Sentence By Sentence
English Translation
& Transliteration of
Siri Guru Granth Sahib
Phonetic Transliteration by: Kulbir Singh Thind, MD
Translation by: Singh Sahib Sant Singh Khalsa, MD Hand Made Books 899 N. Wilmot, Suite C-2 Tucson, Arizona 85711, USA
All word databse making, text arrangement and formatting etc also by: Kulbir Singh Thind, MD
Any use of this text for commercial or internet projects requires express written approval from: Kulbir S Thind, MD and Sant Singh Khalsa, MD.
ust 4
qe ATS on aes usy forse fares nieve Has mot AS aT YATES Ut c-1, we 1) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. The Name Is Truth. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying, Beyond Birth, Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace ~
I FY Ml G-3, Hs 1 jap.
Chant And Meditate:
mife AY Hate AP ll (1-4, wu, He 1
aad sach jugaad sach. True In The Primal Beginning. True Throughout The Ages.
d St AY Soa GAT St AT NU (1-4, Fy, He 1 hai bhee sach naanak hosee bhee sach. ||1]| True Here And Now. O Nanak, Forever And Ever True. ||1]|
He Afs 3 deet A At we Se Il (1-5, FU, He 1)
sochai soch na hova-ee jay sochee lakh vaar.
By thinking, He cannot be reduced to thought, even by thinking hundreds of thousands of times.
wu gu 5 deat A ote aa fee ae Il 1-5, wy, He YD
chupai chup na hova-ee jay laa-ay rahaa liv taar.
By remaining silent, inner silence is not obtained, even by remaining lovingly absorbed deep within.
sfmr gu 3 Csdt A dat usher arg Il 1-5, mu, He D bhukhi-aa bhukh na utree jay bannaa puree-aa bhaar. The hunger of the hungry is not appeased, even by piling up loads of worldly goods.
HA fimreut wu dfs 3 fea 5 3S offs Il c1-6, wy, He 1
sahas si-aanpaa lakh hohi ta ik na chalai naal.
Hundreds of thousands of clever tricks, but not even one of them will go along with you in the end.
fae Ahora Tet fore TS TS UTS I (1-6, Fy, we DY kiv sachi-aaraa ho-ee-ai kiv koorhai tutai paal. So how can you become truthful? And how can the veil of illusion be torn away?
Jat dAet Boat soa fafamr ots NA G-7, FU, Hs D
hukam rajaa-ee chalnaa naanak likhi-aa naal. ||1]|
O Nanak, it is written that you shall obey the Hukam of His Command, and walk in the Way of His Will. ||1]|
gant defs mrarg JaH 3 afar Aret Il 1-7, wu, He hukmee hovan aakaar hukam na kahi-aa jaa-ee. By His Command, bodies are created; His Command cannot be described.
gant defe dbo gath fxs efsmret i a-s, wu, we
hukmee hovan jee-a hukam milai vadi-aa-ee.
By His Command, souls come into being; by His Command, glory and greatness are obtained.
gant @3su ste gath fafa ea Ae urémifa il a-s, wu, He D
hukmee utam neech hukam likh dukh sukh paa-ee-ah.
By His Command, some are high and some are low; by His Written Command, pain and pleasure are obtained.
feaar Jant suntn fefx gant wet sevSinifs I 1-9, wu, He D
iknaa hukmee bakhsees ik hukmee sadaa bhavaa-ee-ah.
Some, by His Command, are blessed and forgiven; others, by His Command, wander aimlessly forever.
Jan niefs As a Hots Jan 6 Af Il (1-9, wy, He 1) hukmai andar sabh ko baahar hukam na ko-ay. Everyone is subject to His Command; no one is beyond His Command.
Soa JAH A TS SICH Ad 6 Ale IQIl (1-10, wy, He 1) naanak hukmai jay bujhai ta ha-umai kahai na ko-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, one who understands His Command, does not speak in ego. ||2||
We FX 3E Te fA SS Il (1-10, wy, we 1) gaavai ko taan hovai kisai taan. Some sing of His Power-who has that Power?
We & Vis WE SIS Il (1-11, FY, He 1) gaavai ko daat jaanai neesaan. Some sing of His Gifts, and know His Sign and Insignia.
We t Te ssnreior yg il c-11, wy, we 1 gaavai ko gun vadi-aa-ee-aa chaar. Some sing of His Glorious Virtues, Greatness and Beauty.
ae a fefeuor feen Steg il c-11, wy, He 1D gaavai ko vidi-aa vikham veechaar. Some sing of knowledge obtained of Him, through difficult philosophical studies.
We a AfA ad 3H UT Il (1-12, wy, we gaavai ko saaj karay tan khayh. Some sing that He fashions the body, and then again reduces it to dust.
We a Hn & fefs Fo il (1-12, wy, we 1) gaavai ko jee-a lai fir dayh. Some sing that He takes life away, and then again restores it.
ae ot AU fer ofa Il (1-12, Fy, He 1) gaavai ko jaapai disai door. Some sing that He seems so very far away.
UST 2 We t SH Tes Tels il 2-1, wy, we 1)
gaavai ko vaykhai haadraa hadoor. Some sing that He watches over us, face to face, ever-present.
aaa wat o nite Sfe il (2-1, wy, He 1) kathnaa kathee na aavai tot. There is no shortage of those who preach and teach.
ofa afa adt act afe af] it (2-1, au, we 1) kath kath kathee kotee kot kot. Millions upon millions offer millions of sermons and stories.
care Be ofa uta il (2-2, wy, we 1) daydaa day laiday thak paahi. The Great Giver keeps on giving, while those who receive grow weary of receiving.
AM waste ust us i (2-2, wy, ne 1) jugaa jugantar khaahee khaahi. Throughout the ages, consumers consume.
Jat JAH VHS TT Il (2-2, wy, we VY hukmee hukam chalaa-ay raahu. The Commander, by His Command, leads us to walk on the Path.
Soa fea SuUseT SI (2-3, AY, He 1D) naanak vigsai vayparvaahu. ||3]| O Nanak, He blossoms forth, Carefree and Untroubled. ||3]|
Wat Atos AS of stam aE wurg il (2-3, wu, He 1) saachaa saahib saach naa-ay bhaakhi-aa bhaa-o apaar. True is the Master, True is His Name-speak it with infinite love.
nmafs Hats etfs ef ots ad BST Il (2-3, FU, He 1) aakhahi mangahi dayhi dayhi daat karay daataar. People beg and pray, "Give to us, give to us", and the Great Giver gives His Gifts.
efa fa nat adh fas fern eaerg Il (2-4, wu, He 1)
fayr ke agai rakhee-ai jit disai darbaar.
So what offering can we place before Him, by which we might see the Darbaar of His Court?
Hd fa doe som fas afs ae flmrg il (2-4, wy, ne YD muhou ke bolan bolee-ai jit sun Dharay pi-aar. What words can we speak to evoke His Love?
wifys zor AY oe efsnret Sarg i 2-5, wy, ue 1)
amrit vaylaa sach naa-o vadi-aa-ee veechaar.
In the Amrit Vaylaa, the ambrosial hours before dawn, chant the True Name, and contemplate His Glorious Greatness.
aot wire Gust Sedt HY BITS Il (2-5, wy, He
karmee aavai kaprhaa nadree mokh du-aar.
By the karma of past actions, the robe of this physical body is obtained. By His Grace, the Gate of Liberation is found.
Soa SS Hea AS nm Afenirs isil (2-6, wy, Hz 1 naanak ayvai jaanee-ai sabh aapay sachiaar. ||4|| O Nanak, know this well: the True One Himself is All. ||4]|
afimet o afe ats o SE I (2-6, wu, He 1) thaapi-aa na jaa-ay keetaa na ho-ay.
He cannot be established, He cannot be created. nmy wif fadre Ae Il (2-7, wy, He 1D
aapay aap niranjan so-ay.
He Himself is Immaculate and Pure.
fate Afeor fate urfenr ure Il (2-7, wu, v8 1D
jin sayvi-aa tin paa-i-aa maan. Those who serve Him are honored.
Soa Tea Tat fears il (2-7, wy, we D) naanak gaavee-ai gunee niDhaan. O Nanak, sing of the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence.
enn Haba nfs sdb ave il (2-8, au, we 1D gaavee-ai sunee-ai man rakhee-ai bhaa-o. Sing, and listen, and let your mind be filled with love.
eu uddfa AY ufs & Ae I (2-8, mu, He D dukh parhar sukh ghar lai jaa-ay. Your pain shall be sent far away, and peace shall come to your home.
aonfa ae qanfe Se aot sfoor Ayret I (2-8, AU, He D
gurmukh naada™ gurmukh vayda‘ gurmukh rahi-aa samaa-ee.
The Guru's Word is the Sound-current of the Naad; the Guru's Word is the Wisdom of the Vedas; the Guru's Word is all-pervading.
ag Sng Te dey sor Te ursast ret Il (2-9, wy, He VY gur eesar gur gorakh barmaa gur paarbatee maa-ee. The Guru is Shiva, the Guru is Vishnu and Brahma; the Guru is Paarvati and Lakhshmi.
A IG Wat nm ort Aa’ AAS B AEH Il (2-9, wy, n3 1D) jay ha-o jaanaa aakhaa naahee kahnaa kathan na jaa-ee. Even knowing God, I cannot describe Him; He cannot be described in words.
as fea efs gSTeT II (2-10, Au, He 1 guraa ik dayhi bujhaa-ee. The Guru has given me this one understanding:
Hao Abr at fea ast AH fenfe o wet Hull (2-10, au, He 1D sabhnaa jee-aa kaa ik daataa so mai visar na jaa-ee. ||5|| there is only the One, the Giver of all souls. May I never forget Him! ||5]|
stefa oe A fSR we fee we fa OTE act Il (2-11, FU, He D
tirath naavaa jay tis bhaavaa vin bhaanay ke naa-ay karee.
If I am pleasing to Him, then that is my pilgrimage and cleansing bath. Without pleasing Him, what good are ritual cleansings?
ast frafs Guret Ser fee aor fa fxs wet | (2-11, wy, we DY
jaytee sirath upaa-ee vaykhaa vin karmaa ke milai la-ee.
I gaze upon all the created beings: without the karma of good actions, what are they given to receive?
fs fefs 336 Ae UG Hea A fea aa at fre Het I (2-12, Fu, He D
mat vich ratan javaahar maanik jay ik gur kee sikh sunee.
Within the mind are gems, jewels and rubies, if you listen to the Guru's Teachings, even once.
as fea efo gsrvet Il (2-12, wu, He D
guraa ik dayhi bujhaa-ee.
The Guru has given me this one understanding:
Hao Alera fea ast AH fenfa o wet NEN (2-13, FU, He DD
sabhnaa jee-aa kaa ik daataa so mai visar na jaa-ee. ||6|| there is only the One, the Giver of all souls. May I never forget Him! ||6]|
A FT WS ots Js eAat Fe il 2-13, ay, Hs 1) jay jug chaaray aarjaa hor dasoonee ho-ay. Even if you could live throughout the four ages, or even ten times more,
det Yast fete waba ate vs AS afe Il (2-14, wy, He 1 navaa khanda vich jaanee-ai naal chalai sabh ko-ay. and even if you were known throughout the nine continents and followed by all,
dar ag safe a AA atefs Afar SF Il (2-14, wy, He 1D changa naa-o rakhaa-ay kai jas keerat jag lay-ay. with a good name and reputation, with praise and fame throughout the world-
a fan oefe 5 orect 5 SS 5 ue a Il (2-15, FU, He 1D
jay tis nadar na aavee ta vaat na puchhai kay.
still, if the Lord does not bless you with His Glance of Grace, then who cares? What is the use?
ate niefe ate afs SHt SA Ue I (2-15, wy, He D
keetaa andar keet kar dosee dos Dharay.
Among worms, you would be considered a lowly worm, and even contemptible sinners would hold you in contempt.
soa fasafs ae ad Te<fsur TS Z Il 2-15, wy, He 1) naanak nirgun gun karay gunvanti-aa gun day. O Nanak, God blesses the unworthy with virtue, and bestows virtue on the virtuous.
3a afe o aset fa fn we afe as NDI (2-16, wy, He 1) tayhaa ko-ay na sujh-ee je tis gun ko-ay karay. ||7|| No one can even imagine anyone who can bestow virtue upon Him. ||7]||
Afem fro ute afe are i (2-16, wu, He 1) suni-ai siDh peer sur naath. Listening-the Siddhas, the spiritual teachers, the heroic warriors, the yogic masters.
Afon cafs cee nTerA Il (2-17, wu, He 1) suni-ai Dharat Dhaval aakaas. Listening-the earth, its support and the Akaashic ethers.
Afsana ty St uss I (2-17, FU, He VY suni-ai deep lo-a paataal. Listening-the oceans, the lands of the world and the nether regions of the underworld.
Afant ufs o Aa aS Il (2-17, wy, He suni-ai pohi na sakai kaal. Listening-Death cannot even touch you.
SOA Sas" Het fSaA Il (2-18, wy, ue 1) naanak bhagtaa sadaa vigaas. O Nanak, the devotees are forever in bliss.
Alam Te UT AT BA MCI (2-18, FY, HE 1) suni-ai dookh paap kaa naas. ||8]| Listening-pain and sin are erased. ||8]||
Afom etrg gent fs i (2-18, wy, HD suni-ai eesar barmaa ind. Listening-Shiva, Brahma and Indra.
Afon ufa Arese HE Il (2-19, FU, He 1) suni-ai mukh saalaahan mand. Listening-even foul-mouthed people praise Him.
Afon ra wats sfs Se Il (2-19, wu, He 1D Suni-ai jog jugat tan bhayd. Listening-the technology of Yoga and the secrets of the body.
Afem ras fafyfs Fe Wt 2-19, wy, He D
Suni-ai saasat simrit vayd.
Listening-the Shaastras, the Simritees and the Vedas. SOA Sas" eT fSarA Il (2-19, wy, ue 1
naanak bhagtaa sadaa vigaas. O Nanak, the devotees are forever in bliss.
Uar 3 Afant Te UT aT BTA ICI (3-1, FY, Hs 1)
suni-ai dookh paap kaa naas. ||9|| Listening-pain and sin are erased. ||9||
Afon As Hsu farrell 3-1, wy, He 1
Suni-ai sat santokh gi-aan.
Listening-truth, contentment and spiritual wisdom. Hfan nents at fears Il (3-1, wy, Hs D
suni-ai athsath kaa isnaan. Listening-take your cleansing bath at the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage.
Afon ufs ufs urefo we Il G-2, wy, He D Suni-ai parh parh paavahi maan. Listening-reading and reciting, honor is obtained.
Hfan oat Aafa fomre il (3-2, wu, Hs D
suni-ai laagai sahj Dhi-aan.
Listening-intuitively grasp the essence of meditation. SSA Sas Het fSarA Il (3-2, wu, He
naanak bhagtaa sadaa vigaas. O Nanak, the devotees are forever in bliss.
Afan TY UY aT BA IAM (3-3, FU, He D suni-ai dookh paap kaa naas. ||10]| Listening-pain and sin are erased. ||10]||
Afant Aa Tat AX WT Il (3-3, WU, wD Suni-ai Saraa gunaa kay gaah. Listening-dive deep into the ocean of virtue.
Afent Ae ute ufsrrs il 3-3, wu, we D suni-ai saykh peer paatisaah. Listening-the Shaykhs, religious scholars, spiritual teachers and emperors.
Afant nit uefa TT Il (3-3, AU, He 1) suni-ai anDhay paavahi raahu. Listening-even the blind find the Path.
Afandt we de wiAag | 3-4, wy, He suni-ai haath hovai asgaahu. Listening-the Unreachable comes within your grasp.
SSA Sas" Het fearA Il (3-4, wy, ve 1) naanak bhagtaa sadaa vigaas. O Nanak, the devotees are forever in bliss.
Alan Te UY aT BTA AAU (3-4, FU, He D Suni-ai dookh paap kaa naas. ||11]| Listening-pain and sin are erased. ||11]|
Hd at afs adt o ATE I G-5, wy, He 1)
mannay kee gat kahee na jaa-ay. The state of the faithful cannot be described.
Aa ad fue ueste Il G-5, wy, He jay ko kahai pichhai pachhutaa-ay. One who tries to describe this shall regret the attempt.
Wate AGH 3 fers as il (3-5, wu, v2 1) kaagad kalam na likhanhaar. No paper, no pen, no scribe
Hd ot sfs afte Seg Il G-5, wy, He 1D mannay kaa bahi karan veechaar. can record the state of the faithful.
MAT oH fadHo fF Il (3-6, muy, H2 1) aisaa naam niranjan ho-ay. Such is the Name of the Immaculate Lord.
a a dfs we Hfs afe 1921 3-6, wy, He 1D) jay ko man jaanai man ko-ay. ||12|| Only one who has faith comes to know such a state of mind. ||12||
H6 Aafs de fs aft Il G-6, wu, He 1D mannai surat hovai man buDh. The faithful have intuitive awareness and intelligence.
Hd Aa see at Afo Il (3-7, wy, He 1) mannai sagal bhavan kee suDh. The faithful know about all worlds and realms.
H6 ufs det at ue il (3-7, wy, ue 1) mannai muhi chotaa naa khaa-ay. The faithful shall never be struck across the face.
Hd FH oa Affe @ ATE I 3-7, AU, He 1) mannai jam kai saath na jaa-ay. The faithful do not have to go with the Messenger of Death.
MAT oH fadHo fe Il (3-7, muy, He 1) aisaa naam niranjan ho-ay. Such is the Name of the Immaculate Lord.
a a dfs we Hfs afe 193i 3-8, ay, He 1) jay ko man jaanai man ko-ay. ||13]| Only one who has faith comes to know such a state of mind. ||13]|
He Hrafat ox & UAE Il (3-8, FU, He 1) mannai maarag thaak na paa-ay. The path of the faithful shall never be blocked.
Hé ufs fAG usae ATE II 3-8, muy, He 1D) mannai pat si-o pargat jaa-ay. The faithful shall depart with honor and fame.
HO Ha 3 VS UE Il (3-9, wy, He 1) mannai mag na chalai panth. The faithful do not follow empty religious rituals.
HO UsH Ast ASAT Il (3-9, wu, He 1) mannai Dharam saytee san-banDh. The faithful are firmly bound to the Dharma.
MAT oH fadHo fe Il (3-9, wu, He 1) aisaa naam niranjan ho-ay. Such is the Name of the Immaculate Lord.
a a dfs we Hfs afe 9ell G-9, Au, He 1) jay ko man jaanai man ko-ay. ||14]| Only one who has faith comes to know such a state of mind. ||14]|
Hé uefa HY BMT Il (3-10, wy, He 1) mannai paavahi mokh du-aar. The faithful find the Door of Liberation.
HO udeTd AMIE Il (3-10, wu, He 1) mannai parvaarai saaDhaar. The faithful uplift and redeem their family and relations.
HO 3d SS Te fe i G-10, wy, we 1) mannai tarai taaray gur sikh. The faithful are saved, and carried across with the Sikhs of the Guru.
Hd soa sefa o fee Il G-10, wy, He D mannai naanak bhavahi na bhikh. The faithful, O Nanak, do not wander around begging.
MAT oH fadHo dfF Il (3-11, wy, He 1) aisaa naam niranjan ho-ay. Such is the Name of the Immaculate Lord.
a a dfs we nfs afe nail G-u, zy, we 1D jay ko man jaanai man ko-ay. ||15]| Only one who has faith comes to know such a state of mind. ||15]|
Us uses UT UTUS Il (3-11, wy, He 1)
panch parvaan panch parDhaan. The chosen ones, the self-elect, are accepted and approved.
Ud uvefa zaafs HTS Il (3-12, AU, He 1) panchay paavahi dargahi maan. The chosen ones are honored in the Court of the Lord.
oN 4
Ud Adfs fs TAS Il (3-12, FU, He 1 panchay sohahi dar raajaan. The chosen ones look beautiful in the courts of kings.
UT at TT Sa fomrg il (3-12, wy, ue panchaa kaa gur ayk Dhi-aan. The chosen ones meditate single-mindedly on the Guru.
Aa ad ad Steg Il (3-12, wy, ne 1) jay ko kahai karai veechaar. No matter how much anyone tries to explain and describe them,
Ads A ATE STS ANT Il 3-13, FY, He 1) kartay kai karnai naahee sumaar. the actions of the Creator cannot be counted.
GS wey wer at uz il 3-13, wy, He 1) Dhoul Dharam da-i-aa kaa poot. The mythical bull is Dharma, the son of compassion;
Asy afu aftr fafs Afs i G-13, vy, He 1 santokh thaap rakhi-aa jin soot. this is what patiently holds the earth in its place.
A a gs de Afr Il (3-14, wy, nH 1) jay ko bujhai hovai sachiaar. One who understands this becomes truthful.
ues Bufs ast arg il 3-14, wy, He D Dhavlai upar kaytaa bhaar. What a great load there is on the bull!
Test dg ud JT IT I 3-14, wy, He YD Dhartee hor parai hor hor. So many worlds beyond this world-so very many!
fsH 3 TT 3S ASE AG Il G-14, wy, we tis tay bhaar talai kavan jor. What power holds them, and supports their weight?
Aba ats dar & SrS Il (3-15, wy, He 1) jee-a jaat rangaa kay naav. The names and the colors of the assorted species of beings
Hao! fefimr Sst ASH Il GB-15, AU, He 1) sabhnaa likhi-aa vurhee kalaam. were all inscribed by the Ever-flowing Pen of God.
fg su feta we af= il (3-15, wu, ve 1) ayhu laykhaa likh jaanai ko-ay. Who knows how to write this account?
But fefmr ast SE i 3-15, wy, He 1) laykhaa likhi-aa kaytaa ho-ay. Just imagine what a huge scroll it would take!
AT SS HMMS TU ll (3-16, wy, we 1) kaytaa taan su-aalihu roop. What power! What fascinating beauty!
ast ws WE AT FT Il G-16, wy, vs 1) kaytee daat jaanai koun koot. And what gifts! Who can know their extent?
ast unre Sa ANTS I (3-16, WU, He 1) keetaa pasaa-o ayko kavaa-o. You created the vast expanse of the Universe with One Word!
fSA 3 de we cdr I G-17, wy, we YD tis tay ho-ay lakh daree-aa-o. Hundreds of thousands of rivers began to flow.
Aes ACE AT BAIT Il (3-17, WU, ve 1) kudrat kavan kahaa veechaar. How can Your Creative Potency be described?
afoot & AST Sa ST Il (3-17, AU, 48 1) vaari-aa na jaavaa ayk vaar. I cannot even once be a sacrifice to You.
A 30 se] At sat aE Il (3-18, FU, H2 1) jo tuDh bhaavai saa-ee bhalee kaar. Whatever pleases You is the only good done,
3 Ae AoHfs fadarg IMEI (3-18, Fy, 8 1) too sadaa salaamat nirankaar. ||16]|| You, Eternal and Formless One! ||16] |
MAY AU MAY BT Il (3-18, FU, He 1) asa‘kh jap asa‘kh bhaa-o. Countless meditations, countless loves.
MAY UAT MAY SU STE ll (3-19, wy, Hs 1) asa‘kh poojaa asa‘kh tap taa-o. Countless worship services, countless austere disciplines.
MAY ade Hf Se urs Il (3-19, wy, He 1) asa‘kh garanth mukh vayd paath. Countless scriptures, and ritual recitations of the Vedas.
WAY Ha Hf dofs Ber Il (3-19, wy, He 1) asa‘kh jog man rahahi udaas. Countless Yogis, whose minds remain detached from the world.
Ua 8 MAY sas Te fares Sere il (4-1, wy, He 1)
asa‘kh bhagat gun gi-aan veechaar. Countless devotees contemplate the Wisdom and Virtues of the Lord.
MAY ASt MAY VSS I (4-1, AU, He 1) asa‘kh satee asa‘kh daataar. Countless the holy, countless the givers.
MAY AS HT SY ATS Il (4-1, wy, Hs 1)
asa‘kh soor muh bhakh saar.
Countless heroic spiritual warriors, who bear the brunt of the attack in battle (who with their mouths eat steel).
mA Hfs fee ofe sre il (4-2, ay, He 1) asa‘kh mon liv laa-ay taar. Countless silent sages, vibrating the String of His Love.
Aes ACE AT BAST Il (4-2, Fy, ue v kudrat kavan kahaa veechaar. How can Your Creative Potency be described?
afot & AST SA STP Il (4-2, AU, He 1) vaari-aa na jaavaa ayk vaar. I cannot even once be a sacrifice to You.
A 30 ae] Act sat arg Il (4-2, wy, He D jo tuDh bhaavai saa-ee bhalee kaar. Whatever pleases You is the only good done,
3 Ae AoHfs fedara VI (4-3, Fy, M8 1) too sadaa salaamat nirankaar. ||17]| You, Eternal and Formless One. ||17]||
MAY Hoe nT us Il (4-3, FU, He asa‘kh moorakh anDh ghor. Countless fools, blinded by ignorance.
MAY SI SIH Il (4-3, AU, He 1) asa‘kh chor haraamkhor. Countless thieves and embezzlers.
WAY MH afe As AS MN 4-4, AY, He 1 asa‘kh amar kar jaahi jor. Countless impose their will by force.
MAY WSS Tfsnt os I (4-4, wy, He 1) asa‘kh galvadh hati-aa kamaahi. Countless cut-throats and ruthless killers.
mA unt uy af vfs i (4-4, wu, He 1) asa‘kh paapee paap kar jaahi. Countless sinners who keep on sinning.
mAY Sfaurg as feats i (4-4, wy, Hs 1) asa‘kh koorhi-aar koorhay firaahi. Countless liars, wandering lost in their lies.
MAY HOE HS Sf utfs il (4-5, wu, He 1 asa‘kh malaychh mal bhakh khaahi. Countless wretches, eating filth as their ration.
mA feea fafs aafs arg Il (4-5, wu, He 1) asa‘kh nindak sir karahi bhaar. Countless slanderers, carrying the weight of their stupid mistakes on their heads.
SOA tT Ad Aes Il (4-5, wy, He 1) naanak neech kahai veechaar. Nanak describes the state of the lowly.
afoot & AST Sa STP Il (4-6, FU, He 1) vaari-aa na jaavaa ayk vaar. I cannot even once be a sacrifice to You.
A 30 ae] Act sat avg Il (4-6, FU, He D jo tuDh bhaavai saa-ee bhalee kaar. Whatever pleases You is the only good done,
3 Ae Hots fadarg WAT (4-6, FY, He D too sadaa salaamat nirankaar. ||18]| You, Eternal and Formless One. ||18]|
MAY STS MAY BTS Il (4-7, FU, He 1) asa‘kh naav asa‘kh thaav. Countless names, countless places.
MIM MSH MAY Be Il (4-7, wu, He 1) agamm agamm asa\kh lo-a. Inaccessible, unapproachable, countless celestial realms.
mH adfs fafs ava ofe i 4-7, mu, He D asa‘kh kehahi sir bhaar ho-ay. Even to call them countless is to carry the weight on your head.
madt SH wtddt ARS Il (4-7, AU, He 1) akhree naam akhree saalaah. From the Word, comes the Naam; from the Word, comes Your Praise.
meat famitg ats TE IT Il (4-8, AU, He 1) akhree gi-aan geet gun gaah. From the Word, comes spiritual wisdom, singing the Songs of Your Glory.
mudt fers soe ats il (4-38, ay, He
akhree likhan bolan baan. From the Word, come the written and spoken words and hymns.
mug fafs Haat safe i 4-8, mu, HD akhraa sir sanjog vakhaan. From the Word, comes destiny, written on one's forehead.
fate fo fea for fafs ofa i (4-9, wu, He jin ayhi likhay tis sir naahi. But the One who wrote these Words of Destiny-no words are written on His Forehead.
fre gone fae foe ufo il (4-9, au, He D jiv furmaa-ay tiv tiv paahi. As He ordains, so do we receive.
AST Als SST BS Il (4-9, Fy, ne VY jaytaa keetaa taytaa naa-o. The created universe is the manifestation of Your Name.
fee ore ardt & aE il (4-10, wy, He vin naavai naahee ko thaa-o. Without Your Name, there is no place at all.
ASS ACS AT SAT Il (4-10, wu, ue 1) kudrat kavan kahaa veechaar. How can I describe Your Creative Power?
safant & ATT Sa STP Il (4-10, FY, He 1) vaari-aa na jaavaa ayk vaar. I cannot even once be a sacrifice to You.
A 30 ae] ASH sat are Il (4-10, FU, H 1) jo tuDh bhaavai saa-ee bhalee kaar. Whatever pleases You is the only good done,
3 Ae AoHfs fadara well (4-11, Fy, Hs 1) too sadaa salaamat nirankaar. ||19]| You, Eternal and Formless One. ||19]|
sdon ga Ug 3o ST Il 4-11, wy, He 1) bharee-ai hath pair tan dayh. When the hands and the feet and the body are dirty,
urat 03 @3gA U7 Il (4-11, wy, He paanee Dhotai utras khayh. water can wash away the dirt.
HS ustst aug ae i (4-12, ay, we 1) moot paleetee kaparh ho-ay. When the clothes are soiled and stained by urine,
@ AgS wet Gg ofS ii (4-12, wy, #2 1) day saaboon la-ee-ai oh Dho-ay. soap can wash them clean.
adm ufs une & Afar it (4-12, wu, we 1) bharee-ai mat paapaa kai sang. But when the intellect is stained and polluted by sin,
6g Gu ae & far il (4-13, wy, ne oh Dhopai naavai kai rang. it can only be cleansed by the Love of the Name.
Ust unit mmre orfs Il (4-13, AU, He 1) punnee paapee aakhan naahi. Virtue and vice do not come by mere words;
af afs agar fof 3 ATT Il (4-13, wu, He 1) kar kar karnaa likh lai jaahu. actions repeated, over and over again, are engraved on the soul.
mira Sif mim dt are il (4-13, wu, He 1 aapay beej aapay hee khaahu. You shall harvest what you plant.
Sa JOH weg AT NOM (4-14, FU, He naanak hukmee aavhu jaahu. ||20|| O Nanak, by the Hukam of God's Command, we come and go in reincarnation. ||20||
Steg su efenr es BS Il (4-14, ay, ne tirath tap da-i-aa dat daan. Pilgrimages, austere discipline, compassion and charity
Ao ure fH aT HTS Il (4-14, FY, He 1)
jay ko paavai til kaa maan. -these, by themselves, bring only an iota of merit.
Hfsur vifeor Hfs atst ar@ i (4-15, au, ne D suni-aa mani-aa man keetaa bhaa-o. Listening and believing with love and humility in your mind,
nisdats Stefa nfs oS Il (4-15, wy, He D antargat tirath mal naa-o. cleanse yourself with the Name, at the sacred shrine deep within.
Afs Te 3d H ad afe i 4-15, wy, He YD sabh gun tayray mai naahee ko-ay. All virtues are Yours, Lord, I have none at all.
fee qe ats sats o Sfe I (4-16, wy, He 1)
vin gun keetay bhagat na ho-ay.
Without virtue, there is no devotional worship. AmAts wife aret SaH"S Il (4-16, Fu, He 1
su-aSat aath banee barmaa-o. I bow to the Lord of the World, to His Word, to Brahma the Creator.
Afs Aas Ae His WS Il (4-16, wy, Hz 1) sat suhaan sadaa man chaa-o. He is Beautiful, True and Eternally Joyful.
ACE A SH" Tuy aes ace fafs AS TI Il (4-16, wy, v8 1)
kavan so vaylaa vakhat kavan kavan thit kavan vaar.
What was that time, and what was that moment? What was that day, and what was that date?
acts fh gat Hg aes fas dor wrargs Il (4-17, FU, He 1) kavan se rutee maahu kavan jit ho-aa aakaar. What was that season, and what was that month, when the Universe was created?
2 6 urd Usst fa dS Bu UTS Il (4-17, Fy, we VY
vayl na paa-ee-aa pandtee je hovai laykh puraan.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, cannot find that time, even if it is written in the Puraanas.
zeus 3 ute ardine fa foufs Sy AES Il (4-18, Fy, He 1) vakhat na paa-i-o kaadee-aa je likhan laykh kuraan. That time is not known to the Qazis, who study the Koran.
fafs ag o Aa we ofS Hg o AST II (4-18, Fy, He D thit vaar naa jogee jaanai rut maahu naa ko-ee. The day and the date are not known to the Yogis, nor is the month or the season.
Ww age fradt AG AHA nM ATS Het I (4-19, FU, He 1) jaa kartaa sirthee ka-o saajay aapay jaanai so-ee. The Creator who created this creation-only He Himself knows.
foe ata mira fore Arad fa saat fos AAT Il (4-19, wu, He 1)
kiv kar aakhaa kiv saalaahee ki-o varnee kiv jaanaa.
How can we speak of Him? How can we praise Him? How can we describe Him? How can we know Him?
UST Uy aed ninifs Ag &t nid fea e fea frre it (5-1, wy, #1
naanak aakhan sabh ko aakhai ik doo ik si-aanaa. O Nanak, everyone speaks of Him, each one wiser than the rest.
zs fog zat ost ast AT at TS I (5-1, FY, He 1) vadaa saahib vadee naa-ee keetaa jaa kaa hovai. Great is the Master, Great is His Name. Whatever happens is according to His Will.
soa Aa mM ATS mit Tent F AT QUI (5-2, FY, He 1)
naanak jay ko aapou jaanai agai ga-i-aa na sohai. ||21]|
O Nanak, one who claims to know everything shall not be decorated in the world hereafter. ||21] |
UTS! USS GY MITATAT MIATA Il (5-2, Wu, He 1)
paataalaa paataal lakh aagaasaa aagaas. There are nether worlds beneath nether worlds, and hundreds of thousands of heavenly worlds above.
Gza aa ae aa Se aafe fea BST Il (5-3, wy, ws VY orhak orhak bhaal thakay vayd kahan ik vaat. The Vedas say that you can search and search for them all, until you grow weary.
HUA Modd aale asa mAS fea WS Il (5-3, wy, #2
sahas athaarah kahan kataybaa asuloo ik Dhaat.
The scriptures say that there are 18,000 worlds, but in reality, there is only One Universe.
Bu dfe s fed oa df feeA i 6-4, wu, He 1)
laykhaa ho-ay ta likee-ai laykhai ho-ay vinaas.
If you try to write an account of this, you will surely finish yourself before you finish writing it.
Soa Sat Mt My ATE MY WII (5-4, WU, He 1) naanak vadaa aakhee-ai aapay jaanai aap. ||22|| O Nanak, call Him Great! He Himself knows Himself. ||22] |
Hod Wet Sst Aas 6 UST I 5-5, FU, He 1) Saalaahee saalaahi aytee surat na paa-ee-aa. The praisers praise the Lord, but they do not obtain intuitive understanding
Sebo ms ed uefa ANfe o ATSMfs Il 5-5, aU, He 1) nadee-aa atai vaah pavahi samund na jaanee-ahi. -the streams and rivers flowing into the ocean do not know its vastness.
ANE AS Hos farsa ASt Hw US Il (5-6, TU, He 1) samund saah sultaan girhaa saytee maal Dhan. Even kings and emperors, with mountains of property and oceans of wealth
atst 3fs 3 deat A ASH Hod 3 anata NBII S-6, FU, He 1) keerhee tul na hovnee jay tis manhu na veesrahi. ||23]| -these are not even equal to an ant, who does not forget God. ||23]|
mz 3 fHest adfe 5 Mis I G-6, FU, He D ant na siftee kahan na ant. Endless are His Praises, endless are those who speak them.
MS 3 Ade Us wT I (5-7, aU, He 1) ant na karnai dayn na ant. Endless are His Actions, endless are His Gifts.
mz 0 tufs Hafe 3 MS Il (5-7, FU, He 1) ant na vaykhan sunan na ant. Endless is His Vision, endless is His Hearing.
ms 3 AU for ufs HT Ul 5-7, AU, He 1D ant na jaapai ki-aa man mant. His limits cannot be perceived. What is the Mystery of His Mind?
MS BAU aS wag | (5-8, AU, He 1) ant na jaapai keetaa aakaar. The limits of the created universe cannot be perceived.
MS BAU UTI Il (5-8, FU, He 1) ant na jaapai paaraavaar. Its limits here and beyond cannot be perceived.
mz aes aS fawerfs i (5-8, mu, He 1) ant kaaran kaytay billaahi. Many struggle to know His limits,
sa nis 6 ue ate ll (5-9, wy, He 1 taa kay ant na paa-ay jaahi. but His limits cannot be found.
Pg uz o We af= Il 6-9, wy, He ayhu ant na jaanai ko-ay. No one can know these limits.
aga adha gIST SE i (5-9, wy, He 1) bahutaa kahee-ai bahutaa ho-ay. The more you say about them, the more there still remains to be said.
za Afog Gar aS it (5-9, wy, He 1) vadaa saahib oochaa thaa-o. Great is the Master, High is His Heavenly Home.
6s Gufs Gar ar il 6-10, Fy, x 1) oochay upar oochaa naa-o. Highest of the High, above all is His Name.
sa &
Ses Bard] ate it (5-10, wy, #2 1) ayvad oochaa hovai ko-ay. Only one as Great and as High as God
SH Ss a we ALE I (5-10, wy, He 1) tis oochay ka-o jaanai so-ay. can know His Lofty and Exalted State.
Aes urfu aS vrfu wef il G-10, ay, He 1D jayvad aap jaanai aap aap. Only He Himself is that Great. He Himself knows Himself.
SSA Seat ATH STS MSM (5-11, wu, He 1)
naanak nadree karmee daat. ||24]| O Nanak, by His Glance of Grace, He bestows His Blessings. ||24]|
ast aay fefaor ar ate i 6-11, wy, ue bahutaa karam likhi-aa naa jaa-ay. His Blessings are so abundant that there can be no written account of them.
za Us (3G 6 SHE Il (6-11, Fy, He 1) vadaa daataa til na tamaa-ay. The Great Giver does not hold back anything.
sn O°
as Hats AO RTS Il (5-12, AY, He 1) kaytay mangahi joDh apaar. There are so many great, heroic warriors begging at the Door of the Infinite Lord.
afsut Tes Sdt Sos Il (5-12, wu, He kayti-aa ganat nahee veechaar. So many contemplate and dwell upon Him, that they cannot be counted.
as ufu sets Sarg il (5-12, wy, He 1D) kaytay khap tutahi vaykaar. So many waste away to death engaged in corruption.
as BB Hag ute i (5-12, wy, He 1) kaytay lai lai mukar paahi. So many take and take again, and then deny receiving.
as Hoe urdt ats il (5-13, Ay, He 1) kaytay moorakh khaahee khaahi. So many foolish consumers keep on consuming.
afsur we Fa AC HT Il (5-13, AY, He 1) kayti-aa dookh bhookh sad maar. So many endure distress, deprivation and constant abuse.
etfs fs ats Sot ass Il (5-13, wu, He 1 ayhi bhe daat tayree daataar. Even these are Your Gifts, O Great Giver!
dfe wet are of i (5-13, wu, we 1D
band khalaasee bhaanai ho-ay. Liberation from bondage comes only by Your Will.
dg mrfa o Aa Ate I (5-14, wu, He 1) hor aakh na sakai ko-ay. No one else has any Say in this.
A a ufea wimafs fe i 5-14, mu, He 1 jay ko khaa-ik aakhan paa-ay. If some fool should presume to say that he does,
6g we Astor yfo we I (5-14, wy, He D oh jaanai jaytee-aa muhi khaa-ay. he shall learn, and feel the effects of his folly.
mm Are nm Se it (5-14, wy, He 1) aapay jaanai aapay day-ay. He Himself knows, He Himself gives.
nmafa fA fs axet afe il (5-15, wu, He D aakhahi se bhe kay-ee kay-ay. Few, very few are those who acknowledge this.
fan 3 sun frefs Ares I (5-15, Ay, He 1) jis no bakhsay sifat saalaah. One who is blessed to sing the Praises of the Lord,
SSA UTSATS UTSATT QUI (5-15, FU, He 1) naanak paatisaahee paatisaahu. ||25] | O Nanak, is the king of kings. ||25]|
MHS WE WMH SU Il (5-16, Au, v3 1) amul gun amul vaapaar. Priceless are His Virtues, Priceless are His Dealings.
MHS SuGPe ww FST Il (5-16, AU, He 1) amul vaapaaree-ay amul bhandaar. Priceless are His Dealers, Priceless are His Treasures.
WMHS nitefs mH B As Il (5-16, AU, He 1) amul aavahi amul lai jaahi. Priceless are those who come to Him, Priceless are those who buy from Him.
MHS STE nner AMT Il (5-17, TU, He 1D amul bhaa-ay amulaa samaahi. Priceless is Love for Him, Priceless is absorption into Him.
MHS UH MHS SAS Il (5-17, FU, He amul Dharam amul deebaan. Priceless is the Divine Law of Dharma, Priceless is the Divine Court of Justice.
WMHS 3G MHS USE Il (5-17, FU, He VD amul tul amul parvaan. Priceless are the scales, priceless are the weights.
MHS SUA MHS StATS Il (5-17, TU, Hs 1) amul bakhsees amul neesaan. Priceless are His Blessings, Priceless is His Banner and Insignia.
MHS ATH MHS SHES Il (5-18, FU, He 1) amul karam amul furmaan. Priceless is His Mercy, Priceless is His Royal Command.
WHS MHS ofr o ATE Il (5-18, Fu, He 1) amulo amul aakhi-aa na jaa-ay. Priceless, O Priceless beyond expression!
nif vite gd fee OTe Il (5-18, FU, Hs D aakh aakh rahay liv laa-ay. Speak of Him continually, and remain absorbed in His Love.
mats SF UTS UTES Il (5-19, FU, v8 1) aakhahi vayd paath puraan. The Vedas and the Puraanas speak.
mmafa us aafs Sfmire il (5-19, wu, He 1) aakhahi parhay karahi vakhi-aan. The scholars speak and lecture.
wats gan vimafs fee i (5-19, mu, He 1) aakhahi barmay aakhahi ind. Brahma speaks, Indra speaks.
Uae wrafs at 3 aifee i (6-1, au, He 1
aakhahi gopee tai govind. The Gopis and Krishna speak.
mmafa Stag witafa fra il (6-1, au, He 1 aakhahi eesar aakhahi siDh. Shiva speaks, the Siddhas speak.
mats XS AtS FT Il (6-1, wy, ue VD aakhahi kaytay keetay buDh. The many created Buddhas speak.
mats Boe miTafs Sz Il (6-1, AU, He D aakhahi daanav aakhahi dayv. The demons speak, the demi-gods speak.
muta Afs ad His AS AS Il (6-2, wu, He
aakhahi sur nar mun jan sayv.
The spiritual warriors, the heavenly beings, the silent sages, the humble and serviceful speak.
as nmaifs wimafe urfo il (6-2, wu, Hs 1) kaytay aakhahi aakhan paahi. Many speak and try to describe Him.
as ats ats fs Cfo ats Il 6-2, wu, He 1D kaytay kahi kahi uth uth jaahi. Many have spoken of Him over and over again, and have then arisen and departed.
Ss ats ofa asta il (6-3, ay, we 1 aytay keetay hor karayhi. If He were to create as many again as there already are,
at nifty o Hats det ate I (6-3, wu, He 1 taa aakh na sakahi kay-ee kay-ay. even then, they could not describe Him.
Aes oe Ses SE Il (6-3, wy, HD) jayvad bhaavai tayvad ho-ay. He is as Great as He wishes to be.
Soa We ATS ALE Il (6-3, WU, He 1) naanak jaanai saachaa so-ay. O Nanak, the True Lord knows.
Ao wid sofears Il (6-4, wu, n2 1) jay ko aakhai boluvigaarh. If anyone presumes to describe God,
ot fed fafs arerat aera QEI (6-4, wu, He 1D) taa likee-ai sir gaavaaraa gaavaar. ||26|| he shall be known as the greatest fool of fools! ||26]|
AH Ug ad A wg aa fas afs Ags ANS Il (6-4, FU, He D so dar kayhaa so ghar kayhaa jit bahi sarab samaalay. Where is that Gate, and where is that Dwelling, in which You sit and take care of all?
TH SSE MSA MAU AS SSS Il (6-5, AU, He 1)
vaajay naad anayk asankhaa kaytay vaavanhaaray.
The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates there, and countless musicians play on all sorts of instruments there.
as Ta udt AG admis xs Weeds Il (6-5, wy, uz 1) kaytay raag paree si-o kahee-an kaytay gaavanhaaray. So many Ragas, so many musicians singing there.
Wefs 3d6 UGS urvet SH3T We TH TSH VMS Il (6-6, wy, He VY
gaavahi tuhno pa-un paanee baisantar gaavai raajaa Dharam du-aaray.
The praanic wind, water and fire sing; the Righteous Judge of Dharma sings at Your Door.
wets fas dus fafa wats fete fof cay Sars i (6-6, wu, He D
gaavahi chit gupat likh jaaneh likh likh Dharam veechaaray.
Chitr and Gupt, the angels of the conscious and the subconscious who record actions, and the Righteous Judge of Dharma who judges this record sing.
Wefs Stag sont tet Aafs AST ANTS Il (6-7, AU, HD gaavahi eesar barmaa dayvee sohan sadaa savaaray. Shiva, Brahma and the Goddess of Beauty, ever adorned, sing.
wefs fee feerafs 83 tefsur efs aS Il 6-7, wy, #1) gaavahi ind idaasan baithay dayviti-aa dar naalay. Indra, seated upon His Throne, sings with the deities at Your Door.
ets faa md wiefs arefe ATG fears Il (6-8, wy, He 1) gaavahi siDh samaaDhee andar gaavan saaDh vichaaray. The Siddhas in Samaadhi sing; the Saadhus sing in contemplation.
refs Ast ASt Hset wets Ste aad I (6-8, wy, He 1) gaavan jatee satee santokhee gaavahi veer karaaray. The celibates, the fanatics, the peacefully accepting and the fearless warriors sing.
wefs ufss usts was Aa Aa Ser BS Il (6-9, AU, we
gaavan pandit parhan rakheesar jug jug vaydaa naalay.
The Pandits, the religious scholars who recite the Vedas, with the supreme sages of all the ages, sing.
Wefs Hoar ue Hole Asa HE ufeMrsS | (6-9, wy, He 1)
gaavahi mohnee-aa man mohan surgaa machh pa-i-aalay.
The Mohinis, the enchanting heavenly beauties who entice hearts in this world, in paradise, and in the underworld of the subconscious sing.
Wels Jo Cure 3g nionls Stee GS Il (6-10, wu, He gaavan ratan upaa-ay tayray athsath tirath naalay. The celestial jewels created by You, and the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage sing.
ets AT HAS AST sets urat WS I (6-10, Ay, He 1)
gaavahi joDh mahaabal sooraa gaavahi khaanee chaaray.
The brave and mighty warriors sing; the spiritual heroes and the four sources of creation sing.
Wefs us Hse sass ats afs Ta ws Il (6-11, wy, Hes DY gaavahi khand mandal varbhandaa kar kar rakhay Dhaaray. The planets, solar systems and galaxies, created and arranged by Your Hand, sing.
Ae 306 wets H 30 Tele GS 3d SAS IAS Il (6-11, wy, He DY
say-ee tuDhuno gaavahi jo tuDh bhaavan ratay tayray bhagat rasaalay.
They alone sing, who are pleasing to Your Will. Your devotees are imbued with the Nectar of Your Essence.
dfs as Wefs AH feta 5 ures aaa for Sted Il 6-12, wu, we 1D
hor kaytay gaavan say mai chit na aavan naanak ki-aa veechaaray.
So many others sing, they do not come to mind. O Nanak, how can I consider them all?
Het Het Het AY AoE ATS ATS Set Il (6-13, AU, He 1D so-ee so-ee Sadaa sach saahib saachaa saachee naa-ee. That True Lord is True, Forever True, and True is His Name.
od ot dat wf 3 at guar fafo goret Il (6-13, ay, He 1)
hai bhee hosee jaa-ay na jaasee rachnaa jin rachaa-ee.
He is, and shall always be. He shall not depart, even when this Universe which He has created departs.
dat dat ast afe afte fAoHt wfeor fafe Buret i 6-14, wu, He 1)
rangee rangee bhaatee kar kar jinsee maa-i-aa jin upaa-ee.
He created the world, with its various colors, species of beings, and the variety of Maya.
afte afs fe atst wmuat fae fan et efsnret i (6-14, ay, He 1
kar kar vaykhai keetaa aapnaa jiv tis dee vadi-aa-ee. Having created the creation, He watches over it Himself, by His Greatness.
a fq oe Het at JAH o Ada AeT Il (6-15, FU, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee hukam na karnaa jaa-ee. He does whatever He pleases. No order can be issued to Him.
Aoufsag Ao ufsatog aad JIS TASH QDI (6-15, FY, He D
SO paatisaahu saahaa paatisaahib naanak rahan rajaa-ee. ||27| |
He is the King, the King of kings, the Supreme Lord and Master of kings. Nanak remains subject to His Will. ||27]|
He sy ASH ug Sot fore at aes fasts i 6-16, wy, we 1
munda santokh saram pat jholee Dhi-aan kee karahi bibhoot.
Make contentment your ear-rings, humility your begging bowl, and meditation the ashes you apply to your body.
fie aes anrdt afior qafs Sat usstfs Il (6-16, wy, He D
khinthaa kaal ku-aaree kaa-i-aa jugat dandaa parteet.
Let the remembrance of death be the patched coat you wear, let the purity of virginity be your way in the world, and let faith in the Lord be your walking stick.
niet Uat Aare AHTSHt Hfs AIS Aa AIS I 6-17, ay, He D
aa-ee panthee sagal jamaatee man jeetai jag jeet.
See the brotherhood of all mankind as the highest order of Yogis; conquer your own mind, and conquer the world.
witeA FSA MTeA I (6-17, AU, He 1) aadays tisai aadays. I bow to Him, I humbly bow.
wife nists uate naats Aa Ha Sa SA QC (6-17, FU, He 1)
aad aneel anaad anaahat jug jug ayko vays. ||28]|
The Primal One, the Pure Light, without beginning, without end. Throughout all the ages, He is One and the Same. ||28]|
sats famre efeor garefs ufe wfe aafs STS Il (6-18, FU, He 1
bhugat gi-aan da-i-aa bhandaaran ghat ghat vaajeh naad.
Let spiritual wisdom be your food, and compassion your attendant. The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates in each and every heart.
nfl ae oat AS AT at feta fafa nea ATE Il (6-19, au, He 1)
aap naath naathee sabh jaa kee riDh siDh avraa saad.
He Himself is the Supreme Master of all; wealth and miraculous spiritual powers, and all other external tastes and pleasures, are all like beads on a string.
Ang feng efe ag vorefa Ba nrefa ava Il (6-19, wy, He 1)
sanjog vijog du-ay kaar chalaaveh laykhay aavahi bhaag.
Union with Him, and separation from Him, come by His Will. We come to receive what is written in our destiny.
UST DO
wien FSA Mer Il (7-1, FU, He 1) aadays tisai aadays. I bow to Him, I humbly bow.
nite nists uate naots Aa Wa Sa SA QC (7-1, Fy, He D
aad aneel anaad anaahat jug jug ayko vays. ||29]||
The Primal One, the Pure Light, without beginning, without end. Throughout all the ages, He is One and the Same. ||29]|
Sar Het walls fenret fafa 8B users il (7-2, wu, ve 1) aykaa maa-ee jugat vi-aa-ee tin chaylay parvaan. The One Divine Mother conceived and gave birth to the three deities.
fea Hac fea sarct fea we thre Il (7-2, wy, we YD ik sansaaree ik bhandaaree ik laa-ay deebaan. One, the Creator of the World; One, the Sustainer; and One, the Destroyer.
fae fan aoe foe sore fae TS SINS Il (7-2, FY, wD
jiv tis bhaavai tivai chalaavai jiv hovai furmaan.
He makes things happen according to the Pleasure of His Will. Such is His Celestial Order.
6g fu Gor defe B ore gost Sg fess Il (7-3, wy, He 1) oh vaykhai onaa nadar na aavai bahutaa ayhu vidaan. He watches over all, but none see Him. How wonderful this is!
wien FSA mreA il (7-3, AU, He 1) aadays tisai aadays. I bow to Him, I humbly bow.
nite nists uate neds Aa Ha Sa SA NOM (7-4, wy, He D
aad aneel anaad anaahat jug jug ayko vays. ||30||
The Primal One, the Pure Light, without beginning, without end. Throughout all the ages, He is One and the Same. ||30||
mine Ofe Sf Sas Il (7-4, FU, He 1) aasan lo-ay lo-ay bhandaar. On world after world are His Seats of Authority and His Storehouses.
A fae ufeor A Sat arg Il (7-5, FU, He 1) jo kichh paa-i-aa so aykaa vaar. Whatever was put into them, was put there once and for all.
afe afs a franege Il (7-5, wu, He 1) kar kar vaykhai sirjanhaar. Having created the creation, the Creator Lord watches over it.
Soa AS at ATS aS Il (7-5, TU, He 1) naanak sachay kee saachee kaar. O Nanak, True is the Creation of the True Lord.
witeH FSA MreA I (7-5, AU, He 1) aadays tisai aadays. I bow to Him, I humbly bow.
nite nists uate neds Ha Ha Sa SA NSAI (7-6, FY, He D
aad aneel anaad anaahat jug jug ayko vays. ||31]||
The Primal One, the Pure Light, without beginning, without end. Throughout all the ages, He is One and the Same. ||31]||
fea = ris ou dfo wy defa we AA Il (7-6, wu, we DY
ik doo jeebhou lakh hohi lakh hoveh lakh vees.
If I had 100,000 tongues, and these were then multiplied twenty times more, with each tongue,
BY wy dat midinifs Sa SH AeA Il (7-7, AU, He 1)
lakh lakh gayrhaa aakhee-ahi ayk naam jagdees.
I would repeat, hundreds of thousands of times, the Name of the One, the Lord of the Universe.
ez afe ufs uesion van afe feate i (7-7, wy, wv
ayt raahi pat pavrhee-aa charhee-ai ho-ay ikees.
Along this path to our Husband Lord, we climb the steps of the ladder, and come to merge with Him.
Ale Wes vitarA at Stet iret STA Il (7-8, FU, He D sun galaa aakaas kee keetaa aa-ee rees. Hearing of the etheric realms, even worms long to come back home.
Boa Seat usb St AS SIA WS (7-8, Fy, Hs 1) naanak nadree paa-ee-ai koorhee koorhai thees. ||32]| O Nanak, by His Grace He is obtained. False are the boastings of the false. ||32||
wmafs AT VU ST AT Il (7-9, AU, He D aakhan jor chupai nah jor. No power to speak, no power to keep silent.
ng 3 Hats Uf 3 Ag Il (7-9, FU, He D jor na mangan dayn na jor. No power to beg, no power to give.
fd 3 Hlefe nafs oo Fe Il (7-9, FY, He D
jor na jeevan maran nah jor. No power to live, no power to die.
Ag 3 Of Hf His Ag Il (7-9, FU, He 1) jor na raaj maal man sor. No power to rule, with wealth and occult mental powers.
rgd 3 Hest famrfs Sets it (7-10, wy, He D jor na surtee gi-aan veechaar. No power to gain intuitive understanding, spiritual wisdom and meditation.
Hd 3 Hast Se AAT Il (7-10, wy, He jor na jugtee chhutai sansaar. No power to find the way to escape from the world.
fan ofa ag afs Se APE II (7-10, Fu, He 1D jis hath jor kar vaykhai so-ay. He alone has the Power in His Hands. He watches over all.
Soa SSH aly Safe S33 (7-11, wy, He 1) naanak utam neech na ko-ay. ||33]| O Nanak, no one is high or low. ||33]|
ost gst fast Ss il 7-11, Au, He Y raatee rutee thitee vaar. Nights, days, weeks and seasons;
UE urTat mast UTS Il (7-11, AY, He 1D) pavan paanee agnee paataal. wind, water, fire and the nether regions
fan fete usst atu sat GaN A Il (7-12, FU, He 1D tis vich Dhartee thaap rakhee Dharam saal. -in the midst of these, He established the earth as a home for Dharma.
faq fefe aba wats & Sa i (7-12, wy, we tis vich jee-a jugat kay rang. Upon it, He placed the various species of beings.
f35 A SH MSA MST Il (7-12, FY, He 1D) tin kay naam anayk anant. Their names are uncounted and endless.
aot aent df tere tl (7-13, wu, we 1) karmee karmee ho-ay veechaar. By their deeds and their actions, they shall be judged.
Het nif AS SINT Il (7-13, FU, v8 1) sachaa aap sachaa darbaar. God Himself is True, and True is His Court.
fsa Hofe ue users Il (7-13, FU, He 1) tithai sohan panch parvaan. There, in perfect grace and ease, sit the self-elect, the self-realized Saints.
Sed ASH us SATS Il (7-13, FU, He 1) nadree karam pavai neesaan. They receive the Mark of Grace from the Merciful Lord.
as uaret Ga ure it (7-14, ay, we 1) kach pakaa-ee othai paa-ay. The ripe and the unripe, the good and the bad, shall there be judged.
Soa Tent A ATE Weil (7-14, AU, He 1) naanak ga-i-aa jaapai jaa-ay. ||34] | O Nanak, when you go home, you will see this. ||34] |
UdH Us at Sd WH Il (7-14, AU, we 1D) Dharam khand kaa ayho Dharam. This is righteous living in the realm of Dharma.
fame YS a nig AIH Il (7-15, Ay, He 1) gi-aan khand kaa aakhhu karam. And now we speak of the realm of spiritual wisdom.
aS ues ulat SH3g AS AS HAA Il (7-15, AY, HE 1) kaytay pavan paanee vaisantar kaytay kaan mahays. So many winds, waters and fires; so many Krishnas and Shivas.
as aH wats wstoifs Ju Ia SX SA Il (7-15, FY, He
kaytay barmay ghaarhat gharhee-ahi roop rang kay vays.
So many Brahmas, fashioning forms of great beauty, adorned and dressed in many colors.
ashor aH sot Hs as aS O Buen Il (7-16, Ay, x2 1)
kaytee-aa karam bhoomee mayr kaytay kaytay Dhoo updays.
So many worlds and lands for working out karma. So very many lessons to be learned!
~~. AS 0
as fe Je AT AS AS HTS CA Il (7-16, wy, we 1) kaytay ind chand soor kaytay kaytay mandal days. So many Indras, so many moons and suns, so many worlds and lands.
—. ee
as fro gu aa as aS Set SA Il (7-17, Fy, He D
kaytay siDh buDh naath kaytay kaytay dayvee vays.
So many Siddhas and Buddhas, so many Yogic masters. So many goddesses of various kinds.
a °
as tz woe His AS AS ISS ANE Il (7-17, FU, He D kaytay dayv daanav mun kaytay kaytay ratan samund. So many demi-gods and demons, so many silent sages. So many oceans of jewels.
ashor uat asion gat AS urs ofse il (7-18, wy, He 1) kaytee-aa khaanee kaytee-aa banee kaytay paat narind. So many ways of life, so many languages. So many dynasties of rulers.
asin Ast Aza AZ Soa MZ 5 MT WSU (7-18, AU, He D kaytee-aa surtee sayvak kaytay naanak ant na ant. ||35]|
So many intuitive people, so many selfless servants. O Nanak, His limit has no limit! [135]|
fame us ufo fame usds Il (7-19, wy, He 1 gi-aan khand meh gi-aan parchand. In the realm of wisdom, spiritual wisdom reigns supreme.
fsa ore fase aS niSE Il (7-19, TY, He 1D
tithai naad binod kod anand.
The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates there, amidst the sounds and the sights of bliss.
uae t AGH ds at aret TU Il (8-1, wy, H8 1)
saram khand kee banee roop. In the realm of humility, the Word is Beauty.
fe wats waht as Sy Il (8-1, Fy, we 1) tithai ghaarhat gharhee-ai bahut anoop. Forms of incomparable beauty are fashioned there.
ST Abt der aaa ot As Il (8-1, AU, He 1 taa kee-aa galaa kathee-aa naa jaahi. These things cannot be described.
Aa ad fue ueste il (3-1, wy, He 1 jay ko kahai pichhai pachhutaa-ay. One who tries to speak of these shall regret the attempt.
fsa wsha nafs nfs yfs aftr i (3-2, mu, n2 1)
tithai gharhee-ai surat mat man buDh. The intuitive consciousness, intellect and understanding of the mind are shaped there.
fsa wea Aa fro of afo Séll (8-2, wu, He 1)
tithai gharhee-ai suraa siDhaa kee suDh. ||36||
The consciousness of the spiritual warriors and the Siddhas, the beings of spiritual perfection, are shaped there. ||36]|
AGH us at wat Ag Il (8-3, wy, He D karam khand kee banee jor. In the realm of karma, the Word is Power.
fsa da 5 aet dg Il (8-3, aU, we DD tithai hor na ko-ee hor. No one else dwells there,
fsa AT HITAS Ag Il (8-3, wy, He 1) tithai joDh mahaabal soor. except the warriors of great power, the spiritual heroes.
fae ufo ay shor sauT Il (8-3, AY, He 1) tin meh raam rahi-aa bharpoor. They are totally fulfilled, imbued with the Lord's Essence.
fsa AIS Atst for ofa I (8-4, au, He 1) tithai seeto seetaa mahimaa maahi. Myriads of Sitas are there, cool and calm in their majestic glory.
TA IU G AGS AT Il (8-4, wy, He 1) taa kay roop na kathnay jaahi. Their beauty cannot be described.
a 6fa Hafs & ona ATs Il (8-4, FU, He 1) naa ohi mareh na thaagay jaahi. Neither death nor deception comes to those,
fe & IH SA HS HM II (8-4, FU, He 1) jin kai raam vasai man maahi. within whose minds the Lord abides.
fsa sas eafs & Snr Il (8-5, wy, He 1) tithai bhagat vaseh kay lo-a. The devotees of many worlds dwell there.
adfs Moe Ae fs AE Il (8-5, wy, He D karahi anand sachaa man so-ay. They celebrate; their minds are imbued with the True Lord.
Ae ufs ZH fadarg Il (8-5, wu, He 1) sach khand vasai nirankaar. In the realm of Truth, the Formless Lord abides.
afa afs 24 aefs fore Il (8-6, wu, He 1)
kar kar vaykhai nadar nihaal.
Having created the creation, He watches over it. By His Glance of Grace, He bestows happiness.
fsa Us HIG TIS Il (8-6, TU, He 1 tithai khand mandal varbhand. There are planets, solar systems and galaxies.
Aa aa SF nis 5 MT Il (8-6, AY, HE 1) jay ko kathai ta ant na ant. If one speaks of them, there is no limit, no end.
fsa Sui Bui rag Il (8-6, AU, we 1) tithai lo-a lo-a aakaar. There are worlds upon worlds of His Creation.
fae fae gou foe foe are il (8-7, wu, He 1D jiv jiv hukam tivai tiv kaar. As He commands, so they exist.
zu fear afa eterg Il (8-7, wu, He 1) vaykhai vigsai kar veechaar. He watches over all, and contemplating the creation, He rejoices.
OSA AAG ATS ATT ISIIl (8-7, wy, He 1) naanak kathnaa karrhaa saar. ||37|| O Nanak, to describe this is as hard as steel! ||37]|
Ag uaa Uten Afomis il (8-8, wu, He 1) jat paahaaraa Dheeraj suni-aar. Let self-control be the furnace, and patience the goldsmith.
moate His Se Tam” Il (8-8, wy, Hs ahran mat vayd hathee-aar. Let understanding be the anvil, and spiritual wisdom the tools.
38 ur mats Su aE Il (8-8, FU, He 1 bha-o khalaa agan tap taa-o. With the Fear of God as the bellows, fan the flames of tapa, the body's inner heat.
sist a@ nifys fsa ete il (8-9, wu, He 1) bhaa“daa bhaa-o amrit tit dhaal. In the crucible of love, melt the Nectar of the Name,
waht Age Adt SAAS Il (8-9 FU, He 1) gharhee-ai sabad sachee taksaal. and mint the True Coin of the Shabad, the Word of God.
fe a8 sets aeH fs as Il (8-9 FY, He 1) jin ka-o nadar karam tin kaar. Such is the karma of those upon whom He has cast His Glance of Grace.
Soa edt Seta fess iSil (8-10 Fy, He 1)
naanak nadree nadar nihaal. ||38]| O Nanak, the Merciful Lord, by His Grace, uplifts and exalts them. ||38]|
HSq Il (8-10) salok. Shalok:
ugze Tg urat fust ust gas HIS Il (8-10, F8a) pavan guroo paanee pitaa maataa Dharat mahat. Air is the Guru, Water is the Father, and Earth is the Great Mother of all.
feen ofs vfs wet wfior as Aa AGS Il (8-11, F8a) divas raat du-ay daa-ee daa-i-aa khaylai sagal jagat. Day and night are the two nurses, in whose lap all the world is at play.
dtamretat gfanréior ard UsH Tels Il (8-11, ABa)
chang-aa-ee-aa buri-aa-ee-aa vaachai Dharam hadoor.
Good deeds and bad deeds-the record is read out in the Presence of the Lord of Dharma.
TSH nr wiruat & BS & UfS Il (8-12, Faa)
karmee aapo aapnee kay nayrhai kay door.
According to their own actions, some are drawn closer, and some are driven farther away.
frat om fomrfenr we HAAtS urfs I (8-12, Fea)
jinee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa ga-ay maskat ghaal. Those who have meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and departed after having worked by the sweat of their brows
Sot SHY Cus ast set ots All (-12, FBa)
naanak tay mukh ujlay kaytee chhutee naal. ||1]|
-O Nanak, their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, and many are saved along with them! ||1]|
H Ug Ta MITA HIST A (8-14) so dar raag aasaa mehlaa 1 So Dar ~ That Door. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl:
qe Afsas yATfe il (8-14)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hw sa ag A wg as fas afo Aga AHS (8-14, oo, He 1)
so dar tayraa kayhaa so ghar kayhaa jit bahi sarab samaalay.
Where is That Door of Yours, and where is That Home, in which You sit and take care of all?
SH 3d SS SA MA AS SI WesTs Il (8-15, wT, ne 1)
vaajay tayray naad anayk asankhaa kaytay tayray vaavanhaaray.
The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates there for You, and countless musicians play all sorts of instruments there for You.
as 39 Ta ust FAG admits as 3d Weeds | (8-15, v7, He 1)
kaytay tayray raag paree si-o kahee-ahi kaytay tayray gaavanhaaray.
There are so many Ragas and musical harmonies to You; so many minstrels sing hymns of You.
Wefs SUS UE U'al SHS We TH UI Vs Il (8-16, om, we 1) gaavan tuDhno pavan paanee baisantar gaavai raajaa Dharam du-aaray. Wind, water and fire sing of You. The Righteous Judge of Dharma sings at Your Door.
Wefs 306 fes qus fofa wefe fofa fof cay ates I (8-17, omer, ne
gaavan tuDhno chit gupat likh jaanan likh likh Dharam beechaaray.
Chitr and Gupt, the angels of the conscious and the subconscious who keep the record of actions, and the Righteous Judge of Dharma who reads this record, sing of You.
refs 306 Stag your eet Aafs 3d HET ASS Il (8-17, wT, He 1) gaavan tuDhno eesar barahmaa dayvee sohan tayray sadaa savaaray. Shiva, Brahma and the Goddess of Beauty, ever adorned by You, sing of You.
wes 306 fe fermf= 83 tefsor efs ws Il (8-18, vr, ue 1) gaavan tuDhno indar indaraasan baithay dayviti-aa dar naalay. Indra, seated on His Throne, sings of You, with the deities at Your Door.
Wefs 306 fro md niefs refs sas AG dhers Il (8-19, rrr, He 1) gaavan tuDhno siDh samaaDhee andar gaavan tuDhno saaDh beechaaray. The Siddhas in Samaadhi sing of You; the Saadhus sing of You in contemplation.
Uae Wefs Jud Wat Ast Hsu wefs sue ste aa? Il (9-1, vr, He 1) gaavan tuDhno jatee satee santokhee gaavan tuDhno veer karaaray.
The celibates, the fanatics, and the peacefully accepting sing of You; the fearless warriors sing of You.
Wefs 306 ufss uate ada Ha Ha SET OS I (9-1, wr, ne 1)
gaavan tuDhno pandit parhan rakheesur jug jug vaydaa naalay. The Pandits, the religious scholars who recite the Vedas, with the supreme sages of all the ages, sing of You.
Wefs us Hver Ho Hole Asa HE ufeMrsS | (9-2, um, H: 1)
gaavan tuDhno mohnee-aa man mohan surag machh pa-i-aalay.
The Mohinis, the enchanting heavenly beauties who entice hearts in paradise, in this world, and in the underworld of the subconscious, sing of You.
Wefs 306 Jo Cure 3d nionfs Stee BS Il (9-2, oor, He 1)
gaavan tuDhno ratan upaa-ay tayray athsath tirath naalay.
The celestial jewels created by You, and the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, sing of You.
Wels 30S AU HES AT Wels JUS wat WS Il (9-3, mmr, we 1)
gaavan tuDhno joDh mahaabal sooraa gaavan tuDhno khaanee chaaray.
The brave and mighty warriors sing of You. The spiritual heroes and the four sources of creation sing of You.
refs 306 us 43m qoHs afs afs ga 3d WS Il (9-4, vir, He 1)
gaavan tuDhno khand mandal barahmandaa kar kar rakhay tayray Dhaaray.
The worlds, solar systems and galaxies, created and arranged by Your Hand, sing of You.
AS 306 Wefs FH 30 Tefs GS 3d SAS IASG Il (O-4, wor, we 1)
say-ee tuDhno gaavan jo tuDh bhaavan ratay tayray bhagat rasaalay.
They alone sing of You, who are pleasing to Your Will. Your devotees are imbued with Your Sublime Essence.
dfs a3 306 wets AH fefs 3 nrefs soa fomr ates Il (9-5, nmr, He 1)
hor kaytay tuDhno gaavan say mai chit na aavan naanak ki-aa beechaaray.
So many others sing of You, they do not come to mind. O Nanak, how can I think of them all?
Het Aet Het AY AoE ATT ATS Bret Il (9-5, new, He 1) so-ee so-ee sadaa sach saahib saachaa saachee naa-ee. That True Lord is True, forever True, and True is His Name.
od ot dat wfe 3 AH duo fafs gave I (9-6, nmr, He 1)
hai bhee hosee jaa-ay na jaasee rachnaa jin rachaa-ee.
He is, and shall always be. He shall not depart, even when this Universe which He has created departs.
dat dat ast afe ats front wfeor fafe Curet il (O-6, vr, ne D
rangee rangee bhaatee kar kar jinsee maa-i-aa jin upaa-ee.
He created the world, with its various colors, species of beings, and the variety of Maya.
af afs fy ats wimuart fa fan ct efsnret i 0-7, mr, ve kar kar daykhai keetaa aapnaa ji-o tis dee vadi-aa-ee. Having created the creation, He watches over it Himself, by His Greatness.
a faq ae Het aart fefs gan 3 aget ASH I 9-7, mT, He 1D) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee fir hukam na karnaa jaa-ee. He does whatever He pleases. No one can issue any order to Him.
A ufsag AS ufsAtos Soa Js TASH NAM (9-8, nM, He 1)
SO paatisaahu saahaa patisaahib naanak rahan rajaa-ee. ||1]|
He is the King, the King of kings, the Supreme Lord and Master of kings. Nanak remains subject to His Will. ||1]|
MITAT HIS 4% Il (9-9)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Afs eat wimg Ag afe II (9-9, mr, He 1) sun vadaa aakhai sabh ko-ay. Hearing of His Greatness, everyone calls Him Great.
aes zat Stor SE Il (9-9, mmm, wz 1) kayvad vadaa deethaa ho-ay. But just how Great His Greatness is-this is known only to those who have seen Him.
ams ute 3 afar ATE I (9-9, wr, He 1) keemat paa-ay na kahi-aa jaa-ay. His Value cannot be estimated; He cannot be described.
~ *
Ae BS 3 TI ANTE Al (9-10, vm, ne 1) kahnai vaalay tayray rahay samaa-ay. ||1|| Those who describe You, Lord, remain immersed and absorbed in You. ||1]||
zs Hd Afss afod asta get ate il (9-10, wr, He 1)
vaday mayray saahibaa gahir gambheeraa gunee gaheeraa.
O my Great Lord and Master of Unfathomable Depth, You are the Ocean of Excellence.
afe 5 We 3a ast aes ste UU! TIS I (9-10, nm, ne 1) ko-ay na jaanai tayraa kaytaa kayvad cheeraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. No one knows the extent or the vastness of Your Expanse. ||1||Pause] |
Afs Hast fut Aafs SHE I (9-11, vm, He 1) sabh surtee mil surat kamaa-ee. All the intuitives met and practiced intuitive meditation.
As aus ffs ahafs uret i (9-11, um, ue 1 sabh keemat mil keemat paa-ee. All the appraisers met and made the appraisal.
famrat fomrst a TaTESt I (9-12, wr, ne 1) gi-aanee Dhi-aanee gur gurhaa-ee. The spiritual teachers, the teachers of meditation, and the teachers of teachers
AE B Wet Sct f3q Sanret 2M (9-12, vm, He kahan na jaa-ee tayree til vadi-aa-ee. ||2] | -they cannot describe even an iota of Your Greatness. ||2||
Afs AS Afs su Afs vfamreior I (9-12, nmr, He 1) sabh sat sabh tap sabh chang-aa-ee-aa. All Truth, all austere discipline, all goodness,
for user aor sfanreor il (9-13, nmr, us 1) siDhaa purkhaa kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa. all the great miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas
3g fee fret fas o ureter II (9-13, nmr, He 1) tuDh vin siDhee kinai na paa-ee-aa.
-without You, no one has attained such powers. oath fre ardt ofa goer 3i (9-13, marr, He 1)
karam milai naahee thaak rahaa-ee-aa. ||3]| They are received only by Your Grace. No one can block them or stop their flow. ||3]|
MMS Sree fait SITS | (9-14, wmv, He 1) aakhan vaalaa ki-aa vaychaaraa. What can the poor helpless creatures do?
frest 3d 33 FSS | (9-14, vm, ve 1) siftee bharay tayray bhandaaraa. Your Praises are overflowing with Your Treasures.
fa 3 efo FSA foo oS Il (9-14, wer, He 1) jis too deh tisai ki-aa chaaraa. Those, unto whom You give-how can they think of any other?
OOA AY ASIST A ISI (9-15, »TAT, He 1) naanak sach savaaranhaaraa. ||4||2|| O Nanak, the True One embellishes and exalts. ||4[|2||
YATAT HIST 4 Il (9-15)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
nina Ate fend Hfs AS Il (9-15, ner, He 1) aakhaa jeevaa visrai mar jaa-o. Chanting it, I live; forgetting it, I die.
mrafe mbar Arat oS Il (9-15, nim, He 1) aakhan a-ukhaa saachaa naa-o. It is so difficult to chant the True Name.
ATS SH at Bat FA Il (9-16, wer, Hs 1) saachay naam kee laagai bhookh. If someone feels hunger for the True Name,
Ss gu ute sents TH NA (9-16, wm, He 1) ut bhookhai khaa-ay chalee-ahi dookh. ||1]| that hunger shall consume his pain. ||1]|
A fax@ fend Hot we i (0-16, nmr, nz 1) So ki-o visrai mayree maa-ay. How can I forget Him, O my mother?
AST Afos ATS OTE NA TIS Ml (9-17, mA, He 1) saachaa saahib saachai naa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. True is the Master, True is His Name. ||1]||Pause| |
Ad OH at (3m Sfaniret i (9-17, ner, He 1) saachay naam kee til vadi-aa-ee. Trying to describe even an iota of the Greatness of the True Name,
mifa aad SHS Sot urTet i (9-17, ner, Hs 1) aakh thakay keemat nahee paa-ee. people have grown weary, but they have not been able to evaluate it.
A Afs fife & nee ufo Il (9-18, nr, He 1) jay sabh mil kai aakhan paahi. Even if everyone were to gather together and speak of Him,
za o de whe & AE IQ (9-18, wr, He 1) vadaa na hovai ghaat na jaa-ay. ||2|| He would not become any greater or any lesser. ||2||
o Gg Hd & de] AG Il (9-18, mr, He 1) naa oh marai na hovai sog. That Lord does not die; there is no reason to mourn.
VE II FA ST Il (9-18, wT, He 1) daydaa rahai na chookai bhog. He continues to give, and His Provisions never run short.
TE Sd IT SS AE Il (9-19, wmv, we 1) gun ayho hor naahee ko-ay. This Virtue is His alone; there is no other like Him.
o a dnt ata de Sil (9-19, wm, He 1) naa ko ho-aa naa ko ho-ay. |[3]| There never has been, and there never will be. ||3]|
Aes orfu Sea Sct STS Il (9-19, nmr, He 1) jayvad aap tayvad tayree daat. As Great as You Yourself are, O Lord, so Great are Your Gifts.
Ua 9o fats fes af & atst TFS Ut (0-1, ver, He 1)
jin din kar kai keetee raat. The One who created the day also created the night.
WAH feats 3 ANAS Il (10-1, vr, He 1) khasam visaareh tay kamjaat. Those who forget their Lord and Master are vile and despicable.
Sod oe HS ASS ISI (10-1, wr, ne 1) naanak naavai baajh sanaat. ||4||3]| O Nanak, without the Name, they are wretched outcasts. ||4||3]|
THT TAS HIS 8 il (10-1) raag goojree mehlaa 4. Raag Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs & AS Afsas Asus fase ass as uA Il (10-2, aaet, ue 4)
har kay jan satgur satpurkhaa bina-o kara-o gur paas.
O humble servant of the Lord, O True Guru, O True Primal Being: I offer my humble prayer to You, O Guru.
JH ated fas Afsad Ageet afe efeur ay ugaA AI (10-2, aA, m8 4)
ham keeray kiram satgur sarnaa-ee kar da-i-aa naam pargaas. ||1] |
I am a mere insect, a worm. O True Guru, I seek Your Sanctuary. Please be merciful, and bless me with the Light of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
Ae Hs Tees HAG TH oN usEfA I (0-3, aAet, He 4) mayray meet gurdayv mo ka-o raam naam pargaas. O my Best Friend, O Divine Guru, please enlighten me with the Name of the Lord.
THs SH Ha urs Aurel ofa atefs THdt FIIA NU JIS Il (10-3, TAT, we 4)
gurmat naam mayraa paraan sakhaa-ee har keerat hamree rahraas. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam is my breath of life. The Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is my life's occupation. ||1||Pause| |
dfs AS & Zs Sa Jad fas os ats Aaa ate fuMMA Il (10-4, gat, He 4)
har jan kay vad bhaag vadayray jin har har sarDhaa har pi-aas.
The servants of the Lord have the greatest good fortune; they have faith in the Lord, and a longing for the Lord.
ofa ofa on fe fgusafs fife Hafs ae usarfA 2H (10-5, gat, He 4)
har har naam milai tariptaasahi mil sangat gun pargaas. ||2||
Obtaining the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied; joining the Sangat, the Blessed Congregation, their virtues shine forth. ||2]|
fe of ofs ofs GA OH 6 Ufenr 3 srardie AH UTA II (10-6, act, He 4)
jin har har har ras naam na paa-i-aa tay bhaagheen jam paas.
Those who have not obtained the Sublime Essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, are most unfortunate; they are led away by the Messenger of Death.
A Afsas Hef Hafs odt ore fog ae foo FtetA SI co-6, art, ne 4)
jo satgur saran sangat nahee aa-ay Dharig jeevay Dharig jeevaas. ||3]||
Those who have not sought the Sanctuary of the True Guru and the Sangat, the Holy Congregation-cursed are their lives, and cursed are their hopes of life. ||3]|
fae ofa ae Afsad Hats uct fS0 ufs HASfa fof feta i ao-7, aact, v2 4)
jin har jan satgur sangat paa-ee tin Dhur mastak likhi-aa likhaas.
Those humble servants of the Lord who have attained the Company of the True Guru, have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed on their foreheads.
ug Ue AsHals fas ofe oA feo ffs Ao Soa SH UsATA IISI (0-8, aA, He 4) Dhan Dhan satsangat jit har ras paa-i-aa mil jan naanak naam pargaas. ||4||4]| Blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the Lord's Essence is obtained. Meeting with His humble servant, O Nanak, the Light of the Naam shines forth. ||4||4] |
THT AAS HIS U i (10-8) raag goojree mehlaa 5. Raag Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
ard 3 Ho fesets Cen wv urate ate AIG ufsMr I 0-9, art, He 5)
kaahay ray man chitvahi udam jaa aahar har jee-o pari-aa.
Why, O mind, do you plot and plan, when the Dear Lord Himself provides for your care?
AS ued ufos Hs Cure ST aot fara vrat afs afar All (10-9, aA, He 5)
sail pathar meh jant upaa-ay taa kaa rijak aagai kar Dhari-aa. ||1]|
From rocks and stones He created living beings; He places their nourishment before them. ||1]|
He Ha@ At AsHats fxs A Sfmt I (10-10, TAS, Hs 5)
mayray maaDha-o jee satsangat milay so tari-aa.
O my Dear Lord of souls, one who joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is saved.
ad usAte us ue ute Aa AS Thm AU TITS I (10-10, aA, He 5)
gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa sookay kaasat hari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the supreme status is obtained, and the dry wood blossoms forth again in lush greenery. ||1]]Pause| |
nofe fust Sa AS sfest afe o fan at afar ii co-11, ast, Hs 5) janan pitaa lok sut banitaa ko-ay na kis kee Dhari-aa. Mothers, fathers, friends, children and spouses-no one is the support of anyone else.
fafs fafs fora Fad sag ard Ho SE afanr II (10-12, TAS, Hs 5)
sir sir rijak Sambaahay thaakur kaahay man bha-o kari-aa. ||2| |
For each and every person, our Lord and Master provides sustenance. Why are you so afraid, O mind? ||2]|
G3 Cf ure A ar fH Ue Aes Sfont Il (10-12, TAT, He 5) ooday ood aavai sai kosaa tis paachhai bachray chhari-aa. The flamingoes fly hundreds of miles, leaving their young ones behind.
fso ASE uae ACE Vare HO fg fAHaS afemr Sil Co-13, aA, He 5)
tin kavan khalaavai kavan chugaavai man meh simran kari-aa. ||3]|
Who feeds them, and who teaches them to feed themselves? Have you ever thought of this in your mind? ||3]|
Afs fours eA nine frorS SAT Ad 3B Ufa I (10-13, act, us 5)
sabh niDhaan das asat sidhaan thaakur kar tal Dhari-aa.
All the nine treasures, and the eighteen supernatural powers are held by our Lord and Master in the Palm of His Hand.
Ae ood af afs Ae af Ae Sa nig o uTaefanr SIU (10-14, TAT, He 5)
jan naanak bal bal sad bal jaa-ee-ai tayraa ant na paraavari-aa. ||4||5||
Servant Nanak is devoted, dedicated, forever a sacrifice to You, Lord. Your Expanse has no limit, no boundary. ||4||5||
Ta MTA HIG 8 A USY (10-16) raag aasaa mehlaa 4 so purakh Raag Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, So Purakh ~ That Primal Being:
qe Afsars yArfe I (10-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A usy fadae ofa use fadre ofe wenn iam wrarar il 10-17, nmr, He 4)
so purakh niranjan har purakh niranjan har agmaa agam apaaraa.
That Primal Being is Immaculate and Pure. The Lord, the Primal Being, is Immaculate and Pure. The Lord is Inaccessible, Unreachable and Unrivalled.
Afs fomrefs vfs fourefs su at ofa Ad fener a Il (10-18, rr, He 4) sabh Dhi-aavahi sabh Dhi-aavahi tuDh jee har sachay sirjanhaaraa. All meditate, all meditate on You, Dear Lord, O True Creator Lord.
Afs Abort Sure At S Aber a arava Il (10-18, mmr, He 4) sabh jee-a tumaaray jee too” jee-aa kaa daataaraa. All living beings are Yours-You are the Giver of all souls.
dfs faureg Hag at Afs eu feATseTs Il (10-19, wr, we 4) har Dhi-aavahu santahu jee sabh dookh visaaranhaaraa. Meditate on the Lord, O Saints; He is the Dispeller of all sorrow.
ofa nat oag dfs mm Aza at fam soa AS fearar WAU (10-19, »m, He 4)
har aapay thaakur har aapay sayvak jee ki-aa naanak jant vichaaraa. ||1||
The Lord Himself is the Master, the Lord Himself is the Servant. O Nanak, the poor beings are wretched and miserable! ||1||
UST Aq 3 ue we nists Ava fadste Ft ofs Sa use AHTST Il (11-1, wr, Hs 4) too” ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar jee har ayko purakh samaanaa.
You are constant in each and every heart, and in all things. O Dear Lord, you are the One.
fefa ws fefa suc Ft Afs 33 da festa i i-1, ver, He 4) ik daatay ik bhaykhaaree jee sabh tayray choj vidaanaa. Some are givers, and some are beggars. This is all Your Wondrous Play.
J nmy ast na. SAS" Ht TS sO fae weg 3 AST I (11-2, wm, He 4)
too” aapay daataa aapay bhugtaa jee ha-o tuDh bin avar na jaanaa.
You Yourself are the Giver, and You Yourself are the Enjoyer. I know no other than You.
3 USAIN Mig ans At So for Te nef Sarar i 1-3, wmv, we 4)
too” paarbarahm bay-ant bay-ant jee tayray ki-aa gun aakh vakhaanaa.
You are the Supreme Lord God, Limitless and Infinite. What Virtues of Yours can I speak of and describe?
a Aefs A Aefs 30 At AS aoa fo Agar QI 11-3, wer, He 4)
jo sayveh jo sayveh tuDh jee jan naanak tin kurbaanaa. ||2||
Unto those who serve You, unto those who serve You, Dear Lord, servant Nanak is a sacrifice. ||2||
dfs furefa ofs faurefo su At A AS Aa Hf AMSTAT I (11-4, wr, He 4)
har Dhi-aavahi har Dhi-aavahi tuDh jee say jan jug meh sukhvaasee.
Those who meditate on You, Lord, those who meditate on You-those humble beings dwell in peace in this world.
A Has A Has 3e fra ofe fomrfenr Ft fe Sct AH ot SAT I c1-4, wr, He 4)
say mukat say mukat bha-ay jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa jee tin tootee jam kee faasee.
They are liberated, they are liberated-those who meditate on the Lord. For them, the noose of death is cut away.
fre fess faa ots fass@ fonrfenr at fsa at 38 AS TeSTAT I 11-5, vr, Hs 4)
jin nirbha-o jin har nirbha-o Dhi-aa-i-aa jee tin kaa bha-o sabh gavaasee.
Those who meditate on the Fearless One, on the Fearless Lord-all their fears are dispelled.
faa Afeor fro Afeer He ofa At 3 ats afs gf ATT I ci-6, mmr, He 4)
jin sayvi-aa jin sayvi-aa mayraa har jee tay har har roop samaasee.
Those who serve, those who serve my Dear Lord, are absorbed into the Being of the Lord, Har, Har.
A Uo A Uo fre ofa fomrfeur at Ae aoa fso af ATT SI (1-7, nmr, He 4)
say Dhan say Dhan jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa jee jan naanak tin bal jaasee. ||3]|
Blessed are they, blessed are they, who meditate on their Dear Lord. Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||3]|
oot sats 3c safs garg at ad faris Avis to c-7, om, He: 4)
tayree bhagat tayree bhagat bhandaar jee bharay bi-ant bay-antaa.
Devotion to You, devotion to You, is a treasure overflowing, infinite and beyond measure.
33 303 39 sas AeTle 30 at ote nifsa MSA MST II (11-8, wT, He 4)
tayray bhagat tayray bhagat salaahan tuDh jee har anik anayk anantaa.
Your devotees, Your devotees praise You, Dear Lord, in many and various and countless ways.
3tt oifoa Sct vifsa asta ate ur At su stufs wuts Suis Il (11-9, wer, Hs 4)
tayree anik tayree anik karahi har poojaa jee tap taapeh jaapeh bay-antaa.
For You, many, for You, so very many perform worship services, O Dear Infinite Lord; they practice disciplined meditation and chant endlessly.
33 mda 3d visa uate ag fAhyfs AAS at afe fafeur we ASH AIST I (11-10, wr, Hs 4) tayray anayk tayray anayk parheh baho simrit saasat jee kar kiri-aa khat karam karantaa.
For You, many, for You, so very many read the various Simritees and Shaastras. They perform rituals and religious rites.
A ds A SIs FG Ho oa HM A Hefa AS Tile SHS INI 11-10, we, He 4)
say bhagat say bhagat bhalay jan naanak jee jo bhaaveh mayray har bhagvantaa. [141]
Those devotees, those devotees are sublime, O servant Nanak, who are pleasing to my Dear Lord God. ||4||
3 onfe usy nudug aes At SU Aes uieg 3 Ae I Ci-u, ww, ws 4)
too” aad purakh aprampar kartaa jee tuDh jayvad avar na ko-ee.
You are the Primal Being, the Most Wonderful Creator. There is no other as Great as You.
3 WT Wa a AS Ae Ss Sa At S feaee AIT At Il (1-12, we, ws 4)
too” jug jug ayko sadaa sadaa too" ayko jee too” nihchal kartaa so-ee.
Age after age, You are the One. Forever and ever, You are the One. You never change, O Creator Lord.
30 omy ae Het eas At ST ym aafa A Tet Il (1-12, wr, Hs 4) tuDh aapay bhaavai so-ee vartai jee too’ aapay karahi so ho-ee. Everything happens according to Your Will. You Yourself accomplish all that occurs.
3u nm fqrfe AS Curet Ft su yd fafa AS Get I (1-13, vm, He 4)
tuDh aapay sarisat sabh upaa-ee jee tuDh aapay siraj sabh go-ee.
You Yourself created the entire universe, and having fashioned it, You Yourself shall destroy it all.
HG Sod Te We ads a At HW ASA aT weet MUNA (11-13, nA, He 4)
jan naanak gun gaavai kartay kay jee jo sabhsai kaa jaano-ee. ||5||1||
Servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Dear Creator, the Knower of all. HS] 141
MTAT HIG 8 Il (11-14)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
3 aos Afsorg HST APET I (11-14, mmr, He 4) too” kartaa sachiaar maidaa saa‘-ee. You are the True Creator, my Lord and Master.
A 38 oe Het Sat AT Ufa Aet TS wet ua TTS ll 1-15, we, ws 4) jo ta-o bhaavai so-ee theesee jo too’ deh so-ee ha-o paa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Whatever pleases You comes to pass. As You give, so do we receive. ||1]||Pause| |
Ag Sat 3 Ast foorfenr it c-15, wer, He 4) sabh tayree too” sabhnee Dhi-aa-i-aa. All belong to You, all meditate on you.
fan 3 faut acts ffs on ase urfeer Ih c-16, vr, 2 4)
jis no kirpaa karahi tin naam ratan paa-i-aa.
Those who are blessed with Your Mercy obtain the Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
TaHte war Houfe aetfent i (11-16, nmr, Hs 4) gurmukh laaDhaa manmukh gavaa-i-aa. The Gurmukhs obtain it, and the self-willed manmukhs lose it.
3g vty feefaur vrfy ferfemr all ci-16, »mr, He 4) tuDh aap vichhorhi-aa aap milaa-i-aa. ||1|| You Yourself separate them from Yourself, and You Yourself reunite with them again.
[21 3 adore As 35 ot fs il 1-17, wr, we 4)
too” daree-aa-o sabh tujh hee maahi. You are the River of Life; all are within You.
33 fag gar aet ofa Wt 1-17, wr, ws 4) tujh bin doojaa ko-ee naahi. There is no one except You.
aba AS Afs Sa Bw Il (1-18, wear, He 4) jee-a jant sabh tayraa khayl. All living beings are Your playthings.
fenfa firs feefaor Ada HS QU ai-1s, wm, He 4)
vijog mil vichhurhi-aa sanjogee mayl. ||2| |
The separated ones meet, and by great good fortune, those suffering in separation are reunited once again. ||2||
fan 6 3 Warfefa ASt AG AS Il (1-18, »m, He 4) jis no too jaanaa-ihi so-ee jan jaanai. They alone understand, whom You inspire to understand;
dfs TE Ae ot orfy SwveS | (11-19, new, He 4) har gun sad hee aakh vakhaanai. they continually chant and repeat the Lord's Praises.
fate ofa Afeor fate Ay ufenr it ci-19, »rr, He 4) jin har sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa. Those who serve You find peace.
Hon dt dfs oth Aner SI (1-19, »rr, He 4) sehjay hee har naam samaa-i-aa. ||3]| They are intuitively absorbed into the Lord's Name. ||3]|
UST A 3 omy ass So ator Ag AE I 2-1, wm, we 4)
too aapay kartaa tayraa kee-aa sabh ho-ay. You Yourself are the Creator. Everything that happens is by Your Doing.
30 fag gat neg o AE I 12-1, wr, Hs 4) tuDh bin doojaa avar na ko-ay. There is no one except You.
3 afs afe sufo wrefa APE Il (12-1, wr, Hs 4) too kar kar vaykheh jaaneh so-ay. You created the creation; You behold it and understand it.
HS aoa Dente us| TE USM (12-2, wm, He 4)
jan naanak gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||4|[2||
O servant Nanak, the Lord is revealed through the Gurmukh, the Living Expression of the Guru's Word. ||4]|2]]|
YTAT HIST 4 Il (12-2)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
faz Adees 388 foe urat urea fafa ator Il 12-2, ner, we 1) tit saravrarhai bha-eelay nivaasaa paanee paavak tineh kee-aa. In that pool, people have made their homes, but the water there is as hot as fire!
Uae HT us sot TS TH Sar sa Tas AU 12-3, vw, we
pankaj moh pag nahee chaalai ham daykhaa tah doobee-alay. ||1||
In the swamp of emotional attachment, their feet cannot move. I have seen them drowning there. ||1]|
HO SA 6 VS UF HOT Il (12-4, mm, He 1) man ayk na chaytas moorh manaa. In your mind, you do not remember the One Lord-you fool!
dfs fangs 33 Te afer a TIS Il 2-4, vem, ve 1) har bisrat tayray gun gali-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have forgotten the Lord; your virtues shall wither away. ||1||Pause| |
a 38 Ast Ast odt ufsor Hee Ha ASH Stem Il 12-4, wer, He 1)
naa ha-o jatee satee nahee parhi-aa moorakh mugDhaa janam bha-i-aa.
I am not celibate, nor truthful, nor scholarly. I was born foolish and ignorant into this world.
yeets aren fa at Age faa 3 ordt Safar QBN (12-5, wr, HE 1)
paranvat naanak tin kee sarnaa jin too naahee veesri-aa. ||2||3]| Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of those who have not forgotten You, O Lord! 2113] |
MTAT HI U Il (12-6)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
set usufs HEY SIMI Ih (12-6, nmr, He 5) bha-ee paraapat maanukh dayhuree-aa. This human body has been given to you.
dfse fue oft fea Sat adver il (12-6, nmr, ue 5) gobind milan kee ih tayree baree-aa. This is your chance to meet the Lord of the Universe.
wets aA 3d fxs B AM Il (12-6, mr, He 5) avar kaaj tayrai kitai na kaam. Nothing else will work.
fies WOHnafs SH ASH SH NA (12-7, mT, Hs 5)
mil saaDhsangat bhaj kayval naam. ||1]|
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; vibrate and meditate on the Jewel of the Naam. ||1]|
Hd tH Sa SSHG SIS SF Il (12-7, wow, ve 5) sara\jaam laag bhavjal taran kai. Make every effort to cross over this terrifying world-ocean.
Aon fge ws df arfeor & na TIC Ut (12-8, wer, ne 5) janam baritha jaat rang maa-i-aa kai. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are squandering this life uselessly in the love of Maya. ||1]||Pause] |
AU 3U AHH Us © NEM I (12-8, wr, He 5) jap tap sanjam Dharam na kamaa-i-aa. I have not practiced meditation, self-discipline, self-restraint or righteous living.
Aa AG 3 Atom ofe ahem I 12-8, wir, He 5)
sayvaa saaDh na jaani-aa har raa-i-aa. I have not served the Holy; I have not acknowledged the Lord, my King.
AT SSA JH Sle ATH Il (12-9, nwt, He 5) kaho naanak ham neech karammaa. Says Nanak, my actions are contemptible!
Hate ud At TUT AGH NUM (12-9, ww, He 5) Saran paray kee raakho sarmaa. ||2||4]]| O Lord, I seek Your Sanctuary; please, preserve my honor! ||2||4]|
Hfoer wa meat chuet Hae A 12-10) sohilaa raag ga-orhee deepkee mehlaa 1 Sohilaa ~ The Song Of Praise. Raag Gauree Deepakee, First Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (12-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
a ufg atefs wmibt aes ar dfe sted il (12-11, a@st crust, v4: 1) jai ghar keerat aakhee-ai kartay kaa ho-ay beechaaro. In that house where the Praises of the Creator are chanted and contemplated
faz ufs reg Afse frefeg froneod NA (2-11, a@st Aref, He 1 tit ghar gaavhu sohilaa sivrihu sirjanhaaro. ||1|| -in that house, sing Songs of Praise; meditate and remember the Creator Lord. ||1]|
3H Weg AS fesse at Afser |i (12-12, ast Hust, ve 1) tum gaavhu mayray nirbha-o kaa sohilaa. Sing the Songs of Praise of my Fearless Lord.
JG adt fs Afss Wet AY SE NU TIS Ut (12-12, ast Hust, nz 1) ha-o vaaree jit sohilai sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to that Song of Praise which brings eternal peace. ||1]|Pause| |
fos fas thas mrsinifs tear esas Il 12-13, west cel, ue 1) nit nit jee-arhay samaalee-an daykhaigaa dayvanhaar. Day after day, He cares for His beings; the Great Giver watches over all.
3d we abs o ue fSA BS ACS ANT INQM (12-13, aGat christ, we 1) tayray daanai keemat naa pavai tis daatay kavan sumaar. ||2|| Your Gifts cannot be appraised; how can anyone compare to the Giver? ||2||
Hafs Aro fofimr fife afs ureg 36 I (12-14, a@at chat, ne 1) sambat saahaa likhi-aa mil kar paavhu tayl.
The day of my wedding is pre-ordained. Come, gather together and pour the oil over the threshold.
2g Ane mAtAsor fa de Afos fAS Hw SI 12-14, agat crust, He dayh sajan aseesrhee-aa ji-o hovai saahib si-o mayl. ||3]| My friends, give me your blessings, that I may merge with my Lord and Master. ||3]|
ufs wfg fd urge Aes fos uefe Il 12-15, west chee, He 1)
ghar ghar ayho paahuchaa sad-rhay nit pavann.
Unto each and every home, into each and every heart, this summons is sent out; the call comes each and every day.
Reaod fandba soa A fea mrefs eal 32-16, ret Aust, ue 1) sadanhaaraa simree-ai naanak say dih aavann. ||4||1]|
Remember in meditation the One who summons us; O Nanak, that day is drawing near! ||4|[1]|
TT MTAT HIST 4% Il (12-16) raag aasaa mehlaa 1. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl:
fam we fant ad fant Sue Il (12-16, nmr, He 1) chhi-a ghar chhi-a gur chhi-a updays. There are six schools of philosophy, six teachers, and six sets of teachings.
TI TI Sa SA MSA WAU (12-17, wm, ve 1) gur gur ayko vays anayk. ||1|| But the Teacher of teachers is the One, who appears in so many forms. ||1]|
wa A ufs as atefs of i 12-17, om, we 1) baabaa jai ghar kartay keerat ho-ay. O Baba: that system in which the Praises of the Creator are sung
Awe oy zaret Sf a TIC il 2-17, ver, ve
so ghar raakh vadaa-ee to-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. -follow that system; in it rests true greatness. ||1]|Pause] |
fene offer wstor use fast edt Hg Iv I (12-18, nm, 2 1) visu-ay chasi-aa gharhee-aa pahraa thitee vaaree maahu ho-aa. The seconds, minutes and hours, days, weeks and months,
Hoy Sa BS nse Il (12-18, ww, ws 1) sooraj ayko rut anayk. and the various seasons originate from the one sun;
ust 93
SSA AIS A AS SA QUI (43-1, wm, wz 1)
naanak kartay kay kaytay vays. ||2||2||
O Nanak, in just the same way, the many forms originate from the Creator. ||2||2]|
Ta USAT HIS Y Il (13-1) raag Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Raag Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
do Hae de ve cha 9 star ise Hea HT Il 13-1, dae, He 1)
gagan mai thaal rav chand deepak banay taarikaa mandal janak motee.
Upon that cosmic plate of the sky, the sun and the moon are the lamps. The stars and their orbs are the studded pearls.
UY HOMISS USS Ved AT AIG Boots SHS AST UI (13-2, got, ws 1)
Dhoop mal-aanlo pavan chavro karay sagal banraa-ay foolant jotee. ||1||
The fragrance of sandalwood in the air is the temple incense, and the wind is the fan. All the plants of the world are the altar flowers in offering to You, O Luminous Lord.
[2
ant orast ofe i se UseT Sat rest I 03-3, cast, we 1)
kaisee aartee ho-ay. bhav khandnaa tayree aartee.
What a beautiful Aartee, lamp-lit worship service this is! O Destroyer of Fear, this is Your Ceremony of Light.
Woda AG SHS Sat UU FIC il 13-3, csvAct, ve
anhataa sabad vaajant bhayree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad is the vibration of the temple drums. ||1]|Pause] |
HUA 3z 3S HS 3 Tio 3fa AS AIA Hols sat Sa Sat ll 13-3, aot, 3 1)
sahas tav nain nan nain heh tohi ka-o sahas moorat nanaa ayk tohee.
You have thousands of eyes, and yet You have no eyes. You have thousands of forms, and yet You do not have even one.
HOA ud fans oo fa ue au fae AOA Se aia fES BOS Hat MN 13-4, carAct, He 1) sahas pad bimal nan ayk pad ganDh bin sahas tav ganDh iv chalat mohee. ||2| |
You have thousands of Lotus Feet, and yet You do not have even one foot. You have no nose, but you have thousands of noses. This Play of Yours entrances me. ||2| |
AS Hfo Afs Afs o APE WN 3-5, carASt, He 1) sabh meh jot jot hai so-ay. Amongst all is the Light-You are that Light.
fan & wofs As nfs woe SF Il 13-5, dae, He 1) tis dai chaanan sabh meh chaanan ho-ay. By this Illumination, that Light is radiant within all.
ae Andt afs usae de Il 113-6, cart, He 1) gur saakhee jot pargat ho-ay. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Light shines forth.
a fA oe A rest OF ISI 13-6, dart, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so aartee ho-ay. ||3]| That which is pleasing to Him is the lamp-lit worship service. ||3]|
dfs Bde ATG Hades Siss nS miofes Hfs wordt fumMAr | 13-6, garAct, He DY
har charan kaval makrand lobhit mano andino mohi aahee pi-aasaa.
My mind is enticed by the honey-sweet Lotus Feet of the Lord. Day and night, I thirst for them.
faut ne efs soa aida a df a 3S 3d ofS ST ISIS 03-7, cert, He 1D
kirpaa jal deh naanak saaring ka-o ho-ay jaa tay tayrai naa-ay vaasaa. ||4||3]| Bestow the Water of Your Mercy upon Nanak, the thirsty song-bird, so that he may come to dwell in Your Name. ||4|[3]|
TH ACH usat HIG 8 Il (13-8) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
oth ada sag ag stor fife Ag ase dsrT Il 13-8, a@at yee, we 4)
kaam karoDh nagar baho bhari-aa mil saaDhoo khandal khanda hay.
The body-village is filled to overflowing with anger and sexual desire; these were broken into bits when I met with the Holy Saint.
yata fous fad ag ufenr nfs afe foe Hae Hat T AU 413-9, aes yet, He 4)
poorab likhat likhay gur paa-i-aa man har liv mandal mandaa hay. ||1||
By pre-ordained destiny, I have met with the Guru. I have entered into the realm of the Lord's Love. ||1]|
ate AY viget Ug st T Il (13-9, ast yset, we 4) kar saaDhoo anjulee pun vadaa hay. Greet the Holy Saint with your palms pressed together; this is an act of great merit.
afs S383 us Fa" T NU TIS Ul 113-10, aeat yaet, ue 4) kar dand-ut pun vadaa hay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Bow down before Him; this is a virtuous action indeed. ||1]||Pause| |
Was dfs aA Ae 3 Wer fso nists TH ase F Il 13-10, west yaet, He 4)
saakat har ras saad na jaani-aa tin antar ha-umai kandaa hay.
The wicked shaaktas, the faithless cynics, do not know the Taste of the Lord's Sublime Essence. The thorn of egotism is embedded deep within them.
fa@ fa vafs us eu uefa HHS Aafo fafs So T NN 3-11, wat yost, ve 4)
ji-o ji-o chaleh chubhai dukh paavahi jamkaal saheh sir dandaa hay. ||2||
The more they walk away, the deeper it pierces them, and the more they suffer in pain, until finally, the Messenger of Death smashes his club against their heads. ||2]|
ofe He ofa ofs oH AHS BY ASH HS SS MTT Il (13-11, aSat ysett, ve 4)
har jan har har naam samaanay dukh janam maran bhav khanda hay.
The humble servants of the Lord are absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The pain of birth and the fear of death are eradicated.
nifsort usa uffor ughAg ag As os YIHS T SI (13-12, west yaet, He 4) abhinaasee purakh paa-i-aa parmaysar baho sobh khand barahmandaa hay. ||3]|| They have found the Imperishable Supreme Being, the Transcendent Lord God, and they receive great honor throughout all the worlds and realms. ||3]|
JH ada HAalS Us So Ts TY TY Ss Fa" T Il (13-13, aSat ysett, we 4)
ham gareeb maskeen parabh tayray har raakh raakh vad vadaa hay.
I am poor and meek, God, but I belong to You! Save me-please save me, O Greatest of the Great!
HS SSa OH ng 2a 0 ae oH dt AY Ha ISIS 43-13, Test Yseh, He 4)
jan naanak naam aDhaar tayk hai har naamay hee sukh mandaa hay. ||4||4| Servant Nanak takes the Sustenance and Support of the Naam. In the Name of the Lord, he enjoys celestial peace. ||4||4||
TH ASS ysat HIG U Il (13-14) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5. Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fifth Mehl:
ase Fsst Heg AS Hist AS fos at Far I 03-14, aSst vse, us 5) kara-o baynantee sunhu mayray meetaa sant tahal kee baylaa. Listen, my friends, I beg of you: now is the time to serve the Saints!
de ufe vag dfs oe nid SAG AIS IAI (13-15, aGSt yaet, Hs 5)
eehaa Khaat chalhu har laahaa aagai basan suhaylaa. ||1]|
In this world, earn the profit of the Lord's Name, and hereafter, you shall dwell in peace. ||1||
ni@u we fear des Il Ho as fife oH ASS A TIS Il 13-15, aSst yet, ne 5) a-oDh ghatai dinas rainaaray. man gur mil kaaj savaaray. ||1]| rahaa-o.
This life is diminishing, day and night. Meeting with the Guru, your affairs shall be resolved. ||1]|Pause| |
feg HAG faorg HA Hfs sfeG yon famrat il 113-16, wat yaet, He 5)
ih sansaar bikaar sansay meh tari-o barahm gi-aanee.
This world is engrossed in corruption and cynicism. Only those who know God are saved.
fants warfe ube feg oA wie aer f3fe ATS IQI (3-17, aGet uae, Hs 5)
jisahi jagaa-ay pee-aavai ih ras akath kathaa tin jaanee. ||2||
Only those who are awakened by the Lord to drink in this Sublime Essence, come to know the Unspoken Speech of the Lord. ||2]|
Wag ure Het faosg fs ae 3 Hofs SAT Il (13-17, aSat ust, He 5)
jaa ka-o aa-ay so-ee bihaajhahu har gur tay maneh basayraa.
Purchase only that for which you have come into the world, and through the Guru, the Lord shall dwell within your mind.
for wha Hoe uTSg AY AOA Sofs o dfs Sa SI 13-18, wat vast, He 5)
nij ghar mahal paavhu sukh sehjay bahur na ho-igo fayraa. ||3] |
Within the home of your own inner being, you shall obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence with intuitive ease. You shall not be consigned again to the wheel of reincarnation. ||3||
visor usa frors Heat He at UT Il (13-18, ast yset, He 5)
antarjaamee purakh biDhaatay sarDhaa man kee pooray.
O Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts, O Primal Being, Architect of Destiny: please fulfill this yearning of my mind.
area oy fed AY Ha H aS afe ASS at TS USUI (13-19, aeat yee, Hs 5) naanak daas ihai sukh maagai mo ka-o kar santan kee Dhooray. ||4||5||
Nanak, Your slave, begs for this happiness: let me be the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|5]|
ust 4 qe Afsars yAfe It (14-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
va fAdtea Hoe ufser 9 we 4 Il (14-2) raag sireeraag mehlaa pahilaa 1 ghar 1. Raag Siree Raag, First Mehl, First House:
Hst 3 Hes Grafs asat 5 dfo Aa it 04-3, frdtora, we motee ta mandar oosreh ratnee ta hohi jarhaa-o. If I had a palace made of pearls, inlaid with jewels,
aAsts aa viata dete sifu mire TS il (14-3, fasta, ve 1) kastoor kungoo agar chandan leep aavai chaa-o. scented with musk, saffron and sandalwood, a sheer delight to behold
Hg tf gor Ans 3a fats o ur] aS UU 14-3, frdtora, we
mat daykh bhoolaa veesrai tayraa chit na aavai naa-o. ||1||
-seeing this, I might go astray and forget You, and Your Name would not enter into my mind. ||1]|
dfs fas AIG afe afs WE I 114-4, firdtera, ve 1) har bin jee-o jal bal jaa-o. Without the Lord, my soul is scorched and burnt.
Hootuar ag ufe efimr neg ant eS na TIS i 114-4, firsts, we mai aapnaa gur poochh daykhi-aa avar naahee thaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I consulted my Guru, and now I see that there is no other place at all. ||1||Pause] |
Udst 3 dtd WS Asst UShW we ASS Il (114-5, fadtea, ve 1)
Dhartee ta heeray laal jarh-tee palagh laal jarhaa-o.
If the floor of this palace was a mosaic of diamonds and rubies, and if my bed was encased with rubies,
Haat ufa Hat AS ad sfor uA i 4-5, fdtera, ne 1)
mohnee mukh manee sohai karay rang pasaa-o.
and if heavenly beauties, their faces adorned with emeralds, tried to entice me with sensual gestures of love
Hg ef gor Aas Sa fats 3 wr] aS iil (14-6, frdtora, ws
mat daykh bhoolaa veesrai tayraa chit na aavai naa-o. ||2| |
-seeing these, I might go astray and forget You, and Your Name would not enter into my mind. ||2||
fro da fafa oret fafa mmr nr I 14-6, firdtora, ve siDh hovaa siDh laa-ee riDh aakhaa aa-o. If I were to become a Siddha, and work miracles, summon wealth
qus udde df sr Ba ga aE I 14-7, fadtea, we gupat pargat ho-ay baisaa lok raakhai bhaa-o. and become invisible and visible at will, so that people would hold me in awe
Hg tf gor Aas Sa feats 3 ure a sil 04-7, frdtora, we
mat daykh bhoolaa veesrai tayraa chit na aavai naa-o. ||3]|
-seeing these, I might go astray and forget You, and Your Name would not enter into my mind. ||3||
Hess det nfs oAad sufs mr urs I 14-8, fate, ue 1) sultaan hovaa mayl laskar takhat raakhaa paa-o. If I were to become an emperor and raise a huge army, and sit on a throne,
JOH JAS adt st Soa AS ag Il (14-8, frrdterar, He 1)
hukam haasal karee baithaa naankaa sabh vaa-o.
issuing commands and collecting taxes-O Nanak, all of this could pass away like a puff of wind.
Hg tf gor Aas Sa fats o ur] aS sual (4-9, frdtoa, we mat daykh bhoolaa veesrai tayraa chit na aavai naa-o. ||4||1||
Seeing these, I might go astray and forget You, and Your Name would not enter into my mind. ||4||1]|
frrstarat HIS 9 Il (14-9) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
afe act Act wren ues unis wifimrS i 14-10, fasta, v2 1) kot kotee mayree aarjaa pavan pee-an api-aa-o. If I could live for millions and millions of years, and if the air was my food and drink,
Je Hed ule Te 3 Se Aus ABS 5 HS Il (14-10, fastora, we 1)
chand sooraj du-ay gufai na daykhaa supnai sa-un na thaa-o.
and if I lived in a cave and never saw either the sun or the moon, and if I never slept, even in dreams
at sat ohifs a ue g@ aes wm are 9 (4-11, facta, v2 1 bhee tayree keemat naa pavai ha-o kayvad aakhaa naa-o. ||1]|
-even so, I could not estimate Your Value. How can I describe the Greatness of Your Name? ||1]|
Aa fodarg for ate it (4-11, fate, ve 1) saachaa nirankaar nij thaa-ay. The True Lord, the Formless One, is Himself in His Own Place.
Afs afs wrgs wget A are as SHAE NU TTC Il 14-11, fetes, ve 0
sun sun aakhan aakh-naa jay bhaavai karay tamaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have heard, over and over again, and so I tell the tale; as it pleases You, Lord, please instill within me the yearning for You. ||1]|Pause| |
an acho arg arg ulate uta ue Il (14-12, firdtora, He 1)
kusaa katee-aa vaar vaar peesan peesaa paa-ay.
If I was slashed and cut into pieces, over and over again, and put into the mill and ground into flour,
Mat Ast Wem SAH ASt of ATE Il (14-12, frrdtea, ne 1D agee saytee jaalee-aa bhasam saytee ral jaa-o. burnt by fire and mixed with ashes
ot Sct ates a ue vB aes mmr ar QM 4-13, fasto, ve bhee tayree keemat naa pavai ha-o kayvad aakhaa naa-o. ||2||
-even then, I could not estimate Your Value. How can I describe the Greatness of Your Name? ||2| |
Udt df] & A Set A mAHTAt AE I 14-13, fist, He 1) pankhee ho-ay kai jay bhavaa sai asmaanee jaa-o. If I was a bird, soaring and flying through hundreds of heavens,
Seat far o ures a fag ult 5 aS i 4-14, firdtora, we nadree kisai na aav-oo naa kichh pee-aa na khaa-o. and if I was invisible, neither eating nor drinking anything
at sat ohifs at ue g@ aes nmr are 3 (14-14, factera, He 1) bhee tayree keemat naa pavai ha-o kayvad aakhaa naa-o. ||3]|
-even so, I could not estimate Your Value. How can I describe the Greatness of Your Name? ||3||
ust qu Sod aae wy Het ufs ufs ate aS i 15-1, frets, we 1) naanak kaagad lakh manaa parh parh keechai bhaa-o.
O Nanak, if I had hundreds of thousands of stacks of paper, and if I were to read and recite and embrace love for the Lord,
HA Sfe 3 ureet Sule uSE Bors i (15-1, frdtora, we masoo tot na aavee laykhan pa-un chalaa-o. and if ink were never to fail me, and if my pen were able to move like the wind
at sat ohifs a ue g@ aes nmr are igi (5-2, fadtera, we 1) bhee tayree keemat naa pavai ha-o kayvad aakhaa naa-o. ||4]|2]|
-even so, I could not estimate Your Value. How can I describe the Greatness of Your Name? ||4||2]|
frrstarat HIS FI (15-2) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Ba AGS FHST BA urat ur I 15-3, facta, ve 1)
laykhai bolan bolnaa laykhai khaanaa khaa-o.
As it is pre-ordained, people speak their words. As it is pre-ordained, they consume their food.
Ba we vorinn Be Afs Sr il 5-3, fadtora, ve
laykhai vaat chalaa-ee-aa laykhai sun vaykhaa-o.
As it is pre-ordained, they walk along the way. As it is pre-ordained, they see and hear.
Be AT Betinifs us fa use AE NU (15-3, fadteora, ve 1)
laykhai saah lavaa-ee-ahi parhay ke puchhan jaa-o. ||1]|
As it is pre-ordained, they draw their breath. Why should I go and ask the scholars about this? ||1]|
war wife gear Oe Il (15-4, fadtea, He 1) baabaa maa-i-aa rachnaa Dhohu. O Baba, the splendor of Maya is deceptive.
nia oy ferfoor a faq fa Ger Al FIC Il 115-4, faster", we anDhai naam visaari-aa naa tis ayh na oh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The blind man has forgotten the Name; he is in limbo, neither here nor there. ||1]|Pause| |
dtes Heat ae a SS uA ats I (15-5, fdtea, we 1) jeevan marnaa jaa-ay kai aythai khaajai kaal. Life and death come to all who are born. Everything here gets devoured by Death.
fra ufo nyse fea af 3 af ate I 5-5, fadtea, He 1) jithai bahi samjaa-ee-ai tithai ko-ay na chali-o naal. He sits and examines the accounts, there where no one goes along with anyone.
dee TS ASS Afs dofs Us uate Nl (5-6, frstoa, He 1) rovan vaalay jayt-rhay sabh baneh pand paraal. ||2|| Those who weep and wail might just as well all tie bundles of straw. ||2||
AS a me gos gos ule B mre AfE Il (15-6, fadtera, He 1) sabh ko aakhai bahut bahut ghat na aakhai ko-ay. Everyone says that God is the Greatest of the Great. No one calls Him any less.
ants fas o ureter aufe 3 zat dfe I (15-7, fates, we 1)
keemat kinai na paa-ee-aa kahan na vadaa ho-ay. No one can estimate His Worth. By speaking of Him, His Greatness is not increased.
We AE Sa 5 ofa Hor as Br Il (15-7, fasta, ws saachaa saahab ayk too hor jee-aa kaytay lo-a. ||3]|| You are the One True Lord and Master of all the other beings, of so many worlds.
[I3I|
ate niete ote ws atet g us ate i aoa fo & Afar Ate sfsur fag for str I cs- 8, frdtear, He 1)
neechaa andar neech jaat neechee hoo at neech. naanak tin kai sang saath vadi-aa si- Oo ki-aa rees.
Nanak seeks the company of the lowest of the low class, the very lowest of the low. Why should he try to compete with the great?
fra ate ANSfs fsa sefa Sct TUAIA ISIS (5-9, facta, He 1)
jithai neech samaalee-an tithai nadar tayree bakhsees. ||4||3]]|
In that place where the lowly are cared for-there, the Blessings of Your Glance of Grace rain down. ||4|[3]|
frrstaar HIS FI (15-9) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
BI AS’ AT YIa" ofa wa Hse, Il (15-9, fastoa, we 1)
lab kutaa koorh choohrhaa thag khaaDhaa murdaar.
Greed is a dog; falsehood is a filthy street-sweeper. Cheating is eating a rotting carcass.
ug fSer ug HS HY At mrafe ao VSS Il 115-10, fadtora, He
par nindaa par mal mukh suDhee agan kroDh chandaal.
Slandering others is putting the filth of others into your own mouth. The fire of anger is the outcaste who burns dead bodies at the crematorium.
dA AA ny Ae Wal & AIH AT AIST MAUI (15-10, frstoa, Hz 1)
ras kas aap salaahnaa ay karam mayray kartaar. ||1]|
I am caught in these tastes and flavors, and in self-conceited praise. These are my actions, O my Creator! ||1]|
aa saint ufS of& i as5-11, facta, ne 1) baabaa bolee-ai pat ho-ay. O Baba, speak only that which will bring you honor.
GsuH A ef Osu adits ate aan afe SE A FHS i 5-11, frstora, He 1)
ootam say dar ootam kahee-ahi neech karam bahi ro-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They alone are good, who are judged good at the Lord's Door. Those with bad karma can only sit and weep. ||1||Pause| |
oA Afest dA gut HE IA USHS St SA Il (15-12, fadtora, He 1)
ras Su-inaa ras rupaa kaaman ras parmal kee vaas.
The pleasures of gold and silver, the pleasures of women, the pleasure of the fragrance of sandalwood,
dA ws dA AW Hed JA He IA HA Il (15-12, fdteora, ve 1)
ras ghorhay ras sayjaa mandar ras meethaa ras maas.
the pleasure of horses, the pleasure of a soft bed in a palace, the pleasure of sweet treats and the pleasure of hearty meals
SS A Add a a ue aM feeA NQM (15-13, factor, He 1)
aytay ras sareer kay kai ghat naam nivaas. ||2||
-these pleasures of the human body are so numerous; how can the Naam, the Name of the Lord, find its dwelling in the heart? ||2]|
fas Sf ufs unt A sfemr users Il 15-13, fasta, He 1) jit boli-ai pat paa-ee-ai so boli-aa parvaan. Those words are acceptable, which, when spoken, bring honor.
feor af feque Afs Hoe Ho MATE II 15-14, firdtora, He 1) fikaa bol viguchnaa sun moorakh man ajaan. Harsh words bring only grief. Listen, O foolish and ignorant mind!
a fan wefo A 3d dfs fa ATS SUS NSM (15-14, fadtora, He 1) jo tis bhaaveh say bhalay hor ke kahan vakhaan. ||3]| Those who are pleasing to Him are good. What else is there to be said? ||3]|
fae nfs feo ufs fs5 us ud fae fase afoor AATfE I 15-15, fadtera, He 1)
tin mat tin pat tin Dhan palai jin hirdai rahi-aa samaa-ay.
Wisdom, honor and wealth are in the laps of those whose hearts remain permeated with the Lord.
f30 ot four Arde nies Aye ate il 15-16, fadtea, ue 1
tin kaa ki-aa salaahnaa avar su-aali-o kaa-ay.
What praise can be offered to them? What other adornments can be bestowed upon them?
SOA Seat aad Tuts ote o ate ISisil (15-16, frdtora, He 1) naanak nadree baahray raacheh daan na naa-ay. ||4||4]|
O Nanak, those who lack the Lord's Glance of Grace cherish neither charity nor the Lord's Name. ||4]|4||
frrstarat HIS 9 I (15-17) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
WHS TT Is a fest Seats il (15-17, fasta, we 1) amal galolaa koorh kaa ditaa dayvanhaar. The Great Giver has given the intoxicating drug of falsehood.
Hat Hee ferent yAt atst feo ate il 5-17, fadtoa, ue 1
matee maran visaari-aa khusee keetee din chaar.
The people are intoxicated; they have forgotten death, and they have fun for a few days.
Ae fifeor fae Aetor ore a eee|rs NU (15-18, facta, He 1) sach mili-aa tin sofee-aa raakhan ka-o darvaar. ||1|| Those who do not use intoxicants are true; they dwell in the Court of the Lord. ||1||
Soa ATS AC AT AS Il (15-18, fates, Hz 1) naanak saachay ka-o sach jaan. O Nanak, Know the True Lord as True.
fas Afent AY uh Sct esas VS HTS UI TIC Il 15-19, fstora, ve Y jit sayvi-ai sukh paa-ee-ai tayree dargeh chalai maan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Serving Him, peace is obtained; you shall go to His Court with honor. ||1||Pause| |
Ag Ad as woo fan fete Ae a il 15-19, firdtoa, ue 1
sach saraa gurh baahraa jis vich sachaa naa-o.
The Wine of Truth is not fermented from molasses. The True Name is contained within it.
Uart 4é Hefs auras ASS UG fso sfeod WE Il (16-1, faster, He 1)
suneh vakaaneh jayt-rhay ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who hear and chant the True Name.
SHG Ute wrehh AT Moet US aE 1211 16-1, fidtera, ve 1)
taa man kheevaa jaanee-ai jaa mahlee paa-ay thaa-o. ||2]|
Only one who obtains a room in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is deemed to be truly intoxicated. ||2||
a ote sfamireint AS USHe 3fs SA Il (16-2, fadtora, Hz 1) naa-o neer chang-aa-ee-aa sat parmal tan vaas. Bathe in the waters of Goodness and apply the scented oil of Truth to your body,
a Hy de Cro wy ost fea oS I (16-2, fadtora, He 1) taa mukh hovai ujlaa lakh daatee ik daat. and your face shall become radiant. This is the gift of 100,000 gifts.
ey fA ufo mmitafa Aa AA ot ut SI (16-3, frstera, He 1D dookh tisai peh aakhee-ahi sookh jisai hee paas. ||3]|| Tell your troubles to the One who is the Source of all comfort. ||3]|
A fx@ Hog fears at & Fhe use Il (16-3, fata, v2 1) so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai jaa kay jee-a paraan.
How can you forget the One who created your soul, and the praanaa, the breath of life?
fan fee Ag wufesz I AT USS We Il (16-4, frstra, He 1) tis vin sabh apvitar hai jaytaa painan khaan. Without Him, all that we wear and eat is impure.
fe aot Afs asor 3y SS USSTES MIU (16-4, firsts, oe 1) hor galaa‘ sabh koorhee-aa tuDh bhaavai parvaan. ||4||5|| Everything else is false. Whatever pleases Your Will is acceptable. ||4]|5]|
frrstaat HIG % Il 16-5) sireeraag mahal 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
ws Ho wih HA afe nfs orere afe ATE Il (16-5, fata, He 1)
jaal moh ghas mas kar mat kaagad kar saar.
Burn emotional attachment, and grind it into ink. Transform your intelligence into the purest of paper.
aE aon afte fas Sut as ufe fou ates il (16-5, frdteoa, ue 1
bhaa-o kalam kar chit laykhaaree gur puchh likh beechaar.
Make the love of the Lord your pen, and let your consciousness be the scribe. Then, seek the Guru's Instructions, and record these deliberations.
fou an Arad feu feu nis o UTSTSTT IU (16-6, firdtora, He 1)
likh naam saalaah likh likh ant na paaraavaar. ||1]|
Write the Praises of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; write over and over again that He has no end or limitation. ||1]|
aa ag Bar fof WE Il 16-6, frrdtea, v2 1) baabaa ayhu laykhaa likh jaan. O Baba, write such an account,
fra Sur Haha fee dfe Ae strr|S 9 TIS il 16-7, fdtera, He 1) jithai laykhaa mangee-ai tithai ho-ay sachaa neesaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. that when it is asked for, it will bring the Mark of Truth. ||1]|Pause||
fra frofo efsoreior Ae union FE UT I (16-7, fata, He 1) jithai mileh vadi-aa-ee-aa sad khusee-aa sad chaa-o. There, where greatness, eternal peace and everlasting joy are bestowed,
f30 ufy fea foots faa His AS a Il (6-8, frstora, He 1)
tin mukh tikay niklahi jin man sachaa naa-o.
the faces of those whose minds are attuned to the True Name are anointed with the Mark of Grace.
oath firs st ureha ardt get aS evr 12H 6-8, fadtera, He 1) karam milai taa paa-ee-ai naahee galee vaa-o du-aa-o. ||2|| If one receives God's Grace, then such honors are received, and not by mere words.
[21]
fefa nirefa fefa ata Sfs adits sv] ABT Il (16-9, frdtea, v2 1)
ik aavahi ik jaahi uth rakhee-ahi naav salaar.
Some come, and some arise and depart. They give themselves lofty names. fefx Cure Has feast SS VISTI (16-9, fadtora, Hz 1)
ik upaa-ay mangtay iknaa vaday darvaar. Some are born beggars, and some hold vast courts.
mat afeur veh fee oS ars ISI (16-10, fadtea, He 1)
agai ga-i-aa jaanee-ai vin naavai vaykaar. ||3]|
Going to the world hereafter, everyone shall realize that without the Name, it is all useless. ||3]|
3 3d 3g moe ufu ufy fen Ba Il (16-10, fadtora, He 1)
bhai tayrai dar aglaa khap khap chhijai dayh.
I am terrified by the Fear of You, God. Bothered and bewildered, my body is wasting away.
ore faat HBSS US de f3S AT Il (16-11, fatwa, He 1) naav jinaa sultaan khaan hoday dithay khayh. Those who are known as sultans and emperors shall be reduced to dust in the end.
aan Sot sleur Afs AF F!S ST BIEN (6-11, fata, He 1) naanak uthee chali-aa sabh koorhay tutay nayh. ||4||6]| O Nanak, arising and departing, all false attachments are cut away. ||4||6]|
frrstaat HIS 4 Il (16-12) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Afs dA fs Hfomt Afant ASS Il (16-12, facta, v2 1) sabh ras mithay mani-ai suni-ai saalonay. Believing, all tastes are sweet. Hearing, the salty flavors are tasted;
Ye Sat Ufa Swat HGS ore AES | (16-12, fastoa, He 1)
khat tursee mukh bolnaa maaran naad kee-ay.
chanting with one's mouth, the spicy flavors are savored. All these spices have been made from the Sound-current of the Naad.
este nits w@ ta wt a@ aefa aSfe Al (16-13, fdtora, He 1)
chhateeh amrit bhaa-o ayk jaa ka-o nadar karay-i. ||1]|
The thirty-six flavors of ambrosial nectar are in the Love of the One Lord; they are tasted only by one who is blessed by His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
wat Ig yet YAt yMIE Il (16-13, firdtora, He 1) baabaa hor khaanaa khusee khu-aar. O Baba, the pleasures of other foods are false.
fas ud 39 ulshat no ufo vats fears ail Joe Il (16-14, facta, He 1)
jit khaaDhai tan peerhee-ai man meh chaleh vikaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Eating them, the body is ruined, and wickedness and corruption enter into the mind. ||1]|Pause| |
IS USE HO IS HUST AS BS Il (16-14, fasta, ve 1)
rataa painan man rataa supaydee sat daan.
My mind is imbued with the Lord's Love; it is dyed a deep crimson. Truth and charity are my white clothes.
alert fhordt xe avat ufoge Us fore il 6-15, fadtora, ve 1
neelee si-aahee kadaa karnee pahiran pair Dhi-aan.
The blackness of sin is erased by my wearing of blue clothes, and meditation on the Lord's Lotus Feet is my robe of honor.
CHsae Hse A UG AIS Sa SMH MQM (16-15, fasta, ne 1) karam-band santokh kaa Dhan joban tayraa naam. ||2|| Contentment is my cummerbund, Your Name is my wealth and youth. ||2||
Wat IT USS YA Ug I (16-16, fadtora, ve 1) baabaa hor painan khusee khu-aar. O Baba, the pleasures of other clothes are false.
fas Ud 39 ulshat He ufo vats fears 19 ToS Il (16-16, fadtoa, v2 1)
jit paiDhai tan peerhee-ai man meh chaleh vikaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Wearing them, the body is ruined, and wickedness and corruption enter into the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
us urag Afes Aas gee Sot FS Il (16-17, fasta, v2 1) ghorhay paakhar su-inay saakhat boojhan tayree vaat. The understanding of Your Way, Lord, is horses, saddles and bags of gold for me.
SIaH Std AWS Ai STS TS WS Il (16-17, fasta, vz tarkas teer kamaan saa‘g taygband gun Dhaat. The pursuit of virtue is my bow and arrow, my quiver, sword and scabbard.
aa on ufs fAG usae AGH Sa Hat WES ISI (16-17, frdtera, He 1)
vaajaa nayjaa pat si-o pargat karam tayraa mayree jaat. ||3]||
To be distinguished with honor is my drum and banner. Your Mercy is my social status. ||3]|
Wat Ig VsST Ut UM I (16-18, fadtera, v2 1) baabaa hor charh-naa khusee khu-aar. O Baba, the pleasures of other rides are false.
fas sfant 3g usin no nfs vats fears 9 TIE It (16-18, fadtoa, He 1)
jit charhi-ai tan peerhee-ai man meh chaleh vikaar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
By such rides, the body is ruined, and wickedness and corruption enter into the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
We Hed UA oH at Sefs Sct ude” Il (16-19, fiesta, Hz 1)
ghar mandar khusee naam kee nadar tayree parvaar.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the pleasure of houses and mansions. Your Glance of Grace is my family, Lord.
usr 9D Jan ASt 30 SSH Gg TMS FIs NST Il 117-1, fadtoa, He 1) hukam so-ee tuDh bhaavsee hor aakhan bahut apaar.
The Hukam of Your Command is the pleasure of Your Will, Lord. To say anything else is far beyond anyone's reach.
aoa AS ufsATyY ule 6 ad seg Vil (17-1, faster, He 1) naanak sachaa paatisaahu poochh na karay beechaar. ||4| | O Nanak, the True King does not seek advice from anyone else in His decisions. | |4| |
wat dg AGat UAT UME Il (17-2, fidtera, He 1) baabaa hor sa-unaa khusee khu-aar. O Baba, the pleasure of other sleep is false.
fas AS 30 Uist Ho ufo vats fears NA FTE SIDI 07-2, fades, He 1)
jit sutai tan peerhee-ai man meh chaleh vikaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. ||4||7]|
By such sleep, the body is ruined, and wickedness and corruption enter into the mind. | |1]|Pause] [4] 71]
frrstarat HIS 4 Il 117-3) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
IT at atfeor gar at aes nafs eA Sls AMA Il (17-3, firdtora, we 1)
kungoo kee kaa™-i-aa ratnaa kee lalitaa agar vaas tan saas.
With the body of saffron, and the tongue a jewel, and the breath of the body pure fragrant incense;
Monts stea at uf fear faa whe HfS fearA il 47-3, fadteoa, ue 1
athsath tirath kaa mukh tikaa tit ghat mat vigaas.
with the face anointed at the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage, and the heart illuminated with wisdom
63 HSt Aa" A OH TESA INU 17-4, faster, v2 1) ot matee salaahnaa sach naam guntaas. ||1]| -with that wisdom, chant the Praises of the True Name, the Treasure of Excellence.
[21
wa dg ufs dg da il 117-4, fadtera, 2 1) baabaa hor mat hor hor. O Baba, other wisdom is useless and irrelevant.
AAG So aH FS FST AT UU TIS ll 17-5, fasta, we 1) jay sa-o vayr kamaa-ee-ai koorhai koorhaa jor. ||1]| rahaa-o. If falsehood is practiced a hundred times, it is still false in its effects. ||1]|Pause| |
UA Ba uty undbat Ag fHs AAT I (7-5, fata, we
pooj lagai peer aakhee-ai sabh milai sansaar.
You may be worshipped and adored as a Pir (a spiritual teacher); you may be welcomed by all the world;
og Hee niuar de fg ANTE Il (17-6, fidtera, He 1) naa-o sadaa-ay aapnaa hovai siDh sumaar. you may adopt a lofty name, and be known to have supernatural spiritual powers
W ufs Se BT us AS UA YM, II (17-6, firdtoa, v8 1)
jaa pat laykhai naa pavai sabhaa pooj khu-aar. ||2]|
-even so, if you are not accepted in the Court of the Lord, then all this adoration is false. ||2]|
fro a@ Afsafe afimr fas Afe o Aa aE Il (17-6, fade, He jin ka-o satgur thaapi-aa tin mayt na sakai ko-ay. No one can overthrow those who have been established by the True Guru.
Gar niefs ay fours J OH usae OF Il 117-7, fadtea, He 1)
onaa andar naam niDhaan hai naamo pargat ho-ay.
The Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within them, and through the Naam, they are radiant and famous.
ae urba we Haba unig wet Ag ALE SI (7-7, fates, we 1)
naa-O poojee-ai naa-o mannee-ai akhand sadaa sach so-ay. ||3||
They worship the Naam, and they believe in the Naam. The True One is forever Intact and Unbroken. ||3]|
ag as sere ST AG aa ae i (17-8, firdtoa, ws 1) khayhoo khayh ralaa-ee-ai taa jee-o kayhaa ho-ay. When the body mingles with dust, what happens to the soul?
emt vfs faoreut Got vfemr sfF Il 7-2, fadtea, He 1) jalee-aa sabh si-aanpaa uthee chali-aa ro-ay. All clever tricks are burnt away, and you shall depart crying.
soa oy ferfon efs afeor fomr df git 17-9, fadtea, v2 1)
naanak naam visaari-ai dar ga-i-aa ki-aa ho-ay. ||4]||8]|
O Nanak, those who forget the Naam-what will happen when they go to the Court of the Lord? ||4]|8]|
frrstarat HIS 9 I 17-9) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Teest Te as niGgeest sts it 7-10, fatwa, ws 1) gunvantee gun veethrai a-ugunvantee jhoor. The virtuous wife exudes virtue; the unvirtuous suffer in misery.
A Sata Fy THat oo fret furs afe it 7-10, fadtoa, v3 1)
jay lorheh var kaamnee nah milee-ai pir koor.
If you long for your Husband Lord, O soul-bride, you must know that He is not met by falsehood.
at dat at geoat ot urea fug fe ua 7-10, frstora, we naa bayrhee naa tulharhaa naa paa-ee-ai pir door. ||1|| No boat or raft can take you to Him. Your Husband Lord is far away. ||1]|
AT SAT us Tufs mss Il (17-11, fardtora, v8 1) mayray thaakur poorai takhat adol. My Lord and Master is Perfect; His Throne is Eternal and Immovable.
ToHfs us A as ust AG nsw UU: TIS ll 17-11, firsts, we gurmukh pooraa jay karay paa-ee-ai saach atol. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who attains perfection as Gurmukh, obtains the Immeasurable True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
us dies Aue fan nfs wea we I Hat dtr fesner ave ae dS Il 117-12, fadtra, H8 1)
parabh harmandar sohnaa tis meh maanak laal. motee heeraa nirmalaa kanchan kot reesaal.
The Palace of the Lord God is so beautiful. Within it, there are gems, rubies, pearls and flawless diamonds. A fortress of gold surrounds this Source of Nectar.
fas u@st afs fa@ sa aa safe fimres fare 211 47-13, fadtora, He 1)
bin pa-orhee garh ki-o charha-o gur har Dhi-aan nihaal. ||2]|
How can I climb up to the Fortress without a ladder? By meditating on the Lord, through the Guru, I am blessed and exalted. ||2||
Gg ust ast ag ag sar she FS il 117-13, fretera, v2 1)
gur pa-orhee bayrhee guroo gur tulhaa har naa-o.
The Guru is the Ladder, the Guru is the Boat, and the Guru is the Raft to take me to the Lord's Name.
ad AY Aad sfee ag Steg odor tt 117-14, fadteora, we 1)
gur sar saagar bohitho gur tirath daree-aa-o.
The Guru is the Boat to carry me across the world-ocean; the Guru is the Sacred Shrine of Pilgrimage, the Guru is the Holy River.
A fa oe Cnet AS Ale wee WS SM (17-14, fasta, we 1)
jay tis bhaavai oojlee sat sar naavan jaa-o. ||3]||
If it pleases Him, I bathe in the Pool of Truth, and become radiant and pure. ||3]| ud ud nid us Sufs feet Il (17-15, firdtora, M3 1)
pooro pooro aakhee-ai poorai takhat nivaas. He is called the Most Perfect of the Perfect. He sits upon His Perfect Throne.
ud as ASS UT MTA SSA I (17-15, frdtora, He 1) poorai thaan suhaavnai poorai aas niraas. He looks so Beautiful in His Perfect Place. He fulfills the hopes of the hopeless.
aed us A HS fas we Te IA ISIC (17-16, firsts, Hs 1) naanak pooraa jay milai ki-o ghaatai gun taas. ||4||9]| O Nanak, if one obtains the Perfect Lord, how can his virtues decrease? ||4]|9] |
frrstarar HIS 9 Il 17-16) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
weg se ale fied nif Ades MIT Il 117-16, fadtea, He 1) aavhu bhainay gal milah ank sahaylrhee-aah. Come, my dear sisters and spiritual companions; hug me close in your embrace.
ffs & aga aoShor AYE AST ahers Il 17-17, frttoa, ue 1) mil kai karah kKahaanee-aa samrath kant kee-aah. Let's join together, and tell stories of our All-powerful Husband Lord.
AS Ass Als Te uae Afs MATT WAI (17-17, fasta, He 1) saachay saahib sabh gun a-ugan sabh asaah. ||1|| All Virtues are in our True Lord and Master; we are utterly without virtue. ||1||
aA 4
ads A a 3d Af Il 117-18, fadtoa, He 1) kartaa sabh ko tayrai jor. O Creator Lord, all are in Your Power.
eq Hae steordha as st for Sf ua TIS ll 17-18, firdtora, we 1)
ayk sabad beechaaree-ai jaa too taa ki-aa hor. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I dwell upon the One Word of the Shabad. You are mine-what else do I need? ||1]|Pause] |
wf ugg Aoaet SHt ofenr fast Tet Il 17-19, fadtea, He
jaa-ay puchhahu sohaaganee tusee raavi-aa kinee gunee.
Go, and ask the happy soul-brides, "By what virtuous qualities do you enjoy your Husband Lord?"
Hofa Asta Atardine for seat il 117-19, facta, He 1) sahj santokh seegaaree-aa mithaa bolnee. "We are adorned with intuitive ease, contentment and sweet words.
fug dhre 3 HS A Te & AAT Het QM (17-19, farts, we 1) pir reesaaloo taa milai jaa gur kaa sabad sunee. ||2||
We meet with our Beloved, the Source of Joy, when we listen to the Word of the Guru's Shabad."||2]|
Uar at
ash sd avast aes Sat STS Il 118-1, fate, ve 1)
kaytee-aa tayree-aa kudratee kayvad tayree daat.
You have so many Creative Powers, Lord; Your Bountiful Blessings are so Great. aS 33 rha as frefs aafa fea af II (13-1, fadtea, nH 1)
kaytay tayray jee-a jant sifat karahi din raat.
So many of Your beings and creatures praise You day and night.
as 3g Ju da as ATS yATAS ISI (8-2, fadtora, He 1)
kaytay tayray roop rang kaytay jaat ajaat. ||3]| You have so many forms and colors, so many classes, high and low. ||3]|
Ag fHs Ag Gur Ae Hfo AS ANTE I (18-2, frdtora, we 1)
sach milai sach oopjai sach meh saach samaa-ay. Meeting the True One, Truth wells up. The truthful are absorbed into the True Lord.
Hats de ufs Cae Taavat SB ule i cs-s, fasta, 2 1)
surat hovai pat oogvai gurbachnee bha-o khaa-ay.
Intuitive understanding is obtained and one is welcomed with honor, through the Guru's Word, filled with the Fear of God.
Soa Ae utsAT nia we fats siIoll 1s-3, fasta, uz 1) naanak sachaa paatisaahu aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||4||10|| O Nanak, the True King absorbs us into Himself. ||4]|10] |
frrstarar HIS 9 Il (18-4) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
sot Adt fa Gadt GOH wet wars Il 118-4, fdtera, He 1) bhalee saree je ubree ha-umai mu-ee gharaahu. It all worked out-I was saved, and the egotism within my heart was subdued.
us od fets wadt Asa a SAT Il (18-4, frstea, He 1)
doot lagay fir chaakree satgur kaa vaysaahu.
The evil energies have been made to serve me, since I placed my faith in the True Guru.
au fsurat afe d ret Sugerg WAU (18-5, fadtera, He 1) kalap ti-aagee baad hai sachaa vayparvaahu. ||1|| I have renounced my useless schemes, by the Grace of the True, Carefree Lord. ||1]|
Ho 3 Ag fre 3 Ate I (18-5, fadtera, He 1) man ray sach milai bha-o jaa-ay. O mind, meeting with the True One, fear departs.
3 fag faoss@ fas dint ganfy nafe mre nai go I (18-6, fate, v2 1)
bhai bin nirbha-o ki-o thee-ai gurmukh sabad samaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Without the Fear of God, how can anyone become fearless? Become Gurmukh, and immerse yourself in the Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
ast nings ning wmafs Sfe 3 dfe i (18-6, fata, wu: 1) kaytaa aakhan aakhee-ai aakhan tot na ho-ay. How can we describe Him with words? There is no end to the descriptions of Him.
Hae BS ASS west Sa ALE Il 18-7, fadtea, He 1) mangan vaalay kayt-rhay daataa ayko so-ay. There are so many beggars, but He is the only Giver.
fan a Abr use do ufe efrot we SE QI 18-7, facta, v2 1)
jis kay jee-a paraan hai man vasi-ai sukh ho-ay. ||2]|
He is the Giver of the soul, and the praanaa, the breath of life; when He dwells within the mind, there is peace. ||2||
Aa Hua wat got fue Hf de Bote il cis-s, fadtera, ve 1)
jag supnaa baajee banee khin meh khayl khaylaa-ay.
The world is a drama, staged in a dream. In a moment, the play is played out. Hrat fife San feat Cfe wf i as-s, facta, He 1)
sanjogee mil ayksay vijogee uth jaa-ay. Some attain union with the Lord, while others depart in separation.
a fSA avet A aha nied & agat WHE ISI (18-9, fadtera, He 1) jo tis bhaanaa so thee-ai avar na karnaa jaa-ay. ||3]|| Whatever pleases Him comes to pass; nothing else can be done. ||3]|
dente As eA A Zug AY IH II (18-9, fidtora, He 1
gurmukh vasat vaysaahee-ai sach vakhar sach raas.
The Gurmukhs purchase the Genuine Article. The True Merchandise is purchased with the True Capital.
faot Ag Zafer gs us ATaA Il (18-10, frdtora, we 1) jinee sach vananji-aa gur pooray saabaas. Those who purchase this True Merchandise through the Perfect Guru are blessed.
Sa ZAS USeHt AY Ae’ fAA UTA IISNAAI (18-10, fistora, He 1
naanak vasat pachhaansee sach sa-udaa jis paas. ||4||11]| O Nanak, one who stocks this True Merchandise shall recognize and realize the Genuine Article. ||4]]11]|
frdtaral HIS % Il (18-11) sireeraag mahal 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
ws fis efs ws ag frest frefs rorfe I cs-u, fades, ve
Dhaat milai fun Dhaat ka-o siftee sifat samaa-ay.
As metal merges with metal, those who chant the Praises of the Lord are absorbed into the Praiseworthy Lord.
WS WSS WIA Ae Sa VaTS il (is-u, fadtoa, ue 1) laal gulaal gahbaraa sachaa rang charhaa-o. Like the poppies, they are dyed in the deep crimson color of Truthfulness.
Ag fxs ASsdior ofa vfu Sa ote All c1s-12, facta, v2 1)
sach milai santokhee-aa har jap aykai bhaa-ay. ||1]|
Those contented souls who meditate on the Lord with single-minded love, meet the True Lord. ||1]|
aet J AS Hal at FS Il (18-12, frdtora, ve 1) bhaa-ee ray sant janaa kee rayn. O Siblings of Destiny, become the dust of the feet of the humble Saints.
H3 AS ag ues Hats versa TS NU! TIS Il (18-12, fata, ve 1)
sant sabhaa gur paa-ee-ai mukat padaarath Dhayn. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In the Society of the Saints, the Guru is found. He is the Treasure of Liberation, the Source of all good fortune. ||1]||Pause| |
Cus ag ATES Cufs HIG HIS II (18-13, fretra, He 1) oocha-o thaan suhaavanaa oopar mahal muraar. Upon that Highest Plane of Sublime Beauty, stands the Mansion of the Lord.
Ay adel & ure eg wa Hoe fimrfa it cis-14, fadtera, He 1)
sach karnee day paa-ee-ai dar ghar mahal pi-aar.
By true actions, this human body is obtained, and the door within ourselves which leads to the Mansion of the Beloved, is found.
aenfy Ho ANSE wITSsH aH stefs NQH (13-14, fadtora, He 1) gurmukh man samjaa-ee-ai aatam raam beechaar. ||2|| The Gurmukhs train their minds to contemplate the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||2| |
fefafa ao anrebafs wim nica ofe Il cis-15, firdtera, ne 1)
taribaDh karam kamaa-ee-ahi aas andaysaa ho-ay.
By actions committed under the influence of the three qualities, hope and anxiety are produced.
fa as fas feact sent Rafe fixfeod Ae SPE II (is-15, firdtoa, He 1)
ki-o gur bin tarikutee chhutsee sahj mili-ai sukh ho-ay.
Without the Guru, how can anyone be released from these three qualities? Through intuitive wisdom, we meet with Him and find peace.
for ufa Hoe ueteha sets ad He OE NI (18-16, fata, He 1)
nij ghar mahal pachhaanee-ai nadar karay mal Dho-ay. ||3]|
Within the home of the self, the Mansion of His Presence is realized when He bestows His Glance of Grace and washes away our pollution. ||3]|
faa ad Ho 3 Gad fae ofa fae we SH Il (18-16, fadtera, He 1)
bin gur mail na utrai bin har ki-o ghar vaas.
Without the Guru, this pollution is not removed. Without the Lord, how can there be any homecoming?
Sa Age sterdhat nea fanrd yA Il 18-17, fasta, v2 1) ayko sabad veechaaree-ai avar ti-aagai aas. Contemplate the One Word of the Shabad, and abandon other hopes.
Soa Ute fours w@ Ae afer AA INBIII (18-17, fates, 42 1)
naanak daykh dikhaa-ee-ai ha-o sad balihaarai jaas. ||4||12||
O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to the one who beholds, and inspires others to behold Him. ||4]|12]|
frrstaat HIS 4 I (18-18) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
fga fies Sorat Hot eA STE I 118-18, fasta, HIS 1) Dharig jeevan duhaaganee muthee doojai bhaa-ay. The life of the discarded bride is cursed. She is deceived by the love of duality.
aed adt au fa uifofeta fafa ef uf= i cis-is, firdtea, 135 1)
kalar kayree kanDh ji-o ahinis kir dheh paa-ay.
Like a wall of sand, day and night, she crumbles, and eventually, she breaks down altogether.
fag Fae AY a abt fus fag ga o ATE NU (18-19, frdtera, HIB 1)
bin sabdai sukh naa thee-ai pir bin dookh na jaa-ay. ||1]|
Without the Word of the Shabad, peace does not come. Without her Husband Lord, her suffering does not end. ||1]|
Hu fue fag foo rites il cs-19, fadtoa, n38 1) munDhay pir bin ki-aa seegaar. O soul-bride, without your Husband Lord, what good are your decorations?
Yat ae
fe ufs et 5 BI Ta SS UT UU TIS Il (19-1, frdtora, ws 1) dar ghar dho-ee na lahai dargeh jhooth khu-aar. ||1]| rahaa-o. In this world, you shall not find any shelter; in the world hereafter, being false, you
shall suffer. ||1]|Pause] |
mifu AWE 6 3HEl Ae ss fKsAS Il (19-1, fadtoa, nos 1)
aap sujaan na bhul-ee sachaa vad kirsaan.
The True Lord Himself knows all; He makes no mistakes. He is the Great Farmer of the Universe.
ufser dsst AG a AY oH @ VE Il (19-2, fadtora, HTB 1) pahilaa Dhartee saaDh kai sach naam day daan. First, He prepares the ground, and then He plants the Seed of the True Name.
5G fofa Gur on Sa ath us SATS QI (19-2, fate, ne 1)
na-o niDh upjai naam ayk karam pavai neesaan. ||2||
The nine treasures are produced from Name of the One Lord. By His Grace, we obtain His Banner and Insignia. ||2||
ad ae wfe 3 Weel four f3H BA NITE Il (19-2, factor, Hos 1)
gur ka-o jaan na jaan-ee ki-aa tis chaj achaar.
Some are very knowledgeable, but if they do not know the Guru, then what is the use of their lives?
nige oy ferfonr Hou nia aarg Il (19-3, fadtoa, Hoe 1)
anDhulai naam visaari-aa manmukh anDh gubaar.
The blind have forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The self-willed manmukhs are in utter darkness.
WES We 3 vaet ufe HOH GE wg ISI (19-3, fasta, How 1)
aavan jaan na chuk-ee mar janmai ho-ay khu-aar. ||3]|
Their comings and goings in reincarnation do not end; through death and rebirth, they are wasting away. ||3]|
Jeg His meteor kT Ha AUT Il (19-4, frdtorar, How 1)
chandan mol anaa-i-aa kungoo maa“g sanDhoor.
The bride may buy sandalwood oil and perfumes, and apply them in great quantities to her hair;
dor GUS AT WaT ust STS AUT Il (19-4, firdtora, v7s 1) cho-aa chandan baho ghanaa paanaa naal kapoor. she may sweeten her breath with betel leaf and camphor,
A U6 ats o Meet SF Als HiSaT FT Sil (19-5, fadtoa, 0B 1) jay Dhan kant na bhaav-ee ta sabh adambar koorh. ||4||
but if this bride is not pleasing to her Husband Lord, then all these trappings are false. [141]
Afs gn sae ate afo vfs Alara feare Il (19-5, fade, He 1 sabh ras bhogan baad heh sabh seegaar vikaar. Her enjoyment of all pleasures is futile, and all her decorations are corrupt.
wa oa Hate 3 set fa Ad Tsenrfs I (19-6, fadtora, He
jab lag sabad na bhaydee-ai ki-o sohai gurdu-aar.
Until she has been pierced through with the Shabad, how can she look beautiful at Guru's Gate?
Soa US AUaat fas AT ots filmirg NUISll (19-6, firtera, He 1) naanak Dhan suhaaganee jin sah naal pi-aar. ||5||13]|
O Nanak, blessed is that fortunate bride, who is in love with her Husband Lord. [15] 13]|
frrstarat HIS 9 Il (19-7) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Het 2g socal wate fees ATE II (19-7, firdtora, He 1) sunjee dayh daraavanee jaa jee-o vichahu jaa-ay. The empty body is dreadful, when the soul goes out from within.
ats ase feset oC & foathHS ate i 19-8, firsts, we 1)
bhaahi balandee vijhvee Dhoo-o na niksi-o kaa-ay.
The burning fire of life is extinguished, and the smoke of the breath no longer emerges.
Us Jd efe sd faor EA STE NA (19-8, firdtora, we
panchay runnay dukh bharay binsay doojai bhaa-ay. ||1]||
The five relatives (the senses) weep and wail painfully, and waste away through the love of duality. ||1]|
HS TH AUG TE AM I (19-8, fstera, He 1) moorhay raam japahu gun saar. You fool: chant the Name of the Lord, and preserve your virtue.
ICH HHS Hat AS Hot warts NA TIS Il (19-9, fadtoa, ve
ha-umai mamtaa mohnee sabh muthee aha™kaar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Egotism and possessiveness are very enticing; egotistical pride has plundered everyone. ||1]|Pause| |
frat on ferfoor gat ars wfar il (9-9, fata, ws 1)
jinee naam visaari-aa doojee kaarai lag.
Those who have forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are attached to affairs of duality.
efaa wat ufs He nists feAar mifer il (9-10, fadtea, us 1) dubiDhaa laagay pach mu-ay antar tarisnaa ag. Attached to duality, they putrefy and die; they are filled with the fire of desire within.
afs aa A Gad dfs Hat Uo ofa NI (19-10, fade, He 1
gur raakhay say ubray hor muthee DhanDhai thag. ||2||
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved; all others are cheated and plundered by deceitful worldly affairs. ||2]|
Het udifs fumirg afeor yor eg fed It (9-11, fates, ne 1) mu-ee pareet pi-aar ga-i-aa mu-aa vair viroDh. Love dies, and affection vanishes. Hatred and alienation die.
do gat 3G Het HHS Hfeor aT Il (19-11, firdtora, He 1
DhanDhaa thakaa ha-o mu-ee mamtaa maa-i-aa kroDh.
Entanglements end, and egotism dies, along with attachment to Maya, possessiveness and anger.
asfh fxs AG uh aqayfe Ae fada Sil (9-1, fadtea, He 1)
karam milai sach paa-ee-ai gurmukh sadaa niroDh. |[3]|
Those who receive His Mercy obtain the True One. The Gurmukhs dwell forever in balanced restraint. ||3]|
Ret ard AG fe TeHfs us ute tt (19-12, fata, v2 1) sachee kaarai sach milai gurmat palai paa-ay. By true actions, the True Lord is met, and the Guru's Teachings are found.
H 3d HH OT He OT nite BT AME Il (19-12, fate, He 1)
SO Nar jammai naa marai naa aavai naa jaa-ay.
Then, they are not subject to birth and death; they do not come and go in reincarnation.
Soa Us uss A dats UOT ATS SII (19-13, faAdtoa, He 1)
naanak dar parDhaan so dargahi paiDhaa jaa-ay. ||4||14|
O Nanak, they are respected at the Lord's Gate; they are robed in honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4||14]|
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (19-13) sireeraag mahal 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
36 Als af Het sfeor He wfear Hfs HET II (19-14, firdtora, Hs 1) tan jal bal maatee bha-i-aa man maa-i-aa mohi manoor. The body is burnt to ashes; by its love of Maya, the mind is rusted through.
m@ae fets og sé afe sre Fa Il (19-14, fasta, we a-ugan fir laagoo bha-ay koor vajaavai toor. Demerits become one's enemies, and falsehood blows the bugle of attack.
fag Fae soHTebH Ufa SH UT UI (19-15, firdtora, Hs 1)
bin sabdai bharmaa-ee-ai dubiDhaa dobay poor. ||1]||
Without the Word of the Shabad, people wander lost in reincarnation. Through the love of duality, multitudes have been drowned. ||1]|
Ho o Aafe sag fos OE Il (19-15, frdtea, v2 1) man ray sabad tarahu chit laa-ay. O mind, swim across, by focusing your consciousness on the Shabad.
fats aeufe oy o afsor Hie ASH nS ATE AU TIS il (19-15, frdtora, 3 1)
jin gurmukh naam na boojhi-aa mar janmai aavai jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who do not become Gurmukh do not understand the Naam; they die, and continue coming and going in reincarnation. ||1]||Pause| |
36 Ae A nmiba fam Hfs APE SS Il (19-16, frdtora, we 1) tan soochaa so aakhee-ai jis meh saachaa naa-o. That body is said to be pure, in which the True Name abides.
3 Afs wat tudt frget AG AME Il 19-17, fadtoa, He YD
bhai sach raatee dayhuree jihvaa sach su-aa-o.
One whose body is imbued with the Fear of the True One, and whose tongue savors Truthfulness,
Het sete faosha gofs o ure 37S IQ (19-17, fadtera, v2 1)
sachee nadar nihaalee-ai bahurh na paavai taa-o. ||2]|
is brought to ecstasy by the True Lord's Glance of Grace. That person does not have to go through the fire of the womb again. ||2| |
AS 3 ucot sfenr ues 3 AG OE Il (19-18, fastora, He 1) saachay tay pavnaa bha-i-aa pavnai tay jal ho-ay. From the True Lord came the air, and from the air came water.
ne 3 fasee wfaor wife wie HfS ANTE II (19-18, frstora, He 1)
jal tay taribhavan saaji-aa ghat ghat jot samo-ay.
From water, He created the three worlds; in each and every heart He has infused His Light.
fsaHe Hor ot dha Aafe gs ufs dfE SI (19-19, fadtera, He 1) nirmal mailaa naa thee-ai sabad ratay pat ho-ay. ||3]|
The Immaculate Lord does not become polluted. Attuned to the Shabad, honor is obtained. ||3]|
feg no Ate H3fimr oefe ad SA HFT II (19-19, fadtora, He 1)
ih man saach santokhi-aa nadar karay tis maahi.
One whose mind is contented with Truthfulness, is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace.
UST 2o
us 33 As 3 3S Afs AS Ho Hf I (20-1, fata, we
panch bhoot sach bhai ratay jot sachee man maahi.
The body of the five elements is dyed in the Fear of the True One; the mind is filled with the True Light.
aoa nae gad afs ge ufs sho sii (20-1, fadtea, He 1) naanak a-ugan veesray gur raakhay pat taahi. ||4||15]|
O Nanak, your demerits shall be forgotten; the Guru shall preserve your honor. [14] [15]
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (20-2) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Sod sat Av at sda Ts Sets i (20-2, fatwa, v2 1) naanak bayrhee sach kee taree-ai gur veechaar. O Nanak, the Boat of Truth will ferry you across; contemplate the Guru.
feta uefa fefa rect ufs se nidorfs Il (20-2, frdtora, He 1) ik aavahi ik jaavhee poor bharay aha‘kaar. Some come, and some go; they are totally filled with egotism.
Hoole Ht gsht Tents AG A SAS NU (20-3, frdtora, we 1)
manhath matee boodee-ai gurmukh sach so taar. ||1]|
Through stubborn-mindedness, the intellect is drowned; one who becomes Gurmukh and truthful is saved. ||1||
ad fag fa sdba we dfe i 0-3, fadtera, He 1) gur bin ki-o taree-ai sukh ho-ay. Without the Guru, how can anyone swim across to find peace?
fa@ are F358 TY TH neg o SAT ae NU TTS I (20-4, fasta, we 1) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh too mai avar na doojaa ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. As it pleases You, Lord, You save me. There is no other for me at all. ||1]|Pause] |
wid TUS SB AS us Tas niga il (20-4, fasta, wu 1) aagai daykh-a-u da-o jalai paachhai hari-o angoor. In front of me, I see the jungle burning; behind me, I see green plants sprouting.
fan 3 Gun fSA 3 faor ufe ule Ag saute II (20-5, fists, H2 1)
jis tay upjai tis tay binsai ghat ghat sach bharpoor.
We shall merge into the One from whom we came. The True One is pervading each and every heart.
nny fs fheredt APS Hates Tes QM (0-5, fdtora, Hs 1) aapay mayl milaavahee saachai mahal hadoor. ||2||
He Himself unites us in Union with Himself; the True Mansion of His Presence is close at hand. ||2]|
Afs Afs 33 AHO ae 6 fers Il (20-6, fadtoa, He 1) saahi saahi tujh sammlaa kaday na vaysaara-o. With each and every breath, I dwell upon You; I shall never forget You.
fa@ fa@ Ase nfs eA aenfe niflgs UC II (20-6, frdtora, 4 1)
ji-o ji-o saahab man vasai gurmukh amrit pay-o.
The more the Lord and Master dwells within the mind, the more the Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
HO 36 3ST Z ual Teg foets AAG ISI (20-6, faetoa, He 1)
man tan tayraa too Dhanee garab nivaar samay-o. ||3]|
Mind and body are Yours; You are my Master. Please rid me of my pride, and let me merge with You. ||3]|
fafe Sg nag Gurfenr feses ate nirarg i (20-7, frdtoa, ue 1) jin ayhu jagat upaa-i-aa taribhavan kar aakaar. The One who formed this universe created the creation of the three worlds.
Tent Woe Wet HoHfa Ha Ta Il (20-8, fadtera, He 1)
gurmukh chaanan jaanee-ai manmukh mugaDh gubaar.
The Gurmukh knows the Divine Light, while the foolish self-willed manmukh gropes around in the darkness.
ufe ufe Af fadsdt a8 TIS AT Nil (20-8, fata, ws
ghat ghat jot nirantree boojhai gurmat saar. ||4||
One who sees that Light within each and every heart understands the Essence of the Guru's Teachings. ||4||
aente frat afeur fae ate Arathi (20-9, factor, He 1) gurmukh jinee jaani-aa tin keechai saabaas. Those who understand are Gurmukh; recognize and applaud them.
Hd Ast of fs AS Te usertA Il (20-9, frdtea, v2 1)
sachay saytee ral milay sachay gun pargaas.
They meet and merge with the True One. They become the Radiant Manifestation of the Excellence of the True One.
eae oft Hsdor He fis us ufA UNE! (20-9, frdtoa, He 1)
naanak naam santokhee-aa jee-o pind parabh paas. ||5||16] |
O Nanak, they are contented with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. They offer their bodies and souls to God. ||5||16]|
frrstarat HIS 4% Il (20-10) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Afs vo firs fimrfamr fe For J ST Il (20-10, frstora, He 1) sun man mitar pi-aari-aa mil vaylaa hai ayh. Listen, O my mind, my friend, my darling: now is the time to meet the Lord.
Wa Sd Hafe AA J 3a Ba feg 35 ST II (20-11, fatwa, He 1) jab lag joban saas hai tab lag ih tan dayh. As long as there is youth and breath, give this body to Him.
fag ae ath 3 oreet efo Sat Sq AT AU (20-11, frrdtea, v2 1) bin gun kaam na aavee dheh dhayree tan khayh. ||1]| Without virtue, it is useless; the body shall crumble into a pile of dust. ||1]|
Hd Ho & Bo wis vfs il (20-12, fadtera, ve 1) mayray man lai laahaa ghar jaahi. O my mind, earn the profit, before you return home.
qTenfy oH Hada ICH foedt afo nai Toe i (20-12, fadtera, we 1) gurmukh naam salaahee-ai ha-umai nivree bhaahi. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukh praises the Naam, and the fire of egotism is extinguished. ||1||Pause| |
Afs afs aiee atdhn fof ufs asfe arg il (20-13, fate, He 1)
sun sun gandhan gandhee-ai likh parh bujheh bhaar.
Again and again, we hear and tell stories; we read and write and understand loads of knowledge,
fgnar vifofath nrarest JBN gar fears il (20-13, faster, v8 1)
tarisnaa ahinis aglee ha-umai rog vikaar.
but still, desires increase day and night, and the disease of egotism fills us with corruption.
6g gugeg nse Tenfs ahafS Arg N21 (20-14, firdtora, He 1)
oh vayparvaahu atolvaa gurmat keemat saar. ||2||
That Carefree Lord cannot be appraised; His Real Value is known only through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings. ||2]|
ou frmirsu A adt ou fA uifs fry I (20-14, fadtorg, He 1)
lakh si-aanap jay karee lakh si-o pareet milaap.
Even if someone has hundreds of thousands of clever mental tricks, and the love and company of hundreds of thousands of people
fag Hats Aa grin fag BS Sa ATTY Il (20-15, frdtora, vs 1)
bin sangat saaDh na Dharaapee-aa bin naavai dookh santaap.
-still, without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he will not feel satisfied. Without the Name, all suffer in sorrow.
dfs afu rr ect qenfa BS wmy WI (20-15, fadtea, He 1)
har jap jee-aray chhutee-ai gurmukh cheenai aap. ||3]|
Chanting the Name of the Lord, O my soul, you shall be emancipated; as Gurmukh, you shall come to understand your own self. ||3]|
36 HO Ad uls Sent HS tir fAg ots Il (20-16, frdtera, He 1)
tan man gur peh vaychi-aa man dee-aa sir naal.
I have sold my body and mind to the Guru, and I have given my mind and head as well.
fgsee Ufa defeor acuta afA footes il (20-16, frstea, ue 1)
taribhavan khoj dhandholi-aa gurmukh khoj nihaal.
I was seeking and searching for Him throughout the three worlds; then, as Gurmukh, I sought and found Him.
Asafa vfs frerfeor soa A us ats sidil (20-17, frdtoa, He 1
satgur mayl milaa-i-aa naanak so parabh naal. ||4||17]]| The True Guru has united me in Union, O Nanak, with that God. ||4]]17]|
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (20-17) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Hae at fest odt Hee at Sct MMA I (20-18, frdtera, H2 1) marnai kee chintaa nahee jeevan kee nahee aas. I have no anxiety about dying, and no hope of living.
3 Aaa Aor yfsuredt Sa ATA fareA Il (20-18, fadtora, v3 1)
too sarab jee-aa partipaalahee laykhai saas giraas.
You are the Cherisher of all beings; You keep the account of our breaths and morsels of food.
nists aaufy 3 zAfs fa sre (38 fosrtA Al (20-19, frstora, we 1) antar gurmukh too vaseh ji-o bhaavai ti-o nirjaas. ||1|| You abide within the Gurmukh. As it pleases You, You decide our allotment. ||1]|
Abad ITH AUS HS HS Il (20-19, fastera, He 1) jee-aray raam japat man maan. O my soul, chant the Name of the Lord; the mind will be pleased and appeased.
nists oat Afes ast ufeor qayfe famre nal FIC il (20-19, fadtoa, He antar laagee jal bujhee paa-i-aa gurmukh gi-aan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The raging fire within is extinguished; the Gurmukh obtains spiritual wisdom. ||1]|Pause| |
UST 29 visa at afs wet ae feoha Ha Carts i (1-1, fadtea, ne antar kee gat jaanee-ai gur milee-ai sank utaar.
Know the state of your inner being; meet with the Guru and get rid of your skepticism.
Hfeor fas wis webs fss defer we wfe I (21-2, faster, He
mu-i-aa jit ghar jaa-ee-ai tit jeevdi-aa mar maar.
To reach your True Home after you die, you must conquer death while you are still alive.
wode Hafe ASS ure aa Stes iQH (21-2, fadtera, He 1) anhad sabad suhaavanay paa-ee-ai gur veechaar. ||2| | The beautiful, Unstruck Sound of the Shabad is obtained, contemplating the Guru.
[121] Mode sat urehat so ICH afe faoA II (21-3, fastora, He 1)
anhad banee paa-ee-ai tah ha-umai ho-ay binaas. The Unstruck Melody of Gurbani is obtained, and egotism is eliminated.
Asad AS nryet JG Ae ATHES SH Il (21-3, fadtoa, we 1) satgur Sayvay aapnaa ha-o sad kurbaanai taas. I am forever a sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru.
ufs van Uareha ufy afs on fee SI (21-4, faster, He
kharh dargeh painaa-ee-ai mukh har naam nivaas. ||3]|
They are dressed in robes of honor in the Court of the Lord; the Name of the Lord is on their lips. ||3]|
Ag tut 3g sfe ad fhe AaSt A HS Il (21-4, fasta, ue 1)
jah daykhaa tah rav rahay siv saktee kaa mayl.
Wherever I look, I see the Lord pervading there, in the union of Shiva and Shakti, of consciousness and matter.
fag ae dct todt A rfenr aAfa AY I (21-5, fete, He
tarihu gun banDhee dayhuree jo aa-i-aa jag so khayl.
The three qualities hold the body in bondage; whoever comes into the world is subject to their play.
ferat efa fees Houfa safe o AS Sil (21-5, frstoa, He 1
vijogee dukh vichhurhay manmukh laheh na mayl. ||4| |
Those who separate themselves from the Lord wander lost in misery. The self-willed manmukhs do not attain union with Him. ||4]|
HO Saat ufs ZA AS S TST GE Il (21-6, fastoa, He 1)
man bairaagee ghar vasai sach bhai raataa ho-ay.
If the mind becomes balanced and detached, and comes to dwell in its own true home, imbued with the Fear of God,
famis HIGH sae Tos su 3 TE Il (21-6, fasta, we 1)
gi-aan mahaaras bhogvai baahurh bhookh na ho-ay.
then it enjoys the essence of supreme spiritual wisdom; it shall never feel hunger again.
sod feg no ute fe st fefe eu o Sf NUNACH (21-7, faster, He 1)
naanak ih man maar mil bhee fir dukh na ho-ay. ||5||18]|
O Nanak, conquer and subdue this mind; meet with the Lord, and you shall never again suffer in pain. ||5]|18] |
frrstarat HIS 9 I (21-7) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
BT HS HAY BI BF BI SIS Il (21-7, frdtora, ws 1) ayhu mano moorakh lobhee-aa lobhay lagaa lobhaan. This foolish mind is greedy; through greed, it becomes even more attached to greed.
Rafe & Sta Aras Sans wr|g ATS Il (21-8, fasta, He 1)
sabad na bheejai saaktaa durmat aavan jaan.
The evil-minded shaaktas, the faithless cynics, are not attuned to the Shabad; they come and go in reincarnation.
AY Asa A fee St ure Tat fears Al (21-8, fates, we 1) saaDhoo satgur jay milai taa paa-ee-ai gunee niDhaan. ||1]| One who meets with the Holy True Guru finds the Treasure of Excellence. ||1||
Ho J ICH efs ING Il (21-9, faster, He 1) man ray ha-umai chhod gumaan. O mind, renounce your egotistical pride.
ofg ag Ades Ale J wets ead HG NU! TIS Il (21-9, fasta, we 1) har gur sarvar sayv too paavahi dargeh maan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Serve the Lord, the Guru, the Sacred Pool, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||1||Pause]|
oH oy Alu fean fs Tent ofs as WS Il (21-10, fadtoa, He 1)
raam naam jap dinas raat gurmukh har Dhan jaan.
Chant the Name of the Lord day and night; become Gurmukh, and know the Wealth of the Lord.
Afs AY ofs dA sae AS AST fife fame i (21-10, fadtoa, v2 1)
sabh sukh har ras bhognay sant sabhaa mil gi-aan.
All comforts and peace, and the Essence of the Lord, are enjoyed by acquiring spiritual wisdom in the Society of the Saints.
fofs mifsfefa ofs yg Afeor Asafe Shor Sn QU (21-11, fadtoa, v3 1) nit ahinis har parabh sayvi-aa satgur dee-aa naam. ||2]| Day and night, continually serve the Lord God; the True Guru has given the Naam.
21 |
Ta IF HSH as fet us use il (21-11, frvtea, 2 1)
kookar koorh kamaa-ee-ai gur nindaa pachai pachaan.
Those who practice falsehood are dogs; those who slander the Guru shall burn in their own fire.
SoH Fe TY WE AH He ad YBIS Il (21-12, fasta, we 1)
bharmay bhoolaa dukh ghano jam maar karai khulhaan.
They wander lost and confused, deceived by doubt, suffering in terrible pain. The Messenger of Death shall beat them to a pulp.
Houfa AY 3 UTehat Toufa AY ASS ISI (21-12, fadtera, He 1)
manmukh sukh na paa-ee-ai gurmukh sukh subhaan. ||3]| The self-willed manmukhs find no peace, while the Gurmukhs are wondrously joyful. H3II
ma Ug fuerdha vg fers ude Il (21-13, factor, He 1)
aithai DnanDh pitaa-ee-ai sach likhat parvaan.
In this world, people are engrossed in false pursuits, but in the world hereafter, only the account of your true actions is accepted.
Ufs AAS TdT ALe’ TT Adal uUsuS Il (21-13, fistoa, ve 1)
har sajan gur sayvdaa gur karnee parDhaan.
The Guru serves the Lord, His Intimate Friend. The Guru's actions are supremely exalted.
SOA OTH 3 SIA ATH Ad SATS NIAC! (21-14, factors, He 1) naanak naam na veesrai karam sachai neesaan. ||4]|19]|
O Nanak, never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the True Lord shall bless you with His Mark of Grace. ||4]|19]|
frrstarar HIS A I (21-14) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
fea fae fimre Jind ca est Ho HS I (21-14, fadtera, He 1) ik til pi-aaraa veesrai rog vadaa man maahi. Forgetting the Beloved, even for a moment, the mind is afflicted with terrible diseases.
fa@ vans ufs uh wT ofs & SA HS Hf I (21-15, fadtora, He 1) ki-o dargeh pat paa-ee-ai jaa har na vasai man maahi. How can honor be attained in His Court, if the Lord does not dwell in the mind?
ats fife me urehat nrafe He TS wfs WAM (21-15, fAdtea, He 1 gur mili-ai sukh paa-ee-ai agan marai gun maahi. ||1]| Meeting with the Guru, peace is found. The fire is extinguished in His Glorious Praises.
[21
Ho o mifsfafh ofs Te AMS Il (21-16, frdtera, H2 1) man ray ahinis har gun saar. O mind, enshrine the Praises of the Lord, day and night.
fas fs us oH 3 SA 3 He fess AAs NA TIS Il (21-16, factor, He 1)
jin khin pal naam na veesrai tay jan virlay sansaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
One who does not forget the Naam, for a moment or even an instant-how rare is such a person in this world! ||1]||Pause| |
nat Afs froth Fest Aefs AAT I (21-17, fadtea, v2 1)
jotee jot milaa-ee-ai surtee surat sanjog.
When one's light merges into the Light, and one's intuitive consciousness is joined with the Intuitive Consciousness,
fon GH Ts Te odt AAT Aa ll (21-17, fata, v2 1)
hinsaa ha-umai gat ga-ay naahee sahsaa sog.
then one's cruel and violent instincts and egotism depart, and skepticism and sorrow are taken away.
gente fan ofs ufs ZA fsa AS TT AAT NM (21-18, fadtea, v2 1)
gurmukh jis har man vasai tis maylay gur sanjog. ||2| |
The Lord abides within the mind of the Gurmukh, who merges in the Lord's Union, through the Guru. ||2]|
afer anfs A adt Sa SHSTS Il (21-18, fadtoa, He 1) kaa-i-aa kaaman jay karee bhogay bhoganhaar. If I surrender my body like a bride, the Enjoyer will enjoy me.
fan fh@ 3g 0 aint FCA UmETS I (21-19, fadtoa, He 1) tis si-o nayhu na keej-ee jo deesai chalanhaar. Do not make love with one who is just a passing show.
qTonfy sefs Aral A ys AA SST BI (21-19, fdtora, ue 1)
gurmukh raveh sohaaganee so parabh sayj bhataar. ||3]|
The Gurmukh is ravished like the pure and happy bride on the Bed of God, her Husband. ||3]|
Yat 22 ad mals foets He TaHfy ote AS UTE Il (22-1, factors, He 1)
chaaray agan nivaar mar gurmukh har jal paa-ay. The Gurmukh puts out the four fires, with the Water of the Lord's Name.
nists aHS yartaor nifys star nurfe | (22-1, fates, ue 1)
antar kamal pargaasi-aa amrit bhari-aa aghaa-ay. The lotus blossoms deep within the heart, and filled with Ambrosial Nectar, one is satisfied.
Soa Asdd His ates Ay wef esa ATE ISIQOMl (22-2, frdtea, He 1)
naanak satgur meet kar sach paavahi dargeh jaa-ay. ||4||20]| O Nanak, make the True Guru your friend; going to His Court, you shall obtain the True Lord. ||4]|20] |
frrstaat HIS 9 I (22-3) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
ofa ofa wug fumrfeur aeanfs & afe sf% i (22-3, fadtora, He 1)
har har japahu pi-aari-aa gurmat lay har bol.
Meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, O my beloved; follow the Guru's Teachings, and speak of the Lord.
Ho Ae aAeet wehat ser us 3H il (22-3, frdtoa, ws 1) man sach kasvatee laa-ee-ai tulee-ai poorai tol. Apply the Touchstone of Truth to your mind, and see if it comes up to its full weight.
otfs fas 3 urn foe urea Hf mnie Nail (22-4, fadtera, He 1) keemat kinai na paa-ee-ai rid maanak mol amol. ||1]| No one has found the worth of the ruby of the heart; its value cannot be estimated.
[21] amet 3 ate Stat Te HT Il (22-4, frrdtoa, v2 1)
bhaa-ee ray har heeraa gur maahi. O Siblings of Destiny, the Diamond of the Lord is within the Guru.
AsAafs Asag ue nifofafA Aafe Refs a TIS i (22-5, fadtera, He 1) satsangat satgur paa-ee-ai ahinis sabad salaahi. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The True Guru is found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Day and night, praise the Word of His Shabad. ||1]||Pause] |
Ag zug 06 of & urban ae usart I (22-5, fatwa, ne 1)
sach vakhar Dhan raas lai paa-ee-ai gur pargaas.
The True Merchandise, Wealth and Capital are obtained through the Radiant Light of the Guru.
fa vtafe ue vfs uf £30 feRa eAfs StH II (22-6, frstoa, He 1)
ji-o agan marai jal paa-i-ai ti-o tarisnaa daasan daas.
Just as fire is extinguished by pouring on water, desire becomes the slave of the Lord's slaves.
AH Hed 3 Baet fC sCHe 3d SoH QI (22-6, frdtwa, He 1
jam jandaar na lag-ee i-o bha-ojal tarai taraas. ||2||
The Messenger of Death will not touch you; in this way, you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean, carrying others across with you. ||2||
Toute az o weet Afs IS AS Ste Il (22-7, frdtera, v2 1)
gurmukh koorh na bhaav-ee sach ratay sach bhaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs do not like falsehood. They are imbued with Truth; they love only Truth.
Was AY 3 Teel aS TST UPS ih (22-7, frdtora, vs 1)
saakat sach na bhaav-ee koorhai koorhee paa‘-ay.
The shaaktas, the faithless cynics, do not like the Truth; false are the foundations of the false.
Afs o3 afe Hf AS Afs fe ISI (22-8, facta, He 1)
sach ratay gur mayli-ai sachay sach samaa-ay. ||3]|
Imbued with Truth, you shall meet the Guru. The true ones are absorbed into the True Lord. ||3]|
HO Hfd HE WS SH ISO UeTsE Tg Il (22-8, fadtoa, ve 1)
man meh maanak laal naam ratan padaarath heer.
Within the mind are emeralds and rubies, the Jewel of the Naam, treasures and diamonds.
Ag zug 06 oH J ufe wie afed aate I (22-9, fadtea, v2 1)
sach vakhar Dhan naam hai ghat ghat gahir gambheer.
The Naam is the True Merchandise and Wealth; in each and every heart, His Presence is deep and profound.
Soa ToHfy usha vfeor ad ata dtag isiIai (22-9, fadtea, ue 1)
naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai da-i-aa karay har heer. ||4||21]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the Diamond of the Lord, by His Kindness and Compassion. ||4]|21]|
frrstaat HIS 4 Il (22-10) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
san ats 3 fese A se ferisg 2H Il (22-10, fade, He 1
bharmay bhaahi na vijhvai jay bhavai disantar days.
The fire of doubt is not extinguished, even by wandering through foreign lands and countries.
nists He 3 Cad fon ates fom FH II (22-10, fadtora, ve 1) antar mail na utrai Dharig jeevan Dharig vays. If inner filth is not removed, one's life is cursed, and one's clothes are cursed.
dg fas safs o deet fas Afsag & Cuen NU 22-11, fadtera, He 1)
hor kitai bhagat na hova-ee bin satgur kay updays. ||1||
There is no other way to perform devotional worship, except through the Teachings of the True Guru. |[1]|
Ho J dente mate fests i (22-11, frstoa, ue 1) man ray gurmukh agan nivaar. O mind, become Gurmukh, and extinguish the fire within.
qa a afoor xfs eA ICH fener fs nan TIS Ml (22-12, fadtora, ne 1)
gur kaa kahi-aa man vasai ha-umai tarisnaa maar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Let the Words of the Guru abide within your mind; let egotism and desires die. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho Hed feshe J TH of ufS ute I (22-12, faster, He 1) man maanak nirmol hai raam naam pat paa-ay. The jewel of the mind is priceless; through the Name of the Lord, honor is obtained.
fife AsHafs afs ues aan afe fee ofF I (22-13, fate, He 1)
mil satsangat har paa-ee-ai gurmukh har liv laa-ay.
Join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and find the Lord. The Gurmukh embraces love for the Lord.
nity afer ay ufeer fife Aes Ae AME II (22-13, fadtera, v2 1)
aap ga-i-aa sukh paa-i-aa mil sallai salal samaa-ay. ||2| |
Give up your selfishness, and you shall find peace; like water mingling with water, you shall merge in absorption. ||2]|
fats ofa ofa ant 3 Sf A mBafs wre AE I 22-14, fadtea, He 1)
jin har har naam na chayti-o so a-ogun aavai jaa-ay.
Those who have not contemplated the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are unworthy; they come and go in reincarnation.
fan Asad use 3 sfeS A sCnfie ud UTE I (22-15, fadtora, He 1)
jis satgur purakh na bhayti-o so bha-ojal pachai pachaa-ay.
One who has not met with the True Guru, the Primal Being, is bothered and bewildered in the terrifying world-ocean.
feg nea Ft fants o fee ast ses AE SN (22-15, fete", He D
ih maanak jee-o nirmol hai i-o ka-udee badlai jaa-ay. ||3]|
This jewel of the soul is priceless, and yet it is being squandered like this, in exchange for a mere shell. ||3]|
fiat Asag ofA fee A Us UTE AAS Il (22-16, firdtora, Hs 1) jinna satgur ras milai say pooray purakh sujaan. Those who joyfully meet with the True Guru are perfectly fulfilled and wise.
ad fife s@re sult vsas ufS uses Il (22-16, fadtera, He 1)
gur mil bha-ojal langhee-ai dargeh pat parvaan.
Meeting with the Guru, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean. In the Court of the Lord, they are honored and approved.
soa SHY CxS ufs Cun Age SIS ISQ2Il (22-17, fade", He
naanak tay mukh ujlay Dhun upjai sabad neesaan. ||4]|22] |
O Nanak, their faces are radiant; the Music of the Shabad, the Word of God, wells up within them. ||4||22]|
frrstarat HIS 9 Il (22-17) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Taq Ad zantad sug BI ANTS I (22-18, fasta, He 1) vanaj karahu vanjaariho vakhar layho samaal. Make your deals, dealers, and take care of your merchandise.
SH ens feandha Ant ford of I (22-18, fasta, He 1) taisee vasat visaahee-ai jaisee nibhai naal. Buy that object which will go along with you.
Wat ATT AWE J BAt SAS ANTS UU (22-19, fata, He 1) agai saahu sujaan hai laisee vasat samaal. ||1|| In the next world, the All-knowing Merchant will take this object and care for it. ||1]|
amet J ITH AT fas BTS Il (22-19, frstora, He 1) bhaa-ee ray raam kahhu chit laa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, chant the Lord's Name, and focus your consciousness on Him.
dfs AA Zug & VET AG a usorfe NAN TIS I (22-19, fate, we 1)
har jas vakhar lai chalhu saho daykhai patee-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Take the Merchandise of the Lord's Praises with you. Your Husband Lord shall see this and approve. ||1]|Pause||
Ust 23 fast ofA o Ae J fae far AY OE I (23-1, fretera, He 1)
jinaa raas na sach hai ki-o tinaa sukh ho-ay. Those who do not have the Assets of Truth-how can they find peace?
ue Zefa eft Ho 3q det OE I (23-1, faster, ve khotai vanaj vananji-ai man tan khotaa ho-ay. By dealing their deals of falsehood, their minds and bodies become false.
aot aa faa fa gy we fas sf nln (23-2, fadtoa, ws 1)
faahee faathay mirag ji-o dookh ghano nit ro-ay. ||2||
Like the deer caught in the trap, they suffer in terrible agony; they continually cry out in pain. ||2]|
Sx SA
a2 US o uefs fae ofs aa Ba 8 OE Il (23-2, fadtoa, He 1
khotay potai naa paveh tin har gur daras na ho-ay. The counterfeit coins are not put into the Treasury; they do not obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord-Guru.
de ats o ufs do dfe 3 AISfA ofS I (23-3, firdtera, 42 1) khotay jaat na pat hai khot na seejhas ko-ay. The false ones have no social status or honor. No one succeeds through falsehood.
ae de aneat oofe afeur ufs df= 3 (23-3, fata, He 1)
khotay khot kamaavanaa aa-ay ga-i-aa pat kho-ay. ||3]|
Practicing falsehood again and again, people come and go in reincarnation, and forfeit their honor. ||3]|
Soa HS AHSTEM aT a ASfe AHS Il (23-4, fadtora, He 1)
naanak man samjaa-ee-ai gur kai sabad saalaah.
O Nanak, instruct your mind through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and praise the Lord.
aH OM dfa sfsur sg o aH ford Il (23-4, fadtoa, He 1) raam naam rang rati-aa bhaar na bharam tinaah.
Those who are imbued with the love of the Name of the Lord are not loaded down by doubt.
dfs Af oo nae fogsS dfs HS HT NNQII (23-5, frrdtera, v8 1)
har jap laahaa aglaa nirbha-o har man maah. ||4]|23]| Those who chant the Name of the Lord earn great profits; the Fearless Lord abides within their minds. ||4]|23]|
frdtaa HIS A We 2 Il (23-5) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 2. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Second House:
US HIG Mig Soa SSIS feo oie Il (23-5, fadtoa, He 1) Dhan joban ar fulrhaa naathee-arhay din chaar. Wealth, the beauty of youth and flowers are guests for only a few days.
uafs ad us fag efs efs HHETS UI (23-6, fadtoa, He 1) paban kayray pat ji-o dhal dhul jummanhaar. ||1]|| Like the leaves of the water-lily, they wither and fade and finally die. ||1]|
da Hf & fimrfour at aa o8 Ia Il (23-6, fadtora, He 1) rang maan lai pi-aari-aa jaa joban na-o hulaa. Be happy, dear beloved, as long as your youth is fresh and delightful.
feo ass aad sfeur usar SH NA TIS Il (23-7, fates, ne 1) din thorh-rhay thakay bha-i-aa puraanaa cholaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
But your days are few-you have grown weary, and now your body has grown old. ||1]|Pause] |
Ane AS Jas Ate AS Hef Il (23-7, factors, ve 1) sajan mayray rangulay jaa-ay sutay jaaraan. My playful friends have gone to sleep in the graveyard.
Jd ot fet gHal de Stat af iQ (23-8, faster, ue 1) ha” bhee vanjaa dumnee rovaa jheenee baan. ||2]| In my double-mindedness, I shall have to go as well. I cry in a feeble voice. ||2||
at o Hedt ade nue xat AE I (23-8, fadtea, He 1) kee na sunayhee goree-ay aapan kannee so-ay. Haven't you heard the call from beyond, O beautiful soul-bride?
Sat viet Aad fos o Uetor af Si (23-9, fadtea, He 1) lagee aavahi saahurai nit na pay-ee-aa ho-ay. ||3]| You must go to your in-laws; you cannot stay with your parents forever. ||3]|
Soa Ast Usha ave feast Afs i (23-9, fastea, He 1)
naanak sutee pay-ee-ai jaan virtee sann.
O Nanak, know that she who sleeps in her parents' home is plundered in broad daylight.
Tat Tevet oat nears vot sf isii2eil (23-10, fata, ue 1)
gunaa gavaa-ee ganth-rhee avgan chalee bann. ||4||24|| She has lost her bouquet of merits; gathering one of demerits, she departs. ||4||24| |
fAdtra Host 1 we EAT 2 Il (23-10) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar doojaa 2. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Second House:
my dA wirfu TA My eSTTT Il (23-10, fidtera, vz 1)
aapay rasee-aa aap ras aapay ravanhaar.
He Himself is the Enjoyer, and He Himself is the Enjoyment. He Himself is the Ravisher of all.
Ys
nyt de Jost MM AA SSS MAU (23-11, fadtera, He 1) aapay hovai cholrhaa aapay sayj bhataar. ||1]| He Himself is the Bride in her dress, He Himself is the Bridegroom on the bed. ||1||
sta sa Ha Afee se afoot sous uA TTS ll (23-11, fasta, 3 1)
rang rataa mayraa saahib rav rahi-aa bharpoor. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My Lord and Master is imbued with love; He is totally permeating and pervading all. ||1]|Pause] |
MY Het Hest nia urSt AM Il (23-12, fasta, He 1) aapay maachhee machhulee aapay paanee jaal. He Himself is the fisherman and the fish; He Himself is the water and the net.
WN AS HEaST OMY niefs Bes ill (23-12, fadtera, v2 1) aapay jaal mankarhaa aapay andar laal. ||2]| He Himself is the sinker, and He Himself is the bait. ||2]|
nm ag fafa door Ade Aa we i (23-13, fadtoa, He 1D aapay baho biDh rangulaa sakhee-ay mayraa laal. He Himself loves in so many ways. O sister soul-brides, He is my Beloved.
fos de Aovaat Sy THT TS WI (23-13, fadteora, v2 1) nit ravai sohaaganee daykh hamaaraa haal. ||3]|
He continually ravishes and enjoys the happy soul-brides; just look at the plight I am in without Him! ||3]|
yse BST ASSt J ASST FJ IA Il (23-14, fasta, we 1) paranvai naanak bayntee too sarvar too hans. Prays Nanak, please hear my prayer: You are the pool, and You are the soul-swan.
ABE 3 adr 5 3 wm Sf feay siQuil (23-14, fastera, we 1)
ka-ul too hai kavee-aa too hai aapay vaykh vigas. ||4]|25] |
You are the lotus flower of the day and You are the water-lily of the night. You Yourself behold them, and blossom forth in bliss. ||4]|25]|
frdtaa HIS A We 3 Il (23-15) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 3. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Third House:
feg 39 Usst Sta aor ad Afes mmr Afsaret Il (23-15, fadteora, we 1)
ih tan Dhartee beej karmaa karo salil aapaa-o saaringpaanee.
Make this body the field, and plant the seed of good actions. Water it with the Name of the Lord, who holds all the world in His Hands.
Ho fasns dfs foe afe & fe urefk ue fagarat All (23-15, fadtera, He 1)
man kirsaan har ridai jammaa-ay lai i-o paavas pad nirbaanee. ||1]|
Let your mind be the farmer; the Lord shall sprout in your heart, and you shall attain the state of Nirvaanaa. ||1||
Od asa Hs Heme il (23-16, fastea, He 1) kaahay garbas moorhay maa-i-aa. You fool! Why are you so proud of Maya?
fus WS Aa wes HST 3d dfs 3 vifs Merfemr I ITE I (23-16, fasta, ve 1)
pit suto sagal kaaltar maataa tayray hohi na ant sakhaa-i-aa. rahaa-o.
Father, children, spouse, mother and all relatives-they shall not be your helpers in the end. ||Pause||
fae faors ene fase ad fee sfx orsn afe fomret i (23-17, facta, He 1)
bikhai bikaar dusat kirkhaa karay in taj aatmai ho-ay Dhi-aa-ee.
So weed out evil, wickedness and corruption; leave these behind, and let your soul meditate on God.
mu 3u HAY dfs Fa Te AHS fear HO mA QI (23-18, fdtora, He 1)
jap tap sanjam hohi jab raakhay kamal bigsai maDh aasarmaa-ee. ||2]|
When chanting, austere meditation and self-discipline become your protectors, then the lotus blossoms forth, and the honey trickles out. ||2||
aA Austad HAG Hg Ste var fos ars ATS Il (23-18, firdtora, ne 1)
bees saptaahro baasro sangrahai teen khorhaa nit kaal saarai.
Bring the twenty-seven elements of the body under your control, and throughout the three stages of life, remember death.
ZA MST H onidud WS ad aod fES Sq TS WSNEN (23-19, fadtora, He 1)
das athaar mai aprampro cheenai kahai naanak iv ayk taarai. ||3||26]||
See the Infinite Lord in the ten directions, and in all the variety of nature. Says Nanak, in this way, the One Lord shall carry you across. ||3||26||
Ust 28 frdtaa HIS A We 3 Il (24-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 3. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Third House:
WHS af usst Sta Aad afs Ae at nia fos Ufa urat Il (24-1, facta, He 1)
amal kar Dhartee beej sabdo kar sach kee aab nit deh paanee.
Make good deeds the soil, and let the Word of the Shabad be the seed; irrigate it continually with the water of Truth.
ofe fasrre Shire wie & fans tea Hs SS At UI (24-2, frdtora, we
ho-ay kirsaan eemaan jammaa-ay lai bhisat dojak moorhay ayv jaanee. ||1|| Become such a farmer, and faith will sprout. This brings knowledge of heaven and hell, you fool! ||1]|
HS We As Tet ute Ih (24-2, frdtea, v2 1) mat jaan seh galee paa-i-aa. Do not think that your Husband Lord can be obtained by mere words.
He a He gu at Ast fes fact Foy aetfeEor 1A TIS it (24-3, fardtora, ws 1) maal kai maanai roop kee sobhaa it biDhee janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are wasting this life in the pride of wealth and the splendor of beauty. ||1]|Pause] |
ma sf faas feg Ho Hise ane at Are oot His uret Il (24-3, frdtera, we 1)
aib tan chikrho ih man meedko kamal kee saar nahee mool paa-ee.
The defect of the body which leads to sin is the mud puddle, and this mind is the frog, which does not appreciate the lotus flower at all.
3@g Cxse fas wfhimr a8 fas gS A oT TST MQM (24-4, firdtora, we
bha-ur ustaad nit bhaakhi-aa bolay ki-o boojhai jaa nah bujhaa-ee. ||2| | The bumble bee is the teacher who continually teaches the lesson. But how can one understand, unless one is made to understand? ||2||
MUS Hoe! ue at wat fed He TST HSMM I (24-5, fasta, ne 1)
aakhan sunnaa pa-un kee banee ih man rataa maa-i-aa.
This speaking and listening is like the song of the wind, for those whose minds are colored by the love of Maya.
WAH ot sete feafo uff? frot afs Sa fomrfenr sil (24-5, facta, v2 1)
khasam kee nadar dilahi pasinday jinee kar ayk Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||3]||
The Grace of the Master is bestowed upon those who meditate on Him alone. They are pleasing to His Heart. ||3]|
ate afs 8 un afs Wet oe ASS HS ale ATH II (24-6, fata, He 1)
teeh kar rakhay panj kar saathee naa-o saitaan mat kat jaa-ee.
You may observe the thirty fasts, and say the five prayers each day, but 'Satan' can undo them.
aod nie ots U weet He UG fas x Afra SQM (24-6, faster, we 1)
naanak aakhai raahi pai chalnaa maal Dhan kit koo sanji-aahee. ||4||27] |
Says Nanak, you will have to walk on the Path of Death, so why do you bother to collect wealth and property? ||4||27]||
frdtaa HIS A Weg Il (24-7) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fourth House:
Het H@or fats wa HCfeor ofaor aor HATS I (24-7, fadtoa, He
so-ee ma-ulaa jin jag ma-oli-aa hari-aa kee-aa sansaaro.
He is the Master who has made the world bloom; He makes the Universe blossom forth, fresh and green.
na ure fate df goet Us franegs NU (24-8, fadtera, He 1) aab khaak jin banDh rahaa-ee Dhan sirjanhaaro. ||1|| He holds the water and the land in bondage. Hail to the Creator Lord! ||1]|
HIS" HO" HIS Il (24-8, fasta, Hs 1) marnaa mulaa marnaa. Death, O Mullah-death will come,
St ASST SIS MU TIS I (24-9, frstora, ve 1) bhee kartaarahu darnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. so live in the Fear of God the Creator. ||1||Pause] |
TIS TI Het Wels oH yet Il (24-9, frstra, we 1) taa too mulaa taa too kaajee jaaneh naam khudaa-ee.
You are a Mullah, and you are a Qazi, only when you know the Naam, the Name of God.
A asd ufsor defo ad Id B sd UTS NM (24-9, facta, we 1) jay bahutayraa parhi-aa hoveh ko rahai na bharee-ai paa-ee. ||2|| You may be very educated, but no one can remain when the measure of life is full.
[21 Het amet fats ory sfavr fea any ahr mrad | (24-10, fasta, v2 1)
so-ee kaajee jin aap taji-aa ik naam kee-aa aaDhaaro. He alone is a Qazi, who renounces selfishness and conceit, and makes the One Name his Support.
od ot dat wf o WH AS fHonSTS BI (24-11, fadtoa, ne 1) hai bhee hosee jaa-ay na jaasee sachaa sirjanhaaro. ||3]|| The True Creator Lord is, and shall always be. He was not born; He shall not die. ||3]|
un zus foes ares usfs ase ATE Il (24-11, fadtoa, v2 1
panj vakhat nivaaj gujaareh parheh katayb kuraanaa.
You may chant your prayers five times each day; you may read the Bible and the Koran.
Soa MT ag AeSt aos utet urar USUQCH (24-12, fata, He 1) naanak aakhai gor saday-ee rahi-o peenaa khaanaa. ||4||28]|
Says Nanak, the grave is calling you, and now your food and drink are finished. 14] [28]
frdtaar HIS A We 8 Il (24-12) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fourth House:
Sa Ang ef Anat of Il (24-13, fidtora, v2 1) ayk su-aan du-ay su-aanee naal. The dogs of greed are with me.
sea Sata Het sents it (24-13, frdtera, He 1) bhalkay bha-ukahi sadaa ba-i-aal. In the early morning, they continually bark at the wind.
FZ ST HO Hee” Il (24-13, frdteg, Hs 1) koorh chhuraa muthaa murdaar. Falsehood is my dagger; through deception, I eat the carcasses of the dead.
Wet THY FI AISI WAU (24-13, frst, v2 1) Dhaanak roop rahaa kartaar. ||1]| I live as a wild hunter, O Creator! ||1||
H ufs at ufe o agat at ae Il (24-14, fdtera, He 1) mai pat kee pand na karnee kee kaar. I have not followed good advice, nor have I done good deeds.
UG faas sfu sa freee Il (24-14, frstora, oe 1) ha-o bigrhai roop rahaa bikraal. I am deformed and horribly disfigured.
37 Sa BH 3S AAG Il (24-15, fadtora, v2 1) tayraa ayk naam taaray sansaar. Your Name alone, Lord, saves the world.
H So wry Sd yrars VU TIS Il (24-15, fstora, ve mai ayhaa aas ayho aaDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is my hope; this is my support. ||1]|Pause| |
Hf feet wma fee TAS I (24-15, factors, He 1 mukh nindaa aakhaa din raat. With my mouth I speak slander, day and night.
UT WE Adt Ste Hots Il (24-15, fadtera, ve 1) par ghar johee neech sanaat. I spy on the houses of others-I am such a wretched low-life!
an au sfs eAfs USTs I (24-16, fadtera, He 1)
kaam kroDh tan vaseh chandaal.
Unfulfilled sexual desire and unresolved anger dwell in my body, like the outcasts who cremate the dead.
WE gfy TI ATS IlQIl (24-16, faAstea, us 1) Dhaanak roop rahaa kartaar. ||2]| I live as a wild hunter, O Creator! ||2||
odt Hats Heat SA I (24-16, frdteoa, He 1) faahee surat malookee vays. I make plans to trap others, although I appear gentle.
IG Sarat Salt SA Il (24-17, frrdteoa, He 1) ha-o thagvaarhaa thagee days. I am a robber-I rob the world.
Ua fimiret FIST SST Il (24-17, fastora, ve 1) kharaa si-aanaa bahutaa bhaar. I am very clever-I carry loads of sin.
WE gfy TI ATS IISIl (24-17, faAstea, Hs 1) Dhaanak roop rahaa kartaar. ||3]| I live as a wild hunter, O Creator! ||3]|
H ast o AST IaH I (24-17, fadtera, 42 1)
mai keetaa na jaataa haraamkhor.
I have not appreciated what You have done for me, Lord; I take from others and exploit them.
JG fomrt Hg SA BAS BT Il (24-18, fadteg, ve 1 ha-o ki-aa muhu daysaa dusat chor. What face shall I show You, Lord? I am a sneak and a thief.
Soa ST Ad Mes Il (24-18, fadtera, vz 1) naanak neech kahai beechaar. Nanak describes the state of the lowly.
WEt gfy TI AGS NSWQCH (24-18, firstera, ve 1)
Dhaanak roop rahaa kartaar. ||4||29|| I live as a wild hunter, O Creator! ||4||29]|
frdtaa HIS A We 8 Il (24-19) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fourth House:
fat Hats AS DAMA I (24-19, fadtea, He 1)
aykaa surat jaytay hai jee-a.
There is one awareness among all created beings. Hats feger af 3 att I (24-19, firsts, we
surat vihoonaa ko-ay na kee-a. None have been created without this awareness.
Yat Qu Adt Aafs Sa fS36 Te Il (25-1, faster, ve 1)
jayhee surat tayhaa tin raahu. As is their awareness, so is their way.
But fea neg AT NU (25-1, fadtoa, He 1) laykhaa iko aavhu jaahu. ||1|| According to the account of our actions, we come and go in reincarnation. ||1]|
aS Aba axsfs FSIET Il (25-1, fastoa, uz 1) kaahay jee-a karahi chaturaa-ee. Why, O soul, do you try such clever tricks?
Be Ve fas o uret Ul ToS Il (25-1, fadtoa, ue 1) layvai dayvai dhil na paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Taking away and giving back, God does not delay. ||1]||Pause| |
3d Aba Hor ar Sfo Il (25-2, fastera, He 1)
tayray jee-a jee-aa kaa tohi.
All beings belong to You; all beings are Yours. O Lord and Master, fas a@ Afos wrefa fo i (25-2, fadtora, He 1)
kit ka-o saahib aavahi rohi.
how can You become angry with them?
A 3 Afoe wreta ofa il (25-2, frdtora, ue 1)
jay too saahib aavahi rohi. Even if You, O Lord and Master, become angry with them,
3 Sar ar 39 Sto NM (25-3, fetes, He 1) too onaa kaa tayray ohi. ||2|| still, You are theirs, and they are Yours. ||2]|
wAt Sofears fears 8 il (25-3, fadtera, we 1) asee bolvigaarh vigaarhah bol. We are foul-mouthed; we spoil everything with our foul words.
3 dedt niels Safe 3m Il (25-3, fadtora, we 1) too nadree andar toleh tol. You weigh us in the balance of Your Glance of Grace.
Ad adel So ust HFS I (25-3, frsterar, He 1) jah karnee tah pooree mat. When one's actions are right, the understanding is perfect.
adel asT we uf| Sil (25-4, fadtea, v2 1) karnee baajhahu ghatay ghat. ||3]| Without good deeds, it becomes more and more deficient. ||3]|
ysets aoa farnrat arr afE I (25-4, fadtera, Hs 1) paranvat naanak gi-aanee kaisaa ho-ay. Prays Nanak, what is the nature of the spiritual people?
ming Use 8 ALS I (25-4, frdtorar, ns 1) aap pachhaanai boojhai so-ay. They are self-realized; they understand God.
Ts uA A Has il (25-5, frdteoa, ue 1) gur parsaad karay beechaar. By Guru's Grace, they contemplate Him;
A famrat ead ude IBIBO (25-5, fidtera, He 1) so gi-aanee dargeh parvaan. ||4]|30]| such spiritual people are honored in His Court. ||4]|30||
frdtaa HIS A WE g Il (25-5) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fourth House:
3 edhorg war gat H Hest AA VIZ BI I (25-6, frstora, we 1)
too daree-aa-o daanaa beenaa mai machhulee kaisay ant lahaa.
You are the River, All-knowing and All-seeing. I am just a fish-how can I find Your limit?
We HT Sa SI 3d 9 S35 3 fSart sfe Ha AU (25-6, firdtora, He 1) jah jah daykhaa tah tah too hai tujh tay niksee foot maraa. ||1]|| Wherever I look, You are there. Outside of You, I would burst and die. ||1]]|
Wat HE o Aral AST Il (25-7, faster, He 1) na jaanaa may-o na jaanaa jaalee. I do not know of the fisherman, and I do not know of the net.
WT Sy Sa 3 SS ANT UU TIS Il (25-7, fadtera, He 1) jaa dukh laagai taa tujhai samaalee. ||1]| rahaa-o. But when the pain comes, then I call upon You. ||1]||Pause| |
3 saute wfour H sf Il (25-8, frrdtora, He 1) too bharpoor jaani-aa mai door. You are present everywhere. I had thought that You were far away.
A Oe Adt A Sd Teles Il (25-8, fdtoa, ws 1) jo kachh karee so tayrai hadoor. Whatever I do, I do in Your Presence.
3 tafe IS Hats ue Il (25-8, faster, 2 1) too daykheh ha-o mukar paa-o. You see all my actions, and yet I deny them.
3d ath o 3d OTE INQ (25-8, fetes, He 1) tayrai kamm na tayrai naa-ay. ||2|| I have not worked for You, or Your Name. ||2||
Ast efs sat TE we I (25-9, fdtora, ve 1) jaytaa deh taytaa ha-o khaa-o. Whatever You give me, that is what I eat.
for eg ardt & fe WE I (25-9, fadtera, ne 1)
bi-aa dar naahee kai dar jaa-o. There is no other door-unto which door should I go?
SOA SA Ad MICA | (25-9, fadtora, He 1) naanak ayk kahai ardaas. Nanak offers this one prayer:
Mm fils As 3d uA SI (25-10, fadtea, He 1) jee-o pind sabh tayrai paas. ||3]| this body and soul are totally Yours. ||3]|
~ SR
nm 3s fe umd dt umr HPS fins i (25-10, fastera, we 1) aapay nayrhai door aapay hee aapay manjh mi-aano. He Himself is near, and He Himself is far away; He Himself is in-between.
‘aR
nm SY AS nm dt aeafs aT ATS Il (25-10, fadtea, v2 1)
aapay vaykhai sunay aapay hee kudrat karay jahaano.
He Himself beholds, and He Himself listens. By His Creative Power, He created the world.
A fSH oS Boat Jan ASt udSTS SISU (25-11, fadtora, He 1) jo tis bhaavai naankaa hukam so-ee parvaano. ||4||31]| Whatever pleases Him, O Nanak-that Command is acceptable. ||4]|31]|
frdtaa HIS A Wa 8 I (25-11) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fourth House:
ats AT AT HfS HS Il (25-12, frrdtera, v8 1) keetaa kahaa karay man maan. Why should the created beings feel pride in their minds?
ezeTd A Ts VS Il (25-12, fata, we 1) dayvanhaaray kai hath daan. The Gift is in the Hands of the Great Giver.
are af 5 tet ALE Il (25-12, factors, He 1) bhaavai day-ay na day-ee so-ay. As it pleases Him, He may give, or not give.
ats a afomt for af Wall (25-12, fadtera, He 1) keetay kai kahi-ai ki-aa ho-ay. ||1]| What can be done by the order of the created beings? ||1]|
nm AY Se FSA AP Il (25-13, factor, He 1) aapay sach bhaavai tis sach. He Himself is True; Truth is pleasing to His Will.
wot aT aT fers NU TIS i (25-13, fadteoa, He 1) anDhaa kachaa kach nikach. ||1|| rahaa-o. The spiritually blind are unripe and imperfect, inferior and worthless. ||1||Pause] |
wa gy fase mira Il (25-13, firdtera, He 1) jaa kay rukh birakh aaraa-o. The One who owns the trees of the forest and the plants of the garden
Ad OSs 37 (35 FE Il (25-14, fiadtora, He 1) jayhee Dhaat tayhaa tin naa-o. -according to their nature, He gives them all their names.
So aE Se foftior ue Il (25-14, frdteoa, ne 1 ful bhaa-o fal likhi-aa paa-ay. The Flower and the Fruit of the Lord's Love are obtained by pre-ordained destiny.
mify att mime dt ae Qi (25-14, firstera, He 1) aap beej aapay hee khaa-ay. ||2]|
As we plant, so we harvest and eat. ||2]|
at aa ae fefs IH I (25-14, fadtea, He 1)
kachee kanDh kachaa vich ra@j. The wall of the body is temporary, as is the soul-mason within it.
nfs meet fear ATE Il (25-15, fidtera, He 1) mat aloonee fikaa saad. The flavor of the intellect is bland and insipid without the Salt.
SA MTS wires SHA Il (25-15, fastea, He 1) naanak aanay aavai raas. O Nanak, as He wills, He makes things right.
fee oe OTS ATTA NSBNBQI (25-15, fadtea, He 1) vin naavai naahee saabaas. ||3||32]| Without the Name, no one is approved. ||3||32||
frdtaral HIS A We U Il (25-16) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 5. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Fifth House:
WES Boel od BS 5I wE aera ats Aa Il (25-16, fadtea, He 1)
achhal chhalaa-ee nah chhalai nah ghaa-o kataaraa kar sakai.
The Undeceiveable is not deceived by deception. He cannot be wounded by any dagger.
fa@ mfsa ae fC ao fem Sst a HE aw Us NA (25-16, fate, He 1)
ji-o saahib raakhai ti-o rahai is lobhee kaa jee-o tal palai. ||1||
As our Lord and Master keeps us, so do we exist. The soul of this greedy person is tossed this way and that. ||1]|
fag 3m dte faS AS NU TIS I (25-17, facta, He 1) bin tayl deevaa ki-o jalai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the oil, how can the lamp be lit? ||1]|Pause] |
ut use anreha i 38 ect fes safe ure it (25-18, fata, v2 1)
pothee puraan kamaa-ee-ai. bha-o vatee it tan paa-ee-ai.
Let the reading of your prayer book be the oil, and let the Fear of God be the wick for the lamp of this body.
Ag 33S ote West QM (25-18, fstera, we 1) sach boojhan aan jalaa-ee-ai. ||2| | Light this lamp with the understanding of Truth. ||2]|
feg 3% det feS AS I (25-18, fata, ne 1) ih tayl deevaa i-o jalai. Use this oil to light this lamp.
afs wos Afos 3B fs Wal TIC il (25-19, fastora, He kar chaanan saahib ta-o milai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Light it, and meet your Lord and Master. ||1]]Pause| |
fez sfs oat waiver Il (25-19, fadteora, v2 1) it tan laagai baanee-aa. This body is softened with the Word of the Guru's Bani;
HY de AS AHS Il (25-19, fata, v2 1) sukh hovai sayv kamaanee-aa. you shall find peace, doing seva (selfless service).
Uart 2é AS Gor nites Ara Sil (26-1, fstera, He 1)
sabh dunee-aa aavan jaanee-aa. ||3]| All the world continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||3]|
fefs goer Ae ane Il (26-1, fadtea, He 1) vich dunee-aa sayv kamaa-ee-ai. In the midst of this world, do seva,
3 Vad SAS ust Il (26-1, fadtea, ue 1) taa dargeh baisan paa-ee-dai. and you shall be given a place of honor in the Court of the Lord.
AT aoa IT SSSA NiS3il (26-2, fadtea, ve 1 kaho naanak baah ludaa-ee-ai. | |4||33]| Says Nanak, swing your arms in joy! ||4||33]|
fridtaad HIS 3 We A (26-3) sireeraag mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Siree Raag, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Asa YATE II (26-3) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
J Afsag At wrue fea nfs fea fats SFE II (26-4, frdteoa, He 3)
ha-o satgur sayvee aapnaa ik man ik chit bhaa-ay.
I serve my True Guru with single-minded devotion, and lovingly focus my consciousness on Him.
Afsag Ho ano Stee d fan 3 Mf gSte Il (26-4, fadtera, He 3)
satgur man kaamnaa tirath hai jis no day-ay bujhaa-ay.
The True Guru is the mind's desire and the sacred shrine of pilgrimage, for those unto whom He has given this understanding.
Ho fefeor zg urea A fee A Se ute I (26-5, fidteora, He 3) man chindi-aa var paavnaa jo ichhai so fal paa-ay. The blessings of the wishes of the mind are obtained, and the fruits of one's desires.
oe foment or Haft om Rafa ANTE I (26-5, fdtera, He 3)
naa-o Dhi-aa-ee-ai naa-o mangee-ai naamay sahj samaa-ay. ||1]|
Meditate on the Name, worship the Name, and through the Name, you shall be absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||1]||
Ho Ad Uf 3A WY fse ATE II (26-6, frst, He 3)
man mayray har ras chaakh tikh jaa-ay.
O my mind, drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, and your thirst shall be quenched.
frat aaHfa ofr AOA Id ANTE NAN TIC I (26-6, frrstera, He 3)
jinee gurmukh chaakhi-aa sehjay rahay samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those Gurmukhs who have tasted it remain intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
frat Afsas Afeor fsot ufemr an fears il (26-7, frstera, He 3)
jinee satgur sayvi-aa tinee paa-i-aa naam niDhaan. Those who serve the True Guru obtain the Treasure of the Naam.
nists ofs cA safe afoot gar Hf wifsHTe I (26-7, firstora, He 3)
antar har ras rav rahi-aa chookaa man abhimaan.
Deep within, they are drenched with the Essence of the Lord, and the egotistical pride of the mind is subdued.
fose ane yarfior oar Aofs fomre Il (26-8, fidtora, v8 3) hirdai kamal pargaasi-aa laagaa sahj Dhi-aan. The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and they intuitively center themselves in meditation.
Ho fosHe ofa ate sfomr urfenr esas He N2QI (26-8, firsts, H2 3) man nirmal har rav rahi-aa paa-i-aa dargahi maan. ||2||
Their minds become pure, and they remain immersed in the Lord; they are honored in His Court. ||2||
Afsag Refs wmyat 3 fees AAfs Il (26-9, factors, He 3) satgur sayvan aapnaa tay virlay sansaar. Those who serve the True Guru in this world are very rare.
GH HHS fs & ofe Thm Bs os I (26-10, fadtera, He 3)
ha-umai mamtaa maar kai har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
Those who keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts subdue egotism and possessiveness.
JG fsa a afease fro OH war fimrg I (26-10, fidtera, He 3) ha-o tin kai balihaarnai jinaa naamay lagaa pi-aar. I am a Sacrifice to those who are in love with the Naam.
Ret Adle vg Halt fat OH MS MUTT ISI (26-11, fate, ve 3)
say-ee sukhee-ay chahu jugee jinaa naam akhut apaar. ||3]|
Those who attain the Inexhaustible Name of the Infinite Lord remain happy throughout the four ages. ||3]|
a fifet on urehat ga Ho filmer I (26-11, frdtora, 3 3)
gur mili-ai naam paa-ee-ai chookai moh pi-aas.
Meeting with the Guru, the Naam is obtained, and the thirst of emotional attachment departs.
ofa Ast He sfe sfoor we dt ts BEA II (26-11, fetes, v2 3)
har saytee man rav rahi-aa ghar hee maahi udaas.
When the mind is permeated with the Lord, one remains detached within the home of the heart.
fro of at Are orfenr 3 fae afeod FA II (26-12, faster, He 3) jinaa har kaa saad aa-i-aa ha-o tin balihaarai jaas. I am a Sacrifice to those who enjoy the Sublime Taste of the Lord.
Soa Sed ut AY SH TESA NSIS (26-13, fasta, He 3) naanak nadree paa-ee-ai sach naam guntaas. ||4||1||34| |
O Nanak, by His Glance of Grace, the True Name, the Treasure of Excellence, is obtained. ||4||1]|34]|
frdtaa HIG 3 Il (26-13)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
ag 3u ate sone nfs fase aus oe I (26-13, fadtera, He 3)
baho bhaykh kar bharmaa-ee-ai man hirdai kapat kamaa-ay.
People wear all sorts of costumes and wander all around, but in their hearts and minds, they practice deception.
dfs a HIG 3 uet ute fen|t HT ANTE WAI (26-14, fistera, He 3)
har kaa mahal na paav-ee mar vistaa maahi samaa-ay. ||1|| They do not attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and after death, they sink into manure. ||1]|
Ho 3 fag dt ufo Sarr Il (26-14, firdtora, He 3) man ray garih hee maahi udaas. O mind, remain detached in the midst of your household.
Ay HAH adel A ad Tonfa df usaA NA TIS I (26-15, frdtera, He 3)
sach sanjam karnee so karay gurmukh ho-ay pargaas. ||1|| rahaa-o. Practicing truth, self-discipline and good deeds, the Gurmukh is enlightened. ||1]|Pause] |
ad a Rafe Ho rifsor afs wafs we nfo ute il (26-15, fadteora, ne 3)
gur kai sabad man jeeti-aa gat mukat gharai meh paa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind is conquered, and one attains the State of Liberation in one's own home.
dfs ot on ferent asrafs fs fete ii (26-16, fadtera, He 3)
har kaa naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai satsangat mayl milaa-ay. ||2||
So meditate on the Name of the Lord; join and merge with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||2||
a ou feRsdor sa adie oe US TH ANT Il (26-16, fata, He 3)
jay lakh istaree-aa bhog karahi nav khand raaj kamaahi.
You may enjoy the pleasures of hundreds of thousands of women, and rule the nine continents of the world.
faa Afsad ny 3 ueet fefs fefa rat us N3i (26-17, fadtera, He 3)
bin satgur sukh na paav-ee fir fir jonee paahi. ||3]|
But without the True Guru, you will not find peace; you will be reincarnated over and over again. ||3]|
dfs wg afe frot ufofer as ueet fos ote Il (26-18, firstera, v2 3)
har haar kanth jinee pahiri-aa gur charnee chit laa-ay.
Those who wear the Necklace of the Lord around their necks, and focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet
fsor fue fafa fafa fed Gor faq o Jr Isl (26-18, fadtera, H2 3)
tinaa pichhai riDh siDh firai onaa til na tamaa-ay. ||4]|
-wealth and supernatural spiritual powers follow them, but they do not care for such things at all. ||4]|
A us ae A aM neg o age ATE I (26-19, firdtora, He 3) jo parabh bhaavai so thee-ai avar na karnaa jaa-ay. Whatever pleases God's Will comes to pass. Nothing else can be done.
He sod He oH S dle Seg Ada ABTS NUNQNSUIl (26-19, frtera, He 3) jan naanak jeevai naam lai har dayvhu sahj subhaa-ay. ||5||2||35||
Servant Nanak lives by chanting the Naam. O Lord, please give it to me, in Your Natural Way. ||5||2||35]|
UST 2d frdtra Hoe 3 We 4 Il (27-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 3 ghar 1. Siree Raag, Third Mehl, First House:
fan dt ot frsors 3 fan dt ot AS aE Il (27-1, fadtea, He 3) jis hee kee sirkaar hai tis hee kaa sabh ko-ay. Everyone belongs to the One who rules the Universe.
qTenfy arg aneet AY ufe use| dF Il (27-2, fadtea, we 3) gurmukh kaar kamaavnee sach ghat pargat ho-ay. The Gurmukh practices good deeds, and the truth is revealed in the heart.
wists fan & A ZA AS Ast ALE Il (27-2, facto, v2 3) antar jis kai sach vasai sachay sachee so-ay. True is the reputation of the true, within whom truth abides.
Afs fxd A 3 feesfa foe for whe ear SE NA (27-2, first, He 3)
sach milay say na vichhurheh tin nij ghar vaasaa ho-ay. ||1]|
Those who meet the True Lord are not separated again; they come to dwell in the home of the self deep within. ||1]|
He oH H ofa fas neg 3 AE Il (27-3, fata, ne 3) mayray raam mai har bin avar na ko-ay. O my Lord! Without the Lord, I have no other at all.
Asdg Ay ys fooner wate froret of na TIC It (27-3, fasta, ue 3)
satgur sach parabh nirmalaa sabad milaavaa ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Guru leads us to meet the Immaculate True God through the Word of His Shabad. ||1]||Pause] |
Rafe fxs A fife ad fan o8 wmi we forte I (27-4, fadtera, nH: 3)
sabad milai so mil rahai jis na-o aapay la-ay milaa-ay.
One whom the Lord merges into Himself is merged in the Shabad, and remains so merged.
en ote & a fre fete fete ore ate Il (27-5, frdtora, v8 3)
doojai bhaa-ay ko naa milai fir fir aavai jaa-ay. No one merges with Him through the love of duality; over and over again, they come and go in reincarnation.
A ufo fea zaser Sat afar ANTE II (27-5, fasta, He 3) sabh meh ik varatdaa ayko rahi-aa samaa-ay. The One Lord permeates all. The One Lord is pervading everywhere.
fan o@ urfy efiore of A qeHfa of ATE QI (27-6, fate, nH: 3)
jis na-o aap da-i-aal ho-ay so gurmukh naam samaaz-ay. ||2||
That Gurmukh, unto whom the Lord shows His Kindness, is absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
ufs ufs ufss Haat ee asfo tes Il (27-6, firdtoa, v2 3)
parh parh pandit jotkee vaad karahi beechaar.
After all their reading, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the astrologers argue and debate.
fs fa set 3 aset nists Se fears I (27-7, fidtora, He 3)
mat buDh bhavee na bujh-ee antar lobh vikaar.
Their intellect and understanding are perverted; they just don't understand. They are filled with greed and corruption.
wy sents sane sf afk df unrg Il (27-7, fretea, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh bharamday bharam bharam ho-ay khu-aar.
Through 8.4 million incarnations they wander lost and confused; through all their wandering and roaming, they are ruined.
uote fofter area af 3 HeSTE SI (27-8, frdtora, He 3) poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||3]| They act according to their pre-ordained destiny, which no one can erase. ||3]|
Asad at Ret armast fag eta ory Tete i 27-2, fadtera, v2 3)
satgur kee sayvaa gaakh-rhee sir deejai aap gavaa-ay.
It is very difficult to serve the True Guru. Surrender your head; give up your selfishness.
Rafe fafs at ofa fxs Aet ue AS ate I (27-9, fadtera, He 3) sabad mileh taa har milai sayvaa pavai sabh thaa-ay. Realizing the Shabad, one meets with the Lord, and all one's service is accepted.
usta usfiot uray df= Hat APS FOE I (27-9, fete, He 3)
paaras parsi-ai paaras ho-ay jotee jot samaa-ay.
By personally experiencing the Personality of the Guru, one's own personality is uplifted, and one's light merges into the Light.
fra ag usta fefimr fsa Asa ffemr orfe ieil (27-10, frdtea, 12 3) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin satgur mili-aa aa-ay. ||4|| Those who have such pre-ordained destiny come to meet the True Guru. ||4| |
HO Sut sat HS Ads HS J Achy yas Il (27-10, frstara, 2 3) man bhukhaa bhukhaa mat karahi mat too karahi pookaar. O mind, don't cry out that you are hungry, always hungry; stop complaining.
wu uGanis fafs fact AeA Sf nore II (27-11, fideo, He 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh jin siree sabhsai day-ay aDhaar. The One who created the 8.4 million species of beings gives sustenance to all.
foss@ Ae effure J ASST ATE ATS Il (27-11, fidtora, He 3) nirbha-o sadaa da-i-aal hai sabhnaa kardaa saar. The Fearless Lord is forever Merciful; He takes care of all.
Soa ToHfy ashe ure He ers WUNSISEN (27-12, fates, He 3) naanak gurmukh bujhee-ai paa-ee-ai mokh du-aar. ||5]|3]|36|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands, and finds the Door of Liberation. ||5||3]|36] |
frrdtaat HIG 3 Il (27-12)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
frat Afs & vifemr fear for wie =A I (27-12, fadtera, He 3) jinee sun kai mani-aa tinaa nij ghar vaas. Those who hear and believe, find the home of the self deep within.
TsHst Werte A dfs ufo TESTA Il (27-13, firsts, ve 3)
gurmatee saalaahi sach har paa-i-aa guntaas.
Through the Guru's Teachings, they praise the True Lord; they find the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence.
Rafe 33 A fesHs 3G Ae afsod WH Il (27-13, fidtoa, He 3)
sabad ratay say nirmalay ha-o sad balihaarai jaas.
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, they are immaculate and pure. I am forever a sacrifice to them.
fase faa a fe eA fsa whe J ug NU (27-14, fadtera, He 3) hirdai jin kai har vasai tit ghat hai pargaas. ||1|| Those people, within whose hearts the Lord abides, are radiant and enlightened. ||1]|
Ho Hd ote ofa feaHe fame i (27-14, fadtera, v2 3) man mayray har har nirmal Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Immaculate Lord, Har, Har.
uf HASta faa a feftimr A asHfe ad fos ote nd TIS Il (27-15, festa, ne 3) Dhur mastak jin ka-o likhi-aa say gurmukh rahay liv laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those whose have such pre-ordained destiny written on their foreheads-those Gurmukhs remain absorbed in the Lord's Love. ||1]|Pause| |
ofs Hag tug sets afe foate A saute il (27-16, frdtora, 8 3) har santahu daykhhu nadar kar nikat vasai bharpoor. O Saints, see clearly that the Lord is near at hand; He is pervading everywhere.
THs frat ueteor A tufs Het Jets Il (27-16, frdtea, 2 3) gurmat jinee pachhaani-aa say daykheh sadaa hadoor. Those who follow the Guru's Teachings realize Him, and see Him Ever-present.
fas ae fs Ae His SA mBgedfsur vfs i (27-17, Ata, v2 3)
jin gun tin sad man vasai a-ugunvanti-aa door.
He dwells forever in the minds of the virtuous. He is far removed from those worthless people who lack virtue.
HoH Te 3 aad fag are Hee Shs WI (27-17, Ata, v2 3)
manmukh gun tai baahray bin naavai marday jhoor. ||2||
The self-willed manmukhs are totally without virtue. Without the Name, they die in frustration. ||2||
fas Fate ag Afe Hfeur fe His fourfenr afe APE i (27-18, Htora, He 3)
jin sabad guroo sun mani-aa tin man Dhi-aa-i-aa har so-ay.
Those who hear and believe in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, meditate on the Lord in their minds.
Motes Saat Sfsur He 36 fSesHe dfE Il (27-18, Ata, He 3) an-din bhagtee rati-aa man tan nirmal ho-ay. Night and day, they are steeped in devotion; their minds and bodies become pure.
ax dq ans ot faoth wte gy afe il (27-19, Htera, we 3) koorhaa rang kasumbh kaa binas jaa-ay dukh ro-ay. The color of the world is false and weak; when it washes away, people cry out in pain.
fan niefs om yarA 3 Gg Het Het fag SE Bi (27-19, Hwa, He 3)
jis andar naam pargaas hai oh sadaa sadaa thir ho-ay. ||3]|
Those who have the Radiant Light of the Naam within, become steady and stable, forever and ever. ||3]|
Yar Qe feg WOH uesg ule a ofa on 3 US fe| OTE Il (28-1, Ata, H: 3) ih janam padaarath paa-ay kai har naam na chaytai liv laa-ay.
The blessing of this human life has been obtained, but still, people do not lovingly focus their thoughts on the Name of the Lord.
ufat fufiot goat oct wird Og @ UTE II (28-2, rhea, He 3)
pag khisi-ai rahnaa nahee aagai tha-ur na paa-ay.
Their feet slip, and they cannot stay here any longer. And in the next world, they find no place of rest at all.
6a 2m ofa 3 ureet nifs afenr usste i (28-2, Hea, He 3)
oh vaylaa hath na aavee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ay.
This opportunity shall not come again. In the end, they depart, regretting and repenting.
fan oefe ad A Gad ofa ASt fee ofF Neil (28-3, Ata, He 3)
jis nadar karay so ubrai har saytee liv laa-ay. ||4||
Those whom the Lord blesses with His Glance of Grace are saved; they are lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||4||
cur aut AS ad HoOHfe gs 3 UTE Il (28-3, Alea, He 3) daykhaa daykhee sabh karay manmukh boojh na paa-ay. They all show off and pretend, but the self-willed manmukhs do not understand.
fas denfy foset Ag od AS uet fso ate il (28-3, Atea, He 3) jin gurmukh hirdaa suDh hai sayv pa-ee tin thaa-ay. Those Gurmukhs who are pure of heart-their service is accepted.
dfs we wets ots fos ust afe ae ate Ae Il (28-4, Aes, He 3)
har gun gaavahi har nit parheh har gun gaa-ay samaa-ay.
They sing the Glorious Praise of the Lord; they read about the Lord each day. Singing the Praise of the Lord, they merge in absorption.
sod fae at sat Het Ae 3 fa oth ad fee oe UNIS (8-5, Hea, He 3)
naanak tin kee banee sadaa sach hai je naam rahay liv laa-ay. ||5||4]|37]| O Nanak, the words of those who are lovingly attuned to the Naam are true forever. [511411371]
frrstaat HIS 3 Il (28-5) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
frat fea nfs on foerfeur aanst etefe il (28-6, firstera, He 3)
jinee ik man naam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmatee veechaar.
Those who meditate single-mindedly on the Naam, and contemplate the Teachings of the Guru
fso & Hu Ae CxS fas AY Peete Il (28-6, fides, He 3) tin kay mukh sad ujlay tit sachai darbaar. -their faces are forever radiant in the Court of the True Lord.
6fe nifgs uefa Fee et AS oth fimefa all (28-7, frtera, v8 3) o-ay amrit peeveh sadaa sadaa sachai naam pi-aar. ||1]| They drink in the Ambrosial Nectar forever and ever, and they love the True Name.
[21
aet 3 qanfa wet ufs dfE I (28-7, fadtea, He 3) bhaa-ee ray gurmukh sadaa pat ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, the Gurmukhs are honored forever.
dfs ofs Het fomrehat ne IBH ae GE NAN TIS I (28-7, fasta, ne 3)
har har sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai mal ha-umai kadhai Dho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They meditate forever on the Lord, Har, Har, and they wash off the filth of egotism. ||1]|Pause] |
HOHY OH 3 Wed fee oe ufs ATE Il (28-8, fadtea, He 3)
manmukh naam na jaannee vin naavai pat jaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know the Naam. Without the Name, they lose their honor.
Hee We 3 orfes oat eA Ste Il (28-9, firdtora, ws 3) sabdai saad na aa-i-o laagay doojai bhaa-ay. They do not savor the Taste of the Shabad; they are attached to the love of duality.
fene a ats uefa fete fener A fener ufo ANTE QI (28-9, fidtora, He 3)
vistaa kay keerhay paveh vich vistaa say vistaa maahi samaa-ay. ||2||
They are worms in the filth of manure. They fall into manure, and into manure they are absorbed. ||2]|
f35 OT HOH AEG J A Vols ASaT STE Il (28-10, factor, He 3) tin kaa janam safal hai jo chaleh satgur bhaa-ay. Fruitful are the lives of those who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
ae Bursfa nmyat Us ASet HAE I (28-10, firstora, He 3) kul uDhaareh aapnaa Dhan janaydee maa-ay. Their families are saved; blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them.
dfs ofa on foment fan a@ fasur ad safe 31 (28-11, fete, He 3)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai jis na-o kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||3]|
By His Will He grants His Grace; those who are so blessed, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
frat asufa on faomrfeor feeg nig mete i (28-11, firstera, ve 3)
jinee gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam; they eradicate selfishness and conceit from within.
Gf nivas aed foane Ad Afs ATE I (28-12, fidtea, He 3) o-ay andrahu baahrahu nirmalay sachay sach samaa-ay. They are pure, inwardly and outwardly; they merge into the Truest of the True.
Soa ne A ude dia fas asHst ole foMM= isnUNscil 23-12, firtea, v2 3)
naanak aa-ay say parvaan heh jin gurmatee har Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||5||38]| O Nanak, blessed is the coming of those who follow the Guru's Teachings and meditate on the Lord. ||4||5||38]|
frdtaat HIG 3 Il (28-13)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
ofs sast ats ug aA St ae ufe asfs erg I (28-13, firdtora, v8 3)
har bhagtaa har Dhan raas hai gur poochh karahi vaapaar.
The devotees of the Lord have the Wealth and Capital of the Lord; with Guru's Advice, they carry on their trade.
dfs oH ABs Het Ae sug Tig oH wOE Il (28-14, fidtera, v2 3)
har naam salaahan sadaa sadaa vakhar har naam aDhaar.
They praise the Name of the Lord forever and ever. The Name of the Lord is their Merchandise and Support.
afs us ofs on fester ofs saat vise FIT UI (28-14, frdtora, v3 3)
gur poorai har naam drirh-aa-i-aa har bhagtaa atut bhandaar. ||1]||
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord into the Lord's devotees; it is an Inexhaustible Treasure. ||1||
set 3 FEA HS AG ANSE Il (28-15, frdtera, He 3) bhaa-ee ray is man ka-o samjhaa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, instruct your minds in this way.
= HO oteH foor asta Tanta on fomrf= nai TIS Il (28-15, firstea, v2 3) ay man aalas ki-aa karahi gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O mind, why are you so lazy? Become Gurmukh, and meditate on the Naam. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs sats af or fimrg 3 A aenfe ad sere Il (28-16, fadtera, He 3)
har bhagat har kaa pi-aar hai jay gurmukh karay beechaar.
Devotion to the Lord is love for the Lord. The Gurmukh reflects deeply and contemplates.
undfs safs o deat efsor $e urs Il (28-17, fadtea, v2 3) pakhand bhagat na hova-ee dubiDhaa bol khu-aar. Hypocrisy is not devotion-speaking words of duality leads only to misery.
A Ao sofeur a 3d fan nists fade steve QU (28-17, faster, ve 3)
so jan ralaa-i-aa naa ralai jis antar bibayk beechaar. ||2||
Those humble beings who are filled with keen understanding and meditative contemplation-even though they intermingle with others, they remain distinct. ||2||
A Rea dfs mi A of we Cfe of Il (28-18, fidtera, v2 3)
so sayvak har aakhee-ai jo har raakhai ur Dhaar.
Those who keep the Lord enshrined within their hearts are said to be the servants of the Lord.
Ho 36 AGU via ud JEN fess wf II (28-18, fardtera, He 3)
man tan sa-upay aagai Dharay ha-umai vichahu maar.
Placing mind and body in offering before the Lord, they conquer and eradicate egotism from within.
Us denfa A uses J fA ae o ore of ISI (28-19, fadtera, He 3) Dhan gurmukh so parvaan hai je kaday na aavai haar. ||3]| Blessed and acclaimed is that Gurmukh, who shall never be defeated. ||3]|
aot fxs at ureha fee aah urfeur & ae I (28-19, fadtera, v2 3) karam milai taa paa-ee-ai vin karmai paa-i-aa na jaa-ay. Those who receive His Grace find Him. Without His Grace, He cannot be found.
yar ae wd vats sane fan HS A HS ofa wre it (29-1, fadtea, ve 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh tarasday jis maylay so milai har aa-ay.
The 8.4 million species of beings all yearn for the Lord. Those whom He unites, come to be united with the Lord.
Soa Tafa ste ufeor Ae ate ath ANTE SNES (29-1, fates, He 3)
naanak gurmukh har paa-i-aa sadaa har naam samaa-ay. ||4||6]|39] | O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the Lord, and remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||4||6||39]|
frrdtaat HIG 3 Il (29-2)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
He Arad dfs on 3 Tonfe urfenr wfe I (29-2, faster, ve 3) sukh saagar har naam hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Name of the Lord is the Ocean of Peace; the Gurmukhs obtain it.
motes oy fmreint non af ANTE II (29-3, fadtera, He 3)
an-din naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sehjay naam samaa-ay.
Meditating on the Naam, night and day, they are easily and intuitively absorbed in the Naam.
nied Jd dfs AY fAG IAe ofa TE ATS NU (29-3, fadtea, He 3) andar rachai har sach si-o rasnaa har gun gaa-ay. ||1||
Their inner beings are immersed in the True Lord; they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
oet F Aa eer er Se i (29-4, frstarar, we 3) bhaa-ee ray jag dukhee-aa doojai bhaa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, the world is in misery, engrossed in the love of duality.
ad Adeet Ay Bale niofes oH fore nai JIS il (29-4, firdteora, ns 3)
gur sarnaa-ee sukh laheh an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Sanctuary of the Guru, peace is found, meditating on the Naam night and day. ||1]|Pause] |
A HS 3 oat Ho fens ofa forte it (29-5, fidtora, ve 3)
saachay mail na laag-ee man nirmal har Dhi-aa-ay.
The truthful ones are not stained by filth. Meditating on the Lord, their minds remain pure.
aToHfy Age uereht ofa nifys of mfe it (29-5, fidtora, vs 3)
gurmukh sabad pachhaanee-ai har amrit naam samaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs realize the Word of the Shabad; they are immersed in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name.
ad famre yss serfenr mifamrg vita AE QU (29-6, fdtera, He 3)
gur gi-aan parchand balaa-i-aa agi-aan anDhayraa jaa-ay. ||2||
The Guru has lit the brilliant light of spiritual wisdom, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled. ||2||
HOHY HS He sd ICH fEHa fears il (29-7, frstea, ve 3)
manmukh mailay mal bharay ha-umai tarisnaa vikaar.
The self-willed manmukhs are polluted. They are filled with the pollution of egotism, wickedness and desire.
fas Hae Ho o Ose ufe Hufs df unr II (29-7, fate", He 3)
bin sabdai mail na utrai mar jameh ho-ay khu-aar.
Without the Shabad, this pollution is not washed off; through the cycle of death and rebirth, they waste away in misery.
Wsd at uate ad a Cases o UTP ISI (29-8, firdtora, Hs 3) Dhaatur baajee palach rahay naa urvaar na paar. ||3]||
Engrossed in this transitory drama, they are not at home in either this world or the next. ||3]|
aenfy wu su Ant ofs & arty fumrg i (29-8, fidtera, v2 3)
gurmukh jap tap sanjmee har kai naam pi-aar.
For the Gurmukh, the love of the Name of the Lord is chanting, deep meditation and self-discipline.
aanfy ret fom Sa SH ATS | (29-9, fadtara, nz 3) gurmukh sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai ayk naam kartaar. The Gurmukh meditates forever on the Name of the One Creator Lord.
Sot OH fret Agar Hho ar nig ISIDIOll (29-9, fata, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabhnaa jee-aa kaa aaDhaar. ||4||7||40]| O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Support of all beings. [14] 17] 140] |
Alea HIG 3 Il (29-10)
sareeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Hone fs feurfimr Sara Cert o GE Il (29-10, frdtoa, 2 3)
manmukh mohi vi-aapi-aa bairaag udaasee na ho-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in emotional attachment; they are not balanced or detached.
Rae 3 dé Ae ey dfs veats ufs ae Il (29-11, faster, He 3)
sabad na cheenai sadaa dukh har dargahi pat kho-ay.
They do not comprehend the Word of the Shabad. They suffer in pain forever, and lose their honor in the Court of the Lord.
ICH Tafa debt of gS AY SE NA (29-11, fete, He 3) ha-umai gurmukh kho-ee-ai naam ratay sukh ho-ay. ||1]| The Gurmukhs shed their ego; attuned to the Naam, they find peace. ||1] |
He Ho mifafotA ufs got fos wir it (29-12, fretera, He 3) mayray man ahinis poor rahee nit aasaa. O my mind, day and night, you are always full of wishful hopes.
Asag Afe Hg usns we dt fa Sera i TI'S ll (29-12, firdtora, ne 3)
satgur sayv moh parjalai ghar hee maahi udaasaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Serve the True Guru, and your emotional attachment shall be totally burnt away; remain detached within the home of your heart. ||1]|Pause| |
qenfe aH ane faa ofs Soa MSs Il (29-13, fadtera, He 3)
gurmukh karam kamaavai bigsai har bairaag anand.
The Gurmukhs do good deeds and blossom forth; balanced and detached in the Lord, they are in ecstasy.
wifofofh safs ad fes wat Jen wis fade il (29-13, faster, we 3)
ahinis bhagat karay din raatee ha-umai maar nichand.
Night and day, they perform devotional worship, day and night; subduing their ego, they are carefree.
zs ofa AsHafs uct ofs ufeor Fafa MISE II (29-14, fdtera, He 3)
vadai bhaag satsangat paa-ee har paa-i-aa sahj anand. ||2||
By great good fortune, I found the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; I have found the Lord, with intuitive ease and ecstasy. ||2| |
A AY aoa Aet fase SH SAS Il (29-14, firdtoa, ws 3)
so saaDhoo bairaagee so-ee hirdai naam vasaa-ay.
That person is a Holy Saadhu, and a renouncer of the world, whose heart is filled with the Naam.
nists ofa & SHA HS fea my TSS I (29-15, frst, v3 3)
antar laag na taamas moolay vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
His inner being is not touched by anger or dark energies at all; he has lost his selfishness and conceit.
on fours Asad fearfemr afs ga uber mre Sil (29-15, fasta, 42 3)
naam niDhaan satguroo dikhaali-aa har ras pee-aa aghaa-ay. ||3] |
The True Guru has revealed to him the Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he drinks in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, and is satisfied. ||3]|
fats fas ufeor AOnast us afar Safar i (29-16, frdtora, v3 3)
jin kinai paa-i-aa saaDhsangtee poorai bhaag bairaag.
Whoever has found it, has done so in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Through perfect good fortune, such balanced detachment is attained.
HoHy feafs o Wafs Asa ICH niefs ofa I (29-16, fadtera, He 3)
manmukh fireh na jaaneh satgur ha-umai andar laag.
The self-willed manmukhs wander around lost, but they do not know the True Guru. They are inwardly attached to egotism.
Soa Aafe gs dia ath dare fag F Act wha SISA (29-17, fete, 2 3)
naanak sabad ratay har naam rangaa-ay bin bhai kayhee laag. ||4||8||41|| O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Shabad are dyed in the Color of the Lord's Name. Without the Fear of God, how can they retain this Color? ||4]|8]|41]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (29-18)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
we dt AGet uh nists AS ce SE Il (29-18, firdtera, He 3)
ghar hee sa-udaa paa-ee-ai antar sabh vath ho-ay.
Within the home of your own inner being, the merchandise is obtained. All commodities are within.
fs fue any AHTeba Tenfe urs aE II (29-18, fadtera, 2 3)
khin khin naam samaalee-ai gurmukh paavai ko-ay.
Each and every moment, dwell on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Gurmukhs obtain it.
oy fours ure J esata uaTufs dE NA (29-19, fadtera, He 3) naam niDhaan akhut hai vadbhaag paraapat ho-ay. ||1]| The Treasure of the Naam is inexhaustible. By great good fortune, it is obtained. ||1]|
He Ho 3a feet IGH mars i (29-19, fidtera, ne 3) mayray man taj nindaa ha-umai aha“kaar. O my mind, give up slander, egotism and arrogance.
UST 30
dfs ME Aer fourfe 3 aaHfs SaxargT Al FTES il (30-1, fastoa, ws 3)
har jee-o sadaa Dhi-aa-ay too gurmukh aykankaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Become Gurmukh, and meditate forever on the Dear Lord, the One and Only Creator. ||1]|Pause] |
THe x HY CAS Te Aaet stete i (30-1, fasta, us 3)
gurmukhaa kay mukh ujlay gur sabdee beechaar.
The faces of the Gurmukhs are radiant and bright; they reflect on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Jofs uafs AY ufge afu fu foe Heats i 0-2, fadtera, He 3)
halat palat sukh paa-iday jap jap ridai muraar.
They obtain peace in this world and the next, chanting and meditating within their hearts on the Lord.
we ot fefs Hoe ufeur ag Ast Sets 2K 0-2, fidtea, ne 3)
ghar hee vich mahal paa-i-aa gur sabdee veechaar. ||2|| Within the home of their own inner being, they obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, reflecting on the Guru's Shabad. ||2| |
Asad 3H Hd cofa He f35 AS I (30-3, fadtea, ne 3) satgur tay jo muh fayreh mathay tin kaalay. Those who turn their faces away from the True Guru shall have their faces blackened.
wWofes Bu ante fos Ad AH ATS Il (30-3, facta, ne 3)
an-din dukh kamaavday nit johay jam jaalay.
Night and day, they suffer in pain; they see the noose of Death always hovering above them.
Hus AY 3 cual ag fest usHS ISI (30-4, factor, He 3)
supnai sukh na daykhnee baho chintaa parjaalay. ||3]||
Even in their dreams, they find no peace; they are consumed by the fires of intense anxiety. |[3]|
Aor aT Ust Sa J MM SUA AafE Il (30-4, fadtea, ue 3) sabhnaa kaa daataa ayk hai aapay bakhas karay-i. The One Lord is the Giver of all; He Himself bestows all blessings.
ade fag 3 Weel fm sve fSH SE Il Go-s, factors, Hs 3) kahnaa kichhoo na jaav-ee jis bhaavai tis day-ay. No one else has any say in this; He gives just as He pleases.
Soa ToHfe ursha wm aT AE SKIS (0-5, faAdtea, He 3)
naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai aapay jaanai so-ay. ||4||9]|42] |
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs obtain Him; He Himself knows Himself. ||4]|9]|42| | frdtaa HIG 3 Il (30-6)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Re Afog Aeby Ae Sfsnret SE Il 0-6, firdtora, ve 3) sachaa saahib sayvee-ai sach vadi-aa-ee day-ay. Serve your True Lord and Master, and you shall be blessed with true greatness.
qs usAet nfs SA TBH els aSfE Il (30-6, firdtora, ws 3) gur parsaadee man vasai ha-umai door karay-i. By Guru's Grace, He abides in the mind, and egotism is driven out.
feg Ho Wes ST ad AT om Sete ase Al (30-7, fadtea, He 3) in man Dhaavat taa rahai jaa aapay nadar karay-i. ||1]| This wandering mind comes to rest, when the Lord casts His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
amet ¢ Tanta dfs om famrf=e il Go0-7, fasta, ue 3) bhaa-ee ray gurmukh har naam Dhi-aa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, become Gurmukh, and meditate on the Name of the Lord.
on fours Ae Hfs SA Host ure aS NA TIC I (30-8, fdtoa, ve 3)
naam niDhaan sad man vasai mahlee paavai thaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Treasure of the Naam abides forever within the mind, and one's place of rest is found in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||1]||Pause] |
HOHY HO 36 vid ofS BE SCI 5 SE I (30-8, fidtoa, He 3)
manmukh man tan anDh hai tis na-o tha-ur na thaa-o.
The minds and bodies of the self-willed manmukhs are filled with darkness; they find no shelter, no place of rest.
ag not s@eur fed fa He wis are il (30-9, fadtera, He 3) baho jonee bha-udaa firai ji-o sunjai’ ghar kaa-o. Through countless incarnations they wander lost, like crows in a deserted house.
Tenst ufe wear Aafe fxs afs oS iI (30-9, fasta, ns 3)
gurmatee ghat chaannaa sabad milai har naa-o. ||2]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, the heart is illuminated. Through the Shabad, the Name of the Lord is received. ||2]|
3 ae fatter nig 3 wfeor Ho THT II Go-10, firdtera, ne 3)
tarai gun bikhi-aa anDh hai maa-i-aa moh gubaar.
In the corruption of the three qualities, there is blindness; in attachment to Maya, there is darkness.
Sst no AG Ase ufs Ser AT YOST Il (30-10, frdtora, ws 3)
lobhee an ka-o sayvday parh vaydaa karai pookaar.
The greedy people serve others, instead of the Lord, although they loudly announce their reading of scriptures.
fafimr niefs ufs He of Gases urs ISI (0-11, fadtea, He 3)
bikhi-aa andar pach mu-ay naa urvaar na paar. |[3]|
They are burnt to death by their own corruption; they are not at home, on either this shore or the one beyond. |[3]|
Hfeor dfs ferrfaur ars fust ufsurfes i (30-11, firétoa, v8 3) maa-i-aa mohi visaari-aa jagat pitaa partipaal. In attachment to Maya, they have forgotten the Father, the Cherisher of the World.
TSI TT uss TAS at AHA Il (30-12, firdtoa, vs 3)
baajhahu guroo achayt hai sabh baDhee jamkaal.
Without the Guru, all are unconscious; they are held in bondage by the Messenger of Death.
Sa TIHs Cad As SH ANTS ISIAIONSSIl (30-12, fdtera, He 3)
naanak gurmat ubray sachaa naam samaal. ||4]|10]|43] | O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, you shall be saved, contemplating the True Name. ||4||10]|43]]|
firstaat HIS 3 Il (30-13) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
3 ve wher ag 3 qenfe vee UE UTE II Go0-13, firetea, He 3)
tarai gun maa-i-aa moh hai gurmukh cha-uthaa pad paa-ay.
The three qualities hold people in attachment to Maya. The Gurmukh attains the fourth state of higher consciousness.
ate fasur Hates dfs aH efor Hfe mrfe Il (30-13, frrstera, He 3)
kar kirpaa maylaa-i-an har naam vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Granting His Grace, God unites us with Himself. The Name of the Lord comes to abide within the mind.
us fro a us 0 fSo ASsHafs Hote Al (0-14, fetes, He 3) potai jin kai punn hai tin satsangat maylaa-ay. ||1|| Those who have the treasure of goodness join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
[]21| amet J Tens AS JIE Il (30-14, fstera, He 3)
bhaa-ee ray gurmat saach rahaa-o. O Siblings of Destiny, follow the Guru's Teachings and dwell in truth.
And ATS aneat ATS Aafe fears wail TIC il (30-15, fete, ve 3)
saacho saach kamaavanaa saachai sabad milaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Practice truth, and only truth, and merge in the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
frat oH uetfenr fs feed afs AE Il (0-15, firstera, He 3) jinee naam pachhaani-aa tin vitahu bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who recognize the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ny efs vdet Sar ver fq a SHE Il (30-16, fadtea, He 3) aap chhod charnee lagaa chalaa tin kai bhaa-ay. Renouncing selfishness, I fall at their feet, and walk in harmony with His Will.
ore dfs ofa an fs AoA oH ANTE QI (30-16, fadtera, He 3)
laahaa har har naam milai sehjay naam samaa-ay. ||2||
Earning the Profit of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am intuitively absorbed in the Naam. |[2||
faa ad HIG & uUreht a B uaufs dE I (30-17, fidtea, He 3)
bin gur mahal na paa-ee-ai naam na paraapat ho-ay.
Without the Guru, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is not found, and the Naam is not obtained.
wT Asde Sf wg fre uréba Ag ALE Il (30-17, fdtoa, v3 3) aisaa satgur lorh lahu jidoo paa-ee-ai sach so-ay. Seek and find such a True Guru, who shall lead you to the True Lord.
wad Hurd Af ZA A fSR ae A OE SI Go0-18, fetes, He 3)
asur sanghaarai sukh vasai jo tis bhaavai so ho-ay. ||3]|
Destroy your evil passions, and you shall dwell in peace. Whatever pleases the Lord comes to pass. ||3]|
Ad Asad afe wher 3d AT AY dE Il (0-18, fates, 2 3) jayhaa satgur kar jaani-aa tayho jayhaa sukh ho-ay. As one knows the True Guru, so is the peace obtained.
8d AIA HS at HE HS AG ale il (30-19, farstora, m2 3) ayhu sahsaa moolay naahee bhaa-o laa-ay jan ko-ay. There is no doubt at all about this, but those who love Him are very rare.
aed Sa Afs efe yest Hate fears de nsnvisell (30-19, firsts, Hs 3)
naanak ayk jot du-ay moortee sabad milaavaa ho-ay. ||4||11]|44| O Nanak, the One Light has two forms; through the Shabad, union is attained. [14] 11] [44] |
Ua 39 frdtaat HIS 3 Il (31-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
nifys dfs faftmr Sere Ae aafa fesrat i G1-1, frdtra, ue 3)
amrit chhod bikhi-aa lobhaanay sayvaa karahi vidaanee.
Discarding the Ambrosial Nectar, they greedily grab the poison; they serve others, instead of the Lord.
witus Udy aeets gets ardt mates uf fearet i (31-2, faetera, He 3) aapnaa Dharam gavaaveh boojheh naahee an-din dukh vihaanee. They lose their faith, they have no understanding; night and day, they suffer in pain.
Hou nig 3 sadt sfa He fas urat WA (31-2, frstra, H3 3)
manmukh anDh na chaythee doob mu-ay bin paanee. ||1]|
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not even think of the Lord; they are drowned to death without water. ||1]|
Ho J Het SHAT Tle AGSTet Il (31-3, frrdtea, vs 3)
man ray sadaa bhajahu har sarnaa-ee.
O mind, vibrate and meditate forever on the Lord; seek the Protection of His Sanctuary.
qd a Age nists eA a fa fenfe & Aret NAN TIS Il (31-3, fadtea, 2 3) gur kaa sabad antar vasai taa har visar na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If the Word of the Guru's Shabad abides deep within, then you shall not forget the Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
feg Adtg weer a user fefs JBN SAS ust I 31-4, fadtera, ne 3) ih sareer maa-i-aa kaa putlaa vich ha-umai dustee paa-ee. This body is the puppet of Maya. The evil of egotism is within it.
WISE ATE’ HHE HIST HOHfe ufs aevet I (31-4, fata, He 3) aavan jaanaa jaman marnaa manmukh pat gavaa-ee. Coming and going through birth and death, the self-willed manmukhs lose their honor.
Asad Afe wet AY ufeor ASt APS forest NIN 1-5, fate, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa jotee jot milaa-ee. || 2] |
Serving the True Guru, eternal peace is obtained, and one's light merges into the Light. ||2]|
Asad ot Aet ifs Aerst A fee A Sw ues Il GI-5, fadtwa, ue 3) satgur kee sayvaa at sukhaalee jo ichhay so fal paa-ay.
Serving the True Guru brings a deep and profound peace, and one's desires are fulfilled.
ag AS 3u ufes Adie ofs ofs His STE Il Gi-6, fiAdtea, He 3)
jat sat tap pavit sareeraa har har man vasaa-ay.
Abstinence, truthfulness and self-discipline are obtained, and the body is purified; the Lord, Har, Har, comes to dwell within the mind.
Ret nféfe ad feg oat fife lis AY ure ISI G1-6, firdtoa, ne 3) sadaa anand rahai din raatee mil pareetam sukh paa-ay. ||3]|
Such a person remains blissful forever, day and night. Meeting the Beloved, peace is found. ||3]|
A Asad at Adeast JC fsa & fs WE II 31-7, fadtoa, He 3) jo satgur kee sarnaagatee ha-o tin kai bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
ofa AY Het efsuret AoA Af ANTS II (31-7, fadtea, He 3)
dar sachai sachee vadi-aa-ee sehjay sach samaa-o.
In the Court of the True One, they are blessed with true greatness; they are intuitively absorbed into the True Lord.
Soa Sedt uSha aanfy nfs fear usi92ueull (31-8, frstea, He 3) naanak nadree paa-ee-ai gurmukh may! milaa-o. ||4]|12]|45] |
O Nanak, by His Glance of Grace He is found; the Gurmukh is united in His Union. [14] ]12||45]|
frdtaar HIS 3 Il (31-8) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
HOHY AGH antes fae coats sfe Aters Il (31-9, fasta, ve 3)
manmukh karam kamaavnay ji-o dohaagan tan seegaar.
The self-willed manmukh performs religious rituals, like the unwanted bride decorating her body.
An az 35 uieet fos fas df ynrg Il (1-9, fidtera, He 3)
sayjai kant na aavee nit nit ho-ay khu-aar.
Her Husband Lord does not come to her bed; day after day, she grows more and more miserable.
furs at He o uTeet of SHA ure STs INA (31-10, fidtera, He 3)
pir kaa mahal na paav-ee naa deesai ghar baar. ||1||
She does not attain the Mansion of His Presence; she does not find the door to His House. ||1||
amet 3 fea nfs oH fomrf= I (1-10, firstera, He 3) bhaa-ee ray ik man naam Dhi-aa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, meditate on the Naam with one-pointed mind.
Ast Harts fife ad afu on on we ute na gaE I (31-10, frdtera, He 3)
santaa sangat mil rahai jap raam naam sukh paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Remain united with the Society of the Saints; chant the Name of the Lord, and find peace. ||1]|Pause| |
aenfy Ae Aoaat fus whim Cas of i 1-11, frdtea, ne 3)
gurmukh sadaa sohaaganee pir raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
The Gurmukh is the happy and pure soul-bride forever. She keeps her Husband Lord enshrined within her heart.
for sofa fafe vats AA Je FSS Il (31-12, fadtea, ue 3) mithaa boleh niv chaleh sayjai ravai bhataar.
Her speech is sweet, and her way of life is humble. She enjoys the Bed of her Husband Lord.
Havest Aoeet fas Te a IZ wg 12 Gi-12, fadtera, He 3) sobhaavantee sohaaganee jin gur kaa hayt apaar. ||2]| The happy and pure soul-bride is noble; she has infinite love for the Guru. ||2]|
ud ota Asa fe AT oa oT Bes ae i Gi-13, frstera, we 3) poorai bhaag satgur milai jaa bhaagai kaa ud-u ho-ay. By perfect good fortune, one meets the True Guru, when one's destiny is awakened.
visa By gH act AY uaufs SE II (31-13, fieteoa, He 3) antrahu dukh bharam katee-ai sukh paraapat ho-ay. Suffering and doubt are cut out from within, and peace is obtained.
Td a TS AVS SU O US AS Bll (31-13, fadtwa, we 3) gur kai bhaanai jo chalai dukh na paavai ko-ay. ||3]| One who walks in harmony with the Guru's Will shall not suffer in pain. ||3]|
qa a we fete nifys 3 AoA ure AfE II 1-14, fadtorg, ve 3)
gur kay bhaanay vich amrit hai sehjay paavai ko-ay.
The Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar, is in the Guru's Will. With intuitive ease, it is obtained.
fro uaufs fae uler a@H fees afF II (31-14, fadtea, ne 3) jinaa paraapat tin pee-aa ha-umai vichahu kho-ay. Those who are destined to have it, drink it in; their egotism is eradicated from within.
Soa Tanta any fonreha vfs fesret dE snISisEll G1-15, fasta, v2 3)
naanak gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sach milaavaa ho-ay. ||4||13]|46]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, and is united with the True Lord. 4] 13] 146] |
fidtaat HIS 3 Il (31-16) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
w fug We nmuet Sq HO Mat Tate Il G31-16, firdtora, He 3) jaa pir jaanai aapnaa tan man agai Dharay-ay. If you know that He is your Husband Lord, offer your body and mind to Him.
Hodat Adu antedint Aet aaH Ade I (31-16, firdtera, He 3) sohaaganee karam kamaavdee-aa say-ee karam karay-i. Behave like the happy and pure soul-bride.
Hon Ate forest ATG saret SfE NAM (31-17, frrstora, ve 3)
sehjay saach milaavrhaa saach vadaa-ee day-ay. ||1]||
With intuitive ease, you shall merge with the True Lord, and He shall bless you with true greatness. ||1]|
amet 3 ag faa sats o df Il (31-17, fadtera, H: 3) bhaa-ee ray gur bin bhagat na ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, without the Guru, there is no devotional worship.
faa ad sats o ueht A Ge AS afe NU ITS I 31-17, factors, He 3)
bin gur bhagat na paa-ee-ai jay lochai sabh ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Guru, devotion is not obtained, even though everyone may long for it. ||1]|Pause] |
wd USaAte Sg ufeur anfs eA se i (1-18, firsts, we 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh fayr pa-i-aa kaaman doojai bhaa-ay.
The soul-bride in love with duality goes around the wheel of reincarnation, through 8.4 million incarnations.
faa ad ate 6 uireet wat df= feat& i (31-19, firdtera, ne 3) bin gur need na aavee dukhee rain vihaa-ay. Without the Guru, she finds no sleep, and she passes her life-night in pain.
fag Fae fug o urn fase HoH Tete 2H (31-19, fadtea, 2 3)
bin sabdai pir na paa-ee-ai birthaa janam gavaa-ay. ||2| |
Without the Shabad, she does not find her Husband Lord, and her life wastes away in vain. ||2||
ust 32 J 3G agst Ha fedt a Ue AY ofe i (32-1, fidtera, He 3) ha-o ha-o kartee jag firee naa Dhan sampai naal.
Practicing egotism, selfishness and conceit, she wanders around the world, but her wealth and property will not go with her.
mitt aH o Vset AS sat HHA Il (32-1, fidtora, ns 3)
anDhee naam na chayt-ee sabh baaDhee jamkaal.
The spiritually blind do not even think of the Naam; they are all bound and gagged by the Messenger of Death.
Asate fife ce urfeor af oor fee ATs NBII (32-1, fadteora, He 3)
satgur mili-ai Dhan paa-i-aa har naamaa ridai samaal. ||3]|
Meeting the True Guru, the wealth is obtained, contemplating the Name of the Lord in the heart. ||3]|
ot a3 A fSsHs ad a Ata AST Il (32-2, fadtea, 2 3)
naam ratay say nirmalay gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
Those who are attuned to the Naam are immaculate and pure; through the Guru, they obtain intuitive peace and poise.
Ho 30 TST da fA ana SHS TATE II (32-3, fidtea, He 3)
man tan raataa rang si-o rasnaa rasan raSaa-ay.
Their minds and bodies are dyed in the Color of the Lord's Love, and their tongues savor His Sublime Essence.
sod da 3 Gad F ofa ofs efor ote IsNISIIgOl (32-3, fAdtea, He 3) naanak rang na utrai jo har Dhur chhodi-aa laa-ay. ||4||14||47]|
O Nanak, that Primal Color which the Lord has applied, shall never fade away. [14] [1411471]
frdtaat HIG 3 Il (32-4)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
aenty faut ad sats ate fas as sats o det I 2-4, fadtora, He 3)
gurmukh kirpaa karay bhagat keejai bin gur bhagat na ho-ee.
By His Grace one becomes Gurmukh, worshipping the Lord with devotion. Without the Guru there is no devotional worship.
nny ning fore gS St fSsHE T= AT I (32-5, frdtora, we 3) aapai aap milaa-ay boojhai taa nirmal hovai so-ee. Those whom He unites with Himself, understand and become pure.
dfs AG Aro AST aeat Hafe frsret TET NAN (32-5, fadtora, He 3)
har jee-o saachaa saachee banee sabad milaavaa ho-ee. ||1]||
The Dear Lord is True, and True is the Word of His Bani. Through the Shabad, we merge with Him. |[1]|
amet J satsdte ae Afar mrfenr Il 32-6, fadtera, He 3)
bhaa-ee ray bhagtiheen kaahay jag aa-i-aa.
O Siblings of Destiny: those who lack devotion-why have they even bothered to come into the world?
ud Id at Ae o oot fase HoH Teter ual TIS il (32-6, frstea, ve 3) pooray gur kee sayv na keenee birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. They do not serve the Perfect Guru; they waste away their lives in vain. ||1]|Pause] |
md AaHleo AMES ny aufA fHore Il (32-7, firdtoa, He 3)
aapay jagjeevan sukh-daata aapay bakhas milaa-ay.
The Lord Himself, the Life of the World, is the Giver of Peace. He Himself forgives, and unites with Himself.
Aba As & foor serg fomr a orfy Wave Il (32-7, fadtera, v2 3) jee-a jant ay ki-aa vaychaaray ki-aa ko aakh sunaa-ay. So what about all these poor beings and creatures? What can anyone say?
aaHte wry ef= earvet wm AS ATES Il (2-8, frstera, ve 3) gurmukh aapay day-ay vadaa-ee aapay sayv karaa-ay. ||2|| He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glory. He Himself enjoins us to His Service. ||2| |
ofa agg vfs Sarat vofenr of o AT II (32-8, fidtora, He 3)
daykh kutamb mohi lobhaanaa chaldi-aa naal na jaa-ee.
Gazing upon their families, people are lured and trapped by emotional attachment, but none will go along with them in the end.
Haag Afe qe fours ufenr fSA et ah o uret Il 2-9, fidtera, vs 3)
satgur sayv gun niDhaan paa-i-aa tis dee keem na paa-ee.
Serving the True Guru, one finds the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence. His Value cannot be estimated.
on 4
ofs yg Aa Hts yg Hat nis Tf Auret ISI (32-9, facto, we 3)
har parabh sakhaa meet parabh mayraa antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||3] |
The Lord God is my Friend and Companion. God shall be my Helper and Support in the end. |[3]|
ntue ufo fefs ad ave fio ae wu & Wet II (32-10, faster, He 3)
aapnai man chit kahai kahaa-ay bin gur aap na jaa-ee.
Within your conscious mind, you may say anything, but without the Guru, selfishness is not removed.
dfs HE ws safs zee J afs faa vfs SAH I (32-10, fasta, He 3)
har jee-o daataa bhagat vachhal hai kar kirpaa man vasaa-ee.
The Dear Lord is the Giver, the Lover of His devotees. By His Grace, He comes to dwell in the mind.
ood Ast Hafs ef ys ord gente & efsuret iigiquiscil G2-11, firdtea, ne 3) naanak sobhaa surat day-ay parabh aapay gurmukh day vadi-aa-ee. ||4||15||48]|
O Nanak, by His Grace, He bestows enlightened awareness; God Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness. ||4||15||48]|
frrstaar HIS 3 Il (32-12) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Ug Hoot fafe wfenr ge fst usorg || Asad Afe AY ufer fees afenr THs II 32-12, frdtera, He 3)
Dhan jannee jin jaa-i-aa Dhan pitaa parDhaan. satgur sayv sukh paa-i-aa vichahu ga-i- aa gumaan.
Blessed is the mother who gave birth; blessed and respected is the father of one who serves the True Guru and finds peace. His arrogant pride is banished from within.
ofs Refs Hs we us Ufefs Tet fears NU (2-13, fadtea, He 3)
dar sayvan sant jan kharhay paa-in gunee niDhaan. ||1]||
Standing at the Lord's Door, the humble Saints serve Him; they find the Treasure of Excellence. ||1]|
He Ho ae yf fourfe ofs APE I 2-13, fade, He 3) mayray man gur mukh Dhi-aa-ay har so-ay. O my mind, become Gurmukh, and meditate on the Lord.
ad a Aa Hie ZA HS 30 fens FE dal TIS Il (32-14, fadtea, we 3)
gur kaa sabad man vasai man tan nirmal ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad abides within the mind, and the body and mind become pure. ||1]||Pause| |
ate fasur wig wren wm fife mre i (32-14, frsterar, v3 3) kar kirpaa ghar aa-i-aa aapay mili-aa aa-ay. By His Grace, He has come into my home; He Himself has come to meet me.
qe Aaet redhat sat Aofa AStE Il (32-15, faster, ve 3)
gur sabdee salaahee-ai rangay sahj subhaa-ay.
Singing His Praises through the Shabads of the Guru, we are dyed in His Color with intuitive ease.
Ae Afs mrfenr fife ad o feefs we i 2-15, fasta, ne 3)
sachai sach samaa-i-aa mil rahai na vichhurh jaa-ay. ||2||
Becoming truthful, we merge with the True One; remaining blended with Him, we Shall never be separated again. ||2| |
ni fag aga’ A ate sfoor meg 5 aAget ATE I (32-16, fatwa, He 3) jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa avar na karnaa jaa-ay. Whatever is to be done, the Lord is doing. No one else can do anything.
fact fees feng Asad Us uTf= Il (32-16, frdtoa, He 3)
chiree vichhunay mayli-an satgur pannai paa-ay.
Those separated from Him for so long are reunited with Him once again by the True Guru, who takes them into His Own Account.
MTU AT AITEA nie & Ada ATE ISI (32-17, firdtera, ve 3) aapay kaar karaa-isee avar na karnaa jaa-ay. ||3]|| He Himself assigns all to their tasks; nothing else can be done. ||3]|
HO 36 33s" da fA ICH Sfx fears II (32-17, fadtwa, nH: 3)
man tan rataa rang si-o ha-umai taj vikaar.
One whose mind and body are imbued with the Lord's Love gives up egotism and corruption.
uifafofh fase afe ad fass@ on fadare Il (32-18, fidtea, ne 3)
ahinis hirdai rav rahai nirbha-o naam nirankaar.
Day and night, the Name of the One Lord, the Fearless and Formless One, dwells within the heart.
area nifu frerfemig ud Hate ners ISIIENSE 2-18, frdtea, He 3)
naanak aap milaa-i-an poorai sabad apaar. ||4||16||49]| O Nanak, He blends us with Himself, through the Perfect, Infinite Word of His Shabad. | 14] |16]|49]|
frdtaat HIG 3 Il (32-19)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
dice dat fous od nis 6 urfeor AE Il (32-19, fide, He 3) govid gunee niDhaan hai ant na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Lord of the Universe is the Treasure of Excellence; His limits cannot be found.
aaSt Fest o uehat IGH fess ATE Il (32-19, fidtera, v2 3) kathnee badnee na paa-ee-ai ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay. He is not obtained by mouthing mere words, but by rooting out ego from within.
ust 33 Asate fufea Aes od orfu SA Hf wrfe Nall (33-1, fadtea, ne 3) satgur mili-ai sad bhai rachai aap vasai man aa-ay. ||1]|
Meeting the True Guru, one is permeated forever with the Fear of God, who Himself comes to dwell within the mind. ||1]|
get 3 TeHfe gs ate il (33-1, frdtora, v3 3) bhaa-ee ray gurmukh boojhai ko-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, one who becomes Gurmukh and understands this is very rare.
fag 33 AGH AHSE FSH ueTsE fe Ul TIS il (33-2, firdtora, ws 3) bin boojhay karam kamaavnay janam padaarath kho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. To act without understanding is to lose the treasure of this human life. ||1||Pause| |
frat afar fat Are ufeur fae ave gafh sorte I (33-2, fadtea, He 3)
jinee chaakhi-aa tinee saad paa-i-aa bin chaakhay bharam bhulaa-ay.
Those who have tasted it, enjoy its flavor; without tasting it, they wander in doubt, lost and deceived.
nifts APS OH I ATat aS o AME Il (33-3, firdtoa, ws 3) amrit saachaa naam hai kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. The True Name is the Ambrosial Nectar; no one can describe it.
ules J uses stent ys Fate AHS IQI (33-3, frdtora, ws 3) peevat hoo parvaan bha-i-aa poorai sabad samaa-ay. ||2]|| Drinking it in, one becomes honorable, absorbed in the Perfect Word of the Shabad.
21 |
nny af 3 ura dg aver fags o AME Il (33-4, frdtora, v8 3) aapay day-ay ta paa-ee-ai hor karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. He Himself gives, and then we receive. Nothing else can be done.
See TS A Ts VS FT TT rs UTS I (33-4, frstera, we 3)
dayvan vaalay kai hath daat hai guroo du-aarai paa-ay.
The Gift is in the Hands of the Great Giver. At the Guru's Door, in the Gurdwara, it is received.
Ad atso So dur AT AGH GHTE Sil 3-5, fadtea, He 3) jayhaa keeton tayhaa ho-aa jayhay karam kamaa-ay. ||3]| Whatever He does, comes to pass. All act according to His Will. ||3]|
WS AS AnH ON J fee ae fase 3 SE Il (33-5, fadtera, H: 3)
jat sat sanjam naam hai vin naavai nirmal na ho-ay.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is abstinence, truthfulness, and self-restraint. Without the Name, no one becomes pure.
ud afar oH Hie SA Rate fre afE il (33-6, firdtora, os 3)
poorai bhaag naam man vasai sabad milaavaa ho-ay.
Through perfect good fortune, the Naam comes to abide within the mind. Through the Shabad, we merge into Him.
Soa AIA dt df ease dfs Te wu] AE SII NYO (33-6, fate, He 3)
naanak sehjay hee rang varatdaa har gun paavai so-ay. ||4||17]||50]|
O Nanak, one who lives in intuitive peace and poise, imbued with the Lord's Love, obtains the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||17]||50]|
firdtaat HIS 3 Il (33-7)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
aifear A Gao su ad fess IBN o ATE II (33-7, fata, He 3)
kaa’-i-aa saaDhai uraDh tap karai vichahu ha-umai na jaa-ay.
You may torment your body with extremes of self-discipline, practice intensive meditation and hang upside-down, but your ego will not be eliminated from within.
Mfrs AGH A A OH O aa Tt UTS Il (33-8, firdtea, v2 3) aDhi-aatam karam jay karay naam na kab hee paa-ay.
You may perform religious rituals, and still never obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ad a Rafe Hes He dfe aH ZA fe ore I (3-8, frdtera, He 3)
gur kai sabad jeevat marai har naam vasai man aa-ay. ||1||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, remain dead while yet alive, and the Name of the Lord shall come to dwell within the mind. ||1]|
Hfeé Ho HS SH Asad Ade Il (33-9, frdtea, ns 3) sun man mayray bhaj satgur sarnaa. Listen, O my mind: hurry to the Protection of the Guru's Sanctuary.
ag usAet ecm feu gene Aafe qe sae AU TIC Il (33-9, faster, ne 3)
gur parsaadee chhutee-ai bikh bhavjal sabad gur tarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace you shall be saved. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean of poison. ||1]||Pause] |
3 Te As wy Fo a feorg Il (33-10, firdtora, v3 3)
tarai gun sabhaa Dhaat hai doojaa bhaa-o vikaar.
Everything under the influence of the three qualities shall perish; the love of duality is corrupting.
ufss us das Ho wor oo gs faftmr fumrfs i (33-10, frdtora, v3 3)
pandit parhai banDhan moh baaDhaa nah boojhai bikhi-aa pi-aar.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read the scriptures, but they are trapped in the bondage of emotional attachment. In love with evil, they do not understand.
Agate fife fact se BBS ufe Hats erg iI 73-1, fates, we 3)
satgur mili-ai tarikutee chhootai cha-uthai pad mukat du-aar. ||2]|
Meeting the Guru, the bondage of the three qualities is cut away, and in the fourth state, the Door of Liberation is attained. ||2]|
Ts 3 Hag ueht ya HT TIT ll 33-11, fastera, we 3)
gur tay maarag paa-ee-ai chookai moh gubaar.
Through the Guru, the Path is found, and the darkness of emotional attachment is dispelled.
Rafe Hd St Gud ue He BME Il (33-12, fadtera, v2 3)
sabad marai taa uDhrai paa-ay mokh du-aar.
If one dies through the Shabad, then salvation is obtained, and one finds the Door of Liberation.
ae usAet fife Jd AT SH ATS ISI (33-12, fidtora, He 3) gur parsaadee mil rahai sach naam kartaar. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, one remains blended with the True Name of the Creator. ||3] |
feg Hout nifs Hae I Bs 3 fas Gute il (33-13, fastera, w: 3) ih manoo-aa at sabal hai chhaday na kitai upaa-ay. This mind is very powerful; we cannot escape it just by trying.
en afe gy fee aust tf Ate Il (33-13, frdtera, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay dukh laa-idaa bahutee day-ay sajaa-ay. In the love of duality, people suffer in pain, condemned to terrible punishment.
Soa ot Bd A Cad IH Aafe Tete usnacnuall (33-14, fadtera, ne 3) naanak naam lagay say ubray ha-umai sabad gavaa-ay. ||4]|18]|51]|
O Nanak, those who are attached to the Naam are saved; through the Shabad, their ego is banished. ||4||18]|]51]|
frdtaat HIG 3 Il (33-14)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
fasu ad ag ue of ont fe featé it 3-15, firdtora, ne 3) kirpaa karay gur paa-ee-ai har naamo day-ay drirh-aa-ay. By His Grace, the Guru is found, and the Name of the Lord is implanted within.
faa ad faa 3 ute fase AoW TSTE I (33-15, fadtera, ne 3) bin gur kinai na paa-i-o birthaa janam gavaa-ay. Without the Guru, no one has obtained it; they waste away their lives in vain.
HOHU AGH AHTSS Vda fHS ANTE I (3-16, fAdtoa, He 3)
manmukh karam kamaavnay dargeh milai sajaa-ay. ||1||
The self-willed manmukhs create karma, and in the Court of the Lord, they receive their punishment. ||1]|
Ho F BAT STS Jars Il (33-16, frdtea, v2 3) man ray doojaa bhaa-o chukaa-ay. O mind, give up the love of duality.
wists 3d ofs ZA ae AS AY ute | Joe I 3-16, fadtera, He 3) antar tayrai har vasai gur sayvaa sukh paa-ay. rahaa-o. The Lord dwells within you; serving the Guru, you shall find peace. ||Pause] |
Ay sel Ay Ase dW Afe od fimrg I 33-17, frdtora, He 3) sach banee sach sabad hai jaa sach Dharay pi-aar.
When you love the Truth, your words are true; they reflect the True Word of the Shabad.
dfs a ay ufs ZA ICH au feats i (33-17, fidtora, He 3) har kaa naam man vasai ha-umai kroDh nivaar. The Name of the Lord dwells within the mind; egotism and anger are wiped away.
fe foo oy fomreint st ure He BHT II (33-18, fiadtera, He 3) man nirmal naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai taa paa-ay mokh du-aar. ||2|| Meditating on the Naam with a pure mind, the Door of Liberation is found. ||2||
J@H fefs aa faore vfs AH wre ATE II (33-18, fadtera, He 3)
ha-umai vich jag binasdaa mar jammai aavai jaa-ay.
Engrossed in egotism, the world perishes. It dies and is re-born; it continues coming and going in reincarnation.
HOHY Hee 6 Heal AAlS ufs Tete il (33-19, frdtea, v2 3)
manmukh sabad na jaannee jaasan pat gavaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not recognize the Shabad; they forfeit their honor, and depart in disgrace.
qd Aet a ur AS Jd ANTE Sil (33-19, fdtoa, He 3) gur Sayvaa naa-O paa-ee-ai sachay rahai samaa-ay. ||3] | Serving the Guru, the Name is obtained, and one remains absorbed in the True Lord.
[31 at 3g Rafe Hfomt ae ures fess wiry aete I (34-1, fidtora, He 3)
sabad mani-ai gur paa-ee-ai vichahu aap gavaa-ay. With faith in the Shabad, the Guru is found, and selfishness is eradicated from within.
mates safs ad Het ATS at fee OTE Il (34-1, frdtea, v2 3) an-din bhagat karay sadaa saachay kee liv laa-ay. Night and day, worship the True Lord with devotion and love forever.
oH uesE Hie Shor Boa AdlA AHTE NSNIACNUI (34-2, frstera, He 3)
naam padaarath man vasi-aa naanak sahj samaa-ay. ||4||19]|52| |
The Treasure of the Naam abides in the mind; O Nanak, in the poise of perfect balance, merge into the Lord. ||4]|19||52]|
frdtaa HIG 3 Il (34-2)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
frat usdt Asad o Afes A eele Aa ote Il (34-3, fiadtea, He 3) jinee purkhee satgur na sayvi-o say dukhee-ay jug chaar. Those who do not serve the True Guru shall be miserable throughout the four ages.
ufg det usy 3 uetfenr mifsrts HS warts i (34-3, firdtora, He 3)
ghar hodaa purakh na pachhaani-aa abhimaan muthay aha™kaar.
The Primal Being is within their own home, but they do not recognize Him. They are plundered by their egotistical pride and arrogance.
Asay foo fecfomr Hfar aa AAS Il 34-4, firdtorar, He 3)
satguroo ki-aa fitki-aa mang thakay sansaar.
Cursed by the True Guru, they wander around the world begging, until they are exhausted.
He Hae 6 Afes Afs aH AetISTT NA (34-4, firdtora, ne 3)
sachaa sabad na sayvi-o sabh kaaj savaaranhaar. ||1]|
They do not serve the True Word of the Shabad, which is the solution to all of their problems. ||1||
Ho Ad Ae ats Sy Jets Il 34-5, Atea, He 3) man mayray sadaa har vaykh hadoor. O my mind, see the Lord ever close at hand.
HOH HIS TY uddd Hale sour saute Ul TIS I (34-5, wove, os 3)
janam maran dukh parharai sabad rahi-aa bharpoor. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He shall remove the pains of death and rebirth; the Word of the Shabad shall fill you to overflowing. ||1]|Pause] |
Ag Aes A AY AS SH MUO Il (34-6, Hoa, He 3) sach salaahan say sachay sachaa naam aDhaar. Those who praise the True One are true; the True Name is their Support.
Het aa anal Ad artes fimirg i (34-6, Hea, He 3) sachee kaar kamaavnee sachay naal pi-aar. They act truthfully, in love with the True Lord.
Ae Ag ease afe B AZSTT Il (34-6, Hoa, ve 3) sachaa saahu varatdaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. The True King has written His Order, which no one can erase.
HOH HIG o uUfsat afs HS afanrg iH 34-7, Atea, He 3)
manmukh mahal na paa-inee koorh muthay koorhi-aar. ||2| |
The self-willed manmukhs do not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. The false are plundered by falsehood. ||2| |
ICH Ags Ha Hor ae fag uls vias Il (34-7, Atea, He 3) ha-umai kartaa jag mu-aa gur bin ghor anDhaar. Engrossed in egotism, the world perishes. Without the Guru, there is utter darkness.
Hfeor Hfo ferrfoor AuETST BSTE Il (34-8, Alea, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi visaari-aa sukh-daata daataar.
In emotional attachment to Maya, they have forgotten the Great Giver, the Giver of Peace.
H3dd Azfy + Cuafs Ag suf Sa Oe Il (34-8, Atos, He 3)
satgur sayveh taa ubreh sach rakheh ur Dhaar.
Those who serve the True Guru are saved; they keep the True One enshrined in their hearts.
fasur 3 ofa uh vfs Rafe etefs 3 (34-9, Ata, He 3)
kirpaa tay har paa-ee-ai sach sabad veechaar. ||3]|| By His Grace, we find the Lord, and reflect on the True Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
Haag Afe He feaner J@H sfx fears Il (34-9, Hea, He 3)
satgur sayv man nirmalaa ha-umai taj vikaar.
Serving the True Guru, the mind becomes immaculate and pure; egotism and corruption are discarded.
niu éfs des Hd ad a Aafe Ses Il (34-10, Hea, nH 3)
aap chhod jeevat marai gur kai sabad veechaar.
So abandon your selfishness, and remain dead while yet alive. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
um wes sfo ae oar Ate fimrg il (34-10, Hea, He 3)
DhanDhaa Dhaavat reh ga-ay laagaa saach pi-aar.
The pursuit of worldly affairs comes to an end, when you embrace love for the True One.
Afs g3 He Gnd fss AS veefe igi (4-11, Hwa, He 3)
sach ratay mukh ujlay tit saachai darbaar. ||4||
Those who are attuned to Truth-their faces are radiant in the Court of the True Lord. [141]
Asdd use 3 HfeS nate 3 oa fimrg it (4-11, fidtera, v2 3)
satgur purakh na mani-o sabad na lago pi-aar.
Those who do not have faith in the Primal Being, the True Guru, and who do not enshrine love for the Shabad
feAag BS AST ast eA Ste yr” Il 34-12, frdtora, we 3)
isnaan daan jaytaa karahi doojai bhaa-ay khu-aar.
-they take their cleansing baths, and give to charity again and again, but they are ultimately consumed by their love of duality.
dfs HG wmvat faur ad st oat oH fimrg Il (34-12, fata, ve 3) har jee-o aapnee kirpaa karay taa laagai naam pi-aar. When the Dear Lord Himself grants His Grace, they are inspired to love the Naam.
aoa BH AHS J Ta a fs orrfs wuNlQ2ouUsil (34-13, frstara, 2 3)
naanak naam samaal too gur kai hayt apaar. ||5]|20]|53]|
O Nanak, immerse yourself in the Naam, through the Infinite Love of the Guru. [|5]|20][53]|
frrstaat HIS 3 Il (34-13) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
fon 3S Aet foor wy adt Asa ySS ATE I (34-13, frdtera, 2 3) kis ha-o sayvee ki-aa jap karee satgur poochha-o jaa-ay. Whom shall I serve? What shall I chant? I will go and ask the Guru.
Hadid a atat ifs wet fess wry Tete il 34-14, firstera, v2 3) satgur kaa bhaanaa man la-ee vichahu aap gavaa-ay. I will accept the Will of the True Guru, and eradicate selfishness from within.
Sot Het wad aH SA fe wrfe i (34-14, fideo, ne 3) ayhaa sayvaa chaakree naam vasai man aa-ay. By this work and service, the Naam shall come to dwell within my mind.
oH dt S AY ud Ad Aafe HOTS NA (34-15, fidtea, He 3) naamai hee tay sukh paa-ee-ai sachai sabad suhaa-ay. ||1||
Through the Naam, peace is obtained; I am adorned and embellished by the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
Ho Hd Motes Wa dla Bs Il (34-15, fidtera, us 3) man mayray an-din jaag har chayt. O my mind, remain awake and aware night and day, and think of the Lord.
ntuat ast afe & aA usat afS ua TIS il 34-16, frstera, we 3) aapnee khaytee rakh lai koo‘j parhaigee khayt. ||1]| rahaa-o. Protect your crops, or else the birds shall descend on your farm. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho otter feet udtor Rafe afer suf il (34-16, fete, v2 3)
man kee-aa ichhaa pooree-aa sabad rahi-aa bharpoor.
The desires of the mind are fulfilled, when one is filled to overflowing with the Shabad.
3 afte sats asta fea ast ofe ME Sa AE Tele I (34-17, fdtora, ws 3)
bhai bhaa-ay bhagat karahi din raatee har jee-o vaykhai sadaa hadoor.
One who fears, loves, and is devoted to the Dear Lord day and night, sees Him always close at hand.
Ae ate Ae He TS gH afenr Adteg Ute I (34-17, facta, vs 3) sachai sabad sadaa man raataa bharam ga-i-aa sareerahu door.
Doubt runs far away from the bodies of those, whose minds remain forever attuned to the True Word of the Shabad.
fesHe Atos ufeor AE Tat Ads MQ (34-18, fastea, ve 3) nirmal saahib paa-i-aa saachaa gunee gaheer. ||2|| The Immaculate Lord and Master is found. He is True; He is the Ocean of Excellence.
21 |
A Wa A Gad AS TS HITE Il (34-18, firdtora, ws 3) jo jaagay say ubray sootay ga-ay muhaa-ay. Those who remain awake and aware are saved, while those who sleep are plundered.
He Aa 6 uets@ Hust afeur feat= i (34-19, fadtea, He 3)
sachaa sabad na pachhaani-o supnaa ga-i-aa vihaa-ay.
They do not recognize the True Word of the Shabad, and like a dream, their lives fade away.
He we ot ugar fa@ orfemr fC we i (34-19, fadtera, He 3) sunjay ghar kaa paahunaa ji-o aa-i-aa ti-o jaa-ay. Like guests in a deserted house, they leave just exactly as they have come.
ar 3u HOHY HOH fase afeur fomr Hg SA ATE ISI (35-1, firétra, He 3) manmukh janam birthaa ga-i-aa ki-aa muhu daysee jaa-ay. ||3]|
The life of the self-willed manmukh passes uselessly. What face will he show when he passes beyond? ||3]|
AS fags wm orfu t IH fete age o ATE I 35-1, fadtora, He 3) sabh kichh aapay aap hai ha-umai vich kahan na jaa-ay. God Himself is everything; those who are in their ego cannot even speak of this.
ad a Aafe ueteha vu ICH fees Tete i (35-2, fidtea, nu: 3)
gur kai sabad pachhaanee-ai dukh ha-umai vichahu gavaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is realized, and the pain of egotism is eradicated from within.
Asad Refs wma @ fsa a wa url= Il (35-2, frdtoa, we 3) satgur sayvan aapnaa ha-o tin kai laaga-o paa-ay. I fall at the feet of those who serve their True Guru.
sod Ufa AY Afemrs ots we fso afeod WE NeNIUUsil 75-3, firetoa, He 3) naanak dar sachai sachiaar heh ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. ||4||21||54]|
O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who are found to be true in the True Court. [14] |22][54]|
frrstaar HIS 3 Il (35-4) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
A tor sus ated a fas tor sats aE i (35-4, faster, He 3) jay vaylaa vakhat veechaaree-ai taa kit vaylaa bhagat ho-ay. Consider the time and the moment-when should we worship the Lord?
wofes oH dfsut AS AST ALE Il (35-4, firdtera, He 3) an-din naamay rati-aa sachay sachee so-ay. Night and day, one who is attuned to the Name of the True Lord is true.
fea fae fimre fend sats faddt afF II (35-5, fade, He 3)
ik til pi-aaraa visrai bhagat kinayhee ho-ay.
If someone forgets the Beloved Lord, even for an instant, what sort of devotion is that?
Ho 36 Ase Are fAG AH Oo fase Af INDI (35-5, fadtera, He 3)
man tan seetal saach si-o saas na birthaa ko-ay. ||1||
One whose mind and body are cooled and soothed by the True Lord-no breath of his is wasted. ||1||
Hd He dfs at amy forte Il (35-6, firdtea, ns 3) mayray man har kaa naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord.
At sats at dha wT ofe SA nfo vorfe ai gos I (35-6, fidtera, He 3)
saachee bhagat taa thee-ai jaa har vasai man aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
True devotional worship is performed when the Lord comes to dwell in the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
Hon ast adh Ay on sta ute i 35-7, facta, He 3)
sehjay khaytee raahee-ai sach naam beej paa-ay.
With intuitive ease, cultivate your farm, and plant the Seed of the True Name. USt wt nrarest Hour sat Aft ASS il (35-7, firsts, 3 3)
khaytee jammee aglee manoo-aa rajaa sahj subhaa-ay. The seedlings have sprouted luxuriantly, and with intuitive ease, the mind is satisfied.
qd o Ase nifys 3 fas uts foe ate it 5-8, fasta, us 3) gur kaa sabad amrit hai jit peetai tikh jaa-ay. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, thirst is quenched.
feg He ATa Af gst AS Sfont AME I2QIl (35-8, fidtea, v2 3) in man saachaa sach rataa sachay rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2|| This true mind is attuned to Truth, and it remains permeated with the True One. ||2]|
Wilds SUSE Het Ase Sfont ANTE I (35-9, fadtera, 2 3) aakhan vaykhan bolnaa sabday rahi-aa samaa-ay. In speaking, in seeing and in words, remain immersed in the Shabad.
Wat Ht VI Adit Ad Ay AETte Il (35-9, fates, ve 3) banee vajee chahu jugee sacho sach sunaa-ay.
The Word of the Guru's Bani vibrates throughout the four ages. As Truth, it teaches Truth.
J@H As of afer AS ofenr free I (35-9, firstera, He 3)
ha-umai mayraa reh ga-i-aa sachai la-i-aa milaa-ay.
Egotism and possessiveness are eliminated, and the True One absorbs them into Himself.
fs5 ag Hoe Jefa TA Ale ad fee OTE Sil (35-10, frdtora, 2 3)
tin ka-o mahal hadoor hai jo sach rahay liv laa-ay. ||3]|
Those who remain lovingly absorbed in the True One see the Mansion of His Presence close at hand. ||3]|
Set oH fame fee aay ufenr Ae Il (35-10, fadtera, v2 3)
nadree naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai vin karmaa paa-i-aa na jaa-ay.
By His Grace, we meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Without His Mercy, it cannot be obtained.
ud ota ASHals Bd Asag Se fA wets il 5-11, frstera, w: 3)
poorai bhaag satsangat lahai satgur bhaytai jis aa-ay.
Through perfect good destiny, one finds the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and one comes to meet the True Guru.
mates oH disor ey faftor fess ATE Il (35-12, firdtera, He 3)
an-din naamay rati-aa dukh bikhi-aa vichahu jaa-ay.
Night and day, remain attuned to the Naam, and the pain of corruption shall be dispelled from within.
Soa Hale fHareat oH OTH AHTES ISNQQNUUll (35-12, fadtea, He 3)
naanak sabad milaavrhaa naamay naam samaa-ay. ||4||22||55|| O Nanak, merging with the Shabad through the Name, one is immersed in the Name. [|4]|22]|55]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (35-13)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
nua 3 fo ufeGe fre ad at Hae stots il 35-13, firdtera, v2 3)
aapnaa bha-o tin paa-i-on jin gur kaa sabad beechaar.
Those who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad are filled with the Fear of God.
HsHast Ae fife gd AS A Te Ate Il (35-13, fadtera, He 3)
satsangtee sadaa mil rahay sachay kay gun saar.
They remain forever merged with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; they dwell upon the Glories of the True One.
efam He vardinig afs afm Ba ofa Il (35-14, faster, He 3)
dubiDhaa mail chukaa-ee-an har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
They cast off the filth of their mental duality, and they keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.
Het sel Ag xfs Ad ote fume IAI (5-14, firdtera, He 3) sachee banee sach man sachay naal pi-aar. ||1]| True is their speech, and true are their minds. They are in love with the True One.
[2
Ho Hd IGH AG 3d oT Il (35-15, fastera, He 3) man mayray ha-umai mail bhar naal. O my mind, you are filled with the filth of egotism.
dfs fasHe Het Avet Aafe AeTISTT NA TIS Il (35-15, frdtera, ve 3) har nirmal sadaa sohnaa sabad savaaranhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Immaculate Lord is eternally Beautiful. We are adorned with the Word of the Shabad. ||1||Pause] |
Ae Aafe He Hfoor ufs mm we free I (35-16, frdtera, v8 3)
sachai sabad man mohi-aa parabh aapay la-ay milaa-ay.
God joins to Himself those whose minds are fascinated with the True Word of His Shabad.
motes on dfsur Ast APS AME II (35-16, fate, 2 3)
an-din naamay rati-aa jotee jot samaa-ay.
Night and day, they are attuned to the Naam, and their light is absorbed into the Light.
nat J ys Wuer fag ASAT Ts o UTE Il 35-17, firdtora, He 3)
jotee hoo parabh jaapdaa bin satgur boojh na paa-ay.
Through His Light, God is revealed. Without the True Guru, understanding is not obtained.
fra ag usta fottimr Asag sfenr fe wets 2 5-17, fretea, He 3) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa satgur bhayti-aa tin aa-ay. ||2|| The True Guru comes to meet those who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||2]|
fee BS AS Hat eA StS yrfs it 35-18, frstera, wu: 3) vin naavai sabh dumnee doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay. Without the Name, all are miserable. In the love of duality, they are ruined.
fan fae wat o eet eet df= feofe i 35-18, fadtea, ue 3)
tis bin gharhee na jeevdee dukhee rain vihaa-ay.
Without Him, I cannot survive even for an instant, and my life-night passes in anguish.
sof gore niger fefs fefa mire fe il (35-19, fadtera, He 3)
bharam bhulaanaa anDhulaa fir fir aavai jaa-ay.
Wandering in doubt, the spiritually blind come and go in reincarnation, over and over again.
dels Ad Us niTuat nm BE fharfe Si (35-19, first, He 3) nadar karay parabh aapnee aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||3]| When God Himself bestows His Glance of Grace, He blends us into Himself. ||3]|
Uar 3¢
AS fae Hee sue fas vats ufeor Ate i (36-1, firdtera, vs 3) sabh kichh sundaa vaykh-daa ki-o mukar pa-i-aa jaa-ay.
He hears and sees everything. How can anyone deny Him? und uTy ants unt usta use Il (36-1, fidtera, He 3)
paapo paap kamaavday paapay pacheh pachaa-ay. Those who sin again and again, shall rot and die in sin.
A yg oele o niet Houfe gs o UNE II (36-2, firdtora, 8 3)
so parabh nadar na aavee manmukh boojh na paa-ay.
God's Glance of Grace does not come to them; those self-willed manmukhs do not obtain understanding.
fan furs Het Sa soa Tafa uf! ien2snuell (6-2, fadtea, ne 3)
jis vaykhaalay so-ee vaykhai naanak gurmukh paa-ay. ||4||23||56||
They alone see the Lord, unto whom He reveals Himself. O Nanak, the Gurmukhs find Him. ||4]|23]|56]|
Alea HIS 3 Il (36-3)
sareeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
fae ae da 5 3eet ISH ule 3 ATE II (36-3, facta, He 3) bin gur rog na tut-ee ha-umai peerh na jaa-ay. Without the Guru, the disease is not cured, and the pain of egotism is not removed.
qd UTA His SA SHA Id ANTE I (36-3, fdtora, He 3) gur parsaadee man vasai naamay rahai samaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, He dwells in the mind, and one remains immersed in His Name.
ad Aaet ofs uch fag Age sath sere all 6-4, fadtea, He 3)
gur sabdee har paa-ee-ai bin sabdai bharam bhulaa-ay. ||1]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is found; without the Shabad, people wander, deceived by doubt. ||1]|
Ho 3 for ute ear dfs Il (36-4, factor, He 3) man ray nij ghar vaasaa ho-ay. O mind, dwell in the balanced state of your own inner being.
oH oH Aes J fete ures AE 3 TE NU TS Il 6-5, frrstora, wu 3) raam naam saalaahi too fir aavan jaan na ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Praise the Lord's Name, and you shall no longer come and go in reincarnation. ||1]|Pause| |
of fet Vs ZIse" VAT neg @ AE I (36-5, frstera, we 3) har iko daataa varatdaa doojaa avar na ko-ay. The One Lord alone is the Giver, pervading everywhere. There is no other at all.
Rafe Ard ufs ZA AoA dt AY OE Il (36-6, fates, He 3)
sabad saalaahee man vasai sehjay hee sukh ho-ay.
Praise the Word of the Shabad, and He shall come to dwell in your mind; you shall be blessed with intuitive peace and poise.
AS oedt niefs fuer A aS 3 SE QI 6-6, frdtora, ue 3) sabh nadree andar vaykh-daa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||2|| Everything is within the Lord's Glance of Grace. As He wishes, He gives. ||2]|
ICH AS Tes J Tes O8 AY Of Il (36-7, facto, He 3) ha-umai sabhaa ganat hai gantai na-o sukh naahi. In egotism, all must account for their actions. In this accounting, there is no peace.
fay at aa anreet fay ot afo mts il (36-7, fastea, us 3) bikh kee kaar kamaavnee bikh hee maahi samaahi. Acting in evil and corruption, people are immersed in corruption.
fag ae oGg o ufest AHufe gu ATT ISI (36-8, frdtera, He 3)
bin naavai tha-ur na paa-inee jam pur dookh sahaahi. ||3||
Without the Name, they find no place of rest. In the City of Death, they suffer in agony. ||3]|
mG fiizs ng fSA a fSA ot nmr” Il (36-8, fadtera, 2 3) jee-o pind sabh tis daa tisai daa aaDhaar. Body and soul all belong to Him; He is the Support of all.
ae UsATSt ash St us HY BM” Il (36-9, fadtera, v2 3) gur parsaadee bujhee-ai taa paa-ay mokh du-aar. By Guru's Grace, understanding comes, and then the Door of Liberation is found.
asa OH HOt J wigs UST ISIQIUII (36-9, firdtora, we 3)
naanak naam salaahi too” ant na paaraavaar. ||4||24]|57]|
O Nanak, sing the Praises of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He has no end or limitation. ||4]|24]|57| |
frdtaat HIG 3 Il (36-10)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
for nide Het AY dD frat Ay OH HIE Il (36-10, fidtoa, He 3) tinaa anand sadaa sukh hai jinaa sach naam aaDhaar. Those who have the Support of the True Name are in ecstasy and peace forever.
Gd Aaet Ay ufeor wy fsesesg il (36-10, frstea, ve 3)
gur sabdee sach paa-i-aa dookh nivaaranhaar.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they obtain the True One, the Destroyer of pain.
Hel Het ATS Te Wels AS offs fimrg i (36-11, fidtera, ve 3)
sadaa sadaa saachay gun gaavahi saachai naa-ay pi-aar.
Forever and ever, they sing the Glorious Praises of the True One; they love the True Name.
facut af & nimuat feso sats Fag NAM (36-11, fates, v2 3) kirpaa kar kai aapnee diton bhagat bhandaar. ||1]| When the Lord Himself grants His Grace, He bestows the treasure of devotion. ||1]|
HO F Ae noe TE IMS Il (36-12, fdtera, ne 3) man ray sadaa anand gun gaa-ay. O mind, sing His Glorious Praises, and be in ecstasy forever.
Ret set ofa ureha ofa fa gd Pe an TIC il (36-12, frdtea, we 3)
sachee banee har paa-ee-ai har si-o rahai samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the True Word of His Bani, the Lord is obtained, and one remains immersed in the Lord. ||1]]Pause||
Hot Sdst HO BS Sot gs" Ala ASE Il (36-13, fdtera, He 3)
sachee bhagtee man laal thee-aa rataa sahj subhaa-ay.
In true devotion, the mind is dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love, with intuitive peace and poise.
qs Aaet Ho Afr aat as 3 ATE Il (36-13, firdtora, 3 3) gur sabdee man mohi-aa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. The mind is fascinated by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, which cannot be described.
fave oat Aafe we nif ule aff ae ae it (36-14, firdtera, ve 3)
jinvaa ratee sabad sachai amrit peevai ras gun gaa-ay.
The tongue imbued with the True Word of the Shabad drinks in the Amrit with delight, singing His Glorious Praises.
aenfy fo da urdht fan 3 faa ad ate Qi 6-14, faster, we 3) gurmukh ayhu rang paa-ee-ai jis no kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||2|| The Gurmukh obtains this love, when the Lord, in His Will, grants His Grace. ||2] |
HA feg HATS 3 Afsor Sf feote it (36-15, fasta, v2 3) sansaa ih sansaar hai suti-aa rain vihaa-ay. This world is an illusion; people pass their life-nights sleeping.
fefa nue ave afe afenig nmi afeGe fete Il (36-15, fadtera, He 3) ik aapnai bhaanai kadh la-i-an aapay la-i-on milaa-ay. By the Pleasure of His Will, He lifts some out, and unites them with Himself.
mm ot orfy nfs efor wrfeor He vate Il (36-16, firdtera, He 3) aapay hee aap man vasi-aa maa-i-aa moh chukaa-ay. He Himself abides in the mind, and drives out attachment to Maya.
nifty zaret fesintg aanfa Sf este Si (36-16, frdtera, ve 3) aap vadaa-ee ditee-an gurmukh day-ay bujhaa-ay. ||3]| He Himself bestows glorious greatness; He inspires the Gurmukh to understand. ||3]|
Aso at ast Sa J Sfonr BS ANSE Il (36-17, fadtera, He 3) sabhnaa kaa daataa ayk hai bhuli-aa la-ay samjhaa-ay. The One Lord is the Giver of all. He corrects those who make mistakes.
fefa nm nif unrfenig eH sfsnig ote I (6-17, firdtora, 3 3) ik aapay aap khu-aa-i-an doojai chhadi-an laa-ay. He Himself has deceived some, and attached them to duality.
TIHst ofa ur Wat AS flrefe i Go-1s, fate, ve 3)
gurmatee har paa-ee-ai jotee jot milaa-ay.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is found, and one's light merges into the Light.
mates SH Sisal soa OTH AHS ISIQUIUTII (6-18, firsts, He 3)
an-din naamay rati-aa naanak naam samaa-ay. ||4||25||58]|
Attuned to the Name of the Lord night and day, O Nanak, you shall be absorbed into the Name. ||4]|25||58]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (36-19)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Test Ay ufeor feAar sha fears il (36-19, firdtora, v3 3) gunvantee sach paa-i-aa tarisnaa taj vikaar. The virtuous obtain Truth; they give up their desires for evil and corruption.
Ta Ast HS dfamr sAat UH fumrfa i (36-19, fiesta, vs 3)
gur sabdee man rangi-aa rasnaa paraym pi-aar.
Their minds are imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Love of their Beloved is on their tongues.
Ua 39 fag Afsas fas o utes afe tug ufe Stes I (37-1, frstera, He 3)
bin satgur kinai na paa-i-o kar vaykhhu man veechaar. Without the True Guru, no one has found Him; reflect upon this in your mind and see.
HOHY HS 3 Gad favs aa Aafe 3 ad fimrg IAI (37-1, fadtera, ne 3) manmukh mail na utrai jichar gur sabad na karay pi-aar. ||1]|
The filth of the self-willed manmukhs is not washed off; they have no love for the Guru's Shabad. ||1]||
Ho Hd Afsad A HS VH Il (37-2, fadtora, 2 3) man mayray satgur kai bhaanai chal. O my mind, walk in harmony with the True Guru.
fon ufs eafo nifys utefs a AY Bafa HIS UU TIC Il (37-2, frdtera, ue 3)
nij ghar vaseh amrit peeveh taa sukh laheh mahal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Dwell within the home of your own inner being, and drink in the Ambrosial Nectar; you shall attain the Peace of the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||Pause| |
MBISest TE I St sale 3 fHS Tels i 37-3, fasta, we 3) a-ugunvantee gun ko nahee bahan na milai hadoor. The unvirtuous have no merit; they are not allowed to sit in His Presence.
Houta Fae o Weel meals A ys fe Il 37-3, frdtoa, vs 3)
manmukh sabad na jaan-ee avgan so parabh door.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know the Shabad; those without virtue are far removed from God.
frat Ag uetenr Afs ss saute il (37-4, fadtoa, ve 3) jinee sach pachhaani-aa sach ratay bharpoor. Those who recognize the True One are permeated and attuned to Truth.
Td Aaet Ho Sftmr ys ffeor orfy gefs ii (37-4, frétea, ve 3)
gur sabdee man bayDhi-aa parabh mili-aa aap hadoor. ||2||
Their minds are pierced through by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and God Himself ushers them into His Presence. ||2| |
nm gate dfaGe nae ofeGe fete iI (37-5, firdtera, ne 3)
aapay rangan rangi-on sabday la-i-on milaa-ay.
He Himself dyes us in the Color of His Love; through the Word of His Shabad, He unites us with Himself.
Ae da 3 Gad FA Afe os fee fe I 37-5, fidtora, He 3) sachaa rang na utrai jo sach ratay liv laa-ay. This True Color shall not fade away, for those who are attuned to His Love.
ad As se Ga HOH Fs 3 UTE Il (37-6, faster, we 3)
chaaray kundaa bhav thakay manmukh boojh na paa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs grow weary of wandering around in all four directions, but they do not understand.
fan Afsag AS A HS AS Fate ANTE ISI 37-6, frdtera, He 3)
jis satgur maylay so milai sachai sabad samaaz-ay. ||3]||
One who is united with the True Guru, meets and merges in the True Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
fly wed afs aot Hat By are AfE II (37-7, frdtoa, He 3)
mitar ghanayray kar thakee mayraa dukh kaatai ko-ay.
I have grown weary of making so many friends, hoping that someone might be able to end my suffering.
ffs Uisu vy afenr Rafe firesret ofE II (37-7, fadtera, He 3)
mil pareetam dukh kati-aa sabad milaavaa ho-ay.
Meeting with my Beloved, my suffering has ended; I have attained Union with the Word of the Shabad.
Ay ude AY OH I AS At AE Il (37-8, fidtora, He 3)
sach khatnaa sach raas hai sachay sachee so-ay.
Earning Truth, and accumulating the Wealth of Truth, the truthful person gains a reputation of Truth.
Afs fxs Ao feesfs aoa Tenfe HE ieiénucll (37-8, fadtea, v2 3)
sach milay say na vichhurheh naanak gurmukh ho-ay. ||4||26||59||
Meeting with the True One, O Nanak, the Gurmukh shall not be separated from Him again. ||4||26]|59]|
frrstaat HIS 3 Il (37-9) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
nm} age aes ad fqnfe Fe orf Curfe i (37-9, fidtea, v8 3)
aapay kaaran kartaa karay sarisat daykhai aap upaa-ay.
The Creator Himself created the Creation; He produced the Universe, and He Himself watches over it.
Hs ea fea ease niwy 3 ofr ATE I 37-9, fasta, He 3) sabh ayko ik varatdaa alakh na lakhi-aa jaa-ay. The One and Only Lord is pervading and permeating all. The Unseen cannot be seen.
nm yg efenig Tmt ef geste i (37-10, fasta, v2 3) aapay parabhoo da-i-aal hai aapay day-ay bujhaa-ay. God Himself is Merciful; He Himself bestows understanding.
asHst Ae Hie efror vfs gd fee Be All (37-10, frdtera, ve 3)
gurmatee sad man vasi-aa sach rahay liv laa-ay. ||1]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, the True One dwells forever in the mind of those who remain lovingly attached to Him. ||1]|
Ho Hd As at Hfe S SATE I 37-11, fatwa, ve 3) man mayray gur kee man lai rajaa-ay. O my mind, surrender to the Guru's Will.
Ho 36 ASS AS aM oH ZA nfo mrfe NA TIE I 7-11, faetea, He 3)
man tan seetal sabh thee-ai naam vasai man aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Mind and body are totally cooled and soothed, and the Naam comes to dwell in the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
fafs afs age ofan Het ATS aSfe Il (37-12, fadtera, He 3) jin kar kaaran Dhaari-aa so-ee saar karay-i. Having created the creation, He supports it and takes care of it.
qd a Wate ueteha AT nm Seta age I 37-12, fatwa, we 3)
gur kai sabad pachhaanee-ai jaa aapay nadar karay-i.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is realized, when He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
A Ho Aad Ave fas Ad veete Il (37-13, fadtoa, H: 3) say jan sabday sohnay tit sachai darbaar. Those who are beautifully adorned with the Shabad in the Court of the True Lord
qanfy Ad Aafe gs vif HS agate IQ 7-13, faster, 2 3) gurmukh sachai sabad ratay aap maylay kartaar. ||2||
-those Gurmukhs are attuned to the True Word of the Shabad; the Creator unites them with Himself. ||2]|
TIHSt A Heder fAA ST nis B users | (37-14, fadtea, vs 3) gurmatee sach salaahnaa jis daa ant na paaraavaar. Through the Guru's Teachings, praise the True One, who has no end or limitation.
ufe wife wmt gat ZA Jan ad ates Il (37-14, fidtera, He 3)
ghat ghat aapay hukam vasai hukmay karay beechaar.
He dwells in each and every heart, by the Hukam of His Command; by His Hukam, we contemplate Him.
ad Aaet werd IGH fess afF i 37-15, frdtoa, ve 3)
gur sabdee salaahee-ai ha-umai vichahu kho-ay.
So praise Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and drive out egotism from within.
AUS oe adel meaedst SfF Sil (37-15, firdtoa, ne 3) saa Dhan naavai baahree avganvantee ro-ay. ||3]| That soul-bride who lacks the Lord's Name acts without virtue, and so she grieves.
[131] Ag Aodt Afs war Ad ane feufs oF i 37-16, firdtora, ne 3)
sach salaahee sach lagaa sachai naa-ay taripat ho-ay. Praising the True One, attached to the True One, I am satisfied with the True Name.
Ge od Te AT meas ae GE | 37-16, firdtorg, ne 3)
gun veechaaree gun sangrahaa avgun kadhaa Dho-ay.
Contemplating His Virtues, I accumulate virtue and merit; I wash myself clean of demerits.
nm vfs fronfeer fefs teat a SE I (37-17, fidtea, He 3) aapay mayl milaa-idaa fir vaychhorhaa na ho-ay. He Himself unites us in His Union; there is no more separation.
Soa TT Ard niruar fre uret ys AE usiQougoll (37-17, fdtoa, v3 3) naanak gur saalaahee aapnaa jidoo paa-ee parabh so-ay. ||4||27||60|| O Nanak, I sing the Praises of my Guru; through Him, I find that God. ||4||27]|60]|
frdtaat HIS 3 Il (37-18) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Hfe Afe aH TIS fomr vats sa Bate I (37-18, fidtea, vs 3)
sun sun kaam gahaylee-ay ki-aa chaleh baah ludaa-ay.
Listen, listen, O soul-bride: you are overtaken by sexual desire-why do you walk like that, swinging your arms in joy?
nua fug o ustedt fom ug SAO ATE I (37-18, frdtea, He 3)
aapnaa pir na pachhaanhee ki-aa muhu dayseh jaa-ay.
You do not recognize your own Husband Lord! When you go to Him, what face will you show Him?
frot AYT a3 uetfemr JG fs5 a was ute Il (37-19, fadtera, nH 3) jinee sakhee™ kant pachhaani-aa ha-o tin kai laaga-o paa-ay. I touch the feet of my sister soul-brides who have known their Husband Lord.
faa dt at at oo AsHafs nfs forte Nall 37-19, fadtea, He 3)
tin hee jaisee thee rahaa satsangat mayl milaa-ay. ||1]|
If only I could be like them! Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I am united in His Union. ||1]|
UST Bt Ha af vot afsorfs i (38-1, factors, ws 3)
munDhay koorh muthee koorhi-aar. O woman, the false ones are being cheated by falsehood.
fug ys ATS get urs ae Sterfa Wal TIS Il Gs8-1, frstoa, Hs 3)
pir parabh saachaa sohnaa paa-ee-ai gur beechaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God is your Husband; He is Handsome and True. He is obtained by reflecting upon the Guru. ||1||Pause| |
HoHfe as 3 uetset fsa fas df= feafe i 38-2, fadtea, He 3)
manmukh kant na pachhaan-ee tin ki-o rain vihaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not recognize their Husband Lord; how will they spend their life-night?
Teta midi fret Fats ey uefa EA SMe Il (38-2, frdtora, we 3)
garab atee-aa tarisnaa jaleh dukh paavahi doojai bhaa-ay.
Filled with arrogance, they burn with desire; they suffer in the pain of the love of duality.
Rafe sion Aoset fsa fees IBN ATE I Gs-3, fidtora, He 3)
sabad ratee-aa sohaaganee tin vichahu ha-umai jaa-ay.
The happy soul-brides are attuned to the Shabad; their egotism is eliminated from within.
Re fug wefo mua fsa Ae AfY feat= i211 Gs-3, firstea, He 3)
Sadaa pir raaveh aapnaa tinaa sukhay sukh vihaa-ay. ||2||
They enjoy their Husband Lord forever, and their life-night passes in the most blissful peace. ||2||
fami feget fuse ustor fusu o urfeor afe il (38-4, fdtera, He 3)
gi-aan vihoonee pir mutee-aa piram na paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
She is utterly lacking in spiritual wisdom; she is abandoned by her Husband Lord. She cannot obtain His Love.
mifemre Hat vids J fae fue fa su 5 ATE II (38-5, fadtora, He 3)
agi-aan matee anDhayr hai bin pir daykhay bhukh na jaa-ay.
In the darkness of intellectual ignorance, she cannot see her Husband, and her hunger does not depart.
neg fires Hosts H fug to frorfe I 38-5, firdtora, He 3) aavhu milhu sahayleeho mai pir dayh milaa-ay. Come and meet with me, my sister soul-brides, and unite me with my Husband.
ud ata Afsag fxs fug ufenr Afs AHS SI (38-6, frstera, we 3)
poorai bhaag satgur milai pir paa-i-aa sach samaa-ay. ||3] |
She who meets the True Guru, by perfect good fortune, finds her Husband; she is absorbed in the True One. ||3]|
A Adm Aoset fro ag aefa adfe I (38-6, fadtea, He 3) say sahee-aa sohaaganee jin ka-o nadar karay-i. Those upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace become His happy soul-brides.
UAH UsTefs nTuSt 3G HS ora SfE I Gs-7, fidtora, He 3)
khasam pachhaaneh aapnaa tan man aagai day-ay.
One who recognizes her Lord and Master places her body and mind in offering before Him.
ufs zg ufenr nmuer IH Ufs aafe Il (8-7, firdtoa, v3 3) ghar var paa-i-aa aapnaa ha-umai door karay-i. Within her own home, she finds her Husband Lord; her egotism is dispelled.
Sod Astesor Aoaat nisfes safs ase SNIAcuEl (38-8, fastera, He 3)
naanak sobhaavantee-aa sohaaganee an-din bhagat karay-i. ||4||28]|61]||
O Nanak, the happy soul-brides are embellished and exalted; night and day they are absorbed in devotional worship. ||4||28]|61]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (38-8)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
fefa fug wefs nue a8 a efs ue ATE I (8-8, fasta, we 3) ik pir raaveh aapnaa ha-o kai dar poochha-o jaa-ay. Some enjoy their Husband Lord; unto whose door should I go to ask for Him?
Afsag Aet we afs H fus ta fofe I (38-9, fadtera, He 3) satgur sayvee bhaa-o kar mai pir dayh milaa-ay. I serve my True Guru with love, that He may lead me to Union with my Husband Lord.
~ AN
Ag Cure nmi 28 fan 3s fan vfs il Gs-9, frdtoa, v3 3)
sabh upaa-ay aapay vaykhai kis nayrhai kis door.
He created all, and He Himself watches over us. Some are close to Him, and some are far away.
fate fg Hat wer fg ae FET Jefe WAI (38-10, firstora, we 3)
jin pir sangay jaani-aa pir raavay sadaa hadoor. ||1||
She who knows her Husband Lord to be always with her, enjoys His Constant Presence. ||1]||
Ho 3 Ve Ts a STE I (38-10, frstora, we 3) munDhay too chal gur kai bhaa-ay. O woman, you must walk in harmony with the Guru's Will.
mates Teta fug nua ATA As ANTE NAN TIS Il Gs-11, frdtea, v2 3)
an-din raaveh pir aapnaa sehjay sach samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Night and day, you shall enjoy your Husband, and you shall intuitively merge into the True One. ||1]||Pause] |
Rafe gsiur Aol Ad Aafe Aterfs i (38-11, fadtea, He 3)
sabad ratee-aa sohaaganee sachai sabad seegaar.
Attuned to the Shabad, the happy soul-brides are adorned with the True Word of the Shabad.
dfs zg ufefs uifa wrué aa & 3fS fimrfe il 3-12, fidtoa, He 3) har var paa-in ghar aapnai gur kai hayt pi-aar. Within their own home, they obtain the Lord as their Husband, with love for the Guru.
An Ast ofa df ge safs sd FT I (38-12, fadtea, ue 3)
sayj sSuhaavee har rang ravai bhagat bharay bhandaar.
Upon her beautiful and cozy bed, she enjoys the Love of her Lord. She is overflowing with the treasure of devotion.
Aus utsy nfs =A fa ASA ME meg II Gs-13, fadtea, ne 3) SO parabh pareetam man vasai je sabhsai day-ay aDhaar. ||2|| That Beloved God abides in her mind; He gives His Support to all. ||2]|
fug Werafs nruet fsa a I Ae Sfeas WE II (33-13, fadtea, He 3) pir saalaahan aapnaa tin kai ha-o sad balihaarai jaa-o. I am forever a sacrifice to those who praise their Husband Lord.
HO 36 maut fhe tet foo a oar ute Il (38-14, fata, v2 3) man tan arpee sir day-ee tin kai laagaa paa-ay. I dedicate my mind and body to them, and give my head as well; I fall at their feet.
frat fea uetfeur gat aS yore il (38-14, fretea, He 3) jinee ik pachhaani-aa doojaa bhaa-o chukaa-ay. Those who recognize the One renounce the love of duality.
TaHfy oH usrehh area Afe AHS NSNQCNEQI (38-15, fasta, He 3)
gurmukh naam pachhaanee-ai naanak sach samaa-ay. ||3||29]||62| | The Gurmukh recognizes the Naam, O Nanak, and is absorbed into the True One. [13] 129]|62]|
frdtaa HIG 3 Il (38-16)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
ofs Ft Aa AY 3 AS fas 3d sl (38-16, factors, ws 3) har jee sachaa sach too sabh kichh tayrai cheerai. O Dear Lord, You are the Truest of the True. All things are in Your Power.
wu wants sane fed fag Ta FS uts I (38-16, fates, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh tarasday firay bin gur bhaytay peerai.
The 8.4 million species of beings wander around searching for You, but without the Guru, they do not find You.
dfs MG sar aufA we AY Ae ASS I (38-17, frdtoa, ws 3) har jee-o bakhsay bakhas la-ay sookh sadaa sareerai. When the Dear Lord grants His Forgiveness, this human body finds lasting peace.
qd UdAS AZ aAdt AY als aasts NA (38-17, fate, He 3) gur parsaadee sayv karee sach gahir gambheerai. ||1]|| By Guru's Grace, I serve the True One, who is Immeasurably Deep and Profound.
[21
Ho Hd STH JS AY SE Il (38-18, fist, 2 3) man mayray naam ratay sukh ho-ay. O my mind, attuned to the Naam, you shall find peace.
TIS oH AShat sa neg 3 af ual TS il s-is, frstea, we 3) gurmatee naam salaahee-ai doojaa avar na ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and praise the Naam; there is no other at all. ||1]|Pause] |
UeH af 6 Jan ¢d afs Ae OaH Mets Il (38-18, firdtea, He 3)
Dharam raa-ay no hukam hai bahi sachaa Dharam beechaar.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma, by the Hukam of God's Command, sits and administers True Justice.
en ate gAS wSH Gg Sat AsaTT Il (38-19, firdtora, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay dusat aatmaa oh tayree sarkaar. Those evil souls, ensnared by the love of duality, are subject to Your Command.
mfonrsnt ofs ae aA Hfs Aufs Sa Ha Il (38-19, fadtea, He 3)
aDhi-aatmee har gun taas man jaapeh ayk muraar.
The souls on their spiritual journey chant and meditate within their minds on the One Lord, the Treasure of Excellence.
yar au fso at AS aH ae ad Us ASSISTS III (39-1, faster, we 3)
tin kee sayvaa Dharam raa-ay karai Dhan savaaranhaar. ||2|| The Righteous Judge of Dharma serves them; blessed is the Lord who adorns them.
21 | Ho & faars Hota sa His ga HT mifsHTe I (39-1, fardtora, H: 3)
man kay bikaar maneh tajai man chookai moh abhimaan. One who eliminates mental wickedness from within the mind, and casts out emotional attachment and egotistical pride,
MSH IH Ustent AOA STH AHS Il (39-2, fdtea, He 3) aatam raam pachhaani-aa sehjay naam samaan. comes to recognize the All-pervading Soul, and is intuitively absorbed into the Naam.
fas Afsas nafs 5 uh Houfa fed fees Il (39-2, fidtera, nH: 3)
bin satgur mukat na paa-ee-ai manmukh firai divaan.
Without the True Guru, the self-willed manmukhs do not find liberation; they wander around like lunatics.
Hae 3 dts agat seat ad fafimr ufo ATS ISI (39-3, fadtea, He 3)
sabad na cheenai kathnee badnee karay bikhi-aa maahi samaan. ||3]||
They do not contemplate the Shabad; engrossed in corruption, they utter only empty words. ||3]|
Ag fag wrt orf 3 ga meg o AE Il (39-4, farstora, He 3) sabh kichh aapay aap hai doojaa avar na ko-ay. He Himself is everything; there is no other at all.
fA@ sore f3@ soba a orfu gore AE II (39-4, fata, He 3) ji-o bolaa-ay ti-o bolee-ai jaa aap bulaa-ay so-ay. I speak just as He makes me speak, when He Himself makes me speak.
qoufa wat gon 3 Aafe fore ofF I 9-5, fdtora, ve 3) gurmukh banee barahm hai sabad milaavaa ho-ay. The Word of the Gurmukh is God Himself. Through the Shabad, we merge in Him.
aoa oH AHS 3 fag Afen AY SE sis0nesil (39-5, frdtoa, ws 3) naanak naam samaal too jit sayvi-ai sukh ho-ay. ||4]|30||63]| O Nanak, remember the Naam; serving Him, peace is obtained. ||4||30||63]|
firstaat HIS 3 Il (39-6) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
fat ICH He ey ue He walt eA STE Il 9-6, fora, 3 3)
jag ha-umai mail dukh paa-i-aa mal laagee doojai bhaa-ay.
The world is polluted with the filth of egotism, suffering in pain. This filth sticks to them because of their love of duality.
HS ICH ast fae 5 Cad A AG Stee oF Il (39-6, fadtea, we 3)
mal ha-umai Dhotee kivai na utrai jay sa-o tirath naa-ay.
This filth of egotism cannot be washed away, even by taking cleansing baths at hundreds of sacred shrines.
ag fafa ag cored vet HS ait wife Il (39-7, frstea, ve 3) baho biDh karam kamaavday doonee mal laagee aa-ay. Performing all sorts of rituals, people are smeared with twice as much filth.
ufant HE 3 Bse us famrstor we Wl (39-7, frdtora, He 3) parhi-ai mail na utrai poochhahu gi-aanee-aa jaa-ay. ||1|| This filth is not removed by studying. Go ahead, and ask the wise ones. ||1] |
Ho He Ad Aefs wre St feans fe Il (39-8, fidtera, He 3)
man mayray gur saran aavai taa nirmal ho-ay.
O my mind, coming to the Sanctuary of the Guru, you shall become immaculate and pure.
HOH dfs dfs afs aa HS o Hat af NA JIE Il (39-8, faster, He 3)
manmukh har har kar thakay mail na sakee Dho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The self-willed manmukhs have grown weary of chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, but their filth cannot be removed. ||1]||Pause] |
Hfs HS sats 3 Jeet ao ufenr ATE II 39-9, fadtea, He 3)
man mailai bhagat na hova-ee naam na paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
With a polluted mind, devotional service cannot be performed, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, cannot be obtained.
HOHY HS HS HE Wale ufS gets il (39-9, faster, ve 3) manmukh mailay mailay mu-ay jaasan pat gavaa-ay. The filthy, self-willed manmukhs die in filth, and they depart in disgrace.
ae usATet His ZA HS ICH ATE ANTE II (39-10, fadtera, He 3)
gur parsaadee man vasai mal ha-umai jaa-ay samaa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to abide in the mind, and the filth of egotism is dispelled.
fag vids dua som fC as fomrfs umifamirg safe 211 (9-10, fata, He 3) ji-o anDhayrai deepak baalee-ai ti-o gur gi-aan agi-aan tajaa-ay. ||2]| Like a lamp lit in the darkness, the spiritual wisdom of the Guru dispels ignorance.
21 |
TH oho TH ATTA TH HIM Wes Il (39-11, fretoa, He 3) ham kee-aa ham karhagay ham moorakh gaavaar. "I have done this, and I will do that"-I am an idiotic fool for saying this!
age ser fenfeur en ate fimrg i (39-12, frdtora, v8 3) karnai vaalaa visri-aa doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar. I have forgotten the Doer of all; I am caught in the love of duality.
Her Aes wu odt Afs sf aa AAT I (39-12, fadtea, He 3)
maa-i-aa jayvad dukh nahee sabh bhav thakay sansaar.
There is no pain as great as the pain of Maya; it drives people to wander all around the world, until they become exhausted.
TaHst AY ure AY oH Gs ofe SII (39-12, frdtoa, He 3) gurmatee sukh paa-ee-ai sach naam ur Dhaar. ||3]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, peace is found, with the True Name enshrined in the heart. ||3]]|
fan 6 HS A fe 3G fan afeod WE II (39-13, fadtea, ne 3) jis no maylay so milai ha-o tis balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who meet and merge with the Lord.
= HO Saat dsor AG set fon FS Il 9-13, firdtea, He 3)
ay man bhagtee rati-aa sach banee nij thaa-o.
This mind is attuned to devotional worship; through the True Word of Gurbani, it finds its own home.
Hfs 33 fave ost offs TE AS AES Il (39-14, frst, ve 3)
man ratay jinvaa ratee har gun sachay gaa-o.
With the mind so imbued, and the tongue imbued as well, sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Soa OTH © Sind Ad Nfs ANTE ISNSAUESI (39-14, faStea, He 3) naanak naam na veesrai sachay maahi samaa-o. ||4||31||64| O Nanak, never forget the Naam; immerse yourself in the True One. ||4||31]|64]|
frdtaa HIG 8 we 4 Il (39-15) sireeraag mehlaa 4 ghar 1. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl, First House:
H nfs 3fe faag ofS nro fa utsy fas wife mrf& i (39-15, fidtera, v8 4)
mai man tan birahu at aglaa ki-o pareetam milai ghar aa-ay.
Within my mind and body is the intense pain of separation; how can my Beloved come to meet me in my home?
weer ys nmuar ufs efiot we ATE II (39-16, firétora, He 4) jaa daykhaa parabh aapnaa parabh daykhi-ai dukh jaa-ay. When I see my God, seeing God Himself, my pain is taken away.
wf ua fs Ane ys fas fafa fxs firerfe Na Go-16, fadtea, v8 4) jaa-ay puchhaa tin sajnaa parabh kit biDh milai milaa-ay. ||1]||
I go and ask my friends, "How can I meet and merge with God?"||1]| He Afsaa A 3s fag meg 3 afe II (39-17, fadtora, He 4)
mayray satiguraa mai tujh bin avar na ko-ay. O my True Guru, without You I have no other at all.
JH Hay Ham AsSTast afs fas AS of AE ua TIS il (39-17, firdtora, ws 4)
ham moorakh mugaDh sarnaagatee kar kirpaa maylay har so-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am foolish and ignorant; I seek Your Sanctuary. Please be Merciful and unite me with the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsag ws ofa om a ys urfu flere AE II (39-18, fiesta, He 4)
satgur daataa har naam kaa parabh aap milaavai so-ay.
The True Guru is the Giver of the Name of the Lord. God Himself causes us to meet Him.
Afsafe of us sfsor ag Aes nied 3 AfE II (39-18, fidtoa, He 4) satgur har parabh bujhi-aa gur jayvad avar na ko-ay. The True Guru understands the Lord God. There is no other as Great as the Guru.
u@ ag Aeeet vfs us ate efor AS ys AE NQI (39-19, fidtora, He 4)
ha-o gur sarnaa-ee dheh pavaa kar da-i-aa maylay parabh so-ay. ||2||
I have come and collapsed in the Guru's Sanctuary. In His Kindness, He has united me with God. ||2]|
Hodte fas 5 ufeur afs Cure aa AS Afe I (39-19, fadtera, He 4) manhath kinai na paa-i-aa kar upaav thakay sabh ko-ay. No one has found Him by stubborn-mindedness. All have grown weary of the effort.
ust BO HOA froreu afs ad nfs ad dao ofE tl (40-1, fastora, He 4) sahas si-aanap kar rahay man korai rang na ho-ay.
Thousands of clever mental tricks have been tried, but still, the raw and undisciplined mind does not absorb the Color of the Lord's Love.
afs aufe fas o ute a att ure APE SI (40-1, frdtora, v2 4) koorh kapat kinai na paa-i-o jo beejai khaavai so-ay. ||3]| By falsehood and deception, none have found Him. Whatever you plant, you shall eat.
[I3I|
Ago Sot uA ys AS thet 33 F TAA Il (40-2, fidtora, we 4) sabhnaa tayree aas parabh sabh jee-a tayray too” raas. O God, You are the Hope of all. All beings are Yours; You are the Wealth of all.
ys sug wet & odt efs aoe SB ATAAA I (40-2, fdtorg, ne 4)
parabh tuDhhu khaalee ko nahee dar gurmukhaa no saabaas.
O God, none return from You empty-handed; at Your Door, the Gurmukhs are praised and acclaimed.
fay s@no sae afe & Ho aoa at maetH ISNAUNEUI (40-3, fAdtea, He 4)
bikh bha-ojal dubday kadh lai jan naanak kee ardaas. ||4||1]|65] |
In the terrifying world-ocean of poison, people are drowning-please lift them up and save them! This is servant Nanak's humble prayer. ||4]|1||65]|
frrstaar HIS g Il (40-4) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
on fixe Ho fuse fas on foo Fhe I 40-4, facta, ve 4) naam milai man taripat-ee-ai bin naamai Dharig jeevaas. Receiving the Naam, the mind is satisfied; without the Naam, life is cursed.
aet asf AAS FA AHS HBA UT TSSA Il (40-4, fetes, ve 4)
ko-ee gurmukh sajan jay milai mai dasay parabh guntaas.
If I meet the Gurmukh, my Spiritual Friend, he will show me God, the Treasure of Excellence.
u@ fan fees 3G daha HON AP UTA INA (40-5, fadtera, 2 4) ha-o tis vitahu cha-o khannee-ai mai naam karay pargaas. ||1]| I am every bit a sacrifice to one who reveals to me the Naam. ||1]|
He ufsur g@ tet omy ferrfe i (40-5, fiesta, ve 4) mayray pareetamaa ha-o jeevaa naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my Beloved, I live by meditating on Your Name.
fag ae dies o dha AS Afsag on feat nan gre it (40-6, fdtora, ve 4)
bin naavai jeevan naa thee-ai mayray satgur naam drirh-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without Your Name, my life does not even exist. My True Guru has implanted the Naam within me. ||1]|Pause| |
oH MHBa TIS FT US AfsaT UTA II (40-6, firdtora, ws 4) naam amolak ratan hai pooray satgur paas. The Naam is a Priceless Jewel; it is with the Perfect True Guru.
Afsag Ae ofr afe sq FS usertA I (40-7, facto, ve 4)
satgur sayvai lagi-aa kadh ratan dayvai pargaas.
When one is enjoined to serve the True Guru, He brings out this Jewel and bestows this enlightenment.
U9 east es aeuer A ure fs ae uth QU (40-7, fadtea, He 4)
Dhan vadbhaagee vad bhaagee-aa jo aa-ay milay gur paas. ||2||
Blessed, and most fortunate of the very fortunate, are those who come to meet the Guru. ||2||
frat Afsag use 6 sfeG A aradte Sth are Il (40-8, fates, v2 4)
jinaa satgur purakh na bhayti-o say bhaagheen vas kaal.
Those who have not met the Primal Being, the True Guru, are most unfortunate, and are subject to death.
6fe fefs fefs rife sercinifs fefe ferret afs fears Il (40-8, fiadtora, v2 4)
o-ay fir fir jon bhavaa-ee-ah vich vistaa kar vikraal.
They wander in reincarnation over and over again, as the most disgusting maggots in manure.
Gor uh eurin 3 fact fro nists ao ss WI (40-9, fadtera, v2 4)
Onaa paas du-aas na bhitee-ai jin antar kroDh chandaal. ||3]||
Do not meet with, or even approach those people, whose hearts are filled with horrible anger. ||3]|
Afsag use nifys Ag esarat arefa mete i (40-10, firdtora, ve 4)
satgur purakh amrit sar vadbhaagee naaveh aa-ay.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, is the Pool of Ambrosial Nectar. The very fortunate ones come to bathe in it.
Go HOH HOH at He Cad faane on feafe it (40-10, firétora, He 4)
un janam janam kee mail utrai nirmal naam drirh-aa-ay.
The filth of many incarnations is washed away, and the Immaculate Naam is implanted within.
Ho sea BSH ue ufeor Afsag at fee STE ISNNEEl (40-11, fstera, He 4)
jan naanak utam pad paa-i-aa satgur kee liv laa-ay. ||4]|2||66] |
Servant Nanak has obtained the most exalted state, lovingly attuned to the True Guru. [14] 12] |66]|
firstaat HIS 8 Il (40-12) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
Te We qe fear Te sat Ast HE it (40-12, fatwa, ve 4) gun gaavaa gun vithraa gun bolee mayree maa-ay. I sing His Glories, I describe His Glories, I speak of His Glories, O my mother.
Tan Ane Teadior ffs ANE dfs Te ATS i (40-12, faster, ve 4)
gurmukh sajan gunkaaree-aa mil sajan har gun gaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs, my spiritual friends, bestow virtue. Meeting with my spiritual friends, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ots ote ffs sfour sf ves ote ua (40-13, fastera, we 4)
heerai heer mil bayDhi-aa rang chaloolai naa-ay. ||1]||
The Diamond of the Guru has pierced the diamond of my mind, which is now dyed in the deep crimson color of the Name. ||1]|
Sa SS
Ae dfger ge aver feufs ufe aE it (40-13, firdtora, ne 4) mayray govindaa gun gaavaa taripat man ho-ay. O my Lord of the Universe, singing Your Glorious Praises, my mind is satisfied.
nists fmm of on at ag fh frre AE NAN TIS I 40-14, fadtera, He 4)
antar pi-aas har naam kee gur tus milaavai so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Within me is the thirst for the Lord's Name; may the Guru, in His Pleasure, grant it to me. ||1]]Pause| |
HO dad essitd TI Jo" AT UATE Il (40-14, fadteora, He 4)
man rangahu vadbhaageeho gur tuthaa karay pasaa-o.
Let your minds be imbued with His Love, O blessed and fortunate ones. By His Pleasure, the Guru bestows His Gifts.
ag on fere ga fa@ 3G Afsag & af WE I (40-15, firsteoa, He 4)
gur naam drirh-aa-ay rang si-o ha-o satgur kai bal jaa-o. The Guru has lovingly implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me; Iam a sacrifice to the True Guru.
fag vAfsas ofs on 3 wset wy act AGH GE I12I1 (40-15, frdteg, ne 4)
bin satgur har naam na labh-ee lakh kotee karam kamaa-o. ||2]|
Without the True Guru, the Name of the Lord is not found, even though people may perform hundreds of thousands, even millions of rituals. ||2]|
fas oar Afsag o fxs wis dfour feafe fos uth Il (40-16, firdtera, He 4)
bin bhaagaa satgur naa milai ghar baithi-aa nikat nit paas.
Without destiny, the True Guru is not found, even though He sits within the home of our own inner being, always near and close at hand.
nists nifmrs wy san o fete user ofa uetortt il (40-17, fastera, we 4) antar agi-aan dukh bharam hai vich parh-daa door pa-ee-aas. There is ignorance within, and the pain of doubt, like a separating screen.
fag Afsaa se aug of Ut HonY BI gS" Sat UTA BI (40-17, fates, He 4)
bin satgur bhaytay kanchan naa thee-ai manmukh lohu boodaa bayrhee paas. ||3]| Without meeting with the True Guru, no one is transformed into gold. The self-willed manmukh sinks like iron, while the boat is very close. ||3]||
Afsag Sfee ofs oe 3 fas fafa sfsor ate I (40-18, faster, 42 4) satgur bohith har naav hai kit biDh charhi-aa jaa-ay. The Boat of the True Guru is the Name of the Lord. How can we climb on board?
Afsad a we A Ve fete Sioa For wrfe i (40-18, fadtea, He 4) satgur kai bhaanai jo chalai vich bohith baithaa aa-ay. One who walks in harmony with the True Guru's Will comes to sit in this Boat.
Uo Us esa aoa fra Afsag we frofe ususiéoi (40-19, faster, v2 4) Dhan Dhan vadbhaagee naankaa jinaa satgur la-ay milaa-ay. ||4||3]|67||
Blessed, blessed are those very fortunate ones, O Nanak, who are united with the Lord through the True Guru. ||4||3]|67] |
UST 8A
frdtaar HIS 8 Il (41-1) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
o@ ug eAet fos ust act us aA ffs WE I (41-1, firdtora, we 4)
ha-o panth dasaa-ee nit kharhee ko-ee parabh dasay tin jaa-o.
I stand by the wayside and ask the Way. If only someone would show me the Way to God-I would go with him.
frat Hat fumret afer fae ute afar fear@ i (41-1, fastera, 2 4) jinee mayraa pi-aaraa raavi-aa tin peechhai laag firaa-o. I follow in the footsteps of those who enjoy the Love of my Beloved.
afs fiefs afe dest H us fesS a ae A (41-2, fadtea, ne 4) kar minat kar jod-rhee mai parabh milnai kaa chaa-o. ||1]|| I beg of them, I implore them; I have such a yearning to meet God! ||1]|
Ae set For aet H as afe ys Afs feofe i (41-2, fasta, ve 4) mayray bhaa-ee janaa ko-ee mo ka-o har parabh mayl milaa-ay. O my Siblings of Destiny, please unite me in Union with my Lord God.
J@ Afsas feeg afour fafs af ys chor fea] wan TIS i (41-3, frdtora, ne 4) ha-o satgur vitahu vaari-aa jin har parabh dee-aa dikhaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who has shown me the Lord God. ||1||Pause] |
ofe faurat efa ue ys Asa utr il (41-4, firdtora, v3 4) ho-ay nimaanee dheh pavaa pooray satgur paas. In deep humility, I fall at the Feet of the Perfect True Guru.
forfeor ag He J ag Afsag ad ATaTH I (41-4, fasta, He 4)
nimaani-aa gur maan hai gur satgur karay saabaas.
The Guru is the Honor of the dishonored. The Guru, the True Guru, brings approval and applause.
UG ag Wats 5 TAG HHS ate ys UTA MQM (41-5, frdtora, Hs 4) ha-o gur saalaahi na raj-oo mai maylay har parabh paas. ||2]| I am never tired of praising the Guru, who unites me with the Lord God. ||2]|
Afsad 3 AS a Sve AS Aas AS AE I (41-5, faster, ne 4) satgur no sabh ko lochdaa jaytaa jagat sabh ko-ay. Everyone, all over the world, longs for the True Guru.
fas star Bane of dha avadte afe SE il (41-6, fadtera, we 4)
bin bhaagaa darsan naa thee-ai bhaagheen bahi ro-ay.
Without the good fortune of destiny, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is not obtained. The unfortunate ones just sit and cry.
A ofa us oat A dior ofe fatter o He afe ISI (41-6, fadtra, us 4)
jo har parabh bhaanaa so thee-aa Dhur likhi-aa na maytai ko-ay. ||3]|
All things happen according to the Will of the Lord God. No one can erase the pre- ordained Writ of Destiny. ||3]|
mma Afsag »irfu of nmr vfs fete i (41-7, fistora, v2 4) aapay satgur aap har aapay mayl milaa-ay. He Himself is the True Guru; He Himself is the Lord. He Himself unites in His Union.
wify efeor afs HoHt ae Afsas ule ute i (41-7, faster, v2 4) aap da-i-aa kar maylsee gur satgur peechhai paa-ay. In His Kindness, He unites us with Himself, as we follow the Guru, the True Guru.
AS Hants Afa urfu dT aoa AS Hels ANTS ISISNECI (41-8, fates, v2 4) sabh jagjeevan jag aap hai naanak jal jaleh samaa-ay. ||4||4||68]|
Over all the world, He is the Life of the World, O Nanak, like water mingled with water. ||4]|4]|68]|
frrstaat HIS 8 Il (41-9) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
JA vifys on oA ifs sor fas fafa fee oa fe I (41-9, fidtora, He 4)
ras amrit naam ras at bhalaa kit biDh milai ras khaa-ay.
The Essence of the Ambrosial Naam is the most sublime essence; how can I get to taste this essence?
wmf ugg Aoaet SA fae af fifeor ys ore I (41-9, firdtora, ne 4) jaa-ay puchhahu sohaaganee tusaa ki-o kar mili-aa parabh aa-ay. I go and ask the happy soul-brides, "How did you come to meet God?"
Gfe gugeg 3 Sat JE Hf nfs Ge faq ute NA (41-10, fatwa, He 4) O-ay vayparvaah na bolnee ha-o mal mal Dhovaa tin paa-ay. ||1]| They are care-free and do not speak; I massage and wash their feet. ||1]|
amet ¢ fife AAS dfs Te AS I (41-11, fardtea, 2 4)
bhaa-ee ray mil sajan har gun saar.
O Siblings of Destiny, meet with your spiritual friend, and dwell upon the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ane Afsag usy J eu ae GEN Hfe NA TIS I (41-11, fatwa, He 4)
Sajan satgur purakh hai dukh kadhai ha-umai maar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, is your Friend, who shall drive out pain and subdue your ego. ||1||Pause| |
Tandon Aaveret fse efeur ult nfs wrfe i (41-12, fadtera, He 4) gurmukhee-aa sohaaganee tin da-i-aa pa-ee man aa-ay. The Gurmukhs are the happy soul-brides; their minds are filled with kindness.
Afsad ve JSG TF AHS A dfs OA UE I (41-12, fatwa, He 4)
satgur vachan ratann hai jo mannay so har ras khaa-ay.
The Word of the True Guru is the Jewel. One who believes in it tastes the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
A gsa es Webs fae dfs GA we aS STS NM (41-13, firdtea, 2 4)
say vadbhaagee vad jaanee-ahi jin har ras khaaDhaa gur bhaa-ay. ||2]|
Those who partake of the Lord's Sublime Essence, through the Guru's Love, are known as great and very fortunate. ||2]|
feg ofa on efs fafs Aas 3 Sade odt ate I (41-13, fidteora, He 4)
ih har ras van tin sabhat hai bhaagheen nahee khaa-ay.
This Sublime Essence of the Lord is in the forests, in the fields and everywhere, but the unfortunate ones do not taste it.
faa Afsag us of ue HOH dd fame I (41-14, fadtera, He 4)
bin satgur palai naa pavai manmukh rahay billaa-ay.
Without the True Guru, it is not obtained. The self-willed manmukhs continue to cry in misery.
6fe Afsas ore o foets Gor nists ao sere Si (41-14, fidtera, ne 4) o-ay satgur aagai naa niveh onaa antar kroDh balaa-ay. ||3]| They do not bow before the True Guru; the demon of anger is within them. ||3]|
dfs of ofe om vrfy 3 mma afe om Safe II (41-15, fadteora, He 4)
har har har ras aap hai aapay har ras ho-ay.
The Lord Himself, Har, Har, Har, is the Sublime Essence. The Lord Himself is the Essence.
wif efeor afs tert aanfer nifigs sf i 41-16, firdtora, ne 4)
aap da-i-aa kar dayvsee gurmukh amrit cho-ay.
In His Kindness, He blesses the Gurmukh with it; the Ambrosial Nectar of this Amrit trickles down.
HS 36 HO dion dfeur aoa ufe efaor nfs Af NeNUNEetl (41-16, fata, He 4)
sabh tan man hari-aa ho-i-aa naanak har vasi-aa man so-ay. ||4||5||69]|
Then, the body and mind totally blossom forth and flourish; O Nanak, the Lord comes to dwell within the mind. ||4]|5||69]|
frrstaat HIS g Il (41-17) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
feon va fefa nrae df= Aavet we I (41-17, facta, He 4) dinas charhai fir aathvai rain sabaa-ee jaa-ay. The day dawns, and then it ends, and the night passes away.
wie ue og ot gs fats HA OA SATE I (41-17, firstora, ws 4)
aav ghatai nar naa bujhai nit moosaa laaj tukaa-ay.
Man's life is diminishing, but he does not understand. Each day, the mouse of death is gnawing away at the rope of life.
as fot fer unfoer Hone ofa nmdt ud ust Wail (41-18, fidtea, He 4)
gurh mithaa maa-i-aa pasri-aa manmukh lag maakhee pachai pachaa-ay. ||1]| Maya spreads out like sweet molasses; the self-willed manmukh is stuck like a fly, rotting away. ||1]|
aet 3H MS Aer ys ALE II (41-19, fdtera, ne 4) bhaa-ee ray mai meet sakhaa parabh so-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, God is my Friend and Companion.
uz aes Hg fay 3 vif aot afe 3 GE Na TIE It (41-19, fadteora, He 4)
put kalat moh bikh hai ant baylee ko-ay na ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Emotional attachment to children and spouse is poison; in the end, no one will go along with you as your helper. ||1||Pause| |
gents ote fee Gad nifsus gd AGSte I (41-19, fidtera, ve 4)
gurmat har liv ubray alipat rahay sarnaa-ay.
Through the Guru's Teachings, some embrace love for the Lord, and are saved. They remain detached and unaffected, and they find the Sanctuary of the Lord.
usar 82 Gat vee Ae footer sfs use Shor ufs uf i (42-1, fiesta, ve 4) onee chalan sadaa nihaali-aa har kharach lee-aa pat paa-ay.
They keep death constantly before their eyes; they gather the Provisions of the Lord's Name, and receive honor.
dante eased Hobufs af urfy we ales fe i (42-2, fates, ue 4)
gurmukh dargeh manee-ah har aap la-ay gal laa-ay. ||2||
The Gurmukhs are honored in the Court of the Lord. The Lord Himself takes them in His Loving Embrace. ||2]|
TInt & Us udder els oa 6 AST UTE Il (42-2, fadtera, 2 4) gurmukhaa no panth pargataa dar thaak na ko-ee paa-ay. For the Gurmukhs, the Way is obvious. At the Lord's Door, they face no obstructions.
dfs oH Aarts aH ule oth dale fee OTe Il (42-3, frdtea, ns 4)
har naam salaahan naam man naam rahaan liv laa-ay.
They praise the Lord's Name, they keep the Naam in their minds, and they remain attached to the Love of the Naam.
Mode USt efs ene vfs Ad Ast ute Si (42-3, fadtea, He 4)
anhad Dhunee dar vajday dar sachai sobhaa paa-ay. |[3]|
The Unstruck Celestial Music vibrates for them at the Lord's Door, and they are honored at the True Door. |[3]|
frat asHfa ou Refoor faer As a ad ATA Il (42-4, fadtera, v2 4) jinee gurmukh naam sahaali-aa tinaa sabh ko kahai saabaas. Those Gurmukhs who praise the Naam are applauded by everyone.
fae at Hafs efs ys A fea at mraerft it (42-4, firdtorar, ne 4) tin kee sangat deh parabh mai jaachik kee ardaas. Grant me their company, God-I am a beggar; this is my prayer.
soa Sa es fst Tene fro nists oH usgarh ISISSIBSUENION (42-5, fits, He 4)
naanak bhaag vaday tinaa gurmukhaa jin antar naam pargaas. ||4||33||31]|6]|70| | O Nanak, great is the good fortune of those Gurmukhs, who are filled with the Light of the Naam within. ||4]|33]|31]|6]|70]|
frdtaa HIG U We Il (42-6) sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 1. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, First House:
foor 3 ast Of & UZ aG_ Alara Il (42-6, firdtora, ws 5) ki-aa too rataa daykh kai putar kaltar seegaar. Why are you so thrilled by the sight of your son and your beautifully decorated wife?
dA sata ure ats uefa Sa wns Il (42-6, fadtea, He 5) ras bhogeh khusee-aa karahi maaneh rang apaar. You enjoy tasty delicacies, you have lots of fun, and you indulge in endless pleasures.
a3 ads sarfent zosfa df mers i (42-7, fadtera, v2 5) bahut karahi furmaa-isee varteh ho-ay afaar. You give all sorts of commands, and you act so superior.
ags' fofs 5 nreet Hone vit TTS IU (42-7, firdtera, He 5) kartaa chit na aavee manmukh anDh gavaar. ||1|| The Creator does not come into the mind of the blind, idiotic, self-willed manmukh.
[11
He He AYES ofa AE I (42-8, fadtea, He 5) mayray man sukh-daata har so-ay. O my mind, the Lord is the Giver of peace.
qe usr usta aot usufs df nal TICS Il (42-8, fate, ns 5)
gur parsaadee paa-ee-ai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, He is found. By His Mercy, He is obtained. ||1||Pause] |
aufs sfa suetenr Afeor gut ure Il (42-9, fadtera, He 5)
kaparh bhog laptaa-i-aa su-inaa rupaa khaak.
People are entangled in the enjoyment of fine clothes, but gold and silver are only dust.
Jed HSI FT da AS Ta wars Il (42-9, fdtera, v2 5) haivar gaivar baho rangay kee-ay rath athaak. They acquire beautiful horses and elephants, and ornate carriages of many kinds.
fon dt fefs a urect fanfeur AS Are Il (42-10, firdtera, He 5)
kis hee chit na paavhee bisri-aa sabh saak. They think of nothing else, and they forget all their relatives.
franeate sorfeor fee are Bra QM (42-10, fadtera, He 5) Sirjanhaar bhulaa-i-aa vin naavai naapaak. ||2| | They ignore their Creator; without the Name, they are impure. ||2]|
ee we wore F ufenr aafe feas i (42-10, firdioa, v3 5) laidaa bad du-aa-ay too’ maa-i-aa karahi ikat. Gathering the wealth of Maya, you earn an evil reputation.
fan 3 3 ustorfeer AAS 38 yifes il (42-11, factors, ws 5) jis no too’ patee-aa-idaa so san tujhai anit. Those whom you work to please shall pass away along with you.
mdarg ata mardi fenrfimr ue at Hf I (42-11, fadtera, He 5) aha‘kaar karahi aha‘kaaree-aa vi-aapi-aa man kee mat. The egotistical are engrossed in egotism, ensnared by the intellect of the mind.
fate ufs orfu gerfeur a fsH wats 6 ufs ISI (42-12, fadtoa, He 5) tin parabh aap bhulaa-i-aa naa tis jaat na pat. ||3]| One who is deceived by God Himself, has no position and no honor. ||3]|
Afsafe usaf firesfemr feat AA APE II (42-13, fist, 2 5) satgur purakh milaa-i-aa iko sajan so-ay. The True Guru, the Primal Being, has led me to meet the One, my only Friend.
dfs AS at oa Sa TD fomr HEA ICH SE Il (42-1, fate, ne 5)
har jan kaa raakhaa ayk hai ki-aa maanas ha-umai ro-ay.
The One is the Saving Grace of His humble servant. Why should the proud cry out in ego?
A dfs Ho Te A ad ole eg 6 US ALE Il (42-13, fidtea, He 5)
jo har jan bhaavai so karay dar fayr na paavai ko-ay.
As the servant of the Lord wills, so does the Lord act. At the Lord's Door, none of his requests are denied.
Soa Ist fa fs AS Aa vfs Woe HE Nsw (42-14, fasta, ne 5)
naanak rataa rang har sabh jag meh chaanan ho-ay. ||4]|1]|71]| Nanak is attuned to the Love of the Lord, whose Light pervades the entire Universe. 41411721]
frrstaat HIS U Il (42-15)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
His faorn ag da wer ferfe sf yrior il (42-15, fistora, He 5)
man bilaas baho rang ghanaa darisat bhool khusee-aa.
With the mind caught up in playful pleasures, involved in all sorts of amusements and sights that stagger the eyes, people are led astray.
ggurg atenrdbr fetes AGA Usha A (42-15, firdtora, He 5) chhatarDhaar baadisaahee-aa vich sahsay paree-aa. ||1]|| The emperors sitting on their thrones are consumed by anxiety. ||1]|
aet 3 AY ATOAfar urfemr It (42-16, factors, v2 5) bhaa-ee ray sukh saaDhsang paa-i-aa. O Siblings of Destiny, peace is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fofimr 3u fate usta faors ey nom fife afeur an gr il (42-16, fate, we 5) likhi-aa laykh tin purakh biDhaatai dukh sahsaa mit ga-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If the Supreme Lord, the Architect of Destiny, writes such an order, then anguish and anxiety are erased. ||1||Pause] |
aS we a6sm 33 safe mrfeor th (42-17, fadtea, He 5) jaytay thaan banantaraa taytay bhav aa-i-aa. There are so many places-I have wandered through them all.
a6 ust e3 sro At At afs ufsmr QU (42-17, fadtera, He 5)
Dhan paatee vad bhoomee-aa mayree mayree kar pari-aa. ||2||
The masters of wealth and the great land-lords have fallen, crying out, "This is mine! This is mine!"|[2||
Jan vere fora df eas wrefanr I (42-18, fate, v2 5) hukam chalaa-ay nisang ho-ay vartai afri-aa. They issue their commands fearlessly, and act in pride.
AS a& cHals ats wfeSo faa ae wax afer SI (42-18, firdtera, He 5)
sabh ko vasgat kar la-i-on bin naavai khaak rali-aa. ||3]|
They subdue all under their command, but without the Name, they are reduced to dust. |[3]]|
afe 33m Azo faa wfos efe afar Il (42-19, fadtera, 42 5)
kot taytees sayvkaa siDh saaDhik dar khari-aa.
Even those who are served by the 33 million angelic beings, at whose door the Siddhas and the Saadhus stand,
fadadt 2s ATS AS soa AUS Sha USNVWOVM (42-19, fadtea, He 5)
girambaaree vad saahbee sabh naanak supan thee-aa. ||4||2||72|| who live in wondrous affluence and rule over mountains, oceans and vast dominions- O Nanak, in the end, all this vanishes like a dream! ||4]|2||72]|
Uar 83 frstaat HIS U Il (43-1
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
soa Cfs uusha fee 33 yao mrrfs I (43-1, fst, He 5)
bhalkay uth papolee-ai vin bujhay mugaDh ajaan.
Arising each day, you cherish your body, but you are idiotic, ignorant and without understanding.
A us fats o onfeé seat dats i (43-2, firdtora, ne 5) so parabh chit na aa-i-o chhutaigee baybaan. You are not conscious of God, and your body shall be cast into the wilderness.
Afsas ASt fas ofe Ae HET Sa HE A (43-2, fidtoa, He 5) satgur saytee chit laa-ay sadaa sadaa rang maan. ||1|| Focus your consciousness on the True Guru; you shall enjoy bliss forever and ever.
[2
yrat 3 nrfenr wrar SFs I (43-3, firdtora, ws 5) paraanee too” aa-i-aa laahaa lain. O mortal, you came here to earn a profit.
Ba fas ceas AS Hat vot Sf= wai ToS I (43-3, fadtera, He 5) lagaa kit khufkarhay sabh mukdee chalee rain. ||1|| rahaa-o.
What useless activities are you attached to? Your life-night is coming to its end. ||1]|Pause] |
eH ad uA Udo feR rst aw I (43-3, fidtera, ne 5) kudam karay pas pankhee-aa disai naahee kaal. The animals and the birds frolic and play-they do not see death.
63 afa ney do aver aefenr aris i (43-4, fadtera, He 5) otai saath manukh hai faathaa maa-i-aa jaal. Mankind is also with them, trapped in the net of Maya.
Has Ret semis fa AST OH ANTS MQM (43-4, firdtera, He 5) muktay say-ee bhaalee-ah je sachaa naam samaal. ||2| |
Those who always remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are considered to be liberated. ||2||
A wg efs TeSet A Ga Ho HT Il (43-5, fadtera, He 5)
jo ghar chhad gavaavnaa so lagaa man maahi.
That dwelling which you will have to abandon and vacate-you are attached to it in your mind.
faa wf so zase fan at feat ofa Il (43-5, fate, ne 5) jithai jaa-ay tuDh vartanaa tis kee chintaa naahi. And that place where you must go to dwell-you have no regard for it at all.
aq Ast foas fa ae at Ust us SI (43-6, fadtera, 2 5) faathay say-ee niklay je gur kee pairee paahi. ||3]| Those who fall at the Feet of the Guru are released from this bondage. ||3]||
aet oft a Hee A at o feats il (43-6, frsterar, we 5) ko-ee rakh na sak-ee doojaa ko na dikhaa-ay. No one else can save you-don't look for anyone else.
ad ast ate a urfe ufeor AgeSte I (43-7, fadtea, He 5) chaaray kundaa bhaal kai aa-ay pa-i-aa sarnaa-ay. I have searched in all four directions; I have come to find His Sanctuary.
Soa Ae uUlsAts seet Sent ASE ISiBiOBi (43-7, fadtea, He 5)
naanak sachai paatisaah dubdaa la-i-aa kadhaa-ay. ||4]|3]|73]| O Nanak, the True King has pulled me out and saved me from drowning! ||4]|3]|73]|
frrstaat HIS U Il (43-8) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Wat HIS A UTS AH ASIST Il (43-8, fistera, He 5) gharhee muhat kaa paahunaa kaaj savaaranhaar. For a brief moment, man is a guest of the Lord; he tries to resolve his affairs.
Hfenr arf feurfimit AHS ont aera Il (43-8, fidtera, v2 5) maa-i-aa kaam vi-aapi-aa samjhai naahee gaavaar. Engrossed in Maya and sexual desire, the fool does not understand.
Cfs sfeur ugar ufo fh Hers NU (43-9, fadtera, He 5)
uth chali-aa pachhutaa-i-aa pari-aa vas jandaar. ||1]|
He arises and departs with regret, and falls into the clutches of the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
oN oS
nid S aor att uta i (43-9, firdtora, He 5) anDhay too™ baithaa kanDhee paahi. You are sitting on the collapsing riverbank-are you blind?
A dat yota fetter st as at gas aT NU TIS ll (43-10, firsts, v3 5) jay hovee poorab likhi-aa taa gur kaa bachan kamaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. If you are so pre-destined, then act according to the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|Pause] |
Jdt St od Sod Uat FEST Il (43-10, fasta, v2 5) haree naahee nah daduree pakee vadhanhaar. The Reaper does not look upon any as unripe, half-ripe or fully ripe.
& 8 ws udfsor we af sere Il (43-11, fdtoa, we 5) lai lai daat pahuti-aa laavay kar ta-ee-aar. Picking up and wielding their sickles, the harvesters arrive.
Ww out gan fagrre ot ot ofe fiifeur Ass NN (43-11, firdtera, He 5) jaa ho-aa hukam kirsaan daa taa lun mini-aa khaytaar. ||2|| When the landlord gives the order, they cut and measure the crop. ||2||
ufos ude Uo afeor en ste Afemr i (43-12, firdtora, v8 5)
pahilaa pahar DhanDhai ga-i-aa doojai bhar so-i-aa.
The first watch of the night passes away in worthless affairs, and the second passes in deep sleep.
ath stu surfer ve sg sfemr Il (43-12, fadtea, ne 5)
teejai jhaakh jhakhaa-i-aa cha-uthai bhor bha-i-aa.
In the third, they babble nonsense, and when the fourth watch comes, the day of death has arrived.
ae dt fats o omfe6 fafs at@ flix dor ai (43-12, faster, He 5) kad hee chit na aa-i-o jin jee-o pind dee-aa. ||3|| The thought of the One who bestows body and soul never enters the mind. ||3]|
AUHats a Sfoor Ae aot agHeE Il (43-13, fidtora, v2 5)
saaDhsangat ka-o vaari-aa jee-o kee-aa kurbaan.
I am devoted to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I sacrifice my soul to them.
fan 3 ASt Hfe uct fifer use BATS I (43-14, fdtora, He 5)
jis tay sojhee man pa-ee mili-aa purakh sujaan.
Through them, understanding has entered my mind, and I have met the All-knowing Lord God.
Sod fsor Het of ais nize WE ISISIDBIl (43-14, fidtoa, He 5)
naanak dithaa sadaa naal har antarjaamee jaan. ||4||4||74|| Nanak sees the Lord always with him-the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||4]|4]|74]|
frstaat HIS U Il (43-15)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
AS aes fende fea fenfa o WE I (43-15, fadtera, He 5) sabhay galaa visran iko visar na jaa-o. Let me forget everything, but let me not forget the One Lord.
um Ag Fete & afs om cor Ag AME I (43-15, firétoa, ne 5)
DhanDhaa sabh jalaa-ay kai gur naam dee-aa sach su-aa-o.
All my evil pursuits have been burnt away; the Guru has blessed me with the Naam, the true object of life.
MAT AS of a fear wT ANTE Il (43-16, faster, He 5) aasaa sabhay laahi kai ikaa aas kamaa-o. Give up all other hopes, and rely on the One Hope.
frat Afsag Afeor fae wrat fifemr aS ail (43-16, fasta, v2 5) jinee satgur sayvi-aa tin agai mili-aa thaa-o. ||1]| Those who serve the True Guru receive a place in the world hereafter. ||1]||
Ho Ae ads S Aerts I (43-17, fadtera, we 5) man mayray kartay no saalaahi. O my mind, praise the Creator.
AS efs froreu ge at ost ufs nan TS Ut (43-17, firdtera, He 5) sabhay chhad si-aanpaa gur kee pairee paahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. Give up all your clever tricks, and fall at the Feet of the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
eu su od fenmuet A Ayes nfs oF I (43-18, fidtera, nH 5) dukh bhukh nah vi-aapa-ee jay sukh-daata man ho-ay. Pain and hunger shall not oppress you, if the Giver of Peace comes into your mind.
fas dt afi 3 ferit at foge Aer APE II (43-18, fidtera, He 5)
kit hee kamm na chhijee-ai jaa hirdai sachaa so-ay.
No undertaking shall fail, when the True Lord is always in your heart. fan 3 sufo va & fA He o Ae AE Il (43-18, firdtora, v3 5)
jis too’ rakheh hath day tis maar na sakai ko-ay. No one can kill that one unto whom You, Lord, give Your Hand and protect.
Hues ag Adm Afs niece ae OE NQN (43-19, frdtora, He 5) sukh-daata gur sayvee-ai sabh avgan kadhai Dho-ay. ||2]| Serve the Guru, the Giver of Peace; He shall remove and wash off all your faults. ||2]|
Ae Hat Aza Beni mngst AS Il (43-19, fasta, we 5) sayvaa mangai sayvko laa-ee-aa™ apunee sayv. Your servant begs to serve those who are enjoined to Your service.
UST 8g
AY Ad HAAS Fo UST SS Il (44-1, firdtora, vs 5)
saaDhoo sang maskatay toothai paavaa dayv.
The opportunity to work hard serving the Saadh Sangat is obtained, when the Divine Lord is pleased.
AS fae eAafs vfos wm age AGS Il (44-1, fastora, He 5) sabh kichh vasgat saahibai aapay karan karayv. Everything is in the Hands of our Lord and Master; He Himself is the Doer of deeds.
Asad & serge HOA AS YSIS MSI (44-2, frdtora, ws 5) satgur kai balihaarnai mansaa sabh poorayv. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who fulfills all hopes and desires. ||3]|
fea fer Ane fea avet HIS II (44-2, fidtera, nH: 5) iko disai sajno iko bhaa-ee meet. The One appears to be my Companion; the One is my Brother and Friend.
fean ot AMadt fear ot ot SHS It (44-2, factors, x: 5)
iksai dee saamagree iksai dee hai reet.
The elements and the components are all made by the One; they are held in their order by the One.
fean fk@ Ho wont st dur fesse BS Il (44-3, fst, ne 5)
ikas si-o man maani-aa taa ho-aa nihchal cheet.
When the mind accepts, and is satisfied with the One, then the consciousness becomes steady and stable.
Ag ust AY Uses! Sa BSA AY AIST MSNUNOUN (44-3, fdtera, He 5)
sach khaanaa sach painnaa tayk naanak sach keet. ||4||5||75]|
Then, one's food is the True Name, one's garments are the True Name, and one's Support, O Nanak, is the True Name. ||4[|5||75]|
frrstaat Has U Il (44-4)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
AS aa usus A mire fea ofa il (44-4, fadtera, v5) sabhay thok paraapatay jay aavai ik hath. All things are received if the One is obtained.
HOH USSG AEG J A AM ASS ate Il (44-5, faster, ue 5)
janam padaarath safal hai jay sachaa sabad kath.
The precious gift of this human life becomes fruitful when one chants the True Word of the Shabad.
Gd 3 Has usus faA foftor Fe fa ual (44-5, fdteora, v8 5)
gur tay mahal paraapatay jis likhi-aa hovai math. ||1]|
One who has such destiny written on his forehead enters the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, through the Guru. ||1]|
Hd Ho San fA fas ote Il (44-6, frrdtera, He 5) mayray man aykas si-o chit laa-ay. O my mind, focus your consciousness on the One.
San fag xs dog 3 As fife He HE NA TIE I (44-6, firdtora, He 5)
aykas bin sabh DhanDh hai sabh mithi-aa moh maa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Without the One, all entanglements are worthless; emotional attachment to Maya is totally false. ||1]|Pause] |
od yA ufsadior A Afsagd sets ase Il (44-7, frdtora, He 5)
lakh khusee-aa paatisaahee-aa jay satgur nadar karay-i.
Hundreds of thousands of princely pleasures are enjoyed, if the True Guru bestows His Glance of Grace.
fon fa ofe on efs Ha Ho 36 Ase GE I (44-7, fata, 2 5)
nimakh ayk har naam day-ay mayraa man tan seetal ho-ay.
If He bestows the Name of the Lord, for even a moment, my mind and body are cooled and soothed.
fan ag usta fotimr fate Afsag sas Td NM (44-8, fete, He 5)
jis ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin satgur charan gahay. ||2||
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny hold tight to the Feet of the True Guru. [21]
HeG HIS Hew wat fas AS ates fimrg il (44-8, frdtea, we 5) safal moorat saflaa gharhee jit sachay naal pi-aar.
Fruitful is that moment, and fruitful is that time, when one is in love with the True Lord.
ey Hay 6 waret fA ats at OH MOE Il (44-9, firdtora, He 5) dookh santaap na lag-ee jis har kaa naam aDhaar.
Suffering and sorrow do not touch those who have the Support of the Name of the Lord.
ag uate afe afeor Het Csfonr urfs ail (44-9, firdtera, He 5)
baah pakarh gur kaadhi-aa so-ee utri-aa paar. ||3]|
Grasping him by the arm, the Guru lifts them up and out, and carries them across to the other side. ||3]|
We Ave ufes d fra AS AST Il (44-10, firdtera, He 5) thaan suhaavaa pavit hai jithai sant sabhaa. Embellished and immaculate is that place where the Saints gather together.
Set fSA Tt S fs fats ys AT BI Il (44-10, firdtora, vs 5) dho-ee tis hee no milai jin pooraa guroo labhaa. He alone finds shelter, who has met the Perfect Guru.
Soa FO wg Soi fae fuss 5 AGH AS ISIENDEN (44-11, fates, He 5)
naanak baDhaa ghar tahaa” jithai mirat na janam jaraa. ||4||6||76]|
Nanak builds his house upon that site where there is no death, no birth, and no old age. ||4||6||76||
Alaral HIS U Il (44-11)
sareeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Het fame Abus fafe Avot urfSrrg it (44-11, Atera, He 5) so-ee Dhi-aa-ee-ai jee-arhay sir saahaa™ paatisaahu. Meditate on Him, O my soul; He is the Supreme Lord over kings and emperors.
fsn dt at afe rr Ho fAA at ASA SATS Il (44-12, Ato, He 5) tis hee kee kar aas man jis kaa sabhas vaysaahu. Place the hopes of your mind in the One, in whom all have faith.
Afs froreut efs & ae at Boat UT NU (44-12, Hie, He 5) sabh si-aanpaa chhad kai gur kee charnee paahu. ||1]| Give up all your clever tricks, and grasp the Feet of the Guru. ||1]|
Ho Hd AY AoA Ast Af VS Il (44-13, Atos, vs 5) man mayray sukh sahj saytee jap naa-o. O my mind, chant the Name with intuitive peace and poise.
mS udd us forte 3 ae afee fos TE ua FHS i (44-13, Atos, v2 5)
aath pahar parabh Dhi-aa-ay too’ gun go-ind nit gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Twenty-four hours a day, meditate on God. Constantly sing the Glories of the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause] |
fSA at Hast ud Hot fan ASS vied o AE Il (44-14, Awa, He 5) tis kee sarnee par manaa jis jayvad avar na ko-ay. Seek His Shelter, O my mind; there is no other as Great as He.
fan fies AY of wer ey ese BS TE I (44-14, Atv, Hs 5)
jis simrat sukh ho-ay ghanaa dukh darad na moolay ho-ay.
Remembering Him in meditation, a profound peace is obtained. Pain and suffering will not touch you at all.
Ret Ae afe wadt us Afoe Ae ALE NI (44-15, Hea, He 5) Sadaa sadaa kar chaakree parabh saahib sachaa so-ay. ||2| | Forever and ever, work for God; He is our True Lord and Master. ||2||
WaHnals df feat act AH at STA Il (44-15, Ate, He 5)
saaDhsangat ho-ay nirmalaa katee-ai jam kee faas.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall become absolutely pure, and the noose of death shall be cut away.
Hues & SHO FSH ora afe wreertA Il (44-16, Hea, He 5) sukh-daata bhai bhanjno tis aagai kar ardaas. So offer your prayers to Him, the Giver of Peace, the Destroyer of fear.
fog ad fan feoseg 3t aren nie oH ISI (44-16, Ate, He 5) mihar karay jis miharvaan taa™ kaaraj aavai raas. ||3]| Showing His Mercy, the Merciful Master shall resolve your affairs. ||3]|
ays as sae Sas Sar aS it (44-17, Atera, we 5)
bahuto bahut vakhaanee-ai oocho oochaa thaa-o.
The Lord is said to be the Greatest of the Great; His Kingdom is the Highest of the High.
zo fase aaa alfa ats 6 Aare Il (44-17, Hea, v2 5) varnaa chihnaa baahraa keemat kahi na sakaa-o. He has no color or mark; His Value cannot be estimated.
soa AS us Hfenr ate AU Peg nS aS ISIDIDIN (44-18, Htwa, He 5) naanak ka-o parabh ma-i-aa kar sach dayvhu apunaa naa-o. ||4||7||77]|| Please show Mercy to Nanak, God, and bless him with Your True Name. ||4]|7||77]||
Aleral HIS U Il (44-18)
sareeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
ony fomre A Het fA HY Caw ae i (44-18, Hera, we 5) naam Dhi-aa-ay so sukhee tis mukh oojal ho-ay. One who meditates on the Naam is at peace; his face is radiant and bright.
ud TI 3 ue usa| Ast Sle il (44-19, Atos, ws 5) pooray gur tay paa-ee-ai pargat sabhnee lo-ay. Obtaining it from the Perfect Guru, he is honored all over the world.
WUHats a wis ZA Sa AST ALE NAM (44-19, tea, He 5) saaDhsangat kai ghar vasai ayko sachaa so-ay. ||1||
In the Company of the Holy, the One True Lord comes to abide within the home of the self. ||1]|
ar gu Hd Ho de ofa aH fame i (45-1, Hera, He 5)
mayray man har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
oH Aoet Aer Afa wird BE Soe AU TIS it (45-1, Hheoa, ne 5)
naam sahaa-ee sadaa sang aagai la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Naam is your Companion; it shall always be with you. It shall save you in the world hereafter. ||1]|Pause| |
ober aber efsureint aed niefa arf il (45-2, Hea, v2 5) dunee-aa kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa kavnai aavahi kaam. What good is worldly greatness?
went at da Ag feat as fof faefs i (45-2, Hea, He 5)
maa-i-aa kaa rang sabh fikaa jaato binas nidaan.
All the pleasures of Maya are tasteless and insipid. In the end, they shall all fade away.
W ao fose ofs ZA A Ys UTM lil (45-3, Ata, Hs 5) jaa kai hirdai har vasai so pooraa parDhaan. ||2|| Perfectly fulfilled and supremely acclaimed is the one, in whose heart the Lord abides.
21 |
AY ot dg Fear wre wiry Surfer i (45-3, Ato, v2 5) saaDhoo kee hohu raynukaa apnaa aap ti-aag. Become the dust of the Saints; renounce your selfishness and conceit.
Cure fimreu vee efs Ta at Boat Ba il (45-3, Alea, ve 5)
upaav si-aanap sagal chhad gur kee charnee laag.
Give up all your schemes and your clever mental tricks, and fall at the Feet of the Guru.
fsrfs usufs gag df fan HASfa JS THT WI (45-4, Alora, He 5)
tiseh paraapat ratan ho-ay jis mastak hovai bhaag. ||3]| He alone receives the Jewel, upon whose forehead such wondrous destiny is written.
[131] far uaufs sete fan FS ys mrfy i (45-5, fea, ue 5)
tisai paraapat bhaa-eeho jis dayvai parabh aap. O Siblings of Destiny, it is received only when God Himself bestows it.
Afsag ot Ae A ad fan fasr IBA S7y I (45-5, Ato, He 5)
satgur kee sayvaa so karay jis binsai ha-umai taap. People serve the True Guru only when the fever of egotism has been eradicated.
Soa AC ag Sfenr fHOA Aas ASU ISICIHOCH (45-5, Hea, He 5) naanak ka-o gur bhayti-aa binsay sagal santaap. ||4]|8]|78]|| Nanak has met the Guru; all his sufferings have come to an end. ||4||8]|78]|
frrstaat HIS U Il (45-6) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
feg uate Aba or fet THET ET Il (45-6, firdtora, v3 5) ik pachhaanoo jee-a kaa iko rakhanhaar. The One is the Knower of all beings; He alone is our Savior.
fean a fs wire feat ure iors I (45-7, fadtora, we 5) ikas kaa man aasraa iko paraan aDhaar. The One is the Support of the mind; the One is the Support of the breath of life.
fSH Adeet Ae’ AY UTIYIH ATSg MUI (45-7, firdtoa, ue 5) tis Sarnaa-ee sadaa sukh paarbarahm kartaar. ||1|| In His Sanctuary there is eternal peace. He is the Supreme Lord God, the Creator.
[4
Ho He Aas Cure fSniray il (45-8, frstera, He 5) man mayray sagal upaav ti-aag. O my mind, give up all these efforts.
ag us orate fos fear at foe oar Al TIS il (45-8, firstera, ve 5) gur pooraa aaraaDh nit ikas kee liv laag. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Dwell upon the Perfect Guru each day, and attach yourself to the One Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
fea ove firs fea feat ns furst I (45-8, fidteora, He 5) iko bhaa-ee mit ik iko maat pitaa. The One is my Brother, the One is my Friend. The One is my Mother and Father.
fean at ufs 2a ad fats at fits fest i (45-9, firdtora, He 5) ikas kee man tayk hai jin jee-o pind ditaa. The One is the Support of the mind; He has given us body and soul.
A ug Hod 3 fend fafs Ag fae efh ats QI (45-9, frdtora, He 5) so parabh manhu na visrai jin sabh kichh vas keetaa. ||2|| May I never forget God from my mind; He holds all in the Power of His Hands. ||2| |
ufg fea aofs feat ae adste rf i (45-10, fitera, v2 5)
ghar iko baahar iko thaan thanantar aap.
The One is within the home of the self, and the One is outside as well. He Himself is in all places and interspaces.
aba Hz Afs fafs ate wire use fSR AY II (45-10, fadtora, v2 5) jee-a jant sabh jin kee-ay aath pahar tis jaap. Meditate twenty-four hours a day on the One who created all beings and creatures.
fean Ast afar o det Aa ASTY SI (45-11, fadtea, He 5) ikas saytee rati-aa na hovee sog santaap. ||3]|| Attuned to the Love of the One, there is no sorrow or suffering. ||3]|
USGS YS SAT GAT Sea AS it (45-11, firdtoa, ws 5) paarbarahm parabh ayk hai doojaa naahee ko-ay. There is only the One Supreme Lord God; there is no other at all.
Mm fis ns fan oa a fan ae FOE I (45-12, fret, 1 5) jee-o pind sabh tis kaa jo tis bhaavai so ho-ay. Soul and body all belong to Him; whatever pleases His Will comes to pass.
afs us us sfeor Af sea Ae ALE ISICNOEN (45-12, frstera, He 5)
gur poorai pooraa bha-i-aa jap naanak sachaa so-ay. ||4]|9]|79]|
Through the Perfect Guru, one becomes perfect; O Nanak, meditate on the True One. 41191179]
frrstaat HIS U Il (45-13)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
fret Afsas fAS fas wfeor A us UTS Il (45-13, fretera, He 5)
jinaa satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa say pooray parDhaan.
Those who focus their consciousness on the True Guru are perfectly fulfilled and famous.
fro ag urfy efiure dfe fae Cun nfs famire i (45-13, fasta, He 5)
jin ka-o aap da-i-aal ho-ay tin upjai man gi-aan.
Spiritual wisdom wells up in the minds of those unto whom the Lord Himself shows Mercy.
fe a HAZSta fofior foo ufeur ats SH AU (45-14, fdtera, He 5)
jin ka-o mastak likhi-aa tin paa-i-aa har naam. ||1]||
Those who have such destiny written upon their foreheads obtain the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
AN AS
Ho Hd Sa OH forte i (45-15, firdtera, ve 5) man mayray ayko naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the One Lord.
Ava AY AY Cunfs esas UOT AMS A TIS Ml (45-15, frdtora, ws 5)
sarab sukhaa sukh oopjahi dargeh paiDhaa jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The happiness of all happiness shall well up, and in the Court of the Lord, you shall be dressed in robes of honor. ||1]|Pause| |
HOH Hds a SS afenr ae sats aes Il 45-16, fadtwa, ue 5)
janam maran kaa bha-o ga-i-aa bhaa-o bhagat gopaal.
The fear of death and rebirth is removed by performing loving devotional service to the Lord of the World.
AY Hats fooner uf ad yfsure il (45-16, firdtora, He 5)
saaDhoo sangat nirmalaa aap karay partipaal.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one becomes immaculate and pure; the Lord Himself takes care of such a one.
HOH Hee at HE aca Ts ean Uf fags iil (45-16, fadtea, v2 5)
janam maran kee mal katee-ai gur darsan daykh nihaal. ||2]|
The filth of birth and death is washed away, and one is uplifted, beholding the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||2]|
ae woste afe afr ursqaH us ALE II (45-17, firdtora, ue 5) thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa paarbarahm parabh so-ay. The Supreme Lord God is pervading all places and interspaces.
ASS! WS Sq FT GAT ra AE I (45-18, firdtora, ws 5) sabhnaa daataa ayk hai doojaa naahee ko-ay. The One is the Giver of all-there is no other at all.
fan Adeet echn ats GS A AE SI (45-18, fdtora, He 5) tis sarnaa-ee chhutee-ai keetaa lorhay so ho-ay. ||3]|| In His Sanctuary, one is saved. Whatever He wishes, comes to pass. ||3]|
faa His efhor ursqon A us UsUTS Il (45-18, frdtea, He 5)
jin man vasi-aa paarbarahm say pooray parDhaan.
Perfectly fulfilled and famous are those, in whose minds the Supreme Lord God abides.
fae at Fat foot ugae set AIS Il (45-19, frdtera, He 5) tin kee sobhaa nirmalee pargat bha-ee jahaan. Their reputation is spotless and pure; they are famous all over the world.
frat Ha yg fmrfeur area f35 ATAS ISUIONCOll (45-19, firdtara, ve 5)
jinee mayraa parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa naanak tin kurbaan. ||4||10||80]| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who meditate on my God. ||4]|10]|80]|
ua gé frdtaat HIS U Il (46-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
fife Afsas AS ey afenr ofe AY efhor vfs morte I (46-1, firdteoa, He 5)
mil satgur sabh dukh ga-i-aa har sukh vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, all my sufferings have ended, and the Peace of the Lord has come to dwell within my mind.
nists Afs yarrior San FAC fess ofe I (46-2, firdtora, v2 5)
antar jot pargaasee-aa aykas si-o liv laa-ay. The Divine Light illuminates my inner being, and I am lovingly absorbed in the One.
ffs Arg He Caer uate feof urfé I 46-2, firetera, 12 5)
mil saaDhoo mukh oojlaa poorab likhi-aa paa-ay. Meeting with the Holy Saint, my face is radiant; I have realized my pre-ordained destiny.
Ge dfee fas wee foone AS ote Ail (46-3, firdtorg, ne 5)
gun govind nit gaavnay nirmal saachai naa-ay. ||1]|
I constantly sing the Glories of the Lord of the Universe. Through the True Name, I have become spotlessly pure. ||1]|
He Ho Td Ast AY OE Il (46-3, frdtoa, we 5) mayray man gur sabdee sukh ho-ay. O my mind, you shall find peace through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ts us at wast fase ate o afe ua TIS il (46-4, frdtora, ws 5) gur pooray kee chaakree birthaa jaa-ay na ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Working for the Perfect Guru, no one goes away empty-handed. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho other feet udhor urfeor any fourg il 46-4, frdtea, ve 5)
man kee-aa ichhaa™ pooree-aa paa-i-aa naam niDhaan.
The desires of the mind are fulfilled, when the Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained.
Maat Ae Aft ASIST USS Il (46-5, fdtora, v2 5)
antarjaamee sadaa sang karnaihaar pachhaan.
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is always with you; recognize Him as the Creator.
as usAet Hy Sao Af on ae feHarS Il (46-5, fretea, He 5)
gur parsaadee mukh oojlaa jap naam daan isnaan.
By Guru's Grace, your face shall be radiant. Chanting the Naam, you shall receive the benefits of giving charity and taking cleansing baths.
an au 83 faofhor sfror As wife i121 (46-6, fadtea, H 5) kaam kroDh lobh binsi-aa taji-aa sabh abhimaan. ||2|| Sexual desire, anger and greed are eliminated, and all egotistical pride is abandoned.
[21 |
urfenrt HI SEZ SH UIs Te aH Il (46-6, firdtora, ws 5) paa-i-aa laahaa laabh naam pooran ho-ay kaam. The Profit of the Naam is obtained, and all affairs are brought to fruition.
ate fasur yfs Afer chor wruar oH Il (46-7, firdtera, ws 5) kar kirpaa parabh mayli-aa dee-aa apnaa naam. In His Mercy, God unites us with Himself, and He blesses us with the Naam.
wee Wat dfs afenr wef dur feggerS Il (46-7, fadtera, v2 5)
aavan jaanaa reh ga-i-aa aap ho-aa miharvaan.
My comings and goings in reincarnation have come to an end; He Himself has bestowed His Mercy.
Ag HI@ We ufemr ag a Aa US'S III (46-8, fidtera, vs 5) sach mahal ghar paa-i-aa gur kaa sabad pachhaan. ||3]||
I have obtained my home in the True Mansion of His Presence, realizing the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
Bas AST AG Iver nimyat fagur ofs il (46-8, firdtera, He 5)
bhagat janaa ka-o raakh-daa aapnee kirpaa Dhaar.
His humble devotees are protected and saved; He Himself showers His Blessings upon us.
Jers ues Ha CAs AMS A TE ATs Il (46-9, frdtera, ve 5)
halat palat mukh oojlay saachay kay gun saar.
In this world and in the world hereafter, radiant are the faces of those who cherish and enshrine the Glories of the True Lord.
MTS UIT TE Ae IS Sat mrs Il (46-9, firdtera, He 5)
aath pahar gun saarday ratay rang apaar.
Twenty-four hours a day, they lovingly dwell upon His Glories; they are imbued with His Infinite Love.
USHIN AY Add Sse AE SSIs SAU (46-10, frdtarg, ve 5)
paarbarahm sukh saagro naanak sad balihaar. ||4]|11||81]|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the Supreme Lord God, the Ocean of Peace. [|4]]12][82]|
frstaa HIG U Il (46-10)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
ust Afsag A fhe ureht wee fears il (46-10, fata, we 5) pooraa satgur jay milai paa-ee-ai sabad niDhaan. If we meet the Perfect True Guru, we obtain the Treasure of the Shabad.
afs fasur ys niruat mbt nifigs on i (46-11, firdtora, ne 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee japee-ai amrit naam. Please grant Your Grace, God, that we may meditate on Your Ambrosial Naam.
HOH Hes BY aS oa Aofa fowre ia (46-11, firstera, He 5)
janam maran dukh kaatee-ai laagai sahj Dhi-aan. ||1]|
The pains of birth and death are taken away; we are intuitively centered on His Meditation. ||1]|
Hd Ho Us Adaret ule | (46-12, fdtora, us 5) mayray man parabh sarnaa-ee paa-ay. O my mind, seek the Sanctuary of God.
of fag gat & Sat Sat BH fowrfe na TS il 46-12, fata, v2 5)
har bin doojaa ko nahee ayko naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Lord, there is no other at all. Meditate on the One and only Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
ans age o Webt Aa Tat wag | (46-13, firdtora, He 5) keemat kahan na jaa-ee-ai saagar gunee athaahu. His Value cannot be estimated; He is the Vast Ocean of Excellence.
zat fee Hast Ae ASE fEATT Il (46-13, firdtora, 2 5)
vadbhaagee mil sangtee sachaa sabad visaahu.
O most fortunate ones, join the Sangat, the Blessed Congregation; purchase the True Word of the Shabad.
afa Ae AY Aad fafs ATI USAT M2 (46-14, fdtera, He 5) kar sayvaa sukh saagrai sir saahaa paatisaahu. ||2|| Serve the Lord, the Ocean of Peace, the Supreme Lord over kings and emperors. ||2]|
TIE GHG A MTA TAT ardt oS I (46-14, frstoa, we 5) charan kamal kaa aasraa doojaa naahee thaa-o. I take the Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet; there is no other place of rest for me.
Hug Sct ursgon 3d Sf ga Il (46-15, firdtora, v2 5) mai Dhar tayree paarbarahm tayrai taan rahaa-o. I lean upon You as my Support, O Supreme Lord God. I exist only by Your Power.
foufent us He F 3s Afat AHS SI (46-15, frstera, we 5) nimaani-aa parabh maan too" tayrai sang samaa-o. ||3]| O God, You are the Honor of the dishonored. I seek to merge with You. ||3]|
dfs muha mre nie uss dfs il (46-15, fadteora, v2 5)
har japee-ai aaraaDhee-ai aath pahar govind.
Chant the Lord's Name and contemplate the Lord of the World, twenty-four hours a day.
fi urs 36 US ae afe faa art fe II (46-16, frdtora, He 5)
jee-a paraan tan Dhan rakhay kar kirpaa raakhee jind.
He preserves our soul, our breath of life, body and wealth. By His Grace, He protects our soul.
Soa AAS tu Caofonig ys ursyqan safe WSiIAVNCIl (46-16, fdtorg, He 5) naanak saglay dokh utaari-an parabh paarbarahm bakhsind. ||4]|12||82||
O Nanak, all pain has been washed away, by the Supreme Lord God, the Forgiver. [14] 12] [82] |
frstaat HIS U Il (46-17)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Uulfs salt fan AD fAE HS ours AE II (46-17, firdtora, v8 5) pareet lagee tis sach si-o marai na aavai jaa-ay. I have fallen in love with the True Lord. He does not die, He does not come and go.
o @efeur fees As nfo afer AHTE I (46-18, fasta, He 5)
naa vaychhorhi-aa vichhurhai sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay.
In separation, He is not separated from us; He is pervading and permeating amongst all.
dis vse eu SHal Asa a AS STE I (46-18, faster, He 5)
deen darad dukh bhanjnaa sayvak kai sat bhaa-ay.
He is the Destroyer of the pain and suffering of the meek. He bears True Love for His servants.
Man U fedae afe Herter wfe Wal (46-19, frdtora, 8 5)
achraj roop niranjano gur maylaa-i-aa maa-ay. ||1]|
Wondrous is the Form of the Immaculate One. Through the Guru, I have met Him, O my mother! ||1]|
aet 3 HIS aad ys AE II (46-19, firdtora, we 5) bhaa-ee ray meet karahu parabh so-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, make God your Friend.
ust go Heer Ho udtfS foo wet 3 SA af Nan TIS i (47-1, fadtera, v2 5) maa-i-aa moh pareet Dharig sukhee na deesai ko-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Cursed is emotional attachment and love of Maya; no one is seen to be at peace. ||1]|Pause] |
aor ast Alwees fooHE TU MU Il (47-1, frdtoa, He 5) daanaa daataa seelvant nirmal roop apaar. God is Wise, Giving, Tender-hearted, Pure, Beautiful and Infinite.
Rat Hovet wits eat ar sar wrurg Il (47-2, fstera, 2 5) sakhaa sahaa-ee at vadaa oochaa vadaa apaar. He is our Companion and Helper, Supremely Great, Lofty and Utterly Infinite.
wed fasta 3 vebh fesse faR BaSTT I (47-2, fidtera, nH: 5)
baalak biraDh na jaanee-ai nihchal tis darvaar. He is not Known as young or old; His Court is Steady and Stable.
A Haat ASt ureht feast nag ll (47-3, fasted, He 5) jo mangee-ai so-ee paa-ee-ai niDhaaraa aaDhaar. ||2|| Whatever we seek from Him, we receive. He is the Support of the unsupported. ||2]|
fan uus faofeu fosfo nfs sf de AMS I (47-3, factor, He 5)
jis paykhat kilvikh hireh man tan hovai saa‘t. Seeing Him, our evil inclinations vanish; mind and body become peaceful and tranquil.
fea ufs Sa foment ne at ofa saifs i (47-4, fadtera, v2 5)
ik man ayk Dhi-aa-ee-ai man kee laahi bharaa“t.
With one-pointed mind, meditate on the One Lord, and the doubts of your mind will be dispelled.
Ge fourg esq AS use AT at VTS Il (47-4, frstora, we 5)
gun niDhaan navtan sadaa pooran jaa kee daat.
He is the Treasure of Excellence, the Ever-fresh Being. His Gift is Perfect and Complete.
Het Het mrad fee fensg odt TFS Sil (47-5, frdtea, He 5) sadaa sadaa aaraaDhee-ai din visrahu nahee raat. ||3]| Forever and ever, worship and adore Him. Day and night, do not forget Him. ||3]|
fis ag usta fottmr fae or mer af i (47-5, firdtora, 8 5)
jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin kaa sakhaa govind.
One whose destiny is so pre-ordained, obtains the Lord of the Universe as his Companion.
3G HO US maul AS Aare edn feo fe i 47-6, fadtea, He 5) tan man Dhan arpee sabho sagal vaaree-ai ih jind. I dedicate my body, mind, wealth and all to Him. I totally sacrifice my soul to Him.
ea He Jefe Ae wife wie gan see Il (47-6, frdtoa, v2 5)
daykhai sunai hadoor sad ghat ghat barahm ravind.
Seeing and hearing, He is always close at hand. In each and every heart, God is pervading.
MifxsuESt S USE UST SSA AE Safe SUITS (47-7, firdtora, Hs 5)
akirat-ghanaa no paaldaa parabh naanak sad bakhsind. ||4||13]|83]| Even the ungrateful ones are cherished by God. O Nanak, He is forever the Forgiver. [4] ]13][83]|
frrdtaat HIS U Il (47-7) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Ho 36 U6 fafe ufs chor afm Rafa ets I (47-7, firdtoa, us 5) man tan Dhan jin parabh dee-aa rakhi-aa sahj savaar. This mind, body and wealth were given by God, who naturally adorns us.
Hea ae afe afumr nists Afs wre il (47-8, fidtera, 42 5) sarab kalaa kar thaapi-aa antar jot apaar. He has blessed us with all our energy, and infused His Infinite Light deep within us.
Ret Het ug fads nists ge Ga ofa ail (47-9, fist, He 5) Sadaa sadaa parabh simree-ai antar rakh ur Dhaar. ||1]|
Forever and ever, meditate in remembrance on God; keep Him enshrined in your heart. ||1]|
He Ho ofa fas neg 3 afe I (47-9, fadtera, nH 5) mayray man har bin avar na ko-ay. O my mind, without the Lord, there is no other at all.
ys Aderet Ae og oy & fenmd afe 9d TIS I (47-9, fasta, we 5) parabh sarnaa-ee sadaa rahu dookh na vi-aapai ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remain in God's Sanctuary forever, and no suffering shall afflict you. ||1]|Pause| |
336 USSG Hea AfSat TUT Ua Il (47-10, firdtera, v8 5) ratan padaarath maankaa su-inaa rupaa khaak. Jewels, treasures, pearls, gold and silver-all these are just dust.
Hs fust AS sou as AS AS Il (47-10, firstora, we 5) maat pitaa sut banDhpaa koorhay sabhay saak. Mother, father, children and relatives-all relations are false.
fate ats fsrfo 6 ArSet HOHE UA SUE MQM (47-11, fstera, He 5)
jin keetaa tiseh na jaan-ee manmukh pas naapaak. ||2||
The self-willed manmukh is an insulting beast; he does not acknowledge the One who created him. |[2||
nists wate af sfoor fA Ss WE Ste Il (47-11, facta, Hs 5) antar baahar rav rahi-aa tis no jaanai door. The Lord is pervading within and beyond, and yet people think that He is far away.
fra wat afs sfour nists IGH afs i (47-12, firdtora, v3 5) tarisnaa laagee rach rahi-aa antar ha-umai koor. They are engrossed in clinging desires; within their hearts there is ego and falsehood.
sast oH fegfenr urefs Fefa us Bll (47-12, frdtoa, Hs 5) bhagtee naam vihooni-aa aavahi vanjahi poor. ||3]| Without devotion to the Naam, crowds of people come and go. ||3]|
of 8 us ages Aba Ay afe efeur i (47-13, fadtera, us 5) raakh layho parabh karanhaar jee-a jant kar da-i-aa. Please preserve Your beings and creatures, God; O Creator Lord, please be merciful!
fas ys afe o suoog Ho fae AN sfeur I (47-13, fdtora, He 5) bin parabh ko-ay na rakhanhaar mahaa bikat jam bha-i-aa. Without God, there is no saving grace. The Messenger of Death is cruel and unfeeling.
SSA SH 3 SAGE Ale must Ts HfEnt NIISICSI (47-14, frdtera, He 5)
naanak naam na veesra-o kar apunee har ma-i-aa. ||4||14||84|| O Nanak, may I never forget the Naam! Please bless me with Your Mercy, Lord! [14] [14] |841 |
frstaat HIG U Il (47-15)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
AT 3g Mg US AT TH TU H VA Il (47-15, frdtera, we 5) mayraa tan ar Dhan mayraa raaj roop mai days. "My body and my wealth; my ruling power, my beautiful form and country-mine!"
HS oa sfest nSa AIS Ga Mg ZA Il (47-15, firdtora, He 5)
sut daaraa banitaa anayk bahut rang ar vays.
You may have children, a wife and many mistresses; you may enjoy all sorts of pleasures and fine clothes.
ofa on fee o enet arate fas 3 Bf Ul (47-16, firdtoa, Hs 5)
har naam ridai na vas-ee kaaraj kitai na laykh. ||1]|
And yet, if the Name of the Lord does not abide within the heart, none of it has any use or value. ||1]|
Hd He ofa af am forte it (47-16, frrdteoa, v2 5) mayray man har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afte Hafs fas AG at ad saat fos ote Na TIC it (47-17, frrstera, v2 5)
kar sangat nit saaDh kee gur charnee chit laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Always keep the Company of the Holy, and focus your consciousness on the Feet of the Guru. ||1||Pause] |
oy fours foment HAsfax dS Sra I 47-17, fadtea, v2 5)
naam niDhaan Dhi-aa-ee-ai mastak hovai bhaag.
Those who have such blessed destiny written on their foreheads meditate on the Treasure of the Naam.
adn Afs Aedifs aa at Bret Ba Il (47-18, frrstera, ve 5) kaaraj sabh savaaree-ah gur kee charnee laag. All their affairs are brought to fruition, holding onto the Guru's Feet.
ICH Faq FH ASH Bt ores OAT MMI (47-18, firdtora, ne 5)
ha-umai rog bharam katee-ai naa aavai naa jaag. ||2||
The diseases of ego and doubt are cast out; they shall not come and go in reincarnation. ||2| |
ate Hafs 3 ATG at moAfe Stee ar Il (47-19, firdtora, ve 5)
kar sangat too saaDh kee athsath tirath naa-o.
Let the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, be your cleansing baths at the sixty- eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
MG yrs HG 36 Jd ATS Sg AMS I (47-19, fdtora, ve 5)
jee-o paraan man tan haray saachaa ayhu su-aa-o.
Your soul, breath of life, mind and body shall blossom forth in lush profusion; this is the true purpose of life.
Ua gt me fhofs zsvetor vaafo uefa aS Sil (48-1, fadtera, He 5) aithai mileh vadaa-ee-aa dargahi paavahi thaa-o. ||3]||
In this world you shall be blessed with greatness, and in the Court of the Lord you shall find your place of rest. ||3]|
ad age oifu yg Ag fag fsA dt ofa i (48-1, fasta, ne 5) karay karaa-ay aap parabh sabh kichh tis hee haath. God Himself acts, and causes others to act; everything is in His Hands.
ufs nm Hee] nists arafs Ate il (48-2, fadtera, 2 5) maar aapay jeevaaldaa antar baahar saath. He Himself bestows life and death; He is with us, within and beyond.
S'Ot US AdStaSst AGS Wet X SES ISUAUINCUI (48-2, firdtora, ve 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee sarab ghataa kay naath. ||4||15]|85|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Master of all hearts. ||4]|15]|85]]|
frdtaat HIG U Il (48-3) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Hafs ue ys mus ag dor fase il (48-3, firdtora, v2 5) Saran pa-ay parabh aapnay gur ho-aa kirpaal. The Guru is Merciful; we seek the Sanctuary of God.
Asad & Cuefimt fan Age AAS Il (48-3, firdtora, He 5) satgur kai updaysi-ai binsay sarab janjaal. Through the Teachings of the True Guru, all worldly entanglements are eliminated.
nies Gar IH OTH nifys sefs fares IA (48-4, firdtora, Hs 5)
andar lagaa raam naam amrit nadar nihaal. ||1]|
The Name of the Lord is firmly implanted within my mind; through His Ambrosial Glance of Grace, I am exalted and enraptured. ||1]|
Ho Hd Afsad AS AS Il (48-4, fidtora, vs 5) man mayray satgur sayvaa Saar. O my mind, serve the True Guru.
ad tent yg ninyat fea fan & Hog feATg Il TIE ll (48-5, facta, ve 5) karay da-i-aa parabh aapnee ik nimakh na manhu visaar. rahaa-o. God Himself grants His Grace; do not forget Him, even for an instant. ||Pause||
we afes fos wehafs nee AceT Ss I (48-5, fadtera, 2 5)
gun govind nit gavee-ah avgun katanhaar.
Continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the Destroyer of demerits.
faa ofa ant 3 AY df afta fas fares Il (48-6, fidtora, He 5)
bin har naam na sukh ho-ay kar dithay bisthaar.
Without the Name of the Lord, there is no peace. Having tried all sorts of ostentatious displays, I have come to see this.
Hon frest sfsor gene Sad ute ii (438-6, firdtea, v2 5)
sehjay siftee rati-aa bhavjal utray paar. ||2||
Intuitively imbued with His Praises, one is saved, crossing over the terrifying world- ocean. ||2||
Stee eas we Ae urehat A Ofe I (48-7, frdtora, 48 5)
tirath varat lakh sanjmaa paa-ee-ai saaDhoo Dhoor.
The merits of pilgrimages, fasts and hundreds of thousands of techniques of austere self-discipline are found in the dust of the feet of the Holy.
Bla aHeS for 3 A Sa AT Tels I (48-7, firstoa, 2 5) look kamaavai kis tay jaa vaykhai sadaa hadoor. From whom are you trying to hide your actions? God sees all;
ae Fests se foo ys Aa saute USI (48-8, firdtora, 3 5) thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa parabh mayraa bharpoor. ||3]| He is Ever-present. My God is totally pervading all places and interspaces. ||3]|
Ag ufsAdt Me AY Ad AST aS Il (48-8, fidtea, He 5) sach paatisaahee amar sach sachay sachaa thaan. True is His Empire, and True is His Command. True is His Seat of True Authority.
Het avafs urdhus Afs fhafaSe ATS Il (48-8, fadtea, v2 5)
sachee kudrat Dhaaree-an sach sirji-on jahaan.
True is the Creative Power which He has created. True is the world which He has fashioned.
Soa HUH AG oH JG Aet Het ATS IIAEICE! (48-9, fasta, He 5)
naanak japee-ai sach naam ha-o sadaa sadaa kurbaan. ||4]|16]|86] | O Nanak, chant the True Name; I am forever and ever a sacrifice to Him. | 4] |16]|86]|
firstaat HIG U Il (48-10)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Gen ate dfs wus ear us uf] Il (48-10, firdtora, He 5) udam kar har jaapnaa vadbhaagee Dhan khaat. Make the effort, and chant the Lord's Name. O very fortunate ones, earn this wealth.
H3Afa fe finest He ASH ASH at arte |All (48-10, fidtera, He 5)
satsang har simranaa mal janam janam kee kaat. ||1||
In the Society of the Saints, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, and wash off the filth of countless incarnations. ||1]|
Ho Hd TH OH Ay AY Il (48-11, firdtera, He 5) man mayray raam naam jap jaap. O my mind, chant and meditate on the Name of the Lord.
Ho fee es sf 3 AS Va Aa AT I ITS I (48-11, factors, we 5) man ichhay fal bhunch too sabh chookai sog santaap. rahaa-o. Enjoy the fruits of your mind's desires; all suffering and sorrow shall depart. ||Pause] |
fan oats 36 heer A ys for ofs II (48-12, fasta, He 5) jis kaaran tan Dhaari-aa so parabh dithaa naal. For His sake, you assumed this body; see God always with you.
me afe Hotes ufsor ys uruat sete foots 2H (48-12, frdtea, 12 5)
jal thal mahee-al poori-aa parabh aapnee nadar nihaal. ||2] |
God is pervading the water, the land and the sky; He sees all with His Glance of Grace. ||2||
HO 36 fesHe dfeor oat Are udtfS II (48-13, fidtera, He 5) man tan nirmal ho-i-aa laagee saach pareet. The mind and body become spotlessly pure, enshrining love for the True Lord.
Jde 3x USAIH & Als AU su f3q at AHS SN (48-13, firdtog, us 5)
charan bhajay paarbarahm kay sabh jap tap tin hee keet. ||3]|
One who dwells upon the Feet of the Supreme Lord God has truly performed all meditations and austerities. ||3]|
I36 Hed Wife nifys afs a oS i (48-14, firstora, ne 5) ratan javayhar maanikaa amrit har kaa naa-o. The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is a Gem, a Jewel, a Pearl.
HY AdH MSE IA Ho Soa Tid TS WE SW Ici (48-15, frstoa, we 5)
sookh sahj aanand ras jan naanak har gun gaa-o. ||4||17]||87] |
The essence of intuitive peace and bliss is obtained, O servant Nanak, by singing the Glories of God. ||4]|17]||87]|
frstaa HIS U Il (48-15)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Het AAS ACs Afe fas AM fs oS I (48-15, fate, He 5)
so-ee Saasat sa-un so-ay jit japee-ai har naa-o.
That is the essence of the scriptures, and that is a good omen, by which one comes to chant the Name of the Lord.
Bde AHS als us er ffemr fears a il (48-16, frrdtea, v2 5)
charan kamal gur Dhan dee-aa mili-aa nithaavay thaa-o.
The Guru has given me the Wealth of the Lotus Feet of the Lord, and I, without shelter, have now obtained Shelter.
Wet Unt Ag ARH nS UTT TE WS il (48-17, fardtora, ws 5)
saachee poonjee sach sanjamo aath pahar gun gaa-o.
The True Capital, and the True Way of Life, comes by chanting His Glories, twenty- four hours a day.
ate fasur yg sfeut HE & miTSS ATE NA (48-17, frdtora, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh bhayti-aa maran na aavan jaa-o. ||1|| Granting His Grace, God meets us, and we no longer die, or come or go in reincarnation. ||1]|
Hd Ho dfs sn Aer fea Shar il (48-18, fadtera, v2 5) mayray man har bhaj sadaa ik rang. O my mind, vibrate and meditate forever on the Lord, with single-minded love.
we we nists sf sfomr Ae Hovet Afar A TITS i (48-18, firdtera, He 5)
ghat ghat antar rav rahi-aa sadaa sahaa-ee sang. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He is contained deep within each and every heart. He is always with you, as your Helper and Support. ||1]|Pause| |
Har oft ffs fom arat at fort aifSe il (48-19, firstera, 2 5) sukhaa kee mit ki-aa ganee jaa simree govind. How can I measure the happiness of meditating on the Lord of the Universe?
faa aftr A fgustior Bo oA AS fe I (48-19, fidtora, we 5) jin chaakhi-aa say tariptaasi-aa uh ras jaanai jind. Those who taste it are satisfied and fulfilled; their souls know this Sublime Essence.
uat ett Aa Hafs ufs eA us utsy sufie I (49-1, firdtora, ne 5) santaa sangat man vasai parabh pareetam bakhsind.
In the Society of the Saints, God, the Beloved, the Forgiver, comes to dwell within the mind.
fafs Afeor ys nmuert Het aH BFE MQM (49-1, firdtora, ne 5) jin sayvi-aa parabh aapnaa so-ee raaj narind. ||2|| One who has served his God is the emperor of kings] |2]|
m@nfa ofa HA Te aNe fas afe HAS fERaTS Il (49-2, fadtea, we 5)
a-osar har jas gun raman jit kot majan isnaan.
This is the time to speak and sing the Praise and the Glory of God, which brings the merit of millions of cleansing and purifying baths.
dno Gud dest af o UA BS Il (49-2, fidtora, He 5) rasnaa uchrai gunvatee ko-ay na pujai daan. The tongue which chants these Praises is worthy; there is no charity equal to this.
fenfe ofs ufs sfs eA efemrs use frases II (49-3, firdtora, ne 5)
darisat Dhaar man tan vasai da-i-aal purakh miharvaan.
Blessing us with His Glance of Grace, the Kind and Compassionate, All-powerful Lord comes to dwell within the mind and body.
aH€ fiz us fsA a IG Ae Ae ATS ISll (49-3, fdtoa, ve 5) jee-o pind Dhan tis daa ha-o sadaa sadaa kurbaan. ||3]| My soul, body and wealth are His. Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||3]|
fifemr ae 3 fees A Afeor aesfe Il (49-4, facto, He 5)
mili-aa kaday na vichhurhai jo mayli-aa kartaar.
One whom the Creator Lord has met and joined to Himself shall never again be separated.
aA a dus afenr AS faaHeate Il (49-4, factors, H: 5) daasaa kay banDhan kati-aa saachai sirjanhaar. The True Creator Lord breaks the bonds of His slave.
so Hata ufeGs TE wieTE o stots Il (49-5, fetes, 2 5)
bhoolaa maarag paa-i-on gun avgun na beechaar.
The doubter has been put back on the path; his merits and demerits have not been considered.
Sa (SH AdStast fA Aas WeT MTT ISUACHCCI (49-5, firtora, He 5)
naanak tis sarnaagatee je sagal ghataa aaDhaar. ||4||18||88]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the One who is the Support of every heart. | 4] | 18] [88] |
frrstaat HIS U Il (49-6) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
dHot Ae fad He so feane afe i (49-6, firstera, v2 5) rasnaa sachaa simree-ai man tan nirmal ho-ay. With your tongue, repeat the True Name, and your mind and body shall become pure.
HS fust Area nies fen fas neg 3 aE I (49-7, fdtera, He 5) maat pitaa saak aglay tis bin avar na ko-ay. Your mother and father and all your relations-without Him, there are none at all.
fas ad A mruat ATS fend APE NAN (49-7, firdtora, He 5) mihar karay jay aapnee chasaa na visrai so-ay. ||1|| If God Himself bestows His Mercy, then He is not forgotten, even for an instant. ||1]|
Ho He Ata Afe fees AA Il (49-8, fidtora, v2 5) man mayray saachaa sayv jichar saas. O my mind, serve the True One, as long as you have the breath of life.
fag AS AS as o vis af fas NU TTS Il (49-8, firdtoa, ws 5) bin sachay sabh koorh hai antay ho-ay binaas. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the True One, everything is false; in the end, all shall perish. ||1]|Pause] |
Atfog Ha fosHer fSH fas IIE 6 ANTE Il (49-8, fidtora, vs 5) saahib mayraa nirmalaa tis bin rahan na jaa-ay. My Lord and Master is Immaculate and Pure; without Him, I cannot even survive.
He vfs 3fe su ufs nraret cet orfs fore fe i (49-9, fadtera, He 5)
mayrai man tan bhukh at aglee ko-ee aan milaavai maa-ay.
Within my mind and body, there is such a great hunger; if only someone would come and unite me with Him, O my mother!
ad Ast set AG fas nies & ATE IQ (49-10, firdtera, He 5)
chaaray kundaa bhaalee-aa sah bin avar na jaa-ay. ||2||
I have searched the four corners of the world-without our Husband Lord, there is no other place of rest. ||2]|
fsH urd meek afs AAS AIS Il (49-10, fadtoa, vs 5) tis aagai ardaas kar jo maylay kartaar. Offer your prayers to Him, who shall unite you with the Creator.
ASadg SS" SH at UT fA STITT Il (49-10, frdtera, ws 5) satgur daataa naam kaa pooraa jis bhandaar. The True Guru is the Giver of the Naam; His Treasure is perfect and overflowing.
Het Het Ararat nis B Users SI (49-11, firdtera, He 5) sadaa sadaa salaahee-ai ant na paaraavaar. ||3]|| Forever and ever, praise the One, who has no end or limitation. ||3]|
udzearg Hardt fan ft Ves niSa Il (49-11, fadtera, He 5) parvardagaar salaahee-ai jis day chalat anayk. Praise God, the Nurturer and Cherisher; His Wondrous Ways are unlimited.
Het eT wradba Sat Hfs ferry il (49-12, fastera, v2 5) sadaa sadaa aaraaDhee-ai ayhaa mat visaykh. Forever and ever, worship and adore Him; this is the most wonderful wisdom.
fe safe fot fon oat fan HAS SSA BY NSIAENCEN (49-12, fadtea, He 5)
man tan mithaa tis lagai jis mastak naanak laykh. ||4||19||89]|
O Nanak, God's Flavor is sweet to the minds and bodies of those who have such blessed destiny written on their foreheads. ||4||19]|89]|
frrstaat HIS U Il (49-13)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Ha Hod fife aretad Het oT ATA I (49-13, firdtera, He 5) sant janhu mil bhaa-eeho sachaa naam samaal. Meet with the humble Saints, O Siblings of Destiny, and contemplate the True Name.
SA dug Abt a wre Ge of i (49-13, faster, v2 5)
tosaa banDhhu jee-a kaa aithai othai naal.
For the journey of the soul, gather those supplies which will go with you here and hereafter.
qs us 3 ure mruat sete feats il (49-14, factors, we 5) gur pooray tay paa-ee-ai apnee nadar nihaal. These are obtained from the Perfect Guru, when God bestows His Glance of Grace.
adh usufs fan de fan 3 df efeore nail (49-14, fidtera, v2 5) karam paraapat tis hovai jis no hou-ay da-i-aal. ||1]|
Those unto whom He is Merciful, receive His Grace. ||1]||
Hd Ho Td ASS MST 3 AE I (49-15, fadtera, v2 5)
mayray man gur jayvad avar na ko-ay. O my mind, there is no other as great as the Guru.
aH TE st AS TINS AG AS NU TIS Il (49-15, frtora, ws 5)
doojaa thaa-o na ko sujhai gur maylay sach so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot imagine any other place. The Guru leads me to meet the True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hae uerse fSH fhe fafs ag for wt Il (49-16, frrdtera, He 5) Sagal padaarath tis milay jin gur dithaa jaa-ay. Those who go to see the Guru obtain all treasures.
Gd Bsa fe HS Bal A saarait HAE Il (49-16, frdteora, He 5) gur charnee jin man lagaa say vadbhaagee maa-ay. Those whose minds are attached to the Guru's Feet are very fortunate, O my mother.
as VS AHIT Td Ag AS Hf Som ANTE Il (49-17, fadtoa, vs 5)
gur daataa samrath gur gur sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay.
The Guru is the Giver, the Guru is All-powerful. The Guru is All-pervading, contained amongst all.
TI USHA USYIH WI sae BE SATE NI (49-17, fdtea, we 5)
gur parmaysar paarbarahm gur dubdaa la-ay taraa-ay. ||2]|
The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God. The Guru lifts up and saves those who are drowning. ||2| |
fas fa ae Woh Ade AGS ANGE Il (49-18, fadtea, ve 5) kit mukh gur salaahee-ai karan kaaran samrath. How shall I praise the Guru, the All-powerful Cause of causes?
A ne foes ad fre af ofr ge Il (49-18, fidtora, He 5)
say mathay nihchal rahay jin gur Dhaari-aa hath.
Those, upon whose foreheads the Guru has placed His Hand, remain steady and stable.
ats nifgs on ulorfemr HOH Hes AT UE Il (49-19, frstora, ne 5)
gur amrit naam pee-aali-aa janam maran kaa path.
The Guru has led me to drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He has released me from the cycle of birth and death.
dg USHA Afeot F SAS VU GE IISll (49-19, frdtera, He 5)
gur parmaysar sayvi-aa bhai bhanjan dukh lath. ||3]|
I serve the Guru, the Transcendent Lord, the Dispeller of fear; my suffering has been taken away. ||3]||
Uat uo Afsag afss asty J AY Aas Mss Il (50-1, fdtera, v2 5)
satgur gahir gabheer hai sukh saagar agh-khand. The True Guru is the Deep and Profound Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of sin.
fats ae Afeor nruar AHES B Hat ST Il (50-1, frdtoa, ws 5)
jin gur sayvi-aa aapnaa jamdoot na laagai dand.
For those who serve their Guru, there is no punishment at the hands of the Messenger of Death.
qe ote sfs o saet ufs fsor gas Il (50-2, firdtora, v2 5)
gur naal tul na lag-ee khoj dithaa barahmand.
There is none to compare with the Guru; I have searched and looked throughout the entire universe.
ony fears Afsafe dur AY sea He Ufo HT ISiQoltoll (50-2, fadtera, 2 5) naam niDhaan satgur dee-aa sukh naanak man meh mand. ||4||20||90]|
The True Guru has bestowed the Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. O Nanak, the mind is filled with peace. ||4||20]|90||
frstarat HIG U Il (50-3)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
fot afe & wfeor agar Buffer ATE Il (50-3, fidtera, He 5) mithaa kar kai khaa-i-aa ka-urhaa upji-aa saad. People eat what they believe to be sweet, but it turns out to be bitter in taste.
amet HIS Afse ate fafimr stem are Il (50-4, fistera, He 5) bhaa-ee meet surid kee-ay bikhi-aa rachi-aa baad. They attach their affections to brothers and friends, uselessly engrossed in corruption.
ae faon o Jeet fee oe far] AI (50-4, fadtera, He 5)
jaa‘day bilam na hova-ee vin naavai bismaad. ||1]|
They vanish without a moment's delay; without God's Name, they are stunned and amazed. ||1]|
Hd HO Asad at AS Ba Il (50-5, fidtera, ns 5) mayray man satgur kee sayvaa laag. O my mind, attach yourself to the service of the True Guru.
fi dA A fen Ho at fs fanra nal TIS Il (0-5, fadtea, v2 5)
jo deesai so vinsanaa man kee mat ti-aag. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever is seen, shall pass away. Abandon the intellectualizations of your mind. ||1]|Pause] |
fA@ gag Jeorfenr oe wa fen ATE I (50-6, firdtora, Hs 5) ji-o kookar harkaa-i-aa Dhaavai dah dis jaa-ay. Like the mad dog running around in all directions,
Sat HS o Weel sy nigsy AS Ute Il (50-6, fadtea, He 5) lobhee jant na jaan-ee bhakh abhakh sabh khaa-ay. the greedy person, unaware, consumes everything, edible and non-edible alike.
amy au Hfe famrfimr fefs fefe rat ute i121 (s0-7, fadtea, u 5)
kaam kroDh mad bi-aapi-aa fir fir jonee paa-ay. ||2| |
Engrossed in the intoxication of sexual desire and anger, people wander through reincarnation over and over again. ||2||
When we unter sists sa gate il (50-7, fate, ue 5) maa-i-aa jaal pasaari-aa bheetar chog banaa-ay. Maya has spread out her net, and in it, she has placed the bait.
fnot udt afin foo o ure HE I (50-8, firdtera, He 5) tarisnaa pankhee faasi-aa nikas na paa-ay maa-ay. The bird of desire is caught, and cannot find any escape, O my mother.
fafs atst fsrfa 3 aset fefs fefs mre wf Sil (50-8, firdtera, Hs 5)
jin keetaa tiseh na jaan-ee fir fir aavai jaa-ay. ||3]|
One who does not know the Lord who created him, comes and goes in reincarnation over and over again. ||3]|
nifoa yardt Hfoer ag fafa fea AAT II (50-9, fidtora, v8 5) anik parkaaree mohi-aa baho biDh ih sansaar. By various devices, and in so many ways, this world is enticed.
fan 6 Je A od Aye use MRE Il (50-9, fidtora, He 5) jis no rakhai so rahai samrith purakh apaar. They alone are saved, whom the All-powerful, Infinite Lord protects.
dfs Ae ofa fee Bud sa AE ASIST NSNQAUIEAUI (50-9, frstera, He 5)
har jan har liv ubhray naanak sad balihaar. ||4]|21||91]| The servants of the Lord are saved by the Love of the Lord. O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||4]|21||91]|
frrdtaa HIG U We 2 Il (50-10) sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 2. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
afets urfeor afeet fomr faq Se UAT Il (50-10, fidtera, v2 5)
go-il aa-i-aa go-ilee ki-aa tis damf pasaar.
The herdsman comes to the pasture lands-what good are his ostentatious displays here?
Hoats ust weet F AHS Ws AT UI (50-11, firsts, 3 5) muhlat punnee chalnaa too’ sammal ghar baar. ||1]| When your allotted time is up, you must go. Take care of your real hearth and home.
[21] dfs Te FE Ho Afsag Afe fumrts ii (50-11, frdtera, He 5)
har gun gaa-o manaa satgur sayv pi-aar. O mind, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and serve the True Guru with love.
for asst FS TNS Ul FITS Ml (50-12, frdtora, ve 5) ki-aa thorh-rhee baat gumaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why do you take pride in trivial matters? ||1]||Pause| |
AA dfs use Cfs vorfs usats Il (50-12, fadtea, He 5) jaisay rain paraahunay uth chalsahi parbhaat. Like an overnight guest, you shall arise and depart in the morning.
foor 3 ost forsAs FAG AS sor at Tarts iM (50-13, firdtora, we 5) ki-aa too” rataa girsat si-o sabh fulaa kee baagaat. ||2|| Why are you so attached to your household? It is all like flowers in the garden. ||2| |
Hat At famr oats fafs chor A ys BFF il (50-13, faster, He 5) mayree mayree ki-aa karahi jin dee-aa so parabh lorh. Why do you say, "Mine, mine"? Look to God, who has given it to you.
Heud Sst vos afs WH we ads ISI (50-14, faster, He 5)
sarpar uthee chalnaa chhad jaasee lakh karorh. ||3]|
It is certain that you must arise and depart, and leave behind your hundreds of thousands and millions. ||3]|
BY weaH FHisuor was ASH UTEGTE Il (50-14, fadtera, ue 5)
lakh cha-oraaseeh bharmati-aa dulabh janam paa-i-o-ay.
Through 8.4 million incarnations you have wandered, to obtain this rare and precious human life.
aoa BH AHS FA feg ar mMESE SINC (50-15, frstara, we 5) naanak naam samaal too™ so din nayrhaa aa-i-o-ay. ||4||22||92| |
O Nanak, remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the day of departure is drawing near! ||4||22||92] |
frSta aT HIG U Il (50-16)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
faag eats Ad@st fAsg ATat ots I (50-16, firdtoa, He 5) tichar vaseh suhaylrhee jichar saathee naal. As long as the soul-companion is with the body, it dwells in happiness.
Ww Aat Got sfour st ae ure TAS UA (50-16, frstea, He 5) jaa saathee uthee chali-aa taa Dhan khaakoo raal. ||1|| But when the companion arises and departs, then the body-bride mingles with dust.
[11
Hfs Sara sfeor wane Sues at a il (50-17, fidtera, ve 5)
man bairaag bha-i-aa darsan daykh-nai kaa chaa-o.
My mind has become detached from the world; it longs to see the Vision of God's Darshan.
Uo AST aS UA FITS Il (50-17, fadtoa, He 5) Dhan so tayraa thaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Blessed is Your Place. ||1||Pause]|
frog =fror as ufs He He Afs aos I (50-17, fadtea, He 5)
jichar vasi-aa kant ghar jee-o jee-o sabh kahaat.
As long as the soul-husband dwells in the body-house, everyone greets you with respect.
w Got vert asa at afe o ue Sot AS NM (50-18, fastora, He 5) jaa uthee chalsee kant-rhaa taa ko-ay na puchhai tayree baat. ||2| | But when the soul-husband arises and departs, then no one cares for you at all. ||2]|
ues Ag Afe J Ages Ale SA I (50-18, frdtera, we 5)
pay-ee-arhai saho sayv too” saahurrhai sukh vas.
In this world of your parents' home, serve your Husband Lord; in the world beyond, in your in-laws' home, you shall dwell in peace.
ad fife oa urerg fru so ae 3 Bd SY II (50-19, facto, ne 5)
gur mil chaj achaar sikh tuDh kaday na lagai dukh. ||3]|
Meeting with the Guru, be a sincere student of proper conduct, and suffering shall never touch you. |[3]|
Hao" Ad eat Afs HAGSST ST Il (50-19, firdtora, He 5)
sabhnaa saahurai vanj-naa sabh muklaavanhaar.
Everyone shall go to their Husband Lord. Everyone shall be given their ceremonial send-off after their marriage.
Yat uy Soa US ATaat fas AG ate fimrg igiIsiesil (51-1, fastea, He 5)
naanak Dhan sohaaganee jin sah naal pi-aar. ||4||23||93]| O Nanak, blessed are the happy soul-brides, who are in love with their Husband Lord. [14] |23]|93]|
frrdtaa Hos u wg € Il (51-2)
sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 6. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:
ade aE Sa Sat fate abort nirarg | (51-2, fidtera, ve 5) karan kaaran ayk ohee jin kee-aa aakaar. The One Lord is the Doer, the Cause of causes, who has created the creation.
fsnfs fomreg Ho He Aa A MUTT AU (51-2, fidtera, He 5) tiseh Dhi-aavahu man mayray sarab ko aaDhaar. ||1]| Meditate on the One, O my mind, who is the Support of all. ||1]|
Td AX BIO Ho Hts fowMfs i (1-3, frstera, ve 5) gur kay charan man meh Dhi-aa-ay. Meditate within your mind on the Guru's Feet.
efs nae fioreu vfs Aafe fos of& nal ToS I 61-3, fdtea, He 5)
chhod sagal si-aanpaa saach sabad liv laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Give up all your clever mental tricks, and lovingly attune yourself to the True Word of the Shabad. ||1||Pause| |
ey aH o 38 fmm ga Hy fase FE i 1-4, fastea, H: 5) dukh kalays na bha-o bi-aapai gur mantar hirdai ho-ay. Suffering, agony and fear do not cling to one whose heart is filled with the GurMantra.
afe asa afs ad as faa sfeG 3 afe QU (1-4, fidteoa, He 5)
kot jatnaa kar rahay gur bin tari-o na ko-ay. ||2]|
Trying millions of things, people have grown weary, but without the Guru, none have been saved. ||2||
ofa waAS HO AUS uy AGS Af Il (51-5, fidtora, He 5)
daykh darsan man saDhaarai paap saglay jaahi.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, the mind is comforted and all sins depart.
JG fs0 a afease fa a ot Ust ufo Sil (1-5, firdtea, He 5) ha-o tin kai balihaarnai je gur kee pairee paahi. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to those who fall at the Feet of the Guru. ||3]|
Wonafs ufs ZA ATE ofs at aE Il (51-6, firdtora, He 5)
saaDhsangat man vasai saach har kaa naa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the True Name of the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
A zsatat aoa faa ule fs TS USNIsietsll (51-6, firstea, ve 5)
say vadbhaagee naankaa jinaa man ih bhaa-o. ||4]||24||94|| Very fortunate are those, O Nanak, whose minds are filled with this love. ||4]|24]|94]|
frrstarat HIS U Il (51-7) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Fife ofa ug ufa Asag efs Aare fears il (51-7, frdtora, v8 5)
sanch har Dhan pooj satgur chhod sagal vikaar.
Gather in the Wealth of the Lord, worship the True Guru, and give up all your corrupt ways.
fats 3 Ata Aetoor of fate df Sarg wall (51-7, fasta, v3 5)
jin too’ saaj savaari-aa har simar ho-ay uDhaar. ||1]|
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord who created and adorned you, and you shall be saved. ||1||
Af Ho SH SA wu Il (61-8, fata, ve 5) jap man naam ayk apaar. O mind, chant the Name of the One, the Unique and Infinite Lord.
UTS Ho 36 faafs dor fee ar mrarg NA TIE I (51-8, frdtora, ne 5)
paraan man tan jineh dee-aa riday kaa aaDhaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He gave you the praanaa, the breath of life, and your mind and body. He is the Support of the heart. ||1]||Pause] |
any afa marta us fenrfime Fare il (51-9, fidtera, v2 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar maatay vi-aapi-aa sansaar. The world is drunk, engrossed in sexual desire, anger and egotism.
u@ HS Adel wa seat fee sy niarg MQM (51-9, fates, we 5)
pa-o sant sarnee laag charnee mitai dookh anDhaar. ||2]|
Seek the Sanctuary of the Saints, and fall at their feet; your suffering and darkness Shall be removed. ||2| |
AS Assy efeor ore Sa aget Are Il (51-10, fdtora, He 5) sat santokh da-i-aa kamaavai ayh karnee saar. Practice truth, contentment and kindness; this is the most excellent way of life.
nity fs AS dfs se fan efe us fadarg Sil (51-10, fidtera, ne 5) aap chhod sabh ho-ay raynaa jis day-ay parabh nirankaar. ||3]||
One who is so blessed by the Formless Lord God renounces selfishness, and becomes the dust of all. ||3]|
A CA A Aare So UAfaMOr UATE I (51-11, firdtora, 8 5) jo deesai so sagal too“hai pasri-aa paasaar. All that is seen is You, Lord, the expansion of the expanse.
ad soa dfs soH Alen Aas FH Steg usiQuictull (51-11, frrstara, ve 5)
kaho naanak gur bharam kaati-aa sagal barahm beechaar. ||4]|25]|95] | Says Nanak, the Guru has removed my doubts; I recognize God in all. ||4||25]|95]|
frstaat HIS U Il (51-12)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
vfas Afas HO AAS Aarsret Il (51-12, firdtera, 2 5) dukarit sukarit manDhay sansaar saglaanaa. The whole world is engrossed in bad deeds and good deeds.
CIT 3 IIS SIZ IF aet fear AST NA 51-13, factors, we 5) duhhoo"™ tay rahat bhagat hai ko-ee virlaa jaanaa. ||1]| God's devotee is above both, but those who understand this are very rare. ||1]|
StaAT Ada AHS Il (51-13, fiesta, He 5) thaakur sarbay samaanaa. Our Lord and Master is all-pervading everywhere.
foo aaS HES Homi FS es use AAT NU TIS Ul (51-13, firstora, we 5)
ki-aa kaha-o suna-o su-aamee too” vad purakh sujaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
What should I say, and what should I hear? O my Lord and Master, You are Great, All- powerful and All-knowing. ||1||Pause] |
HS nifsure Ho A AS Sr Ml (51-14, frstora, He 5) maan abhimaan manDhay so sayvak naahee. One who is influenced by praise and blame is not God's servant.
33 AHH A3d at afe Hardt WN (51-14, frstera, 2 5)
tat samadrasee santahu ko-ee kot manDhaahee. ||2| |
One who sees the essence of reality with impartial vision, O Saints, is very rare-one among millions. ||2]|
ade ATES fg atafs ATH Il (51-15, fasta, He 5) kahan kahaavan ih keerat karlaa. People talk on and on about Him; they consider this to be praise of God.
aes Ae 3 HAST Tenfe set feaer Sil (51-15, frdtera, ve 5) kathan kahan tay muktaa gurmukh ko-ee virlaa. ||3]]| But rare indeed is the Gurmukh, who is above this mere talk. ||3]]|
as mizats ae seta & witfenr Il (51-16, frdtera, ve 5) gat avigat kachh nadar na aa-i-aa. He is not concerned with deliverance or bondage.
H36 at JS Soa VG usr NSIQENCEN (51-16, fdtora, He 5)
santan kee rayn naanak daan paa-i-aa. ||4]|26]|96] | Nanak has obtained the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|26]|96] |
frdtaar HIS U we D Il (51-17) sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 7. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
3d 3dh fimrd A os satfeur I 61-17, fastea, 1 5) tayrai bharosai pi-aaray mai laad ladaa-i-aa. Relying on Your Mercy, Dear Lord, I have indulged in sensual pleasures.
gate gatos aaa Safe fst Her A (1-17, frstora, v2 5)
bhooleh chookeh baarik too™ har pitaa maa-i-aa. ||1|| Like a foolish child, I have made mistakes. O Lord, You are my Father and Mother.
[2
HUG AIG AITSS Il (51-17, frstera, v2 5) suhaylaa kahan kahaavan. It is easy to speak and talk,
3m faay SSG NU TIC I (51-17, faster, ve 5) tayraa bikham bhaavan. ||1|| rahaa-o. but it is difficult to accept Your Will. ||1]]Pause] |
JG HWE Se AIG 3a IG ASE nM I 61-17, fastoa, He 5) ha-o maan taan kara-o tayraa ha-o jaan-o aapaa. I stand tall; You are my Strength. I know that You are mine.
AS dt ufo Asts 3 Hats SHISHA A QM (51-18, frrstera, v2 5) sabh hee maDh sabheh tay baahar baymuhtaaj baapaa. ||2|| Inside of all, and outside of all, You are our Self-sufficient Father. ||2||
fust 36 WAG ardt Sct ATS AAT Il (1-18, frdteoa, ue 5) pitaa ha-o jaan-o naahee tayree kavan jugtaa. O Father, I do not Know-how can I know Your Way?
UST U2
qe Has Asg Het TS HHS II (52-1, fdtoa, He 5) banDhan mukat santahu mayree raakhai mamtaa. ||3]| He frees us from bondage, O Saints, and saves us from possessiveness. ||3] |
se fagues sag sf nies ArST Il (52-1, fardtera, He 5)
bha-ay kirpaal thaakur rahi-o aavan jaanaa.
Becoming Merciful, my Lord and Master has ended my comings and goings in reincarnation.
ad ffs Steax USAIN USTaT ISIQOUCON (52-1, fdtoa, ue 5)
gur mil naanak paarbarahm pachhaanaa. ||4]|27||97]|| Meeting with the Guru, Nanak has recognized the Supreme Lord God. ||4||27]||97] |
frdtaa HIS U We Il (52-2) sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 1. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, First House:
Hs Aor fife sreinn afentat AHATS Il (52-2, fadtera, v2 5)
sant janaa mil bhaa-ee-aa kati-arhaa jamkaal.
Meeting with the humble beings, O Siblings of Destiny, the Messenger of Death is conquered.
Ret Atos Hfs Zor dur aA efeore Il (52-3, fidtera, v2 5)
sachaa saahib man vuthaa ho-aa khasam da-i-aal.
The True Lord and Master has come to dwell within my mind; my Lord and Master has become Merciful.
ua Afsag sfeor faofhor Ag AAS AU (52-3, firstera, ws 5) pooraa satgur bhayti-aa binsi-aa sabh janjaal. ||1|| Meeting with the Perfect True Guru, all my worldly entanglements have ended. ||1||
He Afsaa 3G su feed AIMS Il (52-4, frst, He 5) mayray satiguraa ha-o tuDh vitahu kurbaan. O my True Guru, I am a Sacrifice to You.
33 wane aC afsage sth fea nifys on NA THE Il (52-4, fists, v8 5)
tayray darsan ka-o balihaarnai tus ditaa amrit naam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. By the Pleasure of Your Will, You have blessed me with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
fio 3 Afeor a af Ret use AAS Il (52-5, fotos, 3 5) jin too’ sayvi-aa bhaa-o kar say-ee purakh sujaan. Those who have served You with love are truly wise.
fsor fue ed faa niefa any fears i (52-5, firdtea, v2 5)
tinaa pichhai chhutee-ai jin andar naam niDhaan.
Those who have the Treasure of the Naam within emancipate others as well as themselves.
Gd Aes WS a Sdt fate fest mrSH BS Ill (2-6, frdtea, ve 5) gur jayvad daataa ko nahee jin ditaa aatam daan. ||2|| There is no other Giver as great as the Guru, who has given the gift of the soul. ||2]|
me A udete fo fae ag fifeor wate i (62-6, fates, He 5)
aa-ay say parvaan heh jin gur mili-aa subhaa-ay.
Blessed and acclaimed is the coming of those who have met the Guru with loving faith.
Ae Ast dsr waa SAS ATE Il (52-7, fadtea, ue 5) sachay saytee rati-aa dargeh baisan jaa-ay. Attuned to the True One, you shall obtain a place of honor in the Court of the Lord.
ads ofa efsnreior usta foto ue 13st (52-7, frdtea, 2 5) kartay hath vadi-aa-ee-aa poorab likhi-aa paa-ay. ||3]| Greatness is in the Hands of the Creator; it is obtained by pre-ordained destiny. ||3]|
HY Ads" AY Adedg Ay Ate Av Sa Il (52-8, frdtera, vs 5)
sach kartaa sach karanhaar sach saahib sach tayk.
True is the Creator, True is the Doer. True is our Lord and Master, and True is His Support.
Ae Ag eureba Ad afta fader it (52-2, fidtera, v2 5)
sacho sach vakhaanee-ai sacho buDh bibayk.
So speak the Truest of the True. Through the True One, an intuitive and discerning mind is obtained.
Hea fedsts afe sfoor afl aaa Ale Sa ISIQCNCCH (52-9, frdtera, He 5)
sarab nirantar rav rahi-aa jap naanak jeevai ayk. ||4||28]|98]| Nanak lives by chanting and meditating on the One, who is pervading within and contained amongst all. ||4||28]|98]|
frrsta at HIS U Il (52-9) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Tg USHA ura uf sts ate fimrg ii (52-9, ft, vs 5) gur parmaysur poojee-ai man tan laa-ay pi-aar. Worship the Guru, the Transcendent Lord, with your mind and body attuned to love.
Afsag ost dha at ASA Sfe nrg Il (52-10, fadtea, nH: 5) satgur daataa jee-a kaa sabhsai day-ay aDhaar. The True Guru is the Giver of the soul; He gives Support to all.
Afsad aso AHSe Ae Sg Stars Il (52-10, fidtea, ue 5) satgur bachan kamaavnay sachaa ayhu veechaar. Act according to the Instructions of the True Guru; this is the true philosophy.
fag AY Hats sfsur wer Hg AS ST WAU (52-11, fasterar, we 5)
bin saaDhoo sangat rati-aa maa-i-aa moh sabh chhaar. ||1]|
Without being attuned to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all attachment to Maya is just dust. ||1]|
Hd AHS dle ats SH ANTS Il (52-11, frrstera, v2 5) mayray saajan har har naam samaal. O my friend, reflect upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har
WY Halts His SA YTS TS UH UU TIS ll (52-12, fasta, we 5)
saaDhoo sangat man vasai pooran hovai ghaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
. In the Saadh Sangat, He dwells within the mind, and one's works are brought to perfect fruition. ||1]|Pause] |
Od AHI wu TT esas PIAS AE il (52-12, frdtora, ve 5)
gur samrath apaar gur vadbhaagee darsan ho-ay.
The Guru is All-powerful, the Guru is Infinite. By great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is obtained.
Gd widies fosne ad Aes nied 3 AE Il (52-13, facto, He 5)
gur agochar nirmalaa gur jayvad avar na ko-ay.
The Guru is Imperceptible, Immaculate and Pure. There is no other as great as the Guru.
Td Ada TT Adedy Donte Ast ALE il (52-13, fstera, ve 5) gur kartaa gur karanhaar gurmukh sachee so-ay. The Guru is the Creator, the Guru is the Doer. The Gurmukh obtains true glory.
ad 3 Pots fas adt qs ats BS A APE NM (52-14, faster", He 5) gur tay baahar kichh nahee gur keetaa lorhay so ho-ay. ||2]| Nothing is beyond the Guru; whatever He wishes comes to pass. ||2| |
ag swe Tg WdAS TJ HSA Uded'_ Il (52-14, frrdtera, He 5)
gur tirath gur paarjaat gur mansaa pooranhaar.
The Guru is the Sacred Shrine of Pilgrimage, the Guru is the Wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree.
ag wat ofe on ef= Gud AS AAT Il (52-15, fadteoa, we 5)
gur daataa har naam day-ay uDhrai sabh sansaar.
The Guru is the Fulfiller of the desires of the mind. The Guru is the Giver of the Name of the Lord, by which all the world is saved.
ad AH Ad fodarg TT Cur Ma MUTT Il (52-15, firdtera, Hs 5)
gur samrath gur nirankaar gur oochaa agam apaar.
The Guru is All-powerful, the Guru is Formless; the Guru is Lofty, Inaccessible and Infinite.
qe at HfoHt ma oF for aA AGST ST ISI (52-16, fdtoa, v2 5) gur kee mahimaa agam hai ki-aa kathay kathanhaar. ||3]| The Praise of the Guru is so sublime-what can any speaker say? | |3] |
fiss 26 Hfe webts fsss Afsars UTA Il (52-16, fidtera, v8 5) jit-rhay fal man baachhee-ah tit-rhay satgur paas. All the rewards which the mind desires are with the True Guru.
usa fed ures ATG oH SF IH I (52-17, fete, He 5) poorab likhay paavnay saach naam day raas. One whose destiny is so pre-ordained, obtains the Wealth of the True Name.
Afsad Adel otfenit sats odt fae Il (52-17, fadtoa, He 5) satgur sarnee aa-i-aa’ baahurh nahee binaas. Entering the Sanctuary of the True Guru, you shall never die again.
dfs aaa ae 3 fensG eu HA fills Sa AA ISNQCNEEN (52-18, fadtoa, He 5) har naanak kaday na visra-o ayhu jee-o pind tayraa saas. ||4]|29||99] |
Nanak: may I never forget You, Lord. This soul, body and breath are Yours. [14] |29]|99]|
frstaa HIG U Il (52-18)
sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
HS Hog Ale seta Seq ATS OME Il (52-18, frdtoa, ws 5) sant janhu sun bhaa-eeho chhootan saachai naa-ay. O Saints, O Siblings of Destiny, listen: release comes only through the True Name.
Td & Bde Ade Shea Tig a aS Il (52-19, fata, ve 5)
gur kay charan sarayvnay tirath har kaa naa-o.
Worship the Feet of the Guru. Let the Name of the Lord be your sacred shrine of pilgrimage.
wid esata Habafs fs faars aS Wil (52-19, fadtera, ve 5)
aagai dargahi manee-ah milai nithaavay thaa-o. ||1]|
Hereafter, you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord; there, even the homeless find a home. ||1]|
Us uz aret J ATS Afsag AS Il (53-1, fdtera, He 5)
bhaa-ee ray saachee satgur sayv. O Siblings of Destiny, service to the True Guru alone is True.
AAT 3S UE UTS visas MSs UU TIS ll (53-1, frstera, we 5)
satgur tuthai paa-ee-ai pooran alakh abhayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When the True Guru is pleased, we obtain the Perfect, Unseen, Unknowable Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Afsas fees afoor fats fest AT aS Il (53-2, fadtea, vs 5) satgur vitahu vaari-aa jin ditaa sach naa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who has bestowed the True Name.
motes Ad Howe’ AY X TE WS Il (53-2, fdtoa, us 5) an-din sach salaahnaa sachay kay gun gaa-o. Night and day, I praise the True One; I sing the Glorious Praises of the True One.
Ad Wel Ad Uses! AS AST SE Ql (53-3, fasta, He 5) sach khaanaa sach painnaa sachay sachaa naa-o. ||2| |
True is the food, and true are the clothes, of those who chant the True Name of the True One. ||2||
AMA fata 3 feAd AES Hats Te wry Il (53-3, firdtoa, ws 5)
Saas giraas na visrai safal moorat gur aap.
With each breath and morsel of food, do not forget the Guru, the Embodiment of Fulfillment.
ad Aes nied 6 fenet ne ug f3H ATU II 53-4, fidtera, v8 5) gur jayvad avar na dis-ee aath pahar tis jaap. None is seen to be as great as the Guru. Meditate on Him twenty-four hours a day.
Sets ad ST uh AT OH TEstA Bll (63-4, frdtoa, 2 5)
nadar karay taa paa-ee-ai sach naam guntaas. ||3]|
As He casts His Glance of Grace, we obtain the True Name, the Treasure of Excellence. ||3||
dg usnAg &a J AS nfs sfoor AME It (53-5, fidtera, He 5)
gur parmaysar ayk hai sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay.
The Guru and the Transcendent Lord are one and the same, pervading and permeating amongst all.
fra ag usta foftimr ret on forte i (53-5, fretea, v2 5) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa say-ee naam Dhi-aa-ay. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, meditate on the Naam.
SOA Td AdStaAst Hd 3 nie ATE ISIBZONIOOI (53-6, fadtea, He 5) naanak gur sarnaagatee marai na aavai jaa-ay. ||4||30||100||
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Guru, who does not die, or come and go in reincarnation. ||4||30||100] |
qe Afsars yAfe Il (53-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fadtaa Hoe 9 wg 9 niAcudh I (53-8) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 1 asatpadee-aa. Siree Raag, First Mehl, First House, Ashtapadees:
nify ofa Ho eeet fa fa AT SE I (53-8, frdtora, He 1
aakh aakh man vaavnaa ji-o ji-o jaapai vaa-ay.
I speak and chant His Praises, vibrating the instrument of my mind. The more I know Him, the more I vibrate it.
fan 6 af nerd A aes fas ate I (53-9, fadtora, He 1) jis no vaa-ay sunaa-ee-ai so kayvad kit thaa-ay. The One, unto whom we vibrate and sing-how great is He, and where is His Place?
nds 28 Asa Als wife gd fee ote UU (53-9, factor, ve 1) aakhan vaalay jayt-rhay sabh aakh rahay liv laa-ay. ||1]| Those who speak of Him and praise Him-they all continue speaking of Him with love.
[21
aa MST MaH MUTT Il (53-10, fadtea, Hs 1) baabaa alhu agam apaar. O Baba, the Lord Allah is Inaccessible and Infinite.
ura Set ura a= AS udefeas IAI TIS Il (53-10, fasta, vs 1) paakee naa-ee paak thaa-ay sachaa paravdigaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Sacred is His Name, and Sacred is His Place. He is the True Cherisher. ||1]|Pause| |
37 Jan o mit asa fafa o AE AE Il (53-10, faster, v2 1) tayraa hukam na jaapee kayt-rhaa likh na jaanai ko-ay. The extent of Your Command cannot be seen; no one knows how to write it.
AAG Aes Hes foe 3 uASfa SE I (53-11, facto, 2 1) jay sa-o saa-ir maylee-ah til na pujaaveh ro-ay. Even if a hundred poets met together, they could not describe even a tiny bit of it.
ants fas o urétor vfs afe Afs nmafa AE QU (53-11, faster, He 1)
keemat kinai na paa-ee-aa sabh sun sun aakhahi so-ay. ||2||
No one has found Your Value; they all merely write what they have heard again and again. ||2||
ul UaHS ASA AeA HIS MiGs AS Il (53-12, fadtog, He 1)
peer paikaamar saalak saadak suhday a-or saheed.
The Pirs, the Prophets, the spiritual teachers, the faithful, the innocents and the martyrs,
AY HATEa AH HO efs SISA FATS Il (53-10, factors, He 1) saykh masaa-ik kaajee mulaa dar darvays raseed. the Shaikhs, the mystics, the Qazis, the Mullahs and the Dervishes at His Door
weats fa aS mast use Jdafe TIE SM (53-13, frvtea, He 1) barkat tin ka-o aglee parh-day rahan darood. ||3]|| -they are blessed all the more as they continue reading their prayers in praise to Him.
[I3I|
ufé o AA ufe 6 Bd ufe o BS SE I (53-13, fadtwa, He 1)
puchh na saajay puchh na dhaahay puchh na dayvai lay-ay.
He seeks no advice when He builds; He seeks no advice when He destroys. He seeks no advice while giving or taking.
nual Fees wm We nm aS ASE i (53-14, factor, ve 1) aapnee kudrat aapay jaanai aapay karan karay-i. He alone knows His Creative Power; He Himself does all deeds.
Ago 24 sets afa A ave 3 SE SI (53-14, firdtora, He 1) sabhnaa vaykhai nadar kar jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||4| | He beholds all in His Vision. He gives to those with whom He is pleased. | |4| |
Bret oS 6 Webs Set ATS SS Il (53-15, frdtea, v8 1) thaavaa naav na jaanee-ahi naavaa kayvad naa-o. His Place and His Name are not known, no one knows how great is His Name.
fad ZA Aa ufsAg A ass FT aE I (53-15, fadteoa, ne 1) jithai vasai mayraa paatisaahu so kayvad hai thaa-o. How great is that place where my Sovereign Lord dwells?
wats afe o HaSt 0G for 6 uefs AE Ul (53-16, fadtoa, He 1) ambarh ko-ay na sak-ee ha-o kis no puchhan jaa-o. ||5|| No one can reach it; whom shall I go and ask? ||5]||
ZI FIs 6 TSI A fAA Sat ASE Il (53-16, fadtora, ve 1) varnaa varan na bhaavnee jay kisai vadaa karay-i. One class of people does not like the other, when one has been made great.
zs ofa efsurdinr A are 3 Ofe I 53-17, fadtea, He 1) vaday hath vadi-aa-ee-aa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. Greatness is only in His Great Hands; He gives to those with whom He is pleased.
JatH Hed niu vA o few ade Ell (53-17, fadtea, H2 1) hukam savaaray aapnai chasaa na dhil karay-i. ||6||
By the Hukam of His Command, He Himself regenerates, without a moment's delay. [16] |
AS a nid FIs gos Be a Stofa Il 53-18, fadtwa, ve sabh ko aakhai bahut bahut lainai kai veechaar. Everyone cries out, "More! More!", with the idea of receiving.
Aes VST mdb F a sfowr Ars Il 53-18, fata, v2 1) kayvad daataa aakhee-ai day kai rahi-aa sumaar. How great should we call the Giver? His Gifts are beyond estimation.
Soa Ste 5 uiteet 35 HAT Aa SIT NDNA (53-19, fadtea, He 1)
naanak tot na aavee tayray jugah jugah bhandaar. ||7||1]|
O Nanak, there is no deficiency; Your Storehouses are filled to overflowing, age after age. ||7]|11|
HIS % Il (53-19)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AS aS HIS Aas asta Aters il (53-19, fadtora, Hz 1) sabhay kant mahaylee-aa saglee-aa karahi seegaar. All are brides of the Husband Lord; all decorate themselves for Him.
Yat ug Tes Teste retort Aa SH fears i (54-1, fastoa, He 1)
ganat ganaavan aa-ee-aa soohaa vays vikaar. But when the time comes to settle their accounts, their red robes are corrupt.
undfs Un o ureha der UT WMT NAL (54-1, frdtora, He 1) pakhand paraym na paa-ee-ai khotaa paaj khu-aar. ||1]| His Love is not obtained through hypocrisy. Her false coverings bring only ruin. ||1]|
dfs MG fe fus TS ofe I (54-2, frets, ne 1) har jee-o i-o pir raavai naar. In this way, the Dear Husband Lord ravishes and enjoys His bride.
30 Sefs Aaaat met fasur Sfs Aes Ul TIS il (54-2, fadtora, He 1)
tuDh bhaavan sohaaganee apnee kirpaa laihi savaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The happy soul-bride is pleasing to You, Lord; by Your Grace, You adorn her. ||1]|Pause] |
qed Aaet Atardbort sq Ho fus & uh Il (54-3, fadtera, ne 1)
gur sabdee seegaaree-aa tan man pir kai paas.
She is decorated with the Word of the Guru's Shabad; her mind and body belong to her Husband Lord.
eft ag Afs ust sat AY ad MaeTA I (54-3, fadtea, ne 1)
du-ay kar jorh kharhee takai sach kahai ardaas.
With her palms pressed together, she stands, waiting on Him, and offers her True prayers to Him.
ote gst Ae Ss eat ofS ast Sf TH IQ (54-4, factor, v8 1)
laal ratee sach bhai vasee bhaa-ay ratee rang raas. ||2|| Dyed in the deep crimson of the Love of her Darling Lord, she dwells in the Fear of the True One. Imbued with His Love, she is dyed in the color of His Love. ||2]|
fipy at dat arent wat HS are I (54-4, fidtora, vs 1)
pari-a kee chayree kaa‘dhee-ai laalee maanai naa-o.
She is said to be the hand-maiden of her Beloved Lord; His sweetheart surrenders to His Name.
Arat ulfs o scet Ard Af fore i (54-5, frdtora, ne 1) saachee pareet na tut-ee saachay mayl milaa-o. True Love is never broken; she is united in Union with the True One.
Rafe gat Ho efor g@ Ae afsod WE BI 64-5, fete", He 1
sabad ratee man vayDhi-aa ha-o sad balihaarai jaa-o. ||3]|
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, her mind is pierced through. I am forever a sacrifice to Him. ||3]|
AW uo ds 5 anet A Afsag Hf Ae I (54-6, facta, v2 1) saa Dhan rand na bais-ee jay satgur maahi samaa-ay. That bride, who is absorbed into the True Guru, shall never become a widow.
fug dhs 33S AIG He 3 AME II (54-6, firdtora, we 1)
pir reesaaloo na-otano saacha-o marai na jaa-ay.
Her Husband Lord is Beautiful; His Body is forever fresh and new. The True One does not die, and shall not go.
fos ge Aoeret Act coef safe ISI (54-7, frdtora, He 1)
nit ravai sohaaganee saachee nadar rajaa-ay. ||4||
He continually enjoys His happy soul-bride; He casts His Gracious Glance of Truth upon her, and she abides in His Will. ||4]|
Ag ust us HSA aus UN Aberg I (54-7, fadtera, vs 1) saach Dharhee Dhan maadee-ai kaaparh paraym seegaar. The bride braids her hair with Truth; her clothes are decorated with His Love.
deg vfs erfeor Hes VAS BM” I (54-7, fadtoa, He 1)
chandan cheet vasaa-i-aa mandar dasvaa du-aar.
Like the essence of sandalwood, He permeates her consciousness, and the Temple of the Tenth Gate is opened.
dua Aafe fearfior TH oH BI Te Ul (54-8, firstera, He 1) deepak sabad vigaasi-aa raam naam ur haar. ||5|| The lamp of the Shabad is lit, and the Name of the Lord is her necklace. ||5||
od niefa AJat HASfa Hat fms il (54-8, fata, He 1)
naaree andar sohnee mastak manee pi-aar.
She is the most beautiful among women; upon her forehead she wears the Jewel of the Lord's Love.
Ast Aes Host ATS Uf Rus I (54-9, fidtora, He 1) sobhaa surat suhaavanee saachai paraym apaar. Her glory and her wisdom are magnificent; her love for the Infinite Lord is True.
faa fus usu o weet AM ad & Of fimrfe WEN (54-9, facto, ne 1)
bin pir purakh na jaan-ee saachay gur kai hayt pi-aar. ||6||
Other than her Beloved Lord, she knows no man. She enshrines love for the True Guru. ||6||
fafa nifoerdt wate fa fuse fas dfs feafe it (54-10, fastora, v2
nis anDhi-aaree sutee-ay ki-o pir bin rain vihaa-ay.
Asleep in the darkness of the night, how shall she pass her life-night without her Husband?
na Hee so AShAe He US Af sfs ATE II (54-10, fates, He 1) ank jala-o tan jaalee-a-o man Dhan jal bal jaa-ay. Her limbs shall burn, her body shall burn, and her mind and wealth shall burn as well.
W ue afs 6 eto a fase AaS ATE NDI (54-11, fadtora, He 1)
jaa Dhan kant na raavee-aa taa birthaa joban jaa-ay. ||7]|| When the Husband does not enjoy His bride, then her youth passes away in vain. HI7II
Ad 3 HIGat ASt Is F UTS I (54-12, favtera, we 1)
sayjai kant mahaylrhee sootee boojh na paa-ay.
The Husband is on the Bed, but the bride is asleep, and so she does not come to know Him.
JG ASt fug wae fan xB ys ATE I 54-12, frstra, ve 1)
ha-o sutee pir jaagnaa kis ka-o poochha-o jaa-ay. While I am asleep, my Husband Lord is awake. Where can I go for advice?
Afsafe Het S SAt Soa UM Aafe WCQ (54-12, fdtora, He
satgur maylee bhai vasee naanak paraym sakhaa-ay. ||8]|2|| The True Guru has led me to meet Him, and now I dwell in the Fear of God. O Nanak, His Love is always with me. ||8]|2]]|
frrstarar HIS YI (54-13) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
nm Te wmy ae omy vfs tere Il (54-13, fadtea, ve
aapay gun aapay kathai aapay sun veechaar.
O Lord, You are Your Own Glorious Praise. You Yourself speak it; You Yourself hear it and contemplate it.
WM 3g Use F nm HB wry I (54-14, fastora, we 1)
aapay ratan parakh too™ aapay mol apaar.
You Yourself are the Jewel, and You are the Appraiser. You Yourself are of Infinite Value.
ASS HG HIS SF MM SST NA (54-14, frstora, we 1) saacha-o maan mahat too” aapay dayvanhaar. ||1]| O True Lord, You are Honor and Glory; You Yourself are the Giver. ||1]|
fs ME JF ATT AIS Il (54-15, firdtora, we 1) har jee-o too” kartaa kartaar. O Dear Lord, You are the Creator and the Cause.
fAS sre FB wy FS ofa OH HS wroT WAU TTS Ml (54-15, firsts, we
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh too’ har naam milai aachaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If it is Your Will, please save and protect me; please bless me with the lifestyle of the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
mmy dha fest nm dat Hate Il (54-15, fidtera, He 1) aapay heeraa nirmalaa aapay rang majeeth. You Yourself are the flawless diamond; You Yourself are the deep crimson color.
My Ht CAS nM sas ATS Il (54-16, fasta, we 1) aapay motee oojlo aapay bhagat baseeth. You Yourself are the perfect pearl; You Yourself are the devotee and the priest.
ad a Rafe Howat ufe wie ste miste II (54-16, fata, He 1)
gur kai sabad salaahnaa ghat ghat deeth adeeth. ||2||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, You are praised. In each and every heart, the Unseen is seen. ||2] |
mm ATad Sfsar wmy urs wrarg Il (54-17, fasta, we 1)
aapay saagar bohithaa aapay paar apaar.
You Yourself are the ocean and the boat. You Yourself are this shore, and the one beyond.
Wel Se AWS F Hale BwUTSTT Il (54-17, fidtora, we 1)
saachee vaat sujaan too” sabad laghaavanhaar.
O All-knowing Lord, You are the True Way. The Shabad is the Navigator to ferry us across.
fostaur sg Welt IS TT TMT WS (54-18, fasta, we 1)
nidri-aa dar jaanee-ai baajh guroo gubaar. ||3]||
One who does not fear God shall live in fear; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. ||3]|
wAfag asst Shy Ja ast wr] ATE I (54-18, fata, ve 1) asthir kartaa daykhee-ai hor kaytee aavai jaa-ay. The Creator alone is seen to be Eternal; all others come and go.
wnt fesHE Sa J a sot oo uty i (54-19, fasta, we 1) aapay nirmal ayk too’ hor banDhee DhanDhai paa-ay. Only You, Lord, are Immaculate and Pure. All others are bound up in worldly pursuits.
afs wa A Bad AS fAG fos OTE sil (54-19, fadteoa, He 1
gur raakhay say ubray saachay si-o liv laa-ay. ||4]|
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved. They are lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||4||
UST uy
dfs H@ nafs ues As gS ae ater Il (55-1, firdtora, He 1)
har jee-o sabad pachhaanee-ai saach ratay gur vaak.
Through the Shabad, they recognize the Dear Lord; through the Guru's Word, they are attuned to Truth.
faz 3fo He 5 oaet AS wuts faa Goer I (55-1, fadtera, 2 1) tit tan mail na lag-ee sach ghar jis otaak. Filth does not stick to the body of one who has secured a dwelling in his True Home.
Sets ad Ae ure fie ae fom Are UI! (55-2, fadtera, He 1)
nadar karay sach paa-ee-ai bin naavai ki-aa saak. ||5]|
When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, we obtain the True Name. Without the Name, who are our relatives? ||5||
fret Ag ustfenr A Ade Aa ots I (55-2, frdteoa, ue 1 jinee sach pachhaani-aa say sukhee-ay jug chaar. Those who have realized the Truth are at peace throughout the four ages.
UGH fA whe a A afm Ba ofa I (55-3, fadtora, Hs 1)
ha-umai tarisnaa maar kai sach rakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
Subduing their egotism and desires, they keep the True Name enshrined in their hearts.
Aa Hfs oo Sa oy uSha ag eters Well (55-3, fadtea, v2 1)
jag meh laahaa ayk naam paa-ee-ai gur veechaar. ||6]|
In this world, the only real profit is the Name of the One Lord; it is earned by contemplating the Guru. ||6||
Ae sug odin we AST AY THA I (55-4, fadtora, He 1)
saacha-o vakhar laadee-ai laabh sadaa sach raas.
Loading the Merchandise of the True Name, you shall gather in your profits forever with the Capital of Truth.
Ardt waa sAet safs Adt mgetA I (55-4, fadtera, He 1) saachee dargeh bais-ee bhagat sachee ardaas. In the Court of the True One, you shall sit in truthful devotion and prayer.
ufs fAG Sa fous TH on useriA IDI (55-5, firdtora, He
pat si-o laykhaa nibrhai raam naam pargaas. ||7]||
Your account shall be settled with honor, in the Radiant Light of the Name of the Lord. HI7II
Cu Gus nmi aa o efi AE Il (55-5, fists, we 1) oochaa oocha-o aakhee-ai kaha-o na daykhi-aa jaa-ay. The Lord is said to be the Highest of the High; no one can perceive Him.
Wo tur 30 Sa Fs Afsata cor feute i (55-6, fasta, ws 1) jah daykhaa tah ayk too” satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ay. Wherever I look, I see only You. The True Guru has inspired me to see You.
nfs fadats webn aoa ofa ASE NCSI (55-6, fadtea, He 1)
jot nirantar jaanee-ai naanak sahj subhaa-ay. ||8]|3]|
The Divine Light within is revealed, O Nanak, through this intuitive understanding. [18] 131]
frrstarar HIS FI (55-7) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Heol WS 3 Want Ag Ua MAST I (55-7, firdtera, He 1) machhulee jaal na jaani-aa sar khaaraa asgaahu. The fish did not notice the net in the deep and salty sea.
mits fimiat Avet fas ats Sarg Il 655-7, fade, ve at si-aanee sohnee ki-o keeto vaysaahu. It was so clever and beautiful, but why was it so confident?
ats aafs wast ae 5 cd frag Nl 55-8, fadtea, He 1) keetay kaaran paakrhee kaal na talai siraahu. ||1]| By its actions it was caught, and now death cannot be turned away from its head.
[2
set 3 fC fafa Weg AS Il (55-8, fiadtoa, He 1) bhaa-ee ray i-o sir jaanhu kaal. O Siblings of Destiny, just like this, see death hovering over your own heads!
fa@ Het f3 nrem ue nifsat ATS NU TIS Ul (55-8, fates, He 1)
ji-o machhee ti-o maansaa pavai achintaa jaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
People are just like this fish; unaware, the noose of death descends upon them. ||1]|Pause] |
AS Aa Md aes a fas TT AG nlNTg Il (55-9, fadtera, He 1) sabh jag baaDho kaal ko bin gur kaal afaar. The whole world is bound by death; without the Guru, death cannot be avoided.
Afs g3 A Gad vfs efs fears Il (55-9, fadtera, He 1) sach ratay say ubray dubiDhaa chhod vikaar. Those who are attuned to Truth are saved; they renounce duality and corruption.
UG fae a afease efe AS AfeMis IQ (55-10, fadtea, He 1) ha-o tin kai balihaarnai dar sachai sachiaar. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to those who are found to be Truthful in the True Court. ||2]|
Hes faQ udor arat after oft ih (55-10, firdtera, 2 1) seechaanay ji-o pankhee-aa jaalee baDhik haath. Think of the hawk preying on the birds, and the net in the hands of the hunter.
afs wa A Cad dfs aa sa ATE I (55-11, fidtora, He 1) gur raakhay say ubray hor faathay chogai saath. Those who are protected by the Guru are saved; the others are caught by the bait.
fag oe ufs Adinifs afe 3 Hat Afa NSN 55-11, fadtera, He 1)
bin naavai chun sutee-ah ko-ay na sangee saath. ||3]|
Without the Name, they are picked up and thrown away; they have no friends or companions. ||3]||
Ae Ae wind AS AST ATS Il (55-12, fadtera, He 1) sacho sachaa aakhee-ai sachay sachaa thaan. God is said to be the Truest of the True; His Place is the Truest of the True.
frat Aa Hfomr fsa nfs AG fami Il (55-12, firdteoa, ne 1 jinee sachaa mani-aa tin man sach Dhi-aan. Those who obey the True One-their minds abide in true meditation.
nfo “fa AS ATehata ante for farrgs usil (55-12, faster, He 1)
man mukh soochay jaanee-ahi gurmukh jinaa gi-aan. ||4||
Those who become Gurmukh, and obtain spiritual wisdom-their minds and mouths are known to be pure. ||4||
Afsas wat wreeta afs AHS Sfe free i (55-13, fadtera, He 1)
satgur agai ardaas kar saajan day-ay milaa-ay.
Offer your most sincere prayers to the True Guru, so that He may unite you with your Best Friend.
Aras fifemt Ay ufenr aes He fag ate il 55-14, firdtora, we 1)
Saajan mili-ai sukh paa-i-aa jamdoot mu-ay bikh khaa-ay.
Meeting your Best Friend, you shall find peace; the Messenger of Death shall take poison and die.
oe wiefe JG eA ae eA Hf wrfe Null (55-14, faster, He 1) naavai andar ha-o vasaa™ naa-o vasai man aa-ay. ||5|| I dwell deep within the Name; the Name has come to dwell within my mind. ||5||
WS qT Trg 3 fag Aa Fs 5 UTS I (55-15, firdtora, we 1)
baajh guroo gubaar hai bin sabdai boojh na paa-ay.
Without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness; without the Shabad, understanding is not obtained.
Test usary dfs vfs ad fee wee i (55-15, fidtera, ve 1)
gurmatee pargaas ho-ay sach rahai liv laa-ay.
Through the Guru's Teachings, you shall be enlightened; remain absorbed in the Love of the True Lord.
fsa ae o Hed Aat Afs PTE NEI (5-16, fadteoa, v2 1) tithai kaal na sanchrai jotee jot samaa-ay. ||6|| Death does not go there; your light shall merge with the Light. ||6||
3d AAG FS AWE F uM ABET Il (55-16, firdtora, we 1)
too™hai saajan too” sujaan too” aapay maylanhaar.
You are my Best Friend; You are All-knowing. You are the One who unites us with Yourself.
Oe Aaet Wardha wiz o USS Il (55-16, fata, ve 1)
gur sabdee salaahee-ai ant na paaraavaar.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we praise You; You have no end or limitation.
fsa are 3 mus faa Td a ASE MRE IDI (55-17, fade, He
tithai kaal na aprhai jithai gur kaa sabad apaar. ||7|| Death does not reach that place, where the Infinite Word of the Guru's Shabad resounds. ||7]||
gout As Surfs gant ars ats Il (55-17, frstera, 42 1)
hukmee sabhay oopjahi hukmee kaar kamaahi.
By the Hukam of His Command, all are created. By His Command, actions are performed.
gant as ef 3 gent fs mri i 55-18, fidtora, ve hukmee kaalai vas hai hukmee saach samaahi. By His Command, all are subject to death; by His Command, they merge in Truth.
Sod A fsa ae A aba fea Ha |fh fae ofs Ici (55-18, fadtea, He 1)
naanak jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai inaa jantaa vas kichh naahi. ||8]|4||
O Nanak, whatever pleases His Will comes to pass. Nothing is in the hands of these beings. ||8]||4]|
frrstarat HIS 9 I (55-19) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
“fe 76 Ste af o fae Tot THE il (55-19, firdtora, Hs 1) man joothai tan jooth hai jihvaa joothee ho-ay. If the mind is polluted, then the body is polluted, and the tongue is polluted as well.
ust ue “fa 3S 3S awe fas afs FET TE il (56-1, frstra, ue
mukh jhoothai jhooth bolnaa ki-o kar soochaa ho-ay. With false mouths, people speak falsehood. How can they be made pure?
faa nis Hee o Hib AM 3 AG SE NAN (56-1, faster", He 1
bin abh sabad na maa‘jee-ai saachay tay sach ho-ay. ||1]|
Without the Holy Water of the Shabad, they are not cleansed. From the True One alone comes Truth. ||1]|
HU qedtat Ay Afs Il (56-2, firdtera, v2 1 munDhay gunheenee sukh kayhi. O soul-bride, without virtue, what happiness can there be?
fug seer off nent fs Aafe AY Sfo NA TIS I (56-2, frdteoa, ue 1)
pir ralee-aa raS maansee saach sabad sukh nayhi. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Husband Lord enjoys her with pleasure and delight; she is at peace in the love of the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
fug usent A ahi us set sate il (56-2, factor, v3 1) pir pardaysee jay thee-ai Dhan vaa‘dhee jooray-ay. When the Husband goes away, the bride suffers in the pain of separation,
faG nfs aS Hest ave use adle Il (56-3, fadtera, v2 1) ji-o jal thorhai machhulee karan palaav karay-i. like the fish in shallow water, crying for mercy.
fus are AY urébot AT nm sete ASE QIN (56-3, fiadtera, He 1)
pir bhaavai sukh paa-ee-ai jaa aapay nadar karay-i. ||2]|
As it pleases the Will of the Husband Lord, peace is obtained, when He Himself casts His Glance of Grace. ||2]|
fug Arerdt mruar Fat AISt STS I (56-4, fstora, He 1 pir saalaahee aapnaa sakhee sahaylee naal. Praise your Husband Lord, together with your bridesmaids and friends.
3fs Ad He Afr ast ofa foots i 66-4, fates, v2 1
tan sohai man mohi-aa ratee rang nihaal.
The body is beautified, and the mind is fascinated. Imbued with His Love, we are enraptured.
Rafe Hed Aveat fus TS TE ats Sil (56-5, fasta, He 1) sabad savaaree sohnee pir raavay gun naal. ||3]| Adorned with the Shabad, the beautiful bride enjoys her Husband with virtue. ||3] |
anfs ath a ureet dct nreafeurts i (56-5, faster, He 1) kaaman kaam na aavee khotee avgani-aar. The soul-bride is of no use at all, if she is evil and without virtue.
oT AY uehdt Ad slo Wet Sats Il (56-6, frdtora, He 1)
naa sukh pay-ee-ai saahurai jhooth jalee vaykaar.
She does not find peace in this world or the next; she burns in falsehood and corruption.
wes Jee stag est afs ferfa gil 6-6, fadtea, He 1)
aavan vanjan daakh-rho chhodee kant visaar. ||4||
Coming and going are very difficult for that bride who is abandoned and forgotten by her Husband Lord. ||4]|
fus at ofs Hoeat St A fers Afe I (56-7, facta, He 1)
pir kee naar suhaavanee mutee so kit saad.
The beautiful soul-bride of the Husband Lord-by what sensual pleasures has she been doomed?
fus a oth & nrect 88 ates ate il (56-7, fadtoa, He 1) pir kai kaam na aavee bolay faadil baad. She is of no use to her Husband if she babbles in useless arguments.
ofa ufs Set at Bd Set SH ATS WUll (56-7, fasta, He 1D
dar ghar dho-ee naa lahai chhootee doojai saad. ||5]|
At the Door of His Home, she finds no shelter; she is discarded for seeking other pleasures. ||5]|
ufss eafs udtor ot gata Aes I (6-8, frstera, ue 1)
pandit vaacheh pothee-aa naa boojheh veechaar.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read their books, but they do not understand the real meaning.
Mo AC HSt & Vols Her aT surg Il (56-8, fistora, He 1)
an ka-o matee day chaleh maa-i-aa kaa vaapaar.
They give instructions to others, and then walk away, but they deal in Maya themselves.
RaSt Tot A Fe TNt ASE A AMY ell (56-9, fadtoa, 2 1)
kathnee jhoothee jag bhavai rahnee sabad so saar. ||6] |
Speaking falsehood, they wander around the world, while those who remain true to the Shabad are excellent and exalted. ||6] |
as ufss Azet ser aafa serg I (56-9, fata, He 1) kaytay pandit jotkee baydaa karahi beechaar. There are so many Pandits and astrologers who ponder over the Vedas.
afe fedfa Hoge Be nes AS Il (56-10, fidtera, He 1)
vaad viroDh salaahnay vaaday aavan jaan.
They glorify their disputes and arguments, and in these controversies they continue coming and going.
fag ad AdH 6 SeHt ate Af nrfe Tavs IDI (6-10, frdtora, He 1)
bin gur karam na chhutsee kahi sun aakh vakhaan. ||7||
Without the Guru, they are not released from their karma, although they speak and listen and preach and explain. ||7||
Afs qeest omdinifs HTS ast AfE I (56-11, fadtera, He 1) sabh gunvantee aakhee-ahi mai gun naahee ko-ay. They all call themselves virtuous, but I have no virtue at all.
ofe eg of Hoeat H oS YS APE I (56-11, firdtora, He 1) har var naar suhaavanee mai bhaavai parabh so-ay. With the Lord as her Husband, the soul-bride is happy; I, too, love that God.
Sea Aafe fuoreat ot Sear ofS WCNUll (56-12, firstera, He 1)
naanak sabad milaavrhaa naa vaychhorhaa ho-ay. ||8]|5|| O Nanak, through the Shabad, union is obtained; there is no more separation. ||8]|5]|
frrstaar HIS Y Il (56-12) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Ay su HAH Aba Stefe ahs SH Il (56-12, fata, 2 1)
jap tap sanjam saaDhee-ai tirath keechai vaas.
You may chant and meditate, practice austerities and self-restraint, and dwell at sacred shrines of pilgrimage;
Us BS slammer fag ATS fomr 3H I (56-13, fadtea, He 1)
punn daan chang-aa-ee-aa bin saachay ki-aa taas.
you may give donations to charity, and perform good deeds, but without the True One, what is the use of it all?
as go 30 oe fag Te HOH FEA IAI (6-13, frdtorg, He 1) jayhaa raaDhay tayhaa Iunai bin gun janam vinaas. ||1]| As you plant, so shall you harvest. Without virtue, this human life passes away in vain.
[21
HO qe GH AY OE Il (56-14, fate, v2 munDhay gun daasee sukh ho-ay. O young bride, be a slave to virtue, and you shall find peace.
meade fsurfa AHTeba TSHAS ys AE AU TIS i (6-14, frdtora, 3 1)
avgan ti-aag samaa-ee-ai gurmat pooraa so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Renouncing wrongful actions, following the Guru's Teachings, you shall be absorbed into the Perfect One. ||1||Pause] |
fee At eurdion sat oat ats i (56-15, frrstora, He 1) vin raasee vapaaree-aa takay kundaa chaar. Without capital, the trader looks around in all four directions.
HO 3 YS wus SAS Tat wa alas Il (56-15, frdtora, ws 1)
mool na bujhai aapnaa vasat rahee ghar baar.
He does not understand his own origins; the merchandise remains within the door of his own house.
fee sug ey mare afs Hot afsmrts iI (56-15, frétera, He 1) vin vakhar dukh aglaa koorh muthee koorhi-aar. ||2] | Without this commodity, there is great pain. The false are ruined by falsehood. ||2| |
od mfsfotA aGsa" ude ISO Sets Il (56-16, frrdtoa, vs 1) laahaa ahinis na-otanaa parkhay ratan veechaar. One who contemplates and appraises this Jewel day and night reaps new profits.
SAS Bd ufs ntue Ve asA As Il (56-16, fades, He 1)
vasat lahai ghar aapnai chalai kaaraj saar.
He finds the merchandise within his own home, and departs after arranging his affairs.
genta fa@ gen afe aaHfe qoH ates SI (56-17, fadtoa, ue 1) vanjaari-aa si-o vanaj kar gurmukh barahm beechaar. ||3]| So trade with the true traders, and as Gurmukh, contemplate God. ||3]||
Hat Hats ureha AAS HBESTS Il (56-17, fadtera, ve 1) jantaa’ sangat paa-ee-ai jay maylay maylanhaar. In the Society of the Saints, He is found, if the Uniter unites us.
fifemr df 3 fees fan nists Afs ype II (6-18, fadtoa, He 1
mili-aa ho-ay na vichhurhai jis antar jot apaar.
One whose heart is filled with His Infinite Light meets with Him, and shall never again be separated from Him.
Ae orafs Afs gd Ad UN fimrs iigil (56-18, fretoa, He 1D sachai aasan sach rahai sachai paraym pi-aar. ||4]| True is his position; he abides in Truth, with love and affection for the True One. ||4]|
frat ru ustfenr we fs HIG HATE Il (56-19, firdtera, He 1)
jinee aap pachhaani-aa ghar meh mahal suthaa-ay.
One who understands himself finds the Mansion of the Lord's Presence within his own home.
Ae Ast ofsur Ad us ute il (56-19, fadtera, v2 1) sachay saytee rati-aa sacho palai paa-ay. Imbued with the True Lord, Truth is gathered in.
ua ud fgsefs A ys web AS APS ote WUll (57-1, frdtoa, He 1)
taribhavan so parabh jaanee-ai saacho saachai naa-ay. ||5|| God is known throughout the three worlds. True is the Name of the True One. ||5]|
A ue udt Aveat fafe fug ast Afar i (57-1, fadtea, He 1) saa Dhan kharee suhaavanee jin pir jaataa sang. The wife who knows that her Husband Lord is always with her is very beautiful.
Host Hols soreha A fg aS Sfar il (57-2, fadtea, v2 1)
mahlee mahal bulaa-ee-ai so pir raavay rang.
The soul-bride is called to the Mansion of the His Presence, and her Husband Lord ravishes her with love.
Afs Hots AT sot fufs Het ae Afar WEN (57-2, factor, He 1)
sach suhaagan saa bhalee pir mohee gun sang. ||6|| The happy soul-bride is true and good; she is fascinated by the Glories of her Husband Lord. ||6||
gol gat afs va afe ois sate WE I (57-3, fretra, 2 1)
bhoolee bhoolee thal charhaa thal charh doogar jaa-o.
Wandering around and making mistakes, I climb the plateau; having climbed the plateau, I go up the mountain.
a6 ufo sat A fer fag ae gs 5 UE I (57-3, fetes, He 1)
ban meh bhoolee jay firaa bin gur boojh na paa-o.
But now I have lost my way, and I am wandering around in the forest; without the Guru, I do not understand.
oeg 3a A fer fefs fefs wre WE NON (57-3, faster, He 1)
naavhu bhoolee jay firaa fir fir aava-o jaa-o. ||7||
If I wander around forgetting God's Name, I shall continue coming and going in reincarnation, over and over again. ||7]||
usd We urGur vs Tas aE i (57-4, firsts, ue 1) puchhahu jaa-ay paDhaa-oo-aa chalay chaakar ho-ay. Go and ask the travellers, how to walk on the Path as His slave.
oH Aefs nmuat efs wig oa o SE Il (57-4, fadtera, He 1) raajan jaaneh aapnaa dar ghar thaak na ho-ay.
They know the Lord to be their King, and at the Door to His Home, their way is not blocked.
area Sa ate sour wt neg 3 aE CEN (57-5, frdtora, we 1) naanak ayko rav rahi-aa doojaa avar na ko-ay. ||8]|6|| O Nanak, the One is pervading everywhere; there is no other at all. ||8]|6||
frrstarar HIS FI (57-5) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
ad 3 fsone vem foone ea At Il 657-6, fadtoa, x2 1)
gur tay nirmal jaanee-ai nirmal dayh sareer.
Through the Guru, the Pure One is known, and the human body becomes pure as well.
fodHe ATS nfs SA A ATS ne Ute Il (57-6, fatwa, He 1) nirmal saacho man vasai so jaanai abh peer. The Pure, True Lord abides within the mind; He knows the pain of our hearts.
Hon 3 AY Mas oT rd AH Ste UU (57-7, fadtera, He 1)
sahjai tay sukh aglo naa laagai jam teer. ||1]||
With intuitive ease, a great peace is found, and the arrow of death shall not strike you. ||1]|
aet FHS ost feos afe ate i (57-7, fadtera, He 1) bhaa-ee ray mail naahee nirmal jal naa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, filth is washed away by bathing in the Pure Water of the Name.
fSOHE ATT Sa JIT HG sat AS AVS NU TIS ll (57-7, frdtora, we 1)
nirmal saachaa ayk too hor mail bharee sabh jaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You alone are Perfectly Pure, O True Lord; all other places are filled with filth. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs a Hed Ave abort agea fe Il (57-8, fata, v2 1) har kaa mandar sohnaa kee-aa karnaihaar. The Temple of the Lord is beautiful; it was made by the Creator Lord.
ofe AfA dtu uigu afs fysefe AfS mrs Il (57-8, frdtorar, 3 1)
rav sas deep anoop jot taribhavan jot apaar.
The sun and the moon are lamps of incomparably beautiful light. Throughout the three worlds, the Infinite Light is pervading.
Je UcE Us ASat AY ABS Sg IQ 57-9, fadtera, He 1)
haat patan garh koth-rhee sach sa-udaa vaapaar. ||2||
In the shops of the city of the body, in the fortresses and in the huts, the True Merchandise is traded. ||2||
fomra nine & Sot ty fadne ate Il (57-9, fadtora, He 1)
gi-aan anjan bhai bhanjnaa daykh niranjan bhaa-ay.
The ointment of spiritual wisdom is the destroyer of fear; through love, the Pure One is seen.
Tus ude AS wWebh A He Te one Il 57-10, fete, He
gupat pargat sabh jaanee-ai jay man raakhai thaa-ay.
The mysteries of the seen and the unseen are all known, if the mind is kept centered and balanced.
mA Afsad A AHS St HOA we ferfe NSN (57-10, fata, He 1) aisaa satgur jay milai taa sehjay la-ay milaa-ay. ||3]| If one finds such a True Guru, the Lord is met with intuitive ease. ||3]|
afA anect oe use fos fos ote Il 657-11, fadtea, v2 1)
kas kasvatee laa-ee-ai parkhay hit chit laa-ay.
He draws us to His Touchstone, to test our love and consciousness. ae o8g & ufeat ud uATS UTE I 657-11, faster, He 1)
khotay tha-ur na paa-inee kharay khajaanai paa-ay. The counterfeit have no place there, but the genuine are placed in His Treasury.
wr nie efs ate fe He Ate ANTS Ii (57-12, fctora, He 1) aas andaysaa door kar i-o mal jaa-ay samaa-ay. | |4| | Let your hopes and anxieties depart; thus pollution is washed away. ||4||
HY a@ Ha A a SU o Ha ALE I (57-12, fadtera, He 1) sukh ka-o maagai sabh ko dukh na maagai ko-ay. Everyone begs for happiness; no one asks for suffering.
Ha aG ey nae HoHfe gs o TE Il (57-13, factors, 2 1)
sukhai ka-o dukh aglaa manmukh boojh na ho-ay.
But in the wake of happiness, there comes great suffering. The self-willed manmukhs do not understand this.
HY ey AH ate webs Rafe sfe AY SE Null (657-13, fades, He
sukh dukh sam kar jaanee-ahi sabad bhayd sukh ho-ay. ||5||
Those who see pain and pleasure as one and the same find peace; they are pierced through by the Shabad. ||5||
ae yard sdba seat Fon fara il 657-14, fadtra, vs 1) bayd pukaaray vaachee-ai banee barahm bi-aas. The Vedas proclaim, and the words of Vyaasa tell us,
Hfe AS Aza Ato ath JS TESA Il (57-14, fidtora, us 1)
mun jan sayvak saaDhikaa naam ratay guntaas.
that the silent sages, the servants of the Lord, and those who practice a life of spiritual discipline are attuned to the Naam, the Treasure of Excellence.
Af o3 A fafe ae 38 Ae afeod WH INEM (57-15, fade, He 1)
sach ratay say jin ga-ay ha-o sad balihaarai jaas. ||6] |
Those who are attuned to the True Name win the game of life; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||6]|
UJ Afar HS He sd fro nfs on 3 SE II (57-15, firdteora, He 1)
chahu jug mailay mal bharay jin mukh naam na ho-ay.
Those who do not have the Naam in their mouths are filled with pollution; they are filthy throughout the four ages.
saat ste fegfeor ya aver ufS Ute I (57-16, frdtora, H3 1) bhagtee bhaa-ay vihooni-aa muhu kaalaa pat kho-ay. Without loving devotion to God, their faces are blackened, and their honor is lost.
frat on ferfanr nears Hot Sf NDI (57-16, frtoa, He 1D
jinee naam visaari-aa avgan muthee ro-ay. ||7||
Those who have forgotten the Naam are plundered by evil; they weep and wail in dismay. ||7]|
ans das ufeor sg ate fis ferfe i (57-17, fade, ue 1)
khojat khojat paa-i-aa dar kar milai milaa-ay.
I searched and searched, and found God. In the Fear of God, I have been united in His Union.
nity use ufs ZA IH RAST ATE I (57-17, fadtera, ne 1)
aap pachhaanai ghar vasai ha-umai tarisnaa jaa-ay.
Through self-realization, people dwell within the home of their inner being; egotism and desire depart.
aoe fesHs CxS A TS ala ote cM 7-18, fates, Hs 1) naanak nirmal oojlay jo raatay har naa-ay. ||8||7]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Name of the Lord are immaculate and radiant. H8t1711
frrstaat HIS 9 I (57-18) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Hfe Ho 38 Fed Ts at Vaat Sa I 57-18, frstea, ve 1) sun man bhoolay baavray gur kee charnee laag. Listen, O deluded and demented mind: hold tight to the Guru's Feet.
ofs Ffu ony fmrfe 3 AH sae SU Sa I (57-19, frdtora, we 1)
har jap naam Dhi-aa-ay too jam darpai dukh bhaag.
Chant and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; death will be afraid of you, and suffering shall depart.
ey we coat fas fag TI ATA WAU (57-19, fastora, we 1)
dookh ghano duhaaganee ki-o thir rahai suhaag. ||1]|
The deserted wife suffers terrible pain. How can her Husband Lord remain with her forever? ||1]|
Uat ut aet J nied ardt H AE Il (58-1, fadtera, He 1)
bhaa-ee ray avar naahee mai thaa-o. O Siblings of Destiny, I have no other place to go.
H U9 oH fours J ate dior afe WS NN TIS I (58-1, factors, we 1
mai Dhan naam niDhaan hai gur dee-aa bal jaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru has given me the Treasure of the Wealth of the Naam; I am a sacrifice to Him. ||1]||Pause] |
aenfs ufs ref fan fSn & Afer fore i (58-2, fata, v2 1) gurmat pat saabaas tis tis kai sang milaa-o. The Guru's Teachings bring honor. Blessed is He-may I meet and be with Him!
fan fag wat 3 ates fag ore ufs WE I 8-2, fasta, 4: 1 tis bin gharhee na jeev-oo bin naavai mar jaa-o. Without Him, I cannot live, even for a moment. Without His Name, I die.
H ngs oH 8 dnd 2a feat wis WES NI (58-3, fadtea, ne 1) mai anDhulay naam na veesrai tayk tikee ghar jaa-o. ||2]||
I am blind-may I never forget the Naam! Under His Protection, I shall reach my true home. ||2||
Og frat at niger 3s ardt oS il (58-3, fretera, ve 1)
guroo jinaa kaa anDhulaa chaylay naahee thaa-o.
Those chaylaas, those devotees, whose spiritual teacher is blind, shall not find their place of rest.
fag Afsas a8 3 ure fae are for Aur I (58-3, firdtora, He 1)
bin satgur naa-o na paa-ee-ai bin naavai ki-aa su-aa-o.
Without the True Guru, the Name is not obtained. Without the Name, what is the use of it all?
wife afenr ugseat fa He wife are Sil (53-4, fadtea, ne 1) aa-ay ga-i-aa pachhutaavnaa ji-o sunjai ghar kaa-o. ||3]| People come and go, regretting and repenting, like crows in a deserted house. ||3]|
fag oe vy tudt fr aad at SIF II 658-5, fadtea, He 1) bin naavai dukh dayhuree ji-o kalar kee bheet. Without the Name, the body suffers in pain; it crumbles like a wall of sand.
3a BI HIG o ursht AS Ba ATT 3 HS Il (58-5, fidtera, He 1
tab lag mahal na paa-ee-ai jab lag saach na cheet.
As long as Truth does not enter into the consciousness, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is not found.
Rafe gu we urea fasareat ue stfs igi 658-5, fadtera, He 1)
sabad rapai ghar paa-ee-ai nirbaanee pad neet. ||4]|
Attuned to the Shabad, we enter our home, and obtain the Eternal State of Nirvaanaa. [41 |
J Td yes orue ae ule ag CHE I 58-6, fadtea, He 1)
ha-o gur poochha-o aapnay gur puchh kaar kamaa-o. I ask my Guru for His Advice, and I follow the Guru's Advice.
Rafe Hod nfs ZA ICH eu Als WE Il 8-6, fidtoa, He sabad salaahee man vasai ha-umai dukh jal jaa-o. With the Shabads of Praise abiding in the mind, the pain of egotism is burnt away.
Hon of frorest wre vfs feorS ull (58-7, faster, He 1) sehjay ho-ay milaavrhaa saachay saach milaa-o. ||5|| We are intuitively united with Him, and we meet the Truest of the True. ||5]|
Rafe g3 A fesHs 3fa an au nidarg Il (58-7, fdtoa, He 1)
sabad ratay say nirmalay taj kaam kroDh aha‘kaar.
Those who are attuned to the Shabad are spotless and pure; they renounce sexual desire, anger, selfishness and conceit.
OM Aedes Ae Ae dfs wus Sa of il (58-8, frstora, He 1)
naam salaahan sad sadaa har raakhahi ur Dhaar.
They sing the Praises of the Naam, forever and ever; they keep the Lord enshrined within their hearts.
A fa@ Hog ferrdhat As dior at wrorg Iéll (58-8, fadtoa, He 1 so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai sabh jee-aa kaa aaDhaar. ||6] | How could we ever forget Him from our minds? He is the Support of all beings. ||6]|
Rafe He A fe od fefs He o TAT FT Il 8-9, frstora, we 1) sabad marai so mar rahai fir marai na doojee vaar. One who dies in the Shabad is beyond death, and shall never die again.
Rae dt S ure ofa oH wal fumirg I 58-9, fadtera, He 1) sabdai hee tay paa-ee-ai har naamay lagai pi-aar. Through the Shabad, we find Him, and embrace love for the Name of the Lord.
fag Fae Fa so fed ufs ASH Ss SS MDM (58-10, frdtora, we 1) bin sabdai jag bhoolaa firai mar janmai vaaro vaar. ||7| |
Without the Shabad, the world is deceived; it dies and is reborn, over and over again. [71]
AS Ad nity as zag act TE i (58-10, fadtea, v2 1) sabh salaahai aap ka-o vadahu vadayree ho-ay. All praise themselves, and call themselves the greatest of the great.
ad fag nrg 3 steht ad Ae for SE I (58-11, fata, ne 1)
gur bin aap na cheenee-ai kahay sunay ki-aa ho-ay.
Without the Guru, one's self cannot be known. By merely speaking and listening, what is accomplished?
Soa Aafe uetehy IEH ad B AS UCC (58-11, fadtea, He 1) naanak sabad pachhaanee-ai ha-umai karai na ko-ay. ||8]|8]| O Nanak, one who realizes the Shabad does not act in egotism. ||8]||8]|
frrstaat HIS 9 I (58-12) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
faa fus us Hterdht Aas afe wre Il (68-12, fadtea, v2 1)
bin pir Dhan seegaaree-ai joban baad khu-aar.
Without her Husband, the soul-bride's youth and ornaments are useless and wretched.
He Afy Anat fas fus ate Ateres i (58-13, firsts, He 1
naa maanay sukh sayjrhee bin pir baad seegaar.
She does not enjoy the pleasure of His Bed; without her Husband, her ornaments are absurd.
ey We Coaet a ule AA SIT WAU (58-13, fasta, Hz 1)
dookh ghano duhaaganee naa ghar sayj bhataar. ||1]|
The discarded bride suffers terrible pain; her Husband does not come to the bed of her home. |[1]|
HO J OH AUT AY SPE Il (58-13, fadtora, He 1) man ray raam japahu sukh ho-ay. O mind, meditate on the Lord, and find peace.
fas ae un 3 ureht Rafe fee da of na TIC i (58-14, fdtera, ne 1)
bin gur paraym na paa-ee-ai sabad milai rang ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Guru, love is not found. United with the Shabad, happiness is found. ||1]|Pause] |
ae Ae AY uh ofs eg AafA Ales Il (58-14, fata, v2 1)
gur sayvaa sukh paa-ee-ai har var sahj seegaar.
Serving the Guru, she finds peace, and her Husband Lord adorns her with intuitive wisdom.
Afe He fus AASt Tat TS fumrg il (58-15, fastera, He 1)
sach maanay pir sayjrhee goorhaa hayt pi-aar. Truly, she enjoys the Bed of her Husband, through her deep love and affection.
aenty ats frevett afs Het TS WT QM (58-15, fadtera, He 1)
gurmukh jaan sinjaanee-ai gur maylee gun chaar. ||2||
As Gurmukh, she comes to know Him. Meeting with the Guru, she maintains a virtuous lifestyle. ||2||
Afs fess za amet fufa vot Sat OE i (58-16, faster, He 1)
sach milhu var kaamnee pir mohee rang laa-ay.
Through Truth, meet your Husband Lord, O soul-bride. Enchanted by your Husband, enshrine love for Him.
Ho 36 Ate featAor abs age & ATE Il (58-16, firdtera, v2 1)
man tan saach vigsi-aa keemat kahan na jaa-ay.
Your mind and body shall blossom forth in Truth. The value of this cannot be described.
dfs zg wis Aoeret fosHs ATS OTE SI (58-17, fadtora, He 1)
har var ghar sohaaganee nirmal saachai naa-ay. ||3]||
The soul-bride finds her Husband Lord in the home of her own being; she is purified by the True Name. ||3]|
Ho His HoMt A He ST fg Te STS Il (58-17, fries, Hs 1) man meh manoo-aa jay marai taa pir raavai naar. If the mind within the mind dies, then the Husband ravishes and enjoys His bride.
feas sat af fxs afe HShrs at TE Il (58-18, fadtera, He 1) ikat taagai ral milai gal motee-an kaa haar. They are woven into one texture, like pearls on a necklace around the neck.
AS AS AY Cun TeHfe oH MOE III (58-18, fate, Hs 1)
sant sabhaa sukh oopjai gurmukh naam aDhaar. ||4| |
In the Society of the Saints, peace wells up; the Gurmukhs take the Support of the Naam. ||4||
fs nfs Cur fufs ut fas nie fs ATE II (58-19, fadtora, He 1
khin meh upjai khin khapai khin aavai khin jaa-ay.
In an instant, one is born, and in an instant, one dies. In an instant one comes, and in an instant one goes.
Had uete de ad o fA ae ASME Il (58-19, fadtera, ne 1) sabad pachhaanai rav rahai naa tis kaal santaa-ay. One who recognizes the Shabad merges into it, and is not afflicted by death.
ar ut
Wfog nse 3 Se aafs o user AE Mull (59-1, fadtea, He
saahib atul na tolee-ai kathan na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. ||5||
Our Lord and Master is Unweighable; He cannot be weighed. He cannot be found merely by talking. ||5||
Sud Zena nie sa fats i (59-1, fistora, He 1)
vaapaaree vanjaari-aa aa-ay vajahu likhaa-ay. The merchants and the traders have come; their profits are pre-ordained.
ag antets AD oft wrat fs safe I (59-2, fadtera, He 1) kaar kamaaveh sach kee laahaa milai rajaa-ay. Those who practice Truth reap the profits, abiding in the Will of God.
Unt Ast ae fs a fsa fe 3s se el (9-2, fates, we 1)
poonjee saachee gur milai naa tis til na tamaa-ay. ||6||
With the Merchandise of Truth, they meet the Guru, who does not have a trace of greed. ||6||
qenfy sf safert ng sadt 3B Il (59-3, fadtora, ve gurmukh tol tolaa-isee sach taraajee tol. As Gurmukh, they are weighed and measured, in the balance and the scales of Truth.
WITAT HOA Het af set AT 8B Il (59-3, fadtoa, ve 1) aasaa mansaa mohnee gur thaakee sach bol. The enticements of hope and desire are quieted by the Guru, whose Word is True.
nity 3HS SBA UT UT 3H MDI (59-4, firdtora, Hs 1) aap tulaa-ay tolsee pooray pooraa tol. ||7]|| He Himself weighs with the scale; perfect is the weighing of the Perfect One. ||7]|
aaS Ade o see a ufs ASA Sg Il (59-4, fata, He 1) kathnai kahan na chhutee-ai naa parh pustak bhaar. No one is saved by mere talk and speech, nor by reading loads of books.
afent Ae 3 urn fae ofe sats fimire Il (59-4, fata, v2 1) kaa-i-aa soch na paa-ee-ai bin har bhagat pi-aar. The body does not obtain purity without loving devotion to the Lord.
SOA OH © SAG NS TUT AGS MCI (59-5, fastora, He 1)
naanak naam na veesrai maylay gur kartaar. ||8]|9|| O Nanak, never forget the Naam; the Guru shall unite us with the Creator. ||8]|9]|
frrstaat HIS FI (59-6) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Asay ust A fee urehat Tsq sss il (59-6, frdtera, we satgur pooraa jay milai paa-ee-ai ratan beechaar. Meeting the Perfect True Guru, we find the jewel of meditative reflection.
Ho dA ag vimus urea Aaa fumirg Il (59-6, fadtera, He 1) man deejai gur aapnay paa-ee-ai sarab pi-aar. Surrendering our minds to our Guru, we find universal love.
Hafs uesg usin nigare AZSTS WU (59-7, fadtera, He 1) mukat padaarath paa-ee-ai avgan maytanhaar. ||1]|| We find the wealth of liberation, and our demerits are erased. ||1]|
set 3 ag fae fomre o fe II (59-7, factors, H: 1)
bhaa-ee ray gur bin gi-aan na ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, without the Guru, there is no spiritual wisdom.
YsT FIN ase Fe fara ate 1 TIS il (59-8, firdtora, we 1) poochhahu barahmay naardai bayd bi-aasai ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Go and ask Brahma, Naarad and Vyaas, the writer of the Vedas. ||1]|Pause| |
fami fms ufs Ave nies ao] ALE I (59-8, fadtera, He 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan Dhun jaanee-ai akath kahaavai so-ay.
Know that from the vibration of the Word, we obtain spiritual wisdom and meditation. Through it, we speak the Unspoken.
Hefee fasy cdreor ee wedt df Il (59-9, fata, v2 1) Safli-o birakh haree-aaviaa chhaav ghanayree ho-ay. He is the fruit-bearing Tree, luxuriantly green with abundant shade.
GS Aedd Heat Td FS AE NM (59-9, fata, v2 1) laal javayhar maankee gur bhandaarai so-ay. ||2|| The rubies, jewels and emeralds are in the Guru's Treasury. ||2]|
ae sad ure fasHe am fumirg il (59-10, fadtora, He 1
gur bhandaarai paa-ee-ai nirmal naam pi-aar.
From the Guru's Treasury, we receive the Love of the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ard Sag Adhd us ASH wry Il (59-10, fadterar, we 1) saacho vakhar sanchee-ai poorai karam apaar. We gather in the True Merchandise, through the Perfect Grace of the Infinite.
Huest wy Ace Afsag MAT Aug iSil (59-10, fadtera, He 1) sukh-daata dukh maytno satgur asur sanghaar. ||3]|| The True Guru is the Giver of peace, the Dispeller of pain, the Destroyer of demons.
[I3I|
sens fun saves ot att a ug Il (59-11, fatwa, He 1)
bhavjal bikham daraavno naa kanDhee naa paar.
The terrifying world-ocean is difficult and dreadful; there is no shore on this side or the one beyond.
ot Sat of Soda oT SH SS HO Il (59-11, fidteora, He 1) naa bayrhee naa tulharhaa naa tis vanjh malaar. There is no boat, no raft, no oars and no boatman.
Afsag 3 a Sfoe oedt ufs Sarg Sil (59-12, fadtea, ne 1)
satgur bhai kaa bohithaa nadree paar utaar. ||4||
The True Guru is the only boat on this terrifying ocean. His Glance of Grace carries us across. ||4||
fea fae fimre fend vu ort we ATE I (59-12, fata, ne 1) ik til pi-aaraa visrai dukh laagai sukh jaa-ay. If I forget my Beloved, even for an instant, suffering overtakes me and peace departs.
fave’ Hoe Aoeal SH 3 AU TATE II (59-13, fadtora, ne 1) jinvaa jala-o jalaavanee naam na japai rasaa-ay. Let that tongue be burnt in flames, which does not chant the Naam with love.
we faoR ey nas AH UaSs UESTS Ul (59-13, fata, He 1)
ghat binsai dukh aglo jam pakrhai pachhutaa-ay. ||5||
When the pitcher of the body bursts, there is terrible pain; those who are caught by the Minister of Death regret and repent. ||5]|
Hat Hat afe TE 36 US ASS 3 AYE Il (59-14, fata, ue 1)
mayree mayree kar ga-ay tan Dhan kalat na saath.
Crying out, "Mine! Mine!", they have departed, but their bodies, their wealth, and their wives did not go with them.
fag ae ug ate 3 s8 Hrafar orf il (59-14, firsts, we 1) bin naavai Dhan baad hai bhoolo maarag aath. Without the Name, wealth is useless; deceived by wealth, they have lost their way.
AMG Afos ASht gente mee arf Wel (59-14, fadtora, He saacha-o saahib sayvee-ai gurmukh aktho kaath. ||6|| So serve the True Lord; become Gurmukh, and speak the Unspoken. ||6]||
mie afe sere ufemt forsfs corte i (59-15, fata, He 1)
aavai jaa-ay bhavaa-ee-ai pa-i-ai kirat kamaa-ay.
Coming and going, people wander through reincarnation; they act according to their past actions.
yota fetter fag Heit fester Sy TATE I (59-15, frdtora, 3 1)
poorab likhi-aa ki-o maytee-ai likhi-aa laykh rajaa-ay.
How can one's pre-ordained destiny be erased? It is written in accordance with the Lord's Will.
fas ofa oH 5 eet aanfs fxs fete lo (59-16, fadtea, He 1)
bin har naam na chhutee-ai gurmat milai milaa-ay. ||7]||
Without the Name of the Lord, no one can be saved. Through the Guru's Teachings, we are united in His Union. ||7||
fan faa Ha a adt fan at HI us Il (59-17, fata, v2 1)
tis bin mayraa ko nahee jis kaa jee-o paraan.
Without Him, I have no one to call my own. My soul and my breath of life belong to Him.
ICH HHS Ais sae Bs AEE nifSre i (59-17, facta, He 1)
ha-umai mamtaa jal bala-o lobh jala-o abhimaan.
May my egotism and possessiveness be burnt to ashes, and my greed and egotistical pride consigned to the fire.
Soa Hae sterdha ure gat fare ico (59-18, fata, He 1) naanak sabad veechaaree-ai paa-ee-ai gunee niDhaan. ||8]|10]| O Nanak, contemplating the Shabad, the Treasure of Excellence is obtained. ||8]|10] |
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (59-18) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
3 Ho mat ofe fA ulfs afe AAT A® aHSfT II (59-18, fidtora, He 1) ray man aisee har si-o pareet kar jaisee jal kamlayhi. O mind, love the Lord, as the lotus loves the water.
Bod ate uetshn st fea wimafe I (59-19, fata, He 1) lahree naal pachhaarhee-ai bhee vigsai asnayhi. Tossed about by the waves, it still blossoms with love.
we Hfs Aba Garfe a fas ve Hae fsSfa NAM (59-19, fates, He 1) jal meh jee-a upaa-ay kai bin jal maran tinayhi. ||1]| In the water, the creatures are created; outside of the water they die. ||1]|
ust €o Ho S fa sefs fag fms i (60-1, frstera, He 1)
man ray ki-o chhooteh bin pi-aar. O mind, how can you be saved without love?
dante nists af= sfomr sun sats Sas UU! TIS Il (60-1, fadtoa, He
gurmukh antar rav rahi-aa bakhsay bhagat bhandaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God permeates the inner beings of the Gurmukhs. They are blessed with the treasure of devotion. ||1]|Pause] |
3 Ho MAT ofa fA Ulfs afs AAT NEST Ste Il (60-2, frdtoa, He 1) ray man aisee har si-o pareet kar jaisee machhulee neer. O mind, love the Lord, as the fish loves the water.
fa@ nifta@ fs@ Au we fs fe AifS ATS II (0-2, fadtora, He 1)
ji-o aDhika-o ti-o sukh ghano man tan saa‘t sareer.
The more the water, the more the happiness, and the greater the peace of mind and body.
fag AS wat o Hieet us AS Ss Ute II o-3, fidtra, He 1)
bin jal gharhee na jeev-ee parabh jaanai abh peer. ||2||
Without water, she cannot live, even for an instant. God knows the suffering of her mind. ||2]|
3 Ho Mint ofe fag ulfs afe AAT ofa AT I (0-4, faster, He 1) ray man aisee har si-o pareet kar jaisee chaatrik mayh. O mind, love the Lord, as the song-bird loves the rain.
Ad sfo ae ddored fea de s uset AT Il 60-4, firdtora, we 1)
sar bhar thal haree-aavlay ik boond na pav-ee kayh.
The pools are overflowing with water, and the land is luxuriantly green, but what are they to her, if that single drop of rain does not fall into her mouth?
oath firs A urebit fags ufemr fafs Fo Sil (60-5, fadtoa, He
karam milai so paa-ee-ai kirat pa-i-aa sir dayh. ||3]||
By His Grace, she receives it; otherwise, because of her past actions, she gives her head. ||3]|
3 Ho MAT ofa fA Us afs AAT Aw EU SE II (60-5, frdtea, He 1) ray man aisee har si-o pareet kar jaisee jal duDh ho-ay. O mind, love the Lord, as the water loves the milk.
WTEZS nM ue VU aS uufs o SfE Il (60-6, fadtora, He 1)
aavtan aapay khavai duDh ka-o khapan na day-ay.
The water, added to the milk, itself bears the heat, and prevents the milk from burning.
nm Afs feefour vfs efsnret Sf ligil (60-6, fasta, nz 1)
aapay mayl vichhunni-aa sach vadi-aa-ee day-ay. ||4| |
God unites the separated ones with Himself again, and blesses them with true greatness. ||4||
3 Ho Mint ofe FAG uifS ate AAT Gast AT II (0-7, firsts, we 1) ray man aisee har si-o pareet kar jaisee chakvee soor. O mind, love the Lord, as the chakvee duck loves the sun.
fag ue ate o Aeet we Ufs Tals I (60-7, frstera, wu 1)
khin pal need na sov-ee jaanai door hajoor.
She does not sleep, for an instant or a moment; the sun is so far away, but she thinks that it is near.
Houta ASt a us TaHfe Aer Tae WUll (0-8, fdtoa, we 1)
manmukh sojhee naa pavai gurmukh sadaa hajoor. ||5||
Understanding does not come to the self-willed manmukh. But to the Gurmukh, the Lord is always close. ||5||
HoOHfe Tes Taeat AGS AT A SE Il (60-8, fadtoa, v2 1)
manmukh ganat ganaavanee kartaa karay so ho-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs make their calculations and plans, but only the actions of the Creator come to pass.
a at atufs o ue A Se AS AE Il (60-9, fadtwa, He 1) taa kee keemat naa pavai jay lochai sabh ko-ay. His Value cannot be estimated, even though everyone may wish to do so.
aenfs df 3 uréha vfs fires we df El (60-9, fata, He 1)
gurmat ho-ay ta paa-ee-ai sach milai sukh ho-ay. ||6]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, it is revealed. Meeting with the True One, peace is found. ||6]|
Het og 3 3eet A Afsag se ALE I (60-10, fadtoa, ne 1) sachaa nayhu na tut-ee jay satgur bhaytai so-ay. True love shall not be broken, if the True Guru is met.
fomirs uersg ureha fasee Ast dfE I (0-10, frdtoa, ve 1)
gi-aan padaarath paa-ee-ai taribhavan sojhee ho-ay.
Obtaining the wealth of spiritual wisdom, the understanding of the three worlds is acquired.
fsqHs 3H 5 SA A Te aA Wa TE IDI (60-10, fadtwa, ue 1) nirmal naam na veesrai jay gun kaa gaahak ho-ay. ||7]|
So become a customer of merit, and do not forget the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||7]||
fs we A uve A yae AT Sf Il (o-11, fate, He 1) khayl ga-ay say pa‘kh-noo™ jo chugday sar tal. Those birds which peck at the shore of the pool have played and have departed.
wat fax Hots fx seat BES mA fx aH Il (60-11, factors, He 1)
gharhee ke muhat ke chalnaa khaylan aj ke kal.
In a moment, in an instant, we too must depart. Our play is only for today or tomorrow.
fan 3 Hofo A fhe ate Ae fus Hfs ITI (0-12, factors, we D
jis too’ mayleh so milai jaa-ay sachaa pirh mal. ||8]|
But those whom You unite, Lord, are united with You; they obtain a seat in the Arena of Truth. ||8]|
fag aa ifs o Cun BH HS 3 ATE II (60-12, facto, Hs 1) bin gur pareet na oopjai ha-umai mail na jaa-ay. Without the Guru, love does not well up, and the filth of egotism does not depart.
Ad wy ueteha nafe sfe ustorfe il (60-13, fadtea, v2 1)
soha™ aap pachhaanee-ai sabad bhayd patee-aa-ay.
One who recognizes within himself that, "He is me", and who is pierced through by the Shabad, is satisfied.
aanfy nmy vere nied fa ad wate til (0-13, frdtora, ue 1
gurmukh aap pachhaanee-ai avar ke karay karaa-ay. ||9||
When one becomes Gurmukh and realizes his own self, what more is there left to do or have done? ||9||
fife ot far HSba Aafe fs ustorfE i (60-14, fadtera, ue 1
mili-aa kaa ki-aa maylee-ai sabad milay patee-aa-ay.
Why speak of union to those who are already united with the Lord? Receiving the Shabad, they are satisfied.
HoHfe Ast at ue Stefs dor ute Il (60-14, fadtora, He 1)
manmukh sojhee naa pavai veechhurh chotaa khaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not understand; separated from Him, they endure beatings.
Soa UI wg SA I neg o set APS MINA (60-15, fasta, we 1) naanak dar ghar ayk hai avar na doojee jaa-ay. ||10||11||
O Nanak, there is only the one door to His Home; there is no other place at all. |]10]]11]|
firstaat HIS 4% Il (60-15) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Houfe 38 sHeMA Fat SBI o ATE Il (60-16, frstora, wu 1)
manmukh bhulai bhulaa-ee-ai bhoolee tha-ur na kaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs wander around, deluded and deceived. They find no place of rest.
ad fag & o feureet nidt ure wfe Il (0-16, frdtora, He 1)
gur bin ko na dikhaava-ee anDhee aavai jaa-ay.
Without the Guru, no one is shown the Way. Like the blind, they continue coming and going.
fomra uersg dfenr afar Hot ATE IAI (60-16, fadtera, He 1) gi-aan padaarath kho-i-aa thagi-aa muthaa jaa-ay. ||1]|| Having lost the treasure of spiritual wisdom, they depart, defrauded and plundered.
[21] aan afer sath SOTE Il (60-17, fadtea, uz 1)
baabaa maa-i-aa bharam bhulaa-ay. O Baba, Maya deceives with its illusion.
sath sat soerat ot furs nifor mefE a TIS i (60-17, fadtera, He 1)
bharam bhulee dohaaganee naa pir ank samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Deceived by doubt, the discarded bride is not received into the Lap of her Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
got fed fersdt gat fag sha ATE Il (0-18, frdtera, 2 1)
bhoolee firai disantree bhoolee garihu taj jaa-ay.
The deceived bride wanders around in foreign lands; she leaves, and abandons her own home.
Io Sala als Us SIH HS SOTE Il (0-18, fates, we 1) bhoolee doongar thal charhai bharmai man dolaa-ay. Deceived, she climbs the plateaus and mountains; her mind wavers in doubt.
usg fedat fae fis aafe Hat faserfe 12H (60-19, fadtera, He 1)
Dharahu vichhunnee ki-o milai garab muthee billaa-ay. ||2]|
Separated from the Primal Being, how can she meet with Him again? Plundered by pride, she cries out and bewails. ||2||
feefaor ag HoAt ots af on fimrta Il (60-19, frrdtea, He 1)
vichhurhi-aa gur maylsee har ras naam pi-aar.
The Guru unites the separated ones with the Lord again, through the love of the Delicious Name of the Lord.
uart E9 Wfs AofA AST wat dfs TE oH wrote I (1-1, fadtera, He 1) saach sahj sobhaa ghanee har gun naam aDhaar.
Through truth and intuitive poise, great honor is obtained, with the Support of the Naam and the Glory of the Lord.
fa@ are (38 sy SH Ss fas AEG FIT NSM (61-1, ftv, vs 1)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too’ mai tujh bin kavan bhataar. ||3]|
As it pleases You, Lord, please save and protect me. Without You, O my Husband Lord, who else is there for me? ||3]|
mug ufs ufs sehr Sut sos nifsnre i (61-2, facto, v2 1
akhar parh parh bhulee-ai bhaykhee bahut abhimaan.
Reading their books over and over again, people continue making mistakes; they are so proud of their religious robes.
Stee ast fomr ad He His HG TNS Il (61-2, fadtora, He 1)
tirath naataa ki-aa karay man meh mail gumaan.
But what is the use of bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, when the filth of stubborn pride is within the mind?
ad faa fats AHSTEhH He TH ABS IVI (61-3, fadtora, He 1)
gur bin kin samjaa-ee-ai man raajaa sultaan. ||4]|
Other than the Guru, who can explain that within the mind is the Lord, the King, the Emperor? ||4]|
Un ueeg uh aenfe 33 Steg Il (61-3, firdtora, vs 1)
paraym padaarath paa-ee-ai gurmukh tat veechaar.
The Treasure of the Lord's Love is obtained by the Gurmukh, who contemplates the essence of reality.
A ue ny aetfenr ag a Aafe Aterg Il 1-4, fadtea, ne 1) saa Dhan aap gavaa-i-aa gur kai sabad seegaar.
The bride eradicates her selfishness, and adorns herself with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ug dt A fig wfeor ag & 3s wrrg Null G1-4, fadtera, He 1) ghar hee so pir paa-i-aa gur kai hayt apaar. ||5|| Within her own home, she finds her Husband, through infinite love for the Guru. ||5]|
ad at Ast wad Ho fons wy Sf Il (1-5, fadtera, He 1)
gur kee sayvaa chaakree man nirmal sukh ho-ay.
Applying oneself to the service of the Guru, the mind is purified, and peace is obtained.
ad a Aa Hie afro gen fess ae Il (61-5, fadtea, we 1
gur kaa sabad man vasi-aa ha-umai vichahu kho-ay.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad abides within the mind, and egotism is eliminated from within.
oy ueag ufsar os Ae fe SE NEN (1-6, fadtoa, He 1) naam padaarath paa-i-aa laabh sadaa man ho-ay. ||6]| The Treasure of the Naam is acquired, and the mind reaps the lasting profit. ||6]||
oaty fxs st ureht orf o ofenr wfe i (61-6, fadtera, He 1) karam milai taa paa-ee-ai aap na la-i-aa jaa-ay. If He grants His Grace, then we obtain it. We cannot find it by our own efforts.
ad at vet ofa sg fess wiry TSE il (61-7, firdtoa, ue 1
gur kee charnee lag rahu vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
Remain attached to the Feet of the Guru, and eradicate selfishness from within. Ae Ast sfsur Ad us ute DI (61-7, fadtea, He 1)
sachay saytee rati-aa sacho palai paa-ay. ||7|| Attuned to Truth, you shall obtain the True One. ||7]||
gue uivfs AZ A gw TT AIS Il (61-7, fardtora, ws 1) bhulan andar sabh ko abhul guroo kartaar. Everyone makes mistakes; only the Guru and the Creator are infallible.
Tents He AHStfenr war fA fimrg il 1-8, fadtea, v2 1)
gurmat man samjhaa-i-aa laagaa tisai pi-aar.
One who instructs his mind with the Guru's Teachings comes to embrace love for the Lord.
Sod Ag & SAG HS ASS MUTT NCUA! (61-8, fidtea, He 1)
naanak saach na veesrai maylay sabad apaar. ||8||12||
O Nanak, do not forget the Truth; you shall receive the Infinite Word of the Shabad. [18] [12]
frrstaat HIS 4% Il (61-9) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
fro ufemr Huet AS sou we ofs il (1-9, firdtoa, He 1)
tarisnaa maa-i-aa mohnee sut banDhap ghar naar.
The enticing desire for Maya leads people to become emotionally attached to their children, relatives, households and spouses.
ufe Hale Ha ofemr ofa Sfs nigra i 1-10, fadtera, He 1) Dhan joban jag thagi-aa lab lobh aha‘kaar. The world is deceived and plundered by riches, youth, greed and egotism.
Ho saat JG Het A ees AAs All (1-10, fades, He 1) moh thag-ulee ha-o mu-ee saa vartai sansaar. ||1||
The drug of emotional attachment has destroyed me, as it has destroyed the whole world. ||1]|
Ae utsr H 3s fag neg o aE II (1-10, fadtora, He 1) mayray pareetamaa mai tujh bin avar na ko-ay. O my Beloved, I have no one except You.
H 3s fag vies 5 weet F wef AY TE NU TTS Ut 1-1, fasta, we 1) mai tujh bin avar na bhaav-ee too™ bhaaveh sukh ho-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. Without You, nothing else pleases me. Loving You, I am at peace. ||1]||Pause] |
oy Ard da fa ad a Aafe ASY I (61-11, fata, H: 1) naam saalaahee rang si-o gur kai sabad santokh.
I sing the Praises of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with love; I am content with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
HCA A UO aa Hg 3 SY Il (61-12, frdtora, we jo deesai so chalsee koorhaa moh na vaykh. Whatever is seen shall pass away. So do not be attached to this false show.
Ze Zar nrfenr fos vot ATG SY Mil (61-12, frstea, v2 1) vaat vataa-oo aa-i-aa nit chaldaa saath daykh. ||2|| Like a traveller in his travels, you have come. Behold the caravan leaving each day.
21 |
umfs nnifs ass as fas as 5 ae il 61-13, fastora, we 1) aakhan aakhahi kayt-rhay gur bin boojh na ho-ay. Many preach sermons, but without the Guru, understanding is not obtained.
oy zaret A fre vfs au ufs df II (61-13, fairs, v4: 1
naam vadaa-ee jay milai sach rapai pat ho-ay.
If someone receives the Glory of the Naam, he is attuned to truth and blessed with honor.
A 30 defo A 3S det ua B AE SI (61-14, fata, He 1) jo tuDh bhaaveh say bhalay khotaa kharaa na ko-ay. ||3]| Those who are pleasing to You are good; no one is counterfeit or genuine. ||3] |
ad Ageet Schat Houy Ut THA Il 61-14, fadtora, He 1)
gur sarnaa-ee chhutee-ai manmukh khotee raas.
In the Guru's Sanctuary we are saved. The assets of the self-willed manmukhs are false.
MAE Us ufsATS at web Fate fearfA il (61-14, fadtea, He 1) asat Dhaat paatisaah kee gharhee-ai sabad vigaas. The eight metals of the King are made into coins by the Word of His Shabad.
MM Use UTTY US VATS TH MBI (61-15, frstora, we 1) aapay parkhay paarkhoo pavai khajaanai raas. ||4||
The Assayer Himself assays them, and He places the genuine ones in His Treasury. [141]
sot ohifs a ue AS fest Sfa safe Il (61-15, fretea, He 1) tayree keemat naa pavai sabh dithee thok vajaa-ay. Your Value cannot be appraised; I have seen and tested everything.
ade wa 3 wset Ate fea ufS ute Il 61-16, fadtera, H8 1) kahnai haath na labh-ee sach tikai pat paa-ay. By speaking, His Depth cannot be found. Abiding in truth, honor is obtained.
Tas 3 Wada dg as age o ATE Ul (1-16, frdtora, we 1) gurmat too™ salaahnaa hor keemat kahan na jaa-ay. ||5]| Through the Guru's Teachings, I praise You; otherwise, I cannot describe Your Value.
[5] fas sfs on 3 aeet fsa safe JOH SE II (61-17, factors, He 1)
jit tan naam na bhaav-ee tit tan ha-umai vaad. That body which does not appreciate the Naam-that body is infested with egotism and conflict.
as fag famrg 3 ure fatter gat AE Il (1-17, frdtora, we gur bin gi-aan na paa-ee-ai bikhi-aa doojaa saad. Without the Guru, spiritual wisdom is not obtained; other tastes are poison.
fag ae ath 3 nreet wrfenr gta ATE Mell (1-18, fadtoa, He 1) bin gun kaam na aavee maa-i-aa feekaa saad. ||6|| Without virtue, nothing is of any use. The taste of Maya is bland and insipid. ||6]||
MAT nfefa Afior wma oA aA Ute Il (61-18, fadtera, He 1)
aasaa andar jammi-aa aasaa ras kas khaa-ay.
Through desire, people are cast into the womb and reborn. Through desire, they taste the sweet and sour flavors.
nia dfa sore Ho ufs dat ute Il (61-19, fadtoa, He 1) aasaa banDh chalaa-ee-ai muhay muhi chotaa khaa-ay. Bound by desire, they are led on, beaten and struck on their faces and mouths.
Migate aor Hat se ATHS STE DI Gi-19, fadtora, ws 1)
avgan baDhaa maaree-ai chhootai gurmat naa-ay. ||7]||
Bound and gagged and assaulted by evil, they are released only through the Name, through the Guru's Teachings. ||7]||
Uat €Q Ava wet Sa F fA sre (SS TY Il 62-1, frdtoa, v3 1) sarbay thaa-ee ayk too" ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh.
In all places, You are the One and Only. As it pleases You, Lord, please save and protect me!
aenfs A Hfs ZA OH 3S ufs AME I (62-1, fadtoa, we 1)
gurmat saachaa man vasai naam bhalo pat saakh.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the True One abides within the mind. The Companionship of the Naam brings the most excellent honor.
ICH da Tech Aafe AS AG STY NCH (62-1, fadtora, He 1) ha-umai rog gavaa-ee-ai sabad sachai sach bhaakh. ||8]|
Eradicate the disease of egotism, and chant the True Shabad, the Word of the True Lord. ||8]|
mot urate 3 fysef= afoot ANTE Il (62-2, fasta, He 1)
aakaasee paataal too” taribhavan rahi-aa samaa-ay.
You are pervading throughout the Akaashic Ethers, the nether regions and the three worlds.
nny gsast se F umy fafa free ii 2-2, firsts, we 1)
aapay bhagtee bhaa-o too” aapay mileh milaa-ay.
You Yourself are bhakti, loving devotional worship. You Yourself unite us in Union with Yourself.
Soa OTH 3 Sind fAS ae fSS ATE ICNISI (62-3, factors, He 1) naanak naam na veesrai ji-o bhaavai tivai rajaa-ay. ||9||13]| O Nanak, may I never forget the Naam! As is Your Pleasure, so is Your Will. ||9]|13] |
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (62-3) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
oH OTH HO Sfaor neg fa adt Ses Il (62-4, fastera, ve 1) raam naam man bayDhi-aa avar ke karee veechaar. My mind is pierced through by the Name of the Lord. What else should I contemplate?
Hae Hafs AY Cun ys TSS AY ATT Il (62-4, firdtora, ws 1)
sabad surat sukh oopjai parabh raata-o sukh saar.
Focusing your awareness on the Shabad, happiness wells up. Attuned to God, the most excellent peace is found.
fA@ are FB TY SH ofs BY me” WU 62-4, firdtoa, Hs 1) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh too’ mai har naam aDhaar. ||1|| As it pleases You, please save me, Lord. The Name of the Lord is my Support. ||1]|
HO FATS MAH FATE Il (62-5, firdtera, He 1) man ray saachee khasam rajaa-ay. O mind, the Will of our Lord and Master is true.
fafs 36 Ho ATA Alerter fan ASt fee STE Vl TIS il (62-5, fasta, He 1 jin tan man saaj seegaari-aa tis saytee liv laa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Focus your love upon the One who created and adorned your body and mind. ||1]|Pause] |
36 SHsfe aim fea ast Sf aete I 62-6, fadtora, He 1) tan baisantar homee-ai ik ratee tol kataa-ay. If I cut my body into pieces, and burn them in the fire,
36 HO AHO A Act Males nate ABTS Il (62-6, frdtoa, He 1)
tan man samDhaa jay karee an-din agan jalaa-ay.
and if I make my body and mind into firewood, and night and day burn them in the fire,
dfs on fs 3 unt A we att AGH OE N21 (62-7, fadtwa, He 1)
har naamai tul na puj-ee jay lakh kotee karam kamaa-ay. ||2||
and if I perform hundreds of thousands and millions of religious rituals-still, all these are not equal to the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
nag Adtg ace fife ages cate Il (62-7, fades, He 1) araDh sareer kataa-ee-ai sir karvat Dharaa-ay. If my body were cut in half, if a saw was put to my head,
36 dale rent st Ho 3 da 5 ATE I (62-8, facta, He 1)
tan haimanchal gaalee-ai bhee man tay rog na jaa-ay.
and if my body were frozen in the Himalayas-even then, my mind would not be free of disease.
dfs on sf 3 unet vs feet Sfx ste Si (62-8, fata, He 1)
har naamai tul na puj-ee sabh dithee thok vajaa-ay. ||3]|
None of these are equal to the Name of the Lord. I have seen and tried and tested them all. ||3]|
ave A ac Us ad Fd Jeg Hed VS Il (62-9, fadtoa, ue 1)
kanchan kay kot dat karee baho haivar gaivar daan.
If I made a donation of castles of gold, and gave lots of fine horses and wondrous elephants in charity,
gt ae aor wat st nists age TH Il (2-9, factors, we 1)
bhoom daan ga-oo-aa ghanee bhee antar garab gumaan.
and if I made donations of land and cows-even then, pride and ego would still be within me.
oH OTH HO Sfaor afs drt Ag BE IISIl (2-10, frdtora, He 1) raam naam man bayDhi-aa gur dee-aa sach daan. ||4||
The Name of the Lord has pierced my mind; the Guru has given me this true gift. [141]
Hoge aut ashot as ae ates Il (62-10, fasta, v3 1)
manhath buDhee kaytee-aa kaytay bayd beechaar.
There are so many stubborn-minded intelligent people, and so many who contemplate the Vedas.
as due Hha a qoute He wurs i (62-11, fasta, v2 1)
kaytay banDhan jee-a kay gurmukh mokh du-aar.
There are so many entanglements for the soul. Only as Gurmukh do we find the Gate of Liberation.
Red Gs As a Gufs AY METS Ul (2-11, fata, He 1) sachahu orai sabh ko upar sach aachaar. ||5|| Truth is higher than everything; but higher still is truthful living. ||5]|
Ag & Gat nindint Sty 3 cA ate Il (62-12, fadtora, Hi 1) sabh ko oochaa aakhee-ai neech na deesai ko-ay. Call everyone exalted; no one seems lowly.
feas sis rf fea woe fsa fF Il (2-12, faster, He 1) iknai bhaa“day saaji-ai ik chaanan tihu lo-ay. The One Lord has fashioned the vessels, and His One Light pervades the three worlds.
aot fxs Ae ure ufe sun 3 He afF NEN (62-13, fadtea, He 1) karam milai sach paa-ee-ai Dhur bakhas na maytai ko-ay. ||6]| Receiving His Grace, we obtain Truth. No one can erase His Primal Blessing. ||6] |
Ag fHs AY AS ASY SA Te Ste Il (62-13, frdtoa, we 1)
saaDh milai saaDhoo janai santokh vasai gur bhaa-ay.
When one Holy person meets another Holy person, they abide in contentment, through the Love of the Guru.
wag aa eterdha A Afsas fs ATE Il (62-14, fadteoa, v2 1) akath kathaa veechaaree-ai jay satgur maahi samaa-ay. They contemplate the Unspoken Speech, merging in absorption in the True Guru.
ut nifys ASfimr veafs wor ate WON (62-14, firdtera, He 1)
pee amrit santokhi-aa dargahi paiDhaa jaa-ay. ||7]|
Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, they are contented; they go to the Court of the Lord in robes of honor. ||7]|
ufe wfe an feat niafes Rafe Hate Il (62-14, fadtea, ne 1)
ghat ghat vaajai kinguree an-din sabad subhaa-ay.
In each and every heart the Music of the Lord's Flute vibrates, night and day, with sublime love for the Shabad.
fess a Ast uet aanfa He AHSTE II (62-15, fates, He 1) virlay ka-o sojhee pa-ee gurmukh man samjhaa-ay. Only those few who become Gurmukh understand this by instructing their minds.
Bsa BH 6 VAs Se ASE SHAS UCI (62-15, frstora, we 1) naanak naam na veesrai chhootai sabad kamaa-ay. ||8]||14| O Nanak, do not forget the Naam. Practicing the Shabad you shall be saved. ||8]|14]|
frrstaat HIS 4% Il (62-16) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
fas fenfo uGags sat HX Vrs Il (62-16, fadtoa, ve chitay diseh Dha-ulhar bagay bank du-aar. There are painted mansions to behold, white-washed, with beautiful doors;
ate Hs Yat Carter ent ofS fina i (62-17, factors, 2 1)
kar man khusee usaari-aa doojai hayt pi-aar.
they were constructed to give pleasure to the mind, but this is only for the sake of the love of duality.
nies wet UH fag vfs Sat So ST NA (62-17, faster, ve 1) andar khaalee paraym bin dheh dhayree tan chhaar. ||1]]| The inner being is empty without love. The body shall crumble into a heap of ashes.
[21
amet 3 35 UG Aa & SPE Il (62-18, factors, He 1) bhaa-ee ray tan Dhan saath na ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, this body and wealth shall not go along with you.
TH OH UG fasHs ag ofs ad ys AE NA TTC I (62-18, factors, He 1)
raam naam Dhan nirmalo gur daat karay parabh so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's Name is the pure wealth; through the Guru, God bestows this gift. ||1]|Pause] |
TH SH US fesns A VS SST Il (62-18, facta, ve 1) raam naam Dhan nirmalo jay dayvai dayvanhaar. The Lord's Name is the pure wealth; it is given only by the Giver.
Md Us 3 Jeet fA ASt TI ATI T Il (62-19, frdtora, ws 1) aagai poochh na hova-ee jis baylee gur kartaar. One who has the Guru, the Creator, as his Friend, shall not be questioned hereafter.
mify gave Sct nM} TuAST ST lI (62-19, fadtera, 2 1) aap chhadaa-ay chhutee-ai aapay bakhsanhaar. ||2| | He Himself delivers those who are delivered. He Himself is the Forgiver. ||2||
Uar €3 HOHY Fe nituS Uber us AA Il (63-1, frdtora, we
manmukh jaanai aapnay Dhee-aa poot sanjog. The self-willed manmukh looks upon his daughters, sons and relatives as his own.
ordt efy fearxinifs oS Jay A AG Il (63-1, fdtora, He 1) naaree daykh vigaasee-ah naalay harakh so sog. Gazing upon his wife, he is pleased. But along with happiness, they bring grief.
aenfy Aafe dared mifafsth afe dA Sa ISI (63-2, fadtera, He 1)
gurmukh sabad rangaavlay ahinis har ras bhog. ||3]|
The Gurmukhs are attuned to the Word of the Shabad. Day and night, they enjoy the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||3]|
fez v@ fez wee Was 3fs SHTE II (63-2, fadtora, He 1)
chit chalai vit jaavno saakat dol dolaa-ay.
The consciousness of the wicked, faithless cynics wanders around in search of transitory wealth, unstable and distracted.
wots dfs ead we ufo ery AES Il (63-3, firdtora, ws 1)
baahar dhoondh viguchee-ai ghar meh vasat suthaa-ay.
Searching outside of themselves, they are ruined; the object of their search is in that sacred place within the home of the heart.
Houfa s@H afs HAT aenfe us ute sil (63-3, fadtea, ne 1) manmukh ha-umai kar musee gurmukh palai paa-ay. ||4||
The self-willed manmukhs, in their ego, miss it; the Gurmukhs receive it in their laps. [141]
Has fosafeortaor nmuet HS USE I (63-4, frdtoa, He 1)
saakat nirguni-aari-aa aapnaa mool pachhaan.
You worthless, faithless cynic-recognize your own origin! gaz fie oa fea 36 nrarst uta fuse I (63-4, fadtora, He 1
rakat bind kaa ih tano agnee paas piraan. This body is made of blood and semen. It shall be consigned to the fire in the end.
uge & eff tadt HASfa AE SATS NUIl (63-5, fadtora, He 1)
pavnai kai vas dayhuree mastak sach neesaan. ||5||
The body is under the power of the breath, according to the True Sign inscribed upon your forehead. ||5]|
ast Hes Haha wor 3 SS aE I (63-5, fadtea, v2 1) bahutaa jeevan mangee-ai mu-aa na lorhai ko-ay. Everyone begs for a long life-no one wishes to die.
He dee fsa wmiba faa cent efhmr AE II (63-6, fidtora, He D sukh jeevan tis aakhee-ai jis gurmukh vasi-aa so-ay. A life of peace and comfort comes to that Gurmukh, within whom God dwells.
on fege four aet faa ofa as ean o STE Nell (63-6, frdtera, m2 1)
naam vihoonay ki-aa ganee jis har gur daras na ho-ay. ||6]|
Without the Naam, what good those who do not have the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Lord and Guru? ||6]|
fa@ Hud fofh gaba aa ofa feet SE II (63-7, frdtea, He 1
ji-o supnai nis bhulee-ai jab lag nidraa ho-ay.
In their dreams at night, people wander around as long as they sleep;
fe@ neufs & eff rst nists eH SE II (63-7, fadteoa, v2 1D)
i-o sarpan kai vas jee-arhaa antar ha-umai do-ay.
just so, they are under the power of the snake Maya, as long as their hearts are filled with ego and duality.
aenfs df ated Aus feo Aa SE NDI (63-8, fadtea, nH 1)
gurmat ho-ay veechaaree-ai supnaa ih jag lo-ay. ||7||
Through the Guru's Teachings, they come to understand and see that this world is just a dream. ||7]||
wats He Ae ure fA afex ea HTS Il (63-8, fasta, we 1) agan marai jal paa-ee-ai ji-o baarik dooDhai maa-ay. As thirst is quenched with water, and the baby is satisfied with mother's milk,
faa WS AHS A oT dha fae AS He HeTE Il (3-9, factor, He 1 bin jal kamal so naa thee-ai bin jal meen maraa-ay. and as the lotus does not exist without water, and as the fish dies without water
soa dente ofe afh fxs Ate ofe Te aE cil (63-9, fata, He 1)
naanak gurmukh har ras milai jeevaa har gun gaa-ay. ||8||15]|
-O Nanak, so does the Gurmukh live, receiving the Sublime Essence of the Lord, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||8]|15||
frrstaat HIS 9 Il (63-10) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
Sag tf sree USS sdorA Il (63-10, fadtra, v2 1) doongar daykh daraavno pay-ee-arhai daree-aas. Beholding the terrifying mountain in this world of my father's home, I am terrified.
Cue uses aus a ust fs TH Il 63-11, fasta, we 1) oocha-o parbat gaakh-rho naa pa-orhee tit taas. It is so difficult to climb this high mountain; there is no ladder which reaches up there.
dante nists afenr afs Het sdmorA Al 3-11, fadtea, He
gurmukh antar jaani-aa gur maylee taree-aas. ||1||
But as Gurmukh, I know that it is within my self; the Guru has brought me to Union, and so I cross over. ||1]|
amet J Tene fun sat Il (63-11, fadtea, v2 1) bhaa-ee ray bhavjal bikham daraa™-o. O Siblings of Destiny, the terrifying world-ocean is so difficult to cross-I am terrified!
us Asay oh HS aT Te The SS NU TTS ll (63-12, factors, vs 1)
pooraa satgur ras milai gur taaray har naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect True Guru, in His Pleasure, has met with me; the Guru has saved me, through the Name of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
TO VS A At AS’ VHETS Il (63-12, fadtoa, uz 1) chalaa chalaa jay karee jaanaa chalanhaar. I may say, "I am going, I am going", but I know that, in the end, I must really go.
A otfenr A UGH MME ATT AS Il (63-13, fadtoa, we 1) jo aa-i-aa so chalsee amar so gur kartaar. Whoever comes must also go. Only the Guru and the Creator are Eternal.
ot AS Aedes Ad ate fimrg lI (63-13, fadtera, He 1) bhee sachaa salaahnaa sachai thaan pi-aar. ||2|| So praise the True One continually, and love His Place of Truth. ||2| |
UI WI HIG’ Ade ua AS IAS Il (63-14, fdtera, He 1) dar ghar mehlaa sohnay pakay kot hajaar. Beautiful gates, houses and palaces, solidly built forts,
JASt WS Ua SAAT BY MUTT | (63-14, firstera, we 1) hastee ghorhay paakhray laskar lakh apaar. elephants, saddled horses, hundreds of thousands of uncounted armies
fon ct ote 3 sfour ufu uf He mIATS ISI (63-14, first, He 1)
kis hee naal na chali-aa khap khap mu-ay asaar. ||3]|
-none of these will go along with anyone in the end, and yet, the fools bother themselves to exhaustion with these, and then die. ||3]|
Afeor gut Haba He WS AAS Il (63-15, frdtora, He 1 Su-inaa rupaa sanchee-ai maal jaal janjaal. You may gather gold and sliver, but wealth is just a net of entanglement.
AS Aa fs Sct Schr fag are fafs ae i (63-15, fadtora, He 1)
sabh jag meh dohee fayree-ai bin naavai sir kaal.
You may beat the drum and proclaim authority over the whole world, but without the Name, death hovers over your head.
fiz us HG dort aeeat famr TS Isl (63-16, fadtera, He 1)
pind parhai jee-o khaylsee badfailee ki-aa haal. ||4]|
When the body falls, the play of life is over; what shall be the condition of the evil- doers then? ||4||
ust afy fearnba ardt AA SSS Il (63-16, fadtea, He 1) putaa daykh vigsee-ai naaree sayj bhataar. The husband is delighted seeing his sons, and his wife upon his bed.
dor Jug SEMA AUT Ty Alas il (63-17, fardtora, ws 1) cho-aa chandan laa-ee-ai kaaparh roop seegaar. He applies sandalwood and scented oils, and dresses himself in his beautiful clothes.
Ug Ys sore SfS FS WI MT WUIl (63-17, fates, v3 1)
khayhoo khayh ralaa-ee-ai chhod chalai ghar baar. ||5]|
But dust shall mix with dust, and he shall depart, leaving hearth and home behind. HSI
HIT HSA KIS TH TS fe ars il (63-18, frstora, we 1) mahar malook kahaa-ee-ai raajaa raa-o ke khaan. He may be called a chief, an emperor, a king, a governor or a lord;
seudt TE Heeb Als seb nifrs I (63-18, fadtora, He 1
cha-uDhree raa-o sadaa-ee-ai jal balee-ai abhimaan.
he may present himself as a leader or a chief, but this just burns him in the fire of egotistical pride.
HouHfa on ferfoor faG sfe ear arg Ilell (63-19, fidtea, He 1)
manmukh naam visaari-aa ji-o dav daDhaa kaan. ||6||
The self-willed manmukh has forgotten the Naam. He is like straw, burning in the forest fire. ||6]|
JH afe afe wfent FH urfenr Aa wT II (63-19, fadtora, He 1)
ha-umai kar kar jaa-isee jo aa-i-aa jag maahi. Whoever comes into the world and indulges in ego, must depart.
Us €8
AS A AHS Ast 36 HO Sd AMM I (64-1, fate, He 1)
sabh jag kaajal koth-rhee tan man dayh su-aahi.
The whole world is a store-house of lamp-black; the body and mind are blackened with it.
afs aa A fSaHs Aafe foedt THT WDM (64-1, facta, He 1)
gur raakhay say nirmalay sabad nivaaree bhaahi. ||7]|
Those who are saved by the Guru are immaculate and pure; through the Word of the Shabad, they extinguish the fire of desire. ||7]|
Soa Sdn Afe arty fafs AT ufSATS Il (64-2, fade, He 1
naanak taree-ai sach naam sir saahaa paatisaahu.
O Nanak, they swim across with the True Name of the Lord, the King above the heads of kings.
H dfs aH 3 dined afs oH WSO SAT Il (64-2, fadtera, He 1)
mai har naam na veesrai har naam ratan vaysaahu.
May I never forget the Name of the Lord! I have purchased the Jewel of the Lord's Name.
HoH sCnfe ufs He TsHfe Sd ETT ITIAE! (64-3, facta, He 1)
manmukh bha-ojal pach mu-ay gurmukh taray athaahu. ||8]|16||
The self-willed manmukhs putrefy and die in the terrifying world-ocean, while the Gurmukhs cross over the bottomless ocean. ||8]|16]|
frdtaral HIS A WE 2 Il (64-3) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 2. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Second House:
HoH afe wfs Hat fos vos at Gu Il (64-4, faster, ve 1
mukaam kar ghar baisnaa nit chalnai kee Dhokh.
They have made this their resting place and they sit at home, but the urge to depart is always there.
HOH ST ug Asha AT Id fogTs Ba UI (64-4, fadtora, He 1)
mukaam taa par jaanee-ai jaa rahai nihchal lok. ||1||
This would be known as a lasting place of rest, only if they were to remain stable and unchanging. ||1]|
our af HATH Il (64-5, fadtora, He 1) dunee-aa kais mukaamay. What sort of a resting place is this world?
ats frea avet use Sag ofa TI SH NU TIS Il (64-5, fidtora, uz 1)
kar sidak karnee kharach baaDhhu laag rahu naamay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Doing deeds of faith, pack up the supplies for your journey, and remain committed to the Name. ||1]]Pause| |
nat 3 orn afe sd HoT ad HOTA Il (64-5, fadtora, He 1) jogee ta aasan kar bahai mulaa bahai mukaam. The Yogis sit in their Yogic postures, and the Mullahs sit at their resting stations.
ufss zurefa udior fra sofs te AES QI (64-6, frtora, He 1)
pandit vakaaneh pothee-aa siDh baheh dayv sathaan. ||2||
The Hindu Pandits recite from their books, and the Siddhas sit in the temples of their gods. ||2||
Ho faa ae aos ufs Ae AY ule ABS Il (64-6, fadtoa, He 1)
sur siDh gan ganDharab mun jan saykh peer salaar.
The angels, Siddhas, worshippers of Shiva, heavenly musicians, silent sages, Saints, priests, preachers, spiritual teachers and commanders
ufg av ae ate ae nied fs vHETS SI 64-7, feta, 12 1) dar kooch koochaa kar ga-ay avray bhe chalanhaar. ||3]| -each and every one has left, and all others shall depart as well. ||3]|
HOSS We Hoa Sud Te ats ats aT Il (64-7, frstra, ve 1) sultaan khaan malook umray ga-ay kar kar kooch. The sultans and kings, the rich and the mighty, have marched away in succession.
wat Hots fx soar feo AHS F fs uTs Ill (64-8, frdtoa, we 1)
gharhee muhat ke chalnaa dil samajh too bhe pahooch. ||4||
In a moment or two, we shall also depart. O my heart, understand that you must go as well! ||4]|
Hees ufo surat fear 3 gS ate il (64-8, firdtora, ws 1) sabdaah maahi vakhaanee-ai virlaa ta boojhai ko-ay. This is described in the Shabads; only a few understand this!
Sod TUS Fost vfs ales nds AfE ui (64-9, fasta, v2 1) naanak vakhaanai bayntee jal thal mahee-al so-ay. ||5|| Nanak offers this prayer to the One who pervades the water, the land and the air.
[5] |
MOT MOBY MH ASI AISI ATM Il (64-9, fdtoa, ve 1) alaahu alakh agamm kaadar karanhaar kareem. He is Allah, the Unknowable, the Inaccessible, All-powerful and Merciful Creator.
AS Tol nite Weel HAH SA IIH Ell (64-10, fasta, ve 1) sabh dunee aavan jaavnee mukaam ayk raheem. ||6]| All the world comes and goes-only the Merciful Lord is permanent. ||6]|
HoH fSH 6 umiba faa fafa o det Bey Il (64-10, fadtera, v2 1) mukaam tis no aakhee-ai jis sis na hovee laykh. Call permanent only the One, who does not have destiny inscribed upon His Forehead.
MAS Udst VoHt HAH Gat Sa DI (64-11, fasta, nz asmaan Dhartee chalsee mukaam ohee ayk. ||7]| The sky and the earth shall pass away; He alone is permanent. ||7||
fea afe ud fofh AfA wv staat we uBfe I (64-11, fadtea, He 1)
din rav chalai nis sas chalai taarikaa lakh palo-ay.
The day and the sun shall pass away; the night and the moon shall pass away; the hundreds of thousands of stars shall disappear.
HoH Git Sa I aoat AG Safe NCNIN (64-12, fadtora, He 1) mukaam ohee ayk hai naankaa sach bugo-ay. ||8||17]|| He alone is permanent; Nanak speaks the Truth. ||8]|17]|
HIS ufys Asad MAcUudT I (64-13) mahlay pahilay sataarah asatpadee-aa. Seventeen Ashtapadees Of The First Mehl.
fAdiaa Hos 3 wg A iAcUdT (64-14) sireeraag mehlaa 3 ghar 1 asatpadee-aa Siree Raag, Third Mehl, First House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (64-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aenty faut ad sats atin fas as sats o of Il (64-15, faster, He 3)
gurmukh kirpaa karay bhagat keejai bin gur bhagat na ho-ay.
By God's Grace, the Gurmukh practices devotion; without the Guru, there is no devotional worship.
nny ning frre aS ST fosHE Je aE Il (64-15, firdtora, ws 3) aapai aap milaa-ay boojhai taa nirmal hovai ko-ay. One who merges his own self into Him understands, and so becomes pure.
ofa HG Aa At aret Rafe flsrer SE NA (64-16, firstera, He 3)
har jee-o sachaa sachee banee sabad milaavaa ho-ay. ||1]|
The Dear Lord is True, and True is the Word of His Bani. Through the Word of the Shabad, Union with Him is obtained. ||1]|
amet J Satsdte ae Afar mrfenr Il (64-16, fastera, He 3) bhaa-ee ray bhagtiheen kaahay jag aa-i-aa. O Siblings of Destiny, without devotion, why have people even come into the world?
ud Id at Ae o tat fase Aon Teter nA TIS il (64-17, faster, He 3) pooray gur kee sayv na keenee birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. They have not served the Perfect Guru; they have wasted their lives in vain. ||1]|Pause] |
mma offs Aas VST My gatA THOS Il (64-18, firdtea, ne 3)
aapay har jagjeevan daataa aapay bakhas milaa-ay.
The Lord Himself, the Life of the World, is the Giver. He Himself forgives, and unites us with Himself.
Aba Hs & fowr Sarg fomr a onrfy Wave Il (64-18, fadtera, He 3)
jee-a jant ay ki-aa vaychaaray ki-aa ko aakh sunaa-ay. What are these poor beings and creatures? What can they speak and say?
aaHfe ning & sfanret nm AS ATES Ql (64-19, frdtera, ue 3) gurmukh aapay day vadi-aa-ee aapay sayv karaa-ay. ||2|| God Himself grants glory to the Gurmukhs; He joins them to His Service. ||2||
ofa ade vfs Sarat vafemr ate o AreT II (64-19, firdtea, He 3) daykh kutamb mohi lobhaanaa chaldi-aa naal na jaa-ee.
Beholding your family, you are lured away by emotional attachment, but when you leave, they will not go with you.
ar éu Afsag Afe we foars ufenr fSH at ah & uret Il (65-1, frstera, He 3) satgur sayv gun niDhaan paa-i-aa tis kee keem na paa-ee.
Serving the True Guru, I have found the Treasure of Excellence. Its value cannot be estimated.
on 4
yg Feat ofe AG Hat nis df AMT ISI (65-1, fidtoa, ue 3)
parabh sakhaa har jee-o mayraa antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||3]|
The Dear Lord God is my Best Friend. In the end, He shall be my Companion and Support. |[3]|
usin AaHles Best Houfe ufs Teeth Il (65-2, fata, He 3)
pay-ee-arhai jagjeevan daataa manmukh pat gavaa-ee.
In this world of my father's home, the Great Giver is the Life of the World. The self- willed manmukhs have lost their honor.
fag Afsagd & Ha 3 WS nid OT 5 aret Il (65-2, frdtea, nH: 3) bin satgur ko mag na jaanai anDhay tha-ur na kaa-ee. Without the True Guru, no one knows the Way. The blind find no place of rest.
ofa AUNTS His oot stro nifs afer ussret igi (65-3, firdtora, ve 3)
har sukh-daata man nahee vasi-aa ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ee. ||4]|
If the Lord, the Giver of Peace, does not dwell within the mind, then they shall depart with regret in the end. ||4||
uss AaHles est THis fs sArfenr I (65-3, fadtera, 2 3)
pay-ee-arhai jagjeevan daataa gurmat man vasaa-i-aa. In this world of my father's house, through the Guru's Teachings, I have cultivated within my mind the Great Giver, the Life of the World.
wofes sas acts feg at IGH Ho yorfenr Il (65-4, fadtera, 2 3)
an-din bhagat karahi din raatee ha-umai moh chukaa-i-aa.
Night and day, performing devotional worship, day and night, ego and emotional attachment are removed.
~
fan fa@ wat 3A de Ae Afs AAfeEor ll (65-5, firtora, He 3) jis si-o raataa taiso hovai sachay sach samaa-i-aa. ||5]| And then, attuned to Him, we become like Him, truly absorbed in the True One. ||5||
my sefd ad TS HE Ta Agel stats Il (65-5, frdtea, ve 3)
aapay nadar karay bhaa-o laa-ay gur sabdee beechaar.
Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He gives us His Love, and we contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afsag Aft Ao Gur ISH feAS HAS II 65-6, fdtora, Hs 3) satgur sayvi-ai sahj oopjai ha-umai tarisnaa maar. Serving the True Guru, intuitive peace wells up, and ego and desire die.
dfs gees Ae Hfs ZA Ae sfimr Ba ofa Ell (65-6, fadtea, v2 3)
har gundaataa sad man vasai sach rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||6||
The Lord, the Giver of Virtue, dwells forever within the minds of those who keep Truth enshrined within their hearts. ||6| |
yg Ha Ae fegner Hie feaHfe urfenr afte i (65-7, fidtoa, us 3) parabh mayraa sadaa nirmalaa man nirmal paa-i-aa jaa-ay. My God is forever Immaculate and Pure; with a pure mind, He can be found.
oy fours ofa xfs eA IBN ey AS ATE II (65-7, fidtora, He 3)
naam niDhaan har man vasai ha-umai dukh sabh jaa-ay.
If the Treasure of the Name of the Lord abides within the mind, egotism and pain are totally eliminated.
Afsafe nae Hefeor we Ae sfead WE IDI (65-8, fadtea, He 3)
satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa ha-o sad balihaarai jaa-o. ||7||
The True Guru has instructed me in the Word of the Shabad. I am forever a sacrifice to Him. ||7]||
nue nfs fefs ad ave fas ae wry o AT II (65-8, fadtera, H 3)
aapnai man chit kahai kahaa-ay bin gur aap na jaa-ee.
Within your own conscious mind, you may say anything, but without the Guru, selfishness and conceit are not eradicated.
dfs HG safs zee Hues afs four Hfs TASH II (65-9, fidtora, ne 3)
har jee-o bhagat vachhal sukh-daata kar kirpaa man vasaa-ee.
The Dear Lord is the Lover of His devotees, the Giver of Peace. By His Grace, He abides within the mind.
ood Ast Aafs ef ys ord gente & Sfsuret CUAUACI (65-9, frdtoa, He 3) naanak sobhaa surat day-ay parabh aapay gurmukh day vadi-aa-ee. ||8||1]|18]|
O Nanak, God blesses us with the sublime awakening of consciousness; He Himself grants glorious greatness to the Gurmukh. ||8]|1]|18]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (65-10)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
ICH AGH ANSe AHSS Bd fF wMfe Il (65-10, fadtera, v2 3)
ha-umai karam kamaavday jamdand lagai tin aa-ay.
Those who go around acting in egotism are struck down by the Messenger of Death with his club.
fa Afsag Aefs A Gad afe ASt fee STE UI (5-11, factors, He 3) je satgur sayvan say ubray har saytee liv laa-ay. ||1]| Those who serve the True Guru are uplifted and saved, in love with the Lord. ||1]|
Ho J dente om forte it (65-11, frrdtea, v2 3) man ray gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay. O mind, become Gurmukh, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ufe yata aes feftior fae gents oth morte na TIS il (65-12, factors, ws 3)
Dhur poorab kartai likhi-aa tinaa gurmat naam samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who are so pre-destined by the Creator are absorbed into the Naam, through the Guru's Teachings. ||1]||Pause| |
fee Afsag usstfs 5 nrect ath & wa STE Il (65-12, fadtea, He 3) vin satgur parteet na aavee naam na laago bhaa-o. Without the True Guru, faith does not come, and love for the Naam is not embraced.
Hue AY 6 ureet eu ufo AS ANTS QI (65-13, fate, He 3) supnai sukh na paav-ee dukh meh savai samaa-ay. ||2| | Even in dreams, they find no peace; they sleep immersed in pain. ||2||
A dfs ofs ote aga Seb fags o Afeor WHE II (65-13, fadtea, He 3)
jay har har keechai bahut lochee-ai kirat na mayti-aa jaa-ay.
Even if you chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with great longing, your past actions are still not erased.
ofa at svat saat Hfsur A sas ue vfs ate Sil (65-14, fata, He 3)
har kaa bhaanaa bhagtee mani-aa say bhagat pa-ay dar thaa-ay. ||3]| The Lord's devotees surrender to His Will; those devotees are accepted at His Door.
SII
ag Aad fears da fa fas faa ofenr o Ate I (65-15, fiadtera, nH 3)
gur sabad dirhaavai rang si-o bin kirpaa la-i-aa na jaa-ay.
The Guru has lovingly implanted the Word of His Shabad within me. Without His Grace, it cannot be attained.
A AG nifys até st fae ee oat OE Igil (65-15, frdtea, He 3)
jay sa-o amrit neeree-ai bhee bikh fal laagai Dhaa-ay. ||4||
Even if the poisonous plant is watered with ambrosial nectar a hundred times, it will still bear poisonous fruit. ||4||
A HO Ad foans fae Afsaad ate fimirg il (65-16, frrdtera, He 3) say jan sachay nirmalay jin satgur naal pi-aar. Those humble beings who are in love with the True Guru are pure and true.
Afsag a svat anree fay TBH sfx fearg lull (65-16, firdtoa, He 3)
satgur kaa bhaanaa kamaavday bikh ha-umai taj vikaar. ||5]|
They act in harmony with the Will of the True Guru; they shed the poison of ego and corruption. ||5]|
Hoole fas Cute 3 geht fahyfs rag Aug Ate I (65-17, facta, v3 3)
manhath kitai upaa-ay na chhootee-ai simrit saastar soDhhu jaa-ay.
Acting in stubborn-mindedness, no one is saved; go and study the Simritees and the Shaastras.
fife Hats ATG Cad AT a Hae AHS Ell (65-17, frstoa, 3 3)
mil sangat saaDhoo ubray gur kaa sabad kamaa-ay. ||6]|
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and practicing the Shabads of the Guru, you shall be saved. ||6||
dfs a ay foure 3 fan nig o UTES II (65-18, fidtora, He 3) har kaa naam niDhaan hai jis ant na paaraavaar. The Name of the Lord is the Treasure, which has no end or limitation.
qenfy ASt Ave fro fasur ad AIST IDI (65-18, fadtoa, ve 3) gurmukh say-ee sohday jin kirpaa karay kartaar. ||7]| The Gurmukhs are beauteous; the Creator has blessed them with His Mercy. ||7]||
aoa UST Sa T TA MST 3 AE Il (65-19, frstara, we 3) naanak daataa ayk hai doojaa a-or na ko-ay. O Nanak, the One Lord alone is the Giver; there is no other at all.
qd usAet urea oath usrufs GE NCHQNAEN (65-19, fAstera, He 3) gur parsaadee paa-ee-ai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||8||2||19]| By Guru's Grace, He is obtained. By His Mercy, He is found. ||8||2]|19]|
ar é€ firdtaat HIG 3 Il (66-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
udt fasta FOSS AY vat TT STE Il (66-1, fadtora, ve 3) pankhee birakh suhaavrhaa sach chugai gur bhaa-ay. The soul-bird in the beautiful tree of the body pecks at Truth, with love for the Guru.
dfs oA ule Hof ad Os 3B ni] ATE | (66-2, fidtera, He 3)
har ras peevai sahj rahai udai na aavai jaa-ay.
She drinks in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, and abides in intuitive ease; she does not fly around coming and going.
fon wf ear ufenr ofs afe oth AME Ill (66-2, firsts, He 3)
nij ghar vaasaa paa-i-aa har har naam samaa-ay. ||1]|
She obtains her home within her own heart; she is absorbed into the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
Ho J Td at AS ANTE Il (66-3, frrdtoa, ns 3) man ray gur kee kaar kamaa-ay. O mind, work to serve the Guru.
qd a Te A vols a nrafea Tefs af ate al TIC Il (66-3, frdtea, we 3)
gur kai bhaanai jay chaleh taa an-din raacheh har naa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If you walk in harmony with the Guru's Will, you shall remain immersed in the Lord's Name, night and day. ||1]|Pause| |
unt fase Hoes Cats ug feft wfa Il (66-4, frdtora, 3 3) pankhee birakh suhaavrhay oodeh chahu dis jaahi. The birds in the beautiful trees fly around in all four directions.
As Gata vu we fas ests 3 fame il (66-4, firsts, vs 3) jaytaa oodeh dukh ghanay nit daajheh tai billaahi. The more they fly around, the more they suffer; they burn and cry out in pain.
fas Ta HIG o Wuet a nfs ew urfs QI (6-4, fadtora, He 3)
bin gur mahal na jaap-ee naa amrit fal paahi. ||2||
Without the Guru, they do not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and they do not obtain the Ambrosial Fruit. ||2| |
ToHfa you Tdreer AMS AafA ASE Il (66-5, fidtoa, v8 3)
gurmukh barahm haree-aaviaa saachai sahj subhaa-ay.
The Gurmukh is like God's tree, always green, blessed with the Sublime Love of the True One, with intuitive peace and poise.
Anat Sie foedior Sa Aafe foe ote il (6-6, frdtoa, ue 3)
saakhaa teen nivaaree-aa ayk sabad liv laa-ay.
He cuts off the three branches of the three qualities, and embraces love for the One Word of the Shabad.
nifys eo ofs Sa Fd wm) ef wet 3 6-6, frdtoa, ue 3) amrit fal har ayk hai aapay day-ay khavaa-ay. ||3]| The Lord alone is the Ambrosial Fruit; He Himself gives it to us to eat. ||3]|
Hou Ss Afar Te a Sw far sr Il 66-7, frdtora, we 3)
manmukh oobhay suk ga-ay naa fal tinnaa chhaa-o.
The self-willed manmukhs stand there and dry up; they do not bear any fruit, and they do not provide any shade.
for uf 3 Sri Bor we 3 foraS i (66-7, fadtera, ne 3) tinnaa paas na baisee-ai onaa ghar na giraa-o. Don't even bother to sit near them-they have no home or village.
admits 3 fas wens Gat Age 3 are gil (66-7, fadtea, He 3)
katee-ah tai nit jaalee-ah onaa sabad na naa-o. ||4| |
They are cut down and burnt each day; they have neither the Shabad, nor the Lord's Name. ||4]|
JAH AGH anes ufet fasts fer il (o-s, fdtera, ve 3)
hukmay karam kamaavnay pa-i-ai kirat firaa-o.
According to the Lord's Command, people perform their actions; they wander around, driven by the karma of their past actions.
JOH PIAS SUS AT SaAfs Sd WS Il (66-8, firsts, He 3)
hukmay darsan daykh-naa jah bhayjeh tah jaa-o.
By the Lord's Command, they behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. Wherever He sends them, there they go.
Jan dfs ofs ufs ZA Jan Afs re ilull (66-9, fidtora, He 3)
hukmay har har man vasai hukmay sach samaa-o. ||5]|
By His Command, the Lord, Har, Har, abides within our minds; by His Command we merge in Truth. ||5||
Jon 3 Wels sus 38 feats Tes Il (66-9, frétera, ve 3)
hukam na jaaneh bapurhay bhoolay fireh gavaar.
The wretched fools do not know the Lord's Will; they wander around making mistakes.
Hodls AGH anted fos fos dfs ynrg il (66-10, fidtora, He 3) manhath karam kamaavday nit nit hohi khu-aar. They go about their business stubborn-mindedly; they are disgraced forever and ever.
wiste APs o uieet ot Af wat fms HEN (66-10, firdtera, He 3)
antar saa‘t na aavee naa sach lagai pi-aar. ||6]|
Inner peace does not come to them; they do not embrace love for the True Lord. [161
Tendon Ho Ade Td a dfs fumnfs i (66-11, firdtera, v2 3) gurmukhee-aa muh sohnay gur kai hayt pi-aar. Beautiful are the faces of the Gurmukhs, who bear love and affection for the Guru.
Het saat Afs gs efe Ad Afemrs Il (66-11, fadtera, v2 3)
sachee bhagtee sach ratay dar sachai sachiaar.
Through true devotional worship, they are attuned to Truth; at the True Door, they are found to be true.
nie A udeTe J AS aw at asl Burg IDI (66-12, fadtea, ue 3) aa-ay Say parvaan hai sabh kul kaa karahi uDhaar. ||7]|| Blessed is their coming into being; they redeem all their ancestors. ||7||
AS dedt AGH AHSe edt Hfs & AS Il (66-12, fadtwa, ue 3) sabh nadree karam kamaavday nadree baahar na ko-ay. All do their deeds under the Lord's Glance of Grace; no one is beyond His Vision.
AM oefe afs 2a AST SAT dt a APE Il (66-13, frdtera, He 3)
jaisee nadar kar daykhai sachaa taisaa hee ko ho-ay.
According to the Glance of Grace with which the True Lord beholds us, so do we become.
aaa ot zareion ath uaufS SE UCHSIQON (66-13, fastens, He 3)
naanak naam vadaa-ee-aa karam paraapat ho-ay. ||8]|3||20|| O Nanak, the Glorious Greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is received only by His Mercy. ||8]|3||20||
firstaat HIS 3 Il (66-14) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Tanta ony fimreint Houf as o ure i (6-14, firdtora, 48 3) gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai manmukh boojh na paa-ay. The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam; the self-willed manmukhs do not understand.
qoute Het He Sas ote efhor ufos wrfe i (66-15, fastoa, He 3)
gurmukh sadaa mukh oojlay har vasi-aa man aa-ay.
The faces of the Gurmukhs are always radiant; the Lord has come to dwell within their minds.
Hon ot ay uréhat AoA Td ANTE Ul (6-15, frtora, He 3)
sehjay hee sukh paa-ee-ai sehjay rahai samaa-ay. ||1]|
Through intuitive understanding they are at peace, and through intuitive understanding they remain absorbed in the Lord. ||1]|
aret 3 aAfe oT OE I (66-15, firdtera, He 3) bhaa-ee ray daasan daasaa ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, be the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
qd at Aet as sats d feaer ue afe 9 TIC Il (66-16, faster, ue 3)
gur kee sayvaa gur bhagat hai virlaa paa-ay ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Service to the Guru is worship of the Guru. How rare are those who obtain it! ||1]|Pause| |
He ATG Adel A vats Afsasd STE Il (66-16, frrdtoa, v2 3)
sadaa suhaag suhaaganee jay chaleh satgur bhaa-ay.
The happy soul-bride is always with her Husband Lord, if she walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
Re fug fasss urea at Gg Hd & ATE I (66-17, fidtera, He 3) sadaa pir nihchal paa-ee-ai naa oh marai na jaa-ay. She attains her Eternal, Ever-stable Husband, who never dies or goes away.
Rafe fist o ates furs & nif mrfE 2H (66-17, frdtea, v2 3)
sabad milee naa veechhurhai pir kai ank samaa-ay. ||2]|
United with the Word of the Shabad, she shall not be separated again. She is immersed in the Lap of her Beloved. ||2||
ofa fasne uifs Cro fas as ufeur o Ate I 6-18, fete, He 3)
har nirmal at oojlaa bin gur paa-i-aa na jaa-ay. The Lord is Immaculate and Radiantly Bright; without the Guru, He cannot be found.
US us oT Eset Sut sath Fore Il (66-18, firdtoa, vs 3)
paath parhai naa boojh-ee bhaykhee bharam bhulaa-ay.
He cannot be understood by reading scriptures; the deceitful pretenders are deluded by doubt.
DdHst Ife Het ufemr SAS Tis TA ANTE Ill (66-19, fidtera, 4 3)
gurmatee har sadaa paa-i-aa rasnaa har ras samaa-ay. ||3]||
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is always found, and the tongue is permeated with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||3]]|
Hear Hg vartfeor TeHst Aofa ASE | (66-19, firstera, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh chukaa-i-aa gurmatee sahj subhaa-ay.
Emotional attachment to Maya is shed with intuitive ease, through the Guru's Teachings.
ust €dD fag Hae Aa edion fed Howe Ss aet ute i (67-1, fasta, nH 3) bin sabdai jag dukhee-aa firai manmukhaa no ga-ee khaa-ay.
Without the Shabad, the world wanders lost in pain. The self-willed manmukh is consumed.
Rae ay fomrein Age Afs Ae ell (67-1, fata, 2 3)
sabday naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabday sach samaa-ay. ||4]|
Through the Shabad, meditate on the Naam; through the Shabad, you shall merge in Truth. ||4||
Hfenr 3% fro feats Anta & wat ASTE I (67-2, frdtora, H: 3)
maa-i-aa bhoolay siDh fireh samaaDh na lagai subhaa-ay.
The Siddhas wander around, deluded by Maya; they are not absorbed in the Samaadhi of the Lord's Sublime Love.
3S Su fenrus J nifta at Bu|tE Il 67-2, fadtea, ue 3) teenay lo-a vi-aapat hai aDhik rahee laptaa-ay. The three worlds are permeated by Maya; they are totally covered by it.
fas ad Hats o urent a efsor afenr ate iull (67-3, fadtera, v2 3)
bin gur mukat na paa-ee-ai naa dubiDhaa maa-i-aa jaa-ay. ||5||
Without the Guru, liberation is not attained, and the double-mindedness of Maya does not go away. ||5]|
Hfenr far & wmdhot for user aH ane Il (67-3, fadtea, He 3) maa-i-aa kis no aakhee-ai ki-aa maa-i-aa karam kamaa-ay. What is called Maya? What does Maya do?
ofa afa eg Ae sad GBH aH CONTE II (67-4, fidtea, He 3)
dukh sukh ayhu jee-o baDh hai ha-umai karam kamaa-ay. These beings are bound by pleasure and pain; they do their deeds in egotism.
fag Hae SoH 3 gael a feed TBH ATE NEN (67-4, firdtora, H8 3) bin sabdai bharam na chook-ee naa vichahu ha-umai jaa-ay. ||6]|
Without the Shabad, doubt is not dispelled, and egotism is not eliminated from within. [16] |
fag uist safs o det fag Fae ate o uf II (67-5, fidtoa, He 3)
bin pareetee bhagat na hova-ee bin sabdai thaa-ay na paa-ay.
Without love, there is no devotional worship. Without the Shabad, no one finds acceptance.
Rae JGH yrsba wfeur ar gy AE Il (67-6, firtora, He 3)
sabday ha-umai maaree-ai maa-i-aa kaa bharam jaa-ay.
Through the Shabad, egotism is conquered and subdued, and the illusion of Maya is dispelled.
oy uae uUTeha gente Hof ASTE NDI (67-6, fadtera, He 3) naam padaarath paa-ee-ai gurmukh sahj subhaa-ay. || 7] | The Gurmukh obtains the Treasure of the Naam with intuitive ease. ||7| |
faa ad Te 3 Wuet fas Te gals 5 SE Il (67-7, fadtwa, nH: 3)
bin gur gun na jaapnee bin gun bhagat na ho-ay.
Without the Guru, one's virtues do not shine forth; without virtue, there is no devotional worship.
safs zee ofs ufe efror Aafs fifemr ys AE II (67-7, fietoa, Hs 3)
bhagat vachhal har man vasi-aa sahj mili-aa parabh so-ay. The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He abides within their minds. They meet that God with intuitive ease.
Soa Ase ofa Hardt aay uss TE cust (67-8, fadtea, He 3)
naanak sabday har salaahee-ai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||8]||4||21]| O Nanak, through the Shabad, praise the Lord. By His Grace, He is obtained. [18] 14]]21]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (67-8)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Hor Hg He ufs ater umd sath see Il (67-9, frstera, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh mayrai parabh keenaa aapay bharam bhulaa-ay.
Emotional attachment to Maya is created by my God; He Himself misleads us through illusion and doubt.
HoHfa aaH aafe odt gets fase HOH TSS Il (67-9, frdtea, 2 3)
manmukh karam karahi nahee boojheh birthaa janam gavaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs perform their actions, but they do not understand; they waste away their lives in vain.
aera feR na ufs woe aatH SA fe mre UI (67-10, frdtora, He 3) gurbaanee is jag meh chaanan karam vasai man aa-ay. ||1]|
Gurbani is the Light to illuminate this world; by His Grace, it comes to abide within the mind. ||1]|
Ho 3 3H AUT AY SE Il (67-10, fadtera, He 3) man ray naam japahu sukh ho-ay. O mind, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and find peace.
Ts us Aerdhy Aaa fHs ys AE una FHS il 67-11, fasta, v2 3) gur pooraa salaahee-ai sahj milai parabh so-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. Praising the Perfect Guru, you shall easily meet with that God. ||1]|Pause] |
san Teor 3G afeamr ate vaat fas ote i (67-11, firdtera, He 3)
bharam ga-i-aa bha-o bhaagi-aa har charnee chit laa-ay.
Doubt departs, and fear runs away, when you focus your consciousness on the Lord's Feet.
qenfy Age ane ofs SA fs wre i (67-12, fadtera, He 3) gurmukh sabad kamaa-ee-ai har vasai man aa-ay. The Gurmukh practices the Shabad, and the Lord comes to dwell within the mind.
ufs Hots Afs ANTS ANAS @ Aa UTE MQM (67-12, fasta, He 3)
ghar mahal sach samaa-ee-ai jamkaal na sakai khaa-ay. ||2||
In the mansion of the home within the self, we merge in Truth, and the Messenger of Death cannot devour us. ||2||
on sr addy ow usd Te 3 as wet Il 67-13, frdtora, ws 3)
naamaa chheebaa kabeer jolaahaa pooray gur tay gat paa-ee.
Naam Dayv the printer, and Kabeer the weaver, obtained salvation through the Perfect Guru.
¥oH & 8S Age ueefs WG ATS aeret Il (67-13, firdtora, He 3)
barahm kay baytay sabad pachhaaneh ha-umai jaat gavaa-ee.
Those who know God and recognize His Shabad lose their ego and class consciousness.
Afe od fso at arat wets afe o HS Stet ISI (67-14, factors, nH: 3)
sur nar tin kee banee gaavahi ko-ay na maytai bhaa-ee. ||3]|
Their Banis are sung by the angelic beings, and no one can erase them, O Siblings of Destiny! ||3]|
US US AGH UGH fas HAH 3 US AT SS B A Il (67-14, frdtora, vs 3)
dait put karam Dharam kichh sanjam na parhai doojaa bhaa-o na jaanai.
The demon's son Prahlaad had not read about religious rituals or ceremonies, austerity or self-discipline; he did not know the love of duality.
Afsag sfent fasHe dur niafes SH SUE Il (67-15, fadtera, He 3)
satgur bhayti-ai nirmal ho-aa an-din naam vakhaanai.
Upon meeting with the True Guru, he became pure; night and day, he chanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fa us Sa HS YS TA ney 3 AE IV (67-15, frdtora, we 3)
ayko parhai ayko naa-o boojhai doojaa avar na jaanai. ||4| |
He read only of the One and he understood only the One Name; he knew no other at all. ||4]|
Ye BINS Hat Afoorst fas as sof SHES I (67-16, fasta, ve 3)
khat darsan jogee sani-aasee bin gur bharam bhulaa-ay.
The followers of the six different life-styles and world-views, the Yogis and the Sanyaasees have gone astray in doubt without the Guru.
Afsag Aefs 3 afs ffs uefa afe HIG Hf SATS I (67-17, fata, He 3)
satgur sayveh taa gat mit paavahi har jee-o man vasaa-ay.
If they serve the True Guru, they find the state of salvation; they enshrine the Dear Lord within their minds.
Ret set faG fos ot vee AS JTS Ul (67-17, fades, ue 3)
sachee banee si-o chit laagai aavan jaan rahaa-ay. ||5||
They focus their consciousness on the True Bani, and their comings and goings in reincarnation are over. ||5||
ufss ufs ufs ee surafa fas aa sof gare Il (67-18, fadtera, v2 3)
pandit parh parh vaad vakaaneh bin gur bharam bhulaa-ay.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read and argue and stir up controversies, but without the Guru, they are deluded by doubt.
wy wants eg ufeur fas Fae Hafs o US II (67-18, fadtera, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh fayr pa-i-aa bin sabdai mukat na paa-ay.
They wander around the cycle of 8.4 million reincarnations; without the Shabad, they do not attain liberation.
wT a@ os a afs we w Afsag Afs fers HEI (67-19, frdtoa, He 3)
jaa naa-o chaytai taa gat paa-ay jaa satgur mayl milaa-ay. ||6]|
But when they remember the Name, then they attain the state of salvation, when the True Guru unites them in Union. ||6]|
AsAafs ufs oy of Cun wT Afsag fxs ASS I 67-19, firdtera, He 3)
satsangat meh naam har upjai jaa satgur milai subhaa-ay.
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the Name of the Lord wells up, when the True Guru unites us in His Sublime Love.
ar ét Ho 36 maul wiry Tevet ver Afsagd SS I (68-1, firdtera, He 3) man tan arpee aap gavaa-ee chalaa satgur bhaa-ay.
I offer my mind and body, and I renounce my selfishness and conceit; I walk in Harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
He afeodt as nue feeg fa safe Ast fas Be IDI (8-1, frdtea, ue 3)
sad balihaaree gur apunay vitahu je har saytee chit laa-ay. ||7||
I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, who has attached my consciousness to the Lord. HII
A YgHe yon a fie ofa ASt sf TST I (68-2, firsts, ue 3)
so baraahman barahm jo binday har saytee rang raataa.
He alone is a Brahmin, who knows the Lord Brahma, and is attuned to the Love of the Lord.
us foafe eA Aga we nists aaHfy fers AST II (68-3, fdtora, He 3)
parabh nikat vasai sabhnaa ghat antar gurmukh virlai jaataa.
God is close at hand; He dwells deep within the hearts of all. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, know Him.
Soa OH fuS efsuret ae & Aafe uE|rst ICNUMNQII (68-3, fadtera, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee gur kai sabad pachhaataa. ||8]||5||22||
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is realized. ||8]|5||22]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (68-4) sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Hon 6 AS Suet faa ae ufeor o Ate I 68-4, fidtera, v2 3) sahjai no sabh lochdee bin gur paa-i-aa na jaa-ay. Everyone longs to be centered and balanced, but without the Guru, no one can.
ufs ufs ufss raat aa Sut soft THE I (68-5, fates, v2 3)
parh parh pandit jotkee thakay bhaykhee bharam bhulaa-ay.
The Pandits and the astrologers read and read until they grow weary, while the fanatics are deluded by doubt.
Td se AOA Ufemr niruet fast as TATE AU (68-5, firdteora, He 3)
gur bhaytay sahj paa-i-aa aapnee kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||1]||
Meeting with the Guru, intuitive balance is obtained, when God, in His Will, grants His Grace. ||1||
aet 3 ag fig Aon 3 fe Il (68-6, fiadtea, He 3) bhaa-ee ray gur bin sahj na ho-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, without the Guru, intuitive balance is not obtained.
Hee dt 3 Ao Cun ale ufeor Ag ALE A TIS Il (63-6, fates, we 3)
sabdai hee tay sahj oopjai har paa-i-aa sach so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Shabad, intuitive peace and poise wells up, and that True Lord is obtained. ||1||Pause] |
Hon afenr afe ue fas Aon aaot ate I (68-7, fadtea, He 3)
sehjay gaavi-aa thaa-ay pavai bin sahjai kathnee baad.
That which is sung intuitively is acceptable; without this intuition, all chanting is useless.
Hon ot sats Curt Hata fimrfs safer il s-7, fasta, we 3)
sehjay hee bhagat oopjai sahj pi-aar bairaag.
In the state of intuitive balance, devotion wells up. In intuitive balance, love is balanced and detached.
Hon ot 3 Ay ats of& fao Aon Ales Hfe NQI (63-8, fadtoa, He 3)
sahjai hee tay sukh saat ho-ay bin sahjai jeevan baad. ||2||
In the state of intuitive balance, peace and tranquility are produced. Without intuitive balance, life is useless. ||2]|
Hdfa Werdt Ae’ Het Hota AHO Barfe Il (68-8, frdtera, v3 3)
sahj saalaahee sadaa sadaa sahj samaaDh lagaa-ay.
In the state of intuitive balance, praise the Lord forever and ever. With intuitive ease, embrace Samaadhi.
Hon ot ae Gud sats ad fee ote il 8-9, firdtoa, v3 3)
sehjay hee gun oochrai bhagat karay liv laa-ay.
In the state of intuitive balance, chant His Glories, lovingly absorbed in devotional worship.
Rae dt ofa nfs eA anat ofe oA UTE ISI (68-9, fates, He 3)
sabday hee har man vasai rasnaa har ras khaa-ay. ||3]|
Through the Shabad, the Lord dwells within the mind, and the tongue tastes the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||3]|
Hon ae fesfoot Ae Averett UTE Il (68-10, firstora, He 3)
sehjay kaal vidaari-aa sach sarnaa-ee paa-ay.
In the poise of intuitive balance, death is destroyed, entering the Sanctuary of the True One.
Hon dle oH Hfe Stam Ast ats SHE Il (68-10, firstea, 2 3)
sehjay har naam man vasi-aa sachee kaar kamaa-ay.
Intuitively balanced, the Name of the Lord dwells within the mind, practicing the lifestyle of Truth.
A zasat fast ufenr AoA Id AHTE ISI (68-11, frdtea, v2 3)
say vadbhaagee jinee paa-i-aa sehjay rahay samaa-ay. ||4]|
Those who have found Him are very fortunate; they remain intuitively absorbed in Him. ||4]|
Hfeur fete Hon o Gun Her en ae il (68-11, frdtera, we 3)
maa-i-aa vich sahj na oopjai maa-i-aa doojai bhaa-ay.
Within Maya, the poise of intuitive balance is not produced. Maya leads to the love of duality.
HOHU AGH AHTSS ICH AS AOMTE Il (68-12, fasta, v2 3)
manmukh karam kamaavnay ha-umai jalai jalaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs perform religious rituals, but they are burnt down by their selfishness and conceit.
HHE HIE 3 Yaet feta feta mre ATE ull Gs-12, frdtora, ve 3)
jaman maran na chook-ee fir fir aavai jaa-ay. ||5]|
Their births and deaths do not cease; over and over again, they come and go in reincarnation. ||5||
fag aa fefs Hon 3 ue 3 ae sath gate I (68-13, facto, ne 3)
tarihu gunaa vich sahj na paa-ee-ai tarai gun bharam bhulaa-ay.
In the three qualities, intuitive balance is not obtained; the three qualities lead to delusion and doubt.
ust debt foo adh at veo wer ATE I 8-13, fidtora, He 3) parhee-ai gunee-ai ki-aa kathee-ai jaa mundhhu ghuthaa jaa-ay. What is the point of reading, studying and debating, if one loses his roots?
sq ue xfs Aon Dd Tenfe Us Ute HEN 8-14, firdtera, He 3) cha-uthay pad meh sahj hai gurmukh palai paa-ay. ||6|| In the fourth state, there is intuitive balance; the Gurmukhs gather it in. ||6]|
fosae oy fours 3 AOA ASt SE Il (68-14, fidtera, He 3)
nirgun naam niDhaan hai sehjay sojhee ho-ay.
The Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord, is the treasure. Through intuitive balance, understanding is obtained.
Teest Wetoort AS AS ALE Il (68-15, fadtora, He 3) gunvantee salaahi-aa sachay sachee so-ay. The virtuous praise the True One; their reputation is true.
Sfour Aafa frorfeHt Aafe fore SE DN (68-15, frdtera, He 3)
bhuli-aa sahj milaa-isee sabad milaavaa ho-ay. ||7||
The wayward are united with God through intuitive balance; through the Shabad, union is obtained. ||7]||
faa Hon AS vig Jd wher Ae Ta Il 68-15, fadtora, He 3)
bin sahjai sabh anDh hai maa-i-aa moh gubaar.
Without intuitive balance, all are blind. Emotional attachment to Maya is utter darkness.
Hon dt ASt uct Ad Aafe werfs il (68-16, fadtea, v2 3) sehjay hee sojhee pa-ee sachai sabad apaar. In intuitive balance, understanding of the True, Infinite Shabad is obtained.
wing auth fresfenig ud ae aes II (68-16, frétoa, 1 3) aapay bakhas milaa-i-an pooray gur kartaar. ||8]|| Granting forgiveness, the Perfect Guru unites us with the Creator. ||8]|
Hon “ifene ues feos afs fadarg i (68-17, fadtera, v2 3) sehjay adisat pachhaanee-ai nirbha-o jot nirankaar. In intuitive balance, the Unseen is recognized-the Fearless, Luminous, Formless Lord.
Rao dtr ot fea ast Ast Afs feereegs Il (68-17, fadtea, v2 3) sabhnaa jee-aa kaa ik daataa jotee jot milaavanhaar. There is only the One Giver of all beings. He blends our light with His Light.
ud Hale Aerdha fA oT nig  urserg ICI (68-18, firdtora, 3 3) poorai sabad salaahee-ai jis daa ant na paaraavaar. ||9]| So praise God through the Perfect Word of His Shabad; He has no end or limitation.
[91 |
fomrsior at us oH J ofa aafs Erg Il (68-18, fidtoa, He 3)
gi-aanee-aa kaa Dhan naam hai sahj karahi vaapaar.
Those who are wise take the Naam as their wealth; with intuitive ease, they trade with Him.
wWofes oT dfs oH Sie ne 3d FST Il (68-19, fadtoa, vs 3)
an-din laahaa har naam lain akhut bharay bhandaar.
Night and day, they receive the Profit of the Lord's Name, which is an inexhaustible and over-flowing treasure.
Sa Ste 5 oreet He esate AONE (68-19, fidtera, Hz 3)
naanak tot na aavee dee-ay dayvanhaar. ||10||6||23]| O Nanak, when the Great Giver gives, nothing at all is lacking. ||10]|6||23]|
ar éx firdtaat HIS 3 Il (69-1)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Afsafe fufemt eg 5 ue HOH NaS TY ATE II (69-1, fasta, He 3)
satgur mili-ai fayr na pavai janam maran dukh jaa-ay.
Meeting with the True Guru, you shall not have to go through the cycle of reincarnation again; the pains of birth and death will be taken away.
ud Aafe AS ASt det as SH Ta AME AI (69-2, firdtora, Hs 3)
poorai sabad sabh sojhee ho-ee har naamai rahai samaa-ay. ||1||
Through the Perfect Word of the Shabad, all understanding is obtained; remain absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Ho Hd Afsasd fAG fas te il (9-2, fadtea, ue 3) man mayray satgur si-o chit laa-ay. O my mind, focus your consciousness on the True Guru.
fsdHs aH Ae ose wry SA ufe ure NAN TITS Il (69-3, fadtera, He 3) nirmal naam sad navtano aap vasai man aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Immaculate Naam itself, ever-fresh, comes to abide within the mind. ||1||Pause||
dfs ME Tug nat Averet fA gufs SE gaat Il (69-3, fidtera, ne 3)
har jee-o raakho apunee sarnaa-ee ji-o raakhahi ti-o rahnaa.
O Dear Lord, please protect and preserve me in Your Sanctuary. As You keep me, so do I remain.
ad a Rafe Hes Hd TeHfe SSHG FIST IM (69-4, fadtora, He 3)
gur kai sabad jeevat marai gurmukh bhavjal tarnaa. ||2||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Gurmukh remains dead while yet alive, and swims across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2| |
zs ofa a uch asHfs Aafe Ave II (69-4, fidtera, 2 3)
vadai bhaag naa-o paa-ee-ai gurmat sabad suhaa-ee.
By great good fortune, the Name is obtained. Following the Guru's Teachings, through the Shabad, you shall be exalted.
nm Hfe Sfaor ys ads" AA sfomt AHTEet ISI (69-5, frdtora, He 3)
aapay man vasi-aa parabh kartaa sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||3]|
God, the Creator Himself, dwells within the mind; remain absorbed in the state of intuitive balance. ||3]|
feaor HoHfy Ase 3 aS dufs fa getfenr Il (69-5, fates, He 3)
iknaa manmukh sabad na bhaavai banDhan banDh bhavaa-i-aa.
Some are self-willed manmukhs; they do not love the Word of the Shabad. Bound in chains, they wander lost in reincarnation.
wu uGanis fefs fefs ore fase OH TSTfEnT IIsil (69-6, frdtora, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh fir fir aavai birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||4||
Through 8.4 million lifetimes, they wander over and over again; they waste away their lives in vain. ||4||
sas Hfs wise J Ad Aafe df TS Il (69-7, fadtora, He 3) bhagtaa man aanand hai sachai sabad rang raatay.
In the minds of the devotees there is bliss; they are attuned to the Love of the True Word of the Shabad.
mofeg Te Wels Ae fedHs AdA STH AHTS INUIll (69-7, fdtoa, He 3)
an-din gun gaavahi sad nirmal sehjay naam samaatay. ||5| |
Night and day, they constantly sing the Glories of the Immaculate Lord; with intuitive ease, they are absorbed into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||5]||
qonfy nifys set gafs AS wrSsH IH uETet II (69-8, fidtora, He 3)
gurmukh amrit banee boleh sabh aatam raam pachhaanee.
The Gurmukhs speak the Ambrosial Bani; they recognize the Lord, the Supreme Soul in all.
ta Aefe Sa mroafs qenfe nie aoret ill (69-8, fidtera, He 3)
ayko sayvan ayk araaDheh gurmukh akath kahaanee. ||6] |
They serve the One; they worship and adore the One. The Gurmukhs speak the Unspoken Speech. ||6]|
Re Afoe Reba gana SA nfs wre | (69-9, fasta, ve 3) sachaa saahib sayvee-ai gurmukh vasai man aa-ay. The Gurmukhs serve their True Lord and Master, who comes to dwell in the mind.
Re dfa as Ae fAG mryst faa ad flrofe IDI (69-9, fiadtera, He 3)
Sadaa rang raatay sach si-o apunee kirpaa karay milaa-ay. ||7]||
They are forever attuned to the Love of the True One, who bestows His Mercy and unites them with Himself. ||7]|
mma ad age md fea Afsur ef Aare Il (69-10, frdtera, He 3)
aapay karay karaa-ay aapay iknaa suti-aa day-ay jagaa-ay.
He Himself does, and He Himself causes others to do; He wakes some from their Sleep.
nmy Afs fraser soa Aafe ANTE ICHONQI (69-11, firdtera, He 3)
aapay mayl milaa-idaa naanak sabad samaa-ay. ||8]||7||24| | He Himself unites us in Union; Nanak is absorbed in the Shabad. ||8]|7]||24]|
firdtaat HIG 3 Il (69-11)
sireeraag mehlaa 3. Siree Raag, Third Mehl:
Afsafe Afent Ho fesHer se ufes Ate Il (69-11, fadtera, He 3) satgur sayvi-ai man nirmalaa bha-ay pavit sareer. Serving the True Guru, the mind becomes immaculate, and the body becomes pure.
Hfs moe Het AY ufemr sfeur afag ast Il (69-12, fadtera, v2 3) man aanand sadaa sukh paa-i-aa bhayti-aa gahir gambheer. The mind obtains bliss and eternal peace, meeting with the Deep and Profound Lord.
Het Hats aA Afe ath He ate IAI (69-12, fadtera, He 3)
sachee sangat baisnaa sach naam man Dheer. ||1]|
Sitting in the Sangat, the True Congregation, the mind is comforted and consoled by the True Name. ||1]|
Ho 3 Afsag Afe faHa il (69-13, firdtera, He 3) man ray satgur sayv nisang. O mind, serve the True Guru without hesitation.
Afsag Afedt ofs xfs ZA Ba OHS UST NU! FIT Il (69-13, frdtora, ve 3)
satgur sayvi-ai har man vasai lagai na mail patang. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Serving the True Guru, the Lord abides within the mind, and no trace of filth shall attach itself to you. ||1]|Pause] |
Ae Fate ufs Gur Ad Ae aS Il (69-14, firdtora, v3 3) sachai sabad pat oopjai sachay sachaa naa-o. From the True Word of the Shabad comes honor. True is the Name of the True One.
frat 6H wife uetfenr 3 fq afsad WE I (69-14, fdtera, He 3) jinee ha-umai maar pachhaani-aa ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who conquer their ego and recognize the Lord.
HOH AY 3 Weot f35 ST 5 AST AE Ql (69-15, frdtera, 2 3)
manmukh sach na jaannee tin tha-ur na kathoo thaa-o. ||2]|
The self-willed manmukhs do not know the True One; they find no shelter, and no place of rest anywhere. ||2]|
Ay Weal AY Use Ae dt fete SH Il (69-15, fidtera, He 3)
sach khaanaa sach painnaa sachay hee vich vaas.
Those who take the Truth as their food and the Truth as their clothing, have their home in the True One.
Hel Het Aedet Ad Aafe feetA Il (69-16, fidtera, He 3)
sadaa sachaa salaahnaa sachai sabad nivaas.
They constantly praise the True One, and in the True Word of the Shabad they have their dwelling.
AZ MSH IH Usteur TeHst fon whe SA III (69-16, fadtea, He 3)
sabh aatam raam pachhaani-aa gurmatee nij ghar vaas. ||3]||
They recognize the Lord, the Supreme Soul in all, and through the Guru's Teachings they dwell in the home of their own inner self. ||3]|
Hy fue Ay swat 3G HS AT SE I (69-17, facto, v2 3) sach vaykhan sach bolnaa tan man sachaa ho-ay. They see the Truth, and they speak the Truth; their bodies and minds are True.
Ret Ant @ueH AY Ae AST ALE I (69-17, fidtera, He 3)
sachee saakhee updays sach sachay sachee so-ay.
True are their teachings, and True are their instructions; True are the reputations of the true ones.
fiat Ae ferrfoor A edt vs SE Iigil (69-18, fidtera, He 3)
jinnee sach visaari-aa say dukhee-ay chalay ro-ay. ||4||
Those who have forgotten the True One are miserable-they depart weeping and wailing. ||4||
Afsag frat o Afes A fers mre AAS | (69-18, fata, He 3)
satgur jinee na sayvi-o say kit aa-ay sansaar.
Those who have not served the True Guru-why did they even bother to come into the world?
WH fe aa His AAS AS YOTS Il (69-19, frdtora, we 3)
jam dar baDhay maaree-ah kook na sunai pookaar.
They are bound and gagged and beaten at Death's door, but no one hears their shrieks and cries.
fase Foy aetfeur nfs AHfs ers STS NUM (69-19, fadtera, He 3) birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa mar jameh vaaro vaar. ||5]| They waste their lives uselessly; they die and are reincarnated over and over again.
[5] |
UST DO
Sg Aa nest efy a ofa ue Afsag AgST Il (70-1, fata, 2 3) ayhu jag jaltaa daykh kai bhaj pa-ay satgur sarnaa. Seeing this world on fire, I rushed to the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
Afsafe Ag feafeor Ae Afs AAfH TIS Wl (70-1, firstera, He 3)
satgur sach dirhaa-i-aa sadaa sach sanjam rahnaa.
The True Guru has implanted the Truth within me; I dwell steadfastly in Truth and self-restraint.
Afsag Ae 3 sfsa Age SSHS Sgr Ell (70-2, fasta, ve 3)
satgur sachaa hai bohithaa sabday bhavjal tarnaa. ||6]||
The True Guru is the Boat of Truth; in the Word of the Shabad, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||6]|
wu uGanis fese ad faa Afsae nafs & det Il (70-2, fadtora, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh firday rahay bin satgur mukat na ho-ee.
People continue wandering through the cycle of 8.4 million incarnations; without the True Guru, liberation is not obtained.
ufs uf ufss Hot wat eH ote ufs Tet I (70-3, frstera, we 3)
parh parh pandit monee thakay doojai bhaa-ay pat kho-ee.
Reading and studying, the Pandits and the silent sages have grown weary, but attached to the love of duality, they have lost their honor.
Afsafe nae Hefeor fas AS vied 3 Get IDI (70-3, fata, He 3)
satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa bin sachay avar na ko-ee. ||7||
The True Guru teaches the Word of the Shabad; without the True One, there is no other at all. ||7||
a Ad we A Ate oa fos Adt ag adie Il (70-4, fadtera, 2 3) jo sachai laa-ay say sach lagay nit sachee kaar karann. Those who are linked by the True One are linked to Truth. They always act in Truth.
fsor for whe ear urfimr AS Hofs TdfS II (70-5, fadtera, He 3)
tinaa nij ghar vaasaa paa-i-aa sachai mahal rahann.
They attain their dwelling in the home of their own inner being, and they abide in the Mansion of Truth.
Soa SIS AMS Ae AS OTH ssf NCUA QUIl (70-5, fadtea, He 3)
naanak bhagat sukhee-ay sadaa sachai naam rachann. ||8||17||8||25]|
O Nanak, the devotees are happy and peaceful forever. They are absorbed in the True Name. ||8]|17][8][25]|
frrstaat HIS U Il (70-6) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
Wag HAAS nifs ae set af! o SE Il (70-6, faster, nH 5) jaa ka-o muskal at banai dho-ee ko-ay na day-ay. When you are confronted with terrible hardships, and no one offers you any support,
WY TS SAHA Aa fs Sh YS Il (70-6, firdtora, ws 5) laagoo ho-ay dusmanaa saak bhe bhaj khalay. when your friends turn into enemies, and even your relatives have deserted you,
AS 3H MTA Ya AS MASE Il (70-7, fades, ue 5) sabho bhajai aasraa chukai sabh asraa-o. and when all support has given way, and all hope has been lost
fafs mre GA USN Ba o Sat SC UA (70-7, fdtora, ws 5)
chit aavai os paarbarahm lagai na tatee vaa-o. ||1]|
-if you then come to remember the Supreme Lord God, even the hot wind shall not touch you. ||1]|
Atfog festfent at 37S Il (70-8, fdtea, ue 5) saahib nitaani-aa kaa taan. Our Lord and Master is the Power of the powerless.
mf 3 wet fag Het Tg Agel AV ATS IA TIS Il (70-8, fistoa, vs 5)
aa-ay na jaa-ee thir sadaa gur sabdee sach jaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He does not come or go; He is Eternal and Permanent. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is known as True. ||1]||Pause| |
Aa de wae Sa gu at ute Il (70-9, fadtea, ne 5) jay ko hovai dublaa nang bhukh kee peer. If you are weakened by the pains of hunger and poverty,
HST US Bt US BT A VS Me Il (70-9, fadtea, He 5) damrhaa palai naa pavai naa ko dayvai Dheer. with no money in your pockets, and no one will give you any comfort,
Aree Aur o a ad 3 fas JS aH Il (70-9, fdtera, He 5)
su-aarath su-aa-o na ko karay naa kichh hovai kaaj.
and no one will satisfy your hopes and desires, and none of your works is accomplished
fafs ure GR uTsqaH 3 fegse JS TH IMI (70-10, fadtora, ue 5)
chit aavai os paarbarahm taa nihchal hovai raaj. ||2||
-if you then come to remember the Supreme Lord God, you shall obtain the eternal kingdom. ||2||
Wag fis soz sos Sct feamd ga Il (70-10, fidtwa, 2 5) jaa ka-o chintaa bahut bahut dayhee vi-aapai rog. When you are plagued by great and excessive anxiety, and diseases of the body;
fans aéfa usfenr ae Tay KE AG Il (70-11, firdtora, ne 5)
garisat kutamb palayti-aa kaday harakh kaday sog.
when you are wrapped up in the attachments of household and family, sometimes feeling joy, and then other times sorrow;
GE ad VI Ae a wat & FAS ALE Il (70-11, fdtera, Ht: 5)
ga-on karay chahu kunt kaa gharhee na baisan so-ay.
when you are wandering around in all four directions, and you cannot sit or sleep even for a moment
fafs mre GA uTsqTH 3o HO Alse aE WS (70-12, firdtorg, v2 5)
chit aavai os paarbarahm tan man seetal ho-ay. ||3]| -if you come to remember the Supreme Lord God, then your body and mind shall be cooled and soothed. ||3]|
any adfa Hf efh ater fagus ofs fumrg il (70-12, fadtera, H2 5)
kaam karoDh mohi vas kee-aa kirpan lobh pi-aar.
When you are under the power of sexual desire, anger and worldly attachment, or a greedy miser in love with your wealth;
wd faafeu Sfs ony ate dur wins Aurg il (70-13, firdtora, v2 5)
chaaray kilvikh un agh kee-ay ho-aa asur sanghaar.
if you have committed the four great sins and other mistakes; even if you are a murderous fiend
ut ats afes fae axe 3 aafe afer Il (70-13, fidtea, He 5) pothee geet kavit kichh kaday na karan Dhari-aa. who has never taken the time to listen to sacred books, hymns and poetry
fafs mre GA ursqaH 3 feHu fines Sfenr etl (70-14, firdtera, He 5)
chit aavai os paarbarahm taa nimakh simrat tari-aa. ||4||
-if you then come to remember the Supreme Lord God, and contemplate Him, even for a moment, you shall be saved. ||4||
WAS fAf_fs se ofe nara fags i (70-15, fdtora, He 5) saasat simrit bayd chaar mukhaagar bichray. People may recite by heart the Shaastras, the Simritees and the four Vedas;
su suing Aaiur Stefa Tea A Il (70-15, fate, He 5)
tapay tapeesar jogee-aa tirath gavan karay.
they may be ascetics, great, self-disciplined Yogis; they may visit sacred shrines of pilgrimage
UE ATH J CAS UAT AIS STE I (70-15, fstara, ve 5)
khat karmaa tay dugunai poojaa kartaa naa-ay.
and perform the six ceremonial rituals, over and over again, performing worship services and ritual bathings.
Jd Sat Wa_IH 3 Haus oda AVE HUI (70-16, fidtoa, Hs 5)
rang na lagee paarbarahm taa sarpar narkay jaa-ay. ||5]| Even so, if they have not embraced love for the Supreme Lord God, then they shall surely go to hell. ||5||
TH faa froediut oA sae fang Il (70-16, firdtera, Hi: 5)
raaj milak sikdaaree-aa ras bhogan bisthaar.
You may possess empires, vast estates, authority over others, and the enjoyment of myriads of pleasures;
Wad HIS AVS YH JAH Me|TS Il (70-17, fadtea, ve 5) baag suhaavay sohnay chalai hukam afaar. you may have delightful and beautiful gardens, and issue unquestioned commands;
da SHA ag fact wfe ofa afomr il (70-17, firstera, v2 5)
rang tamaasay baho biDhee chaa-ay lag rahi-aa.
you may have enjoyments and entertainments of all sorts and kinds, and continue to enjoy exciting pleasures
fafs 3 ores ursqay 3 Hau ot afs afer ell (70-18, firstera, H8 5)
chit na aa-i-o paarbarahm taa sarap kee joon ga-i-aa. ||6] |
-and yet, if you do not come to remember the Supreme Lord God, you shall be reincarnated as a snake. ||6||
ads uate merses Hat faaHe dts I (70-18, fate, v2 5)
bahut Dhanaadh achaarvant sobhaa nirmal reet.
You may possess vast riches, maintain virtuous conduct, have a spotless reputation and observe religious customs;
Hs fust AS aver AHO Afar udtfS Il (70-19, fadtera, v2 5) maat pitaa sut bhaa-ee-aa saajan sang pareet. you may have the loving affections of mother, father, children, siblings and friends;
BHAT SIaAAge se AE A Aerst ats |! (70-19, fadtea, He 5)
laskar tarkasband band jee-o jee-o saglee keet.
you may have armies well-equipped with weapons, and all may salute you with respect;
UST D9 fats 3 one ursgqan 3 ufs sATSTS SS NDI (71-1, firétoa, ue 5) chit na aa-i-o paarbarahm taa kharh rasaatal deet. ||7]||
But still, if you do not come to remember the Supreme Lord God, then you shall be taken and consigned to the most hideous hell! ||7||
afer da 3 fee fas ot fas aa AG | (71-1, fastera, H2 5)
kaa-i-aa rog na chhidar kichh naa kichh kaarhaa sog.
You may have a body free of disease and deformity, and have no worries or grief at all;
firas 3 vret fos fan uifofafa Sat Sar il (71-2, firdtora, v2 5) mirat na aavee chit tis ahinis bhogai bhog. you may be unmindful of death, and night and day revel in pleasures;
AS fag atso wruar Ate 3 He Ofer Il (71-2, fadtea, He 5) sabh kichh keeton aapnaa jee-ay na sank Dhari-aa. you may take everything as your own, and have no fear in your mind at all;
fats o onfe@ ursqaun AHaas SfA Ufa HICH (71-3, fdtora, He 5)
chit na aa-i-o paarbarahm jamkankar vas pari-aa. ||8]||
but still, if you do not come to remember the Supreme Lord God, you shall fall under the power of the Messenger of Death. ||8]|
frau ad fA UTSqoH TS ATT Aa ll (71-3, fates, we 5)
kirpaa karay jis paarbarahm hovai saaDhoo sang.
The Supreme Lord showers His Mercy, and we find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fag fa Go caren FS FE afs fAG Sa I (71-4, fata, He 5) ji-o ji-o oh vaDhaa-ee-ai ti-o ti-o har si-o rang. The more time we spend there, the more we come to love the Lord.
eo fafoor ar any orf neg 3 BAT aS I (71-4, frtera, He 5) duhaa siri-aa kaa khasam aap avar na doojaa thaa-o. The Lord is the Master of both worlds; there is no other place of rest.
Afsag 36 fer sea AST oS NENUIEN (71-5, firstora, He 5) satgur tuthai paa-i-aa naanak sachaa naa-o. ||9||1]|26] |
When the True Guru is pleased and satisfied, O Nanak, the True Name is obtained. 9} 1]126]|
frrdtaa Hos U we U Il (71-5)
sireeraag mehlaa 5 ghar 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:
Wo dt se ACH HST Il (71-6, fadtoa, ue 5) jaan-o nahee bhaavai kavan baataa. I do not know what pleases my Lord.
HO Ufa HST UA TITS ll (71-6, fastera, 2 5) man khoj maarag. ||1|| rahaa-o. O mind, seek out the way! ||1]|Pause| |
fomret famrg orefs Il (71-6, firdtera, v8 5) Dhi-aanee Dhi-aan laaveh. The meditatives practice meditation,
famirat famire anata il (71-7, fdtea, ve 5) gi-aanee gi-aan kamaaveh. and the wise practice spiritual wisdom,
yg fas ot AST A (71-7, fdtoa, v8 5) parabh kin hee jaataa. ||1]| but how rare are those who know God! ||1]|
saICst JIS AAS Il (71-7, fdtera, ve 5) bhag-utee rahat jugtaa. The worshipper of Bhagaauti practices self-discipline,
Halt AIS HAST Il (71-7, fadtera, v2 5) jogee kahat muktaa. the Yogi speaks of liberation,
SuAt Sufd FST NMI (71-8, frrdtea, He 5) tapsee tapeh raataa. ||2|| and the ascetic is absorbed in asceticism. ||2||
Hot Hfeardt il (71-8, fidtera, ve 5) monee moniDhaaree. The men of silence observe silence,
AfourAt YH Il (71-8, firdtara, us 5) sani-aasee barahamchaaree. the Sanyaasees observe celibacy,
Cont SetH TS SI (71-8, fidtoa, v2 5) udaasee udaas raataa. ||3]| and the Udaasees abide in detachment. ||3]|
safs Se UTATS | (71-9, firdtora, ve 5) bhagat navai parkaaraa. There are nine forms of devotional worship.
ufss Zz UAT Il (71-9, fadtoa, He 5) pandit vayd pukaaraa. The Pandits recite the Vedas.
farsrst farsAfs TSHTST ISI (71-9, frstera, He 5) girsatee girsat Dharmaataa. ||4] | The householders assert their faith in family life. ||4]|
fea Aaet ag gf megs Il (71-9, frtea, H 5) ik sabdee baho roop avDhootaa. Those who utter only One Word, those who take many forms, the naked renunciates,
aust AVS AGS Il (71-10, frrstera, v2 5) kaaprhee ka-utay jaagootaa. the wearers of patched coats, the magicians, those who remain always awake,
fefa stefa ast ull (71-10, frrstera, He 5) ik tirath naataa. ||5|| and those who bathe at holy places of pilgrimage-||5] |
fedos ZISt MMIPAT Il (71-10, frstera, He 5) nirhaar vartee aaprasaa. Those who go without food, those who never touch others,
fefa ofa o ets SAT Il (71-11, frstera, 12 5) ik look na dayveh darsaa. the hermits who never show themselves,
fefa Ho dt famirst Well (71-11, fstera, He 5)
ik man hee gi-aataa. ||6]| and those who are wise in their own minds-||6||
wife & fae dt xofenr it (71-11, frsterar, v3 5) ghaat na kin hee kahaa-i-aa. Of these, no one admits to any deficiency;
Ag ads od ufemr | (7-1, fadtea, He 5) sabh kahtay hai paa-i-aa. all say that they have found the Lord.
fam AS A Sas MDI (71-12, fasta, ue 5) jis maylay so bhagtaa. ||7]|| But he alone is a devotee, whom the Lord has united with Himself. ||7]|
Hae Cats Curer i fSnrait Aafe urer il (71-12, firstera, He 5) Sagal ukat upaavaa. ti-aagee saran paavaa. Abandoning all devices and contrivances, I have sought His Sanctuary.
SSA WT VIS UTS [CNN (71-12, frstera, He 5)
naanak gur charan paraataa. ||8]|2]||27]|| Nanak has fallen at the Feet of the Guru. ||8]|2]|27]|
qe Afsas ure il (71-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
frdtaa HIG A We 3 Il (71-15) sireeraag mehlaa 1 ghar 3. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Third House:
Aa wiets Haier | (71-15, fadtera, He 1) jogee andar jogee-aa. Among Yogis, You are the Yogi;
3 sat neta sate i 71-15, frdtora, ws 1) too” bhogee andar bhogee-aa. among pleasure seekers, You are the Pleasure Seeker.
37 nis 6 ufeor Fafa ufe ufsorfs Ae WA (71-15, facto, ve D
tayraa ant na paa-i-aa surag machh pa-i-aal jee-o. ||1]]|
Your limits are not known to any of the beings in the heavens, in this world, or in the nether regions of the underworld. ||1||
IG ad IG age aoeS 39 TSS NU TTS Il (71-16, factors, v4: 1 ha-o vaaree ha-o vaarnai kurbaan tayray naav no. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am devoted, dedicated, a sacrifice to Your Name. ||1||Pause] |
30 AAS Curfeor | (71-17, frstera, He 1) tuDh sansaar upaa-i-aa. You created the world,
fad fafe co afer I 71-17, fasta, 42 1) siray sir DhanDhay laa-i-aa. and assigned tasks to one and all.
eufs ats wruert afe aeats uA ats AG QI (71-17, firdteoa, He 1
vaykheh keetaa aapnaa kar kudrat paasaa dhaal jee-o. ||2]|
You watch over Your Creation, and through Your All-powerful Creative Potency, You cast the dice. ||2||
udate UTIs AUST | (71-18, fadtera, He 1)
pargat pahaarai jaapdaa. You are manifest in the Expanse of Your Workshop.
AS oe & USSU Il (71-18, fadtera, He 1)
sabh naavai no partaapdaa. Everyone longs for Your Name,
Afsas as 3 ute AS Hot wfeor ate FIG SI (71-18, fata, He 1) satgur baajh na paa-i-o sabh mohee maa-i-aa jaal jee-o. ||3]| but without the Guru, no one finds You. All are enticed and trapped by Maya. ||3]|
Afsas aS af veh | (71-19, fadtera, ne 1) satgur ka-o bal jaa-ee-ai. I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru.
fas fiufent usH afs ure il (71-19, fasta, v2 1) jit mili-ai param gat paa-ee-ai. Meeting Him, the supreme status is obtained.
Ust D2 Afe od ufs AS Sve A Afsafe dor gsfe AE sil (72-1, fadtwa, He 1) sur nar mun jan lochday so satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay jee-o. ||4] |
The angelic beings and the silent sages long for Him; the True Guru has given me this understanding. ||4||
H3Hats aAt Arab Il (72-1, fadtera, He 1) satsangat kaisee jaanee-ai. How is the Society of the Saints to be known?
fra Sat oH Sars | (72-1, fasta, v2 1) jithai ayko naam vakhaanee-ai. There, the Name of the One Lord is chanted.
Sa SH JAH J Soa Afsafe tor gee Ae ull (72-2, fadtoa, He 1
ayko naam hukam hai naanak satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay jee-o. ||5]|
The One Name is the Lord's Command; O Nanak, the True Guru has given me this understanding. ||5||
feg Aas 3afh serfeur I (72-2, fadtoa, u2 1) ih jagat bharam bhulaa-i-aa. This world has been deluded by doubt.
mug 30 ynitfenr |i (72-3, fadtea, He 1) aaphu tuDh khu-aa-i-aa. You Yourself, Lord, have led it astray.
udsTy Ba saaat sa fro a ats AE él (72-3, faster, ve partaap lagaa duhaaganee bhaag jinaa kay naahi jee-o. ||6|| The discarded soul-brides suffer in terrible agony; they have no luck at all. ||6||
soraet fant otarehar i (72-4, firdtera, He 1) duhaaganee ki-aa neesaanee-aa. What are the signs of the discarded brides?
WAH wear feats fateh Il (72-4, frrdtera, He 1) khasmahu ghuthee-aa fireh nimaanee-aa. They miss their Husband Lord, and they wander around in dishonor.
H® 2H fsa anet vat sfs feafe HE NON (72-4, fete", He D mailay vays tinaa kaamnee dukhee rain vihaa-ay jee-o. ||7|| The clothes of those brides are filthy-they pass their life-night in agony. ||7| |
Hovaeat fom aay orfear i (72-5, fastera, v2 1) sohaaganee ki-aa karam kamaa-i-aa. What actions have the happy soul-brides performed?
usta fesfimor se urfenr it (72-5, fadtea, He 1) poorab likhi-aa fal paa-i-aa. They have obtained the fruit of their pre-ordained destiny.
Seta ad & nmyat nmy we fof! AG CH (72-5, fdtoa, He 1 nadar karay kai aapnee aapay la-ay milaa-ay jee-o. ||8]| Casting His Glance of Grace, the Lord unites them with Himself. ||8]|
Jan faat 3 Hatfenr Il (72-6, fadtora, He 1) hukam jinaa no manaa-i-aa. Those, whom God causes to abide by His Will,
fae nists Fae eAfenr Il (72-6, fadtera, ve 1) tin antar sabad vasaa-i-aa. have the Shabad of His Word abiding deep within.
Adon A Aoaeat fro Ao of fumirg A ICI (72-7, facto, He 1 sahee-aa say sohaaganee jin sah naal pi-aar jee-o. ||9|| They are the true soul-brides, who embrace love for their Husband Lord. ||9]|
fiat ste at GA mrfenr Il (72-7, frdtera, He 1) jinaa bhaanay kaa ras aa-i-aa. Those who take pleasure in God's Will
faa fess saN Barfenr Il (72-7, factors, Hz 1) tin vichahu bharam chukaa-i-aa. remove doubt from within.
Soa Afsagd MA Wabi A ASA we fete HIG AON (72-8, fadtea, He 1) naanak satgur aisaa jaanee-ai jo sabhsai la-ay milaa-ay jee-o. ||10]| O Nanak, know Him as the True Guru, who unites all with the Lord. ||10]||
Afsafe fife ee urfeor Il (72-8, fadtera, He 1) satgur mili-ai fal paa-i-aa. Meeting with the True Guru, they receive the fruits of their destiny,
fats feed ngage garfenr | (72-9, fadtera, He 1) jin vichahu ahkaran chukaa-i-aa. and egotism is driven out from within.
ZoHfs at ey afent arg Hor HASfa mrfE AE NAA (72-9, faStea, He 1)
durmat kaa dukh kati-aa bhaag baithaa mastak aa-ay jee-o. ||11]||
The pain of evil-mindedness is eliminated; good fortune comes and shines radiantly from their foreheads. ||11]|
nis Sat aretor i (72-10, fiesta, ue 1)
amrit tayree baanee-aa.
The Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar.
Sfoor garst fae AHTetor II (72-10, fadtea, He 1)
tayri-aa bhagtaa ridai samaanee-aa.
It permeates the hearts of Your devotees.
Hu Ae niefe fim wmuet oefe acts farsa AE 92 (72-10, fadtera, He 1)
sukh sayvaa andar rakhi-ai aapnee nadar karahi nistaar jee-o. ||12]|
Serving You, peace is obtained; granting Your Mercy, You bestow salvation. ||12] | Afsag fixfeor wre I (72-11, fadtera, He 1)
satgur mili-aa jaanee-ai. Meeting with the True Guru, one comes to know;
fas fife ont sure Il (72-11, fadtera, He 1) jit mili-ai naam vakhaanee-ai. by this meeting, one comes to chant the Name.
Afsag 1s 6 ufeEG AS Uat AIH ANTS AG ISI (72-12, fadtea, He 1)
satgur baajh na paa-i-o sabh thakee karam kamaa-ay jee-o. ||13]|
Without the True Guru, God is not found; all have grown weary of performing religious rituals. ||13]|
J Afsad feeg wafer |i (72-12, firdteora, He 1 ha-o satgur vitahu ghumaa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru;
fate sft ger Hrafar urfemr i (72-13, fdtera, v3 1) jin bharam bhulaa maarag paa-i-aa. I was wandering in doubt, and He has set me on the right path.
etd Ad A nual ning we gore AS NASI (72-13, fist, He 1) nadar karay jay aapnee aapay la-ay ralaa-ay jee-o. ||14|| If the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, He unites us with Himself. ||14]|
3 Ago fs AME Il (72-14, frdterar, we 1) too’ sabhnaa maahi samaa-i-aa. You, Lord, are pervading in all,
fafs as ny warfenr Il (72-14, fate, He 1) tin kartai aap lukaa-i-aa. and yet, the Creator keeps Himself concealed.
Soa TeHfy usae dfeor wa Afs adt asia HIG ql (72-14, fasta, He 1D) naanak gurmukh pargat ho-i-aa jaa ka-o jot Dharee kartaar jee-o. ||15]|
O Nanak, the Creator is revealed to the Gurmukh, within whom He has infused His Light. ||15]|
mmy Ah feetfrmr i (72-15, fidtera, He 1) aapay khasam nivaaji-aa. The Master Himself bestows honor.
AG fitz & wf i (72-15, fadtea, ue jee-o pind day saaji-aa. He creates and bestows body and soul.
wus Aza at Un sdiot ofs ag HASfa of AE AEN (72-15, fata, He 1)
aapnay sayvak kee paij rakhee-aa du-ay kar mastak Dhaar jee-o. ||16]|
He Himself preserves the honor of His servants; He places both His Hands upon their foreheads. ||16||
Afs AHH Id fimireur il (72-16, frdtora, He 1) sabh sanjam rahay si-aanpaa. All strict rituals are just clever contrivances.
Ha yg Ag fas AST Il (72-16, frrstora, He 1) mayraa parabh sabh kichh jaandaa. My God knows everything.
use usu zasteS Ag Ba ad Hag AI ADI (72-17, fidtwa, He 1 pargat partaap vartaa-i-o sabh lok karai jaikaar jee-o. ||17]|| He has made His Glory manifest, and all people celebrate Him. ||17 |
Hd TE nae o Stefan il (72-17, fadtea, uz 1) mayray gun avgan na beechaari-aa. | He has not considered my merits and demerits;
yfs wnat fase AHtfgne Il (72-18, frdtora, we 1) parabh apnaa birad samaari-aa. this is God's Own Nature.
dfs ofs a afSe oa 5 sat TS AE NICH (72-18, faster, He YD
kanth laa-ay kai rakhi-on lagai na tatee vaa-o jee-o. ||18]|
Hugging me close in His Embrace, He protects me, and now, even the hot wind does not touch me. ||18]|
Houfs 3fs us fierfenr it (72-18, fastera, 2 1) mai man tan parabhoo Dhi-aa-i-aa. Within my mind and body, I meditate on God.
ale fefentat se urfenr i (72-19, fasta, He 1)
jee-ay ichhi-arhaa fal paa-i-aa.
I have obtained the fruits of my soul's desire.
Ag ufsaAd ffs wAH S Af aoe Fe SS AIG NIE (72-19, frdtora, we saah paatisaah sir khasam too” jap naanak jeevai naa-o jee-o. ||19]|
You are the Supreme Lord and Master, above the heads of kings. Nanak lives by chanting Your Name. ||19]|
Uat 93 30 mmr ming Burfemr | (73-1, firdteora, He 1)
tuDh aapay aap upaa-i-aa. You Yourself created the Universe;
am ae ate feawrfenr i (73-1, frdtea, He 1) doojaa khayl kar dikhlaa-i-aa. You created the play of duality, and staged it.
Ag Ad Ay zdse" fan ave fSA gee HIG ION (73-1, fadtea, H2 1) sabh sacho sach varatdaa jis bhaavai tisai bujhaa-ay jee-o. ||20]|
The Truest of the True is pervading everywhere; He instructs those with whom He is pleased. ||20]|
as USATSt urfemr Il (73-2, firdtoa, He 1) gur parsaadee paa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, I have found God.
fsa wfeor Hg vorfemr Il (73-2, fadtea, He tithai maa-i-aa moh chukaa-i-aa. By His Grace, I have shed emotional attachment to Maya.
facut afs & niet wmt we ANTE AIG QU (73-3, fastoa, He 1) kirpaa kar kai aapnee aapay la-ay samaa-ay jee-o. ||21]| Showering His Mercy, He has blended me into Himself. ||21] |
Tut S amrshor | (73-3, fastera, He 1)
gopee nai go-aalee-aa.
You are the Gopis, the milk-maids of Krishna; You are the sacred river Jamunaa; You are Krishna, the herdsman.
3a um afe Garstor 1 (73-3, fadtera, He 1) tuDh aapay go-ay uthaalee-aa. You Yourself support the world.
gout st3 Afor 3 nm sis ASts AG QQ (73-4, fatora, we 1)
hukmee bhaa™day saaji-aa too’ aapay bhann savaar jee-o. ||22||
By Your Command, human beings are fashioned. You Yourself embellish them, and then again destroy them. ||22||
fe Afsas fAC fas afenr i (73-4, frstera, He 1) jin satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa. Those who have focused their consciousness on the True Guru
fsat eat a yorfeur it (73-4, frstera, v2 1) tinee doojaa bhaa-o chukaa-i-aa. have rid themselves of the love of duality.
fosne fs foo yreior Gfe 3S HON Aetfs AE N2SIl (73-5, fidtra, He 1)
nirmal jot tin paraanee-aa o-ay chalay janam savaar jee-o. ||23]||
The light of those mortal beings is immaculate. They depart after redeeming their lives. ||23]|
Sdor wet wet sfamreior 1 A ofS fed |fsmrent i (73-5, firstera, v3 1) tayree-aa sadaa sadaa chang-aa-ee-aa. mai raat dihai vadi-aa-ee-aa™. Forever and ever, night and day, I praise the Greatness of Your Goodness.
meHfamt ag eat AT SHA AY ANTS ME Isai (73-6, fadtera, ve 1)
anmangi-aa daan dayvnaa kaho naanak sach samaal jee-o. ||24||1||
You bestow Your Gifts, even if we do not ask for them. Says Nanak, contemplate the True Lord. ||24||1||
frrstaat HIS U Il (73-7) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
u umfe Horet Afe AIG I (73-7, fadtera, He 5) pai paa-ay manaa-ee so-ay jee-o. I fall at His Feet to please and appease Him.
Afsas usfa frorfeur fan Aes oreg 5 afe AE Nan Toe Il (73-7, fidtora, He 5) satgur purakh milaa-i-aa tis jayvad avar na ko-ay jee-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The True Guru has united me with the Lord, the Primal Being. There is no other as great as He. ||1||Pause] |
anAret firdat feost il (73-8, fadtea, H2 5) gosaa-ee mihandaa ith-rhaa. The Lord of the Universe is my Sweet Beloved.
MH me aeg fost il (73-8, fadtea, He 5) amm abay thaavhu mith-rhaa. He is sweeter than my mother or father.
se ae Afs AAS SO AT ot afe ATG NAN (73-9, firdtera, He 5) bhain bhaa-ee sabh sajnaa tuDh jayhaa naahee ko-ay jee-o. ||1]| Among all sisters and brothers and friends, there is no one like You. ||1]|
3d JaH Wes nrfenr | (73-9, fadtea, 2 5) tayrai hukmay saavan aa-i-aa. By Your Command, the month of Saawan has come.
H AS a Ie Ayre I (73-9, fadtea, ue 5) mai sat kaa hal jo-aa-i-aa. I have hooked up the plow of Truth,
oe dine war orn afe ofa Som SUR ANTE AIG IH (73-10, firétora, H8 5)
naa-o beejan lagaa aas kar har bohal bakhas jamaa-ay jee-o. ||2||
and I plant the seed of the Name in hopes that the Lord, in His Generosity, will bestow a bountiful harvest. ||2| |
38 aa fife fea usreer il (73-10, fdtora, v8 5) ha-o gur mil ik pachhaandaa. Meeting with the Guru, I recognize only the One Lord.
eu ara fats a ASE Il (73-11, firsts, He 5)
duyaa kaagal chit na jaandaa. In my consciousness, I do not know of any other account.
dfs feas ars ofeGe fa@ ae fee forts HE Si (73-11, fadtoa, ne 5)
har iktai kaarai laa-i-on ji-o bhaavai ti‘vai nibaahi jee-o. ||3]|
The Lord has assigned one task to me; as it pleases Him, I perform it. ||3]| sHt sfarg Sug sgetT I (73-12, frdtora, He 5)
tusee bhogihu bhunchahu bhaa-eeho. Enjoy yourselves and eat, O Siblings of Destiny.
afte cafe ae Uses i (73-12, fadtera, He 5) gur deebaan kavaa-ay painaa-ee-o. In the Guru's Court, He has blessed me with the Robe of Honor.
IG dur nag fils & dfs ore uA Acta AG etl (73-12, fata, nH 5)
ha-o ho-aa maahar pind daa bann aaday panj sareek jee-o. ||4]|
I have become the Master of my body-village; I have taken the five rivals as prisoners. ||4||
JG orfeor AM fsdshor I (73-13, faster, He 5) ha-o aa-i-aa saamai"' tihandee-aa. I have come to Your Sanctuary.
Ufa fasne HAS firofsmr i (73-13, frtera, He 5) panj kirsaan mujayray mihdi-aa. The five farm-hands have become my tenants;
ae aet afe 5 duet soa zor uf fare HIG null (73-14, facto, He 5)
kann ko-ee kadh na hangh-ee naanak vuthaa ghugh giraa-o jee-o. ||5||
none dare to raise their heads against me. O Nanak, my village is populous and prosperous. ||5||
IG Sat wT ASST I (73-14, fadtera, He 5) ha-o vaaree ghummaa jaavdaa. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to You.
fea A su fomrfeer it (73-14, frrdtera, He 5) ik saahaa tuDh Dhi-aa-idaa. I meditate on You continually.
Crs ag eAfeG 3G 3u fees ages A EN (73-15, frrdtoa, He 5) ujarh thayhu vasaa-i-o ha-o tuDh vitahu kurbaan jee-o. ||6]| The village was in ruins, but You have re-populated it. Iam a sacrifice to You. ||6]|
dfa fes fos fomrf er i (73-15, fadtea, 3 5) har ithai nit Dhi-aa-idaa. O Beloved Lord, I meditate on You continually;
fs feet A ee urfeer il (73-16, fadtoa, He 5) man chindee so fal paa-idaa. I obtain the fruits of my mind's desires.
HS WHA Hetanig Bde Ho at su AIG IDI (73-16, firdtera, He 5) sabhay kaaj savaari-an laahee-an man kee bhukh jee-o. ||7|| All my affairs are arranged, and the hunger of my mind is appeased. ||7]||
H efsur AS Gust Il (73-16, fadtea, He 5) mai chhadi-aa sabho DhanDh-rhaa. I have forsaken all my entanglements;
aAret ASt ABST Il (73-17, fadtera, u2 5) gosaa-ee sayvee sachrhaa. I serve the True Lord of the Universe.
o@ fofa an fours ofa H us aor fafer AS UCI (73-17, faster, He 5) na-o niDh naam niDhaan har mai palai baDhaa chhik jee-o. ||8]| I have firmly attached the Name, the Home of the Nine Treasures to my robe. ||8]||
Het S Ae urfeor i (73-17, fates, ue 5) mai sukhee hoo™ sukh paa-i-aa. I have obtained the comfort of comforts.
afs nists Agee SAEMr Il (73-18, fadtea, v2 5) gur antar sabad vasaa-i-aa. The Guru has implanted the Word of the Shabad deep within me.
Afsafs usfy feerfeor HAsfa ofs & ge A CI (73-18, firdtora, He 5)
satgur purakh vikhaali-aa mastak Dhar kai hath jee-o. ||9||
The True Guru has shown me my Husband Lord; He has placed His Hand upon my forehead. ||9]|
H act AY Ta AG T Il (73-19, firdtora, He 5) mai baDhee sach Dharam saal hai. I have established the Temple of Truth.
Taha BIE Shs A Il (73-19, fadtoa, ue 5) gursikhaa lahdaa bhaal kai. I sought out the Guru's Sikhs, and brought them into it.
ug tet ua deer fSH fate fafe war ute AIG AON (73-19, faster, He 5) pair Dhovaa pakhaa fayrdaa tis niv niv lagaa paa-ay jee-o. ||10] | I wash their feet, and wave the fan over them. Bowing low, I fall at their feet. ||10]|
Ua 98 Afe ae ad uta nirfenr it (74-1, firstea, v2 5)
sun galaa gur peh aa-i-aa. I heard of the Guru, and so I went to Him.
oH ee feos featur il (74-1, frdtera, vs 5) naam daan isnaan dirhaa-i-aa. He instilled within me the Naam, the goodness of charity and true cleansing.
AS Has Int AAS Soa Ast Sat ots A dal (74-1, fastera, He 5) sabh mukat ho-aa saisaarrhaa naanak sachee bayrhee chaarh jee-o. ||11]| All the world is liberated, O Nanak, by embarking upon the Boat of Truth. ||11]|
AS fqrfe AS feg ahs AIG I (74-2, fdtea, He 5)
sabh sarisat sayvay din raat jee-o.
The whole Universe serves You, day and night.
2 ao Hed maetA AIG I (74-2, fadtea, He 5)
day kann sunhu ardaas jee-o.
Please hear my prayer, O Dear Lord.
ofa eats AS fasion sf omit ofenre safe AIG 19211 (74-3, fiadtea, He 5)
thok vajaa-ay sabh dithee-aa tus aapay la-i-an chhadaa-ay jee-o. ||12]| I have thoroughly tested and seen all-You alone, by Your Pleasure, can save us. ||12]|
dfs Jou dor figsere ST Il (74-3, fidtera, 2 5) hun hukam ho-aa miharvaan daa. Now, the Merciful Lord has issued His Command.
u afte 3 fxn Terser il (74-4, fata, we 5) pai ko-ay na kisai ranjaandaa. Let no one chase after and attack anyone else.
As AUTet sdtor feg dur vert ga AIG NASI (74-4, firdtera, He 5) sabh sukhaalee vuthee-aa ih ho-aa halaymee raaj jee-o. ||13]| Let all abide in peace, under this Benevolent Rule. ||13]|
Sfx Shy vifys eareEr i (74-5, fadtora, us 5) jhimm jhimm amrit varasdaa. Softly and gently, drop by drop, the Ambrosial Nectar trickles down.
Sefer set MAM BT Il (74-5, fadtera, He 5) bolaa-i-aa bolee khasam daa. I speak as my Lord and Master causes me to speak.
ag He aot 3g Bug F wm uefa ate AIS IVI (74-5, frstera, Hs 5) baho maan kee-aa tuDh upray too” aapay paa-ihi thaa-ay jee-o. ||14|| I place all my faith in You; please accept me. ||14]|
Sfor sast su AE Sor I (74-6, firdtera, He 5) tayri-aa bhagtaa bhukh sad tayree-aa. Your devotees are forever hungry for You.
fs BI YTS Ashe I (74-6, fata, we 5) har lochaa pooran mayree-aa. O Lord, please fulfill my desires.
og van Auetsor Hae fefe do frofe AE Nal (74-6, firtora, He 5)
dayh daras sukh-daati-aa mai gal vich laihu milaa-ay jee-o. ||15]|
Grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Giver of Peace. Please, take me into Your Embrace. ||15]||
3U ASS Meg & Sem I (74-7, frdtera, He 5) tuDh jayvad avar na bhaali-aa. I have not found any other as Great as You.
3 cu Su ufeoriemr ih (74-7, firdtra, v2 5) too” deep lo-a pa-i-aali-aa. You pervade the continents, the worlds and the nether regions;
3 ots adste ofe sft Soa Sas AY wos AS AEM (74-8, frdtera, Hs 5)
too” thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa naanak bhagtaa sach aDhaar jee-o. ||16]|
You are permeating all places and interspaces. Nanak: You are the True Support of Your devotees. ||16]|
JG aGASt a ufsweaat Il (74-8, fidtera, v2 5) ha-o gosaa-ee daa pahilvaanrhaa. I am a wrestler; I belong to the Lord of the World.
H a fife Ga eHeAT II (74-9, firdtora, He 5) mai gur mil uch dumaalrhaa. I met with the Guru, and I have tied a tall, plumed turban.
AS det fés feadior va sar Se orf HE NII (74-9, fasta, He 5)
sabh ho-ee chhinjh ikthee-aa da-yu baithaa vaykhai aap jee-o. ||17]|
All have gathered to watch the wrestling match, and the Merciful Lord Himself is seated to behold it. |]17]|
as eafe Sua Sor Il (74-10, frdtera, He 5) vaat vajan tamak bhayree-aa. The bugles play and the drums beat.
SA
HS Ba BE SAM I (74-10, frrdteoa, ve 5)
mal lathay laiday fayree-aa. The wrestlers enter the arena and circle around.
fogs ufa yore A ae anit fest afs AIG NACI (74-10, fate, He 5)
nihtay panj ju-aan mai gur thaapee ditee kand jee-o. ||18]|
I have thrown the five challengers to the ground, and the Guru has patted me on the back. ||18]|
AS fead of wrfeor it (74-11, fadtera, 42 5) sabh ikthay ho-ay aa-i-aa. All have gathered together,
wie WAS ee setfenr i (74-11, frdtera, v2 5) ghar jaasan vaat vataa-i-aa. but we shall return home by different routes.
TaHfs wT S TE HOY VS HS Tete AS ude (74-11, frdtora, ws 5)
gurmukh laahaa lai ga-ay manmukh chalay mool gavaa-ay jee-o. ||19]|
The Gurmukhs reap their profits and leave, while the self-willed manmukhs lose their investment and depart. ||19]|
3 I fITst AIT Il (74-12, firsts, us 5) too" varnaa chihnaa baahraa. You are without color or mark.
Ufa fens THT AIA Il (74-12, fdtera, He 5) har diseh haajar jaahraa. The Lord is seen to be manifest and present.
Afe Afs 33 fourfee 33 sas gS TESTA ME IQ (74-12, fadtera, ve 5)
sun sun tujhai Dhi-aa-iday tayray bhagat ratay guntaas jee-o. ||20]|
Hearing of Your Glories again and again, Your devotees meditate on You; they are attuned to You, O Lord, Treasure of Excellence. ||20]|
H afar afar ear ASSt I (74-13, firdtora, He 5)
mai jug jug da-yai sayvrhee.
Through age after age, I am the servant of the Merciful Lord. afe aet fost Heat I (74-13, frdtera, He 5)
gur katee mihdee jayvrhee. The Guru has cut away my bonds.
US rule fos 5 SUS aSa MAG Bor ahs AIS NQAUIQUQCN (74-14, firdtora, v2 5)
ha-o baahurh chhinjh na nach-oo naanak a-osar laDhaa bhaal jee-o. ||21||2||29] |
I shall not have to dance in the wrestling arena of life again. Nanak has searched, and found this opportunity. ||21]|2]|29]|
qe Afsars yAfe I (74-15) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
frrdtaa HIG A UTS We A Il (74-15) sireeraag mehlaa 1 pahray ghar 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl, Pehray, First House:
ufsS usd sf= & gerfeor first gat ufeor aes i (74-16, firstoa, 48
pahilai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa hukam pa-i-aa garbhaas.
In the first watch of the night, O my merchant friend, you were cast into the womb, by the Lord's Command.
Gan sy nists ag eenfenr first WAH ASt msetA I (74-16, facta, 48 1)
uraDh tap antar karay vanjaari-aa mitraa khasam saytee ardaas.
Upside-down, within the womb, you performed penance, O my merchant friend, and you prayed to your Lord and Master.
YAH Ast meet sure Cau fomrts fos war il (74-17, fasta, He 1)
khasam saytee ardaas vakhaanai uraDh Dhi-aan liv laagaa.
You uttered prayers to your Lord and Master, while upside-down, and you meditated on Him with deep love and affection.
oO Hone oitfenr ate state aos AAT Sra Il (74-17, fastera, He 1) naa marjaad aa-i-aa kal bheetar baahurh jaasee naagaa. You came into this Dark Age of Kali Yuga naked, and you shall depart again naked.
AAt AGH Tat D HASfa SAT HS uA II (74-18, fadtea, He 1) jaisee kalam vurhee hai mastak taisee jee-arhay paas. As God's Pen has written on your forehead, so it shall be with your soul.
aT soa yrat ufos usd gaty ufsor aaah al (74-18, frdtoa, He 1)
kaho naanak paraanee pahilai pahrai hukam pa-i-aa garbhaas. ||1||
Says Nanak, in the first watch of the night, by the Hukam of the Lord's Command, you enter into the womb. ||1]|
Us ou en udd ofe a zenfonr fet ferfs afenr forge il (75-1, fadtera, ue doojai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa visar ga-i-aa Dhi-aan.
In the second watch of the night, O my merchant friend, you have forgotten to meditate.
va ofa saeha zenfaor fleet fa@ weet wife are Il (75-2, fadtoa, He 1)
hatho hath nachaa-ee-ai vanjaari-aa mitraa ji-o jasudaa ghar kaan.
From hand to hand, you are passed around, O my merchant friend, like Krishna in the house of Yashoda.
va ofa saeht yret HS a AS AT Il (75-2, fadtera, ne 1) hatho hath nachaa-ee-ai paraanee maat kahai sut mayraa. From hand to hand, you are passed around, and your mother says, "This is my son."
dfs mds Hs Ho Ae vfs adt AS ST Il (75-3, fastora, Hs 1) chayt achayt moorh man mayray ant nahee kachh tayraa. O, my thoughtless and foolish mind, think: In the end, nothing shall be yours.
fate af afeur fanfs o We Ho Stsfe ofa fame il (75-3, fastoa, He 1)
jin rach rachi-aa tiseh na jaanai man bheetar Dhar gi-aan.
You do not know the One who created the creation. Gather spiritual wisdom within your mind.
aI Sa yet eA usd feats afenr firs 2H (75-4, fates, oe 1) kaho naanak paraanee doojai pahrai visar ga-i-aa Dhi-aan. ||2|| Says Nanak, in the second watch of the night, you have forgotten to meditate. ||2]|
Sh usd sf & zemfonr first us Fae fA fas II (75-4, firdtora, He 1)
teejai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa Dhan joban si-o chit.
In the third watch of the night, O my merchant friend, your consciousness is focused on wealth and youth.
dfs a OH 3 Vad Zanttomr fg gor seta fAS Il (75-5, fdtoa, we 1)
har kaa naam na chaythee vanjaari-aa mitraa baDhaa chhuteh jit.
You have not remembered the Name of the Lord, O my merchant friend, although it would release you from bondage.
ofg a oH 6 3S Urat feos ster Afar wfemr I (75-6, fidtora, He 1) har kaa naam na chaytai paraanee bikal bha-i-aa sang maa-i-aa. You do not remember the Name of the Lord, and you become confused by Maya.
ue fa@ gat tafe Hat ifoer HON TetfEnr II (75-6, fadtea, He 1) Dhan si-o rataa joban mataa ahilaa janam gavaa-i-aa. Revelling in your riches and intoxicated with youth, you waste your life uselessly.
UeH Ast eurg 3 ats aaH 3 ats fis IN (75-7, fadteora, He 1)
Dharam saytee vaapaar na keeto karam na keeto mit.
You have not traded in righteousness and Dharma; you have not made good deeds your friends.
aT soa StH usd yrat us wae fA fas SI (75-7, firdtora, He 1)
kaho naanak teejai pahrai paraanee Dhan joban si-o chit. ||3]|
Says Nanak, in the third watch of the night, your mind is attached to wealth and youth. ||3]|
aa usd dfs & cemfour fas wet orfemr Bs I (75-8, firdtora, Hs 1)
cha-uthai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa laavee aa-i-aa khayt.
In the fourth watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the Grim Reaper comes to the field.
w fy uats verfeur zerfemr first fan o fifemr Sz II (75-8, fetes, He 1)
jaa jam pakarh chalaa-i-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa kisai na mili-aa bhayt.
When the Messenger of Death seizes and dispatches you, O my merchant friend, no one knows the mystery of where you have gone.
33 33 df for o fifes a afk uate verfenr I (75-9, fate, He 1)
bhayt chayt har kisai na mili-o jaa jam pakarh chalaa-i-aa.
So think of the Lord! No one knows this secret, of when the Messenger of Death will seize you and take you away.
Bo gee dur curs fas ufo sfeur user it (75-10, fastera, 2 1)
jhoothaa rudan ho-aa do-aalai khin meh bha-i-aa paraa-i-aa.
All your weeping and wailing then is false. In an instant, you become a stranger. Wet zAS usufs det fan fAG ofeor Fs I (75-10, fasta, He 1)
Saa-ee vasat paraapat ho-ee jis si-o laa-i-aa hayt. You obtain exactly what you have longed for.
aT soa yrat wea usd wet ofanr Az USA (75-11, fstoa, He D
kaho naanak paraanee cha-uthai pahrai laavee luni-aa khayt. ||4||1]|
Says Nanak, in the fourth watch of the night, O mortal, the Grim Reaper has harvested your field. ||4]|1]|
frrstarar HIS 9 I (75-11) sireeraag mehlaa 1. Siree Raag, First Mehl:
ufsS uad f= & gerfeor first wee sfo mrss I (75-12, fadtera, ne 1)
pahilai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa baalak buDh achayt.
In the first watch of the night, O my merchant friend, your innocent mind has a child- like understanding.
dtg ubt dors eerfoor feat urs fust AS ds 1 ws fust AS 3g WoT Hfeor Hg Favet il (75-12, frrdterar, He 1)
kheer pee-ai khaylaa-ee-ai vanjaari-aa mitraa maat pitaa sut hayt. maat pitaa sut nayhu ghanayraa maa-i-aa moh sabaa-ee.
You drink milk, and you are fondled so gently, O my merchant friend. The mother and father love their child so much, but in Maya, all are caught in emotional attachment.
Hrat wtfeur fags oorfeor aget ars aaret Il (75-13, fata, v2 1)
sanjogee aa-i-aa kirat kamaa-i-aa karnee kaar karaa-ee.
By the good fortune of good deeds done in the past, you have come, and now you perform actions to determine your future.
oH oH fag Hats 3 det gst SA AS Il (75-14, fata, we
raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee boodee doojai hayt.
Without the Lord's Name, liberation is not obtained, and you are drowned in the love of duality.
aI Sa yet ufys usd sefsar ahs SS ual (75-14, fastora, we 1)
kaho naanak paraanee pahilai pahrai chhootahigaa har chayt. ||1]|
Says Nanak, in the first watch of the night, O mortal, you shall be saved by remembering the Lord. ||1]|
en usd dfs a zerfonr fst ofa rate HOPS II (75-15, fardtorar, v8 1)
doojai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa bhar joban mai mat.
In the second watch of the night, O my merchant friend, you are intoxicated with the wine of youth and beauty.
mifafata oth feorflmr eeafenr fist nige on 6 fats il (75-16, firstera, ve 1)
ahinis kaam vi-aapi-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa anDhulay naam na chit.
Day and night, you are engrossed in sexual desire, O my merchant friend, and your consciousness is blind to the Naam.
TH 3H we nists ardt dfs We GA GA Hie Il (75-16, fadtea, He 1)
raam naam ghat antar naahee hor jaanai ras kas meethay.
The Lord's Name is not within your heart, but all sorts of other tastes seem sweet to you.
famirg fours Te AAH St Hoth Haga FS Il (75-17, frstora, we 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan gun sanjam naahee janam marhugay jhoothay.
You have no wisdom at all, no meditation, no virtue or self-discipline; in falsehood, you are caught in the cycle of birth and death.
Stee eas Afs HAH St ASH TaN Sot UAT II (75-17, fasta, M8 1)
tirath varat such sanjam naahee karam Dharam nahee poojaa.
Pilgrimages, fasts, purification and self-discipline are of no use, nor are rituals, religious ceremonies or empty worship.
aoa ate sats forsre efaor fanmy ga QI (75-18, faster, He 1)
naanak bhaa-ay bhagat nistaaraa dubiDhaa vi-aapai doojaa. ||2] |
O Nanak, emancipation comes only by loving devotional worship; through duality, people are engrossed in duality. ||2||
Sh usd sf & zerfour fig Afs SA Coas urfe i (75-19, fdtora, ne 1)
teejai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa sar hans ultharhay aa-ay.
In the third watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the swans, the white hairs, come and land upon the pool of the head.
nag We Ago fre Zenfanr fst wre we fea ATE Il (75-19, frdtora, we 1)
joban ghatai jaroo-aa jinai vanjaari-aa mitraa aav ghatai din jaa-ay.
Youth wears itself out, and old age triumphs, O my merchant friend; as time passes, your days diminish.
Uat dE nfs ate uss vias wT af uafs vorfeur I (76-1, fadtera, He 1) ant kaal pachhutaasee anDhulay jaa jam pakarh chalaa-i-aa.
At the last moment, you repent-you are so blind!-when the Messenger of Death seizes you and carries you away.
AS fae nus afe ats atime fas ufo sfenr ustfenr Il (76-2, fasta, He 1) sabh kichh apunaa kar kar raakhi-aa khin meh bha-i-aa paraa-i-aa. You kept all your things for yourself, but in an instant, they are all lost.
gfa fenat aet famreu afte nigee usste il (76-2, frstera, ve 1)
buDh visarjee ga-ee si-aanap kar avgan pachhutaa-ay.
Your intellect left you, your wisdom departed, and now you repent for the evil deeds you committed.
ag aod urat St usd us dag fas ote si (76-3, facto, ue 1)
kaho naanak paraanee teejai pahrai parabh chaytahu liv laa-ay. ||3]||
Says Nanak, O mortal, in the third watch of the night, let your consciousness be lovingly focused on God. ||3]|
aa usd df= & zanfour fre fasta sfimr Ze ate II (76-3, fadtora, ne 1) cha-uthai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa biraDh bha-i-aa tan kheen.
In the fourth watch of the night, O my merchant friend, your body grows old and weak.
mredt nig o atret eenfour fg Kat AE 3 SE Il (76-4, fsteoa, He
akhee anDh na dees-ee vanjaari-aa mitraa kannee sunai na vain.
Your eyes go blind, and cannot see, O my merchant friend, and your ears do not hear any words.
mot nig Hs JA odt Td UTA Stat Il (76-5, fdtora, ve 1)
akhee anDh jeebh ras naahee rahay paraaka-o taanaa.
Your eyes go blind, and your tongue is unable to taste; you live only with the help of others.
we nists ot fa AY UTS HOHY MISS ATST Il (76-5, fata, v2 1)
gun antar naahee ki-o sukh paavai manmukh aavan jaanaa.
With no virtue within, how can you find peace? The self-willed manmukh comes and goes in reincarnation.
us uot afs an fron urfe us fomr HS I (76-6, fate, nH 1)
kharh pakee kurh bhajai binsai aa-ay chalai ki-aa maan.
When the crop of life has matured, it bends, breaks and perishes; why take pride in that which comes and goes?
aT soa yet Ba usd Taf AAE USE ISI (76-6, fasta, Hs 1)
kaho naanak paraanee cha-uthai pahrai gurmukh sabad pachhaan. ||4||
Says Nanak, O mortal, in the fourth watch of the night, the Gurmukh recognizes the Word of the Shabad. ||4] |
Gaq urfenr fsa Aor seater feat Ae AaeTat as I (76-7, firdtora, He 1)
orhak aa-i-aa tin saahi-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa jar jarvaanaa kann.
Your breath comes to its end, O my merchant friend, and your shoulders are weighed down by the tyrant of old age.
fea ast qe 3 Afar eeefenr feat nreae usAfe afs Il (76-7, fata, 48 1)
ik ratee gun na samaani-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa avgan kharhsan bann.
Not one iota of virtue came into you, O my merchant friend; bound and gagged by evil, you are driven along.
Ee Anh We de o we a fSAq HHE Hes Il (76-8, fade", He 1
gun sanjam jaavai chot na khaavai naa tis jaman marnaa.
One who departs with virtue and self-discipline is not struck down, and is not consigned to the cycle of birth and death.
aS WS AH fs o AS ofS sats S Saat Il (76-9, fadtora, He 1)
kaal jaal jam johi na saakai bhaa-ay bhagat bhai tarnaa.
The Messenger of Death and his trap cannot touch him; through loving devotional worship, he crosses over the ocean of fear.
ufs ASt We Hota AHS AAS Ta fers il (76-9, frdtora, ws pat saytee jaavai sahj samaavai saglay dookh mitaavai. He departs with honor, and merges in intuitive peace and poise; all his pains depart.
I Sa yet TaHfe ge ATS J ulSs urs NUMA (76-10, firdtoa, v3 1) kaho naanak paraanee gurmukh chhootai saachay tay pat paavai. ||5||2]|
Says Nanak, when the mortal becomes Gurmukh, he is saved and honored by the True Lord. ||5]|2]|
firstaat HIS 8 Il (76-10) sireeraag mehlaa 4. Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl:
ufsS usd sf= & zerfeor first ofa urfeor Bea Hera I (76-11, fdtera, He 4) pahilai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa har paa-i-aa udar manjhaar.
In the first watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the Lord places you in the womb.
ofa foure ofa Gud zerfemr first ofa ofa an AHS I (76-11, firdtora, ne 4)
har Dhi-aavai har uchrai vanjaari-aa mitraa har har naam samaar.
You meditate on the Lord, and chant the Lord's Name, O my merchant friend. You contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
df dfs oH AY oreg fete niet dfs Afu Aten Il (76-12, firstora, He 4)
har har naam japay aaraaDhay vich agnee har jap jeevi-aa.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and meditating on it within the fire of the womb, your life is sustained by dwelling on the Naam.
Ws ASH sfenr ufa oar AGA fust HS aint Il (76-13, frrdtea, v2 4)
baahar janam bha-i-aa mukh laagaa sarsay pitaa maat theevi-aa.
You are born and you come out, and your mother and father are delighted to see your face.
fan at eas fsa dag yet afe fase aanfe stefe it (76-13, fadtera, ne 4)
jis kee vasat tis chaytahu paraanee kar hirdai gurmukh beechaar.
Remember the One, O mortal, to whom the child belongs. As Gurmukh, reflect upon Him within your heart.
aT soa yrat ufus usd ofa mba farsur ofa Wall (76-14, facta, ne 4)
kaho naanak paraanee pahilai pahrai har japee-ai kirpaa Dhaar. ||1||
Says Nanak, O mortal, in the first watch of the night, dwell upon the Lord, who shall shower you with His Grace. ||1||
en usd afe & zero feet He wer eA STE Il (76-14, frdtora, we 4)
doojai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa man laagaa doojai bhaa-ay.
In the second watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the mind is attached to the love of duality.
Aa Ae afs ust zerfeor first B urs fust ars ore ih (76-15, fdteora, v8 4)
mayraa mayraa kar paalee-ai vanjaari-aa mitraa lay maat pitaa gal laa-ay.
Mother and father hug you close in their embrace, claiming, "He is mine, he is mine"; so is the child brought up, O my merchant friend.
oe Hg fust Het ae Ast vfs Are ufe were I (76-16, fadtea, He 4)
laavai maat pitaa sadaa gal saytee man jaanai khat khavaa-ay.
Your mother and father constantly hug you close in their embrace; in their minds, they believe that you will provide for them and support them.
A te fA 5 We Ha fes S Bure Il (76-16, firdtoa, v3 4) jo dayvai tisai na jaanai moorhaa ditay no laptaa-ay. The fool does not know the One who gives; instead, he clings to the gift.
act qanfa de A ad deg ofa fimre nfs fee oe Il (76-17, facta, 12 4)
ko-ee gurmukh hovai so karai veechaar har Dhi-aavai man liv laa-ay.
Rare is the Gurmukh who reflects upon, meditates upon, and within his mind, is lovingly attached to the Lord.
TI TSA SH usd yrat fA TS aaT UTS WM (76-17, frstoa, ws 4) kaho naanak doojai pahrai paraanee tis kaal na kabahoo™ khaa-ay. ||2]| Says Nanak, in the second watch of the night, O mortal, death never devours you.
[21] Sh usd sf & zerfour first He war orf Heri I (76-18, firtoa, v8 4)
teejai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa man lagaa aal janjaal. In the third watch of the night, O my merchant friend, your mind is entangled in worldly and household affairs.
ug fase ug Hue Zanfour feet afe oor afa o ANTS Il (76-19, fasta, H8 4)
Dhan chitvai Dhan sanchvai vanjaari-aa mitraa har naamaa har na samaal. You think of wealth, and gather wealth, O my merchant friend, but you do not contemplate the Lord or the Lord's Name.
dfs ont ofa ofa ae 3 AWS fa dS ifs Aart I (76-19, fist, He 4)
har naamaa har har kaday na samaalai je hovai ant sakhaa-ee.
You never dwell upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, who will be your only Helper and Support in the end.
ust 99 feg ug AU wfenr sot uifs afs fer ugsTet I (77-1, firstora, 8 4) in Dhan sampai maa-i-aa jhoothee ant chhod chali-aa pachhutaa-ee.
This wealth, property and Maya are false. In the end, you must leave these, and depart in sorrow.
fA 3 fasur ad ag He A ofa ofa ant ATA I (77-1, fidtera, He 4)
jis no kirpaa karay gur maylay so har har naam samaal.
Those whom the Lord, in His Mercy, unites with the Guru, reflect upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
aT soa Sit usd urat A fe fies fe ofs Si (77-2, fadtora, He 4)
kaho naanak teejai pahrai paraanee say jaa-ay milay har naal. ||3]|
Says Nanak, in the third watch of the night, O mortal, they go, and are united with the Lord. ||3]|
aa usd dfs & cenfour fs afe vos For re I (77-3, facta, He 4)
cha-uthai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa har chalan vaylaa aadee.
In the fourth watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the Lord announces the time of departure.
ate Reg us Afsag zerfonr fist AS vet sfe ferret il (77-3, frstora, ou: 4)
kar sayvhu pooraa satguroo vanjaari-aa mitraa sabh chalee rain vihaadee.
Serve the Perfect True Guru, O my merchant friend; your entire life-night is passing away.
ofs Ag fag fas feo ufs o afeg fas wifes Fa Aa Jeg Ml (77-4, fastora, we 4)
har sayvhu khin khin dhil mool na karihu jit asthir jug jug hovhu. Serve the Lord each and every instant-do not delay! You shall become eternal throughout the ages.
dfs Ast Ae HST Tht HOH HIS SU MST Il (77-5, fatwa, ne 4) har saytee sad maanhu ralee-aa janam maran dukh khovhu. Enjoy ecstasy forever with the Lord, and do away with the pains of birth and death.
ad Afsad ATH se 3 wed fas fife ofe sats Aart I (77-5, fadtera, He 4)
gur satgur su-aamee bhayd na jaanhu jit mil har bhagat sukhaa™dee.
Know that there is no difference between the Guru, the True Guru, and your Lord and Master. Meeting with Him, take pleasure in the Lord's devotional service.
aT soa yal va uad AefHe sf= sas St USNAUISI (77-6, fetoa, He 4) kaho naanak paraanee cha-uthai pahrai safli-o rain bhagtaa dee. ||4]|1]|3]|
Says Nanak, O mortal, in the fourth watch of the night, the life-night of the devotee is fruitful. ||4]|1]|3]|
frrstarat HIS U Il (77-7) sireeraag mehlaa 5. Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
ufyS uad f= & zerfenr first ofs ures Ged ofa il (77-7, fidteora, v8 5)
pahilai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa Dhar paa-itaa udrai maahi.
In the first watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the Lord placed your soul in the womb.
At HAT HOA abot gentoo fst afs Hels AGH AH II (77-8, fadtoa, us 5)
dasee maasee maanas kee-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa kar muhlat karam kamaahi.
In the tenth month, you were made into a human being, O my merchant friend, and you were given your allotted time to perform good deeds.
Huefs afe det aan one AAT fous ufs ufeor It (77-8, fadtera, He 5)
muhlat kar deenee karam kamaanay jaisaa likhat Dhur paa-i-aa.
You were given this time to perform good deeds, according to your pre-ordained destiny.
Hs fust set AS afest fe sists ys AAfenr I (77-9, firdtora, v8 5)
maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banitaa tin bheetar parabhoo sanjo-i-aa. God placed you with your mother, father, brothers, sons and wife.
dH HASH age nmi feR AS |fA fae ofs i (77-9, fadtea, v2 5)
karam sukaram karaa-ay aapay is jantai vas kichh naahi.
God Himself is the Cause of causes, good and bad-no one has control over these things.
aT soa yrat ufos usd ufs ufesr Bed wfs wail (77-10, frdtera, v8 5) kaho naanak paraanee pahilai pahrai Dhar paa-itaa udrai maahi. ||1|| Says Nanak, O mortal, in the first watch of the night, the soul is placed in the womb.
[11] en usd dfs & zerfonr fest sf qorat sadt fF ii (77-1, fata, we 5)
doojai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa bhar ju-aanee lahree day-ay. In the second watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the fullness of youth rises in you like waves.
as sor usrect sertfar fest He HST MALE Mt (77-11, frstora, ue 5)
buraa bhalaa na pachhaan-ee vanjaari-aa mitraa man mataa ahamay-ay.
You do not distinguish between good and evil, O my merchant friend-your mind is intoxicated with ego.
YT 3H S USS Urat nigh UT ATS I (77-12, firdtora, ne 5)
buraa bhalaa na pachhaanai paraanee aagai panth karaaraa.
Mortal beings do not distinguish between good and evil, and the road ahead is treacherous.
ua Afsag aad 3 Afeor ffs ore AH HES II (77-12, firsts, Hs 5)
pooraa satgur kabahoo™ na sayvi-aa sir thaadhay jam jandaaraa.
They never serve the Perfect True Guru, and the cruel tyrant Death stands over their heads.
UdH of Aa uadih sed Se foot AEE ASE Il (77-13, fastens, He 5)
Dharam raa-ay jab pakras bavray tab ki-aa jabaab karay-i.
When the Righteous Judge seizes you and interrogates you, O madman, what answer will you give him then?
AI HSA BH usd yrat ste Hag Badt SE I (77-13, firdtoa, ws 5)
kaho naanak doojai pahrai paraanee bhar joban lahree day-ay. ||2||
Says Nanak, in the second watch of the night, O mortal, the fullness of youth tosses you about like waves in the storm. ||2||
Sh usd sf & zenfour firs fey AS vio mrfamire il (77-14, fadtora, He 5)
teejai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa bikh sanchai anDh agi-aan.
In the third watch of the night, O my merchant friend, the blind and ignorant person gathers poison.
ufg aefs dfs sufeur zerfaor first nists safe Bare Il (77-15, firdtora, ve 5)
putir kaltir mohi lapti-aa vanjaari-aa mitraa antar lahar lobhaan.
He is entangled in emotional attachment to his wife and sons, O my merchant friend, and deep within him, the waves of greed are rising up.
nists wafs Save ust A ys fats 3 wre Il (77-15, firdtera, He 5) antar lahar lobhaan paraanee so parabh chit na aavai. The waves of greed are rising up within him, and he does not remember God.
Wonafs fag Ha o aor ag Hot Sy US I (77-16, fadtea, He 5)
saaDhsangat si-o sang na kee-aa baho jonee dukh paavai.
He does not join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and he suffers in terrible pain through countless incarnations.
franous ferrfaur Aymit fea fans 3 wat fomie il (77-17, fates, He 5)
Sirjanhaar visaari-aa Ssu-aamee ik nimakh na lago Dhi-aan.
He has forgotten the Creator, his Lord and Master, and he does not meditate on Him, even for an instant.
aT soa yrat Sth usd fay AS vio mifamre Sil (77-17, fadtera, ue 5)
kaho naanak paraanee teejai pahrai bikh sanchay anDh agi-aan. ||3]||
Says Nanak, in the third watch of the night, the blind and ignorant person gathers poison. ||3]|
aa usd df= & eanfour fea fea 33 vrfemr AFE II (77-18, fidtoa, v8 5) cha-uthai pahrai rain kai vanjaari-aa mitraa din nayrhai aa-i-aa so-ay. In the fourth watch of the night, O my merchant friend, that day is drawing near.
aonfa on mts F zenteur fest Sot waa sat TE i (77-18, fastera, we 5)
gurmukh naam samaal too” vanjaari-aa mitraa tayraa dargeh baylee ho-ay. As Gurmukh, remember the Naam, O my merchant friend. It shall be your Friend in the Court of the Lord.
qanfa an ANTS usat nis df waret i (77-19, fadtea, He 5)
gurmukh naam samaal paraanee antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee.
As Gurmukh, remember the Naam, O mortal; in the end, it shall be your only companion.
yar ot feg Hg wheur 33 Afro TS sat uifS waret il (78-1, fates, we 5) ih moh maa-i-aa tayrai sang na chaalai jhoothee pareet lagaa-ee.
This emotional attachment to Maya shall not go with you; it is false to fall in love with it.
Rast dfs qedt nifourdt Afe nfsag woe dfE il (78-1, fidtera, v2 5)
saglee rain gudree anDhi-aaree sayv satgur chaanan ho-ay.
The entire night of your life has passed away in darkness; but by serving the True Guru, the Divine Light shall dawn within.
aT soa yrat va uad feg 33 vurfemr ALE ISI (78-2, firdtera, He 5) kaho naanak paraanee cha-uthai pahrai din nayrhai aa-i-aa so-ay. ||4|| Says Nanak, O mortal, in the fourth watch of the night, that day is drawing near! ||4| |
fofioor urfemr afse ar zefeur first Cfe 3S aHrat Arf I (78-3, firdtorg, ne 5) likhi-aa aa-i-aa govind kaa vanjaari-aa mitraa uth chalay kamaanaa saath. Receiving the summons from the Lord of the Universe, O my merchant friend, you must arise and depart with the actions you have committed.
fea ost faan 3 teat zarfenr feat Got Sas ure TE Il (78-3, frdtera, v8 5)
ik ratee bilam na dayvnee vanjaari-aa mitraa onee takrhay paa-ay haath.
You are not allowed a moment's delay, O my merchant friend; the Messenger of Death seizes you with firm hands.
fofior urfenr uate sorfenr HOHY Ae SIS Il (78-4, fiesta, ue 5)
likhi-aa aa-i-aa pakarh chalaa-i-aa manmukh sadaa duhaylay.
Receiving the summons, people are seized and dispatched. The self-willed manmukhs are miserable forever.
frat ust Afsag Afeor A esas HET ATS Il (78-5, fdtera, 12 5) jinee pooraa satgur sayvi-aa say dargeh sadaa suhaylay. But those who serve the Perfect True Guru are forever happy in the Court of the Lord.
ad usst Adte wa wists A Se A ofS I (78-5, fidteora, He 5) karam Dhartee sareer jug antar jo bovai so khaat. The body is the field of karma in this age; whatever you plant, you shall harvest.
AT sod Sas Adfs TdeTd HOHY Het SST MUNIN (738-6, faAdtea, He 5)
kaho naanak bhagat soheh darvaaray manmukh sadaa bhavaat. ||5||1||4|| Says Nanak, the devotees look beautiful in the Court of the Lord; the self-willed manmukhs wander forever in reincarnation. ||5||1||4]|
fadioa HIS 8 we 2 BS (78-7) sireeraag mehlaa 4 ghar 2 chhant Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl, Second House, Chhant:
qe Afsars yArfe il (78-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hu feniret uens faS afe afa cane fut Il (78-8, fadtera, He 4)
munDh i-aanee pay-ee-arhai ki-o kar har darsan pikhai.
How can the ignorant soul-bride obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, while she is in this world of her father's home?
dfs ofe wrust faa ad aenfe Ages aH fie I (73-8, fadtera, ne 4)
har har apnee kirpaa karay gurmukh saahurrhai kamm sikhai.
When the Lord Himself grants His Grace, the Gurmukh learns the duties of her Husband's Celestial Home.
Ages ay fra aenfy afe afs wet fore I (78-9, faster, He 4)
saahurrhai kamm sikhai gurmukh har har sadaa Dhi-aa-ay.
The Gurmukh learns the duties of her Husband's Celestial Home; she meditates forever on the Lord, Har, Har.
Hdor fefs fed Hdst ofs wads aT BTS Il (78-9, fadtoa, He 4)
sahee-aa vich firai suhaylee har dargeh baah ludaa-ay.
She walks happily among her companions, and in the Lord's Court, she swings her arms joyfully.
But usH ae at sat wfu ata afe an forse i (73-10, fastora, He 4)
laykhaa Dharam raa-ay kee baakee jap har har naam kirkhai.
Her account is cleared by the Righteous Judge of Dharma, when she chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hu feurat Ueto asf af wane feet iil (73-10, fadtea, v2 4)
munDh i-aanee pay-ee-arhai gurmukh har darsan dikhai. ||1]]|
The ignorant soul-bride becomes Gurmukh, and gains the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, while she is still in her father's house. ||1]|
durg dur ad waar gene dfs ufemr it (78-11, fadtea, ue 4) vee-aahu ho-aa mayray babulaa gurmukhay har paa-i-aa. My marriage has been performed, O my father. As Gurmukh, I have found the Lord.
wifamirg nite afenr as famrg uss serfenr i (78-1, fadteoa, ue 4)
agi-aan anDhayraa kati-aa gur gi-aan parchand balaa-i-aa.
The darkness of ignorance has been dispelled. The Guru has revealed the blazing light of spiritual wisdom.
Sfour as famre nite faafimr sf g3q UeTse Ba Il (78-12, fadtea, v2 4) bali-aa gur gi-aan anDhayraa binsi-aa har ratan padaarath laaDhaa.
This spiritual wisdom given by the Guru shines forth, and the darkness has been dispelled. I have found the Priceless Jewel of the Lord.
ICH da afeor vy wer ny nm aTeHfSs wT I (78-13, fate, v2 4)
ha-umai rog ga-i-aa dukh laathaa aap aapai gurmat khaaDhaa.
The sickness of my ego has been dispelled, and my pain is over and done. Through the Guru's Teachings, my identity has consumed my identical identity.
mers Hats eg ufenr nifxarAt a axe He B EMT I (78-13, firdtora, He 4)
akaal moorat var paa-i-aa abhinaasee naa kaday marai na jaa-i-aa.
I have obtained my Husband Lord, the Akaal Moorat, the Undying Form. He is Imperishable; He shall never die, and He shall never ever leave.
durg dur yes aser Tene afe urfemr iii (73-14, fasta, ne 4) vee-aahu ho-aa mayray baabolaa gurmukhay har paa-i-aa. ||2| | My marriage has been performed, O my father. As Gurmukh, I have found the Lord.
21 |
dfs vfs AS AS ager afte Ao fife He AST II (78-15, fdtera, He 4)
har sat satay mayray babulaa har jan mil janj suhandee.
The Lord is the Truest of the True, O my father. Meeting with the humble servants of the Lord, the marriage procession looks beautiful.
ugas ufs afu moat fete wagss ust ASST I (78-15, factor, He 4)
payvkarhai har jap suhaylee vich saahurrhai kharee sohandee.
She who chants the Lord's Name is happy in this world of her father's home, and in the next world of her Husband Lord, she shall be very beautiful.
Wode fefs udt Adet fafs Ueas on Mrfemr I (78-16, firdtera, He 4) saahurrhai vich kharee sohandee jin payvkarhai naam samaali-aa.
In her Husband Lord's Celestial Home, she shall be most beautiful, if she has remembered the Naam in this world.
AS Aetes ASH for a aaHfy frat Ho fafe uA fem I (78-16, firdtoa, He 4) sabh safli-o janam tinaa daa gurmukh jinaa man jin paasaa dhaali-aa.
Fruitful are the lives of those who, as Gurmukh, have conquered their minds-they have won the game of life.
dfs Aa Ao ffs arse Afour eg urfenr use mse il (78-17, frdtora, He 4)
har sant janaa mil kaaraj sohi-aa var paa-i-aa purakh anandee.
Joining with the humble Saints of the Lord, my actions bring prosperity, and I have obtained the Lord of Bliss as my Husband.
ofa Afs Afs He Sater fe He ffs He Ae SI (78-18, fetes, H2 4)
har sat sat mayray baabolaa har jan mil janj sohandee. ||3]|
The Lord is the Truest of the True, O my father. Joining with the humble servants of the Lord, the marriage party has been embellished. ||3]|
dfs ys AS Seer ofs eg we A SH Il (78-18, facta, ne 4) har parabh mayray babulaa har dayvhu daan mai daajo. O my father, give me the Name of the Lord God as my wedding gift and dowry.
Ua or
dfs aus of Hat te fas ASd AS aH Il (79-1, fastera, we 4)
har kaprho har sobhaa dayvhu jit savrai mayraa kaajo.
Give me the Lord as my wedding gown, and the Lord as my glory, to accomplish my works.
dfs ots sast aa Ave afte Afsats we fester Il (79-1, firdtea, He 4)
har har bhagtee kaaj suhaylaa gur satgur daan divaa-i-aa.
Through devotional worship to the Lord, this ceremony is made blissful and beautiful; the Guru, the True Guru, has given this gift.
dfs cass ofa Hat det feg we 3 IS sorfeor I (79-2, factor, He 4)
khand varbhand har sobhaa ho-ee ih daan na ralai ralaa-i-aa.
Across the continents, and throughout the Universe, the Lord's Glory is pervading. This gift is not diminished by being diffused among all.
dfs HoH wa fa afte fewrafs A az midarg AG UMA Il (79-2, fstora, we 4)
hor manmukh daaj je rakh dikhaaleh so koorh aha“kaar kach paajo.
Any other dowry, which the self-willed manmukhs offer for show, is only false egotism and a worthless display.
dfs ys Ae Hyer vfs teg VS H BA ISI (79-3, fasta, He 4)
har parabh mayray babulaa har dayvhu daan mai daajo. ||4| |
O my father, please give me the Name of the Lord God as my wedding gift and dowry. [41 |
dfs oH aH He aden fus ffs as Fo Saat Il (79-4, fdteora, He 4)
har raam raam mayray baabolaa pir mil Dhan vayl vaDhandee.
The Lord, Raam, Raam, is All-pervading, O my father. Meeting her Husband Lord, the soul-bride blossoms forth like the flourishing vine.
Us FAT Fa Fa Fad Fat Ae ulst Tg Bet Il (79-4, feta, ws 4)
har jugah jugo jug jugah jugo sad peerhee guroo chalandee.
In age after age, through all the ages, forever and ever, those who belong to the Guru's Family shall prosper and increase.
afar afar ust 3S Afsag at frst aaufa any fomrfenr | (79-5, fadtera, v2 4)
jug jug peerhee chalai satgur kee jinee gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Age after age, the Family of the True Guru shall increase. As Gurmukh, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
dfs usy 3 aa dt fan we fas te vs Aetfenr Il (79-5, fata, ue 4) har purakh na kab hee binsai jaavai nit dayvai charhai savaa-i-aa. The Almighty Lord never dies or goes away. Whatever He gives, keeps on increasing.
Sod HS As ofa Sa wfu afe afs oH Ade I (79-6, fata, ne 4)
naanak sant sant har ayko jap har har naam sohandee.
O Nanak, the One Lord is the Saint of Saints. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the soul-bride is bountiful and beautiful.
dfs TH TH AS Hager fus fife ae Fe Saet NUN (79-7, fadtera, He 4)
har raam raam mayray babulaa pir mil Dhan vayl vaDhandee. ||5||1]|
The Lord, Raam, Raam, is All-pervading, O my father. Meeting her Husband Lord, the soul-bride blossoms forth like the flourishing vine. ||5||1]|
frdtea Hoe u Zs (79-8) sireeraag mehlaa 5 chhant Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (79-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ho fimrfaor Ate first aiff OU ATS II (79-9, fidtora, He 5) man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa gobind naam samaalay. O dear beloved mind, my friend, reflect upon the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
Ho fimrfaor st frat afe ford So 5s Il (79-9, firdtora, we 5) man pi-aari-aa jee mitraa har nibhai tayrai naalay. O dear beloved mind, my friend, the Lord shall always be with you.
Afar Aovet ofa any fomret fase afe o WE Il (79-10, faster, v2 5)
sang sahaa-ee har naam Dhi-aa-ee birthaa ko-ay na jaa-ay.
The Name of the Lord shall be with you as your Helper and Support. Meditate on Him- no one who does so shall ever return empty-handed.
Ho fee Ret eo uefa vas ANG fas we Il (79-10, factor, v2 5)
man chinday say-ee fal paavahi charan kamal chit laa-ay.
You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires, by focusing your consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet.
me afs ufs stor aaedt ufe ufe oes feos i (79-11, fete, v2 5)
jal thal poor rahi-aa banvaaree ghat ghat nadar nihaalay.
He is totally pervading the water and the land; He is the Lord of the World-forest. Behold Him in exaltation in each and every heart.
ood fia ef Ho UISH ATGAfa SH AS NA (79-11, frtora, He 5) naanak sikh day-ay man pareetam saaDhsang bharam jaalay. ||1]|
Nanak gives this advice: O beloved mind, in the Company of the Holy, burn away your doubts. ||1]|
Ho fumrfanr at fst afs fag So UATS II (79-12, fidtera, v2 5) man pi-aari-aa jee mitraa har bin jhooth pasaaray. O dear beloved mind, my friend, without the Lord, all outward show is false.
Ho fumrfanr at first fag Ara AAS II (79-12, fdtora, He 5) man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa bikh saagar sansaaray. O dear beloved mind, my friend, the world is an ocean of poison.
TIE THS ate sag AIS TAT sy B fem | (79-13, firdtoa, ws 5)
charan kamal kar bohith kartay sahsaa dookh na bi-aapai.
Let the Lord's Lotus Feet be your Boat, so that pain and skepticism shall not touch you.
TT UT se SST nS uTT YS AU Il (79-13, firdtoa, ws 5)
gur pooraa bhaytai vadbhaagee aath pahar parabh jaapai.
Meeting with the Perfect Guru, by great good fortune, meditate on God twenty-four hours a day.
mife Faret Aza AMMA Sas" STH wT Il (79-14, fdtera, vs 5)
aad jugaadee sayvak su-aamee bhagtaa naam aDhaaray.
From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, He is the Lord and Master of His servants. His Name is the Support of His devotees.
ood fra ef Ho UisH fag ofa 35 UAT NQI (79-14, fretera, He 5) naanak sikh day-ay man pareetam bin har jhooth pasaaray. ||2|| Nanak gives this advice: O beloved mind, without the Lord, all outward show is false.
[121] Ho fimrfoor Ate fgt fe we Yu Asst Il (79-15, firdtoa, us 5)
man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa har laday khayp savlee. O dear beloved mind, my friend, load the profitable cargo of the Lord's Name.
Ho fimrfoor Ate first af vg forse Het Il (79-15, frstora, He 5) man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa har dar nihchal malee. O dear beloved mind, my friend, enter through the eternal Door of the Lord.
dfs Fs AS nie mise fogse wtAS ufenr Il (79-16, fidtera, v8 5)
har dar sayvay alakh abhayvay nihchal aasan paa-i-aa.
One who serves at the Door of the Imperceptible and Unfathomable Lord, obtains this eternal position.
3d HOH 8 HES 5 MSS AAT AAT ey fletfenr Il (79-17, firdtora, He 5) tah janam na maran na aavan jaanaa sansaa dookh mitaa-i-aa. There is no birth or death there, no coming or going; anguish and anxiety are ended.
fey Tus aT aE Shot AHES AE o VOT Il (79-17, frstea, He 5)
chitar gupat kaa kaagad faari-aa jamdootaa kachhoo na chalee.
The accounts of Chitr and Gupt, the recording scribes of the conscious and the subconscious are torn up, and the Messenger of Death cannot do anything.
ood fry ef Ho UISH die Be Fu Ast ISI (79-18, fdtoa, ue 5) naanak sikh day-ay man pareetam har laday khayp savlee. ||3]|
Nanak gives this advice: O beloved mind, load the profitable cargo of the Lord's Name. ||3]|
Ho fimrfenr He fst af Hat Fifer festa Il (79-18, fiesta, He 5) man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa kar santaa sang nivaaso. O dear beloved mind, my friend, abide in the Society of the Saints.
Ho fimrfaor He feat afs oO AUS UTEA II (79-19, fidtora, v8 5)
man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa har naam japat pargaaso.
O dear beloved mind, my friend, chanting the Lord's Name, the Divine Light shines within.
ffs Amit Aug amt fee Aart Yoho | (79-19, firétera, He 5)
simar su-aamee sukhah gaamee ichh saglee punnee-aa. Remember your Lord and Master, who is easily obtained, and all desires shall be fulfilled.
Ua to usa ane Alda ure ofa fee fact feefanr i (so-1, firdtera, us 5) purbay kamaa-ay sareerang paa-ay har milay chiree vichhunni-aa.
By my past actions, I have found the Lord, the Greatest Lover. Separated from Him for so long, I am united with Him again.
wists wots Heats sfeor ufs Cuftmr faayrA it (80-1, facto, He 5)
antar baahar sarbat ravi-aa man upji-aa bisu-aaso.
Inside and out, He is pervading everywhere. Faith in Him has welled up within my mind.
ood fra ef no uisn afe Hat Afar foe gil (80-2, firdtora, v2 5)
naanak sikh day-ay man pareetam kar santaa sang nivaaso. ||4| |
Nanak gives this advice: O beloved mind, let the Society of the Saints be your dwelling. ||4||
Ho fumrfour At fest afs UH sats HE Star Il (80-3, fasta, ne 5)
man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa har paraym bhagat man leenaa.
O dear beloved mind, my friend, let your mind remain absorbed in loving devotion to the Lord.
Ho fumrfour At fist afe Ae ffs Ate Hor I (s0-3, fiesta, ue 5)
man pi-aari-aa jee-o mitraa har jal mil jeevay meenaa.
O dear beloved mind, my friend, the fish of the mind lives only when it is immersed in the Water of the Lord.
ofa ut nmurd nifys ard Ae AUT HS ZS Il (80-4, fasta, ve 5)
har pee aaghaanay amrit baanay sarab sukhaa man vuthay.
Drinking in the Lord's Ambrosial Bani, the mind is satisfied, and all pleasures come to abide within.
Alog ue Hares are fee uot Afsag 3S Il (80-4, firstora, ne 5)
sareeDhar paa-ay mangal gaa-ay ichh punnee satgur tuthay.
Attaining the Lord of Excellence, I sing the Songs of Joy. The True Guru, becoming merciful, has fulfilled my desires.
als Be we o@ fafa ue a AaaA Safe Stat Il (80-5, fidtea, ns 5)
larh leenay laa-ay na-o niDh paa-ay naa-o sarbas thaakur deenaa.
He has attached me to the hem of His robe, and I have obtained the nine treasures. My Lord and Master has bestowed His Name, which is everything to me.
ood fry AS AHSTet ofe UN safs He BS NUNN (80-5, firdtara, Hs 5)
naanak sikh sant samjhaa-ee har paraym bhagat man leenaa. ||5]|1]|2]| Nanak instructs the Saints to teach, that the mind is imbued with loving devotion to the Lord. ||5||1]|2]|
fadiana & ZS HIS u (80-7)
sireeraag kay chhant mehlaa 5 Chhants Of Siree Raag, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas urrfe iI (80-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sdear |l (80-7) dakh-naa. Dakhanaa:
Jo HET Ht fudt uA fx eters i (s0-8, fretea, 12 5) hath majhaahoo maa piree pasay ki-o deedaar. My Beloved Husband Lord is deep within my heart. How can I see Him?
HS AdSet BIS BSA US MUS IAI (g0-8, frstora, ue 5)
sant sarnaa-ee labh-nay naanak paraan aDhaar. ||1||
In the Sanctuary of the Saints, O Nanak, the Support of the breath of life is found. [11|
#Z Il (80-9) chhant. Chhant:
3s GH frG uifs dfs Ase fs mee AE Il (80-9, fdtoa, He 5)
charan kamal si-o pareet reet santan man aav-ay jee-o.
To love the Lotus Feet of the Lord-this way of life has come into the minds of His Saints.
esior ar faudifs niatfs eA og ae AIG Il (80-10, fata, He 5) dutee-aa bhaa-o bipreet aneet daasaa nah bhaav-ay jee-o. The love of duality, this evil practice, this bad habit, is not liked by the Lord's slaves.
aH od see fag vance fea fue dten fae ad il (s0-10, firdtera, He 5) daasaa nah bhaav-ay bin darsaav-ay ik khin Dheeraj ki-o karai.
It is not pleasing to the Lord's slaves; without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, how can they find peace, even for a moment?
on faa 39 Ho dat we fag Hest FAG He II (80-11, frdtora, v2 5)
naam bihoonaa tan man heenaa jal bin machhulee ji-o marai.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the body and mind are empty; like fish out of water, they die.
fs HS filmrs ure mors ae ATGAfa ffs ares il (80-11, firdtera, Hs 5)
mil mayray pi-aaray paraan aDhaaray gun saaDhsang mil gaav-ay.
Please meet with me, O my Beloved-You are the Support of my breath of life. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
soa a AnMt ofs vod” ufo sf nif AHTSS UI (s0-12, fdtora, He 5)
naanak kay su-aamee Dhaar anoograhu man tan ank samaav-ay. ||1||
O Lord and Master of Nanak, please grant Your Grace, and permeate my body, mind and being. ||1]|
sda il (80-13) dakh-naa. Dakhanaa:
Ades us ove af o fer SAS Il (80-13, firsts, we 5) sohandarho habh thaa-ay ko-ay na disai doojrho. He is Beautiful in all places; I do not see any other at all.
Ys AUS Soa Alsdd SSS NA (80-13, frdtara, wz 5) khul"rhay kapaat naanak satgur bhayttay. ||1]| Meeting with the True Guru, O Nanak, the doors are opened wide. ||1]||
=z Il (80-14) chhant. Chhant:
33 FS nIgU oRIg Ass uTUES wet starsat A il (0-14, firsts, we 5)
tayray bachan anoop apaar santan aaDhaar banee beechaaree-ai jee-o.
Your Word is Incomparable and Infinite. I contemplate the Word of Your Bani, the Support of the Saints.
frnes ATA forerA use faRMrA fas Hog farsint FIG II (90-14, frrdterar, w2 5)
simrat saas giraas pooran bisu-aas ki-o manhu bisaaree-ai jee-o.
I remember Him in meditation with every breath and morsel of food, with perfect faith. How could I forget Him from my mind?
fa@ Hog Sadi foxy adt edbat Tess yrs IHS Il (80-15, firdtorg, ne 5)
ki-o manhu baysaaree-ai nimakh nahee taaree-ai gunvant paraan hamaaray.
How could I forget Him from my mind, even for an instant? He is the Most Worthy; He is my very life!
Ho dies eu US J AM Aha at fase AS Il (80-16, fardtera, 2 5)
man baa'chhat fal dayt hai su-aamee jee-a kee birthaa saaray.
My Lord and Master is the Giver of the fruits of the mind's desires. He knows all the useless vanities and pains of the soul.
MSE & SSA HS A A Af HM ASH B TIA Il (0-16, frstara, we 5)
anaath kay naathay sarab kai saathay jap joo-ai janam na haaree-dai.
Meditating on the Patron of lost souls, the Companion of all, your life shall not be lost in the gamble.
soe at Sst us ufs fur afs seHw BIH IMI! (80-17, fasta, us 5)
naanak kee baynantee parabh peh kirpaa kar bhavjal taaree-ai. ||2| |
Nanak offers this prayer to God: Please shower me with Your Mercy, and carry me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|
sdeat Il (80-18) dakh-naa. Dakhanaa:
gat HAS AGU Aret ate ferures i (s0-18, fidtora, He 5)
Dhoorhee majan saaDh khay saa-ee thee-ay kirpaal. People bathe in the dust of the feet of the Saints, when the Lord becomes merciful.
BU Js das SSA Sls TS HS MAUI (80-18, fadtera, He 5) laDhay habhay thokrhay naanak har Dhan maal. ||1]| I have obtained all things, O Nanak; the Lord is my Wealth and Property. ||1]||
=z Il (80-19) chhant. Chhant:
Hed Amit on sarsa faR wr afar Aes AIG II (80-19, frstora, He 5)
sundar su-aamee Dhaam bhagtah bisraam aasaa lag jeevtay jee-o.
My Lord and Master's Home is beautiful. It is the resting place of His devotees, who live in hopes of attaining it.
Hfs 36 Tess faves ys on ofa nifys utes AIG II (80-19, frstora, He 5)
man tanay galtaan simrat parabh naam har amrit peevtay jee-o.
Their minds and bodies are absorbed in meditation on the Name of God; they drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar.
Ua tq nifys of ules Ae fag des fae sq ctor afer I (81-1, frdtera, we 5) amrit har peevtay sadaa thir theevtay bikhai ban feekaa jaani-aa.
They drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, and become eternally stable. They know that the water of corruption is insipid and tasteless.
se fxsue dus us AS AGH fafa ufer I (81-2, firétora, He 5)
bha-ay kirpaal gopaal parabh mayray saaDhsangat niDh maani-aa.
When my God, the Lord of the Universe became merciful, I came to look upon the Saadh Sangat as the treasure.
AVA AY vee us fimrd fs 336 Ho uists ASS Il (81-2, fasta, we 5)
sarbaso sookh aanand ghan pi-aaray har ratan man antar seevtay.
All pleasures and supreme ecstasy, O my Beloved, come to those who sew the Jewel of the Lord into their minds.
fea fe adt fend yo oro afu Afu aoa Aes III (1-3, frdtora, He 5)
ik til nahee visrai paraan aaDhaaraa jap jap naanak jeevtay. ||3]|
They do not forget, even for an instant, the Support of the breath of life. They live by constantly meditating on Him, O Nanak. |[3]|
sda il (81-4) dakh-naa. Dakhanaa:
A 3G ata nrue far & ffesGta il (81-4, fasta, we 5) jo ta-o keenay aapnay tinaa koo™ mili-ohi. O Lord, You meet and merge with those whom you have made Your Own.
nmr dt onfy HfsSs AA Soa orf AfSGfo Wall (81-4, firtera, He 5) aapay hee aap mohi-ohu jas naanak aap suni-ohi. ||1]| You Yourself are entranced, O Nanak, hearing Your Own Praises. ||1] |
#3 Il (81-5) chhant. Chhant:
Un oadt ufe dite afie He Hfoor AIG II (81-5, fidtera, ue 5)
paraym thag-uree paa-ay reejhaa-ay gobind man mohi-aa jee-o.
Administering the intoxicating drug of love, I have won over the Lord of the Universe; I have fascinated His Mind.
Hao a uate marta aS ofa Afr ATE I (81-5, fdtera, He 5)
santan kai parsaad agaaDh kanthay lag sohi-aa jee-o.
By the Grace of the Saints, I am held in the loving embrace of the Unfathomable Lord, and I am entranced.
ofa afs ofa Afr eu Afs afer sats sue afe ef se I (31-6, firdtoa, ue 5) har kanth lag sohi-aa dokh sabh johi-aa bhagat lakh-yan kar vas bha-ay.
Held in the Lord's loving embrace, I look beautiful, and all my pains have been dispelled. By the loving worship of His devotees, the Lord has come under their power.
Hf Aaa AY S dfee 3S HOH Hae" Afs fife TE Il (81-7, faster, ne 5)
man sarab sukh vuthay govid tuthay janam marnaa sabh mit ga-ay.
All pleasures have come to dwell in the mind; the Lord of the Universe is pleased and appeased. Birth and death have been totally eliminated.
Ret Has afeur fee urfenr gofs 3 wfenr Sfowr i (si-7, fstera, ve 5)
sakhee manglo gaa-i-aa ichh pujaa-i-aa bahurh na maa-i-aa hohi-aa.
O my companions, sing the Songs of Joy. My desires have been fulfilled, and I shall never again be trapped or shaken by Maya.
ag afs wd soa us fimrd AAG Ara dt UfoMr igi (si-s, firdtora, ne 5)
kar geh leenay naanak parabh pi-aaray sansaar saagar nahee pohi-aa. ||4||
Taking hold of my hand, O Nanak, my Beloved God will not let me be swallowed up by the world-ocean. ||4||
sdeat Il (81-9) dakh-naa. Dakhanaa:
At OH MHS aH  ASt ATS Il (81-9, fidtora, He 5) Saa-ee naam amol keem na ko-ee jaando. The Master's Name is Priceless; no one knows its value.
frat sta Hafo A otoa Tie Sa HSS IAI (81-9, fadtora, He 5) jinaa bhaag mathaahi say naanak har rang maando. ||1||
Those who have good destiny recorded upon their foreheads, O Nanak, enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||1]|
ZZ Il (81-10) chhant. Chhant:
ads ufez Hes Als Ue feust awe star AI II (s1-10, frsteoa, He 5)
kahtay pavitar suntay sabh Dhan likh-tee™ kul taari-aa jee-o.
Those who chant are sanctified. All those who listen are blessed, and those who write save their ancestors.
fie a@ AG Ha oH ofa ga fSat gon stotfawr FIG Il (81-10, feta, nH 5)
jin ka-o saaDhoo sang naam har rang tinee barahm beechaari-aa jee-o.
Those who join the Saadh Sangat are imbued with the Lord's Love; they reflect and meditate on God.
gon stefour Aon Aetfour use fasur yfs at il (81-11, fretera, ve 5)
barahm beechaari-aa janam savaari-aa pooran kirpaa parabh karee. Contemplating God, their lives are reformed and redeemed; God has showered His Perfect Mercy upon them.
ad afs wd ofa nA ats Afs a OS og HT Il (s1-12, fidtera, He 5)
kar geh leenay har jaso deenay jon naa Dhaavai nah maree.
Taking them by the hand, the Lord has blessed them with His Praises. They no longer have to wander in reincarnation, and they never have to die.
Afsasg efeors fasus ses Jd aH au Ss Hf Il (81-12, fadtwa, 2 5) satgur da-i-aal kirpaal bhaytat haray kaam kroDh lobh maari-aa.
Through the Kind and Compassionate True Guru, I have met the Lord; I have conquered sexual desire, anger and greed.
aas 6 ATS nag AMM Hea ATE soa Sfmt NUIUISI (81-13, fdtera, He 5) kathan na jaa-ay akath su-aamee sadkai jaa-ay naanak vaari-aa. ||5||1||3||
Our Indescribable Lord and Master cannot be described. Nanak is devoted, forever a sacrifice to Him. ||5]|1]|3]|
frdtaa HIG 8 FEAT (81-15) sireeraag mehlaa 4 vanjaaraa Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl, Vanajaaraa ~ The Merchant:
QB As on ae YATE II (81-15) ik-o’kaar sat naam gur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. By Guru's Grace:
dfs ofa Gan an 3 fats fafeor AS afe ATE II (s1-16, fadtea, He 4) har har utam naam hai jin siri-aa sabh ko-ay jee-o. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Excellent and Sublime. He created everyone.
ofa riba AS ufsuser wife wie gHeber ALE II (81-16, fidtoa, 8 4) har jee-a sabhay partipaaldaa ghat ghat rama-ee-aa so-ay. The Lord cherishes all beings. He permeates each and every heart.
A dfs Ae foment fon fas nies 3 ae I (81-17, fiadtera, ne 4) so har sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai tis bin avar na ko-ay. Meditate forever on that Lord. Without Him, there is no other at all.
a Hfo wfeor fos ofee A efs oS wy SE II (81-17, factors, He 4)
jo mohi maa-i-aa chit laa-iday say chhod chalay dukh ro-ay.
Those who focus their consciousness on emotional attachment to Maya must leave; they depart crying out in despair.
He aaa ay fourfenr of nifs maret SE AI (81-18, fate, v2 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa har ant sakhaa-ee ho-ay. ||1]|
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, his only Companion in the end. ||1]|
H ofa fag nied 3 afe Il (s1-18, faster, He 4) mai har bin avar na ko-ay. I have none other than You, O Lord.
ofa aa Aaeet uri zerfamr first esarfar uss SE NA TIC Il (si-19, fasta, ve 4)
har gur sarnaa-ee paa-ee-ai vanjaari-aa mitraa vadbhaag paraapat ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa- O. In the Guru's Sanctuary, the Lord is found, O my merchant friend; by great good fortune, He is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
ust t2 Hz wot fee arent ats fas o ufeor a Il (92-1, fadtewa, He 4) sant janaa vin bhaa-ee-aa har kinai na paa-i-aa naa-o.
Without the humble Saints, O Siblings of Destiny, no one has obtained the Lord's Name.
fefs JGH agH anred fa@ Sar us fear Il (82-1, fasta, He 4) vich ha-umai karam kamaavday ji-o vaysu-aa put ninaa-o. Those who do their deeds in ego are like the prostitute's son, who has no name.
fust wis a cet ag sar ad UATE Il (82-2, fidtera, ne 4) pitaa jaat taa ho-ee-ai gur tuthaa karay pasaa-o. The father's status is obtained only if the Guru is pleased and bestows His Favor.
zasat ag ufenr af mifofefA war aS il (82-2, fadtera, He 4) vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa har ahinis lagaa bhaa-o. By great good fortune, the Guru is found; embrace love for the Lord, day and night.
Ho alata qoH ustenr afe atefs AGH AHS IQil (82-3, fadtora, us 4)
jan naanak barahm pachhaani-aa har keerat karam kamaa-o. ||2||
Servant Nanak has realized God; he sings the Lord's Praises through the actions he does. ||2||
Hf ote ats war BE Il (82-3, fasta, ue 4) man har har lagaa chaa-o. In my mind there is such a deep yearning for the Lord, Har, Har.
afs us on fearfenr of fife afs ys aS nd TIS I (82-4, frstora, we 4)
gur poorai naam drirh-aa-i-aa har mili-aa har parabh naa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Naam within me; I have found the Lord through the Lord God's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
Aa Gd Wale AA TD 3a Ba OH forte Il (92-4, fadtora, He 4) jab lag joban saas hai tab lag naam Dhi-aa-ay. As long as there is youth and health, meditate on the Naam.
vofent ate ofa vert of nis we wate Il (82-5, fadtea, ve 4) chaldi-aa naal har chalsee har antay la-ay chhadaa-ay. Along the way, the Lord shall go along with you, and in the end, He shall save you.
JG seo fSo aB fro ate ufs sor wrfe Il (82-5, fasta, 2 4) ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o jin har man vuthaa aa-ay. I am a Sacrifice to those, within whose minds the Lord has come to dwell.
frot afs ofa ant o 3f3G A nifs ae uss Il (82-6, fadtera, nu 4)
jinee har har naam na chayti-o say ant ga-ay pachhutaa-ay.
Those who have not remembered the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, shall leave with regret in the end.
ufs HASte ofs ufs fefimr AS StSa OH fore ISI (82-6, fdtora, we 4)
Dhur mastak har parabh likhi-aa jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]|
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads, O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam. |[3]|
Ho dfa ofa utfs warfe i (82-7, facta, ve 4) man har har pareet lagaa-ay. O my mind, embrace love for the Lord, Har, Har.
zara as ufenr ag Agel ute surfe nai TIS il (82-7, fistera, He 4)
vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa gur sabdee paar laghaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, the Guru is found; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are carried across to the other side. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs wim wry Gurfeer af nm SS SLE Il (82-8, fadtea, ve 4) har aapay aap upaa-idaa har aapay dayvai lay-ay. The Lord Himself creates, He Himself gives and takes away.
dfs wry sath gorfee ofs nme dt ufs Ste Il (82-9, firdtera, He 4) har aapay bharam bhulaa-idaa har aapay hee mat day-ay. The Lord Himself leads us astray in doubt; the Lord Himself imparts understanding.
Tone ufs usara 3 A fess det afe il (82-9, fadtora, H2 4)
gurmukhaa man pargaas hai say virlay kay-ee kay-ay.
The minds of the Gurmukhs are illuminated and enlightened; they are so very rare. JG seas fSo aS fro ofe ufenr TINS Il (82-10, fadtera, ve 4)
ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o jin har paa-i-aa gurmatay. I am a Sacrifice to those who find the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings.
Ho sala AHS udathor vfs dfs dfs Zar FT Ill (82-10, fdtera, ve 4)
jan naanak kamal pargaasi-aa man har har vuth-rhaa hay. ||4||
Servant Nanak's heart-lotus has blossomed forth, and the Lord, Har, Har, has come to dwell in the mind. ||4]|
Hfe ofa afs AUS As Il (82-11, frdtera, He 4) man har har japan karay. O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fs qs Aseet ste us fie As faxofed eu usTT AU TIS ll (82-11, frstoa, we 4) har gur sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-o jindoo sabh kilvikh dukh parharay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Guru, O my soul; all your sins shall be taken away. ||1]|Pause| |
ufe wfe oreien fs eA fa ureint fas afS i (82-12, fadtera, v2 4)
ghat ghat rama-ee-aa man vasai ki-o paa-ee-ai kit bhat.
The All-pervading Lord dwells within each and every person's heart-how can He be obtained?
Gg us Afsag sci ofe wefe eA fs feats ii (2-12, frstera, ue 4)
gur pooraa satgur bhaytee-ai har aa-ay vasai man chit. By meeting the Perfect Guru, the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell within the conscious mind.
H Ud oH nog JD dfs oH SF ats Hf II (82-13, fadtora, He 4)
mai Dhar naam aDhaar hai har naamai tay gat mat.
The Naam is my Support and Sustenance. From the Lord's Name, I obtain salvation and understanding.
H ofa ofa on ferrg d ofa am ot afs ufS Il (82-13, fastora, He 4)
mai har har naam visaahu hai har naamay hee jat pat.
My faith is in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The Lord's Name is my status and honor.
He area oy fonrfeor fa asa fs dfar ofS ull (g2-14, facto, v2 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa rang rat-rhaa har rang rat. ||5||
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He is dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love. ||5||
dfs fureg afs ys APS I (82-15, frdtora, He 4) har Dhi-aavahu har parabh sat. Meditate on the Lord, the True Lord God.
ad aval oe yg wafer AS as us FS Ssufs uA FIG I (82-15, fdtora, ue 4)
gur bachnee har parabh jaani-aa sabh har parabh tay utpat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Word, you shall come to know the Lord God. From the Lord God, everything was created. ||1||Pause] |
fro ag usta ffir A urfe fs ag uti I (82-16, frdtea, He 4) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa say aa-ay milay gur paas. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, come to the Guru and meet Him.
Aza ate zarntour fet ag ats afs ant yarfe il (g2-16, frdtora, v2 4)
sayvak bhaa-ay vanjaari-aa mitraa gur har har naam pargaas.
They love to serve, O my merchant friend, and through the Guru, they are illuminated by the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
US U6 Zen Tudor fre zug ofentar ats TAA Il (82-17, fadtera, He 4)
Dhan Dhan vanaj vapaaree-aa jin vakhar ladi-arhaa har raas.
Blessed, blessed is the trade of those traders who have loaded the merchandise of the Wealth of the Lord.
aan es Hy Cae A orfe fue ofa uth Il (82-17, fiadtea, v2 4)
gurmukhaa dar mukh ujlay say aa-ay milay har paas.
The faces of the Gurmukhs are radiant in the Court of the Lord; they come to the Lord and merge with Him.
Ho oa dd fe ufenr faa orf sar TestA Ell (82-18, firdtora, Hs 4)
jan naanak gur tin paa-i-aa jinaa aap tuthaa guntaas. ||6] |
O servant Nanak, they alone find the Guru, with whom the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence, is pleased. ||6] |
ofa fomreg ATA foratH Il (82-18, fidtera, He 4) har Dhi-aavahu saas giraas. Meditate on the Lord, with every breath and morsel of food.
Hfs ulfs wait fsa" ASHE ofs OH fat Jaa NA TIS WAU (82-19, fdtora, ue 4) man pareet lagee tinaa gurmukhaa har naam jinaa rahraas. ||1|| rahaa-o. ||1]| The Gurmukhs embrace the Love of the Lord in their minds; they are continually occupied with the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause]|1||
Us tZ qe Afsars YATE II (83-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fadtarar at avg Has 8 ASat ats Il (s3-1)
sireeraag kee vaar mehlaa 4 salokaa naal. Vaar Of Siree Raag, Fourth Mehl, With Shaloks:
HBa H8 3 Il (83-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
oar fefs Hoa 3 A Afs od fimrg Il (83-2, frstea, He 3)
raagaa vich sareeraag hai jay sach Dharay pi-aar. Among the ragas, Siree Raag is the best, if it inspires you to enshrine love for the True Lord.
Re ofa Ag Hfs ZA fages Hfs wrrg Il (93-2, factor, He 3)
sadaa har sach man vasai nihchal mat apaar.
The True Lord comes to abide forever in the mind, and your understanding becomes steady and unequalled.
336 Hwa uUfeor ag a Hae shes Il (83-3, fadtea, He 3) ratan amolak paa-i-aa gur kaa sabad beechaar. The priceless jewel is obtained, by contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fide" Het HS Ae Ae Aste wars Il (93-3, fates, He 3)
jihvaa sachee man sachaa sachaa sareer akaar.
The tongue becomes true, the mind becomes true, and the body becomes true as well.
Soa Ae Afsate Afea Ae A SU Il (83-4, fadtea, us 3) naanak sachai satgur sayvi-ai sadaa sach vaapaar. ||1]|| O Nanak, forever true are the dealings of those who serve the True Guru. ||1]|
He 3 Il (83-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dg faso As og 3 Aa oa Atos Us o SE II (83-4, fasta, He 3) hor birhaa sabh Dhaat hai jab lag saahib pareet na ho-ay. All other loves are transitory, as long as people do not love their Lord and Master.
feg Ho Hfeur Hf Sus Hos 3 AE I (93-5, fidtera, He 3) ih man maa-i-aa mohi-aa vaykhan sunan na ho-ay. This mind is enticed by Maya-it cannot see or hear.
Ao 2y fag uifs o Gur nict fom aafe I (83-5, frstera, ue 3)
sah daykhay bin pareet na oopjai anDhaa ki-aa karay-i.
Without seeing her Husband Lord, love does not well up; what can the blind person do?
sod fate ondt StSstor Aet Wet SfE NI (83-6, fadtera, v2 3)
naanak jin akhee leetee-aa so-ee sachaa day-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, the True One who takes away the eyes of spiritual wisdom-He alone can restore them. ||2]|
ust Il (83-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs fea asst fea feat chars ofa il (93-6, fidtora, He 3) har iko kartaa ik iko deebaan har. The Lord alone is the One Creator; there is only the One Court of the Lord.
dfs fear a 3 ung fea ofe fats afs il (93-7, faster, He 3)
har iksai daa hai amar iko har chit Dhar.
The One Lord's Command is the One and Only-enshrine the One Lord in your consciousness.
ofs fan fag cet af sa 3H 38 Uf afe II (93-7, fides, Hs 3) har tis bin ko-ee naahi dar bharam bha-o door kar. Without that Lord, there is no other at all. Remove your fear, doubt and dread.
dfs fn 6 Ata fa so ae safe wis I (33-8, fadtea, ne 3) har tisai no saalaahi je tuDh rakhai baahar ghar. Praise that Lord who protects you, inside your home, and outside as well.
dfs fan 3 df efeure A afe afl 3@ finn safe Nall (93-8, fadtea, He 3)
har jis no ho-ay da-i-aal so har jap bha-o bikham tar. ||1]|
When that Lord becomes merciful, and one comes to chant the Lord's Name, one swims across the ocean of fear. ||1]|
HEX He % Il (83-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ast afsa Adior fom vd fA ats il (83-9, fadtea, He 1) daatee saahib sandee-aa ki-aa chalai tis naal. The gifts belong to our Lord and Master; how can we compete with Him?
fea aie a adie faa Afsor sf Barf all (93-9, fates, He 1)
ik jaaganday naa lahann iknaa suti-aa day-ay uthaal. ||1||
Some remain awake and aware, and do not receive these gifts, while others are awakened from their sleep to be blessed. ||1||
He % Il (83-10) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fea Hast Afear Hag SAT Hefeat Il (83-10, frdtora, we 1) sidak sabooree saadikaa sabar tosaa malaa-ikaa’. Faith, contentment and tolerance are the food and provisions of the angels.
deg us ufear a ardt urfear QU (83-10, fastora, He 1)
deedaar pooray paa-isaa thaa-o naahee khaa-ikaa. ||2||
They obtain the Perfect Vision of the Lord, while those who gossip find no place of rest. ||2||
ust Il (83-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS omy 30 Gane & wef ard wet I (93-11, fadtera, He 1)
sabh aapay tuDh upaa-ay kai aap kaarai laa-ee. You Yourself created all; You Yourself delegate the tasks.
3 nmr Safe feaner niruet sfsuret il (93-11, fasta, 3 1)
too” aapay vaykh vigsadaa aapnee vadi-aa-ee.
You Yourself are pleased, beholding Your Own Glorious Greatness. dfs 30g wate fag adt F At At Il (83-12, factor, He 1)
har tuDhhu baahar kichh naahee too™ sachaa saa-ee. O Lord, there is nothing at all beyond You. You are the True Lord.
3 nme urfy zaser Agot ot aret Il (83-12, fasta, Hs 1) too” aapay aap varatdaa sabhnee hee thaa-ee. You Yourself are contained in all places.
dfs fan fred AS Hod A BS wsret WIIl (83-13, fadtea, v2 1) har tisai Dhi-aavahu sant janhu jo la-ay chhadaa-ee. ||2|| Meditate on that Lord, O Saints; He shall rescue and save you. ||2||
HEX H2 % Il (83-13)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Sas AWSt Sas SE Il (83-13, fadtoa, uz 1) fakarh jaatee fakarh naa-o. Pride in social status is empty; pride in personal glory is useless.
Aso" Aer fear ere il (83-14, facta, ue 1) sabhnaa jee-aa ikaa chhaa-o. The One Lord gives shade to all beings.
WUT A A TH ATS Il (83-14, fadtea, He 1) aaphu jay ko bhalaa kahaa-ay. You may call yourself good;
Sod ST UT AU AT ufs BY US INA (83-14, fadtora, He 1) naanak taa par jaapai jaa pat laykhai paa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, this will only be known when your honor is approved in God's Account. ||1]|
Hs 2 Il (83-15)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
fan fumrd faG 3g fon vrat nfs sem II (83-15, fidtora, He 2) jis pi-aaray si-o nayhu tis aagai mar chalee-ai. Die before the one whom you love;
fgg dies Aerfa St & ure Pleat II! (93-15, firdtora, ne 2) Dharig jeevan sansaar taa kai paachhai jeevnaa. ||2|| to live after he dies is to live a worthless life in this world. ||2||
ugat II (83-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
30 omy cast Aba Ue Ase oe TS I (93-16, fasta, we 2) tuDh aapay Dhartee saajee-ai chand sooraj du-ay deevay. You Yourself created the earth, and the two lamps of the sun and the moon.
eA ots Jz 30 Ato aug aate Il (83-16, fidtoa, ve 2) das chaar hat tuDh saaji-aa vaapaar kareevay. You created the fourteen world-shops, in which Your Business is transacted.
feast 6 fe wg tf FH TaHfe AS II (83-17, fate, He 2) iknaa no har laabh day-ay jo gurmukh theevay. The Lord bestows His Profits on those who become Gurmukh.
fsa AHaTS 3 fenruet fro Ag vif~s ule I (83-17, firdtera, He 2)
tin jamkaal na vi-aapa-ee jin sach amrit peevay.
The Messenger of Death does not touch those who drink in the True Ambrosial Nectar.
6fe orfu se users fa foo fue AS AGS Sale ISI (93-17, fades, ne 2)
o-ay aap chhutay parvaar si-o tin pichhai sabh jagat chhuteevay. ||3]|
They themselves are saved, along with their family, and all those who follow them are saved as well. ||3]|
H&aX H2 Y Il (83-18)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
aves afs & efron APE II (83-18, fadtera, He 1) kudrat kar kai vasi-aa so-ay. He created the Creative Power of the Universe, within which He dwells.
yar ts wuz dod A det SE Il (84-1, firdtera, w: 1)
vakhat veechaaray so bandaa ho-ay. One who reflects upon his allotted span of life, becomes the slave of God.
aeatfs J ahifs adt ue i (94-1, fadtea, He 1) kudrat hai keemat nahee paa-ay. The value of the Creative Power of the Universe cannot be known.
aw atts ute 3 adt & ATE Il (94-1, firdtoa, He 1) jaa keemat paa-ay ta kahee na jaa-ay. Even if its value were known, it could not be described.
Ae Admits aafa sterg i (84-1, fadtera, v2 1) Sarai saree-at karahi beechaar. Some think about religious rituals and regulations,
fag 33 aA urefa urg Il (84-2, frdtora, we 1) bin boojhay kaisay paavahi paar. but without understanding, how can they cross over to the other side?
freag ats frre He ats HAE I (94-2, fastora, He 1)
sidak kar sijdaa man kar makhsood.
Let sincere faith be your bowing in prayer, and let the conquest of your mind be your objective in life.
fag fats eur fsa fats HBAS NAN (84-2, fastora, He 1) jih Dhir daykhaa tih Dhir ma-ujood. ||1]| Wherever I look, there I see God's Presence. ||1||
He 3 Il (84-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
qs AS Sz 5 urea BS J Sle Il (94-3, firdtora, vs 3) gur sabhaa ayv na paa-ee-ai naa nayrhai naa door. The Society of the Guru is not obtained like this, by trying to be near or far away.
aoa Afsag St Hs AHS Fd Jets MQM (94-3, fastorar, m2 3) naanak satgur taa’ milai jaa man rahai hadoor. ||2|| O Nanak, you shall meet the True Guru, if your mind remains in His Presence. ||2| |
ust Il (34-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Rus thy Aus Ae o€ Us Ute Se GA NIA| UTTET Il (94-4, fdtera, He 3) Sapat deep sapat saagraa nav khand chaar vayd das asat puraanaa. The seven islands, seven seas, nine continents, four Vedas and eighteen Puraanas
dfs Asa fefs J ease ois ASST SET Il (84-5, firsts, us 3) har sabhnaa vich too’ varatdaa har sabhnaa bhaanaa. -O Lord, You pervade and permeate all. Lord, everyone loves You.
Afs 33 fowrefs dba HS ofa Arse ura Il (84-5, frst, He 3) sabh tujhai Dhi-aavahi jee-a jant har saarag paanaa. All beings and creatures meditate on You, Lord. You hold the earth in Your Hands.
A conte ofs mace fs5 JG aTETST II (84-6, faster, He 3) jo gurmukh har aaraaDhaday tin ha-o kurbaanaa. I am a Sacrifice to those Gurmukhs who worship and adore the Lord.
3 um nrfu zaser ate oA fester Sil (84-6, firdtora, He 3) too” aapay aap varatdaa kar choj vidaanaa. ||4|| You Yourself are All-pervading; You stage this wondrous drama! ||4||
HBa H28 3 Il (84-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aes HATH fam Hee fase ot fats ST il (94-7, fates, ne 3) kala-o masaajnee ki-aa sadaa-ee-ai hirdai hee likh layho. Why ask for a pen, and why ask for ink? Write within your heart.
He Atoe x dat Id cad o See ST Il (84-7, firstora, Hi: 3)
sadaa saahib kai rang rahai kabahoo™ na tootas nayhu.
Remain immersed forever in the Love of your Lord and Master, and your love for Him Shall never break.
ao HAHOSt ATEAT for Sst ars ATE Il (84-8, frrdtera, He 3) kala-o masaajnee jaa-isee likhi-aa bhee naalay jaa-ay. Pen and ink shall pass away, along with what has been written.
soa Ao ulfs 3 afent A ofs gat AS UTE AI (84-8, fdtoa, He 3)
naanak sah pareet na jaa-isee jo Dhur chhodee sachai paa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, the Love of your Husband Lord shall never perish. The True Lord has bestowed it, as it was pre-ordained. ||1]|
He 3 Il (84-9) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Sed mreer ots o vEet Sug a feGufe i (84-9, fadtera, He 3)
nadree aavdaa naal na chal-ee vaykhhu ko vi-upaa-ay.
That which is seen, shall not go along with you. What does it take to make you see this?
Afsafe Ag fesfeur Afs gag fee ote i (84-10, fiesta, ne 3) satgur sach drirh-aa-i-aa sach rahhu liv laa-ay.
The True Guru has implanted the True Name within; remain lovingly absorbed in the True One.
Soa Heel AS FT aot US UTS |Ml (g4-10, fistera, v2 3) naanak sabdee sach hai karmee palai paa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, the Word of His Shabad is True. By His Grace, it is obtained. ||2||
UugST II (84-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofs nets wate fea 3 F Aefy SZ il (84-11, frstora, v2 3) har andar baahar ik too™ too’ jaaneh bhayt. O Lord, You are inside and outside as well. You are the Knower of secrets.
A old A ofa Weel Ad HS Ufa Ss Il (84-11, fadtera, ne 3) jo keechai so har jaandaa mayray man har chayt. Whatever anyone does, the Lord knows. O my mind, think of the Lord.
A 3d fa uy arent cat fears I (94-11, fate, He 3) so darai je paap kamaavdaa Dharmee vigsayt. The one who commits sins lives in fear, while the one who lives righteously rejoices.
3 Ae orf fourS Ag st shot AT Il (84-12, fasta, we 3) too” sachaa aap ni-aa-o sach taa daree-ai kayt.
O Lord, You Yourself are True, and True is Your Justice. Why should anyone be afraid?
fiat Soa AG Uetent A As IBZ MUI (84-12, fdtea, He 3) jinaa naanak sach pachhaani-aa say sach ralayt. ||5]| O Nanak, those who recognize the True Lord are blended with the True One. ||5]|
HBa H8 3 Il (84-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
AGH ASS AS HASTaHt ava st vfs WE Il (94-13, faster, He 3) kalam jala-o san masvaanee-ai kaagad bhee jal jaa-o. Burn the pen, and burn the ink; burn the paper as well.
fous ser Als ae fats fetter gat aS Il (94-14, frdtera, nH 3) likhan vaalaa jal bala-o jin likhi-aa doojaa bhaa-o. Burn the writer who writes in the love of duality.
aot ust foftmr aHear neg & ATet ATE UA (84-14, frtera, He 3) naanak poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa avar na karnaa jaa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, people do what is pre-ordained; they cannot do anything else. ||1]|
He 3 Il (84-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dg FZ use’ ay soe whenr ates fing i (94-15, frstera, we 3) hor koorh parh-naa koorh bolnaa maa-i-aa naal pi-aar. False is other reading, and false is other speaking, in the love of Maya.
sod fee ae a fag adt ufs ufs df wars II (84-15, fadtera, v2 3) naanak vin naavai ko thir nahee parh parh ho-ay khu-aar. ||2||
O Nanak, without the Name, nothing is permanent; those who read and read are ruined. ||2||
ust II (84-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofa ot efsuret eat 3 afe ates ofa at Il (84-16, fadtera, v2 3) har kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai har keertan har kaa. Great is the Greatness of the Lord, and the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
dfs oft efsnret eat I at four J can at Il (94-16, fadtera, v2 3) har kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai jaa ni-aa-o hai Dharam kaa. Great is the Greatness of the Lord; His Justice is totally Righteous.
ofa oft efsnret eat J A Se TF Ahr at I (94-17, fadtera, 2 3) har kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai jaa fal hai jee-a kaa. Great is the Greatness of the Lord; people receive the fruits of the soul.
dfs at efanret eat 3 aS ASet afoot yaw aT Il (84-17, fate, ne 3) har kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai jaa na sun-ee kahi-aa chugal kaa. Great is the Greatness of the Lord; He does not hear the words of the back-biters.
dfs ot efsnret eat J nrpfenr ere Fear |EM (84-18, fadtera, 2 3) har kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai apuchhi-aa daan dayvkaa. ||6|| Great is the Greatness of the Lord; He gives His Gifts without being asked. ||6] |
HBa H8 3 Il (84-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
IG 3G agst AS Het Hu fan o arfe II (g4-19, firdtora, He 3)
ha-o ha-o kartee sabh mu-ee sampa-o kisai na naal.
Those who act in ego shall all die. Their worldly possessions shall not go along with them.
en ate gy ufenr AS Hot AHOTS Il (84-19, firdtora, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay dukh paa-i-aa sabh johee jamkaal.
Because of their love of duality, they suffer in pain. The Messenger of Death is watching all.
Ue tu
Sa TSHfe Sad AvSt SH ANTS NA (85-1, firstera, He 3) naanak gurmukh ubray saachaa naam samaal. ||1]| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved, by contemplating the True Name. ||1]|
He % Il (85-1)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
TOt mt Sahor ners} gIhwrs i (95-1, fadtora, v2 1) galee’ asee changee-aa aachaaree buree-aah. We are good at talking, but our actions are bad.
Hod AAO are sats feeds i (95-2, fistora, He 1) manhu kusuDhaa kaalee-aa baahar chitvee-aah. Mentally, we are impure and black, but outwardly, we appear white.
dor afag fsasior Ff Refs es usr Il (85-2, fadtoa, He 1) reesaa karih tinaarhee-aa jo sayveh dar kharhee-aah. We imitate those who stand and serve at the Lord's Door.
ots UAH sion Hrafs Afy Sinisa Il (95-3, fasta, He 1)
naal khasmai ratee-aa maaneh sukh ralee-aah.
They are attuned to the Love of their Husband Lord, and they experience the pleasure of His Love.
de ats fosretor sofa forraainis Il (85-3, fadtera, ve 1) hodai taan nitaanee-aa raheh nimaannee-aah. They remain powerless, even while they have power; they remain humble and meek.
Soa HOH Havsa A fsa a Afar fers NMI (85-4, fadtera, He 1) naanak janam sakaarthaa jay tin kai sang milaah. ||2]| O Nanak, our lives become profitable if we associate with them. ||2| |
ust II (85-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 om AS Htar d omy wma ot wrt Fw I (85-4, fasta, oe 1) too” aapay jal meenaa hai aapay aapay hee aap jaal. You Yourself are the water, You Yourself are the fish, and You Yourself are the net.
3 umd we earfeer wm} fete AA Il (95-5, firsts, 3 1) too” aapay jaal vataa-idaa aapay vich saybaal. You Yourself cast the net, and You Yourself are the bait.
J uml ane nifeus 3 A oer fete THs Il (85-5, firsts, we
too” aapay kamal alipat hai sai hathaa vich gulaal.
You Yourself are the lotus, unaffected and still brightly-colored in hundreds of feet of water.
3 umd Hats aateer fea fora wat afe fire il (95-6, frdtora, m3 1) too” aapay mukat karaa-idaa ik nimakh gharhee kar khi-aal. You Yourself liberate those who think of You for even an instant.
dfs 3ug wale fas adt aa Aaet Sfy fares IDI (85-6, frdtra, vs 1)
har tuDhhu baahar kichh nahee gur sabdee vaykh nihaal. ||7]||
O Lord, nothing is beyond You. I am delighted to behold You, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||7]|
H8a H8 3 Il (85-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
JAH B WS FIST de Il (85-7, fadtoa, ve 3) hukam na jaanai bahutaa rovai. One who does not know the Hukam of the Lord's Command cries out in terrible pain.
mets Tur ate & AS Il (85-7, faster, He 3) andar Dhokhaa need na sovai. She is filled with deception, and she cannot sleep in peace.
A US YAH VS sat I Ufa wie Hat Hafes geet I (85-7, fidtera, He 3)
jay Dhan khasmai chalai rajaa-ee. dar ghar sobhaa mahal bulaa-ee.
But if the soul-bride follows the Will of her Lord and Master, she shall be honored in her own home, and called to the Mansion of His Presence.
aoa aot fea nfs uret Il (95-8, firstera, ne 3) naanak karmee ih mat paa-ee. O Nanak, by His Mercy, this understanding is obtained.
ad USATS Afs AHTET IAI (85-8, firstera, He 3) gur parsaadee sach samaa-ee. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, she is absorbed into the True One. ||1||
He 3 Il (85-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HoH oH fegfeur ga ans Sf 3 FB il (85-9, frstara, ws 3)
manmukh naam vihooni-aa rang kasumbhaa daykh na bhul.
O self-willed manmukh, devoid of the Naam, do not be misled upon beholding the color of the safflower.
fen at da feo Sfaor ger fER SHG Il (85-9, faster, ne 3) is kaa rang din thorhi-aa chhochhaa is daa mul. Its color lasts for only a few days-it is worthless!
SH Ba uly He Hoa vit Tes Il (85-10, frvtera, we 3) doojai lagay pach mu-ay moorakh anDh gavaar. Attached to duality, the foolish, blind and stupid people waste away and die.
fanart viefs ote A ufe uefa etd STE II (85-10, fadtea, He 3) bistaa andar keet say pa-i pacheh vaaro vaar. Like worms, they live in manure, and in it, they die over and over again.
Sod BH IS A SIG Td a Ala ASE Il (95-11, faster, ve 3)
naanak naam ratay say rangulay gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are dyed in the color of truth; they take on the intuitive peace and poise of the Guru.
saat da 3 3d AGA Jd ANTS NI (95-11, fadtera, He 3)
bhagtee rang na utrai sehjay rahai samaa-ay. ||2||
The color of devotional worship does not fade away; they remain intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||2||
uGat Il (85-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fanfe Guret As so nm fara Hafan | (85-12, firdtera, v2 3) sisat upaa-ee sabh tuDh aapay rijak sambaahi-aa. You created the entire universe, and You Yourself bring sustenance to it.
ik val chhal kar kai khaavday muhhu koorh kusat tinee dhaahi-aa. Some eat and survive by practicing fraud and deceit; from their mouths they drop falsehood and lies.
30 wm we A ads 30 6S ath Gf wfeor I (95-13, fadtera, He 3) tuDh aapay bhaavai so karahi tuDh otai kamm o-ay laa-i-aa. As it pleases You, You assign them their tasks.
feast ng asteGe fsar nse garg Verfenr I (85-13, fidtea, He 3) iknaa sach bujhaa-i-on tinaa atut bhandaar dayvaa-i-aa. Some understand Truthfulness; they are given the inexhaustible treasure.
dfs 3f8 wis fae Aes F nS Je SatfeMr Ic (85-14, firdtera, He 3)
har chayt khaahi tinaa safal hai achaytaa hath tadaa-i-aa. ||8]|
Those who eat by remembering the Lord are prosperous, while those who do not remember Him stretch out their hands in need. ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (85-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ufs ufs ufss se zurefo rfemr vo Arte I (95-15, firtera, He 3)
parh parh pandit bayd vakaaneh maa-i-aa moh su-aa-ay.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, constantly read and recite the Vedas, for the sake of the love of Maya.
en ate ofe on ferfoor Ho Hoe FHS ARTE I (95-15, frstera, we 3)
doojai bhaa-ay har naam visaari-aa man moorakh milai sajaa-ay.
In the love of duality, the foolish people have forgotten the Lord's Name; they shall receive their punishment.
fate Aig fils fest fA aad 3 33 A ee fara Hata Il (95-16, factors, Hs 3)
jin jee-o pind ditaa tis kabahoo™ na chaytai jo day“daa rijak sambaahi.
They never think of the One who gave them body and soul, who provides sustenance to all.
AH ot ae deg 6 aca feta fafa mre we i (95-16, firdtera, ne 3)
jam kaa faahaa galhu na katee-ai fir fir aavai jaa-ay.
The noose of death shall not be cut away from their necks; they shall come and go in reincarnation over and over again.
Houfe fag 3 AS nine votes fest corte i (95-17, fates, we 3)
manmukh kichhoo na soojhai anDhulay poorab likhi-aa kamaa-ay.
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand anything. They do what they are pre-ordained to do.
ud ata Afsag fs ANETS oH SA His morte It (95-18, facta, vs 3)
poorai bhaag satgur milai sukh-daata naam vasai man aa-ay.
Through perfect destiny, they meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace, and the Naam comes to abide in the mind.
HY Hrefs AY Uae AY Afe feafe I (95-18, firdtora, He 3) sukh maaneh sukh painnaa sukhay sukh vihaa-ay. They enjoy peace, they wear peace, and they pass their lives in the peace of peace.
Soa A oS Had o fend fas vfs Ad AST ute IAI (85-19, fidtera, He 3) naanak so naa-o manhu na visaaree-ai jit dar sachai sobhaa paa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, they do not forget the Naam from the mind; they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (85-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag Afe AY ufeor AY OH TESTA Il (95-19, firdtera, ve 3)
satgur sayv sukh paa-i-aa sach naam guntaas.
Serving the True Guru, peace is obtained. The True Name is the Treasure of Excellence.
at té TaHSt wry use TH SH UPA Il (g6-1, fidtera, 2 3) gurmatee aap pachhaani-aa raam naam pargaas.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and recognize your own self; the Divine Light of the Lord's Name shall shine within.
Ae Ag aneat efsnret es uit Il (86-1, fasta, He 3) sacho sach kamaavanaa vadi-aa-ee vaday paas. The true ones practice Truth; greatness rests in the Great Lord.
a€ fiz Ag fsA ao fhefs ad maetA Il (80-2, frdtera, He 3)
jee-o pind sabh tis kaa sifat karay ardaas.
Body, soul and all things belong to the Lord-praise Him, and offer your prayers to Him.
Ae Aafe Aerget AY Afy feeA Il (s6-2, fadtera, He 3)
sachai sabad salaahnaa sukhay sukh nivaas.
Sing the Praises of the True Lord through the Word of His Shabad, and you shall abide in the peace of peace.
mu Su HAY HO Hf fae oe fog HteTA II (86-3, firdtora, He 3)
jap tap sanjam manai maahi bin naavai Dharig jeevaas.
You may practice chanting, penance and austere self-discipline within your mind, but without the Name, life is useless.
TaHst oS urs Hone Hfo feenA I (86-3, fidtera, He 3)
gurmatee naa-o paa-ee-ai manmukh mohi vinaas.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Name is obtained, while the self-willed manmukh wastes away in emotional attachment.
fa are (38 TY SF HSA ST HA II (86-4, frdtoa, ws 3) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh too” naanak tayraa daas. ||2|| Please protect me, by the Pleasure of Your Will. Nanak is Your slave. ||2]|
uGat Il (86-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag A 37 5 ASA US ASS! TA Il (86-4, frdtera, we 3) sabh ko tayraa too” sabhas daa too” sabhnaa raas. All are Yours, and You belong to all. You are the wealth of all.
Afs 30 umd Hae fos af migerth Il (86-5, fadtea, He 3) sabh tuDhai paashu mangday nit kar ardaas. Everyone begs from You, and all offer prayers to You each day.
fan 3 fo fen Ag fas fs fear ofs J UA II (86-5, firdtora, v8 3)
jis too’ deh tis sabh kichh milai iknaa door hai paas.
Those, unto whom You give, receive everything. You are far away from some, and You are close to others.
30 Msg a a at fan uA Halt nfs Sug a foartA Il (s6-6, frdtera, He 3)
tuDh baajhahu thaa-o ko naahee jis paashu mangee-ai man vaykhhu ko nirjaas. Without You, there is not even a place to stand begging. See this yourself and verify it in your mind.
Afs 30 6 Warde ufs Tae & usaA ICI (86-6, fata, He 3) sabh tuDhai no salaahday dar gurmukhaa no pargaas. ||9]|| All praise You, O Lord; at Your Door, the Gurmukhs are enlightened. ||9||
H8a H8 3 Il (86-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ufss ufs ufs Ger gover Hrfemr dfs fimrrg I (86-7, firdtora, Hs 3)
pandit parh parh uchaa kookdaa maa-i-aa mohi pi-aar.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read and read, and shout out loud, but they are attached to the love of Maya.
nists FIH 3 dloet nfs Hey aes Il (86-8, firdtora, we 3) antar barahm na cheen-ee man moorakh gaavaar. They do not recognize God within themselves-they are so foolish and ignorant!
en StS Hays USAT ot FS aos Il (86-8, firdtora, wi 3)
doojai bhaa-ay jagat parboDhadaa naa boojhai beechaar.
In the love of duality, they try to teach the world, but they do not understand meditative contemplation.
fase AOH Tetfeur nfs AA SS SST INU (86-9, firsts, He 3) birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa mar jammai vaaro vaar. ||1|| They lose their lives uselessly; they die, only to be re-born, over and over again. ||1]||
He 3 Il (86-9) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
frat Afsag Afeor fat ow ufeor gsg afs dterg il (86-9, fretea, He 3) jinee satgur sayvi-aa tinee naa-o paa-i-aa boojhhu kar beechaar. Those who serve the True Guru obtain the Name. Reflect on this and understand.
He ANS AY His SA Ya TA USS Il (86-10, frstora, Hs 3) sadaa saa“t sukh man vasai chookai kook pukaar. Eternal peace and joy abide in their minds; they abandon their cries and complaints.
nm 3 ny ute Ho fase Jd] ag Aaet <terg Il (86-10, fidtora, He 3)
aapai no aap khaa-ay man nirmal hovai gur sabdee veechaar.
Their identity consumes their identical identity, and their minds become pure by contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Sod Aafe gs A Has dD ofa ME SfS filmrg III (s6-11, fide, He 3)
naanak sabad ratay say mukat hai har jee-o hayt pi-aar. ||2] |
O Nanak, attuned to the Shabad, they are liberated. They love their Beloved Lord. [21]
uQat Il (86-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs at Ae Hew F Tanfe urs STE I (86-12, faster, ne 3) har kee sayvaa safal hai gurmukh paavai thaa-ay. Service to the Lord is fruitful; through it, the Gurmukh is honored and approved.
fan dfs we fan ag fixe A fe ont fomrfe II (86-12, facto, ne 3)
jis har bhaavai tis gur milai so har naam Dhi-aa-ay.
That person, with whom the Lord is pleased, meets with the Guru, and meditates on the Name of the Lord.
qd Rat ofs ureh afe urfa surfs i (s6-13, fatera, v2 3) gur sabdee har paa-ee-ai har paar laghaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is found. The Lord carries us across.
Hodle fas 5 ufes ues Ser ATE I (86-13, first, 2 3)
manhath kinai na paa-i-o puchhahu vaydaa jaa-ay.
Through stubborn-mindedness, none have found Him; go and consult the Vedas on this.
Soa Tig at Ae A ad faA we dla STE IAOll (s6-13, fate, nH: 3) naanak har kee sayvaa so karay jis la-ay har laa-ay. ||10]| O Nanak, he alone serves the Lord, whom the Lord attaches to Himself. ||10]|
HBa H8 3 Il (86-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aoa A Aa edu fats fees ere nidasE wfar Il (86-14, fdterar, we 3) naanak so sooraa varee-aam jin vichahu dusat ahankaran maari-aa. O Nanak, he is a brave warrior, who conquers and subdues his vicious inner ego.
Tanta aH Ato HOH Asta Il (g6-15, frdtera, He 3) gurmukh naam saalaahi janam savaari-aa. Praising the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Gurmukhs redeem their lives.
wif dur Het HAS AS AG fonsfanr | (g6-15, fdtea, v2 3) aap ho-aa sadaa mukat sabh kul nistaari-aa. They themselves are liberated forever, and they save all their ancestors.
Hofe Afs eorfa any fimrfenr Il (g6-16, fasta, He 3) sohan sach du-aar naam pi-aari-aa. Those who love the Naam look beauteous at the Gate of Truth.
HOHY Hofs mdats Ho fearfsnr Il (g6-16, fdtea, He 3) manmukh mareh aha‘kaar maran vigaarhi-aa. The self-willed manmukhs die in egotism-even their death is painfully ugly.
AS zas Jou fomr aafa fearon il (s6-17, fadtea, 2 3) sabho vartai hukam ki-aa karahi vichaari-aa. Everything happens according to the Lord's Will; what can the poor people do?
MTU SH Bla WAH ferent I (6-17, frdtora, He 3) aaphu doojai lag khasam visaari-aa. Attached to self-conceit and duality, they have forgotten their Lord and Master.
Sod fas ae AS eu AY ferfenr IAI (86-17, fadtera, He 3) naanak bin naavai sabh dukh sukh visaari-aa. ||1]| O Nanak, without the Name, everything is painful, and happiness is forgotten. ||1]|
He 2 Il (86-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
afs us fs on feafeur ffs fess sau gorfemr I (86-18, frdtorar, He 3)
gur poorai har naam dirhaa-i-aa tin vichahu bharam chukaa-i-aa.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me. It has dispelled my doubts from within.
oH on ofa alas wet afe wee Ha feutfenr Il (g6-19, firdtera, He 3)
raam naam har keerat gaa-ee kar chaanan mag dikhaa-i-aa.
I sing the Lord's Name and the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; the Divine Light shines, and now I see the Way.
IeH Hf Sa foe oret nists on sAfeEnt Il (s6-19, fdtera, He 3)
ha-umai maar ayk liv laagee antar naam vasaa-i-aa.
Conquering my ego, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord; the Naam has come to dwell within me.
Ust td TaHst AH Fife o AA ATS SH AfEMr I (87-1, fadtora, He 3) gurmatee jam johi na saakai saachai naam samaa-i-aa.
Following the Guru's Teachings, I cannot be touched by the Messenger of Death. I am absorbed in the True Name.
AS omy orfy eas ast A oe A ote orfeur | (97-1, frdtea, ne 3)
sabh aapay aap vartai kartaa jo bhaavai so naa-ay laa-i-aa.
The Creator Himself is All-pervading everywhere; He links those with whom He is pleased to His Name.
Ho aoa aH Be 3 He fag oe fs ofa AfeMr NI (87-2, fadtoa, He 3)
jan naanak naam la-ay taa jeevai bin naavai khin mar jaa-i-aa. ||2||
Servant Nanak chants the Naam, and so he lives. Without the Name, he would die in an instant. ||2]|
u@at Il (37-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
a fufeor ofs dha fa A Raat cheat fifsmr I (87-3, fadtera, He 3) jo mili-aa har deebaan si-o so sabhnee deebaanee mili-aa. One who is accepted at the Court of the Lord shall be accepted in courts everywhere.
fra Gg ate fsa Go Haug BA a ufo fSS AS Unit Sten II (87-3, fates, He 3) jithai oh jaa-ay tithai oh surkharoo us kai muhi dithai sabh paapee tari-aa. Wherever he goes, he is recognized as honorable. Seeing his face, all sinners are saved.
6A nists ay fours J SH usefant I (87-4, fdtera, He 3)
os antar naam niDhaan hai naamo parvaari-aa.
Within him is the Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Through the Naam, he is exalted.
ag una ag Hat ae fasted As fafemr il (97-4, fadtora, Hu: 3)
naa-O poojee-ai naa-o mannee-ai naa-ay kilvikh sabh hiri-aa.
He worships the Name, and believes in the Name; the Name erases all his sinful mistakes.
frat ony fowrfenr fea nfs fea fefs A omfas afar sfomr 99 (87-5, fdtora, He 3) jinee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa ik man ik chit say asthir jag rahi-aa. ||11]|
Those who meditate on the Name, with one-pointed mind and focused consciousness, remain forever stable in the world. ||11]|
H8a H8 3 Il (87-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
MSH 8 urba TI x Aah ASE Il (87-6, fdtora, ws 3)
aatmaa day-o poojee-ai gur kai sahj subhaa-ay. Worship the Divine, Supreme Soul, with the intuitive peace and poise of the Guru.
MSH S wisn dt uss af a we dt user ute Il (87-6, fidtoa, He 3)
aatmay no aatmay dee parteet ho-ay taa ghar hee parchaa paa-ay.
If the individual soul has faith in the Supreme Soul, then it shall obtain realization within its own home.
WISH NSS o seet Te a ate ASE | (87-7, fadtera, He 3)
aatmaa adol na dol-ee gur kai bhaa-ay subhaa-ay.
The soul becomes steady, and does not waver, by the natural inclination of the Guru's Loving Will.
ad fee AoW 3 vreet Ss He 6 fess WHE II (87-7, fadtea, He 3)
gur vin sahj na aavee lobh mail na vichahu jaa-ay.
Without the Guru, intuitive wisdom does not come, and the filth of greed does not depart from within.
fs ue ofs on ufo eA AS nionfe Stee OTe Il (87-8, fadtea, nH: 3)
khin pal har naam man vasai sabh athsath tirath naa-ay.
If the Lord's Name abides within the mind, for a moment, even for an instant, it is like bathing at all the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Ae HS 3 BAT HS Ba EH STE il (87-8, frstaa, we 3)
sachay mail na lag-ee mal laagai doojai bhaa-ay.
Filth does not stick to those who are true, but filth attaches itself to those who love duality.
ast ufs 3 Cas A Mone Stee STS I (87-9, frdtorar, Hs 3)
Dhotee mool na utrai jay athsath tirath naa-ay.
This filth cannot be washed off, even by bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
HOHU AGH Ad nidardt AF ea wy ANTE II (87-9, fadtea, He 3)
The self-willed manmukh does deeds in egotism; he earns only pain and more pain.
aed He CaS oT shat a Asa Hf AHS NA (87-10, frsterar, we 3)
naanak mailaa oojal taa thee-ai jaa satgur maahi samaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, the filthy ones become clean only when they meet and surrender to the True Guru. ||1]|
He 3 Il (87-10) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY Ba ANSE aed ANSTfEor ATS Il (97-11, fadtera, He 3) manmukh lok samjaa-ee-ai kadahu samjhaa-i-aa jaa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs may be taught, but how can they really be taught?
Hone dorfeur ot as ufent forafs feat& i (97-11, fidtera, v2 3)
manmukh ralaa-i-aa naa ralai pa-i-ai kirat firaa-ay.
The manmukhs do not fit in at all. Because of their past actions, they are condemned to the cycle of reincarnation.
foe os of wo 3 Tet as GE Il (87-12, fists, Hi 3)
liv Dhaat du-ay raah hai hukmee kaar kamaa-ay.
Loving attention to the Lord and attachment to Maya are the two separate ways; all act according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
aaHfe nruat He Hfeor Aafe aAS’et STE Il (87-12, frrdtera, He 3)
gurmukh aapnaa man maari-aa sabad kasvatee laa-ay.
The Gurmukh has conquered his own mind, by applying the Touchstone of the Shabad.
Ho dt ote saat uo dt ofe Aa He dt HfS ANTS I (87-13, fadtera, nH: 3)
man hee naal jhagrhaa man hee naal sath man hee manjh samaa-ay. He fights with his mind, he settles with his mind, and he is at peace with his mind.
HO i fee A od AY Aafe Aas I (87-13, facta, He 3) man jo ichhay so lahai sachai sabad subhaa-ay.
All obtain the desires of their minds, through the Love of the True Word of the Shabad.
nifys on Ae sdbn Tanta arg ate I (87-14, fasta, us 3)
amrit naam sad bhunchee-ai gurmukh kaar kamaa-ay. They drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam forever; this is how the Gurmukhs act.
fee HO fa oct ofe ose WH HON TSE I (87-14, faster, ne 3)
vin manai je horee naal lujh-naa jaasee janam gavaa-ay.
Those who struggle with something other than their own mind, shall depart having wasted their lives.
Hout Hodle Tar AZ AAS AHS Il (87-15, frstera, ve 3)
manmukhee manhath haari-aa koorh kusat kamaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs, through stubborn-mindedness and the practice of falsehood, lose the game of life.
ad usATet Ho fae ofa Ast fos OE Il (97-15, fadtea, ne 3)
gur parsaadee man jinai har saytee liv laa-ay.
Those who conquer their own mind, by Guru's Grace, lovingly focus their attention on the Lord.
Sod Tent AT AHS Hout mre ATE QI (87-16, fidtera, He 3)
naanak gurmukh sach kamaavai manmukh aavai jaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs practice Truth, while the self-willed manmukhs continue coming and going in reincarnation. ||2]|
ust Il (87-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs & AS Hed Ao set ofa Afsag at fea ANH II (97-16, fist, ne 3)
har kay sant sunhu jan bhaa-ee har satgur kee ik saakhee.
O Saints of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, listen, and hear the Lord's Teachings, through the True Guru.
fan ufs aa de uf Hasta fats vfs & fase ait il (97-17, fata, nH: 3)
jis Dhur bhaag hovai mukh mastak tin jan lai hirdai raakhee.
Those who have good destiny pre-ordained and inscribed on their foreheads, grasp it and keep it enshrined in the heart.
dfs uifys ae ASHE SSH Ts avast Aon Best il (87-17, firstoa, we 3)
har amrit kathaa saraysat ootam gur bachnee sehjay chaakhee. Through the Guru's Teachings, they intuitively taste the sublime, exquisite and ambrosial sermon of the Lord.
30 sfeur yarn fifenr nifters fa@ Aan sfe forandt it (87-18, frrstora, os 3)
tah bha-i-aa pargaas miti-aa anDhi-aaraa ji-o sooraj rain kiraakhee.
The Divine Light shines in their hearts, and like the sun which removes the darkness of night, it dispels the darkness of ignorance.
mifene nidied mou fadne A tfimr qoute wm 19211 (87-19, fadtera, He 3)
adisat agochar alakh niranjan so daykhi-aa gurmukh aakhee. ||12||
As Gurmukh, they behold with their eyes the Unseen, Imperceptible, Unknowable, Immaculate Lord. ||12]|
H8q H2 3 Il (87-19) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
yar ct Afsag Ae viuat A fhe BA HE il (ss-1, fidtera, ve 3)
satgur Sayvay aapnaa so sir laykhai laa-ay. Those who serve their True Guru are certified and accepted.
feud ny dete & sofe vfs fee ote I (88-1, fidtoa, He 3)
vichahu aap gavaa-ay kai rahan sach liv laa-ay.
They eradicate selfishness and conceit from within; they remain lovingly absorbed in the True One.
Afsag faat 3 Afes fsa fase HOH TSE Il (g8-1, frdteora, ve 3) satgur jinee na sayvi-o tinaa birthaa janam gavaa-ay. Those who do not serve the True Guru waste away their lives in vain.
aed FH PSH Se A ad aver fags o ATE A (98-2, firdtora, v2 3) naanak jo tis bhaavai so karay kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, the Lord does just as He pleases. No one has any say in this. ||1]|
He 3 Il (88-3) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HO Sarat Sfaur Sarat ATH ANTE Il (98-3, frstera, He 3) man vaykaaree vayrhi-aa vaykaaraa karam kamaa-ay. With the mind encircled by wickedness and evil, people do evil deeds.
en ote nifemrat une Users fs AATE I (88-3, firdtora, H2 3) doojai bhaa-ay agi-aanee poojday dargeh milai sajaa-ay. The ignorant worship the love of duality; in the Lord's Court they shall be punished.
msn &@ urn fas Afsas gs 3 ute il (88-4, frdtora, we 3)
aatam day-o poojee-ai bin satgur boojh na paa-ay.
So worship the Lord, the Light of the soul; without the True Guru, understanding is not obtained.
WY 3uU HAH Ser Asay a oat us ute il (98-4, firdtora, ws 3)
jap tap sanjam bhaanaa satguroo kaa karmee palai paa-ay.
Meditation, penance and austere self-discipline are found by surrendering to the True Guru's Will. By His Grace this is received.
Soa AS Hafs aneat A dfs ave A STS ute QM (88-5, fadtera, He 3)
naanak sayvaa surat kamaavnee jo har bhaavai so thaa-ay paa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, serve with this intuitive awareness; only that which is pleasing to the Lord is approved. ||2||
ust Il (88-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs ofs om Aug Ho Ae fas Ae AY Je fea Tt Il (88-5, fates, ne 3)
har har naam japahu man mayray jit sadaa sukh hovai din raatee.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind; it will bring you eternal peace, day and night.
dfs ofs SH Aug Ho He fas fAnes Als fawfed uy BIST Il (88-6, firdtoa, He 3) har har naam japahu man mayray jit simrat sabh kilvikh paap lahaatee.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind; meditating on it, all sins and misdeeds shall be erased.
dfs ofs SH Aug HO Hd fay Swe Fu sy AS Bld AST Il (88-7, fadtoa, v2 3)
har har naam japahu man mayray jit daalad dukh bhukh sabh leh jaatee.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind; through it, all poverty, pain and hunger shall be removed.
dfs dfs oH Aug Ho He Hfy asHfy US wast I (s8-7, frstora, ne 3) har har naam japahu man mayray mukh gurmukh pareet lagaatee. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind; as Gurmukh, declare your love.
fas ufy ava foftimr ofs avs fe fos nfs an must 119811 (ss-s, fate, He 3)
jit mukh bhaag likhi-aa Dhur saachai har tit mukh naam japaatee. ||13]|
One who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead by the True Lord, chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||13]|
HBa H2 3 Il (88-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag frat o Afes Aafe 3 ats Steg Il (88-9, fidtera, He 3)
satgur jinee na sayvi-o sabad na keeto veechaar.
Those who do not serve the True Guru, and who do not contemplate the Word of the Shabad
nists famre 5 ure firssa d AAs il (ss-9, fidtera, He 3)
antar gi-aan na aa-i-o mirtak hai sansaar.
-spiritual wisdom does not enter into their hearts; they are like dead bodies in the world.
oy u@ants eg ufeur nfs HH SPE wr II (83-10, fadtea, He 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh fayr pa-i-aa mar jammai ho-ay khu-aar.
They go through the cycle of 8.4 million reincarnations, and they are ruined through death and rebirth.
Afsad at Ae A ad fan 6 wef age AE Il (88-11, fadtera, He 3) satgur kee sayvaa so karay jis no aap karaa-ay so-ay. He alone serves the True Guru, whom the Lord Himself inspires to do so.
Afsas fefs on forse 3 acfh uaufs dfE II (ss-11, firdtera, He 3) satgur vich naam niDhaan hai karam paraapat ho-ay. The Treasure of the Naam is within the True Guru; by His Grace, it is obtained.
Afs g3 aa Age fae fsa AST HET fee TE II (g8-12, firdtera, He 3)
sach ratay gur sabad si-o tin sachee sadaa liv ho-ay.
Those who are truly attuned to the Word of the Guru's Shabad-their love is forever True.
Sod fan S HS 3 fees Aofa AN] ALE NI (88-12, factor, He 3)
naanak jis no maylay na vichhurhai sahj samaavai so-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, those who are united with Him shall not be separated again. They merge imperceptibly into God. ||1]|
He 3 Il (88-13)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
AH sagst # sales ATE Il (88-13, firdtora, v2 3) so bhag-utee jo bhagvantai jaanai. One who knows the Benevolent Lord God is the true devotee of Bhagaautee.
Ts USAT ny UES Il (88-13, frdtoa, He 3) gur parsaadee aap pachhaanai. By Guru's Grace, he is self-realized.
Wes ay frag uf wire il (88-13, fidtera, v2 3) Dhaavat raakhai ikat ghar aanai. He restrains his wandering mind, and brings it back to its own home within the self.
Ales He dfs SH SUE Il (98-14, fate, v2 3) jeevat marai har naam vakhaanai. He remains dead while yet alive, and he chants the Name of the Lord.
mA set CsH GE Il (88-14, frtera, v2 3) aisaa bhag-utee utam ho-ay. Such a Bhagaautee is most exalted.
Soa Afs AHS ALE II (g8-14, factors, He 3) naanak sach samaavai so-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, he merges into the True One. ||2||
He 2 Il (88-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
nists Aue saAst TS Il (88-15, fadtoa, ve 3) antar kapat bhag-utee kahaa-ay. He is full of deceit, and yet he calls himself a devotee of Bhagaautee.
undts uUTsqTH ae S US Il (88-15, firdtora, ve 3) pakhand paarbarahm kaday na paa-ay. Through hypocrisy, he shall never attain the Supreme Lord God.
ud feet ad nists HS BS Il (88-15, fidtea, ve 3) par nindaa karay antar mal laa-ay. He slanders others, and pollutes himself with his own filth.
Ts HS Ts Ho at Als F AES I (88-16, firdtora, ws 3) baahar mal Dhovai man kee jooth na jaa-ay. Outwardly, he washes off the filth, but the impurity of his mind does not go away.
HsHats fAG are Fae Il (88-16, frdtora, He 3) satsangat si-o baad rachaa-ay. He argues with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
notes gdb gH ae Tas I (s8-17, fries, 2 3) an-din dukhee-aa doojai bhaa-ay rachaa-ay. Night and day, he suffers, engrossed in the love of duality.
dfs SH 3 US FT AGH AHS Il (s8-17, fdtwa, we 3)
har naam na chaytai baho karam kamaa-ay.
He does not remember the Name of the Lord, but still, he performs all sorts of empty rituals.
uaa fetter A HeEet o AS I (98-17, fretea, He 3) poorab likhi-aa so maytnaa na jaa-ay. That which is pre-ordained cannot be erased.
sod fas Afsagd AS HY o US ISI (88-18, fadtea, He 3) naanak bin satgur sayvay mokh na paa-ay. ||3]|| O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||3]|
ust Il (88-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsag frat fomrfenr A afs & AST Il (ss-18, frdtera, He 3) satgur jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa say karh na savaahee. Those who meditate on the True Guru shall not be burnt to ashes.
Afsag faat fourfeur A fsufs vrurdt il (88-19, fidtora, ve 3) satgur jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa say taripat aghaahee.
Those who meditate on the True Guru are satisfied and fulfilled. Afsasd frat fomrfenr fsa AM Seg Svat Il (s8-19, frdtera, He 3)
satgur jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa tin jam dar naahee. Those who meditate on the True Guru are not afraid of the Messenger of Death.
yar ut fro aG dur furs ofa A Afsae Ust urd Il (s9-1, fadtera, He 3)
jin ka-o ho-aa kirpaal har say satgur pairee paahee. Those upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, fall at the Feet of the True Guru.
fae ma Ga we CxS fe wang UT ATS NAVI (89-1, faetera, He 3)
tin aithai othai mukh ujlay har dargeh paiDhay jaahee. ||14||
Here and hereafter, their faces are radiant; they go to the Lord's Court in robes of honor. ||14||
HX H8 2 Il (89-2) salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
a fia niet o foe A fg tA ote Il (99-2, fadtera, He 2) jo sir saa‘-ee naa nivai so sir deejai daar. Chop off that head which does not bow to the Lord.
sod fan fiias ufo fago act A fire & ais all (99-2, fadtea, ve 2)
naanak jis pinjar meh birhaa nahee so pinjar lai jaar. ||1]| O Nanak, that human body, in which there is no pain of separation from the Lord-take that body and burn it. ||1]|
He U Il (89-3)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Heg gat aoa fete fefs Hof HeMMA II (s9-3, fidtora, 2 5) mundhhu bhulee naankaa fir fir janam mu-ee-aas. Forgetting the Primal Lord, O Nanak, people are born and die, over and over again.
oN o
ASS & SHS Te StH ueMA I2Il (s9-4, facta, ws 5) kastooree kai bholrhai gunday dumm pa-ee-aas. ||2|| Mistaking it for musk, they have fallen into the stinking pit of filth. ||2]|
ust Il (89-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A mit ofa an foment no Ad A Ago Gufs Jan vas Il (99-4, fidtora, He 5) so aisaa har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai man mayray jo sabhnaa upar hukam chalaa-ay. Meditate on that Name of the Lord, O my mind, whose Command rules over all.
A mit ofa any Aub Ho He A vist mBafs we ese I (99-5, fidtera, He 5)
so aisaa har naam japee-ai man mayray jo antee a-osar la-ay chhadaa-ay. Chant that Name of the Lord, O my mind, which will save you at the very last moment.
A mint ofa ou wubt He AS WHO at feHo AS gy TSS Il (99-6, fdtora, ve 5)
SO aisaa har naam japee-ai man mayray jo man kee tarisnaa sabh bhukh gavaa-ay. Chant that Name of the Lord, O my mind, which shall drive out all hunger and desire from your mind.
A gente ony afimr esac fae Sea en]e vfs ust ue I (99-6, fidtera, nH 5)
so gurmukh naam japi-aa vadbhaagee tin nindak dusat sabh pairee paa-ay.
Very fortunate and blessed is that Gurmukh who chants the Naam; it shall bring all slanderers and wicked enemies to fall at his feet.
Sod OH mata Ase S eat Afs are wnat ifs fees WAU (89-7, fadtera, He 5) naanak naam araaDh sabhnaa tay vadaa sabh naavai agai aan nivaa-ay. ||15]|
O Nanak, worship and adore the Naam, the Greatest Name of all, before which all come and bow. ||15||
HBa H28 3 Il (89-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aA ad aafu qeuat His de afsnrta Il (s9-8, frdtora, 8 3)
vays karay kuroop kulkhanee man khotai koorhi-aar.
She may wear good clothes, but the bride is ugly and rude; her mind is false and impure.
fulgd & SE BT VS JAH Ad aWerfa il (99-9, fist, ve 3)
pir kai bhaanai naa chalai hukam karay gaavaar.
She does not walk in harmony with the Will of her Husband Lord. Instead, she foolishly gives Him orders.
qd a Te AVS Afs wy foeseate Il (99-9, fadtea, ns 3)
gur kai bhaanai jo chalai sabh dukh nivaaranhaar.
But she who walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, shall be spared all pain and suffering.
foftimr Afe 3 Reha A ofs fefimr agate Il (89-9, fasta, He 3) likhi-aa mayt na sakee-ai jo Dhur likhi-aa kartaar. That destiny which was pre-ordained by the Creator cannot be erased.
Ho 30 ACU as aS Hae Ud fim Il (89-10, fidtera, He 3) man tan sa-upay kant ka-o sabday Dharay pi-aar.
She must dedicate her mind and body to her Husband Lord, and enshrine love for the Word of the Shabad.
fag oe fas 5 ufemr tug foe stots i (89-10, firstora, nH 3) bin naavai kinai na paa-i-aa daykhhu ridai beechaar. Without His Name, no one has found Him; see this and reflect upon it in your heart.
Sa AT AMES Heat fa Tet franoots NAM (89-11, fdtora, He 3) naanak saa su-aali-o sulakh-nee je raavee sirjanhaar. ||1]| O Nanak, she is beautiful and graceful; the Creator Lord ravishes and enjoys her. ||1]|
He 3 Il (89-12) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hor Hg Tag d fH a 3 fer Sues 5 UG Il (89-12, fade, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh gubaar hai tis daa na disai urvaar na paar.
Attachment to Maya is an ocean of darkness; neither this shore nor the one beyond can be seen.
Hone uifsmrot Hot eu ufse se ofa aH ferta il (s9-12, fidtea, v2 3)
manmukh agi-aanee mahaa dukh paa-iday dubay har naam visaar.
The ignorant, self-willed manmukhs suffer in terrible pain; they forget the Lord's Name and drown.
sea Cis ag ASH aHtefs eH Ste flmrg i (s9-13, firdtora, v2 3)
bhalkay uth baho karam kamaaveh doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar.
They arise in the morning and perform all sorts of rituals, but they are caught in the love of duality.
Afsag Aets nruat sBne Cad urfa il (s9-13, fidtea, vs 3) satgur sayveh aapnaa bha-ojal utray paar. Those who serve the True Guru cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
Soa THY Afs AHS AY OH Ss Os NI (89-14, fidtera, He 3) naanak gurmukh sach samaaveh sach naam ur Dhaar. ||2||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs keep the True Name enshrined in their hearts; they are absorbed into the True One. ||2| |
u@at Il (89-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
of Ate ats Hdmi soufs eA ofa ate il (89-15, firstora, Hi 3)
har jal thal mahee-al bharpoor doojaa naahi ko-ay.
The Lord pervades and permeates the water, the land and the sky; there is no other at all.
ofs nifu ats ad four afsure As ute vefe II (89-15, firdtora, v3 3)
har aap bahi karay ni-aa-o koorhi-aar sabh maar kadho-ay.
The Lord Himself sits upon His Throne and administers justice. He beats and drives out the false-hearted.
Rfsoret afe efsnret ofa aan four atGfe i (9-16, firdtera, He 3)
sachi-aaraa day-ay vadi-aa-ee har Dharam ni-aa-o kee-o-ay.
The Lord bestows glorious greatness upon those who are truthful. He administers righteous justice.
AS dfs at asd Casts fats adta mara af SIGlE Il (s9-16, faster, v2 3) sabh har kee karahu ustat jin gareeb anaath raakh lee-o-i. So praise the Lord, everybody; He protects the poor and the lost souls.
nag At carer at unit as Se PGE AEN (89-17, fadtera, v2 3) jaikaar kee-o dharmee-aa kaa paapee ka-o dand dee-o-i. ||16]| He honors the righteous and punishes the sinners. ||16] |
HBa H8 3 Il (89-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HOHY Hot aHet aouat asta Il (89-18, fidtoa, v2 3) manmukh mailee kaamnee kulkhanee kunaar. The self-willed manmukh, the foolish bride, is a filthy, rude and evil wife.
fug dfsur wis nmsret us used of fimirg Il (99-18, firdtora, He 3) pir chhodi-aa ghar aapnaa par purkhai naal pi-aar. Forsaking her Husband Lord and leaving her own home, she gives her love to another.
fIAa ae 5 Vaet ABEt AT Yas Il (89-19, frstea, He 3) tarisnaa kaday na chuk-ee jaldee karay pookaar. Her desires are never satisfied, and she burns and cries out in pain.
aed fag oe afl grat usafe gst sats AM (9-19, farstora, oH 3)
naanak bin naavai kuroop kusohanee parhar chhodee bhataar. ||1||
O Nanak, without the Name, she is ugly and ungraceful. She is abandoned and left behind by her Husband Lord. ||1]|
Ua co Hg 3 Il (90-1)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Rafe ost Aart Afsag a ate fumrfa il (90-1, fadtera, He 3)
sabad ratee sohaaganee satgur kai bhaa-ay pi-aar.
The happy soul-bride is attuned to the Word of the Shabad; she is in love with the True Guru.
Ret ae fug nmuet Ad Uf fumrfa i (0-1, fidtora, we 3) Sadaa raavay pir aapnaa sachai paraym pi-aar. She continually enjoys and ravishes her Beloved, with true love and affection.
mifs Aries Hedt AaTSst arts i (90-2, fidtera, He 3) at su-aali-o sundree sobhaavantee naar. She is such a loveable, beautiful and noble woman.
saa OTH Aaaet Ht HBsTts i2I1 (90-2, fadtera, He 3) naanak naam sohaaganee maylee maylanhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, through the Naam, the happy soul-bride unites with the Lord of Union. ||2]|
ust II (90-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs sat AS asts CxHats fafs aa afent Il (90-3, fistera, He 3) har tayree sabh karahi ustat jin faathay kaadhi-aa. Lord, everyone sings Your Praises. You have freed us from bondage.
dfs 306 asta AS oHAaTS fafs unt 3 afm Il (90-3, fadtea, He 3) har tuDhno karahi sabh namaskaar jin paapai tay raakhi-aa. Lord, everyone bows in reverence to You. You have saved us from our sinful ways.
of fourfeor ¥ ure ofa aret J FS Ser I (90-4, frstera, we 3) har nimaani-aa too’ maan har daadhee hoo’ too” daadhi-aa. Lord, You are the Honor of the dishonored. Lord, You are the Strongest of the strong.
dfs uidardior wife foes HoHY Hs Afar I (90-4, firstora, He 3) har aha‘kaaree-aa maar nivaa-ay manmukh moorh saaDhi-aa. The Lord beats down the egocentrics and corrects the foolish, self-willed manmukhs.
Ufs sast ef= Senet adte nate 9D I (90-5, frdtera, He 3)
har bhagtaa day-ay vadi-aa-ee gareeb anaathi-aa. ||17]||
The Lord bestows glorious greatness on His devotees, the poor, and the lost souls. []17]|
HBa H28 3 Il (90-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsas a ae A VS faq efsnret est GE II (0-6, firdtoa, He 3) satgur kai bhaanai jo chalai tis vadi-aa-ee vadee ho-ay. One who walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru, obtains the greatest glory.
ofa a ay @3H nfs ZA fe 3 Aa AfE I (0-6, fadtera, He 3) har kaa naam utam man vasai mayt na sakai ko-ay. The Exalted Name of the Lord abides in his mind, and no one can take it away.
fasut ad fan nruet fan act uaufs dE Il (90-7, fata, nH 3) kirpaa karay jis aapnee tis karam paraapat ho-ay. That person, upon whom the Lord bestows His Grace, receives His Mercy.
aoa ATE ASS SA FT Tayfr gs aE Ail (0-7, fastoa, ws 3)
naanak kaaran kartay vas hai gurmukh boojhai ko-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, creativity is under the control of the Creator; how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, realize this! ||1]|
He 3 Il (90-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Sea Ts oH fAat wratamr niofes ats fee 3g Il (90-8, fadtera, He 3)
naanak har naam jinee aaraaDhi-aa an-din har liv taar.
O Nanak, those who worship and adore the Lord's Name night and day, vibrate the String of the Lord's Love.
Hfenr det wAN at faq nidt AHS ATT Il (90-9, fadtera, He 3) maa-i-aa bandee khasam kee tin agai kamaavai kaar. Maya, the maid-servant of our Lord and Master, serves them.
ud ust ate sfaor Jat ASIST ST Il (90-9, firstora, 2 3)
poorai pooraa kar chhodi-aa hukam savaaranhaar.
The Perfect One has made them perfect; by the Hukam of His Command, they are embellished.
ae usAet fafs afer fats ufier He erg Il (90-10, fiadtera, He 3)
gur parsaadee jin bujhi-aa tin paa-i-aa mokh du-aar. By Guru's Grace, they understand Him, and they find the gate of salvation.
HOH JaH & ATSot fSa HS AH HST Il (90-10, fata, He 3)
manmukh hukam na jaannee tin maaray jam jandaar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know the Lord's Command; they are beaten down by the Messenger of Death.
dant frat warfomr feat sfomr sBae AAT I (90-11, firstera, He 3)
gurmukh jinee araaDhi-aa tinee tari-aa bha-ojal sansaar.
But the Gurmukhs, who worship and adore the Lord, cross over the terrifying world- ocean.
Afs nae aat fretfeor ag ym) gHAST 121 (90-11, frstora, ne 3)
sabh a-ugan gunee mitaa-i-aa gur aapay bakhsanhaar. ||2| |
All their demerits are erased, and replaced with merits. The Guru Himself is their Forgiver. ||2||
uQat Il (90-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs at sas" uss ote AS fxs WET Il (90-12, firstea, v2 3) har kee bhagtaa parteet har sabh kichh jaandaa. The Lord's devotees have faith in Him. The Lord knows everything.
dfs Aes ot aet we ofs cen terse | (0-13, fidtera, He 3) har jayvad naahee ko-ee jaan har Dharam beechaardaa. No one is as great a Knower as the Lord; the Lord administers righteous justice.
arat near fa ata AT ardt moet HTseT II (90-13, fidtera, He 3)
kaarhaa andaysaa ki-o keejai jaa naahee aDhram maardaa.
Why should we feel any burning anxiety, since the Lord does not punish without just cause?
Ae Afoa Ag fore unit og ISseT Il (90-14, fadtera, ve 3) sachaa saahib sach ni-aa-o paapee nar haardaa. True is the Master, and True is His Justice; only the sinners are defeated.
Wefod sdsd ad nfs ols sas AS SIE NACI (90-14, fdtera, He 3)
saalaahihu bhagtahu kar jorh har bhagat jan taardaa. ||18]|
O devotees, praise the Lord with your palms pressed together; the Lord saves His humble devotees. ||18]|
HBa H8 3 Il (90-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
nue UISH fife ao nists ser Cfa ofa Il (90-15, firdtora, He 3) aapnay pareetam mil rahaa antar rakhaa ur Dhaar. Oh, if only I could meet my Beloved, and keep Him enshrined deep within my heart!
Wendt A us Ae Ae ag a 3fs fimrfa il (90-15, fidtera, v8 3) Saalaahee so parabh sadaa sadaa gur kai hayt pi-aar. I praise that God forever and ever, through love and affection for the Guru.
Soe fAA sefe ad fs Af we AEt Hos ats NAM (90-16, firstera, He 3)
naanak jis nadar karay tis mayl la-ay saa-ee suhaagan naar. ||1||
O Nanak, that one upon whom He bestows His Glance of Grace is united with Him; such a person is the true soul-bride of the Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (0-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ad Ae 3 ofa ushn A aS sefa age Il (90-17, faster, He 3) gur sayvaa tay har paa-ee-ai jaa ka-o nadar karay-i. Serving the Guru, the Lord is obtained, when He bestows His Glance of Grace.
HEH 3 tes se fomrfenr on Ja Il (90-17, firdtea, v2 3) maanas tay dayvtay bha-ay Dhi-aa-i-aa naam haray. They are transformed from humans into angels, meditating on the Naam, the Name of
the Lord. ICH ufs frerfemig aa a Aafe 3g Il (90-18, frdtera, He 3)
ha-umai maar milaa-i-an gur kai sabad taray. They conquer their egotism and merge with the Lord; they are saved through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Soa Ada AMES sts mruet faut AF Ql (90-18, frrstera, He 3)
naanak sahj samaa-i-an har aapnee kirpaa karay. ||2||
O Nanak, they merge imperceptibly into the Lord, who has bestowed His Favor upon them. ||2]|
ust II (90-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs nruat sats aot sfanret Sursinig il (90-19, frdtera, ve 3) har aapnee bhagat karaa-ay vadi-aa-ee vaykhaali-an. The Lord Himself inspires us to worship Him; He reveals His Glorious Greatness.
ntuat witfu ad ussifs nmy AS wrsnig il (90-19, firdtera, He 3) aapnee aap karay parteet aapay sayv ghaalee-an. He Himself inspires us to place our faith in Him. Thus He performs His Own Service.
uar £4 dfs sast 3 efe mise fag wet sofas | (91-1, fdtera, ve 3)
har bhagtaa no day-ay anand thir gharee bahaali-an. The Lord bestows bliss upon His devotees, and gives them a seat in the eternal home.
unfor 3 3 eet fag safe vfs saa uifs wfemig Il (1-1, fata, He 3)
paapee-aa no na day-ee thir rahan chun narak ghor chaali-an.
He does not give the sinners any stability or place of rest; He consigns them to the depths of hell.
dfs saat 3 Uf fimrg afe nig fanstfanie dell (91-2, fadtea, v2 3)
har bhagtaa no day-ay pi-aar kar ang nistaari-an. ||19]|
The Lord blesses His devotees with His Love; He sides with them and saves them. []19]|
HEX H2 Y Il (91-3)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
gata suet aefeor anfefe us feer we gost Hot af Parts ii 1-3, fdtoa, ws 1) kubuDh doomnee kud-i-aa kasaa-in par nindaa ghat choohrhee muthee kroDh chandaal.
False-mindedness is the drummer-woman; cruelty is the butcheress; slander of others in one's heart is the cleaning-woman, and deceitful anger is the outcast-woman.
ard at fom dha wt ord Foter ats il (91-4, fadtora, ve
kaaree kadhee ki-aa thee-ai jaa‘ chaaray baithee-aa naal.
What good are the ceremonial lines drawn around your kitchen, when these four are seated there with you?
AY HAH adel Ad oes aE AUST Il (91-4, fadteoa, ve
sach sanjam karnee kaaraa‘ naavan naa-o japayhee.
Make Truth your self-discipline, and make good deeds the lines you draw; make chanting the Name your cleansing bath.
aoa Mat SSH At ft unat ufs o Sat AU (91-4, frdtora, ws 1)
naanak agai ootam say-ee je paapaa™ pand na dayhee. ||1||
O Nanak, those who do not walk in the ways of sin, shall be exalted in the world hereafter. ||1]|
He % Il (91-5)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
for dH fomr saer at a ovfe aafe Il (91-5, firstoa, v2 1) ki-aa hans ki-aa bagulaa jaa ka-o nadar karay-i. Which is the swan, and which is the crane? It is only by His Glance of Grace.
A SH SS BST Ad JH ASE Il (91-6, fadtera, He 1) jo tis bhaavai naankaa kaagahu hans karay-i. ||2|| Whoever is pleasing to Him, O Nanak, is transformed from a crow into a swan. ||2||
ust Il (91-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
atst Bsmt ay A dfs ufo mmhy Il (91-6, fadtera, He 1) keetaa lorhee-ai kamm so har peh aakhee-ai. Whatever work you wish to accomplish-tell it to the Lord.
ardq ef nets Afsag Ay AMA II (91-6, fadtora, He 1 kaaraj day-ay savaar satgur sach saakhee-ai. He will resolve your affairs; the True Guru gives His Guarantee of Truth.
Ast Afar foorg nifigs adh it 1-7, frdtea, ve 1) santaa sang niDhaan amrit chaakhee-ai. In the Society of the Saints, you shall taste the treasure of the Ambrosial Nectar.
3 one froges BA at ITH I (91-7, fate, ne 1) bhai bhanjan miharvaan daas kee raakhee-ai. The Lord is the Merciful Destroyer of fear; He preserves and protects His slaves.
woe dfs Te fe ney ys adh QO (1-8, frstoa, He 1) naanak har gun gaa-ay alakh parabh laakhee-ai. ||20|| O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and see the Unseen Lord God. ||20]|
H8a HH 3 Il (91-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
m@ fils ns fsA a ASA Sf wierg Il (91-8, fasta, nH 3) jee-o pind sabh tis kaa sabhsai day-ay aDhaar. Body and soul, all belong to Him. He gives His Support to all.
Soa TsHfa ASha AST AST VST Il (91-9, firdtara, ne 3)
naanak gurmukh sayvee-ai sadaa sadaa daataar. O Nanak, become Gurmukh and serve Him, who is forever and ever the Giver.
J@ sfsoct faq a8 fafs fourfeur afe fedarg il (91-9, firstera, He 3) ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o jin Dhi-aa-i-aa har nirankaar. I am a Sacrifice to those who meditate on the Formless Lord.
Gat a Hu Ae Cus Gar S AS AAS Ad SHAG INA (91-10, fatwa, He 3) onaa kay mukh sad ujlay onaa no sabh jagat karay namaskaar. ||1]| Their faces are forever radiant, and the whole world bows in reverence to them. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (1-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsas fifo Gact set oe fafa uafe we i (1-1, firdtoa, we 3)
satgur mili-ai ultee bha-ee nav niDh kharchi-o khaa-o.
Meeting the True Guru, I am totally transformed; I have obtained the nine treasures to use and consume.
word frat fue safer feats fon wis =A for ate ii (91-11, fates, ve 3)
athaarah siDhee pichhai lagee-aa firan nij ghar vasai nij thaa-ay.
The Siddhis-the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers-follow in my footsteps; I dwell in my own home, within my own self.
Mode Ud Ae eHe Banfs aia foe Ole Il (91-12, fidtea, ns 3)
anhad Dhunee sad vajday unman har liv laa-ay.
The Unstruck Melody constantly vibrates within; my mind is exalted and uplifted-I am lovingly absorbed in the Lord.
Sod dfs sails fsa a ufs ZA fro HASte fof ofe ue NIN (91-12, fidtea, He 3)
naanak har bhagat tinaa kai man vasai jin mastak likhi-aa Dhur paa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, devotion to the Lord abides within the minds of those who have such pre- ordained destiny written on their foreheads. ||2] |
ugat II (91-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
o@ wet ofe ys UAH ot afe & Uf wrfer I (91-13, fidtora, He 3) ha-o dhaadhee har parabh khasam kaa har kai dar aa-i-aa. I am a minstrel of the Lord God, my Lord and Master; I have come to the Lord's Door.
dfs uiefs Hat yors erat Hf fen 1 (91-14, fiesta, v8 3)
har andar sunee pookaar dhaadhee mukh laa-i-aa.
The Lord has heard my sad cries from within; He has called me, His minstrel, into His Presence.
ofs yfeur erat Afe a& fas wate Forfar i (1-14, frdtora, v8 3) har puchhi-aa dhaadhee sad kai kit arath too” aa-i-aa. The Lord called His minstrel in, and asked, "Why have you come here?"
fos teg ae tiene us ats oH fourfenr II (91-15, fdtea, v8 3) nit dayvhu daan da-i-aal parabh har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. "O Merciful God, please grant me the gift of continual meditation on the Lord's Name."
dfs as ofe on merfeor soa Uarfemr QUA AT (91-15, fdtera, He 3)
har daatai har naam japaa-i-aa naanak painaa-i-aa. ||21]|1]| suDhu
And so the Lord, the Great Giver, inspired Nanak to chant the Lord's Name, and blessed him with robes of honor. ||21]|1]||Sudh]|
qe Afsars yrrfe il (91-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fidion acts He a i Sa AMIS a wis eat (1-18) sireeraag kabeer jee-o kaa. ayk su-aan kai ghar gaavnaa Siree Raag, Kabeer Jee: To Be Sung To The Tune Of "Ayk Su-Aan" :
Hoot WSs AS ast ds J fesa' a 3 We fa feo feo meu wes J Il (91-19, fades, sas ate Hf)
jannee jaanat sut badaa hot hai itnaa ko na jaanai je din din avaDh ghatat hai.
The mother thinks that her son is growing up; she does not understand that, day by day, his life is diminishing.
He He afe mifoe os ofs dus dt ANTS TA AI (91-19, fadtera, sas adits Hh
mor mor kar aDhik laad Dhar paykhat hee jamraa-o hasai. ||1]|
Calling him, "Mine, mine", she fondles him lovingly, while the Messenger of Death looks on and laughs. ||1]||
ar x2 MAT Ss Aa Safe ofenr | (92-1, fata, sas adits 7)
aisaa tai‘ jag bharam laa-i-aa. You have misled the world so deeply in doubt.
aA FS Aa Hfor F wear a TIS il (92-1, fadtoa, sas alte Fh kaisay boojhai jab mohi-aa hai maa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. How can people understand You, when they are entranced by Maya? ||1]||Pause| |
ads adie efs fafimr on fes Hafs fose@ Heer Il (92-2, fata, gas ate af) kahat kabeer chhod bikhi-aa ras it sangat nincha-o marnaa. Says Kabeer, give up the pleasures of corruption, or else you will surely die of them.
gHer Fug yal nies Alea arat feo fafa se Ara STS NI (92-2, fadtoa, sas ate af)
rama-ee-aa japahu paraanee anat jeevan banee in biDh bhav saagar tarnaa. ||2]| Meditate on the Lord, O mortal being, through the Word of His Bani; you shall be blessed with eternal life. In this way, shall you cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
21 |
at fq oe ST oat STE Il (92-3, fata, sas ade Ft) jaa’ tis bhaavai taa laagai bhaa-o. As it pleases Him, people embrace love for the Lord,
SoH sere feag ATE Il (92-3, fadtoa, sas aste Hh) bharam bhulaavaa vichahu jaa-ay. and doubt and delusion are dispelled from within.
Cun Aon fame HfS Fret I (92-4, fadteora, gas ate Ff)
upjai sahj gi-aan mat jaagai.
Intuitive peace and poise well up within, and the intellect is awakened to spiritual wisdom.
aa unte nists fee ad SII (92-4, frdtoa, sas aeite Hh)
gur parsaad antar liv laagai. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, the inner being is touched by the Lord's Love. ||3]||
fes Hafs ont HoT Il (92-4, fadtora, sas acta at)
it sangat naahee marnaa. In this association, there is no death.
TaH usts St MAH feet IU THE AT Il (92-5, fates, sas aeits Ff)
hukam pachhaan taa khasmai milnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa.
Recognizing the Hukam of His Command, you shall meet with your Lord and Master. ||1]|Second Pause] |
frdtera fsaee at il (92-5)
sireeraag tarilochan kaa.
Siree Raag, Trilochan:
Hfeor Hg Hf urdeat urst Het Hee 3@ fenfe afeur I (92-5, fadtera, fyBus)
maa-i-aa moh man aaglarhaa paraanee jaraa maran bha-o visar ga-i-aa.
The mind is totally attached to Maya; the mortal has forgotten his fear of old age and death.
acy af faanfs ane fa us wis aofs au| Sa INU (92-6, fadtra, frBus)
kutamb daykh bigsahi kamlaa ji-o par ghar joheh kapat naraa. ||1||
Gazing upon his family, he blossoms forth like the lotus flower; the deceitful person watches and covets the homes of others. ||1]|
va nnfesta mHfs ser i fa wraes H IE 3 ATE Il (92-7, facies, fx8us) doorhaa aa-i-ohi jameh tanaa. tin aaglarhai mai rahan na jaa-ay.
When the powerful Messenger of Death comes, no one can stand against his awesome power.
aet vet wae wife ad Il (92-7, faster, fdus) ko-ee ko-ee saajan aa-ay kahai. Rare, very rare, is that friend who comes and says,
fie He How S west eof i fee AS Dior A Sia sate 19a ToS I (2-8, fata, fZ8uS)
mil mayray beethulaa lai baahrhee valaa-ay. mil mayray rama-ee-aa mai layhi chhadaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
"O my Beloved, take me into Your Embrace! O my Lord, please save me!"||1]|Pause| |
uifoa nifox sar on fare yret HATS Aare U mg safer | (92-9, fidtog, fdas) anik anik bhog raaj bisray paraanee sansaar saagar pai amar bha-i-aa.
Indulging in all sorts of princely pleasures, O mortal, you have forgotten God; you have fallen into the world-ocean, and you think that you have become immortal.
Hfeut Ho sath ard AoW TeTeEs weber i211 (92-9, faster, fesse)
maa-i-aa moothaa chaytas naahee janam gavaa-i-o aalsee-aa. ||2||
Cheated and plundered by Maya, you do not think of God, and you waste your life in laziness. ||2||
fun ura ufa omer urat ofe Aff 3a 3 USA II (92-10, firdtera, feBus)
bikham ghor panth chaalnaa paraanee rav sas tah na parvaysa”.
The path you must walk is treacherous and terrifying, O mortal; neither the sun nor the moon shine there.
Hear Hg sa farfe afeor At sxbrs AAT SI (2-10, fidtra, frBEs)
maa-i-aa moh tab bisar ga-i-aa jaa" tajee-alay sa“saara’. | |3]|
Your emotional attachment to Maya will be forgotten, when you have to leave this world. |[3]|
wig AS His yse Sfeor 3d Udbas cans | (92-11, frdtoa, fy8us)
aaj mayrai man pargat bha-i-aa hai paykhee-alay Dharamraa-o.
Today, it became clear to my mind that the Righteous Judge of Dharma is watching us.
3d Ad US adle Hove fSs nraes H dE 3 ATE ISI (92-12, fadtra, frBus)
tah kar dal karan mahaabalee tin aaglarhai mai rahan na jaa-ay. ||4||
His messengers, with their awesome power, crush people between their hands; I cannot stand against them. ||4]|
Aa Quen ass 3 oT fe Efe asa artes Il (92-12, fadtra, fxBas)
jay ko moo’ updays karat hai taa van tarin rat-rhaa naaraa-inaa.
If someone is going to teach me something, let it be that the Lord is pervading the forests and fields.
Mm at Sum vs fas Wee gels Fevg THe Wl (92-13, frdtoa, f8ss) ai jee too’ aapay sabh kichh jaandaa badat tarilochan raam-ee-aa. ||5||2]| O Dear Lord, You Yourself know everything; so prays Trilochan, Lord. ||5||2]|
Higa sas oats Ae ar il (92-14) sareeraag bhagat kabeer jee-o kaa. Siree Raag, Devotee Kabeer Jee:
MddH SA Hod J Uso ng fas AIS o WET II (02-14, Aiea, sas adits Ft) achraj ayk sunhu ray pandee-aa ab kichh kahan na jaa-ee. Listen, O religious scholar: the One Lord alone is Wondrous; no one can describe Him.
Afs og ae aga fafs Hd fesee Hust wet Al (92-14, Aiwa, sas ate Hh
sur nar gan ganDharab jin mohay taribhavan maykhulee laa-ee. ||1]|
He fascinates the angels, the celestial singers and the heavenly musicians; he has strung the three worlds upon His Thread. ||1||
TH TH node foradt IA I 02-15, Aiwa, sas adits rh raajaa raam anhad kinguree baajai. The Unstruck Melody of the Sovereign Lord's Harp vibrates;
w at fenfe oe fae Oa NU TTS Il (92-15, Aiwa, sas adie Th jaa kee disat naad liv laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
by His Glance of Grace, we are lovingly attuned to the Sound-current of the Naad. ||1]|Pause] |
sot alo fifsor mg visor asa AGA fea ufeur Il (92-16, Aiea, gas adits Fh) bhaathee gagan sinyi-aa ar chunyi-aa kanak kalas ik paa-i-aa.
The Tenth Gate of my crown chakra is the distilling fire, and the channels of the Ida and Pingala are the funnels, to pour in and empty out the golden vat.
faq ufo oe ont mifs foore oA ufo gAS yurfeor QI (92-16, Aiwa, yas ate FH)
tis meh Dhaar chu-ai at nirmal ras meh rasan chu-aa-i-aa. ||2||
Into that vat, there trickles a gentle stream of the most sublime and pure essence of all distilled essences. ||2||
2a FT IS nigu wat dF uss finer AMT I (92-17, Hira, sas ats Hh) ayk jo baat anoop banee hai pavan pi-aalaa saaji-aa. Something wonderful has happened-the breath has become the cup.
ais seo ufo Sa Halt AIT AEG TF TH ISI (92-18, Aiwa, sas adie 7H) teen bhavan meh ayko jogee kahhu kavan hai raajaa. ||3]| In all the three worlds, such a Yogi is unique. What king can compare to him? ||3]||
MA fame yafent usHSH ag ade dfor TS | (92-18, Aiwa, sas ats fh
aisay gi-aan pargati-aa purkhotam kaho kabeer rang raataa.
This spiritual wisdom of God, the Supreme Soul, has illuminated my being. Says Kabeer, I am attuned to His Love.
MGT Pol AS SdH JHrst HS TH GATES HST NII (92-19, Hira, sas asta
a-or dunee sabh bharam bhulaanee man raam rasaa-in maataa. ||4]|3]| All the rest of the world is deluded by doubt, while my mind is intoxicated with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||4]|3]|
Ua «3
Aiea wat sas set AE at i (93-1) sareeraag banee bhagat baynee jee-o kee. Sree Raag, The Word Of Devotee Baynee Jee:
udfamt & wife azar il (93-1, Aiea, Het Ie) pehri-aa kai ghar gaavnaa. To Be Sung To The Tune Of "Pehray":
qe Afsas ure II (93-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
J 3d ds Ase AS wes Cau fomrs fos ar Il (93-2, Atera, Fat HE)
ray nar garabh kundal jab aachhat uraDh Dhi-aan liv laagaa.
O man, when you were coiled in the cradle of the womb, upside-down, you were absorbed in meditation.
frase fiifs ue He ot uifofofA Sa mifamre A ara I (93-2, Hea, Fat HE)
mirtak pind pad mad naa ahinis ayk agi-aan so naagaa.
You took no pride in your perishable body; night and day were all the same to you- you lived unknowing, in the silence of the void.
3 fee AHS ane Ho ey wa fes nifoe uAfant II (93-3, Hea, Fat A)
tay din sammal kasat mahaa dukh ab chit aDhik pasaari-aa.
Remember the terrible pain and suffering of those days, now that you have spread out the net of your consciousness far and wide.
aes efs figs 43m urfemr 38 aaafe Hog farrfenr Ail (93-4, Htear, Bet HIB)
garabh chhod mitar mandal aa-i-aa ta-o narhar manhu bisaari-aa. ||1] |
Leaving the womb, you entered this mortal world; you have forgotten the Lord from your mind. ||1]|
fefs usstefoar Hfsor FS aea aHfs gf Bar il (93-4, Htra, Fat Ae)
fir pachhutaavhigaa moorhi-aa too’ kavan kumat bharam laagaa.
Later, you will regret and repent-you fool! Why are you engrossed in evil-mindedness and skepticism?
ofS an ardt aH ufs whoa Ae feed meso NU TIS I (93-5, Alora, Fat HB) chayt raam naahee jam pur jaahigaa jan bichrai anraaDhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Think of the Lord, or else you shall be led to the City of Death. Why are you wandering around, out of control? ||1||Pause| |
we fade fee oA oar faa fas vfs fmm I (03-6, Hoa, Fat He)
baal binod chind ras laagaa khin khin mohi bi-aapai.
You play like a child, craving sweets; moment by moment, you become more entangled in emotional attachment.
3A fia no nifys faa unit 3B us yare ASU Il (93-6, Hoa, Fat FH)
ras mis mayDh amrit bikh chaakhee ta-o panch pargat santaapai.
Tasting good and bad, you eat nectar and then poison, and then the five passions appear and torture you.
Ay su Aan éefs Afas HAs OH OH o Mafomr II 63-7, Aiwa, Fat HB)
jap tap sanjam chhod sukarit mat raam naam na araaDhi-aa.
Abandoning meditation, penance and self-restraint, and the wisdom of good actions, you do not worship and adore the Lord's Name.
Csfoor an are Hfs oat 38 utfe Aafs af afar QI (93-7, Afra, Fat FHP) uchhli-aa kaam kaal mat laagee ta-o aan sakat gal baa™Dhi-aa. ||2||
You are overflowing with sexual desire, and your intellect is stained with darkness; you are held in the grip of Shakti's power. ||2||
3ge 3q us for ny Aofs Ag MUR, 6 UEtfEMr II (93-8, Atra, Set AB)
tarun tayj par tari-a mukh joheh sar apsar na pachhaani-aa.
In the heat of youthful passion, you look with desire upon the faces of other men's wives; you do not distinguish between good and evil.
Cous of no fay 38 uy US B Ustfonr I (93-9, Hoa, Fat HE)
unmat kaam mahaa bikh bhoolai paap punn na pachhaani-aa.
Drunk with sexual desire and other great sins, you go astray, and do not distinguish between vice and virtue.
AS Hufs efe feg ne aefmer on foe 3 dfeur i (03-9, Alva, Fat HE)
sut sampat daykh ih man garbi-aa raam ridai tay kho-i-aa.
Gazing upon your children and your property, your mind is proud and arrogant; you cast out the Lord from your heart.
Wied HIS Wher He 3B 3E sa ufe HoH feafenr SII (93-10, Hea, Bet HE)
avar marat maa-i-aa man tolay ta-o bhag mukh janam vigo-i-aa. ||3]||
When others die, you measure your own wealth in your mind; you waste your life in the pleasures of the mouth and sexual organs. ||3]|
Usd AA AA 3 Us AUS uss at aret Il (93-11, Hoa, Fat He
pundar kays kusam tay Dha-ulay sapat paataal kee banee.
Your hair is whiter than the jasmine flower, and your voice has grown feeble, as if it comes from the seventh underworld.
&ve Anfs fa ae ost ST amy uefa Hart Il (93-11, Ato, Fat FH)
lochan sarmeh buDh bal naathee taa kaam pavas maaDhaanee.
Your eyes water, and your intellect and strength have left you; but still, your sexual desire churns and drives you on.
a 3 fae set nfs wefh ofemr ane AHSST II (03-12, Hea, Fat re)
taa tay bikhai bha-ee mat paavas kaa-i-aa kamal kumlaanaa.
And so, your intellect has dried up through corruption, and the lotus flower of your body has wilted and withered.
weats afs afs fxs vats 36 ue ussret ISI (93-12, Atoa, dat HB)
avgat baan chhod mitar mandal ta-o paachhai pachhutaanaa. ||4]|
You have forsaken the Bani, the Word of the Immortal Lord, in this mortal world; in the end, you shall regret and repent. ||4||
foaet ta ofs ufs Cur we aes sot FF Il (93-13, Hora, det AE)
nikutee dayh daykh Dhun upjai maan karat nahee boojhai.
Gazing upon the tiny bodies of your children, love has welled up within your heart; you are proud of them, but you do not understand.
Woy Ad Hea UE AGS SIS As 3 AS Il (93-13, wha, Bet He) laalach karai jeevan pad kaaran lochan kachhoo na soojhai. You long for the dignity of a long life, but your eyes can no longer see anything.
war 3H Cfsur ne Udt wie vitae @ AUTeT I (93-14, Alea, Bet FB
thaakaa tayj udi-aa man pankhee ghar aa‘gan na sukhaa-ee.
Your light has gone out, and the bird of your mind has flown away; you are no longer welcome in your own home and courtyard.
Yat Ad Hod J sasT Hde Hats fats uret Null (93-14, Ato, Set re) baynee kahai sunhu ray bhagtahu maran mukat kin paa-ee. ||5] | Says Baynee, listen, O devotee: who has ever attained liberation after such a death?
HSI] firstaa il (93-15)
sireeraag. Sree Raag:
Sot Hot Hat Sct iss AAT I (93-15, Aiwa, ofeeA) tohee mohee mohee tohee antar kaisaa. You are me, and I am You-what is the difference between us?
aod afex AS Sda AAT MAUI (93-16, Hoa, sheen)
kanak katik jal tarang jaisaa. ||1]| We are like gold and the bracelet, or water and the waves. ||1||
AG U THB UU ada MT MGS Il (93-16, Alva, oeeA) ja-o pai ham na paap karantaa ahay anantaa. If I did not commit any sins, O Infinite Lord,
ufss ues OH AA TST NU TIS I (93-16, Aiwa, sfeeA) patit paavan naam kaisay huntaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. how would You have acquired the name, 'Redeemer of sinners’? ||1]|Pause]|
3H A ofea nied nisermt i (93-17, Aira, ofeerA) tum" jo naa-ik aachhahu antarjaamee. You are my Master, the Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts.
ys 3 Ae Woln AS SF AMMA N12 3-17, Awa, ae) parabh tay jan jaaneejai jan tay su-aamee. ||2|| The servant is known by his God, and the Lord and Master is known by His servant.
21 | Adtg wrad Ha eters Ug Il 93-18, Aiea, afer)
sareer aaraaDhai mo ka-o beechaar dayhoo. Grant me the wisdom to worship and adore You with my body.
SH AH VS AHSTS SS SI (93-18, Ato, sfeerA) ravidaas sam dal samjhaavai ko-oo. ||3]|| O Ravi Daas, one who understands that the Lord is equally in all, is very rare. ||3]|
uar tg
TH HS Bue we I HIS 8 (94-1) raag maajh cha-upday ghar 1 mehlaa 4 Raag Maajh, Chau-Padas, First House, Fourth Mehl:
qe Asan aes usy forse fares nieve Heals oral AS aT YATE I (94-2) ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. The Name Is Truth. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying, Beyond Birth, Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
dfs ofa an Ht ofe Hfe atfemr I (94-4, Hs, He 4) har har naam mai har man bhaa-i-aa. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
zasrat dfs on famrfenr | (94-4, urs, u8 4) vadbhaagee har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. By great good fortune, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
afs us ofs on fafa uret & feaer Tents 3S FIG UA (94-4, ws, we 4)
gur poorai har naam siDh paa-ee ko virlaa gurmat chalai jee-o. ||1||
The Perfect Guru has attained spiritual perfection in the Name of the Lord. How rare are those who follow the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|
H dfs ofa wag fen Sfe us Il (94-5, ns, He 4) mai har har kharach la-i-aa bann palai. I have loaded my pack with the provisions of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Aa urs Auret Het arf TSH Il (94-5, os, He 4) mayraa paraan sakhaa-ee sadaa naal chalai. The Companion of my breath of life shall always be with me.
afs us fs on feafenr afa faaee fe ae us FIG IN (94-6, ws, we 4) gur poorai har naam dirhaa-i-aa har nihchal har Dhan palai jee-o. ||2|| The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me. I have the Imperishable
Treasure of the Lord in my lap. ||2]|
dfs fs AWE Hat UISH TEM II (4-6, ws, us 4) har har sajan mayraa pareetam raa-i-aa. The Lord, Har, Har, is my Best Friend; He is my Beloved Lord King.
aet nfs fare AS ure Aterfer I (4-7, os, us 4)
ko-ee aan milaavai mayray paraan jeevaa-i-aa.
If only someone would come and introduce me to Him, the Rejuvenator of my breath of life.
JG ofa o Aor fag Fe Ui Hate Sd afa BS AIG SI (94-7, ws, He 4) ha-o reh na sakaa bin daykhay pareetamaa mai neer vahay veh chalai jee-o. ||3]| I cannot survive without seeing my Beloved. My eyes are welling up with tears. ||3]|
Afsag fey Hat ares AUTet Il (94-8, ws, He 4) satgur mitar mayraa baal sakhaa-ee. My Friend, the True Guru, has been my Best Friend since I was very young.
J afo 6 Hat fas Sa Ast Het Il (94-8, ws, He 4) ha-o reh na sakaa bin daykhay mayree maa-ee. I cannot survive without seeing Him, O my mother!
dfs MG faur agg TT HSI We SSA Tia UG us MIS ISNA (94-9, Hs, He 4)
har jee-o kirpaa karahu gur maylhu jan naanak har Dhan palai jee-o. ||4]|1]|
O Dear Lord, please show Mercy to me, that I may meet the Guru. Servant Nanak gathers the Wealth of the Lord's Name in his lap. ||4]|1]|
HS HIS 8 Il (94-9)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
HOHES HF HS So YTAT Il (94-9, ws, He 4) maDhusoodan mayray man tan paraanaa. The Lord is my mind, body and breath of life.
JG ate fig FA MST & AAT Il (94-10, ws, He 4) ha-o har bin doojaa avar na jaanaa. I do not know any other than the Lord.
aet Ane He fs eserait H ofe ys fimre eA AE IAI (94-10, ws, He 4)
ko-ee sajan sant milai vadbhaagee mai har parabh pi-aaraa dasai jee-o. ||1||
If only I could have the good fortune to meet some friendly Saint; he might show me the Way to my Beloved Lord God. ||1||
JG Ho 36 Vat ates sTaret Il (94-11, 115, He 4) ha-o man tan khojee bhaal bhaalaa-ee. I have searched my mind and body, through and through.
fag fimirar Uisny fires ASt Het I (94-11, os, He 4) ki-o pi-aaraa pareetam milai mayree maa-ee. How can I meet my Darling Beloved, O my mother?
fife AsHafs da cAret fefs Hafs fs ys SA AE NH (4-12, ws, He 4)
mil satsangat khoj dasaa-ee vich sangat har parabh vasai jee-o. ||2||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I ask about the Path to God. In that Congregation, the Lord God abides. ||2||
Aa fimirg ulsy Afsag TSH | (94-12, ws, ue 4) mayraa pi-aaraa pareetam satgur rakhvaalaa. My Darling Beloved True Guru is my Protector.
JH Maa ce agg yfsurer i (94-13, wes, He 4) ham baarik deen karahu partipaalaa. I am a helpless child-please cherish me.
Aa Hs fus gg Afsag us as AS ffs ane fear AIS W3i (4-13, ws, we 4)
mayraa maat pitaa gur satgur pooraa gur jal mil kamal vigsai jee-o. ||3]|
The Guru, the Perfect True Guru, is my Mother and Father. Obtaining the Water of the Guru, the lotus of my heart blossoms forth. ||3]|
H fae aa 2a Ste 5 MS I (94-14, ws, He 4) mai bin gur daykhay need na aavdi. Without seeing my Guru, sleep does not come.
Hd Ho 3fe Fea aa fags Bare] I (94-14, 115, ne 4) mayray man tan vaydan gur birahu lagaavai. My mind and body are afflicted with the pain of separation from the Guru.
dfs ofs efor agg ae Hed AS Soa as ffs sar HIG NNN (4-15, ws, He 4)
har har da-i-aa karahu gur maylhu jan naanak gur mil rahsai jee-o. ||4||2||
O Lord, Har, Har, show mercy to me, that I may meet my Guru. Meeting the Guru, servant Nanak blossoms forth. ||4]|2]|
Ue cu HS HIS 8 Il (95-1)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
dfs we ust of TE TEMA Il (95-1, ws, ne 4) har gun parhee-ai har gun gunee-ai. Read of the Lord's Glories and reflect upon the Lord's Glories.
dfs ofs om ae fas AEM I (5-1, Hs, He 4) har har naam kathaa nit sunee-ai. Listen continually to the Sermon of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fife nsHafs ofs ae we wa sGne vse Sdht FIG NAN (95-1, ws, He 4)
mil satsangat har gun gaa-ay jag bha-ojal dutar taree-ai jee-o. ||1||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you shall cross over the treacherous and terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|
me Adt dfs H® ATT Il (95-2, ws, He 4) aa-o sakhee har mayl karayhaa. Come, friends, let us meet our Lord.
AS YtSH at A SE AST" I (95-2, ws, us 4) mayray pareetam kaa mai day-ay sanayhaa. Bring me a message from my Beloved.
Ae faz mer A oisy set H eA afe saad AG QI (95-3, ws, He 4)
mayraa mitar sakhaa so pareetam bhaa-ee mai dasay har narharee-ai jee-o. ||2]|
He alone is a friend, companion, beloved and brother of mine, who shows me the way to the Lord, the Lord of all. ||2]|
Hat Fea Ts TT US AE Il (95-3, os, ws 4) mayree baydan har gur pooraa jaanai. My illness is known only to the Lord and the Perfect Guru.
JC of o Hat fas SH SHS Il (95-4, ns, He 4) ha-o reh na sakaa bin naam vakhaanay. I cannot continue living without chanting the Naam.
H m@ug xz AA ag ud H afs afs at Sudha AS Sil (5-4, ws, He 4)
mai a-ukhaDh mantar deejai gur pooray mai har har naam uDhree-ai jee-o. ||3]|| So give me the medicine, the Mantra of the Perfect Guru. Through the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am saved. |[3]|
JH Mga ce Afsad ATES I (95-5, ws, ws 4) ham chaatrik deen satgur sarnaa-ee. I am just a poor song-bird, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru,
dfs afs oH ge yfe uret I (95-5, ws, ns 4) har har naam boond mukh paa-ee. who has placed the Drop of Water, the Lord's Name, Har, Har, in my mouth.
dfs w@fafa TH AG & HIS Ae BSA AG fas HdbH AIG IVS (5-5, ws, He 4)
har jalniDh ham jal kay meenay jan naanak jal bin maree-ai jee-o. ||4||3]|
The Lord is the Treasure of Water; I am just a fish in that water. Without this Water, servant Nanak would die. ||4]||3]|
HS HIS 8 Il (95-6)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
dfs Ae AS fo AT SET II (95-6, ws, He 4) har jan sant milhu mayray bhaa-ee. O servants of the Lord, O Saints, O my Siblings of Destiny, let us join together!
Aa ofs ys SAT H ge Barret I (95-7, ws, ne 4) mayraa har parabh dashu mai bhukh lagaa-ee. Show me the way to my Lord God-I am so hungry for Him!
Het Few ufs Aarites ws fife afs canis Hg StA AI UA (95-7, ws, we 4) mayree sarDhaa poor jagjeevan daatay mil har darsan man bheejai jee-o. ||1|| Please reward my faith, O Life of the World, O Great Giver. Obtaining the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my mind is fulfilled. ||1]|
ffs AsHfa sat afs set il 95-8, ws, H: 4) mil satsang bolee har banee. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I chant the Bani of the Lord's Word.
dfs of aa He His Srat Il (95-8, 11S, He 4) har har kathaa mayrai man bhaanee. The Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
ofa fs vifqs ofe nfs ae fife Afsas nifys uth AIG HQH (95-9, ws, He 4)
har har amrit har man bhaavai mil satgur amrit peejai jee-o. ||2||
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, is so sweet to my mind. Meeting the True Guru, I drink in this Ambrosial Nectar. ||2| |
essa ofa Hafs uefa il (95-9, ws, we 4)
vadbhaagee har sangat paavahi. By great good fortune, the Lord's Congregation is found,
sadte afk ser urefs i (95-10, ws, Hs 4) bhaagheen bharam chotaa khaaveh. while the unfortunate ones wander around in doubt, enduring painful beatings.
fag Sar ASH 5 Be feo Hafs HS SdH AE SBN (95-10, ws, He 4)
bin bhaagaa satsang na labhai bin sangat mail bhareejai jee-o. ||3]|
Without good fortune, the Sat Sangat is not found; without this Sangat, people are stained with filth and pollution. ||3]|
H one fog Aates fumirds i 5-11, 15, He 4) mai aa-ay milhu jagjeevan pi-aaray. Come and meet me, O Life of the World, my Beloved.
dfs of oH efeur ufs WS I (95-11, ws, Hs 4) har har naam da-i-aa man Dhaaray. Please bless me with Your Mercy, and enshrine Your Name, Har, Har, within my mind.
aanfs an Hor nfs afer Ae BSA OTH Ho StH ATE ISIN (95-11, ws, He 4) gurmat naam meethaa man bhaa-i-aa jan naanak naam man bheejai jee-o. | |4||4| | Through the Guru's Teachings, the Sweet Name has become pleasing to my mind. Servant Nanak's mind is drenched and delighted with the Naam. ||4||4]|
HS HIS 8 Il (95-12)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ad fomrg sts oA dfs urfenr Ih (95-12, ws, He 4)
har gur gi-aan har ras har paa-i-aa.
Through the Guru, I have obtained the Lord's spiritual wisdom. I have obtained the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
Ho dfs da as ofs aA Ure I (95-13, ws, He 4)
man har rang raataa har ras pee-aa-i-aa.
My mind is imbued with the Love of the Lord; I drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
dfs ofa an ufy ofa ofe sat Ho ofs aff |fs efs uBet AMIS NA (5-13, +s, He 4) har har naam mukh har har bolee man har ras tul tul pa-udaa jee-o. ||1]|
With my mouth, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; my mind is filled to overflowing with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||
weg ASH ales Hore I (95-14, ws, He 4) aavhu sant mai gal maylaa-ee-ai. Come, O Saints, and lead me to my Lord's Embrace.
Ae Utsu at H wer AaTehat  (95-14, ws, ue 4) mayray pareetam kee mai kathaa sunaa-ee-ai. Recite to me the Sermon of my Beloved.
dfs & HS fog Ho tat A Teaet Hfa Ber HIG NIN (95-15, ws, He 4)
har kay sant milhu man dayvaa jo gurbaanee mukh cha-udaa jee-o. ||2||
I dedicate my mind to those Saints of the Lord, who chant the Word of the Guru's Bani with their mouths. ||2]|
zsaat ofa AS firefemr II (95-15, Ws, He 4) vadbhaagee har sant milaa-i-aa. By great good fortune, the Lord has led me to meet His Saint.
afs us ofs om uf ufemr i (95-16, ws, Hs 4) gur poorai har ras mukh paa-i-aa. The Perfect Guru has placed the Sublime Essence of the Lord into my mouth.
sade Afsag odt ufeor Houy aes Fat fofs ue AIG WS (5-16, ws, 2 4) bhaagheen satgur nahee paa-i-aa manmukh garabh joonee nit pa-udaa jee-o. ||3]| The unfortunate ones do not find the True Guru; the self-willed manmukhs continually endure reincarnation through the womb. ||3]|
nifty efenris cfenr yfs ardt i (95-17, ws, He 4) aap da-i-aal da-i-aa parabh Dhaaree. God, the Merciful, has Himself bestowed His Mercy.
H@ JGH faftmr As foerdt il (95-17, ws, He 4) mal ha-umai bikhi-aa sabh nivaaree. He has totally removed the poisonous pollution of egotism.
Sod Je ude fefs aifmr afs Se Tonfa ABS HIG giUll (95-18, Hs, He 4) naanak hat patan vich kaa‘-i-aa har lai‘day gurmukh sa-udaa jee-o. ||4][5]| O Nanak, in the shops of the city of the human body, the Gurmukhs buy the merchandise of the Lord's Name. ||4]|5]|
HS HIS 8 Il (95-18)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
JG ae afee afe on forrest I (95-18, Ws, He 4)
ha-o gun govind har naam Dhi-aa-ee.
I meditate on the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and the Name of the Lord.
fife Hafs ufo on SATEH II (95-19, Hs, He 4) mil sangat man naam vasaa-ee. Joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, the Name comes to dwell in the mind.
ofe ys mam midiad Amit fife Afsare ofs oA ats AE WAN (95-19, ns, ne 4)
har parabh agam agochar su-aamee mil satgur har ras keechai jee-o. ||1]|
The Lord God is our Lord and Master, Inaccessible and Unfathomable. Meeting the True Guru, I enjoy the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||
Yat tEé
U6 U6 dfs Ao fats ofs ys AST I (96-1, ws, He 4) Dhan Dhan har jan jin har parabh jaataa. Blessed, blessed are the humble servants of the Lord, who know the Lord God.
afte ust HS dfs at AST Il (96-1, Hs, He 4) jaa-ay puchhaa jan har kee baataa. I go and ask those humble servants about the Mysteries of the Lord.
ure H@eT Hie fs cer ffs ofs we ofs aA UtS ATG MQM (96-2, +, 2 4)
paav malovaa mal mal Dhovaa mil har jan har ras peechai jee-o. ||2||
I wash and massage their feet; joining with the humble servants of the Lord, I drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||2||
Afsag as on featfemr Il (96-2, 15, nH 4) satgur daatai naam dirhaa-i-aa. The True Guru, the Giver, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
Tso TI PIAS UTE I (96-3, ws, us 4) vadbhaagee gur darsan paa-i-aa. By great good fortune, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
nifts 3A Ag uifys aot afe us vifys Ste AG SI (6-3, ws, Hs 4)
amrit ras sach amrit bolee gur poorai amrit leechai jee-o. ||3]|
The True Essence is Ambrosial Nectar; through the Ambrosial Words of the Perfect Guru, this Amrit is obtained. ||3]]|
dfs AsHafs AS use frost I (96-4, us, H8 4) har satsangat sat purakh milaa-ee-ai. O Lord, lead me to the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and the true beings.
ffs AsHafs afs ony fame i (6-4, us, H2 4) mil satsangat har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Joining the Sat Sangat, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
Sod dfs aa Hat Hie sat aenfs afe of udtd ME isnEl (96-5, ws, He 4) naanak har kathaa sunee mukh bolee gurmat har naam pareechai jee-o. ||4||6|| O Nanak, I listen and chant the Lord's Sermon; through the Guru's Teachings, I am
fulfilled by the Name of the Lord. ||4]|6]]|
HS HIS 8 Il (96-5)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
weg Se SH fog fimrdior | (96-6, ws, He 4) aavhu bhainay tusee milhu pi-aaree-aa. Come, dear sisters-let us join together.
a Ae ulsy 2A fA a IG dr Il (96-6, ws, 8 4) jo mayraa pareetam dasay tis kai ha-o vaaree-aa. I am a Sacrifice to the one who tells me of my Beloved.
ffs HsHafs oo ofs ANE JC Afsag fees unretor AE INU (96-6, 15, He 4)
mil satsangat laDhaa har sajan ha-o satgur vitahu ghumaa-ee-aa jee-o. ||1]|
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have found the Lord, my Best Friend. I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru. ||1||
Ad Ad Sut 3g ST AMM I (96-7, ws, us 4) jah jah daykhaa tah tah su-aamee. Wherever I look, there I see my Lord and Master.
3 ufe ule afer nisarmt Il (96-8, ws, 3 4) too ghat ghat ravi-aa antarjaamee. You are permeating each and every heart, O Lord, Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts.
afs us ofs ote ferieor 38 Afsas fees Fe Shor AS MQM (96-8, Hs, 43 4) gur poorai har naal dikhaali-aa ha-o satgur vitahu sad vaari-aa jee-o. ||2]|
The Perfect Guru has shown me that the Lord is always with me. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2]|
Sa ues Het AS Sat AS Sar xfs Aare Il (96-9, +15, He 4)
ayko pavan maatee sabh aykaa sabh aykaa jot sabaa-ee-aa.
There is only one breath; all are made of the same clay; the light within all is the same.
As fear Afs zas fats fats o amet fan ct goretor I (96-9, ws, He 4)
sabh ikaa jot vartai bhin bhin na ral-ee kisai dee ralaa-ee-aa.
The One Light pervades all the many and various beings. This Light intermingles with them, but it is not diluted or obscured.
ad usAret fea sedt urfenr 3G Afsas fees zatfenr AIG SII (96-10, ws, He 4) gur parsaadee ik nadree aa-i-aa ha-o satgur vitahu vataa-i-aa jee-o. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, I have come to see the One. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||3]|
Ae Soa FS nifys aret il (96-11, ws, ue 4) jan naanak bolai amrit banee. Servant Nanak speaks the Ambrosial Bani of the Word.
Tata? & Hfs fumirdt svat | (96-11, ws, Hz 4) gursikhaa™ kai man pi-aaree bhaanee. It is dear and pleasing to the minds of the GurSikhs.
Quen ad ag Afsag us ag Afsag usCuardor AG NSN (6-12, Hs, He 4) updays karay gur satgur pooraa gur satgur par-upkaaree-aa jee-o. ||4||7]|
The Guru, the Perfect True Guru, shares the Teachings. The Guru, the True Guru, is Generous to all. ||4]|7]|
HS Beue HIG VES SF Il (96-12, ws, v8 4) sat cha-upday mahlay cha-uthay kay. Seven Chau-Padas Of The Fourth Mehl. ||
HS HIS u Bue We 4 Il (96-14) maajh mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1. Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
HI HS BS TS CIAS ST Il (6-15, ws, v2 5) mayraa man lochai gur darsan taa-ee. My mind longs for the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
fasu ad wfsa at foniret il (96-15, ns, H8 5) bilap karay chaatrik kee ni-aa-ee. It cries out like the thirsty song-bird.
fgur a Gad AMS o mre fag Bane As fimrd FI IAN (96-15, ws, He 5)
tarikhaa na utrai saa“t na aavai bin darsan sant pi-aaray jee-o. ||1]|
My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace, without the Blessed Vision of the Beloved Saint. ||1||
IG ust He ufs unret ae vane AS fimrd HIG NAN TIC Il (96-16, ws, v8 5)
ha-o gholee jee-o ghol ghumaa-ee gur darsan sant pi-aaray jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the Blessed Vision of the Beloved Saint Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
Sov HY Ase HG AoA Ofs aet Il (96-17, Ws, He 5) tayraa mukh suhaavaa jee-o sahj Dhun banee. Your Face is so Beautiful, and the Sound of Your Words imparts intuitive wisdom.
fag dur ea Afsauret Il (96-17, 15, v8 5) chir ho-aa daykhay saaringpaanee. It is so long since this rainbird has had even a glimpse of water.
Uo Aen Aa S Sfhor Ae An] HIS Has AI QI (96-18, os, HE 5) Dhan so days jahaa too” vasi-aa mayray sajan meet muraaray jee-o. ||2]| Blessed is that land where You dwell, O my Friend and Intimate Divine Guru. ||2]|
JG ust 0G ufs upret ag ANE HIS HaTS AIG NA TIS I (96-18, v5, H2 5)
ha-o gholee ha-o ghol ghumaa-ee gur sajan meet muraaray jee-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice, I am forever a sacrifice, to my Friend and Intimate Divine Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
fea wet 3 fires a afera FS Il (96-19, 1s, ne 5)
ik gharhee na miltay taa kalijug hotaa.
When I could not be with You for just one moment, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga dawned for me.
gfe afe fish finn sa sas Il (96-19, ws, H8 5) hun kad milee-ai pari-a tuDh bhagvantaa. When will I meet You, O my Beloved Lord?
Uuat to Hfo dfs o fea ate 5 ure fag Fa ae vaard ATG SI (97-1, Ws, He 5) mohi rain na vihaavai need na aavai bin daykhay gur darbaaray jee-o. ||3]|
I cannot endure the night, and sleep does not come, without the Sight of the Beloved Guru's Court. ||3]|
JG wat ME ufs unret fon AS Te veas AIG NAN TIS I 97-1, ws, He 5)
ha-o gholee jee-o ghol ghumaa-ee tis sachay gur darbaaray jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to that True Court of the Beloved Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
aa dot ats Hs ferfemr i 97-2, ws, He 5) bhaag ho-aa gur sant milaa-i-aa. By good fortune, I have met the Saint Guru.
yg vifaarat we ufos urfemi il (97-3, 175, He 5) parabh abhinaasee ghar meh paa-i-aa. I have found the Immortal Lord within the home of my own self.
Az Adt US BAS fess Ao SSA SA SHS AIG ISI (97-3, ws, He 5)
sayv karee pal chasaa na vichhurhaa jan naanak daas tumaaray jee-o. ||4| |
I will now serve You forever, and I shall never be separated from You, even for an instant. Servant Nanak is Your slave, O Beloved Master. ||4]|
JG ust He ufs unet Ae area BA SHS AIG I TTS NAUICH (97-4, ws, He 5)
ha-o gholee jee-o ghol ghumaa-ee jan naanak daas tumaaray jee-o. rahaa-o. ||1||8]| I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice; servant Nanak is Your slave, Lord.
| |Pause||1||8]|
SdH HS HIG UY Il (97-4)
raag maajh mehlaa 5. Raag Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
A of3 Ade fas SO ANT Il (97-4, ws, HB 5) saa rut suhaavee jit tuDh samaalee. Sweet is that season when I remember You.
A aM Ader A Scat wrest Il (97-5, 11, we 5) so kamm suhaylaa jo tayree ghaalee. Sublime is that work which is done for You.
A fee qoe fas fee 5 sor Asa x VSI AME AU (97-5, ws, Hs 5) so ridaa suhaylaa jit ridai too’ vuthaa sabhnaa kay daataaraa jee-o. ||1]| Blessed is that heart in which You dwell, O Giver of all. ||1]|
3 AST Atfys BY THT Il (97-6, 475, He 5) too” saajhaa saahib baap hamaaraa. You are the Universal Father of all, O my Lord and Master.
58 fafa 3d mr] FSS Il (97-6, ws, ne 5) na-o niDh tayrai akhut bhandaaraa. Your nine treasures are an inexhaustible storehouse.
fan 3 ef w fgufs were Aet sas SHS AS MQM (97-6, ws, Hs 5)
jis too’ deh so taripat aghaavai so-ee bhagat tumaaraa jee-o. ||2]|
Those unto whom You give are satisfied and fulfilled; they become Your devotees, Lord. ||2||
AS & MTA Sot FST Il (97-7, ws, nw 5) sabh ko aasai tayree baithaa. All place their hopes in You.
we we nists SI FS" il (97-7, ws, He 5) ghat ghat antar too‘hai vuthaa. You dwell deep within each and every heart.
AS WStes Aetets J far 3 ferfs aoe AMG Sil (97-8, ws, we 5) sabhay saajheevaal sadaa-in too™ kisai na diseh baahraa jee-o. ||3]| All share in Your Grace; none are beyond You. ||3]|
3 uma genfa vats asfete il (97-8, ws, Hs 5) too” aapay gurmukh mukat karaa-ihi. You Yourself liberate the Gurmukhs;
3 omy Houfa Aafh s]etefs Il 7-9, os, 2 5) too" aapay manmukh janam bhavaa-ihi. You Yourself consign the self-willed manmukhs to wander in reincarnation.
Sod UA 3d afssd AT Sa Uw CATT AG ISIC (97-9, +5, He 5) naanak daas tayrai balihaarai sabh tayraa khayl dasaahraa jee-o. ||4]|2]|9|| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to You; Your Entire Play is self-evident, Lord. ||4]|2||9]|
HTS HIG U Il (97-10)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
WOE SH Ala AIS Il (97-10, ws, He 5) anhad vaajai sahj suhaylaa. The Unstruck Melody resounds and resonates in peaceful ease.
Rafe wise Ad AS AT Il (97-10, ws, Hs 5) Sabad anand karay sad kaylaa. I rejoice in the eternal bliss of the Word of the Shabad.
Hon Fe uf St wet wns Su Aetanr AS WA (97-10, ws, He 5)
sahj gufaa meh taarhee laa-ee aasan ooch savaari-aa jee-o. ||1||
In the cave of intuitive wisdom I sit, absorbed in the silent trance of the Primal Void. I have obtained my seat in the heavens. ||1]|
fefs fiufa mré fata Hfo mirfemr i) (97-11, ws, He 5)
fir ghir apunay garih meh aa-i-aa.
After wandering through many other homes and houses, I have returned to my own home,
A Sater ASt ufenr | (97-11, ws, v2 5) jo lorheedaa so-ee paa-i-aa. and I have found what I was longing for.
fgufs wurfe sfoor 3 Hag afs nase use feurfour AG HQ (97-12, Ws, He 5) taripat aghaa-ay rahi-aa hai santahu gur anbha-o purakh dikhaari-aa jee-o. ||2]| I am satisfied and fulfilled; O Saints, the Guru has shown me the Fearless Lord God.
21 |
WM TH MM Balt i (97-12, Hs, v2 5) aapay raajan aapay logaa. He Himself is the King, and He Himself is the people.
wif fagaret mm Sar il (97-13, ws, He 5) aap nirbaanee aapay bhogaa. He Himself is in Nirvaanaa, and He Himself indulges in pleasures.
nm sufs ad Ag fonret AS gat aa yorfar AIG USI (97-13, ws, Hs 5) aapay takhat bahai sach ni-aa-ee sabh chookee kook pukaari-aa jee-o. ||3]| He Himself sits on the throne of true justice, answering the cries and prayers of all.
[I3I|
ag fsor Ht Sd afar Il 97-14, Hs, He 5) jayhaa dithaa mai tayho kahi-aa. As I have seen Him, so have I described Him.
fA 3H urfenr fafs se wfomr Il (97-14, us, He 5) tis ras aa-i-aa jin bhayd lahi-aa. This Sublime Essence comes only to one who knows the Mystery of the Lord.
nat fs fret wy ufeor AS area fea urrfenr HIE IISNSNIOI (97-14, Hs, He 5) jotee jot milee sukh paa-i-aa jan naanak ik pasaari-aa jee-o. ||4||3||10]|
His light merges into the Light, and he finds peace. O servant Nanak, this is all the Extension of the One. ||4]|3]|10]|
HTS HIG U Il (97-15)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
fas ufs fufs Ao gatfemr I (97-15, ws, He 5) jit ghar pir sohaag banaa-i-aa. That house, in which the soul-bride has married her Husband Lord
faz wie wate Hares arfeur | (97-16, 11s, Hz 5) tit ghar sakhee-ay mangal gaa-i-aa. -in that house, O my companions, sing the songs of rejoicing.
woe fade fss ufs Aofs Hoe af frovdt AIG All (97-16, ws, He 5)
anad binod titai ghar soheh jo Dhan kant sigaaree jee-o. ||1]|
Joy and celebrations decorate that house, in which the Husband Lord has adorned His soul-bride. ||1||
AT qeest AT essrefs Il (97-17, Ws, Hz 5) saa gunvantee saa vadbhaagan. She is virtuous, and she is very fortunate;
uszest Hteefs Aavafe 1 (097-17, ws, ue 5)
putarvantee seelvant sohagan.
she is blessed with sons and tender-hearted. The happy soul-bride is loved by her Husband.
guefs AT Ruts froufs A oe xs fimrdst AS QU (97-17, ws, we 5) roopvant saa sugharh bichkhan jo Dhan kant pi-aaree jee-o. ||2|| She is beautiful, wise, and clever. That soul-bride is the beloved of her Husband Lord.
21 |
modets At UTS Il (97-18, HS, He 5) achaarvant saa-ee parDhaanay. She is well-mannered, noble and distinguished.
AS fHarg ae f3A famrs Il 07-18, ws, H2 5) sabh singaar banay tis gi-aanay. She is decorated and adorned with wisdom.
AH awest A Asaet A fufs & df Herc AE NSH (7-18, ws, He 5)
saa kulvantee saa sabhraa-ee jo pir kai rang savaaree jee-o. ||3]|
She is from a most respected family; she is the queen, adorned with the Love of her Husband Lord. ||3]||
HfoHt f3A at ATE B AES Il (97-19, 7s, He 5) mahimaa tis kee kahan na jaa-ay. Her glory cannot be described;
a fufe Afs wet nifar we i (97-19, 23, 2 5) jo pir mayl la-ee ang laa-ay. she melts in the Embrace of her Husband Lord.
var tt fag ATG SI aH nidigs Ho atea UN AS HE susAall (98-1, 13, He 5) thir suhaag var agam agochar jan naanak paraym saaDhaaree jee-o. ||4||4||11]|
Her marriage is eternal; her Husband is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible. O Servant Nanak, His Love is her only Support. ||4||4]|11]|
HTS HIG U Il (98-1)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
UAS YAS TIAS BS Il (98-2, ws, He 5) khojat khojat darsan chaahay. I have searched and searched, seeking the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
ats 33 Yo FS Mead Il (98-2, wes, He 5) bhaat bhaat ban ban avgaahay. I travelled through all sorts of woods and forests.
fosae Aeae dfs af Ha aet 3 HE nfs fore FIG NAN (8-2, ws, He 5)
nirgun sargun har har mayraa ko-ee hai jee-o aan milaavai jee-o. ||1]|
My Lord, Har, Har, is both absolute and related, unmanifest and manifest; is there anyone who can come and unite me with Him? ||1]|
ue AAS fasas Hfy formirer Il (98-3, HTS, He 5) khat saasat bichrat mukh gi-aanaa. People recite from memory the wisdom of the six schools of philosophy;
um fea Stee ferret il (98-3, ws, x2 5)
poojaa tilak tirath isnaanaa.
they perform worship services, wear ceremonial religious marks on their foreheads, and take ritual cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
fozet aa oTAS wears fee ufo AHS & TS AIG NH (98-4, ws, He 5)
niviee karam aasan cha-oraaseeh in meh saa‘t na aavai jee-o. ||2]|
They perform the inner cleansing practice with water and adopt the eighty-four Yogic postures; but still, they find no peace in any of these. ||2||
miok Fae AS AU SU Il (98-4, ws, vs 5) anik barakh kee-ay jap taapaa. They chant and meditate, practicing austere self-discipline for years and years;
Teo At TISt SIMS Il (98-5, HS, Hs 5) gavan kee-aa Dhartee bharmaataa. they wander on journeys all over the earth;
fea fue fase nfs o ure Halt sufs safe Cfo we AMG ISI (98-5, Hs, He 5)
ik khin hirdai saa‘t na aavai jogee bahurh bahurh uth Dhaavai jee-o. ||3]|
and yet, their hearts are not at peace, even for an instant. The Yogi rises up and goes out, over and over again. ||3||
afa fasur xfs Arg firerfemr II (98-6, 3, He 5) kar kirpaa mohi saaDh milaa-i-aa. By His Mercy, I have met the Holy Saint.
HO 36 Ase Ulen ufer I (8-6, 173, H2 5)
man tan seetal Dheeraj paa-i-aa.
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed; I have been blessed with patience and composure.
us mifsent sfhor we stats ofs Has aaa ae AIG ISNUNAI (98-6, ws, Hs 5) parabh abhinaasee basi-aa ghat bheetar har mangal naanak gaavai jee-o. ||4||5||12]| The Immortal Lord God has come to dwell within my heart. Nanak sings the songs of joy to the Lord. ||4|[5||12]|
HS HIG U Il (98-7)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
UTSAIH mMUsUT FST I (98-7, us, He 5) paarbarahm aprampar dayvaa. The Supreme Lord God is Infinite and Divine;
WG Mdiss MIB MST Il (98-8, HTS, He 5) agam agochar alakh abhayvaa. He is Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, Invisible and Inscrutable.
ae efeors dure afte ofs fomres aanfi ast AIS 9 Cs-s, Hs, He 5)
deen da-i-aal gopaal gobindaa har Dhi-aavahu gurmukh gaatee jee-o. ||1||
Merciful to the meek, Sustainer of the World, Lord of the Universe-meditating on the Lord, the Gurmukhs find salvation. ||1]|
ToHfy HOHeS feHSTs Il (98-9, Hs, 42 5) gurmukh maDhusoodan nistaaray. The Gurmukhs are emancipated by the Lord.
aanfa Hatt fare HIS Il (98-9, Hs, H8 5) gurmukh sangee krisan muraaray. The Lord Krishna becomes the Gurmukh's Companion.
efenrs eHeg dente usa Jaz fas 5 TSH AS NN (98-9, ws, He 5) da-i-aal damodar gurmukh paa-ee-ai horat kitai na bhaatee jee-o. ||2|| The Gurmukh finds the Merciful Lord. He is not found any other way. ||2]|
fadardt AAS fossa il (98-10, 13, He 5) nirhaaree kaysav nirvairaa. He does not need to eat; His Hair is Wondrous and Beautiful; He is free of hate.
ate Aa A x UAfT UT I (98-10, ws, Hs 5) kot janaa jaa kay poojeh pairaa. Millions of people worship His Feet.
aenty frase wa a afs afs Het sas feast FIG SI (8-10, +5, nH 5)
gurmukh hirdai jaa kai har har so-ee bhagat ikaatee jee-o. ||3]|
He alone is a devotee, who becomes Gurmukh, whose heart is filled with the Lord, Har, Har. |]3]|
MHU PIAS BAZ wns Il (98-11, ws, He 5) amogh darsan bay-ant apaaraa. Forever fruitful is the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; He is Infinite and Incomparable.
es HHdg Adt ets Il (98-11, HS, Hs 5) vad samrath sadaa daataaraa. He is Awesome and All-powerful; He is forever the Great Giver.
aanfa on aruba fsa sd afs asa feast west AIG nenéngail (93-12, ws, ne 5) gurmukh naam japee-ai tit taree-ai gat naanak virlee jaatee jee-o. ||4||6||13]|
As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and you shall be carried across. O Nanak, rare are those who know this state! ||4]|6||13]|
HTS HIG U Il (98-13)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
afot agar fest Sart il (98-13, ws, Hz 5) kahi-aa karnaa ditaa lainaa. As You command, I obey; as You give, I receive.
asta Maran Sq HST Il (98-13, HTS, He 5) gareebaa anaathaa tayraa maanaa. You are the Pride of the meek and the poor.
AS fas Sd Sd He filmes Sat aeals a afs wet AIG NU (98-13, os, w8 5) sabh kichh too“hai too‘hai mayray pi-aaray tayree kudrat ka-o bal jaa-ee jee-o. ||1|| You are everything; You are my Beloved. I am a sacrifice to Your Creative Power.
[1
ae Oss aS TT Il (98-14, 175, He 5) bhaanai ujharh bhaanai raahaa. By Your Will, we wander in the wilderness; by Your Will, we find the path.
ae dfs ae Tanfy Wes I (98-14, ws, He 5) bhaanai har gun gurmukh gaavaahaa. By Your Will, we become Gurmukh and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
se SoH se Ag Aol AS fag A TATET ATS NN (98-15, +s, we 5)
bhaanai bharam bhavai baho joonee sabh kichh tisai rajaa-ee jee-o. ||2||
By Your Will, we wander in doubt through countless lifetimes. Everything happens by Your Will. ||2]|
ot A Hay 3 a fiat Il (98-15, ws, Hs 5) naa ko moorakh naa ko si-aanaa. No one is foolish, and no one is clever.
Zs AS fas Sa SST Il (98-16, ws, He 5) vartai sabh kichh tayraa bhaanaa. Your Will determines everything;
WOH Midd Sis wrarst Sct atHfS age o wet FIG SI (8-16, Hs, He 5)
agam agochar bay-ant athaahaa tayree keemat kahan na jaa-ee jee-o. ||3]| You are Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, Infinite and Unfathomable. Your Value cannot be expressed. ||3]|
we Hse at Sg furs i (98-17, 1s, He 5) khaak santan kee dayh pi-aaray. Please bless me with the dust of the Saints, O my Beloved.
wife ufsor ofs 3d ws | (8-17, ws, He 5) aa-ay pa-i-aa har tayrai du-aarai. I have come and fallen at Your Door, O Lord.
ZING UNS HS nue ara free AaTest AIG IsIDNASI (98-17, Ws, He 5)
darsan paykhat man aaghaavai naanak milan subhaa-ee jee-o. ||4||7||14|| Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is fulfilled. O Nanak, with natural ease, I merge into Him. ||4||7||14]|
HTS HIG U Il (98-18)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
eu se a fenfa we I (8-18, 175, H2 5) dukh taday jaa visar jaavai. They forget the Lord, and they suffer in pain.
ou fenmy ag fafa we Il (98-18, Hs, v2 5) bhukh vi-aapai baho biDh Dhaavai. Afflicted with hunger, they run around in all directions.
fangs oH Het Hoe fan te cto efenrar AE NA (98-19, +S, He 5) simrat naam sadaa suhaylaa jis dayvai deen da-i-aalaa jee-o. ||1]|
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, they are happy forever. The Lord, Merciful to the meek, bestows it upon them. ||1]|
Afsag Ha" SST AHS Il (98-19, Hs, He 5) satgur mayraa vad samrathaa. My True Guru is absolutely All-powerful.
Ua ie
Ale AHS 3S AST TY BET Il (99-1, ws, we 5)
jee-ay samaalee taa sabh dukh lathaa. When I dwell upon Him in my soul, all my sorrows depart.
fos da aet 3G uta orf ag yfsurer FIG II (99-1, ws, v2 5) chintaa rog ga-ee ha-o peerhaa aap karay partipaalaa jee-o. ||2]| The sickness of anxiety and the disease of ego are cured; He Himself cherishes me.
[121] afaax etait JG AS fae Har I (99-2, ws, He 5)
baarik vaa‘gee ha-o sabh kichh mangaa. Like a child, I ask for everything.
Ne)
ae Sfe adt us Fa Il (99-2, ws, ue 5) dayday tot naahee parabh rangaa. God is Bountiful and Beautiful; He never comes up empty.
udt U UY aos Host de efenre auras AIG SII (99-2, ws, He 5)
pairee pai pai bahut manaa-ee deen da-i-aal gopaalaa jee-o. ||3]|
Again and again, I fall at His Feet. He is Merciful to the meek, the Sustainer of the World. ||3]|
IG afeadt AfSaT UT I (99-3, ws, HE 5) ha-o balihaaree satgur pooray. I am a Sacrifice to the Perfect True Guru,
fafe sae ae Aas AT Il (99-3, ws, nz 5) jin banDhan kaatay saglay mayray. who has shattered all my bonds.
fase on @ fone ate aaa df grr AE SICH (9-4, Hs, He 5)
hirdai naam day nirmal kee-ay naanak rang rasaalaa jee-o. ||4]|8]|15]|
With the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in my heart, I have been purified. O Nanak, His Love has imbued me with nectar. ||4]|8]|15]|
HTS HIG U Il (99-4)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
BS Tues Vfenies Jats i (99-4, us, ue 5) laal gopaal da-i-aal rangeelay. O my Love, Sustainer of the World, Merciful, Loving Lord,
Mss aste Ins adfes il (99-5, ws, nz 5) gahir gambheer bay-ant govinday. Profoundly Deep, Infinite Lord of the Universe,
Gz ners auis Homi fins frufe 7 Het FIG NA (99-5, ws, HF 5)
ooch athaah bay-ant su-aamee simar simar ha-o jeevaa™ jee-o. ||1]|
Highest of the High, Unfathomable, Infinite Lord and Master: continually remembering You in deep meditation, I live. ||1]|
zu SH fous mS Il (99-6, ws, He 5) dukh bhanjan niDhaan amolay. O Destroyer of pain, Priceless Treasure,
foss@ faded niarg mis Il (99-6, 175, H2 5) nirbha-o nirvair athaah atolay. Fearless, free of hate, Unfathomable, Immeasurable,
mS Hots wget HS Ho fAHSS Se stet AIS MQM (99-6, ws, He 5)
akaal moorat ajoonee sambhou man simrat thandhaa theevaa” jee-o. ||2||
of Undying Form, Unborn, Self-illumined: remembering You in meditation, my mind is filled with a deep and profound peace. ||2||
Het Halt ofa Sar dura il (99-7, ws, vs 5) Sadaa sangee har rang gopaalaa. The Joyous Lord, the Sustainer of the World, is my constant Companion.
Gz ate ag yfsurer il (99-7, ws, nH 5) ooch neech karay partipaalaa. He cherishes the high and the low.
oy sAtes Ho fgustee aanfe nifys utet AIG Si (99-7, ws, ue 5)
naam rasaa-in man tariptaa-in gurmukh amrit peevaa™ jee-o. ||3]|
The Nectar of the Name satisfies my mind. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]]|
efy afa filmed sa fomret Il (99-8, HT, v8 5) dukh sukh pi-aaray tuDh Dhi-aa-ee. In suffering and in comfort, I meditate on You, O Beloved.
Sa AMIS TT S uret Il (99-8, ws, He 5) ayh sumat guroo tay paa-ee. I have obtained this sublime understanding from the Guru.
aod at Us So Sas oie sa wuts udtet AS UsNtNIEl (9-9, rs, Hs 5) naanak kee Dhar too‘hai thaakur har rang paar pareevaa’ jee-o. ||4]|9}|16]|
You are Nanak's Support, O my Lord and Master; through Your Love, I swim across to the other side. ||4]|9]|16] |
HTS HIG U Il (99-10)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Uo A eo fas A Afsag fixfemr It (99-10, ws, He 5) Dhan so vaylaa jit mai satgur mili-aa. Blessed is that time when I meet the True Guru.
He@ PIAS 6S US Shani | (99-10, ws, ue 5) safal darsan naytar paykhat tari-aa. Gazing upon the Fruitful Vision of His Darshan, I have been saved.
Ud Hes VA us war Ufs A GE Arar AIG UA (99-10, ws, we 5) Dhan moorat chasay pal gharhee-aa Dhan so o-ay sanjogaa jee-o. ||1|| Blessed are the hours, the minutes and the seconds-blessed is that Union with Him.
[21
Ben ads Ho fesHS IMT Il (99-11, +5, He 5) udam karat man nirmal ho-aa. Making the effort, my mind has become pure.
ofa Hrafa ses FH Aarer afer | (99-11, ws, us 5)
har maarag chalat bharam saglaa kho-i-aa. Walking on the Lord's Path, my doubts have all been cast out.
on fours Afsag Hefenr fife Te AAS Far AG iM (99-12, 7s, Hs 5)
naam niDhaan satguroo sunaa-i-aa mit ga-ay saglay rogaa jee-o. ||2||
The True Guru has inspired me to hear the Treasure of the Naam; all my illness has been dispelled. ||2||
nists safe Sdt aret i (99-13, ws, v3 5) antar baahar tayree banee. The Word of Your Bani is inside and outside as well.
au urfy aet 3 wrfy Surat Il (99-13, 75, v8 5) tuDh aap kathee tai aap vakhaanee. You Yourself chant it, and You Yourself speak it.
afs afoor Ag Sa Sa neg 3 act dfear AE Si (99-13, ws, He 5) gur kahi-aa sabh ayko ayko avar na ko-ee ho-igaa jee-o. ||3]|| The Guru has said that He is One-All is the One. There shall never be any other. ||3]|
wifys oA dfs aa 3 uber it (99-14, us, ne 5) amrit ras har gur tay pee-aa. I drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Essence from the Guru;
dfs Uses BH SHS Shor Il (99-14, ws, ve 5) har painan naam bhojan thee-aa. the Lord's Name has become my clothing and food.
ofy da oth SH SHA OS Boa ald Sar AE IsIIONIDII (99-14, ws, Hs 5)
naam rang naam choj tamaasay naa-o naanak keenay bhogaa jee-o. ||4||10||17]|| The Name is my delight, the Name is my play and entertainment. O Nanak, I have made the Name my enjoyment. ||4||10]|17]|
HTS HIG U Il (99-15)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Hae Hao ufo zAs fea Hia@ il (99-15, ns, v8 5) Sagal santan peh vasat ik maa‘ga-o. I beg of all the Saints: please, give me the merchandise.
ase fost He fSnrarG i (99-16, ws, He 5) kara-o binantee maan ti-aaga-o. I offer my prayers-I have forsaken my pride.
ata ate Wet wy edit ty Ass at Gs AE UA (9-16, os, He 5)
vaar vaar jaa-ee lakh varee-aa dayh santan kee Dhooraa jee-o. ||1]||
I am a sacrifice, hundreds of thousands of times a sacrifice, and I pray: please, give me the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1]|
3H BS SH uaE faars Il (99-17, ws, He 5) tum daatay tum purakh biDhaatay. You are the Giver, You are the Architect of Destiny.
3H AH Ae’ AYES II (99-17, Hs, He 5) tum samrath sadaa sukh-daatay. You are All-powerful, the Giver of Eternal Peace.
AS & SH Ut S FINS MAG ATT THI YS AG MM (99-17, ws, we 5) sabh ko tum hee tay varsaavai a-osar karahu hamaaraa pooraa jee-o. ||2|| You bless everyone. Please bring my life to fulfillment. ||2||
Zante Sd SSH YSIS Il (99-18, ns, He 5) darsan tayrai bhavan puneetaa. The body-temple is sanctified by the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan,
MSH as faa fsar dt AIST Il (99-18, ws, H8 5) aatam garh bikham tinaa hee jeetaa. and thus, the impregnable fort of the soul is conquered.
3H US 3H use fas JO ASS MST o AT AS SI (9-19, ws, HE 5)
tum daatay tum purakh biDhaatay tuDh jayvad avar na sooraa jee-o. ||3]|
You are the Giver, You are the Architect of Destiny. There is no other warrior as great as You. |[3]|
ust 9oo
3 Hse at He Hf walt | 00-1, ws, w3 5) rayn santan kee mayrai mukh laagee. I applied the dust of the feet of the Saints to my face.
eons faort aafa misrait i (100-1, us, us 5) durmat binsee kubuDh abhaagee. My evil-mindedness disappeared, along with my misfortune and false-mindedness.
Ae ufe aff ad Te we soa faor aT AM usnIaUAcil (100-1, ws, Hs 5)
sach ghar bais rahay gun gaa-ay naanak binsay kooraa jee-o. ||4||11]|18]|
I sit in the true home of my self; I sing His Glorious Praises. O Nanak, my falsehood has vanished! ||4]|11||18]|
HTS HIG U Il (100-2)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
feng atdt SFS SS Il (100-2, ws, He 5) visar naahee ayvad daatay. I shall never forget You-You are such a Great Giver!
ate fasur sae Afar IS i (100-2, H7s, He 5) kar kirpaa bhagtan sang raatay. Please grant Your Grace, and imbue me with the love of devotional worship.
feon df= fa su fomret Sg we dfs ager AIG IAI (100-3, +5, He 5) dinas rain ji-o tuDh Dhi-aa-ee ayhu daan mohi karnaa jee-o. ||1]| If it pleases You, let me meditate on You day and night; please, grant me this gift!
[211 Het nidt ASfs AHTEt I Co0-3, Hs, He 5)
maatee anDhee surat samaa-ee. Into this blind clay, You have infused awareness.
AS fxs chor senor ArT Il (100-4, us, v8 5) sabh kichh dee-aa bhalee-aa jaa-ee. Everything, everywhere which You have given is good.
woe fase dH SHA SU oS A dat AIG NM (100-4, ws, He 5)
anad binod choj tamaasay tuDh bhaavai so honaa jee-o. ||2]|
Bliss, joyful celebrations, wondrous plays and entertainment-whatever pleases You, comes to pass. ||2]|
fan ot fest As fee BST Il (100-5, ws, He 5) jis daa ditaa sabh kichh lainaa. Everything we receive is a gift from Him
este nifys SAS YET Il (100-5, ws, He 5) chhateeh amrit bhojan khaanaa. -the thirty-six delicious foods to eat,
AA Aust ASS uss" AIH Aw Ja aga™ AE ISI 00-5, Hs, He 5) sayj sukhaalee seetal pavnaa sahj kayl rang karnaa jee-o. ||3|| cozy beds, cooling breezes, peaceful joy and the experience of pleasure. ||3]|
AW afd din fas fersfa ardt it (00-6, ws, n2 5) saa buDh deejai jit visrahi naahee. Give me that state of mind, by which I may not forget You.
AW xfs an fas so fomret i 00-6, us, v2 5) saa mat deejai jit tuDh Dhi-aa-ee. Give me that understanding, by which I may meditate on You.
AA ATA 3d Te Wet Ge GHA Td BIST AS USNIVUAEN (100-6, ws, nH 5)
Saas Saas tayray gun gaavaa ot naanak gur charnaa jee-o. ||4||12]|19]| I sing Your Glorious Praises with each and every breath. Nanak takes the Support of the Guru's Feet. ||4||12]|19]|
HTS HIG U Il (100-7)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
frefs Wade SI JAH FAT Il (100-7, us, He 5) sifat saalaahan tayraa hukam rajaa-ee. To praise You is to follow Your Command and Your Will.
A famrg fomrg F 3a stet II 100-8, +5, He 5) so gi-aan Dhi-aan jo tuDh bhaa-ee. That which pleases You is spiritual wisdom and meditation.
At FY A Us ME sre aS ys fara AG UA (00-8, ws, H8 5)
so-ee jap jo parabh jee-o bhaavai bhaanai poor gi-aanaa jee-o. ||1]|
That which pleases God is chanting and meditation; to be in harmony with His Will is perfect spiritual wisdom. ||1||
wifys on Sa Ret ae i A Afse 3d fs SS I (100-9, ns, ne 5)
amrit naam tayraa so-ee gaavai. jo saahib tayrai man bhaavai.
He alone sings Your Ambrosial Naam, who is pleasing to Your Mind, O my Lord and Master.
3 AS H AS SHS AS Afoa HS HAT ATG III (100-9, 27s, He 5)
too” santan kaa sant tumaaray sant saahib man maanaa jee-o. ||2||
You belong to the Saints, and the Saints belong to You. The minds of the Saints are attuned to You, O my Lord and Master. ||2]|
3 A306 at ats yfsurer il (100-10, ws, 12 5) too” santan kee karahi partipaalaa. You cherish and nurture the Saints.
Hz wots SH Afar aus | (100-10, us, v8 5) sant khayleh tum sang gopaalaa. The Saints play with You, O Sustainer of the World.
wud AS 3g ud flmrd 3 A3s & ya AME ISI (100-10, ws, nH 5) apunay sant tuDh kharay pi-aaray too santan kay paraanaa jee-o. ||3]| Your Saints are very dear to You. You are the breath of life of the Saints. ||3] |
8a H3a A AT HS ATHS Il (100-11, ws, He 5) un santan kai mayraa man kurbaanay. My mind is a sacrifice to those Saints who know You,
fae 3 WS A BO Hf BTS II (100-11, os, w8 5) jin too’ jaataa jo tuDh man bhaanay. and are pleasing to Your Mind.
fs & Af Ae AY ufeur ofs oA Soa feufs mera HIE BNASIOll (100-12, ws, He 5) tin kai sang sadaa sukh paa-i-aa har ras naanak taripat aghaanaa jee-o. ||4||13||20||
In their company I have found a lasting peace. Nanak is satisfied and fulfilled with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||4]|13]|20]|
HTS HIG U Il (100-13)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl
3 Fofefa aH rts SHS I (100-13, #3, 2 5) too’ jalniDh ham meen tumaaray. : You are the Ocean of Water, and I am Your fish.
37 OY Fe TH Oya Sages I (100-13, 3, 2 5) tayraa naam boond ham chaatrik tikhhaaray. Your Name is the drop of water, and I am a thirsty rainbird.
SHot win fume suet 3H ct Afar He Stat AE NA 00-13, Hs, He 5) tumree aas pi-aasaa tumree tum hee sang man leenaa jee-o. ||1]| You are my hope, and You are my thirst. My mind is absorbed in You. ||1||
fA@ afta ut dts wre il (100-14, ns, He 5) ji-o baarik pee kheer aghaavai. Just as the baby is satisfied by drinking milk,
fag fosae ug ef AY UTS II (100-14, Hs, He 5) ji-o nirDhan Dhan daykh sukh paavai. and the poor person is pleased by seeing wealth,
fgurds ne ules Se fC ofa fa feg He stat AE NN (100-15, ws, Hs 5) tarikhaava“t jal peevat thandhaa ti-o har sang ih man bheenaa jee-o. ||2]|
and the thirsty person is refreshed by drinking cool water, so is this mind drenched with delight in the Lord. |[2||
faG niftmrd chug usaAT II (100-15, Hs, He 5) ji-o anDhi-aarai deepak pargaasaa. Just as the darkness is lit up by the lamp,
IT FIST YTS MITA I (100-16, wg, v2 5) bhartaa chitvat pooran aasaa. and the hopes of the wife are fulfilled by thinking about her husband,
ffs utsu fa@ ds nse fC afe dfa He data HE Sil (100-16, ws, He 5)
mil pareetam ji-o hot anandaa ti-o har rang man rangeenaa jee-o. ||3]|
and people are filled with bliss upon meeting their beloved, so is my mind imbued with the Lord's Love. ||3]|
Hao H AG Ufa Hrafar urfemr It (100-17, Ws, He 5) santan mo ka-o har maarag paa-i-aa. The Saints have set me upon the Lord's Path.
Arg faxurfes ofs Afar farstfemr i 00-17, ws, 18 5) saaDh kirpaal har sang gijhaa-i-aa. By the Grace of the Holy Saint, I have been attuned to the Lord.
Ufs THT TH Ts SF SH ood AE Tg AG cto AMS snail (100-18, ws, He 5) har hamraa ham har kay daasay naanak sabad guroo sach deenaa jee-o. ||4||14||21]|
The Lord is mine, and I am the slave of the Lord. O Nanak, the Guru has blessed me with the True Word of the Shabad. ||4]|14]|21]|
HTS HIG U Il (100-18)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
nits oH Het fSaHsMM I (00-19, ws, Hs 5) amrit naam sadaa nirmalee-aa. The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is eternally pure.
Haeret eu fasta adhe il (100-19, ws, H8 5) sukh-daa-ee dookh bidaaran haree-aa. The Lord is the Giver of Peace and the Dispeller of sorrow.
mete Ae ofy Aa Sa Ho ofa JA AS ZS Hor ATE IAI (100-19, ws, He 5)
avar saad chakh saglay daykhay man har ras sabh tay meethaa jee-o. ||1]|
I have seen and tasted all other flavors, but to my mind, the Subtle Essence of the Lord is the sweetest of all. ||1]|
Yat 9OK
af ute A fuses It ca01-1, ws, He 5)
jo jo peevai so tariptaavai. Whoever drinks this in, is satisfied.
WHE de A OH IA UTS Il (101-1, +75, He 5) amar hovai jo naam ras paavai. Whoever obtains the Sublime Essence of the Naam becomes immortal.
on fours fats usufs faa Hae Tg His For ATS NM co1-1, ws, He 5)
naam niDhaan tiseh paraapat jis sabad guroo man voothaa jee-o. ||2||
The Treasure of the Naam is obtained by one whose mind is filled with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
fafs afs sa urfemr A fgufs mrwrar il (101-2, ws, 2 5) jin har ras paa-i-aa so taripat aghaanaa. One who obtains the Sublime Essence of the Lord is satisfied and fulfilled.
fafs of Are ufeor A ofa Sora Il (101-3, ws, He 5) jin har saad paa-i-aa so naahi dulaanaa. One who obtains this Flavor of the Lord does not waver.
farts usufs ofs af ont fam HASfa Stator ATE SII Co1-3, ws, He 5)
tiseh paraapat har har naamaa jis mastak bhaageethaa jee-o. ||3]|
One who has this destiny written on his forehead obtains the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||{3]|
dfs fear ofa orfeor zane FIST Il (101-4, ws, He 5)
har ikas hath aa-i-aa varsaanay bahutayray.
The Lord has come into the hands of the One, the Guru, who has blessed so many with good fortune.
SH ofa HAS SS Wes I (101-4, ws, vs 5) tis lag mukat bha-ay ghanayray. Attached to Him, a great many have been liberated.
om fsarat aeHfa uh ag soa feast stor AG IsNqUIQIIl (01-4, ws, He 5)
naam niDhaanaa gurmukh paa-ee-ai kaho naanak virlee deethaa jee-o. ||4]|15]|22] | The Gurmukh obtains the Treasure of the Naam; says Nanak, those who see the Lord are very rare. ||4]]15]|22] |
HTS HIG U Il (101-5)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
fofo fafa fafa ofs afs ofa HS II Co1-5, ws, nH 5)
niDh siDh riDh har har har mayrai.
My Lord, Har, Har, Har, is the nine treasures, the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, wealth and prosperity.
HOH ues asd astd Il (101-6, ws, He 5) janam padaarath gahir gambheerai. He is the Deep and Profound Treasure of Life.
wre az union ga Te ATT war ust AE Al col-6, ws, He 5)
laakh kot khusee-aa rang raavai jo gur laagaa paa-ee jee-o. ||1]|
Hundreds of thousands, even millions of pleasures and delights are enjoyed by one who falls at the Guru's Feet. ||1]|
SIHS UNS FS USS Il (101-7, Hs, Hs 5) darsan paykhat bha-ay puneetaa. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all are sanctified,
Hares Burg set HIST Il (101-7, Hs, He 5) sagal uDhaaray bhaa-ee meetaa. and all family and friends are saved.
WH Midd AMM wruar ae fast 3 Ag fomret AIG QU co1-7, ws, He 5) agam agochar su-aamee apunaa gur kirpaa tay sach Dhi-aa-ee jee-o. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Inaccessible and Unfathomable True Lord. ||2||
Ww ag dnfo nee Cure | eseait wane a fear US II (101-8, 275, He 5)
jaa ka-o khojeh sarab upaa-ay. vadbhaagee darsan ko virlaa paa-ay.
The One, the Guru, who is sought by all-only a few, by great good fortune, receive His Darshan.
Cz unre vidas aa SI HIG TT Suet A 3 co1-9, ws, ws 5) ooch apaar agochar thaanaa oh mahal guroo daykhaa-ee jee-o. ||3|| His Place is lofty, infinite and unfathomable; the Guru has shown me that palace. ||3]|
Tes asts vifys SH Sa Il (101-9, ws, Hs 5) gahir gambheer amrit naam tayraa. Your Ambrosial Name is deep and profound.
Hafs sfeur fam fee SAT Il (101-10, ws, He 5) mukat bha-i-aa jis ridai vasayraa. That person is liberated, in whose heart You dwell.
afs due fs5 & AAS AS AS Boa Hola ANTS AE ISIENQSIl (101-10, +s, Hs 5) gur banDhan tin kay saglay kaatay jan naanak sahj samaa-ee jee-o. ||4]|16||23]| The Guru cuts away all his bonds; O Servant Nanak, he is absorbed in the poise of intuitive peace. ||4||16||23]|
HTS HIG U Il (101-11)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
ys fasur 3 afe afe fimre@ it co1-11, as, 2 5) parabh kirpaa tay har har Dhi-aava-o. By God's Grace, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
ys efeor 3 Hae we I cio1-11, ws, w: 5) parabhoo da-i-aa tay mangal gaava-o. By God's Kindness, I sing the songs of joy.
Gos dos Aes Was de fomren FAIS wrest A WAU Co1-12, ws, He 5)
oothat baithat sovat jaagat har Dhi-aa-ee-ai sagal avradaa jee-o. ||1]||
While standing and sitting, while sleeping and while awake, meditate on the Lord, all your life. ||1]|
oH migug Hag ATG Shor It (01-12, ws, Hs 5) naam a-ukhaDh mo ka-o saaDhoo dee-aa. The Holy Saint has given me the Medicine of the Naam.
fxofaa are fedHe ahi il (01-13, us, He 5) kilbikh kaatay nirmal thee-aa. My sins have been cut out, and I have become pure.
moe stent foant As ule Aare faaTA Saet ATE NM (01-13, Hs, He 5)
anad bha-i-aa niksee sabh peeraa sagal binaasay dardaa jee-o. ||2|| I am filled with bliss, and all my pains have been taken away. All my suffering has been dispelled. ||2]|
fan at nigt ad Ha films || A HAS ATS AAT Il (101-14, ws, He 5) jis kaa ang karay mayraa pi-aaraa. so muktaa saagar sansaaraa. One who has my Beloved on his side, is liberated from the world-ocean.
Afs ad fats ag usrst A ard AS seer AS BN (101-14, ws, we 5) sat karay jin guroo pachhaataa so kaahay ka-o dardaa jee-o. ||3]|| One who recognizes the Guru practices Truth; why should he be afraid? ||3]|
Wa 3 AY Aas we Il TI Ses IS TEt AHS Il (101-15, ws, we 5)
jab tay saaDhoo sangat paa-ay. gur bhaytat ha-o ga-ee balaa-ay.
Since I found the Company of the Holy and met the Guru, the demon of pride has departed.
Ath fA ofs are Soa Afsag eta Sor Ha use AE NSNADNVSIl (101-15, HS, He 5) Saas Saas har gaavai naanak satgur dhaak lee-aa mayraa parh-daa jee-o.
[14] [17] 1241]
With each and every breath, Nanak sings the Lord's Praises. The True Guru has covered my sins. ||4||17||24||
HTS HIG U Il (101-16)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
6f3 ufs Aea Afor IST II (101-16, ws, Hz 5) ot pot sayvak sang raataa. Through and through, the Lord is intermingled with His servant.
ys ufsurs Aga AYETST Il (101-17, 17s, Hs 5) parabh partipaalay sayvak sukh-daata. God, the Giver of Peace, cherishes His servant.
urat uu UAE Rea a Stag dt at nag MIS NA 101-17, +5, He 5)
paanee pakhaa peesa-o sayvak kai thaakur hee kaa aahar jee-o. ||1||
I carry the water, wave the fan, and grind the grain for the servant of my Lord and Master. ||1]]|
ate fra yfs Het afer Il cio1-18, ws, He 5)
kaat silak parabh sayvaa laa-i-aa. God has cut the noose from around my neck; He has placed me in His Service.
Jay Asa at Asa His Stee |i (101-18, Hs, He 5) hukam saahib kaa sayvak man bhaa-i-aa. The Lord and Master's Command is pleasing to the mind of His servant.
Het ane A Afva ae Rea nists wots Hg MIG NM (01-18, Hs, He 5)
so-ee kamaavai jo saahib bhaavai sayvak antar baahar maahar jee-o. ||2]|
He does that which pleases his Lord and Master. Inwardly and outwardly, the servant knows his Lord. ||2]|
3 war orag AS fafa Aafs I (101-19, ws, He 5) too” daanaa thaakur sabh biDh jaaneh. You are the All-knowing Lord and Master; You know all ways and means.
Yat 9O2
Sad A Aza dfs Sa vrata Ml (102-1, ws, He 5) thaakur kay sayvak har rang maaneh. The servant of the Lord and Master enjoys the Love and Affection of the Lord.
f fae Sad aH AeA a Aea oas dt Afa Ag MG SI (102-1, ws, He 5)
jo kichh thaakur kaa so sayvak kaa sayvak thaakur hee sang jaahar jee-o. ||3]|| That which belongs to the Lord and Master, belongs to His servant. The servant becomes distinguished in association with his Lord and Master. ||3]|
nus oats A ufsafeur i safe o Sart ufe gerfemr It (102-2, ws, v2 5)
apunai thaakur jo pehraa-i-aa. bahur na laykhaa puchh bulaa-i-aa.
He, whom the Lord and Master dresses in the robes of honor, is not called to answer for his account any longer.
fH Aza a BSA Asal A afd asta ass AME isnaciuil (102-2, ws, He 5) tis sayvak kai naanak kurbaanee so gahir gabheeraa ga-uhar jee-o. ||4||18]|25]| Nanak is a sacrifice to that servant. He is the pearl of the deep and unfathomable Ocean of God. ||4||18]]25]|
HTS HIG U Il (102-3)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
AS fxs we ufo ats oat Il 102-3, ws, He 5) sabh kichh ghar meh baahar naahee. Everything is within the home of the self; there is nothing beyond.
Wis 28 A Saf Tara i (102-4, ws, ne 5) baahar tolai so bharam bhulaahee. One who searches outside is deluded by doubt.
ae usAet frot nists ufenr A nists aafe Ade AIG NAN (102-4, ws, He 5) gur parsaadee jinee antar paa-i-aa so antar baahar suhaylaa jee-o. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, one who has found the Lord within is happy, inwardly and outwardly.
[21
fSfit ff SoA ify ara I 02-5, ws, He 5)
jhim jhim varsai amrit Dhaaraa. Slowly, gently, drop by drop, the stream of nectar trickles down within.
Ho ule Afs AgE aera Il (102-5, +s, He 5) man peevai sun sabad beechaaraa. The mind drinks it in, hearing and reflecting on the Word of the Shabad.
woe fase ad fea wat Het Het dfs aor AG NM (102-5, ws, He 5) anad binod karay din raatee sadaa sadaa har kaylaa jee-o. ||2|| It enjoys bliss and ecstasy day and night, and plays with the Lord forever and ever.
21] HOH AON at feefanr fife i (102-6, Hs, H2 5)
janam janam kaa vichhurhi-aa mili-aa. I have now been united with the Lord after having been separated and cut off from Him for so many lifetimes;
Ag feu 3 Hor afar Il (102-6, ws, 18 5)
saaDh kirpaa tay sookaa hari-aa.
by the Grace of the Holy Saint, the dried-up branches have blossomed forth again in their greenery.
Ayfs ure ay fomre qenfe de Her AG SII (102-7, os, He 5)
Sumat paa-ay naam Dhi-aa-ay gurmukh ho-ay maylaa jee-o. ||3]|
I have obtained this sublime understanding, and I meditate on the Naam; as Gurmukh, I have met the Lord. ||3]|
A® sda fa wefs Arfemr It 02-7, ws, He 5) jal tarang ji-o jaleh samaa-i-aa. As the waves of water merge again with the water,
fs Ast Afar AfS frerfemr I 102-7, ws, He 5) ti-o jotee sang jot milaa-i-aa. so does my light merge again into the Light.
AW soa 3H ae fees aofs o Teha Aa AE USNIACNEM (102-8, ns, ne 5) kaho naanak bharam katay kivaarhaa bahurh na ho-ee-ai ja-ulaa jee-o. ||4]|19||26]|
Says Nanak, the veil of illusion has been cut away, and I shall not go out wandering any more. ||4||19]|26]|
HTS HIG U Il (102-9)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
fsq aaaret fats 3 Afenr il (102-9, ws, H2 5) tis kurbaanee jin too™ suni-aa. I am a Sacrifice to those who have heard of You.
fan afeodt fate sAHor sfemr il (102-9, urs, v8 5) tis balihaaree jin rasnaa bhani-aa. I am a Sacrifice to those whose tongues speak of You.
ofa afe wet fan fees F nfs sfs so era HIE A (102-9, ws, Ht 5) vaar vaar jaa-ee tis vitahu jo man tan tuDh aaraaDhay jee-o. ||1|| Again and again, I am a sacrifice to those who meditate on You with mind and body.
[11
fH vse ust A Sd HSfa BS Il (102-10, ws, He 5) tis charan pakhaalee jo tayrai maarag chaalai. I wash the feet of those who walk upon Your Path.
30 feast fSR use efeers Il (102-10, ws, H2 5) nain nihaalee tis purakh da-i-aalai. With my eyes, I long to behold those kind people.
Hg ta fq mud AH fafs ae fife A ys wa AG NN 02-11, ws, He 5) man dayvaa tis apunay saajan jin gur mil so parabh laaDhay jee-o. ||2|| I offer my mind to those friends, who have met the Guru and found God. ||2||
A gsaret fate SH ATE Il (102-12, Hs, He 5) say vadbhaagee jin tum jaanay. Very fortunate are those who know You.
AS & HO nifsus fegare Il (102-12, ws, He 5) sabh kai maDhay alipat nirbaanay. In the midst of all, they remain detached and balanced in Nirvaanaa.
Ag & Hla Cfs s@re sfor Fae es Sfe AG AI WSN (102-12, ws, we 5)
saaDh kai sang un bha-ojal tari-aa sagal doot un saaDhay jee-o. ||3]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they cross over the terrifying world- ocean, and conquer all their evil passions. ||3]|
f36 at Aafe ufsmr He AT Il (102-13, ws, v8 5) tin kee saran pari-aa man mayraa. My mind has entered their Sanctuary.
HS Ste Sf HI MTT Il (102-13, 5, He 5)
maan taan taj moh anDhayraa.
I have renounced my pride in my own strength, and the darkness of emotional attachment.
oH we cit sea ag fA Us na mara AE ISON QN (102-14, ws, Hs 5) naam daan deejai naanak ka-o tis parabh agam agaaDhay jee-o. ||4||20]||27]|| Please bless Nanak with the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable God. ||4||20]|27]||
HTS HIG U Il (102-14)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
J Us ATG Sot set Il (102-15, ws, we 5) too” payd saakh tayree foolee. You are the tree; Your branches have blossomed forth.
3 AU Tur mATS I (102-15, ws, He 5) too’ sookham ho-aa asthoolee. From the very small and subtle, You have become huge and manifest.
3 rafeta 5 eo yeaa sy fas neg 3 srs AIG AU (102-15, ws, we 5)
too’ jalniDh too” fayn budbudaa tuDh bin avar na bhaalee-ai jee-o. ||1||
You are the Ocean of Water, and You are the foam and the bubbles on its surface. I cannot see any other except You, Lord. ||1||
3 AS Hale St ST Il (102-16, ws, 2 5) too” soot manee-ay bhee toohai. You are the thread, and You are also the beads.
3 aot Hg ffs ST il 102-16, ws, He 5) too” ganthee mayr sir too‘hai. You are the knot, and You are the primary bead of the maalaa.
uf ufo nifs ys Het neg o afe feursht AIG 1211 (102-16, 13, Hs 5)
aad maDh ant parabh so-ee avar na ko-ay dikhaalee-ai jee-o. ||2||
In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, there is God. I cannot see any other except You, Lord. ||2||
3 fosqeE AsaS AVES Il (102-17, ws, Hs 5)
too” nirgun sargun sukh-daata.
You transcend all qualities, and You possess the supreme qualities. You are the Giver of peace.
3 fosare orton Sfor FST I (102-17, ws, H8 5) too” nirbaan rasee-aa rang raataa. You are detached in Nirvaanaa, and You are the Enjoyer, imbued with love.
nue aase omy wrefa wma so ANTS AIG SII (102-18, Hs, He 5) apnay kartab aapay jaaneh aapay tuDh samaalee-ai jee-o. ||3]| You Yourself know Your Own Ways; You dwell upon Yourself. ||3||
3 sag Aea Sfo mM Il (102-18, os, He 5) too” thaakur sayvak fun aapay. You are the Master, and then again, You are the servant.
J TUS uss YS MM Il (102-19, wes, ns 5) too" gupat pargat parabh aapay. O God, You Yourself are the Manifest and the Unmanifest.
Soa UA Ae Te We fea st aefa farsha AE ie lIUIeil (102-19, ws, He 5) naanak daas sadaa gun gaavai ik bhoree nadar nihaalee-ai jee-o. ||4]|21]|28]|
Slave Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises forever. Please, just for a moment, bless him with Your Glance of Grace. ||4]|21]|28]|
Yat 903
HTS HIG U Il (103-1)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Hee A oat fas OH Surat Il (103-1, ws, He 5) safal so banee jit naam vakhaanee. Blessed are those words, by which the Naam is chanted.
ag usrfe fas fess Aret Il (103-1, ns, v8 5) gur parsaad kinai virlai jaanee. Rare are those who know this, by Guru's Grace.
Uo A eo fas ofs wes Host wre 3 usear ATG A (103-2, ws, HH 5)
Dhan so vaylaa jit har gaavat sunnaa aa-ay tay parvaanaa jee-o. ||1]||
Blessed is that time when one sings and hears the Lord's Name. Blessed and approved is the coming of such a one. ||1]|
A 83 udere frat BIAS UA Il (103-2, ws, we 5)
Say naytar parvaan jinee darsan paykhaa.
Those eyes which behold the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan are approved and accepted.
A ad 38 frot dfs AA Bar Il (103-3, ws, He 5) say kar bhalay jinee har jas laykhaa. Those hands which write the Praises of the Lord are good.
A vse AS Ft fs wofa vs J fe fSo Af use AG MQM (103-3, ws, He 5)
say charan suhaavay jo har maarag chalay ha-o bal tin sang pachhaanaa jee-o. ||2]| Those feet which walk in the Lord's Way are beautiful. I am a sacrifice to that Congregation in which the Lord is recognized. ||2| |
Afé AHS Ae Hts fumPs it 103-4, ns, v8 5) sun Saajan mayray meet pi-aaray. Listen, O my beloved friends and companions:
AaHfa firs wf Bars Il (103-4, ws, He 5) saaDhsang khin maahi uDhaaray. in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be saved in an instant.
faofeu afe ium Ho fasne fife ae ures vret AIG SI (103-4, ws, He 5)
kilvikh kaat ho-aa man nirmal mit ga-ay aavan jaanaa jee-o. ||3]|
Your sins will be cut out; your mind will be immaculate and pure. Your comings and goings shall cease. ||3]|
efe as afs fea fao@ adth Il (103-5, a5, nH 5) du-ay kar jorh ik bin-o kareejai. With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer:
afa fagut sae uag SiH Il (103-6, Hs, He 5) kar kirpaa dubdaa pathar leejai. please bless me with Your Mercy, and save this sinking stone.
Sot AS us se fgurar ys STS HS Brat AIG NSUQINICI (103-6, ws, He 5)
naanak ka-o parabh bha-ay kirpaalaa parabh naanak man bhaanaa jee-o. [14] ]22]|29]| God has become merciful to Nanak; God is pleasing to Nanak's mind. ||4]|22||29]|
HTS HIG U Il (103-7)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
nifys aat af ofa Sat it (103-7, ws, we 5) amrit banee har har tayree. The Word of Your Bani, Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar.
Afs afs de usH afs At Il 103-7, +5, He 5) sun sun hovai param gat mayree. Hearing it again and again, I am elevated to the supreme heights.
moe Fst Ase ae Hour Afsas a eaAS ure A WAU (103-7, es, v8 5)
jalan bujhee seetal ho-ay manoo-aa satgur kaa darsan paa-ay jee-o. ||1]|
The burning within me has been extinguished, and my mind has been cooled and soothed, by the Blessed Vision of the True Guru. ||1]|
HY sfeor ey Efe uss Il (103-8, Hs, H8 5) sookh bha-i-aa dukh door paraanaa. Happiness is obtained, and sorrow runs far away,
HS GAO did SH SUS Il (103-8, HS, He 5) sant rasan har naam vakhaanaa. when the Saints chant the Lord's Name.
HS 46 dis sd Ad Had fase afe o WES AIG NIN (103-9, 17, He 5)
jal thal neer bharay sar subhar birthaa ko-ay na jaa-ay jee-o. ||2||
The sea, the dry land, and the lakes are filled with the Water of the Lord's Name; no place is left empty. ||2]|
efenr urdt fate franoeas Il (103-9, Hs, 2 5) da-i-aa Dhaaree tin sirjanhaaray. The Creator has showered His Kindness;
Fba #3 Aas yfsurs i (103-10, ws, 48 5) jee-a jant saglay partipaaray. He cherishes and nurtures all beings and creatures.
frases fasurs efenrar Aas feufs wre FIG SI (103-10, ws, Hs 5) miharvaan kirpaal da-i-aalaa saglay taripat aghaa-ay jee-o. ||3]| He is Merciful, Kind and Compassionate. All are satisfied and fulfilled through Him.
[1311 ze fae fgaee atse afm it (103-11, ws, v8 5)
van tarin taribhavan keeton hari-aa. The woods, the meadows and the three worlds are rendered green.
adeutd fas stafa afamr i (103-11, Hs, He 5) karanhaar khin bheetar kari-aa. The Doer of all did this in an instant.
Tenfy soa fSA nad Ho at or uATS AIG ISNQSISOll (103-11, +s, He 5)
gurmukh naanak tisai araaDhay man kee aas pujaa-ay jee-o. ||4]|23]|30] | As Gurmukh, Nanak meditates on the One who fulfills the desires of the mind. ||4]|23]|30]|
HTS HIG U Il (103-12)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Se fust FI Ha HST I (103-12, ws, He 5) too” mayraa pitaa too“hai mayraa maataa. You are my Father, and You are my Mother.
3 Ae Fay F As gS Il (103-13, ws, we 5) too’ mayraa banDhap too™ mayraa bharaataa. You are my Relative, and You are my Brother.
3 Hae mer Agat et StS aa ast AE NA (103-13, ws, M8 5) too’ mayraa raakhaa sabhnee thaa-ee taa bha-o kayhaa kaarhaa jee-o. ||1]| You are my Protector everywhere; why should I feel any fear or anxiety? ||1]|
SHat fxur 3 3 UsTST Il (103-14, Hs, He 5) tumree kirpaa tay tuDh pachhaanaa. By Your Grace, I recognize You.
3 Hat Ge FT Ha Hr Il (103-14, ws, He 5) too” mayree ot too‘hai mayraa maanaa. You are my Shelter, and You are my Honor.
35 fag gH neg 5 ae AS Sa Aw orvsr AE NN (103-14, ws, Hs 5) tujh bin doojaa avar na ko-ee sabh tayraa khayl akhaarhaa jee-o. ||2|| Without You, there is no other; the entire Universe is the Arena of Your Play. ||2||
aba #3 Afs so Bure i (103-15, 1s, He 5) jee-a jant sabh tuDh upaa-ay.
You have created all beings and creatures. fas fas ave fas fS3 WES Il 103-15, ws, us 5)
jit jit bhaanaa tit tit laa-ay. As it pleases You, You assign tasks to one and all.
AS fag ata Sa de] ard fas worst AE SI (103-15, +, He 5) sabh kichh keetaa tayraa hovai naahee kichh asaarhaa jee-o. ||3]|| All things are Your Doing; we can do nothing ourselves. ||3]||
ony famrfe Hot AY utfemi Il (103-16, HTS, He 5) naam Dhi-aa-ay mahaa sukh paa-i-aa. Meditating on the Naam, I have found great peace.
dfs ge afte Aa Ho Als@rfErr Ih (103-16, Hs, He 5) har gun gaa-ay mayraa man seetlaa-i-aa. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my mind is cooled and soothed.
afs us ait soret aaa fas frst AG siIen3iui (103-17, ws, ws 5)
gur poorai vajee vaaDhaa-ee naanak jitaa bikhaarhaa jee-o. ||4||24||31]|
Through the Perfect Guru, congratulations are pouring in-Nanak is victorious on the arduous battlefield of life! ||4]|24||31] |
HTS HIG U Il (103-18)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Abt yre Ys Hots MUST Il (103-18, Hs, H8 5) jee-a paraan parabh maneh aDhaaraa. God is the Breath of Life of my soul, the Support of my mind.
Sas Alefs Te ATE nrwSe Il (103-18, Hs, He 5) bhagat jeeveh gun gaa-ay apaaraa. His devotees live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
ae fous nifgs ofs ane ofe fourfe fourfe wy ufemr AE WAN (103-18, +3, H8 5)
gun niDhaan amrit har naamaa har Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay sukh paa-i-aa jee-o. ||1]| The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the Treasure of Excellence. Meditating, meditating on the Lord's Name, I have found peace. ||1] |
HOM! Ufa Ho we S mre] | ATGHfal HOH Hes feTS Il (103-19, ws, He 5)
mansaa Dhaar jo ghar tay aavai. saaDhsang janam maran mitaavai.
One whose heart's desires lead him from his own home to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall be rid of the cycle of birth and death.
UST YOR
WTA HOVE UTS Je SeS TS TaAEnt MS iM (104-1, ws, we 5)
aas manorath pooran hovai bhaytat gur darsaa-i-aa jee-o. ||2||
His hopes and desires are fulfilled, when he gains the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||2||
Ma nidiad foe ffs oct AAT Il (104-1, +5, He 5) agam agochar kichh mit nahee jaanee. The limits of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord cannot be known.
Afae fro fomrefa famirat il 104-2, ws, He 5)
saaDhik siDh Dhi-aavahi gi-aanee.
The seekers, the Siddhas, those beings of miraculous spiritual powers, and the spiritual teachers, all meditate on Him.
yet fret gor Sore af He at ufs yaetenr AIG 3 (104-2, ws, Hs 5)
khudee mitee chookaa bholaavaa gur man hee meh paragtaa-i-aa jee-o. ||3]|
Thus, their egos are erased, and their doubts are dispelled. The Guru has enlightened their minds. ||3]|
moe Hae afore fears il AY AoA Ths SH SAAT Il (104-3, ws, ws 5)
anad mangal kali-aan niDhaanaa. sookh sahj har naam vakhaanaa.
I chant the Name of the Lord, the Treasure of bliss, joy, salvation, intuitive peace and poise.
ofe faurs Aymit ora oS area we Hfo urfeor AE NeNQuIISII (104-4, ws, He 5) ho-ay kirpaal su-aamee apnaa naa-o naanak ghar meh aa-i-aa jee-o. ||4]|25]|32] | When my Lord and Master blessed me with His Mercy, O Nanak, then His Name entered the home of my mind. ||4]|25]|32]||
HTS HIG U Il (104-4)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Afs afs Het AfE Syst Il (104-5, ws, He 5) sun sun jeevaa so-ay tumaaree. Hearing of You, I live.
3 USH oag vfs ard Il C04-s, ws, H 5) too” pareetam thaakur at bhaaree. You are my Beloved, my Lord and Master, Utterly Great.
SHI ASS SH dt Weg Suet Ce gure AE NAN (104-5, Ws, He 5) tumray kartab tum hee jaanhu tumree ot gopaalaa jee-o. ||1|| You alone know Your Ways; I grasp Your Support, Lord of the World. ||1]||
TE Wes HO Tfaot Te Il (104-6, ws, v2 5) gun gaavat man hari-aa hovai. Singing Your Glorious Praises, my mind is rejuvenated.
AG HES HS Aalst Fe Il (104-6, ws, v2 5) kathaa sunat mal saglee khovai. Hearing Your Sermon, all filth is removed.
32s Afa AT Ase a AST AUS efenrer AG MQM (104-6, ws, He 5)
bhaytat sang saaDh santan kai sadaa japa-o da-i-aalaa jee-o. ||2| |
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meditate forever on the Merciful Lord. ||2]|
yg nual AYA AMA AHS Il (104-7, 15, v8 5) parabh apunaa saas saas samaara-o. I dwell on my God with each and every breath.
fea nfs as yA] nfs OrsE Il (104-7, 15, H8 5) in mat gur parsaad man Dhaara-o. This understanding has been implanted within my mind, by Guru's Grace.
suet fur 3 df yarn Age Hfeor yfsurer AIG BI (104-8, Hs, Hs 5) tumree kirpaa tay ho-ay pargaasaa sarab ma-i-aa partipaalaa jee-o. ||3]| By Your Grace, the Divine Light has dawned. The Merciful Lord cherishes everyone.
[131] Afs Afs AfS Us Aet I (104-8, ws, ue 5)
sat sat sat parabh so-ee. True, True, True is that God.
Hel Ae AS nM Tet Il (104-9, ws, Hz 5) sadaa sadaa sad aapay ho-ee. Forever, forever and ever, He Himself is.
Ses SHS Yate fumrd efy aoa se forer AIG ISNQENSSI (104-9, ws, vs 5) chalit tumaaray pargat pi-aaray daykh naanak bha-ay nihaalaa jee-o. ||4]|26]|33] |
Your Playful Ways are revealed, O my Beloved. Beholding them, Nanak is enraptured. [14] |26]|33]|
HTS HIG U Il (104-10)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
JaHt SIAS Bat AT" Il (104-10, us, vz 5) hukmee varsan laagay mayhaa. By His Command, the rain begins to fall.
AAS AS fife om AUT I (104-10, ws, He 5) Saajan sant mil naam japayhaa. The Saints and friends have met to chant the Naam.
Hise Aifs Aon AY ufeor arte uret ufs mmt ATG AI (104-10, ws, He 5)
seetal saa“t sahj sukh paa-i-aa thaadh paa-ee parabh aapay jee-o. ||1]|
Serene tranquility and peaceful ease have come; God Himself has brought a deep and profound peace. ||1]|
AS fas ass aga Burfeor tt 104-11, +5, 12 5) sabh kichh bahuto bahut upaa-i-aa. God has produced everything in great abundance.
afd fasur ufs Aare dAfenr i (104-11, ws, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh sagal rajaa-i-aa. Granting His Grace, God has satisfied all.
ats agg AS ware Aba AS Afs gry AE WM (104-12, ws, Hs 5)
daat karahu mayray daataaraa jee-a jant sabh Dharaapay jee-o. ||2|| Bless us with Your Gifts, O my Great Giver. All beings and creatures are satisfied. ||2||
Het Atos Ast Set I (104-12, Hs, He 5) sachaa saahib sachee naa-ee. True is the Master, and True is His Name.
aa usAte fsA Het fomret Il (104-13, us, 8 5) gur parsaad tis sadaa Dhi-aa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I meditate forever on Him.
HOH Hee F Ate Ho fHoR Aa As AS WI (104-13, ws, He 5)
janam maran bhai kaatay mohaa binsay sog santaapay jee-o. ||3]|
The fear of birth and death has been dispelled; emotional attachment, sorrow and suffering have been erased. ||3]|
ATA ATA Som AHS Il (104-13, Hs, He 5) Saas Saas naanak saalaahay. With each and every breath, Nanak praises the Lord.
fings aH are Afs ST Il (104-14, us, 8 5) simrat naam kaatay sabh faahay. Meditating in remembrance on the Name, all bonds are cut away.
use win adt fas stats ofs afe afs ae AY AG UsNIONSEI (04-14, ws, HE 5)
pooran aas karee khin bheetar har har har gun jaapay jee-o. ||4||27||34|| One's hopes are fulfilled in an instant, chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||4]|27]|34||
HTS HIG U Il (104-15)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
m@ Ame AS Hts fumes It (104-15, nH, He 5) aa-O Saajan sant meet pi-aaray. Come, dear friends, Saints and companions:
ffs eo TE Ma US Il (104-15, us, He 5) mil gaavah gun agam apaaray. let us join together and sing the Glorious Praises of the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord.
Wes Hes AS dt Has A fomreha fafe gH ate AIG wall 04-16, ws, ne 5)
gaavat sunat sabhay hee muktay so Dhi-aa-ee-ai jin ham kee-ay jee-o. ||1]|
Those who sing and hear these praises are liberated, so let us meditate on the One who created us. ||1]||
HOH HOH & fafa ASfs Il (104-16, HTS, He 5) janam janam kay kilbikh jaaveh. The sins of countless incarnations depart,
ufo fee Ret ee urefs i (104-17, ws, v3 5) man chinday say-ee fal paavahi. and we receive the fruits of the mind's desires.
frufs wfos A A Hom fora ASA AG Me AIS QM (104-17, +S, He 5) simar saahib so sach su-aamee rijak sabhas ka-o dee-ay jee-o. ||2|| So meditate on that Lord, our True Lord and Master, who gives sustenance to all.
21 |
OM AUS Hea AY uTeht Il (104-18, ns, He 5) naam japat sarab sukh paa-ee-ai. Chanting the Naam, all pleasures are obtained.
As 3@ faan afa ofa foment i (104-18, Hs, He 5) sabh bha-o binsai har har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. All fears are erased, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fafs Afeor A ursfarenit avsH Aas ge AG Sil 104-18, ws, He 5)
jin sayvi-aa so paargiramee kaaraj saglay thee-ay jee-o. ||3]||
One who serves the Lord swims across to the other side, and all his affairs are resolved. ||3]|
mife ufemr Sot AgSTeT I (104-19, ws, 8 5) aa-ay pa-i-aa tayree sarnaa-ee. I have come to Your Sanctuary;
fa@ are f3@ Sfo firsret i 104-19, ws, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o laihi milaa-ee. if it pleases You, unite me with You.
User qou
afs fas ys sast weg AY Soa vis ute AG USNIACHSUll (105-1, 1, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh bhagtee laavhu sach naanak amrit pee-ay jee-o. ||4]|28]|35] | Shower Your Mercy upon me, God; let me be committed to devotional worship. Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of Truth. ||4]|28]|]35]|
HTS HIG U Il (105-1)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
se faurs dfs TAT II (105-2, 115, He 5) bha-ay kirpaal govind gusaa-ee. The Lord of the Universe, the Support of the earth, has become Merciful;
Huy ZA AsSt Set Il (105-2, ws, He 5) maygh varsai sabhnee thaa-ee. the rain is falling everywhere.
ae eens Aer fagurest ofe uret Haas AIG NAM (105-2, Hts, He 5)
deen da-i-aal sadaa kirpaalaa thaadh paa-ee kartaaray jee-o. ||1]|
He is Merciful to the meek, always Kind and Gentle; the Creator has brought cooling relief. ||1]|
mud Aha As yfsurs il (105-3, ws, us 5) apunay jee-a jant partipaaray. He cherishes all His beings and creatures,
fa@ afaa HST ANTS Il (105-3, HTS, He 5) ji-o baarik maataa sammaaray. as the mother cares for her children.
Su SHO AY Add AMM SS Aare mas AIG MQM 105-3, ws, He 5) dukh bhanjan sukh saagar su-aamee dayt sagal aahaaray jee-o. ||2||
The Destroyer of pain, the Ocean of Peace, the Lord and Master gives sustenance to all. ||2]|
me ate ufs sfour fogerar Il (05-4, Hs, H8 5) jal thal poor rahi-aa miharvaanaa. The Merciful Lord is totally pervading and permeating the water and the land.
Re afsots web TAT Il (105-4, ws, He 5) sad balihaar jaa-ee-ai kurbaanaa. I am forever devoted, a sacrifice to Him.
dfs fear fm Aer fomret fa fas nfo nares Burd AIG SII (105-5, Hs, He 5) rain dinas tis sadaa Dhi-aa-ee je khin meh sagal uDhaaray jee-o. ||3]| Night and day, I always meditate on Him; in an instant, He saves all. ||3]|
of Be Aas yfs mms il (05-5, ws, us 5) raakh lee-ay saglay parabh aapay. God Himself protects all;
Gsfs qe As Aa AST Il (105-6, +5, He 5) utar ga-ay sabh sog santaapay. He drives out all sorrow and suffering.
OH AUS HS 36 JdmrSs us HHA Geld food AG USIQENSEN (105-6, ws, He 5) naam japat man tan haree-aaval parabh naanak nadar nihaaray jee-o. ||4||29||36]|
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind and body are rejuvenated. O Nanak, God has bestowed His Glance of Grace. ||4||29]|36]|
HTS HIG U Il (105-7)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
fra om aubt ys firs 1 105-7, urs, H8 5) jithai naam japee-ai parabh pi-aaray. Where the Naam, the Name of God the Beloved is chanted
A mmAae Afes vars Il (105-7, ws, v2 5) say asthal so-in cha-ubaaray. -those barren places become mansions of gold.
fra ou o nuba He dfeer ASt one Cast AIG A (105-7, ws, nH 5)
jithai naam na japee-ai mayray go-idaa say-ee nagar ujaarhee jee-o. ||1||
Where the Naam, the Name of my Lord of the Universe is not chanted-those towns are like the barren wilderness. ||1||
ofa set dN wife ANTS I (105-8, 7s, He 5) har rukhee rotee khaa-ay samaalay. One who meditates as he eats dry bread,
ofa wists safe sets fears Il (105-8, ws, He 5) har antar baahar nadar nihaalay. sees the Blessed Lord inwardly and outwardly.
ufe ufe ad aeeat We fer at eat AG QM 105-9, ws, we 5)
khaa-ay khaa-ay karay badfailee jaan visoo kee vaarhee jee-o. ||2||
Know this well, that one who eats and eats while practicing evil, is like a field of poisonous plants. ||2||
Hat Ast aT 3B BS Il (105-9, ws, He 5) santaa saytee rang na laa-ay. One who does not feel love for the Saints,
Has Afar fears AHS Il (105-10, Hs, v2 5) saakat sang vikram kamaa-ay. misbehaves in the company of the wicked shaaktas, the faithless cynics;
vos tu det mifamrat AS mat orf Cust AIG SII 105-10, 7s, He 5)
dulabh dayh kho-ee agi-aanee jarh apunee aap upaarhee jee-o. ||3]|
he wastes this human body, so difficult to obtain. In his ignorance, he tears up his own roots. ||3]|
Sot Aafe HS Ste Semmes I (105-11, ws, v2 5) tayree saran mayray deen da-i-aalaa. I seek Your Sanctuary, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek,
HY Arad HS AS AUB I (105-11, ws, v2 5) sukh saagar mayray gur gopaalaa. Ocean of Peace, my Guru, Sustainer of the world.
afa fasu aad TE We Tug AGH mATSHt FIG NSISONSIN (05-11, +s, He 5)
kar kirpaa naanak gun gaavai raakho saram asaarhee jee-o. ||4||30||37]|| Shower Your Mercy upon Nanak, that he may sing Your Glorious Praises; please, preserve my honor. ||4]||30||37]|
HTS HIG U Il (105-12)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
UIE SAT A feet ANTS Il (105-12, ws, ne 5) charan thaakur kay ridai samaanay. I cherish in my heart the Feet of my Lord and Master.
ats AeA AS Efs ules Il (105-12, ws, He 5) kal kalays sabh door pa-i-aanay. All my troubles and sufferings have run away.
AS AY Aon Ufs Curt AG Afar foeAr ATS UA 05-13, ws, Hs 5)
saat sookh sahj Dhun upjee saaDhoo sang nivaasaa jee-o. ||1||
The music of intuitive peace, poise and tranquility wells up within; I dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
want ys o SS HS Il (105-13, ws, He 5) laagee pareet na tootai moolay. The bonds of love with the Lord are never broken.
ofs nists arate afoot saus Il (105-14, ws, H2 5) har antar baahar rahi-aa bharpooray. The Lord is totally permeating and pervading inside and out.
finite frites frafs ae aet aret AH at STAT ATG NM (05-14, Hs, He 5)
simar simar simar gun gaavaa kaatee jam kee faasaa jee-o. ||2]| Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, singing His Glorious Praises, the noose of death is cut away. ||2]|
mifqs Sad wage aret il (105-15, us, ue 5) amrit varkhai anhad banee. The Ambrosial Nectar, the Unstruck Melody of Gurbani rains down continually;
HO 36 vista AifS AHret Il (105-15, Hs, 43 5) man tan antar saat Samaanee. deep within my mind and body, peace and tranquility have come.
fgufs vurfe gd Ae 3d Afsate oho fear AIG SI (105-15, ws, He 5)
taripat aghaa-ay rahay jan tayray satgur kee-aa dilaasaa jee-o. ||3]|
Your humble servants remain satisfied and fulfilled, and the True Guru blesses them with encouragement and comfort. ||3]|
fan a AT fSA 3 Se ufeni Il (105-16, HTS, He 5) jis kaa saa tis tay fal paa-i-aa. We are His, and from Him, we receive our rewards.
afs fasur ys Afar fHerfemr i a05-16, us, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh sang milaa-i-aa. Showering His Mercy upon us, God has united us with Him.
WSS WS Id Zot SSA UTS MTA AG USUSUISCI (105-17, ws, He 5)
aavan jaan rahay vadbhaagee naanak pooran aasaa jee-o. ||4||31||38]|
Our comings and goings have ended, and through great good fortune, O Nanak, our hopes are fulfilled. ||4]|31]|38]|
HTS HIG U Il (105-17)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Htg ufemr usnAts urfemr il 05-17, ws, He 5) meehu pa-i-aa parmaysar paa-i-aa. The rain has fallen; I have found the Transcendent Lord God.
dba #3 Afs Wet sAfeMr | 105-18, Hs, He 5) jee-a jant sabh sukhee vasaa-i-aa. All beings and creatures dwell in peace.
dent xen sfenr AY ATS Ufa ols aH AHS AE IAN (105-18, Hs, He 5)
ga-i-aa kalays bha-i-aa sukh saachaa har har naam samaalee jee-o. ||1||
Suffering has been dispelled, and true happiness has dawned, as we meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
fA a A fo dt ufsurd il (05-19, ws, 8 5) jis kay say tin hee partipaaray. The One, to whom we belong, cherishes and nurtures us.
UTIYIH YS SS TST Il (105-19, ws, us 5) paarbarahm parabh bha-ay rakhvaaray. The Supreme Lord God has become our Protector.
Hat ast Safe AS uss Tet wrest AS iI (05-19, ws, we 5) sunee baynantee thaakur mayrai pooran ho-ee ghaalee jee-o. ||2]| My Lord and Master has heard my prayer; my efforts have been rewarded. ||2]|
Yat 9OE
Hae Abt aS SesTTSe Il (106-1, Hs, He 5) sarab jee-aa ka-o dayvanhaaraa. He is the Giver of all souls.
Td udAet Seta fSoa il (106-1, 73, v8 5) gur parsaadee nadar nihaaraa. By Guru's Grace, He blesses us with His Glance of Grace.
me ae Hd Afs fyuse AT yao uaTSt ATE NSM (106-2, ws, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al sabh tariptaanay saaDhoo charan pakhaalee jee-o. ||3]|
The beings in the water, on the land and in the sky are all satisfied; I wash the Feet of the Holy. ||3]|
Ho at fee uUATSSITTS Il (106-2, Hs, He 5) man kee ichh pujaavanhaaraa. He is the Fulfiller of the desires of the mind.
Het Het ATE afHITS Il (106-3, Hes, He 5) sadaa sadaa jaa-ee balihaaraa. Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him.
Soa VS at vy safe Js df Sst MG ISsiSI2nSei (06-3, ws, He 5) naanak daan kee-aa dukh bhanjan ratay rang rasaalee jee-o. ||4||32]|39]||
O Nanak, the Destroyer of pain has given this Gift; I am imbued with the Love of the Delightful Lord. ||4||32||39]|
HTS HIG U Il (106-4)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
HO 36 3ST UG St 3g Il (106-4, ws, He 5) man tan tayraa Dhan bhee tayraa. Mind and body are Yours; all wealth is Yours.
3 sag Aum ys AS Il (106-4, ws, ns 5) too” thaakur su-aamee parabh mayraa. You are my God, my Lord and Master.
mG fis ngs oth ard 3a As dures AIG WAI (106-4, +15, He 5) jee-o pind sabh raas tumaaree tayraa jor gopaalaa jee-o. ||1|| Body and soul and all riches are Yours. Yours is the Power, O Lord of the World. ||1]|
Het Het So AMET Il (106-5, ws, Hz 5) sadaa sadaa too“hai sukh-daa-ee. Forever and ever, You are the Giver of Peace.
fofe fafe war Sct uret I (106-5, +75, He 5) niv niv laagaa tayree paa-ee. I bow down and fall at Your Feet.
ag TH A SU eet aT Ss Ufa cfenrar AMS iil (106-6, ws, us 5) kaar kamaavaa jay tuDh bhaavaa jaa too” deh da-i-aalaa jee-o. ||2|| I act as it pleases You, as You cause me to act, Kind and Compassionate Dear Lord.
21 |
Ys SH FS BIST JF AT TIS Il (106-6, ws, we 5) parabh tum tay lahnaa too” mayraa gahnaa. O God, from You I receive; You are my decoration.
HS Ufo Het AY AVS Il (106-7, ws, we 5) jo too" deh so-ee sukh sahnaa. Whatever You give me, brings me happiness.
fra sufa aes fSeret F Asa a yfsurer AIG SI (106-7, as, He 5) jithai rakheh baiku“th tithaa-ee too” sabhnaa kay partipaalaa jee-o. ||3]| Wherever You keep me, is heaven. You are the Cherisher of all. ||3]|
finite frifs aoa AY uTfeMt Il (106-8, HTS, H8 5) simar simar naanak sukh paa-i-aa. Meditating, meditating in remembrance, Nanak has found peace.
MS Udd Sd Te Ter Il (106-8, Hs, He 5) aath pahar tayray gun gaa-i-aa. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
HIS HOde UIs Je ae 3 Ae sare ME sissigoll (106-8, ws, we 5) sagal manorath pooran ho-ay kaday na ho-ay dukhaalaa jee-o. ||4||33||40|| All my hopes and desires are fulfilled; I shall never again suffer sorrow. ||4||33]|40]|
HTS HIG U Il (106-9)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
ursgatH ufs Hy ustfeni Il (106-9, urs, H8 5) paarbarahm parabh maygh pathaa-i-aa. The Supreme Lord God has unleashed the rain clouds.
ate afe Hobe eo feta zorfemr Il c106-9, us, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al dah dis varsaa-i-aa.
Over the sea and over the land-over all the earth's surface, in all directions, He has brought the rain.
Aifs get ast AS fyASt moe sfenr AS oret AIS AI (106-10, ws, Hs 5)
saat bha-ee bujhee sabh tarisnaa anad bha-i-aa sabh thaa-ee jee-o. ||1||
Peace has come, and the thirst of all has been quenched; there is joy and ecstasy everywhere. ||1]|
HYSTST VU SHS Il (106-11, 475, He 5) sukh-daata dukh bha‘janhaaraa. He is the Giver of Peace, the Destroyer of pain.
mrad sath ad Abt ATS Il (106-11, ws, Hs 5) aapay bakhas karay jee-a saaraa.
He gives and forgives all beings.
nus ats 3 urfu yfsurs uf& ust faafa Haet AIG HQN Co6-11, ns, nH 5)
apnay keetay no aap partipaalay pa-i pairee tiseh manaa-ee jee-o. ||2||
He Himself nurtures and cherishes His Creation. I fall at His Feet and surrender to Him. ||2||
Ww at Hofe ufsor afs ure | (106-12, Hs, He 5) jaa kee saran pa-i-aa gat paa-ee-dai.
Seeking His Sanctuary, salvation is obtained. AfA AA ofs ony fore I (106-12, +15, nH 5)
Saas Saas har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. With each and every breath, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
fH fag o3 3 UT oag AS SA aor AST AIG SN 06-13, ws, Hs 5) tis bin hor na doojaa thaakur sabh tisai kee-aa jaa-ee jee-o. ||3]| Without Him, there is no other Lord and Master. All places belong to Him. |]|3]|
3T HE SSE YF ST Il (106-13, ws, ne 5) tayraa maan taan parabh tayraa. Yours is the Honor, God, and Yours is the Power.
3 Ae AfsE Tat AIT Il (106-13, ws, ws 5) too” sachaa saahib gunee gahayraa. You are the True Lord and Master, the Ocean of Excellence.
Sod UH Ad Fost nto ugg su fomret AE usussisai (06-14, ws, we 5)
naanak daas kahai baynantee aath pahar tuDh Dhi-aa-ee jee-o. ||4||34]|41]| Servant Nanak utters this prayer: may I meditate on You twenty-four hours a day. [14] 134] 1411]
HTS HIG U Il (106-15)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
AS AY Se YS ZS Il (106-15, ws, uz 5) sabhay sukh bha-ay parabh tuthay. All happiness comes, when God is pleased.
TI UT A BIS HG FW Il (106-15, ws, He 5) gur pooray kay charan man vuthay. The Feet of the Perfect Guru dwell in my mind.
Hon Ania wait fee nists A oA Het We FIG NAM 106-15, os, He 5)
sahj samaaDh lagee liv antar so ras so-ee jaanai jee-o. ||1]|
I am intuitively absorbed in the state of Samaadhi deep within. God alone knows this sweet pleasure. ||1||
WAH Midd Afos AST Il (106-16, HS, He 5) agam agochar saahib mayraa. My Lord and Master is Inaccessible and Unfathomable.
we we nists Zs ST Il (106-16, ws, He 5) ghat ghat antar vartai nayraa. Deep within each and every heart, He dwells near and close at hand.
Ret nifsus thor ar ast at feaer wiry use AIG M211 (106-16, ws, 8 5)
sadaa alipat jee-aa kaa daataa ko virlaa aap pachhaanai jee-o. ||2||
He is always detached; He is the Giver of souls. How rare is that person who understands his own self. ||2| |
us free aft Sa Strret Il (106-17, Hrs, v8 5) parabh milnai kee ayh neesaanee. This is the sign of union with God:
fe feat Het JOH UETAt Il (106-17, Hs, He 5) man iko sachaa hukam pachhaanee. in the mind, the Command of the True Lord is recognized.
Hofa Hafy Ae USA noe uA a sve AG ISI (106-18, 3, He 5)
sahj santokh sadaa tariptaasay anad khasam kai bhaanai jee-o. ||3]|
Intuitive peace and poise, contentment, enduring satisfaction and bliss come through the Pleasure of the Master's Will. ||3]|
vet fest ufs Fezas I (106-18, ws, He 5) hathee ditee parabh dayvanhaarai. God, the Great Giver, has given me His Hand.
HOH HS da Afs fees Il (106-19, 73, v3 5) janam maran rog sabh nivaaray. He has erased all the sickness of birth and death.
soa oH ale ufs nud dfs ateste ga we AG ISISUIs2il (106-19, ws, Hs 5)
naanak daas kee-ay parabh apunay har keertan rang maanay jee-o. ||4]|35||42||
O Nanak, those whom God has made His slaves, rejoice in the pleasure of singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||4||35]||42] |
Yat OD
HTS HIG U Il (107-1)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
atet efeor aus TAT Il (107-1, ns, He 5) keenee da-i-aa gopaal gusaa-ee. The Life of the World, the Sustainer of the Earth, has showered His Mercy;
Ud X BIE SA HS Hat Il (107-1, ws, uz 5)
gur kay charan vasay man maahee. the Guru's Feet have come to dwell within my mind.
Midas otter fais ass wa at sat afonr AE WA (107-2, ws, He 5) angeekaar kee-aa tin kartai dukh kaa dayraa dhaahi-aa jee-o. ||1|| The Creator has made me His Own. He has destroyed the city of sorrow. ||1]|
Hfs sfs effor wet Het I (107-2, Ws, He 5) man tan vasi-aa sachaa so-ee. The True One abides within my mind and body;
faust arg & fer aet I (107-2, H3, He 5) bikh-rhaa thaan na disai ko-ee. no place seems difficult to me now.
eS CAH Als ANE Je Sa AM ofr AS 2M 107-3, ows, we 5)
doot dusman sabh sajan ho-ay ayko su-aamee aahi-aa jee-o. ||2| |
All the evil-doers and enemies have now become my friends. I long only for my Lord and Master. ||2||
A fae ad A MM mm II (107-3, +7, He 5) jo kichh karay so aapay aapai. Whatever He does, He does all by Himself.
afa frmreu fog & ATH I 107-4, os, 4 5)
buDh si-aanap kichhoo na jaapai. No one can know His Ways.
ntufsur Hat 3 orf Aoet ufs san gare ofonr AE NBII (107-4, ws, He 5)
aapni-aa santaa no aap sahaa-ee parabh bharam bhulaavaa laahi-aa jee-o. ||3] |
He Himself is the Helper and Support of His Saints. God has cast out my doubts and delusions. ||3]|
TIE FHS AS AT nM Il (107-5, ws, He 5) charan kamal jan kaa aaDhaaro. His Lotus Feet are the Support of His humble servants.
WTS UIT TH BH STU Il (107-5, ws, He 5) aath pahar raam naam vaapaaro. Twenty-four hours a day, they deal in the Name of the Lord.
Hon wee aefs ae afee ys area Aaa AMfour Ae UsisEnssil (107-5)
sahj anand gaavahi gun govind parabh naanak sarab samaahi-aa jee-o. ||4]|36||43]| In peace and pleasure, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. O Nanak, God is permeating everywhere. ||4]|36]|43] |
HTS HIG U Il (107-6)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
A Ag deg fas Ag fore I 107-6, ws, ne 5) so sach mandar jit sach Dhi-aa-ee-ai. True is that temple, within which one meditates on the True Lord.
A fee noe fas afs ae we | 107-7, ws, v2 5) so ridaa suhaylaa jit har gun gaa-ee-di. Blessed is that heart, within which the Lord's Glorious Praises are sung.
HW uafs Aeet fas zafs afs we AS OH fees ages AIG NU (107-7, +5, He 5)
saa Dharat suhaavee jit vaseh har jan sachay naam vitahu kurbaano jee-o. ||1|| Beautiful is that land, where the Lord's humble servants dwell. I am a sacrifice to the True Name. ||1||
Ag eset aH & uret il (107-8, ws, ns 5) sach vadaa-ee keem na paa-ee. The extent of the True Lord's Greatness cannot be known.
Aes ATH & Ade! AT Il (107-8, us, He 5) kudrat karam na kahnaa jaa-ee. His Creative Power and His Bounties cannot be described.
fomrfe fourfe Hiefs AS 3d AE Age Hf HE AIG NN (107-8, os, He 5)
Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay jeeveh jan tayray sach sabad man maano jee-o. ||2]|
Your humble servants live by meditating, meditating on You. Their minds treasure the True Word of the Shabad. ||2| |
AY Aedes esovat ure | (107-9, ws, He 5) sach saalaahan vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. The Praises of the True One are obtained by great good fortune.
ad usAet dfs ge TEM Il (107-10, ws, He 5) gur parsaadee har gun gaa-ee-di. By Guru's Grace, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
dfa gs 3d 30 Selo AY oH Sire HIG NSN (107-10, ws, He 5)
rang ratay tayrai tuDh bhaaveh sach naam neesaano jee-o. ||3]|
Those who are imbued with Your Love are pleasing to You. The True Name is their Banner and Insignia. ||3]|
He “iz o We At Il (107-10, ws, He 5) sachay ant na jaanai ko-ee. No one knows the limits of the True Lord.
afs adate wet At I (107-11, +5, He 5) thaan thanantar sachaa so-ee. In all places and interspaces, the True One is pervading.
soa Ay ferent Ae dt isan we AE esNaoNsell Go7-11, ws, He 5)
naanak sach Dhi-aa-ee-ai sad hee antarjaamee jaano jee-o. ||4]|37||44||
O Nanak, meditate forever on the True One, the Searcher of hearts, the Knower of all. [14113711441]
HTS HIG U Il (107-12)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
dfs Haat een AIS Il (107-12, ws, v2 5) rain suhaavarhee dinas suhaylaa. Beautiful is the night, and beautiful is the day,
Afy nifts on ASAfa AS il (107-12, ws, He 5) jap amrit naam satsang maylaa. when one joins the Society of the Saints and chants the Ambrosial Naam.
wat Hos frHes us Zefa Hee Hew fSeret A ual (107-12, ws, w2 5)
gharhee moorat simrat pal vanjahi jeevan safal tithaa-ee jee-o. ||1]|
If you remember the Lord in meditation for a moment, even for an instant, then your life will become fruitful and prosperous. ||1] |
faunas oy tu Afs Be I (107-13, 1, He 5) simrat naam dokh sabh laathay. Remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all sinful mistakes are erased.
nists arate afs ys ATE Il (107-13, ns, He 5) antar baahar har parabh saathay. Inwardly and outwardly, the Lord God is always with us.
3 38 30H dfenr afe us Ser AsSt AST AS QM (107-14, ws, we 5)
bhai bha-o bharam kho-i-aa gur poorai daykhaa sabhnee jaa-ee jee-o. ||2|| Fear, dread and doubt have been dispelled by the Perfect Guru; now, I see God everywhere. ||2||
Us ANTE Zs So wqurs Il (107-14, ws, v2 5) parabh samrath vad ooch apaaraa. God is All-powerful, Vast, Lofty and Infinite.
3@ fafa oH SI FSS Il (107-15, ws, He 5) na-o niDh naam bharay bhandaaraa. The Naam is overflowing with the nine treasures.
uife nifs Hfa ys Het sa Be & Bet AME WB (107-15, ws, He 5)
aad ant maDh parabh so-ee doojaa lavai na laa-ee jee-o. ||3]|
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, there is God. Nothing else even comes close to Him. ||3]|
ate fasur HS ete afer il (107-16, Hs, H2 5) kar kirpaa mayray deen da-i-aalaa. Take pity on me, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek.
Wha ATS ATT FSH Il (107-16, Hs, He 5) jaachik jaachai saaDh ravaalaa. I am a beggar, begging for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
Sfo we aSa AS Hel Aet Het af fomret HE nsnscisull 107-16, ws, He 5) deh daan naanak jan maagai sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee jee-o. ||4||38]|45]|
Servant Nanak begs for this gift: let me meditate on the Lord, forever and ever. [4] 38] [45] |
HTS HIG U Il (107-17) maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
AA ON N
ME SI Ma MM I (107-17, Hs, He 5) aithai too‘hai aagai aapay. You are here, and You are hereafter.
Aba Az Afs SF AY Ml 1107-17, ws, He 5) jee-a jantar sabh tayray thaapay. All beings and creatures were created by You.
30 fag neg 5 at aes Hus Ge art AIG NA (107-18, ws, He 5) tuDh bin avar na ko-ee kartay mai Dhar ot tumaaree jee-o. ||1]|| Without You, there is no other, O Creator. You are my Support and my Protection.
[111 ona Afy afl tS AMM I 07-18, Hs, v8 5)
rasnaa jap jap jeevai su-aamee. The tongue lives by chanting and meditating on the Lord's Name.
USAIH YS msIAMt I (107-18, ws, Hs 5) paarbarahm parabh antarjaamee. The Supreme Lord God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
fats Afeur fsa dt ay ufenr A ASH S AM TSH AG QM (107-19, ws, we 5) jin sayvi-aa tin hee sukh paa-i-aa so janam na joo-ai haaree jee-o. ||2|| Those who serve the Lord find peace; they do not lose their lives in the gamble. ||2| |
omy meng fafs Ae So urfeMr It (107-19, +5, He 5) naam avkhaDh jin jan tayrai paa-i-aa. Your humble servant, who obtains the Medicine of the Naam,
User qot
HOH HOH AT da Teen Il (108-1, ws, He 5) janam janam kaa rog gavaa-i-aa. is rid of the illnesses of countless lifetimes and incarnations.
dfs atese aed feo ast Hew Sa FT art MG SI (108-1, ws, He 5)
har keertan gaavhu din raatee safal ayhaa hai kaaree jee-o. ||3]||
So sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, day and night. This is the most fruitful occupation. ||3]|
fenfe ofs must aA AStani Il (108-2, ns, H3 5) darisat Dhaar apnaa daas savaari-aa. Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He has adorned His slave.
we we nists uUsyTH SHAATIM Il (108-2, ws, He 5)
ghat ghat antar paarbarahm namaskaari-aa. Deep within each and every heart, the Supreme Lord is humbly worshipped.
fear fee dg or oot wa asa feo HPs AS AIG NeNatIsEl (108-3, ws, 8 5) ikas vin hor doojaa naahee baabaa naanak ih mat saaree jee-o. ||4]|39||46]|| Without the One, there is no other at all. O Baba Nanak, this is the most excellent wisdom. ||4||39]|46]|
HTS HIG U Il (108-4)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
HO 36 33ST TH firs Il (108-4, u73, v8 5) man tan rataa raam pi-aaray. My mind and body are imbued with love for the Lord.
ASSA St wus STs Il (108-4, ws, He 5) sarbas deejai apnaa vaaray. I sacrifice everything for Him.
WTS Udd diese Te web fang 3 det AAT ATE NA Cos-4, ws, He 5)
aath pahar govind gun gaa-ee-ai bisar na ko-ee saasaa jee-o. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. Do not forget Him, for even one breath. ||1]|
Het AHS Hts fumrar I 108-5, ws, He 5) so-ee Saajan meet pi-aaraa. He is a companion, a friend, and a beloved of mine,
TH OH AOA sera i) C10s-5, ws, He 5) raam naam saaDhsang beechaaraa. who reflects upon the Lord's Name, in the Company of the Holy.
AY Afar sdte Aras aebat FH at STAT ATG MQM 108-6, ws, we 5)
saaDhoo sang tareejai saagar katee-ai jam kee faasaa jee-o. ||2| |
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, cross over the world-ocean, and the noose of death shall be cut away. ||2]|
oats ueaa ofg at AS il (108-6, Hs, He 5) chaar padaarath har kee sayvaa. The four cardinal blessings are obtained by serving the Lord.
UTSHS Af nse MSS Il (108-6, Hs, He 5)
paarjaat jap alakh abhayvaa.
The Elysian Tree, the source of all blessings, is meditation on the Unseen and Unknowable Lord.
aH &y foofrs afs ae yas cet wat ATG SI (108-7, ws, H3 5) kaam kroDh kilbikh gur kaatay pooran ho-ee aasaa jee-o. ||3]|
The Guru has cut out the sinful mistakes of sexual desire and anger, and my hopes have been fulfilled. ||3]|
yao sa se fra yret i AGAfa fHs ATSaruTAt Il (108-7, ws, Hs 5)
pooran bhaag bha-ay jis paraanee. saaDhsang milay saarangpaanee.
That mortal who is blessed by perfect destiny meets the Lord, the Sustainer of the Universe, in the Company of the Holy.
Soa oH Shor fan nists uses fans Ce AMG IISIBO8III (108-38, Hs, He 5) naanak naam vasi-aa jis antar parvaan girsat udaasaa jee-o. ||4||40]|47]|
O Nanak, if the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells within the mind, one is approved and accepted, whether he is a house-holder or a renunciate. ||4||40||47||
HTS HIG U Il (108-9)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
faunas oy fee Ae urfemr II 108-9, ns, He 5) simrat naam ridai sukh paa-i-aa. Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, my heart is filled with peace.
afd fasur sat yaretfemr | (108-9, ws, He 5) kar kirpaa bhagtee™ paragtaa-i-aa. By His Grace, His devotees become famous and acclaimed.
Hanfa fits ofs ofs vfimr fas wien gar FIG NA (108-10, Hs, He 5) satsang mil har har japi-aa binsay aalas rogaa jee-o. ||1]|
Joining the Society of the Saints, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the disease of laziness has disappeared. ||1]||
vw a fafa oe fafa ofe sre I (108-10, ws, He 5) jaa kai garihi nav niDh har bhaa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, the nine treasures are found in the Home of the Lord;
fSn fifeoor fan use AHTET I (108-11, ws, v8 5) tis mili-aa jis purab kamaa-ee. He comes to meet those who deserve it by their past actions.
fare fours uss USHAT US ASS TS Har AS QM 108-11, 7s, ws 5)
gi-aan Dhi-aan pooran parmaysur parabh sabhnaa galaa jogaa jee-o. ||2||
The Perfect Transcendent Lord is spiritual wisdom and meditation. God is All-powerful to do all things. ||2]|
fas ufo af Sarusara Il (108-12, ws, He 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.
mify feetst orfu UATE II (108-12, Hs, He 5) aap ikantee aap pasaaraa. He Himself is the One, and He Himself is the Many.
Bu Sd Hales VS cane fss alo fear AS WSN (08-12, Hs, He 5)
layp nahee jagjeevan daatay darsan dithay lahan vijogaa jee-o. ||3]|
Filth does not stick to the Giver, the Life of the World. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, the pain of separation departs. ||3]|
nite ofe AS frAfe Saret I (108-13, Hs, He 5) anchal laa-ay sabh sisat taraa-ee. Holding on to the hem of His Robe, the entire Universe is saved.
ntuar are nif AUTET Il (108-13, HS, He 5)
aapnaa naa-o aap japaa-ee. He Himself causes His Name to be chanted.
ad ste ufenr fasur 3 soa ufe Axa AIG NgISAUiseil Co38-14, Hs, He 5)
gur bohith paa-i-aa kirpaa tay naanak Dhur sanjogaa jee-o. ||4||41||48]|
The Boat of the Guru is found by His Grace; O Nanak, such blessed destiny is pre- ordained. ||4||41]|48]|
HTS HIG U Il (108-14)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Het ager fa orf xae i (108-15, ws, He 5) so-ee karnaa je aap karaa-ay. People do whatever the Lord inspires them to do.
fra ga AT set ATS Il (108-15, Hs, He 5) jithai rakhai saa bhalee jaa-ay. Wherever He keeps us is a good place.
Het fimoret A ufsdat gan oat fan Htor AIS AN (108-15, ws, He 5)
sO-ee Si-aanaa so pativantaa hukam lagai jis meethaa jee-o. ||1]|
That person is clever and honorable, unto whom the Hukam of the Lord's Command seems sweet. ||1]|
AS udet feas ora Il (108-16, Hs, He 5) sabh paro-ee ikat Dhaagai. Everything is strung upon the One String of the Lord.
fan ofe we A vst Sal Il (108-16, ws, He 5) jis laa-ay la-ay so charnee laagai. Those whom the Lord attaches, are attached to His Feet.
Cu aes fan af yar fats Aaa fadHe sto AIS 12 (108-16, ws, we 5)
oo'Dh kaval jis ho-ay pargaasaa tin sarab niranjan deethaa jee-o. ||2]|
Those, whose inverted lotus of the crown chakra is illuminated, see the Immaculate Lord everywhere. ||2]|
Sot HfoHt So ASAT Il (108-17, ws, He 5) tayree mahimaa too‘hai jaaneh. Only You Yourself know Your Glory.
mua ning 3 wif usreta il (108-17, ws, Hs 5) apnaa aap too” aap pachhaaneh. You Yourself recognize Your Own Self.
IG sfeodt Hae 3d fafs ay au Be ulor HIG NSN (08-18, +5, He 5)
ha-o balihaaree santan tayray jin kaam kroDh lobh peethaa jee-o. ||3]||
I am a sacrifice to Your Saints, who have crushed their sexual desire, anger and greed. |[3]|
3 fosea AS 33 fSsHS I (108-18, +3, Hs 5) too™ nirvair sant tayray nirmal. You have no hatred or vengeance; Your Saints are immaculate and pure.
fia fa AS Ssats ABH Il (108-19, ws, He 5) jin daykhay sabh utreh kalmal. Seeing them, all sins depart.
saa ony fimrfe fomrfe rie faofimor su 38 dor FIG Issues cos-19, xs, He 5) naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay jeevai binsi-aa bharam bha-o Dheethaa jee-o.
[14] |42||49]|
Nanak lives by meditating, meditating on the Naam. His stubborn doubt and fear have departed. ||4]|42]|49] |
at yor
HS HIG U Il (109-1)
maa‘jh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Bo NaS A AST HMA Il (109-1, ws, Hs 5) jhoothaa mangan jay ko-ee maagai. One who asks for a false gift,
fSA AG HIS WSt S Sea Il (109-1, ws, ne 5) tis ka-o martay gharhee na laagai. Shall not take even an instant to die.
USGUH HAE dt AS A ae fife fegss TEST NA 109-2, ws, He 5)
paarbarahm jo sad hee sayvai so gur mil nihchal kahnaa. ||1]|
But one who continually serves the Supreme Lord God and meets the Guru, is said to be immortal. ||1||
qn sats fr & His walt i (109-2, ws, Hs 5)
paraym bhagat jis kai man laagee. One whose mind is dedicated to loving devotional worship
we We nisfes fofs raft i) 09-3, ws, 2 5) gun gaavai an-din nit jaagee. sings His Glorious Praises night and day, and remains forever awake and aware.
ag uats fsa Aomit HS fAA a HASTA BIST II! (109-3, ws, He 5)
baah pakarh tis su-aamee maylai jis kai mastak lahnaa. ||2||
Taking him by the hand, the Lord and Master merges into Himself that person, upon whose forehead such destiny is written. ||2]| |
TIO AHS Fast Hf FW Il (109-4, ws, nz 5) charan kamal bhagtaa‘ man vuthay. His Lotus Feet dwell in the minds of His devotees.
fe= USHA Aas HS Il (109-4, us, He 5) vin parmaysar saglay muthay. Without the Transcendent Lord, all are plundered.
Hs Aat at ufs fos atefa SY AS AT TIS ISI (109-4, ws, we 5)
sant janaa™ kee Dhoorh nit baa’chheh naam sachay kaa gahnaa. ||3]|
I long for the dust of the feet of His humble servants. The Name of the True Lord is my decoration. ||3]|
Gos sos fa ofs TEM II (109-5, ws, we 5) oothat baithat har har gaa-ee-ai. Standing up and sitting down, I sing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fan fanes za fagee uTeint i (109-5, 75, H8 5) jis simrat var nihchal paa-ee-ai. Meditating in remembrance on Him, I obtain my Eternal Husband Lord.
saa a ys dfs efenrer Sar ats AUST ISIBSNUOI (109-6, HTS, He 5)
naanak ka-o parabh ho-ay da-i-aalaa tayraa keetaa sahnaa. ||4||43]|50]| God has become merciful to Nanak. I cheerfully accept Your Will. ||4]|43]|50||
Ta HS mMAcue HIG A We A (109-7) raag maajh asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Maajh, Ashtapadees: First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas ure II (109-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Rafe gare gat AAS i (109-8, ws, He 1) sabad rangaa-ay hukam sabaa-ay. By His Command, all are attuned to the Word of the Shabad,
Hat Fddd HIS FHS Il (109-8, ws, He 1) sachee dargeh mahal bulaa-ay. and all are called to the Mansion of His Presence, the True Court of the Lord.
He te tears As Atos AS HS UsiSfenr IAI (109-8, HS, He 1)
sachay deen da-i-aal mayray saahibaa sachay man patee-aavani-aa. ||1||
O my True Lord and Master, Merciful to the meek, my mind is pleased and appeased by the Truth. ||1]|
IG adt ME set Aafe AoSfEMr Il (109-9, ws, He 1)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sabad suhaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who are adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
wifts ou Ae AueTSt TeHsSt Hfs sATSfEmr NA TITS Il (109-10, wes, He 1)
amrit naam sadaa sukh-daata gurmatee man vasaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever the Giver of Peace. Through the Guru's Teachings, it dwells in the mind. ||1]]Pause| |
ot a Hat IG fa AT Il (109-10, ws, He 1) naa ko mayraa ha-o kis kayraa. No one is mine, and I am no one else's.
Arg Stag fysefE HS i (109-11, ws, He 1) saachaa thaakur taribhavan mayraa. The True Lord and Master of the three worlds is mine.
UGH afs af wie wedt afs wede uesefemr III (109-11, ws, Hs 1)
ha-umai kar kar jaa-ay ghanayree kar avgan pachhotaavani-aa. ||2||
Acting in egotism, so very many have died. After making mistakes, they later repent and regret. ||2||
Jan Uses A Ufa TE SUS Il (109-12, ws, nz 1)
hukam pachhaanai so har gun vakhaanai.
Those who recognize the Hukam of the Lord's Command chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ad a Aafe oth SAS Il (109-12, ws, He 1) gur kai sabad naam neesaanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are glorified with the Naam.
Aso a ufs Sa AY seta oth AavSfEnt SI (109-12, ws, Hs 1)
sabhnaa kaa dar laykhaa sachai chhootas naam suhaavani-aa. ||3]||
Everyone's account is kept in the True Court, and through the Beauty of the Naam, they are saved. ||3]|
HOHY FB" SST & ure Il (109-13, wg, we 1) manmukh bhoolaa tha-ur na paa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs are deluded; they find no place of rest.
AH efe gar T|T UES I (109-13, Hs, He 1) jam dar baDhaa chotaa khaa-ay. Bound and gagged at Death's Door, they are brutally beaten.
faa oe ao Afat 5 ATE HAS oH fomrefenr Isil (109-13, +, He 1)
bin naavai ko sang na saathee muktay naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||4||
Without the Name, there are no companions or friends. Liberation comes only by meditating on the Naam. ||4]|
WAS FS AY 3 SS Il (109-14, wry, we 1) Saakat koorhay sach na bhaavai. The false shaaktas, the faithless cynics, do not like the Truth.
efaor sro ne ATS Il (109-14, +5, He 1) dubiDhaa baaDhaa aavai jaavai. Bound by duality, they come and go in reincarnation.
fofimr Su a He aet TaHfa nafs aaefenr iull (109-15, ws, He likhi-aa laykh na maytai ko-ee gurmukh mukat karaavani-aa. ||5|| No one can erase pre-recorded destiny; the Gurmukhs are liberated. ||5||
uetas fug AS ost I 09-15, +5, He 1) pay-ee-arhai pir jaato naahee. In this world of her parents' house, the young bride did not know her Husband.
fs fegat FS Tat Il (109-16, +s, we jhooth vichhunnee rovai Dhaahee. Through falsehood, she has been separated from Him, and she cries out in misery.
Mee HOt HIG 3 US nigae aTfs suASfent IEIl (109-16, ws, He 1)
avgan muthee mahal na paa-ay avgan gun bakhsaavani-aa. ||6||
Defrauded by demerits, she does not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. But through virtuous actions, her demerits are forgiven. ||6]|
ushas fafe ast fume it (109-17, Hs, He 1) pay-ee-arhai jin jaataa pi-aaraa. She, who knows her Beloved in her parents’ house,
TaHfs FS FZ FIT il (109-17, ws, we 1) gurmukh boojhai tat beechaaraa. as Gurmukh, comes to understand the essence of reality; she contemplates her Lord.
WES Frat Ota TIES Ae OH AHTSfSnt DI (109-17, ws, He 1) aavan jaanaa thaak rahaa-ay sachai naam samaavani-aa. ||7| | Her comings and goings cease, and she is absorbed in the True Name. ||7||
TIHfs FS MAT ATS Il (109-18, ws, we 1) gurmukh boojhai akath kahaavai. The Gurmukhs understand and describe the Indescribable.
Ae SAT ATS SS Il (109-18, 15, Hs 1) sachay thaakur saacho bhaavai. True is our Lord and Master; He loves the Truth.
Sod AY Ad Fost Ay fs Te Wefsor cual 109-19, ws, He 1) naanak sach kahai baynantee sach milai gun gaavani-aa. ||8]|1]||
Nanak offers this true prayer: singing His Glorious Praises, I merge with the True One. [8] {11 |
HTS HIG 3 WJ 4 Il (109-19)
maajh mehlaa 3 ghar 1. Maajh, Third Mehl, First House:
IH Je AfsagT fess il (109-19, ws, we 3) karam hovai satguroo milaa-ay. By His Mercy, we meet the True Guru.
Yat AYO
Az Hafs Aafe fas Be Il (110-1, ws, vs 3) sayvaa surat sabad chit laa-ay.
Center your awareness on seva-selfless service-and focus your consciousness on the Word of the Shabad.
GH Hfe Het AY Ufeor Hfeor He Vor]fent All (110-1, Hs, He 3)
ha-umai maar sadaa sukh paa-i-aa maa-i-aa moh chukaavani-aa. ||1] |
Subduing your ego, you shall find a lasting peace, and your emotional attachment to Maya will be dispelled. ||1]|
IG ad HE ad Afsas & sfseosfenr Il (110-2, +5, ne 3) ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree satgur kai balihaarni-aa. I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, I am totally devoted to the True Guru.
TInt usarA dor Ht mafes ofs qe wefenr nal Fa il 110-2, +s, He 3) gurmatee pargaas ho-aa jee an-din har gun gaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Divine Light has dawned; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1||Pause]|
3G HO MA ST O'S US Il (110-3, +5, He 3) tan man khojay taa naa-o paa-ay. Search your body and mind, and find the Name.
Wes Te of TIS I (110-3, ws, He 3) Dhaavat raakhai thaak rahaa-ay. Restrain your wandering mind, and keep it in check.
ad at wat niofes we Aon safs aefsnt QU (110-4, ws, v8 3)
gur kee banee an-din gaavai sehjay bhagat karaavani-aa. ||2||
Night and day, sing the Songs of the Guru's Bani; worship the Lord with intuitive devotion. ||2||
feR ofemr niefa SAS MET II (110-4, Hs, He 3) is kaa-i-aa andar vasat asankhaa. Within this body are countless objects.
aanfa Are fies St Sar | 110-5, ws, v2 3) gurmukh saach milai taa vaykhaa. The Gurmukh attains Truth, and comes to see them.
OG VdSTH VAS HAS wisde Ae SASfer SII (110-5, ws, He 3)
na-o darvaajay dasvai muktaa anhad sabad vajaavani-aa. ||3]||
Beyond the nine gates, the Tenth Gate is found, and liberation is obtained. The Unstruck Melody of the Shabad vibrates. ||3]|
Ha Atos Ast Set il (110-5, wes, v8 3) sachaa saahib sachee naa-ee. True is the Master, and True is His Name.
ad usAet Hfs SATEt Il (110-6, Hs, He 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, He comes to dwell within the mind.
wofes Het dd df ast Ufa AS ASt uUTSfEnr II (110-6, Hs, He 3)
an-din sadaa rahai rang raataa dar sachai sojhee paavni-aa. ||4||
Night and day, remain attuned to the Lord's Love forever, and you shall obtain understanding in the True Court. ||4]|
ury Us at ATS © ATAt I (110-7, ws, He 3) paap punn kee saar na jaanee. Those who do not understand the nature of sin and virtue
SH Sat SHH Fart il (110-7, ws, ws 3) doojai laagee bharam bhulaanee. are attached to duality; they wander around deluded.
mifamrot niat Hat o He fefe fefa ures ATefanr Hull (110-7, HS, He 3) agi-aanee anDhaa mag na jaanai fir fir aavan jaavani-aa. ||5||
The ignorant and blind people do not know the way; they come and go in reincarnation over and over again. ||5||
ad Ae 3 Het AY ufeMr Il (110-8, Hs, He 3) gur sayvaa tay sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. Serving the Guru, I have found eternal peace;
IBH Hat ofr Jaf I (110-8, Hs, Hs 3) ha-umai mayraa thaak rahaa-i-aa. my ego has been silenced and subdued.
aa Ardt fife niftmers sag aure yorefsnt Ell (110-9, Hs, He 3)
gur saakhee miti-aa anDhi-aaraa bajar kapaat khulaavani-aa. ||6]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, the darkness has been dispelled, and the heavy doors have been opened. ||6||
JH wfs fs sAEMM | (110-9, ws, He 3) ha-umai maar man vasaa-i-aa. Subduing my ego, I have enshrined the Lord within my mind.
ad veel Ae fas went il (110-10, ws, v8 3) gur charnee sadaa chit laa-i-aa. I focus my consciousness on the Guru's Feet forever.
ad facut 3 Ho 36 feaHe feaHs an famrefEnr IDI (110-10, Hs, He 3)
gur kirpaa tay man tan nirmal nirmal naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||7]||
By Guru's Grace, my mind and body are immaculate and pure; I meditate on the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||7]|
Hig Host AS ST STet I 110-11, +5, v2 3) jeevan marnaa sabh tuDhai taa-ee. From birth to death, everything is for You.
fA syn fsa = efsmret il (10-11, ws, He 3) jis bakhsay tis day vadi-aa-ee. You bestow greatness upon those whom You have forgiven.
area ony fourfe ret FS AHS Hes AStSfEnr CUA (110-11, ws, Hs 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay sadaa too” jaman maran savaarni-aa. ||8]|1]|2||
O Nanak, meditating forever on the Naam, you shall be blessed in both birth and death. ||8]|1]|2]|
HS HIS 8 Il (110-12)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Hat ys fSdHS MAH UTS | (110-12, ws, He 3) mayraa parabh nirmal agam apaaraa. My God is Immaculate, Inaccessible and Infinite.
fag sast 38 HATS Il (110-13, 475, He 3) bin takrhee tolai sansaaraa. Without a scale, He weighs the universe.
qenfa de Aet gs Te afs Tet AHrSfEr UI (110-13, ws, Hs 3)
gurmukh hovai so-ee boojhai gun kahi gunee samaavani-aa. ||1||
One who becomes Gurmukh, understands. Chanting His Glorious Praises, he is absorbed into the Lord of Virtue. ||1]|
IG aot ME act afs a on His Srrefeur I (110-13, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har kaa naam man vasaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those whose minds are filled with the Name of the Lord.
A Afs od A uiofes Aa efe Ad AST uefsnr A TITS Il (110-14, ws, He 3)
jo sach laagay say an-din jaagay dar sachai sobhaa paavni-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Those who are committed to Truth remain awake and aware night and day. They are honored in the True Court. ||1]]Pause| |
mify Ae 3 mMy SA Il (110-15, ws, He 3) aap sunai tai aapay vaykhai. He Himself hears, and He Himself sees.
fH 6 oefa ad Het AS Be Il (110-15, ws, He 3) jis no nadar karay so-ee jan laykhai. Those, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, become acceptable.
nm ofs we A od ToHfe AG aHSfEnr II (110-15, ws, v2 3) aapay laa-ay la-ay so laagai gurmukh sach kamaavani-aa. ||2] | They are attached, whom the Lord Himself attaches; as Gurmukh, they live the Truth.
[21 |
fan urfy sere A fae Te ures Il (110-16, ws, He 3) jis aap bhulaa-ay so kithai hath paa-ay. Those whom the Lord Himself misleads-whose hand can they take?
usta fatto A AST FATES Il (110-16, ws, 18 3) poorab likhi-aa so maytnaa na jaa-ay. That which is pre-ordained, cannot be erased.
fas Afsag fifeor A essrat us oath frerefemr 131 (10-17, ws, Hs 3)
jin satgur mili-aa say vadbhaagee poorai karam milaavani-aa. ||3]||
Those who meet the True Guru are very fortunate and blessed; through perfect karma, He is met. ||3]]|
usin ae nafes At Il (110-17, ws, He 3) pay-ee-arhai Dhan an-din sutee. The young bride is fast asleep in her parents' home, night and day.
afs ferrdt meats Hat i (110-18, 475, He 3)
kant visaaree avgan mutee.
She has forgotten her Husband Lord; because of her faults and demerits, she is abandoned.
motes Het fed famaret faa fus ste o urefenr igil (110-18, +, nH: 3)
an-din sadaa firai billaadee bin pir need na paavni-aa. ||4|| She wanders around continually, crying out, night and day. Without her Husband Lord, she cannot get any sleep. ||4||
uss ASST AST Il (110-19, HS, He 3) pay-ee-arhai sukh-daata jaataa. In this world of her parents' home, she may come to know the Giver of peace,
ICH fs aa Aafe UES Il (110-19, ws, He 3) ha-umai maar gur sabad pachhaataa. if she subdues her ego, and recognizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Aa Aoet Het fug Te Ag Ales Fase |ull (110-19, Hs, He 3)
Sayj Suhaavee sadaa pir raavay sach seegaar banaavani-aa. ||5||
Her bed is beautiful; she ravishes and enjoys her Husband Lord forever. She is adorned with the Decorations of Truth. ||5]|
UST AAA
od BeaAts Abt Sure | ca1-1, ws, He 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh jee-a upaa-ay. He created the 8.4 million species of beings.
fA 6 dete ad FSA Te fore i cii-1, ws, v2 3) jis no nadar karay tis guroo milaa-ay. Those, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, come to meet the Guru.
foofaa ofe net AS fasHe efs AY of HoSfEmr HEN (111-2, +3, He 3)
kilbikh kaat sadaa jan nirmal dar sachai naam suhaavani-aa. ||6||
Shedding their sins, His servants are forever pure; at the True Court, they are beautified by the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6]|
But Hrat St fats Shr il 1-2, ws, ve 3) laykhaa maagai taa kin dee-ai. When they are called to settle their accounts, who will answer then?
AY oret efe et Shit I au-3, ws, us 3) sukh naahee fun doo-ai tee-ai. There shall be no peace then, from counting out by twos and threes.
nmy suff ee yg Are wind auth feorefEmr WI (11-3, ws, u8 3)
aapay bakhas la-ay parabh saachaa aapay bakhas milaavani-aa. ||7]|
The True Lord God Himself forgives, and having forgiven, He unites them with Himself. ||7]| |
mify ad 3 rfl eae Il 111-3, +75, He 3) aap karay tai aap karaa-ay. He Himself does, and He Himself causes all to be done.
us Te & Hate fee il au-4, ws, we 3) pooray gur kai sabad milaa-ay. Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, He is met.
Sot OH feS Sfsuret omy Afs frovefemr ICQI au-4, Hs, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee aapay mayl milaavani-aa. ||8]|2]|3]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained. He Himself unites in His Union. [18] 12] 131]
HS HIS 8 Il (111-5)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
fea vrfu fed ugear il (11-5, 175, nH 3) iko aap firai parchhannaa. The One Lord Himself moves about imperceptibly.
aanfa tur st feg ue Far Il 11-5, ws, ve 3) gurmukh vaykhaa taa ih man bhinnaa. As Gurmukh, I see Him, and then this mind is pleased and uplifted.
fgno sfa Hon AY ufeor eat Hfs eArSfenr AI (111-5, HTS, Hs 3)
tarisnaa taj sahj sukh paa-i-aa ayko man vasaavani-aa. ||1]||
Renouncing desire, I have found intuitive peace and poise; I have enshrined the One within my mind. ||1||
Ie Tot AG act fean AC fos wefenr it ci-6, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree ikas si-o chit laavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the One.
TaHst HO feas ufs orfeor ws df Sarefenr wa TITS ih ca11-7, ws, ve 3)
gurmatee man ikat ghar aa-i-aa sachai rang rangaavin-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, my mind has come to its only home; it is imbued with the True Color of the Lord's Love. ||1]||Pause] |
feg Fa gor S nef gorfemr it can-7, os, 8 3)
ih jag bhoolaa tai’ aap bhulaa-i-aa. This world is deluded; You Yourself have deluded it.
feg ferrfs en Safer il (1-8, ws, ws 3) ik visaar doojai lobhaa-i-aa. Forgetting the One, it has become engrossed in duality.
wotes Het fed afk gor fag ae va ureter |QN (au-8, os, Hs 3)
an-din sadaa firai bharam bhoolaa bin naavai dukh paavni-aa. ||2| |
Night and day, it wanders around endlessly, deluded by doubt; without the Name, it suffers in pain. ||2]|
A df aS aan fears It ciu1-9, 113, He 3) jo rang raatay karam biDhaatay. Those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord, the Architect of Destiny
Od AS 3 Aa BS AS Il (111-9, ws, vs 3) gur sayvaa tay jug chaaray jaatay. -by serving the Guru, they are known throughout the four ages.
fan 3 orfy efe efsmret af & of AHefemr BI ”iti-9, +s, He 3)
jis no aap day-ay vadi-aa-ee har kai naam samaavani-aa. ||3] |
Those, upon whom the Lord bestows greatness, are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
wenn vfs ofa SS ard Il (11-10, +s, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi har chaytai naahee. Being in love with Maya, they do not think of the Lord.
AHufs sa" SY ATT I (111-10, Hes, He 3) jampur baDhaa dukh sahaahee. Bound and gagged in the City of Death, they suffer in terrible pain.
wot Sor fae sets & ore Hone uty usefEnr ISI (111-10, +s, He 3) annaa bolaa kichh nadar na aavai manmukh paap pachaavani-aa. ||4|| Blind and deaf, they see nothing at all; the self-willed manmukhs rot away in sin. ||4||
fefa df as A 30 urfu fees BS th au-11, ws, He 3) ik rang raatay jo tuDh aap liv laa-ay. Those, whom You attach to Your Love, are attuned to Your Love.
ofe safs 33 ufe ave Il caui-11, +, H 3) bhaa-ay bhagat tayrai man bhaa-ay. Through loving devotional worship, they become pleasing to Your Mind.
Afsag Aefe Ae AMES AS feet wey uATSfeor ull (111-12, ws, Hs 3) satgur sayvan sadaa sukh-daata sabh ichhaa aap pujaavani-aa. ||5|| They serve the True Guru, the Giver of eternal peace, and all their desires are fulfilled.
HSI] dfs ME Sat AE AGS Il ca11-12, ws, He 3)
har jee-o tayree sadaa sarnaa-ee. O Dear Lord, I seek Your Sanctuary forever.
mma sufats & Sfsnret il cai-13, ws, He 3) aapay bakhsihi day vadi-aa-ee. You Yourself forgive us, and bless us with Glorious Greatness.
mHos fan dfs 3 ore Fafa afe ay fomrefenr EN au-13, +s, He 3)
jamkaal tis nayrh na aavai jo har har naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||6||
The Messenger of Death does not draw near those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||6]|
Wofes IS A The SS Il (111-14, +5, He 3) an-din raatay jo har bhaa-ay. Night and day, they are attuned to His Love; they are pleasing to the Lord.
AS yufs AS Afs fess Wn ca1-14, ws, ne 3) mayrai parabh maylay may! milaa-ay. My God merges with them, and unites them in Union.
He! Het Ad Sot Adeet J nm AG getefenk DI i-14, ws, Hs 3)
sadaa sadaa sachay tayree sarnaa-ee too” aapay sach bujhaavani-aa. ||7]|
Forever and ever, O True Lord, I seek the Protection of Your Sanctuary; You Yourself inspire us to understand the Truth. ||7]|
fie Ag WS" A AfSs AWTS Il (111-15, 473, He 3) jin sach jaataa say sach samaanay. Those who know the Truth are absorbed in Truth.
Ufs TE Wels AT SAS I 111-15, ws, He 3) har gun gaavahi sach vakhaanay. They sing the Lord's Glorious Praises, and speak the Truth.
soa oth gs Saat for wis saat wefenr ICIS (11-16, Hs, He 3)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee nij ghar taarhee laavani-aa. ||8||3||4||
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam remain unattached and balanced; in the home of the inner self, they are absorbed in the primal trance of deep meditation.
[18] 13] 141]
HS HIS 3 Il (111-16)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Rafe Hd AMT AME I (111-16, 4s, He 3) sabad marai SO mu-aa jaapai. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad is truly dead.
ae oe UU SY S AST Il (111-17, ws, He 3) kaal na chaapai dukh na santaapai. Death does not crush him, and pain does not afflict him.
nat fefs fife afs mret afs He Afs AHSfEMr A c11-17, ws, He 3)
jotee vich mil jot samaanee sun man sach samaavani-aa. ||1||
His light merges and is absorbed into the Light, when he hears and merges in the Truth. ||1]|
o@ ad ME act as & of Hat urefenr I catt-18, +s, He 3) ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har kai naa-ay sobhaa paavni-aa. I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the Lord's Name, which brings us to glory.
Afsag Afe Afs fos ofenr Tenst Ata AHTSfEMr A TIS I c1i1-18, Hs, Hs 3)
satgur sayv sach chit laa-i-aa gurmatee sahj samaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who serves the True Guru, and focuses his consciousness on Truth, following the Guru's Teachings, is absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||1||Pause| |
afer act aa tte Jee Il (111-19, ws, vs 3) kaa-i-aa kachee kachaa cheer handhaa-ay. This human body is transitory, and transitory are the garments it wears.
SH Wat HIG S US Il (111-19, ws, we 3) doojai laagee mahal na paa-ay. Attached to duality, no one attains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
ust A92 notes Aodt fed fea ast fas fue go su uefenr IQ (112-1, ws, He 3)
an-din jaldee firai din raatee bin pir baho dukh paavni-aa. ||2|| Night and day, day and night, they burn. Without her Husband Lord, the soul-bride suffers in terrible pain. ||2]|
oot WES o na ATS I (112-1, Hs, He 3) dayhee jaat na aagai jaa-ay. Her body and her status shall not go with her to the world hereafter.
fra Sut Haha fee SS AG AHS I (112-2, ws, ve 3)
jithai laykhaa mangee-ai tithai chhutai sach kamaa-ay.
Where she is called to answer for her account, there, she shall be emancipated only by true actions.
Afsag Aefe A Ueds we Ge at Ar]fsur BI (112-2, +s, He 3)
satgur sayvan say Dhanvantay aithai othai naam samaavani-aa. ||3]||
Those who serve the True Guru shall prosper; here and hereafter, they are absorbed in the Naam. |[3]|
3 afe Atrg gave Il (112-3, ns, He 3) bhai bhaa-ay seegaar banaa-ay. She who adorns herself with the Love and the Fear of God,
TT USAT HIG We US Il (112-3, ws, vs 3) gur parsaadee mahal ghar paa-ay. by Guru's Grace, obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence as her home.
wofes Het de feg TSt HAS da gerefSur Sil (112-3, Hs, He 3)
an-din sadaa ravai din raatee majeethai rang banaavani-aa. ||4| |
Night and day, day and night, she constantly ravishes and enjoys her Beloved. She is dyed in the permanent color of His Love. ||4||
Hao fug SA Het aS Il (112-4, ws, He 3) sabhnaa pir vasai sadaa naalay. The Husband Lord abides with everyone, always;
Td UIA & Sets foas I (112-4, ws, ne 3) gur parsaadee ko nadar nihaalay. but how rare are those few who, by Guru's Grace, obtain His Glance of Grace.
Ae yg ifs Gs Ca ate fosur orfy fovefenr ull (112-4, ws, He 3) mayraa parabh at oocho oochaa kar kirpaa aap milaavani-aa. ||5] | My God is the Highest of the High; granting His Grace, He merges us into Himself.
[5] |
Hfeor Hfo fes Aa AST I (112-5, Hs, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi ih jag sutaa. This world is asleep in emotional attachment to Maya.
omy fers nifs feerst il (112-5, +175, He 3) naam visaar ant vigutaa. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, it ultimately comes to ruin.
fan 3 AST A Were qenfs Ast urefeur Ell (112-6, ws, Hs 3)
jis tay sutaa so jaagaa-ay gurmat sojhee paavni-aa. ||6]|
The One who put it to sleep shall also awaken it. Through the Guru's Teachings, understanding dawns. ||6]||
mifug ub A SdH TSS I 112-6, ws, ne 3) api-o pee-ai so bharam gavaa-ay. One who drinks in this Nectar, shall have his delusions dispelled.
aa usAte Hats afs ure Il (112-6, ws, Hs 3)
gur parsaad mukat gat paa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, the state of liberation is attained.
saat Ist HST Saat wry wfs frorefenr oi (12-7, ws, He 3) bhagtee rataa sadaa bairaagee aap maar milaavani-aa. ||7]||
One who is imbued with devotion to the Lord, remains always balanced and detached. Subduing selfishness and conceit, he is united with the Lord. ||7]||
mify Bure Ga we i (112-7, ws, ve 3) aap upaa-ay DhanDhai laa-ay. He Himself creates, and He Himself assigns us to our tasks.
oY Beant fara mrfy nese il (112-8, us, v8 3) lakh cha-uraasee rijak aap aprhaa-ay. He Himself gives sustenance to the 8.4 million species of beings.
ood oH fame vfs v3 A fA aS A ae aoeSfanr ICSU (112-8, Hs, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay sach raatay jo tis bhaavai so kaar karaavani-aa. ||8||4||5||
O Nanak, those who meditate on the Naam are atuned to Truth. They do that which is pleasing to His Will. ||8]|4]|5]|
HS HIG 3 Il (112-9)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
meta Sta wre safer | (112-9, ws, He 3) andar heeraa laal banaa-i-aa. Diamonds and rubies are produced deep within the self.
ad a Rafe uate userfemr It 112-9, +, ne 3) gur kai sabad parakh parkhaa-i-aa. They are assayed and valued tthrough the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fio AY US Ad euefe AY anSct SefEnt AU (112-10, ws, He 3)
jin sach palai sach vakaaneh sach kasvatee laavani-aa. ||1]|
Those who have gathered Truth, speak Truth; they apply the Touch-stone of Truth. H1II
oG act AE act as at aeat vfs sAv]fenr Il (112-10, ns, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gur kee banee man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Word of the Guru's Bani within their minds.
nino Hs fadno ufeor Ast AfS fhorefemr an TIS Mh 112-11, +s, He 3)
anjan maahi niranjan paa-i-aa jotee jot milaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the midst of the darkness of the world, they obtain the Immaculate One, and their light merges into the Light. ||1]||Pause] |
feR ofemr niefa ggS UATST Ih (112-12, 47s, He 3) is kaa-i-aa andar bahut pasaaraa. Within this body are countless vast vistas;
oH fedAe mits want wrurat Il (112-12, ws, nH 3) naam niranjan at agam apaaraa. the Immaculate Naam is totally Inaccessible and Infinite.
dante de Het ure ymy suf ferefanr iN (112-12, ws, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so-ee paa-ay aapay bakhas milaavani-aa. ||2||
He alone becomes Gurmukh and obtains it, whom the Lord forgives, and unites with Himself. ||2] |
Aa sag Ag fesre it (112-13, ws, ws 3) mayraa thaakur sach drirh-aa-ay. My Lord and Master implants the Truth.
aa usAret Afs fez Be ll (112-13, ws, vs 3) gur parsaadee sach chit laa-ay. By Guru's Grace, one's consciousness is attached to the Truth.
Ae Ay 2d Asal eet Ad Afs ANSfEMr ISI (112-13, ws, He 3) sacho sach vartai sabhnee thaa-ee sachay sach samaavani-aa. ||3]|| The Truest of the True is pervading everywhere; the true ones merge in Truth. ||3]|
fuged A Ha femal (112-14, ws, vs 3) vayparvaahu sach mayraa pi-aaraa. The True Carefree Lord is my Beloved.
fxofeud meas ASSIS Il (112-14, ues, He 3) kilvikh avgan kaatanhaaraa. He cuts out our sinful mistakes and evil actions;
un Uifs Ae fourein 3 afe safe fesrefsur inet (112-15, 1s, He 3)
paraym pareet sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai bhai bhaa-ay bhagat darirhaavni-aa. ||4||
with love and affection, meditate forever on Him. He implants the Fear of God and loving devotional worship within us. ||4]|
dt safs Ast A OAS STS I (112-15, ws, He 3) tayree bhagat sachee jay sachay bhaavai. Devotional worship is True, if it pleases the True Lord.
mm Sf o UES Il (112-16, +5, He 3) aapay day-ay na pachhotaavai. He Himself bestows it; He does not regret it later.
H3o' Hort at Sa ast Hae Hfe HlerefEnr HUI (112-16, ws, 43 3)
sabhnaa jee-aa kaa ayko daataa sabday maar jeevaavni-aa. ||5]| He alone is the Giver of all beings. The Lord kills with the Word of His Shabad, and then revives. ||5||
dfs 30 asg H aet ord Il (112-16, ns, He 3) har tuDh baajhahu mai ko-ee naahee. Other than You, Lord, nothing is mine.
dfs 30 ASt 3 30 ArH I (112-17, ws, ne 3) har tuDhai sayvee tai tuDh saalaahee. I serve You, Lord, and I praise You.
mint Hf SI ys AS us ae F urSfer EN (112-17, ws, 2 3)
aapay mayl laihu parabh saachay poorai karam too” paavni-aa. ||6||
You unite me with Yourself, O True God. Through perfect good karma You are obtained. ||6||
H dg 3 aet 30 AT I 112-18, ws, He 3) mai hor na ko-ee tuDhai jayhaa. For me, there is no other like You.
Sot oedt ASA Sa" I (112-18, 1175, nH 3) tayree nadree seejhas dayhaa. By Your Glance of Grace, my body is blessed and sanctified.
motes Afs AHS os aufs aaHfe AoA AHSfeMr IDI (112-18, Hs, He 3)
an-din saar samaal har raakhahi gurmukh sahj samaavani-aa. ||7]||
Night and day, the Lord takes care of us and protects us. The Gurmukhs are absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||7]|
30 Aes H Ig 3 et It (112-19, ws, nH 3) tuDh jayvad mai hor na ko-ee. For me, there is no other as Great as You.
3a wm frart mmy det it (112-19, ws, He 3) tuDh aapay sirjee aapay go-ee. You Yourself create, and You Yourself destroy.
UST AWS 3 uma ot ule sfs Heats Sea STH Hoefer WC NUIEN (113-1, +s, He 3)
too” aapay hee gharh bhann savaareh naanak naam suhaavani-aa. ||8]|5||6]| You Yourself create, destroy and adorn. O Nanak, we are adorned and embellished with the Naam. ||8]|5]|6]|
HS HIS 8 Il (113-1)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
AS We nM} SHSTST Il (113-1, ws, He 3) sabh ghat aapay bhoganhaaraa. He is the Enjoyer of all hearts.
WEY SIS MATH MUST | (113-2, HTS, He 3) alakh vartai agam apaaraa. The Invisible, Inaccessible and Infinite is pervading everywhere.
qd & Aafe Aa ofe ys fame Aon Afs AHrefEnr NA (113-2, Hs, He 3)
gur kai sabad mayraa har parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai sehjay sach samaavani-aa. || 1] | Meditating on my Lord God, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am intuitively absorbed in the Truth. |[1]|
JG act HG act as Age His SrrefEnr Ih (113-3, ws, 2 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gur sabad man vasaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who implant the Word of the Guru's Shabad in their minds.
Hae AS ST HS fA OS HOA Hs ANTSfenr NU TIS Ml (113-3, ws, we 3) sabad soojhai taa man si-o loojhai mansaa maar samaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. When someone understands the Shabad, then he wrestles with his own mind; subduing his desires, he merges with the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
us eS Hats AAS Il (113-4, ws, He 3) panch doot muheh sansaaraa. The five enemies are plundering the world.
HOHY vid Afa BATT Il (113-4, Hs, He 3) manmukh anDhay suDh na saaraa. The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand or appreciate this.
Tsnfe de A nue wg we Us es Hale usar MQM (113-5, ws, we 3) gurmukh hovai so apnaa ghar raakhai panch doot sabad pachaavani-aa. ||2|| Those who become Gurmukh-their houses are protected. The five enemies are destroyed by the Shabad. ||2||
fefa aaufa eT AS Sf TS th (113-5, ws, He 3) ik gurmukh sadaa sachai rang raatay. The Gurmukhs are forever imbued with love for the True One.
Hon ys Aefs mofeg HS Il (113-6, ns, ws 3) sehjay parabh sayveh an-din maatay. They serve God with intuitive ease. Night and day, they are intoxicated with His Love.
fife Uisu AS ae aefe ofa efs Aa uefEnr WS (113-6, ws, 8 3)
mil pareetam sachay gun gaavahi har dar sobhaa paavni-aa. ||3]|
Meeting with their Beloved, they sing the Glorious Praises of the True one; they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
San fa ny Surfer th 113-7, ws, ve 3) aykam aykai aap upaa-i-aa. First, the One created Himself;
tfaar gar ffafa arfemr it (13-7, ws, He 3) dubiDhaa doojaa taribaDh maa-i-aa. second, the sense of duality; third, the three-phased Maya.
aCe ust genta Sut As AG aHrefEnr gil (113-7, ws, He 3)
cha-uthee pa-orhee gurmukh oochee sacho sach kamaavani-aa. | |4| |
The fourth state, the highest, is obtained by the Gurmukh, who practices Truth, and only Truth. ||4] |
AS 3 Ae A Ae Se Il (113-8, ws, He 3) sabh hai sachaa jay sachay bhaavai. Everything which is pleasing to the True Lord is true.
fafe AY AST A Af ANTS Il (113-8, WS, He 3) jin sach jaataa so sahj samaavai. Those who know the Truth merge in intuitive peace and poise.
aay agat AS Aets ATS ATS ANSfEMr UI (113-8, HTS, He 3)
gurmukh karnee sachay sayveh saachay jaa-ay samaavani-aa. ||5||
The life-style of the Gurmukh is to serve the True Lord. He goes and blends with the True Lord. ||5]|
Ae FST & neg F SMT Il (113-9, ws, oe 3) sachay baajhahu ko avar na doo-aa. Without the True One, there is no other at all.
ent afar ra afer afr HT II (113-9, os, He 3) doojai laag jag khap khap moo-aa. Attached to duality, the world is distracted and distressed to death.
aenfy de A Sa We Sa Afe wy urefenr Mell 113-10, ws, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so ayko jaanai ayko sayv sukh paavni-aa. ||6]|
One who becomes Gurmukh knows only the One. Serving the One, peace is obtained. [16] |
aba #3 Afs Aafs SHH I 113-10, 1s, v8 3)
jee-a jant sabh saran tumaaree. All beings and creatures are in the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
mmgy ofg eufs Xet ust ATS il (113-10, ws, He 3) aapay Dhar daykheh kachee pakee saaree. You place the chessmen on the board; You see the imperfect and the perfect as well.
motes unt arg aae nim Afs fhorefanr IDI (113-11, Hrs, Hs 3) an-din aapay kaar karaa-ay aapay may! milaavani-aa. ||7]|| Night and day, You cause people to act; You unite them in Union with Yourself. ||7]|
3 omy Hafa sufa Tefs i 113-11, +3, 2 3) too” aapay mayleh vaykheh hadoor. You Yourself unite, and You see Yourself close at hand.
Ag ufs erty sfowr saute i (113-12, ws, v2 3) sabh meh aap rahi-aa bharpoor. You Yourself are totally pervading amongst all.
Sot nN otfu sas ToHfe ASt urSfanr CHENIN (113-12, Hs, He 3)
naanak aapay aap vartai gurmukh sojhee paavni-aa. ||8]|6||7]||
O Nanak, God Himself is pervading and permeating everywhere; only the Gurmukhs understand this. ||8]|6||7]|
HS HIS 3 Il (113-13)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
nits wet ae at HtSt i 13-13, ws, He 3) amrit banee gur kee meethee. The Nectar of the Guru's Bani is very sweet.
gente fess fas oft Stet it (13-13, +5, 2 3) gurmukh virlai kinai chakh deethee. Rare are the Gurmukhs who see and taste it.
wists UdIA HO oA ule Uf AS Ase SHefEnr A (113-13, +5, He 3)
antar pargaas mahaa ras peevai dar sachai sabad vajaavani-aa. ||1||
The Divine Light dawns within, and the supreme essence is found. In the True Court, the Word of the Shabad vibrates. ||1]|
Ie Tet AG ad Ts saat fos wefEnr it (113-14, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gur charnee chit laavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet.
Afsag 3 vifys Ag ATS HS oS HE Yorefenr Ul TIS Ul 1113-15, ws, ne 3)
satgur hai amrit sar saachaa man naavai mail chukaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The True Guru is the True Pool of Nectar; bathing in it, the mind is washed clean of all filth. ||1]|Pause||
3a Ad fas nis o ufemr it 113-15, ns, He 3) tayraa sachay kinai ant na paa-i-aa. Your limits, O True Lord, are not known to anyone.
ag usrte fas feos fos wfeor tt 1113-16, +3, He 3) gur parsaad kinai virlai chit laa-i-aa. Rare are those who, by Guru's Grace, focus their consciousness on You.
30 Wats 3 aA aad AG SS at FY SSM MI (113-16, ws, Hs 3) tuDh saalaahi na rajaa kabahoo™ sachay naavai kee bhukh laavani-aa. ||2|| Praising You, I am never satisfied; such is the hunger I feel for the True Name. ||2]|
Sa Sat neg o shor Il 113-17, ws, v2 3) ayko vaykhaa avar na bee-aa. I see only the One, and no other.
Ts usAet nifigs Ub i (113-17, ws, us 3) gur parsaadee amrit pee-aa. By Guru's Grace, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
qs & Hate four foest Hon Ate AHTefEnr WM (113-17, Hs, He 3)
gur kai sabad tikhaa nivaaree sehjay sookh samaavani-aa. ||3]||
My thirst is quenched by the Word of the Guru's Shabad; I am absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||3]||
g36 ues uste fSniat i (113-18, Hs, He 3) ratan padaarath palar ti-aagai. The Priceless Jewel is discarded like straw;
HOHY nia SA STS Ba Il (113-18, ws, Hs 3) manmukh anDhaa doojai bhaa-ay laagai. the blind self-willed manmukhs are attached to the love of duality.
A dn Aet ee ure AUS AY Oo Uefent ISI (113-19, Hs, He 3)
jo beejai so-ee fal paa-ay supnai sukh na paavni-aa. ||4]|
As they plant, so do they harvest. They shall not obtain peace, even in their dreams. [141]
nual fasur ad ASt AS ue Il 113-19, Hs, He 3) apnee kirpaa karay so-ee jan paa-ay. Those who are blessed with His Mercy find the Lord.
Td a Wee Hfs SAS | (113-19, ws, He 3) gur kaa sabad man vasaa-ay. The Word of the Guru's Shabad abides in the mind.
yar 948 Wofes Het dd F viefs S fs SoH Varefenr UII (114-1, WS, He 3)
an-din sadaa rahai bhai andar bhai maar bharam chukaavani-aa. ||5|| Night and day, they remain in the Fear of God; conquering their fears, their doubts are dispelled. ||5||
SdH Voter Het AY USM I (114-1, ws, He 3) bharam chukaa-i-aa sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. Dispelling their doubts, they find a lasting peace.
ad usAte ugh UE uUfeMe Ih (114-2, Hs, He 3) gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, the supreme status is attained.
nisd fone fasHe wet dfs ge AoA aefemr el (114-2, ws, He 3)
antar nirmal nirmal banee har gun sehjay gaavani-aa. ||6]|
Deep within, they are pure, and their words are pure as well; intuitively, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||6] |
fAfigfs AMS He Tas | (114-3, ws, ne 3) simrit saasat bayd vakhaanai. They recite the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Vedas,
SIH FH Sz HAS Il (114-3, 7s, ws 3) bharmay bhoolaa tat na jaanai. but deluded by doubt, they do not understand the essence of reality.
faa Afsag AS AY oS Ue Be ey anefenr DI (114-3, 25, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay sukh na paa-ay dukho dukh kamaavani-aa. ||7||
Without serving the True Guru, they find no peace; they earn only pain and misery. [711
mify ad for wird ote I 114-4, ns, Hs 3) aap karay kis aakhai ko-ee. The Lord Himself acts; unto whom should we complain?
wirafs web A Fer Tet I 114-4, ws, we 3) aakhan jaa-ee-ai jay bhoolaa ho-ee. How can anyone complain that the Lord has made a mistake?
SOA MN AT ATS STH STH AHS CMON (114-4, ws, He 3)
naanak aapay karay karaa-ay naamay naam samaavani-aa. ||8]||7||8| |
O Nanak, the Lord Himself does, and causes things to be done; chanting the Naam, we are absorbed in the Naam. ||8]||7||8] |
HTS HIG 3 Il (114-5) maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
~ oN
my dat Aah ASE Il (114-5, us, He 3) aapay rangay sahj subhaa-ay. He Himself imbues us with His Love, with effortless ease.
ad a Rafe of da Gare I (114-5, 5, 2 3) gur kai sabad har rang charhaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are dyed in the color of the Lord's Love.
Ho 36 3S" SHS sha woot s ofS Jaq varefenr Ul (114-6, rs, He 3)
man tan rataa rasnaa rang chaloolee bhai bhaa-ay rang charhaavani-aa. ||1||
This mind and body are so imbued, and this tongue is dyed in the deep crimson color of the poppy. Through the Love and the Fear of God, we are dyed in this color. ||1]|
JG ad ME act fags vife sAefemr Ih 114-6, Hs, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree nirbha-o man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Fearless Lord within their minds.
as fasu 3 fs foss@ fomrfenr fay s@ne Aafe soefavr NA TITS Ml (114-7, ws, ve 3) gur kirpaa tay har nirbha-o Dhi-aa-i-aa bikh bha-ojal sabad taraavani-aa. ||1]| rahaa- 0. By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Fearless Lord; the Shabad has carried me across the poisonous world-ocean. ||1]||Pause| |
HOHY Hag ashy VSTST Il 114-8, ws, He 3) manmukh mugaDh karahi chaturaa-ee. The idiotic self-willed manmukhs try to be clever,
oat Ost ae & uret i (114-8, 475, v2 3) naataa Dhotaa thaa-ay na paa-ee. but in spite of their bathing and washing, they shall not be acceptable.
Ao utfeor so wet afs meas uestefenr IH (114-8, ws, He 3) jayhaa aa-i-aa tayhaa jaasee kar avgan pachhotaavani-aa. ||2|| As they came, so shall they go, regretting the mistakes they made. ||2||
HoH nit fos o AS Il (114-9, ws, 3 3) manmukh anDhay kichhoo na soojhai. The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand anything;
Hee ferrfe wre Sot FF Il (114-9, ws, 3 3)
maran likhaa-ay aa-ay nahee boojhai.
death was pre-ordained for them when they came into the world, but they do not understand.
HOHY AGH Ad St ure fag aS ASH Tetefanr Sil (114-10, ws, He 3)
manmukh karam karay nahee paa-ay bin naavai janam gavaavni-aa. ||3]|
The self-willed manmukhs may practice religious rituals, but they do not obtain the Name; without the Name, they lose this life in vain. ||3]|
Ay adel AaE FT ATS Ill (114-10, ws, ve 3) sach karnee sabad hai saar. The practice of Truth is the essence of the Shabad.
ud afe ure He Erg I 114-11, 2, v8 3) poorai gur paa-ee-ai mokh du-aar. Through the Perfect Guru, the gate of salvation is found.
wofes wat Hafe Have Afs TS df darefeur igil 14-11, ws, v8 3)
an-din banee sabad sunaa-ay sach raatay rang rangaavin-aa. ||4||
So, night and day, listen to the Word of the Guru's Bani, and the Shabad. Let yourself be colored by this love. ||4]|
dHo dfs a TSt ST BS th (114-12, ws, He 3) rasnaa har ras raatee rang laa-ay. The tongue, imbued with the Lord's Essence, delights in His Love.
HO 36 Hfoor AafA ASS Ul (114-12, ws, He 3) man tan mohi-aa sahj subhaa-ay. My mind and body are enticed by the Lord's Sublime Love.
Fon ufsy fimre urfeur Aon Aofa forefemr ull (114-12, ws, He 3) sehjay pareetam pi-aaraa paa-i-aa sehjay sahj milaavani-aa. ||5|| I have easily obtained my Darling Beloved; I am intuitively absorbed in celestial peace.
[5] |
fan vies da Ret TE WS I 114-13, ws, ns 3) jis andar rang so-ee gun gaavai. Those who have the Lord's Love within, sing His Glorious Praises;
ad a Aafe Aon Af ANTS Il (114-13, 475, He 3)
gur kai sabad sehjay sukh samaavai.
through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are intuitively absorbed in celestial peace.
8 afoot Ae fs fees as AS fas wefevr El (114-14, ws, 8 3)
ha-o balihaaree sadaa tin vitahu gur sayvaa chit laavani-aa. ||6| |
I am forever a sacrifice to those who dedicate their consciousness to the Guru's Service. ||6||
Ae Ad Afe ust il (114-14, ws, He 3) sachaa sacho sach pateejai. The True Lord is pleased with Truth, and only Truth.
Te UAT nies StH I (114-14, ws, He 3) gur parsaadee andar bheejai. By Guru's Grace, one's inner being is deeply imbued with His Love.
aff nats ofs ge wets wm afe Afs HorvefEnr IDI (114-15, +75, He 3)
bais suthaan har gun gaavahi aapay kar sat manaavni-aa. ||7| |
Sitting in that blessed place, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, who Himself inspires us to accept His Truth. ||7]||
fAA 6 Sets ad A Ue Il (114-15, ws, He 3) jis no nadar karay so paa-ay. That one, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtains it.
Te UAT TBH WES Il (114-16, ws, He 3) gur parsaadee ha-umai jaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, egotism departs.
Sod OH ZA Ho vista els AY AST uSfEnr ICICI! (114-16, HS, He 3) naanak naam vasai man antar dar sachai sobhaa paavni-aa. ||8]||8]|9]|
O Nanak, that one, within whose mind the Name dwells, is honored in the True Court. [18] 18] 191]
HS HIG 3 Il (114-17)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh Third Mehl:
Afsag Afent zat efsnret it 114-17, ws, v2 3) satgur sayvi-ai vadee vadi-aa-ee. Serving the True Guru is the greatest greatness.
dfs Ht ofss SA fe mre it 114-17, os, ne 3) har jee achint vasai man aa-ee. The Dear Lord automatically comes to dwell in the mind.
ofa MG AefaG fasy 3 vifiys fafs uts fsa foe soefenr WA (114-17, 1s, H8 3) har jee-o safli-o birakh hai amrit jin peetaa tis tikhaa lahaavani-aa. ||1]|
The Dear Lord is the fruit-bearing tree; drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, thirst is quenched. ||1]|
IG ad ME act AG Hats Afs ferefanr Ih (114-18, Hs, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sach sangat may! milaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the one who leads me to join the True Congregation.
dfs ASHafs wma AS aE Aaet ofs Te Wefanr al TIS tl (114-19, ws, ne 3)
har satsangat aapay maylai gur sabdee har gun gaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord Himself unites me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
ust AAU
Afsag Aet Aafe AofEMr I 15-1, us, He 3) satgur sayvee sabad suhaa-i-aa. I serve the True Guru; the Word of His Shabad is beautiful.
fate afs at om Hfe sarfer th 5-1, ws, He 3) jin har kaa naam man vasaa-i-aa. Through it, the Name of the Lord comes to dwell within the mind.
dfs fasHe ICH HS Tee vfs AS AST USfEnt 2H 115-1, ws, He 3) har nirmal ha-umai mail gavaa-ay dar sachai sobhaa paavni-aa. ||2]| The Pure Lord removes the filth of egotism, and we are honored in the True Court.
21] fag ad oH 8 ufenr ATS I 115-2, 173, H8 3)
bin gur naam na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. Without the Guru, the Naam cannot be obtained.
fra AfoR god faworte i (115-2, Hs, He 3) siDh saaDhik rahay billaa-ay. The Siddhas and the seekers lack it; they weep and wail.
fag aa AS AY 3 dat US Sha Te wefan WSN (115-2, ws, we 3)
bin gur sayvay sukh na hovee poorai bhaag gur paavni-aa. ||3]|
Without serving the True Guru, peace is not obtained; through perfect destiny, the Guru is found. ||3]|
feg Ho mart aet aonfe SH I 115-3, 5, v2 3) ih man aarsee ko-ee gurmukh vaykhai. This mind is a mirror; how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, see themselves in it.
Hoe 3 Bat A ICH AS I (115-3, 5, He 3) morchaa na laagai jaa ha-umai sokhai. Rust does not stick to those who burn their ego.
Mods Wat fesHs Ase SHS Te Agel Afs ANSfevr Sil (115-4, Hs, He 3) anhat banee nirmal sabad vajaa-ay gur sabdee sach samaavani-aa. ||4| | The Unstruck Melody of the Bani resounds through the Pure Word of the Shabad; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are absorbed into the True One. ||4||
fag Afsas fag o Sfimr Ate i 115-4, ws, He 3) bin satgur kihu na daykhi-aa jaa-ay. Without the True Guru, the Lord cannot be seen.
afa fasur ats miry fest feat i 5-5, us, He 3) gur kirpaa kar aap ditaa dikhaa-ay. Granting His Grace, He Himself has allowed me to see Him.
mma orfu orf ffs afoot AoA AofA AHSfanr MUL (115-5, HTS, He 3)
aapay aap aap mil rahi-aa sehjay sahj samaavani-aa. ||5||
All by Himself, He Himself is permeating and pervading; He is intuitively absorbed in celestial peace. ||5||
aenfy de A fear fr fos we Il 115-6, 15, He 3) gurmukh hovai so ikas si-o liv laa-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh embraces love for the One.
SW SIH TT Hale AGES Il (115-6, ws, He 3) doojaa bharam gur sabad jalaa-ay. Doubt and duality are burned away by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
afent niefs zen ad aura ony fourg Ag urefsnt EN (115-7, 175, He 3)
kaa-i-aa andar vanaj karay vaapaaraa naam niDhaan sach paavni-aa. ||6||
Within his body, he deals and trades, and obtains the Treasure of the True Name. [|6]|
aaHfy agat ofe atefs Arg il (115-7, ws, He 3) gurmukh karnee har keerat saar. The life-style of the Gurmukh is sublime; he sings the Praises of the Lord.
TaHfe us He BMT Il (115-8, HS, ne 3) gurmukh paa-ay mokh du-aar. The Gurmukh finds the gate of salvation.
wofes df ga ae ae niefs Hots gerefsur IDI (115-8, Ws, He 3)
an-din rang rataa gun gaavai andar mahal bulaavani-aa. ||7| |
Night and day, he is imbued with the Lord's Love. He sings the Lord's Glorious Praises, and he is called to the Mansion of His Presence. ||7| |
Afsag ost fis fefemr It 115-9, +3, ne 3) satgur daataa milai milaa-i-aa. The True Guru, the Giver, is met when the Lord leads us to meet Him.
ud stat His Hae SAEMM I (115-9, ws, Hs 3) poorai bhaag man sabad vasaa-i-aa. Through perfect destiny, the Shabad is enshrined in the mind.
soa on fue efsuret afs AS A TE WefSur WCUCNIOM (115-9, ws, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee har sachay kay gun gaavani-aa. ||8]|9]|10||
O Nanak, the greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained by chanting the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||8]|9||10] |
HS HIS 8 Il (115-10)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
miry Zee st AS forse UTS I (115-10, 4s, He 3) aap vanjaa-ay taa sabh kichh paa-ay. Those who lose their own selves obtain everything.
ad Agel Ast fee BS i (115-11, ws, He 3)
gur sabdee sachee liv laa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they enshrine Love for the True one.
Ay Zenfo Ay Hwefs AY erg Asef WAM (115-11, Hs, He 3) sach vana‘jahi sach sanghrahi sach vaapaar karaavani-aa. ||1]| They trade in Truth, they gather in Truth, and they deal only in Truth. |[1]|
Ie adt ME at ae Te nofeq wefenr I (115-11, Ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har gun an-din gaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day.
I 3a F oag Ae Rafe ssuret Sefer AU TTS ll 115-12, ws, ws 3)
ha-o tayraa too” thaakur mayraa sabad vadi-aa-ee dayvani-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am Yours, You are my Lord and Master. You bestow greatness through the Word of Your Shabad. ||1||Pause] |
zor zeus Afs Hatem I 115-13, ws, He 3) vaylaa vakhat sabh suhaa-i-aa. That time, that moment is totally beautiful,
fas Ae AS HfS ster Ih (115-13, HTS, He 3) jit sachaa mayray man bhaa-i-aa. when the True One becomes pleasing to my mind.
Ae Afent Ag efsuret as faa 3 Ag UefEMr II 1115-13, +s, He 3)
sachay sayvi-ai sach vadi-aa-ee gur kirpaa tay sach paavni-aa. ||2||
Serving the True One, true greatness is obtained. By Guru's Grace, the True One is obtained. ||2||
a@ sno Afsafs 3S US I (115-14, Hs, He 3) bhaa-o bhojan satgur tuthai paa-ay. The food of spiritual love is obtained when the True Guru is pleased.
CY ° La Mia TH Ya Tis IA His SATS Il (115-14, ws, He 3) an ras chookai har ras man vasaa-ay. Other essences are forgotten, when the Lord's Essence comes to dwell in the mind.
Ag H3y Ada AY wet ys Te SF ureter WS (115-15, ws, we 3)
sach santokh sahj sukh banee pooray gur tay paavni-aa. ||3]||
Truth, contentment and intuitive peace and poise are obtained from the Bani, the Word of the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
Afsag 8 Asta Hae HiT AST I (115-15, ws, He 3) satgur na sayveh moorakh anDh gavaaraa. The blind and ignorant fools do not serve the True Guru;
fefs Gfe fag ufefs Her Eni I 115-16, ws, He 3) fir o-ay kithhu paa-in mokh du-aaraa. how will they find the gate of salvation?
fs ufs Aufs fefs fefs orefe aH efs der urefemr IIS (115-16, ws, 1 3)
mar mar jameh fir fir aavahi jam dar chotaa khaavani-aa. ||4|| They die and die, over and over again, only to be reborn, over and over again. They are struck down at Death's Door. ||4||
Rae Ae Weta st my ueTefs Il (115-17, ws, He 3) sabdai saad jaaneh taa aap pachhaaneh. Those who know the essence of the Shabad, understand their own selves.
fosHe aret Aafe surats il (115-17, us, He 3) nirmal banee sabad vakaaneh. Immaculate is the speech of those who chant the Word of the Shabad.
Ae Afe Ae AY uTfefs o8 fafa any Hf sATSfenr ull (115-17, WS, He 3)
sachay sayv sadaa sukh paa-in na-o niDh naam man vasaavani-aa. ||5]|
Serving the True One, they find a lasting peace; they enshrine the nine treasures of the Naam within their minds. ||5]|
A ag Aofeor A af ufe atfemr It (115-18, +5, Hs 3) so thaan suhaa-i-aa jo har man bhaa-i-aa. Beautiful is that place, which is pleasing to the Lord's Mind.
AsHats af sf ae afer th (115-19, us, He 3)
satsangat bahi har gun gaa-i-aa.
There, sitting in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
motes dfs Aedes ATS fogs se SASfEnt WEN (115-19, HS, He 3)
an-din har saalaahahi saachaa nirmal naad vajaavani-aa. ||6]||
Night and day, the True One is praised; the Immaculate Sound-current of the Naad resounds there. ||6||
ust a9
HOHY Yet aH Met UTATST Il (116-1, WS, He 3) manmukh khotee raas khotaa paasaaraa. The wealth of the self-willed manmukhs is false, and false is their ostentatious display.
IF AHS CY Wa IT Il (116-1, 4s, He 3) koorh kamaavan dukh laagai bhaaraa. They practice falsehood, and suffer terrible pain.
3dH 38 feals feo Tt nfs AoHfs AH TeTefEMr DM (116-1, Hs, He 3)
bharmay bhoolay firan din raatee mar janmeh janam gavaavni-aa. ||7| |
Deluded by doubt, they wander day and night; through birth and death, they lose their lives. ||7||
Ret Afoa A ifs fumirar it 116-2, +13, v2 3) sachaa saahib mai at pi-aaraa. My True Lord and Master is very dear to me.
UT TT & ASE warS I (116-2, ws, He 3) pooray gur kai sabad aDhaaraa. The Shabad of the Perfect Guru is my Support.
Soe of fee efsuret ey AY AH afe WafsMt ICAO (116-3, HTS, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee dukh sukh sam kar jaanni-aa. ||8||10||11]| O Nanak, one who obtains the Greatness of the Naam, looks upon pain and pleasure as one and the same. ||8||10||11]|
HS HIS 8 Il (116-3)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Sor urat Soho grat i (116-4, ws, v8 3) tayree-aa khaanee tayree-aa banee. The four sources of creation are Yours; the spoken word is Yours.
fag oe AS Saf garet Il (116-4, ws, He 3) bin naavai sabh bharam bhulaanee. Without the Name, all are deluded by doubt.
ad Ast 3 ofa ay ufenr fas afsag afe 5 urefenr all 116-4, +15, nH 3)
gur sayvaa tay har naam paa-i-aa bin satgur ko-ay na paavni-aa. ||1]||
Serving the Guru, the Lord's Name is obtained. Without the True Guru, no one can receive it. ||1]|
Ie Tat AG at afe ASt foes Sefer Ih (116-5, Hs, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har saytee chit laavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the Lord.
dfs AS Te sast ue Aon fs eAefeur NA TIS Il 116-5, ws, He 3)
har sachaa gur bhagtee paa-ee-ai sehjay man vasaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through devotion to the Guru, the True One is found; He comes to abide in the mind, with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause]|
Afsag Ae 3 AS fxs US Il (116-6, Hs, He 3) satgur sayvay taa sabh kichh paa-ay. Serving the True Guru, all things are obtained.
dt HOA afs Sa SI Sw UES Il (116-6, ws, He 3) jayhee mansaa kar laagai tayhaa fal paa-ay. As are the desires one harbors, so are the rewards one receives.
Asay ws" Asat ee at us Star frerefanr iI (116-7, ws, He 3) satgur daataa sabhnaa vathoo kaa poorai bhaag milaavani-aa. ||2|| The True Guru is the Giver of all things; through perfect destiny, He is met. ||2]|
feg Ho Hor fea o fore I (116-7, ns, v2 3) ih man mailaa ik na Dhi-aa-ay. This mind is filthy and polluted; it does not meditate on the One.
nists HE wat AT TA SS Il (116-8, ws, we 3) antar mail laagee baho doojai bhaa-ay. Deep within, it is soiled and stained by the love of duality.
sfe stefa ferisfe se widardt da eas IGH HS wefenr |3I (16-8, ws, He 3)
tat tirath disantar bhavai aha“kaaree hor vaDhayrai ha-umai mal laavani-aa. ||3| | The egotists may go on pilgrimages to holy rivers, sacred shrines and foreign lands, but they only gather more of the dirt of egotism. ||3]|
Afsagd AS 3 HS AS Il (116-9, us, He 3) satgur sayvay taa mal jaa-ay. Serving the True Guru, filth and pollution are removed.
Hes He fe fA fos we II (116-9, 5, He 3) jeevat marai har si-o chit laa-ay. Those who focus their consciousness on the Lord remain dead while yet alive.
dfs fecHe AY HS o oa Afs oe Ho aeefEnt iigil (116-9, ws, He 3)
har nirmal sach mail na laagai sach laagai mail gavaavni-aa. ||4||
The True Lord is Pure; no filth sticks to Him. Those who are attached to the True One have their filth washed away. ||4]|
MS TTF vig TAT Il (116-10, ws, ws 3) baajh guroo hai anDh gubaaraa. Without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
mifamrot niar nig vias Il (116-10, Hs, Hs 3) agi-aanee anDhaa anDh anDhaaraa. The ignorant ones are blind-there is only utter darkness for them.
fanet a ats fare anrets fefs fare ufo usefenr ull 16-11, ws, Hs 3) bistaa kay keerhay bistaa kamaaveh fir bistaa maahi pachaavani-aa. ||5|| The maggots in manure do filthy deeds, and in filth they rot and putrefy. ||5||
HAS AS HAST DS I (116-11, 475, 2 3) muktay sayvay muktaa hovai. Serving the Lord of Liberation, liberation is achieved.
ICH HHS ASS VS Il (116-12, ws, ne 3) ha-umai mamtaa sabday khovai. The Word of the Shabad eradicates egotism and possessiveness.
notes ofs MG Aa Aet us ofa Tg ursfenr Well (116-12, ws, Hs 3)
an-din har jee-o sachaa sayvee poorai bhaag gur paavni-aa. ||6||
So serve the Dear True Lord, night and day. By perfect good destiny, the Guru is found. ||6]|
mma sar Ate FHS I (116-13, HS, He 3) aapay bakhsay mayl milaa-ay. He Himself forgives and unites in His Union.
ud as 3 oH fof ure i (116-13, ws, 42 3) pooray gur tay naam niDh paa-ay. From the Perfect Guru, the Treasure of the Naam is obtained.
Ae of Het Ho Ae AY AS Sy Tetefamt IDI (116-13, ws, He 3)
sachai naam sadaa man sachaa sach sayvay dukh gavaavni-aa. ||7| |
By the True Name, the mind is made true forever. Serving the True Lord, sorrow is driven out. ||7]|
Het date Ufs o AST Il (116-14, ws, 2 3) sadaa hajoor door na jaanhu. He is always close at hand-do not think that He is far away.
ad Aaet dfs nists uered il (116-14, ws, ns 3)
gur sabdee har antar pachhaanhu.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, recognize the Lord deep within your own being.
aed oth fhe sfsuret us Te 3 wSfEnr WCUIAUIII (116-14, ws, Hs 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee pooray gur tay paavni-aa. ||8||11]|12]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, glorious greatness is received. Through the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained. ||8||11]|12]|
HTS HIG 8 Il (116-15)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
ME ATS A MTS ATS Il (116-15, HS, He 3) aithai saachay so aagai saachay. Those who are True here, are True hereafter as well.
HO Ast Ae Aafe Ie Il (116-16, ws, v2 3) man sachaa sachai sabad raachay. That mind is true, which is attuned to the True Shabad.
Ae Refs AY anefo Ad AY AHSfSEnt IAI (116-16, HTS, He 3) sachaa sayveh sach kamaaveh sacho sach kamaavani-aa. ||1]| They serve the True One, and practice Truth; they earn Truth, and only Truth. |[1]|
8 ad ME act AS oN His errefEnr Il (116-16, Hs, Hs 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sachaa naam man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those whose minds are filled with the True Name.
He Aefs Afs ANefs AS & TS WefEnr All FITS Il (116-17, ws, He 3)
sachay sayveh sach samaaveh sachay kay gun gaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
They serve the True One, and are absorbed into the True One, singing the Glorious Praises of the True One. ||1]||Pause||
ufss usfs ATE o urefs Il (116-18, HTS, He 3) pandit parheh saad na paavahi. The Pandits, the religious scholars read, but they do not taste the essence.
en ote whet Ho SeHeT Il (116-18, +73, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay maa-i-aa man bharmaaveh. In love with duality and Maya, their minds wander, unfocused.
Hfeur dfs AS Af Tevet afe neds udsefemr QI (116-18, HS, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi sabh suDh gavaa-ee kar avgan pachhotaavani-aa. ||2||
The love of Maya has displaced all their understanding; making mistakes, they live in regret. ||2||
Afsag fxs 3t ST UTS | (116-19, 11, ve 3) satgur milai taa tat paa-ay. But if they should meet the True Guru, then they obtain the essence of reality;
dfs a on Hfs SATE I (116-19, ws, He 3) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. the Name of the Lord comes to dwell in their minds.
Yat AAD
Rafe Hd HO HS MUST Hast at eg uTSfsnr SH (117-1, Ws, He 3)
sabad marai man maarai apunaa muktee kaa dar paavni-aa. ||3]||
Those who die in the Shabad and subdue their own minds, obtain the door of liberation. ||3]|
forsfeu are ay foes it (117-1, 13, He 3) kilvikh kaatai kroDh nivaaray. They erase their sins, and eliminate their anger;
ad a Age se Bs as I (117-1, +5, v2 3) gur kaa sabad rakhai ur Dhaaray. they keep the Guru's Shabad clasped tightly to their hearts.
Afs gS Het Saat IEH wfe fiesrefenr gil 1117-2, ws, ve 3)
sach ratay sadaa bairaagee ha-umai maar milaavani-aa. ||4]|
Those who are attuned to Truth, remain balanced and detached forever. Subduing their egotism, they are united with the Lord. ||4||
nists I36 fs femfeor i (117-2, ws, v2 3)
antar ratan milai milaa-i-aa.
Deep within the nucleus of the self is the jewel; we receive it only if the Lord inspires us to receive it.
fsfafa Hort fefafo urfemr i (17-3, os, v3 3) taribaDh mansaa taribaDh maa-i-aa. The mind is bound by the three dispositions-the three modes of Maya.
ufs ufs ufss Hat aa VER ue at AS B uefa ull (117-3, 275, He 3)
parh parh pandit monee thakay cha-uthay pad kee saar na paavni-aa. ||5||
Reading and reciting, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages have grown weary, but they have not found the supreme essence of the fourth state. ||5||
=~ o
MM} Sa Sa Bae Il (117-4, ws, vs 3) aapay rangay rang charhaa-ay. The Lord Himself dyes us in the color of His Love.
A Ho TS Te ASfe Jas Il 117-4, ws, nz 3)
say jan raatay gur sabad rangaa-ay.
Only those who are steeped in the Word of the Guru's Shabad are so imbued with His Love.
dfs ga sfsur mifs oars afe off off qe wefsur Well (117-4, 1s, v2 3)
har rang charhi-aa at apaaraa har ras ras gun gaavani-aa. ||6]|
Imbued with the most beautiful color of the Lord's Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, with great pleasure and joy. ||6]|
aenty fafa fafa Ae AAH AST WN 0117-5, 15, ne 3)
gurmukh riDh siDh sach sanjam so-ee.
To the Gurmukh, the True Lord is wealth, miraculous spiritual powers and strict self- discipline.
aante famirg at nafs Tet il 17-5, ws, ne 3)
gurmukh gi-aan naam mukat ho-ee.
Through the spiritual wisdom of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Gurmukh is liberated.
aaHfe aa AY AHSfo Ad Afs AHSfEnt HDI (117-6, Hs, He 3) gurmukh kaar sach kamaaveh sachay sach samaavani-aa. ||7|| The Gurmukh practices Truth, and is absorbed in the Truest of the True. ||7| |
aanfe any arfy Bary |i (117-6, 7s, He 3) gurmukh thaapay thaap uthaapay. The Gurmukh realizes that the Lord alone creates, and having created, He destroys.
anf vfs ufs AS MMT I 117-7, Hs, He 3) gurmukh jaat pat sabh aapay. To the Gurmukh, the Lord Himself is social class, status and all honor.
Sea TSHfe oH fare oH oth ANSfanr ICNIVIASI (117-7, HS, 48 3)
naanak gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay naamay naam samaavani-aa. ||8]|12]|13]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam; through the Naam, they merge in the Naam. ||8]|12]|13]]|
HS HIS 8 Il (117-8)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Gsufs use Age JS Il 117-8, ws, He 3) utpat parla-o sabday hovai. Creation and destruction happen through the Word of the Shabad.
Hae ot fefa Gufs dS it 117-8, ws, ve 3) sabday hee fir opat hovai. Through the Shabad, creation happens again.
dante zs AS vm AST TeHfe Guf=e AHefEnr WAU (117-8, HS, He 3)
gurmukh vartai sabh aapay sachaa gurmukh upaa-ay samaavani-aa. ||1]||
The Gurmukh knows that the True Lord is all-pervading. The Gurmukh understands creation and merger. ||1]|
ws Fat ME edt TT us His sArefeMr Ih (117-9, os, Hs 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gur pooraa man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Perfect Guru within their minds.
ad 3 ATS gals ad fee TSt Te ats Tat ANSfEnr NAN TIC i 117-9, ws, ns 3) gur tay saat bhagat karay din raatee gun kahi gunee samaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. From the Guru comes peace and tranquility; worship Him with devotion, day and night. Chanting His Glorious Praises, merge into the Glorious Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
aaHfy cast aaufe uret i (117-10, us, v8 3) gurmukh Dhartee gurmukh paanee. The Gurmukh sees the Lord on the earth, and the Gurmukh sees Him in the water.
Tenfy ues SHsg US fesret ii 117-11, ws, ve 3) gurmukh pavan baisantar khaylai vidaanee. The Gurmukh sees Him in wind and fire; such is the wonder of His Play.
A foaa A ufe ufe HH foad wre wrefsor 12H (117-11, 1, He 3)
SO niguraa jo mar mar jammai niguray aavan jaavani-aa. ||2||
One who has no Guru, dies over and over again, only to be re-born. One who has no Guru continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||2| |
fats ass fea ae gerfenr | 117-12, ws, He 3) tin kartai ik khayl rachaa-i-aa. The One Creator has set this play in motion.
afenr Adte fefs As fae ufemr it (117-12, ws, nH 3) kaa-i-aa sareerai vich sabh kichh paa-i-aa. In the frame of the human body, He has placed all things.
Rafe sfe ast HIG ues HIS Hols gorefEnt SI 1117-12, ws, He 3)
sabad bhayd ko-ee mahal paa-ay mahlay mahal bulaavani-aa. ||3]||
Those few who are pierced through by the Word of the Shabad, obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. He calls them into His Wondrous Palace. ||3]|
He A AS Seas Il (117-13, ws, He 3) sachaa saahu sachay vanjaaray. True is the Banker, and true are His traders.
Ay zenfs qd 3fS wrrs | (117-13, Hs, He 3) sach vana‘jahi gur hayt apaaray. They purchase Truth, with infinite love for the Guru.
Ae feasts Ay antefs AS AY AHS fer Il (117-14, Ws, He 3) sach vihaajheh sach kamaaveh sacho sach kamaavani-aa. ||4| | They deal in Truth, and they practice Truth. They earn Truth, and only Truth. ||4||
fag oat & ee for@ ure it 117-14, +15, v2 3) bin raasee ko vath ki-o paa-ay. Without investment capital, how can anyone acquire merchandise?
HOHE 3B BA AVS Il (117-14, ws, vs 3) manmukh bhoolay lok sabaa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs have all gone astray.
fae TA AS wet oe wet fe ey urSfanr Ul (117-15, Hs, He 3)
bin raasee sabh khaalee chalay khaalee jaa-ay dukh paavni-aa. ||5]|
Without true wealth, everyone goes empty-handed; going empty-handed, they suffer in pain. ||5]|
fefa Ag zenfs ag Aafe fumirs i (117-15, 15, He 3) ik sach vana‘jahi gur sabad pi-aaray. Some deal in Truth, through love of the Guru's Shabad.
mf Safa Aas AB 3S Il (117-16, ws, He 3) aap tareh saglay kul taaray. They save themselves, and save all their ancestors as well.
mire Auge de fife utsn Ay urefsur Hell (117-16, ns, v8 3) aa-ay say parvaan ho-ay mil pareetam sukh paavni-aa. ||6|| Very auspicious is the coming of those who meet their Beloved and find peace. ||6| |
nists AZ UB AIT SS I (117-17, ws, ws 3) antar vasat moorhaa baahar bhaalay. Deep within the self is the secret, but the fool looks for it outside.
Hone nit feats FSH Il (117-17, ws, He 3) manmukh anDhay fireh baytaalay. The blind self-willed manmukhs wander around like demons;
fra za de fsag af o ue Hone sof gserefenr DI 117-17, +s, He 3)
jithai vath hovai tithhu ko-ay na paavai manmukh bharam bhulaavani-aa. ||7|| but where the secret is, there, they do not find it. The manmukhs are deluded by doubt. ||7]|
~ AA
my fe Aafe FoeS Il (117-18, ws, ve 3) aapay dayvai sabad bulaa-ay. He Himself calls us, and bestows the Word of the Shabad.
HIGl Hots ATH AY UTES Il (117-18, Hs, He 3) mahlee mahal sahj sukh paa-ay. The soul-bride finds intuitive peace and poise in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Soe of fs efsuret nmi Afe Afs fomrefeur CASAS (117-18, +s, He 3) naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee aapay sun sun Dhi-aavani-aa. ||8]|13]|14]|
O Nanak, she obtains the glorious greatness of the Naam; she hears it again and again, and she meditates on it. ||8]|13]|14]|
HS HIS 8 Il (117-19)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Afsaad Ast fra AareT I 117-19, us, v8 3) satgur saachee sikh sunaa-ee. The True Guru has imparted the True Teachings.
Yast age
dfs 330 vifs df Maret I cis-1, Hs, v8 3) har chaytahu ant ho-ay sakhaa-ee. Think of the Lord, who shall be your Help and Support in the end.
dfs want widieg nieve uinst Afsad & ofS urefsur NA (118-1, ws, He 3)
har agam agochar anaath ajonee satgur kai bhaa-ay paavni-aa. ||1]|
The Lord is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible. He has no master, and He is not born. He is obtained through love of the True Guru. |]1]|
Ie sat ME set nry feerafent il cis-2, ws, v3 3) ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree aap nivaarni-aa. I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who eliminate selfishness and conceit.
my dee 3 ofe ue ofa AG AoA AHSfeor A TIS Il (118-2, ws, He 3)
aap gavaa-ay taa har paa-ay har si-o sahj samaavani-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
They eradicate selfishness and conceit, and then find the Lord; they are intuitively immersed in the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
usta ffir A aa CHEM I (118-3, ws, He 3) poorab likhi-aa so karam kamaa-i-aa. According to their pre-ordained destiny, they act out their karma.
Afsag Afe Ae AY UTfEMT Il (118-3, ws, Hs 3) satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. Serving the True Guru, a lasting peace is found.
fag oar ag urn ont Aad Afs forefemr IQ (118-4, Hs, He 3)
bin bhaagaa gur paa-ee-ai naahee sabdai may! milaavani-aa. ||2||
Without good fortune, the Guru is not found. Through the Word of the Shabad, they are united in the Lord's Union. ||2||
aanfy mfsus Jd HATS Il (118-4, WS, He 3) gurmukh alipat rahai sansaaray. The Gurmukhs remain unaffected in the midst of the world.
ad ax Saba SH mars i (118-4, ws, v2 3) gur kai takee-ai naam aDhaaray. The Guru is their cushion, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is their Support.
qenty ag ad fomr far 6 omy ufu ge urefeur 3 (is-5, +s, v2 3) gurmukh jor karay ki-aa tis no aapay khap dukh paavni-aa. ||3]|| Who can oppress the Gurmukh? One who tries shall perish, writhing in pain. ||3]|
Honfe nid Afo & aret I (118-5, 475, He 3) manmukh anDhay suDh na kaa-ee. The blind self-willed manmukhs have no understanding at all.
WISH wTSt I AGS AAS Il (118-6, Hs, He 3) aatam ghaatee hai jagat kasaa-ee. They are the assassins of the self, and the butchers of the world.
foe afe ata ag avg Core fag Hast svg uTeTefEmr III (118-6, 7s, Hs 3)
nindaa kar kar baho bhaar uthaavai bin majooree bhaar pahuchaavani-aa. ||4| |
By continually slandering others, they carry a terrible load, and they carry the loads of others for nothing. ||4]|
feg Ad Sat AT Ys Hest Il c1is-7, ws, us 3) ih jag vaarhee mayraa parabh maalee. This world is a garden, and my Lord God is the Gardener.
Het AHS & ost UST Il (118-7, ws, He 3) sadaa samaalay ko naahee khaalee. He always takes care of it-nothing is exempt from His Care.
Hot SHS ure Sot eas SH SH HarefEnr Wil (118-7, ws, 2 3) jayhee vaasnaa paa-ay tayhee vartai vaasoo vaas janaavani-aa. ||5|| As is the fragrance which He bestows, so is the fragrant flower known. ||5]|
HOHY dat J HATS Il (118-8, HS, He 3) manmukh rogee hai sansaaraa. The self-willed manmukhs are sick and diseased in the world.
HYest feAfani nia nurs il (118-8, 47s, H8 3) sukh-daata visri-aa agam apaaraa. They have forgotten the Giver of peace, the Unfathomable, the Infinite.
eule fats feats fasare fas aa ATS o Urefenr HEI (118-9, 175, He 3)
dukhee-ay nit fireh billaaday bin gur saa“t na paavni-aa. ||6||
These miserable people wander endlessly, crying out in pain; without the Guru, they find no peace. ||6]|
fafs otS Het fafa Are it cis-9, ns, nH 3) jin keetay so-ee biDh jaanai. The One who created them, knows their condition.
wif ad St Jaf UES Il (118-10, Hs, He 3) aap karay taa hukam pachhaanai. And if He inspires them, then they realize the Hukam of His Command.
av niefs ue so eas nmr aafe urefenr DI (118-10, Hs, He 3)
jayhaa andar paa-ay tayhaa vartai aapay baahar paavni-aa. ||7]||
Whatever He places within them, that is what prevails, and so they outwardly appear. [711
fsH wsg Ae H Igo Set Il (118-10, ws, He 3) tis baajhahu sachay mai hor na ko-ee. I know of no other except the True One.
fan ofe we A feos Tet Il (118-11, ws, He 3) jis laa-ay la-ay so nirmal ho-ee. Those, whom the Lord attaches to Himself, become pure.
Soa OH ZH we nists fan VS A UefEnr CNIS (118-11, ws, He 3)
naanak naam vasai ghat antar jis dayvai so paavni-aa. ||8]||14||15]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the heart of those, unto whom He has given it. ||8]|14]|15]|
HS HIS 3 Il (118-12)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
nifys on Hfs SAE Il c1is-12, ws, we 3) amrit naam man vasaa-ay. Enshrining the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the mind,
ICH HT AT SY ASS Il (118-12, ws, ne 3) ha-umai mayraa sabh dukh gavaa-ay. all the pains of egotism, selfishness and conceit are eliminated.
mifys set Fe Herd vifyfs wife urefenr al (18-13, Hs, He 3)
amrit banee sadaa salaahay amrit amrit paavni-aa. ||1]||
By continually praising the Ambrosial Bani of the Word, I obtain the Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|
JG aet ME sat nifys aret ifs eArSfenr I (118-13, ws, Hs 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree amrit banee man vasaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Ambrosial Bani of the Word within their minds.
nifys set Hfs sre nifys ou fomrefanr an TIS it (is-14, ws, us 3)
amrit banee man vasaa-ay amrit naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Enshrining the Ambrosial Bani in their minds, they meditate on the Ambrosial Naam. ||1]|Pause] |
wifys 38 Ae fy Set 1 vifys Fa uss HET Sat Il (18-14, ws, ne 3)
amrit bolai sadaa mukh vainee. amrit vaykhai parkhai sadaa nainee.
Those who continually chant the Ambrosial Words of Nectar see and behold this Amrit everywhere with their eyes.
nifys aa ad He fea wat mea urfy Hoefer MI (118-15, HTS, He 3)
amrit kathaa kahai sadaa din raatee avraa aakh sunaavni-aa. ||2||
They continually chant the Ambrosial Sermon day and night; chanting it, they cause others to hear it. ||2]|
nits dfa ga fees Be It cis-16, ws, ue 3)
amrit rang rataa liv laa-ay.
Imbued with the Ambrosial Love of the Lord, they lovingly focus their attention on Him.
Mis Ta USAT UTS Il (118-16, ws, Hs 3) amrit gur parsaadee paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, they receive this Amrit.
nifys dro 88 feo ast ufo sfe nifgs ubrefemr 1311 cis-16, 5, He 3)
amrit rasnaa bolai din raatee man tan amrit pee-aavni-aa. ||3]|
They chant the Ambrosial Name with their tongues day and night; their minds and bodies are satisfied by this Amrit. ||3]|
A fag ad a fefs o cet Il cis-17, +s, ne 3) so kichh karai jo chit na ho-ee. That which God does is beyond anyone's consciousness;
fSA a gan Afe 3 Aa AST Il (118-17, ws, He 3) tis daa hukam mayt na sakai ko-ee. no one can erase the Hukam of His Command.
Jan zs vifys get Jan nifiys uUbrefenr ell cis-is, ws, He 3)
hukmay vartai amrit banee hukmay amrit pee-aavni-aa. ||4||
By His Command, the Ambrosial Bani of the Word prevails, and by His Command, we drink in the Amrit. ||4| |
WAG AH Ads Tfs AT Il (118-18, ws, 43 3) ajab kamm kartay har kayray. The actions of the Creator Lord are marvellous and wonderful.
feg Ho For Are ST I (118-19, ws, He 3) ih man bhoolaa jaa‘daa fayray. This mind is deluded, and goes around the wheel of reincarnation.
vifys wat fag fos we nifys nate sarefeor null cis-19, ws, He 3)
amrit banee si-o chit laa-ay amrit sabad vajaavani-aa. ||5||
Those who focus their consciousness on the Ambrosial Bani of the Word, hear the vibrations of the Ambrosial Word of the Shabad. ||5]|
ar a9
ae ud so nef Bure | 119-1, a5, 2 3) khotay kharay tuDh aap upaa-ay. You Yourself created the counterfeit and the genuine.
3 wm usd BA ASS Il 119-1, ws, He 3) tuDh aapay parkhay lok sabaa-ay. You Yourself appraise all people.
ud uate uns ufefs de safh sorefemr HEN (19-1, xs, He 3)
kharay parakh khajaanai paa-ihi khotay bharam bhulaavani-aa. ||6]|
You appraise the true, and place them in Your Treasury; You consign the false to wander in delusion. ||6]|
fas afa sur fas Arardt il ci9-2, us, He 3) ki-o kar vaykhaa ki-o saalaahee. How can I behold You? How can I praise You?
Ts uUdATet Hate Asst Il (119-2, wes, He 3) gur parsaadee sabad salaahee. By Guru's Grace, I praise You through the Word of the Shabad.
33 we fete vifys eA FT are nifys Ulorefenr ID 11 (119-2, os, v3 3)
tayray bhaanay vich amrit vasai too’ bhaanai amrit pee-aavni-aa. ||7]|
In Your Sweet Will, the Amrit is found; by Your Will, You inspire us to drink in this Amrit. ||7]|
nifys Aa vifqs afe aret i (119-3, ws, He 3) amrit sabad amrit har banee. The Shabad is Amrit; the Lord's Bani is Amrit.
Afsafe Afet fee AHTet Il (119-3, Hs, He 3) satgur sayvi-ai ridai samaanee. Serving the True Guru, it permeates the heart.
soa nits ou Ae AMES ut nifys AS su afs ASfEnr ICIAUIIIEN (119-4, HS, He 3) naanak amrit naam sadaa sukh-daata pee amrit sabh bhukh leh jaavani-aa. [|8][15]]16]|
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Naam is forever the Giver of peace; drinking in this Amrit, all hunger is satisfied. ||8]|15]|16]|
HS HIG 3 Il (119-5)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
nifys Zan AofA ASS Il (119-5, ws, He 3) amrit varsai sahj subhaa-ay. The Ambrosial Nectar rains down, softly and gently.
aante feaer set He UTS Il (119-5, HS, He 3) gurmukh virlaa ko-ee jan paa-ay. How rare are those Gurmukhs who find it.
nifys ut Het fgusA ata fasu fener gsrefsr Al (119-5, Hrs, He 3)
amrit pee sadaa tariptaasay kar kirpaa tarisnaa bujhaavani-aa. ||1]||
Those who drink it in are satisfied forever. Showering His Mercy upon them, the Lord quenches their thirst. ||1]|
I aot ME eat Taner vifys ubresfeur i (119-6, ws, us 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gurmukh amrit pee-aavni-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those Gurmukhs who drink in this Ambrosial Nectar.
dHa' dH ofa Het ad df ast AoA dfs TE Wefevr ail TIC il 119-7, ws, ve 3) rasnaa ras chaakh sadaa rahai rang raatee sehjay har gun gaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The tongue tastes the essence, and remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love, intuitively singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Ts USAT ATH A UTS I (119-7, ws, ne 3) gur parsaadee sahj ko paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, intuitive understanding is obtained;
efam nd fear fA fee we I 119-8, ws, v8 3) dubiDhaa maaray ikas si-o liv laa-ay. subduing the sense of duality, they are in love with the One.
dels Ad 3 dfs TE We Sedt Afs ANSfSnr NII (119-8, ws, v2 3)
nadar karay taa har gun gaavai nadree sach samaavani-aa. ||2||
When He bestows His Glance of Grace, then they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; by His Grace, they merge in Truth. ||2||
Haat Gufs sefa ys Sat Il (119-9, ws, ws 3) sabhnaa upar nadar parabh tayree. Above all is Your Glance of Grace, O God.
fan ast far J wedt il (119-9, ws, nH 3) kisai thorhee kisai hai ghanayree. Upon some it is bestowed less, and upon others it is bestowed more.
33 3 wos fae 5 de ToHfY ASt Uv|fenr ZI (119-9, +5, He 3) tujh tay baahar kichh na hovai gurmukh sojhee paavni-aa. ||3]|| Without You, nothing happens at all; the Gurmukhs understand this. ||3]|
aenfy 33 3 stars Il 119-10, ws, we 3) gurmukh tat hai beechaaraa. The Gurmukhs contemplate the essence of reality;
~
Mifyfs so SI FTI Il 119-10, ws, we 3) amrit bharay tayray bhandaaraa. Your Treasures are overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar.
fag Afsag AS det o ure aa fase 3 urefanr Ii (119-10, +, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay ko-ee na paavai gur kirpaa tay paavni-aa. ||4||
Without serving the True Guru, no one obtains it. It is obtained only by Guru's Grace. [141]
Afsag Ae A AS Ad Il (119-11, ws, v2 3) satgur Sayvai so jan sohai. Those who serve the True Guru are beautiful.
nifys oft nisg He AT Il (119-11, ws, Hs 3) amrit naam antar man mohai. The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, entices their inner minds.
wifyfs He 36 wet gs" nifys AofA Hevefenr WU (119-12, ws, Hs 3)
amrit man tan banee rataa amrit sahj sunaavni-aa. ||5||
Their minds and bodies are attuned to the Ambrosial Bani of the Word; this Ambrosial Nectar is intuitively heard. ||5||
HOHY SH SA StS yrs I (119-12, ws, we 3) manmukh bhoolaa doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay. The deluded, self-willed manmukhs are ruined through the love of duality.
oH & Be He fay we I 119-13, +5, 2 3) naam na layvai marai bikh khaa-ay. They do not chant the Naam, and they die, eating poison.
motes Het fenet ufos eA faa AS ASH Teeter Ell (119-13, Hs, He 3)
an-din sadaa vistaa meh vaasaa bin sayvaa janam gavaavni-aa. ||6||
Night and day, they continually sit in manure. Without selfless service, their lives are wasted away. ||6||
nifgs ule far S& rfp ube ih (19-14, ws, us 3) amrit peevai jis no aap pee-aa-ay. They alone drink in this Amrit, whom the Lord Himself inspires to do so.
ds UdAet Hote fest BES Il (119-14, ws, He 3)
gur parsaadee sahj liv laa-ay. By Guru's Grace, they intuitively enshrine love for the Lord.
use ufs stout As md THs sect wrefEnr DI (119-14, ws, He 3)
pooran poor rahi-aa sabh aapay gurmat nadree aavani-aa. ||7||
The Perfect Lord is Himself perfectly pervading everywhere; through the Guru's Teachings, He is perceived. ||7||
nmy orfu fedae Aet Il (119-15, Hs, Hs 3) aapay aap niranjan so-ee. He Himself is the Immaculate Lord.
fate fred fafs mt det i ci9-15, Hs, He 3) jin sirjee tin aapay go-ee. He who has created, shall Himself destroy.
Soa OH AHS Het J AoA Afs AHTSfent ITIVE (119-15, 4s, Hs 3) naanak naam samaal sadaa too” sehjay sach samaavani-aa. ||8]|16]|17]|
O Nanak, remember the Naam forever, and you shall merge into the True One with intuitive ease. ||8]|16||17]|
HS HIS 8 Il (119-16)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
A Afs oat HST SS Il (119-16, 15, ne 3) say sach laagay jo tuDh bhaa-ay. Those who please You are linked to the Truth.
He Ag Aetd AdH ASS Il (119-17, ws, vs 3) sadaa sach sayveh sahj subhaa-ay. They serve the True One forever, with intuitive ease.
Ae Aafe Het ATerdt Ae Afs ferefsmr All (119-17, 13, He 3)
sachai sabad sachaa saalaahee sachai mayl milaavani-aa. ||1] |
Through the True Word of the Shabad, they praise the True One, and they merge in the merging of Truth. ||1]|
IG Tat AG Set AG ATE It (119-17, ws, He 3) ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sach salaahni-aa. I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who praise the True One.
Ae fourfefs A Afs aS Ad Afs AHTSfemr NAN TIE I (119-18, ws, v8 3)
sach Dhi-aa-in say sach raatay sachay sach samaavani-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Those who meditate on the True One are attuned to Truth; they are absorbed into the Truest of the True. ||1]|Pause] |
Ag fa AG Agot aret Il (119-18, ws, Hs 3) jah daykhaa sach sabhnee thaa-ee. The True One is everywhere, wherever I look.
ad udAet Hfs SATET Il (119-19, ws, ns 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I enshrine Him in my mind.
36 Ae dHa Afs Tst AG AS orf SarofEmr QM (119-19, Hs, 2 3)
tan sachaa rasnaa sach raatee sach sun aakh vakhaanni-aa. ||2]|
True are the bodies of those whose tongues are attuned to Truth. They hear the Truth, and speak it with their mouths. ||2]|
UST 92O
Hon Hig Afs AHTAt Il (120-1, Hs, He 3) mansaa maar sach samaanee. Subduing their desires, they merge with the True One;
fefe Hfe Stat As “ies Fret Il (120-1, ws, He 3) in man deethee sabh aavan jaanee. they see in their minds that everyone comes and goes in reincarnation.
Afsag Ae Ae’ Ho fesse fon wis sar urefent NBII (120-1, Hs, He 3)
satgur sayvay sadaa man nihchal nij ghar vaasaa paavni-aa. ||3] |
Serving the True Guru, they become stable forever, and they obtain their dwelling in the home of the self. ||3]|
ad a Rafe foe fearfenr it (120-2, ws, v2 3) gur kai sabad ridai dikhaa-i-aa. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is seen within one's own heart.
Hier Hg Aafe Aefent | 120-2, Hs, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaa-i-aa. Through the Shabad, I have burned my emotional attachment to Maya.
Ae Ae efy Wot qe Aget AG USfEnt Iigil (120-3, ws, He 3)
sacho sachaa vaykh saalaahee gur sabdee sach paavni-aa. ||4||
I gaze upon the Truest of the True, and I praise Him. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I obtain the True One. ||4||
a Afs as fSo vet fee walt I (120-3, ws, 42 3) jo sach raatay tin sachee liv laagee. Those who are attuned to Truth are blessed with the Love of the True One.
dfs SH AH A Psat Il (120-4, ws, Hs 3) har naam samaaleh say vadbhaagee. Those who praise the Lord's Name are very fortunate.
Ae Aafe orf fore AsHafs Ay Te aefsur ull 20-4, ws, He 3)
sachai sabad aap milaa-ay satsangat sach gun gaavani-aa. ||5||
Through the Word of His Shabad, the True One blends with Himself, those who join the True Congregation and sing the Glorious Praises of the True One. ||5]|
But usa A Ba fefs FS i (120-5, ws, He 3) laykhaa parhee-ai jay laykhay vich hovai. We could read the account of the Lord, if He were in any account.
6g wan widieg Aafe Afo JS il (120-5, 115, v2 3)
oh agam agochar sabad suDh hovai.
He is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible; through the Shabad, understanding is obtained.
wWofes Ae Aafe Wed dg afe 3 ahifs urefenr Ell 120-5, +5, nH 3)
an-din sach sabad saalaahee hor ko-ay na keemat paavni-aa. ||6||
Night and day, praise the True Word of the Shabad. There is no other way to know His Worth. ||6]|
ufs ufs ae ATS & niet Il (120-6, ws, He 3) parh parh thaakay saa“t na aa-ee. People read and recite until they grow weary, but they do not find peace.
fgHor ANS Af & aret II (120-6, ws, He 3) tarisnaa jaalay suDh na kaa-ee. Consumed by desire, they have no understanding at all.
fay faorsta fay Ho flmrn ag af fry urefemr 111 (120-7, os, 3 3)
bikh bihaajheh bikh moh pi-aasay koorh bol bikh khaavani-aa. ||7||
They purchase poison, and they are thirsty with their fascination for poison. Telling lies, they eat poison. ||7||
ae USATS Sa AST Il (120-7, ws, He 3) gur parsaadee ayko jaanaa. By Guru's Grace, I know the One.
ca Hts Hoe Afs ANTS Il (120-8, Hs, He 3) doojaa maar man sach samaanaa. Subduing my sense of duality, my mind is absorbed into the True One.
Soa SA SH Cds HO ists Ts USAT USfEnt ICUADIATI (120-8, HTS, He 3) naanak ayko naam vartai man antar gur parsaadee paavni-aa. ||8]||17]||18]|
O Nanak, the One Name is pervading deep within my mind; by Guru's Grace, I receive it. |[8]]17]|18]|
HS HIS 3 Il (120-9)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Io TU Zastd AS ST Il (120-9, ws, He 3) varan roop varteh sabh tayray. In all colors and forms, You are pervading.
Hfe fs Hufs Sa usta WT Il (120-9, Hs, He 3)
mar mar jameh fayr paveh ghanayray.
People die over and over again; they are re-born, and make their rounds on the wheel of reincarnation.
3 Sa forse nig ors TaHSt gs FsrefEnr AU 120-9, ws, we 3)
too” ayko nihchal agam apaaraa gurmatee boojh bujhaavani-aa. ||1||
You alone are Eternal and Unchanging, Inaccessible and Infinite. Through the Guru's Teachings, understanding is imparted. ||1]||
IG act HE act TH OW Hfo SAefeur II (120-10, HS, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree raam naam man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds.
SH gy 3 Sfimr zag 3 aet Test orf gsrefanr AU TIS ll 120-11, os, ws 3)
tis roop na raykh-i-aa varan na ko-ee gurmatee aap bujhaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord has no form, features or color. Through the Guru's Teachings, He inspires us to understand Him. ||1||Pause| |
As fat afs We A eT Il (120-11, 5, He 3) sabh aykaa jot jaanai jay ko-ee. The One Light is all-pervading; only a few know this.
Afsag Afet usae Jet i (120-12, 1s, 2 3) satgur sayvi-ai pargat ho-ee. Serving the True Guru, this is revealed.
Tuy udde fds AS Tet Ast fs frorefsor IN (120-12, ws, He 3)
gupat pargat vartai sabh thaa-ee jotee jot milaavani-aa. ||2||
In the hidden and in the obvious, He is pervading all places. Our light merges into the Light. ||2]|
fsnat nate AS HATS Il (120-13, 475, He 3) tisnaa agan jalai sansaaraa. The world is burning in the fire of desire,
Bs mifsHS FITS MIA Il (120-13, ws, v2 3) lobh abhimaan bahut aha‘kaaraa. in greed, arrogance and excessive ego.
fs xfs HOH ufs ae viet fase AoW aeTefEur SI (120-13, ws, He 3)
mar mar janmai pat gavaa-ay apnee birthaa janam gavaavni-aa. ||3]||
People die over and over again; they are re-born, and lose their honor. They waste away their lives in vain. ||3]|
TS oT Hae & fess FF Il (120-14, ws, we 3) gur kaa sabad ko virlaa boojhai. Those who understand the Word of the Guru's Shabad are very rare.
MY HTS St SSS AS Il (120-14, wy, ws 3) aap maaray taa taribhavan soojhai. Those who subdue their egotism, come to know the three worlds.
fefs Go HS B Hee" Je AoA Afs AHSfEnr Igil (120-15, ws, He 3)
fir oh marai na marnaa hovai sehjay sach samaavani-aa. ||4||
Then, they die, never to die again. They are intuitively absorbed in the True One. [141]
Hfenr xfs fefs fas o BES Il (120-15, us, He 3) maa-i-aa meh fir chit na laa-ay. They do not focus their consciousness on Maya again.
ad a Aafe Ae Id AME Il (120-16, Hs, He 3) gur kai sabad sad rahai samaa-ay. They remain absorbed forever in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ay AGW AS we nists Ad AY AO SfeMr ull (120-16, Hs, He 3)
sach salaahay sabh ghat antar sacho sach suhaavani-aa. ||5||
They praise the True One, who is contained deep within all hearts. They are blessed and exalted by the Truest of the True. ||5]|
Ag Aad Het IAT Il (120-16, ws, He 3) sach saalaahee sadaa hajooray. Praise the True One, who is Ever-present.
Ts & Hate soo sIUs Il (120-17, ws, ws 3) gur kai sabad rahi-aa bharpooray. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is pervading everywhere.
Td USA AY oedt wire AS dt AY uTefsnt WEI (120-17, 7, He 3)
gur parsaadee sach nadree aavai sachay hee sukh paavni-aa. ||6] |
By Guru's Grace, we come to behold the True One; from the True One, peace is obtained. ||6||
AY Ho viefe sft ANTE II (120-18, HS, He 3) sach man andar rahi-aa samaa-ay. The True One permeates and pervades the mind within.
Het Ag fase mre & ATE Il (120-18, +15, He 3) sadaa sach nihchal aavai na jaa-ay. The True One is Eternal and Unchanging; He does not come and go in reincarnation.
He Gd A Ho fesHe TsHst Afs AHSfEMr INDI (120-18, HS, He 3)
sachay laagai so man nirmal gurmatee sach samaavani-aa. ||7| |
Those who are attached to the True One are immaculate and pure. Through the Guru's Teachings, they merge in the True One. ||7||
Ag Weardt weg 3 aet Il (120-19, ws, v2 3) sach saalaahee avar na ko-ee. Praise the True One, and no other.
fas Afen Ae AY TET II (120-19, ws, He 3) jit sayvi-ai sadaa sukh ho-ee. Serving Him, eternal peace is obtained.
UST IA
soe of gS sed Ad AG AHSfEnr WCHACHVEN (121-1, 2s, He 3)
naanak naam ratay veechaaree sacho sach kamaavani-aa. ||8]|18]|19]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, reflect deeply on the Truth; they practice only Truth. ||8]|18]|19]|
HS HIS 3 Il (121-1)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
foaHe Aad fase d sat I (121-1, ws, He 3) nirmal sabad nirmal hai banee. The Word of the Shabad is Immaculate and Pure; the Bani of the Word is Pure.
foane Afs AS ufo AHTetT II (121-2, ws, H: 3) nirmal jot sabh maahi samaanee. The Light which is pervading among all is Immaculate.
fous sat ofe Aerdt afu af fears He aev]efsnr NAN (121-2, Hs, He 3)
nirmal banee har saalaahee jap har nirmal mail gavaavni-aa. ||1||
So praise the Immaculate Word of the Lord's Bani; chanting the Immaculate Name of the Lord, all filth is washed away. ||1]|
IG aot ME act Hues fe TATSfanr | (121-3, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sukh-daata man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Giver of peace within their minds.
dfs feane ad Aafe Aerdt Age Afs for feevefemr 19 TIS Il (121-3, ws, v2 3) har nirmal gur sabad salaahee sabdo sun tisaa mitaavni-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Praise the Immaculate Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Listen to the Shabad, and quench your thirst. ||1]]Pause| |
fegHe oH Stor Hfe mire I 121-4, 175, 2 3) nirmal naam vasi-aa man aa-ay. When the Immaculate Naam comes to dwell in the mind,
Ho 36 fosne Heer Ho TSS I 121-5, Hs, He 3) man tan nirmal maa-i-aa moh gavaa-ay. the mind and body become Immaculate, and emotional attachment to Maya departs.
fosHe Te ae fos ws & fone are err|fenr iQ (121-5, ws, ne 3)
nirmal gun gaavai nit saachay kay nirmal naad vajaavani-aa. ||2||
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate True Lord forever, and the Immaculate Sound-current of the Naad shall vibrate within. ||2]|
foane nifts aa 3 urfemr I (21-6, ws, He 3) nirmal amrit gur tay paa-i-aa. The Immaculate Ambrosial Nectar is obtained from the Guru.
feag nig Hor fsa Ho o HEMT I 21-6, +3, He 3)
vichahu aap mu-aa tithai moh na maa-i-aa.
When selfishness and conceit are eradicated from within, then there is no attachment to Maya.
foone famre fare nifs fasne fase sat rife eArefeur SI (121-6, H5, He 3)
nirmal gi-aan Dhi-aan at nirmal nirmal banee man vasaavani-aa. ||3]|
Immaculate is the spiritual wisdom, and utterly immaculate is the meditation, of those whose minds are filled with the Immaculate Bani of the Word. ||3]|
A fess Ae A fsaHe de il (121-7, ws, v2 3) jo nirmal sayvay so nirmal hovai. One who serves the Immaculate Lord becomes immaculate.
~
ICH HG Ws Age GS Il (121-8, ws, nz 3) ha-umai mail gur sabday Dhovai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the filth of egotism is washed away.
fosHe SH nose ufs wet uf AS Ast urefenr Ill (21-8, ws, He 3)
nirmal vaajai anhad Dhun banee dar sachai sobhaa paavni-aa. ||4]|
The Immaculate Bani and the Unstruck Melody of the Sound-current vibrate, and in the True Court, honor is obtained. ||4]|
fsaHe 3 As fSgHe Jz Il (121-9, ws, He 3) nirmal tay sabh nirmal hovai. Through the Immaculate Lord, all become immaculate.
fooHe Hour afs Fate uds Il (121-9, »s, Hs 3) nirmal manoo-aa har sabad parovai. Immaculate is the mind which weaves the Word of the Lord's Shabad into itself.
fegHe oth od asa fasHe oth Ao Sfemr |Ull (121-9, Hs, He 3)
nirmal naam lagay badbhaagee nirmal naam suhaavani-aa. ||5||
Blessed and very fortunate are those who are committed to the Immaculate Name; through the Immaculate Name, they are blessed and beautified. ||5||
A fesse A Ase Ad Il (121-10, ws, He 3) so nirmal jo sabday sohai. Immaculate is the one who is adorned with the Shabad.
fsdHe ot Ho 3 Hg Il (121-10, +s, He 3) nirmal naam man tan mohai. The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, entices the mind and body.
Afs OTH HE ae 3 Ba HY SAS AG aaefenr Ell (121-10, rs, vs 3) sach naam mal kaday na laagai mukh oojal sach karaavani-aa. ||6]||
No filth ever attaches itself to the True Name; one's face is made radiant by the True One. ||6]|
Ho Hos SA STS I (21-11, ws, we 3) man mailaa hai doojai bhaa-ay. The mind is polluted by the love of duality.
Hor var HS aE Ih (121-11, ns, ne 3) mailaa cha-ukaa mailai thaa-ay. Filthy is that kitchen, and filthy is that dwelling;
Hor ufe fefs He eS Hone Hw wy urefanr IDI (121-12, ws, He 3)
mailaa khaa-ay fir mail vaDhaa-ay manmukh mail dukh paavni-aa. ||7]|
eating filth, the self-willed manmukhs become even more filthy. Because of their filth, they suffer in pain. ||7]||
HS fosne Afs gat Aae il (121-12, ws, He 3)
mailay nirmal sabh hukam sabaa-ay.
The filthy, and the immaculate as well, are all subject to the Hukam of God's Command.
A foo a ofa AS TS Il 121-13, +7, He 3) say nirmal jo har saachay bhaa-ay. They alone are immaculate, who are pleasing to the True Lord.
Sod OH ZA Ho Nise TaHfy He vorvefEnt ICUAENQON (121-13, Hs, He 3) naanak naam vasai man antar gurmukh mail chukaavani-aa. ||8]|19]|20] |
O Nanak, the Naam abides deep within the minds of the Gurmukhs, who are cleansed of all their filth. ||8]]19||20] |
HS HIS 8 Il (121-14)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
dfs Cae SAS TAT I (121-14, ws, He 3) govind oojal oojal hansaa. The Lord of the Universe is radiant, and radiant are His soul-swans.
Ho atat faaHes Hat HOAT Il (121-14, Hs, He 3) man banee nirmal mayree mansaa. Their minds and their speech are immaculate; they are my hope and ideal.
His Cae Ae He Aafe nits Cae ony fomrefenr Wal 21-14, os, Hs 3)
man oojal sadaa mukh soheh at oojal naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||1]|
Their minds are radiant, and their faces are always beautiful; they meditate on the most radiant Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
IG ad HE act aie ge wefeor th c121-15, ws, 2 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gobind gun gaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
difae dfae ad fea wat aifse ae Aafe Hevefemr a TIC tl 21-15, ws, He 3) gobid gobid kahai din raatee gobid gun sabad sunaavni-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
So chant Gobind, Gobind, the Lord of the Universe, day and night; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord Gobind, through the Word of His Shabad. ||1]||Pause] |
difae wets AafA ASS Il (121-16, 45, He 3) gobid gaavahi sahj subhaa-ay. Sing of the Lord Gobind with intuitive ease,
TI a F SAS ISH HS WS Il (121-17, os, ws 3)
gur kai bhai oojal ha-umai mal jaa-ay.
in the Fear of the Guru; you shall become radiant, and the filth of egotism shall depart.
He widfe safe sats asfo feg wat vfs afse qe wefenr iii 121-17, ws, x2 3)
sadaa anand raheh bhagat karahi din raatee sun gobid gun gaavani-aa. ||2||
Remain in bliss forever, and perform devotional worship, day and night. Hear and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord Gobind. ||2||
Hour ard sats fase i 121-18, ws, ws 3) manoo-aa naachai bhagat drirh-aa-ay. Channel your dancing mind in devotional worship,
ad a Aafe He He fers It (121-18, ws, v2 3)
gur kai sabad manai man milaa-ay.
and through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, merge your mind with the Supreme Mind.
Aa 3S us Hier vg yore Hae feats avefanr |Sil (121-18, ws, we 3)
sachaa taal pooray maa-i-aa moh chukaa-ay sabday nirat karaavani-aa. ||3]|| Let your true and perfect tune be the subjugation of your love of Maya, and let yourself dance to the Shabad. ||3]|
Ca aa sofs USTs Il (121-19, ws, He 3) oochaa kookay taneh pachhaarhay. People shout out loud and move their bodies,
Hfeor Hfo Hfomt AHATS Il (121-19, +S, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi johi-aa jamkaalay.
but if they are emotionally attached to Maya, then the Messenger of Death shall hunt them down.
UST 922 Hftor Hg fen Hof awe nists que vy uTefenr Ii (122-1, +s, 4 3)
maa-i-aa moh is maneh nachaa-ay antar kapat dukh paavni-aa. ||4] | The love of Maya makes this mind dance, and the deceit within makes people suffer in pain. ||4]|
aanfe sats A erty eas I (122-1, ws, He 3) gurmukh bhagat jaa aap karaa-ay. When the Lord inspires one to become Gurmukh, and perform devotional worship,
36 HO TS" Ada ASS Il (122-2, ws, He 3) tan man raataa sahj subhaa-ay. then his body and mind are attuned to His Love with intuitive ease.
Wat eH Aafe eae anf sats ate urefenr iui (122-2, ws, v2 3)
banee vajai sabad vajaa-ay gurmukh bhagat thaa-ay paavni-aa. ||5||
The Word of His Bani vibrates, and the Word of His Shabad resounds, for the Gurmukh whose devotional worship is accepted. ||5||
Bg TS UT TH SVS Il (122-3, ws, v2 3) baho taal pooray vaajay vajaa-ay. One may beat upon and play all sorts of instruments,
oa Ae o Hfs SAE Il 122-3, ws, 2 3) naa ko sunay na man vasaa-ay. but no one will listen, and no one will enshrine it in the mind.
Hfeor orefe fus dfa oe en ate ey ureter ill (122-3, ws, we 3)
maa-i-aa kaaran pirh banDh naachai doojai bhaa-ay dukh paavni-aa. ||6||
For the sake of Maya, they set the stage and dance, but they are in love with duality, and they obtain only sorrow. ||6||
fan nists uifS wat A YaST I 122-4, ws, Hs 3) jis antar pareet lagai so muktaa. Those whose inner beings are attached to the Lord's Love are liberated.
feet ef Ae ARH Was I 122-4, ws, He 3) indree vas sach sanjam jugtaa. They control their sexual desires, and their lifestyle is the self-discipline of Truth.
ad a Aafe Ae ofa fomre Sa sats afs srefenr DI 122-5, ws, He 3)
gur kai sabad sadaa har Dhi-aa-ay ayhaa bhagat har bhaavni-aa. ||7||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they meditate forever on the Lord. This devotional worship is pleasing to the Lord. ||7]||
aenty sats wa ws Tet Ml 122-5, ws, He 3) gurmukh bhagat jug chaaray ho-ee. To live as Gurmukh is devotional worship, throughout the four ages.
dds sats 5 US AST Il (122-6, 115, ne 3) horat bhagat na paa-ay ko-ee. This devotional worship is not obtained by any other means.
Sod OH Id Saat uch ag vet fos wefeur |e NAoNVUi (122-6, ws, He 3) naanak naam gur bhagtee paa-ee-ai gur charnee chit laavani-aa. ||8||20]|21]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained only through devotion to the Guru. So focus your consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||8]|20||21] |
HS HIS 3 Il (122-7)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
He ASt Ag AH ll (122-7, vs, v8 3) sachaa sayvee sach saalaahee. Serve the True One, and praise the True One.
Ae of= ey aa dt art i (122-7, 15, ne 3) sachai naa-ay dukh kab hee naahee. With the True Name, pain shall never afflict you.
Hues Refs AY ufefs aenfs fe sATSfEmr AU (122-7, +s, He 3)
sukh-daata sayvan sukh paa-in gurmat man vasaavani-aa. ||1]||
Those who serve the Giver of peace find peace. They enshrine the Guru's Teachings within their minds. ||1]|
we adt ME set AY AOfA ANE Barefevr Il (122-8, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sukh sahj samaaDh lagaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who intuitively enter into the peace of Samaadhi.
a dfs Refs A Ae Aafs Ae Als ATSfenr NAN TIS I (122-9, ws, ne 3)
jo har sayveh say sadaa soheh sobhaa surat suhaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who serve the Lord are always beautiful. The glory of their intuitive awareness is beautiful. ||1]|Pause] |
AS aA 3ST SITS ATS Il (122-9, 115, ne 3) sabh ko tayraa bhagat kahaa-ay. All call themselves Your devotees,
ASt sas 3d Hfs STS Il 122-10, ws, He 3) say-ee bhagat tayrai man bhaa-ay. but they alone are Your devotees, who are pleasing to Your mind.
Ag wet 30 Aeros df TS safs aaefsnr QI (122-10, ws, He 3)
sach banee tuDhai saalaahan rang raatay bhagat karaavani-aa. ||2||
Through the True Word of Your Bani, they praise You; attuned to Your Love, they worship You with devotion. ||2]|
AS a Ae die AE Sa Il (122-10, ws, v2 3) sabh ko sachay har jee-o tayraa. All are Yours, O Dear True Lord.
TaHfs fees St Ya ST Ut 122-11, 7s, ws 3) gurmukh milai taa chookai fayraa. Meeting the Gurmukh, this cycle of reincarnation comes to an end.
WT 3g ee T OTE goes SoM FS Aurefant WSN (122-11, 7s, v8 3)
jaa tuDh bhaavai taa naa-ay rachaaveh too” aapay naa-o japaavani-aa. ||3]| When it pleases Your Will, then we merge in the Name. You Yourself inspire us to chant the Name. |[3]|
aanst ofa vfs sAfenr Ih 122-12, Ws, nH 3) gurmatee har man vasaa-i-aa. Through the Guru's Teachings, I enshrine the Lord within my mind.
Jay Ad As He Tetfenr | (122-12, 1, v2 3) harakh sog sabh moh gavaa-i-aa. Pleasure and pain, and all emotional attachments are gone.
fean fk@ fos wet Ae ct ofs ant Hfs Srrefenr igi 122-12, ws, 2 3)
ikas si-o liv laagee sad hee har naam man vasaavani-aa. ||4| |
I am lovingly centered on the One Lord forever. I enshrine the Lord's Name within my mind. ||4||
sas df TS Ae SI WS I (122-13, 0, we 3)
bhagat rang raatay sadaa tayrai chaa-ay.
Your devotees are attuned to Your Love; they are always joyful. 6 fofa om efor HfS mire I (122-13, Hs, He 3)
na-o niDh naam vasi-aa man aa-ay. The nine treasures of the Naam come to dwell within their minds.
ud ata Asag ufenr Aa Afs frevefsor ull (122-14, ws, He 3)
poorai bhaag satgur paa-i-aa sabday may! milaavani-aa. ||5]|
By perfect destiny, they find the True Guru, and through the Word of the Shabad, they are united in the Lord's Union. |[5]||
S cfenry Wet AYES I (122-14, os, He 3) too” da-i-aal sadaa sukh-daata. You are Merciful, and always the Giver of peace.
3 nm Afefa aaHfe AST I 122-15, Hrs, He 3) too” aapay mayleh gurmukh jaataa. You Yourself unite us; You are known only to the Gurmukhs.
3 nm gets oH earet of 3S AY UTefenr EN (122-15, ws, Hs 3)
too” aapay dayveh naam vadaa-ee naam ratay sukh paavni-aa. ||6]|
You Yourself bestow the glorious greatness of the Naam; attuned to the Naam, we find peace. ||6]|
He Het APS SO AS Il (122-16, us, He 3) sadaa sadaa saachay tuDh saalaahee. Forever and ever, O True Lord, I praise You.
TaHfs WS SAT I Sra Il (122-16, ws, we 3) gurmukh jaataa doojaa ko naahee. As Gurmukh, I know no other at all.
San fA Ho sfoor ANTS Hfs Hfomt Hata fkoTefsnt ID II (122-16, Hs, He 3)
aykas si-o man rahi-aa samaa-ay man mani-ai maneh milaavani-aa. ||7]|
My mind remains immersed in the One Lord; my mind surrenders to Him, and in my mind I meet Him. ||7]||
Tanta JS A AHS Il (122-17, ws, He 3) gurmukh hovai so saalaahay. One who becomes Gurmukh, praises the Lord.
Ad StAT SUS Il (122-17, ws, He 3) saachay thaakur vayparvaahay. Our True Lord and Master is Carefree.
SOA OH ZH Ho Hist Ted Ast ole HaSfar NCNQUII (122-17, HS, He 3)
naanak naam vasai man antar gur sabdee har maylaavani-aa. ||8||21||22|| O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the mind; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we merge with the Lord. ||8]|21||22]|
HS HIG 3 Il (122-18)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
3d saz Adfs ATS BIAS Il (122-18, +, He 3) tayray bhagat soheh saachai darbaaray. Your devotees look beautiful in the True Court.
ad a Aafe of Aes Il (122-19, ws, He 3) gur kai sabad naam savaaray. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are adorned with the Naam.
He nidfe sofs feg ast ae afo Tat AHSfEnr WAU (122-19, Hs, He 3)
sadaa anand raheh din raatee gun kahi gunee samaavani-aa. ||1]|
They are forever in bliss, day and night; chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, they merge with the Lord of Glory. ||1]|
Yat 923
JG act AE act ony Afs Hf SAefenr I 123-1, 275, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-O vaaree naam sun man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who hear and enshrine the Naam within their minds.
ofs MG AT Cs Sa ISH ue fHerefenr IA TIS il (123-1, ws, Hs 3)
har jee-o sachaa oocho oochaa ha-umai maar milaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Dear Lord, the True One, the Highest of the High, subdues their ego and blends them with Himself. ||1]|Pause||
dfs ME Ara Ast Set Il 123-2, ws, He 3) har jee-o saachaa saachee naa-ee. True is the Dear Lord, and True is His Name.
aa usAet for fieret il (123-2, ns, v2 3) gur parsaadee kisai milaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, some merge with Him.
ad Aafe frafs A fegsts odt Aon Afs AHTSfEMk QM (423-2, ws, He 3)
gur sabad mileh say vichhurheh naahee sehjay sach samaavani-aa. ||2||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, those who merge with the Lord shall not be separated from Him again. They merge with intuitive ease into the True Lord. ||2]|
33 3 wats ag 3 TE I 123-3, os, ws 3) tujh tay baahar kachhoo na ho-ay. There is nothing beyond You;
3 ate ate zufa arefa ALE It (123-3, os, Hs 3) too” kar kar vaykheh jaaneh so-ay. You are the One who does, sees, and knows.
my ad ave ast TaHfs orfu fHorefavr Bil 423-4, ws, v8 3)
aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa gurmat aap milaavani-aa. ||3]||
The Creator Himself acts, and inspires others to act. Through the Guru's Teachings, He blends us into Himself. ||3]|
anfs qeest dfs ure i 123-4, 1s, He 3) kaaman gunvantee har paa-ay. The virtuous soul-bride finds the Lord;
3 afe Atrg gave Il (123-5, ws, He 3) bhai bhaa-ay seegaar banaa-ay. she decorates herself with the Love and the Fear of God.
Afsag Afe Ae Aas AS CuefA AT]fenr SII (123-5, Hs, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sohagan sach updays samaavani-aa. ||4||
She who serves the True Guru is forever a happy soul-bride. She is absorbed in the true teachings. ||4| |
Hae ferrate far Ba 5 SE Il 123-6, ws, He 3) sabad visaaran tinaa tha-ur na thaa-o. Those who forget the Word of the Shabad have no home and no place of rest.
gf 38 fag Ae wis a il (123-6, ws, we 3) bharam bhoolay ji-o sunjai ghar kaa-o. They are deluded by doubt, like a crow in a deserted house.
Jes ues fest te Tee Ve vfy feoefeur ull 123-6, +3, He 3)
halat palat tinee dovai gavaa-ay dukhay dukh vihaavani-aa. ||5]|
They forfeit both this world and the next, and they pass their lives suffering in pain and misery. ||5||
foufenr feufenr arare HA Bet HN (123-7, WS, He 3) likh-di-aa likh-di-aa kaagad mas kho-ee. Writing on and on endlessly, they run out of paper and ink.
en ofS AY Ue BAST Il (123-7, ws, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay sukh paa-ay na ko-ee. Through the love with duality, no one has found peace.
as feufs 3 ag cnrefa als wets af fos wefenr ell (123-8, ws, He 3) koorh likheh tai koorh kamaaveh jal jaaveh koorh chit laavani-aa. ||6||
They write falsehood, and they practice falsehood; they are burnt to ashes by focusing their consciousness on falsehood. ||6]|
aenfy Ad Ae feufs Sere Il (123-8, WS, He 3) gurmukh sacho sach likheh veechaar. The Gurmukhs write and reflect on Truth, and only Truth.
A Ho Ad usta HY BME Il (123-9, WS, He 3) say jan sachay paavahi mokh du-aar. The true ones find the gate of salvation.
Ad Wale AGH HA et Ag foe Afs ANTSfEMt NDI (123-9, Hs, He 3)
sach kaagad kalam masvaanee sach likh sach samaavani-aa. ||7]||
True is their paper, pen and ink; writing Truth, they are absorbed in the True One. II7II
Aa ys nists For SH | (123-10, ws, ue 3) mayraa parabh antar baithaa vaykhai. My God sits deep within the self; He watches over us.
ae usAet fs Het AS BA I (123-10, ws, He 3) gur parsaadee milai so-ee jan laykhai. Those who meet the Lord, by Guru's Grace, are acceptable.
aoa oH MHS Seuret us TSI 3 wets NCU IIWSIl (123-10, ws, Hs 3) naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee pooray gur tay paavni-aa. ||8||22||23] |
O Nanak, glorious greatness is received through the Naam, which is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||8]|22||23] |
HS HIG 3 Il (123-11)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
WISH TH USA TdT S JS Il (123-11, ws, He 3) aatam raam pargaas gur tay hovai. The Divine Light of the Supreme Soul shines forth from the Guru.
ICH HS Set Ta Aset FS i (123-12, ws, He 3) ha-umai mail laagee gur sabdee khovai. The filth stuck to the ego is removed through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ho fesHs mates sast TS sats ad dfs urefEmt A (123-12, ws, He 3)
man nirmal an-din bhagtee raataa bhagat karay har paavni-aa. ||1]||
One who is imbued with devotional worship to the Lord night and day becomes pure. Worshipping the Lord, He is obtained. ||1]|
Ie Tat AE sat orfu safs ace nies sats agefEnr il (123-13, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree aap bhagat karan avraa bhagat karaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who themselves worship the Lord, and inspire others to worship Him as well.
fsa" sas Hot AG Ae BHAA ain H Miofes Jia Te Wefeur al TIS I (123-14, ws, H8 3)
tinaa bhagat janaa ka-o sad namaskaar keejai jo an-din har gun gaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I humbly bow to those devotees who chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1]||Pause] |
MY AGS ATE ATES Il (123-15, uvs, Hs 3) aapay kartaa kaaran karaa-ay. The Creator Lord Himself is the Doer of deeds.
fas a] fS5 aS WES I 123-15, 5, He 3) jit bhaavai tit kaarai laa-ay. As He pleases, He applies us to our tasks.
ud ofa Ts AS Je TI AS S AY USE IM 123-15, ws, 3 3) poorai bhaag gur sayvaa hovai gur sayvaa tay sukh paavni-aa. ||2|| Through perfect destiny, we serve the Guru; serving the Guru, peace is found. ||2||
Hf fe Fite St fas UTS I (123-16, Hs, He 3) mar mar jeevai taa kichh paa-ay. Those who die, and remain dead while yet alive, obtain it.
ad usAret ofs Hfs SAE Il (123-16, ws, He 3) gur parsaadee har man vasaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, they enshrine the Lord within their minds.
Re Has Ufa dfs ere AoA AoA AHTSfEut ISI (123-16, ws, He 3)
sadaa mukat har man vasaa-ay sehjay sahj samaavani-aa. ||3]|
Enshrining the Lord within their minds, they are liberated forever. With intuitive ease, they merge into the Lord. ||3]|
ad AGH AHS HAls o UTES I (123-17, ws, He 3) baho karam kamaavai mukat na paa-ay. They perform all sorts of rituals, but they do not obtain liberation through them.
SHST Se SA SS YOMS I (123-17, ws, we 3) daysantar bhavai doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay. They wander around the countryside, and in love with duality, they are ruined.
fase HoH detfenr auet fag Fae ey uefEnt igi! (123-18, Ws, He 3)
birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa kaptee bin sabdai dukh paavni-aa. ||4||
The deceitful lose their lives in vain; without the Word of the Shabad, they obtain only misery. ||4||
Wes Te ofa TIS I (123-18, Hs, He 3) Dhaavat raakhai thaak rahaa-ay. Those who restrain their wandering mind, keeping it steady and stable,
Ts UPA UTH UE UTES Il (123-19, Hs, He 3) gur parsaadee param pad paa-ay. obtain the supreme status, by Guru's Grace.
Afsag wit vfs fears fife utsyH AY urefenit [ull (123-19, 3, He 3)
satgur aapay mayl milaa-ay mil pareetam sukh paavni-aa. ||5| |
The True Guru Himself unites us in Union with the Lord. Meeting the Beloved, peace is obtained. ||5||
Yat 928
feta af wet TF SH US I (124-1, ws, He 3) ik koorh laagay koorhay fal paa-ay. Some are stuck in falsehood, and false are the rewards they receive.
en ote fase AGH TSS Il (124-1, ws, we 3)
doojai bhaa-ay birthaa janam gavaa-ay. In love with duality, they waste away their lives in vain.
wif 5a AIS ae 3a as Ste fay wets el 124-1, ws, we 3)
aap dubay saglay kul dobay koorh bol bikh khaavani-aa. ||6||
They drown themselves, and drown their entire family; speaking lies, they eat poison. [16] |
fen 36 Hfo He & Tafa SA I (124-2, ws, ne 3) is tan meh man ko gurmukh daykhai. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, look within their bodies, into their minds.
ofe safs at IGH AS I (124-2, ns, He 3) bhaa-ay bhagat jaa ha-umai sokhai. Through loving devotion, their ego evaporates.
fro wfoe foot a0 foe ofe fsa st 35 nfo HO & feuefenr DI (124-3, HWS, He 3) siDh saaDhik moniDhaaree rahay liv laa-ay tin bhee tan meh man na dikhaavani-aa. HI7II
The Siddhas, the seekers and the silent sages continually, lovingly focus their consciousness, but they have not seen the mind within the body. ||7]||
wify aoe IST AST I (124-3, Hs, ne 3) aap karaa-ay kartaa so-ee. The Creator Himself inspires us to work;
dg fx ad ats fam Tet Il (124-4, ns, vs 3) hor ke karay keetai ki-aa ho-ee. what can anyone else do? What can be done by our doing?
Sod fA oH te A S| SH Hfo SASfanr NCIS (124-4, ws, He 3) naanak jis naam dayvai so layvai naamo man vasaavani-aa. ||8||23||24| |
O Nanak, the Lord bestows His Name; we receive it, and enshrine it within the mind. [18]|23]|24]|
HS HIS 3 Il (124-5)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
fem ae fs mr] FSI I (124-5, ws, He 3) is gufaa meh akhut bhandaaraa. Within this cave, there is an inexhaustible treasure.
fan fefs ZA ofs mise mre Ih (124-5, 3, He 3) tis vich vasai har alakh apaaraa. Within this cave, the Invisible and Infinite Lord abides.
MM Tus udde J ym age wat wy SerefEnr AU (124-6, ws, He 3)
aapay gupat pargat hai aapay gur sabdee aap vanjaavan-i-aa. ||1||
He Himself is hidden, and He Himself is revealed; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, selfishness and conceit are eliminated. ||1]|
IG aot ME eat nifys ou His eArefanr II (124-6, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree amrit naam man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, within their minds.
wif{ts oH Ho dA Hot AsHSt vifys Ubrefsor nan TIS Mt 124-7, ws, ne 3)
amrit naam mahaa ras meethaa gurmatee amrit pee-aavni-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The taste of the Ambrosial Naam is very sweet! Through the Guru's Teachings, drink in this Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause| |
ICH Hfs aHe Sure yorfenr Il (124-8, ws, He 3) ha-umai maar bajar kapaat khulaa-i-aa. Subduing egotism, the rigid doors are opened.
oH MGA Ts USATST ufEMM | 124-8, ws, Hs 3) naam amolak gur parsaadee paa-i-aa. The Priceless Naam is obtained by Guru's Grace.
fag Hae oH 5 ue at ag fasur His errefenr IH 124-8, ws, He 3)
bin sabdai naam na paa-ay ko-ee gur kirpaa man vasaavani-aa. ||2||
Without the Shabad, the Naam is not obtained. By Guru's Grace, it is implanted within the mind. ||2]|
ad fame nine AY Sst urfeur it 124-9, us, ne 3) gur gi-aan anjan sach naytree paa-i-aa. The Guru has applied the true ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes.
nists Tos uifsmirg nity aefeur | (124-9, ws, ne 3)
antar chaanan agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-i-aa.
Deep within, the Divine Light has dawned, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled.
Ast Afs fret Ho Hfeer ofs ef Het urSfemt SII (124-10, ws, He 3)
jotee jot milee man maani-aa har dar sobhaa paavni-aa. ||3]||
My light has merged into the Light; my mind has surrendered, and I am blessed with Glory in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
Adie Safe & gals WE | SH 6 Bd STS Sas Sa wes I (124-11, ws, ne 3) sareerahu bhaalan ko baahar jaa-ay. naam na lahai bahut vaygaar dukh paa-ay. Those who look outside the body, searching for the Lord, shall not receive the Naam; they shall instead be forced to suffer the terrible pains of slavery.
HoH nit AS ordt fete fufe orf aeufa se ureter isl (124-11, ws, we 3)
manmukh anDhay soojhai naahee fir ghir aa-ay gurmukh vath paavni-aa. ||4||
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand; but when they return once again to their own home, then, as Gurmukh, they find the genuine article. ||4||
Ts usAet AS Ths UTS Il (124-12, 7s, He 3)
gur parsaadee sachaa har paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, the True Lord is found.
Hfs sfe Se GBH HS WES I (124-12, os, He 3) man tan vaykhai ha-umai mail jaa-ay. Within your mind and body, see the Lord, and the filth of egotism shall depart.
afk nets Ae ofa Te ae Ae Wate ANSfEnr Ul (124-13, ws, He 3)
bais suthaan sad har gun gaavai sachai sabad samaavani-aa. ||5||
Sitting in that place, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever, and be absorbed in the True Word of the Shabad. ||5]|
6C Ud Sa WSeZ IIS Il (124-13, ws, He 3) na-o dar thaakay Dhaavat rahaa-ay. Those who close off the nine gates, and restrain the wandering mind,
one fon ufe Snar ure I (124-14, a3, 2 3) dasvai nij ghar vaasaa paa-ay. come to dwell in the Home of the Tenth Gate.
Ga node Age enfs fea Tat Tost Ase HevefEur WEI (124-14, 15, He 3)
othai anhad sabad vajeh din raatee gurmatee sabad sunaavni-aa. ||6||
There, the Unstruck Melody of the Shabad vibrates day and night. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Shabad is heard. ||6||
fag Aad nists wise Il (124-15, ws, v2 3) bin sabdai antar aanayraa. Without the Shabad, there is only darkness within.
3 GAS BI B YA ST Il (124-15, ws, He 3) na vasat lahai na chookai fayraa. The genuine article is not found, and the cycle of reincarnation does not end.
Afsas ofa adit das eg ws ost aT us Star frerefenr dl (124-15, ws, we 3)
satgur hath kunjee horat dar khulai naahee gur poorai bhaag milaavani-aa. ||7]| The key is in the hands of the True Guru; no one else can open this door. By perfect destiny, He is met. ||7]|
Tuy ude J Agat aret Il (124-16, ws, we 3) gupat pargat too” sabhnee thaa-ee. You are the hidden and the revealed in all places.
ae usATet ffs ASt uTet I (124-16, 15, He 3) gur parsaadee mil sojhee paa-ee. Receiving Guru's Grace, this understanding is obtained.
aod oy Aete Ae Ss Tene Hf SASfEor WC UQVSNQUIl (124-17, 2s, He 3) naanak naam salaahi sadaa too’ gurmukh man vasaavani-aa. ||8||24||25||
O Nanak, praise the Naam forever; as Gurmukh, enshrine it within the mind. [18] [24] [25] |
HS HIS 3 Il (124-17)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Tanta fires free wmd it 124-18, ws, He 3) gurmukh milai milaa-ay aapay. The Gurmukhs meet the Lord, and inspire others to meet Him as well.
aS Oo Hd SY O ASN Il (124-18, ws, He 3) kaal na johai dukh na santaapay. Death does not see them, and pain does not afflict them.
ICH He Hue AS SS TeHfy nafs AI]fent AM (124-18, +1, He 3)
ha-umai maar banDhan sabh torhai gurmukh sabad suhaavani-aa. ||1||
Subduing egotism, they break all their bonds; as Gurmukh, they are adorned with the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
we adt ME set aie af ath AaSfEvr Ih (124-19, Hs, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har har naam suhaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who look beautiful in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Tanta are qenfy are ofa Ast fos wefeur ai ToS It (124-19, ws, He 3)
gurmukh gaavai gurmukh naachai har saytee chit laavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukhs sing, the Gurmukhs dance, and focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
UYSst q2Qu
aanfe Ate HS UTSTS Il (125-1, ws, He 3) gurmukh jeevai marai parvaan. The Gurmukhs are celebrated in life and death.
WdH & Sth AGE USS Il (125-1, 47s, ve 3) aarjaa na chheejai sabad pachhaan. Their lives are not wasted; they realize the Word of the Shabad.
Dante Hs 5 aS o we Tanfe Afs AN|fenr NIM (125-2, ws, He 3)
gurmukh marai na kaal na khaa-ay gurmukh sach samaavani-aa. ||2||
The Gurmukhs do not die; they are not consumed by death. The Gurmukhs are absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||
aente ofs efs Ast ue Il (125-2, ws, He 3) gurmukh har dar sobhaa paa-ay. The Gurmukhs are honored in the Court of the Lord.
aanfe fea wiry Tee Il (125-2, Hs, He 3) gurmukh vichahu aap gavaa-ay. The Gurmukhs eradicate selfishness and conceit from within.
nify 3d AG AS 3d Dente Aon ASTafEnr ISI (125-3, ws, He 3)
aap tarai kul saglay taaray gurmukh janam savaarni-aa. ||3]|
They save themselves, and save all their families and ancestors as well. The Gurmukhs redeem their lives. ||3]|
ante su ae o Ba Adis il 125-3, ws, He 3) gurmukh dukh kaday na lagai sareer. The Gurmukhs never suffer bodily pain.
TaHfs TBH ga utes il (125-4, ws, ns 3) gurmukh ha-umai chookai peer. The Gurmukhs have the pain of egotism taken away.
aenty Ho foo fefs He 3 oat Tanfy AafA ANT]fenr ISI (125-4, Hs, He 3) gurmukh man nirmal fir mail na laagai gurmukh sahj samaavani-aa. ||4| |
The minds of the Gurmukhs are immaculate and pure; no filth ever sticks to them again. The Gurmukhs merge in celestial peace. ||4||
aanta oy fis efsmret it 125-5, ws, He 3) gurmukh naam milai vadi-aa-ee. The Gurmukhs obtain the Greatness of the Naam.
Tenfy ge We Hat uret | (125-5, ws, ne 3) gurmukh gun gaavai sobhaa paa-ee. The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and obtain honor.
He nidfe ad feg ast qenfe Age aaefenr ull (125-5, Hs, v2 3)
sadaa anand rahai din raatee gurmukh sabad karaavani-aa. ||5||
They remain in bliss forever, day and night. The Gurmukhs practice the Word of the Shabad. ||5]||
aaHfy nates Aas IST Il (125-6, us, He 3) gurmukh an-din sabday raataa. The Gurmukhs are attuned to the Shabad, night and day.
TaHfe Fa WS FT AST Il (125-6, ws, vs 3) gurmukh jug chaaray hai jaataa. The Gurmukhs are known throughout the four ages.
aenfy ae we Ae fede Hae sas aaefenr ell 125-7, ws, He 3)
gurmukh gun gaavai sadaa nirmal sabday bhagat karaavani-aa. ||6]||
The Gurmukhs always sing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate Lord. Through the Shabad, they practice devotional worship. ||6]||
MS TT F vig vias i (125-7, ws, ws 3) baajh guroo hai anDh anDhaaraa. Without the Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness.
AHATS WIS ATT USS | (125-8, 7s, Hz 3) jamkaal garthay karahi pukaaraa. Seized by the Messenger of Death, people cry out and scream.
wofes dat fare & ats fare ufo ey urefent IDI (125-8, 4s, He 3)
an-din rogee bistaa kay keerhay bistaa meh dukh paavni-aa. ||7]|
Night and day, they are diseased, like maggots in manure, and in manure they endure agony. ||7]|
Tafa nim AT ATES Il (125-9, Hs, He 3) gurmukh aapay karay karaa-ay. The Gurmukhs know that the Lord alone acts, and causes others to act.
aanfa fase zor wrfiy mre | 125-9, ws, v2 3) gurmukh hirdai vuthaa aap aa-ay. In the hearts of the Gurmukhs, the Lord Himself comes to dwell.
aed oth fre sfsuret us Ts 3 wrSfEr CUQUIEN (125-9, os, Hs 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee pooray gur tay paavni-aa. ||8||25||26]||
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained. It is received from the Perfect Guru. ||8]]25]|26| |
HS HIG 8 Il (125-10)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
far fs Afs F Aste Il (125-10, ws, v2 3) aykaa jot jot hai sareeraa. The One Light is the light of all bodies.
Rafe feare Afsag UT I (125-10, ws, 42 3) sabad dikhaa-ay satgur pooraa. The Perfect True Guru reveals it through the Word of the Shabad.
nm gig aise we nists wmi ges gavefeor Al (125-11, Hs, He 3)
aapay farak keeton ghat antar aapay banat banaavani-aa. ||1] |
He Himself instills the sense of separation within our hearts; He Himself created the Creation. ||1]|
IG ad ME ad We Ad a Te Wefenr | (125-11, ws, ve 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har sachay kay gun gaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
TS IT a Add owe Tent Aofe AHSfemr AU TIS Ml (125-12, ws, we 3)
baajh guroo ko sahj na paa-ay gurmukh sahj samaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Guru, no one obtains intuitive wisdom; the Gurmukh is absorbed in intuitive peace. ||1]||Pause| |
3 omy} Aafa wm Aa Hats Il (125-13, +s, Hs 3) too” aapay soheh aapay jag moheh. You Yourself are Beautiful, and You Yourself entice the world.
J nm sedt Fag ude|ts | 125-13, ws, Hs 3) too” aapay nadree jagat paroveh. You Yourself, by Your Kind Mercy, weave the thread of the world.
3 umd wy AY tafe aes Tents afs SarefEr |QM (125-13, ws, Hs 3)
too” aapay dukh sukh dayveh kartay gurmukh har daykhaavani-aa. ||2||
You Yourself bestow pain and pleasure, O Creator. The Lord reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||2]|
MTU ATS AT ATES Il (125-14, us, nz 3) aapay kartaa karay karaa-ay. The Creator Himself acts, and causes others to act.
mm} Aa Td Hfe SAS | (125-14, ws, He 3) aapay sabad gur man vasaa-ay. Through Him, the Word of the Guru's Shabad is enshrined within the mind.
Rae Gur vifys aret aenfa orf wevefeor SI 125-14, Hs, He 3)
sabday upjai amrit banee gurmukh aakh sunaavni-aa. ||3]||
The Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani emanates from the Word of the Shabad. The Gurmukh speaks it and hears it. ||3]|
MY ATS MY FATS" Il (125-15, Hes, He 3) aapay kartaa aapay bhugtaa. He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer.
que 33 Het TF HAST Il (125-15, ns, He 3) banDhan torhay sadaa hai muktaa. One who breaks out of bondage is liberated forever.
Het HAS MM J AST My niwy werefent igi (125-16, ws, He 3) sadaa mukat aapay hai sachaa aapay alakh lakhaavani-aa. ||4|| The True Lord is liberated forever. The Unseen Lord causes Himself to be seen. ||4||
my Hf nid erfemir Il (125-16, HTS, He 3) aapay maa-i-aa aapay chhaa-i-aa. He Himself is Maya, and He Himself is the Illusion.
nm Hd AS Aas Surfer th (125-16, ws, ne 3) aapay moh sabh jagat upaa-i-aa. He Himself has generated emotional attachment throughout the entire universe.
nm Tees’ Te ae my nr warefsnr ull 125-17, ws, vs 3)
aapay gundaataa gun gaavai aapay aakh sunaavni-aa. ||5||
He Himself is the Giver of Virtue; He Himself sings the Lord's Glorious Praises. He chants them and causes them to be heard. ||5]||
MN AT TITS MMT Il (125-17, HS, He 3) aapay karay karaa-ay aapay. He Himself acts, and causes others to act.
mre afy Gant mm} il (125-18, us, He 3) aapay thaap uthaapay aapay. He Himself establishes and disestablishes.
33 3 wale ag 3 dS F MM aS Befenr MEM (125-18, ws, He 3) tujh tay baahar kachhoo na hovai too” aapay kaarai laavani-aa. ||6]| Without You, nothing can be done. You Yourself have engaged all in their tasks. ||6]|
Mme Hes nif ATSTES Il (125-19, HTS, He 3) aapay Maaray aap jeevaa-ay. He Himself kills, and He Himself revives.
~~
mm AS Hts feos i (125-19, ws, He 3) aapay maylay mayl milaa-ay. He Himself unites us, and unites us in Union with Himself.
Ret 3 Ae AY ufenr gente Aol AHSfEMt DI (125-19, HS, He 3)
sayvaa tay sadaa sukh paa-i-aa gurmukh sahj samaavani-aa. ||7||
Through selfless service, eternal peace is obtained. The Gurmukh is absorbed in intuitive peace. ||7||
UST AE
mig Bor Sa Tet Il 126-1, ws, we 3) aapay oochaa oocho ho-ee. He Himself is the Highest of the High.
fan orf fears Wee ae I (126-1, +15, He 3) jis aap vikhaalay so vaykhai ko-ee. How rare are those who behold Him. He causes Himself to be seen.
Sod OH ZA We nists nmi Ste feasfent Ic NIENQII (126-1, ws, He 3) naanak naam vasai ghat antar aapay vaykh vikhaalani-aa. ||8||26||27]|| O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the hearts of those who see the Lord themselves, and inspire others to see Him as well. ||8]|26]|27]||
HS HIG 3 Il (126-2)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Aa ys sdufs sfour As aet Il (126-2, ns, He 3) mayraa parabh bharpoor rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee. My God is pervading and permeating all places.
as usAret we St Hfo uret il (126-3, 7s, He 3) gur parsaadee ghar hee meh paa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I have found Him within the home of my own heart.
He Addt fea His fomret aanfa Afs AHTSfEmt IAI 426-3, Hs, He 3)
Sadaa sarayvee ik man Dhi-aa-ee gurmukh sach samaavani-aa. ||1] |
I serve Him constantly, and I meditate on Him single-mindedly. As Gurmukh, I am absorbed in the True One. ||1||
IG ad ME act Hales Hf srrefenr It (126-4, 115, 8 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree jagjeevan man vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Lord, the Life of the World, within their minds.
dfs Aaniee forse ast Tens Aafa AHTSfEnt NAN TIS i (126-4, ws, v8 3)
har jagjeevan nirbha-o daataa gurmat sahj samaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I merge with intuitive ease into the Lord, the Life of the World, the Fearless One, the Great Giver. ||1||Pause]|
we xfs Usst UBS UTS Il (126-5, HTS, Hs 3)
ghar meh Dhartee Dha-ul paataalaa.
Within the home of the self is the earth, its support and the nether regions of the underworld.
we ot ufo utsy Aer d wer il (126-5, ws, Hs 3) ghar hee meh pareetam sadaa hai baalaa. Within the home of the self is the Eternally Young Beloved.
Ret néfe gd Aes" TENS Aofs AH|fSMr M211 (126-6, Hs, He 3)
Sadaa anand rahai sukh-daata gurmat sahj samaavani-aa. ||2||
The Giver of peace is eternally blissful. Through the Guru's Teachings, we are absorbed in intuitive peace. ||2||
afent nfefs IGH HAT Il (126-6, HS, He 3) kaa-i-aa andar ha-umai mayraa. When the body is filled with ego and selfishness,
HHE HIS B Ya ST Il (126-6, ws, ws 3) jaman maran na chookai fayraa. the cycle of birth and death does not end.
aanfa Je A IH He Ad Ag fowrefenr Bil (126-7, ws, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so ha-umai maaray sacho sach Dhi-aavani-aa. ||3]|
One who becomes Gurmukh subdues egotism, and meditates on the Truest of the True. |[3]|
afent niefs uy ue efe svet I (126-7, ns, He 3) kaa-i-aa andar paap punn du-ay bhaa-ee. Within this body are the two brothers, sin and virtue.
cot fife & figafe Guret II (126-8, ws, He 3) duhee mil kai sarisat upaa-ee. When the two joined together, the Universe was produced.
ce ufs ate feag ufe wre aenfs nafs AHTefEnr Ist (126-8, Hs, He 3)
dovai maar jaa-ay ikat ghar aavai gurmat sahj samaavani-aa. ||4||
Subduing both, and entering into the Home of the One, through the Guru's Teachings, we are absorbed in intuitive peace. ||4]|
we Tt HT SA StS MST Il (126-9, ws, He 3) ghar hee maahi doojai bhaa-ay anayraa. Within the home of the self is the darkness of the love of duality.
SA SA
Tos de SS IGH HT Il (126-9, ws, He 3) chaanan hovai chhodai ha-umai mayraa. When the Divine Light dawns, ego and selfishness are dispelled.
udde Hae J ques nofes aH fomrefenr ull (126-9, Hs, He 3)
pargat sabad hai sukh-daata an-din naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||5||
The Giver of peace is revealed through the Shabad, meditating upon the Naam, night and day. ||5||
nists Afs UsaS UTATST II (126-10, HS, He 3)
antar jot pargat paasaaraa.
Deep within the self is the Light of God; It radiates throughout the expanse of His creation.
aa Anat fifenr niftmirst i 126-10, ws, H8 3) gur saakhee miti-aa anDhi-aaraa. Through the Guru's Teachings, the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled.
one faerfa net Ay ufeor Ast Afs frerefemr EN 426-11, ws, He 3)
kamal bigaas sadaa sukh paa-i-aa jotee jot milaavani-aa. ||6]||
The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and eternal peace is obtained, as one's light merges into the Light. ||6]|
nets HIG ISSt SI FST Il (126-11, Hs, vz 3) andar mahal ratnee bharay bhandaaraa. Within the mansion is the treasure house, overflowing with jewels.
anf urs STH MUST Il (126-12, HTS, He 3) gurmukh paa-ay naam apaaraa. The Gurmukh obtains the Infinite Naam, the Name of the Lord.
aaHfe fen Het eurdt Ba SH AS urSfent DI (126-12, ws, He 3)
gurmukh vanjay sadaa vaapaaree laahaa naam sad paavni-aa. ||7]||
The Gurmukh, the trader, always purchases the merchandise of the Naam, and always reaps profits. ||7]|
mm ze ay mmr SfE il (126-13, ws, He 3) aapay vath raakhai aapay day-ay. The Lord Himself keeps this merchandise in stock, and He Himself distributes it.
aaHty gents aet ate i (126-13, us, He 3) gurmukh vanjahi kay-ee kay-ay. Rare is that Gurmukh who trades in this.
Sod fan sets ad A ure afte forour His SATSfEnr ICNQINQCH (126-13, HTS, He 3)
naanak jis nadar karay so paa-ay kar kirpaa man vasaavani-aa. ||8]||27||28] | O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtain it. Through His Mercy, it is enshrined in the mind. ||8||27]||28]|
HS HIS 3 Il (126-14)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Ts mM AS AS ATES I (126-14, wy, nz 3) har aapay maylay sayv karaa-ay. The Lord Himself leads us to merge with Him and serve Him.
Ts a Hate 7S SA AS Il (126-14, ws, ws 3) gur kai sabad bhaa-o doojaa jaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the love of duality is eradicated.
dfs fesHe Ae Tees dfs Te nfs orfy ANTSfEMt NAM (126-15, HS, He 3)
har nirmal sadaa gundaataa har gun meh aap samaavani-aa. ||1||
The Immaculate Lord is the Bestower of eternal virtue. The Lord Himself leads us to merge in His Virtuous Goodness. ||1]|
IG ad HE ad AY Ae fase eASfEmr II (126-16, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree sach sachaa hirdai vasaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Truest of the True within their hearts.
Het oY Het d fesHe aa Aaet Hfe errefemr 9 TIC I (126-16, ws, v2 3)
sachaa naam sadaa hai nirmal gur sabdee man vasaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Name is eternally pure and immaculate. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is enshrined within the mind. ||1||Pause] |
mma ag ast aay faarst ih (126-17, ws, He 3) aapay gur daataa karam biDhaataa. The Guru Himself is the Giver, the Architect of Destiny.
Rea Aets TaHfe Ife AST Il 126-17, Hs, He 3) sayvak sayveh gurmukh har jaataa. The Gurmukh, the humble servant who serves the Lord, comes to know Him.
nifys of Ae AS Aofs aeHfs afs ga urSfenr QU (126-17, Hs, He 3)
amrit naam sadaa jan soheh gurmat har ras paavni-aa. ||2|| Those humble beings look beautiful forever in the Ambrosial Naam. Through the Guru's Teachings, they receive the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||
fen ae ufo fea ae AafeEnt I (126-18, Hs, He 3) is gufaa meh ik thaan suhaa-i-aa. Within the cave of this body, there is one beautiful place.
ud afs BH saH Yorfenr I (126-19, +s, He 3) poorai gur ha-umai bharam chukaa-i-aa. Through the Perfect Guru, ego and doubt are dispelled.
mofes oH Aodls df ws ad fas 3 urefeur Sil (126-19, Hs, He 3)
an-din naam salaahan rang raatay gur kirpaa tay paavni-aa. ||3]||
Night and day, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; imbued with the Lord's Love, by Guru's Grace, you shall find Him. |[3]|
ust 929 ad a wate feg wet Stes Il (127-1, ws, v2 3)
gur kai sabad ih gufaa veechaaray. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, search this cave.
oy fadne nists ZA Has Il (127-1, +5, He 3) naam niranjan antar vasai muraaray. The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the self.
dfs we ae Aafe Hae fife UtsH AY urefenr Ig (127-1, ws, He 3)
har gun gaavai sabad suhaa-ay mil pareetam sukh paavni-aa. ||4]|
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and decorate yourself with the Shabad. Meeting with your Beloved, you shall find peace. ||4| |
WH WarSt SH StS aT BS Il (127-2, ws, vs 3) jam jaagaatee doojai bhaa-ay kar laa-ay. The Messenger of Death imposes his tax on those who are attached to duality.
eT 3S Ve AME Il (127-2, ws, He 3) naavhu bhoolay day-ay sajaa-ay. He inflicts punishment on those who forget the Name.
wet HIS aT Bu Se Wing WA 3G aerefanr Mull (127-2, ws, ve 3)
gharhee muhat kaa laykhaa layvai ratee-ahu maasaa tol kadhaavani-aa. ||5|| They are called to account for each instant and each moment. Every grain, every particle, is weighed and counted. ||5||
yehas fug 33 sat i SA HSt FS TAT I 27-3, os, ws 3)
pay-ee-arhai pir chaytay naahee. doojai muthee rovai Dhaahee.
One who does not remember her Husband Lord in this world is being cheated by duality; she shall weep bitterly in the end.
udt aorfas agfu aeuet Aus fug sdt ureter ell (127-4, ws, we 3)
kharee ku-aali-o kuroop kulkhanee supnai pir nahee paavni-aa. ||6]|
She is from an evil family; she is ugly and vile. Even in her dreams, she does not meet her Husband Lord. ||6||
ues fus Hfs earfemr it 127-4, ws, v2 3) pay-ee-arhai pir man vasaa-i-aa. She who enshrines her Husband Lord in her mind in this world
ud afs defs feerfenr it (127-5, ws, He 3) poorai gur hadoor dikhaa-i-aa. -His Presence is revealed to her by the Perfect Guru.
omnfs fus ofimr afe of age fus we AW AoSfEMr DI (127-5, +, He 3)
kaaman pir raakhi-aa kanth laa-ay sabday pir raavai sayj suhaavani-aa. ||7]|
That soul-bride keeps her Husband Lord clasped tightly to her heart, and through the Word of the Shabad, she enjoys her Husband Lord upon His Beautiful Bed. ||7| |
~ AA
mmry fe Afe THe Il (127-6, us, He 3) aapay dayvai sad bulaa-ay. The Lord Himself sends out the call, and He summons us to His Presence.
nmuet arg vfs SATE Il (127-6, Hs, He 3) aapnaa naa-o man vasaa-ay. He enshrines His Name within our minds.
Soa OH fuS Sfsuret nrafes Ae Te WefSnr WecuIAciIell (127-6, ws, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee an-din sadaa gun gaavani-aa. ||8]|28||29]||
O Nanak, one who receives the greatness of the Naam night and day, constantly sings His Glorious Praises. ||8||28]|29] |
HS HIS 3 Il (127-7)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
@3H AoW HES F SAT I (127-7, ws, He 3) ootam janam suthaan hai vaasaa. Sublime is their birth, and the place where they dwell.
Afsag vets we Hf BeAr Il (127-7, us, v8 3) satgur sayveh ghar maahi udaasaa. Those who serve the True Guru remain detached in the home of their own being.
ofa df safs Ae df aS ofa afh ue feustefenr NAN (127-8, ws, Hs 3)
har rang raheh sadaa rang raatay har ras man tariptaavni-aa. ||1]|
They abide in the Lord's Love, and constantly imbued with His Love, their minds are satisfied and fulfilled with the Lord's Essence. ||1]|
JG act AG act ufs af vfs Srrefenr It (127-8, ws, 2 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree parh bujh man vasaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who read of the Lord, who understand and enshrine Him within their minds.
aenfy usts ofs on Aerofs efs Ad AST Uefsmr a TIC il 127-9, ws, He 3) gurmukh parheh har naam salaaheh dar sachai sobhaa paavni-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukhs read and praise the Lord's Name; they are honored in the True Court. ||1]|Pause] |
mod ms@ af sont ANTE I (127-10, HTS, He 3) alakh abhay-o har rahi-aa samaa-ay. The Unseen and Inscrutable Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.
Cure o fast ufenr Ae Il (127-10, 473, H2 3) upaa-ay na kitee paa-i-aa jaa-ay. He cannot be obtained by any effort.
fast ad at Afsag se oedt Hf fkorefemr 1211 (127-10, 5, He 3) kirpaa karay taa satgur bhaytai nadree may! milaavani-aa. ||2||
If the Lord grants His Grace, then we come to meet the True Guru. By His Kindness, we are united in His Union. ||2]|
en ote us oot 88 ll 127-11, ws, we 3) doojai bhaa-ay parhai nahee boojhai. One who reads, while attached to duality, does not understand.
fafafa wrfeor arate BS il 127-11, ws, He 3) taribaDh maa-i-aa kaaran loojhai. He yearns for the three-phased Maya.
fefafa dus sefo as Aaet as Aaet Hats aaefenr BI (127-12, +s, He 3)
taribaDh banDhan tooteh gur sabdee gur sabdee mukat karaavani-aa. ||3]||
The bonds of the three-phased Maya are broken by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Through the Guru's Shabad, liberation is achieved. ||3||
feg He due eH o mS Il (127-12, ws, He 3) ih man chanchal vas na aavai. This unstable mind cannot be held steady.
ofa oat va fefa oe I 127-13, +15, nH 3) dubiDhaa laagai dah dis Dhaavai. Attached to duality, it wanders in the ten directions.
fay a ata fay ufo ast fay ot fo usefanr isi (127-13, Ws, He 3) bikh kaa keerhaa bikh meh raataa bikh hee maahi pachaavani-aa. ||4|| It is a poisonous worm, drenched with poison, and in poison it rots away. ||4||
IG IG ad 3 nme ASS I 127-14, ws, He 3) ha-o ha-o karay tai aap janaa-ay. Practicing egotism and selfishness, they try to impress others by showing off.
ad AGH ad foes aE o ure Il 127-14, 15, nH 3) baho karam karai kichh thaa-ay na paa-ay. They perform all sorts of rituals, but they gain no acceptance.
33 3 wots fag 5 de aaA Aafe Hoefer Ul (127-14, os, HF 3)
tujh tay baahar kichhoo na hovai bakhsay sabad suhaavani-aa. ||5||
Without You, Lord, nothing happens at all. You forgive those who are adorned with the Word of Your Shabad. ||5]|
Cur ud afe FS Sat i 27-15, +s, He 3) upjai pachai har boojhai naahee. They are born, and they die, but they do not understand the Lord.
motes en ate feast i (127-15, ws, we 3) an-din doojai bhaa-ay firaa-ee. Night and day, they wander, in love with duality.
HOHY HOH afenr o fase nifs afeor usstefenr Ell (127-15, Hs, He 3)
manmukh janam ga-i-aa hai birthaa ant ga-i-aa pachhutaavani-aa. ||6||
The lives of the self-willed manmukhs are useless; in the end, they die, regretting and repenting. ||6||
fug usefh frerg Fere Il (127-16, Hs, He 3) pir pardays sigaar banaa-ay. The Husband is away, and the wife is getting dressed up.
HOHY HiT MA ATH AHS Il (127-16, ws, He 3) manmukh anDh aisay karam kamaa-ay. This is what the blind, self-willed manmukhs are doing.
Jofs 5 Ast uafs 3 det fase HON TSe|fenr DN 127-17, Ws, He 3)
halat na sobhaa palat na dho-ee birthaa janam gavaavni-aa. ||7||
They are not honored in this world, and they shall find no shelter in the world hereafter. They are wasting their lives in vain. ||7]|
ofa at any fxs feos AST Il 127-17, 15, He 3) har kaa naam Kinai virlai jaataa. How rare are those who know the Name of the Lord!
US TT a Aafe USS Il (127-18, +s, He 3) pooray gur kai sabad pachhaataa. Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, the Lord is realized.
motes salts ad fes TSt Aan dt AY UTsfaMr ICI (127-18, ws, He 3)
an-din bhagat karay din raatee sehjay hee sukh paavni-aa. ||8]|
Night and day, they perform the Lord's devotional service; day and night, they find intuitive peace. ||8]|
AS Hfs eas Sa AST I (127-19, ws, He 3) sabh meh vartai ayko so-ee. That One Lord is pervading in all.
Tafa fear gS Tet I (127-19, os, Hs 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand this.
Soa STH JS Ho Hutg ate faour orfy fyorefenr We NQENSON (127-19, ws, He 3)
naanak naam ratay jan soheh kar kirpaa aap milaavani-aa. ||9||29||30] | O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are beautiful. Granting His Grace, God unites them with Himself. ||9||29]|30] |
UST q2Qe
HS HIG 3 Il (128-1)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Hony ust ufss axae]fs Il (128-1, ws, nH 3) manmukh parheh pandit kahaaveh. The self-willed manmukhs read and recite; they are called Pandits-spiritual scholars.
en ote Ho ey urefs Il (128-1, ws, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay mahaa dukh paavahi. But they are in love with duality, and they suffer in terrible pain.
fatter HS fas AS ondt fete fefs wat mrefenr Al (128-2, +s, Hs 3)
bikhi-aa maatay kichh soojhai naahee fir fir joonee aavani-aa. ||1]| Intoxicated with vice, they understand nothing at all. They are reincarnated, over and over again. ||1]|
IG ad AE sat TBH wf fieerefenr I (128-2, +15, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree ha-umai maar milaavani-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who subdue their ego, and unite with the Lord.
ad Ae 3 ofa Hfe efhor ofe 3A AoA Urefer I TITS Il (128-3, ws, He 3)
gur sayvaa tay har man vasi-aa har ras sahj pee-aavni-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
They serve the Guru, and the Lord dwells within their minds; they intuitively drink in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Ze usta ofa JA odt mrfenr I (128-4, Hs, HH 3) vayd parheh har ras nahee aa-i-aa. The Pandits read the Vedas, but they do not obtain the Lord's essence.
ae zurafs Ho Hfemr Il 128-4, ws, He 3) vaad vakaaneh mohay maa-i-aa. Intoxicated with Maya, they argue and debate.
mifamroHst Aer uiftmre aaufy afs af arefemr ii (128-4, ws, Hs 3)
agi-aanmatee sadaa anDhi-aaraa gurmukh boojh har gaavani-aa. ||2||
The foolish intellectuals are forever in spiritual darkness. The Gurmukhs understand, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
wae adba Aafe ATS Il (128-5, ws, He 3) aktho kathee-ai sabad suhaavai. The Indescribable is described only through the beauteous Word of the Shabad.
TaHSt Hf AS SS Il (128-5, ws, He 3) gurmatee man sacho bhaavai. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Truth becomes pleasing to the mind.
He Ag defo feo at fea Ho Afe davefemr ISI (128-6, +5, He 3)
sacho sach raveh din raatee ih man sach rangaavin-aa. ||3]||
Those who speak of the truest of the true, day and night-their minds are imbued with the Truth. |]3]|
a Af gS f8a AS STS I (128-6, ws, He 3) jo sach ratay tin sacho bhaavai. Those who are attuned to Truth, love the Truth.
nm Sf o UES Il (128-6, HS, He 3) aapay day-ay na pachhotaavai. The Lord Himself bestows this gift; He shall not take it back.
ad a Rafe Ae AY AST fife AS AY UefEur igi (128-7, Ws, He 3)
gur kai sabad sadaa sach jaataa mil sachay sukh paavni-aa. ||4||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the True Lord is known forever; meeting the True One, peace is found. ||4]|
IT GAS aT HS 3 Ha il TT USA viafeg A ll (128-7, ws, ws 3)
koorh kusat tinaa mail na laagai. gur parsaadee an-din jaagai.
The filth of fraud and falsehood does not stick to those who, by Guru's Grace, remain awake and aware, night and day.
fsdHs oH ZA we state Ast Afs fHorefemr ilull (128-8, +s, He 3)
nirmal naam vasai ghat bheetar jotee jot milaavani-aa. ||5] |
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within their hearts; their light merges into the Light. ||5]|
3 ae usfs ofa 33 3 Wefs II (128-9, 13, He 3)
tarai gun parheh har tat na jaaneh.
They read about the three qualities, but they do not know the essential reality of the Lord.
HOI 38 WI ARE B UErefs Il (128-9, ws, 42 3)
moolhu bhulay gur sabad na pachhaaneh.
They forget the Primal Lord, the Source of all, and they do not recognize the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ha fmt fags AS adt Ta Aaet ate ureter ell (128-9, ws, we 3)
moh bi-aapay kichh soojhai naahee gur sabdee har paavni-aa. ||6]|
They are engrossed in emotional attachment; they do not understand anything at all. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is found. ||6] |
ze yard fefafar wefemr i (128-10, ws, 8 3) vayd pukaarai taribaDh maa-i-aa. The Vedas proclaim that Maya is of three qualities.
HOH 8 asfs eA Sefer I (128-10, ws, Hs 3) manmukh na boojheh doojai bhaa-i-aa. The self-willed manmukhs, in love with duality, do not understand.
3 Te uate fs Sa 3 wefe fag gs gy ureter DI (128-11, ws, He 3)
tarai gun parheh har ayk na jaaneh bin boojhay dukh paavni-aa. ||7]|
They read of the three qualities, but they do not know the One Lord. Without understanding, they obtain only pain and suffering. ||7]|
wv faq are at vrfy fire tt (128-11, 15, nH 3) jaa tis bhaavai taa aap milaa-ay. When it pleases the Lord, He unites us with Himself.
Td Aaet AGA TY YAS Il (128-12, ws, He 3) gur sabdee sahsaa dookh chukaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, skepticism and suffering are dispelled.
Soa oe at Aut efanret oH HfS AY uUT]fenr IC NBONSUI (128-12, HS, He 3) naanak naavai kee sachee vadi-aa-ee naamo man sukh paavni-aa. ||8]|30]|31]| O Nanak, True is the Greatness of the Name. Believing in the Name, peace is obtained. ||8||30]|31||
HS HIG 3 Il (128-13)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
fade Hades mt wet Il (128-13, ws, v2 3) nirgun sargun aapay so-ee. The Lord Himself is Unmanifest and Unrelated; He is Manifest and Related as well.
33 use A ufss det i (128-13, +5, v2 3) tat pachhaanai so pandit ho-ee. Those who recognize this essential reality are the true Pandits, the spiritual scholars.
wif 3d Ae AG 3d Us oH Hfs SATSfeMr A (128-13, 4s, He 3)
aap tarai saglay kul taarai har naam man vasaavani-aa. ||1]|
They save themselves, and save all their families and ancestors as well, when they enshrine the Lord's Name in the mind. ||1]|
we adt ME set afe oA ofy AS UTSfEMT I (128-14, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree har ras chakh saad paavni-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who taste the essence of the Lord, and savor its taste.
dfs 3A wale A Ao fase fesHs an fomrefanr ail TIS Il (128-14, ws, He 3) har ras chaakhahi say jan nirmal nirmal naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who taste this essence of the Lord are the pure, immaculate beings. They meditate on the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
A fssanit 4 Age sherds Il (128-15, ws, ne 3) so nihkarmee jo sabad beechaaray. Those who reflect upon the Shabad are beyond karma.
nists 33 famrfs IBH HTS II (128-16, HS, He 3) antar tat gi-aan ha-umai maaray. They subdue their ego, and find the essence of wisdom, deep within their being.
oy uese o@ fofa ue 3 ae Afe AHTSfEr III (128-16, Hs, He 3)
naam padaarath na-o niDh paa-ay tarai gun mayt samaavani-aa. ||2||
They obtain the nine treasures of the wealth of the Naam. Rising above the three qualities, they merge into the Lord. ||2||
ICH ad fasasHt 5 TS Il (128-16, 75, v2 3) ha-umai karai nihkarmee na hovai. Those who act in ego do not go beyond karma.
qe UAT IBH FS I (128-17, 15, nz 3) gur parsaadee ha-umai khovai. It is only by Guru's Grace that one is rid of ego.
nists faa ret ory ghd ad Aset Te Wefanr Bll (128-17, ws, He 3)
antar bibayk sadaa aap veechaaray gur sabdee gun gaavani-aa. ||3]||
Those who have discriminating minds, continually examine their own selves. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they sing the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||3] |
dfs Ag Aad foons Aet 1 AS vate fos qanfe Tet Il (128-18, ws, v2 3)
har sar saagar nirmal so-ee. sant chugeh nit gurmukh ho-ee.
The Lord is the most pure and sublime Ocean. The Saintly Gurmukhs continually peck at the Naam, like swans pecking at pearls in the ocean.
fenas acts Het feg TSt WEN He yorefEnr Ii! (128-18, +, He 3) isnaan karahi sadaa din raatee ha-umai mail chukaavani-aa. ||4| | They bathe in it continually, day and night, and the filth of ego is washed away. ||4||
fogs dA UH fimrfa u ofs Afs eA BH fs It 128-19, xs, v8 3)
nirmal hansaa paraym pi-aar. har sar vasai ha-umai maar.
The pure swans, with love and affection, dwell in the Ocean of the Lord, and subdue their ego.
Yar qa
wifofofa uifs Rafe Ard ofe Afs ear urefsmr Hull (129-1, Hs, He 3)
ahinis pareet sabad saachai har sar vaasaa paavni-aa. ||5]|
Day and night, they are in love with the True Word of the Shabad. They obtain their home in the Ocean of the Lord. ||5||
HOHY Het Fa HE IGH HS Bret | (129-1, ws, ve 3) manmukh sadaa bag mailaa ha-umai mal laa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs shall always be filthy cranes, smeared with the filth of ego.
fenas Ad Ud Hw B AT Il (129-2, ws, ne 3) isnaan karai par mail na jaa-ee. They may bathe, but their filth is not removed.
Hes Hd Ts Age sterd EH HS yorefEnr MEI (129-2, ws, He 3)
jeevat marai gur sabad beechaarai ha-umai mail chukaavani-aa. | |6| |
One who dies while yet alive, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad, is rid of this filth of ego. ||6]|
336 use we 3 ufeMr I (129-3, ws, He 3) ratan padaarath ghar tay paa-i-aa. The Priceless Jewel is found, in the home of one's own being,
ud Afsafe Aa AeteEMr Il (129-3, ws, Hs 3) poorai satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa. when one listens to the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect True Guru.
aa uate fifeur nifomre ufe woe wiry usrafEnit IDI 129-3, Hs, He 3)
gur parsaad miti-aa anDhi-aaraa ghat chaanan aap pachhaanni-aa. ||7]||
By Guru's Grace, the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled; I have come to recognize the Divine Light within my own heart. ||7]|
mify Sure 3 nmy Se Il (129-4, ns, v2 3) aap upaa-ay tai aapay vaykhai. The Lord Himself creates, and He Himself beholds.
Afsag Ae AAS Be Il (129-4, ns, He 3) satgur sayvai so jan laykhai. Serving the True Guru, one becomes acceptable.
Sot OH ZA we nists as faa 3 wSfEnt ICNSAUIBI (129-5, HS, He 3) naanak naam vasai ghat antar gur kirpaa tay paavni-aa. ||8]||31]||32]|
O Nanak, the Naam dwells deep within the heart; by Guru's Grace, it is obtained. [18] |32][32]|
HS HIS 8 Il (129-5)
maajh mehlaa 3. Maajh, Third Mehl:
Hfter Hg Has Hater Il (129-6, ws, He 3) maa-i-aa moh jagat sabaa-i-aa. The whole world is engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya.
3 ae cfs Ha wfenr I (129-6, os, 48 3) tarai gun deeseh mohay maa-i-aa. Those who are controlled by the three qualities are attached to Maya.
qs use & fea gs va ufe fee sefenr Al (129-6, ws, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee ko virlaa boojhai cha-uthai pad liv laavani-aa. ||1]||
By Guru's Grace, a few come to understand; they center their consciousness in the fourth state. ||1||
IG adt ME act wfenr Hg Aafe Her|fenr II (129-7, ws, He 3)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who burn away their emotional attachment to Maya, through the Shabad.
Went Hg vee A ofa fAS fos we fs fe Host AST urefenr NAN TIS Il (129-7, ws, H8 3)
maa-i-aa moh jalaa-ay so har si-o chit laa-ay har dar mahlee sobhaa paavni-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Those who burn away this attachment to Maya, and focus their consciousness on the Lord are honored in the True Court, and the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||1]|Pause] |
Sat Set HS F HAST I (129-8, ws, we 3) dayvee dayvaa mool hai maa-i-aa. The source, the root, of the gods and goddesses is Maya.
fAfyfs AAS ffs Gurfenr i (129-9, urs, ne 3) simrit Saasat jinn upaa-i-aa. For them, the Simritees and the Shaastras were composed.
amy au unfeor AAS orfe ate vey ur|fenr III (129-9, ws, He 3)
kaam kroDh pasri-aa sansaaray aa-ay jaa-ay dukh paavni-aa. ||2||
Sexual desire and anger are diffused throughout the universe. Coming and going, people suffer in pain. ||2||
fan fefs famra sae fea ufemr II (129-9, HT, He 3) tis vich gi-aan ratan ik paa-i-aa. The jewel of spiritual wisdom was placed within the universe.
ad usAret Hfs sAfeMt | 129-10, Hs, He 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, it is enshrined within the mind.
WZ AS AAH Ay one Ais us SH fomrefenr Il (129-10, ws, Hs 3)
jat sat sanjam sach kamaavai gur poorai naam Dhi-aavani-aa. ||3]||
Celibacy, chastity, self-discipline and the practice of truthfulness are obtained from the Perfect Guru, by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. |[3]|
usin ue sft geret Il 129-11, ws, He 3) pay-ee-arhai Dhan bharam bhulaanee. In this world of her parents' home, the soul-bride has been deluded by doubt.
en oat fete ussret il (129-11, ws, Hs 3) doojai laagee fir pachhotaanee. Attached to duality, she later comes to regret it.
Jos USS te TSS AUS AY 5 USfsvr igil (129-11, ws, ne 3)
halat palat dovai gavaa-ay supnai sukh na paavni-aa. ||4| |
She forfeits both this world and the next, and even in her dreams, she does not find peace. ||4||
ues TS AZ ANS Il (129-12, 475, Hs 3) pay-ee-arhai Dhan kant samaalay. The soul-bride who remembers her Husband Lord in this world,
TST USAT SH BS Il (129-12, ns, He 3) gur parsaadee vaykhai naalay. by Guru's Grace, sees Him close at hand.
fus a Hofa ad df ost Aafe fare gevefemr ull (129-13, Hs, He 3)
pir kai sahj rahai rang raatee sabad singaar banaavani-aa. ||5||
She remains intuitively attuned to the Love of her Beloved; she makes the Word of His Shabad her decoration. ||5||
HES HOH frat Afsag urfemr il 129-13, ws, ve 3) safal janam jinaa satgur paa-i-aa. Blessed and fruitful is the coming of those who find the True Guru;
am a @ qo Hate Aefenr It (129-14, ws, He 3) doojaa bhaa-o gur sabad jalaa-i-aa. through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they burn their love of duality.
Sa afe afuur we nists fife AsHafs ofe ae aefenr ell (129-14, ws, He 3)
ayko rav rahi-aa ghat antar mil satsangat har gun gaavani-aa. ||6||
The One Lord is permeating and pervading deep within the heart. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||6] |
Afsag o AS A ad wrfenr It (129-15, ws, v2 3) satgur na sayvay so kaahay aa-i-aa. Those who do not serve the True Guru-why did they even come into this world?
fa figs facet HOH aetfenr | (129-15, ws, Hs 3) Dharig jeevan birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. Cursed are their lives; they have uselessly wasted this human life.
Houfa on fafs o ure fag are ag vu urefsmt IDI (129-15, 25, He 3)
manmukh naam chit na aavai bin naavai baho dukh paavni-aa. ||7]||
The self-willed manmukhs do not remember the Naam. Without the Naam, they suffer in terrible pain. ||7]|
fafs fanfe watt Wet AS I 129-16, ws, He 3) jin sisat saajee so-ee jaanai. The One who created the Universe, He alone knows it.
SV
mma HS Aafe use ll (129-16, ws, m2 3) aapay maylai sabad pachhaanai. He unites with Himself those who realize the Shabad.
aoa oH fifeur fe Ae as fre ufs HASta By feurefEnt NCNANZ2NSSI (29-17, +4, H8 3)
naanak naam mili-aa tin jan ka-o jin Dhur mastak laykh likhaavani-aa. ||8]|1]|32||33]| O Nanak, they alone receive the Naam, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is recorded. ||8||1]|32]|]33]|
HS HIS 8 Il (129-18)
maajh mehlaa 4. Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
mife usd mrdUug MMF Il (129-18, HTS, He 4) aad purakh aprampar aapay. The Primal Being is Himself remote and beyond.
my any arf Bary il (129-18, ws, v8 4) aapay thaapay thaap uthaapay. He Himself establishes, and having established, He disestablishes.
AS Hf eas Sa ASt Tenfy Ast wefemt WAU (129-18, ws, He 4) sabh meh vartai ayko so-ee gurmukh sobhaa paavni-aa. ||1]|| The One Lord is pervading in all; those who become Gurmukh are honored. ||1]|
IG act AE act fadardt ony fomrefenr | (129-19, +1, He 4)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree nirankaaree naam Dhi-aavani-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord.
UST 930
fA gua chm ufe ufe tfmr qoute meoy wurefenr A TIS i (130-1, +s, Hs 4) tis roop na raykh-i-aa ghat ghat daykhi-aa gurmukh alakh lakhaavani-aa. ||1|| rahaa- O. He has no form or shape; He is seen within each and every heart. The Gurmukh comes to know the unknowable. ||1]||Pause| |
3 cfenre faaurs ys Aet Il (130-1, 2s, Hs 4) too da-i-aal kirpaal parabh so-ee. You are God, Kind and Merciful.
30 fag gt neg & At Il (130-2, ws, Hs 4) tuDh bin doojaa avar na ko-ee. Without You, there is no other at all.
Td UAE Ad OH PS SH of AHTSfEMr MQM (130-2, Hs, He 4)
gur parsaad karay naam dayvai naamay naam samaavani-aa. ||2||
When the Guru showers His Grace upon us, He blesses us with the Naam; through the Naam, we merge in the Naam. ||2]|
3 umd Het fitsAeTs Il (130-3, 17s, He 4) too” aapay sachaa sirjanhaaraa. You Yourself are the True Creator Lord.
ast 3d SF FST I (130-3, ws, He 4) bhagtee bharay tayray bhandaaraa. Your treasures are overflowing with devotional worship.
aanfa an fes Ho sth Aofa AN warefsnr SII (130-3, HS, He 4)
gurmukh naam milai man bheejai sahj samaaDh lagaavani-aa. ||3]||
The Gurmukhs obtain the Naam. Their minds are enraptured, and they easily and intuitively enter into Samaadhi. ||3]|
mofeg TE Wet YS 3g Il (130-4, ws, ws 4) an-din gun gaavaa parabh tayray. Night and day, I sing Your Glorious Praises, God.
30 Arardt YlSH HT Il 130-4, ws, He 4) tuDh saalaahee pareetam mayray. I praise You, O my Beloved.
30 fag neg 3 aet We Te UsASt F refer sil (130-4, ws, we 4)
tuDh bin avar na ko-ee jaachaa gur parsaadee too” paavni-aa. ||4]|
Without You, there is no other for me to seek out. It is only by Guru's Grace that You are found. ||4||
man mated fufs adt uret i 130-5, Hs, He 4) agam agochar mit nahee paa-ee. The limits of the Inaccessible and Incomprehensible Lord cannot be found.
niet four xats 3 Sfa fresret il (130-5, ws, He 4) apnee kirpaa karahi too™ laihi milaa-ee. Bestowing Your Mercy, You merge us into Yourself.
ud Te & Rafe foment Fag Afe Ay ureter MUI (130-6, HB, He 4)
pooray gur kai sabad Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabad sayv sukh paavni-aa. ||5||
Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, we meditate on the Lord. Serving the Shabad, peace is found. ||5]|
dHoT Teest TE We Il (130-6, 1s, we 4) rasnaa gunvantee gun gaavai. Praiseworthy is the tongue which sings the Lord's Glorious Praises.
oH AST Ad BT] Il (130-7, ws, He 4) naam salaahay sachay bhaavai. Praising the Naam, one becomes pleasing to the True One.
qanfa Ae sd df ast ffs AS Hat urefemr EN (130-7, Hs, He 4)
gurmukh sadaa rahai rang raatee mil sachay sobhaa paavni-aa. ||6||
The Gurmukh remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love. Meeting the True Lord, glory is obtained. ||6||
HOHY ATH Ad niJard Il (130-8, us, He 4) manmukh karam karay aha‘kaaree. The self-willed manmukhs do their deeds in ego.
WM ASH AS Pet Tt Il (130-8, ws, us 4) joo-ai janam sabh baajee haaree. They lose their whole lives in the gamble.
nists Ss Ho gas fete fetes wree wefsur D1 (130-8, Hs, He 4)
antar lobh mahaa gubaaraa fir fir aavan jaavani-aa. ||7]||
Within is the terrible darkness of greed, and so they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again. ||7]|
my ast & efsnret il fae aS orfu fous afe uret il 1130-9, 7s, He 4) aapay kartaa day vadi-aa-ee. jin ka-o aap likhat Dhur paa-ee. The Creator Himself bestows Glory on those whom He Himself has so pre-destined.
Sod OH fus SS SHO Td Aaet AY USfEMr CIA (130-9, WS, He 4) naanak naam milai bha-o bhanjan gur sabdee sukh paavni-aa. ||8]||1]||34]]|
O Nanak, they receive the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Destroyer of fear; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they find peace. ||8]|1]|34]|
HTS HIG U WI 4 Il (130-10)
maajh mehlaa 5 ghar 1. Maajh, Fifth Mehl, First House:
nist mee o ATEt fem Il (130-10, Hs, He 5)
antar alakh na jaa-ee lakhi-aa. The Unseen Lord is within, but He cannot be seen.
oH ISO B TS Semw I (130-11, Hs, He 5)
naam ratan lai gujhaa rakhi-aa.
He has taken the Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and He keeps it well concealed.
WH nde AS 3 Ca as x Hale Sarefenr WAU (130-11, ws, Hs 5) agam agochar sabh tay oochaa gur kai sabad lakhaavani-aa. ||1]||
The Inaccessible and Incomprehensible Lord is the highest of all. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is known. ||1]|
we adt ME set ate nfs oH Aeefevr Il (130-12, ws, He 5)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree kal meh naam sunaavni-aa.
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who chant the Naam, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Hz fimrd Ae ws eset PIAS uTefenr NU TIS i 130-12, ws, He 5)
sant pi-aaray sachai Dhaaray vadbhaagee darsan paavni-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Beloved Saints were established by the True Lord. By great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of their Darshan is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
Afos fro fan aS fess I (130-13, WS, He 5)
saaDhik siDh jisai ka-o firday.
The One who is sought by the Siddhas and the seekers, gan fee fimrfefs fase i 130-13, us, ne 5)
barahmay indar Dhi-aa-in hirday. upon whom Brahma and Indra meditate within their hearts,
afe sstr dafs a a a fife food arefemr 12 i (130-13, ns, 2 5)
kot tayteesaa khojeh taa ka-o gur mil hirdai gaavani-aa. ||2||
whom the three hundred thirty million demi-gods search for-meeting the Guru, one comes to sing His Praises within the heart. ||2| |
MS Udd 3O ANT URS! Il (130-14, HTS, He 5) aath pahar tuDh jaapay pavnaa. Twenty-four hours a day, the wind breathes Your Name.
Udgst AeA UTEA BIST Il (130-14, Hs, Hz 5) Dhartee sayvak paa-ik charnaa. The earth is Your servant, a slave at Your Feet.
urat arat Hoe foeHt Asa a Ufo stefEnit SI (130-15, 13, 2 5)
khaanee banee sarab nivaasee sabhnaa kai man bhaavni-aa. ||3]| In the four sources of creation, and in all speech, You dwell. You are dear to the minds of all. ||3]]|
Ara Afog aaHfey AT I (130-15, HTS, He 5) saachaa saahib gurmukh jaapai. The True Lord and Master is known to the Gurmukhs.
us Te a Hate fret Il (130-16, ws, He 5) pooray gur kai sabad sinjaapai. He is realized through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru.
fo ubor Ret fsustA AG Afs wwTefanr ISil (130-16, ws, He 5)
jin pee-aa say-ee tariptaasay sachay sach aghaavani-aa. ||4| |
Those who drink it in are satisfied. Through the Truest of the True, they are fulfilled. [141]
fay ufs AoA Het AIST Il (130-16, Hs, He 5) tis ghar sahjaa so-ee suhaylaa. In the home of their own beings, they are peacefully and comfortably at ease.
Mod fase Ad AS AT Il (130-17, 1s, He 5) anad binod karay sad kaylaa. They are blissful, enjoying pleasures, and eternally joyful.
AH U6es' A 2S AS HH Td Vaal HO Sefer Uli (130-17, ws, He 5) so Dhanvantaa so vad saahaa jo gur charnee man laavani-aa. ||5|| They are wealthy, and the greatest kings; they center their minds on the Guru's Feet.
[5] |
ufaeé & 3 fenax ANT Il (130-18, 1, He 5) pahilo day tai’ rijak samaahaa. First, You created nourishment;
fue 2 3° Hs Burs | (130-18, ws, He 5) pichho day tai’ jant upaahaa. then, You created the living beings.
30 ASS WS nied © AMM we o act wefenr IlEll (130-18, 1, He 5)
tuDh jayvad daataa avar na su-aamee lavai na ko-ee laavani-aa. ||6]|
There is no other Giver as Great as You, O my Lord and Master. None approach or equal You. ||6||
fA S Jor A 3g fore I 1130-19, ws, we 5) jis too’ tuthaa so tuDh Dhi-aa-ay. Those who are pleasing to You meditate on You.
AMY AST OT AZ ANTE Il (130-19, ws, He 5) saaDh janaa kaa mantar kamaa-ay. They practice the Mantra of the Holy.
wif 3d AIS AG 3d fSH Va oa BS USfEut IDI (130-19, Hs, He 5)
aap tarai saglay kul taaray tis dargeh thaak na paavni-aa. ||7||
They themselves swim across, and they save all their ancestors and families as well. In the Court of the Lord, they meet with no obstruction. ||7]|
Yast 939
3 ea Ss Os Sa Il 031-1, oy, v2 5) too” vadaa too” oocho oochaa. You are so Great! You are the Highest of the High!
S aig ofS Hs HI I (131-1, ws, He 5) too” bay-ant at moocho moochaa. You are Infinite, You are Everything!
JG qeaat 3d Jet Soa STA VASE ICN AUNSUII (131-1, HS, He 5) ha-o kurbaanee tayrai vanjaa naanak daas dasaavani-aa. ||8]|1||35]|| I am a sacrifice to You. Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. ||8]|1]|35]|
HTS HIG U Il (131-2)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
aCe A HAS’ AGS A Aas Il (131-2, ws, ve 5) ka-un so muktaa ka-un so jugtaa. Who is liberated, and who is united?
ae A fomrst AVS A FAT Il (131-3, ws, He 5) ka-un so gi-aanee ka-un so baktaa. Who is a spiritual teacher, and who is a preacher?
age H fad aBe Gent aGe A ats wes AIG NAM (131-3, ws, He 5) ka-un so girhee ka-un udaasee ka-un so keemat paa-ay jee-o. ||1]| Who is a house-holder, and who is a renunciate? Who can estimate the Lord's Value?
[11
fate fafa aor fats fafa ser i 31-4, ws, He 5) kin biDh baaDhaa kin biDh chhootaa. How is one bound, and how is one freed of his bonds?
fate fafa wires ATES Je|T Il 131-4, ws, we 5) kin biDh aavan jaavan tootaa. How can one escape from the cycle of coming and going in reincarnation?
age aGH ae fouanr aBe Aad ATS FIG NN (131-4, ws, He 5)
ka-un karam ka-un nihkarmaa ka-un so kahai kahaa-ay jee-o. ||2||
Who is subject to karma, and who is beyond karma? Who chants the Name, and inspires others to chant it? ||2||
age A Adm aGe A edi Il 1131-5, Hs, He 5) ka-un so sukhee-aa ka-un so dukhee-aa. Who is happy, and who is sad?
aE A AOHY AGS SHAM I (131-5, HS, He 5)
ka-un so sanmukh ka-un vaymukhee-aa.
Who, as sunmukh, turns toward the Guru, and who, as vaymukh, turns away from the Guru?
fats fafa fireshy fats fafa foes feo fafa aBe yore AIG SII 31-6, Ws, He 5)
kin biDh milee-ai kin biDh bichhurai ih biDh ka-un pargataa-ay jee-o. ||3]|
How can one meet the Lord? How is one separated from Him? Who can reveal the way to me? ||3]||
age A mud fay Wes FIST Il (131-6, 175, Hs 5) ka-un so akhar jit Dhaavat rahtaa. What is that Word, by which the wandering mind can be restrained?
age Quen fas ey AY AH AST Il (131-7, Hs, H2 5) ka-un updays jit dukh sukh sam sahtaa. What are those teachings, by which we may endure pain and pleasure alike?
a@e A we fas urTeqoH fomre fats fafa atese ae FIG Ist (31-7, os, He 5)
ka-un so chaal jit paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ay kin biDh keertan gaa-ay jee-o. ||4||
What is that lifestyle, by which we may come to meditate on the Supreme Lord? How may we sing the Kirtan of His Praises? ||4||
aaHfe Hast aaHfe Aas I (131-8, us, v8 5) gurmukh muktaa gurmukh jugtaa. The Gurmukh is liberated, and the Gurmukh is linked.
aanfe famrat rant sest Il 1131-8, Hs, He 5) gurmukh gi-aanee gurmukh baktaa. The Gurmukh is the spiritual teacher, and the Gurmukh is the preacher.
Uo faadt Gert aauf aeofa ahifs ure HI ull 31-9, ws, nH 5)
Dhan girhee udaasee gurmukh gurmukh keemat paa-ay jee-o. ||5||
Blessed is the Gurmukh, the householder and the renunciate. The Gurmukh knows the Lord's Value. ||5]|
ISH aor AIH SET I 131-9, ws, we 5) ha-umai baaDhaa gurmukh chhootaa. Egotism is bondage; as Gurmukh, one is emancipated.
TINY wrsS ASE FST Il (131-9, wy, v2 5) gurmukh aavan jaavan tootaa. The Gurmukh escapes the cycle of coming and going in reincarnation.
aaHfy aan aaHfe fesasH TaHfy ad A ASS AG NEM (131-10, Hs, He 5)
gurmukh karam gurmukh nihkarmaa gurmukh karay so subhaa-ay jee-o. ||6]||
The Gurmukh performs actions of good karma, and the Gurmukh is beyond karma. Whatever the Gurmukh does, is done in good faith. ||6]|
aaHfa rede HoHfe eee It (131-10, us, He 5) gurmukh sukhee-aa manmukh dukhee-aa. The Gurmukh is happy, while the self-willed manmukh is sad.
aaHfe ASHY HoHfe Syed i (131-11, ws, v8 5)
gurmukh sanmukh manmukh vaymukhee-aa.
The Gurmukh turns toward the Guru, and the self-willed manmukh turns away from the Guru.
qonfy frst Houfy feed aeanf fafa yaree FIG NON 31-11, os, He 5)
gurmukh milee-ai manmukh vichhurai gurmukh biDh pargataa-ay jee-o. ||7]||
The Gurmukh is united with the Lord, while the manmukh is separated from Him. The Gurmukh reveals the way. ||7]|
aanfe nrg fs Wes FIST Il (131-12, ws, vs 5) gurmukh akhar jit Dhaavat rahtaa. The Guru's Instruction is the Word, by which the wandering mind is restrained.
aaHfy @ueA ey AY AH ATS Il (131-12, Hs, He 5) gurmukh updays dukh sukh sam sahtaa. Through the Guru's Teachings, we can endure pain and pleasure alike.
aoHfy we fas usqoy fmre asufy atese ae AIG CH 31-13, +s, He 5) gurmukh chaal jit paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ay gurmukh keertan gaa-ay jee-o. ||8]||
To live as Gurmukh is the lifestyle by which we come to meditate on the Supreme Lord. The Gurmukh sings the Kirtan of His Praises. ||8]||
Het Fes Tavet MMF Il (131-13, ws, H2 5) saglee banat banaa-ee aapay. The Lord Himself created the entire creation.
mM AT TITS ANY | (131-14, vs, He 5) aapay karay karaa-ay thaapay. He Himself acts, and causes others to act. He Himself establishes.
fean 3 dE més aoa fan nfs AHS AG WENQNSEN (131-14, Hs, He 5)
ikas tay ho-i-o anantaa naanak aykas maahi samaa-ay jee-o. ||9||2||36||
From oneness, He has brought forth the countless multitudes. O Nanak, they shall merge into the One once again. ||9||2]|36]|
HTS HIG U Il (131-15)
maajh mehlaa 5. Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
yg nifaarat 3 fom arat Il (131-15, ws, He 5) parabh abhinaasee taa ki-aa kaarhaa. God is Eternal and Imperishable, so why should anyone be anxious?
Ts SHS BS AS UIT AMTH I (131-15, Hs, He 5) har bhagvantaa taa jan kharaa sukhaalaa. The Lord is Wealthy and Prosperous, so His humble servant should feel totally secure.
Fim yrs HS AMES F aaa ASt AY UTSfE AI (131-16, Hs, He 5) jee-a paraan maan sukh-daata too™ karahi so-ee sukh paavni-aa. ||1]| O Giver of peace of the soul, of life, of honor-as You ordain, I obtain peace. ||1]|
we sat ME set asHfy ufo 3fo aefemr Ih (131-16, ws, He 5)
ha-o vaaree jee-o vaaree gurmukh man tan bhaavni-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to that Gurmukh whose mind and body are pleased with You.
3 HT usaz 3 He Gor gH Ala we 5 Sefer AU TIS Ml (131-17, ws, we 5)
too’ mayraa parbat too” mayraa olaa tum sang lavai na laavani-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. You are my mountain, You are my shelter and shield. No one can rival You. ||1]|Pause] |
3m ats fan oat Hor Il 131-17, ws, v2 5) tayraa keetaa jis laagai meethaa. That person, unto whom Your actions seem sweet,
uffe ufe ursqaH fate Afs Stor Il 31-18, ws, us 5) ghat ghat paarbarahm tin jan deethaa. comes to see the Supreme Lord God in each and every heart.
ats adste So 30 fea feq Fasefanr NM 131-18, +s, Hs 5)
thaan thanantar too‘hai too‘hai iko ik vartaavani-aa. ||2||
In all places and interspaces, You exist. You are the One and Only Lord, pervading everywhere. |[2||
HIS HOTA SF SSSI Il (131-19, 173, He 5) sagal manorath too” dayvanhaaraa. You are the Fulfiller of all the mind's desires.
saat ate sd FSS Il (131-19, ws, nz 5) bhagtee bhaa-ay bharay bhandaaraa. Your treasures are overflowing with love and devotion.
cfeor wfs aa 3g Aet ud oath AHTSfEnr SI (131-19, ws, He 5)
da-i-aa Dhaar raakhay tuDh say-ee poorai karam samaavani-aa. ||3]||
Showering Your Mercy, You protect those who, through perfect destiny, merge into You. ||3]|
Yat 932
nig Fu SS BST I (132-1, wy, ve 5) anDh koop tay kandhai chaarhay. You pulled me out of the deep, dark well onto the dry ground.
ate fasur aA Seta fers Il (132-1, ws, Hs 5) kar kirpaa daas nadar nihaalay. Showering Your Mercy, You blessed Your servant with Your Glance of Grace.
Ge wets yss nifsot afs ate Sfe 3 wrefanr isi (132-2, ws, ws 5)
gun gaavahi pooran abhinaasee kahi sun tot na aavani-aa. ||4]|
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Perfect, Immortal Lord. By speaking and hearing these Praises, they are not used up. ||4]|
me Sa ST TASH Il (132-2, ws, ue 5) aithai othai too“hai rakhvaalaa. Here and hereafter, You are our Protector.
HS as Hid SH St US Il (132-2, Hs, He 5) maat garabh meh tum hee paalaa. In the womb of the mother, You cherish and nurture the baby.
Hhtor mafs o ud fae a@ df a3 Te wefan ull 132-3, ws, v2 5)
maa-i-aa agan na pohai tin ka-o rang ratay gun gaavani-aa. ||5||
The fire of Maya does not affect those who are imbued with the Lord's Love; they sing His Glorious Praises. ||5||
for qe 3d witty ANTS Il (132-3, Hs, He 5) ki-aa gun tayray aakh samaalee. What Praises of Yours can I chant and contemplate?
Ho 36 “iste 30 oefe feast I 132-4, Hs, He 5) man tan antar tuDh nadar nihaalee. Deep within my mind and body, I behold Your Presence.
3 Aa Hs AHS Ae Amit 30 fag veg o Hofer NEM (132-4, 23, He 5)
too’ mayraa meet saajan mayraa su-aamee tuDh bin avar na jaanni-aa. ||6||
You are my Friend and Companion, my Lord and Master. Without You, I do not know any other at all. ||6]|
fan ag J ys stent Aaret i (132-5, ws, we 5) jis ka-o too’ parabh bha-i-aa sahaa-ee. O God, that one, unto whom You have given shelter,
sq sat SE 5 Ga avet Il 1132-5, os, He 5) tis tatee vaa-o na lagai kaa-ee. is not touched by the hot winds.
3 Whoa Hele AUETS ASHals Afy ystetefenr NDI (132-5, ws, Hs 5)
too saahib saran sukh-daata satsangat jap pargataavani-aa. ||7||
O my Lord and Master, You are my Sanctuary, the Giver of peace. Chanting, meditating on You in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, You are revealed. ||7||
3 Bo mary mug MAST I (132-6, 17s, He 5) too” ooch athaahu apaar amolaa. You are Exalted, Unfathomable, Infinite and Invaluable.
3 ArT ATE SH Sa AB Il (132-6, ws, we 5) too” saachaa saahib daas tayraa golaa. You are my True Lord and Master. I am Your servant and slave.
J te wrest oaget aoa afs afe wrefemr CISIBOI (132-7, ws, Hs 5)
too’ meeraa saachee thakuraa-ee naanak bal bal jaavani-aa. ||8]|3||37]| You are the King, Your Sovereign Rule is True. Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. [18] 131]37]]
HS HIG U Wy 2 Il (132-7) maajh mehlaa 5 ghar 2.
Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
fos fas Ba ANTS Il (132-8, Hs, He 5) nit nit da-yu samaalee-ai. Continually, continuously, remember the Merciful Lord.
“fs 3 Hog ferrsha il TIS Ml 132-8, ws, He 5) mool na manhu visaaree-ai. rahaa-o. Never forget Him from your mind. ||Pause| |
Hat Hats ure i 32-8, ws, 12 5) santaa sangat paa-ee-di. Join the Society of the Saints,
fas AH ot Ufa o ATS I 132-8, m5, He 5) jit jam kai panth na jaa-ee-ai. and you shall not have to go down the path of Death.
3H ofa a aH 8 39 als o oa ats FIG NAN (132-9, ws, He 5)
tosaa har kaa naam lai tayray kuleh na laagai gaal jee-o. ||1]|
Take the Provisions of the Lord's Name with you, and no stain shall attach itself to your family. ||1]|
a fad] Arent i (132-9, os, we 5) jo simranday saa‘-ee-ai. Those who meditate on the Master
Sata & ASt ure Il (132-10, 23, v3 5) narak na say-ee paa-ee-ai. shall not be thrown down into hell.
sat BE 3 waet fro ufs gor wrf=S ATE 2M (132-10, ws, He 5)
tatee vaa-o na lag-ee jin man vuthaa aa-ay jee-o. ||2||
Even the hot winds shall not touch them. The Lord has come to dwell within their minds. ||2||
Ret Hed ATS Il (132-10, ws, ne 5) Say-ee sundar sohnay. They alone are beautiful and attractive,
AGHfa fae FI Il 132-11, ws, He 5) saaDhsang jin baihnay. who abide in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
dfs ue frat Afr Ret aiste were AIG SN 432-11, Ws, Hs 5)
har Dhan jinee sanji-aa say-ee gambheer apaar jee-o. ||3]|
Those who have gathered in the wealth of the Lord's Name-they alone are deep and thoughtful and vast. ||3]|
dfs wif srfes utes i 32-11, ws, 2 5) har ami-o rasaa-in peevee-ai.
Drink in the Ambrosial Essence of the Name, fo f8S AS a Ath | 132-12, ws, 2 5)
muhi dithai jan kai jeevee-ai. and live by beholding the face of the Lord's servant.
aren Als Ate & fas ung Ts & urS AS Sil 132-12, ws, 3 5) kaaraj sabh savaar lai nit poojahu gur kay paav jee-o. ||4| | Let all your affairs be resolved, by continually worshipping the Feet of the Guru. ||4||
A dfs atst mmyet | fSofa aATet AUST II (132-13, Hs, He 5) jo har keetaa aapnaa. tineh gusaa-ee jaapnaa. He alone meditates on the Lord of the World, whom the Lord has made His Own.
AAS usarg A HASte fAA S Sa AG NUN (132-13, 2B, He 5)
SO sooraa parDhaan so mastak jis dai bhaag jee-o. ||5]|
He alone is a warrior, and he alone is the chosen one, upon whose forehead good destiny is recorded. ||5||
Ho HO yg nears It 132-14, ns, ne 5) man manDhay parabh avgaahee-aa. Within my mind, I meditate on God.
Sfo A sae ufsardior | (132-14, +5, ne 5) ayhi ras bhogan paatisaahee-aa. For me, this is like the enjoyment of princely pleasures.
He nfs 3 Gufae se ret ore afar AIG WEN 132-14, ws, Hs 5)
mandaa mool na upji-o taray sachee kaarai laag jee-o. ||6||
Evil does not well up within me, since I am saved, and dedicated to truthful actions. [16] |
aaa" fe safer i 132-15, 4s, He 5) kartaa man vasaa-i-aa. I have enshrined the Creator within my mind;
HOH a Se ue Il 132-15, ws, He 5) janmai kaa fal paa-i-aa. I have obtained the fruits of life's rewards.
Hfs seat as ofs Sa fas dor Aaa AG WON 132-15, ws, He 5) man bhaavandaa kant har tayraa thir ho-aa sohaag jee-o. ||7| |
If your Husband Lord is pleasing to your mind, then your married life shall be eternal. [711
Mee UsTIG UTPEMT Il (132-16, HTS, He 5) atal padaarath paa-i-aa. I have obtained everlasting wealth;
3 3n6 at AdetfeEnt Ih 132-16, Hs, He 5) bhai bhanjan kee sarnaa-i-aa. I have found the Sanctuary of the Dispeller of fear.
one nists aoa sf fast HoH yrs AIG NCISISCH (432-16, Ws, He 5) laa-ay anchal naanak taari-an jitaa janam apaar jee-o. ||8||4||38]|
Grasping hold of the hem of the Lord's robe, Nanak is saved. He has won the incomparable life. ||8]|4]|38] |
qe Afsas ure Il (132-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS HIG U Wg 8 Il (132-18)
maajh mehlaa 5 ghar 3. Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
ofa Afu AY HS ats NAN TIS Il 032-19, ws, He 5) har jap japay man Dheeray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Chanting and meditating on the Lord, the mind is held steady. ||1]|Pause| |
frufe frufs wee fife ve S ST WAU (132-19, 23, v8 5) simar simar gurday-o mit ga-ay bhai dooray. ||1||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Divine Guru, one's fears are erased and dispelled. ||1]|
Aefe wire ursgqan at 3 fefs ard SF QM (132-19, ws, we 5)
Saran aavai paarbarahm kee taa fir kaahay jhooray. ||2||
Entering the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God, how could anyone feel grief any longer? |[2||
Yat 933
TIS AE AS AT A Ags HOTS US ISM (133-1, wry, Hz 5) charan sayv sant saaDh kay sagal manorath pooray. ||3]| Serving at the Feet of the Holy Saints, all desires are fulfilled. ||3||
ufe wie Sa ease Ale ates Hohl us Si 133-2, Hs, He 5)
ghat ghat ayk varatdaa jal thal mahee-al pooray. ||4| | In each and every heart, the One Lord is pervading. He is totally permeating the water, the land, and the sky. ||4||
uvy faarAg Afeor ufeg AZo at Os UI (133-2, ws, He 5) paap binaasan sayvi-aa pavitar santan kee Dhooray. ||5]| I serve the Destroyer of sin, and I am sanctified by the dust of the feet of the Saints.
[5] | Ag eset wath orfu ats Af set ogg WE (133-3, ws, He 5)
sabh chhadaa-ee khasam aap har jap bha-ee tharooray. ||6|| My Lord and Master Himself has saved me completely; I am comforted by meditating on the Lord. ||6||
TIS Aho SuUTEA GAS HE TS HS MDI (133-3, ws, we 5) kartai kee-aa tapaavaso dusat mu-ay ho-ay mooray. ||7||
The Creator has passed judgement, and the evil-doers have been silenced and killed. II7II
aoa Is Ate ate da SF AST TAT MTMUNBENUSINUIUNBEM (133-4, ws, Hs 5)
naanak rataa sach naa-ay har vaykhai sadaa hajooray. ||8]|5||39||1]|32||]1]|5]|39]| Nanak is attuned to the True Name; he beholds the Presence of the Ever-present Lord. ||8][5]]39][1]]32|[1][51|39]|
add HIT HS HIS U We 8 (133-5)
baarah maahaa maa‘jh mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Baarah Maahaa ~ The Twelve Months: Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yATfe it (133-5) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fasts AGH a es ate fast HOT IH Il (133-6, Hs, He 5)
kirat karam kay veechhurhay kar kirpaa maylhu raam.
By the actions we have committed, we are separated from You. Please show Your Mercy, and unite us with Yourself, Lord.
ots ae a0 fen gH ofa mre ys at AH Il (133-6, 47S, He 5)
chaar kunt dah dis bharamay thak aa-ay parabh kee saam.
We have grown weary of wandering to the four corners of the earth and in the ten directions. We have come to Your Sanctuary, God.
Oe ea 3 wodt fas 5 ors AH Il (133-7, ws, v2 5) Dhayn duDhai tay baahree kitai na aavai kaam. Without milk, a cow serves no purpose.
we fag AY auerest Cunfs ot BH Il (133-7, Ws, He 5) jal bin saakh kumlaavatee upjahi naahee daam. Without water, the crop withers, and it will not bring a good price.
dfs ad 3 feeba AHS aS Usha fant I 133-7, Hs, He 5) har naah na milee-ai saajnai kat paa-ee-ai bisraam. If we do not meet the Lord, our Friend, how can we find our place of rest?
fag ufs ofs &3 3 yaedt sfs Sard A TH Il (133-8, ws, He 5)
jit ghar har kant na pargata-ee bhath nagar say garaam.
Those homes, those hearts, in which the Husband Lord is not manifest-those towns and villages are like burning furnaces.
Aa Aled Shs JA AS Sst AS MA I (133-9, ws, us 5)
sarab seegaar tambol ras san dayhee sabh khaam.
All decorations, the chewing of betel to sweeten the breath, and the body itself, are all useless and vain.
ys Hum &s fegehor Hts Ane Afs AM II (133-9, ws, Hs 5)
parabh su-aamee kant vihoonee-aa meet sajan sabh jaam.
Without God, our Husband, our Lord and Master, all friends and companions are like the Messenger of Death.
Soa at oso ate forsur eta SH Il (133-10, ws, He 5) naanak kee banantee-aa kar kirpaa deejai naam. This is Nanak's prayer: "Please show Your Mercy, and bestow Your Name.
dfs Hog Homi Afar us fan at feaee UM NAM (133-10, 47s, He 5)
har maylhu su-aamee sang parabh jis kaa ninchal Dhaam. ||1]|
O my Lord and Master, please unite me with Yourself, O God, in the Eternal Mansion of Your Presence". ||1]|
ofs dfs madha JS wise wet i (133-11, 15, v2 5)
chayt govind araaDhee-ai hovai anand ghanaa.
In the month of Chayt, by meditating on the Lord of the Universe, a deep and profound joy arises.
Ha Hor fife urea gAat BH Far Il (133-11, ns, He 5)
sant janaa mil paa-ee-ai rasnaa naam bhanaa.
Meeting with the humble Saints, the Lord is found, as we chant His Name with our tongues.
fate urfemr ys nimgar wire fSAfo afer il (133-12, 15, Hs 5) jin paa-i-aa parabh aapnaa aa-ay tiseh ganaa. Those who have found God-blessed is their coming into this world.
fea fus fan fag Alea fase HOH AST Il (133-12, Hs, He 5) ik khin tis bin jeevnaa birthaa janam janaa. Those who live without Him, for even an instant-their lives are rendered useless.
me ate Hobos ufsor sfenr fete Fer il 133-13, ws, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al poori-aa ravi-aa vich vanaa. The Lord is totally pervading the water, the land, and all space. He is contained in the forests as well.
A us fefs o rect fasar ey Tet Il (133-13, ws, He 5) so parabh chit na aavee kit-rhaa dukh ganaa. Those who do not remember God-how much pain must they suffer!
fast ofeor A ys far say HAT Il (133-14, ws, we 5) jinee raavi-aa so parabhoo tinnaa bhaag manaa. Those who dwell upon their God have great good fortune.
dfs PIAS AG Ho Byer soa fumirA Hat Il 133-14, ws, He 5)
har darsan ka‘-u man lochdaa naanak pi-aas manaa.
My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. O Nanak, my mind is so thirsty!
fs frare A yg fA & UTS Bar MII (133-15, Hrs, He 5) chayt milaa-ay so parabhoo tis kai paa-ay lagaa. ||2]| I touch the feet of one who unites me with God in the month of Chayt. ||2||
arty dtefs fa@ erdtor for Un fea it 133-15, 47s, He 5)
vaisaakh Dheeran ki-o vaadhee-aa jinaa paraym bichhohu.
In the month of Vaisaakh, how can the bride be patient? She is separated from her Beloved.
dfs AHS use ferrfa & walt HfEor Te Il (133-16, Hs, He 5)
har saajan purakh visaar kai lagee maa-i-aa Dhohu.
She has forgotten the Lord, her Life-companion, her Master; she has become attached to Maya, the deceitful one.
Uz aeyZ 3 Afa ast ote mifearat Gg il 1133-16, ws, He 5) putar kaltar na sang Dhanaa har avinaasee oh. Neither son, nor spouse, nor wealth shall go along with you-only the Eternal Lord.
uate uate Aaret Het FS TO HT Il (133-17, ws, we 5)
palach palach saglee mu-ee jhoothai DhanDhai moh.
Entangled and enmeshed in the love of false occupations, the whole world is perishing.
fean ofa & on fag ora wetoifs afo II 133-17, ws, He 5) ikas har kay naam bin agai la-ee-ah khohi. Without the Naam, the Name of the One Lord, they lose their lives in the hereafter.
au ferfs feave us fag nied & Af II (133-18, Hs, He 5) da-yu visaar viguchnaa parabh bin avar na ko-ay. Forgetting the Merciful Lord, they are ruined. Without God, there is no other at all.
UlsH aaet A oa fsa at fooHe APE II (133-18, Hs, He 5) pareetam charnee jo lagay tin kee nirmal so-ay. Pure is the reputation of those who are attached to the Feet of the Beloved Lord.
ust 938 vod at us dost ys fesg uarufS ae i 134-1, ws, ue 5)
naanak kee parabh bayntee parabh milhu paraapat ho-ay. Nanak makes this prayer to God: "Please, come and unite me with Yourself."
SAY ATS St Ba A AS se Tha ALS NSN (134-1, Hs, He 5)
vaisaakh suhaavaa taa™ lagai jaa sant bhaytai har so-ay. ||3]|
The month of Vaisaakh is beautiful and pleasant, when the Saint causes me to meet the Lord. ||3]|
dfs Afs Ase Saha fan ora Afs foefs i 134-2, ws, ve 5)
har jayth jurhandaa lorhee-ai jis agai sabh nivann.
In the month of Jayt'h, the bride longs to meet with the Lord. All bow in humility before Him.
dfs Ane wets ofamr fan & Tet ss Il (134-2, ws, He 5)
har sajan daavan lagi-aa kisai na day-ee bann.
One who has grasped the hem of the robe of the Lord, the True Friend-no one can keep him in bondage.
Had HSt BH Us Co Bal ardt Af I (134-3, ws, He 5) maanak motee naam parabh un lagai naahee sann. God's Name is the Jewel, the Pearl. It cannot be stolen or taken away.
da AS oases AS His avSfH I (134-3, HS, He 5) rang sabhay naaraa-inai jaytay man bhaavann. In the Lord are all pleasures which please the mind.
a dfa SS A ad ASt Abt adie Il (134-3, ns, He 5) jo har lorhay so karay so-ee jee-a karann. As the Lord wishes, so He acts, and so His creatures act.
A ufs ats mrue Ret adinifa dfs i 134-4, us, 48 5) jo parabh keetay aapnay say-ee kahee-ahi Dhan. They alone are called blessed, whom God has made His Own.
nus Short A fs feefs fa sefo i 34-4, ws, ve 5)
aapan lee-aa jay milai vichhurh ki-o rovann.
If people could meet the Lord by their own efforts, why would they be crying out in the pain of separation?
AY Ad UUs aoa Sat HSS Il (134-5, wes, He 5)
saaDhoo sang paraapatay naanak rang maanan.
Meeting Him in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, celestial bliss is enjoyed.
dfs AS date fsn et fan & ava Hafs ISI (134-5, Hs, He 5)
har jayth rangeelaa tis Dhanee jis kai bhaag mathann. ||4| |
In the month of Jayt'h, the playful Husband Lord meets her, upon whose forehead such good destiny is recorded. ||4] |
mAs suet fq Ba dfs ad 3 frat UTA II 134-6, ws, He 5)
aasaarh tapandaa tis lagai har naahu na jinna paas.
The month of Aasaarh seems burning hot, to those who are not close to their Husband Lord.
Hadise use faorfar & HSA Het mA I 134-6, ws, He 5)
jagjeevan purakh ti-aag kai maanas sandee aas.
They have forsaken God the Primal Being, the Life of the World, and they have come to rely upon mere mortals.
ea afe feadha afs ueta aH at SA Il 134-7, os, 2 5)
duyai bhaa-ay viguchee-ai gal pa-ees jam kee faas.
In the love of duality, the soul-bride is ruined; around her neck she wears the noose of Death.
Ad din A Se He A femmes It 134-7, ws, He 5) jayhaa beejai so lunai mathai jo likhi-aas. As you plant, so shall you harvest; your destiny is recorded on your forehead.
dfs fearat ugsrat Cfo vat aet fear Il (134-8, Hs, He 5)
rain vihaanee pachhutaanee uth chalee ga-ee niraas.
The life-night passes away, and in the end, one comes to regret and repent, and then depart with no hope at all.
fe t AT scht A aa SS YHA Il (134-8, wy, 2 5) jin kou saaDhoo bhaytee-ai so dargeh ho-ay khalaas. Those who meet with the Holy Saints are liberated in the Court of the Lord.
afs fasur ys niruat 33 wane df fummr i 1134-9, us, 48 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee tayray darsan ho-ay pi-aas. Show Your Mercy to me, O God; I am thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
ys 3 fag BA & Bt BSA at mgETHA I (134-9, ws, Hs 5) parabh tuDh bin doojaa ko nahee naanak kee ardaas. Without You, God, there is no other at all. This is Nanak's humble prayer.
mAs Ade fq oa fan ufs dfs vse fSeTA MUI (134-10, HTS, He 5) aasaarh suhandaa tis lagai jis man har charan nivaas. ||5|| The month of Aasaarh is pleasant, when the Feet of the Lord abide in the mind. ||5]|
Wefs AeA AHel BIS AHS fAS fumrs il (134-10, ws, He 5)
Saavan sarsee kaamnee charan kamal si-o pi-aar.
In the month of Saawan, the soul-bride is happy, if she falls in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
HO 36 3S" Ae dha fet oH wore II (134-11, ns, He 5)
man tan rataa sach rang iko naam aDhaar.
Her mind and body are imbued with the Love of the True One; His Name is her only Support.
fatter gat aatfeur ferfs AS ST I (134-11, ws, 2 5) bikhi-aa rang koorhaavi-aa disan sabhay chhaar. The pleasures of corruption are false. All that is seen shall turn to ashes.
ofs nifys xe Aveet fife AG UteeTs I (134-12, ws, 8 5)
har amrit boond suhaavanee mil saaDhoo peevanhaar.
The drops of the Lord's Nectar are so beautiful! Meeting the Holy Saint, we drink these in.
ze fse ys Af n@fenr AHS UTE MUTE Il (134-12, ws, Hs 5)
van tin parabh sang ma-oli-aa samrath purakh apaar.
The forests and the meadows are rejuvenated and refreshed with the Love of God, the All-powerful, Infinite Primal Being.
dfs fee 3 HO Bue aay fires es I (134-13, 15, v2 5)
har milnai no man lochdaa karam milaavanhaar.
My mind yearns to meet the Lord. If only He would show His Mercy, and unite me with Himself!
frat Ate ys ufeor JC fee a Ae sfsors I (134-13, ws, He 5) jinee sakhee-ay parabh paa-i-aa ha‘-u tin kai sad balihaar. Those brides who have obtained God-I am forever a sacrifice to them.
Soa fd At Hfeor ates Aafe ASTIET ST Il (134-14, us, He 5)
naanak har jee ma-i-aa kar sabad savaaranhaar.
O Nanak, when the Dear Lord shows kindness, He adorns His bride with the Word of His Shabad.
Wee fsa" AOaet fre TH oN Sf TE MEN (134-14, ws, He 5)
saavan tinaa suhaaganee jin raam naam ur haar. ||6]|
Saawan is delightful for those happy soul-brides whose hearts are adorned with the Necklace of the Lord's Name. ||6]|
sete sah seer EA Ba FT Il (134-15, 7s, ws 5)
bhaadu-ay bharam bhulaanee-aa doojai lagaa hayt. In the month of Bhaadon, she is deluded by doubt, because of her attachment to duality.
oY Aland Fatfent areata otdt XZ Il (134-15, ws, ns 5) lakh seegaar banaa-i-aa kaaraj naahee kayt. She may wear thousands of ornaments, but they are of no use at all.
fas fefs 2a font fess 28 aoafs US I (134-16, ws, He 5) jit din dayh binsasee tit vaylai kahsan parayt. On that day when the body perishes-at that time, she becomes a ghost.
uate vorets es AH fan 3 Sat FF Il (134-16, ws, ws 5) pakarh chalaa-in doot jam kisai na daynee bhayt. The Messenger of Death seizes and holds her, and does not tell anyone his secret.
efs uss fad wfo faa fA@ war TS Il 134-17, ws, ne 5) chhad kharhotay khinai maahi jin si-o lagaa hayt. And her loved ones-in an instant, they move on, leaving her all alone.
Ja Hes 36 BU fimrgg It AZ Il 034-17, ws, He 5) hath marorhai tan kapay si-aahhu ho-aa sayt. She wrings her hands, her body writhes in pain, and she turns from black to white.
Ad stn A BS AGH Avast As Il (134-18, ws, He 5) jayhaa beejai so lunai karmaa sand-rhaa khayt. As she has planted, so does she harvest; such is the field of karma.
ost US HdStIst vas Sfoa ys ST il (134-18, ws, us 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee charan bohith parabh dayt. Nanak seeks God's Sanctuary; God has given him the Boat of His Feet.
A wefe sala 6 uefa ae TUS Ber FZ IDI 134-19, ws, ns 5)
say bhaadu-ay narak na paa-ee-ah gur rakhan vaalaa hayt. ||7]|
Those who love the Guru, the Protector and Savior, in Bhaadon, shall not be thrown down into hell. ||7]|
wafs UH Cura fa fiesba af Ate I (134-19, os, He 5)
asun paraym umaahrhaa ki-o milee-ai har jaa-ay.
In the month of Assu, my love for the Lord overwhelms me. How can I go and meet the Lord?
Uuar qau Hfs 3fs fumin wane wet aet urf= fore Hee I 135-1, us, m8 5)
man tan pi-aas darsan ghanee ko-ee aan milaavai maa-ay. My mind and body are so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. Won't someone please come and lead me to him, O my mother.
Hs Aaet Un & we fo & rar ute I (135-1, ws, 2 5) sant sahaa-ee paraym kay ha-o tin kai laagaa paa-ay. The Saints are the helpers of the Lord's lovers; I fall and touch their feet. fee ys fae Ay ureint gat ardt AME I (135-2, os, nH 5)
vin parabh ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai doojee naahee jaa-ay. Without God, how can I find peace? There is nowhere else to go.
fiat ofr un oA A fZufs ad nrurfe i 435-2, ws, He 5) jin"ee chaakhi-aa paraym ras say taripat rahay aaghaa-ay. Those who have tasted the sublime essence of His Love, remain satisfied and fulfilled.
wiry fsurfar faost acts So ys ofs Be Il (135-3, ws, He 5)
aap ti-aag bintee karahi layho parabhoo larh laa-ay.
They renounce their selfishness and conceit, and they pray, "God, please attach me to the hem of Your robe."
A dfs afs froreior fit feefs asa & fe th (135-3, ws, He 5)
jo har kant milaa-ee-aa se vichhurh kateh na jaa-ay.
Those whom the Husband Lord has united with Himself, shall not be separated from Him again.
ys fee BAT a Sot SHA Tle AGSTS I (135-4, ws, we 5) parabh vin doojaa ko nahee naanak har sarnaa-ay. Without God, there is no other at all. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord.
mA Het eHebor frat Hier ofs FFE Uti (135-4, Hs, He 5)
asoo sukhee vasandee-aa jinaa ma-i-aa har raa-ay. ||8| |
In Assu, the Lord, the Sovereign King, has granted His Mercy, and they dwell in peace. ||8||
asx AGH THE SHS AT AT Il (135-5, ws, we 5) katik karam kamaavnay dos na kaahoo jog. In the month of Katak, do good deeds. Do not try to blame anyone else.
ugnAd 3 sfemt fenmufs AS Ta i 135-5, ws, He 5) parmaysar tay bhuli-aa% vi-aapan sabhay rog. Forgetting the Transcendent Lord, all sorts of illnesses are contracted.
HY Je IH 3 Bale ASH fend I 135-6, HS, He 5)
vaimukh ho-ay raam tay lagan janam vijog.
Those who turn their backs on the Lord shall be separated from Him and consigned to reincarnation, over and over again.
fas nfs aGs of ae fass weer sar il (135-6, ws, ne 5) khin meh ka-urhay ho-ay ga-ay jit-rhay maa-i-aa bhog. In an instant, all of Maya's sensual pleasures turn bitter.
fey o act af Aa fan & defo SA Il (135-7, Hs, He 5) vich na ko-ee kar sakai kis thai roveh roj. No one can then serve as your intermediary. Unto whom can we turn and cry?
as fag 5 Jeet fottmr ofs Axa i 135-7, +s, He 5)
keetaa kichhoo na hova-ee likhi-aa Dhur sanjog.
By one's own actions, nothing can be done; destiny was pre-determined from the very beginning.
zaoat Hae ys fee St Csafe vfs faGar it 135-7, 1s, ne 5) vadbhaagee mayraa parabh milai taa™ utreh sabh bi-og. By great good fortune, I meet my God, and then all pain of separation departs.
soa a@ us ote Sfo AS Afos set He Il 1135-3, ws, He 5) naanak ka-o parabh raakh layhi mayray saahib bandee moch. Please protect Nanak, God; O my Lord and Master, please release me from bondage.
afsa de AOHG faonfo AS AP ICN (135-8, WS, He 5) katik hovai saaDhsang binsahi sabhay soch. ||9|| In Katak, in the Company of the Holy, all anxiety vanishes. ||9] |
Hfufs ufo Addon afs furs Afar Fosters | (135-9, ws, He 5) manghir maahi sohandee-aa har pir sang baith-rhee-aah. In the month of Maghar, those who sit with their Beloved Husband Lord are beautiful.
fso at Hat fomr arat fa Afofs Hes MIT I 135-9, Hs, H2 5) tin kee sobhaa ki-aa ganee je saahib maylrhee-aah. How can their glory be measured? Their Lord and Master blends them with Himself.
30 Ho Hefoor on fh Aft AT AdwBSs MrT Il 135-10, Hs, He 5)
tan man ma-oli-aa raam si-o sang saaDh sahaylrhee-aah.
Their bodies and minds blossom forth in the Lord; they have the companionship of the Holy Saints.
AU Ho 3 add A dole fears Il (135-10, Hs, He 5) saaDh janaa tay baahree say rahan ikaylarhee-aah. Those who lack the Company of the Holy, remain all alone.
fas By 6 aad sd A AH & Sf UstorT II (135-11, 3, nH 5) tin dukh na kabhoo utrai say jam kai vas parhee-aah. Their pain never departs, and they fall into the grip of the Messenger of Death.
frat fear ug nua A feAfe fos usbars Il 435-11, ws, us 5)
jinee raavi-aa parabh aapnaa say disan nit kharhee-aah.
Those who have ravished and enjoyed their God, are seen to be continually exalted and uplifted.
330 Adds WS fa afe fsa ASIST Il (135-12, Hs, He 5) ratan javayhar laal har kanth tinaa jarhee-aah. They wear the Necklace of the jewels, emeralds and rubies of the Lord's Name.
aoa ae ufs fsa ys Avet efs users Il (135-13, ws, we 5)
naanak baa‘chhai Dhoorh tin parabh sarnee dar parhee-aah.
Nanak seeks the dust of the feet of those who take to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door.
Hfufs ys wracet agfs 3 ASHSMATT ION (135-13, HS, He 5)
manghir parabh aaraaDhanaa bahurh na janamrhee-aah. ||10]||
Those who worship and adore God in Maghar, do not suffer the cycle of reincarnation ever again. ||10]|
uf surg 3 fenmuet afe fifemr afe og Il 435-14, ws, He 5)
pokh tukhaar na vi-aapa-ee kanth mili-aa har naahu.
In the month of Poh, the cold does not touch those, whom the Husband Lord hugs close in His Embrace.
Ho Sfaor vaorafie wants wast ATT I (135-14, 475, He 5)
man bayDhi-aa charnaarbind darsan lagrhaa saahu.
Their minds are transfixed by His Lotus Feet. They are attached to the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Ge dfge dues af Aet AMM Be I (135-15, Hs, He 5) ot govind gopaal raa-ay sayvaa su-aamee laahu. Seek the Protection of the Lord of the Universe; His service is truly profitable.
faftor ufo o Heet ffs ATT Te ay il (135-15, ws, ws 5)
bikhi-aa pohi na sak-ee mil saaDhoo gun gaahu.
Corruption shall not touch you, when you join the Holy Saints and sing the Lord's Praises.
Ad 3 Curt 3a feet Adt ulfs ANT II 435-16, ws, He 5)
jah tay upjee tah milee sachee pareet samaahu.
From where it originated, there the soul is blended again. It is absorbed in the Love of the True Lord.
ag af stat usqoy agfs o feestorg il 1135-16, ws, ue 5)
kar geh leenee paarbarahm bahurh na vichhurhi-aahu.
When the Supreme Lord God grasps someone's hand, he shall never again suffer separation from Him.
ats We wy dr dfs AHS MISH MAID I (135-17, HS, He 5)
baar jaa-o lakh bayree-aa har sajan agam agaahu.
I am a Sacrifice, 100,000 times, to the Lord, my Friend, the Unapproachable and Unfathomable.
Han uet safes stead fs uci il (135-17, us, He 5) saram pa-ee naaraa-inai naanak dar pa-ee-aahu. Please preserve my honor, Lord; Nanak begs at Your Door.
uy Ade" Hea AY fAA SUA FusSNTT AAI (135-18, HS, He 5)
pokh sohandaa sarab sukh jis bakhsay vayparvaahu. ||11]|
Poh is beautiful, and all comforts come to that one, whom the Carefree Lord has forgiven. ||11]|
Hfiy HAS Afar ATM ost afs fears I (135-18, ws, Hs 5)
maagh majan sang saaDhoo-aa Dhoorhee kar isnaan.
In the month of Maagh, let your cleansing bath be the dust of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
dfs a any fomrfe Afs Ago S afe BS Il (135-19, Hs, He 5) har kaa naam Dhi-aa-ay sun sabhnaa no kar daan. Meditate and listen to the Name of the Lord, and give it to everyone.
HOH AGH HS Cad Ha 3 ATE MG Il (135-19, ws, 2 5)
janam karam mal utrai man tay jaa-ay gumaan.
In this way, the filth of lifetimes of karma shall be removed, and egotistical pride shall vanish from your mind.
Uat 93 at adfa o Hd fio SS AMIS Il 1136-1, ws, He 5)
kaam karoDh na mohee-ai binsai lobh su-aan. Sexual desire and anger shall not seduce you, and the dog of greed shall depart.
Ae Hofa vofenr Grafs ad ATS Il (136-1, ws, He 5) sachai maarag chaldi-aa ustat karay jahaan. Those who walk on the Path of Truth shall be praised throughout the world.
Mons Stee Aare Us Aba elem ug|rs Il (136-2, ws, He 5)
athsath tirath sagal punn jee-a da-i-aa parvaan.
Be kind to all beings-this is more meritorious than bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage and the giving of charity.
fan 6 te efeur afe Het Use AAS Il (136-2, HS, He 5) jis no dayvai da-i-aa kar so-ee purakh sujaan. That person, upon whom the Lord bestows His Mercy, is a wise person.
fra fifemr ug nme aT6a f3o ATA Il (136-3, ws, ws 5) jinaa mili-aa parabh aapnaa naanak tin kurbaan. Nanak is a sacrifice to those who have merged with God.
Hfy AS A ates fro us ag frogea NII (136-3, Hs, HE 5)
maagh suchay say kaa“dhee-ah jin pooraa gur miharvaan. ||12]|
In Maagh, they alone are known as true, unto whom the Perfect Guru is Merciful. ||12]|
sods mdse Cursno ofa AAS Yate wfE II (136-4, HTS, He 5)
fulgun anand upaarjanaa har sajan pargatay aa-ay.
In the month of Phalgun, bliss comes to those, unto whom the Lord, the Friend, has been revealed.
Hs poet oH & ate forour Shor fete i 36-4, ws, ne 5) sant sahaa-ee raam kay kar kirpaa dee-aa milaa-ay. The Saints, the Lord's helpers, in their mercy, have united me with Him.
An Aoet Aga AY df= ear adh ATE Il (136-5, Hs, He 5) Sayj suhaavee sarab sukh hun dukhaa naahee jaa-ay. My bed is beautiful, and I have all comforts. I feel no sadness at all.
fee ust zaaaet ea urfemr ats THE Il (136-5, ws, He 5)
ichh punee vadbhaagnee var paa-i-aa har raa-ay.
My desires have been fulfilled-by great good fortune, I have obtained the Sovereign Lord as my Husband.
fife Ader Hae wedt ats adfse nfe i 136-6, ws, He 5)
mil sahee-aa mangal gaavhee geet govind alaa-ay.
Join with me, my sisters, and sing the songs of rejoicing and the Hymns of the Lord of the Universe.
ofs AT neg 8 fenet tet SA Be 3 BLE Il (136-6, ws, He 5) har jayhaa avar na dis-ee ko-ee doojaa lavai na laa-ay. There is no other like the Lord-there is no equal to Him.
Jos UuBs HetaGe fesse fesintg ATE Il 136-7, ws, nH 5)
halat palat savaari-on nihchal ditee-an jaa-ay.
He embellishes this world and the world hereafter, and He gives us our permanent home there.
HAS Aad 3 afmig safe o ASH OE I (136-7, os, He 5)
sansaar Saagar tay rakhi-an bahurh na janmai Dhaa-ay.
He rescues us from the world-ocean; never again do we have to run the cycle of reincarnation.
fide SA MSA WE 3d FHA Vat UTE Il (136-8, ws, He 5)
jinvaa ayk anayk gun taray naanak charnee paa-ay.
I have only one tongue, but Your Glorious Virtues are beyond counting. Nanak is saved, falling at Your Feet.
coals fos Had fan 3 f3e 5 Ste 193i (136-8, +5, He 5) fulgun nit salaahee-ai jis no til na tamaa-ay. ||13]]| In Phalgun, praise Him continually; He has not even an iota of greed. ||13]|
fats fafe on fomrfenr fo & ATH Ag Il (136-9, 7s, He 5) jin jin naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tin kay kaaj saray. Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord-their affairs are all resolved.
ofs TT UT oration esas Afs UT Il (136-10, 47s, He 5)
har gur pooraa aaraaDhi-aa dargeh sach kharay.
Those who meditate on the Perfect Guru, the Lord-Incarnate-they are judged true in the Court of the Lord.
Hea Aut fefa sae sie seHe@ fea 3g Il (136-10, 75, He 5)
sarab sukhaa niDh charan har bha-ojal bikham taray.
The Lord's Feet are the Treasure of all peace and comfort for them; they cross over the terrifying and treacherous world-ocean.
UH sas fo uréhor fatto ofa A I 436-11, Ws, Hs 5) paraym bhagat tin paa-ee-aa bikhi-aa naahi jaray. They obtain love and devotion, and they do not burn in corruption.
as Te efaor oat use Afs Ss Il (136-11, ws, He 5)
koorh ga-ay dubiDhaa nasee pooran sach bharay.
Falsehood has vanished, duality has been erased, and they are totally overflowing with Truth.
USHIH YF Ase Ho niefs SX UF Il (136-11, ws, ne 5) paarbarahm parabh sayvday man andar ayk Dharay. They serve the Supreme Lord God, and enshrine the One Lord within their minds.
Hd feeH HIS 3S fA AS sets AT Il (136-12, ws, He 5)
maah divas moorat bhalay jis ka-o nadar karay.
The months, the days, and the moments are auspicious, for those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace.
Soa Hot VIA VG fagur adT Je NAIA (136-12, 75, He 5) naanak mangai daras daan kirpaa karahu haray. ||14]|1]|
Nanak begs for the blessing of Your Vision, O Lord. Please, shower Your Mercy upon me! ||14]|1]|
HTS Hoe u fea df= (136-14)
maajh mehlaa 5 din raiian Maajh, Fifth Mehl: Day And Night:
qe Afsars ure Il (136-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ret Afsag »ruart ofa fin fea vfs FS i (136-15, 1, v2 5) sayvee satgur aapnaa har simree din sabh rain. I serve my True Guru, and meditate on Him all day and night.
ny faurfar Aaet uet fy set fos Se i 136-15, ns, He 5)
aap ti-aag sarnee pavaa‘ mukh bolee mith-rhay vain.
Renouncing selfishness and conceit, I seek His Sanctuary, and speak sweet words to Him.
HOH HOH at feefsur afs HoT AAS AS Il (136-16, Hs, He 5)
janam janam kaa vichhurhi-aa har maylhu sajan sain.
Through countless lifetimes and incarnations, I was separated from Him. O Lord, you are my Friend and Companion-please unite me with Yourself.
A dba ofs 3 fees A Afa o eAfe SE Il (136-16, Hs, He 5) jo jee-a har tay vichhurhay say sukh na vasan bhain. Those who are separated from the Lord do not dwell in peace, O sister.
dfs fus faa 3a 3 urebot dfs fs Afs Te Il 136-16, ws, He 5)
har pir bin chain na paa-ee-ai khoj dithay sabh gain.
Without their Husband Lord, they find no comfort. I have searched and seen all realms.
ny ante fegst SH o AY SS Il (136-17, ws, 3 5)
aap kamaanai vichhurhee dos na kaahoo dayn.
My own evil actions have kept me separate from Him; why should I accuse anyone else?
afs fasu ys ofa SI dg ost ATE AIS Il (136-17, ws, 8 5) kar kirpaa parabh raakh layho hor naahee karan karayn. Bestow Your Mercy, God, and save me! No one else can bestow Your Mercy.
ofs 3u fee wa Jaa ad fers SE I 136-18, ws, v8 5)
har tuDh vin khaakoo roolnaa kahee-ai kithai vain.
Without You, Lord, we roll around in the dust. Unto whom should we utter our cries of distress?
Soa at Foster sis AaHG Sa Se INA (136-18, ws, wz 5) naanak kee banantee-aa har surjan daykhaa nain. ||1|| This is Nanak's prayer: "May my eyes behold the Lord, the Angelic Being."||1]||
ba at fase A Ae ofs Afyes usY RIE Il (136-19, Hs, He 5)
jee-a kee birthaa so sunay har sammrith purakh apaar.
The Lord hears the anguish of the soul; He is the All-powerful and Infinite Primal Being.
Hale Alefe nradEt ASS AT MTU Il (136-19, HS, He 5) maran jeevan aaraaDhanaa sabhnaa kaa aaDhaar. In death and in life, worship and adore the Lord, the Support of all.
Yat 932
AA ue fSA as at est fAW UsSTT II (137-1, HS, HE 5)
sasurai pay-ee-ai tis kant kee vadaa jis parvaar.
In this world and in the next, the soul-bride belongs to her Husband Lord, who has such a vast family.
Ca nian marta aa fags vis o UrSSrg Il (137-1, 47s, Hs 5) oochaa agam agaaDh boDh kichh ant na paaraavaar. He is Lofty and Inaccessible. His Wisdom is Unfathomable.
Ret AT SH SEA Ast at SE ag Ml (137-2, ws, He 5)
sayvaa Saa tis bhaavsee santaa kee ho-ay chhaar.
He has no end or limitation. That service is pleasing to Him, which makes one humble, like the dust of the feet of the Saints.
dot ova ere ve ufss Burges Il 137-2, ws, He 5) deenaa naath dai-aal dayv patit uDhaaranhaar. He is the Patron of the poor, the Merciful, Luminous Lord, the Redeemer of sinners.
mife Haret Tue’ AT STH ATS Il (137-3, ws, ns 5)
aad jugaadee rakh-daa sach naam kartaar.
From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, the True Name of the Creator has been our Saving Grace.
aHfs afe o weet & ardt SwETs Il 137-3, 475, v2 5) keemat ko-ay na jaan-ee ko naahee tolanhaar. No one can know His Value; no one can weigh it.
Ho 36 iste Sf Id BSA Sdt ANT Il (137-4, Hs, He 5) man tan antar vas rahay naanak nahee sumaar. He dwells deep within the mind and body. O Nanak, He cannot be measured.
feo dfs fa us XC Ase fSq a Ae sf IQ (137-4, ws, He 5) din rain je parabh ka’-u sayvday tin kai sad balihaar. ||2|| I am forever a sacrifice to those who serve God, day and night. ||2] |
HS wife Ae Ae Ase a SUPT I (137-5, 4s, He 5) sant araaDhan sad sadaa sabhnaa kaa bakhsind. The Saints worship and adore Him forever and ever; He is the Forgiver of all.
at€ fitz fafe wfaor afe fasur fests fate i 137-5, Hs, v2 5) jee-o pind jin saaji-aa kar kirpaa diteen jind. He fashioned the soul and the body, and by His Kindness, He bestowed the soul.
ae Aget wracdiba aruba fasHs HS Il 137-6, ws, v2 5)
gur sabdee aaraaDhee-ai japee-ai nirmal mant.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, worship and adore Him, and chant His Pure Mantra.
ans age o Web UsHAT 87s Il (137-6, ws, v2 5) keemat kahan na jaa-ee-ai parmaysur bay-ant. His Value cannot be evaluated. The Transcendent Lord is endless.
fan Hfs eA oafee A adhe SaSs Il 1137-6, ws, v2 5) jis man vasai naaraa-ino so kahee-ai bhagvant. That one, within whose mind the Lord abides, is said to be most fortunate.
Fit at Sar ysha fs AMA SZ i 037-7, os, ws 5) jee-a kee lochaa pooree-ai milai su-aamee kant. The soul's desires are fulfilled, upon meeting the Master, our Husband Lord.
Soa He Afy dct Su AS dt IT ll (137-7, 115, ne 5) naanak jeevai jap haree dokh sabhay hee hant. Nanak lives by chanting the Lord's Name; all sorrows have been erased.
feo dfs fan o fend A dfeur Je AZ SI 437-8, ws, He 5) din rain jis na visrai so hari-aa hovai jant. ||3|| One who does not forget Him, day and night, is continually rejuvenated. ||3]|
Ava ae ys use He fenret a i (137-8, ws, Hs 5) sarab kalaa parabh poorno manj nimaanee thaa-o. God is overflowing with all powers. I have no honor-He is my resting place.
ofa Ge adt Ho vied af afu Att oS it 137-9, 1s, v2 5)
har ot gahee man andray jap jap jeevaa™ naa-o.
I have grasped the Support of the Lord within my mind; I live by chanting and meditating on His Name.
ate fasur ys wimuet Ao Ost Afar AHS Il (137-9, ws, 8 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee jan Dhoorhee sang samaa-o. Grant Your Grace, God, and bless me, that I may merge into the dust of the feet of
the humble. fae 3 wafs 38 sar Sa fest UST we il 137-10, ws, ws 5)
ji-o too’ raakhahi ti-o rahaa tayraa ditaa painaa khaa-o. As You keep me, so do I live. I wear and eat whatever You give me.
Gey Feat ate ys ffs ATG TE WS i 137-10, ws, us 5)
udam so-ee karaa-ay parabh mil saaDhoo gun gaa-o.
May I make the effort, O God, to sing Your Glorious Praises in the Company of the Holy.
ont we o Aset fxs TAS AS I (137-10, ws, He 5) doojee jaa-ay na sujh-ee kithai kookan jaa-o. I can conceive of no other place; where could I go to lodge a complaint?
mifomre faovHe SH Ide SS wat MATE i (137-11, ws, 42 5) agi-aan binaasan tam haran oochay agam amaa-o.
You are the Dispeller of ignorance, the Destroyer of darkness, O Lofty, Unfathomable and Unapproachable Lord.
HO feefsur af Heh sea ST AMS I 137-11, ws, He 5) man vichhurhi-aa har maylee-ai naanak ayhu su-aa-o. Please unite this separated one with Yourself; this is Nanak's yearning.
Hea atenirar fas fefs af usht Tg aX US USNAN (137-12, Hs, He 5) sarab kali-aanaa tit din har parsee gur kay paa-o. ||4||1]| That day shall bring every joy, O Lord, when I take to the Feet of the Guru. ||4[|1]|
ZI HS at SA ABA HIS HEA Hote sar Yess Adbor at gat aeet il 1137-13) vaar maajh kee tathaa salok mehlaa 1 malak mureed tathaa chandarharhaa sohee-aa kee Dhunee gaavnee.
Vaar In Maajh, And Shaloks Of The First Mehl: To Be Sung To The Tune Of "Malik Mureed And Chandrahraa Sohee-Aa"
9B Afs on aes Use TT UATE II 137-14)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
ABA Hs % Il (137-15)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ag ws ag foe we ag che fsa Sf it 137-15, ws, we 1)
gur daataa gur hivai ghar gur deepak tih lo-ay.
The Guru is the Giver; the Guru is the House of ice. The Guru is the Light of the three worlds.
WHE URGE saat Hfe Hfont AY SE INA (137-16, HS, He 1)
amar padaarath naankaa man maanee-ai sukh ho-ay. ||1] |
O Nanak, He is everlasting wealth. Place your mind's faith in Him, and you shall find peace. ||1||
He % Il (137-16)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
ufsé fumrfs war ae eft Il 137-16, ws, He 1) pahilai pi-aar lagaa than duDh. First, the baby loves mother's milk;
en Hfe ary at Ae I (137-16, ws, 8 1) doojai maa-ay baap kee suDh. second, he learns of his mother and father;
Sta sur sat Ss Il 137-17, ws, He 1) teejai bha-yaa bhaabhee bayb. third, his brothers, sisters-in-law and sisters;
aq fimrfa Guat Ys i 037-17, ws, He 1) cha-uthai pi-aar upannee khayd. fourth, the love of play awakens.
Une ue ube at aS Il 137-17, 15, He 1) punjvai khaan pee-an kee Dhaat. Fifth, he runs after food and drink;
fee aH 3 ue ATS I 137-18, HS, He 1) chhivai kaam na puchhai jaat. sixth, in his sexual desire, he does not respect social customs.
Ase Afa aot we SH Il 137-18, 4s, He 1) satvai sanj kee-aa ghar vaas. Seventh, he gathers wealth and dwells in his house;
Woe AT In 3H OA Il (137-18, HS, He 1) athvai kroDh ho-aa tan naas. eighth, he becomes angry, and his body is consumed.
oe US Bs ATT Il (137-18, ws, He 1) naavai Dha-ulay ubhay saah. Ninth, he turns grey, and his breathing becomes labored;
AS VOT IMT AMATI Il (137-19, HS, He 1) dasvai daDhaa ho-aa su-aah. tenth, he is cremated, and turns to ashes.
ae frats uarst ors il (137-19, ws, v8 1) ga-ay sigeet pukaaree Dhaah. His companions send him off, crying out and lamenting.
fant JA PATS TT Il 137-19, wes, He 1) udi-aa hans dasaa-ay raah. The swan of the soul takes flight, and asks which way to go.
Uat q3at mitfent afenr yfeor ars il (138-1, ws, He 1)
aa-i-aa ga-i-aa mu-i-aa naa-o. He came and he went, and now, even his name has died.
fue uss Afeg are | (138-1, Hs, He 1)
pichhai patal sadihu kaav. After he left, food was offered on leaves, and the birds were called to come and eat.
Soa HOHfa nig fumirg i 1138-1, ws, He 1) naanak manmukh anDh pi-aar. O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs love the darkness.
MS TI ST AAT iQ (138-1, ws, ws 1)
baajh guroo dubaa sansaar. ||2]| Without the Guru, the world is drowning. ||2||
He % Il (138-2)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
on deste da gefe Sta aT AST ATS I (138-2, 15, 2 1)
das baaltan bees ravan teesaa kaa sundar kahaavai.
At the age of ten, he is a child; at twenty, a youth, and at thirty, he is called handsome.
Tot ug df ust ug far Hot X FSur wir} | (138-2, ws, nz 1)
chaaleesee pur ho-ay pachaasee pag khisai sathee kay bodhaypaa aavai. At forty, he is full of life; at fifty, his foot slips, and at sixty, old age is upon him.
Rafe a Hfsdte omtst a feGorg 5 ure Il 138-3, 15, He 1) satar kaa matiheen aseehaa” kaa vi-uhaar na paavai. At seventy, he loses his intellect, and at eighty, he cannot perform his duties.
oe OT frawnet yf 5 AS MRI Aw Il 138-3, ws, we 1) navai kaa sihjaasnee mool na jaanai ap bal. At ninety, he lies in his bed, and he cannot understand his weakness.
Seion Bfen fo H asa A YS a TewI ISI 138-4, ws, we 1)
dhandholim dhoodhim dith mai naanak jag Dhoo-ay kaa Dhavalhar. ||3]|
After seeking and searching for such a long time, O Nanak, I have seen that the world is just a mansion of smoke. ||3]|
uGst Il (138-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 aes yoy mary oF urfu figAfe Burst il 38-5, ws, we 1) too” kartaa purakh agamm hai aap sarisat upaatee. You, O Creator Lord, are Unfathomable. You Yourself created the Universe,
da uda Gursnat ag sg fafa ast il 38-5, ws, He 1 rang parang upaarjanaa baho baho biDh bhaatee. its colors, qualities and varieties, in so many ways and forms.
3 wets fats Guretat AZ Ye SHS Il (138-6, ws, He 1) too” jaaneh jin upaa-ee-ai sabh khayl tumaatee. You created it, and You alone understand it. It is all Your Play.
fefa nrefo fefa mfo Cfe faa ave nfo AST II 1138-6, Hs, He ik aavahi ik jaahi uth bin naavai mar jaatee. Some come, and some arise and depart; but without the Name, all are bound to die.
asta df sefemr sfar ate sfar IST I (138-7, ws, He 1)
gurmukh rang chalooli-aa rang har rang raatee.
The Gurmukhs are imbued with the deep crimson color of the poppy; they are dyed in the color of the Lord's Love.
A Azg Afs fodns of use fast I 138-7, 1s, ne 1) so sayvhu sat niranjano har purakh biDhaatee. So serve the True and Pure Lord, the Supremely Powerful Architect of Destiny.
3 om orf AAS T SST UTY SST Il (138-7, ws, vs 1) too” aapay aap sujaan hai vad purakh vadaatee. You Yourself are All-knowing. O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great!
a ufe fats so fomrfee AS Afeor afs afs oC fSo AST AN 38-8, Hs, He 1D
jo man chit tuDh Dhi-aa-iday mayray sachi-aa bal bal ha-o tin jaatee. ||1]|
O my True Lord, I am a sacrifice, a humble sacrifice, to those who meditate on You within their conscious mind. ||1||
Had H2 Y Il (138-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
mG ute so Afar shim ges gets Il (138-9, ws, He 1)
jee-o paa-ay tan saaji-aa rakhi-aa banat banaa-ay.
He placed the soul in the body which He had fashioned. He protects the Creation which He has created.
mot fe faget 8B aot Aafs ATE I (138-9, 1s, He 1)
akhee daykhai jihvaa bolai kannee surat samaa-ay.
With their eyes, they see, and with their tongues, they speak; with their ears, they bring the mind to awareness.
Udt ve gat agar fest US wfe il 1138-10, 5, v2 1)
pairee chalai hathee karnaa ditaa painai khaa-ay.
With their feet, they walk, and with their hands, they work; they wear and eat whatever is given.
fafs afe afemr fsrfo o we nior nig oorfe I 138-10, +s, Hz 1)
jin rach rachi-aa tiseh na jaanai anDhaa anDh kamaa-ay.
They do not know the One who created the Creation. The blind fools do their dark deeds.
W SH 3 Slag de was wet o ATE Il (138-11, +45, He 1
jaa bhajai taa theekar hovai ghaarhat gharhee na jaa-ay.
When the pitcher of the body breaks and shatters into pieces, it cannot be re-created again.
Sea Jd fas ota ufs ufs fee ute o ute NAN (138-11, Ws, He 1 naanak gur bin naahi pat pat vin paar na paa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, without the Guru, there is no honor; without honor, no one is carried across.
[21 |
H8 2 Il (138-12)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
eo weg fest dar Honfe mia ATS II 138-12, 75, Hs 2)
day“day thaavhu ditaa changa manmukh aisaa jaanee-ai.
They prefer the gift, instead of the Giver; such is the way of the self-willed manmukhs.
Hofs Hfs vsoet a at fom afe mois Sure I 138-12, 173, v2 2) surat mat chaturaa-ee taa kee ki-aa kar aakh vakhaanee-ai. What can anyone say about their intelligence, their understanding or their cleverness?
wists afo & AGH AHS A VT AST WSPA Il (138-13, Ws, He 2)
antar bahi kai karam kamaavai so chahu kundee jaanee-ai.
The deeds which one commits, while sitting in one's own home, are known far and wide, in the four directions.
A Udy ane faq cen oe de urfu ore unit ATEN II 138-13, 275, He 2)
jo Dharam kamaavai tis Dharam naa-o hovai paap kamaanai paapee jaanee-ai.
One who lives righteously is known as righteous; one who commits sins is known as a sinner.
3 nm ae asta Als aes for ear vrfey Sarehot  (138-14, wes, oe 2) too” aapay khayl karahi sabh kartay ki-aa doojaa aakh vakhaanee-ai. You Yourself enact the entire play, O Creator. Why should we speak of any other?
frag Sat afs eg Ast fete F dale fee Ast aet fas afeg fear finest it 38-15, ws, Hs 2)
jichar tayree jot tichar jotee vich too’ boleh vin jotee ko-ee kichh karihu dikhaa si- aanee-ai.
As long as Your Light is within the body, You speak through that Light. Without Your Light, who can do anything? Show me any such cleverness!
Soa TeHfy edt orfenr ale feat AWS AAEM IQI (138-15, Hs, He 2) naanak gurmukh nadree aa-i-aa har iko sugharh sujaanee-ai. ||2|| O Nanak, the Lord alone is Perfect and All-knowing; He is revealed to the Gurmukh.
[21] ust Il (138-16)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
30 wm Aas Gurfe & so wm do afer I 38-16, ws, He 2) tuDh aapay jagat upaa-ay kai tuDh aapay DhanDhai laa-i-aa. You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself put it to work.
Ho oaget ufe & 30 nrug Aas yorfenr It 138-17, ws, He 2)
moh thag-ulee paa-ay kai tuDh aaphu jagat khu-aa-i-aa.
Administering the drug of emotional attachment, You Yourself have led the world astray.
fara niefs uiafs 3 og fsus ger fsarfeur i 38-17, Ws, He 2) tisnaa andar agan hai nah tiptai bhukhaa tihaa-i-aa. The fire of desire is deep within; unsatisfied, people remain hungry and thirsty.
Hort feg HATS 3 Hfe HH rfeor Arfeor tt 38-18, WSs, He 2) sahsaa ih sansaar hai mar jammai aa-i-aa jaa-i-aa. This world is an illusion; it dies and it is re-born-it comes and it goes in reincarnation.
fae Afsad Ho 3 Scet Afs aa GaN oTfeur II 138-18, HS, He 2)
bin satgur moh na tut-ee sabh thakay karam kamaa-i-aa.
Without the True Guru, emotional attachment is not broken. All have grown weary of performing empty rituals.
TaHst om fore Afe gat aT so atfemr It 138-19, ws, He 2)
gurmatee naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sukh rajaa jaa tuDh bhaa-i-aa.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Filled with a joyful peace, they surrender to Your Will.
ae Curd nimuat ge Aeet wfemr | (138-19, Hs, He 2)
kul uDhaaray aapnaa Dhan janaydee maa-i-aa.
They save their families and ancestors; blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them.
yar qa Hat Aofs Aoeat fats ofs Ast fos wfeor I (139-1, ws, He 2)
sobhaa surat suhaavanee jin har saytee chit laa-i-aa. ||2|| Beautiful and sublime is the glory and the understanding of those who focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||2| |
H@a Hs 2 Il (139-2) salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
mot asg Suet feE AST ASST Il (139-2, ws, Hz 2) akhee baajhahu vaykh-naa vin kanna sunnaa. To see without eyes; to hear without ears;
ust asg weal fee Jat ATS Il (139-2, ws, He 2) pairaa baajhahu chalnaa vin hathaa karnaa. to walk without feet; to work without hands;
His asg deat fe Ales NaS I (139-2, ws, He 2) jeebhai baajhahu bolnaa i-o jeevat marnaa. to speak without a tongue-like this, one remains dead while yet alive.
Soa JAH vette a 3B UAH fieser AI (139-3, +15, He 2)
naanak hukam pachhaan kai ta-o khasmai milnaa. ||1||
O Nanak, recognize the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and merge with your Lord and Master. ||1]||
He 2 Il (39-3)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
fen Aeba ATeha Ae o urfeor AE II 139-3, ns, He 2) disai sunee-ai jaanee-ai Saa-o na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. He is seen, heard and known, but His subtle essence is not obtained.
goes gat niger fas ate oat ote I (139-4, ws, He 2) ruhlaa tundaa anDhulaa ki-o gal lagai Dhaa-ay. How can the lame, armless and blind person run to embrace the Lord?
3a vse ad Te a Sles Hafs ASE Il (139-4, ws, He 2)
bhai kay charan kar bhaav kay lo-in surat karay-i.
Let the Fear of God be your feet, and let His Love be your hands; let His Understanding be your eyes.
Soa Ad frorate fee az flrsret fF QM (139-5, Hs, He 2)
naanak kahai si-aanee-ay iv kant milaavaa ho-ay. ||2| |
Says Nanak, in this way, O wise soul-bride, you shall be united with your Husband Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (139-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Het Ae’ Ss Sa TF SO SA Aw ToS I (139-5, ws, ws 2)
sadaa sadaa too” ayk hai tuDh doojaa khayl rachaa-i-aa.
Forever and ever, You are the only One; You set the play of duality in motion. GH ase Gute a Se nists Hat ue I (139-6, Hs, He 2)
ha-umai garab upaa-ay kai lobh antar jantaa paa-i-aa. You created egotism and arrogant pride, and You placed greed within our beings.
fA@ are (38 sy 5 AS as ST aTfEnt It (139-6, ws, we 2) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too sabh karay tayraa karaa-i-aa. Keep me as it pleases Your Will; everyone acts as You cause them to act.
feaar sunfo nfs fs aenst 30 wfeor 139-7, Ws, He 2)
iknaa bakhsahi mayl laihi gurmatee tuDhai laa-i-aa.
Some are forgiven, and merge with You; through the Guru's Teachings, we are joined to You.
fefa us aafo Sct wadt fee oe dg 5 afer I 139-7, ws, He 2) ik kharhay karahi tayree chaakree vin naavai hor na bhaa-i-aa. Some stand and serve You; without the Name, nothing else pleases them.
dg ag 2arg 3 feta wet ard fer I (139-8, ns, He 2)
hor kaar vaykaar hai ik sachee kaarai laa-i-aa.
Any other task would be worthless to them-You have enjoined them to Your True Service.
uz aes ace Jd fefa mfsus gd A 3o Sten I (139-8, a5, He 2)
put kalat kutamb hai ik alipat rahay jo tuDh bhaa-i-aa.
In the midst of children, spouse and relations, some still remain detached; they are pleasing to Your Will.
6fs niesg adag fasHs Ae ate Aarfemr ISI (139-9, HS, He 2) ohi andrahu baahrahu nirmalay sachai naa-ay samaa-i-aa. ||3]| Inwardly and outwardly, they are pure, and they are absorbed in the True Name. ||3]|
ABA Hs 4 Ill (139-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Afes a usafs get adt & urat ufemrfs Il (139-10, ws, He 1) su-inay kai parbat gufaa karee kai paanee pa-i-aal. I may make a cave, in a mountain of gold, or in the water of the nether regions;
a fefs asst & ores Cafa go ffs ae i 139-10, ws, Hs kai vich Dhartee kai aakaasee uraDh rahaa sir bhaar. I may remain standing on my head, upside-down, on the earth or up in the sky;
ug af afer aus ufsat det Het ats I (139-11, 75, He 1) pur kar kaa-i-aa kaparh pahiraa Dhovaa sadaa kaar. I may totally cover my body with clothes, and wash them continually;
Fat Tat Uber ara Het at UAT | (139-11, ws, vs 1) bagaa rataa pee-alaa kaalaa baydaa karee pukaar. I may shout out loud, the white, red, yellow and black Vedas;
dfs adie got He odt wants nfs feare il (139-12, ws, we 1)
ho-ay kucheel rahaa mal Dhaaree durmat mat vikaar.
I may even live in dirt and filth. And yet, all this is just a product of evil-mindedness, and intellectual corruption.
ot Ie aH oT Ue del Soa ASS Slots NAM (139-12, ws, He 1) naa ha-o naa mai naa ha-o hovaa naanak sabad veechaar. || 1] |
I was not, I am not, and I will never be anything at all! O Nanak, I dwell only on the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 4% Il (139-13) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
SAS uarfes wars arfemr mm AAfy FS I (139-13, ws, He 1) vastar pakhaal pakhaalay kaa-i-aa aapay sanjam hovai. They wash their clothes, and scrub their bodies, and try to practice self-discipline.
nists HS Bat odt We aaa His nfs TS i (139-13, ws, He 1)
antar mail lagee nahee jaanai baahrahu mal mal Dhovai.
But they are not aware of the filth staining their inner being, while they try and try to wash off the outer dirt.
nicr sf ufsor AH ATS I (139-14, ws, He 1) anDhaa bhool pa-i-aa jam jaalay. The blind go astray, caught by the noose of Death.
ZA uset nual afs AS ICH fefs sa wes I (139-14, WS, He 1) vasat paraa-ee apunee kar jaanai ha-umai vich dukh ghaalay. They see other people's property as their own, and in egotism, they suffer in pain.
Soa TaHfy IGH se st afa afe on fms It (139-15, +s, He 1)
naanak gurmukh ha-umai tutai taa har har naam Dhi-aavai.
O Nanak, the egotism of the Gurmukhs is broken, and then, they meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
OM AU SH yaad oF Af ANTS IQ (139-15, HS, He 1)
naam japay naamo aaraaDhay naamay sukh samaavai. ||2]|
They chant the Naam, meditate on the Naam, and through the Naam, they are absorbed in peace. ||2]|
ugat Il (139-16)
pavrhee. Pauree:
afenr fk Ana vfs firerfemr i 139-16, 4s, Hs 1 kaa-i-aa hans sanjog mayl milaa-i-aa. Destiny has brought together and united the body and the soul-swan.
fso dt aur fera fafs Gurfemr | 139-16, ws, He 1) tin hee kee-aa vijog jin upaa-i-aa. He who created them, also separates them.
Hay sa Sq Te AafEn | (139-17, ws, vs 1) moorakh bhogay bhog dukh sabaa-i-aa. The fools enjoy their pleasures; they must also endure all their pains.
Hug 83 ga uy antfeur tt (139-17, ws, He 1) sukhhu uthay rog paap kamaa-i-aa. From pleasures, arise diseases and the commission of sins.
Jaug Aa feria Gurfe werfeur i 139-17, ws, He 1) harkhahu sog vijog upaa-ay khapaa-i-aa. From sinful pleasures come sorrow, separation, birth and death.
Had Tes Tate sara urfens | (139-18, ws, we 1) moorakh ganat ganaa-ay jhagrhaa paa-i-aa. The fools try to account for their misdeeds, and argue uselessly.
Afsad dfa fads sas vorfenr I (139-18, Hs, He 1) satgur hath nibayrh jhagarh chukaa-i-aa. The judgement is in the Hands of the True Guru, who puts an end to the argument.
Ada Ad AIT} VS VOTEMT Ill (139-19, ws, He 1) kartaa karay so hog na chalai chalaa-i-aa. ||4| |
Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. It cannot be changed by anyone's efforts. [141]
ABA Hs 4 Ill (139-19)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
az afe uaerg ute i (139-19, ws, Hs 1) koorh bol murdaar khaa-ay. Telling lies, they eat dead bodies.
UST Wo mMedt & AHStTefe ATE Il (140-1, ws, ue 1)
avree no samjhaavan jaa-ay. And yet, they go out to teach others.
Hor wirfly Hae ATE I (140-1, ws, He 1) muthaa aap muhaa-ay saathai. They are deceived, and they deceive their companions.
SSA MAT MTT APY WAU (140-1, os, Hs 1) naanak aisaa aagoo jaapai. ||1|| O Nanak, such are the leaders of men. ||1]|
HI 8 Il (140-1)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
fan @ viefs AY dA AST oy Hf AY Me Il (140-2, ws, He 4)
jis dai andar sach hai so sachaa naam mukh sach alaa-ay.
Those, within whom the Truth dwells, obtain the True Name; they speak only the Truth.
6g ofs wefa orfu seer Jaa 3 ofe wafer ure Il (140-2, +15, nH 4) oh har maarag aap chaldaa hornaa no har maarag paa-ay. They walk on the Lord's Path, and inspire others to walk on the Lord's Path as well.
A ma Stee dfs a He od eufs oS AaeSt HS WES Il (140-3, ws, we 4)
jay agai tirath ho-ay taa mal lahai chhaparh naatai sagvee mal laa-ay.
Bathing in a pool of holy water, they are washed clean of filth. But, by bathing in a stagnant pond, they are contaminated with even more filth.
Steg ua Afsag A uisfes afs afe oy fre i (140-3, ws, we 4)
tirath pooraa satguroo jo an-din har har naam Dhi-aa-ay.
The True Guru is the Perfect Pool of Holy Water. Night and day, He meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
6g urfu get ada fa@ 2 afe ofa on As fqAfe see I 140-4, a3, He 4)
oh aap chhutaa kutamb si-o day har har naam sabh sarisat chhadaa-ay.
He is saved, along with his family; bestowing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, He saves the whole world.
Ho ood fen sfeoge A ourfy AU nea OH AUS IQM (140-5, ws, He 4)
jan naanak tis balihaarnai jo aap japai avraa naam japaa-ay. ||2||
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to one who himself chants the Naam, and inspires others to chant it as well. ||2]|
ust Il (140-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fefa de He ofe uta ee dfs SAT I (140-5, 273, He 4) ik kand mool chun khaahi van khand vaasaa. Some pick and eat fruits and roots, and live in the wilderness.
fefa sae 2n afe feafo Haft AfemmAr Il (140-6, 115, He 4) ik bhagvaa vays kar fireh jogee saniaasaa. Some wander around wearing saffron robes, as Yogis and Sanyaasees.
niefs fener sos Seo SHS at MAT II (140-6, ns, ne 4) andar tarisnaa bahut chhaadan bhojan kee aasaa. But there is still so much desire within them-they still yearn for clothes and food.
fase AOH Tete 3 farsdt o BeAr Il 140-7, ws, us 4) birthaa janam gavaa-ay na girhee na udaasaa. They waste their lives uselessly; they are neither householders nor renunciates.
ANAS frag o Gad fSfafa HOA II (140-7, ns, He 4)
jamkaal sirahu na utrai taribaDh mansaa.
The Messenger of Death hangs over their heads, and they cannot escape the three- phased desire.
TINS WSS we SS A de] VAS VAT Il (140-8, ws, He 4)
gurmatee kaal na aavai nayrhai jaa hovai daasan daasaa.
Death does not even approach those who follow the Guru's Teachings, and become the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
He Ade AG fe we dt Hts BeAr il (140-8, ws, H8 4)
sachaa sabad sach man ghar hee maahi udaasaa.
The True Word of the Shabad abides in their true minds; within the home of their own inner beings, they remain detached.
Soa Alsdd Ago wtu|er A nA S feaAr UI (140-8, HTS, He 4) naanak satgur sayvan aapnaa say aasaa tay niraasaa. ||5|| O Nanak, those who serve their True Guru, rise from desire to desirelessness. ||5| |
HBA Hs 9 Il (140-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
A IS Bd Aus AH AE uss Il 140-9, ws, ve VY jay rat lagai kaprhai jaamaa ho-ay paleet. If one's clothes are stained with blood, the garment becomes polluted.
a a3 ulefo ner fS0 fae faone BS II (140-10, ws, He 1)
jo rat peeveh maansaa tin ki-o nirmal cheet. Those who suck the blood of human beings-how can their consciousness be pure?
sod a uere ar fete ge uf BT il (140-10, ws, He 1) naanak naa-o khudaa-ay kaa dil hachhai mukh layho. O Nanak, chant the Name of God, with heart-felt devotion.
mets feet Pat A SS MHS ATT WAM (140-11, ws, He 1) avar divaajay dunee kay jhoothay amal karayhu. ||1|| Everything else is just a pompous worldly show, and the practice of false deeds. ||1]|
He 4% Il (140-11)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
wT IG ot a fomr nme fag ardt far det it 40-11, ws, ne 1) jaa ha-o naahee taa ki-aa aakhaa kihu naahee ki-aa hovaa. Since I am no one, what can I say? Since I am nothing, what can I be?
ast agar afomr age sfenr fe sfa Get it (140-12, ws, He 1)
keetaa karnaa kahi-aa kathnaa bhari-aa bhar bhar Dhovaa’.
As He created me, so I act. As He causes me to speak, so I speak. I am full and overflowing with sins-if only I could wash them away!
uf & FST SX FSET MAT nrg TS I (140-12, ws, 3 1) aap na bujhaa lok bujhaa-ee aisaa aagoo hovaa",. I do not understand myself, and yet I try to teach others. Such is the guide I am!
Soa nut dfs ad CA Wd ASA HTS ATE Il (140-13, ws, He 1)
naanak anDhaa ho-ay kai dasay raahai sabhas muhaa-ay saathai.
O Nanak, the one who is blind shows others the way, and misleads all his companions.
Mat afent He Hfs ute A MEAT Mia AM MQM (140-13, Hs, He 1D)
agai ga-i-aa muhay muhi paahi so aisaa aagoo jaapai. ||2]|
But, going to the world hereafter, he shall be beaten and kicked in the face; then, it will be obvious, what sort of guide he was! ||2]|
u@at Il (140-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ho gat AS FS ust HIS Ses Il (140-14, ws, we 1) maahaa rutee sabh too” gharhee moorat veechaaraa.
Through all the months and the seasons, the minutes and the hours, I dwell upon You, O Lord.
3 mes fas 3 ues AS nie AUST Il (140-14, os, He 1) too” gantai kinai na paa-i-o sachay alakh apaaraa. No one has attained You by clever calculations, O True, Unseen and Infinite Lord.
ufsor Hoy nindint fA Ba BF MITA Il (140-15, ws, 4s 1) parhi-aa moorakh aakhee-ai jis lab lobh aha‘kaaraa. That scholar who is full of greed, arrogant pride and egotism, is known to be a fool.
oe usht a ssh qanst Sera i (140-15, ws, He 1) naa-o parhee-ai naa-o bujhee-ai gurmatee veechaaraa. So read the Name, and realize the Name, and contemplate the Guru's Teachings.
TIHSt BH US ufenr sast FF FSS Il (140-16, ws, He 1)
gurmatee naam Dhan khati-aa bhagtee bharay bhandaaraa.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I have earned the wealth of the Naam; I possess the storehouses, overflowing with devotion to the Lord.
fsdHe oH Hfoor efs AS Afenira Il (140-16, Hs, He 1)
nirmal naam mani-aa dar sachai sachi-aaraa.
Believing in the Immaculate Naam, one is hailed as true, in the True Court of the Lord.
fan a HG use J nists AfS wre Ih (140-17, ws, He D
jis daa jee-o paraan hai antar jot apaaraa.
The Divine Light of the Infinite Lord, who owns the soul and the breath of life, is deep within the inner being.
Aa AY fea J Is Way SSS Mell (140-17, ws, we 1) sachaa saahu ik too” hor jagat vanjaaraa. ||6||
You alone are the True Banker, O Lord; the rest of the world is just Your petty trader. [16] |
ABA Hs 4 Ill (140-18) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
fhog HAS frea HAS IX Iss ATES Il (140-18, ws, ue 1) mihar maseet sidak muslaa hak halaal kuraan. Let mercy be your mosque, faith your prayer-mat, and honest living your Koran.
Han Hats Ake SAT TT HAGHTS Il (140-18, 15, He 1)
Ssaram sunat seel rojaa hohu musalmaan.
Make modesty your circumcision, and good conduct your fast. In this way, you shall be a true Muslim.
Adal AS AG UlT ABH ATH (SST Il (140-19, ws, He 1)
karnee kaabaa sach peer kalmaa karam nivaaj.
Let good conduct be your Kaabaa, Truth your spiritual guide, and the karma of good deeds your prayer and chant.
sAet AT SH SSH Soa TS BA A (140-19, ws, He 1)
tasbee saa tis bhaavsee naanak rakhai laaj. ||1]|
Let your rosary be that which is pleasing to His Will. O Nanak, God shall preserve your honor. ||1]|
UST ABA
He % Il (141-1) mehlaa 1. First Mehl
Ig UTtent area SH Ag SH ate It c4i-1, ws, 42 1)
hak paraa-i-aa naankaa us SOO-ar US gaa-ay.
: To take what rightfully belongs to another, is like a Muslim eating pork, or a Hindu eating beef.
ag uls I St og A HET BUTE I (141-1, ws, He 1 gur peer haamaa taa bharay jaa murdaar na khaa-ay. Our Guru, our Spiritual Guide, stands by us, if we do not eat those carcasses.
aet fants o wea ge AG OTE I 141-2, ws, He 1)
galee bhisat na jaa-ee-ai chhutai sach kamaa-ay.
By mere talk, people do not earn passage to Heaven. Salvation comes only from the practice of Truth.
Hae ufo gon ufs of gare BATE I (141-2, 15, He 1) maaran paahi haraam meh ho-ay halaal na jaa-ay. By adding spices to forbidden foods, they are not made acceptable.
SST TS ATH TS UB UTS I (141-3, ws, we naanak galee koorhee-ee koorho palai paa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, from false talk, only falsehood is obtained. ||2||
Hs 4 Il (141-3)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
ufa foe sus Ufa UAT UA OTE II 41-3, Hs, He panj nivaajaa vakhat panj panjaa panjay naa-o. There are five prayers and five times of day for prayer; the five have five names.
ufser Ag Joe fe Str oe wee i (41-4, os, ne Y
pahilaa sach halaal du-ay teejaa khair khudaa-ay.
Let the first be truthfulness, the second honest living, and the third charity in the Name of God.
sCat shufs ath Ho Unet frefs AOTE (141-4, 1s, He 1 cha-uthee nee-at raas man panjvee sifat sanaa-ay. Let the fourth be good will to all, and the fifth the praise of the Lord.
ATS AGH nifly & St MATS ASETE i ca4i-5, ws, He 1) karnee kalmaa aakh kai taa musalmaan sadaa-ay. Repeat the prayer of good deeds, and then, you may call yourself a Muslim.
sea AS afsurs as gat utes sil 141-5, ws, we naanak jaytay koorhi-aar koorhai koorhee paa-ay. ||3]|| O Nanak, the false obtain falsehood, and only falsehood. ||3] |
uQat Il (141-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fefa g35 uerae zene fefa as F Sars | 141-6, ws, ne 1) ik ratan padaarath vanjaday ik kachai day vaapaaraa. Some trade in priceless jewels, while others deal in mere glass.
Afsafe 36 urdinifs niefs Ie FTI Il 141-6, ws, He 1)
satgur tuthai paa-ee-an andar ratan bhandaaraa.
When the True Guru is pleased, we find the treasure of the jewel, deep within the self.
fee aa fas 3 aftr nid s@fa He afsora i 141-7, ws, we D
vin gur kinai na laDhi-aa anDhay bha-uk mu-ay koorhi-aaraa.
Without the Guru, no one has found this treasure. The blind and the false have died in their endless wanderings.
Hou eA ufs He a asta Sera i 141-7, ws, Hs 1)
manmukh doojai pach mu-ay naa boojheh veechaaraa.
The self-willed manmukhs putrefy and die in duality. They do not understand contemplative meditation.
fean weg A & oot fan nia aafs YTS Il (141-8, Hrs, He 1) ikas baajhahu doojaa ko nahee kis agai karahi pukaaraa. Without the One Lord, there is no other at all. Unto whom should they complain?
fefa fasas Het sGae feaat Sd SAS I (141-8, ws, He 1)
ik nirDhan sadaa bha-ukday iknaa bharay tujaaraa.
Some are destitute, and wander around endlessly, while others have storehouses of wealth.
fee ore dg 09 ont dg fatto Ag |e I 141-9, 15, He 1)
vin naavai hor Dhan naahee hor bikhi-aa sabh chhaaraa.
Without God's Name, there is no other wealth. Everything else is just poison and ashes.
Soa nifty ae ad of Jah ASIST ST WDM (141-9, Hs, He 1)
naanak aap karaa-ay karay aap hukam savaaranhaaraa. ||7||
O Nanak, the Lord Himself acts, and causes others to act; by the Hukam of His Command, we are embellished and exalted. ||7]|
HBX Hs 4% Il (141-10) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
HAGHTS AITSE HAAG A dfe 3S HAGHTS ATS Il (141-10, 75, He 1) musalmaan kahaavan muskal jaa ho-ay taa musalmaan kahaavai. It is difficult to be called a Muslim; if one is truly a Muslim, then he may be called one.
nets mi@is ae afs fot HAAG HOT HTS HATS Il (141-11, Hs, He 1)
aval a-ul deen kar mithaa maskal maanaa maal musaavai.
First, let him savor the religion of the Prophet as sweet; then, let his pride of his possessions be scraped away.
df= HAfen de use Hee Ales aT SSH Vas I (141-11, ws, He 1)
ho-ay muslim deen muhaanai maran jeevan kaa bharam chukhaavai.
Becoming a true Muslim, a disciple of the faith of Mohammed, let him put aside the delusion of death and life.
va at aafe Hd fra Gufs aga HS my TSS I (141-12, 115, 2 1)
rab kee rajaa-ay mannay sir upar kartaa mannay aap gavaavai.
As he submits to God's Will, and surrenders to the Creator, he is rid of selfishness and conceit.
38 aoa Hee Hor frodufs af 3 HASHES ATS AU (141-12, ws, He 1) ta-o naanak sarab jee-aa mihramat ho-ay ta musalmaan kahaavai. ||1|| And when, O Nanak, he is merciful to all beings, only then shall he be called a Muslim.
[21
HI! 8 Il (141-13)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
uddte OH 0 3S fee Shr Her wars FarS I (141-13, 27s, Hs 4)
parhar kaam kroDh jhooth nindaa taj maa-i-aa aha%kaar chukhaavai. Renounce sexual desire, anger, falsehood and slander; forsake Maya and eliminate egotistical pride.
3fa ay afhat He SA St nine uf fadHe urs Il (141-14, ws, He 4)
taj kaam kaaminee moh tajai taa anjan maahi niranjan paavai.
Renounce sexual desire and promiscuity, and give up emotional attachment. Only then shall you obtain the Immaculate Lord amidst the darkness of the world.
3fa we wife ulfs AS oe Sfa fuer oor OM fies BS I 141-14, os, He 4)
taj maan abhimaan pareet sut daaraa taj pi-aas aas raam liv laavai.
Renounce selfishness, conceit and arrogant pride, and your love for your children and spouse. Abandon your thirsty hopes and desires, and embrace love for the Lord.
ood Are" Hfs SA Are ASfe ofa StH ANTS NI (141-15, Ws, He 4)
naanak saachaa man vasai saach sabad har naam samaavai. ||2||
O Nanak, the True One shall come to dwell in your mind. Through the True Word of the Shabad, you shall be absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||2||
ust Il (141-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oH dafs frees afe & TIA Il (141-16, ws, He 4) raajay ra-yat sikdaar ko-ay na rahsee-o. Neither the kings, nor their subjects, nor the leaders shall remain.
Je USE HHS JAH SIA I (141-16, ws, ns 4)
hat patan baajaar hukmee dhahsee-o.
The shops, the cities and the streets shall eventually disintegrate, by the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
UX AX WIT HIY ATE TUS I (141-17, 47s, 4 4) pakay bank du-aar moorakh jaanai aapnay. Those solid and beautiful mansions-the fools think that they belong to them.
vata ad garg SS fefax we Il (141-17, ws, we 4) darab bharay bhandaar reetay ik khanay. The treasure-houses, filled with wealth, shall be emptied out in an instant.
aH sa gars Tet uss i aa few we ae fos fA rue i Sy usu foes notes Best Il (141-17, Hs, Hs 4)
taajee rath tukhaar haathee paakhray. baag milakh ghar baar kithai se aapnay. tamboo palangh nivaar saraa-ichay laaltee.
The horses, chariots, camels and elephants, with all their decorations; the gardens, lands, houses, tents, soft beds and satin pavilions-Oh, where are those things, which they believe to be their own?
Soa Ae ess fous Asst ICI (141-18, ws, He 4)
naanak sach daataar sinaakhat kudratee. ||8]||
O Nanak, the True One is the Giver of all; He is revealed through His All-powerful Creative Nature. ||8]|
HBX Hs 9 Il (141-19) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Seb defo tee AH defs vo ute i (41-19, ws, He 1) nadee-aa hoveh Dhaynvaa summ hoveh duDh ghee-o. If the rivers became cows, giving milk, and the spring water became milk and ghee;
Hast dest Had de unt ad fos IG I c4i-19, +, nz 1) saglee Dhartee sakar hovai khusee karay nit jee-o. If all the earth became sugar, to continually excite the mind;
UST 82
ugag Afear gud] de we ASE I (142-1, 1s, ne 1) parbat su-inaa rupaa hovai heeray laal jarhaa-o. if the mountains became gold and silver, studded with gems and jewels
St FT AIS nds BI FS WS WAU (142-1, os, 48 1)
bhee too“hai salaahnaa aakhan lahai na chaa-o. ||1]|
-even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||1||
Hs % Il (142-2) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
aT MoS Het de Taga TS AMS lt (142-2, +15, v2 1) bhaar athaarah mayvaa hovai garurhaa ho-ay su-aa-o. If all the eighteen loads of vegetation became fruits,
Je Hen ule fess aiinis fagee JS TS i 142-2, ws, we
chand sooraj du-ay firday rakhee-ahi nihchal hovai thaa-o.
and the growing grass became sweet rice; if I were able to stop the sun and the moon in their orbits and hold them perfectly steady
St FT ABTS ngs BI F WS MQM (142-3, ws, we
bhee too™hai salaahnaa aakhan lahai na chaa-o. ||2]|
-even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||2||
He 4% Il (142-3) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
~~ &
A td vy weha uu gag ef& TT Il (142-3, 15, ne 1) jay dayhai dukh laa-ee-ai paap garah du-ay raahu. If my body were afflicted with pain, under the evil influence of unlucky stars;
ag ule on fae Gufs cibafo SS A are I (142-4, ws, ne 1) rat peenay raajay sirai upar rakhee-ahi ayvai jaapai bhaa-o. and if the blood-sucking kings were to hold power over me
St Fd AIS ngs BI 5 WS SI (142-4, ws, we 1)
bhee too™hai salaahnaa aakhan lahai na chaa-o. ||3]|
-even if this were my condition, I would still worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||3]|
He 4% Il (142-5)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Walt Ue aus TS urat TS STS I (142-5, 1175, vz 1) agee paalaa kaparh hovai khaanaa hovai vaa-o. If fire and ice were my clothes, and the wind was my food;
Had tor Hose fensdior defe aaa AS AE Il 142-5, ws, He 1)
surgai dee-aa mohnee-aa istaree-aa hovan naanak sabho jaa-o.
and even if the enticing heavenly beauties were my wives, O Nanak-all this shall pass away!
St 3d ATS nimags BI S TS Sil (142-6, ws, Hs 1)
bhee toohai salaahnaa aakhan lahai na chaa-o. ||4||
Even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||4||
Ugat Il (142-6) pavrhee. Pauree:
Geet TAS MAH 3 ASeT Il (142-6, HS, He 1) badfailee gaibaanaa khasam na jaan-ee. The foolish demon, who does evil deeds, does not know his Lord and Master.
A adit erat ny o usec i (142-7, 15, ne 1) so kahee-ai dayvaanaa aap na pachhaan-ee. Call him a mad-man, if he does not understand himself.
aes adt AAs ere wht il (142-7, 1s, ne 1) kaleh buree sansaar vaaday khapee-ai. The strife of this world is evil; these struggles are consuming it.
fee ae garfe SoH UdM Il (142-8, Ws, He 1)
vin naavai vaykaar bharmay pachee-ai.
Without the Lord's Name, life is worthless. Through doubt, the people are being destroyed.
ag te fea we Het fASHt I (142-8, 15, He 1) raah dovai ik jaanai so-ee sijhsee. One who recognizes that all spiritual paths lead to the One shall be emancipated.
aed dt aAeaS ufeor eset it 142-8, ws, ue 1) kufar go-a kufraanai pa-i-aa dajhsee. One who speaks lies shall fall into hell and burn.
AS vdir Asa Afs ANTE Il (142-9, Hs, He 1)
sabh dunee-aa sub-haan sach samaa-ee-ai.
In all the world, the most blessed and sanctified are those who remain absorbed in Truth.
firs ofs dtefs wimg area CI (142-9, 2175, He 1) sijhai dar deevaan aap gavaa-ee-ai. ||9|| One who eliminates selfishness and conceit is redeemed in the Court of the Lord. ||9||
H8 Y AGE Il (142-9) mehlaa 1 salok. First Mehl, Shalok:
A dtfenr fan ufo efrmr AE I (142-10, +5, He 1) SO jeevi-aa jis man vasi-aa So-ay. They alone are truly alive, whose minds are filled with the Lord.
SOA MST O Ale ALE Il (142-10, ws, He 1) naanak avar na jeevai ko-ay. O Nanak, no one else is truly alive;
A Ate ufs wet ATE II 142-10, ws, He 1 jay jeevai pat lathee jaa-ay. those who merely live shall depart in dishonor;
AS Jay AST fxs we i (142-10, ws, He 1) sabh haraam jaytaa kichh khaa-ay. everything they eat is impure.
ofa da Hts da il df gst BS Sa Il (142-11, +s, ve 1)
raaj rang maal rang. rang rataa nachai nang.
Intoxicated with power and thrilled with wealth, they delight in their pleasures, and dance about shamelessly.
SHA SlaMa? HO" AME i (142-11, ws, Hs 1) naanak thagi-aa muthaa jaa-ay. O Nanak, they are deluded and defrauded.
fee oe ufs afer mete nal (142-11, +, He 1) vin naavai pat ga-i-aa gavaa-ay. ||1]|| Without the Lord's Name, they lose their honor and depart. ||1||
He 4% Il (142-12)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
foo arty foot Ut SFE i (142-12, ws, He 1) ki-aa khaaDhai ki-aa paiDhai ho-ay. What good is food, and what good are clothes,
wv nfs ardt AST APE I (142-12, Hs, He 1) jaa man naahee sachaa so-ay. if the True Lord does not abide within the mind?
fom Het foro fiu@ as flor foot Her fom HMA II (142-12, Hs, He 1)
ki-aa mayvaa ki-aa ghi-o gurh mithaa ki-aa maidaa ki-aa maas.
What good are fruits, what good is ghee, sweet jaggery, what good is flour, and what good is meat?
for aus for AA AaSt otafs sar fer i 142-13, ws, He 1)
ki-aa kaparh ki-aa sayj sukhaalee keejeh bhog bilaas.
What good are clothes, and what good is a soft bed, to enjoy pleasures and sensual delights?
fom wAad fom Sa wea mS HIST STA IN (142-14, WS, He 1) ki-aa laskar ki-aa nayb khavaasee aavai mahlee vaas. What good is an army, and what good are soldiers, servants and mansions to live in?
Sod AY OH fee AS So fearA NM (142-14, ws, He 1) naanak sachay naam vin sabhay tol vinaas. ||2] |
O Nanak, without the True Name, all this paraphernalia shall disappear. ||2]|
ugat Il (142-15)
pavrhee. Pauree:
wat & famr ofa Ag Usd | (142-15, 1, He YD jaatee dai ki-aa hath sach parkhee-ai. What good is social class and status? Truthfulness is measured within.
Hos de] ofa ndbat web | 142-15, ws, ne mahuraa hovai hath maree-ai chakhee-ai. Pride in one's status is like poison-holding it in your hand and eating it, you shall die.
Ae at fsa Ha WaT ASH I (142-15, ws, ne 1) sachay kee sirkaar jug jug jaanee-ai. The True Lord's Sovereign Rule is known throughout the ages.
Jan Ho frees vfs chars Il 142-16, 5, He 1)
hukam mannay sirdaar dar deebaanee-ai.
One who respects the Hukam of the Lord's Command is honored and respected in the Court of the Lord.
Sonat Jd arg UAH usTfemr Il (142-16, Hs, He 1) furmaanee hai kaar khasam pathaa-i-aa. By the Order of our Lord and Master, we have been brought into this world.
saorn shes Aafe Hetfemr Il (142-16, Hs, He 1)
tabalbaaj beechaar sabad sunaa-i-aa.
The Drummer, the Guru, has announced the Lord's meditation, through the Word of the Shabad.
fefa dé nme feaar ATaSt I (142-17, ns, He 1) ik ho-ay asvaar iknaa saakh-tee. Some have mounted their horses in response, and others are saddling up.
feast aa sta fear sTuSt NAO (142-17, Hs, He 1) iknee baDhay bhaar iknaa taakh-tee. ||10|| Some have tied up their bridles, and others have already ridden off. ||10||
ABA Hs % Il (142-17) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Ww uat at afent gdt A uals Sts Il (142-18, Hs, He 1) jaa pakaa taa kati-aa rahee so palar vaarh. When the crop is ripe, then it is cut down; only the stalks are left standing.
He atarat fafaor ae ofent so StS Il (142-18, ws, He 1
san keesaaraa chithi-aa kan la-i-aa tan jhaarh.
The corn on the cob is put into the thresher, and the kernels are separated from the cobs.
efe uz vol afs & uime ore afoe I (142-18, 1, He 1) du-ay purh chakee jorh kai peesan aa-ay bahith. Placing the kernels between the two mill-stones, people sit and grind the corn.
A ufs ad A Gad aoa ning FS NAN (142-19, 15, He 1)
jo dar rahay so ubray naanak ajab dith. ||1]|
Those kernels which stick to the central axle are spared-Nanak has seen this wonderful vision! ||1]|
He 4% Il (142-19)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
eu fa for afeur afe afe aor ute Il (142-19, Hs, He 1)
vaykh je mithaa kati-aa kat kut baDhaa paa-ay.
Look, and see how the sugar-cane is cut down. After cutting away its branches, its feet are bound together into bundles,
ust 98s der niete of a efe A He ATS Il (143-1, +s, He 1)
khundhaa andar rakh kai dayn so mal sajaa-ay. and then, it is placed between the wooden rollers and crushed.
dH AA cefa ure su S fete i (143-1, 15, v2 1)
ras kas tatar paa-ee-ai tapai tai villaa-ay.
What punishment is inflicted upon it! Its juice is extracted and placed in the cauldron; as it is heated, it groans and cries out.
St A ca AHS fed wif ATE I (143-2, ws, He 1) bhee so fog samaalee-ai dichai ag jaalaa-ay. And then, the crushed cane is collected and burnt in the fire below.
Sod fs usdha Sug Gar ofS I (143-2, ws, we naanak mithai patree-ai vaykhhu lokaa aa-ay. ||2|| Nanak: come, people, and see how the sweet sugar-cane is treated! ||2| |
Uugat Il (143-3) pavrhee. Pauree:
feaa uve 6 fats nA wafer Il (143-3, HS, He 1) iknaa maran na chit aas ghanayri-aa. Some do not think of death; they entertain great hopes.
fa xfs Auf fos far o afer i 143-3, 5, He 1) mar mar jameh nit kisai na kayri-aa. They die, and are re-born, and die, over and over again. They are of no use at all!
ntuas His fats aafs safer i 43-4, ws, He 1) aapnarhai man chit kahan changayri-aa. In their conscious minds, they call themselves good.
Anon fos fos HoHe dfaor i 143-4, Hs, He 1)
jamraajai nit nit manmukh hayri-aa.
The King of the Angels of Death hunts down those self-willed manmukhs, over and over again.
HOHY BE TSH for o AfEnr it 143-4, ws, we 1)
manmukh loon haaraam ki-aa na jaani-aa.
The manmukhs are false to their own selves; they feel no gratitude for what they have been given.
WO Adis ABH YAH S Stasi Il (143-5, wes, He 1)
baDhay karan salaam khasam na bhaani-aa.
Those who merely perform rituals of worship are not pleasing to their Lord and Master.
Ae fxd yf on wfos arent il 143-5, ws, v2 sach milai mukh naam saahib bhaavsee. Those who attain the True Lord and chant His Name are pleasing to the Lord.
AAS Sufs AON feo ursrt AAU 143-5, Hs, He 1
karsan takhat salaam likhi-aa paavsee. ||11]|
They worship the Lord and bow at His Throne. They fulfill their pre-ordained destiny. []11]|
H8 Y AGE Il (143-6) mehlaa 1 salok. First Mehl, Shalok:
Het 37g fora as Utt foowt mraz I (143-6, HS, He 1) machhee taaroo ki-aa karay pankhee ki-aa aakaas. What can deep water do to a fish? What can the vast sky do to a bird?
ugg UTE fant AT YAS fami we SA Il (143-6, HTS, He 1) pathar paalaa ki-aa karay khusray ki-aa ghar vaas. What can cold do to a stone? What is married life to a eunuch?
as dee wea st A ast oS I 0143-7, ws, He 1) kutay chandan laa-ee-ai bhee so kutee Dhaat. You may apply sandalwood oil to a dog, but he will still be a dog.
aor A ANsehy usbafs fAAYAS ure IN (143-7, ws, He 1)
bolaa jay samjaa-ee-ai parhee-ah simrit paath.
You may try to teach a deaf person by reading the Simritees to him, but how will he learn?
nit softs sd He sefo USA Il 143-8, Hs, He 1) anDhaa chaanan rakhee-ai deevay baleh pachaas. You may place a light before a blind man and burn fifty lamps, but how will he see?
ue Afeo unt ofs ofs we wr II (143-8, 15, He 1) cha-unay su-inaa paa-ee-ai chun chun khaavai ghaas. You may place gold before a herd of cattle, but they will pick out the grass to eat.
SI Hofs usha ed o df QUA Il (143-9, 15, He 1) lohaa maaran paa-ee-ai dhahai na ho-ay kapaas. You may add flux to iron and melt it, but it will not become soft like cotton.
area Hoe Sfo Te Fs Aer FESTA AU 143-9, ws, we naanak moorakh ayhi gun bolay sadaa vinaas. ||1]| O Nanak, this is the nature of a fool-everything he speaks is useless and wasted. ||1]|
He 4% Il (143-10)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AI ATS SS ATS Il (143-10, ws, He 1) kaihaa kanchan tutai saar. When pieces of bronze or gold or iron break,
Walot de UTES BITS Il (143-10, 175, 2 1) agnee gandh paa-ay lohaar. the metal-smith welds them together again in the fire, and the bond is established.
dat ASt SS FST Il (143-10, ws, Hs goree saytee tutai bhataar. If a husband leaves his wife,
ust die ue AAs i (143-10, HS, He 1) putee™ gandh pavai sansaar. their children may bring them back together in the world, and the bond is established.
om Hat fes ate ute i 43-11, ws, He 1) raajaa mangai ditai gandh paa-ay. When the king makes a demand, and it is met, the bond is established.
sftimr ate ue AT ate Ih 143-11, +5, He 1) bhukhi-aa gandh pavai jaa khaa-ay. When the hungry man eats, he is satisfied, and the bond is established.
ae ae Sebo Hts SH ll (143-11, ws, He 1) kaalaa gandh nadee-aa meeh jhol. In the famine, the rain fills the streams to overflowing, and the bond is established.
Hes UdtSt HHS FH Ml (143-11, ws, He 1) gandh pareetee mithay bol. There is a bond between love and words of sweetness.
Het ae 88 AG AE il (143-12, ws, we 1) baydaa gandh bolay sach ko-ay. When one speaks the Truth, a bond is established with the Holy Scriptures.
Hfeor ae Sat AS SE i 143-12, ws, He mu-i-aa gandh naykee sat ho-ay. Through goodness and truth, the dead establish a bond with the living.
BZ dife ZIs AAS Il (143-12, ws, He 1) ayt gandh vartai sansaar. Such are the bonds which prevail in the world.
Hae ae us HfT HT I (143-12, ws, we 1) moorakh gandh pavai muhi maar. The fool establishes his bonds only when he is slapped in the face.
Soa mires ST ses il (143-13, ws, v2 1) naanak aakhai ayhu beechaar. Nanak says this after deep reflection:
frest ate ue vaats QI (143-13, 4s, He 1) siftee gandh pavai darbaar. ||2]| through the Lord's Praise, we establish a bond with His Court. ||2]|
u@at Il (143-13)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
nm aevafs AA a omy ad HoT I (143-13, ws, He 1)
aapay kudrat saaj kai aapay karay beechaar. He Himself created and adorned the Universe, and He Himself contemplates it.
fefa a2 fefa ud nmi ususars Il (143-14, Hs, He 1) ik khotay ik kharay aapay parkhanhaar. Some are counterfeit, and some are genuine. He Himself is the Appraiser.
ud une uTeinifa dS Achafs aoe ahs Il (143-14, 5, He 1) kharay khajaanai paa-ee-ah khotay satee-ah baahar vaar. The genuine are placed in His Treasury, while the counterfeit are thrown away.
ue Adt esas Acmifs far viet aafs UAT Il (143-15, 1s, He 1) khotay sachee dargeh sutee-ah kis aagai karahi pukaar. The counterfeit are thrown out of the True Court-unto whom should they complain?
Afsas fue afa uefo Sa aget ATT Il (143-15, Hs, He 1) satgur pichhai bhaj paveh ayhaa karnee saar. They should worship and follow the True Guru-this is the lifestyle of excellence.
Afsag dfeng ud ad Aafe ASIST ST I (143-16, 175, v2 1)
satgur khoti-ahu kharay karay sabad savaaranhaar.
The True Guru converts the counterfeit into genuine; through the Word of the Shabad, He embellishes and exalts us.
Aet vac Holuifs aa a Un fimrfa i (143-16, ws, ue 1)
sachee dargeh mannee-an gur kai paraym pi-aar.
Those who have enshrined love and affection for the Guru, are honored in the True Court.
des fae ot a fomr ad A orf gan aasfe IN (143-17, WS, He 1)
ganat tinaa dee ko ki-aa karay jo aap bakhsay kartaar. ||12]|
Who can estimate the value of those who have been forgiven by the Creator Lord Himself? ||12||
ABA Hs 4% Il (143-18)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
oH Aad fat eater Ute HAfEar afer I 143-18, wes, He 1)
ham jayr jimee dunee-aa peeraa masaa-ikaa raa-i-aa.
All the spiritual teachers, their disciples and the rulers of the world shall be buried under the ground.
A sefe aera visa were il (143-18, +s, He 1) may ravad baadisaahaa afjoo khudaa-ay. The emperors shall also pass away; God alone is Eternal.
Sa Zot Sa Sat WAU (143-19, ws, we 1) ayk toohee ayk tuhee. ||1]| You alone, Lord, You alone. ||1]|
He 4% Il (143-19) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
& Uz Wor oT Il o fra Aaa Ua Il (143-19, ws, He 1)
na dayv daanvaa naraa. na siDh saaDhikaa Dharaa.
Neither the angels, nor the demons, nor human beings, nor the Siddhas, nor the seekers shall remain on the earth.
mats &a feats Xt il 143-19, ws, He 1) asat ayk digar ku-ee. Who else is there?
Ust 48s
Sa set SH JST WM (144-1, wy, ve Y ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||2|| You alone, Lord, You alone. ||2]|
He % Il (144-1) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
6 ae fede wren ilo Aus As fet i (144-1, Ws, ne 1
na daaday dihand aadmee. na sapat jayr jimee.
Neither the just, nor the generous, nor any humans at all, nor the seven realms beneath the earth, shall remain.
mats Sa feats Tet i 144-2, ws, He 1) asat ayk digar ku-ee. The One Lord alone exists. Who else is there?
Sa set SA Jet MSM (144-2, ws, ve ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||3]| You alone, Lord, You alone. |[3]|
He % Il (144-2)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
3 He AMA Hse Ilo Aus cy od AS Il nis US fag o TST I (144-2, ws, He 1)
na soor sas mandlo. na sapat deep nah jalo. ann pa-un thir na ku-ee.
Neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the planets, nor the seven continents, nor the oceans, nor food, nor the wind-nothing is permanent.
Sa set Sa Tet NSM 144-3, ws, we Y ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||4]| You alone, Lord, You alone. ||4]|
He % Il (144-3) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
® fone GAS MT AA Il (144-3, ns, He 1) na rijak dasat aa kasay. Our sustenance is not in the hands of any person.
JH FT SA MTA ZA Il (144-3, Hs, He 1) hamaa raa ayk aas vasay. The hopes of all rest in the One Lord.
mAs &a fears Tet Il 044-4, ws, vs 1) asat ayk digar ku-ee. The One Lord alone exists-who else is there?
Sa set Sa Tet WU 144-4, ws, He 1) ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||5|| You alone, Lord, You alone. ||5]|
He % Il (144-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Udee & faras AT I (144-4, ns, He 1) paranday na giraah jar. The birds have no money in their pockets.
adds nia MITA A Il (144-5, HS, He 1) darkhat aab aas kar. They place their hopes on trees and water.
fede wet I 144-5, Ws, He 1 dihand su-ee. He alone is the Giver.
Sa set Sa Jet MEM (144-5, ws, He v ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||6]| You alone, Lord, You alone. ||6]|
He % Il (144-5) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Sod forte fesfimor APE I 144-5, WS, He 1) naanak lilaar likhi-aa so-ay. O Nanak, that destiny which is pre-ordained and written on one's forehead
Hfe & Ara ASE Il (144-6, 3, we 1) mayt na saakai ko-ay. -no one can erase it.
oer ud fad wet Il (144-6, Hs, He 1) kalaa Dharai hirai su-ee. The Lord infuses strength, and He takes it away again.
Sa set Sa TST WDM (144-6, ws, ve 1) ayk tu-ee ayk tu-ee. ||7|| You alone, O Lord, You alone. ||7]|
ust Il (144-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ae 3a" Jan TaHfe Afar Il 144-6, ws, He 1) sachaa tayraa hukam gurmukh jaani-aa. True is the Hukam of Your Command. To the Gurmukh, it is known.
TsHst wry dete A user i 144-7, ws, Hs 1
gurmatee aap gavaa-ay sach pachhaani-aa.
Through the Guru's Teachings, selfishness and conceit are eradicated, and the Truth is realized.
Ag 3a vag Age StASnt Il (144-7, ws, He 1) sach tayraa darbaar sabad neesaani-aa. True is Your Court. It is proclaimed and revealed through the Word of the Shabad.
Ae Age stata Afs ANfEMt I (144-8, ws, He 1) sachaa sabad veechaar sach samaani-aa. Meditating deeply on the True Word of the Shabad, I have merged into the Truth.
HoHY Ae afsnrg sath sorter it 144-8, ws, He 1) manmukh sadaa koorhi-aar bharam bhoolaani-aa. The self-willed manmukhs are always false; they are deluded by doubt.
fener niefs SH ATE o When Il (144-8, Hs, He 1) vistaa andar vaas saad na jaani-aa. They dwell in manure, and they do not know the taste of the Name.
fee ore oy ufe mres wWheur I (144-9, ws, He 1) vin naavai dukh paa-ay aavan jaani-aa. Without the Name, they suffer the agonies of coming and going.
Sto uray nif fafe det wat uetfent ISI (144-9, Hs, He 1)
naanak paarakh aap jin khotaa kharaa pachhaani-aa. ||13]|
O Nanak, the Lord Himself is the Appraiser, who distinguishes the counterfeit from the genuine. ||13]]|
ABA Hs 4% Il (144-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Alo" SH Saar ho SST USS WT I (144-10, ws, yz 1) seehaa baajaa chargaa kuhee-aa aynaa khavaalay ghaah. Tigers, hawks, falcons and eagles-the Lord could make them eat grass.
wry utes far HA ues Shy VHS IT Il (144-10, ws, He 1)
ghaahu khaan tinaa maas khavaalay ayhi chalaa-ay raah.
And those animals which eat grass-He could make them eat meat. He could make them follow this way of life.
oem fete fea sus aet AT MAGI i (144-11, ws, Hz 1) nadee-aa vich tibay daykhaalay thalee karay asgaah. He could raise dry land from the rivers, and turn the deserts into bottomless oceans.
ata afy ef ufsadt SAAT Ad AMT I (144-11, ws, v2 1) keerhaa thaap day-ay paatisaahee laskar karay su-aah. He could appoint a worm as king, and reduce an army to ashes.
as Aba dtefs & wo ates ST fea wT Ih 144-12, os, ve 1) jaytay jee-a jeeveh lai saahaa jeevaalay taa ke asaah.
All beings and creatures live by breathing, but He could keep us alive, even without the breath.
sod fa faG Ad sve f8 FSC Sfe farsa NA 144-12, 4s, He naanak ji-o ji-o sachay bhaavai ti-o ti-o day-ay giraah. ||1]| O Nanak, as it pleases the True Lord, He gives us sustenance. ||1] |
He % Il (144-13)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fefa umAaTdt fefa fee ufo i 144-13, os, ws 1) ik maashaaree ik tarin khaahi. Some eat meat, while others eat grass.
feast este nifgs urfa i 144-13, ws, Hs 1) iknaa chhateeh amrit paahi. Some have all the thirty-six varieties of delicacies,
fefa fuctor ufo fsbo urfa i (144-14, Hes, He 1) ik mitee-aa meh mitee-aa khaahi. while others live in the dirt and eat mud.
fefa u@e ANTS UBS ANTS I (144-14, Hs, He 1 ik pa-un Sumaaree pa-un sumaar. Some control the breath, and regulate their breathing.
fefea fodardt oH mimorfa I (144-14, ws, He 1) ik nirankaaree naam aaDhaar. Some live by the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord.
Ate ast ue & APS I 144-15, ws, 4 1) jeevai daataa marai na ko-ay. The Great Giver lives; no one dies.
Soa HO As odt nfs ALE MQM (144-15, ws, He 1) naanak muthay jaahi naahee man so-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, those who do not enshrine the Lord within their minds are deluded. ||2||
ust Il (144-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Us Ts at ars Tat SHSM I (144-16, ws, He 1) pooray gur kee kaar karam kamaa-ee-ai. By the karma of good actions, some come to serve the Perfect Guru.
TaHst wimg aes ony fore ih 144-16, ws, Hs
gurmatee aap gavaa-ay naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai.
Through the Guru's Teachings, some eliminate selfishness and conceit, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Set aS Slat ASH TSE Il (144-16, wes, Hs 1) doojee kaarai lag janam gavaa-ee-ai. Undertaking any other task, they waste their lives in vain.
fee ae AS feR US ure Ih 144-17, ws, we 1) vin naavai sabh vis paijhai khaa-ee-ai. Without the Name, all that they wear and eat is poison.
Ae Age Aerts Afs ANTE I (144-17, Hs, He 1)
sachaa sabad saalaahi sach samaa-ee-ai. Praising the True Word of the Shabad, they merge with the True Lord.
fee Afsag AS oct fy foe feta fefs mrent i 144-17, ws, ne 1)
vin satgur sayvay naahee sukh nivaas fir fir aa-ee-ai.
Without serving the True Guru, they do not obtain the home of peace; they are consigned to reincarnation, over and over again.
ohn eet TH AZ AHEM Il (144-18, ws, He 1) dunee-aa khotee raas koorh kamaa-ee-ai. Investing counterfeit capital, they earn only falsehood in the world.
Soa AY ua Ate ufs fae ASM NASI (144-18, Hs, He 1 naanak sach kharaa saalaahi pat si-o jaa-ee-ai. ||14|| O Nanak, singing the Praises of the Pure, True Lord, they depart with honor. ||14]|
ABA Hs % Il (144-19) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
30 ve wT ely refs 30 oS Ae ore|fa Il (144-19, 115, He 1) tuDh bhaavai taa vaaveh gaavahi tuDh bhaavai jal naaveh. When it pleases You, we play music and sing; when it pleases You, we bathe in water.
uat gu Ww 3y Sela oT aote fags fet ore ervefe Il (145-1, +3, He 1)
jaa tuDh bhaaveh taa karahi bibhootaa sinyee naad vajaavah. When it pleases You, we smear our bodies with ashes, and blow the horn and the conch shell.
W 3g ge 3 ust ase Ho AY agefa Il (145-1, ws, He 1) jaa tuDh bhaavai taa parheh kataybaa mulaa saykh kahaaveh.
When it pleases You, we read the Islamic Scriptures, and are acclaimed as Mullahs and Shaykhs.
W 30 ge 3 dels TH GA AA BIS ANe|fa Il (145-2, 1s, He 1) jaa tuDh bhaavai taa hoveh raajay ras kas bahut kamaaveh. When it pleases You, we become kings, and enjoy all sorts of tastes and pleasures.
W 30 ge 3a zarefs fra Hot afe wrefs I (145-2, 15, He 1) jaa tuDh bhaavai tayg vagaaveh sir mundee kat jaaveh. When it pleases You, we wield the sword, and cut off the heads of our enemies.
Ww 30 ae ats fenste Afs ae wis refs Il 145-3, 1s, He
jaa tuDh bhaavai jaahi disantar sun galaa ghar aavahi.
When it pleases You, we go out to foreign lands; hearing news of home, we come back again.
W 3g se of sorets 3g se F eT Il (145-3, os, Hs 1)
jaa tuDh bhaavai naa-ay rachaaveh tuDh bhaanay too” bhaaveh.
When it pleases You, we are attuned to the Name, and when it pleases You, we become pleasing to You.
seg SA aT Isat She ATS AZ AHS UI (145-4, ws, 3 1) naanak ayk kahai baynantee hor saglay koorh kamaaveh. ||1]| Nanak utters this one prayer; everything else is just the practice of falsehood. ||1]|
He 4% Il (145-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Wg es Als Sfontetor sa Far Tet 145-4, ors, Hs 1)
jaa too’ vadaa sabh vadi-aa‘-ee-aa changai changa ho-ee.
You are so Great-all Greatness flows from You. You are So Good-Goodness radiates from You.
W SAS SAS a AS gat aS B AST Il (145-5, ws, we 1) jaa too’ sachaa taa sabh ko sachaa koorhaa ko-ay na ko-ee. You are True-all that flows from You is True. Nothing at all is false.
WTS TUS ABS VSS ASS HIST WS Il (145-5, 15, vs 1) aakhan vaykhan bolan chalan jeevan marnaa Dhaat. Talking, seeing, speaking, walking, living and dying-all these are transitory.
Jan AH Jan fefs ge area AST yrfy MQM (145-6, ws, He 1
hukam saaj hukmai vich rakhai naanak sachaa aap. ||2||
By the Hukam of His Command, He creates, and in His Command, He keeps us. O Nanak, He Himself is True. ||2||
ugat Il (145-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsag Afe fata SoH VaTeMM Il (145-6, ws, He 1) satgur sayv nisang bharam chukhaa-ee-ai. Serve the True Guru fearlessly, and your doubt shall be dispelled.
Afsag wre arg Hata HSM I (145-7, Hs, He 1) satgur aakhai kaar so kaar kamaa-ee-ai. Do that work which the True Guru asks you to do.
Afsag df efemrs 3 an foment i 0145-7, ws, v2 satgur ho-ay da-i-aal ta naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. When the True Guru becomes merciful, we meditate on the Naam.
we gals A ATS ToHfe ust I (145-8, Hs, He 1) laahaa bhagat so saar gurmukh paa-ee-ai. The profit of devotional worship is excellent. It is obtained by the Gurmukh.
Houta az TIT AZ AHEM I (145-8, ors, 4s 1)
manmukh koorh gubaar koorh kamaa-ee-di.
The self-willed manmukhs are trapped in the darkness of falsehood; they practice nothing but falsehood.
Ae & fe wie Ag Vere I (145-8, WS, He 1) sachay dai dar jaa-ay sach chavaa™-ee-ai. Go to the Gate of Truth, and speak the Truth.
Ae viefs Hofes Afs gore i (145-9, 1s, He 1) sachai andar mahal sach bulaa-ee-ai. The True Lord calls the true ones to the Mansion of His Presence.
Sod AY Het Afenitg Afs AHTEDA NAWII (145-9, HS, He 1) naanak sach sadaa sachiaar sach samaa-ee-ai. ||15]| O Nanak, the true ones are forever true; they are absorbed in the True Lord. ||15||
ABA Hs 4% Il (145-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
afs ast oH ATS usH Ue afs Ssfanr Il (145-10, ws, He 1)
kal kaatee raajay kaasaa-ee Dharam pankh kar udri-aa.
The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is the knife, and the kings are butchers; righteousness has sprouted wings and flown away.
IT MASA Ay Gent SA art aT shaw Il (145-10, ws, oe 1) koorh amaavas sach chandarmaa deesai naahee kah charhi-aa. In this dark night of falsehood, the moon of Truth is not visible anywhere.
IG af fectat det i was ag B et Wt 145-11, 25, ne
ha-o bhaal vikunnee ho-ee. aaDhaarai raahu na ko-ee.
I have searched in vain, and I am so confused; in this darkness, I cannot find the path.
fefs s@H afe wy get il (45-11, ws, we vich ha-umai kar dukh ro-ee. In egotism, they cry out in pain.
ag aad fats fafa afs set wan 145-12, ws, us kaho naanak kin biDh gat ho-ee. ||1]| Says Nanak, how will they be saved? ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (145-12) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
afte atefs usae Woe AAS Il (145-12, ws, He 3)
kal keerat pargat chaanan sansaar.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise has appeared as a Light in the world.
aenty vet Cad urfe it 145-13, ws, He 3) gurmukh ko-ee utrai paar. How rare are those few Gurmukhs who swim across to the other side!
fan 6 oefe ad fSA SS Il 145-13, 25, He 3) jis no nadar karay tis dayvai. The Lord bestows His Glance of Grace;
Soa TSH ISS A BS MMi (145-13, ws, ne 3) naanak gurmukh ratan so layvai. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh receives the jewel. ||2| |
u@at Il 145-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
saat 3 AAS As ae B yrfeor 145-14, ws, He 3)
bhagtaa tai saisaaree-aa jorh kaday na aa-i-aa.
Between the Lord's devotees and the people of the world, there can never be any true alliance.
ass uify mse 3 3 3S fan a gerfenr | 145-14, ws, He 3) kartaa aap abhul hai na bhulai kisai daa bhulaa-i-aa. The Creator Himself is infallible. He cannot be fooled; no one can fool Him.
sas omy Afenre fast Ae AS afeMr | 145-14, Hs, He 3) bhagat aapay mayli-an jinee sacho sach kamaa-i-aa. He blends His devotees with Himself; they practice Truth, and only Truth.
AAS orf uorfeng frat az af af fg went i 145-15, os, us 3)
Saisaaree aap khu-aa-i-an jinee koorh bol bol bikh khaa-i-aa.
The Lord Himself leads the people of the world astray; they tell lies, and by telling lies, they eat poison.
UGE AT B ATSat aH ada fem earfemr It 145-16, ws, He 3)
chalan saar na jaannee kaam karoDh vis vaDhaa-i-aa.
They do not recognize the ultimate reality, that we all must go; they continue to cultivate the poisons of sexual desire and anger.
sas aes ds Tact frat visfes an famrfeor it 145-16, ws, He 3) bhagat karan har chaakree jinee an-din naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. The devotees serve the Lord; night and day, they meditate on the Naam.
anfs on dfs a frat fesg wimg aetfemr Ih (145-17, 1s, He 3)
daasan daas ho-ay kai jinee vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa.
Becoming the slaves of the Lord's slaves, they eradicate selfishness and conceit from within.
Gat uAH a vfs HY CAS Ad Aafe Hofer NEN (145-17, Hs, He 3)
onaa khasmai kai dar mukh ujlay sachai sabad suhaa-i-aa. ||16]|
In the Court of their Lord and Master, their faces are radiant; they are embellished and exalted with the True Word of the Shabad. ||16]|
ABA Hs % Il (145-18)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Hardt Ares fast fowrfenr fee vfs it 045-18, ws, He 1)
sabaahee saalaah jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa ik man. Those who praise the Lord in the early hours of the morning and meditate on Him single-mindedly,
Aet us AT us Cufe wis HE I (145-19, os, Hs 1) Say-ee pooray saah vakh-tai upar larh mu-ay. are the perfect kings; at the right time, they die fighting.
eH ATs TI Ho ahr Ht fsbo ih (145-19, ws, He 1) doojai bahutay raah man kee-aa matee khindee-aa. In the second watch, the focus of the mind is scattered in all sorts of ways.
ads ue wns as ute & feats it (145-19, 1, nH 1)
bahut pa-ay asgaah gotay khaahi na niklahi.
So many fall into the bottomless pit; they are dragged under, and they cannot get out again.
ust ae ath udt fara gu four ef sation i 46-1, 215, ne
teejai muhee giraah bhukh tikhaa du-ay bha-ukee-aa. In the third watch, both hunger and thirst bark for attention, and food is put into the mouth.
ur df= Anis St ure fA SST I 146-1, ws, He khaaDhaa ho-ay su-aah bhee khaanay si-o dostee. That which is eaten becomes dust, but they are still attached to eating.
Bea ret Sw ort vife ues afm i (146-2, ws, Hs 1) cha-uthai aa-ee oo%gh akhee meet pavaar ga-i-aa. In the fourth watch, they become drowsy. They close their eyes and begin to dream.
St @fs sfeGq ee A efenr aft fs sat i 146-2, os, ne 1)
bhee uth rachi-on vaad sai vareh-aa kee pirh baDhee.
Rising up again, they engage in conflicts; they set the stage as if they will live for 100 years.
AS 2a zus Afs A mist 3C SE I 146-3, 215, He 1) sabhay vaylaa vakhat sabh jay athee bha-o ho-ay. If at all times, at each and every moment, they live in the fear of God
Soa Atos ufs SA AST ares TE NU (146-3, ws, He 1) naanak saahib man vasai sachaa naavan ho-ay. ||1]| -O Nanak, the Lord dwells within their minds, and their cleansing bath is true. ||1]|
He 2 Il (146-3)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Ret ud Ara frst yst uf it 146-4, ws, He 2) Say-ee pooray saah jinee pooraa paa-i-aa. They are the perfect kings, who have found the Perfect Lord.
wot fused dale fees Sar il (146-4, ws, He 2)
athee vayparvaah rahan iktai rang.
Twenty-four hours a day, they remain unconcerned, imbued with the Love of the One Lord.
zante gfu mars fea uretorfa i (46-4, ws, 42 2)
darsan roop athaah virlay paa-ee-ah.
Only a few obtain the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the Unimaginably Beauteous Lord.
AHH UT UT AT UT A aT IB Il (146-5, ws, we 2)
karam poorai pooraa guroo pooraa jaa kaa bol.
Through the perfect karma of good deeds, one meets the Perfect Guru, whose speech is perfect.
TS YT A AT We St 3B ll (146-5, wy, we 2) naanak pooraa jay karay ghatai naahee tol. ||2|| O Nanak, when the Guru makes one perfect, one's weight does not decrease. ||2| |
uGat Il (146-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WS 3 for ofa HAG Heeb I (146-5, ws, v3 2) jaa too’ taa ki-aa hor mai sach sunaa-ee-ai. When You are with me, what more could I want? I speak only the Truth.
Hot Ud dfs Hoe B UTS Il (146-6, 175, 2 2) muthee DhanDhai chor mahal na paa-ee-ai.
Plundered by the thieves of worldly affairs, she does not obtain the Mansion of His Presence.
26 fefs adfa AS Tee Il (146-6, 5, He 2) aynai chit kathor sayv gavaa-ee-ai. Being so stone-hearted, she has lost her chance to serve the Lord.
fas wfe AY o ufe A Sfe ware II (146-7, H5, He 2) jit ghat sach na paa-ay so bhann gharhaa-ee-ai. That heart, in which the True Lord is not found, should be torn down and re-built.
fag afs us efe sf Jaret I (146-7, ws, v3 2) ki-o kar poorai vat tol tulaa-ee-ai. How can she be weighed accurately, upon the scale of perfection?
afe 3 wma wie IGH ATS II (146-7, 25, He 2)
ko-ay na aakhai ghat ha-umai jaa-ee-ai.
No one will say that her weight has been shorted, if she rids herself of egotism. wens ud uate efe stare i 46-8, 1s, He 2)
la-ee-an kharay parakh dar beenaa-ee-ai. The genuine are assayed, and accepted in the Court of the All-knowing Lord.
Age feas ofe us afe urehH ADI (146-8, os, Hs 2)
Sa-udaa ikat hat poorai gur paa-ee-ai. ||17]|
The genuine merchandise is found only in one shop-it is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||17]|
HBA H8 2 Il (146-9)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
mot Uda MS US set UT AST Il (146-9, ws, ne 2)
athee pahree ath khand naavaa khand sareer.
Twenty-four hours a day, destroy the eight things, and in the ninth place, conquer the body.
fan fefs 5@ fafa on Sa Safe Tat adi Il (146-9, 5, He 2)
tis vich na-o niDh naam ayk bhaaleh gunee gaheer.
Within the body are the nine treasures of the Name of the Lord-seek the depths of these virtues.
aHest Aefoor soa afs ag ute i (146-10, ws, He 2)
karamvantee salaahi-aa naanak kar gur peer. Those blessed with the karma of good actions praise the Lord. O Nanak, they make the Guru their spiritual teacher.
3a udfs Aa a ASfsuor Cun WE Il (146-10, ws, He 2)
cha-uthai pahar sabaah kai surti-aa upjai chaa-o.
In the fourth watch of the early morning hours, a longing arises in their higher consciousness.
fSor edinret fa SHst ufo ufe FET OTS I 146-11, 25, He 2) tinaa daree-aavaa si-o dostee man mukh sachaa naa-o. They are attuned to the river of life; the True Name is in their minds and on their lips.
6a nifys Ssh cat af ure i 46-11, vs, ne 2) othai amrit vandee-ai karmee ho-ay pasaa-o. The Ambrosial Nectar is distributed, and those with good karma receive this gift.
ave afenr ary Zot vs Vas I (146-11, 175, ne 2) kanchan kaa-i-aa kasee-ai vannee charhai charhaa-o. Their bodies become golden, and take on the color of spirituality.
A de oefa Aa at safe & ust SE I (146-12, os, v2 2) jay hovai nadar saraaf kee bahurh na paa-ee taa-o. If the Jeweller casts His Glance of Grace, they are not placed in the fire again.
Rat usdt AS ser sdb ufsor uf il (146-12, os, v2 2)
satee pahree sat bhalaa bahee-ai parhi-aa paas.
Throughout the other seven watches of the day, it is good to speak the Truth, and sit with the spiritually wise.
Ga uy ug sted as we TH Il (146-13, os, v8 2) othai paap punn beechaaree-ai koorhai ghatai raas. There, vice and virtue are distinguished, and the capital of falsehood is decreased.
6a de Adhafo ud atefo Arai Il 146-13, ws, He 2) othai khotay satee-ah kharay keecheh saabaas. There, the counterfeit are cast aside, and the genuine are cheered.
HOHE SUES STOaT SU AY UAH UTA IAM (146-14, HS, He 2)
bolan faadal naankaa dukh sukh khasmai paas. ||1]|
Speech is vain and useless. O Nanak, pain and pleasure are in the power of our Lord and Master. ||1]||
H8 2 Il (146-14) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
ue ag urat fust HrSt Tats HIS Il (146-14, ws, He 2) pa-un guroo paanee pitaa maataa Dharat mahat. Air is the Guru, Water is the Father, and Earth is the Great Mother of all.
feon ots ofe wet afeor 8S Aas Aas Il (146-15, ws, He 2) dinas raat du-ay daa-ee daa-i-aa khaylai sagal jagat. Day and night are the two nurses, in whose lap all the world is at play.
dtamreétur afonrebort ard TSH Tefs I (146-15, ws, Hs 2)
chang-aa-ee-aa buri-aa-ee-aa vaachay Dharam hadoor.
Good deeds and bad deeds-the record is read out in the Presence of the Lord of Dharma.
SH wit nruNt & SSF HX fs Il 146-16, ws, we 2)
karmee aapo aapnee kay nayrhai kay door.
According to their own actions, some are drawn closer, and some are driven farther away.
frat om fomrfenr we HAAS urfs i 146-16, Hs, 42 2)
jinee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa ga-ay maskat ghaal.
Those who have meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and departed after having worked by the sweat of their brow
Soa SHY Cus da ast set of MQM (146-17, ws, He 2)
naanak tay mukh ujlay hor kaytee chhutee naal. ||2||
-O Nanak, their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, and many others are saved along with them! ||2]|
uGat Il (146-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ret sno 3 Afsafe efter it (146-17, +3, He 2)
sachaa bhojan bhaa-o satgur dasi-aa. The True Food is the Love of the Lord; the True Guru has spoken.
He ot usmrfe vfs feather i (146-18, ws, v2 2) sachay hee patee-aa-ay sach vigsi-aa. With this True Food, I am satisfied, and with the Truth, I am delighted.
Ae afe fasife for wie eft il (146-18, ws, nH 2)
sachai kot giraa’-ay nij ghar vasi-aa.
True are the cities and the villages, where one abides in the True Home of the self. Afsafe 36 o@ Ufh gaftmr I (146-18, Hs, Hs 2)
satgur tuthai naa-o paraym rehsi-aa.
When the True Guru is pleased, one receives the Lord's Name, and blossoms forth in His Love.
Ae & ttrfe afs o web Il (146-19, os, 2 2) sachai dai deebaan koorh na jaa-ee-di. No one enters the Court of the True Lord through falsehood.
BS 3S Sate A HIG ye I (146-19, os, 8 2) jhootho jhooth vakhaan so mahal khu-aa-ee-ai. By uttering falsehood and only falsehood, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is lost.
Yat 98D He Hafe sates stax & ure I (147-1, 2173, ws 2)
sachai sabad neesaan thaak na paa-ee-ai. No one blocks the way of those who are blessed with the Banner of the True Word of the Shabad.
Ae Afe fs arts nofs gore 9c (147-1, WS, He 2)
sach sun bujh vakhaan mahal bulaa-ee-ai. ||18] |
Hearing, understanding and speaking Truth, one is called to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||18]|
HB Hs 9 Il 147-1)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufsa nafs foe we aa SAG ATT ASH I (147-2, 1175, nz 1) pahiraa agan hivai ghar baaDhaa bhojan saar karaa-ee. If I dressed myself in fire, and built my house of snow, and made iron my food;
Aas va urat ate ute cast ex Brest | (147-2, ws, we 1)
saglay dookh paanee kar peevaa Dhartee haak chalaa-ee. and if I were to drink in all pain like water, and drive the entire earth before me;
ufs sat niag Sot fue da vast i 147-3, ws, He 1) Dhar taaraajee ambar tolee pichhai tank charhaa-ee. and if I were to place the earth upon a scale and balance it with a single copper coin;
Seg ea Wet ant ASA ofa veret i 147-3, ns, ne 1)
ayvad vaDhaa maavaa naahee sabhsai nath chalaa-ee.
and if I were to become so great that I could not be contained, and if I were to control and lead all;
Sat ste Je Ho nivta act fe wrt aavet I (147-3, ws, He 1)
aytaa taan hovai man andar karee bhe aakh karaa-ee.
and if I were to possess so much power within my mind that I could cause others to do my bidding-so what?
Ags Ag Sea Sst SS AT TAT I (147-4, ws, He YD)
jayvad saahib tayvad daatee day day karay rajaa-ee.
As Great as our Lord and Master is, so great are His gifts. He bestows them according to His Will.
Soa Sele ad fan Gufs Afs oth Sfsniret wai 047-4, ws, we 1
naanak nadar karay jis upar sach naam vadi-aa-ee. ||1]|
O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtain the glorious greatness of the True Name. ||1||
He Q Il (147-5)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
nae nift & afro Hale & TA AS Il (147-5, Hs, He 2) aakhan aakh na raji-aa sunan na rajay kann. The mouth is not satisfied by speaking, and the ears are not satisfied by hearing.
mot ef o sro ae aaa fea Zo Il 147-5, ws, ve 2) akhee daykh na rajee-aa gun gaahak ik vann. The eyes are not satisfied by seeing-each organ seeks out one sensory quality.
sfmr suo Gad net su 5 ATE II (147-6, 45, He 2) bhukhi-aa bhukh na utrai galee bhukh na jaa-ay. The hunger of the hungry is not appeased; by mere words, hunger is not relieved.
Soa SU 3 IH AT TS afd Tat AVES ll (147-6, ws, He 2)
naanak bhukhaa taa rajai jaa gun kahi gunee samaa-ay. ||2| |
O Nanak, hunger is relieved only when one utters the Glorious Praises of the Praiseworthy Lord. ||2||
u@at Il 447-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fee AS AS AZ az ane I (147-7, ws, wi: 2) vin sachay sabh koorh koorh kamaa-ee-ai. Without the True One, all are false, and all practice falsehood.
fee AS afsurg afe sere I 147-7, ws, 48 2) vin sachay koorhi-aar bann chalaa-ee-ai. Without the True One, the false ones are bound and gagged and driven off.
fee Ad 36 SS Ss THe I 1147-8, 15, ve 2) vin sachay tan chhaar chhaar ralaa-ee-ai. Without the True One, the body is just ashes, and it mingles again with ashes.
fee Ae AS ay fA US we I 1147-8, Ws, He 2) vin sachay sabh bhukh je paijhai khaa-ee-ai. Without the True Ome, all food and clothes are unsatisfying.
fee AS voag afs 5 ure Il (147-8, os, Hs 2) vin sachay darbaar koorh na paa-ee-di. Without the True One, the false ones do not attain the Lord's Court.
as wate ofa HIS worehat Il (147-9, ws, Hs 2) koorhai laalach lag mahal khu-aa-ee-ai. Attached to false attachments, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is lost.
AS Aa ofa afar mire Aret I 147-9, ns, He 2) sabh jag thagi-o thag aa-ee-ai jaa-ee-ai. The whole world is deceived by deception, coming and going in reincarnation.
36 ufo fener vif Hafe ssret AEN (147-9, ws, He 2)
tan meh tarisnaa ag sabad bujhaa-ee-ai. ||19]||
Within the body is the fire of desire; through the Word of the Shabad, it is quenched. []19]|
HEX H3 Y Il (147-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Soa TT HSY IY UH SB SG fame I (147-10, ws, ve 1)
naanak gur santokh rukh Dharam ful fal gi-aan.
O Nanak, the Guru is the tree of contentment, with flowers of faith, and fruits of spiritual wisdom.
afm ofimr afeor wet ua aft fomrfs i 47-11, ws, He 1)
ras rasi-aa hari-aa sadaa pakai karam Dhi-aan.
Watered with the Lord's Love, it remains forever green; through the karma of good deeds and meditation, it ripens.
ufs & ATE wet Bd Bo a ffs BS NU (147-11, ws, He 1) pat kay saad khaadaa lahai daanaa kai sir daan. ||1]| Honor is obtained by eating this tasty dish; of all gifts, this is the greatest gift. ||1]|
He 4% Il (147-12) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Hes a fasy us UTS SH ASIST BS Il (147-12, ws, He 1) su-inay kaa birakh pat parvaalaa ful javayhar laal. The Guru is the tree of gold, with leaves of coral, and blossoms of jewels and rubies.
faz 2&3 336 sale ufa afrs fore foe faos Il 147-12, 1s, He tit fal ratan lageh mukh bhaakhit hirdai ridai nihaal. The Words from His Mouth are fruits of jewels. Within His Heart, He beholds the Lord.
Sod AGH de Hfy Hasta fofimr JS Se lt 147-13, ws, He 1)
naanak karam hovai mukh mastak likhi-aa hovai laykh.
O Nanak, He is obtained by those, upon whose faces and foreheads such pre-recorded destiny is written.
ufsAfs steve ae at geet uA wet ferry il (147-13, ws, ue
athisath tirath gur kee charnee poojai sadaa visaykh.
The sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage are contained in the constant worship of the feet of the Exalted Guru.
JA 3S Bs ay Us Odor wife I 147-14, ws, He 1) hans hayt lobh kop chaaray nadee-aa ag. Cruelty, material attachment, greed and anger are the four rivers of fire.
uefa ests aoar sdb aot afar Qi 047-14, ws, He
paveh dajheh naankaa taree-ai karmee lag. ||2| |
Falling into them, one is burned, O Nanak! One is saved only by holding tight to good deeds. ||2||
ust Il (147-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Atefeor Hg ute & ues I (147-15, ws, He 1) jeevdi-aa mar maar na pachhotaa-ee-ai. While you are alive, conquer death, and you shall have no regrets in the end.
3o' feg HATE fats ANSE I 147-15, os, Hs 1) jhoothaa ih sansaar kin samjaa-ee-ai. This world is false, but only a few understand this.
Af 3 ud fimrg do ore it 147-15, 5, we sach na Dharay pi-aar DhanDhai Dhaa-ee-ai. People do not enshrine love for the Truth; they chase after worldly affairs instead.
ae gat y are fafs vob i 147-16, ws, He 1) kaal buraa khai kaal sir dunee-aa-ee-ai. The terrible time of death and annihilation hovers over the heads of the world.
gomt ffs Hers HTS STEM Ih 147-16, ws, Hs
hukmee sir jandaar maaray daa-ee-ai.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the Messenger of Death smashes his club over their heads.
nm efe fumirg Hfs SATs i 147-17, ws, He aapay day-ay pi-aar man vasaa-ee-di. The Lord Himself gives His Love, and enshrines it within their minds.
HUSs 3 UAT eeu scot ust I 147-17, ws, He 1) muhat na chasaa vilamm bharee-ai paa-ee-ai. Not a moment or an instant's delay is permitted, when one's measure of life is full.
ae usAet aff vfs AHTEDA NONl (147-17, HS, He 1 gur parsaadee bujh sach samaa-ee-ai. ||20] | By Guru's Grace, one comes to know the True One, and is absorbed into Him. ||20]|
ABA Hs % Il (147-18) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
out sur fer ne asa fou SS il 147-18, ws, w2 1) tumee tumaa vis ak Dhatooraa nim fal. Bitter melon, swallow-wort, thorn-apple and nim fruit
nfs uf eats fsa faa S fats o wiredt Il (147-18, ws, Hs 1)
man mukh vaseh tis jis too’ chit na aavhee.
-these bitter poisons lodge in the minds and mouths of those who do not remember You.
Soa AIH for Jefe AIH sas AU (147-19, ws, He 1)
naanak kahee-ai kis handhan karmaa baahray. ||1||
O Nanak, how shall I tell them this? Without the karma of good deeds, they are only destroying themselves. ||1]|
He 4% Il (147-19) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
nfs ug fess Afa aa SSH aa ate Il (147-19, ws, M8 1) mat pankhayroo kirat saath kab utam kab neech.
The intellect is a bird; on account of its actions, it is sometimes high, and sometimes low.
User ast
ag dele aa nif ate as Sot udtfS I 43-1, 1, v2
kab chandan kab ak daal kab uchee pareet.
Sometimes it is perched on the sandalwood tree, and sometimes it is on the branch of the poisonous swallow-wort. Sometimes, it soars through the heavens.
soa JatH vorehy aise wait SHS iM (148-1, ws, ne 1)
naanak hukam chalaa-ee-ai saahib lagee reet. ||2| |
O Nanak, our Lord and Master leads us on, according to the Hukam of His Command; such is His Way. |[2||
u@at Il (148-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aS dfs sure ats ats ASST I (148-2, ws, He 1) kaytay kaheh vakhaan kahi kahi jaavnaa. Some speak and expound, and while speaking and lecturing, they pass away.
au adfa shmire nis o UTSST I (148-2, 1s, He 1) vayd kaheh vakhi-aan ant na paavnaa. The Vedas speak and expound on the Lord, but they do not know His limits.
ufant ardt Se gfe urear Il (148-3, 5, He 1) parhi-ai naahee bhayd bujhi-ai paavnaa. Not by studying, but through understanding, is the Lord's Mystery revealed.
We Bane & Sf fan Afs AHTSST Il (148-3, WS, He 1)
khat darsan kai bhaykh kisai sach samaavnaa.
There are six pathways in the Shaastras, but how rare are those who merge in the True Lord through them.
He use moy Aafe AIST I (148-3, ws, He 1) sachaa purakh alakh sabad suhaavanaa. The True Lord is Unknowable; through the Word of His Shabad, we are embellished.
Hd a fare esas urSar | (148-4, ws, He 1) mannay naa-o bisankh dargeh paavnaa. One who believes in the Name of the Infinite Lord, attains the Court of the Lord.
WA AS vITSH Set Sar Il (148-4, es, He 1) khaalak ka-o aadays dhaadhee gaavnaa. I humbly bow to the Creator Lord; I am a minstrel singing His Praises.
Sot AT A Sa fs SASS QUI (148-4, ws, He 1) naanak jug jug ayk man vasaavnaa. ||21]| Nanak enshrines the Lord within his mind. He is the One, throughout the ages. ||21] |
HOAX HIG 2 Il (148-5) salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
Hat af wrofoor arat wat ATE i wrueS Tet mys S Ter wm BAS I (148-5, ws, we 2) mantree ho-ay athoohi-aa naagee lagai jaa-ay. aapan hathee aapnai day koochaa aapay laa-ay.
Those who charm scorpions and handle snakes only brand themselves with their own hands.
Jou ufeor ofs wAH at mist J Gar ate It (148-6, ws, He 2)
hukam pa-i-aa Dhur khasam kaa atee hoo Dhakaa khaa-ay.
By the pre-ordained Order of our Lord and Master, they are beaten badly, and struck down.
aany fag Houy ms se fet foorfe il 1148-6, ws, vs 2)
gurmukh si-o manmukh arhai dubai hak ni-aa-ay. If the self-willed manmukhs fight with the Gurmukh, they are condemned by the Lord, the True Judge.
eo fafeor wm umn fe afe feGufe tl (148-7, ws, He 2)
duhaa siri-aa aapay khasam vaykhai kar vi-upaa-ay.
He Himself is the Lord and Master of both worlds. He beholds all and makes the exact determination.
Soa Se Are AS fae fenfs sate ail (148-7, +s, ve 2) naanak ayvai jaanee-ai sabh kichh tiseh rajaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, know this well: everything is in accordance with His Will. ||1]|
HIS 2 Il (148-8)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Soa Ue wy AG St uTsy ATS Il (148-8, Hs, He 2) naanak parkhay aap ka-o taa paarakh jaan. O Nanak, if someone judges himself, only then is he known as a real judge.
dT MY SS FS BST AAS Il (148-8, os, 3 2)
rog daaroo dovai bujhai taa vaid sujaan.
If someone understands both the disease and the medicine, only then is he a wise physician.
we 3 aset HHO WS fHIHTS Il (148-9, HS, He 2)
vaat na kar-ee maamlaa jaanai mihmaan.
Do not involve yourself in idle business on the way; remember that you are only a guest here.
HS ATE To ad TE BE TE Il (148-9, wy, He 2) mool jaan galaa karay haan laa-ay haan. Speak with those who know the Primal Lord, and renounce your evil ways.
ofa o veel Afs gd A fen] UdSTs Il (148-10, 175, He 2)
lab na chal-ee sach rahai so visat parvaan.
That virtuous person who does not walk in the way of greed, and who abides in Truth, is accepted and famous.
Ag Ad warn a fas uge ae Il (148-10, ws, ne 2) sar sanDhay aagaas ka-o ki-o pahuchai baan. If an arrow is shot at the sky, how can it reach there?
mat GI vidi J SIS ATS MN! (148-10, ws, He 2) agai oh agamm hai vaahaydarh jaan. ||2|| The sky above is unreachable-know this well, O archer! ||2||
u@at Il 148-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ost use fimirg ofh Atardhor it 48-11, ws, ws 2) naaree purakh pi-aar paraym seegaaree-aa. The soul-bride loves her Husband Lord; she is embellished with His Love.
ase sats fee TS o Jot Sd I (148-11, ws, He 2) karan bhagat din raat na rahnee vaaree-aa. She worships Him day and night; she cannot be restrained from doing so.
Hoe Hfs foea Aafe Aes i (148-12, ns, He 2)
mehlaa manjh nivaas sabad savaaree-aa.
In the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, she has made her home; she is adorned with the Word of His Shabad.
AY aale maetA A Sard Il (148-12, ws, He 2) sach kahan ardaas say vaychaaree-aa. She is humble, and she offers her true and sincere prayer.
Hofe wan uA gefy frodtor il (148-13, os, v8 2)
sohan khasmai paas hukam siDhaaree-aa.
She is beautiful in the Company of her Lord and Master; she walks in the Way of His Will.
Ret aafe meet Hog funder il 48-13, us, v2 2) sakhee kahan ardaas manhu pi-aaree-aa. With her dear friends, she offers her heart-felt prayers to her Beloved.
fag ae foa =n fee A Htfenr It (148-13, ws, He 2) bin naavai Dharig vaas fit so jeevi-aa. Cursed is that home, and shameful is that life, which is without the Name of the Lord.
Rafe Aedorey nifys ulfenr 12211 (148-14, ws, Hs 2)
sabad savaaree-aas amrit peevi-aa. ||22||
But she who is adorned with the Word of His Shabad, drinks in the Amrit of His Nectar. ||22]|
ABA Hs % Il (148-14)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Hg Hifs 3 fgufsor wait BIS TA Ml 148-14, ws, we 1) maaroo meehi na taripti-aa agee lahai na bhukh. The desert is not satisfied by rain, and the fire is not quenched by desire.
om ot 3 fgufser Afes sd fora Il (148-15, 1s, 48 1)
raajaa raaj na taripti-aa saa-ir bharay kisuk.
The king is not satisfied with his kingdom, and the oceans are full, but still they thirst for more.
SSA Ad OH at Ast USt Us IA (148-15, Hs, Hs 1) naanak sachay naam kee kaytee puchhaa puchh. ||1]| O Nanak, how many times must I seek and ask for the True Name? ||1||
HIS! 2 Il (148-16)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
foges 3th AoHfA Wey YIN 3 HES I (148-16, ws, us 2) nihfala’ tas janmas jaavat barahm na bindtay. Life is useless, as long as one does not know the Lord God.
Aad AAS Te udATet Sofa & il (148-16, ws, ve 2) saagra’ sansaaras gur parsaadee tareh kay. Only a few cross over the world-ocean, by Guru's Grace.
ATE ATE AHIG FT AT BSA Hots Il (148-17, ws, He 2) karan kaaran samrath hai kaho naanak beechaar. The Lord is the All-powerful Cause of causes, says Nanak after deep deliberation.
ade ads an 3d fas ae set whe MQM (148-17, +5, He 2) kaaran kartay vas hai jin kal rakhee Dhaar. ||2|| The creation is subject to the Creator, who sustains it by His Almighty Power. ||2||
ugat Il (148-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WAH a woes eet efi Il 48-18, us, He 2) khasmai kai darbaar dhaadhee vasi-aa. In the Court of the Lord and Master, His minstrels dwell.
Aa AH aote ane feat il (148-18, ws, He 2)
sachaa khasam kalaan kamal vigsi-aa.
Singing the Praises of their True Lord and Master, the lotuses of their hearts have blossomed forth.
YAH Us ute Hog TofAMM Il (148-19, Hs, 18 2) khasmahu pooraa paa-ay manhu rehsi-aa. Obtaining their Perfect Lord and Master, their minds are transfixed with ecstasy.
SHHS Ae Hg AAS AGAMA Il (148-19, HS, H8 2) dusman kadhay maar sajan sarsi-aa. Their enemies have been driven out and subdued, and their friends are very pleased.
He Afsdd Azle AS Ha SAM Il (148-19, HTS, He 2) sachaa satgur sayvan sachaa maarag dasi-aa. Those who serve the Truthful True Guru are shown the True Path.
uat qett Ae Age dats anes feaSfimr i (149-1, ws, us 2)
sachaa sabad beechaar kaal viDh-usi-aa. Reflecting on the True Word of the Shabad, death is overcome.
wel ae mae Aste AStfant il (149-1, ws, He 2)
dhaadhee kathay akath sabad savaari-aa.
Speaking the Unspoken Speech of the Lord, one is adorned with the Word of His Shabad.
Soa Te ae IA de MS fee fumrfemr IZM (149-1, ws, He 2)
naanak gun geh raas har jee-o milay pi-aari-aa. ||23]|
Nanak holds tight to the Treasure of Virtue, and meets with the Dear, Beloved Lord. [|23]|
HO Hs 9 Il (149-2) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufsnrg AH us ass 3 ufsor fefe uf i (149-2, ws, He 1)
khati-ahu jammay khatay karan ta khati-aa vich paahi.
Born because of the karma of their past mistakes, they make more mistakes, and fall into mistakes.
as ufe 3 Gsafa A AG Gee urs Il (149-3, os, Hs 1)
Dhotay mool na utreh jay sa-o Dhovan paahi.
By washing, their pollution is not removed, even though they may wash hundreds of times.
Soa auA suAbafs aty 3 urdt ura Ail (149-3, ws, He 1)
naanak bakhsay bakhsee-ahi naahi ta paahee paahi. ||1|| O Nanak, if God forgives, they are forgiven; otherwise, they are kicked and beaten.
[21|
He 4% Il (149-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
SOA HSS SuaT wy sls Hathfs we i (149-4, ws, He 1) naanak bolan jhakh-naa dukh chhad mangee-ah sukh. O Nanak, it is absurd to ask to be spared from pain by begging for comfort.
AY ey efe efs aus ufsate Wfe Hoe I (149-4, ws, He 1) sukh dukh du-ay dar kaprhay pahirahi jaa-ay manukh. Pleasure and pain are the two garments given, to be worn in the Court of the Lord.
fra safe odin fsa dalt gu iQ (149-5, ws, He 1) jithai bolan haaree-ai tithai changee chup. ||2|| Where you are bound to lose by speaking, there, you ought to remain silent. ||2]|
ust Il (149-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ae aat Ufy nies afer il 49-5, ws, He 1) chaaray kundaa daykh andar bhaali-aa. After looking around in the four directions, I looked within my own self.
Ae usta note fhafa feafemr i 49-6, ws, Hs sachai purakh alakh siraj nihaali-aa. There, I saw the True, Invisible Lord Creator.
Csfz 38 Ta afs Sutter Il (149-6, 5, He 1) ujharh bhulay raah gur vaykhaali-aa. I was wandering in the wilderness, but now the Guru has shown me the Way.
Afsad Ad Sg Ag Aer Il 149-6, ws, He 1) satgur sachay vaahu sach samaali-aa. Hail to the True, True Guru, through whom we merge in the Truth.
ute Jaq wag eter afer i (149-7, ws, vs 1) paa-i-aa ratan gharaahu deevaa baali-aa. I have found the jewel within the home of my own self; the lamp within has been lit.
Ae Aafe nets Aete AS Shem I (149-7, Hs, He 1) sachai sabad salaahi sukhee-ay sach vaali-aa. Those who praise the True Word of the Shabad, abide in the peace of Truth.
fosteur 3g ofa areata fA arfemr Il (49-8, 1s, He 1
nidri-aa dar lag garab se gaali-aa.
But those who do not have the Fear of God, are overtaken by fear. They are destroyed by their own pride.
Sed se Aa fed Safer IVI (149-8, ws, He 1) naavhu bhulaa jag firai baytaali-aa. | |24| | Having forgotten the Name, the world is roaming around like a wild demon. ||24| |
HS H3 3 Il (149-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
3 fefe HHS Hd St SE Ho nfs TE I (149-9, m5, He 3) bhai vich jammai bhai marai bhee bha-o man meh ho-ay. In fear we are born, and in fear we die. Fear is always present in the mind.
soa & fefs A Ud Afr wrfenr ATE NAM (149-9, Hs, He 3)
naanak bhai vich jay marai sahilaa aa-i-aa so-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, if one dies in the fear of God, his coming into the world is blessed and approved. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (149-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
3 fes He sos sos union yA ote I (149-10, 3, He 3)
bhai vin jeevai bahut bahut khusee-aa khusee kamaa-ay.
Without the fear of God, you may live very, very long, and savor the most enjoyable pleasures.
Soa 8 fee A He His aS Cfo ATE NM (149-10, ws, He 3)
naanak bhai vin jay marai muhi kaalai uth jaa-ay. ||2]||
O Nanak, if you die without the fear of God, you will arise and depart with a blackened face. ||2]|
ust Il (149-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsag dfe efenres 3 Aer yeh Il (149-11, ws, we 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal ta sarDhaa pooree-ai. When the True Guru is merciful, then your desires will be fulfilled.
Afsag dfe efenrs 3 aad Sd I (149-11, os, v8 3)
satgur ho-ay da-i-aal na kabahoo" jhooree-ai. When the True Guru is merciful, you will never grieve.
Afsag df& efenre a eu ATED II (149-11, 5, He 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal taa dukh na jaanee-ai. When the True Guru is merciful, you will know no pain.
Afsag df& efor a ofs da HSMM I (149-12, ws, He 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal taa har rang maanee-ai. When the True Guru is merciful, you will enjoy the Lord's Love.
Afsag df efeurs 3 AN aT 3g AT Il (149-12, ws, ne 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal taa jam kaa dar kayhaa. When the True Guru is merciful, then why should you fear death?
Afsag df& efeure a Ae dt AY ST I (149-13, +15, He 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal taa sad hee sukh dayhaa. When the True Guru is merciful, the body is always at peace.
Afsag dfe efeors a oe fofa ure It 149-13, 75, nH 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal taa nav niDh paa-ee-dai. When the True Guru is merciful, the nine treasures are obtained.
Afsag df= efenre 3 vfs Are Quill (149-14, ws, He 3) satgur ho-ay da-i-aal ta sach samaa-ee-ai. ||25]|| When the True Guru is merciful, you shall be absorbed in the True Lord. ||25]|
HBA Hs 4% Il (149-14) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
fag date ubnfs Heeet For far Afar ust i (149-15, ws, oe 1)
sir khohaa-ay pee-ah malvaanee joothaa mang mang khaahee.
They pluck the hair out of their heads, and drink in filthy water; they beg endlessly and eat the garbage which others have thrown away.
éfs edtofs ufo Sfs sar urat Sf Aart i (149-15, ws, He 1)
fol fadeehat muhi lain bharhaasaa paanee daykh sagaahee. They spread manure, they suck in rotting smells, and they are afraid of clean water.
3a wal fra dofefs sdinifs ge Ard I (149-16, 5, He 1)
bhaydaa vaagee sir khohaa-in bharee-an hath su-aahee.
Their hands are smeared with ashes, and the hair on their heads is plucked out-they are like sheep!
Ww ug fas aetefs cag defs Oat Il (149-16, os, Hs 1)
maa-oo pee-oo kirat gavaa-in tabar rovan Dhaahee.
They have renounced the lifestyle of their mothers and fathers, and their families and relatives cry out in distress.
Car fils o uste fatour o det He foerS urdt it 149-17, ws, v8 1)
onaa pind na patal kiri-aa na deevaa mu-ay kithaa-oo paahee.
No one offers the rice dishes at their last rites, and no one lights the lamps for them. After their death, where will they be sent?
Worle Stee 2fs o det FHS nig B urct il (149-17, ws, He 1)
athsath tirath dayn na dho-ee barahman ann na khaahee.
The sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage give them no place of protection, and no Brahmin will eat their food.
Het avie sofa fea ast ne feat ord il (149-18, os, He 1)
sadaa kucheel raheh din raatee mathai tikay naahee.
They remain polluted forever, day and night; they do not apply the ceremonial tilak mark to their foreheads.
Sat ufe gate fafs nee efs chefs o wet I (149-18, +5, ne 1) jhundee paa-ay bahan nit marnai darh deebaan na jaahee. They sit together in silence, as if in mourning; they do not go to the Lord's Court.
Bat AA Tet SHE mat fuet ATS i (149-19, ws, He 1)
lakee kaasay hathee fumman ago pichhee jaahee.
With their begging bowls hanging from their waists, and their fly-brushes in their hands, they walk along in single file.
o Gfe Hat o Gf Han o Gf art Ha I (149-19, ns, He 1
naa o-ay jogee naa o-ay jangam naa o-ay kaajee mu"laa.
They are not Yogis, and they are not Jangams, followers of Shiva. They are not Qazis or Mullahs.
usr qo ofa feae feafs fears feet 23 Ter I (150-1, 1s, He
da-yi vigo-ay fireh vigutay fitaa vatai galaa. Ruined by the Merciful Lord, they wander around in disgrace, and their entire troop is contaminated.
Hier ots Hes Het nies o aet TH Il 150-1, ws, He 1) jee-aa maar jeevaalay so-ee avar na ko-ee rakhai. The Lord alone kills and restores to life; no one else can protect anyone from Him.
aod 3 feRasg 2A on ust fife we II (150-2, 15, He D
daanhu tai isnaanhu vanjay bhas pa-ee sir khuthai.
They go without giving alms or any cleansing baths; their shaven heads become covered with dust.
urat fess ge Bus Ae aor Haat II (150-2, Hs, He 1) paanee vichahu ratan upannay mayr kee-aa maaDhaanee. The jewel emerged from the water, when the mountain of gold was used to churn it.
wonfs Stee et at uset wat aati (150-3, 5, Hz 1)
athsath tirath dayvee thaapay purbee lagai banee.
The gods established the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where the festivals are celebrated and hymns are chanted.
one foes ars unt arefe Het AATSt Il (150-3, ws, He 1)
naa-ay nivaajaa naatai poojaa naavan sadaa sujaanee.
After bathing, the Muslims recite their prayers, and after bathing, the Hindus perform their worship services. The wise always take cleansing baths.
Hfeur dtefenr afs de at fafe urent uret I 50-4, ws, He 1)
mu-i-aa jeevdi-aa gat hovai jaa" sir paa-ee-ai paanee.
At the time of death, and at the time of birth, they are purified, when water is poured on their heads.
Sod fava Asst Sat TS 3 Set Il (150-4, ws, we 1)
naanak sirkhutay saitaanee aynaa gal na bhaanee.
O Nanak, the shaven-headed ones are devils. They are not pleased to hear these words.
26 dent df faoree hor wats Aret II 150-5, ws, He vuthai ho-i-ai ho-ay bilaaval jee-aa jugat samaanee. When it rains, there is happiness. Water is the key to all life.
ZS nig AHS AUT ASA useT De Il (150-5, ws, He 1)
vuthai ann kamaad kapaahaa sabhsai parh-daa hovai.
When it rains, the corn grows, and the sugar cane, and the cotton, which provides clothing for all.
6 ug vata fafs Aadt AT Us Ut FESS Il 150-5, +5, He 1)
vuthai ghaahu chareh nit surhee saa Dhan dahee vilovai.
When it rains, the cows always have grass to graze upon, and housewives can churn the milk into butter.
feg fufe du war Ae uA ule aS AT II (150-6, +s, Hs 1)
tit ghi-ay hom jag sad poojaa pa-i-ai kaaraj sohai.
With that ghee, sacred feasts and worship services are performed; all these efforts are blessed.
ag AXE set Als firdt os fg Sfamret it (50-6, ws, 4s 1)
guroo samund nadee sabh sikhee naatai jit vadi-aa-ee.
The Guru is the ocean, and all His Teachings are the river. Bathing within it, glorious greatness is obtained.
Soa A fAaua aele od 3 AS ve fAfs Set WA (150-7, ws, Hs 1)
naanak jay sirkhutay naavan naahee taa sat chatay sir chhaa-ee. ||1]||
O Nanak, if the shaven-headed ones do not bathe, then seven handfuls of ashes are upon their heads. ||1]|
He 2 Il (150-8)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Malt ue fx ad AoA Adt TT I (150-8, ws, He 2)
agee paalaa ke karay sooraj kayhee raat. What can the cold do to the fire? How can the night affect the sun?
Je now fa ad us urat fom APS I (150-8, ws, He 2) chand anayraa ke karay pa-un paanee ki-aa jaat. What can the darkness do to the moon? What can social status do to air and water?
Test wit fa as fan fete As fae dE i (150-9, +, He 2) Dhartee cheejee ke karay jis vich sabh kichh ho-ay. What are personal possessions to the earth, from which all things are produced?
soa ST ufs webs aT ufs ge ALE QI (150-9, ws, He 2) naanak taa pat jaanee-ai jaa pat rakhai so-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, he alone is known as honorable, whose honor the Lord preserves. ||2||
ust II (150-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3U Ad Aad Het aera Il (150-10, Hrs, He 2) tuDh sachay sub-haan sadaa kalaani-aa. It is of You, O my True and Wondrous Lord, that I sing forever.
3 Ae ttre ofa wee AEM I (150-10, ws, Hs 2) too” sachaa deebaan hor aavan jaani-aa. Yours is the True Court. All others are subject to coming and going.
Ae fa Hafs we fk 30 afer t c150-10, +, nH 2) sach je mangeh daan se tuDhai jayhi-aa. Those who ask for the gift of the True Name are like You.
Ag 3d SIH] Age Afont I 1150-11, ws, ve 2)
sach tayraa furmaan sabday sohi-aa. Your Command is True; we are adorned with the Word of Your Shabad.
Hfomt famre fomre sa 3 urfemr it 50-11, 1s, He 2)
mani-ai gi-aan Dhi-aan tuDhai tay paa-i-aa.
Through faith and trust, we receive spiritual wisdom and meditation from You. adh ue StAS 3 VS VorfEor | (50-11, ws, He 2)
karam pavai neesaan na chalai chalaa-i-aa. By Your Grace, the banner of honor is obtained. It cannot be taken away or lost.
3 AS wag fos cefa vata Aefer Il (150-12, ws, Hs 2) too” sachaa daataar nit dayveh charheh savaa-i-aa. You are the True Giver; You give continually. Your Gifts continue to increase.
Soa Hat VS A ST SSM NEM (150-12, ws, He 2) naanak mangai daan jo tuDh bhaa-i-aa. ||26]| Nanak begs for that gift which is pleasing to You. ||26]|
HBA Hs 2 Il (150-13) salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
ctf orfy gstfeor frest Afs AAG I 50-13, ws, v8 2)
deekhi-aa aakh bujhaa-i-aa siftee sach samay-o.
Those who have accepted the Guru's Teachings, and who have found the path, remain absorbed in the Praises of the True Lord.
fsa a@ fomr GueHhya fas ag soa SE NU (150-13, +, He 2)
tin ka-o ki-aa updaysee-ai jin gur naanak day-o. ||1]|
What teachings can be imparted to those who have the Divine Guru Nanak as their Guru? ||1]|
He 4% Il (150-14) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
nity gare Het FS Il (150-14, ws, Hs 1) aap bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai. We understand the Lord only when He Himself inspires us to understand Him.
fan orf Aste fH Ag fas AS Il (150-14, ws, He jis aap sujhaa-ay tis sabh kichh soojhai. He alone knows everything, unto whom the Lord Himself gives knowledge.
ato ata Ta HSM BST Il (150-15, HB, He 1) kahi kahi kathnaa maa-i-aa loojhai. One may talk and preach and give sermons but still yearn after Maya.
JOHt Aas AT MAST Il (150-15, HS, He 1) hukmee sagal karay aakaar. The Lord, by the Hukam of His Command, has created the entire creation.
mnt Are Ada fers I (150-15, ws, 2 1) aapay jaanai sarab veechaar. He Himself knows the inner nature of all.
mag otea nif wef i 50-16, urs, He 1) akhar naanak akhi-o aap. O Nanak, He Himself uttered the Word.
&d sats Je fAA STS MQM (150-16, ws, He 1) lahai bharaat hovai jis daat. ||2|| Doubt departs from one who receives this gift. ||2]|
ugat Il (150-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
IG et arg ard orfenr I (150-16, 175, He 1) ha-o dhaadhee vaykaar kaarai laa-i-aa. I was a minstrel, out of work, when the Lord took me into His service.
afs fed & aa gag soutien Ih (150-17, ws, He 1) raat dihai kai vaar Dharahu furmaa-i-aa. To sing His Praises day and night, He gave me His Order, right from the start.
wet Ad Hote MATH gerfeor I (150-17, ws, He 1)
dhaadhee sachai mahal khasam bulaa-i-aa.
My Lord and Master has summoned me, His minstrel, to the True Mansion of His Presence.
Ret fhefs Ares aust urfemr | 150-17, Hs, He 1) sachee sifat saalaah kaprhaa paa-i-aa. He has dressed me in the robes of His True Praise and Glory.
Ae nifys on sxe vrfemr | (50-18, ws, 48 1) sachaa amrit naam bhojan aa-i-aa. The Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name has become my food.
aaHst wor ofa ffs AY ufeMt I 150-18, ws, He 1)
gurmatee khaaDhaa raj tin sukh paa-i-aa.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings, who eat this food and are satisfied, find peace.
wel Ad US Ase SATEMM I (150-19, Hs, He 1) dhaadhee karay pasaa-o sabad vajaa-i-aa. His minstrel spreads His Glory, singing and vibrating the Word of His Shabad.
waa AG Aes ys ute QO AD (150-19, ws, He 1) naanak sach saalaahi pooraa paa-i-aa. ||27|| suDhu O Nanak, praising the True Lord, I have obtained His Perfection. ||27]||Sudh| |
UST WU
TH AGSt Turd Hs 9 Beue Bus 151-1) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 1 cha-upday dupday Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, First Mehl, Chau-Padas & Du-Padas:
96 ATS on aes usy fos fares nies Has mast AS aT YATE I 51-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
38 HU STH SST SH Il (151-3, ast arse, we 1) bha-o much bhaaraa vadaa tol. The Fear of God is overpowering, and so very heavy,
Ho Hfs IeSt FS FH I 151-3, Test anrdet, we 1) man mat ha-ulee bolay bol. while the intellect is lightweight, as is the speech one speaks.
fafs ofs seb Adbet srg il 151-3, ast anrset, ne 1) sir Dhar chalee-ai sahee-ai bhaar. So place the Fear of God upon your head, and bear that weight;
Sed KIM TT SIT WAU (151-3, TVS arset, nz 1) nadree karmee gur beechaar. ||1]| by the Grace of the Merciful Lord, contemplate the Guru. ||1]|
3 fag afe o Suh us it asi-4, aet arse, we 1) bhai bin ko-ay na langhas paar. Without the Fear of God, no one crosses over the world-ocean.
3 38 whim ate neta nal Joe Il 51-4, ast ards, He 1) bhai bha-o raakhi-aa bhaa-ay savaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. This Fear of God adorns the Love of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
3 safe mats sa 3 ats Il 15i-4, aGst anrdet, v2 1) bhai tan agan bhakhai bhai naal. The fire of fear within the body is burnt away by the Fear of God.
3 3@ wha Aafe Hefei 51-5, aGSt ard, He 1) bhai bha-o gharhee-ai sabad savaar. Through this Fear of God, we are adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
3 fas was ag food Il 151-5, est ards, v1) bhai bin ghaarhat kach nikach. Without the Fear of God, all that is fashioned is false.
MOT Ae nidt AS NI (151-5, Test aorset, He 1) anDhaa sachaa anDhee sat. ||2|| Useless is the mold, and useless are the hammer-strokes on the mold. ||2| |
aot aet Gun aS il cs5i-6, at anrsct, ve buDhee baajee upjai chaa-o. The desire for the worldly drama arises in the intellect,
HOA frorsu ue 5 EC Il (isi-6, aGat aoradet, He 1)
sahas si-aanap pavai na taa-o.
but even with thousands of clever mental tricks, the heat of the Fear of God does not come into play.
SOA HOF HHS SE ll (151-6, ast gurset, wz naanak manmukh bolan vaa-o. O Nanak, the speech of the self-willed manmukh is just wind.
MO neg SE enrG SUA 151-7, asst arsct, ve 1) anDhaa akhar vaa-o du-aa-o. ||3]|1]| His words are worthless and empty, like the wind. ||3||1||
aeat HIG 4 Il (151-7) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
ats wa wis sg afs so ATE I 151-7, Test, He 1D)
dar ghar ghar dar dar dar jaa-ay.
Place the Fear of God within the home of your heart; with this Fear of God in your heart, all other fears shall be frightened away.
A 3g ag fag safe 3g ute It casi-7, a@st, ve 1) so dar kayhaa jit dar dar paa-ay. What sort of fear is that, which frightens other fears?
3g fag ert act ate i casi-s, ast, He 1) tuDh bin doojee naahee jaa-ay. Without You, I have other place of rest at all.
A fag eos AS Sot SATE NA casi-8, aes, He 1) jo kichh vartai sabh tayree rajaa-ay. ||1]| Whatever happens is all according to Your Will. ||1]|
Sdn A 3d dS TT ll (51-9, ast, ne 1) daree-ai jay dar hovai hor. Be afraid, if you have any fear, other than the Fear of God.
fs sfs set HO AT AT AU TIC Il 1151-9, aVHt, wes Y dar dar darnaa man kaa sor. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Afraid of fear, and living in fear, the mind is held in tumult. ||1]|Pause] |
a AG He 3 Ta Ss Il 151-9, Tes, ws 1) naa jee-o marai na doobai tarai. The soul does not die; it does not drown, and it does not swim across.
fats foe ator A fore Ag I (151-10, aa, He 1) jin kichh kee-aa so kichh karai. The One who created everything does everything.
Jan mre JAH ATE Il 1151-10, ast, He hukmay aavai hukmay jaa-ay. By the Hukam of His Command we come, and by the Hukam of His Command we go.
Wid UT Jat ANTE WI (151-10, west, Hz 1) aagai paachhai hukam samaaz-ay. ||2| | Before and after, His Command is pervading. ||2]|
JA IZ MAT MANS II (151-10, west, v2 1) hans hayt aasaa asmaan. Cruelty, attachment, desire and egotism
fH fefs ga BIT SB AS Il cisi-u1, aes, 3 1) tis vich bhookh bahut nai saan. - there is great hunger in these, like the raging torrent of a wild stream.
3G urar ular nag I (151-11, Test, ve 1D) bha-o khaanaa peenaa aaDhaar. Let the Fear of God be your food, drink and support.
fee umd nfs dfs aes SI s5i-11, west, He 1) vin khaaDhay mar hohi gavaar. ||3]| Without doing this, the fools simply die. ||3]|
fan ot afe aet afe af i (51-12, a@t, u2 1) jis kaa ko-ay ko-ee ko-ay ko-ay. If anyone really has anyone else - how rare is that person!
Ag & 3a 3 Aga a ALE II (isi-12, west, we sabh ko tayraa too” sabhnaa kaa so-ay. All are Yours - You are the Lord of all.
Wa tht AS Us WS I (151-12, aah, ve jaa kay jee-a jant Dhan maal. All beings and creatures, wealth and property belong to Him.
Sea nus fru HIT WSN (151-13, Tet, He 1 naanak aakhan bikham beechaar. ||4||2|| O Nanak, it is so difficult to describe and contemplate Him. ||4||2]|
aSSt HIS 4 Il (451-13) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Hat fs fust Hsu Il 151-13, ast, He 1) maataa mat pitaa santokh. Let wisdom be your mother, and contentment your father.
AZ set ats Sa feAY A (151-14, aes, He sat bhaa-ee kar ayhu visaykh. ||1]| Let Truth be your brother - these are your best relatives. ||1]|
ade d fas ase 5 WE II 51-14, aSst, v2 1) kahnaa hai kichh kahan na jaa-ay. He has been described, but He cannot be described at all.
38 azals ahifs adt ute a TIS Il 451-14, west, ve 1) ta-o kudrat keemat nahee paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your All-pervading creative nature cannot be estimated. ||1||Pause]|
Yat qU2
Hen Ads efe AAT SES Il (152-1, west, He 1) Saram surat du-ay sasur bha-ay. Modesty, humility and intuitive understanding are my mother-in-law and father-in-law;
adet AH afs HS BE iM (152-1, TVs, we karnee kaaman kar man la-ay. ||2|| I have made good deeds my spouse. ||2]|
We" Ana Shoarg festa i 152-1, ast, xe 1)
saahaa sanjog vee-aahu vijog.
Union with the Holy is my wedding date, and separation from the world is my marriage.
Ay Hafs ag aa AT WSNBI 152-2, ast, ne 1)
sach santat kaho naanak jog. ||3]|3]|| Says Nanak, Truth is the child born of this Union. ||3]|3]|
ACS HIS A Il (152-2) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
uge urat mraet AT AG Il 152-2, ast, we pa-unai paanee agnee kaa mayl. The union of air, water and fire
JUG Bus fa at aw Il (152-3, west, ve 1) chanchal chapal buDh kaa khayl. - the body is the play-thing of the fickle and unsteady intellect.
6@ PISA CAST EMT Il (152-3, ast, ue 1) na-o darvaajay dasvaa du-aar. It has nine doors, and then there is the Tenth Gate.
as F famrat Sa ses Al 152-3, west, ue 1) bujh ray gi-aanee ayhu beechaar. ||1]| Reflect upon this and understand it, O wise one. ||1]|
Aas FAST HOS Et Il (152-4, ast, v2 1) kathtaa baktaa suntaa so-ee. The Lord is the One who speaks, teaches and listens.
nig ators A famirot Tet WA TIS i 152-4, aes, He aap beechaaray so gi-aanee ho-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. One who contemplates his own self is truly wise. ||1||Pause| |
oot Het 8B ues il 152-4, ast, nz 1) dayhee maatee bolai pa-un. The body is dust; the wind speaks through it.
aS F famrat yor F AVS I (152-5, aes, Hs 1) bujh ray gi-aanee moo-aa hai ka-un. Understand, O wise one, who has died.
Het Aas aE nidarg Il (152-5, ast, we 1) moo-ee surat baad aha‘kaar. Awareness, conflict and ego have died,
Gg o Hor A SUST MQ (152-5, aes, ws 1) oh na moo-aa jo daykhanhaar. ||2|| but the One who sees does not die. ||2||
a ade sfe Stee Act Il (152-5, ast, we 1) jai kaaran tat tirath jaahee. For the sake of it, you journey to sacred shrines and holy rivers;
336 USE WS Tt Hd Il (152-6, aCHt, Hz ratan padaarath ghat hee maahee. but this priceless jewel is within your own heart.
ufs ufs ufss are Sue I (152-6, aSHt, He 1)
parh parh pandit baad vakhaanai.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read and read endlessly; they stir up arguments and controversies,
Safe Jet SAS 3 WE ISI (152-6, ast, He 1) bheetar hodee vasat na jaanai. ||3]| but they do not know the secret deep within. ||3]|
JG 3 Hor At Het ate i 152-7, ast, v2 1) ha-o na moo-aa mayree mu-ee balaa-ay. I have not died - that evil nature within me has died.
Gg 3 Hor A afoot ANTE I (152-7, aes, Hs 1) oh na moo-aa jo rahi-aa samaa-ay. The One who is pervading everywhere does not die.
ag soa afa gan feerfenr it ci52-7, ast, ws kaho naanak gur barahm dikhaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, the Guru has revealed God to me,
HIST AST Seles S wMfEnT ISIS 152-8, TBST, He 1)
martaa jaataa nadar na aa-i-aa. ||4||4] | and now I see that there is no such thing as birth or death. ||4||4||
ast HIS 9 Bat Il (152-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1 dakh-nee. Gauree, First Mehl, Dakhanee:
Afe Afe gS HS oS Il BT a AS asad AS Il (152-9, west euet, we
sun sun boojhai maanai naa-o. taa kai sad balihaarai jaa-o.
I am forever a sacrifice to the one who listens and hears, who understands and believes in the Name.
mf gore SBT SE Il (152-9, ast euet, us 1) aap bhulaa-ay tha-ur na thaa-o. When the Lord Himself leads us astray, there is no other place of rest for us to find.
3 AHsrefa Af fers WA 152-9, west euet, Hs 1) too’ samjhaavahi may! milaa-o. ||1]| You impart understanding, and You unite us in Your Union. ||1]|
oy fHS BSH BTS I (152-10, aGat cut, we 1) naam milai chalai mai naal. I obtain the Naam, which shall go along with me in the end.
faa oe act AS ats NU TIS I (152-10, west weet, He 1) bin naavai baaDhee sabh kaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Name, all are held in the grip of Death. ||1]||Pause] |
ast zen Bre at Ge tl (152-11, aSat weet, we 1) khaytee vanaj naavai kee ot. My farming and my trading are by the Support of the Name.
uy Ug aie at U]| i 152-11, ast waa, He 1 paap punn beej kee pot. The seeds of sin and virtue are bound together.
amy ag Aba xfs s] Il 152-11, a@at weet, He 1) kaam kroDh jee-a meh chot. Sexual desire and anger are the wounds of the soul.
omy ferfa 38 fs W| NI 452-11, ast weet, He 1) naam visaar chalay man khot. ||2] | The evil-minded ones forget the Naam, and then depart. ||2| |
Ard a at APSt Abe il (152-12, a@st wut, ns 1) saachay gur kee saachee seekh. True are the Teachings of the True Guru.
36 HO ASG ATS usTe Il (152-12, ast wut, He 1) tan man seetal saach pareekh. The body and mind are cooled and soothed, by the touchstone of Truth.
We ustefs TA AHS ude Il (152-12, ast wat, He 1)
jal puraa-in ras kamal pareekh.
This is the true mark of wisdom: that one remains detached, like the water-lily, or the lotus upon the water.
Rafe gs HIS GA Ste ISI 152-13, ast wut, He 1)
sabad ratay meethay ras eekh. |[3]|
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, one becomes sweet, like the juice of the sugar cane. |[3]|
Jaty Anat afs SA SMrs Il (152-13, west wut, He 1) hukam sanjogee garh das du-aar. By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the castle of the body has ten gates.
Us zrfs fife Afs wre i 152-13, ast euct, H 1) panch vaseh mil jot apaar. The five passions dwell there, together with the Divine Light of the Infinite.
mify 3B MMy SEAS Il (152-14, ast wut, nz 1) aap tulai aapay vanjaar. The Lord Himself is the merchandise, and He Himself is the trader.
Soa STH ASIST NSIUUI (152-14, aGSt wut, He 1)
naanak naam savaaranhaar. ||4||5|| O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, we are adorned and rejuvenated. 4115] |
ASSt HIS 4 Il (152-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
as afe ag 3 wr| Ih (152-15, ast, He 1) jaato jaa-ay kahaa tay aavai. How can we know where we came from?
ad Gur ag Ave ANTS Il (152-15, TES, He 1) kah upjai kah jaa-ay samaavai. Where did we originate, and where will we go and merge?
fae sfo fas yoast ure il 152-15, a@st, v2 1) ki-o baaDhi-o ki-o muktee paavai. How are we bound, and how do we obtain liberation?
fa@ uifsorit AofA ANTS IU (152-16, ast, He 1) ki-o abhinaasee sahj samaavai. ||1|| How do we merge with intuitive ease into the Eternal, Imperishable Lord? ||1]|
on fee nifigs uf any i 452-16, a@st, ne naam ridai amrit mukh naam. With the Naam in the heart and the Ambrosial Naam on our lips,
ddd OH Bddd [SIH NAN FIC Il (152-16, aSSt, He 1) narhar naam narhar nihkaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. through the Name of the Lord, we rise above desire, like the Lord. ||1]]Pause] |
Hon ite AoA ANE I (152-17, west, He 1) sehjay aavai sehjay jaa-ay. With intuitive ease we come, and with intuitive ease we depart.
Ho 3 Gun Ho He ANTE I (152-17, aSat, He 1) man tay upjai man maahi samaa-ay. From the mind we originate, and into the mind we are absorbed.
Tenfy Has Oo ute It 152-18, ast, He 1) gurmukh mukto banDh na paa-ay. As Gurmukh, we are liberated, and are not bound.
Rae stots ee afe of& iii 152-18, ast, v2 1) sabad beechaar chhutai har naa-ay. ||2||
Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, we are emancipated through the Name of the Lord. ||2||
soed Uet sg fafa aA II (152-18, ast, He 1) tarvar pankhee baho nis baas. At night, lots of birds settle on the tree.
He edinn nfs Ho feere Il (152-19, aS, He D sukh dukhee-aa man moh vinaas. Some are happy, and some are sad. Caught in the desires of the mind, they perish.
AWS fas Sats wirarA Il (152-19, a@at, He 1) saajh bihaag takeh aagaas. And when the life-night comes to its end, then they look to the sky.
ed fefh wefo aah feftimimr Sil (152-19, wet, 4 1D
dah dis Dhaaveh karam likhi-aas. ||3]| They fly away in all ten directions, according to their pre-ordained destiny. ||3]|
Us qu3s
OH Anat afefs aS il 153-1, ast, we 1) naam sanjogee go-il thaat. Those who are committed to the Naam, see the world as merely a temporary pasture.
OH au ge fay HS I (153-1, west, we 1) kaam kroDh footai bikh maat. Sexual desire and anger are broken, like a jar of poison.
fag Sas AS WE TS Il (153-1, west, we 1)
bin vakhar soono ghar haat.
Without the merchandise of the Name, the house of the body and the store of the mind are empty.
ad ffs 4S sAT AUS ISil 153-2, west, He 1) gur mil kholay bajar kapaat. ||4|| Meeting the Guru, the hard and heavy doors are opened. ||4||
Ag fs Ysa AAT | (153-2, aeat, we 1) saaDh milai poorab sanjog. One meets the Holy Saint only through perfect destiny.
Afy TIA Us dfs Sa I (153-2, ast, we 1) sach rahsay pooray har log. The Lord's perfect people rejoice in the Truth.
HO 36 @ S Adin AST Il 153-2, west, we 1) man tan day lai sahj subhaa-ay. Surrendering their minds and bodies, they find the Lord with intuitive ease.
Sod fsa a was ute uel 153-3, west, we 1) naanak tin kai laaga-o paa-ay. ||5||6|| Nanak falls at their feet. ||5]|6]|
TCS HIS A I (153-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
amy ag wfenr nfs ots Il 153-3, ast, v2 1) kaam kroDh maa-i-aa meh cheet. The conscious mind is engrossed in sexual desire, anger and Maya.
36 feorfs rat fos Bt Il 153-4, Cat, Hz 1) jhooth vikaar jaagai hit cheet. The conscious mind is awake only to falsehood, corruption and attachment.
Urt uy Ss at aT i 153-4, Vat, we 1) poonjee paap lobh kee keet. It gathers in the assets of sin and greed.
3I SSH HS SH ASS NA (453-4, Test, He 1) tar taaree man naam sucheet. ||1]|
So swim across the river of life, O my mind, with the Sacred Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
ag Sg ATS H Sot Sax Il 153-4, aSHt, He 1) vaahu vaahu saachay mai tayree tayk. Waaho! Waaho! - Great! Great is my True Lord! I seek Your All-powerful Support.
Ie unit J fens Sq AU TIS I (153-5, ast, vs 1) ha-o paapee too” nirmal ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a sinner - You alone are pure. ||1]|Pause||
wate uTet 8B SSNS Il (153-5, TSH, we 1) agan paanee bolai bharhvaa-o. Fire and water join together, and the breath roars in its fury!
faget fet Sa AMIS I (153-5, aSst, ve 1) jinvaa indree ayk su-aa-o. The tongue and the sex organs each seek to taste.
fente feast ont 3B aS Il (153-6, aSst, He 1) disat vikaaree naahee bha-o bhaa-o. The eyes which look upon corruption do not know the Love and the Fear of God.
MY HTS 3ST UTES |S NM (153-6, aVst, He 1) aap maaray taa paa-ay naa-o. ||2|| Conquering self-conceit, one obtains the Name. ||2||
Rafe ud fefs nee 3 SPE Il (153-6, ast, He 1) sabad marai fir maran na ho-ay. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad, shall never again have to die.
fag He fas us af it (153-7, ast, ws 1) bin moo-ay ki-o pooraa ho-ay. Without such a death, how can one attain perfection?
usufe feurfy sfour ne Sfe i (153-7, a@Ht, He D parpanch vi-aap rahi-aa man do-ay. The mind is engrossed in deception, treachery and duality.
fag oofes ad A OE ISI (153-7, ast, He 1) thir naaraa-in karay so ho-ay. ||3]| Whatever the Immortal Lord does, comes to pass. ||3]|
Sfofa ga wT or] SET Il 153-8, ast, Hz 1) bohith charha-o jaa aavai vaar. So get aboard that boat when your turn comes.
Sa Syd Baad HST Il (153-8, ast, we 1) thaakay bohith dargeh maar. Those who fail to embark upon that boat shall be beaten in the Court of the Lord.
AY Aer GS Teens Il (153-8, aSat, nz 1)
sach saalaahee Dhan gurdu-aar.
Blessed is that Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate, where the Praises of the True Lord are sung.
Soa Ufs ufs Saag SIDI (153-9, aes, He 1 naanak dar ghar aykankaar. ||4||7]| O Nanak, the One Creator Lord is pervading hearth and home. ||4||7]||
TCSt HIS A Il (153-9) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Cafe ane YoH Stata Il (153-9, Test, He 1) ulti-o kamal barahm beechaar.
The inverted heart-lotus has been turned upright, through reflective meditation on God.
nifys ure safe eA ents il (153-9, weet, Hs 1) amrit Dhaar gagan das du-aar. From the Sky of the Tenth Gate, the Ambrosial Nectar trickles down.
fgsee aftmr orfu Hata all 453-10, west, He 1) taribhavan bayDhi-aa aap muraar. ||1]| The Lord Himself is pervading the three worlds. ||1]|
J HO He SIH 3 Ale Il (153-10, aGHt, He 1) ray man mayray bharam na keejai. O my mind, do not give in to doubt.
Hfs ufo nifys oa uty Al Fae I 153-10, ae, He 1)
man maanee-ai amrit ras peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When the mind surrenders to the Name, it drinks in the essence of Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause] |
HOH Alfs Hefs HS Hon I (153-11, asst, He 1) janam jeet maran man maani-aa. So win the game of life; let your mind surrender and accept death.
wif yet He Ho 3 ASM I 53-11, west, He 1) aap moo-aa man man tay jaani-aa. When the self dies, the individual mind comes to know the Supreme Mind.
Ontd Set We We FS Afow MQ (153-12, aSHt, Hz 1)
najar bha-ee ghar ghar tay jaani-aa. ||2||
As the inner vision is awakened, one comes to know one's own home, deep within the self. ||2||
AZ AS Stee HAS OTH Il (153-12, aSHt, Hz 1)
jat sat tirath majan naam.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is austerity, chastity and cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
mifoa frags aa@ fon ath Il (153-12, west, He 1 aDhik bithaar kara-o kis kaam. What good are ostentatious displays?
od Safes nissHH ISI 153-13, Tee, He 1) nar naaraa-in antarjaam. ||3]| The All-pervading Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||3]|
mS HOS 3B ud We AE Il (153-13, aSat, He 1) aan man-o ta-o par ghar jaa-o. If I had faith in someone else, then I would go to that one's house.
fan Ae ot A AS il 153-13, aa, He 1) kis jaacha-o naahee ko thaa-o. But where should I go, to beg? There is no other place for me.
SSA WIHS ATA AHS SICH (153-14, aSst, He 1 naanak gurmat sahj samaa-o. ||4||8]| O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, I am intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||4||8]|
TSt HIS Y Il (153-14) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Afsag fee A Hee feare i 153-14, aSHt, He satgur milai so maran dikhaa-ay. Meeting the True Guru, we are shown the way to die.
HIE WE IA nists SS Il (153-15, TCH, He 1) maran rahan ras antar bhaa-ay. Remaining alive in this death brings joy deep within.
aaa fests aaa Us US NA (153-15, TSH, He 1) garab nivaar gagan pur paa-ay. ||1]| Overcoming egotistical pride, the Tenth Gate is found. ||1||
Hoe fous nie odt Tart Il (153-15, aSst, He 1) maran likhaa-ay aa-ay nahee rahnaa. Death is pre-ordained - no one who comes can remain here.
ofa Afu atu sve dfs AGS A TIS Il 153-16, TSS, He 1)
har jap jaap rahan har sarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. So chant and meditate on the Lord, and remain in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Afsag fxs 3 efsar svat tl (153-16, aSHt, Hs satgur milai ta dubiDhaa bhaagai. Meeting the True Guru, duality is dispelled.
ane faarft ue ofs ys wrt I (153-16, eat, He 1) kamal bigaas man har parabh laagai. The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and the mind is attached to the Lord God.
AS HS HI IA MATA MQ (153-17, TSH, He 1) jeevat marai mahaa ras aagai. ||2| | One who remains dead while yet alive obtains the greatest happiness hereafter. ||2||
Afsate fife AS HATH AST I (153-17, aC, 2 1) satgur mili-ai sach sanjam soochaa. Meeting the True Guru, one becomes truthful, chaste and pure.
Ts at uSst Ss Sar il (153-18, ast, we 1) gur kee pa-orhee oocho oochaa. Climbing up the steps of the Guru's Path, one becomes the highest of the high.
oath Hs AH a SV HT SI (153-18, ast, 2 1) karam milai jam kaa bha-o moochaa. ||3]|| When the Lord grants His Mercy, the fear of death is conquered. ||3]|
ata fufemt fife nif morfemr i 153-18, west, He 1) gur mili-ai mil ank samaa-i-aa. Uniting in Guru's Union, we are absorbed in His Loving Embrace.
ate faut wg Hoe fearfemr | (153-19, 7Bst, He 1)
kar kirpaa ghar mahal dikhaa-i-aa.
Granting His Grace, He reveals the Mansion of His Presence, within the home of the self.
Soa ICH Hf frerfeor sitll 153-19, aH, He 1)
naanak ha-umai maar milaa-i-aa. ||4]|9]| O Nanak, conquering egotism, we are absorbed into the Lord. ||4||9]|
UST qus
ACS HIS A Il (154-1) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
fags ufemr og Ae afe I (154-1, west, He 1) kirat pa-i-aa nah maytai ko-ay. Past actions cannot be erased.
for Arar foro wirat df Il 154-1, ast, we 1) ki-aa jaanaa ki-aa aagai ho-ay. What do we know of what will happen hereafter?
nt fSH stat ASt Jnr il 154-1, ast, ws 1) jo tis bhaanaa so-ee hoo-aa. Whatever pleases Him shall come to pass.
MET 5 ATE TH TM WAU (154-2, aSst, we 1) avar na karnai vaalaa doo-aa. ||1|| There is no other Doer except Him. ||1]|
Oo" Wal AGH aes Sat StS Il 154-2, ast, ue 1) naa jaanaa karam kayvad tayree daat. I do not know about karma, or how great Your gifts are.
AGH UH SI OH at AAS UA TIC Il (154-2, TVs, ve 1)
karam Dharam tayray naam kee jaat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The karma of actions, the Dharma of righteousness, social class and status, are contained within Your Name. ||1||Pause| |
3 Sey WS UeSTT Il (154-3, wat, we 1) too ayvad daataa dayvanhaar. You are So Great, O Giver, O Great Giver!
sfe odt 30 safs Fas I 154-3, TCH, He 1) tot naahee tuDh bhagat bhandaar. The treasure of Your devotional worship is never exhausted.
abot aaa & wit]e SAA i 154-3, ast, He 1) kee-aa garab na aavai raas. One who takes pride in himself shall never be right.
mM fils AS 3d UTA QI 154-4, ast, ne 1) jee-o pind sabh tayrai paas. ||2|| The soul and body are all at Your disposal. ||2||
3 ung Fieote auth frefe Wt cs4-4, ast, He 1) too maar jeevaaleh bakhas milaa-ay. You kill and rejuvenate. You forgive and merge us into Yourself.
frS aret f36 ony Aufe I 154-4, ast, ne ji-o bhaavee ti-o naam japaa-ay. As it pleases You, You inspire us to chant Your Name.
3 wor dor Ara ffs AS I 54-5, weet, we 1) too’ daanaa beenaa saachaa sir mayrai. You are All-knowing, All-seeing and True, O my Supreme Lord.
aanfs efe sdA Sd SI (154-5, west, He 1) gurmat day-ay bharosai tayrai. ||3]| Please, bless me with the Guru's Teachings; my faith is in You alone. ||3]|
36 Hf HS ot HS TST Il 154-5, aSst, wz 1) tan meh mail naahee man raataa. One whose mind is attuned to the Lord, has no pollution in his body.
ad adat AY Aafe uss Il (154-6, west, ve 1) gur bachnee sach sabad pachhaataa. Through the Guru's Word, the True Shabad is realized.
ST TVS OH at Some Il 154-6, aSst, ue 1 tayraa taan naam kee vadi-aa-ee. All Power is Yours, through the greatness of Your Name.
Soa Jat Sails ATStet ISUIOMl (154-6, TSS, He 1)
naanak rahnaa bhagat sarnaa-ee. ||4]|10]| Nanak abides in the Sanctuary of Your devotees. ||4]|10]|
TCS HIS A Il (154-7) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
fafs more aotfemr mifuS uborfenr it 54-7, a@st, ne 1) jin akath kahaa-i-aa api-o pee-aa-i-aa. Those who speak the Unspoken, drink in the Nectar.
wo 3 fend oft mrfemr Wal 154-7, aes, He 1)
an bhai visray naam samaa-i-aa. ||1]|
Other fears are forgotten, and they are absorbed into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
fom sdb 3g sofa ANAT Il (154-8, west, He 1) ki-aa daree-ai dar dareh samaanaa. Why should we fear, when fear is dispelled by the Fear of God?
Us TT & Hale USS IU TIS i (154-8, aSst, we 1) pooray gur kai sabad pachhaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, I recognize God. ||1]|Pause]|
fan og oH fee of oh 1 ofA Hate fies AEA NN (154-9, west, He 1)
jis nar raam ridai har raas. sahj subhaa-ay milay saabaas. ||2||
Those whose hearts are filled with the Lord's essence are blessed and acclaimed, and intuitively absorbed into the Lord. ||2]|
wf Herd ATS fires Il 154-9, weet, He 1 jaahi savaarai saajh bi-aal. Those whom the Lord puts to sleep, evening and morning
fes 8S HOHY TO aes Ill (154-9, aSst, ve 1) it ut manmukh baaDhay kaal. ||3]]| - those self-willed manmukhs are bound and gagged by Death, here and hereafter.
[SII
uifafata oH fee A Us Il (154-10, ast, Hs 1) ahinis raam ridai say pooray. Those whose hearts are filled with the Lord, day and night, are perfect.
TSX TH FHS FH EF USUAL 154-10, ast, v2 1) naanak raam milay bharam dooray. ||4||11]| O Nanak, they merge into the Lord, and their doubts are cast away. ||4]|11]|
ASt HIG Il (154-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Hof He 3 Te fasarg il (54-11, wet, ve 1) janam marai tarai gun hitkaar. One who loves the three qualities is subject to birth and death.
ad Fe AAT MAT Il (154-11, aVst, He 1) chaaray bayd katheh aakaar. The four Vedas speak only of the visible forms.
Ste mene aats eftimirg il 154-11, rest, uz teen avasthaa kaheh vakhi-aan. They describe and explain the three states of mind,
sdurene Asad 3 dfs AS NA (154-12, Test, He 1 turee-aavasthaa satgur tay har jaan. ||1|| but the fourth state, union with the Lord, is known only through the True Guru. ||1]|
TH Salts WT AST STar Il (154-12, west, uz 1) raam bhagat gur sayvaa tarnaa. Through devotional worship of the Lord, and service to the Guru, one swims across.
wofs HOH 6 dfs FT Heat NU TTS Il 154-12, west, He 1) baahurh janam na ho-ay hai marnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Then, one is not born again, and is not subject to death. ||1||Pause| |
ofs uesa ad AS AST Il (154-13, ast, v2 1) chaar padaarath kahai sabh ko-ee. Everyone speaks of the four great blessings;
fifqfs wrAS ufss uf Ret I 154-13, Bet, He 1) simrit saasat pandit mukh so-ee. the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Pandits speak of them as well.
fae ad vise stag © urfemr I 054-13, rest, ue bin gur arath beechaar na paa-i-aa. But without the Guru, they do not understand their true significance.
Hats ues sats af urfemr Qi 154-14, west, He 1 mukat padaarath bhagat har paa-i-aa. ||2|| The treasure of liberation is obtained through devotional worship of the Lord. ||2]|
aw a fase efor afe Aet i 154-14, ast, He 1) jaa kai hirdai vasi-aa har so-ee. Those, within whose hearts the Lord dwells,
qenty sats usufs det | 154-15, ast, He 1) gurmukh bhagat paraapat ho-ee. become Gurmukh; they receive the blessings of devotional worship.
dfs at safs Hats mrss il 154-15, ast, ne 1) har kee bhagat mukat aanand. Through devotional worship of the Lord, liberation and bliss are obtained.
TIHAS US UPHSET NBM (154-15, aCst, He 1) gurmat paa-ay parmaanand. ||3]| Through the Guru's Teachings, supreme ecstasy is obtained. ||3]||
fafs utfeur afe efy fearfemr it 154-16, a@st, He 1 jin paa-i-aa gur daykh dikhaa-i-aa. One who meets the Guru, beholds Him, and inspires others to behold Him as well.
mA Hts feaA getter i 154-16, asst, us 1) aasaa maahi niraas bujhaa-i-aa. In the midst of hope, the Guru teaches us to live above hope and desire.
dar STE Aa AYSTST Il (154-16, west, He 1) deenaa naath sarab sukh-daata. He is the Master of the meek, the Giver of peace to all.
BSA Ts BIat HS HS" MSNA (154-17, aVst, He 1
naanak har charnee man raataa. ||4||12|| Nanak's mind is imbued with the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||4]]12]|
ast Sst HIS 9 Il (154-17) ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 1. Gauree Chaytee, First Mehl:
nifys afeor od Haret at feg AAS I 454-17, aGet Tat, He amrit kaa-i-aa rahai sukhaalee baajee ih sansaaro. With your nectar-like body, you live in comfort, but this world is just a passing drama.
BI BF HY az antefs ages Borefa srg Il (154-18, aC SSH, we lab lobh much koorh kamaaveh bahut uthaaveh bhaaro. You practice greed, avarice and great falsehood, and you carry such a heavy burden.
3 wfeor 4 gaet Set fas os Gufs ss AM (154-18, ast Sz, Hs 1) too” kaa-i-aa mai ruldee daykhee ji-o Dhar upar chhaaro. ||1|| O body, I have seen you blowing away like dust on the earth. ||1||
Afe Afe fre THs Il (154-19, ast SSH, ne 1) sun sun sikh hamaaree. Listen - listen to my advice!
Afaz atst sort AS Abs safe o mre Sat NA TIS I (154-19, west Sz, we 1) sukarit kKeetaa rahsee mayray jee-arhay bahurh na aavai vaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only the good deeds which you have done shall remain with you, O my soul. This opportunity shall not come again! ||1]|Pause| |
Uar quu ve 30 nme Hot ofenr F Afe fra TS I (155-1, wet SA, we
ha-o tuDh aakhaa mayree kaa-i-aa too™ sun sikh hamaaree. I say to you, O my body: listen to my advice!
foer feet xafa uaret sat wfesarct Il (155-1, ast Sst, we 1) nindaa chindaa karahi paraa-ee jhoothee laa-itbaaree. You slander, and then praise others; you indulge in lies and gossip.
efs uset Hafs Hhas ass Sct sfonrst i 155-2, aGat Sst, we 1 vayl paraa-ee joheh jee-arhay karahi choree buri-aaree. You gaze upon the wives of others, O my soul; you steal and commit evil deeds.
Jn siour 3 fue sdtefs gefs Tenis ares WU 155-2, ast Sst, ws 1) hans chali-aa too” pichhai rahee-ayhi chhutarh ho-ee-ah naaree. ||2]| But when the swan departs, you shall remain behind, like an abandoned woman. ||2| |
3 afent adits qudésts 30 for aaH oorfenr I (155-3, west Sst, He too” kaa-i-aa rahee-ah supnantar tuDh ki-aa karam kamaa-i-aa. O body, you are living in a dream! What good deeds have you done?
afe odt Hw fae Sor st nfs ser otfemr Ih 155-4, aGat SSH, He 1 kar choree mai jaa kichh lee-aa taa man bhalaa bhaa-i-aa. When I stole something by deception, then my mind was pleased.
Jofs 5 Ast uafs 3 eet wifoer AoW TetfeMr ISI 155-4, agSt 3s, He 1
halat na sobhaa palat na dho-ee ahilaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||3]|
I have no honor in this world, and I shall find no shelter in the world hereafter. My life has been lost, wasted in vain! |[3]|
IG udt vost det wa ood Ast aS 5 ue set NU TIS Ih (155-5, TSH TSA, ne Y ha-o kharee duhaylee ho-ee baabaa naanak mayree baat na puchhai ko-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am totally miserable! O Baba Nanak, no one cares for me at all! ||1]||Pause||
aH Saat Aes Ju Aus AT SI I (155-5, ast SH, ve 1) taajee turkee su-inaa rupaa kaparh kayray bhaaraa. Turkish horses, gold, silver and loads of gorgeous clothes
fan dt ots 5 VS Boa Bis Sis US TSS Il (155-6, aSst FSH, ve 1) kis hee naal na chalay naanak jharh jharh pa-ay gavaaraa. - none of these shall go with you, O Nanak. They are lost and left behind, you fool!
aw Het H AS fas whim fea vifys on SHS Vil 155-6, Test SSH, we
koojaa mayvaa mai sabh kichh chaakhi-aa ik amrit naam tumaaraa. ||4||
I have tasted all the sugar candy and sweets, but Your Name alone is Ambrosial Nectar. ||4]|
2 2 ole fees Crd smivg af St i 155-7, aSat SS, we
day day neev divaal usaaree bhasmandar kee dhayree.
Digging deep foundations, the walls are constructed, but in the end, the buildings return to heaps of dust.
Hd Afe 3 cet fan dt vig we AS eT Il 155-7, agat SSH, He 1) sanchay sanch na day-ee kis hee anDh jaanai sabh mayree.
People gather and hoard their possessions, and give nothing to anyone else - the poor fools think that everything is theirs.
Afes sar Afes ust AU fan o act ull ”55-8, ast SSF, He 1) so-in lankaa so-in maarhee sampai kisai na kayree. ||5|| Riches do not remain with anyone - not even the golden palaces of Sri Lanka. ||5]|
Afe Had Ho MAST Il (155-8, aGet Sst, we 1) sun moorakh man ajaanaa. Listen, you foolish and ignorant mind
da fA at Stat AU TTS Il 1155-9, ast SHH, He VY hog tisai kaa bhaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. - only His Will prevails. ||1]|Pause] |
ATT JH StaAT SS" TH (3A A SEAS Ill (155-9, aTCat Sst, uz 1) saahu hamaaraa thaakur bhaaraa ham tis kay vanjaaray. My Banker is the Great Lord and Master. I am only His petty merchant.
Mm fils As afk fA at wfa omy STS NENVUISI (155-9, Test TSH, nz Y jee-o pind sabh raas tisai kee maar aapay jeevaalay. ||6||1]]13]]| This soul and body all are His. He Himself kills, and brings back to life. ||6]|1]|13]|
agat SSt HIS 9 I (155-10) ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 1. Gauree Chaytee, First Mehl:
wefa Us JH Sa Hot fas gu we srg HoT Il (155-10, ast Sst, He 1)
avar panch ham ayk janaa ki-o raakha-o ghar baar manaa.
There are five of them, but I am all alone. How can I protect my hearth and home, O my mind?
Hefs Sets ats ats far ora ast yors AST UU (155-11, Test SA, He 1)
maareh looteh neet neet kis aagai karee pukaar janaa. ||1|| They are beating and plundering me over and over again; unto whom can I complain?
[2|
At TH STH Bug Hor Il (155-11, aGat Sst, we 1) Saree raam naamaa uchar manaa. Chant the Name of the Supreme Lord, O my mind.
Widl AH Ve fey war a TIS i 155-12, aSat 3s, ve 1)
aagai jam dal bikham ghanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Otherwise, in the world hereafter, you will have to face the awesome and cruel army of Death. ||1]||Pause| |
Gris nsat ge eure safe sot AT GT I (155-12, aGst SSH, He 1)
usaar marholee raakhai du-aaraa bheetar baithee saa Dhanaa.
God has erected the temple of the body; He has placed the nine doors, and the soul- bride sits within.
nifys ae ad fos ants wets e2efe AUS AST IQ (155-13, west Sst, He 1) amrit kayl karay nit kaaman avar lutayn so panch janaa. ||2|| She enjoys the sweet play again and again, while the five demons are plundering her.
21 |
ata Heat Sfenr Sas AT US UaSt SA AST Il (155-13, TS SSA, we
dhaahi marholee looti-aa dayhuraa saa Dhan pakrhee ayk janaa.
In this way, the temple is being demolished; the body is being plundered, and the soul-bride, left all alone, is captured.
AH 3a ae Hae ufsur ofa Te A Us AST SBI (155-14, aCSt SSH, He 1)
jam dandaa gal sangal parhi-aa bhaag ga-ay say panch janaa. ||3]||
Death strikes her down with his rod, the shackles are placed around her neck, and now the five have left. ||3]|
onfs os Afea our fig wafe A wOST I (155-14, aGat Sst, He 1) kaaman lorhai su-inaa rupaa mitar lurhayn so khaaDhaataa. The wife yearns for gold and silver, and her friends, the senses, yearn for good food.
Soa UU ad fo HSE WA AHUfs PAS ISNNISI (155-15, Test SSH, vs 1D)
naanak paap karay tin kaaran jaasee jampur baaDhaataa. ||4]|2||14]| O Nanak, she commits sins for their sake; she shall go, bound and gagged, to the City of Death. ||4]|2]|14]|
ast SSt HIS 9 Il (155-16) ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 1. Gauree Chaytee, First Mehl:
Hear 3 we sists Her atfenr ath fifarst i 155-16, ret SH, ne 1)
mundraa tay ghat bheetar mundraa kaa"-i-aa keejai khinthaataa.
Let your ear-rings be those ear-rings which pierce deep within your heart. Let your body be your patched coat.
uv 38 aff atafs wee fg ne ata SITS A 155-16, TSH SH, He
panch chaylay vas keejeh raaval ih man keejai dandaataa. ||1||
Let the five passions be disciples under your control, O begging Yogi, and make this mind your walking stick. ||1||
na Hats fe|s urefAst Il 155-17, aGst SSH, He 1) jog jugat iv paavsitaa. Thus you shall find the Way of Yoga.
fq Hae a dg oAls ae His Ho SST UU TIS I (155-17, ast Ss, 3 1)
ayk sabad doojaa hor naasat kand mool man laavsitaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
There is only the One Word of the Shabad; everything else shall pass away. Let this be the fruits and roots of your mind's diet. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfs Hsfent A ag ue TH Ts alot sarse il (155-18, Tes SzA, we
moond moondaa-i-ai jay gur paa-ee-ai ham gur keenee gangaataa.
Some try to find the Guru by shaving their heads at the Ganges, but I have made the Guru my Ganges.
fasee sawed” Aum Sa o SSiA viarst IQ (155-19, aGat TH, He 1)
taribhavan taaranhaar su-aamee ayk na chaytas anDhaataa. ||2| | The Saving Grace of the three worlds is the One Lord and Master, but those in darkness do not remember Him. ||2| |
ats ucy met Ho Beth AAT HTS 3 ATSAST I (155-19, aCSt Set, Hs 1)
kar patamb galee man laavas sansaa mool na jaavsitaa.
Practicing hypocrisy and attaching your mind to worldly objects, your doubt shall never depart.
uot que San val A fos wets off Sfs at wefAs SI (156-1, Test SSH, He DY
aykas charnee jay chit laaveh lab lobh kee Dhaavsitaa. ||3]|| If you focus your consciousness on the Feet of the One Lord, what reason would you have to chase after greed? ||3]|
auth fadre defA Hat Il (156-1, west Set, He 1) japas niranjan rachas manaa. Meditate on the Immaculate Lord, and saturate your mind with Him.
and safe Halt aus wor Al TIS I 156-2, west SH, He kaahay boleh jogee kapat ghanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why, O Yogi, do you make so many false and deceptive claims? ||1]|Pause]|
atfent anet SAH feuiret Het Het ass faaetst I 156-2, west Set, nz 1)
kaa-i-aa kamlee hans i-aanaa mayree mayree karat bihaaneetaa.
The body is wild, and the mind is foolish. Practicing egotism, selfishness and conceit, your life is passing away.
ysets ood oat as fefs ue ussratst IVISINIWI (156-3, aSSt Tat, He paranvat naanak naagee daajhai fir paachhai pachhutaaneetaa. ||4]|3||15]| Prays Nanak, when the naked body is cremated, then you will come to regret and repent. ||4]|3]|15]|
ast Sst HIS 9 Il (156-3) ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 1. Gauree Chaytee, First Mehl:
miGug 43 He Ho Sa A ate fer fag att F i 156-3, ast Set, ws 1)
a-ukhaDh mantar mool man aykai jay kar darirh chit keejai ray.
O mind, there is only the One medicine, mantra and healing herb - center your consciousness firmly on the One Lord.
HOH HOH A UT AGH A ASST SIA F MAU! (156-4, aSst Sst, we 1) janam janam kay paap karam kay katanhaaraa leejai ray. ||1]| Take to the Lord, the Destroyer of the sins and karma of past incarnations. ||1]|
Ho Sa Afog set FT ll 156-5, aGat SSH, He 1) man ayko saahib bhaa-ee ray. The One Lord and Master is pleasing to my mind.
33 sifs ga AAs AHefs nie o BMST AST TU TIC Il 56-5, Test SSH, He tayray teen gunaa sansaar samaaveh alakh na lakh-naa jaa-ee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In Your three qualities, the world is engrossed; the Unknowable cannot be known. ||1]|Pause] |
Had us Hear sfs Htet gH 3G us Buret F Il 156-6, west SH, He sakar khand maa-i-aa tan meethee ham ta-o pand uchaa-ee ray. Maya is so sweet to the body, like sugar or molasses. We all carry loads of it.
ots mddt AStA od oA cata HAT STEt F MI (156-6, aCst Sst, He 1)
raat anayree soojhas naahee laj tookas moosaa bhaa-ee ray. ||2||
In the dark of the night, nothing can be seen. The mouse of death is gnawing away at the rope of life, O Siblings of Destiny! ||2]|
Houfa aafs Sat eu ore Tafa fs Zoret Fi 156-7, aes SSH, we Y
manmukh karahi taytaa dukh laagai gurmukh milai vadaa-ee ray.
As the self-willed manmukhs act, they suffer in pain. The Gurmukh obtains honor and greatness.
a fate aor ret dur fass 3 Afenr wet FT SI 156-7, west 3S, He jo tin kee-aa so-ee ho-aa kirat na mayti-aa jaa-ee ray. ||3]|| Whatever He does, that alone happens; past actions cannot be erased. ||3]||
Had 38 3 dele CS ATS GT HS T Il 156-8, west SSH, we DY
subhar bharay na hoveh oonay jo raatay rang laa-ee ray.
Those who are imbued with, and committed to the Lord's Love, are filled to overflowing; they never lack anything.
fo at ua de A Sa 3 Hs fas uret F ISIS! (56-8, Tet TS, we 1)
tin kee pank hovai jay naanak ta-o moorhaa kichh paa-ee ray. ||4]|4]|16|| If Nanak could be the dust of their feet, then he, the ignorant one, might also obtain some. ||4]|4]|16] |
ast St HIS 9 Il (156-9) ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 1. Gauree Chaytee, First Mehl:
as at Het ay as aT fors GST TH wie I (156-9, wat Sst, He 1) kat kee maa-ee baap kat kayraa kidoo thaavhu ham aa-ay. Who is our mother, and who is our father? Where did we come from?
wate fis ne stats foun ard af Cure all 156-10, a@at SS, He 1)
agan bimb jal bheetar nipjay kaahay kamm upaa-ay. ||1]||
We are formed from the fire of the womb within, and the bubble of water of the sperm. For what purpose are we created? ||1]|
He wfsa ae We Te 3g Il 156-10, west SHH, He mayray saahibaa ka-un jaanai gun tayray. O my Master, who can know Your Glorious Virtues?
ad & Wat mMBae HS NU! TIS Il 156-11, Test SHH, He 1 kahay na jaanee a-ugan mayray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My own demerits cannot be counted. ||1||Pause]|
as gu fsa IH MS AS UA Sure Il 156-11, ast Set, He 1) kaytay rukh birakh ham cheenay kaytay pasoo upaa-ay. I took the form of so many plants and trees, and so many animals.
iN
as aa get xfs ore AZ Ue STS | 156-11, aCat TH, v2 Y kaytay naag kulee meh aa-ay kaytay pankh udaa-ay. ||2]| Many times I entered the families of snakes and flying birds. ||2| |
Je uce fan Hea 36 afs Sat whe mre II (156-12, aGst BSF, He 1)
hat patan bij mandar bhannai kar choree ghar aavai.
I broke into the shops of the city and well-guarded palaces; stealing from them, I snuck home again.
wag ea fueg Fa 35 3 AT SUS ll (156-12, aGat SH, we agahu daykhai pichhahu daykhai tujh tay kahaa chhapaavai. ||3]|| I looked in front of me, and I looked behind me, but where could I hide from You?
[I3]|
Ze shee TH Oe US VA J] USS HAT Il (156-13, TGs BS, He 1)
tat tirath ham nav khand daykhay hat patan baajaaraa.
I saw the banks of sacred rivers, the nine continents, the shops and bazaars of the cities.
Ba saat safe war we dt ufs Tanta ISI (156-13, west Set, He 1) lai kai takrhee tolan laagaa ghat hee meh vanjaaraa. ||4]| Taking the scale, the merchant begins to weigh his actions within his own heart. ||4||
as AMe AT olfe sf 33 mBaE TH Il 156-14, weet SSH, He jaytaa samund saagar neer bhari-aa taytay a-ugan hamaaray. As the seas and the oceans are overflowing with water, so vast are my own sins.
efent aad fag food Gureg sae UaT BS MUM (156-15, TCHt Sst, Hs 1)
da-i-aa karahu kichh mihar upaavhu dubday pathar taaray. ||5]|
Please, shower me with Your Mercy, and take pity upon me. I am a sinking stone - please carry me across! ||5||
Ahr wats saafe su safe edt ast I 156-15, ast Sst, we 1) jee-arhaa agan baraabar tapai bheetar vagai kaatee. My soul is burning like fire, and the knife is cutting deep.
ysets SOR JAH use AY Je feg TSt NENUNII (156-16, TSHt SH, He 1) paranvat naanak hukam pachhaanai sukh hovai din raatee. ||6||5||17]|
Prays Nanak, recognizing the Lord's Command, I am at peace, day and night. [6] [5] [2171]
ast Faas HIS 4 Il (156-16) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 1. Gauree Bairaagan, First Mehl:
dfs aeet Afe & feeR aetfeur ute I 156-17, aGst Seats, He 1) rain gavaa-ee so-ay kai divas gavaa-i-aa khaa-ay. The nights are wasted sleeping, and the days are wasted eating.
dts AA HOH J aGst ges ATE NA (156-17, aGSt Aoals, He 1) heeray jaisaa janam hai ka-udee badlay jaa-ay. ||1|| Human life is such a precious jewel, but it is being lost in exchange for a mere shell.
[21
OH 6 AfSeni TH A Il (156-17, Test Feats, v2 1) naam na jaani-aa raam kaa. You do not know the Name of the Lord.
He fefs ue ussfe FU TIS il (156-18, Test Aorafs, uz 1) moorhay fir paachhai pachhutaahi ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. You fool - you shall regret and repent in the end! ||1]|Pause]|
Mos" US Udel Ud MOS 3B Mtowt ATE I (156-18, Test Soars, v2 1)
antaa Dhan Dharnee Dharay anat na chaahi-aa jaa-ay.
You bury your temporary wealth in the ground, but how can you love that which is temporary?
Mos AG WIS A Te A Me nies Tete Ql (156-19, aSat aware, ue 1)
anat ka-o chaahan jo ga-ay say aa-ay anat gavaa-ay. ||2||
Those who have departed, after craving for temporary wealth, have returned home without this temporary wealth. ||2||
nitus Shor A HS STAT a aa AE Il 156-19, aGat aoats, nz 1) aapan lee-aa jay milai taa sabh ko bhaagath ho-ay. If people could gather it in by their own efforts, then everyone would be so lucky.
UST quD
ao Gufs foas A Se AS af! SI 157-1, aSat dears, nH: 1)
karmaa upar nibrhai jay lochai sabh ko-ay. ||3]|
According to the karma of past actions, one's destiny unfolds, even though everyone wants to be so lucky. ||3]||
Soa ade fate aor At ATS ASE I 157-1, aGst Aorafs, He 1) naanak karnaa jin kKee-aa so-ee saar karay-i. O Nanak, the One who created the creation - He alone takes care of it.
Jay 3 AN MAH at fan earet STE NSNANACH (157-2, aGst Aoats, He 1)
hukam na jaapee khasam kaa kisai vadaa-ee day-ay. ||4||1||18]|
The Hukam of our Lord and Master's Command cannot be known; He Himself blesses us with greatness. ||4]|1]|18]|
ast Saas HIS 4 I (157-2) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 1. Gauree Bairaagan, First Mehl:
Tet det afs aA ae He Ble wS i 157-2, ast doats, ws
harnee hovaa ban basaa kand mool chun khaa-o.
What if I were to become a deer, and live in the forest, picking and eating fruits and roots
qd ust Ha Ag fs ais ais ge we AE WA 157-3, aGat dora, ve 1)
gur parsaadee mayraa saho milai vaar vaar ha-o jaa-o jee-o. ||1]|
- by Guru's Grace, I am a sacrifice to my Master. Again and again, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice. ||1]|
H gonate IH at Il (157-3, aGst Sorafs, ve 1) mai banjaaran raam kee. I am the shop-keeper of the Lord.
37 OH Sug Surg At NAN TTS I 157-4, aGst Sorafs, ue 1) tayraa naam vakhar vaapaar jee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your Name is my merchandise and trade. ||1]|Pause| |
afae de nifa sat ofa wae ses Il 157-4, west dorats, He 1) kokil hovaa amb basaa sahj sabad beechaar.
If I were to become a cuckoo, living in a mango tree, I would still contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
Aofa pate He Ag fee Tents sf mg i (157-5, ast Boats, vs 1)
sahj subhaa-ay mayraa saho milai darsan roop apaar. ||2| |
I would still meet my Lord and Master, with intuitive ease; the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of His Form, is incomparably beautiful. ||2] |
Hest de vfs sat aba Hs Afs vfs i 57-5, aSat Serats, ne 1)
machhulee hovaa jal basaa jee-a jant sabh saar.
If I were to become a fish, living in the water, I would still remember the Lord, who watches over all beings and creatures.
Gsefs ufs Ha AG ZA IG feat aa ure Sil (157-6, a@at aerate, nz 1)
urvaar paar mayraa saho vasai ha-o mila-ugee baah pasaar. ||3]||
My Husband Lord dwells on this shore, and on the shore beyond; I would still meet Him, and hug Him close in my embrace. ||3]|
Safe det Ud ZA Ase ZA SC ATE I 157-6, ast avafs, He 1)
naagan hovaa Dhar vasaa sabad vasai bha-o jaa-ay.
If I were to become a snake, living in the ground, the Shabad would still dwell in my mind, and my fears would be dispelled.
Soa Ae’ Avaat fas Ast vfs ANTS NSNQNAC! (457-7, ast Seats, He 1)
naanak sadaa sohaaganee jin jotee jot samaa-ay. ||4]|2||19]| O Nanak, they are forever the happy soul-brides, whose light merges into His Light. [14] 12] [19] |
asst ysat Shut HIS 4 (157-8) ga-orhee poorbee deepkee mehlaa 1 Gauree Poorbee Deepkee, First Mehl:
qe Afsars urrfe il (157-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A ufe atefs wiht ages a af ated il 157-9, a@at uset ust, we 1) jai ghar keerat aakhee-ai kartay kaa ho-ay beechaaro. In that house where the Praises of the Creator are chanted
fez ufs aeg Afser freag franead A 1157-9, a@at yset Shust, Hs 1)
tit ghar gaavhu sohilaa sivrahu sirjanhaaro. ||1]|
- in that house, sing the Songs of Praise, and meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord. ||1]|
3H weg He fesse a Afoer i (157-10, west yoet Shustt, us 1)
tum gaavhu mayray nirbha-o kaa sohilaa.
Sing the Songs of Praise of my Fearless Lord.
JG act we fas Afss Ae AY SE NAN TIS Il 157-10, aCzt yset hua, ve 1)
ha-o vaaree jaa-o jit sohilai sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to that Song of Praise which brings eternal peace. ||1]|Pause| |
fos fos Hhas AHsbafs Shar Pesos | (157-11, aSat yset rust, us 1) nit nit jee-arhay samaalee-an daykhaigaa dayvanhaar. Day after day, He cares for His beings; the Great Giver watches over all.
33 2S ahs o ue fSR GS AS ANG IMI (157-11, aGat yoo Shot, we 1) tayray daanai keemat naa pavai tis daatay kavan sumaar. ||2|| Your gifts cannot be appraised; how can anyone compare to the Giver? | |2] |
Rats Are foftor ffs afe ured 3 i (157-12, a@at uset Shut, us 1)
sSambat saahaa likhi-aa mil kar paavhu tayl.
The day of my wedding is pre-ordained. Come - let's gather together and pour the oil over the threshold.
2g Ane orAtAsior fa Je wrfog fC AS Si (157-12, west yset Shust, ws 1) dayh sajan aaseesrhee-aa ji-o hovai saahib si-o mayl. ||3]| My friends, give me your blessings, that I may merge with my Lord and Master. ||3]|
ufe ufs Sd urge Aes fos uefa I (157-13, aGat yset Shust, He 1)
ghar ghar ayho paahuchaa sad-rhay nit pavann.
Unto each and every home, into each and every heart, this summons is sent out; the call comes each and every day.
Heeas frit saa A feo orefe sUlQoil 057-13, ast yset Crust, ne 1) sadanhaaraa simree-ai naanak say dih aavann. ||4||1||20] |
Remember in meditation the One who summons us; O Nanak, that day is drawing near! ||4]|1]|20]|
TH ACSt Wrst it 057-15) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree. Raag Gauree Gwaarayree:
HIG 3 Bue ll 157-15)
mehlaa 3 cha-upday. Third Mehl, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars urrfe i (157-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ata fife ofs Hor det il 157-16, wat amrsct, ve 3) gur mili-ai har maylaa ho-ee. Meeting the Guru, we meet the Lord.
nmy Afs fre Het I (157-16, aGst aursct, ve 3) aapay mayl milaavai so-ee. He Himself unites us in His Union.
Aa us AS fafa md AS I (157-16, at anrdct, He 3) mayraa parabh sabh biDh aapay jaanai. My God knows all His Own Ways.
i a
Jan HS ASfe use WAU! (157-17, aSSt arse, He 3) hukmay maylay sabad pachhaanai. ||1]|
By the Hukam of His Command, He unites those who recognize the Word of the Shabad. ||1]||
Afsag & aff gu 3@ Ate i 157-17, a@et anrdct, v8 3) satgur kai bha-ay bharam bha-o jaa-ay. By the Fear of the True Guru, doubt and fear are dispelled.
3 Ie Ae star ANTS UU TIS Il 157-17, aSSt anrset, ne 3) bhai raachai sach rang samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Imbued with His Fear, we are absorbed in the Love of the True One. ||1]|Pause] |
ats fife ofa nfs ZA ASE i (157-18, aGst amrdct, ve 3) gur mili-ai har man vasai subhaa-ay. Meeting the Guru, the Lord naturally dwells within the mind.
Aa yg stat ats Sot UAE I (157-18, aGSt aorsct, ne 3) mayraa parabh bhaaraa keemat nahee paa-ay. My God is Great and Almighty; His value cannot be estimated.
Rafe Ad MSO UTSTSTT Il (157-19, Test arses, 2 3) sabad salaahai ant na paaraavaar. Through the Shabad, I praise Him; He has no end or limitations.
Ha Ys FMA FAAST'Y IQ! (157-19, aGat gnrset, we 3) mayraa parabh bakhsay bakhsanhaar. ||2|| My God is the Forgiver. I pray that He may forgive me. ||2||
ate fufemt As nfs fa df& I 157-19, west amrddt, He 3) gur mili-ai sabh mat buDh ho-ay. Meeting the Guru, all wisdom and understanding are obtained.
UST Que
Hfs fooHfs SA Ag AE I (58-1, aGSt ardet, He 3) man nirmal vasai sach so-ay. The mind becomes pure, when the True Lord dwells within.
Ate efit ATS AS ATS Il (158-1, test araset, v2 3) saach vasi-ai saachee sabh kaar. When one dwells in Truth, all actions become true.
Osu aget Hae Fas SI (158-1, Ast gorsst, He 3) ootam karnee sabad beechaar. ||3]| The ultimate action is to contemplate the Word of the Shabad. ||3] |
qd J ASH AST SE ll (158-2, aSst anrdet, 2 3) gur tay saachee sayvaa ho-ay. Through the Guru, true service is performed.
Tanfe oH uere af& | (158-2, a@st ards, v2 3) gurmukh naam pachhaanai ko-ay. How rare is that Gurmukh who recognizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ale Bat Seg Il (158-2, west anrsct, ve 3) jeevai daataa dayvanhaar. The Giver, the Great Giver, lives forever.
Soa Ts SH SA firs uslUIUi (158-3, Test anrset, He 3) naanak har naamay lagai pi-aar. ||4||1||21]| Nanak enshrines love for the Name of the Lord. ||4]|1]|21]|
ast Wairgat HIS 3 Il (158-3) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
ad 3 fomrg ue AG ate Il (158-3, aSat anrdet, He 3) gur tay gi-aan paa-ay jan ko-ay. Those who obtain spiritual wisdom from the Guru are very rare.
Gs 3 gs AS AE i (158-4, west arse, ws 3) gur tay boojhai seejhai so-ay. Those who obtain this understanding from the Guru become acceptable.
ad 3 AIA AS Steg Il (58-4, ast anrdst, ve 3) gur tay sahj saach beechaar. Through the Guru, we intuitively contemplate the True One.
qd 3 we Hats SMrs IA (158-4, Test arse, He 3) gur tay paa-ay mukat du-aar. ||1]| Through the Guru, the Gate of Liberation is found. ||1]|
ud ota FHS TT wrfe i ass-4, est gorse, vs 3) poorai bhaag milai gur aa-ay. Through perfect good destiny, we come to meet the Guru.
Ard ofa Aes ANTE NAN TIS I 158-5, ast aurset, He 3) saachai sahj saach samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The true ones are intuitively absorbed in the True Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
ate fife feror nafs see 1 (158-5, aGst anrdct, ne 3) gur mili-ai tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ay. Meeting the Guru, the fire of desire is quenched.
ad 3 ALS SA Hf MME I 158-5, west gursst, 2 3) gur tay saat vasai man aa-ay. Through the Guru, peace and tranquility come to dwell within the mind.
ad 3 ufes ures af df Il (158-6, ast auras, He 3) gur tay pavit paavan such ho-ay. Through the Guru, we become pure, holy and true.
ad 3 Rafe fort SE QI 158-6, west aursct, He 3) gur tay sabad milaavaa ho-ay. ||2| | Through the Guru, we are absorbed in the Word of the Shabad. ||2]|
WS TI AS SHH SHet I (158-6, tat aurset,, 2 3) baajh guroo sabh bharam bhulaa-ee. Without the Guru, everyone wanders in doubt.
fag oe gost oy uTet Il (158-7, aGSt anrdet, He 3) bin naavai bahutaa dukh paa-ee. Without the Name, they suffer in terrible pain.
qoute Je A BMH fore it (158-7, aes amrddt, ve 3) gurmukh hovai so naam Dhi-aa-ee. Those who meditate on the Naam become Gurmukh.
ZdAfs Ad At ufs Tet WS 158-7, ast anrset, He 3) darsan sachai sachee pat ho-ee. ||3]| True honor is obtained through the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the True Lord. ||3]|
fan S adh est fea ASt Il 1158-8, ast arse, v2 3) kis no kahee-ai daataa ik so-ee. Why speak of any other? He alone is the Giver.
fagut ad Aafe fore det I 158-8, ast anradet, 2 3) kirpaa karay sabad milaavaa ho-ee. When He grants His Grace, union with the Shabad is obtained.
firs UfSH ATS TS Ae Il 158-8, Test anrsct, ve 3) mil pareetam saachay gun gaavaa. Meeting with my Beloved, I sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Soa ATS ATs AHS NSUQUQAM (158-9, TSSt arrdet, He 3)
naanak saachay saach samaavaa. ||4]||2||22|| O Nanak, becoming true, I am absorbed in the True One. ||4||2||22| |
aTSt Wairsat HIS 3 I (158-9) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
Hw wg Ho foone dfs I 58-9, weet ards, He 3) so thaa-o sach man nirmal ho-ay. True is that place, where the mind becomes pure.
Afs foeq ad Ag ALE II (158-10, Text ardet, He 3) sach nivaas karay sach so-ay. True is the one who abides in Truth.
Het oat Aa VS AT Il (158-10, St rset, He 3) sachee banee jug chaaray jaapai. The True Bani of the Word is known throughout the four ages.
AS fae ATS mM mM NAM (158-10, ast amrsct, He 3) sabh kichh saachaa aapay aapai. ||1|| The True One Himself is everything. ||1]|
AGH de ASAfa foe i 58-11, aGst arse, He 3) karam hovai satsang milaa-ay. Through the karma of good actions, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
dfs we we SA A aS NA TIS Nh (158-11, aSSt ardet, He 3) har gun gaavai bais so thaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Sing the Glories of the Lord, sitting in that place. ||1]|Pause]|
mee fea frase er STE i ass-11, ast aorsct, we 3) jala-o ih jihvaa doojai bhaa-ay. Burn this tongue, which loves duality,
dfs GAS oe Slat wrete I (158-12, aGst ardct, He 3) har ras na chaakhai feekaa aalaa-ay. which does not taste the sublime essence of the Lord, and which utters insipid words.
fag 33 39 HO clo SE I (ass-12, aes vrdsct, vs 3) bin boojhay tan man feekaa ho-ay. Without understanding, the body and mind become tasteless and insipid.
fag oe eer ofemr ofe NU (158-12, test amrrddt, He 3) bin naavai dukhee-aa chali-aa ro-ay. ||2]| Without the Name, the miserable ones depart crying out in pain. ||2]|
TAS de dA ofr AoA ASE i as fase S Afs ANTE Il 158-13, Test amrdet, He 3) rasnaa har ras chaakhi-aa sahj subhaa-ay. gur kirpaa tay sach samaa-ay.
One whose tongue naturally and intuitively tastes the Lord's sublime essence, by Guru's Grace, is absorbed in the True Lord.
Ad st Td Ase Ses Il 158-14, aSst anrdct, ue 3) saachay raatee gur sabad veechaar. Imbued with Truth, one contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad,
nifys ute fase Ue ISI (158-14, Tat anrset, He 3) amrit peevai nirmal Dhaar. ||3|| and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar, from the immaculate stream within. ||3]|
OH ANTS A STST OE I (158-14, ast amrrset, He 3) naam samaavai jo bhaadaa ho-ay. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is collected in the vessel of the mind.
Cu ss fea 5 ae I 158-14, test arse, ws 3) oo'Dhai bhaa"dai tikai na ko-ay. Nothing is collected if the vessel is upside-down.
ae Aaet His oth (SSA Il 1158-15, aGst anrsct, v2 3) gur sabdee man naam nivaas. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Naam abides within the mind.
Sa Av Stat fAA Ase fmt ISN (158-15, aAGzt anrsst, He 3)
naanak sach bhaa"daa jis sabad pi-aas. ||4]|3]|23]| O Nanak, True is that vessel of the mind, which thirsts for the Shabad. ||4||3]|23]|
AISt Marsa HIS 3 Il (158-16) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
fefa wes od Hf ATE & UTE Il (158-16, aSt arrest, He 3) ik gaavat rahay man saad na paa-ay. Some sing on and on, but their minds do not find happiness.
J@H fefs aefa fase AE I (158-16, west amrrdct, He 3) ha-umai vich gaavahi birthaa jaa-ay. In egotism, they sing, but it is wasted uselessly.
wets wefo fae oH fume Il 58-17, a@st ardat, ue 3)
gaavan gaavahi jin naam pi-aar. Those who love the Naam, sing the song.
Fret arat ASE SST WAI (158-17, ast amrdet, ve 3) saachee banee sabad beechaar. ||1]| They contemplate the True Bani of the Word, and the Shabad. ||1] |
Wes Id A Afsas SS Il (158-18, aSSt Tnrdet, He 3) gaavat rahai jay satgur bhaavai. They sing on and on, if it pleases the True Guru.
Ho 36 TS OTH ATS NA TIE I (158-18, aSSt aordet, He 3) man tan raataa naam suhaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Their minds and bodies are embellished and adorned, attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
fefa arets fefa safs asta il 158-18, a@st avrdct, v2 3) ik gaavahi ik bhagat karayhi. Some sing, and some perform devotional worship.
oH 6 Ustad fae MAST Il (158-19, aet anrsdt, He 3) naam na paavahi bin asnayh. Without heart-felt love, the Naam is not obtained.
Het sats aed Ase fumrfe i (58-19, west amrdet, ve 3)
sachee bhagat gur sabad pi-aar. True devotional worship consists of love for the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
muat fug afior ret Bfe Us IQ (158-19, Teat amrdet, He 3) apnaa pir raakhi-aa sadaa ur Dhaar. ||2]| The devotee keeps his Beloved clasped tightly to his heart. ||2||
at que
sats asta HIE MITY AeTSfs Il (159-1, aCst ars, ue 3) bhagat karahi moorakh aap janaaveh. The fools perform devotional worship by showing off;
ote ofe cufs aga ey Ur|fs Il (159-1, Test amrdat, He 3) nach nach tapeh bahut dukh paavahi. they dance and dance and jump all around, but they only suffer in terrible pain.
Stem cfumt sats a afe il cs59-2, ast anrdet, us 3)
nachi-ai tapi-ai bhagat na ho-ay.
By dancing and jumping, devotional worship is not performed. Rafe ud sats uve AS ALE SII 159-2, ast aursct, He 3)
sabad marai bhagat paa-ay jan so-ay. ||3]|| But one who dies in the Word of the Shabad, obtains devotional worship. ||3]|
sats zee sats age AE II (159-2, aGst amrddt, He 3)
bhagat vachhal bhagat karaa-ay so-ay.
The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He inspires them to perform devotional worship.
Het sats fees wimg safe Il (159-3, west anrdst, 2 3) sachee bhagat vichahu aap kho-ay. True devotional worship consists of eliminating selfishness and conceit from within.
Aa ug Ara AS fafa AE I (159-3, west anrdet, ve 3) mayraa parabh saachaa sabh biDh jaanai. My True God knows all ways and means.
SOA SUA BH USES III (159-3, AST arse, He 3) naanak bakhsay naam pachhaanai. ||4||4||24|| O Nanak, He forgives those who recognize the Naam. ||4||4||24| |
asst derdat HIG 3 Il 1159-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
Ho Wd OS Mfs ATE I (159-4, aBSt aurdet, He 3) man maaray Dhaat mar jaa-ay. When someone kills and subdues his own mind, his wandering nature is also subdued.
fag He aA of ute Il (159-4, +Gat ards, ws 3) bin moo-ay kaisay har paa-ay. Without such a death, how can one find the Lord?
HO He Bg WS aS i (159-5, rat rset, we 3) man marai daaroo jaanai ko-ay. Only a few know the medicine to kill the mind.
Ho Aafe He FS AG AE WA (159-5, Test aurdct, ws 3) man sabad marai boojhai jan so-ay. ||1]|| One whose mind dies in the Word of the Shabad, understands Him. ||1]|
fA 3 Sen @ Sefer Il (159-5, aGst aura, He 3) jis no bakhsay day vadi-aa-ee. He grants greatness to those whom He forgives.
ag uaate ofs A ufe mret A TITS Il (159-6, aGSt anrdet, He 3) gur parsaad har vasai man aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell within the mind. ||1]|Pause| |
TInt ATat ATT AHS | (159-6, at gure, 2 3) gurmukh karnee kaar kamaavai. The Gurmukh practices doing good deeds;
a fA Ho at AST US Il (159-6, Test amrrdct, He 3) taa is man kee sojhee paavai. thus he comes to understand this mind.
HO HHS Hae fevers | (159-7, aGet anrdet,, vz 3) man mai mat maigal mikdaaraa. The mind is like an elephant, drunk with wine.
Ts MAA wife HtesSsTS MQ (159-7, aSSt arsct, He 3) gur ankas maar jeevaalanhaaraa. ||2|| The Guru is the rod which controls it, and shows it the way. ||2||
HO MAT AT AS Af Il 159-7, aGst ardct, ne 3) man asaaDh saaDhai jan ko-ay. The mind is uncontrollable; how rare are those who subdue it.
Wad Ud 3 SHS dE i 159-8, at arses, v2 3) achar charai taa nirmal ho-ay. Those who move the immovable become pure.
asnty feg ue ofenr Aes Il 159-8, ast anrdsct, v2 3) gurmukh ih man la-i-aa savaar. The Gurmukhs embellish and beautify this mind.
JGH fesd SA fears IISII 159-8, Test aursct, He 3) ha-umai vichahu tajay vikaar. ||3]| They eradicate egotism and corruption from within. ||3]|
a Ufs afimig nfs fete | 59-9, ast anract, He 3) jo Dhur raakhi-an may! milaa-ay. Those who, by pre-ordained destiny, are united in the Lord's Union,
ae 6 feests mafe mts il (159-9, a@at anrdct, v2 3) kaday na vichhurheh sabad samaa-ay. are never separated from Him again; they are absorbed in the Shabad.
nimuat aor wm St ATS il (159-9, a@at anrdet, He 3) aapnee kalaa aapay hee jaanai. He Himself knows His Own Almighty Power.
Sa THY oH USE WSNUNQUI (159-10, TST anrset, He 3) naanak gurmukh naam pachhaanai. ||4]|5||25|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||5||25] |
ast Wairsst HIS 3 Il (159-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
JGH fefs AS Aa SCs Il 159-10, ast arse, 2 3) ha-umai vich sabh jag ba-uraanaa. The entire world has gone insane in egotism.
en fe sof Swat Il (159-11, Ast Turse, vs 3) doojai bhaa-ay bharam bhulaanaa. In the love of duality, it wanders deluded by doubt.
ag fest fase niu o UeTAT Il (159-11, west anrdet, He 3) baho chintaa chitvai aap na pachhaanaa. The mind is distracted by great anxiety; no one recognizes one's own self.
ua adtsor mofes fearar All (159-11, ast anrsct, He 3) DhanDhaa karti-aa an-din vihaanaa. ||1]| Occupied with their own affairs, their nights and days are passing away. ||1]||
fase IH THT HS Se Il (159-12, aSSt arrdet, He 3) hirdai raam ramhu mayray bhaa-ee. Meditate on the Lord in your hearts, O my Siblings of Destiny.
aaHfy sAat dfs TAS SATEt NA TIS Il (159-12, ast arset, us 3) gurmukh rasnaa har rasan rasaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukh's tongue savors the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
aenty fase fafs IH UES II 1159-13, weet ards, He 3) gurmukh hirdai jin raam pachhaataa. The Gurmukhs recognize the Lord in their own hearts;
AaHnles Af Ha VS AST Il (159-13, Test anrset, ve 3) jagjeevan sayv jug chaaray jaataa. they serve the Lord, the Life of the World. They are famous throughout the four ages.
GH He Td Aafe UES Il (159-13, aGSt anrdet, He 3) ha-umai maar gur sabad pachhaataa. They subdue egotism, and realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
faut ad ys AGH faarst HQ 59-14, Test anrsct, vs 3) kirpaa karay parabh karam biDhaataa. ||2]| God, the Architect of Destiny, showers His Mercy upon them. ||2| |
A Ho Ae A de Aaf]e fare I (159-14, aGst anrdet, He 3) say jan sachay jo gur sabad milaa-ay. True are those who merge into the Word of the Guru's Shabad;
Wes Zan Sta JIS Il (159-14, aGat grat, us 3) Dhaavat varjay thaak rahaa-ay. they restrain their wandering mind and keep it steady.
oH oO fafa aa 3 ure Il (159-15, ast aurdset, He 3) naam nav niDh gur tay paa-ay. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the nine treasures. It is obtained from the Guru.
dfs fasur 3 fs ZA nfs wre ISI (159-15, test anrset, 2 3) har kirpaa tay har vasai man aa-ay. ||3]| By the Lord's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind. ||3]|
TH TH Adisnr AY ATS Aste Il (159-15, aSzt anrset, v2 3)
raam raam karti-aa sukh saa‘t sareer.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, the body becomes peaceful and tranquil.
mists ZA S Ba AH Utd Il (159-16, ast amrrset, He 3) antar vasai na laagai jam peer. He dwells deep within - the pain of death does not touch Him.
mma Atos of sate il (159-16, a@st anrdct, v2 3) aapay saahib aap vajeer. He Himself is our Lord and Master; He is His Own Advisor.
Soa Afe Het Ts Tat HAdts ISUENEN (159-16, ast arset, ve 3)
naanak sayv sadaa har gunee gaheer. ||4||6]|26] | O Nanak, serve the Lord forever; He is the treasure of glorious virtue. ||4||6]||26] |
ast Marga HIS 3 Il (159-17) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
A fa fend fan & Abo usar il 159-17, aGst anrset, ne 3) So ki-o visrai jis kay jee-a paraanaa. Why forget Him, unto whom the soul and the breath of life belong?
A fag fend ws wf ANTS II (159-18, ast arse, He 3) So ki-o visrai sabh maahi samaanaa. Why forget Him, who is all-pervading?
fas Afendt voor ufs usgetsr IAI (159-18, ast amrsct, He 3) jit sayvi-ai dargeh pat parvaanaa. ||1|| Serving Him, one is honored and accepted in the Court of the Lord. ||1||
dfs & an feeg afs AE Il 159-18, TeSt anda, He 3) har kay naam vitahu bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the Name of the Lord.
3 fensfs sfe tt xfs WE a TIS Il (159-19, Test aorsct, ws 3) too” visrahi tad hee mar jaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. If I were to forget You, at that very instant, I would die. ||1]|Pause] |
fae 3 fensts fa sg nef swS Il (159-19, ast gorsct, v2 3) tin too” visrahi je tuDh aap bhulaa-ay. Those whom You Yourself have led astray, forget You.
Yat YEO
fae 3 fensfe ft SA SS I (60-1, aCH aurdet, Hs 3) tin too’ visrahi je doojai bhaa-ay. Thse who are in love with duality forget You.
HOHY vifamirat At UTS NVI (160-1, TGS aursst, 2 3) manmukh agi-aanee jonee paa-ay. ||2|| The ignorant, self-willed manmukhs are consigned to reincarnation. ||2| |
fra fea nfs sor A Afsag AS we 1 fae fea nfs so fSe ofe vif SAS II (160-1, aeat amrdsdt, Hs 3)
jin ik man tuthaa say satgur sayvaa laa-ay. jin ik man tuthaa tin har man vasaa-ay. Those who are pleasing to the One Lord are assigned to His service and enshrine Him within their minds.
TsHst ote oth ANTES III (160-2, test anrset, He 3) gurmatee har naam samaa-ay. ||3]| Through the Guru's Teachings, they are absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||3]||
frat us us A fame sterdt i (160-3, aGst anrdet, ne 3) jinaa potai punn say gi-aan beechaaree. Those who have virtue as their treasure, contemplate spiritual wisdom.
frat us ue fo ICH HSH II (160-3, aget anrsst, He 3) jinaa potai punn tin ha-umai maaree. Those who have virtue as their treasure, subdue egotism.
Soa AH OTH aS f35 a afar NID (60-3, AST anrdet, He 3) naanak jo naam ratay tin ka-o balihaaree. ||4||7||27] |
Nanak is a sacrifice to those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. 4171127] |
aISt Wairgat HIG 3 Il (160-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
3 nog fas afer aria i) (160-4, west aursst, we 3) too” akath ki-o kathi-aa jaahi. You are Indescribable; how can I describe You?
ad AWE HSE HO HT AH Il (160-5, TGSt asst, He 3)
gur sabad maaran man maahi samaahi.
Those who subdue their minds, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, are absorbed in You.
3d Te nda AHS og UT NA (160-5, Test anrset, He 3) tayray gun anayk keemat nah paahi. ||1|| Your Glorious Virtues are countless; their value cannot be estimated. ||1]|
fan at aat fSAR Hts AHTAt II (160-5, ast anrset, ns 3) jis kee banee tis maahi samaanee. The Word of His Bani belongs to Him; in Him, it is diffused.
Sot naa ae aa Aafe surat NA TIS il (160-6, Test anrset, ve 3) tayree akath kathaa gur sabad vakhaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your Speech cannot be spoken; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is chanted. ||1]|Pause| |
ad Afsag 3d ASHats gSTet Il (160-6, aSst anrsct, He 3) jah satgur tah satsangat banaa-ee. Where the True Guru is - there is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
Ad Afsagd Asn dle Te Wet Il 160-7, Test anrsst,, ve 3) jah satgur sehjay har gun gaa-ee. Where the True Guru is - there, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are intuitively sung.
Ad Afsagd so ICH Aafe ABret QM (160-7, TGS amrsdt, He 3) jah satgur tahaa ha-umai sabad jalaa-ee. ||2| |
Where the True Guru is - there egotism is burnt away, through the Word of the Shabad. ||2||
aanfy At Host HE urs Il (160-7, west anrset, ue 3) gurmukh sayvaa mahlee thaa-o paa-ay. The Gurmukhs serve Him; they obtain a place in the Mansion of His Presence.
dante nists afs an SAS Il (160-8, aCSt ardet, ve 3) gurmukh antar har naam vasaa-ay. The Gurmukhs enshrine the Naam within the mind.
asHte sats ate ath ANTES ZI (160-8, test aurset, He 3) gurmukh bhagat har naam samaa-ay. ||3]| The Gurmukhs worship the Lord, and are absorbed in the Naam. ||3]||
mma ats AT BST Il (160-9, ast anrsct, ns 3) aapay daat karay daataar. The Giver Himself gives His Gifts,
ud Afsaa fA wat firs 11 (ic0-9, ast anrsct, we 3) pooray satgur si-o lagai pi-aar. as we enshrine love for the True Guru.
Sod oH gs fq a AAT ISICHQCH (160-9, AST arse, He 3) naanak naam ratay tin ka-o jaikaar. ||4||8||28]|
Nanak celebrates those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [141 |8][28]|
ast Wiss HIS 3 Il (160-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
San 3 Afs gu aa Fa Il (160-10, ast aursst, ue 3) aykas tay sabh roop heh rangaa. All forms and colors come from the One Lord.
u@e urat Sag Afs AISA Il (160-10, west arse, He 3) pa-un paanee baisantar sabh sahlangaa. Air, water and fire are all kept together.
feo feo 28 ofe ys Fa NA (160-11, Tea aurset, ve 3) bhinn bhinn vaykhai har parabh rangaa. ||1|| The Lord God beholds the many and various colors. ||1]|
aq mds Sa FT Aet Il (160-11, aSst arsct, ne 3) ayk achraj ayko hai so-ee. The One Lord is wondrous and amazing! He is the One, the One and Only.
aenty sters feaer set 1d TIS i 60-11, Test anrset, ve 3) gurmukh veechaaray virlaa ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. How rare is that Gurmukh who meditates on the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
Hof 32 us Ast Set I 160-12, Test anrdet, ve 3) sahj bhavai parabh sabhnee thaa-ee. God is naturally pervading all places.
as qug ya¢ ufs ges geet Il (160-12, ast anract, we 3)
kahaa gupat pargat parabh banat banaa-ee.
Sometimes He is hidden, and sometimes He is revealed; thus God has made the world of His making.
mma Afsor Sf Aaret QI (160-12, Test anrset, He 3) aapay suti-aa day-ay jagaa-ee. ||2||
He Himself wakes us from sleep. ||2| |
fSn oft ahifs fas 3 det Il 160-13, test anrdet, nu: 3)
tis kee keemat kinai na ho-ee. No one can estimate His value,
afs afs aag ad AS aet Il (160-13, aGst anrset, ne 3) kahi kahi kathan kahai sabh ko-ee. although everyone has tried, over and over again, to describe Him.
Gs Hate AHS FS fs ASt USI (160-13, Test ards, ws 3) gur sabad samaavai boojhai har so-ee. ||3]| Those who merge in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, come to understand the Lord.
H13II Afs afs a wafe free i (60-14, west amrdct, He 3)
sun sun vaykhai sabad milaa-ay. They listen to the Shabad continually; beholding Him, they merge into Him.
zat sfanret ag AST S US Il (160-14, aSst anrdct, vs 3) vadee vadi-aa-ee gur sayvaa tay paa-ay. They obtain glorious greatness by serving the Guru.
Soa STH IS Tl STH ANS NSICNQEM (160-15, AGSt arse, He 3)
naanak naam ratay har naam samaa-ay. ||4||9||29]| O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Name are absorbed in the Lord's Name. [41/9] [29]|
ast Wiss HIS 3 Il (160-15) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
Houta wat Hfenr Afs fire i c60-15, 7est aurset, Hs 3) manmukh sootaa maa-i-aa mohi pi-aar. The self-willed manmukhs are asleep, in love and attachment to Maya.
Tanta wa Te famra state i (160-16, ast anrset, us 3) gurmukh jaagay gun gi-aan beechaar. The Gurmukhs are awake, contemplating spiritual wisdom and the Glory of God.
A Ho wa fae oH fumrfs ail 60-16, Test aurrsct, vs 3) Say jan jaagay jin naam pi-aar. ||1]| Those humble beings who love the Naam, are awake and aware. ||1]|
Hoa Ad Ae 3 AS Il (160-17, aGst aursdt, we 3) sehjay jaagai savai na ko-ay. One who is awake to this intuitive wisdom does not fall asleep.
Us TI 3 Fs AS ale UU TIS ll 60-17, aSat arse, v2 3)
pooray gur tay boojhai jan ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
How rare are those humble beings who understand this through the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
MAS UsSt TE F FT Il (160-17, Tat ards, ws 3) asant anaarhee kaday na boojhai. The unsaintly blockhead shall never understand.
aeAt AS S Het StS BS Il (160-18, ast auras, ns 3) kathnee karay tai maa-i-aa naal loojhai. He babbles on and on, but he is infatuated with Maya.
nig mifamrat ae & ALS QI (60-18, at amrdct, v8 3) anDh agi-aanee kaday na seejhai. ||2|| Blind and ignorant, he shall never be reformed. ||2||
fen aa Hfs IH ath feASS I (160-18, Test amrdet, He 3) is jug meh raam naam nistaaraa.
In this age, salvation comes only from the Lord's Name. fear a ue ag Aafe Sera Il (160-19, teat aurddt, v2 3)
virlaa ko paa-ay gur sabad veechaaraa. How rare are those who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
mify 3d AIS AS Sus Sil (160-19, aGst arset, He 3) aap tarai saglay kul uDhaaraa. ||3]| They save themselves, and save all their family and ancestors as well. ||3]|
UST EQ
fen afera ufo aH Gen 3 Aet Il (61-1, Sst amrrdct, He 3) is kalijug meh karam Dharam na ko-ee. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, no one is interested in good karma, or Dharmic faith.
At A ASH VSS a ufs Tat i (161-1, west asst, ve 3) kalee kaa janam chandaal kai ghar ho-ee. This Dark Age was born in the house of evil.
Sod OH fast a Hats o Jet IIIONSZON (161-1, Test aursst, 2 3)
naanak naam binaa ko mukat na ho-ee. ||4||10||30]| O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is liberated. ||4]|10||30] |
agat Hos 3 Tis Il (161-2) ga-orhee mehlaa 3 gu-aarayree. Gauree, Third Mehl, Gwaarayree:
He wig Ae UTSATT Il (161-2, west anrdet, ve 3) sachaa amar sachaa paatisaahu. True is the Lord King, True is His Royal Command.
Hfs AS TS Ufs Suse”T || AY Hole Afs ofH ANT NU (61-2, teat anrdet, He 3)
man saachai raatay har vayparvaahu. sachai mahal sach naam samaahu. ||1]|
Those whose minds are attuned to the True, Carefree Lord enter the True Mansion of His Presence, and merge in the True Name. ||1]||
Ale Ho He Ase Sets il (161-3, ast anrsdt, v2 3) sun man mayray sabad veechaar. Listen, O my mind: contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
TH Aug sens Ssag uts ual FITS Il 161-3, Test anrsst, ve 3) raam japahu bhavjal utarahu paar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Chant the Lord's Name, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]||Pause] |
SdH vrs SIH ATE Il 161-4, aCSt aursdt, He 3) bharmay aavai bharmay jaa-ay. In doubt he comes, and in doubt he goes.
feg Aa Aah eA Ste i (61-4, wat amrsct, v2 3) ih jag janmi-aa doojai bhaa-ay. This world is born out of the love of duality.
HoHfe & SS mS ATE MQM (161-4, aSSt anrdet, He 3)
manmukh na chaytai aavai jaa-ay. ||2]|
The self-willed manmukh does not remember the Lord; he continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||2||
nif gor fax ufs uirfy gerfemr I 61-5, aGat aorsdt, ne 3) aap bhulaa ke parabh aap bhulaa-i-aa. Does he himself go astray, or does God lead him astray?
feg MG fesrat Tadt wfenr Il 61-5, aBst anrdct, v2 3) ih jee-o vidaanee chaakree laa-i-aa. This soul is enjoined to the service of someone else.
Ho ey ud fase Aon TetfeEnr SI (161-5, Test anrset, ns 3) mahaa dukh khatay birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||3]| It earns only terrible pain, and this life is lost in vain. ||3]|
facut afs Afsag foes i (61-6, west anrsct, H2 3) kirpaa kar satguroo milaa-ay. Granting His Grace, He leads us to meet the True Guru.
Sa BH VS feyd SIH VAS Il (161-6, aSat arses, ne 3) ayko naam chaytay vichahu bharam chukaa-ay. Remembering the One Name, doubt is cast out from within.
Sea aH AU aE 3 fafa wes IsiIiSal (161-7, Test anrsct, ne 3)
naanak naam japay naa-o na-o niDh paa-ay. ||4||11]|31]|
O Nanak, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the nine treasures of the Name are obtained. ||4||11||31]|
ast Marsa HIS 3 Il (161-7) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
frat dante foerfenr faq ues vfs i 61-7, ast anrset, ve 3) jinaa gurmukh Dhi-aa-i-aa tin poochha-o jaa-ay. Go and ask the Gurmukhs, who meditate on the Lord.
ad AS 3 HS use Il 61-8, west amrdet, ve 3) gur sayvaa tay man patee-aa-ay. Serving the Guru, the mind is satisfied.
A Goes ofa oH AHS Il (161-8, aGSt anrsct, He 3) say Dhanvant har naam kamaa-ay. Those who earn the Lord's Name are wealthy.
ud TI 3 ASt UTS Al c6i-9, ast ards, ws 3) pooray gur tay sojhee paa-ay. ||1|| Through the Perfect Guru, understanding is obtained. ||1] |
Ufe dfs oH AUT AS TST Il (161-9, Test avrset, He 3) har har naam japahu mayray bhaa-ee. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my Siblings of Destiny.
dante Aer ofs ures ate uret 9 TITS Il (161-9, aGSt anrsat, He 3) gurmukh sayvaa har ghaal thaa-ay paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukhs serve the Lord, and so they are accepted. ||1||Pause| |
nity UETe HS fesHe df Il (161-10, aGst amrdct, ne 3) aap pachhaanai man nirmal ho-ay. Those who recognize the self - their minds become pure.
Hes Hats ofe ure AE II (161-10, west auras, He 3) jeevan mukat har paavai so-ay. They become Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive, and they find the Lord.
fs TE ae HfS SSH FE il 61-10, tat ards, ws 3) har gun gaavai mat ootam ho-ay. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the intellect becomes pure and sublime,
Hon Adfa ANTS AE WI (61-11, ast arse, He 3) sehjay sahj samaavai so-ay. ||2|| and they are easily and intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||2]|
en ate o Afeor ate Il coi-u1, ast arsed, vs 3) doojai bhaa-ay na sayvi-aa jaa-ay. In the love of duality, no one can serve the Lord.
ICH Hfeor wor fs ate I 61-11, west ardet, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa mahaa bikh khaa-ay. In egotism and Maya, they are eating toxic poison.
ufs adéfa fafa Hfomr we I ci6i-12, aGst avrdct, ne 3) put kutamb garihi mohi-aa maa-ay. They are emotionally attached to their children, family and home.
HoHfe niot wire AE SI (161-12, ast arse, v2 3) manmukh anDhaa aavai jaa-ay. ||3]| The blind, self-willed manmukhs come and go in reincarnation. ||3]|
dfs ofs on @e Ho AE Il wafes sats ag Hat SE Il (61-12, aest arse, v2 3)
har har naam dayvai jan so-ay. an-din bhagat gur sabdee ho-ay.
Those, unto whom the Lord bestows His Name, worship Him night and day, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Tents feser gS ae i 61-13, ast qorsct, we 3) gurmat virlaa boojhai ko-ay. How rare are those who understand the Guru's Teachings!
Sea STH AHS AS NSINIVNS2M (61-13, ast aude, 2 3)
naanak naam samaavai so-ay. ||4||12||32|| O Nanak, they are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4[|12]|32||
ast Imrsat HIG 3 Il (161-14)
ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
Od AS Aa Bs Tet Il (161-14, ast arsct, ve 3) gur sayvaa jug chaaray ho-ee. The Guru's service has been performed throughout the four ages.
UT AG AT AHS AE I (161-14, TSS Tors, we 3) pooraa jan kaar kamaavai ko-ee. Very few are those perfect ones who do this good deed.
we an ug dia Sfe & det Il (161-14, aSst arse, ns 3) akhut naam Dhan har tot na ho-ee. The wealth of the Lord's Name is inexhaustible; it shall never be exhausted.
me wet AY Ufs AST Set WAU (61-15, aSSt ards, He 3) aithai sadaa sukh dar sobhaa ho-ee. ||1|| In this world, it brings a constant peace, and at the Lord's Gate, it brings honor. ||1]|
= HO HS SdH B Ale Il (161-15, Test aursdt,, us 3) ay man mayray bharam na keejai. O my mind, have no doubt about this.
Tonfa As nifigs ga utr NA TIE Il 61-15, aCSt avrdct, ne 3) gurmukh sayvaa amrit ras peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those Gurmukhs who serve, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsag Aefs A HITT HATS Il (161-16, Test arse, 2 3) satgur sayveh say mahaa purakh sansaaray. Those who serve the True Guru are the greatest people of the world.
mf Bud ae Hae feAsTs Il (ici-16, aGSt anrsct, v2 3) aap uDhray kul sagal nistaaray. They save themselves, and they redeem all their generations as well.
dfs at om sufs Ss Ws Il (161-17, TeHt amrdet, He 3) har kaa naam rakheh ur Dhaaray. They keep the Name of the Lord clasped tightly to their hearts.
OTH gs SCHw Bsafa urs MQ (161-17, ast amrdat, ue 3) naam ratay bha-ojal utreh paaray. ||2]| Attuned to the Naam, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
Afsagd Aefs Het HfS SAT Il (161-17, TeHt arse, He 3) satgur sayveh sadaa man daasaa. Serving the True Guru, the mind becomes humble forever.
ICH Hs AHS USAT Il (61-18, St anrdet, He 3) ha-umai maar kamal pargaasaa. Egotism is subdued, and the heart-lotus blossoms forth.
Mode SH for ufs SAT Il (61-18, aGSt anrdet, He 3) anhad vaajai nij ghar vaasaa. The Unstruck Melody vibrates, as they dwell within the home of the self.
OotH gs we Hf BeAr III (161-18, TGSt aurset, He 3) naam ratay ghar maahi udaasaa. ||3]|| Attuned to the Naam, they remain detached within their own home. ||3]|
Afsag Aefs f3o at Ast sat Il cici-19, ast anrsct, v2 3) satgur sayveh tin kee sachee banee. Serving the True Guru, their words are true.
Ad Aa sast wife surat | (ici-19, ast anrdet, ve 3) jug jug bhagtee aakh vakhaanee. Throughout the ages, the devotees chant and repeat these words.
mofes Aufs af AMauret Il (161-19, test anrset, 2 3) an-din jaapeh har saarangpaanee. Night and day, they meditate on the Lord, the Sustainer of the Earth.
UST YE
Saad OTH gs fesaes fogarat ISIISISSIl (162-1, Test arrdset, He 3)
naanak naam ratay nihkayval nirbaanee. ||4||13]|33]| O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are detached, in the perfect balance of Nirvaanaa. ||4||13]|33]|
ast Wirsgst HIS Z Il (162-1) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3. Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl:
Afsag fxs esarfar Ara Il (162-2, ast amrdct, He 3) satgur milai vadbhaag sanjog. Through great good fortune and high destiny, one meets the True Guru.
fase oy fos ofs GA Sa IAI (162-2, aGst arddt, He 3)
hirdai naam nit har ras bhog. ||1]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is constantly within the heart, and one enjoys the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]|
gone yrat oH fe forte i c62-2, west anrsct, ve 3) gurmukh paraanee naam har Dhi-aa-ay. O mortal, become Gurmukh, and meditate on the Name of the Lord.
Hon AS wo oH UTE IV TIS I 162-3, Test amrdet, He 3) janam jeet laahaa naam paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Be victorious in the game of life, and earn the profit of the Naam. ||1]|Pause] |
fama fours as Age J tot Il (162-3, west anrdet, 2 3)
gi-aan Dhi-aan gur sabad hai meethaa.
Spiritual wisdom and meditation come to those unto whom the Word of the Guru's Shabad is sweet.
ad frou 3 fads fess fy Stor QI (162-4, ast ardet, He 3) gur kirpaa tay kinai virlai chakh deethaa. ||2| | By Guru's Grace, a few have tasted, and seen it. ||2]|
AIH as IT Ads wT Il (162-4, aBSt avrset, vs 3) karam kaa‘d baho karahi achaar. They may perform all sorts of religious rituals and good actions,
fag are fon foo nies SI (162-4, ast anrdct, Hs 3) bin naavai Dharig Dharig aha“kaar. ||3]| but without the Name, the egotistical ones are cursed and doomed. ||3]|
gofe afaS afer SA Il 162-5, weet arsct, ve 3) banDhan baaDhi-o maa-i-aa faas. They are bound and gagged, and hung by Maya's noose;
WS SSA Fe TT UTIA ISUAWIUSll (162-5, ast grsct, we 3)
jan naanak chhootai gur pargaas. ||4||14||34|| O servant Nanak, they shall be released only by Guru's Grace. ||4||14]|34]|
Hoe 3 ast Saas il (162-6) mehlaa 3 ga-orhee bairaagan. Third Mehl, Gauree Bairaagan:
AAT Uast Cufshyer sens J for cast HO urAt Sat Il 162-6, weet doafs, we 3)
jaisee Dhartee oopar mayghulaa barsat hai ki-aa Dhartee maDhay paanee naahee. The clouds pour their rain down upon the earth, but isn't there water within the earth as well?
AA Udst HO ural usarfaor fags uar zane feast All (162-6, west Aerafs, He 3)
jaisay Dhartee maDhay paanee pargaasi-aa bin pagaa varsat firaa-ee. ||1]|
Water is contained within the earth; without feet, the clouds run around and let down their rain. ||1]|
9 AN
Wer FMA SIN Yard Il (162-7, wat seats, ws 3) baabaa too” aisay bharam chukaahee. O Baba, get rid of your doubts like this.
A fae ass od AS ast oo SA Ae AST NU TTS Il 162-7, aSat awars, v2 3) jo kichh karat hai so-ee ko-ee hai ray taisay jaa-ay samaahee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. As you act, so shall you become, and so you shall go and mingle. ||1||Pause] |
fensdt usu dfs a famr Gfe aan AHS II (162-8, aGst Sorafs, v2 3) istaree purakh ho-ay kai ki-aa o-ay karam kamaahee. As woman or man, what can anyone do?
oer gu Ae oe 3d 35 ot ufo ANA NII (162-9, ast Soars, 2 3) naanaa roop sadaa heh tayray tujh hee maahi samaahee. ||2]|
The many and various forms are always Yours, O Lord; they shall merge again into You. ||2]|
fesd Aon 3f% ud A AT Ufemr St gS Brat Il (162-9, ast dears, v2 3)
itnay janam bhool paray say jaa paa-i-aa taa bhoolay naahee.
In countless incarnations, I went astray. Now that I have found You, I shall no longer wander.
Wo aon Het ug We A Ad a ASfe ANA NSM (162-10, ast Sarafs, He 3)
jaa kaa kaaraj so-ee par jaanai jay gur kai sabad samaahee. ||3]||
It is His work; those who are absorbed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad come to know it well. ||3]|
37 Hag So ofo wm SoH ATT Il (162-10, west Aorafs, oz 3) tayraa sabad too‘hai heh aapay bharam kahaahee. The Shabad is Yours; You are Yourself. Where is there any doubt?
Sa 33 33 fAC fufeur usatu AofH & nT ISNAUAUISUIl (62-11, Test Sarah, 12 3) naanak tat tat si-o mili-aa punrap janam na aahee. ||4||1]|15]|35]|
O Nanak, one whose essence is merged with the Lord's essence does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again. ||4||1]|15]|35]|
ast Faas HIS 3 Il (162-11) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 3. Gauree Bairaagan, Third Mehl:
Ag Aa oS SAT aor eA STS Il (162-12, weet oats, we 3) sabh jag kaalai vas hai baaDhaa doojai bhaa-ay. The whole world is under the power of Death, bound by the love of duality.
ICH AGH aHSe HoHfe fs AATE AU (162-12, wea Savas, v2 3) ha-umai karam kamaavday manmukh milai sajaa-ay. ||1|| The self-willed manmukhs do their deeds in ego; they receive their just rewards. ||1]|
Hd HO Td Beal fas STE I 162-13, aCat Saas, ue 3) mayray man gur charnee chit laa-ay. O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Guru's Feet.
qenfy on fours & waa we sate Al JIS I (162-13, at Sorafs, vs 3)
gurmukh naam niDhaan lai dargeh la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, you shall be awarded the treasure of the Naam. In the Court of the Lord, you shall be saved. ||1]|Pause| |
BY VeIHT SaHe Hodle nie ATE Il (162-13, aGst Sorafs, He 3)
lakh cha-oraaseeh bharamday manhath aavai jaa-ay.
Through 8.4 million incarnations, people wander lost; in stubborn-mindedness, they come and go.
qd a Aa 6 Ufo fefa feta Fat wfE Qi 162-14, aGst aoats, ne 3)
gur kaa sabad na cheeni-o fir fir jonee paa-ay. ||2||
They do not realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad; they are reincarnated over and over again. ||2| |
aaHfa nig usttenr afe on efron yfe wife i (162-14, a@at Saray, ve 3)
gurmukh aap pachhaani-aa har naam vasi-aa man aa-ay.
The Gurmukh understands his own self. The Lord's Name comes to dwell within the mind.
mates saat dtsor ots oH Afe ANTES ISI (162-15, ast Soave, He 3) an-din bhagtee rati-aa har naamay sukh samaa-ay. ||3]| Imbued with devotion to the Lord's Name, night and day, he merges in peace. ||3]|
Ho Rafe Hd usstfs dfe IGH 3A fears I (162-16, aGst Sorat, He 3)
man sabad marai parteet ho-ay ha-umai tajay vikaar.
When one's mind dies in the Shabad, one radiates faith and confidence, shedding egotism and corruption.
Ho sea aaHt urns afs aut sats Fag ISIQNINSEM (162-16, TGSt Forafs, He 3)
jan naanak karmee paa-ee-an har naamaa bhagat bhandaar. ||4]|2||16]|36]|| O servant Nanak, through the karma of good actions, the treasure of devotional worship and the Name of the Lord are attained. ||4||2||16]|36||
ast Faas HIS 3 Il (162-17) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 3. Gauree Bairaagan, Third Mehl:
utins fes afs do ofe ofe fete ufeor i 162-17, ast aeats, v2 3)
pay-ee-arhai din chaar hai har har likh paa-i-aa.
The Lord, Har, Har, has ordained that the soul is to stay in her parents' home for only a few short days.
Aaest ofe 3 qonfa qe wfeur tt (162-18, tet Sarat, vs 3) sobhaavantee naar hai gurmukh gun gaa-i-aa. Glorious is that soul-bride, who as Gurmukh, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Uzas TE AHS AT SH ue | (162-18, ast darafs, He 3) payvkarhai gun sammlai saahurai vaas paa-i-aa. She who cultivates virtue in her parents' home, shall obtain a home at her in-laws.
aaHfe Aofa AHS ofe ote Hfe SfEMr NAN (162-18, west Farafs, ve 3)
gurmukh sahj samaanee-aa har har man bhaa-i-aa. ||1]|
The Gurmukhs are intuitively absorbed into the Lord. The Lord is pleasing to their minds. ||1]|
AA unt fus eA ag fas fafo ust I (162-19, weet Sorat, ve 3)
sasurai pay-ee-ai pir vasai kaho kit biDh paa-ee-ai.
Our Husband Lord dwells in this world, and in the world beyond. Tell me, how can He be found?
nity fade vise dt um Horst Al TIS Il (162-19, ast Saray, ve 3) aap niranjan alakh hai aapay maylaa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Immaculate Lord Himself is unseen. He unites us with Himself. ||1]|Pause| |
at 9€3
nm dt ug ef Hfs afe ony femret it 163-1, a@et Soars, ve 3) aapay hee parabh deh mat har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. God Himself bestows wisdom; meditate on the Name of the Lord.
zsoat Afsag fixe wife nifigs urent I 163-1, a@at dorarfs, ne 3)
vadbhaagee satgur milai mukh amrit paa-ee-ai.
By great good fortune, one meets the True Guru, who places the Ambrosial Nectar in the mouth.
J@H vfs faafa ate Aon AfeY AHS II (163-2, Test Sorafs, He 3) ha-umai dubiDhaa binas jaa-ay sehjay sukh samaa-ee-ai. When egotism and duality are eradicated, one intuitively merges in peace.
Ag wm orfuy zaser mt ae wre iQ il (163-2, west Boats, v2 3) sabh aapay aap varatdaa aapay naa-ay laa-ee-ai. ||2]| He Himself is All-pervading; He Himself links us to His Name. ||2]|
Honfa aefa o ute mifamire femre i 163-3, a@at darafs, He 3)
manmukh garab na paa-i-o agi-aan i-aanay.
The self-willed manmukhs, in their arrogant pride, do not find God; they are so ignorant and foolish!
Afsad Ae 3 asta feta fefs ues Il (163-3, aGst Forafs, ue 3)
satgur sayvaa naa karahi fir fir pachhutaanay.
They do not serve the True Guru, and in the end, they regret and repent, over and over again.
qs Hot aH ufee ges als WS Il (163-4, aGat Sorafs, ve 3) garabh jonee vaas paa-iday garbhay gal jaanay. They are cast into the womb to be reincarnated, and within the womb, they rot.
He AGS SS SSE HOHU SSH'S MBI (163-4, aCst Aoafs, ne 3) mayray kartay ayvai bhaavdaa manmukh bharmaanay. ||3]| As it pleases my Creator Lord, the self-willed manmukhs wander around lost. ||3]|
Ae fe ufs Sy ferfeor ofs MASA UT Il (163-5, Test Foafs, Hs 3) mayrai har parabh laykh likhaa-i-aa Dhur mastak pooraa. My Lord God inscribed the full pre-ordained destiny upon the forehead.
ofa ats ony foorfenr sfenr Te AT Il (163-5, aGst Seats, ve 3)
har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa bhayti-aa gur sooraa.
When one meets the Great and Courageous Guru, one meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Aa fust ust afs ay oD ofs Fay ste I (163-6, west Sarat, v2 3) mayraa pitaa maataa har naam hai har banDhap beeraa. The Lord's Name is my mother and father; the Lord is my relative and brother.
dfs ofs auth fhone us AG SSA Als USISUIUSIN (163-6, ast Farah, He 3)
har har bakhas milaa-ay parabh jan naanak keeraa. ||4]|3]|17||37]| O Lord, Har, Har, please forgive me and unite me with Yourself. Servant Nanak is a lowly worm. ||4]|3]]17]|37]|
ast Saafs HIS 3 Il (163-7) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 3. Gauree Bairaagan, Third Mehl:
Afsad 3 fomre ufeur ats 33 atest Il (163-7, aGat Saas, vs 3) satgur tay gi-aan paa-i-aa har tat beechaaraa. From the True Guru, I obtained spiritual wisdom; I contemplate the Lord's essence.
Hfs Hole usae set Af SH HATS Il (163-8, ast Forafs, vs 3) mat maleen pargat bha-ee jap naam muraaraa. My polluted intellect was enlightened by chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fafe Hats freetor gor niftmrs I (163-8, west Sorarfs, v2 3)
siv sakat mitaa-ee-aa chookaa anDhi-aaraa.
The distinction between Shiva and Shakti - mind and matter - has been destroyed, and the darkness has been dispelled.
ufs HASte fe ae fofimr faq safe an fume A 463-8, aSat Foafs, ve 3)
Dhur mastak jin ka-o likhi-aa tin har naam pi-aaraa. ||1||
The Lord's Name is loved by those, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny was written. ||1]|
dfs fas fafa ut AS Hog fan efe JG Het II (163-9, aGst Aorafs, He 3) har kit biDh paa-ee-ai sant janhu jis daykh ha-o jeevaa. How can the Lord be obtained, O Saints? Seeing Him, my life is sustained.
dfs fae sv 3 Alest aa Afeg of aA Ute NAN TIS I 163-10, aeat Saas, ue 3)
har bin chasaa na jeevtee gur maylihu har ras peevaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Lord, I cannot live, even for an instant. Unite me with the Guru, so that I may drink in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
J afs ae we fos ofa Hat fs afe afs atat I (163-10, west Sorafs, ve 3)
ha-o har gun gaavaa nit har sunee har har gat keenee.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and I listen to them daily; the Lord, Har, Har, has emancipated me.
dfs 3A Td 3 feo Hat HO Zo Slot Il (163-11, ast Soars, ns 3) har ras gur tay paa-i-aa mayraa man tan leenee.
I have obtained the Lord's essence from the Guru; my mind and body are drenched with it.
U6 06 ag AS use Jd fats sats ofs cat Il (163-11, aGst Sorafs, ve 3)
Dhan Dhan gur sat purakh hai jin bhagat har deenee.
Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the True Being, who has blessed me with devotional worship of the Lord.
fan ad 3 ofa ufeor A ag IH aot QM (163-12, aGat Seats, ne 3) jis gur tay har paa-i-aa so gur ham keenee. ||2|| From the Guru, I have obtained the Lord; I have made Him my Guru. |[2||
Teast dfs Tf FI IN meafenrs Il 163-12, west Saray, He 3) gundaataa har raa-ay hai ham avgani-aaray. The Sovereign Lord is the Giver of virtue. I am worthless and without virtue.
undt urag sae TIS ofa Seg il (163-13, ast Faas, nH 3) paapee paathar doobday gurmat har taaray. The sinners sink like stones; through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord carries us across.
3 Tees fosne TH nigafenrs i (163-13, ast dorafe, vs 3) too” gundaataa nirmalaa ham avgani-aaray. You are the Giver of virtue, O Immaculate Lord; I am worthless and without virtue.
ofs Aseats af SI us HoT SASS NZI (163-13, ast Fras, Hs 3)
har sarnaagat raakh layho moorh mugaDh nistaaray. ||3]|
I have entered Your Sanctuary, Lord; please save me, as You have saved the idiots and fools. ||3]]|
Ada mee Het Tent afe ofa xfs fomrfeur i 163-14, aGat Saray, 2 3)
sahj anand sadaa gurmatee har har man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Eternal celestial bliss comes through the Guru's Teachings, by meditating continually on the Lord, Har, Har.
Ane dfs us ufemr wife Afoer arfemr i 63-15, aGst Sarafs, 118 3)
sajan har parabh paa-i-aa ghar sohilaa gaa-i-aa.
I have obtained the Lord God as my Best Friend, within the home of my own self. I sing the Songs of Joy.
dfs tfeor ug ys dost ofa ae sateur | 63-15, west Favafe, ve 3)
har da-i-aa Dhaar parabh bayntee har har chaytaa-i-aa.
Please shower me with Your Mercy, O Lord God, that I may meditate on Your Name, Har, Har.
Wo soa Hat ofS fee fas AfSsag wfenr sislICHScil (163-16, ast aorarfs, we 3)
jan naanak mangai Dhoorh tin jin satgur paa-i-aa. ||4||4]|18]|38]|
Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of those who have found the True Guru. [14] 14] [18] |38]|
agat durddt Hoe 8 wea weue 163-17) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4 cha-uthaa cha-upday Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars ure Il (163-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ufss AAS fAfyfS ufsor i (63-18, Get anrdet, H8 4) pandit saasat simrit parhi-aa. The Pandit - the religious scholar - recites the Shaastras and the Simritees;
Hat dae day afar il (163-18, aGst arse, v2 4) jogee gorakh gorakh kari-aa. the Yogi cries out, "Gorakh, Gorakh".
H yee ofs ofa AY ufsMF IA (163-18, ast aorsst, He 4) mai moorakh har har jap parhi-aa. ||1]|| But I am just a fool - I just chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
OT Aa! fom ats TH JHA Il (163-19, ast avrset, He 4) naa jaanaa ki-aa gat raam hamaaree. I do not know what my condition shall be, Lord.
of SH Ho He 3g SAG FJ ISH AU TIC it (163-19, aCst arse, ve 4)
har bhaj man mayray tar bha-ojal too taaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Name of the Lord. You shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause| |
Uar 4é8 Hout fags ofe ta Aetat il (164-1, aGst aursct, we 4)
sani-aasee bibhoot laa-ay dayh savaaree. The Sannyaasee smears his body with ashes;
ug fxr fsnra adt Gone I (164-1, west gursst, He 4) par tari-a ti-aag karee barahamchaaree. renouncing other men's women, he practices celibacy.
H Yee Tis MTA SHS MI (164-1, ast gorse, we 4) mai moorakh har aas tumaaree. ||2|| I am just a fool, Lord; I place my hopes in You! ||2||
USt ATH AT ASSES UTS Il (164-2, TSS ards, ws 4) khatree karam karay soortan paavai. The Kh'shaatriya acts bravely, and is recognized as a warrior.
He 2H ud fasts are il (164-2, ret amrsct, we 4) sood vais par kirat kamaavai. The Shoodra and the Vaisha work and slave for others;
H Yee Tis SH STS UBM (164-2, TSS arsed, we 4) mai moorakh har naam chhadaavai. ||3]| I am just a fool - I am saved by the Lord's Name. ||3]|
Ag Sat fqafe 3 mete sfomr ANTE II (164-3, aGat aorsct, Hs 4) sabh tayree sarisat too’ aap rahi-aa samaa-ee. The entire Universe is Yours; You Yourself permeate and pervade it.
TINY SSX S Ssniret il 164-3, ast ardet, ue 4) gurmukh naanak day vadi-aa-ee. O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are blessed with glorious greatness.
H nue ofa 2a fearet SNUB€ll 164-3, aCSt amrdct, He 4) mai anDhulay har tayk tikaa-ee. ||4||1]|39]| I am blind - I have taken the Lord as my Support. ||4]|1||39]|
ast Wirsa HIS g Il (164-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl:
favre we ae Fafa at i 164-4, aGst amrdsct, ne 4) nirgun kathaa kathaa hai har kee. The Speech of the Lord is the most sublime speech, free of any attributes.
3a fife Arg Hats Ae ot Il (64-4, ast aorsct, Hs 4) bhaj mil saaDhoo sangat jan kee. Vibrate on it, meditate on it, and join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
3d 3Cne nae ae Als Ths St A (164-5, TeSt amrdet, He 4) tar bha-ojal akath kathaa sun har kee. ||1]| Cross over the terrifying world-ocean, listening to the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
[11
difse ASHafs Hote i) 64-5, aGst anrset, v2 4) gobind satsangat maylaa-ay. O Lord of the Universe, unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
Ufe TA IAS TH TS TE Al TIS il 164-6, ast arse, ue 4) har ras rasnaa raam gun gaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My tongue savors the sublime essence of the Lord, singing the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause] |
A Ho famrefs ofa afs ant Il 164-6, aGet amrsct, He 4) jo jan Dhi-aavahi har har naamaa. Those humble beings who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har
f36 GAS BA AIT JH IH Il (164-6, Teast ards, He 4) tin daasan daas karahu ham raamaa. - please make me the slave of their slaves, Lord.
Ao at AST SSH AAT MQM (164-7, aSSt gorsst, ue 4) jan kee sayvaa ootam kaamaa. ||2|| Serving Your slaves is the ultimate good deed. ||2| |
A dfa at dfs aa ASS Il (164-7, aGst ardct, He 4) jo har kee har kathaa sunaavai. One who chants the Speech of the Lord
H Ho dnd nfo fats a] Il 164-7, aGat amrdct, He 4) so jan hamrai man chit bhaavai. - that humble servant is pleasing to my conscious mind.
HO Ud SS Tse at US ISI (164-8, TES arrset, ue 4)
jan pag rayn vadbhaagee paavai. ||3]|
Those who are blessed with great good fortune obtain the dust of the feet of the humble. ||3] |
Hs Ao fas utfs afe nret 1 fro a@ fous fofior ofa uct i c64-8, a@et anrdet, vs 4) sant janaa si-o pareet ban aa-ee. jin ka-o likhat likhi-aa Dhur paa-ee.
Those who are blessed with such pre-ordained destiny are in love with the humble Saints.
3 HO Bod OTH ANTS ISIQNBOll (164-9, aGSt aurset, He 4)
tay jan naanak naam samaa-ee. ||4||2||40]|| Those humble beings, O Nanak, are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [14112] 140] |
ast mrss HIS Il (164-9) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl:
Hat UlfS ad UT Ue Il 464-9, ast aursct, ws 4) maataa pareet karay put khaa-ay. The mother loves to see her son eat.
Hté uifs set Ale ofe i 164-10, aGat aorsdt, ne 4) meenay pareet bha-ee jal naa-ay. The fish loves to bathe in the water.
Afsas uifs aafira ft ute Wail 64-10, ast aurrsct, vs 4) satgur pareet gursikh mukh paa-ay. ||1]| The True Guru loves to place food in the mouth of His GurSikh. ||1]|
3 dfs Ho Tia Hod IH films I (164-10, TeSt amrdet, ue 4) tay har jan har maylhu ham pi-aaray. If only I could meet those humble servants of the Lord, O my Beloved.
fae fufeur eu ato gas AU TIS Ml 164-11, ast anrset, v2 4) jin mili-aa dukh jaahi hamaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting with them, my sorrows depart. ||1]||Pause] |
fa@ ffs aes a Uifs war] I (164-11, ast aorsct, we 4) ji-o mil bachhray ga-oo pareet lagaavai. As the cow shows her love to her strayed calf when she finds it,
omits ulfs at fug wife mre i (164-12, aGet anrdct, ne 4) kaaman pareet jaa pir ghar aavai. and as the bride shows her love for her husband when he returns home,
dfs He UifS a ofs AA AS NM (164-12, west anrdet, He 4) har jan pareet jaa har jas gaavai. ||2|| so does the Lord's humble servant love to sing the Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
Afga utfs SA Aw OS Il (164-12, aSst avrdct, ne 4) saaring pareet basai jal Dhaaraa. The rainbird loves the rainwater, falling in torrents;
deufs Uffs Hfenr efe UATE I (164-13, Test aurrsct, us 4) narpat pareet maa-i-aa daykh pasaaraa.
the king loves to see his wealth on display.
df He Uifs AU fadarar ISB (164-13, aGSt anrdet, ne 4)
har jan pareet japai nirankaaraa. ||3]| The humble servant of the Lord loves to meditate on the Formless Lord. ||3]|
od yret Ulfs ytfemr ag WTS I (164-13, aGSt ors, He 4) nar paraanee pareet maa-i-aa Dhan khaatay. The mortal man loves to accumulate wealth and property.
aafre utfs ae fees aesS I 164-14, ast amract, ve 4) gursikh pareet gur milai galaatay. The GurSikh loves to meet and embrace the Guru.
Ao aod UlfS AT Ua BS ISUSISAU (164-14, Test gorsct, us 4)
jan naanak pareet saaDh pag chaatay. ||4]||3]||41]]| Servant Nanak loves to kiss the feet of the Holy. ||4]|3]|41]|
ast Wass HIS S Il (164-15) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl:
staat uifs sha ys ure il 64-15, ast aura, we 4) bheekhak pareet bheekh parabh paa-ay. The beggar loves to receive charity from the wealthy landlord.
ga Ulfs JS nig ute il (64-15, aCHt Turse, Hs 4) bhookhay pareet hovai ann khaa-ay. The hungry person loves to eat food.
date uifs aa ffs mrurfe 4 (64-15, west gnrsct, us 4) gursikh pareet gur mil aaghaa-ay. ||1]| The GurSikh loves to find satisfaction by meeting the Guru. ||1]|
dfs FIAS ST Ts wTA SHS Il (164-16, TCS anrset, ne 4) har darsan dayh har aas tumaaree. O Lord, grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; I place my hopes in You, Lord.
ate fasur Se ufs TSH UU TIS il (164-16, aCst gorse, we 4) kar kirpaa loch poor hamaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Shower me with Your Mercy, and fulfill my longing. ||1||Pause]|
Tat US Hae Hf Bra Il (164-17, ast nrsct, we 4) chakvee pareet sooraj mukh laagai. The song-bird loves the sun shining in her face.
fis fimrd AS eu fsurd i 164-17, rest ards, v4) milai pi-aaray sabh dukh ti-aagai. Meeting her Beloved, all her pains are left behind.
gata ytfs aa yft Brat QU (164-17, rest ards, vs 4) gursikh pareet guroo mukh laagai. ||2|| The GurSikh loves to gaze upon the Face of the Guru. ||2| |
wed Ulfs ute Hie wife I 64-18, ast anrsct, ue 4) bachhray pareet kheer mukh khaa-ay. The calf loves to suck its mother's milk;
fase foo Fe HfE I 164-18, west anrdet, v2 4) hirdai bigsai daykhai maa-ay. its heart blossoms forth upon seeing its mother.
aoa uifs ag uf ofS sil (64-18, ast aursst, He 4) gursikh pareet guroo mukh laa-ay. ||3]| The GurSikh loves to gaze upon the Face of the Guru. ||3]|
dg AS UifS afer He ATT II (164-19, ast arse, Hs 4) hor sabh pareet maa-i-aa moh kaachaa. All other loves and emotional attachment to Maya are false.
faoth ate aa ag urs Il (164-19, ast aursdt, 2 4) binas jaa-ay kooraa kach paachaa. They shall pass away, like false and transitory decorations.
Ao aod uifs feufs ag ATS USISNSII (164-19, rest gorse, ue 4)
jan naanak pareet taripat gur saachaa. | |4]|4]|42]| Servant Nanak is fulfilled, through the Love of the True Guru. ||4]|4||42] |
Yat 9éu
aTSt Wiss HIS g Il (165-1) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl:
Afsagd AS AEG FT gat Il (165-1, west aursct, ve 4) satgur sayvaa Safal hai banee. Service to the True Guru is fruitful and rewarding;
fas fate afs any fomrfenr afe cat i (165-2, ast aurdet, ve 4) jit mil har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa har Dhanee. meeting Him, I meditate on the Name of the Lord, the Lord Master.
fae ofa afumr fae ute get wet Wal (165-2, teat anrdct, ws 4) jin har japi-aa tin peechhai chhootee ghanee. ||1]|| So many are emancipated along with those who meditate on the Lord. ||1||
Tate dfs so AST set | 165-2, ast aursct, ve 4) gursikh har bolhu mayray bhaa-ee. O GurSikhs, chant the Name of the Lord, O my Siblings of Destiny.
dfs das AS uy ofa wT NAN TIE Il (165-3, TES amrrsdt, ve 4) har bolat sabh paap leh jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Lord's Name, all sins are washed away. ||1]||Pause| |
aa dd fufemr sa Ho =fA orfeur | 165-3, west anrdet, ve 4) jab gur mili-aa tab man vas aa-i-aa. When one meets the Guru, then the mind becomes centered.
Wes uv dd ofa fomrfeor il 165-4, ast anradt, He 4) Dhaavat panch rahay har Dhi-aa-i-aa. The five passions, running wild, are brought to rest by meditating on the Lord.
mates Sddt Sts Te AMT MQM 165-4, ast amrdet, ue 4) an-din nagree har gun gaa-i-aa. ||2| | Night and day, within the body-village, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung. ||2]|
Afsas ua ute fro ufe wet It (165-4, west aorset, He 4) satgur pag Dhoor jinaa mukh laa-ee. Those who apply the dust of the Feet of the True Guru to their faces,
fo as fsurc oie fos wet il (165-5, ast aurset, 2 4) tin koorh ti-aagay har liv laa-ee. renounce falsehood and enshrine love for the Lord.
3 dfs cand He CAs set NSM (165-5, Test arash, He 4) tay har dargeh mukh oojal bhaa-ee. ||3]|| Their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3] |
ad Aat wify fs ar] il (165-5, ast arse, we 4) gur sayvaa aap har bhaavai. Service to the Guru is pleasing to the Lord Himself.
fQAG Fess Ts ua Siar forrs il (165-6, ast aorsct, v2 4) krisan balbhadaro gur pag lag Dhi-aavai. Even Krishna and Balbhadar meditated on the Lord, falling at the Guru's Feet.
Soa ToHfe dfs orfu sas ISUUISI (165-6, AST Turse, He 4)
naanak gurmukh har aap taraavai. ||4||5||43]| O Nanak, the Lord Himself saves the Gurmukhs. ||4||5]|43] |
TSt Wairsgst HIS 8 Il (165-7) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs nmd Fat Soar I 165-7, ast arse, we 4) har aapay jogee dandaaDhaaree. The Lord Himself is the Yogi, who wields the staff of authority.
ofa umd ofe sfour qoerct i ofa mma sy amt of See A (165-7, at ardct, v2 4) har aapay rav rahi-aa banvaaree. har aapay tap taapai laa-ay taaree. ||1||
The Lord Himself practices tapa - intense self-disciplined meditation; He is deeply absorbed in His primal trance. ||1]|
MAT HS TH Sonor seule il (165-8, Test Tors, we 4) aisaa mayraa raam rahi-aa bharpoor. Such is my Lord, who is all-pervading everywhere.
foate eA ardt afe efa ntl TIS Ul (165-8, ast aorsct, we 4) nikat vasai naahee har door. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He dwells near at hand - the Lord is not far away. ||1||Pause| |
dfs wm Age Aafs fs mM} Il (165-9, aCat amrdet, 8 4)
har aapay sabad surat Dhun aapay.
The Lord Himself is the Word of the Shabad. He Himself is the awareness, attuned to its music.
dfs nm fa fear wm Il (165-9, aGst aurdct, He 4) har aapay vaykhai vigsai aapay. The Lord Himself beholds, and He Himself blossoms forth.
ofa erfu pute wmt ots ANY QM (165-9, TS arrdet, He 4)
har aap japaa-ay aapay har jaapay. ||2||
The Lord Himself chants, and the Lord Himself inspires others to chant. ||2|| ofa wiry Asa wififsars il (165-10, wat amrsct, ue 4)
har aapay saaring amrit-Dhaara. He Himself is the rainbird, and the Ambrosial Nectar raining down.
ofa nifgs erful ubresaar il (165-10, aGat anrdet, us 4) har amrit aap pee-aavanhaaraa. The Lord is the Ambrosial Nectar; He Himself leads us to drink it in.
dfs wrfu ad nm fSeASTaT SI (165-11, Test amrsct, ve 4)
har aap karay aapay nistaaraa. ||3]| The Lord Himself is the Doer; He Himself is our Saving Grace. ||3]|
Ufs my Fst SBI" ST I (165-11, ast anrsst, nz 4) har aapay bayrhee tulhaa taaraa. The Lord Himself is the Boat, the Raft and the Boatman.
dfs mrt TaHst fSASTs Il 65-11, ast anrsct, 2 4) har aapay gurmatee nistaaraa. The Lord Himself, through the Guru's Teachings, saves us.
dfs mt Soa UTS UTS SUENSSI (165-12, TST Tursct, He 4)
har aapay naanak paavai paaraa. ||4||6]|44] | O Nanak, the Lord Himself carries us across to the other side. ||4]|6||44]|
ast Saas HIS 8 Il 165-12) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
AY THs Fs ual AA S oA efo Sat ON Ba Il (165-12, west Boas, ws 4) saahu hamaaraa too” Dhanee jaisee too” raas deh taisee ham layhi. O Master, You are my Banker. I receive only that capital which You give me.
dfs om Zeng da fa A orfu efenre Sf Sf NU G65-13, aGst Seats, ne 4)
har naam vannjah rang si-o jay aap da-i-aal ho-ay deh. ||1||
I would purchase the Lord's Name with love, if You Yourself, in Your Mercy, would sell it to me. ||1]|
JH Zand TH A Il (165-13, aSst Foray, ue 4) ham vanjaaray raam kay. I am the merchant, the peddler of the Lord.
dfs gen aoe F THAT NU THC Il (165-14, aC Boras, He 4) har vanaj karaavai day raas ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I trade in the merchandise and capital of the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause| |
od dfs sats ug ufent dfs Ad AS Hfs Stem Il (165-14, ast Forafs, He 4)
laahaa har bhagat Dhan khati-aa har sachay saah man bhaa-i-aa.
I have earned the profit, the wealth of devotional worship of the Lord. I have become pleasing to the Mind of the Lord, the True Banker.
dfs Afu ofa zug afer AY wWarst Off & yrfenr QI (165-15, ast Forafs, us 4)
har jap har vakhar ladi-aa jam jaagaatee nayrh na aa-i-aa. ||2||
I chant and meditate on the Lord, loading the merchandise of the Lord's Name. The Messenger of Death, the tax collector, does not even approach me. ||2| |
dg Zen adfs eerse niss sdait ey wfenr | 165-15, ast Sarat, v2 4)
hor vanaj karahi vaapaaree-ay anant tarangee dukh maa-i-aa.
Those traders who trade in other merchandise, are caught up in the endless waves of the pain of Maya.
6fe Ad <afa ofe wfeur eo 3a fse ufemr ISI (165-16, aGat Seats, He 4)
o-ay jayhai vanaj har laa-i-aa fal tayhaa tin paa-i-aa. ||3]|
According to the business in which the Lord has placed them, so are the rewards they obtain. ||3]|
fe ofa gen A He a fan faurs df us Set II 165-17, aet Soars, ue 4)
har har vanaj so jan karay jis kirpaal ho-ay parabh day-ee.
People trade in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, when the God shows His Mercy and bestows it.
Ao oto Ary ote Afenr fefs sar ufs 5 Set usuwUldusull (165-17, aCst soarfe, v2 4)
jan naanak saahu har sayvi-aa fir laykhaa mool na lay-ee. ||4]|1]|7]|45]| Servant Nanak serves the Lord, the Banker; he shall never again be called to render his account. ||4]]1]|7||45]|
ast Faas HIS 8 Il 165-18) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
fA Aadl ads wsst AS at afs MTAT II (165-18, aeSt Sorafs, Hs 4) ji-o jannee garabh paaltee sut kee kar aasaa. The mother nourishes the fetus in the womb, hoping for a son,
zs dfe ue ufe afe afs sar faa I (165-19, aGat Sorats, ve 4) vadaa ho-ay Dhan khaat day-ay kar bhog bilaasaa. who will grow and earn and give her money to enjoy herself.
f@ ofs Aa Uifs ofs Teer SF mrfy TaAT AI (165-19, Test Foafs, we 4)
ti-o har jan pareet har raakh-daa day aap hathaasaa. ||1||
In just the same way, the humble servant of the Lord loves the Lord, who extends His Helping Hand to us. ||1]|
ust 9éé
AS TH Hee fs TY HT TACT I 166-1, aSst Aorafs, we 4) mayray raam mai moorakh har raakh mayray gus-ee-aa. O my Lord, I am so foolish; save me, O my Lord God!
Ho at Cunt s3fs eer AU FITS Il 166-1, ast Forafs, He 4) jan kee upmaa tujheh vad-ee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Your servant's praise is Your Own Glorious Greatness. ||1||Pause]|
Hefe wis wrée of ofs AA His SS Il (166-2, aest Aeats, nu: 4)
mandar ghar aanand har har jas man bhaavai.
Those whose minds are pleased by the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, are joyful in the palaces of their own homes.
AS 3A iS ufe wale wT ofs TE We Il (166-2, ast avats, ue 4) sabh ras meethay mukh lageh jaa har gun gaavai.
Their mouths savor all the sweet delicacies when they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
dfs AS uses AUG J feats ast AS AAS SSS MQM (166-3, aCat Aoats, ne 4)
har jan parvaar saDhaar hai ikeeh kulee sabh jagat chhadaavai. ||2||
The Lord's humble servants are the saviors of their families; they save their families for twenty-one generations - they save the entire world! ||2| |
A fas der A of aint ofe at efsniet Il 166-3, aGat derafs, He 4)
jo kichh kee-aa so har kee-aa har kee vadi-aa-ee.
Whatever has been done, has been done by the Lord; it is the Glorious Greatness of the Lord.
fs ha 33 3 ease als uA aTet Il (166-4, Test Brats, us 4) har jee-a tayray too’ varatdaa har pooj karaa-ee. O Lord, in Your creatures, You are pervading; You inspire them to worship You.
dfs safs garg Sofa mM TasTet MBI (166-4, aCat Sorafs, ve 4) har bhagat bhandaar lahaa-idaa aapay vartaa-ee. ||3]| The Lord leads us to the treasure of devotional worship; He Himself bestows it. ||3]|
oes me featsur fam fsH TsaeT Il (166-5, at aoa, ue 4) laalaa haat vihaajhi-aa ki-aa tis chaturaa-ee. I am a slave, purchased in Your market; what clever tricks do I have?
A ot ave st ols GOH wat as aig oH aeet Il 166-5, aCat Foals, us 4)
jay raaj bahaalay taa har gulaam ghaasee ka-o har naam kadhaa-ee.
If the Lord were to set me upon a throne, I would still be His slave. If I were a grass- cutter, I would still chant the Lord's Name.
He sod dig at oA ST ofa at Samrat IIQICIBEN (166-6, AST Saas, He 4)
jan naanak har kaa daas hai har kee vadi-aa-ee. ||4||2||8||46]| Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord; contemplate the Glorious Greatness of the Lord||4||2||8||46]|
ATSt WirsSaH HIS Il (166-6) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
fagrret fase ad Se AG ote Il (166-7, Test amrrddt,, He 4) kirsaanee kirsaan karay lochai jee-o laa-ay. The farmers love to work their farms;
JG HS Cen ad AT us ot ate I 66-7, weet arse, He 4) hal jotai udam karay mayraa put Dhee khaa-ay. they plow and work the fields, so that their sons and daughters may eat.
f3@ ofs ne afe ofs Au ad ofe ifs eSTte NA (166-7, aCat aursdt, He 4)
ti-o har jan har har jap karay har ant chhadaa-ay. ||1||
In just the same way, the Lord's humble servants chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and in the end, the Lord shall save them. ||1]|
Hee at afs att AS IH Il (166-8, ast arse, we 4) mai moorakh kee gat keejai mayray raam. I am foolish - save me, O my Lord!
ad Alsad AS de ote IN AM AU FS Il (166-8, aS arrest, 2 4) gur satgur sayvaa har laa-ay ham kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O Lord, enjoin me to work and serve the Guru, the True Guru. ||1||Pause| |
B 3d ACwad ACSA OS I (166-9, TGS arse, He 4) lai turay sa-udaagree sa-udaagar Dhaavai. The traders buy horses, planning to trade them.
US ve mA ad Heo Hg SOS Il (166-9, aGSt ardet, He 4) Dhan khatai aasaa karai maa-i-aa moh vaDhaavai. They hope to earn wealth; their attachment to Maya increases.
fs@ afs ne afs ofs Ses ofe Sf AE US III (166-10, aBSt arse, He 4)
ti-o har jan har har boltaa har bol sukh paavai. ||2||
In just the same way, the Lord's humble servants chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; chanting the Lord's Name, they find peace. ||2]|
faa He Jeeeinr afs wfe ante I (166-10, aGSt anrset, He 4) bikh sanchai hatvaanee-aa bahi haat kamaa-ay. The shop-keepers collect poison, sitting in their shops, carrying on their business.
HI 3S UAT FS a FS BUCHE Il (166-11, TCs gorse, we 4) moh jhooth pasaaraa jhooth kaa jhoothay laptaa-ay. Their love is false, their displays are false, and they are engrossed in falsehood.
fs@ ofs vfs ofs ae Afeor ofs use & ATE SI (66-11, agSt mrss, He 4)
ti-o har jan har Dhan sanchi-aa har kharach lai jaa-ay. ||3]|
In just the same way, the Lord's humble servants gather the wealth of the Lord's Name; they take the Lord's Name as their supplies. ||3] |
feg wheat Ha aca d ate SH SA Il (166-12, west ards, Hs 4)
ih maa-i-aa moh kutamb hai bhaa-ay doojai faas.
This emotional attachment to Maya and family, and the love of duality, is a noose around the neck.
TINS AAS 3d A MAS SA Il (166-12, aes aurddt,, He 4)
gurmatee so jan tarai jo daasan daas.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the humble servants are carried across; they become the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
ate sofa oH fierfeor aaHfe ugarA ISISIENSIN (166-13, Test aurset, He 4) jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmukh pargaas. ||4||3||9||47]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam; the Gurmukh is enlightened. ||4]|3]|9]|47]|
ast Faas HIS g Il (166-13) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
fos feon af3 wae ad SdH SaHfeEMr II (166-13, aGst Seats, He 4) nit dinas raat laalach karay bharmai bharmaa-i-aa. Continuously, day and night, they are gripped by greed and deluded by doubt.
zarfa fed ardor fafa ava Borfeur i (166-14, aGat Sorafs, ve 4) vaygaar firai vaygaaree-aa sir bhaar uthaa-i-aa. The slaves labor in slavery, carrying the loads upon their heads.
A dd ot Ho AST AG A wa ao fH df Sear NAN (166-14, west Saray, He 4) jo gur kee jan sayvaa karay so ghar kai kamm har laa-i-aa. ||1|| That humble being who serves the Guru is put to work by the Lord in His Home. ||1]|
He oH Sf das wfeor we a afh Ste Il (166-15, ast Saas, we 4) mayray raam torh banDhan maa-i-aa ghar kai kamm laa-ay. O my Lord, please break these bonds of Maya, and put me to work in Your Home.
fos ofs we wes ots oth ANTE NU TICS Il (166-16, aCHt Faas, v2 4)
nit har gun gaavah har naam samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I continuously sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; I am absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause]|
og ual Dad ad souls TH niafa AS HEMT II 166-16, Test Faas, ve 4) nar paraanee chaakree karay narpat raajay arath sabh maa-i-aa. Mortal men work for kings, all for the sake of wealth and Maya.
a sa a ate afe a soufs uf wfenr It (166-17, ast derats, v: 4) kai banDhai kai daan lay-ay kai narpat mar jaa-i-aa. But the king either imprisons them, or fines them, or else dies himself.
Ud U9 Ae Hee Afsag ot fag ate ate an atu ofs AY UfeMr QI (166-17, aest aoats, H8 4)
Dhan Dhan sayvaa safal satguroo kee jit har har naam jap har sukh paa-i-aa. ||2| | Blessed, rewarding and fruitful is the service of the True Guru; through it, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and I have found peace. ||2]|
fos ABe Ae ate ag ats afe fer & Set I (166-18, aC Aorats, we 4)
nit sa-udaa sood keechai baho bhaat kar maa-i-aa kai taa-ee.
Everyday, people carry on their business, with all sorts of devices to earn interest, for the sake of Maya.
W oot ef= ST AY HS S| Ufa ATT Il (166-19, west Aarafs, He 4) jaa laahaa day-ay taa sukh manay totai mar jaa-ee. If they earn a profit, they are pleased, but their hearts are broken by losses.
a ae Ast ad fAS ad fos fos AY uret ISI (166-19, aGst Sarat, He 4)
jo gun saajhee gur si-o karay nit nit sukh paa-ee. ||3]|
One who is worthy, becomes a partner with the Guru, and finds a lasting peace forever. ||3||
at IED
fAset su nis TA Ae gd fSset su fefs wat il 167-1, ast aoars, we 4)
jitnee bhookh an ras saad hai titnee bhookh fir laagai.
The more one feels hunger for other tastes and pleasures, the more this hunger persists.
fan ofs urfy faut ad A Sd fg Te yra l (167-1, west Seats, v2 4) jis har aap kirpaa karay so vaychay sir gur aagai. Those unto whom the Lord Himself shows mercy, sell their head to the Guru.
Wo soa dfs ofA fyufsur fefs ga F Sa SISIIONScil (167-2, ACH daats, we 4) jan naanak har ras taripti-aa fir bhookh na laagai. ||4||4||10||48] |
Servant Nanak is satisfied by the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. He shall never feel hungry again. ||4||4]|10]|48] |
ast Faas HIS 8 Il 167-2) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
dud xfs fefs ofs orn fas fas Sur of ean Ss I (167-3, aSat aerate, 2 4)
hamrai man chit har aas nit ki-o daykhaa har daras tumaaraa.
Within my conscious mind is the constant longing for the Lord. How can I behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, Lord?
fafs uifs oret A est ond nfo fafs ofa sas filme II 167-3, aGat dorafs, He 4) jin pareet laa-ee so jaantaa hamrai man chit har bahut pi-aaraa. One who loves the Lord knows this; the Lord is very dear to my conscious mind.
J ageat ad nue fats feefaur Afoor Ha fHaASI ST AU (167-4, aCHt Farah, ve 4) ha-o kurbaanee gur aapnay jin vichhurhi-aa mayli-aa mayraa sirjanhaaraa. ||1]||
I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has re-united me with my Creator Lord; I was separated from Him for such a long time! ||1]|
Hd IH DH unt Aefe ud ale ert Il 167-5, aCzt aoafs, ve 4) mayray raam ham paapee saran paray har du-aar.
O my Lord, I am a sinner; I have come to Your Sanctuary, and fallen at Your Door, Lord.
Hy fesqe TH AS aad vryat fasur ofs wu TIS i 67-5, ast Aoarfs, ws 4)
mat nirgun ham maylai kabahoo™ apunee kirpaa Dhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My intellect is worthless; I am filthy and polluted. Please shower me with Your Mercy sometime. ||1]|Pause] |
JHd NTE SIS HIS I 8g He we fe Tes 3 MVS Il (167-6, aSat Aoars, we 4) hamray avgun bahut bahut hai baho baar baar har ganat na aavai.
My demerits are so many and numerous. I have sinned so many times, over and over again. O Lord, they cannot be counted.
3 gees ofs af efenre afs nm aufA Sfa afe sre Il (167-6, aat dorarts, we 4)
too” gunvantaa har har da-i-aal har aapay bakhas laihi har bhaavai.
You, Lord, are the Merciful Treasure of Virtue. When it pleases You, Lord, You forgive me.
dH nud wa ae Hast Gun “te gfe any ws] NM (167-7, aSat doafs, vs 4) ham apraaDhee raakhay gur sangtee updays dee-o har naam chhadaavai. ||2|| I am a sinner, saved only by the Company of the Guru. He has bestowed the Teachings of the Lord's Name, which saves me. ||2]|
Sue Te foor ag Ae Afsae Aa ag Fed sa fanny dE we Il 167-8, aGst Awafs, He 4) tumray gun ki-aa kahaa mayray satiguraa jab gur bolah tab bisam ho-ay jaa-ay. What Glorious Virtues of Yours can I describe, O my True Guru? When the Guru speaks, I am transfixed with wonder.
dH AA nua weg aet ga AA OH Afsafe of Me sate i 167-2, aSat dorafs, v2 4) ham jaisay apraaDhee avar ko-ee raakhai jaisay ham satgur raakh lee-ay chhadaa-ay. Can anyone else save a sinner like me? The True Guru has protected and saved me.
3 ag fus 33 ae ws FS ae doy AT Ae AUS SI (167-9, aSat Soars, ue 4)
too” gur pitaa too‘hai gur maataa too’ gur banDhap mayraa sakhaa sakhaa-ay. ||3]| O Guru, You are my father. O Guru, You are my mother. O Guru, You are my relative, companion and friend. ||3]|
A ond fafa dst AS Afsae vr fafa SH ofs WET MM II (167-10, aGHt Aoats, nH: 4) jo hamree biDh hotee mayray satiguraa saa biDh tum har jaanhu aapay. My condition, O my True Guru - that condition, O Lord, is known only to You.
dH ges fess eet ws 5 UST Te Alsage Af ats TH AV I (167-10, weet Aoats, we 4) ham rultay firtay ko-ee baat na poochh-taa gur satgur sang keeray ham thaapay.
I was rolling around in the dirt, and no one cared for me at all. In the Company of the Guru, the True Guru, I, the worm, have been raised up and exalted.
Us U9 Fy sea Ao ae fas feet ya Afs Aa AS NSNUNAUISE (67-11, Test Suate, He 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo naanak jan kayraa jit mili-ai chookay sabh sog santaapay.
[4] 15] [1111491]
Blessed, blessed is the Guru of servant Nanak; meeting Him, all my sorrows and troubles have come to an end. ||4||5]|11]|49] |
ast Faafs HIS g Il 167-12) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
ave od Hfs AG wes J Hg Hto afer It 167-12, ast aoats, ne 4)
kanchan naaree meh jee-o lubhat hai moh meethaa maa-i-aa.
The soul of the man is lured by gold and women; emotional attachment to Maya is so sweet to him.
wg Hed ws YA He we ofA ofenr I 167-13, aest Aeafs, He 4)
ghar mandar ghorhay khusee man an ras laa-i-aa.
The mind has become attached to the pleasures of houses, palaces, horses and other enjoyments.
ofa ys fats o oreet fas ger He ofa ahemr WAN (167-13, ast Soarfs, 2 4)
har parabh chit na aavee ki-o chhootaa mayray har raa-i-aa. ||1]|
The Lord God does not even enter his thoughts; how can he be saved, O my Lord King? ||1]|
Hd oH fes ate AGH Ta A Il (167-14, aSst Sorafs, ve 4) mayray raam ih neech karam har mayray. O my Lord, these are my lowly actions, O my Lord.
Tees dfs dfs efure afs fou sufk niece Afs AT NU TIS Il 167-14, aCat Seats,
H8 4)
gunvantaa har har da-i-aal kar kirpaa bakhas avgan sabh mayray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Lord, Har, Har, Treasure of Virtue, Merciful Lord: please bless me with Your Grace and forgive me for all my mistakes. ||1]||Pause] |
fos JU ddt fas vhs adt fas Sa SAT I (167-15, Sat Soars, we 4) kichh roop nahee kichh jaat naahee kichh dhang na mayraa. I have no beauty, no social status, no manners.
foor Ho & sad TE fags oy Afr 5 ST I (167-16, ast Aorarfe, ws 4) ki-aa muhu lai bolah gun bihoon naam japi-aa na tayraa. With what face am I to speak? I have no virtue at all; I have not chanted Your Name.
oH unit Af ag Cad uo Afsag AT iQ (167-16, aGst aoats, v2 4) ham paapee sang gur ubray punn satgur kayraa. ||2||
I am a sinner, saved only by the Company of the Guru. This is the generous blessing of the True Guru. ||2]|
Ag Ae fils we o@ chor case AG uret Il (167-17, aSat doats, v2 4) sabh jee-o pind mukh nak dee-aa vartan ka-o paanee. He gave all beings souls, bodies, mouths, noses and water to drink.
Mo ual AUS USS cor aA nifs Sarat Il 167-17, aGat Sorafs, ve 4) ann khaanaa kaparh painan dee-aa ras an bhogaanee. He gave them corn to eat, clothes to wear, and other pleasures to enjoy.
fate de F fats o oreet uy IG afs wet ISI (167-18, aBat dears, v2 4)
jin dee-ay so chit na aavee pasoo ha-o kar jaanee. ||3]|
But they do not remember the One who gave them all this. The animals think that they made themselves! ||3]|
Ag atst So ease F niga il (167-18, aGst seats, us 4)
sabh keetaa tayraa varatdaa too” antarjaamee.
You made them all; You are all-pervading. You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
dH Ha fears far asd AS YS SH AMT I 167-19, ast Soars, ne 4)
ham jant vichaaray ki-aa karah sabh khayl tum su-aamee.
What can these wretched creatures do? This whole drama is Yours, O Lord and Master.
Ho soa Ie feafsur sis TSH Tt iSieiIVuuoll (167-19, ast Faas, ue 4)
jan naanak haat vihaajhi-aa har gulam gulaamee. ||4||6]|12]|50]| Servant Nanak was purchased in the slave-market. He is the slave of the Lord's slaves. [14] 16]]12]]|50]|
ua yet ast saafs HIS gs Il (168-1)
ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
fa@ woot AS Afs uest ae Sets HST II (168-1, Test Aas, He 4) ji-o jannee sut jan paaltee raakhai nadar majhaar. Just as the mother, having given birth to a son, feeds him and keeps him in her vision
wists aofs uf & foroa fas fos uefa iI (68-2, a@st aerate, He 4)
antar baahar mukh day giraas khin khin pochaar.
- indoors and outdoors, she puts food in his mouth; each and every moment, she caresses him.
fs@ Afsag asia aust ofs ulfs fimrfe 149i c6s-2, a@at Soars, ws 4)
ti-o satgur gursikh raakh-taa har pareet pi-aar. ||1||
In just the same way, the True Guru protects His GurSikhs, who love their Beloved Lord. ||1]|
AS IH OH Hfea afs ys a F feos It 168-3, aGat Soars, us 4) mayray raam ham baarik har parabh kay hai i-aanay. O my Lord, we are just the ignorant children of our Lord God.
U6 U9 ag ag Afsag ut fats ofs Guen 2 ae fimre Ul ITS I (68-3, ast Soars, H8 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo gur satgur paaDhaa jin har updays day kee-ay si-aanay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Hail, hail, to the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru, the Divine Teacher who has made me wise through the Lord's Teachings. ||1||Pause] |
AAT Tate fedst Gost aus ara ast Il (168-4, TCH Aoafs, we 4) jaisee gagan firantee oodtee kapray baagay vaalee. The white flamingo circles through the sky,
6g ae ds ule fafe sed fos fos aia ANT II (168-5, west aorafs, He 4)
oh raakhai cheet peechhai bich bachray nit hirdai saar samaalee.
but she keeps her young ones in her mind; she has left them behind, but she constantly remembers them in her heart.
fs@ Afsas fire uifs ofe afs ot ag fre ce rho Sat QM (168-5, aSst Foray, v8 4)
ti-o satgur sikh pareet har har kee gur sikh rakhai jee-a naalee. ||2||
In just the same way, the True Guru loves His Sikhs. The Lord cherishes His GurSikhs, and keeps them clasped to His Heart. ||2||
AA ost Sm asin Jd fefs aed Aa HA IS AT Il (168-6, aes Aas, nu: 4) jaisay kaatee tees batees hai vich raakhai rasnaa maas rat kayree.
Just as the tongue, made of flesh and blood, is protected within the scissors of the thirty-two teeth
act Wed HA ast a fae ofa 3 AS enafs J als Art Il 168-6, ast Aoafs, He 4)
ko-ee jaanhu maas kaatee kai kichh haath hai sabh vasgat hai har kayree.
- who thinks that the power lies in the flesh or the scissors? Everything is in the Power of the Lord.
fs Aa Ha at og fer asta afe Ia UA Ae Ast ISI (168-7, ast aoats, v2 4)
ti-o sant janaa kee nar nindaa karahi har raakhai paij jan kayree. ||3]|
In just the same way, when someone slanders the Saint, the Lord preserves the honor of His servant. ||3]|
oet us act wed fart ao foe ofa 3 AS ad aafenr Il (168-8, ast Aes, He 4) bhaa-ee mat ko-ee jaanhu kisee kai kichh haath hai sabh karay karaa-i-aa.
O Siblings of Destiny, let none think that they have any power. All act as the Lord causes them to act.
ag Ho sy fhofs AY AS ofa a ahd at ofa 3 Ae faa ofa a ofenr II (168-8, rest aorate, us 4)
jaraa maraa taap sirat saap sabh har kai vas hai ko-ee laag na sakai bin har kaa laa-i- aa.
Old age, death, fever, poisons and snakes - everything is in the Hands of the Lord. Nothing can touch anyone without the Lord's Order.
MAT dfs oH Hfe fats fofs fmres Ho ood A nist mGAfs we eatfenr IsNONasNUal (168-9, a@at Faas, v3 4)
aisaa har naam man chit nit Dhi-aavahu jan naanak jo antee a-osar la-ay chhadaa-i- aa. ||4]|7|]13]|51]|
Within your conscious mind, O servant Nanak, meditate forever on the Name of the Lord, who shall deliver you in the end. ||4]|7]]13]|51]|
ast Faas HIS g Il (168-10) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 4. Gauree Bairaagan, Fourth Mehl:
fan fife fs df wide A Afsag adh Il a6s-u1, a@st aerate, ne 4) jis mili-ai man ho-ay anand so satgur kahee-ai. Meeting Him, the mind is filled with bliss. He is called the True Guru.
Ho at efaor faafh ate ofe wen ue wd NAM (168-11, west Aoats, v2 4) man kee dubiDhaa binas jaa-ay har param pad lahee-ai. ||1]|| Double-mindedness departs, and the supreme status of the Lord is obtained. ||1||
na Afsag fimrs fas fafa fxs I c6s-12, aGst aerate, He 4) mayraa satgur pi-aaraa kit biDh milai. How can I meet my Beloved True Guru?
UG fag fag act SHAE AT TT uT fas HS WA TIS it 68-12, ast Sorarfs, ws 4) ha-o khin khin karee namaskaar mayraa gur pooraa ki-o milai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Each and every moment, I humbly bow to Him. How will I meet my Perfect Guru? ||1]|Pause] |
ats fasur ofa Hfemr Har Afsag UT I (168-13, aSSt Serafe, ve 4) kar kirpaa har mayli-aa mayraa satgur pooraa. Granting His Grace, the Lord has led me to meet my Perfect True Guru.
fee Yat Ao adr & Asa TST NM (168-13, west Sorarfs, we 4) ichh punnee jan kayree-aa lay satgur Dhooraa. ||2||
The desire of His humble servant has been fulfilled. I have received the dust of the Feet of the True Guru. ||2]|
ofe safs fear ofs safs ne fan Afsas fer I c6s-14, a@st Seats, ue 4)
har bhagat darirh-aavai har bhagat sunai tis satgur milee-ai.
Those who meet the True Guru implant devotional worship to the Lord, and listen to this devotional worship of the Lord.
3c yfs 3 ureet ofa org fats fesiot 3 cos-15, west aoafs, us 4) totaa mool na aavee har laabh nit darirhee-ai. ||3]|| They never suffer any loss; they continually earn the profit of the Lord. ||3]|
fan ag fee feara 3 oe A ard Il (168-15, wea Aoats, we 4) jis ka-o ridai vigaas hai bhaa-o doojaa naahee. One whose heart blossoms forth, is not in love with duality.
sod fSn aa fife Gud of ge Wed NSNcCNISNUIH (68-15, Test Boats, v2 4)
naanak tis gur mil uDhrai har gun gaavaahee. ||4]|8]|14]|52|| O Nanak, meeting the Guru, one is saved, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. [14] 18] ]14][52]|
Hoe 8 Ast UTet II (68-16) mehlaa 4 ga-orhee poorbee. Fourth Mehl, Gauree Poorbee:
ofa efeorts efemr ufs att AS ufe 3fe uf af Fat i ci6s-16, aCzt yaet, He 4)
har da-i-aal da-i-aa parabh keenee mayrai man tan mukh har bolee.
The Merciful Lord God showered me with His Mercy; with mind and body and mouth, I chant the Lord's Name.
aenfa da steur vfs aa ate sar stat Ast FS WAU 8-17, aCst yset, ws 4) gurmukh rang bha-i-aa at goorhaa har rang bheenee mayree cholee. ||1||
As Gurmukh, I have been dyed in the deep and lasting color of the Lord's Love. The robe of my body is drenched with His Love. ||1]|
nus dfs ys at IS ast | 68-18, aeat vast, ue 4) apunay har parabh kee ha-o golee. I am the maid-servant of my Lord God.
wa dH ofa ASt Ho Hour afs HS AAS AS dw mst Ul TIC I 68-18, aCat yas, ve 4)
jab ham har saytee man maani-aa kar deeno jagat sabh gol amolee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. When my mind surrendered to the Lord, He made all the world my slave. ||1]|Pause| |
ag fraa As ao set Ufa food Sfy Peat il (168-19, aGat uset, He 4)
karahu bibayk sant jan bhaa-ee khoj hirdai daykh dhandholee.
Consider this well, O Saints, O Siblings of Destiny - search your own hearts, seek and find Him there.
ofs afs gy As Ais Aaet ofa feafe SA ala AS NM (168-19, ast yore, we 4)
har har roop sabh jot sabaa-ee har nikat vasai har kolee. ||2| |
The Beauty and the Light of the Lord, Har, Har, is present in all. In all places, the Lord dwells near by, close at hand. |[2]|
at ae
ofa ofs faafe ZA AS Ha a mudus usY mMsat Il (169-1, west yseh, ne 4)
har har nikat vasai sabh jag kai aprampar purakh atolee.
The Lord, Har, Har, dwells close by, all over the world. He is Infinite, All-powerful and Immeasurable.
ofs ofs yae aE afe us fg fos as ufo Het NZI (69-2, ast yee, we 4)
har har pargat kee-o gur poorai sir vaychi-o gur peh molee. ||3]||
The Perfect Guru has revealed the Lord, Har, Har, to me. I have sold my head to the Guru. ||3]|
ofa Ft nists wafs su Ades 3H Ss UTE SSA Il (169-2, aCst use, He 4)
har jee antar baahar tum sarnaagat tum vad purakh vadolee.
O Dear Lord, inside and outside, I am in the protection of Your Sanctuary; You are the Greatest of the Great, All-powerful Lord.
He soa Mofes dfs we ae fife Afsag aa Saat NSsNAUIUNUsi (69-3, aCzt yset, v8 4)
jan naanak an-din har gun gaavai mil satgur gur vaycholee. ||4||1||15]|53]|
Servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day, meeting the Guru, the True Guru, the Divine Intermediary. ||4||1]||15]||53]|
asst usst HIS 8 Il (169-4) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
Addis nudua AyMt Aeretas use fears il (169-4, rat yaet, He 4)
jagjeevan aprampar su-aamee jagdeesur purakh biDhaatay.
Life of the World, Infinite Lord and Master, Master of the Universe, All-powerful Architect of Destiny.
fas Hata SH Usg Aum fSs Hrafar TH ATS AU (169-4, aeSt Tet, we 4) jit maarag tum parayrhu su-aamee tit maarag ham jaatay. ||1]|| Whichever way You turn me, O my Lord and Master, that is the way I shall go. ||1]|
TH HT HS da Ast TS Il (169-5, aCst set, ws 4) raam mayraa man har saytee raatay. O Lord, my mind is attuned to the Lord's Love.
AsHats fife oH oa fer afe oH oth AHS NA TIE Il (169-5, aCat yset, He 4) satsangat mil raam ras paa-i-aa har raamai naam samaatay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have obtained the sublime essence of the Lord. I am absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
dfs af an afe afe afar wreug ots afs oH fe ATS Il (169-6, west yas, He 4)
har har naam har har jag avkhaDh har har naam har saatay.
The Lord, Har, Har, and the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the panacea, the medicine for the world. The Lord, and the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, bring peace and tranquility.
fsa & uu du Afs faon A aeHfSs TH IA WS IQM (169-7, aSt yaet, He 4)
tin kay paap dokh sabh binsay jo gurmat raam ras khaatay. ||2||
Those who partake of the Lord's sublime essence, through the Guru's Teachings - their sins and sufferings are all eliminated. ||2| |
fro ag fous fou ufs HAsfa 3 ad Hsu Afs oS Il (169-7, west yeh, ne 4)
jin ka-o likhat likhay Dhur mastak tay gur santokh sar naatay.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed on their foreheads, bathe in the pool of contentment of the Guru.
vonfs He aet AS fo at HH OH Sa TS USI (169-8, aCzt use, He 4)
durmat mail ga-ee sabh tin kee jo raam naam rang raatay. ||3]|
The filth of evil-mindedness is totally washed away, from those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord's Name. |[3]|
TH SH my vif rf Ug SAT SH ASS MST } US Il (169-9, west yest, we 4)
raam tum aapay aap aap parabh thaakur tum jayvad avar na daatay.
O Lord, You Yourself are Your Own Master, O God. There is no other Giver as Great as You.
Ad Sod oH we St He afe mba ofa fas FS SINUS 69-9, aCat Yost, He 4) jan naanak naam la-ay taa% jeevai har japee-ai har kirpaa tay. ||4]|2]|16||54]| Servant Nanak lives by the Naam, the Name of the Lord; by the Lord's Mercy, he chants the Lord's Name. ||4]|2||16]|54]|
asst UTst HIS 8 Il (169-10) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
add faut rates os Hat Ho dfs Ast Fes Il (169-10, aGst set, ws 4) karahu kirpaa jagjeevan daatay mayraa man har saytee raachay.
Show Mercy to me, O Life of the World, O Great Giver, so that my mind may merge with the Lord.
Afsafs ae HG nifs fears afu ofa afte afs He HS NA (169-11, aGat Yost, He 4) satgur bachan dee-o at nirmal jap har har har man maachay. ||1]|
The True Guru has bestowed His most pure and sacred Teachings. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, my mind is transfixed and enraptured. ||1]|
TH Ha He 36 Sfa StS aa APS Il 69-11, aSat uset, ne 4) raam mayraa man tan bayDh lee-o har saachay. O Lord, my mind and body have been pierced through by the True Lord.
fag ores & ufy was AS afer as Afsas a safe ofe TH TS NA TTS I (169-12, aGat usat, H8 4)
jih kaal kai mukh jagat sabh garsi-aa gur satgur kai bachan har ham baachay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The whole world is caught and held in the mouth of Death. Through the Teachings of the Guru, the True Guru, O Lord, I am saved. ||1||Pause| |
fra ag Uffs adt afs ASt 3 AAS HF SI AS Il (169-13, ast yset, we 4)
jin ka-o pareet naahee har saytee tay saakat moorh nar kaachay.
Those who are not in love with the Lord are foolish and false - they are faithless cynics.
f36 AC HOH HE vfs otct fefs fen|t His His UTS NQIl 69-13, Test Use, He 4) tin kKa-o janam maran at bhaaree vich vistaa mar mar paachay. ||2||
They suffer the most extreme agonies of birth and death; they die over and over again, and they rot away in manure. ||2||
3H tfenrs Aafs ufsursa 4 a@ dA we Ufs TH AS II (169-14, ast usett, He 4)
tum da-i-aal saran partipaalak mo ka-o deejai daan har ham jaachay.
You are the Merciful Cherisher of those who seek Your Sanctuary. I beg of You: please grant me Your gift, Lord.
dfg & BA TA TH ala HO foals ad afs oe ISI (169-15, west yet, He 4) har kay daas daas ham keejai man nirat karay kar naachay. ||3]| Make me the slave of the Lord's slaves, so that my mind might dance in Your Love.
[I3I|
nm AT eS Ys AMM JH ants Tg ST Il (169-15, west yaett, ws 4) aapay saah vaday parabh su-aamee ham vanjaaray heh taa chay. He Himself is the Great Banker; God is our Lord and Master. I am His petty merchant.
Ha HO 36 AG TH As Sat AS BOA A ATT YS ATS ISUSIIONUUI (169-16, Test use, H8 4)
mayraa man tan jee-o raas sabh tayree jan naanak kay saah parabh saachay.
[4] 13]]17]155]]
My mind, body and soul are all Your capital assets. You, O God, are the True Banker of servant Nanak. ||4]|3]|17]|55]|
asst usst HIS 8 Il (169-17) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
3H efenrs Aaa eu SH fea faa Ho FAS Il (169-17, aGat yaet, He 4)
tum da-i-aal sarab dukh bhanjan ik bin-o sunhu day kaanay.
You are Merciful, the Destroyer of all pain. Please give me Your Ear and listen to my prayer.
fan 3 3H dfs WS Homi A Afsag Afs Aa US IAI (169-17, Tat Yast, He 4)
jis tay tum har jaanay su-aamee so satgur mayl mayraa paraanay. ||1]|
Please unite me with the True Guru, my breath of life; through Him, O my Lord and Master, You are known. ||1||
TH JH Afsdd uUayqTH as HS Il (169-18, aGSt yet, He 4) raam ham satgur paarbarahm kar maanay. O Lord, I acknowledge the True Guru as the Supreme Lord God.
JH He Ha wiAU His 3S ae Afsae a sels Ts TH AS UU TTS Il (19-18, west yoet, H8 4)
ham moorh mugaDh asuDh mat hotay gur satgur kai bachan har ham jaanay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am foolish and ignorant, and my intellect is impure. Through the Teachings of the Guru, the True Guru, O Lord, I come to know You. ||1||Pause| |
fi36 JA uid JA DH fy As f3s6 da gars Il 169-19, west use, ue 4) jitnay ras an ras ham daykhay sabh titnay feek feekaanay.
All the pleasures and enjoyments which I have seen - I have found them all to be bland and insipid.
UST DO
ofa & on vifqs oA ohm ffs Afsaa HtS SA WS MQM (170-1, aSat use, ve 4)
har kaa naam amrit ras chaakhi-aa mil satgur meeth ras gaanay. ||2||
I have tasted the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, by meeting the True Guru. It is sweet, like the juice of the sugarcane. ||2]|
fra aS ag Afsag adt sfeur 3 HAS Hs fess Il (170-2, west yset, He 4)
jin ka-o gur satgur nahee bhayti-aa tay saakat moorh divaanay.
Those who have not met the Guru, the True Guru, are foolish and insane - they are faithless cynics.
fsa & asndie ufs ue efy tug xfs uss ISI (170-2, reat yas, He 4)
tin kay karamheen Dhur paa-ay daykh deepak mohi pachaanay. ||3]||
Those who were pre-ordained to have no good karma at all - gazing into the lamp of emotional attachment, they are burnt, like moths in a flame. ||3]|
fio a 3H efeur afs Hag 3 de dfs AS Bars Il 170-3, aSst use, us 4) jin ka-o tum da-i-aa kar maylhu tay har har sayv lagaanay. Those whom You, in Your Mercy, have met, Lord, are committed to Your Service.
Ao s'Sa oie aie ate Afy yae HfS ASHS STH AHS IBISNACHUEN (170-3, Test yaet, H8 4)
jan naanak har har har jap pargatay mat gurmat naam samaanay. ||4||4]|18]|56] | Servant Nanak chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. He is famous, and through the Guru's Teachings, He merges in the Name. ||4||4]|18]|56] |
asst ust HIS 8 Il (170-4) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
Wd Ho A us Ae ate d Amit ag faa ofe ug SADA Il (170-4, aGat vast, He 4)
mayray man so parabh sadaa naal hai su-aamee kaho kithai har pahu nasee-ai.
O my mind, God is always with you; He is your Lord and Master. Tell me, where could you run to get away from the Lord?
ofa om) suff we us AT ofa wef eave SAMA IAI 170-5, TST vast, He 4)
har aapay bakhas la-ay parabh saachaa har aap chhadaa-ay chhutee-ai. ||1]|
The True Lord God Himself grants forgiveness; we are emancipated only when the Lord Himself emancipates us. ||1]|
Ha Ho Afu ofe afe afe ufs mba i (170-6, west yee, ne 4) mayray man jap har har har man japee-ai. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har - chant it in your mind.
Afsag at Aseret sft u@ AS Ha" ae Afsag ute sehr nd TIC i (170-6, weet yas, ve 4)
satgur kee sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-o mayray manaa gur satgur peechhai chhutee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Quickly now, run to the Sanctuary of the True Guru, O my mind; following the Guru, the True Guru, you shall be saved. ||1]||Pause] |
Hd Ho Ag A us AS AVES fag Afen fon whe SAH II (170-7, aCat use, He 4) mayray man sayvhu so parabh sarab sukh-daata jit sayvi-ai nij ghar vasee-ai.
O my mind, serve God, the Giver of all peace; serving Him, you shall come to dwell in your own home deep within.
qonfa ate wag we nua wufh dee ofe AA WA III (170-8, wat yas, He 4) gurmukh jaa-ay lahhu ghar apnaa ghas chandan har jas ghasee-ai. ||2||
As Gurmukh, go and enter your own home; anoint yourself with the sandalwood oil of the Lord's Praises. ||2]|
Hd Ho fe ate ofs afe ate AA SSH & wT ata His TAMA II (170-8, ast yore, we 4) mayray man har har har har har jas ootam lai laahaa har man hasee-ai.
O my mind, the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, are exalted and sublime. Earn the profit of the Lord's Name, and let your mind be happy.
ofa af wef efeor afs 22 3 nifigs ofs aA seb ZI 470-9, weet yeast, ue 4) har har aap da-i-aa kar dayvai taa amrit har ras chakhee-ai. ||3]|
If the Lord, Har, Har, in His Mercy, bestows it, then we partake of the ambrosial essence of the Lord's Name. ||3]|
AS HS OH faa A EA Sa 3 AAS oe AH Web I (170-10, aeat YaE, Hs 4)
mayray man naam binaa jo doojai laagay tay saakat nar jam ghutee-ai.
O my mind, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and attached to duality, those faithless cynics are strangled by the Messenger of Death.
3 Was da faa on ferrfenr no fq & foafe a fecha ell «70-10, aGet oe, He 4) tay saakat chor jinaa naam visaari-aa man tin kai nikat na bhitee-ai. ||4||
Such faithless cynics, who have forgotten the Naam, are thieves. O my mind, do not even go near them. ||4]|
Ad Ho Aeg mee fadna oats fas Afen Sar sehr | (70-11, wat vast, us 4) mayray man sayvhu alakh niranjan narhar jit sayvi-ai laykhaa chhutee-ai.
O my mind, serve the Unknowable and Immaculate Lord, the Man-lion; serving Him, your account will be cleared.
We soa dfs ufs us ate fag HAT 3B Ss wea NUNUNAENUIIL (170-12, TCS ya, Hs 4) jan naanak har parabh pooray kee-ay khin maasaa tol na ghatee-ai. ||5||5||19||57]| The Lord God has made servant Nanak perfect; he is not diminished by even the tiniest particle. ||5||5||19]|57]|
asst uss HIS 8 Il (170-13) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
Jue US SA's ys Sue Ha Me fils AS Sc I 70-13, west yse, He 4) hamray paraan vasgat parabh tumrai mayraa jee-o pind sabh tayree. My breath of life is in Your Power, God; my soul and body are totally Yours.
cfeur agg ofs an feureg He ufs 3fs Ss west A (170-13, aCst uset, He 4)
da-i-aa karahu har daras dikhaavhu mayrai man tan loch ghanayree. ||1||
Be merciful to me, and show me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. There is such a great longing within my mind and body! ||1||
oH Hd Hfs 3fo Bs fos ofa act Il (170-14, wat york, ue 4) raam mayrai man tan loch milan har kayree. O my Lord, there is such a great longing within my mind and body to meet the Lord.
aa fauts feu fass afe atet ofa fifemr orfe ys Heat Wa TIS il 170-14, aSst yack, H8 4)
gur kirpaal kirpaa kichant gur keenee har mili-aa aa-ay parabh mayree. ||1|| rahaa-o. When the Guru, the Merciful Guru, showed just a little mercy to me, my Lord God came and met me. ||1]|Pause| |
A dd Ho fats 3 Amit a fafa gH afs Wag At I (170-15, Tat yseH, He 4)
jo hamrai man chit hai su-aamee saa biDh tum har jaanhu mayree.
Whatever is in my conscious mind, O Lord and Master - that condition of mine is known only to You, Lord.
mofes oH Aut AY uel fos Ale uIA Tie Sat QU (170-16, west yaet, we 4)
an-din naam japee sukh paa-ee nit jeevaa aas har tayree. ||2| |
Night and day, I chant Your Name, and I find peace. I live by placing my hopes in You, Lord. ||2||
afa Afsafe es ug satfenr ofe fife orfe ys Ast i (170-17, west yset, Hs 4)
gur satgur daatai panth bataa-i-aa har mili-aa aa-ay parabh mayree.
The Guru, the True Guru, the Giver, has shown me the Way; my Lord God came and met me.
motes noe sfeur esarait AS yA Url AS At SII (170-17, agst use, ve 4)
an-din anad bha-i-aa vadbhaagee sabh aas pujee jan kayree. ||3]||
Night and day, I am filled with bliss; by great good fortune, all of the hopes of His humble servant have been fulfilled. ||3]|
Adee AAAS AGS AS Has 9 fe Act I (170-18, aGat yost, ue 4) jagannaath jagdeesur kartay sabh vasgat hai har kayree. O Lord of the World, Master of the Universe, everything is under Your control.
He woe Aves ore ofa Tag UA Ao Act ISNENQONUCH (170-18, aGat yas, Hs 4) jan naanak sarnaagat aa-ay har raakho paij jan kayree. ||4||6||20||58]|
Servant Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, Lord; please, preserve the honor of Your humble servant. ||4]|6]|20]|58] |
asst ust HIS 8 Il (170-19) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
feg Hour fag o fear ag daft ea va fefh af fs TS Il 170-19, ast yee, we 4) ih manoo-aa khin na tikai baho rangee dah dah dis chal chal haadhay.
This mind does not hold still, even for an instant. Distracted by all sorts of distractions, it wanders around aimlessly in the ten directions.
Yat 999
Tg ys ufeor esarat fe Hy thor He SS AU 71-1, aSst yas, we 4)
gur pooraa paa-i-aa vadbhaagee har mantar dee-aa man thaadhay. ||1]|
I have found the Perfect Guru, through great good fortune; He has given me the Mantra of the Lord's Name, and my mind has become quiet and tranquil. ||1]|
TH TH Afsds BS aS AU FICS i (171-2, ast yout, us 4) raam ham satgur laalay kaa‘dhay. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Lord, I am the slave of the True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
THE HAS VY CaS’ TH ATA TT BT AS Il (171-2, west yoet, ws 4) hamrai mastak daag dagaanaa ham karaj guroo baho saadhay. My forehead has been branded with His brand; I owe such a great debt to the Guru.
usGuarg US ag abot sO vsg ahs uss MQ 171-3, wat yaet, He 4)
par-upkaar punn baho kee-aa bha-o dutar taar paraadhay. ||2||
He has been so generous and kind to me; He has carried me across the treacherous and terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
fis ag uifs fee afs act fsa as Wes We | 171-3, west ys, Hs 4)
jin ka-o pareet ridai har naahee tin kooray gaadhan gaadhay.
Those who do not have love for the Lord within their hearts, harbor only false intentions and goals.
fa urat arcre feof ws 3 fC HoH aefs Tes SI 71-4, vest ust, He 4)
ji-o paanee kaagad binas jaat hai ti-o manmukh garabh galaadhay. ||3]||
As paper breaks down and dissolves in water, the self-willed manmukh wastes away in arrogant pride. ||3]|
oH Wor ae 3 WoT nia fA ahs gs IE Ses il ca7i-5, west yoet, ws 4) ham jaani-aa kachhoo na jaanah aagai ji-o har raakhai ti-o thaadhay. I know nothing, and I do not know the future; as the Lord keeps me, so do I stand.
TH 3G YA Ud fas WIT AS SSA ASI HAS NGUOUVUUEM (171-5, ast yset, ve 4)
ham bhool chook gur kirpaa Dhaarahu jan naanak kutray kaadhay. ||4]]7||21]|59|| For my failings and mistakes, O Guru, grant me Your Grace; servant Nanak is Your obedient dog. ||4]|7]|21||59]|
asst usst HIS 8 Il (71-6) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
oth ada sag ag stor fife Ag ase dS T I 1171-6, west yset, Hs 4)
kaam karoDh nagar baho bhari-aa mil saaDhoo khandal khanda hay.
The body-village is filled to overflowing with sexual desire and anger, which were broken into bits when I met with the Holy Saint.
yata fous fad ag ufeur nfs afe foe Hae Hat T AU Ca71-7, west yee, Hs 4) poorab likhat likhay gur paa-i-aa man har liv mandal mandaa hay. ||1||
By pre-ordained destiny, I have met with the Guru. I have entered into the realm of the Lord's Love. ||1]|
ate AY viget US SST T Ml (171-7, ast vat, Hs 4) kar saaDhoo anjulee punn vadaa hay. Greet the Holy Saint with your palms pressed together; this is an act of great merit.
afs S383 us Fa T NU TTS Ul ci7i-8, west yaet, ue 4) kar dand-ut pun vadaa hay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Bow down before Him; this is a virtuous action indeed. ||1]||Pause| |
Was dfs aA Ae 3 Wour fSo nists IN ase T Il ci7i-s, aGat yaet, He 4)
saakat har ras saad na jaani-aa tin antar ha-umai kandaa hay.
The wicked shaaktas, the faithless cynics, do not know the taste of the Lord's sublime essence. The thorn of egotism is embedded deep within them.
fa@ fa vafs us ey uefa nHore Rafe fafs Sav T QU 71-9, Test yseh, ne 4)
ji-o ji-o chaleh chubhai dukh paavahi jamkaal saheh sir dandaa hay. ||2||
The more they walk away, the deeper it sticks into them, and the more they suffer in pain, until finally, the Messenger of Death smashes his club against their heads. ||2]|
of He dfs ofs aH AHS BY ASH HS SS UT T Il (71-9, aSat yset, ve 4)
har jan har har naam samaanay dukh janam maran bhav khanda hay.
The humble servants of the Lord are absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The pain of birth and the fear of death are eradicated.
wifsort use uffor usnAg ag As os YIHS FT SI (71-10, a@at vast, ue 4) abhinaasee purakh paa-i-aa parmaysar baho sobh khand barahmandaa hay. ||3]|| They have obtained the Imperishable Supreme Being, the Transcendent Lord God, and they obtain great honor throughout all the worlds and realms. ||3]||
JH ada HAalS Ys So Os TY TY Ss aT T Il (71-11, ast usett, ws 4)
ham gareeb maskeen parabh tayray har raakh raakh vad vadaa hay.
I am poor and meek, God, but I am Yours! Save me, please save me, O Greatest of the Great!
WS Soa OH nUOTG 2a dD Us oN dt AY Ha T ISICNQINEON (71-1, aeet vast, He 4) jan naanak naam aDhaar tayk hai har naamay hee sukh mandaa hay. ||4||8]|22||60]| Servant Nanak takes the Sustenance and Support of the Naam. In the Name of the Lord, he enjoys celestial peace. ||4||8]|22]|60] |
asst usst HIS 8 Il (171-12) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
fea as xfs ofs on ofe 9 fae Are o ure Cher Il (171-12, aGat set, He 4)
is garh meh har raam raa-ay hai kichh saad na paavai Dheethaa.
Within this body-fortress is the Lord, the Sovereign Lord King, but the stubborn ones do not find the taste.
ofa de efeurts nigqg ator ofe aa Aaet ofa Stor NU ca71-13, west uaet, He 4) har deen da-i-aal anoograhu kee-aa har gur sabdee chakh deethaa. ||1]|| When the Lord, Merciful to the meek, showed His Mercy, I found and tasted it, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
TH dfs dese Ad fos Har uA TIC it 7-14, west use, we 4)
raam har keertan gur liv meethaa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Lovingly focused upon the Guru, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise has become sweet to me. ||1||Pause| |
ofe nam widies uagay o fife Afsas ofa sate I (71-14, wat vad, He 4)
har agam agochar paarbarahm hai mil satgur laag baseethaa.
The Lord, the Supreme Lord God, is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. Those who are committed to the True Guru, the Divine Intermediary, meet the Lord.
fae Te avo Aus had fsa rat vrfs udder ii ci7i-15, wat vast, ue 4)
jin gur bachan sukhaanay hee-arai tin aagai aan pareethaa. ||2||
Those whose hearts are pleased with the Guru's Teachings - the Lord's Presence is revealed to them. ||2||
HoH dha ofS ade 3d fo nists arg adtor Il 71-15, wat vast, He 4)
manmukh hee-araa at kathor hai tin antar kaar kareethaa.
The hearts of the self-willed manmukhs are hard and cruel; their inner beings are dark.
farina ag ag ey Ubreht fry for ef soto SI (71-16, ast yore, we 4) bisee-ar ka-o baho dooDh pee-aa-ee-ai bikh niksai fol futheelaa. ||3] | Even if the poisonous snake is fed large amounts of milk, it will still yield only poison.
[I3I|
ofe ys its fhoreg ag Ary uf ages Aa Hf Stor il 171-17, ast yset, we 4)
har parabh aan milaavhu gur saaDhoo ghas garurh sabad mukh leethaa.
O Lord God, please unite me with the Holy Guru, so that I might joyfully grind and eat the Shabad.
WS TSA TIA HS AS Ola Aas Ager HS use nIwEUl (071-17, aCst yset, us 4) jan naanak gur kay laalay golay lag sangat karoo-aa meethaa. ||4||9||23||61]| Servant Nanak is the slave of the Guru; in the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, the bitter becomes sweet. ||4]|9]|23||61||
asst usst HIS 8 Il (171-18) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
ofs ofa nate Adte TH afer ys TI AX wea Il (7-18, a7Sat yoet, ws 4) har har arath sareer ham baychi-aa pooray gur kai aagay. For the sake of the Lord, Har, Har, I have sold my body to the Perfect Guru.
Afsag ws on fearfeur ufa waste scar Asa WAU (171-19, west yset, He 4)
satgur daatai naam dirhaa-i-aa mukh mastak bhaag sabhaagay. ||1]||
The True Guru, the Giver, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me. A very blessed and fortunate destiny is recorded upon my forehead. ||1]||
oH Tats oe fee Sat Ul TIS il ca7i-19, 7st yaet, ve 4)
raam gurmat har liv laagay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Guru's Teachings, I am lovingly centered on the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
Ust 992 ufe ufe sHeter sHs oH ate as Hate Tg fee Sat i (172-1, west yset, ws 4)
ghat ghat rama-ee-aa ramat raam raa-ay gur sabad guroo liv laagay. The All-pervading Sovereign Lord King is contained in each and every heart. Through the Guru, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am lovingly centered on the Lord.
JG HS 36 CEE ofe TT AG HT FH 8S Ts gaat Sa NI (172-2, aSst yeast, we 4) ha-o man tan dayva-o kaat guroo ka-o mayraa bharam bha-o gur bachnee bhaagay.
2] | Cutting my mind and body into pieces, I offer them to my Guru. The Guru's Teachings have dispelled my doubt and fear. ||2| |
nifomrs tue wits Fee aa farts ae fee aT i (172-2, ast yor, we 4)
anDhi-aarai deepak aan jalaa-ay gur gi-aan guroo liv laagay.
In the darkness, the Guru has lit the lamp of the Guru's wisdom; I am lovingly focused on the Lord.
nifamirg nite fata faotr wis sas wdt Ho ATH SI (172-3, aGst use, He 4) agi-aan anDhayraa binas binaasi-o ghar vasat lahee man jaagay. ||3]|
The darkness of ignorance has been dispelled, and my mind has been awakened; within the home of my inner being, I have found the genuine article. ||3]|
Was fox wfenrocdt fsa an Hats wat Il (172-4, aGet uset, Hs 4) saakat baDhik maa-i-aaDhaaree tin jam johan laagay. The vicious hunters, the faithless cynics, are hunted down by the Messenger of Death.
Go Afsas uid Ata o Sfeor Gf nrefa af visa gil (172-4, aGSt uset, He 4)
un satgur aagai sees na baychi-aa o-ay aavahi jaahi abhaagay. ||4| |
They have not sold their heads to the True Guru; those wretched, unfortunate ones continue coming and going in reincarnation. | |4| |
THe fis Hod ys SAT TH ASE YS Ta HA Il (172-5, ast yset, ve 4) hamraa bin-o sunhu parabh thaakur ham saran parabhoo har maagay. Hear my prayer, O God, my Lord and Master: I beg for the Sanctuary of the Lord God.
Wo soa at outs ag od fig afeS Afsas yrs NUNIONIIEI (172-5, Tat yse, ws 4)
jan naanak kee laj paat guroo hai sir baychi-o satgur aagay. ||5||10]|24]|62| |
Servant Nanak's honor and respect is the Guru; he has sold his head to the True Guru. | |5]|10]|24]|62]|
asst usst HIS 8 Il (172-6) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
TH udardt uidars uifamre Hfs ata fife wry aefemr i (172-7, weat use, He 4) ham aha‘kaaree aha"kaar agi-aan mat gur mili-ai aap gavaa-i-aa.
I am egotistical and conceited, and my intellect is ignorant. Meeting the Guru, my selfishness and conceit have been abolished.
ICH da afenr AY ufenr ug US ag ale Ther WA (172-7, west yset, He 4)
ha-umai rog ga-i-aa sukh paa-i-aa Dhan Dhan guroo har raa-i-aa. ||1||
The illness of egotism is gone, and I have found peace. Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the Sovereign Lord King. ||1||
oH ad & sale ofs ufsor nan TIE Il (172-8, Test yset, Hs 4) raam gur kai bachan har paa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. I have found the Lord, through the Teachings of the Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
Ae dhs uifs on ae at afe wea ve ssfeor It (172-8, aat yas, He 4)
mayrai hee-arai pareet raam raa-ay kee gur maarag panth bataa-i-aa.
My heart is filled with love for the Sovereign Lord King; the Guru has shown me the path and the way to find Him.
ha AH fis As Afsas ora fafs feefaor afe ates wfeor i (172-9, reat vast, He 4) mayraa jee-o pind sabh satgur aagai jin vichhurhi-aa har gal laa-i-aa. ||2||
My soul and body all belong to the Guru; I was separated, and He has led me into the Lord's Embrace. ||2||
Ae nists ulfs sat tus a ats fase of fearfemr i (172-10, west yseh, ne 4)
mayrai antar pareet lagee daykhan ka-o gur hirday naal dikhaa-i-aa.
Deep within myself, I would love to see the Lord; the Guru has inspired me to see Him within my heart.
Hon ide sfeur ufs He Te wrat wiry Sorfemr BI (172-10, Test yseh, He 4)
sahj anand bha-i-aa man morai gur aagai aap vaychaa-i-aa. ||3]||
Within my mind, intuitive peace and bliss have arisen; I have sold myself to the Guru. 131]
oH musa uy ag ate afs eAet oo Vater I 172-11, west uset, He 4) ham apraaDh paap baho keenay kar dustee chor churaa-i-aa. I am a sinner - I have committed so many sins; I am a villainous, thieving thief.
ma sod Adeats wre alg dg oa da sent WSUAU QUES (172-12, Test yoet, He 4)
ab naanak sarnaagat aa-ay har raakho laaj har bhaa-i-aa. ||4||11]|25||63]|
Now, Nanak has come to the Lord's Sanctuary; preserve my honor, Lord, as it pleases Your Will. ||4]]11]]25]]63]|
asst uss HIS 8 Il (172-13) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4. Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl:
Tos IH AF oa Te THs HoH ae] Il (172-13, aVat yore, we 4)
gurmat baajai sabad anaahad gurmat manoo-aa gaavai.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the unstruck music resounds; through the Guru's Teachings, the mind sings.
BsTG TT VAS wfenr ug us Tg fee HS A (172-13, TSS ya, He 4) vadbhaagee gur darsan paa-i-aa Dhan Dhan guroo liv laavai. ||1]|
By great good fortune, I received the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Blessed, blessed is the Guru, who has led me to love the Lord. |]1]|
aonfa afs fees oe ud TIS i 172-14, aCst yset, us 4) gurmukh har liv laavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukh is lovingly centered on the Lord. ||1]|Pause||
THT SAT ASAT UT HS TT at AST AHS Il (172-14, aSat ys, ws 4) hamraa thaakur satgur pooraa man gur kee kaar kamaavai. My Lord and Master is the Perfect True Guru. My mind works to serve the Guru.
oH Hfe His Ged ue ae a A Ufa of Aa ASS MI (172-15, aCe ys, Hs 4) ham mal mal Dhovah paav guroo kay jo har har kathaa sunaavai. ||2| | I massage and wash the Feet of the Guru, who recites the Sermon of the Lord. ||2]|
fose aanfs on oAfee fase of qe we | (172-16, Test yseh, ne 4)
hirdai gurmat raam rasaa-in jihvaa har gun gaavai.
The Teachings of the Guru are in my heart; the Lord is the Source of nectar. My tongue sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ho sAfa safe ats af wrurd fete gots o Fe BS WI (172-16, aS yset, ws 4) man rasak rasak har ras aaghaanay fir bahur na bhookh lagaavai. ||3]|
My mind is immersed in, and drenched with the Lord's essence. Fulfilled with the Lord's Love, I shall never feel hunger again. ||3]||
aet ad Bure nda sos fae fas oH o US Il (172-17, 7eHt Use, He 4) ko-ee karai upaav anayk bahutayray bin kirpaa naam na paavai. People try all sorts of things, but without the Lord's Mercy, His Name is not obtained.
Wo stad a fe fasur ost Hfs TaHfS oH fess VNINENESI (172-17, aC yseh, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har kirpaa Dhaaree mat gurmat naam darirhaavai. ||4||12||26]||64| | The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; through the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, he has enshrined the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
| [4] [12] ]26]|64]|
TA ACSt HS HIS S Il (172-18) raag ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Raag Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
genta fie Af on ATH I (172-19, ast ws, 3 4) gurmukh jindoo jap naam karammaa. O my soul, as Gurmukh, do this deed: chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hfs Hat ofS AIG OH Hf IT I 472-19, aSst Hs, He 4)
mat maataa mat jee-o naam mukh raamaa.
Make that teaching your mother, that it may teach you to keep the Lord's Name in your mouth.
Hay fust afs qa use MAOH I (172-19, Tet ws, He 4)
santokh pitaa kar gur purakh ajnamaa.
Let contentment be your father; the Guru is the Primal Being, beyond birth or incarnation.
UST 903
Saoaat fe THT NAM (173-1, ASST ws, He 4) vadbhaagee mil raamaa. ||1|| By great good fortune, you shall meet with the Lord. ||1]|
ad vat use fufeor ga yrat AIG Ul (173-1, aGst ws, He 4) gur jogee purakh mili-aa rang maanee jee-o. I have met the Guru, the Yogi, the Primal Being; I am delighted with His Love.
ad ofa dfa gaat Aer fosarat AIG Il 173-2, ast ns, He 4) gur har rang rat-rhaa sadaa nirbaanee jee-o. The Guru is imbued with the Love of the Lord; He dwells forever in Nirvaanaa.
zara fe AUS AATet AIG Il 473-2, aSst ws, He 4) vadbhaagee mil sugharh sujaanee jee-o. By great good fortune, I met the most accomplished and all-knowing Lord.
HI Ho 30 dia Shar fFar MQM 173-2, aCst ws, He 4) mayraa man tan har rang bhinnaa. ||2]| My mind and body are drenched in the Love of the Lord. ||2]|
meg Had fife ant Aura Il 173-3, ast Hs, He 4) aavhu santahu mil naam japaahaa. Come, O Saints - let's meet together and chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fefs Hafs an Ae B oo AG II 1173-3, ast Ws, He 4) vich sangat naam sadaa lai laahaa jee-o. In the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, let's earn the lasting profit of the Naam.
afs Ae AS nifys uf ura AIG i 173-3, west rs, ne 4) kar sayvaa santaa amrit mukh paahaa jee-o. Let's serve the Saints, and drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
fe usta fotos ofs aaH ISI (173-4, aSSt ws, He 4) mil poorab likhi-arhay Dhur karmaa. ||3]|| By one's karma and pre-ordained destiny, they are met. ||3]|
Wefs zon vifyfs aa Sfenr AIG I 473-4, west us, He 4) saavan varas amrit jag chhaa-i-aa jee-o. In the month of Saawan, the clouds of Ambrosial Nectar hang over the world.
Ho Hg agfoors Fae Hfe urfemr i 173-5, aBet ws, us 4)
man mor kuhuki-arhaa sabad mukh paa-i-aa. The peacock of the mind chirps, and receives the Word of the Shabad, in its mouth;
ofa nif gost fifemr ofe afenr AIG I 173-5, aGat ws, He 4) har amrit vuth-rhaa mili-aa har raa-i-aa jee-o. the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord rains down, and the Sovereign Lord King is met.
AS Soa Uf Tar USUAUIQONEUI 473-6, Tez ws, Hs 4)
jan naanak paraym ratannaa. ||4||1]|27]||65]| Servant Nanak is imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||4]|1]|27]|65] |
ast HS HIS 8 Il (173-6)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
m@ Ad de AHS Act AG Il 1173-6, aBSt Hs, He 4) aa-o sakhee gun kaaman kareehaa jee-o. Come, O sisters - let's make virtue our charms.
fife Hs Fo da wifes sehr AE I (173-7, west as, He 4) mil sant janaa rang maanih ralee-aa jee-o. Let's join the Saints, and enjoy the pleasure of the Lord's Love.
ad tua famrg Ae fe sehr ATS I (173-7, aSst ws, He 4) gur deepak gi-aan sadaa man balee-aa jee-o. The lamp of the Guru's spiritual wisdom burns steadily in my mind.
dfs 33 ofs afs fistor FIG All 473-8, west ws, He 4) har tuthai dhul dhul milee-aa jee-o. ||1]| The Lord, being pleased and moved by pity, has led me to meet Him. ||1||
Ae fs sfs Un war afs SS AIG i 173-8, ast ws, He 4) mayrai man tan paraym lagaa har dholay jee-o. My mind and body are filled with love for my Darling Lord.
HAS fs Afsag FIs A 1 (173-9, aes ws, we 4) mai maylay mitar satgur vaycholay jee-o. The True Guru, the Divine Intermediary, has united me with my Friend.
HO Vet AST Ha US AS AE il 173-9, aSat ws, we 4) man dayvaa™ santaa mayraa parabh maylay jee-o. I offer my mind to the Guru, who has led me to meet my God.
ofa feefanrg WET ws ATE QI 173-9, aGSt ws, He 4) har vitrhi-ahu sadaa gholay jee-o. ||2|| I am forever a sacrifice to the Lord. ||2]|
2A Wd fimrfer 2A ve dfee ais afs faa nfs =A ATE II 173-10, west ws, He 4) vas mayray pi-aari-aa vas mayray govidaa har kar kirpaa man vas jee-o.
Dwell, O my Beloved, dwell, O my Lord of the Universe; O Lord, show mercy to me and come to dwell within my mind.
His fefenesr ee ufenr ne afser ag ua eft fear AIS 1 173-10, west ws, v8 4) man chindi-arhaa fal paa-i-aa mayray govindaa gur pooraa vaykh vigas jee-o.
I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires, O my Lord of the Universe; I am transfixed with ecstasy, gazing upon the Perfect Guru.
dfs ay fiufeor Aoseat Ae afer nfs mrafes nioe JIA ATE II 173-11, ast ws, He 4) har naam mili-aa sohaaganee mayray govindaa man an-din anad rahas jee-o.
The happy soul-brides receive the Lord's Name, O my Lord of the Universe; night and day, their minds are blissful and happy.
dfs ufos esoraitet ne afge fas & oo nfs oA ATG SI 73-12, aGst ws, He 4) har paa-i-arhaa vadbhaagee-ee mayray govindaa nit lai laahaa man has jee-o. ||3]| By great good fortune, the Lord is found, O my Lord of the Universe; earning profit continually, the mind laughs with joy. ||3]|
of urfy Cure afe omy Sa afe wma ard orfenr FIG tN 173-13, aGst ws, He 4)
har aap upaa-ay har aapay vaykhai har aapay kaarai laa-i-aa jee-o.
The Lord Himself creates, and the Lord Himself beholds; the Lord Himself assigns all to their tasks.
fefa uefa sun sfe 3 ne feaat cor urfeor AG I 173-13, aGat ws, He 4)
ik khaaveh bakhas tot na aavai iknaa fakaa paa-i-aa jee-o.
Some partake of the bounty of the Lord's favor, which never runs out, while others receive only a handful.
fefa aa sufs sofs fos Aete faa fou Harfeor FIG HI 73-14, west ws, He 4)
ik raajay takhat baheh nit sukhee-ay iknaa bhikh mangaa-i-aa jee-o.
Some sit upon thrones as kings, and enjoy constant pleasures, while others must beg for charity.
AS fea nae ease" He afer He Soa oH fourfeor AE NenInIcieel 073-15, ast HTS, He 4)
sabh iko sabad varatdaa mayray govidaa jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa jee-o.
[14] [2] 128] |66] |
The Word of the Shabad is pervading in everyone, O my Lord of the Universe; servant Nanak meditates on the Naam. ||4||2||28]|66]|
ast HS HIS 8 Il (173-16)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Ho Ht He HS AS afeer ots Sf Tat HS HS AE Il (173-16, ast ws, He 4)
man maahee man maahee mayray govindaa har rang rataa man maahee jee-o. From within my mind, from within my mind, O my Lord of the Universe, I am imbued with the Love of the Lord, from within my mind.
ofs da ots 3 wiht AS afar TT us vise Saat AG il 173-16, ASS ws, Hs 4) har rang naal na lakhee-ai mayray govidaa gur pooraa alakh lakhaahee jee-o. The Lord's Love is with me, but it cannot be seen, O my Lord of the Universe; the Perfect Guru has led me to see the unseen.
dfs ofa an usarfaor Ae dfee As wee vy of ATT AIG I 173-17, west WS, He 4) har har naam pargaasi-aa mayray govindaa sabh daalad dukh leh jaahee jee-o. He has revealed the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my Lord of the Universe; all poverty and pain have departed.
ofs ue Osu ufenr ne afer esarat oth ANTS AS UA (173-18, Test ws, Hs 4)
har pad ootam paa-i-aa mayray govindaa vadbhaagee naam samaahee jee-o. ||1||
I have obtained the supreme status of the Lord, O my Lord of the Universe; by great good fortune, I am absorbed in the Naam. ||1]|
Oat Ae fimrfaor Sat Hs aifse fas ala ys fsoar Sat FIG II 173-19, wat ws, ne 4) nainee mayray pi-aari-aa nainee mayray govidaa kinai har parabh dith-rhaa nainee jee-o.
With his eyes, O my Beloved, with his eyes, O my Lord of the Universe - has anyone ever seen the Lord God with his eyes?
HI HS 36 HIS Safer ne afer ofs wsg us anset ME Il (173-19, agSt ws, He 4) mayraa man tan bahut bairaagi-aa mayray govindaa har baajhahu Dhan kumlainee jee-o.
My mind and body are sad and depressed, O my Lord of the Universe; without her Husband Lord, the soul-bride is withering away.
Yat 98
As vot fife ufemr ve afee Ae ofs ys AMES Ast A I 74-1, Tests, He 4) sant janaa mil paa-i-aa mayray govidaa mayraa har parabh sajan sainee jee-o. Meeting the Saints, O my Lord of the Universe, I have found my Lord God, my Companion, my Best Friend.
fs ure fiufeor nenies He dfeer 4 Afe feast Sat AE i (174-2, west as, He 4) har aa-ay mili-aa jagjeevan mayray govindaa mai sukh vihaanee rainee jee-o. ||2]| The Lord, the Life of the World, has come to meet me, O my Lord of the Universe. The night of my life now passes in peace. ||2| |
H Aeg AS As ofe ys ANE H fs Sis su Barer HE I (174-3, west ws, He 4)
mai maylhu sant mayraa har parabh sajan mai man tan bhukh lagaa-ee-aa jee-o.
O Saints, unite me with my Lord God, my Best Friend; my mind and body are hungry for Him.
J@ afs o Fae fag Fe HS USHA nists fees ofe weer HE I 174-3, west os, He 4) ha-o reh na saka-o bin daykhay mayray pareetam mai antar birahu har laa-ee-aa jee- O.
I cannot survive without seeing my Beloved; deep within, I feel the pain of separation from the Lord.
dfs Teor Hat AAS fulmra TT AS AT Ho AlevSor AIG I 174-4, aCat ws, He 4) har raa-i-aa mayraa sajan pi-aaraa gur maylay mayraa man jeevaa-ee-aa jee-o. The Sovereign Lord King is my Beloved, my Best Friend. Through the Guru, I have met Him, and my mind has been rejuvenated.
Ae Hie sfs wr user ve afer afe fifemr yfs earetor FG Sil (174-5, west ors, ws 4)
mayrai man tan aasaa pooree-aa mayray govindaa har mili-aa man vaaDhaa-ee-aa jee-o. ||3]|
The hopes of my mind and body have been fulfilled, O my Lord of the Universe; meeting the Lord, my mind vibrates with joy. ||3]|
aot He afeer adt He fimrfenr 3G sa feefanrg Ae Set FIG I 174-6, west ws, He 4) vaaree mayray govindaa vaaree mayray pi-aari-aa ha-o tuDh vitrhi-ahu sad vaaree jee-o.
A sacrifice, O my Lord of the Universe, a sacrifice, O my Beloved; I am forever a sacrifice to You.
Ae Hie ste Un fusH or AS afee ofa ust er TH ATG I (174-6, Test ors, we 4) mayrai man tan paraym piramm kaa mayray govidaa har poonjee raakh hamaaree jee-o.
My mind and body are filled with love for my Husband Lord; O my Lord of the Universe, please preserve my assets.
Afsag feng vfs AS afeer ofs HS afs Sard AIG 74-7, ast Ws, He 4)
satgur visat mayl mayray govindaa har maylay kar raibaaree jee-o.
Unite me with the True Guru, Your Advisor, O my Lord of the Universe; through His guidance, He shall lead me to the Lord.
dfs om efenr afs ufeor vs afge ne soa Aafs suet AG sNsNItneo «74-8, ast HS, He 4)
har naam da-i-aa kar paa-i-aa mayray govindaa jan naanak saran tumaaree jee-o. [14] 131129] 167] |
I have obtained the Lord's Name, by Your Mercy, O my Lord of the Universe; servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary. ||4||3]|29]|67||
ast HS HIS 8 Il (174-9)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Sit Ae afeer dat AS fimrfamr afs ys Ha sat AE 74-9, west ws, He 4)
chojee mayray govindaa chojee mayray pi-aari-aa har parabh mayraa chojee jee-o. Playful is my Lord of the Universe; playful is my Beloved. My Lord God is wondrous and playful.
ofs my arg Surfeer AS afeer afs mia at set AG Wt 74-10, wat wry, He 4)
har aapay kaan" upaa-idaa mayray govidaa har aapay gopee khojee jee-o.
The Lord Himself created Krishna, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord Himself is the milkmaids who seek Him.
dfs wm AS we sae Ae dfeer ym gAior salt AE tl 174-10, aes Ws, He 4)
har aapay sabh ghat bhogdaa mayray govindaa aapay rasee-aa bhogee jee-o.
The Lord Himself enjoys every heart, O my Lord of the Universe; He Himself is the Ravisher and the Enjoyer.
dfs AWE 3 eet Ae afer wma Afsag Hatt AE Wall 074-11, aGst os, ne 4)
har sujaan na bhul-ee mayray govindaa aapay satgur jogee jee-o. ||1||
The Lord is All-knowing - He cannot be fooled, O my Lord of the Universe. He is the True Guru, the Yogi. ||1]|
nm Aas Curfeer AS afee afs urfu as go daft AIG (174-12, ast ws, He 4)
aapay jagat upaa-idaa mayray govidaa har aap khaylai baho rangee jee-o.
He Himself created the world, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord Himself plays in so many ways!
feaat sa sarfeer ne afeer fefa aaa feats Sa Sait MG Wt 174-12, west ws, He 4) iknaa bhog bhogaa-idaa mayray govindaa ik nagan fireh nang nangee jee-o. Some enjoy enjoyments, O my Lord of the Universe, while others wander around naked, the poorest of the poor.
nm Aas Curfser AS afer ofs we te AS Halt AE I 74-13, west as, He 4)
aapay jagat upaa-idaa mayray govidaa har daan dayvai sabh mangee jee-o.
He Himself created the world, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord gives His gifts to all who beg for them.
sas oH wag IHS afee ote ag Hale ofe Gat MS Qn 74-14, agst ws, He 4) bhagtaa naam aaDhaar hai mayray govindaa har kathaa mangeh har changee jee-o. 2] |
His devotees have the Support of the Naam, O my Lord of the Universe; they beg for the sublime sermon of the Lord. ||2]|
ofs nm sats aatee Ae afeer ate sas Be Hfs yest AG Wl 74-14, Test ors, we 4) har aapay bhagat karaa-idaa mayray govindaa har bhagtaa loch man pooree jee-o. The Lord Himself inspires His devotees to worship Him, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord fulfills the desires of the minds of His devotees.
nny ates af case AS afeer afe sfour sat eet AIG I (174-15, aes ws, Hs 4)
aapay jal thal varatdaa mayray govidaa rav rahi-aa nahee dooree jee-o.
He Himself is permeating and pervading the waters and the lands, O my Lord of the Universe; He is All-pervading - He is not far away.
ofs nists wate urfy 3 AS aifee afe wef sfoor sayat AIG I (174-16, ast ws, we 4) har antar baahar aap hai mayray govidaa har aap rahi-aa bharpooree jee-o.
The Lord Himself is within the self, and outside as well, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord Himself is fully pervading everywhere.
ofs mrsH oH ufo AS afser ofs Se orf Test AG WSN 74-17, Test ws, Hs 4) har aatam raam pasaari-aa mayray govindaa har vaykhai aap hadooree jee-o. ||3]| The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is diffused everywhere, O my Lord of the Universe. The Lord Himself beholds all; His Immanent Presence is pervading everywhere. ||3]||
dfs nists ant ue de afer afe orf ere FE aA AE I 74-17, west ws, we 4) har antar vaajaa pa-un hai mayray govindaa har aap vajaa-ay ti-o vaajai jee-o.
O Lord, the music of the praanic wind is deep within, O my Lord of the Universe; as the Lord Himself plays this music, so does it vibrate and resound.
ofa nists om fears 3 AS afer as Aadt ofs ys aA AIG I 474-18, aGSt as, He 4) har antar naam niDhaan hai mayray govindaa gur sabdee har parabh gaajai jee-o.
O Lord, the treasure of the Naam is deep within, O my Lord of the Universe; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord God is revealed.
nm Aofs ueteer AS afer ofe sas Het TE oA AE Il (174-19, aGat as, He 4) aapay saran pavaa-idaa mayray govindaa har bhagat janaa raakh laajai jee-o. He Himself leads us to enter His Sanctuary, O my Lord of the Universe; the Lord preserves the honor of His devotees.
ust qu
woot firs Hast He afer AS Soa on fafa aH AIG IisigiZonéci 075-1, Test ws, H8 4)
vadbhaagee mil sangtee mayray govindaa jan naanak naam siDh kaajai jee-o.
[14] 14] [30] |68] |
By great good fortune, one joins the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, O my Lord of the
Universe; O servant Nanak, through the Naam, one's affairs are resolved. [14] 14] |30]|68] |
ast HS HIS 8 Il (175-2)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
H dfs on ofa fags waret FIG I 175-2, west ws, He 4) mai har naamai har birahu lagaa-ee jee-o. The Lord has implanted a longing for the Lord's Name within me.
na ofe ys fies fs Fe uret AIG I 75-2, west ws, He 4) mayraa har parabh mit milai sukh paa-ee jee-o. I have met the Lord God, my Best Friend, and I have found peace.
dfs yg oft ater Ast Het AE I ca75-3, west ws, ws 4)
har parabh daykh jeevaa mayree maa-ee jee-o. Beholding my Lord God, I live, O my mother.
Ha SH Aa dfs get AS MAI 75-3, at Hs, He 4) mayraa naam sakhaa har bhaa-ee jee-o. ||1|| The Lord's Name is my Friend and Brother. ||1]||
VE Weg As we xe ole ys AT AE i 175-3, aes rs, 2 4) gun gaavhu sant jee-o mayray har parabh kayray jee-o. O Dear Saints, sing the Glorious Praises of my Lord God.
afu gant on AIG aa esd AE I 175-4, aCat ws, He 4) jap gurmukh naam jee-o bhaag vadayray jee-o. As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O very fortunate ones.
dfs as aH AG ure ofa HS AG II c75-4, ast ws, ws 4) har har naam jee-o paraan har mayray jee-o. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my soul and my breath of life.
fefs sofa 6 SeHw Sg AG MQM 175-5, aVHt ws, He 4) fir bahurh na bhavjal fayray jee-o. ||2|| I shall never again have to cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|
fa@ ofa ys tur AS Hf sfe WE AIG II (175-5, ast ws, He 4) ki-o har parabh vaykhaa mayrai man tan chaa-o jee-o. How shall I behold my Lord God? My mind and body yearn for Him.
dfs Hod As Me nfs war HS AIG I 175-6, aVHt ws, He 4) har maylhu sant jee-o man lagaa bhaa-o jee-o. Unite me with the Lord, Dear Saints; my mind is in love with Him.
qd Aaet uch ofe uisH Te AG I 475-6, west ws, He 4)
gur sabdee paa-ee-ai har pareetam raa-o jee-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have found the Sovereign Lord, my Beloved.
zoo Alu oS AIG ISI 175-7, Test ws, Hs 4) vadbhaagee jap naa-o jee-o. ||3]| O very fortunate ones, chant the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
Ad ufs 3fs eset afse ys wir HE Ut 75-7, aSet ws, ve 4)
mayrai man tan vadrhee govind parabh aasaa jee-o.
Within my mind and body, there is such a great longing for God, the Lord of the Universe.
dfe Hed HS Me adfee ys uA AE I 175-7, west ws, Hs 4) har maylhu sant jee-o govid parabh paasaa jee-o. Unite me with the Lord, Dear Saints. God, the Lord of the Universe, is so close to me.
Afsad Hfs oH Het UsaIAT AIG I (1175-8, aCHt Hs, He 4) satgur mat naam sadaa pargaasaa jee-o. Through the Teachings of the True Guru, the Naam is always revealed;
Ae oto Ufomst ufe ora AIG ISNUNSUECH (175-8, ast ws, He 4)
jan naanak poori-arhee man aasaa jee-o. ||4||5||31||69]| the desires of servant Nanak's mind have been fulfilled. ||4]|5||31]|69]|
ast HS HIS 8 Il (175-9)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 4. Gauree Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Hat fasdt an fs st Het AIS II 175-9, west ws, He 4) mayraa birhee naam milai taa jeevaa jee-o. If I receive my Love, the Naam, then I live.
Ho nef nifts aanfs ofa ster AE il 175-9, Test ws, ue 4)
man andar amrit gurmat har leevaa jee-o.
In the temple of the mind, is the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord; through the Guru's Teachings, we drink it in.
Ho dfs dfat wat dfs TA Het Utet HIG Il 175-10, aCat ws, He 4)
man har rang rat-rhaa har ras sadaa peevaa jee-o.
My mind is drenched with the Love of the Lord. I continually drink in the sublime essence of the Lord.
ofa uremia ufs Ate AIG UA 75-10, aBHt us, 8 4) har paa-i-arhaa man jeevaa jee-o. ||1]| I have found the Lord within my mind, and so I live. ||1]|
He fs sfs Un war afs are AG Hl a75-11, west os, He 4) mayrai man tan paraym lagaa har baan jee-o. The arrow of the Lord's Love has pierced by mind and body.
Aa utsy fag ofs use AAS AIG II (175-11, aSst ors, r2 4) mayraa pareetam mitar har purakh sujaan jee-o. The Lord, the Primal Being, is All-knowing; He is my Beloved and my Best Friend.
dg AS AS dfs AWS AAS AG I 75-12, Test Ws, He 4) gur maylay sant har sugharh sujaan jee-o. The Saintly Guru has united me with the All-knowing and All-seeing Lord.
JG on fees AaaS AG MQ 475-12, TSS ws, He 4) ha-o naam vitahu kurbaan jee-o. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
J@ ats ofa Ane ofa HIS SAS AE IN 175-13, ast as, He 4) ha-o har har sajan har meet dasaa-ee jee-o. I seek my Lord, Har, Har, my Intimate, my Best Friend.
dfs eAg Hag mt ofe da usTet AIG I 175-13, west ws, He 4) har dashu santahu jee har khoj pavaa-ee jee-o. Show me the way to the Lord, Dear Saints; I am searching all over for Him.
Afsag Joa GA Tas uret AE Il (175-13, TSH ws, Hs 4)
satgur tuth-rhaa dasay har paa-ee jee-o.
The Kind and Compassionate True Guru has shown me the Way, and I have found the Lord.
dfs OH ath AHTST AIG ISI (175-14, ast Hs, He 4) har naamay naam samaa-ee jee-o. ||3]| Through the Name of the Lord, I am absorbed in the Naam. ||3]||
H 2e0 UH of faag waret AG I 475-14, west ws, He 4) mai vaydan paraym har birahu lagaa-ee jee-o. I am consumed with the pain of separation from the Love of the Lord.
ae nam uf vifys ufe uret AIG II (175-15, west wes, He 4)
gur sarDhaa poor amrit mukh paa-ee jee-o.
The Guru has fulfilled my desire, and I have received the Ambrosial Nectar in my mouth.
dfs dg efeore afs on forret FIG I 175-15, west ws, He 4) har hohu da-i-aal har naam Dhi-aa-ee jee-o. The Lord has become merciful, and now I meditate on the Name of the Lord.
HS Soa Tis JA USt AME NSUENAONACHS2AUDON (175-15, aS ws, He 4)
jan naanak har ras paa-ee jee-o. ||4||6||20||18]|32]|70] | Servant Nanak has obtained the sublime essence of the Lord. ||4]|6||20||18]|32]|70]|
HIG uU Ta ACSt Tyrac BBue 175-17) mehlaa 5 raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree cha-upday Fifth Mehl, Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yArfe it (175-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fas fafa ane da He se I 1175-18, aH arrsct, He 5) kin biDh kusal hot mayray bhaa-ee. How can happiness be found, O my Siblings of Destiny?
faG ur ofs oH AIST NAN TIS | 175-18, TGS arse, ne 5) ki-o paa-ee-ai har raam sahaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. How can the Lord, our Help and Support, be found? ||1||Pause] |
aAS 3 fafa Ast AS HEMT | 75-19, Test aursct, ve 5) kusal na garihi mayree sabh maa-i-aa. There is no happiness in owning one's own home, in all of Maya,
Qe Hes Hes Stent It 175-19, rest aursst, H2 5) oochay mandar sundar chhaa-i-aa. or in lofty mansions casting beautiful shadows.
3d wale AON Teter Ui (175-19, ast aurset, v2 5) jhoothay laalach janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1|| In fraud and greed, this human life is being wasted. ||1||
at WE
JASt ws Sf fearar il (176-1, ast amrrset, He 5) hastee ghorhay daykh vigaasaa. He is pleased at the sight of his elephants and horses
BHAT AS ST MSTA Il (176-1, aGSt anrset, v2 5) laskar jorhay nayb khavaasaa. and his armies assembled, his servants and his soldiers.
as Azat IGH A SA Ml (176-1, ast anrset, vz 5) gal jayvrhee ha-umai kay faasaa. ||2|| But the noose of egotism is tightening around his neck. ||2] |
TH an] Ud fen AH Il (176-1, Test auras, He 5) raaj kamaavai dah dis saaree. His rule may extend in all ten directions;
He dar Sa AT SA Il (176-2, ast andes, wz 5) maanai rang bhog baho naaree. he may revel in pleasures, and enjoy many women
faG ogufs AUS Sud Sil 176-2, ast aursct, He 5) ji-o narpat supnai bhaykhaaree. ||3]| - but he is just a beggar, who in his dream, is a king. ||3]|
2a FAS H aS Afsag sstenr il 176-2, est aursct, v3 5)
ayk kusal mo ka-o satguroo bataa-i-aa.
The True Guru has shown me that there is only one pleasure. dfs a fas ad A ofa fomr sat atten Il 176-3, west aursst, v2 5)
har jo kichh karay so har ki-aa bhagtaa bhaa-i-aa. Whatever the Lord does, is pleasing to the Lord's devotee.
Ho aoa JH Hs ANfEMr ISI (176-3, aCe aursct, He 5) jan naanak ha-umai maar samaa-i-aa. ||4]| Servant Nanak has abolished his ego, and he is absorbed in the Lord. ||4]|
fefs fafa ane ds HS SSH I 176-4, aSSt anrset, He 5) in biDh kusal hot mayray bhaa-ee. This is the way to find happiness, O my Siblings of Destiny.
fe@ ure ofe TH AIST IU TIS TAT Il 176-4, TSS arsed, vs 5) i-O paa-ee-ai har raam sahaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o doojaa. This is the way to find the Lord, our Help and Support. ||1]|Second Pause] |
ATSt WarST HIS U Il (176-5) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
fa@ sha gy for ar det il (176-5, aSet avrdct, ne 5) ki-o bharmee-ai bharam kis kaa ho-ee. Why do you doubt? What do you doubt?
av af afe udinife sfenm Het I 176-5, aGst anrdet, H: 5) jaa jal thal mahee-al ravi-aa so-ee. God is pervading the water, the land and the sky.
aenfy Gad Hone ufs det All 176-6, aGst arsct, v2 5) gurmukh ubray manmukh pat kho-ee. ||1]| The Gurmukhs are saved, while the self-willed manmukhs lose their honor. ||1]|
fan ae vrfy ay efeerer I 176-6, test amrrsct, He 5) jis raakhai aap raam da-i-aaraa. One who is protected by the Merciful Lord
fH Sdt SA A UTISIT IU! TIES i (176-6, ast ards, ws 5) tis nahee doojaa ko pahuchanhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. - no one else can rival him. ||1||Pause]|
AS Hfs fas SA MSS Il (176-7, aSSt arse, He 5) sabh meh vartai ayk anantaa. The Infinite One is pervading among all.
oS Af AG df mifss i 76-7, rest ards, v2 5) taa too” sukh so-o ho-ay achintaa. So sleep in peace, and don't worry.
6g Ag fae WE ASIST NM (176-7, ast arse, Hz 5) oh sabh kichh jaanai jo vartantaa. ||2|| He knows everything which happens. ||2||
HOHY HE fae wat fimrAr Il 176-8, ast amrset, ve 5)
manmukh mu-ay jin doojee pi-aasaa. The self-willed manmukhs are dying in the thirst of duality.
ag not sete ufe fasts fesfimrar i) 176-8, aGst anrdet, He 5) baho jonee bhaveh Dhur kirat likhi-aasaa. They wander lost through countless incarnations; this is their pre-ordained destiny.
AA gtafs SAT UAT ISI (176-9, aGst anrset, H: 5) jaisaa beejeh taisaa khaasaa. ||3]| As they plant, so shall they harvest. ||3]|
efy aan Hie sfemr fearAr il (176-9, west amrset, He 5) daykh daras man bha-i-aa vigaasaa. Beholding the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my mind has blossomed forth.
Ag odd wien FIN UPAAT Il (176-9, TGSt ars, ve 5) sabh nadree aa-i-aa barahm pargaasaa. And now everywhere I look, God is revealed to me.
AS SSa ot Ts UTS MTA USIQNDAIM (176-10, T<St aurset, 2 5)
jan naanak kee har pooran aasaa. ||4]|2]|71|| Servant Nanak's hopes have been fulfilled by the Lord. ||4]|2]|71]|
Ast Marga HIS U Il (176-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
act HOH se ale usa Il (176-10, west aursdt, He 5) ka-ee janam bha-ay keet patangaa. In so many incarnations, you were a worm and an insect;
act HOH aA Hts ATA Il 176-11, ast aurrdct, He 5) ka-ee janam gaj meen kurangaa. in SO many incarnations, you were an elephant, a fish and a deer.
oaet HoH Udt Hau des il 176-11, west anrset, 2 5) ka-ee janam pankhee sarap ho-i-o. In so many incarnations, you were a bird and a snake.
aet HoH dea fzu APES NAN (176-11, AGS aordct, v2 5) ka-ee janam haivar barikh jo-i-o. ||1]| In so many incarnations, you were yoked as an ox and a horse. ||1||
fe AaretA foo at adr i (176-12, aBSt anrdet, ve 5) mil jagdees milan kee baree-aa. Meet the Lord of the Universe - now is the time to meet Him.
fadars feg fa AAdor A TIS Ul (176-12, Test ards, v2 5) chirankaal ih dayh sanjaree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. After so very long, this human body was fashioned for you. ||1]||Pause] |
act HoH AS fafa afar i 176-12, rest arse, v2 5) ka-ee janam sail gir kari-aa. In so many incarnations, you were rocks and mountains;
wet HOH aes fofs ufemr il 176-13, asst amrdct, 2 5) ka-ee janam garabh hir khari-aa. in SO many incarnations, you were aborted in the womb;
axel ASH AMY ats Burfenr it 176-13, Test amrdet, He 5) ka-ee janam saakh kar upaa-i-aa. in SO many incarnations, you developed branches and leaves;
wy sans rife arfenr 2H 176-13, est aorsct, v8 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh jon bharmaa-i-aa. ||2|| you wandered through 8.4 million incarnations. ||2||
Wonfa sfeS wey usufs it (176-14, west arse, v2 5) saaDhsang bha-i-o janam paraapat. Through the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you obtained this human life.
ats Ae 3a ofa fe TaHfs I (176-14, aeHt arset, v2 5)
kar sayvaa bhaj har har gurmat.
Do seva - selfless service; follow the Guru's Teachings, and vibrate the Lord's Name, Har, Har.
fsortar He SS uifsHTg I (176-14, ast aurset, 2 5) ti-aag maan jhooth abhimaan. Abandon pride, falsehood and arrogance.
Aes Hots SIATT UPSTS NI (176-15, TSSt aurset, ve 5) jeevat mareh dargeh parvaan. ||3]|| Remain dead while yet alive, and you shall be welcomed in the Court of the Lord.
[SII
A fae dur A SS 3 TT Ml 1176-15, aSat anrsct, v2 5) jo kichh ho-aa so tujh tay hog. Whatever has been, and whatever shall be, comes from You, Lord.
MET 5 VT ATS AT Il (176-15, ast ards, we 5) avar na doojaa karnai jog. No one else can do anything at all.
ot fsbo at Sfo fete i 76-16, ast aurset, ue 5) taa milee-ai jaa laihi milaa-ay. We are united with You, when You unite us with Yourself.
AI OA Tes Ts TE MME NSUSIO2M (176-16, aSSt avrdet, v1 5)
kaho naanak har har gun gaa-ay. ||4||3||72]| Says Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|3]|72]|
ast Wairsst HIS U il (176-17) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
OGH Sf Hfs Mg SH Il 176-17, ast aorsct, we 5) karam bhoom meh bo-ahu naam. In the field of karma, plant the seed of the Naam.
yas ote SH AH Il (176-17, aC aorsct, we 5) pooran ho-ay tumaaraa kaam. Your works shall be brought to fruition.
oo urefa fe AH STA II 176-17, aGet anrsdt, ue 5) fal paavahi mitai jam taraas. You shall obtain these fruits, and the fear of death shall be dispelled.
fos wets afs af TE WA INA (176-18, aBSt anrdet, He 5) nit gaavahi har har gun jaas. ||1|| Sing continually the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
ofa of an nists Cfa ofa i (76-18, rest arsct, He 5) har har naam antar ur Dhaar. Keep the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, enshrined in your heart,
Hug ada SI ASts AU JIS ll 176-19, ACS ardet, us 5) seeghar kaaraj layho savaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and your affairs shall be quickly resolved. ||1]||Pause] |
nus ys fA dg AreaS Il (176-19, aGxt anrdct, v8 5) apnay parabh si-o hohu saavDhaan. Be always attentive to your God;
3S UdaT usta HG Il (176-19, a7SSt aorsst, ws 5) taa too” dargeh paavahi maan. thus you shall be honored in His Court.
Uat 9D Gafs fimreu Aart fSurar il 177-1, aest amrdet, He 5)
ukat si-aanap saglee ti-aag. Give up all your clever tricks and devices,
HS Fort ot Baat BAT MQ (177-1, west amrsdt, ue 5)
sant janaa kee charnee laag. ||2| | and hold tight to the Feet of the Saints. ||2]|
Hea Aba ofo aT at ofa i 77-1, west amrsdt, He 5) sarab jee-a heh jaa kai haath. The One, who holds all creatures in His Hands,
ae 6 fees As ot AS Il 1177-2, aGst aurddt, v2 5) kaday na vichhurhai sabh kai saath. is never separated from them; He is with them all.
Gure efs ag fSA at Ge Il 1177-2, west ards, He 5) upaav chhod gahu tis kee ot. Abandon your clever devices, and grasp hold of His Support.
fang ufo de Sct efe Si 077-2, west arse, x: 5) nimakh maahi hovai tayree chhot. ||3]| In an instant, you shall be saved. ||3]|
He foafe afa fn & AWE Il 1177-2, west anrddt, ve 5) sadaa nikat kar tis no jaan. Know that He is always near at hand.
ys at orfamr AfS afs Hg Il 177-3, aGst aursst, He 5) parabh kee aagi-aa sat kar maan. Accept the Order of God as True.
ad a sete frees nie il 177-3, aGst amrdsct, ne 5) gur kai bachan mitaavhu aap. Through the Guru's Teachings, eradicate selfishness and conceit.
Uf de oH aoa Aly AY ISISIOSI (177-3, AGS arrsdt, H2 5)
har har naam naanak jap jaap. ||4||4||73]| O Nanak, chant and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. 411411731]
ast Marsa HIS U Il (177-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Td a Faq Ae mfsa At Il (177-4, ast anrsct, nz 5) gur kaa bachan sadaa abhinaasee. The Guru's Word is eternal and everlasting.
qd a Fale Act AN SAT Il (177-5, ast arses, v2 5) gur kai bachan katee jam faasee. The Guru's Word cuts away the noose of Death.
Td a ade Ha a Afar i 177-5, aGst ardct, He 5) gur kaa bachan jee-a kai sang. The Guru's Word is always with the soul.
Td a sale Jd TH A Sat WA 177-5, ast arses, we 5) gur kai bachan rachai raam kai rang. ||1]| Through the Guru's Word, one is immersed in the Love of the Lord. |]1]|
A af dor AHS & TAH II 1177-6, ast arddt, He 5) jo gur dee-aa so man kai kaam. Whatever the Guru gives, is useful to the mind.
Hs ot aor Afs afe He WA TIS il (177-6, ast amrrddt, He 5) sant kaa kee-aa sat kar maan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Whatever the Saint does - accept that as True. ||1||Pause| |
TT A FIG MSH MST Il (177-6, aSSt anrdet, ve 5) gur kaa bachan atal achhayd. The Guru's Word is infallible and unchanging.
Gs a yale AS FH Fe Il 177-7, TSH arse, uz 5) gur kai bachan katay bharam bhayd. Through the Guru's Word, doubt and prejudice are dispelled.
Td HT AIG AST 6 AVE Il (177-7, west anrsdt, ue 5) gur kaa bachan katahu na jaa-ay. The Guru's Word never goes away;
ad a sale ofe &X TE WE NM 177-7, asst arse, we 5) gur kai bachan har kay gun gaa-ay. ||2|| through the Guru's Word, we sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
Td A aIS HbA A AVE Il (177-8, aSat anrdet, He 5) gur kaa bachan jee-a kai saath. The Guru's Word accompanies the soul.
Td A IIS MSE & OE Il (177-8, ast arse, v2 5) gur kaa bachan anaath ko naath. The Guru's Word is the Master of the masterless.
Td a Fale oda S US Il (177-8, ast arse, H2 5) gur kai bachan narak na pavai. The Guru's Word saves one from falling into hell.
Gd a sale GAS nifys Je Sl 177-9, ast anrsst,, uz 5) gur kai bachan rasnaa amrit ravai. ||3]| Through the Guru's Word, the tongue savors the Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]|
Td a sag ude AAS Il (177-9, aGst arddt, He 5) gur kaa bachan pargat sansaar. The Guru's Word is revealed in the world.
Td a sale o wis Te Il (177-9, ast arse, v2 5) gur kai bachan na aavai haar. Through the Guru's Word, no one suffers defeat.
fan Ae de urfy furs il Soa Afsae AST efeors siUlIVsil (177-10, Test anrdet, He 5) jis jan ho-ay aap kirpaal. naanak satgur sadaa da-i-aal. | |4||5||74||
O Nanak, the True Guru is always kind and compassionate, unto those whom the Lord Himself has blessed with His Mercy. ||4||5||74] |
ast Marsa HIS U il (177-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
fafs ats wet 3 I3q ll 177-11, west anrdet, ve 5) jin keetaa maatee tay ratan. He makes jewels out of the dust,
aes Hf whiner fats afs ASS Il 177-11, west amrdet, He 5) garabh meh raakhi-aa jin kar jatan.
and He managed to preserve you in the womb.
fafs atat Het efsnret i 77-11, aGst aurddt, He 5)
jin deenee sobhaa vadi-aa-ee. He has given you fame and greatness;
fSH ys AG nto ud forest AU 477-12, Test anrsct, v8 5) tis parabh ka-o aath pahar Dhi-aa-ee. ||1|| meditate on that God, twenty-four hours a day. ||1||
sHebert Io AT AS USE Il (177-12, ast arrsst, v2 5) rama-ee-aa rayn saaDh jan paava-o. O Lord, I seek the dust of the feet of the Holy.
ad fufs wus wAH fomre@ 19 FI Il 477-12, aS ardet, v2 5) gur mil apunaa khasam Dhi-aava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting the Guru, I meditate on my Lord and Master. ||1]|Pause||
fate otst us 3 FAST Ml (177-13, TSS Torsst, He 5) jin keetaa moorh tay baktaa. He transformed me, the fool, into a fine speaker,
fafs ats SAgs 3 AIST I 177-13, Test avrset, ve 5) jin keetaa baysurat tay surtaa. and He made the unconscious become conscious;
fan usAfe o€ fafa uret I 177-13, ast aursct, He 5) jis parsaad navai niDh paa-ee. by His Grace, I have obtained the nine treasures.
A ug Ho 3 fangs ord 2H 77-14, aSst anrsct, ne 5)
so parabh man tay bisrat naahee. ||2| | May I never forget that God from my mind. ||2]|
fafs tor faare aS are il (177-14, ast anrsst, v2 5) jin dee-aa nithaavay ka-o thaan. He has given a home to the homeless;
fafs ehor feuds a He ll 177-14, west anrdet, ve 5) jin dee-aa nimaanay ka-o maan. He has given honor to the dishonored.
fats ottet AS UTS MAT Il (177-15, aGSt aorsst, H2 5) jin keenee sabh pooran aasaa. He has fulfilled all desires;
frnse feo sfe vm fara SI 177-15, agst avrsst, He 5)
simra-o din rain saas giraasaa. ||3]||
remember Him in meditation, day and night, with every breath and every morsel of food. ||3]|
fam uAtfe Hfenr fot aret i 177-15, rest ars, v2 5) jis parsaad maa-i-aa silak kaatee. By His Grace, the bonds of Maya are cut away.
aa ure nifs fr wet i 077-16, west aordct, ue 5) gur parsaad amrit bikh khaatee. By Guru's Grace, the bitter poison has become Ambrosial Nectar.
aI soa fA Ss fas Sat il (177-16, Test avrdet, ve 5) kaho naanak is tay kichh naahee. Says Nanak, I cannot do anything;
TUSIS AF AST NSWENOUI 177-17, Test arset, He 5) raakhanhaaray ka-o saalaahee. ||4]|6]||75|| I praise the Lord, the Protector. | |4||6||75||
ast Wairsst HIS U il 177-17) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
fsn at Rafe ot SB Aa Nl (177-17, aSst amrdct, nH: 5) tis kee saran naahee bha-o sog. In His Sanctuary, there is no fear or sorrow.
GA 3 wale ae 3 IT Il (177-18, Tat ards, ws 5) us tay baahar kachhoo na hog. Without Him, nothing at all can be done.
Sat fimreu ae ufo fears il 1177-18, west amrset, ne 5) tajee si-aanap bal buDh bikaar. I have renounced clever tricks, power and intellectual corruption.
GA MUS At PUSITS UU (177-18, TSSt gorset, v2 5) daas apnay kee raakhanhaar. ||1]|| God is the Protector of His servant. ||1]|
afu He HS TH TH Sar il (177-19, west aursct, He 5) jap man mayray raam raam rang. Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord, Raam, Raam, with love.
ufs aofs 3d Ae Afar A FIC i 177-19, Test aursct, vs 5) ghar baahar tayrai sad sang. ||1|| rahaa-o. Within your home, and beyond it, He is always with you. ||1||Pause| |
SA at 2a HS Hfo TE Il (177-19, ast anrset, He 5) tis kee tayk manai meh raakh. Keep His Support in your mind.
Yar qt
Ts a Hae nis IA TY Il (178-1, Text aordct, uz 5) gur kaa sabad amrit ras chaakh. Taste the ambrosial essence, the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
mets ASS AIT ACS HH Il (178-1, west amrdet, ue 5) avar jatan kahhu ka-un kaaj. Of what use are other efforts?
afte fagur art mify SrA QI 178-1, west avrsst, He 5) kar kirpaa raakhai aap laaj. ||2|| Showing His Mercy, the Lord Himself protects our honor. ||2]|
fom HeU ATT for AT Il (178-2, aGst amrsct, He 5) ki-aa maanukh kahhu ki-aa jor. What is the human? What power does he have?
Bor Wife at AG Ag Il (178-2, ast qorsst, v2 5) jhoothaa maa-i-aa kaa sabh sor. All the tumult of Maya is false.
ATE ASSIS AMM Il 178-2, ast anrsst, ve 5) karan karaavanhaar su-aamee. Our Lord and Master is the One who acts, and causes others to act.
Aas wet xX nisaaHt Sil 178-3, ast arset, us 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. ||3]| He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts. ||3]|
Hea AY AY APS ST Il (178-3, west anrsdt, ue 5) sarab sukhaa sukh saachaa ayhu. Of all comforts, this is the true comfort.
ded Suen HS fs ST Il (178-3, teat arse, ve 5) gur updays manai meh layho. Keep the Guru's Teachings in your mind.
wT aS TH aM foe wail Il (173-3, aVSt anrdet, He 5) jaa ka-o raam naam liv laagee. Those who bear love for the Name of the Lord
AT soa A Us SSSTat NSIDNDEN (178-4, aGSt aorset, He 5) kaho naanak so Dhan vadbhaagee. ||4||7||76] | - says Nanak, they are blessed, and very fortunate. ||4]|7||76]|
ast Wairsst HIS U il (178-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Afs ofa aa Gardt HS I (178-4, aSst anrdet, He 5) sun har kathaa utaaree mail. Listening to the Lord's sermon, my pollution has been washed away.
Ho uss SE AY AG Il (178-5, aSat anrdet, He 5) mahaa puneet bha-ay sukh sail. I have become totally pure, and I now walk in peace.
zs ofa ufenr AAT Il (178-5, ast arse, v2 5) vadai bhaag paa-i-aa saaDhsang. By great good fortune, I found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
ursqgn fA@ arat Fa WA (178-5, at aorset, He 5) paarbarahm si-o laago rang. ||1|| I have fallen in love with the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
Ufa ofs aH AUS AS Shas Il 178-6, west ards, v2 5) har har naam japat jan taari-o. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, His servant has been carried across.
mate Aas afs ute Cafes nai TIS il 178-6, ast and, us 5) agan saagar gur paar utaari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru has lifted me up and carried me across the ocean of fire. ||1]|Pause] |
ald AIS HO ASG Ze Il (178-6, aSst ardet, ue 5) kar keertan man seetal bha-ay. Singing the Kirtan of His Praises, my mind has become peaceful;
HOH HOH & fated Te Il 1738-7, west amrdct, v2 5) janam janam kay kilvikh ga-ay. the sins of countless incarnations have been washed away.
Hea fours ua He HM I (178-7, ast anrset, He 5) sarab niDhaan paykhay man maahi. I have seen all the treasures within my own mind;
ME Fe AT AS ATT WAM (178-7, Ast Tursst, ue 5) ab dhoodhan kaahay ka-o jaahi. ||2|| why should I now go out searching for them? ||2]|
ys nus Aa se BfEnrs Il 178-8, west qursct, us 5) parabh apunay jab bha-ay da-i-aal. When God Himself becomes merciful,
UTS Tet ASA UNH Il (178-8, TSt Turse, wz 5) pooran ho-ee sayvak ghaal. the work of His servant becomes perfect.
gue ate ate mus A Il (173-8, ast anda, v2 5) banDhan kaat kee-ay apnay daas. He has cut away my bonds, and made me His slave.
fits faufe fats TESA SI (178-9, west anrset, He 5) simar simar simar guntaas. ||3]|| Remember, remember, remember Him in meditation; He is the treasure of excellence.
[I3]|
Sa fs Sa AS OFS Il 178-9, ast anrdet, u: 5) ayko man ayko sabh thaa-ay. He alone is in the mind; He alone is everywhere.
ude ufs sfuS AS ATE I (178-9, aeSt aursst, HE 5) pooran poor rahi-o sabh jaa-ay. The Perfect Lord is totally permeating and pervading everywhere.
dfs us Ag SoH Yarfenr I (178-10, west gnrsct, we 5) gur poorai sabh bharam chukaa-i-aa. The Perfect Guru has dispelled all doubts.
Uf fAHeSs SOA AY UEMT SITCHIN (178-10, AGzt anrsst, nH 5)
har simrat naanak sukh paa-i-aa. ||4||8]|77] | Remembering the Lord in meditation, Nanak has found peace. ||4||8]|77| |
ast WairsSat HIS U Il (178-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
mae He fa ue us Il (1738-11, agst arse, H2 5) aglay mu-ay se paachhai paray. Those who have died have been forgotten.
a Gad A df wa Ug II 178-11, Test ards, He 5) jo ubray say banDh lak kharay. Those who survive have fastened their belts.
fag ua ufo Gfe BueSTeS I 1178-11, west aursdt, He 5) jih DnanDhay meh o-ay laptaa-ay. They are busily occupied in their affairs;
Go 3 eae feat Bo HES NA (178-12, Test anrset, He 5) un tay dugun dirhee un maa-ay. ||1|| they cling twice as hard to Maya. ||1]|
6g dar ae dis & mr] Il 178-12, weet anract, ue 5) oh baylaa kachh cheet na aavai. No one thinks of the time of death;
fasta ate sry BUSTS UU TIS Il (178-12, CS aorsc, vs 5) binas jaa-ay taahoo laptaavai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. people grasp to hold that which shall pass away. ||1||Pause] |
MAT Sot HTH ST Il (178-13, Tat aorsct, us 5) aasaa banDhee moorakh dayh. The fools - their bodies are bound down by desires.
aH au wsufeS mAs Il (178-13, aGst arsct, v2 5) kaam kroDh lapti-o asnayh. They are mired in sexual desire, anger and attachment;
fa Gufs ore can TE Il (178-13, west ursc, Hs 5) sir oopar thaadho Dharam raa-ay. the Righteous Judge of Dharma stands over their heads.
Hiot ate ata fatto afte Qi (178-14, west anrsct, He 5) meethee kar kar bikhi-aa khaa-ay. ||2|| Believing it to be sweet, the fools eat poison. ||2||
ug dug a8 AUS Fe I Tet Shh ABS ws Ug Il (178-14, ast rset, we 5)
ha-o banDha-o ha-o saaDha-o bair. hamree bhoom ka-un ghaalai pair.
They say, "I shall tie up my enemy, and I shall cut him down. Who dares to set foot upon my land?
JG ufss J@ vag fimr|e Il 1178-15, test amrrsct, He 5) ha-o pandit ha-o chatur si-aanaa. I am learned, I am clever and wise."
adesg 6 FS fara Sil (178-15, test arse, v2 5) karnaihaar na bujhai bigaanaa. ||3]|| The ignorant ones do not recognize their Creator. ||3]|
must afs fufs mmr ATS Il 178-15, ast arse, v2 5) apunee gat mit aapay jaanai. The Lord Himself knows His Own state and condition.
for & ad for wrfig Sars Il (178-16, aGst avast, He 5) ki-aa ko kahai ki-aa aakh vakhaanai. What can anyone say? How can anyone describe Him?
fs fas wets fsa fS3 waar Il 1178-16, at arse, v2 5) jit jit laaveh tit tit lagnaa. Whatever He attaches us to - to that we are attached.
MUST SH AS AT HATS Sil (178-16, Test aorset, ws 5) apnaa bhalaa sabh kaahoo mangnaa. ||4]| Everyone begs for their own good. ||4||
AS fas 37 F AIST Il (178-17, ast gorse, we 5) sabh kichh tayraa too” karnaihaar. Everything is Yours; You are the Creator Lord.
MS ordt fxs UST Il (178-17, at andes, nz 5) ant naahee kichh paaraavaar. You have no end or limitation.
aA nus AG eta BS Il (178-17, west gurset, v2 5) daas apnay ka-o deejai daan. Please give this gift to Your servant,
aT 3 FAS FSA SH NUNCMOCH (178-18, aCst Tors, we 5) kabhoo na visrai naanak naam. ||5||9||78]| that Nanak might never forget the Naam. ||5]|9]|78]|
ast WairsSa HIS U il (178-18) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
mifead ASS Sdt IS SSS Il 178-18, ast gursct, v2 5) anik jatan nahee hot chhutaaraa. By all sorts of efforts, people do not find salvation.
HIS fimrsu nia ST I (178-19, TSt anrsst, 2 5) bahut si-aanap aagal bhaaraa. Through clever tricks, the weight is only piled on more and more.
Ufs at As fSsHs TS Il (178-19, aeat anrsct, v2 5) har kee sayvaa nirmal hayt. Serving the Lord with a pure heart,
ys at Baad AS AT AI (178-19, aSst aorsct, ne 5) parabh kee dargeh sobhaa sayt. ||1]|| you shall be received with honor at God's Court. ||1]|
ar qo
Ho Hd ad dfs oH aT Gor il (179-1, west aurdct, 2 5) man mayray gahu har naam kaa olaa. O my mind, hold tight to the Support of the Lord's Name.
3S 5 Oa BST So NU TIS I (179-1, aSat arse, ne 5) tujhai na laagai taataa jholaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The hot winds shall never even touch you. ||1||Pause| |
fa@ sfoe S Arora fs I (179-1, aGSt arse, He 5) ji-o bohith bhai saagar maahi. Like a boat in the ocean of fear;
nigars tua chefs il (179-2, ast arse, v2 5) anDhkaar deepak deepaahi. like a lamp which illumines the darkness;
male AS oF BrafA A Il (179-2, Test arset, 2 5) agan seet kaa laahas dookh. like fire which takes away the pain of cold
oy AUS His JSST AY MQM (179-2, TCS arse, vs 5) naam japat man hovat sookh. ||2|| - just so, chanting the Name, the mind becomes peaceful. ||2||
Cafe Ate 3d HS at fumrA Il (179-3, west anrdset, He 5) utar jaa-ay tayray man kee pi-aas. The thirst of your mind shall be quenched,
YUIS TS AaB MA Il (179-3, ast arse, we 5) pooran hovai saglee aas. and all hopes shall be fulfilled.
3S Stdt SHA MS Il (179-3, aSst arddt, He 5) dolai naahee tumraa cheet. Your consciousness shall not waver.
nifys on Afu aaufa HIS SI 479-4, rest aorddt, ue 5) amrit naam jap gurmukh meet. ||3]| Meditate on the Ambrosial Naam as Gurmukh, O my friend. ||3]|
oy m@ug At AS US Il (179-4, Test amrrdct, He 5) naam a-ukhaDh so-ee jan paavai. He alone receives the panacea, the medicine of the Naam,
ate fasur fan urfy feere i 179-4, cat amrddt, He 5)
kar kirpaa jis aap divaavai. unto whom the Lord, in His Grace, bestows it.
dfs dfs an Wa fase SA Il 1179-5, aGst aorddt, He 5) har har naam jaa kai hirdai vasai. One whose heart is filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har
SY UIE (STI ssa BA IMIIIONDEN (179-5, ast aorsct, we 5) dookh darad tih naanak nasai. ||4]|10]|79|| - O Nanak, his pains and sorrows are eliminated. ||4||10||79||
ast Amst HIS U Il (179-6) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
WIS tas ats HS B mMUrar Il (179-6, ast arse, ve 5) bahut darab kar man na aghaanaa. Even with vast sums of wealth, the mind is not satisfied.
mifox gu ete og ustarat Il (179-6, aSat anrast, H2 5) anik roop daykh nah patee-aanaa. Gazing upon countless beauties, the man is not satisfied.
uz aes CasG ate Heat I 079-7, aSst anrdct, 2 5) putar kaltar urjhi-o jaan mayree. He is so involved with his wife and sons - he believes that they belong to him.
6a fasn Gfe SAH Sat AU 79-7, agst arse, 2 5) oh binsai o-ay bhasmai dhayree. ||1]| That wealth shall pass away, and those relatives shall be reduced to ashes. ||1]|
fag sf sxe euG fasars il 179-7, aSst amrdet, us 5) bin har bhajan daykh-a-u billaatay. Without meditating and vibrating on the Lord, they are crying out in pain.
fon 30 for ug wfeor Aft TS NA TIS Il 79-8, west avrsct, ue 5)
Dharig tan Dharig Dhan maa-i-aa sang raatay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Their bodies are cursed, and their wealth is cursed - they are imbued with Maya. ||1]|Pause] |
fa@ faardt & fafs ctafo er Il 179-8, west anrsct, He 5) ji-o bigaaree kai sir deejeh daam. The servant carries the bags of money on his head,
Gfe uAH & fafa Go ga ATH I (179-8, west gnrddt, v3 5) o-ay khasmai kai garihi un dookh sahaam. but it goes to his master's house, and he receives only pain.
fa@ Aus df SAS TA Il (179-9, aSst anrset, He 5) ji-o supnai ho-ay baisat raajaa. The man sits as a king in his dreams,
33 UATS ST fossa AT MMi (179-9, test arse, v8 5) naytar pasaarai taa niraarath kaajaa. ||2|| but when he opens his eyes, he sees that it was all in vain. ||2]|
fA mer as Bufs use il (179-10, teat aurset, 2 5) ji-o raakhaa khayt oopar paraa-ay. The watchman oversees the field of another,
US YAN at amar BS WES Il (179-10, TSS anrsst, nz 5) khayt khasam kaa raakhaa uth jaa-ay. but the field belongs to his master, while he must get up and depart.
@n a3 aafe mT aS Il 1179-10, aGSt gmrrsct, He 5) us khayt kaaran raakhaa karhai. He works so hard, and suffers for that field,
(SA & US Ag B US IBM (179-10, ast arse, we 5) tis kai paalai kachhoo na parhai. ||3]| but still, nothing comes into his hands. ||3]||
fan at aq FSA aT AUST Il 179-11, ast aursct, He 5)
jis kaa raaj tisai kaa supnaa. The dream is His, and the kingdom is His;
fate tfemr etot fate wet fear i (179-11, aGst gorse, ve 5) jin maa-i-aa deenee tin laa-ee tarisnaa. He who has given the wealth of Maya, has infused the desire for it.
mimfy fears otf ad IAA I (179-11, aBSt amrdct, v3 5) aap binaahay aap karay raas. He Himself annihilates, and He Himself restores.
SSR UST ia MSE WSUAUICOM (179-12, aS awrdet, ne 5)
naanak parabh aagai ardaas. ||4||11]||80|| Nanak offers this prayer to God. ||4||11]|80]|
ast Wairsgat HIS U Il (179-12) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
ag da wher ag fafa wt i 179-13, rest ardet, 2 5) baho rang maa-i-aa baho biDh paykhee. I have gazed upon the many forms of Maya, in so many ways.
AGH Aare famtou Set il (179-13, west arsct, ve 5) kalam kaagad si-aanap laykhee. With pen and paper, I have written clever things.
Hos Hea ste Show urs i 179-13, aest aursst, ws 5) mahar malook ho-ay daykhi-aa khaan. I have seen what it is to be a chief, a king, and an emperor,
TS dt He fuss] WAU (179-14, aCSt ors, ve 5) taa tay naahee man tariptaan. ||1]|| but they do not satisfy the mind. ||1]|
AH AY H a AS aS" Il 179-14, ast arse, ne 5) so sukh mo ka-o sant bataavhu. Show me that peace, O Saints,
fra a8 He fus]T UU FHS il 179-14, ast arse, we 5) tarisnaa boojhai man tariptaavho. ||1|| rahaa-o. which will quench my thirst and satisfy my mind. ||1]|Pause]|
MA US JAS MASTS Il (179-15, TSS arsat, He 5) as pavan hasat asvaaree. You may have horses as fast as the wind, elephants to ride on,
out eo An Hele ard ll (179-15, Test anrset, He 5) cho-aa chandan sayj sundar naaree. sandalwood oil, and beautiful women in bed,
Be Bea nirars afenrt i (179-15, ast avrset, He 5) nat naatik aakhaaray gaa-i-aa. actors in dramas, singing in theaters
at ufo ufs ASy & urfemr IQ (179-15, aGSt aorsdt, He 5) taa meh man santokh na paa-i-aa. ||2|| - but even with them, the mind does not find contentment. ||2||
SUS AST HSS SHS Il (179-16, TSS aurddt, He 5) takhat sabhaa mandan doleechay. You may have a throne at the royal court, with beautiful decorations and soft carpets,
Has HS AVS Tails Il 179-16, ast anrsct, us 5) Sagal mayvay sundar baageechay. all sorts of luscious fruits and beautiful gardens,
mas fasts THO St Sse Il (179-16, Test anrset, ue 5) aakhayrh birat raajan kee leelaa. the excitement of the chase and princely pleasures
HO 3 Hue usu Soe Sil (179-17, aGst ands, ue 5) man na suhaylaa parpanch heelaa. ||3]| - but still, the mind is not made happy by such illusory diversions. ||3]||
ate fagut H3e Ag afomr Il (179-17, ast aursdt, He 5) kar kirpaa santan sach kahi-aa. In their kindness, the Saints have told me of the True One,
Aa AY feg wee Bfour Il (179-17, rest aursct, He 5) sarab sookh ih aanand lahi-aa. and so I have obtained all comforts and joy.
WoAfa dfs atese ae I (179-18, aGSt ards, He 5) saaDhsang har keertan gaa-ee-ai. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
AT soa Ssarat ust igil (179-18, aGst ardet, He 5) kaho naanak vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. ||4| | Says Nanak, through great good fortune, I have found this. ||4]|
Wo dfs us Het AIS Il (179-18, aGat arse, He 5) jaa kai har Dhan so-ee suhaylaa. One who obtains the wealth of the Lord becomes happy.
ys fase 3 ACHE AS Ul FHS SAT MIVUCUI (179-19, TSSt aorset, He 5) parabh kirpaa tay saaDhsang maylaa. ||1]| rahaa-o doojaa. ||12||81]| By God's Grace, I have joined the Saadh Sangat. ||1||Second Pause||12||81]|
asst Amrsat HIG U Il (179-19) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
UST Aco
urat We feg Sq AT Il (1s0-1, Test anrset,, ve 5) paraanee jaanai ih tan mayraa. The mortal claims this body as his own.
aot agfs nrg Sues Il (180-1, aSst anract, u2 5) bahur bahur u-aahoo laptayraa. Again and again, he clings to it.
UZ AsZ fasAS AT STAT Il (1g0-1, aCSt gorse, ve 5) putar kaltar girsat kaa faasaa. He is entangled with his children, his wife and household affairs.
Jo 3 Usha TH A STAT IA (180-2, aGSt ardet, He 5) hon na paa-ee-ai raam kay daasaa. ||1]| He cannot be the slave of the Lord. ||1]|
age A fafa fas TH ae WE I (180-2, wat anrdet, He 5) kavan so biDh jit raam gun gaa-ay. What is that way, by which the Lord's Praises might be sung?
aze A ufs fas sd feo wife a go Il 180-2, ast amrsct, He 5)
kavan so mat jit tarai in maa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
What is that intellect, by which this person might swim across, O mother? ||1]|Pause] |
A SHet A Fa AS Il (180-3, agSt arses, He 5) jo bhalaa-ee so buraa jaanai. That which is for his own good, he thinks is evil.
Arg od A feet ANTS Il (180-3, west anrdct, He 5) saach kahai so bikhai samaanai. If someone tells him the truth, he looks upon that as poison.
We Sd AS mg TS Il (130-3, aSSt anrdet, He 5) jaanai naahee jeet ar haar. He cannot tell victory from defeat.
feg ZHeT AAS AAT IlQil (1g0-4, ast amrsdt, ue 5) ih valayvaa saakat sansaar. ||2|| This is the way of life in the world of the faithless cynic. ||2]|
A JOdG A ule sCa Il (130-4, agst anrdet, He 5) jo halaahal so peevai ba-uraa. The demented fool drinks in the deadly poison,
nifys on AS afs ABS Il (180-4, Test anrdet, ue 5) amrit naam jaanai kar ka-uraa. while he believes the Ambrosial Naam to be bitter.
AGHA & adt dfa Il (is0-5, west arse, uz 5) saaDhsang kai naahee nayr. He does not even approach the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
Bd VOTH FHS" Y|fe Sil (180-5, Test anrsst, vs 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh bharmataa fayr. ||3]| he wanders lost through 8.4 million incarnations. ||3]|
Sa Afs eae wut | as0-5, a@st auradt, ve 5) aykai jaal fahaa-ay pankhee. The birds are caught in the net of Maya;
af ofa sa asta ad ait Il (180-5, ast amrsct, He 5) ras ras bhog karahi baho rangee. immersed in the pleasures of love, they frolic in so many ways.
aI Sa fAA se fas il als ys TA aS WS UVUISUCM (180-6, ast gorse, we 5) kaho naanak jis bha-ay kirpaal. gur poorai taa kay kaatay jaal. ||4||13]|82||
Says Nanak, the Perfect Guru has cut away the noose from those, unto whom the Lord has shown His Mercy. ||4]|13]|82||
aISt Wairsst HIS U Il (180-6) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
38 fasur 3 Hea ure I (180-7, west ands, v2 5) ta-o kirpaa tay maarag paa-ee-ai. By Your Grace, we find the Way.
ys farsur 3 any foment i 0-7, 7Bst anrddt, ue 5) parabh kirpaa tay naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. By God's Grace, we meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ys fasur 3 sue se Il (180-7, west gnrset, ve 5) parabh kirpaa tay banDhan chhutai. By God's Grace, we are released from our bondage.
38 faa 3 IBH SS NU ig0-8, aGat anrset, He 5) ta-o kirpaa tay ha-umai tutai. ||1]| By Your Grace, egotism is eradicated. ||1]||
3H Beg 3G Bad Az Il (180-8, aSat anrdet, us 5) tum laavhu ta-o laagah sayv. As You assign me, so I take to Your service.
TH 3 Ae S JS SS UU! TTS Il (180-8, Test aurss, ws 5) ham tay kachhoo na hovai dayv. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By myself, I cannot do anything at all, O Divine Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
30 oS ST Wet aat Il (10-9, west aurddt, He 5) tuDh bhaavai taa gaavaa banee. If it pleases You, then I sing the Word of Your Bani.
30 Fe SAG Surat Il (180-9, aGat arse, nH: 5) tuDh bhaavai taa sach vakhaanee. If it pleases You, then I speak the Truth.
30 xe 3 Afsag Hfeor I is0-9, aGat anrset, He 5) tuDh bhaavai taa satgur ma-i-aa. If it pleases You, then the True Guru showers His Mercy upon me.
Hea Hat ys Sot fer | (180-10, ast vrs, ve 5) sarab sukhaa parabh tayree da-i-aa. ||2| | All peace comes by Your Kindness, God. ||2||
A 30 Ste A fea Aa Il (180-10, west ards, nH 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so nirmal karmaa. Whatever pleases You is a pure action of karma.
A 30 Se A AY TMT Il (180-10, aGst amrsdt, we 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so sach Dharmaa. Whatever pleases You is the true faith of Dharma.
Hea fours Te SH dt UTA Il (180-10, west anrdet, He 5) sarab niDhaan gun tum hee paas. The treasure of all excellence is with You.
3 rag Aea vise tA SI (180-11, Test aorsdt, we 5) too” saahib sayvak ardaas. ||3]| Your servant prays to You, O Lord and Master. ||3]|
Ho 36 foone dfs afs far i cso-11, aGst anrdet, He 5) man tan nirmal ho-ay har rang. The mind and body become immaculate through the Lord's Love.
Aaa Aa ure ASAfa Il s0-11, ast anrsct, He 5) sarab sukhaa paava-o satsang. All peace is found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ot Sd Id HS FST Il (180-12, west aursdt, ue 5) naam tayrai rahai man raataa. My mind remains attuned to Your Name;
feg afenre sea Als AST IIASIITSI (180-12, GST anrsst, He 5)
ih kali-aan naanak kar jaataa. ||4||14||83]| Nanak affirms this as his greatest pleasure. ||4]|14||83]|
ast Wars HIS U il (180-13) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
MTS SAT AS SB Il (180-13, aGst anrset, v2 5) aan rasaa jaytay tai chaakhay. You may taste the other flavors,
fou 3 fgHat Sat eS Il 180-13, west aursct, ws 5) nimakh na tarisnaa tayree laathay. but your thirst shall not depart, even for an instant.
fs TA a SF ofa APY Il (180-13, ast aursst, we 5) har ras kaa too” chaakhahi saad. But when you taste the sweet flavor the the Lord's sublime essence
ous df gofe fare] IU (180-14, agst anrset, He 5) chaakhat ho-ay raheh bismaad. ||1]| - upon tasting it, you shall be wonder-struck and amazed. ||1||
wifys TAat ut fimrdt i iso-14, a@at anrdet, vs 5) amrit rasnaa pee-o pi-aaree. O dear beloved tongue, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
fs oA ost df fxusrct nan TIS i 80-14, ast avrdet, ne 5) ih ras raatee ho-ay tariptaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Imbued with this sublime essence, you shall be satisfied. ||1]||Pause| |
3 fide FS TH TE WS Il 180-15, ast aursst, we 5) hay jihvay too” raam gun gaa-o. O tongue, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fone fone ate afs afs fomr€ i 30-15, rest anrdct, v2 5) nimakh nimakh har har har Dhi-aa-o. Each and every moment, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
mis & Hom AST AShA Il (180-15, ACs aarsct, vz 5) aan na sunee-ai katahoo" jaa-ee-ai. Do not listen to any other, and do not go anywhere else.
AUHats essrat ust |i (180-16, aGSt arse, Hz 5)
saaDhsangat vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. ||2]|
By great good fortune, you shall find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. [21]
me udd fade irate Il UTsqTH Stag viata Il s0-16, Test gurrsct, vs 5)
aath pahar jihvay aaraaDh. paarbarahm thaakur aagaaDh.
Twenty-four hours a day, O tongue, dwell upon God, the Unfathomable, Supreme Lord and Master.
Sta Sar Ae ATs I (180-17, ast ars, ve 5) eehaa oohaa sadaa suhaylee. Here and hereafter, you shall be happy forever.
dfs TE WSS GAS MAS I3ll 180-17, west arses, v2 5) har gun gaavat rasan amolee. ||3]| Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O tongue, you shall become priceless. ||3]|
qonufs HVBt SH SB US Il (180-17, aSSt anrset, vs 5) banaspat ma-ulee fal ful payday. All the vegetation will blossom forth for you, flowering in fruition;
fea oA Tt safe & ES Il (130-18, Sst anrdet, He 5) ih ras raatee bahur na chhoday. imbued with this sublime essence, you shall never leave it again.
WTS 3 JA AA Be B Bet Il (180-18, aGst anrset, x: 5) aan na ras kas lavai na laa-ee. No other sweet and tasty flavors can compare to it.
AI sod Td se J ATS SII (180-18, Text aursct, He 5) kaho naanak gur bha-ay hai sahaa-ee. ||4||15||84]| Says Nanak, the Guru has become my Support. ||4]|15]|84] |
aTSt Wairgs HIS U il (180-19) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
HO Hes 36 AM ste il 1s0-19, test anrdsdt, ve 5) man mandar tan saajee baar. The mind is the temple, and the body is the fence built around it.
UST ACY
fen dt Ha SAS wR Il (isi-1, west arse, He 5) is hee maDhay basat apaar. The infinite substance is within it.
fen dt sists AoMs AT Il cisi-1, Test arddt, v2 5) is hee bheetar sunee-at saahu. Within it, the great merchant is said to dwell.
aeg aurdt ator Sar ferrg uA (asi-1, at amrset, ve 5) kavan baapaaree jaa kaa oohaa visaahu. ||1]|| Who is the trader who deals there? ||1||
oH 330 a a faGocst Il (isi-2, ast arse, 2 5) naam ratan ko ko bi-uhaaree. How rare is that trader who deals in the jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
nifys SAg Ad wrod Ul TIS il si-2, ast amrset, vs 5) amrit bhojan karay aahaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. He takes the Ambrosial Nectar as his food. ||1]|Pause] |
HO 36 Maul As AdtA Il (181-2, Test anrsct, He 5) man tan arpee sayv kareejai. He dedicates his mind and body to serving the Lord.
aes A Hats fas afe sta Il si-3, west arddt, ue 5) kavan so jugat jit kar bheejai. How can we please the Lord?
ufe oa sfa Hat Sg Il 181-3, Test aursst, nH 5) paa-ay laga-o taj mayraa tayrai. I fall at His Feet, and I renounce all sense of 'mine and yours’.
aS HAS A ASST Ag MQM (181-3, aSst anrsct, ne 5) kavan so jan jo sa-udaa jorai. ||2|| Who can settle this bargain? ||2] |
HIG ATS at fae fafo urs it cisi-4, ast auras, v2 5) mahal saah kaa kin biDh paavai. How can I attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence?
ae A fafa fas stsfe gore Il csi-4, a@st aurddt, ve 5) kavan so biDh jit bheetar bulaavai. How can I get Him to call me inside?
3 sg Wa ale Fars Il (181-4, teat ards, ws 5) too” vad saahu jaa kay kot vanjaaray. You are the Great Merchant; You have millions of traders.
ASS A USS Hyg Ill (181-5, ast aursdt, we 5) kavan so daataa lay sanchaaray. ||3]|| Who is the benefactor? Who can take me to Him? |[3]|
ans dns for we ufemr it casi-s, aGst anrdet, He 5) khojat khojat nij ghar paa-i-aa. Seeking and searching, I have found my own home, deep within my own being.
WMHS Io ATS feusfenr il asi-s, aGst arsdt, ue 5) amol ratan saach dikhlaa-i-aa. The True Lord has shown me the priceless jewel.
ats faxgut Ae HS ATT Il isi-6, est arsct, He 5) kar kirpaa jab maylay saahi. When the Great Merchant shows His Mercy, He blends us into Himself.
AT sod Td a SATS NSIIENCUN (isi-s, AGS arse, we 5) kaho naanak gur kai vaysaahi. ||4]||16]|85] | Says Nanak, place your faith in the Guru. ||4||16]|85]]|
asst HIS U aMrga Il cisi-6) ga-orhee mehlaa 5 gu-aarayree. Gauree, Fifth Mehl, Gwaarayree:
dfs feon dd fea Jar il casi-7, aGst anrdet, 2 5) rain dinas rahai ik rangaa. Night and day, they remain in the Love of the One.
us ag We Ae dt Aa il cisi-7, Test anrset, ve 5) parabh ka-o jaanai sad hee sangaa. They know that God is always with them.
oa oH aS Sfs easte i isi-7, west arset, 2 5) thaakur naam kee-o un vartan. They make the Name of their Lord and Master their way of life;
fgufs meres ofa & Tans NA Cisi-s, weet amrsct, He 5) taripat aghaavan har kai darsan. ||1]| they are satisfied and fulfilled with the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1]|
ofa Afat TS Ho 3a Je Il cisi-s, ast anrsdt, He 5) har sang raatay man tan haray. Imbued with the Love of the Lord, their minds and bodies are rejuvenated,
TT us at Asst us UA TIS Il Cisi-3, Sst arse, ue 5) gur pooray kee sarnee paray. ||1|| rahaa-o. entering the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
UIE GHG MISH MUTT Il (181-9, ABSt aura, Hs 5) charan kamal aatam aaDhaar. The Lord's Lotus Feet are the Support of the soul.
ea fesata mrfemrars il isi-9, a@st anrdct, v2 5) ayk nihaarahi aagi-aakaar. They see only the One, and obey His Order.
Sa Fon Sa faa i cisi-9, aGat arse, v2 5) ayko banaj ayko bi-uhaaree. There is only one trade, and one occupation.
wed 3 Wafs fae fedardt II (isi-10, a@et aursct, He 5) avar na jaaneh bin nirankaaree. ||2|| They know no other than the Formless Lord. ||2| |
Tod AT TIT 3 HAS Il (isi-10, ast arse, we 5) harakh sog duhhoo™ tay muktay. They are free of both pleasure and pain.
Ret nifsus Aa wg WAS Il (1si-10, ast anrdet, ve 5) sadaa alipat jog ar jugtay. They remain unattached, joined to the Lord's Way.
anf AS Hfs AS S JIS Il (181-11, aes anrset, He 5) deeseh sabh meh sabh tay rahtay. They are seen among all, and yet they are distinct from all.
uTaqgH at Gfe fmirg uss ISI (isi-u, west aursct, v2 5) paarbarahm kaa o-ay Dhi-aan Dhartay. ||3]| They focus their meditation on the Supreme Lord God. ||3]|
H36 at HfoHt aeo SuSE I Cisi-11, ast anrdet, nz 5) santan kee mahimaa kavan vakhaana-o. How can I describe the Glories of the Saints?
marta afta fae fufs adt Wo Il csi-12, et anrdct, ve 5) agaaDh boDh kichh mit nahee jaan-o. Their knowledge is unfathomable; their limits cannot be known.
ursqan Hfo fasur att il (isi-12, ast anrdct, ne 5) paarbarahm mohi kirpaa keejai. O Supreme Lord God, please shower Your Mercy upon me.
fs ASS at SSA AA USIVITEN (181-12, Test Iursct, Hs 5)
Dhoor santan kee naanak deejai. ||4||17]||86|| Bless Nanak with the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|17]||86] |
ast Marsa HIS U il (1s1-13) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
3 Ao met Sot Hat HIS I 181-13, ast gorsst, we 5) too” mayraa sakhaa too“hee mayraa meet. You are my Companion; You are my Best Friend.
3 Ae Ytsy SH Afar HT il cisi-13, ast grat, vs 5) too” mayraa pareetam tum sang heet. You are my Beloved; I am in love with You.
3 Het ufs Ja HI TIS I asi-14, ast arse, we 5) too” mayree pat toohai mayraa gahnaa. You are my honor; You are my decoration.
33 fag fond o ATET FIST MAM (181-14, 7BSt anrdst, 2 5) tujh bin nimakh na jaa-ee rahnaa. ||1]| Without You, I cannot survive, even for an instant. ||1]|
SHS BS FHT YS Il (181-14, ast qrrset, vs 5) too” mayray laalan too’ mayray paraan. You are my Intimate Beloved, You are my breath of life.
SHS AoE FAST aS WAU TIS I (asi-15, aSat gorse, we 5) too’ mayray saahib too’ mayray khaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my Lord and Master; You are my Leader. ||1||Pause] |
fas 3H Tug fae dt TIS I (asi-15, ast ardsat, ne 5) ji-o tum raakho tiv hee rahnaa. As You keep me, so do I survive.
A SH Add At Hfs agar Il (isi-16, ast arse, nH 5) jo tum kahhu so-ee mohi karnaa. Whatever You say, that is what I do.
Ad UNS SI SH SAS Il (181-16, TSSt anrdet, 2 5) jah paykha-o tahaa tum basnaa. Wherever I look, there I see You dwelling.
fess oH AUG 3a FAST IQIl (isi-16, ast arrest, nH 5) nirbha-o naam japa-o tayraa rasnaa. ||2|| O my Fearless Lord, with my tongue, I chant Your Name. ||2||
J Het og fafa F Sag I casi-16, ast gorsst, we 5) too” mayree nav niDh too” bhandaar. You are my nine treasures, You are my storehouse.
Ja TA S Hots wOrg Il (isi-17, Test aorsdt, us 5) rang rasaa too” maneh aDhaar. I am imbued with Your Love; You are the Support of my mind.
3 Het Ast SH Afar Teor Ut casi-17, ast gorsct, we 5) too” mayree sobhaa tum sang rachee-aa. You are my Glory; I am blended with You.
Z Het Ge FF AT Soor SI (isi-17, Test gurss,, v3 5) too” mayree ot too” hai mayraa takee-aa. ||3]| You are my Shelter; You are my Anchoring Support. ||3]|
Ho 36 nists sdt fomrfenr It asi-is, west arse, 2 5) man tan antar tuhee Dhi-aa-i-aa. Deep within my mind and body, I meditate on You.
HoH SHS TT S UfEMr I (isi-is, ast anrset, us 5) maram tumaaraa gur tay paa-i-aa. I have obtained Your secret from the Guru.
Afsag 3 fefsur fea Sa | cisi-is, a@et anrsct, v8 5) satgur tay darirhi-aa ik aykai. Through the True Guru, the One and only Lord was implanted within me;
Soa BH Ufa dia afs Sa NIACIN (isi-19, Test arse, He 5)
naanak daas har har har taykai. ||4]|18]|87] | servant Nanak has taken to the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||4]|18]|87]|
aISt Wairss HIS U Il (1si-19) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Yat Ac2
famrus dau Aart fares Il (182-1, rest araset, ue 5) bi-aapat harakh sog bisthaar. It torments us with the expression of pleasure and pain.
fans Add SIX MEI Il (182-1, Test ands, He 5) bi-aapat surag narak avtaar. It torments us through incarnations in heaven and hell.
fmmus us fesas ufe AST II (182-1, ast aurset, He 5) bi-aapat Dhan nirDhan paykh sobhaa. It is seen to afflict the rich, the poor and the glorious.
He feorct famrafit Sst Al (182-2, ast aorsst, ws 5) mool bi-aaDhee bi-aapas lobhaa. ||1]| The source of this illness which torments us is greed. ||1]|
Mfeur fimrus sd Uda Il (182-2, a@st anrdet, ve 5) maa-i-aa bi-aapat baho parkaaree. Maya torments us in SO many ways.
Ha Htefs ys Ge sya A TIS it 82-2, west anrdet, vs 5) sant jeeveh parabh ot tumaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. But the Saints live under Your Protection, God. ||1]||Pause| |
fms widafa at HST II (182-3, aGst amrrddt, He 5) bi-aapat aha’-buDh kaa maataa. It torments us through intoxication with intellectual pride.
fimrus ux ay Aft IS I (182-3, ast anrset, ve 5) bi-aapat putar kaltar sang raataa. It torments us through the love of children and spouse.
fimmus gAfs ws nig FAST Il (182-3, west arse, H 5) bi-aapat hasat ghorhay ar bastaa. It torments us through elephants, horses and beautiful clothes.
fares gu Aas HE HAS IQ (182-4, west gnrsct, ws 5) bi-aapat roop joban mad mastaa. ||2|| It torments us through the intoxication of wine and the beauty of youth. ||2]|
fanrues gf Ja vig Jar Il (182-4, est aorsct, ws 5) bi-aapat bhoom rank ar rangaa. It torments landlords, paupers and lovers of pleasure.
fimmus ats ove Af Har il (182-4, a@at ardet, v2 5) bi-aapat geet naad sun sangaa. It torments us through the sweet sounds of music and parties.
fms AA HIG Alara Il (182-5, ast anrset, He 5) bi-aapat sayj mahal seegaar. It torments us through beautiful beds, palaces and decorations.
Us v3 firmus nifamrg 113i (1382-5, rest aursdt, u: 5) panch doot bi-aapat anDhi-aar. ||3]|| It torments us through the darkness of the five evil passions. ||3]|
fimmus aH ad IG SAT Il (182-5, aGst arse, w: 5) bi-aapat karam karai ha-o faasaa. It torments those who act, entangled in ego.
famrufs farsrs fms BeAr il (182-6, aest anrddt, v2 5) bi-aapat girsat bi-aapat udaasaa. It torments us through household affairs, and it torments us in renunciation.
mrag faGors famrrus fea AWS Il (182-6, aBst aurset, He 5) aachaar bi-uhaar bi-aapat ih jaat. It torments us through character, lifestyle and social status.
AS fae fmrus fag ofs Ja TS gil (132-6, Test anrdet, 2 5)
sabh kichh bi-aapat bin har rang raat. ||4||
It torments us through everything, except for those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||4||
H30 & U6 ae dfs ae I (182-7, aSst arse, v2 5) santan kay banDhan kaatay har raa-ay. The Sovereign Lord King has cut away the bonds of His Saints.
a a aot fmm wf |) (182-7, aGst anrset, He 5) taa ka-o kahaa bi-aapai maa-ay. How can Maya torment them?
ag aaa fate fs AS uret ot et foarte & rs HET NUNAENCCH (182-7, Test aursct, v3 5)
kaho naanak jin Dhoor sant paa-ee. taa kai nikat na aavai maa-ee. ||5||19||88]|
Says Nanak, Maya does not draw near those who have obtained the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||5]|19]|88]|
ast Wairsga HIS U Il (182-8) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
dog ate ud fenfe fears Il (182-9, aGat avrdct, ne 5) nainhu need par darisat vikaar. The eyes are asleep in corruption, gazing upon the beauty of another.
Wee Ae Afe fee Stes Il 1182-9, wat amrdet, us 5) sarvan so-ay sun nind veechaar. The ears are asleep, listening to slanderous stories.
dHat Het Bfs Hts Af Il 182-9, agat anrdet, He 5) rasnaa so-ee lobh meethai saad. The tongue is asleep, in its desire for sweet flavors.
Ho Afeor ufenr farrfe all as2-9, reat amrdsdt, ve 5) man so-i-aa maa-i-aa bismaad. ||1]|| The mind is asleep, fascinated by Maya. ||1]|
fer fas Hf det Aras FI Il (182-10, at anrdct, 8 5) is garih meh ko-ee jaagat rahai. Those who remain awake in this house are very rare;
Was ens Gg nrust BI NU TIS I (182-10, test arse, nH 5) Saabat vasat oh apnee lahai. ||1|| rahaa-o. by doing so, they receive the whole thing. ||1]||Pause| |
Hae Adet wus JA HST Il (182-11, aest avast, wi: 5) Sagal sahaylee apnai ras maatee. All of my companions are intoxicated with their sensory pleasures;
fas nud at wafe o AST Il (182-11, west arsct, He 5) garih apunay kee khabar na jaatee. they do not know how to guard their own home.
HHOdS Ud FeNTs Il (182-11, aSst ands, ve 5) musanhaar panch batvaaray. The five thieves have plundered them;
HO dald UT SAIS Il (182-12, ast arse, ve 5) soonay nagar paray thag-haaray. ||2]| the thugs descend upon the unguarded village. ||2| |
Ba 3 ay ay & HT I (182-12, aGat ards, »: 5) un tay raakhai baap na maa-ee. Our mothers and fathers cannot save us from them;
Ba 3 ae nis © avet I 182-12, aGat ara, He 5) un tay raakhai meet na bhaa-ee. friends and brothers cannot protect us from them
vata frmreu ot Gfe gas Il (182-12, ast anrsct, nH: 5) darab si-aanap naa o-ay rahtay. - they cannot be restrained by wealth or cleverness.
AWUHfa Gfe eA] SfA JS SI (182-13, ast anrset, He 5)
saaDhsang o-ay dusat vas hotay. ||3]|
Only through the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, can those villains be brought under control. ||3]|
af fasur dfs Afgarfs il 132-13, a@st auradt, ue 5) kar kirpaa mohi saaringpaan. Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, Sustainer of the world.
Aso Ufa Hea fours il (182-13, ast aursct, ue 5) santan Dhoor sarab niDhaan. The dust of the feet of the Saints is all the treasure I need.
Arag Unt Afsars Afor i 182-14, ast gers, ws 5) saabat poonjee satgur sang. In the Company of the True Guru, one's investment remains intact.
SSS Wal USAIN & far Sil 182-14, west anrdet, us 5) naanak jaagai paarbarahm kai rang. ||4|| Nanak is awake to the Love of the Supreme Lord. ||4]|
A wal fan ys fasurs i 182-14, west anrddt, ue 5) SO jaagai jis parabh kirpaal. He alone is awake, unto whom God shows His Mercy.
feo ut AAS UG HSH UU TTS SA MONTE (182-15, Tat Trss, He 5) ih poonjee saabat Dhan maal. ||1]| rahaa-o doojaa. ||20||89] | This investment, wealth and property shall remain intact. ||1||Second Pause||20||89| |
TSt Wars HIS U il (182-15) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Wa afh we AGS Il (182-16, aGst ardet, He 5) jaa kai vas khaan sultaan. Kings and emperors are under His Power.
Wa ef I Aa ATS Il (182-16, ast aursdt, He 5) jaa kai vas hai sagal jahaan. The whole world is under His Power.
Ww at aint AS fas df Il (182-16, west anrsct, He 5) jaa kaa kee-aa sabh kichh ho-ay. Everything is done by His doing;
fn 3 safe ardt afe A (182-16, aGst arset, H 5) tis tay baahar naahee ko-ay. ||1]| other than Him, there is nothing at all. ||1]|
aT Isat mus Afsas wuts it (182-17, west arse, v2 5) kaho baynantee apunay satgur paahi. Offer your prayers to your True Guru;
aH SHe efe forts nai TTS I (182-17, Test anrsst, ue 5) kaaj tumaaray day-ay nibaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. He will resolve your affairs. ||1||Pause| |
AS 3 Gu a Usa Il (182-17, at anrset,, ve 5) sabh tay ooch jaa kaa darbaar. The Darbaar of His Court is the most exalted of all.
Ad® Ss A a OTH MU'"_ Il (182-18, aGSt gurdt, Hs 5) sagal bhagat jaa kaa naam aDhaar. His Name is the Support of all His devotees.
Aaa femrfus use dot Il 182-18, ast aurset, 2 5) sarab bi-aapat pooran Dhanee. The Perfect Master is pervading everywhere.
aw at Hat wife whe qat QI (182-18, rest anrsst, He 5) jaa kee sobhaa ghat ghat banee. ||2|| His Glory is manifest in each and every heart. ||2]|
fan fAnes eu ST SI Il 182-19, test aurddt, ve 5) jis simrat dukh dayraa dhahai. Remembering Him in meditation, the home of sorrow is abolished.
fan fies FH fos 3 AT I 182-19, ast anrsct, we 5) jis simrat jam kichhoo na kahai. Remembering Him in meditation, the Messenger of Death shall not touch you.
fan fies TS AA TS I (182-19, west gorrsct, vz 5) jis simrat hot sookay haray. Remembering Him in meditation, the dry branches become green again.
Yat Ac3B
fan fuss SIS UTS SFI USI (183-1, test aurset, He 5) jis simrat doobat paahan taray. ||3]|| Remembering Him in meditation, sinking stones are made to float. ||3]|
HZ Ast AG Ae Aa Il (183-1, aGst arset, He 5) sant sabhaa ka-o sadaa jaikaar. I salute and applaud the Society of the Saints.
dfs as SH AS UTS MOET Il (183-1, Test aurrsct, ws 5) har har naam jan paraan aDhaar. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the Support of the breath of life of His servant.
AI Boa Hot Hat Met Il (183-2, ast arsat, ne 5) kaho naanak mayree sunee ardaas. Says Nanak, the Lord has heard my prayer;
As une Hag on fost siIUitoll (183-2, aezt anrsct, ne 5) sant parsaad mo ka-o naam nivaas. ||4||21||90|| by the Grace of the Saints, I dwell in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|21]|90]|
ast mrss HIS U Il (183-3) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Afsad ents mate feerst il s3-3, reat amrdet, ue 5) satgur darsan agan nivaaree. By the Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan, the fire of desire is quenched.
Afsag Ses TBH Hrs Il (183-3, Tat anrdet, He 5) satgur bhaytat ha-umai maaree. Meeting the True Guru, egotism is subdued.
Afsad Afar adit HS 3B Il (183-4, aGst anrset, He 5) satgur sang naahee man dolai. In the Company of the True Guru, the mind does not waver.
nifys sat aoufe FS UA 1183-4, rest anrdet, ne 5) amrit banee gurmukh bolai. ||1]| The Gurmukh speaks the Ambrosial Word of Gurbani. ||1]|
AS Ad AM A AD Mfg FS Il (193-4, west anrset, ve 5) sabh jag saachaa jaa sach meh raatay. He sees the True One pervading the whole world; he is imbued with the True One.
Hise ATs ds 3 ys AS NA TIS Il as3-5, Test gnrrset, we 5) seetal saat gur tay parabh jaatay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have become cool and tranquil, knowing God, through the Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
As une wu dfs oS Il (183-5, Gat anrddt, we 5) sant parsaad japai har naa-o. By the Grace of the Saints, one chants the Lord's Name.
Hz yuAtfe of atese WE Il (183-5, Text aordct, ue 5) sant parsaad har keertan gaa-o. By the Grace of the Saints, one sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
Aa yAfe Aas By fe I 3-6, a@at anrddt, us 5) sant parsaad sagal dukh mitay. By the Grace of the Saints, all pains are erased.
Aa yAfe sas 3 SS MMi (133-6, ast gnrset, ve 5) sant parsaad banDhan tay chhutay. ||2]| By the Grace of the Saints, one is released from bondage. ||2||
Ha faut 3 fe Ho SIH Il 183-6, aSSt arsct, v2 5) sant kirpaa tay mitay moh bharam. By the kind Mercy of the Saints, emotional attachment and doubt are removed.
A 3S HAS Als USH Il (183-7, Test ardet, He 5) saaDh rayn majan sabh Dharam. Taking a bath in the dust of the feet of the Holy - this is true Dharmic faith.
AG fxure vfenrs aifse i as3-7, ast amrdsct, ns 5) saaDh kirpaal da-i-aal govind. By the kindness of the Holy, the Lord of the Universe becomes merciful.
Aa vfs feo oHet fe SI 183-7, AGS aursdt, He 5) saaDhaa meh ih hamree jind. ||3]| The life of my soul is with the Holy. ||3]|
faour fafa fsus fomre@ i rroHfa st dos USE Il 1183-8, aeat anrdet, He 5)
kirpaa niDh kirpaal Dhi-aava-o. saaDhsang taa baithan paava-o.
Meditating on the Merciful Lord, the Treasure of Mercy, I have obtained a seat in the Saadh Sangat.
Hfs fasae a@ ufs attet efor I (183-8, rest aorsct, v2 5) mohi nirgun ka-o parabh keenee da-i-aa. I am worthless, but God has been kind to me.
AUAfa SSA SH BEnt WSiIVeAUil (133-9, asst arset, v2 5) saaDhsang naanak naam la-i-aa. ||4||22||91] |
In the Saadh Sangat, Nanak has taken to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [14] |22]|91]|
ASt WairSa HIS U Il (183-9) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Aanfa AfuG sas Il 183-9, west ards, He 5) saaDhsang japi-o bhagvant. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meditate on the Lord God.
aes oH AG gfe HS Il cis3-10, aBst amrdct, ve 5)
kayval naam dee-o gur mant.
The Guru has given me the Mantra of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. 3fa miss se faged il (183-10, aGst auract, He 5)
taj abhimaan bha-ay nirvair. Shedding my ego, I have become free of hate.
MIS UIT UAT TSI UT WAU (183-10, ast aorsdt, we 5) aath pahar poojahu gur pair. ||1]| Twenty-four hours a day, I worship the Guru's Feet. ||1]|
ma Hfs faont eA] faarat il s3-11, ast ardet, v2 5) ab mat binsee dusat bigaanee. Now, my evil sense of alienation is eliminated,
wa 3 Afeor ats AA aot A TIS Il 183-11, west anrsdt, ne 5) jab tay suni-aa har jas kaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. since I have heard the Praises of the Lord with my ears. ||1]|Pause] |
Hon AY miree fears i (183-11, west aorsdt, us 5) sahj sookh aanand niDhaan. The Savior Lord is the treasure of intuitive peace, poise and bliss.
muss ofr oe feera il 183-12, a@at anrddt, ve 5) raakhanhaar rakh lay-ay nidaan. He shall save me in the end.
eu ude fAoA F SH Il (183-12, ast grace, we 5) dookh darad binsay bhai bharam. My pains, sufferings, fears and doubts have been erased.
mMTee WE TH afd AH Ill (183-12, ast anrsct, ws 5) aavan jaan rakhay kar karam. ||2| | He has mercifully saved me from coming and going in reincarnation. ||2]|
NA SA EN
ud 3% Ae AS Mu Il (133-13, west ardet, He 5) paykhai bolai sunai sabh aap. He Himself beholds, speaks and hears all.
Re Afar St AG He AMY II (183-13, aGSt and, He 5) Sadaa sang taa ka-o man jaap. O my mind, meditate on the One who is always with you.
Aa yAtfe sfeS userA il (183-13, aGat anrdet, us 5) sant parsaad bha-i-o pargaas. By the Grace of the Saints, the Light has dawned.
uf 3d Sa TESA MSI (183-14, ast arse, we 5) poor rahay aykai guntaas. ||3]| The One Lord, the Treasure of Excellence, is perfectly pervading everywhere. ||3]||
as ufez Hes uols Il ae afe awefa fos ots Il 1183-14, aGat anrdct, ne 5)
kahat pavitar sunat puneet. gun govind gaavahi nit neet.
Pure are those who speak, and sanctified are those who hear and sing, forever and ever, the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
AT Bea AW aS IT furs il (193-15, ast arsct, v2 5) kaho naanak jaa ka-o hohu kirpaal. Says Nanak, when the Lord bestows His Mercy,
SH AS at AS UTS WS USNC (183-15, ast gurset, 2 5)
tis jan kee sabh pooran ghaal. ||4||23]|92]| all one's efforts are fulfilled. ||4]|23||92]|
ASt Wasa HIS U Il (183-15) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
aus sf sas TH Il 183-16, aGst grrsdt, He 5) banDhan torh bolaavai raam. He breaks our bonds, and inspires us to chant the Lord's Name.
Ho Hfs ore ATE fomre 1 fkefo aBA Het SE adh Il 183-16, Tet ards, He 5) man meh laagai saach Dhi-aan. miteh kalays sukhee ho-ay rahee-ai.
With the mind centered in meditation on the True Lord, anguish is eradicated, and one comes to dwell in peace.
MAT ost Afsags aA WAU (183-17, aSat anrset, ve 5) aisaa daataa satgur kahee-ai. ||1]| Such is the True Guru, the Great Giver. ||1]|
A AYES fA OH AUS Il (183-17, Test gras, 2 5)
so sukh-daata je naam japaavai.
He alone is the Giver of peace, who inspires us to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ate fasur fan Fifa frre Na TIS i 183-17, aSSt anrdet, He 5) kar kirpaa tis sang milaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. By His Grace, He leads us to merge with Him. ||1||Pause] |
fan of efenre for orfu fore I 183-18, aGst amrsct, He 5) jis ho-ay da-i-aal tis aap milaavai. He unites with Himself those unto whom He has shown His Mercy.
Ava fours TT 3 US Il (183-18, ast aorsdt, we 5) sarab niDhaan guroo tay paavai. All treasures are received from the Guru.
ning fanrfar fe nites ATST II (193-18, aTGSt arset, He 5) aap ti-aag mitai aavan jaanaa. Renouncing selfishness and conceit, coming and going come to an end.
ATM & Afar UTIGIH Ustat IlQil (183-19, asst qursdt, ue 5)
saaDh kai sang paarbarahm pachhaanaa. ||2| |
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Supreme Lord God is recognized. [21]
Ao Sus ys se efeurs Il (183-19, aSat anrast, H2 5) jan oopar parabh bha-ay da-i-aal. God has become merciful to His humble servant.
UST acy
He at 2a SA TUS Il (184-1, ast anrdet, we 5) jan kee tayk ayk gopaal. The One Lord of the Universe is the Support of His humble servants.
tar fee Sa His ar i (184-1, aGst anrset, v2 5) aykaa liv ayko man bhaa-o. They love the One Lord; their minds are filled with love for the Lord.
Hea fous Ae a dfs JE Si (184-1, ast anrset, 2 5) sarab niDhaan jan kai har naa-o. ||3]| The Name of the Lord is all treasures for them. ||3]|
uTgqaH fAG arait US i (84-1, ast auras, us 5) paarbarahm si-o laagee pareet.
They are in love with the Supreme Lord God; fesHe adet Ast SHS i (184-2, aCst amrdet, us 5)
nirmal karnee saachee reet. their actions are pure, and their lifestyle is true.
afs us Afenr niftmrs it (is4-2, ast aorsct, we 5) gur poorai mayti-aa anDhi-aaraa. The Perfect Guru has dispelled the darkness.
SHA A YF MUT MUTA ISUQVSICSIl (184-2, asst arses, ve 5)
naanak kaa parabh apar apaaraa. ||4||24||93]| Nanak's God is Incomparable and Infinite. ||4]|24]|93]|
ast mrss HIS U Il (184-3) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
fan ufs ZA 3d AS AE Il (184-3, aGSt aradct, He 5) jis man vasai tarai jan so-ay. Those whose minds are filled with the Lord, swim across.
wT a aot usufs df i (184-3, west arse, He 5) jaa kai karam paraapat ho-ay. Those who have the blessing of good karma, meet with the Lord.
ey dq ae 38 3 fant Il (184-4, west anraet, ws 5) dookh rog kachh bha-o na bi-aapai. Pain, disease and fear do not affect them at all.
nifys on fee ofs AT NA (184-4, rest anrdet, ve 5) amrit naam ridai har jaapai. ||1|| They meditate on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord within their hearts. ||1] |
UTsggH UAAS foment | 184-4, aGst anrdct, ne 5) paarbarahm parmaysur Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Meditate on the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord.
as us 3 fea nfs ureht 1 TTS I (184-5, Test aurss, ws 5) gur pooray tay ih mat paa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. From the Perfect Guru, this understanding is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
ATE ATSHIS SEMIS Il (184-5, TSS ands, He 5) karan karaavanhaar da-i-aal. The Merciful Lord is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
ba AS Aas ufsurs il s4-5, reat anrdet, us 5) jee-a jant saglay partipaal. He cherishes and nurtures all beings and creatures.
WIM MTS AST Anise Il (184-6, ast aurrseh, we 5) agam agochar sadaa bay-antaa. He is Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, Eternal and Infinite.
frufs Hat Us Tas HS MQM (1g4—6, asst aurset, we 5) simar manaa pooray gur manntaa. ||2|| Meditate on Him, O my mind, through the Teachings of the Perfect Guru. ||2]|
W at Het Age fears il (184-6, a@st amrdet, He 5) jaa kee sayvaa sarab niDhaan. Serving Him, all treasures are obtained.
ys ot ya urea HE Il (184-7, aGat arsst, ws 5) parabh kee poojaa paa-ee-ai maan. Worshipping God, honor is obtained.
WT at cue © faget ATE I (184-7, aSst anrdset, He 5) jaa kee tahal na birthee jaa-ay. Working for Him is never in vain;
He Hel dig X TS WE Sil (184-7, west ards, ue 5) sadaa sadaa har kay gun gaa-ay. ||3]|| forever and ever, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
afs fasur ys nissan Il (1s4-8, west amrdct, ne 5) kar kirpaa parabh antarjaamee. Show Mercy to me, O God, O Searcher of hearts.
Hy fears dfe ney AyMt il is4-8, rest arddt, v2 5) sukh niDhaan har alakh su-aamee. The Unseen Lord and Master is the Treasure of Peace.
Hb HS Sot Agaret Il (184-8, ast asst, He 5) jee-a jant tayree sarnaa-ee. All beings and creatures seek Your Sanctuary;
Sot OH fHS SfSnret IigiQuiltsil (134-9, ast anrset, He 5)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee. ||4||25||94|| Nanak is blessed to receive the greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [14] |25][94]|
TSt Wars HIS U Il (184-9) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
aba Fats AT a FT TS Il (134-9, aGat amrddt, ve 5) jee-a jugat jaa kai hai haath. Our way of life is in His Hands;
A fAygg nieve & SE Il (184-10, aGst ardct, He 5) so simrahu anaath ko naath. remember Him, the Master of the masterless.
ys fofs wre Ag ou ATE I (184-10, Ast aurset, He 5) parabh chit aa-ay sabh dukh jaa-ay. When God comes to mind, all pains depart.
3 AS faonfs ofa & BTS NA (184-10, ast anrset, Hu: 5) bhai sabh binsahi har kai naa-ay. ||1]| All fears are dispelled through the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
fag dfs 38 ard a ofa Il (184-11, west amrdet, He 5) bin har bha-o kaahay kaa maaneh. Why do you fear any other than the Lord?
dfs fangs ad AY Wofs IAN TTS I (184-11, ast anrdet, us 5) har bisrat kaahay sukh jaaneh. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Forgetting the Lord, why do you pretend to be at peace? ||1||Pause| |
fafs Urs ao Use MaA Il (184-11, ast arset, He 5) jin Dhaaray baho Dharan agaas. He established the many worlds and skies.
aw at Afs Abort usErA Il (184-12, aGst auradt, He 5) jaa kee jot jee-a pargaas. The soul is illumined with His Light;
aw at SUAS He afe Il (184-12, ast anradet, nH: 5) jaa kee bakhas na maytai ko-ay. no one can revoke His Blessing.
fafa frnfs ys fass@ Sf 2H (184-12, vest avrdct, ne 5) simar simar parabh nirbha-o ho-ay. ||2]| Meditate, meditate in remembrance on God, and become fearless. ||2| |
mS Ud fAHIT YS SH Il (134-13, Test aurrsct, ws 5) aath pahar simrahu parabh naam. Twenty-four hours a day, meditate in remembrance on God's Name.
mMfok Stee HAS FEASTS Il (184-13, west anrsdt, He 5) anik tirath majan isnaan. In it are the many sacred shrines of pilgrimage and cleansing baths.
UTSAIH at Adat urs Il (184-13, aGst gorse, ne 5) paarbarahm kee sarnee paahi. Seek the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God.
afe asa fis ufo fufe vfs Sil as4-14, ast anrddt, He 5) kot kalank khin meh mit jaahi. ||3]| Millions of mistakes shall be erased in an instant. ||3]|
SHISHA UT UTSATT Il (184-14, aCSt arse, He 5) baymuhtaaj pooraa paatisaahu. The Perfect King is self-sufficient.
Ys Aga Ae SAY Il (184-14, Test anrsst, we 5) parabh sayvak saachaa vaysaahu. God's servant has true faith in Him.
Gfs ys aes S TS I 184-14, Test ards, ws 5) gur poorai raakhay day haath. Giving him His Hand, the Perfect Guru protects him.
aot UTSYIH HHTE IBUQENCUI (84-15, TGSt qrst, Hs 5)
naanak paarbarahm samraath. ||4||26||95]| O Nanak, the Supreme Lord God is All-powerful. ||4||26]|95]|
ast Wairsga HIS U Il (184-15) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
Td uUsATS STH HS Bal" Il (184-15, west anrset, He 5) gur parsaad naam man laagaa. By Guru's Grace, my mind is attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
HOM HOH at Afer ATE Il (184-16, ast amrsdt, He 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaagaa. Asleep for so many incarnations, it is now awakened.
nifys ae Gud ys aet Il (184-16, aext amrdet, He 5) amrit gun uchrai parabh banee. I chant the Ambrosial Bani, the Glorious Praises of God.
ud Ts at AHFS usAt UA (184-17, aCSt arse, He 5) pooray gur kee sumat paraanee. ||1]| The Pure Teachings of the Perfect Guru have been revealed to me. ||1]|
ys fAHes aA Afs ure |) (184-17, west gursct, ue 5) parabh simrat kusal sabh paa-ay. Meditating in remembrance on God, I have found total peace.
wig wots AY AGA ABS AI TIS Il (184-17, west anrsdt, ue 5) ghar baahar sukh sahj sabaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Within my home, and outside as well, there is peace and poise all around. ||1]|Pause| |
Het uerst frofs Gurfemr | s4-18, aGst ardct, He 5) so-ee pachhaataa jineh upaa-i-aa. I have recognized the One who created me.
ate fasur yfs oirfu ferfenr il as4-18, reat aursct, ws 5) kar kirpaa parabh aap milaa-i-aa. Showing His Mercy, God has blended me with Himself.
ag uate BS afs wruasr Il (184-19, teat arse, He 5) baah pakar leeno kar apnaa. Taking me by the arm, He has made me His Own.
Uf Ts Aa AST AY AUST MQM (184-19, ast anrsdt, nz 5) har har kathaa sadaa jap japnaa. ||2] | I continually chant and meditate on the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||
HZ Sz niSug usssg I s4-19, ast gurrset,, ue 5) mantar tantar a-ukhaDh punahchaar. Mantras, tantras, all-curing medicines and acts of atonement,
Yar acu
ofa af oH Abe YTS nT I (185-1, Test aurrsct, ws 5)
har har naam jee-a paraan aDhaar.
are all in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Support of the soul and the breath of life.
Aat ag utes ofe dfar i s5-1, west arset, v2 5) saachaa Dhan paa-i-o har rang. I have obtained the true wealth of the Lord's Love.
wag 3d AU a Afar Sil (135-1, west arsdt, He 5)
dutar taray saaDh kai sang. ||3]||
I have crossed over the treacherous world-ocean in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3]|
Afa SA AS ANS UST Il (185-1, aS anrdet, He 5) sukh baishu sant sajan parvaar. Sit in peace, O Saints, with the family of friends.
dfs us ufeS a at ata ANTE Il (185-2, aGHt anrddt, He 5) har Dhan khati-o jaa kaa naahi sumaar. Earn the wealth of the Lord, which is beyond estimation.
farts usufs fSA ae SfE Il 35-2, a@st anrddt, v2 5) jisahi paraapat tis gur day-ay. He alone obtains it, unto whom the Guru has bestowed it.
aoa fase af 3 Sf NSNQONKEN (185-3, ast aurset, He 5)
naanak birthaa ko-ay na hay-ay. ||4||27||96]|| O Nanak, no one shall go away empty-handed. ||4||27]||96| |
ast Tmrsat HIS U Il (185-3) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
JAS Udsls dfs S3avw Il (185-3, ast aursct, vs 5) hasat puneet hohi tatkaal. The hands are sanctified instantly,
faofa afo ufenr AAS I 185-4, aest anrsct, He 5) binas jaahi maa-i-aa janjaal. and the entanglements of Maya are dispelled.
TAS SHI TH Te lS Il (185-4, aSat ards, ue 5) rasnaa ramhu raam gun neet. Repeat constantly with your tongue the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
AY ureg He avet HIS IAI (185-4, aSSt ardset, ne 5) sukh paavhu mayray bhaa-ee meet. ||1]| and you shall find peace, O my friends, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|
feu sufs arate HAST Il (185-5, aGst anrdet, ve 5) likh laykhan kaagad masvaanee. With pen and ink, write upon your paper
TH OH Ufa wifys set UU TIS i 185-5, ast anrset, ue 5) raam naam har amrit banee. ||1|| rahaa-o. the Name of the Lord, the Ambrosial Word of the Lord's Bani. ||1]]|Pause]|
fes aofa 39 Ato fears Il 185-5, ast avrdet, He 5) ih kaaraj tayray jaahi bikaar. By this act, your sins shall be washed away.
fAHTS TH St AH HTT Il (185-6, Tet arrsct, He 5) simrat raam naahee jam maar.
Remembering the Lord in meditation, you shall not be punished by the Messenger of Death.
UsH TE & TS 3B Ad Il (185-6, west gursc, ws 5) Dharam raa-ay kay doot na johai. The couriers of the Righteous Judge of Dharma shall not touch you.
Hier Has & AEM HT MQM (185-6, west garded, vs 5) maa-i-aa magan na kachhoo-ai mohai. ||2|| The intoxication of Maya shall not entice you at all. ||2||
Gusts urfu 3d AAS Il (185-7, west aursct, He 5) uDhrahi aap tarai sansaar. You shall be redeemed, and through you, the whole world shall be saved,
TH OH Afu Saas I (185-7, TSS arse, v2 5) raam naam jap aykankaar. if you chant the Name of the One and Only Lord.
mf ae mea Buen il 135-7, west anrset, ue 5) aap kamaa-o avraa updays. Practice this yourself, and teach others;
TH OM fase UPeA ISI (185-7, Test anrset, H2 5) raam naam hirdai parvays. ||3]|| instill the Lord's Name in your heart. ||3]|
Ww a He Sg fours il 185-8, at amrasct, we 5) jaa kai maathai ayhu niDhaan. That person, who has this treasure upon his forehead
Het use AU SASS Il (185-8, aSst arses, ne 5) so-ee purakh japai bhagvaan. - that person meditates on God.
MTS UIT fd Id TE WS Il (185-8, west amrdet, ue 5) aath pahar har har gun gaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
aT sea IC fSA afs WE ISIQAcCHEDI (185-9, ACH anrdet, us 5) kaho naanak ha-o tis bal jaa-o. ||4||28]|97]|| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||4||28]|97]||
Ta AGSt Iursdt Hos u Bue Fue 135-10) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5 cha-upday dupday Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars yATfe I (185-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
a uaf]es Het mruar il (is5-11, ast amrsdt, He 5) jo paraa-i-o so-ee apnaa. That which belongs to another - he claims as his own.
A 3fa 230 fan fA Ho Fear NA C1s5-u1, west aursct, He 5) jo taj chhodan tis si-o man rachnaa. ||1]| That which he must abandon - to that, his mind is attracted. ||1]|
ATT TAS frabat AT i s5-11, ast anrdet, ve 5) kahhu gusaa-ee milee-ai kayh. Tell me, how can he meet the Lord of the World?
a fasens fSr fA ST NU TIE th 85-12, aeat anrset, He 5) jo bibarjat tis si-o nayh. ||1]| rahaa-o. That which is forbidden - with that, he is in love. ||1]|Pause] |
3S FS ATA ate WT Il (185-12, ast anrsct, He 5) jhooth baat saa sach kar jaatee. That which is false - he deems as true.
AS deo fe Bat B TSH Ml 185-12, west asst, ve 5) sat hovan man lagai na raatee. ||2]| That which is true - his mind is not attached to that at all. ||2]|
We HST Set VHT Il (185-13, ast aurset, v2 5) baavai maarag taydhaa chalnaa. He takes the crooked path of the unrighteous way;
Far sfS wysr Far SI (185-13, Test aursst, ws 5) seeDhaa chhod apoothaa bunnaa. ||3]|| leaving the straight and narrow path, he weaves his way backwards. ||3]||
eo fafoor ar uA Us Aet I (185-13, text amrdat, v8 5) duhaa siri-aa kaa khasam parabh so-ee. God is the Lord and Master of both worlds.
fA AS soa A HAST Jet NSNQCNKCH (185-14, Tee arsst, He 5) jis maylay naanak so muktaa ho-ee. ||4||29||98]| He, whom the Lord unites with Himself, O Nanak, is liberated. ||4]|29]|98] |
ast Imrsat HIS U Il (185-14) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
afeaa ufo fife wire Ada I (185-15, agst arse, He 5) kalijug meh mil aa-ay sanjog. In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, they come together through destiny.
frog orfamr fsa safo Sa WU (135-15, rest anrset, He 5) jichar aagi-aa tichar bhogeh bhog. ||1]|| As long as the Lord commands, they enjoy their pleasures. ||1]|
Ae 3 urea IH AST Il (185-15, ast aurrset, He 5) jalai na paa-ee-ai raam sanayhee. By burning oneself, the Beloved Lord is not obtained.
fasts Haifa Ast Cfo Tet wail TIC il 1g5-16, aSst aursct, nz 5)
kirat sanjog satee uth ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Only by the actions of destiny does she rise up and burn herself, as a 'satee’. ||1]|Pause] |
cur aut Hoots vfs Are I (185-16, west anradet, H: 5) daykhaa daykhee manhath jal jaa-ee-ai. Imitating what she sees, with her stubborn mind-set, she goes into the fire.
fina Hal o ure ag xfs sevebat QU (185-17, ACS avrdct, ne 5)
pari-a Sang na paavai baho jon bhavaa-ee-ai. ||2]|
She does not obtain the Company of her Beloved Lord, and she wanders through countless incarnations. ||2]|
Aes afi fio wefan Hrs I (185-17, aGet goract, us 5) seel sanjam pari-a aagi-aa maanai. With pure conduct and self-restraint, she surrenders to her Husband Lord's Will;
SH odt AB BU o AHS ISI (135-17, Test anrset, He 5) tis naaree ka-o dukh na jamaanai. ||3]| that woman shall not suffer pain at the hands of the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
ag aod fafs fy@ ustag afs atonr I as5-18, reat gursdt, us 5) kaho naanak jin pari-o parmaysar kar jaani-aa. Says Nanak, she who looks upon the Transcendent Lord as her Husband,
Uo Ast esas usstfont SiZonecell (135-18, ast ars, ue 5)
Dhan satee dargeh parvaani-aa. ||4]|30||99] |
is the blessed 'satee'; she is received with honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|30]|99]|
ast Wairss HIS U il (185-19) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl:
JH US6es SS AD STE Il (185-19, ast anrset, us 5) ham Dhanvant bhaagath sach naa-ay. I am prosperous and fortunate, for I have received the True Name.
dfs TE Wed ATA HASTE Al TIS i (195-19, west amrdet, ve 5) har gun gaavah sahj subhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, with natural, intuitive ease. ||1||Pause| |
Yast AcE
UIE we ar dfs fFor uATAT II (186-1, ast amrsct, we 5) pee-oo daaday kaa khol dithaa khajaanaa. When I opened it up and gazed upon the treasures of my father and grandfather,
a Ad fe sfeur fearer IA (186-1, Test anrset, He 5) taa mayrai man bha-i-aa niDhaanaa. ||1]|| then my mind became very happy. ||1]|
TSH TS AT A FE FHS ll FI STS MYS MSG INI (186-2, ast aursch, v2 5)
ratan laal jaa kaa kachhoo na mol. bharay bhandaar akhoot atol. ||2||
The storehouse is inexhaustible and immeasurable, overflowing with priceless jewels and rubies. ||2||
uefa uses af ff set i (is6-2, a@at amrdct, He 5) khaaveh kharcheh ral mil bhaa-ee. The Siblings of Destiny meet together, and eat and spend,
Sfe 3 mre ead ATet ISI (186-2, rest anrset, H: 5) tot na aavai vaDh-do jaa-ee. ||3]| but these resources do not diminish; they continue to increase. ||3]||
aT saa fAA HASta By feate il as6-3, west anrset, He 5) kaho naanak jis mastak laykh likhaa-ay. Says Nanak, one who has such destiny written on his forehead,
H&S un ofeor gate isiSaiavooll (186-3, aGst amrsct, 2 5) so ayt khajaanai la-i-aa ralaa-ay. ||4||31||100]| becomes a partner in these treasures. ||4||31||100]|
TACSt HIS U Il (186-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
afe sfs Hes Fa ASM Efe Il (186-4, Test, He 5) dar dar martay jab jaanee-ai door. I was scared, scared to death, when I thought that He was far away.
BI var Shim saufs uA (186-4, ast, n2 5) dar chookaa daykhi-aa bharpoor. ||1]| But my fear was removed, when I saw that He is pervading everywhere. ||1]||
Afsag nud a afsad Il (16-5, ast, v2 5) satgur apunay ka-o balihaarai. I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru.
efs o wel Haug STS NU TIC Il 186-5, Tes, He 5) chhod na jaa-ee sarpar taarai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He shall not abandon me; He shall surely carry me across. ||1||Pause]|
ey dq Ag far Fa oH Il (186-5, ast, we 5) dookh rog sog bisrai jab naam. Pain, disease and sorrow come when one forgets the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
He MSs AT Ufs TE WH IM (186-6, west, nz 5) Sadaa anand jaa har gun gaam. ||2| | Eternal bliss comes when one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
as sar aet & Adz Il (186-6, Test, v2 5) buraa bhalaa ko-ee na kaheejai. Do not say that anyone is good or bad.
efs HS Ufa Vas TdA ISI (186-6, Test, He 5) chhod maan har charan gaheejai. ||3]| Renounce your arrogant pride, and grasp the Feet of the Lord. ||3]|
aT ated TI AF fests il as6-7, ast, xs 5) kaho naanak gur mantar chitaar. Says Nanak, remember the GurMantra;
AY urefs ATS Paste ISiSVIIOAI (186-7, Test, He 5)
sukh paavahi saachai darbaar. ||4||32||101]| you shall find peace at the True Court. ||4]|32||101]|
ast HIS U Il (186-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Wat Hts AHS D AMM I (186-8, ast, v2 5) jaa kaa meet saajan hai samee-aa. Those who have the Lord as their Friend and Companion
fs Ao AG ag a at adr IAI Cis6-8, ast, He 5) tis jan ka-o kaho kaa kee kamee-aa. ||1]| - tell me, what else do they need? ||1]|
wv at ulfs afte fa orait 1 cise-s, ret, 48 5) jaa kee pareet gobind si-o laagee. Those who are in love with the Lord of the Universe
TY UE FH Ta sat AU FI Il (186-9, aSst, we 5) dookh darad bharam taa kaa bhaagee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. - pain, suffering and doubt run away from them. ||1||Pause] |
Ww ag oA ofa oA OD erfEs II is6-9, aBst, He 5) jaa ka-o ras har ras hai aa-i-o. Those who have enjoyed the flavor of the Lord's sublime essence
Hod 3A ost BUSES Iii (136-9, ast, uz 5) SO an ras naahee laptaa-i-o. ||2|| are not attracted to any other pleasures. ||2| |
WT at afonit PdIaT VS Il (186-10, ast, v2 5) jaa kaa kahi-aa dargeh chalai. Those whose speech is accepted in the Court of the Lord
A fan a seta & nr] SS Ill (186-10, aes, v2 5) so kis ka-o nadar lai aavai talai. ||3]| - what do they care about anything else? ||3]|
Ww ot Ag fore st at SE Il (is6-10, wet, He 5) jaa kaa sabh kichh taa kaa ho-ay. Those who belong to the One, unto whom all things belong
Soa ST AS Ae AY TE NsiSSiIo2Il (186-11, ast, He 5)
naanak taa ka-o sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||4||33]|102]| - O Nanak, they find a lasting peace. ||4||33]|102]|
ast HIS U Il (186-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Wa ey AY AM ale AT Il (186-11, ast, He 5) jaa kai dukh sukh sam kar jaapai. Those who look alike upon pleasure and pain
a a arat aot fmm il (1s6-12, aGst, He: 5) taa ka-o kaarhaa kahaa bi-aapai. ||1]| - how can anxiety touch them? ||1]|
Hon mee ofa AY HM Il (186-12, at, Hs 5) sahj anand har saaDhoo maahi. The Lord's Holy Saints abide in celestial bliss.
mfemrardt dfs dfs af dl TIS il 1g6-12, Test, 2 5)
aagi-aakaaree har har raa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. They remain obedient to the Lord, the Sovereign Lord King. ||1]||Pause| |
Ww a nifes ZA Hf rte Il (186-13, ast, He 5) jaa kai achint vasai man aa-ay. Those who have the Carefree Lord abiding in their minds
Sag fest asd ofa Qi 186-13, ast, ws 5) taa ka-o chintaa katahoo™ naahi. ||2]| - no cares will ever bother them. ||2||
aw a faofaAS ue 3 SoH Il (186-13, ast, He 5) jaa kai binsi-o man tay bharmaa. Those who have banished doubt from their minds
SA Ae HS SI AH II (186-14, Tea, v2 5) taa kai kachhoo naahee dar jamaa. ||3]|| are not afraid of death at all. ||3]|
wa fase AG afs oor Il (is6-14, ast, v2 5) jaa kai hirdai dee-o gur naamaa. Those whose hearts are filled with the Lord's Name by the Guru
aT Hog ST & Aas foaar sissiIiosil (186-14, ast, v2 5)
kaho naanak taa kai sagal niDhaanaa. ||4||34||103]| - says Nanak, all treasures come to them. ||4||34]|103]|
ast HIS U Il (186-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
MoH JU a Ho HiT Aa Il (186-15, Test, He 5) agam roop kaa man meh thaanaa. The Lord of Unfathomable Form has His Place in the mind.
aa unte fas feas AST AU (186-15, 7eHt, He 5) gur parsaad kinai virlai jaanaa. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, a rare few come to understand this. ||1] |
Hon Aa & nifys XeT Il (186-16, Set, us 5) sahj kathaa kay amrit kuntaa. The Ambrosial Pools of the celestial sermon
fanfs usufs fsH S Fo NU TTS it cig6-16, ast, 2 5) jisahi paraapat tis lai bhunchaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. - those who find them, drink them in. ||1]|Pause] |
Mods at ae fears il (136-17, ast, v2 5) anhat banee thaan niraalaa. The unstruck melody of the Guru's Bani vibrates in that most special place.
oT at afs He Gus iQ 1s6-17, ast, He 5) taa kee Dhun mohay gopaalaa. ||2]| The Lord of the World is fascinated with this melody. ||2]|
3d AIA MTS MSA MSS Il (186-17, ast, He 5) tah sahj akhaaray anayk anantaa. The numerous, countless places of celestial peace
UTSHIH & Halt HS SII (186-18, Test, Hs 5) paarbarahm kay sangee santaa. ||3]| - there, the Saints dwell, in the Company of the Supreme Lord God. ||3]|
IIe MSS Aa Sdt Fhe Il (1g6-18, aSst, we 5) harakh anant sog nahee bee-aa. There is infinite joy, and no sorrow or duality.
A wg dfs soa aG chor eiSulqosil (186-18, ast, He 5)
so ghar gur naanak ka-o dee-aa. ||4||35||104]| The Guru has blessed Nanak with this home. ||4]|35]|104] |
ast Hs U Il (136-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ae TY ST mgs Il (186-19, ast, we 5) kavan roop tayraa aaraaDha-o. What form of Yours should I worship and adore?
azo na afer & ATI All (1s6-19, ast, v2 5) kavan jog kaa-i-aa lay saaDha-o. ||1|| What Yoga should I practice to control my body? ||1||
UST AcD
a5 TS A SSB MSE Il (187-1, ast, He 5) kavan gun jo tujh lai gaava-o. What is that virtue, by which I may sing of You?
aso IH uUTSAIN stsvsO A TIE I (187-1, west, ne 5) kavan bol paarbarahm reejhaava-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. What is that speech, by which I may please the Supreme Lord God? ||1]||Pause] |
ae A UAT Sot AS Il (187-1, west, He 5) kavan so poojaa tayree kara-o. What worship service shall I perform for You?
azo A fafa fas sen SdG MQ (137-2, west, v2 5) kavan so biDh jit bhavjal tara-o. ||2]| How can I cross over the terrifying world-ocean? ||2||
aee su fas autor aff i s7-2, ast, v2 5) kavan tap jit tapee-aa ho-ay. What is that penance, by which I may become a penitent?
aS ASH ICH HG fF SI (187-2, ast, v2 5) kavan so naam ha-umai mal kho-ay. ||3]| What is that Name, by which the filth of egotism may be washed away? ||3]|
TEs uA forra fora soa Aas wes Il (187-3, Tet, 42 5) gun poojaa gi-aan Dhi-aan naanak sagal ghaal. Virtue, worship, spiritual wisdom, meditation and all service, O Nanak,
fan afe fasu Afsag fxs efeore iieil as7-3, ast, He 5)
jis kar kirpaa satgur milai da-i-aal. ||4||
are obtained from the True Guru, when, in His Mercy and Kindness, He meets us. [141]
fSA ot ae f3o St ys AST Il 87-4, west, He 5) tis hee gun tin hee parabh jaataa. They alone receive this merit, and they alone know God,
fan at ute Bf Hees A TIE SAT USENIOUII (187-4, TSS, He 5)
jis kee maan lay-ay sukh-daata. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||36||105]| who are approved by the Giver of peace. ||1||Second Pause] |36||105] |
ast HIS U Il (187-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
WTUS 3O Sdt AT A TSA Il (187-5, ast, He 5) aapan tan nahee jaa ko garbaa. The body which you are so proud of, does not belong to you.
Ta foe odt mms SIs WAI (137-5, Test, v2 5)
raaj milakh nahee aapan darbaa. ||1]|| Power, property and wealth are not yours. ||1]|
nus ddt a AG Burkes i (187-6, aSst, vz 5) aapan nahee kaa ka-o laptaa-i-o. They are not yours, so why do you cling to them?
nus oH Afsad S ufES Al TIS Il (187-6, TSH, Hz 5)
aapan naam satgur tay paa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is yours; it is received from the True Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
HS Sfost niue Sdt Set Il 187-7, west, 2 5) sut banitaa aapan nahee bhaa-ee. Children, spouse and siblings are not yours.
fee Hts mre ary & Het QM (187-7, aSst, He 5)
isat meet aap baap na maa-ee. ||2]| Dear friends, mother and father are not yours. ||2| |
Afear gut sf adt @H Il (187-7, aSst, Hu: 5) su-inaa roopaa fun nahee daam. Gold, silver and money are not yours.
Jed Keg nTUS St AH IB (187-8, west, v2 5) haivar gaivar aapan nahee kaam. ||3]| Fine horses and magnificent elephants are of no use to you. |[3]|
ad area A dfs auth frofenr Il 187-8, ae, He 5) kaho naanak jo gur bakhas milaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, those whom the Guru forgives, meet with the Lord.
fan a Ag fas fan a safe Tent SiSDIIOEN (187-8, aes, v8 5)
tis kaa sabh kichh jis kaa har raa-i-aa. ||4||37||106|| Everything belongs to those who have the Lord as their King. ||4]|37]||106] |
ast HIS U Il (187-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ts x BIE Gufs HT HT Il (187-9, aTSst, ue 5) gur kay charan oopar mayray maathay. I place the Guru's Feet on my forehead,
3S BUNT AAS BA IAI (187-9, ast, ve 5) taa tay dukh mayray saglay laathay. ||1]| and all my pains are gone. ||1]|
Afsad mus AS aTarat Il (187-10, a@st, vs 5) satgur apunay ka-o kurbaanee. I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru.
MTSH die usH da Hat NA TIS Il (187-10, aCHt, He 5)
aatam cheen param rang maanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have come to understand my soul, and I enjoy supreme bliss. ||1||Pause| |
Use JE Ts at HfY Holt il (1s7-11, aSst, ue 5) charan rayn gur kee mukh laagee. I have applied the dust of the Guru's Feet to my face,
mata fats Aare fsorait Qi as7-11, west, He 5) aha’-buDh tin sagal ti-aagee. ||2|| which has removed all my arrogant intellect. ||2| |
Td a Hae Ba Hf Htor Il (187-11, agat, He 5) gur kaa sabad lago man meethaa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad has become sweet to my mind,
uUTsquH 3t 3 Hfa Stor Sil (187-12, ast, 8 5) paarbarahm taa tay mohi deethaa. ||3]| and I behold the Supreme Lord God. ||3]|
ag Ades TI ATS Il (187-12, 7st, us 5) gur sukh-daata gur kartaar. The Guru is the Giver of peace; the Guru is the Creator.
Amt YE BSA AT MAY INiScuIODil (187-12, Tat, ue 5) jee-a paraan naanak gur aaDhaar. ||4||38]|107]|| O Nanak, the Guru is the Support of the breath of life and the soul. ||4]|38]|107]|
ast HIS U Il (187-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ho As FT aS vnfs i Aa Cat aed ats WAU (187-13, ast, 2 5) ray man mayray too” taa ka-o aahi. jaa kai oonaa kachhhoo naahi. ||1]| O my mind, seek the One who lacks nothing. ||1]|
dfs AT UtsH afs Ho HIS Il 487-13, west, He 5) har saa pareetam kar man meet. Make the Beloved Lord your friend.
UTS Mog Ig AE MWS UU FIC il cs7-14, west, we 5) paraan aDhaar raakho sad cheet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Keep Him constantly in your mind; He is the Support of the breath of life. ||1||Pause]|
3 Ho Ae SF TT aS Afe ll (187-14, west, v2 5) ray man mayray too” taa ka-o sayV. O my mind, serve Him;
mife usd wugud SS QI (187-15, west, He 5) aad purakh aprampar dayv. ||2]| He is the Primal Being, the Infinite Divine Lord. ||2]|
fH Sufs Ho afs J TAT Il 187-15, 7st, He 5) tis oopar man kar too’ aaSaa. Place your hopes in the One
mite Farts AT AT SISTA NI (187-15, aSst, He 5)
aad jugaad jaa kaa bharvaasaa. ||3]| who is the Support of all beings, from the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages. ||3]|
wv at ulfs Het AY SE I (187-16, a@Ht, He 5) jaa kee pareet sadaa sukh ho-ay. His Love brings eternal peace;
Sod We ad fife AE snstnaocil (187-16, agst, He 5) naanak gaavai gur mil so-ay. ||4||39||108] | meeting the Guru, Nanak sings His Glorious Praises. ||4||39||108]|
ast HIS U Il (187-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hts ad Het IH HAT II (187-17, ast, He 5) meet karai so-ee ham maanaa. Whatever my Friend does, I accept.
HIS & AISI AAG ANTS IAI (187-17, aVHt, v2 5) meet kay kartab kusal samaanaa. ||1]| My Friend's actions are pleasing to me. ||1||
Sat 2a HS Hfs BMS Il 187-17, ast, v3 5) aykaa tayk mayrai man cheet. Within my conscious mind, the One Lord is my only Support.
fan fxs Ada A INST HTS NAN TIS Il (187-17, aSSt, He 5) jis kichh karnaa so hamraa meet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. One who does this is my Friend. ||1]|Pause| |
HIS THe SuTSTI Il (187-18, TSS, He 5) meet hamaaraa vayparvaahaa. My Friend is Carefree.
ad frou 3 Hfo mASTIT IQ (187-18, aGst, He 5) gur kirpaa tay mohi asnaahaa. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, I give my love to Him. ||2]|
HIS THs visa Il 187-19, aSHt, He 5) meet hamaaraa antarjaamee. My Friend is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
AHI UY UTSYIH Fort Sil (187-19, a@st, v3 5) samrath purakh paarbarahm su-aamee. ||3]| He is the All-powerful Being, the Supreme Lord and Master. ||3] |
JH BA SH Sa HG Il (187-19, ast, ue 5) ham daasay tum thaakur mayray. I am Your servant; You are my Lord and Master.
User act
HS HIS SSA UF 3g IUBONIOCI (188-1, Test, He 5) maan mahat naanak parabh tayray. ||4||40||109]| Nanak: my honor and glory are Yours, God. ||4||40||109]|
ast HIS U Il (188-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
aw a@ 3H 3S ANGE Nia Il (188-1, Test, He 5) jaa ka-o tum bha-ay samrath angaa. Those who have You on their side, O All-powerful Lord
a ag ost ABA INU! (18-2, west, He 5) taa ka-o kachh naahee kaalangaa. ||1]|| - no black stain can stick to them. ||1]|
Hag AT ag TF MTA SHS II (188-2, aSst, v2 5) maaDha-o jaa ka-o hai aas tumaaree.
O Lord of wealth, those who place their hopes in You a a ag adt AAS NU TIS I (188-2, west, ve 5)
taa ka-o kachh naahee sansaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. - nothing of the world can touch them at all. ||1]|Pause] |
Wa fase stag SE Il (188-3, ast, He 5) jaa kai hirdai thaakur ho-ay. Those whose hearts are filled with their Lord and Master
3 a AOA od AfE III (188-3, west, He 5) taa ka-o sahsaa naahee ko-ay. ||2|| - no anxiety can affect them. ||2]|
aw a@ 3H cat ys dtd Il (iss-3, ast, ws 5) jaa ka-o tum deenee parabh Dheer. Those, unto whom You give Your consolation, God
a a foafe 3 mire ute ISI (1ss-4, aGst, 12 5) taa kai nikat na aavai peer. ||3]|| - pain does not even approach them. ||3]||
ad asa HA Te ufeor | cass-4, west, He 5) kaho naanak mai so gur paa-i-aa. Says Nanak, I have found that Guru,
USAIN UTS Safer USUSAUlAoll (188-4, TSH, 2 5) paarbarahm pooran daykhaa-i-aa. ||4||41||110]|| who has shown me the Perfect, Supreme Lord God. ||4||41]|110]|
ast HIS U Il (188-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Pos VI US Sarat Il (188-5, aSst, He 5) dulabh dayh paa-ee vadbhaagee. This human body is so difficult to obtain; it is only obtained by great good fortune.
oH 6 Aufg 3 TSH ust IA (iss-5, aSst, He 5)
naam na jaapeh tay aatam ghaatee. ||1]||
Those who do not meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are murderers of the soul. ||1]|
Hts o Ad frat faATS IM Il (iss-6, aVst, He 5)
mar na jaahee jinaa bisrat raam. Those who forget the Lord might just as well die.
on faga Hea Aa OH NU TIS Il 1s8-6, ast, H: 5) naam bihoon jeevan ka-un kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, of what use are their lives? ||1]|Pause] |
urs uls Yes JAS fans Il (188-7, Tea, He 5) khaat peet khaylat hasat bisthaar. Eating, drinking, playing, laughing and showing off
azo mga fHasax Atars iQ (1ss-7, ast, v2 5)
kavan arath mirtak seegaar. ||2|| - what use are the ostentatious displays of the dead? ||2]|
A 3 Hold AA USHTSET Il (188-7, Tea, He 5) jo na suneh jas parmaanandaa. Those who do not listen to the Praises of the Lord of supreme bliss,
un ut fyare rife 3 He SI Ciss-s, ast, He 5) pas pankhee tarigad jon tay mandaa. ||3]|| are worse off than beasts, birds or creeping creatures. ||3]||
ag aed dfs Hz fester i ass-s, ast, 3 5) kaho naanak gur mantar drirh-aa-i-aa. Says Nanak, the GurMantra has been implanted within me;
azo OH foe Hts AEM NSISVNAAA (iss-8, asst, He 5)
kayval naam rid maahi samaa-i-aa. ||4||42]|111]| the Name alone is contained within my heart. ||4||42]|111]|
ast HIS U Il (188-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ot at Het at x BNL Il (188-9, aGst, we 5) kaa kee maa-ee kaa ko baap. Whose mother is this? Whose father is this?
oH Uda SS Afs ATH IAI (188-9, Test, 42 5) naam Dhaareek jhoothay sabh saak. ||1|| They are relatives in name only- they are all false. ||1]|
ad AS Hod sue I (188-10, aCst, H2 5) kaahay ka-o moorakh bhakhlaa-i-aa. Why are you screaming and shouting, you fool?
fife Hafa sath 3 orfenr ai TIS il ciss-10, west, Hs 5) mil sanjog hukam too" aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. By good destiny and the Lord's Order, you have come into the world. ||1]|Pause| |
Sart Ht Sar AS I (188-10, ast, v3 5) aykaa maatee aykaa jot. There is the one dust, the one light,
Sa uso AT ABS FfS NM! (iss-11, aes, ve 5) ayko pavan kahaa ka-un rot. ||2|| the one praanic wind. Why are you crying? For whom do you cry? ||2||
Ha Ha ate fawardt il ass-11, west, ue 5) mayraa mayraa kar billaahee. People weep and cry out, "Mine, mine!"
HaeTg feg Abra ot Si ass-11, ast, v2 5) maranhaar ih jee-araa naahee. ||3]|| This soul is not perishable. ||3]|
AT aa Afs HS AUS Il (ss-12, west, He 5) kaho naanak gur kholay kapaat. Says Nanak, the Guru has opened my shutters;
Hag se fASA FH AS IISSUAIII (188-12, Test, 2 5) mukat bha-ay binsay bharam thaat. ||4||43]]112]| I am liberated, and my doubts have been dispelled. ||4||43]]112]|
ast HIS U Il (188-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
zs 23 A ctafs Sa Il ciss-13, ast, n2 5) vaday vaday jo deeseh log. Those who seem to be great and powerful,
f30 ag fmm fest ga Nall ass-13, west, He 5) tin ka-o bi-aapai chintaa rog. ||1]| are afflicted by the disease of anxiety. ||1]|
aa zat Hfenr efsniret il (188-13, a@st, v2 5) ka-un vadaa maa-i-aa vadi-aa-ee. Who is great by the greatness of Maya?
A est fats an foe wet a ToS i iss-14, ast, v2 5)
SO vadaa jin raam liv laa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. They alone are great, who are lovingly attached to the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
gHior gf Gufs fos BF Il ciss-14, aGat, Hs 5) bhoomee-aa bhoom oopar nit lujhai. The landlord fights over his land each day.
efs 3% feAat odt FS li ss-14, west, ne 5) chhod chalai tarisnaa nahee bujhai. ||2]| He shall have to leave it in the end, and yet his desire is still not satisfied. ||2]|
aT aaa feg 33 stars Il (188-15, aS, us 5) kaho naanak ih tat beechaaraa. Says Nanak, this is the essence of Truth:
fag dfs sxe ad SZaTS NSUNSSNAWI (188-15, Test, He 5)
bin har bhajan naahee chhutkaaraa. ||3||44||113]| without the Lord's meditation, there is no salvation. ||3]||44||113]|
ast HIS U Il (188-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
us Haat ust fEHATE Il (188-16, ast, x2 5) pooraa maarag pooraa isnaan. Perfect is the path; perfect is the cleansing bath.
Ag fas ust fase SH UI (188-16, Tes, He 5) sabh kichh pooraa hirdai naam. ||1|| Everything is perfect, if the Naam is in the heart. ||1]|
udt oat A Us Tet Il (188-16, Test, He 5) pooree rahee jaa poorai raakhee. One's honor remains perfect, when the Perfect Lord preserves it.
UTSgIH at ASE AS Sat UU TIS Il (iss-17, 7SHt, 2 5) paarbarahm kee saran jan taakee. ||1|| rahaa-o. His servant takes to the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God. ||1]||Pause] |
UT AY US ASE Il (188-17, ast, we 5) pooraa sukh pooraa santokh. Perfect is the peace; perfect is the contentment.
YT SY YIS TH AT MWA (188-17, Tes, v8 5) pooraa tap pooran raaj jog. ||2]| Perfect is the penance; perfect is the Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success.
[121] ofa & Hafa ufss uals Il ciss-1s, west, H2 5)
har kai maarag patit puneet. On the Lord's Path, sinners are purified.
udt Ast Yat Baa SII (188-18, Test, Hs 5) pooree sobhaa pooraa lokeek. ||3]| Perfect is their glory; perfect is their humanity. ||3]|
AIETY AE SA TET Il (igs-18, ast, we 5) karanhaar sad vasai hadooraa. They dwell forever in the Presence of the Creator Lord.
AJ THA AT AfsTT UT ISISUNIAIWil (1g8-19, ast, v2 5)
kaho naanak mayraa satgur pooraa. ||4||45||114]| Says Nanak, my True Guru is Perfect. ||4]|45||114]|
ast HIS U Il (188-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
AS ot ofa fe nny &S I cigs-19, a@at, we 5) sant kee Dhoor mitay agh kot. Millions of sins are wiped away by the dust of the feet of the Saints.
Ua ace
Aa une HOH HIS 3S FS NA (189-1, ast, 8 5) sant parsaad janam maran tay chhot. ||1]| By the Grace of the Saints, one is released from birth and death. ||1]]|
AS a TaH Uda fEAATS Il (139-1, west, we 5) sant kaa daras pooran isnaan. The Blessed Vision of the Saints is the perfect cleansing bath.
Ha fur 3 wba oH Al TIS I 1g9-1, aSst, v2 5)
sant kirpaa tay japee-ai naam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By the Grace of the Saints, one comes to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ha a Afar fifent niarg il 1s9-2, ast, v2 5) sant kai sang miti-aa aha‘kaar. In the Society of the Saints, egotism is shed,
fenfe wire Ag SaaS lI! (1s9-2, west, ve 5) darisat aavai sabh aykankaar. ||2|| and the One Lord is seen everywhere. ||2||
AS AYAS ore efh Us Il (189-2, ast, ue 5) sant suparsan aa-ay vas panchaa. By the pleasure of the Saints, the five passions are overpowered,
nifys on fae & AE BI (189-3, west, ne 5) amrit naam ridai lai sanchaa. ||3]|| and the heart is irrigated with the Ambrosial Naam. ||3]||
AT SSK AT AT UT AIH Il (189-3, THT, He 5) kaho naanak jaa kaa pooraa karam. Says Nanak, one whose karma is perfect,
fH st AT S VIS ISIENIUII (189-3, Test, He 5) tis bhaytay saaDhoo kay charan. ||4]||46||115]| touches the feet of the Holy. ||4]|46]|115] |
ACSt HIS U Il (189-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs TE AUS AHS UPAA Il (189-4, ast, ne 5) har gun japat kamal pargaasai. Meditating on the Glories of the Lord, the heart-lotus blossoms radiantly.
ofa frngs JH AS SA IAI (139-4, ast, 48 5) har simrat taraas sabh naasai. ||1]|| Remembering the Lord in meditation, all fears are dispelled. ||1]|
AW His ust fag af TE ae Il (189-5, at, we 5) saa mat pooree jit har gun gaavai. Perfect is that intellect, by which the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
zs ota AG AG ues IU TIS Il (189-5, ast, we 5)
vadai bhaag saaDhoo sang paavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, one finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
Aronfar ureint fafa ar i iso-5, a@st, v2 5) saaDhsang paa-ee-ai niDh naamaa. In the Saadh Sangat, the treasure of the Name is obtained.
AGA UTS Afs AH II (189-6, Test, we 5) saaDhsang pooran sabh kaamaa. ||2|| In the Saadh Sangat, all one's works are brought to fruition. ||2||
dfs at Safs AGH UTES Il (199-6, TSst, He 5) har kee bhagat janam parvaan. Through devotion to the Lord, one's life is approved.
ad fasut 3 SH UTES ISI (199-6, aSst, He 5) gur kirpaa tay naam vakhaan. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, one chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
AT BSA A AS UIS Il (189-7, ast, v2 5) kaho naanak so jan parvaan. Says Nanak, that humble being is accepted,
Wa fee ZA SASS ISISINVEN (139-7, ast, He 5) jaa kai ridai vasai bhagvaan. ||4||47||116]| within whose heart the Lord God abides. ||4||47||116||
ast HIS U Il (189-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
San fAG A at He TST Il (189-8, TCH, He 5) aykas si-o jaa kaa man raataa. Those whose minds are imbued with the One Lord,
ferdt fSA uset STS AI (is9-8, aGat, Hs 5) visree tisai paraa-ee taataa. ||1]|| forget to feel jealous of others. ||1]|
fag afse 3 tA ae Il (189-8, aGat, He 5) bin gobind na deesai ko-ee. They see none other than the Lord of the Universe.
Ade ATSS AIST AT UU! TI i ciso-9, aSst, ne 5) karan karaavan kartaa so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Creator is the Doer, the Cause of causes. ||1||Pause||
Hofs ante uf ofs af FS Il (1s9-9, west, ne 5) maneh kamaavai mukh har har bolai. Those who work willingly, and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har
H Ao fes 63 asia 5 38 QI (139-9, west, He 5) so jan it ut kateh na dolai. ||2|| - they do not waver, here or hereafter. ||2] |
W a dfs Ue A Ae ATT Il (189-10, a@Ht, He 5) jaa kai har Dhan so sach saahu. Those who possess the wealth of the Lord are the true bankers.
afs us afs as fers Sil c1s9-10, a@at, we 5) gur poorai kar deeno visaahu. ||3]| The Perfect Guru has established their line of credit. ||3]|
Ales use fufemr ats afemr Il cis9-10, aBst, He 5) jeevan purakh mili-aa har raa-i-aa. The Giver of life, the Sovereign Lord King meets them.
AT SSA UGH UE UfEMT SISTA (189-11, asst, v8 5)
kaho naanak param pad paa-i-aa. ||4||48]|117]|| Says Nanak, they attain the supreme status. ||4||48]|117]|
ast HIS U Il (189-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
OY SIs AX UTS MOE Il (189-11, a@Ht, we 5) naam bhagat kai paraan aDhaar. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of the breath of life of His devotees.
oH UG oH faGars Ill (189-12, west, H2 5) naamo Dhan naamo bi-uhaar. ||1]| The Naam is their wealth, the Naam is their occupation. ||1]|
oH east AS AST UTS Il (189-12, ast, He 5) naam vadaa-ee jan sobhaa paa-ay. By the greatness of the Naam, His humble servants are blessed with glory.
ate fasur fan orfy feere nai Joe il (is9-12, a@st, v2 5) kar kirpaa jis aap divaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord Himself bestows it, in His Mercy. ||1||Pause| |
oH SIs A AY MAAS Il (189-13, ast, He 5) naam bhagat kai sukh asthaan. The Naam is the home of peace of His devotees.
OH IS A SAS UPS III (189-13, ast, 2 5) naam rat so bhagat parvaan. ||2|| Attuned to the Naam, His devotees are approved. ||2||
dfs a BH AS AG Ws Il (139-13, aeHt, He 5) har kaa naam jan ka-o Dhaarai. The Name of the Lord is the support of His humble servants.
AfA ATA AS OTH ANTS ISI (139-14, aes, He 5) Saas Saas jan naam samaarai. ||3]|| With each and every breath, they remember the Naam. ||3]|
AT aoe fA UT Sa Il (139-14, west, He 5) kaho naanak jis pooraa bhaag. Says Nanak, those who have perfect destiny
OH Afa St aT HS BA USISENIATH (139-14, west, vs 5)
naam sang taa kaa man laag. ||4||49||118]| - their minds are attached to the Naam. ||4||49||118]|
ast HIS U Il (189-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ha yAtfe ofa ony fomrfenr i 189-15, a@st, He 5) sant parsaad har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. By the Grace of the Saints, I meditated on the Name of the Lord.
3a 3 Weg He fuser Al (189-15, ast, He 5) tab tay Dhaavat man tariptaa-i-aa. ||1]| Since then, my restless mind has been satisfied. ||1||
AY faAy urfenr ae ate i (189-16, ast, n2 5) sukh bisraam paa-i-aa gun gaa-ay. I have obtained the home of peace, singing His Glorious Praises.
AH fhfeur Hat Sst sorte ua FIC il s9-16, west, vs 5)
Saram miti-aa mayree hatee balaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. My troubles have ended, and the demon has been destroyed. ||1]||Pause| |
TIS AHS mata saTSST Il (189-17, aSst, Hz 5) charan kamal araaDh bhagvantaa. Worship and adore the Lotus Feet of the Lord God.
ofa fande 3 fet Ht fest NQN (89-17, aes, v2 5) har simran tay mitee mayree chintaa. ||2]| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, my anxiety has come to an end. ||2| |
AS 3fa mara Sa Aafs wmMfES Il c1s9-17, west, v2 5) sabh taj anaath ayk saran aa-i-o. I have renounced all - Iam an orphan. I have come to the Sanctuary of the One Lord.
Czy nmeg 3a Aon utes Sil (139-18, ast, H2 5) ooch asthaan tab sehjay paa-i-o. ||3]| Since then, I have found the highest celestial home. ||3]|
TY UE IIH 3C Sf I 189-18, ast, ve 5) dookh darad bharam bha-o nasi-aa. My pains, troubles, doubts and fears are gone.
ATETT BOA HfS SAT ISUNUONAIE! (189-18, Test, Hz 5)
karanhaar naanak man basi-aa. ||4||50||119]| The Creator Lord abides in Nanak's mind. ||4||50||119]|
ast HIS U Il (189-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ad ats ZIG TAS AE WSC Il (189-19, aSst, nz 5)
kar kar tahal rasnaa gun gaava-o. With my hands I do His work; with my tongue I sing His Glorious Praises.
Yat axo
3do SAT & Hafa SS Al (190-1, aSat, He 5) charan thaakur kai maarag Dhaava-o. ||1|| With my feet, I walk on the Path of my Lord and Master. ||1]|
38 AH fangs at adr il (190-1, ast, nH: 5) bhalo samo simran kee baree-aa. It is a good time, when I remember Him in meditation.
fans oH 3 ufe Cader 4 TIC Il 90-1, aeHt, He 5)
simrat naam bhai paar utree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I cross over the terrifying world- ocean. ||1||Pause] |
33 ASS A IAS UY Il (190-2, aSst, ue 5) naytar santan kaa darsan paykh. With your eyes, behold the Blessed Vision of the Saints.
ys uifeorat HO Hfo BY II (190-2, aSst, we 5) parabh avinaasee man meh laykh. |[2|| Record the Immortal Lord God within your mind. ||2]|
Afé atese AG ufo ATE Il (190-2, aH, He 5) sun keertan saaDh peh jaa-ay. Listen to the Kirtan of His Praises, at the Feet of the Holy.
HOH Hee at STA fHeTf=e Sil (90-3, west, ws 5)
janam maran kee taraas mitaa-ay. ||3]| Your fears of birth and death shall depart. ||3]|
TIE GHG Sad Sfa ofa il (190-3, aeHt, Hz 5) charan kamal thaakur ur Dhaar. Enshrine the Lotus Feet of your Lord and Master within your heart.
POs UI a'Ha fSASts NNUUIIOI (190-3, aSSt, He 5)
dulabh dayh naanak nistaar. ||4]|51]|120]| Thus this human life, so difficult to obtain, shall be redeemed. ||4||51]|120] |
TCSt HIS U Il (190-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
a a@ nual forsur urd Il (190-4, aGst, He 5)
jaa ka-o apnee kirpaa Dhaarai. Those, upon whom the Lord Himself showers His Mercy,
H HO dHat oH Burd iil (190-4, west, v2 5) SO jan rasnaa naam uchaaray. ||1|| chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with their tongues. ||1]|
dfs fangs AoA ey fmm Il 190-5, west, nH 5) har bisrat sahsaa dukh bi-aapai. Forgetting the Lord, superstition and sorrow shall overtake you.
frngs oH san SC sat NA TIE Il (190-5, ast, He 5) simrat naam bharam bha-o bhaagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Naam, doubt and fear shall depart. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs atese He die atesq We Il (190-5, aGHt, He 5) har keertan sunai har keertan gaavai. Listening to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and singing the Lord's Kirtan,
fH AS By fSafe sat mFS NI (90-6, Bat, we 5) tis jan dookh nikat nahee aavai. ||2| | misfortune shall not even come near you. ||2||
dfs at ZIG ATS AS Ad Il (190-6, west, we 5) har kee tahal karat jan sohai. Working for the Lord, His humble servants look beautiful.
a a wfeur nafs o Us ISI (90-7, aes, He 5) taa ka-o maa-i-aa agan na pohai. ||3]| The fire of Maya does not touch them. ||3]|
Hfe 3fs ufa fs om efenire Il 1190-7, ast, ve 5) man tan mukh har naam da-i-aal. Within their minds, bodies and mouths, is the Name of the Merciful Lord.
SSA SHAS wets AAS ISUUVNAVAUI (190-7, ast, Hz 5)
naanak tajee-alay avar janjaal. ||4]|52]|121]| Nanak has renounced other entanglements. ||4]|52||121]||
ast HIS U Il (190-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ats frmrou ag T3saeT Il 190-8, west, He 5) chhaad si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee. Renounce your cleverness, and your cunning tricks.
TT us at Sa feast All (190-8, ast, we 5) gur pooray kee tayk tikaa-ee. ||1]| Seek the Support of the Perfect Guru. ||1]|
eu faon AY dfs Te ae Il (190-9, ast, nu 5) dukh binsay sukh har gun gaa-ay. Your pain shall depart, and in peace, you shall sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ag us sfeur foe ote 4a TIS i (190-9, west, 2 5)
gur pooraa bhayti-aa liv laa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Meeting the Perfect Guru, let yourself be absorbed in the Lord's Love. ||1]|Pause] | ofs or ay Ate afs HZ i 90-9, ast, we 5)
har kaa naam dee-o gur mantar. The Guru has given me the Mantra of the Name of the Lord.
flee fend Sset FFT NHN (190-10, Test, v2 5) mitay visooray utree chint. ||2] | My worries are forgotten, and my anxiety is gone. ||2||
moe Se Td fess farurs il (190-10, west, v2 5) anad bha-ay gur milat kirpaal. Meeting with the Merciful Guru, I am in ecstasy.
ate faxgut are AH ANS IIBII (190-10, a@st, He 5)
kar kirpaa kaatay jam jaal. ||3]| Showering His Mercy, He has cut away the noose of the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
AT Tor TI UT ue i (190-11, west, we 5) kaho naanak gur pooraa paa-i-aa. Says Nanak, I have found the Perfect Guru;
a3 gots 3 fant wfemr ignusia22il (190-11, aGst, He 5) taa tay bahur na bi-aapai maa-i-aa. ||4||53||122| | Maya shall no longer harass me. ||4||53||122||
ast HIS U Il (190-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ahs Shor afs us orf i (90-12, west, Hs 5) raakh lee-aa gur poorai aap. The Perfect Guru Himself has saved me.
HOHY A Ba AS |All (190-12, ast, v2 5) manmukh ka-o laago santaap. ||1|| The self-willed manmukhs are afflicted with misfortune. ||1]|
GT Ts AfY HS TH I (190-12, ast, we 5) guroo guroo jap meet hamaaray. Chant and meditate on the Guru, the Guru, O my friend.
He Cae defs waas Ul TIS I (190-13, wet, we 5) mukh oojal hoveh darbaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
qd a vse fase SATE il 190-13, west, ne 5) gur kay charan hirdai vasaa-ay. Enshrine the Feet of the Guru within your heart;
Su PAHS Sat TS TOTS | (190-13, aes, ve 5) dukh dusman tayree hatai balaa-ay. ||2|| your pains, enemies and bad luck shall be destroyed. ||2]|
ad a Age 3d Afar AoE Il (190-14, ast, vz 5) gur kaa sabad tayrai sang sahaa-ee. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is your Companion and Helper.
cfenis se Aas Abt SveT ISI (190-14, west, He 5) da-i-aal bha-ay saglay jee-a bhaa-ee. ||3]| O Siblings of Destiny, all beings shall be kind to you. ||3]|
afs us wa fxsur axat Il (190-14, a@at, we 5) gur poorai jab kirpaa karee. When the Perfect Guru granted His Grace,
sols saad Hot ust ust ISNUsIILSII (190-15, ast, He 5)
bhanat naanak mayree pooree paree. ||4||54||123]| says Nanak, I was totally, completely fulfilled. ||4]|54]|123]|
ast HIS U Il (190-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
mifeax SAT ue AA ST Il (190-15, ast, v2 5) anik rasaa khaa-ay jaisay dhor. Like beasts, they consume all sorts of tasty treats.
Ho at Aedt ahs Fs INA 90-16, aSst, He 5) moh kee jayvree baaDhi-o chor. ||1]| With the rope of emotional attachment, they are bound and gagged like thieves. ||1]|
frase ea AGHA fagar Il (190-16, west, 3 5) mirtak dayh saaDhsang bihoonaa. Their bodies are corpses, without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
wes AS Hat ee dts Al TIC Il (190-16, ast, v2 5) aavat jaat jonee dukh kheenaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. They come and go in reincarnation, and are destroyed by pain. ||1||Pause] |
wifsx sAZ Hes ufsafenr it (190-17, Test, Hs 5) anik bastar sundar pehraa-i-aa. They wear all sorts of beautiful robes,
fas saat YS HT Sate MI (190-17, ast, ve 5) ji-o darnaa khayt maahi daraa-i-aa. ||2]| but they are still just scarecrows in the field, frightening away the birds. ||2]|
Ha Adtd MSS AS aH Il (190-18, Teast, He 5) Sagal sareer aavat sabh kaam. All bodies are of some use,
fodee HOY AU odt SH ISI (190-18, aga, He 5)
nihfal maanukh japai nahee naam. ||3]|
but those who do not meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are totally useless. ||3]|
aT saa A AG se efenrar Il (190-18, aeat, He 5) kaho naanak jaa ka-o bha-ay da-i-aalaa. Says Nanak, those unto whom the Lord becomes Merciful,
WGHfa fufs safs Tus is iuUlIsil (190-19, Test, v2 5)
saaDhsang mil bhajeh gopaalaa. ||4]||55||124|| join the Saadh Sangat, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe. ||4]|55]|124]|
ast HIS U Il (190-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
usr atq ate AGA Td Hate feers il ci9i-1, wSst, ue 5)
kal kalays gur sabad nivaaray. The Word of the Guru's Shabad quiets worries and troubles.
MISS WE TI AY ATS INA (191-1, Test, He 5) aavan jaan rahay sukh saaray. ||1|| Coming and going ceases, and all comforts are obtained. ||1]||
3 faon feas@ ofa fomrfenr it 191-1, ast, v2 5) bhai binsay nirbha-o har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Fear is dispelled, meditating on the Fearless Lord.
AUHfa dfs & Te arfenr ai TIC il 91-2, ast, ve 5)
saaDhsang har kay gun gaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
3do aes fee nists ws I (191-2, aCHt, v2 5) charan kaval rid antar Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Lotus Feet of the Lord within my heart.
mate Aad dfs uts SSsrs iQ (191-2, ast, v2 5) agan saagar gur paar utaaray. ||2|| The Guru has carried me across the ocean of fire. ||2]|
Yss WS us Als HS Il (191-3, ast, we 5) boodat jaat poorai gur kaadhay. I was sinking down, and the Perfect Guru pulled me out.
HOH HOH A Te AS MSI (191-3, Test, we 5)
janam janam kay tootay gaadhay. ||3]|
I was cut off from the Lord for countless incarnations, and now the Guru united me with Him again. ||3]|
aT saa f3H as afoot Il (191-3, west, He 5) kaho naanak tis gur balihaaree. Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to the Guru;
fan S23 ats Set THA NSNUENIQUIT (191-4, aSSt, He 5)
jis bhaytat gat bha-ee hamaaree. ||4]|56]|125] | meeting Him, I have been saved. ||4||56||125]|
ACSt HIS U Il (191-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
AaAfa 3t at AGSt UTT Il (191-4, west, nz 5) saaDhsang taa kee sarnee parahu. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, seek His Sanctuary.
HO 30 MUST nT UsT IA (191-5, Tet, He 5) man tan apnaa aagai Dharahu. ||1]| Place your mind and body in offering before Him. ||1]|
mitts on uleg AS set I 191-5, aGat, He 5) amrit naam peevhu mayray bhaa-ee. Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name, O my Siblings of Destiny.
finite fruits AS sufs gsTet NU TIS Il c91-5, ast, He 5)
simar simar sabh tapat bujhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the fire of desire is totally quenched. ||1]|Pause| |
3fa uifsHTg ASH Hae fees Il (191-6, wBst, He 5) taj abhimaan janam maran nivaarahu. Renounce your arrogant pride, and end the cycle of birth and death.
Uf A VA A VIS SHAA TG IlQil (191-6, ast, vs 5) har kay daas kay charan namaskaarahu. ||2|| Bow in humility to the feet of the Lord's slave. ||2||
AYA ATA Ys Hots AHS Il (191-7, west, He 5)
Saas Saas parabh maneh samaalay. Remember God in your mind, with each and every breath.
H UO Hud HWS SS III (191-7, ast, ve 5) so Dhan sanchahu jo chaalai naalay. ||3|| Gather only that wealth, which shall go with you. ||3]|
farts usufs faa HASfa ST Il (191-7, aes, He 5) tiseh paraapat jis mastak bhaag. He alone obtains it, upon whose forehead such destiny is written.
AT SSA I At BaSt ST ISUUDIIE! (191-8, aSst, vs 5)
kaho naanak taa kee charnee laag. ||4]|57||126|| Says Nanak, fall at the Feet of that Lord. ||4]|57||126]||
ast HIS U Il (191-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ha Jd ate fis urd il ci9i-8, ast, He 5) sookay haray kee-ay khin maahay. The dried branches are made green again in an instant.
nifys feafe Afs Aes WA 91-9, wet, we 5) amrit darisat sanch jeevaa-ay. ||1|| His Ambrosial Glance irrigates and revives them. ||1]||
He AHS UT TICS Il (191-9, aSat, we 5) kaatay kasat pooray gurdayv. The Perfect Divine Guru has removed my sorrow.
Hea AS aot nat AS UU FICS i (191-9, ast, v2 5) sayvak ka-o deenee apunee sayv. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He blesses His servant with His service. ||1]||Pause] |
fife wet fe3 USt HO MITAT II (191-10, aGHt, He 5) mit ga-ee chint punee man aasaa. Anxiety is removed, and the desires of the mind are fulfilled,
act efenr Afsafs TESA QI (191-10, west, He 5) karee da-i-aa satgur guntaasaa. ||2|| when the True Guru, the Treasure of Excellence, shows His Kindness. ||2]|
eu 3S AY wife AHS Il (191-10, west, He 5) dukh naathay sukh aa-ay samaa-ay. Pain is driven far away, and peace comes in its place;
de 6 udt A ats SINS ISI (191-11, aes, v2 5) dheel na paree jaa gur furmaa-ay. ||3]| there is no delay, when the Guru gives the Order. ||3]|
fees uat ud as FHS I (91-11, wet, 42 5) ichh punee pooray gur milay. Desires are fulfilled, when one meets the True Guru;
SSA SAS ASG SS NNUCHIVIM (191-11, west, He 5)
naanak tay jan sufal falay. ||4||58]|127]| O Nanak, His humble servant is fruitful and prosperous. ||4]|58]|127]|
ast HIS U Il (191-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
su ae uret ufs AMS II (191-12, west, He 5) taap ga-ay paa-ee parabh saat. The fever has departed; God has showered us with peace and tranquility.
Hise se alat ys ats All (191-12, west, ne 5) seetal bha-ay keenee parabh daat. ||1]| A cooling peace prevails; God has granted this gift. ||1]|
ys fagur 3 Se AVS Il (191-13, ast, us 5) parabh kirpaa tay bha-ay suhaylay. By God's Grace, we have become comfortable.
a i
HOH HOH & fess HS NA FICS Il (191-13, TSH, 2 5)
janam janam kay bichhuray maylay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Separated from Him for countless incarnations, we are now reunited with Him. ||1]|Pause] |
frnas fAHes Ys a STE | (91-13, 7st, v3 5) simrat simrat parabh kaa naa-o. Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God's Name,
Aas da at faafhor aS i (91-14, Bet, 2 5) Sagal rog kaa binsi-aa thaa-o. ||2|| the dwelling of all disease is destroyed. ||2||
Hofa ASte FS ofa aet il ci91-14, west, He 5) sahj subhaa-ay bolai har banee. In intuitive peace and poise, chant the Word of the Lord's Bani.
mS udd YS fAHag yrat ISI (191-14, Test, ws 5) aath pahar parabh simrahu paraanee. ||3]| Twenty-four hours a day, O mortal, meditate on God. ||3]|
SY UIE AH SfF 3 MS Il (191-15, Tea, v8 5) dookh darad jam nayrh na aavai. Pain, suffering and the Messenger of Death do not even approach that one,
AT aa A fs As We NSNUCNIVCH (191-15, TSH, He 5) kaho naanak jo har gun gaavai. ||4]|59||128]| says Nanak, who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|59]|128]|
Ast HIS U Il (191-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
38 fear 38 Axa Il (91-16, ast, Hu: 5) bhalay dinas bhalay sanjog. Auspicious is the day, and auspicious is the chance,
fas 32 uragan fearar AI (191-16, weet, He 5) jit bhaytay paarbarahm nirjog. ||1|| which brought me to the Supreme Lord God, the Unjoined, Unlimited One. ||1]||
6g aa as Je fs WE I (isi-16, west, v2 5)
oh baylaa ka-o ha-o bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to that time,
fas Ha HS AU ofa oS NA TIS I (191-17, ast, He 5) jit mayraa man japai har naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. when my mind chants the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
HES HIS AES Go wet Il civi-17, west, we 5) safal moorat safal oh gharee. Blessed is that moment, and blessed is that time,
fas dHat Gud dfs Tat iQ (191-17, west, He 5) jit rasnaa uchrai har haree. ||2|| when my tongue chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Haree. ||2]|
Hee GJ Ha AS OHAASHA Il (191-18, aSst, v2 5) safal oh maathaa sant namaskaaras. Blessed is that forehead, which bows in humility to the Saints.
VIE USS Vols Ts Hat Il (91-18, aSst, He 5)
charan puneet chaleh har maarag. ||3]| Sacred are those feet, which walk on the Lord's Path. ||3]|
AT SSA FH HS ATH Il (191-19, TSH, uz 5) kaho naanak bhalaa mayraa karam. Says Nanak, auspicious is my karma,
fas SS AT S VIS IUEONIVEN (191-19, Test, 2 5) jit bhaytay saaDhoo kay charan. ||4]|60]|129] | which has led me to touch the Feet of the Holy. ||4]|60||129] |
Yat akQ
ast HIS U Il (192-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ad a AaE TY Ho HAT Il (192-1, wSat, He 5) gur kaa sabad raakh man maahi. Keep the Word of the Guru's Shabad in your mind.
on fife fest AS fo INA (192-1, aga, He 5)
naam simar chintaa sabh jaahi. ||1]|
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all anxiety is removed. ||1]|
fag sues od nis afe I (192-1, west, He 5) bin bhagvant naahee an ko-ay. Without the Lord God, there is no one else at all.
Hd amd Sat AE NU TIS Il (192-2, ast, ve 5) maarai raakhai ayko so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone preserves and destroys. ||1]||Pause| |
ad a vse foe Cfs ofa ii (192-2, aSst, v2 5)
gur kay charan ridai ur Dhaar.
Enshrine the Guru's Feet in your heart.
mate Aad AfY Ssefa uts iQ (192-2, Test, v2 5)
agan saagar jap utreh paar. ||2|| Meditate on Him and cross over the ocean of fire. ||2]|
ad Hats fas ate forge il (192-3, west, He 5) gur moorat si-o laa-ay Dhi-aan. Focus your meditation on the Guru's Sublime Form.
Sta So urefa HG SII (192-3, ast, ve 5) eehaa oohaa paavahi maan. ||3]| Here and hereafter, you shall be honored. ||3] |
Hare fsnrta aa Adet wrfeEnr i (192-3, ast, ns 5) Sagal ti-aag gur sarnee aa-i-aa. Renouncing everything, I have come to the Guru's Sanctuary.
fire nieA sea AY ufemr siEUIBOll (192-4, aCHt, He 5) mitay andaysay naanak sukh paa-i-aa. ||4||61]|130]| My anxieties are over - O Nanak, I have found peace. ||4||61]|130]|
TCSt HIS U Il (192-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fan faHes ey AS ATE I (192-5, Test, He 5) jis simrat dookh sabh jaa-ay. Remembering Him in meditation, all pains are gone.
oH 330 SA Ufo mrfE NAM (192-5, TSH, He 5) naam ratan vasai man aa-ay. ||1]|| The jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell in the mind. ||1]|
afu ue Hd aifee at aret i (192-5, ast, v3 5) jap man mayray govind kee banee. O my mind, chant the Bani, the Hymns of the Lord of the Universe.
AY AS TH JAo Sarat Al TIS il (192-6, ast, we 5) saaDhoo jan raam rasan vakhaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Holy People chant the Lord's Name with their tongues. ||1]|Pause| |
fean fag oat ert ate Il (192-6, west, H8 5) ikas bin naahee doojaa ko-ay. Without the One Lord, there is no other at all.
wv at fenfe Ae AY SE IQI (192-6, aa, He 5) jaa kee darisat sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||2]| By His Glance of Grace, eternal peace is obtained. ||2]|
AAG Hts Aa ats Sa Il (192-7, aSst, He 5) Saajan meet sakhaa kar ayk. Make the One Lord your friend, intimate and companion.
dfs ots wreigd HO Hf BY MSI (192-7, aSst, vs 5) har har akhar man meh laykh. ||3]| Write in your mind the Word of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
afe stunt Haas AMM Il (192-7, 7est, He 5) rav rahi-aa sarbat su-aamee. The Lord Master is totally pervading everywhere.
TE We Soa visa seawall (192-8, ast, vz 5) gun gaavai naanak antarjaamee. ||4]|62]|131]|| Nanak sings the Praises of the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||4||62]|131]|
ast HIS U Il (192-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
3 ufo afeG As HATS Il (192-8, aGst, He 5) bhai meh rachi-o sabh sansaaraa. The whole world is engrossed in fear.
fan 38 odt fAA OH nIOTST IAI (192-9, west, H2 5) tis bha-o naahee jis naam aDhaaraa. ||1]| Those who have the Naam, the Name of the Lord, as their Support, feel no fear. ||1]|
38 5 fenmt Sat Age Il (192-9, aes, He 5) bha-o na vi-aapai tayree sarnaa. Fear does not affect those who take to Your Sanctuary.
A 30 oe ASt ageST AU TIS Il (192-9, west, He 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so-ee karnaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. You do whatever You please. ||1||Pause| |
Hat dau fo nite AST Il (192-10, aGst, He 5) sog harakh meh aavan jaanaa. In pleasure and in pain, the world is coming and going in reincarnation.
ffs ry urfemr A Us sTEr III (192-10, west, He 5) tin sukh paa-i-aa jo parabh bhaanaa. ||2|| Those who are pleasing to God, find peace. ||2||
wate Aad Hot femme ufer i (192-10, aSHt, He 5) agan saagar mahaa vi-aapai maa-i-aa. Maya pervades the awesome ocean of fire.
A Also fae Afsag ufenr Sil (92-11, ast, He 5) say seetal jin satgur paa-i-aa. ||3]| Those who have found the True Guru are calm and cool. ||3]|
ofa afe ys MSI | (192-11, ast, ue 5) raakh lay-ay parabh raakhanhaaraa. Please preserve me, O God, O Great Preserver!
aT ose fom HS fesrar SiESNIASil (192-12, Test, He 5)
kaho naanak ki-aa jant vichaaraa. ||4||63]|132]|| Says Nanak, what a helpless creature I am! ||4||63]|132]|
ast HIS U Il (192-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hot faut 3 mbt |r it (192-12, west, ve 5) tumree kirpaa tay japee-ai naa-o. By Your Grace, I chant Your Name.
SHot faur 3 ead aS All (192-13, ast, Hz 5) tumree kirpaa tay dargeh thaa-o. ||1]| By Your Grace, I obtain a seat in Your Court. ||1]|
33 fag uraqgan odt afF I (192-13, a@Ht, He 5) tujh bin paarbarahm nahee ko-ay. Without You, O Supreme Lord God, there is no one.
suet feu 3 Het AY OE NA TIE Il 192-13, ast, v2 5) tumree kirpaa tay sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Your Grace, everlasting peace is obtained. ||1|]Pause| |
3H His FA SE TY & Wa Il (192-14, wea, ws 5) tum man vasay ta-o dookh na laagai. If You abide in the mind, we do not suffer in sorrow.
suet faut 3 gH 3B Ta MN (192-14, ast, v8 5) tumree kirpaa tay bharam bha-o bhaagai. ||2|| By Your Grace, doubt and fear run away. ||2||
USAIN nUsUT AMMT Il (192-14, west, Hs 5) paarbarahm aprampar su-aamee. O Supreme Lord God, Infinite Lord and Master,
Aas wet X visa Ht ISB (192-15, aSst, vs 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. ||3]| You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts. ||3]|
ase naeth nus Afsad uA Il (192-15, ast, He 5) kara-o ardaas apnay satgur paas. I offer this prayer to the True Guru:
Soa OH fHS AG TH IgiésiIAssil (192-15, ast, He 5)
naanak naam milai sach raas. ||4||64||133]| O Nanak, may I be blessed with the treasure of the True Name. ||4||64]|133] |
ast HIS U Il (192-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
as fast AA Fas Sa II (192-16, ast, ne 5) kan binaa jaisay thothar tukhaa. As the husk is empty without the grain,
on fags Ad A HAT IA (192-16, ast, v2 5) naam bihoon soonay say mukhaa. ||1]| so is the mouth empty without the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
dfs af oH Aug fos yrat Il (192-17, Eat, us 5) har har naam japahu nit paraanee. O mortal, chant continually the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
on fage faa ea faarat nan sas il (192-17, ast, v2 5)
naam bihoon Dharig dayh bigaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Without the Naam, cursed is the body, which shall be taken back by Death. ||1]|Pause| |
om fear ardt Hf Sra Il (192-18, ast, He 5) naam binaa naahee mukh bhaag. Without the Naam, no one's face shows good fortune.
38S fags AT ATT lM (192-18, aBst, we 5) bharat bihoon kahaa sohaag. ||2| | Without the Husband, where is the marriage? ||2||
omy farrfa oat nie AMMfe Il (192-18, west, v2 5) naam bisaar lagai an su-aa-ay. Forgetting the Naam, and attached to other tastes,
ST ot utr UA aE BI (192-19, west, Hs 5)
taa kee aas na poojai kaa-ay. ||3]| no desires are fulfilled. ||3]|
ate fasur ys nrust afS i (192-19, ast, ws 5) kar kirpaa parabh apnee daat. O God, grant Your Grace, and give me this gift.
Soa OTH AU fea TH IsiEeUISell (192-19, ast, He 5)
naanak naam japai din raat. ||4|]65||134]| Please, let Nanak chant Your Name, day and night. ||4||65]|134||
Yat aks
ast HIS U Il (193-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
3 AHeg Sd Ha AMT I (193-1, ast, we 5) too” samrath too‘hai mayraa su-aamee. You are All-powerful, You are my Lord and Master.
Ag fag 3H 3 SF visarMtt All (193-1, west, we 5) sabh kichh tum tay too” antarjaamee. ||1]| Everything comes from You; You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||1]|
USAIN UTS AS GE Il (193-2, ast, we 5) paarbarahm pooran jan ot. The Perfect Supreme Lord God is the Support of His humble servant.
3dt nafs Gusts Ae afe Nall TIC Il 193-2, aSst, v2 5) tayree saran uDhrahi jan kot. ||1|| rahaa-o. Millions are saved in Your Sanctuary. ||1||Pause| |
AS Aba 33 As 3g Il (193-2, west, He 5) jaytay jee-a taytay sabh tayray. As many creatures as there are - they are all Yours.
Suet four S AA UST III (193-3, ast, we 5) tumree kirpaa tay sookh ghanayray. ||2|| By Your Grace, all sorts of comforts are obtained. ||2||
A fag eos AS SI SST II (193-3, ast, He 5) jo kichh vartai sabh tayraa bhaanaa. Whatever happens, is all according to Your Will.
JAH FS A Afs AHS ISI (193-3, Tea, 8 5) hukam boojhai so sach samaanaa. ||3]|
One who understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, is absorbed in the True Lord. ||3]|
afs fasur da ys Be Il (193-4, wat, Hs 5) kar kirpaa deejai parabh daan. Please grant Your Grace, God, and bestow this gift
Soa fad oH fours ISieENISUll (193-4, ast, He 5) naanak simrai naam niDhaan. ||4]|66]|135]| upon Nanak, that he may meditate on the treasure of the Naam. ||4||66]|135]|
ast HIS U Il (193-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
a at way usb esarait Il (193-5, west, Hz 5) taa kaa daras paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee. By great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is obtained,
A at IH OTH fHs Bait WAU (193-5, Test, He 5)
jaa kee raam naam liv laagee. ||1]| by those who are lovingly absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1]|
a a ofa efimr Ho Het Il (193-5, a@st, He 5) jaa kai har vasi-aa man maahee. Those whose minds are filled with the Lord,
a a eu Aue st od Ul ToS Il 193-6, west, He 5) taa ka-o dukh supnai bhee naahee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. do not suffer pain, even in dreams. ||1||Pause||
Hea fours ae AG Hf Il (193-6, a7eHt, He 5) sarab niDhaan raakhay jan maahi. All treasures have been placed within the minds of His humble servants.
a a Afar faster eu wAfs ii (193-6, aGst, He 5) taa kai sang kilvikh dukh jaahi. ||2]| In their company, sinful mistakes and sorrows are taken away. ||2||
Ho at HfoHt aat o ATE I (193-7, ast, He 5)
jan kee mahimaa kathee na jaa-ay. The Glories of the Lord's humble servants cannot be described.
USAIN AS Shon AHTE ISI (193-7, Test, He 5) paarbarahm jan rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||3]| The servants of the Supreme Lord God remain absorbed in Him. ||3]|
afs fasur ys fao@ Hate Il (193-7, ast, ne 5) kar kirpaa parabh bin-o suneejai. Grant Your Grace, God, and hear my prayer:
aA at ufs atea aS SA ISIESNIZEN (193-8, Tes, 8 5)
daas kee Dhoor naanak ka-o deejai. ||4||67||136]| please bless Nanak with the dust of the feet of Your slave. ||4||67||136] |
ast HIS U Il (193-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs frnags Sat ATS sorte i (193-9, ast, He 5) har simrat tayree jaa-ay balaa-ay. Remembering the Lord in meditation, your misfortune shall be taken away,
Aaa afemire ZA fs orf= il (193-9, ast, ne 5) sarab kali-aan vasai man aa-ay. ||1|| and all joy shall come to abide in your mind. ||1]|
AX AS
3H HO HI Sa SH Il (193-9, 7st, Hs 5) bhaj man mayray ayko naam. Meditate, O my mind, on the One Name.
Hh 33 Xt nS ATH NA TIT Il (193-10, aEst, v2 5) jee-a tayray kai aavai kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. It alone shall be of use to your soul. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs fear Te WE mss Il (193-10, ast, v2 5) rain dinas gun gaa-o anantaa. Night and day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord,
Ts Us a fSsHs HI IM (193-10, west, He 5) gur pooray kaa nirmal manntaa. ||2|| through the Pure Mantra of the Perfect Guru. ||2]|
efs Gure Sa Sa TY Il (193-11, aSst, v2 5) chhod upaav ayk tayk raakh. Give up other efforts, and place your faith in the Support of the One Lord.
Hd UdTIG nifys JA TY WRI (193-11, Test, v2 5) mahaa padaarath amrit ras chaakh. ||3]| Taste the Ambrosial Essence of this, the greatest treasure. ||3] |
fun ATI Set AS 3d Il (193-11, west, He 5) bikham saagar tay-ee jan taray. They alone cross over the treacherous world-ocean,
SSA A AS Sel Ad NWECUISIIN (193-12, 7st, Hz 5)
naanak jaa ka-o nadar karay. ||4||68]|137]| O Nanak, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace. ||4||68]|137] |
ast HIS U Il (193-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fase JIS AHS YS US Il (193-12, aSat, ue 5) hirdai charan kamal parabh Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Lotus Feet of God within my heart.
ud Afsas fife forsts nll (193-13, ast, He 5) pooray satgur mil nistaaray. ||1]| Meeting the Perfect True Guru, I am emancipated. ||1]|
diet TE Weg AS set Il (193-13, ast, v2 5) govind gun gaavhu mayray bhaa-ee. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, O my Siblings of Destiny.
ffs rg ofs oy fomret 19 TIS il (193-13, ast, He 5)
mil saaDhoo har naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Joining the Holy Saints, meditate on the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause]|
wos ta Jet us|Ts Il (193-14, west, He 5) dulabh dayh ho-ee parvaan. This human body, so difficult to obtain, is redeemed
Afsad 3 ufemt oH SATS I2QII (193-14, aSsat, 8 5) satgur tay paa-i-aa naam neesaan. ||2]| when one receives the banner of the Naam from the True Guru. ||2]|
fe fsa use ue ufemr it (193-14, ast, v2 5) har simrat pooran pad paa-i-aa. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the state of perfection is attained.
Honfa Ss SdH fetfemr SII (193-15, Test, He 5) saaDhsang bhai bharam mitaa-i-aa. ||3]|| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, fear and doubt depart. ||3]|
As a3 eu 33 sont ANTE Il (193-15, west, He 5) jat kat daykh-a-u tat rahi-aa samaa-ay. Wherever I look, there I see the Lord pervading.
Soa VA dla at APIS ISUECNISCI (193-16, TST, He 5)
naanak daas har kee sarnaa-ay. ||4||69||138] | Slave Nanak has entered the Lord's Sanctuary. ||4||69||138] |
ast HIS U Il (193-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ad At A PIAS AS als AG Il (193-16, aSat, v2 5) gur jee kay darsan ka-o bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
afu afu Ate Afsag are Ail (193-17, aSst, v2 5) jap jap jeevaa satgur naa-o. ||1|| Chanting and meditating on the Name of the True Guru, I live. ||1]|
USAIN UTS UATSS Il (193-17, TSSt, He 5) paarbarahm pooran gurdayv. O Supreme Lord God, O Perfect Divine Guru,
ate fasur oa Sat AS AU TIS Il (193-17, west, He 5) kar kirpaa laaga-o tayree sayv. ||1]|| rahaa-o. show mercy to me, and commit me to Your service. ||1]|Pause| |
Jdo AHS fase Sa uct Il (193-18, aGst, He 5) charan kamal hirdai ur Dhaaree. I enshrine His Lotus Feet within my heart.
Hd 36 US AT UTS MUS IQ! (193-18, ast, ws 5) man tan Dhan gur paraan aDhaaree. ||2|| I offer my mind, body and wealth to the Guru, the Support of the breath of life. ||2||
HeG HOH J] UdeTS Ill (193-18, ast, He 5) safal janam hovai parvaan. My life is prosperous, fruitful and approved;
ag uaqdH foate afs AS SI (193-19, ast, 2 5) gur paarbarahm nikat kar jaan. ||3]|| I know that the Guru, the Supreme Lord God, is near me. |[3]|
AS Ufs uh eserait | (193-19, west, ws 5) sant Dhoor paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee. By great good fortune, I have obtained the dust of the feet of the Saints.
SOA Wd ses Tia HE fee Heit iSiOonISeil (193-19, aSst, He 5)
naanak gur bhaytat har si-o liv laagee. ||4||70||139]| O Nanak, meeting the Guru, I have fallen in love with the Lord. ||4]|70||139]|
Yar akg
ACSt HIS U Il (194-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ad PIAIH feure FT Il (194-1, ast, vz 5) karai duhkaram dikhaavai hor. They do their evil deeds, and pretend otherwise;
OH at Saad Fa FT AU (194-2, wet, He 5) raam kee dargeh baaDhaa chor. ||1]|| but in the Court of the Lord, they shall be bound and gagged like thieves. ||1||
OH SH ASt THAT Il (194-2, ast, He 5) raam ramai so-ee raamaanaa. Those who remember the Lord belong to the Lord.
ate af Hdbufes Sax ANTS IA TIS Il (194-2, ast, He 5) jal thal mahee-al ayk samaanaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The One Lord is contained in the water, the land and the sky. ||1]|Pause| |
nists faa ufy nifigs AES I 94-3, ast, ne 5)
antar bikh mukh amrit sunaavai.
Their inner beings are filled with poison, and yet with their mouths, they preach words of Ambrosial Nectar.
AH ufs aor s|T urs IQ (194-3, ast, He 5) jam pur baaDhaa chotaa khaavai. ||2]| Bound and gagged in the City of Death, they are punished and beaten. ||2| |
wifsa use ufo ane fears Il (194-3, ast, He 5) anik parh-day meh kamaavai vikaar. Hiding behind many screens, they commit acts of corruption,
fas ufs yare dfo HATS ISI (194-4, aGat, He 5) khin meh pargat hohi sansaar. ||3]| but in an instant, they are revealed to all the world. ||3]|
mate wAfs of ofA ast Il (194-4, ast, v2 5)
antar saach naam ras raataa.
Those whose inner beings are true, who are attuned to the ambrosial essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord
aa FSH faxsurs fast ISIOAUIABOll (194-4, Test, He 5)
naanak tis kirpaal biDhaataa. ||4||71||140]|| - O Nanak, the Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is merciful to them. ||4]|71||140]|
TCS HIS U Il (194-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
oH da ae sia a ATE Il (194-5, west, ne 5) raam rang kaday utar na jaa-ay. The Lord's Love shall never leave or depart.
ag us fra efe gee ail (194-5, ast, ve 5) gur pooraa jis day-ay bujhaa-ay. ||1|| They alone understand, unto whom the Perfect Guru gives it. ||1]|
dfs df Tat A HG ATS Il (194-6, west, He 5) har rang raataa so man saachaa. One whose mind is attuned to the Lord's Love is true.
WS Ja uss ysy feast Ul FTES il (194-6, ast, ws 5) laal rang pooran purakh biDhaataa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Love of the Beloved, the Architect of Destiny, is perfect. ||1]||Pause||
Had Afa sfh ae ate il 194-7, west, H2 5) santeh sang bais gun gaa-ay. Sitting in the Society of the Saints, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Tat dar o Cad WE MQM (194-7, ast, v2 5) taa kaa rang na utrai jaa-ay. ||2|| The color of His Love shall never fade away. ||2]|
fag dfs fangs AY odt Ue II (194-7, aBst, He 5) bin har simran sukh nahee paa-i-aa. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, peace is not found.
me dal dla As HEM Sil (194-8, ast, He 5) aan rang feekay sabh maa-i-aa. ||3] | All the other loves and tastes of Maya are bland and insipid. ||3]|
dfs sa A se feos il (194-8, west, ve 5) gur rangay say bha-ay nihaal. Those who are imbued with love by the Guru become happy.
AT BSA Td se J PfEnrs IgiOViIwAll (194-8, ast, v2 5) kaho naanak gur bha-ay hai da-i-aal. ||4||72||141]| Says Nanak, the Guru has become merciful to them. ||4]|72||141||
TCS HIS U Il (194-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
figs Aymt faafee aA Il (194-9, ast, ve 5) simrat su-aamee kilvikh naasay. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord Master, sinful mistakes are erased,
HY AOA MTSE (SSA AI (194-9, Test, He 5) sookh sahj aanand nivaasay. ||1|| and one comes to abide in peace, celestial joy and bliss. ||1]|
TH Ao AG IH SAAT Il (194-10, aGHt, He 5) raam janaa ka-o raam bharosaa. The Lord's humble servants place their faith in the Lord.
oH Hus AS fifes visa all TITS Il (194-10, west, v2 5) naam japat sabh miti-o andaysaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all anxieties are dispelled. ||1]|Pause]|
Hunfa xe 3B 5 SIH Il (194-10, aSHt, He 5)
saaDhsang kachh bha-o na bharaatee. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, there is no fear or doubt.
ae dues wets fes ast ii 194-11, ast, v2 5) gun gopaal gaa-ee-ah din raatee. ||2]| The Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung there, day and night. ||2]|
afs fasur ys due gz Il (194-11, Gat, v8 5) kar kirpaa parabh banDhan chhot. Granting His Grace, God has released me from bondage.
VIE GHG at Atat G| Sil (194-11, aSst, ue 5)
charan kamal kee deenee ot. ||3]| He has given me the Support of His Lotus Feet. ||3]|
aT sed Hfs set uastfs i fogHs AA ules AS SHS ISIOSIISII (194-12, west, He 5) kaho naanak man bha-ee parteet. nirmal jas peeveh jan neet. ||4]|73||142||
Says Nanak, faith comes into the mind of His servant, who continually drinks in the Immaculate Praises of the Lord. ||4]|73]|142||
TCSt HIS U Il (194-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa saat A AT HS Ba Il (194-13, 7SHt, ue 5) har charnee jaa kaa man laagaa. Those who keep their minds attached to the Lord's Feet
oe Use FH TOT SAT MA (194-13, ast, He 5) dookh darad bharam taa kaa bhaagaa. ||1|| - pain, suffering and doubt run away from them. ||1]|
fs us x SUS YS Il (194-13, ast, we 5) har Dhan ko vaapaaree pooraa. Those who deal in the Lord's wealth are perfect.
fants fees AAG AS AU TIS il (194-14, ast, ns 5) jisahi nivaajay so jan sooraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Those who are honored by the Lord are the true spiritual heroes. ||1||Pause]|
Ww as se furs TAT Il (194-14, wBat, He 5) jaa ka-o bha-ay kirpaal gusaa-ee. Those humble beings, unto whom the Lord of the Universe shows mercy,
AAS Sa TT At UST MI (194-14, aSst, ue 5) say jan laagay gur kee paa-ee. ||2]| fall at the Guru's Feet. ||2]|
AY AoA ANS mTSer Il (194-15, Test, He 5) sookh sahj saa“t aanandaa. They are blessed with peace, celestial bliss, tranquility and ecstasy;
afu afu AS USHTSET ISI (194-15, Test, He 5) jap jap jeevay parmaanandaa. ||3]| chanting and meditating, they live in supreme bliss. ||3]|
oH ofA ATG Afar wet Il (194-15, west, He 5) naam raas saaDh sang khaatee. In the Saadh Sangat, I have earned the wealth of the Naam.
ag aad ufs nue arct SiOsuasail (194-16, Test, Hs 5)
kaho naanak parabh apdaa kaatee. ||4||74||143]| Says Nanak, God has relieved my pain. ||4||74]||143]|
ast HIS U Il (194-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs faunas Afs fuefo ASA II (194-16, a@zt, He 5) har simrat sabh miteh kalays. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, all suffering is eradicated.
TIE GHG HS Hfy USA MAUI (194-17, ast, ws 5) charan kamal man meh parvays. ||1|| The Lord's Lotus Feet are enshrined within my mind. ||1]|
BudI TH OH Be Aa Il (194-17, aSst, He 5) uchrahu raam naam lakh baaree. Chant the Lord's Name, hundreds of thousands of times, O my dear,
nifys oA uted ys fimrst na ga il (194-17, ast, ve 5) amrit ras peevhu parabh pi-aaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. and drink deeply of the Ambrosial Essence of God. ||1]||Pause||
HY AH FA HoT MSeT Il (194-18, ast, Hs 5) sookh sahj ras mahaa anandaa. Peace, celestial bliss, pleasures and the greatest ecstasy are obtained;
afu fu Ate UsHTSeT NI (194-18, TSH, 18 5) jap jap jeevay parmaanandaa. ||2|| chanting and meditating, you shall live in supreme bliss. ||2||
aH AU SF He Be Il (194-18, ast, v2 5) kaam kroDh lobh mad kho-ay. Sexual desire, anger, greed and ego are eradicated;
AG ot Afar fafa AS TS SI (194-19, aGst, He 5) saaDh kai sang kilbikh sabh Dho-ay. ||3]| in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all sinful mistakes are washed away.
[131] ate fasur ys dts afemirar i (194-19, ast, us 5)
kar kirpaa parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Grant Your Grace, O God, O Merciful to the meek.
Sea VA AT FSH ISUOUNISSIl (194-19, aSst, He 5)
naanak deejai saaDh ravaalaa. ||4]|75||144| | Please bless Nanak with the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4]|75||144]|
Yar acu
ast HIS U Il (195-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fan ot Shor Us ue | (195-1, west, He 5) jis kaa dee-aa painai khaa-ay. They wear and eat the gifts from the Lord;
fan fa@ nro fas ae wf il c195-1, west, He 5) tis si-o aalas ki-o banai maa-ay. ||1|| how can laziness help them, O mother? ||1]|
uAH farts nite af orate il (195-2, west, He 5)
khasam bisaar aan kamm laageh. Forgetting her Husband Lord, and attaching herself to other affairs,
ast ses 336 fSurats nai FaS Il (195-2, ast, ve 5)
ka-udee badlay ratan ti-aageh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
the soul-bride throws away the precious jewel in exchange for a mere shell. ||1]|Pause] |
ys fSurfa wars nis BSI Il 195-3, ast, we 5) parabhoo ti-aag laagat an lobhaa. Forsaking God, she is attached to other desires.
af ASH AGS AT AST Il (195-3, ast, ue 5) daas salaam karat kat sobhaa. ||2|| But who has gained honor by saluting the slave? ||2||
wifys TA uefa ue UTS Il (195-3, weet, Hs 5) amrit ras khaaveh khaan paan. They consume food and drink, delicious and sublime as ambrosial nectar.
fafs ae fants o wats AMIS ISI (195-4, a@Ht, He 5) jin dee-ay tiseh na jaaneh su-aan. ||3]| But the dog does not know the One who has bestowed these. ||3] |
AT SSX TH BE Tani Il (195-4, ast, ue 5) kaho naanak ham loon haraamee. Says Nanak, I have been unfaithful to my own nature.
aufh SI ys nisaAMT IsIDENIUIl 95-4, ast, He 5)
bakhas layho parabh antarjaamee. ||4||76||145]| Please forgive me, O God, O Searcher of hearts. ||4]|76]|145]|
ast HIS U Il (195-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
YS A VIS HO Ha fomirg Il (195-5, Test, ve 5) parabh kay charan man maahi Dhi-aan. I meditate on the Feet of God within my mind.
Hae Stde HAS fEASS IIA (195-5, aBst, He 5) Sagal tirath majan isnaan. ||1|| This is my cleansing bath at all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1]|
ofa fee sfe fanaa AS ST Il 195-6, west, He 5) har din har simran mayray bhaa-ee. Meditate in remembrance on the Lord every day, O my Siblings of Destiny.
afe AH at He ofs AST NAN TIS Il (195-6, ast, v2 5) kot janam kee mal leh jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Thus, the filth of millions of incarnations shall be taken away. ||1||Pause| |
ofa at xa foe Hts SASH I (195-7, ast, He 5) har kee kathaa rid maahi basaa-ee. Enshrine the Lord's Sermon within your heart,
HO Fes AS SH UTet il 95-7, ast, ue 5) man baa'chhat saglay fal paa-ee. | |2|| and you shall obtain all the desires of your mind. ||2]|
Ale HIS AGH UST Il (195-7, Test, He 5) jeevan maran janam parvaan. Redeemed is the life, death and birth of those,
Wa fee ZA SASS ISI (195-8, aGst, Hs 5) jaa kai ridai vasai bhagvaan. ||3]| within whose hearts the Lord God abides. ||3]||
AT soa ASt Ao UT Il (195-8, 7st, He 5) kaho naanak say-ee jan pooray. Says Nanak, those humble beings are perfect,
fAat usTufs AT OS NIDINIEN (195-8, aBst, H2 5) jinaa paraapat saaDhoo Dhooray. ||4]|77||146]| who are blessed with the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4]|77]|146]|
ast HIS U Il (195-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
rer Uset Hats uTE Il (195-9, west, ws 5) khaadaa paindaa mookar paa-ay. They eat and wear what they are given, but still, they deny the Lord.
fSH 6 Hats TS TaHSTES UA (195-9, Test, He 5) tis no joheh doot Dharamraa-ay. ||1]|| The messengers of the Righteous Judge of Dharma shall hunt them down. ||1]||
faq fA@ sre fafe Ate fits ctor I (195-9, a@Ht, He 5) tis si-o baymukh jin jee-o pind deenaa. They are unfaithful to the One, who has given them body and soul.
ate HOH SeHfs AT AAT WAU TIS Il (195-10, Tes, ws 5) kot janam bharmeh baho joonaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Through millions of incarnations, for so many lifetimes, they wander lost. ||1]|Pause] |
Aras at Mat F SHS i (195-10, ast, v3 5) saakat kee aisee hai reet. Such is the lifestyle of the faithless cynics;
A fas ad Aare feuds 21 (195-10, west, He 5) jo kichh karai sagal bipreet. ||2|| everything they do is evil. ||2]|
me ure fafs Ho Sq Wfemr | Het og Hog farfeur Si (95-11, aGst, Hs 5) jee-o paraan jin man tan Dhaari-aa. so-ee thaakur manhu bisaari-aa. ||3]|
Within their minds, they have forgotten that Lord and Master, who created the soul, breath of life, mind and body. ||3]|
ag faars fed FI Aa Il (195-12, ast, vs 5)
baDhay bikaar likhay baho kaagar.
Their wickedness and corruption have increased - they are recorded in volumes of books.
aoa Sug faut AY Aree ISI (195-12, aes, vs 5) naanak uDhar kirpaa sukh saagar. ||4|| O Nanak, they are saved only by the Mercy of God, the Ocean of peace. ||4| |
UTIAIH Sct APSE Il 195-12, west, ve 5) paarbarahm tayree sarnaa-ay. O Supreme Lord God, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
au ofe 3d ots ofS IU TIS TAT MOTUS (195-13, TCs, Hz 5) banDhan kaat tarai har naa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||78||147]||
Break my bonds, and carry me across, with the Lord's Name. ||1]||Second Pause| | 78] |147]|
ast HIS U Il (195-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
MUS BF A ate HIS Il (195-13, ast, He 5) apnay lobh ka-o keeno meet. For their own advantage, they make God their friend.
Aas Hose Hats us AS NU (195-14, aes, He 5) sagal manorath mukat pad deet. ||1|| He fulfills all their desires, and blesses them with the state of liberation. ||1]|
MAT HIS AdT AS aE i (195-14, aBet, 2 5) aisaa meet karahu sabh ko-ay. Everyone should make Him such a friend.
vw 3 fase afe o of Na doe Il 95-14, west, He 5) jaa tay birthaa ko-ay na ho-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. No one goes away empty-handed from Him. ||1]|Pause] |
nus Aorfe fee & ofan it (195-15, ast, ue 5) apunai Su-aa-ay ridai lai Dhaari-aa. For their own purposes, they enshrine the Lord in the heart;
eu Use sa Aare faerfant QM (195-15, Bat, we 5) dookh darad rog sagal bidaari-aa. ||2]| all pain, suffering and disease are taken away. ||2]|
dHoT atdt Fos TH Il 195-16, Test, He 5) rasnaa geeDhee bolat raam. Their tongues learn the habit of chanting the Lord's Name,
YIS TS AS AH Sli (195-16, ast, we 5) pooran ho-ay saglay kaam. ||3]|| and all their works are brought to perfection. ||3]|
MfSx IST BSA Asda Il (195-16, ast, ve 5) anik baar naanak balihaaraa. So many times, Nanak is a sacrifice to Him;
HeG VdAS Afse INS WSUDENIVCI (195-16, aSST, He 5)
safal darsan gobind hamaaraa. ||4||79]||148]| fruitful is the Blessed Vision, the Darshan, of my Lord of the Universe. ||4||79]|148]|
ast HIS U Il (195-17)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
afe faus fod firs uefa i (195-17, ast, v2 5) kot bighan hiray khin maahi. Millions of obstacles are removed in an instant,
dfs ofs aa AUHfa Hots UI (195-18, ae, He 5)
har har kathaa saaDhsang sunaahi. ||1||
for those who listen to the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
ules OH FA ifs TE AA II 195-18, TCs, He 5) peevat raam ras amrit gun jaas. They drink in the sublime essence of the Lord's Name, the Ambrosial Elixir.
afu fs sae fet ufo SH NAN TIS I (195-18, aSst, 8 5) jap har charan mitee khuDh taas. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Lord's Feet, hunger is taken away. ||1]||Pause] |
Hea afemre AY AdH fears il (195-19, a@st, He 5) sarab kali-aan sukh sahj niDhaan. The treasure of all happiness, celestial peace and poise,
aw a foe enfs saree IQ (195-19, west, He 5) jaa kai ridai vaseh bhagvaan. ||2|| are obtained by those, whose hearts are filled with the Lord God. ||2]|
Yat ate
mi@ug Hz 33 Afs ST Il (196-1, west, Hs 5) a-ukhaDh mantar tant sabh chhaar. All medicines and remedies, mantras and tantras are nothing more than ashes.
ade fee ufo org Sil (196-1, ae, He 5) karnaihaar riday meh Dhaar. ||3]| Enshrine the Creator Lord within your heart. ||3]|
3fa Afs SdH STAG UTS_IH Il (196-1, ast, v2 5) taj sabh bharam bhaji-o paarbarahm. Renounce all your doubts, and vibrate upon the Supreme Lord God.
AT SAA USS fET UGH ISICONISE! (196-2, aSH, v8 5)
kaho naanak atal ih Dharam. ||4||80||149]| Says Nanak, this path of Dharma is eternal and unchanging. ||4||80]|149]|
ast HIS U Il (196-2)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ate fasur SS aa ASt Il (196-2, ast, He 5) kar kirpaa bhaytay gur so-ee. The Lord bestowed His Mercy, and led me to meet the Guru.
faz afs dao famed set 19 196-3, wet, He 5) tit bal rog na bi-aapai ko-ee. ||1]]| By His power, no disease afflicts me. ||1]|
TH SHE 3de F ATM Il (196-3, aCat, He 5) raam raman taran bhai saagar. Remembering the Lord, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
AGE A Sts AH AAT UA TIC Il (196-3, TSS, He 5)
saran soor faaray jam kaagar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Sanctuary of the spiritual warrior, the account books of the Messenger of Death are torn up. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsafs Hz AS afs oH Ii 96-4, ast, we 5) satgur mantar dee-o har naam. The True Guru has given me the Mantra of the Lord's Name.
fed mA UTS FS AH III (196-4, TSS, He 5) ih aasar pooran bha-ay kaam. ||2|| By this Support, my affairs have been resolved. ||2]|
mu 3u HAH Ut Sfeuret i ae fase ofa se ATT ISI (196-4, Test, we 5)
jap tap sanjam pooree vadi-aa-ee. gur kirpaal har bha-ay sahaa-ee. ||3]|
Meditation, self-discipline, self-control and perfect greatness were obtained when the Merciful Lord, the Guru, became my Help and Support. ||3]|
HS HT we Ala SdH Il (196-5, ast, He 5) maan moh kho-ay gur bharam. The Guru has dispelled pride, emotional attachment and superstition.
UY SSX UAT USAIH ISUCAUIAUOll (196-5, Tat, He 5)
paykh naanak pasray paarbarahm. ||4||81||150]|| Nanak sees the Supreme Lord God pervading everywhere. ||4||81]|150]|
aTSt HIS U Ill (196-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fae aH 3 niger act Il (196-6, ast, He 5) bikhai raaj tay anDhulaa bhaaree. The blind beggar is better off than the vicious king.
ofa oat TH on fasrdt All (196-6, aest, v2 5) dukh laagai raam naam chitaaree. ||1]| Overcome by pain, the blind man invokes the Lord's Name. ||1]|
3d TA AS Sat Ssnret Il (196-7, 7eHt, He 5) tayray daas ka-o tuhee vadi-aa-ee. You are the glorious greatness of Your slave.
fen Hare Sof B AST NU TIS Il 196-7, Test, He 5) maa-i-aa magan narak lai jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The intoxication of Maya leads the others to hell. ||1]|Pause] |
da farans fears ar il (196-8, west, He 5) rog girsat chitaaray naa-o. Gripped by disease, they invoke the Name.
fay HTS at SBT S SE IQ (196-8, TSH, Hz 5) bikh maatay kaa tha-ur na thaa-o. ||2|| But those who are intoxicated with vice shall find no home, no place of rest. ||2]|
Jdo GHG fAS wait uifS i 96-8, ast, us 5) charan kamal si-o laagee pareet. One who is in love with the Lord's Lotus Feet,
MTS Hat Sdt mets HS USI (196-9, west, Hz 5) aan sukhaa nahee aavahi cheet. ||3]|| does not think of any other comforts. ||3]|
Het et fAHee ys AMT I (196-9, west, He 5) sadaa sadaa simra-o parabh su-aamee. Forever and ever, meditate on God, your Lord and Master.
fis soa dfs niserMit IsNcINwAll (196-9, Test, He 5)
mil naanak har antarjaamee. ||4]|82||151]| O Nanak, meet with the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. [|4]|82]]151]|
ast HIS U Il (196-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
WTS Udd Halt Fees Il (196-10, TSHt, Hz 5) aath pahar sangee batvaaray. Twenty-four hours a day, the highway robbers are my companions.
ate fasur yfs ee feed IAI (196-10, 7eHt, 2 5) kar kirpaa parabh la-ay nivaaray. ||1]|| Granting His Grace, God has driven them away. ||1||
MAT Ufs TA THT AS AE i (196-11, ast, ne 5) aisaa har ras ramhu sabh ko-ay. Everyone should dwell on the Sweet Name of such a Lord.
Ava ae uss ys AE AU TTS il (196-11, Tes, v8 5) sarab kalaa pooran parabh so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. God is overflowing with all power. ||1||Pause] |
Hot sufs Arad AAT Il (196-11, age, He 5) mahaa tapat saagar sansaar. The world-ocean is burning hot!
ys fas ufo ufe SstgETTT IQ (196-12, 7st, we 5) parabh khin meh paar utaaranhaar. ||2|| In an instant, God saves us, and carries us across. ||2| |
wife Sue Sd odt AT Il (196-12, ast, v2 5) anik banDhan toray nahee jaahi. There are so many bonds, they cannot be broken.
figs oH Hats Sw us III 196-12, aSst, He 5)
simrat naam mukat fal paahi. ||3]| Remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the fruit of liberation is obtained.
[131] Gafs frmreu feA 3 ag ats Il (196-13, aBst, He 5)
ukat si-aanap is tay kachh naahi. By clever devices, nothing is accomplished.
ate faxsur saa TE MTT NICS (196-13, TVs, ve 5)
kar kirpaa naanak gun gaahi. ||4||83||152|| Grant Your Grace to Nanak, that he may sing the Glories of God. ||4]|83]|152]|
TCSt HIS U Il (196-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ast uret afg & OH Il (196-14, ast, v2 5) thaatee paa-ee har ko naam. Those who obtain the wealth of the Lord's Name
fasg HATS uss Als aH NA (196-14, ast, He 5) bichar sansaar pooran sabh kaam. ||1|| move freely in the world; all their affairs are resolved. ||1]|
saat sfa atese ae Il 196-15, west, He 5) vadbhaagee har keertan gaa-ee-ai. By great good fortune, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
UTaqTH F ef 3 ureht WAU TIS Il (196-15, TSS, 8 5) paarbarahm too” deh ta paa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Supreme Lord God, as You give, so do I receive. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs & vee fase Sfa ofe Il (196-15, aGst, He 5)
har kay charan hirdai ur Dhaar. Enshrine the Lord's Feet within your heart.
32 Ag ots Ssats wuts iQI (196-16, west, He 5) bhav saagar charh utreh paar. |[2|| Get aboard this boat, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|
AY Ag asd AS ate I (196-16, ast, v3 5) saaDhoo sang karahu sabh ko-ay. Everyone who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
Het afenre fete gy 3 dfe Sil (196-16, Test, H8 5) sadaa kali-aan fir dookh na ho-ay. ||3]| obtains eternal peace; pain does not afflict them any longer. ||3]|
UH sats 3A Tat fours il (196-17, ast, we 5) paraym bhagat bhaj gunee niDhaan. With loving devotional worship, meditate on the treasure of excellence.
Sot Vdd Usha HTS ISCAS (196-17, Test, He 5)
naanak dargeh paa-ee-ai maan. ||4||84||153]| O Nanak, you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|84||153]|
ast HIS U Il (196-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
me afs Hotes use of HIS Il (196-18, at, we 5) jal thal mahee-al pooran har meet. The Lord, our Friend, is totally pervading the water, the land and the skies.
3H fasn We TE Sts INA (196-18, west, ne 5) bharam binsay gaa-ay gun neet. ||1]| Doubts are dispelled by continually singing the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||1] |
Gos Aes ata Af uTguT I 196-19, a@at, we 5)
oothat sovat har sang pahroo-aa.
While rising up, and while lying down in sleep, the Lord is always with you, watching over you.
W & fryafe AH Sat SIT AU TIS I 196-19, ast, we 5) jaa kai simran jam nahee daroo-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remembering Him in meditation, the fear of Death departs. ||1]|Pause] |
TIE HS ys fae fSSH Il (196-19, aSst, H8 5) charan kamal parabh ridai nivaas. With God's Lotus Feet abiding in the heart,
yar ato
AIS sa ot Teor SA MQM (197-1, aa, vs 5) Sagal dookh kaa ho-i-aa naas. ||2|| all suffering comes to an end. ||2||
MAT HTE STS UG SA Ill (197-1, TSH, ns 5) aasaa maan taan Dhan ayk. The One Lord is my hope, honor, power and wealth.
Ad ATS at HS Hid Sa ISI (197-1, Test, He 5) saachay saah kee man meh tayk. ||3]|| Within my mind is the Support of the True Banker. ||3]|
Ho data AS AT Mss Il (197-2, west, He 5) mahaa gareeb jan saaDh anaath. I am the poorest and most helpless servant of the Holy.
Soe Ufs IA FT ITT WSUCUIIUSI (197-2, Test, He 5)
naanak parabh raakhay day haath. ||4]|85||154|| O Nanak, giving me His Hand, God has protected me. ||4||85||154||
ast HIS U Il (197-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa ate ot HAG Afs AS Il (197-3, ast, He 5) har har naam majan kar soochay. Taking my cleansing bath in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been purified.
afe ase US SH USF UU FHS Il (197-3, TCs, ws 5) kot garahan punn fal moochay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Its reward surpasses the giving of charity at millions of solar eclipses. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs & wae foe ufo SA Il (197-3, ast, He 5) har kay charan riday meh basay. With the Lord's Feet abiding in the heart,
HOH AOH & fosfer SA NU (197-4, west, Hs 5) janam janam kay kilvikh nasay. ||1]| the sinful mistakes of countless incarnations are removed. ||1]|
AuAfa ates ee ufemr il (197-4, west, v2 5)
saaDhsang keertan fal paa-i-aa.
I have obtained the reward of the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
AH a Hea feAfe 3 uitfenr iQI (97-5, west, us 5) jam kaa maarag darisat na aa-i-aa. ||2]| I no longer have to gaze upon the way of death. ||2]|
HO 8d SH difee mag Il (197-5, ast, ne 5) man bach karam govind aDhaar. In thought, word and deed, seek the Support of the Lord of the Universe;
33 afe@ fay AAT ISI (197-5, aGHt, He 5) taa tay chhuti-o bikh sansaar. ||3]| thus you shall be saved from the poisonous world-ocean. ||3]||
afs fasur ufs ate wruar il 197-6, aGat, Hs 5) kar kirpaa parabh keeno apnaa. Granting His Grace, God has made me His Own.
Soa AU AY Ts AUS NSITENWUUI (197-6, TSH, He 5) naanak jaap japay har japnaa. ||4]|86]|155]| Nanak chants and meditates on the Chant of the Lord's Name. ||4||86]|155]|
ast HIS U Il (197-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
u@ Haaret fafs af ATS Il (197-7, west, 2 5) pa-o sarnaa-ee jin har jaatay. Seek the Sanctuary of those who have come to know the Lord.
HO 36 AlSG dE Ts TS NA (197-7, Test, v2 5)
man tan seetal charan har raatay. ||1]|
Your mind and body shall become cool and peaceful, imbued with the Feet of the Lord. ||1||
3 SHO Us His B SATS Il (197-7, aGst, He 5) bhai bhanjan parabh man na basaahee. If God, the Destroyer of fear, does not dwell within your mind,
SIUS SIUS HGH HTS AT NU TIS i (197-8, aes, v2 5)
darpat darpat janam bahut jaahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. you shall spend countless incarnations in fear and dread. ||1||Pause] |
aw a foe afa& afe on Il (197-8, ast, v3 5)
jaa kai ridai basi-o har naam. Those who have the Lord's Name dwelling within their hearts
AIS HSss ST A UTS AH Il (197-8, wes, ws 5) Sagal manorath taa kay pooran kaam. ||2|| have all their desires and tasks fulfilled. ||2||
HOH Ad fees fAR SHA II 1197-9, ast, He 5) janam jaraa mirat jis vaas. Birth, old age and death are in His Power,
A AHae fants fA faretA Sil 197-9, aes, He 5) so samrath simar saas giraas. ||3]| so remember that All-powerful Lord with each breath and morsel of food. ||3]|
Ht AAS AY ys Sa Il 197-9, west, ne 5) meet saajan sakhaa parabh ayk. The One God is my Intimate, Best Friend and Companion.
OH AMTHt at SSA SA IICIUAUE! (197-10, aSst, He 5)
naam su-aamee kaa naanak tayk. ||4]|87||156]|| The Naam, the Name of my Lord and Master, is Nanak's only Support. ||4]|87||156]|
ast HIS U Il (197-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
wots ofa foe mts i (197-10, ast, v3 5) baahar raakhi-o ridai samaal. When they are out and about, they keep Him enshrined in their hearts;
ufs mre afge 3 ofS Ul 97-11, asst, v2 5) ghar aa-ay govind lai naal. ||1|| returning home, the Lord of the Universe is still with them. ||1]|
dfs ofs aH AHSo a Afar i (97-11, aGst, ve 5) har har naam santan kai sang. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the Companion of His Saints.
Ho 36 TS ITH A Shar A TTS Il 197-11, west, He 5) man tan raataa raam kai rang. ||1|| rahaa-o. Their minds and bodies are imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ts UdAet Aras Stent il (197-12, 7eHt, v2 5) gur parsaadee saagar tari-aa. By Guru's Grace, one crosses over the world-ocean;
HOH HOH a& faster Afs fafa QI (197-12, west, us 5) janam janam kay kilvikh sabh hiri-aa. ||2| | the sinful mistakes of countless incarnations are all washed away. ||2]|
Hat Aafs at SASS Il (197-13, west, He 5) sobhaa surat naam bhagvant. Honor and intuitive awareness are acquired through the Name of the Lord God.
ud Ta oT fooHs HZ Sl (197-13, Test, we 5) pooray gur kaa nirmal mant. ||3]| The Teachings of the Perfect Guru are immaculate and pure. |[3]|
Tse AHS fase Hfs AY Il (197-13, ast, v2 5) charan kamal hirday meh jaap. Within your heart, meditate on the His Lotus Feet.
Sos Uf HS UTSTY ISICCNAUII (197-14, aga, He 5) naanak paykh jeevai partaap. ||4||88]|157]| Nanak lives by beholding the Lord's Expansive Power. ||4||88]|157]|
TCSt HIS U Il (197-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Uo fey ae adfee Te We Il (197-14, aes, ne 5) Dhan ih thaan govind gun gaa-ay. Blessed is this place, where the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe are sung.
aAS 8H ufs wiry gATE UU TIS Il 197-15, Test, He 5) kusal khaym parabh aap basaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. God Himself bestows peace and pleasure. ||1]||Pause] |
faufs sa Aa ofa fae art Il (197-15, Tea, He 5) bipat tahaa jahaa har simran naahee. Misfortune occurs where the Lord is not remembered in meditation.
afe mee AT dfs Ts AS NA 197-15, Test, He 5) kot anand jah har gun gaahee. ||1]|| There are millions of joys where the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung. ||1]|
ofa fanfont ea gat ws Il (197-16, ast, He 5) har bisri-ai dukh rog ghanayray. Forgetting the Lord, all sorts of pains and diseases come.
Us AS AH Bd 3 3g IQ (197-16, ast, ue 5) parabh sayvaa jam lagai na nayray. ||2]| Serving God, the Messenger of Death will not even approach you. ||2| |
A zsarat fesse ae Il (197-16, ast, v2 5)
so vadbhaagee nihchal thaan. Very blessed, stable and sublime is that place,
Ag HUA YS ASH SH INI (197-17, aSst, He 5) jah japee-ai parabh kayval naam. |[3]| where the Name of God alone is chanted. ||3]|
Ag wWeha 3a ofs Hat AMMA I 197-17, west, He 5) jah jaa-ee-ai tah naal mayraa su-aamee. Wherever I go, my Lord and Master is with me.
aoa aC fiifenr nize isicenquell (197-17, aest, He 5)
naanak ka-o mili-aa antarjaamee. ||4||89||158] | Nanak has met the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||4]|89]|158] |
ast HIS U Il (197-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
A ural aifee fore I (197-18, aBet, He 5) jo paraanee govind Dhi-aavai. That mortal who meditates on the Lord of the Universe,
ufsur nisufsor usH afs ure Al (197-18, aest, 48 5) parhi-aa anparhi-aa param gat paavai. ||1|| whether educated or uneducated, obtains the state of supreme dignity. ||1]|
ATG Afar ffs sere il (197-19, aGet, Hs 5) saaDhoo sang simar gopaal. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on the Lord of the World.
fag HS SS" US HG AU TIS Il (197-19, ast, Hs 5) bin naavai jhoothaa Dhan maal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Name, wealth and property are false. ||1]|Pause] |
Yar atte
gueg A vga frre il (198-1, aes, 3 5) roopvant so chatur si-aanaa. They alone are handsome, clever and wise,
fate Afs HSM Ys aT SET IQ (198-1, TSH, He 5)
jin jan maani-aa parabh kaa bhaanaa. ||2|| who surrender to the Will of God. ||2]|
Hal Hfo wrfeur A Uses Il (198-1, west, He 5) jag meh aa-i-aa so parvaan. Blessed is their coming into this world,
wie wie net Amt ATE ISI (98-2, wBst, He 5)
ghat ghat apnaa su-aamee jaan. ||3]| if they recognize their Lord and Master in each and every heart. ||3]]|
AT THA AT A UTS Sa Il (198-2, ast, we 5) kaho naanak jaa kay pooran bhaag. Says Nanak, their good fortune is perfect,
Us BaUSt St A HS Ba NSICONWUE! (198-2, Test, He 5)
har charnee taa kaa man laag. ||4]|90]|159] | if they enshrine the Lord's Feet within their minds. ||4||90||159] |
ast HIS U Il (198-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & @A fAG AAS odt Aa Il (198-3, ast, He 5) har kay daas si-o saakat nahee sang. The Lord's servant does not associate with the faithless cynic.
6g fret GH OH & Sa NU TIE Il (198-3, Test, He 5) oh bikh-ee os raam ko rang. ||1]|| rahaa-o. One is in the clutches of vice, while the other is in love with the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
HO WARS AA Sat Ate Il (198-4, west, we 5) man asvaar jaisay turee seegaaree. It would be like an imaginary rider on a decorated horse,
fag avrysy usd ardt AI (198-4, ast, He 5) ji-o kaapurakh puchaarai naaree. ||1]| or a eunuch caressing a woman. ||1||
ao a@ Sat fe aS | (198-4, wGst, ve 5) bail ka-o naytaraa paa-ay duhaavai. It would be like tying up an ox and trying to milk it,
a ofs fiw us UTS QM (198-5, Tes, He 5) ga-oo char singh paachhai paavai. ||2]| or riding a cow to chase a tiger. ||2]|
TSI & THIS ats ust ii (198-5, west, we 5) gaadar lay kaamDhayn kar poojee. It would be like taking a sheep and worshipping it as the Elysian cow,
AGS ag ue fag ust SI (98-5, weet, we 5) sa-uday ka-o Dhaavai bin poonjee. ||3]|| the giver of all blessings; it would be like going out shopping without any money. ||3]|
SSA TH OH Alu Ss Il (198-6, Test, v2 5)
naanak raam naam jap cheet. O Nanak, consciously meditate on the Lord's Name.
frifs Aymt afe AT HTS USI AUAEO (98-6, Test, He 5)
simar su-aamee har saa meet. ||4||91||160]| Meditate in remembrance on the Lord Master, your Best Friend. ||4||91]||160]|
ast HIS U Il (198-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
AT fs fede AThaxs Utes Il (198-7, ast, He 5) saa mat nirmal kahee-at Dheer. Pure and steady is that intellect,
oH oAfeS ules Ste INA (198-7, west, He 5) raam rasaa-in peevat beer. ||1]| which drinks in the Lord's sublime essence. ||1||
dfs a ude fase afs Se i (198-7, ast, v3 5) har kay charan hirdai kar ot. Keep the Support of the Lord's Feet in your heart,
HOH HIS 3 SS SS NU TIE Il (198-8, ast, He 5) janam maran tay hovat chhot. ||1|| rahaa-o. and you shall be saved from the cycle of birth and death. ||1||Pause||
H 30 fone fas Gur o ure Il (198-8, ast, He 5) so tan nirmal jit upjai na paap. Pure is that body, in which sin does not arise.
OH da fess UsSTY III (98-8, west, nH 5)
raam rang nirmal partaap. ||2]| In the Love of the Lord is pure glory. ||2||
AaAfa fife ws fears il (198-9, age, He 5) saaDhsang mit jaat bikaar. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, corruption is eradicated.
AS 3 Gu Sd Cuarg Sil (i9s-9, a@at, v2 5) sabh tay ooch ayho upkaar. ||3]|| This is the greatest blessing of all. ||3]|
UH gals IS sus Il (198-9, wat, us 5) paraym bhagat raatay gopaal. Imbued with loving devotional worship of the Sustainer of the Universe,
SSA AS AT FSH IICQNAEAUI (198-10, ast, Hs 5)
naanak jaachai saaDh ravaal. ||4||92||161|| Nanak asks for the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4]|92||161]|
ast HIS U Il (198-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
mat ulfs afge fA orait I (i9s-10, Bet, He 5) aisee pareet govind si-o laagee. Such is my love for the Lord of the Universe;
AfS BE uss esa WAU TIC i (198-11, ast, w2 5) mayl la-ay pooran vadbhaagee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. through perfect good destiny, I have been united with Him. ||1||Pause] |
gost uf faa fa oct il 98-11, west, He 5) bhartaa paykh bigsai ji-o naaree. As the wife is delighted upon beholding her husband,
f3@ af Ho Ae on fesrdt nail c98-11, aGst, v2 5) ti-o har jan jeevai naam chitaaree. ||1]|| so does the Lord's humble servant live by chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
[11
us Ufa fa AEs HST I (198-12, ast, ve 5) poot paykh ji-o jeevat maataa. As the mother is rejuvenated upon seeing her son,
6fs ufs Ae of fAG TST MQM 198-12, ast, v2 5)
ot pot jan har si-o raataa. ||2]| so is the Lord's humble servant imbued with Him, through and through. ||2]|
Bat now ad Uf Tar Il (198-12, west, He 5) lobhee anad karai paykh Dhanaa. As the greedy man rejoices upon beholding his wealth,
Ho VIG SHS fA wa HAT ISI (198-13, Tes, He 5) jan charan kamal si-o laago manaa. ||3]| so is the mind of the Lord's humble servant attached to His Lotus Feet. ||3]|
fang odt fea fe BSS Il (198-13, Test, He 5) bisar nahee ik til daataar. May I never forget You, for even an instant, O Great Giver!
Sot A UF UTS MUTT NICSIAEI (198-14, west, ve 5)
naanak kay parabh paraan aDhaar. ||4]||93||162|| Nanak's God is the Support of his breath of life. ||4]|93]|162] |
ast HIS U Il (198-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
oH sAtefs A AS att I 98-14, west, He 5) raam rasaa-in jo jan geeDhay. Those humble beings who are accustomed to the Lord's sublime essence,
JIO GHG YH Sast HT Al FITS it (98-14, wSst, wz 5) charan kamal paraym bhagtee beeDhay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
are pierced through with loving devotional worship of the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
mS SAT StAfs Afs Ss Il (198-15, aS, vs 5) aan rasaa deeseh sabh chhaar. All other pleasures look like ashes;
oH faa fadew AATS NA (198-15, weet, He 5) naam binaa nihfal sansaar. ||1|| without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is fruitless. ||1]|
nig gu Ss are rf i (98-16, ast, xs 5) anDh koop tay kaadhay aap. He Himself rescues us from the deep dark well.
Te dies MIA UTSTY III (198-16, Ast, He 5) gun govind achraj partaap. ||2|| Wondrous and Glorious are the Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||2||
afe fafe fysefe uss Tus Il 1198-16, ast, we 5)
van tarin taribhavan pooran gopaal.
In the woods and meadows, and throughout the three worlds, the Sustainer of the Universe is pervading.
qaH UATE Abe Afar eens SI (198-17, Tet, He 5) barahm pasaar jee-a sang da-i-aal. ||3]| The Expansive Lord God is Merciful to all beings. ||3]|
AT SSA AT aaat ATT Il (198-17, aSat, v2 5) kaho naanak saa kathnee saar. Says Nanak, that speech alone is excellent,
He BS fan fAdHOIT? ISICSIIESI (198-17, Test, H2 5)
maan layt jis sirjanhaar. ||4||94||163]| which is approved by the Creator Lord. ||4||94||163] |
ast HIS U Il (198-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fosufs awe on Afe ath Il (198-18, weet, He 5) nitparat naavan raam sar keejai. Every day, take your bath in the Sacred Pool of the Lord.
Sf Ho oA afs vifys Uta NA TIC I (98-18, awe, He 5) jhol mahaa ras har amrit peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Mix and drink in the most delicious, sublime Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
foaHe Bea aifge at ant Il (198-19, ast, He 5) nirmal udak govind kaa naam. The water of the Name of the Lord of the Universe is immaculate and pure.
HAG ATS UTS Afs AH NA (198-19, ast, He 5) majan karat pooran sabh kaam. ||1]|| Take your cleansing bath in it, and all your affairs shall be resolved. ||1]|
Uar att HsAfa so anAfe df it 99-1, west, nH: 5)
satsang tah gosat ho-ay. In the Society of the Saints, spiritual conversations take place.
af HOH & forsfeu df= QI (99-1, aes, He 5) kot janam kay kilvikh kho-ay. ||2]| The sinful mistakes of millions of incarnations are erased. ||2||
frafs ATG aafs mTSes Il (199-1, west, He 5) simrahi saaDh karahi aanand. The Holy Saints meditate in remembrance, in ecstasy.
Hfs sfs sfenr USHTSE III (199-2, aSst, Hz 5) man tan ravi-aa parmaanand. ||3]| Their minds and bodies are immersed in supreme ecstasy. ||3]|
fants usufs ofa vse fours il Sea BA fSAfs Aas ISICUNIESI (199-2, west, He 5)
jisahi paraapat har charan niDhaan. naanak daas tiseh kurbaan. ||4||95||164|| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to those who have obtained the treasure of the Lord's Feet. ||4]|95]]164]|
ast HIS U Il (199-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
A fae afe fas HS o Bd Il (199-3, ast, v2 5) so kichh kar jit mail na laagai. Do only that, by which no filth or pollution shall stick to you.
dfs atese ufo So Ho AA NA TIC Il (199-3, ast, v2 5)
har keertan meh ayhu man jaagai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Let your mind remain awake and aware, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||1]|Pause] |
Sa frufa 3 BAT aS Il (199-4, wat, 8 5) ayko simar na doojaa bhaa-o. Meditate in remembrance on the One Lord; do not be in love with duality.
HaAfa Af Xes oS All (199-4, west, ne 5) satsang jap kayval naa-o. ||1|| In the Society of the Saints, chant only the Name. ||1]|
OSH UGH BH FS UAT Il (199-5, ast, He 5)
karam Dharam naym barat poojaa.
The karma of good actions, the Dharma of righteous living, religious rituals, fasts and worship
urdqan fag WS 3 FAT IM (199-5, Test, He 5) paarbarahm bin jaan na doojaa. ||2| | - practice these, but do not know any other than the Supreme Lord God. ||2||
Tat uss det ures i AT at US nus Ys as SII (199-5, ast, we 5)
taa kee pooran ho-ee ghaal. jaa kee pareet apunay parabh naal. ||3]|| Those who place their love in God - their works are brought to fruition. ||3]|
A AAS J mud Rg Il (199-6, ast, He 5) so baisno hai apar apaar. Infinitely invaluable is that Vaishnaav, that worshipper of Vishnu,
ad aoa fafs sa fears IgitEenIeull Ci99-6, aSst, He 5)
kaho naanak jin tajay bikaar. ||4||96||165]| says Nanak, who has renounced corruption. ||4]|96]|165] |
ast HIS U Il (199-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ales ats Ato Fe Il (199-7, ast, He 5) jeevat chhaad jaahi dayvaanay. They desert you even when you are alive, O madman;
Hfeur Ba 3 & SAAS INA (199-7, TEs, He 5) mu-i-aa un tay ko varsaa™nay. ||1]| what good can they do when someone is dead? ||1||
frnfs afge nfs sfe afs fetter i (199-7, ast, v2 5)
simar govind man tan Dhur likhi-aa.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe in your mind and body - this is your pre-ordained destiny.
ag an o ues fatto nai ToS i (199-8, west, we 5) kaahoo kaaj na aavat bikhi-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The poison of Maya is of no use at all. ||1]|Pause]|
fae oat fafs fafe wet il 99-8, a@at, nH 5) bikhai thag-uree jin jin khaa-ee. Those who have eaten this poison of deception
3 ot AAT aad & At iQ (199-9, west, we 5) taa kee tarisnaa kabahoo" na jaa-ee. ||2|| - their thirst shall never depart. ||2]|
BIS PU TSI AAMT Il (199-9, aS, He 5) daaran dukh dutar sansaar. The treacherous world-ocean is filled with terrible pain.
oH OH fas aA Ssafh ute Sil (199-9, aes, He 5) raam naam bin kaisay utras paar. ||3]|| Without the Lord's Name, how can anyone cross over? ||3]|
AGH fa fife vfs ae ATE I (199-10, a@Ht, v2 5)
saaDhsang mil du-ay kul saaDh.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be saved here and hereafter.
TH BH Boa niTITT IID IIEE! (199-10, aBst, He 5)
raam naam naanak aaraaDh. ||4||97||166]| O Nanak, worship and adore the Name of the Lord. ||4||97]||166] |
ast HIS U Il (199-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
adr Gufs fa fit ast il a99-11, ast, He 5) gareebaa upar je khinjai daarhee. The bearded emperor who struck down the poor,
ursgatH AT nafs Hf ATSt WU (199-11, 7st, we 5)
paarbarahm saa agan meh saarhee. ||1]| has been burnt in the fire by the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
um foorG ad AIST Il (199-11, wet, 2 5) pooraa ni-aa-o karay kartaar. The Creator administers true justice.
mus TAH AG TuST Al TIS Il (199-12, aSst, vz 5) apunay daas ka-o raakhanhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Saving Grace of His slaves. ||1]||Pause] |
mite qarfe yate uTsTY Il (199-12, 7st, ws 5) aad jugaad pargat partaap. In the beginning, and throughout the ages, His glory is manifest.
fava Hor Cufa Ss SY MQM (199-12, west, v2 5) nindak mu-aa upaj vad taap. ||2|| The slanderer died after contracting the deadly fever. ||2]|
fafs ufour fa se 3 fe i 199-13, ast, v2 5) tin maari-aa je rakhai na ko-ay.
He is killed, and no one can save him.
mat ute Het AfE SII (199-13, west, He 5)
aagai paachhai mandee so-ay. ||3]| Here and hereafter, his reputation is evil. ||3]|
MUS BA Ie afe STE Il 199-13, west, He 5) apunay daas raakhai kanth laa-ay. The Lord hugs His slaves close in His Embrace.
Hale saa Tle oH fore isnetciIedil (199-14, ast, v2 5)
Saran naanak har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||98]|167] | Nanak seeks the Lord's Sanctuary, and meditates on the Naam. ||4||98]|167] |
ast HIS U Il (199-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hog Bo" atsq nef i (199-14, ast, we 5) mahjar jhoothaa keeton aap. The memorandum was proven to be false by the Lord Himself.
unit x@ wer AST INU (199-15, aC, He 5) paapee ka-o laagaa santaap. ||1]| The sinner is now suffering in despair. ||1]|
fants Aoet afse Ha Il 199-15, ast, v2 5) jisahi sahaa-ee gobid mayraa. Those who have my Lord of the Universe as their support
fH aS AH odt MTS Sa NU! TIS I (199-15, Test, He 5) tis ka-o jam nahee aavai nayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. - death does not even approach them. ||1||Pause]|
Ardt IAT IS TZ Il (199-16, ast, we 5) saachee dargeh bolai koorh. In the True Court, they lie;
fg TE uss nfo HZ II (199-16, ast, we 5) sir haath pachhorhay anDhaa moorh. ||2|| the blind fools strike their own heads with their own hands. ||2| |
da fama age uns il (199-16, ast, v3 5) rog bi-aapay karday paap. Sickness afflicts those who commit sins;
meet dfs for ys orf Sil (199-17, Bet, He 5) adlee ho-ay baithaa parabh aap. ||3]|| God Himself sits as the Judge. ||3]|
nus aHtfent mm ard Il (199-17, ast, v2 5) apan kamaa-i-ai aapay baaDhay. By their own actions, they are bound and gagged.
zag afeor As Abt & ATE Igil (199-17, ast, He 5) darab ga-i-aa sabh jee-a kai saathai. ||4| | All their wealth is gone, along with their lives. ||4] |
Soa Adle ud Paats il (199-18, aGst, us 5) naanak saran paray darbaar. Nanak has taken to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Court;
ant Ua AS aes NUNCK NEC (199-18, ast, He 5) raakhee paij mayrai kartaar. ||5||99||168] | my Creator has preserved my honor. ||5||99||168]|
ast HIS U Il (199-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ao att ufs Ho HIS YeTat I (199-19, aGat, He 5) jan kee Dhoor man meeth khataanee. The dust of the feet of the humble beings is so sweet to my mind.
usta oath ffir ofs yrat Wail TIS il (199-19, ast, we 5) poorab karam likhi-aa Dhur paraanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Perfect karma is the mortal's pre-ordained destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
UST 20O
nidata Ho ufs faaret i (200-1, west, H3 5) aha‘-buDh man poor thiDhaa-ee. The mind is overflowing with the greasy dirt of egotistical pride.
Ag ofs afe AG HAST NAN (200-1, west, He 5) saaDh Dhoor kar suDh manjaa-ee. ||1|| With the dust of the feet of the Holy, it is scrubbed clean. ||1]|
san
mfok AS A OS Sat il (200-1, ast, ue 5) anik jalaa jay Dhovai dayhee. The body may be washed with loads of water,
HS 3 Gsd AT B Sat MQM (200-1, wet, He 5) mail na utrai suDh na tayhee. ||2|| and yet its filth is not removed, and it does not become clean. ||2]|
Afsag sfe ret furs il (200-2, a@Ht, ue 5) satgur bhayti-o sadaa kirpaal. I have met the True Guru, who is merciful forever.
ofa fruts frufs afent 38 ares iil (200-2, a@st, He 5)
har simar simar kaati-aa bha-o kaal. ||3]| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, I am rid of the fear of death.
[131] Hats gafs Hafs dfs oS Il (200-3, ae, He 5)
mukat bhugat jugat har naa-o. Liberation, pleasures and worldly success are all in the Lord's Name.
UH sdfs SSA TE AE NSUAouAec il (200-3, ast, ns 5) paraym bhagat naanak gun gaa-o. ||4]|100]|169] | With loving devotional worship, O Nanak, sing His Glorious Praises. ||4||100||169] |
ast HIS U Il (200-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Algo ueet ofs & SA Il (200-4, west, He 5) jeevan padvee har kay daas. The Lord's slaves attain the highest status of life.
fre fufemr mrsH usa IAI (200-4, west, H8 5) jin mili-aa aatam pargaas. ||1]|| Meeting them, the soul is enlightened. ||1]]|
ofa a finde Afs Ho arat Il (200-4, ast, vs 5) har kaa simran sun man kaanee. Those who listen with their mind and ears to the Lord's meditative remembrance,
AY wets ofg eng usat idl FI Il (200-5, aSst, He 5) sukh paavahi har du-aar paraanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. are blessed with peace at the Lord's Gate, O mortal. ||1]||Pause| |
MTS UT foment sure il (200-5, aGat, He 5) aath pahar Dhi-aa-ee-ai gopaal. Twenty-four hours a day, meditate on the Sustainer of the World.
SOA PIAS Vly SIS MANIOUADOMN (200-5, aSHt, v8 5)
naanak darsan daykh nihaal. ||2||101||170||
O Nanak, gazing on the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I am enraptured. ||2]|1021]]170]|
ast HIS U Il (200-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Rifs set ae afafe uct il (200-6, ast, He 5) saa“t bha-ee gur gobid paa-ee. Peace and tranquility have come; the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, has brought it.
amy ury faor Ae SST UA FI Il (200-6, aSst, He 5)
taap paap binsay mayray bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The burning sins have departed, O my Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
TH 3H fos JAS FAS Il (200-7, TCH, v2 5) raam naam nit rasan bakhaan. With your tongue, continually chant the Lord's Name.
fear da se afer iil (200-7, ast, 8 5) binsay rog bha-ay kali-aan. ||1]| Disease shall depart, and you shall be saved. ||1]|
UTIYIH TE MAH Mas il (200-7, ast, us 5) paarbarahm gun agam beechaar. Contemplate the Glorious Virtues of the Unfathomable Supreme Lord God.
ATG Hat F SASS MII (200-8, Tes, Hs 5) saaDhoo sangam hai nistaar. ||2]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be emancipated. ||2| |
fedHe Te Weg fos ats il (200-8, ast, ve 5) nirmal gun gaavhu nit neet. Sing the Glories of God each and every day;
aet faerfa Cad AS HIS ISI (200-8, ast, He 5) ga-ee bi-aaDh ubray jan meet. ||3]| your afflictions shall be dispelled, and you shall be saved, my humble friend. ||3]|
HO 8s AH YS nuat fomret i (200-9, ast, vs 5) man bach karam parabh apnaa Dhi-aa-ee. In thought, word and deed, I meditate on my God.
SOA VA Sot APSE MIAOVNAOAI (200-9, ast, v2 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee. ||4]|102]|171]| Slave Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||102]|171]|
ast HIS U Il (200-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
33 YMA abot AIes Il (200-10, west, ve 5) naytar pargaas kee-aa gurdayv. The Divine Guru has opened his eyes.
SIH TE UTS Set AS NAN TI Il (200-10, ast, ve 5) bharam ga-ay pooran bha-ee sayv. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Doubt has been dispelled; my service has been successful. ||1]||Pause||
Hiser 3 ofr faordt i (200-11, a@st, H2 5) seetiaa tay rakhi-aa bihaaree. The Giver of joy has saved him from smallpox.
UTasqIH ys fagur ardt wAll (200-11, ast, we 5) paarbarahm parabh kirpaa Dhaaree. ||1]| The Supreme Lord God has granted His Grace. ||1]|
Soa OTH AU A Ale Il (200-11, ast, He 5) naanak naam japai so jeevai. O Nanak, he alone lives, who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
AOHfa dfs nfs UtS 12NIOBUID2I (200-11, TBH, He 5)
saaDhsang har amrit peevai. ||2||103]|172||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, drink deeply of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar. ||2||103]|172]|
ast HIS U Il (200-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ua 6g HASa UG 3d SS Il (200-12, aH, He 5) Dhan oh mastak Dhan tayray nayt. Blessed is that forehead, and blessed are those eyes;
ug Gfe sas fas SH Afar FS UNAM (200-12, west, H2 5) Dhan o-ay bhagat jin tum sang hayt. ||1|| blessed are those devotees who are in love with You. ||1||
oH faat aA AY BdM Il (200-13, aga, He 5) naam binaa kaisay sukh lahee-ai. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how anyone find peace?
THA! TH OH AA AIA NU! TIS I (200-13, aS, He 5) rasnaa raam naam jas kahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. With your tongue, chant the Praises of the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
fae Gufs weba ATH Il (200-14, ast, Hs 5) tin oopar jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. Nanak is a sacrifice to those
aed fate Afumt fags IlQNIOSIIDZIl (200-14, TSH, He 5) naanak jin japi-aa nirbaan. ||2||104]|173]| who meditate on the Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||2||104||173] |
ast HIS U Il (200-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Sd HASLS FI SS Il (200-15, at, He 5) too‘hai maslat too‘hai naal. You are my Advisor; You are always with me.
3d outa ATS ANTS UA (200-15, ast, we 5) toohai raakhahi saar samaal. ||1]| You preserve, protect and care for me. ||1]|
MAT aH ae west ATT Il (200-15, ast, He 5) aisaa raam deen dunee sahaa-ee. Such is the Lord, our Help and Support in this world and the next.
aA at UA ge HS SST UA TITS Il (200-16, ast, v2 5) daas kee paij rakhai mayray bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He protects the honor of His slave, O my Sibling of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
mat wif feg are =f AT Et Il (200-16, aGat, He 5) aagai aap ih thaan vas jaa kai. He alone exists hereafter; this place is in His Power.
WTS UIT HO Tia AV AY QM (200-17, ast, nz 5) aath pahar man har ka-o jaapai. ||2|| Twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, chant and meditate on the Lord. ||2||
ufS udet= A SATE Il (200-17, at, 2 5) pat parvaan sach neesaan. His honor is acknowledged, and he bears the True Insignia;
Ww ag uifu asts SINS ISI (200-17, Test, Hz 5) jaa ka-o aap karahi furmaan. ||3]| the Lord Himself issues His Royal Command. ||3] |
nmy erst mirfy yfsurfs il (200-18, rest, He 5) aapay daataa aap partipaal. He Himself is the Giver; He Himself is the Cherisher.
fos fas Soe TH BH ANTS ISIIOUIISI (200-18, 7Sst, He 5)
nit nit naanak raam naam samaal. ||4||105]|174|| Continually, continuously, O Nanak, dwell upon the Name of the Lord. ||4||105]|174| |
ast HIS U Il (200-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Afsag ys sfemr fxurs il (200-19, ast, x2 5) satgur pooraa bha-i-aa kirpaal. When the Perfect True Guru becomes merciful,
fase efhor FET TUG WAU (200-19, ast, Hz 5) hirdai vasi-aa sadaa gupaal. ||1|| the Lord of the World abides in the heart forever. ||1]|
oH des Ae dt AY ufeMr Il (200-19, aS, 2 5) raam ravat sad hee sukh paa-i-aa. Meditating on the Lord, I have found eternal peace.
UST 2OA Hfeur adt use ats afer na TIS il (01-1, ast, u2 5)
ma-i-aa karee pooran har raa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Sovereign Lord, the Perfect King, has shown His Mercy to me. ||1]||Pause] |
AT THX A A UT SMA Il (201-1, ast, we 5) kaho naanak jaa kay pooray bhaag. Says Nanak, one whose destiny is perfect,
dfs of om mAfag ATE NQNIOEN (201-2, TBs, He 5) har har naam asthir sohaag. ||2||106]| meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Everlasting Husband. ||2||106] |
ast HIS U Il (201-2)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ast dfs feare 3fs il (201-2, ast, 2 5) Dhotee khol vichhaa-ay hayth. He opens his loin-cloth, and spreads it out beneath him.
asau Sa wd ufe wll (201-3, ast, we 5) garDhap vaa™goo laahay payt. ||1|| Like a donkey, he gulps down all that comes his way. ||1]||
fag aasst Hats 3 ure II (201-3, a@at, we 5) bin kartootee mukat na paa-ee-ai. Without good deeds, liberation is not obtained.
Hafs uesa oH fore A TIS I (201-3, aes, He 5)
mukat padaarath naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The wealth of liberation is only obtained by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
um fsea ads feAarat Il (201-4, ast, x 5)
poojaa tilak karat isnaanaa”.
He performs worship ceremonies, applies the ceremonial tilak mark to his forehead, and takes his ritual cleansing baths;
edt ofe Se ofa Bar QI (201-4, west, H2 5) chhuree kaadh layvai hath daanaa. ||2|| he pulls out his knife, and demands donations. ||2||
ae us yf Htet aat i 01-4, west, v2 5) bayd parhai mukh meethee banee. With his mouth, he recites the Vedas in sweet musical measures,
Hbat AIS 3 Ad usTat ISI (201-5, ast, He 5) jee-aa™ kuhat na sangai paraanee. ||3]| and yet he does not hesitate to take the lives of others. ||3]|
ad aaa fan farsur os i (201-5, aBst, ne 5) kaho naanak jis kirpaa Dhaarai. Says Nanak, when God showers His Mercy,
fase" AO YIN Has SIDI (201-5, ast, He 5) hirdaa suDh barahm beechaarai. ||4||107]| even his heart becomes pure, and he contemplates God. ||4||107] |
ast HIS U Il (201-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fag ufs Sng afs Ae furs i (01-6, west, He 5) thir ghar baishu har jan pi-aaray. Remain steady in the home of your own self, O beloved servant of the Lord.
Afsafs Sud AH ASS UU! TIS Il (201-6, TSH, uz 5) satgur tumray kaaj savaaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The True Guru shall resolve all your affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
TA TS USHAfG HTT Il (201-7, TCs, He 5) dusat doot parmaysar maaray. The Transcendent Lord has struck down the wicked and the evil.
Ae ot Un set AIST AU (201-7, ast, He 5) jan kee paij rakhee kartaaray. ||1]| The Creator has preserved the honor of His servant. ||1]|
afeAT ATS AS SA ats SS Il (201-7, wat, v2 5) baadisaah saah sabh vas kar deenay. The kings and emperors are all under his power;
MS SH HI SA US IM (01-8, Test, Hs 5) amrit naam mahaa ras peenay. ||2|| he drinks deeply of the most sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam. ||2]|
faas@ dfe sng aes Il (201-8, ast, v2 5) nirbha-o ho-ay bhajahu bhagvaan. Meditate fearlessly on the Lord God.
AGHats fufs ats VS USI 01-8, ast, v2 5) saaDhsangat mil keeno daan. ||3]| Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, this gift is given. ||3]|
Rafe ud ys nisaemt il (201-9, a@at, ue 5) Saran paray parabh antarjaamee. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts;
soa Ge uadt ys AMM ISIAOTII (201-9, ast, Hz 5) naanak ot pakree parabh su-aamee. ||4||108]| he grasps the Support of God, his Lord and Master. ||4||108]|
ast HIS U Il (201-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa Afa as atfs & AS Il (201-10, ast, v3 5) har sang raatay bhaahi na jalai. One who is attuned to the Lord, shall not be burned in the fire.
ofa Afar aS Her Sdt SS il (201-10, west, v2 5) har sang raatay maa-i-aa nahee chhalai. One who is attuned to the Lord, shall not be enticed by Maya.
fs Aft FS Sot FA AS I (201-10, ast, we 5) har sang raatay nahee doobai jalaa. One who is attuned to the Lord, shall not be drowned in water.
dfs Aft TS ASH SH MAUI (201-11, aSst, He 5) har sang raatay sufal falaa. ||1]| One who is attuned to the Lord, is prosperous and fruitful. ||1]|
AS & fefa sur oe Il (201-11, ast, v2 5) sabh bhai miteh tumaarai naa-ay. All fear is eradicated by Your Name.
323 Hfa ofs ofs ae afe 1 ToS Il (01-11, west, v2 5)
bhaytat sang har har gun gaa-ay. rahaa-o.
Joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||Pause| |
ofa Afa as fe AS fest I 201-12, ast, H2 5) har sang raatay mitai sabh chintaa. One who is attuned to the Lord, is free of all anxieties.
dfs fa A oe fAA ATO ot HST I (201-12, aGst, He 5) har si-o so rachai jis saaDh kaa manntaa. One who is attuned to the Lord, is blessed with the Mantra of the Holy.
ofa Aft FS AH at Sdt 3A Il (201-13, ast, He 5)
har sang raatay jam kee nahee taraas. One who is attuned to the Lord, is not haunted by the fear of death.
fe Afar FS UIs WA III (201-13, Test, Hs 5)
har sang raatay pooran aas. ||2|| One who is attuned to the Lord, sees all his hopes fulfilled. ||2| |
ofs fat TS SYS Ba Il (201-13, Tea, ws 5) har sang raatay dookh na laagai. One who is attuned to the Lord, does not suffer in pain.
ofa Af ast niafes Ara I (201-14, ast, v2 5) har sang raataa an-din jaagai. One who is attuned to the Lord, remains awake and aware, night and day.
ofa Afa ast AoA wis SA Il (201-14, ast, v3 5)
har sang raataa sahj ghar vasai. One who is attuned to the Lord, dwells in the home of intuitive peace.
ofa Afar TS FH SC SA ISI (201-14, Test, He 5) har sang raatay bharam bha-o nasai. ||3]| One who is attuned to the Lord, sees his doubts and fears run away. ||3]|
ofs fat TS HPS BSH FE ii (201-15, aVst, we 5) har sang raatay mat ootam ho-ay. One who is attuned to the Lord, has the most sublime and exalted intellect.
ofa Afa as faane Ae Il (201-15, ast, m2 5) har sang raatay nirmal so-ay. One who is attuned to the Lord, has a pure and spotless reputation.
ag aod fs6 a@ afe wet 1 fro aS Us Hat faAas ardt ISNAOtH! (201-15, Test, He 5)
kaho naanak tin ka-o bal jaa-ee. jin ka-o parabh mayraa bisrat naahee. ||4]|109] | Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who do not forget my God. ||4]|109]|
ast HIS U Il (201-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
BeH ATS ASG HO FE Il (201-16, TSH, Hz 5) udam karat seetal man bha-ay. Through sincere efforts, the mind is made peaceful and calm.
HSfal THS Aas Sa TS Il (201-17, aSHt, vz 5) maarag chalat sagal dukh ga-ay. Walking on the Lord's Way, all pains are taken away.
oH AUS Hfe SS MST Il (201-17, aVst, He 5) naam japat man bha-ay anand. Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind becomes blissful.
oH WE WS USHST MAUI (201-17, Test, He 5) ras gaa-ay gun parmaanand. ||1]| Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, supreme bliss is obtained. ||1]|
aH sfeor ane wuts mre I (201-18, west, H2 5) khaym bha-i-aa kusal ghar aa-ay. There is joy all around, and peace has come to my home.
Ses WOnfa Tet sss Il TIS Il (201-18, aSat, He 5) bhaytat saaDhsang ga-ee balaa-ay. rahaa-o. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, misfortune disappears. ||Pause| |
}3 Udls Uus dt AA Il (201-19, west, wz 5) naytar puneet paykhat hee daras. My eyes are purified, beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
ufe HHSA BIS AHS dt UGA Il (201-19, aGst, He 5) Dhan mastak charan kamal hee paras. Blessed is the forehead which touches His Lotus Feet.
difse at cue Aes fea aifemr i (201-19, 7st, v2 5) gobind kee tahal safal ih kaa"-i-aa. Working for the Lord of the Universe, the body becomes fruitful.
UST 2OD
Aa yAfe usH ue uf QM (202-1, aGat, He 5) sant parsaad param pad paa-i-aa. ||2|| By the Grace of the Saints, I have obtained the supreme status. ||2]|
He at atat wrfu AITe Il (202-1, ast, He 5)
jan kee keenee aap sahaa-ay. The Lord is the Help and Support of His humble servant.
AY ufenr afar eA Ute Il (202-1, west, He 5) sukh paa-i-aa lag daasah paa-ay. I have found peace, falling at the feet of His slaves.
mma afer st mrufs Se Il (202-2, ast, v2 5)
aap ga-i-aa taa aapeh bha-ay.
When selfishness is gone, then one becomes the Lord Himself; faur fours at Adat ues IS (202-2, ast, us 5)
kirpaa niDhaan kee sarnee pa-ay. ||3]|| seek the Sanctuary of the treasure of mercy. ||3]|
a wos Aet we ufeor | (202-2, ast, nH 5) jo chaahat so-ee jab paa-i-aa. When someone finds the One he has desired,
3a Fea aT a EM Il (202-3, aeet, Hs 5) tab dhoodhan kahaa ko jaa-i-aa. then where should he go to look for Him?
mAfad Sf SA AY MAS Il (202-3, ast, He 5) asthir bha-ay basay sukh aasan. I have become steady and stable, and I dwell in the seat of peace.
Td YATES soa AY AAS ISUAION (202-3, TSH, He 5) gur parsaad naanak sukh baasan. ||4||110|| By Guru's Grace, Nanak has entered the home of peace. ||4||110] |
ACS HIS U Il (202-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
afe HAe até fears Il (202-4, wea, He 5) kot majan keeno isnaan. The merits of taking millions of ceremonial cleansing baths,
Brey MIT UIT MS VS Il (202-4, ast, we 5) laakh arab kharab deeno daan. the giving of hundreds of thousands, billions and trillions in charity
Ww nfs efAG afs & on A (202-5, ast, He 5) jaa man vasi-o har ko naam. ||1]| - these are obtained by those whose minds are filled with the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Hae ules To WE TUS Il (202-5, aSst, ue 5) sagal pavit gun gaa-ay gupaal. Those who sing the Glories of the Lord of the World are totally pure.
ury fefs AT Hate eters i TIS il (202-5, at, we 5)
paap miteh saaDhoo saran da-i-aal. rahaa-o. Their sins are erased, in the Sanctuary of the Kind and Holy Saints. ||Pause] |
as Sag Su AGS AMT Il (202-6, ast, He 5) bahut uraDh tap saaDhan saaDhay. The merits of performing all sorts of austere acts of penance and self-discipline,
nifsax BST HSTA BD Il (202-6, ast, v2 5) anik laabh manorath laaDhay. earning huge profits and seeing one's desires fulfilled
Offs Ts SH IAS MST IQ (202-6, aBst, n2 5) har har naam rasan aaraaDhay. ||2|| - these are obtained by chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with the tongue.
21 |
fafyfs AAS FE sas Il (202-7, west, us 5) simrit saasat bayd bakhaanay. The merits of reciting the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Vedas,
na famire fa Ae ATS Il (202-7, aS, He 5)
jog gi-aan siDh sukh jaanay.
knowledge of the science of Yoga, spiritual wisdom and the pleasure of miraculous spiritual powers
oH Aus ys fAG HO HS ISI (202-7, Tet, He 5) naam japat parabh si-o man maanay. ||3]|| - these come by surrendering the mind and meditating on the Name of God. ||3]|
marta sfa afs mremt nrg Il (202-8, ast, H2 5) agaaDh boDh har agam apaaray. The wisdom of the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord is incomprehensible.
OH AUS oH fae ated Il (202-8, wat, He 5)
naam japat naam riday beechaaray.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and contemplating the Naam within our hearts,
Sot A US forgur ars USUI (202-8, Test, ws 5) naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa Dhaaray. ||4]|111]|| O Nanak, God has showered His Mercy upon us. ||4||111]|
ast Hs U Il (202-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fra faufe frafs we urfemr it (202-9, aBst, He 5) simar simar simar sukh paa-i-aa. Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance, I have found peace.
Jdo SHS ad fee safenr Al (202-9, aSat, He 5) charan kamal gur ridai basaa-i-aa. ||1]| I have enshrined the Lotus Feet of the Guru within my heart. ||1]|
Gs aie uUrIxTH UT Il (202-10, wes, v2 5) gur gobind paarbarahm pooraa. The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, the Supreme Lord God, is perfect.
farts mata Hat HS Uta i FITS Il (202-10, west, He 5) tiseh araaDh mayraa man Dheeraa. rahaa-o. Worshipping Him, my mind has found a lasting peace. ||Pause]|
Motes AUS TI TI SH Il (202-10, ast, v2 5) an-din japa-o guroo gur naam. Night and day, I meditate on the Guru, and the Name of the Guru.
at 3 fafa se Aas AM MQM (202-11, a@st, He 5) taa tay siDh bha-ay sagal kaa“m. ||2|| Thus all my works are brought to perfection. ||2| |
SdHS Ufa ASG HS SE Il (202-11, aSst, He 5) darsan daykh seetal man bha-ay. Beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind has become cool and tranquil,
HOH HOH & fawfaa TS Sil (202-11, aest, He 5) janam janam kay kilbikh ga-ay. |[3]| and the sinful mistakes of countless incarnations have been washed away. ||3]|
AT soa AI Ss SSH Il (202-12, ast, He 5) kaho naanak kahaa bhai bhaa-ee. Says Nanak, where is fear now, O Siblings of Destiny?
mud Aza at wif UA garet SAI (202-12, west, He 5) apnay sayvak kee aap paij rakhaa-ee. ||4||112]| The Guru Himself has preserved the honor of His servant. ||4]|112]|
ast HIS U Il (202-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
mus Aza AG nity Agvet Il (202-13, at, ve 5) apnay sayvak ka-o aap sahaa-ee. The Lord Himself is the Help and Support of His servants.
fos ufsurs aru AA Het NA (202-13, ast, He 5) nit partipaarai baap jaisay maa-ee. ||1|| He always cherishes them, like their father and mother. ||1]|
us at Hafe Gad AS af Il (202-13, weet, He 5) parabh kee saran ubrai sabh ko-ay. In God's Sanctuary, everyone is saved.
AIG ATES UIG AY APE i TIS il (202-14, wes, v8 5) karan karaavan pooran sach so-ay. rahaa-o. That Perfect True Lord is the Doer, the Cause of causes. ||Pause| |
ma Hfs afhor ATSTTT I (202-14, ast, v2 5) ab man basi-aa karnaihaaraa. My mind now dwells in the Creator Lord.
3 fS5A MISH AY ATS QI (202-14, aGst, He 5) bhai binsay aatam sukh saaraa. ||2|| My fears have been dispelled, and my soul has found the most sublime peace. ||2||
ate faxsut mus AS I Il (202-15, aVst, He 5) kar kirpaa apnay jan raakhay. The Lord has granted His Grace, and saved His humble servant.
HOH HOH & feos Be iil (202-15, west, He 5) janam janam kay kilbikh laathay. ||3]| The sinful mistakes of so many incarnations have been washed away. ||3]|
ade 6 ate ys at sfaniet Il (202-16, west, He 5) kahan na jaa-ay parabh kee vadi-aa-ee. The Greatness of God cannot be described.
SOA VA ALT APSE IIA (202-16, ast, He 5)
naanak daas sadaa sarnaa-ee. ||4||113]| Servant Nanak is forever in His Sanctuary. ||4||113] |
Ta ACSt Fst HIS u Bus (202-17) raag ga-orhee chaytee mehlaa 5 dupday Raag Gauree Chaytee, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:
qe Afsara YATE II (202-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH I AB UTS SET Il (202-18, aGat Ist, vs 5) raam ko bal pooran bhaa-ee. The power of the Lord is universal and perfect, O Siblings of Destiny.
a3 fga o famrd aret a Ta Il (202-18, aGat S37, He 5) taa tay baritha na bi-aapai kaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. So no pain can ever afflict me. ||1]||Pause||
A A fase aA Uf HT II (202-18, west SSH, He 5) jo jo chitvai daas har maa-ee. Whatever the Lord's slave wishes, O mother,
AA aest orf aaret WA (202-19, a+at Sst, He 5) so so kartaa aap karaa-ee. ||1|| the Creator Himself causes that to be done. ||1]|
feea at ufs ufs areret it (202-19, wet S37, He 5) nindak kee parabh pat gavaa-ee. God causes the slanderers to lose their honor.
Soa Ts Te fessS WET NAUAWI (202-19, ast SHH, v2 5) naanak har gun nirbha-o gaa-ee. ||2||114]| Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Fearless Lord. ||2||114]|
UST 20S
ast HIS U Il (203-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
3H 8S sed YH AY A des uss ate SI wigs ua FIC i (203-1, aSst, ne 5) bhuj bal beer barahm sukh saagar garat parat geh layho anguree-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O Brave and Powerful God, Ocean of Peace, I fell into the pit - please, take my hand. ||1]|Pause] |
Refs 3 Hafs 35 Hed Sdt ores eons ges fiiador al (203-2, aBst, 8 5)
sarvan na surat nain sundar nahee aarat du-aar ratat pinguree-aa. ||1||
My ears do not hear, and my eyes are not beautiful. I am in such pain; I am a poor cripple, crying at Your Door. ||1]|
dist Sa nova ATS" H AHS His fust HIsdMM II (203-3, west, He 5)
deenaa naath anaath karunaa mai saajan meet pitaa mahatree-aa.
O Master of the poor and helpless, O Embodiment of Compassion, You are my Friend and Intimate, my Father and Mother.
3do aes fuse ats soa F AG AS utes Sader NINVNAWII (203-3, aS, He 5)
charan kaval hirdai geh naanak bhai saagar sant paar utree-aa. ||2||2||115]| Nanak holds tight to the Lord's Lotus Feet in his heart; thus the Saints cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||2||115]|
Ta Ast Foals Hos u (203-5) raag ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Bairaagan, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsara yATfe it (203-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
au get Hise 3 Aft OS IA AS UA TIS Il (203-6, wat dorafs, ws 5) da-y gusaa-ee meetulaa too” sang hamaarai baas jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Dear Lord God, my Best Friend, please, abide with me. ||1]|Pause||
33 fag wet 3 ates foo sae Aerts II (203-6, aGxt Sorarfs, He 5) tujh bin gharee na jeevnaa Dharig rahnaa sansaar. Without You, I cannot live, even for an instant, and my life in this world is cursed.
Aba ure Auetfsur fony foHy afeate At il (203-7, reat Foafs, ve 5)
jee-a paraan sukh-daati-aa nimakh nimakh balihaar jee. ||1||
O Breath of Life of the soul, O Giver of peace, each and every instant I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||
JAS nse 2T us Tesg Cug aus il (203-7, aeat daats, us 5)
hasat alamban dayh parabh gartahu uDhar gopaal.
Please, God, give me the Support of Your Hand; lift me up and pull me out of this pit, O Lord of the World.
Hfa fasae His adhor F Ae ot tte efenrs iQ 203-8, aCat Aaats, we 5) mohi nirgun mat thoree-aa too” sad hee deen da-i-aal. ||2]| I am worthless, with such a shallow intellect; You are always Merciful to the meek.
21 |
font AY 3d HHet aeo fact ders Il (203-8, ast Saray, 2 5) ki-aa sukh tayray sammlaa kavan biDhee beechaar. What comforts of Yours can I dwell upon? How can I contemplate You?
Rafe AME OH fos Cs wa vrUTT ISI (203-9, aCst Serarfe, v2 5) saran Samaa-ee daas hit oochay agam apaar. ||3]|
You lovingly absorb Your slaves into Your Sanctuary, O Lofty, Inaccessible and Infinite Lord. ||3]|
Ha@ uersa nine fafa om HoT SA HT Il (203-9, a@at Sarafs, He 5)
sagal padaarath asat siDh naam mahaa ras maahi.
All wealth, and the eight miraculous spiritual powers are in the supremely sublime essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
HUA 3e AAS A AS Ufa Te Wf sil (203-10, wat Soars, ue 5)
suparsan bha-ay kaysvaa say jan har gun gaahi. ||4]|
Those humble beings, with whom the beautifully-haired Lord is thoroughly pleased, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4] |
Hs fust AS dou FAT YS wT Il (203-10, ast Soars, us 5) maat pitaa sut banDhpo too” mayray paraan aDhaar. You are my mother, father, son and relative; You are the Support of the breath of life.
WUHfa soa Sn fay Sfmt HATS NUNIUIE! (203-11, west Foafs, 2 5)
saaDhsang naanak bhajai bikh tari-aa sansaar. ||5||1||116]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak meditates on the Lord, and swims across the poisonous world-ocean. ||5]|1||116||
ast agate we a Fs a wis ns u_ (203-12)
ga-orhee bairaagan raho-ay kay chhant kay ghar mehlaa 5 Gauree Bairaagan, Chhants Of Rehoay, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE II (203-12)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: J aet oH fumrd ar] it (203-13, aGst Seats, v3 5)
hai ko-ee raam pi-aaro gaavai. Is there anyone who will sing of the Beloved Lord?
Ava afore AY AG urs ll TIE il (203-13, aCe Aoats, we 5) sarab kali-aan sookh sach paavai. rahaa-o. Surely, this will bring all pleasures and comforts. ||Pause] |
aS 8o wns fees Sarat i (203-13, ast aware, us 5) ban ban khojat firat bairaagee. The renunciate goes out into the woods, searching for Him.
fase org Sa fee wait Il (203-14, aSst Seats, x: 5) birlay kaahoo ayk liv laagee. But those who embrace love for the One Lord are very rare.
fate ofs urfemr A esarait 4 (203-14, west Faorafs, ve 5) jin har paa-i-aa say vadbhaagee. ||1|| Those who find the Lord are very fortunate and blessed. ||1]|
qontfea Hooter ad Il (203-14, west darafs, ne 5) barahmaadik sankaadik chaahai. The Gods like Brahma and Sanak yearn for Him;
Hot Ast faa afs wird i (203-15, aGst Feats, nH: 5) jogee jatee siDh har aahai. the Yogis, celibates and Siddhas yearn for the Lord.
fanfo uaufs A of TE Wd MQM (203-15, aGst Sarafs, He 5) jisahi paraapat so har gun gaahai. ||2]| One who is so blessed, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
3 at Hote fre fangs oct Il (203-15, a@at Soars, n3 5)
taa kee saran jin bisrat naahee. I seek the Sanctuary of those who have not forgotten Him.
saat ofa HS fHardt Il (203-16, aGet aerate, Hz 5) vadbhaagee har sant milaahee. By great good fortune, one meets the Lord's Saint.
HOH HIE f3T HS SAH MSI (203-16, aSst Seats, ve 5) janam maran tih moolay naahee. ||3]| They are not subject to the cycle of birth and death. ||3]|
ate fasur fs utsH fimrg i (203-16, a@st darafe, He 5) kar kirpaa mil pareetam pi-aaray. Show Your Mercy, and lead me to meet You, O my Darling Beloved.
fasS Hog us By mrs Il (203-17, ast seats, ve 5) bin-o sunhu parabh ooch apaaray. Hear my prayer, O Lofty and Infinite God;
SOA HAAS SH MOST USUAUIAIW I (203-17, ast Forafs, 2 5) naanak maa“gat naam aDhaaray. ||4||1||117]| Nanak begs for the Support of Your Name. ||4||1]|117]|
UST 2oV
TH Ast usst HIG U (204-1) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas urfe il (204-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ago Ts ywoufs fees Hat yet ud JIS Il (204-2, west yseit, we 5) kavan gun paraanpat mila-o mayree maa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. By what virtues can I meet the Lord of life, O my mother? ||1]|Pause| |
gu de afa ae dat xfs usents ga S wret WAU (204-2, ast yee, He 5) roop heen buDh bal heenee mohi pardaysan door tay aa-ee. ||1]|| I have no beauty, understanding or strength; I am a stranger, from far away. ||1]|
ofss eae o Hae HST Hf nova at ATT AHET IQ (204-3, west yset, Hs 5) naahin darab na joban maatee mohi anaath kee karahu samaa-ee. ||2|| I am not wealthy or youthful. Iam an orphan - please, unite me with Yourself. ||2||
dns dns set Foals ys vans aC UG fess fSrret 3 (204-3, west ust, us 5) khojat khojat bha-ee bairaagan parabh darsan ka-o ha-o firat tisaa-ee. ||3] | Searching and searching, I have become a renunciate, free of desire. I wander around, searching for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||3] |
ae eins faurs us soa HUAfa Hat Fale TsTET UNSNAUIAICH (204-4, ast yset, He 5) deen da-i-aal kirpaal parabh naanak saaDhsang mayree jalan bujhaa-ee. ||4]|1]|118]| God is Compassionate, and Merciful to the meek; O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the fire of desire has been quenched. ||4||1]|118]|
ATSt HIS U Il (204-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ys fhod a uifs ufe rail Il (204-5, west, He 5) parabh milbay ka-o pareet man laagee. The loving desire to meet my Beloved has arisen within my mind.
ufe wag Hf ass dost AS AZ HS asset NA TIS il (204-5, Tat, 2 5)
paa-ay laga-o mohi kara-o bayntee ko-oo sant milai badbhaagee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I touch His Feet, and offer my prayer to Him. If only I had the great good fortune to meet the Saint. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho nau us su wird He oft Hfs Hfo Aare fSnrsit | (204-6, ast, He 5)
man arpa-o Dhan raakha-o aagai man kee mat mohi sagal ti-aagee.
I surrender my mind to Him; I place my wealth before Him. I totally renounce my selfish ways.
A us at of am Hare mates fea fen fue feaatt nail (204-7, aGat, 3 5) jo parabh kee har kathaa sunaavai an-din fira-o tis pichhai viraagee. ||1|| One who teaches me the Sermon of the Lord God - night and day, I shall follow Him.
[21
Ysa GH vig wa yae sfeS usy aha Aaa i (204-7, Tes, ws 5)
poorab karam ankur jab pargatay bhayti-o purakh rasik bairaagee.
When the seed of the karma of past actions sprouted, I met the Lord; He is both the Enjoyer and the Renunciate.
fife& nitg fies ofs atSa HOH HOH at Het Ara WIANQUAVEN (204-8, TSH, He 5) miti-o anDhayr milat har naanak janam janam kee so-ee jaagee. ||2||2||119]| My darkness was dispelled when I met the Lord. O Nanak, after being asleep for countless incarnations, I have awakened. ||2||2||119]|
TCSt HIS U Il (204-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
foan J uUdt fifa af ure il (204-9, a@at, He 5)
nikas ray pankhee simar har paa™kh.
Come out, O soul-bird, and let the meditative remembrance of the Lord be your wings.
fife AQ ASfe ag uss TH 339 Shs Aft TY AU TIS Il (204-9, Test, v2 5)
mil saaDhoo saran gahu pooran raam ratan hee-aray sang raakh. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meet the Holy Saint, take to His Sanctuary, and keep the perfect jewel of the Lord enshrined in your heart. ||1]|Pause| |
3H ot get feAS oA uaa ifs Ste HT at SA Il (204-10, aBat, we 5)
bharam kee koo-ee tarisnaa ras pankaj at teekh-yan moh kee faas.
Superstition is the well, thirst for pleasure is the mud, and emotional attachment is the noose, so tight around your neck.
AEGIS AIS Wd dfs VIS GHG 3 aA Add (SSA NAM (204-10, wat, He 5)
kaatanhaar jagat gur gobid charan kamal taa kay karahu nivaas. ||1|| The only one who can cut this is the Guru of the World, the Lord of the Universe. So let yourself dwell at His Lotus Feet. ||1]|
afs fasu diffe ys utsn dat ava Hog maetA Il (204-11, ast, He 5)
kar kirpaa gobind parabh pareetam deenaa naath sunhu ardaas.
Bestow Your Mercy, O Lord of the Universe, O God, My Beloved, Master of the meek - please, listen to my prayer.
ad dfs SI soa & Aum ae fils AS Suet TH NINSIIVON (204-12, west, Hz 5) kar geh layho naanak kay su-aamee jee-o pind sabh tumree raas. ||2||3||120|| Take my hand, O Lord and Master of Nanak; my body and soul all belong to You. [12] 13] [120] |
ast HIS U Il (204-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ues AS fAHTS HO AT Il (204-13, aSHt, 2 5) har paykhan ka-o simrat man mayraa. My mind yearns to behold the Lord in meditation.
nin fumrrt fese@ fea sot d aet As fhe Sa NA TIC Il (204-13, aBs, ne 5)
aas pi-aasee chitva-o din rainee hai ko-ee sant milaavai nayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I think of Him, I hope and thirst for Him, day and night; is there any Saint who may bring Him near me? ||1||Pause] |
Ae age BA BAS at nifoa sifs fsH ase fads Il (204-14, west, He 5) sayvaa kara-o daas daasan kee anik bhaa‘t tis kara-o nihoraa. I serve the slaves of His slaves; in so many ways, I beg of Him.
se ufg 38 AY Hae fas afs VIA AS St GST NA (204-14, west, He 5)
tulaa Dhaar tolay sukh saglay bin har daras sabho hee thoraa. ||1]|
Setting them upon the scale, I have weighed all comforts and pleasures; without the Lord's Blessed Vision, they are all totally inadequate. ||1]||
Hs uAfe we Ts Add HOH HOH A AS SIT Il (204-15, aGet, ve 5)
sant parsaad gaa-ay gun saagar janam janam ko jaat bahoraa.
By the Grace of the Saints, I sing the Praises of the Ocean of virtue; after countless incarnations, I have been released.
Moe HY Ses Tis aoa AGH fAsIE ASG AST MQUSNIWU (204-16, ast, we 5) aanad sookh bhaytat har naanak janam kirtaarath safal savayraa. ||2||4]]121] | Meeting the Lord, Nanak has found peace and bliss; his life is redeemed, and prosperity dawns for him. ||2||4]|121]|
THT Ast uset HIB U (204-17) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars YATE it (204-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fas fafa fires aAret AS oH THE I (204-18, wat vast, He 5) kin biDh milai gusaa-ee mayray raam raa-ay. How may I meet my Master, the King, the Lord of the Universe?
aet wit AS AoA AMES Hfo Hag Sf ssret NA TIS i (204-18, aSst ysett, ne 5) ko-ee aisaa sant sahj sukh-daata mohi maarag day-ay bataa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Is there any Saint, who can bestow such celestial peace, and show me the Way to Him? ||1||Pause] |
UST 2ou
nists ned o vet ofimr fefs user TBH uret I (205-1, aSat ysett, He 5)
antar alakh na jaa-ee lakhi-aa vich parh-daa ha-umai paa-ee.
The Unseen Lord is deep within the self; He cannot be seen; the curtain of egotism intervenes.
Hfenr fo AS Aa Afeor feg sau ao fa AT UA (205-1, aes yaet, He 5)
maa-i-aa mohi sabho jag so-i-aa ih bharam kahhu ki-o jaa-ee. ||1||
In emotional attachment to Maya, all the world is asleep. Tell me, how can this doubt be dispelled? ||1]|
ea’ Hats feas fafs sas ffs aso aes Bret I (205-2, west ye, ne 5)
aykaa sangat ikat garihi bastay mil baat na kartay bhaa-ee.
The one lives together with the other in the same house, but they do not talk to one another, O Siblings of Destiny.
ea ang fag ue vIs Ga sAy vidya Set II (205-2, wat vse, ve 5)
ayk basat bin panch duhaylay oh basat agochar thaa-ee. ||2||
Without the one substance, the five are miserable; that substance is in the unapproachable place. ||2||
fan or fag fats dor srr ae aa ACuret Il (205-3, west yas, us 5) jis kaa garihu tin dee-aa taalaa kunjee gur sa-upaa-ee. And the one whose home it is, has locked it up, and given the key to the Guru.
nifoa Bure ad odt ue fag Afsas ASST SI (205-4, wat vast, He 5)
anik upaav karay nahee paavai bin satgur sarnaa-ee. ||3]| You may make all sorts of efforts, but it cannot be obtained, without the Sanctuary of the True Guru. |[3]|
fae & dus ae Afsas fae WOnaS fee wet I (205-4, reat yaet, He 5)
jin kay banDhan kaatay satgur tin saaDhsangat liv laa-ee.
Those whose bonds have been broken by the True Guru, enshrine love for the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
us aot fife Hares afenr afs saa SEB SET ISI (205-5, Text yaet, He 5)
panch janaa mil mangal gaa-i-aa har naanak bhayd na bhaa-ee. ||4||
The self-elect, the self-realized beings, meet together and sing the joyous songs of the Lord. Nanak, there is no difference between them, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4]|
Ae on ofe feo fafa fies are? I (205-5, rat uae, Hs 5) mayray raam raa-ay in biDh milai gusaa-ee. This is how my Sovereign Lord King, the Lord of the Universe, is met;
Hod sfeur gy fis ufo over fife vst aS Met NA THIS SAT MAUI (205-6, wat usat, He 5)
sahj bha-i-aa bharam khin meh naathaa mil jotee jot samaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. [J1][122]|
celestial bliss is attained in an instant, and doubt is dispelled. Meeting Him, my light merges in the Light. ||1]|Second Pause||1||122||
ast HIS U Il (205-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
MA Uses UTEE Il (205-7, west, v2 5) aiso parcha-o paa-i-o. I am intimate with Him;
adt fur efeurs died afsas usfo sate an soe i (205-7, west, He 5) karee kirpaa da-i-aal beethulay satgur mujheh bataa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. granting His Grace, my Kind Beloved has told me of the True Guru. ||1]||Pause] |
AS as tuG 35 35 SH Tt fo feo farora SE rfEE I (205-8, aah, v2 5) jat kat daykh-a-u tat tat tum hee mohi ih bisu-aas ho-ay aa-i-o. Wherever I look, there You are; I am totally convinced of this.
a ufs ag maeth dast AG Has FT SWaTES NA (205-8, west, He 5) kai peh kara-o ardaas bayntee ja-o sunto hai raghuraa-i-o. ||1]|| Unto whom should I pray? The Lord Himself hears all. ||1]|
ofS AIA dus dfs 3g St AST AOA AY UTES Il (205-9, aSat, v2 5) lahi-o sahsaa banDhan gur toray taa’ sadaa sahj sukh paa-i-o. My anxiety is over. The Guru has cut away my bonds, and I have found eternal peace.
dat AT Het efe SH AY Bu ae feafeS 2H (205-10, wet, He 5) honaa saa so-ee fun hosee sukh dukh kahaa dikhaa-i-o. ||2]| Whatever shall be, shall be in the end; so where can pain and pleasure be seen? ||2| |
us qos a 8a ore afe user dfs feufEE i (205-10, ast, ne 5)
khand barahmand kaa ayko thaanaa gur pardaa khol dikhaa-i-o.
The continents and the solar systems rest in the support of the One Lord. The Guru has removed the veil of illusion, and shown this to me.
o@ fofa ant fours fea oet 3B wafs ad AMEE SI (205-11, Test, v2 5)
na-o niDh naam niDhaan ik thaa-ee ta-o baahar kaithai jaa-i-o. ||3]|
The nine treasures of the wealth of the Name of the Lord are in that one place. Where else should we go? ||3]|
ta ated nifoa ats vat so udars seve il (205-11, ast, v2 5)
aykai kanik anik bhaat saajee baho parkaar rachaa-i-o.
The same gold is fashioned into various articles; just so, the Lord has made the many patterns of the creation.
a Sod SdH Afe wet 3 fEe 33 33 frotES igiInI3il (205-12, wea, vs 5)
kaho naanak bharam gur kho-ee hai iv tatai tat milaa-i-o. ||4]|2||123]|
Says Nanak, the Guru has dispelled my doubt; in this way, my essence merges into God's essence. ||4]|2]|123]|
ast HIS U Il (205-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
m@u we fesH sors Il (205-13, Tat, He 5) a-oDh ghatai dinas rainaaray. This life is diminishing, day and night.
Ho aa ful aA ASS UA TIS Il (205-13, Test, He 5) man gur mil kaaj savaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting with the Guru, your affairs shall be resolved. ||1||Pause| |
aI Fost Hod HS HIST AS fds at BH Il (205-14, aVHt, ve 5) kara-o baynantee sunhu mayray meetaa sant tahal kee baylaa. Listen, my friends, I beg of you: now is the time to serve the Saints!
ato ufe veg dfs oe nat SAS AIS IU (205-14, ast, v2 5)
eehaa khaat chalhu har laahaa aagai basan suhaylaa. ||1]|
In this world, earn the profit of the Lord's Name, and hereafter, you shall dwell in peace. ||1||
feg HAG faorg AOA Hfs sfaS yan farwrst il (205-15, ast, ve 5)
ih sansaar bikaar sahsay meh tari-o barahm gi-aanee.
This world is engrossed in corruption and cynicism. Only those who know God are saved.
fants warfe ure ots dA nee ae f3fs AST MQM (205-15, TBs, He 5)
jisahi jagaa-ay pee-aa-ay har ras akath kathaa tin jaanee. ||2|| Those who are awakened by the Lord to drink in this sublime essence, come to know the Unspoken Speech of the Lord. ||2||
Ww ag ure Het fearsg of aa 3 Hafs SAT Il (205-16, aeHH, He 5)
jaa ka-o aa-ay so-ee vihaajhahu har gur tay maneh basayraa.
Purchase only that for which you have come into the world, and through the Guru, the Lord shall dwell within your mind.
fon ufe HIG ued HY HoH Safe & fea ST NWSI (205-16, TCs, He 5)
nij ghar mahal paavhu sukh sehjay bahur na ho-igo fayraa. ||3] |
Within the home of your own inner being, you shall obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence with intuitive ease. You shall not be consigned again to the wheel of reincarnation. ||3||
nisort usa frors Heat Hs at UT Il (205-17, aes, H2 5)
antarjaamee purakh biDhaatay sarDhaa man kee pooray.
O Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts, Primal Being, Architect of Destiny: please fulfill this yearning of my mind.
arog oA fedt AY Ha H AG afe ASS at UF UNSNIVEI (205-18, ast, we 5) naanak daas ihee sukh maagai mo ka-o kar santan kee Dhooray. ||4||3||124|| Nanak, Your slave, begs for this happiness: let me be the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|3]|124] |
ast HIS U Il (205-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ay fust ys HT I (205-18, 7st, vs 5) raakh pitaa parabh mayray. Save me, O My Father God.
Hfo fesde AS Ts 3g AU TIC il (205-19, aSHH, v2 5) mohi nirgun sabh gun tayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am worthless and without virtue; all virtues are Yours. ||1]||Pause| |
us fraret Sa adhe gag TUSITS | (205-19, ast, v2 5) panch bikhaadee ayk gareebaa raakho raakhanhaaray. The five vicious thieves are assaulting my poor being; save me, O Savior Lord!
ae acs nig sos Haefs we Aafs STS AU (205-19, aSst, He 5) khayd karahi ar bahut santaaveh aa-i-o saran tuhaaray. ||1]| They are tormenting and torturing me. I have come, seeking Your Sanctuary. ||1]||
Ust 2o€ ate afs wfeS uifsa ag ast eats aT ST I (206-1, a7Cat, 3 5)
kar kar haari-o anik baho bhaatee chhodeh katahoo™ naahee. Trying all sorts of things, I have grown weary, but still, they will not leave me alone.
ta as vfs set Gat HOH far fife AST NI (206-2, west, He 5)
ayk baat sun taakee otaa saaDhsang mit jaahee. ||2||
But I have heard that they can be rooted out, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; and so I seek their Shelter. ||2]|
ate fasur Hs fue Hfo foe 3 dten urfeor I (206-2, ast, He 5)
kar kirpaa sant milay mohi tin tay Dheeraj paa-i-aa. In their Mercy, the Saints have met me, and from them, I have obtained satisfaction.
Hat H3 AG xfs fags ae a Hae afeEMr SII (206-3, as, v2 5)
santee mant dee-o mohi nirbha-o gur kaa sabad kamaa-i-aa. ||3]|
The Saints have given me the Mantra of the Fearless Lord, and now I practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
aifs we Gfe Ho faaret HOA AIST sat Il (206-3, aCHt, Hz 5)
jeet la-ay o-ay mahaa bikhaadee sahj suhaylee banee.
I have now conquered those terrible evil-doers, and my speech is now sweet and sublime.
aI aoa Hie ster ugar ufenr ue fegarat ISUsiIQuil (206-4, aSst, He 5) kaho naanak man bha-i-aa pargaasaa paa-i-aa pad nirbaanee. ||4||4]|125||
Says Nanak, the Divine Light has dawned within my mind; I have obtained the state of Nirvaanaa. ||4]|4]|125]|
ast HIS U Il (206-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
6g wifsorat atfemr Il (206-5, aBst, He 5) oh abhinaasee raa-i-aa. He is the Eternal King.
foss@ Af sud SHS fea sag aT S mrfemr NA TIE Il 206-5, TSH, He 5) nirbha-o sang tumaarai bastay ih daran kahaa tay aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Fearless Lord abides with you. So where does this fear come from? ||1||Pause||
Sa Hats F dfs mers Sa Hales fSHS I (206-6, aCat, vz 5)
ayk mahal too” hohi afaaro ayk mahal nimaano.
In one person, You are arrogant and proud, and in another, You are meek and humble.
Sa Hats F vim wm Sa Has TSAS WAU (206-6, Tes, ws 5) ayk mahal too” aapay aapay ayk mahal gareebaano. ||1|| In one person, You are all by Yourself, and in another, You are poor. ||1]|
fa Hats 3 ufsy aast Sa Hales yw TT I (206-7, ast, we 5)
ayk mahal too” pandit baktaa ayk mahal khal hotaa.
In one person, you are a Pandit, a religious scholar and a preacher, and in another, You are just a fool.
ea Hole SAS fas YA Sa Hols AE F BIT Il (206-7, ast, vs 5) ayk mahal too” sabh kichh garaahaj ayk mahal kachhoo na laytaa. ||2]| In one person, You grab hold of everything, and in another, You accept nothing. ||2]|
are at usdt a ad sudt fusreaad AS Il (206-8, ast, He 5) kaath kee putree kahaa karai bapuree khilaavanhaaro jaanai. What can the poor wooden puppet do? The Master Puppeteer knows everything.
AAT 3y ade] MH SI SA dt ATA MTS ISI (206-8, ast, v2 5) jaisaa bhaykh karaavai baajeegar oh taiso hee saaj aanai. ||3]|| As the Puppeteer dresses the puppet, so is the role the puppet plays. ||3]||
mifoad aodt sos ats adior wef Jur gue|Ts Il (206-9, TSH, v2 5)
anik kothree bahut bhaat karee-aa aap ho-aa rakhvaaraa.
The Lord has created the various chambers of assorted descriptions, and He Himself protects them.
AA Hols Ia SA JJor far feg ad fers ISI (206-10, west, He 5)
jaisay mahal raakhai taisai rahnaa ki-aa ih karai bichaaraa. ||4||
As is that vessel in which the Lord places the soul, so does it dwell. What can this poor being do? ||4||
fate fae aur ret we fafs feo ne fafa At I (206-10, aGst, He 5) jin kichh kee-aa so-ee jaanai jin ih sabh biDh saajee. The One who created the thing, understands it; He has fashioned all of this.
aT sed wudus AMM ahifs wus art NUNUNAIEN (206-11, Test, Hz 5)
kaho naanak aprampar su-aamee keemat apunay kaajee. ||5||5]|126] | Says Nanak, the Lord and Master is Infinite; He alone understands the value of His Creation. ||5]|5]|126] |
ast HIS U Il (206-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
efs efs 3 fatter & TAM II (206-12, aeet, H: 5) chhod chhod ray bikhi-aa kay rasoo-aa. Give them up - give up the pleasures of corruption;
Cafes sfus 3 wea wed fae fast afore uM UI TTS Il (206-12, ast, we 5) urajh rahi-o ray baavar gaavar ji-o kirkhai hari-aa-i-o pasoo-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
you are entangled in them, you crazy fool, like an animal grazing in the green fields. ||1]|Pause| |
nH Wald FS MUS aH A Af 3 VS SI SAMT Il (206-13, ast, we 5) jo jaaneh too’ apunay kaajai so sang na chaalai tayrai tasoo-aa. That which you believe to be of use to you, shall not go even an inch with you.
oat urfes aa front efe fetes nrg ats aaa AI (206-13, wat, we 5)
naago aa-i-o naag siDhaasee fayr firi-o ar kaal garsoo-aa. ||1]||
Naked you came, and naked you shall depart. You shall go round and round the cycle of birth and death, and you shall be food for Death. ||1]|
Ufy ufé ¢ ats at Sher ote ute fad BS TAM I (206-14, ast, He 5)
paykh paykh ray kasumbh kee leelaa raach maach tinhoo" la-o hasoo-aa. Watching, watching the transitory dramas of the world, you are embroiled and enmeshed in them, and you laugh with delight.
dias 3fe fear nig sat Abt t aA B als AEM MM (206-15, ast, we 5)
chheejat dor dinas ar rainee jee-a ko kaaj na keeno kachhoo-aa. ||2]|
The string of life is wearing thin, day and night, and you have done nothing for your soul. ||2||
aes aes fee tt fraurs ats Cas 3g MOAT II (206-15, aR, v3 5)
karat karat iv hee birDhaano haari-o uktay tan kheensoo-aa.
Doing your deeds, you have grown old; your voice fails you, and your body has become weak.
fa HfaS fs Haat wer CAS we ast FT VAM ISI (206-16, at, we 5) ji-o mohi-o un mohnee baalaa us tay ghatai naahee ruch chasoo-aa. ||3]|| You were enticed by Maya in your youth, and your attachment for it has not diminished, one little bit. ||3]|
ma wir fe aefs ferfes 38 nafs ufss sft TeaAMM Il (206-16, a@at, HW: 5)
jag aisaa mohi gureh dikhaa-i-o ta-o saran pari-o taj garabsu-aa.
The Guru has shown me that this is the way of the world; I have abandoned the dwelling of pride, and entered Your Sanctuary.
Hed ys ot fs wastes fest waa wA gals as AAMT ISIENIIIN (206-17, Tes, 8 5)
maarag parabh ko sant bataa-i-o darirhee naanak daas bhagat har jasoo-aa. [|4] [6] ]127]|
The Saint has shown me the Path of God; slave Nanak has implanted devotional worship and the Praise of the Lord. ||4||6]|127] |
ast HIS U Il (206-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
33 faq AEG THT Il (206-18, aSst, He 5) tujh bin kavan hamaaraa. Except for You, who is mine?
He UTSH Yrs wUTE UA FITS Il (206-18, west, He 5) mayray pareetam paraan aDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. O my Beloved, You are the Support of the breath of life. ||1]|Pause| |
nisd at fafa 3H dt wat 3H dt AAS AIS Il (206-19, aBst, ns 5) antar kee biDh tum hee jaanee tum hee sajan suhaylay. You alone know the condition of my inner being. You are my Beautiful Friend.
x.
Hed AUTH 3S 3 US HT SAT MIT MSS IA (206-19, aSHt, He 5)
sarab sukhaa mai tujh tay paa-ay mayray thaakur agah atolay. ||1]||
I receive all comforts from You, O my Unfathomable and Immeasurable Lord and Master. ||1]|
UST 2OD
aafe o AAG Sus Jar Te fours AYES II (207-1, ast, Hi: 5) baran na saaka-o tumray rangaa gun niDhaan sukh-daatay. I cannot describe Your Manifestations, O Treasure of Excellence, O Giver of peace.
MEH nase ys uifaeAt Us TT 3 AS Ml (207-1, Tes, v2 5)
agam agochar parabh abhinaasee pooray gur tay jaatay. ||2||
God is Inaccessible, Incomprehensible and Imperishable; He is known through the Perfect Guru. ||2]|
3H 3@ ofe ate fosaee Aa 3 IGH HSH Il (207-2, aGat, He 5)
bharam bha-o kaat kee-ay nihkayval jab tay ha-umai maaree.
My doubt and fear have been taken away, and I have been made pure, since my ego was conquered.
HOH HIS A Ya AVA AUHaS TIA MSI (207-2, Tes, ws 5)
janam maran ko chooko sahsaa saaDhsangat darsaaree. ||3]||
My fear of birth and death has been abolished, beholding Your Blessed Vision in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3]|
ade uutg ase Td AS ats WE we sd Il (207-3, aSst, He 5) charan pakhaar kara-o gur sayvaa baar jaa-o lakh baree-aa. I wash the Guru's Feet and serve Him; I am a sacrifice to Him, 100,000 times.
fag une feg s@ae shor AS soa fun Afar fiestor SONIC (207-3, TSH, He 5) jih parsaad ih bha-ojal tari-aa jan naanak pari-a sang miree-aa. ||4||7||128]|
By His Grace, servant Nanak has crossed over this terrifying world-ocean; I am united with my Beloved. ||4||7||128]|
TCS HIS U I (207-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
33 fag azo dis Sct Il (207-5, west, He 5) tujh bin kavan reejhaavai tohee. Who can please You, except You Yourself?
3g gy Aas Sf Hat UA TIS il 207-5, ast, 3 5) tayro roop sagal daykh mohee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon Your Beauteous Form, all are entranced. ||1||Pause| |
Hoa ufenis fees gut ASG Asa AHS Sa Sat il (207-5, wat, we 5)
Surag pa-i-aal mirat bhoo-a mandal sarab samaano aykai ohee.
In the heavenly paradise, in the nether regions of the underworld, on the planet earth and throughout the galaxies, the One Lord is pervading everywhere.
fhe fhe aes Hae ad Aafo AeE Hier oad Sct Sat WA (207-6, aVHt, 2 5)
Siv siv karat sagal kar joreh sarab ma-i-aa thaakur tayree dohee. ||1]||
Everyone calls upon You with their palms pressed together, saying, "Shiva, Shiva". O Merciful Lord and Master, everyone cries out for Your Help. ||1]|
ufss USS SAT OH SHA AUeTSt fasHs Asset Il (207-7, aSat, v2 5)
patit paavan thaakur naam tumraa sukh-daa-ee nirmal seetlohee.
Your Name, O Lord and Master, is the Purifier of sinners, the Giver of peace, immaculate, cooling and soothing.
fomra four aod efsuret Ha 3d fAG WS Todt NNCNIVEN (207-7, TES, v2 5) gi-aan Dhi-aan naanak vadi-aa-ee sant tayray si-o gaal galohee. ||2||8||129| |
O Nanak, spiritual wisdom, meditation and glorious greatness come from dialogue and discourse with Your Saints. ||2]|8]]129]|
ast HIS U Il (207-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fog fumrs Abr i (207-8, aBst, He 5) milhu pi-aaray jee-aa. Meet with me, O my Dear Beloved.
ys at Sure Shot Ul TIS Il (207-9, west, we 5) parabh kee-aa tumaaraa thee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O God, whatever You do - that alone happens. ||1||Pause] |
nifox AO ag ot sfimr safe safe ey usr I (207-9, aeHt, ne 5)
anik janam baho jonee bharmi-aa bahur bahur dukh paa-i-aa.
Wandering around through countless incarnations, I endured pain and suffering in so many lives, over and over again.
suet faut 3 wou tg ust do tg waA dfs TfeMr AI (207-10, aBst, He 5)
tumree kirpaa tay maanukh dayh paa-ee hai dayh daras har raa-i-aa. ||1||
By Your Grace, I obtained this human body; grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Sovereign Lord King. ||1]|
Het dur fi fsa sat nied 3 faa dt atst Il (207-10, aBsh, He 5) so-ee ho-aa jo tis bhaanaa avar na kin hee keetaa. That which pleases His Will has come to pass; no one else can do anything.
SHo Se Sot Hf Hfyor Way St AS MQM (207-11, Tes, v8 5)
tumrai bhaanai bharam mohi mohi-aa jaagat naahee sootaa. ||2]|
By Your Will, enticed by the illusion of emotional attachment, the people are asleep; they do not wake up. ||2||
fas@ Hog SH UToufs fimrd fagur fof efenir I (207-11, west, He 5) bin-o sunhu tum paraanpat pi-aaray kirpaa niDh da-i-aalaa. Please hear my prayer, O Lord of Life, O Beloved, Ocean of mercy and compassion.
ofy &g fust ys He marag afte yfsurer Sil (207-12, west, 3 5) raakh layho pitaa parabh mayray anaathah kar partipaalaa. ||3]|| Save me, O my Father God. I am an orphan - please, cherish me! ||3]|
fan 6 snfo feafe6 vane WUHafs & ue Il (207-12, aSst, v2 5)
jis no tumeh dikhaa-i-o darsan saaDhsangat kai paachhai.
You reveal the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, for the sake of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ate fasur ufs eg Ase at AY atea feg FE ISICNISON (207-13, Tes, 8 5)
kar kirpaa Dhoor dayh santan kee sukh naanak ih baachhai. ||4||9||130]|
Grant Your Grace, and bless us with the dust of the feet of the Saints; Nanak yearns for this peace. ||4]|9]|130]|
ACSt HIS U Il (207-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
IG 3 a Sfeodt I (207-14, wea, v2 5) ha-o taa kai balihaaree. I am a Sacrifice to those
WT a ASH SH MOSH WAU TIC Il (207-14, TEs, ve 5) jaa kai kayval naam aDhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. who take the Support of the Naam. ||1]|Pause| |
Hf st at asa Toba AS USAIN Sar TS Il (207-15, ast, v8 5)
mahimaa taa kee kaytak ganee-ai jan paarbarahm rang raatay.
How can I recount the praises of those humble beings who are attuned to the Love of the Supreme Lord God?
AY Aon noe far Afar Sa AMAL nies o STS MAUI (207-15, ast, He 5) sookh sahj aanand tinaa sang un samsar avar na daatay. ||1]||
Peace, intuitive poise and bliss are with them. There are no other givers equal to them. ||1]|
Aas Gorse ASt wre HAS TA fuMMAT II (207-16, ast, He 5)
jagat uDhaaran say-ee aa-ay jo jan daras pi-aasaa.
They have come to save the world - those humble beings who thirst for His Blessed Vision.
Go at Hafe ud A Sfaor ASA US MAT III (207-16, 7st, Hs 5)
un kee saran parai so tari-aa satsang pooran aasaa. ||2| |
Those who seek their Sanctuary are carried across; in the Society of the Saints, their hopes are fulfilled. ||2] |
J a vote us 3 Het Ao a Afa feos Il (207-17, ast, He 5)
taa kai charan para-o taa jeevaa jan kai sang nihaalaa.
If I fall at their Feet, then I live; associating with those humble beings, I remain happy.
ISH at FE TE HG NT dg ys fags iS (207-18, Tes, Hs 5)
bhagtan kee rayn ho-ay man mayraa hohu parabhoo kirpaalaa. ||3] |
O God, please be merciful to me, that my mind might become the dust of the feet of Your devotees. ||3]|
TH HaS weT A UA AS fae Fa His whew I (207-18, agHt, He 5)
raaj joban avaDh jo deesai sabh kichh jug meh ghaati-aa.
Power and authority, youth and age - whatever is seen in this world, all of it shall fade away.
on fours He 6230 fone feg asa dis US wfent NSIIONISUI (207-19, Test, He 5) naam niDhaan sad navtan nirmal ih naanak har Dhan khaati-aa. ||4]|10||131]|
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever new and immaculate. Nanak has earned this wealth of the Lord. ||4]|10]|131]|
UST 2oc
ast HIS U Il (208-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
na Fats Afs urfES aa F il (208-1, west, He 5) jog jugat sun aa-i-o gur tay. I came to the Guru, to learn the Way of Yoga.
H a@ vfsag Aafe este na soe i (208-1, west, He 5) mo ka-o satgur sabad bujhaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru has revealed it to me through the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
o@ us fyent fer 3a nfo afer fone feu SHAS Il (208-2, ast, ue 5)
na-o khand parithmee is tan meh ravi-aa nimakh nimakh namaskaaraa.
He is contained in the nine continents of the world, and within this body; each and every moment, I humbly bow to Him.
ctfimr aa at Her arat fefse Sa fedarat All (208-2, ast, 2 5)
deekhi-aa gur kee mundraa kaanee darirhi-o ayk nirankaaraa. ||1]||
I have made the Guru's Teachings my ear-rings, and I have enshrined the One Formless Lord within my being. ||1]|
us 38 fife se feast San & afh ate I (208-3, aeHt, ne 5)
panch chaylay mil bha-ay iktaraa aykas kai vas kee-ay.
I have brought the five disciples together, and they are now under the control of the one mind.
oA Saale urfomradt sa fesns Aait Me in (208-3, a@st, we 5)
das bairaagan aagi-aakaaree tab nirmal jogee thee-ay. ||2||
When the ten hermits become obedient to the Lord, then I became an immaculate Yogi. ||2]|
3H Hote veret fags ug Sa ate uftmr i (208-4, west, He 5) bharam jaraa-ay charaa-ee bibhootaa panth ayk kar paykhi-aa.
I have burnt my doubt, and smeared my body with the ashes. My path is to see the One and Only Lord.
Hon AY A alet sas A oats HASla Sfemr ail (08-5, wes, H8 5)
sahj sookh so keenee bhugtaa jo thaakur mastak laykhi-aa. ||3]|
I have made that intuitive peace my food; the Lord Master has written this pre- ordained destiny upon my forehead. ||3]|
Ad 38 ardt so nIAS afus fiat nods set Il (208-5, west, Hz 5)
jah bha-o naahee tahaa aasan baaDhi-o singee anhat baanee.
In that place where there is no fear, I have assumed my Yogic posture. The unstruck melody of His Bani is my horn.
33 Seg Sa ats The Fals ay fs Set gil (208-6, ast, v2 5)
tat beechaar dandaa kar raakhi-o jugat naam man bhaanee. ||4| |
I have made contemplation upon the essential reality my Yogic staff. The Love of the Name in my mind is my Yogic lifestyle. ||4]|
MAT Halt esaTat Se Ufeor a das aS | (208-6, ast, v2 5) aisaa jogee vadbhaagee bhaytai maa-i-aa kay banDhan kaatai. By great good fortune, such a Yogi is met, who cuts away the bonds of Maya.
As un ae fH vats at aoa fA Ua TS NUNIUIS2I (208-7, 7H, He 5) Sayvaa pooj kara-o tis moorat kee naanak tis pag chaatai. ||5||11]|132|| Nanak serves and adores this wondrous person, and kisses his feet. ||5]]11]|132]||
ast HIS U Il (208-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
MigU URTGE OTH Hog Aas fomrfEs HIST Il (208-8, ast, ve 5)
anoop padaarath naam sunhu sagal Dhi-aa-ilay meetaa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is an incomparably beautiful treasure. Listen, everyone, and meditate on it, O friends.
dfs m@ug a as afe dor a a fegHe BST IU TIC Il (208-8, ast, vs 5)
har a-ukhaDh jaa ka-o gur dee-aa taa kay nirmal cheetaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Those, unto whom the Guru has given the Lord's medicine - their minds become pure and immaculate. ||1||Pause] |
niuarg fufes fsa 30 3 afe Aafe Shia usEAT Il (208-9, ast, Hs 5)
anDhkaar miti-o tin tan tay gur sabad deepak pargaasaa.
Darkness is dispelled from within that body, in which the Divine Light of the Guru's Shabad shines.
aH oft wet at ot art wr aS Arana fT AI (208-10, ast, we 5)
bharam kee jaalee taa kee kaatee jaa ka-o saaDhsangat bisvaasaa. ||1]|
The noose of doubt is cut away from those who place their faith in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
IHS Tene 3g farst sfos AT Aa il (208-10, west, ns 5)
taareelay bhavjal taaroo bikh-rhaa bohith saaDhoo sangaa.
The treacherous and terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, in the boat of the Saadh Sangat.
yas det HS at or ag sfeS afs Far iM (208-11, Tes, 8 5) pooran ho-ee man kee aasaa gur bhayti-o har rangaa. ||2|| My mind's desires are fulfilled, meeting the Guru, in love with the Lord. ||2||
OH uAtat Sat ufent He 30 feufs mews |i (208-11, west, ve 5)
naam khajaanaa bhagtee paa-i-aa man tan taripat aghaa-ay.
The devotees have found the treasure of the Naam; their minds and bodies are satisfied and satiated.
Sod dfs AE aT as SS A AG JOH HOS NZNIVNISSI (208-12, ast, He 5)
naanak har jee-o taa ka-o dayvai jaa ka-o hukam manaa-ay. ||3||12]|133]| O Nanak, the Dear Lord gives it only to those who surrender to the Lord's Command. [|3][12]]133]|
ast HIS U Il (208-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
efenr ufeor afe uroufs He Hfo wore Aafe ys Sct i (208-13, a@et, v2 5)
da-i-aa ma-i-aa kar paraanpat moray mohi anaath saran parabh toree.
Please be kind and compassionate, O Lord of my life; Iam helpless, and I seek Your Sanctuary, God.
nig gu ufs oe & ag ag fimrou Cats o Hat NA TIS il (208-14, ast, v2 5)
anDh koop meh haath day raakho kachhoo si-aanap ukat na moree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please, give me Your Hand, and lift me up, out of the deep dark pit. I have no clever tricks at all. ||1]|Pause] |
AIS ASS AS fos SH dt SH ANGE od Mio Sct Il (208-14, west, v2 5)
karan karaavan sabh kichh tum hee tum samrath naahee an horee.
You are the Doer, the Cause of causes - You are everything. You are All-powerful; there is no other than You.
suet afs ffs su dt wet A Rea fAo Sa HES NAM (208-15, TBs, He 5)
tumree gat mit tum hee jaanee say sayvak jin bhaag mathoree. ||1]||
You alone know Your condition and extent. They alone become Your servants, upon whose foreheads such good destiny is recorded. ||1]|
nud Aza Af 3H us TS fs ufs sase Afa At I (208-16, aeat, 2 5)
apunay sayvak sang tum parabh raatay ot pot bhagtan sang joree.
You are imbued with Your servant, God; Your devotees are woven into Your Fabric, through and through.
fue fye ou Sa vane wd AA fenfe Ga de vost MQM (208-16, aa, us 5)
pari-o pari-o naam tayraa darsan chaahai jaisay darisat oh chand chakoree. ||2||
O Darling Beloved, they yearn for Your Name and the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, like the chakvee bird which longs to see the moon. ||2||
oH Hs ufs 3 fas ost Sa He aet nfo wa ada Il (208-17, TSH, He 5)
raam sant meh bhayd kichh naahee ayk jan ka-ee meh laakh karoree.
Between the Lord and His Saint, there is no difference at all. Among hundreds of thousands and millions, there is scarcely one humble being.
wa db uae ux dor mafes atese JAS THs ISI (208-18, aGat, Hs 5)
jaa kai hee-ai pargat parabh ho-aa an-din keertan rasan ramoree. ||3]|
Those whose hearts are illuminated by God, sing the Kirtan of His Praises night and day with their tongues. ||3]|
3H ANE nurs nfs Ss NETS YS yrs mit Il 208-19, aeet, 2 5)
tum samrath apaar at oochay sukh-daatay parabh paraan aDhoree.
You are All-powerful and Infinite, the most lofty and exalted, the Giver of peace; O God, You are the Support of the breath of life.
soa a@ us ale faa Ba Asa & Afar Aaidt siIISVll (208-19, ast, Hs 5) naanak ka-o parabh keejai kirpaa un santan kai sang sangoree. ||4||13||134||
Please show mercy to Nanak, O God, that he may remain in the Society of the Saints. | 4] |13]]134]|
Ua ort
ast HIS U Il (209-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
3H dfs ASt TS AZT Il (209-1, ast, v2 5) tum har saytee raatay santahu. O Saint, You are attuned to the Lord.
forts 8g H a use feos Gf ugTE|T BS NU THC I (209-2, aat, 2 5)
nibaahi layho mo ka-o purakh biDhaatay orh pahuchaavahu daatay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please stand my me, Architect of Destiny; please take me to my destination, Great Giver. ||1]]Pause] |
SUS HoH SH dt font SH UTS UTE fears Il (209-2, west, He 5) tumraa maram tumaa hee jaani-aa tum pooran purakh biDhaatay. You alone know Your mystery; You are the Perfect Architect of Destiny.
Tug Hafe mara ele aS AT IHS AWS NA (209-3, ast, ue 5) raakho saran anaath deen ka-o karahu hamaaree gaatay. ||1] | I am a helpless orphan - please keep me under Your Protection and save me. ||1]|
3de Aad Sfse Vas SHS 3H Ws myst SS Il (209-3, aeHt, He 5)
taran saagar bohith charan tumaaray tum jaanhu apunee bhaatay.
Your Feet are the boat to carry us across the world-ocean; You alone know Your ways.
ate fasur fan dug Ha 3 3 us uss IKI (209-4, aSHt, He 5) kar kirpaa jis raakho sangay tay tay paar paraatay. ||2|| Those whom You keep protected, by Your Kindness, cross over to the other side. ||2]||
as 8s ys SH AHee Ag fas SHe TE I (209-5, aCst, 3 5) eet oot parabh tum samrathaa sabh kichh tumrai haathay. Here and hereafter, God, You are All-powerful; everything is in Your Hands.
mA fours tg H aA dfs AS VS TNS ATE Ill (209-5, aSst, v2 5) aisaa niDhaan dayh mo ka-o har jan chalai hamaarai saathay. ||3]| Please give me that treasure, which will go along with me, O servant of the Lord. ||3]|
fasasid aS ae ate of on Ha He AN Il (209-6, aGst, v2 5)
nirgunee-aaray ka-o gun keejai har naam mayraa man jaapay.
I am without virtue - please bless me with virtue, so that my mind might chant the Name of the Lord.
Ha yAtfe aoa dfs SS HS 3H ASS GN WSUAIISUII (209-6, TSH, Hs 5)
sant parsaad naanak har bhaytay man tan seetal Dharaapay. ||4||14||135]|
By the Grace of the Saints, Nanak has met the Lord; his mind and body are soothed and satisfied. ||4]|14]|135]|
ast HIS U Il (209-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hofa AHTES FS Il (209-7, aVst, He 5) Sahj Samaa-i-o dayv. I am intuitively absorbed in the Divine Lord.
H a@ afsag se efenre Fz NU TIS I (209-7, Tes, v2 5) mo ka-o satgur bha-ay da-i-aal dayv. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Divine True Guru has become Merciful to me. ||1||Pause| |
ofa Aedt a oad Hse cuetEs Il (209-8, ast, w2 5) kaat jayvree kee-o daasro santan tahlaa-i-o. Cutting away the halter, He has made me His slave, and now I work for the Saints.
2a oH & HS urd H aS nreee Tafa feerfE nai (209-8, ast, we 5)
ayk naam ko thee-o poojaaree mo ka-o achraj gureh dikhaa-i-o. ||1]||
I have become a worshipper of the One Name; the Guru has shown me this amazing wonder. ||1]|
sfeS yarn Hea CHiora aa famrg Hats yatete il (209-9, aGat, v2 5)
bha-i-o pargaas sarab ujee-aaraa gur gi-aan maneh paragtaa-i-o.
The Divine Light has dawned, and everything is illuminated; the Guru has revealed this spiritual wisdom to my mind.
nifys on ulG He fZufsur nies soafEE 11211 (209-10, weet, 8 5)
amrit naam pee-o man taripti-aa anbhai thahraa-i-o. ||2||
Drinking deeply of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, my mind is satisfied, and my fears have been vanquished. ||2]|
Hf urfomr Aga AY Ue TUT oS Teves I (209-10, wat, nH 5)
maan aagi-aa sarab sukh paa-ay dookhah thaa-o gavaa-i-o.
Accepting the Command of the Lord's Will, I have found total peace; the home of suffering has been destroyed.
AG HYHS se YS Sas AS wTSe gu ferfES Sil (209-11, ast, vs 5)
ja-o Suparsan bha-ay parabh thaakur sabh aanad roop dikhaa-i-o. ||3]|
When God, our Lord and Master was totally pleased, He revealed everything in the form of ecstasy. ||3]|
a fag nites o fae Wes AS 4G ate Us IEE I (209-11, aS, v2 5)
naa kichh aavat naa kichh jaavat sabh khayl kee-o har raa-i-o.
Nothing comes, and nothing goes; this play is all set in motion by the Lord, the Sovereign King.
AT sod MH Man J oad Sas Sa dha SES ISNIUINISEM (209-12, TES, v2 5)
kaho naanak agam agam hai thaakur bhagat tayk har naa-i-o. ||4||15||136]| Says Nanak, our Lord and Master is inaccessible and unfathomable. The Lord's devotees take His Name as their Support. ||4]|15]|136||
ast HIS U Il (209-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
UTIYTH UIS USHAT HO ST at Ge at F Il (209-13, ast, we 5)
paarbarahm pooran parmaysur man taa kee ot gaheejai ray.
He is the Supreme Lord God, the Perfect Transcendent Lord; O my mind, hold tight to the Support of the One
fafs os qoHs us ofa st a OM MUA FT NU TIC I (209-14, west, ne 5)
jin Dhaaray barahmand khand har taa ko naam japeejai ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. who established the solar systems and galaxies. Chant the Name of that Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho ot ufs fsorag ofa AS JAH af AY UMA F II (209-14, aes, Hs 5)
man kee mat ti-aagahu har jan hukam boojh sukh paa-ee-ai ray.
Renounce the intellectual cleverness of your mind, O humble servants of the Lord; understanding the Hukam of His Command, peace is found.
A us ad Aet 3m Hog Afe ofr Got formes F WAU (209-15, ast, nH 5)
jo parabh karai so-ee bhal maanhu sukh dukh ohee Dhi-aa-ee-ai ray. ||1]|
Whatever God does, accept that with pleasure; in comfort and in suffering, meditate on Him. |[1]|
afe ufsa Gud fas nfs ass as B Wa FT Il (209-15, ast, He 5) kot patit uDhaaray khin meh kartay baar na laagai ray. The Creator emancipates millions of sinners in an instant, without a moment's delay.
dle wae ey SHo Aymt fam ae fSAfs fosA F MQM (209-16, wea, v2 5)
deen darad dukh bhanjan su-aamee jis bhaavai tiseh nivaajai ray. ||2]|
The Lord, the Destroyer of the pain and sorrow of the poor, blesses those with whom He is pleased. ||2]|
AS a Hs fust yfsuree riba urs AY Aare F Il (209-17, ast, us 5)
sabh ko maat pitaa partipaalak jee-a paraan sukh saagar ray.
He is Mother and Father, the Cherisher of all; He is the Breath of life of all beings, the Ocean of peace.
AN &
ee sfe odt fH aes ule sus aaa F USI (209-17, ast, v2 5)
day“day tot naahee tis kartay poor rahi-o ratnaagar ray. ||3]|
While giving so generously, the Creator does not diminish at all. The Source of jewels, He is All-pervading. ||3]|
Whe AS oN Sa AyMit we we nists Het F II (209-18, ast, He 5)
jaachik jaachai naam tayraa su-aamee ghat ghat antar so-ee ray.
The beggar begs for Your Name, O Lord and Master; God is contained deep within the nucleus of each and every heart.
eos BH St at Asaet aS fea Bo aet FT USUIENISIN (209-18, ast, He 5)
naanak daas taa kee sarnaa-ee jaa tay baritha na ko-ee ray. ||4||16||137]| Slave Nanak has entered His Sanctuary; no one returns from Him empty-handed. ||4]|16]]137]|
UST 290
TH Ast uset Hos U (210-1) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe il (210-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa afs aag o Ho” faATS Il (210-2, ast set, ve 5) har har kabhoo na manhu bisaaray. Never forget the Lord, Har, Har, from your mind.
tis So Aga AYES! AGS wer yfsurg uA TIS i (210-2, west yset, w2 5) eehaa oohaa sarab sukh-daata sagal ghataa partipaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Here and hereafter, He is the Giver of all peace. He is the Cherisher of all hearts. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho ane are fas stafs Rat BH fasrs Il (210-3, aGat yaet, He 5) mahaa kasat kaatai khin bheetar rasnaa naam chitaaray. He removes the most terrible pains in an instant, if the tongue repeats His Name.
Hise AS AY fs Aeet Fest wate foes AM (210-3, ast yset, H2 5)
seetal saat sookh har sarnee jaltee agan nivaaray. ||1]|
In the Lord's Sanctuary there is soothing coolness, peace and tranquility. He has extinguished the burning fire. ||1]|
WIS AT oda 3 TY enw uy Sas Il (210-4, west yet, ne 5)
garabh kund narak tay raakhai bhavjal paar utaaray.
He saves us from the hellish pit of the womb, and carries us across the terrifying world-ocean.
3IO AHS us Ho Hid AH at STA faers MQ (210-4, aGst yaet, ne 5) charan kamal aaraaDhat man meh jam kee taraas bidaaray. ||2| | Adoring His Lotus Feet in the mind, the fear of death is banished. ||2]||
UTS UTYIH USHAT Sor way wiUrT Il (210-5, ast yet, v2 5)
pooran paarbarahm parmaysur oochaa agam apaaray.
He is the Perfect, Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, lofty, unfathomable and infinite.
Te Wes fourses AY AIT FE AGH J I'S MBM (210-5, ast yset, He 5)
gun gaavat Dhi-aavat sukh saagar joo-ay janam na haaray. ||3]||
Singing His Glorious Praises, and meditating on the Ocean of peace, one's life is not lost in the gamble. ||3]|
oth afa afs xfs He ate fosae & BSS I (210-6, ast yaett, Hs 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mohi man leeno nirgun kay daataaray.
My mind is engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment, O Giver to the unworthy.
afs fasur nus on dn aaa Ae afsas NIAUIISCH (210-6, Test yset, He 5) kar kirpaa apuno naam deejai naanak sad balihaaray. ||4]|1]|138] |
Please grant Your Grace, and bless me with Your Name; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||4]]1][138]|
Ta ACSt FSt HIS u 210-8) raag ga-orhee chaytee 1 mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Chaytee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsara yATfe il (210-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HY od F ofa sats faa il (210-9, a@at SSH, He 5) sukh naahee ray har bhagat binaa. There is no peace without devotional worship of the Lord.
aifs AoH feg 33q mea AUS Afu fea fest AN TIC it (210-9, aGat TS, He 5) jeet janam ih ratan amolak saaDhsangat jap ik khinaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Be victorious, and win the priceless jewel of this human life, by meditating on Him in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, even for an instant. ||1]||Pause] |
HS Hufs sfest fase i fs Te 3d Sa Sa NA (210-10, ast SH, He 5)
sut Sampat banitaa binod. chhod ga-ay baho log bhog. ||1||
Many have renounced and left their children, wealth, spouses, joyful games and pleasures. ||1]|
Jed HLT TH Ja Il (210-10, aGst St, vz 5) haivar gaivar raaj rang. Horses, elephants and the pleasures of power
fsurfa safe J Hz ST MM (210-10, ast Bz, ws 5) ti-aag chali-o hai moorh nang. ||2|| - leaving these behind, the fool must depart naked. ||2]|
dor Fas Sa slew il (210-11, Test SSA, we 5) cho-aa chandan dayh fooli-aa. The body, scented with musk and sandalwood
A 36 Ud Ala sfemor Wail (210-11, west SSA, we 5) so tan Dhar sang rooli-aa. ||3|| - that body shall come to roll in the dust. |]3]|
Hfa Afr AS Bf F il (210-11, est SH, v2 5) mohi mohi-aa jaanai door hai. Infatuated with emotional attachment, they think that God is far away.
TI HSA AST Tels F USIAUISEM (210-12, ast Sz, we 5) kaho naanak sadaa hadoor hai. ||4||1]|139]]| Says Nanak, he is Ever-present! ||4]|1]|139]|
ast HIS U Il (210-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
HO Ud 3a Tis BH S Il (210-12, west, He 5) man Dhar tarbay har naam no. O mind, cross over with the Support of the Lord's Name.
Had Sdfs HA AAS Ag Sfyg urs TSH AU! FIC I (210-13, aSst, ne 5)
saagar lahar sansaa sansaar gur bohith paar garaamano. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru is the boat to carry you across the world-ocean, through the waves of cynicism and doubt. ||1]|Pause| |
ate aree nifammdbar il (210-13, a@st, He 5) kal kaalakh anDhi-aaree-aa. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, there is only pitch darkness.
a fama cua Sfanidior nail (210-13, aes, He 5)
gur gi-aan deepak uji-aaree-aa. ||1]|
The lamp of the Guru's spiritual wisdom illuminates and enlightens. ||1]| fay faftmr undt nfs wat il (210-14, a@st, He 5)
bikh bikhi-aa pasree at ghanee. The poison of corruption is spread out far and wide.
Gad afu afu ofa Tat QN (210-14, a@st, 2 5) ubray jap jap har gunee. ||2]| Only the virtuous are saved, chanting and meditating on the Lord. ||2||
Herd ufeur Afenr i (210-15, aest, H2 5) matvaaro maa-i-aa SO-i-aa. Intoxicated with Maya, the people are asleep.
Gd 323 FH SC afer SI (210-15, 7st, He 5) gur bhaytat bharam bha-o kho-i-aa. ||3]| Meeting the Guru, doubt and fear are dispelled. ||3]|
aT saa Sa fonrfenr it (210-15, aSst, vs 5) kaho naanak ayk Dhi-aa-i-aa. Says Nanak, meditate on the One Lord;
wife ufe sect wtfEnr IsilQIIBOll (210-15, Test, He 5)
ghat ghat nadree aa-i-aa. ||4||2||140|| behold Him in each and every heart. ||4]|2||140]|
ast HIS U Il (210-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
atarg JHTd Sot Sa Il (210-16, Test, v2 5) deebaan hamaaro tuhee ayk. You alone are my Chief Advisor.
Ae ast Tats SX AU TIS il (210-16, west, 2 5) sayvaa thaaree gureh tayk. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I serve You with the Support of the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
mfsx Fats odt ute Il (210-17, aSHt, v2 5) anik jugat nahee paa-i-aa. By various devices, I could not find You.
Tf Bad B Sten Al (210-17, west, He 5) gur chaakar lai laa-i-aa. ||1]| Taking hold of me, the Guru has made me Your slave. ||1]||
Hd Us fauredbor it (210-17, a@st, He 5) maaray panch bikhaadee-aa. I have conquered the five tyrants.
ad fasut 3 2 Ao 21 (210-18, wBst, He 5) gur kirpaa tay dal saaDhi-aa. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, I have vanquished the army of evil. ||2]|
SUuAtA zag ffs Sa SH Il (210-18, aes, v8 5) bakhsees vajahu mil ayk naam. I have received the One Name as His bounty and blessing.
AY Aon woe PAA ISI (210-18, Test, 48 5) sookh sahj aanand bisraam. ||3]| Now, I dwell in peace, poise and bliss. ||3]|
UST 29
Ys A Vag A ZS Il (211-1, ast, us 5) parabh kay chaakar say bhalay. The slaves of God are good.
aed fe He GAS NSISNIAU (211-1, Test, v2 5)
naanak tin mukh oojlay. ||4]|3]|141] | O Nanak, their faces are radiant. ||4||3||141]|
ast HIS U Il (211-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hid Gar SH aT I (211-1, aSat, v2 5) jee-aray ol"aa naam kaa. Hey, soul: your only Support is the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
wed fa ade ages f35 ufo SE OS AH aT NA TIE Ih (211-2, aSHt, He 5)
avar je karan karaavano tin meh bha-o hai jaam kaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever else you do or make happen, the fear of death still hangs over you. ||1]|Pause] |
Wed HSte odt UTS I (211-2, west, He 5) avar jatan nahee paa-ee-ai. He is not obtained by any other efforts.
zs ofa ofa fomrebt ail (11-3, ast, He 5) vadai bhaag har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]| By great good fortune, meditate on the Lord. ||1]|
wre fooHst ASM Il (211-3, Test, He 5) laakh hikmatee jaanee-ai. You may know hundreds of thousands of clever tricks,
wat f3q odt HTShH MQM (211-3, ast, He 5) aagai til nahee maanee-ai. ||2|| but not even one will be of any use at all hereafter. ||2||
nidafa aH aHTS Il fy we astfs aS SI (11-3, wet, Hs 5) aha’-buDh karam kamaavanay. garih baaloo neer bahaavanay. ||3]| Good deeds done in the pride of ego are swept away, like the house of sand by water.
[I3I|
us furs fagur ad il (211-4, w@at, ne 5) parabh kirpaal kirpaa karai. When God the Merciful shows His Mercy,
oH Boa AY Afar fH Susy (u-4, Test, ws 5) naam naanak saaDhoo sang milai. ||4]|4]|142||
Nanak receives the Naam in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. [14] 14] [1421]
ast HIS U Il (211-5)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
WIS afsse Be sdb | (211-5, ast, He 5) baarnai balihaarnai lakh baree-aa. I am a Sacrifice, dedicated hundreds of thousands of times, to my Lord and Master.
on J on AoE & YTS mobo A TIS Il (211-5, aSHt, ne 5) naamo ho naam saahib ko paraan aDhree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. His Name, and His Name alone, is the Support of the breath of life. ||1]|Pause] |
AIS ATSS Sd SA Il (211-6, west, 2 5) karan karaavan tuhee ayk. You alone are the Doer, the Cause of causes.
Aba Aa at Sot Sa NA (211-6, aSHt, He 5) jee-a jant kee tuhee tayk. ||1]| You are the Support of all beings and creatures. ||1]|
TH HIS US FT ot i S fSsaqa F Asati (u-6, wes, we 5)
raaj joban parabh too” Dhanee. too” nirgun too™ sargunee. ||2]|
O God, You are my power, authority and youth. You are absolute, without attributes, and also related, with the most sublime attributes. ||2||
Star Sar SH TF Il (211-7, ast, ve 5) eehaa oohaa tum rakhay. Here and hereafter, You are my Savior and Protector.
ad frou 3 x BA USI (211-7, aes, ne 5) gur kirpaa tay ko lakhay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, some understand You. ||3]||
Misa Us AAS Il (211-7, ast, He 5) antarjaamee parabh sujaan. God is All-knowing, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
SSA Sao Sot SS NSUUNASSI (211-8, ast, Hz 5)
naanak takee-aa tuhee taan. ||4]|5||143]| You are Nanak's strength and support. ||4]|5||143]|
ast HIS U Il (211-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa afe afe mira i (211-8, a@st, we 5) har har har aaraaDhee-ai. Worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
Hanfa dfs nfs ZA SdH HT SC Adhs a TIS Il (211-9, west, ve 5)
satsang har man vasai bharam moh bha-o saaDhee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Society of the Saints, He dwells in the mind; doubt, emotional attachment and fear are vanquished. ||1]||Pause| |
ae use fARYIS 3S I (211-9, ast, He 5) bayd puraan simrit bhanay. The Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees are heard to proclaim
AS Gu fartas Ae AS NA (211-9, ast, H2 5) sabh ooch biraajit jan sunay. ||1]|| that the Lord's servant dwells as the highest of all. ||1]|
Hae MAES F SS do Il (211-10, 7H, He 5) Sagal asthaan bhai bheet cheen. All places are filled with fear - know this well.
TH ASA F JIS AS Il (211-10, west, v2 5) raam sayvak bhai rahat keen. ||2|| Only the Lord's servants are free of fear. ||2||
wy wants afs feats i (211-10, a@st, He 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh jon fireh. People wander through 8.4 million incarnations.
diss SA Sat AafH Hafs Si (21-11, west, v2 5) gobind lok nahee janam mareh. ||3]|| God's people are not subject to birth and death. ||3]|
ae ofa frmrou gen act i dfs AG Hats Soa Tat NSIENISSII (211-11, TEs, He 5) bal buDh si-aanap ha-umai rahee. har saaDh saran naanak gahee. ||4||6||144] | Nanak has taken to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Holy Saints; he has given up power, wisdom, cleverness and egotism. ||4||6||144]|
ast HIS U Il (211-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
HO TH BH TS TEM Il (211-12, west, ve 5) man raam naam gun gaa-ee-ai. O my mind, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
als ols ufe ASba af Af ofe fomreht ai TIC Ul (211-12, ast, 2 5)
neet neet har sayvee-ai saas saas har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Serve the Lord continually and continuously; with each and every breath, meditate on the Lord. ||1||Pause]|
HsAfa ofa ufe SA il (211-13, a@st, u2 5) satsang har man vasai. In the Society of the Saints, the Lord dwells in the mind,
SY VIE MST FH OA MA (211-13, as, He 5) dukh darad anayraa bharam nasai. ||1]|| and pain, suffering, darkness and doubt depart. ||1]|
As ure ofe writ i AAS Uf o fenmi QU (211-14, a@at, we 5)
sant parsaad har jaapee-ai. so jan dookh na vi-aapee-ai. ||2]|
That humble being, who meditates on the Lord, by the Grace of the Saints, is not afflicted with pain. ||2]|
Ww a@ gg df HZ Fit (21-14, aah, rw: 5) jaa ka-o gur har mantar day. Those unto whom the Guru gives the Mantra of the Lord's Name,
A Gator wfenr wrafs 3 Sil (21-14, west, H2 5) so ubri-aa maa-i-aa agan tay. ||3]| are saved from the fire of Maya. ||3]|
Soa AG YS Hfemr ate il (211-15, west, ws 5) naanak ka-o parabh ma-i-aa kar. Be kind to Nanak, O God;
He ufs 3fe SA aH ofa NSIONAeUIl (211-15, TES, v2 5)
mayrai man tan vaasai naam har. ||4||7||145]| let the Lord's Name dwell within my mind and body. ||4||7||145]|
Ast HIS U Il (211-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dHat Aut Sa SM Il (211-16, aSat, He 5) rasnaa japee-ai ayk naam. With your tongue, chant the Name of the One Lord.
Sto AY Tse wor nite Hh ax Afr aM AU TIC Il (211-16, aSHt, v2 5)
eehaa sukh aanand ghanaa aagai jee-a kai sang kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In this world, it shall bring you peace, comfort and great joy; hereafter, it shall go with your soul, and shall be of use to you. ||1]|Pause] |
achat Sa wid Fa ll (211-17, ast, v2 5) katee-ai tayraa aha" rog. The disease of your ego shall be eradicated.
3 aa yrte afe TA AS AU u-17, Test, Hs 5) too” gur parsaad kar raaj jog. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, practice Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||1] |
dfs 3A fate afs afer it (211-17, a@Ht, v8 5) har ras jin jan chaakhi-aa. Those who taste the sublime essence of the Lord
XT oft fFASt web iQ (211-18, aes, us 5)
taa kee tarisnaa laathee-aa. ||2| | have their thirst quenched. ||2||
ofa fay fofa urfemr |) (211-18, west, He 5) har bisraam niDh paa-i-aa. Those who have found the Lord, the Treasure of peace,
A agfs 6 as ot ofenr Sil (2u-18, west, He 5) so bahur na kat hee Dhaa-i-aa. ||3]| Shall not go anywhere else again. ||3]||
dfs of aH A As afs Sr Il 1-19, Test, He 5) har har naam jaa ka-o gur dee-aa. Those, unto whom the Guru has given the Lord's Name, Har, Har
SSA SAT SG Tent ISIciUISEll (211-19, ast, vz 5)
naanak taa kaa bha-o ga-i-aa. ||4||8]|146] | - O Nanak, their fears are removed. ||4||8]|146] |
UST 292
ast HIS U Il (212-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Wag fers TH BH ST AG us I (212-1, Tea, v8 5)
jaa ka-o bisrai raam naam taahoo ka-o peer. One who forgets the Lord's Name, suffers in pain.
Aunts fufs ofs sefo A Tat ate A FIC it (212-1, aCst, v2 5)
saaDhsangat mil har raveh say gunee gaheer. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and dwell upon the Lord, find the Ocean of virtue. ||1]|Pause] |
vw a qonfa foe afa i (212-2, aah, He 5) jaa ka-o gurmukh ridai buDh. Those Gurmukhs whose hearts are filled with wisdom,
sa ad 36 o€ fafa fafa nal (212-2, ast, n: 5)
taa kai kar tal nav niDh siDh. ||1]| hold the nine treasures, and the miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas in the palms of their hands. ||1]|
A wWofs dfs ys det Il (212-2, west, ne 5) jo jaaneh har parabh Dhanee. Those who know the Lord God as their Master,
faxes att St a GH QM (212-3, west, He 5) kichh naahee taa kai kamee. ||2|| do not lack anything. ||2]|
AdeTS Ustfont il (212-3, ast, v2 5) karnaihaar pachhaani-aa. Those who realize the Creator Lord,
Ava AY sat HEM Wil (212-3, west, 3 5) sarab sookh rang maani-aa. ||3]|| enjoy all peace and pleasure. ||3]|
ofa ug A at fafa SA I (212-3, aGet, 8 5) har Dhan jaa kai garihi vasai. Those whose inner homes are filled with the Lord's wealth
ad sod faq Af Sy OA ISIENAGII (212-4, aes, He 5) kaho naanak tin sang dukh nasai. ||4||9||147]| - says Nanak, in their company, pain departs. ||4]|9]|147]|
TCS HIS U Il (212-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
TIF AS HB FEBS Il (212-4, ast, we 5) garab bado mool itno. Your pride is so great, but what about your origins?
JJG odt Ad fase NA TIC tl (212-5, ast, v2 5) rahan nahee gahu kitno. ||1]| rahaa-o. You cannot remain, no matter how much you try to hold on. ||1]|Pause| |
aaens se Asa Surg fAS F ITS Il 212-5, Tes, 2 5) baybarjat bayd santnaa u-aahoo si-o ray hitno. That which is forbidden by the Vedas and the Saints - with that, you are in love.
we Hors gor faa st Ste S FATS WAU (212-5, ast, we 5)
haar joo-aar joo-aa biDhay indree vas lai jitno. ||1]|
Like the gambler losing the game of chance, you are held in the power of sensory desires. ||1||
TIS SIS AYTS' VIS AHS Sar FITS il (212-6, Ts, 2 5)
haran bharan sampoornaa charan kamal rang ritno.
The One who is All-powerful to empty out and fill up - you have no love for His Lotus Feet.
soa Bud AUHfa frau fafa H FESS NNIONASEI (212-6, Tea, Hs 5)
naanak uDhray saaDhsang kirpaa niDh mai ditno. ||2||10||148] |
O Nanak, I have been saved, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. I have been blessed by the Treasure of Mercy. ||2||10]|148]|
ast HIS U Il (212-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Hfa BA SAT F Il (212-7, ast, v2 5) mohi daasro thaakur ko. I am the slave of my Lord and Master.
We YS at UST UNA TIS Il (212-8, aSst, ws 5) Dhaan parabh kaa khaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I eat whatever God gives me. ||1||Pause| |
AS ASA
MA J J YAH DHS Il (212-8, aSat, He 5) aiso hai ray khasam hamaaraa.
Such is my Lord and Master.
fas ufo AA ASTISITST WAU (212-8, ast, He 5)
khin meh saaj savaaranhaaraa. ||1]|| In an instant, He creates and embellishes. ||1]|
aH Adt A SAT SST Il (212-8, aSat, ve 5) kaam karee jay thaakur bhaavaa. I do that work which pleases my Lord and Master.
Ms Biss YS A TS WAST NM (212-9, Tea, nz 5) geet charit parabh kay gun gaavaa. ||2|| I sing the songs of God's glory, and His wondrous play. ||2]|
Hafe ufsG stars SAT Il (212-9, aVHt, 2 5) saran pari-o thaakur vajeeraa. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord's Prime Minister;
fsa efa Ha HE Os ISI (212-9, Test, 2 5) tinaa daykh mayraa man Dheeraa. ||3]|| beholding Him, my mind is comforted and consoled. ||3]|
Sa Sa Sa MUTT I (212-10, ast, He 5) ayk tayk ayko aaDhaaraa. The One Lord is my support, the One is my steady anchor.
HS SSA Td At Ba AS NSUAUIAVE (212-10, TST, He 5)
jan naanak har kee laagaa kaaraa. ||4||11||149]| Servant Nanak is engaged in the Lord's work. ||4||11||149]|
ast HIS U Il (212-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
od aet MAT IGH Sg Il (212-11, aSst, v2 5) hai ko-ee aisaa ha-umai torai. Is there anyone, who can shatter his ego,
fen Het 3 feg He Ts NU TIE tt (212-11, aH, v2 5) is meethee tay ih man horai. ||1]| rahaa-o. and turn his mind away from this sweet Maya? ||1]||Pause] |
mifamrat Hoy stor A ad A Bs Il (212-11, west, He 5) agi-aanee maanukh bha-i-aa jo naahee so lorai. Humanity is in spiritual ignorance; people see things that do not exist.
dfs vind ardor aes nafs fas FSF NA (212-12, aes, He 5) rain anDhaaree kaaree-aa kavan jugat jit bhorai. ||1]| The night is dark and gloomy; how will the morning dawn? ||1]|
gus 3HS Thor nifse fact afe Sd | (212-12, a@Ht, 2 5)
bharmato bharmato haari-aa anik biDhee kar torai.
Wandering, wandering all around, I have grown weary; trying all sorts of things, I have been searching.
ad aod fasur set Hanafs fafa HS NINIVNAWON (212-13, Tes, He 5)
kaho naanak kirpaa bha-ee saaDhsangat niDh morai. ||2||12]|150]| Says Nanak, He has shown mercy to me; I have found the treasure of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||12]|150]|
TCS HIS U I (212-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fesnfs agar HE WU TIS Il (212-14, aCHt, He 5) chintaaman karunaa ma-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Wish-fulfilling Jewel, the Embodiment of Mercy. ||1]|Pause] |
ate afeniert uTsqIH Il (212-14, ast, v3 5) deen da-i-aalaa paarbarahm. The Supreme Lord God is Merciful to the meek;
w a fiat Ae Se NA (212-14, Test, He 5) jaa kai simran sukh bha-ay. ||1|| meditating in remembrance on Him, peace is obtained. ||1]|
Wane Use Marfa ST Il (212-15, ast, He 5) akaal purakh agaaDh boDh. The Wisdom of the Undying Primal Being is beyond comprehension.
Hos FA af]e way we MQM (212-15, aGst, He 5) sunat jaso kot agh kha-ay. ||2|| Hearing His Praises, millions of sins are erased. ||2]|
foaour fefa ys Hfeur ofa i asa df dfs SH BE NSIISUAUA (212-15, TBs, He 5) kirpaa niDh parabh ma-i-aa Dhaar. naanak har har naam la-ay. ||3||13]|151] |
O God, Treasure of Mercy, please bless Nanak with Your kindness, that he may repeat the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|13]|151]|
Tat Us HIS U Il (212-16) ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5. Gauree Poorbee, Fifth Mehl:
Hd Ho Ase YS AY UTS I (212-17, aSat yset, He 5) mayray man saran parabhoo sukh paa-ay. O my mind, in the Sanctuary of God, peace is found.
w fefs fard yrs BUSS A fee AS ATS A TIS Ml (212-17, aSst yas, ne 5)
jaa din bisrai paraan sukh-daata so din jaat ajaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
That day, when the Giver of life and peace is forgotten - that day passes uselessly. ||1]|Pause] |
Sa Iz A UTS SH OMS BT AT MA aS Il (212-18, ast yaett, Hs 5)
ayk rain kay paahun tum aa-ay baho jug aas baDhaa-ay.
You have come as a guest for one short night, and yet you hope to live for many ages.
oN S&S
fad Hes HU A A fae seeg at SS A (212-18, aGat yaett, He 5) garih mandar sampai jo deesai ji-o tarvar kee chhaa-ay. ||1]| Households, mansions and wealth - whatever is seen, is like the shade of a tree. ||1]|
36 AT AU AS Hot sar foe AS WS I (212-19, aSat yas, ne 5) tan mayraa sampai sabh mayree baag milakh sabh jaa-ay. My body, wealth, and all my gardens and property shall all pass away.
zou fanfas oag fas nfs FS UTS MMW (212-19, wat yor, ue 5)
dayvanhaaraa bisri-o thaakur khin meh hot paraa-ay. ||2]|
You have forgotten your Lord and Master, the Great Giver. In an instant, these shall belong to somebody else. ||2]|
UST 293
ufad sar afe ferare sor see WE I (213-1, west yset, us 5)
pahirai baagaa kar isnaanaa cho-aa chandan laa-ay.
You wear white clothes and take cleansing baths, and anoint yourself with sandalwood oil.
foas@ fadarg odt difonr fa@ gASt aee SI (213-1, Test ast, Hs 5)
nirbha-o nirankaar nahee cheeni-aa ji-o hastee naavaa-ay. ||3]|
But you do not remember the Fearless, Formless Lord - you are like an elephant bathing in the mud. ||3]|
mG dfe faurs 3 Afsag NS Afs AY Ufs a SS Il (213-2, aSat yas, Hs 5)
ja-o ho-ay kirpaal ta satgur maylai sabh sukh har kay naa-ay.
When God becomes merciful, He leads you to meet the True Guru; all peace is in the Name of the Lord.
Has sfeur gus afs us Ho Boa Ts TE WE NSUAISWIUI (213-2, Test yet, ne 5) mukat bha-i-aa banDhan gur kholay jan naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||4||14||152||
The Guru has liberated me from bondage; servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|14]|152]|
Isat ysst HIG U Il (213-3)
ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
AT HS TT TT TI AS TIM I (213-3, ast ysett, ue 5) mayray man gur gur gur sad karee-ai. O my mind, dwell always upon the Guru, Guru, Guru.
J36 HOH Aes afs dur wane a sfeadhy ail FS Il (213-4, aSat ysett, He 5) ratan janam safal gur kee-aa darsan ka-o baliharee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru has made the jewel of this human life prosperous and fruitful. Iam a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]||Pause] |
AS AA A HS BS 33 St aS Web I 213-4, aSat vast, ue 5)
jaytay saas garaas man laytaa taytay hee gun gaa-ee-ai.
As many breaths and morsels as you take, O my mind - so many times, sing His Glorious Praises.
AG dfe eure Afsag mua st fea HfS sfo Ue IAN (213-5, aGat uset, He 5) ja-o ho-ay dai-aal satgur apunaa taa ih mat buDh paa-ee-ai. ||1||
When the True Guru becomes merciful, then this wisdom and understanding is obtained. ||1]|
AS HS OTH BE FH BO S gels Ava AMT Aa UTM IN (213-6, Tat uae, Hs 5)
mayray man naam la-ay jam banDh tay chhooteh sarab sukhaa sukh paa-ee-ai.
O my mind, taking the Naam, you shall be released from the bondage of death, and the peace of all peace will be found.
Afe aumit Afsag eS Ho Fes Ses nS MIM (213-6, ast use, He 5)
Sayv Su-aamee satgur daataa man banchhat fal aa-ee-ai. ||2||
Serving your Lord and Master, the True Guru, the Great Giver, you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||2]|
on fene His AS aes HS Af SoS TS Il (213-7, west ys, ne 5)
naam isat meet sut kartaa man sang tuhaarai chaalai.
The Name of the Creator is your beloved friend and child; it alone shall go along with you, O my mind.
afs Ae Afsas nus at as 3 usb us BI (213-7, aSst ysett, ne 5) kar sayvaa satgur apunay kee gur tay paa-ee-ai paalai. ||3]|| So serve your True Guru, and you shall receive the Name from the Guru. ||3]|
ate fants four ufs ost fio Asa MAT Il (213-8, aGat yset, He 5)
gur kirpaal kirpaa parabh Dhaaree binsay sarab andaysaa. When God, the Merciful Guru, showered His Mercy upon me, all my anxieties were dispelled.
soa AY uUfenr ofe alesis fhfes Aas ASAT ISIAH (213-8, agst yaet, He 5)
naanak sukh paa-i-aa har keertan miti-o sagal kalaysaa. ||4||15]|153]| Nanak has found the peace of the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. All his sorrows have been dispelled. ||4]|15]|153]|
Ta ACSt HIG U (213-10)
raag ga-orhee mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure Il (213-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fgnor fags dt at gst Fu TIS i (213-11, Test, v2 5) tarisnaa birlay hee kee bujhee hay. ||1]| rahaa-o. The thirst of only a few is quenched. ||1||Pause||
afe Ad BU ad He Bg Il (213-11, aes, He 5)
kot joray laakh kroray man na horay.
People may accumulate hundreds of thousands, millions, tens of millions, and yet the mind is not restrained.
ud ud dt AG Sst FT NU (213-11, aeHt, He 5) parai parai hee ka-o lujhee hay. ||1]| They only yearn for more and more. ||1]|
Hed ardt nifea usardt ua fora faarst i (213-12, aS, us 5)
sundar naaree anik parkaaree par garih bikaaree.
They may have all sorts of beautiful women, but still, they commit adultery in the homes of others.
YI so Sdt ASt T MQ (213-12, aSHt, uz 5) buraa bhalaa nahee sujhee hay. ||2| | They do not distinguish between good and bad. ||2||
mfoa sue Wher sans soHtfeur ae foto odt arfenr It (213-12, aes, He 5)
anik banDhan maa-i-aa bharmat bharmaa-i-aa gun niDh nahee gaa-i-aa.
They wander around lost, trapped in the myriad bonds of Maya; they do not sing the Praises of the Treasure of Virtue.
Ho faa dt ufo ost F SN (213-13, Test, He 5) man bikhai hee meh lujhee hay. ||3]| Their minds are engrossed in poison and corruption. ||3]|
wT aQ g faar ad ates Aet nd WOAfa wfeor Ss Il (213-13, aes, He 5)
jaa ka-o ray kirpaa karai jeevat so-ee marai saaDhsang maa-i-aa tarai.
Those, unto whom the Lord shows His Mercy, remain dead while yet alive. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they cross over the ocean of Maya.
Soa A Ho Ufe afta frst J NSNANWBI (213-14, TES, He 5)
naanak so jan dar har sijhee hay. ||4||1]|154]| O Nanak, those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||4||1]|154]|
ast HIS U Il (213-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
AB & IA Ts F UU FHS Ml (213-15, aVst, we 5) sabhhoo ko ras har ho. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Lord is the essence of all. ||1]|Pause] |
aT Aa ag sa arg fama arg fare il (213-15, a@at, we 5)
kaahoo jog kaahoo bhog kaahoo gi-aan kaahoo Dhi-aan.
Some practice Yoga, some indulge in pleasures; some live in spiritual wisdom, some live in meditation.
aT I 55 Ole FT AU (213-16, aBat, we 5) kaahoo ho dand Dhar ho. ||1|| Some are bearers of the staff. ||1]|
TT AU AY STUY AT UAT IH BH Il (213-16, Test, He 5)
kaahoo jaap kaahoo taap kaahoo poojaa hom naym.
Some chant in meditation, some practice deep, austere meditation; some worship Him in adoration, some practice daily rituals.
HT I TVG als F I (213-16, wat, we 5) kaahoo ho ga-un kar ho. ||2|| Some live the life of a wanderer. ||2| |
ag ste arg ats arg Se ates Il (213-17, aGat, n2 5) kaahoo teer kaahoo neer kaahoo bayd beechaar. Some live by the shore, some live on the water; some study the Vedas.
soa sats finn F WBNINWUI (213-17, TSS, 8 5)
naankaa bhagat pari-a ho. ||3]|2||155]|| Nanak loves to worship the Lord. ||3||2||155]|
ast HIS U Il (213-17)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ae otefs fafa Het 1a TIS i (213-18, TSH, He 5) gun keerat niDh moree. ||1|| rahaa-o. To sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is my treasure. ||1||Pause] |
Sot GA Sot AA Sot gu Tat Sa Il (213-18, ast, v2 5) too“hee ras too‘hee jas too“hee roop toohee rang. You are my delight, You are my praise. You are my beauty, You are my love.
mmm Ge ys Sat WAU (213-18, west, ne 5) aas ot parabh toree. ||1|| O God, You are my hope and support. ||1]|
sot we Sat ws sat ufs Tat yrs I (213-19, Test, 8 5) toohee maan too‘hee Dhaan toohee pat toohee paraan. You are my pride, You are my wealth. You are my honor, You are my breath of life.
Ofs Set B Aa NIU (213-19, ast, we 5) gur tootee lai joree. ||2|| The Guru has repaired that which was broken. ||2||
oot fats sot afs sot re sot fe it (213-19, ast, v2 5)
toohee garihi toohee ban toohee gaa-o toohee sun.
You are in the household, and You are in the forest. You are in the village, and You are in the wilderness.
UST 29g
Jd Sa OT Oat MBUSIUAWEN (214-1, ast, w3 5)
hai naanak nayr nayree. ||3||3||156|| Nanak: You are near, so very near! ||3]|3]|156] |
TCS HIS U Il (214-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
HS dfs df ws NA TIS Il (214-1, aes, He 5) maato har rang maato. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am intoxicated, intoxicated with the Love of the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
Gat ul Sat ate gafo MG we ate it (214-2, ast, nz 5) ohee pee-o ohee khee-o gureh dee-o daan kee-o. I drink it in - I am drunk with it. The Guru has given it to me in charity.
Curg AG HE TS WAM (214-2, Ts, v8 5) u-aahoo si-o man raato. ||1]| My mind is drenched with it. ||1]|
Gat sat Sat us Sat fimrg Sat Ta i (214-2, aes, 3 5) ohee bhaathee ohee pochaa uhee pi-aaro uhee roochaa. It is my furnace, it is the cooling plaster. It is my love, it is my longing.
Hfs God AY ATS NI (214-3, THT, He 5) man oho sukh jaato. ||2|| My mind knows it as peace. ||2||
HUH AG ue YG Id STI SS HG Il (214-3, ast, He 5)
sahj kayl anad khayl rahay fayr bha-ay mayl.
I enjoy intuitive peace, and I play in bliss; the cycle of reincarnation is ended for me, and I am merged with the Lord.
Soa Td ASfe UTS IBISIWIIN (214-4, ast, He 5)
naanak gur sabad paraato. ||3||4||157]|| Nanak is pierced through with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3||4]|157]|
TT Tat HHS HIG U (214-5) raag gourhee maalvaa mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Maalwaa, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrfe il (214-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs on So Hist Bg ura fant us sore al TIC Il (214-6, Fat wwe, wz 5)
har naam layho meetaa layho aagai bikham panth bhai-aan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Lord's Name; O my friend, chant it. Hereafter, the path is terrifying and treacherous. ||1]|Pause||
Aes Aes Het Afe 3d Af SAS FT aS Il (214-7, Hat woe, us 5) sayvat sayvat sadaa sayv tayrai sang basat hai kaal. Serve, serve, forever serve the Lord. Death hangs over your head.
ate Aet SAT at F SDA AH AH UA (214-7, dat wae, He 5)
kar sayvaa too” saaDh kee ho kaatee-ai jam jaal. ||1||
Do seva, selfless service, for the Holy Saints, and the noose of Death shall be cut away. ||1]|
oH Aa Stee ate fafs IGN aa fxare II (214-8, et wee, nH 5)
hom jag tirath kee-ay bich ha-umai baDhay bikaar.
You may make burnt offerings, sacrificial feasts and pilgrimages to sacred shrines in egotism, but your corruption only increases.
ode Hed fe sua dfe safe safe mess NM (214-8, Fst weer, ve 5)
narak surag du-ay bhunchanaa ho-ay bahur bahur avtaar. ||2]|
You are subject to both heaven and hell, and you are reincarnated over and over again. ||2||
fre uct gon fa uct forse & ae ate i (214-9, det user, He 5)
siv puree barahm indar puree nihchal ko thaa-o naahi.
The realm of Shiva, the realms of Brahma and Indra as well - no place anywhere is permanent.
faa ofa Ret AY odt J AAS uefa Wh ISI (214-9, Fat wwS, He 5)
bin har sayvaa sukh nahee ho saakat aavahi jaahi. ||3]||
Without serving the Lord, there is no peace at all. The faithless cynic comes and goes in reincarnation. ||3]|
AA dfs Guefimr 4 SA afer yorfs I (214-10, ast wer, He 5) jaiso gur updaysi-aa mai taiso kahi-aa pukaar. As the Guru has taught me, so have I spoken.
Sod Ad Afs J Hat ate alase df Burg sell (214-10, Fst wer, He 5) naanak kahai sun ray manaa kar keertan ho-ay uDhaar. ||4]]1]|158] |
Says Nanak, listen, people: sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and you shall be saved. ||4||1]]158]|
TA ATSt HS HIS U (214-12) raag ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars ure il (214-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ute ares aft AY FI (214-13, west wer , He 5) paa-i-o baal buDh sukh ray. Adopting the innocent mind of a child, I have found peace.
Jed Aa ots fas gu AY fefs AHAfS as fHS NAN TIS il (214-13, ast ws , we 5) harakh sog haan mirat dookh sukh chit samsar gur milay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Joy and sorrow, profit and loss, birth and death, pain and pleasure - they are all the same to my consciousness, since I met the Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
Ag oG JG fas AUC fese 3B BE TUS Sg II (214-14, aGat swe 5) ja-o la-o ha-o kichh socha-o chitva-o ta-o la-o dukhan bharay. As long as I plotted and planned things, I was full of frustration.
ne fare ag ust sfenr 3B urae AIH NA (214-14, Test wT , He 5) ja-o kirpaal gur pooraa bhayti-aa ta-o aanad sehjay. ||1]| When I met the Kind, Perfect Guru, then I obtained bliss so easily. ||1]|
ast frorou agn 3 ote 33 Fo us I (214-15, west we , He 5) jaytee si-aanap karam ha-o kee-ay taytay banDh paray. The more clever tricks I tried, the more bonds I was saddled with.
Ag AY ag HASta OfsS Sa IN HAS FS Ml (214-15, TSSt ww , Hs 5) ja-o saaDhoo kar mastak Dhari-o tab ham mukat bha-ay. ||2]| When the Holy Saint placed His Hand upon my forehead, then I was liberated. ||2]|
NS AS s
AG HB Hd Hd AGS 3E BE fay wes I (214-16, TeSt HT, He 5) ja-o la-o mayro mayro karto ta-o la-o bikh ghayray. As long as I claimed, "Mine, mine!", I was surrounded by wickedness and corruption.
HO 36 afa meat oa aS 3a IH AoA AS NSN (214-16, Text HH , He 5)
man tan buDh arpee thaakur ka-o tab ham sahj so-ay. ||3]|
But when I dedicated my mind, body and intellect to my Lord and Master, then I began to sleep in peace. ||3]|
Ag wo us Cort via 3B aE a] Sg I (214-17, aoa we , He 5) ja-o la-o pot uthaa-ee chali-a-o ta-o la-o daan bharay. As long as I walked along, carrying the load, I continued to pay the fine.
ue ats ag us fifeor 38 aaa fasse SAU (214-17, Rat wre , He 5)
pot daar gur pooraa mili-aa ta-o naanak nirbha-ay. ||4||1||159]|
But I threw away that bundle, when I met the Perfect Guru; O Nanak, then I became fearless. ||4]|1]|159]|
ast HST HIS U Il (214-18)
ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
azo faurfas st fsurfarG i (214-18, a@st wer , Hz 5) bhaavan ti-aagi-o ree ti-aagi-o. I have renounced my desires; I have renounced them.
fsurfas 4 ae fife fourfarS i (214-19, aGat ws , He 5) ti-aagi-o mai gur mil ti-aagi-o. I have renounced them; meeting the Guru, I have renounced them.
Hee AY nitoe Hae oA nfs afse orf nan TIS ii (214-19, west ws , vs 5)
sarab sukh aanand mangal ras maan gobindai aagi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All peace, joy, happiness and pleasures have come since I surrendered to the Will of the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause| |
UST 2quy
Hg nifsHg & AHS HASA Ste Te ura i (215-1, aC wer , v3 5)
maan abhimaan do-oo samaanay mastak daar gur paagi-o.
Honor and dishonor are the same to me; I have placed my forehead upon the Guru's Feet.
AUS Jay B ys sa Iq SAT BLAS WAU (215-1, TS wer , us 5)
Sampat harakh na aapat dookhaa rang thaakurai laagi-o. ||1||
Wealth does not excite me, and misfortune does not disturb me; I have embraced love for my Lord and Master. ||1]|
WA SAS Sa Amt Cfenra fererfarS i (215-2, a@at wer , He 5) baas baasree aykai su-aamee udi-aan daristaagi-o. The One Lord and Master dwells in the home; He is seen in the wilderness as well.
forse ge AS gH Ste uss AsHfaAS ii (215-2, ast wer , v2 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay sant bharam daari-o pooran sarbaagi-o. ||2||
I have become fearless; the Saint has removed my doubts. The All-knowing Lord is pervading everywhere. ||2]|
A fag ads age ae Hie ad & ofa I (215-3, aGat wes , He 5) jo kichh kartai kaaran keeno man buro na laagi-o. Whatever the Creator does, my mind is not troubled.
WoHats usAfe Hse a AES He ATS USI (215-3, ast ws , He 5)
saaDhsangat parsaad santan kai so-i-o man jaagi-o. ||3]|
By the Grace of the Saints and the Company of the Holy, my sleeping mind has been awakened. ||3]|
Ho aoa Gf sat ufsS mre AgetfaS it (215-4, west wer , Hz 5) jan naanak orh tuhaaree pari-o aa-i-o sarnaagi-o. Servant Nanak seeks Your Support; he has come to Your Sanctuary.
OH dal Hon 3A He fefs sy F HtaAS USINOll (215-5, Tat ww, Hs 5)
naam rang sahj ras maanay fir dookh na laagi-o. ||4||2||160] |
In the Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he enjoys intuitive peace; pain no longer touches him. ||4]|2||160]|
ast HS HIS U Il (215-5)
ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
urfemt oe Iso He UfEMt Il (215-5, TSH HTT , He 5) paa-i-aa laal ratan man paa-i-aa. I have found the jewel of my Beloved within my mind.
36 AlSG Ho Als@ dor Asad Hate AHfeEor A TIS Il (215-6, aCst ws , 2 5) tan seetal man seetal thee-aa satgur sabad samaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My body is cooled, my mind is cooled and soothed, and I am absorbed into the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
wet gu fgAS AS wet fea Aare frATSH Il (215-7, TSS we , Hs 5)
laathee bhookh tarisan sabh laathee chintaa sagal bisaaree.
My hunger has departed, my thirst has totally departed, and all my anxiety is forgotten.
ag HAS afs us ules He AIS Aa APS UA (215-7, eat wre , v8 5)
kar mastak gur poorai Dhari-o man jeeto jag saaree. ||1||
The Perfect Guru has placed His Hand upon my forehead; conquering my mind, I have conquered the whole world. ||1| |
fgufs uurfe ao fee nists So 3 wa VS I (215-8, ast ws , we 5)
taripat aghaa-ay rahay rid antar dolan tay ab chookay.
Satisfied and satiated, I remain steady within my heart, and now, I do not waver at all.
we unter Afsate thor sfe adt F Ha MII (215-8, TS wre , Hs 5)
akhut khajaanaa satgur dee-aa tot nahee ray mookay. ||2]|
The True Guru has given me the inexhaustible treasure; it never decreases, and never runs out. ||2||
Made SX HoT 3 set ate wrt gs geet I (215-9, aSst war , ws 5) achraj ayk sunhu ray bhaa-ee gur aisee boojh bujhaa-ee.
Listen to this wonder, O Siblings of Destiny: the Guru has given me this understanding.
ots use Sad AG SfeG 38 fandt sts uset Bil (215-9, aSHt HET , He 5)
laahi pardaa thaakur ja-o bhayti-o ta-o bisree taat paraa-ee. ||3]||
I threw off the veil of illusion, when I met my Lord and Master; then, I forgot my jealousy of others. |[3]|
afoS o wet &g mda A AS fafs whim II (215-10, aGst wer , He 5) kahi-o na jaa-ee ayhu achambha-o so jaanai jin chaakhi-aa. This is a wonder which cannot be described. They alone know it, who have tasted it.
ad aoa Ae se fear afe fours foe & ohm isnsnveUi (215-10, ast ws , He 5) kaho naanak sach bha-ay bigaasaa gur niDhaan ridai lai raakhi-aa. ||4||3||161||
Says Nanak, the Truth has been revealed to me. The Guru has given me the treasure; I have taken it and enshrined it within my heart. ||4]|3||161]|
TSt HS HIS U Il (215-11)
ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
Gags TH IH at Aget i (215-11, Test ws , He 5) ubrat raajaa raam kee sarnee. Those who take to the Sanctuary of the Lord, the King, are saved.
Hag 3a Whar & 3G fats fafs uss daat NA TIC it (215-12, TSS HHT , He 5) sarab lok maa-i-aa kay mandal gir gir partay Dharnee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All other people, in the mansion of Maya, fall flat on their faces on the ground. ||1]|Pause] |
WAS fAf_fs se shes Ho usue FEE afar i (215-12, weet ws , He 5)
saasat simrit bayd beechaaray mahaa purkhan i-o kahi-aa.
The great men have studied the Shaastras, the Simritees and the Vedas, and they have said this:
fag afs sHo andt farsa AY o fxod Bho WAI (215-13, ast we , Hs 5)
bin har bhajan naahee nistaaraa sookh na kinhoo" lahi-aa. ||1||
"Without the Lord's meditation, there is no emancipation, and no one has ever found peace."||1]|
SHS se5 at ment Ast ass |S BIT Il (215-14, aC wer , we 5)
teen bhavan kee lakhmee joree boojhat naahee lahray.
People may accumulate the wealth of the three worlds, but the waves of greed are still not subdued.
fas fs sats as fafa ue feas usd uTd INQ (215-14, west He , He 5)
bin har bhagat kahaa thit paavai firto pahray pahray. ||2]|
Without devotional worship of the Lord, where can anyone find stability? People wander around endlessly. ||2||
mise fae ATS HS HIS UIs ISB AH Il (215-15, St wa , Hs 5)
anik bilaas karat man mohan pooran hot na kaamaa.
People engage in all sorts of mind-enticing pastimes, but their passions are not fulfilled.
HOS HSS TAT 3 gss Haw fee fas or Sl (215-15, ast wer , vs 5) jalto jalto kabhoo na boojhat sagal barithay bin naamaa. ||3]|| They burn and burn, and are never satisfied; without the Lord's Name, it is all useless.
[I3I|
fs a OH Aug Ae Hist fed ATS AY YT Il (215-16, wea we , He 5) har kaa naam japahu mayray meetaa ihai saar sukh pooraa. Chant the Name of the Lord, my friend; this is the essence of perfect peace.
AWUHSS ASH HIS foes SSA AS at YS USUI (215-16, TSS wer , Hs 5)
saaDhsangat janam maran nivaarai naanak jan kee Dhooraa. ||4||4||162]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, birth and death are ended. Nanak is the dust of the feet of the humble. ||4||4]|162] |
ast HST HIS U Il (215-17)
ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
H ag feo fafa & ANSTS I (215-17, TBST wT , He 5) mo ka-o ih biDh ko samjhaavai. Who can help me understand my condition?
asst fe AST] NU TIS Il (215-18, ast wer , He 5) kartaa ho-ay janaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only the Creator knows it. ||1]|Pause] |
nones fag feats aS AU SU AE BATH Il (215-18, TSS wer , Hs 5)
anjaanat kichh ineh kamaano jap tap kachhoo na saaDhaa.
This person does things in ignorance; he does not chant in meditation, and does not perform any deep, self-disciplined meditation.
zd fefa & feg no eeafes aee aH afe ga NA (215-18, aGSt HET , He 5) dah dis lai ih man da-uraa-i-o kavan karam kar baaDhaa. ||1|| This mind wanders around in the ten directions - how can it be restrained? ||1||
Ho 36 Us StH a oad IS feA a feg Ha I (215-19, aSSt wwe , v2 5) man tan Dhan bhoom kaa thaakur ha-o is kaa ih mayraa. "I am the lord, the master of my mind, body, wealth and lands. These are mine."
USt 29
3H Hd ae ASIA oct fea dus us Ua QM (216-1, aCat wer , Hi 5)
bharam moh kachh soojhas naahee ih paikhar pa-ay pairaa. ||2||
In doubt and emotional attachment, this person understands nothing; with this leash, these feet are tied up. ||2]|
3a feg ar ares ufeur wa feg ag 5 IT Il (216-1, Sat wear, Hs 5) tab ih kahaa kamaavan pari-aa jab ih kachhoo na hotaa. What did this person do, when he did not exist?
ma Sa fodno fedars us Ag fae vrufs ATT SI (216-2, aeat ws , He 5) jab ayk niranjan nirankaar parabh sabh kichh aapeh kartaa. ||3]|
When the Immaculate and Formless Lord God was all alone, He did everything by Himself. ||3] |
mus adsa nm Ae fats feg seq sof I (216-2, west wer , He 5) apnay kartab aapay jaanai jin ih rachan rachaa-i-aa. He alone knows His actions; He created this creation.
aI sod adeug J wm Afsafe say vorfemr SUIS (216-3, agSt ws , He 5) kaho naanak karanhaar hai aapay satgur bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||4||5||163]|
Says Nanak, the Lord Himself is the Doer. The True Guru has dispelled my doubts. [14] [5] ]163]|
ASSt Hse HIG U Il (216-4)
ga-orhee maalaa mehlaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
ofa fas mes far fase i (216-4, a@at wer , 8 5) har bin avar kir-aa birthay. Without the Lord, other actions are useless.
WU SU AFH aeH ane fefa GF HA UU TTS Il (216-4, TCS wer , Hs 5)
jap tap sanjam karam kamaanay ihi orai moosay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditative chants, intense deep meditation, austere self-discipline and rituals - these are plundered in this world. ||1]|Pause| |
ds 3H AnH Hfs gost faq a Ss & uTfeur I (216-5, ACS HET, He 5)
barat naym sanjam meh rahtaa tin kaa aadh na paa-i-aa.
Fasting, daily rituals, and austere self-discipline - those who keep the practice of these, are rewarded with less than a shell.
Wd THE niST F set Sor arf & ure WAU (216-5, aC wer , Hs 5)
aagai chalan a-or hai bhaa-ee oo“haa kaam na aa-i-aa. ||1||
Hereafter, the way is different, O Siblings of Destiny. There, these things are of no use at all. ||1]|
Stefa afe nig ast gHST nid SBT US Il (216-6, aSat ws , He 5)
tirath naa-ay ar Dharnee bharmataa aagai tha-ur na paavai.
Those who bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and wander over the earth, find no place of rest hereafter.
Ca ath 3 ure fea fafa Ga Sas Tt users Ii (216-7, Tea we , 8 5) oohaa kaam na aavai ih biDh oh logan hee patee-aavai. ||2|| There, these are of no use at all. By these things, they only please other people. ||2||
Usd Fe HU svat Gud nid HIG 5 USM I (216-7, TSS ws , He 5)
chatur bayd mukh bachnee uchrai aagai mahal na paa-ee-ai.
Reciting the four Vedas from memory, they do not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence hereafter.
gs ad Faq AUG Sy Aaet Sa SaTEMA USI (216-8, TSH wer , Hs 5) boojhai naahee ayk suDhaakhar oh saglee jhaakh jhakhaa-ee-ai. ||3]|| Those who do not understand the One Pure Word, utter total nonsense. ||3] |
Sod ads feg dea fa ore A urs Tent Il (216-8, aGst wer , nH 5) naanak kahto ih beechaaraa je kamaavai so paar garaamee. Nanak voices this opinion: those who practice it, swim across.
ad Agd mg oH fonred faurag HoT THAT INIENAESI (216-9, THT HHT , 8 5) gur sayvhu ar naam Dhi-aavahu ti-aagahu manhu gumaanee. ||4||6||164||
Serve the Guru, and meditate on the Naam; renounce the egotistical pride from your mind. ||4]|6||164] |
ast HS U Il (216-10)
ga-orhee maalaa 5. Gauree Maalaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ha ofs afs ofa nfs adh Il (216-10, west we , He 5) maaDha-o har har har mukh kahee-ai. O Lord, I chant Your Name, Har, Har, Har.
dH 3 ae 3 de HM fas wag (SS sot AU TTS tl (216-10, seat wer , v3 5) ham tay kachhoo na hovai su-aamee ji-o raakho ti-o rahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot do anything by myself, O Lord and Master. As You keep me, so I remain. ||1]|Pause] |
fomr fas ad fx ageaa fomr fen ofa fees II (216-11, aGst we , He 5) ki-aa kichh karai ke karnaihaaraa ki-aa is haath bichaaray. What can the mere mortal do? What is in the hands of this poor creature?
fas 3H oeg fas dt war UTS AH THT NA (216-11, TEST wT , He 5) jit tum laavhu tit hee laagaa pooran khasam hamaaray. ||1]|| As You attach us, so we are attached, O my Perfect Lord and Master. ||1]|
AST fgur Ava a BS Sa Ty fs GST il (216-12, aSSt ws , 2 5) karahu kirpaa sarab kay daatay ayk roop liv laavhu. Take pity on me, O Great Giver of all, that I may enshrine love for Your Form alone.
Soa ot FSst oe ufs mrs SH AUST NQANDNIEUI (216-13, ACS Hrs , He 5)
naanak kee baynantee har peh apunaa naam japaavhu. ||2||7||165]|
Nanak offers this prayer to the Lord, that he may chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||7]|165] |
TH ACSt HS HIS U (216-14) raag ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure Il (216-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
de efeore ates afenr AIG I (216-15, aGst ws , He 5) deen da-i-aal damodar raa-i-aa jee-o. O Merciful to the meek, O Dear Lord King,
afe Hot af AS Sarfeor AE i (216-15, aSSt ws , He 5) kot janaa kar sayv lagaa-i-aa jee-o. You have engaged millions of people in Your Service.
30s eG ST fase Tefenr A II (216-15, TCH ws , He 5) bhagat vachhal tayraa birad rakhaa-i-aa jee-o. You are the Lover of Your devotees; this is Your Nature.
use Asal Wet AS WAM (216-16, ast ws , HE 5) pooran sabhnee jaa-ee jee-o. ||1]| You are totally pervading all places. ||1||
faG uur uisH age Hadet FIG Il (216-16, west ws , He 5) ki-o paykhaa pareetam kavan sukarnee jee-o. How can I behold my Beloved? What is that way of life?
Hat oHt AS vat A Il (216-16, aSHt ws , He 5) santaa daasee sayvaa charnee jee-o. Become the slave of the Saints, and serve at their feet.
feg AG zaret af afe Aret AIG I (216-17, TSH ws , He 5) ih jee-o vataa-ee bal bal jaa-ee jee-o. I dedicate this soul; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them.
fan fate fofe oa uret AIG QI (216-17, Tee ws , He 5) tis niv niv laaga-o paa-ee jee-o. ||2]| Bowing low, I fall at the Feet of the Lord. ||2||
ut ufss Fe ss AG i (216-18, aSSt ws , He 5) pothee pandit bayd khojantaa jee-o. The Pandits, the religious scholars, study the books of the Vedas.
dfs saat stefa oest AE It (216-18, west Ws , He 5) ho-ay bairaagee tirath naavantaa jee-o. Some become renunciates, and bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Ms Se atsesg West AM Il (216-18, west ws , Hs 5) geet naad keertan gaavantaa jee-o. Some sing tunes and melodies and songs.
dfs fess on fomret AIG ISI (216-19, Test ws , v2 5)
har nirbha-o naam Dhi-aa-ee jee-o. ||3]|
But I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Fearless Lord. ||3]| se fgus Aumit AS ATG Il (216-19, west ws , nH 5)
bha-ay kirpaal su-aamee mayray jee-o.
My Lord and Master has become merciful to me.
ufss ufes ofa Ta & US AE Il (216-19, aGSt ws , He 5)
patit pavit lag gur kay pairay jee-o. I was a sinner, and I have been sanctified, taking to the Guru's Feet.
Ua 299 3H 3@ ofe ate faaed AIG II (217-1, west Ts , He 5)
bharam bha-o kaat kee-ay nirvairay jee-o. Dispelling my doubts and fears, the Guru has rid me of hatred.
Td Hs at wa UTE AG sil (217-1, Test ws , He 5)
gur man kee aas pooraa-ee jee-o. ||4|| The Guru has fulfilled the desires of my mind. ||4]|
fafs o@ ufeur A oedst AIG II (217-1, aGst ws , He 5) jin naa-o paa-i-aa so Dhanvantaa jee-o. One who has obtained the Name is wealthy.
fafs ys fomrfeur A Aaa AG I (217-2, aBat ws , H8 5) jin parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa so sobhaavantaa jee-o. One who meditates on God is glorified.
fan Ag Hats fSH AS Hoset AIG WN (217-2, west ws , He 5)
jis saaDhoo sangat tis sabh sukarnee jee-o.
Sublime are all the actions of those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ho S'6a Ad AHStT AIS NUNANAEEN (217-3, TST Hs , He 5)
jan naanak sahj samaa-ee jee-o. ||5||1||166|| Servant Nanak is intuitively absorbed into the Lord. ||5||1||166]|
ast HIG U HTS Il (217-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5 maajh. Gauree, Fifth Mehl, Maajh:
mt@ gHTS TH fimrd AIG I (217-3, weet ws , He 5) aa-o hamaarai raam pi-aaray jee-o. Come to me, O my Beloved Lord.
dfs fear Ata Ata fess AIG I (217-4, aBst ws , He 5) rain dinas saas saas chitaaray jee-o. Night and day, with each and every breath, I think of You.
Ha 2 AeA UY yaad AG Il (217-4, aGst ws , He 5) sant day-o sandaysaa pai charnaaray jee-o. O Saints, give Him this message; I fall at Your Feet.
3u fas fas fafa sdbo FIG Nall (217-4, west ws , nH 5) tuDh bin kit biDh taree-ai jee-o. ||1]| Without You, how can I be saved? ||1]|
Hfat SHS H AS mse AE It (217-5, ASST ws , He 5) sang tumaarai mai karay anandaa jee-o. In Your Company, I am in ecstasy.
fe fafe fasef= na uanTSer FIG I (217-5, ast ws , He 5) van tin taribhavan sukh parmaanandaa jee-o. In the forest, the fields and the three worlds, there is peace and supreme bliss.
An Aoet fea Ho faarer AG II (217-6, west ws , He 5) sayj suhaavee ih man bigsandaa jee-o. My bed is beautiful, and my mind blossoms forth in ecstasy.
ufé zane feg wy wdhat AIG Nn (217-6, aGst ws , He 5) paykh darsan ih sukh lahee-ai jee-o. ||2| | Beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I have found this peace. ||2]|
de ute adt fos AS AE I (217-7, west ws , nH 5) charan pakhaar karee nit sayvaa jee-o. I wash Your Feet, and constantly serve You.
UAT nse Feo Set AMS Ml (217-7, asst ws , He 5) poojaa archaa bandan dayvaa jee-o. O Divine Lord, I worship and adore You; I bow down before You.
amAfe SA OH AU Be AS Il (217-7, west ws , He 5) daasan daas naam jap layvaa jee-o. I am the slave of Your slaves; I chant Your Name.
faa oag ufo adit HE SI (217-8, aGSt ws , He 5) bin-o thaakur peh kahee-ai jee-o. ||3]| I offer this prayer to my Lord and Master. ||3]|
fee Yat Hat He 3q dfemr AIG I (217-3, aes ws , He 5) ichh punnee mayree man tan hari-aa jee-o. My desires are fulfilled, and my mind and body are rejuvenated.
@dHo UNS AS ey UdTiam AIG Il (217-8, TSH ws , He 5)
darsan paykhat sabh dukh parhari-aa jee-o.
Beholding the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, all my pains have been taken away.
dfs ofs oH AY Afy Sfmt AIG I (217-9, west ws , v2 5) har har naam japay jap tari-aa jee-o. Chanting and meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been saved.
feg ving aoa AY Ada AIG ISNQNIADIN (217-9, Test ws , He 5) ih ajar naanak sukh sahee-ai jee-o. ||4]|2||167]|| Nanak endures this unendurable celestial bliss. ||4||2||167]|
ast HS HIS U Il (217-10)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5. Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Afe Afe AHS HO fs flrs ATS I (217-10, west ws , v2 5) sun sun Saajan man mit pi-aaray jee-o. Listen, listen, O my friend and companion, O Beloved of my mind:
Ho 36 so fea Ae fs se AME I (217-10, west ws, H 5) man tan tayraa ih jee-o bhe vaaray jee-o. my mind and body are Yours. This life is a sacrifice to You as well.
feng adt ys ure wird AIG I (217-11, aGst ws, He 5) visar naahee parabh paraan aDhaaray jee-o. May I never forget God, the Support of the breath of life.
Het Sot Agee AIS UNA (217-11, west ws , He 5) sadaa tayree sarnaa-ee jee-o. ||1]|| I have come to Your Eternal Sanctuary. ||1]|
fan fife Ho ate orvet AIG WN (217-11, Test ws , He 5) jis mili-ai man jeevai bhaa-ee jee-o. Meeting Him, my mind is revived, O Siblings of Destiny.
ae usATet A ufs ofs uret AG Il (217-12, west ws , He 5)
gur parsaadee so har har paa-ee jee-o. By Guru's Grace, I have found the Lord, Har, Har.
AS fag ys at us oho Aret FIG I (217-12, aSst ws, He 5) sabh kichh parabh kaa parabh kee-aa jaa-ee jee-o. All things belong to God; all places belong to God.
ys ag Ae ate wet AE QU (217-13, west ws , He 5) parabh ka-o sad bal jaa-ee jeea. ||2|| I am forever a sacrifice to God. ||2]|
fg fag wu esarat AE I (217-13, west ws , He 5)
ayhu niDhaan japai vadbhaagee jee-o.
Very fortunate are those who meditate on this treasure. on fadao fa fos oat AE i 217-13, west ws , He 5)
naam niranjan ayk liv laagee jee-o. They enshrine love for the Naam, the Name of the One Immaculate Lord.
ag us ufeor Ag vy fetfenr AG Wt (217-14, aBst ws , HE 5) gur pooraa paa-i-aa sabh dukh mitaa-i-aa jee-o. Finding the Perfect Guru, all suffering is dispelled.
MS Udd Te afent AS WS (217-14, ast ws , He 5) aath pahar gun gaa-i-aa jee-o. ||3]| Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glories of God. ||3]|
336 uesE Tig SH SHS AG Il (217-15, TSH Ws , He 5) ratan padaarath har naam tumaaraa jee-o. Your Name is the treasure of jewels, Lord.
3 AT AY sas ZeNST AMG Il (217-15, Test ws , He 5) too” sachaa saahu bhagat vanjaaraa jee-o. You are the True Banker; Your devotee is the trader.
dfs ug IH AG Sure AIG I (217-15, west ws , He 5) har Dhan raas sach vaapaaraa jee-o. True is the trade of those who have the wealth of the Lord's assets.
HO Soa AE Meds AS NSNSNIECH (217-16, Test ws , He 5)
jan naanak sad balihaaraa jee-o. ||4]|3||168] | Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice. ||4]|3]|168] |
Ta ACSt HS HIG U (217-17)
raag ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (217-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 AT aT WE ATS FAT AT HE Il (217-18, 7st ws , He 5) too” mayraa baho maan kartay too’ mayraa baho maan. I am so proud of You, O Creator; I am so proud of You.
fa sud Afa SAT AY Hae SATS WAU TIC Il (217-18, aSSt ws , He 5)
jor tumaarai sukh vasaa sach sabad neesaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through Your Almighty Power, I dwell in peace. The True Word of the Shabad is my banner and insignia. ||1]]Pause| |
AS ver wstor Afs & gu abr il (217-19, aSst ws , v2 5) sabhay galaa jaatee-aa sun kai chup kee-aa. He hears and knows everything, but he keeps silent.
ae dt nafs 3 edie afer Hofsmr al (217-19, agst ws , He 5) kad hee surat na laDhee-aa maa-i-aa mohrhi-aa. ||1]| Bewitched by Maya, he never regains awareness. ||1||
efe yses ASST A met fsofsnr it (217-19, aSst ws , He 5) day-ay bujhaarat saartaa say akhee dith-rhi-aa. The riddles and hints are given, and he sees them with his eyes.
UST QAc aet fa Hoe Sstor ufs o Het afar IH (is-1, Tat ws , 3 5)
ko-ee je moorakh lobhee-aa mool na sunee kahi-aa. ||2| | But he is foolish and greedy, and he never listens to what he is told. ||2||
fear eg vg fomr aet As feas Afe HOt I (218-1, Tee ws , He 5)
ikas duhu chahu ki-aa ganee sabh ikat saad muthee.
Why bother to count one, two, three, four? The whole world is defrauded by the same enticements.
fea ng af sabia a feaat wfe est Sil (218-2, ast ws , ns 5) ik aDh naa-ay rasee-arhaa kaa virlee jaa-ay vuthee. ||3]| Hardly anyone loves the Lord's Name; how rare is that place which is in bloom. ||3]|
Sas Ad Ue Ae mae acts fea TAS I (218-2, aGst ws , H 5) bhagat sachay dar sohday anad karahi din raat. The devotees look beautiful in the True Court; night and day, they are happy.
dfat JS USHA AS StS f3e af AS ISIUIEC! (218-3, AGS WS , He 5)
rang ratay parmaysrai jan naanak tin bal jaat. ||4]|1||169]| They are imbued with the Love of the Transcendent Lord; servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||4]|1||169]|
ast HIS U HPS Il (218-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5 maa‘jh. Gauree, Fifth Mehl, Maajh:
Su SHO ST OW At ey SHe ST GM Il (218-4, aSat ws, He 5) dukh bhanjan tayraa naam jee dukh bhanjan tayraa naam. The Destroyer of sorrow is Your Name, Lord; the Destroyer of sorrow is Your Name.
mS ude mrad use Afsae fare ual TIS il (218-4, TSS ws, ws 5) aath pahar aaraaDhee-ai pooran satgur gi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Twenty-four hours a day, dwell upon the wisdom of the Perfect True Guru. ||1||Pause] |
fas wie eA uragon Aet Ao] aE Il (218-5, west ws, Hs 5) jit ghat vasai paarbarahm so-ee suhaavaa thaa-o. That heart, in which the Supreme Lord God abides, is the most beautiful place.
AH aad ofs 3 nreet gHat ofs TE WS NA (218-5, Test ws, He 5)
jam kankar nayrh na aavee rasnaa har gun gaa-o. ||1||
The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord with the tongue. ||1]|
Ae’ Aofs 3 Wehr oF AT nrafa I (218-6, aGat ws, He 5)
sayvaa Surat na jaanee-aa naa jaapai aaraaDh.
I have not understood the wisdom of serving Him, nor have I worshipped Him in meditation.
Ge 3dt Hala AT Stag MGI Marfa NII (218-6, west ws, v2 5)
ot tayree jagjeevanaa mayray thaakur agam agaaDh. ||2||
You are my Support, O Life of the World; O my Lord and Master, Inaccessible and Incomprehensible. | |2| |
se faurs aASiot 5S Aa AST Il (218-7, Test HS, He 5) bha-ay kirpaal gusaa-ee-aa nathay sog santaap. When the Lord of the Universe became merciful, sorrow and suffering departed.
sat BE 3 waet Afsate se orfu SI (18-7, Test ws, v8 5) tatee vaa-o na lag-ee satgur rakhay aap. ||3]|| The hot winds do not even touch those who are protected by the True Guru. ||3]|
Ts owes a TI Td Ae fAsHeT ST Il (218-8, aSst ws, He 5)
gur naaraa-in da-yu gur gur sachaa sirjanhaar.
The Guru is the All-pervading Lord, the Guru is the Merciful Master; the Guru is the True Creator Lord.
dfs 36 AS fos ufeur AS Soa Ae afHas ISIQNWOll (218-8, aGSt ws, He 5)
gur tuthai sabh kichh paa-i-aa jan naanak sad balihaar. ||4]|2||170||
When the Guru was totally satisfied, I obtained everything. Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||4||2||170]|
ast HS HIS U Il (218-9)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5. Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
fs TH TH TH IM Il (218-9, west 117s, He 5) har raam raam raam raamaa. The Lord, the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam:
mf Yas TS AH UU TIS il (218-10, ast ws, we 5) jap pooran ho-ay kaamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. meditating on Him, all affairs are resolved. ||1||Pause| |
oH afte rafeor dor Hy ufez il (218-10, aGat ws, He 5) raam gobind japaydi-aa ho-aa mukh pavitar. Chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, one's mouth is sanctified.
dfs AA Heba fra 3 Het set fH WAM (218-10, west ws, He 5) har jas sunee-ai jis tay so-ee bhaa-ee mitar. ||1]| One who recites to me the Praises of the Lord is my friend and brother. ||1]|
Afs uevga Als cor Aaa Te" fAA HAT Il (218-11, west ws, H8 5) sabh padaarath sabh falaa sarab gunaa jis maahi. All treasures, all rewards and all virtues are in the Lord of the Universe.
fa afiz Hog ferrdin fam fanes eu fs QU (218-11, wat ws, He 5) ki-o gobind manhu visaaree-ai jis simrat dukh jaahi. ||2|| Why forget Him from your mind? Remembering Him in meditation, pain departs. ||2]|
fan ofs ofa ebay gene ue urfa il (218-12, aGst os, 2 5) jis larh lagi-ai jeevee-ai bhavjal pa-ee-ai paar. Grasping the hem of His robe, we live, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
fife Arg Afar Garg af Hu Cres esata SI (218-12, Test ws, v8 5)
mil saaDhoo sang uDhaar ho-ay mukh oojal darbaar. ||3]|
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and one's face becomes radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
Heo JU aus AA AS Hat at TH I (218-13, ast ws, we 5)
jeevan roop gopaal jas sant janaa kee raas.
The Praise of the Sustainer of the Universe is the essence of life, and the wealth of His Saints.
soa Gad an af ef AY AEH ISNSNIOA (218-13, aCSt ws, He 5) naanak ubray naam jap dar sachai saabaas. ||4]|3]|171]|
Nanak is saved, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord; in the True Court, he is cheered and applauded. ||4||3||171]|
ast HS HIS U Il (218-14)
ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5. Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
M6 ofs Te we fie JF lS afe TE WS tt (218-14, ast ws, ws 5)
meethay har gun gaa-o jindoo too” meethay har gun gaa-o. Sing the Sweet Praises of the Lord, O my soul, sing the Sweet Praises of the Lord.
Ae Ast dfsur fifer fears aS di TIS il (218-15, aSHt ws, He 5) sachay saytee rati-aa mili-aa nithaavay thaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Attuned to the True One, even the homeless find a home. ||1]||Pause] |
dfs Are Afs fefomr 3g Ho feat SF Il (218-15, aGat ws, He 5)
hor saad sabh fiki-aa tan man fikaa ho-ay.
All other tastes are bland and insipid; through them, the body and mind are rendered insipid as well.
fee usnnd A ad fee A Hes ALE NU (18-16, aeat ws, He 5)
vin parmaysar jo karay fit so jeevan so-ay. ||1]|
Without the Transcendent Lord, what can anyone do? Cursed is his life, and cursed his reputation. ||1]|
nize afd a AT at saat fg AAT Il (218-16, aGSt Hs, He 5) anchal geh kai saaDh kaa tarnaa ih sansaar. Grasping the hem of the robe of the Holy Saint, we cross over the world-ocean.
USGI wrath Gud AT UPS MQM (218-17, aSzt ws, He 5) paarbarahm aaraaDhee-ai uDhrai sabh parvaar. ||2| | Worship and adore the Supreme Lord God, and all your family will be saved as well.
21 |
AMG 80 Afhs A af oy fase SfE ii (218-17, asst ws, v2 5)
saajan banDh sumitar so har naam hirdai day-ay.
He is a companion, a relative, and a good friend of mine, who implants the Lord's Name within my heart.
m@ae vfs free a usGuarg adfe SI (218-18, aGst Hs, He 5) a-ugan sabh mitaa-ay kai par-upkaar karay-i. ||3]| He washes off all my demerits, and is so generous to me. |[3]|
HS uno ag we fs a vas fears Il (218-18, agst ws, He 5)
maal khajaanaa thayhu ghar har kay charan niDhaan.
Wealth, treasures, and household are all just ruins; the Lord's Feet are the only treasure.
wos Wud ee 3d US BUS Hat VS SUSAN (218-19, aSet ws, ne 5)
naanak jaachak dar tayrai parabh tuDhno mangai daan. ||4||4||172]| Nanak is a beggar standing at Your Door, God; he begs for Your charity. ||4]|4]|172]|
Uar 29 qe Afsars yAfe II (219-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta ACSt HIM € Il (219-1) raag ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Raag Gauree, Ninth Mehl
ATG HS at HG fara il (219-1, ast, ne 9) saaDho man kaa maan ti-aaga-o. : Holy Saadhus: forsake the pride of your mind.
an au Hats vane at at 3 wifofath ara nd TIC I (219-1, aCst, v8 9)
kaam kroDh sangat durjan kee taa tay ahinis bhaaga-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Sexual desire, anger and the company of evil people - run away from them, day and night. ||1]|Pause| |
HY wy 8S AH ala AS MT HS MRT I (219-2, aBat, He 9)
sukh dukh dono sam kar jaanai a-or maan apmaanaa.
One who knows that pain and pleasure are both the same, and honor and dishonor as well,
Jad Aa 3 dd wistst fSfs Af SS UTS IAI (219-3, aga, He 9) harakh sog tay rahai ateetaa tin jag tat pachhaanaa. ||1]|| who remains detached from joy and sorrow, realizes the true essence in the world.
[111 Cnsfs Se SC fSora vA ue fesarar il (219-3, ast, we 9)
ustat nindaa do-oo ti-aagai khojai pad nirbaanaa. Renounce both praise and blame; seek instead the state of Nirvaanaa.
Wo sod feg ae aog 3 fasd TaHfe AT QUAI (219-4, Tes, Hs 9)
jan naanak ih khayl kathan hai kinhoo™ gurmukh jaanaa. ||2||1|| O servant Nanak, this is such a difficult game; only a few Gurmukhs understand it! 21121]
agat HI € Il (219-4) ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
AM yet TH Faret il (219-4, ast, ve 9) saaDho rachnaa raam banaa-ee. Holy Saadhus: the Lord fashioned the creation.
fefa fron fea omfag HS user ofeG o AST NA TIC Il (219-5, ast, ne 9)
ik binsai ik asthir maanai achraj lakhi-o na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One person passes away, and another thinks that he will live forever - this is a wonder beyond understanding! ||1]||Pause| |
aH au Ha ofA yrst afe Hats farAaet I (219-5, 7st, 3 9)
kaam kroDh moh bas paraanee har moorat bisraa-ee.
The mortal beings are held in the power of sexual desire, anger and emotional attachment; they have forgotten the Lord, the Immortal Form.
Bo" 39 Ae afe Hes fAG Aus Jaret Al (219-6, Tes, 8 9) jhoothaa tan saachaa kar maani-o ji-o supnaa rainaa-ee. ||1]|| The body is false, but they believe it to be true; it is like a dream in the night. ||1]|
A dA A AG fon fae aes af aret Il (219-6, aEst, v2 9) jo deesai so sagal binaasai ji-o baadar kee chhaa-ee. Whatever is seen, shall all pass away, like the shadow of a cloud.
Ho oa Aa ASS fifamr sfoS TH AGS NN (219-7, TCS, He 9)
jan naanak jag jaani-o mithi-aa rahi-o raam sarnaa-ee. ||2||2]| O servant Nanak, one who knows the world to be unreal, dwells in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||2]|
agat Hae € Il (219-8) ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
urat a@ ofe aA xfs odt mS I (219-8, aBHt, He 9) paraanee ka-o har jas man nahee aavai. The Praise of the Lord does not come to dwell in the minds of the mortal beings.
wifofofh Hae dd feet A aT AA To WS NU! TIS ll (219-8, aSst, ne 9)
ahinis magan rahai maa-i-aa mai kaho kaisay gun gaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Day and night, they remain engrossed in Maya. Tell me, how can they sing God's Glories? ||1||Pause] |
us His wfenr Hust fas fea fafa nrg dors 1 (219-9, 7st, 8 9) poot meet maa-i-aa mamtaa si-o ih biDh aap banDhaavai. In this way, they bind themselves to children, friends, Maya and possessiveness.
frat fare faS 3d feg war etfs shh Bfs are NAN (219-9, aBaA, ws 9) marig tarisnaa ji-o jhootho ih jag daykh taas uth Dhaavai. ||1|| Like the deer's delusion, this world is false; and yet, beholding it, they chase after it.
[21
sats Hats a arse AoMt Hs atte fares Il (219-10, west, 3 9)
bhugat mukat kaa kaaran su-aamee moorh taahi bisraavai.
Our Lord and Master is the source of pleasures and liberation; and yet, the fool forgets Him.
WS SSA ACS H AG SAG TH FX US MUI (219-11, Tat, we 9)
jan naanak kotan mai ko-oo bhajan raam ko paavai. ||2||3]|
O servant Nanak, among millions, there is scarcely anyone who attains the Lord's meditation. ||2||3]|
agat Hoe € Il (219-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
AG feg Ho afeG o AT II (219-11, aEHt, He 9) saaDho ih man gahi-o na jaa-ee. Holy Saadhus: this mind cannot be restrained.
Jue fre Afa sas do 3 fag o goet A TIE I (219-12, aGst, v8 9) chanchal tarisnaa sang basat hai yaa tay thir na rahaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Fickle desires dwell with it, and so it cannot remain steady. ||1||Pause| |
aos au we dt a stats fro Afo AS fanart Il (219-12, ast, v2 9) kathan karoDh ghat hee kay bheetar jih suDh sabh bisraa-ee. The heart is filled with anger and violence, which cause all sense to be forgotten.
336 famre vs a fofs stor a AE aE o SAT AN (219-13, ASH, He 9)
ratan gi-aan sabh ko hir leenaa taa si-o kachh na basaa-ee. ||1]|
The jewel of spiritual wisdom has been taken away from everyone; nothing can withstand it. ||1]|
nat Aso Ass Als TS Tat Jd To Wet | (219-14, THA, ve 9)
jogee jatan karat sabh haaray gunee rahay gun gaa-ee.
The Yogis have tried everything and failed; the virtuous have grown weary of singing God's Glories.
Ho soa dig se efenrer 38 As fafa safe niet INI (219-14, Tez, 2 9)
jan naanak har bha-ay da-i-aalaa ta-o sabh biDh ban aa-ee. ||2||4] | O servant Nanak, when the Lord becomes merciful, then every effort is successful. 21141]
aeat Hae € Il (219-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
AG dfs & Ts Wes I (219-15, ast, ne 9) saaDho gobind kay gun gaava-o. Holy Saadhus: sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
HOH HOH MMOS UfEs fase orfo TevSS A TIS I (219-15, Tat, ne 9) maanas janam amolak paa-i-o birthaa kaahi gavaava-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You have obtained the priceless jewel of this human life; why are you uselessly wasting it? ||1||Pause]|
ufss usts de da afe nafs afo SH mreO Il (219-16, west, He 9)
patit puneet deen banDh har saran taahi tum aava-o.
He is the Purifier of sinners, the Friend of the poor. Come, and enter the Lord's Sanctuary.
am a 3a fufeS fra fines 3H ard fare]? II (219-16, ast, v8 9) gaj ko taraas miti-o jih simrat tum kaahay bisraava-o. ||1|| Remembering Him, the elephant's fear was removed; so why do you forget Him? ||1]|
3fa uifars Ho Wfeor |fs sHo TH fos BEE Il (219-17, ae, He 9)
taj abhimaan moh maa-i-aa fun bhajan raam chit laava-o.
Renounce your egotistical pride and your emotional attachment to Maya; focus your consciousness on the Lord's meditation.
Soa aS Hats ve feg qTenfe df SH USO NQUNUI (218-19, TBs, He 9) naanak kahat mukat panth ih gurmukh ho-ay tum paava-o. ||2||5]| Says Nanak, this is the path to liberation. Become Gurmukh, and attain it. ||2||5]|
aeat Hae € Il (219-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
aS net sfeS HS AHSTS Il (219-18, ast, we 9) ko-00 maa-ee bhooli-o man samjhaavai. O mother, if only someone would instruct my wayward mind.
UST 22o
ae use A Ha Afe ate ford o ofs To WS NU TIS I (220-1, aes, He 9)
bayd puraan saaDh mag sun kar nimakh na har gun gaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This mind listens to the Vedas, the Puraanas, and the ways of the Holy Saints, but it does not sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, for even an instant. ||1]||Pause| |
woes to ute won at fase HoH fas II (220-1, aeHH, He 9)
durlabh dayh paa-ay maanas kee birthaa janam siraavai.
Having obtained this human body, so very difficult to obtain, it is now being uselessly wasted.
Hor Ho Ho Hae ao ST AE go Bure] IA (220-2, aS, ne 9)
maa-i-aa moh mahaa sankat ban taa si-o ruch upjaavai. ||1]|
Emotional attachment to Maya is such a treacherous wilderness, and yet, people are in love with it. ||1]|
nists xofs Ae Af ys ot AG STS WS I (220-3, weet, ve 9)
antar baahar sadaa sang parabh taa si-o nayhu na laavai.
Inwardly and outwardly, God is always with them, and yet, they do not enshrine Love for Him.
Soa Hats stfe SH He” fro wife IH ANTS IQIEN (220-3, ast, He 9)
naanak mukat taahi tum maanhu jih ghat raam samaavai. ||2||6|| O Nanak, know that those whose hearts are filled with the Lord are liberated. ||2||6]|
TCSt HIS € Il (220-4)
ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
AM oH Aafe faAaH Il (220-4, aGst, He 9) saaDho raam saran bisraamaa. Holy Saadhus: rest and peace are in the Sanctuary of the Lord.
ae use us a feo qo fins ofa & oor NU TTS I 220-4, west, He 9)
bayd puraan parhay ko ih gun simray har ko naamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This is the blessing of studying the Vedas and the Puraanas, that you may meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
8s Ho fer Hust Sfe mG fatmia at Ae i Jee Aa UusA fra ote A Hats FT ter
HAI (220-5, Test, He 9)
lobh moh maa-i-aa mamtaa fun a-o bikhi-an kee sayvaa. harakh sog parsai jih naahan SO moorat hai dayvaa. ||1]||
Greed, emotional attachment to Maya, possessiveness, the service of evil, pleasure and pain - those who are not touched by these, are the very embodiment of the Divine Lord. ||1]|
Had oe vifiys faa & AS SE ase wig UAT I (220-6, wet, He 9)
surag narak amrit bikh ay sabh ti-o kanchan ar paisaa.
Heaven and hell, ambrosial nectar and poison, gold and copper - these are all alike to them.
Grafs fee & AN A a Be Hg Se SAT NI (220-6, aes, He 9) ustat nindaa ay sam jaa kai lobh moh fun taisaa. ||2]| Praise and slander are all the same to them, as are greed and attachment. ||2]|
ey AY = ad fag ovale fsa 3H ASS fapnrat Il (220-7, west, He 9)
dukh sukh ay baaDhay jih naahan tih tum jaan-o gi-aanee. They are not bound by pleasure and pain - know that they are truly wise.
soa Hats sfs 3H Hoe fea fafa & A yrTst SIDI (220-8, az, Hs 9) naanak mukat taahi tum maan-o ih biDh ko jo paraanee. ||3]||7|| O Nanak, recognize those mortal beings as liberated, who live this way of life. ||3]|7]|
asst Has € Il (220-8) ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
Ho J as sfeS S aa Il (220-8, aSst, v2 9) man ray kahaa bha-i-o tai ba-uraa. O mind, why have you gone crazy?
wifofafa mBa we adt we sfeG os Af Jes NA TIS I (220-9, aes, He 9)
ahinis a-oDh ghatai nahee jaanai bha-i-o lobh sang ha-uraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Don't you know that your life is decreasing, day and night? Your life is made worthless with greed. ||1||Pause]|
fH 30 3 nus afs wie mg Hea faa arc II (220-9, aGat, v8 9) jo tan tai apno kar maani-o ar sundar garih naaree. That body, which you believe to be your own, and your beautiful home and spouse
feo H ag 3d 9 ovals Sa As fees 9 (220-10, ast, v2 9) in mai’ kachh tayro ray naahan daykho soch bichaaree. ||1]| - none of these is yours to keep. See this, reflect upon it and understand. ||1]|
330 HOH nus 3 Ife afse afs act wat Il (220-11, ast, He 9)
ratan janam apno tai haari-o gobind gat nahee jaanee.
You have wasted the precious jewel of this human life; you do not know the Way of the Lord of the Universe.
fouu 3 ole sfeS vdeo fre fase Ba frat NI (220-11, west, 12 9)
nimakh na leen bha-i-o charnan si‘-o birthaa a-oDh siraanee. ||2|| You have not been absorbed in the Lord's Feet, even for an instant. Your life has passed away in vain! ||2||
aT aaa Het og Ado IH SH TS We Il (220-12, ast, vz 9) kaho naanak so-ee nar sukhee-aa raam naam gun gaavédi. Says Nanak, that man is happy, who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
m@a Aare Aa Hfenr Hfoor fags us adt urs ISIC (220-12, agHt, He 9)
a-or Sagal jag maa-i-aa mohi-aa nirbhai pad nahee paavai. ||3||8]||
All the rest of the world is enticed by Maya; they do not obtain the state of fearless dignity. ||3]|8]|
ast Hae € Il (220-13)
ga-orhee mehlaa 9. Gauree, Ninth Mehl:
od MSS UU S 3g T Il (220-13, west, v2 9)
nar achayt paap tay dar ray. You people are unconscious; you should be afraid of sin.
de vfenre nae 3 SHO Aefe sts SH ug FT NU TIC Ml (220-13, ast, v2 9) deen da-i-aal sagal bhai bhanjan saran taahi tum par ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Seek the Sanctuary of the Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of all fear. ||1]|Pause] |
ae uss WA IS Wes TA oH Shot Hag F Il (220-14, aBeH, He 9) bayd puraan jaas gun gaavat taa ko naam hee-ai mo Dhar ray. The Vedas and the Puraanas sing His Praises; enshrine His Name within your heart.
urzo omy Hala H dfs & ffs frufs GAH AS Je TF NA (220-15, Tea, He 9)
paavan naam jagat mai har ko simar simar kasmal sabh har ray. ||1]|
Pure and sublime is the Name of the Lord in the world. Remembering it in meditation, all sinful mistakes shall be washed away. ||1]|
HOA @d ale oo ue as Cur Hats a ag F Il (220-15, ast, 1 9)
maanas dayh bahur nah paavai kachhoo upaa-o mukat kaa kar ray.
You shall not obtain this human body again; make the effort - try to achieve liberation!
Soa AIS ae agar nH se Aa a utes Ssg F NIAC NQUAUI (220-16, ast, He 9)
naanak kahat gaa-ay karunaa mai bhav saagar kai paar utar ray. ||2||9||251]|| Says Nanak, sing of the Lord of compassion, and cross over the terrifying world- ocean. ||2||9||251]|
Ta AGSt mAcudMT Hos AV ASt amrsat (220-18) raag ga-orhee asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ga-orhee gu-aarayree Raag Gauree, Ashtapadees, First Mehl: Gauree Gwaarayree:
qe AfsanH asst uTY TT YATE II (220-18)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
fafa fafa fogHe oH Stes Il (220-19, west anrsct, uz 1)
niDh siDh nirmal naam beechaar.
The nine treasures and the miraculous spiritual powers come by contemplating the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
use ufs sfoor far fe Il (220-19, ast amrset, He 1) pooran poor rahi-aa bikh maar. The Perfect Lord is All-pervading everywhere; He destroys the poison of Maya.
fact ect fares Hes Il (220-19, eat arset, He 1) tarikutee chhootee bimal majhaar. I am rid of the three-phased Maya, dwelling in the Pure Lord.
UST 229 ad at Hfs Ae wiret ats NAN (221-1, west amrset, He 1
gur kee mat jee-ay aa-ee kaar. ||1]| The Guru's Teachings are useful to my soul. ||1]|
fee fafa oH SHS Ho HEMT I (221-1, aest arse, He 1 in biDh raam ramat man maani-aa. Chanting the Lord's Name in this way, my mind is satisfied.
fomre nite ae Aafe ustfomr A TIS Ut (221-1, aSst arsct, we 1)
gi-aan anjan gur sabad pachhaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have obtained the ointment of spiritual wisdom, recognizing the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause] |
fea AY Honor Hats feerfenr I (221-2, rest anrdat, ue 1) ik sukh maani-aa sahj milaa-i-aa. Blended with the One Lord, I enjoy intuitive peace.
fSdHe set SIH Garter | (221-2, west amrdet, He 1) nirmal banee bharam chukaa-i-aa. Through the Immaculate Bani of the Word, my doubts have been dispelled.
WS se AT so fener | (221-3, ast aorsdt,, ws 1)
laal bha-ay soohaa rang maa-i-aa.
Instead of the pale color of Maya, I am imbued with the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love.
Sefd set fay ofa Tom NIM (221-3, aSSt aurset, v2 1) nadar bha-ee bikh thaak rahaa-i-aa. ||2] | By the Lord's Glance of Grace, the poison has been eliminated. ||2]|
Cue set Aes Hfe Afamr Il 221-3, a@st arse, He 1) ulat bha-ee jeevat mar jaagi-aa. When I turned away, and became dead while yet alive, I was awakened.
Rafe de Ho ofa FAG wfamr il 221-4, aSst anrdset, nz 1) sabad ravay man har si-o laagi-aa. Chanting the Word of the Shabad, my mind is attached to the Lord.
3A Aafo fay uate fserfamr i (221-4, aGst anrdet, ue 1) ras sangrahi bikh parhar ti-aagi-aa. I have gathered in the Lord's sublime essence, and cast out the poison.
ate SA AH a 3 Stfamr ISI (221-4, west amrset, He 1) bhaa-ay basay jam kaa bha-o bhaagi-aa. ||3]| Abiding in His Love, the fear of death has run away. ||3]|
Are Jd We nara Il (221-5, aGSt anrset, ue 1) saad rahay baada™ aha‘kaaraa. My taste for pleasure ended, along with conflict and egotism.
fas ofa fAG ast gath mrs Il 221-5, west anrsct, He 1) chit har si-o raataa hukam apaaraa. My consciousness is attuned to the Lord, by the Order of the Infinite.
ats Td Uls A nora | (221-5, aSst ards, v2 1) jaat rahay pat kay aachaaraa. My pursuit for worldy pride and honour is over.
fenfe set AY MISH Ure SI (221-6, Test rss, He 1) darisat bha-ee sukh aatam Dhaaraa. ||4||
When He blessed me with His Glance of Grace, peace was established in my soul. [141]
33 fag af& o Su HIS II @21-6, aest arses, He 1D tujh bin ko-ay na daykh-a-u meet. Without You, I see no friend at all.
fan Ae fan FeO StS Il (221-6, aCat anrset, us 1
kis sayva-o kis dayva-o cheet.
Whom should I serve? Unto whom should I dedicate my consciousness? fon ue fan oars ute it (221-7, ast arse, v2 1)
kis poochha-o kis laaga-o paa-ay. Whom should I ask? At whose feet should I fall?
fon GuetA go foe OfE Ul (221-7, Test anrsat, He 1) kis updays rahaa liv laa-ay. ||5|| By whose teachings will I remain absorbed in His Love? ||5||
ad ASt TI SAS ute i (221-7, west arse, ue 1) gur sayvee gur laaga-o paa-ay. I serve the Guru, and I fall at the Guru's Feet.
sats adt Tee ahs Ste il (221-8, aSst anrsst, nz 1) bhagat karee raacha-o har naa-ay. I worship Him, and I am absorbed in the Lord's Name.
frftier Afr sre aS il (221-8, west amrrdct, He 1) sikhi-aa deekhi-aa bhojan bhaa-o. The Lord's Love is my instruction, sermon and food.
Jaty Anat for whe Ae Ell (221-8, west anrset, we 1) hukam sanjogee nij ghar jaa-o. ||6] | Enjoined to the Lord's Command, I have entered the home of my inner self. ||6] |
dss TS AY MSH forrest | (221-9, aGst aursct, He 1) garab gata™ sukh aatam Dhi-aanaa. With the extinction of pride, my soul has found peace and meditation.
afs set Fat afa ANAT I (221-9, aGst arset, He 1 jot bha-ee jotee maahi samaanaa. The Divine Light has dawned, and I am absorbed in the Light.
fous fit adt Hae StATAT Il (221-9, aGst anrdet, He 1) likhat mitai nahee sabad neesaanaa. Pre-ordained destiny cannot be erased; the Shabad is my banner and insignia.
ATS ATS" ATS ATS IDI (221-10, ABSt aura, Hs 1) kartaa karnaa kartaa jaanaa. ||7]|| I know the Creator, the Creator of His Creation. ||7| |
od Ufss od Vag fAMTa Il (221-10, aGst aursct, He 1) nah pandit nah chatur si-aanaa. I am not a learned Pandit, I am not clever or wise.
Od 3B BI SHH FHS Il (221-10, aCat gorse, we 1) nah bhoolo nah bharam bhulaanaa. I do not wander; I am not deluded by doubt.
was o AaSt JAH USS Il (221-10, Test anrsct, He 1) katha-o na kathnee hukam pachhaanaa. I do not speak empty speech; I have recognized the Hukam of His Command.
SSA WIHS ATA AHA NCUA (221-11, Test arse, ue 1)
naanak gurmat sahj samaanaa. ||8]|1|| Nanak is absorbed in intuitive peace through the Guru's Teachings. ||8]|1||
ast Tmrsat HIS A I (221-11) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 1. Gauree Gwaarayree, First Mehl:
He avg afer fens | (221-11, ast anrset, v2 1) man kunchar kaa-i-aa udi-aanai. The mind is an elephant in the forest of the body.
Gg wan AY Wee SAS Il TH SHS AS AHS NA (221-12, ast ardet, vs 1)
gur ankas sach sabad neesaanai. raaj du-aarai sobh so maanai. ||1||
The Guru is the controlling stick; when the Insignia of the True Shabad is applied, one obtains honor in the Court of God the King. ||1]|
TSTSt Od Bont ATE I (221-12, aGst anrdat, uz 1) chaturaa-ee nah cheeni-aa jaa-ay.
He cannot be known through clever tricks.
fag He fas ahfs ute na TIS i (221-13, Test aurset, He Y
bin maaray ki-o keemat paa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. Without subduing the mind, how can His value be estimated? ||1||Pause] |
we Hfo nifys SAag Bet il (221-13, west aorsct, ne 1) ghar meh amrit taskar lay-ee. In the house of the self is the Ambrosial Nectar, which is being stolen by the thieves.
Soars © afS AE Il (221-14, ast aursct, He 1) nannaakaar na ko-ay karay-ee. No one can say no to them.
oa mify efsniet Set MQM (221-14, ast arse, He 1) raakhai aap vadi-aa-ee day-ee. ||2|| He Himself protects us, and blesses us with greatness. ||2]|
Ste male ntale fea Set il (221-14, ast amrset, ve 1) neel aneel agan ik thaa-ee. There are billions, countless billions of fires of desire at the seat of the mind.
me foedt afs gs gsret i (221-14, ast aursdt, He 1) jal nivree gur boojh bujhaa-ee. They are extinguished only with the water of understanding, imparted by the Guru.
Ho & Bot Ja Te Wet Sil (221-15, ast arse, uz 1) man day lee-aa rahas gun gaa-ee. ||3]| Offering my mind, I have attained it, and I joyfully sing His Glorious Praises. ||3]|
an wifg aofs A SAT Il (221-15, aGst amrset, He 1) jaisaa ghar baahar so taisaa. Just as He is within the home of the self, so is He beyond.
afA get nfs mma AAT Il (221-15, aGst anrdet, He 1) bais gufaa meh aakha-o kaisaa. But how can I describe Him, sitting in a cave?
Wats sate fess wir sil (221-16, ast gorsct, we 1) Saagar doogar nirbha-o aisaa. ||4| | The Fearless Lord is in the oceans, just as He is in the mountains. ||4]|
HE AS AT HS ACS Il (221-16, aCst arse, we 1) moo-ay ka-o kaho maaray ka-un. Tell me, who can kill someone who is already dead?
fosd aG AAT 3g ASO Il (221-16, aSst anrdet, we 1) nidray ka-o kaisaa dar kavan. What does he fear? Who can frighten the fearless one?
Rafe ues StS 38 Mull (221-17, test arse, He 1) sabad pachhaanai teenay bha-un. ||5]| He recognizes the Word of the Shabad, throughout the three worlds. ||5]|
fats afoor fats age zatfent il (221-17, west aurset, ve 1) jin kahi-aa tin kahan vakhaani-aa. One who speaks, merely describes speech.
fate afsur f3fe raft user I (221-17, ast arse, He 1) jin boojhi-aa tin sahj pachhaani-aa. But one who understands, intuitively realizes.
efy stata Hat Ho HSM Ell (221-18, Test arse, He 1)
daykh beechaar mayraa man maani-aa. ||6]| Seeing and reflecting upon it, my mind surrenders. ||6||
ates Asfs Hats fea set il (221-18, aeat aorset, He 1) keerat soorat mukat ik naa-ee. Praise, beauty and liberation are in the One Name.
dt fadre sfonr ANTS I (221-18, aeSt anrset, He 1) tahee niranjan rahi-aa samaa-ee. In it, the Immaculate Lord is permeating and pervading.
fon uf faurfu sfour for ovet DI (221-19, aeat anrsct, He 1)
nij ghar bi-aap rahi-aa nij thaa-ee. ||7]||
He dwells in the home of the self, and in His own sublime place. ||7]| Grafs asta as HfS Uifs I 221-19, aGat aorsct, ne 1)
ustat karahi kaytay mun pareet. The many silent sages lovingly praise Him.
UST III
ste ufs Ae APE A SHS I (222-1, aet gorsct, we 1)
tan man soochai saach so cheet.
Their bodies and minds are purified, as they enshrine the True Lord in their consciousness.
SSA Ts 3H StS" SHS NCNM (222-1, TSSt anrsst, v2 1D) naanak har bhaj neetaa neet. ||8]|2] | O Nanak, meditate on the Lord, each and every day. ||8][2||
aGat amrsat HIS YI (222-1) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 1. Gauree Gwaarayree, First Mehl:
SHO Hd B ASH TES Il (222-2, ast arddt, He 1) naa man marai na kaaraj ho-ay. The mind does not die, so the job is not accomplished.
Ho Sf est VHS UE il (222-2, eat arse, we 1) man vas dootaa durmat do-ay. The mind is under the power of the demons of evil intellect and duality.
Ho HS dd Ss fea SE NAN (222-2, aes amrrdct, He 1) man maanai gur tay ik ho-ay. ||1]| But when the mind surrenders, through the Guru, it becomes one. ||1]||
fosae IH Ted SA SE I (222-2, aGst arse, He 1) nirgun raam gunah vas ho-ay. The Lord is without attributes; the attributes of virtue are under His control.
nig feats ates ATE NA TIS Il (222-3, ast anrsct, we 1)
aap nivaar beechaaray so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. One who eliminates selfishness contemplates Him. ||1]|Pause] |
He 38 ag fas fears il (222-3, aat gorsct, we 1) man bhoolo baho chitai vikaar. The deluded mind thinks of all sorts of corruption.
Ho 38 ffs mrs Ss I (222-3, aat gnrsct, we 1) man bhoolo sir aavai bhaar. When the mind is deluded, the load of wickedness falls on the head.
HO HS Tha SAAT MQ (222-4, aSst ardct, ue man maanai har aykankaar. ||2|| But when the mind surrenders to the Lord, it realizes the One and Only Lord. ||2||
He 38 When ute ATE Wl (222-4, aGat gorset, we 1) man bhoolo maa-i-aa ghar jaa-ay. The deluded mind enters the house of Maya.
ath fagaS ad 3 ote il (222-4, ast aurset, vs 1) kaam birooDha-o rahai na thaa-ay. Engrossed in sexual desire, it does not remain steady.
dfs SH Urat TAS TATE SI (222-5, Test gurrsct, we 1) har bhaj paraanee rasan rasaa-ay. ||3]|| O mortal, lovingly vibrate the Lord's Name with your tongue. ||3]|
Hed JST AVS AS STA Il (222-5, aSat ardet, we 1) gaivar haivar kanchan sut naaree. Elephants, horses, gold, children and spouses
ag fest fus TS TH I (222-5, ast arddt, He 1) baho chintaa pirh chaalai haaree. - in the anxious affairs of all these, people lose the game and depart.
WM YE aS AS Sil (222-6, west aurset, ws 1) joo-ai khaylan kaachee saaree. ||4| In the game of chess, their pieces do not reach their destination. ||4]|
Hu wet se fears Il (222-6, a@st anrddt, He 1) sampa-o sanchee bha-ay vikaar. They gather wealth, but only evil comes from it.
Jay Aa Bs waerfs I (222-6, aGat anrdet, He 1) harakh sok ubhay darvaar. Pleasure and pain stand in the doorway.
HY Hon Afu fee wats ull (222-6, west amrdct, He 1) sukh sehjay jap ridai muraar. ||5|| Intuitive peace comes by meditating on the Lord, within the heart. ||5||
etd Ad ST AS fore Il (222-7, west anrsct, ve 1) nadar karay taa may! milaa-ay. When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then He unites us in His Union.
we Agfa mBae Aafe ASS i 222-7, aezt avrsct, ve 1)
gun sangrahi a-ugan sabad jalaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Shabad, merits are gathered in, and demerits are burned away.
Tanta aH USSG ue Ell (222-7, ast anrsat, ue 1) gurmukh naam padaarath paa-ay. ||6|| The Gurmukh obtains the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6]|
fag ae AS ee (SSA Il (222-8, Test arse, we 1) bin naavai sabh dookh nivaas. Without the Name, all live in pain.
HoH Hs Her fess SH I (222-8, west aursct, He 1) manmukh moorh maa-i-aa chit vaas. The consciousness of the foolish, self-willed manmukh is the dwelling place of Maya.
aanfy famre ufs aath fefimimr IDI (222-8, a@st anrdet, He 1) gurmukh gi-aan Dhur karam likhi-aas. ||7]|| The Gurmukh obtains spiritual wisdom, according to pre-ordained destiny. ||7]||
Ho 3UG Wes of WS Il (222-9, aGat anrdet, we 1) man chanchal Dhaavat fun Dhaavai. The fickle mind continuously runs after fleeting things.
Ad AE HSB SS Il (222-9, Gat aurdst, we 1) saachay soochay mail na bhaavai. The Pure True Lord is not pleased by filth.
Soa TIHfe Ss TE We NCSI (222-9, west aorseh, He 1)
naanak gurmukh har gun gaavai. ||8||3]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||8]|3]|
Tat Imrsat HIS A Il (222-10) ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 1. Gauree Gwaarayree, First Mehl:
ICH adfsor og AY SE I (222-10, ast anrdet, He 1) ha-umai karti-aa nah sukh ho-ay. Acting in egotism, peace is not obtained.
HOHfS Zot AS ALE il (222-10, west aursct, Hs 1) manmat jhoothee sachaa so-ay. The intellect of the mind is false; only the Lord is True.
Aas fers sre Sfe il (222-11, west aurset, vs 1) sagal bigootay bhaavai do-ay. All who love duality are ruined.
A ane ofa feftmor df wall (222-11, west aursdt, ve 1) so kamaavai Dhur likhi-aa ho-ay. ||1]| People act as they are pre-ordained. ||1]|
MT Ag Sher AMS I (222-11, ast aorsct, we 1) aisaa jag daykhi-aa joo-aaree. I have seen the world to be such a gambler;
Afs wa Hat OTH fers AU TIC Ul (222-12, aSst arsct, ve 1 sabh sukh maagai naam bisaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. all beg for peace, but they forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
mifene fer at afer ate il (222-12, aGst anrset, we 1) adisat disai taa kahi-aa jaa-ay. If the Unseen Lord could be seen, then He could be described.
fag ta ager fase ATE I (222-12, a@st amrdet, He 1) bin daykhay kahnaa birthaa jaa-ay. Without seeing Him, all descriptions are useless.
aenfy aA Aafa Aas | (222-13, west arset, He 1) gurmukh deesai sahj subhaa-ay. The Gurmukh sees Him with intuitive ease.
Ae Aals Sa fos BTS 2M (222-13, ast aurset, v2 1) sayvaa Surat ayk liv laa-ay. ||2|| So serve the One Lord, with loving awareness. ||2]|
AY Has ey vitae SE Il (222-13, aSSt anrdet, He 1) sukh maa™gat dukh aagal ho-ay. People beg for peace, but they receive severe pain.
Hae feardt arg udfe il (222-14, aGst anrdet, ne: 1) Sagal vikaaree haar paro-ay. They are all weaving a wreath of corruption.
2a faa 33 Hats 3 SE il (222-14, aCe gorse, vz 1) ayk binaa jhoothay mukat na ho-ay. You are false - without the One, there is no liberation.
af afs agar fe ALE SI (222-14, west arses, He 1) kar kar kartaa daykhai so-ay. ||3]| The Creator created the creation, and He watches over it. ||3]|
fgHor urate Fate FSS | (222-14, aSst gorse, ue 1) tarisnaa agan sabad bujhaa-ay. The fire of desire is quenched by the Word of the Shabad.
SW SIH Ad ASS Il (222-15, ast arse, ve 1) doojaa bharam sahj subhaa-ay. Duality and doubt are automatically eliminated.
TIHSt oH fot STS il (222-15, west aursdt,, He 1) gurmatee naam ridai vasaa-ay. Following the Guru's Teachings, the Naam abides in the heart.
Frat seat Ife TS WE Sil (222-15, aSst anrset, v2 1) saachee banee har gun gaa-ay. ||4|| Through the True Word of His Bani, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|
36 Hfo ATS Tafa SE tl (222-16, aSat ardct, ve tan meh saacho gurmukh bhaa-o. The True Lord abides within the body of that Gurmukh who enshrines love for Him.
om faa ardt for oS Il (222-16, aSst anrdet, He 1) naam binaa naahee nij thaa-o. Without the Naam, none obtain their own place.
UH uatee YISH TE ll (222-16, west ars, He 1) paraym paraa-in pareetam raa-o. The Beloved Lord King is dedicated to love.
Sets AT SIS FS WU (222-17, ast auras, we 1) nadar karay taa boojhai naa-o. ||5|| If He bestows His Glance of Grace, then we realize His Name. ||5||
Hfenr He AT AAT Il (222-17, ast ardet, He 1) maa-i-aa moh sarab janjaalaa. Emotional attachment to Maya is total entanglement.
HOH Ade ates faraer Il (222-17, reat anrdet, us 1) manmukh kucheel khuchhit bikraalaa. The self-willed manmukh is filthy, cursed and dreadful.
ASAT AS YX HAH Il (222-18, at gorrset, we 1) satgur sayvay chookai janjaalaa. Serving the True Guru, these entanglements are ended.
MS SH Ae AY ST WEll (222-18, aSSt gurdet, He 1) amrit naam sadaa sukh naalaa. ||6|| In the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, you shall abide in lasting peace. ||6] |
TsHfe gs Sa fos SS Il (222-18, ast aurdst, we 1) gurmukh boojhai ayk liv laa-ay. The Gurmukhs understand the One Lord, and enshrine love for Him.
fon wis aA vfs ANTS | (222-18, aGst avrset, He 1) nij ghar vaasai saach samaa-ay. They dwell in the home of their own inner beings, and merge in the True Lord.
HHE HIS" ofa TIS Il (222-19, aGSt ands, vz 1) jaman marnaa thaak rahaa-ay. The cycle of birth and death is ended.
ud as 3 feo nfs ure WOM (222-19, ast aurset, He 1) pooray gur tay ih mat paa-ay. ||7|| This understanding is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||7| |
aast aa o nite Ge Il (222-19, aGat ardet, He 1) kathnee katha-o na aavai or. Speaking the speech, there is no end to it.
UST IIB
ag ufe Shimer adt es Ig Il (223-1, aSst arse, nz 1) gur puchh daykhi-aa naahee dar hor. I have consulted the Guru, and I have seen that there is no other door than His.
eu AY oe FSA aA Il (223-1, aGet amract, He 1) dukh sukh bhaanai tisai rajaa-ay. Pain and pleasure reside in the Pleasure of His Will and His Command.
Soe Sty ad fee ote csi (223-1, ast arse, He 1) naanak neech kahai liv laa-ay. ||8]|4|| Nanak, the lowly, says embrace love for the Lord. ||8]|4| |
ACS HIS A Il (223-2) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
eat ufenr Aas fas SA Ml (223-2, ast, v2 1) doojee maa-i-aa jagat chit vaas. The duality of Maya dwells in the consciousness of the people of the world.
OH AU nidard faoTA IU (223-2, Test, He 1) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar binaas. ||1]| They are destroyed by sexual desire, anger and egotism. ||1]|
SH ACE AT Sat Ae I (223-3, aS, we doojaa ka-un kahaa nahee ko-ee. Whom should I call the second, when there is only the One?
AS ufo Sa fadne At a ToS Il (223-3, ast, He 1) sabh meh ayk niranjan so-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. The One Immaculate Lord is pervading among all. ||1||Pause| |
Sat TIHAS wm SE i (223-3, west, we doojee durmat aakhai do-ay. The dual-minded evil intellect speaks of a second.
wire fe Hie TAT SE QM (223-4, west, we 1) aavai jaa-ay mar doojaa ho-ay. ||2| | One who harbors duality comes and goes and dies. ||2| |
Use dae od Sus Ste i (223-4, ast, ve 1) Dharan gagan nah daykh-a-u do-ay. In the earth and in the sky, I do not see any second.
ont usu Aaret SF Sil (223-4, west, He 1) naaree purakh sabaa-ee lo-ay. ||3]|| Among all the women and the men, His Light is shining. ||3]|
ofe AfA Sus chug Stra il (223-5, aes, v2 1) rav sas daykh-a-u deepak uji-aalaa. In the lamps of the sun and the moon, I see His Light.
Hea fedsts usu wer gil (223-5, ast, ve 1) sarab nirantar pareetam baalaa. ||4|| Dwelling among all is my ever-youthful Beloved. ||4| |
ate fasur Ha fess arfemr it (223-5, aSst, He 1) kar kirpaa mayraa chit laa-i-aa. In His Mercy, He attuned my consciousness to the Lord.
Afsafe 4 aG Sa gsrfenr ull (223-6, west, He 1) satgur mo ka-o ayk bujhaa-i-aa. ||5|| The True Guru has led me to understand the One Lord. ||5]|
ta fedne aaHfe AS I (223-6, ast, 2 1) ayk niranjan gurmukh jaataa. The Gurmukh knows the One Immaculate Lord.
am Hts Hate USS Ell (223-6, at, He 1) doojaa maar sabad pachhaataa. ||6|| Subduing duality, one comes to realize the Word of the Shabad. ||6] |
Sa JAH fds AS Bet I (223-7, asst, ve 1) ayko hukam vartai sabh lo-ee. The Command of the One Lord prevails throughout all the worlds.
fan 3 AS Gufs det Wil (223-7, west, He 1) aykas tay sabh opat ho-ee. ||7|| From the One, all have arisen. ||7]|
ag de UAH Sa WE Il (223-7, ast, v2 1) raah dovai khasam ayko jaan. There are two routes, but remember that their Lord and Master is only One.
Td aX Aafe JAH USTs Ici (223-8, ast, He 1)
gur kai sabad hukam pachhaan. ||8]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, recognize the Hukam of the Lord's Command. ||8]||
AIS JU FIs Ho Ha I (223-8, ast, we 1) Sagal roop varan man maahee. He is contained in all forms, colors and minds.
AT sod Sa Aart ICU (223-8, at, He 1) kaho naanak ayko saalaahee. ||9||5]| Says Nanak, praise the One Lord. ||9]|5||
TCS HIS A Il (223-9) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
mfIMirsH AH AT 3ST ATS Il (223-9, ast, He 1) aDhi-aatam karam karay taa saachaa. Those who live a spiritual lifestyle - they alone are true.
Hafs Se for ATS Ara AU (223-9, ast, He 1) mukat bhayd ki-aa jaanai kaachaa. ||1]|| What can the false know about the secrets of liberation? ||1] |
MAT Hat Hats Ferd il (223-9, ast, He 1) aisaa jogee jugat beechaarai. Those who contemplate the Way are Yogis.
us ufs ATS Bfs os NU TIS il (223-10, ast, v2 1) panch maar saach ur Dhaarai. ||1]| rahaa-o. They conquer the five thieves, and enshrine the True Lord in the heart. ||1]|Pause] |
fan a nists ATS SATS Il (223-10, west, He 1) jis kai antar saach vasaavai. Those who enshrine the True Lord deep within,
Aa Aafs at ahs UTS NM (223-10, ast, He 1) jog jugat kee keemat paavai. ||2|| realize the value of the Way of Yoga. ||2||
fe vfA Sa fas Cfenrs Il (223-11, Get, He 1)
rav sas ayko garih udi-aanai.
The sun and the moon are one and the same for them, as are household and wilderness.
adal atefs AIH AHS III (223-11, aes, Hz 1) karnee keerat karam samaanai. ||3]|| The karma of their daily practice is to praise the Lord. ||3]|
Sa Aa fea fafinr yrat it (223-11, ast, He 1) ayk sabad ik bhikhi-aa maagai. They beg for the alms of the one and only Shabad.
fomreg fomrg ats AY ATE ISI (223-12, aes, He 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan jugat sach jaagai. ||4||
They remain awake and aware in spiritual wisdom and meditation, and the true way of life. ||4]|
3 dfs dd 5 Mate ATE Il (223-12, ast, He 1) bhai rach rahai na baahar jaa-ay. They remain absorbed in the fear of God; they never leave it.
ans aGe ad fee ofe null (223-13, ast, #2 1) keemat ka-un rahai liv laa-ay. ||5|| Who can estimate their value? They remain lovingly absorbed in the Lord. ||5||
~~
MY HS SIH VaTES Il (223-13, aSst, vz 1) aapay maylay bharam chukaa-ay. The Lord unites them with Himself, dispelling their doubts.
ad usdATS UGH UE UTES Ell (223-13, Test, He 1) gur parsaad param pad paa-ay. ||6]| By Guru's Grace, the supreme status is obtained. ||6]|
ad at Ae Aa Sherg Il (223-14, aSst, ve 1) gur kee sayvaa sabad veechaar. In the Guru's service is reflection upon the Shabad.
ICH HTS ATat ATT MDI (223-14, ast, ne 1) ha-umai maaray karnee saar. ||7]| Subduing ego, practice pure actions. ||7]|
AU SU AAH UTS UTE Il (223-14, aCHt, He 1) jap tap sanjam paath puraan. Chanting, meditation, austere self-discipline and the reading of the Puraanas,
AT soa muUsUT HT CHEM (223-14, 7st, He 1 kaho naanak aprampar maan. ||8]|6|| says Nanak, are contained in surrender to the Unlimited Lord. ||8]|6]]|
ASSt HIS 4 Il (223-15) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
os 0
fH aot ys As ASY I (223-15, ast, we 1) khimaa gahee barat seel santokha”. To practice forgiveness is the true fast, good conduct and contentment.
da & fant at AN Se Il (223-15, aGst, He 1) rog na bi-aapai naa jam dokha”. Disease does not afflict me, nor does the pain of death.
HAS se YS JUG FF AU (223-16, ast, we 1) mukat bha-ay parabh roop na raykha™. ||1|| I am liberated, and absorbed into God, who has no form or feature. ||1]|
nat AB aA sg SE Il (223-16, ast, 2 1) jogee ka-o kaisaa dar ho-ay. What fear does the Yogi have?
ofa frafs fafo wats APE WA TIS i (223-16, TSH, Hs 1)
rookh birakh garihi baahar so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is among the trees and the plants, within the household and outside as well. ||1]|Pause] |
foss@ Hat fadre fami] i (223-17, aGst, He 1) nirbha-o jogee niranjan Dhi-aavai. The Yogis meditate on the Fearless, Immaculate Lord.
wofes Aa Ae fee we Il (223-17, west, He 1)
an-din jaagai sach liv laavai.
Night and day, they remain awake and aware, embracing love for the True Lord. A Haft AS HfS StS HQ (223-17, west, He 1)
SO jogee mayrai man bhaavai. ||2]| Those Yogis are pleasing to my mind. ||2||
AS AS IH Mast AS ll (223-18, ast, uz 1) kaal jaal barahm agnee jaaray. The trap of death is burnt by the Fire of God.
Ad HIE TS Teas fees il (223-18, west, He 1) jaraa maran gat garab nivaaray. Old age, death and pride are conquered.
uifu sd fusdt forss ISI (223-18, aGst, He 1)
aap tarai pitree nistaaray. ||3]| They swim across, and save their ancestors as well. ||3||
Afsag Az A Halt SE i (223-19, aah, ue satgur sayvay so jogee ho-ay. Those who serve the True Guru are the Yogis.
3 afy ad A fees Sf II (223-19, aGst, ne 1) bhai rach rahai so nirbha-o ho-ay. Those who remain immersed in the Fear of God become fearless.
NA AS S
AA Ae SA df Sil (223-19, wget, He 1) jaisaa sayvai taiso ho-ay. ||4|| They become just like the One they serve. ||4]|
UST 228 od fauaee fogs oS Il (224-1, a@zt, ve
nar nihkayval nirbha-o naa-o. The Name makes a man pure and fearless.
MaTad STE Ad Sls WE Il (224-1, ast, ve 1) anaathah naath karay bal jaa-o. It makes the masterless become the master of all. I am a sacrifice to him.
usdlu HOH aot TE WS lull (224-1, west, ve 1) punrap janam naahee gun gaa-o. ||5|| Such a person is not reincarnated again; he sings the Glories of God. ||5]||
nists aafs Sa WS Il (224-2, aGst, we 1) antar baahar ayko jaanai. Inwardly and outwardly, he knows the One Lord;
Gd A AGS viMY USTs | (224-2, aSat, ve 1) gur kai sabday aap pachhaanai. through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he realizes himself.
Ard Aafe ofa otAe Il€ll (224-2, ast, He 1) saachai sabad dar neesaanai. ||6|| He bears the Banner and Insignia of the True Shabad in the Lord's Court. ||6] |
Rafe ue fsq for whe STAT Il (224-2, west, v2 1) sabad marai tis nij ghar vaasaa. One who dies in the Shabad abides in his own home within.
MS BAS Ya MMA Il (224-3, aa, Hs 1) aavai na jaavai chookai aasaa. He does not come or go in reincarnation, and his hopes are subdued.
Td AX Ashe AHS USAT IDI (224-3, ast, nz 1) gur kai sabad kamal pargaasaa. ||7|| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, his heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||7]|
a tA A orn fear Il (224-3, ast, we 1) jo deesai so aas niraasaa. Whoever is seen, is driven by hope and despair,
an au fg su filmit il (224-4, a@et, 2 1) kaam karoDh bikh bhookh pi-aasaa. by sexual desire, anger, corruption, hunger and thirst.
area fase fhofs Bea ICD I (224-4, ast, He naanak birlay mileh udaasaa. ||8]|7]|| O Nanak, those detached recluses who meet the Lord are so very rare. ||8]|7]|
TSSt HIS 4 Il (224-4) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
MA OTA AHS AY Tet i (224-5, west, He 1 aiso daas milai sukh ho-ee. Meeting such a slave, peace is obtained.
ou fend ure Ag Aet NA (224-5, west, He 1) dukh visrai paavai sach so-ee. ||1|| Pain is forgotten, when the True Lord is found. ||1]|
Tan Uf set ufs ust i (224-5, aSat, we 1) darsan daykh bha-ee mat pooree. Beholding the blessed vision of his darshan, my understanding has become perfect.
MOMS HAG BIod Tst UA FITS Il (224-5, ast, v2 1)
athsath majan charnah Dhooree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The cleansing baths at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage are in the dust of his feet. ||1]|Pause] |
o5N
3 Ase Sa fee ST Il (224-6, wat, ws 1) naytar santokhay ayk liv taaraa. My eyes are contented with the constant love of the One Lord.
fase" Het fs SA ATE MQM (224-6, ast, we 1) jinvaa soochee har ras saaraa. ||2|| My tongue is purified by the most sublime essence of the Lord. ||2| |
AY adel nig nists AST I (224-7, aSet, nz 1) sach karnee abh antar sayvaa. True are my actions, and deep within my being, I serve Him.
Ho fgustthor nied niseSr BI (224-7, Test, 43 1) man tariptaasi-aa alakh abhayvaa. ||3]|| My mind is satisfied by the Inscrutable, Mysterious Lord. ||3]]|
Ad Ad Pus 3d 3d AT Il (224-7, west, v2 1)
jah jah daykh-a-u tah tah saachaa. Wherever I look, there I find the True Lord.
fag 3S STs AT AS Sil (224-8, ast, He 1) bin boojhay jhagrat jag kaachaa. ||4|| Without understanding, the world argues in falsehood. ||4||
Oe ANS] ASt Tet ll (224-8, aSat, ve 1) gur samjhaavai sojhee ho-ee. When the Guru instructs, understanding is obtained.
Tafa fear gS Tet UN (224-8, aCst, we 1) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. ||5|| How rare is that Gurmukh who understands. ||5||
ate faxsur Tug TASS Il (224-8, aSst, ue 1) kar kirpaa raakho rakhvaalay. Show Your Mercy, and save me, O Savior Lord!
fag 38 uA Se FSS MEM (224-9, aSat, we 1) bin boojhay pasoo bha-ay baytaalay. ||6|| Without understanding, people become beasts and demons. ||6||
ats afour weg dt SA Il (224-9, ast, He 1) gur kahi-aa avar nahee doojaa. The Guru has said that there is no other at all.
for ag ef ATE mis UAT IDI (224-9, aGat, He 1) kis kaho daykh kara-o an poojaa. ||7|| So tell me, who should I see, and who should I worship? ||7| |
As ufs ufs fesse ws I (224-10, Test, ve 1) sant hayt parabh taribhavan Dhaaray. For the sake of the Saints, God has established the three worlds.
MISH WS A SS ters IC (224-10, ast, He aatam cheenai so tat beechaaray. ||8|| One who understands his own soul, contemplates the essence of reality. ||8]|
Arg fae Ae UM fesA Il (224-11, aCe, He 1) saach ridai sach paraym nivaas. One whose heart is filled with Truth and true love
ySets SSA JH TA WA UCC (224-11, west, ve 1)
paranvat naanak ham taa kay daas. ||9||8]| - prays Nanak, I am his servant. ||9]||8]|
TSt HIS Y I (224-11) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
qon wee ahr odt wfomr i (224-11, ast, ve barahmai garab kee-aa nahee jaani-aa. Brahma acted in pride, and did not understand.
ae at faufs ust uestenr i (224-12, west, ue 1) bayd kee bipat parhee pachhutaani-aa. Only when he was faced with the downfall of the Vedas did he repent.
Ag ys fAHe Sdt He HSM NAM (224-12, ast, He 1) jah parabh simray tahee man maani-aa. ||1]| Remembering God in meditation, the mind is conciliated. ||1||
MAT TSI FIT AAT Il (224-13, aSat, He 1) aisaa garab buraa sansaarai. Such is the horrible pride of the world.
fan ag fxs fan weg foes nal FIC Il (224-13, west, He 1) jis gur milai tis garab nivaarai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru eliminates the pride of those who meet Him. ||1]|Pause] |
af at Hfemr nidardt il (224-13, aSst, He 1) bal raajaa maa-i-aa aha‘kaaree. Bal the King, in Maya and egotism,
Ade Ad AT STS MSTA Il (224-14, ast, ve 1) jagan karai baho bhaar afaaree. held his ceremonial feasts, but he was puffed up with pride.
fag ae ye ate ufemrdt 2 (224-14, ast, Hs 1) bin gur poochhay jaa-ay pa-i-aaree. ||2]| Without the Guru's advice, he had to go to the underworld. ||2| |
JAE BUS Ad AA BE Il (224-14, aSat, we 1) hareechand daan karai jas layvai. Hari Chand gave in charity, and earned public praise.
fag ad nis & ute mise Il (224-15, aGst, He 1) bin gur ant na paa-ay abhayvai. But without the Guru, he did not find the limits of the Mysterious Lord.
uify gorfe nmi nfs SS SI (224-15, ast, He 1) aap bhulaa-ay aapay mat dayvai. ||3]| The Lord Himself misleads people, and He Himself imparts understanding. ||3]|
Panis JSSUA FISTS Il (224-15, ast, ue durmat harnaakhas duraachaaree. The evil-minded Harnaakhash committed evil deeds.
yg sates aga yodt il (224-16, west, ne 1) parabh naaraa-in garab par-haaree. God, the Lord of all, is the Destroyer of pride.
ysere Burg fagur ardt isi (224-16, ast, we 1) parahlaad uDhaaray kirpaa Dhaaree. ||4| | He bestowed His Mercy, and saved Prahlaad. ||4||
3S TSE HAY vss I (224-16, aa, vs 1) bhoolo raavan mugaDh achayt. Raawan was deluded, foolish and unwise.
Bet Bar ALA AAFS il (224-17, west, we 1) lootee lankaa sees samayt. Sri Lanka was plundered, and he lost his head.
deta afenr fas Afsag df WUll (224-17, aes, uz 1) garab ga-i-aa bin satgur hayt. ||5]| He indulged in ego, and lacked the love of the True Guru. ||5||
HIST HO ate HfIUTAT Il (224-17, wSst, He 1)
sahasbaahu maDh keet mahikhaasaa.
The Lord killed the thousand-armed Arjun, and the demons Madhu-keetab and Meh- khaasaa.
Jdsu B Sg fAUAT Il (224-18, west, uz 1) harnaakhas lay nakhahu biDhaasaa. He seized Harnaakhash and tore him apart with his nails.
es Hurd fas sats wifsorar ell (224-18, ast, He 1) dait sanghaaray bin bhagat abhi-aasaa. ||6]|| The demons were slain; they did not practice devotional worship. ||6]||
ATH ASAD Ars i (224-19, west, 2 1) jaraasanDh kaalajmun sanghaaray. The demons Jaraa-sandh and Kaal-jamun were destroyed.
TASHA ABS faers il (224-19, west, ve 1) rakatbeej kaalunaym bidaaray. Rakat-beej and Kaal-naym were annihilated.
es Hurfg Az fSAsrs IDI (224-19, ast, He 1) dait sanghaar sant nistaaray. ||7|| Slaying the demons, the Lord saved His Saints. ||7| |
mma Afsagd Aa sted Il (224-19, wSst, ve 1)
aapay satgur sabad beechaaray. He Himself, as the True Guru, contemplates the Shabad.
UST Q2Qu
en afe SS Hurd il (225-1, west, we 1) doojai bhaa-ay dait sanghaaray. Because of the love of duality, God killed the demons.
aaHfy vfs sats feAss ici (225-1, west, He 1) gurmukh saach bhagat nistaaray. ||8]|| By their true devotion, the Gurmukhs have been saved. ||8] |
ga" varus uls get il (225-1, west, we boodaa durjoDhan pat kho-ee. Sinking down, Durodhan lost his honor.
TH 6 Wout wast Het I (225-2, west, He 1) raam na jaani-aa kartaa so-ee. He did not know the Creator Lord.
Wo aS efe ud Ty Tet CM (225-2, Tea, Hs 1) jan ka-o dookh pachai dukh ho-ee. ||9|| One who makes the Lord's humble servant suffer, shall himself suffer and rot. ||9] |
HOHA Td Ase & ASM Il (225-2, west, ne 1) janmayjai gur sabad na jaani-aa. Janameja did not know the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
faG Ay ure sof gorfonr I (225-3, ast, He 1) ki-o sukh paavai bharam bhulaani-aa. Deluded by doubt, how could he find peace?
fea fae 38 agfs usstomr AON (225-3, ast, He 1) ik til bhoolay bahur pachhutaani-aa. ||10|| Making a mistake, for even an instant, you shall regret and repent later on. ||10]|
AA AA VST F Ae I (225-3, ast, we 1) kans kays chaa‘door na ko-ee. Kansa the King and his warriors Kays and Chandoor had no equals.
aH 6 difsur nnsat ufs wet I (225-4, ast, He 1) raam na cheeni-aa apnee pat kho-ee. But they did not remember the Lord, and they lost their honor.
fag Aan & TH at NAA (225-4, Tes, He 1) bin jagdees na raakhai ko-ee. ||11]| Without the Lord of the Universe, no one can be saved. ||11]|
fae ad aaa 3 Afeor Ate I (225-4, ast, He 1) bin gur garab na mayti-aa jaa-ay. Without the Guru, pride cannot be eradicated.
TaHfs usH Ute ofa ote Il (225-5, west, ue 1) gurmat Dharam Dheeraj har naa-ay.
Following the Guru's Teachings, one obtains Dharmic faith, composure and the Lord's Name.
Soa OH FHS TE ATE NAVIN (225-5, ast, He 1) naanak naam milai gun gaa-ay. ||12]|9|| O Nanak, singing the Glories of God, His Name is received. ||12]||9]|
TCSt HIS A Il (225-6) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
dunt dee nif vas Il (225-6, aGst, v2 1) cho-aa chandan ank charhaava-o. I may anoint my limbs with sandalwood oil.
ure udag ufafe Jere@ Il (225-6, Gat, He 1) paat patambar pahir hadhaava-o. I may dress up and wear silk and satin clothes.
fag dfs oH ad AY USS IAI (225-6, ast, H2 1) bin har naam kahaa sukh paava-o. ||1|| But without the Lord's Name, where would I find peace? ||1||
fomr ufsa@ fomr fe fee i (225-7, a@Ht, ne 1) ki-aa pahira-o ki-aa odh dikhaava-o. So what should I wear? In what clothes should I display myself?
fag AeA aT AY USE IA TIC Il (225-7, ast, v2 D bin jagdees kahaa sukh paava-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord of the Universe, how can I find peace? ||1||Pause] |
ast Ase ale HS at HHT Il (225-8, aSst, He 1) kaanee kundal gal motee-an kee maalaa. I may wear ear-rings, and a pearl necklace around my neck;
BS fSTSt SH AGH Il (225-8, 7st, v2 1) laal nihaalee fool gulaalaa. my bed may be adorned with red blankets, flowers and red powder;
fag AeA AT AY SH QM (225-8, aSst, He 1) bin jagdees kahaa sukh bhaalaa. ||2| | but without the Lord of the Universe, where can I search for peace? ||2||
30 H@dl AV SrA Il (225-9, aSet, He 1) nain salonee sundar naaree. I may have a beautiful woman with fascinating eyes;
az Atera ad wifs fumrdt i 225-9, aGst, we 1)
khorh seegaar karai at pi-aaree.
she may decorate herself with the sixteen adornments, and make herself appear gorgeous.
fag AeA sa fos UIST SI (225-9, Test, v2 1) bin jagdees bhajay nit khu-aaree. ||3]| But without meditating on the Lord of the Universe, there is only continual suffering.
[I3]|
SI WT HIG" AM AMS Il (225-10, aSst, He 1) dar ghar mehlaa sayj sukhaalee. In his hearth and home, in his palace, upon his soft and comfortable bed,
mifafoth se fares Het I (225-10, Bt, we 1) ahinis fool bichhaavai maalee. day and night, the flower-girls scatter flower petals;
fag dfs oH A ST SUS ISI (225-10, aSst, He 1) bin har naam so dayh dukhaalee. ||4| | but without the Lord's Name, the body is miserable. ||4| |
ded Hed SA AA Il 225-11, aSst, nz 1) haivar gaivar nayjay vaajay. Horses, elephants, lances, marching bands,
BAAS SF MSTA UTA I (225-11, aGst, He 1) laskar nayb khavaasee paajay. armies, standard bearers, royal attendants and ostentatious displays
fag AaretA 3S fest Null (225-11, ast, 2 1) bin jagdees jhoothay divaajay. ||5|| - without the Lord of the Universe, these undertakings are all useless. ||5||
fro aveé foto fafa sere8 i (225-12, at, v2 1)
siDh kahaava-o riDh siDh bulaava-o.
He may be called a Siddha, a man of spiritual perfection, and he may summon riches and supernatural powers;
aA aed fafs ez oS Il 225-12, aSat, we 1) taaj kulah sir chhatar banaava-o. he may place a crown upon his head, and carry a royal umbrella;
fag AeA AT AG urSS Ell (225-12, aSst, He 1) bin jagdees kahaa sach paava-o. ||6]|| but without the Lord of the Universe, where can Truth be found? ||6]|
WG HSA ATSS TH Il (225-13, ast, we 1) khaan malook kahaava-o raajaa. He may be called an emperor, a lord, and a king;
Wa Sa AS FT UAT Il (225-13, ast, Hs 1) abay tabay koorhay hai paajaa. he may give orders - "Do this now, do this then" - but this is a false display.
fae Td Aas 6 ASA AA IDI (225-13, aCHt, He 1) bin gur sabad na savras kaajaa. ||7| | Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, his works are not accomplished. ||7]||
ICH HHS ad Hate fers | (225-14, est, He 1) ha-umai mamtaa gur sabad visaaree. Egotism and possessiveness are dispelled by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
gents wfsor fee ward il (225-14, west, He 1) gurmat jaani-aa ridai muraaree. With the Guru's Teachings in my heart, I have come to know the Lord.
ysets SSA Ade SHS UCUAOM (225-14, TSH, He 1) paranvat naanak saran tumaaree. ||8||10|| Prays Nanak, I seek Your Sanctuary. ||8||10||
ASSt HIS 4 Il (225-15) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Az Sa 3 WOlA uss Il (225-15, west, v8 1) sayvaa ayk na jaanas avray. Those who serve the One Lord, do not Know any other.
usus famrfa fourdt wed i (225-15, aSst, He 1) parpanch bi-aaDh ti-aagai kavray. They abandon the bitter worldly conflicts.
ofe fis Ag AMS Ag SF NA (225-16, aGst, He 1) bhaa-ay milai sach saachai sach ray. ||1]| Through love and truth, they meet the Truest of the True. ||1||
WAT TH SIS AS Te I (225-16, ast, ue aisaa raam bhagat jan ho-ee. Such are the humble devotees of the Lord.
dfs we ae fies HS Get 9A TIC it (225-16, aSst, v2 1)
har gun gaa-ay milai mal Dho-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and their pollution is washed away. ||1]|Pause] |
CU ASH AAS AAS Il (225-17, ae, we 1) oo'Dho kaval sagal sansaarai. The heart-lotus of the entire universe is upside-down.
ToHfs was AAS USAT? I (225-17, Test, v2 1) durmat agan jagat parjaarai. The fire of evil-mindedness is burning up the world.
A Gad ao Age ses QM (225-17, aSHt, He so ubrai gur sabad beechaarai. ||2]| They alone are saved, who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2| |
fea usa axes wg ter i (225-18, weet, us 1) bharing patang kunchar ar meenaa. The bumble bee, the moth, the elephant, the fish
fsa He Afs wruar ator il (225-18, a@at, He 1 mirag marai seh apunaa keenaa. and the deer - all suffer for their actions, and die.
fgHo Ths Jz odt ats Sil (225-18, west, ne 1) tarisnaa raach tat nahee beenaa. ||3]|| Trapped by desire, they cannot see reality. ||3]|
an fas anfs fosardt il (225-19, aGst, He 1) kaam chitai kaaman hitkaaree. The lover of women is obsessed with sex.
au faa Hares feardt i (225-19, aGat, ue 1) kroDh binaasai sagal vikaaree. All the wicked are ruined by their anger.
ufs uf defo on ferrst leit (225-19, ast, He 1)
pat mat khoveh naam visaaree. ||4||
Honor and good sense are lost, when one forgets the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [141]
UST QE
ug ufs dts HoHfa Sate I (226-1, west, He 1) par ghar cheet manmukh dolaa-ay. The self-willed manmukh is lured by another man's wife.
ae Aedt Ud Bu|te i 226-1, west, wz 1) gal jayvree DhanDhai laptaa-ay. The noose is around his neck, and he is entangled in petty conflicts.
qoute sefA ate we ate nuit (226-1, ast, v2 1) gurmukh chhootas har gun gaa-ay. ||5|| The Gurmukh is emancipated, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||5]|
fAS 36 fags ug aS Set | 226-2, west, ue 1 ji-o tan biDhvaa par ka-o day-ee. The lonely widow gives her body to a stranger;
ath oth fess ug fA ASt Il (226-2, ast, He 1) kaam daam chit par vas say-ee. she allows her mind to be controlled by others for lust or money
fag fus fufs 5 aad Tet el (226-2, aes, ws 1) bin pir taripat na kabahoo" ho-ee. ||6]| , but without her husband, she is never satisfied. ||6]|
ufs ufs udt fafgfs uve i Se use us Af Ger Il (226-3, ast, He 1) parh parh pothee simrit paathaa. bayd puraan parhai sun thaataa. You may read, recite and study the scriptures, the Simritees, Vedas and Puraanas;
fie SA TS HO FT SET MDI (226-3, aSst, ve 1) bin ras raatay man baho naataa. ||7]| but without being imbued with the Lord's essence, the mind wanders endlessly. ||7]|
fA wfsa Ae YN fummAr I (226-4, west, HW 1) ji-o chaatrik jal paraym pi-aasaa. As the rainbird thirsts longingly for the drop of rain,
fag Ha Ae Hts Barr Il (226-4, ast, ue 1) ji-o meenaa jal maahi ulaasaa. and as the fish delights in the water,
Soa The FA ut FFUSTAT CUA (226-4, TCT, He 1)
naanak har ras pee tariptaasaa. ||8||11]|| Nanak is satisfied by the sublime essence of the Lord. ||8]|11]|
TSSt HIS 4 Il (226-5) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
JO afd Hd 3 BA US Il (226-5, aSat, He 1) hath kar marai na laykhai paavai. One who dies in stubbornness shall not be approved,
ZH Ad YT SAH Bae] Il (226-5, west, wz 1) vays karai baho bhasam lagaavai. even though he may wear religious robes and smear his body all over with ashes.
omy farfa safe uss] IAI (226-5, aGst, He 1) naam bisaar bahur pachhutaavai. ||1| |
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he comes to regret and repent in the end. ||1||
3 nfs fs HE F ufs AA I (226-6, ast, 2 1) too” man har jee-o too” man sookh. Believe in the Dear Lord, and you shall find peace of mind.
on farts Rafe AH Ee NAN TIS Il (226-6, ast, He 1) naam bisaar saheh jam dookh. ||1]| rahaa-o. Forgetting the Naam, you shall have to endure the pain of death. ||1]|Pause]|
dot GIS mas TUS I (226-7, ast, we 1) cho-aa chandan agar kapoor. The smell of musk, sandalwood and camphor,
Hifeur Hae USH UE Efe Il (226-7, ast, He 1) maa-i-aa Magan param pad door. and the intoxication of Maya, takes one far away from the state of supreme dignity.
ony farfent Ag as afe QI (226-7, est, He 1D naam bisaari-ai sabh koorho koor. ||2|| Forgetting the Naam, one becomes the most false of all the false. ||2| |
On ZH Suls AGH Il (226-7, ast, He 1) nayjay vaajay takhat salaam. Lances and swords, marching bands, thrones and the salutes of others
moat ferat fenmt an il (226-8, a@Ht, He 1)
aDhkee tarisnaa vi-aapai kaam.
only increase his desire; he is engrossed in sexual desire. fag dfs Ws safs B OH Ill (226-8, aes, v2 1D)
bin har jaachay bhagat na naam. ||3]| Without seeking the Lord, neither devotional worship nor the Naam are obtained. ||3]||
afte ndarfs odt us HS Il (226-8, rat, Hs 1) vaad aha‘kaar naahee parabh maylaa. Union with God is not obtained by arguments and egotism.
Ho @ ustd SH AVS Il (226-9, aSst, uz 1) man day paavahi naam suhaylaa. But by offering your mind, the comfort of the Naam is obtained.
en ate mifamrge TIS sil (226-9, aa, Hs 1) doojai bhaa-ay agi-aan duhaylaa. ||4]| In the love of duality and ignorance, you shall suffer. ||4||
fag GH A ABST dt TS Il (226-9, aSst, He 1) bin dam kay sa-udaa nahee haat. Without money, you cannot buy anything in the store.
fag Sfoa Ava Sot SS Il (226-10, west, He 1) bin bohith saagar nahee vaat. Without a boat, you cannot cross over the ocean.
fae aa AS wre urfe tull (226-10, a@st, uz 1) bin gur sayvay ghaatay ghaat. ||5|| Without serving the Guru, everything is lost. ||5||
fan a@ ag ag fa ae feurS Il (226-10, ast, nH 1) tis ka-o vaahu vaahu je vaat dikhaavai. Waaho! Waaho! - Hail, hail, to the one who shows us the Way.
fan a@ ag ag fA Hae ASS I (226-11, aBat, He 1) tis ka-o vaahu vaahu je sabad sunaavai. Waaho! Waaho! - Hail, hail, to the one who teaches the Word of the Shabad.
fan ag ag ag fa vfs fier] NEN (226-11, as, nH 1) tis ka-o vaahu vaahu je mayl milaavai. ||6] | Waaho! Waaho! - Hail, hail, to the one who unites me in the Lord's Union. ||6]|
ag ag fan as fan at feg AIG I 226-11, west, He 1 vaahu vaahu tis ka-o jis kaa ih jee-o. Waaho! Waaho! - Hail, hail, to the one who is the Keeper of this soul.
aa vat Hfa nifys ut@ ii (226-12, west, ve 1) gur sabdee math amrit pee-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, contemplate this Ambrosial Nectar.
oH zavet BO ave UIE NDI (226-12, wea, He 1) naam vadaa-ee tuDh bhaanai dee-o. ||7||
The Glorious Greatness of the Naam is bestowed according to the Pleasure of Your Will. ||7] |
om faa faS ater He i (226-13, west, v2 1)
naam binaa ki-o jeevaa maa-ay.
Without the Naam, how can I live, O mother?
mates AUS JIC Sat AgSte il (226-13, west, nz 1)
an-din japat raha-o tayree sarnaa-ay.
Night and day, I chant it; I remain in the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
Sod OTH IS uls UTS NCUA (226-13, ast, He 1)
naanak naam ratay pat paa-ay. ||8||12|| O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, honor is attained. ||8]|12]]|
TSt HIS % Il (226-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
ICH ads Set odt Afomr I (226-14, aes, He 1) ha-umai karat bhaykhee nahee jaani-aa. Acting in egotism, the Lord is not known, even by wearing religious robes.
ast sats fess Ho Hen NAN (226-14, aBSt, He 1) gurmukh bhagat virlay man maani-aa. ||1]| How rare is that Gurmukh, who surrenders his mind in devotional worship. || 1] |
IG 3G ass Sd AG USA I (226-15, Test, He 1) ha-o ha-o karat nahee sach paa-ee-ai. By actions done in egotism, selfishness and conceit, the True Lord is not obtained.
ICH Ate UsH UE UT NAN TITS Il (226-15, TSS, we 1) ha-umai jaa-ay param pad paa-ee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. But when egotism departs, then the state of supreme dignity is obtained. ||1]|Pause| |
ICH afs TH FT Oefs I (226-15, aes, He 1) ha-umai kar raajay baho Dhaaveh. The kings act in egotism, and undertake all sorts of expeditions.
J@H uufa Aofy Hfe wirefs QI (226-16, west, He 1)
ha-umai khapeh janam mar aavahi. ||2||
But through their egotism, they are ruined; they die, only to be reborn over and over again. ||2||
ICH foed Td Age Ses I (226-16, Tes, He 1) ha-umai nivrai gur sabad veechaarai. Egotism is overcome only by contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
due ufs fsurd us Hurd Sil (226-16, ast, He 1) chanchal mat ti-aagai panch sanghaarai. ||3]| One who restrains his fickle mind subdues the five passions. ||3]|
wists ATS AOA wis wets i (226-17, wget, He 1) antar saach sahj ghar aavahi. With the True Lord deep within the self, the Celestial Mansion is intuitively found.
THe We usH ats urT|fs ISI (226-17, aVst, He 1) raajan jaan param gat paavahi. ||4]| Understanding the Sovereign Lord, the state of supreme dignity is obtained. ||4||
Ay adel TI SIH YAS Il (226-18, aSHt, ue sach karnee gur bharam chukhaavai. The Guru dispels the doubts of those whose actions are true.
fogs a wfs stSt BS ull (226-18, aes, He 1) nirbha-o kai ghar taarhee laavai. ||5|| They focus their attention on the Home of the Fearless Lord. ||5||
I 3G afs Haat fom uTS I (226-18, Test, He 1) ha-o ha-o kar marnaa ki-aa paavai. Those who act in egotism, selfishness and conceit die; what do they gain?
UT TT sf A SIT YaS MEM (226-19, ast, we 1) pooraa gur bhaytay so jhagar chukhaavai. ||6|| Those who meet the Perfect Guru are rid of all conflicts. ||6]|
Ast d Sat fag ardt il (226-19, west, He 1) jaytee hai taytee kihu naahee. Whatever exists, is in reality nothing.
aanfy famra sfe ae ardt iD II (226-19, aBst, He 1) gurmukh gi-aan bhayt gun gaahee. ||7|| Obtaining spiritual wisdom from the Guru, I sing the Glories of God. ||7]||
UST IID
ICH dae sf sev] Il (227-1, TES, v2 1) ha-umai banDhan banDh bhavaavai. Egotism binds people in bondage, and causes them to wander around lost.
SoA TH Safs AY US NCUA (227-1, TSH, He 1)
naanak raam bhagat sukh paavai. ||8]|13]| O Nanak, peace is obtained through devotional worship of the Lord. ||8]|13]|
TCSt HIS A Il (227-1) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
YeH Font are ufs nirfemr i (227-2, a@et, ue 1) parathmay barahmaa kaalai ghar aa-i-aa. First, Brahma entered the house of Death.
dH GHS ufeorts o urfenr it (227-2, west, ne 1)
barahm kamal pa-i-aal na paa-i-aa.
Brahma entered the lotus, and searched the nether regions, but he did not find the end of it.
mifamt odt Stat Safty safer Al (227-2, ast, v2 1) aagi-aa nahee leenee bharam bhulaa-i-aa. ||1] | He did not accept the Lord's Order - he was deluded by doubt. ||1]|
a Gun A ate Aurfamr | (227-3, ast, He 1) jo upjai so kaal sanghaari-aa. Whoever is created, shall be destroyed by Death.
oH vfs TS Te ASE stator ual JIS il (227-3, aSst, uz
ham har raakhay gur sabad beechaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
But I am protected by the Lord; I contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
fen Had eet Afs Fer i 227-4, ast, we 1) maa-i-aa mohay dayvee sabh dayvaa. All the gods and goddesses are enticed by Maya.
ae 3 as faa aa at AS Il (227-4, aSst, ne 1) kaal na chhodai bin gur kee sayvaa. Death cannot be avoided, without serving the Guru.
6g nist nie miseT QM (227-4, ast, He 1) oh abhinaasee alakh abhayvaa. ||2|| That Lord is Imperishable, Invisible and Inscrutable. ||2||
HOSS US MEAT Sdt ToT Il (227-5, aSst, He 1) sultaan khaan baadisaah nahee rahnaa. The sultans, emperors and kings shall not remain.
SHY 38 AH A TY ATA Il (227-5, wat, we 1) naamhu bhoolai jam kaa dukh sahnaa. Forgetting the Name, they shall endure the pain of death.
H Ud on faAG Tag TIS NI (227-5, Test, He 1) mai Dhar naam ji-o raakho rahnaa. ||3]| My only Support is the Naam, the Name of the Lord; as He keeps me, I survive. ||3]|
seudt TH Sdt fa HANH II (227-6, ast, He cha-uDhree raajay nahee kisai mukaam. The leaders and kings shall not remain.
And Hots Hots Heft aH I (227-6, aga, He 1) saah mareh sa“cheh maa-i-aa daam. The bankers shall die, after accumulating their wealth and money.
Hue an afe wifgs on ell 227-6, west, ne 1) mai Dhan deejai har amrit naam. ||4|| Grant me, O Lord, the wealth of Your Ambrosial Naam. ||4||
gufs Hdd HaCH fAaETS Il (227-7, ast, He 1) ra-yat mahar mukdam sikdaarai. The people, rulers, leaders and chiefs
fosse af= o fen HATS Il (227-7, west, He 1) nihchal ko-ay na disai sansaarai. - none of them shall be able to remain in the world.
wetes ae az fife ws null 227-7, aC, Hz 1) afri-o kaal koorh sir maarai. ||5]| Death is inevitable; it strikes the heads of the false. ||5]|
fades Sa Het Ag Aet Il (227-8, west, ne 1) nihchal ayk sachaa sach so-ee. Only the One Lord, the Truest of the True, is permanent.
fats afa anit fof AS set i (227-8, west, ve 1) jin kar saajee tineh sabh go-ee. He who created and fashioned everything, shall destroy it.
6g qenfe au st ufS Tet Well (227-8, ast, v2 1) oh gurmukh jaapai taa™ pat ho-ee. ||6]| One who becomes Gurmukh and meditates on the Lord is honored. ||6||
Ht AY su Sata Il (227-9, ast, ue 1) kaajee saykh bhaykh fakeeraa. The Qazis, Shaykhs and Fakeers in religious robes
zs adets IGH sfs ute I (227-9, west, 2 1) vaday kahaaveh ha-umai tan peeraa. call themselves great; but through their egotism, their bodies are suffering in pain.
ae o 2s faa Afsag af Ute NOM (227-9, a@Ht, He kaal na chhodai bin satgur kee Dheeraa. ||7]|| Death does not spare them, without the Support of the True Guru. ||7]|
ane WS fade nig Seat Il (227-10, aa, ve 1) kaal jaal jihvaa ar nainee. The trap of Death is hanging over their tongues and eyes.
arat ae He far Sat ii (227-10, west, He 1) kaanee kaal sunai bikh bainee. Death is over their ears, when they hear talk of evil.
fag Fae HS feg sat uci (227-10, ast, 2 1) bin sabdai moothay din rainee. ||8]| Without the Shabad, they are plundered, day and night. ||8]|
fase AS ZA dfs off 1 ave 3 Afo Aa TS WE I 227-11, ast, ve 1
hirdai saach vasai har naa-ay. kaal na johi sakai gun gaa-ay.
Death cannot touch those whose hearts are filled with the True Name of the Lord, and who sing the Glories of God.
Sea THY Aafe ANTS NENAGH (227-11, Test, He 1)
naanak gurmukh sabad samaa-ay. ||9||14|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is absorbed in the Word of the Shabad. ||9||14]|
ASSt HIS 4 Il (227-12)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
Safa Ave fife act get il (227-12, west, He 1) boleh saach mithi-aa nahee raa-ee. They speak the Truth - not an iota of falsehood.
Tod ASH JAH SAT Il (227-12, aSHt, Hz 1) chaaleh gurmukh hukam rajaa-ee. The Gurmukhs walk in the Way of the Lord's Command.
Jats MSS AS Asset WAU (227-12, aeHt, Hs 1) raheh ateet sachay sarnaa-ee. ||1]| They remain unattached, in the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||1]|
Ae wife SA aso Hd Il (227-13, aGst, He 1) sach ghar baisai kaal na johai. They dwell in their true home, and Death does not touch them.
HOHY AG nes ASS BY HT NA TIS Il (227-13, aes, He 1D) manmukh ka-o aavat jaavat dukh mohai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The self-willed manmukhs come and go, in the pain of emotional attachment. ||1]|Pause] |
mifug uba@ nee af adit i (227-14, aSHt, ue api-o pee-a-o akath kath rahee-ai. So, drink deeply of this Nectar, and speak the Unspoken Speech.
fon ufs aff AoA wa Bd I (227-14, ast, He 1)
nij ghar bais sahj ghar lahee-ai.
Dwelling in the home of your own being within, you shall find the home of intuitive peace.
dfs off HS feo AY aA QU (227-14, aVHt, He D har ras maatay ih sukh kahee-ai. ||2|| One who is imbued with the Lord's sublime essence, is said to experience this peace.
21 |
THs WS fs odt 3B Il 227-15, west, we 1) gurmat chaal nihchal nahee dolai. Following the Guru's Teachings, one becomes perfectly stable, and never wavers.
aanfs rte Aofa of FS i (227-15, aSst, we 1) gurmat saach sahj har bolai. Following the Guru's Teachings, one intuitively chants the Name of the True Lord.
ule nifgs sz fedH BN (227-15, aCe, He peevai amrit tat virolai. ||3]| Drinking in this Ambrosial Nectar, and churning it, the essential reality is discerned.
131] Afsag efor ether stat il (227-16, aSst, uz 1)
satgur daykhi-aa deekhi-aa leenee. Beholding the True Guru, I have received His Teachings.
Ho 30 mafus vise afs atat il (227-16, west, ve 1) man tan arpi-o antar gat keenee. I have offered my mind and body, after searching deep within my own being.
afs fufs uret nirsy stot gil (227-16, west, He 1)
gat mit paa-ee aatam cheenee. ||4]| I have come to realize the value of understanding my own soul. ||4||
SHO On fadHo ATS Il (227-17, aSat, He 1) bhojan naam niranjan saar. The Naam, the Name of the Immaculate Lord, is the most excellent and sublime food.
UdH JA Ag Afs MRIS Il (227-17, Test, He 1) param hans sach jot apaar. The pure swan-souls see the True Light of the Infinite Lord.
Ad Gu 3g Saag WUll (227-17, ast, ve jah daykh-a-u tah aykankaar. ||5|| Wherever I look, I see the One and Only Lord. ||5]|
dd far@H fat AY Adat Il (227-18, ast, He 1) rahai niraalam aykaa sach karnee. One who remains pure and unblemished and practices only true deeds,
UdH Us Ue AS TT Beet Il (227-18, aSst, uz 1)
param pad paa-i-aa sayvaa gur charnee. obtains the supreme status, serving at the Guru's Feet.
Ho 3 Ho Hfonr got mid gHet Weil (227-18, Test, we 1) man tay man maani-aa chookee aha™ bharmanee. ||6||
The mind is reconciliated with the mind, and the ego's wandering ways come to an end. ||6||
fee fafa aBe aGe adt afar I (227-19, aBst, Hz 1) in biDh ka-un ka-un nahee taari-aa. In this way, who - who has not been saved?
ofa afk HS sas fenstenr i (227-19, ast, H2 1)
har jas sant bhagat nistaari-aa. The Lord's Praises have saved His Saints and devotees.
UST QQAt
Ys Ue JH Mies 6 Sam IDI (228-1, aSst, He 1) parabh paa-ay ham avar na bhaari-aa. ||7|| I have found God - I am not searching for any other. ||7| |
Ara Hote ats ney warfent | (228-1, west, He 1) saach mahal gur alakh lakhaa-i-aa. The Guru has shown me the unseen Mansion of the True Lord.
fesse HIG odt stent wfenr i (228-1, ast, v2 1) nihchal mahal nahee chhaa-i-aa maa-i-aa. His Mansion is eternal and unchanging; it is not a mere reflection of Maya.
Whe Hse SoH Yorfeor cil (228-2, ast, v2 1) saach santokhay bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||8]|| Through truth and contentment, doubt is dispelled. ||8]|
fas a Hfe efhor Ag ASt Il (228-2, west, He 1) jin kai man vasi-aa sach so-ee. That person, within whose mind the True Lord dwells
fso at Hafs qantas Tet Il (228-3, ast, v2 1) tin kee sangat gurmukh ho-ee. - in his company, one becomes Gurmukh.
Soa As of HS set ICN (228-3, Test, He 1) naanak saach naam mal kho-ee. ||9||15]| O Nanak, the True Name washes off the pollution. ||9||15]|
TCS HIS A Il (228-3) ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
oth of fos I AT aT Il (228-3, west, He 1) raam naam chit raapai jaa kaa. One whose consciousness is permeated with the Lord's Name
Curfu wane ata ST aT NU (228-4, aSHt, He upjamp darsan keejai taa kaa. ||1]| - receive the blessing of his darshan in the early light of dawn. ||1]|
TH 3 AUT MSTA SHS Il (228-4, ast, He 1) raam na japahu abhaag tumaaraa. If you do not meditate on the Lord, it is your own misfortune.
Afar afat est ys TH THs NA TIT Il (228-4, ast, we 1 jug jug daataa parabh raam hamaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. In each and every age, the Great Giver is my Lord God. ||1||Pause] |
ToS TH AY AG UT Il (228-5, weaA, we gurmat raam japai jan pooraa. Following the Guru's Teachings, the perfect humble beings meditate on the Lord.
fF We MSIS FA FT MQM (228-5, aSst, He 1) tit ghat anhat baajay tooraa. ||2|| Within their hearts, the unstruck melody vibrates. ||2]|
a He OH sats ofa fumrfe I (228-5, ast, He 1) jo jan raam bhagat har pi-aar.
Those who worship the Lord and love the Lord A ufs ae fagur of Sil (228-6, west, He 1)
say parabh raakhay kirpaa Dhaar. ||3]|| - showering His Mercy, God protects them. ||3]|
faa a fase ofs afs Het I 228-6, west, He 1) jin kai hirdai har har so-ee. Those whose hearts are filled with the Lord, Har, Har
fo a van uath AY Jet ISI (228-6, aes, He 1) tin kaa daras paras sukh ho-ee. ||4|| - gazing upon the blessed vision of their darshan, peace is obtained. ||4||
Hea Ator uf Sa FS Il (228-7, west, wz 1) Sarab jee-aa meh ayko ravai. Among all beings, the One Lord is pervading.
Houta nidardt fefs Fat SS Ul (228-7, aS, we manmukh aha‘kaaree fir joonee bhavai. ||5|| The eogtistical, self-willed manmukhs wander in reincarnation. ||5||
Ags Wf Afsag we Il (228-7, aes, vs 1) so boojhai jo satgur paa-ay. They alone understand, who have found the True Guru.
ICH HS Td Ase US ill (228-8, ast, we 1) ha-umai maaray gur sabday paa-ay. ||6|| Subduing their ego, they receive the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||6]|
mag Gan at Afa fax AWS Il (228-8, aGst, nz 1)
araDh uraDh kee sanDh ki-o jaanai.
How can anyone know of the Union between the being below and the Supreme Being above?
aante Afa fos Ho HTS IDI (228-8, ast, He 1) gurmukh sanDh milai man maanai. ||7|| The Gurmukhs obtain this Union; their minds are reconciliated. ||7||
JH unit fase aS TE Ad Il (228-9, ast, v2 1) ham paapee nirgun ka-o gun karee-di. I am a worthless sinner, without merit. What merit do I have?
us of efenrs soa AS SdH CIE! (228-9, aCe, He 1) parabh ho-ay da-i-aal naanak jan taree-ai. ||8||16|| When God showers His Mercy, servant Nanak is emancipated. ||8||16]|
Hod mAcudion gmirddt ast ait | (228-10, west, He 1) solah asatpadee-aa gu-aarayree ga-orhee kee-aa. Sixteen Ashtapadees Of Gwaarayree Gauree| |
ast Faas HIS A (228-11) ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 1 Gauree Bairaagan, First Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (228-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fAG wet aS afest aafo af Ae 1 ofofoefh wats ofa Sfo wrsH AY OS NA (228-12, ast saafe, 2 1)
ji-o gaa-ee ka-o go-ilee raakhahi kar saaraa. ahinis paaleh raakh layhi aatam sukh Dhaaraa. ||1||
As the dairy farmer watches over and protects his cows, so does the Lord cherish and protect us, night and day. He blesses the soul with peace. ||1]|
fes Os Tug tHe efenrer Il 228-13, aSat aoafs, ue 1)
it ut raakho deen da-i-aalaa. Please protect me here and hereafter, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.
38 Heeals sets fore NA TIS Il (228-13, ast Forafs, ue 1)
ta-o sarnaagat nadar nihaalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I seek Your Sanctuary; please bless me with Your Glance of Grace. ||1||Pause] |
Ag fu 30 oe Td Ty MUST S Il (228-13, ast Soars, vs 1) jah daykh-a-u tah rav rahay rakh raakhanhaaraa. Wherever I look, there You are. Save me, O Savior Lord!
3 US ZIT FT F YS MTS NI (228-14, aSst Faas, we 1) too” daataa bhugtaa too™hai too” paraan aDhaaraa. ||2|| You are the Giver, and You are the Enjoyer; You are the Support of the breath of life.
21 |
fass ufeor nia Cact fas fomrs steve il (228-14, ast Seats, ve 1)
kirat pa-i-aa aDh oorDhee bin gi-aan beechaaraa.
According to the karma of past actions, people descend to the depths or rise to the heights, unless they contemplate spiritual wisdom.
faa Guor naretn at fHoR 3 nifamre 3i 228-15, a@at aeats, n2 1) bin upmaa jagdees kee binsai na anDhi-aaraa. ||3]| Without the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the darkness is not dispelled. ||3] |
Ag faons oH thm SSF vias | (228-15, ast Sorafs, ue 1) jag binsat ham daykhi-aa lobhay aha‘kaaraa. I have seen the world being destroyed by greed and egotism.
ad As yg ufeor Ag Hats Enis Sil (228-16, Test Hoare, ve 1) gur sayvaa parabh paa-i-aa sach mukat du-aaraa. ||4|| Only by serving the Guru is God obtained, and the true gate of liberation found. ||4| |
fon ufs HIG wud a onus Aet Il (228-16, aGat Avats, 2 1)
nij ghar mahal apaar ko aprampar so-ee.
The Mansion of the Infinite Lord's Presence is within the home of one's own being. He is beyond any boundaries.
fag Fae fag t odt gs AY Tet Ul (228-17, ast doats, 4s
bin sabdai thir ko nahee boojhai sukh ho-ee. ||5]|
Without the Word of the Shabad, nothing shall endure. Through understanding, peace is obtained. ||5]|
fomr 3 orfeur & ate fomr aafo AM AST Il (228-17, aGst aerate, we 1)
ki-aa lai aa-i-aa lay jaa-ay ki-aa faaseh jam jaalaa.
What have you brought, and what will you take away, when you are caught by the noose of Death?
36 aa af ASdt mratA user Ell (228-18, aGst Sarats, He 1)
dol baDhaa kas jayvree aakaas pataalaa. ||6||
Like the bucket tied to the rope in the well, you are pulled up to the Akaashic Ethers, and then lowered down to the nether regions of the underworld. ||6]|
Tens on o aad Aon ufs ue I (228-18, aGat aoats, nz 1)
gurmat naam na veesrai sehjay pat paa-ee-ai.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord; you Shall automatically obtain honor.
wists Aa fours 3 fife wry Test DI (228-18, weet dora, He
antar sabad niDhaan hai mil aap gavaa-ee-ai. ||7]|
Deep within the self is the treasure of the Shabad; it is obtained only by eradicating selfishness and conceit. ||7| |
oefs ad us mmuat Te nifx AHS | (228-19, aCat dorafs, ue 1) nadar karay parabh aapnee gun ank samaavai. When God bestows His Glance of Grace, people settle in the Lap of the Virtuous Lord.
SSA AS F FRET WI AG UPS ICMAUIVI (228-19, west Farafs, we 1) naanak mayl na chook-ee laahaa sach paavai. ||8||1]|17]| O Nanak, this Union cannot be broken; the true profit is obtained. ||8]|1]|17]|
UST 2a‘
ACSt HIS A Il (229-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 1. Gauree, First Mehl:
qs usAret afs & 3G dfe fara i (229-1, weet, vz 1) gur parsaadee boojh lay ta-o ho-ay nibayraa. By Guru's Grace, one comes to understand, and then, the account is settled.
ufs ufs on fadaat A oag HAT NU (229-2, Test, He 1)
ghar ghar naam niranjanaa so thaakur mayraa. ||1||
In each and every heart is the Name of the Immaculate Lord; He is my Lord and Master. ||1]]|
fag ae Hae 3 scm Sug Sars il 229-2, aes, ws 1)
bin gur sabad na chhootee-ai daykhhu veechaaraa.
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, no one is emancipated. See this, and reflect upon it.
A BY AGH aNedl fae ae viftra Na TIS i (229-2, west, ne
jay lakh karam kamaavahee bin gur anDhi-aaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Even though you may perform hundreds of thousands of rituals, without the Guru, there is only darkness. ||1]||Pause| |
MO Mae Bd four fsa fA adit i (229-3, ast, ue 1) anDhay aklee baahray ki-aa tin si-o kahee-ai. What can you say, to one who is blind and without wisdom?
fag ae ve 3 Aset fas fafa fasadht 12m (229-3, ast, Hs 1) bin gur panth na soojh-ee kit biDh nirabahee-ai. ||2]| Without the Guru, the Path cannot be seen. How can anyone proceed? ||2||
ade AG Ua Ad Ud ATS B ATE Il (229-4, ast, He 1) khotay ka-o kharaa kahai kharay saar na jaanai. He calls the counterfeit genuine, and does not know the value of the genuine.
nit ot aS uray aet are fear I (229-4, ast, we 1) anDhay kaa naa-o paarkhoo kalee kaal vidaanai. ||3]|| The blind man is known as an appraiser; this Dark Age of Kali Yuga is so strange!
[SII
HS AG Was Ad WAS AS AT Il (229-5, ast, we 1) sootay ka-o jaagat kahai jaagat ka-o sootaa. The sleeper is said to be awake, and those who are awake are like sleepers.
Mes AG Hor ad HE Sat FT iil (229-5, ast, we jeevat ka-o moo-aa kahai moo-ay nahee rotaa. ||4| | The living are said to be dead, and no one mourns for those who have died. ||4| |
wes AG AST ad ATS AG wrfenr Ih (229-6, ast, He 1) aavat ka-o jaataa kahai jaatay ka-o aa-i-aa. One who is coming is said to be going, and one who is gone is said to have come.
ud at aG nrust ad nus odt afer tull (229-6, aah, He
par kee ka-o apunee kahai apuno nahee bhaa-i-aa. ||5||
That which belongs to others, he calls his own, but he has no liking for that which is his. |[5]|
HIS aB aBa ad age aS Hor i (229-7, at, oz 1) meethay ka-o ka-urhaa kahai karhoo-ay ka-o meethaa. That which is sweet is said to be bitter, and the bitter is said to be sweet.
as ot fear aafa mtr afe ufo stor ell (229-7, aGst, 2 1)
raatay kee nindaa karahi aisaa kal meh deethaa. ||6]|
One who is imbued with the Lord's Love is slandered - his is what I have seen in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||6] |
oot at Ae aafs Sag odt CA Il (229-7, aes, He 1) chayree kee sayvaa karahi thaakur nahee deesai. He serves the maid, and does not see his Lord and Master.
tug ote feds Hus dt HA IDI (229-8, west, He 1) pokhar neer virolee-ai maakhan nahee reesai. ||7]| Churning the water in the pond, no butter is produced. ||7]||
feR ue a meats af A AT THT I (229-8, ast, we 1) is pad jo arthaa-ay lay-ay so guroo hamaaraa. One who understands the meaning of this verse is my Guru.
So Bes nity aC A wus wu ICI (229-9, aSHt, He 1) naanak cheenai aap ka-o so apar apaaraa. ||8]|| O Nanak, one who knows his own self, is infinite and incomparable. ||8] |
Ag nmy wtfy zaset wm SaHTEMT Ih (229-9, aSst, He 1) sabh aapay aap varatdaa aapay bharmaa-i-aa. He Himself is All-pervading; He Himself misleads the people.
qs fase 3 gst AS oH AHH ICNQUATH (229-10, Tea, He gur kirpaa tay boojhee-ai sabh barahm samaa-i-aa. ||9||2]|18] | By Guru's Grace, one comes to understand, that God is contained in all. ||9]|2]|18]|
Ta Ast Tyrsdt Hos 2 wneud (229-11) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (229-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HO A ASA SA SS ll (229-12, ast arset, ve 3) man kaa sootak doojaa bhaa-o. The pollution of the mind is the love of duality.
SIH 3S MSS AS AU (229-12, ast anrset, ve 3) bharmay bhoolay aava-o jaa-o. ||1]| Deluded by doubt, people come and go in reincarnation. ||1]|
HoHfe Asa oats o ATE Il (229-12, ast aurset, 2 3) manmukh sootak kabeh na jaa-ay. The pollution of the self-willed manmukhs will never go away,
favg Hafe o stn ofa & of= NU TIS I (229-12, aeHt anrdet, He 3) jichar sabad na bheejai har kai naa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. as long as they do not dwell on the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
AS ASa AS HT MATT I (229-13, aCst anrrasct, vs 3) sabho sootak jaytaa moh aakaar. All the created beings are contaminated by emotional attachment;
Hfa Hfs HH STS ST NM (229-13, Sst anrdet, uz 3) mar mar jammai vaaro vaar. ||2|| they die and are reborn, only to die over and over again. ||2| |
Asa uae ugs urat HT I (229-14, aeHt anrsct, vs 3) sootak agan pa-unai paanee maahi. Fire, air and water are polluted.
H3q sH6 AS fos uta WS (229-14, west aursct, vs 3) sootak bhojan jaytaa kichh khaahi. ||3]|| The food which is eaten is polluted. ||3]|
Hata TSH & UAT fe Il (229-14, ast gnrsct, we 3) sootak karam na poojaa ho-ay. The actions of those who do not worship the Lord are polluted.
ot gS He foane dE Neil (229-14, aGSt anrdet, He 3) naam ratay man nirmal ho-ay. ||4| | Attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind becomes immaculate. ||4]|
Afsag Afent Asa ATE I (229-15, ast ards, ws 3) satgur sayvi-ai sootak jaa-ay. Serving the True Guru, pollution is eradicated,
Hd 3 HOH ASB UMS MUI (229-15, ast arse, v2 3) marai na janmai kaal na khaa-ay. ||5|| and then, one does not suffer death and rebirth, or get devoured by death. ||5||
AAS fiif_fs Afo Sag AfE II (229-15, aGet anrdat, v8 3) Saasat simrit soDh daykhhu ko-ay. You may study and examine the Shaastras and the Simritees,
fee oe ad Hats & SE NEI (229-16, west auras, He 3) vin naavai ko mukat na ho-ay. ||6|| but without the Name, no one is liberated. ||6||
Ad Td OH OSH ARE stata Il (229-16, Test anrsat, He 3) jug chaaray naam utam sabad beechaar.
Throughout the four ages, the Naam is the ultimate; reflect upon the Word of the Shabad.
ate Hf asHfy Ssath urfe Dil (229-17, a@st anrsat, He 3) kal meh gurmukh utras paar. ||7|| In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, only the Gurmukhs cross over. ||7] |
Arat Hd me APE Il (229-17, west anrset, v2 3) saachaa marai na aavai jaa-ay. The True Lord does not die; He does not come or go.
Soa TIHf Fd AME NCUA (229-17, TGS amrrdct, ve 3) naanak gurmukh rahai samaa-ay. ||8]||1|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh remains absorbed in the Lord. ||8]|1]|
ast HIG 3 Il (229-18)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
TIHfy AS YTS nUrs | (229-18, ast, ws 3) gurmukh sayvaa paraan aDhaaraa. Selfless service is the support of the breath of life of the Gurmukh.
dfs HE mug fase Sa ara Il (229-18, ast, v2 3) har jee-o raakho hirdai ur Dhaaraa. Keep the Dear Lord enshrined in your heart.
anf AST ATT SMT NA (229-19, ast, ne 3) gurmukh sobhaa saach du-aaraa. ||1]|| The Gurmukh is honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
ufss fs us sag fears Il (229-19, aGHt, He 3) pandit har parh tajahu vikaaraa. O Pandit, O religious scholar, read about the Lord, and renounce your corrupt ways.
dante sere Ssag urs AU TIS Il (229-19, aSst, ve 3) gurmukh bha-ojal utarahu paaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukh crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause] |
UST 230 aenfy fess IH ATE II (230-1, ast, He 3)
gurmukh vichahu ha-umai jaa-ay. The Gurmukh eradicates egotism from within.
TaHfs HSS Bat wife |i (230-1, ast, ve 3) gurmukh mail na laagai aa-ay. No filth sticks to the Gurmukh.
aanfa oy ZA Hfs mmf i (230-1, ast, ne 3) gurmukh naam vasai man aa-ay. ||2|| The Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell within the mind of the Gurmukh.
21 |
Tent AGH UsH Afs Tet i (230-2, west, He 3)
gurmukh karam Dharam sach ho-ee.
Through karma and Dharma, good actions and righteous faith, the Gurmukh becomes true.
Tans nidarg ASS Tet i (230-2, ast, ve 3) gurmukh aha‘kaar jalaa-ay do-ee. The Gurmukh burns away egotism and duality.
aenfy afk gS AY det ISI (230-2, ast, He 3) gurmukh naam ratay sukh ho-ee. |[3]| The Gurmukh is attuned to the Naam, and is at peace. ||3]|
Must He UssUT FST At Il (230-3, wat, ws 3) aapnaa man parboDhahu boojhhu so-ee. Instruct your own mind, and understand Him.
BA AHS AS 5 At Il (230-3, ast, He 3) lok samjhaavhu sunay na ko-ee. You may preach to other people, but no one will listen.
Tenfy ANSI AST AY Tet igil (230-3, ast, Hs 3) gurmukh samjhahu sadaa sukh ho-ee. ||4|| The Gurmukh understands, and is always at peace. ||4||
Honfa Ss IIS Vsset Il (230-4, aVHt, ue 3) manmukh damf bahut chaturaa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs are such clever hypocrites.
A fae ane wate o uret Il (230-4, ast, He 3) jo kichh kamaavai so thaa-ay na paa-ee. No matter what they do, it is not acceptable.
We ATS SCT 6 AST MUI (230-4, ast, He 3) aavai jaavai tha-ur na kaa-ee. ||5]| They come and go in reincarnation, and find no place of rest. ||5||
HOHY AGH Ad ATS wfSHTs" Il (230-5, west, He 3) manmukh karam karay bahut abhimaanaa. The manmukhs perform their rituals, but they are totally selfish and conceited.
aa faS ofe ad fos fora Il (230-5, west, He 3) bag ji-o laa-ay bahai nit Dhi-aanaa. They sit there, like storks, pretending to meditate.
Ath uatsor sa dt UsSTAT NEI (230-5, aBst, He 3) jam pakrhi-aa tab hee pachhutaanaa. ||6]|| Caught by the Messenger of Death, they shall regret and repent in the end. ||6]|
fag Afsagd AS nafs & Tet I (230-6, west, v2 3)
bin satgur sayvay mukat na ho-ee. Without serving the True Guru, liberation is not obtained.
Td UTAet fs ofa Het Il (230-6, west, He 3) gur parsaadee milai har so-ee. By Guru's Grace, one meets the Lord.
TT VS Fa WS Tet WDM (230-6, aSst, He 3) gur daataa jug chaaray ho-ee. ||7|| The Guru is the Great Giver, throughout the four ages. ||7]|
ante ats ufs ant efsniret i (230-7, az, v2 3) gurmukh jaat pat naamay vadi-aa-ee. For the Gurmukh, the Naam is social status, honor and glorious greatness.
Afeg at ust farts aeret i (230-7, aGat, vs 3) saa-ir kee putree bidaar gavaa-ee. Maya, the daughter of the ocean, has been slain.
aed fag are St TITS UCU (230-7, Tes, 2 3) naanak bin naavai jhoothee chaturaa-ee. ||8]|2]| O Nanak, without the Name, all clever tricks are false. ||8||2||
ast Hs 2 Il (230-8) ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
feR Aa aA UH UST SH Set Il (230-8, ast, He 3) is jug kaa Dharam parhahu tum bhaa-ee. Learn the Dharma of this age, O Siblings of Destiny;
ud af AS ASt uret Il (230-8, ast, He 3) poorai gur sabh sojhee paa-ee. all understanding is obtained from the Perfect Guru.
me mat dfs aH AMET UI (230-9, Tea, He 3) aithai agai har naam sakhaa-ee. ||1]| Here and hereafter, the Lord's Name is our Companion. ||1||
TH usd Hie Add ates Il (230-9, wSst, He 3) raam parhahu man karahu beechaar. Learn of the Lord, and contemplate Him in your mind.
ae usATSt HS SsTg Al FI Il (230-9, aSst, nz 3) gur parsaadee mail utaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, your filth shall be washed away. ||1||Pause| |
afe fedfa 5 urfemr afe Il (230-10, aGst, He 3) vaad viroDh na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. Through argument and debate, He cannot be found.
Ho 36 dla eA STE il (230-10, Bat, w2 3) man tan feekaa doojai bhaa-ay. The mind and body are made insipid through the love of duality.
ad a Wate Af fee STE 2M (230-10, ast, He 3) gur kai sabad sach liv laa-ay. ||2]| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, lovingly attune yourself to the True Lord.
21 |
ICH Her fg AATET Il (230-11, ast, He 3) ha-umai mailaa ih sansaaraa. This world is polluted with egotism.
fos stefa ae 3 Ae nara Il (230-11, est, He 3)
nit tirath naavai na jaa-ay aha"kaaraa.
By taking cleansing baths daily at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, egotism is not eliminated.
fae TI 3S AH AP YTS III (230-11, Test, v8 3) bin gur bhaytay jam karay khu-aaraa. ||3]| Without meeting the Guru, they are tortured by Death. ||3]|
A A@ Ae fa IBN He Il (230-12, wet, He 3) so jan saachaa je ha-umai maarai. Those humble beings are true, who conquer their ego.
dd a Aafe us Aus Il (230-12, west, He 3) gur kai sabad panch sanghaarai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they conquer the five thieves.
mify 3d AIS AG 3S II (230-12, ast, He 3) aap tarai saglay kul taarai. ||4]| They save themselves, and save all their generations as well. ||4| |
ufenr dfs afe aat uret i (230-13, ast, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi nat baajee paa-ee. The Actor has staged the drama of emotional attachment to Maya.
HoH nig Jd Bu|ret Il (230-13, aCat, He 3) manmukh anDh rahay laptaa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs cling blindly to it.
aaHfy nifsus ad fee Set ull (230-13, 7est, He 3)
gurmukh alipat rahay liv laa-ee. ||5|| The Gurmukhs remain detached, and lovingly attune themselves to the Lord. ||5]|
as su ad SUMS Il (230-14, west, ne 3) bahutay bhaykh karai bhaykh-Dhaaree. The disguisers put on their various disguises.
nists fanart fed nidardt il (230-14, aGst, He 3) antar tisnaa firai aha‘kaaree. Desire rages within them, and they carry on egotistically.
ny & Me TH dH EM (230-14, aga, He 3) aap na cheenai baajee haaree. ||6| | They do not understand themselves, and they lose the game of life. ||6]|
aus ufats ad TSIET Il (230-15, TSS, vs 3) kaaparh pahir karay chaturaa-ee. Putting on religious robes, they act so clever,
Hwfenr vfs nfs sath soret It (230-15, west, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi at bharam bhulaa-ee. but they are totally deluded by doubt and emotional attachment to Maya.
fae ad AS AIS TY Ure IDI (230-15, ast, v2 3) bin gur sayvay bahut dukh paa-ee. ||7| | Without serving the Guru, they suffer in terrible pain. ||7]||
otH IS Het Fara i (230-16, ast, we 3) naam ratay sadaa bairaagee. Those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, remain detached forever.
fort vista arts fee orait il (230-16, ret, He 3) garihee antar saach liv laagee. Even as householders, they lovingly attune themselves to the True Lord.
Sa Afsdd Ald A Psat UCUSI (230-16, 7Sst, He 3) naanak satgur sayveh say vadbhaagee. ||8]|3]|| O Nanak, those who serve the True Guru are blessed and very fortunate. ||8]|3]|
ast HIG 3 Il (230-17)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
oH HS Se miso Il (230-17, asst, He 3) barahmaa mool vayd abhi-aasaa. Brahma is the founder of the study of the Vedas.
fan 3 Gun te Ho fim It 230-17, west, He 3) tis tay upjay dayv moh pi-aasaa. From him emanated the gods, enticed by desire.
3 Te SdH ot for wha SAT NA (230-18, ast, He 3) tarai gun bharmay naahee nij ghar vaasaa. ||1|| They wander in the three qualities, and they do not dwell within their own home. ||1]|
oH dfs oe Afsarg fhefer i (230-18, ast, ve 3) ham har raakhay satguroo milaa-i-aa. The Lord has saved me; I have met the True Guru.
mofeg sats dia an fesfenr nai TIS Il (230-19, ast, v2 3) an-din bhagat har naam drirh-aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He has implanted devotional worship of the Lord's Name, night and day. ||1]|Pause] |
3 Ue Feat FH HAST Il (230-19, aCe, us 3) tarai gun banee barahm janjaalaa. The songs of Brahma entangle people in the three qualities.
ufa ae zurets fAfs HTS ANAS Il (230-19, aBst, He 3)
parh vaad vakaaneh sir maaray jamkaalaa.
Reading about the debates and disputes, they are hit over the head by the Messenger of Death.
UST 23BA
33 3 dofs safe Us Use IM (231-1, west, 2 3)
tat na cheeneh baneh pand paraalaa. ||2| |
They do not understand the essence of reality, and they gather their worthless bundles of straw. ||2]|
HoH mifamrts AHSfar UTS il (231-1, aSst, He 3) manmukh agi-aan kumaarag paa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs, in ignorance, take the path of evil.
dfs oH fart ag aaH fess Il (231-2, west, He 3) har naam bisaari-aa baho karam drirh-aa-ay. They forget the Lord's Name, and in its place, they establish all sorts of rituals.
Ses FA TH SS NSM (231-2, 7a, 3 3) bhavjal doobay doojai bhaa-ay. ||3]| They drown in the terrifying world-ocean, in the love of duality. ||3]|
Hear at Hosta Ufss ATS | (231-2, TSH, He 3) maa-i-aa kaa muhtaaj pandit kahaavai. Driven crazy, infatuated by Maya, they call themselves Pandits - religious scholars;
fafimor ast ags By US I (231-3, TGs, He 3) bikhi-aa raataa bahut dukh paavai. stained with corruption, they suffer terrible pain.
AH at afe Aza fos ae ASS ISI (231-3, Test, He 3)
jam kaa gal jayvrhaa nit kaal santaavai. ||4]|
The noose of the Messenger of Death is around their necks; they are constantly tormented by death. ||4||
Tanfy AHATS Sfs o nS Il (231-3, ast, He 3) gurmukh jamkaal nayrh na aavai. The Messenger of Death does not even approach the Gurmukhs.
UGH TA Hate ABS Il (231-4, 7st, Hs 3) ha-umai doojaa sabad jalaavai. Through the Word of the Shabad, they burn away their ego and duality.
oH TS dfs TE We Mull (231-4, west, He 3) naamay raatay har gun gaavai. ||5|| Attuned to the Name, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||5]|
Hear aAt sast at ATS AHS Il (231-4, ast, v2 3) maa-i-aa daasee bhagtaa kee kaar kamaavai. Maya is the slave of the Lord's devotees; it works for them.
Tat Sa St HIG urs Il (231-5, aSst, v2 3) charnee laagai taa mahal paavai. One who falls at their feet attains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
He dt fegHe Aofa AN] Ell (231-5, ast, He 3) sad hee nirmal sahj samaavai. ||6]|| He is forever immaculate; he is absorbed in intuitive peace. | |6| |
dfs aa Hafs A Uses fenfs Aa HST I (231-5, west, He 3)
har kathaa suneh say Dhanvant diseh jug maahee.
Those who listen to the Lord's Sermon are seen to be the wealthy people in this world.
fsa a8 Afs foets notes uA aad Il (231-6, ast, He 3) tin ka-o sabh niveh an-din pooj karaahee. Everyone bows down to them, and adores them, night and day.
HdA We defo AMS HS HST MDI (231-6, aBst, He 3) sehjay gun raveh saachay man maahee. ||7|| They intuitively savor the Glories of the True Lord within their minds. ||7]||
ud Alsafe Fag AefeMr il 231-7, ast, v3 3) poorai satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa. The Perfect True Guru has revealed the Shabad;
3 ae Ae va fas wfenr It (231-7, ast, v8 3) tarai gun maytay cha-uthai chit laa-i-aa. it eradicates the three qualities, and attunes the consciousness to the fourth state.
soa ICH ufs Fon fhorfeur ceil (231-7, Test, He 3) naanak ha-umai maar barahm milaa-i-aa. ||8]|4|| O Nanak, subduing egotism, one is absorbed into God. ||8]||4||
ast HIS 3 Il (231-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
Gout Se us BE TUS Il (231-8, ast, vs 3) barahmaa vayd parhai vaad vakhaanai. Brahma studied the Vedas, but these lead only to debates and disputes.
Wists SHA MTU S UTS Il (231-8, Tea, He 3) antar taamas aap na pachhaanai. He is filled with darkness; he does not understand himself.
JT Us ue Ts ASE SS MAUI (231-9, ast, He 3) taa parabh paa-ay gur sabad vakhaanai. ||1]| And yet, if he chants the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he finds God. ||1]|
ad Ae ase feta ae o fe Il 231-9, ast, ve 3) gur sayvaa kara-o fir kaal na khaa-ay. So serve the Guru, and you shall not be consumed by death.
HoHe wo SH STS uA TIS il (231-9, Test, we 3) manmukh khaaDhay doojai bhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The self-willed manmukhs have been consumed by the love of duality. ||1||Pause| |
aaHfe yrat mrraat Ald i (231-10, ast, ue 3) gurmukh paraanee apraaDhee seeDhay. Becoming Gurmukh, the sinful mortals are purified.
ad a Aafe nists wef Ha tl (231-10, ast, v2 3)
gur kai sabad antar sahj reeDhay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they find intuitive peace and poise deep within.
Aa yg ufenr ae & Aafe AM QI (231-10, 7Gat, He 3)
mayraa parabh paa-i-aa gur kai sabad seeDhay. ||2||
I have found my God, through the Guru's Shabad, and I have been reformed. ||2| | Afsafe HS ufs orfu fare i (231-11, ast, us 3)
satgur maylay parabh aap milaa-ay. God Himself unites us in Union with the True Guru,
AS us AS a fs SES Il (231-11, west, He 3) mayray parabh saachay kai man bhaa-ay. when we become pleasing to the Mind of my True God.
dfs Te Wefo AafA ASS SII (231-12, west, He 3) har gun gaavahi sahj subhaa-ay. ||3]| They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, in the poise of celestial peace. ||3]|
fag dd AS SoH SHS Il (231-12, ast, 2 3) bin gur saachay bharam bhulaa-ay. Without the True Guru, they are deluded by doubt.
HOHY vid AT fe we Il (231-12, weet, He 3) manmukh anDhay sadaa bikh khaa-ay. The blind, self-willed manmukhs constantly eat poison.
AH 3S Adfs AST Sy UTS Ii! (231-13, aBst, He 3)
jam dand saheh sadaa dukh paa-ay. ||4||
They are beaten by the Messenger of Death with his rod, and they suffer in constant pain. ||4]|
THor 3 Ad ofa at Asaret il (231-13, ast, Hs 3) jamoo-aa na johai har kee sarnaa-ee.
The Messenger of Death does not catch sight of those who enter the Sanctuary of the Lord.
Jen Hfe Afs foe wet Il (231-13, TGs, He 3) ha-umai maar sach liv laa-ee. Subduing egotism, they lovingly center their consciousness on the True Lord.
Het gd ofa oft fee wet iui (231-14, ast, v2 3)
sadaa rahai har naam liv laa-ee. ||5|| They keep their consciousness constantly focused on the Lord's Name. ||5]|
Afsagd Aefs A Ae fasHe ufes Il (231-14, aSst, He 3) satgur sayveh say jan nirmal pavitaa. Those humble beings who serve the True Guru are pure and immaculate.
Ho fA@ ue feos AS Aa ATS Il (231-14, aSst, v2 3) man si-o man milaa-ay sabh jag jeetaa. Merging their minds into the Mind, they conquer the entire world.
feo fafa ane 3d HS HIST NEN (231-15, TES, 2 3) in biDh kusal tayrai mayray meetaa. ||6|| In this way, you too shall find happiness, O my friend. ||6] |
Asag AS A Sw US Il (231-15, 7st, ws 3) satguroo sayvay so fal paa-ay. Those who serve the True Guru are blessed with fruitful rewards.
fase on fear ny Tee I (231-15, west, He 3)
hirdai naam vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides in their hearts; selfishness and conceit depart from within them.
Mode Wat AXE SHS IDI (231-16, west, nz 3) anhad banee sabad vajaa-ay. ||7|| The unstruck melody of the Shabad vibrates for them. ||7]|
Afsagd 3 Ado ASS B Ala HS ove I (231-16, aSst, ve 3) satgur tay kavan kavan na seeDho mayray bhaa-ee. Who - who has not been purified by the True Guru, O my Siblings of Destiny?
saat Ata efs Ast uret Il (231-17, ast, v8 3) bhagtee seeDhay dar sobhaa paa-ee. The devotees are purified, and honored in His Court.
SOA TH STH Samrat UCUUIl (231-17, TCSt, He 3)
naanak raam naam vadi-aa-ee. ||8]|5]| O Nanak, greatness is in the Lord's Name. ||8]||5]]|
ast HIG 3 Il (231-17)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
3 Ue we SIH 3 AE I (231-17, weet, He 3) tarai gun vakhaanai bharam na jaa-ay. Those who speak of the three qualities - their doubts do not depart.
806 3 Selo Hats 6 UTS Il (231-18, ast, Hs 3) banDhan na tooteh mukat na paa-ay. Their bonds are not broken, and they do not obtain liberation.
Hats as Afsag Aa HFT NAM (231-18, ast, He 3) mukat daataa satgur jug maahi. ||1]| The True Guru is the Bestower of liberation in this age. ||1]|
aaHfe yrat SoH TSE It (231-19, Test, ve 3) gurmukh paraanee bharam gavaa-ay. Those mortals who become Gurmukh give up their doubts.
Hon ufs Gun of fee ote nail Jas Il (231-19, aes, v2 3)
sahj Dhun upjai har liv laa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The celestial music wells up, when they lovingly attune their consciousness to the Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
3 Te aS at fifa ara Il (231-19, aGet, He 3) tarai gun kaalai kee sir kaaraa. Those who are controlled by the three qualities have death hovering over their heads.
UST 2B2
oH 6 Vals Surssaas Il (232-1, ast, 2 3) naam na cheeteh upaavanhaaraa. They do not remember the Name of the Creator Lord.
Hf Aufs fefs ard Sar iI (232-1, ast, He 3) mar jameh fir vaaro vaaraa. ||2|| They die, and are reborn, over and over, again and again. ||2||
Mid TI 3 SSH B AT Il (232-1, ast, v2 3) anDhay guroo tay bharam na jaa-ee. Those whose guru is spiritually blind - their doubts are not dispelled.
HO efs war EA set il (232-2, ast, we 3) mool chhod laagay doojai bhaa-ee. Abandoning the Source of all, they have become attached to the love of duality.
fag at yrat fy ufo AHTET SI (232-2, west, He 3) bikh kaa maataa bikh maahi samaa-ee. ||3]| Infected with poison, they are immersed in poison. ||3]|
Hfent afs He AT SHS Il (232-2, ast, we 3) maa-i-aa kar mool jantar bharmaa-ay. Believing Maya to be the source of all, they wander in doubt.
ofs MG feAfoor BA se I (232-3, wat, we 3) har jee-o visri-aa doojai bhaa-ay. They have forgotten the Dear Lord, and they are in love with duality.
fan defs ad A usH afs ues gil (232-3, west, He 3)
jis nadar karay so param gat paa-ay. ||4]|
The supreme status is obtained only by those who are blessed with His Glance of Grace. ||4||
nists AS Mdfs A FISTS Il (232-3, aCHt, He 3) antar saach baahar saach vartaa-ay. One who has Truth pervading within, radiates Truth outwardly as well.
AY 5 SU A a Ta SUS I (232-4, aSat, ve 3) saach na chhapai jay ko rakhai chhapaa-ay. The Truth does not remain hidden, even though one may try to hide it.
fomrat asta Aft ASE NUN (232-4, ast, He 3) gi-aanee boojheh sahj subhaa-ay. ||5|| The spiritually wise know this intuitively. ||5||
anf vfs sfoor fee we | (232-4, aBat, ue 3) gurmukh saach rahi-aa liv laa-ay. The Gurmukhs keep their consciousness lovingly centered on the Lord.
ICH Hfeor Aafe ABE Il (232-5, Test, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa sabad jalaa-ay. Ego and Maya are burned away by the Word of the Shabad.
Hat ys Ara fs fare Well (232-5, ast, ws 3) mayraa parabh saachaa mayl milaa-ay. ||6] | My True God unites them in His Union. ||6]||
Afsag WS" AAE ASS Il (232-5, aSst, He 3) satgur daataa sabad sunaa-ay. The True Guru, The Giver, preaches the Shabad.
Wes Te ofr TIS I (232-6, ast, He 3) Dhaavat raakhai thaak rahaa-ay. He controls, and restrains, and holds still the wandering mind.
Us TI 3 ASt US WDM (232-6, ast, vs 3) pooray gur tay sojhee paa-ay. ||7]|| Understanding is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||7]||
nm aest fqrfe firafa fafs det i (232-6, ast, 8 3) aapay kartaa sarisat siraj jin go-ee. The Creator Himself has created the universe; He Himself shall destroy it.
fH fag BAT neg o AST Il (232-7, aes, vs 3) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ee. Without Him, there is no other at all.
Boa THY Fs AST CUE (232-7, TCs, ws 3) naanak gurmukh boojhai ko-ee. ||8||6]| O Nanak, how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, understand this! ||8]||6||
ast HIG 3 Il (232-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
oH MHA Taf urs Il (232-8, west, v2 3) naam amolak gurmukh paavai. The Gurmukhs obtain the Naam, the Priceless Name of the Lord.
OH Ae otf Hof ANTS Il (232-8, aes, He 3)
naamo sayvay naam sahj samaavai.
They serve the Name, and through the Name, they are absorbed in intuitive peace and poise.
nifys on dAat fos ae Il (232-8, west, ne 3) amrit naam rasnaa nit gaavai. With their tongues, they continually sing the Ambrosial Naam.
fA 3 faut ad A dfs GA US IU (232-8, agst, He 3) jis no kirpaa karay so har ras paavai. ||1]|| They obtain the Lord's Name; the Lord showers His Mercy upon them. ||1||
motes fase AUG HaretAT Il (232-9, aGHt, He 3) an-din hirdai japa-o jagdeesaa. Night and day, within your heart, meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
ToHfs ues uTH UE AMT NAN TIS il (232-9, aCe, we 3) gurmukh paava-o param pad sookhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukhs obtain the supreme state of peace. ||1]||Pause] |
food AY snr UsaA Il (232-10, aBat, He 3) hirdai sookh bha-i-aa pargaas. Peace comes to fill the hearts of those
aaHfy aefo AY TESA Il (232-10, aCt, He 3) gurmukh gaavahi sach guntaas. who, as Gurmukh, sing of the True Lord, the treasure of excellence.
anfs on fos defs SA Il (232-10, west, He 3) daasan daas nit hoveh daas. They become the constant slaves of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
fas aca Hfs Ae Bera QI (232-11, weet, Hs 3) garih kutamb meh sadaa udaas. ||2| | Within their households and families, they remain always detached. ||2| |
Hes Has Tafa & Tet Il (232-11, ast, ne 3) jeevan mukat gurmukh ko ho-ee. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, become Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive.
UH UeTag ure ASHt Il (232-11, ast, He 3) param padaarath paavai so-ee. They alone obtain the supreme treasure.
3 Te Ae fosne Tet Il (232-12, wet, vs 3) tarai gun maytay nirmal ho-ee. Eradicating the three qualities, they become pure.
Hon Afs fee ys Het Wil (232-12, ast, us 3) sehjay saach milai parabh so-ee. ||3]| They are intuitively absorbed in the True Lord God. ||3]|
Ha ada fr ulfs o ofE i (232-12, wat, v2 3) moh kutamb si-o pareet na ho-ay. Emotional attachment to family does not exist,
vw fose effor Ag APE I (232-13, aGst, He 3) jaa hirdai vasi-aa sach so-ay. when the True Lord abides within the heart.
aenfy Ho Sfaur omfag oF i (232-13, west, He 3) gurmukh man bayDhi-aa asthir ho-ay. The mind of the Gurmukh is pierced through and held steady.
JH Use FS AY AE Vil (232-13, west, ws 3) hukam pachhaanai boojhai sach so-ay. ||4| |
One who recognizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command understands the True Lord. [141 |
3 AIT H neg 3 AE I (232-14, ast, ve 3) too” kartaa mai avar na ko-ay. You are the Creator Lord - there is no other for me.
33 At o3 3 ufs GE It (232-14, aes, He 3) tujh sayvee tujh tay pat ho-ay. I serve You, and through You, I obtain honor.
fasur asta aret ug APE I (232-14, aGet, Hs 3) kirpaa karahi gaavaa parabh so-ay. God showers His Mercy, and I sing His Praises.
3H 330 AS Aa Hfs SE Ul (232-15, Test, v2 3) naam ratan sabh jag meh lo-ay. ||5|| The light of the jewel of the Naam permeates the entire world. ||5| |
aaHfe arat Het wait i (232-15, west, He 3) gurmukh banee meethee laagee. To the Gurmukhs, the Word of God's Bani seems so sweet.
nisd faan niafes fee walt Il (232-15, agst, He 3)
antar bigsai an-din liv laagee.
Deep within, their hearts blossom forth; night and day, they lovingly center themselves on the Lord.
Hon Ad fifemr ugAret il (232-16, aBst, He 3) sehjay sach mili-aa parsaadee. The True Lord is intuitively obtained, by His Grace.
Afsag ufeor us esarat Wel (232-16, aes, Hs 3) satgur paa-i-aa poorai vadbhaagee. ||6|| The True Guru is obtained by the destiny of perfect good fortune. ||6]|
ICH HHS PaHfS SU OA Il (232-16, TCH, He 3) ha-umai mamtaa durmat dukh naas. Egotism, possessiveness, evil-mindedness and suffering depart,
wa fase TH OH TESA Il (232-17, TSH, He 3) jab hirdai raam naam guntaas. when the Lord's Name, the Ocean of Virtue, comes to dwell within the heart.
aanfe afa yaet ys ATA Il (232-17, aGt, ve 3) gurmukh buDh pargatee parabh jaas. The intellect of the Gurmukhs is awakened, and they praise God,
wa fase sfenr vee fSerA IDI (232-17, west, He 3) jab hirdai ravi-aa charan nivaas. ||7]|| when the Lord's Lotus Feet come to dwell within the heart. ||7]|
fan oH Sf Het Ae UTES Il (232-18, TSH, He 3) jis naam day-ay so-ee jan paa-ay. They alone receive the Naam, unto whom it is given.
TaHfe HS nimy TSS Il (232-18, aSst, ne 3) gurmukh maylay aap gavaa-ay. The Gurmukhs shed their ego, and merge with the Lord.
fase ATS OH SATE Il (232-18, aGst, He 3) hirdai saachaa naam vasaa-ay. The True Name abides within their hearts.
SOA AIH AfS AHS ICI (232-19, ast, He 3) naanak sehjay saach samaa-ay. ||8]||7|| O Nanak, they are intuitively absorbed in the True Lord. ||8||7||
ast HIS 3 Il (232-19)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
Ho dt Ho Aetfeor F Aft ASE I (232-19, ast, v2 3) man hee man savaari-aa bhai sahj subhaa-ay. The mind has intuitively healed itself, through the Fear of God.
Us 233 Rafe He stam fee fe il (233-1, ast, He 3)
sabad man rangi-aa liv laa-ay. The mind is attuned to the Word of the Shabad; it is lovingly attuned to the Lord.
fon wife efor ys at sae UU (233-1, Tat, vs 3) nij ghar vasi-aa parabh kee rajaa-ay. ||1]| It abides within its own home, in harmony with the Lord's Will. ||1]|
Afsag Afedt ate wife it (233-1, ast, He 3) satgur sayvi-ai jaa-ay abhimaan. Serving the True Guru, egotistical pride departs,
dies uveha gat fours wail TIS i (233-2, aSat, vs 3) govid paa-ee-ai gunee niDhaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and the Lord of the Universe, the Treasure of Excellence, is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
HO Saat wT Aafe se ute il (233-2, ast, He 3)
man bairaagee jaa sabad bha-o khaa-ay.
The mind becomes detached and free of desire, when it experiences the Fear of God, through the Shabad.
na us fesner As 3S ofr pfeil (233-2, west, ne 3) mayraa parabh nirmalaa sabh tai rahi-aa samaa-ay. My Immaculate God is pervading and contained among all.
ad forout 3 fH feofe 120 (233-3, west, He 3) gur kirpaa tay milai milaa-ay. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, one is united in His Union. ||2||
dfs BAS A SA AY US Il (233-3, aGst, He 3) har daasan ko daas sukh paa-ay. The slave of the Lord's slave attains peace.
Aa ofg ug feo fafa user Are I (233-4, west, ne 3) mayraa har parabh in biDh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. My Lord God is found in this way.
Ufe fagur 3 TH TE WE Ill (233-4, ast, us 3) har kirpaa tay raam gun gaa-ay. ||3]|| By the Grace of the Lord, one comes to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
fog ag ries fas fe oth o oat fimrg I (233-4, aBHt, nH 3) Dharig baho jeevan jit har naam na lagai pi-aar. Cursed is that long life, during which love for the Lord's Name is not enshrined.
fgg AA Hast anfs HO THT i (233-5, aes, ne 3)
Dharig sayj sukhaalee kaaman moh gubaar.
Cursed is that comfortable bed which lures one into the darkness of attachment to sexual desire.
{36 HES HOH fAS SH UTE ISI (233-5, aBst, He 3)
tin safal janam jin naam aDhaar. ||4]|
Fruitful is the birth of that person who takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||
fon fon fos aca fas ofe utfs o SfE II (233-6, a@et, He 3) Dharig Dharig garihu kutamb jit har pareet na ho-ay. Cursed, cursed is that home and family, in which the love of the Lord is not embraced.
Het gts HIS A fe Te we AE Il (233-6, ast, v2 3) so-ee hamaaraa meet jo har gun gaavai so-ay. He alone is my friend, who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
dfs oH fear H meg 3 aS Null (233-7, ast, He 3) har naam binaa mai avar na ko-ay. ||5|| Without the Lord's Name, there is no other for me. ||5]|
Afsad 3 IH ats ufs wet Il (233-7, ast, Hs 3) satgur tay ham gat pat paa-ee. From the True Guru, I have obtained salvation and honor.
ofa oy fourfeur zy Rares fueTet Il (233-7, ast, He 3) har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa dookh sagal mitaa-ee. I have meditated on the Name of the Lord, and all my sufferings have been erased.
Ret mse ofa ott fs wet ell (233-8, west, v2 3) sadaa anand har naam liv laa-ee. ||6|| I am in constant bliss, lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name. ||6||
ata fufemt mn a Adte Afa set I (233-8, ast, He 3) gur mili-ai ham ka-o sareer suDh bha-ee. Meeting the Guru, I came to understand my body.
J@H Aa AS wale gTset I (233-9, ast, He 3) ha-umai tarisnaa sabh agan bujh-ee. The fires of ego and desire have been totally quenched.
fon au fine afa wet IDI (233-9, ast, He 3) binsay kroDh khimaa geh la-ee. ||7]|| Anger has been dispelled, and I have grasped hold of tolerance. ||7]|
ofa wit faut ad SH SS Il (233-9, aGst, 2 3) har aapay kirpaa karay naam dayvai. The Lord Himself showers His Mercy, and bestows the Naam.
Tanfy we a feaar BS Il (233-10, wea, He 3) gurmukh ratan ko virlaa layvai. How rare is that Gurmukh, who receives the jewel of the Naam.
SOA TE We Ta nig niss ICICI (233-10, ast, ne 3)
naanak gun gaavai har alakh abhayvai. ||8]|8]|
O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Unknowable, the Incomprehensible. ||8]||8]||
qe Afsas urrfe il (233-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta ast Saas HIS 3 I (233-11) raag ga-orhee bairaagan mehlaa 3. Raag Gauree Bairaagan, Third Mehl:
Afsag 3 A HO Sd 3 Sue as fenfs I 033-11, a@at aerate, ne 3)
satgur tay jo muh fayray tay vaimukh buray disann.
Those who turn their faces away from the True Guru, are seen to be unfaithful and evil.
mofes aa Hdmife fefs Far ar wdfs NAM (233-12, aGSt Foray, He 3)
an-din baDhay maaree-an fir vaylaa naa lahann. ||1]|
They shall be bound and beaten night and day; they shall not have this opportunity again. ||1||
dfs ofa aug faut ots i (233-12, aeat Soave, He 3) har har raakho kirpaa Dhaar. O Lord, please shower Your Mercy upon me, and save me!
AsHats Hote ys ofa fose ofs we Afs NA TIC i (233-12, aCat Saray, ue 3) satsangat maylaa-ay parabh har hirdai har gun saar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Lord God, please lead me to meet the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, that I may dwell upon the Glorious Praises of the Lord within my heart. ||1]|Pause] |
A sas dfs wee A Tenfe ate vse Il (233-13, ast Aaa, He 3) say bhagat har bhaavday jo gurmukh bhaa-ay chalann.
Those devotees are pleasing to the Lord, who as Gurmukh, walk in harmony with the Way of the Lord's Will.
ny efs Aet aate Hes HE dfs QM (233-13, Test Aoafs, He 3)
aap chhod sayvaa karan jeevat mu-ay rahann. ||2||
Subduing their selfishness and conceit, and performing selfless service, they remain dead while yet alive. ||2||
fan a fis uae 3 fen at fafs are Il (233-14, a@st Sorats, ve 3)
jis daa pind paraan hai tis kee sir kaar.
The body and the breath of life belong to the One - perform the greatest service to Him.
6g faS nog fern ofa ait fase ofs ai (233-14, a@st aerate, He 3) oh ki-o manhu visaaree-ai har rakhee-ai hirdai Dhaar. ||3]| Why forget Him from your mind? Keep the Lord enshrined in your heart. ||3]|
ofy fufeont ufs ureint ary Hfemt Ay ofE I (233-15, aGet Sorat, He 3)
naam mili-ai pat paa-ee-ai naam mani-ai sukh ho-ay.
Receiving the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains honor; believing in the Naam, one is at peace.
Afsag 3 ou ureht ath fe ys APE ISI (233-16, aGSt Saray, He 3) satgur tay naam paa-ee-ai karam milai parabh so-ay. ||4]| The Naam is obtained from the True Guru; by His Grace, God is found. ||4| |
Afsag 3 A ug So Gf gre of feafs II (233-16, aext Sorat, ne 3) satgur tay jo muhu fayray o-ay bharamday naa tikann. They turn their faces away from the True Guru; they continue to wander aimlessly.
Udfs wimg 3 seet fete fen|et ue udfs Null (233-17, Test Foray, Hz 3) Dharat asmaan na jhal-ee vich vistaa pa-ay pachann. ||5]| They are not accepted by the earth or the sky; they fall into manure, and rot. ||5]|
feg na sath gorfeur va oaGat ute Il (233-17, aGat dorafs, He 3) ih jag bharam bhulaa-i-aa moh thag-ulee paa-ay. This world is deluded by doubt - it has taken the drug of emotional attachment.
fast Afsag sfeur fae afs fae HE EN (233-18, aGst Sorafs, He 3) jinaa satgur bhayti-aa tin nayrh na bhitai maa-ay. ||6|| Maya does not draw near those who have met with the True Guru. ||6]|
Afsag Aefe A Ae ICH HS TSte i (233-18, aSat aoats, ne 3)
satgur sayvan so sohnay ha-umai mail gavaa-ay.
Those who serve the True Guru are very beautiful; they cast off the filth of selfishness and conceit.
UST 238 Rafe gs A fSeHs voto Afsagd STE DI (234-1, west Seas, v2 3)
sabad ratay say nirmalay chaleh satgur bhaa-ay. ||7| | Those who are attuned to the Shabad are immaculate and pure. They walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||7]|
fs ys ost Sa FF um auth foe i 234-1, west aerate, we 3)
har parabh daataa ayk too” too” aapay bakhas milaa-ay.
O Lord God, You are the One and Only Giver; You forgive us, and unite us with Yourself.
He sod Adstast fag ave fos Sate cael (234-2, aGst Serafs, ve 3) jan naanak sarnaagatee ji-o bhaavai tivai chhadaa-ay. ||8]|1]|9]| Servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; if it is Your Will, please save him! ||8]|1]|9]|
TH Ast usst HIG 8 ATIG (234-3) raag ga-orhee poorbee mehlaa 4 karhalay Raag Gauree Poorbee, Fourth Mehl, Karhalay:
qe Afsas yrrfe Il (234-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AIS HS uTerion fa fiesba afs wfe i (234-4, west yeh, ne 4)
karhalay man pardaysee-aa ki-o milee-ai har maa-ay.
O my wandering mind, you are like a camel - how will you meet the Lord, your Mother?
ae fa us urfeor ate fifemr fine orf nai (234-4, west yset, ws 4)
gur bhaag poorai paa-i-aa gal mili-aa pi-aaraa aa-ay. ||1||
When I found the Guru, by the destiny of perfect good fortune, my Beloved came and embraced me. ||1]|
Ho ado Afsag use fore wan TIS i (234-5, aSat uaat, ve 4) man karhalaa satgur purakh Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O camel-like mind, meditate on the True Guru, the Primal Being. ||1||Pause] |
Ho adder sterdior afs IH aH fimrfe i (234-5, ast yout, us 4) man karhalaa veechaaree-aa har raam naam Dhi-aa-ay. O camel-like mind, contemplate the Lord, and meditate on the Lord's Name.
fra Sar Hatha afe mm we SStE Ii (234-6, aGat yseh, ue 4) jithai laykhaa mangee-ai har aapay la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||2|| When you are called to answer for your account, the Lord Himself shall release you.
21 |
He adder ifs fener HS wait TBH orfe il (234-6, aSst yaet, Hs 4)
man karhalaa at nirmalaa mal laagee ha-umai aa-ay.
O camel-like mind, you were once very pure; the filth of egotism has now attached itself to you.
ussfe fug ufs ofe fimre feefs der ue Si (234-7, rat vast, He 4)
partakh pir ghar naal pi-aaraa vichhurh chotaa khaa-ay. ||3] |
Your Beloved Husband is now manifest before you in your own home, but you are separated from Him, and you suffer such pain! ||3]|
Ho adoer AS ubsur ofe fee aris arate i (234-7, aat yoeh, ve 4) man karhalaa mayray pareetamaa har ridai bhaal bhaalaa-ay. O my beloved camel-like mind, search for the Lord within your own heart.
Curfe fas 5 wset ag fase ofe Serf lei (234-8, aSst use, He 4)
upaa-ay kitai na labh-ee gur hirdai har daykhaa-ay. ||4]|
He cannot be found by any device; the Guru will show you the Lord within your heart. [141]
Ho adoer AS utsur feg df= ofa fee wfe i (234-8, wet yoeh, ue 4) man karhalaa mayray pareetamaa din rain har liv laa-ay. O my beloved camel-like mind, day and night, lovingly attune yourself to the Lord.
we mfe urefs da Hoet aT AS ofa Hote iui 234-9, wat yset, ue 4) ghar jaa-ay paavahi rang mahlee gur maylay har maylaa-ay. ||5||
Return to your own home, and find the palace of love; meet the Guru, and meet the Lord. ||5||
Ho aoe SHS Aa unig SF SATE i (234-10, west yet, ws 4) man karhalaa too’ meet mayraa pakhand lobh tajaa-ay. O camel-like mind, you are my friend; abandon hypocrisy and greed.
undfs Sat urd FH Ss Se AATE Wel (234-10, aGat yaet, Hs 4)
pakhand lobhee maaree-ai jam dand day-ay sajaa-ay. ||6]||
The hypocritical and the greedy are struck down; the Messenger of Death punishes them with his club. ||6]|
Ho Aso HS YTS FAB ds SIH TSTS Il (234-10, ast yor, we 4)
man karhalaa mayray paraan too” mail pakhand bharam gavaa-ay.
O camel-like mind, you are my breath of life; rid yourself of the pollution of hypocrisy and doubt.
of uifys Ag afs ufour fife Hast He ots ATE WON (234-11, west yee, Hs 4) har amrit sar gur poori-aa mil sangtee mal leh jaa-ay. ||7]|
The Perfect Guru is the Ambrosial Pool of the Lord's Nectar; join the Holy Congregation, and wash away this pollution. ||7]||
Ho adder He fimrfour fea as at fra AeTte i (234-12, west use, ue 4) man karhalaa mayray pi-aari-aa ik gur kee sikh sunaa-ay. O my dear beloved camel-like mind, listen only to the Teachings of the Guru.
feg Ho wfeor unfeor nifs afa o aet fe CH (234-12, west yset, He 4)
in moh maa-i-aa pasri-aa ant saath na ko-ee jaa-ay. ||8]|
This emotional attachment to Maya is so pervasive. Ultimately, nothing shall go along with anyone. ||8||
Ho adder Ad AAT fe usg Shor ufs us ii (234-13, aSst use, ve 4)
man karhalaa mayray saajnaa har kharach lee-aa pat paa-ay.
O camel-like mind, my good friend, take the supplies of the Lord's Name, and obtain honor.
dfs waa Uatfemr afe orf afer afs ofe nei (234-13, a@at uset, He 4)
har dargeh painaa-i-aa har aap la-i-aa gal laa-ay. ||9||
In the Court of the Lord, you shall be robed with honor, and the Lord Himself shall embrace you. ||9]|
Ho ade afs Hfoor aaHfe ars THE i (234-14, west yee, us 4) man karhalaa gur mani-aa gurmukh kaar kamaa-ay.
O camel-like mind, one who surrenders to the Guru becomes Gurmukh, and works for the Lord.
Gd vid afs Hest Ae Soa dfs Hate AOU (234-15, aGet yseh, He 4) gur aagai kar jod-rhee jan naanak har maylaa-ay. ||10||1||
Offer your prayers to the Guru; O servant Nanak, He shall unite you with the Lord. || 10] [21]
ast HIS S Il (234-15) ga-orhee mehlaa 4. Gauree, Fourth Mehl:
Ho adder Sarde Stats Sy ANTS Il (234-15, Test, uz 4) man karhalaa veechaaree-aa veechaar daykh samaal. O contemplative camel-like mind, contemplate and look carefully.
a6 fefs aa so SHior fus ants fee foo 9 (234-16, a@Ht, He 4)
ban fir thakay ban vaasee-aa pir gurmat ridai nihaal. ||1]|
The forest-dwellers have grown weary of wandering in the forests; following the Guru's Teachings, see your Husband Lord within your heart. ||1]|
Ho AdIH Ts dee AHS AU FITS il (234-16, Test, He 4) man karhalaa gur govind samaal. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O camel-like mind, dwell upon the Guru and the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||
Ho Adder Shard Hone Stam Hot ALS I (234-17, aSst, He 4)
man karhalaa veechaaree-aa manmukh faathi-aa mahaa jaal.
O camel-like contemplative mind, the self-willed manmukhs are caught in the great net.
qonfa yret nas 3 ofe af on AS N21 (234-18, ast, He 4) gurmukh paraanee mukat hai har har naam samaal. ||2| |
The mortal who becomes Gurmukh is liberated, dwelling upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2]|
Ho adder He flmrfoor AsHafs Afsag sts | (234-18, aeHt, He 4)
man karhalaa mayray pi-aari-aa satsangat satgur bhaal.
O my dear beloved camel-like mind, seek the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and the True Guru.
H3nafs ofa ats fonrehn afe afs 38 3d ofS Sil (234-19, vest, v2 4)
satsangat lag har Dhi-aa-ee-ai har har chalai tayrai naal. ||3]|
Joining the Sat Sangat, meditate on the Lord, and the Lord, Har, Har, shall go along with you. ||3]|
Ho Ade essai os Sa sels feats i (234-19, aSst, ue 4)
man karhalaa vadbhaagee-aa har ayk nadar nihaal. O very fortunate camel-like mind, with one Glance of Grace from the Lord, you shall be enraptured.
Ua 23u uify gave echa Afsag vee ANTS ISI (235-1, agst, He 4)
aap chhadaa-ay chhutee-ai satgur charan samaal. ||4]| If the Lord Himself saves you, then you shall be saved. Dwell upon the Feet of the True Guru. ||4]|
Ho adver Ad fumrfenr fefs sot AfS Fors I (235-1, aGst, He 4) man karhalaa mayray pi-aari-aa vich dayhee jot samaal. O my dear beloved camel-like mind, dwell upon the Divine Light within the body.
afs 68 fafa om feuttemr ofe ats act fens ull (235-2, aBst, He 4)
gur na-o niDh naam vikhaali-aa har daat karee da-i-aal. ||5||
The Guru has shown me the nine treasures of the Naam. The Merciful Lord has bestowed this gift. ||5]|
Ho asa 3 due vsaet als feats il 235-3, west, we 4) man karhalaa too™ chanchlaa chaturaa-ee chhad vikraal. O camel-like mind, you are so fickle; give up your cleverness and corruption.
dfs ofs on Ante Safe Hats ad nis aT Ell (235-3, west, Hs 4)
har har naam samaal too” har mukat karay ant kaal. ||6]|
Dwell upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; at the very last moment, the Lord shall liberate you. ||6]|
Ho adder essai J famirg J3q AHS Il (235-4, west, we 4)
man karhalaa vadbhaagee-aa too” gi-aan ratan samaal.
O camel-like mind, you are so very fortunate; dwell upon the jewel of spiritual wisdom.
as fomrg usa ofa ofeor AN Hfemst AHAMTS IDI (235-4, Tet, v8 4)
gur gi-aan kharhag hath Dhaari-aa jam maari-arhaa jamkaal. ||7||
You hold in your hands the sword of the Guru's spiritual wisdom; with this destroyer of death, kill the Messenger of Death. ||7]||
nists faurg Ho aade afk sefa wate ahs i (235-5, ast, ue 4)
antar niDhaan man karhalay bharam bhaveh baahar bhaal.
The treasure is deep within, O camel-like mind, but you wander around outside in doubt, searching for it.
Tg use ust sfeur ofs AAS Bas STS Ici (235-5, TCst, H2 4)
gur purakh pooraa bhayti-aa har sajan laDh-rhaa naal. ||8]|
Meeting the Perfect Guru, the Primal Being, you shall discover that the Lord, your Best Friend, is with you. ||8] |
dfat Jas HS AdIG hs Sa AST ANTS I (235-6, ast, He 4)
rang rat-rhay man karhalay har rang sadaa samaal.
You are engrossed in pleasures, O camel-like mind; dwell upon the Lord's lasting love instead!
dfs da ae & Gad Te AS Age ANTS NCI (235-6, aes, He 4) har rang kaday na utrai gur sayvaa sabad samaal. ||9||
The color of the Lord's Love never fades away; serve the Guru, and dwell upon the Word of the Shabad. ||9]|
JH Udt Ho adds dfs 3eeg uTY nafs Il (235-7, aCHt, He 4) ham pankhee man karhalay har tarvar purakh akaal. We are birds, O camel-like mind; the Lord, the Immortal Primal Being, is the tree.
zasat TaHfy ufent AS BSA SH AMT NAOMI (235-7, ASS, He 4)
vadbhaagee gurmukh paa-i-aa jan naanak naam samaal. ||10]|2]| The Gurmukhs are very fortunate - they find it. O servant Nanak, dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||10]|2]|
Ta ACSt IMrsdt HIS u nAeudmMI (235-9) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees:
q@ Afsan ass uTY Te YATE Il (235-9)
ik-o’kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
wa fed Ho Hfs ATS AHS Il (235-10, west ards, He 5)
jab ih man meh karat gumaanaa. When this mind is filled with pride,
3a feg seg fess faarar Il (235-10, 78st anrdct, v2 5) tab ih baavar firat bigaanaa. then it wanders around like a madman and a lunatic.
wa feg gor wae at Stor it (235-10, at aurset, v2 5) jab ih hoo-aa sagal kee reenaa. But when it becomes the dust of all,
3 sHebor ufe wife star wal (235-11, ast gursct, vs 5) taa tay rama-ee-aa ghat ghat cheenaa. ||1]|| then it recognizes the Lord in each and every heart. ||1]|
HdA HIS SG HAAlot Il (235-11, aGst anrsct, ns 5) sahj suhaylaa fal maskeenee. The fruit of humility is intuitive peace and pleasure.
Afsag nus Hfs oe Stet wall TIC tl (235-11, aBst arse, ne 5) satgur apunai mohi daan deenee. ||1|| rahaa-o. My True Guru has given me this gift. ||1]]Pause]|
vg fan a@ feo wWofh He I (235-12, ast ardet, 2 5) jab kis ka-o ih jaanas mandaa. When he believes others to be bad,
3a Aa feR Hofs Set Il (235-12, ast aurdct, He 5) tab saglay is mayleh fandaa. then everyone lays traps for him.
Ha 3a Fa feats varet I (235-12, aBSt anrdet, He 5) mayr tayr jab ineh chukaa-ee. But when he stops thinking in terms of ‘mine’ and ‘yours’,
a3 fen Afar act Saves NM (235-13, aSst anrset, ne 5) taa tay is sang nahee bairaa-ee. ||2| | then no one is angry with him. |[2||
wa fefe mrt mrt Urdt Il (235-13, a@st anrsct, v2 5) jab in apunee apnee Dhaaree. When he clings to 'my own, my own’,
sa fen a8 3 HAAG ad I (235-13, aGst arddt, He 5) tab is ka-o hai muskal bhaaree. then he is in deep trouble.
va fefe ageag USTST I (235-14, aGSt ardet, He 5) jab in karnaihaar pachhaataa. But when he recognizes the Creator Lord,
3a fen 3 ordt fas SST NSN (235-14, ast arsct, He 5) tab is no naahee kichh taataa. ||3]| then he is free of torment. ||3]|
wa fefs mre afa& Hao i (235-14, aGst amrdsct, 2 5) jab in apuno baaDhi-o mohaa. When he entangles himself in emotional attachment,
me Ate Ae Af ATT Il (235-15, Test arses, Hu: 5) aavai jaa-ay sadaa jam johaa. he comes and goes in reincarnation, under the constant gaze of Death.
wa feA 3 AS faoA SAH Il (235-15, ast avrset, He 5) jab is tay sabh binsay bharmaa. But when all his doubts are removed,
Se ard J USAT Ill (235-15, aSSt gnrdct,, ne 5) bhayd naahee hai paarbrahmaa. ||4|| then there is no difference between him and the Supreme Lord God. ||4]|
wa fete fxs afs HS SET Il (235-16, west anrdet, He 5) jab in kichh kar maanay bhaydaa. When he perceives differences,
BaF TY ST Mg ET Il (235-16, Tat aorsst,, us 5) tab tay dookh dand ar khaydaa. then he suffers pain, punishment and sorrow.
wa fefs Sa Sat gfsnr i (235-16, west arsed, vs 5) jab in ayko aykee boojhi-aa. But when he recognizes the One and Only Lord,
3a 3 fen 3 Ag fag Afsur ull (235-17, rest aorsct, Hs 5) tab tay is no sabh kichh soojhi-aa. ||5|| he understands everything. ||5||
aa feg oe wfeur nreet il (235-17, aGst ands, we 5) jab ih Dhaavai maa-i-aa arthee. When he runs around for the sake of Maya and riches,
od fguse o0 FSA wet Il (235-17, aeat amrdsct, 18 5) nah tariptaavai nah tis laathee. he is not satisfied, and his desires are not quenched.
aa fen 3 fea dS AGe I (235-18, ast ards, He 5) jab is tay ih ho-i-o ja-ulaa.
But when he runs away from Maya,
ute ofa vat Sfs aBar Ell (235-18, AGS arse, He 5)
peechhai laag chalee uth ka-ulaa. ||6|| then the Goddess of Wealth gets up and follows him. ||6]|
ats fasur Ag Afsag fife@ i 235-18, a@st anrdct, He 5) kar kirpaa ja-o satgur mili-o. When, by His Grace, the True Guru is met,
Ho Hed Hfo Shue Af i (235-19, rat amrdet, He 5)
man mandar meh deepak jali-o. the lamp is lit within the temple of the mind.
ats oe at ASt ast Il (235-19, aGst auract, He 5) jeet haar kee sojhee karee. When he realizes what victory and defeat really are,
38 fen we at atts udt NDI (235-19, aBst anrdct, 2 5) ta-o is ghar kee keemat paree. ||7]|| then he comes to appreciate the true value of his own home. ||7]||
UST IBE
AIS ASS AS fs Sat il (236-1, aGst gnrrsdt, ve 5) karan karaavan sabh kichh aykai. The One Lord is the Creator of all things, the Cause of causes.
nmt ofa state faster i (236-1, aGat aurdct, ue 5) aapay buDh beechaar bibaykai. He Himself is wisdom, contemplation and discerning understanding.
efa 5 33 AS A A I (236-1, CH Tors, ve 5) door na nayrai sabh kai sangaa. He is not far away; He is near at hand, with all.
AY AIS SSA Ts Fa NCUA (236-2, west anrdet, 2 5) sach saalaahan naanak har rangaa. ||8||1|| So praise the True One, O Nanak, with love! ||8]|1]|
ast HIS U Il (236-2)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Td Ast SF SH Bal Il (236-2, west, He 5) gur sayvaa tay naamay laagaa. Serving the Guru, one is committed to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fan a@ fifeor faa HASte Sa I (236-2, 7eHt, He 5)
tis ka-o mili-aa jis mastak bhaagaa.
It is received only by those who have such good destiny inscribed upon their foreheads.
fan a fase afenr Afe II (236-3, aGst, He 5)
tis kai hirdai ravi-aa so-ay.
The Lord dwells within their hearts.
HO 36 Ase fesse dfE IAI (236-3, ast, He 5)
man tan seetal nihchal ho-ay. ||1|| Their minds and bodies become peaceful and stable. ||1]|
MAT atase afs He AT Il (236-4, ast, He 5) aisaa keertan kar man mayray. O my mind, sing such Praises of the Lord,
ata Bo A ath SF Ul FHS Il 236-4, ast, Hs 5) eehaa oohaa jo kaam tayrai. ||1]| rahaa-o. which shall be of use to you here and hereafter. ||1]|Pause| |
WA AUS 3C nue ATE Il (236-4, TCH, He 5) jaas japat bha-o apdaa jaa-ay. Meditating on Him, fear and misfortune depart,
Wes HOT nis OTE Il (236-5, TSH, 8 5) Dhaavat manoo-aa aavai thaa-ay. and the wandering mind is held steady.
WH FuS fefs sy S Ha Il (236-5, Tes, ws 5) jaas japat fir dookh na laagai. Meditating on Him, suffering shall never again overtake you.
WH AUS fea IBN Sra MQ (236-5, ast, He 5) jaas japat ih ha-umai bhaagai. ||2|| Meditating on Him, this ego runs away. ||2||
WA AUS SA wiefa Use I (236-5, west, H2 5) jaas japat vas aavahi panchaa. Meditating on Him, the five passions are overcome.
WH Hus fee nifys Aa I (236-6, west, ne 5) jaas japat ridai amrit sanchaa. Meditating on Him, Ambrosial Nectar is collected in the heart.
WA Hus fea feAar gs Il (236-6, ast, He 5) jaas japat ih tarisnaa bujhai. Meditating on Him, this desire is quenched.
WH Aus dfs waar fAS ISI (236-6, ast, He 5) jaas japat har dargeh sijhai. ||3]| Meditating on Him, one is approved in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
?wA Aus afe fefa wre Il (236-7, west, He 5) jaas japat kot miteh apraaDh. Meditating on Him, millions of mistakes are erased.
WH Aus dfs Jefe AT Il (236-7, west, He 5) jaas japat har hoveh saaDh. Meditating on Him, one becomes Holy, blessed by the Lord.
WH AUS HO ASS de Il (236-7, aBat, He 5) jaas japat man seetal hovai. Meditating on Him, the mind is cooled and soothed.
WH AUS HS Aaet FS lgil (236-8, ast, He 5) jaas japat mal saglee khovai. ||4|| Meditating on Him, all filth is washed away. ||4||
WH AUS 336 Tf fs Il (236-8, ast, v2 5) jaas japat ratan har milai. Meditating on Him, the jewel of the Lord is obtained.
wdfa o es ofa Afar fos il (236-8, west, He 5) bahur na chhodai har sang hilai. One is reconciled with the Lord, and shall not abandon Him again.
WH AUS aet FAS STH Il (236-9, TCH, ve 5) jaas japat ka-ee baikunth vaas. Meditating on Him, many acquire a home in the heavens.
WA AUS AY Ada feeA IUll (236-9, Test, He 5) jaas japat sukh sahj nivaas. ||5]| Meditating on Him, one abides in intuitive peace. ||5||
wA Aus feo mais 3 Us I (236-9, Test, H2 5) jaas japat ih agan na pohat. Meditating on Him, one is not affected by this fire.
WH AUS fg ae o HIS Il (236-10, aBat, 2 5) jaas japat ih kaal na johat. Meditating on Him, one is not under the gaze of Death.
WH AUS Sa fSgHs HA Il (236-10, TCH, He 5) jaas japat tayraa nirmal maathaa. Meditating on Him, your forehead shall be immaculate.
WH AUS Ade Ty BT IlEll (236-10, 7Gst, uz 5) jaas japat saglaa dukh laathaa. ||6|| Meditating on Him, all pains are destroyed. ||6||
WH HUS HAAS AT 3 FS Il (236-11, Tes, ws 5) jaas japat muskal kachhoo na banai. Meditating on Him, no difficulties are encountered.
WH AUS Afs MSIs WS Il (236-11, aSst, v2 5) jaas japat sun anhat Dhunai. Meditating on Him, one hears the unstruck melody.
?wA Aus fe foone AE I (236-11, west, He 5) jaas japat ih nirmal so-ay. Meditating on Him, one acquires this pure reputation.
WH AUS AHS Alor dfE MDI (236-12, ast, v2 5)
jaas japat kamal seeDhaa ho-ay. ||7]||
Meditating on Him, the heart-lotus is turned upright. ||7]|| ata As fenfe As Cufs at II (236-12, west, He 5)
gur subh darisat sabh oopar karee. The Guru has bestowed His Glance of Grace upon all,
fan at fase HE S Tat il (236-12, aes, we 5) jis kai hirdai mantar day haree. within whose hearts the Lord has implanted His Mantra.
uds atese ffs SAS YT Il (236-13, TEs, we 5) akhand keertan tin bhojan chooraa. The unbroken Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is their food and nourishment.
OT aoe fA ASAT UT NTI (236-13, Test, He 5) kaho naanak jis satgur pooraa. ||8]||2|| Says Nanak, they have the Perfect True Guru. ||8]|2]|
TCS HIS U Il (236-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
ae a Rae fee nists ad il (236-14, ast, He 5) gur kaa sabad rid antar Dhaarai. Those who implant the Word of the Guru's Shabad within their hearts
us Hot fA@ Aa fees Il (236-14, wea, He 5) panch janaa si-o sang nivaardi. cut their connections with the five passions.
on feet afe aed sh i (236-14, aGat, Hs 5) das indree kar raakhai vaas. They keep the ten organs under their control;
SA MISH OE UsgA INA (236-15, aGHt, He 5) taa kai aatmai ho-ay pargaas. ||1]|| their souls are enlightened. ||1||
MAT fesst ot & Sf Il (236-15, aBHt, He 5) aisee darirh-taa taa kai ho-ay. They alone acquire such stability,
Ww ag efeur ufeor us AE A TIE Il (236-15, TBH, He 5) jaa ka-o da-i-aa ma-i-aa parabh so-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. whom God blesses with His Mercy and Grace. ||1]||Pause] |
WHO PAS AT a SA ANTS Il (236-16, aes, He 5) Saajan dusat jaa kai ayk samaanai. Friend and foe are one and the same to them.
Aa Foe Sat farwrs Il (236-16, ast, He 5) jaytaa bolan taytaa gi-aanai. Whatever they speak is wisdom.
HS" Hos SST OH Il (236-16, west, v2 5) jaytaa sunnaa taytaa naam. Whatever they hear is the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ast Uug Sz fore Ill (236-17, west, He 5) jaytaa paykhan taytaa Dhi-aan. ||2|| Whatever they see is meditation. ||2||
Hon Was AoA ALE Il (236-17, ast, He 5) sehjay jaagan sehjay so-ay. They awaken in peace and poise; they sleep in peace and poise.
Hon ost ate A OPE I (236-17, aes, H 5) sehjay hotaa jaa-ay so ho-ay. That which is meant to be, automatically happens.
Hofa FI a ATA St TAT Il (236-18, west, v2 5) sahj bairaag sehjay hee hasnaa. In peace and poise, they remain detached; in peace and poise, they laugh.
Hon JU AoA dt AUST Sli (236-18, ast, ve 5) sehjay choop sehjay hee japnaa. ||3]|| In peace and poise, they remain silent; in peace and poise, they chant. ||3]|
Hon SHO HoH SE Il (236-18, ast, v2 5) sehjay bhojan sehjay bhaa-o. In peace and poise they eat; in peace and poise they love.
Hon fufeS Aas eas il (236-18, aSHt, He 5) sehjay miti-o sagal duraa-o. The illusion of duality is easily and totally removed.
Hon dot AY Aa ll (236-19, west, Hs 5) sehjay ho-aa saaDhoo sang. They naturally join the Saadh Sangat, the Society of the Holy.
Rofa fufeS ursqan fora sil (236-19, rat, He 5) sahj mili-o paarbarahm nisang. ||4] | In peace and poise, they meet and merge with the Supreme Lord God. ||4||
Han fas ufo Aafa Beret il (236-19, west, ne 5) sehjay garih meh sahj udaasee. They are at peace in their homes, and they are at peace while detached.
UST IBD
Hon efaar 3a at At il (237-1, west, v2 5) sehjay dubiDhaa tan kee naasee. In peace, their bodies' duality is eliminated.
W a Adfa Hie ster mises Il (237-1, west, v2 5) jaa kai sahj man bha-i-aa anand. Bliss comes naturally to their minds.
a a sfeur ugHTSe MUNI (237-1, Test, Hz 5) taa ka-o bhayti-aa parmaanand. ||5]| They meet the Lord, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss. ||5||
Han nits ut& any i (237-2, a@t, ue 5)
sehjay amrit pee-o naam.
In peaceful poise, they drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hon ate Hat x VS Il (237-2, ast, He 5)
sehjay keeno jee-a ko daan. In peace and poise, they give to the poor.
Adon Aa vfs wiTSH arr Il (237-2, aSst, He 5) sahj kathaa meh aatam rasi-aa. Their souls naturally delight in the Lord's Sermon.
a a Afar mifsot fame well (237-3, a@st, v2 5) taa kai sang abhinaasee vasi-aa. ||6|| The Imperishable Lord abides with them. ||6||
Hon “AS mAfag atfenr | (237-3, aSst, vs 5) sehjay aasan asthir bhaa-i-aa. In peace and poise, they assume the unchanging position.
Hon M6ds Ase SA fen I (237-3, aSst, He 5) sehjay anhat sabad vajaa-i-aa. In peace and poise, the unstruck vibration of the Shabad resounds.
Hon Jz Saag ATfEne Il (237-4, west, He 5) sehjay run jhunkaar suhaa-i-aa. In peace and poise, the celestial bells resound.
a a wife usgon ANfeur HDI (237-4, aBet, He 5) taa kai ghar paarbarahm samaa-i-aa. ||7]|| Within their homes, the Supreme Lord God is pervading. ||7]||
Hon A aS ufsG ATH Il (237-4, aS, 2 5) sehjay jaa ka-o pari-o karmaa. With intuitive ease, they meet the Lord, according to their karma.
Ada Ie Sfe AT WIHT Il (237-5, aSst, v2 5) sehjay gur bhayti-o sach Dharmaa. With intuitive ease, they meet with the Guru, in the true Dharma.
W a Add ster A ATE Il (237-5, ast, He 5) jaa kai sahj bha-i-aa so jaanai. Those who know, attain the poise of intuitive peace.
SOA VHA STA ATAES ICSI (237-5, TSH, He 5) naanak daas taa kai kurbaanai. ||8]||3]| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||8]|3]|
ast HIS U Il (237-6)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
YSH ads SAS Sham | (237-6, west, vs 5) parathmay garabh vaas tay tari-aa. First, they come forth from the womb.
uz a@sx aes Afar Afar il (237-6, west, ue 5) putar kaltar kutamb sang juri-aa. They become attached to their children, spouses and families.
Sno uifeax yas FT Aus ll Asus TeQ Acad TUT Al (237-6, aSat, us 5) bhojan anik parkaar baho kapray. sarpar gavan karhigay bapuray. ||1]|| The foods of various sorts and appearances will surely pass away, O wretched mortal!
[21|
ALG MAGS A AG B Sd Il (237-7, ast, He 5) kavan asthaan jo kabahu na tardi. What is that place which never perishes?
aze Aa fas vous gt dl Joe Il (237-7, ast, v2 5) kavan sabad jit durmat harai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. What is that Word by which the dirt of the mind is removed? ||1]|Pause] |
féz udt ufo Asus HIS" Il (237-8, TSH, He 5) indar puree meh sarpar marnaa. In the Realm of Indra, death is sure and certain.
¥dH udt fease odt Taar Il (237-8, aTSat, v2 5) barahm puree nihchal nahee rahnaa. The Realm of Brahma shall not remain permanent.
fre udt at dfear arer | (237-9, west, v2 5)
siv puree kaa ho-igaa kaalaa. The Realm of Shiva shall also perish.
3 ae whnr faofh fase 12H (237-9, aGat, H8 5)
tarai gun maa-i-aa binas bitaalaa. ||2| | The three dispositions, Maya and the demons shall vanish. ||2]|
fats 3a Use aes Mig SS Il (237-9, TSH, He 5) gir tar Dharan gagan ar taaray. The mountains, the trees, the earth, the sky and the stars;
of AA uzS USA Stes Il (237-10, aSst, He 5) rav Sas pavan paavak neeraaray. the sun, the moon, the wind, water and fire;
feon df= sas vig SET Il (237-10, west, He 5) dinas rain barat ar bhaydaa. day and night, fasting days and their determination;
AAS fAf_fS fasrfsat Fer Si (237-10, ast, He 5) saasat simrit binashigay baydaa. ||3]|| the Shaastras, the Simritees and the Vedas shall pass away. ||3]||
Stee te Vga Vet i (237-11, west, v2 5) tirath dayv dayhuraa pothee. The sacred shrines of pilgrimage, gods, temples and holy books;
He fea AD ura dst Il (237-11, west, He 5)
maalaa tilak soch paak hotee.
rosaries, ceremonial tilak marks on the forehead, meditative people, the pure, and the performers of burnt offerings;
Ost sa@fs usAes Sa Il (237-11, west, He 5) Dhotee dand-ut parsaadan bhogaa. wearing loin cloths, bowing in reverence and the enjoyment of sacred foods
TS Ada AS Gal iSil (237-12, ast, He 5) gavan karaigo saglo logaa. ||4]| - all these, and all people, shall pass away. ||4||
Ans PIS SIA lg FFT i (237-12, ast, vs 5) jaat varan turak ar hindoo. Social classes, races, Muslims and Hindus;
un Ut mits rife FE Wl (237-12, wes, He 5) pas pankhee anik jon jindoo. beasts, birds and the many varieties of beings and creatures;
Hae UATE STA UTATST Il (237-12, aSst, He 5) Sagal paasaar deesai paasaaraa. the entire world and the visible universe
faofa afd Aare wrarat lull (237-13, aGst, He 5) binas jaa-igo sagal aakaaraa. ||5]| - all forms of existence shall pass away. ||5||
Hoa frefs safs 33 fomirar i (237-13, aBst, He 5)
sahj sifat bhagat tat gi-aanaa.
Through the Praises of the Lord, devotional worship, spiritual wisdom and the essence of reality,
Het nde fasse AT aT Il (237-14, west, ns 5) sadaa anand nihchal sach thaanaa. eternal bliss and the imperishable true place are obtained.
30 Hafs A Te FA Il (237-14, ast, v2 5)
tahaa sangat saaDh gun rasai.
There, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord's Glorious Praises are sung with love.
MSSE odd Sd Ae SA MEN (237-14, aa, He 5) anbha-o nagar tahaa sad vasai. ||6|| There, in the city of fearlessness, He dwells forever. ||6| |
3d 38 sar Aa 6 fea I (237-15, aSst, He 5) tah bha-o bharmaa sog na chintaa. There is no fear, doubt, suffering or anxiety there;
mies Wee fees o IST Il (237-15, aC, He 5) aavan jaavan mirat na hotaa. there is no coming or going, and no death there.
SI AST MSE MOIS MITTS Il (237-15, AGH, He 5) tah sadaa anand anhat aakhaaray. There is eternal bliss, and the unstruck celestial music there.
SIS SAT AtIsS MUS WDM (237-16, aSHt, v8 5) bhagat vaseh keertan aaDhaaray. ||7|| The devotees dwell there, with the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises as their support. ||7]|
USAIN A MFT B UT Il (237-16, Test, us 5) paarbarahm kaa ant na paar. There is no end or limitation to the Supreme Lord God.
age ad Stat ates Il (237-16, ast, He 5) ka-un karai taa kaa beechaar. Who can embrace His contemplation?
aT aaa fan farsur ag i (237-16, aeat, He 5) kaho naanak jis kirpaa karai. Says Nanak, when the Lord showers His Mercy,
fades BS AUHfa Sd CIS (237-17, Test, He 5) nihchal thaan saaDhsang tarai. ||8]||4]| the imperishable home is obtained; in the Saadh Sangat, you shall be saved. ||8]|4] |
ast HIS U Il (237-17)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
nf feA HS At Aa Il (237-17, Test, Hs 5) jo is maaray so-ee sooraa. One who kills this is a spiritual hero.
ft fem He et UT Il (237-18, ast, we 5) jo is maaray so-ee pooraa. One who kills this is perfect.
a fem ne fsnfo efsniet Il (237-18, ast, v2 5) jo is maaray tiseh vadi-aa-ee. One who kills this obtains glorious greatness.
a feR ue fSR ot ey AST NA (237-18, Test, He 5) jo is maaray tis kaa dukh jaa-ee. ||1]|| One who kills this is freed of suffering. ||1]|
mt afe fa efor uf ate] Il (237-19, ast, He 5) aisaa ko-ay je dubiDhaa maar gavaavai. How rare is such a person, who kills and casts off duality.
fenfs ufe oH Ha AHS NU TIS il (237-19, ast, v2 5) iseh maar raaj jog kamaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Killing it, he attains Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||1]||Pause] |
yar 2st a fem ud fan a8 38 ofs I (238-1, aes, HH 5)
jo is maaray tis ka-o bha-o naahi. One who kills this has no fear.
a fq nd A Ooty AMTfa II (238-1, aGst, He 5) jo is maaray so naam samaahi. One who kills this is absorbed in the Naam.
A fem ud fA at fare gS Il (238-1, Test, He 5) jo is maaray tis kee tarisnaa bujhai. One who kills this has his desires quenched.
a feR HS A Pea FAS QI (238-2, ast, He 5) jo is maaray so dargeh sijhai. ||2]| One who kills this is approved in the Court of the Lord. ||2]||
a feA We A UeSST Il (238-2, ast, He 5) jo is maaray so Dhanvantaa. One who kills this is wealthy and prosperous.
a feR nd A ufsesr il (238-2, west, He 5) jo is maaray so pativantaa. One who kills this is honorable.
a fem nd ASt AST Il (238-2, ast, He 5) jo is maaray so-ee jatee. One who kills this is truly a celibate.
a fem ne fsH Je Tt NSN (238-3, Test, He 5) jo is maaray tis hovai gatee. ||3]| One who kills this attains salvation. ||3]|
a fem wd fA ot mrfenr Tat Il (238-3, west, He 5) jo is maaray tis kaa aa-i-aa ganee. One who kills this - his coming is auspicious.
a fem Hd A feaee Test Il (238-3, agHt, He 5) jo is maaray so nihchal Dhanee. One who kills this is steady and wealthy.
a feA Wd A SSS Il (238-4, west, He 5) jo is maaray so vadbhaagaa. One who kills this is very fortunate.
a fem HS A uafes Aa gil (238-4, ast, He 5) jo is maaray so an-din jaagaa. ||4|| One who kills this remains awake and aware, night and day. ||4||
a feR HS A leo HAST II (238-4, ast, He 5)
jo is maaray so jeevan muktaa. One who kills this is Jivan Mukta, liberated while yet alive.
a feR nd fSn at foo FAST II (238-5, ae, He 5) jo is maaray tis kee nirmal jugtaa. One who kills this lives a pure lifestyle.
a fem nd ASt Afemrat i (238-5, ast, He 5) jo is maaray so-ee sugi-aanee. One who kills this is spiritually wise.
a fem Hd A Aon forest ull (238-5, ast, v2 5) jo is maaray so sahj Dhi-aanee. ||5|| One who kills this meditates intuitively. ||5||
fen ut fas afe 3 ud Il afe aa FTE SU ad Il (238-6, ast, H 5)
is maaree bin thaa-ay na parai. kot karam jaap tap karai.
Without killing this, one is not acceptable, even though one may perform millions of rituals, chants and austerities.
fen Hct fas AON 3 f!S I 238-6, wet, He 5) is maaree bin janam na mitai. Without killing this, one does not escape the cycle of reincarnation.
fen ut fas AH 3 odt Ee MEI (238-7, ast, v2 5) is maaree bin jam tay nahee chhutai. ||6]|| Without killing this, one does not escape death. ||6||
fen Hct fas fami o det i (238-7, west, He 5) is maaree bin gi-aan na ho-ee. Without killing this, one does not obtain spiritual wisdom.
feR nat fas afe o Get I (238-7, west, 2 5) is maaree bin jooth na Dho-ee. Without killing this, one's impurity is not washed off.
fen dt fas AS fos Har il 0238-8, west, He 5) is maaree bin sabh kichh mailaa. Without killing this, everything is filthy.
fem Het fae AS fas ABS IDI (238-8, aSst, ue 5)
is maaree bin sabh kichh ja-ulaa. ||7]|| Without killing this, everything is a losing game. ||7]||
Ww ag se fxurs four fafa il 238-8, a@at, He 5) jaa ka-o bha-ay kirpaal kirpaa niDh. When the Lord, the Treasure of Mercy, bestows His Mercy,
fam set uot det Aare fafa i (238-9, ast, v2 5)
tis bha-ee khalaasee ho-ee sagal siDh. one obtains release, and attains total perfection.
afte afar at at Het Il (238-9, ast, He 5) gur dubiDhaa jaa kee hai maaree. One whose duality has been killed by the Guru,
AT SOA A YI seas cull (238-9, ast, us 5) kaho naanak so barahm beechaaree. ||8]|5|| says Nanak, contemplates God. ||8]|5||
ast HIS U Il (238-10)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs faS Ae J AS a HIS Il (238-10, aes, He 5) har si-o jurai ta sabh ko meet. When someone attaches himself to the Lord, then everyone is his friend.
dfs fa ad 3 fesse BS Il (238-10, ast, v2 5)
har si-o jurai ta nihchal cheet. When someone attaches himself to the Lord, then his consciousness is steady.
ofa fA@ ad 3 feud arat | (238-11, a@Ht, He 5) har si-o jurai na vi-aapai kaarhhaa. When someone attaches himself to the Lord, he is not afflicted by worries.
dfs fa ad 3 df= forse NA (238-11, aes, He 5) har si-o jurai ta ho-ay nistaaraa. ||1|| When someone attaches himself to the Lord, he is emancipated. ||1]|
3 Ho He SF fe fA AT I (238-11, aVat, we 5) ray man mayray too™ har si-o jor. O my mind, unite yourself with the Lord.
ata sod SS FT NU TIS i (238-12, aH, He 5) kaaj tuhaarai naahee hor. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Nothing else is of any use to you. ||1]|Pause] |
Ss SS A VSMTSTS Il (238-12, west, v2 5) vaday vaday jo dunee-aadaar. The great and powerful people of the world
aT at ard Wes il (238-12, ast, He 5) kaahoo kaaj naahee gaavaar. are of no use, you fool!
dfs & VHA Sle AG ASfs Il (238-12, ast, ue 5) har kaa daas neech kul suneh. The Lord's slave may be born of humble origins,
fsn a Afa fue nfs Guefs iI (238-13, ast, He 5) tis kai sang khin meh uDhrahi. ||2| | but in his company, you shall be saved in an instant. ||2]|
afe HAS AT a Afs SM Il (238-13, ast, He 5) kot majan jaa kai sun naam. Hearing the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is equal to millions of cleansing baths.
afe ua AT & J fms Il (238-13, 7H, Hs 5) kot poojaa jaa kai hai Dhi-aan. Meditating on it is equal to millions of worship ceremonies.
afe us Afs ofs at arat i (238-14, ast, He 5) kot punn sun har kee banee. Hearing the Word of the Lord's Bani is equal to giving millions in alms.
afe cor aa 3 fafa wrat Sil (238-14, ast, H2 5) kot falaa gur tay biDh jaanee. ||3]| To know the way, through the Guru, is equal to millions of rewards. ||3]]|
Ho mus Hf fefs fefs SF Il (238-14, west, 2 5) man apunay meh fir fir chayt. Within your mind, over and over again, think of Him,
faata ata ufeur & TS Il (238-15, 7SSt, Hs 5) binas jaahi maa-i-aa kay hayt. and your love of Maya shall depart.
ofa miso SHS Afar il (238-15, aes, He 5)
har abhinaasee tumrai sang. The Imperishable Lord is always with you.
Ho Hd Ie TH a Shar Ill (238-15, aga, He 5) man mayray rach raam kai rang. ||4|| O my mind, immerse yourself in the Love of the Lord. ||4||
W a oH Css AS Fu Il (238-16, aat, 3 5) jaa kai kaam utrai sabh bhookh. Working for Him, all hunger departs.
Wa OH & Hafs FT Il (238-16, Tes, Hs 5) jaa kai kaam na joheh doot. Working for Him, the Messenger of Death will not be watching you.
wa ath Sa Ss WH Il (238-16, west, H2 5) jaa kai kaam tayraa vad gamar. Working for Him, you shall obtain glorious greatness.
Wa oth defs F yMMHg ull (238-16, a@at, we 5) jaa kai kaam hoveh too™ amar. ||5]| Working for Him, you shall become immortal. ||5||
Wa Wag aC Sdt SS Il (238-17, west, 2 5) jaa kay chaakar ka-o nahee daan. His servant does not suffer punishment.
Wa Wag AG Sdt IS Il (238-17, wSst, He 5) jaa kay chaakar ka-o nahee baan. His servant suffers no loss.
W a vests Ue B BA Il (238-17, west, He 5) jaa kai daftar puchhai na laykhaa. In His Court, His servant does not have to answer for his account.
3 at wadt asd fara él (238-18, west, H2 5) taa kee chaakree karahu bisaykhaa. ||6]| So serve Him with distinction. ||6]|
Wa Bo ard AY MS Il (238-18, aVst, we 5) jaa kai oon naahee kaahoo baat. He is not lacking in anything.
tata uifuy nidata afs i (238-18, west, He 5) aykeh aap anaykeh bhaat. He Himself is One, although He appears in so many forms.
wv at fenfe cf& net feos Il (238-19, a@Ht, He 5) jaa kee darisat ho-ay sadaa nihaal. By His Glance of Grace, you shall be happy forever.
Ho He Als ST At WH NDI (238-19, aSst, He 5) man mayray kar taa kee ghaal. ||7]|| So work for Him, O my mind. ||7]]|
oT A IIT SSH HI Il (238-19, ast, ws 5) naa ko chatur naahee ko moorhaa. No one is clever, and no one is foolish.
aA HS ast I AT I (238-19, Tat, Hz 5) naa ko heen naahee ko sooraa. No one is weak, and no one is a hero.
yar 23 fas o& ofenr fsa dt oar Il (239-1, aGst, He 5)
jit ko laa-i-aa tit hee laagaa. As the Lord attaches someone, so is he attached.
A Azad aoa fA STI CHEN (239-1, 7st, He 5)
so sayvak naanak jis bhaagaa. ||8]||6]| He alone is the Lord's servant, O Nanak, who is so blessed. ||8]||6||
ast HIS U Il (239-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
faa finde AA Aeu mand Il (239-2, west, He 5)
bin simran jaisay sarap aarjaaree. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one's life is like that of a snake.
f3@ Atefs Aas oH PSA IAI (239-2, a@Ht, He 5) ti-o jeeveh saakat naam bisaaree. ||1]|| This is how the faithless cynic lives, forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Sa feud A fhree ufo Ahor i (239-2, ast, x: 5) ayk nimakh jo simran meh jee-aa. One who lives in meditative remembrance, even for an instant,
afe feon ora Het fag dot ai TIS il (239-3, ast, v2 5)
kot dinas laakh sadaa thir thee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
lives for hundreds of thousands and millions of days, and becomes stable forever. ||1]|Pause] |
fag faHse faa ATH ATA I (239-3, Test, v2 5) bin simran Dharig karam karaas. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one's actions and works are cursed.
aa 836 fare Hfs SA IIQIl (239-4, ast, H3 5)
kaag batan bistaa meh vaas. ||2|| Like the crow's beak, he dwells in manure. ||2||
fag frusa Sf TAT HH I (239-4, ast, ue 5) bin simran bha-ay kookar kaam. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one acts like a dog.
Has aA us fay iS (239-4, ast, ve 5) saakat baysu-aa poot ninaam. ||3]| The faithless cynic is nameless, like the prostitute's son. ||3]|
faa finde AA Ale SSS I (239-5, aSat, He 5) bin simran jaisay seeny chhataaraa. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one is like a horned ram.
Fos AT AAS HY ATS Ill (239-5, aVat, we 5) boleh koor saakat mukh kaaraa. ||4|| The faithless cynic barks out his lies, and his face is blackened. ||4]|
fag fangs aaus at fant i (239-5, aBst, He 5) bin simran garDhabh kee ni-aa-ee. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one is like a donkey.
Has ae stan] feardt ull (239-6, ast, He 5)
saakat thaan bharisat firaa-ee. ||5|| The faithless cynic wanders around in polluted places. ||5||
fag fase aa gaorfeEnr | (239-6, asst, He 5) bin simran kookar harkaa-i-aa. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one is like a mad dog.
Hay Sst Fo 3 ufeor Ell (239-6, west, He 5) saakat lobhee banDh na paa-i-aa. ||6|| The greedy, faithless cynic falls into entanglements. ||6] |
fas fange J nis wrst Il (239-7, ast, He 5) bin simran hai aatam ghaatee. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, he murders his own soul.
Has ald SAH ae odt WSt IDI (239-7, TCH, He 5) saakat neech tis kul nahee jaatee. ||7| | The faithless cynic is wretched, without family or social standing. ||7]| |
fan sfeor faure faa Asafa frerfemr i 239-7, aBst, H2 5) jis bha-i-aa kirpaal tis satsang milaa-i-aa. When the Lord becomes merciful, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
aT saa als Aas Softer NCD (239-8, west, He 5) kaho naanak gur jagat taraa-i-aa. ||8||7]|| Says Nanak, the Guru has saved the world. ||8]||7||
ast HIS U Il (239-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
qd a sale Hfs usH ats uret Il (239-8, west, He 5) gur kai bachan mohi param gat paa-ee. Through the Guru's Word, I have attained the supreme status.
afs us Hat Ue Tat UA (239-9, ast, we 5) gur poorai mayree paij rakhaa-ee. ||1]| The Perfect Guru has preserved my honor. ||1]|
ad a sete fmrfes Hfs a i (239-9, west, v2 5) gur kai bachan Dhi-aa-i-o mohi naa-o. Through the Guru's Word, I meditate on the Name.
ae usrtfe Hfo fifo ae ai TITe il (239-10, ast, v2 5) gur parsaad mohi mili-aa thaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, I have obtained a place of rest. ||1||Pause] |
ae a sete Afs GAS Surat Il (239-10, aBet, v2 5) gur kai bachan sun rasan vakhaanee. I listen to the Guru's Word, and chant it with my tongue.
ad fas 3 nifigs Ast set QI (239-10, west, Hs 5) gur kirpaa tay amrit mayree banee. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, my speech is like nectar. ||2]|
ae a sete fifeor Hat mime Il (239-11, ast, He 5) gur kai bachan miti-aa mayraa aap. Through the Guru's Word, my selfishness and conceit have been removed.
ad at cent 3 Aa Ss UTSY Ill (239-11, a7Sst, ue 5) gur kee da-i-aa tay mayraa vad partaap. ||3]| Through the Guru's kindness, I have obtained glorious greatness. ||3]||
ad a sete fifeur Hat SdH II (239-12, aSHH, He 5) gur kai bachan miti-aa mayraa bharam. Through the Guru's Word, my doubts have been removed.
Gd & safe uf AZ FIN ISI (239-12, west, He 5) gur kai bachan paykhi-o sabh barahm. ||4] | Through the Guru's Word, I see God everywhere. ||4| |
Gd a sale ats TH AT Il (239-12, ast, ve 5) gur kai bachan keeno raaj jog. Through the Guru's Word, I practice Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success.
ad a Afa sft AS SA ull (239-13, ast, ne 5) gur kai sang tari-aa sabh log. ||5|| In the Company of the Guru, all the people of the world are saved. ||5||
qd a sale AS aren fifa il (239-13, ast, He 5) gur kai bachan mayray kaaraj siDh. Through the Guru's Word, my affairs are resolved.
ad a sete ufior oe fof nell (239-13, west, He 5) gur kai bachan paa-i-aa naa-o niDh. ||6|| Through the Guru's Word, I have obtained the nine treasures. ||6||
fate fafe atet Ae as at MMA I (239-14, aBst, nH 5) jin jin Keenee mayray gur kee aasaa. Whoever places his hopes in my Guru,
fSA oft adit AH at SAT IDI (239-14, ast, H: 5)
tis kee katee-ai jam kee faasaa. ||7]|| has the noose of death cut away. ||7]|
ae a sate Afar Ha ATH Il (239-14, ast, v2 5) gur kai bachan jaagi-aa mayraa karam. Through the Guru's Word, my good karma has been awakened.
SOA UT Sam UTIIH NCIC (239-15, aGat, ws 5) naanak gur bhayti-aa paarbarahm. ||8]|8] | O Nanak, meeting with the Guru, I have found the Supreme Lord God. ||8]|8]|
Ast HIS U Il (239-15)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fan aa a@ fine Ata ATA II (239-15, ast, He 5) tis gur ka-o simra-o saas saas. I remember the Guru with each and every breath.
ag Ad ure Afsag Ast THA NAN TI ll (239-16, aSat, ws 5) gur mayray paraan satgur mayree raas. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Guru is my breath of life, the True Guru is my wealth. ||1]|Pause] |
Td a PIAS ety Sty Ate Il (239-16, aVst, He 5) gur kaa darsan daykh daykh jeevaa. Beholding the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I live.
dd a vee Gfe afe ute All (239-17, ast, He 5) gur kay charan Dho-ay Dho-ay peevaa. ||1]|| I wash the Guru's Feet, and drink in this water. ||1]|
ad at Jz fS3 HAS ATE Il (239-17, ast, uz 5) gur kee rayn nit majan kara-o. I take my daily bath in the dust of the Guru's Feet.
HOH HSH at IH HS Ja II (239-17, aBst, v2 5) janam janam kee ha-umai mal hara-o. ||2| | The egotistical filth of countless incarnations is washed off. ||2| |
SA TI aS sHSs ura Il (239-18, west, Hz 5) tis gur ka-o jhoolaava-o paakhaa. I wave the fan over the Guru.
HO mate 3 IE S Ia SI (239-18, aSst, He 5) mahaa agan tay haath day raakhaa. ||3]| Giving me His Hand, He has saved me from the great fire. ||3]|
fen aa & fafa FSS urat il (239-18, weet, ve 5) tis gur kai garihi dhova-o paanee. I carry water for the Guru's household;
fA TS 3 WAG als Aret Sil (239-19, aSHt, v2 5) jis gur tay akal gat jaanee. ||4|| from the Guru, I have learned the Way of the One Lord. ||4| |
fen aa & fafa utAg sts Il (239-19, west, ne 5) tis gur kai garihi peesa-o neet. I grind the corn for the Guru's household.
fan usAfe edt AS HIS Mull (239-19, west, He 5) jis parsaad vairee sabh meet. ||5|| By His Grace, all my enemies have become friends. ||5| |
Uat 280 fate afa 4 ag eta MS II (240-1, west, He 5)
jin gur mo ka-o deenaa jee-o. The Guru who gave me my soul,
mua eTAS mira Hf Bt ell (240-1, west, He 5) aapunaa daasraa aapay mul lee-o. ||6] | has Himself purchased me, and made me His slave. ||6]|
mry wre mruar fuming il (240-2, a@st, vs 5) aapay laa-i-o apnaa pi-aar. He Himself has blessed me with His Love.
He Het (SH Td AS Adt SHAG IDI (240-2, aSst, 2 5) Sadaa sadaa tis gur ka-o karee namaskaar. ||7|| Forever and ever, I humbly bow to the Guru. ||7]|
ats ABA S FH TY BAT Il (240-2, ast, ue 5) kal kalays bhai bharam dukh laathaa. My troubles, conflicts, fears, doubts and pains have been dispelled;
AT BOA AT TT AMIS NCIC (240-3, wea, v2 5) kaho naanak mayraa gur samraathaa. ||8]||9]| says Nanak, my Guru is All-powerful. ||8||9||
TCS HIS U Il (240-3)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
fire He aifie mrss BH ST Il (240-3, aBat, v2 5) mil mayray gobind apnaa naam dayh. Meet me, O my Lord of the Universe. Please bless me with Your Name.
on faar faa fom MAST NU TIS Il (240-4, aSHt, ne 5) naam binaa Dharig Dharig asnayhu. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, cursed, cursed is love and intimacy. ||1]|Pause] |
om faa A ufsd ute II (240-4, ast, v2 5) naam binaa jo pahirai khaa-ay. Without the Naam, one who dresses and eats well
fAS gag Foo His UTE A (240-4, ast, v2 5) ji-o kookar joothan meh paa-ay. ||1|| is like a dog, who falls in and eats impure foods. ||1]|
on fas AS faBos i fae frase fufemr Ateras NH (240-5, ast, He 5) naam binaa jaytaa bi-uhaar. ji-o mirtak mithi-aa seegaar. ||2|| Without the Naam, all occupations are useless, like decorations on a dead body. ||2||
omy farfa ad GA Sa Il (240-5, ast, He 5) naam bisaar karay ras bhog. One who forgets the Naam and indulges in pleasures,
HY AUS Sdt So Hfs Sa ISI (240-6, ast, v2 5) sukh supnai nahee tan meh rog. |[3]| shall find no peace, even in dreams; his body shall become diseased. ||3] |
om fsnrta AI wie AH Il (240-6, west, He 5) naam ti-aag karay an kaaj. One who renounces the Naam and engages in other occupations,
faoth ate 36 vfs uTA ISI (240-6, ast, He 5) binas jaa-ay jhoothay sabh paaj. ||4|| shall see all of his false pretenses fall away. ||4||
on Afar Hfe uifs o wes Il (240-7, weet, He 5) naam sang man pareet na laavai. One whose mind does not embrace love for the Naam
afe AGH ATS Safar AS NUM (240-7, Test, H: 5) kot karam karto narak jaavai. ||5|| shall go to hell, even though he may perform millions of ceremonial rituals. ||5]|
ofa a on fate His & vireo Il (240-7, ast, 2 5) har kaa naam jin man na aaraaDhaa. One whose mind does not contemplate the Name of the Lord
ag ot fonret aH ufs aor Hell (240-8, aEst, v2 5) chor kee ni-aa-ee jam pur baaDhaa. ||6]| is bound like a thief, in the City of Death. ||6]|
ore mse Sos fares il (240-8, west, nz 5) laakh adambar bahut bisthaaraa. Hundreds of thousands of ostentatious shows and great expanses
on fast SS UTATST DIN (240-8, ast, He 5) naam binaa jhoothay paasaaraa. ||7|| - without the Naam, all these displays are false. ||7]||
dfs a ay ASt AS BE Il (240-9, wea, He 5) har kaa naam so-ee jan lay-ay. That humble being repeats the Name of the Lord,
ate fasur stan fAA Sfe CIAO (240-9, aBst, He 5) kar kirpaa naanak jis day-ay. ||8||10]| O Nanak, whom the Lord blesses with His Mercy. ||8||10]]|
ACS HIS U Il (240-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
uife ufo A nifs fears il A AAS AS HS BS IA (240-10, ast, H2 5) aad maDh jo ant nibaahai. so saajan mayraa man chaahai. ||1]|
My mind longs for that Friend, who shall stand by me in the beginning, in the middle and in the end. |[1]|
ofa at Ulf Aer Afar BTS I (240-10, west, ne 5) har kee pareet sadaa sang chaalai. The Lord's Love goes with us forever.
cfenres usd use Ufsurs A TIS il (240-11, TCs, 3 5) da-i-aal purakh pooran paratipaalai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Perfect and Merciful Lord cherishes all. ||1]|Pause| |
faons ardt efs o ATE I (240-11, ast, 4: 5) binsat naahee chhod na jaa-ay. He shall never perish, and He shall never abandon me.
Ad Ua SI Show AHS QI (240-11, aSst, He 5) jah paykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2| | Wherever I look, there I see Him pervading and permeating. ||2||
Hed AWS Vag Abt SST Il (240-12, aS, nz 5) sundar sugharh chatur jee-a daataa. He is Beautiful, All-Knowing, the most Clever, the Giver of life.
set us fust ys HST ISI (240-12, ast, He 5) bhaa-ee poot pitaa parabh maataa. ||3]| God is my Brother, Son, Father and Mother. ||3]|
Alea ure mug Hat SAA I (240-12, west, we 5) jeevan paraan aDhaar mayree raas. He is the Support of the breath of life; He is my Wealth.
ulfs oret afs foe fost gil (240-13, ret, 8 5) pareet laa-ee kar ridai nivaas. ||4|| Abiding within my heart, He inspires me to enshrine love for Him. ||4||
Hfent fre aret arurfs i (240-13, ast, nH: 5) maa-i-aa silak kaatee gopaal. The Lord of the World has cut away the noose of Maya.
af nuar ate dsefe foots null (240-13, ast, He 5) kar apunaa leeno nadar nihaal. ||5|| He has made me His own, blessing me with His Glance of Grace. ||5||
finifs froifs ore Afs gar il (240-14, ast, v2 5) simar simar kaatay sabh rog. Remembering, remembering Him in meditation, all diseases are healed.
ude fms Aga AY Sa MEN (240-14, aGst, He 5) charan Dhi-aan sarab sukh bhog. ||6]|| Meditating on His Feet, all comforts are enjoyed. ||6]|
ude UT SSG fT AS I (240-14, ast, ve 5) pooran purakh navtan nit baalaa. The Perfect Primal Lord is Ever-fresh and Ever-young.
ofa nists aofe Afar TuSTHT IDI (240-15, ast, Hz 5) har antar baahar sang rakhvaalaa. ||7|| The Lord is with me, inwardly and outwardly, as my Protector. ||7]||
AJ Boa Ue dg ue se il AGHA SH Sas AS SHS CIA (240-15, ast, He 5)
kaho naanak har har pad cheen. sarbas naam bhagat ka-o deen. ||8]|11]| Says Nanak, that devotee who realizes the state of the Lord, Har, Har, is blessed with the treasure of the Naam. ||8]|11]|
TH ACSt HS HIG U (240-17)
raag ga-orhee maajh mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe It (240-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ans fed mtu nis & udder i (240-18, aGat ws, He 5)
khojat firay asa’kh ant na paaree-aa.
Countless are those who wander around searching for You, but they do not find Your limits.
Aet Je sas frat fasursor Wi (240-18, west ws, we 5) say-ee ho-ay bhagat jinaa kirpaaree-aa. ||1|| They alone are Your devotees, who are blessed by Your Grace. ||1]||
IS adr as sd NA TITS Il (240-18, ast ws, He 5) ha-o vaaree-aa har vaaree-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause| |
Afs afs ve sae aos Sodor Il (240-19, ast ws, He 5) sun sun panth daraa-o bahut bhaihaaree-aa. Continually hearing of the terrifying path, I am so afraid.
H sat Ge Hag BI Bardo iQ (240-19, aSst ws, nH 5) mai takee ot santaah layho ubaaree-aa. ||2|| I have sought the Protection of the Saints; please, save me! ||2]|
UST 2BqA
HIS BS mou Ada Ararghar i (241-1, a@at ues, He 5) mohan laal anoop sarab saaDhaaree-aa. The Fascinating and Beauteous Beloved is the Giver of support to all.
as fate fate wae ufe eg fears Sil (241-1, a@st ws, He 5) gur niv niv laaga-o paa-ay dayh dikhaaree-aa. ||3]| I bow low and fall at the Feet of the Guru; if only I could see the Lord! ||3]|
A ate fg vida feow afsadior ii (241-1, west ws, ve 5) mai kee-ay mitar anayk ikas balihaaree-aa. I have made many friends, but I am a sacrifice to the One alone.
As ae fon dt ats afs ys Sas Il (241-2, ast ws, Hs 5) sabh gun kis hee naahi har poor bhandaaree-aa. ||4|| No one has all virtues; the Lord alone is filled to overflowing with them. ||4] |
ag feta mit a ate Aero i (241-2, ast ors, ws 5)
chahu dis japee-ai naa-o sookh savaaree-aa.
His Name is chanted in the four directions; those who chant it are embellished with peace.
H ordt Gf safe aaa afeadion ull (241-3, a@at ws, He 5) mai aahee orh tuhaar naanak balihaaree-aa. ||5|| I seek Your Protection; Nanak is a sacrifice to You. ||5]|
afs ates gat urfs Ho Turse it (241-3, aSat ws, v8 5)
gur kaadhi-o bhujaa pasaar moh koopaaree-aa.
The Guru reached out to me, and gave me His Arm; He lifted me up, out of the pit of emotional attachment.
H ASG Hon verge safe o TdT EM (241-4, Test ws, He 5) mai jeeti-o janam apaar bahur na haaree-aa. ||6] | I have won the incomparable life, and I shall not lose it again. ||6]|
H ute nse fours nie aerdbor il (241-4, a@at ws, nH 5) mai paa-i-o sarab niDhaan akath kathaaree-aa. I have obtained the treasure of all; His Speech is unspoken and subtle.
dfs Vaad ASS IT Bars WI (241-5, ast ws, we 5) har dargeh sobhaavant baah ludaaree-aa. ||7|| In the Court of the Lord, I am honored and glorified; I swing my arms in joy. ||7]|
HS BSA BU ISO MHS wurde Il (241-5, aS ws, 2 5) jan naanak laDhaa ratan amol aapaaree-aa. Servant Nanak has received the invaluable and incomparable jewel.
ad At SCne sda AIG vars ICNIVM (241-6, TSH Hs, He 5)
gur sayvaa bha-ojal taree-ai kaha-o pukaaree-aa. ||8||12| |
Serving the Guru, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean; I proclaim this loudly to all. [|8] [121]
ast HIG U (241-7)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5 Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yArfe it (241-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aafes ofs da da il (241-8, ast, nH: 5) naaraa-in har rang rango. Dye yourself in the color of the Lord's Love.
afu faget ofa Sa Hat dl TITS il (241-8, Test, v2 5)
jap jinvaa har ayk mango. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the One Lord with your tongue, and ask for Him alone. ||1]|Pause] |
3fa IGH as fomrs SH Il (241-8, ast, v2 5) taj ha-umai gur gi-aan bhajo. Renounce your ego, and dwell upon the spiritual wisdom of the Guru.
fife Hats ofs aan fefe& nai (241-9, west, v2 5) mil sangat Dhur karam likhi-o. ||1]| Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, join the Sangat, the Holy Congregation.
[41
a tA A Af o afes Il (241-9, ast, m2 5) jo deesai so sang na ga-i-o. Whatever you see, shall not go with you.
AAS HS Sat uly HES iil (241-9, west, v2 5) Saakat moorh lagay pach mu-i-o. ||2]| The foolish, faithless cynics are attached - they waste away and die. ||2]|
Hds oH Ae ae ay Il (241-10, west, He 5) mohan naam sadaa rav rahi-o. The Name of the Fascinating Lord is all-pervading forever.
afe Ho fas aonfe ofS ai (241-10, ast, v2 5) kot maDhay kinai gurmukh lahi-o. ||3]| Among millions, how rare is that Gurmukh who attains the Name. ||3]|
dfs Hae afs SH OH Il (241-10, ast, He 5) har santan kar namo namo. Greet the Lord's Saints humbly, with deep respect.
o@ fofa uefa ni3G AS ISI (241-11, TES, 42 5) na-o niDh paavahi atul sukho. ||4]| You shall obtain the nine treasures, and receive infinite peace. ||4]|
30 MSEC AT AS Il (241-11, ast, nH 5) nain alova-o saaDh jano. With your eyes, behold the holy people;
fase Weg on fod iui (241-11, west, He 5) hirdai gaavhu naam niDho. ||5]|| in your heart, sing the treasure of the Naam. ||5]|
aH AU SF HT 3H Ml (241-11, aes, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh moh tajo. Abandon sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment.
HOH HIS VI 3S sos Well (241-12, aCHt, He 5)
janam maran duhu tay rahi-o. ||6|| Thus you shall be rid of both birth and death. ||6]|
ey niger we 3 fife i (241-12, a@st, ns 5) dookh anDhayraa ghar tay miti-o. Pain and darkness shall depart from your home,
ata fomrg feates chu af oi (241-12, wat, ne 5) gur gi-aan darirhaa-i-o deep bali-o. ||7|| when the Guru implants spiritual wisdom within you, and lights that lamp. ||7]||
fafs Afeor A urfa ufsS il (241-13, west, v2 5) jin sayvi-aa So paar pari-o. One who serves the Lord crosses over to the other side.
Ho ssa Taf Aas Shes NCUAUIISI (241-13, ASH, v8 5) jan naanak gurmukh jagat tari-o. ||8]|1]|13]| O servant Nanak, the Gurmukh saves the world. ||8]|1]]13]|
Hoe u asst Il (241-14)
mehlaa 5 ga-orhee. Fifth Mehl, Gauree:
dfs of TT TT ATS SSH TE Il (241-14, aSst, v2 5)
har har gur gur karat bharam ga-ay.
Dwelling upon the Lord, Har, Har, and the Guru, the Guru, my doubts have been dispelled.
He nfs Afs we UES NA TIS Ut (241-14, Tes, He 5) mayrai man sabh sukh paa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My mind has obtained all comforts. ||1]|Pause| |
aos qos 3Cfoor ag deo AiseteEs Nal (241-15, west, He 5)
balto jalto ta-uki-aa gur chandan seetlaa-i-o. ||1]|
I was burning, on fire, and the Guru poured water on me; He is cooling and soothing, like the sandalwood tree. ||1||
mifemre vide fife afeor as fame thrfeS i (241-15, a@at, v2 5)
agi-aan anDhayraa mit ga-i-aa gur gi-aan deepaa-i-o. ||2||
The darkness of ignorance has been dispelled; the Guru has lit the lamp of spiritual wisdom. ||2||
Ua AIT Wd vis Ass SS SITES SI (241-16, aes, we 5) paavak saagar gahro char santan naav taraa-i-o. ||3]||
The ocean of fire is so deep; the Saints have crossed over, in the boat of the Lord's Name. |[3]|
Oo" JH AH © OSH Ae us ats sat mMTEE Sil (241-17, west, v8 5)
naa ham karam na Dharam such parabh geh bhujaa aapaa-i-o. ||4||
I have no good karma; I have no Dharmic faith or purity. But God has taken me by the arm, and made me His own. ||4]|
3G dso uu sn sats zem ofa SES lull (241-17, ast, 2 5)
bha-o khandan dukh bhanjno bhagat vachhal har naa-i-o. ||5| |
The Destroyer of fear, the Dispeller of pain, the Lover of His Saints - these are the Names of the Lord. ||5]|
worad oe faurs tte Afys Hs GeteS wei (241-18, ast, ue 5)
anaathah naath kirpaal deen sammrith sant otaa-i-o. ||6||
He is the Master of the masterless, Merciful to the meek, All-powerful, the Support of His Saints. ||6]|
fasasrs at Fost tg wan ole THEE OM (241-18, west, He 5)
nirgunee-aaray kee bayntee dayh daras har raa-i-o. ||7||
I am worthless - I offer this prayer, O my Lord King: "Please, grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan."||7]||
Soa Adle SIS SaAT ASA Ens mMEST ICU (241-19, aSHT, He 5)
naanak saran tuhaaree thaakur sayvak du-aarai aa-i-o. ||8]|2||14||
Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord and Master; Your servant has come to Your Door. ||8]|2||14]|
UST 2B2
ast HIS U Il (242-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
dfa Afar fatter & sar fee Afat nia o Ast NA (242-1, ast, He 5)
rang sang bikhi-aa kay bhogaa in sang anDh na jaanee. ||1||
He is immersed in the enjoyment of corrupt pleasures; engrossed in them, the blind fool does not understand. ||1]|
J@ Hue J west Rast men fost i TIS i (242-1, aSHt, He 5) ha-o sancha-o ha-o khaattaa saglee avaDh bihaanee. rahaa-o. "I am earning profits, I am getting rich", he says, as his life passes away. ||Pause| |
Ue AT usTS I & Sat HSfT ANAT NQI (242-2, aC, Hz 5) ha-o sooraa parDhaan ha-o ko naahee mujheh samaanee. ||2]| "Iam a hero, I am famous and distinguished; no one is equal to me."||2]|
Haoes ia Asia Ho fs dE THAT Sil (242-2, ast, vz 5)
jobanvant achaar kuleenaa man meh ho-ay gumaanee. ||3]||
"Iam young, cultured, and born of a good family." In his mind, he is proud and arrogant like this. ||3]]|
fie Castes aa gfo a Hefsor act feast I8il (242-3, west, He 5) ji-o uljhaa-i-o baaDh buDh kaa marti-aa nahee bisraanee. ||4]| He is trapped by his false intellect, and he does not forget this until he dies. ||4]|
get His dou Aa ure fad a Hurst lull (242-4, west, ws 5)
bhaa-ee meet banDhap sakhay paachhay tinhoo ka-o sampaanee. ||5]|
Brothers, friends, relatives and companions who live after him - he entrusts his wealth to them. ||5]||
fay od Ho TAT nifs AST yseat WEN (242-4, west, He 5) jit laago man baasnaa ant saa-ee paragtaanee. ||6||
That desire, to which the mind is attached, at the last moment, becomes manifest. [161]
mdata afs xen afe fea doe darst WOM (242-5, ast, He 5) aha’-buDh such karam kar ih banDhan banDhaanee. ||7]|
He may perform religious deeds, but his mind is egotistical, and he is bound by these bonds. ||7||
cfenre use fast ATT SHA VA SAA NCNSIWUISSIl AHS (242-5, TSH, He 5)
da-i-aal purakh kirpaa karahu naanak daas dasaanee. ||8]|3||15||44|| jumlaa O Merciful Lord, please bless me Your Mercy, that Nanak may become the slave of Your slaves. ||8]|3]|15||44||Total| |
W@ AfsenH aes usY TIYyATS I (242-7)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gurparsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
TT Tat usst ST HIS 4 Il (242-7) raag ga-orhee poorbee chhant mehlaa 1. Raag Gauree Poorbee, Chhant, First Mehl:
Hu df= wdasior HE ste B ore I (242-7, aGat vast, ue 1) munDh rain duhaylrhee-aa jee-o need na aavai. For the bride, the night is painful; sleep does not come.
A ue vashr He furs & TS Il (242-8, aGat vast, vs 1) saa Dhan dublee-aa jee-o pir kai haavai. The soul-bride has grown weak, in the pain of separation from her Husband Lord.
us oet vats as we Az Set SUS Il (242-8, aSat ysstt, ne 1)
Dhan thee-ee dubal kant haavai kayv nainee daykh-ay.
The soul-bride is wasting away, in the pain of separation from her Husband; how can she see Him with her eyes?
ters fe TA Sa So AS BS faS 3 BUS Il (242-9, aSat yoet, we
seegaar mith ras bhog bhojan sabh jhooth kitai na laykh-ay.
Her decorations, sweet foods, sensuous pleasures and delicacies are all false; they are of no account at all.
Aus Fafe aefa aat gor wat o mS Il (242-9, aGat yas, ne 1)
mai mat joban garab gaalee duDhaa thanee na aav-ay.
Intoxicated with the wine of youthful pride, she has been ruined, and her breasts no longer yield milk.
ood AT US fee froret fag furs ste o miree Al (242-10, a@at ysett, Hs 1)
naanak saa Dhan milai milaa-ee bin pir need na aav-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, the soul-bride meets her Husband Lord, when He causes her to meet Him; without Him, sleep does not come to her. ||1]|
Hu foHosior AG fas cat fimrs it (242-10, a@at vast, us munDh nimaanrhee-aa jee-o bin Dhanee pi-aaray. The bride is dishonored without her Beloved Husband Lord.
fa@ Ay ureait fas Ba ors II (242-11, aeat vost, He 1) ki-o sukh paarhaigee bin ur Dhaaray. How can she find peace, without enshrining Him in her heart?
od fag we SA Ot Us Adt Adwbor I (242-11, aSat yset, we 1
naah bin ghar vaas naahee puchhahu sakhee sahaylee-aa.
Without her Husband, her home is not worth living in; go and ask your sisters and companions.
fas on uifs flurg ont enfo afe Ader | Ae Hfs AAS HSsfy Ho asHSt AG when Il (242-11, ast use, 2 1)
bin naam pareet pi-aar naahee vaseh saach suhaylee-aa. sach man sajan santokh maylaa gurmatee saho jaani-aa.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, there is no love and affection; but with her True Lord, she abides in peace. Through mental truthfulness and contentment, union with the True Friend is attained; through the Guru's Teachings, the Husband Lord is known.
SSt SH 3 SS AT US OH Hola AHS QM (242-12, aGat yas, He 1) naanak naam na chhodai saa Dhan naam sahj samaanee-aa. ||2||
O Nanak, that soul-bride who does not abandon the Naam, is intuitively absorbed in the Naam. ||2]|
fle Aet Hd@Std on fug TST | (242-13, aCSt use, He 1) mil sakhee sahaylrheeho ham pir raavayhaa. Come, O my sisters and companions - let's enjoy our Husband Lord.
ad ufe fouSat A Aafe AST i (242-13, wat yset, we 1) gur puchh likh-ugee jee-o sabad sanayhaa. I will ask the Guru, and write His Word as my love-note.
Hae Are afe feurfenr HOHet ugstehor Il (242-14, west use, ue 1)
sabad saachaa gur dikhaa-i-aa manmukhee pachhutaanee-aa.
The Guru has shown me the True Word of the Shabad. The self-willed manmukhs will regret and repent.
fafa ws@ gd waAfag wh Ag UeTfemr I (242-14, ast yset, He 1D nikas jaata-o rahai asthir jaam sach pachhaani-aa. My wandering mind became steady, when I recognized the True One.
Ag at His Het SVSS Hale SI SeBE Il (242-15, west sett, we 1) saach kee mat sadaa na-utan sabad nayhu navayla-o. The Teachings of Truth are forever new; the love of the Shabad is forever fresh.
oo oedt dfs AT fess Aet AIST SI (242-15, ast Yosh, ne 1)
naanak nadree sahj saachaa milhu sakhee sahayleeho. ||3]|
O Nanak, through the Glance of Grace of the True Lord, celestial peace is obtained; let's meet Him, O my sisters and companions. ||3]||
Hot fee ust AE gH whe AAG fen II (242-16, aCSt use, He 1) mayree ichh punee jee-o ham ghar saajan aa-i-aa. My desire has been fulfilled - my Friend has come to my home.
ffs eg oct Hares arfemrt i (242-16, Gat useft, ue 1) mil var naaree mangal gaa-i-aa. At the Union of husband and wife, the songs of rejoicing were sung.
ae afe Hares Ufk sont Ho fs BHI I (242-17, west vast, us
gun gaa-ay mangal paraym rahsee munDh man omaaha-o.
Singing the songs of joyful praise and love to Him, the soul-bride's mind is thrilled and delighted.
Ao SIA EAS fenmd AY Af AE BIE lt (242-17, ast use, He 1)
Saajan rahansay dusat vi-aapay saach jap sach laaha-o.
My friends are happy, and my enemies are unhappy; meditating on the True Lord, the true profit is obtained.
ad ifs A us ad feast Sfe fea aft feo II (242-18, wat vast, Hs 1)
kar jorh saa Dhan karai bintee rain din ras bhinnee-aa.
With her palms pressed together, the soul-bride prays, that she may remain immersed in the Love of her Lord, night and day.
soa fug us asta sor fee Het Usb sl (242-18, west uae, He 1)
naanak pir Dhan karahi ralee-aa ichh mayree punnee-aa. ||4||1||
O Nanak, the Husband Lord and the soul-bride revel together; my desires are fulfilled. 4] 111]
UST 283
Tat SI HIS 9 Il (243-1)
ga-orhee chhant mehlaa 1. Gauree, Chhant, First Mehl:
Afe as us AIG Sawst ao HS Il (243-1, west, He 1) sun naah parabhoo jee-o aykalrhee ban maahay. Hear me, O my Dear Husband God - I am all alone in the wilderness.
faG utsat avo fear ys Suged Il (243-1, ast, ue 1) ki-o Dheeraigee naah binaa parabh vayparvaahay. How can I find comfort without You, O my Carefree Husband God?
Ue od asd dfs 6 Ae faun Sfs wedr il (243-2, west, ne 1) Dhan naah baajhahu reh na saakai bikham rain ghanayree-aa. The soul-bride cannot live without her Husband; the night is so painful for her.
od dle wire UN ae Af= Fost Adhor ih (243-2, ast, ue nah need aavai paraym bhaavai sun baynantee mayree-aa. Sleep does not come. I am in love with my Beloved. Please, listen to my prayer!
asd fimrd aff o AS Sawest IGS Il (243-3, ast, v2 1) baajhahu pi-aaray ko-ay na saaray aykalrhee kurlaa-ay. Other than my Beloved, no one cares for me; I cry all alone in the wilderness.
ood At ue fixe fret fas utsn ey ue IA (243-3, a@Ht, He 1)
naanak saa Dhan milai milaa-ee bin pareetam dukh paa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, the bride meets Him when He causes her to meet Him; without her Beloved, she suffers in pain. ||1]|
fufs dfauirst Ae aes fers II (243-4, aBst, ne 1) pir chhodi-arhee jee-o kavan milaavai. She is separated from her Husband Lord - who can unite her with Him?
ofA Uf first FIG Aafe ATS I (243-4, west, He 1) ras paraym milee jee-o sabad suhaavai. Tasting His Love, she meets Him, through the Beautiful Word of His Shabad.
Rae Ae ST ufs ure chia ta Bars Il (243-5, west, we 1)
sabday suhaavai taa pat paavai deepak dayh ujaarai.
Adorned with the Shabad, she obtains her Husband, and her body is illuminated with the lamp of spiritual wisdom.
Afe Ret Host Afs AIS AN A TES ATS Il (243-5, aSst, v2 1)
sun sakhee sahaylee saach suhaylee saachay kay gun saarai.
Listen, O my friends and companions - she who is at peace dwells upon the True Lord and His True Praises.
Afsata Hat so fufs wet feat nifys aret i 243-6, west, us
satgur maylee taa pir raavee bigsee amrit banee.
Meeting the True Guru, she is ravished and enjoyed by her Husband Lord; she blossoms forth with the Ambrosial Word of His Bani.
Soa AT US St fug we wW fSA a nfs Stat QM (243-6, west, He 1) naanak saa Dhan taa pir raavay jaa tis kai man bhaanee. ||2]| O Nanak, the Husband Lord enjoys His bride when she is pleasing to His Mind. ||2]|
Hfeur Het shudhor mI afs Hot afsurs i (243-7, ast, we maa-i-aa mohnee neeghree-aa jee-o koorh muthee koorhi-aaray. Fascination with Maya made her homeless; the false are cheated by falsehood.
fas ys ae Asser AIG fas aes ifs fins tt (243-7, aH, Hs 1)
ki-o khoolai gal jayvarhee-aa jee-o bin gur at pi-aaray.
How can the noose around her neck be untied, without the Most Beloved Guru? ofa uifs furs Rafe fated fSn dt ar A dS I (243-8, aGat, He 1)
har pareet pi-aaray sabad veechaaray tis hee kaa so hovai. One who loves the Beloved Lord, and reflects upon the Shabad, belongs to Him.
Us WS nda see fas visa Hw GS Il (243-8, aCst, He 1)
punn daan anayk naavan ki-o antar mal Dhovai.
How can giving donations to charities and countless cleansing baths wash off the filth within the heart?
on faa afs afe o ure afe foagfa sare it (243-9, wet, ne 1)
naam binaa gat ko-ay na paavai hath nigrahi baybaanai.
Without the Naam, no one attains salvation. Stubborn self-discipline and living in the wilderness are of no use at all.
Sod Av wg Hale feu fsa noe fa WS ISI (243-9, ast, He 1
naanak sach ghar sabad sinjaapai dubiDhaa mahal ke jaanai. ||3]||
O Nanak, the home of Truth is attained through the Shabad. How can the Mansion of His Presence be known through duality? ||3]|
3m oH AT Ae AEE AST Stes I (243-10, aSHt, He 1 tayraa naam sachaa jee-o sabad sachaa veechaaro. True is Your Name, O Dear Lord; True is contemplation of Your Shabad.
3T HIG Ae AG oH AST Sug I (243-10, wat, ue 1 tayraa mahal sachaa jee-o naam sachaa vaapaaro. True is the Mansion of Your Presence, O Dear Lord, and True is trade in Your Name.
oH at eturg Hor sas ara miafes Il (243-11, west, He 1) naam kaa vaapaar meethaa bhagat laahaa andino. Trade in Your Name is very sweet; the devotees earn this profit night and day.
fA ws zug ae 5 AS oH Seg fas FHS I 243-11, aCHt, we 1)
tis baajh vakhar ko-ay na soojhai naam layvhu khin khino.
Other than this, I can think of no other merchandise. So chant the Naam each and every moment.
usta Ser sets Ara cath ys ure it (243-12, aC, we 1)
parakh laykhaa nadar saachee karam poorai paa-i-aa.
The account is read; by the Grace of the True Lord and good karma, the Perfect Lord is obtained.
aoa BH HI VA Hot afs us AG UfeMr ISIN (243-12, Tes, Hs 1) naanak naam mahaa ras meethaa gur poorai sach paa-i-aa. ||4]|2| |
O Nanak, the Nectar of the Name is so sweet. Through the Perfect True Guru, it is obtained. ||4]|2]|
TT Tat usst SF HIS 3 (243-14) raag ga-orhee poorbee chhant mehlaa 3 Raag Gauree Poorbee, Chhant, Third Mehl:
qe AfsenH aes use TSYATS I (243-14)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gurparsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
A ue fas ad AG dfs & Te APS Il (243-15, aSst ysl, vs 3)
saa Dhan bin-o karay jee-o har kay gun saaray.
The soul-bride offers her prayers to her Dear Lord; she dwells upon His Glorious Virtues.
fas us ofa 3 Aa HG fae ofa fips I (243-15, aGat uset, He 3) khin pal reh na sakai jee-o bin har pi-aaray. She cannot live without her Beloved Lord, for a moment, even for an instant.
fag ofa fimrd sf 5 Areata fas HOw o USM Il (243-15, west ye, He 3)
bin har pi-aaray reh na saakai gur bin mahal na paa-ee-ai.
She cannot live without her Beloved Lord; without the Guru, the Mansion of His Presence is not found.
A dg ad Aet ug ain fSRar nafs gare I (243-16, Test ye, He 3)
jo gur kahai so-ee par keejai tisnaa agan bujhaa-ee-ai. Whatever the Guru says, she should surely do, to extinguish the fire of desire.
ofa Ara Het fon fag neg 3 cet fag Afet AY o US II (243-17, west Use, He 3) har saachaa so-ee tis bin avar na ko-ee bin sayvi-ai sukh na paa-ay.
The Lord is True; there is no one except Him. Without serving Him, peace is not found.
ood AT ue fixe firsret far 3 urfu fire ail (243-17, aGat eet, He 3)
naanak saa Dhan milai milaa-ee jis no aap milaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, that soul-bride, whom the Lord Himself unites, is united with Him; He Himself merges with her. ||1]|
us sfs HdeSte Ae ae fAG fas we It (243-18, ast vad, He 3)
Dhan rain suhaylrhee-ay jee-o har si-o chit laa-ay.
The life-night of the soul-bride is blessed and joyful, when she focuses her consciousness on her Dear Lord.
Afsag Ae aC ad AMG feag nmy TSS | (243-18, wat yo, He 3) satgur sayvay bhaa-o karay jee-o vichahu aap gavaa-ay. She serves the True Guru with love; she eradicates selfishness from within.
feag nity aee ofe Te We niofeg war HE i (243-19, aSat sett, ve 3)
vichahu aap gavaa-ay har gun gaa-ay an-din laagaa bhaa-o.
Eradicating selfishness and conceit from within, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, she is in love with the Lord, night and day.
Afe ret Host Hho at Hat as a Aafe ANTE I (243-19, ast usett, He 3)
sun sakhee sahaylee jee-a kee maylee gur kai sabad samaa-o.
Listen, dear friends and companions of the soul - immerse yourselves in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
UST 288 dfs we AS St as finest OM et filmes I (244-1, Gat vast, He 3)
har gun saaree taa kant pi-aaree naamay Dharee pi-aaro. Dwell upon the Lord's Glories, and you shall be loved by your Husband, embracing love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oad aHfs os fimrdt an on arf TS QI (244-1, aat yoet, He 3) naanak kaaman naah pi-aaree raam naam gal haaro. ||2||
O Nanak, the soul-bride who wears the necklace of the Lord's Name around her neck is loved by her Husband Lord. ||2]|
U6 faeat AG fas ara firs il (244-2, a@st use, ue 3) Dhan aykalrhee jee-o bin naah pi-aaray. The soul-bride who is without her beloved Husband is all alone.
en ate Hot Me fag Ta AE ATS Il (244-2, west yet, ws 3) doojai bhaa-ay muthee jee-o bin gur sabad karaaray. She is cheated by the love of duality, without the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fag nae furs ae vag ad Hfemr Hfs unret I (244-3, ast usett, Hs 3)
bin sabad pi-aaray ka-un dutar taaray maa-i-aa mohi khu-aa-ee.
Without the Shabad of her Beloved, how can she cross over the treacherous ocean? Attachment to Maya has led her astray.
af feast 3 fufs ust A ae HIG 3 ure Il (244-3, ast use, ve 3)
koorh vigutee taa pir mutee saa Dhan mahal na paa-ee.
Ruined by falsehood, she is deserted by her Husband Lord. The soul-bride does not attain the Mansion of His Presence.
Gd Age TSt AoA HSt mofes Td AMES I (244-4, Sst sett, He 3)
gur sabday raatee sehjay maatee an-din rahai samaa-ay.
But she who is attuned to the Guru's Shabad is intoxicated with celestial love; night and day, she remains absorbed in Him.
soa aHfs Ae cfr ast ofe AME orf feare SI (244-4, aCst use, He 3)
naanak kaaman sadaa rang raatee har jee-o aap milaa-ay. ||3]|
O Nanak, that soul-bride who remains constantly steeped in His Love, is blended by the Lord into Himself. ||3]|
a faba ofa HS Ae ofa fas wee flores I (244-5, aCst usett, He 3)
taa milee-ai har maylay jee-o har bin kavan milaa-ay.
If the Lord merges us with Himself, we are merged with Him. Without the Dear Lord, who can merge us with Him?
fag ae ulsH niue AIG ABs SIH VATS | (244-6, aEat vost, ne 3) bin gur pareetam aapnay jee-o ka-un bharam chukaa-ay. Without our Beloved Guru, who can dispel our doubt?
Ts 3H vores fe fesha we ST AT US AY US II (244-6, west ys, ne 3)
gur bharam chukaa-ay i-o milee-ai maa-ay taa saa Dhan sukh paa-ay.
Through the Guru, doubt is dispelled. O my mother, this is the way to meet Him; this is how the soul-bride finds peace.
ad Az fag us niorg fas TS Ha SUES Il (244-7, aSst sett, v8 3)
gur sayvaa bin ghor anDhaar bin gur mag na paa-ay.
Without serving the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. Without the Guru, the Way is not found.
onfs df rst Aon Hest aa & Aafe Shes I (244-7, west yse, ne 3)
kaaman rang raatee sehjay maatee gur kai sabad veechaaray.
That wife who is intuitively imbued with the color of His Love, contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
soa aHfs ofs eg ufeor ae & ate fimrds sal (244-8, aGst uset, He 3)
naanak kaaman har var paa-i-aa gur kai bhaa-ay pi-aaray. ||4]|1]|
O Nanak, the soul-bride obtains the Lord as her Husband, by enshrining love for the Beloved Guru. ||4]|1]|
ACS HIS S Il (244-8)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
fus fae uct fonrat AIG faa fus faS Fler AST HET I (244-8, Tes, He 3)
pir bin kharee nimaanee jee-o bin pir ki-o jeevaa mayree maa-ee.
Without my Husband, I am utterly dishonored. Without my Husband Lord, how can I live, O my mother?
fus fag ate 5 ore HIG aus 3fs 3 ATT II (244-9, aBst, H: 3)
pir bin need na aavai jee-o kaaparh tan na suhaa-ee.
Without my Husband, sleep does not come, and my body is not adorned with my bridal dress.
aug 3fs Ase A fue ae Tanst fos wen I (244-10, west, He 3)
kaapar tan suhaavai jaa pir bhaavai gurmatee chit laa-ee-ai.
The bridal dress looks beautiful upon my body, when I am pleasing to my Husband Lord. Following the Guru's Teachings, my consciousness is focused on Him.
Re Aafe a Afsag AS ae a nif AHS I (244-10, ast, He 3) sadaa suhaagan jaa satgur sayvay gur kai ank samaa-ee-ai.
I become His happy soul-bride forever, when I serve the True Guru; I sit in the Lap of the Guru.
dd Age Hor st fug Tet GI OU AAS Il (244-11, ast, ve 3)
gur sabdai maylaa taa pir raavee laahaa naam sansaaray.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the soul-bride meets her Husband Lord, who ravishes and enjoys her. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the only profit in this world.
aTea aHfe ag fumrdt at ofs & TE AS NA (244-11, Test, ve 3)
naanak kaaman naah pi-aaree jaa har kay gun saaray. ||1||
O Nanak, the soul-bride is loved by her Husband, when she dwells upon the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||
Aue da He Ae nme ote fimrs Il (244-12, aah, He 3) saa Dhan rang maanay jee-o aapnay naal pi-aaray. The soul-bride enjoys the Love of her Beloved.
mfofofa sf ast HE ag Age Sters It (244-12, weet, v2 3)
ahinis rang raatee jee-o gur sabad veechaaray.
Imbued with His Love night and day, she contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ad Hae <ted ICH nd fea fafa fog fimrs I 244-13, aBst, n2 3)
gur sabad veechaaray ha-umai maaray in biDh milhu pi-aaray.
Contemplating the Guru's Shabad, she conquers her ego, and in this way, she meets her Beloved.
A as Avafe wet df ast ATS arty fumrs Il (244-13, ast, nu: 3)
saa Dhan sohagan sadaa rang raatee saachai naam pi-aaray.
She is the happy soul-bride of her Lord, who is forever imbued with the Love of the True Name of her Beloved.
nus aa ffs sdbn nifgs aha efsor ofa fees il (244-14, aBet, ve 3)
apunay gur mil rahee-ai amrit gahee-ai dubiDhaa maar nivaaray.
Abiding in the Company of our Guru, we grasp the Ambrosial Nectar; we conquer and cast out our sense of duality.
aoe ante ats eg urfeor Aas Ee FEATS MQM (244-15, ast, v2 3) naanak kaaman har var paa-i-aa saglay dookh visaaray. ||2|| O Nanak, the soul-bride attains her Husband Lord, and forgets all her pains. ||2| |
omnfs fuss set ate wfenr vfs firs I (244-15, west, He 3)
kaaman pirahu bhulee jee-o maa-i-aa mohi pi-aaray.
The soul-bride has forgotten her Husband Lord, because of love and emotional attachment to Maya.
sot sfo wait HE afs HOt afamrs Il (244-16, ast, v2 3) jhoothee jhooth lagee jee-o koorh muthee koorhi-aaray. The false bride is attached to falsehood; the insincere one is cheated by insincerity.
as foes IHS AS HA AGH 3 TS Il (244-16, aBat, we 3)
koorh nivaaray gurmat saaray joo-ai janam na haaray.
She who drives out her falsehood, and acts according to the Guru's Teachings, does not lose her life in the gamble.
ad Hae Ae Afs ANS fesg IBH WS I (244-17, aGst, He 3)
gur sabad sayvay sach samaavai vichahu ha-umai maaray.
One who serves the Word of the Guru's Shabad is absorbed in the True Lord; she eradicates egotism from within.
dfs at on fee SAS nit ad Aterd Il (244-17, aGst, ve 3) har kaa naam ridai vasaa-ay aisaa karay seegaaro. So let the Name of the Lord abide within your heart; decorate yourself in this way.
Soa AHS Hafa ANTSt fA ATS BM MOS Il (244-17, TCH, He 3) naanak kaaman sahj samaanee jis saachaa naam aDhaaro. ||3]|
O Nanak, the soul-bride who takes the Support of the True Name is intuitively absorbed in the Lord. |[3]|
fs He UlsHt AIG su fae uct fouret I (244-18, aes, ne 3) mil mayray pareetamaa jee-o tuDh bin kharee nimaanee. Meet me, O my Dear Beloved. Without You, I am totally dishonored.
H dat ale 3 nie ME ate nig o urat Il (244-19, aGat, He 3) mai nainee need na aavai jee-o bhaavai ann na paanee. Sleep does not come to my eyes, and I have no desire for food or water.
urat nig o ate Hob ae fa furs fas wy Teh II (244-19, west, He 3)
paanee ann na bhaavai maree-ai haavai bin pir ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai.
I have no desire for food or water, and I am dying from the pain of separation. Without my Husband Lord, how can I find peace?
Uat 2gu qe wird aa fasst A as ae fas fs fSS fore Ih (245-1, ast, v2 3)
gur aagai kara-o binantee jay gur bhaavai ji-o milai tivai milaa-ee-ai. I offer my prayers to the Guru; if it pleases the Guru, He shall unite me with Himself.
mmo Af Be AMES nity fife whe mre | (245-1, aSst, ve 3)
aapay mayl la-ay sukh-daata aap mili-aa ghar aa-ay.
The Giver of peace has united me with Himself; He Himself has come to my home to meet me.
Soa AHfs Het Haas ot fg Hd o WES ISI (245-2, as, He 3)
naanak kaaman sadaa suhaagan naa pir marai na jaa-ay. ||4||2||
O Nanak, the soul-bride is forever the Lord's favorite wife; her Husband Lord does not die, and He shall never leave. ||4||2]|
TCSt HIS S Il (245-2)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
anfe ofa aff Sct HG ufs & ofA ASS Il (245-3, west, He 3)
kaaman har ras bayDhee jee-o har kai sahj subhaa-ay.
The soul-bride is pierced through with the sublime essence of the Lord, in intuitive peace and poise.
HO Hofe Hfs Shor Ae efsor AafA ANTS II (245-3, ast, He 3)
man mohan mohi lee-aa jee-o dubiDhaa sahj samaa-ay. The Enticer of hearts has enticed her, and her sense of duality has been easily dispelled.
vfao nofa ANTS anfs Sg ue TIHSt Sa BES Il (245-4, aVHt, ve 3)
dubiDhaa sahj samaa-ay kaaman var paa-ay gurmatee rang laa-ay.
Her sense of duality has been easily dispelled, and the soul-bride obtains her Husband Lord; following the Guru's Teachings, she makes merry.
feg Adtg afs ants sfoor ae sret ure AHS I (245-4, aSst, H2 3)
ih sareer koorh kusat bhari-aa gal taa-ee paap kamaa-ay.
This body is filled to overflowing with falsehood, deception and the commission of sins.
aenfy safs fas Aon ufe Cun fas sast HS o WE I (245-5, aes, He 3)
gurmukh bhagat jit sahj Dhun upjai bin bhagtee mail na jaa-ay.
The Gurmukh practices that devotional worship, by which the celestial music wells up; without this devotional worship, filth is not removed.
aoa wHfe fusts fumrdt fess wimg TSS WA (245-6, TCH, He 3)
naanak kaaman pireh pi-aaree vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, the soul-bride who sheds selfishness and conceit from within, is dear to her Beloved. ||1]|
omnfs fug ufeur ae ag a ate fimrd i (245-6, aes, He 3)
kaaman pir paa-i-aa jee-o gur kai bhaa-ay pi-aaray.
The soul-bride has found her Husband Lord, through the love and affection of the Guru.
dfs afa Ast Ie nists Sfe as I (245-7, ast, v2 3) rain sukh sutee jee-o antar ur Dhaaray. She passes her life-night sleeping in peace, enshrining the Lord in her heart.
wists Cfo urd faba fumird niofes vu feed i (245-7, ast, He 3)
antar ur Dhaaray milee-ai pi-aaray an-din dukh nivaaray.
Enshrining Him deep within her heart night and day, she meets her Beloved, and her pains depart.
nists HIG fus Te aHfs Tat Stes I (245-8, ast, He 3)
antar mahal pir raavay kaaman gurmatee veechaaray.
Deep within the mansion of her inner being, she enjoys her Husband Lord, reflecting upon the Guru's Teachings.
wifys ou ub fea ast efsor ofa foes Il (245-8, ast, v2 3)
amrit naam pee-aa din raatee dubiDhaa maar nivaaray.
She drinks deeply of the Nectar of the Naam, day and night; she conquers and casts off her sense of duality.
soa Afe fest Aoafs aa ax SfS wns MQM (245-9, ast, He 3)
naanak sach milee sohagan gur kai hayt apaaray. ||2||
O Nanak, the happy soul-bride meets her True Lord, through the Infinite Love of the Guru. ||2||
meg tent ad AIG UISH uifs fumid I (245-9, aGat, ve 3) aavhu da-i-aa karay jee-o pareetam at pi-aaray. Come, and shower Your Mercy upon me, my most Darling, Dear Beloved.
ante faa@ ad AG Af Aafe Aters Il (245-10, ast, 2 3)
kaaman bin-o karay jee-o sach sabad seegaaray.
The soul-bride offers her prayers to You, to adorn her with the True Word of Your Shabad.
Afs nafe rtrd IGH HS TaHfe AGH ASS Il (245-10, wea, He 3)
sach sabad seegaaray ha-umai maaray gurmukh kaaraj savaaray.
Adorned with the True Word of Your Shabad, she conquers her ego, and as Gurmukh, her affairs are resolved.
afar afar Sa Aa At gS Ts MoS I (245-11, Tes, ws 3) jug jug ayko sachaa so-ee boojhai gur beechaaray. Throughout the ages, the One Lord is True; through the Guru's Wisdom, He is known.
Houfe af feumit fo Hanut for wrat AE uATS I (245-11, ast, v2 3)
manmukh kaam vi-aapee mohi santaapee kis aagai jaa-ay pukaaray.
The self-willed manmukh is engrossed in sexual desire, and tormented by emotional attachment. With whom should she lodge her complaints?
Sea Hout ae 3 ure fag ae vis fumrs Bil (245-12, aVst, He 3)
naanak manmukh thaa-o na paa-ay bin gur at pi-aaray. ||3]|
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukh finds no place of rest, without the most Beloved Guru. ||3||
Hu fenret sat foareior AG furs vient wrurar I (245-12, west, v2 3)
munDh i-aanee bholee nigunee-aa jee-o pir agam apaaraa.
The bride is foolish, ignorant and unworthy. Her Husband Lord is Unapproachable and Incomparable.
nmy Hfs frst AG wm guAST ST Il (245-13, Test, He 3) aapay mayl milee-ai jee-o aapay bakhsanhaaraa. He Himself unites us in His Union; He Himself forgives us.
Weds sdASS aHfs aS filmit wie wie afoot AHTeT II (245-13, ast, He 3)
avgan bakhsanhaaraa kaaman kant pi-aaraa ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-ee.
The soul-bride's Beloved Husband Lord is the Forgiver of sins; He is contained in each and every heart.
yn us afte sat uret wfsafs gs gsret i (245-14, aes, vs 3)
paraym pareet bhaa-ay bhagtee paa-ee-ai satgur boojh bujhaa-ee.
The True Guru has made me understand this understanding, that the Lord is obtained through love, affection and loving devotion.
Het nidfe ad fea ast nates ad fos wet i (245-15, ast, v2 3)
sadaa anand rahai din raatee an-din rahai liv laa-ee.
She remains forever in bliss, day and night; she remains immersed in His Love, night and day.
Sa HUH dig eg ufemr AT ue a@ fofa uret ISiSil (245-15, aSst, He 3)
naanak sehjay har var paa-i-aa saa Dhan na-o niDh paa-ee. ||4||3|| O Nanak, that soul-bride who obtains the nine treasures, intuitively obtains her Husband Lord. ||4]|3]|
ast HIS 3 Il (245-16)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
Hho Ag AaG eds AG fas afs vag sfoor ATE I (245-16, ast, v2 3)
maa-i-aa sar sabal vartai jee-o ki-o kar dutar tari-aa jaa-ay. The sea of Maya is agitated and turbulent; how can anyone cross over this terrifying world-ocean?
oH oy afe Sfee HG Age de™ fefe ute II (245-17, aes, He 3) raam naam kar bohithaa jee-o sabad khayvat vich paa-ay. Make the Lord's Name your boat, and install the Word of the Shabad as the boatman.
Rae age fefes uve ofa orf sure feo fafa esa sdb il (245-17, ast, He 3)
sabad khayvat vich paa-ay har aap laghaa-ay in biDh dutar taree-ai.
With the Shabad installed as the boatman, the Lord Himself shall take you across. In this way, the difficult ocean is crossed.
aenfy sats usufs de Htefamr fe@ db il (245-18, west, ne 3)
gurmukh bhagat paraapat hovai jeevti-aa i-o maree-ai.
The Gurmukh obtains devotional worship of the Lord, and thus remains dead while yet alive.
fas nfs TH OH fated ae se ufez AST Il (245-18, aCHt, He 3) khin meh raam naam kilvikh kaatay bha-ay pavit sareeraa. In an instant, the Lord's Name erases his sinful mistakes, and his body becomes pure.
aoa TH ath feHsa ads SS HST MAUI (245-19, Test, we 3)
naanak raam naam nistaaraa kanchan bha-ay manooraa. ||1] |
O Nanak, through the Lord's Name, emancipation is obtained, and the slag iron is transformed into gold. ||1]|
Uat 2g fensdt usa ath fend ate an am at fafa oct Aret Il (246-1, a7eHt, v2 3)
istaree purakh kaam vi-aapay jee-o raam naam kee biDh nahee jaanee. Men and women are obsessed with sex; they do not know the Way of the Lord's Name.
Hs fust AS set ud flmrs AI sfs He fae urat il (246-1, west, He 3)
maat pitaa sut bhaa-ee kharay pi-aaray jee-o doob mu-ay bin paanee.
Mother, father, children and siblings are very dear, but they drown, even without water.
fa ye fag urat afs oot Wet TBH US AAS II (246-2, Test, 3 3)
doob mu-ay bin paanee gat nahee jaanee ha-umai Dhaat sansaaray.
They are drowned to death without water - they do not know the path of salvation, and they wander around the world in egotism.
A otfenr AAS ao WHT Cad ae Sted Il (246-2, aGat, ne 3)
jo aa-i-aa so sabh ko jaasee ubray gur veechaaray.
All those who come into the world shall depart. Only those who contemplate the Guru Shall be saved.
Tanta JS TH aH sure onfu 3g AG 3S Il (246-3, aSat, He 3)
gurmukh hovai raam naam vakhaanai aap tarai kul taaray.
Those who become Gurmukh and chant the Lord's Name, save themselves and save their families as well.
Soa BH ZA we nists qenfs fue fimrs iI (246-4, ast, v2 3)
naanak naam vasai ghat antar gurmat milay pi-aaray. ||2| |
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within their hearts; through the Guru's Teachings, they meet their Beloved. ||2||
oH oH fag a fag ant HE set FAAS I (246-4, TSH, He 3) raam naam bin ko thir naahee jee-o baajee hai sansaaraa. Without the Lord's Name, nothing is stable. This world is just a drama.
fez sats At AG TH aM ETT | (246-5, ast, ws 3) darirh bhagat sachee jee-o raam naam vaapaaraa. Implant true devotional worship within your heart, and trade in the Name of the Lord.
TH SH SUS Ma MUTeT TSHSt US Teh Il (246-5, aSst, ne 3)
raam naam vaapaaraa agam apaaraa gurmatee Dhan paa-ee-ai.
Trade in the Lord's Name is infinite and unfathomable. Through the Guru's Teachings, this wealth is obtained.
Re’ Aofs safs feo wt fees wy Tevet Il (246-6, ast, 2 3)
sayvaa surat bhagat ih saachee vichahu aap gavaa-ee-ai.
This selfless service, meditation and devotion is true, if you eliminate selfishness and conceit from within.
oH Hfs de Hee Hara wid Afsafs Haft ure Il (246-6, TCs, v8 3) ham mat heen moorakh mugaDh anDhay satgur maarag paa-ay.
I am senseless, foolish, idiotic and blind, but the True Guru has placed me on the Path.
Soa THY Aafe AIS nofes Is Te WE Ill (246-7, ast, uz 3)
naanak gurmukh sabad suhaavay an-din har gun gaa-ay. ||3]||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are adorned with the Shabad; night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
nifty ase ad nity AIG nm Rafe Aes Il (246-7, aSst, He 3) aap karaa-ay karay aap jee-o aapay sabad savaaray.
He Himself acts, and inspires others to act; He Himself embellishes us with the Word of His Shabad.
mma Afsag wifu nae AIG Aa Aa Sars fms Il (246-8, ast, 2 3)
aapay satgur aap sabad jee-o jug jug bhagat pi-aaray.
He Himself is the True Guru, and He Himself is the Shabad; in each and every age, He loves His devotees.
Ad Fa sas fumrd ote urfu Aes mm sarst BE Il (246-9, aSst, He 3)
jug jug bhagat pi-aaray har aap savaaray aapay bhagtee laa-ay.
In age after age, He loves His devotees; the Lord Himself adorns them, and He Himself enjoins them to worship Him with devotion.
My VST my Hot nim AS ATES Il (246-9, ast, ve 3) aapay daanaa aapay beenaa aapay sayv karaa-ay. He Himself is All-knowing, and He Himself is All-seeing; He inspires us to serve Him.
nM Tees" niea|e ate fase SH SATS Il (246-10, ast, He 3)
aapay gundaataa avgun kaatay hirdai naam vasaa-ay.
He Himself is the Giver of merits, and the Destroyer of demerits; He causes His Name to dwell within our hearts.
Soa AE Wes Ad feeTg nmy aI ATES ISI (246-10, TVs, ve 3)
naanak sad balihaaree sachay vitahu aapay karay karaa-ay. ||4]|4||
Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the True Lord, who Himself is the Doer, the Cause of causes. ||4||4]|
ast HIS 3 Il (246-11)
ga-orhee mehlaa 3. Gauree, Third Mehl:
aa at Ae ate fue Ate af an fore I (246-11, aBat, He 3) gur kee sayvaa kar piraa jee-o har naam Dhi-aa-ay. Serve the Guru, O my dear soul; meditate on the Lord's Name.
Heg ofs 3 ate fur HG wie Sfomr afs ure il (246-11, aes, Hs 3)
manjahu door na jaahi piraa jee-o ghar baithi-aa har paa-ay.
Do not leave me, O my dear soul - you shall find the Lord while sitting within the home of your own being.
ufs Sfonr of ure net fos we AOA APS ASE Il (246-12, 7eHt, He 3)
ghar baithi-aa har paa-ay sadaa chit laa-ay sehjay sat subhaa-ay.
You shall obtain the Lord while sitting within the home of your own being, focusing your consciousness constantly upon the Lord, with true intuitive faith.
ae at Ast udt Hest fan 3 vrfy ATS I (246-13, ast, He 3)
gur kee sayvaa kharee sukhaalee jis no aap karaa-ay.
Serving the Guru brings great peace; they alone do it, whom the Lord inspires to do SO.
oH dit oH AH Ont Hfs SATS It (246-13, ast, we 3)
naamo beejay naamo jammai naamo man vasaa-ay.
They plant the seed of the Name, and the Name sprouts within; the Name abides within the mind.
aaa Ale oth efsnret usta fofimr ure nail (246-14, ast, He 3)
naanak sach naam vadi-aa-ee poorab likhi-aa paa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, glorious greatness rests in the True Name; It is obtained by perfect pre- ordained destiny. ||1]|
ofa a on io fue Ae A orate fas we I (246-14, ast, He 3)
har kaa naam meethaa piraa jee-o jaa chaakhahi chit laa-ay.
The Name of the Lord is so sweet, O my dear; taste it, and focus your consciousness on it.
AS Ud JA BY HG AIG no DA ATS TSS Il (246-15, Test, 2 3)
rasnaa har ras chaakh muyay jee-o an ras saad gavaa-ay.
Taste the sublime essence of the Lord with your tongue, my dear, and renounce the pleasures of other tastes.
He ofg dA ue AT dfs ae TAS" Aafe ATES Il (246-15, west, He 3)
sadaa har ras paa-ay jaa har bhaa-ay rasnaa sabad suhaa-ay.
You shall obtain the everlasting essence of the Lord when it pleases the Lord; your tongue shall be adorned with the Word of His Shabad.
om foure Feet AY ue of ad fee BES Il (246-16, ast, He 3)
naam Dhi-aa-ay sadaa sukh paa-ay naam rahai liv laa-ay.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, a lasting peace is obtained; so remain lovingly focused on the Naam.
on Cun an faon on Afs AWS Il (246-16, Test, He 3)
naamay upjai naamay binsai naamay sach samaa-ay.
From the Naam we originate, and into the Naam we shall pass; through the Naam, we are absorbed in the Truth.
Soa SH TIHSt Usha mm} BE BTS Nl (246-17, ast, v2 3)
naanak naam gurmatee paa-ee-ai aapay la-ay lavaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, the Naam is obtained through the Guru's Teachings; He Himself attaches us to it. ||2]|
fg ferret vadt fue HG ue efs useth foe I (246-17, aBHt, v2 3)
ayh vidaanee chaakree piraa jee-o Dhan chhod pardays siDhaa-ay.
Working for someone else, O my dear, is like forsaking the bride, and going to foreign countries.
en fas AY 3 utes fue Fe faftmr Sis Bare i (246-18, Tes, v2 3)
doojai kinai sukh na paa-i-o piraa jee-o bikhi-aa lobh lubhaa-ay.
In duality, no one has ever found peace, O my dear; you are greedy for corruption and greed.
fafior dfs sae safh sore Gg fa afe wy Ue II (246-18, aGat, He 3) bikhi-aa lobh lubhaa-ay bharam bhulaa-ay oh ki-o kar sukh paa-ay. Greedy for corruption and greed, and deluded by doubt, how can anyone find peace?
aad fesrat ust surat miry Sfe TaN TASS Il (246-19, TSst, He 3)
chaakree vidaanee kharee dukhaalee aap vaych Dharam gavaa-ay.
Working for strangers is very painful; doing so, one sells himself and loses his faith in the Dharma.
Ust 28 Hfeur das feet andt fas fas eu ASS Il (247-1, ast, v2 3)
maa-i-aa banDhan tikai naahee khin khin dukh santaa-ay. Bound by Maya, the mind is not stable. Each and every moment, it suffers in pain.
aoa Hint at gy se Ya AT AT Aaet fos BS USI (247-1, wes, ws 3) naanak maa-i-aa kaa dukh taday chookai jaa gur sabdee chit laa-ay. ||3]||
O Nanak, the pain of Maya is taken away by focusing one's consciousness on the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
HouY Hag arerg fust HIG Age Hfo 6 SAS Il (247-2, aCat, 2 3)
manmukh mugaDh gaavaar piraa jee-o sabad man na vasaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs are foolish and crazy, O my dear; they do not enshrine the Shabad within their minds.
Heo a gy nig fuer AG ofe urea fas urs i (247-2, aS, us 3)
maa-i-aa kaa bharam anDh piraa jee-o har maarag ki-o paa-ay.
The delusion of Maya has made them blind, O my dear; how can they find the Way of the Lord?
fag waa ure fag Afsagd aS HOHfe ny TSS Il (247-3, aah, us 3)
ki-o maarag paa-ay bin satgur bhaa-ay manmukh aap ganaa-ay.
How can they find the Way, without the Will of the True Guru? The manmukhs foolishly display themselves.
dfs A WAT Ae AIS Td vsat fas Be I (247-4, ast, ue 3)
har kay chaakar sadaa suhaylay gur charnee chit laa-ay.
The Lord's servants are forever comfortable. They focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet.
fan 6 ofa HG ad fas Ae afs A Te WE I (247-4, TSH, ve 3)
jis no har jee-o karay kirpaa sadaa har kay gun gaa-ay.
Those unto whom the Lord shows His Mercy, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
SOA SH ISG Ala Sa TeHfy wif FSS WSNUNDI (247-5, ASH, He 3)
naanak naam ratan jag laahaa gurmukh aap bujhaa-ay. ||4||5||7||
O Nanak, the jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the only profit in this world. The Lord Himself imparts this understanding to the Gurmukh. ||4||5]|7]|
TI ACSt SS HIS U (247-6) raag ga-orhee chhant mehlaa 5 Raag Gauree, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe it (247-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ae ufs saa sfeur He fae Sar ys SS I (247-7, ast, ne 5) mayrai man bairaag bha-i-aa jee-o ki-o daykhaa parabh daatay. My mind has become sad and depressed; how can I see God, the Great Giver?
He His Ae ofs AIG ae use fears II (247-7, ash, nH 5) mayray meet sakhaa har jee-o gur purakh biDhaatay. My Friend and Companion is the Dear Lord, the Guru, the Architect of Destiny.
usd faorst Sa Flog fae fires 33 Cstehor i (247-8, ast, 2 5)
purkho biDhaataa ayk sareeDhar ki-o milah tujhai udeenee-aa.
The One Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is the Master of the Goddess of Wealth; how can I, in my sadness, meet You?
AT Add AS AA Vaal Hf nA TEA fSHramr I (247-8, aBst, He 5)
kar karahi sayvaa sees charnee man aas daras nimaanee-aa.
My hands serve You, and my head is at Your Feet. My mind, dishonored, yearns for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
AMA ATA oO wat feAs UB Has fee TS I (247-9, wat, we 5)
Saas Saas na gharhee visrai pal moorat din raatay.
With each and every breath, I think of You, day and night; I do not forget You, for an instant, even for a moment.
soa Afda fa firma fe fiesba ys BS UA (247-9, ast, 8 5) naanak saaring ji-o pi-aasay ki-o milee-ai parabh daatay. ||1|| O Nanak, I am thirsty, like the rainbird; how can I meet God, the Great Giver? ||1]|
fea faoG asG HIG afs aS fumrs th (247-10, aBst, nH 5) ik bin-o kara-o jee-o sun kant pi-aaray. I offer this one prayer - please listen, O my Beloved Husband Lord.
Ha He 30 Hfs Shor He Sha vos Bs | (247-10, ast, v2 5) mayraa man tan mohi lee-aa jee-o daykh chalat tumaaray. My mind and body are enticed, beholding Your wondrous play.
Tos SHS Uf Hat Gera us fas ase it (247-11, aSst, v2 5)
chaltaa tumaaray daykh mohee udaas Dhan ki-o Dheer-ay.
Beholding Your wondrous play, I am enticed; but how can the sad, forlorn bride find contentment?
Tees HT cfenrge Wer Aga TS FIUE Il (247-12, ast, vz 5)
gunvant naah da-i-aal baalaa sarab gun bharpoor-ay.
My Lord is Meritorious, Merciful and Eternally Young; He is overflowing with all excellences.
fus fH ont Hu ws Je fest sfaors II (247-12, aes, v2 5)
pir dos naahee sukhah daatay ha-o vichhurhee buri-aaray.
The fault is not with my Husband Lord, the Giver of peace; I am separated from Him by my own mistakes.
faodts aoa efor wag ute wreg arg fumirs iQ (247-13, west, Hz 5) binvant naanak da-i-aa Dhaarahu ghar aavhu naah pi-aaray. ||2||
Prays Nanak, please be merciful to me, and return home, O my Beloved Husband Lord. ||2]|
JG HO “aut AS So Mat mraut Afs SAT I (247-13, ast, He 5) ha-o man arpee sabh tan arpee arpee sabh daysaa. I surrender my mind, I surrender my whole body; I surrender all my lands.
u@ fig nreut fan vis fimrd F us ef ASAT I (247-14, west, He 5)
ha-o sir arpee tis meet pi-aaray jo parabh day-ay sadaysaa. I surrender my head to that beloved friend, who brings me news of God.
wefior 3 Ata Fetes ae ufo Afar ys feurfenr i (247-14, Gat, H3 5)
arpi-aa ta sees suthaan gur peh sang parabhoo dikhaa-i-aa.
I have offered my head to the Guru, the most exalted; He has shown me that God is with me.
fas ufo Hore ey fife Hog fefeor ufemr il (247-15, ast, 48 5) khin maahi saglaa dookh miti-aa manhu chindi-aa paa-i-aa. In an instant, all suffering is removed. I have obtained all my mind's desires.
feo df= aétor ad anfé fre Aare MISAT II (247-15, aGHt, He 5)
din rain ralee-aa karai kaaman mitay sagal andaysaa. Day and night, the soul-bride makes merry; all her anxieties are erased.
faodfs aoa as fiufemr S33 TH AA ISI (247-16, TES, 4 5) binvant naanak kant mili-aa lorh-tay ham jaisaa. ||3]|| Prays Nanak, I have met the Husband Lord of my longing. ||3]|
He nfs wise sfeur AG sat Sraret Il (247-16, aBst, v2 5) mayrai man anad bha-i-aa jee-o vajee vaaDhaa-ee. My mind is filled with bliss, and congratulations are pouring in.
wie ares nitfent fume AS far gsret I (247-17, wBst, He 5) ghar laal aa-i-aa pi-aaraa sabh tikhaa bujhaa-ee. My Darling Beloved has come home to me, and all my desires have been satisfied.
fifeor 3 oe que sag vet Hae afenr it 247-17, aVHt, He 5)
mili-aa ta laal gupaal thaakur sakhee mangal gaa-i-aa.
I have met my Sweet Lord and Master of the Universe, and my companions sing the songs of joy.
Ag Hts dou vey Cuftor es aS aefenr ii (247-18, ast, Hs 5)
sabh meet banDhap harakh upji-aa doot thaa-o gavaa-i-aa.
All my friends and relatives are happy, and all traces of my enemies have been removed.
Woods eA zafs we yfo fue Afat AA feeret i (247-19, aSHt, v2 5)
anhat vaajay vajeh ghar meh pir sang sayj vichhaa-ee.
The unstruck melody vibrates in my home, and the bed has been made up for my Beloved.
faodfs aoa Aofa ad fe fifeur xs Feet IAI (247-19, asst, He 5)
binvant naanak sahj rahai har mili-aa kant sukh-daa-ee. ||4||1]|
Prays Nanak, I am in celestial bliss. I have obtained the Lord, the Giver of peace, as my Husband. ||4||1]|
UST Wt
ast HIS U Il (248-1)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
HIS 33 SI HET HIG weary I (248-1, Test, He 5) mohan tayray oochay mandar mahal apaaraa. O Mohan, your temple is so lofty, and your mansion is unsurpassed.
Huo 39 Aofe enre HIG AS GH ATH Il (248-1, aBst, He 5) mohan tayray sohan du-aar jee-o sant Dharam saalaa. O Mohan, your gates are so beautiful. They are the worship-houses of the Saints.
UdH AG Mus Snitg StaT Het also WeT Il (248-2, west, ue 5)
Dharam saal apaar dai-aar thaakur sadaa keertan gaavhay.
In these incomparable worship-houses, they continually sing Kirtan, the Praises of their Lord and Master.
Ag AG AS feas defs so safe fimr|d Il (248-2, west, ne 5) jah saaDh sant ikatar hoveh tahaa tujheh Dhi-aavhay. Where the Saints and the Holy gather together, there they meditate on you.
afe efeur nfsor efeors Amit do cto furs il (248-3, a@st, v2 5) kar da-i-aa ma-i-aa da-i-aal su-aamee hohu deen kirpaaraa. Be Kind and Compassionate, O Merciful Lord; be Merciful to the meek.
faodfs aoa van fimrr fife wane AY ATS IAI (248-4, aBst, Hz 5)
binvant naanak daras pi-aasay mil darsan sukh saaraa. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, I thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; receiving Your Darshan, I am totally at peace. ||1]|
HIS 3s ass nigu ws feast il 248-4, ast, vz 5) mohan tayray bachan anoop chaal niraalee. O Mohan, your speech is incomparable; wondrous are your ways.
Has 3 Hols Sa At nisa AS TS Il (248-5, Test, we 5) mohan too” maaneh ayk jee avar sabh raalee. O Mohan, you believe in the One. Everything else is dust to you.
Hols 3 Sa wy Sad fHats AS Aw Urs Il (248-5, ast, ve 5)
maaneh ta ayk alaykh thaakur jineh sabh kal Dhaaree-aa.
You adore the One Lord, the Unknowable Lord and Master; His Power gives Support to all.
30 sefe ae & afh oor orfe use soe | (248-6, ae, He 5)
tuDh bachan gur kai vas kee-aa aad purakh banvaaree-aa.
Through the Guru's Word, you have captured the heart of the Primal Being, the Lord of the World.
3 urfy afer orf sfoor wrt As ae Udo Il (248-6, west, 43 5)
too” aap chali-aa aap rahi-aa aap sabh kal Dhaaree-aa.
You Yourself move, and You Yourself stand still; You Yourself support the whole creation.
faodfs aoa Un Tug AS Aza als SHS NMI (248-7, ast, ve 5)
binvant naanak paij raakho sabh sayvak saran tumaaree-aa. ||2||
Prays Nanak, please preserve my honor; all Your servants seek the Protection of Your Sanctuary. ||2||
Hue 30 AsHafs fomre van foro I (248-7, aSst, He 5)
mohan tuDh satsangat Dhi-aavai daras Dhi-aanaa.
O Mohan, the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, meditates on you; they meditate on the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Huo AH afs 5 ure Su Auta fees Il (248-8, aeHt, He 5)
mohan jam nayrh na aavai tuDh jaapeh nidaanaa.
O Mohan, the Messenger of Death does not even approach those who meditate on You, at the last moment.
AHS fs5 aS wal ot F fea nfs foamed I (248-8, Tea, He 5) jamkaal tin ka-o lagai naahee jo ik man Dhi-aavhay. The Messenger of Death cannot touch those who meditate on You single-mindedly.
Hfe sete aay fa su maats A AS SH urSNT Il (248-9, west, v2 5)
man bachan karam je tuDh araaDheh say sabhay fal paavhay.
Those who worship and adore You in thought, word and deed, obtain all fruits and rewards.
HS 3 ue fat Hara dS fA etfs ean Afamrar il (248-9, aes, 3 5)
mal moot moorh je mugaDh hotay se daykh daras sugi-aanaa.
Those who are foolish and stupid, filthy with urine and manure, become all-knowing upon gaining the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
faodts aoa TH fegse YTS UTY SHASTA ISI (248-10, wat, 3 5) binvant naanak raaj nihchal pooran purakh bhagvaanaa. ||3]| Prays Nanak, Your Kingdom is Eternal, O Perfect Primal Lord God. ||3]|
Hus J HSS Sloot AS UT!S I (248-11, wat, we 5) mohan too” sufal fali-aa san parvaaray. O Mohan, you have blossomed forth with the flower of your family.
Hue uz Hts aret ada Afs SS Il (248-11, aSst, 8 5) mohan putar meet bhaa-ee kutamb sabh taaray. O Mohan, your children, friends, siblings and relatives have all been saved.
stot Ase Bloor uifsHts fast Pane ufenr Il (248-11, 7eHt, He 5)
taari-aa jahaan lahi-aa abhimaan jinee darsan paa-i-aa.
You save those who give up their egotistical pride, upon gaining the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
frat 306 Ue afonr fs AN afs 5 urfenr I (248-12, ae, He 5) jinee tuDhno Dhan kahi-aa tin jam nayrh na aa-i-aa. The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who call you ‘blessed’.
Buis TE 3d AA O Wed Afsag use HIT Il (248-12, west, Hz 5)
bay-ant gun tayray kathay na jaahee satgur purakh muraaray.
Your Virtues are unlimited - they cannot be described, O True Guru, Primal Being, Destroyer of demons.
faodfs aoa 2a amt fas ofa sfemr HATS NII (248-13, west, nH 5)
binvant naanak tayk raakhee jit lag tari-aa sansaaray. ||4||2||
Prays Nanak, Yours is that Anchor, holding onto which the whole world is saved. [141121]
ast HIS U Il (248-14)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl,
ASE Il (248-14)
salok. Shalok:
ufss nity uals afs usd udd Sfeos I (248-14, west, He 5) patit asa‘kh puneet kar punah punah balihaar. Countless sinners have been purified; I am a sacrifice, over and over again, to You.
soa TH oH Afy ued fSo faofry BIST ST NA (248-14, aCe, He 5)
naanak raam naam jap paavko tin kilbikh dahanhaar. ||1]|
O Nanak, meditation on the Lord's Name is the fire which burns away sinful mistakes like straw. ||1]|
2S ll (248-15) chhant. Chhant:
mf Ho SoH sae|s afer ahs HT I (248-15, TSH, Hs 5)
jap manaa too” raam naraa-in govindaa har maaDho.
Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord God, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Master of Wealth.
fomrfe Hot Hafe Hae aint aw Ta |S Il (248-16, ast, v2 5)
Dhi-aa-ay manaa muraar mukanday katee-ai kaal dukh faaDho.
Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord, the Destroyer of ego, the Giver of salvation, who cuts away the noose of agonizing death.
wuss tie Ave Alas Bas AHS mrad I (248-16, aSst, ne 5)
dukhharan deen saran sareeDhar charan kamal araaDhee-ai. Meditate lovingly on the Lotus Feet of the Lord, the Destroyer of distress, the Protector of the poor, the Lord of excellence.
an ue feat mrafe Aver fore fares Arch It (248-17, ast, v2 5)
jam panth bikh-rhaa agan saagar nimakh simrat saaDhee-ai.
The treacherous path of death and the terrifying ocean of fire are crossed over by meditating in remembrance on the Lord, even for an instant.
afsHed vast AU aes feor Sf= mat I (248-17, west, He 5) kalimalah dahtaa suDh kartaa dinas rain araaDho. Meditate day and night on the Lord, the Destroyer of desire, the Purifier of pollution.
faodfs aoa add faour dure adfsi=s HT NAN (248-18, aGHt, He 5)
binvant naanak karahu kirpaa gopaal gobind maaDho. ||1]||
Prays Nanak, please be Merciful to me, O Cherisher of the world, Lord of the Universe, Lord of wealth. ||1]|
frufs Hot ees Buss S SHO Tha Theor | (248-18, Test, He 5)
simar manaa daamodar dukhhar bhai bhanjan har raa-i-aa.
O my mind, remember the Lord in meditation; He is the Destroyer of pain, the Eradicator of fear, the Sovereign Lord King.
Alda efimrs Houg safs zee faserfemr II (248-19, aBxt, He 5)
sareerango da-i-aal manohar bhagat vachhal birdaa-i-aa.
He is the Greatest Lover, the Merciful Master, the Enticer of the mind, the Support of His devotees - this is His very nature.
Ua 2et Sas Fes UTA Uso Hota fefenr usb Il (249-1, Tes, v2 5)
bhagat vachhal purakh pooran maneh chindi-aa paa-ee-ai. The Perfect Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He fulfills the desires of the mind.
3H vig aus Bars omy Hf SATS I (249-1, 7st, v2 5) tam anDh koop tay uDhaarai naam man vasaa-ee-ai. He lifts us up out of the deep, dark pit; enshrine His Name within your mind.
Ho faa ae aos ufs Ae Te ifsa sarst arfeur | (249-2, aSHt, He 5)
sur siDh gan ganDharab mun jan gun anik bhagtee gaa-i-aa.
The gods, the Siddhas, the angels, the heavenly singers, the silent sages and the devotees sing Your countless Glorious Praises.
faadis aoa aay fas ursqaH ofe ahem HQ (249-2, ast, Hs 5) binvant naanak karahu kirpaa paarbarahm har raa-i-aa. ||2]| Prays Nanak, please be merciful to me, O Supreme Lord God, my King. ||2||
dfs Hot USYIH USHA Ada aor fafs ord il (249-3, west, ve 5)
chayt manaa paarbarahm parmaysar sarab kalaa jin Dhaaree.
O my mind, be conscious of the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, who wields all power.
age" H AME Hom we we yre ward il (249-3, a@et, ve 5)
karunaa mai samrath su-aamee ghat ghat paraan aDhaaree.
He is All-powerful, the Embodiment of compassion. He is the Master of each and every heart;
UTS HO So Abel St Anis ma wns Il (249-4, ast, ne 5)
paraan man tan jee-a daataa bay-ant agam apaaro.
He is the Support of the breath of life. He is the Giver of the breath of life, of mind, body and soul. He is Infinite, Inaccessible and Unfathomable.
Hafs tal ANGE HIS Aes Su fkers il (249-4, aSst, v2 5)
saran jog samrath mohan sarab dokh bidaaro.
The All-powerful Lord is our Sanctuary; He is the Enticer of the mind, who banishes all SOrrows.
da Aa Afs eu faonfs Aus oH HATS Il (249-5, aGst, ne 5) rog sog sabh dokh binsahi japat naam muraaree. All illnesses, sufferings and pains are dispelled, by chanting the Name of the Lord.
faodfs aoa agg faa ANGE AS aw Ud INSll (249-5, west, nz 5)
binvant naanak karahu kirpaa samrath sabh kal Dhaaree. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, please be merciful to me, All-powerful Lord; You are the Wielder of all power. ||3]|
TE WS Ho mgs oifsort Ass Sw efenrar il (249-6, ast, v2 5)
gun gaa-o manaa achut abhinaasee sabh tay ooch da-i-aalaa. O my mind, sing the Glorious Praises of the Imperishable, Eternal, Merciful Master, the Highest of all.
farisg 225 aG Sa nae ad ufsurer il (249-7, west, ne 5)
bisambhar dayvan ka-o aykai sarab karai partipaalaa.
The One Lord is the Sustainer of the Universe, the Great Giver; He is the Cherisher of all.
ufsurs Hot efi eer efeor ord AS FAA I (249-7, 7eHt, ne 5) partipaal mahaa da-i-aal daanaa da-i-aa Dhaaray sabh kisai. The Cherisher Lord is so very merciful and wise; He is compassionate to all.
ae Aca BT HT SA Hy A a YS SA Il (249-8, aS, us 5)
kaal kantak lobh moh naasai jee-a jaa kai parabh basai.
The pains of death, greed and emotional attachment simply vanish, when God comes to dwell in the soul.
HYHS Ge" ASS AST SEt UTS WH Il (249-8, ast, we 5) suparsan dayvaa Safal sayvaa bha-ee pooran ghaalaa. When the Lord is thoroughly pleased, then one's service becomes perfectly fruitful.
faods soa fee ust Aus ete Sys IgilSil (249-9, aSst, He 5)
binvant naanak ichh punee japat deen dai-aalaa. ||4]|3]|
Prays Nanak, my desires are fulfilled by meditating on the Lord, Merciful to the meek. [41131]
ACS HIS U Il (249-9)
ga-orhee mehlaa 5. Gauree, Fifth Mehl:
Afs mete fife Gen ada Harte Sfs af AS Il (249-9, west, He 5)
sun sakhee-ay mil udam karayhaa manaa-ay laihi har kantai.
Listen, O my companions: let's join together and make the effort, to surrender to our Husband Lord.
Hg fsurfa ate sats saset HoT AT HS I (249-10, wes, 8 5)
maan ti-aag kar bhagat thag-uree mohah saaDhoo mantai.
Renouncing our pride, let's charm Him with the potion of devotional worship, and the mantra of the Holy Saints.
Ret 2fh urfenr fefs efs 5 vet fea dS sat sae3 I (249-10, ast, nH: 5)
sakhee vas aa-i-aa fir chhod na jaa-ee ih reet bhalee bhagvantai.
O my companions, when He comes under our power, He shall never leave us again. This is the good nature of the Lord God.
Sod Ad’ HIE F Oda foetd usls ad FSA HS NAN (249-11, aSst, ne 5) naanak jaraa maran bhai narak nivaarai puneet karai tis jantai. ||1]| O Nanak, God dispels the fear of old age, death and hell; He purifies His beings. ||1]|
Afe mete feo set fasst So Hsts uae Ih (249-12, aBst, v2 5) sun sakhee-ay ih bhalee binantee ayhu mataa™t pakaa-ee-ai. Listen, O my companions, to my sincere prayer: let's make this firm resolve.
Hofa nate Guia gos afe ats afefo wea i (249-102, west, v2 5)
sahj subhaa-ay upaaDh rahat ho-ay geet govindeh gaa-ee-ai.
In the peaceful poise of intuitive bliss, violence will be gone, as we sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
afes aan fuefs gH ofa fe fefeor ee ure Il (249-13, a@et, He 5)
kal kalays miteh bharam naaseh man chindi-aa fal paa-ee-ai.
Our pains and troubles shall be eradicated, and our doubts shall be dispelled; we will receive the fruits of our minds' desires.
UTSYTH UIS USHAT asa SH foment 2M (249-13, Tes, we 5)
paarbarahm pooran parmaysar naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. | |2| |
O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Supreme Lord God, the Perfect, Transcendent Lord. ||2| |
Ret fee act fos AY HoTet ys AST MTA UATE II (249-14, Tat, ws 5)
sakhee ichh karee nit sukh manaa-ee parabh mayree aas pujaa-ay.
O my companions, I yearn for Him continually; I invoke His Blessings, and pray that God may fulfill my hopes.
ado fimret ean Soafs ua ae ATES | (249-15, ast, He 5)
charan pi-aasee daras bairaagan paykha-o thaan sabaa-ay.
I thirst for His Feet, and I long for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; I look for Him everywhere.
aff wu@ uf AS Ao Aa Afys use fee Il (249-15, a@Ht, ve 5)
khoj laha-o har sant janaa sang sammrith purakh milaa-ay.
I search for traces of the Lord in the Society of the Saints; they will unite me with the All-powerful Primal Lord God.
aed fs fufeor AfsAe AMES" A esa HS NI (249-16, aSst, He 5)
naanak tin mili-aa surijan sukh-daata say vadbhaagee maa-ay. ||3]|
O Nanak, those humble, noble beings who meet the Lord, the Giver of peace, are very blessed, O my mother. ||3]|
Ret of SA nus org fimrd Hat Ho 3a Jha Afar fate i (249-16, aCHt, He 5) sakhee naal vasaa apunay naah pi-aaray mayraa man tan har sang hili-aa.
O my companions, now I dwell with my Beloved Husband; my mind and body are attuned to the Lord.
Afe Ade Het ote set H nmusar furs fifeor i (249-17, aSHt, v2 5) sun sakhee-ay mayree need bhalee mai aapnarhaa pir mili-aa. Listen, O my companions: now I sleep well, since I found my Husband Lord.
gn ufes vfs Raff AyMmit usera sfeur ae fufemr I (249-18, weHt, He 5) bharam kho-i-o saa‘t sahj su-aamee pargaas bha-i-aa ka-ul khili-aa.
My doubts have been dispelled, and I have found intuitive peace and tranquility through my Lord and Master. I have been enlightened, and my heart-lotus has blossomed forth.
zg ufeur us nisarmt aoa Aad o Shem NSNSIQNUINAA (249-18, aes, 48 5)
var paa-i-aa parabh antarjaamee naanak sohaag na tali-aa. ||4]|4]|2]|5]|11]| I have obtained God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, as my Husband; O Nanak, my marriage shall last forever. ||4]|4]|2]|5]|11]|
Uat Quo qe Asad YATE II (250-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ast FSS mast HIS U Il (250-1)
ga-orhee baavan akhree mehlaa 5. Gauree, Baavan Akhree ~ The 52 Letters, Fifth Mehl:
AS Il (250-1) salok. Shalok:
des HS" Tees fuss Tees AnMit USHAT Il (250-1, aS, ns 5)
gurdayv maataa gurdayv pitaa gurdayv su-aamee parmaysuraa.
The Divine Guru is my mother, the Divine Guru is my father; the Divine Guru is my Transcendent Lord and Master.
ses Ae wifes SAS TseS sfou AdeT | (250-2, west, ne 5)
gurdayv sakhaa agi-aan bhanjan gurdayv banDhip sahodaraa.
The Divine Guru is my companion, the Destroyer of ignorance; the Divine Guru is my relative and brother.
Tes ws ofa aH Cuen gees Hy fedaa il (250-2, ast, v2 5)
gurdayv daataa har naam updaysai gurdayv mant niroDharaa.
The Divine Guru is the Giver, the Teacher of the Lord's Name. The Divine Guru is the Mantra which never fails.
gees ATS As afa Hats TIS UTA UTA UT I (250-3, ast, He 5)
gurdayv saat sat buDh moorat gurdayv paaras paras paraa.
The Divine Guru is the Image of peace, truth and wisdom. The Divine Guru is the Philosopher's Stone - touching it, one is transformed.
ses Stee nifys Ade as fomrs HAS mrudUS Il (250-3, west, ne 5)
gurdayv tirath amrit sarovar gur gi-aan majan apramparaa.
The Divine Guru is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage, and the pool of divine ambrosia; bathing in the Guru's wisdom, one experiences the Infinite.
qses Aas Als UY Jas Tses ufss ules AT Il (250-4, ast, ue 5)
gurdayv kartaa sabh paap hartaa gurdayv patit pavit karaa.
The Divine Guru is the Creator, and the Destroyer of all sins; the Divine Guru is the Purifier of sinners.
dees orfe warfe wa Ha Aves HS Jfe wf Gas I (250-5, ast, v2 5)
gurdayv aad jugaad jug jug gurdayv mant har jap uDhraa.
The Divine Guru existed at the primal beginning, throughout the ages, in each and every age. The Divine Guru is the Mantra of the Lord's Name; chanting it, one is saved.
ses Hats ys Af ats fas TH Hs unit firs afer Sa Il (250-5, ast, Hs 5) gurdayv sangat parabh mayl kar kirpaa ham moorh paapee jit lag taraa.
O God, please be merciful to me, that I may be with the Divine Guru; I am a foolish sinner, but holding onto Him, I am carried across.
TIeS AfsdgI USZIH USHA Ades SSa Ils SHAAT IU (250-6, Sat, ws 5) gurdayv satgur paarbarahm parmaysar gurdayv naanak har namaskaraa. ||1]| The Divine Guru is the True Guru, the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord; Nanak bows in humble reverence to the Lord, the Divine Guru. ||1]]|
He Il (250-7)
Salok. Shalok:
wtufa ater xafenr nirufs ass AT Il (250-7, ast, He 5) aapeh kee-aa karaa-i-aa aapeh karnai jog. He Himself acts, and causes others to act; He Himself can do everything.
area Sa afe sour ers or o FT AU (250-7, ast, 2 5)
naanak ayko rav rahi-aa doosar ho-aa na hog. ||1]|
O Nanak, the One Lord is pervading everywhere; there has never been any other, and there never shall be. ||1]|
uGat II (250-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
@ni ATG Afsad SHAATS Il (250-8, aSHt, He 5) o-a™ saaDh satgur namaskaara”. ONG: I humbly bow in reverence to the One Universal Creator, to the Holy True Guru.
nife ufo nifs fedard il (250-8, aGst, H: 5) aad maDh ant nira‘kaara”. In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, He is the Formless Lord.
nmufs He wmufs AY MTA Il (250-8, a@Ht, He 5)
aapeh sunn aapeh sukh aasan.
He Himself is in the absolute state of primal meditation; He Himself is in the seat of peace.
mufs Hes nity ot AAS Il (250-9, west, Hs 5) aapeh sunat aap hee jaasan. He Himself listens to His Own Praises.
nus my nitufs Buf it (250-9, a@st, Hs 5) aapan aap aapeh upaa-i-o. He Himself created Himself.
mmufo ay nimy ot HEE Il (250-9, ast, ve 5) aapeh baap aap hee maa-i-o. He is His Own Father, He is His Own Mother.
mitufo FaH wirufs MAeET i (250-10, ast, H2 5) aapeh sookham aapeh asthoolaa. He Himself is subtle and etheric; He Himself is manifest and obvious.
Bat B AST SSX Bl AU (250-10, Test, He 5)
lakhee na jaa-ee naanak leelaa. ||1]| O Nanak, His wondrous play cannot be understood. ||1||
ate fasur ys ate afemirar il (250-10, ast, v8 5) kar kirpaa parabh deen da-i-aalaa. O God, Merciful to the meek, please be kind to me,
ee
3d Hse at Ho Sfe seer I TTS I (250-11, aBs, He 5) tayray santan kee man ho-ay ravaalaa. rahaa-o. that my mind might become the dust of the feet of Your Saints. ||Pause] |
ASE Il (250-11)
salok. Shalok:
fadarg otras oify fesde Addo Sa Il (250-11, 7st, v2 5)
nirankaar aakaar aap nirgun sargun ayk.
He Himself is formless, and also formed; the One Lord is without attributes, and also with attributes.
Sats Sa TUSGS aaa SA MSs MAU (250-12, aH, v2 5) aykeh ayk bakhaanano naanak ayk anayk. ||1]| Describe the One Lord as One, and Only One; O Nanak, He is the One, and the many.
[21] Uugat Il (250-12)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
ni gant StS mara i (250-12, ast, v2 5)
o-a’ gurmukh kee-o akaaraa.
ONG: The One Universal Creator created the Creation through the Word of the Primal Guru.
Sats APS UdZSTT Il (250-12, ast, we 5) aykeh soot parovanhaaraa. He strung it upon His one thread.
fsa f¥5 3 ae fares Il (250-13, ast, ne 5) bhinn bhinn tarai gun bisthaara’. He created the diverse expanse of the three qualities.
fedde 3 Aaade fered il (250-13, aGat, He 5) nirgun tay sargun daristaara’. From formless, He appeared as form.
Hae sts ats aaa Cute il (250-13, west, v2 5) sagal bhaat kar karahi upaa-i-o. The Creator has created the creation of all sorts.
HOH Hdo HS HT sete il (250-14, ast, u2 5) janam maran man moh badhaa-i-o. The attachment of the mind has led to birth and death.
eg ats 3 rf foarat i (250-14, a@at, v2 5) duhoo bhaat tay aap niraaraa. He Himself is above both, untouched and unaffected.
SSA MSO UTSTSTA (Il (250-14, ast, ve 5) naanak ant na paaraavaaraa. ||2|| O Nanak, He has no end or limitation. ||2]|
AS Il (250-15)
salok. Shalok:
Ret ATT aes A AY AY dfs TH Il (250-15, ast, He 5)
say-ee saah bhagvant say sach sampai har raas.
Those who gather Truth, and the riches of the Lord's Name, are rich and very fortunate.
Soa Ae Afs urea fsa Ase & UTA NI (250-15, aGst, He 5) naanak sach such paa-ee-ai tih santan kai paas. ||1]| O Nanak, truthfulness and purity are obtained from Saints such as these. ||1]|
ugat Il (250-16)
pavrhee. Pauree:
AA AS AfS APS AG Il (250-16, a@at, we 5) SaSaa Sat sat sat SO-o0. SASSA: True, True, True is that Lord.
ARS usd 3 £85 5 AE Il (250-16, ast, Hz 5) sat purakh tay bhinn na ko-oo. No one is separate from the True Primal Lord.
AG Hate ud fs wt Il (250-16, west, He 5) SO-00 saran parai jih paa-ya™. They alone enter the Lord's Sanctuary, whom the Lord inspires to enter.
frnfs froifs ae afe Aare i (250-17, west, v2 5)
simar simar gun gaa-ay sunaa-ya”.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance, they sing and preach the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
HA SoH Sdt as fants Il (250-17, aBst, ne 5) sansai bharam nahee kachh bi-aapat. Doubt and skepticism do not affect them at all.
Yas YSTY ST A AUT Il (250-17, ast, Hs 5) pargat partaap taahoo ko jaapat. They behold the manifest glory of the Lord.
A AY feo ugasss Il (250-17, a@at, we 5) so saaDhoo ih pahuchanhaaraa. They are the Holy Saints - they reach this destination.
Soa St aA AS Asars |SIl (250-18, aSst, wz 5)
naanak taa kai sad balihaaraa. ||3]|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||3]|
Hq Il (250-18)
salok. Shalok:
Ug U6 aT yorss Wife HT AS AT Il (250-18, ast, Hz 5)
Dhan Dhan kahaa pukaartay maa-i-aa moh sabh koor.
Why are you crying out for riches and wealth? All this emotional attachment to Maya is false.
UST uA
on fags asa IS WS AG Ts NA (251-1, wes, v2 5) naam bihoonay naankaa hot jaat sabh Dhoor. ||1]| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, all are reduced to dust. ||1]|
usat Il (251-1) pavrhee. Pauree:
um Ufs uats SI ASM Il (251-1, ast, w2 5) DhaDhaa Dhoor puneet tayray janoo-aa. DHADHA: The dust of the feet of the Saints is sacred.
uf 38 fra go feor Hur II (251-1, west, H 5) Dhan tay-oo jih ruch i-aa manoo-aa. Blessed are those whose minds are filled with this longing.
Ue odt Fels Asa 6 Mela I (251-2, wat, us 5) Dhan nahee baachheh surag na aachheh. They do not seek wealth, and they do not desire paradise.
mits finer uifs Aa ga Tefs Il (251-2, aes, 3 5)
at pari-a pareet saaDh raj raacheh.
They are immersed in the deep love of their Beloved, and the dust of the feet of the Holy.
uo ao ferufs ag i A Sa ats we asta o AT Il (251-2, Get, 42 5)
DhanDhay kahaa bi-aapahi taahoo. jo ayk chhaad an kateh na jaahoo.
How can worldly affairs affect those who do not abandon the One Lord, and who go nowhere else?
wat dy AE ys aM Il (251-3, ast, Hs 5) jaa kai hee-ai dee-o parabh naam. One whose heart is filled with God's Name,
Stak AT UTS SASS IISil (251-3, agat, Hs 5) naanak saaDh pooran bhagvaan. ||4|| O Nanak, is a perfect spiritual being of God. ||4||
Ha Il (251-4)
salok. Shalok:
nifsa su vig faora fomre Hoole fife o afe II (251-4, aGst, v2 5)
anik bhaykh ar nyi-aan Dhi-aan manhath mili-a-o na ko-ay.
By all sorts of religious robes, knowledge, meditation and stubborn-mindedness, no one has ever met God.
a aod frou set sas fart APE NA (251-4, aBst, He 5)
kaho naanak kirpaa bha-ee bhagat nyi-aanee so-ay. ||1]||
Says Nanak, those upon whom God showers His Mercy, are devotees of spiritual wisdom. ||1]|
uQat Il (251-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aa’ faure adt we as I (251-5, weet, He 5) nyanyaa nyi-aan nahee mukh baata-o. NGANGA: Spiritual wisdom is not obtained by mere words of mouth.
mfoad Aas AAS afg STS il (251-5, aGat, ws 5) anik jugat saastar kar bhaata-o. It is not obtained through the various debates of the Shaastras and scriptures.
faurat Afe AT ot fes A I (251-6, west, He 5) nyi-aanee so-ay jaa kai darirh so-oo. They alone are spiritually wise, whose minds are firmly fixed on the Lord.
TIS HOS As AT 3 IS Il (251-6, a7CsH, 3 5) kahat sunat kachh jog na ho-oo. Hearing and telling stories, no one attains Yoga.
faorat gos urfamr fes AT a Il (251-6, west, He 5) nyi-aanee rahat aagi-aa darirh jaa kai. They alone are spiritually wise, who remain firmly committed to the Lord's Command.
no Hts AHAfs AS 3a Il (251-7, aes, He 5) usan seet samsar sabh taa kai. Heat and cold are all the same to them.
feorot 33 Tafa stars i (251-7, aSst, He 5)
nyi-aanee tat gurmukh beechaaree.
The true people of spiritual wisdom are the Gurmukhs, who contemplate the essence of reality;
Soa A AS fagur arst WUll (251-7, west, us 5) naanak jaa ka-o kirpaa Dhaaree. ||5|| O Nanak, the Lord showers His Mercy upon them. ||5||
HS Il (251-8)
salok. Shalok:
ules wie fiqrfe ufo fas gS UA Sa Il (251-8, aes, 2 5)
aavan aa-ay sarisat meh bin boojhay pas dhor.
Those who have come into the world without understanding are like animals and beasts.
Sod Tet A IS AT SA Sa HAT NA (251-8, ast, we 5)
naanak gurmukh so bujhai jaa kai bhaag mathor. ||1]||
O Nanak, those who become Gurmukh understand; upon their foreheads is such pre- ordained destiny. |]|1]|
ugat Il (251-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
W Aa Hf Sats a mrfenr it (251-9, aSst, v2 5) yaa jug meh aykeh ka-o aa-i-aa. They have come into this world to meditate on the One Lord.
HOHS HfaS Hast HfEur i (251-9, aes, ve 5) janmat mohi-o mohnee maa-i-aa. But ever since their birth, they have been enticed by the fascination of Maya.
des az Hfs Sam Su ATS Il (251-9, west, He 5) garabh kunt meh uraDh tap kartay. Upside-down in the chamber of the womb, they performed intense meditation.
AYA AA ANTS YF JIS Il (251-10, west, ue 5) Saas Saas simrat parabh rahtay. They remembered God in meditation with each and every breath.
Cafs ud A fs Ba II (251-10, ast, He 5) urajh paray jo chhod chhadaanaa. But now, they are entangled in things which they must leave behind.
SzoTT Hale FAAS I (251-10, Test, He 5) dayvanhaar maneh bisraanaa. They forget the Great Giver from their minds.
weg facut faAfs greet fs Ss aoa fSA fared ardt Ell (251-11, wBst, He 5) Dhaarahu kirpaa jisahi gusaa-ee. it ut naanak tis bisrahu naahee. ||6||
O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, do not forget Him, here or hereafter. ||6]|
AS Il (251-11)
salok. Shalok:
nies Jaty fasA gafh orfamr feo o af Il (251-11, aSst, v2 5)
aavat hukam binaas hukam aagi-aa bhinn na ko-ay.
By His Command, we come, and by His Command, we go; no one is beyond His Command.
mee Aart fag fhe aoa fag Hf ALE NAN (251-12, ast, He 5)
aavan jaanaa tih mitai naanak jih man so-ay. ||1]| Coming and going in reincarnation is ended, O Nanak, for those whose minds are filled with the Lord. ||1]|
ust Il (251-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
SS Ahr ads YS SA Il (251-13, ast, u2 5) ay-oo jee-a bahut garabh vaasay. This soul has lived in many wombs.
Hd Hale He Afs SA Il (251-13, ast, v2 5) moh magan meeth jon faasay. Enticed by sweet attachment, it has been trapped in reincarnation.
fefe wrfimr 3 ae sfh at I (251-13, aBet, He 5) in maa-i-aa tarai gun bas keenay. This Maya has subjugated beings through the three qualities.
nus Ho we whe aS i (251-14, aSst, nH: 5) aapan moh ghatay ghat deenay. Maya has infused attachment to itself in each and every heart.
= AHS as Ao Surfer it (251-14, aS, ns 5) ay saajan kachh kahhu upaa-i-aa. O friend, tell me some way,
vw 3 398 foun feo wear It (251-14, aBst, He 5) jaa tay tara-o bikham ih maa-i-aa. by which I may swim across this treacherous ocean of Maya.
afte fasur ASAfar fHere I (251-14, aBst, He 5)
kar kirpaa satsang milaa-ay.
The Lord showers His Mercy, and leads us to join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
aoa st a feafe SHES IDI (251-15, west, He 5) naanak taa kai nikat na maa-ay. ||7]| O Nanak, Maya does not even come near. ||7]||
He Il (251-15)
salok. Shalok:
fads SHS AS uA ate fSfs yfs mrfu i (251-15, reat, we 5) kirat kamaavan subh asubh keenay tin parabh aap. God Himself causes one to perform good and bad actions.
Un nus JG IG ad Soa fas ofa aT ANAS NA (251-16, Tes, He 5)
pas aapan ha-o ha-o karai naanak bin har kahaa kamaat. ||1] |
The beast indulges in egotism, selfishness and conceit; O Nanak, without the Lord, what can anyone do? ||1]||
UugSt Il (251-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Pats nif ASSIST Il (251-16, aSst, us 5) aykeh aap karaavanhaaraa. The One Lord Himself is the Cause of all actions.
mmufs uny us fara Il (251-17, a@st, He 5) aapeh paap punn bisthaaraa. He Himself distributes sins and noble acts.
feur aa fas fas rafts ote i (251-17, 7st, v8 5) i-aa jug jit jit aapeh laa-i-o. In this age, people are attached as the Lord attaches them.
AA ufe@ 9 orfu feet] it (251-17, aes, v2 5) SO SO paa-i-O jo aap divaa-i-o. They receive that which the Lord Himself gives.
Cur ar nig 3 AS AE Il (251-18, Tes, 48 5) u-aa kaa ant na jaanai ko-oo. No one knows His limits.
At ad AG sf FS il (251-18, ast, we 5) jo jo karai so-oo fun ho-oo. Whatever He does, comes to pass.
Sats 3 Aare fanaa Il (251-18, west, v2 5) aykeh tay saglaa bisthaaraa. From the One, the entire expanse of the Universe emanated.
Soa nif ASTISITSAT NCI (251-19, ast, He 5)
naanak aap savaaranhaaraa. ||8|| O Nanak, He Himself is our Saving Grace. ||8] |
He Il (251-19)
salok. Shalok:
af ad afest fase AnH da faa Ag Il (251-19, ast, He 5)
raach rahay banitaa binod kusam rang bikh sor.
Man remains engrossed in women and playful pleasures; the tumult of his passion is like the dye of the safflower, which fades away all too soon.
soa fsa Aaat us faofA ate H He NAM (251-19, west, He 5) naanak tih sarnee para-o binas jaa-ay mai mor. ||1|| O Nanak, seek God's Sanctuary, and your selfishness and conceit shall be taken away.
[21
UST Qu
ust Il (252-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
J Ho faa dfs AO Jug 3d 3d Hae us Il (252-1, ast, He 5) ray man bin har jah rachahu tah tah banDhan paahi. O mind: without the Lord, whatever you are involved in shall bind you in chains.
fro fafa asg 3 ect Aas 3B ons I (252-1, ast, H: 5) jih biDh kathoo na chhootee-ai saakat tay-oo kamaahi. The faithless cynic does those deeds which will never allow him to be emancipated.
IG IG AGS AGH WT TA TG STS Il (252-2, ast, ve 5)
ha-o ha-o kartay karam rat taa ko bhaar afaar.
Acting in egotism, selfishness and conceit, the lovers of rituals carry the unbearable load.
Utfs adt AS on fAB 3B SS aan fears II (252-2, ast, x2 5) pareet nahee ja-o naam si-o ta-o ay-oo karam bikaar.
When there is no love for the Naam, then these rituals are corrupt. Wd AH ot ASdt Het Hfenr Pa Il (252-3, ast, ws 5)
baaDhay jam kee jayvree meethee maa-i-aa rang. The rope of death binds those who are in love with the sweet taste of Maya.
ys
3H & Hd 3d aSte A US Ae Aa Il (252-3, aGet, vs 5) bharam kay mohay nah bujheh so parabh sadhoo sang. Deluded by doubt, they do not understand that God is always with them.
Ba Tes 3 set oat SHS 3 Alo i 252-4, aCst, ws 5)
laykhai ganat na chhootee-ai kaachee bheet na suDh.
When their accounts are called for, they shall not be released; their wall of mud cannot be washed clean.
frAts ase aoa fag aanHfy feane afar itil (252-4, a@st, us 5)
jisahi bujhaa-ay naankaa tih gurmukh nirmal buDh. ||9||
One who is made to understand - O Nanak, that Gurmukh obtains immaculate understanding. ||9||
HS Il (252-5)
salok. Shalok:
Se 8S WH SX Io AY AA Il (252-5, ast, we 5) tootay banDhan jaas kay ho-aa saaDhoo sang. One whose bonds are cut away joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ATS II SA A FSA TS FT MWA (252-5, ast, wz 5)
jo raatay rang ayk kai naanak goorhaa rang. ||1]||
Those who are imbued with the Love of the One Lord, O Nanak, take on the deep and lasting color of His Love. ||1||
uGat II (252-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ta Jag fear He mua il (252-6, aGst, vs 5) raaraa rangahu i-aa man apnaa. RARRA: Dye this heart of yours in the color of the Lord's Love.
ofa ofs SH AUT AY FAS Il (252-6, aS, ns 5) har har naam japahu jap rasnaa. Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - chant it with your tongue.
TF TINT Ad F AE Il (252-6, TSA, ws 5) ray ray dargeh kahai na ko-oo. In the Court of the Lord, no one shall speak harshly to you.
mS 8S neg AS SE il (252-6, a@at, we 5) aa-o baith aadar subh day-oo. Everyone shall welcome you, saying, "Come, and sit down."
Cor Host uefa J AAT Il (252-7, ast, ve 5)
u-aa mahlee paavahi too baasaa. In that Mansion of the Lord's Presence, you shall find a home.
HOH HIS 3d de faarAr Il (252-7, ast, x: 5) janam maran nah ho-ay binaasaa. There is no birth or death, or destruction there.
HASta aH fofaS ofa AT a i (252-7, aS, He 5) mastak karam likhi-o Dhur jaa kai. One who has such karma written on his forehead,
dfs HU BSA us StS NAO (252-8, THT, He 5) har sampai naanak ghar taa kai. ||10]| O Nanak, has the wealth of the Lord in his home. ||10]|
HS Il (252-8) salok. Shalok:
wee 3S faors Ho fanrus HS iT II (252-8, ast, 42 5)
laalach jhooth bikaar moh bi-aapat moorhay anDh.
Greed, falsehood, corruption and emotional attachment entangle the blind and the foolish.
ofa ud vada fAG ata Hf Fa UU (252-9, ast, He 5)
laag paray durganDh si-o naanak maa-i-aa banDh. ||1||
Bound down by Maya, O Nanak, a foul odor clings to them. ||1]| ust II (252-9)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
wor wufe fat JA TS Il (252-9, ast, He 5) lalaa lapat bikhai ras raatay. LALLA: People are entangled in the love of corrupt pleasures;
mdata wfeer we HTS Il (252-9, aGat, He 5) aha’-buDh maa-i-aa mad maatay. they are drunk with the wine of egotistical intellect and Maya.
four utfeur uf ASHfs HIST Il (252-10, west, v3 5)
i-aa maa-i-aa meh janmeh marnaa. In this Maya, they are born and die.
fa@ fa@ gan fae f3@ agar Il (252-10, as, nH 5) ji-o ji-o hukam tivai ti-o karnaa. People act according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
AS Bs 3 A UT Il (252-10, Tat, 2 5) ko-00 00n na ko-0o pooraa. No one is perfect, and no one is imperfect.
ae AUS 3 AS HT I (252-11, 7st, He 5) ko-oo sughar na ko-oo mooraa. No one is wise, and no one is foolish.
fas fas weg fs f33 wares Il (252-11, Test, He 5) jit jit laavhu tit tit lagnaa. Wherever the Lord engages someone, there he is engaged.
SHA SAT Het nifsusr WAU (252-11, aSHt, vs 5)
naanak thaakur sadaa alipanaa. ||11]|| O Nanak, our Lord and Master is forever detached. ||11||
Hq Il (252-12)
salok. Shalok:
we Tus afie ys afes aste wars i (252-12, ast, ne 5)
laal gupaal gobind parabh gahir gambheer athaah.
My Beloved God, the Sustainer of the World, the Lord of the Universe, is deep, profound and unfathomable.
GAT St nied A SSA AUTSTT MAUI (252-12, wat, we 5) doosar naahee avar ko naanak bayparvaah. ||1|| There is no other like Him; O Nanak, He is not worried. ||1]|
UugST Il (252-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
BH BA BS F A Il (252-13, 7a, v2 5) lalaa taa kai lavai na ko-oo. LALLA: There is no one equal to Him.
Sate nrfu nied ST FE il (252-13, ast, v3 5) aykeh aap avar nah ho-oo. He Himself is the One; there shall never be any other.
dzodg JS AS wife Il (252-13, west, He 5) hovanhaar hot sad aa-i-aa. He is now, He has been, and He shall always be.
Cur at nig 3 arg ufemr Il (252-14, ast, He 5) u-aa kaa ant na kaahoo paa-i-aa. No one has ever found His limit.
ate oats ufo us ANTS Il (252-14, ast, He 5) keet hasat meh poor samaanay. In the ant and in the elephant, He is totally pervading.
Ye UTH AS OS AA Ill (252-14, west, He 5) pargat purakh sabh thaa-oo jaanay. The Lord, the Primal Being, is known by everyone everywhere.
Wag vs ofe oA muse Il (252-14, aSHt, He 5) jaa ka-o deeno har ras apnaa. That one, unto whom the Lord has given His Love
aoa TaHfe sts dfs fST AUS NAVI (252-15, TSH, He 5)
naanak gurmukh har har tih japnaa. ||12|| - O Nanak, that Gurmukh chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||12]|
AS Il (252-15)
salok. Shalok:
MSH 3A fro Whour dfs Ja ATA HTS Il (252-15, aSHt, He 5)
aatam ras jih jaani-aa har rang sehjay maan.
One who knows the taste of the Lord's sublime essence, intuitively enjoys the Lord's Love.
soe fe ufs Ufs AS mre S UTSTS INA (252-16, TCH, He 5)
naanak Dhan Dhan Dhan jan aa-ay tay parvaan. ||1]|
O Nanak, blessed, blessed, blessed are the Lord's humble servants; how fortunate is their coming into the world! ||1]|
UgST Il (252-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufent Hes ST A TSM Il (252-16, Tea, ws 5) aa-i-aa safal taahoo ko ganee-ai. How fruitful is the coming into the world, of those
WH IHS dfs dfs AA FSA Il (252-17, TCs, He 5) jaas rasan har har jas bhanee-dai. whose tongues celebrate the Praises of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
wife aAfs AT & Aa Il (252-17, a@at, we 5) aa-ay baseh saaDhoo kai sangay. They come and dwell with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
mofes oH fomrefs Fa Il (252-17, aSst, He 5) an-din naam Dhi-aavahi rangay. night and day, they lovingly meditate on the Naam.
Wes AAS oHfs TST Il (252-18, ast, v2 5)
aavat so jan naameh raataa. Blessed is the birth of those humble beings who are attuned to the Naam;
wv a efenr ufeor fast it (252-18, a@st, He 5) jaa ka-o da-i-aa ma-i-aa biDhaataa. the Lord, the Architect of Destiny, bestows His Kind Mercy upon them.
Sats oreo fefs fs 3 wrfenr | (252-18, ast, He 5) aykeh aavan fir jon na aa-i-aa. They are born only once - they shall not be reincarnated again.
Soa dfs a vata ANfEnr VSI (252-19, Test, H2 5)
naanak har kai daras samaa-i-aa. ||13]| O Nanak, they are absorbed into the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||13] |
Hq Il (252-19)
salok. Shalok:
wa wus Hie af wide faor eT oe i Te Use FFAs gs aoa oth ANE NA (252-19, ast, H3 5)
yaas japat man ho-ay anand binsai doojaa bhaa-o. dookh darad tarisnaa bujhai naanak naam samaa-o. ||1||
Chanting it, the mind is filled with bliss; love of duality is eliminated, and pain, distress and desires are quenched. O Nanak, immerse yourself in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Uat Qua uGat Il (253-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
WoT WIS TIHS SS il (253-1, aCst, we 5) ya-yaa jaara-o durmat do-oo. YAYYA: Burn away duality and evil-mindedness.
farts fora Aa AoA A I (253-1, 7st, Hs 5) tiseh ti-aag sukh sehjay so-oo. Give them up, and sleep in intuitive peace and poise.
aot Ate usd HS AGS Il (253-2, west, He 5) ya-yaa jaa-ay parahu sant sarnaa. Yaya: Go, and seek the Sanctuary of the Saints;
fags org fem SeHw SIS Il (253-2, ast, Hs 5) jih aasar i-aa bhavjal tarnaa. with their help, you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
Uo Hoth o wie AG Il SX SH S Hols us Il (253-2, ast, ws 5)
ya-yaa janam na aavai so-00. ayk naam lay maneh paro-oo.
Yaya: One who weaves the One Name into his heart, does not have to take birth again.
WM ASH & TS TAT yT at Sq Il (253-3, TSa, 3 5) ya-yaa janam na haaree-ai gur pooray kee tayk. Yaya: This human life shall not be wasted, if you take the Support of the Perfect Guru.
soa fsa Ay ufenr AT a dios Sa VII (253-3, TCH, He 5) naanak tih sukh paa-i-aa jaa kai hee-arai ayk. ||14|| O Nanak, one whose heart is filled with the One Lord finds peace. ||14]|
AS Il (253-4)
salok. Shalok:
nists Ho 36 aft ad StS BS & HTS I (253-4, west, v2 5) antar man tan bas rahay eet oot kay meet. The One who dwells deep within the mind and body is your friend here and hereafter.
afs us Guetior aoa ret ats Al (253-4, a@at, we 5) gur poorai updaysi-aa naanak japee-ai neet. ||1]| The Perfect Guru has taught me, O Nanak, to chant His Name continually. ||1]|
ust Il (253-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wofes fared aH AG A nifs AoSt OE I (253-5, aGst, He 5) an-din simrahu taas ka-o jo ant sahaa-ee ho-ay.
Night and day, meditate in remembrance on the One who will be your Help and Support in the end.
fea fafimr feo of fan ats vfee AS afe I (253-5, aGst, He 5) ih bikhi-aa din chaar chhi-a chhaad chali-o sabh ko-ay. This poison shall last for only a few days; everyone must depart, and leave it behind.
a a nS fust AS dor Il (253-6, a@Ht, He 5) kaa ko maat pitaa sut Dhee-aa. Who is our mother, father, son and daughter?
fas safest ae Afar & Br | (253-6, aSst, ue 5) garih banitaa kachh sang na lee-aa. Household, wife, and other things shall not go along with you.
MAT Afs a fHoAs oT Il (253-6, TEST, v2 5) aisee sanch jo binsat naahee. So gather that wealth which shall never perish,
ufs Ast wras wis ATS Il (253-7, ast, He 5) pat saytee apunai ghar jaahee. so that you may go to your true home with honor.
Honfa ate atsse arfenr i (253-7, aSst, v2 5)
saaDhsang kal keertan gaa-i-aa.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, those who sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy
Soa 33 Als o fer All (253-7, ast, He 5) naanak tay tay bahur na aa-i-aa. ||15]|| - O Nanak, they do not have to endure reincarnation again. ||15]|
HS Il (253-8)
salok. Shalok:
mifs Hed ase vad Hf faerot dads Il (253-8, aBat, ns 5)
at sundar kuleen chatur mukh nyi-aanee Dhanvant.
He may be very handsome, born into a highly respected family, very wise, a famous spiritual teacher, prosperous and wealthy;
frasa adinifa asa fag ulfs odt sareS IAI (253-8, ast, He 5)
mirtak kahee-ahi naankaa jih pareet nahee bhagvant. ||1]||
but even so, he is looked upon as a corpse, O Nanak, if he does not love the Lord God. ||1]|
UuGSt II (253-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aa" ue AAS ofe frst il (253-9, west, ne 5) nyanyaa khat saastar ho-ay nyi-aataa. NGANGA: He may be a scholar of the six Shaastras.
YIA ATA FIA ATHTS Il (253-9, TSSt, we 5) poorak kumbhak raychak karmaataa. He may practice inhaling, exhaling and holding the breath.
faura fone stea fenarat il (253-10, ast, 42 5)
nyi-aan Dhi-aan tirath isnaanee.
He may practice spiritual wisdom, meditation, pilgrimages to sacred shrines and ritual cleansing baths.
Ayu wrergA Sfenrat i (253-10, ast, v2 5)
sompaak apras udi-aanee.
He may cook his own food, and never touch anyone else's; he may live in the wilderness like a hermit.
aH OT Afa fe odt TST Il (253-10, ast, He 5) raam naam sang man nahee haytaa. But if he does not enshrine love for the Lord's Name within his heart,
A Oe aS AG MSs Il (253-11, ast, vs 5) jo kachh keeno so-oo anaytaa. then everything he does is transitory.
Cur 3 SSH TSS Vs Il (253-11, west, we 5) u-aa tay ootam gan-o chandalaa. Even an untouchable pariah is superior to him,
Sea fad His SAfT TUT WIE (253-11, Test, H2 5)
naanak jih man baseh gupaalaa. ||16]| O Nanak, if the Lord of the World abides in his mind. ||16]|
AS Il (253-12)
salok. Shalok:
ae ofa vs fefa gH aH fasts at Fe I (253-12, west, v2 5)
kunt chaar dah dis bharamay karam kirat kee raykh.
He wanders around in the four quarters and in the ten directions, according to the dictates of his karma.
AY gy Hots His sae foreS Sx wil (253-12, ast, Hz 5)
sookh dookh mukat jon naanak likhi-o laykh. ||1||
Pleasure and pain, liberation and reincarnation, O Nanak, come according to one's pre-ordained destiny. ||1]|
Ugat Il (253-13)
pavrhee. Pauree:
TA AIS TIS AG Il (253-13, TEs, Hs 5) kakaa kaaran kartaa so-oo. KAKKA: He is the Creator, the Cause of causes.
fats Sys HSS AT i (253-13, Tes, 2 5) likhi-o laykh na maytat ko-oo. No one can erase His pre-ordained plan.
oot IS AE SS MT I (253-13, aS, we 5) nahee hot kachh do-oo baaraa. Nothing can be done a second time.
TISTY F FBSIST Il (253-13, ast, we 5) karnaihaar na bhoolanhaaraa. The Creator Lord does not make mistakes.
arg ug fears nM i (253-14, 7Gat, Hs 5) kaahoo panth dikhaarai aapai. To some, He Himself shows the Way.
ag Stents FHS USSU Il (253-14, TSH, Hs 5) kaahoo udi-aan bharmat pachhutaapai. While He causes others to wander miserably in the wilderness.
WTS 4S wry dt ats Il (253-14, west, v2 5) aapan khayl aap hee keeno. He Himself has set His own play in motion.
AH US A Soa SO IAWIII (253-15, THT, He 5) jo jo deeno so naanak leeno. ||17]|| Whatever He gives, O Nanak, that is what we receive. ||17]|
HS Il (253-15)
salok. Shalok:
wg ues frases ad efe 3 ATE BIT Il (253-15, Test, He 5)
khaat kharchat bilchhat rahay toot na jaahi bhandaar.
People continue to eat and consume and enjoy, but the Lord's warehouses are never exhausted.
Uf Ts AUS MSA AS BSA STI AHS WAU (253-15, TSH, He 5)
har har japat anayk jan naanak naahi sumaar. ||1|| So many chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; O Nanak, they cannot be counted.
[21
UgST Il (253-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wet ust ag Sot FA AYE & us i (253-16, Test, H8 5) khakhaa khoonaa kachh nahee tis samrath kai paahi. KHAKHA: The All-powerful Lord lacks nothing;
A ta A @ afus are 3g Sa ATS II (253-16, ast, 4: 5) jo daynaa so day rahi-o bhaavai tah tah jaahi. whatever He is to give, He continues to give - let anyone go anywhere he pleases.
Uses MAST OTH UG fenr sase at TA I (253-17, ast, He 5)
kharach khajaanaa naam Dhan i-aa bhagtan kee raas.
The wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a treasure to spend; it is the capital of His devotees.
for adtat wise AA AUS dds TESA Il (253-17, aSSt, He 5)
khimaa gareebee anad sahj japat raheh guntaas.
With tolerance, humility, bliss and intuitive poise, they continue to meditate on the Lord, the Treasure of excellence.
wots faanfs mise fae A aS Js fauTs i 0253-18, aSHt, He 5) khayleh bigsahi anad si-o jaa ka-o hot kirpaal. Those, unto whom the Lord shows His Mercy, play happily and blossom forth.
Hele aate ASS TH OH foffs HTH I (253-18, ast, vs 5)
sadeev ganeev suhaavanay raam naam garihi maal.
Those who have the wealth of the Lord's Name in their homes are forever wealthy and beautiful.
We 5 By 6 3g fsa As sels act I (253-19, Test, v2 5)
khayd na dookh na daan tih jaa ka-o nadar karee.
Those who are blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace suffer neither torture, nor pain, nor punishment.
area A Ys stent yat far ust WAC (253-19, ast, we 5) naanak jo parabh bhaani-aa pooree tinaa paree. ||18]| O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God become perfectly successful. ||18]|
UST 2ug
ASE Il (254-1)
salok. Shalok:
ae fife Sug HS Hf AUT VHS BA Il (254-1, west, ve 5)
gan min daykhhu manai maahi sarpar chalno log.
See, that even by calculating and scheming in their minds, people must surely depart in the end.
win wifes aaHfa fe area OH niga NU (254-1, TBS, He 5)
aas anit gurmukh mitai naanak naam arog. ||1||
Hopes and desires for transitory things are erased for the Gurmukh; O Nanak, the Name alone brings true health. ||1]|
Uugat Il (254-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dar dfse qe deg AfA AH Afu ats Il (254-2, at, He 5)
gagaa gobid gun ravhu saas saas jap neet.
GAGGA: Chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe with each and every breath; meditate on Him forever.
ao fara ta at fou 3 afed HIS Il (254-2, ast, H: 5) kahaa bisaasaa dayh kaa bilam na kariho meet. How can you rely on the body? Do not delay, my friend;
od Sfx od Aas od faadt aS FT Ml (254-3, aSst, ne 5)
nah baarik nah jobnai nah birDhee kachh banDh.
there is nothing to stand in Death's way - neither in childhood, nor in youth, nor in old age.
Gg aa BT gst AS nee us AH ST Il (254-3, Tea, v8 5) oh bayraa nah boojhee-ai ja-o aa-ay parai jam fanDh. That time is not known, when the noose of Death shall come and fall on you.
famrat fourst saa uf soe odt fea OTE Il (254-4, aH, v2 5)
gi-aanee Dhi-aanee chatur paykh rahan nahee ih thaa-ay.
See, that even spiritual scholars, those who meditate, and those who are clever shall not stay in this place.
ats ats Aart wet us So Bu|rfs Il (254-4, ast, v2 5) chhaad chhaad saglee ga-ee moorh tahaa laptaahi. Only the fool clings to that, which everyone else has abandoned and left behind.
ae ure fAHes Fd AT HASTA Sra Il (254-5, ast, Hz 5)
gur parsaad simrat rahai jaahoo mastak bhaag.
By Guru's Grace, one who has such good destiny written on his forehead remembers the Lord in meditation.
Soa me HeS 3 A as fins ATE NEN (254-5, 7SHH, He 5)
naanak aa-ay Safal tay jaa ka-o pari-ahi suhaag. ||19]|
O Nanak, blessed and fruitful is the coming of those who obtain the Beloved Lord as their Husband. ||19]||
HSE Il (254-6) salok. Shalok:
we AAS Fe AS Se 6 Aas ale Il (254-6, ast, ne 5) ghokhay saastar bayd sabh aan na khathata-o ko-ay. I have searched all the Shaastras and the Vedas, and they say nothing except this:
wife qaret dfs Jes saa Sa AE NAM (254-6, aS, He 5)
aad jugaadee hun hovat naanak aykai so-ay. ||1||
"In the beginning, throughout the ages, now and forevermore, O Nanak, the One Lord alone exists."||1]|
ugat Il (254-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wut weg Hots &d fag ats BAG ats I (254-7, at, ue 5) ghaghaa ghaalhu maneh ayh bin har doosar naahi. GHAGHA: Put this into your mind, that there is no one except the Lord.
od dot od dea" AS aS Got Aa I (254-7, aBHt, He 5) nah ho-aa nah hovnaa jat kat ohee samaahi. There never was, and there never shall be. He is pervading everywhere.
wots 3B Hoe AG nrefa AGS Il (254-8, ast, x2 5) ghooleh ta-o man ja-o aavahi sarnaa. You shall be absorbed into Him, O mind, if you come to His Sanctuary.
OH 33 AG Hd USTSTST I (254-8, aSst, ve 5)
naam tat kal meh punharchanaa.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall be of any real use to you.
wrt urts nifax ussets I (254-8, aBst, He 5) ghaal ghaal anik pachhutaavahi. So many work and slave continually, but they come to regret and repent in the end.
fag dfs safs as fats uefa i (254-9, a@st, 2 5) bin har bhagat kahaa thit paavahi. Without devotional worship of the Lord, how can they find stability?
uifs Ho oA nifigs fea Uber II (254-9, aGat, He 5) ghol mahaa ras amrit tih pee-aa. They alone taste the supreme essence, and drink in the Ambrosial Nectar,
aoa Te ats A AG ST Noll (254-10, west, ue 5)
naanak har gur jaa ka-o dee-aa. ||20]| O Nanak, unto whom the Lord, the Guru, gives it. ||20||
HS Il (254-10)
salok. Shalok:
ate wm As feeH ATA Gd Feo Wes (3G APS Il (254-10, aSat, ns 5)
nyan ghaalay sabh divas saas nah badhan ghatan til saar.
He has counted all the days and the breaths, and placed them in people's destiny; they do not increase or decrease one little bit.
Hes Sols SIH HT FSA SS AST UI (254-11, Tea, v3 5) jeevan loreh bharam moh naanak tay-oo gavaar. ||1]| Those who long to live in doubt and emotional attachment, O Nanak, are total fools.
[21
Uugat Il (254-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aa SA ae fsa nf Aas ufs ate I (254-11, aGt, us 5) nyanyaa nyaraasai kaal tih jo saakat parabh keen. NGANGA: Death seizes those whom God has made into faithless cynics.
mifoa afs Aoufs Hafs ws IH & ste Il (254-12, west, n2 5)
anik jon janmeh mareh aatam raam na cheen.
They are born and they die, enduring countless incarnations; they do not realize the Lord, the Supreme Soul.
faors fours srg aS wire I (254-12, aSst, Hi: 5) nyi-aan Dhi-aan taahoo ka-o aa-ay.
They alone find spiritual wisdom and meditation, ats fasur fro nirfu feere | (254-12, ast, v2 5) kar kirpaa jih aap divaa-ay.
whom the Lord blesses with His Mercy;
Heat Bat St AT FS Il (254-13, at, we 5)
nyantee nyanee nahee ko-oo chhootai. no one is emancipated by counting and calculating.
NSH Waifs AUT Se Il (254-13, ast, we 5) kaachee gaagar sarpar footai. The vessel of clay shall surely break.
A tes fag tes Afumr It (254-13, ast, v2 5) so jeevat jih jeevat japi-aa. They alone live, who, while alive, meditate on the Lord.
Ys FS SSA ST SUMAT NIUI (254-14, wat, ws 5) pargat bha-ay naanak nah chhapi-aa. ||21]|| They are respected, O Nanak, and do not remain hidden. ||21]||
Se Il (254-14)
salok. Shalok:
fats fase@ veersfie Gu aew faarArs II (254-14, aEst, H2 5)
chit chitva-o charnaarbind ooDh kaval bigsaa™t.
Focus your consciousness on His Lotus Feet, and the inverted lotus of your heart shall blossom forth.
yae se viufa aifie Soa AS HSS AI (254-15, Tet, He 5)
pargat bha-ay aapeh gobind naanak sant mataa’t. ||1]|
The Lord of the Universe Himself becomes manifest, O Nanak, through the Teachings of the Saints. ||1]|
UgST Il (254-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
To VIS GHG Td war il ofs ufs Gur fea Ana Asta Il (254-15, ast, ne 5) chachaa charan kamal gur laagaa. Dhan Dhan u-aa din sanjog sabhaagaa. CHACHA: Blessed, blessed is that day, when I became attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet.
ofa ae vs fet aft mre i (254-16, Gat, ue 5) chaar kunt dah dis bharam aa-i-o. After wandering around in the four quarters and the ten directions,
set faut sa eaAS UTES I (254-16, wBst, H2 5) bha-ee kirpaa tab darsan paa-i-o. God showed His Mercy to me, and then I obtained the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
ad fares faofiS As Er I (254-16, west, H2 5) chaar bichaar binsi-o sabh doo-aa. By pure lifestyle and meditation, all duality is removed.
ATGHfal He fSSHS Ini Il (254-17, ast, ws 5) saaDhsang man nirmal hoo-aa. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the mind becomes immaculate.
fea farnrst Sa feResr i (254-17, wet, us 5) chint bisaaree ayk daristaytaa. Anxieties are forgotten, and the One Lord alone is seen,
saa famine nite fd SS M22 (254-17, aSst, 2 5) naanak gi-aan anjan jih naytaraa. ||22||
O Nanak, by those whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of spiritual wisdom. [|22]|
AS Il (254-18)
salok. Shalok:
eat Ase Ho AU es dfse Te ate Il (254-18, ast, He 5)
chhaatee seetal man sukhee chhant gobid gun gaa-ay.
The heart is cooled and soothed, and the mind is at peace, chanting and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
MAT fasur ag Ys sea VA SATE NA (254-18, ast, He 5) aisee kirpaa karahu parabh naanak daas dasaa-ay. ||1|| Show such Mercy, O God, that Nanak may become the slave of Your slaves. ||1]|
UgST Il (254-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Bel FIs VA SH Il (254-19, aSat, ne 5) chhachhaa chhohray daas tumaaray. CHHACHHA: I am Your child-slave.
SA VAS A UTStITS Il (254-19, ast, He 5) daas daasan kay paaneehaaray. I am the water-carrier of the slave of Your slaves.
Zeal ag IS 3d AST I (254-19, aSHHt, He 5) chhachhaa chhaar hot tayray santaa. Chhachha: I long to become the dust under the feet of Your Saints.
Us| Quy
must faut AIT SASS Il (255-1, west, v2 5) apnee kirpaa karahu bhagvantaa. Please shower me with Your Mercy, O Lord God!
ats frmrou ag T3geT I (255-1, aVst, vs 5) chhaad si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee. I have given up my excessive cleverness and scheming,
H30 at Ho cat fearet Il (255-1, aGst, He 5) santan kee man tayk tikaa-ee. and I have taken the support of the Saints as my mind's support.
ag at usdt ua afs uret Il (255-2, ast, He 5) chhaar kee putree param gat paa-ee. Even a puppet of ashes attains the supreme status,
Soa AT AG AS ATT NSM (255-2, ast, He 5) naanak jaa ka-o sant sahaa-ee. ||23]| O Nanak, if it has the help and support of the Saints. ||23]|
Hq Il (255-2) salok. Shalok:
Ad FOH sols ws ae Sa fas il (255-2, west, ws 5)
jor julam fooleh ghano kaachee dayh bikaar.
Practicing oppression and tyranny, he puffs himself up; he acts in corruption with his frail, perishable body.
mogfa das us BSA SH SETS MAUI (255-3, TCH, He 5)
aha’-buDh banDhan paray naanak naam chhutaar. ||1||
He is bound by his egotistical intellect; O Nanak, salvation comes only through the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
UugSt Il (255-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AT WS IS AE THM Il (255-3, ast, vz 5) jajaa jaanai ha-o kachh hoo-aa. JAJJA: When someone, in his ego, believes that he has become something,
afas fag ofsat sfh Aur Il (255-4, ast, H 5) baaDhi-o ji-o nalinee bharam soo-aa. he is caught in his error, like a parrot in a trap.
Ag AS IE sas farrat Il (255-4, ast, v2 5) ja-o jaanai ha-o bhagat gi-aanee. When he believes, in his ego, that he is a devotee and a spiritual teacher,
wat oats fq Sot HOt Il (255-4, AGH, He 5)
aagai thaakur til nahee maanee.
then, in the world hereafter, the Lord of the Universe shall have no regard for him at all.
Ag ATS H Asst AGS Il (255-5, aes, v2 5) ja-o jaanai mai kathnee kartaa. When he believes himself to be a preacher,
fmrurst aor fA fegsr il (255-5, a@st, us 5) bi-aapaaree basuDhaa ji-o firtaa. he is merely a peddler wandering over the earth.
AWaHfa fad ICH Hat I (255-5, 7eHt, He 5) saaDhsang jih ha-umai maaree. But one who conquers his ego in the Company of the Holy,
Sa STAC MHS HASH NSM (255-5, ast, He 5) naanak taa ka-o milay muraaree. ||24]| O Nanak, meets the Lord. ||24||
HSE Il (255-6)
salok. Shalok:
sou Bfe an Afu fofA wag wirett | (255-6, aBat, H3 5)
jhaalaaghay uth naam jap nis baasur aaraaDh.
Rise early in the morning, and chant the Naam; worship and adore the Lord, night and day.
arg 38 3 fanmuet aaa fee Surf 9 (255-6, a@at, H3 5) kaar"aa tujhai na bi-aapa-ee naanak mitai upaaDh. ||1|| Anxiety shall not afflict you, O Nanak, and your misfortune shall vanish. ||1]|
uGat Il (255-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
BST SIG fee SHS Il (255-7, ast, us 5) jhajhaa jhooran mitai tumaaro. JHAJHA: Your sorrows shall depart,
oH OH fae afe fas II (255-7, ast, He 5) raam naam si-o kar bi-uhaaro. when you deal with the Lord's Name.
BIT JIS AAT HM Il (255-8, ast, Hs 5) jhoorat jhoorat saakat moo-aa. The faithless cynic dies in sorrow and pain;
wa fee ds a@ shor i (255-8, aSat, v2 5) jaa kai ridai hot bhaa-o bee-aa. his heart is filled with the love of duality.
Boy AAHS UY SF HM I (255-8, ast, we 5) jhareh kasamal paap tayray manoo-aa. Your evil deeds and sins shall fall away, O my mind,
nifys wer HSAfat HOM ll (255-8, ast, we 5) amrit kathaa satsang sunoo-aa. listening to the ambrosial speech in the Society of the Saints.
Bofd AH AT TATE Il (255-9, ast, He 5) jhareh kaam kroDh darustaa-ee. Sexual desire, anger and wickedness fall away,
SSA A AS fur TAS QUI (255-9, west, He 5) naanak jaa ka-o kirpaa gusaa-ee. ||25] | O Nanak, from those who are blessed by the Mercy of the Lord of the World. ||25] |
HS Il (255-9) salok. Shalok:
36 Add SH mio fafa sag & UST HIS I (255-9, ast, He 5) njatan karahu tum anik biDh rahan na paavhu meet. You can try all sorts of things, but you still cannot remain here, my friend.
Hes gag ots dfs SAT SHA BH USS IAI (255-10, TCH, He 5) jeevat rahhu har har bhajahu naanak naam pareet. ||1]|
But you shall live forevermore, O Nanak, if you vibrate and love the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
Usat Il (255-10)
pavrhee. Pauree:
ge ereg fes Adt faofh AS So TS Il (255-11, west, us 5)
njanjaa njaanaho darirh sahee binas jaat ayh hayt.
NYANYA: Know this as absolutely correct, that that this ordinary love shall come to an end.
Test TEs 5 ae AAS Sfo frags ST i (255-11, ast, v2 5)
gantee gana-o na gan saka-o ooth siDhaaray kayt.
You may count and calculate as much as you want, but you cannot count how many have arisen and departed.
= uu@ A faanse a fA adh Aa Il (255-11, west, ne 5)
njo paykha-o so binasta-o kaa si-o karee-ai sang.
Whoever I see shall perish. With whom should I associate? ered feur fafa wot fos 308 whemr Fa Il 255-12, west, we 5)
njaanaho i-aa biDh sahee chit jhooth-o maa-i-aa rang. Know this as true in your consciousness, that the love of Maya is false.
wes Aet As Afe gn 3 atfes f¥o I (255-12, west, ne 5) njanat so-ee sant su-ay bharam tay keechit bhinn. He alone knows, and he alone is a Saint, who is free of doubt.
nig au 3 fsa axeg faa Ted AYAS Il (255-13, 7st, 48 5) anDh koop tay tih kadhahu jih hovhu suparsan. He is lifted up and out of the deep dark pit; the Lord is totally pleased with him.
aa ofa ANGE 3 AMS ATS AT Il (255-13, ast, v2 5) njaa kai haath samrath tay kaaran karnai jog. God's Hand is All-powerful; He is the Creator, the Cause of causes.
aod fsa Grats aa Sg aS AAT NEN (255-14, Bt, we 5) naanak tih ustat kara-o njahoo kee-o sanjog. ||26] | O Nanak, praise the One, who joins us to Himself. ||26| |
Aq Il (255-14)
salok. Shalok:
ge 80s ASH Hes ATT AS AY UTS Il (255-14, ast, we 5) tootay banDhan janam maran saaDh sayv sukh paa-ay. The bondage of birth and death is broken and peace is obtained, by serving the Holy.
Sod Hod o stad ae fafa afse aE na (255-15, ast, He 5)
naanak manhu na beesrai gun niDh gobid raa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, may I never forget from my mind, the Treasure of Virtue, the Sovereign Lord of the Universe. ||1]]|
UgST Il (255-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
2d8 Ads 38 Sa at aS fee o afe Ih (255-15, ast, 8 5) tahal karahu ta-o ayk kee jaa tay baritha na ko-ay. Work for the One Lord; no one returns empty-handed from Him.
fe sfe fe dha aA A wT A SPE I (255-16, wea, He 5)
man tan mukh hee-ai basai jo chaahhu so ho-ay.
When the Lord abides within your mind, body, mouth and heart, then whatever you desire shall come to pass.
ZIG HIG 3 AS fee AT AG AT fRus Il (255-16, ast, v2 5)
tahal mahal taa ka-o milai jaa ka-o saaDh kirpaal.
He alone obtains the Lord's service, and the Mansion of His Presence, unto whom the Holy Saint is compassionate.
AY Hats 38 aA AG urus afa efenrs Il (255-17, aBat, we 5)
saaDhoo sangat ta-o basai ja-o aapan hohi da-i-aal.
He joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, only when the Lord Himself shows His Mercy.
ed amd ag 326 fag BS AY Sta Il (255-17, TES, 2 5)
tohay taahay baho bhavan bin naavai sukh naahi.
I have searched and searched, across so many worlds, but without the Name, there is no peace.
cord AH & Es fso A AY Afer AHO Il (255-18, Tet, He 5) taleh jaam kay doot tih jo saaDhoo sang samaahi. The Messenger of Death retreats from those who dwell in the Saadh Sangat.
afe ofa we AS Hea Il (255-18, aGst, He 5) baar baar jaa-o sant sadkay. Again and again, I am forever devoted to the Saints.
Soa UY PASTA AhE TX WQDI (255-19, wat, ve 5) naanak paap binaasay kad kay. ||27]| O Nanak, my sins from so long ago have been erased. ||27]|
AS Il (255-19)
salok. Shalok:
oa 8 dat fsog ufe faa deg AYA Il (255-19, ast, He 5)
thaak na hotee tinhu dar jih hovhu suparsan.
Those beings, with whom the Lord is thoroughly pleased, meet with no obstacles at His Door.
A Ho ufs mud ad Soa 3 ofs Uf NA (255-19, west, 48 5)
jo jan parabh apunay karay naanak tay Dhan Dhan. ||1||
Those humble beings whom God has made His own, O Nanak, are blessed, so very blessed. ||1||
at Qué ust Il (256-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sot HOM Safa Sat i A Aare forts Sata wu|rd il (256-1, Ss, ws 5)
thathaa manoo-aa thaaheh naahee. jo sagal ti-aag aykeh laptaahee.
T'HAT'HA: Those who have abandoned all else, and who cling to the One Lord alone, do not make trouble for anyone's mind.
Sua Safar Hfeur Ffst HE Il (256-2, ast, we 5) thahak thahak maa-i-aa sang moo-ay. Those who are totally absorbed and preoccupied with Maya are dead;
Gut & FAS 3 AST Je Il (256-2, ast, uz 5) u-aa kai kusal na kathoo hoo-ay. they do not find happiness anywhere.
oe udt Had Afa sfAmr il (256-2, aGst, H2 5) thaa‘dh paree santeh sang basi-aa. One who dwells in the Society of the Saints finds a great peace;
mMifs oH So Aba afhmr I (256-3, ast, ue 5) amrit naam tahaa jee-a rasi-aa. the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam becomes sweet to his soul.
SAT MUS AAS SEM I (256-3, aes, ne 5) thaakur apunay jo jan bhaa-i-aa. That humble being, who is pleasing to his Lord and Master
Sea Cnt at He Alsafenr Aci (256-3, aSHt, vs 5) naanak u-aa kaa man seetlaa-i-aa. ||28] | - O Nanak, his mind is cooled and soothed. ||28]|
HSE Il (256-4) salok. Shalok:
SaCfs deo nifoa aI ATA AG" AHA Il (256-4, aSHt, He 5)
dand-ut bandan anik baar sarab kalaa samrath.
I bow down, and fall to the ground in humble adoration, countless times, to the All- powerful Lord, who possesses all powers.
BOO 3 TU UZ soa S Ala TA MAUI (256-4, ast, we 5)
dolan tay raakho parabhoo naanak day kar hath. |[1]|
Please protect me, and save me from wandering, God. Reach out and give Nanak Your Hand. ||1]|
Uugat I (256-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oa 3m feg odt Ad Sa 3g WS Il (256-5, TCH, He 5) dadaa dayraa ih nahee jah dayraa tah jaan. DADDA: This is not your true place; you must know where that place really is.
Gut 3a" aT AHH ad a ASfe USTs Il (256-5, aBst, He 5) u-aa dayraa kaa sanjamo gur kai sabad pachhaan.
You shall come to realize the way to that place, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
for 3a a AN afs wes I (256-6, wet, He 5) i-aa dayraa ka-o saram kar ghaalai. This place, here, is established by hard work,
WO SH Sat Afar TS I (256-6, ast, vz 5) jaa kaa tasoo nahee sang chaalai. but not one iota of this shall go there with you.
Gor sa at A HAS ATS II (256-6, ast, He 5) u-aa dayraa kee so mit jaanai. The value of that place beyond is known only to those,
W ag fenfe yas TASS Il (256-7, TEs, v8 5) jaa ka-o darisat pooran bhagvaanai. upon whom the Perfect Lord God casts His Glance of Grace.
3a fesse AY AGHA ufeur Il (256-7, aSst, He 5)
dayraa nihchal sach saaDhsang paa-i-aa.
That permanent and true place is obtained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
Sea SHS Sd SHE ICI (256-7, TSHH, 2 5) naanak tay jan nah dolaa-i-aa. ||29]| O Nanak, those humble beings do not waver or wander. ||29]|
HS Il (256-8)
salok. Shalok:
Bde oa ugh wf faafs o whe sa I (256-8, ast, He 5)
dhaahan laagay Dharam raa-ay kineh na ghaali-o banDh.
When the Righteous Judge of Dharma begins to destroy someone, no one can place any obstacle in His Way.
aoa Cad vf get AOAfa ASST IA (256-8, Test, H2 5) naanak ubray jap haree saaDhsang san-banDh. ||1]| O Nanak, those who join the Saadh Sangat and meditate on the Lord are saved. ||1||
UuGSt II (256-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ue gus ag fesg veo feur Ho HM II (256-9, ast, He 5)
dhadhaa dhoodhat kah firahu dhoodhan i-aa man maahi.
DHADHA: Where are you going, wandering and searching? Search instead within your own mind.
Afa sad ug FA 89 8 aT feats il (256-9, aBHt, ne 5) sang tuhaarai parabh basai ban ban kahaa firaahi. God is with you, so why do you wander around from forest to forest?
dt wag AUAfa vitafa fags Il (256-10, aCHt, He 5)
dhayree Dhahhu saaDhsang aha™-buDh bikraal.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, tear down the mound of your frightful, egotistical pride.
HY USd AdH SAd Gano ety fares Il (256-10, aBat, He 5)
sukh paavhu sehjay bashu darsan daykh nihaal.
You shall find peace, and abide in intuitive bliss; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan, you shall be delighted.
dt WH AfH He Tes Afe ea UTE I (256-11, ag, He 5)
dhayree jaamai jam marai garabh jon dukh paa-ay.
One who has such a mound as this, dies and suffers the pain of reincarnation through the womb.
Hd Hale Bes Jd WE IE mrs WE Il (256-11, aSst, 2 5)
moh magan laptat rahai ha-o ha-o aavai jaa-ay.
One who is intoxicated by emotional attachment, entangled in egotism, selfishness and conceit, shall continue coming and going in reincarnation.
@dIs BIS Ma Blo us AT AST AGSMS Il (256-12, ast, He 5)
dhahat dhahat ab dheh paray saaDh janaa sarnaa-ay. Slowly and steadily, I have now surrendered to the Holy Saints; I have come to their Sanctuary.
ey aX ad Aleut sea BE AHTE IlZOll (256-12, aSst, He 5) dukh kay faahay kaati-aa naanak lee-ay samaa-ay. ||30||
God has cut away the noose of my pain; O Nanak, He has merged me into Himself. ||30]|
AS Il (256-13)
salok. Shalok:
Wo WY alse SAG AtISG SSA StS Il (256-13, ast, v3 5)
jah saaDhoo gobid bhajan keertan naanak neet.
Where the Holy people constantly vibrate the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, O Nanak
awe ag a0 gels feate 5 Wenig FT UI (256-13, Tea, we 5)
naa ha-o naa too™ nah chhuteh nikat na jaa-ee-ahu doot. ||1||
- the Righteous Judge says, "Do not approach that place, O Messenger of Death, or else neither you nor I shall escape!"||1] |
uGat Il (256-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Stat ge 3 Abst wrsn ats afe it 256-14, ast, 2 5) naanaa ran tay seejhee-ai aatam jeetai ko-ay. NANNA: One who conquers his own soul, wins the battle of life.
TSH nis fag ofe He A Ast safe il 256-14, wet, we 5)
ha-umai an si-o lar marai so sobhaa doo ho-ay.
One who dies, while fighting against egotism and alienation, becomes sublime and beautiful.
Hat frets Ales He TI us SueHA Il (256-15, ast, we 5)
manee mitaa-ay jeevat marai gur pooray updays.
One who eradicates his ego, remains dead while yet alive, through the Teachings of the Perfect Guru.
Hour Mis afte fs fSa AISS SA Il (256-15, TCs, Hs 5) manoo-aa jeetai har milai tih soortan vays. He conquers his mind, and meets the Lord; he is dressed in robes of honor.
Sa We nmue Safa 2a Ms Ill (256-16, TSH, He 5) naa ko jaanai aapno aykeh tayk aDhaar. He does not claim anything as his own; the One Lord is his Anchor and Support.
dfs feen fines gd A Us Use MRE Il (256-16, aSst, 48 5) rain dinas simrat rahai so parabh purakh apaar. Night and day, he continually contemplates the Almighty, Infinite Lord God.
3S Aas feor ue ad SB ATH SHAE Il (256-16, aS, we 5) rayn sagal i-aa man karai ay-oo karam kamaa-ay. He makes his mind the dust of all; such is the karma of the deeds he does.
JaH FS Ae AY set foto us Waal (256-17, ast, Hs 5)
hukmai boojhai sadaa sukh naanak likhi-aa paa-ay. ||31]||
Understanding the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he attains everlasting peace. O Nanak, such is his pre-ordained destiny. ||31]|
HS Il (256-18)
salok. Shalok:
36 HO US nau fA ys fore Hf II (256-18, west, He 5) tan man Dhan arpa-o tisai parabhoo milaavai mohi. I offer my body, mind and wealth to anyone who can unite me with God.
aed 3H SB arch Ya AH at AT AI (256-18, ast, Hs 5)
naanak bharam bha-o kaatee-ai chookai jam kee joh. ||1||
O Nanak, my doubts and fears have been dispelled, and the Messenger of Death does not see me any longer. ||1]||
UgST I (256-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3a a fh ulfs af ae fofa affe af& i (256-19, ast, v8 5)
tataa taa si-o pareet kar gun niDh gobid raa-ay.
TATTA: Embrace love for the Treasure of Excellence, the Sovereign Lord of the Universe.
6 Uefy HS Hes Suls sas ANTE Il (256-19, aSat, ue 5)
fal paavahi man baachh-tay tapat tuhaaree jaa-ay.
You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires, and your burning thirst shall be quenched.
Us 2ud
3H fie aH Ue at A SA fs ore II (257-1, aGet, He 5) taraas mitai jam panth kee jaas basai man naa-o. One whose heart is filled with the Name shall have no fear on the path of death.
afs uefa ufs of yarn Host uefa oS i (257-1, a@Ht, ve 5)
gat paavahi mat ho-ay pargaas mahlee paavahi thaa-o.
He shall obtain salvation, and his intellect shall be enlightened; he will find his place in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
ag Af 5 ug 3S fas HAS oT TH Il (257-2, ast, Hi: 5) taahoo sang na Dhan chalai garih joban nah raaj. Neither wealth, nor household, nor youth, nor power shall go along with you.
Hanfa fares dog fed SOS aA I (257-2, TSH, He 5)
satsang simrat rahhu ihai tuhaarai kaaj.
In the Society of the Saints, meditate in remembrance on the Lord. This alone shall be of use to you.
TT ag 3s Tet FT AS su fees mM Il (257-3, aa, Hs 5) taataa kachhoo na ho-ee hai ja-o taap nivaarai aap. There will be no burning at all, when He Himself takes away your fever.
ufsus soa sufa mrufs Het ary BQH (257-3, ast, He 5)
paratipaalai naanak hameh aapeh maa-ee baap. ||32|| O Nanak, the Lord Himself cherishes us; He is our Mother and Father. ||32]|
AS Il (257-4)
salok. Shalok:
aa ug fafa was fgufs 3 feAat we Il (257-4, Test, us 5)
thaakay baho biDh ghaaltay taripat na tarisnaa laath.
They have grown weary, struggling in all sorts of ways; but they are not satisfied, and their thirst is not quenched.
fs Afs Was He Boa HfeMr o ATE MA (257-4, ast, Hs 5)
sanch sanch saakat moo-ay naanak maa-i-aa na saath. ||1]|
Gathering in and hoarding what they can, the faithless cynics die, O Nanak, but the wealth of Maya does not go with them in the end. ||1]|
UuGSt II (257-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ar fag aG adt ate uATag Ure Il (257-5, aGet, 3 5) thathaa thir ko-oo nahee kaa-ay pasaarahu paav. T'HAT'HA: Nothing is permanent - why do you stretch out your feet?
mfox Fo 85 SH ATT Hear Sa Bure Il (257-5, aSHt, He 5) anik banch bal chhal karahu maa-i-aa ayk upaav. You commit so many fraudulent and deceitful actions as you chase after Maya.
aot Hud AM Ad atx usT Wes Il (257-6, ast, us 5) thailee sanchahu saram karahu thaak parahu gaavaar. You work to fill up your bag, you fool, and then you fall down exhausted.
Ho & fH o uieet nis miGAS se Il (257-6, ast, v2 5) man kai kaam na aavee antay a-osar baar. But this shall be of no use to you at all at that very last instant.
fafs ureg afse sng Hag at fre Bs Il (257-7, aSHt, He 5)
thit paavhu gobid bhajahu santeh kee sikh layho.
You shall find stability only by vibrating upon the Lord of the Universe, and accepting the Teachings of the Saints.
Ulf agg Ae Sa fA fer Ara nS” Il (257-7, Test, He 5) pareet karahu sad ayk si-o i-aa saachaa asnayhu. Embrace love for the One Lord forever - this is true love!
ads ade ASS AS fafa Sa Ta | (257-8, aBat, He 5) kaaran karan karaavano sabh biDh aykai haath. He is the Doer, the Cause of causes. All ways and means are in His Hands alone.
fas fas weg fas fas sata ea AZ MiSs I3BSil (257-8, aes, H2 5)
jit jit laavhu tit tit lageh naanak jant anaath. ||33]|
Whatever You attach me to, to that I am attached; O Nanak, I am just a helpless creature. ||33]|
HS Il (257-9) salok. Shalok:
aA &a fortant AF As SSSI" Il (257-9, ast, us 5) daasah ayk nihaari-aa sabh kachh dayvanhaar. His slaves have gazed upon the One Lord, the Giver of everything.
AA AA fAHes Jats SSA SAA MOTT NA (257-9, ast, He 5)
Saas Saas simrat raheh naanak daras aDhaar. ||1]| They continue to contemplate Him with each and every breath; O Nanak, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is their Support. ||1]|
UST Il (257-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wer ust Sa I AS AG SSI Il (257-10, aGs, He 5) dadaa daataa ayk hai sabh ka-o dayvanhaar. DADDA: The One Lord is the Great Giver; He is the Giver to all.
AN &
ve sfe 3 niect niles 3d ST Il (257-10, ast, Hz 5) day“day tot na aavee agnat bharay bhandaar. There is no limit to His Giving. His countless warehouses are filled to overflowing.
Pods Ae Aleog as Il (257-11, west, He 5) dainhaar sad jeevanhaaraa. The Great Giver is alive forever.
Ho Hae fas sta ferret i (257-11, ast, He 5)
man moorakh ki-o taahi bisaaraa. O foolish mind, why have you forgotten Him?
SH oot aT AS Hts il (257-11, 7st, ws 5) dos nahee kaahoo ka-o meetaa. No one is at fault, my friend.
Hfeor Ho so us ats I (257-12, aSst, ne 5) maa-i-aa moh banDh parabh keetaa. God created the bondage of emotional attachment to Maya.
ddd forats A a omy Il Soa S 3 ATHY Gry WSVell 257-12, Test, ue 5) darad nivaareh jaa kay aapay. naanak tay tay gurmukh Dharaapay. ||34]| He Himself removes the pains of the Gurmukh; O Nanak, he is fulfilled. ||34||
Aq Il (257-12)
salok. Shalok:
us Hid fea ca 3 of fastat MTA II (257-13, aSst, He 5) Dhar jee-aray ik tayk too laahi bidaanee aas. O my soul, grasp the Support of the One Lord; give up your hopes in others.
Soa oH fomreha arae wre TA NA (257-13, Test, He 5)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai kaaraj aavai raas. ||1]||
O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, your affairs shall be resolved. ||1]|
UugST Il (257-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
um wes 38 fe Hanif Sf aA It (257-14, as, Ht 5)
DhaDhaa Dhaavat ta-o mitai satsang ho-ay baas.
DHADHA: The mind's wanderings cease, when one comes to dwell in the Society of the Saints.
us 3 faar aag vif 38 df Hafs UsErA Il (257-14, aBst, He 5) Dhur tay kirpaa karahu aap ta-o ho-ay maneh pargaas. If the Lord is Merciful from the very beginning, then one's mind is enlightened.
U6 Are 3B AG ATT Il (257-14, ast, ve 5) Dhan saachaa tay-oo sach saahaa. Those who have the true wealth are the true bankers.
dfs ofs Ut on fara Il (257-15, west, He 5) har har poonjee naam bihaasaa. The Lord, Har, Har, is their wealth, and they trade in His Name.
Uten AA Ast fsa sfsmr i (257-15, ast, v2 5) Dheeraj jas sobhaa tih bani-aa. Patience, glory and honor come to those
dfs afs aH Azo fas AfSnt Il (257-15, aes, 2 5) har har naam sarvan jih suni-aa. who listen to the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
aanfy fag ufe 3d AHTET II (257-16, 7Bat, He 5) gurmukh jih ghat rahay samaa-ee. That Gurmukh whose heart remains merged with the Lord,
Sod fsa AS feet esTet ISUIl (257-16, aBSt, He 5)
naanak tih jan milee vadaa-ee. ||35]| O Nanak, obtains glorious greatness. ||35||
Hq Il (257-17)
salok. Shalok:
Soa STH SH AU Afumr nists aofe Sfar il (257-17, aCHt, He 5)
naanak naam naam jap japi-aa antar baahar rang.
O Nanak, one who chants the Naam, and meditates on the Naam with love inwardly and outwardly,
afs us Guetior saa ofa AaAfaT A (257-17, ae, 43 5)
gur poorai updaysi-aa narak naahi saaDhsang. ||1]|
receives the Teachings from the Perfect Guru; he joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and does not fall into hell. ||1]|
UugST Il (257-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
do! dla Udts S ard AT a Hf Sis oH SATS Il (257-18, aBst, He 5)
nannaa narak pareh tay naahee. jaa kai man tan naam basaahee.
NANNA: Those whose minds and bodies are filled with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall not fall into hell.
oy fours dante AH AUS Il (257-18, ast, v2 5) naam niDhaan gurmukh jo japtay. Those Gurmukhs who chant the treasure of the Naam,
fry utfeor ufo or GfE wus Il (257-19, aBHt, Hz 5) bikh maa-i-aa meh naa o-ay khaptay. are not destroyed by the poison of Maya.
dorag o Is Tag il on Hg ate eta ag Il (257-19, ast, H2 5)
nannaakaar na hotaa taa kaho. naam mantar gur deeno jaa kaho.
Those who have been given the Mantra of the Naam by the Guru, shall not be turned away.
Yar Que fafa fours ate nifys us i (258-1, 7st, we 5)
niDh niDhaan har amrit pooray. They are filled and fulfilled with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, the Treasure of sublime wealth;
3d TH Boa MSIE FT MBE (258-1, 7Sst, H2 5) tah baajay naanak anhad tooray. ||36|| O Nanak, the unstruck celestial melody vibrates for them. ||36]|
Aq Il (258-1)
salok. Shalok:
ufs odt afs uegon sf uss Ha fsers Il (258-1, ast, He 5)
pat raakhee gur paarbarahm taj parpanch moh bikaar.
The Guru, the Supreme Lord God, preserved my honor, when I renounced hypocrisy, emotional attachment and corruption.
aoa AG nrariat nis o ursrerg WAU (258-2, ast, Hs 5) naanak so-oo aaraaDhee-ai ant na paaraavaar. ||1]| O Nanak, worship and adore the One, who has no end or limitation. ||1]|
ust II (258-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
uur uses urs & uTfEMt Il (258-2, ast, He 5) papaa parmit paar na paa-i-aa. PAPPA: He is beyond estimation; His limits cannot be found.
ufss uree mar dfs afm Il (258-3, aBst, H2 5) patit paavan agam har raa-i-aa. The Sovereign Lord King is inaccessible;
TS USS AS MUTT Il (258-3, Tat, Hs 5) hot puneet kot apraaDhoo. He is the Purifier of sinners. Millions of sinners are purified;
nifys omy Aufe fife APG II (258-3, west, He 5) amrit naam jaapeh mil saaDhoo. they meet the Holy, and chant the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ugus Oo Ho feeoret I (258-4, a@Ht, He 5) parpach Dharoh moh mitnaaee. Deception, fraud and emotional attachment are eliminated,
wT ag aug mrfu TASH I (258-4, aBat, He 5) jaa ka-o raakho aap gusaa-ee. by those who are protected by the Lord of the World.
ufsArg sy fe AG il (258-4, west, ws 5) paatisaahu chhatar sir so-oo. He is the Supreme King, with the royal canopy above His Head.
BSA TAT Meg 3 AG BI (258-5, 7Ss, ws 5) naanak doosar avar na ko-oo. ||37]| O Nanak, there is no other at all. ||37]||
HS Il (258-5) salok. Shalok:
ad ae fue azo fag set Hfe ATS I (258-5, ast, nH 5)
faahay kaatay mitay gavan fatih bha-ee man jeet.
The noose of Death is cut, and one's wanderings cease; victory is obtained, when one conquers his own mind.
Soa Td 3 fas uret fess fe fos sts All (258-5, ast, ve 5)
naanak gur tay thit paa-ee firan mitay nit neet. ||1]|
O Nanak, eternal stability is obtained from the Guru, and one's day-to-day wanderings cease. ||1]||
Uugat I (258-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oo fess fess 3 mrfenr Il (258-6, ast, H2 5) fafaa firat firat too aa-i-aa. FAFFA: After wandering and wandering for so long, you have come;
gos ta afena ufo urfemr II (258-6, west, ne 5)
darulabh dayh kalijug meh paa-i-aa.
in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, you have obtained this human body, so very difficult to obtain.
fefs four nigAg vd & TA Il (258-7, aSst, v2 5) fir i-aa a-osar charai na haathaa. This opportunity shall not come into your hands again.
oH AU 36 adits SA Il (258-7, aS, 2 5) naam japahu ta-o katee-ah faasaa. So chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the noose of Death shall be cut away.
fefa fefs nrea ae & Tet Il (258-7, ast, v2 5) fir fir aavan jaan na ho-ee. You shall not have to come and go in reincarnation over and over again,
Sats fa AUT AY AST I (258-8, aBat, He 5) aykeh ayk japahu jap so-ee. if you chant and meditate on the One and Only Lord.
ag faur ys AIST Il (258-8, 7SHt, ne 5) karahu kirpaa parabh karnaihaaray. Shower Your Mercy, O God, Creator Lord,
HIS BI FSA FIST NSC (258-8, Test, us 5) mayl layho naanak baychaaray. ||38|| and unite poor Nanak with Yourself. ||38] |
Hq Il (258-9) salok. Shalok:
fas@ Hog SH USATH cs cfenre TU I (258-9, west, He 5) bin-o sunhu tum paarbarahm deen da-i-aal gupaal. Hear my prayer, O Supreme Lord God, Merciful to the meek, Lord of the World.
HY AU as Sa GA Soa AT GSTS IAI (258-9, aSHt, v2 5) sukh sampai baho bhog ras naanak saaDh ravaal. ||1]|
The dust of the feet of the Holy is peace, wealth, great enjoyment and pleasure for Nanak. ||1]|
UST Il (258-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aa YIN WSs FS YH Il (258-10, ast, ws 5)
babaa barahm jaanat tay barahmaa. BABBA: One who knows God is a Brahmin.
SAS 3 TaHfy AY TMT Il (258-10, west, He 5) baisno tay gurmukh such Dharmaa. A Vaishnaav is one who, as Gurmukh, lives the righteous life of Dharma.
ata wits gat fev] Il (258-10, a@et, H2 5) beeraa aapan buraa mitaavai. One who eradicates his own evil is a brave warrior;
ag gat feafe sot wre il 258-11, aGat, 3 5) taahoo buraa nikat nahee aavai. no evil even approaches him.
afag nmue 3B IB gor Il (258-11, west, He 5) baaDhi-o aapan ha-o ha-o banDhaa. Man is bound by the chains of his own egotism, selfishness and conceit.
oH 23 nia aC nia il (258-11, ast, v2 5) dos dayt aagah ka-o anDhaa. The spiritually blind place the blame on others.
ag vs AS sot frmreu Il (258-12, ast, H: 5) baat cheet sabh rahee si-aanap. But all debates and clever tricks are of no use at all.
fanfo HOST A ATS Ba WSC (258-12, aga, He 5) jisahi janaavhu so jaanai naanak. ||39]|| O Nanak, he alone comes to know, whom the Lord inspires to know. ||39]|
He Il (258-12)
salok. Shalok:
3 SHS wu ga SA Hots wate Ts Il (258-12, ast, Hs 5)
bhai bhanjan agh dookh naas maneh araaDh haray.
The Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of sin and sorrow - enshrine that Lord in your mind.
Hana fas fee aA soa 3 3 FH IAI (258-13, ast, He 5)
satsang jih rid basi-o naanak tay na bharamay. ||1]|
One whose heart abides in the Society of the Saints, O Nanak, does not wander around in doubt. ||1]|
UugST Il (258-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3a" San fHeTST MUST I (258-13, Test, He 5) bhabhaa bharam mitaavhu apnaa. BHABHA: Cast out your doubt and delusion
four HATS Aas FT AUST Il (258-14, Test, He 5) i-aa sansaar sagal hai supnaa. - this world is just a dream.
Ban As od SSt SST Il (258-14, a7Sst, ve 5) bharmay sur nar dayvee dayvaa. The angelic beings, goddesses and gods are deluded by doubt.
SoH fra Afoa FINS I (258-14, 7st, vs 5) bharmay siDh saaDhik barahmayvaa. The Siddhas and seekers, and even Brahma are deluded by doubt.
SoH Sa HSU SINE Il (258-15, aSst, He 5) bharam bharam maanukh dahkaa-ay. Wandering around, deluded by doubt, people are ruined.
esd Ho fun feo He I (258-15, west, 2 5) dutar mahaa bikham ih maa-ay. It is so very difficult and treacherous to cross over this ocean of Maya.
aToufa gH S Ha frerfemr Ih (258-15, ast, 8 5) gurmukh bharam bhai moh mitaa-i-aa. That Gurmukh who has eradicated doubt, fear and attachment,
Soa STI UGH AY UfEMT ISOll (258-16, TBST, He 5) naanak tayh param sukh paa-i-aa. ||40]|| O Nanak, obtains supreme peace. ||40||
HS Il (258-16)
salok. Shalok:
Hor 3% ag fact Ho wufes faa Aa Il (258-16, ast, He 5) maa-i-aa dolai baho biDhee man lapti-o tih sang. Maya clings to the mind, and causes it to waver in so many ways.
Hae 3 fad 3H SUT A O'Oa BHT Fa WAU (258-17, TSH, v8 5)
maagan tay jih tum rakhahu so naanak naameh rang. ||1]|
When You, O Lord, restrain someone from asking for wealth, then, O Nanak, he comes to love the Name. ||1||
Uugat Il (258-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HHT HaSIS fEnirar il (258-17, a@st, He 5) mamaa maaganhaar i-aanaa. MAMMA: The beggar is so ignorant
food & og AAS Il (258-18, Test, He 5) daynhaar day rahi-o sujaanaa. - the Great Giver continues to give. He is All-knowing.
a te A Safe ae Il (258-18, ast, H2 5) jo deeno so aykeh baar. Whatever He gives, He gives once and for all.
HS HIN AT ATT UST Il (258-18, ast, w2 5) man moorakh kah karahi pukaar. O foolish mind, why do you complain, and cry out so loud?
AG Hats 3B Hrafo Sh i (258-18, aSst, vs 5) ja-o maageh ta-o maageh bee-aa. Whenever you ask for something, you ask for worldly things;
W 3 AAS 3 ay Bho Il (258-19, ast, u: 5) jaa tay kusal na kaahoo thee-aa. no one has obtained happiness from these.
Hate Ha S Sats Ha Il (258-19, aSst, He 5) maagan maag ta aykeh maag. If you must ask for a gift, then ask for the One Lord.
SOA ATS Usd UTS SAU (258-19, west, He 5) naanak jaa tay pareh paraag. ||41]|| O Nanak, by Him, you shall be saved. ||41]|
Ua 2ue
Ha Il (259-1)
salok. Shalok:
nfs ust ustTs 3 TT US Ho HS Il (259-1, ast, vs 5)
mat pooree parDhaan tay gur pooray man mant.
Perfect is the intellect, and most distinguished is the reputation, of those whose minds are filled with the Mantra of the Perfect Guru.
fas WES us mTUS Soa FS SASS MAUI (259-1, TSH, us 5) jih jaani-o parabh aapunaa naanak tay bhagvant. ||1|| Those who come to know their God, O Nanak, are very fortunate. ||1]|
uGat II (259-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HHT ATT HOH Usa Il SSS AGHA Usha Il (259-2, wat, we 5)
mamaa jaahoo maram pachhaanaa. bhaytat saaDhsang patee-aanaa. MAMMA: Those who understand God's mystery are satisfied, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
eu AY Gor & AHS aera Il (259-2, aes, He 5) dukh sukh u-aa kai samat beechaaraa. They look upon pleasure and pain as the same.
da Add JIS MSS Il (259-3, aSst, ue 5) narak surag rahat a-utaaraa. They are exempt from incarnation into heaven or hell.
IT Hat 37g fagsur il (259-3, west, v2 5) taahoo sang taahoo nirlaypaa. They live in the world, and yet they are detached from it.
ude we we use fara Il (259-3, west, He 5) pooran ghat ghat purakh bisaykhaa. The Sublime Lord, the Primal Being, is totally pervading each and every heart.
Cor oA ufo Corg AY uTfeMT II (259-4, 7st, He 5) u-aa ras meh u-aahoo sukh paa-i-aa. In His Love, they find peace.
see feus sdt f3a wfEnr IS2il (259-4, Test, He 5)
naanak lipat nahee tih maa-i-aa. ||42]| O Nanak, Maya does not cling to them at all. ||42||
He Il (259-4) salok. Shalok:
ug HIS Afs AHo”d fae ais sea ofa II (259-4, ast, ve 5) yaar meet sun saajanhu bin har chhootan naahi. Listen, my dear friends and companions: without the Lord, there is no salvation.
Sod fsa dus ae ag at vast uta Ail (259-5, west, ns 5) naanak tih banDhan katay gur kee charnee paahi. ||1|| O Nanak, one who falls at the Feet of the Guru, has his bonds cut away. ||1]|
ugat Il (259-5) pavrhee. Pauree:
Ut A36 Ads ag fadior it (259-6, ast, vs 5) ya-yaa jatan karat baho biDhee-aa. YAYYA: People try all sorts of things,
fa an fae ag wo frdior |i 259-6, aSst, He 5) ayk naam bin kah la-o siDhee-aa. but without the One Name, how far can they succeed?
Wy ASS als TS FeTS Il (259-6, aVet, we 5) yaahoo jatan kar hot chhutaaraa. Those efforts, by which emancipation may be attained
Curg 730 AT Hara Il (259-7, ast, ue 5) u-aahoo jatan saaDh sangaaraa. - those efforts are made in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ww Sage Ud AZ A Il (259-7, ast, 3 5) yaa ubran Dhaarai sabh ko-oo. Everyone has this idea of salvation,
Curt AU fas Cass FS Il (259-7, aCst, v2 5) u-aahi japay bin ubar na ho-oo. but without meditation, there can be no salvation.
ug 3IO 33S AHI |l (259-7, ABst, He 5) yaahoo taran taaran samraathaa. The All-powerful Lord is the boat to carry us across.
ate Bg fade SISA Il (259-8, ast, He 5) raakh layho nirgun narnaathaa. O Lord, please save these worthless beings!
Ho ad SH fag orf Aaret I (259-8, wat, He 5) man bach karam jih aap janaa-ee. Those whom the Lord Himself instructs in thought, word and deed
Sod fsa HFS yatet mret SSI (259-8, TSH, He 5)
naanak tih mat pargatee aa-ee. ||43]| - O Nanak, their intellect is enlightened. ||43]|
AS Il (259-9) salok. Shalok:
dH 3 WY Aa aay wirus ny stats il (259-9, aat, us 5) ros na kaahoo sang karahu aapan aap beechaar. Do not be angry with anyone else; look within your own self instead.
of farar afar gag area Best us NA (259-9, aest, He 5) ho-ay nimaanaa jag rahhu naanak nadree paar. ||1]| Be humble in this world, O Nanak, and by His Grace you shall be carried across. ||1||
UST Il (259-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ia 35 dS AS A aft Il (259-10, ast, He 5)
raaraa rayn hot sabh jaa kee. RARRA: Be the dust under the feet of all.
fa mifairg ee Sct gol | (259-10, Bat, ne 5) taj abhimaan chhutai tayree baakee. Give up your egotistical pride, and the balance of your account shall be written off.
oe veats 3B Asta SSH I (259-11, west, He 5) ran dargahi ta-o seejheh bhaa-ee. Then, you shall win the battle in the Court of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
AG qaHfa TH OM fees Set I (259-11, 7Sst, 2 5) ja-o gurmukh raam naam liv laa-ee. As Gurmukh, lovingly attune yourself to the Lord's Name.
TIS JIS ofa whe feos | TT us & AafE wer I (259-11, ast, we 5) rahat rahat reh jaahi bikaaraa. gur pooray kai sabad apaaraa.
Your evil ways shall be slowly and steadily blotted out, by the Shabad, the Incomparable Word of the Perfect Guru.
TS IT BH IA HS Il (259-12, ast, H: 5)
raatay rang naam ras maatay.
You shall be imbued with the Lord's Love, and intoxicated with the Nectar of the Naam.
SSA Ts TT Atat BS Sell (259-12, west, ne 5) naanak har gur keenee daatay. ||44]| O Nanak, the Lord, the Guru, has given this gift. ||44] |
HS Il (259-12)
salok. Shalok:
wed 3d fre fanrfa fer sat ufs aA I (259-13, aBat, we 5) laalach jhooth bikhai bi-aaDh i-aa dayhee meh baas. The afflictions of greed, falsehood and corruption abide in this body.
dfs ofs uifts aenfs uber area Afy foeA AI (259-13, ast, He 5)
har har amrit gurmukh pee-aa naanak sookh nivaas. ||1||
Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, O Nanak, the Gurmukh abides in peace. ||1]|
Uugat Il (259-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Bo BSS mBug ATT Il (259-14, asst, we 5) lalaa laava-o a-ukhaDh jaahoo. LALLA: One who takes the medicine of the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
way use fsa frrefa faarg I (259-14, ast, v2 5) dookh darad tih miteh khinaahoo. is cured of his pain and sorrow in an instant.
oH mug fro foe fas] il (259-14, a@Ht, He 5) naam a-ukhaDh jih ridai hitaavai. One whose heart is filled with the medicine of the Naam,
afs da Aus odt mie Il (259-15, west, He 5) taahi rog supnai nahee aavai. is not infested with disease, even in his dreams.
dfs niGug As we J set I (259-15, aSHH, He 5) har a-ukhaDh sabh ghat hai bhaa-ee. The medicine of the Lord's Name is in all hearts, O Siblings of Destiny.
a ud fag fafa o aaret Il (259-15, aSat, H2 5) gur pooray bin biDh na banaa-ee. Without the Perfect Guru, no one knows how to prepare it.
afs us ARH afte hor Il (259-16, aBet, we 5) gur poorai sanjam kar dee-aa. When the Perfect Guru gives the instructions to prepare it,
aan 38 fefs ga o hor isull (259-16, west, He 5) naanak ta-o fir dookh na thee-aa. ||45]| then, O Nanak, one does not suffer illness again. ||45] |
HSE Il (259-16)
salok. Shalok:
Hes Ada H Ba o AST one Il (259-16, aa, Hs 5) vaasudayv sarbatar mai oon na kathoo thaa-ay. The All-pervading Lord is in all places. There is no place where He does not exist.
nists sofa Afa J sea ae vate AU (259-17, ast, He 5) antar baahar sang hai naanak kaa-ay duraa-ay. ||1]| Inside and outside, He is with you. O Nanak, what can be hidden from Him? ||1]|
ust Il (259-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ze SIF AIM AY Il (259-17, ast, 42 5) vavaa vair na karee-ai kaahoo. WAWWA: Do not harbor hatred against anyone.
we we nists YH AH Il (259-18, west, He 5) ghat ghat antar barahm samaahoo. In each and every heart, God is contained.
SHES AS 8G Hla Tent Il (259-18, ast, ve 5) vaasudayv jal thal meh ravi-aa. The All-pervading Lord is permeating and pervading the oceans and the land.
aa unte fears ot afenr it (259-18, ast, 8 5) gur parsaad virlai hee gavi-aa. How rare are those who, by Guru's Grace, sing of Him.
2g fedu fue fa Ha 3 II (259-19, ast, H3 5) vair viroDh mitay tih man tay. Hatred and alienation depart from those
dfs atese TeHfa FH AOS II (259-19, aeHH, He 5) har keertan gurmukh jo suntay. who, as Gurmukh, listen to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
26 fade Ade 3 JIT || Soa Ufa dfs Tenfy A ATT INEM (259-19, TES, He 5)
varan chihan saglah tay rahtaa. naanak har har gurmukh jo kahtaa. ||46|| O Nanak, one who becomes Gurmukh chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and rises above all social classes and status symbols. ||46]|
UST 2EO
H@a Il (260-1)
salok. Shalok:
38 3G aes farsi AAS HAT MATS Il (260-1, 7Bat, He 5) ha-o ha-o karat bihaanee-aa saakat mugaDh ajaan.
Acting in egotism, selfishness and conceit, the foolish, ignorant, faithless cynic wastes his life.
sata He faG fgurss cae feorafs AHS AU (260-2, aGzt, He 5) rharhak mu-ay ji-o tarikhaava‘t naanak kirat kamaan. ||1]|
He dies in agony, like one dying of thirst; O Nanak, this is because of the deeds he has done. ||1]|
uGat Il (260-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
war as fue Afar ATT I (260-2, a@et, v2 5) rhaarhaa rhaarh mitai sang saaDhoo. RARRA: Conflict is eliminated in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
ASH UH SZ GH MIT Il (260-3, Tat, He 5)
karam Dharam tat naam araaDhoo.
meditate in adoration on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the essence of karma and Dharma.
gs fra afAS fee Hat I (260-3, a@at, v2 5) roorho jih basi-o rid maahee. When the Beautiful Lord abides within the heart,
Gur at ats frees faortt Il (260-3, a7@Ht, He 5) u-aa kee rhaarh mitat binsaahee. conflict is erased and ended.
az AIS AAS WSS Il (260-4, aSat, ve 5) rhaarh karat saakat gaavaaraa. The foolish, faithless cynic picks arguments
Ag dha uidafa faarer il (260-4, ast, H2 5) jayh hee-ai aha‘-buDh bikaaraa. - his heart is filled with corruption and egotistical intellect.
aa genta ats fHeet i fone Hts oa AHSTET NDI (260-4, Test, H2 5)
rhaarhaa gurmukh rhaarh mitaa-ee. nimakh maahi naanak samjhaa-ee. ||47]| RARRA: For the Gurmukh, conflict is eliminated in an instant, O Nanak, through the Teachings. ||47]| |
HS Il (260-5) salok. Shalok:
AY at Ho Se ag Bats fimrau fIora I (260-5, west, H 5) saaDhoo kee man ot gahu ukat si-aanap ti-aag. O mind, grasp the Support of the Holy Saint; give up your clever arguments.
aa dtftmr fro vfs aA area HASfa Sa A (260-5, west, He 5)
gur deekhi-aa jih man basai naanak mastak bhaag. ||1]|
One who has the Guru's Teachings within his mind, O Nanak, has good destiny inscribed upon his forehead. ||1]|
Ugat I (260-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AA Ade ud we ad il AAS ffs Fe yoTs i (260-6, ast, H2 5)
SaSaa Saran paray ab haaray. saastar simrit bayd pookaaray.
SASSA: I have now entered Your Sanctuary, Lord; I am so tired of reciting the Shaastras, the Simritees and the Vedas.
Hos Aus Afo stars il (260-7, aGst, v2 5) soDhat soDhat soDh beechaaraa. I searched and searched and searched, and now I have come to realize,
fag dfs sxe Bdt Fears Il (260-7, ast, 2 5) bin har bhajan nahee chhutkaaraa. that without meditating on the Lord, there is no emancipation.
AA ATA JH BBs Il (260-7, west, Hz 5) Saas saas ham bhoolanhaaray. With each and every breath, I make mistakes.
SH ANGE MASS MUTT Il (260-8, Test, He 5) tum samrath agnat apaaray. You are All-powerful, endless and infinite.
Hale ud at Ime Semis Il (260-8, aSst, He 5) saran paray kee raakh da-i-aalaa. I seek Your Sanctuary - please save me, Merciful Lord!
SOR SHI FSH TUT Stil (260-8, ast, ne 5)
naanak tumray baal gupaalaa. ||48]| Nanak is Your child, O Lord of the World. ||48]|
HS Il (260-9)
salok. Shalok:
udt fet sa AY Se HS 3S SS NIST Il (260-9, aes, He 5)
khudee mitee tab sukh bha-ay man tan bha-ay arog.
When selfishness and conceit are erased, peace comes, and the mind and body are healed.
soe fenct urfimr Grafs ass FA IAI (260-9, aCe, He 5) naanak daristee aa-i-aa ustat karnai jog. ||1|| O Nanak, then He comes to be seen - the One who is worthy of praise. ||1] |
UST Il (260-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wat UT ASIC 3g Il (260-10, ast, Hs 5)
khakhaa kharaa saraaha-o taahoo. KHAKHA: Praise and extol Him on High,
A fas Hfa 8S HSe SIT Il (260-10, wet, Hz 5) jo khin meh oonay subhar bharaahoo. who fills the empty to over-flowing in an instant.
wat feurar dS ust Il (260-10, ast, He 5) kharaa nimaanaa hot paraanee. When the mortal being becomes totally humble,
wofes AU ys fegarat Il (260-11, wat, Hs 5) an-din jaapai parabh nirbaanee. then he meditates night and day on God, the Detached Lord of Nirvaanaa.
ae UAH 5 Gor AY SST II (260-11, Tat, v2 5) bhaavai khasam ta u-aa sukh daytaa. If it pleases the Will of our Lord and Master, then He blesses us with peace.
UTSHIN MA MTGASST Il (260-11, aBet, He 5) paarbarahm aiso aagnataa. Such is the Infinite, Supreme Lord God.
MAY us fis SHAS Il (260-11, aGHt, He 5) asa‘kh khatay khin bakhsanhaaraa. He forgives countless sins in an instant.
SOA Ass Ae SfEMmirar Sell (260-12, ast, He 5)
naanak saahib sadaa da-i-aaraa. ||49]| O Nanak, our Lord and Master is merciful forever. ||49]|
He Il (260-12)
salok. Shalok:
Afs av@ Afs HO HS Astle usT The TE Il (260-12, aBst, He 5)
sat kaha-o sun man mayray saran parahu har raa-ay.
I speak the Truth - listen, O my mind: take to the Sanctuary of the Sovereign Lord King.
Gafs fimrou Aare fsurfar ssa BE ANTE NA (260-13, Test, H2 5) ukat si-aanap sagal ti-aag naanak la-ay samaa-ay. ||1|| Give up all your clever tricks, O Nanak, and He shall absorb you into Himself. ||1]|
UgST Il (260-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AAT famrou avs feurar il (260-13, west, v2 5) sasaa si-aanap chhaad i-aanaa. SASSA: Give up your clever tricks, you ignorant foo!!
fronts gafH o yg usher Il (260-14, west, ne 5) hikmat hukam na parabh patee-aanaa.
God is not pleased with clever tricks and commands. HIA ts aats VST Il (260-14, Test, 2 5)
sahas bhaat karahi chaturaa-ee. You may practice a thousand forms of cleverness,
Hfat Sard SAB WT Il (260-14, aSst, ve 5) sang tuhaarai ayk na jaa-ee. but not even one will go along with you in the end.
AG AG afy fee Tt I (260-15, ast, He 5) SO-00 SO-00 jap din raatee. Meditate on that Lord, that Lord, day and night.
J Abt Vs SoS AT Il (260-15, ast, v2 5) ray jee-a chalai tuhaarai saathee. O soul, He alone shall go along with you.
ATG AS wre fg mM Il (260-15, ast, v2 5) saaDh sayvaa laavai jih aapai. Those whom the Lord Himself commits to the service of the Holy,
aoa Sk AS sy o fam Uoll (260-15, 7st, 3 5) naanak taa ka-o dookh na bi-aapai. | |50|| O Nanak, are not afflicted by suffering. ||50] |
HSE Il (260-16)
salok. Shalok:
ofs afs wa 3 seat His FS AY SE il (260-16, ast, ws 5)
har har mukh tay bolnaa man voothai sukh ho-ay.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and keeping it in your mind, you shall find peace.
atea AS Hf afe sour as wdsta ALE IA (260-16, aSst, 42 5)
naanak sabh meh rav rahi-aa thaan thanantar so-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, the Lord is pervading everywhere; He is contained in all spaces and interspaces. ||1||
Uugat Il (260-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Jae ufe ule Hae x Ufs TI SASS Il (260-17, at, we 5) hayra-o ghat ghat sagal kai poor rahay bhagvaan. Behold! The Lord God is totally pervading each and every heart.
des wre Ae Aele Bu SHO As fara Il (260-18, aes, He 5) hovat aa-ay sad sadeev dukh bhanjan gur gi-aan. Forever and ever, the Guru's wisdom has been the Destroyer of pain.
IG dea dfe nde fsa 3B odt 3a mrfu Il (260-18, ast, H2 5)
ha-o chhutkai ho-ay anand tih ha-o naahee tah aap.
Quieting the ego, ecstasy is obtained. Where the ego does not exist, God Himself is there.
JS TU ASHI HIS ASHA UTS Il (260-19, ast, Hs 5) hatay dookh janmah maran satsang partaap. The pain of birth and death is removed, by the power of the Society of the Saints.
fos af on fes efeurer i Asa Afar Fs fasurer il (260-19, aSat, 42 5)
hit kar naam darirhai da-i-aalaa. santeh sang hot kirpaalaa.
He becomes kind to those who lovingly enshrine the Name of the Merciful Lord within their hearts, in the Society of the Saints.
UST EY Ge ag 3 faog ahr it (261-1, west, vs 5)
orai kachhoo na kinhoo kee-aa. In this world, no one accomplishes anything by himself.
TA AF As YS S IMM MUA (261-1, west, wz 5) naanak sabh kachh parabh tay hoo-aa. ||51]|| O Nanak, everything is done by God. ||51]|
ASE Il (261-1) salok. Shalok:
Ba asts 3 ect fry fas sHSTS Il (261-1, ast, we 5)
laykhai kateh na chhootee-ai khin khin bhoolanhaar.
Because of the balance due on his account, he can never be released; he makes mistakes each and every moment.
ano aufA & aaa ute Sars NU (261-2, ast, He 5) bakhsanhaar bakhas lai naanak paar utaar. ||1]|| O Forgiving Lord, please forgive me, and carry Nanak across. ||1]|
uGat Il (261-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
BE JIU THdas Sarat mrsu HFS il (261-2, ast, wu: 5) loon haraamee gunahgaar baygaanaa alap mat. The sinner is unfaithful to himself; he is ignorant, with shallow understanding.
AG fils fafs wa ate ahs o Wes 3S Il (261-3, west, He 5) jee-o pind jin sukh dee-ay taahi na jaanat tat. He does not know the essence of all, the One who gave him body, soul and peace.
oe Hfeor arse ed fet geo ATE II (261-3, west, He 5) laahaa maa-i-aa kaarnay dah dis dhoodhan jaa-ay. For the sake of personal profit and Maya, he goes out, searching in the ten directions.
geod ass ys fey 3 Hold SAVE Il (261-4, west, He 5)
dayvanhaar daataar parabh nimakh na maneh basaa-ay.
He does not enshrine the Generous Lord God, the Great Giver, in his mind, even for an instant.
wed 3S faars Ho feur AU Hs HAT II (261-4, Tes, Hs 5)
laalach jhooth bikaar moh i-aa sampai man maahi.
Greed, falsehood, corruption and emotional attachment - these are what he collects within his mind.
Bue 3a fSea Ho fsog Afar faote it (261-5, aGat, 3 5) lampat chor nindak mahaa tinhoo sang bihaa-ay. The worst perverts, thieves and slanderers - he passes his time with them.
30 xe 3 aufA Sfo dS Afa us Il (261-5, ast, v2 5) tuDh bhaavai taa bakhas laihi khotay sang kharay. But if it pleases You, Lord, then You forgive the counterfeit along with the genuine.
SSA BS USAIN uo Slfg ST WU (261-6, wet, ve 5) naanak bhaavai paarbarahm paahan neer taray. ||52]|
O Nanak, if it pleases the Supreme Lord God, then even a stone will float on water. ||52]|
HSq Il (261-6)
salok. Shalok:
ums UlS USS JAS SIH ASH MSA Il (261-6, ast, He 5)
khaat peet khaylat hasat bharmay janam anayk.
Eating, drinking, playing and laughing, I have wandered through countless incarnations.
BeHS 3 AST YS aaa Sot Sa AU (261-7, ast, u2 5)
bhavjal tay kaadhahu parabhoo naanak tayree tayk. ||1]|
Please, God, lift me up and out of the terrifying world-ocean. Nanak seeks Your Support. ||1]|
ust I (261-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wes Yes wes uifsa AfSs ea Ute I (261-7, ast, He 5)
khaylat khaylat aa-i-o anik jon dukh paa-ay.
Playing, playing, I have been reincarnated countless times, but this has only brought pain.
We fe AG fHes Aisa gee ANTE Il (261-7, ast, v2 5) khayd mitay saaDhoo milat satgur bachan samaa-ay.
Troubles are removed, when one meets with the Holy; immerse yourself in the Word of the True Guru.
for adt AY Afse wes nifys on I (Qo1-8, west, v2 5)
khimaa gahee sach sanchi-o khaa-i-o amrit naam.
Adopting an attitude of tolerance, and gathering truth, partake of the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name.
udt feu sag set mise Fe PAM II (261-8, ast, v2 5)
kharee kirpaa thaakur bha-ee anad sookh bisraam.
When my Lord and Master showed His Great Mercy, I found peace, happiness and bliss.
au ford ass os wie wre ufses Il (261-9, a@Ht, He 5)
khayp nibaahee bahut laabh ghar aa-ay pativant.
My merchandise has arrived safely, and I have made a great profit; I have returned home with honor.
uot feo afs dor orf fue sas Il (261-9, west, v2 5) kharaa dilaasaa gur dee-aa aa-ay milay bhagvant. The Guru has given me great consolation, and the Lord God has come to meet me.
niu abot aaa wif wirat ure vrfur i (261-10, ast, v2 5)
aapan kee-aa karahi aap aagai paachhai aap.
He Himself has acted, and He Himself acts. He was in the past, and He shall be in the future.
area AG Aad fa wife wie afar farts iusi (261-10, reat, v2 5) naanak so-oo saraahee-ai je ghat ghat rahi-aa bi-aap. ||53]| O Nanak, praise the One, who is contained in each and every heart. ||53]|
AS Il (261-11)
salok. Shalok:
me ys Hdoast fac fefa efenre i 261-11, ast, v2 5) aa-ay parabh sarnaagatee kirpaa niDh da-i-aal. O God, I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Merciful Lord, Ocean of compassion.
fa mug dfs nfs ans soa IS feos INA (261-11, west, He 5) ayk akhar har man basat naanak hot nihaal. ||1]|
One whose mind is filled with the One Word of the Lord, O Nanak, becomes totally blissful. ||1]|
UugaT Il (261-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mug Hf fyse0 yfs Os Il (261-12, ast, v2 5) akhar meh taribhavan parabh Dhaaray. In the Word, God established the three worlds.
mad ats afs Fe eters Il (261-12, west, v2 5) akhar kar kar bayd beechaaray. Created from the Word, the Vedas are contemplated.
nds AAS fAAYAS UaTST I (261-13, west, He 5) akhar saastar simrit puraanaa. From the Word, came the Shaastras, Simritees and Puraanas.
MMI OTE AAS TUT Il (261-13, TCHt, He 5) akhar naad kathan vakh-yaanaa. From the Word, came the sound current of the Naad, speeches and explanations.
wud Hats Fats SF SIT Il (261-13, ast, v2 5) akhar mukat jugat bhai bharmaa. From the Word, comes the way of liberation from fear and doubt.
Mud AIH fasts AT TSH Il (261-14, 7SSt, He 5) akhar karam kirat such Dharmaa. From the Word, come religious rituals, karma, sacredness and Dharma.
fenfens was 3 AST I (261-14, aSst, He 5) daristimaan akhar hai jaytaa. In the visible universe, the Word is seen.
Soa USAIN fessur usil (261-14, ast, ws 5) naanak paarbarahm nirlaypaa. ||54|| O Nanak, the Supreme Lord God remains unattached and untouched. ||54||
HS Il (261-15)
salok. Shalok:
ofa ASH nian MASE feurest i (261-15, west, v2 5) hath kalamm agamm mastak likhaavatee. With pen in hand, the Inaccessible Lord writes man's destiny on his forehead.
Cafes sfuS As Af nigu guest il (261-15, west, we 5) urajh rahi-o sabh sang anoop roopaavatee. The Lord of Incomparable Beauty is involved with all.
Grafs age o ATE HUT SI SMT Il (261-15, aSH, v2 5) ustat kahan na jaa-ay mukhahu tuhaaree-aa. I cannot describe Your Praises with my mouth, O Lord.
Hot ef wan soa afsadior All (261-16, west, He 5) mohee daykh daras naanak balihaaree-aa. ||1||
Nanak is fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; he is a sacrifice to You. ||1||
UugaT Il (261-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
J mgs FT UTSAIH MfsSTA MUIGTA Il (261-16, Test, He 5) hay achut hay paarbarahm abhinaasee aghnaas. O Immovable Lord, O Supreme Lord God, Imperishable, Destroyer of sins:
J uss DT AGA H VU SAS DSTA Il (261-17, Tea, we 5) hay pooran hay sarab mai dukh bhanjan guntaas. O Perfect, All-pervading Lord, Destroyer of pain, Treasure of virtue:
J Hat 3 fadars 3 fess AS 2a Il (261-17, west, nH 5) hay sangee hay nirankaar hay nirgun sabh tayk. O Companion, Formless, Absolute Lord, Support of all:
J dfse 3 ae fame wat Het feaa Il (261-18, west, v2 5) hay gobid hay gun niDhaan jaa kai sadaa bibayk. O Lord of the Universe, Treasure of excellence, with clear eternal understanding:
J mudug ofa gd ofa st dzogs Il (261-18, west, nH: 5) hay aprampar har haray heh bhee hovanhaar. Most Remote of the Remote, Lord God: You are, You were, and You shall always be.
Jd Asd a Ae Afar fears wrarg Il (261-19, a@st, nu: 5) hay santeh kai sadaa sang niDhaaraa aaDhaar. O Constant Companion of the Saints, You are the Support of the unsupported.
J oad JG wd H fssae ae odt afF Il (261-19, ast, v2 5) hay thaakur ha-o daasro mai nirgun gun nahee ko-ay. O my Lord and Master, I am Your slave. I am worthless, I have no worth at all.
UST EQ
Sot UH OH BG Us Shy ud nual (262-1, west, ue 5)
naanak deejai naam daan raakha-o hee-ai paro-ay. ||55||
Nanak: grant me the Gift of Your Name, Lord, that I may string it and keep it within my heart. ||55]|
AS Il (262-1) salok. Shalok:
Tse HST" Tes fust Tats AnMit USAAT Il (262-1, wSst, ve 5)
gurdayv maataa gurdayv pitaa gurdayv su-aamee parmaysuraa.
The Divine Guru is our mother, the Divine Guru is our father; the Divine Guru is our Lord and Master, the Transcendent Lord.
Tes Ae wifes SAS TseS afar ATT i (262-2, ast, ve 5)
gurdayv sakhaa agi-aan bhanjan gurdayv banDhip sahodaraa.
The Divine Guru is my companion, the Destroyer of ignorance; the Divine Guru is my relative and brother.
Tes vst ofs aH CueH Tges Hy fedas il (262-2, ast, v2 5)
gurdayv daataa har naam updaysai gurdayv mant niroDharaa.
The Divine Guru is the Giver, the Teacher of the Lord's Name. The Divine Guru is the Mantra which never fails.
gees ATS As sfa Hats TIS UTA UTA UT Il (262-3, TSS, He 5)
gurdayv saat sat buDh moorat gurdayv paaras paras paraa.
The Divine Guru is the image of peace, truth and wisdom. The Divine Guru is the Philosopher's Stone - touching it, one is transformed.
Tes Stee nifys Ade as fomrs HAS mruTUS Il (262-3, west, ne 5)
gurdayv tirath amrit sarovar gur gi-aan majan apramparaa.
The Divine Guru is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage, and the pool of divine nectar; bathing in the Guru's wisdom, one experiences the Infinite.
Tdses Aas Als UY Jas Tses ufss ules AT Il (262-4, ast, uz 5)
gurdayv kartaa sabh paap hartaa gurdayv patit pavit karaa.
The Divine Guru is the Creator, and the Destroyer of all sins; the Divine Guru is the Purifier of sinners.
dees orfe warfe wa Wa Aves HS Jie wf Gas Il (262-5, west, v2 5)
gurdayv aad jugaad jug jug gurdayv mant har jap uDhraa.
The Divine Guru existed in the very beginning, throughout the ages, in each and every age. The Divine Guru is the Mantra of the Lord's Name; chanting it, one is saved.
ses Hats ys Afs ats fas TH Hs unt fry afar Sa Il (262-5, ast, vs 5) gurdayv sangat parabh mayl kar kirpaa ham moorh paapee jit lag taraa.
O God, please be merciful to me, that I may be with the Divine Guru; I am a foolish sinner, but holding onto Him, I will be carried across.
TIeS AfsdgI USAIN USHA Tses Soa Ils SHAAT IU (262-6, ast, us 5) gurdayv satgur paarbarahm parmaysar gurdayv naanak har namaskaraa. ||1]| The Divine Guru is the True Guru, the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord; Nanak bows in humble reverence to the Lord, the Divine Guru. ||1]]|
Sg AeA uife nifs user il (262-7, ast, He 5) ayhu salok aad ant parh-naa. Read this Shalok at the beginning, and at the end. ||
ast AYHAt Hs U Il (262-8) ga-orhee sukhmanee mehlaa 5. Gauree Sukhmani, Fifth Mehl,
HS Il (262-8) salok. Shalok:
qe Afsas ATE II (262-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mife TIE SHI Il (262-9, west Henist, He 5) aad gur-ay namah. I bow to the Primal Guru.
Aarfe TIE SH Il (262-9, ast, uz 5) jugaad gur-ay namah. I bow to the Guru of the ages.
Afsaqge SHI Il (262-9, aSst Ment, He 5) satgur-ay namah. I bow to the True Guru.
At AIeSS SHIT UA (262-9, Est Ment, He 5) Saree gurdayv-ay namah. ||1]|| I bow to the Great, Divine Guru. ||1]|
MAeUeT Il (262-9) asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
fina@ fhe frafs AY use Il (262-10, west Fen, He 5) simra-o simar simar sukh paava-o. Meditate, meditate, meditate in remembrance of Him, and find peace.
ate AGA 36 fT fHeTS@ Il (262-10, aCzt Ment, He 5) kal kalays tan maahi mitaava-o. Worry and anguish shall be dispelled from your body.
foe aH fariag Sa Il (262-10, west ment, He 5) simra-o jaas bisumbhar aykai. Remember in praise the One who pervades the whole Universe.
OH AUS Mass MSa Il (262-11, aSSt Hest, He 5) naam japat agnat anaykai. His Name is chanted by countless people, in so many ways.
ae use fAfyfSs AUT II (262-11, aGat Met, He 5) bayd puraan simrit suDhaakh-yar. The Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, the purest of utterances,
ats IH OTH fear nig I (262-11, Test Henst, v2 5) keenay raam naam ik aakh-yar. were created from the One Word of the Name of the Lord.
fasart Sa fa Ht SATS | (262-12, aGSt Mest, He 5) kinkaa ayk jis jee-a basaavai. That one, in whose soul the One Lord dwells
ST oft ufo Tat o TS Il (262-12, aGst ment, He 5) taa kee mahimaa ganee na aavai. - the praises of his glory cannot be recounted.
andt Sat CIA SIS Il (262-12, ast mnt, He 5) kaa‘khee aykai daras tuhaaro. Those who yearn only for the blessing of Your Darshan
Soa So Afar Nfs Sars Ail (262-12, west Mest, He 5) naanak un sang mohi uDhaaro. ||1]| - Nanak: save me along with them! ||1]|
Hunat AY uifys YS SH Il (262-13, aSst Henct, ne 5) sukhmanee sukh amrit parabh naam. Sukhmani: Peace of Mind, the Nectar of the Name of God.
sas Ho a Hfe faA | TIS I (262-13, west ent, He 5) bhagat janaa kai man bisraam. rahaa-o. The minds of the devotees abide in a joyful peace. ||Pause| |
us & finafs aefs 3 SA Il (262-13, aGet Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran garabh na basai. Remembering God, one does not have to enter into the womb again.
ys & fAHafs BY AH SA Il (262-14, ast mnt, 8 5) parabh kai simran dookh jam nasai. Remembering God, the pain of death is dispelled.
us & fixate are udTd Il (262-14, at mnet, He 5) parabh kai simran kaal parharai. Remembering God, death is eliminated.
us & finafs BAH Sd Il (262-14, aGet Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran dusman tardi. Remembering God, one's enemies are repelled.
us fines ae fag 5 wat Il (262-15, aGst ment, Hs 5) parabh simrat kachh bighan na laagai. Remembering God, no obstacles are met.
us & fiefs wiafes ATH Il (262-15, 7st ment, He 5) parabh kai simran an-din jaagai. Remembering God, one remains awake and aware, night and day.
us & finafs 38 5 fmm I (262-15, west Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran bha-o na bi-aapai. Remembering God, one is not touched by fear.
us & finafe FY S AST Il (262-16, aCzt Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran dukh na santaapai. Remembering God, one does not suffer sorrow.
us a fines AG & Afar il (262-16, aGet Pent, He 5) parabh kaa simran saaDh kai sang. The meditative remembrance of God is in the Company of the Holy.
Hea fours area ofa dfat iQ (262-16, aGst Ment, He 5) sarab niDhaan naanak har rang. ||2|| All treasures, O Nanak, are in the Love of the Lord. ||2]|
us & finrefe fafa fafa 5@ fafa i) 262-17, a@at ment, Hs 5)
parabh kai simran riDh siDh na-o niDh.
In the remembrance of God are wealth, miraculous spiritual powers and the nine treasures.
us & finafe fami fomrs sz aft i (262-17, a@st moet, He 5) parabh kai simran gi-aan Dhi-aan tat buDh. In the remembrance of God are knowledge, meditation and the essence of wisdom.
ys & firsts Wu Su UAT Il (262-18, Test Pet, He 5) parabh kai simran jap tap poojaa. In the remembrance of God are chanting, intense meditation and devotional worship.
ys & fittafe fasr SAT Il (262-18, ast Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran binsai doojaa. In the remembrance of God, duality is removed.
us & fiefs Stee ferorst i (262-18, 7st mot, Hs 5) parabh kai simran tirath isnaanee. In the remembrance of God are purifying baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
us & fiefs eaard HOt II (262-19, aGzt Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran dargeh maanee. In the remembrance of God, one attains honor in the Court of the Lord.
us & finafe df A Se I (262-19, Tet Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran ho-ay so bhalaa. In the remembrance of God, one becomes good.
us & fats Hee SE I (262-19, aext Meneet, He 5) parabh kai simran sufal falaa. In the remembrance of God, one flowers in fruition.
A frets fae orfu free i (262-19, a@at meniat, 3 5) say simrahi jin aap simraa-ay. They alone remember Him in meditation, whom He inspires to meditate.
UST 2ES
Sot SA SAG US Bll (263-1, ast Mensst, He 5) naanak taa kai laaga-o paa-ay. ||3]|| Nanak grasps the feet of those humble beings. ||3]|
ys ot fRHsg AS 3 So il (263-1, Test HenIst, He 5) parabh kaa simran sabh tay oochaa. The remembrance of God is the highest and most exalted of all.
ys & frHafs us HO I (263-1, TES Mt, He 5) parabh kai simran uDhray moochaa. In the remembrance of God, many are saved.
us & finafe fare gS | (263-2, rat mot, He 5) parabh kai simran tarisnaa bujhai. In the remembrance of God, thirst is quenched.
us & finafe Ag fos AS Il (263-2, west Men, He 5) parabh kai simran sabh kichh sujhai. In the remembrance of God, all things are known.
us & fats oct AH SAT Il (263-2, aGet nt, He 5) parabh kai simran naahee jam taraasaa. In the remembrance of God, there is no fear of death.
ys & fAHafs YTS MTAT II (263-3, Tat Rent, Hs 5) parabh kai simran pooran aasaa. In the remembrance of God, hopes are fulfilled.
us & fats He at He ATE II (263-3, aSat ent, He 5) parabh kai simran man kee mal jaa-ay. In the remembrance of God, the filth of the mind is removed.
nifys on fee uta ANTE I (263-3, aGet mnt, Hs 5) amrit naam rid maahi samaa-ay. The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is absorbed into the heart.
ys At aAfo ATG ot GAS Il (263-4, aGat Menrst, He 5) parabh jee baseh saaDh kee rasnaa. God abides upon the tongues of His Saints.
SSA AS A VALS PAS Sil (263-4, TGat Met, He 5) naanak jan kaa daasan dasnaa. ||4|| Nanak is the servant of the slave of His slaves. ||4| |
us a@ frnafs A Uaes Il (263-4, aGat Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say Dhanvantay. Those who remember God are wealthy.
us ag frnafa A ufs23 II (263-5, west Mit, us 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say pativantay. Those who remember God are honorable.
ys a@ fhuafs A AS UPS Il (263-5, TESt Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say jan parvaan. Those who remember God are approved.
ys a@ fauafs A use YUTS Il (263-5, aCHt Ment, Hs 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say purakh parDhaan. Those who remember God are the most distinguished persons.
ys a@ fauata fA SHISHA | (203-6, Test Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi se baymuhtaajay. Those who remember God are not lacking.
ys a fhuafs fA Aga & TH Il (263-6, Teat Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi se sarab kay raajay. Those who remember God are the rulers of all.
ys a fayafs A AMSAT II (263-6, west Ment, Hs 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say sukhvaasee. Those who remember God dwell in peace.
ys a fauafa Aer nifaaret | (263-7, west Pent, ve 5) parabh ka-o simrahi sadaa abhinaasee. Those who remember God are immortal and eternal.
frase 3 od fas urfy efenrer i 263-7, aGst ment, He 5) simran tay laagay jin aap da-i-aalaa. They alone hold to the remembrance of Him, unto whom He Himself shows His Mercy.
Soa AS at Hat TSH NU (263-8, ast Mest, He 5)
naanak jan kee mangai ravaalaa. ||5|| Nanak begs for the dust of their feet. ||5]|
ys a fhuafs A usGuardt Il (263-8, wat mnt, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say par-upkaaree. Those who remember God generously help others.
ys a fhuats fso Ae afsardt | (263-8, west ment, vs 5) parabh ka-o simrahi tin sad balihaaree. Those who remember God - to them, I am forever a sacrifice.
ys a@ fauxafs A HY AS Il (263-9, aGst Ment, ue 5) parabh ka-o simrahi say mukh suhaavay. Those who remember God - their faces are beautiful.
ys ag finats fsa af faa i (263-9, rat mnt, v3 5) parabh ka-o simrahi tin sookh bihaavai. Those who remember God abide in peace.
ys a fhuata fs wiTsH AIST II (263-9, aGst Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi tin aatam jeetaa. Those who remember God conquer their souls.
ys a fauats f85 fesHe gtSt Il (263-10, west Ment, Hs 5) parabh ka-o simrahi tin nirmal reetaa. Those who remember God have a pure and spotless lifestyle.
ys a fruats f85 noe WSs I (263-10, aGSt Ment, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi tin anad ghanayray. Those who remember God experience all sorts of joys.
ys a fauata aAfo afs 3g Il (263-11, west Pent, He 5) parabh ka-o simrahi baseh har nayray. Those who remember God abide near the Lord.
Hs faut 3 niofes afar it (263-11, a@st ment, v2 5) sant kirpaa tay an-din jaag. By the Grace of the Saints, one remains awake and aware, night and day.
area fnsg us star Ell (263-11, aGat Rent, He 5) naanak simran poorai bhaag. ||6]| O Nanak, this meditative remembrance comes only by perfect destiny. ||6] |
ys & fAHafs SH UT II (263-12, ast Mot, He 5) parabh kai simran kaaraj pooray. Remembering God, one's works are accomplished.
ys & fAHafs wag 6 ST Il (263-12, vat Ment, He 5) parabh kai simran kabahu na jhooray. Remembering God, one never grieves.
us & fiefs ofa ae ast Il (263-12, west Mot, He 5) parabh kai simran har gun baanee. Remembering God, one speaks the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
us & fiefs Aofs ANAT Il (263-13, aGat nt, He 5) parabh kai simran sahj samaanee. Remembering God, one is absorbed into the state of intuitive ease.
us & finafe fogee wiIAG Il (263-13, aGet PnIt, He 5) parabh kai simran nihchal aasan. Remembering God, one attains the unchanging position.
us & fiefs ane faarAg Il (263-13, west mot, He 5) parabh kai simran kamal bigaasan. Remembering God, the heart-lotus blossoms forth.
us & finafs nage Soares Il (263-14, aSat Pent, Hs 5) parabh kai simran anhad jhunkaar. Remembering God, the unstruck melody vibrates.
AY ys fade a viz 6 UTE Il (263-14, aGSt Ment, He 5) sukh parabh simran kaa ant na paar. The peace of the meditative remembrance of God has no end or limitation.
fafa A AS fae a@ ys HfeMr I (263-14, west Ment, He 5) simrahi say jan jin ka-o parabh ma-i-aa. They alone remember Him, upon whom God bestows His Grace.
Sod (3G AS Adal ufeor WI (263-15, ast Ment, vs 5) naanak tin jan sarnee pa-i-aa. ||7]|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of those humble beings. ||7| |
dfs frnag afe Sas YsSTS Il (263-15, Teat Ment, He 5) har simran kar bhagat pargataa-ay. Remembering the Lord, His devotees are famous and radiant.
dfs frnate ofa Fe Burs Il 263-16, aVst mniet, 2 5) har simran lag bayd upaa-ay. Remembering the Lord, the Vedas were composed.
ofa fhnafs se fra ASt BS Il (263-16, Sst mnt, 2 5) har simran bha-ay siDh jatee daatay. Remembering the Lord, we become Siddhas, celibates and givers.
dfs frnsfs ote vg Fe WS Il (263-16, aeSt Ment, He 5) har simran neech chahu kunt jaatay. Remembering the Lord, the lowly become known in all four directions.
ofa frnate ost AS TIS I (263-17, ast ment, He 5) har simran Dhaaree sabh Dharnaa. For the remembrance of the Lord, the whole world was established.
frites frites afs arse AIST I (263-17, ast Henet,, He 5) simar simar har kaaran karnaa. Remember, remember in meditation the Lord, the Creator, the Cause of causes.
ofa frets ot Aas wars Il (263-17, azt Het, He 5) har simran kee-o sagal akaaraa. For the remembrance of the Lord, He created the whole creation.
ofa fange ufo orf fadara il (263-18, aGst Het, He 5) har simran meh aap nirankaaraa. In the remembrance of the Lord, He Himself is Formless.
ate fas fan orfu sstfenr il (263-18, west ment, He 5) kar kirpaa jis aap bujhaa-i-aa. By His Grace, He Himself bestows understanding.
area Tate ote free fate ufenr cA (263-18, aBst Ment, He 5) naanak gurmukh har simran tin paa-i-aa. ||8]|1]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh attains the remembrance of the Lord. ||8]|1]|
HS Il (263-19)
salok. Shalok:
de vse eu sar uf]e ufe are mare Il (263-19, aGat Het, He 5)
deen darad dukh bhanjnaa ghat ghat naath anaath.
O Destroyer of the pains and the suffering of the poor, O Master of each and every heart, O Masterless One:
Rafe surat orfeS soa & YS ATT AU (263-19, aGat ment, us 5)
saran tum"aaree aa-i-o naanak kay parabh saath. ||1]| I have come seeking Your Sanctuary. O God, please be with Nanak! ||1]|
Yat EY MASUet Il (264-1)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
Ad HS fust AS HIS B TST I (264-1, ast AenIeH, He 5) jah maat pitaa sut meet na bhaa-ee. Where there is no mother, father, children, friends or siblings
Ho Oa aH 3d Afar ATT Il (264-1, west mnt, He 5)
man oohaa naam tayrai sang sahaa-ee.
- O my mind, there, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall be with you as your help and support.
Wd Ho sfenrs TS AH VS Il (264-2, ast Ment, vs 5) jah mahaa bha-i-aan doot jam dalai. Where the great and terrible Messenger of Death shall try to crush you,
3J ASH OH Afar SS VS Il (264-2, aSSt Meet, He 5) tah kayval naam sang tayrai chalai. there, only the Naam shall go along with you.
Ad HAAG de wits ad Il (264-2, aGat went, He 5) jah muskal hovai at bhaaree. Where the obstacles are so very heavy,
dfs & ay fue ufo Card i (264-3, west ment, He 5) har ko naam khin maahi uDhaaree. the Name of the Lord shall rescue you in an instant.
Mfex USIIIS ATS Sdt 3d Il (264-3, aSat Hest, wz 5) anik punahcharan karat nahee tarai. By performing countless religious rituals, you shall not be saved.
dfs & on afe uy uddd Il (264-3, west Ant, He 5) har ko naam kot paap parharai. The Name of the Lord washes off millions of sins.
aaHfe SH AUT HO Hg Il (264-4, ast Fenst, He 5) gurmukh naam japahu man mayray. As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, O my mind.
TS UST AY WSs MAU (264-4, ast Ment, He 5) naanak paavhu sookh ghanayray. ||1|| O Nanak, you shall obtain countless joys. ||1]|
Rares fqrfe & aa eebor i (264-4, wet mnect, ne 5) Sagal sarisat ko raajaa dukhee-aa. The rulers of the all the world are unhappy;
dfs a on Aus dfs Aer Il (264-5, west Ment, He 5) har kaa naam japat ho-ay sukhee-aa. one who chants the Name of the Lord becomes happy.
wre addt HOF Us Il (264-5, agSt ANAT, He 5) laakh karoree banDh na parai. Acquiring hundreds of thousands and millions, your desires shall not be contained.
dfs at oy AUS fSAS Il (264-5, Test HUNT, He 5) har kaa naam japat nistarai. Chanting the Name of the Lord, you shall find release.
mifoa Hfenr ga for & gsTS Il (264-6, Test Hut, He 5) anik maa-i-aa rang tikh na bujhaavai. By the countless pleasures of Maya, your thirst shall not be quenched.
dfs a OH AUS wmuTS Il (264-6, TEST Met, He 5) har kaa naam japat aaghaavai. Chanting the Name of the Lord, you shall be satisfied.
fag rata fea AS fear il (264-6, west meniAt, He 5) jih maarag ih jaat ikaylaa. Upon that path where you must go all alone,
3d dfs OH Afa IS AIT Il (264-7, ast ment, He 5) tah har naam sang hot suhaylaa. there, only the Lord's Name shall go with you to sustain you.
MAT OM He Het forest Il (264-7, at mnit, vs 5) aisaa naam man sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai. On such a Name, O my mind, meditate forever.
Soa ToHfe usH afs urs iQ (264-7, ast went, He 5) naanak gurmukh param gat paa-ee-ai. ||2] | O Nanak, as Gurmukh, you shall obtain the state of supreme dignity. ||2]||
Bes Sat ale we aa Il 264-8, aSst Met, we 5) chhootat nahee kot lakh baahee. You shall not be saved by hundreds of thousands and millions of helping hands.
OM Aus 3d Uts Us Il (264-8, aCHt Ment, He 5) naam japat tah paar paraahee. Chanting the Naam, you shall be lifted up and carried across.
wifoo faus AT orfe Hurd il (264-8, aGst mest, He 5) anik bighan jah aa-ay sanghaarai. Where countless misfortunes threaten to destroy you,
dfs a oH ssa Burs Il (264-9, aSat ment, He 5) har kaa naam tatkaal uDhaarai. the Name of the Lord shall rescue you in an instant.
mifoot fs ASH Hfs AMT Il (264-9, ast Aen, He 5) anik jon janmai mar jaam. Through countless incarnations, people are born and die.
OY Hus ure FAA II (264-9, aGat Ment, He 5) naam japat paavai bisraam. Chanting the Name of the Lord, you shall come to rest in peace.
JG HS HS AGI 3 Ge Il (264-10, aGat ment, Hs 5) ha-o mailaa mal kabahu na Dhovai. The ego is polluted by a filth which can never be washed off.
dfs at oy afe uns BS Il (264-10, ast MH, He 5) har kaa naam kot paap khovai. The Name of the Lord erases millions of sins.
WAT OM AUT HO fat i (264-10, aext Menist, He 5) aisaa naam japahu man rang. Chant such a Name with love, O my mind.
Soa urShat AT a Afal Sil (264-10, ast Het, He 5) naanak paa-ee-ai saaDh kai sang. ||3]| O Nanak, it is obtained in the Company of the Holy. ||3]|
fad Ha A AS Ah S AAT Il (264-11, aGzt Ment, He 5) jih maarag kay ganay jaahi na kosaa. On that path where the miles cannot be counted,
fs a OH Sa Afar SAT I (264-11, aSat Ment, He 5) har kaa naam oohaa sang tosaa. there, the Name of the Lord shall be your sustenance.
fad US HOT HiT TAS | (264-11, aSSt Het, He 5) jih paidai mahaa anDh gubaaraa. On that journey of total, pitch-black darkness,
dfs a oH Afar Sribra Il (264-12, aGst ment, He 5) har kaa naam sang ujee-aaraa. the Name of the Lord shall be the Light with you.
Ae Ufa Sa ot 3 free ll (264-12, west Ment, we 5) jahaa panth tayraa ko na sinjaanoo. On that journey where no one knows you,
Ths HT SH SI tS USS Il (264-12, Tat Hest, He 5) har kaa naam tah naal pachhaanoo. with the Name of the Lord, you shall be recognized.
Ad Ho sfemre sufs FT WH Il (264-13, TBST Ment, He 5) jah mahaa bha-i-aan tapat baho ghaam. Where there is awesome and terrible heat and blazing sunshine,
30 dfs & oH at SH Gufs SH Il (264-13, Test MeNIt, He 5) tah har kay naam kee tum oopar chhaam. there, the Name of the Lord will give you shade.
Ag fur He SE wiraTs Il (264-14, aSat Ment, us 5) jahaa tarikhaa man tujh aakrakhai. Where thirst, O my mind, torments you to cry out,
3d ated Ufa ofe mifys gas SI (264-14, aSSt NIH, He 5) tah naanak har har amrit barkhai. ||4|| there, O Nanak, the Ambrosial Name, Har, Har, shall rain down upon you. ||4]|
Bas AST at Faste OH Il (264-14, aSst Ment, He 5) bhagat janaa kee bartan naam. Unto the devotee, the Naam is an article of daily use.
Ha vot at Hfe fa Il (264-15, aGet Ment, He 5) sant janaa kai man bisraam. The minds of the humble Saints are at peace.
Ufa a SH BA at BE Il (264-15, TS MeN, He 5) har kaa naam daas kee ot. The Name of the Lord is the Support of His servants.
dfs & of Bud He afe Il (264-15, aGSt Hen, HE 5) har kai naam uDhray jan kot. By the Name of the Lord, millions have been saved.
dfs AA ads AS fea TAS Il (264-15, ast Meni, He 5) har jas karat sant din raat. The Saints chant the Praises of the Lord, day and night.
dfs dfs mBug AT AHS Il (264-16, ast Ment, He 5) har har a-ukhaDh saaDh kamaat. Har, Har - the Lord's Name - the Holy use it as their healing medicine.
dfs Ae a dfs aN fears Il (264-16, aGSt Het, H2 5) har jan kai har naam niDhaan. The Lord's Name is the treasure of the Lord's servant.
USAT AS AS BS Il (264-17, St Ment, He 5) paarbarahm jan keeno daan. The Supreme Lord God has blessed His humble servant with this gift.
Ho 36 sta dS Sa Sa Il (264-17, ast mnt, v2 5) man tan rang ratay rang aykai. Mind and body are imbued with ecstasy in the Love of the One Lord.
Soa Ae a faafs fads null (264-17, ast mnt, He 5)
naanak jan kai birat bibaykai. ||5||
O Nanak, careful and discerning understanding is the way of the Lord's humble servant. ||5||
dfs & SH AS a Hats Aas Il (264-17, west FenIet, He 5) har kaa naam jan ka-o mukat jugat. The Name of the Lord is the path of liberation for His humble servants.
ofa & of Ae ag feufs gafs i (264-18, ast Ment, He 5) har kai naam jan ka-o taripat bhugat. With the food of the Name of the Lord, His servants are satisfied.
Tis A SY AS A IU FT Il (264-18, aCst Met, ws 5) har kaa naam jan kaa roop rang. The Name of the Lord is the beauty and delight of His servants.
dfs SH AUS Aa ud B ST Il (264-19, aSat ent, He 5) har naam japat kab parai na bhang. Chanting the Lord's Name, one is never blocked by obstacles.
Ufs AT SH AS at Sfsnret Il (264-19, ast Ment, He 5) har kaa naam jan kee vadi-aa-ee. The Name of the Lord is the glorious greatness of His servants.
dfs & oth AS Ast uret Il (264-19, wget ment, He 5) har kai naam jan sobhaa paa-ee. Through the Name of the Lord, His servants obtain honor.
Us Eu
dfs a OH AS AG Sa AT Il (265-1, ast ANAT, HE 5) har kaa naam jan ka-o bhog jog. The Name of the Lord is the enjoyment and Yoga of His servants.
dfs an Aus ag ote faGar il (265-1, west Mnit, He 5) har naam japat kachh naahi bi-og. Chanting the Lord's Name, there is no separation from Him.
HO TST Us SH at AS Il (265-1, aCHt Ment, ne 5) jan raataa har naam kee sayvaa. His servants are imbued with the service of the Lord's Name.
SSa UA Te Ts Sst EM (265-2, ast Ment, ws 5) naanak poojai har har dayvaa. ||6] | O Nanak, worship the Lord, the Lord Divine, Har, Har. ||6||
dfs dfs AS A HG UAIST Il (265-2, aS AUNT, He 5) har har jan kai maal khajeenaa. The Lord's Name, Har, Har, is the treasure of wealth of His servants.
dfs ug AS AG urfy yfs Star i (265-2, west Menst, He 5) har Dhan jan ka-o aap parabh deenaa. The treasure of the Lord has been bestowed on His servants by God Himself.
dfs ofa AS a Ge AStet Il (265-3, aGst Ment, He 5) har har jan kai ot sataanee. The Lord, Har, Har is the All-powerful Protection of His servants.
dfs ys AS wigs B Frat Il (265-3, aGat Ment, He 5) har partaap jan avar na jaanee. His servants know no other than the Lord's Magnificence.
6fs ufs ao ofe aff TS I (265-3, wget Ment, He 5) ot pot jan har ras raatay. Through and through, His servants are imbued with the Lord's Love.
Ho AMG SH IA HS Il (265-4, weet ment, He 5) sunn samaaDh naam ras maatay. In deepest Samaadhi, they are intoxicated with the essence of the Naam.
WTS UTE HS Ufa Tha AU Il (265-4, aH AeNIT, He 5) aath pahar jan har har japai. Twenty-four hours a day, His servants chant Har, Har.
ofg a sas Yate Sdt SU ll (265-4, ast Ment, ue 5) har kaa bhagat pargat nahee chhapai. The devotees of the Lord are known and respected; they do not hide in secrecy.
dfs at sats Hats I AP Il (265-4, ast manit, He 5) har kee bhagat mukat baho karay. Through devotion to the Lord, many have been liberated.
SSA AS Afal AS Sg NDI (265-5, aSSt Het, He 5) naanak jan sang kaytay taray. ||7]|| O Nanak, along with His servants, many others are saved. ||7]||
urgas fg ofs & SMH Il (265-5, agat NT, He 5) paarjaat ih har ko naam. This Elysian Tree of miraculous powers is the Name of the Lord.
aHUS ds dfs Te WH Il (265-5, ast went, He 5)
kaamDhayn har har gun gaam.
The Khaamadhayn, the cow of miraculous powers, is the singing of the Glory of the Lord's Name, Har, Har.
AS 3 BSH ofa at AA Il (265-6, Test MeNIt, He 5) sabh tay ootam har kee kathaa. Highest of all is the Lord's Speech.
OH HOS UdIe CY GAT Il (265-6, TGat Aunt, Hs 5) naam sunat darad dukh lathaa. Hearing the Naam, pain and sorrow are removed.
3H of HfoHt AS fee SA Il (265-6, west ment, He 5) naam kee mahimaa sant rid vasai. The Glory of the Naam abides in the hearts of His Saints.
As ystu ess A OA Il (265-7, aSst ent, He 5) sant partaap durat sabh nasai. By the Saint's kind intervention, all guilt is dispelled.
HZ oO Ha esarat ure Il (265-7, aGst Ment, He 5) sant kaa sang vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. The Society of the Saints is obtained by great good fortune.
Ha at Het any foment i (265-7, aSst mest, He 5) sant kee sayvaa naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Serving the Saint, one meditates on the Naam.
OH 3f% ae nied 3 AE I (265-8, west Ment, He 5) naam tul kachh avar na ho-ay. There is nothing equal to the Naam.
Soa Tent aH urs AG AE ICH (265-8, TCS ANT, He 5) naanak gurmukh naam paavai jan ko-ay. ||8]|2|| O Nanak, rare are those, who, as Gurmukh, obtain the Naam. ||8]|2]|
HS Il (265-8) salok. Shalok:
ag AAS ag fAfySt Ua Ase wes Il (265-8, aeet MN, He 5)
baho saastar baho simritee paykhay sarab dhadhol.
The many Shaastras and the many Simritees - I have seen and searched through them all.
yAtA ardt Ts TS FSA SH MA IU (265-9, ast Mens, ws 5) poojas naahee har haray naanak naam amol. ||1|| They are not equal to Har, Haray - O Nanak, the Lord's Invaluable Name. ||1]|
MAeuet Il (265-9)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
aATy sty fomita Afs filmit Il (265-9, a@st Ment, 3 5) jaap taap gi-aan sabh Dhi-aan. Chanting, intense meditation, spiritual wisdom and all meditations;
ue AMAS fAfyfs sf It (265-10, west ment, He 5) khat saastar simrit vakhi-aan. the six schools of philosophy and sermons on the scriptures;
al vifsnrr aay OH fafanr I (265-10, aGet mnt, He 5) jog abhi-aas karam Dharam kiri-aa. the practice of Yoga and righteous conduct;
Hae fsurfar ge Ho feta il (265-10, west Hen, He 5) Sagal ti-aag ban maDhay firi-aa. the renunciation of everything and wandering around in the wilderness;
mod yas MS AT ASAT Il (265-11, Test Henet, we 5) anik parkaar kee-ay baho jatnaa. the performance of all sorts of works;
Us Be IH Fd ISS Il (265-11, aESt Mest, He 5) punn daan homay baho ratnaa. donations to charities and offerings of jewels to fire;
Adtg dete dH afs Tat I (265-11, aGst Hest, H2 5) sareer kataa-ay homai kar raatee. cutting the body apart and making the pieces into ceremonial fire offerings;
ZIS BH Ad FT TST I (265-12, aSst Hens, v2 5) varat naym karai baho bhaatee. keeping fasts and making vows of all sorts
Sot 3h TH OH Ses Il (265-12, aBst mnie, He 5) nahee tul raam naam beechaar. - none of these are equal to the contemplation of the Name of the Lord,
Soa Tafa ay Aub fea as WU (265-12, Test Het, He 5) naanak gurmukh naam japee-ai ik baar. ||1]| O Nanak, if, as Gurmukh, one chants the Naam, even once. ||1]|
o@ us fyent fed fag AS I 265-13, ast Mo, He 5) na-o khand parithmee firai chir jeevai. You may roam over the nine continents of the world and live a very long life;
Ho Germ suing AS Il (265-13, aGst Ment, He 5) mahaa udaas tapeesar theevai. you may become a great ascetic and a master of disciplined meditation
mats Hf SHS UTS Il (265-13, aCSt Met, He 5) agan maahi homat paraan. and burn yourself in fire;
aoa mig ded Sf BS Il (265-14, Sat Ment, He 5) kanik asav haivar bhoom daan. you may give away gold, horses, elephants and land;
feGat AGH Ad FI MMAS Il (265-14, west MH, He 5) ni-ulee karam karai baho aasan. you may practice techniques of inner cleansing and all sorts of Yogic postures;
AO Hdd HAH MS AMIS Il (265-14, aGst HeNIT, He 5) jain maarag sanjam at saaDhan. you may adopt the self-mortifying ways of the Jains and great spiritual disciplines;
fouy fonu afa Adts aevS Il (265-15, west Mest, He 5) nimakh nimakh kar sareer kataavai. piece by piece, you may cut your body apart;
38 st JOH HS BAS I (265-15, aGst Ment, He 5) ta-o bhee ha-umai mail na jaavai. but even so, the filth of your ego shall not depart.
Uf & SH AHA AE ots Il (265-15, ast Mest, He 5) har kay naam samsar kachh naahi. There is nothing equal to the Name of the Lord.
Soa THY oH AUS als utd Ml (265-16, Test FenIt, He 5) naanak gurmukh naam japat gat paahi. ||2]| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, chant the Naam, and obtain salvation. ||2]|
Ho aHat Stee ST SS Il (265-16, west Het, He 5)
man kaamnaa tirath dayh chhutai.
With your mind filled with desire, you may give up your body at a sacred shrine of pilgrimage;
TIT PHS SHS S Te Il (265-16, aSst ment, He 5) garab gumaan na man tay hutai. but even so, egotistical pride shall not be removed from your mind.
Hu ad feon nig ats Il (265-17, aGst ment, He 5) soch karai dinas ar raat. You may practice cleansing day and night,
Ho at HS 3 36 SATS Il (265-17, Test MeN, HE 5) man kee mail na tan tay jaat. but the filth of your mind shall not leave your body.
fen odt a@ ag AUS AP Il (265-17, wea Ment, He 5) is dayhee ka-o baho saaDhnaa karai. You may subject your body to all sorts of disciplines,
Ho 3 wag 3 faftmr |g il (265-18, rat mnt, Hs 5) man tay kabhoo na bikhi-aa tarai. but your mind will never be rid of its corruption.
Afe de ag to mals Il (265-18, aGst Ment, He 5) jal Dhovai baho dayh aneet. You may wash this transitory body with loads of water,
AG ag af art SHS I (265-18, west Ment, He 5) suDh kahaa ho-ay kaachee bheet. but how can a wall of mud be washed clean?
Ho fs & OH at HfaHT Bs Il (265-18, west Mest, He 5) man har kay naam kee mahimaa ooch. O my mind, the Glorious Praise of the Name of the Lord is the highest;
aad OTH Sug uss ag HS SI (265-19, aSSt Hest, He 5) naanak naam uDhray patit baho mooch. ||3]| O Nanak, the Naam has saved so many of the worst sinners. ||3]|
ads fimrsu aH at 3G fmm It (265-19, aGst mnt, He 5) bahut si-aanap jam kaa bha-o bi-aapai. Even with great cleverness, the fear of death clings to you.
Yat NEE
uifoa Ase afe fer at GU Il (266-1, aSat Ment, He 5) anik jatan kar tarisan naa Dharaapai. You try all sorts of things, but your thirst is still not satisfied.
Su vida wats odt TS Il (266-1, west Huet, He 5) bhaykh anayk agan nahee bujhai. Wearing various religious robes, the fire is not extinguished.
afe Gure waar odt fAS Il (266-1, west Ment, He 5) kot upaav dargeh nahee sijhai. Even making millions of efforts, you shall not be accepted in the Court of the Lord.
scfA andt Ss ufenrts it 206-2, west menist, He 5) chhootas naahee oobh pa-i-aal. You cannot escape to the heavens, or to the nether regions,
Hfo fammufa fer ats i (266-2, a@at ment, u 5) mohi bi-aapahi maa-i-aa jaal. if you are entangled in emotional attachment and the net of Maya.
MET AIST ASS AH SS Il (266-2, ES Ment, we 5) avar kartoot saglee jam daanai. All other efforts are punished by the Messenger of Death,
diez sno fae fq odt HS Il (266-3, agHt ANT, HE 5) govind bhajan bin til nahee maanai. which accepts nothing at all, except meditation on the Lord of the Universe.
dfs & OH AUS Fy ATE Il (266-3, aC Ment, He 5) har kaa naam japat dukh jaa-ay. Chanting the Name of the Lord, sorrow is dispelled.
Soa FS Adfa ASTE iSil (266-3, west Aut, He 5) naanak bolai sahj subhaa-ay. ||4| | O Nanak, chant it with intuitive ease. ||4||
ofs ueTsa A A HT Il (266-4, wget Met, He 5) chaar padaarath jay ko maagai. One who prays for the four cardinal blessings
AT AST at AST Bra Il (266-4, aGst Ment, He 5) saaDh janaa kee sayvaa laagai. should commit himself to the service of the Saints.
A ot wmyart gy flere I (266-4, aGat mnt, Hs 5) jay ko aapunaa dookh mitaavai. If you wish to erase your sorrows,
dfs ofa an fot AS We Il (266-4, aGSt AeA, HE 5) har har naam ridai sad gaavai. sing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within your heart.
A a Myst Ast Bd Il (266-5, aSst Hes, He 5) jay ko apunee sobhaa lorai. If you long for honor for yourself,
WoHfa fea TH Es Il (266-5, aCSt MMH, He 5) saaDhsang ih ha-umai chhorai. then renounce your ego in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
A a& AON Hee 3 3d Il (266-5, aGSt MeNT, He 5) jay ko janam maran tay darai. If you fear the cycle of birth and death,
Ag Hat at Hast us Il (266-6, aCSt Ment, He 5) saaDh janaa kee sarnee parai. then seek the Sanctuary of the Holy.
fA AS AS Ys aA fimMAr | (266-6, aGSt Ment, ue 5) jis jan ka-o parabh daras pi-aasaa. Those who thirst for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan
Soa ST at Ss als AAT MUI (266-6, TEST MMH, He 5) naanak taa kai bal bal jaasaa. ||5]| - Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them. ||5]]|
Hae use His UTY YUTS | (266-7, aSSt Menvat, He 5) Sagal purakh meh purakh parDhaan. Among all persons, the supreme person is the one
AGHfa AT at fue wifsre il (266-7, west Hunt, He 5) saaDhsang jaa kaa mitai abhimaan. who gives up his egotistical pride in the Company of the Holy.
WTUR AG A ATE StS Il (266-7, agSt AeNIAT, He 5) aapas ka-o jo jaanai neechaa. One who sees himself as lowly,
AG Taha AS 3 So Il (266-7, vest Mn, He 5) SO-0O ganee-ai sabh tay oochaa. shall be accounted as the highest of all.
Wat HS de Aare at Sar Il (266-8, aGst Ment, He 5) jaa kaa man ho-ay sagal kee reenaa. One whose mind is the dust of all,
ofe ofa on fate ute whe stor il (266-8, Bet Aen, He 5) har har naam tin ghat ghat cheenaa. recognizes the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in each and every heart.
Ho MUS 3S Fa fear Il (266-8, aSst Ment, He 5) man apunay tay buraa mitaanaa. One who eradicates cruelty from within his own mind,
ue Aare figafe ArAST I (266-9, aBet Ment, He 5) paykhai sagal sarisat saajnaa. looks upon all the world as his friend.
Ha &a Ao AH feA!st Il (266-9, aGat UNIT, He 5) sookh dookh jan sam daristaytaa. One who looks upon pleasure and pain as one and the same,
SSX UU US St BUT ill (266-9, TSSt Hest, He 5) naanak paap punn nahee laypaa. ||6|| O Nanak, is not affected by sin or virtue. ||6||
fasas a@ us 3d 3G Il (266-10, aGat Aen, He 5) nirDhan ka-o Dhan tayro naa-o. To the poor, Your Name is wealth.
fore aG ae Sa a Il (266-10, aGst ment, He 5) nithaavay ka-o naa-o tayraa thaa-o. To the homeless, Your Name is home.
fours a ys Sd HS Il (266-10, aGzt MNIH, He 5) nimaanay ka-o parabh tayro maan. To the dishonored, You, O God, are honor.
Has Wet AG SST BS Il (266-11, ast Meniet, vz 5) Sagal ghataa ka-o dayvhu daan. To all, You are the Giver of gifts.
Ado ATIHITS Hat Il (266-11, 78st Aunt, Hs 5) karan karaavanhaar su-aamee. O Creator Lord, Cause of causes, O Lord and Master,
Aas wet X nisaaHt Il (266-11, west ment, vs 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. Inner-knower, Searcher of all hearts:
must afs fufs AST MMT Il (266-11, west mnit, He 5) apnee gat mit jaanhu aapay. You alone know Your own condition and state.
nus Afar orf ys FS Il (266-12, west Ment, Hs 5) aapan sang aap parabh raatay. You Yourself, God, are imbued with Yourself.
Sudt Crsfs 3H 3 SE II 266-12, text Mort, He 5) tum"ree ustat tum tay ho-ay. You alone can celebrate Your Praises.
Sod MST o AoalA afS IDI (266-12, aGSt Hen, 2 5) naanak avar na jaanas ko-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, no one else knows. ||7||
Hea UdH His AAS UdH Il (266-13, Tat Ment, ues 5) sarab Dharam meh saraysat Dharam. Of all religions, the best religion
dfs & oH Afu fSegHe AH Il (266-13, Test HUNT, He 5) har ko naam jap nirmal karam. is to chant the Name of the Lord and maintain pure conduct.
Hare faur ufs SSH fatamr i (266-13, ast ment, He 5) Sagal kir-aa meh ootam kiri-aa. Of all religious rituals, the most sublime ritual
AaAfa vanfs He fafamr it (266-14, west Ment, He 5) saaDhsang durmat mal hiri-aa. is to erase the filth of the dirty mind in the Company of the Holy.
Hae Gen His Ben FH Il (266-14, aGat Menist, He 5) Sagal udam meh udam bhalaa. Of all efforts, the best effort
Ufs A OH AUT Aba AST Il (266-14, aSst Ment, He 5) har kaa naam japahu jee-a sadaa. is to chant the Name of the Lord in the heart, forever.
Hares wat Hfs vifys sot il (266-15, aGat ment, ue 5) Sagal baanee meh amrit baanee. Of all speech, the most ambrosial speech
dfs & AA Als TAS gaat Il (266-15, Test HUNT, He 5) har ko jas sun rasan bakhaanee. is to hear the Lord's Praise and chant it with the tongue.
AAS aa 3 SI SSH ag Il (266-15, Test Mest, He 5) Sagal thaan tay oh ootam thaan. Of all places, the most sublime place,
Sod fas wie ZA dfs SH ICSI (266-16, AGS PNT, He 5) naanak jih ghat vasai har naam. ||8]|3]| O Nanak, is that heart in which the Name of the Lord abides. ||8]|3] |
HS Il (266-16)
salok. Shalok:
fosters feurfonr A ys Aet ANTS I (266-16, 7at Pent, He 5) nirgunee-aar i-aani-aa so parabh sadaa samaal. You worthless, ignorant fool - dwell upon God forever.
fafs aur fan sis ge aoa foadt ots Ul (266-17, aest mnt, He 5)
jin kee-aa tis cheet rakh naanak nibhee naal. ||1]||
Cherish in your consciousness the One who created you; O Nanak, He alone shall go along with you. ||1||
MASUet Il (266-17)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
sHeber a Ts sts usrat il (266-17, west menrat, He 5) rama-ee-aa kay gun chayt paraanee. Think of the Glory of the All-pervading Lord, O mortal;
AEG HS 3 AG fenerat il (266-18, Sst est, 42 5) kavan mool tay kavan daristaanee.
what is your origin, and what is your appearance?
fate 3 Af Aes Aterfonr i (266-18, ast Mnrt, Hs 5) jin too’ saaj savaar seegaari-aa.
He who fashioned, adorned and decorated you
aes mate uf faofs Carfaur i (266-18, west meniat, He 5) garabh agan meh jineh ubaari-aa.
- in the fire of the womb, He preserved you.
we fren s3fo fimrs 20 Il (266-19, west MN, He 5)
baar bivasthaa tujheh pi-aarai dooDh. In your infancy, He gave you milk to drink.
fe Has SHS AY AT Il (266-19, Sat Pent, He 5) bhar joban bhojan sukh sooDh. In the flower of your youth, He gave you food, pleasure and understanding.
fasta sfeur Guta Aa AS i Hfe mifimre 8s aS es Il (206-19, 7S Mt, we 5) biraDh bha-i-aa oopar saak sain. mukh api-aa-o baith ka-o dain. As you grow old, family and friends are there to feed you as you rest.
UST NED
feg fase TS As 3 FF Il (267-1, aCst Moet, we 5)
ih nirgun gun kachhoo na boojhai.
This worthless person has not appreciated in the least, all the good deeds done for him.
auf Bg SB aaa ALS A (267-1, aGst Aen, He 5) bakhas layho ta-o naanak seejhai. ||1]| If you bless him with forgiveness, O Nanak, only then will he be saved. ||1]|
fag yA] ug Guta Af safe il (267-1, vest ment, He 5) jih parsaad Dhar oopar sukh baseh. By His Grace, you abide in comfort upon the earth.
HS 37s Hts safes Afor TAfT Il (267-2, Text Ment, Hs 5) sut bharaat meet banitaa sang haseh. With your children, siblings, friends and spouse, you laugh.
fag yrAtfe ulefs AlSe AS Il (267-2, west meniet, He 5) jih parsaad peeveh seetal jalaa. By His Grace, you drink in cool water.
HYSTeSt USS UST MHS Il (267-3, ast Fenst, ue 5) sukh-daa-ee pavan paavak amulaa. You have peaceful breezes and priceless fire.
fas yrtfe safe Afs SAT Il (267-3, Get Menect, He 5) jih parsaad bhogeh sabh rasaa. By His Grace, you enjoy all sorts of pleasures.
Hares AHalt Afar Aa SAT il (267-3, aGxt mnt, us 5) Sagal samagree sang saath basaa. You are provided with all the necessities of life.
GS JAS U's AIS SF TAA Il (267-4, aSst Ment, ws 5) deenay hasat paav karan naytar rasnaa. He gave you hands, feet, ears, eyes and tongue,
fsnfo fsurfa nied Afar FIST I (267-4, ast ment, He 5) tiseh ti-aag avar sang rachnaa. and yet, you forsake Him and attach yourself to others.
mA sa Hs vio fmm I (267-4, 7st Ment, Hs 5) aisay dokh moorh anDh bi-aapay. Such sinful mistakes cling to the blind fools;
SOt AS SI YS MM Iii (267-5, ast Ment, us 5) naanak kaadh layho parabh aapay. ||2|| Nanak: uplift and save them, God! ||2||
wife nifs A USI Il (267-5, aGst AeNATt, He 5) aad ant jo raakhanhaar. From beginning to end, He is our Protector,
fan fa@ uifs 5 ad Teg | 267-5, west Menect, ne 5) tis si-o pareet na karai gavaar. and yet, the ignorant do not give their love to Him.
a at Ret oe fafa ur] Il (267-5, aGst ment, He 5) jaa kee sayvaa nav niDh paavai. Serving Him, the nine treasures are obtained,
3 AB Hs HS Sdt HS I (267-6, aC MN, Hs 5) taa si-o moorhaa man nahee laavai. and yet, the foolish do not link their minds with Him.
A OAT Ae Ae’ TAs Il (267-6, aSxt Ment, we 5) jo thaakur sad sadaa hajooray. Our Lord and Master is Ever-present, forever and ever,
J aS uiar Wes ET Il (267-6, ast mnt, He 5) taa ka-o anDhaa jaanat dooray. and yet, the spiritually blind believe that He is far away.
WT at SIG UTS VITT HS Il (267-7, aGSt HeNAAt, H2 5) jaa kee tahal paavai dargeh maan. In His service, one obtains honor in the Court of the Lord,
fsnfo fants Hao MTS Il (267-7, west Met, He 5) tiseh bisaarai mugaDh ajaan. and yet, the ignorant fool forgets Him.
Het Het feg gHod'g Il (267-7, aSst ment, v2 5) sadaa sadaa ih bhoolanhaar. Forever and ever, this person makes mistakes;
oO JUST YT MUTT Iii (267-7, ABSt Aunt, He 5) naanak raakhanhaar apaar. ||3]| O Nanak, the Infinite Lord is our Saving Grace. ||3]||
330 fsurfa agst Fifa Fe Il (267-8, west MeNET, He 5) ratan ti-aag ka-udee sang rachai. Forsaking the jewel, they are engrossed with a shell.
Wg efs 3o Afat He Il (267-8, aa Ment, Hs 5) saach chhod jhooth sang machai. They renounce Truth and embrace falsehood.
A ese" A wAfag af HS Il (267-8, aGat MeSH, He 5) jo chhadnaa so asthir kar maanai. That which passes away, they believe to be permanent.
A deo A Efe UTS Il (267-9, TCH Mn, we 5) jo hovan so door paraanai. That which is immanent, they believe to be far off.
efs we fsA a AM AP Il (267-9, aGat ment, Hs 5) chhod jaa-ay tis kaa saram karai. They struggle for what they must eventually leave.
Hfa Hovet FSR usTe Il (267-9, aGst Het, He 5) sang sahaa-ee tis parharai. They turn away from the Lord, their Help and Support, who is always with them.
dee Bu Card Gf Il (267-10, aGst mnet, He 5) chandan layp utaarai Dho-ay. They wash off the sandalwood paste;
aos uifs SAN Afa df i (267-10, ast Ment, He 5) garDhab pareet bhasam sang ho-ay. like donkeys, they are in love with the mud.
nig gu fs ufss farses Il (267-10, ast Rent, He 5) anDh koop meh patit bikraal. They have fallen into the deep, dark pit.
Sot ahs SI YS Sens Sil (267-10, teat Pent, He 5) naanak kaadh layho parabh da-i-aal. ||4|| Nanak: lift them up and save them, O Merciful Lord God! ||4]|
ISS uA at HOA ATS Il (267-11, Test Ment, HE 5) kartoot pasoo kee maanas jaat. They belong to the human species, but they act like animals.
Ba usa ad feg TFS Il (267-11, ast ANT, He 5) lok pachaaraa karai din raat. They curse others day and night.
wots su nists He Her I (267-11, west Ment, He 5) baahar bhaykh antar mal maa-i-aa. Outwardly, they wear religious robes, but within is the filth of Maya.
eufA ats ae ad eufemr il (267-12, weet ment, He 5) chhapas naahi kachh karai chhapaa-i-aa. They cannot conceal this, no matter how hard they try.
wots fame fame fenare Il (267-12, west Aen, 8 5) baahar gi-aan Dhi-aan isnaan. Outwardly, they display knowledge, meditation and purification,
nists fam SF AMIS Il (267-13, aGst Het, He 5) antar bi-aapai lobh su-aan. but within clings the dog of greed.
nists mate safe 3o AMIS I (267-13, a@at Ment, He 5) antar agan baahar tan su-aah. The fire of desire rages within; outwardly they apply ashes to their bodies.
as Ua AA Sd METS Il (267-13, aGSt Ment, He 5) gal paathar kaisay tarai athaah. There is a stone around their neck - how can they cross the unfathomable ocean?
wa nists eA ys orf il (267-13, aGet mnt, He 5) jaa kai antar basai parabh aap. Those, within whom God Himself abides
SOA SAS Adi ANTS WUll (267-14, west Ment, 2 5) naanak tay jan sahj samaat. ||5]| - O Nanak, those humble beings are intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||5||
Afs niat AA Ha UTS Il (267-14, ast AeNAT, He 5) sun anDhaa kaisay maarag paavai. By listening, how can the blind find the path?
ag afs dg Gf fears I (267-14, aGst mnt, He 5) kar geh layho orh nibhaavai. Take hold of his hand, and then he can reach his destination.
TT BSTSsS FS Sa Il (267-15, ASH Meet, we 5) kahaa bujhaarat boojhai doraa. How can a riddle be understood by the deaf?
fafa adha 3B ANS Sa Il (267-15, ast MNT, He 5) nis kahee-ai ta-o samjhai bhoraa. Say 'night', and he thinks you said ‘day’.
as farsue ae aa il (267-15, aGst ment, He 5) kahaa bisanpad gaavai gung. How can the mute sing the Songs of the Lord?
q36 ad 3G St Ag ST Il (267-16, west MeN, He 5) jatan karai ta-o bhee sur bhang. He may try, but his voice will fail him.
ad fiiae uses ud SSS Il (267-16, Test Ment, He 5) kah pingul parbat par bhavan. How can the cripple climb up the mountain?
oot 33 ST CA TS Il (267-16, aC MN, Hs 5) nahee hot oohaa us gavan. He simply cannot go there.
ASS ATS HH Ute Fost A Il (267-17, west went, ve 5) kartaar karunaa mai deen bayntee karai. O Creator, Lord of Mercy - Your humble servant prays;
SOA SHS frst Sg NEM (267-17, aSst Aust, He 5) naanak tumree kirpaa tarai. ||6|| Nanak: by Your Grace, please save me. ||6||
Ha Aovet Ane & OHS Il (267-17, aes MMH, He 5)
sang sahaa-ee so aavai na cheet.
The Lord, our Help and Support, is always with us, but the mortal does not remember Him.
A Soret st fAS uifS i (267-18, aGat Mn, He 5)
jo bairaa-ee taa si-o pareet. He shows love to his enemies.
wor & fas Sst3fs aA il (267-18, ast mnt, Hs 5) baloo-aa kay garih bheetar basai. He lives in a castle of sand.
Moe ae HfSor Sfar TA Il (267-18, aGst Ment, He 5) anad kayl maa-i-aa rang rasai. He enjoys the games of pleasure and the tastes of Maya.
fez afs Hd Hofa Yysts II (267-18, aGat mnt, He 5) darirh kar maanai maneh parteet. He believes them to be permanent - this is the belief of his mind.
NSS nts HS SHS il (267-19, ast Menwst, ws 5) kaal na aavai moorhay cheet. Death does not even come to mind for the fool.
ag fada an au A Il (267-19, west ment, He 5) bair biroDh kaam kroDh moh. Hate, conflict, sexual desire, anger, emotional attachment,
36 fears HI BF TT Il (267-19, 7st Ment, vs 5) jhooth bikaar mahaa lobh Dharoh. falsehood, corruption, immense greed and deceit:
Yar 2ét feorg wats fos aet AGH Il (268-1, aSSt Hest, 2 5)
i-aahoo jugat bihaanay ka-ee janam. So many lifetimes are wasted in these ways.
SSA Th BI mus ats AIH INDI (268-1, west AeneAt, He 5) naanak raakh layho aapan kar karam. ||7|| Nanak: uplift them, and redeem them, O Lord - show Your Mercy! ||7]||
3 OAT SH ule maetA Il (268-1, ast Ment, HE 5) too thaakur tum peh ardaas. You are our Lord and Master; to You, I offer this prayer.
AG fiz Ag Sct TH II (268-2, weet Moet, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tayree raas. This body and soul are all Your property.
3H WS fust IN Hea 3g Il (268-2, ast HeNIH, He 5) tum maat pitaa ham baarik tayray. You are our mother and father; we are Your children.
Suet four His Aa WST I (268-2, west Het, He 5) tumree kirpaa meh sookh ghanayray. In Your Grace, there are so many joys!
afe & AS SHAT MIT Il (268-3, aat AUNT, He 5) ko-ay na jaanai tumraa ant. No one knows Your limits.
Cv 3 Su sHSYT Il (268-3, Tat MeN, He 5) oochay tay oochaa bhagvant. O Highest of the High, Most Generous God,
AIS AHat SHe APS Ut | (268-3, ast mnt, v8 5) Sagal samagree tumrai sutir Dhaaree. the whole creation is strung on Your thread.
3H 3 ofe A orfamrarcdt I (268-3, aGst Aen, He 5) tum tay ho-ay so aagi-aakaaree. That which has come from You is under Your Command.
Suot afs fiefs 3H ot wot Il (268-4, ast ment, He 5) tumree gat mit tum hee jaanee. You alone know Your state and extent.
66K VA Aer agaat ICUS (268-4, Test Fast, He 5) naanak daas sadaa kurbaanee. ||8]|4| | Nanak, Your slave, is forever a sacrifice. ||8]||4| |
HS Il (268-4) salok. Shalok:
Zou” us efs & orate mre AoE It (268-5, wet menect, ne 5) daynhaar parabh chhod kai laageh aan su-aa-ay. One who renounces God the Giver, and attaches himself to other affairs
asa aT 3 Aiset fas ae ufS ATS 9 (268-5, west Ment, we 5) naanak kahoo na seejh-ee bin naavai pat jaa-ay. ||1|| - O Nanak, he shall never succeed. Without the Name, he shall lose his honor. ||1]|
MASUeT Il (268-6) asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
GA FAS & UES UTS Il (268-6, TST Ment, Hs 5) das bastoo lay paachhai paavai. He obtains ten things, and puts them behind him;
fa aA ade fife werS Il (268-6, aGst ment, v2 5) ayk basat kaaran bikhot gavaavai. for the sake of one thing withheld, he forfeits his faith.
fa ot 6 Ufe cA st fats SE il (268-6, ast mnt, He 5) ayk bhee na day-ay das bhee hir lay-ay. But what if that one thing were not given, and the ten were taken away?
38 Ha ag AT AGE Il (268-7, ast Ment, HE 5) ta-o moorhaa kaho kahaa karay-i. Then, what could the fool say or do?
fA oad fAG ardt Sa I (268-7, aCat ment, us 5) jis thaakur si-o naahee chaaraa. Our Lord and Master cannot be moved by force.
3 a@ ath AE SHAATS Il (268-7, ast MIT, He 5) taa ka-o keejai sad namaskaaraa. Unto Him, bow forever in adoration.
Wat Hfs rar ys Hor Il (268-8, a@at Ment, He 5) jaa kai man laagaa parabh meethaa. That one, unto whose mind God seems sweet
Ada AY Sky His FST Il (268-8, aSSt Hest, He 5) sarab sookh taahoo man voothaa. - all pleasures come to abide in his mind.
fA AS MUST JAH HotEMt I (268-8, west Ant, He 5) jis jan apnaa hukam manaa-i-aa. One who abides by the Lord's Will,
Hea da soa fSfs usr ail 268-8, ast ment, H2 5) sarab thok naanak tin paa-i-aa. ||1]| O Nanak, obtains all things. ||1]|
Mos AT nUSst & IA Il (268-9, aBSt Het, He 5) agnat saahu apnee day raas. God the Banker gives endless capital to the mortal,
ug uls ses nee Bott Il (268-9, aGst Ment, He 5) khaat peet bartai anad ulaas. who eats, drinks and expends it with pleasure and joy.
must MHS As Sdfs ATT SE Il (268-10, Test FenIH, He 5) apunee amaan kachh bahur saahu lay-ay. If some of this capital is later taken back by the Banker,
mifamrat Hfs dH aSfE I (268-10, aGSt Het, He 5) agi-aanee man ros karay-i. the ignorant person shows his anger.
nust usstfs nmr dt 4S Il (268-10, wea Ment, He 5) apnee parteet aap hee khovai. He himself destroys his own credibility,
afte Gn ot fA & FS Il (268-11, Tat PNT, HE 5) bahur us kaa bisvaas na hovai. and he shall not again be trusted.
fan at SAS FSA vie ITs Il (268-11, Test MIT, He 5) jis kee basat tis aagai raakhai. When one offers to the Lord, that which belongs to the Lord,
ys at mrfamr HTS HE I (268-11, +@et Menect, He 5) parabh kee aagi-aa maanai maathai. and willingly abides by the Will of God's Order,
Gn 3 wae ad feos Il (268-11, west MMH, He 5) us tay cha-ugun karai nihaal. the Lord will make him happy four times over.
Soa ATs Het Sens iQ (268-12, ast Ment, v2 5) naanak saahib sadaa da-i-aal. ||2|| O Nanak, our Lord and Master is merciful forever. ||2||
wifoa ofS ufenr & IZ Il Haus JSS AS MSS Il (268-12, aGst Ment, He 5)
anik bhaat maa-i-aa kay hayt. sarpar hovat jaan anayt.
The many forms of attachment to Maya shall surely pass away - know that they are transitory.
fasy at atfeur fA Ja BS I 268-13, west MMH, He 5) birakh kee chhaa-i-aa si-o rang laavai. People fall in love with the shade of the tree,
6a fran Gg ufo ues Il (268-13, at MNT, He 5) oh binsai uho man pachhutaavai. and when it passes away, they feel regret in their minds.
A UA A Ww Il (268-13, west Ant, He 5) jo deesai so chaalanhaar. Whatever is seen, shall pass away;
wufe su 30 nig nig Il (268-14, a@st Hens, He 5) lapat rahi-o tah anDh anDhaar. and yet, the blindest of the blind cling to it.
were fAG A we ST Il (268-14, Test Moet, Hs 5) bataa-oo si-o jo laavai nayh. One who gives her love to a passing traveler
a a ofa 5 nie AT Il (268-14, west Met, He 5) taa ka-o haath na aavai kayh. - nothing shall come into her hands in this way.
Ho dfs & oH at Ulfs AueTet I (268-15, Test Ment, He 5) man har kay naam kee pareet sukh-daa-ee. O mind, the love of the Name of the Lord bestows peace.
ate faxsur sea vif SS Bet Sil (268-15, Test Ment, He 5) kar kirpaa naanak aap la-ay laa-ee. ||3]| O Nanak, the Lord, in His Mercy, unites us with Himself. ||3]|
fuffmer sq ua ads Aafeur Il (268-15, at Aent, He 5) mithi-aa tan Dhan kutamb sabaa-i-aa. False are body, wealth, and all relations.
firfemr IBH HAST HTfET I (268-16, agSt MNT, He 5) mithi-aa ha-umai mamtaa maa-i-aa. False are ego, possessiveness and Maya.
fufamr aH HAS US HS Il (268-16, aGSt Ment, H: 5) mithi-aa raaj joban Dhan maal. False are power, youth, wealth and property.
fiufemr an au faeras Il (268-16, aGst ment, He 5) mithi-aa kaam kroDh bikraal. False are sexual desire and wild anger.
fife ga TASt oA AAS Il (268-17, aSet ent, He 5) mithi-aa rath hastee asav bastaraa. False are chariots, elephants, horses and expensive clothes.
fifaor gar Afar Hfenr uf TAST Il (268-17, aCe MNT, He 5) mithi-aa rang sang maa-i-aa paykh hastaa. False is the love of gathering wealth, and reveling in the sight of it.
fifamr go Ho nifsHTe II (268-17, at mnt, He 5) mithi-aa Dharoh moh abhimaan. False are deception, emotional attachment and egotistical pride.
fufaur urun Cufs AIS TH Il (268-18, aGat Ment, He 5) mithi-aa aapas oopar karat gumaan. False are pride and self-conceit.
mAfag sats AT at ATS Il (268-18, ast Ment, He 5) asthir bhagat saaDh kee saran. Only devotional worship is permanent, and the Sanctuary of the Holy.
ood Afu afu He afe & vse lig (268-18, aGet Mn, He 5) naanak jap jap jeevai har kay charan. ||4|| Nanak lives by meditating, meditating on the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||4]|
fifemr Fea ua Se" Hots Il (268-19, Text Mn, Hs 5) mithi-aa sarvan par nindaa suneh. False are the ears which listen to the slander of others.
fufemr gAS ug esa aG fasts il (268-19, west mnist, He 5) mithi-aa hasat par darab ka-o hireh. False are the hands which steal the wealth of others.
Yar Er
fufaur oy ues ug for Tus i (269-1, west Ment, He 5) mithi-aa naytar paykhat par tari-a roopaad. False are the eyes which gaze upon the beauty of another's wife.
fifi SHOT SHS MS AES I (269-1, ast Ment, He 5) mithi-aa rasnaa bhojan an savaad. False is the tongue which enjoys delicacies and external tastes.
fufemr sae us faors AB wets Il (269-1, west ment, He 5) mithi-aa charan par bikaar ka-o Dhaaveh. False are the feet which run to do evil to others.
fiuffmr ue ud SS Barefs Il (269-2, ast ent, He 5) mithi-aa man par lobh lubhaaveh. False is the mind which covets the wealth of others.
fufemr 35 odt UTBuaTS Il (269-2, ast ment, He 5) mithi-aa tan nahee par-upkaaraa. False is the body which does not do good to others.
fufemr aA Bs fears Il (269-2, TCHt Ment, H2 5) mithi-aa baas layt bikaaraa. False is the nose which inhales corruption.
fag aS fufaur As se Il (269-3, aSSt Hest, He 5) bin boojhay mithi-aa sabh bha-ay. Without understanding, everything is false.
HES FI SSA Tid Tig SH BE MUI (269-3, aSst Ment, He 5) safal dayh naanak har har naam la-ay. ||5]]| Fruitful is the body, O Nanak, which takes to the Lord's Name. ||5||
faset Was at TSA Il (269-3, aBSt Mt, 43 5) birthee saakat kee aarjaa. The life of the faithless cynic is totally useless.
Arg fast aT TES AT I (269-4, ast Ment, ws 5) saach binaa kah hovat soochaa. Without the Truth, how can anyone be pure?
fagar am fast 3 nid II (269-4, west Ment, He 5) birthaa naam binaa tan anDh. Useless is the body of the spiritually blind, without the Name of the Lord.
Hf wes ST a SIT Il (269-4, ast AenIAT, He 5) mukh aavat taa kai durganDh. From his mouth, a foul smell issues forth.
fag finrse fea df fger farorfe 1 (269-5, a@at mort, Hs 5) bin simran din rain baritha bihaa-ay. Without the remembrance of the Lord, day and night pass in vain,
Hy faa fa ast ATE I (269-5, aBst AenIt, He 5) maygh binaa ji-o khaytee jaa-ay. like the crop which withers without rain.
difse sao faa fge AS aN Il (269-5, aGst mot, He 5)
gobid bhajan bin barithay sabh kaam. Without meditation on the Lord of the Universe, all works are in vain,
fis fasus & forse BH Il (269-6, wet Het, He 5) ji-o kirpan kay niraarath daam. like the wealth of a miser, which lies useless.
ufs ufe 3 Ae fas wife afAS afe a Il (209-6, aGat mot, He 5) Dhan Dhan tay jan jih ghat basi-o har naa-o. Blessed, blessed are those, whose hearts are filled with the Name of the Lord.
Sot St A ats sis AE Ell (269-6, west Ment, He 5) naanak taa kai bal bal jaa-o. ||6|| Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them. ||6]|
Ids MET As MET AH'SS Il (269-7, TSSt Aust, v2 5) rahat avar kachh avar kamaavat. He says one thing, and does something else.
fs oot UlfSs HUT aes Bes i (269-7, aGzt Mani, us 5) man nahee pareet mukhahu gandh laavat. There is no love in his heart, and yet with his mouth he talks tall.
WTS YS UTete Il (269-8, aCat mest, He 5) jaananhaar parabhoo parbeen. The Omniscient Lord God is the Knower of all.
wate su aT SG Il (269-8, aGat Ment, HE 5) baahar bhaykh na kaahoo bheen. He is not impressed by outward display.
wed Buen vif o ad Il (269-8, agst ANAT, He 5) avar updaysai aap na karai. One who does not practice what he preaches to others,
WSS WSS HOH He Il (269-8, aGat Meet, He 5) aavat jaavat janmai marai. shall come and go in reincarnation, through birth and death.
fan a nists aA fedarg il (269-9, aGst ment, v2 5) jis kai antar basai nirankaar. One whose inner being is filled with the Formless Lord
fSA at Ahr Sd AAS Il (269-9, west ANT, He 5) tis kee seekh tarai sansaar. - by his teachings, the world is saved.
Af 3H 3S f30 YS WS II (269-9, weet Menect, He 5) jo tum bhaanay tin parabh jaataa. Those who are pleasing to You, God, know You.
SOA CS AS VIS UIST IDI (269-9, Test Met, 2 5) naanak un jan charan paraataa. ||7]|| Nanak falls at their feet. ||7||
ase Fost USAIN AT AS Il (269-10, aSzt Penect, ue 5) kara-o bayntee paarbarahm sabh jaanai. Offer your prayers to the Supreme Lord God, who knows everything.
must ahr wirufs HS Il (269-10, ast Henst, 2 5) apnaa kee-aa aapeh maanai. He Himself values His own creatures.
nuts wimg wif ags fees Il (269-10, west Ment, He 5) aapeh aap aap karat nibayraa. He Himself, by Himself, makes the decisions.
far efs Aves far FST ST Il 269-11, TSS Met, we 5) kisai door janaavat kisai bujhaavat nayraa. To some, He appears far away, while others perceive Him near at hand.
Cure frmisu Aas 3S IIS Il (269-11, west ment, He 5) upaav si-aanap sagal tay rahat. He is beyond all efforts and clever tricks.
AS AS WS MISH at JIS Il (269-12, aGat HN, He 5) sabh kachh jaanai aatam kee rahat. He knows all the ways and means of the soul.
fan se fan we ofs SE Il (269-12, aGat mnt, He 5) jis bhaavai tis la-ay larh laa-ay. Those with whom He is pleased are attached to the hem of His robe.
aes Foste sont ANTE Il (269-12, ast Hent, He 5) thaan thanantar rahi-aa samaa-ay. He is pervading all places and interspaces.
H Aza fan fou at Il (269-12, west ment, He 5) SO sayvak jis kirpaa karee. Those upon whom He bestows His favor, become His servants.
fone fone Afu steex Jat NCU (269-13, ast Ment, He 5)
nimakh nimakh jap naanak haree. ||8]|5|| Each and every moment, O Nanak, meditate on the Lord. ||8]||5||
HS Il (269-13)
salok. Shalok:
OH au nig BS Ho faofh we mMTHS I (269-13, ast PNA, He 5)
kaam kroDh ar lobh moh binas jaa-ay aha‘mayv.
Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment - may these be gone, and egotism as well.
Sot US AdStast ats YATE APES NA (269-14, aSSt Menat, vs 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee kar parsaad gurdayv. ||1]|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God; please bless me with Your Grace, O Divine Guru.
1111] MASUet Il (269-14)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
fag yAtte este nifs ufo il (269-14, at ment, ne 5) jih parsaad chhateeh amrit khaahi. By His Grace, you partake of the thirty-six delicacies;
fan sag AaB gy Ho Hf Il (269-15, aGHt mnt, He 5) tis thaakur ka-o rakh man maahi. enshrine that Lord and Master within your mind.
fas yAtfe Adios 3fs wef Il (269-15, ast Ment, He 5) jih parsaad suganDhat tan laaveh. By His Grace, you apply scented oils to your body;
fan ag fines usH afs urefs Il (269-15, aBst Aen, He 5) tis ka-o simrat param gat paavahi. remembering Him, the supreme status is obtained.
fag urfe aAfs AY Hete Il (269-16, 7ext Ment, He 5) jih parsaad baseh sukh mandar. By His Grace, you dwell in the palace of peace;
fants fomrfe wet He niefs I (269-16, ast Ment, He 5) tiseh Dhi-aa-ay sadaa man andar. meditate forever on Him within your mind.
fas urrfe fats Afor AY SAT Il (269-16, aGat mensst, He 5) jih parsaad garih sang sukh basnaa. By His Grace, you abide with your family in peace;
mS udd fAHdT FSA TAS Il (269-17, ast menIt, He 5) aath pahar simrahu tis rasnaa. keep His remembrance upon your tongue, twenty-four hours a day.
fas yrtfe Ja SA Sa Il (269-17, aSat ment, He 5) jih parsaad rang ras bhog. By His Grace, you enjoy tastes and pleasures;
ood Het fomreba fimres Aa WAU (269-18, aGzt Ment, He 5) naanak sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai Dhi-aavan jog. ||1]| O Nanak, meditate forever on the One, who is worthy of meditation. ||1]|
fag ure ure udad Jerets Il (269-18, west Ment, Hs 5) jih parsaad paat patambar hadhaaveh. By His Grace, you wear silks and satins;
fants fsurfa as nied Barets Il (269-18, aBst ment, He 5) tiseh ti-aag kat avar lubhaaveh. why abandon Him, to attach yourself to another?
fas yAtfe Afa AA ASH II (269-19, a@ext ment, He 5) jih parsaad sukh sayj so-eejai. By His Grace, you sleep in a cozy bed;
HO MTS Udd STAT AA ASA Il (269-19, aGSt He, He 5) man aath pahar taa kaa jas gaaveejai. O my mind, sing His Praises, twenty-four hours a day.
fa yAfe SB AS AS HS Il (269-19, aCat Mn, we 5) jih parsaad tujh sabh ko-oo maanai. By His Grace, you are honored by everyone;
UST 200
Hf at&t AA SAS FAS Il (270-1, west Meet, He 5) mukh taa ko jas rasan bakhaanai. with your mouth and with your tongue, chant His Praises.
fas yAtfe 3d FIST OTH Il (270-1, aGat Mn, He 5) jih parsaad tayro rahtaa Dharam. By His Grace, you remain in the Dharma;
Ho Ae ftmrfe ase USAT Il (270-1, west Ment, Hs 5) man sadaa Dhi-aa-ay kayval paarbarahm. O mind, meditate continually on the Supreme Lord God.
ys At AUS Vddd HG urefa Il (270-2, Test ent, He 5) parabh jee japat dargeh maan paavahi. Meditating on God, you shall be honored in His Court;
Soa ufs Ast whe ASfs IQI (270-2, aGSt Ment, He 5)
naanak pat saytee ghar jaaveh. ||2|| O Nanak, you shall return to your true home with honor. ||2||
fag yrs vida ase Tat i (270-3, ast Ment, He 5) jih parsaad aarog kanchan dayhee. By His Grace, you have a healthy, golden body;
fez wed SH TH AST Il (270-3, awBst ment, He 5) liv laavhu tis raam sanayhee. attune yourself to that Loving Lord.
fag yAtfe Sat Gar FIT Il (270-3, Test Ment, He 5) jih parsaad tayraa olaa rahat. By His Grace, your honor is preserved;
Ho AY uefa dfs dfs AA ATS Il (270-3, aGzt mnt, us 5) man sukh paavahi har har jas kahat. O mind, chant the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, and find peace.
fag yAtfe 3d Aare fee Bot Il (270-4, west ment, ue 5) jih parsaad tayray sagal chhidar dhaakay. By His Grace, all your deficits are covered;
Ho Adel ug SAT YS SA I (270-4, ast Ment, ne 5) man sarnee par thaakur parabh taa kai. O mind, seek the Sanctuary of God, our Lord and Master.
fra ye 3B aS UTS Il (270-5, west MN, HE 5) jih parsaad tujh ko na pahoochai. By His Grace, no one can rival you;
Ho ATA AA fAHsT Ys Ss Il (270-5, ast Ment, He 5) man saas saas simrahu parabh oochay. O mind, with each and every breath, remember God on High.
fag yrs ust PHS VT Il (270-5, ast Hent, ne 5) jih parsaad paa-ee darulabh dayh. By His Grace, you obtained this precious human body;
SSX St At Salts ATT Ill (270-6, west Meneet, nz 5) naanak taa kee bhagat karayh. ||3]| O Nanak, worship Him with devotion. ||3]|
fro yAte wrgus ufsdte il (270-6, west mnt, we 5) jih parsaad aabhookhan pehreejai. By His Grace, you wear decorations;
Ho fsn fares faG mren ate Il (270-6, aGst ment, HE 5)
man tis simrat ki-o aalas keejai.
O mind, why are you so lazy? Why don't you remember Him in meditation? fro ute wig JAS mined I (270-7, aGat Pent, v8 5)
jih parsaad asav hasat asvaaree. By His Grace, you have horses and elephants to ride;
Ho fH ys aS aug o fers i (270-7, aSat ment, He 5) man tis parabh ka-o kabhoo na bisaaree. O mind, never forget that God.
fg yAtfe aver foe dar I (270-7, aGat Ment, He 5) jih parsaad baag milakh Dhanaa. By His Grace, you have land, gardens and wealth;
ay udfe ys MUS HOT Il (270-8, aGSt Het, He 5) raakh paro-ay parabh apunay manaa. keep God enshrined in your heart.
fate Sct HO Fos Foret Il (270-8, aSst Ment, us 5) jin tayree man banat banaa-ee. O mind, the One who formed your form
Gos 8o3 Ae fSAfs fret It (270-8, aCat Mn, H8 5) oothat baithat sad tiseh Dhi-aa-ee. - standing up and sitting down, meditate always on Him.
fsnfa fomrfe # Sa ni@e | (270-9, aGst ment, He 5) tiseh Dhi-aa-ay jo ayk alkhai. Meditate on Him - the One Invisible Lord;
Sta Sa ssa Sot TH sil (270-9, aes mnt, we 5) eehaa oohaa naanak tayree rakhai. ||4|| here and hereafter, O Nanak, He shall save you. ||4]|
fag yAte asta Us aT BS Il (270-9, Text Ment, Hs 5) jih parsaad karahi punn baho daan. By His Grace, you give donations in abundance to charities;
Ho nS Ud ate fA at forse Il (270-10, west Hen, He 5) man aath pahar kar tis kaa Dhi-aan. O mind, meditate on Him, twenty-four hours a day.
fag yAtfe 3 orerg faGardt it (270-10, ret ment, He 5) jih parsaad too aachaar bi-uhaaree. By His Grace, you perform religious rituals and worldly duties;
fsA ys ag ATH ATA fest Il (270-10, Test Ment, He 5) tis parabh ka-o saas saas chitaaree. think of God with each and every breath.
faa yAfe So Aes TY Il (270-11, Tat Ment, He 5) jih parsaad tayraa sundar roop. By His Grace, your form is so beautiful;
A ys fAHag AS MSU Il (270-11, 7st Ment, Hs 5) so parabh simrahu sadaa anoop. constantly remember God, the Incomparably Beautiful One.
fag yAtfe Sat Stat ATS Ul (270-11, west Ment, us 5) jih parsaad tayree neekee jaat. By His Grace, you have such high social status;
A us fife we fea ofS i (270-11, ast moet, Hs 5) so parabh simar sadaa din raat. remember God always, day and night.
fas yAtfe Sot ufS Fd Il (270-12, a@et mnt, He 5) jih parsaad tayree pat rahai. By His Grace, your honor is preserved;
Gs une Soa AA AT Ul (270-12, aezt MeNKeH, He 5) gur parsaad naanak jas kahai. ||5]| by Guru's Grace, O Nanak, chant His Praises. ||5]|
fag yAtfe Halo Ads SE Il (270-12, ast Ment, He 5) jih parsaad suneh karan naad. By His Grace, you listen to the sound current of the Naad.
fa yrtfe uefa faAHTS I (270-13, Test Het, He 5) jih parsaad paykheh bismaad. By His Grace, you behold amazing wonders.
fas yrfe Safa nifigs GAar Il (270-13, aGet Ment, He 5) jih parsaad boleh amrit rasnaa. By His Grace, you speak ambrosial words with your tongue.
fag yrAtfe Afa AOA SAAT Il (270-13, Test Ment, He 5) jih parsaad sukh sehjay basnaa. By His Grace, you abide in peace and ease.
fag yAtfe JAS ad Vals il (270-14, west Ment, He 5) jih parsaad hasat kar chaleh. By His Grace, your hands move and work.
fa yrtfe Huse Sele Il (270-14, aest Ment, He 5) jih parsaad sampooran faleh. By His Grace, you are completely fulfilled.
fag yAtfe ugh afs urefo Il (270-14, west ment, He 5) jih parsaad param gat paavahi. By His Grace, you obtain the supreme status.
fag yrtfe Afa Aofa ANTe|fs Il (270-15, at Ment, vs 5) jih parsaad sukh sahj samaaveh. By His Grace, you are absorbed into celestial peace.
mA us fsurfa nies AS Baws | (270-15, west Ment, He 5) aisaa parabh ti-aag avar kat laagahu. Why forsake God, and attach yourself to another?
ad YAS soa HS Aa Well (270-15, ACH FenIAt, vs 5) gur parsaad naanak man jaagahu. ||6|| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, awaken your mind! ||6||
fro yrfe F yates HAMS Il (270-16, ast Mnt, HE 5) jih parsaad too’ pargat sansaar. By His Grace, you are famous all over the world;
fH ys aS ute o Hog ferris I (270-16, ast Ment, HE 5) tis parabh ka-o mool na manhu bisaar. never forget God from your mind.
fg yAtfe Sat UTSTY | (270-16, aGat Ment, He 5) jih parsaad tayraa partaap. By His Grace, you have prestige;
HO HS FT AC AY Il 270-17, ast Mnst, He 5) ray man moorh too taa ka-o jaap. O foolish mind, meditate on Him!
fag YAS So OIA UT Il (270-17, Tat PNIt, He 5) jih parsaad tayray kaaraj pooray. By His Grace, your works are completed;
fsAfs AS Ho Aet TAT Il (270-17, west Het, He 5) tiseh jaan man sadaa hajooray. O mind, know Him to be close at hand.
fro yrfe F urefs APY Il (270-18, ast Mt, He 5) jih parsaad too’ paavahi saach. By His Grace, you find the Truth;
3 HO HS SF 3 AG TE Il (270-18, eat Ment, He 5) ray man mayray too” taa si-o raach. O my mind, merge yourself into Him.
fas yrfe AS at afs SE II (270-18, wat Ment, He 5) jih parsaad sabh kee gat ho-ay. By His Grace, everyone is saved;
Soa WU AU AY ALE IDI (270-19, aeat MNT, He 5) naanak jaap japai jap so-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, meditate, and chant His Chant. ||7||
mify AUS AU A SE il (270-19, west Hest, He 5) aap japaa-ay japai so naa-o. Those, whom He inspires to chant, chant His Name.
mfu ree A ots To WS Il (270-19, west Fent, He 5) aap gaavaa-ai so har gun gaa-o. Those, whom He inspires to sing, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
UST IDA
ys fasur 3 df Yara Il 271-1, ast mnt, He 5) parabh kirpaa tay ho-ay pargaas. By God's Grace, enlightenment comes.
ys efeur 3 ane faarA i (271-1, Test HenIst, He 5) parabhoo da-i-aa tay kamal bigaas. By God's Kind Mercy, the heart-lotus blossoms forth.
us HUHS SA fs APE I 271-1, wet ment, He 5) parabh suparsan basai man so-ay. When God is totally pleased, He comes to dwell in the mind.
ys ofeor 3 ufs OSH fe I 71-1, rat mnt, He 5) parabh da-i-aa tay mat ootam ho-ay. By God's Kind Mercy, the intellect is exalted.
Rea fours ys Sot Hfenr ii (271-2, aeat meant, ve 5) sarab niDhaan parabh tayree ma-i-aa. All treasures, O Lord, come by Your Kind Mercy.
niug ae o food wfenr it (271-2, reat ment, He 5) aaphu kachhoo na kinhoo |a-i-aa. No one obtains anything by himself.
fas fas weg fas oats ofs ae Il 271-2, west ment, u2 5) jit jit laavhu tit lageh har naath. As You have delegated, so do we apply ourselves, O Lord and Master.
aed fa kX AE F TE NCMEN (271-3, tat Ment, Hs 5) naanak in kai kachhoo na haath. ||8||6]| O Nanak, nothing is in our hands. ||8]||6| |
He Il (271-3)
salok. Shalok:
wan warfa ursgon AfE II (271-3, reat Ment, He 5) agam agaaDh paarbarahm so-ay. Unapproachable and Unfathomable is the Supreme Lord God;
AH ad A HAST Se Il (271-4, agst Aen, H: 5) jo jo kahai so muktaa ho-ay. whoever speaks of Him shall be liberated.
Afe Hist atea faosst il AT Wat at MIA AS INA (271-4, Test Henst, He 5) sun meetaa naanak binvantaa. saaDh janaa kee achraj kathaa. ||1]| Listen, O friends, Nanak prays, to the wonderful story of the Holy. ||1]]|
mMAeUeT Il (271-5) asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
AY & fat He BAe TT Il (271-5, Test Pct, we 5) saaDh kai sang mukh oojal hot. In the Company of the Holy, one's face becomes radiant.
ATGHfal HS Aaest YS ll (271-5, aGst Aenst, v2 5) saaDhsang mal saglee khot. In the Company of the Holy, all filth is removed.
AG & Afar fe wifsHre il (271-5, west Mest, He 5) saaDh kai sang mitai abhimaan. In the Company of the Holy, egotism is eliminated.
Aa & Afa yare Afamrre il (271-6, aGat Pant, He 5) saaDh kai sang pargatai sugi-aan. In the Company of the Holy, spiritual wisdom is revealed.
AG & Afa 33 Ys ST Il (271-6, aSst Pen, Hs 5) saaDh kai sang bujhai parabh nayraa. In the Company of the Holy, God is understood to be near at hand.
WaHfa AS Js fears Il (271-6, ast ANT, He 5) saaDhsang sabh hot nibayraa. In the Company of the Holy, all conflicts are settled.
AT & Aft ues SH I3S Il (271-6, aGst Ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang paa-ay naam ratan. In the Company of the Holy, one obtains the jewel of the Naam.
AY & Alfa fax Gufs ASS Il 271-7, Test Pct, we 5) saaDh kai sang ayk oopar jatan. In the Company of the Holy, one's efforts are directed toward the One Lord.
AG at HfsHt sas ABS yrot Il (271-7, aGst Mant, ue 5) saaDh kee mahimaa barnai ka-un paraanee. What mortal can speak of the Glorious Praises of the Holy?
ood Ag at Ast ys Hf ANTSt NA (271-7, Tat Ment, He 5) naanak saaDh kee sobhaa parabh maahi samaanee. ||1|| O Nanak, the glory of the Holy people merges into God. ||1]|
AQ a Afar wiatad FHS I (271-8, agSt NT, He 5) saaDh kai sang agochar milai. In the Company of the Holy, one meets the Incomprehensible Lord.
AQ & Aft Het UTSS Il (271-8, aGSt Met, He 5) saaDh kai sang sadaa parfulai. In the Company of the Holy, one flourishes forever.
A ot Afar wirefa ofA ust il 71-8, a@st ment, H 5) saaDh kai sang aavahi bas panchaa. In the Company of the Holy, the five passions are brought to rest.
Wonfa vifys TA ST Il (271-9, west Manet, us 5) saaDhsang amrit ras bhunchaa. In the Company of the Holy, one enjoys the essence of ambrosia.
Wonfa dfs As at 3H Il (271-9, west Ment, H: 5) saaDhsang ho-ay sabh kee rayn. In the Company of the Holy, one becomes the dust of all.
A & Afat HSdd Bo Il (271-9, ast ment, x: 5) saaDh kai sang manohar bain. In the Company of the Holy, one's speech is enticing.
AY & Ala 6 AST US Il (271-10, AES Mn, we 5) saaDh kai sang na katahoo™ Dhaavai. In the Company of the Holy, the mind does not wander.
AGHfa wAfafs He UTS I (271-10, agSt Het, He 5) saaDhsang asthit man paavai. In the Company of the Holy, the mind becomes stable.
A & Afar ufeur 3 fsa i (271-10, west ment, H: 5) saaDh kai sang maa-i-aa tay bhinn. In the Company of the Holy, one is rid of Maya.
WUAfa Soa US AYAS MQM (271-11, aSzt ent, us 5) saaDhsang naanak parabh suparsan. ||2|| In the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, God is totally pleased. ||2]|
AUGAfa SANS Afs HIS Il (271-11, ast Men, He 5) saaDhsang dusman sabh meet. In the Company of the Holy, all one's enemies become friends.
AY & Aft HoT YStS Ml 71-11, aes Ment, we 5) saaDhoo kai sang mahaa puneet. In the Company of the Holy, there is great purity.
AGHfa for fAG odt FF il (271-12, asst Ment, He 5) saaDhsang kis si-o nahee bair. In the Company of the Holy, no one is hated.
AQ a Af o Mer Us i (271-12, west Ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang na beegaa pair. In the Company of the Holy, one's feet do not wander.
AG & Afar ardt x Hert Il (271-12, ast Het, He 5) saaDh kai sang naahee ko mandaa. In the Company of the Holy, no one seems evil.
AOA fal ATS UPHTSET Il (271-12, aCSt MeNAAT, He 5) saaDhsang jaanay parmaanandaa. In the Company of the Holy, supreme bliss is known.
AQ a Af ost TE Sy Il (271-13, aGSt MeSH, He 5) saaDh kai sang naahee ha-o taap. In the Company of the Holy, the fever of ego departs.
AQ a Af SA AS MMY Il (271-13, west Aut, He 5) saaDh kai sang tajai sabh aap. In the Company of the Holy, one renounces all selfishness.
nim ATS AT gSTet Il (271-13, ast Ment, He 5) aapay jaanai saaDh badaa-ee. He Himself knows the greatness of the Holy.
aoa AT YS ae wiret SI (271-14, aGet Ment, He 5) naanak saaDh parabhoo ban aa-ee. ||3]|| O Nanak, the Holy are at one with God. ||3]|
AY & Ala 6 AT WS I (271-14, Gat Menst, ws 5) saaDh kai sang na kabhoo Dhaavai. In the Company of the Holy, the mind never wanders.
AQ & Afel Het AY US Il (271-14, west ANT, He 5) saaDh kai sang sadaa sukh paavai. In the Company of the Holy, one obtains everlasting peace.
AUHfal SAS Mass Bd Il (271-14, aSst Hest, He 5) saaDhsang basat agochar lahai. In the Company of the Holy, one grasps the Incomprehensible.
AQ & Ala wig Ad il (271-15, ast mnt, ws 5) saaDhoo kai sang ajar sahai. In the Company of the Holy, one can endure the unendurable.
Ag & Afar aA ats Ss il 271-15, wat Ment, Hs 5) saaDh kai sang basai thaan oochai. In the Company of the Holy, one abides in the loftiest place.
AY & Afet Hats UTe Il (271-15, ast Ment, 2 5) saaDhoo kai sang mahal pahoochai. In the Company of the Holy, one attains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Aa & Afa fes Afs GaH Il (271-16, aext Ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang darirhai sabh Dharam. In the Company of the Holy, one's Dharmic faith is firmly established.
AG & Afat ASS USTIN I (271-16, Text Menect, ne 5) saaDh kai sang kayval paarbarahm. In the Company of the Holy, one dwells with the Supreme Lord God.
Aa & Afar ure om foure Il (271-16, ast mest, He 5) saaDh kai sang paa-ay naam niDhaan. In the Company of the Holy, one obtains the treasure of the Naam.
Bsa AY X AIAG Ill 71-16, aCst Ment, ws 5) naanak saaDhoo kai kurbaan. ||4|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Holy. ||4]|
AQ a Af AS aw Sars il (271-17, ast Ant, us 5) saaDh kai sang sabh kul uDhaarai. In the Company of the Holy, all one's family is saved.
AUHfa AAS HIS aca fEAsts i (271-17, asst Hest, He 5) saaDhsang saajan meet kutamb nistaarai. In the Company of the Holy, one's friends, acquaintances and relatives are redeemed.
Ag & Afol A Us ures il (271-17, west Ment, we 5) saaDhoo kai sang so Dhan paavai. In the Company of the Holy, that wealth is obtained.
faA Us 3 AS a SEAS | (271-18, aSat MN, He 5) jis Dhan tay sabh ko varsaavai. Everyone benefits from that wealth.
AUAfa Gdn Ife ad AST Il (271-18, Test Hen, He 5) saaDhsang Dharam raa-ay karay sayvaa. In the Company of the Holy, the Lord of Dharma serves.
A & Aft AST APSS Il (271-18, TSS Aut, He 5) saaDh kai sang sobhaa surdayvaa. In the Company of the Holy, the divine, angelic beings sing God's Praises.
Ag & Afer uy UstES Il (271-19, 7st Ment, Hs 5) saaDhoo kai sang paap palaa-in. In the Company of the Holy, one's sins fly away.
Wonfa vifys ae afes i (271-19, reat ment, ue 5) saaDhsang amrit gun gaa-in. In the Company of the Holy, one sings the Ambrosial Glories.
AG & Afat Ae aS aH i (271-19, ast ment, us 5) saaDh kai sang sarab thaan gamm. In the Company of the Holy, all places are within reach.
UST III
Soa AT a Afel ASH ASH MUll (272-1, ast Ment, He 5) naanak saaDh kai sang safal jannam. ||5|| O Nanak, in the Company of the Holy, one's life becomes fruitful. ||5]|
AG a Afal odt AE WH Il (272-1, Test AeNAt, He 5) saaDh kai sang nahee kachh ghaal. In the Company of the Holy, there is no suffering.
ZING Ses IS fers Il (272-1, aSst MeN, He 5) darsan bhaytat hot nihaal. The Blessed Vision of their Darshan brings a sublime, happy peace.
AY & Ala AGUS TS Il (272-1, TCH Mn, we 5) saaDh kai sang kalookhat harai. In the Company of the Holy, blemishes are removed.
AT & Afat Sax Ud Il (272-2, ast Met, He 5) saaDh kai sang narak parharadi. In the Company of the Holy, hell is far away.
AY & Ala Sto Sat AIS Ml (272-2, aSst Pent, we 5) saaDh kai sang eehaa oohaa suhaylaa. In the Company of the Holy, one is happy here and hereafter.
HoAfa faess Ife HS Il (272-2, west Het, He 5) saaDhsang bichhurat har maylaa. In the Company of the Holy, the separated ones are reunited with the Lord.
a fee Aet eo u|S Il (272-3, west Ant, He 5) jo ichhai so-ee fal paavai. The fruits of one's desires are obtained.
A oh Afar 3 fase AS | (272-3, aGst ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang na birthaa jaavai. In the Company of the Holy, no one goes empty-handed.
urTsgoH Ara fee SA ll (272-3, wet menect, He 5) paarbarahm saaDh rid basai. The Supreme Lord God dwells in the hearts of the Holy.
soa Gud AT Afs FA Ell (272-3, Test HUNT, He 5) naanak uDhrai saaDh sun rasai. ||6|| O Nanak, listening to the sweet words of the Holy, one is saved. ||6]|
AG & Af HOS dfs SS Il (272-4, aBst Ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang sun-o har naa-o. In the Company of the Holy, listen to the Name of the Lord.
Wanfa dfs X To WS Il (272-4, west Ment, He 5) saaDhsang har kay gun gaa-o. In the Company of the Holy, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
A & Afar 3 He S faAd I (272-4, ast Ment, HE 5) saaDh kai sang na man tay bisrai. In the Company of the Holy, do not forget Him from your mind.
AUHfa Aaud fSAss il (272-5, aGst Ment, He 5) saaDhsang sarpar nistarai. In the Company of the Holy, you shall surely be saved.
AG & Afar wat ys Hor il (272-5, aSst ment, He 5) saaDh kai sang lagai parabh meethaa. In the Company of the Holy, God seems very sweet.
Ag & Afar wife we Ste il (272-5, ast Mn, Hs 5) saaDhoo kai sang ghat ghat deethaa. In the Company of the Holy, He is seen in each and every heart.
AUAfa se vtfamrarct il (272-6, aGst Met, He 5) saaDhsang bha-ay aagi-aakaaree. In the Company of the Holy, we become obedient to the Lord.
AuAfa afs set IHS Il (272-6, aGst HUNT, He 5) saaDhsang gat bha-ee hamaaree. In the Company of the Holy, we obtain the state of salvation.
ATG ot Afar fue Afs da il (272-6, ast Ment, H: 5) saaDh kai sang mitay sabh rog. In the Company of the Holy, all diseases are cured.
XN 90s
ood AY ¥c¢ AAT IDIl (272-7, aGSt Aunt, Hs 5) naanak saaDh bhaytay sanjog. ||7]|| O Nanak, one meets with the Holy, by highest destiny. ||7]||
AT at HfgHT Se B ASls Il (272-7, west HencH, He 5) saaDh kee mahimaa bayd na jaaneh. The glory of the Holy people is not known to the Vedas.
AS Hots Sa" aftmrafs i (272-7, ast Aen, He 5) jaytaa suneh taytaa bakhi-aaneh. They can describe only what they have heard.
A at Cunt fsa Te Ss Efe il (272-7, aSat Mnist, ve 5) saaDh kee upmaa tihu gun tay door. The greatness of the Holy people is beyond the three qualities.
AG at Sunt sot sours il (272-8, ast ment, He 5) saaDh kee upmaa rahee bharpoor. The greatness of the Holy people is all-pervading.
ATG ot Ast at ardt wis Il (272-8, ast ment, Hs 5) saaDh kee sobhaa kaa naahee ant. The glory of the Holy people has no limit.
ATG ot AST AST Anis | (272-8, ast Ment, H: 5) saaDh kee sobhaa sadaa bay-ant. The glory of the Holy people is infinite and eternal.
AY at Ast Ss Ss Set il 272-9, ast mnt, we 5) saaDh kee sobhaa ooch tay oochee. The glory of the Holy people is the highest of the high.
AY ot Ast He S Het Ml (272-9, aeat mnt, we 5) saaDh kee sobhaa mooch tay moochee. The glory of the Holy people is the greatest of the great.
ATG ot Ast ATG afe mire i (272-9, aGst meet, He 5) saaDh kee sobhaa saaDh ban aa-ee. The glory of the Holy people is theirs alone;
Soa AT ys FeO SET MCUDI (272-10, Test Pent, He 5) naanak saaDh parabh bhayd na bhaa-ee. ||8]|7]|| O Nanak, there is no difference between the Holy people and God. ||8]|7||
HS Il (272-10)
salok. Shalok:
Hfs Are Hf ATT ALE Il (272-10, west HT, He 5) man saachaa mukh saachaa so-ay. The True One is on his mind, and the True One is upon his lips.
wed & Ud San fas afe Il (272-10, aGst Hes, He 5) avar na paykhai aykas bin ko-ay. He sees only the One.
soe fea see Fon fomrat df NA (272-11, 7st Mo, He 5) naanak ih lachhan barahm gi-aanee ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, these are the qualities of the God-conscious being. ||1]|
MAeuet I (272-11)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
Yo fomirat Het fegsu i (272-11, west Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sadaa nirlayp. The God-conscious being is always unattached,
AA AG fs AHS MSU Il (272-11, ast Met, He 5) jaisay jal meh kamal alayp. as the lotus in the water remains detached.
gon famrot Het fesse il (272-12, wet ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sadaa nirdokh. The God-conscious being is always unstained,
AA Ag Asa AE AY ll (272-12, west Mnet, we 5) jaisay soor sarab ka-o sokh. like the sun, which gives its comfort and warmth to all.
gan famret & ferfe Aarfs il (272-12, a@et mnt, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai darisat samaan. The God-conscious being looks upon all alike,
AA TH da a ord 3h uss Il (272-13, agst ANT, He 5) jaisay raaj rank ka-o laagai tul pavaan. like the wind, which blows equally upon the king and the poor beggar.
qoH famrat & Utsy Sa Il (272-13, aSat Mens, ue 5) barahm gi-aanee kai Dheeraj ayk. The God-conscious being has a steady patience,
faA@ ano aG de a Fes Su i (272-13, west Mn, we 5) ji-o basuDhaa ko-oo khodai ko-oo chandan layp. like the earth, which is dug up by one, and anointed with sandal paste by another.
gan famrot a fed ae i 272-14, a@st mnt, ue 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa ihai gunaa-o. This is the quality of the God-conscious being:
aoa fA usa a AIA ASE IA (272-14, aCst Ment, He 5) naanak ji-o paavak kaa sahj subhaa-o. ||1]| O Nanak, his inherent nature is like a warming fire. ||1]|
¥oH fomirat fasHe 3 fedHer Il (272-15, aGst ment, us 5) barahm gi-aanee nirmal tay nirmalaa. The God-conscious being is the purest of the pure;
AA HG O Bal AS Il (272-15, west Mest, He 5) jaisay mail na laagai jalaa. filth does not stick to water.
gan famret & Hfs af yara Il (272-15, aGet Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai man ho-ay pargaas. The God-conscious being's mind is enlightened,
AA Ud Cufe nrary I (272-16, Gat Rent, v3 5) jaisay Dhar oopar aakaas. like the sky above the earth.
Won ferrat & fg AZ ANTS I (272-16, ast PHT, HE 5) barahm gi-aanee kai mitar satar samaan. To the God-conscious being, friend and foe are the same.
gan famrat & ordt mifsure il (272-16, rat ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai naahee abhimaan. The God-conscious being has no egotistical pride.
gon fomrat Ba 3 Sa it (272-17, ast Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee ooch tay oochaa. The God-conscious being is the highest of the high.
Hfs mus J AS S Ste Il (272-17, aSst ment, He 5) man apnai hai sabh tay neechaa. Within his own mind, he is the most humble of all.
YoH fomrat A AS SS ll (272-17, aSat Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee say jan bha-ay. They alone become God-conscious beings,
Sod fas ys wif ase ii (272-17, west Ment, us 5) naanak jin parabh aap karay-i. ||2| | O Nanak, whom God Himself makes so. ||2]|
Yo fomirat Aare at Star il (272-18, aGst Ment, us 5) barahm gi-aanee sagal kee reenaa. The God-conscious being is the dust of all.
MTSH FA YH famarat Star il (272-18, ast ment, us 5) aatam ras barahm gi-aanee cheenaa. The God-conscious being knows the nature of the soul.
gon fomrat ot As Gufs ufemr i (272-18, ast ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kee sabh oopar ma-i-aa. The God-conscious being shows kindness to all.
¥oH fomrat 3 ae aa @ Sten | (272-19, aGst Menst, we 5) barahm gi-aanee tay kachh buraa na bha-i-aa. No evil comes from the God-conscious being.
¥oH fomrat Het AHSTAT Il (272-19, west Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sadaa samadrasee. The God-conscious being is always impartial.
ust 293 Wan famirst at fenfe nifts aeAt i (273-1, aGat manet, ue 5)
barahm gi-aanee kee darisat amrit barsee. Nectar rains down from the glance of the God-conscious being.
gan famrat das 3 HAS Il (273-1, aGat mens, ve 5) barahm gi-aanee banDhan tay muktaa. The God-conscious being is free from entanglements.
go fomirat at fegHes AAS Il (273-1, Test Ment, vs 5) barahm gi-aanee kee nirmal jugtaa. The lifestyle of the God-conscious being is spotlessly pure.
gan famret ar sxe fare i (273-2, west most, Hs 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa bhojan gi-aan. Spiritual wisdom is the food of the God-conscious being.
SOA YIH famirst at YH fms 3 (273-2, ast Ment, us 5) naanak barahm gi-aanee kaa barahm Dhi-aan. ||3]| O Nanak, the God-conscious being is absorbed in God's meditation. ||3]|
Won fomrat fa Gufs oA il (273-3, aSst mest, He 5) barahm gi-aanee ayk oopar aas. The God-conscious being centers his hopes on the One alone.
Ao famirat at Sot FASTA Il (273-3, aGSt Ment, vs 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa nahee binaas. The God-conscious being shall never perish.
¥oH famrat & ardtat AHI I (273-3, aBat Mnet, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai gareebee samaahaa. The God-conscious being is steeped in humility.
¥oH fomrat usGuara Bxrat il (273-4, aGst menset, ue 5) barahm gi-aanee par-upkaar omaahaa. The God-conscious being delights in doing good to others.
gan famret & odt dar i (273-4, a@st ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai naahee DhanDhaa. The God-conscious being has no worldly entanglements.
gon famrat B wes Fe Il (273-4, aSst Menect, ue 5) barahm gi-aanee lay Dhaavat banDhaa. The God-conscious being holds his wandering mind under control.
gan fomret & df A Ser Il (273-5, at mnt, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai ho-ay so bhalaa. The God-conscious being acts in the common good.
YoH fomrat HSS SS Il (273-5, TGat Ment, we 5) barahm gi-aanee sufal falaa. The God-conscious being blossoms in fruitfulness.
gan famrat Afar Aas Burg i) (273-5, aGet went, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sang sagal uDhaar. In the Company of the God-conscious being, all are saved.
SSA FIN farnrat AU Aas AAT Igil (273-6, aCat MnIt, He 5) naanak barahm gi-aanee japai sagal sansaar. ||4|| O Nanak, through the God-conscious being, the whole world meditates on God. ||4||
gan famret & Sa Fa i (273-6, ast Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai aykai rang. The God-conscious being loves the One Lord alone.
gan fomret & SA Us Aa il (273-6, west Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai basai parabh sang. The God-conscious being dwells with God.
qon famrot & OM rags I (273-7, aSat ment, Hs 5) barahm gi-aanee kai naam aaDhaar. The God-conscious being takes the Naam as his Support.
gan famrot & OU UTS Il (273-7, Tat Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai naam parvaar. The God-conscious being has the Naam as his Family.
¥oH fomrat Het AE AAS I (273-7, TeSt Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sadaa sad jaagat. The God-conscious being is awake and aware, forever and ever.
gan famrat ndafa fara i 273-8, a@at pant, Hs 5) barahm gi-aanee aha‘-buDh ti-aagat. The God-conscious being renounces his proud ego.
gan famrot & Hfs usHTSE I (273-8, aS Met, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai man parmaanand. In the mind of the God-conscious being, there is supreme bliss.
gon fomret & whe HET Se Il (273-8, aGzt Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai ghar sadaa anand. In the home of the God-conscious being, there is everlasting bliss.
¥oH fomrat AY Ade fSeA Il (273-9, west Het, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sukh sahj nivaas. The God-conscious being dwells in peaceful ease.
SOA YIH famirst at odt FASTA Ul (273-9, aGat Ment, He 5) naanak barahm gi-aanee kaa nahee binaas. ||5]|| O Nanak, the God-conscious being shall never perish. ||5||
gan fomrat {IH a FST I (273-10, aSat Hest, He 5) barahm gi-aanee barahm kaa baytaa. The God-conscious being knows God.
Wan famrat Sa Afar TS" i (273-10, ast ent, vz 5) barahm gi-aanee ayk sang haytaa. The God-conscious being is in love with the One alone.
qoH famrat & dfe ofFs i (273-10, ret Pent, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai ho-ay achint. The God-conscious being is carefree.
gan famrat a fess HS Il (273-10, aGat ent, Hs 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa nirmal mant. Pure are the Teachings of the God-conscious being.
gon fomret fan ad ys vrfir il (273-11, at mnset, ne 5) barahm gi-aanee jis karai parabh aap. The God-conscious being is made so by God Himself.
Yo fomrat at as UTS | (273-11, aGSt Mensst, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa bad partaap. The God-conscious being is gloriously great.
gon fomret a eaH assrait ure Il (273-12, ast Menset, 8 5)
barahm gi-aanee kaa daras badbhaagee paa-ee-ai.
The Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the God-conscious being, is obtained by great good fortune.
gan famret a sfes af vreat i (273-12, a@et ment, ue 5) barahm gi-aanee ka-o bal bal jaa-ee-ai. To the God-conscious being, I make my life a sacrifice.
gon famret a dafo HIT Il (273-12, tat Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee ka-o khojeh mahaysur. The God-conscious being is sought by the great god Shiva.
SSA YIH famirst uirfy USHAT NEM (273-13, west Mert, He 5) naanak barahm gi-aanee aap parmaysur. ||6|| O Nanak, the God-conscious being is Himself the Supreme Lord God. ||6] |
¥oH fomrat at atHfs ofs il (273-13, aGat ment, ve 5) barahm gi-aanee kee keemat naahi. The God-conscious being cannot be appraised.
gan famrot & Aare Ho Hf I (273-13, weet PNIt, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kai sagal man maahi. The God-conscious being has all within his mind.
gan famret a ae AS SE Il (273-14, aCet mnt, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa ka-un jaanai bhayd. Who can know the mystery of the God-conscious being?
Yo fomrat AS Aet MSA Il (273-14, Test MenIst, He 5) barahm gi-aanee ka-o sadaa adays. Forever bow to the God-conscious being.
qoH fomirat ot afemr @ ae mromgrg i (273-15, aGst Ment, Hs 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa kathi-aa na jaa-ay aDhaakh-yar. The God-conscious being cannot be described in words.
YoH fomrat Ada aT SAT Il (273-15, ast Ment, vs 5) barahm gi-aanee sarab kaa thaakur. The God-conscious being is the Lord and Master of all.
gan famrot at fufs aba gars Il (273-15, tat ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kee mit ka-un bakhaanai. Who can describe the limits of the God-conscious being?
gan famrot at afS Fon farrat AS Il (273-16, aGzt Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kee gat barahm gi-aanee jaanai. Only the God-conscious being can know the state of the God-conscious being.
Aan famrat a uiZ o UTE Il (273-16, aS Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa ant na paar. The God-conscious being has no end or limitation.
SSA YIH famirst AF AeT SHAS IDI (273-16, Test Ment, He 5) naanak barahm gi-aanee ka-o sadaa namaskaar. || 7] | O Nanak, to the God-conscious being, bow forever in reverence. ||7| |
¥oH fomrat AS fAfe at ATS I (273-17, TES Pet, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sabh sarisat kaa kartaa. The God-conscious being is the Creator of all the world.
gon fomrot He te odt HES I (273-17, aGHt Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee sad jeevai nahee martaa. The God-conscious being lives forever, and does not die.
goH fomrat Hats wats Abt ar ast il (273-18, aeat Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee mukat jugat jee-a kaa daataa. The God-conscious being is the Giver of the way of liberation of the soul.
Won fomrat use use faarst it (273-18, ret ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee pooran purakh biDhaataa. The God-conscious being is the Perfect Supreme Being, who orchestrates all.
YoH fomirat visa a STE ll (273-19, aGat Pest, He 5) barahm gi-aanee anaath kaa naath. The God-conscious being is the helper of the helpless.
gon fomrat o AS Gufs IE i (273-19, aGst Ment, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa sabh oopar haath. The God-conscious being extends his hand to all.
YoH famirat at Aas MATT | (273-19, aGat menrst, He 5) barahm gi-aanee kaa sagal akaar. The God-conscious being owns the entire creation.
UST 2OY
gan famrat wrfu fedarg i (274-1, a@at mens, He 5) barahm gi-aanee aap nirankaar. The God-conscious being is himself the Formless Lord.
gan fomrot at Hat gon farrst sat Wt (274-1, ast ment, 8 5) barahm gi-aanee kee sobhaa barahm gi-aanee banee. The glory of the God-conscious being belongs to the God-conscious being alone.
SOA YIH famirst Aga at TSt WCU (274-1, TST Ment, us 5)
naanak barahm gi-aanee sarab kaa Dhanee. ||8]|8]| O Nanak, the God-conscious being is the Lord of all. ||8]|8]|
HS Il (274-2)
salok. Shalok:
fs os FH uists OH I (274-2, aGst Mnit, He 5) ur Dhaarai jo antar naam. One who enshrines the Naam within the heart,
Hae H Ue SaeS Il (274-2, aESt Ment, He 5) sarab mai paykhai bhagvaan. who sees the Lord God in all,
foHy fon SaxT SHAS Il (274-2, ast Aunt, He 5) nimakh nimakh thaakur namaskaarai. who, each and every moment, bows in reverence to the Lord Master
Soa GJ mus Aas feAsrd |AUl (274-3, Tet PENH, He 5) naanak oh apras sagal nistaarai. ||1]|| - O Nanak, such a one is the true 'touch-nothing Saint', who emancipates everyone.
1111] MAeUet Il (274-3)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
fiufemir ardt TAS UPA Il (274-3, ast ment, He 5) mithi-aa naahee rasnaa paras. One whose tongue does not touch falsehood;
Ho Hf ulfs fade SaA Il (274-4, aGat mensst, He 5) man meh pareet niranjan daras. whose mind is filled with love for the Blessed Vision of the Pure Lord,
us fant gus Ue SF Il (274-4, ast Mot, ws 5) par tari-a roop na paykhai naytar. whose eyes do not gaze upon the beauty of others' wives,
AT at cue ASAfa IS Il (274-4, ast MNT, He 5) saaDh kee tahal satsang hayt. who serves the Holy and loves the Saints' Congregation,
TIS BAS AT at (Ser il (274-5, ACH Met, we 5) karan na sunai kaahoo kee nindaa. whose ears do not listen to slander against anyone,
AS 3 WS wun AG He I (274-5, aGat Ae, H: 5) sabh tay jaanai aapas ka-o mandaa. who deems himself to be the worst of all,
aa unte fafimr ugad i (274-5, a@at ment, He 5) gur parsaad bikhi-aa parharai. who, by Guru's Grace, renounces corruption,
Ho at SAS He S Sd Il (274-5, aGst ment, H: 5) man kee baasnaa man tay tarai. who banishes the mind's evil desires from his mind,
feet fas us ty 3 JIT Il (274-6, aSst mene, ue 5) indree jit panch dokh tay rahat. who conquers his sexual instincts and is free of the five sinful passions
Sea ate HO A MAT MUSA MAUI (274-6, west Het, He 5) naanak kot maDhay ko aisaa apras. ||1]|| - O Nanak, among millions, there is scarcely one such 'touch-nothing Saint’
ano A fam Gufs AYAS Il (274-6, rat mnt, 8 5)
baisno so jis oopar suparsan.
The true Vaishnaav, the devotee of Vishnu, is the one with whom God is thoroughly pleased.
fana at ufenr 3 dfs fea I 274-7, aGst mnt, He 5) bisan kee maa-i-aa tay ho-ay bhinn. He dwells apart from Maya.
AGH ATS Je fEdaASH | (274-7, aSst ment, v3 5) karam karat hovai nihkaram. Performing good deeds, he does not seek rewards.
fSH SAS a fess SH Il (274-7, agst AUNT, He 5) tis baisno kaa nirmal Dharam. Spotlessly pure is the religion of such a Vaishnaav;
NT SS at fear odt ae I (274-8, wat moet, vs 5) kaahoo fal kee ichhaa nahee baachhai. he has no desire for the fruits of his labors.
aze sas atese Afar TS Il (274-8, aext Ment, He 5)
kayval bhagat keertan sang raachai.
He is absorbed in devotional worship and the singing of Kirtan, the songs of the Lord's Glory.
Ho 36 Mists frHeS Tus Il (274-8, aext Ment, He 5) man tan antar simran gopaal. Within his mind and body, he meditates in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe.
As Gufs des faaurs il (274-9, vat mnt, Hs 5) sabh oopar hovat kirpaal. He is kind to all creatures.
wif fas neds oH AUS Il (274-9, aGat nit, He 5) aap darirhai avrah naam japaavai. He holds fast to the Naam, and inspires others to chant it.
Soa GI SAS USH Als urs NMI (274-9, aSSt AUT, He 5) naanak oh baisno param gat paavai. ||2]| O Nanak, such a Vaishnaav obtains the supreme status. ||2]|
sagst saes sats a Ia Il (274-10, weet mnt, x2 5) bhag-utee bhagvant bhagat kaa rang. The true Bhagaautee, the devotee of Adi Shakti, loves the devotional worship of God.
Hae fsnirdt SAS AT Ag Il (274-10, aGst west, He 5) Sagal ti-aagai dusat kaa sang. He forsakes the company of all wicked people.
Ho 3 faa Aas SIH I (274-10, aGSt Het, He 5) man tay binsai saglaa bharam. All doubts are removed from his mind.
OS UA AS USFTH Il (274-11, ACS Met, we 5) kar poojai sagal paarbarahm. He performs devotional service to the Supreme Lord God in all.
ATGHfal ura He BS il (274-11, aGSt Mest, He 5) saaDhsang paapaa mal khovai. In the Company of the Holy, the filth of sin is washed away.
fH saGst at HPS SSH FS Il (274-11, Test Ment, ws 5) tis bhag-utee kee mat ootam hovai. The wisdom of such a Bhagaautee becomes supreme.
Saes at 20G ad fos StS I (274-12, west mnt, nH: 5) bhagvant kee tahal karai nit neet. He constantly performs the service of the Supreme Lord God.
Ho 36 mau fans udtfS Il (274-12, aGst ment, He 5) man tan arpai bisan pareet. He dedicates his mind and body to the Love of God.
dfs & vdeo fase SATS Il (274-12, aGst Ment, He 5) har kay charan hirdai basaavai. The Lotus Feet of the Lord abide in his heart.
Soa MAT SACS Ses AG urs NI (274-12, aSSt Ment, He 5) naanak aisaa bhag-utee bhagvant ka-o paavai. ||3]| O Nanak, such a Bhagaautee attains the Lord God. ||3]|
A ufss Fe Useo I (274-13, at mnt, He 5) SO pandit jo man parboDhai. He is a true Pandit, a religious scholar, who instructs his own mind.
oH BH TSH ufo AT il (274-13, west ANT, He 5) raam naam aatam meh soDhai. He searches for the Lord's Name within his own soul.
TH BH ATS GA ule Il (274-13, aGSt Ae, He 5) raam naam saar ras peevai. He drinks in the Exquisite Nectar of the Lord's Name.
Gn ufss a Guefh Aa AS I (274-14, at ment, He 5) us pandit kai updays jag jeevai. By that Pandit's teachings, the world lives.
ofa at aa fase SATS Il (274-14, west mnt, H: 5) har kee kathaa hirdai basaavai. He implants the Sermon of the Lord in his heart.
A ufss fefs afs 3 mre il (274-14, aGst meni, nH: 5) so pandit fir jon na aavai. Such a Pandit is not cast into the womb of reincarnation again.
ae uae fais gS He Il 274-15, ast mnt, Hs 5)
bayd puraan simrit boojhai mool.
He understands the fundamental essence of the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees.
AYH Hf AS MATS ll (274-15, Test Mnet, we 5) sookham meh jaanai asthool. In the unmanifest, he sees the manifest world to exist.
TJ Zo aS & Bued Il (274-15, aSst menst, ue 5) chahu varnaa ka-o day updays. He gives instruction to people of all castes and social classes.
soa CA ufss a Het mfeA ISI (274-16, west Ment, 2 5) naanak us pandit ka-o sadaa adays. ||4|| O Nanak, to such a Pandit, I bow in salutation forever. ||4||
ait HZ Asa & fore il 274-16, rest ment, He 5) beej mantar sarab ko gi-aan. The Beej Mantra, the Seed Mantra, is spiritual wisdom for everyone.
TT Fat Hfs AU AS SH I (274-16, aSst Ment, v3 5) chahu varnaa meh japai ko-oo naam. Anyone, from any class, may chant the Naam.
aA nm fA at afs ofe It (274-17, west mat, n 5) jo jo japai tis kee gat ho-ay. Whoever chants it, is emancipated.
ATGHfal ure AS APE il (274-17, aS AeNAH, He 5) saaDhsang paavai jan ko-ay. And yet, rare are those who attain it, in the Company of the Holy.
ate fasur nists Ba as Il (274-17, aGst Hen, H2 5) kar kirpaa antar ur Dhaarai. By His Grace, He enshrines it within.
UH US Hue uTag AG 3g Il (274-18, aGzt menet, He 5) pas parayt mughad paathar ka-o taarai. Even beasts, ghosts and the stone-hearted are saved.
Hag dat at mBue oH Il (274-18, aGst mot, ve 5) sarab rog kaa a-ukhad naam. The Naam is the panacea, the remedy to cure all ills.
atoms gu Hares TE WH Il (274-18, aCSt Ment, Hs 5) kali-aan roop mangal gun gaam. Singing the Glory of God is the embodiment of bliss and emancipation.
aT Fats fas 5 urehat cath il (274-19, ast ment, vs 5) kaahoo jugat kitai na paa-ee-ai Dharam. It cannot be obtained by any religious rituals.
sod fan fixe fan fefimr ofe aaft iui (274-19, a@st mnt, He 5) naanak tis milai jis likhi-aa Dhur karam. ||5|| O Nanak, he alone obtains it, whose karma is so pre-ordained. ||5||
fan & Hfs ursgqan ar fSerA Il (274-19, aGat nt, He 5) jis kai man paarbarahm kaa nivaas. One whose mind is a home for the Supreme Lord God
UST Qou
fSA & OH AS THEA Il (275-1, ast Hen, He 5) tis kaa naam sat raamdaas. - his name is truly Ram Das, the Lord's servant.
MSH TH 3H Sedt rfenr | 275-1, ast Ment, He 5) aatam raam tis nadree aa-i-aa. He comes to have the Vision of the Lord, the Supreme Soul.
aA tHse ote fats ufemr Il (275-1, weet ment, He 5) daas dasantan bhaa-ay tin paa-i-aa. Deeming himself to be the slave of the Lord's slaves, he obtains it.
He foate faate ats AS Il (275-2, aCat ment, 8 5) sadaa nikat nikat har jaan. He knows the Lord to be Ever-present, close at hand.
AH OH VIII UIST Il (275-2, ast Ment, He 5) so daas dargeh parvaan. Such a servant is honored in the Court of the Lord.
mud aA as uirfy faxgut AP Il (275-2, aGSt ANAT, He 5) apunay daas ka-o aap kirpaa karai. To His servant, He Himself shows His Mercy.
fsHq oA AG AS ASt Us Il (275-3, west ANT, He 5) tis daas ka-o sabh sojhee parai. Such a servant understands everything.
Hares Afat MSH BSA Il (275-3, weet Menet, nH 5) Sagal sang aatam udaas. Amidst all, his soul is unattached.
MAT Hats Soak THA ME (275-3, aGSt MMT, He 5) aisee jugat naanak raamdaas. ||6|| Such is the way, O Nanak, of the Lord's servant. ||6]|
ys at mrfamr nirsu fase il (275-4, aGet ment, He 5) parabh kee aagi-aa aatam hitaavai. One who, in his soul, loves the Will of God,
Hes Hats AG ATS Il (275-4, aCH Met, we 5) jeevan mukat so-oo kahaavai. is said to be Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive.
3H Jay SA GA Aa Il (275-4, a@at mnt, He 5) taisaa harakh taisaa us sog. As is joy, so is sorrow to him.
Het nse 3d odt faSa i (275-5, aGat ment, ue 5) sadaa anand tah nahee bi-og. He is in eternal bliss, and is not separated from God.
3H ASS SH Cw Het I (275-5, aGSt MNT, He 5) taisaa suvran taisee us maatee. As is gold, so is dust to him.
3m nifys SHt fg uct i 275-5, a@st ment, He 5) taisaa amrit taisee bikh khaatee. As is ambrosial nectar, so is bitter poison to him.
SAT HTS SAT mifsHTe Il (275-6, ast AUNT, He 5) taisaa maan taisaa abhimaan. As is honor, so is dishonor.
SH dq SA IHS Il (275-6, Test Het, He 5) taisaa rank taisaa raajaan. As is the beggar, so is the king.
A zgsve AST Fats I (275-6, agst Hens, A: 5) jo vartaa-ay saa-ee jugat. Whatever God ordains, that is his way.
soa Gy use adh Heo Hats IDI (275-6, west Mot, He 5) naanak oh purakh kahee-ai jeevan mukat. ||7]|| O Nanak, that being is known as Jivan Mukta. ||7||
UTIYIH A AS SS ll (275-7, aSst Ment, ve 5) paarbarahm kay saglay thaa-o. All places belong to the Supreme Lord God.
fas fas ufe oat Sar faq ae I 275-7, west Ment, He 5) jit jit ghar raakhai taisaa tin naa-o. According to the homes in which they are placed, so are His creatures named.
WM ATG ATSS AT Il (275-7, ast west, vs 5) aapay karan karaavan jog. He Himself is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
us ae Het ofo Ta Il (275-8, aGet Pent, He 5) parabh bhaavai so-ee fun hog. Whatever pleases God, ultimately comes to pass.
unfss uify dfs nes Soar il (275-8, aGat ment, H: 5) pasri-o aap ho-ay anat tarang. He Himself is All-pervading, in endless waves.
BY B AT USAIN Fa Il (275-8, aSst Menect, uz 5) lakhay na jaahi paarbarahm kay rang. The playful sport of the Supreme Lord God cannot be known.
AM Hfs ef SAT UsETA Il (275-9, aGst Het, He 5) jaisee mat day-ay taisaa pargaas. As the understanding is given, so is one enlightened.
USAIN ATS MifIsTA Il (275-9, Teat Ment, He 5) paarbarahm kartaa abinaas. The Supreme Lord God, the Creator, is eternal and everlasting.
Het Het AST SEs Il (275-9, aTSSt Ment, He 5) sadaa Sadaa sadaa da-i-aal. Forever, forever and ever, He is merciful.
fanfs fAHfs aoa se feos CIC (275-10, Test Mt, He 5)
simar simar naanak bha-ay nihaal. ||8]|9|| Remembering Him, remembering Him in meditation, O Nanak, one is blessed with ecstasy. ||8]|9||
HS Il (275-10)
salok. Shalok:
Cnsfs aafs niSa AS MIT B USS Il (275-10, Test Ment, He 5) ustat karahi anayk jan ant na paaraavaar. Many people praise the Lord. He has no end or limitation.
Sod svar yfs sot ag fafa nifsa yars A (275-11, aGSt Ment, Hs 5) naanak rachnaa parabh rachee baho biDh anik parkaar. ||1]| O Nanak, God created the creation, with its many ways and various species. ||1]|
mMAeuet I (275-11)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
aet afe FS YASH Il (275-11, west MN, we 5) ka-ee kot ho-ay poojaaree. Many millions are His devotees.
at afe ures faGarct i 275-11, test Met, He 5) ka-ee kot aachaar bi-uhaaree. Many millions perform religious rituals and worldly duties.
act afe g@ stee Sat Il (275-12, a@st ment, H: 5) ka-ee kot bha-ay tirath vaasee. Many millions become dwellers at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
aet afe ae gufs Bert il (275-12, a@xt mnt, ne 5) ka-ee kot ban bharmeh udaasee. Many millions wander as renunciates in the wilderness.
aet afe Fe A AS il (275-12, aSzt Meneet, us 5) ka-ee kot bayd kay sarotay. Many millions listen to the Vedas.
ast afe suas FS ll (275-13, west Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot tapeesur hotay. Many millions become austere penitents.
at afe nian fomre urefs Il (275-13, aGst mest, He 5) ka-ee kot aatam Dhi-aan Dhaareh. Many millions enshrine meditation within their souls.
act afe afa ofe sterafa il (275-13, a@st mast, He 5) ka-ee kot kab kaab beechaareh. Many millions of poets contemplate Him through poetry.
act afe aeso oH fomrefs i (275-14, west Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot navtan naam Dhi-aavahi. Many millions meditate on His eternally new Naam.
SSA ATS aT MZ o Urea UU (275-14, TVs Ment, v2 5) naanak kartay kaa ant na paavahi. ||1]|| O Nanak, none can find the limits of the Creator. ||1]|
act afe se nifsurat il (275-14, a@st ment, ve 5) ka-ee kot bha-ay abhimaanee. Many millions become self-centered.
aet afe nit nifamirat i (275-15, aGst ent, He 5) ka-ee kot anDh agi-aanee. Many millions are blinded by ignorance.
aet afe fagus FSg Il (275-15, west Ant, He 5) ka-ee kot kirpan kathor. Many millions are stone-hearted misers.
act afe mifsar nirsn feats il (275-15, a@st menist, ue 5) ka-ee kot abhig aatam nikor. Many millions are heartless, with dry, withered souls.
act afe ug wae a foafe il (275-15, west ment, He 5) ka-ee kot par darab ka-o hireh. Many millions steal the wealth of others.
aet afe us Tas" AST Il (275-16, TLS Ment, Hs 5) ka-ee kot par dookhnaa karahi. Many millions slander others.
aet afe ufemr AH He II (275-16, a@xt Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot maa-i-aa saram maahi. Many millions struggle in Maya.
aet afe user gus i (275-16, Gat Pent, He 5) ka-ee kot pardays bharmaahi. Many millions wander in foreign lands.
fas fas weg fs f33 ware Il (275-17, aest Ment, He 5) jit jit laavhu tit tit lagnaa. Whatever God attaches them to - with that they are engaged.
SOA ATS At WS ATS FIST MQM (275-17, Tat Hest, ne 5) naanak kartay kee jaanai kartaa rachnaa. ||2|| O Nanak, the Creator alone knows the workings of His creation. ||2]|
act afe fro vst Aaft (275-18, ast Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot siDh jatee jogee. Many millions are Siddhas, celibates and Yogis.
act afe aH IA Sait i (275-18, west Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot raajay ras bhogee. Many millions are kings, enjoying worldly pleasures.
at afe udt rau Gure il (275-18, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot pankhee sarap upaa-ay. Many millions of birds and snakes have been created.
act afe unag faou fourre i (275-18, a@st ment, He 5) ka-ee kot paathar birakh nipjaa-ay. Many millions of stones and trees have been produced.
aet afe uze uret SAS Il (275-19, aGst Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot pavan paanee baisantar. Many millions are the winds, waters and fires.
aet afe SAF HTS Il (275-19, ast Ment, Hs 5) ka-ee kot days bhoo mandal. Many millions are the countries and realms of the world.
aet afe AAAS AT SUT Il (275-19, Gat Ment, v3 5) ka-ee kot sasee-ar soor nakh-yatar. Many millions are the moons, suns and stars.
Us dE
aet afe te woe fee fafs SF i (276-1, aes moet, ne 5) ka-ee kot dayv daanav indar sir chhatar. Many millions are the demi-gods, demons and Indras, under their regal canopies.
AIS AHat nus AS OS Il (276-1, aCSt MMH, we 5) Sagal samagree apnai soot Dhaarai. He has strung the entire creation upon His thread.
sod fan fan ae fn fn fers SI (276-1, aeSt ment, He 5) naanak jis jis bhaavai tis tis nistaarai. ||3]| O Nanak, He emancipates those with whom He is pleased. ||3] |
act afe THA SHA ASA Il (276-2, ast Ment, H: 5) ka-ee kot raajas taamas saatak. Many millions abide in heated activity, slothful darkness and peaceful light.
at afe fe uae frfyfs wig AAS I (276-2, wat Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot bayd puraan simrit ar saasat. Many millions are the Vedas, Puraanas, Simritees and Shaastras.
act afe ate Iso ANE Il (276-3, Test MMH, He 5) ka-ee kot kee-ay ratan samud. Many millions are the pearls of the oceans.
wet afe sar yars AS Il (276-3, aSst Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot naanaa parkaar jant. Many millions are the beings of so many descriptions.
act afe ote fos Fe I (276-3, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot kee-ay chir jeevay. Many millions are made long-lived.
act afe fadt Ha AIS HS Il (276-4, aSst MNT, H 5) ka-ee kot giree mayr suvran theevay. Many millions of hills and mountains have been made of gold.
oet afe my feos furs I (276-4, aGat mart, He 5)
ka-ee kot jakh-y kinnar pisaach.
Many millions are the Yakhshas - the servants of the god of wealth, the Kinnars - the gods of celestial music, and the evil spirits of the Pisaach.
aet afe 33 US Aas fears il (276-4, west Pet, we 5) ka-ee kot bhoot parayt sookar marigaach. Many millions are the evil nature-spirits, ghosts, pigs and tigers.
AS 3 3d ASg 3 Efe Il (276-5, wat Mt, Hs 5) sabh tay nayrai sabhhoo tay door. He is near to all, and yet far from all;
aan wtfy mifsus stor saute sil (276-5, ast mest, He 5) naanak aap alipat rahi-aa bharpoor. ||4|| O Nanak, He Himself remains distinct, while yet pervading all. ||4]|
at afe urs & SAT I (276-5, aSat meni, He 5) ka-ee kot paataal kay vaasee. Many millions inhabit the nether regions.
act afe aaa Aaa feet il (276-6, west Met, He 5) ka-ee kot narak surag nivaasee. Many millions dwell in heaven and hell.
act afe aonfs Atefa nafs Il (276-6, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot janmeh jeeveh mareh. Many millions are born, live and die.
act afe ag Hat feats i (276-6, west ment, He 5) ka-ee kot baho jonee fireh. Many millions are reincarnated, over and over again.
act afe dos dt af il (276-7, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot baithat hee khaahi. Many millions eat while sitting at ease.
act afe wrafs afx ufs il (276-7, rest ment, He 5) ka-ee kot ghaaleh thak paahi. Many millions are exhausted by their labors.
aet afe ote ases Il (276-7, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot kee-ay Dhanvant. Many millions are created wealthy.
at afe ufemr ufo Fes i 276-7, aBet Pn, He 5) ka-ee kot maa-i-aa meh chint. Many millions are anxiously involved in Maya.
Hd AT Stal ST 3ST TT Il (276-8, aSat ment, H: 5) jah jah bhaanaa tah tah raakhay. Wherever He wills, there He keeps us.
woe AS fas ys FX TS MUll (276-8, aSst ent, us 5) naanak sabh kichh parabh kai haathay. ||5]| O Nanak, everything is in the Hands of God. ||5]|
act afe se Sarat i (276-8, west ment, nH: 5) ka-ee kot bha-ay bairaagee. Many millions become Bairaagees, who renounce the world.
aH on Afa fats fee wait Il (276-9, west ment, He 5) raam naam sang tin liv laagee. They have attached themselves to the Lord's Name.
aet afe ys a SHS I (276-9, Tat Mot, He 5) ka-ee kot parabh ka-o khojantay. Many millions are searching for God.
MISH Hfs USAIN BIS Il (276-9, Text Ment, us 5) aatam meh paarbarahm lahantay. Within their souls, they find the Supreme Lord God.
aet afe zane ys fumrr il (276-10, ast Men, He 5) ka-ee kot darsan parabh pi-aas. Many millions thirst for the Blessing of God's Darshan.
fo a@ fife ys mifaarA I (276-10, Text Ment, He 5) tin ka-o mili-o parabh abinaas. They meet with God, the Eternal.
act afe nafs ASA I (276-10, aGst ment, He 5) ka-ee kot maageh satsang. Many millions pray for the Society of the Saints.
USAIN F835 Bear Fa Il (276-11, Ast Meneet, ne 5) paarbarahm tin laagaa rang. They are imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God.
fas ag ce orf AYA Il (276-11, aeat Ment, He 5) jin ka-o ho-ay aap suparsan. Those with whom He Himself is pleased,
Sa 3 Ho Ae fs Ute il€ll (276-11, west Hest, He 5) naanak tay jan sadaa Dhan Dhan. ||6]| O Nanak, are blessed, forever blessed. ||6]|
at afe uret nig YE Il (276-11, aGst Het, He 5) ka-ee kot khaanee ar khand. Many millions are the fields of creation and the galaxies.
aet afe niarr FINS Il (276-12, at mnt, He 5) ka-ee kot akaas barahmand. Many millions are the etheric skies and the solar systems.
aet afe Je wiesrs il (276-12, aGst ment, u: 5) ka-ee kot ho-ay avtaar. Many millions are the divine incarnations.
act wats ate fares il (276-12, aGst ment, nH: 5) ka-ee jugat keeno bisthaar. In so many ways, He has unfolded Himself.
aet arg unfsG uA Il (276-13, aGst Aenst, He 5) ka-ee baar pasri-o paasaar. So many times, He has expanded His expansion.
Ret Ae fea SAAS Il (276-13, ast Ment, He 5) sadaa sadaa ik aykankaar. Forever and ever, He is the One, the One Universal Creator.
at afe até aa ofS i (276-13, aGst Aent, He 5) ka-ee kot keenay baho bhaat. Many millions are created in various forms.
XY 4
ys 3 de ys Ha AHS Il (276-13, Test PeMIt, He 5) parabh tay ho-ay parabh maahi samaat. From God they emanate, and into God they merge once again.
ST aT nis BAS AE Il (276-14, west ANT, He 5) taa kaa ant na jaanai ko-ay. His limits are not known to anyone.
nm uirfu area ys APE DI (276-14, wet Menet, He 5) aapay aap naanak parabh so-ay. ||7|| Of Himself, and by Himself, O Nanak, God exists. ||7]|
ae afe usgoH & BA Il (276-14, aext Menect, He 5) ka-ee kot paarbarahm kay daas. Many millions are the servants of the Supreme Lord God.
fo JSS MISH USAA Il (276-15, at MNT, He 5) tin hovat aatam pargaas. Their souls are enlightened.
aet afe 33 AX FS Il (276-15, west Hens, v2 5) ka-ee kot tat kay baytay. Many millions know the essence of reality.
Re fearafa Sa SF il (276-15, aSzt Ment, ue 5) Sadaa nihaarahi ayko naytaray. Their eyes gaze forever on the One alone.
act afe ant am utefs i (276-15, west Ment, He 5) ka-ee kot naam ras peeveh. Many millions drink in the essence of the Naam.
MHS SS AE Ae Tt Aleta Il (276-16, ast ment, He 5) amar bha-ay sad sad hee jeeveh. They become immortal; they live forever and ever.
at afe an ae aets il (276-16, aGst Het, 42 5) ka-ee kot naam gun gaavahi. Many millions sing the Glorious Praises of the Naam.
msH ofA Afa Hof AHS Il (276-16, aeSt Ment, He 5) aatam ras sukh sahj samaaveh. They are absorbed in intuitive peace and pleasure.
mus AS AG ATA ATA AAS Il (276-17, ast Feet, He 5) apunay jan ka-o saas saas samaaray. He remembers His servants with each and every breath.
aoa Gfe usHAT & flmrs ICIION (276-17, aBzt Ment, He 5)
naanak o-ay parmaysur kay pi-aaray. ||8]||10]| O Nanak, they are the beloveds of the Transcendent Lord God. ||8]|10]|
Hq Il (276-17)
salok. Shalok:
AIS AIS UF SAT VAT Hat AS ll (276-18, west Monet, we 5) karan kaaran parabh ayk hai doosar naahee ko-ay. God alone is the Doer of deeds - there is no other at all.
sod fen afease vfs afe Hdtofs APE NAN (276-18, agSt ReNIT, He 5)
naanak tis balihaarnai jal thal mahee-al so-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the One, who pervades the waters, the lands, the sky and all space. ||1]|
MAeUet Il (276-19)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
AIS ASS ATS AT Il (276-19, aSSt Hest, wz 5) karan karaavan karnai jog. The Doer, the Cause of causes, is potent to do anything.
a faq oe Het Ja Il (276-19, west ment, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so-ee hog. That which pleases Him, comes to pass.
fas nfs atu Barusaat Il (276-19, aGat ment, us 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa. In an instant, He creates and destroys.
UST IID
MS Odt fxs UTS | (277-1, TEST Het, He 5) ant nahee kichh paaraavaaraa. He has no end or limitation.
Jan ofs mag Joes Il (277-1, west Met, He 5) hukmay Dhaar aDhar rahaavai. By His Order, He established the earth, and He maintains it unsupported.
Jan Gun gat AHS II (277-1, aGst mnt, He 5) hukmay upjai hukam samaavai. By His Order, the world was created; by His Order, it shall merge again into Him.
gon Su ate fasars Il (277-1, aGat Monit, HE 5) hukmay ooch neech bi-uhaar. By His Order, one's occupation is high or low.
Jan nifsax Jat UTaTS | (277-2, Test Ment, 2 5) hukmay anik rang parkaar. By His Order, there are so many colors and forms.
afte afs fa must efsniret i (277-2, aGst mast, He 5) kar kar daykhai apnee vadi-aa-ee. Having created the Creation, He beholds His own greatness.
Soa AS Hfs Soni ANTE UA (277-2, Test Fen, HE 5)
naanak sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1] | O Nanak, He is pervading in all. ||1]|
Us ee HOY ats urs Il (277-3, aext Menect, He 5) parabh bhaavai maanukh gat paavai. If it pleases God, one attains salvation.
Us eS ST urag SIS Il (277-3, TSS Ment, He 5) parabh bhaavai taa paathar taraavai. If it pleases God, then even stones can swim.
us se fag ATA S TS Il (277-3, west Men, He 5) parabh bhaavai bin saas tay raakhai. If it pleases God, the body is preserved, even without the breath of life.
ys we ST ofe TE TS Il (277-3, ast mene, ue 5) parabh bhaavai taa har gun bhaakhai. If it pleases God, then one chants the Lord's Glorious Praises.
ys xe ST ufss Curd Il (277-4, wat mnt, ne 5) parabh bhaavai taa patit uDhaarai. If it pleases God, then even sinners are saved.
wif ad nrue sted il (277-4, a@et ment, He 5) aap karai aapan beechaarai. He Himself acts, and He Himself contemplates.
eo fafoor ar mrfy AnMit il (277-4, west meniat, He 5) duhaa siri-aa kaa aap su-aamee. He Himself is the Master of both worlds.
a@ faa nisaemit il (277-5, aGst ment, He 5) khaylai bigsai antarjaamee. He plays and He enjoys; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
A Ste A ATS ATS Il (277-5, west Hens, He 5) jo bhaavai so kaar karaavai. As He wills, He causes actions to be done.
Sa feAct neg F wis QM (277-5, ast Ment, He 5) naanak daristee avar na aavai. ||2|| Nanak sees no other than Him. ||2||
ad Hou 3 foo dfe nre il (277-6, aGat ment, He 5) kaho maanukh tay ki-aa ho-ay aavai. Tell me - what can a mere mortal do?
A faq ae Het ATS Il (277-6, Test MNT, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karaavai. Whatever pleases God is what He causes us to do.
fen a ofa off a AS foe SE Il (277-6, ast Mot, He 5) is kai haath ho-ay taa sabh kichh lay-ay. If it were in our hands, we would grab up everything.
a fan ave Het aefe I (277-6, west Ment, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karay-i. Whatever pleases God - that is what He does.
wones fatter ufo ge Il (277-7, aGst Ment, He 5) anjaanat bikhi-aa meh rachai. Through ignorance, people are engrossed in corruption.
A Wes Mus Mmy Be Il (277-7, aeSt Het, He 5) jay jaanat aapan aap bachai. If they knew better, they would save themselves.
SoH ger ee feta we Il (277-7, ast mnt, 3 5) bharmay bhoolaa dah dis Dhaavai. Deluded by doubt, they wander around in the ten directions.
fony uta ofa ae fefs mre il (277-8, aGst PNT, He 5)
nimakh maahi chaar kunt fir aavai.
In an instant, their minds go around the four corners of the world and come back again.
ate fasu fan must sats efe i 277-8, rest mnt, v2 5)
kar kirpaa jis apnee bhagat day-ay. Those whom the Lord mercifully blesses with His devotional worship
SOA SAS OTH HOLE ISI (277-8, Test Ment, He 5) naanak tay jan naam milay-ay. ||3]| - O Nanak, they are absorbed into the Naam. ||3]|
fas ufo ote ate AS TH Il (277-9, ast AenIH, He 5) khin meh neech keet ka-o raaj. In an instant, the lowly worm is transformed into a king.
UTSYIH ada (SSA Il (277-9, ast Pent, vs 5) paarbarahm gareeb nivaaj. The Supreme Lord God is the Protector of the humble.
Wo fenfe ag 3 nS Il (277-9, ASH PH, He 5) jaa kaa darisat kachhoo na aavai. Even one who has never been seen at all,
fsH 33am ed fe yes I (277-10, aSSt Ren, He 5) tis tatkaal dah dis paragtaavai. becomes instantly famous in the ten directions.
WT ag nust ad SUAIA I (277-10, aGst ment, He 5) jaa ka-o apunee karai bakhsees. And that one upon whom He bestows His blessings
St aT Bu o Ts AeA Il (277-10, ast Ment, 4: 5) taa kaa laykhaa na ganai jagdees. - the Lord of the world does not hold him to his account.
A€ fitz As fsn at HA I 277-11, west Mont, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tis kee raas. Soul and body are all His property.
uffe ufe use FIN YIA Il (277-11, Test Hest, v2 5) ghat ghat pooran barahm pargaas. Each and every heart is illuminated by the Perfect Lord God.
must Fes mifu garet il (277-11, west Hee, He 5) apnee banat aap banaa-ee. He Himself fashioned His own handiwork.
Soa Ate Sf gash Sil (277-12, asst MNT, 4: 5) naanak jeevai daykh badaa-ee. ||4|| Nanak lives by beholding His greatness. ||4||
fen a ae ad fA TS Il (277-12, west moni, He 5) is kaa bal naahee is haath. There is no power in the hands of mortal beings;
Ads ASH AST A FE Il (277-12, ast Het, v2 5) karan karaavan sarab ko naath. the Doer, the Cause of causes is the Lord of all.
mfemirardt sus AS il (277-13, ast Ment, He 5) aagi-aakaaree bapuraa jee-o. The helpless beings are subject to His Command.
a faq oe et sfo aE i (277-13, aGst Mot, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so-ee fun thee-o. That which pleases Him, ultimately comes to pass.
aag Gu ate ufo SA Il (277-13, west Mat, He 5) kabhoo ooch neech meh basai. Sometimes, they abide in exaltation; sometimes, they are depressed.
RAT Aa Tee Sar TA ll (277-13, Sst Mnect, we 5) kabhoo sog harakh rang hasai. Sometimes, they are sad, and sometimes they laugh with joy and delight.
aad fee fee faGorg il (277-14, west ment, He 5) kabhoo nind chind bi-uhaar. Sometimes, they are occupied with slander and anxiety.
aay Ss morn ules Il 277-14, ast ment, He 5)
kabhoo oobh akaas pa-i-aal.
Sometimes, they are high in the Akaashic Ethers, sometimes in the nether regions of the underworld.
aay FS" FIN sas il 277-14, aGat ment, us 5) kabhoo baytaa barahm beechaar. Sometimes, they know the contemplation of God.
aaa mify fHoresss MUI (277-15, aBSt MIA, Hs 5) naanak aap milaavanhaar. ||5|| O Nanak, God Himself unites them with Himself. ||5]|
aay feats ad ag StS I (277-15, ast Mn, 8 5) kabhoo nirat karai baho bhaat. Sometimes, they dance in various ways.
aag Afe ad fea aS I 277-15, west MN, He 5) kabhoo so-ay rahai din raat. Sometimes, they remain asleep day and night.
TAT HIT AT fAeIH Il (277-15, TSI Mensa, v3 5) kabhoo mahaa kroDh bikraal. Sometimes, they are awesome, in terrible rage.
Ta AGA at FT TSS Il (277-16, aCat Mt, ws 5) kabahoo™ sarab kee hot ravaal. Sometimes, they are the dust of the feet of all.
aay dfs ad aS TA Il (277-16, Tat Ment, v3 5) kabhoo ho-ay bahai bad raajaa. Sometimes, they sit as great kings.
AAT SUS StS A AMA Il (277-16, aEat HensAt, He 5) kabahu bhaykhaaree neech kaa saajaa. Sometimes, they wear the coat of a lowly beggar.
aay nuatefs Hfs wire il (277-17, ast ment, Hs 5) kabhoo apkeerat meh aavai. Sometimes, they come to have evil reputations.
TAT FH FH ATS Il (277-17, St Mens, v3 5) kabhoo bhalaa bhalaa kahaavai. Sometimes, they are known as very, very good.
faG ys ae fae ct ad It (277-17, aGat mn, Hs 5) ji-o parabh raakhai tiv hee rahai. As God keeps them, so they remain.
Gs yAte Soa AY Ad Well (277-17, aSat Mant, ve 5) gur parsaad naanak sach kahai. ||6] | By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, the Truth is told. ||6]|
aag dfs ufsy as Tes I (277-18, aes MN, we 5) kabhoo ho-ay pandit karay bakh-yaan. Sometimes, as scholars, they deliver lectures.
aag Hearst wre fire il (277-18, 7est Pt, He 5) kabhoo moniDhaaree laavai Dhi-aan. Sometimes, they hold to silence in deep meditation.
aay se Stee fenare Il (277-18, ast Pent, He 5) kabhoo tat tirath isnaan. Sometimes, they take cleansing baths at places of pilgrimage.
aad fro vfoe yfe ferrs il (277-19, rest ment, He 5) kabhoo siDh saaDhik mukh gi-aan. Sometimes, as Siddhas or seekers, they impart spiritual wisdom.
aag ate sats usa dfs Aber it (277-19, ret mat, ws 5) kabhoo keet hasat patang ho-ay jee-aa. Sometimes, they becomes worms, elephants, or moths.
nifea afs SoH Sarr I (277-19, aGst ment, He 5) anik jon bharmai bharmee-aa. They may wander and roam through countless incarnations.
UST Qdote
orer gu fA Araft fears i (278-1, aSet Pet, He 5) naanaa roop ji-o savaagee dikhaavai. In various costumes, like actors, they appear.
fa@ ys are fae Sas I (278-1, Text Meet, He 5) ji-o parabh bhaavai tivai nachaavai. As it pleases God, they dance.
a faq ave Het SE I (278-1, aGat ANT, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so-ee ho-ay. Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass.
SSA VA nie F AE WOU (278-2, aCat Mn, vs 5) naanak doojaa avar na ko-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, there is no other at all. ||7]|
aag AUnats feg urs il (278-2, 7eat ment, Hs 5) kabhoo saaDhsangat ih paavai. Sometimes, this being attains the Company of the Holy.
Gn umes 3 dats 3 MIS I (278-2, aGSt ANT, HE 5) us asthaan tay bahur na aavai. From that place, he does not have to come back again.
nists df famrs udarA Il (278-3, agst ANT, He 5) antar ho-ay gi-aan pargaas. The light of spiritual wisdom dawns within.
CA MAES a Sot ASA II (278-3, TeSt FeNIT, He 5) us asthaan kaa nahee binaas. That place does not perish.
Ho 30 of aS fea df il (278-3, west HenIt, He 5) man tan naam ratay ik rang.
The mind and body are imbued with the Love of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
Ae SAfs usqoH & Afar il (278-4, aGat ent, we 5) sadaa baseh paarbarahm kai sang. He dwells forever with the Supreme Lord God.
fag Ae ufo Ae wefe erat Il (278-4, aGat Mnist, He 5) ji-o jal meh jal aa-ay khataanaa. As water comes to blend with water,
fs Ast Af AfS MTs I (278-4, west NT, He 5) ti-o jotee sang jot samaanaa. his light blends into the Light.
fife ae area ure faATH II (278-5, west Ment, He 5) mit ga-ay gavan paa-ay bisraam. Reincarnation is ended, and eternal peace is found.
SSA US A AS ATA] UCUAUI (278-5, TSH Mest, ue 5) naanak parabh kai sad kurbaan. ||8||11]|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to God. ||8]|11]|
HS Il (278-5)
salok. Shalok:
Hut aA HAAS wimg feetfa 3B Il (278-5, west Met, He 5) sukhee basai maskeenee-aa aap nivaar talay. The humble beings abide in peace; subduing egotism, they are meek.
as aS ndardor soa sata TS WAU (278-6, aSat went, ve 5) baday baday aha‘kaaree-aa naanak garab galay. ||1]| The very proud and arrogant persons, O Nanak, are consumed by their own pride.
[111] MAeUet Il (278-6)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
fan a nists oH nifsrre Il (278-6, west nT, He 5) jis kai antar raaj abhimaan. One who has the pride of power within,
AH adaust Ges AMIS Il (278-7, aSst wast, He 5) SO narakpaatee hovat su-aan. Shall dwell in hell, and become a dog.
A ATS H AASSS Il (278-7, aGSt Hest, v2 5) jo jaanai mai jobanvant. One who deems himself to have the beauty of youth,
A des fanet at AZ Il (278-7, aGat went, He 5) so hovat bistaa kaa jant. Shall become a maggot in manure.
WTUA AG AGHSS ATS Il (278-8, ast Hest, v2 5) aapas ka-o karamvant kahaavai. One who claims to act virtuously,
Aofy He ag Afs FHS I (278-8, Tat Ment, He 5) janam marai baho jon bharmaavai. Shall live and die, wandering through countless reincarnations.
Ua Sf a HAT TH Il (278-8, ast Ment, vs 5) Dhan bhoom kaa jo karai gumaan. One who takes pride in wealth and lands
A Hay nite nifamire il (278-8, Gat Rent, He 5) so moorakh anDhaa agi-aan. is a fool, blind and ignorant.
af fasur fan & fose adtet sare il (278-9, a@st ment, He 5) kar kirpaa jis kai hirdai gareebee basaavai. One whose heart is mercifully blessed with abiding humility,
Soa Sto HAT Ta AY UTS AU (278-9, aGat Met, He 5) naanak eehaa mukat aagai sukh paavai. ||1]| O Nanak, is liberated here, and obtains peace hereafter. ||1]|
Uses afe af aaa] Il (278-10, aGst ment, H: 5) Dhanvantaa ho-ay kar garbaavai. One who becomes wealthy and takes pride in it
fge mfe ag Afar o AS I (278-10, Tat Ment, He 5) tarin samaan kachh sang na jaavai. - not even a piece of straw shall go along with him.
Ug BHAT HOY Cufs AT mA Il (278-10, ast PENIAt, He 5) baho laskar maanukh oopar karay aas. He may place his hopes on a large army of men,
us stsfe at at af fear Il (278-11, wget mnt, He 5) pal bheetar taa kaa ho-ay binaas. but he shall vanish in an instant.
AS 3 MM AS FGSS Il (278-11, aSat Ment, ne 5) sabh tay aap jaanai balvant. One who deems himself to be the strongest of all,
fas ufo df& afte SANs I (278-11, aGst ment, He 5) khin meh ho-ay jaa-ay bhasmant. in an instant, shall be reduced to ashes.
fan o ge ify nidardt il (278-12, aGst ment, He 5) kisai na badai aap aha™kaaree. One who thinks of no one else except his own prideful self
UdH ote SH Ad WMT Il (278-12, Test Ment, He 5) Dharam raa-ay tis karay khu-aaree. - the Righteous Judge of Dharma shall expose his disgrace.
ae une at ar fixe mifsre i (278-12, a@at menist, Hs 5) gur parsaad jaa kaa mitai abhimaan. One who, by Guru's Grace, eliminates his ego,
H HO SOA UIAIT UGS IlQIl (278-12, ASST Aunt, He 5) So jan naanak dargeh parvaan. ||2|| O Nanak, becomes acceptable in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
ate AGH ad IE WS Il (278-13, agst Ant, He 5) kot karam karai ha-o Dhaaray. If someone does millions of good deeds, while acting in ego,
AM ure war fase it (278-13, a@at ment, Hs 5) saram paavai saglay birthaaray. he shall incur only trouble; all this is in vain.
mifsx suffor ad mdars ll (278-13, 7ext Ment, He 5) anik tapasi-aa karay aha™kaar. If someone performs great penance, while acting in selfishness and conceit,
oda Ada feta fefs ness il (278-14, aGat mnist, He 5) narak surag fir fir avtaar. he shall be reincarnated into heaven and hell, over and over again.
nifoa Ase afe mTSH Sdt BS Il (278-14, west Mrenect, ne 5) anik jatan kar aatam nahee darvai. He makes all sorts of efforts, but his soul is still not softened
dfs ITT AT AA Te Il (278-15, ast ent, He 5) har dargeh kaho kaisay gavai. - how can he go to the Court of the Lord?
WTUA AG A IG ATS Il (278-15, aSst Hust, Hz 5) aapas ka-o jo bhalaa kahaavai. One who calls himself good
fsnfs soret faafe o mire Il (278-15, west Ment, He 5) tiseh bhalaa-ee nikat na aavai. - goodness shall not draw near him.
Hag at 3s AT aT HO TE Il (278-15, Test HUNT, He 5) sarab kee rayn jaa kaa man ho-ay. One whose mind is the dust of all
aT soa St at foanes ALS ISI (278-16, ast ANT, He 5) kaho naanak taa kee nirmal so-ay. ||3]| - says Nanak, his reputation is spotlessly pure. ||3]|
Wa SI WS HS Ss aE AE Il (278-16, aGst Ment, us 5) jab lag jaanai mujh tay kachh ho-ay. As long as someone thinks that he is the one who acts,
3a fen a AY odt afF Il (278-16, aGst Mot, He 5) tab is ka-o sukh naahee ko-ay. he shall have no peace.
aa fea We H fas AIST Il (278-17, ast HenIT, He 5) jab ih jaanai mai kichh kartaa. As long as this mortal thinks that he is the one who does things,
3a Bd Tes rfs Hfs feast il (278-17, west ANH, He 5) tab lag garabh jon meh firtaa. he shall wander in reincarnation through the womb.
Wa Os AS Fat HTS lt 278-17, Sst Mn, we 5) jab Dhaarai ko-oo bairee meet. As long as he considers one an enemy, and another a friend,
3a Sd fSdsse Sst BMS il (278-18, ast Mnist, He 5) tab lag nihchal naahee cheet. his mind shall not come to rest.
AG Bd HI Hale Afar HAS il (278-18, ast Ment, He 5) jab lag moh magan sang maa-ay. As long as he is intoxicated with attachment to Maya,
3a Sd Tan ae ofS ANTE Il (278-18, aGSt AeNIH, He 5) tab lag Dharam raa-ay day-ay sajaa-ay. the Righteous Judge shall punish him.
ys fas 3 Fas J} Il 278-19, ast Mn, ws 5) parabh kirpaa tay banDhan tootai. By God's Grace, his bonds are shattered;
Ts yAE ssa IS Fe Sil (278-19, ast Ment, ws 5) gur parsaad naanak ha-o chhootai. ||4|| by Guru's Grace, O Nanak, his ego is eliminated. ||4||
AIA ue we aS Cfs wes Il (278-19, aSst ment, He 5) sahas khatay lakh ka-o uth Dhaavai. Earning a thousand, he runs after a hundred thousand.
Ua aor
fgufs 3 mre wefeor ure ure I (279-1, Gat ment, ne 5) taripat na aavai maa-i-aa paachhai paavai. Satisfaction is not obtained by chasing after Maya.
wifsa sar fafimi & AT i (279-1, TGS Ment, He 5) anik bhog bikhi-aa kay karai. He may enjoy all sorts of corrupt pleasures,
od fgusre ufy uf He I (279-1, west Ment, He 5)
nah tariptaavai khap khap mardi.
but he is still not satisfied; he indulges again and again, wearing himself out, until he dies.
fast H3u odt AB TH Il (279-2, aes mnt, we 5) binaa santokh nahee ko-oo raajai. Without contentment, no one is satisfied.
Huo Hosa fga As aA Il (279-2, aGet MnIt, He 5) supan manorath barithay sabh kaajai. Like the objects in a dream, all his efforts are in vain.
oH dfa Ase AY IE Il (279-2, agst ANT, H: 5) naam rang sarab sukh ho-ay. Through the love of the Naam, all peace is obtained.
asarat fan uaufs df& i (279-3, a@st Rent, He 5) badbhaagee kisai paraapat ho-ay. Only a few obtain this, by great good fortune.
ade ATSS wnt wef il (279-3, aSst went, us 5) karan karaavan aapay aap. He Himself is Himself the Cause of causes.
Het Het SSA Ta ANY WUll (279-3, ast AensH, He 5) sadaa sadaa naanak har jaap. ||5]| Forever and ever, O Nanak, chant the Lord's Name. ||5]|
AIS ATES ATHT'G Il (279-3, ast Hest, ve 5) karan karaavan karnaihaar. The Doer, the Cause of causes, is the Creator Lord.
fen a ofa am sterg il (279-4, aSat meni, He 5) is kai haath kahaa beechaar. What deliberations are in the hands of mortal beings?
nt fenfe ad SAT OE I (279-4, west Men, He 5) jaisee darisat karay taisaa ho-ay. As God casts His Glance of Grace, they come to be.
mm wif wirfu ys APE I (279-4, aGst ment, He 5) aapay aap aap parabh so-ay. God Himself, of Himself, is unto Himself.
A fae at A rs dat I (279-5, wat Ment, He 5) jo kichh keeno so apnai rang. Whatever He created, was by His Own Pleasure.
AS 3 efs Asay & Af il (279-5, ast Mn, Hs 5) sabh tay door sabhhoo kai sang. He is far from all, and yet with all.
gs ca ad faa il (279-5, est Pet, we 5) boojhai daykhai karai bibayk. He understands, He sees, and He passes judgment.
mute Sax nitufo mse Il (279-5, ast ment, He 5) aapeh ayk aapeh anayk. He Himself is the One, and He Himself is the many.
Hd 3 faan nie 3 Ae I (279-6, aGst Ment, He 5) marai na binsai aavai na jaa-ay. He does not die or perish; He does not come or go.
SOA AS Tt Sow ANTS IWEll (279-6, Test Ment, HH 5) naanak sad hee rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||6]|| O Nanak, He remains forever All-pervading. ||6]|
mify GueA ANS vrfu il (279-6, west Aut, He 5) aap updaysai samjhai aap. He Himself instructs, and He Himself learns.
mmy sent AS a AME Il (279-7, west Het, He 5) aapay rachi-aa sabh kai saath. He Himself mingles with all.
mify ate wus fares il (279-7, aGst ment, He 5) aap keeno aapan bisthaar. He Himself created His own expanse.
Ag as CH at Gg aAdaTg Il (279-7, ast Mant, He 5) sabh kachh us kaa oh karnaihaar. All things are His; He is the Creator.
Cn 3 f85 aug fae SE Il (279-8, aeHt Ment, He 5) us tay bhinn kahhu kichh ho-ay. Without Him, what could be done?
sa 5
Be Bost Sa ALE il (279-8, ast Ment, He 5) thaan thanantar aykai so-ay. In the spaces and interspaces, He is the One.
mus sfes uirfy aTeTS Il (279-8, ast ent, He 5) apunay chalit aap karnaihaar. In His own play, He Himself is the Actor.
ACTA Ad Fa wimg Il (279-8, aSst Hest, v2 5) ka-utak karai rang aapaar. He produces His plays with infinite variety.
Ho ufo witty Ho MUS HT Il (279-9, ast AenIt, He 5) man meh aap man apunay maahi. He Himself is in the mind, and the mind is in Him.
SOA AHS AIS & ATE IDI (279-9, aCat Ment, He 5) naanak keemat kahan na jaa-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, His worth cannot be estimated. ||7| |
Afs Afs As ys AMM i (279-9, aGst Menret, we 5) sat sat sat parabh su-aamee. True, True, True is God, our Lord and Master.
ad uate fas efimrat il (279-10, west mest, He 5) gur parsaad kinai vakhi-aanee. By Guru's Grace, some speak of Him.
HY Av AY AS ater il (279-10, aGat mniat, He 5) sach sach sach sabh keenaa. True, True, True is the Creator of all.
afe Ho fad fas stat il (279-10, aGst ment, He 5) kot maDhay kinai birlai cheenaa. Out of millions, scarcely anyone knows Him.
IH FH SH SIT JU Il (279-10, ast Ment, ue 5) bhalaa bhalaa bhalaa tayraa roop. Beautiful, Beautiful, Beautiful is Your Sublime Form.
mis HET MUS MIGU Il (279-11, Tat MeNVst, He 5) at sundar apaar anoop. You are Exquisitely Beautiful, Infinite and Incomparable.
fegHe fedHe fesHs Sat arat il (279-11, west mnist, ne 5) nirmal nirmal nirmal tayree banee. Pure, Pure, Pure is the Word of Your Bani,
ufe wife Hat Aso THeAt I (279-11, ast Ment, Hs 5) ghat ghat sunee sarvan bakh-yaanee. heard in each and every heart, spoken to the ears.
ufegz ufez ufegz uasts Il (279-12, a@st Ment, ue 5) pavitar pavitar pavitar puneet. Holy, Holy, Holy and Sublimely Pure
OH AY ated Hfs US WII (279-12, aCe MNIt, He 5) naam japai naanak man pareet. ||8]|12]| - chant the Naam, O Nanak, with heart-felt love. ||8]|12]|
AS Il (279-12)
salok. Shalok:
HZ Adfe WAS Ud A HS GussTs Il (279-13, ast Mat, He 5) sant saran jo jan parai so jan uDhranhaar. One who seeks the Sanctuary of the Saints shall be saved.
Hs ot feet soar safes safe mess NAM (279-13, aGSt Ment, He 5) sant kee nindaa naankaa bahur bahur avtaar. ||1]| One who slanders the Saints, O Nanak, shall be reincarnated over and over again.
1111] MAeUet Il (279-14)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
AS ot Tals mS We I (279-14, TCS MMH, He 5) sant kai dookhan aarjaa ghatai. Slandering the Saints, one's life is cut short.
AS o wale AH F Sdt Fe Il (279-14, ast Mont, ws 5) sant kai dookhan jam tay nahee chhutai. Slandering the Saints, one shall not escape the Messenger of Death.
AS o wale AY AS ATE Il (279-14, wat eM, He 5) sant kai dookhan sukh sabh jaa-ay. Slandering the Saints, all happiness vanishes.
AS ao wats aaa Hs UAE Il (279-15, Test Pt, He 5) sant kai dookhan narak meh paa-ay. Slandering the Saints, one falls into hell.
AS o& wats His de Hats Il (279-15, AES MN, He 5) sant kai dookhan mat ho-ay maleen. Slandering the Saints, the intellect is polluted.
AS & wale Ast Ss Tes Il (279-15, ast mnt, ws 5) sant kai dookhan sobhaa tay heen. Slandering the Saints, one's reputation is lost.
HZ a Js AG Te 8 AE Il (279-15, Test MeN, He 5) sant kay hatay ka-o rakhai na ko-ay. One who is cursed by a Saint cannot be saved.
AS oa wale Ge ZAS AE il 279-16, ast Ment, ws 5) sant kai dookhan thaan bharsat ho-ay. Slandering the Saints, one's place is defiled.
Ha faurs faut A ad Il (279-16, Tet Ment, He 5) sant kirpaal kirpaa jay karai. But if the Compassionate Saint shows His Kindness,
Soa ASHfa Sea st St AU (279-16, TSSt Mest, He 5) naanak satsang nindak bhee tarai. ||1|| O Nanak, in the Company of the Saints, the slanderer may still be saved. ||1]|
AS & TAS SHY SS Il (279-17, aVSt Mrenest, vs 5) sant kay dookhan tay mukh bhavai. Slandering the Saints, one becomes a wry-faced malcontent.
ABS & Tals aa fAG Be! il (279-17, ast Ment, v3 5) santan kai dookhan kaag ji-o lavai. Slandering the Saints, one croaks like a raven.
Ass o wale Asu Fife UTS Il (279-17, 7st Ment, Hs 5) santan kai dookhan sarap jon paa-ay. Slandering the Saints, one is reincarnated as a snake.
AS a wale fyare fs fasts it (279-18, 7est Ment, He 5) sant kai dookhan tarigad jon kirmaa-ay. Slandering the Saints, one is reincarnated as a wiggling worm.
Ase o& wale fRAS Hfs AS I (279-18, ast RenIt, v3 5) santan kai dookhan tarisnaa meh jalai. Slandering the Saints, one burns in the fire of desire.
AS o wale AS A SS ll (279-18, Sat Met, we 5) sant kai dookhan sabh ko chhalai. Slandering the Saints, one tries to deceive everyone.
AS o wale 3a AS ALE Il (279-19, west Mt, we 5) sant kai dookhan tayj sabh jaa-ay. Slandering the Saints, all one's influence vanishes.
AS o wale atgy State il (279-19, west mnt, we 5) sant kai dookhan neech neechaa-ay. Slandering the Saints, one becomes the lowest of the low.
Hs set at a a ara Il (279-19, ast AeNAT, He 5) sant dokhee kaa thaa-o ko naahi. For the slanderer of the Saint, there is no place of rest.
UST 2co
sea Hs ate ot Gfe st afs ufs 2h 80-1, west Ment, H3 5)
naanak sant bhaavai taa o-ay bhee gat paahi. ||2]| O Nanak, if it pleases the Saint, even then, he may be saved. ||2||
HS ot fSeaq HoT mse Il (280-1, west ANT, He 5) sant kaa nindak mahaa attaa-ee. The slanderer of the Saint is the worst evil-doer.
Ha ot fever fas fears o uret il (280-1, a@at manic, He 5) sant kaa nindak khin tikan na paa-ee. The slanderer of the Saint has not even a moment's rest.
HS ot fSeq HoT furs Il (280-2, west mnt, nu 5) sant kaa nindak mahaa hati-aaraa. The slanderer of the Saint is a brutal butcher.
Hs ot fSeq usnAte Ha Il (280-2, west ment, He 5) sant kaa nindak parmaysur maaraa. The slanderer of the Saint is cursed by the Transcendent Lord.
Hs ot fSea TH S THe Il (280-2, aGat ment, He 5) sant kaa nindak raaj tay heen. The slanderer of the Saint has no kingdom.
Hs ot feea edb nrg ate | (230-3, a@st ment, v2 5) sant kaa nindak dukhee-aa ar deen. The slanderer of the Saint becomes miserable and poor.
Hz a feea aG Age Ia Il (280-3, aGst He, 2 5) sant kay nindak ka-o sarab rog. The slanderer of the Saint contracts all diseases.
Ha a feea a Aer fara il (280-3, aGat Aenet, He 5) sant kay nindak ka-o sadaa bijog. The slanderer of the Saint is forever separated.
Ha at feet su nfs Se i (280-4, aSst went, v2 5) sant kee nindaa dokh meh dokh. To slander a Saint is the worst sin of sins.
Sod AS se ST CH at St Se Hy ISI (2380-4, west AeNIT, He 5) naanak sant bhaavai taa us kaa bhee ho-ay mokh. ||3]|| O Nanak, if it pleases the Saint, then even this one may be liberated. ||3]|
Ha ot edt wet nruf]es il (280-4, aGat Mest, He 5) sant kaa dokhee sadaa apvit. The slanderer of the Saint is forever impure.
Ha ot Sut fan at adt fs I (280-5, aGst ANT, He 5) sant kaa dokhee kisai kaa nahee mit. The slanderer of the Saint is nobody's friend.
Ha & Set AG sq Sa Il (280-5, west Ment, He 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o daan laagai. The slanderer of the Saint shall be punished.
Ha a cut a AS ford Il (280-5, west ANT, 48 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o sabh ti-aagai. The slanderer of the Saint is abandoned by all.
HS ot Set Hot widardt Il (280-5, ast ment, He 5) sant kaa dokhee mahaa aha‘kaaree. The slanderer of the Saint is totally egocentric.
Hs ot set Aer feardt il (280-6, west Het, He 5) sant kaa dokhee sadaa bikaaree. The slanderer of the Saint is forever corrupt.
HS ot Sut HoH Hg Il (280-6, aGst MAT, He 5) sant kaa dokhee janmai marai. The slanderer of the Saint must endure birth and death.
AS ot Tas" AY FS Sg Il (280-6, aCat Mn, Hs 5) sant kee dookhnaa sukh tay tarai. The slanderer of the Saint is devoid of peace.
Hs & St as at oS Il (280-7, west mens, v2 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o naahee thaa-o. The slanderer of the Saint has no place of rest.
Soa HS ste St we fee igil (280-7, ast Ment, He 5) naanak sant bhaavai taa la-ay milaa-ay. ||4|| O Nanak, if it pleases the Saint, then even such a one may merge in union. ||4]|
AS or set nig sty S SM Il (280-7, ast Ment, ws 5) sant kaa dokhee aDh beech tay tootai. The slanderer of the Saint breaks down mid-way.
AS or cut fas ofA o uTe Il (280-8, aeat Mt, He 5) sant kaa dokhee kitai kaaj na pahoochai. The slanderer of the Saint cannot accomplish his tasks.
AS & eet xB Sfemra gyre Il (280-8, west ment, He 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o udi-aan bharmaa-ee-ai. The slanderer of the Saint wanders in the wilderness.
Ha ot out Ssfs ure I (280-8, west ent, He 5) sant kaa dokhee ujharh paa-ee-ai. The slanderer of the Saint is misled into desolation.
HS ot Set nisg 3 Fa Il (280-9, west Aenst, He 5) sant kaa dokhee antar tay thothaa. The slanderer of the Saint is empty inside,
fa@ ATA for figse at Sar Il (280-9, west Ment, He 5) ji-o saas binaa mirtak kee lothaa. like the corpse of a dead man, without the breath of life.
Ha a cut at as fae of il (280-9, west Menist, He 5) sant kay dokhee kee jarh kichh naahi. The slanderer of the Saint has no heritage at all.
mus aifa md ot ats il (280-10, west ment, v8 5) aapan beej aapay hee khaahi. He himself must eat what he has planted.
Ha & Set aS meg & TUsTT Il (280-10, a@et Ment, v2 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o avar na raakhanhaar. The slanderer of the Saint cannot be saved by anyone else.
Sod HS se St we Cars ull (2380-10, ast Ment, He 5) naanak sant bhaavai taa la-ay ubaar. ||5|| O Nanak, if it pleases the Saint, then even he may be saved. ||5||
Ha ot cut fe freee il (280-11, west Ment, He 5) sant kaa dokhee i-o billaa-ay. The slanderer of the Saint bewails like this
fAS ne fags Hest Sees Il (280-11, Test MNIt, He 5) ji-o jal bihoon machhulee tarhafrhaa-ay. - like a fish, out of water, writhing in agony.
AS ot dt sur Sot TA Il (280-11, Tat Ment, ws 5) sant kaa dokhee bhookhaa nahee raajai. The slanderer of the Saint is hungry and is never satisfied,
fa@ ureg tafe adt grt il (280-12, a@at nit, He 5) ji-o paavak eeDhan nahee Dharaapai. as fire is not satisfied by fuel.
Ha ot edt se faa i (280-12, west ment, He 5) sant kaa dokhee chhutai ikaylaa. The slanderer of the Saint is left all alone,
fAS surg fae us ufo Is Il (280-12, ast Ment, He 5) ji-o boo-aarh til khayt maahi duhaylaa. like the miserable barren sesame stalk abandoned in the field.
HS ot Set UsH J JIS Il (280-13, ast Het, He 5) sant kaa dokhee Dharam tay rahat. The slanderer of the Saint is devoid of faith.
Hs ot det Ae fifemr aTs I (280-13, aGst Mt, He 5) sant kaa dokhee sad mithi-aa kahat. The slanderer of the Saint constantly lies.
fags fava ar fe ct ufsor Il (280-13, west Hen, He 5) kirat nindak kaa Dhur hee pa-i-aa. The fate of the slanderer is pre-ordained from the very beginning of time.
Sod A fsH ave Het fem ell (280-14, ast Meni, nH: 5) naanak jo tis bhaavai so-ee thi-aa. ||6|| O Nanak, whatever pleases God's Will comes to pass. ||6||
AS or out fas gu af AME I (280-14, aext Mt, He 5) sant kaa dokhee bigarh roop ho-ay jaa-ay. The slanderer of the Saint becomes deformed.
Ha a edt a@ waa fies ANTE II (280-14, ast MoH, He 5) sant kay dokhee ka-o dargeh milai sajaa-ay. The slanderer of the Saint receives his punishment in the Court of the Lord.
HS ot Set WET Haare I (280-15, aGst MNT, He 5) sant kaa dokhee sadaa sahkaa-ee-ai. The slanderer of the Saint is eternally in limbo.
HS ot Set S Hd © Meet Il (280-15, aGSt HeNIT, He 5) sant kaa dokhee na marai na jeevaa-ee-ai. He does not die, but he does not live either.
Ha a Sut at uA B MTAT Il (280-15, wat AUNT, He 5) sant kay dokhee kee pujai na aasaa. The hopes of the slanderer of the Saint are not fulfilled.
Ha at edt Cfs ve feaAr il (280-16, agst Het, He 5) sant kaa dokhee uth chalai niraasaa. The slanderer of the Saint departs disappointed.
Ha a df o feAS afe 1 (280-16, aGat Pent, Hs 5) sant kai dokh na taristai ko-ay. Slandering the Saint, no one attains satisfaction.
AAT ate SAT aet de Il (280-16, ast Ment, He 5) jaisaa bhaavai taisaa ko-ee ho-ay. As it pleases the Lord, so do people become;
ufeor fags o He af= I (280-17, ast Ment, He 5) pa-i-aa kirat na maytai ko-ay. no one can erase their past actions.
Sa AS Ae AS DI (280-17, west Aenst, He 5) naanak jaanai sachaa so-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, the True Lord alone knows all. ||7]|
AS we fsH a GI AST Il (280-17, aGst Mont, He 5) sabh ghat tis kay oh karnaihaar. All hearts are His; He is the Creator.
Het Het {SH a SHAS Il (280-17, west Aunt, He 5) sadaa sadaa tis ka-o namaskaar. Forever and ever, I bow to Him in reverence.
ys at Grafs agg fee TAS I (280-18, aGat Ment, He 5) parabh kee ustat karahu din raat. Praise God, day and night.
fants fowreg Ata faretA il (280-18, a@st Hen, He 5) tiseh Dhi-aavahu saas giraas. Meditate on Him with every breath and morsel of food.
AS ae zds fSA a AMT I (280-18, west ANT, He 5) sabh kachh vartai tis kaa kee-aa. Everything happens as He wills.
AAT ad SAT A Ghor I (280-19, west ment, He 5) jaisaa karay taisaa ko thee-aa. As He wills, so people become.
MUS Ye mf ATSITS Il (280-19, aGst Mest, He 5) apnaa khayl aap karnaihaar. He Himself is the play, and He Himself is the actor.
GAT ASS AT MIT Il (280-19, 7st Ment, ws 5) doosar ka-un kahai beechaar. Who else can speak or deliberate upon this?
UST 2eA
far 3 faut ad fsA nrus on Sf Il (281-1, Test Mn, He 5) jis no kirpaa karai tis aapan naam day-ay. He Himself gives His Name to those, upon whom He bestows His Mercy.
asset Sa AS AE NCUISI (281-1, Test ReNIAT, Hs 5)
badbhaagee naanak jan say-ay. ||8||13]| Very fortunate, O Nanak, are those people. ||8]|13] |
ASE Il (281-1)
salok. Shalok:
3rd fmrou Afs Ae”g fAHag ofa oie TE Il (281-2, aeat mens, H8 5) tajahu si-aanap sur janhu simrahu har har raa-ay. Give up your cleverness, good people - remember the Lord God, your King!
Sa oA ate His Tug Soa SY SIH SS ATE NA (281-2, aCSt ment, He 5)
ayk aas har man rakhahu naanak dookh bharam bha-o jaa-ay. ||1]|
Enshrine in your heart, your hopes in the One Lord. O Nanak, your pain, doubt and fear shall depart. ||1]|
mMAeUeT Il (281-3) asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
HOY at fa fyat AS AS Il (281-3, aest Ment, He 5) maanukh kee tayk barithee sabh jaan. Reliance on mortals is in vain - Know this well.
eo AG Sa TASS Il (281-3, aGSt AenAAt, He 5) dayvan ka-o aykai bhagvaan. The Great Giver is the One Lord God.
fan a dnt ao wrrfe | (281-3, ast ment, He 5) jis kai dee-ai rahai aghaa-ay. By His gifts, we are satisfied,
gofa o fanart aot wife Il (281-4, aGet mnit, He 5) bahur na tarisnaa laagai aa-ay. and we suffer from thirst no longer.
Hd ae Sat nrfiy | (281-4, aGst ment, He 5) maarai raakhai ayko aap. The One Lord Himself destroys and also preserves.
Hoy a fxs ard THE I (281-4, agSt Aen, 2 5) maanukh kai kichh naahee haath. Nothing at all is in the hands of mortal beings.
SA a gay ofS AY afe Il (si-4, Gat Ment, He 5) tis kaa hukam boojh sukh ho-ay. Understanding His Order, there is peace.
fsA at am sy afe udfe Il (281-5, ast ment, He 5) tis kaa naam rakh kanth paro-ay. So take His Name, and wear it as your necklace.
fafa fifa fafe ys APE I (281-5, west moet, Hs 5) simar simar simar parabh so-ay. Remember, remember, remember God in meditation.
Soe furs o Brat APE NAM (281-5, Test Met, He 5) naanak bighan na laagai ko-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, no obstacle shall stand in your way. ||1]|
Grafs Ho ufo afe fadarg il (281-6, west Hent, He 5) ustat man meh kar nirankaar. Praise the Formless Lord in your mind.
ats He Ae Afs faGos Il (281-6, Test Ment, He 5) kar man mayray sat bi-uhaar. O my mind, make this your true occupation.
feaHe SAat nifiys ut i (si-6, aGzt went, ue 5) nirmal rasnaa amrit pee-o. Let your tongue become pure, drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar.
Het Hoe ats Sa AS il (281-7, a@st mnie, He 5) sadaa suhaylaa kar layhi jee-o. Your soul shall be forever peaceful.
dod UY Stag a Ia Il (281-7, ast Ment, He 5) nainhu paykh thaakur kaa rang. With your eyes, see the wondrous play of your Lord and Master.
WoHfa faon AS Aa ll (281-7, west Aen, He 5) saaDhsang binsai sabh sang. In the Company of the Holy, all other associations vanish.
3do VOR Hota dfs i (osi-8, ast ANT, He 5) charan chala-o maarag gobind. With your feet, walk in the Way of the Lord.
firefo ury mt afe fide i (si-s, ast ment, He 5) miteh paap japee-ai har bind. Sins are washed away, chanting the Lord's Name, even for a moment.
ad dfs AGH Aels dfs AM | (81-8, ast Ment, us 5) kar har karam sarvan har kathaa. So do the Lord's Work, and listen to the Lord's Sermon.
Td IAT SSA SAG HA iil (281-8, Tat Hest, ve 5) har dargeh naanak oojal mathaa. ||2|| In the Lord's Court, O Nanak, your face shall be radiant. ||2]|
yaa 3 AS Aa AT Il (2381-9, west Ment, He 5) badbhaagee tay jan jag maahi. Very fortunate are those humble beings in this world,
Het Het Ifg X TS Ad il (281-9, ast Ment, ue 5) Sadaa sadaa har kay gun gaahi. who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, forever and ever.
TH OH A Ada Stes Il (281-9, west ment, H: 5) raam naam jo karahi beechaar. Those who dwell upon the Lord's Name,
A U6e3 Tot AAS Il (281-10, west Het, He 5) say Dhanvant ganee sansaar. are the most wealthy and prosperous in the world.
Hfs safe ufa safe ofa wet i (281-10, rest Ment, He 5) man tan mukh boleh har mukhee. Those who speak of the Supreme Lord in thought, word and deed
He’ Hel AST S Het ll (281-10, west ment, v2 5) sadaa sadaa jaanhu tay sukhee. - know that they are peaceful and happy, forever and ever.
Sa SA SA USS Il (281-11, aSst meneet, ve 5) ayko ayk ayk pachhaanai. One who recognizes the One and only Lord as One,
fez @3 at Go ASt AS II Csi-11, Test AN, He 5) it ut kee oh sojhee jaanai. understands this world and the next.
oH Afal fan at He HSM I (si-11, west Ment, nH 5) naam sang jis kaa man maani-aa. One whose mind accepts the Company of the Naam,
aoa fsafa fadre font Sil (2si-11, west mnt, nH 5) naanak tineh niranjan jaani-aa. ||3] | the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, knows the Immaculate Lord. ||3] |
qe ure mms nim AS I (281-12, a@et menect, ne 5) gur parsaad aapan aap sujhai. By Guru's Grace, one understands himself;
fsn at weg feAe eS i (281-12, ast ment, He 5) tis kee jaanhu tarisnaa bujhai. know that then, his thirst is quenched.
WuAfa dfs ofs AA ATS Il (281-12, west Hen, He 5) saaDhsang har har jas kahat. In the Company of the Holy, one chants the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hes da 3 Gg ofa AS JIS Il (281-13, west MMH, He 5) sarab rog tay oh har jan rahat. Such a devotee of the Lord is free of all disease.
notes SSG ATH AUS Il (281-13, aCSt Ment, ws 5) an-din keertan kayval bakh-yaan. Night and day, sing the Kirtan, the Praises of the One Lord.
faoAs Hfo Het fosae i (281-13, a@xt mensct, He 5) garihsat meh so-ee nirbaan. In the midst of your household, remain balanced and unattached.
ea Cuts fan AS at MAT I (281-14, aSSt Hest, He 5) ayk oopar jis jan kee aasaa. One who places his hopes in the One Lord
fSA oft adit AH at SAT I (281-14, aGst ment, He 5) tis kee katee-ai jam kee faasaa. - the noose of Death is cut away from his neck.
UTSQoH at fA His Te Il (281-14, ast Ment, He 5) paarbarahm kee jis man bhookh. One whose mind hungers for the Supreme Lord God,
aad fsAfs o wats Te II (281-15, aGst Ment, HE 5) naanak tiseh na laageh dookh. ||4|| O Nanak, shall not suffer pain. ||4]|
fan ag ofa us Hfe fats wre it (2si-15, a@et ment, ne 5) jis ka-o har parabh man chit aavai. One who focuses his conscious mind on the Lord God
A AZ Ade odt SHS Il (281-15, aGzt Mn, ve 5) so sant suhaylaa nahee dulaavai. - that Saint is at peace; he does not waver.
fan ys nus farsur ad Il (281-16, aGet Ment, He 5) jis parabh apunaa kirpaa karai. Those unto whom God has granted His Grace
A Aza ag fan 3 3d Il (281-16, weet mene, He 5) so sayvak kaho kis tay darai. - who do those servants need to fear?
AAT AT SAT fenetfenr il (281-16, rat ment, He 5) jaisaa saa taisaa daristaa-i-aa. As God is, so does He appear;
mus ada Hts wrfu AMTfeMT Il 281-17, ast Ment, He 5) apunay kaaraj meh aap samaa-i-aa. in His Own creation, He Himself is pervading.
Hos Aas Aas Alfsor it (281-17, aSst ment, He 5) soDhat soDhat soDhat seejhi-aa. Searching, searching, searching, and finally, success!
ad ure 33 AS gfsor it 81-17, west ment, He 5) gur parsaad tat sabh boojhi-aa. By Guru's Grace, the essence of all reality is understood.
ma tug sa Ag fas HS Il (281-17, Tat ANAT, He 5) jab daykh-a-u tab sabh kichh mool. Wherever I look, there I see Him, at the root of all things.
Soa A AYH ASt MAAS Ul (281-18, ast Ment, ws 5) naanak so sookham so-ee asthool. ||5|| O Nanak, He is the subtle, and He is also the manifest. ||5| |
od fxs HOH od fas He Il (281-18, west MMH, He 5) nah kichh janmai nah kichh marai. Nothing is born, and nothing dies.
nus ses vy Tt ad Il (2si-19, aGst ment, He 5) aapan chalit aap hee karai. He Himself stages His own drama.
meg Are ferfe mofenfe il (2si-19, rest mnt, He 5) aavan jaavan darisat an-darisat. Coming and going, seen and unseen,
mtfamiardt urdt AS figAfe i (281-19, a@st ment, us 5) aagi-aakaaree Dhaaree sabh sarisat. all the world is obedient to His Will.
UST 2eI
mmgy wif Aas Hfo mifu il (282-1, a@St mnt, H3 5) aapay aap sagal meh aap. He Himself is All-in-Himself.
mfoa Fats ste af Cafu il (282-1, west Ment, He 5) anik jugat rach thaap uthaap. In His many ways, He establishes and disestablishes.
mfsoHt ardt fos Ys i (282-1, west Menst, He 5) abhinaasee naahee kichh khand. He is Imperishable; nothing can be broken.
wge wfe afaS yas Il (282-1, aSst ment, ue 5) Dhaaran Dhaar rahi-o barahmand. He lends His Support to maintain the Universe.
Mod MSS UTY UTSU Il (282-2, ast Ment, He 5) alakh abhayv purakh partaap. Unfathomable and Inscrutable is the Glory of the Lord.
mmf FuTes J BOR AY IEll (282-2, Test Ment, 2 5) aap japaa-ay ta naanak jaap. ||6|| As He inspires us to meditate, O Nanak, so do we meditate. ||6]||
fae US WS A ASST Il (282-2, aGat ent, He 5) jin parabh jaataa so sobhaavant. Those who know God are glorious.
Hae HATS Gud f35 HF Il (282-3, west Ment, He 5) Sagal sansaar uDhrai tin mant. The whole world is redeemed by their teachings.
Ys A ASA Aas Burs Il (282-3, wat Hemet, we 5) parabh kay sayvak sagal uDhaaran. God's servants redeem all.
ys a Hea Tu faATIS II (282-3, aCst Hest, He 5) parabh kay sayvak dookh bisaaran. God's servants cause sorrows to be forgotten.
mime Afe we farsurs il (282-4, wet ment, He 5) aapay mayl la-ay kirpaal. The Merciful Lord unites them with Himself.
ad a Ase Alu se fEas Il (282-4, aSat mnist, He 5) gur kaa sabad jap bha-ay nihaal. Chanting the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they become ecstatic.
Go at Ast ASt Sal I (282-4, aSst Hens, H: 5) un kee sayvaa so-ee laagai. He alone is committed to serve them,
fA 3 faut asta asad Il (282-5, aGst Ment, He 5) jis no kirpaa karahi badbhaagai. upon whom God bestows His Mercy, by great good fortune.
oH Aus ureta faAMH Il (282-5, west Ment, He 5) naam japat paavahi bisraam. Those who chant the Naam find their place of rest.
aad fsa use AS SSH ats HG MDI (282-5, Test EIT, He 5) naanak tin purakh ka-o ootam kar maan. ||7|| O Nanak, respect those persons as the most noble. ||7]|
A fas ad Aus a dha i (282-6, aeext menect, He 5) jo kichh karai so parabh kai rang. Whatever you do, do it for the Love of God.
Hel Ae SA dfs Afar il (282-6, west Hest, He 5) sadaa sadaa basai har sang. Forever and ever, abide with the Lord.
Hon Hate de A fe Il (282-6, aGat Ant, He 5) sahj subhaa-ay hovai so ho-ay. By its own natural course, whatever will be will be.
Ade Use AfE il (282-6, aGst went, v2 5) karnaihaar pachhaanai so-ay. Acknowledge that Creator Lord;
Ys at abot AS HS Barat il (282-7, aSst Ment, us 5) parabh kaa kee-aa jan meeth lagaanaa. God's doings are sweet to His humble servant.
AAT AT SAT fEA|TST I (282-7, a@at ment, He 5) jaisaa saa taisaa daristaanaa. As He is, so does He appear.
fan 3 Gua fSR wfo ANTE Il (282-7, aBst ANI, He 5) jis tay upjay tis maahi samaa-ay. From Him we came, and into Him we shall merge again.
6fe Au fours Bog afe wire I (282-8, aGat ent, He 5) o-ay sukh niDhaan unhoo ban aa-ay. He is the treasure of peace, and so does His servant become.
nmun ag vrfy StS HTS Il (282-8, ast ent, He 5) aapas ka-o aap deeno maan. Unto His own, He has given His honor.
SSA UT HS Sa AG ICI! (282-8, ast Menect, ne 5) naanak parabh jan ayko jaan. ||8]|14] | O Nanak, know that God and His humble servant are one and the same. ||8||14] |
HS Il (282-9) salok. Shalok:
Ada AS sdug us fase ASST? Il (282-9, aGSt Hunt, He 5) sarab kalaa bharpoor parabh birthaa jaananhaar. God is totally imbued with all powers; He is the Knower of our troubles.
w a fanate Cudhy soa fan sfeos Ill (282-9, west Ment, He 5) jaa kai simran uDhree-ai naanak tis balihaar. ||1|| Meditating in remembrance on Him, we are saved; Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||1]|
MAeUet Il (282-10)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
Sat MWSSTST TUN I (282-10, Tat Mensst, ws 5) tootee gaadhanhaar gopaal. The Lord of the World is the Mender of the broken.
Hea Abo wmy yfsurs il (282-10, west ment, us 5) sarab jee-aa aapay partipaal. He Himself cherishes all beings.
Rae ot fest fam Ho HT I (282-10, west Hens, He 5) Sagal kee chintaa jis man maahi. The cares of all are on His Mind;
fan 3 fase aet afo i (282-11, ast ment, H: 5) tis tay birthaa ko-ee naahi. no one is turned away from Him.
J HO He Ae Os AY Il (282-11, wet HeNIeH, He 5) ray man mayray sadaa har jaap. O my mind, meditate forever on the Lord.
mifaoAt ug wmy niTfy i) (282-11, a@at mensst, He 5) abhinaasee parabh aapay aap. The Imperishable Lord God is Himself All-in-all.
Minus athe ae 3 TE il (282-12, rat mnt, ws 5) aapan kee-aa kachhoo na ho-ay. By one's own actions, nothing is accomplished,
AAG yrst Be aE i (282-12, aSst ment, He 5) jay sa-o paraanee lochai ko-ay. even though the mortal may wish it so, hundreds of times.
fan faa ardt 3d fore OH Il (282-12, aGst mnt, He 5) tis bin naahee tayrai kichh kaam. Without Him, nothing is of any use to you.
as Sea Af Sa Ths SH MAU (282-12, ast Ment, ue 5) gat naanak jap ayk har naam. ||1]| Salvation, O Nanak, is attained by chanting the Name of the One Lord. ||1]|
gues dfs ardt HF I (282-13, Gat Ment, Hs 5) roopvant ho-ay naahee mohai. One who is good-looking should not be vain;
us at afs Aare we Ad Il (282-13, at ment, ne 5) parabh kee jot sagal ghat sohai. the Light of God is in all hearts.
Uses afe far & Tee Il (282-13, aGst ment, He 5) Dhanvantaa ho-ay ki-aa ko garbai. Why should anyone be proud of being rich?
wv Ag fae fSR ot chor eae I (282-14, ast Ment, He 5) jaa sabh kichh tis kaa dee-aa darbai. All riches are His gifts.
mts AT A AG AIS Il (282-14, aSSt Mn, we 5) at sooraa jay ko-0o kahaavai. One may call himself a great hero,
us at oer feat aT OS I (282-14, aSat Pent, He 5) parabh kee kalaa binaa kah Dhaavai. but without God's Power, what can anyone do?
A a df gd BSE Il (282-15, ast ANT, He 5) jay ko ho-ay bahai daataar. One who brags about giving to charities
fSA VSI s AS Weg Il (282-15, aGst Ment, ne 5) tis daynhaar jaanai gaavaar. - the Great Giver shall judge him to be a fool.
fan ae yAte 3S TS FT Il (282-15, west MN, we 5) jis gur parsaad tootai ha-o rog. One who, by Guru's Grace, is cured of the disease of ego
SOA AAS Het MT Il (282-16, aGst Mest, He 5) naanak so jan sadaa arog. ||2|| - O Nanak, that person is forever healthy. ||2||
fa@ Hes AB GH FHS Il (282-16, aGst Mot, He 5) ji-o mandar ka-o thaamai thamman. As a palace is supported by its pillars,
fs@ ag a Aas Hofs MAEHS Il (282-16, Teet Ment, He 5) ti-o gur kaa sabad maneh asthamman. so does the Guru's Word support the mind.
fa@ unre ore ofs 3d Il (282-17, west AUNT, He 5) ji-o paakhaan naav charh tarai. As a stone placed in a boat can cross over the river,
urat Td VIE BAS fEASs il (282-17, west Ment, ue 5) paraanee gur charan lagat nistarai. so is the mortal saved, grasping hold of the Guru's Feet.
fa nigarg hue udgaA Il (282-17, west Ment, He 5) ji-o anDhkaar deepak pargaas. As the darkness is illuminated by the lamp,
qd vane efy nfs df= faara il (282-18, aGst ment, He 5) gur darsan daykh man ho-ay bigaas. so does the mind blossom forth, beholding the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
fa@ Ho Cfenra ufo Hag ure 1 FE ATG Afer fife APS yates I (282-18, Gat Ment, Hs 5)
ji-o mahaa udi-aan meh maarag paavai. ti-o saaDhoo sang mil jot paragtaavai.
The path is found through the great wilderness by joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and one's light shines forth.
f85 He ot ae ofs i (282-19, west mnt, Hs 5) tin santan kee baachha-o Dhoor. I seek the dust of the feet of those Saints;
area at ahs Ba uf Si (282-19, ast Ment, ws 5) naanak kee har lochaa poor. ||3]| O Lord, fulfill Nanak's longing! ||3]|
Ho Had ara farweret il (282-19, ast mnt, ws 5) man moorakh kaahay billaa-ee-ai. O foolish mind, why do you cry and bewail?
UST 2es
usa fest at fesfimm ureint i (283-1, aGst ment, He 5) purab likhay kaa likhi-aa paa-ee-ai. You shall obtain your pre-ordained destiny.
wu AY Ys SSH Il (283-1, aSat ment, He 5) dookh sookh parabh dayvanhaar. God is the Giver of pain and pleasure.
med furta 3 fsAfo fess Il (283-1, Test HenIt, He 5) avar ti-aag too tiseh chitaar. Abandon others, and think of Him alone.
A Oe Ad ASt AY HS Il (283-2, aGat ment, He 5) jo kachh karai so-ee sukh maan. Whatever He does - take comfort in that.
go ard feats mire I (283-2, aSst Hest, He 5) bhoolaa kaahay fireh ajaan. Why do you wander around, you ignorant fool?
ao SAS uTet Sd Aa Il (283-2, aGst mnt, He 5) ka-un basat aa-ee tayrai sang. What things did you bring with you?
oufe sfuS afh Sst usa | (283-3, ast ment, He 5) lapat rahi-o ras lobhee patang. You cling to worldly pleasures like a greedy moth.
TH OH Alu fase fT Il (283-3, west Ment, He 5) raam naam jap hirday maahi. Dwell upon the Lord's Name in your heart.
soa ufs Ast whe wAhs Sil (283-3, ast Feet, He 5) naanak pat saytee ghar jaahi. ||4|| O Nanak, thus you shall return to your home with honor. ||4||
fAR eae aS Sfs J urfenr it (283-3, ast ment, vs 5) jis vakhar ka-o lain too aa-i-aa. This merchandise, which you have come to obtai
TH OH Ase ws usr Il (283-4, ast Met, He 5) raam naam santan ghar paa-i-aa. n - the Lord's Name is obtained in the home of the Saints.
ofa uifsrs Sg Ho Hfs I IH on fase ufo SH II (283-4, aGSt menit, He 5)
taj abhimaan layho man mol. raam naam hirday meh tol.
Renounce your egotistical pride, and with your mind, purchase the Lord's Name - measure it out within your heart.
ofe du A3d Aa Bw il (283-5, Test Menest, v2 5) laad khayp santeh sang chaal. Load up this merchandise, and set out with the Saints.
med fauna fafior HATS I (283-5, ast Ment, He 5) avar ti-aag bikhi-aa janjaal. Give up other corrupt entanglements.
fs ufs ad AS af il (283-5, west Aut, He 5) Dhan Dhan kahai sabh ko-ay. "Blessed, blessed", everyone will call you,
He Cae ofs esata ALE Il (283-6, ast Ment, He 5) mukh oojal har dargeh so-ay. and your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord.
feg eurg feaer eturd Il (283-6, aGSt Hest, He 5) ih vaapaar virlaa vaapaarai. In this trade, only a few are trading.
Sot St A AS afsss MUll (283-6, aSst ment, ve 5) naanak taa kai sad balihaarai. ||5|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||5]|
vdo AG & of af ute Il (283-7, aGat went, He 5) charan saaDh kay Dho-ay Dho-ay pee-o. Wash the feet of the Holy, and drink in this water.
motu AT aS must AE Il (283-7, aGst mnt, He 5) arap saaDh ka-o apnaa jee-o. Dedicate your soul to the Holy.
Ag at ufs aay FEASTS Il (283-7, aCst mest, He 5) saaDh kee Dhoor karahu isnaan. Take your cleansing bath in the dust of the feet of the Holy.
AY Gufs wet ATA | (283-7, aCat Ment, Hs 5) saaDh oopar jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. To the Holy, make your life a sacrifice.
AG AS Soot UTS | (283-8, west AenAt, He 5) saaDh sayvaa vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. Service to the Holy is obtained by great good fortune.
WUHfa dfs atese ae i (283-8, aGSt mest, He 5) saaDhsang har keertan gaa-ee-ai. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is sung.
mifea faus 3 AT Ie Il (283-8, west Mt, we 5) anik bighan tay saaDhoo raakhai. From all sorts of dangers, the Saint saves us.
dfs ae afe nifys TA TY Il (283-9, aGzt Ment, He 5) har gun gaa-ay amrit ras chaakhai. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, we taste the ambrosial essence.
Ge adt Had Ufe wrfenr | (283-9, west FensT, He 5) ot gahee santeh dar aa-i-aa. Seeking the Protection of the Saints, we have come to their door.
Aaa AY Sod fsa ufenr ell (283-9, ast ment, He 5) sarab sookh naanak tih paa-i-aa. ||6|| All comforts, O Nanak, are so obtained. ||6]|
fugsa a AleTHST ST Il (283-10, ast nt, He 5) mirtak ka-o jeevaalanhaar. He infuses life back into the dead.
sa AG SET AUT Il (283-10, Tat MENA, ve 5) bhookhay ka-o dayvat aDhaar. He gives food to the hungry.
Hea fours at ot feret ufo i (283-10, wat ment, He 5) sarab niDhaan jaa kee daristee maahi. All treasures are within His Glance of Grace.
usa fed at oat utd i (283-11, west Ant, He 5) purab likhay kaa lahnaa paahi. People obtain that which they are pre-ordained to receive.
HS fag fSA a Gy Ags AT Il (283-11, aGst Hen, 2 5) sabh kichh tis kaa oh karnai jog. All things are His; He is the Doer of all.
fH fag FAS dor o IT Ml (283-11, ast mnt, Hs 5) tis bin doosar ho-aa na hog. Other than Him, there has never been any other, and there shall never be.
Afu AS Ae AST fes gat I (283-12, aGSt wet, He 5) jap jan sadaa sadaa din rainee. Meditate on Him forever and ever, day and night.
AS 3 Gu fosne fea aget I (283-12, ast ment, HE 5) sabh tay ooch nirmal ih karnee. This way of life is exalted and immaculate.
ate fasu fan aS om chor it (283-12, ast Rent, He 5) kar kirpaa jis ka-o naam dee-aa. One whom the Lord, in His Grace, blesses with His Name
Soa AAS fSsHs sr dil (283-13, weet Ment, He 5) naanak so jan nirmal thee-aa. ||7|| - O Nanak, that person becomes immaculate and pure. ||7]|
Wa nfs ad at usstfs I (283-13, aGst Meni, He 5) jaa kai man gur kee parteet. One who has faith in the Guru in his mind
fsH Ho mre ofe ys SHS I (283-13, 7st Moet, He 5) tis jan aavai har parabh cheet. comes to dwell upon the Lord God.
sas sas Hom fsa Sf I (283-14, aSst Hest, He 5) bhagat bhagat sunee-ai tihu lo-ay. He is acclaimed as a devotee, a humble devotee throughout the three worlds.
wa fade Sat OfF I (283-14, aGst mnt, H: 5) jaa kai hirdai ayko ho-ay. The One Lord is in his heart.
HY adel AY 3 at JIS Il (283-14, aSst Mnet, uz 5) sach karnee sach taa kee rahat. True are his actions; true are his ways.
Ag foe vfs yfit ATS Il (283-14, west Het, He 5) sach hirdai sat mukh kahat. True is his heart; Truth is what he speaks with his mouth.
Avot ferfe ArSt nitarg Il (283-15, Test Bent, He 5) saachee darisat saachaa aakaar. True is his vision; true is his form.
Ag ds ATS UATE Il (283-15, aGSt Het, He 5) sach vartai saachaa paasaar. He distributes Truth and he spreads Truth.
urggoH fate AY ats ATST I (283-15, TeSt Ment, He 5) paarbarahm jin sach kar jaataa. One who recognizes the Supreme Lord God as True
Soa A AS Afs ANTS WCNWI (283-16, TeSt HUNT, He 5) naanak so jan sach samaataa. ||8]|15|| - O Nanak, that humble being is absorbed into the True One. ||8||15]]|
HS Il (283-16)
salok. Shalok:
gus su 5 da fas eg TE 3 ys fs Il (283-16, west MenMt, He 5) roop na raykh na rang kichh tarihu gun tay parabh bhinn. He has no form, no shape, no color; God is beyond the three qualities.
fsrfa gsr soot faa de AYA AU (283-17, reat Ment, He 5) tiseh bujhaa-ay naankaa jis hovai suparsan. ||1]|| They alone understand Him, O Nanak, with whom He is pleased. ||1]||
MAeUet Il (283-17)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
mfaoAt ug HO Hfo Ie Il (283-17, ast Ment, vs 5) abhinaasee parabh man meh raakh. Keep the Immortal Lord God enshrined within your mind.
Hoy ot 3 Ytfs fra i (283-17, ast nit, ve 5) maanukh kee too pareet ti-aag. Renounce your love and attachment to people.
fA 3 ud ardt fas afe i (283-18, west Ment, He 5) tis tay parai naahee kichh ko-ay. Beyond Him, there is nothing at all.
Hea fadsfs Sa AE I (283-18, aGst HeNIAT, He 5) sarab nirantar ayko so-ay. The One Lord is pervading among all.
mmr Star mm SST Il (283-18, Gat Ment, us 5) aapay beenaa aapay daanaa. He Himself is All-seeing; He Himself is All-knowing,
Odd Aste Ads AAT Il (283-19, at HeNAT, He 5) gahir gambheer gaheer sujaanaa. Unfathomable, Profound, Deep and All-knowing.
UTSHIH USHA ase | (283-19, Tat Ment, He 5) paarbarahm parmaysur gobind. He is the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, the Lord of the Universe,
fur fours vfenis SUAS | (283-19, weet Ment, He 5) kirpaa niDhaan da-i-aal bakhsand. the Treasure of mercy, compassion and forgiveness.
AT 3g at saat US Il (283-19, ast Ment, He 5) saaDh tayray kee charnee paa-o. To fall at the Feet of Your Holy Beings
UST Ics
Sot a His feg nisge Al (284-1, agst Aen, He 5) naanak kai man ih anraa-o. ||1]|| - this is the longing of Nanak's mind. ||1]|
HOA! UTS ASS Aa Il (284-1, ast Ment, ws 5) mansaa pooran sarnaa jog. He is the Fulfiller of wishes, who can give us Sanctuary;
A afe ufeor Het Ja Il (284-1, aGst mnt, He 5) jo kar paa-i-aa so-ee hog. that which He has written, comes to pass.
JIS BIS A AT SF ST Il (284-2, at Mnect, vz 5) haran bharan jaa kaa naytar for. He destroys and creates in the twinkling of an eye.
fA a HES AS FT Il (284-2, ast Pt, HE 5) tis kaa mantar na jaanai hor. No one else knows the mystery of His ways.
Me TU HAS AS AT a Il (284-2, ast Ment, ws 5) anad roop mangal sad jaa kai. He is the embodiment of ecstasy and everlasting joy.
Hea da Ass wis st ax il (284-3, aGst went, He 5) sarab thok sunee-ah ghar taa kai. I have heard that all things are in His home.
oH Hf TH Ha Hfs Halt I (284-3, aGSt Hes, He 5) raaj meh raaj jog meh jogee. Among kings, He is the King; among yogis, He is the Yogi.
su xfs suing faors ufo Sait i (284-3, a@et mnret, ne 5) tap meh tapeesar garihsat meh bhogee. Among ascetics, He is the Ascetic; among householders, He is the Enjoyer.
fourfe fourfe sarso AY urfenr I (284-4, ast mnt, He 5) Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay bhagtah sukh paa-i-aa. By constant meditation, His devotee finds peace.
Sod fsH use at fas nis & ufenr 2H (284-4, west ment, He 5) naanak tis purakh kaa kinai ant na paa-i-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, no one has found the limits of that Supreme Being. ||2| |
a at Stor at ffs ats il (284-5, a@st mnt, He 5)
jaa kee leelaa kee mit naahi. There is no limit to His play.
HAS SS TS Meats il (284-5, west Ment, ve 5) Sagal dayv haaray avgaahi. All the demigods have grown weary of searching for it.
fst or OH fx AS UZ Il (284-5, 7st Ment, Hs 5) pitaa kaa janam ke jaanai poot. What does the son know of his father's birth?
AIS udet nyse AfS il (284-6, ast ment, v3 5) Sagal paro-ee apunai soot. All are strung upon His string.
AHfs famre fomre fae efe 1 AS BA oH fonrefa ALE I (284-6, aSst ment, He 5) sumat gi-aan Dhi-aan jin day-ay. jan daas naam Dhi-aavahi say-ay.
He bestows good sense, spiritual wisdom and meditation on His humble servants and Slaves who meditate on the Naam.
fag qe ufo A AS SINS Il (284-7, ast Ment, He 5) tihu gun meh jaa ka-o bharmaa-ay. He leads some astray in the three qualities;
Aofy Hd fefes mire ATE Il (284-7, aGst ment, He 5) janam marai fir aavai jaa-ay. they are born and die, coming and going over and over again.
Gz ate fSA & mAES Il (284-7, aSat mest, He 5) ooch neech tis kay asthaan. The high and the low are His places.
AAT HOTS SAT GSA A'S ISI (284-7, ast MNT, He 5) jaisaa janaavai taisaa naanak jaan. ||3]| As He inspires us to know Him, O Nanak, so is He known. |[3]|
SST TU SS AT A FT Il (284-8, aSat Ment, He 5) naanaa roop naanaa jaa kay rang. Many are His forms; many are His colors.
oat su acta fea Sa il (284-8, wet Ment, He 5) naanaa bhaykh karahi ik rang. Many are the appearances which He assumes, and yet He is still the One.
oor fafa até fararg il (284-8, aGst ment, He 5) naanaa biDh keeno bisthaar. In so many ways, He has extended Himself.
us mifsarAt Saarg Il (284-9, west mnt, us 5) parabh abhinaasee aykankaar. The Eternal Lord God is the One, the Creator.
SS" wes ad fas HT Il (284-9, aCat Het, He 5) naanaa chalit karay khin maahi. He performs His many plays in an instant.
ufs sfuS use AS one Il (284-9, ast ment, He 5) poor rahi-o pooran sabh thaa-ay. The Perfect Lord is pervading all places.
ara fafa afs qos Fovet Il (284-10, ast ment, He 5) naanaa biDh kar banat banaa-ee. In so many ways, He created the creation.
must atHfs mmd uret il (284-10, ast ment, He 5) apnee keemat aapay paa-ee. He alone can estimate His worth.
AS we fs & AS fA a OE Il (284-10, aGst mnt, He 5) sabh ghat tis kay sabh tis kay thaa-o. All hearts are His, and all places are His.
afu afu He aoa ofa are igi (284-11, aGst Ment, He 5) jap jap jeevai naanak har naa-o. ||4] | Nanak lives by chanting, chanting the Name of the Lord. ||4||
SH A Ud AIS AS Il (284-11, aGat wensst, He 5) naam kay Dhaaray saglay jant. The Naam is the Support of all creatures.
OH & Os YS FINS Il (284-11, aGat Peneet, wz 5) naam kay Dhaaray khand barahmand. The Naam is the Support of the earth and solar systems.
oH & Und fAfYfS Ae UsTS Il (284-12, west Meniet, He 5) naam kay Dhaaray simrit bayd puraan. The Naam is the Support of the Simritees, the Vedas and the Puraanas.
oH A Ud Hoos fami fame il (234-12, west meniat, He 5) naam kay Dhaaray sunan gi-aan Dhi-aan. The Naam is the Support by which we hear of spiritual wisdom and meditation.
OH & US MSNA UTS Il (284-12, a7Gat Menist, He 5) naam kay Dhaaray aagaas paataal. The Naam is the Support of the Akaashic ethers and the nether regions.
OH A US Aas MATT Il (284-13, a@st Hunt, v3 5) naam kay Dhaaray sagal aakaar. The Naam is the Support of all bodies.
oH A Wd UdMT AS FSS Il (284-13, TST AeNAAt, He 5) naam kay Dhaaray puree-aa sabh bhavan. The Naam is the Support of all worlds and realms.
on & Afar Gud Afs ASS Il (284-13, wet mnect, ne 5) naam kai sang uDhray sun sarvan. Associating with the Naam, listening to it with the ears, one is saved.
ate fosur far nid af we Il (284-14, aGSt ment, He 5) kar kirpaa jis aapnai naam laa-ay. Those whom the Lord mercifully attaches to His Naam
Soa ua ue xfs AAS Tis US Ul (284-14, aCSt Ment, He 5) naanak cha-uthay pad meh so jan gat paa-ay. ||5|| - O Nanak, in the fourth state, those humble servants attain salvation. ||5||
gu Als wT ot ALS METS I (284-14, aGet Ment, He 5) roop sat jaa kaa sat asthaan. His form is true, and true is His place.
ugy As ASH UU Il (284-15, aSSt Aen, 2 5) purakh sat kayval parDhaan. His personality is true - He alone is supreme.
assts vfs vfs AT oft aret i (284-15, aet ment, He 5) kartoot sat sat jaa kee banee. His acts are true, and true is His Word.
Afs use AS Hf AHTeT I (284-15, west ment, He 5) sat purakh sabh maahi samaanee. The True Lord is permeating all.
Afs AH A at TIS" ALS Il (284-16, aCHt Ment, He 5) sat karam jaa kee rachnaa sat. True are His actions; His creation is true.
Ho Afs Afs Ssufs it (284-16, Tat MeNIt, He 5) mool sat sat utpat. His root is true, and true is what originates from it.
Afs adgat fasHe feaHst Il (284-16, west Henct, He 5) sat karnee nirmal nirmalee. True is His lifestyle, the purest of the pure.
fants ase fants As set Il (284-17, aGst Mnet, He 5) jisahi bujhaa-ay tiseh sabh bhalee. All goes well for those who know Him.
ARs OH YS at AYeTeT Il (284-17, TST MNT, He 5) sat naam parabh kaa sukh-daa-ee. The True Name of God is the Giver of peace.
fara AS Soe Ae SF ret WEN (284-17, wat Peet, ne 5) bisvaas sat naanak gur tay paa-ee. ||6|| Nanak has obtained true faith from the Guru. ||6]|
Afs Feo AY Suen il (284-18, ast mnt, we 5) sat bachan saaDhoo updays. True are the Teachings, and the Instructions of the Holy.
Afs 3 Ho A a fee URSA Il (284-18, aGet mnt, He 5) sat tay jan jaa kai ridai parvays. True are those into whose hearts He enters.
Afs feats as A ate I (284-18, west Met, we 5) sat nirat boojhai jay ko-ay. One who knows and loves the Truth
oy AUS ST at afs SE I (284-19, aGSt Hen, He 5) naam japat taa kee gat ho-ay. - chanting the Naam, he obtains salvation.
nifty Afs amt AS ALS Il (284-19, west HeMIAt, He 5)
aap sat kee-aa sabh sat. He Himself is True, and all that He has made is true.
mm ATS must fufS afs il (284-19, aGst ment, He 5) aapay jaanai apnee mit gat. He Himself knows His own state and condition.
Ust 2cu
fan at fqnfe A aPeTS I (285-1, tat Ment, He 5) jis kee sarisat so karnaihaar. He is the Creator Lord of His world.
Med Oo OS ATS sterg i (285-1, Sst Mest, v2 5) avar na boojh karat beechaar. No one else understands Him, although they may try.
aas at fufs o ATS oor I (285-1, aGst ment, we 5) kartay kee mit na jaanai kee-aa. The created cannot know the extent of the Creator.
Soa A fSA aS A cash IDI (285-2, ast Het, He 5) naanak jo tis bhaavai so vartee-aa. ||7|| O Nanak, whatever pleases Him comes to pass. ||7]|
fanHe fan se faAHTe II (285-2, wat Fenet, He 5) bisman bisam bha-ay bismaad. Gazing upon His wondrous wonder, I am wonder-struck and amazed!
fate gfsur faq orfeor ATE Il (285-2, aGat Pent, ne 5) jin boojhi-aa tis aa-i-aa savaad. One who realizes this, comes to taste this state of joy.
us & df wfs Ae Ts Il (285-3, ast Ment, He 5) parabh kai rang raach jan rahay. God's humble servants remain absorbed in His Love.
Td aA Fas USTIG Gd Il (285-3, aSSt Hest, He 5) gur kai bachan padaarath lahay. Following the Guru's Teachings, they receive the four cardinal blessings.
6fe as Ba ASoTS Il (285-3, aH Aen, nz 5) o-ay daatay dukh kaatanhaar. They are the givers, the dispellers of pain.
aw a Afar Sd AAS Il (285-3, ast Aent, He 5) jaa kai sang tarai sansaar. In their company, the world is saved.
Ho A Aa A saat Il (285-4, ast Het, He 5) jan kaa sayvak so vadbhaagee. The slave of the Lord's servant is so very blessed.
Ho & Afar Sa fee wait il (285-4, aSst monet, 2 5) jan kai sang ayk liv laagee. In the company of His servant, one becomes attached to the Love of the One.
To dfae atsse AS We Il (285-4, ast went, ve 5) gun gobid keertan jan gaavai. His humble servant sings the Kirtan, the songs of the glory of God.
Gs UAE Soa SH US CIM (285-5, aCzt Mnest, ne 5) gur parsaad naanak fal paavai. ||8]|16]| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, he receives the fruits of his rewards. ||8]|16]|
HS Il (285-5) salok. Shalok:
mife AY Hate Ag ll (285-5, aSst Aenst, He 5) aad sach jugaad sach. True in the beginning, True throughout the ages,
d fs AY Soa DAT fS AS NA (285-5, aGSt ANAT, He 5) hai bhe sach naanak hosee bhe sach. ||1|| True here and now. O Nanak, He shall forever be True. ||1]|
mMAeUeT Il (285-6) asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
3d6 Als Als UPHSI"S Il (285-6, TST AeNIAt, He 5) charan sat sat parsanhaar. His Lotus Feet are True, and True are those who touch Them.
unt Als AfS AZT Il (285-6, aSSt Hest, He 5) poojaa sat sat sayvdaar. His devotional worship is True, and True are those who worship Him.
SdH Afs AS USI" Il (285-6, TS ANAT, He 5) darsan sat sat paykhanhaar. The Blessing of His Vision is True, and True are those who behold it.
oH Afs Als fomreags I (285-7, west Ant, He 5) naam sat sat Dhi-aavanhaar. His Naam is True, and True are those who meditate on it.
mimfy AfS AfS AS OT Il (285-7, west Ment, He 5) aap sat sat sabh Dhaaree. He Himself is True, and True is all that He sustains.
my TE MY Teast il (285-7, aSst went, ns 5) aapay gun aapay gunkaaree. He Himself is virtuous goodness, and He Himself is the Bestower of virtue.
Hag Afs Afs ys FAST Il (285-8, ast Ment, ve 5) sabad sat sat parabh baktaa. The Word of His Shabad is True, and True are those who speak of God.
Hefs Afs As AA AOS Il (285-8, wat Fenst, He 5) Surat sat sat jas suntaa. Those ears are True, and True are those who listen to His Praises.
asoud a@ Afs AS SE I (285-8, weet Ae, He 5) bujhanhaar ka-o sat sabh ho-ay. All is True to one who understands.
ood Afs AfS ys ALE IAI (285-9, aGst ent, He 5) naanak sat sat parabh so-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, True, True is He, the Lord God. ||1||
Afs Fay fee fats wfenr i (295-9, rat mnt, Hs 5) sat saroop ridai jin maani-aa. One who believes in the Embodiment of Truth with all his heart
ade ATS f3fs HS uetour il (285-9, ast ment, He 5) karan karaavan tin mool pachhaani-aa. recognizes the Cause of causes as the Root of all.
w a foe fie ys orfeor I (285-10, aSet ment, He 5) jaa kai ridai bisvaas parabh aa-i-aa. One whose heart is filled with faith in God
33 fomre fen Hf yatetfemr I (285-10, aGat Menit, He 5) tat gi-aan tis man paragtaa-i-aa. - the essence of spiritual wisdom is revealed to his mind.
3 3 fess df sro Il (285-10, west ment, He 5) bhai tay nirbha-o ho-ay basaanaa. Coming out of fear, he comes to live without fear.
fan 3 Cufsor fsq ufo ANTE II (285-11, west ment, He 5)
jis tay upji-aa tis maahi samaanaa. He is absorbed into the One, from whom he originated.
SAS Hd S FAS TST Il (285-11, ast Mensst, vz 5) basat maahi lay basat gadaa-ee. When something blends with its own,
a aQ fF a Aor AT I (285-11, west Ment, He 5) taa ka-o bhinn na kahnaa jaa-ee. it cannot be said to be separate from it.
US gsaTg fra il (285-12, 7st mnt, we 5) boojhai boojhanhaar bibayk. This is understood only by one of discerning understanding.
STIS THs SHA SA MQIl (285-12, 7st Hanst, He 5) naaraa-in milay naanak ayk. ||2|| Meeting with the Lord, O Nanak, he becomes one with Him. ||2||
SAT A ASA mamas | (285-12, ast meniat, ue 5) thaakur kaa sayvak aagi-aakaaree. The servant is obedient to his Lord and Master.
OAT OT ASA HET UATS il (285-12, wat ment, ue 5) thaakur kaa sayvak sadaa poojaaree. The servant worships his Lord and Master forever.
Sa A Aa a Hfs UsSifs Il (285-13, ast Ment, He 5) thaakur kay sayvak kai man parteet. The servant of the Lord Master has faith in his mind.
SAT a Aza at fogHes SHS il (285-13, ast Aen, He 5) thaakur kay sayvak kee nirmal reet. The servant of the Lord Master lives a pure lifestyle.
oad AC Aea AS Afar il (285-13, west AeA, He 5) thaakur ka-o sayvak jaanai sang. The servant of the Lord Master knows that the Lord is with him.
Us A ASA OH A Sa il (285-14, aSat mneet, uz 5) parabh kaa sayvak naam kai rang. God's servant is attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Aga XG YS UHSTS Il (285-14, ast Mensat, vs 5) sayvak ka-o parabh paalanhaaraa. God is the Cherisher of His servant.
Aza at amt fadarer il (285-14, ast ment, v2 5) sayvak kee raakhai nirankaaraa. The Formless Lord preserves His servant.
A Aea faa efor ys od Il (285-15, rat menect, ne 5) SO sayvak jis da-i-aa parabh Dhaarai. Unto His servant, God bestows His Mercy.
Soa A Aza ATA ATA ANTS ISI (285-15, Test ENT, He 5) naanak so sayvak saas saas samaarai. ||3]|| O Nanak, that servant remembers Him with each and every breath. ||3]|
MUS AS AT USE Sa Il (285-15, AST AUT, He 5) apunay jan kaa pardaa dhaakai. He covers the faults of His servant.
nus ASx at APU TH Il (285-16, aSst ment, He 5) apnay sayvak kee sarpar raakhai. He surely preserves the honor of His servant.
mus TA AS Vf ssret Il (285-16, aSt Ment, He 5) apnay daas ka-o day-ay vadaa-ee. He blesses His slave with greatness.
mus Aza AG SH Auret Il (285-16, west mensAt, He 5) apnay sayvak ka-o naam japaa-ee. He inspires His servant to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
mud Aza at wif ufS at il (285-17, aGst Aent, He 5) apnay sayvak kee aap pat raakhai. He Himself preserves the honor of His servant.
a at afs ffs af & wes I 285-17, aGst ment, He 5) taa kee gat mit ko-ay na laakhai. No one knows His state and extent.
Ys & ASA AG tH UTS Il (285-17, west Mn, we 5) parabh kay sayvak ka-o ko na pahoochai. No one is equal to the servant of God.
ys & Hea Su Ss ST Il (285-18, west Meet, He 5) parabh kay sayvak ooch tay oochay. The servant of God is the highest of the high.
A ufs must Ae orfeur i (285-18, aSst ment, He 5) jo parabh apnee sayvaa laa-i-aa. One whom God applies to His own service, O Nanak
ood A Aza vs fefh ysereur ell (285-18, rat ment, He 5) naanak so sayvak dah dis paragtaa-i-aa. ||4| | - that servant is famous in the ten directions. ||4||
Slot ott ufs as IT Il (285-19, aSst Ment, He 5) neekee keeree meh kal raakhai. He infuses His Power into the tiny ant;
SAH Ad BHAT afe wes Il (285-19, ast ANT, He 5) bhasam karai laskar kot laakhai. it can then reduce the armies of millions to ashes
fAA a ATA ares wTfU Il (285-19, west Heit, He 5) jis kaa saas na kaadhat aap. Those whose breath of life He Himself does not take away
UST cE
sa ag mus t afs Te Il (286-1, west Ment, H: 5) taa ka-o raakhat day kar haath. - He preserves them, and holds out His Hands to protect them.
HOA H36 ATS AT SS Il (286-1, west mens, He 5) maanas jatan karat baho bhaat. You may make all sorts of efforts,
fan a agsa fase ATS Il (2386-1, Teast Ment, He 5) tis kay kartab birthay jaat. but these attempts are in vain.
Hd & IH MST B AE Il (286-1, aSSt MeN, He 5) maarai na raakhai avar na ko-ay. No one else can kill or preserve
Hea Hert ar ar Afe Il (286-2, a@st ment, He 5) sarab jee-aa kaa raakhaa so-ay. - He is the Protector of all beings.
ard Ae aafa F yrat Il (286-2, aSst ment, Hs 5) kaahay soch karahi ray paraanee. So why are you so anxious, O mortal?
Afu soa ys mie fesrat lull (286-2, aGat ment, He 5) jap naanak parabh alakh vidaanee. ||5|| Meditate, O Nanak, on God, the invisible, the wonderful! ||5||
ad ag ag ys Aub it (286-3, rat moet, ne 5) baara™ baar baar parabh japee-ai. Time after time, again and again, meditate on God.
ut nifys fea He 3 Gud Il (286-3, aGet mnt, He 5) pee amrit ih man tan Dharpee-ai. Drinking in this Nectar, this mind and body are satisfied.
oH 336 fats Toufa ufeur I (286-3, west ment, He 5) naam ratan jin gurmukh paa-i-aa.
The jewel of the Naam is obtained by the Gurmukhs; fSH fogs neg odt fenetfenr Il (286-4, wat ment, He 5)
tis kichh avar naahee daristaa-i-aa. they see no other than God.
oH Ug oH TU Sa Il (286-4, wat Ment, He 5) naam Dhan naamo roop rang. Unto them, the Naam is wealth, the Naam is beauty and delight.
OH AY dfs SH Al AT Il (286-4, aGst Hest, 2 5) naamo sukh har naam kaa sang. The Naam is peace, the Lord's Name is their companion.
on ofA A He fuss I (286-5, aext Mt, He 5) naam ras jo jan tariptaanay. Those who are satisfied by the essence of the Naam
Ho 36 SHfs OTH AHS Il (286-5, aSSt MnIAt, He 5) man tan naameh naam samaanay. - their minds and bodies are drenched with the Naam.
Gos 8s ASST 3H Il (286-5, Tat Ment, Hs 5) oothat baithat sovat naam. While standing up, sitting down and sleeping, the Naam,
AT Sod Ao A AS AH Nell (286-6, ast ANAT, He 5) kaho naanak jan kai sad kaam. ||6]|| says Nanak, is forever the occupation of God's humble servant. | |6] |
aod AA fave feo Tf Il C86-6, Text Mn, He 5) bolhu jas jihbaa din raat. Chant His Praises with your tongue, day and night.
ufs mud Ae atet ets It (286-6, a@xt mnt, ne 5) parabh apnai jan keenee daat. God Himself has given this gift to His servants.
adts safs mrsu a ote Il (286-7, aGst mnt, He 5) karahi bhagat aatam kai chaa-ay. Performing devotional worship with heart-felt love,
ys nud fAG gofo ANTE I (286-7, west Ment, ue 5) parabh apnay si-o raheh samaa-ay. they remain absorbed in God Himself.
A dot des A AS Il (286-7, aGst Mt, He 5) jo ho-aa hovat so jaanai. They know the past and the present.
US MUS A JAH UES Il (286-7, Text Menect, He 5) parabh apnay kaa hukam pachhaanai. They recognize God's Own Command.
fan at Hf ABs sus Il (236-8, aest Menst, He 5) tis kee mahimaa ka-un bakhaana-o. Who can describe His Glory?
fSA HT TS als SAG ASE Il (286-8, ast Ment, He 5) tis kaa gun kahi ayk na jaan-o. I cannot describe even one of His virtuous qualities.
MIS UIT US SAfs Jag Il (286-8, Gat Ment, He 5) aath pahar parabh baseh hajooray. Those who dwell in God's Presence, twenty-four hours a day
AT SHA At He UT MDI (286-9, aCst mest, He 5) kaho naanak say-ee jan pooray. ||7|| - says Nanak, they are the perfect persons. ||7]||
Ho Hd f3e at Ge Bfo i (286-9, west ment, He 5) man mayray tin kee ot layhi. O my mind, seek their protection;
HO 36 Must f35 AS Ufa Il (286-9, west mnit, He 5) man tan apnaa tin jan deh. give your mind and body to those humble beings.
fate Afe mrs Ys UsTST Il (286-10, at Pent, HE 5) jin jan apnaa parabhoo pachhaataa. Those humble beings who recognizes God
H HO Ads Sa aT VST Il (286-10, aSst Het, He 5) so jan sarab thok kaa daataa. are the givers of all things.
fan at Aafe Aga AY uUTNfs Il (286-10, aGSt HeNIH, He 5) tis kee saran sarab sukh paavahi. In His Sanctuary, all comforts are obtained.
fsn ao zofA AS uy fevefs I (286-11, west Fent, He 5) tis kai daras sabh paap mitaaveh. By the Blessing of His Darshan, all sins are erased.
med froreu Aart SS Il (286-11, west ment, 2 5) avar si-aanap saglee chhaad. So renounce all other clever devices,
SH AS at J AST ST Il (286-11, ast Ment, ue 5) tis jan kee too sayvaa laag. and enjoin yourself to the service of those servants.
MITES WS 3 det Sa Il (286-12, ast MNT, He 5) aavan jaan na hovee tayraa. Your comings and goings shall be ended.
aoe (SH AS & UAT AS US ICUVI (286-12, TES Pet, He 5) naanak tis jan kay poojahu sad pairaa. ||8]||17]| O Nanak, worship the feet of God's humble servants forever. ||8]|17] |
HS Il (286-12)
salok. Shalok:
Afs use fate wfoor Afsag fA at oS I (286-12, aGst mnit, He 5) sat purakh jin jaani-aa satgur tis kaa naa-o. The one who knows the True Lord God, is called the True Guru.
fan a Hfa fre Gad aoa ofs as TE NA 286-13, agSt Ment, He 5) tis kai sang sikh uDhrai naanak har gun gaa-o. ||1|| In His Company, the Sikh is saved, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
1111] MAeuUet Il (286-13)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
Afsag fia at ad ufsurs Il (286-14, +@at mnt, ne 5) satgur sikh kee karai partipaal. The True Guru cherishes His Sikh.
Rea AC TT Het Sfenrs Il (286-14, ast Aent, ve 5) sayvak ka-o gur sadaa da-i-aal. The Guru is always merciful to His servant.
fra at aa vonfs ne fas Il (286-14, aBst Ment, He 5) sikh kee gur durmat mal hirai. The Guru washes away the filth of the evil intellect of His Sikh.
ae Fast dfs aH Bud | (286-15, aGst menit, He 5) gur bachnee har naam uchrai. Through the Guru's Teachings, he chants the Lord's Name.
Afsag fre & Fae a!S | (286-15, aSSt AUT, He 5) satgur sikh kay banDhan kaatai. The True Guru cuts away the bonds of His Sikh.
ad ot fry faorg 3 TS Il (286-15, TGS Met, He 5) gur kaa sikh bikaar tay haatai. The Sikh of the Guru abstains from evil deeds.
Afsagd fru xB oH Ue Sf Il (286-15, west ment, U8 5) satgur sikh ka-o naam Dhan day-ay. The True Guru gives His Sikh the wealth of the Naam.
ad a fry esarat J il (286-16, aBst Aen, He 5) gur kaa sikh vadbhaagee hay. The Sikh of the Guru is very fortunate.
Afsag fia at JSS UBS ASS Il (286-16, TES AenAt,, v2 5) satgur sikh kaa halat palat savaarai. The True Guru arranges this world and the next for His Sikh.
sod Afsad fra aS rh ate ATS NU (286-16, Text AeA, He 5) naanak satgur sikh ka-o jee-a naal samaarai. ||1|| O Nanak, with the fullness of His heart, the True Guru mends His Sikh. ||1]|
aa & fafo Aza A Id Il (286-17, Text Meet, He 5) gur kai garihi sayvak jo rahai. That selfless servant, who lives in the Guru's household,
ad at wtfamr He ufs Ad Il (286-17, aat AUNT, He 5) gur kee aagi-aa man meh sahai. is to obey the Guru's Commands with all his mind.
WTUR AG afs AE 3 ASS Il (286-18, ast ent, He 5) aapas ka-o kar kachh na janaavai. He is not to call attention to himself in any way.
ofa ofa an fae Ae fore] Il (286-18, west Ment, He 5) har har naam ridai sad Dhi-aavai. He is to meditate constantly within his heart on the Name of the Lord.
Ho Se Afsagd & uA Il (286-18, aGst ment, He 5) man baychai satgur kai paas. One who sells his mind to the True Guru
fSH AGA AX ASA TAA Il (236-19, ast Ment, He 5) tis sayvak kay kaaraj raas. - that humble servant's affairs are resolved.
Rat ags df= fegant il (s6-19, ast ment, He 5) sayvaa karat ho-ay nihkaamee. One who performs selfless service, without thought of reward,
fsA ag ds usufs AyMt I (286-19, ast ANT, He 5) tis ka-o hot paraapat su-aamee. Shall attain his Lord and Master.
Us Qe must faut fa uirfy ase i (287-1, west ment, us 5)
apnee kirpaa jis aap karay-i. He Himself grants His Grace;
Soa A ASA Td at Hfs SS 2 (287-1, west Ment, He 5) naanak so sayvak gur kee mat lay-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, that selfless servant lives the Guru's Teachings. ||2||
ain fans Ts aT He HS Il (287-1, ast NI, He 5) bees bisvay gur kaa man maanai. One who obeys the Guru's Teachings one hundred per cent
A Aza ushHs at afs AS Il (287-2, at Mn, He 5) so sayvak parmaysur kee gat jaanai. - that selfless servant comes to know the state of the Transcendent Lord.
A Afsasg far fee ofs oS it (287-2, west ment, He 5) so satgur jis ridai har naa-o. The True Guru's Heart is filled with the Name of the Lord.
mfok TS TdT AS sf AWE Il (287-2, west Fenit, He 5) anik baar gur ka-o bal jaa-o. So many times, I am a sacrifice to the Guru.
Hea fears Aba ar Vrst il (287-3, a@at ment, He 5) sarab niDhaan jee-a kaa daataa. He is the treasure of everything, the Giver of life.
WTS UTS USYIH Sfat PS | (287-3, aSst Ment, ne 5) aath pahar paarbarahm rang raataa. Twenty-four hours a day, He is imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God.
¥dH Hid AS AS Hfs UTSYIH Il (287-3, aSst Ment, we 5) barahm meh jan jan meh paarbarahm. The servant is in God, and God is in the servant.
eats orf adt As SIH Il (287-4, ast Ment, He 5) aykeh aap nahee kachh bharam. He Himself is One - there is no doubt about this.
HOA frorau afer 3 arent i (287-4, ast manist, v2 5) sahas si-aanap la-i-aa na jaa-ee-ai. By thousands of clever tricks, He is not found.
Soa MAT TT assrat uh Sl (2387-4, ast went, He 5) naanak aisaa gur badbhaagee paa-ee-ai. ||3]| O Nanak, such a Guru is obtained by the greatest good fortune. ||3]|
HES PIAS UNS uss Il (287-5, ast Aent, He 5) safal darsan paykhat puneet. Blessed is His Darshan; receiving it, one is purified.
USHS BIO als feaHs SHS il (287-5, ast Mest, He 5) parsat charan gat nirmal reet. Touching His Feet, one's conduct and lifestyle become pure.
3e3 Aft TH Ws Je Il (287-5, Test Ment, 2 5) bhaytat sang raam gun ravay. Abiding in His Company, one chants the Lord's Praise,
UTIYIH at TIA As Il (287-6, TGat Ment, He 5) paarbarahm kee dargeh gavay. and reaches the Court of the Supreme Lord God.
Afs ats FIG ATS MUS Il (287-6, ast Ment, He 5) sun kar bachan karan aaghaanay. Listening to His Teachings, one's ears are satisfied.
Hfs ASy MITSsH uss Il (287-6, ast HenIT, He 5) man santokh aatam patee-aanay. The mind is contented, and the soul is fulfilled.
ust TT oa AT ar AF il (287-7, west ment, we 5) pooraa gur akh-ya-o jaa kaa mantar. The Guru is perfect; His Teachings are everlasting.
wifys ferfe ua df AS i (2387-7, west Men, Hs 5) amrit darisat paykhai ho-ay sant. Beholding His Ambrosial Glance, one becomes saintly.
ae fants ahafs act ute il (287-7, ast meni, 2 5)
gun bi-ant keemat nahee paa-ay.
Endless are His virtuous qualities; His worth cannot be appraised. Sod fan se fen we fete igi (287-8, agst Rent, H 5)
naanak jis bhaavai tis la-ay milaa-ay. ||4|| O Nanak, one who pleases Him is united with Him. ||4]|
faga a BAsts mse I (287-8, aest mnt, He 5) jinbaa ayk ustat anayk. The tongue is one, but His Praises are many.
ARS usd yas faa I oY 8s S UTES Yat I (287-8, ast mnt, ws 5) sat purakh pooran bibayk. kaahoo bol na pahuchat paraanee. The True Lord, of perfect perfection - no speech can take the mortal to Him.
Man nidisd YS fegarat il (287-9, ret mnt, us 5) agam agochar parabh nirbaanee. God is Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, balanced in the state of Nirvaanaa.
foros fasta FueTet I (287-9, ast nit, He 5) niraahaar nirvair sukh-daa-ee. He is not sustained by food; He has no hatred or vengeance; He is the Giver of peace.
ot at ahafs fas & uret i (287-10, ast ment, H: 5) taa kee keemat kinai na paa-ee. No one can estimate His worth.
mfoa sas dee fos aafa il (287-10, ast mnt, He 5) anik bhagat bandan nit karahi. Countless devotees continually bow in reverence to Him.
do ane fase finrefs i (287-10, aGst Ment, He 5) charan kamal hirdai simrahi. In their hearts, they meditate on His Lotus Feet.
He afeardt Afsarg wus I (287-10, west meniat, He 5) sad balihaaree satgur apnay. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the True Guru;
ood fan ure MAT Us AUS MUI (287-11, Text Ment, He 5) naanak jis parsaad aisaa parabh japnay. ||5|| by His Grace, he meditates on God. ||5]|
feg ofa oH ue Fo AfE I (287-11, aest MN, He 5) ih har ras paavai jan ko-ay. Only a few obtain this ambrosial essence of the Lord's Name.
nifys ute ong A SPE II (287-12, a@et mnt, ne 5) amrit peevai amar so ho-ay. Drinking in this Nectar, one becomes immortal.
CA use a ot ae faa AT a HfS YRS TSSA Il (287-12, aGaxt Mnect, He 5) us purakh kaa naahee kaday binaas. jaa kai man pargatay guntaas. That person whose mind is illuminated by the treasure of excellence, never dies.
MTS UIT Tid a SH BLE Il (287-12, ast Mnit, He 5) aath pahar har kaa naam lay-ay. Twenty-four hours a day, he takes the Name of the Lord.
Ae Guen Aa aS Ufe Il (287-13, aGat ment, v2 5) sach updays sayvak ka-o day-ay. The Lord gives true instruction to His servant.
Ho wfeor & Afat & Buy Il (287-13, ast wet, He 5) moh maa-i-aa kai sang na layp. He is not polluted by emotional attachment to Maya.
Ho Hfs ave ofa ofs Sa Il (287-13, aSst west, He 5) man meh raakhai har har ayk. In his mind, he cherishes the One Lord, Har, Har.
Mgars Sua UPA Il (287-14, Test Ment, He 5) anDhkaar deepak pargaasay. In the pitch darkness, a lamp shines forth.
Sod SIH HI VY SIS BA Ell (287-14, Test Aen, He 5) naanak bharam moh dukh tah tay naasay. ||6|| O Nanak, doubt, emotional attachment and pain are erased. ||6||
sufs Hts ofe SISTET I (287-14, TeSt Ment, He 5) tapat maahi thaadh vartaa-ee. In the burning heat, a soothing coolness prevails.
Moe Stent wy BS Smet Il (287-15, aSSt Ment, He 5) anad bha-i-aa dukh naathay bhaa-ee. Happiness ensues and pain departs, O Siblings of Destiny.
ons
HOH HIS & fHe MISA Il (287-15, ast MenIT, He 5) janam maran kay mitay andaysay. The fear of birth and death is dispelled,
AY & use Suen il (287-15, Sat mest, He 5) saaDhoo kay pooran updaysay. by the perfect Teachings of the Holy Saint.
38 yor fos af aA Il (287-15, west MN, He 5) bha-o chookaa nirbha-o ho-ay basay. Fear is lifted, and one abides in fearlessness.
Hae faurfa He 3B SA Il (287-16, ast Ment, He 5) Sagal bi-aaDh man tay khai nasay. All evils are dispelled from the mind.
fan at AT fate farsur ordt Il (287-16, a@st mnt, H3 5)
jis kaa saa tin kirpaa Dhaaree. He takes us into His favor as His own.
AoAfa Afy aH HASH II (287-16, west Het, He 5) saaDhsang jap naam muraaree. In the Company of the Holy, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fafs urét ya JH TSS Il (287-17, Sst Mest, v2 5) thit paa-ee chookay bharam gavan. Stability is attained; doubt and wandering cease,
Afs ata Tle dfs AA ASS NDI (287-17, aGst Ment, we 5) sun naanak har har jas sarvan. ||7|| O Nanak, listening with one's ears to the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||7]|
fasae urfy Haare Sst Gat i (287-17, west ment, He 5) nirgun aap sargun bhee ohee. He Himself is absolute and unrelated; He Himself is also involved and related.
oer ufe fafs Aart Hot I (287-18, 7eSt Ment, He 5) kalaa Dhaar jin saglee mohee. Manifesting His power, He fascinates the entire world.
mua ates ufs wiry aare Il (287-18, Test Pent, He 5) apnay charit parabh aap banaa-ay. God Himself sets His play in motion.
must StHfs wimp ure il (287-18, ast Aenst, He 5) apunee keemat aapay paa-ay. Only He Himself can estimate His worth.
of fas sa ardt AE il (287-19, a@at most, ns 5) har bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. There is none, other than the Lord.
Hea fedsfs Sa AE I (287-19, aGst ment, He 5) sarab nirantar ayko so-ay. Permeating all, He is the One.
Gf ufs sfenr gu Fa I (287-19, 7eat Ment, He 5) ot pot ravi-aa roop rang. Through and through, He pervades in form and color.
se YA AT & Aa Il (287-19, 7st Ment, He 5) bha-ay pargaas saaDh kai sang. He is revealed in the Company of the Holy.
UST Wet
Se TIS" Must AB Urs il (288-1, west mnt, v2 5) rach rachnaa apnee kal Dhaaree. Having created the creation, He infuses His own power into it.
Misa AS SSA SSIS UCUACH (288-1, aGSt Ment, ve 5)
anik baar naanak balihaaree. ||8||18]| So many times, Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||8]|18]|
HS Il (288-1) salok. Shalok:
Afa 3 3 fas sno faftmr Aart es Il (288-2, west Het, He 5) saath na chaalai bin bhajan bikhi-aa saglee chhaar. Nothing shall go along with you, except your devotion. All corruption is like ashes.
Uf ds SH ANSa Baa fT US AT NA (288-2, west AenIAt, He 5) har har naam kamaavanaa naanak ih Dhan saar. ||1]| Practice the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. O Nanak, this is the most excellent wealth.
1111] MAeuet Il (288-3)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
Hz ot fife agg ates Il (288-3, weet mnt, He 5) sant janaa mil karahu beechaar. Joining the Company of the Saints, practice deep meditation.
ea fhfs aH nrg Il (288-3, west meniat, He 5) ayk simar naam aaDhaar. Remember the One, and take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
mete Cure Afs Hts faAreT Il (288-3, west ment, HH 5) avar upaav sabh meet bisaarahu.
Forget all other efforts, O my friend
3d6 aHS foe nfs Sf arag Il (288-4, west ment, 8 5)
charan kamal rid meh ur Dhaarahu. - enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within your heart.
AIS ATS A US AH Il (288-4, aSst ment, vs 5) karan kaaran so parabh samrath. God is All-powerful; He is the Cause of causes.
fez af dag an af <a Il (288-4, a@st mens, ue 5) darirh kar gahhu naam har vath. Grasp firmly the object of the Lord's Name.
fey ug Hed deg SHST I (288-5, west Ment, He 5) ih Dhan sanchahu hovhu bhagvant. Gather this wealth, and become very fortunate.
HS Fat at fSegHs HS Il (288-5, west Het, He 5) sant janaa kaa nirmal mant. Pure are the instructions of the humble Saints.
Sa MITA TUT HS HT Il (288-5, ast Ment, He 5) ayk aas raakho man maahi. Keep faith in the One Lord within your mind.
Hea da atoa fife as nail @ss-6, ast ment, Hu: 5) sarab rog naanak mit jaahi. ||1]| All disease, O Nanak, shall then be dispelled. ||1]|
fan ue ag ots ae Cfo wets Il (oss-6, a@at menit, He 5) jis Dhan ka-o chaar kunt uth Dhaaveh. The wealth which you chase after in the four directions
A U9 ofa Ae S uefa Il (288-6, weet Ant, He 5) so Dhan har sayvaa tay paavahi. - you shall obtain that wealth by serving the Lord.
fA AY a@ fos aefa HIS Il (7288-7, west Fenst, He 5) jis sukh ka-o nit baachheh meet. The peace, which you always yearn for, O friend
A AY AG Afar uss il ss-7, vest Ment, we 5) so sukh saaDhoo sang pareet. - that peace comes by the love of the Company of the Holy.
fan Ast a asta set adat Il (288-7, agst Aenst, H2 5) jis sobhaa ka-o karahi bhalee karnee. The glory, for which you perform good deeds
HT Het Sx dla at Haat Il (288-7, west Met, He 5) saa sobhaa bhaj har kee sarnee. - you shall obtain that glory by seeking the Lord's Sanctuary.
wife Curt dao ATE Il (288-8, aGst Ment, He 5) anik upaavee rog na jaa-ay. All sorts of remedies have not cured the disease
da fire ofa nreug ofF II (288-8, aGst Ment, He 5) rog mitai har avkhaDh laa-ay. - the disease is cured only by giving the medicine of the Lord's Name.
Hea fours ufo dfs am fears il (288-8, Gat mnt, He 5) sarab niDhaan meh har naam niDhaan. Of all treasures, the Lord's Name is the supreme treasure.
Afy Soa Udafd UTSTS MQM (288-9, aBSt Het, He 5) jap naanak dargahi parvaan. ||2|| Chant it, O Nanak, and be accepted in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
Ho ude ofa a ote Il (288-9, agst ment, He 5) man parboDhahu har kai naa-ay. Enlighten your mind with the Name of the Lord.
zd fefa mes mre off II (288-9, aGst ment, He 5) dah dis Dhaavat aavai thaa-ay. Having wandered around in the ten directions, it comes to its place of rest.
a a@ fous 3 oat afF Il (288-10, Test MNT, He 5) taa ka-o bighan na laagai ko-ay. No obstacle stands in the way of one
aw a foe aA ofa Ae I (ss-10, west Ment, H: 5) jaa kai ridai basai har so-ay. whose heart is filled with the Lord.
ates sat ater ats |S il (288-10, west HeniAt, He 5) kal taatee thaa“dhaa har naa-o. The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is so hot; the Lord's Name is soothing and cool.
frnifs faufa Ae AY Ure Il (288-11, aest Ment, He 5) simar simar sadaa sukh paa-o. Remember, remember it in meditation, and obtain everlasting peace.
3 faor use df uPA I (288-11, ast mnt, 8 5) bha-o binsai pooran ho-ay aas. Your fear shall be dispelled, and your hopes shall be fulfilled.
Sats STE MISH UPA Il (288-11, 7eat Ment, He 5) bhagat bhaa-ay aatam pargaas. By devotional worship and loving adoration, your soul shall be enlightened.
faz ufs afte sa mfsort i css-11, agst Ant, H 5) tit ghar jaa-ay basai abhinaasee. You shall go to that home, and live forever.
AI BOR AST AH SAT III (288-12, ast Menist, He 5) kaho naanak kaatee jam faasee. ||3]| Says Nanak, the noose of death is cut away. ||3]|
33 sted Ad AS ANT Il (288-12, aSst mnit, He 5) tat beechaar kahai jan saachaa. One who contemplates the essence of reality, is said to be the true person.
Hof Hd A ATS ATS Il (288-12, west Aenst, He 5) janam marai so kaacho kaachaa. Birth and death are the lot of the false and the insincere.
wirer aeg fixe ys AS Il (288-13, aCzt MnIt, He 5) aavaa gavan mitai parabh sayv. Coming and going in reincarnation is ended by serving God.
my fsurfa Aste AIeS Il (288-13, aSst ment, He 5) aap ti-aag saran gurdayv. Give up your selfishness and conceit, and seek the Sanctuary of the Divine Guru.
fe@ g30 HoH a af Curg Il (288-13, west Mn, He 5) i-o ratan janam kaa ho-ay uDhaar. Thus the jewel of this human life is saved.
dfs ofa fife yrs viorg il (288-14, west ment, He 5) har har simar paraan aaDhaar. Remember the Lord, Har, Har, the Support of the breath of life.
mifox Sure o SeGI ST Il (288-14, aSat Hest, He 5) anik upaav na chhootanhaaray. By all sorts of efforts, people are not saved
fafyfs AAS Fe shes | (288-14, west mnt, us 5) simrit saasat bayd beechaaray. - not by studying the Simritees, the Shaastras or the Vedas.
dfs at sats ATT HS STE Il (288-14, aSst mnict, ne 5) har kee bhagat karahu man laa-ay. Worship the Lord with whole-hearted devotion.
Hfs Hes SHA SH UTE Sil (288-15, aGSt MNT, He 5) man banchhat naanak fal paa-ay. ||4| | O Nanak, you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desire. ||4| |
Hfat o wef So Tar Il (288-15, west Aent, He 5) sang na chaalas tayrai Dhanaa. Your wealth shall not go with you;
3 fomr wuctefs Hae HOT Il (288-15, Test Ment, He 5) too” ki-aa laptaavahi moorakh manaa. why do you cling to it, you fool?
HS Hts ada nig Bfost Il (288-16, Text Ment, He 5) sut meet kutamb ar banitaa. Children, friends, family and spouse
fes 3 ATT SH ASS ASST Il (288-16, TSst Ment, v2 5) in tay kahhu tum kavan sanaathaa. - who of these shall accompany you?
oa da Hfenr farang il (288-16, ast mnt, He 5) raaj rang maa-i-aa bisthaar. Power, pleasure, and the vast expanse of Maya
fee 3 ATT ALS SEAS Il (288-17, TSS Ment, He 5) in tay kahhu kavan chhutkaar. - who has ever escaped from these?
MA JASt Ta MASTS Il (288-17, Teast HUNT, He 5) as hastee rath asvaaree. Horses, elephants, chariots and pageantry
BO" Ss FS UAT Il (288-17, west Mt, HW: 5) jhoothaa damf jhooth paasaaree. - false shows and false displays.
fafs ate fan gS & faearar il (288-17, a@at Het, He 5) jin dee-ay tis bujhai na bigaanaa. The fool does not acknowledge the One who gave this;
on farts sox USS MUll (288-18, TSS ANAT, He 5) naam bisaar naanak pachhutaanaa. ||5]| forgetting the Naam, O Nanak, he will repent in the end. ||5||
Gs at fs 3 Sia feurS il (88-18, ast mnt, we 5) gur kee mat too” layhi i-aanay. Take the Guru's advice, you ignorant fool;
sats fast ag sa frors i (288-18, ast ment, HE 5) bhagat binaa baho doobay si-aanay. without devotion, even the clever have drowned.
dfs at sats ATT HS HTS Il (288-19, aCzt Mnist, He 5) har kee bhagat karahu man meet. Worship the Lord with heart-felt devotion, my friend;
fears df sud BS Il (288-19, west ment, Hs 5) nirmal ho-ay tum"aaro cheet. your consciousness shall become pure.
TIS AHS TUT HO HM Il (288-19, west ment, He 5) charan kamal raakho man maahi. Enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet in your mind;
Ua ace
HOH HOH & faofaa As il (289-1, west Ment, 2 5) janam janam kay kilbikh jaahi. the sins of countless lifetimes shall depart.
mf AUT MT SH AUST Il (289-1, aSst Ment, He 5) aap japahu avraa naam japaavhu. Chant the Naam yourself, and inspire others to chant it as well.
Hos AIS JIS AS wUe|T Il (289-1, ast manit, ue 5) sunat kahat rahat gat paavhu. Hearing, speaking and living it, emancipation is obtained.
AS 33 Als ofa & SS Il (289-2, ast Ment, ws 5) saar bhoot sat har ko naa-o. The essential reality is the True Name of the Lord.
Hola HSTe Sea TS WE ill (289-2, ast Mnist, nz 5) sahj subhaa-ay naanak gun gaa-o. ||6|| With intuitive ease, O Nanak, sing His Glorious Praises. ||6||
Ts Wes Sct Csafh HS i (239-2, west ment, ws 5) gun gaavat tayree utras mail. Chanting His Glories, your filth shall be washed off.
faofh wfe s@n firs So 1 (289-3, aGst ment, He 5) binas jaa-ay ha-umai bikh fail. The all-consuming poison of ego will be gone.
dfs miss SA AY ats Il (289-3, aGst Ment, He 5)
hohi achint basai sukh naal.
You shall become carefree, and you shall dwell in peace. AYA ata ofs STH AHS Il (2389-3, west Ment, He 5)
Saas garaas har naam samaal. With every breath and every morsel of food, cherish the Lord's Name.
ats fimrou Aart Har Il (289-4, a@at mnt, He 5) chhaad si-aanap saglee manaa. Renounce all clever tricks, O mind.
AaAfa uefa AM TST Il (289-4, ast Het, He 5) saaDhsang paavahi sach Dhanaa. In the Company of the Holy, you shall obtain the true wealth.
dfs unt Afs xag faGag I (289-4, aest Ment, He 5) har poonjee sanch karahu bi-uhaar. So gather the Lord's Name as your capital, and trade in it.
Sto AY PIT AAT Il (289-4, aGst ment, He 5)
eehaa sukh dargeh jaikaar.
In this world you shall be at peace, and in the Court of the Lord, you shall be acclaimed.
Has fodats Sa Sy Il (289-5, west mot, ve 5) sarab nirantar ayko daykh. See the One permeating all;
AT sod A aA HASa BY IDI (289-5, aGst Hest, He 5) kaho naanak jaa kai mastak laykh. ||7]|| says Nanak, your destiny is pre-ordained. ||7]|
Sa Afu Sat Aes Il (289-5, ast Meet, He 5) ayko jap ayko saalaahi. Meditate on the One, and worship the One.
fa finife Sa Ho vrfa il (289-6, aGst menist, He 5) ayk simar ayko man aahi. Remember the One, and yearn for the One in your mind.
SAH A TS WS nSs Il (289-6, ast went, He 5) aykas kay gun gaa-o anant. Sing the endless Glorious Praises of the One.
Hfs sfe wafu Sa saSS Il (289-6, west mt, Hs 5) man tan jaap ayk bhagvant. With mind and body, meditate on the One Lord God.
Sa Sa Sa Ais mrfu il (289-7, west ment, we 5) ayko ayk ayk har aap. The One Lord Himself is the One and Only.
uae ufe sfoS ys famrfur i (289-7, ast mnt, He 5) pooran poor rahi-o parabh bi-aap. The Pervading Lord God is totally permeating all.
mfoa fanaa Sa 3 Fe Il (289-7, Test Mnst, us 5) anik bisthaar ayk tay bha-ay. The many expanses of the creation have all come from the One.
fa mata uses Te Il (239-7, west mnt, He 5) ayk araaDh paraachhat ga-ay. Adoring the One, past sins are removed.
HS 36 nists SA YF IS Il (289-8, aSzt wens, ue 5) man tan antar ayk parabh raataa. Mind and body within are imbued with the One God.
qd yAtS soa fea AST NCE! (289-8, TST Ment, Hs 5) gur parsaad naanak ik jaataa. ||8||19]| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, the One is known. ||8]|19]|
HS Il (289-9) salok. Shalok:
fess fess ys urfenr ufomr 36 AoE Il (289-9, west Ment, He 5)
firat firat parabh aa-i-aa pari-aa ta-o sarnaa-ay.
After wandering and wandering, O God, I have come, and entered Your Sanctuary. sot at US Fost must sast STE Ul (289-9, ast Ment, ws 5)
naanak kee parabh bayntee apnee bhagtee laa-ay. ||1|| This is Nanak's prayer, O God: please, attach me to Your devotional service. ||1]||
WMAeUet Il (289-10)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
WIA AS AS YS VS Il (289-10, aSst Pent, us 5) jaachak jan jaachai parabh daan. I am a beggar; I beg for this gift from You:
ate fasur feo dfs SH Il (289-10, west ment, He 5) kar kirpaa dayvhu har naam. please, by Your Mercy, Lord, give me Your Name.
AG Aor at HAS Us il (289-10, Test PENI, He 5) saaDh janaa kee maaga-o Dhoor. I ask for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
uTdqan Hat Aaa ute i (289-11, west Hest, He 5) paarbarahm mayree sarDhaa poor. O Supreme Lord God, please fulfill my yearning;
Het Ae US A TS WSS Il (289-11, Test ent, we 5) sadaa sadaa parabh kay gun gaava-o. may I sing the Glorious Praises of God forever and ever.
AYA ATA ys SHfo foMrsé il (289-11, reat Ment, He 5) Saas Saas parabh tumeh Dhi-aava-o. With each and every breath, may I meditate on You, O God.
TIS HS fAG ora UtfS il (289-12, aSst Ment, He 5) charan kamal si-o laagai pareet. May I enshrine affection for Your Lotus Feet.
sats as ys at fos ots i (289-12, aGst mnrt, we 5) bhagat kara-o parabh kee nit neet. May I perform devotional worship to God each and every day.
fa Ce Sa nrarg Il (289-12, aGst went, 2 5) ayk ot ayko aaDhaar. You are my only Shelter, my only Support.
SSX Hal SH YS AT AU (289-12, west Menect, He 5) naanak maagai naam parabh saar. ||1|| Nanak asks for the most sublime, the Naam, the Name of God. ||1]|
ys at fernfe no AY SfE I (289-13, aGet ment, Hs 5) parabh kee darisat mahaa sukh ho-ay. By God's Gracious Glance, there is great peace.
dfs aA ue faaor afe I (289-13, agst ment, He 5) har ras paavai birlaa ko-ay. Rare are those who obtain the juice of the Lord's essence.
fe afm A AS fZUsTS II (289-13, west Ment, He 5) jin chaakhi-aa say jan tariptaanay. Those who taste it are satisfied.
YIS UIA SIt SHS Il (289-14, Tat Meow, ws 5) pooran purakh nahee dolaanay. They are fulfilled and realized beings - they do not waver.
Had 3d UH SA Sar i (289-14, aGat Mnit, Hs 5) subhar bharay paraym ras rang. They are totally filled to over-flowing with the sweet delight of His Love.
Cun we Aa a Afar il (289-14, aGat ment, He 5) upjai chaa-o saaDh kai sang. Spiritual delight wells up within, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ud Hate nie AS fSurfar il (289-14, ast ment, He 5) paray Saran aan sabh ti-aag. Taking to His Sanctuary, they forsake all others.
nists yarn nates fee orfar Il (289-15, ast Ment, ue 5) antar pargaas an-din liv laag. Deep within, they are enlightened, and they center themselves on Him, day and night.
gssrat Afr ys APE Il (289-15, west ent, He 5) badbhaagee japi-aa parabh so-ay. Most fortunate are those who meditate on God.
Soa OTH TS AY AE NM (289-15, aSSt HeNsT, He 5) naanak naam ratay sukh ho-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, they are at peace. ||2]|
Hea ot HOAT udt set I (289-16, at Ment, He 5) sayvak kee mansaa pooree bha-ee. The wishes of the Lord's servant are fulfilled.
Afsad 3 feds His Bet Il (239-16, 7st Ment, He 5) satgur tay nirmal mat la-ee. From the True Guru, the pure teachings are obtained.
We ag us deG efemrs I (289-16, reat Ment, He 5) jan ka-o parabh ho-i-o da-i-aal. Unto His humble servant, God has shown His kindness.
Aza ate eT feos Il (289-17, aGat west, He 5) sayvak keeno sadaa nihaal. He has made His servant eternally happy.
due afte yafs AS sfeur Il (289-17, aGst mnt, He 5) banDhan kaat mukat jan bha-i-aa. The bonds of His humble servant are cut away, and he is liberated.
HOH HIS TA FH ASM il (289-17, ast Ment, He 5) janam maran dookh bharam ga-i-aa. The pains of birth and death, and doubt are gone.
fees uat Hem AS Udt II (289-18, ast Rent, HE 5) ichh punee sarDhaa sabh pooree. Desires are satisfied, and faith is fully rewarded,
fe sfoor Ae Afar Tae | (289-18, ast Mt, Hs 5) rav rahi-aa sad sang hajooree. imbued forever with His all-pervading peace.
fan at AT fate shor frote i (289-18, a@st mnist, v2 5) jis kaa saa tin lee-aa milaa-ay. He is His - he merges in Union with Him.
SSA Fast STH ANTE Sil (289-19, ast ment, He 5) naanak bhagtee naam samaa-ay. ||3]| Nanak is absorbed in devotional worship of the Naam. ||3]||
H fa fans fa wre o 37 Il (289-19, wat But, He 5) so ki-o bisrai je ghaal na bhaanai. Why forget Him, who does not overlook our efforts?
A fa fang fa aint we Il (289-19, west Menist, He 5) so ki-o bisrai je kee-aa jaanai. Why forget Him, who acknowledges what we do?
Uar 2to A fa@ fard fafs ns fee for il (290-1, a@st mnit, He 5)
so ki-o bisrai jin sabh kichh dee-aa. Why forget Him, who has given us everything?
A fa fans fa Hes Ar it (290-1, west menest, He 5) so ki-o bisrai je jeevan jee-aa. Why forget Him, who is the Life of the living beings?
A fag fans fa wtafs yfo at i (290-1, aGat ment, He 5)
so ki-o bisrai je agan meh raakhai. Why forget Him, who preserves us in the fire of the womb?
aa unte & fraser we Il (290-2, aGet nit, He 5) gur parsaad ko birlaa laakhai. By Guru's Grace, rare is the one who realizes this.
A fa@ fand fa fr 3 are il (290-2, aGat menist, nH 5) so ki-o bisrai je bikh tay kaadhai. Why forget Him, who lifts us up out of corruption?
HOH ASH AT SST IS Il (290-2, ast Manat, ws 5) janam janam kaa tootaa gaadhai. Those separated from Him for countless lifetimes, are re-united with Him once again.
afs us 3g fea gerfemr i (290-3, aeat mnt, we 5) gur poorai tat ihai bujhaa-i-aa. Through the Perfect Guru, this essential reality is understood.
UZ MUST Soa AS flmrfenr igi (290-3, ast Ment, vs 5) parabh apnaa naanak jan Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4]| O Nanak, God's humble servants meditate on Him. ||4||
AHS AS add fed aH Il (290-3, aGat mnet, He 5) saajan sant karahu ih kaam. O friends, O Saints, make this your work.
me fsurfar Au Tfs SH Il (290-4, ast FenIt, He 5) aan ti-aag japahu har naam. Renounce everything else, and chant the Name of the Lord.
finite frites frafs AY UTS I (290-4, aGat mnrt, He 5) simar simar simar sukh paavhu. Meditate, meditate, meditate in remembrance of Him, and find peace.
mf AUT MIT OH AUST Il (290-4, a@st mnist, H2 5) aap japahu avrah naam japaavhu. Chant the Naam yourself, and inspire others to chant it.
sats afe sdht AAT Il (290-5, agst ANT, He 5) bhagat bhaa-ay taree-ai sansaar. By loving devotional worship, you shall cross over the world-ocean.
fag sat 30 JHt erg Il (290-5, west Ment, He 5) bin bhagtee tan hosee chhaar. Without devotional meditation, the body will be just ashes.
Hoa afemire AY fof aH i (290-5, aGat ment, He 5) sarab kali-aan sookh niDh naam. All joys and comforts are in the treasure of the Naam.
Bas WS ue fA Il (290-6, ast MMT, He 5) boodat jaat paa-ay bisraam. Even the drowning can reach the place of rest and safety.
AIS TY a TFS SA Il (290-6, wat Manat, ws 5) sagal dookh kaa hovat naas. All sorrows shall vanish.
oO SH AUT DOSA IUll (290-6, aEat Aunt, Hs 5) naanak naam japahu guntaas. ||5|| O Nanak, chant the Naam, the treasure of excellence. ||5| |
Cunt uifS UH TA BE Il (290-6, aGst Ment, we 5) upjee pareet paraym ras chaa-o. Love and affection, and the taste of yearning, have welled up within;
Ho 36 wists fest Are il (290-7, west mnt, He 5) man tan antar ihee su-aa-o. within my mind and body, this is my purpose:
O30 Uf von AY SPE II (290-7, aGet Mn, He 5) naytarahu paykh daras sukh ho-ay. beholding with my eyes His Blessed Vision, I am at peace.
Ho faa ATG vee GE I (290-7, aGst ment, He 5) man bigsai saaDh charan Dho-ay. My mind blossoms forth in ecstasy, washing the feet of the Holy.
sas Ho a Hfs 3fe Sa Il (290-8, aGst Ment, He 5) bhagat janaa kai man tan rang. The minds and bodies of His devotees are infused with His Love.
faser AG urs Aa Il (290-8, wat mnt, Hs 5) birlaa ko-00 paavai sang. Rare is the one who obtains their company.
Sa ans Uta ate fer i (290-8, agat Aent, He 5) ayk basat deejai kar ma-i-aa. Show Your mercy - please, grant me this one request:
ad yAte oH Afy wfen Il (290-9, west Ment, ue 5) gur parsaad naam jap la-i-aa. by Guru's Grace, may I chant the Naam.
a at Cunt adt & ATE Il (290-9, a@at mnit, He 5) taa kee upmaa kahee na jaa-ay. His Praises cannot be spoken;
SOA Son Ags ANTE ilEll (290-9, ast Hen, He 5) naanak rahi-aa sarab samaa-ay. ||6|| O Nanak, He is contained among all. ||6]|
Us aaHe tte efenrs Il (290-9, reat went, He 5) parabh bakhsand deen da-i-aal. God, the Forgiving Lord, is kind to the poor.
Sats Fes AS farsgurss il (290-10, ast west, He 5) bhagat vachhal sadaa kirpaal. He loves His devotees, and He is always merciful to them.
MOTE oe fds TUT il (290-10, ast Aen, H2 5) anaath naath gobind gupaal. The Patron of the patronless, the Lord of the Universe, the Sustainer of the world,
Hea wet ads yfsurs il (290-10, west Ment, He 5) sarab ghataa karat partipaal. the Nourisher of all beings.
mite ude ATE ATS Il (290-11, aSt Ment, 2 5) aad purakh kaaran kartaar. The Primal Being, the Creator of the Creation.
SIS AS A UTS MUS Il (290-11, aGst Ment, we 5) bhagat janaa kay paraan aDhaar. The Support of the breath of life of His devotees.
An AG A ofS usts Il (290-11, west ment, He 5) jo jo japai so ho-ay puneet. Whoever meditates on Him is sanctified,
sats afte we Ho SS Il (290-12, aGst Mat, He 5) bhagat bhaa-ay laavai man heet. focusing the mind in loving devotional worship.
TH fasarsmirs Ste MAS Il (290-12, wet Ment, He 5) ham nirgunee-aar neech ajaan. I am unworthy, lowly and ignorant.
SSA SHA Adle UTY Fae" MDI (290-12, ast Hen, He 5) naanak tumree saran purakh bhagvaan. ||7]|| Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, O Supreme Lord God. ||7]|
Hes ad Hots HY ues | (290-13, ast Ment, He 5) sarab baikunth mukat mokh paa-ay. Everything is obtained: the heavens, liberation and deliverance,
Sa fone dfs x Ts We I (290-13, west menist, He 5) ayk nimakh har kay gun gaa-ay. if one sings the Lord's Glories, even for an instant.
mifsa IA sa Sfsniet it (290-13, west Hest, He 5) anik raaj bhog badi-aa-ee. So many realms of power, pleasures and great glories,
Ufs X BH At AAT Hfs SET Il (290-14, aSat Ment, He 5) har kay naam kee kathaa man bhaa-ee. come to one whose mind is pleased with the Sermon of the Lord's Name.
ad SHO AU Halts Il (290-14, west weet, He 5) baho bhojan kaapar sangeet. Abundant foods, clothes and music
dra Aust fe dfs sts Il (290-14, ast Aenist, He 5) rasnaa japtee har har neet. come to one whose tongue continually chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har.
ot A AdTSt AST USSs Il (290-14, aGst Aenst, H2 5) bhalee so karnee sobhaa Dhanvant. His actions are good, he is glorious and wealthy;
fase SA UIs TT HF Il (290-15, Sst Peet, we 5) hirdai basay pooran gur mant. the Mantra of the Perfect Guru dwells within his heart.
WoAfa ys FI fSeA Il (290-15, aSst Ment, ue 5) saaDhsang parabh dayh nivaas. O God, grant me a home in the Company of the Holy.
Ada AY SSA UTA NCWQOM (290-15, aSSt Fant, Hs 5) sarab sookh naanak pargaas. ||8||20|| All pleasures, O Nanak, are so revealed. ||8||20]|
HS Il (290-16)
salok. Shalok:
Rade fesas fadars Ho ANT wif i (290-16, ast ment, He 5)
sargun nirgun nirankaar sunn samaaDhee aap.
He possesses all qualities; He transcends all qualities; He is the Formless Lord. He Himself is in Primal Samaadhi.
nus abit Stoat mint dt fafa Af Al (290-16, west menIMtT, He 5)
aapan kee-aa naankaa aapay hee fir jaap. ||1]| Through His Creation, O Nanak, He meditates on Himself. ||1]|
mMAeuet Il (290-17)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
wa marys feg dg 3 feAest Il (290-17, west Ment, He 5) jab akaar ih kachh na daristaytaa. When this world had not yet appeared in any form,
uy us 3a aT 3 IST Il (290-17, ast ANT, He 5) paap punn tab kah tay hotaa. who then committed sins and performed good deeds?
Ag Urdt nme Ao ANTE Il (290-18, ast HeNHtT, He 5) jab Dhaaree aapan sunn samaaDh. When the Lord Himself was in Profound Samaadhi,
3a ao faco fan Af orfs i (290-18, agst ANT, He 5) tab bair biroDh kis sang kamaat. then against whom were hate and jealousy directed?
wa fen a ade fede o AUS Il (290-18, Test Ment, He 5) jab is kaa baran chihan na jaapat. When there was no color or shape to be seen,
sa vou Aa ag fants femmes Il (290-19, west Ment, He 5) tab harakh sog kaho kiseh bi-aapat. then who experienced joy and sorrow?
Wa nits nny wify UTITIH Il (290-19, aGst Aunt, v3 5) jab aapan aap aap paarbarahm. When the Supreme Lord Himself was Himself All-in-all,
3a Hd AT faH Jes SAH Il (290-19, aGst Hen, H2 5) tab moh kahaa kis hovat bharam. then where was emotional attachment, and who had doubts?
Us 2KQ
nus 8e mf Sash Il (291-1, ast Ment, He 5) aapan khayl aap varteejaa. He Himself has staged His own drama;
OAT AOI © THT UA (291-1, Tat Fant, He 5) naanak karnaihaar na doojaa. ||1|| O Nanak, there is no other Creator. ||1]|
Wa IFS YS ATH Tot Il (291-1, 7st Ment, vs 5) jab hovat parabh kayval Dhanee. When there was only God the Master,
3a au Hats ag fan a aot I (291-2, weet mnt, He 5) tab banDh mukat kaho kis ka-o ganee. then who was called bound or liberated?
wa Satd Ife Ma wars Il (291-2, west Aenet, He 5) jab aykeh har agam apaar. When there was only the Lord, Unfathomable and Infinite,
3a dda Add AT AVS MSS Il (291-2, ast Ment, vs 5) tab narak surag kaho ka-un a-utaar. then who entered hell, and who entered heaven?
na fede ys Ada ASE Il (291-3, west ment, He 5) jab nirgun parabh sahj subhaa-ay. When God was without attributes, in absolute poise,
3a fhe nats aug fas of= I (291-3, west mnit, He 5)
tab siv sakat kahhu kit thaa-ay.
then where was mind and where was matter - where was Shiva and Shakti? ag wiufa wif must AfSs Us II (291-3, aGst ment, He 5)
jab aapeh aap apnee jot Dharai. When He held His Own Light unto Himself,
3a aes fasd Azo AS 3d Il (291-4, aSat Ae, He 5) tab kavan nidar kavan kat darai. then who was fearless, and who was afraid?
nus sfes mrfy xISTS Il (291-4, aSSt Meet, He 5) aapan chalit aap karnaihaar. He Himself is the Performer in His own plays;
oO SAT MAH MUTT QI (291-4, aSst AuHat, Hs 5) naanak thaakur agam apaar. ||2|| O Nanak, the Lord Master is Unfathomable and Infinite. ||2]|
MPSoTA AY MITES MITAS Il (291-5, aSet Het, He 5) abhinaasee sukh aapan aasan. When the Immortal Lord was seated at ease,
3d HOH HIS AT AT fASTAG Il (291-5, ast HenIH, He 5) tah janam maran kaho kahaa binaasan. then where was birth, death and dissolution?
Wa UIs ATS YS AE I (291-5, aCat Met, we 5) jab pooran kartaa parabh so-ay. When there was only God, the Perfect Creator,
3a FH at 37H ag fan SE I (291-6, aGezt mnt, He 5) tab jam kee taraas kahhu kis ho-ay. then who was afraid of death?
ma nifsas wiaisd ys Sar il (291-6, wat mensct, ne 5) jab abigat agochar parabh aykaa. When there was only the One Lord, unmanifest and incomprehensible,
3a fez qus fan uss Ser Il (291-6, wat Ment, HE 5)
tab chitar gupat kis poochhat laykhaa.
then who was called to account by the recording scribes of the conscious and the subconscious?
ag oe fedne vidas nara i (291-7, aGst ment, He 5) jab naath niranjan agochar agaaDhay. When there was only the Immaculate, Incomprehensible, Unfathomable Master,
sa a@a ee aa Fue FT Il (291-7, aSat meni, ne 5) tab ka-un chhutay ka-un banDhan baaDhay. then who was emancipated, and who was held in bondage?
MUS MIME MTU Tt MBSA Il (291-8, agat AuHat, Hs 5)
aapan aap aap hee acharjaa. He Himself, in and of Himself, is the most wonderful.
aod wits gu nig dt Suse SI (291-8, ast Ment, we 5)
naanak aapan roop aap hee uparjaa. ||3]|| O Nanak, He Himself created His Own Form. ||3]|
Ad fescue usy use ufs JS I (291-8, west Het, He 5) jah nirmal purakh purakh pat hotaa. When there was only the Immaculate Being, the Lord of beings,
30 faa He aag fom TST I 291-9, test ment, He 5) tah bin mail kahhu ki-aa Dhotaa. there was no filth, so what was there to be washed clean?
ad fadre fadars fagara Il (291-9, a@et mnt, He 5) jah niranjan nirankaar nirbaan. When there was only the Pure, Formless Lord in Nirvaanaa,
3I ABS AG HS ABS nifsHrs Il (291-9, west ment, He 5) tah ka-un ka-o maan ka-un abhimaan. then who was honored, and who was dishonored?
Ad ASU ATH AGIA Il (291-10, ast Ment, He 5) jah saroop kayval jagdees. When there was only the Form of the Lord of the Universe,
3d 26 fee BAS AT AIA Il (291-10, wat Ment, He 5) tah chhal chhidar lagat kaho kees. then who was tainted by fraud and sin?
We Aifs Agut APS Afar ANTS Il (291-10, west Ment, we 5) jah jot saroopee jot sang samaavai. When the Embodiment of Light was immersed in His Own Light,
30 fants gu weg FUSS I (291-11, 7st Mot, ws 5) tah kiseh bhookh kavan tariptaavai. then who was hungry, and who was satisfied?
AIS ASS ATHT'S Il (291-11, west Ment, Hz 5) karan karaavan karnaihaar. He is the Cause of causes, the Creator Lord.
SOA ATS AT OtT AMT ISIl (291-11, Test Ment, He 5) naanak kartay kaa naahi sumaar. ||4]| O Nanak, the Creator is beyond calculation. ||4| |
wa wust Ast yue Afar qaret | (291-12, west ment, ve 5) jab apnee sobhaa aapan sang banaa-ee. When His Glory was contained within Himself,
sa age Hfe ary fee AS Set I (291-12, aGst mens, ue 5) tab kavan maa-ay baap mitar sut bhaa-ee. then who was mother, father, friend, child or sibling?
Ad Aga aor nitufs usetes il (291-12, w@at menist, He 5) jah sarab kalaa aapeh parbeen. When all power and wisdom was latent within Him,
30 ae asa aT a WS Il 291-13, wat Mn, He 5) tah bayd katayb kahaa ko-oo cheen. then where were the Vedas and the scriptures, and who was there to read them?
Aa nus wry wef Sf ard i (291-13, aGst ment, He 5) jab aapan aap aap ur Dhaardi. When He kept Himself, All-in-all, unto His Own Heart,
38 Aas Mune Aa sterd i (291-13, aGst mest, He 5) ta-o sagan apasgan kahaa beechaarai. then who considered omens to be good or bad?
Ad wus Bs nrus oirfuy Sa Ml (291-14, aSat Hest, He 5) jah aapan ooch aapan aap nayraa. When He Himself was lofty, and He Himself was near at hand,
3J AGS Sag ABS Ad ST Il (291-14, aSat Mnst, He 5) tah ka-un thaakur ka-un kahee-ai chayraa. then who was called master, and who was called disciple?
fanne fanny ad faAnre Il (291-15, ast mnt, He 5) bisman bisam rahay bismaad. We are wonder-struck at the wondrous wonder of the Lord.
aoa nual ats Wed mrfy WuUll (291-15, west AenIAt, He 5) naanak apnee gat jaanhu aap. ||5|| O Nanak, He alone knows His own state. ||5||
Ad MEO Mee mse AHEM I (291-15, aSst MAT, 3 5) jah achhal achhayd abhayd samaa-i-aa. When the Undeceiveable, Impenetrable, Inscrutable One was self-absorbed,
Ca fants famrus wrfenr 1 (291-16, west ment, v2 5) oohaa kiseh bi-aapat maa-i-aa. then who was swayed by Maya?
MUA AG mitufs MEA Il (291-16, 7BSt HUNT, He 5) aapas ka-o aapeh aadays. When He paid homage to Himself,
fad TE a St USSH Il (291-16, aCSt MeneH, He 5) tihu gun kaa naahee parvays. then the three qualities were not prevailing.
wd Safa Sa Sa SASS I (291-17, aSst Ment, us 5) jah aykeh ayk ayk bhagvantaa. When there was only the One, the One and Only Lord God,
3d aCe nies fan oat fest i (291-17, aGst men, He 5) tah ka-un achint kis laagai chintaa. then who was not anxious, and who felt anxiety?
Ad nimue wiry mrfy usbara Il (291-17, ast Arent, He 5) jah aapan aap aap patee-aaraa. When He Himself was satisfied with Himself,
3I AGS AA AGS HOSTS Il (291-18, west Het, He 5) tah ka-un kathai ka-un sunnaihaaraa. then who spoke and who listened?
ag avis Sa 3 Sa i (91-18, ast Ment, He 5) baho bay-ant ooch tay oochaa. He is vast and infinite, the highest of the high.
soa MTUA AC nmuta uggs NEll (291-18, 7Gst Aenst, 43 5) naanak aapas ka-o aapeh pahoochaa. ||6]| O Nanak, He alone can reach Himself. ||6]|
wg orfy ofS usuy ners Il (291-19, aat ment, He 5) jah aap rachi-o parpanch akaar. When He Himself fashioned the visible world of the creation,
fsa ae ufo ate fanarg | (291-19, aGst ment, He 5) tihu gun meh keeno bisthaar. he made the world subject to the three dispositions.
uy Us 3d set ASS Il (291-19, aGst menist, nz 5) paap punn tah bha-ee kahaavat. Sin and virtue then began to be spoken of.
UST 2X2
aS sda AG ASAT ASST Il (292-1, aSst Menest, ws 5) ko-oo narak ko-oo surag banchhaavat. Some have gone to hell, and some yearn for paradise.
VATS FS HSM AAS Il (292-1, ast Ment, He 5) aal jaal maa-i-aa janjaal. Worldly snares and entanglements of Maya,
IBH HI SdH F SS Il (292-1, west Ant, He 5) ha-umai moh bharam bhai bhaar. egotism, attachment, doubt and loads of fear;
od He HS MUMS Il (292-2, aGst Funat, He 5) dookh sookh maan apmaan. pain and pleasure, honor and dishonor
nifoa yoTs AS TAS I (292-2, ast Ment, He 5) anik parkaar kee-o bakh-yaan. - these came to be described in various ways.
nus 4e wif afs Se Il (292-2, aet ment, He 5) aapan khayl aap kar daykhai. He Himself creates and beholds His own drama.
os
YG Hod 3B soa Sa INDI (292-2, west went, 2 5) khayl sankochai ta-o naanak aykai. ||7]|| He winds up the drama, and then, O Nanak, He alone remains. ||7]||
Ad mifsas sas 3a MY I (292-3, ast ment, He 5) jah abigat bhagat tah aap. Wherever the Eternal Lord's devotee is, He Himself is there.
Ad UAd UAT AS usSTty Il (292-3, aGst Het, He 5) jah pasrai paasaar sant partaap. He unfolds the expanse of His creation for the glory of His Saint.
wg ura at mirufa dat Il (292-3, aet ment, He 5) duhoo paakh kaa aapeh Dhanee. He Himself is the Master of both worlds.
Ga at Hat Bag wat Il (292-4, Gat ment, ws 5) un kee sobhaa unhoo banee. His Praise is to Himself alone.
ntufs ASA Ad MSE BA Il (292-4, aGst Met, He 5) aapeh ka-utak karai anad choj. He Himself performs and plays His amusements and games.
witufo JA Salo fsa il (292-4, aGst ment, He 5) aapeh ras bhogan nirjog. He Himself enjoys pleasures, and yet He is unaffected and untouched.
fan ate SR mmus ofe Be Il (292-5, ast MNT, He 5) jis bhaavai tis aapan naa-ay laavai. He attaches whomever He pleases to His Name.
fan ate fSR Us fame] II (292-5, west Ment, He 5) jis bhaavai tis khayl khilaavai. He causes whomever He pleases to play in His play.
SANS METS Mass MSS Il (292-5, aGst AenAt, He 5) baysumaar athaah agnat atolai. He is beyond calculation, beyond measure, uncountable and unfathomable.
fag soreg f38 aaa SA FS NCNQVUI (292-6, Tat MeN, He 5) ji-o bulaavhu ti-o naanak daas bolai. ||8]|21|| As You inspire him to speak, O Lord, so does servant Nanak speak. ||8]|21] |
HS Il (292-6) salok. Shalok:
Aba AS AX StaT HM SISST ST Il (292-6, ast went, He 5)
jee-a jant kay thaakuraa aapay vartanhaar.
O Lord and Master of all beings and creatures, You Yourself are prevailing everywhere.
Soa Sa UAfIor sAT AT FEASTS NA (292-7, TSH Mt, we 5) naanak ayko pasri-aa doojaa kah daristaar. ||1|| O Nanak, The One is All-pervading; where is any other to be seen? ||1||
mMAeUet Il (292-7)
asatpadee.
Ashtapadee:
mify axe vif ASST Il (292-7, west Ment, He 5)
aap kathai aap sunnaihaar.
He Himself is the speaker, and He Himself is the listener. ntufa Sa orfu fares il (292-8, ast Aen, He 5)
aapeh ayk aap bisthaar. He Himself is the One, and He Himself is the many.
Ww fsa ae a fiqAfe Cure il (292-8, aGat mort, He 5) jaa tis bhaavai taa sarisat upaa-ay. When it pleases Him, He creates the world.
WTUS STS GE ANTES Il (292-8, ast Het, He 5) aapnai bhaanai la-ay samaa-ay. As He pleases, He absorbs it back into Himself.
3H 3 fo adt fos TE Il (292-8, aGst mene, He 5) tum tay bhinn nahee kichh ho-ay. Without You, nothing can be done.
ntus Afs Ag Aas use il (292-9, west mnt, we 5) aapan soot sabh jagat paro-ay. Upon Your thread, You have strung the whole world.
WT a@ ys AG orfu gee II (292-9, aGat Mnst, He 5) jaa ka-o parabh jee-o aap bujhaa-ay. One whom God Himself inspires to understand
Ag on Het Ho US Il (292-9, weet ment, He 5) sach naam so-ee jan paa-ay. - that person obtains the True Name.
H AHSdAt SS aT SST Il (292-10, aGst went, He 5) so samadrasee tat kaa baytaa. He looks impartially upon all, and he knows the essential reality.
SO Aas fAAfe a AS WAU (292-10, Teat Ment, He 5) naanak sagal sarisat kaa jaytaa. ||1]| O Nanak, he conquers the whole world. ||1]||
ba HZ AS ST A TE Il (292-10, weet meet, ne 5) jee-a jantar sabh taa kai haath. All beings and creatures are in His Hands.
ae canis nea & SE Il (292-11, a@at meni, He 5) deen da-i-aal anaath ko naath. He is Merciful to the meek, the Patron of the patronless.
fan ae fan af & Hrs Il (292-11, aGst Hens, HE 5) jis raakhai tis ko-ay na maarai. No one can kill those who are protected by Him.
Avot faa Hog FAAS I (292-11, +est Ment, Hs 5) SO moo-aa jis manhu bisaaradi. One who is forgotten by God, is already dead.
fsH sfa wed ao at ATE II (292-12, aGet ANT, He 5) tis taj avar kahaa ko jaa-ay. Leaving Him, where else could anyone go?
AS fafa Sa fadne ate Il (292-12, aGst ment, He 5) sabh sir ayk niranjan raa-ay. Over the heads of all is the One, the Immaculate King.
Aba at was aT a AS THE I (292-12, aGst ment, He 5) jee-a kee jugat jaa kai sabh haath. The ways and means of all beings are in His Hands.
nists wots AMS AE I (292-13, west Henst, He 5) antar baahar jaanhu saath. Inwardly and outwardly, know that He is with you.
qe fears suis wus i (292-13, wat ment, v2 5) gun niDhaan bay-ant apaar. He is the Ocean of excellence, infinite and endless.
BOA VTA AST HITT NM (292-13, ast menvst, He 5) naanak daas sadaa balihaar. ||2|| Slave Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||
use ufs sd eters Il (292-14, aSst mest, He 5) pooran poor rahay da-i-aal. The Perfect, Merciful Lord is pervading everywhere.
AS Gufs des fraurs il (292-14, a@at ment, ws 5) sabh oopar hovat kirpaal. His kindness extends to all.
MUS AISS AS vf I (292-14, agst Ment, He 5) apnay kartab jaanai aap. He Himself knows His own ways.
misont sfo famrfir ii (292-14, ast menist, He 5)
antarjaamee rahi-o bi-aap.
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is present everywhere. ufsurd Abas sg ats Il (292-15, aGat mrenet, ve 5)
paratipaalai jee-an baho bhaat. He cherishes His living beings in so many ways.
aH ofee A fsnfa fomrfs II (292-15, aGst Hens, HE 5) jo jo rachi-o so tiseh Dhi-aat. That which He has created meditates on Him.
fan ave fan we firefe Il (292-15, a@et ment, He 5) jis bhaavai tis la-ay milaa-ay. Whoever pleases Him, He blends into Himself.
salts ads dfs a TE WE Il (292-16, aCat Mnist, ne 5) bhagat karahi har kay gun gaa-ay. They perform His devotional service and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ho nists fa afe ufomr Il (292-16, ast ment, He 5) man antar bisvaas kar maani-aa. With heart-felt faith, they believe in Him.
AIS BOA fa ATSnit Sil (292-16, aVSt Ment, He 5) karanhaar naanak ik jaani-aa. ||3]| O Nanak, they realize the One, the Creator Lord. ||3]|
He oar dfs Sa BTS Il (292-17, west Ant, He 5) jan laagaa har aykai naa-ay. The Lord's humble servant is committed to His Name.
f3n at nA 3 faset ATE I (292-17, aSst ment, He 5) tis kee aas na birthee jaa-ay. His hopes do not go in vain.
Hea aS AST af wire Il (292-17, aCat mniat, 2 5) sayvak ka-o sayvaa ban aa-ee. The servant's purpose is to serve;
Jou gfS us ue uret Il (292-18, aet ment, HE 5) hukam boojh param pad paa-ee. obeying the Lord's Command, the supreme status is obtained.
fen 3 Sufa adt dterg il (292-18, ret ment, He 5) is tay oopar nahee beechaar. Beyond this, he has no other thought.
wa ufo sfaor fedarg il (292-18, aGst ment, He 5) jaa kai man basi-aa nirankaar. Within his mind, the Formless Lord abides.
due sfs se faded il (292-19, a@st ment, He 5) banDhan tor bha-ay nirvair. His bonds are cut away, and he becomes free of hatred.
woes UAfT TTX UT Il (292-19, ast mnt, ws 5) an-din poojeh gur kay pair. Night and day, he worships the Feet of the Guru.
fea Sa AAS usa AIS Il (292-19, aCSt Ment, He 5) ih lok sukhee-ay parlok suhaylay. He is at peace in this world, and happy in the next.
UST 2K3B
Soa ote ufs nmufs HS gil (293-1, west mensst, He 5) naanak har parabh aapeh maylay. ||4|| O Nanak, the Lord God unites him with Himself. ||4| |
Aonfa fufs xgT MSs Il (293-1, aGst Het, He 5) saaDhsang mil karahu anand. Join the Company of the Holy, and be happy.
TS MSI YS USHSE Il (293-1, Test Ment, ve 5) gun gaavhu parabh parmaanand. Sing the Glories of God, the embodiment of supreme bliss.
TH BH 33 ATT MIT Il (293-2, ast mnt, uz 5) raam naam tat karahu beechaar. Contemplate the essence of the Lord's Name.
THs VI A ATT Surg Il (293-2, aGat ent, ne 5) darulabh dayh kaa karahu uDhaar. Redeem this human body, so difficult to obtain.
nifys sas dfs X TS WE Ii (293-2, ast Menect, nz 5) amrit bachan har kay gun gaa-o. Sing the Ambrosial Words of the Lord's Glorious Praises;
ure 30 ot fed Are I (293-3, wat menect, ne 5) paraan taran kaa ihai su-aa-o. this is the way to save your mortal soul.
mS UTI YS UT ST Il (293-3, aGat Ment, ue 5) aath pahar parabh paykhahu nayraa. Behold God near at hand, twenty-four hours a day.
fire mifamire for nitte Il (293-3, aGst Hent, He 5) mitai agi-aan binsai anDhayraa. Ignorance shall depart, and darkness shall be dispelled.
Afs Guen fase aA] Il (293-4, west ment, He 5) sun updays hirdai basaavhu. Listen to the Teachings, and enshrine them in your heart.
Ho fe SSA SH UST MUI (293-4, ast Mnist, nz 5) man ichhay naanak fal paavhu. ||5| | O Nanak, you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||5]|
JOS uss efe Bw AS Il (293-4, wat Mnst, Hs 5) halat palat du-ay layho savaar. Embellish both this world and the next;
aH oH nists Cfa ofe II (293-5, aGat ment, He 5) raam naam antar ur Dhaar. enshrine the Lord's Name deep within your heart.
ud TT at ust Sth il (293-5, Test MeNIt, He 5) pooray gur kee pooree deekhi-aa. Perfect are the Teachings of the Perfect Guru.
fan Hfe SA fsa ATS udifimr I (293-5, west ment, He 5) jis man basai tis saach pareekhi-aa. That person, within whose mind it abides, realizes the Truth.
Hfe 3fe aH Aug fee OTE Il (293-5, ast Ment, He 5) man tan naam japahu liv laa-ay. With your mind and body, chant the Naam; lovingly attune yourself to it.
wy UE Hs 3 3S ATE Il (293-6, aGat MNT, HE 5) dookh darad man tay bha-o jaa-ay. Sorrow, pain and fear shall depart from your mind.
Ag Surg AIT Mura} Il (293-6, aSat went, vs 5) sach vaapaar karahu vaapaaree. Deal in the true trade, O trader,
edad foad Au SHH Il (293-6, west Ment, He 5) dargeh nibhai khayp tumaaree. and your merchandise shall be safe in the Court of the Lord.
Sat SA TUT HS AMT Il (293-7, ast ment, ve 5) aykaa tayk rakhahu man maahi. Keep the Support of the One in your mind.
aoa Fale 3 wets fs WE (293-7, 7Bst HUNK, He 5) naanak bahur na aavahi jaahi. ||6|| O Nanak, you shall not have to come and go in reincarnation again. ||6||
fA 3 ofe ao a ATE I (293-7, ast Ment, Hs 5) tis tay door kahaa ko jaa-ay. Where can anyone go, to get away from Him?
Cad musa fomrf= i (293-8, west Mest, He 5) ubrai raakhanhaar Dhi-aa-ay. Meditating on the Protector Lord, you shall be saved.
fass@ AU Aa 3G fe II (293-8, aGat AeNIT, He 5) nirbha-o japai sagal bha-o mitai. Meditating on the Fearless Lord, all fear departs.
us fasur 3 yret Be Il (293-8, a@et mnt, He 5) parabh kirpaa tay paraanee chhutai. By God's Grace, mortals are released.
fAR ys ae FSH ord TY I (293-9, aat mnt, He 5) jis parabh raakhai tis naahee dookh. One who is protected by God never suffers in pain.
oH AUS His JSS AY Il (293-9, wat mnt, He 5) naam japat man hovat sookh. Chanting the Naam, the mind becomes peaceful.
fost ate fie widarg Il (293-9, aGat Het, He 5) chintaa jaa-ay mitai aha"kaar. Anxiety departs, and ego is eliminated.
fH Ao AG ate o UTUSTY Il (293-10, aGst Hest, He 5) tis jan ka-o ko-ay na pahuchanhaar. No one can equal that humble servant.
fas Gufs ore TT AT Il (293-10, aSat Hest, He 5) sir oopar thaadhaa gur sooraa. The Brave and Powerful Guru stands over his head.
SOA STA AGHA UT MDI (293-10, Text FaHMt, He 5)
naanak taa kay kaaraj pooraa. ||7|| O Nanak, his efforts are fulfilled. ||7||
nfs ust wifys ar at ferfe i (293-11, ast mnt, Hs 5) mat pooree amrit jaa kee darisat. His wisdom is perfect, and His Glance is Ambrosial.
dng US Cues fAAfe Il (293-11, west Pent, He 5) darsan paykhat uDhrat sarisat. Beholding His Vision, the universe is saved.
TIO THS AT A nigu il (293-11, ast Pst, He 5) charan kamal jaa kay anoop. His Lotus Feet are incomparably beautiful.
HeG PIAS Hed Tis FU Il (293-11, ast Mnect, Hw: 5)
safal darsan sundar har roop.
The Blessed Vision of His Darshan is fruitful and rewarding; His Lordly Form is beautiful.
Ud As ACA UTS} Il (293-12, ast menit, ne 5) Dhan sayvaa sayvak parvaan. Blessed is His service; His servant is famous.
nisarHt UTY YOS Il (293-12, a@xt mit, Hs 5) antarjaamee purakh parDhaan. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is the most exalted Supreme Being.
fan ufs aA A dS fers Il (293-12, west eT, He 5) jis man basai so hot nihaal. That one, within whose mind He abides, is blissfully happy.
a a fsafe o nies ae Il (293-13, aGst Ment, He 5) taa kai nikat na aavat kaal. Death does not draw near him.
WMHS SS MHS UE UTM II (293-13, ast AUNT, He 5) amar bha-ay amraa pad paa-i-aa. One becomes immortal, and obtains the immortal status,
AUOHfa soa dfs fomrfenr |c22I1 (293-13, aGSt MNT, He 5)
saaDhsang naanak har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||8||22| | meditating on the Lord, O Nanak, in the Company of the Holy. ||8]|22||
HS Il (293-14)
salok. Shalok:
fomits nine afe dot wifamie nits fron il (293-14, a@st ment, He 5)
gi-aan anjan gur dee-aa agi-aan anDhayr binaas.
The Guru has given the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom, and dispelled the darkness of ignorance.
ofa fasur 3 AS Sfeur area nfs UsETA IAI (293-14, aeSt Het, He 5) har kirpaa tay sant bhayti-aa naanak man pargaas. ||1|| By the Lord's Grace, I have met the Saint; O Nanak, my mind is enlightened. ||1||
MAeuet Il (293-15)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
HaAfa nists ys Star Il (293-15, ast ment, ue 5) satsang antar parabh deethaa. In the Society of the Saints, I see God deep within my being.
oH YS at Bran Hor Il (293-15, aCat mest, He 5) naam parabhoo kaa laagaa meethaa. God's Name is sweet to me.
Hare AfHalt San we HT Il (293-16, ast Ment, vs 5) sagal samagree aykas ghat maahi. All things are contained in the Heart of the One,
nifex dat oar ferrets il (293-16, aGat Penst, He 5) anik rang naanaa daristaahi. although they appear in so many various colors.
6@ fafa nifys ys a OH Il (293-16, wget Ment, He 5) na-o niDh amrit parabh kaa naam. The nine treasures are in the Ambrosial Name of God.
cot ufo fen ar faATH II (293-17, west Ment, He 5) dayhee meh is kaa bisraam. Within the human body is its place of rest.
Ho AM meds 3d BE Il (293-17, aGst mnt, Hs 5) sunn samaaDh anhat tah naad. The Deepest Samaadhi, and the unstruck sound current of the Naad are there.
AIS 6 Wet wtgan fAAHTE I (293-17, aCHt ment, Hs 5) kahan na jaa-ee achraj bismaad. The wonder and marvel of it cannot be described.
fate efimr fan vertu feae i (293-18, a@st meniat, He 5) tin daykhi-aa jis aap dikhaa-ay. He alone sees it, unto whom God Himself reveals it.
Sod FSH AS ASt UES AU (293-18, aGSt Met, He 5) naanak tis jan sojhee paa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, that humble being understands. ||1] |
A nists A wate miss Il (293-18, west Ment, He 5) so antar so baahar anant. The Infinite Lord is inside, and outside as well.
wife whe famrfu sfomr sares Il (293-19, ast Ment, He 5) ghat ghat bi-aap rahi-aa bhagvant. Deep within each and every heart, the Lord God is pervading.
Tate Hfo miramA ufemies Il (293-19, a@st HUHAt, He 5) Dharan maahi aakaas pa-i-aal. In the earth, in the Akaashic ethers, and in the nether regions of the underworld
Ava BA UTS yPSurs Il (293-19, aCHt Mn, we 5) sarab lok pooran partipaal. - in all worlds, He is the Perfect Cherisher.
UST 2X8
fe fafe usafs J uTsqoH Il (294-1, aSat ent, Hs 5) ban tin parbat hai paarbarahm. In the forests, fields and mountains, He is the Supreme Lord God.
AAT ntfamt SAT ATH I (294-1, aGSt Hest, He 5) jaisee aagi-aa taisaa karam. As He orders, so do His creatures act.
u@e urat SH3g HFT Il (294-1, west Ment, He 5) pa-un paanee baisantar maahi. He permeates the winds and the waters.
ots a&@ va fen Ante Il (294-2, ast ment, He 5) chaar kunt dah disay samaahi. He is pervading in the four corners and in the ten directions.
fsn 3 f85 dt A SE Il (294-2, aSst Ment, He 5) tis tay bhinn nahee ko thaa-o. Without Him, there is no place at all.
ad YAS soa AY UTE NI (294-2, ast Ment, vs 5) gur parsaad naanak sukh paa-o. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, peace is obtained. ||2||
ae uae fAfyfS Hfs Fe Il (294-2, west mnt, ue 5) bayd puraan simrit meh daykh. See Him in the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees.
RAM AT oxy Hid SA Il (294-3, west wenist, ne 5) sasee-ar soor nakh-yatar meh ayk. In the moon, the sun and the stars, He is the One.
Tet ys at AT A FB Il (294-3, wat menect, ne 5) banee parabh kee sabh ko bolai. The Bani of God's Word is spoken by everyone.
uf mise TAT SB Il (294-3, aat enc, ws 5) aap adol na kabhoo dolai. He Himself is unwavering - He never wavers.
Hea aot afs YS AS Il (294-4, ast mensst, ve 5) sarab kalaa kar khaylai khayl. With absolute power, He plays His play.
Hfs o ureint ded MNS Il (294-4, ast Aunt, He 5) mol na paa-ee-ai gunah amol. His value cannot be estimated; His virtues are invaluable.
Hea Afs ufo at ot AfS II (294-4, aGSt ment, He 5) sarab jot meh jaa kee jot. In all light, is His Light.
afa sfoS Aum Sf ufs i (294-5, aGat menist, He 5) Dhaar rahi-o su-aamee ot pot. The Lord and Master supports the weave of the fabric of the universe.
ad USA SIM A SA Il (294-5, west HeMMAT, He 5) gur parsaad bharam kaa naas. By Guru's Grace, doubt is dispelled.
aa f3e ufs So PATA NZI (294-5, ast Ment, He 5) naanak tin meh ayhu bisaas. ||3]| O Nanak, this faith is firmly implanted within. ||3]|
HZ Hat a UNS AF IH Il (294-6, aSat mensat, ue 5) sant janaa kaa paykhan sabh barahm. In the eye of the Saint, everything is God.
Hs Aol ot fase Afs Gan Il (294-6, aGst ment, He 5) sant janaa kai hirdai sabh Dharam. In the heart of the Saint, everything is Dharma.
HS Ho Hold AS Fo Il (294-6, ast ment, 2 5) sant janaa suneh subh bachan. The Saint hears words of goodness.
Raa fmt on Afar Fae i (294-7, ast menist, He 5) sarab bi-aapee raam sang rachan. He is absorbed in the All-pervading Lord.
fate wast fSA at fea TIS Il (294-7, ast MenIH, He 5) jin jaataa tis kee ih rahat. This is the way of life of one who knows God.
Afs gee AY Afs AIS Il (294-7, aSat Hest, He 5) sat bachan saaDhoo sabh kahat. True are all the words spoken by the Holy.
aH dfe Het AY HS Il (294-7, west ment, He 5) jo jo ho-ay so-ee sukh maanai. Whatever happens, he peacefully accepts.
AIS ATSOTT UT AS Il (294-8, aSat menect, uz 5) karan karaavanhaar parabh jaanai. He knows God as the Doer, the Cause of causes.
nists aA safe st Gat il (294-8, ast Ment, He 5) antar basay baahar bhee ohee. He dwells inside, and outside as well.
Soa VIA Uf AS Hat Il (294-8, agSTt AeA, He 5) naanak darsan daykh sabh mohee. ||4|| O Nanak, beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all are fascinated. ||4||
nifty Afs amt AZ ALS Il (294-9, aBst mnt, He 5) aap sat kee-aa sabh sat. He Himself is True, and all that He has made is True.
fSH ys 3 Aaet Ssufs il (294-9, aGst ment, us 5) tis parabh tay saglee utpat. The entire creation came from God.
faq ae st ad fares Il (294-9, aGat ment, He 5) tis bhaavai taa karay bisthaar. As it pleases Him, He creates the expanse.
{SH aS St Saas Il (294-10, aGat wet, He 5) tis bhaavai taa aykankaar. As it pleases Him, He becomes the One and Only again.
mMiok er wet od ATE Il (294-10, aCst mnt, Hs 5) anik kalaa lakhee nah jaa-ay. His powers are so numerous, they cannot be known.
fan ave fan we firefe II (294-10, a@st mot, He 5) jis bhaavai tis la-ay milaa-ay. As it pleases Him, He merges us into Himself again.
aes feafe aea adit Vfs I (294-11, 7st Ment, Hs 5) kavan nikat kavan kahee-ai door. Who is near, and who is far away?
ming orfy wiry saute il (294-11, ret ment, He 5) aapay aap aap bharpoor. He Himself is Himself pervading everywhere.
nisdats fam orf Fae I (294-11, weet ment, He 5) antargat jis aap janaa-ay. One whom God causes to know that He is within the heart
Sa (SA AS viMfU FSS NUll (294-12, Test AeNAAt, He 5) naanak tis jan aap bujhaa-ay. ||5|| - O Nanak, He causes that person to understand Him. ||5]||
Ada FS orf FISTS I (294-12, aCat menst, ue 5) sarab bhoot aap vartaaraa. In all forms, He Himself is pervading.
Hae 30 ify UasIa Il (294-12, aGst ment, He 5) sarab nain aap paykhanhaaraa. Through all eyes, He Himself is watching.
Hale AHat AT aT SSr Il (294-12, Gat Menest, He 5) Sagal samagree jaa kaa tanaa. All the creation is His Body.
MUS AA nity St AST Il (294-13, ast mest, He 5) aapan jas aap hee sunaa. He Himself listens to His Own Praise.
mize We fea Ye FotfeEnr I (294-13, west ment, He 5) aavan jaan ik khayl banaa-i-aa. The One has created the drama of coming and going.
mifamrardt stot HEM i (294-13, Bat ment, He 5) aagi-aakaaree keenee maa-i-aa. He made Maya subservient to His Will.
As a yfo mifsus Fd Il (294-14, aGst ment, He 5) sabh kai maDh alipato rahai. In the midst of all, He remains unattached.
A fas ATs A MMI AT Il (294-14, aGst Hens, 2 5) jo kichh kahnaa so aapay kahai. Whatever is said, He Himself says.
mifamr wire nifonrt AME I (294-14, aGst ment, He 5) aagi-aa aavai aagi-aa jaa-ay. By His Will we come, and by His Will we go.
SOA AT Ste St GE AHS Ell (294-15, ast Mest, He 5) naanak jaa bhaavai taa la-ay samaa-ay. ||6|| O Nanak, when it pleases Him, then He absorbs us into Himself. ||6]|
fen 3 df Fad ga I (294-15, agst ANT, He 5) is tay ho-ay so naahee buraa. If it comes from Him, it cannot be bad.
Gg add fas AS AT Il (294-15, west Mest, He 5) orai kahhu kinai kachh karaa. Other than Him, who can do anything?
uify sor aasfs mits stat i (294-16, ast ment, He 5) aap bhalaa kartoot at neekee. He Himself is good; His actions are the very best.
MM ATS MUS At at Il (294-16, ast Met, He 5) aapay jaanai apnay jee kee. He Himself knows His Own Being.
mtu ATS Udt AS ATS Il (294-16, west Hunt, He 5) aap saach Dhaaree sabh saach. He Himself is True, and all that He has established is True.
6fs ufs wmue Afat ae Il (294-16, west HUNT, He 5) ot pot aapan sang raach. Through and through, He is blended with His creation.
a at afs ffs adt o we Il (294-17, aGst ment, He 5) taa kee gat mit kahee na jaa-ay. His state and extent cannot be described.
ene dfs 3 ASt UTS Il (294-17, ast Ment, Hs 5) doosar ho-ay ta sojhee paa-ay. If there were another like Him, then only he could understand Him.
fan a aor AS udeS Il (294-17, ast Ment, He 5) tis kaa kee-aa sabh parvaan. His actions are all approved and accepted.
ad yAte soa feg AG IDI (294-18, Test Ment, He 5) gur parsaad naanak ih jaan. ||7|| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, this is known. ||7||
a we faq wet AY STE I (294-18, aGSt Hest, He 5) jo jaanai tis sadaa sukh ho-ay. One who knows Him, obtains everlasting peace.
wif frome we ys APE II (294-18, a@et mensct, He 5) aap milaa-ay la-ay parabh so-ay. God blends that one into Himself.
6g dads Aes ufseZ Il (294-19, aGst Meni, He 5) oh Dhanvant kulvant pativant. He is wealth and prosperous, and of noble birth.
nies Hats fan fot saSs Il (294-19, aGat Het, He 5) jeevan mukat jis ridai bhagvant. He is Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive; the Lord God abides in his heart.
Uo Us Us Ae wrfenr I 294-19, ast ment, He 5) Dhan Dhan Dhan jan aa-i-aa. Blessed, blessed, blessed is the coming of that humble being;
Ua acy
fan ure Ag Aas Safer | (295-1, west Ment, us 5) jis parsaad sabh jagat taraa-i-aa. by his grace, the whole world is saved.
He wise at fed AMT Il (295-1, wat AUNT, He 5) jan aavan kaa ihai su-aa-o. This is his purpose in life;
He a& Hfa fats wre are i (295-1, aGst ment, He 5) jan kai sang chit aavai naa-o. in the Company of this humble servant, the Lord's Name comes to mind.
nif HAS HAS Ad AAT Il (295-2, aGat went, He 5) aap mukat mukat karai sansaar. He Himself is liberated, and He liberates the universe.
Oa (SH Ao AS AS SHAS ICIQSM (295-2, ast MeSH, He 5) naanak tis jan ka-o sadaa namaskaar. ||8]|23]| O Nanak, to that humble servant, I bow in reverence forever. ||8]|23]|
Hq Il (295-2) salok. Shalok:
um ys nirafoor us AT aT aE Il (295-2, ast ment, He 5) pooraa parabh aaraaDhi-aa pooraa jaa kaa naa-o. I worship and adore the Perfect Lord God. Perfect is His Name.
Toe UT Ufsot ys X To MS AU (295-3, aSst ment, we 5)
naanak pooraa paa-i-aa pooray kay gun gaa-o. ||1||
O Nanak, I have obtained the Perfect One; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Perfect Lord. ||1]|
mMAeuet Il (295-3)
asatpadee. Ashtapadee:
ud Ts a Als Suey il (295-3, reat Ment, ve 5) pooray gur kaa sun updays. Listen to the Teachings of the Perfect Guru;
urgqaH feafe afe ue il (295-4, Gat ment, He 5) paarbarahm nikat kar paykh. see the Supreme Lord God near you.
AfA AA fhe ates Ml (295-4, aGst Hen, H: 5) Saas Saas simrahu gobind. With each and every breath, meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe,
Ho nisd at Gad FFs Il (295-4, ast Ant, He 5) man antar kee utrai chind. and the anxiety within your mind shall depart.
mA nifes fauna Soa i (295-5, weet Ment, 2 5) aas anit ti-aagahu tarang. Abandon the waves of fleeting desire,
AS Hat at ofs Ho Ha Il (295-5, west Ment, He 5) sant janaa kee Dhoor man mang. and pray for the dust of the feet of the Saints.
nity efs Fost APT Il (295-5, aSat meni, He 5) aap chhod bayntee karahu. Renounce your selfishness and conceit and offer your prayers.
AaAfa vias Aa SIT Il (295-5, weet Meni, v2 5) saaDhsang agan saagar tarahu. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, cross over the ocean of fire.
dfs ue & afs BT FTP Il (295-6, ast Menest, ne 5) har Dhan kay bhar layho bhandaar. Fill your stores with the wealth of the Lord.
TSX TI UT SHAS All (295-6, ast Ment, He 5) naanak gur pooray namaskaar. ||1]|| Nanak bows in humility and reverence to the Perfect Guru. ||1]|
OH AAS AIA MSS Il (295-6, ast ment, nH 5) khaym kusal sahj aanand. Happiness, intuitive peace, poise and bliss
AOA fa SH UHH Il (295-7, TGS Ment, v2 5) saaDhsang bhaj parmaanand. - in the Company of the Holy, meditate on the Lord of supreme bliss.
aaa foets Burag AIG II (295-7, aCst Ment, He 5) narak nivaar uDhaarahu jee-o. You shall be spared from hell - save your soul!
Go afse wifys ga ute i 295-7, ast mort, us 5) gun gobind amrit ras pee-o. Drink in the ambrosial essence of the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
fafs faseg aratee Sa Il (295-8, aSet menet, Hs 5) chit chitvahu naaraa-in ayk. Focus your consciousness on the One, the All-pervading Lord
Sa TU A A FT MSs Il (295-8, aCst MenWt, Hs 5) ayk roop jaa kay rang anayk. - He has One Form, but He has many manifestations.
aus Hes ate efenrs i 295-8, ast mnt, we 5) gopaal daamodar deen da-i-aal. Sustainer of the Universe, Lord of the world, Kind to the poor,
SY SHO UTS fersurTs Il (295-8, aeSt Ment, He 5) dukh bhanjan pooran kirpaal. Destroyer of sorrow, perfectly Merciful.
frnifa ffs ont ad ars Il (295-9, west mnt, nH 5) simar simar naam baara” baar. Meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Naam, again and again.
Soa Aba ar fEd nas IQ (295-9, aGat Mest, He 5) naanak jee-a kaa ihai aDhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, it is the Support of the soul. ||2]|
@SH ASA AT aA Fs Il (295-9, aSat Ment, He 5) utam salok saaDh kay bachan. The most sublime hymns are the Words of the Holy.
MHBS BS SI ISS Il (295-10, ast Menst, Hz 5) amuleek laal ayhi ratan. These are priceless rubies and gems.
Hos AHS IS Surg Il (295-10, aGat went, He 5) sunat kamaavat hot uDhaar. One who listens and acts on them is saved.
nif 3d SaT SASS Il (295-10, 7GSt Ment, H2 5) aap tarai lokah nistaar. He himself swims across, and saves others as well.
HeG Hee HSS 3S AT AT Il (295-10, aGat ment, He 5) safal jeevan safal taa kaa sang. His life is prosperous, and his company is fruitful;
wa fe oar ots da il (295-11, aGst ment, He 5) jaa kai man laagaa har rang. his mind is imbued with the love of the Lord.
A A ASE MOTe TH Il (295-11, aGst ment, He 5) jai jai sabad anaahad vaajai. Hail, hail to him, for whom the sound current of the Shabad vibrates.
Afs afs woe ad US aA Il (295-11, aGat Ment, ue 5) sun sun anad karay parabh gaajai. Hearing it again and again, he is in bliss, proclaiming God's Praises.
Yse TUB HIS A HA I (295-12, ast menct, ve 5) pargatay gupaal mahaa"t kai maathay. The Lord radiates from the foreheads of the Holy.
Soa Gud faq & AE ISI (295-12, west Ment, He 5) naanak uDhray tin kai saathay. ||3]| Nanak is saved in their company. ||3]||
Rafe Aa Afs Adal MITE | (295-12, aGst ment, He 5) Saran jog sun sarnee aa-ay. Hearing that He can give Sanctuary, I have come seeking His Sanctuary.
ate fasur ys nimy fee Il (295-13, a@st ment, vs 5) kar kirpaa parabh aap milaa-ay. Bestowing His Mercy, God has blended me with Himself.
fufe we Fa se AS IS Il (295-13, ast Mn, u: 5) mit ga-ay bair bha-ay sabh rayn. Hatred is gone, and I have become the dust of all.
nifys on ATGHfal BS ll (295-13, aSat ment, He 5) amrit naam saaDhsang lain. I have received the Ambrosial Naam in the Company of the Holy.
HYAS SS WSS Il (295-14, aSat Meni, us 5) suparsan bha-ay gurdayv. The Divine Guru is perfectly pleased;
yas Jet Aza at AS Il (295-14, ast mnt, ws 5) pooran ho-ee sayvak kee sayv. the service of His servant has been rewarded.
mS HAS fears 3 TIS Il (295-14, aGSt AeNIH, He 5) aal janjaal bikaar tay rahtay. I have been released from worldly entanglements and corruption,
TH OH Ale TAS ATS Il (295-14, ast Hens, ve 5) raam naam sun rasnaa kahtay. hearing the Lord's Name and chanting it with my tongue.
afe yAre efemr ufs ardt il (295-15, a@st ment, vs 5) kar parsaad da-i-aa parabh Dhaaree. By His Grace, God has bestowed His Mercy.
Soa fogdt Au THA Sil (295-15, asst mnt, Hs 5) naanak nibhee khayp hamaaree. ||4|| O Nanak, my merchandise has arrived save and sound. ||4||
us at Grafs agg AS HIS Il (295-15, west Mnet, He 5) parabh kee ustat karahu sant meet. Sing the Praises of God, O Saints, O friends,
Hus Saas BS Il (295-16, aGst mnt, vz 5) saavDhaan aykaagar cheet. with total concentration and one-pointedness of mind.
Hunt Ada dfs TS SH Il (295-16, ast Hest, H2 5) sukhmanee sahj gobind gun naam. Sukhmani is the peaceful ease, the Glory of God, the Naam.
fan ufs aA A dS fours Il (295-16, west Ment, He 5) jis man basai so hot niDhaan. When it abides in the mind, one becomes wealthy.
Ava fear st at use ote i (295-17, west Ment, we 5) sarab ichhaa taa kee pooran ho-ay. All desires are fulfilled.
YUTS UTY YS AS BE I (295-17, ast Ment, ne 5) parDhaan purakh pargat sabh lo-ay. One becomes the most respected person, famous all over the world.
AS 3 Bu we nIAETG Il (295-17, ast Ment, HE 5) sabh tay ooch paa-ay asthaan. He obtains the highest place of all.
adfa o de MTS AS Il (295-18, aGst Ae, He 5) bahur na hovai aavan jaan. He does not come and go in reincarnation any longer.
dfs ug we 38 AS AE Il (295-18, aGst ment, He 5) har Dhan khaat chalai jan so-ay. One who departs, after earning the wealth of the Lord's Name,
Stee faAfs usufs df= null (295-18, west ment, He 5) naanak jisahi paraapat ho-ay. ||5|| O Nanak, realizes it. ||5]|
an Alfs fafa og fafa il (295-19, west Ment, 3 5) khaym saa‘t riDh nav niDh. Comfort, peace and tranquility, wealth and the nine treasures;
af fomrg Aga 3d fafa Il (295-19, ast Fen, He 5) buDh gi-aan sarab tah siDh. wisdom, knowledge, and all spiritual powers;
fafemr su dat ys fore Il (295-19, ret menset, He 5) bidi-aa tap jog parabh Dhi-aan. learning, penance, Yoga and meditation on God;
Us ate
famirg HAS Osu feAaTs Il (296-1, ast ment, He 5) gi-aan saraysat ootam isnaan. The most sublime wisdom and purifying baths;
Sts ULTSA AHS USA | (296-1, ast Mensst, we 5) chaar padaarath kamal pargaas. the four cardinal blessings, the opening of the heart-lotus;
AS & ofa Aas 3 BSA Il (296-1, aSst Ant, He 5) sabh kai maDh sagal tay udaas. in the midst of all, and yet detached from all;
Heg V3I 33 a FT Il (296-1, aSst monet, us 5) sundar chatur tat kaa baytaa. beauty, intelligence, and the realization of reality;
HHGdAt Sa fEASST | (296-2, aGSt Ment, ue 5) samadrasee ayk daristaytaa. to look impartially upon all, and to see only the One
fes eo fH Ho & ufe 3S Il TT aa OH av fs AS IEll (296-2, Text Ment, He 5) ih fal tis jan kai mukh bhanay. gur naanak naam bachan man sunay. ||6]|
- these blessings come to one who, through Guru Nanak, chants the Naam with his mouth, and hears the Word with his ears. ||6]|
feg fears Au ufo afF II (296-3, aGst mot, He 5) ih niDhaan japai man ko-ay. One who chants this treasure in his mind
AS Wa Hfs ot at afs SE I (296-3, aGst Hen, H2 5) sabh jug meh taa kee gat ho-ay. - in every age, he attains salvation.
we afse on ufe arat il (296-3, weet Henst, He 5) gun gobind naam Dhun banee. In it is the Glory of God, the Naam, the chanting of Gurbani.
faffs AAS He surat | (296-4, ast ment, ws 5) simrit saastar bayd bakhaanee. The Simritees, the Shaastras and the Vedas speak of it.
HIS HSS ASG Is SH Il (296-4, ast Henet, He 5) sagal mataa™t kayval har naam. The essence of all religion is the Lord's Name alone.
afte sas a Hie fA I (296-4, aSat Ment, He 5) gobind bhagat kai man bisraam. It abides in the minds of the devotees of God.
afe mpm AroHfar fixe II (296-5, aGat Ment, He 5) kot apraaDh saaDhsang mitai. Millions of sins are erased, in the Company of the Holy.
Ha faut 3 AH 3 BS Il (296-5, Test Ment, He 5) sant kirpaa tay jam tay chhutai. By the Grace of the Saint, one escapes the Messenger of Death.
W a HASfa AH ufs us Il (296-5, aGSt ment, Hs 5) jaa kai mastak karam parabh paa-ay. Those, who have such pre-ordained destiny on their foreheads,
AT AHafe SSA S MITE IDI (296-6, wat Mest, us 5) saaDh saran naanak tay aa-ay. ||7|| O Nanak, enter the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||7]|
fan xfs SA AS orfe Ulf II (296-6, aGat meni, Hs 5) jis man basai sunai laa-ay pareet. One, within whose mind it abides, and who listens to it with love
fSH Ho mre ofe ys SH I (296-6, aGeat mnt, He 5) tis jan aavai har parabh cheet. - that humble person consciously remembers the Lord God.
WOH HIS ST aT wy fExs Il (296-7, ASS MN, we 5) janam maran taa kaa dookh nivaardi. The pains of birth and death are removed.
VHS VI S3aG Sus Il (296-7, aGst Meet, He 5) dulabh dayh tatkaal uDhaarai. The human body, so difficult to obtain, is instantly redeemed.
foanes Hat nifiys Sst at set Il (296-7, a@at ment, He 5) nirmal sobhaa amrit taa kee baanee. Spotlessly pure is his reputation, and ambrosial is his speech.
Sa SH HO Hd AHTSt Il (296-7, ast HUNT, He 5) ayk naam man maahi samaanee. The One Name permeates his mind.
wu da far F SSH Il (296-8, ast MN, He 5) dookh rog binsay bhai bharam. Sorrow, sickness, fear and doubt depart.
FATT OTH fSdHS ST A ATH Il (296-8, aCat Mnet, He 5) saaDh naam nirmal taa kay karam. He is called a Holy person; his actions are immaculate and pure.
AS 3 Go ST at Ast wat Il (296-8, Tat Ment, Hs 5) sabh tay ooch taa kee sobhaa banee. His glory becomes the highest of all.
aed fed af=e SH AYHAt NCNQEIl (296-9, Teat HUNK, Hs 5) naanak ih gun naam sukhmanee. ||8||24|| O Nanak, by these Glorious Virtues, this is named Sukhmani, Peace of mind. ||8]|24||
fast aBst HIG u Il (296-10)
thitee ga-orhee mehlaa 5. T'hitee ~ The Lunar Days: Gauree, Fifth Mehl,
HS Il (296-10)
salok. Shalok:
qe Afsas YATE Il (296-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
me ate Hototes ufsor Aum franaag Il (296-11, fast wat, 12 5) jal thal mahee-al poori-aa su-aamee sirjanhaar. The Creator Lord and Master is pervading the water, the land, and the sky.
wifsa sifs dfe unfemr soa Saas MU (296-11, fest aBst, v2 5) anik bhaa‘t ho-ay pasri-aa naanak aykankaar. ||1|| In so many ways, the One, the Universal Creator has diffused Himself, O Nanak. ||1]|
UgST Il (296-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
San Saag ys ase sear fomrfe i (296-12, fast aSat, ue 5)
aykam aykankaar parabh kara-o bandnaa Dhi-aa-ay.
The first day of the lunar cycle: Bow in humility and meditate on the One, the Universal Creator Lord God.
Ge dfse que ys Aefs us afs TE Il (296-12, fast aBet, ve 5)
gun gobind gupaal parabh saran para-o har raa-ay.
Praise God, the Lord of the Universe, the Sustainer of the World; seek the Sanctuary of the Lord, our King.
wT ot umm afemre AY ATS AS aS SE I (296-13, fast west, He 5) taa kee aas kali-aan sukh jaa tay sabh kachh ho-ay. Place your hopes in Him, for salvation and peace; all things come from Him.
ofa a2 vo fefh sfx6 fan fas weg 5 af& II (296-13, fast wat, 2 5)
chaar kunt dah dis bharmi-o tis bin avar na ko-ay.
I wandered around the four corners of the world and in the ten directions, but I saw nothing except Him.
ae use fAfyfs Ad ag fafa ag dterg II (296-14, fast aGat, ws 5)
bayd puraan simrit sunay baho biDh kara-o beechaar.
I listened to the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, and I pondered over them in SO many ways.
ufss Guras 3 Jae AY Ava fodars il (296-14, fast aBat, He 5)
patit uDhaaran bhai haran sukh saagar nirankaar.
The Saving Grace of sinners, the Destroyer of fear, the Ocean of peace, the Formless Lord.
ast gas tad fSH fae nied o ATE Il (296-15, fast west, He 5) daataa bhugtaa daynhaar tis bin avar na jaa-ay. The Great Giver, the Enjoyer, the Bestower - there is no place at all without Him.
A wots Het fHS Soa fe To WE NA (296-15, fast as, He 5) jo chaaheh so-ee milai naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||1]| You shall obtain all that you desire, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
[21
difse AA em ofs Sts Il (296-16, fast west, He 5)
gobind jas gaa-ee-ai har neet. Sing the Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, each and every day.
ffs seb AroAfa HS HIS NA TITS il (296-16, fast Test, He 5)
mil bhajee-ai saaDhsang mayray meet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and vibrate, meditate on Him, O my friend. ||1]|Pause] |
HS Il (296-16)
salok. Shalok:
a year mifoa ea Aafe use dfs TE Il (296-17, frst ast, He 5)
kara-o bandnaa anik vaar saran para-o har raa-ay.
Bow in humility to the Lord, over and over again, and enter the Sanctuary of the Lord, our King.
gu adm aoa AOAfa eshor a fete 21 (296-17, fast ast, Hs 5)
bharam katee-ai naanak saaDhsang dutee-aa bhaa-o mitaa-ay. ||2]|
Doubt is eradicated, O Nanak, in the Company of the Holy, and the love of duality is eliminated. ||2||
UgST Il (296-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ustor vans efe ats aa AS afe ats Il (296-18, fast west, H2 5)
dutee-aa durmat door kar gur sayvaa kar neet.
The second day of the lunar cycle: Get rid of your evil-mindedness, and serve the Guru continually.
oH 330 He 3fs SA Sha aH ao Bs HIS Il (296-18, fast ast, v2 5)
raam ratan man tan basai taj kaam kroDh lobh meet.
The jewel of the Lord's Name shall come to dwell in your mind and body, when you renounce sexual desire, anger and greed, O my friend.
Hdé fie reo fxs faonfo Aas ABA Il (296-19, fast wea, He 5) maran mitai jeevan milai binsahi sagal kalays. Conquer death and obtain eternal life; all your troubles will depart.
wy Sag afie sag TE safs ude Il (296-19, fast west, He 5)
aap tajahu gobind bhajahu bhaa-o bhagat parvays.
Renounce your self-conceit and vibrate upon the Lord of the Universe; loving devotion to Him shall permeate your being.
Us aXeo
org fus sa fod ofa wang ufses Il (297-1, fast west, He 5)
laabh milai totaa hirai har dargeh pativant.
You shall earn profit and suffer no loss, and in the Court of the Lord you shall be honored.
TH BH US Ave ATS AT Saes Il (297-1, fast ast, He 5)
raam naam Dhan sanchvai saach saah bhagvant.
Those who gather in the riches of the Lord's Name are truly wealthy, and very blessed.
Gos sos fe sag AG Aft uatfS i (297-2, fast weet, 3 5)
oothat baithat har bhajahu saaDhoo sang pareet.
So, when standing up and sitting down, vibrate upon the Lord, and cherish the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Sot TaHis gfe wet uragTH FA SHS QI (297-2, fast west, ve 5) naanak durmat chhut ga-ee paarbarahm basay cheet. ||2||
O Nanak, evil-mindedness is eradicated, when the Supreme Lord God comes to dwell in the mind. ||2]||
HS Il (297-3) salok. Shalok:
sifs fimrufs was a sdior ure af& I (297-3, fast aes, He 5)
teen bi-aapahi jagat ka-o turee-aa paavai ko-ay.
The world is in the grip of the three qualities; only a few attain the fourth state of absorption.
Sod HS fedHe se fro nfs efhmr AE ISI (297-3, fast ast, He 5) naanak sant nirmal bha-ay jin man vasi-aa so-ay. ||3]| O Nanak, the Saints are pure and immaculate; the Lord abides within their minds.
[131] ust Il (297-4)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
fgsor 3 ae fad oo as BSH aS Ste Il (297-4, fast a@Ht, He 5)
taritee-aa tarai gun bikhai fal kab utam kab neech.
The third day of the lunar cycle: Those who are bound by the three qualities gather poison as their fruit; now they are good, and now they are bad.
Oda Ada FHSS we et Hurd Hts I (297-4, fast ast, ne 5) narak surag bharamta-o ghano sadaa sanghaarai meech. They wander endlessly in heaven and hell, until death annihilates them.
Jay Aal HUA HATE UE IC age feote | (297-5, fast aCst, v2 5) harakh sog sahsaa sansaar ha-o ha-o karat bihaa-ay. In pleasure and pain and worldly cynicism, they pass their lives acting in ego.
fafe ate farts o aAreat fesefa nif Gute i (297-5, frst west, 2 5)
jin kee-ay tiseh na jaannee chitvahi anik upaa-ay.
They do not know the One who created them; they think up all sorts of schemes and plans.
unfa forfa Curia aA aa 5 FS STU Il (297-6, fast ast, we 5)
aaDh bi-aaDh upaaDh ras kabahu na tootai taap.
Their minds and bodies are distracted by pleasure and pain, and their fever never departs.
USAIN YIS Tt SI FS USSU Il (297-6, fast ast, we 5)
paarbarahm pooran Dhanee nah boojhai partaap.
They do not realize the glorious radiance of the Supreme Lord God, the Perfect Lord and Master.
HI SdH FSS WE HI SIA HfT SA Il (297-7, fast aCe, we 5)
moh bharam boodat ghano mahaa narak meh vaas.
So many are being drowned in emotional attachment and doubt; they dwell in the most horrible hell.
ate fasur ys afy SJ Soa Sat MTA ISI (297-7, fast west, vs 5) kar kirpaa parabh raakh layho naanak tayree aas. ||3]|| Please bless me with Your Mercy, God, and save me! Nanak places his hopes in You.
[SII
HS Il (297-8)
salok. Shalok:
vad fimre nus Afe fafe sfaor nifsrre I (297-8, fast aGst, v2 5) chatur si-aanaa sugharh so-ay jin taji-aa abhimaan. One who renounces egotistical pride is intelligent, wise and refined.
ata uersa nine fafa sa Sta Ths SH IISIl (297-8, fast Test, He 5)
chaar padaarath asat siDh bhaj naanak har naam. ||4||
The four cardinal blessings, and the eight spiritual powers of the Siddhas are obtained, O Nanak, by meditating, vibrating on the Lord's Name. ||4| |
ust Il (297-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
vada wd Sz Afs Ao sz ates Il (297-9, fast ast, v2 5)
chaturath chaaray bayd sun soDhi-o tat beechaar.
The fourth day of the lunar cycle: Listening to the four Vedas, and contemplating the essence of reality, I have come to realize
Hea YH afemire fafa oH on AfU ATS Il (297-9, fast ast, us 5)
sarab khaym kali-aan niDh raam naam jap saar.
that the treasure of all joy and comfort is found in sublime meditation on the Lord's Name.
aa foes BY Id Sefs mifsa ABA Il (297-10, fast aBet, we 5) narak nivaarai dukh harai tooteh anik kalays. One is saved from hell, suffering is destroyed, countless pains depart,
Hg Je AH 3 ee ofa atase USA Il (297-10, fast Test, He 5)
meech hutai jam tay chhutai har keertan parvays.
death is overcome, and one escapes the Messenger of Death, by absorption in the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
3@ faor nifgs oA df a3 fadars il (297-11, fast aCe, 8 5)
bha-o binsai amrit rasai rang ratay nirankaar.
Fear departs, and one savors the Ambrosial Nectar, imbued with the Love of the Formless Lord.
eu afge nufegst amAfo OH MOTE Il (297-11, fast ast, v8 5) dukh daarid apvitartaa naaseh naam aDhaar.
Pain, poverty and impurity are removed, with the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Afe od ufs Ao MAS AY ASS TUS Il (297-12, fast aSst, ve 5)
sur nar mun jan khojtay sukh saagar gopaal.
The angels, the seers and the silent sages search for the Ocean of peace, the Sustainer of the world.
Ho fesne HY Cro af asa AT FSVH ISI (297-12, fast Tes, H8 5)
man nirmal mukh oojlaa ho-ay naanak saaDh ravaal. ||4||
The mind becomes pure, and one's face is radiant, O Nanak, when one becomes the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4]|
HSE Il (297-13)
salok. Shalok:
us faars Ho ufo aA aS Hfeor Afar il (297-13, fast ast, v2 5) panch bikaar man meh basay raachay maa-i-aa sang. The five evil passions dwell in the mind of one who is engrossed in Maya.
Wronfa df fone aoa ys & far ull (297-13, fast west, ne 5) saaDhsang ho-ay nirmalaa naanak parabh kai rang. ||5|| In the Saadh Sangat, one becomes pure, O Nanak, imbued with the Love of God. ||5]|
ugat Il (297-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ust us yore 3 fag fe uss il (297-14, fast aGat, us 5)
pancham panch parDhaan tay jih jaani-o parpanch.
The fifth day of the lunar cycle: They are the self-elect, the most distinguished, who know the true nature of the world.
AH A ag da we AS fife aeds I (297-14, fast aah, He 5) kusam baas baho rang ghano sabh mithi-aa balbanch. The many colors and scents of flowers - all worldly deceptions are transitory and false.
od WY BI FSA BI AS ATS MTT Il (297-15, fast wea, ws 5) nah jaapai nah boojhee-ai nah kachh karat beechaar. People do not see, and they do not understand; they do not reflect upon anything.
Hore Ha oA afaS mifamrfs afeG HATS II (297-15, fast ast, v2 5)
su-aad moh ras bayDhi-o agi-aan rachi-o sansaar.
The world is pierced through with attachment to tastes and pleasures, engrossed in ignorance.
HOH HE Bd fs JHE AS AGH MSA Il (297-16, fast ast, ve 5)
janam maran baho jon bharman keenay karam anayk.
Those who perform empty religious rituals will be born, only to die again. They wander through endless incarnations.
godd od fhnfss ufo o dteta fader il (297-16, frst ast, He 5)
rachanhaar nah simri-o man na beechaar bibayk.
They do not meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord; their minds do not understand.
a@ safs saee Afar wfenr feus 3 Is Il (297-17, fast ast, He 5) bhaa-o bhagat bhagvaan sang maa-i-aa lipat na ranch. By loving devotion to the Lord God, you shall not be polluted by Maya at all.
aoa fags ucnifs A 3 gefs uals IUll (297-17, fast west, He 5) naanak birlay paa-ee-ah jo na racheh parpanch. ||5]|| O Nanak, how rare are those, who are not engrossed in worldly entanglements. ||5||
HS Il (297-18)
salok. Shalok:
ue AAS Ss aaa wiz USTs Il (297-18, fast aCet, v3 5) khat saastar oochou kaheh ant na paaraavaar. The six Shaastras proclaim Him to be the greatest; He has no end or limitation.
Bas Aufs Te Wes Joa US A BMT Ill (297-18, fast aSat, vs 5)
bhagat soheh gun gaavtay naanak parabh kai du-aar. ||6||
The devotees look beauteous, O Nanak, when they sing the Glories of God at His Door. ||6||
Uugat Il (297-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
uAefH ue AAS ats PARAS aafs mss Il (297-19, fast wat, He 5)
khastam khat saastar kaheh simrit katheh anayk.
The sixth day of the lunar cycle: The six Shaastras say, and countless Simritees assert,
UST ace
Osu Os usqaH TE nig 3 Weta AY I (298-1, fast aC, 3 5)
ootam oochou paarbarahm gun ant na jaaneh saykh.
that the Supreme Lord God is the most sublime and lofty. Even the thousand-tongued serpent does not know the limits of His Glories.
ode His Ao Aa fern AA Wes afFe I (298-1, fast ast, He 5)
naarad mun jan suk bi-aas jas gaavat gobind.
Naarad, the humble beings, Suk and Vyaasa sing the Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
JA aa fs fAG std sas Fe SaqST Il (298-2, fast Test, v2 5)
ras geeDhay har si-o beeDhay bhagat rachay bhagvant.
They are imbued with the Lord's essence; united with Him; they are absorbed in devotional worship of the Lord God.
Ho we gy faofaS uret nafs cfr i (298-2, frst wat, ne 5)
moh maan bharam binsi-o paa-ee saran da-i-aal.
Emotional attachment, pride and doubt are eliminated, when one takes to the Sanctuary of the Merciful Lord.
JIS AHS ufo 3f6 SA PIAS Vfy fogs Il (298-3, fest west, ns 5)
charan kamal man tan basay darsan daykh nihaal.
His Lotus Feet abide within my mind and body and I am enraptured, beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
ors fxs sa fos rronfa foe ote i (298-3, fast west, He 5)
laabh milai totaa hirai saaDhsang liv laa-ay.
People reap their profits, and suffer no loss, when they embrace love for the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ute unter ae fafa Jd aoa oH flere iEll (298-3, fast wat, 2 5)
khaat khajaanaa gun niDh haray naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||6||
They gather in the treasure of the Lord, the Ocean of Excellence, O Nanak, by meditating on the Naam. ||6]|
HS Il (298-4) salok. Shalok:
Ha 430 dfs AA aafe safo Afs ASE Il (298-4, fast ast, He 5)
sant mandal har jas katheh boleh sat subhaa-ay.
In the gathering of the Saints, chant the Praises of the Lord, and speak the Truth with love.
Soa Ho Hsdba San fre fos ote Di (98-5, fast aes, He 5) naanak man santokhee-ai aykas si-o liv laa-ay. || 7] | O Nanak, the mind becomes contented, enshrining love for the One Lord. ||7]||
ust II (298-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hust Hag 3H UG Sfe 3 As STS Il (298-5, fast Test, we 5)
saptam sanchahu naam Dhan toot na jaahi bhandaar.
The seventh day of the lunar cycle: Gather the wealth of the Naam; this is a treasure which shall never be exhausted.
H3nats ufos urehat nis & urserg Il (298-6, fast aGat, ve 5) santsangat meh paa-ee-ai ant na paaraavaar. In the Society of the Saints, He is obtained; He has no end or limitations.
wy SHd dfs sag Aefe us ofa THE Il (298-6, fast aBat, He 5)
aap tajahu gobind bhajahu saran parahu har raa-ay.
Renounce your selfishness and conceit, and meditate, vibrate on the Lord of the Universe; take to the Sanctuary of the Lord, our King.
eu Id SENG 3d Ho fSfenr se ule i (298-7, fast ast, 3 5)
dookh harai bhavjal tarai man chindi-aa fal paa-ay.
Your pains shall depart - swim across the terrifying world-ocean, and obtain the fruits of your mind's desires.
WTS Udd Hie dfa AU ASG HOH UPSTES Il (298-7, fast TSH, He 5)
aath pahar man har japai safal janam parvaan.
One who meditates on the Lord twenty-four hours a day - fruitful and blessed is his coming into the world.
wists aofs Het fat ASIST USE Il (298-8, fast wat, v2 5) antar baahar sadaa sang karnaihaar pachhaan. Inwardly and outwardly, realize that the Creator Lord is always with you.
A AH A Ae Hts A df at HfS Sf I (298-8, fast west, He 5) SO Saajan so sakhaa meet jo har kee mat day-ay.
He is your friend, your companion, your very best friend, who imparts the Teachings of the Lord.
sod faq afsose ofa fs any AUfE IDI (298-8, fast aes, He 5) naanak tis balihaarnai har har naam japay-ay. ||7]| Nanak is a sacrifice to one who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||7||
HS Il (298-9)
salok. Shalok:
MTS Ud Te Wehats sats mrefs AAS Il (298-9, fast Test, v2 5)
aath pahar gun gaa-ee-ah tajee-ah avar janjaal.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord twenty-four hours a day; renounce other entanglements.
THaag rls 5 Aaet ssa YS Cfenrs ici (298-10, fast aat, 3 5)
jamkankar johi na sak-ee naanak parabhoo da-i-aal. ||8]|
The Minister of Death cannot even see that person, O Nanak, unto whom God is merciful. ||8] |
UST Il (298-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mAeHt mA fafa oe fof il (298-10, fest ast, He 5)
astamee asat siDh nav niDh.
The eighth day of the lunar cycle: The eight spiritual powers of the Siddhas, the nine treasures,
Aas UeTIA UTS Sf i (298-11, fast wat, ve 5) Sagal padaarath pooran buDh. all precious things, perfect intellect,
ASS YSA AST MISE Il (298-11, fast west, ve 5) kaval pargaas sadaa aanand. the opening of the heart-lotus, eternal bliss,
fase dfs fedag 45 I (298-11, fast ast, H2 5) nirmal reet niroDhar mant. pure lifestyle, the infallible Mantra,
Hale UsH ufey feAarg Il (298-11, fast aGat, ws 5) sagal Dharam pavitar isnaan. all Dharmic virtues, sacred purifying baths,
AS Hfo Sa fare famirg Il (298-12, fast a@at, H2 5) sabh meh ooch bisaykh gi-aan. the most lofty and sublime spiritual wisdom
dfs ofs SHG UT Ts Afar il (298-12, fast west, us 5)
har har bhajan pooray gur sang.
- these are obtained by meditating, vibrating upon the Lord, Har, Har, in the Company of the Perfect Guru.
afu sdimt area am ofa dSfar util (298-12, fast ast, He 5)
jap taree-ai naanak naam har rang. ||8|| You shall be saved, O Nanak, by lovingly chanting the Lord's Name. ||8]|
HS Il (298-13)
salok. Shalok:
oases od fanfes vfs amre fare il (298-13, fast aGat, He 5)
naaraa-in nah simri-o mohi-o su-aad bikaar.
He does not remember the Lord in meditation; he is fascinated by the pleasures of corruption.
Soa of farrfont oda Ada MISTS IM (298-13, fast Test, He 5) naanak naam bisaari-ai narak surag avtaar. ||9|| O Nanak, forgetting the Naam, he is reincarnated into heaven and hell. ||9]|
uGst Il (298-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oSHt og fee nuts i (298-14, fast west, He 5) na-umee navay chhidar apveet. The ninth day of the lunar cycle: The nine holes of the body are defiled.
dfs oH 6 Aufs aes faustfs Il (298-14, fast ast, He 5) har naam na jaapeh karat bipreet. People do not chant the Lord's Name; instead, they practice evil.
ud fan aufa gato ATT SE Il (298-15, fast aGat, we 5) par tari-a rameh bakeh saaDh nind. They commit adultery, slander the Saints,
ads 3 Hod dfs AA fHe Il (298-15, fast west, He 5) karan na sunhee har jas bind. and do not listen to even a tiny bit of the Lord's Praise.
fosfa us vse Bes aX SH I (298-15, fast aBst, He 5) hireh par darab udar kai taa-ee. They steal others' wealth for the sake of their own bellies,
wate 3 feed fRAaT S TSE Il (298-16, frst west, ne 5) agan na nivrai tarisnaa na bujhaa-ee. but the fire is not extinguished, and their thirst is not quenched.
dfs AS fag ST SH SA Il (298-16, frst ast, v2 5) har sayvaa bin ayh fal laagay. Without serving the Lord, these are their rewards.
Sot ys fanas Hfe AHfs Mista IKI (298-16, fast Test, He 5) naanak parabh bisrat mar jameh abhaagay. ||9]| O Nanak, forgetting God, the unfortunate people are born, only to die. ||9]|
HS Il (298-17)
salok. Shalok:
on fen das H fefes as tus sz AE I (298-17, fast west, He 5) das dis khojat mai firi-o jat daykh-a-u tat so-ay. I have wandered, searching in the ten directions - wherever I look, there I see Him.
Ho ofA vrs SSot A UTS fag dE ION! (298-17, fast TSH, Hs 5) man bas aavai naankaa jay pooran kirpaa ho-ay. ||10]| The mind comes to be controlled, O Nanak, if He grants His Perfect Grace. ||10]|
UgST Il (298-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
SAM FA Enis ath ats Il (298-18, fst aH, v2 5) dasmee das du-aar bas keenay. The tenth day of the lunar cycle: Overpower the ten sensory and motor organs;
Hfs H3y oH Afu StS Il (298-18, fast west, He 5) man santokh naam jap leenay. your mind will be content, as you chant the Naam.
Adel ASMA AA TU I (298-19, fast west, He 5) karnee sunee-ai jas gopaal. With your ears, hear the Praises of the Lord of the World;
dot UMS AT safes Il (298-19, fast west, ve 5) nainee paykhat saaDh da-i-aal. with your eyes, behold the kind, Holy Saints.
dHoT WS We His Il (298-19, fast ast, ws 5) rasnaa gun gaavai bay-ant. With your tongue, sing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
Ho Hfs fess UTS SaSST Il (298-19, fast wat, we 5) man meh chitvai pooran bhagvant. In your mind, remember the Perfect Lord God.
Yar ae
JAS BIO AS Fas AHTeM | (299-1, fast west, v2 5) hasat charan sant tahal kamaa-ee-ai. With your hands and feet, work for the Saints.
ood fea AA Us fasur ure IAOM (299-1, fast a@Ht, He 5) naanak ih sanjam parabh kirpaa paa-ee-ai. ||10]| O Nanak, this way of life is obtained by God's Grace. ||10] |
HS Il (299-2) salok. Shalok:
Sa Sq aursha fase AS ATE Il (299-2, fest ast, vz 5)
ayko ayk bakhaanee-ai birlaa jaanai savaad.
Describe the Lord as the One, the One and Only. How rare are those who know the taste of this essence.
He diss 5 Weba soa AS fAAHTS IVI (299-2, fast aes, He 5)
gun gobind na jaanee-ai naanak sabh bismaad. ||11]||
The Glories of the Lord of the Universe cannot be known. O Nanak, He is totally amazing and wonderful! ||11]|
uQat II (299-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sarent foate uug dfs IH Il (299-3, fast aGat, ue 5) aykaadasee nikat paykhahu har raam. The eleventh day of the lunar cycle: Behold the Lord, the Lord, near at hand.
feet aff afs neg ofa BH Il (299-3, fast aGet, He 5) indree bas kar sunhu har naam. Subdue the desires of your sexual organs, and listen to the Lord's Name.
Hfs Hay Hea Abort efenr Il (299-3, fast west, He 5) man santokh sarab jee-a da-i-aa. Let your mind be content, and be kind to all beings.
feo fafa ass Huse sfenr Il (299-4, fast ast, 3 5) in biDh barat sampooran bha-i-aa. In this way, your fast will be successful.
Wes He ad fea ote il (299-4, fast ast, He 5) Dhaavat man raakhai ik thaa-ay. Keep your wandering mind restrained in one place.
HO 36 AU AUS dia OTS Il (299-4, fast ast, ve 5) man tan suDh japat har naa-ay. Your mind and body shall become pure, chanting the Lord's Name.
AS ufo ufs Id UTITIH Il (299-5, fast wat, ve 5) sabh meh poor rahay paarbarahm. The Supreme Lord God is pervading amongst all.
SOA Sid atdsg Als Mes ST TSH IAI (299-5, fast aSst, vs 5) naanak har kKeertan kar atal ayhu Dharam. ||11]|
O Nanak, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; this alone is the eternal faith of Dharma. ||11]|
HS Il (299-6)
salok. Shalok:
anls Jat AS adt SS ATG fauTs Il (299-6, fast west, He 5)
durmat haree sayvaa karee bhaytay saaDh kirpaal.
Evil-mindedness is eliminated, by meeting with and serving the compassionate Holy Saints.
soa us fr@ fife ad faoR Aas AA III (299-6, fast TSH, Hs 5) naanak parabh si-o mil rahay binsay sagal janjaal. ||12| | Nanak is merged with God; all his entanglements have come to an end. ||12]|
ust Il (299-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
SMTEH BS aH fEAAS Il (299-7, fast TCs, He 5)
du-aadasee daan naam isnaan.
The twelfth day of the lunar cycle: Dedicate yourself to giving charity, chanting the Naam and purification.
ofa at sats ad St HS Il (299-7, fast ast, 2 5) har kee bhagat karahu taj maan. Worship the Lord with devotion, and get rid of your pride.
dfs uifqgs urs Ady ATGAfaT | (299-7, fast aGat, ue 5)
har amrit paan karahu saaDhsang.
Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ho fRusA atese us far Il (299-8, fest ast, v8 5) man tariptaasai keertan parabh rang. The mind is satisfied by lovingly singing the Kirtan of God's Praises.
GHS wat AS AG ASH Il (299-8, fast west, He 5) komal banee sabh ka-o santokhai. The Sweet Words of His Bani soothe everyone.
us x urs ate oH ofA Ue II (299-8, fast a@at, we 5)
panch bhoo aatmaa har naam ras pokhai.
The soul, the subtle essence of the five elements, cherishes the Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Gs us 3 Sa fess ust I (299-9, fast aCe, vz 5) gur pooray tay ayh nihcha-o paa-ee-ai. This faith is obtained from the Perfect Guru.
saa TH IHS fefa Hfs & mire 92M (299-9, fest wea, He 5)
naanak raam ramat fir jon na aa-ee-ai. ||12] |
O Nanak, dwelling upon the Lord, you shall not enter the womb of reincarnation again. ||12||
Hq Il (299-10)
salok. Shalok:
Sis ae ufo fearfimr yas TSS aH Il (299-10, fast Cat, Hs 5) teen gunaa meh bi-aapi-aa pooran hot na kaam. Engrossed in the three qualities, one's efforts do not succeed.
ufss Gurge His aA SSA FS SH NASI (299-10, fast Tes, 8 5)
patit uDhaaran man basai naanak chhootai naam. ||13]|
When the Saving Grace of sinners dwells in the mind, O Nanak, then one is saved by the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||13]|
ugat Il (299-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3@ent sie Stu AAS Il (299-11, fast ast, ue 5)
tar-udsee teen taap sansaar. The thirteenth day of the lunar cycle: The world is in the fever of the three qualities.
Mes ATS OIA MEST Il (299-11, fast ast, vs 5)
aavat jaat narak avtaar. It comes and goes, and is reincarnated in hell.
Ufa of SH 3 HO Hts MrfEG Il (299-11, fast ast, 2 5)
har har bhajan na man meh aa-i-o. Meditation on the Lord, Har, Har, does not enter into the minds of the people.
AY Arad ys foxy & ate il (299-12, fast ast, vs 5)
sukh saagar parabh nimakh na gaa-i-o. They do not sing the Praises of God, the Ocean of peace, even for an instant.
Jay Aa at ea afe aha |i (299-12, fast ast, v3 5) harakh sog kaa dayh kar baaDhi-o. This body is the embodiment of pleasure and pain.
draw da Hfeer nmrfa€ i (299-12, fast aS, He 5) deeragh rog maa-i-aa aasaaDhi-o.
It suffers from the chronic and incurable disease of Maya. feats faors ass AH UTEE II (299-13, fast ast, v2 5)
dineh bikaar karat saram paa-i-o. By day, people practice corruption, wearing themselves out.
dot Ste AUS Fates I (299-13, fast aSst, nz 5) nainee need supan barrhaa-i-o. And then with sleep in their eyes, they mutter in dreams.
dfs fanss des FI TS Il (299-13, fast ast, we 5) har bisrat hovat ayh haal. Forgetting the Lord, this is their condition.
Hale Soa YS UTH Stems ASll (299-14, fast west, ve 5) saran naanak parabh purakh da-i-aal. ||13]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the kind and compassionate Primal Being. ||13]|
AS Il (299-14)
salok. Shalok:
owts xe ues 320 Hae fers TH Il (299-14, frst west, v2 5) chaar kunt cha-odah bhavan sagal bi-aapat raam. The Lord is pervading in all the four directions and the fourteen worlds.
area Bao Sih yas St a AH Wil (299-15, fast aVet, we 5) naanak oon na daykhee-ai pooran taa kay kaam. ||14||
O Nanak, He is not seen to be lacking anything; His works are perfectly complete. ||14]|
ust Il (299-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
sets wfs AS Us nM Il (299-15, fast west, He 5) cha-udeh chaar kunt parabh aap. The fourteenth day of the lunar cycle: God Himself is in all four directions.
AIS SEO UTS UTS Il (299-16, fast at, us 5)
Sagal bhavan pooran partaap. On all worlds, His radiant glory is perfect.
oA fer sfeut ys Sa Il (299-16, fast ast, 2 5) dasay disaa ravi-aa parabh ayk. The One God is diffused in the ten directions.
Usts nit AS Hig Ys UY Il (299-16, fast west, us 5) Dharan akaas sabh meh parabh paykh. Behold God in all the earth and sky.
HO 4S Fs UTaS USS Il (299-17, fast TEST, He 5)
jal thal ban parbat paataal. In the water, on the land, in the forests and mountains, and in the nether regions of the underworld,
USHA 3d SAfs fers I (299-17, fast weet, us 5) parmaysvar tah baseh da-i-aal. the Merciful Transcendent Lord is abiding.
HaH MAGS Ads SASS Il (299-17, fast asst, ue 5) sookham asthool sagal bhagvaan. The Lord God is in all mind and matter, subtle and manifest.
SOA ATH YIN USS |All (299-18, fast west, ne 5)
naanak gurmukh barahm pachhaan. ||14|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes God. ||14]|
HS Il (299-18)
salok. Shalok:
MISH HST TeHSt TE We afFe i (299-18, fast aSs, ne 5) aatam jeetaa gurmatee gun gaa-ay gobind. The soul is conquered, through the Guru's Teachings, singing the Glories of God.
As uAet & fue aoa feat fee nil (299-18, frst west, He 5) sant parsaadee bhai mitay naanak binsee chind. ||15]|| By the Grace of the Saints, fear is dispelled, O Nanak, and anxiety is ended. ||15]|
Uugat Il (299-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WHA wisn Aut se ASy cot TIS | (299-19, fast aes, He 5) amaavas aatam sukhee bha-ay santokh dee-aa gurdayv. The day of the new moon: My soul is at peace; the Divine Guru has blessed me with
contentment.
UST 300
HO 36 Als AS AA Bar ys at A Il (300-1, fast ast, ve 5)
man tan seetal saat sahj laagaa parabh kee sayv.
My mind and body are cooled and soothed, in intuitive peace and poise; I have dedicated myself to serving God.
ce aus ag faars Fee YTS ST A TH I VaHiS fet TBH set fines als & SH II (300- 1, fast a@at, He 5)
tootay banDhan baho bikaar safal pooran taa kay kaam. durmat mitee ha-umai chhutee simrat har ko naam.
One who meditates in remembrance on the Name of the Lord - his bonds are broken, all his sins are erased, and his works are brought to perfect fruition; his evil- mindedness disappears, and his ego is subdued.
Hate aot ursgan at ffemm niet seo Il (300-2, fast ast, v2 5)
saran gahee paarbarahm kee miti-aa aavaa gavan.
Taking to the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God, his comings and goings in reincarnation are ended.
uf sfor aga fa@ ae afi=e ys Fes Il (300-3, fast aBat, ue 5)
aap tari-aa kutamb si-o gun gubind parabh ravan.
He saves himself, along with his family, chanting the Praises of God, the Lord of the Universe.
of at coe anreat AUbH Ys ar BMH Il (300-3, fast aGat, He 5) har kee tahal kamaavnee japee-ai parabh kaa naam. I serve the Lord, and I chant the Name of God.
Gd ud 3 ufenr aoa AY AAT NWI (00-3, fast ast, He 5) gur pooray tay paa-i-aa naanak sukh bisraam. ||15]| From the Perfect Guru, Nanak has obtained peace and comfortable ease. ||15] |
HS Il (300-4) salok. Shalok:
YUIS TAT 3 SHS" UT aor ys wef | (300-4, fast ae, we 5) pooran kabahu na doltaa pooraa kee-aa parabh aap. The perfect person never wavers; God Himself made him perfect.
feo fea vs Aetfeur area JS 5 wrfe NIEI (300-5, fast aes, He 5) din din charhai savaa-i-aa naanak hot na ghaat. ||16]| Day by day, he prospers; O Nanak, he shall not fail. ||16]|
ust Il (300-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
UTSHT UTS YS SA ATE ATE AHA Il (300-5, fast ast, we 5) poornamaa pooran parabh ayk karan kaaran samrath. The day of the full moon: God alone is Perfect; He is the All-powerful Cause of causes.
not Hs efenre use AS Cuts AT at TE Il (300-6, fast ast, we 5)
jee-a jant da-i-aal purakh sabh oopar jaa kaa hath.
The Lord is kind and compassionate to all beings and creatures; His Protecting Hand is over all.
ae fous afde aa avr at at afF I (300-6, fast aGat, v2 5) gun niDhaan gobind gur kee-aa jaa kaa ho-ay. He is the Treasure of Excellence, the Lord of the Universe; through the Guru, He acts.
nisaat us AAS view fedHe AE II (300-7, fast wat, 48 5)
antarjaamee parabh sujaan alakh niranjan so-ay.
God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is All-knowing, Unseen and Immaculately Pure.
ursggH ushAd As fafa WETS II (300-7, fast wet, He 5) paarbarahm parmaysaro sabh biDh jaananhaar. The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, is the Knower of all ways and means.
Ha Aoet Hafe Ha ITS UTI SHAATS Il (300-7, fast ast, v2 5)
sant sahaa-ee saran jog aath pahar namaskaar.
He is the Support of His Saints, with the Power to give Sanctuary. Twenty-four hours a day, I bow in reverence to Him.
MEE TT SI Fst fag ois X BIS Il (300-8, fast ast, we 5) akath kathaa nah boojhee-ai simrahu har kay charan. His Unspoken Speech cannot be understood; I meditate on the Feet of the Lord.
ufs3 Garde nave STG Soa YS at APS MAEM (300-8, fast ast, vs 5)
patit uDhaaran anaath naath naanak parabh kee saran. ||16|| He is the Saving Grace of sinners, the Master of the masterless; Nanak has entered God's Sanctuary. ||16] |
HS Il (300-9) salok. Shalok:
eu faon AOA aes Aafe act dfs TE I (300-9, fast aH, He 5)
dukh binsay sahsaa ga-i-o saran gahee har raa-ay.
My pain is gone, and my sorrows have departed, since I took to the Sanctuary of the Lord, my King.
nfs fee eo ufemr oea of Te ae 1911 (300-10, fast ast, He 5)
man chinday fal paa-i-aa naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||17]| I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||17]|
UST Il (300-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aet we & He aet ad sterg Il (300-10, fast ast, v2 5) ko-ee gaavai ko sunai ko-ee karai beechaar. Some sing, some listen, and some contemplate;
a Quen a fes fn or df Curg Il Go0-u, fast west, ve 5) ko updaysai ko darirhai tis kaa ho-ay uDhaar. some preach, and some implant the Name within; this is how they are saved.
fosfza are df= faoHe HOH ASH H® ATE II (300-11, fest wea, He 5)
kilbikh kaatai ho-ay nirmalaa janam janam mal jaa-ay.
Their sinful mistakes are erased, and they become pure; the filth of countless incarnations is washed away.
Jars uals Hy Cre og Ud fA HAE I Go0-12, fast weet, m3 5)
halat palat mukh oojlaa nah pohai tis maa-ay.
In this world and the next, their faces shall be radiant; they shall not be touched by Maya.
H Hes" A ANS A famrot dees Il (300-12, fast aGst, v2 5)
So surtaa so baisno so gi-aanee Dhanvant.
They are intuitively wise, and they are Vaishnaavs, worshippers of Vishnu; they are spiritually wise, wealthy and prosperous.
A Ad ques Ale fats stor sass Il (00-12, fast a@et, m3 5) so sooraa kulvant so-ay jin bhaji-aa bhagvant. They are spiritual heros, of noble birth, who vibrate upon the Lord God.
ust FINE AE 8H Cus fants U3 I (300-13, fast Test, we 5)
khatree baraahman sood bais uDhrai simar chandaal.
The Kh'shatriyas, the Brahmins, the low-caste Soodras, the Vaisha workers and the outcast pariahs are all saved,
fats ASS ys nits area fSAfT FSH NVI (300-13, fast ast, v2 5)
jin jaani-o parabh aapnaa naanak tiseh ravaal. ||17]|| meditating on the Lord. Nanak is the dust of the feet of those who know his God. [|17]|
agat at Se HIS 8 Il (300-15)
ga-orhee kee vaar mehlaa 4. Vaar In Gauree, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE II (300-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa H2 8 Il (300-16)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok Fourth Mehl:
Afsag usy eens do fAA 3 ANS AS Ale Il (300-16, agHt, He 4) satgur purakh da-i-aal hai jis no samat sabh ko-ay. The True Guru, the Primal Being, is kind and compassionate; all are alike to Him.
ba fenfe afs tue Ho seat 3 fifa SE II 00-16, 7H, He 4) ayk darisat kar daykh-daa man bhaavnee tay siDh ho-ay. He looks upon all impartially; with pure faith in the mind, He is obtained.
Afsas fefs nifgs 3 ofs Gay afe ue ALE II (300-17, aeHt, He 4)
satgur vich amrit hai har utam har pad so-ay.
The Ambrosial Nectar is within the True Guru; He is exalted and sublime, of Godly status.
sod faxsut 3 ofa fomreha aanfie ure af il (300-17, ast, 2 4) naanak kirpaa tay har Dhi-aa-ee-ai gurmukh paavai ko-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, by His Grace, one meditates on the Lord; the Gurmukhs obtain Him. ||1]|
He 8 Il (00-18)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ICH Hfeur As fay 3 fos af Set AAS Il (300-18, ast, He 4)
ha-umai maa-i-aa sabh bikh hai nit jag totaa sansaar.
Egotism and Maya are total poison; in these, people continually suffer loss in this world.
oe dg us ufenr aaHfy Aa Stats Il 00-18, aest, He 4) laahaa har Dhan khati-aa gurmukh sabad veechaar.
The Gurmukh earns the profit of the wealth of the Lord's Name, contemplating the Word of the Shabad.
J@H He fay Css afe nif af Ba Os I Go0-19, aes, He 4)
ha-umai mail bikh utrai har amrit har ur Dhaar.
The poisonous filth of egotism is removed, when one enshrines the Ambrosial Name of the Lord within the heart.
UST 309
Afs aaa f30 & fafa ofs fae aanfe fagur ofa il Go1-1, west, He 4)
sabh kaaraj tin kay siDh heh jin gurmukh kirpaa Dhaar.
All the Gurmukh's affairs are brought to perfect completion; the Lord has showered him with His Mercy.
Soa A Ufe fs A fife ao of NS fRaHeots I2QI (01-1, Test, He: 4)
naanak jo Dhur milay say mil rahay har maylay sirjanhaar. ||2| |
O Nanak, one who meets the Primal Lord remains blended with the Lord, the Creator Lord. ||2||
ust Il (301-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae AfvE AY FAY Ae aA Il Goi-2, west, ws 4)
too sachaa saahib sach hai sach sachaa gosaa-ee.
You are True, O True Lord and Master. You are the Truest of the True, O Lord of the World.
306 As fourfedt ns oa Sat uret Il (301-2, west, He 4) tuDhuno sabh Dhi-aa-idee sabh lagai tayree paa-ee. Everyone meditates on You; everyone falls at Your Feet.
3c frefs Aurfs@ Agu o fats ast fA ute suet i Go1-3, west, we 4) tayree sifat su-aali-o saroop hai jin keetee tis paar laghaa-ee. Your Praises are graceful and beautiful; You save those who speak them.
Tone & 2 ufeer Afs of ANTE Il (301-3, ast, He 4) gurmukhaa no fal paa-idaa sach naam samaa-ee. You reward the Gurmukhs, who are absorbed in the True Name.
zs He Atos eat Sot Sane IA (01-4, Test, He 4) vaday mayray saahibaa vadee tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||1|| O my Great Lord and Master, great is Your glorious greatness. ||1]| |
HBa H2 8 Il (301-4)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
fez ote dg Aaa AS sHeE feat AE Il Go1-4, west, H 4) vin naavai hor salaahnaa sabh bolan fikaa saad. Without the Name, all other praise and speech is insipid and tasteless.
HOHY NidaTT HSWIe IGH HHS STE Il (301-5, aS, He 4)
manmukh aha‘kaar salaahday ha-umai mamtaa vaad.
The self-willed manmukhs praise their own egos; their attachment to egotism is useless.
fas Aerdfe A Hofe ufu ATS AT MUSES Il (301-5, ast, He 4) jin saalaahan say mareh khap jaavai sabh apvaad. Those whom they praise, die; they all waste away in conflict.
Ho soa defy Cad afu fe safe usHare IAI Goi-6, Test, He 4)
jan naanak gurmukh ubray jap har har parmaanaad. ||1||
O servant Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss. ||1]|
He 8 Il G01-7) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsasd afs ys eff om fomret ufe oat I 01-7, west, ne 4)
satgur har parabh das naam Dhi-aa-ee man haree.
O True Guru, tell me of my Lord God, that I may meditate on the Naam within my mind.
Soa OH ules Ufa ufy sat Afs ea UTI NI (301-7, ast, He 4)
naanak naam pavit har mukh bolee sabh dukh parharee. ||2| |
O Nanak, the Lord's Name is sacred and pure; chanting it, all my pain has been taken away. ||2||
ust Il (301-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 omy orfu fadarg g fadne ofe went | Goi-8, wet, we 4) too aapay aap nirankaar hai niranjan har raa-i-aa. You Yourself are the Formless Lord, the Immaculate Lord, our Sovereign King.
frat 3 fea nfs Ag fomrfeur faq oa Ag BY Tefenr I Goi-s, rest, He 4)
jinee too ik man sach Dhi-aa-i-aa tin kaa sabh dukh gavaa-i-aa.
Those who meditate on You, O True Lord with one-pointed mind, are rid of all their pain.
3a Ada a ot fan 6 oe oe Hatfenr | Gol-9, agst, He 4) tayraa sareek ko naahee jis no lavai laa-ay sunaa-i-aa. You have no equal, next to whom I might sit and speak of You.
30 Aes TST 30 fede 3d AG HS His Sher It Go1-10, ast, Hs 4)
tuDh jayvad daataa toohai niranjanaa toohai sach mayrai man bhaa-i-aa.
You are the only Giver as great as Yourself. You are Immaculate; O True Lord, you are pleasing to my mind.
~~
He Ae Atos As AG SEM Qi! (301-10, aBst, He 4) sachay mayray saahibaa sachay sach naa-i-aa. ||2|| O my True Lord and Master, Your Name is the Truest of the True. ||2]|
HBa H2 8 Il (301-11)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Ho wists IGH da F gf 3S HSH TIAA Il Gol-11, Tes, ws 4)
man antar ha-umai rog hai bharam bhoolay manmukh durjanaa.
Deep within the mind is the disease of ego; the self-willed manmukhs, the evil beings, are deluded by doubt.
aoa da aete ffs Asae AG AAS AU Go1-11, west, He 4) naanak rog gavaa-ay mil satgur saaDhoo sajnaa. ||1||
O Nanak, this disease is eradicated, only when one meets the True Guru, our Holy Friend. ||1||
Hs 8 Il (01-12) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Ho 36 3a" da fA TaHfe ofs TESTA I Go1-12, aH, 42 4)
man tan rataa rang si-o gurmukh har guntaas.
The mind and body of the Gurmukh are imbued with the Love of the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
Ho soa old Adeast dfs HS AT ATATA QI (301-12, west, He 4)
jan naanak har sarnaagatee har maylay gur saabaas. ||2||
Servant Nanak has taken to the Sanctuary of the Lord. Hail to the Guru, who has united me with the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (301-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 oss ysy wien F fan ots J Baht Il Go1-13, Vat, we 4)
too kartaa purakh agamm hai kis naal too varhee-ai.
You are the Personification of Creativity, the Inaccessible Lord. With whom should I compare You?
30 Aes of A umd sg AT Sd Us I 01-14, ast, He 4)
tuDh jayvad ho-ay so aakhee-ai tuDh jayhaa toohai parhee-ai.
If there was anyone else as great as You, I would name him; You alone are like Yourself.
3 ufe ufe fea ease qonfs uss I 01-14, 7st, Hs 4) too ghat ghat ik varatdaa gurmukh pargarhee-ai. You are the One, permeating each and every heart; You are revealed to the Gurmukh.
3 Ae ASH OT MAH FAS TF VSM Il Go1-15, ast, we 4) too sachaa sabhas daa khasam hai sabh doo too charhee-ai. You are the True Lord and Master of all; You are the Highest of all.
3 aata AAS dfeAt a fey as Sl Goi-15, ast, we 4) too karahi so sachay ho-isee taa kaa-it karhee-ai. ||3]|| Whatever You do, O True Lord - that is what happens, so why should we grieve? ||3||
HBa H8 8 Il (301-15)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Hufs 3fe uy fudH a mid use wails Il Goi-16, wet, ne 4) mai man tan paraym piramm kaa athay pahar lagann. My mind and body are imbued with the Love of my Beloved, twenty-four hours a day.
We ood faa ofs ys Afsas Afe SAfS WA Goi-16, west, He 4)
jan naanak kirpaa Dhaar parabh satgur sukh vasann. ||1]||
Shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, O God, that he may dwell in peace with the True Guru. ||1]|
He 8 Il (01-17)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
faa niefs ulfs fudu at fa date fe Af II Goi-17, west, ne 4)
jin andar pareet piramm kee ji-o bolan tivai sohann.
Those whose inner beings are filled with the Love of their Beloved, look beautiful as they speak.
saa de wd weer fafs wet uifs fuss i (01-17, ast, ne 4) naanak har aapay jaandaa jin laa-ee pareet pirann. ||2|| O Nanak, the Lord Himself knows all; the Beloved Lord has infused His Love. ||2| |
ust II (301-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 ass nity nige 3 gue fefs sat I Goi-1s, west, v2 4) too kartaa aap abhul hai bhulan vich naahee. O Creator Lord, You Yourself are infallible; You never make mistakes.
3 aad AAS sero Ts ale FSS Il Goi-is, ast, ws 4)
too karahi so sachay bhalaa hai gur sabad bujhaahee.
Whatever You do is good, O True Lord; this understanding is obtained through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
3 ATE AIS ANT F VA a Ha Il (301-19, wat, we 4) too karan kaaran samrath hai doojaa ko naahee. You are the Cause of causes, the All-powerful Lord; there is no other at all.
3 Atos wen eenrs J Afs 30 fom i Goi-19, 7st, Hs 4) too saahib agam da-i-aal hai sabh tuDh Dhi-aahee. O Lord and Master, You are inaccessible and merciful. Everyone meditates on You.
UST B02
Afs Hh Sd J ASA SS AS Sard IVil (302-1, ast, ve 4) sabh jee-a tayray too sabhas daa too sabh chhadaahee. ||4|| All beings are Yours; You belong to all. You deliver all. ||4 |
HBa H2 8 Il (302-1)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afé WHo UH Hen nrdt srs walle i 02-1, ast, ve 4) sun Saajan paraym sandaysraa akhee taar lagann. Listen, O my Friend, to my message of love; my eyes are fixed upon You.
dfs 36 Ane Afemr AS aoa Afe ASfS All (302-2, ast, v2 4)
gur tuthai sajan mayli-aa jan naanak sukh savann. ||1||
The Guru was pleased - He united servant Nanak with his friend, and now he sleeps in peace. ||1||
He 8 Il G02-2) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsag ast efeors J fan 6 efeur Ae|t OfE I (302-3, west, nH 4) satgur daataa da-i-aal hai jis no da-i-aa sadaa ho-ay. The True Guru is the Merciful Giver; He is always compassionate.
Afsag niesg fase 3 Ag ee Yon fea AE I 02-3, ast, ne 4) satgur andrahu nirvair hai sabh daykhai barahm ik so-ay. The True Guru has no hatred within Him; He beholds the One God everywhere.
faves ate fa ta vorfee fae fees fsnfeur 3 af& II (302-4, aGHt, He 4)
nirvairaa naal je vair chalaa-iday tin vichahu tisti-aa na ko-ay.
Anyone who directs hate against the One who has no hate, shall never be satisfied within.
Afsag Aso a sor Hofeer fs a ga fa dE il (302-4, ast, ne 4) satgur sabhnaa daa bhalaa manaa-idaa tis daa buraa ki-o ho-ay. The True Guru wishes everyone well; how can anything bad happen to Him?
Afsad 3 AS a feet Sa ee ue AfE Il 02-5, as, w: 4) satgur no jayhaa ko ichh-daa tayhaa fal paa-ay ko-ay. As one feels towards the True Guru, so are the rewards he receives.
aed aes Ag fas Wee frre fas Ts o TES lM (302-5, ast, we 4)
naanak kartaa sabh kichh jaandaa jidoo kichh gujhaa na ho-ay. ||2] | O Nanak, the Creator knows everything; nothing can be hidden from Him. ||2]|
ust Il (302-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan 6 Atos zat ad ASt Ss Aret Il (302-6, aes, ne 4) jis no saahib vadaa karay so-ee vad jaanee. One who has been made great by his Lord and Master - know him to be great!
fan Atos ae faq sufh we A Afos Hf srt I (302-7, west, nH: 4) jis saahib bhaavai tis bakhas la-ay so saahib man bhaanee. By His Pleasure, the Lord and Master forgives those who are pleasing to His Mind.
Ao GA et SA Ad AMS wATAT II (302-7, aBat, we 4) jay ko os dee rees karay so moorh ajaanee. One who tries to compete with Him is a senseless fool.
fan 6 Afsag HS A Te de Te nrf Surat Il (302-8, ast, we 4)
jis no satgur maylay so gun ravai gun aakh vakhaanee.
One who is united with the Lord by the True Guru, sings His Praises and speaks His Glories.
Soa AU Ay o afs Afe Anat NUll (302-28, Test, He 4) naanak sachaa sach hai bujh sach samaanee. ||5]| O Nanak, the True Lord is True; one who understands Him is absorbed in Truth. ||5]|
HBa H2 8 Il (302-9)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs Afs fodue vg d fsss@ foses fadarg il (02-9, ast, v2 4) har sat niranjan amar hai nirbha-o nirvair nirankaar. The Lord is true, immaculate and eternal; He has no fear, hatred or form.
fro nfumr fea nfs fea fofs foo wa IBH sg II (302-9, aes, He 4)
jin japi-aa ik man ik chit tin lathaa ha-umai bhaar.
Those who chant and meditate on Him, who single-mindedly focus their consciousness on Him, are rid of the burden of their ego.
fas denfy af wrafomr fee AS HoT AAT I (302-10, 7st, v2 4) jin gurmukh har aaraaDhi-aa tin sant janaa jaikaar. Those Gurmukhs who worship and adore the Lord - hail to those Saintly beings!
aet fee as ud Afsag at fA d fee fee ad Ag HATE Il (302-10, wea, 3 4)
ko-ee nindaa karay pooray satguroo kee tis no fit fit kahai sabh sansaar.
If someone slanders the Perfect True Guru, he will be rebuked and reproached by the whole world.
Afsasd fefs urfu ease of nm guSTT Il (302-11, wSst, He 4) satgur vich aap varatdaa har aapay rakhanhaar. The Lord Himself abides within the True Guru; He Himself is His Protector.
UG UG TI Te Wee (SA S Ae AST GHASTT Il (302-12, west, ws 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo gun gaavdaa tis no sadaa sadaa namaskaar.
Blessed, Blessed is the Guru, who sings the Glories of God. Unto Him, I bow forever and ever in deepest reverence.
Ho saa fs as afour fas Afumr fAsHeTS INA (02-12, west, He 4) jan naanak tin ka-o vaari-aa jin japi-aa sirjanhaar. ||1|| Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to those who have meditated on the Creator Lord. ||1]|
He 8 Il (02-13)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
my ast AM MM MITA I (302-13, ast, He 4) aapay Dhartee saajee-an aapay aakaas. He Himself made the earth; He Himself made the sky.
fefa mma Hs Burfleig yfy nmd Of farea I (302-13, at, He 4) vich aapay jant upaa-i-an mukh aapay day-ay giraas. He Himself created the beings there, and He Himself places food in their mouths.
Ag mma orf easet nid St TESA Il (302-14, aSst, He 4) sabh aapay aap varatdaa aapay hee guntaas. He Himself is All-pervading; He Himself is the Treasure of Excellence.
Ao oto oH fimrfe s vfs fawfed AS SA II (302-14, ast, He 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay too sabh kilvikh katay taas. ||2||
O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He shall take away all your sinful mistakes. ||2]|
ugat Il (302-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae Ag AY FAG Ae Se Il (302-15, west, Hs 4) too sachaa saahib sach hai sach sachay bhaavai. You, O True Lord and Master, are True; the Truth is pleasing to the True One.
fH SU AY Howe faq AH aad Sf 5 MTS II (302-15, TBH, He 4) jo tuDh sach salaahday tin jam kankar nayrh na aavai. The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who praise You, O True Lord.
fso a nu efs CxS fra afe fase AST STS II (302-16, Te, He 4) tin kay mukh dar ujlay jin har hirdai sachaa bhaavai. Their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord; the Lord is pleasing to their hearts.
afaureg fuera Aémifs az fase TUS HI TY UTS Il (302-16, aC, we 4)
koorhi-aar pichhaahaa satee-an koorh hirdai kapat mahaa dukh paavai.
The false ones are left behind; because of the falsehood and deceit in their hearts, they suffer in terrible pain.
Ho ws afsurdion afsure as afe AS MEM (302-17, 7st, Hs 4) muh kaalay koorhi-aaree-aa koorhi-aar koorho ho-ay jaavai. ||6|| Black are the faces of the false; the false remain just false. ||6]|
HBa H8 8 Il (302-17)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afsag usst oan 3d fSH fefe Aa a sta ST Sw we Il (302-18, ast, ne 4)
satgur Dhartee Dharam hai tis vich jayhaa ko beejay tayhaa fal paa-ay.
The True Guru is the field of Dharma; as one plants the seeds there, so are the fruits obtained.
Tare vifgs sifior fae nifys oe afs ue il (302-18, ast, v2 4) gursikhee amrit beeji-aa tin amrit fal har paa-ay. The GurSikhs plant ambrosial nectar, and obtain the Lord as their ambrosial fruit.
Gor vafs uals Hu Cn Gfe afs wang Adt USE I (302-19, wea, He 4)
onaa halat palat mukh ujlay o-ay har dargeh sachee painaa-ay.
Their faces are radiant in this world and the next; in the Court of the Lord, they are robed with honor.
feaqt niefs de fas de orefs Go AT aA So Sw we Il (302-19, aSst, ne 4)
ikn"aa andar khot nit khot kamaaveh oh jayhaa beejay tayhaa fal khaa-ay.
Some have cruelty in their hearts - they constantly act in cruelty; as they plant, so are the fruits which they eat.
UST 303 w Afsag Ase sete afs Se AMrecite Afs Gufs mre it (303-1, west, 42 4)
jaa satgur saraaf nadar kar daykhai su-aavgeer sabh ugharh aa-ay. When the True Guru, the Tester, observes with His Glance, the selfish ones are all exposed.
Gf As fesefs fas sa ufefs Sfe 3a AD eft SAS II (303-2, west, He 4) o-ay jayhaa chitvahi nit tayhaa paa-in o-ay tayho jayhay da-yi vajaa-ay. As one thinks, so does he receive, and so does the Lord make him known.
Soa Ut fast wAN nm zs fos afe afs Fa VHS AAS INA (303-3, ast, He 4) naanak duhee siree khasam aapay vartai nit kar kar daykhai chalat sabaa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, the Lord and Master is pervading at both ends; He continually acts, and beholds His own play. ||1]|
He 8 Il (03-3) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
fea Ho fea zoser fas oa A afte ute 1 303-3, aGat, He 4) ik man ik varatdaa jit lagai so thaa-ay paa-ay. The mortal is of one mind - whatever he dedicates it to, in that he is successful.
act ae ad waedior fa wfe eq de Aret ufe i (303-4, aGat, ne 4) ko-ee galaa karay ghanayree-aa je ghar vath hovai saa-ee khaa-ay. Some talk a lot, but they eat only that which is in their own homes.
fag Afsag Ast a ue nidarg o fees ATE II (303-4, west, He 4)
bin satgur sojhee naa pavai aha‘kaar na vichahu jaa-ay.
Without the True Guru, understanding is not obtained, and egotism does not depart from within.
ndardor S vu gud vg sate ute wife Harte 1 03-5, ast, v2 4)
aha“kaaree-aa no dukh bhukh hai hath tadeh ghar ghar mangaa-ay.
Suffering and hunger cling to the egotistical people; they hold out their hands and beg from door to door.
TT Sat TSt a Id HSH uA Bla ALE il G03-6, 7st, Hs 4)
koorh thagee gujhee naa rahai mulammaa paaj leh jaa-ay.
Their falsehood and fraud cannot remain concealed; their false appearances fall off in the end.
fan d= uote foto fA Afsag fH ys nefe 1 (03-6, west, He 4) jis hovai poorab likhi-aa tis satgur milai parabh aa-ay. One who has such pre-ordained destiny comes to meet God through the True Guru.
faG ao ureth sci fife Hats wede of ATE II (303-7, aes, He 4)
ji-o lohaa paaras bhaytee-ai mil sangat suvran ho-ay jaa-ay.
Just as iron is transmuted into gold by the touch of the Philosopher's Stone, so are people transformed by joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation.
Wo SSa & US F Val fAS sre FSS Gore 2M (303-7, west, ws 4) jan naanak kay parabh too Dhanee ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-ay. ||2|| O God, You are the Master of servant Nanak; as it pleases You, You lead him. ||2| |
ugat Il (303-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fae afs fase Afeur fSo af urfu fre 1 (303-8, ast, He 4) jin har hirdai sayvi-aa tin har aap milaa-ay. One who serves the Lord with all his heart - the Lord Himself unites him with Himself.
ae at AtS fso fae adt Afs niece Hate Ae I (303-8, west, He 4)
gun kee saajh tin si-o karee sabh avgan sabad jalaa-ay.
He enters into a partnership with virtue and merit, and burns off all his demerits with the fire of the Shabad.
m@ae feats uadt fan etfs AAS US Il (303-9, ast, He 4)
a-ugan vikan palree jis deh so sachay paa-ay.
Demerits are purchased cheap, like straw; he alone gathers merit, who is so blessed by the True Lord.
afoesrdt ae nrue fats mBae Hfe qe ugaemre il (303-9, a@zt, v2 4)
balihaaree gur aapnay jin a-ugan mayt gun pargatee-aa-ay.
I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has erased my demerits, and revealed my virtuous merits.
zat efanret eS at aaHfe nrwe IDI Go03-10, aeat, He 4) vadee vadi-aa-ee vaday kee gurmukh aalaa-ay. ||7]| The Gurmukh chants the glorious greatness of the great Lord God. ||7]||
HBa H2 8 Il (303-11)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afsas fete est efsnret A niafes afe afs ay fomre Il (303-11, ast, 2 4)
satgur vich vadee vadi-aa-ee jo an-din har har naam Dhi-aavai.
Great is the greatness within the True Guru, who meditates night and day on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofa fs ou SHS AE HAN dfs on at feusS | 03-11, west, ne 4)
har har naam ramat such sanjam har naamay hee tariptaavai.
The repetition of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is his purity and self-restraint; with the Name of the Lord, He is satisfied.
dfs oH ste ofa on cere fs OH TY age Il (303-12, aGst, He 4)
har naam taan har naam deebaan har naamo rakh karaavai.
The Lord's Name is His power, and the Lord's Name is His Royal Court; the Lord's Name protects Him.
A fs ofe un aa Hats A Ho fee SH US Il (303-12, west, 8 4)
jo chit laa-ay poojay gur moorat so man ichhay fal paavai.
One who centers his consciousness and worships the Guru, obtains the fruits of his mind's desires.
A fsa ad Afsae us at fA ATS He fees I (303-13, TCH, Hs 4)
jo nindaa karay satgur pooray kee tis kartaa maar divaavai.
But one who slanders the Perfect True Guru, shall be killed and destroyed by the Creator.
efe Go ear GA afa 5 ure Bg mre stfhmr wm urs | 03-13, west, He 4)
fayr oh vaylaa os hath na aavai oh aapnaa beeji-aa aapay khaavai.
This opportunity shall not come into his hands again; he must eat what he himself has planted.
Sofa uifs uf ars ufsur fa@ srag ute ae] Il 03-14, ast, v2 4)
narak ghor muhi kaalai kharhi-aa ji-o taskar paa-ay galaavai.
He shall be taken to the most horrible hell, with his face blackened like a thief, and a noose around his neck.
fefs nfsaa at Aget ue ot Gad w afe afe an fomre I (303-15, ast, He 4)
fir satgur kee sarnee pavai taa ubrai jaa har har naam Dhi-aavai.
But if he should again take to the Sanctuary of the True Guru, and meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, then he shall be saved.
dfs wat onfy Wave Bea dfs AGS SS SS IA (03-15, TSS, He 4)
har baataa aakh sunaa-ay naanak har kartay ayvai bhaavai. ||1]|
Nanak speaks and proclaims the Lord's Story; as it pleases the Creator, so does he speak. ||1||
Hs 8 Il (03-16) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Us TI a JAH 3 HS Gy HoHY mifemre Hor fay HEMT I 03-16, ast, m2 4) pooray gur kaa hukam na mannai oh manmukh agi-aan muthaa bikh maa-i-aa. One who does not obey the Hukam, the Command of the Perfect Guru - that self- willed manmukh is plundered by his ignorance and poisoned by Maya.
Ga uviefs ag as af gS niede sas Ufa GAS ates wfenr I (303-17, aes, Hs 4)
os andar koorh koorho kar bujhai anhoday jhagrhay da-yi os dai gal paa-i-aa. Within him is falsehood, and he sees everyone else as false; the Lord has tied these useless conflicts around his neck.
6g ae cart ad osc GA a Sfoor fan o afer It (303-17, west, He 4) oh gal farosee karay bahutayree os daa boli-aa kisai na bhaa-i-aa. He babbles on and on, but the words he speaks please no one.
6g ufs ufs de fae do twats GA ofs ng AS GA St wes HET II G03-18, ast, He 4)
oh ghar ghar handhai ji-o rann dohaagan os naal muhu jorhay os bhee lachhan laa-i- aa.
He wanders from house to house like an abandoned woman; whoever associates with him is stained by the mark of evil as well.
deny df A uifsus ees GA un als ae uth afo wher I (303-19, agst, He 4) gurmukh ho-ay so alipato vartai os daa paas chhad gur paas bahi jaa-i-aa.
Those who become Gurmukh avoid him; they forsake his company and sit hear the Guru.
UST 308
A Og Gu orua A se ad uvg Ge ws us AS Teter Il (304-1, west, ws 4)
jo gur gopay aapnaa so bhalaa naahee panchahu on laahaa mool sabh gavaa-i-aa.
O chosen people, O self-elect, one who does not publicly affirm his Guru is not a good person; he loses all his profits and capital.
ufser nia foo ato orfy weve ud ad at ave Gufs mrfenr it 04-1, ast, H: 4) pahilaa aagam nigam naanak aakh sunaa-ay pooray gur kaa bachan upar aa-i-aa. People used to chant and recite the Shaastras and the Vedas, O Nanak, but now the Words of the Perfect Guru have come to be the most exalted of all.
qos sfsuret ss TS ys at Hone Ga sor ala & orfenr IM (304-2, ast, we 4) gursikhaa vadi-aa-ee bhaavai gur pooray kee manmukhaa oh vaylaa hath na aa-i-aa.
[2] | The glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru is pleasing to the GurSikh; the self-willed manmukhs have lost this opportunity. ||2||
ust Il (304-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag Ae AS © ea" ad A we fA Afsag fea il (304-3, west, we 4)
sach sachaa sabh doo vadaa hai so la-ay jis satgur tikay.
The True Lord is truly the greatest of all; he alone obtains Him, who is anointed by the Guru.
A Afsag fa wg fourfeer Ag Ae Afsag fea II (304-4, aes, He 4)
so satgur je sach Dhi-aa-idaa sach sachaa satgur ikay.
He is the True Guru, who meditates on the True Lord. The True Lord and the True Guru are truly One.
Aet Afsag use 3 fale UA es aS sft fee il (304-4, Bat, we 4) so-ee satgur purakh hai jin panjay doot keetay vas chhikay. He is the True Guru, the Primal Being, who has totally conquered his five passions.
fa fag Afsae Ae wiry aetee f3s viele az fee fee ua fea I (304-5, aeat, 8 4) je bin satgur sayvay aap ganaa-iday tin andar koorh fit fit muh fikay.
One who does not serve the True Guru, and who praises himself, is filled with falsehood within. Cursed, cursed is his ugly face.
Gfe a fan a west HI ae Asa 3 Va III (04-6, ast, v2 4) o-ay bolay kisai na bhaavnee muh kaalay satgur tay chukay. ||8] |
His words are not pleasing to anyone; his face is blackened, and he is separated from the True Guru. ||8]|
H8a H8 8 Il (304-6)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ys at Ag Us 9 af orfy faarret fer II (304-6, ast, He 4) har parabh kaa sabh khayt hai har aap kirsaanee laa-i-aa. Everyone is the field of the Lord God; the Lord Himself cultivates this field.
qoute sata AHeig Hout He aefeEnr i 304-7, ast, ve 4)
gurmukh bakhas jamaa-ee-an manmukhee mool gavaa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh grows the crop of forgiveness, while the self-willed manmukh loses even his roots.
AS a ain yrue 38 3 ofa TS A US AHEM I (304-7, west, He 4)
sabh ko beejay aapnay bhalay no har bhaavai so khayt jamaa-i-aa.
They all plant for their own good, but the Lord causes to grow only that field with which He is pleased.
Tart ofe nifigs dtfaor ofe nif on 2 vifys ufemr il (304-8, ast, v2 4) gursikhee har amrit beeji-aa har amrit naam fal amrit paa-i-aa.
The GurSikh plants the seed of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, and obtains the Lord's Ambrosial Naam as his Ambrosial Fruit.
TH UT fasn fos asae ale ass fs aerfenr Il (304-9, aBet, we 4)
jam choohaa kiras nit kurkadaa har kartai maar kadhaa-i-aa. The mouse of Death is continually gnawing away at the crop, but the Creator Lord has beaten it off and driven it away.
fagrret Ht ae afs ofs doe gaA ATfEMT II (304-9, west, He 4)
kirsaanee jammee bhaa-o kar har bohal bakhas jamaa-i-aa.
The farm was successful, by the Love of the Lord, and the crop was produced by God's Grace.
fs0 a ast ita Ag ofsGe fast Afsag use fomrfenr I 304-10, weet, He 4)
tin kaa kaarhaa andaysaa sabh laahi-on jinee satgur purakh Dhi-aa-i-aa.
He has removed all the burning and anxiety of those, who have meditated on the True Guru, the Primal Being.
Ho saa OH Mattoon orfy sfenr AS AGS Softer Al (04-11, west, us 4)
jan naanak naam araaDhi-aa aap tari-aa sabh jagat taraa-i-aa. ||1||
O servant Nanak, one who worships and adores the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Swims across, and saves the whole world as well. ||1]|
He 8 Il (04-11)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Ae feo orsfs mifenr Houf FS Ter i 04-11, weet, He 4)
Saaraa din laalach ati-aa manmukh horay galaa.
The self-willed manmukh is occupied with greed all day long, although he may claim otherwise.
TSt Cu efor oe AS Als fear i (304-12, west, Hs 4) raatee ooghai dabi-aa navay sot sabh dhilaa. At night, he is overcome by fatigue, and all his nine holes are weakened.
Hone & fafs Aa ong J fos tefs SH Il (304-12, ast, He 4)
manmukhaa dai sir joraa amar hai nit dayveh bhalaa.
Over the head of the manmukh is the order of the woman; to her, he ever holds out his promises of goodness.
Ad oT nif use antee A mufes mT UST I 304-13, Test, He 4) joraa daa aakhi-aa purakh kamaavday say apvit amayDh khalaa. Those men who act according to the orders of women are impure, filthy and foolish.
at femmi anu ad A Ae ufe VE Il (304-13, ast, He 4)
kaam vi-aapay kusuDh nar say joraa puchh chalaa.
Those impure men are engrossed in sexual desire; they consult their women and walk accordingly.
Afsasg & orf HS A APS Use FH SS Il (304-14, as, He 4) satgur kai aakhi-ai jo chalai so sat purakh bhal bhalaa. One who walks as the True Guru tells him to, is the true man, the best of the best.
nat use Afs rfl Gurfene afe ae Afs firs i 04-14, aHt, v2 4) joraa purakh sabh aap upaa-i-an har khayl sabh khilaa. He Himself created all women and men; the Lord Himself plays every play.
AS 3dt Fes FStSat SSA FG FH IIQIl (304-15, ast, v2 4)
sabh tayree banat banaavanee naanak bhal bhalaa. ||2|| You created the entire creation; O Nanak, it is the best of the best. ||2]|
UugST Il (304-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 fussy nergy I uss fas ss I (304-15, west, ws 4) too vayparvaahu athaahu hai atul ki-o tulee-ai. You are carefree, unfathomable and immeasurable; how can You be measured?
A zara fa su fomrfee faa vfsae fist i) 04-16, ast, v2 4) say vadbhaagee je tuDh Dhi-aa-iday jin satgur milee-ai. Those who have met the True Guru and who meditate on You are very fortunate.
Afsae at aet AfS Agu FT Taarat aEMA Il (304-16, Test, Hs 4)
satgur kee banee sat saroop hai gurbaanee banee-dai.
The Word of the True Guru's Bani is the embodiment of Truth; through Gurbani, one becomes perfect.
Afsas oat str dfs ag fug doe A afore as sis usb I (304-17, aGat, we 4)
satgur kee reesai hor kach pich bolday say koorhi-aar koorhay jharh parhee-ai. Jealously emulating the True Guru, some others may speak of good and bad, but the false are destroyed by their falsehood.
Gor niefs dg uf dg 3 fay feo 6 sft Hee asbH ICI G04-18, west, He 4)
on"aa andar hor mukh hor hai bikh maa-i-aa no jhakh marday karhee-ai. ||9]|
Deep within them is one thing, and in their mouths is another; they suck in the poison of Maya, and then they painfully waste away. ||9]|
HBa H2 8 Il (304-18)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afsas at Ret fasHat fasHs Ao df A AST ws I (304-18, ast, He 4)
satgur kee sayvaa nirmalee nirmal jan ho-ay so sayvaa ghaalay.
Service to the True Guru is immaculate and pure; those humble beings who are pure perform this service.
fas nists aue fearg 36 Gfe uma Ae Sf aS AAHS Il G04-19, aCst, oH: 4) jin andar kapat vikaar jhooth o-ay aapay sachai vakh kadhay jajmaalay. Those who have deceit, corruption and falsehood within - the True Lord Himself casts
them out like lepers.
ust 30Uu Afeure fra afe Afsas uta wets afore 3 ast fas ate BH Il (305-1, Test, He 4)
sachiaar sikh bahi satgur paas ghaalan koorhi-aar na labhnee kitai thaa-ay bhaalay. The truthful Sikhs sit by the True Guru's side and serve Him. The false ones search, but find no place of rest.
fro Afsas ot orf Fare ardt far na sed feats ofa TS Il (05-1, aeHt, Hz 4) jinaa satgur kaa aakhi-aa sukhaavai naahee tinaa muh bhalayray fireh da-yi gaalay. Those who are not pleased with the Words of the True Guru - their faces are cursed, and they wander around, condemned by God.
fae niefa uifs adt ofe adt A fassa Faeinifs HEHY FSS Il (305-2, aSst, ue 4)
jin andar pareet nahee har kayree say kichrak vayraa-ee-an manmukh baytaalay. Those who do not have the Love of the Lord within their hearts - how long can those demonic, self-willed manmukhs be consoled?
Afsag 3 fxs A ures HO ae aa Gg urfu as iuet SE aS Il (305-3, TCHt, He 4) satgur no milai so aapnaa man thaa-ay rakhai oh aap vartai aapnee vath naalay. One who meets the True Guru, keeps his mind in its own place; he spends only his own assets.
Ho tod feast ag vfs wy ee fefa mmt ef ae Sas NA (305-4, TCs, He 4)
jan naanak iknaa gur mayl sukh dayvai ik aapay vakh kadhai thagvaalay. ||1]|
O servant Nanak, some are united with the Guru; to some, the Lord grants peace, while others - deceitful cheats - suffer in isolation. ||1]|
He 8 Il (05-4) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
frat niets oy fours ofs fae & an ofa wire THA I (305-4, aGst, He 4)
jinaa andar naam niDhaan har tin kay kaaj da-yi aaday raas.
Those who have the treasure of the Lord's Name deep within their hearts - the Lord resolves their affairs.
fs vat HISTH Bas at afs ys via afs For urTfA i (305-5, at, we 4)
tin chookee muhtaajee lokan kee har parabh ang kar baithaa paas.
They are no longer subservient to other people; the Lord God sits by them, at their side.
a ag fs a Ag a ofe Afs cane Uf ats AEA II (305-6, aGat, He 4)
jaa kartaa val taa sabh ko val sabh darsan daykh karahi saabaas.
When the Creator is on their side, then everyone is on their side. Beholding their vision, everyone applauds them.
A UTSATS AS did at aor Als Ho AG wife ads JIITA Il (305-6, Test, H2 4)
saahu paatisaahu sabh har kaa kee-aa sabh jan ka-o aa-ay karahi rahraas.
Kings and emperors are all created by the Lord; they all come and bow in reverence to the Lord's humble servant.
Gd ud at eat seuret afe ear Afe wise AY ufeMr It 305-7, aCst, ve 4)
gur pooray kee vadee vadi-aa-ee har vadaa sayv atul sukh paa-i-aa.
Great is the greatness of the Perfect Guru. Serving the Great Lord, I have obtained immeasurable peace.
afs us we tr ate fesse fos aun vs Aetfemr il 05-8, ast, Hs 4)
gur poorai daan dee-aa har nihchal nit bakhsay charhai savaa-i-aa.
The Lord has bestowed this eternal gift upon the Perfect Guru; His blessings increase day by day.
act Sea efsnret tf o Aa A ass orf user Il 305-8, ast, He 4) ko-ee nindak vadi-aa-ee daykh na sakai so kartai aap pachaa-i-aa. The slanderer, who cannot endure His greatness, is destroyed by the Creator Himself.
HO soa TE 88 AGS A FS S AST TueT nef III (305-9, ast, ve 4)
jan naanak gun bolai kartay kay bhagtaa no sadaa rakh-daa aa-i-aa. ||2||
Servant Nanak chants the Glorious Praises of the Creator, who protects His devotees forever. ||2||
UST Il (305-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Wfog wan efenre T ST WS Var Il (305-10, Test, Hs 4)
too saahib agam da-i-aal hai vad daataa daanaa.
You, O Lord and Master, are inaccessible and merciful; You are the Great Giver, All- knowing.
30 Aes H dg ot feth o oreet So AWS AS Hfe star II (305-10, ast, Hs 4) tuDh jayvad mai hor ko dis naa aavee toohai’ sugharh mayrai man bhaanaa. I can see no other as great as You; O Lord of Wisdom, You are pleasing to my mind.
Ho ads fet wreet AS VHST ST MSS AST Il (305-11, TES, v2 4)
moh kutamb dis aavdaa sabh chalanhaaraa aavan jaanaa.
Emotional attachment to your family and everything you see is temporary, coming and going.
A fag Ae dag fas ofee A afsure aa fe HET II (305-11, aBt, He 4)
jo bin sachay horat chit laa-iday say koorhi-aar koorhaa tin maanaa.
Those who attach their consciousness to anything except the True Lord are false, and false is their pride.
aaa Ag fimrfe 3 fag AS ufe ufs HE mATET NAOMI (305-12, ast, He 4)
naanak sach Dhi-aa-ay too bin sachay pach pach mu-ay ajaanaa. ||10]||
O Nanak, meditate on the True Lord; without the True Lord, the ignorant rot away and putrefy to death. ||10]|
H8a H8 8 Il (305-13)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
wii 2 AS a 6 fed fue & vrfimr ath o mire I 305-13, west, He 4)
ago day sat bhaa-o na dichai pichho day aakhi-aa kamm na aavai.
At first, he did not show respect to the Guru; later, he offered excuses, but it is no use.
wig fefs fed HoH Foo aat fa@ AY UTS II (305-13, aBet, He 4)
aDh vich firai manmukh vaychaaraa galee ki-o sukh paavai.
The wretched, self-willed manmukhs wander around and are stuck mid-way; how can they find peace by mere words?
fan nies ulfs oct Asas at A ast ur] ast FS II G05-14, Bat, we 4)
jis andar pareet nahee satgur kee so koorhee aavai koorhee jaavai.
Those who have no love for the True Guru within their hearts come with falsehood, and leave with falsehood.
A faur ad Aa ofs us ass St Afsag uTTAIH Sedt mre Il (305-14, wet, He 4)
jay kirpaa karay mayraa har parabh kartaa taa‘ satgur paarbarahm nadree aavai. When my Lord God, the Creator, grants His Grace, then they come to see the True Guru as the Supreme Lord God.
a mfuG ule Age Te Ad AS AS nieAT SIH VaTS Il (305-15, TSH, He 4)
taa api-o peevai sabad gur kayraa sabh kaarhaa andaysaa bharam chukhaavai. Then, they drink in the Nectar, the Word of the Guru's Shabad; all burning, anxiety, and doubts are eliminated.
Het ndfe ad feg TSt AS Boa niBfes ale TS We NA (305-16, aes, He 4) Sadaa anand rahai din raatee jan naanak an-din har gun gaavai. ||1] |
They remain in ecstasy forever, day and night; O servant Nanak, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (05-16)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ad Afsad a A fry ore A ama Cfo afa ant famre II (305-16, ast, v2 4)
gur satgur kaa jo sikh akhaa-ay so bhalkay uth har naam Dhi-aavai. One who calls himself a Sikh of the Guru, the True Guru, shall rise in the early morning hours and meditate on the Lord's Name.
Ben ad saa usast fens ad nifys Afs are II (305-17, aBHt, He 4)
udam karay bhalkay parbhaatee isnaan karay amrit sar naavai.
Upon arising early in the morning, he is to bathe, and cleanse himself in the pool of nectar.
Cue ag afe ofs wy AU Afs faofes un ta ols AS II (305-18, Test, Hs 4)
updays guroo har har jap jaapai sabh kilvikh paap dokh leh jaavai.
Following the Instructions of the Guru, he is to chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. All sins, misdeeds and negativity shall be erased.
fefs us feen qearet are sofenr Cofemr afe ant famre 1 (305-18, ast, v8 4)
fir charhai divas gurbaanee gaavai bahdi-aa uth-di-aa har naam Dhi-aavai.
Then, at the rising of the sun, he is to sing Gurbani; whether sitting down or standing up, he is to meditate on the Lord's Name.
A AH fareta fore He af fe A gate ae Hf STS Il 05-19, aBat, we 4)
jo saas giraas Dhi-aa-ay mayraa har har so gursikh guroo man bhaavai.
One who meditates on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and every morsel of food - that GurSikh becomes pleasing to the Guru's Mind.
ust 30€ fan 3 tenures de He Amit fsa aafha ay Cuew ASS I (06-1, Bat, ue 4)
jis no da-i-aal hovai mayraa su-aamee tis gursikh guroo updays sunaavédi. That person, unto whom my Lord and Master is kind and compassionate - upon that GurSikh, the Guru's Teachings are bestowed.
Wo soa Ofs Ha fA Tete at A orf AU neTT SH AUS II (306-2, at, we 4) jan naanak Dhoorh mangai tis gursikh kee jo aap japai avrah naam japaavai. ||2|| Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of that GurSikh, who himself chants the Naam, and inspires others to chant it. ||2]|
ust II (306-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
a 3u Ag fomrfee A fees GS I (306-2, aGst, v2 4) jo tuDh sach Dhi-aa-iday say virlay thorhay. Those who meditate on You, O True Lord - they are very rare.
a ufo fofs fea mreue fae at seats ufs mnie ads I (306-3, aCe, He 4)
jo man chit ik araaDh-day tin kee barkat khaahi asa%kh karorhay.
Those who worship and adore the One Lord in their conscious minds - through their generosity, countless millions are fed.
306 As fourfedt A afte ue A Aiea SS Il (306-3, ast, He 4)
tuDhuno sabh Dhi-aa-idee say thaa-ay pa-ay jo saahib lorhay.
All meditate on You, but they alone are accepted, who are pleasing to their Lord and Master.
A fag Afsae AS we Use A He Hfs AA AZT Il Go6-4, west, we 4)
jo bin satgur sayvay khaaday painday say mu-ay mar jammay korh"ay.
Those who eat and dress without serving the True Guru die; after death, those wretched lepers are consigned to reincarnation.
6fe wag fot Soe aofs fen aefe ufe ws I (306-4, west, He 4)
o-ay haajar mithaa bolday baahar vis kadheh mukh gholay.
In His Sublime Presence, they talk sweetly, but behind His back, they exude poison from their mouths.
Hfs de ef fees 199 (306-5, west, v2 4) man khotay da-yi vichhorhay. ||11]| The evil-minded are consigned to separation from the Lord. ||11]|
HBa H2 8 Il (306-5)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
HE Tet sfaor ster aver faecsar fSfs suf Soe | ufenr il (306-5, west, ws 4)
mal joo-ee bhari-aa neelaa kaalaa khiDholrhaa tin vaimukh vaymukhai no paa-i-aa. The faithless baymukh sent out his faithless servant, wearing a blue-black coat, filled with filth and vermin.
uf 3 eet aet wofe wars ufo ae ufs Aart HE ote HeHY urfenr II (306-6, Test, He 4) paas na day-ee ko-ee bahan jagat meh gooh parh sagvee mal laa-ay manmukh aa-i- aa.
No one in the world will sit near him; the self-willed manmukh fell into manure, and returned with even more filth covering him.
uset A fee vast 3 Hy afs a Siro Ga st yg oer eo Set ot aater I 306-7, ast, Hs 4)
paraa-ee jo nindaa chuglee no vaimukh kar kai bhayji-aa othai bhee muhu kaalaa duhaa vaymukhaa daa karaa-i-aa.
The faithless baymukh was sent to slander and back-bite others, but when he went there, the faces of both he and his faithless master were blackened instead.
33 Afeor Ass vas fefs wet Sy Ae sed UCst uUGdt we TE a Cfo wie urfenr II (306-8, AST, He 4)
tarh suni-aa sabhat jagat vich bhaa-ee vaimukh sanai nafrai pa-ulee pa-udee faavaa ho-ay kai uth ghar aa-i-aa.
It was immediately heard throughout the whole world, O Siblings of Destiny, that this faithless man, along with his servant, was kicked and beaten with shoes; in humiliation, they got up and returned to their homes.
Wal Hast ASH Sue swat 5 fs at oct saint fefs urf= wife usr i (306-9, ast, v8
4)
agai sangtee kurhmee vaimukh ralnaa na milai taa vahutee bhateejee” fir aan ghar paa-i-aa.
The faithless baymukh was not allowed to mingle with others; his wife and niece then brought him home to lie down.
JSZ usy ee Te fos sar aa fSorfenr il (306-10, aPat, we 4) halat palat dovai ga-ay nit bhukhaa kookay tihaa-i-aa. He has lost both this world and the next; he cries out continually, in hunger and thirst.
U6 Us AyMit aga usu Jd fafs four Ag afe vrfy aafenr It (306-10, west, nH: 4)
Dhan Dhan su-aamee kartaa purakh hai jin ni-aa-o sach bahi aap karaa-i-aa.
Blessed, blessed is the Creator, the Primal Being, our Lord and Master; He Himself sits and dispenses true justice.
A fsa ad Afsae us at A Are Hts UsfEMT I (06-11, Test, Hs 4) jo nindaa karay satgur pooray kee so saachai maar pachaa-i-aa. One who slanders the Perfect True Guru is punished and destroyed by the True Lord.
eg nid fate urfanr fafs wars AS Burfeur AI Go6-12, aSst, He 4) ayhu akhar tin aakhi-aa jin jagat sabh upaa-i-aa. ||1|| This Word is spoken by the One who created the whole universe. ||1||
He 8 Il (306-12)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
AWfog fan at Sar gut de fsn a deg faag aft we Il (306-12, west, He 4) saahib jis kaa nangaa bhukhaa hovai tis daa nafar kithhu raj khaa-ay. One who has a poor beggar for a master - how can he be well-fed?
fa Afoa a wfs eq de A ded ofa ore miedet faag ue I (06-13, aHt, He 4)
je saahib kai ghar vath hovai so nafrai hath aavai anhodee kithhu paa-ay.
If there is something in his master's house, he can get it; but how can he get what is not there?
fan ot Ae ofst fefe Sar Hatt AT AST met Tet i Goe-14, west, He 4)
jis dee sayvaa keetee fir laykhaa mangee-ai saa Sayvaa a-ukhee ho-ee.
Serving him, who will be called to answer for his account? That service is painful and useless.
Soa Ast add die Ts Hes wano at fefs Sar Hat o AEF iM (306-14, ast, we 4) naanak sayvaa karahu har gur safal darsan kee fir laykhaa mangai na ko-ee. ||2]| O Nanak, serve the Guru, the Lord Incarnate; the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is profitable, and in the end, you shall not be called to account. ||2| |
UgST Il (306-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Soa ehersfy HS AS Ute Se ATS Il (306-15, aSst, He 4) naanak vichaareh sant jan chaar vayd kahanday. O Nanak, the Saints consider, and the four Vedas proclaim,
SIs Ha 3 FGe A Pde Jee Il (306-16, aGst, ve 4) bhagat mukhai tay bolday say vachan hovanday. that whatever the Lord's devotees utter with their mouths, shall come to pass.
ys ue Aue Afs BX AST Il (306-16, Tat, He 4) pargat pahaaraa jaapdaa sabh lok sunanday. He is manifest in His cosmic workshop. All people hear of this.
Ay 3 ufefs Hag od AS ofS Ue Il (306-16, aSat, He 4) sukh na paa-in mugaDh nar sant naal khahanday. The stubborn men who fight with the Saints shall never find peace.
Gfe Sule Gar ge 3 Gf nidorfs ASS Il (306-17, aeHt, He 4) o-ay lochan onaa gunai no o-ay aha“kaar sarhanday. The Saints seek to bless them with virtue, but they only burn in their egos.
Gfe fears fomr aafa vt ata ofa HS II (306-17, aS, He 4)
o-ay vichaaray ki-aa karahi jaa bhaag Dhur manday.
What can those wretched ones do, since, from the very beginning, their destiny is cursed with evil.
A Hd fSfe ursgufy A fan o AS Il (306-18, ae, 8 4) jo maaray tin paarbarahm say kisai na sanday. Those who are struck down by the Supreme Lord God are of no use to anyone.
2g ade foses ofe usH fourfe ude I 06-18, aes, nH 4)
vair karahi nirvair naal Dharam ni-aa-ay pachanday.
Those who hate the One who has no hatred - according to the true justice of Dharma, they shall perish.
a A Afs Aotfumr A feats se II (306-19, ast, v3 4) jo jo sant saraapi-aa say fireh bhavanday. Those who are cursed by the Saints will continue wandering aimlessly.
Us Hed afenr fA 3H AAS NII (306-19, Tat, He 4) payd mu‘dhaahoo" kati-aa tis daal sukanday. ||12|| When the tree is cut off at its roots, the branches wither and die. ||12||
HBa H2 8 Il (306-19)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok Fourth Mehl:
ust 309 nists ofs ag fourfser est efsuret il (307-1, 78H, H3 4)
antar har guroo Dhi-aa-idaa vadee vadi-aa-ee. Great is the greatness of the Guru, who meditates on the Lord within.
ff fest us Afsag we ant fea fae far et weret i (307-1, Bat, we 4)
tus ditee poorai satguroo ghatai naahee ik til kisai dee ghataa-ee.
By His Pleasure, the Lord has bestowed this upon the Perfect True Guru; it is not diminished one bit by anyone's efforts.
Ay Wg Afsag & fe 3 st sf she He AS Bart Il Go7-2, ast, vs 4)
sach saahib satguroo kai val hai taa’ jhakh jhakh marai sabh lokaa-ee.
The True Lord and Master is on the side of the True Guru; and so, all those who oppose Him waste away to death in anger, envy and conflict.
fseat & HI aS ad ofa ags wrfy saret | (307-2, west, v2 4)
nindkaa kay muh kaalay karay har kartai aap vaDhaa-ee.
The Lord, the Creator, blackens the faces of the slanderers, and increases the glory of the Guru.
faG fag fSea fee aafo fs fs fas fas vs AeTet II (307-3, aSat, ue 4) ji-o ji-o nindak nind karahi ti-o ti-o nit nit charhai savaa-ee. As the slanderers spread their slander, so does the Guru's glory increase day by day.
He sod ofa wratonr fefs udt orf= As ure 4 (07-3, ast, He 4)
jan naanak har aaraaDhi-aa tin pairee aan sabh paa-ee. ||1]| Servant Nanak worships the Lord, who makes everyone fall at His Feet. ||1]|
He 8 Il (07-4) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsad Ast des fa va Jes uss AS fsA a afenr Il (307-4, ast, He 4)
satgur saytee ganat je rakhai halat palat sabh tis kaa ga-i-aa.
One who enters into a calculated relationship with the True Guru loses everything, this world and the next.
fos sdtor ure sq Ad suet suet sfs ufemr il (307-5, aC, H: 4) nit jhahee-aa paa-ay jhagoo sutay jhakh-daa jhakh-daa jharh pa-i-aa. He grinds his teeth continually and foams at the mouth; screaming in anger, he
perishes.
fos Cure ad wfenr us arafe wares us st Sfs afemr Il (307-5, west, 4: 4) nit upaav karai maa-i-aa Dhan kaaran aglaa Dhan bhee ud ga-i-aa. He continually chases after Maya and wealth, but even his own wealth flies away.
foor Gg ua fomr Go ure fa viefs AOA Su ufeMT II (307-6, ae, He 4)
ki-aa oh khatay ki-aa oh khaavai jis andar sahsaa dukh pa-i-aa.
What shall he earn, and what shall he eat? Within his heart, there is only cynicism and pain.
foses ate fa tg gee Ag uy Aas ao fate ffs ofemr I 07-7, aes, w2 4) nirvairai naal je vair rachaa-ay sabh paap jagtai kaa tin sir la-i-aa.
One who hates the One who has no hatred, shall bear the load of all the sins of the world on his head.
6A mat fue det ardt fan niefs Ser ufo niga ufemr I (307-7, west, 2 4)
Os agai pichhai dho-ee naahee jis andar nindaa muhi amb pa-i-aa.
He shall find no shelter here or hereafter; his mouth blisters with the slander in his heart.
A Afes 6 Gg ge ue Fag ASt af afer it Go7-8, ast, v3 4) jay su-inay no oh hath paa-ay taa khayhoo saytee ral ga-i-aa. If gold comes into his hands, it turns to dust.
A ad ot Adal fefe So ure a fuss miGae sufk ofeur I (307-9, ast, He 4)
jay gur kee sarnee fir oh aavai taa pichhlay a-ugan bakhas la-i-aa.
But if he should come again to the Sanctuary of the Guru, then even his past sins shall be forgiven.
Ho saa Motes oH ftmrfeur ate fans fofea ure afer i211 07-9, est, Hz 4) jan naanak an-din naam Dhi-aa-i-aa har simrat kilvikh paap ga-i-aa. ||2| |
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, night and day. Remembering the Lord in meditation, wickedness and sins are erased. ||2]||
ust Il (307-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3d Ae Ay 5 AS eg Gufs J cher| Il (307-10, ast, we 4) toohai sachaa sach too sabh doo upar too deebaan. You are the Truest of the True; Your Regal Court is the most exalted of all.
A 30 Ay fomrfee Ay Refs AS Sa HS Il Go7-11, ast, v2 4)
jo tuDh sach Dhi-aa-iday sach sayvan sachay tayraa maan.
Those who meditate on You, O True Lord, serve the Truth; O True Lord, they take pride in You.
Gar niefs A HY GAS AY Safes Ad Sa SE Il (307-11, west, wz 4)
onaa andar sach mukh ujlay sach bolan sachay tayraa taan.
Within them is the Truth; their faces are radiant, and they speak the Truth. O True Lord, You are their strength.
A 30s faat dente Aerfomr AY AaE SATS Il (307-12, ast, He 4)
say bhagat jinee gurmukh salaahi-aa sach sabad neesaan.
Those who, as Gurmukh, praise You are Your devotees; they have the insignia and the banner of the Shabad, the True Word of God.
Ad fa Ad Ase f35 Sst Ae ATHS I9ll (307-12, aSHt, uz 4) sach je sachay sayvday tin vaaree sad kurbaan. ||13]| I am truly a sacrifice, forever devoted to those who serve the True Lord. ||13]|
H8a H8 8 Il (307-13)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
fs He us Afsag Aet afte Afsafs HS I 07-13, west, we 4)
Dhur maaray poorai satguroo say-ee hun satgur maaray.
Those who were cursed by the Perfect True Guru, from the very beginning, are even now cursed by the True Guru.
A HSE 3 HIST Sd o tet fms aga Il (307-13, ast, He 4)
jay maylan no bahutayraa lochee-ai na day-ee milan kartaaray.
Even though they may have a great longing to associate with the Guru, the Creator does not allow it.
AsHats eet a sole fefs Hafs afe eters Il (307-14, ast, v2 4)
satsangat dho-ee naa lahan vich sangat gur veechaaray.
They shall not find shelter in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; in the Sangat, the Guru has proclaimed this.
act ate fe afs Gard fSA wd AH HES Il (307-14, aes, He 4)
ko-ee jaa-ay milai hun onaa no tis maaray jam jandaaray. Whoever goes out to meet them now, will be destroyed by the tyrant, the Messenger of Death.
afs wa feea A fee afs niate ats afsors il (307-15, a@at, v2 4)
gur baabai fitkay say fitay gur angad keetay koorhi-aaray.
Those who were condemned by Guru Nanak were declared counterfeit by Guru Angad as well.
afe stat utst stefeur fom ofa Sar Sars Il (307-16, wSst, ue 4)
gur teejee peerhee veechaari-aa ki-aa hath aynaa vaychaaray.
The Guru of the third generation thought, "What lies in the hands of these poor people?"
ag vet utst fefomr fats feea ere Afs STS Il (307-16, aGHt, nH 4) gur cha-uthee peerhee tiki-aa tin nindak dusat sabh taaray. The Guru of the fourth generation saved all these slanderers and evil-doers.
aet us fig Ae as Afsag at fsa aan Als ASS Il (307-17, Tes, Hs 4) ko-ee put sikh sayvaa karay satguroo kee tis kaaraj sabh savaaray. If any son or Sikh serves the True Guru, then all of his affairs will be resolved.
a fee A ee ufeit us us ent ufs AS afe feAsrs I 07-17, aGst, v2 4)
jo ichhai so fal paa-isee put Dhan lakhmee kharh maylay har nistaaray.
He obtains the fruits of his desires - children, wealth, property, union with the Lord and emancipation.
Afs fous Afsag fete fan uiefs afs Sa os Il (307-18, ast, Hs 4) sabh niDhaan satguroo vich jis andar har ur Dhaaray. All treasures are in the True Guru, who has enshrined the Lord within the heart.
Aue ya Afsag faa foto feus fears i (307-19, ast, Hs 4)
SO paa-ay pooraa satguroo jis likhi-aa likhat lilaaray.
He alone obtains the Perfect True Guru, on whose forehead such blessed destiny is pre-ordained.
We Hoa Ha Ufs fo A Tatra fs furs ai Go7-19, ast, we 4)
jan naanak maagai Dhoorh tin jo gursikh mit pi-aaray. ||1]|
Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of those GurSikhs who love the Lord, their Friend. ||1||
UST B0t
H3 8 Il (08-1) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
fro ag urfy ef efsuret vas st om urfs faq aG Ut ue | Gos-1, aes, nH 4)
jin ka-o aap day-ay vadi-aa-ee jagat bhee aapay aan tin ka-o pairee paa-ay.
The Lord Himself bestows glorious greatness; He Himself causes the world to come and fall at their feet.
adit St A fag wm gs ate Ag AIST nruSt aH SHS Il (308-2, Tat, vs 4)
daree-ai taa™ jay kichh aap doo keechai sabh kartaa aapnee kalaa vaDhaa-ay.
We should only be afraid, if we try to do things by ourselves; the Creator is increasing His Power in every way.
aug set Og ura ofa Ulsn Ad ot fafs wirue dfs Afs mrf= fase I Gos-2, aeHt, ne 4) daykhhu bhaa-ee ayhu akhaarhaa har pareetam sachay kaa jin aapnai jor sabh aan nivaa-ay.
Behold, O Siblings of Destiny: this is the Arena of the Beloved True Lord; His power brings everyone to bow in humility.
nmufsnm gaat at gu ad dfs Amit feear vH|T aA HIT ATS ATES Il (308-3, ast, v2 4) aapni-aa bhagtaa kee rakh karay har su-aamee nindkaa dustaa kay muh kaalay karaa-
ay. The Lord, our Lord and Master, preserves and protects His devotees; He blackens the faces of the slanderers and evil-doers.
Afsas at efsuret fos vs Reet afe atefs sats fos urfu age i 308-4, west, He 4) satgur kee vadi-aa-ee nit charhai savaa-ee har keerat bhagat nit aap karaa-ay.
The glorious greatness of the True Guru increases day by day; the Lord inspires His devotees to continually sing the Kirtan of His Praises.
mates OH AUT TAY Jie ATS Afsag west SAS Il (308-5, ast, uz 4)
an-din naam japahu gursikhahu har kartaa satgur gharee vasaa-ay.
O GurSikhs, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, night and day; through the True Guru, the Creator Lord will come to dwell within the home of your inner being.
Afsad at wet Afs Afs afe weg aafRag sf aes orfu HIT ATES Il (308-5, ast, uz 4) satgur kee banee sat sat kar jaanhu gursikhahu har kartaa aap muhhu kadhaa-ay.
O GurSikhs, know that the Bani, the Word of the True Guru, is true, absolutely true. The Creator Lord Himself causes the Guru to chant it.
Taha a HI Cus ad aie fimra qe a Aarg AAS ASS ATS Il (308-6, ast, v2 4) gursikhaa kay muh ujlay karay har pi-aaraa gur kaa jaikaar sansaar sabhat karaa-ay. The Beloved Lord makes the faces of His GurSikhs radiant; He makes the whole world applaud and acclaim the Guru.
He sod dg at aA dS ofa BAS at ofa UA THES III (308-7, west, Hz 4)
jan naanak har kaa daas hai har daasan kee har paij rakhaa-ay. ||2| |
Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord; the Lord Himself preserves the honor of His Slave. ||2||
ust Il (308-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae Ate ory FAG ATT DHS Il (308-8, a@et, we 4) too sachaa saahib aap hai sach saah hamaaray. O My True Lord and Master, You Yourself are my True Lord King.
Ag unt on feate ys eend ag Il Gos-3, ast, u2 4)
sach poojee naam drirh-aa-ay parabh vanjaaray thaaray.
Please, implant within me the true treasure of Your Name; O God, I am Your merchant.
Ay Aes AY zefn Sfa Te aaa fears il (308-8, ast, He 4) sach sayveh sach vananj laihi gun kathah niraaray. I serve the True One, and deal in the True One; I chant Your Wondrous Praises.
Hea ate A Ao fH ae ASfe Aes Il (308-9, aGst, He 4)
sayvak bhaa-ay say jan milay gur sabad savaaray.
Those humble beings who serve the Lord with love meet Him; they are adorned with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
3 Ae Afog ney I TT Aafe Bas Vil (08-9, ast, Hs 4) too sachaa saahib alakh hai gur sabad lakhaaray. ||14]|
O my True Lord and Master, You are unknowable; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, You are known. ||14||
HBa H2 8 Il (308-10)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
fan niefs fs uset de fA a ae & Jet Sa Il (308-10, Tes, v2 4) jis andar taat paraa-ee hovai tis daa kaday na hovee bhalaa. One whose heart is filled with jealousy of others, never comes to any good.
Gre orfiod set 3 oa fos GrSt yas wer Il (308-11, aCe, we 4)
os dai aakhi-ai ko-ee na lagai nit ojaarhee pookaaray khalaa.
No one pays any attention to what he says; he is just a fool, crying out endlessly in the wilderness.
fan niets gast vas SH ats asfsur GA a AS afeuT Il (308-11, aga, He 4)
jis andar chuglee chuglo vajai keetaa karti-aa os daa sabh ga-i-aa.
One whose heart is filled with malicious gossip, is Known as a malicious gossip; everything he does is in vain.
fos vast ad medet uset ug afe o Aa GA ot are sft I (308-12, ast, He 4)
nit chuglee karay anhodee paraa-ee muhu kadh na sakai os daa kaalaa bha-i-aa. Night and day, he continually gossips about others; his face has been blackened, and he cannot show it to anyone.
adH dest Adte afena fefs AT a sta Sa a we II (308-13, aGHt, He 4)
karam Dhartee sareer kalijug vich jayhaa ko beejay tayhaa ko khaa-ay.
The body is the field of action, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; as you plant, so shall you harvest.
ae Gufs suren 3 det fen uct saare nfs AE II (308-13, aGst, He 4) galaa upar tapaavas na ho-ee vis khaaDhee tatkaal mar jaa-ay. Justice is not passed on mere words; if someone eats poison, he dies.
aet sug fonrG Ay ass a AT aet ad Sat at US I Gos-14, west, 2 4)
bhaa-ee vaykhhu ni-aa-o sach kartay kaa jayhaa ko-ee karay tayhaa ko-ee paa-ay. O Siblings of Destiny, behold the justice of the True Creator; as people act, so they are rewarded.
He aoa a AS ASt uct afe wa aioe grat wrrfly ASTS AI (308-14, ast, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o sabh sojhee paa-ee har dar kee-aa baataa aakh sunaa-ay. ||1]|| The Lord has bestowed total understanding upon servant Nanak; he speaks and proclaims the words of the Lord's Court. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (08-15) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
de ussty ag A fees fa aS efe Set ara Il 08-15, Bat, we 4)
hodai partakh guroo jo vichhurhay tin ka-o dar dho-ee naahee.
Those who separate themselves from the Guru, in spite of His Constant Presence - they find no place of rest in the Court of the Lord.
at afe fe faa feet uo fea ga aa yfo urdt Il (308-16, west, He 4)
ko-ee jaa-ay milai tin nindkaa muh fikay thuk thuk muhi paahee.
If someone goes to meet with those dull-faced slanderers, he will find their faces covered with spit.
A Afsate feca A AS als feea fas Fam SA Ut Il (308-16, TCH, Hs 4)
jo satgur fitkay say sabh jagat fitkay nit bhambal bhoosay khaahee.
Those who are cursed by the True Guru, are cursed by all the world. They wander around endlessly.
fae ae dfumr wmyat A Be sat feast Il (308-17, west, He 4) jin gur gopi-aa aapnaa say laiday dhahaa firaa-ee. Those who do not publicly affirm their Guru wander around, moaning and groaning.
fo at gu ae 3 Css fos gear su Fara 1 Gos-1s, ast, we 4) tin kee bhukh kaday na utrai nit bhukhaa bhukh kookaahee. Their hunger shall never depart; afflicted by constant hunger, they cry out in pain.
Gar a urine a o He fas IBS ISIS HoT I Gos-18, Tes, He 4)
Onaa daa aakhi-aa ko na sunai nit ha-ulay ha-ul maraahee.
No one hears what they have to say; they live in constant fear and terror, until they finally die.
Afsad at efanret Sf o Hoot Gar iat fue arG art i (308-19, ast, v2 4)
satgur kee vadi-aa-ee vaykh na saknee onaa agai pichhai thaa-o naahee.
They cannot bear the glorious greatness of the True Guru, and they find no place of rest, here or hereafter.
a Afsate ud fsa wfe feof soct yoet AS ufs Ter Il (308-19, aga, He 4)
jo satgur maaray tin jaa-ay mileh rahdee khuhdee sabh pat gavaahee.
Those who go out to meet with those who have been cursed by the True Guru, lose all remnants of their honor.
uat 30e Gfe mat ant ad a fees fa GA fixe fon an]| Bord I Go9-1, aes, He 4)
o-ay agai kustee gur kay fitkay je os milai tis kusat uthaahee. They have already become like lepers; cursed by the Guru, whoever meets them is also afflicted with leprosy.
of fa a VIAG oT aagT A UA ate fag wt Il 09-2, ast, Hs 4)
har tin kaa darsan naa karahu jo doojai bhaa-ay chit laahee.
O Lord, I pray that I may not even catch sight of those, who focus their consciousness on the love of duality.
ufs aes orfu fof ufo fan ofs fag oat ardt Il (309-2, west, He 4)
Dhur kartai aap likh paa-i-aa tis naal kihu chaaraa naahee.
That which the Creator pre-ordained from the very beginning - there can be no escape from that.
Wo soa oH mata 3 SA wufs & 3 Aaa Il 09-3, ast, Hs 4)
jan naanak naam araaDh too tis aparh ko na sakaahee.
O servant Nanak, worship and adore the Naam, the Name of the Lord; no one can equal it.
are at efanret est J fos Aevet VS vardt MQM (309-3, ast, ne 4) naavai kee vadi-aa-ee vadee hai nit savaa-ee charhai charhaahee. ||2|| Great is the greatness of His Name; it increases, day by day. ||2]|
He 8 Il (09-4) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
fa Te ag ate fefaur fq AS at Sfsnret sat Tet Il (309-4, aCat, m2 4)
je ho‘dai guroo bahi tiki-aa tis jan kee vadi-aa-ee vadee ho-ee.
Great is the greatness of that humble being, whom the Guru Himself anointed in His Presence.
fan a@ nas fofeor AS ost ufeor wR eafsur Set I 09-5, west, v2 4)
tis ka-o jagat nivi-aa sabh pairee pa-i-aa jas varti-aa lo-ee.
All the world comes and bows to him, falling at his feet. His praises spread throughout the world.
fA ag us qos sung aefe fAA & HASa JE Ufsor gs us A UT Tet Il 09-5, agst, H3 4)
tis ka-o khand barahmand namaskaar karahi jis kai mastak hath Dhari-aa gur poorai SO pooraa ho-ee.
The galaxies and solar systems bow in reverence to him; the Perfect Guru has placed His hand upon his head, and he has become perfect.
ad at efsuret fos vs Aevet wrufs & 3 Aaet I (309-6, ast, He 4) gur kee vadi-aa-ee nit charhai savaa-ee aparh ko na sako-ee. The glorious greatness of the Guru increases day by day; no one can equal it.
We soa dfs ads vrfy fo fefoor nd UA ge ys Aet Sil 09-7, aes, ne 4) jan naanak har kartai aap bahi tiki-aa aapay paij rakhai parabh so-ee. ||3]|| O servant Nanak, the Creator Lord Himself established him; God preserves his honor.
[131] ust II (309-8)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
afer az wurg od niefs Jes Il (309-8, west, He 4) kaa-i-aa kot apaar hai andar hatnaalay. The human body is a great fortress, with its shops and streets within.
aanfa AGet A ad dfs SAS ANS Il (309-8, ast, He 4) gurmukh sa-udaa jo karay har vasat samaalay. The Gurmukh who comes to trade gathers the cargo of the Lord's Name.
oy fours ofa zara dtd useTS I (309-8, ast, He 4) naam niDhaan har vanjee-ai heeray parvaalay. He deals in the treasure of the Lord's Name, the jewels and the diamonds.
fee ofeur fa da & ug de A UZ BTS Il (309-9, west, ws 4)
vin kaa-i-aa je hor thai Dhan khojday say moorh baytaalay.
Those who search for this treasure outside of the body, in other places, are foolish demons.
A @sfz aafh seventy faS srs foa 37H UII (309-9, ast, we 4)
say ujharh bharam bhavaa-ee-ah ji-o jhaarh mirag bhaalay. ||15]|
They wander around in the wilderness of doubt, like the deer who searches for the musk in the bushes. ||15]|
HBa H8 8 Il (309-10)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
A fsa ad Afsae ys at Amu Aa Hfs dfn Il (309-10, west, we 4) jo nindaa karay satgur pooray kee so a-ukhaa jag meh ho-i-aa. One who slanders the Perfect True Guru, shall have difficulty in this world.
aoa ug wa yg 3 a uals Go Sent It (309-11, wea, 2 4) narak ghor dukh khoohu hai othai pakarh oh dho-i-aa. He is caught and thrown into the most horrible hell, the well of pain and suffering.
TA yaS 3 He Cy mur ae ae sfenr i (309-11, west, we 4) kook pukaar ko na sunay oh a-ukhaa ho-ay ho-ay ro-i-aa. No one listens to his shrieks and cries; he cries out in pain and misery.
Gis Jey ues Ag Teteor we ue AS der i 309-12, ast, we 4) on halat palat sabh gavaa-i-aa laahaa mool sabh kho-i-aa. He totally loses this world and the next; he has lost all of his investment and profit.
6g 3a He sae afs fos sua Cfo ufs fer II (309-12, weHt, He 4)
oh taylee sandaa balad kar nit bhalkay uth parabh jo-i-aa.
He is like the ox at the oil-press; each morning when he rises, God places the yoke upon him.
ofs 24 We fos Ag fas fe fas as 3 TfeMr Il (309-13, west, Hs 4) har vaykhai sunai nit sabh kichh tidoo kichh gujhaa na ho-i-aa. The Lord always sees and hears everything; nothing can be concealed from Him.
AA din A Be AT ust fas sfenr |i (309-14, west, He 4) jaisaa beejay so lunai jayhaa purab kinai bo-i-aa. As you plant, so shall you harvest, according to what you planted in the past.
fan faut ad ys uruat fen Afsag & vee Gfeur II (309-14, aBet, He 4) jis kirpaa karay parabh aapnee tis satgur kay charan Dho-i-aa. One who is blessed by God's Grace washes the feet of the True Guru.
ad Afsasd fue sfe afeor fa Sa ave Hafenr I 09-15, aes, v2 4)
gur satgur pichhai tar ga-i-aa ji-o lohaa kaath sango-i-aa.
He is carried across by the Guru, the True Guru, like iron which is carried across by wood.
Wo ssa oH forfe 3 afu of afe oth AY afenr A (309-15, west, 8 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay too jap har har naam sukh ho-i-aa. ||1||
O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, peace is obtained. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (09-16) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
zsoaiot Aavaret faa aenfe fiufsor afs TE I (309-16, aGst, He 4) vadbhaagee-aa sohaaganee jinaa gurmukh mili-aa har raa-ay. Very fortunate is the soul-bride, who, as Gurmukh, meets the Lord, her King.
nisd Afs yarrion Soa OTH ANE NQI (309-17, aBet, H8 4) antar jot pargaasee-aa naanak naam samaa-ay. ||2||
Her inner being is illiminated with His Divine Light; O Nanak, she is absorbed in His Name. |[2||
ust Il (309-17)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
feg Adts AS UsH J faR niefs AS at fete FS II (09-17, aga, He 4)
ih sareer sabh Dharam hai jis andar sachay kee vich jot. This body is the home of Dharma; the Divine Light of the True Lord is within it.
dun 330 fete ofa ad act gente Asa ae Afs I (309-18, ast, He 4)
guhaj ratan vich luk rahay ko-ee gurmukh sayvak kadhai khot.
Hidden within it are the jewels of mystery; how rare is that Gurmukh, that selfless servant, who digs them out.
AS TSH IH Uetfenr st fea sfeur fea GfS US II (309-18, aes, He 4)
sabh aatam raam pachhaani-aa taa’ ik ravi-aa iko ot pot.
When someone realizes the All-pervading Soul, then he sees the One and Only Lord permeating, through and through.
fea dfimr fea vfour fea afenr Age ASfS II (09-19, aGst, 48 4) ik daykhi-aa ik mani-aa iko suni-aa sarvan sarot. He sees the One, he believes in the One, and with his ears, he listens only to the One.
UST 390
Wo Bsa oH Hots 3 AY Ae AS Sat aS VEN (310-1, ast, vs 4)
jan naanak naam salaahi too sach sachay sayvaa tayree hot. ||16]||
O servant Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is your service to the Lord, the Truest of the True. ||16] |
H8a H8 8 Il (310-1)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afs gn f30 & fee ato faa ofs efor ue Hf II (310-1, aGst, He 4) sabh ras tin kai ridai heh jin har vasi-aa man maahi. All joy is in the hearts of those, within whose minds the Lord abides.
dfs vsats 3 HY Bus fSo aG Afs Sus ATT Il (310-2, aBst, He 4) har dargahi tay mukh ujlay tin ka-o sabh daykhan jaahi. In the Court of the Lord, their faces are radiant, and everyone goes to see them.
fro fess@ any fomrfemr fae ag s@ aet ofa i 10-2, aGst, v2 4)
jin nirbha-o naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tin ka-o bha-o ko-ee naahi. Those who meditate on the Name of the Fearless Lord have no fear.
dfs @3sH fat Adfeur fas a@ ufs feftimr vrs i Gi0-3, west, He 4) har utam tinee sarayvi-aa jin ka-o Dhur likhi-aa aahi. Those who have such pre-destined destiny remember the Sublime Lord.
3 dfs waats Uses fre af gor He HAT II (310-4, ast, He 4)
tay har dargahi painaa-ee-ah jin har vuthaa man maahi.
Those, within whose minds the Lord abides, are robed with honor in the Court of the Lord.
6fe orfu sd AS ads fr@ fsa fue AS HAS ests I (310-4, ast, nH 4)
o-ay aap taray sabh kutamb si-o tin pichhai sabh jagat chhadaahi.
They are carried across, along with all their family, and the whole world is saved along with them.
Ho soa ag afa His Aa fo Sfy Sfe TH Aleta NAM 10-5, TSH, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har mayl jan tin vaykh vaykh ham jeevaahi. ||1]|
O Lord, please unite servant Nanak with Your humble servants; beholding them, beholding them, I live. ||1]|
He 8 Il (10-5)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
AW uast set Tdierest fra Aa Afsas For ore il (310-5, ast, ne 4) saa Dhartee bha-ee haree-aavalee jithai mayraa satgur baithaa aa-ay. That land, where my True Guru comes and sits, becomes green and fertile.
AHS se Wdres frat As Afsag Shimer AE I Gi0-6, west, ns 4) say jant bha-ay haree-aavlay jinee mayraa satgur daykhi-aa jaa-ay. Those beings who go and behold my True Guru are rejuvenated.
ug Ug fust ug UG Aw US US A Asal fale ag afer He I (310-7, west, we 4) Dhan Dhan pitaa Dhan Dhan kul Dhan Dhan so jannee jin guroo jani-aa maa-ay. Blessed, blessed is the father; blessed, blessed is the family; blessed, blessed is the mother, who gave birth to the Guru.
a9 U9 ag fafe oH wefoor urfy sfour frat for fear we safe il (310-7, west, we 4) Dhan Dhan guroo jin naam araaDhi-aa aap tari-aa jinee dithaa tinaa la-ay chhadaa-ay. Blessed, blessed is the Guru, who worships and adores the Naam; He saves Himself, and emancipates those who see Him.
dfs Afsag Hog efeur afs AS BTS GS UTE | (310-8, aes, He 4)
har satgur maylhu da-i-aa kar jan naanak Dhovai paa-ay. ||2]|
O Lord, be kind, and unite me with the True Guru, that servant Nanak may wash His feet. ||2]|
ust Il (310-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag Ae Afsag wing 3 fan viefs ofe Sfs ofemr I Gi0-9, aGst, v2 4)
sach sachaa satgur amar hai jis andar har ur Dhaari-aa.
Truest of the True is the Immortal True Guru; He has enshrined the Lord deep within His heart.
Ay Ae Afsag usy do fafs any ao fay Hfemr Il (310-9, ast, He 4)
sach sachaa satgur purakh hai jin kaam kroDh bikh maari-aa.
Truest of the True is the True Guru, the Primal Being, who has conquered sexual desire, anger and corruption.
W fsor ua Afsag 3t nigag HO ArafaMi Il (310-10, west, He 4)
jaa dithaa pooraa satguroo taa” andrahu man saaDhaari-aa.
When I see the Perfect True Guru, then deep within, my mind is comforted and consoled.
ford TI wus Ae Het wt stant il (310-11, west, vs 4)
balihaaree gur aapnay sadaa sadaa ghum vaari-aa.
I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru; I am devoted and dedicated to Him, forever and ever.
ante frst Houta Tfamr di (310-11, aest, v2 4) gurmukh jitaa manmukh haari-aa. ||17]| A Gurmukh wins the battle of life whereas a self-willed manmukh loses it. ||17]|
HBa H8 8 Il (310-11)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
ate fasur Afsag Afeée yfe aayfa on fomrfert i Gi0-12, aBst, v2 4)
kar kirpaa satgur mayli-on mukh gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-isee.
By His Grace, He leads us to meet the True Guru; then, as Gurmukh, we chant the Lord's Name, and meditate on it.
Aad fa Asad sent Tg us wet SEAT II (310-12, west, Hs 4)
so karay je satgur bhaavsee gur pooraa gharee vasaa-isee.
We do that which pleases the True Guru; the Perfect Guru comes to dwell in the home of the heart.
fro niefa an fours 3 fsa a 3G AS TSTEAT II (310-13, west, nH: 4) jin andar naam niDhaan hai tin kaa bha-o sabh gavaa-isee. Those who have the treasure of the Naam deep within - all their fears are removed.
fas sue a@ af orfu of da ast sf sf feat I 310-13, weet, He 4)
jin rakhan ka-o har aap ho-ay hor kaytee jhakh jhakh jaa-isee.
They are protected by the Lord Himself; others struggle and fight against them, but they only come to death.
Wo sted 3H fimrfe 3 afe vals uals ssrfErt Wall (310-14, west, v3 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay too har halat palat chhodaa-isee. ||1]|| O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam; the Lord shall deliver you, here and hereafter. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (10-15) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
deer & nfs sect ag Afsag at efsmret il (310-15, ast, ne 4) gursikhaa kai man bhaavdee gur satgur kee vadi-aa-ee. The glorious greatness of the Guru, the True Guru, is pleasing to the GurSikh's mind.
fs wag UA Afsag at fos gs AST Il Gi0-15, ast, Hs 4) har raakho paij satguroo kee nit charhai savaa-ee. The Lord preserves the honor of the True Guru, which increases day by day.
ae Afsag a nfs usgqun J ursqoH saret Il Gi0-16, weet, v2 4)
gur satgur kai man paarbarahm hai paarbarahm chhadaa-ee.
The Supreme Lord God is in the Mind of the Guru, the True Guru; the Supreme Lord God saves Him.
ad Afsad ste etre die fate As orf feeet i (310-16, aBst, He 4)
gur satgur taan deebaan har tin sabh aan nivaa-ee. The Lord is the Power and Support of the Guru, the True Guru; all come to bow before Him.
frat fsa na Afsags eC ats fo a Afs uy TeTet I (310-17, aSst, He 4) jinee dithaa mayraa satgur bhaa-o kar tin kay sabh paap gavaa-ee. Those who have gazed lovingly upon my True Guru - all their sins are taken away.
dfs edad 3 HY CAS ag Ast uret Il (310-17, aes, ne 4) har dargeh tay mukh ujlay baho sobhaa paa-ee. Their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, and they obtain great glory.
Wo Hoa Hat Ufs fo A As a fra AS set I Gi0-18, Test, Hs 4)
jan naanak mangai Dhoorh tin jo gur kay sikh mayray bhaa-ee. ||2||
Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of those GurSikhs, O my Siblings of Destiny. ||2]|
ust I (310-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
8 uty Hot fhefs AY AY Ad at Sfsnret i (310-19, aSst, us 4)
ha-o aakh salaahee sifat sach sach sachay kee vadi-aa-ee.
I chant the Praises and Glories of the True One. True is the glorious greatness of the True Lord.
Hod Ag Hod Ay AY ats fads o uret Il (10-19, ast, Hz 4)
Saalaahee sach salaah sach sach keemat kinai na paa-ee.
I praise the True Lord, and the Praises of the True Lord. His worth cannot be estimated.
Uuar 399 Ag Ae 3H frat ote A fsufs gd wurst i (311-1, aSHt, ue 4)
sach sachaa ras jinee chakhi-aa say taripat rahay aaghaa-ee. Those who have tasted the true essence of the True Lord, remain satisfied and fulfilled.
feg of oA Ret wee fA aat fifonret wet i Gii-1, aGat, v2 4)
ih har ras say-ee jaanday ji-o goo“gai mithi-aa-ee khaa-ee.
They know this essence of the Lord, but they say nothing, like the mute who tastes the sweet candy, and says nothing.
afs us ofs ys Afeor Hf ext eoret ac Gii-2, west, we 4)
gur poorai har parabh sayvi-aa man vajee vaaDhaa-ee. ||18]|
The Perfect Guru serves the Lord God; His vibration vibrates and resounds in the mind. ||18]|
HBa H8 8 Il (311-2)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
frat niefs Gxsae Het wets Ahr Il 311-2, ast, Hs 4) jinaa andar umarthal say-ee jaanan soolee-aa. Those who have a festering boil within - they alone know its pain.
dfs wats ASt fess 3G fae fees Fe wh user I GBu-3, west, He 4)
har jaaneh say-ee birahu ha-o tin vitahu sad ghum gholee-aa.
Those who know the pain of separation from the Lord - I am forever a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them.
dfs Hed ANS usy Ha fra fSa fees 3q Fr Il 31-4, ast, v2 4)
har maylhu sajan purakh mayraa sir tin vitahu tal rolee-aa.
O Lord, please lead me to meet the Guru, the Primal Being, my Friend; my head shall roll in the dust under His feet.
a fre ag og refs JG Gen fsa a sr Il 311-4, ast, ve 4) jo sikh gur kaar kamaaveh ha-o gulam tinaa kaa golee-aa. I am the slave of the slaves of those GurSikhs who serve Him.
of sfa vee A as fa fast afe sf ss i Gis, ast, we 4)
har rang chaloolai jo ratay tin bhinee har rang cholee-aa.
Those who are imbued with the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love - their robes are drenched in the Love of the Lord.
ate fasur aaa Afs ae ufo fre Sfomr Her A GB11-5, aest, He 4)
kar kirpaa naanak mayl gur peh sir vaychi-aa molee-aa. ||1]| Grant Your Grace, and lead Nanak to meet the Guru; I have sold my head to Him.
[21 |
He 8 Il (G11-6) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
mGaretl sfur adts J fa Hag fone aE Il Gu-6, west, v2 4) a-uganee bhari-aa sareer hai ki-o santahu nirmal ho-ay. The body is full of mistakes and misdeeds; how can it become pure, O Saints?
Tanfy Te zasinifs ue IGH ae GfE i 11-7, ast, He 4) gurmukh gun vayhaajhee-ah mal ha-umai kadhai Dho-ay. The Gurmukh purchases virtues, which wash off the sin of egotism.
Ay zens da fae AG ABST SE Ii (3-7, aes, He 4) sach vana‘jahi rang si-o sach sa-udaa ho-ay. True is the trade which purchases the True Lord with love.
3a Hfs 3 oreet ors afs are ALE I (311-8, 7st, Hs 4) totaa mool na aavee laahaa har bhaavai so-ay. No loss will come from this, and the profit comes by the Lord's Will.
sod fae Ay zefror fro ufe fofimr uarufs HE Qn Gu-s, ast, v2 4)
naanak tin sach vananji-aa jinaa Dhur likhi-aa paraapat ho-ay. ||2] |
O Nanak, they alone purchase the Truth, who are blessed with such pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
ugat I (311-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hedt Ag Wedel AG AS use fers Il (311-9, aS, v2 4)
Saalaahee sach salaahnaa sach sachaa purakh niraalay.
I praise the True One, who alone is worthy of praise. The True Primal Being is True - this is His unique quality.
Ag Aet Ag ufo SA AY AS dfs THN Il 311-9, ast, He 4)
sach sayvee sach man vasai sach sachaa har rakhvaalay.
Serving the True Lord, the Truth comes to dwell in the mind. The Lord, the Truest of the True, is my Protector.
Ag Ae frat maton A ATE TG AG GS Il Gi1-10, aes, ve 4)
sach sachaa jinee araaDhi-aa say jaa-ay ralay sach naalay.
Those who worship and adore the Truest of the True, shall go and merge with the True Lord.
Ag Ae frat o Afent A HOH Hs SSS Il (311-10, west, v2 4)
sach sachaa jinee na sayvi-aa say manmukh moorh baytaalay.
Those who do not serve the Truest of the True - those self-willed manmukhs are foolish demons.
Go ore uss Hog See faS utS Hfe nesses VEN Gu-u1, aes, He 4)
oh aal pataal muhhu bolday ji-o peetai mad matvaalay. ||19]|
With their mouths, they babble on about this and that, like the drunkard who has drunk his wine. ||19]|
H8a HIS 3 Il (311-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ast wf Hoel A UAH fefs ade I Gi-12, west, He 3) ga-orhee raag sulakh-nee jay khasmai chit karay-i. Gauree Raga is auspicious, if, through it, one comes to think of his Lord and Master.
TS VS Asa a MAT Atarg ASE i (311-12, ast, v2 3)
bhaanai chalai satguroo kai aisaa seegaar karay-i.
He should walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru; this should be his decoration.
He Hae sag J AST Het Tele Il (311-12, ast, ne 3) sachaa sabad bhataar hai sadaa sadaa raavay-ay. The True Word of the Shabad is our spouse; ravish and enjoy it, forever and ever.
fag Cust Hats da quae fs8 AS So AIG SE I Gu-13, aes, nH: 3)
ji-o ublee majeethai rang gahgahaa ti-o sachay no jee-o day-ay.
Like the deep crimson color of the madder plant - such is the dye which shall color you, when you dedicate your soul to the True One.
Sa Bee ifs ast AS AS Bar SI I (311-13, ast, 42 3)
rang chaloolai at ratee sachay si-o lagaa nayhu.
One who loves the True Lord is totally imbued with the Lord's Love, like the deep crimson color of the poppy.
TT Sat Ist a Id AZ HSH usfe usT i Gii-14, wat, ws 3) koorh thagee gujhee naa rahai koorh mulammaa palayt Dharayhu.
Falsehood and deception may be covered with false coatings, but they cannot remain hidden.
ast asts eareor as fA war Sg Il (311-14, west, He 3) koorhee karan vadaa-ee-aa koorhay si-o lagaa nayhu. False is the uttering of praises, by those who love falsehood.
soa Ae wif J mm oefe ase A Gi-15, west, He 3) naanak sachaa aap hai aapay nadar karay-i. ||1]| O Nanak, He alone is True; He Himself casts His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (11-15) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
AsAats Hfa ofs Grats o Afar ATG fee furor i Gi-is, 7st, Hs 4)
satsangat meh har ustat hai sang saaDhoo milay pi-aari-aa.
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the Lord's Praises are sung. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Beloved Lord is met.
Gfe usu urat ufs Ae ofs Guen asta usGuarfar II (311-16, Text, Hs 4) o-ay purakh paraanee Dhan jan heh updays karahi par-upkaari-aa. Blessed is that mortal being, who shares the Teachings for the good of others.
dfs oH fesets ofs oH Hees dfs oH Aa fens i (311-17, ast, ve 4)
har naam darirhaaveh har naam sunaaveh har naamay jag nistaari-aa.
He implants the Name of the Lord, and he preaches the Name of the Lord; through the Name of the Lord, the world is saved.
dd sue a Ag det Bs oe Us Aals sHAafemr | 311-17, west, w: 4)
gur vaykhan ka-o sabh ko-ee lochai nav khand jagat namaskaari-aa.
Everyone longs to see the Guru; the world, and the nine continents, bow down to Him.
3u nm nig afm Afsasd fefs ag mrad so AStant I Gi-is, aes, He 4) tuDh aapay aap rakhi-aa satgur vich gur aapay tuDh savaari-aa. You Yourself have established the True Guru; You Yourself have adorned the Guru.
3 umd uns un aveta Afsad aS froneatoor It Gii-19, ast, H2 4)
too aapay poojeh pooj karaaveh satgur ka-o sirjanhaari-aa.
You Yourself worship and adore the True Guru; You inspire others to worship Him as well, O Creator Lord.
aet fests wt Afsag ung fA oer He ATH Hfenr I Gai1-19, a@et, we 4)
ko-ee vichhurh jaa-ay satguroo paashu tis kaalaa muhu jam maari-aa.
If someone separates himself from the True Guru, his face is blackened, and he is destroyed by the Messenger of Death.
UST 342 sR mat fue det ant aafhet ufe Stetfamr i 312-1, west, w2 4)
tis agai pichhai dho-ee naahee gursikhee man veechaari-aa. He shall find no shelter, here or hereafter; the GurSikhs have realized this in their minds.
Afsag 6 fs Ret Ae Cus fas fase aH ANTM I (312-2, aes, Hs 4)
satguroo no milay say-ee jan ubray jin hirdai naam samaari-aa.
That humble being who meets the True Guru is saved; he cherishes the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in his heart.
Ho S'6a A TafAY usd de Afiong oe feAstar QI Gi2-2, west, He 4)
jan naanak kay gursikh puthahu har japi-ahu har nistaari-aa. ||2||
Servant Nanak says: O GurSikhs, O my sons, meditate on the Lord; only the Lord shall save you. ||2||
HIS! 3 Il (312-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ICH Aas safer vats faftmr faare Il (312-3, west, He 3)
ha-umai jagat bhulaa-i-aa durmat bikhi-aa bikaar.
Egotism has led the world astray, along with evil-mindedness and the poison of corruption.
Afsag fxs 3 see of Hone nid niftmrs I 12-3, west, He 3)
satgur milai ta nadar ho-ay manmukh anDh anDhi-aar.
Meeting with the True Guru, we are blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace, while the self-willed manmukh gropes around in the darkness.
soa ni Afs we fAA 3 Aafe we fimirg Si 12-4, ast, nH: 3) naanak aapay mayl la-ay jis no sabad laa-ay pi-aar. ||3]||
O Nanak, the Lord absorbs into Himself those whom He inspires to love the Word of His Shabad. ||3]|
ust Il (312-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ay Ae ot fkefs nos 3 A ad fA niea fen I 12-5, ast, He 3)
sach sachay kee sifat salaah hai so karay jis andar bhijai.
True are the Praises and the Glories of the True One; he alone speaks them, whose mind is softened within.
frat fea His fea meetin fe or ag 3 aag fer Il (312-5, west, Hs 3)
jinee ik man ik araaDhi-aa tin kaa kanDh na kabhoo chhijai.
Those who worship the One Lord with single-minded devotion - their bodies shall never perish.
U6 Us use ATA 3 fo AG dAO nif_s furs I Gi2-6, aeHt, ne 3)
Dhan Dhan purakh saabaas hai jin sach rasnaa amrit pijai.
Blessed, blessed and acclaimed is that person, who tastes with his tongue the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name.
Ad Ast fro nfs steet A fs Aet Paar fHH Il 12-6, agst, nH 3) sach sachaa jin man bhaavdaa say man sachee dargeh lijai. One whose mind is pleased with the Truest of the True is accepted in the True Court.
US Ud HOH Afemrdior Hu Caw Av afan IQOll (312-7, agHt, He 3) Dhan Dhan janam sachi-aaree-aa mukh ujal sach karijai. ||20||
Blessed, blessed is the birth of those true beings; the True Lord brightens their faces. ||20]|
HBa H8 8 Il (312-8)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Was We fests ae wrt fs de afs afsurs il 12-8, ast, He 4)
Saakat jaa-ay niveh gur aagai man khotay koorh koorhi-aaray.
The faithless cynics go and bow before the Guru, but their minds are corrupt and false, totally false.
W ag ad Gog He act afo wis wats saSs I 12-8, Test, He 4)
jaa gur kahai uthahu mayray bhaa-ee bahi jaahi ghusar bagulaaray.
When the Guru says, "Rise up, my Siblings of Destiny", they sit down, crowded in like cranes.
aah niefs afsag eos vfs aS BAST Il (312-9, ast, v2 4) gursikhaa andar satgur vartai chun kadhay laDhovaaray. The True Guru prevails among His GurSikhs; they pick out and expel the wanderers.
6fe nia fue afo ng eufefs o deat denrs Il (312-9, aes, He 4)
o-ay agai pichhai bahi muhu chhapaa-in na ralnee khotay-aaray.
Sitting here and there, they hide their faces; being counterfeit, they cannot mix with the genuine.
Ga a sy A Ga ant Ae ag Bale STS Il (312-10, Tes, He 4) onaa daa bhakh so othai naahee jaa-ay koorh lahan bhaydaaray. There is no food for them there; the false go into the filth like sheep.
A AAS od wereha Sdn fru ae ufy Caras Il (312-10, ast, He 4) jay saakat nar khaavaa-ee-ai lochee-ai bikh kadhai mukh uglaaray. If you try to feed the faithless cynic, he will spit out poison from his mouth.
dfs Was ASt Ha 3 adm Gfe HS franeTs Il (312-11, west, He 4)
har saakat saytee sang na karee-ahu o-ay maaray sirjanhaaray.
O Lord, let me not be in the company of the faithless cynic, who is cursed by the Creator Lord.
fan ao feg ae Het afs Fa Ae BSA BH ANTS IAI (312-12, Tea, He 4)
jis kaa ih khayl so-ee kar vaykhai jan naanak naam samaaray. ||1]|
This drama belongs to the Lord; He performs it, and He watches over it. Servant Nanak cherishes the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (12-12) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsag use main d fan niefs of Cfo ofanr It (312-12, ast, He 4)
satgur purakh agamm hai jis andar har ur Dhaari-aa.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, is inaccessible; He has enshrined the Lord's Name within His heart.
Afsag 6 niufs afe 3 Reet fan ef franeotanr I (312-13, ast, He 4) satguroo no aparh ko-ay na sak-ee jis val sirjanhaari-aa. No one can equal the True Guru; the Creator Lord is on His side.
Asay a usa AAG os sats o fry we deg whe festfenr i (312-13, west, vs 4) satguroo kaa kharhag sanjo-o har bhagat hai jit kaal kantak maar vidaari-aa. Devotional worship of the Lord is the sword and armor of the True Guru; He has killed and cast out Death, the torturer.
Afsag oa susoe ofs nif 3 Afsag & fue ofs Afs Carfoor i 12-14, a@at, wi: 4) satguroo kaa rakhanhaaraa har aap hai satguroo kai pichhai har sabh ubaari-aa. The Lord Himself is the Protector of the True Guru. The Lord saves all those who follow in the footsteps of the True Guru.
nf He fase us Afsag a A fu Gurecars far Il (312-15, Test, He 4) jo mandaa chitvai pooray satguroo kaa so aap upaavanhaarai maari-aa. One who thinks evil of the Perfect True Guru - the Creator Lord Himself destroys him.
Sd TG de dig vadd Ad at Ho Soa MH Setfant QI (312-16, aes, He: 4)
ayh gal hovai har dargeh sachay kee jan naanak agam veechaari-aa. ||2||
These words will be confirmed as true in the Court of the Lord; servant Nanak reveals this mystery. ||[2||
UST I (312-16)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
Ag Afsor frat watoor AT BS St Ag BS Il (312-16, TCH, Hz 4) sach suti-aa jinee araaDhi-aa jaa uthay taa sach chavay.
Those who dwell upon the True Lord while asleep, utter the True Name when they are awake.
A fees wa ufo wets # Tenfy AG Je Il (312-17, west, He 4) say virlay jug meh jaanee-ahi jo gurmukh sach ravay. How rare in the world are those Gurmukhs who dwell upon the True Lord.
J8 seas fo a fA uisfes AT Be Il (312-17, Test, He 4) ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o je an-din sach lavay. I am a sacrifice to those who chant the True Name, night and day.
fe ufo 3f6 AS Steer A AS Pda Te Il (312-18, 7SHt, ue 4)
jin man tan sachaa bhaavdaa say sachee dargeh gavay.
The True Lord is pleasing to their minds and bodies; they go to the Court of the True Lord.
AS ssa 8S AY OH Ag AM AST oe MQAUI (312-18, ast, wz 4) jan naanak bolai sach naam sach sachaa sadaa navay. ||21]||
Servant Nanak chants the True Name; truly, the True Lord is forever brand new. [|21]|
HSE H2 8 Il (312-19)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
fom Heat font ATaret Tafa 3 ugSES Il (312-19, aSst, v8 4) ki-aa savnaa ki-aa jaagnaa gurmukh tay parvaan. Who is asleep, and who is awake? Those who are Gurmukh are approved.
UST 393
fro Ate farrth o fens A Us Use UTUS Il (313-1, wat, He 4)
jinaa saas giraas na visrai say pooray purakh parDhaan.
Those who do not forget the Lord, with each and every breath and morsel of food, are the perfect and famous persons.
aot Afsag urea nrafea wat fomre i 313-1, west, He 4) karmee satgur paa-ee-ai an-din lagai Dhi-aan. By His Grace they find the True Guru; night and day, they meditate.
fae oft Hats fife gor vag urTet HT II (313-2, west, He 4) tin kee sangat mil rahaa dargeh paa-ee maan.
I join the society of those persons, and in so doing, I am honored in the Court of the Lord.
ABS ag ag Buafs Boe st ag aals I (313-2, ast, He 4)
sa-uday vaahu vaahu uchrahi uth-day bhee vaahu karayn.
While asleep, they chant, "Waaho! Waaho!", and while awake, they chant, "Waaho!" as well.
aoa 3 HY CxS fa fos Cfo AHSfe IAI (313-3, west, He 4) naanak tay mukh ujlay je nit uth samaalayn. ||1||
O Nanak, radiant are the faces of those, who rise up early each day, and dwell upon the Lord. ||1]|
He 8 Il (13-3) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsag AShat nmyert ust SH wT Il (313-3, Test, He 4) satgur Sayvee-ai aapnaa paa-ee-ai naam apaar. Serving his True Guru, one obtains the Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord.
3Cnle safeur afe we dfs ots ad SIT Il (13-4, west, He 4)
bha-ojal dubdi-aa kadh la-ay har daat karay daataar.
The drowning person is lifted up and out of the terrifying world-ocean; the Great Giver gives the gift of the Lord's Name.
U9 Ua AA So fA of ats EVE Il (313-4, aSat, He 4) Dhan Dhan say saah hai je naam karahi vaapaar. Blessed, blessed are those bankers who trade the Naam.
Zend fra nree Aafe BureeTs il (313-5, west, us 4)
vanjaaray sikh aavday sabad laghaavanhaar.
The Sikhs, the traders come, and through the Word of His Shabad, they are carried across.
Ho oa fre as faur set f3o Afeor fAaHET ST QI (313-5, west, He 4) jan naanak jin ka-o kirpaa bha-ee tin sayvi-aa sirjanhaar. ||2| | O servant Nanak, they alone serve the Creator Lord, who are blessed by His Grace.
21 |
ugat Il (313-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HY Ad & Ao Sas dig AY Ae fAat maf Il (313-6, aSst, He 4)
sach sachay kay jan bhagat heh sach sachaa jinee araaDhi-aa.
Those who truly worship and adore the True Lord, are truly the humble devotees of the True Lord.
fae denfy dfs défenr fae nies dt Ae ofr Il (313-6, aga, He 4) jin gurmukh khoj dhandholi-aa tin andrahu hee sach laaDhi-aa. Those Gurmukhs who search and seek, find the True One within themselves.
Ay Atos AY fHot Afeor ans aca wife fost Afar i 313-7, aBst, x2 4)
sach saahib sach jinee sayvi-aa kaal kantak maar tinee saaDhi-aa.
Those who truly serve their True Lord and Master, overwhelm and conquer Death, the torturer.
Ag Ae AS © ea" d AY ASS A Als sero Il (313-8, a@at, we 4) sach sachaa sabh doo vadaa hai sach sayvan say sach ralaaDhi-aa.
The True One is truly the greatest of all; those who serve the True One are blended with the True One.
Ag Ae 3 AafA oO AY AS Afe corto 112211 313-8, west, He 4)
sach sachay no saabaas hai sach sachaa sayv falaaDhi-aa. ||22| |
Blessed and acclaimed is the Truest of the True; serving the Truest of the True, one blossoms forth in fruition. ||22||
HBa H2 8 Il (313-9)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
HoHY yrat Ha od ode SITE II (313-9, ast, He 4)
manmukh paraanee mugaDh hai naamheen bharmaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh is foolish; he wanders around without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fag aa Hour or fea feta fefa Fat ue i (13-9, ast, we 4)
bin gur manoo-aa naa tikai fir fir joonee paa-ay.
Without the Guru, his mind is not held steady, and he is reincarnated, over and over again.
ofe ys urfu efor dfs st Afsag firfemr ore I i3-10, az, He 4) har parabh aap da-i-aal hohi taa™ satgur mili-aa aa-ay.
But when the Lord God Himself becomes merciful to him, then the True Guru comes to meet him.
AS ood SH Hots J HOH HIS SY AVE NA Gi3-11, 7st, He 4) jan naanak naam salaahi too janam maran dukh jaa-ay. ||1]| O servant Nanak, praise the Naam; the pains of birth and death shall come to an end.
[21
Hs 8 Il (13-11) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ag Ard nruet ag fafa sf Fate i Gis-11, west, ue 4) gur saalaahee aapnaa baho biDh rang subhaa-ay. I praise my Guru in so many ways, with joyful love and affection.
Afsad Ast HO IS Sor ges FSt= Il (313-12, ast, v2 4) satgur saytee man rataa rakhi-aa banat banaa-ay. My mind is imbued with the True Guru; He has preserved the make of its making.
frost Aas o sHet afe Ulsn fos ote i 13-12, west, ws 4)
jihvaa saalaahi na raj-ee har pareetam chit laa-ay.
My tongue is not satisfied by praising Him; He has linked my consciousness with the Lord, my Beloved.
oe ore at Hfs gud He fRus ofe oA UTE NQI 13-13, west, He 4)
naanak naavai kee man bhukh hai man tariptai har ras khaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, my mind hungers for the Name of the Lord; my mind is satisfied, tasting the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (313-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ay Ae avats wai feo wet fafo geet il (313-13, ast, He 4)
sach sachaa kudrat jaanee-ai din raatee jin banaa-ee-aa.
The True Lord is truly known for His all-powerful creative nature; He fashioned the days and the nights.
H AY AS Ae Het Ay AS oor efsnretur | (313-14, ast, He 4) so sach salaahee sadaa sadaa sach sachay kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa.
I praise that True Lord, forever and ever; True is the glorious greatness of the True Lord.
Hardt AY HoT AY AY ofS fas o ureter Il (313-14, west, nH 4)
Saalaahee sach salaah sach sach keemat kinai na paa-ee-aa.
True are the Praises of the Praiseworthy True Lord; the value of the True Lord cannot be appraised.
Ww fhfeor us Afsag 3 oHg Sect mrehor Il 313-15, aSst, He 4)
jaa mili-aa pooraa satguroo taa haajar nadree aa-ee-aa.
When someone meets the Perfect True Guru, then His Sublime Presence comes to be seen.
Ae aenfe frat Aetoor fser gut Afs Teeter QSII (313-15, ast, H2 4)
sach gurmukh jinee sahaali-aa tinaa bhukhaa sabh gavaa-ee-aa. ||23]| Those Gurmukhs who praise the True Lord - all their hunger is gone. ||23]|
HBa H2 8 Il (313-16)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Hue 36 Ufa dAfeor A ys oO BFF I Gis-16, ast, He 4)
mai man tan khoj khojaydi-aa so parabh laDhaa lorh.
Searching and examining my mind and body, I have found that God, whom I longed for.
fene ag A urfemr fats ofs ys fest fs nal Gi3-17, aes, Hs 4)
visat guroo mai paa-i-aa jin har parabh ditaa jorh. ||1||
I have found the Guru, the Divine Intermediary, who has united me with the Lord God. ||1]|
He 3 Il (313-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hfenrardt nfs nist sar Il (313-17, west, v2 3) maa-i-aaDhaaree at annaa bolaa. One who is attached to Maya is totally blind and deaf.
Hae 6 Heet aT IG ws Il (313-18, west, He 3) sabad na sun-ee baho rol ghacholaa. He does not listen to the Word of the Shabad; he makes a great uproar and tumult.
aenfy au Rafe foe ofe i 313-18, ast, He 3)
gurmukh jaapai sabad liv laa-ay.
The Gurmukhs chant and meditate on the Shabad, and lovingly center their consciousness on it.
dfs oy Afe Hd ofs ofh AME II 13-18, west, He 3)
har naam sun mannay har naam samaa-ay.
They hear and believe in the Name of the Lord; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord.
a fsRq aS A ad aatemr Il (313-19, ast, v2 3) jo tis bhaavai so karay karaa-i-aa. Whatever pleases God, He causes that to be done.
SOA SHE HS SAS III (313-19, ast, He 3) naanak vajdaa jant vajaa-i-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, human beings are the instruments which vibrate as God plays them. ||2]|
UST 398
u@at Il (314-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 aes Ag fas Wee a ror niefs Fes Il 314-1, aC, w: 3) too kartaa sabh kichh jaandaa jo jee-aa andar vartai. You, O Creator, know everything which occurs within our beings.
3 aes nefu nares 3 Ag Aa fete TES I (314-1, aes, vs 3)
too kartaa aap agnat hai sabh jag vich gantai.
You Yourself, O Creator, are incalculable, while the entire world is within the realm of calculation.
Ag atst Sa ease AS Sat ass Il (314-2, ast, He 3) sabh keetaa tayraa varatdaa sabh tayree bantai. Everything happens according to Your Will; You created all.
3 ufe ufe fea ease AY Aa VHS I (314-2, TCH, Hs 3)
too ghat ghat ik varatdaa sach saahib chaltai.
You are the One, pervading in each and every heart; O True Lord and Master, this is Your play.
Afsasd 3 fe A afe fxs oct fa uss NQSIl (314-3, Test, He 3) satgur no milay so har milay naahee kisai partai. ||24]| One who meets the True Guru meets the Lord; no one can turn him away. ||24||
HO H3 8 Il (314-3) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
feg Hour fez afs adh qantas went fez i (314-3, wat, we 4) ih manoo-aa darirh kar rakhee-ai gurmukh laa-ee-ai chit. Hold this mind steady and stable; become Gurmukh and focus your consciousness.
fa@ af faarth feast sofenr Gofemr fas il Gi4-4, aes, He 4)
ki-o saas giraas visaaree-ai bahdi-aa uth-di-aa nit.
How could you ever forget Him, with each breath and morsel of food, sitting down or standing up?
Hde Hize at fest get feg Abra afe us SA I 314-4, aGat, He 4) maran jeevan kee chintaa ga-ee ih jee-arhaa har parabh vas.
My anxiety about birth and death has ended; this soul is under the control of the Lord God.
fA@ sre (38 Ty SAS SSA OH SAA A (14-5, Test, He 4) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too jan naanak naam bakhas. ||1|| If it pleases You, then save servant Nanak, and bless him with Your Name. ||1]|
He 3 Il (314-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY Midas HIG 3 ATS fas nora fas ute Il (314-6, ast, He 3)
manmukh aha‘kaaree mahal na jaanai khin aagai khin peechhai.
The egotistical, self-willed manmukh does not know the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; one moment he is here, and the next moment he is there.
Ret goreh Hate o nie fa af waa AIS I 314-6, a8, He 3)
sadaa bulaa-ee-ai mahal na aavai ki-o kar dargeh seejhai.
He is always invited, but he does not go to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. How shall he be accepted in the Court of the Lord?
Afsag a Hoe fear We Het dd as AfS I (314-7, TCH, He 3)
satgur kaa mahal virlaa jaanai sadaa rahai kar jorh.
How rare are those who know the Mansion of the True Guru; they stand with their palms pressed together.
nituat faut ad dfs Hat Soa BE gas lM (314-7, TVs, He 3) aapnee kirpaa karay har mayraa naanak la-ay bahorh. ||2| | If my Lord grants His Grace, O Nanak, He restores them to Himself. ||2||
ugat Il (314-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AW Aa’ ast Aes J fas Afsag at Ho HS Il (314-8, ast, ve 3) Saa Ssayvaa keetee safal hai jit satgur kaa man mannay. Fruitful and rewarding is that service, which is pleasing to the Guru's Mind.
wv Afsad a Ho Hist St uy AHHS FS Il (314-8, Test, ve 3) jaa satgur kaa man mani-aa taa paap kasamal bhannay. When the Mind of the True Guru is pleased, then sins and misdeeds run away.
Guen fa fest Afsag A Afeor fret aS I (314-9, ast, we 3) updays je ditaa satguroo so suni-aa sikhee kannay. The Sikhs listen to the Teachings imparted by the True Guru.
fae Afsad at stat Hfour fso vat seats Fs il (314-9, west, v2 3)
jin satgur kaa bhaanaa mani-aa tin charhee chavgan vannay.
Those who surrender to the True Guru's Will are imbued with the four-fold Love of the Lord.
fea oe forat aenut aa ctftmr Afs He fFS MQUil G14-10, ast, vs 3)
ih chaal niraalee gurmukhee gur deekhi-aa sun man bhinnay. ||25]|
This is the unique and distinct life-style of the Gurmukhs: listening to the Guru's Teachings, their minds blossom forth. ||25]]|
HS H3 3 Il (314-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fafs aa dfumr wmret fan 5Ca 3 SE Il 14-11, ast, v2 3) jin gur gopi-aa aapnaa tis tha-ur na thaa-o. Those who do not affirm their Guru shall have no home or place of rest.
JOS USS SS TE Vag aS TS it 314-11, Test, ve 3) halat palat dovai ga-ay dargeh naahee thaa-o. They lose both this world and the next; they have no place in the Court of the Lord.
6g aor ofa 5 oreet fefs Afsas wafa ute i 314-12, aGst, He 3)
oh vaylaa hath na aavee fir satgur lageh paa-ay. This opportunity to bow at the Feet of the True Guru shall never come again.
Afsad at ges writ ea efe feof i 314-12, west, He 3)
satgur kee gantai ghusee-ai dukhay dukh vihaa-ay.
If they miss out on being counted by the True Guru, they shall pass their lives in pain and misery.
Afsag usy fades od wm we fam of II (314-13, aes, He 3)
satgur purakh nirvair hai aapay la-ay jis laa-ay.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, has no hatred or vengeance; He unites with Himself those with whom He is pleased.
Sa LIAS faa sutese fSar vad BE SSte All (314-13, west, He 3)
naanak darsan jinaa vaykhaali-on tinaa dargeh la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, those who behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, are emancipated in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (14-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY Mifemia FIHfS nidardt |i (314-14, ast, ve 3) manmukh agi-aan durmat aha‘kaaree. The self-willed manmukh is ignorant, evil-minded and egotistical.
nists ato aut HAS ot I 14-14, west, we 3) antar kroDh joo-ai mat haaree. He is filled with anger within, and he loses his mind in the gamble.
Gs AAS Sy uy AHS I (314-15, ast, we 3) koorh kusat oh paap kamaavai. He commits the sins of fraud and unrighteousness.
fomr Go Ae foro onfy WETS I 314-15, AHH, He 3) ki-aa oh sunai ki-aa aakh sunaavai. What can he hear, and what can he tell others?
mot sor ufe Osfs ute il (314-15, ast, v2 3) annaa bolaa khu-ay ujharh paa-ay. He is blind and deaf; he loses his way, and wanders lost in the wilderness.
HOHY Mitt nie ATE I (314-16, TSH, He 3)
manmukh anDhaa aavai jaa-ay. The blind, self-willed manmukh comes and goes in reincarnation;
fag Afsag se ate o UTE II (314-16, wBst, He 3) bin satgur bhaytay thaa-ay na paa-ay. without meeting the True Guru, he finds no place of rest.
oak Uste feftmr AHS QU (314-16, ast, He 3) naanak poorab likhi-aa kamaa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, he acts according to his pre-ordained destiny. ||2]|
ust Il (314-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fro & fas ade ofa A sofs o Afsae UA Il (314-17, west, He 3) jin kay chit kathor heh say baheh na satgur paas. Those who have hearts as hard as stone, do not sit near the True Guru.
Ga Ag zase afsure fas Beth i (314-17, aes, 3 3) othai sach varatdaa koorhi-aaraa chit udaas. Truth prevails there; the false ones do not attune their consciousness to it.
6fe 2a 2s afe sf aee fefs wie safe afore uA II 314-18, ast, 2 3)
o-ay val chhal kar jhat kadh-day fir jaa-ay baheh koorhi-aaraa paas.
By hook or by crook, they pass their time, and then they go back to sit with the false ones again.
fefa AY az 3 aset His Sag & foot Il (314-18, ast, Hs 3) vich sachay koorh na gad-ee man vaykhhu ko nirjaas. Falsehood does not mix with the Truth; O people, check it out and see.
afore afsurdt ate 38 afore fra 8S Afsas utr QEN (14-19, Tes, v8 3) koorhi-aar khoorhi-aaree jaa-ay ralay sachiaar sikh baithay satgur paas. ||26]||
The false go and mingle with the false, while the truthful Sikhs sit by the side of the True Guru. ||26]|
User 3qu
HBa He U Il (315-1)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Je yde fSea wing afs nmi nirgg Il 15-1, 7st, v2 5) rahday khuhday nindak maari-an kar aapay aahar. By their own efforts, the slanderers have destroyed all remnants of themselves.
Ha Avett saat Sas AS ATT IU (315-1, ast, v2 5) sant sahaa-ee naankaa vartai sabh jaahar. ||1|| The Support of the Saints, O Nanak, is manifest, pervading everywhere. ||1]|
He U Il (15-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hed 33 He 3 fae ufefe ge Il 15-2, aSst, ve 5)
mundhhu bhulay mundh tay kithai paa-in hath.
Those who went astray from the Primal Being in the very beginning - where can they find refuge?
(33 HS aToat fa ATE AGS ANGE lM (315-2, aSst, ne 5) tinnai maaray naankaa je karan kaaran samrath. ||2|| O Nanak, they are struck down by the All-powerful, the Cause of causes. ||2]|
ugat U Il (315-3) pa-orhee 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
& aa wat gafs ys WE yrat Il (315-3, west, ue 5)
lai faahay raatee tureh parabh jaanai paraanee.
They take the noose in their hands, and go out at night to strangle others, but God knows everything, O mortal.
safo ofe useinn ofa niefs ovat Il (315-3, west, He 5) takeh naar paraa-ee-aa luk andar thaanee. They spy on other men's women, concealed in their hiding places.
Hat afe feu afte for we nret i 315-4, aGet, ue 5) san"ee dayni" vikhamm thaa-ay mithaa mad maanee. They break into well-protected places, and revel in sweet wine.
aot nmi nimgat wm ussrat I (315-4, ast, v2 5) karmee aapo aapnee aapay pachhutaanee. But they shall come to regret their actions - they create their own karma.
MATHS SAS f3H UIs wrat QI (315-4, aSst, ue 5)
ajraa-eel faraystaa til peerhay ghaanee. ||27]| Azraa-eel, the Angel of Death, shall crush them like sesame seeds in the oil-press. [|27]|
HBa He U Il (315-5)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Hea Ad AT & ASt UPSTS Il (315-5, TVs, ns 5) sayvak sachay saah kay say-ee parvaan. The servants of the True King are acceptable and approved.
um Hels ooo A ute ufs HE MATE AU (15-5, Test, He 5) doojaa sayvan naankaa say pach pach mu-ay ajaan. ||1|| Those ignorant ones who serve duality, O Nanak, rot, waste away and die. ||1]||
He U Il G15-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
A ofa fofimr Su ys Hee o AME II (315-6, weHt, ne 5)
jo Dhur likhi-aa laykh parabh maytnaa na jaa-ay.
That destiny which was pre-ordained by God from the very beginning cannot be erased.
TH BH UG Sud aoa Ae fomMfe 2H (315-6, ast, He 5) raam naam Dhan vakhro naanak sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. ||2|| The wealth of the Lord's Name is Nanak's capital; he meditates on it forever. ||2| |
ust u Il (315-7) pa-orhee 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
arafets afenr arSarat us feret TH il (315-7, Tes, He 5) naaraa-in la-i-aa naathoo‘garhaa pair kithai rakhai. One who has received a kick from the Lord God - where can he place his foot?
ager uy nififsur fos fer vet il 315-7, a@t, He: 5) kardaa paap amiti-aa nit viso chakhai. He commits countless sins, and continually eats poison.
feet ager uf yor fefe edt se I (315-8, aes, He 5) nindaa kardaa pach mu-aa vich dayhee bhakhai. Slandering others, he wastes away and dies; within his body, he burns.
Ae Atos ufo ae fSA S Ts Il (315-8, Tes, He 5)
sachai saahib maari-aa ka-un tis no rakhai.
One who has been struck down by the True Lord and Master - who can save him now?
Sod fSq AdSTaSt A UTE MSA NCH (315-9, TES, He 5) naanak tis sarnaagatee jo purakh alkhai. ||28]| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Unseen Lord, the Primal Being. ||28]|
HBa He U Il (315-9)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
da UT AT TU We nifagswar at as Il (315-9, aGat, He 5)
narak ghor baho dukh ghanay akirat-ghanaa kaa thaan.
In the most horrible hell, there is terrible pain and suffering. It is the place of the ungrateful.
fafe ufs urd aaa dfe df He TIN IA (15-10, Tee, He 5) tin parabh maaray naankaa ho-ay ho-ay mu-ay haraam. ||1]| They are struck down by God, O Nanak, and they die a most miserable death. ||1]|
He U Il (15-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
meu Ag alfsnig Sea at erg |e Il (315-10, ast, we 5) avkhaDh sabhay keeti-an nindak kaa daaroo naahi. All kinds of medicines may be prepared, but there is no cure for the slanderer.
uify gore soot ufs ufe Hat Us IQH (315-11, Tes, He 5) aap bhulaa-ay naankaa pach pach jonee paahi. ||2|| Those whom the Lord Himself misleads, O Nanak, putrefy and rot in reincarnation.
21 |
ust U Il (315-11) pa-orhee 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
off fest ug Afsag ofa ug Ag MS II Gis-u1, Test, Hs 5)
tus ditaa poorai satguroo har Dhan sach akhut.
By His Pleasure, the True Guru has blessed me with the inexhaustible wealth of the Name of the True Lord.
Afs with fife we AH at 3B BE Il (315-12, aSHt, He 5) sabh andaysay mit ga-ay jam kaa bha-o chhut. All my anxiety is ended; I am rid of the fear of death.
OH aU gfe Afar ATT SS Il (315-12, ast, we 5)
kaam kroDh buri-aa-ee-aa™ sang saaDhoo tut.
Sexual desire, anger and other evils have been subdued in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fee AY Un Age gfe HIAfG Fe Il (315-13, ast, He 5) vin sachay doojaa sayvday hu-ay marsan but. Those who serve another, instead of the True Lord, die unfulfilled in the end.
soa a afs sufimr on Afal Ae QC (315-13, TBs, He 5)
naanak ka-o gur bakhsi-aa naamai sang jut. ||29]|
The Guru has blessed Nanak with forgiveness; he is united with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||29]|
HBa H2 8 Il (315-14) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
su 3 de nies Sat fos whenr 3 fed arf | 15-14, west, He 4)
tapaa na hovai andarahu lobhee nit maa-i-aa no firai jajmaali-aa.
He is not a penitent, who is greedy within his heart, and who constantly chases after Maya like a leper.
wat @ Afeor AS ot feftmr we ont fue & ueste a orfs su us fefe safer tt Gis-14, ast, Hs 4)
ago day sadi-aa satai dee bhikhi-aa la-ay naahee pichho day pachhutaa-ay kai aan tapai put vich bahaali-aa.
When this penitent was first invited, he refused our charity; but later he repented and sent his son, who was seated in the congregation.
Uv Ba Afs JAS Ba su Ss wala I wher Il 315-15, west, #2 4)
panch log sabh hasan lagay tapaa lobh lahar hai gaali-aa.
The village elders all laughed, saying that the waves of greed have destroyed this penitent.
fra Sat ug 2a fee sur fae odt ufs sos fss su ua Thr I 15-16, ast, v2 4) jithai thorhaa Dhan vaykhai tithai tapaa bhitai naahee Dhan bahutai dithai tapai Dharam haari-aa.
If he sees only a little wealth, he does not bother to go there; but when he sees a lot of wealth, the penitent forsakes his vows.
ae Sg sus det sae do af AO net Sterfemr I (315-17, aes, He 4)
bhaa-ee ayhu tapaa na hovee bagulaa hai bahi saaDh janaa veechaari-aa.
O Siblings of Destiny, he is not a penitent - he is only a stork. Sitting together, the Holy Congregation has so decided.
AS usd at sur feet ad AAT at Crsst fee de Sa Se sur efit wf It 315-17, asst, H8 4)
sat purakh kee tapaa nindaa karai sansaarai kee ustatee vich hovai ayt dokhai tapaa da-yi maari-aa.
The penitent slanders the True Primal Being, and sings the praises of the material world. For this sin, he is cursed by the Lord.
Ho usut at feet at Su fa su 3 Se Bar AS afeor su at upfer I 315-18, ast, v2 4) mahaa purkhaa™ kee nindaa kaa vaykh je tapay no fal lagaa sabh ga-i-aa tapay kaa ghaali-aa.
Behold the fruit the penitent gathers, for slandering the Great Primal Being; all his labors have gone in vain.
wots ad usr fefs Sut FETS I (315-19, ast, He 4) baahar bahai panchaa vich tapaa sadaa-ay. When he sits outside among the elders, he is called a penitent;
mets Fd Sut UY AME Il (315-19, aGSt, He 4) andar bahai tapaa paap kamaa-ay. but when he sits within the congregation, the penitent commits sin.
UST BYE
dfs nivaer uy user S Gur afe Surfer Il (316-1, ast, He 4) har andarlaa paap panchaa no ughaa kar vaykhaali-aa. The Lord has exposed the penitent's secret sin to the elders.
UeH ofe HHaaT 6 orfy efsur SA su 6 fee ufs ufeg fre no Hot ofsurfenr It Gi6-
1, Test, Hes 4)
Dharam raa-ay jamkankraa no aakh chhadi-aa ays tapay no tithai kharh paa-ihu jithai mahaa mahaa" hati-aari-aa.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma said to the Messenger of Death, "Take this penitent and put him with the worst of the worst murderers."
fefs Sn su 2 Hfo act wag at Sa Afsafe 3 fecorfanr Il (316-2, ast, He 4)
fir ays tapay dai muhi ko-ee lagahu naahee ayhu satgur hai fitkaari-aa.
No one is to look at the face of this penitent again. He has been cursed by the True Guru.
dfs & ufs zafsur A arate wrfs Fetfemr I (316-3, aga, He 4) har kai dar varti-aa so naanak aakh sunaa-i-aa. Nanak speaks and reveals what has taken place in the Court of the Lord.
Ags 7 Ufa Aetfanr Ul Gi6-3, west, we 4) so boojhai jo da-yi savaari-aa. ||1]| He alone understands, who is blessed and adorned by the Lord. ||1]|
He 8 Il (16-4)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs saat ofe wrefonr afe at efsnret il (316-4, 7est, H: 4)
har bhagtaa™ har aaraaDhi-aa har kee vadi-aa-ee.
The devotees of the Lord worship and adore the Lord, and the glorious greatness of the Lord.
dfs atese sas fos aee safe oH AYETET II (316-4, TCH, He 4)
har keertan bhagat nit gaa“vday har naam sukh-daa-ee.
The Lord's devotees continually sing the Kirtan of His Praises; the Name of the Lord is the Giver of peace.
dfs sasi 6 fos oe ot efanret auiinig fos vs AeTet Il (316-5, west, He 4)
har bhagtaa™ no nit naavai dee vadi-aa-ee bakhsee-an nit charhai savaa-ee.
The Lord ever bestows upon His devotees the glorious greatness of His Name, which increases day by day.
dfs saat 3 fag uct sofa vrvet UA gure Il (316-6, ast, v2 4)
har bhagtaa™ no thir gharee bahaali-an apnee paij rakhaa-ee.
The Lord inspires His devotees to sit, steady and stable, in the home of their inner being. He preserves their honor.
fevat ung ofa Sat vat ag VfS AAT I 316-6, west, nH 4)
nindkaa™ paashu har laykhaa mangsee baho day-ay sajaa-ee.
The Lord summons the slanderers to answer for their accounts, and He punishes them severely.
x~ sab
Ad fSea nue Hfe oret Sd ee uret Il (316-7, ast, He 4) jayhaa nindak apnai jee-ay kamaavday tayho fal paa-ee. As the slanderers think of acting, so are the fruits they obtain.
wets aHat Haus Cus ave aet afs ast fefs anret i 316-7, aGst, He 4) andar kamaanaa sarpar ugh-rhai bhaavai ko-ee bahi Dhartee vich kamaa-ee. Actions done in secrecy are sure to come to light, even if one does it underground.
Ho soa efy feathor ote at sfanret 2K (316-8, aBst, He 4) jan naanak daykh vigsi-aa har kee vadi-aa-ee. ||2|| Servant Nanak blossoms forth in joy, beholding the glorious greatness of the Lord.
21 |
ugSt Hs U II (316-8)
pa-orhee mehlaa 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
sas wat at ant afg wrfu do far unit adh i (316-9, west, u: 5) bhagat janaa™ kaa raakhaa har aap hai ki-aa paapee karee-ai. The Lord Himself is the Protector of His devotees; what can the sinner do to them?
OHS aata Hs THe fer urdt waht il Gic-9, Test, ws 5) gumaan karahi moorh gumaanee-aa vis khaaDhee maree-ai. The proud fool acts in pride, and eating his own poison, he dies.
uife wal ot fea daa fag ua Ys Bet I (316-10, ast, ne 5) aa-ay lagay nee dih thorh-rhay ji-o pakaa khayt lunee-ai. His few days have come to an end, and he is cut down like the crop at harvest.
~~ AAS
Ad AH ante 32d seh Il (316-10, 7SHt, 2 5) jayhay karam kamaavday tayvayho bhanee-ai. According to one's actions, so is one spoken of.
HS Boa AT UAH St FT ASST VT TEM IZOMl (316-10, ast, He 5) jan naanak kaa khasam vadaa hai sabhnaa daa Dhanee-ai. ||30]||
Glorious and great is the Lord and Master of servant Nanak; He is the Master of all. ||30]|
HBa H2 8 Il (316-11)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
HoH Hod sfour fete wa BF mIaT I (316-11, aVat, we 4)
manmukh moolhu bhuli-aa vich lab lobh aha‘kaar.
The self-willed manmukhs forget the Primal Lord, the Source of all; they are caught in greed and egotism.
Saat adfent nates aed Aafe o asta Stes Il (316-12, agHt, He 4)
jhagrhaa kardi-aa an-din gudrai sabad na karahi veechaar.
They pass their nights and days in conflict and struggle; they do not contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
Afa nfs aes As fofe wet Safe AS fears I Gi6-12, wea, He 4)
suDh mat kartai sabh hir la-ee bolan sabh vikaar.
The Creator has taken away all their understanding and purity; all their speech is evil and corrupt.
fes fas 3 Hadas nists fara ag oifemrg ving Il 16-13, Bat, He 4)
ditai kitai na santokhee-ah antar tisnaa baho agi-aan anDh-yaar.
No matter what they are given, they are not satisfied; within their hearts there is great desire, ignorance and darkness.
SOA HOHU oS Set sat fas wfeor He fumrg all (316-13, west, He 4)
naanak manmukhaa naalo tutee bhalee jin maa-i-aa moh pi-aar. ||1||
O Nanak, it is good to break away from the self-willed manmukhs, who have love and attachment to Maya. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (16-14) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
faa niets ga are o far gente Uifs o afte il Gic-14, a@at, we 4) jinaa andar doojaa bhaa-o hai tin"aa gurmukh pareet na ho-ay. Those whose hearts are filled with the love of duality, do not love the Gurmukhs.
6g ure wie seven Aus AY Safe II (316-15, west, He 4)
ohu aavai jaa-ay bhavaa-ee-ai supnai sukh na ko-ay.
They come and go, and wander in reincarnation; even in their dreams, they find no peace.
as ane az Cus afs afar az ae il (316-15, Bat, we 4)
koorh kamaavai koorh uchrai koorh lagi-aa koorh ho-ay.
They practice falsehood and they speak falsehood; attached to falsehood, they become false.
Hfeor Hg As wy dD ofa fon vy SE I Gi6-16, aGst, He 4) maa-i-aa moh sabh dukh hai dukh binsai dukh ro-ay. The love of Maya is total pain; in pain they perish, and in pain they cry out.
Sot OS fae As 5 orect A Be Ag afE II 16-16, TEST, H: 4)
naanak Dhaat livai jorh na aavee jay lochai sabh ko-ay.
O Nanak, there can be no union between the love of worldliness and the love of the Lord, no matter how much everyone may desire it.
fro ag us ue ufeor fsa ae Aget AY OE QI (316-17, aes, He 4)
jin ka-o potai punn pa-i-aa tinaa gur sabdee sukh ho-ay. ||2||
Those who have the treasure of virtuous deeds find peace through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
UugST Hs U II (316-17)
pa-orhee mehlaa 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
Soa erate AS Hfe Hat wfe Fe ATS Il (316-17, Test, He 5) naanak vichaareh sant mun janaa™ chaar vayd kahanday. O Nanak, the Saints and the silent sages think, and the four Vedas proclaim,
SIs Ha 3 FGe A Pd Jee Il (316-18, ast, we 5) bhagat mukhai tay bolday say vachan hovanday. that whatever the Lord's devotees speak comes to pass.
uUdde usd Aue Afs SA ASe Il (316-18, TSH, He 5) pargat pahaarai jaapday sabh lok sunanday. He is revealed in His cosmic workshop; all people hear of it.
HY 6 utfefs ya od AS artes ude Il (310-19, aCHt, He 5) sukh na paa-in mugaDh nar sant naal khahanday. The foolish people, who fight with the Saints, find no peace.
Gfe sufs Gar aa 6 Gfe nafs ASE II (316-19, aes, He 5) o-ay lochan onaa gunaa no o-ay aha™kaar sarhanday. The Saints seek to bless them with virtue, but they are burning with egotism.
6fe 2urd famr aafa At ova afa HE I 16-19, aGHt, He 5) o-ay vaychaaray ki-aa karahi jaa’ bhaag Dhur manday. What can those wretched ones do? Their evil destiny was pre-ordained.
Us 399
A Hrd fafs ursqaufy A far o AS Ul (317-1, ast, Hs 5) jo maaray tin paarbarahm say kisai na sanday. Those who are struck down by the Supreme Lord God do not belong to anyone.
2g ade fases ofs cath fourfe ude Il (317-1, west, He 5) vair Karan nirvair naal Dharam ni-aa-ay pachanday. Those who hate the One who has no hatred, are destroyed by righteous justice.
a A Afs Aotumr A fests se Il (317-2, ast, 2 5) jo jo sant saraapi-aa say fireh bhavanday. Those who are cursed by the Saints wander around lost.
Us Hey afenr fA Te AAS WAU (317-2, Test, He 5) payd mundhaahoo kati-aa tis daal sukanday. ||31]| When the tree is cut off at its roots, the branches wither and die. ||31]||
HBa H2 U Il (317-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Td SS dfs oH fesfenr sor wee ANGE Il (317-3, ast, 2 5)
gur naanak har naam drirh-aa-i-aa bhannan gharhan samrath.
Guru Nanak implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me; He is All-powerful, to create and destroy.
ys Ae AMete fs J ey Aafeor GE AI (317-3, ast, ve 5) parabh sadaa samaaleh mitar too dukh sabaa-i-aa lath. ||1]| Remember God forever, my friend, and all your suffering will disappear. ||1]| |
He U Il (17-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ufmres 5 Weel SH AGH AHS Il (317-4, TCs, He 5) khuDhi-aavant na jaan-ee laaj kulaaj kubol. The hungry person does not care about honor, dishonor or harsh words.
SO Hid aH ofa afa faxsur AAA QM (317-4, aes, He 5)
naanak maa‘gai naam har kar kirpaa sanjog. ||2||
Nanak begs for the Name of the Lord; please grant Your Grace, and unite me with Yourself. ||2]|
u@at Il (317-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AA ~~ bat
Hed AIH AH ee? SIU SHS Il (317-5, Tat, v8 5)
javayhay karam kamaavdaa tavayhay faltay. According to the deeds which one does, so are the fruits one obtains.
va 3a Bs AG fefs Hut uss Il (317-5, west, He 5) chabay tataa loh saar vich sanghai paltay. If someone chews on red-hot iron, his throat will be burned.
ufs aeret afer ffs ets ws FS Il (317-6, ast, ve 5)
ghat galaavaa” chaali-aa tin doot amal tay.
The halter is put around his neck and he is led away, because of the evil deeds he has done.
aret nA o User fos us He fags Il (317-6, west, He 5) kaa-ee aas na punnee-aa nit par mal hirtay. None of his desires are fulfilled; he continually steals the filth of others.
dot o we nifxgsue fefe rat fess i 17-7, ast, v2 5)
kee-aa na jaanai aakirat-ghan vich jonee firtay.
The ungrateful wretch does not appreciate what he has been given; he wanders lost in reincarnation.
AS fast faudion fats wea Us 3 Il (317-7, aSst, He 5) sabhay Dhiraa™ nikhutee-as hir la-ee-as Dhar tay. He loses all support, when the Support of the Lord is taken away from him.
fese ASI 6 Seer st Ofer ags Il (317-8, ast, us 5) vijhan kalah na dayvdaa taa” la-i-aa kartay. He does not let the embers of strife die down, and so the Creator destroys him.
A A ads MINE sfs dest uss N32il (317-8, as, H: 5) jo jo kartay ahamay-o jharh Dhartee parh-tay. ||32|| Those who indulge in egotism crumble and fall to the ground. ||32]|
HBa H8 3 Il (317-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aenty fomre fasta fo fF i (317-9, ast, v2 3) gurmukh gi-aan bibayk buDh ho-ay. The Gurmukh is blessed with spiritual wisdom and a discerning intellect.
dfs we we fase gg udfe I 17-9, ast, He 3) har gun gaavai hirdai haar paro-ay. He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and weaves this garland into his heart.
ufes USO UH Steet Il (317-9, west, 2 3) pavit paavan param beechaaree. He becomes the purest of the pure, a being of supreme understanding.
fa GA fxs fon ufe Bard i 317-10, wat, v2 3) je os milai tis paar utaaree. Whoever he meets, he saves and carries across.
nists dfs aH BAST AHTet Il (317-10, aGHt, He 3) antar har naam baasnaa samaanee. The fragrance of the Lord's Name permeates his being deep within.
dfs ef Fat HoT BSH arat Il (317-10, aGst, v2 3) har dar sobhaa mahaa utam banee. He is honored in the Court of the Lord, and his speech is the most sublime.
fa use He A Of fess Il (317-11, as, v2 3) je purakh sunai so ho-ay nihaal. Those who hear him are delighted.
soa Afsasd fixfemt ufSor on as HS IA (317-11, ast, He 3) naanak satgur mili-ai paa-i-aa naam Dhan maal. ||1]| O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, one obtains the wealth and property of the Naam.
[21
Hs 8 Il (17-12) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsas & Aba at Ars 3 A fax us AfSae SS I (317-12, 7st, we 4)
satgur kay jee-a kee saar na jaapai ke poorai satgur bhaavai.
The sublime state of the True Guru is not known; no one knows what pleases the Perfect True Guru.
gett niefs Afsag eos A frat S Ss A TT yAt mrs Il (317-12, aC, Hs 4) gursikhaa™ andar satguroo vartai jo sikhaa™ no lochai so gur khusee aavai. Deep within the hearts of His GurSikhs, the True Guru is pervading. The Guru is pleased with those who long for His Sikhs.
Afsag via Aare oefe A AU anefs Tatra at wes AST ate ur} I 317-13, ast, He 4)
satgur aakhai so kaar kamaavan so jap kamaaveh gursikhaa™ kee ghaal sachaa thaa- ay paavai.
As the True Guru directs them, they do their work and chant their prayers. The True Lord accepts the service of His GurSikhs.
fee Afsag & Jan fa qefrat ung ay asfeor ws fan aafhe fefs dfs 5 mre] I G17- 14, AST, Hs 4)
vin satgur kay hukmai je gursikhaa™ paashu kamm karaa-i-aa lorhay tis gursikh fir nayrh na aavai.
But those who want the GurSikhs to work for them, without the Order of the True Guru - the Guru's Sikhs shall not come near them again.
dd Afsad wat & AE ofe wes fsR net TafAy ars AHS Il (317-15, ast, nH: 4) gur satgur agai ko jee-o laa-ay ghaalai tis agai gursikh kaar kamaavai. One who works diligently for the Guru, the True Guru - the GurSikhs work for him.
fa Sait wre oat Cfo ate fA 3s Tatty ufs 3 ures I (317-15, ast, we 4)
je thagee aavai thagee uth jaa-ay tis nayrhai gursikh mool na aavai.
One who comes to deceive, who rises up and goes out to deceive - the GurSikhs shall never come near him.
qon aberg aad urfy ASTS I 317-16, 7eHt, He 4) barahm beechaar naanak aakh sunaavai. Nanak proclaims and announces this wisdom of God.
fa fee Afsag & Ho HS AH ATE AAS HT SY US IM (317-16, aVHt, He 4)
je vin satgur kay man mannay kamm karaa-ay so jant mahaa dukh paavai. ||2|| One who is not pleasing to the Mind of the True Guru may do his deeds, but that being will only suffer in terrible pain. ||2]|
ust Il (317-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae Atos wis est Sfo ASS F IT SB Il 317-17, TSS, ve 4)
too” sachaa saahib at vadaa tuhi jayvad too” vad vaday.
O True Lord and Master, You are so very great. As great as You are, You are the greatest of the great.
fan 3 Hofs A sy fee F ume sath Sis Sar ws il i718, ast, we 4)
jis too’ mayleh so tuDh milai too’ aapay bakhas laihi laykhaa chhaday.
He alone is united with You, whom You unite with Yourself. You Yourself bless and forgive us, and tear up our accounts.
fan 3 3 orfu freee A Afsag AS HO TS TS Il (317-18, wes, ws 4) jis no too’ aap milaa-idaa so satgur sayvay man gad gaday. One whom You unite with Yourself, whole-heartedly serves the True Guru.
3 Aa Atos AG 5 Ag Me fis GH Sa IS Il 17-19, west, we 4)
too” sachaa saahib sach too sabh jee-o pind chamm tayraa haday.
You are the True One, the True Lord and Master; my soul, body, flesh and bones are all Yours.
fa sve (38 sy F Afr sea His HPA Set Ss ST WBBUUI AT Il 17-19, 7st, 3 4) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too” sachi-aa naanak man aas tayree vad vaday. ||33||1]| suDh. If it pleases You, then save me, True Lord. Nanak places the hopes of his mind in You alone, O greatest of the great! ||33]|1]| Sudh||
Ua 3qt ast at ae Hos u afte aeet HAet at se at afs Gufs areeat 7318-2)
ga-orhee kee vaar mehlaa 5 raa-ay kamaaldee mojdee kee vaar kee Dhun upar gaavnee
Gauree Kee Vaar, Fifth Mehl: Sung To The Tune Of Vaar Of Raa-I Kamaaldee- Mojadee:
qe Afsars yATfe II (318-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa HE U Il (318-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
dfs dfs aN A AS AU A orfeor useTS II (318-3, aGst, He 5)
har har naam jo jan japai so aa-i-aa parvaan.
Auspicious and approved is the birth of that humble being who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fsH Ho & afsase fafs sfimr ys fogare Il (318-3, a@et, He 5)
tis jan kai balihaarnai jin bhaji-aa parabh nirbaan.
I am a sacrifice to that humble being who vibrates and meditates on God, the Lord of Nirvaanaa.
HOH Hdo Fu alent ate sfent usgy AAS Il (318-4, aSst, 8 5)
janam maran dukh kati-aa har bhayti-aa purakh sujaan.
The pains of birth and death are eradicated, upon meeting the All-knowing Lord, the Primal Being.
HZ Afal Ag 3d HS SSA AT SES MUI Gis-4, west, us 5)
sant sang saagar taray jan naanak sachaa taan. ||1]||
In the Society of the Saints, he crosses over the world-ocean; O servant Nanak, he has the strength and support of the True Lord. ||1]|
He U Il (G18-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
soa Cfo usage HS wis mrSG | 318-5, ast, He 5)
bhalkay uth paraahunaa mayrai ghar aava-o.
I rise up in the early morning hours, and the Holy Guest comes into my home. ur@ uurer fSH & Hf So fos SSS Il Gis-5, TCH, He 5)
paa-o pakhaalaa tis kay man tan nit bhaava-o. I wash His feet; He is always pleasing to my mind and body.
OU He OU Had on fae BSE Il (3is-6, west, ne 5) naam sunay naam sangrahai naamay liv laava-o. I hear the Naam, and I gather in the Naam; I am lovingly attuned to the Naam.
fag ug Ag ules df ofa a TE TS Il (3is-6, aes, v2 5) garihu Dhan sabh pavitar ho-ay har kay gun gaava-o. My home and wealth are totally sanctified as I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Us SH Sud Sat Tsar USS Ql (318-7, aCHt, ve 5)
har naam vaapaaree naankaa vadbhaagee paava-o. ||2]| The Trader in the Lord's Name, O Nanak, is found by great good fortune. ||2]|
ust I (318-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A 30 Se A IH AG SI Ser II (318-7, ast, v2 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so bhalaa sach tayraa bhaanaa. Whatever pleases You is good; True is the Pleasure of Your Will.
3 As fs Sa ease" AS HT AHS Il (318-8, TSS, He 5) too sabh meh ayk varatdaa sabh maahi samaanaa. You are the One, pervading in all; You are contained in all.
ae geste afe afar rh nets ATST II (18-8, aGHt, He 5)
thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa jee-a andar jaanaa.
You are diffused throughout and permeating all places and interspaces; You are known to be deep within the hearts of all beings.
Aronfa fife ureint ufs AS Stet Il (318-9, aSst, He 5)
saaDhsang mil paa-ee-ai man sachay bhaanaa.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and submitting to His Will, the True Lord is found.
Sot US AdStast AE AE ATaST IA (318-9, ast, ws 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee sad sad kurbaanaa. ||1]|| Nanak takes to the Sanctuary of God; he is forever and ever a sacrifice to Him. ||1]|
HBa H2 U Il (318-10)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
oa et ai ofS Afog AS A Tet Il (318-10, aes, H 5) chaytaa ee taa™ chayt saahib sachaa so Dhanee. If you are conscious, then be conscious of the True Lord, Your Lord and Master.
sod Afsag Afe ofs sfofa s@re us us Nall (318-10, ast, nH 5)
naanak satgur sayv charh bohith bha-ojal paar pa-o. ||1]|
O Nanak, come aboard upon the boat of the service of the True Guru, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|
He U Il (G18-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
2G He aus ufsata aafa Tes Il (318-11, ast, Hs 5) vaa-oo sanday kaprhay pahirahi garab gavaar. He wears his body, like clothes of wind - what a proud fool he is!
Soa SS @ Vwot Als af Te Sg NM (Gis-u1, ast, He 5) naanak naal na chalnee jal bal ho-ay chhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, they will not go with him in the end; they shall be burnt to ashes. ||2| |
ust Il (318-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Aet Cad vat fefes A AS TA Il (318-12, west, He 5)
say-ee ubray jagai vich jo sachai rakhay.
They alone are delivered from the world, who are preserved and protected by the True Lord.
ufs f36 fsa & Het afe nifys Be II Gis-12, ast, He 5) muhi dithai tin kai jeevee-ai har amrit chakhay. I live by beholding the faces of those who taste the Ambrosial Essence of the Lord.
aH a0 Bs Hg Af AGT Se Il (318-13, ast, ve 5)
kaam kroDh lobh moh sang saaDhaa bhakhay.
Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment are burnt away, in the Company of the Holy.
ate fasur yfs nimuat afe wiry usd 1) (18-13, west, us 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee har aap parkhay. God grants His Grace, and the Lord Himself tests them.
SSA VHS F AUS A Aa F Be IIl (318-13, aSst, wz 5) naanak chalat na jaapnee ko sakai na lakhay. ||2|| O Nanak, His play is not Known; no one can understand it. ||2]|
HBa HU Il (318-14)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
oa Het fear Hoes fas ys wire fats i Gis-14, ast, He 5) naanak so-ee dinas suhaavrhaa jit parabh aavai chit. O Nanak, that day is beautiful, when God comes to mind.
fas fefs fers usgqon fee sot ofS NA (sis-15, aest, He 5)
jit din visrai paarbarahm fit bhalayree rut. ||1]|
Cursed is that day, no matter how pleasant the season, when the Supreme Lord God is forgotten. ||1]|
He U Il (G18-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ood fraret fan fr@ vs fae fan & ofa | Gis-15, west, ne 5) naanak mitraa-ee tis si-o sabh kichh jis kai haath. O Nanak, become friends with the One, who holds everything in His hands.
afist Fret atdinits fea fea a vata Are NI (318-16, ast, us 5) kumitraa say-ee kaa“dhee-ah ik vikh na chaleh saath. ||2]| They are accounted as false friends, who do not go with you, for even one step. ||2||
UugST II (318-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nifys on fours o fife uteg aret i Gis-16, a@Ht, ne 5)
amrit naam niDhaan hai mil peevhu bhaa-ee.
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar; meet together and drink it in, O Siblings of Destiny.
fan fayes AY ure AS fsa gsret II (318-17, Test, He 5) jis simrat sukh paa-ee-ai sabh tikhaa bujhaa-ee. Remembering Him in meditation, peace is found, and all thirst is quenched.
afs Ast USHIH Ts FY Id B AT Il (318-17, Tat, ve 5) kar sayvaa paarbarahm gur bhukh rahai na kaa-ee. So serve the Supreme Lord God and the Guru, and you shall never be hungry again.
Ads Hose Ufowrt wpe ue uret |i (318-18, wet, He 5) sagal manorath punni-aa amraa pad paa-ee. All your desires shall be fulfilled, and you shall obtain the status of immortality.
30 ASS JI USAIN HA ATSret ISI (318-18, ast, we 5)
tuDh jayvad toohai paarbarahm naanak sarnaa-ee. ||3]|
You alone are as great as Yourself, O Supreme Lord God; Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||3]|
HBa H2 U Il (318-19)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
fsor os ofe Ba 5 wet AME II Gis-19, Tes, 2 5) dith-rho habh thaa-ay oon na kaa-ee jaa-ay. I have seen all places; there is no place without Him.
Soa wa fo Hore fra Afsaad sfemr Ail (18-19, aSst, v2 5)
naanak laDhaa tin su-aa-o jinaa satgur bhayti-aa. ||1]| O Nanak, those who meet with the True Guru find the object of life. ||1]|
Yar 3a
He U Il G19-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
SHO! BH3ad (3G asta" Aa A Il (319-1, west, 2 5)
daamnee chamatkaar ti-o vartaaraa jag khay. Like the flash of lightning, worldly affairs last only for a moment.
ze Avett wfe aoa oe Aue fSH Tat NI 19-1, west, He 5)
vath suhaavee saa-ay naanak naa-o japando tis Dhanee. ||2||
The only thing which is pleasing, O Nanak, is that which inspires one to meditate on the Name of the Master. ||2||
u@at Il (319-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fafiyfs AAS Afo vfs fas ahi o ArTAt Il (319-2, west, ne 5)
simrit saastar soDh sabh kinai keem na jaanee.
People have searched all the Simritees and Shaastras, but no one knows the Lord's value.
HO Se AUAfa A dfs da Hat Il (319-2, wet, He 5) jo jan bhaytai saaDhsang so har rang maanee. That being, who joins the Saadh Sangat enjoys the Love of the Lord.
Ad oH Ags usY ST Isat Uvat Il (319-3, wSat, He 5)
sach naam kartaa purakh ayh ratnaa khaanee.
True is the Naam, the Name of the Creator, the Primal Being. It is the mine of precious jewels.
HASta d2 fefimr afs faufs uarat il (319-3, aGst, #2 5)
mastak hovai likhi-aa har simar paraanee.
That mortal, who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead, meditates in remembrance on the Lord.
3H fed Ay aH asa foHret IISIl (319-4, aes, He 5) tosaa dichai sach naam naanak mihmaanee. ||4||
O Lord, please bless Nanak, Your humble guest, with the supplies of the True Name. 141]
HBa HU Il (319-4)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
nists fear Sat Met ufs 3 Css ge Il (319-4, west, 2 5)
antar chintaa nainee sukhee mool na utrai bhukh.
He harbors anxiety within himself, but to the eyes, he appears to be happy; his hunger never departs.
Soa Ae oH fag fan 5 BE SY NAN 19-5, 7st, He 5) naanak sachay naam bin kisai na latho dukh. ||1]| O Nanak, without the True Name, no one's sorrows have ever departed. ||1] |
He U Il (19-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hos ASt Ava Hot AT o Bent Il (319-5, aSst, He 5) muth-rhay say-ee saath jinee sach na ladi-aa. Those caravans which did not load the Truth have been plundered.
aoa A AatA faot aa fife fea usrfenr iQ (319-6, aSst, v8 5)
naanak say saabaas jinee gur mil ik pachhaani-aa. ||2||
O Nanak, those who meet the True Guru, and acknowledge the One Lord, are congratulated. ||2||
ust I (319-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
faa Safs AT Ho A OAS ASST Il (319-6, west, He 5) jithai baisan saaDh jan so thaan suhandaa. Beautiful is that place, where the Holy people dwell.
Gf Refs fxs wruer faor Ag HET Il (319-7, west, He 5) o-ay sayvan sammrith aapnaa binsai sabh mandaa. They serve their All-powerful Lord, and they give up all their evil ways.
ufsz Gude uTSqIH AS FE ATE Il (319-7, aGat, ue 5)
patit uDhaaran paarbarahm sant bayd kahandaa.
The Saints and the Vedas proclaim, that the Supreme Lord God is the Saving Grace of sinners.
sats 22o 3a fase 3 nfs af ease Il (319-8, ast, He 5) bhagat vachhal tayraa birad hai jug jug vartandaa. You are the Lover of Your devotees - this is Your natural way, in each and every age.
Sod A Sa aH nfs sls SET UII 19-8, aGst, He 5) naanak jaachai ayk naam man tan bhaavandaa. ||5|| Nanak asks for the One Name, which is pleasing to his mind and body. ||5]|
HBa H8 U Il (319-9)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
fost vaot ug set zafe aTs Sda Il (19-9, west, nz 5) chirhee chuhkee pahu futee vagan bahut tarang. The sparrows are chirping, and dawn has come; the wind stirs up the waves.
MPSA JU ASS Fd soa SHfd Fa MAUl (319-9, west, 3 5) achraj roop santan rachay naanak naameh rang. ||1]| Such a wondrous thing the Saints have fashioned, O Nanak, in the Love of the Naam.
[21|
He U Il (19-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
we Hed uA sot wT 3 rete fats il Gi9-10, west, u2 5) ghar mandar khusee-aa tahee jah too aavahi chit. Homes, palaces and pleasures are there, where You, O Lord, come to mind.
for art sfanreior stad Afs AHS I2QIl (319-10, wet, Hz 5) dunee-aa kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa naanak sabh kumit. ||2|| All worldly grandeur, O Nanak, is like false and evil friends. ||2| |
ugat Il (319-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs ug Adt aH F fas fess AST II (319-11, aes, He 5) har Dhan sachee raas hai kinai virlai jaataa. The wealth of the Lord is the true capital; how rare are those who understand this.
fan usufs afeag fan efe faorst il (319-11, a@st, v2 5)
tisai paraapat bhaa-irahu jis day-ay biDhaataa.
He alone receives it, O Siblings of Destiny, unto whom the Architect of Destiny gives it.
Ho 36 Staffs HCfemr ats df AG TS I Gi9-12, ast, ve 5) man tan bheetar ma-oli-aa har rang jan raataa. His servant is imbued with the Love of the Lord; his body and mind blossom forth.
WoHfa qe afer Afs sag rset il (319-12, ast, v2 5)
saaDhsang gun gaa-i-aa sabh dokhah khaataa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and all of his sufferings are removed.
stot Het Hifeur fafe fea uerst Ell (319-13, west, He 5)
naanak so-ee jeevi-aa jin ik pachhaataa. ||6|| O Nanak, he alone lives, who acknowledges the One Lord. ||6]||
HBa He U Il (319-13)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
uastor HoShort Bast nix afS il (319-13, aSst, He 5) khakh-rhee-aa suhaavee-aa lagrhee-aa ak kanth. The fruit of the swallow-wort plant looks beautiful, attached to the branch of the tree;
fags fees vat fAG soa AOA aife All (319-14, ast, He 5)
birah vichhorhaa Dhanee si-o naanak sahsai ganth. ||1]|
but when it is separated from the stem of its Master, O Nanak, it breaks apart into thousands of fragments. ||1||
He U Il G19-14)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ferrse uf ae ufs fs o ato HFS I (319-14, ast, He 5) visaarayday mar ga-ay mar bhe na sakahi mool. Those who forget the Lord die, but they cannot die a complete death.
qHY dé TH 3 fas sas Gufs Als NH (319-15, Bat, we 5) vaimukh ho-ay raam tay ji-o taskar upar sool. ||2|| Those who turn their backs on the Lord suffer, like the thief impaled on the gallows.
21 |
ust I (319-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AY fsurg us Sa od ifsarst afer Il (319-15, weet, He 5)
sukh niDhaan parabh ayk hai abhinaasee suni-aa.
The One God is the treasure of peace; I have heard that He is eternal and imperishable.
me afe Hodtotes ufsor ufe ufe afs sfeur il (319-16, 78st, 12 5)
jal thal mahee-al poori-aa ghat ghat har bhani-aa.
He is totally pervading the water, the land and the sky; the Lord is said to be permeating each and every heart.
Gz ate vs fea mie ate oASt afer Il (319-16, west, He 5) ooch neech sabh ik samaan keet hastee bani-aa. He looks alike upon the high and the low, the ant and the elephant.
His Aa AS fad Afs fen @ Afenr i 19-17, west, v2 5) meet sakhaa sut banDhipo sabh tis day jani-aa. Friends, companions, children and relatives are all created by Him.
3fh soa 2 fan oy fate afs da Hfemr ND Gi9-17, ast, nH 5) tus naanak dayvai jis naam tin har rang mani-aa. ||7]||
O Nanak, one who is blessed with the Naam, enjoys the Lord's love and affection. [711
HBa H2 U Il (319-18)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
fast AA fasth o fend ofs ont Hf HZ I 19-18, aGst, H 5)
jinaa saas giraas na visrai har naamaa‘ man mant.
Those who do not forget the Lord, with each breath and morsel of food, whose minds are filled with the Mantra of the Lord's Name
Ud fit Ret saat yas ASt AZ Al (319-18, ast, we 5) Dhan se say-ee naankaa pooran so-ee sant. ||1]| - they alone are blessed; O Nanak, they are the perfect Saints. ||1]|
He U Il G19-19)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
mid ude SGu fed wee Hes ARS Il (319-19, ast, we 5) athay pahar bha-udaa firai khaavan sand-rhai sool. Twenty-four hours a day, he wanders around, driven by his hunger for food.
cla ug fas sd A fats 3 TE TAR NN (319-19, ast, we 5) dojak pa-udaa ki-o rahai jaa chit na ho-ay rasool. ||2|| How can he escape from falling into hell, when he does not remember the Prophet?
21 |
UST B2o
u@at Il (320-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fsA Adeg yretd fan ft oS us Il (320-1, aGat, Hs 5)
tisai sarayvhu paraaneeho jis dai naa-o palai. Serve Him, O mortals, who has the Lord's Name in His lap.
Me TIT Hofer rat aries FS i (320-1, west, ve 5)
aithai rahhu suhayli-aa agai naal chalai.
You shall dwell in peace and ease in this world; in the world hereafter, it shall go with you.
Wg FU AY UH at als SH MIS Il (320-2, ast, ve 5) ghar banDhhu sach Dharam kaa gad thamm ahlai. So build your home of true righteousness, with the unshakable pillars of Dharma.
Ge &g oats de war 3S Il (320-2, ast, v2 5) ot laihu naaraa-inai deen dunee-aa jhalai. Take the Support of the Lord, who gives support in the spiritual and material worlds.
Sod US VIE dla fSA Vad HS ICI (320-3, ast, He 5) naanak pakrhay charan har tis dargeh malai. ||8]| Nanak grasps the Lotus Feet of the Lord; he humbly bows in His Court. ||8]]|
HBa H8 U Il (320-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Wea Hat Ve Ufo fimrfenr it (320-3, est, ne 5) jaachak mangai daan deh pi-aari-aa. The beggar begs for charity: give to me, O my Beloved!
desu wag H fos featur it (320-4, west, He 5) dayvanhaar daataar mai nit chitaari-aa. O Great Giver, O Giving Lord, my consciousness is continually centered on You.
foufe o Aret ufs vise satfamr Il (320-4, west, He 5) nikhut na jaa-ee mool atul bhandaari-aa. The immeasurable warehouses of the Lord can never be emptied out.
soa Ade viurg fate As fas Afni NA (320-4, aBst, He 5)
naanak sabad apaar tin sabh kichh saari-aa. ||1||
O Nanak, the Word of the Shabad is infinite; it has arranged everything perfectly. [111
He U Il 20-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
frug Hae fimrfad HOH Has at Sa Il (320-5, Tea, He 5) sikhahu sabad pi-aariho janam maran kee tayk. O Sikhs, love the Word of the Shabad; in life and death, it is our only support.
He Saw Het Hat Sod fAHTS SH MQM (320-5, ast, He 5)
mukh oojal sadaa sukhee naanak simrat ayk. ||2||
Your face shall be radiant, and you shall find a lasting peace, O Nanak, remembering the One Lord in meditation. ||2]|
ust II (320-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
6a nifys Sst dbo afs ATE I 20-6, Test, ne 5) othai amrit vandee-ai sukhee-aa har karnay. There, the Ambrosial Nectar is distributed; the Lord is the Bringer of peace.
AH & Ufa 3 ureinifa fefs ardt Hage Il (320-6, aSHt, v2 5) jam kai panth na paa-ee-ah fir naahee marnay. They are not placed upon the path of Death, and they shall not have to die again.
fan 3 orfenr Un aa PSA dt ABS II (320-7, west, He 5) jis no aa-i-aa paraym ras tisai hee jarnay. One who comes to savor the Lord's Love experiences it.
wet Guets AU Ae ME vats See I (320-7, TCH, He 5) banee uchrahi saaDh jan ami-o chaleh jharnay. The Holy beings chant the Bani of the Word, like nectar flowing from a spring.
uf zaAG StS Alfeor Ho niefs age ICI (320-8, aC, He 5)
paykh darsan naanak jeevi-aa man andar Dharnay. ||9||
Nanak lives by beholding the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of those who have implanted the Lord's Name within their minds. ||9] |
HBa He U Il (320-8)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Afsafs us Afemt eur ot af SA Il (320-9, ast, we 5) satgur poorai sayvi-ai dookhaa kaa ho-ay naas. Serving the Perfect True Guru, suffering ends.
Sot OTH mato aaa me IAA IAI (320-9, west, v2 5) naanak naam araaDhi-ai kaaraj aavai raas. ||1]|| O Nanak, worshipping the Naam in adoration, one's affairs come to be resolved. ||1] |
He U Il G20-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fan fAnas Hae gets wise Hares faAMH II (320-10, ast, He 5)
jis simrat sankat chhuteh anad mangal bisraam.
Remembering Him in meditation, misfortune departs, and one comes to abide in peace and bliss.
Soa Hub Ae ofa foxy o faAss SH II (320-10, wea, He 5) naanak japee-ai sadaa har nimakh na bisara-o naam. ||2| | O Nanak, meditate forever on the Lord - do not forget Him, even for an instant. ||2| |
ust Il (320-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
faq at Ast for arat frat ofa afs war i (320-11, ast, nH: 5)
tin kee sobhaa ki-aa ganee jinee har har laDhaa. How can I estimate the glory of those, who have found the Lord, Har, Har?
A Adel HO US A SS SOT Il (320-11, wat, ve 5) saaDhaa sarnee jo pavai so chhutai baDhaa. One who seeks the Sanctuary of the Holy is released from bondage.
ae we nifsanria vfs aefs o ea Il (320-12, west, v2 5)
gun gaavai abinaasee-ai jon garabh na daDhaa.
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Imperishable Lord does not burn in the womb of reincarnation.
ag sfeur ursqon afe ufs afs AHO II (320-12, a@Ht, He 5)
gur bhayti-aa paarbarahm har parh bujh samDhaa.
One who meets the Guru and the Supreme Lord God, who reads and understands, enters the state of Samaadhi.
aTea ufeSnt A Uat dfs wa waar IAM (320-12, ast, v3 5)
naanak paa-i-aa so Dhanee har agam agDhaa. ||10|| Nanak has obtained that Lord Master, who is inaccessible and unfathomable. ||10]|
HBa H8 U Il (320-13)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
aH 3} add nruer feafa nest SE Il (320-13, west, He 5) kaam na karhee aapnaa fireh avtaa lo-ay. People do not perform their duties, but instead, they wander around aimlessly.
soa ofe ferrfon wy fasat df Nall (320-14, west, He 5) naanak naa-ay visaari-ai sukh kinayhaa ho-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, if they forget the Name, how can they ever find peace? ||1]|
H8 U Il (320-14) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fae aQzats nae ufo nafs adt SuSE I (320-14, aes, v2 5) bikhai ka-urh-tan sagal maahi jagat rahee laptaa-ay. The bitter poison of corruption is everywhere; it clings to the substance of the world.
Bea Ale Stata Hor ahs at oS Ml (20-15, wSst, He 5)
naanak jan veechaari-aa meethaa har kaa naa-o. ||2]| O Nanak, the humble being has realized that the Name of the Lord alone is sweet.
121] ugat Il (320-15)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
fea drat AG at fan Ses Sd I (320-15, aGst, He 5)
in neesaanee saaDh kee jis bhaytat taree-ai.
This is the distinguishing sign of the Holy Saint, that by meeting with him, one is saved.
AHaad dfs 3 mreet fefa safe o Hh Il (320-16, aes, v2 5) jamkankar nayrh na aavee fir bahurh na maree-ai. The Messenger of Death does not come near him; he never has to die again.
ge Aad HATS fay A utes Bodh I (320-16, ast, v2 5) bhav saagar sansaar bikh so paar utree-ai. He crosses over the terrifying, poisonous world-ocean.
dfs we deg ufe we ofs AS HS usd Il (320-17, ast, v2 5)
har gun gufhu man maal har sabh mal parharee-ai.
So weave the garland of the Lord's Glorious Praises into your mind, and all your filth Shall be washed away.
ood UISH ffs sd UTsqTH BATAAN (320-17, Test, He 5) naanak pareetam mil rahay paarbarahm narharee-ai. ||11]| Nanak remains blended with his Beloved, the Supreme Lord God. ||11]|
HBa H8 U Il (320-18)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Soa me A uders J fro aia gor fefs it (20-18, wat, He 5) naanak aa-ay say parvaan hai jin har vuthaa chit. O Nanak, approved is the birth of those, within whose consciousness the Lord abides.
Tet nies Usha ath @ miefa fs Ul (320-18, west, Hs 5)
gaal"'ee al palaalee-aa kamm na aavahi mit. ||1|| Useless talk and babbling is useless, my friend. ||1]|
He U Il G20-19)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
uraqan ys ferdt orfenr use mre fAAHTE II (320-19, 7st, He 5) paarbarahm parabh daristee aa-i-aa pooran agam bismaad. I have come to see the Supreme Lord God, the Perfect, Inaccessible, Wonderful Lord.
UST 329
TSX TH SH UG Ast UT Te USATS MI (321-1, 7SSt, He 5) naanak raam naam Dhan keetaa pooray gur parsaad. ||2|| Nanak has made the Lord's Name his wealth, by the Grace of the Perfect Guru. ||2||
u@at Il (321-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ug 3 vet WAH ofe afs Hfo feas I 21-1, ast, He 5)
Dhohu na chalee khasam naal lab mohi vigutay.
Deception does not work with our Lord and Master; through their greed and emotional attachment, people are ruined.
asa aate sefaor Hfe wfent AS Il (321-2, west, 2 5) kartab karan bhalayri-aa mad maa-i-aa sutay. They do their evil deeds, and sleep in the intoxication of Maya.
fefs fefs afe seretuifs AH Hrafar HS II 21-2, west, He 5)
fir fir joon bhavaa-ee-an jam maarag mutay.
Time and time again, they are consigned to reincarnation, and abandoned on the path of Death.
ast ufefs niruer eu ASt AS Il (321-3, ast, 2 5) keetaa paa-in aapnaa dukh saytee jutay. They receive the consequences of their own actions, and are yoked to their pain.
sod ae ferfont As Het TS IVI 21-3, Tet, He 5) naanak naa-ay visaari-ai sabh mandee rutay. ||12]| O Nanak, if one forgets the Name, all the seasons are evil. ||12]|
HBa H8 U Il (321-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Cdfeur adfenr nefenr AY ALE II (21-4, as, He 5) uthandi-aa bahandi-aa suvandiaa sukh so-ay. While standing up, sitting down and sleeping, be at peace;
Sod at Hatt HS 3o ASS ae A (321-4, ast, He 5)
naanak naam salaahi-ai man tan seetal ho-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, praising the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind and body are cooled and soothed. ||1]|
He U Il 21-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
woofs mfeut fos fed nurse ad 5 afe I 21-5, wet, He 5) laalach ati-aa nit firai su-aarath karay na ko-ay. Filled with greed, he constantly wanders around; he does not do any good deeds.
fan dg se aoa fsR nfs Sfrmr AE QI (321-5, TBs, He 5) jis gur bhaytai naankaa tis man vasi-aa so-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, the Lord abides within the mind of one who meets with the Guru. ||2||
ust Il (321-6)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
AS ZHs aSsor AS oS fot Il (321-6, ast, H: 5)
sabhay vastoo ka-urhee-aa sachay naa-o mithaa. All material things are bitter; the True Name alone is sweet.
Are otfenr fe ote wat ofy Act for Il (321-6, aSst, He 5) saad aa-i-aa tin har janaa’ chakh saaDhee dithaa. Those humble servants of the Lord who taste it, come to savor its flavor.
ursqat fra fatter ufs fA gor il (321-7, ast, 48 5)
paarbarahm jis likhi-aa man tisai vuthaa.
It comes to dwell within the mind of those who are so pre-destined by the Supreme Lord God.
fea fodne sfe sfoor a vor gar Il (321-7, west, H2 5) ik niranjan rav rahi-aa bhaa-o duyaa kuthaa. The One Immaculate Lord is pervading everywhere; He destroys the love of duality.
oN S&S
ofa saa Hat Ais aT YS SS JS NASM 21-7, aa, us 5)
har naanak mangai jorh kar parabh dayvai tuthaa. ||13]| Nanak begs for the Lord's Name, with his palms pressed together; by His Pleasure, God has granted it. ||13]|
HBa H8 U Il (321-8)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Weal AAT A ASST JAS I (321-8, ast, He 5) jaachrhee saa saar jo jaachandee haykrho. The most excellent begging is begging for the One Lord.
oret faor fears aaa dat fegehor dl G21-8, ast, x2 5) gaal"'ee bi-aa vikaar naanak Dhanee vihoonee-aa. ||1|| Other talk is corrupt, O Nanak, except that of the Lord Master. ||1]|
He U Il G21-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
alfa fa fear Hg ues feos fas i (321-9, a@et, wu: 5)
neehi je viDhaa man pachhaanoo virlo thi-o.
One who recognizes the Lord is very rare; his mind is pierced through with the Love of the Lord.
AseETST AZ Soa UT ud Ili (321-9, Gat, 2 5) jorhanhaaraa sant naanak paaDhar paDhro. ||2|| Such a Saint is the Uniter, O Nanak - he straightens out the path. |[2||
ust Il (321-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Het Afeg Abas ast gaffes I (321-10, ast, He 5) so-ee sayvihu jee-arhay daataa bakhsind. Serve Him, O my soul, who is the Giver and the Forgiver.
faofeu vfs fom afs fanaa aifge i (321-10, ast, v2 5)
kilvikh sabh binaas hon simrat govind.
All sinful mistakes are erased, by meditating in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe.
fs Hag AY efor ub ASAT | 21-11, 7st, ws 5) har maarag saaDhoo dasi-aa japee-ai gurmant. The Holy Saint has shown me the Way to the Lord; I chant the GurMantra.
Hfear Aire Afs fefomr ofs nfs skSe I 21-11, Test, Hz 5) maa-i-aa su-aad sabh fiki-aa har man bhaavand. The taste of Maya is totally bland and insipid; the Lord alone is pleasing to my mind.
fourfe aaa usnnd fafs fest fife 9eil (321-12, aes, He 5)
Dhi-aa-ay naanak parmaysrai jin ditee jind. ||14||
Meditate, O Nanak, on the Transcendent Lord, who has blessed you with your soul and your life. ||14||
HBa HU Il (321-12)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ZZ Salt Ad SH at A SA A ae It (321-12, ast, we 5)
vat lagee sachay naam kee jo beejay so khaa-ay.
The time has come to plant the seed of the Lord's Name; one who plants it, shall eat its fruit.
fsrfa usufs soar fan 3 faftmr urf& nail G21-13, rest, He 5) tiseh paraapat naankaa jis no likhi-aa aa-ay. ||1|| He alone receives it, O Nanak, whose destiny is so pre-ordained. ||1||
H8 U Il (321-13) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hae 3 Ag fea fan fh 8S vrfu it 21-13, aSst, ne 5)
mangnaa ta sach ik jis tus dayvai aap.
If one begs, then he should beg for the Name of the True One, which is given only by His Pleasure.
fas wd He fgusht aoa Afoe ofS i (21-14, ast, He 5) jit knhaaDhai man taripat-ee-ai naanak saahib daat. ||2|| Eating this gift from the Lord and Master, O Nanak, the mind is satisfied. ||2||
ust Il (321-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Od Aa Hfd A uete fas Ife aS TAH Il (321-14, ast, He 5) laahaa jag meh say khateh jin har Dhan raas. They alone earn profit in this world, who have the wealth of the Lord's Name.
esr ar 8 Weal Ad Ut MA Il (321-15, ast, He 5) dutee-aa bhaa-o na jaannee sachay dee aas. They do not know the love of duality; they place their hopes in the True Lord.
fouse Sa Hdfenr dg As feaA Il (321-15, west, nH 5) nihchal ayk sarayvi-aa hor sabh vinaas. They serve the One Eternal Lord, and give up everything else.
ursqon far fend fan fear ATA II (321-16, wet, He 5) paarbarahm jis visrai tis birthaa saas. One who forgets the Supreme Lord God - useless is his breath.
afe ofe AS ohm soa afs ATA QUI (321-16, 7est, He 5)
kanth laa-ay jan rakhi-aa naanak bal jaas. ||15]||
God draws His humble servant close in His loving embrace and protects him - Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||]15]|
HBa 8 U Il (321-17)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ursgath goutfenr Hig gor Af ASE | (321-17, ast, ve 5) paarbarahm furmaa-i-aa meehu vuthaa sahj subhaa-ay. The Supreme Lord God gave the Order, and the rain automatically began to fall.
nig Ue sas Cufaor fyentt oat fsufS mrurfe i 321-17, aGst, ue 5)
ann Dhan bahut upji-aa parithmee rajee tipat aghaa-ay.
Grain and wealth were produced in abundance; the earth was totally satisfied and satiated.
He Het Te Gud wy wee afenr faot= i (321-18, aes, v2 5)
sadaa sadaa gun uchrai dukh daalad ga-i-aa bilaa-ay.
Forever and ever, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and pain and poverty shall run away.
yota fetter urfenr fifemr fA aATE | (21-18, west, H8 5)
poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa mili-aa tisai rajaa-ay.
People obtain that which they are pre-ordained to receive, according to the Will of the Lord.
uSHAfe Htetfemt son FSA forte ai (21-19, rest, He 5)
parmaysar jeevaali-aa naanak tisai Dhi-aa-ay. ||1||
The Transcendent Lord keeps you alive; O Nanak, meditate on Him. ||1|| Hs u Il (321-19)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Ust 322 Hes uz fosae fea finn i (322-1, ast, v2 5)
jeevan pad nirbaan iko simree-ai. To obtain the state of life of Nirvaanaa, meditate in remembrance on the One Lord.
eet arat ate fats fafa cts i 322-1, west, ws 5)
doojee naahee jaa-ay kin biDh Dheeree-ai. There is no other place; how else can we be comforted?
fso" HS HATS AY} OM fae Il (322-1, aah, He 5)
dithaa sabh sansaar sukh na naam bin. I have seen the whole world - without the Lord's Name, there is no peace at all.
3 U6 JH eg We afe He Il (322-2, agst, H 5) tan Dhan hosee chhaar jaanai ko-ay jan. Body and wealth shall return to dust - hardly anyone realizes this.
da gu oA ate fx asta usetar | (322-2, 7st, we 5) rang roop ras baad ke karahi paraanee-aa. Pleasure, beauty and delicious tastes are useless; what are you doing, O mortal?
fA sore uty PSH ae dt ATE I 22-2, west, He 5) jis bhulaa-ay aap tis kal nahee jaanee-aa. One whom the Lord Himself misleads, does not understand His awesome power.
dfa ss fasare AST aedt Il 322-3, ast, He 5)
rang ratay nirbaan sachaa gaavhee.
Those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord attain Nirvaanaa, singing the Praises of the True One.
Soa Aste etfs A 30 SST Ql (322-3, ast, ue 5) naanak saran du-aar jay tuDh bhaavhee. ||2|| Nanak: those who are pleasing to Your Will, O Lord, seek Sanctuary at Your Door.
21] ust Il (322-4)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hue HE 0 f3q aC A fe BS Sas Il (322-4, ast, 2 5) jaman maran na tin" ka-o jo har larh laagay. Those who are attached to the hem of the Lord's robe, do not suffer birth and death.
Hes A uses de ofa attests Ara Il (322-4, west, He 5) jeevat say parvaan ho-ay har keertan jaagay. Those who remain awake to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - their lives are approved.
AGH fas ufeor Ret ssa Il (322-5, west, He 5) saaDhsang jin paa-i-aa say-ee vadbhaagay. Those who attain the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, are very fortunate.
one fenton faa alee 3S aT UG I (322-5, aC, Hs 5)
naa-ay visri-ai Dharig jeevnaa tootay kach Dhaagay.
But those who forget the Name - their lives are cursed, and broken like thin strands of thread.
aod Ufs uats ATG we afe frat IMEI 322-6, 7a, Hs 5)
naanak Dhoorh puneet saaDh lakh kot piraagay. ||16] |
O Nanak, the dust of the feet of the Holy is more sacred than hundreds of thousands, even millions of cleansing baths at sacred shrines. ||16]|
HBA Hs U Il (322-6) salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ude Azdl us J30 Fast ofa UN UTE HS Sr Il (322-6, ast, 2 5) Dharan suvannee kharh ratan jarhaavee har paraym purakh man vuthaa.
Like the beautiful earth, adorned with jewels of grass - such is the mind, within which the Love of the Lord abides.
HS OH Ades WE TT Sa AfsaT SS" INA 22-7, wat, ve 5)
sabhay kaaj suhaylrhay thee-ay gur naanak satgur tuthaa. ||1]||
All one's affairs are easily resolved, O Nanak, when the Guru, the True Guru, is pleased. ||1||
He U Il (22-7)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
feet feset va fen Ae UgaS THIS Il (322-7, aSHt, ue 5) firdee firdee dah disaa jal parbat banraa-ay. Roaming and wandering in the ten directions, over water, mountains and forests
fre fsor frase feo afoet urfe i (322-8, ast, 2 5) jithai dithaa mirtako il bahithee aa-ay. ||2|| - wherever the vulture sees a dead body, he flies down and lands. ||2]|
uQst Il (322-8)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
faH Ada Au ee Ssmifs A AT AHSE Il (322-9, ast, v2 5)
jis sarab sukhaa fal lorhee-ah so sach kamaava-o. One who longs for all comforts and rewards should practice Truth.
ds eu ursgqan fea on fore I 322-9, weet, He 5)
nayrhai daykh-a-u paarbarahm ik naam Dhi-aava-o.
Behold the Supreme Lord God near you, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
ofe nae at Sear ofa Afr AHTSE Il (322-9, aSst, v2 5) ho-ay sagal kee raynukaa har sang samaava-o. Become the dust of all men's feet, and so merge with the Lord.
ey 3 tet far Aba ufs fag whe ASE II (322-10, wet, Hs 5) dookh na day-ee kisai jee-a pat si-o ghar jaava-o. Do not cause any being to suffer, and you shall go to your true home with honor.
ufs3 uals Asa UTY BSA AHSTSS NAVI (322-10, west, He 5) patit puneet kartaa purakh naanak sunaava-o. ||17] | Nanak speaks of the Purifier of sinners, the Creator, the Primal Being. ||17]|
HOA TIT He U Il (322-11)
salok dohaa mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dohaa, Fifth Mehl:
Sa fa AHS H amit Ase AS ANGE Il (322-11, ast, v2 5) ayk je saajan mai kee-aa sarab kalaa samrath. I have made the One Lord my Friend; He is All-powerful to do everything.
AG gHa Ys dfs Ho 3H Hest SS AU (22-12, west, v2 5) jee-o hamaaraa khannee-ai har man tan sand-rhee vath. ||1]| My soul is a sacrifice to Him; the Lord is the treasure of my mind and body. ||1]|
H8 U Il (322-12) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
A ag wots flmrss 30 5 Ss" HAS Il 322-12, aBet, we 5) jay kar gaheh pi-aarrhay tuDh na chhodaa mool. Take my hand, O my Beloved; I shall never forsake You.
ofs gate A vane usta tH & AS QI 22-13, ast, we 5) har chhodan say durjanaa parheh dojak kai sool. ||2]||
Those who forsake the Lord, are the most evil people; they shall fall into the horrible pit of hell. ||2]|
ust Il (322-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afs fours wis fan & ofs ad A Je Il (322-13, aGst, He 5) sabh niDhaan ghar jis dai har karay so hovai. All treasures are in His Home; whatever the Lord does, comes to pass.
afu afu Htefs AS AS UT He GS Il (322-14, aSst, He 5)
jap jap jeeveh sant jan paapaa mal Dhovai.
The Saints live by chanting and meditating on the Lord, washing off the filth of their sins.
do aHe fuse enfy Hae Afs Ws Il (322-14, ast, v3 5)
charan kamal hirdai vaseh sankat sabh khovai.
With the Lotus Feet of the Lord dwelling within the heart, all misfortune is taken away.
ag us faq Seba vfs wath & FS I (322-15, wes, 8 5) gur pooraa jis bhaytee-ai mar janam na rovai. One who meets the Perfect Guru, shall not have to suffer through birth and death.
us TdA fimrn aoa wat fast afa FS NACH (22-15, Text, He 5)
parabh daras pi-aas naanak ghanee kirpaa kar dayvai. ||18]|
Nanak is thirsty for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan; by His Grace, He has bestowed it. ||18] |
HOA SYST HE U Il (322-16)
salok dakh-naa mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dakhanaa, Fifth Mehl:
Sot say sere fust noafs fox F il (322-16, aBst, we 5) bhoree bharam vanjaa-ay piree muhabat hik too. If you can dispel your doubts, even for an instant, and love your only Beloved,
frag 22 wfe fear nBae APE NA (22-16, ret, 3 5) jithahu vanjai jaa-ay tithaa-oo ma-ujood so-ay. ||1|| then wherever you go, there you shall find Him. ||1]|
H8 U Il (322-17) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
vfs a uss de uate Yat et ware i (322-17, aest, ws 5) charh kai ghorh-rhai kunday pakrheh khoondee dee khaydaaree. Can they mount horses and handle guns, if all they know is the game of polo?
JA Ast fos Cornfs aas et Bact 12H (322-17, west, n2 5)
hansaa saytee chit ulaaseh kukarh dee odaaree. ||2||
Can they be swans, and fulfill their conscious desires, if they can only fly like chickens? ||2||
ust Il (322-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
gna Gud ofa Azet He A Gud fest il (322-18, aSst, He 5)
rasnaa uchrai har sarvanee sunai so uDhrai mitaa.
Those who chant the Lord's Name with their tongues and hear it with their ears are saved, O my friend.
Uf AA feufs ofe se est A IAS ufest Il (322-18, west, He 5) har jas likheh laa-ay bhaavnee say hasat pavitaa. Those hands which lovingly write the Praises of the Lord are pure.
mons Stee HAat Afs ua fafe fers | (322-19, ast, He 5)
athsath tirath majnaa sabh punn tin kitaa.
It is like performing all sorts of virtuous deeds, and bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
HATS Aad 3 Gud faftmr as fast il (322-19, ast, He 5) sansaar saagar tay uDhray bikhi-aa garh jitaa. They cross over the world-ocean, and conquer the fortress of corruption.
UST 323 aoa oes ofe Catentg ea Afe mfHs IACI (323-1, TBs, He 5)
naanak larh laa-ay uDhaari-an da-yu sayv amitaa. ||19]| O Nanak, serve the Infinite Lord; grasp the hem of His robe, and He will save you. []19]|
HBa H8 U Il (323-1)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
dus aed fats 5 wire Jas Il (323-1, west, H 5) DhanDh-rhay kulaah chit na aavai haykrho. Worldly affairs are unprofitable, if the One Lord does not come to mind.
stot ASt So acfo faar niet fers All (323-2, ast, He 5) naanak say-ee tann futann jinaa saa‘-ee visrai. ||1|| O Nanak, the bodies of those who forget their Master shall burst apart. ||1]|
He U Il (23-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
udad ase test fats aga Il 323-2, ast, v2 5) paraytahu keeton dayvtaa tin karnaihaaray. The ghost has been transformed into an angel by the Creator Lord.
AS fra Gafanig ufs aA AeTd Il (323-3, ast, ws 5) sabhay sikh ubaari-an parabh kaaj savaaray. God has emancipated all the Sikhs and resolved their affairs.
sea ucts ustanig 3S Bsa Il 323-3, ast, we 5)
nindak pakarh pachhaarhi-an jhoothay darbaaray.
He has seized the slanderers and thrown them to the ground, and declared them false in His Court.
soe a us eat d wef AA Aes MQM (323-4, aa, He 5) naanak kaa parabh vadaa hai aap saaj savaaray. ||2|| Nanak's God is glorious and great; He Himself creates and adorns. ||2] |
ugat Il (323-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
us ants fag viz ofs Ag fA ATS II (323-4, ast, He 5) parabh bay-ant kichh ant naahi sabh tisai karnaa. God is unlimited; He has no limit; He is the One who does everything.
WAH Midas Atos Abt ar ugar Il (323-5, ast, He 5) agam agochar saahibo jee-aa™ kaa parnaa. The Inaccessible and Unapproachable Lord and Master is the Support of His beings.
ons af ufsumse sae UNS ATS I (323-5, aSHt, ve 5) hasat day-ay partipaaldaa bharan pokhan karnaa. Giving His Hand, He nurtures and cherishes; He is the Filler and Fulfiller.
frases suffie orfu af AS Seer Il G23-6, aCHt, He 5) miharvaan bakhsind aap jap sachay tarnaa. He Himself is Merciful and Forgiving. Chanting the True Name, one is saved.
A 30 Se A IH BSA WA AGS [Ol (323-6, ast, v2 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so bhalaa naanak daas sarnaa. ||20|| Whatever pleases You - that alone is good; slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||20]||
HBa H8 U Il (323-6)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
fSar gu 3 a adt fan a ys od ALE II 323-7, weet, Hs 5) tinnaa bhukh na kaa rahee jis daa parabh hai so-ay. One who belongs to God has no hunger.
Soa Vdel Slant Bug As af 9 (323-7, west, He 5) naanak charnee lagi-aa uDhrai sabho ko-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, everyone who falls at his feet is saved. ||1]|
He U Il (23-7)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
mya Hat fas oH Atos aT THB Il (323-8, Tes, ws 5)
jaachik mangai nit naam saahib karay kabool.
If the beggar begs for the Lord's Name every day, his Lord and Master will grant his request.
TX USHAT AAS fSAfT sy S HFS NI (323-8, Test, He 5)
naanak parmaysar jajmaan tiseh bhukh na mool. ||2||
O Nanak, the Transcendent Lord is the most generous host; He does not lack anything at all. ||2]|
ust Il (323-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HO ds" dfee Aft AY SHO AS Il (323-9, ast, ve 5) man rataa govind sang sach bhojan jorhay. To imbue the mind with the Lord of the Universe is the true food and dress.
ulfs salt ofa aH fae & TAST Ws II (323-9, TCs, He 5) pareet lagee har naam si-o ay hastee ghorhay. To embrace love for the Name of the Lord is to possess horses and elephants.
on fiese union wat fomrfe yu o HS Il (323-9, ast, nH 5)
raaj milakh khusee-aa ghanee Dhi-aa-ay mukh na morhay.
To meditate on the Lord steadfastly is to rule over kingdoms of property and enjoy all sorts of pleasures.
ae ufg us Hae eg Ke G SS Il (323-10, ast, ue 5) dhaadhee dar parabh mangnaa dar kaday na chhorhay. The minstrel begs at God's Door - he shall never leave that Door.
oad Hf sfs we Sg fas ys AB BS QUAI AT A 23-10, ast, He 5)
naanak man tan chaa-o ayhu nit parabh ka-o lorhay. ||21]|1]| suDh keechay
Nanak has this yearning in his mind and body - he longs continually for God. ||21]]1|| Sudh Keechay| |
Ta ACSt sarst at sat (323-12) raag ga-orhee bhagtaa™ kee banee Raag Gauree, The Word Of The Devotees:
ae AfsanH asst Use TT YATE II (323-12)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
ast dursat At adte AG a Bue ae I (23-13) ga-orhee gu-aarayree saree kabeer jee-o kay cha-upday 14. Gauree Gwaarayree, Fourteen Chau-Padas Of Kabeer Jee:
wa Hfs Aes TH AS Ufeor | 323-13, asst awrsdt, gas adie Ah ab mohi jalat raam jal paa-i-aa. I was on fire, but now I have found the Water of the Lord's Name.
oH Cela 3o FOS FSteor Ul TIS Il G23-13, ast anrdet, sas adits Ah raam udak tan jalat bujhaa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This Water of the Lord's Name has cooled my burning body. ||1]||Pause] |
HO Hd ass Fo WEA Il (323-14, ast arsct, sas asta rh man maaran kaaran ban jaa-ee-ai. To subdue their minds, some go off into the forests;
A AG fas saes 3 ure Ul (323-14, west amrrddt, gas asta Ah so jal bin bhagvant na paa-ee-ai. ||1]| but that Water is not found without the Lord God. ||1]|
fag urea Afe og D A'S Il (323-15, aGSt anrset, az adits Th jih paavak sur nar hai jaaray. That fire has consumed angels and mortal beings,
oH Cela Ao ASS Cas Qi (323-15, ast anrset, sas aete Ah raam udak jan jalat ubaaray. ||2| | but the Water of the Lord's Name saves His humble servants from burning. ||2||
Bz AIS AY ATA Hd I (323-15, ast aurset, sas adie FH) bhav saagar sukh saagar maahee. In the terrifying world-ocean, there is an ocean of peace.
ulfe Jd Aw feu|™s ST NI (323-16, aBst aursdt, sas adie Fh) peev rahay jal nikhutat naahee. ||3]| I continue to drink it in, but this Water is never exhausted. ||3]||
afs adts sa Atserst il 323-16, a@st anrdct, sas asia a)
kahi kabeer bhaj saringpaanee.
Says Kabeer, meditate and vibrate upon the Lord, like the rainbird remembering the water.
oH Cefa Hat far TsrSt ISNA G23-16, Test aordset, sas asta Ah
raam udak mayree tikhaa bujhaanee. ||4]|1]| The Water of the Lord's Name has quenched my thirst. ||4]|1]|
agat axate Ht il (323-17)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
HUG Ae at fumrA o ATE II 23-17, at, ate A) maaDha-o jal kee pi-aas na jaa-ay. O Lord, my thirst for the Water of Your Name will not go away.
ae Hf mate Cat mifarfe na ToS Il G23-17, 7st, ate FH)
jal meh agan uthee aDhikaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The fire of my thirst burns even more brightly in that Water. ||1]||Pause] |
3 Fefafa IS Aw a HIG Il (323-18, west, ats FH)
too” jalniDh ha-o jal kaa meen.
You are the Ocean of Water, and I am just a fish in that Water. Ae His sa Fale fas Ute IA (323-18, Test, ate Hh
jal meh raha-o jaleh bin kheen. ||1]| In that Water, I remain; without that Water, I would perish. ||1]|
3 fing IS AMr|et 3a Il 23-18, west, aets Ft) too” pinjar ha-o soo-ataa tor. You are the cage, and I am Your parrot.
AH HAT ATT AT AT MQM! (323-19, ast, adte Ff) jam manjaar kahaa karai mor. ||2|| So what can the cat of death do to me? ||2||
3 33g TS Uet ris it (323-19, west, arta Hh) too” tarvar ha-o pankhee aahi. You are the tree, and I am the bird.
Hest Sd wane ots ISil (323-19, ast, asta Ah mand-bhaagee tayro darsan naahi. ||3|| I am so unfortunate - I cannot see the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan! ||3]|
UST 32g
3 Afsag IG SC3q Va Il 324-1, west, ats A) too” satgur ha-o na-utan chaylaa. You are the True Guru, and I am Your new disciple.
ats adte fire nis at Ser iQ (324-1, ast, adie xh
kahi kabeer mil ant kee baylaa. ||4]|2||
Says Kabeer, O Lord, please meet me - this is my very last chance! ||4]|2]| ast ads Ft i (324-1)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
wa JH fa Sa ate wiser Il (324-1, ast, adie rh jab ham ayko ayk kar jaani-aa. When I realize that there is One, and only One Lord,
3a Bad ad Sy Hfent AU (324-2, aSst, asta Ah tab logah kaahay dukh maani-aa. ||1]|| why then should the people be upset? ||1||
JH musd niyst ufs wet I G24-2, aes, adte A) ham aptah apunee pat kho-ee. I am dishonored; I have lost my honor.
oud Ufa usd Hfs aet NA TIS Il 24-2, west, asta Hf) hamrai khoj parahu mat ko-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. No one should follow in my footsteps. ||1]||Pause] |
oN oN
JH He He HS HT Il (324-3, aGst, asta Ah
ham manday manday man maahee. I am bad, and bad in my mind as well.
As us arg fA ad 2H 24-3, ast, ats Fh saajh paat kaahoo si-o naahee. ||2]| I have no partnership with anyone. ||2| |
ufs mufs St at adt BA Il (324-3, a@st, ate Ah
pat apat taa kee nahee laaj. I have no shame about honor or dishonor.
3a Wodd Aa Cuda uA Ill (324-4, west, adte rh tab jaanhugay jab ughraigo paaj. ||3|| But you shall know, when your own false covering is laid bare. ||3]|
a aats ufs dfs users Il (324-4, ast, aste Ah kaho kabeer pat har parvaan. Says Kabeer, honor is that which is accepted by the Lord.
Hea fsurfa SH ASH TH ISIS (324-4, ast, ate Ah sarab ti-aag bhaj kayval raam. ||4|[3]| Give up everything - meditate, vibrate upon the Lord alone. ||4|[3]|
ast aats Ft i (324-5) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
dae fess HUSH Aa Il (324-5, west, adte A nagan firat jou paa-ee-ai jog. If Yoga could be obtained by wandering around naked,
a6 ot fea Hats AS Ja NU (24-5, aeHt, asta Ah ban kaa mirag mukat sabh hog. ||1]| then all the deer of the forest would be liberated. ||1]|
fom Stat fomit aT BH Il (324-6, ast, adits Hh) ki-aa naagay ki-aa baaDhay chaam. What does it matter whether someone goes naked, or wears a deer skin,
Aa odt Sof MSH TH IA TIS Il (24-6, Test, adits Ah
jab nahee cheenas aatam raam. ||1|| rahaa-o. if he does not remember the Lord within his soul? ||1]|Pause] |
Hs Have A fafa uret i 24-6, a@at, ats Hh) mood mundaa-ay jou siDh paa-ee. If the spiritual perfection of the Siddhas could be obtained by shaving the head,
Hast 33 3 Teor get iQ 24-7, ast, ate A muktee bhayd na ga-ee-aa kaa-ee. ||2|| then why haven't sheep found liberation? ||2| |
faz of F sd oet 1 324-7, ast, aate A) bind raakh jou taree-ai bhaa-ee. If someone could save himself by celibacy, O Siblings of Destiny,
und fa8 o usH afs uret ISI (324-7, ast, adte af) khusrai ki-o na param gat paa-ee. ||3]| why then haven't eunuchs obtained the state of supreme dignity? ||3]|
AI KAT HOT Od Set Il (324-8, aCat, acta kaho kabeer sunhu nar bhaa-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O men, O Siblings of Destiny:
oH OH fae fate afs uret iigisil G24-8, ast, ate raam naam bin kin gat paa-ee. ||4]||4|| without the Lord's Name, who has ever found salvation? ||4||4||
ast aate Ft i (324-8) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Afour ys ferrg aardt it (324-9, a@at, acts Ht) sanDhi-aa paraat isnaan karaahee. Those who take their ritual baths in the evening and the morning
fA@ se aes urat HTT NA 24-9, aCat, ats Hh ji-o bha-ay daadur paanee maahee. ||1|| are like the frogs in the water. ||1]|
ag u oH aH ofS od Il G24-9, ast, adte A) ja-O pai raam raam rat naahee. When people do not love the Lord's Name,
3 Afs can of & AST NU TIS Il (324-9, aSHt, adie rh tay sabh Dharam raa-ay kai jaahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. they must all go to the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||1||Pause||
ofeor ss ag Ju Ted Il (324-10, ast, ats FA) kaa-i-aa rat baho roop rachaahee. Those who love their bodies and try different looks,
fo aG efenr Aus St ardt 211 (324-10, ast, adie rh tin ka-o da-i-aa supnai bhee naahee. ||2| | do not feel compassion, even in dreams. ||2| |
Ud BIS Aid FT Mas Il (324-11, aSst, ate FH) chaar charan kaheh baho aagar. The wise men call them four-footed creatures;
AQ AY urefs af ATT WSN 324-11, ast, ats saaDhoo sukh paavahi kal saagar. ||3]| the Holy find peace in this ocean of pain. ||3]|
ag ade ag afte adh Il (324-11, a@st, acta rh kaho kabeer baho kaa-ay kareejai. Says Kabeer, why do you perform so many rituals?
AdaA efs Ho IA Ul ISIN (324-12, aes, ate Ah sarbas chhod mahaa ras peejai. ||4]|5]| Renounce everything, and drink in the supreme essence of the Lord. ||4]|5||
aad At ABST i (324-12) kabeer jee ga-orhee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
foro AY foo Su fomr gs UAT I 324-12, ast, ats Ft) ki-aa jap ki-aa tap ki-aa barat poojaa. What use is chanting, and what use is penance, fasting or devotional worship,
Wa fot TET SA NU (24-13, aH, aes Ht) jaa kai ridai bhaa-o hai doojaa. ||1]| to one whose heart is filled with the love of duality? ||1]|
J We Ho HU fAE wet Il (324-13, west, asta Ah ray jan man maaDha-o si-o laa-ee-ai. O humble people, link your mind to the Lord.
vavet 5 VsIaH Ue I TTC I 24-13, ast, adits rh chaturaa-ee na chaturbhuj paa-ee-ai. rahaa-o. Through cleverness, the four-armed Lord is not obtained. ||Pause| |
USST BI MT BAST Il (324-14, aGst, adie rh parhar lobh ar lokaachaar. Set aside your greed and worldly ways.
UdST AH AT MATT Ql (324-14, ast, aes rh parhar kaam kroDh aha‘kaar. ||2|| Set aside sexual desire, anger and egotism. ||2]|
AGH ATS A MINS Il 324-14, aSst, ate A karam karat baDhay aha‘mayv. Ritual practices bind people in egotism;
ffs uvag at ATI AZ USI (324-15, aVst, adte Fh
mil paathar kee karhee sayv. |[3]| meeting together, they worship stones. ||3]|
ad ats sats ates ufemr il 324-15, reat, asta kaho kabeer bhagat kar paa-i-aa. Says Kabeer, He is obtained only by devotional worship.
38 ate fxs ayofenr igieél 324-15, aeet, adte A bholay bhaa-ay milay raghuraa-i-aa. ||4||6|| Through innocent love, the Lord is met. ||4]|6]|
agat aate Ft il (324-16) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
ds SA Hf AG St AST Il G24-16, aSHt, ate Ah garabh vaas meh kul nahee jaatee. In the dwelling of the womb, there is no ancestry or social status.
qon fiz 3 AS Bsurst All (324-16, ast, acta Hh barahm bind tay sabh utpaatee. ||1]| All have originated from the Seed of God. ||1]|
~
ad ¢ Ufss THe aa a TS Il (324-17, aH, ate kaho ray pandit baaman kab kay ho-ay. Tell me, O Pandit, O religious scholar: since when have you been a Brahmin?
wHo afs afs ASH HS BS AU! TIC lt 24-17, west, asta HH) baaman kahi kahi janam mat kho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Don't waste your life by continually claiming to be a Brahmin. ||1]|Pause] |
HS QOHS qonet WeMr | 24-18, a@at, afta Fh) jou too” baraahman barahmanee jaa-i-aa. If you are indeed a Brahmin, born of a Brahmin mother,
38 mre we ae Sot wer Ql (324-18, ast, asta ta-o aan baat kaahay nahee aa-i-aa. ||2|| then why didn't you come by some other way? ||2| |
SH AS YWIHE JH AS AP Il (324-18, ast, ate tH) tum kat baraahman ham kat sood. How is it that you are a Brahmin, and I am of a low social status?
TH FS BI SH AS VT Sli (324-19, ast, alte Ft) ham kat lohoo tum kat dooDh. ||3]|| How is it that I am formed of blood, and you are made of milk? |[3]|
ag ade A YIN ses il (324-19, ast, adits Ff) kaho kabeer jo barahm beechaarai. Says Kabeer, one who contemplates God,
A HS Ads I IHS MIDI 24-19, aCe, adits HH) so baraahman kahee-at hai hamaarai. ||4||7|| is said to be a Brahmin among us. ||4||7||
Uat 32Qu agat aate Ft i (325-1)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
wives AfY aafs o Het FT Il (325-1, west, adits mf) anDhkaar sukh kabeh na so-ee hai. In the darkness, no one can sleep in peace.
oat 3g UC fife set F WU 25-1, ast, aes FA) raajaa rank do-oo mil ro-ee hai. ||1]| The king and the pauper both weep and cry. ||1||
AG U GAo IH 3 afad Il (325-1, aes, adie th ja-O pai rasnaa raam na kahibo. As long as the tongue does not chant the Lord's Name,
Guns fions des fod nail JIC Il (325-2, as, ade rh upjat binsat rovat rahibo. ||1|| rahaa-o.
the person continues coming and going in reincarnation, crying out in pain. ||1]|Pause] |
An edbt saed at eatfemr I (325-2, west, asta at jas daykhee-ai tarvar kee chhaa-i-aa. It is like the shadow of a tree;
UTS TE AT at at HEMT QI 325-3, west, wets HH) paraan ga-ay kaho kaa kee maaz-i-aa. ||2| |
when the breath of life passes out of the mortal being, tell me, what becomes of his wealth? ||2]|
An Hat Hfo AG AHA I (325-3, west, adte At) jas jantee meh jee-o samaanaa. It is like the music contained in the instrument;
He HOH I AT AT AAT MSM (325-3, ast, aets Fh) moo-ay maram ko kaa kar jaanaa. ||3]| how can anyone know the secret of the dead? ||3]|
UAT Adeg AS Adts Il (325-4, ast, adits ah hansaa sarvar kaal sareer. Like the swan on the lake, death hovers over the body.
oH oAtfes UIs F ats IIT G25-4, Test, adte
raam rasaa-in pee-o ray kabeer. ||4||8]| Drink in the Lord's sweet elixir, Kabeer. ||4||8]|
ast aats Ft i (325-4) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Afs at ats afs of FST I (325-4, ast, adte Ah jot kee jaat jaat kee jotee. The creation is born of the Light, and the Light is in the creation.
FF HH kent Sw ASH AU (25-5, Test, alts Fh tit laagay kanchoo-aa fal motee. ||1]| It bears two fruits: the false glass and the true pearl. ||1]|
azo A we A fesse adh i 325-5, aSat, acta Ah kavan so ghar jo nirbha-o kahee-ai. Where is that home, which is said to be free of fear?
30 afh afe wis df adhH NAN TTC It G25-5, ast, acts wh bha-o bhaj jaa-ay abhai ho-ay rahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. There, fear is dispelled and one lives without fear. ||1]|Pause| |
sfe stefa odt He use I (325-6, ast, acts
tat tirath nahee man patee-aa-ay. On the banks of sacred rivers, the mind is not appeased.
TT MIS IS CIStE IQ (325-6, aSst, asta Ft) chaar achaar rahay urjhaa-ay. ||2|| People remain entangled in good and bad deeds. ||2||
uTu Us efe Sa ANS Il (325-7, ast, asta Ft) paap punn du-ay ayk samaan. Sin and virtue are both the same.
fon wig WaH SAT TS “IS ISI 325-7, aCat, ate Ah
nij ghar paaras tajahu gun aan. ||3]|
In the home of your own being, is the Philosopher's Stone; renounce your search for any other virtue. ||3]|
ats fasae aH 8 FA Il (325-7, aes, ate A) kabeer nirgun naam na ros. Kabeer: O worthless mortal, do not lose the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fem usafe uate gg SA SICH (325-7, Tea, ate Ah
is parchaa-ay parach rahu ays. ||4||9]| Keep this mind of yours involved in this involvement. ||4||9]|
agat aate Ft il (325-8) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
A Ho UdtHfs UsHS AST Il (325-8, ast, adie rh jo jan parmit parman jaanaa. He claims to know the Lord, who is beyond measure and beyond thought;
Wse dt FAS ANAT IAI (325-8, ast, ate rh baatan hee baikunth samaanaa. ||1]| by mere words, he plans to enter heaven. ||1]|
oT AST HAS AT Tt Il (325-9, ast, asta rh naa jaanaa baikunth kahaa hee. I do not know where heaven is.
We We Als ads So Tt NU TIC Il 25-9, west, acta A jaan jaan sabh kaheh tahaa hee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Everyone claims that he plans to go there. ||1||Pause| |
AIS ASS BI use FT ll (325-9, ast, asta at kahan kahaavan nah patee-a-ee hai. By mere talk, the mind is not appeased.
38 Ho HS ATS ICH et TF QIN 325-10, aeHt, acta AD ta-O man maanai jaa tay ha-umai ja-ee hai. ||2]| The mind is only appeased, when egotism is conquered. ||2||
wa Ga His Fao at MTA Il (325-10, aeHt, ate Ah jab lag man baikunth kee aas. As long as the mind is filled with the desire for heaven,
3a oa df odt yao feeA ISI (25-11, Bet, ate rh tab lag ho-ay nahee charan nivaas. ||3]| he does not dwell at the Lord's Feet. ||3]|
ag adie fe adh ato il (325-11, rest, acts rt) kaho kabeer ih kahee-ai kaahi. Says Kabeer, unto whom should I tell this?
AUHats Fas viTfT NIION (325-11, asst, asta Ah saaDhsangat baikunthay aahi. ||4||10]| The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is heaven. ||4]|10]|
agat aate Ft il (325-12) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Cun four fouft ANTET II (325-12, ast, adit rh upjai nipjai nipaj samaa-ee. We are born, and we grow, and having grown, we pass away.
dod eus feg Aa AST NA (325-12, aes, ate rh nainah daykhat ih jag jaa-ee. ||1|| Before our very eyes, this world is passing away. ||1]|
OHA O Hdd AIT We HT Il (325-12, aSat, ate Ah laaj na marahu kahhu ghar mayraa. How can you not die of shame, claiming, "This world is mine"?
Ms at ad ot AS ST NU TIS ll (325-13, aSHt, ats Ah ant kee baar nahee kachh tayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. At the very last moment, nothing is yours. ||1||Pause]|
mfsa Ase ats atfenr ust I (325-13, aSst, adte Hh
anik jatan kar kaa-i-aa paalee. Trying various methods, you cherish your body,
Host aa nafs Afar AST MQM (325-14, aCst, adte rh
martee baar agan sang jaalee. ||2]| but at the time of death, it is burned in the fire. ||2]|
Suit PES HIS ia Il (325-14, ast, asta rh cho-aa chandan mardan angaa. You apply sandalwood oil to your limbs,
H 30 WS HOA AM ISil (325-14, ast, adte ri) so tan jalai kaath kai sangaa. ||3]| but that body is burned with the firewood. ||3] |
aI ats HoT F TSM Il 25-15, aSst, acta A kaho kabeer sunhu ray gunee-aa. Says Kabeer, listen, O virtuous people:
faornat gy Se AS Tse ISNA (325-15, 7st, wets Fh binsaigo roop daykhai sabh dunee-aa. ||4||11]| your beauty shall vanish, as the whole world watches. ||4||11]|
agat aate Ft il (325-15) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Mes HE for Aa ASA Il (325-15, ast, aete Fh) avar moo-ay ki-aa sog kareejai. Why do you cry and mourn, when another person dies?
38 ata AG nrus AIA I G25-16, Bet, asta Hf) ta-o keejai ja-o aapan jeejai. ||1]| Do so only if you yourself are to live. ||1]|
H 3 Ha Hiss AAS Il (325-16, aes, ate Ah mai na mara-o maribo sansaaraa. I shall not die as the rest of the world dies,
wa Hfo fufes J Areog sa NA TIC Il (325-16, ast, adte HH) ab mohi mili-o hai jee-aavanhaaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. for now I have met the life-giving Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
femr Sot UH HIGeT | (325-17, ast, aats Ah i-aa dayhee parmal mahkandaa. People anoint their bodies with fragrant oils,
St AY faAS UPHSET II (325-17, TSS, aate zh taa sukh bisray parmaanandaa. ||2]|| and in that pleasure, they forget the supreme bliss. ||2||
gnet Sa us ufsaet il 325-18, aGat, aes Fh) koo-ataa ayk panch panihaaree. There is one well, and five water-carriers.
cat oa sd HIS TSH BI 25-18, ast, ats HH) tootee laaj bharai mat haaree. ||3]| Even though the rope is broken, the fools continue trying to draw water. ||3]|
ag adte fea afa sterst i (325-18, a@st, adte Ff) kaho kabeer ik buDh beechaaree. Says Kabeer, through contemplation, I have obtained this one understanding.
a Sg anter a ufsadt ISiIIl (325-19, ast, sets Fh
naa oh koo-ataa naa panihaaree. ||4]|12]|| There is no well, and no water-carrier. ||4]|12||
agat aate Ft ll (325-19) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
MASS HH ate Usa Il (325-19, west, asta rt) asthaavar jangam keet patangaa. The mobile and immobile creatures, insects and moths
mfox AOH ate FI Fa NA (325-19, aCHt, asta Fh anik janam kee-ay baho rangaa. ||1|| - in numerous lifetimes, I have passed through those many forms. ||1]|
US B2E
WA WI JH AIS SAS Il (326-1, ast, asta Hf) aisay ghar ham bahut basaa-ay. I lived in many such homes, O Lord,
Aa JH TH aes dfs wre Al TIC Il 26-1, ast, acta AH jab ham raam garabh ho-ay aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. before I came into the womb this time. ||1]|Pause]|
Hat ASt Sut gone I (326-2, a@xt, ats Fh jogee jatee tapee barahamchaaree. I was a Yogi, a celibate, a penitent, and a Brahmchaaree, with strict self-discipline.
aa TH sgufs aay sara iQ (326-2, west, ate Fh kabhoo raajaa chhatarpat kabhoo bhaykhaaree. ||2|| Sometimes I was a king, sitting on the throne, and sometimes I was a beggar. ||2| |
Was Hofs AS Afs Alef II (326-2, ast, ate FH) Saakat mareh sant sabh jeeveh. The faithless cynics shall die, while the Saints shall all survive.
TH GATES TAS" Ulefs NZI (326-3, aSst, ate Ah raam rasaa-in rasnaa peeveh. ||3]| They drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Essence with their tongues. ||3]||
ag ade ys fasur att il (326-3, ret, adits Hf) kaho kabeer parabh kirpaa keejai. Says Kabeer, O God, have mercy on me.
Ths us Ma UT ee ISIS (326-3, Test, wets Fh haar paray ab pooraa deejai. ||4||13]| I am so tired; now, please bless me with Your perfection. ||4]|13]|
Ist adte At at ote sorte fesftor Hos u Il 326-4)
ga-orhee kabeer jee kee naal ralaa-ay likhi-aa mehlaa 5. Gauree, Kabeer Jee, With Writings Of The Fifth Mehl:
WMA orseH Shas ate il (326-4, ast, ate rt He 5) aiso achraj daykhi-o kabeer. Kabeer has seen such wonders!
afa & 3S fads ste NA TIS Il (326-4, aes, adits rt 2 5) daDh kai bholai birolai neer. ||1]| rahaa-o. Mistaking it for cream, the people are churning water. ||1||Pause] |
Tat nage TEI Bs il 326-5, ast, aelts Ht us 5) haree angooree gadhaa chardi. The donkey grazes upon the green grass;
fos Cfs TA Stet HS NA (326-5, TES, aate Ht He 5) nit uth haasai heegai marai. ||1]| arising each day, he laughs and brays, and then dies. ||1]|
HST SAT nT AME Il (326-5, aGst, aete rt H: 5) maataa bhaisaa ammuhaa jaa-ay. The bull is intoxicated, and runs around wildly.
afe afe ad orate ufé II (326-6, ast, asta rt 2 5) kud kud charai rasaatal paa-ay. ||2|| He romps and eats and then falls into hell. ||2]|
aT wats use set YS Il (326-6, aCst, ate Ft us 5) kaho kabeer pargat bha-ee khayd. Says Kabeer, a strange sport has become manifest:
BS aS gu fs SF USI 26-6, aes, afte st Hs 5) laylay ka-o chooghai nit bhayd. ||3]| the sheep is sucking the milk of her lamb. ||3]|
TH JHS Hs UdaYNt MITET I (326-7, TCH, adits At He 5)
raam ramat mat pargatee aa-ee. Chanting the Lord's Name, my intellect is enlightened.
ag ade afe Ast ust SAUIIVll (26-7, Text, aete Ft He 5) kaho kabeer gur sojhee paa-ee. ||4||1]|14]]| Says Kabeer, the Guru has blessed me with this understanding. ||4||1||14] |
ast aete At Usue Il (326-7) ga-orhee kabeer jee panchpaday. Gauree, Kabeer Jee, Panch-Padas:
faG ne efs safe safe ris II (326-8, west, adits mH) ji-o jal chhod baahar bha-i-o meenaa. I am like a fish out of water,
Uda HOH IS su at Har Ul 26-8, ast, ats Ah poorab janam ha-o tap kaa heenaa. ||1|| because in my previous life, I did not practice penance and intense meditation. ||1]|
WE AT TH azo als Ht Il (26-8, ast, asta Ah ab kaho raam kavan gat moree. Now tell me, Lord, what will my condition be?
SH & 3oSH Hf set Sat Al TIC I) (26-9, ast, acta Ah
tajee lay banaaras mat bha-ee thoree. ||1|| rahaa-o. I left Benares - I had little common sense. ||1]||Pause| |
Hae AoW fre udt Teteur Il (326-9, aSst, ate zh) Sagal janam siv puree gavaa-i-aa. I wasted my whole life in the city of Shiva;
Hast ae Hatdts Sf nrfenr iQ (326-10, west, ate
martee baar maghar uth aa-i-aa. ||2]| at the time of my death, I moved to Magahar. ||2| |
WIS FA Su alot at Il (26-10, west, acta bahut baras tap kee-aa kaasee. For many years, I practiced penance and intense meditation at Kaashi;
HIS Sent Has At SAT Sil (326-10, west, asta A
maran bha-i-aa maghar kee baasee. ||3]|| now that my time to die has come, I have come to dwell at Magahar! ||3]|
AA Had AH Sted il (326-11, aSst, asta Ah
kaasee maghar sam beechaaree. Kaashi and Magahar - I consider them the same.
Gat safs an Ssafh uct sil 326-11, rest, adits Hh
ochhee bhagat kaisay utras paaree. ||4|| With inadequate devotion, how can anyone swim across? ||4||
ad Id an fae A a AS Il G26-u1, aeHt, ate Ah kaho gur gaj siv sabh ko jaanai. Says Kabeer, the Guru and Ganaysha and Shiva all know
Hort ate SHS At TH WUNIUI (326-12, aes, aes FH) mu-aa kabeer ramat saree raamai. ||5||15]| that Kabeer died chanting the Lord's Name. ||5]|15]|
ast aate Ft Il (326-12) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Mt JIS HIeS Mia Il (326-12, ast, aeita zt) cho-aa chandan mardan angaa. You may anoint your limbs with sandalwood oil,
H 30 WS HOA AMT IA 326-12, west, ade Hh so tan jalai kaath kai sangaa. ||1]| but in the end, that body will be burned with the firewood. ||1||
fEH 35 Us at Aeo ASS Il (326-13, aSst, ate Hh is tan Dhan kee kavan badaa-ee. Why should anyone take pride in this body or wealth?
uate ud Gaeta o ATT NA TIC Il (326-13, aC, aaite Hh
Dharan parai urvaar na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They shall end up lying on the ground; they shall not go along with you to the world beyond. ||1]|Pause| |
ofs fa Hefs fea aafs aM Il 326-14, a@st, adte AD
raat je soveh din karahi kaam. They sleep by night and work during the day,
fea fus dfs 5 of & SH MQM (326-14, as, adits rh ik khin layhi na har ko naam. ||2|| but they do not chant the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||2]|
ofa 3 30 Hf we Sag Il (326-14, ast, adits Ah haath ta dor mukh khaa-i-o tambor. They hold the string of the kite in their hands, and chew betel leaves in their mouths,
Host ae af afas ss SI (326-15, ast, ate A)
martee baar kas baaDhi-o chor. ||3|| but at the time of death, they shall be tied up tight, like thieves. ||3]|
gents off aff afs aa we Il (326-15, ast, asta rh gurmat ras ras har gun gaavai.
Through the Guru's Teachings, and immersed in His Love, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
TH TH SHS AY US Ill (326-15, agst, ate rh raamai raam ramat sukh paavai. ||4|| Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, and find peace. ||4]|
fasur afs & on feaet Il (326-16, Bet, arts Fh kirpaa kar kai naam darirhaa-ee. In His Mercy, He implants the Naam within us;
dfs dfs HA AAT SATE MUI (326-16, AGH, asta zh) har har baas suganDh basaa-ee. ||5|| inhale deeply the sweet aroma and fragrance of the Lord, Har, Har. ||5]|
ads adte sfs J nia Il (326-16, ast, ate Ah kahat kabeer chayt ray anDhaa. Says Kabeer, remember Him, you blind fool!
ARS TH So" AS UO ENE! (326-17, west, wats Ft) sat raam jhoothaa sabh DhanDhaa. ||6||16]| The Lord is True; all worldly affairs are false. ||6||16] |
agat adie At fsue wasa Il 26-17) ga-orhee kabeer jee tipday chaartukay. Gauree, Kabeer Jee, Ti-Padas And Chau-Tukas:
AH 3 Cafe se I IM I (326-17, aSst, asta rh jam tay ulat bha-ay hai raam. I have turned away from death and turned to the Lord.
eu for AY alG fare I 326-18, a@at, adits A dukh binsay sukh kee-o bisraam. Pain has been eliminated, and I dwell in peac and comfort.
adt Cafe se J HIST I (26-18, aGst, asta Ah bairee ulat bha-ay hai meetaa. My enemies have been transformed into friends.
Has Cafe AAS SE BIST NA (26-18, aSst, ats A saakat ulat sujan bha-ay cheetaa. ||1|| The faithless cynics have been transformed into good-hearted people. ||1]|
wa dfs Aga AHS afe ufo il (326-19, ast, ade Ah ab mohi sarab kusal kar maani-aa. Now, I feel that everything brings me peace.
Rifs set wa dfse wfomr a oS Il (326-19, wea, ate Hh
saat bha-ee jab gobid jaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Peace and tranquility have come, since I realized the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause] |
Us 329 36 Hfe dst afe Gaurfa it (327-1, west, adte
tan meh hotee kot upaaDh. My body was afflicted with millions of diseases.
Cafe set Au Aafa ANTE Il G27-1, west, ats Hh ulat bha-ee sukh sahj samaaDh. They have been transformed into the peaceful, tranquil concentration of Samaadhi.
MY UES MM nM II (327-1, ast, adte A) aap pachhaanai aapai aap. When someone understands his own self,
da & fami SS sry | (327-1, west, adits rog na bi-aapai teenou taap. ||2|| he no longer suffers from illness and the three fevers. ||2| |
ma Ho Cale AaTsg IMM Il (327-2, ast, adts A) ab man ulat sanaatan hoo-aa. My mind has now been restored to its original purity.
3a Woon Ae ASS HT Il 327-2, ast, wets Fh tab jaani-aa jab jeevat moo-aa. When I became dead while yet alive, only then did I come to know the Lord.
ag adte AfY ofA AHTSE Il 27-2, ast, ate Ah
kaho kabeer sukh sahj samaava-o. Says Kabeer, I am now immersed in intuitive peace and poise.
mf 3 3dG 8 nied STS ISI (27-3, eat, ate
aap na dara-o na avar daraava-o. ||3||17]|| I do not fear anyone, and I do not strike fear into anyone else. ||3]|17]|
agat axate Ht il (327-3) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fis ut AIG fas wife AST I 27-3, Tes, alte Fh pind moo-ai jee-o kih ghar jaataa. When the body dies, where does the soul go?
Rafe wists niorafe IST Il (327-4, a@st, asta fh sabad ateet anaahad raataa. It is absorbed into the untouched, unstruck melody of the Word of the Shabad.
fafe oH wWhonr fsafo uetfonr Il (327-4, aBst, ate Ft) jin raam jaani-aa tineh pachhaani-aa. Only one who knows the Lord realizes Him.
fA dat AT HE Hom UA (327-5, ast, sete Fh)
ji-o goongay saakar man maani-aa. ||1]||
The mind is satisfied and satiated, like the mute who eats the sugar candy and just smiles, without speaking. ||1]|
MAT fame AG FoeTsH I 327-5, ast, adte A aisaa gi-aan kathai banvaaree. Such is the spiritual wisdom which the Lord has imparted.
Ho 3 uds fes AYHS STAT NA FIC i 327-5, west, aete A) man ray pavan darirh sukhman naaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O mind, hold your breath steady within the central channel of the Sushmanaa. ||1]|Pause] |
A ag add fa safe 5 agar Il (327-6, ast, adie FH) so gur karahu je bahur na karnaa. Adopt such a Guru, that you shall not have to adopt another again.
A ug ded fa sofa 3 Fear Il (327-6, ast, adits rh So pad ravhu je bahur na ravnaa. Dwell in such a state, that you shall never have to dwell in any other.
A fomre usd fa safe 6 Gdar Il (327-6, west, adits wh) so Dhi-aan Dharahu je bahur na Dharnaa. Embrace such a meditation, that you shall never have to embrace any other.
WMA Hod fa Sof S HIST MQM (327-7, aGH, adits rh aisay marahu je bahur na marnaa. ||2|| Die in such a way, that you shall never have to die again. ||2]|
Cact atar AHS fHereP II (327-7, aGHt, asia rh
ultee gangaa jamun milaava-o.
Turn your breath away from the left channel, and away from the right channel, and unite them in the central channel of the Sushmanaa.
fas Fe Aan Ho ufo BTS Il 27-7, aGxt, asta Hh) bin jal sangam man meh n"aava-o. At their confluence within your mind, take your bath there without water.
Se AHAfe feg faBors | 327-8, aeHt, ate Ah lochaa samsar ih bi-uhaaraa. To look upon all with an impartial eye - let this be your daily occupation.
33 stots fomr mets steer Zi (327-38, a@st, ate Ah
tat beechaar ki-aa avar beechaaraa. ||3]| Contemplate this essence of reality - what else is there to contemplate? ||3] |
muy sa afte fyeHt mrarrr il 327-8, a@st, ade Ah ap tayj baa-ay parithmee aakaasaa. Water, fire, wind, earth and ether
MAT JIS JIG Tis UAT Il (327-9, ast, adie rh) aisee rahat raha-o har paasaa. - adopt such a way of life and you shall be close to the Lord.
ad adte fadao fmre€ il 327-9, ast, adte A) kahai kabeer niranjan Dhi-aava-o. Says Kabeer, meditate on the Immaculate Lord.
faz ufs we fa safe o mre SNATCH (327-9, reat, adte Fh) tit ghar jaa-o je bahur na aava-o. ||4]|18] | Go to that home, which you shall never have to leave. ||4]||18]|
agat aate At fsue Il (27-10) ga-orhee kabeer jee tipday. Gauree, Kabeer Jee, Ti-Padas:
ave fag ureint odt SfH I (27-10, aes, adte Ah kanchan si-o paa-ee-ai nahee tol. He cannot be obtained by offering your weight in gold.
He & oH Sor F fs AU G27-10, aes, ast A) man day raam lee-aa hai mol. ||1]| But I have bought the Lord by giving my mind to Him. ||1]|
ma dfs oH mua ate wafer il 327-11, ast, adte af) ab mohi raam apunaa kar jaani-aa. Now I recognize that He is my Lord.
Hon Aste HT Ho Hfowt A TIS Il (327-11, ast, ats Ah sahj subhaa-ay mayraa man maani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My mind is intuitively pleased with Him. ||1||Pause]|
gon afa afa nig o urfemr Il 327-12, rex, ate Fh barahmai kath kath ant na paa-i-aa. Brahma spoke of Him continually, but could not find His limit.
oH sats 86 wuts yrfenr Qi (27-12, rest, adte AH
raam bhagat baithay ghar aa-i-aa. ||2||
Because of my devotion to the Lord, He has come to sit within the home of my inner being. ||2||
ad adts vee nfs fsureit i) (327-12, west, acts xt)
kaho kabeer chanchal mat ti-aagee. Says Kabeer, I have renounced my restless intellect.
aes TH sats for Sait WSUUACN (327-13, Test, ate Ah kayval raam bhagat nij bhaagee. ||3]||1]|19]| It is my destiny to worship the Lord alone. ||3]|1||19]|
agat axate Ht i (327-13)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fad HIS AS Aas SoA | 327-13, ast, asta Hf) jih marnai sabh jagat taraasi-aa. That death which terrifies the entire world
A ude ae Aafe yartimr il (327-14, a@et, adits Fh SO marnaa gur sabad pargaasi-aa. ||1]||
- the nature of that death has been revealed to me, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
ma aA Hae Hale He HSM I (327-14, ast, adte Ff) ab kaisay mara-o maran man maani-aa. Now, how shall I die? My mind has already accepted death.
Hfg Hfs ATS fae TH Oo ATSMT IAN TIS Il (327-14, west, aete Ah
mar mar jaatay jin raam na jaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who do not know the Lord, die over and over again, and then depart. ||1]|Pause| |
HIS HIG Ad AS HET Il (327-15, aSst, aes wh marno maran kahai sabh ko-ee. Everyone says, "I will die, I will die."
Hon Hd ong fe Wet MQN G27-15, aes, adte Hh) sehjay marai amar ho-ay so-ee. ||2]| But he alone becomes immortal, who dies with intuitive understanding. ||2||
ag ate nfs afer niser il (327-16, west, acta xt) kaho kabeer man bha-i-aa anandaa. Says Kabeer, my mind is filled with bliss;
Tent SIH Sot USHSeT NBIQOM (327-16, aCst, ate Ah
ga-i-aa bharam rahi-aa parmaanandaa. ||3]|20] | my doubts have been eliminated, and I am in ecstasy. ||3]|20||
agat aate Ht il (327-16)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
AS dt SVI HS AS BSS Il (327-17, ast, sas aes wh kat nahee tha-ur mool kat laava-o. There is no special place where the soul aches; where should I apply the ointment?
ans 36 fs oBa o USE NU 27-17, west, sas adits Ah khojat tan meh tha-ur na paava-o. ||1|| I have searched the body, but I have not found such a place. ||1||
wrat df A ATS Ute Il 327-17, Test, sas adits Th) laagee ho-ay so jaanai peer. He alone knows it, who feels the pain of such love;
TH sats MSs Ste Ul TIS il (27-18, Test, sas adits FH)
raam bhagat anee-aalay teer. ||1|| rahaa-o. the arrows of the Lord's devotional worship are so sharp! ||1||Pause] |
ea afe fus AS ot Il (327-18, wat, sas adie Ft) ayk bhaa-ay daykh-a-u sabh naaree. I look upon all His soul-brides with an impartial eye;
for Wee AT ao fumrdt ii (327-18, rest, sas aeite A) ki-aa jaan-o sah ka-un pi-aaree. ||2|| how can I know which ones are dear to the Husband Lord? ||2] |
ad adts A a MASA Sa Il (327-19, aGst, sas adits Ah
kaho kabeer jaa kai mastak bhaag. Says Kabeer, one who has such destiny inscribed upon her forehead
AS uddfa 3 aS FHS ATS NSNVUI: 327-19, aCHt, sas aes Th)
sabh parhar taa ka-o milai suhaag. ||3||21]| - her Husband Lord turns all others away, and meets with her. ||3]|21]|
Us BQ agat aate Ft i (328-1)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
W a dfs A Sag set I (328-1, west, sas adie Ff) jaa kai har saa thaakur bhaa-ee. One who has the Lord as his Master, O Siblings of Destiny
Hafs mes uarafs AST NA G28-1, ast, sas aes AH mukat anant pukaaran jaa-ee. ||1|| - countless liberations knock at his door. ||1]|
WE AT TH SdH Sa Il (328-1, ast, sas ast 7) ab kaho raam bharosaa toraa. If I say now that my trust is in You alone, Lord,
IAT aT ASG fogs Ul FHS il 328-2, aes, sas alta Fh) tab kaahoo kaa kavan nihoraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. then what obligation do I have to anyone else? ||1]|Pause| |
Sifs Sa A a ols sg Il (328-2, ast, sas ade rh teen lok jaa kai heh bhaar. He bears the burden of the three worlds;
Aad 3 ad ufsurg IlQI1 (328-2, ast, sas adits Ff) so kaahay na karai partipaar. ||2|| why should He not cherish you also? ||2||
ag adte fea afa stedt i (28-3, west, sas acts Ff) kaho kabeer ik buDh beechaaree. Says Kabeer, through contemplation, I have obtained this one understanding.
for aA AG fay F HISTSH NBN2Q2I (28-3, aCe, sas ate A ki-aa bas ja-o bikh day mehtaaree. ||3]||22|| If the mother poisons her own child, what can anyone do? ||3]||22] |
agat aate at il (328-3) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fag AS Ast df aA ate Il (328-4, ast, sas adie Ah
bin sat satee ho-ay kaisay naar.
Without Truth, how can the woman be a true satee - a widow who burns herself on her husband's funeral pyre?
ufss tug foe stefs nail 28-4, west, saz asta rh pandit daykhhu ridai beechaar. ||1]| O Pandit, O religious scholar, see this and contemplate it within your heart. ||1]|
ulfs faa AA sd AST Il (328-4, ast, sas acta Hh) pareet binaa kaisay baDhai sanayhu. Without love, how can one's affection increase?
Ha Od JA 3a Sd Sd Sg INA JTS Il 28-5, aCat, sas adits Hh jab lag ras tab lag nahee nayhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. As long as there is attachment to pleasure, there can be no spiritual love. ||1||Pause] |
Wofe AS ad At yrs Il (328-5, aGst, sas ate A saahan sat karai jee-a apnai. One who, in his own soul, believes the Queen Maya to be true,
A GHG AG fHS 3 AUS IQ G28-5, Test, sas ate Ff) so ramyay ka-o milai na supnai. ||2| | does not meet the Lord, even in dreams. ||2] |
36 HO U6 fag AGfu Adte 1 (328-6, ast, sas ate Hh tan man Dhan garihu sa-up sareer. One who surrenders her body, mind, wealth, home and self
Het Haas ad aate SNQSI (328-6, aes, sas aete Ah so-ee suhaagan kahai kabeer. ||3]|23] | - she is the true soul-bride, says Kabeer. ||3||23]|
agat aate Ft il (328-6) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fafimer famrfimr Aare AAS Il 328-7, a@st, sas adte Ah bikhi-aa bi-aapi-aa sagal sansaar. The whole world is engrossed in corruption.
fatter & sat uss UI (328-7, Test, sas ats A) bikhi-aa lai doobee parvaar. ||1|| This corruption has drowned entire families. ||1]|
J od oS Uels as Sat Il (328-7, ast, sas adie Hh) ray nar naav cha-urh kat borhee. O man, why have you wrecked your boat and sunk it?
dfs fa@ Sf fattoor Afar Fat wa ToS Il (328-8, ax, sas acts Ah har si-o torh bikhi-aa sang jorhee. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have broken with the Lord, and joined hands with corruption. ||1||Pause]|
Afs od Ba Sait orfar il (328-8, ast, sas aceite Ah sur nar daaDhay laagee aag. Angels and human beings alike are burning in the raging fire.
foate ata un utefA o Stat QI (28-8, aext, sas adie Ft) nikat neer pas peevas na jhaag. ||2|| The water is near at hand, but the beast does not drink it in. ||2||
333 333 foathé ate Il 28-9, west, sas adits ah) chaytat chaytat niksi-o neer. By constant contemplation and awareness, the water is brought forth.
A A® fase aes ate SQ (328-9, ast, sas ate a) so jal nirmal kathat kabeer. ||3||24| | That water is immaculate and pure, says Kabeer. ||3]||24]|
agat aate Ft Il (328-10) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fag afs us 3 fomre dterdt il (328-10, ast, sas ats Hh jih kul poot na gi-aan beechaaree. That family, whose son has no spiritual wisdom or contemplation
faget aA S Set HISTAT INA (328-10, reat, sas adte Ah
biDhvaa kas na bha-ee mehtaaree. ||1]| - why didn't his mother just become a widow? ||1]|
fad od IH Sats Sfs ATH Il (328-10, a@st, sas adie Fh
jih nar raam bhagat neh saaDhee. That man who has not practiced devotional worship of the Lord
OHS GA 6 HE must Al TTS Il G28-11, a@Ht, sas ate A
janmat kas na mu-o apraaDhee. ||1|| rahaa-o. - why didn't such a sinful man die at birth? ||1]|Pause] |
HU He dds Te alo Afent Il G28-11, ast, sas acts FH) much much garabh ga-ay keen bachi-aa. So many pregnancies end in miscarriage - why was this one spared?
assn gu Me Aa HfSur QU 28-12, ast, sas adts FA) budbhuj roop jeevay jag majhi-aa. ||2|| He lives his life in this world like a deformed amputee. ||2||
OT cats AA Aes Agu I OH faa AA AIA TIU WSNQUI (328-12, Tea, sas aets Hh) kaho kabeer jaisay sundar saroop. naam binaa jaisay kubaj kuroop. ||3||25] | Says Kabeer, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, beautiful and handsome people are just ugly hunch-backs. ||3||25||
agat aate Ft il (328-13)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
A Ho Sfo WAH ao are | fsa a Ae afeod WE INA (328-13, ast, sas adie Ah
jo jan layhi khasam kaa naa-o. tin kai sad balihaarai jaa-o. ||1]|
I am forever a sacrifice to those humble beings who take the Name of their Lord and Master. ||1]]|
H fecns faons afe qo We Il (328-13, ast, sas adie Ah SO nirmal nirmal har gun gaavai. Those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Pure Lord are pure.
A amet Hd Hf aS NU TIS Il (328-14, aGHt, sas adie Th) so bhaa-ee mayrai man bhaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. They are my Siblings of Destiny, so dear to my heart. ||1]|Pause] |
fra we oH stor saute i fsa at uat Ua TH Ofs IQ G28-14, west, sas aes FH) jih ghat raam rahi-aa bharpoor. tin kee pag pankaj ham Dhoor. ||2]|
I am the dust of the lotus feet of those whose hearts are filled with the All-pervading Lord. ||2||
ams Far Hfs at Ute Il (328-15, west, sas adte FH) jaat julaahaa mat kaa Dheer. I am a weaver by birth, and patient of mind.
Hofa Adfa Te TH Aste NSNEM (328-15, ast, sas aes Ah
sahj sahj gun ramai kabeer. ||3||26|| Slowly, steadily, Kabeer chants the Glories of God. ||3]|26]|
asst sate Ft Il (328-16)
ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Tals IAS wat Hat sot ll (328-16, ast, sas adie Ah gagan rasaal chu-ai mayree bhaathee. From the Sky of the Tenth Gate, the nectar trickles down, distilled from my furnace.
Hfs Ho" GH 36 Stet aeat IU (28-16, Text, sas adte FH) sanch mahaa ras tan bha-i-aa kaathee. ||1]| I have gathered in this most sublime essence, making my body into firewood. ||1]|
Cnt a adh AIH HSSTT Il (328-17, aC, sas ast Ah u-aa ka-o kahee-ai sahj matvaaraa. He alone is called intoxicated with intuitive peace and poise,
ules IH GA famro stars Al TIC Il (328-17, aSHt, sas acts HH)
peevat raam ras gi-aan beechaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. who drinks in the juice of the Lord's essence, contemplating spiritual wisdom. ||1]|Pause] |
Hon aerate AG ffs mret i 28-17, west, sas adie Ft)
sahj kalaalan ja-o mil aa-ee. Intuitive poise is the bar-maid who comes to serve it.
mTéfe HS niSfes ATE IQI (328-18, ast, sas adte zh) aanand maatay an-din jaa-ee. ||2]| I pass my nights and days in ecstasy. ||2||
dies us fedae wfenr i (328-18, a@et, sas asta at)
cheenat cheet niranjan laa-i-aa. Through conscious meditation, I linked my consciousness with the Immaculate Lord.
ag ads 3 nes ufemr Si2Q011 (328-19, ast, sas aes Ah
kaho kabeer tou anbha-o paa-i-aa. ||3||27]| Says Kabeer, then I obtained the Fearless Lord. ||3]||27]|
agat aate Ft Il (328-19) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
Ho & ASS Hats femmit il 28-19, rest, sas adie Ft)
man kaa subhaa-o maneh bi-aapee. The natural tendency of the mind is to chase the mind.
User B2aK*
Hota Hf aes fafa art all 29-1, ast, sas adte Hh)
maneh maar kavan siDh thaapee. ||1]| Who has established himself as a Siddha, a being of miraculous spiritual powers, by killing his mind? ||1]|
aS A Ufs A He He Il (329-1, aes, sas adie FH) kavan so mun jo man maarai. Who is that silent sage, who has killed his mind?
Ho a ufs aod far STS NU TIC I 329-1, west, sas ate FH) man ka-o maar kahhu kis taarai. ||1]| rahaa-o. By killing the mind, tell me, who is saved? ||1]||Pause| |
Ho nists 83 AS aet Il (329-2, ast, sas adit Ah man antar bolai sabh ko-ee. Everyone speaks through the mind.
Ho Hd fag sats o det MQM (329-2, aes, sas adte Hh man maaray bin bhagat na ho-ee. ||2|| Without killing the mind, devotional worship is not performed. ||2]|
ad adts AAS SC Il (329-2, aCst, sas adits Hh kaho kabeer jo jaanai bhay-o. Says Kabeer, one who knows the secret of this mystery,
Ho HOES fFsTE SS USNQcil 329-3, ast, sas ats Fh) man maDhusoodan taribhavan day-o. ||3]|28] | beholds within his own mind the Lord of the three worlds. ||3]|28]|
agat aate Ht il (329-3) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
6fe 9 dnfa niafe SS I (329-3, ast, sas ate Hh) o-ay jo deeseh ambar taaray. The stars which are seen in the sky
fafs Gfe aS dss INA (29-4, asst, sas acts Hh kin o-ay cheetay cheetanhaaray. ||1|| - who is the painter who painted them? ||1||
ag 3 ufss nigg a fA@ oer | (329-4, a@st, sas adits Hf) kaho ray pandit ambar kaa si-o laagaa. Tell me, O Pandit, what is the sky attached to?
FS FISTS ASI UU IIS il (329-4, ast, sas arate Fh) boojhai boojhanhaar sabhaagaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Very fortunate is the knower who knows this. ||1]]Pause]|
Han ve asta Srihari (329-5, ast, gars aets Ht) sooraj chand karahi ujee-aaraa. The sun and the moon give their light;
AS Hfo uate YH UATE III (329-5, aCst, sas aes Ht)
sabh meh pasri-aa barahm pasaaraa. ||2|| God's creative extension extends everywhere. ||2]|
ad ase Wear ALE Il (329-5, aGst, sas adits rh kaho kabeer jaanaigaa so-ay. Says Kabeer, he alone knows this,
fase oy Hfe aH SE NBNQEN (29-6, Test, sas ate Ff) hirdai raam mukh raamai ho-ay. ||3]|29]|
whose heart is filled with the Lord, and whose mouth is also filled with the Lord. [131|29]|
agat aate Ft Il (329-6) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
ae at ust fAAYAS set I (329-6, aGat, sas adits Hf) bayd kee putree simrit bhaa-ee. The Simritee is the daughter of the Vedas, O Siblings of Destiny.
Hae Azdt S F niet All (329-6, ast, sas asta Ft) saa"kal jayvree lai hai aa-ee. ||1|| She has brought a chain and a rope. ||1||
MUS odd MU S Afonit I (329-7, west, sas asta Ah aapan nagar aap tay baaDhi-aa. She has imprisoned the people in her own city.
Ho & ofa ae Ag Aifomr a Joe I 329-7, aeat, sas ate a) moh kai faaDh kaal sar saa‘Dhi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
She has tightened the noose of emotional attachment and shot the arrow of death. ||1]|Pause] |
at 5 aS Sfe Sa AT II (329-8, aes, sas aes Ft) katee na katai toot nah jaa-ee. By cutting, she cannot be cut, and she cannot be broken.
AW Avufe df Aa A wet QI (329-8, asst, gas ate FH) Saa Saapan ho-ay jag ka-o khaa-ee. ||2]| She has become a serpent, and she is eating the world. ||2]|
oH @us fats As Aa Blew il 329-8, ast, sas aes Fh) ham daykhat jin sabh jag looti-aa. Before my very eyes, she has plundered the entire world.
aT wats HTH af sfent SNZOll (329-9, aes, sas alta Fh) kaho kabeer mai raam kahi chhooti-aa. ||3]|30]| Says Kabeer, chanting the Lord's Name, I have escaped her. ||3||30]|
agat aate Ft il (329-9) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
efe Ho BAH uss Il (329-9, aCst, sas acta A) day-ay muhaar lagaam pahiraava-o. I have grasped the reins and attached the bridle;
AIG 3 Ale Tae SVTSS AU 29-10, aSst, sas ate Hh Sagal ta jeen gagan da-oraava-o. ||1|| abandoning everything, I now ride through the skies. ||1]|
nus stats west att Il (329-10, a@st, sas asta Ah apnai beechaar asvaaree keejai. I made self-reflection my mount,
Hon & ues ug Ufs StH Ul TIE Il 29-10, aCHt, sas adie th sahj kai paavrhai pag Dhar leejai. ||1]| rahaa-o. and in the stirrups of intuitive poise, I placed my feet. ||1||Pause| |
3S J AAS S3fd S SE Il 329-11, aSst, sas adie chal ray baikunth tujheh lay taara-o. Come, and let me ride you to heaven.
fosfs 3 UM & TEER HSE IQ (329-11, ast, sas aefte FH) hicheh ta paraym kai chaabuk maara-o. ||2|| If you hold back, then I shall strike you with the whip of spiritual love. ||2]|
aS aals 3G MASTS || Fe asa 3 Jala fogs WSN2Ui G29-12, aSst, sas ate Hh kahat kabeer bhalay asvaaraa. bayd katayb tay raheh niraaraa. ||3]||31]||
Says Kabeer, those who remain detached from the Vedas, the Koran and the Bible are the best riders. ||3]|31]|
asst asta Ft Il (329-12) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fas Hfe ute nifigs wre II (329-12, a@Ht, sas afte Hf) jih mukh paa‘cha-o amrit khaa-ay. That mouth, which used to eat the five delicacies
ST HY SUS HAS BE IAI (329-13, ast, sas aes Fh tih mukh daykhat lookat laa-ay. ||1]| - I have seen the flames being applied to that mouth. ||1]|
fea ey on fe weg AS Il (329-13, aH, sas aete FH) ik dukh raam raa-ay kaatahu mayraa. O Lord, my King, please rid me of this one affliction:
wae 2d Mg TdT HAT NA TIS Il (329-13, aSat, sas ate FH) agan dahai ar garabh basayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. may I not be burned in fire, or cast into the womb again. ||1]||Pause] |
ofeur fast ag fafa ast | 29-14, aGst, saz acta zh kaa-i-aa bigootee baho biDh bhaatee. The body is destroyed by so many ways and means.
a Ad a ats & WMS QI (329-14, aGst, sas asta rh) ko jaaray ko gad lay maatee. ||2|| Some burn it, and some bury it in the earth. ||2]|
ag wate dfs vse feured Il (29-15, a@st, sas adits ah) kaho kabeer har charan dikhaavhu. Says Kabeer, O Lord, please reveal to me Your Lotus Feet;
Ue 3 AH faG 5 USTEST ISIB2I (329-15, agst, sas adits Tt) paachhai tay jam ki-o na pathaavhu. ||3||32|| after that, go ahead and send me to my death. ||3]|32||
agat aate Ft il (329-15) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
MT UTS MN US Il (329-16, aSst, sas asta aapay paavak aapay pavnaa. He Himself is the fire, and He Himself is the wind.
Wd UAH 3 TS ASAT AU (329-16, aSat, sas ate Ff) jaarai khasam ta raakhai kavnaa. ||1]| When our Lord and Master wishes to burn someone, then who can save him? ||1] |
TH AUS 36 Als at S ANE Il (329-16, aeHt, sas adie FH) raam japat tan jar kee na jaa-ay. When I chant the Lord's Name, what does it matter if my body burns?
oH OH fas afont AHTE IU TIS Il G29-16, aSst, sas ats Hh)
raam naam chit rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. My consciousness remains absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
aa Ad ats dfs ate il (329-17, aGst, sas adie zt) kaa ko jarai kaahi ho-ay haan. Who is burned, and who suffers loss?
oe Ze 4S Afgeefs 2K (329-17, aSst, sas adits Ah
nat vat khaylai saarigpaan. ||2|| The Lord plays, like the juggler with his ball. ||2]|
ag ade nus efe ate I 329-18, a@st, sas adits Hh) kaho kabeer akhar du-ay bhaakh. Says Kabeer, chant the two letters of the Lord's Name - Raa Maa.
dfear AH 3 Sfear The 1SNB3il (329-18, ast, sas adie FH) ho-igaa khasam ta lay-igaa raakh. ||3||33]| If He is your Lord and Master, He will protect you. ||3]|33]|
agat aate At ue Il (329-18) ga-orhee kabeer jee dupday. Gauree, Kabeer Jee, Du-Padas:
oH Hal fame fos ofemr I 329-19, aes, sas adte Hh) naa mai jog Dhi-aan chit laa-i-aa. I have not practiced Yoga, or focused my consciousness on meditation.
fag Soa 3 sefA went Ail (329-19, ast, sas aets Ft) bin bairaag na chhootas maa-i-aa. ||1]| Without renunciation, I cannot escape Maya. ||1]|
aA Hee df TTT II G29-19, a@st, sas adits Ft) kaisay jeevan ho-ay hamaaraa. How have I passed my life?
UST 330
Aa 3 ofS IH OM nore IU TIC Il (330-1, aGst, sas adits Th)
jab na ho-ay raam naam aDhaaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have not taken the Lord's Name as my Support. ||1]|Pause| |
ad ads FAS mAs | 330-1, west, sas adte Fh) kaho kabeer khoja-o asmaan. Says Kabeer, I have searched the skies,
TH ANTS B VU nS |QUSSll (330-1, west, gas asta Th)
raam samaan na daykh-a-u aan. ||2||34|| and have not seen another, equal to the Lord. ||2]|34||
agat axate Ht il (330-2) ga-orhee kabeer jee. Gauree, Kabeer Jee:
fas fats sfe of sas ure il (330-2, ast, sas adits Fh
jih sir rach rach baaDhat paag. That head which was once embellished with the finest turban
A fag vu Rests aa AU (30-2, weet, sas acta Hh so sir chunch savaareh kaag. ||1]| - upon that head, the crow now cleans his beak. ||1||
feR 3a U6 ao for Tagen Il (330-3, ast, sas adie Ah is tan Dhan ko ki-aa garab-ee-aa. What pride should we take in this body and wealth?
TH OH ad 3 fextor IU FIC il 330-3, ast, sas oeits FH) raam naam kaahay na darirh-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why not hold tight to the Lord's Name instead? ||1]|Pause| |
AIS AAT HST HO He Il (330-3, aCst, sas aceite FH) kahat kabeer sunhu man mayray. Says Kabeer, listen, O my mind:
fedt gee dfadt SF NQUNBUI (330-4, ACs, sas adte AH ihee havaal hohigay tayray. ||2||35|| this may be your fate as well! ||2||35] |
ast aursdt & us USHA Il 30-4) ga-orhee gu-aarayree kay paday paitees. Thirty-Five Steps Of Gauree Gwaarayree. ||
TH ACSt Iursdt mAcuet ate At at (330-5) raag ga-orhee gu-aarayree asatpadee kabeer jee kee Raag Gauree Gwaarayree, Ashtapadees Of Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (330-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AY Has SY Nd nITS I (330-6, aGSt anrdet, sas adits Th) sukh maa™gat dukh aagai aavai. People beg for pleasure, but pain comes instead.
A AY JNd 3 Hifamr sv] IU (330-6, aGst aoradt, sas asta Th) so sukh hamhu na maa‘gi-aa bhaavai. ||1|| I would rather not beg for that pleasure. ||1]|
fatior ig Hefs AY MAT II (330-6, ast arse, sas adie Hh bikhi-aa ajahu surat sukh aasaa. People are involved in corruption, but still, they hope for pleasure.
an det d oa aH feeAr All TITS Il (330-7, ast arddt, gas asite Ah kaisay ho-ee hai raajaa raam nivaasaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. How will they find their home in the Sovereign Lord King? ||1||Pause]|
fem AY 3 fhe JOH STS Il (330-7, ast gursct, sas adie Ah is sukh tay siv barahm daraanaa. Even Shiva and Brahma are afraid of this pleasure,
A AY JN ATS af AAT IQI (330-8, aGSt aoradt, sas adits Th) so sukh hamhu saach kar jaanaa. ||2|| but I have judged that pleasure to be true. ||2]|
Hoatet otae Hie AM Il (330-8, Test anrdsdt, sas adits Hh) sankaadik naarad mun saykhaa. Even sages like Sanak and Naarad, and the thousand-headed serpent,
fa St 36 Hf HS Sot UA Bll (330-8, a@st aurset, sas acta Hh) tin bhee tan meh man nahee paykhaa. ||3]| did not see the mind within the body. ||3]|
fen Ho aG aet dag sTet II (330-9, aes arse, sas adits Ah is man ka-o ko-ee khojahu bhaa-ee. Anyone can search for this mind, O Siblings of Destiny.
3o Fe HO AT ANE Sil 330-9, aCst anrset, sas ats Fh) tan chhootay man kahaa samaa-ee. ||4|| When it escapes from the body, where does the mind go? ||4]|
Td USAT ASS Sn Il (330-9, ast anrset, sas adie 7) gur parsaadee jaiday-o naamaa’. By Guru's Grace, Jai Dayv and Naam Dayv
sats & uf fea dtd ATS Ul (30-10, aGet anrddt, sas acta Ff) bhagat kai paraym in hee hai jaanaa”™. ||5]| came to know this, through loving devotional worship of the Lord. ||5]]|
feA Ho AG adt neq AST Il (330-10, Test arddt, sas adits Ah is man ka-o nahee aavan jaanaa. This mind does not come or go.
fan at say afenr fate ATG USTs MEI (330-10, aeSt aordct, sas adits Ah jis kaa bharam ga-i-aa tin saach pachhaanaa. ||6]|| One whose doubt is dispelled, knows the Truth. ||6||
fen Ha as gu a Shmr aret I (330-11, ast aursdt, saz aete Ht) is man ka-o roop na raykh-i-aa kaa-ee. This mind has no form or outline.
Tan dfeur gow ef ANTE DI (330-11, Test aurset, sas afte Fh)
hukmay ho-i-aa hukam boojh samaa-ee. ||7]||
By God's Command it was created; understanding God's Command, it will be absorbed into Him again. ||7]||
fen Ho a act ATS SE Il (330-11, west arddt, gas acts Ah is man kaa ko-ee jaanai bhay-o. Does anyone know the secret of this mind?
fea ufo Sle Se ASE ICI G30-12, Test anrdct, sas adits Ah ih man leen bha-ay sukh-day-o. ||8]| This mind shall merge into the Lord, the Giver of peace and pleasure. ||8]|
AG Sa vig Aas Asta | (330-12, a@st anrset, sas adits Ft) jee-o ayk ar sagal sareeraa. There is One Soul, and it pervades all bodies.
fen Ho ae safe ad aata NC NUE! (330-12, test anrset, sas acts Fh
is man ka-o rav rahay kabeeraa. ||9||1||36]| Kabeer dwells upon this Mind. ||9||1||36]|
agat amrsat Il 30-13) ga-orhee gu-aarayree. Gauree Gwaarayree:
wifofofa Sa oH A ATE Il (30-13, Test amrdct, sas adits Fh ahinis ayk naam jo jaagay. Those who are awake to the One Name, day and night
ase fro se fee Sa AU TIS Il (330-13, ast anrsdt, sas adits Ah
kaytak siDh bha-ay liv laagay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
- many of them have become Siddhas - perfect spiritual beings - with their consciousness attuned to the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
Aaa faa Aas Hfs IS Il (330-14, aGst anrdsdt, sas adits Ah saaDhak siDh sagal mun haaray. The seekers, the Siddhas and the silent sages have all lost the game.
Sa SH Au 3d 3S INA (330-14, ast aorset, sas adie Fh)
ayk naam kalip tar taaray. ||1]|
The One Name is the wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree, which saves them and carries them across. ||1]||
a dfs Jd A dfs & MS Il (330-14, aGat arse, sas adie 7) jo har haray so hohi na aanaa. Those who are rejuvenated by the Lord, do not belong to any other.
AI AHS TH SH USAT IQAUSIIN (330-15, ast aurset, sas ate Fh
kahi kabeer raam naam pachhaanaa. ||2||37]|| Says Kabeer, they realize the Name of the Lord. ||2||37]|
ast st Aafe St Il (330-15) ga-orhee bhee sorath bhee. Gauree And Also Sorat'h:
o Hho fear on Sf art Il (330-15, aGst oS Fels, gas adie Ah ray jee-a nilaj laaj tohi naahee. O shameless being, don't you feel ashamed?
oe St aS aT St ATS NA TIS Il (330-16, Tat 3 Fals, sas adie HH) har taj kat kaahoo kay jaa‘hee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You have forsaken the Lord - now where will you go? Unto whom will you turn? ||1]|Pause] |
W a Sag Sar Tet il (330-16, west mS Fale, sas atts Ff) jaa ko thaakur oochaa ho-ee. One whose Lord and Master is the highest and most exalted
HHO Ud We AS OAT NU (30-16, Test Ss Aefls, sas ate A) so jan par ghar jaat na sohee. ||1]| - it is not proper for him to go to the house of another. ||1]|
A Afog sfoor saufs i (330-17, ext ws aafs, sas adits Fh so saahib rahi-aa bharpoor. That Lord and Master is pervading everywhere.
Het Afat ardt ofa Efe iQ (330-17, ast we Aafs, sas sete Fh) Sadaa sang naahee har door. ||2|| The Lord is always with us; He is never far away. ||2||
ASH VIS Ade J ATA Il (330-17, aGet ws Fels, sas adits sh kavlaa charan saran hai jaa kay. Even Maya takes to the Sanctuary of His Lotus Feet.
AI AS A oS We 37a Ill 30-18, ast ws Aefs, sas adits Ah kaho jan kaa naahee ghar taa kay. ||3]| Tell me, what is there which is not in His home? ||3]|
Ag AG ad WA at PS Il (330-18, ast mF Hale, sas outs Ht) sabh ko-oo kahai jaas kee baataa. Everyone speaks of Him; He is All-powerful.
A Aye for ufs 3 SST Sil G30-18, Text ws Fels, sas adits Hf) so samrath nij pat hai daataa. ||4|| He is His Own Master; He is the Giver. ||4||
TI TAT YIS Aa At il 330-19, Test m3 Fels, sas ata zh) kahai kabeer pooran jag so-ee. Says Kabeer, he alone is perfect in this world,
Ww a foge nied 5 det NUNS G30-19, ast ws Aefs, sas ade Th) jaa kay hirdai avar na ho-ee. ||5||38]| in whose heart there is none other than the Lord. ||5||38]|
UST 339
agg a us fuse a a st II (331-1, ast ws Fale, sas ots A) ka-un ko poot pitaa ko kaa ko. Whose son is he? Whose father is he?
aCe Hd & Mfe ASNT NA 31-1, ast ws Aels, sas ade Ah ka-un marai ko day-ay santaapo. ||1]|| Who dies? Who inflicts pain? ||1]|
dfs ST Aa AG Saat Bet il 31-1, west os Fels, sas adits ah har thag jag ka-o thag-uree laa-ee. The Lord is the thug, who has drugged and robbed the whole world.
dfs & faGa an HbxS Ast wet NA TIC Il (331-2, aGst wd Fale, sas adie a) har kay bi-og kaisay jee-a-o mayree maa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am separated from the Lord; how can I survive, O my mother? ||1||Pause] |
age a usy aa at ardt il 331-2, west nS Aafs, sas adie rh ka-un ko purakh ka-un kee naaree. Whose husband is he? Whose wife is she?
feur 33 Sg Adte fears 2 (331-2, ast mB Fels, sas adie Fh) i-aa tat layho sareer bichaaree. ||2|| Contemplate this reality within your body. ||2||
ats adte oat fAB He HfoMr Il (331-3, aest ws Aefs, sas ade HH kahi kabeer thag si-o man maani-aa. Says Kabeer, my mind is pleased and satisfied with the thug.
aet saat og ufsatfonr SIBCI 631-3, aeat ws Aefs, sas ate Ah
ga-ee thag-uree thag pehchaani-aa. ||3||39|| The effects of the drug have vanished, since I recognized the thug. ||3]|39]|
ma Hag se TH IH Ao Il (331-4, aGat ws Fats, sas adie Hh) ab mo ka-o bha-ay raajaa raam sahaa-ee. Now, the Lord, my King, has become my help and support.
HOH Hdo afe usH afs uret NA JTS ll (331-4, aCat ws Aafs, sas acta MH
janam maran kat param gat paa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have cut away birth and death, and attained the supreme status. ||1]||Pause] |
Ag Halls CS sate il 331-5, west ws Aafo, sas ate rh saaDhoo sangat dee-o ralaa-ay. He has united me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Us gs 3 HS sate il 331-5, ast m3 Fels, sas aes FH) panch doot tay lee-o chhadaa-ay. He has rescued me from the five demons.
wifts ou AUG AY SAAT Il (331-5, Ast ws Aafs, sas adits A) amrit naam japa-o jap rasnaa. I chant with my tongue and meditate on the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
WMHS UA afs BS wus Al G3i-5, TGs ws Aes, sas adte A amol daas kar leeno apnaa. ||1|| He has made me his own slave. ||1||
Afsag ats usGuarg il 331-6, at 3 Aals, sas adie th satgur keeno par-upkaar. The True Guru has blessed me with His generosity.
arfe Sto Ad HATS Il (331-6, ret ws Aefs, sas adie Fh) kaadh leen saagar sansaar. He has lifted me up, out of the world-ocean.
Jdo AHS fAG await ytfS i (331-6, reat ws Aafo, sas adte A) charan kamal si-o laagee pareet. I have fallen in love with His Lotus Feet.
dfse aA fost fos BS iQ (331-7, aGst oS Aafs, sas ast Ah gobind basai nitaa nit cheet. ||2|| The Lord of the Universe dwells continually within my consciousness. ||2||
Heer sufs sfsor nifamrg il 631-7, test ws Fefs, sas ate Hh) maa-i-aa tapat bujhi-aa angi-aar.
The burning fire of Maya has been extinguished.
Hfs ASY SH MOE” Il (331-8, aGst ws False, gas ate FH)
man santokh naam aaDhaar. My mind is contented with the Support of the Naam.
me afs ufs gd ys AoMt | 331-8, ast ws Asis, sas adts FH) jal thal poor rahay parabh su-aamee. God, the Lord and Master, is totally permeating the water and the land.
As UaG 33 nissan 1131 (331-8, ast ws Fels, sas adits Ah jat paykha-o tat antarjaamee. ||3]| Wherever I look, there is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||3] |
must safs ning ot fesret il (331-9, a@st 3 Aafo, sas ait Ft) apnee bhagat aap hee darirhaa-ee. He Himself has implanted His devotional worship within me.
usa fous fifeor HE set I 31-9, Test ws Fefo, sas ats Ht) poorab likhat mili-aa mayray bhaa-ee. By pre-ordained destiny, one meets Him, O my Siblings of Destiny.
fan faut ad fH UTS ATH Il (331-9, ast ms Asie, sas adts Fh) jis kirpaa karay tis pooran saaj. When He grants His Grace, one is perfectly fulfilled.
ads & Aomit acta fees isisoll (331-10, agst wi Fats, sas adie rh
kabeer ko su-aamee gareeb nivaaj. ||4||40|| Kabeer's Lord and Master is the Cherisher of the poor. ||4]|40]|
nfs 3 Asa of J Asa Asa Gufs Jet il 31-10, west v3 Fels, sas ata Fh) jal hai sootak thal hai sootak sootak opat ho-ee. There is pollution in the water, and pollution on the land; whatever is born is polluted.
HOH A3a He Sfo ASA Asa USA faaet ul G31-u, Test ws af, sas afta Fh) janmay sootak moo-ay fun sootak sootak paraj bigo-ee. ||1]|
There is pollution in birth, and more pollution in death; all beings are ruined by pollution. ||1]|
ag 3 User asa uetst Il 331-1, et ws Fefs, sas adte Hh) kaho ray pandee-aa ka-un paveetaa. Tell me, O Pandit, O religious scholar: who is clean and pure?
mrt fame AUT HS HIST NAN TIS Il (331-12, Test wi Aals, sas ade rh aisaa gi-aan japahu mayray meetaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditate on such spiritual wisdom, O my friend. ||1]|Pause] |
360 ASG Add AIA ASA Hot Tet Il Gs1-12, ast 3 Fels, sas adits Hf)
nainhu sootak bainhu sootak sootak sarvanee ho-ee.
There is pollution in the eyes, and pollution in speech; there is pollution in the ears as well.
Gos Fos AIA HSH AIA Ud FAST lil (331-12, west m3 Fels, sas ata Fh oothat baithat sootak laagai sootak parai raso-ee. ||2|| Standing up and sitting down, one is polluted; one's kitchen is polluted as well. ||2| |
ono at fafa Ag a WS seo at fa Ae I 31-13, aCHt Ss Fels, sas adits Ff) faasan kee biDh sabh ko-oo jaanai chhootan kee ik ko-ee. Everyone knows how to be caught, but hardly anyone knows how to escape.
afte oats ay fee fros Asa FS o Tet SUSU G31-14, ast wi Fale, sas ats HH) kahi kabeer raam ridai bichaarai sootak tinai na ho-ee. ||3||41||
Says Kabeer, those who meditate on the Lord within their hearts, are not polluted. [13]142]|
ast Il (331-14) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Sag Sa feasT TH Il 331-14, west, sas adits FH) jhagraa ayk nibayrahu raam. Resolve this one conflict for me, O Lord,
AG SH MUS Ao A AH NU TIS I 331-15, aCHt, sas adie th ja-o tum apnay jan sou kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. if you require any work from Your humble servant. ||1]||Pause| |
feg He as" fa A AG Ho for II 331-15, west, sas adie Ah ih man badaa ke jaa sa-o man maani-aa. Is this mind greater, or the One to whom the mind is attuned?
aH sat at ofa weer Al (331-15, aes, sas adits Th) raam badaa kai raameh jaani-aa. ||1]| Is the Lord greater, or one who knows the Lord? ||1]|
oH" ast fa ATA Gurfemr | (331-16, ast, sas ata Hh) barahmaa badaa ke jaas upaa-i-aa. Is Brahma greater, or the One who created Him?
ae gst fax Aa S orfeEnr NK 331-16, aSst, sas ate Hh) bayd badaa ke jahaa" tay aa-i-aa. ||2|| Are the Vedas greater, or the One from which they came? ||2]||
ats ats IG sfemr Ber Il 31-17, west, sas adits Hh kahi kabeer ha-o bha-i-aa udaas. Says Kabeer, I have become depressed;
Stee ast fe dfs & SA NZIS (31-17, ast, sas ate Hh)
tirath badaa ke har kaa daas. ||3]||42]| is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage greater, or the slave of the Lord? ||3||42| |
Ta Ast Sst il (331-17) raag ga-orhee chaytee. Raag Gauree Chaytee:
ay oret are at wiret nitdt i (331-18, a@st Sat, sas ate Fh daykhou bhaa-ee ga-yaan kee aa-ee aa“Dhee. Behold, O Siblings of Destiny, the storm of spiritual wisdom has come.
AS @srot 3H at eet ad o Hf Sit AN TIS I 31-18, aCst Sat, sas acta zh) sabhai udaanee bharam kee taatee rahai na maa-i-aa baa“Dhee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
It has totally blown away the thatched huts of doubt, and torn apart the bonds of Maya. ||1]|Pause||
efes at efe afe fararst Ho FSS TNT Il 31-19, ast Sst, sas afta Fh)
duchitay kee du-ay thoon giraanee moh balaydaa tootaa.
The two pillars of double-mindedness have fallen, and the beams of emotional attachment have come crashing down.
fare ate udt ug Gufs eaHfs sist Set AU (331-19, ast Sst, sas aete Fh) tisnaa chhaan paree Dhar oopar durmat bhaa“daa footaa. ||1]|
The thatched roof of greed has caved in, and the pitcher of evil-mindedness has been broken. ||1]]|
UST B32
widt ue AAS seed fafs 3a A Sor Il (332-1, ast 31, sas asta Hf) aa‘Dhee paachhay jo jal barkhai tihi tayraa jan bheenaa”. Your servant is drenched with the rain that has fallen in this storm.
afs adte uf sfeor yarar BS avg Aa Dar WQNSSll (332-1, west Jat, sas adits Hf)
kahi kabeer man bha-i-aa pargaasaa udai bhaan jab cheenaa. ||2]||43] | Says Kabeer, my mind became enlightened, when I saw the sun rise. ||2||43]|
agat Fst (332-3) ga-orhee chaytee Gauree Chaytee:
qe Afsas ure I (332-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs AA Hols 6 Ue TS Wels Il (332-4, ast Jat, sas adits Hh) har jas suneh na har gun gaavahi. They do not listen to the Lord's Praises, and they do not sing the Lord's Glories,
WSS dt MANS forsefs Al (32-4, west Sat, sas adits Fh) baatan hee asmaan giraaveh. ||1]|| but they try to bring down the sky with their talk. ||1]|
MA Bae fAC form ad il (332-4, wat 3st, sas acta Ah aisay logan si-o ki-aa kahee-ai. What can anyone say to such people?
Aus ae safs 3 won fo 3 FET SIS TSH NA TIS Il (332-5, wat 3st, sas adits Hh) jo parabh kee-ay bhagat tay baahaj tin tay sadaa daraanay rahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. You should always be careful around those whom God has excluded from His devotional worship. ||1]|Pause| |
uifu 3 ets og sf urat Il 332-5, ast 3st, sas ats Fh) aap na deh churoo bhar paanee. They do not offer even a handful of water,
faa feets fas ater wrt IQ (332-6, ast 3st, sas acta Th) tih nindeh jih gangaa aanee. ||2|| while they slander the one who brought forth the Ganges. ||2]|
Yas Cos afeos wats Il (332-6, a@at Sat, sas aete Hf) baithat uthat kutiltaa chaaleh. Sitting down or standing up, their ways are crooked and evil.
my Te wisss J wets Sil 332-6, ast dst, saz adits Ft) aap ga-ay a-uran hoo ghaaleh. ||3]| They ruin themselves, and then they ruin others. |[3]|
ats AIT nT 3B Aol Il 332-7, west 3st, sas adie FH) chhaad kuchrachaa aan na jaaneh. They know nothing except evil talk.
qo J x Mas o Halas lgil (332-7, west Sat, sas arts Ht) barahmaa hoo ko kahi-o na maaneh. ||4| | They would not even obey Brahma's orders. ||4||
ning Te mss J dete il 332-7, aat 3st, sas alta Fh) aap ga-ay a-uran hoo khoveh. They themselves are lost, and they mislead others as well.
nif safe Hed H Aefs lull (332-8, ast dst, sas adie zh) aag lagaa-ay mandar mai soveh. ||5|| They set their own temple on fire, and then they fall asleep within it. ||5]|
MZIS JAS MTU Tid AS Il (332-8, ast IH, sas acts A avran hasat aap heh kaa‘nay. They laugh at others, while they themselves are one-eyed.
f35 aG efy aate GAS NENUISSI (332-8, Test Sst, sas ate FH)
tin ka-o daykh kabeer lajaanay. ||6]||1||44]| Seeing them, Kabeer is embarrassed. ||6]|1||44]|
Ta Ast soafs ate Ft (332-10) raag ga-orhee bairaagan kabeer jee Raag Gauree Bairaagan, Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsara YATE Il (332-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hes fuse 5 HS AS US fra aed I (332-11, reat aoafs, sas alta Fh)
jeevat pitar na maanai ko-oo moo-ay” siraaDh karaahee.
He does not honor his ancestors while they are alive, but he holds feasts in their honor after they have died.
fuss st aus ag faS wefs aur gag ud NA (332-11, reat Seafe, sas aets A) pitar bhee bapuray kaho ki-o paavahi ka-oo-aa kookar khaahee. ||1]||
Tell me, how can his poor ancestors receive what the crows and the dogs have eaten up? |[1]|
H a@ ane aseg aet Il (332-12, aGst wats, sas adits Hf) mo ka-o kusal bataavhu ko-ee. If only someone would tell me what real happiness is!
AN S&
AHS AHS ads Ad fear ane st aA det di Joe ll 332-12, ast awats, saz asta Ah kusal kusal kartay jag binsai kusal bhee kaisay ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Speaking of happiness and joy, the world is perishing. How can happiness be found? ||1]|Pause] |
Hat a afe tet Ser fSR ora AE Sst I G32-13, aGat awats, sas adits Ah maatee kay kar dayvee dayvaa tis aagai jee-o dayhee. Making gods and goddesses out of clay, people sacrifice living beings to them.
mA fuse sus adhe virus afonr 3 Sat MQ (332-13, aCst oats, sas aets HH) aisay pitar tumaaray kahee-ahi aapan kahi-aa na layhee. ||2]| Such are your dead ancestors, who cannot ask for what they want. ||2||
AIMne aefs foot yrfs nis are aS sat | 332-14, aGat arate, sas ata A) sarjee-o kaateh nirjee-o poojeh ant kaal ka-o bhaaree.
You murder living beings and worship lifeless things; at your very last moment, you shall suffer in terrible pain.
TH OH at as odt Wat F Ta AAS WSN 332-14, ast aoafe, sas adits Fh)
raam naam kee gat nahee jaanee bhai doobay sansaaree. ||3]||
You do not know the value of the Lord's Name; you shall drown in the terrifying world-ocean. ||3]|
val tet yuna sala USAT Sot AS Il 332-15, ast aoafs, sas alte Fh) dayvee dayvaa poojeh doleh paarbarahm nahee jaanaa. You worship gods and goddesses, but you do not know the Supreme Lord God.
aS aals mae adt sfsur faftimr fA Bue|s SNAUIsUll (332-15, west Feats, sas ats Ht)
kahat kabeer akul nahee chayti-aa bikhi-aa si-o laptaanaa. ||4||1]|45]|
Says Kabeer, you have not remembered the Lord who has no ancestors; you are clinging to your corrupt ways. ||4||1]|45]|
at Il (332-16) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Hes Hd He efe Ate MA Afs Pfenr I (332-16, ast, gas adie Ah jeevat marai marai fun jeevai aisay sunn samaa-i-aa.
One who remains dead while yet alive, will live even after death; thus he merges into the Primal Void of the Absolute Lord.
nino Hf fdas sdbt sofs a senfe ufemr All (332-17, ast, sas ate A
anjan maahi niranjan rahee-ai bahurh na bhavjal paa-i-aa. ||1]| Remaining pure in the midst of impurity, he will never again fall into the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
He oH nT ate fase i 332-17, aes, sas adits Th mayray raam aisaa kheer bilo-ee-ai. O my Lord, this is the milk to be churned.
Tents Hour niAfag aug fes fafa nifys utsett na Tae il (332-18, ast, sas aes Ff) gurmat manoo-aa asthir raakho in biDh amrit pee-o-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, hold your mind steady and stable, and in this way, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]]Pause| |
qd a af sng am act yafenr ue usar Il (332-18, west, sas ants Fh
gur kai baan bajar kal chhaydee pargati-aa pad pargaasaa.
The Guru's arrow has pierced the hard core of this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, and the state of enlightenment has dawned.
Rots odd Heat SH Ya" foase fre wis IAT II (332-19, ast, sas aes Fh)
sakat aDhayr jayvrhee bharam chookaa nihchal siv ghar baasaa. ||2]|
In the darkness of Maya, I mistook the rope for the snake, but that is over, and now I dwell in the eternal home of the Lord. ||2||
fats fag we day vere fea Aa Sftmr set | (332-19, ast, gas acta Ah
tin bin baanai Dnanakh chadhaa-ee-ai ih jag bayDhi-aa bhaa-ee.
Maya has drawn her bow without an arrow, and has pierced this world, O Siblings of Destiny.
UST 333
wd fen gst ueg sore Ste adt fos wet 3 33-1, aes, sas adits Fh
dah dis boodee pavan jhulaavai dor rahee liv laa-ee. ||3]|
The drowning person is blown around in the ten directions by the wind, but I hold tight to the string of the Lord's Love. ||3]|
Confs Hour Afs AHTe efaor eaHfS Sait | (333-2, aCst, sas ata A)
unman manoo-aa sunn samaanaa dubiDhaa durmat bhaagee.
The disturbed mind has been absorbed in the Lord; duality and evil-mindedness have run away.
ag adits nose fea efor aH ath fos wait SiISEll (333-2, Test, sas ate Ah
kaho kabeer anbha-o ik daykhi-aa raam naam liv laagee. ||4||2||46]| Says Kabeer, I have seen the One Lord, the Fearless One; I am attuned to the Name of the Lord. ||4||2||46]|
ast Saas fue i 333-3) ga-orhee bairaagan tipday. Gauree Bairaagan, Ti-Padas:
Ques uzo Va Ue Bt HAS Ho Mama Il (333-3, a@at Seats, sas adie Hh
ultat pavan chakar khat bhayday surat sunn anraagee.
I turned my breath inwards, and pierced through the six chakras of the body, and my awareness was centered on the Primal Void of the Absolute Lord.
me 3 ATE Hd O Ale STH UA Ast AI (333-4, aGat awals, sas ade Hh
aavai na jaa-ay marai na jeevai taas khoj bairaagee. ||1]||
Search for the One who does not come or go, who does not die and is not born, O renunciate. ||1]|
Hd HO Ho dt Cale ANS Il (333-4, ast Soats, sas adie eh) mayray man man hee ulat samaanaa. My mind has turned away from the world, and is absorbed in the Mind of God.
qe usAte nafs set ned ose a Sars Ul JIS Il 333-5, ast aoats, sas adits wh gur parsaad akal bha-ee avrai naatar thaa baygaanaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, my understanding has been changed; otherwise, I was totally ignorant. ||1||Pause] |
foes fs of ofs foes fate rar afe Hier i 333-5, ast dorats, sas ots Ht)
nivrai door door fun nivrai jin jaisaa kar maani-aa.
That which was near has become distant, and again, that which was distant is near, for those who realize the Lord as He is.
Mest at AA sfeur adst fats uber fate wfenr 12QI (333-6, ast awats, sas adie A
alutee kaa jaisay bha-i-aa baraydaa jin pee-aa tin jaani-aa. ||2| | It is like the sugar water made from the candy; only one who drinks it knows its taste.
[21 | Sot fosae ae ofe fae adba mia afe fasat i 333-6, a@st avats, sas acta FH)
tayree nirgun kathaa kaa-ay si-o kahee-ai aisaa ko-ay bibaykee. Unto whom should I speak Your speech, O Lord; it is beyond the three qualities. Is there anyone with such discerning wisdom?
ag adie fafs dior ustst fafs SHt 3m Sut SISSON (333-7, aGst awats, sas adte A)
kaho kabeer jin dee-aa paleetaa tin taisee jhal daykhee. ||3]|3]|47]|| Says Kabeer, as is the fuse which you apply, so is the flash you will see. ||3]|3]|47]]|
ast il (333-8) ga-orhee. Gauree:
30 wen fitg gu odt sdor 30 Csufs uses ardt Il (333-8, aGst, sas anita Ft) tah paavas sinDh Dhoop nahee chhahee-aa tah utpat parla-o naahee. There is no rainy season, ocean, sunshine or shade, no creation or destruction there.
fies fues 3 oy AY fanrd Ae mfe SB so set AI 333-8, aGst, sas aes Ft) jeevan mirat na dukh sukh bi-aapai sunn samaaDh do-oo tah naahee. ||1||
No life or death, no pain or pleasure is felt there. There is only the Primal Trance of Samaadhi, and no duality. ||1]|
Hoa ot nia ae d feardt il 333-9, a@st, sas adte AD
sahj kee akath kathaa hai niraaree. The description of the state of intuitive poise is indescribable and sublime.
3fs adt ve we 5 Host Twat Ba B STH NU! TIE I 33-9, ast, sas adie th tul nahee chadhai jaa-ay na mukaatee halukee lagai na bhaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It is not measured, and it is not exhausted. It is neither light nor heavy. ||1]||Pause] |
nan San eS 30 at wf fear 3a ard Il 333-10, est, sas ats Ht) araDh uraDh do-oo tah naahee raat dinas tah naahee. Neither lower nor upper worlds are there; neither day nor night are there.
HS odt uzo Urea So ost Afsad ST ANTS M2QI 33-11, aeHt, sas adits Fh) jal nahee pavan paavak fun naahee satgur tahaa samaahee. ||2]| There is no water, wind or fire; there, the True Guru is contained. ||2| |
WOH nididd Jd fedsts aa fasur 3 wd I 333-11, ast, sas adie rh)
agam agochar rahai nirantar gur kirpaa tay lahee-ai.
The Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord dwells there within Himself; by Guru's Grace, He is found.
ag ade afe we ae mud AsHals fife adh NZIsIStil (333-12, rest, sas adte th
kaho kabeer bal jaa-o gur apunay satsangat mil rahee-ai. ||3]|4||48]| Says Kabeer, I am a sacrifice to my Guru; I remain in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3||4]|48]|
ast Il (333-13) ga-orhee. Gauree:
uy ug Ufe ae fers ues unt usarfAS | (333-13, Get, sas adits Ft)
paap punn du-ay bail bisaahay pavan poojee pargaasi-o.
With both sin and virtue, the ox of the body is purchased; the air of the breath is the capital which has appeared.
fgro afe act we state feo fafa ats ferries nai 333-13, ast, sas ate Hh)
tarisnaa goon bharee ghat bheetar in biDh taa'd bisaahi-o. ||1|| The bag on its back is filled with desire; this is how we purchase the herd. ||1]|
MAT BEA TH THT Il (333-14, ast, sas asta rh aisaa naa-ik raam hamaaraa. My Lord is such a wealthy merchant!
Hae HATS at gana A FIC il 33-14, aCat, sas aete zh
Sagal sansaar kee-o banjaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He has made the whole world his peddler. ||1]||Pause| |
an ag ufe se narst Ho Soa FeSTs Il 333-15, aGst, sas aes Ah
kaam kroDh du-ay bha-ay jagaatee man tarang batvaaraa.
Sexual desire and anger are the tax-collectors, and the waves of the mind are the highway robbers.
us 33 fife we feasts cat Cafe ura 1121 (333-15, weet, sas adits Ft) panch tat mil daan nibayreh taa“daa utri-o paaraa. ||2]|
The five elements join together and divide up their loot. This is how our herd is disposed of! ||2||
ads add Hod 3 AST we Mat afs met I 333-16, ast, sas adie rh) kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu ab aisee ban aa-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: This is the state of affairs now!
wet ges 80 fea gar vs dfs fecaret ISiUNstI (333-16, agst, sas adte A
ghaatee chadhat bail ik thaakaa chalo gon chhitkaa-ee. ||3||5||49]| Going uphill, the ox has grown weary; throwing off his load, he continues on his journey. ||3]|5||49]|
ast UsTyST | (333-17)
ga-orhee panchpadaa. Gauree, Panch-Padas:
uzas fea of J AIS AST Il (333-17, west, sas ate Th)
payvkarhai din chaar hai saahurrhai jaanaa.
For a few short days, the soul-bride stays in her parent's house; then, she must go to her in-laws.
nit BA 3 Weel HY Snrar Ul (333-17, aCe, gars alta Fh) anDhaa lok na jaan-ee moorakh ay-aanaa. ||1]|| The blind, foolish and ignorant people do not know this. ||1]|
ad sor wo us at Il 333-18, west, sas adie rh) kaho dadee-aa baaDhai Dhan kharhee. Tell me, why is the bride wearing her ordinary clothes?
ug ufs mre HAS wiTE AU TIS i (333-18, ast, sas acta zh paahoo ghar aa-ay muklaa-oo aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The guests have arrived at her home, and her Husband has come to take her away. ||1]|Pause] |
Ga fa fer yost aBo oa Fost I 333-18, aes, sas ats Ht)
oh je disai khoohrhee ka-un laaj vahaaree.
Who has lowered the rope of the breath down, into the well of the world which we see?
ord wat fae sfe ust Cfo vat ufsadt QI (333-19, Gat, saz adits Ht)
laaj gharhee si-o toot parhee uth chalee panihaaree. ||2]|
The rope of the breath breaks away from the pitcher of the body, and the water- carrier gets up and departs. ||2||
Afog df= cfenre faut ad nat arse ASTS I (333-19, ast, gas ade th
saahib ho-ay da-i-aal kirpaa karay apunaa kaaraj savaaray.
When the Lord and Master is kind and grants His Grace, then her affairs are all resolved.
UST 338
a Aoas Wet dd Age des Sli (334-1, aes, sas aes Ah taa sohagan jaanee-ai gur sabad beechaaray. ||3]|
Then she is known as the happy soul-bride, if she contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
fags of aidt ns fed tug atest Il (334-1, west, sas adie rh
kirat kee baa“Dhee sabh firai daykhhu beechaaree.
Bound by the actions she has committed, she wanders around - see this and understand.
SA 3 fom nmihnt fomr ad feat igi 334-2, a@st, saz adte Ah ays no ki-aa aakhee-ai ki-aa karay vichaaree. ||4|| What can we say to her? What can the poor soul-bride do? ||4]|
set foaoHt Cfo vat fos dfa a Ute I (334-2, a@st, sas adie Hh
bha-ee niraasee uth chalee chit banDh na Dheeraa. Disappointed and hopeless, she gets up and departs. There is no support or encouragement in her consciousness.
dfs at saat ota dg SH Hale aata WUNENUOI (334-3, TCH, sas aets A
har kee charnee laag rahu bhaj saran kabeeraa. ||5||6||50|| So remain attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet, and hurry to His Sanctuary, Kabeer! [15] 16] [50] |
aati (334-3) ga-orhee. Gauree :
Hat Xdfs Aa se Hier veg & VAT set I (334-3, aSst, sas ats A) jogee kaheh jog bhal meethaa avar na doojaa bhaa-ee. The Yogi says that Yoga is good and sweet, and nothing else is, O Siblings of Destiny.
dfss Hiss Sa Aadct efe aofe fafa uret 9 634-4, west, sas adie rh
rundit mundit aykai sabdee ay-ay kaheh siDh paa-ee. ||1||
Those who shave their heads, and those who amputate their limbs, and those who utter only a single word, all say that they have attained the spiritual perfection of the Siddhas. ||1]|
ofa fas sath sas niar | (334-5, ACH, sas adits Hh har bin bharam bhulaanay anDhaa. Without the Lord, the blind ones are deluded by doubt.
aw uf we nru eeorefe 3 ad ag So NA TIC ll 34-5, west, sas adits Ft)
jaa peh jaa-o aap chhutkaavan tay baaDhay baho fanDhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
And those, to whom I go to find release - they themselves are bound by all sorts of chains. ||1||Pause]|
Ad 3 Guat sdt Ast fea fafa faRst Sa Tt I 34-5, ast, sas ate Fh)
jah tay upjee tahee samaanee ih biDh bisree tab hee.
The soul is re-absorbed into that from which it originated, when one leaves this path of errors.
Ufss Tet As TH as Sfo aaa as TH TH Mil (34-6, ast, sas atte Fh)
pandit gunee soor ham daatay ayhi kaheh bad ham hee. ||2] |
The scholarly Pandits, the virtuous, the brave and the generous, all assert that they alone are great. ||2||
fants gave Het gs fag gs fas sdt i 334-7, aGat, sas adits Ff)
jisahi bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai bin boojhay ki-o rahee-ai.
He alone understands, whom the Lord inspires to understand. Without understanding, what can anyone do?
Afsag fre vite go feo fafa Hea wd SI (334-7, rest, sas aets Hh) satgur milai anDhayraa chookai in biDh maanak lahee-ai. ||3] |
Meeting the True Guru, the darkness is dispelled, and in this way, the jewel is obtained. ||3]|
sf we was feos of ug fes afs adht it 634-8, west, sas ante Ah
taj baavay daahnay bikaaraa har pad darirh kar rahee-ai.
Give up the evil actions of your left and right hands, and grasp hold of the Feet of the Lord.
aT wats aa az went ys 3 far adit usnouudiil 34-8, ast, sas acts Ft)
kaho kabeer goo'gai gurh khaa-i-aa poochhay tay ki-aa kahee-ai. ||4]|7]|51]|
Says Kabeer, the mute has tasted the molasses, but what can he say about it if he is asked? ||4]|7||51]|
TH Ast uset sets Ft I (334-10) raag ga-orhee poorbee kabeer jee. Raag Gauree Poorbee, Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsas urrfe I (334-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ad oe Mo so fag ardt Us 33 30 art Il 334-11, aSat ust, sas adits ah
jah kachh ahaa tahaa kichh naahee panch tat tah naahee.
Where something existed, now there is nothing. The five elements are no longer there.
fear fila HUHS Fe S nies AS AT UU 34-11, Test vast, sas adits Hh
irhaa pingulaa sukhman banday ay avgan kat jaahee. ||1]||
The Ida, the Pingala and the Sushmanaa - O human being, how can the breaths through these be counted now? ||1||
Tr so gas froth afeor sa aHsz aT AH I (334-12, aCe uset, sas adits Fh) taagaa tootaa gagan binas ga-i-aa tayraa bolat kahaa samaa-ee.
The string has been broken, and the Sky of the Tenth Gate has been destroyed. Where has your speech gone?
Sd AAT H a niofes fama 4 a & 5 ad AMS NA TTS Il (334-12, west use, sas ate Hf)
ayh sansaa mo ka-o an-din bi-aapai mo ka-o ko na kahai samjhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. This cynicism afflicts me, night and day; who can explain this to me and help me understand? ||1||Pause| |
Ad sass fils 30 ot suoTE 3d ST Il (334-13, rat uset, sas adits Hh) jah barbhand pind tah naahee rachanhaar tah naahee. Where the world is - the body is not there; the mind is not there either.
Aszodd Ae nists fea adit for wet Qi (34-13, aGat uaet, sas ants Hf jorhanhaaro sadaa ateetaa ih kahee-ai kis maahee. ||2|| The Joiner is forever unattached; now, within whom is the soul said to be contained?
21 |
Hal 7s 3 Sat J! Fa Ba ae fast il (334-14, wat uae, sas adits Ft)
jorhee jurhai na torhee tootai jab lag ho-ay binaasee.
By joining the elements, people cannot join them, and by breaking, they cannot be broken, until the body perishes.
TA SAT Tat ASA a aT X AAT MSI (334-14, weet yset, sas anita Fh)
kaa ko thaakur kaa ko sayvak ko kaahoo kai jaasee. ||3]|
Of whom is the soul the master, and of whom is it the servant? Where, and to whom does it go? ||3]||
ag ade fee ofa adt 3 Aa SA fea ast I 34-15, aet yadt, sas adits Hh)
kaho kabeer liv laag rahee hai jahaa basay din raatee.
Says Kabeer, I have lovingly focused my attention on that place where the Lord dwells, day and night.
Cor a non Gat ug WS Gg 3 AST nifsorAt NSNANU2I (34-15, aCSt use, sas aes Hh) u-aa kaa maram ohee par jaanai oh ta-o sadaa abhinaasee. ||4||1||52||
Only He Himself truly knows the secrets of His mystery; He is eternal and indestructible. ||4]]1]|52]|
ast Il (334-16) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Hafs fafyfs efe aot Her ustifs wate five i 34-16, Gat, sas afte Hf)
surat simrit du-ay kannee munda parmit baahar khinthaa.
Let contemplation and intuitive meditation be your two ear-rings, and true wisdom your patched overcoat.
Ho de ufo wns ane awu faasfas ve All (334-17, aGat, sas ade rh
sunn gufaa meh aasan baisan kalap bibarjit panthaa. ||1]|
In the cave of silence, dwell in your Yogic posture; let the subjugation of desire be your spiritual path. ||1||
He THs HW Saat Aait i 334-17, ast, sas adie Hh) mayray raajan mai bairaagee jogee. O my King, I am a Yogi, a hermit, a renunciate.
Has 3 Aa faait 19a soe Il (334-18, ast, sas ate Ah marat na sog bi-ogee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I do not die or suffer pain or separation. ||1||Pause||
ds quis ufo fist As sent Ag Aa SANUS Il 334-18, aCst, sas aets Ft)
khand barahmand meh sinyee mayraa batoo-aa sabh jag bhasmaaDhaaree.
The solar systems and galaxies are my horn; the whole world is the bag to carry my ashes.
wat wat fuse usdmt ge af urs i121 334-19, aes, sas ats Ht)
taarhee laagee taripal paltee-ai chhootai ho-ay pasaaree. ||2||
Eliminating the three qualities and finding release from this world is my deep meditation. ||2||
He ueg fe SH ast F FT Fa ASS AH I 334-19, aS, sas ats Ht)
man pavan du-ay toombaa karee hai jug jug saarad saajee.
My mind and breath are the two gourds of my fiddle, and the Lord of all the ages is its frame.
ust 33u fag set Sat Seth and mage feat aet Si (35-1, ast, sas ats Ft)
thir bha-ee tantee tootas naahee anhad kinguree baajee. ||3]| The string has become steady, and it does not break; this guitar vibrates with the unstruck melody. ||3]]|
Als Ho Has Se FT Us Hien 3B Ball Il (335-1, ast, sas aes FH)
sun man magan bha-ay hai pooray maa-i-aa dol na laagee.
Hearing it, the mind is enraptured and becomes perfect; it does not waver, and it is not affected by Maya.
ag ads st a usd HoH det afs aes Saat isiInusil (335-2, aes, sas ast Ah
kaho kabeer taa ka-o punrap janam nahee khayl ga-i-o bairaagee. ||4]|2||53]| Says Kabeer, the bairaagee, the renunciate, who has played such a game, is not reincarnated again into the world of form and substance. ||4]|2||53]|
agat il (335-3) ga-orhee. Gauree:
OH O€ TA CA TH feat ud Sa Soret Il (335-3, aSst, sas ase Hh) gaj nav gaj das gaj ikees puree-aa ayk tanaa-ee. Nine yards, ten yards, and twenty-one yards - weave these into the full piece of cloth;
WS AS o¢ Us wIshs we Ba miftaret UU (335-3, aes, sas adits Fh) saath soot nav khand bahtar paat lago aDhikaa-ee. ||1]| take the sixty threads and add nine joints to the seventy-two on the loom. ||1]|
Tet FSSS HTT Il (335-4, ast, sas adits Tt) ga-ee bunaavan maaho. Life weaves itself into its patterns.
we efam wf! Fed NAN TIC Il (335-4, aes, sas aes Ah ghar chhodi-ai jaa-ay julaaho. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Leaving her home, the soul goes to the world of the weaver. ||1]|Pause]|
ant 3 frobt Sf a sem use Ag neret | (335-4, west, gas asta a)
gajee na mini-ai tol na tulee-ai paachan sayr adhaa-ee.
This cloth cannot be measured in yards or weighed with weights; its food is two and a half measures.
Hi afe uve Sfa 5 ue Sad Ad Wat NI 35-5, aCHt, sas adits Th) jou kar paachan bayg na paavai jhagar karai gharhaa-ee. ||2|| If it does not obtain food right away, it quarrels with the master of the house. ||2| |
fea ot 30 UAH at sean fe dar as niet Il (335-5, aGst, sas adie rh)
din kee baith khasam kee barkas ih baylaa kat aa-ee.
How many days will you sit here, in opposition to your Lord and Master? When will this opportunity come again?
Be aS Sta udior Bis Ford Tre lS (335-6, ast, sas ats Ht)
chhootay koonday bheegai puree-aa chali-o julaaho reesaa-ee. ||3]||
Leaving his pots and pans, and the bobbins wet with his tears, the weaver soul departs in jealous anger. |[3]|
eat oat SS ad faan 3g It Casret Il (335-6, aGat, sas adie rh)
chhochhee nalee tant nahee niksai natar rahee urjhaa-ee.
The wind-pipe is empty now; the thread of the breath does not come out any longer. The thread is tangled; it has run out.
efs ung ete ag sudt ag ade ANS ISIZNUBII (335-7, aes, sas adie Ah
chhod pasaar eehaa rahu bapuree kaho kabeer samjhaa-ee. ||4||3||54]| So renounce the world of form and substance while you remain here, O poor soul; says Kabeer: you must understand this! ||4||3]|54||
agat il (335-8) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Sa rfs far fat faa dfe nafe i 335-8, aGst, sas adte Ah ayk jot aykaa milee kimbaa ho-ay maho-ay. When one light merges into another, what becomes of it then?
fag ufe on 3 Gun gfe He AG APE A 35-8, aes, sas afte Fh) jit ghat naam na oopjai foot marai jan so-ay. ||1]|
That person, within whose heart the Lord's Name does not well up - may that person burst and die! ||1]]|
ASS Hed THEM Il (335-9, ast, sas ate Saaval sundar raam-ee-aa. O my dark and beautiful Lord,
Aa HS Bar Sf ual FI il 35-9, ast, sas adie wh mayraa man laagaa tohi. ||1|| rahaa-o. my mind is attached to You. ||1||Pause] |
Ag fie fafa ure fa Sa Aa fa sa I 35-9, ast, sas adie rh)
saaDh milai siDh paa-ee-ai ke ayhu jog ke bhog.
Meeting with the Holy, the perfection of the Siddhas is obtained. What good is Yoga or indulgence in pleasures?
od fife wag Cur TH OH AAT II (335-10, ast, sas adits Ht)
duhu mil kaaraj oopjai raam naam sanjog. ||2]|
When the two meet together, the business is conducted, and the link with the Lord's Name is established. ||2]|
Sa ws feg ats 3 feg 3B gon ates Il 635-10, a8Ht, sas adits Hh log jaanai ih geet hai ih ta-o barahm beechaar. People believe that this is just a song, but it is a meditation on God.
fag anit Guen df HOA Hest FE BI (335-11, aes, sas aete Ah ji-o kaasee updays ho-ay maanas martee baar. ||3]| It is like the instructions given to the dying man at Benares. ||3]|
aet we a ne ofa oor fas of I 35-11, aSst, sas adie rh) ko-ee gaavai ko sunai har naamaa chit laa-ay. Whoever sings or listens to the Lord's Name with conscious awareness
ad adts AAT odt nifs usH afs ute IsNANSNUUll (335-11, aes, sas adie zh)
kaho kabeer sansaa nahee ant param gat paa-ay. ||4||1]|4]|55]| - says Kabeer, without a doubt, in the end, he obtains the highest status. [414] 141155] |
aeat Il (335-12) ga-orhee. Gauree:
AS AS AGS 3 Fa 3S AAT Sat BGS F Ml 335-12, ast, sas ats Ht)
jaytay jatan karat tay doobay bhav saagar nahee taari-o ray.
Those who try to do things by their own efforts are drowned in the terrifying world- ocean; they cannot cross over.
dH UH AIS 8d ADH yEfa He ates F NU (35-13, aes, sas ate FH)
karam Dharam kartay baho sanjam aha‘-buDh man jaari-o ray. ||1||
Those who practice religious rituals and strict self-discipline - their egotistical pride Shall consume their minds. ||1||
AWA OA & os Stag A fa Hog farfes J i 335-13, aeHt, sas adits Hh
Saas garaas ko daato thaakur so ki-o manhu bisaari-o ray. Your Lord and Master has given you the breath of life and food to sustain you; Oh, why have you forgotten Him?
St BS MHS AOH J ast aes Ths F a TIC Il 335-14, aes, sas ast Ah heeraa laal amol janam hai ka-udee badlai haari-o ray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Human birth is a priceless jewel, which has been squandered in exchange for a worthless shell. ||1]|]Pause| |
gre far gu afk oratt fase afe dtateS F i (335-15, a@st, sas ats Hh)
tarisnaa tarikhaa bhookh bharam laagee hirdai naahi beechaari-o ray.
The thirst of desire and the hunger of doubt afflict you; you do not contemplate the Lord in your heart.
Bons Hm fofsG Ho Ht AIT a AE 6 OTE F QM (335-15, aVst, sas asta Ah unmat maan hiri-o man maahee gur kaa sabad na Dhaari-o ray. ||2]|
Intoxicated with pride, you cheat yourself; you have not enshrined the Word of the Guru's Shabad within your mind. |[2]|
Fore oss feet oA ufes we aA Bs faorfaG J II (335-16, aet, sas ate Hf)
su-aad lubhat indree ras parayri-o mad ras lait bikaari-o ray.
Those who are deluded by sensual pleasures, who are tempted by sexual delights and enjoy wine are corrupt.
AGH Sd H3S Has AH| BI Cats F Sil (335-17, ast, sas ade Hh
karam bhaag santan sangaanay kaasat loh uDhaari-o ray. ||3||
But those who, through destiny and good karma, join the Society of the Saints, float over the ocean, like iron attached to wood. ||3]||
wes ffs HoH ofh wa wa eu afs GH TEE F Il (335-17, aSHt, sas adits Hh
Dhaavat jon janam bharam thaakay ab dukh kar ham haari-o ray.
I have wandered in doubt and confusion, through birth and reincarnation; now, I am so tired. I am suffering in pain and wasting away.
afy ade aa fees Ho 3A UH sats feAstas FJ NSIAUNUEN (35-18, reat, sas ate Hf)
kahi kabeer gur milat mahaa ras paraym bhagat nistaari-o ray. ||4]|1]|5||56]|
Says Kabeer, meeting with the Guru, I have obtained supreme joy; my love and devotion have saved me. ||4]]1]|5||56]|
ast Il (335-19) ga-orhee. Gauree:
TSIS at TASAt Ho IST J vos Sys AGIA Il 335-19, west, sas ats Ht)
kaalboot kee hastanee man ba-uraa ray chalat rachi-o jagdees.
Like the straw figure of a female elephant, fashioned to trap the bull elephant, O crazy mind, the Lord of the Universe has staged the drama of this world.
am Ayrfe an afA ud He aa J nian AfoG AIA IAI (335-19, aGst, sas adits Fh) kaam su-aa-ay gaj bas paray man ba-uraa ray ankas sahi-o sees. ||1]||
Attracted by the lure of sexual desire, the elephant is captured, O crazy mind, and now the halter is placed around its neck. ||1]]|
Ua 33E
fad ag ufs wy ANS HO BST ST Il (336-1, west, sas adie Hf)
bikhai baach har raach samajh man ba-uraa ray.
So escape from corruption and immerse yourself in the Lord; take this advice, O crazy mind.
fogs df 3 ufs oH Ho Bea Sd alos o TH ATH NU ITS I 36-1, Test, sas ate Ff) nirbhai ho-ay na har bhajay man ba-uraa ray gahi-o na raam jahaaj. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have not meditated fearlessly on the Lord, O crazy mind; you have not embarked upon the Lord's Boat. ||1||Pause] |
Hdade HAS MOH at Ho aCe ¢ Slat Ja uA Il (336-2, aGst, sas ate Hh markat mustee anaaj kee man ba-uraa ray leenee haath pasaar. The monkey stretches out its hand, O crazy mind, and takes a handful of corn;
BCs & HOM ufeor Ho asa 3 ote wa we fs iQ (336-3, ast, sas adits A) chhootan ko sahsaa pari-aa man ba-uraa ray naachi-o ghar ghar baar. ||2|| now unable to escape, O crazy mind, it is made to dance door to door. ||2]|
fAS ovat Hore afoS He aa g Hor feg fasag II 336-3, west, sas aes Fh) ji-o nalnee soo-ataa gahi-o man ba-uraa ray maa-yaa ih bi-uhaar. Like the parrot caught in the trap, O crazy mind, you trapped by the affairs of Maya.
AA dd OHS a He Beat g (SC unfes uATE III (336-4, weet, sas adie Hf)
jaisaa rang kasumbh kaa man ba-uraa ray ti-o pasri-o paasaar. ||3]|
Like the weak dye of the safflower, O crazy mind, so is the expanse of this world of form and substance. ||3]|
wea AS Stee WS Ho BCT FI uAS AG Bg Ue Il (336-5, ast, saz adits Ht)
naavan ka-o tirath ghanay man ba-uraa ray poojan ka-o baho dayv.
There are so many holy shrines in which to bathe, O crazy mind, and so many gods to worship.
AJ ads seg St Ho aST J Seg Aes at AS ISIAUENUSI (336-5, ast, sas ats FH) kaho kabeer chhootan nahee man ba-uraa ray chhootan har kee sayv. ||4||1]|6]|57]| Says Kabeer, you shall not be saved like this, O crazy mind; only by serving the Lord will you find release. ||4||1]|6]|57]|
ast Il (336-6) ga-orhee. Gauree:
male & Ud USS Sdt Hal SAAT dfd 5 NMS Il (336-6, aSst, sas adie A) agan na dahai pavan nahee magnai taskar nayr na aavai. Fire does not burn it, and the wind does not blow it away; thieves cannot get near it.
TH 5H US afa HUGS A US aS dt SA] NA (336-7, Test, saz adie Th) raam naam Dhan kar sanch-unee so Dhan kat hee na jaavai. ||1|| Accumulate the wealth of the Lord's Name; that wealth does not go anywhere. ||1||
JHS us Hug afde usetug fed ATG US adh Il (336-7, aGst, sas adits Ah
hamraa Dhan maaDha-o gobind DharneeDhar ihai saar Dhan kahee-ai.
My wealth is God, the Lord of Wealth, the Lord of the Universe, the Support of the earth: this is called the most excellent wealth.
A AY ys dfs at Ae A AY of oBdA NU TIC Il 336-8, wea, sas ate Ah
jo sukh parabh gobind kee sayvaa so sukh raaj na lahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The peace which is obtained by serving God, the Lord of the Universe - that peace cannot be found in kingdoms or power. ||1]|Pause| |
fen ua aefs fhe Hoofea das se Cent | 336-8, west, sas adie rh)
is Dhan kaaran siv sankaadik khojat bha-ay udaasee.
Shiva and Sanak, in their search for this wealth, became Udaasees, and renounced the world.
Hfs Hae froe safes ud 3 AH at SAT II (336-9, aeHt, sas adie Th
man mukand jihbaa naaraa-in parai na jam kee faasee. ||2| |
One whose mind is filled with the Lord of liberation, and whose tongue chants the Name of the Lord, shall not be caught by the noose of Death. ||2||
fon U6 famre sats afs eat SA AHS HS Bar Il (336-10, west, sas ate FH)
nij Dhan gi-aan bhagat gur deenee taas sumat man laagaa.
My own wealth is the spiritual wisdom and devotion given by the Guru; my mind is held steady in perfect neutral balance.
Hes vis fs Ho Wes SdH Has SC SA ISI 336-10, aGat, sas adits
jalat ambh thambh man Dhaavat bharam banDhan bha-o bhaagaa. ||3]|
It is like water for the burning soul, like an anchoring support for the wandering mind; the bondage of doubt and fear is dispelled. ||3]|
ad ads Hes A HS fose Sy shed | 336-11, west, sas adie ZH)
kahai kabeer madan kay maatay hirdai daykh beechaaree.
Says Kabeer: O you who are intoxicated with sexual desire, reflect upon this in your heart, and see.
3H ufs ora afe wy TASt oH ufs Sa NaH USNUINUCH (336-11, ast, sas alts Ff)
tum ghar laakh kot asav hastee ham ghar ayk muraaree. ||4||1]|7]|58]| Within your home there are hundreds of thousands, millions of horses and elephants; but within my home is the One Lord. ||4||1]|7||58] |
ast Il (336-12) ga-orhee. Gauree:
fa@ afu & ag HAfe Boo at wala o fSura ees Il 36-10, west, sas adie Ff) ji-o kap kay kar musat chanan kee lubaDh na ti-aag da-i-o. Like the monkey with a handful of grain, who will not let go because of greed
AH aH ate oes fhe 3 fefs nafs ufs nal 336-13, aes, sas ate ZH)
jo jo karam kee-ay laalach si-o tay fir gareh pari-o. ||1||
- just so, all the deeds committed in greed ultimately become a noose around one's neck. ||1]|
sats fas fase HOH afEG i 336-13, ast, sas ate ah bhagat bin birthay janam ga-i-o. Without devotional worship, human life passes away in vain.
HUHas sae Sno fas ad o AY sas Al TIC I 336-14, west, sas adits Ft)
saaDhsangat bhagvaan bhajan bin kahee na sach rahi-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. Without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, without vibrating and meditating on the Lord God, one does not abide in Truth. ||1]|Pause| |
fa@ Gfeurs GAH udefes faafs o we BES Il (336-14, aCst, sas adits FH) ji-o udi-aan kusam parfulit kineh na gharaa-o la-i-o. Like the flower which blossoms in the wilderness with no one to enjoy its fragrance,
3A 3HS ida Afs ufo fefa fete are TEE 12 (336-15, Ht, sas ate Hh taisay bharmat anayk jon meh fir fir kaal ha-i-o. ||2||
so do people wander in reincarnation; over and over again, they are destroyed by Death. ||2]|
four us Hae ig AS BS Ue aS A SES I 336-16, ast, sas adie Th)
i-aa Dhan joban ar sut daaraa paykhan ka-o jo da-i-o.
This wealth, youth, children and spouse which the Lord has given you - this is all just a passing show.
fsa ct fs mefa a Cas fet ufs wfEE IS 36-16, Text, sas aeita HH) tin hee maahi atak jo urjhay indree parayr la-i-o. ||3]| Those who are caught and entangled in these are carried away by sensual desire.
[I3]|
n@u nies 30 fo a Hes vg fen oe of€6 II (336-17, west, sas ate Ff)
a-oDh anal tan tin ko mandar chahu dis thaat tha-i-o.
Age is the fire, and the body is the house of straw; on all four sides, this play is being played out.
afs ade S ATI Sao AG H Afsas Ge of NsNUcHUtl (336-17, agst, sas adits Th
kahi kabeer bhai saagar taran ka-o mai satgur ot la-i-o. ||4]|1]|8]|59]| Says Kabeer, to cross over the terriffying world-ocean, I have taken to the Shelter of the True Guru. ||4]|1]|8]|59]|
ast Il (336-18) ga-orhee. Gauree:
ust Her Het dd il (336-18, ast, sas adte Ah paanee mailaa maatee goree. The water of the sperm is cloudy, and the egg of the ovary is crimson.
fen Het at usdt Act AU (336-18, ast, sas adte A)
is maatee kee putree joree. ||1]| From this clay, the puppet is fashioned. ||1]|
H atdt ae orf & Ha Il (336-19, west, sas adie HH) mai naahee kachh aahi na moraa. I am nothing, and nothing is mine.
36 U6 AS OA aifde So NA TIE Il (336-19, ast, sas ade AH tan Dhan sabh ras gobind toraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This body, wealth, and all delicacies are Yours, O Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause] |
fen wet ufo use AMTfEMr Il 36-19, reat, sas ate Ft) is maatee meh pavan samaa-i-aa. Into this clay, the breath is infused.
Us’ BBD
Bo usuy rife verfenr QI (337-1, ast, sas adits Ff) jhoothaa parpanch jor chalaa-i-aa. ||2]| By Your Power, You have set this false contrivance in motion. ||2||
fag ord utg at Hat I (337-1, aes, sas ats Ht) kinhoo laakh paa'ch kee joree. Some collect hundreds of thousands of dollars,
mis at ag Tarde Sat Si 337-1, rest, sas adits A
ant kee baar gagree-aa foree. ||3]| but in the end, the pitcher of the body bursts. ||3]|
ats axdte fea ate Bart il 337-2, west, sas acta Hh kahi kabeer ik neev usaaree. Says Kabeer, that single foundation which you have laid
fas ufo faofa ate oad snwUecneoll 637-2, Test, sas ate FH) khin meh binas jaa-ay aha™kaaree. ||4]|1]|9||60]| will be destroyed in an instant - you are so egotistical. ||4]]1]|9||60]||
ast il (337-3) ga-orhee. Gauree:
oH Aus Aha MA MAY yfsere AUS ofs AA NI (337-3, aH, gars alts Ft) raam japa-o jee-a aisay aisay. Dharoo par-hilaad japi-o har jaisay. ||1||
Just as Dhroo and Prahlaad meditated on the Lord, so should you meditate on the Lord, O my soul. ||1]|
ae ufenrs sd 3d Il (337-3, ast, saz asta Ft) deen da-i-aal bharosay tayray. O Lord, Merciful to the meek, I have placed my faith in You;
Ag users Vater SS AU TIS Il (337-4, Teast, sas adits FH) sabh parvaar charhaa-i-aa bayrhay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. along with all my family, I have come aboard Your boat. ||1||Pause] |
wW fq SS 3ST JAH HOS Il (337-4, ast, sas adie th) jaa tis bhaavai taa hukam manaavai. When it is pleasing to Him, then He inspires us to obey the Hukam of His Command.
fen 3 ag ute sure 121 (337-4, a@st, sas adie Th) is bayrhay ka-o paar laghaavai. ||2|| He causes this boat to cross over. ||2||
ad usAtfe mt afa Ast Il (337-5, weet, sas asta FH) gur parsaad aisee buDh samaanee. By Guru's Grace, such understanding is infused into me;
via wet fefs urea AST BI (337-5, ast, sas ete Fh)
chook ga-ee fir aavan jaanee. ||3]| my comings and goings in reincarnation have ended. ||3]|
ad adte sa Atsaurst Il (337-5, ast, sas adie Ah kaho kabeer bhaj saarigpaanee. Says Kabeer, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord, the Sustainer of the earth.
Gsefs ufs As Sa Bat ISIVIONEU! (337-6, ACH, sas ade rh
urvaar paar sabh ayko daanee. ||4||2||10]|61]| In this world, in the world beyond and everywhere, He alone is the Giver. [14] |2]]10]]61]|
agat € Il (337-6) ga-orhee 9. Gauree 9:
nfs ats Ag Aa nfs ores I 337-6, aes, sas adie Th) jon chhaad ja-o jag meh aa-i-o. He leaves the womb, and comes into the world;
Bds ues wAH fant] idl (337-7, ast, sas adits Ft)
laagat pavan khasam bisraa-i-o. ||1]| as soon as the air touches him, he forgets his Lord and Master. ||1]|
Abas sts & Ta TS Al FICS il (337-7, aSst, sas adits Hh jee-araa har kay gunaa gaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O my soul, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]||Pause||
aes rife xfs Sau su ATS Il (337-8, aes, sas adie 7)
garabh jon meh uraDh tap kartaa.
You were upside-down, living in the womb; you generated the intense meditative heat of 'tapas’.
38 Hod “ae HiT JIS MQM (337-8, aeHt, sas adie Ft)
ta-o jathar agan meh rahtaa. ||2|| Then, you escaped the fire of the belly. ||2]|
wy sant rife afk ure 1 37-8, a@Ht, sas ate Hh lakh cha-oraaseeh jon bharam aa-i-o. After wandering through 8.4 million incarnations, you came.
Me aA sea BVI B StSS ill 337-9, aSst, sas adits FH) ab kay chhutkay tha-ur na thaa-i-o. ||3]| If you stumble and fall now, you shall find no home or place of rest. ||3]|
a ade sa Atsaurst Il (337-9, aSst, sas adits Hh kaho kabeer bhaj saarigpaanee. Says Kabeer, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord, the Sustainer of the earth.
mies CA AS B AST USUAUIAUEI (337-9, Txt, sas ae Ht) aavat deesai jaat na jaanee. ||4||1||11]|62]| He is not seen to be coming or going; He is the Knower of all. ||4]|1||11]|62]|
asst ysat il (337-10) ga-orhee poorbee. Gauree Poorbee:
Aaa FH o weba sd 3 cdf fos il (337-10, rat yaet, sas aeite Ft) surag baas na baachhee-ai daree-ai na narak nivaas. Don't wish for a home in heaven, and don't be afraid to live in hell.
da od A det 3 Hala 3 Ath MTA IAI 37-10, aGat yset, sas adits a) honaa hai so ho-ee hai maneh na keejai aas. ||1]| Whatever will be will be, so don't get your hopes up in your mind. ||1||
Heber ae are | 337-11, a@at yset, sas anits Fh rama-ee-aa gun gaa-ee-ai. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
vw 3 ureha uan fears dl FS Il (337-1, wat vaet, sas adits Fh) jaa tay paa-ee-ai param niDhaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. from whom the most excellent treasure is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
for Fu for su HAN fomr aes for feFeS Il 637-12, aGst yset, sas adits Hf) ki-aa jap ki-aa tap sanjamo ki-aa barat ki-aa isnaan.
What good is chanting, penance or self-mortification? What good is fasting or cleansing baths,
Wa Sd Hals o Webt SS gals sae] I2QI 37-12, aCst yset, sas adits Hh)
jab lag jugat na jaanee-ai bhaa-o bhagat bhagvaan. ||2|| unless you know the way to worship the Lord God with loving devotion? ||2| |
ON SN
Hu ef o gadba faufs eft o sf I 637-13, a@at yeet, sas adits Fh
sampai daykh na harkhee-ai bipat daykh na ro-ay.
Don't feel so delighted at the sight of wealth, and don't weep at the sight of suffering and adversity.
fa@ Au f3@ faufS 3 faa 3 sfour A OOfE 131 (337-13, aeat yset, sas adits Fh ji-o sampai ti-o bipat hai biDh nay rachi-aa so ho-ay. ||3]| As is wealth, so is adversity; whatever the Lord proposes, comes to pass. ||3]||
afs adte ora wafer Ase fee uefa I (337-14, west yseh, sas adits Fh kahi kabeer ab jaani-aa santan ridai majhaar. Says Kabeer, now I know that the Lord dwells within the hearts of His Saints;
Aza A AS 3 fag we FA Hats NSNAUINESI (337-14, Tat Yee, sas adits Fh
sayvak so sayvaa bhalay jih ghat basai muraar. ||4]|1]|12||63]| that servant performs the best service, whose heart is filled with the Lord. [|4] [1] [12]]63] |
ast Il (337-15) ga-orhee. Gauree:
J Ho 3d afe oot fife Sfe fats svg Il (337-15, aGst, sas adits Th ray man tayro ko-ay nahee khinch lay-ay jin bhaar. O my mind, even if you carry someone's burden, they don't belong to you.
fase aAd uft & SA feg HATS NU (37-16, aCst, sas adits rh) birakh basayro pankh ko taiso ih sansaar. ||1]| This world is like the perch of the bird on the tree. ||1]|
TH A Ur F Il (337-16, aSst, sas asta raam ras pee-aa ray. I drink in the sublime essence of the Lord.
fra oA fants we dA BT NA TICS I (337-16, Tea, sas aete FH)
jih ras bisar ga-ay ras a-or. ||1|| rahaa-o. With the taste of this essence, I have forgotten all other tastes. ||1]|Pause]|
m@a He foor cet AG vmer fag o gate I 337-17, aGst, sas adie Ah a-or mu-ay ki-aa ro-ee-ai ja-o aapaa thir na rahaa-ay. Why should we weep at the death of others, when we ourselves are not permanent?
a Gun A faofh 3 ey afe de sere 1211 (337-17, a@at, sas ade th jo upjai so binas hai dukh kar rovai balaa-ay. ||2|| Whoever is born shall pass away; why should we cry out in grief? ||2]|
Ad at Curt 3d det ules HIeS Ba Il (337-18, ast, sas aceite Hh)
jah kee upjee tah rachee peevat mardan laag. We are re-absorbed into the One from whom we came; drink in the Lord's essence, and remain attached to Him.
afs ate fefs sfsur on faufs Soa NSNQIISNESI (337-18, aes, sas ate AH
kahi kabeer chit chayti-aa raam simar bairaag. ||3]|2||13||64|| Says Kabeer, my consciousness is filled with thoughts of remembrance of the Lord; I have become detached from the world. ||3]|2||13]|64]|
Ta ACS Il (337-19) raag ga-orhee. Raag Gauree:
ug fod AHS! BIS Sat B SAT Il (337-19, ast, sas aete Ah panth nihaarai kaamnee lochan bharee lay usaasaa. The bride gazes at the path, and sighs with tearful eyes.
Uat 33Bt
6a 0 Stn ua o fun afe wane at MTA IU G38-1, west, sas adie Ff)
ur na bheejai pag naa khisai har darsan kee aasaa. ||1]|
Her heart is not happy, but she does not retrace her steps, in hopes of seeing the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1]|
C3sg 6 Wa ard Il (338-1, aSst, sas asta Hh) udahu na kaagaa kaaray. So fly away, black crow,
Sfa fuata wus an furs ai Jae it 38-2, ast, sas adits sh bayg mileejai apunay raam pi-aaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. so that I may quickly meet my Beloved Lord. ||1||Pause| |
afs ade Hes ue arete afs ot sats adie Il (338-2, a@st, sas adte AD
kahi kabeer jeevan pad kaaran har kee bhagat kareejai. Says Kabeer, to obtain the status of eternal life, worship the Lord with devotion.
aq nag SH SSIES AST TH StH NVUNAUIIWIEUI (38-3, TES, sas adte ayk aaDhaar naam naaraa-in rasnaa raam raveejai. ||2]|1]|14||65]|
The Name of the Lord is my only Support; with my tongue, I chant the Lord's Name. [12] 1] [14] ]65]|
Ta AST 99 Il (338-3) raag ga-orhee 11. Raag Gauree 11:
MTA UTA us SoA ot fase us aa TA TS F Il 38-3, ast, sas adts A)
aas paas ghan tursee kaa birvaa maajh banaa ras gaa-oo" ray.
All around, there are thick bushes of sweet basil, and there in the midst of the forest, the Lord is singing with joy.
Gur a Agy tfy Hot auras H aS af 3 mr s ATT F UI (338-4, aes, sas adits Fh) u-aa kaa saroop daykh mohee gu-aaran mo ka-o chhod na aa-o na jaahoo ray. ||1|| Beholding His wondrous beauty, the milk-maid was entranced, and said, "Please don't leave me; please don't come and go!"||1||
Sfo JIG HS Ba Asa Il 338-5, ast, sas adie 7) tohi charan man laago saaringDhar. My mind is attached to Your Feet, O Archer of the Universe;
A fHS A aseTa WAU TIS Il (338-5, ast, sas ade Ah so milai jo badbhaago. ||1|| rahaa-o. he alone meets You, who is blessed by great good fortune. ||1]|Pause]|
fdaras Ho Jas HOTS fEAS VSS WE FT il 338-6, ast, sas aes Ff) bindraaban man haran manohar krisan charaavat gaa-oo ray. In Brindaaban, where Krishna grazes his cows, he entices and fascinates my mind.
Wo og sot Asa Hfs ate SS F MINNIE! (38-6, ast, sas ots Ht)
jaa kaa thaakur tuhee saaringDhar mohi kabeeraa naa-oo ray. ||2]|2||15||66]| You are my Lord Master, the Archer of the Universe; my name is Kabeer. [12] 2] |15]]66] |
asst yUTet I2 Il (38-7) ga-orhee poorbee 12. Gauree Poorbee 12:
fuses aay a3 3 ufos far ae HO aA II (338-7, aGat uaeh, sas acta Ht) bipal bastar kaytay hai pahiray ki-aa ban maDhay baasaa. Many people wear various robes, but what is the use of living in the forest?
as sfeur og ter ae fomr fs sfeG farrsr 9 38-7, a@st yset, sas adits Hf) kahaa bha-i-aa nar dayvaa Dhokhay ki-aa jal bori-o gi-aataa. ||1]|
What good does it do if a man burns incense before his gods? What good does it do to dip one's body in water? ||1]|
Abas wfoar A AAT Il 38-8, west yee, sas ate Fh jee-aray jaahigaa mai jaanaa”. O soul, I know that I will have to depart.
mifaas AHS fenirar || (338-8, a@st uset, sas ate ah abigat samajh i-aanaa. You ignorant idiot: understand the Imperishable Lord.
AS AS tu@ safe o UYs Afar wfeor Buss Ul TIS Il 338-9, aSst yset, sas aete Hh) jat jat daykh-a-u bahur na paykha-o sang maa-i-aa laptaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever you see, you will not see that again, but still, you cling to Maya. ||1]|Pause] |
famrot fomret sg Guert fg Aa Aas Gor | (338-9, ast yset, sas acta Hf)
gi-aanee Dhi-aanee baho updaysee ih jag saglo DhanDhaa.
The spiritual teachers, meditators and the great preachers are all engrossed in these worldly affairs.
afs ade fea on oH fag four aa wfemr nior NINAUIAENEDI 38-10, Test yaet, sas adte rt)
kahi kabeer ik raam naam bin i-aa jag maa-i-aa anDhaa. ||2||1||16||67]|
Says Kabeer, without the Name of the One Lord, this world is blinded by Maya.
[12] ]1]]16]]67]|
ast 92 Il (338-11) ga-orhee 12. Gauree 12:
HO 3 SSg SdH YaS die oreg four wfeur & 33 1 38-11, aet, sas adits Hh) man ray chhaadahu bharam pargat ho-ay naachahu i-aa maa-i-aa kay daa™day. O people, O victims of this Maya, abandon your doubts and dance out in the open.
Hg fa HoH 3s 3 sau ASt fa APS SS UU G38-u1, aes, sas alte Fh)
soor ke sanmukh ran tay darpai satee ke saa\chai bhaa'day. ||1||
What sort of a hero is one who is afraid to face the battle? What sort of satee is she who, when her time comes, starts collecting her pots and pans? ||1]||
sana ats J Ho AST Il (338-12, a@xt, sas adits Fh) dagmag chhaad ray man ba-uraa. Stop your wavering, O crazy people!
ma 3@ nd He fafa ue ats ofa HOST NU Joe I 38-12, ast, sas adits rh) ab ta-o jaray maray siDh paa-ee-ai leeno haath sanDh-uraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Now that you have taken up the challenge of death, let yourself burn and die, and attain perfection. ||1]|Pause] |
aH au Hf & ws fer fafa wars feast i 38-13, a@st, sas ots Ht)
kaam kroDh maa-i-aa kay leenay i-aa biDh jagat bigootaa.
The world is engrossed in sexual desire, anger and Maya; in this way it is plundered and ruined.
ae sates TH TH F S38 ATG Ss FS So NAUIQIVUECH (338-14, ast, sas ata Fh)
kahi kabeer raajaa raam na chhoda-o sagal ooch tay oochaa. ||2||2||17||68]| Says Kabeer, do not forsake the Lord, your Sovereign King, the Highest of the High. [12] 12]]17]]68]|
ast 92 Il (338-14) ga-orhee 13. Gauree 13:
SoH 3ST fis Gufs feta o aes sters Il (338-14, ast, sas atts Ht) furmaan tayraa sirai oopar fir na karat beechaar. Your Command is upon my head, and I no longer question it.
Tot edor sct adorn SS 3 fenss WU 338-15, aCat, sas adits Th) tuhee daree-aa tuhee karee-aa tujhai tay nistaar. ||1]| You are the river, and You are the boatman; salvation comes from You. ||1]|
oN o
Ye Feat fashrs il (338-15, aVst, sas adits wh banday bandagee iktee-aar. O human being, embrace the Lord's meditation,
Wfog dA as fa fimirg 1d Joe I 338-16, aCHt, sas aeite Th) saahib ros Dhara-o ke pi-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o. whether your Lord and Master is angry with you or in love with you. ||1||Pause] |
oH So nrorg He fA se wet I STs I (338-16, ae, sas adits Fh naam tayraa aaDhaar mayraa ji-o fool ja-ee hai naar. Your Name is my Support, like the flower blossoming in the water.
afs ade Ton we a Here are arfs QUICHE (338-16, aGHt, sas adte rh
kahi kabeer gulaam ghar kaa jee-aa-ay bhaavai maar. ||2||18]|69]|| Says Kabeer, I am the slave of Your home; I live or die as You will. ||2]|18]|69]|
ast Il (338-17) ga-orhee. Gauree:
wy sents hy xfs uf gHS SE aT AS T I 338-17, aCst, sas adie Hh)
lakh cha-oraaseeh jee-a jon meh bharmat nand baho thaako ray.
Wandering through 8.4 million incarnations, Krishna's father Nand was totally exhausted.
sats dfs mesg OE I oa aS SUT A FT NA (338-18, ast, sas adie Ah
bhagat hayt avtaar lee-o hai bhaag bado bapuraa ko ray. ||1||
Because of his devotion, Krishna was incarnated in his home; how great was the good fortune of this poor man! ||1]|
3H FW aus Ue Se a SUS GE A eG AAT Il (338-18, aGet, sas ace FH) tum" jo kahat ha-o nand ko nandan nand so nandan kaa ko ray. You say that Krishna was Nand's son, but whose son was Nand himself?
Udfe niorH eA fen ont sa feg de aT SF NU ToS Il (338-19, aGst, sas ast Ah Dharan akaas daso dis naahee tab ih nand kahaa tho ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When there was no earth or ether or the ten directions, where was this Nand then? ||1]|Pause] |
Ua sat
Hafe adt ud Afs odt wre an fodne AT a F Il (339-1, west, sas adie Hf) sankat nahee parai jon nahee aavai naam niranjan jaa ko ray.
He does not fall into misfortune, and He does not take birth; His Name is the Immaculate Lord.
ads & AMM oA oes AT at Het @ aM FT QUIEN DON (339-1, aCHt, sas adits Th) kabeer ko su-aamee aiso thaakur jaa kai maa-ee na baapo ray. ||2||19||70|| Kabeer's Lord is such a Lord and Master, who has no mother or father. ||2]|19]|70]|
ast il (339-2) ga-orhee. Gauree:
fSee See 4 aS Sa Se il (339-2, west, saz adits rh) ninda-o ninda-o mo ka-o log ninda-o. Slander me, slander me - go ahead, people, and slander me.
feet Ae a udt fumrdt il (339-2, west, sas asia Fh) nindaa jan ka-o kharee pi-aaree. Slander is pleasing to the Lord's humble servant.
feet ary fear HaSTSH NU TIS |i (339-3, ast, gas ast Hh nindaa baap nindaa mehtaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Slander is my father, slander is my mother. ||1]|Pause||
fear aff 3 Safe web II (339-3, aGst, saz adit Ah nindaa ho-ay ta baikunth jaa-ee-ai. If I am slandered, I go to heaven;
oy ueTag Hold SATS Il (339-3, west, sas adie rh naam padaarath maneh basaa-ee-ai. the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides within my mind.
foe nO AG fer SE I 339-4, aCHt, sas adie th ridai suDh ja-o nindaa ho-ay. If my heart is pure, and I am slandered,
Jue aud fSea GfE NAN (339-4, ast, sas adie Ah hamray kapray nindak Dho-ay. ||1]| then the slanderer washes my clothes. ||1||
fer ad A He HIS II (339-4, a@at, sas adie th nindaa karai so hamraa meet. One who slanders me is my friend;
feea Hts DHS BMS Il (339-5, aGst, sas ate Hf) nindak maahi hamaaraa cheet. the slanderer is in my thoughts.
fsea AH fSer Is Il (339-5, west, sas adie Th) nindak so jo nindaa horai. The slanderer is the one who prevents me from being slandered.
THT Ales Sea Bs ili! (339-5, ast, sas adie FH) hamraa jeevan nindak lorai. ||2|| The slanderer wishes me long life. ||2] |
fSe" THat UH fimrg il 39-5, ast, sas acta ah nindaa hamree paraym pi-aar. I have love and affection for the slanderer.
fsa gna ad Burg il (339-6, a@st, sas aes Ah) nindaa hamraa karai uDhaar. Slander is my salvation.
Ho ads aG fSer ATS Il (339-6, a@at, sas adits jan kabeer ka-o nindaa saar. Slander is the best thing for servant Kabeer.
Sea ST TH Css us WSN DUl (339-6, ast, sas aets Ft) nindak doobaa ham utray paar. ||3||20||71|| The slanderer is drowned, while I am carried across. ||3]|20||71] |
TH TH F MA fesse Fao TIS TH TEM AU TTS il 339-7, ast, sas aes Ff) raajaa raam too’ aisaa nirbha-o taran taaran raam raa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my Sovereign Lord King, You are Fearless; You are the Carrier to carry us across, O my Lord King. ||1]|Pause] |
Aa JH dS 3a SH BS Me SH Ud DH Ot Il (339-7, a@st, sas adits Hf) jab ham hotay tab tum naahee ab tum hahu ham naahee. When I was, then You were not; now that You are, I am not.
Wa JH 3H Sa Be Ufo Sa TUS HO usr AU (39-8, west, sas adie A) ab ham tum ayk bha-ay heh aykai daykhat man patee-aahee. ||1] | Now, You and I have become one; seeing this, my mind is content. ||1]|
wa af dat 3a ae ant mre aft ae o Yee II 339-9, ast, sas adie Th
jab buDh hotee tab bal kaisaa ab buDh bal na khataa-ee.
When there was wisdom, how could there be strength? Now that there is wisdom, strength cannot prevail.
ats adte afa ofe set At afa seat fAfo uret 1QN2AUD2II (39-9, Test, sas aete FH)
kahi kabeer buDh har la-ee mayree buDh badlee siDh paa-ee. ||2]|21||72|| Says Kabeer, the Lord has taken away my wisdom, and I have attained spiritual perfection. ||2||21||72] |
ast Il (339-10) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Ye 3H ae Aoat Aut FAS wigy ate uret il 39-10, ast, sas acts Ft)
khat naym kar koth-rhee baa“Dhee basat anoop beech paa-ee.
He fashioned the body chamber with six rings, and placed within it the incomparable thing.
ant aes yrs afs Ta ATS ss B Bet Al (39-u1, ast, sas adits HH)
kunjee kulaf paraan kar raakhay kartay baar na laa-ee. ||1||
He made the breath of life the watchman, with lock and key to protect it; the Creator did this in no time at all. ||1]|
ME HS WAS TI F SET Il (339-11, ast, sas adie wh) ab man jaagat rahu ray bhaa-ee. Keep your mind awake and aware now, O Sibling of Destiny.
Wes de a AON Teves ss HA We AST NAN TIC Il (339-11, ast, sas adits Ah gaafal ho-ay kai janam gavaa-i-o chor musai ghar jaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You were careless, and you have wasted your life; your home is being plundered by thieves. ||1]||Pause| |
Us udgur ug xfs gos f3a a jdt uUsharst Il (339-12, ast, sas aes Ft) panch pahroo-aa dar meh rahtay tin kaa nahee patee-aaraa. The five senses stand as guards at the gate, but now can they be trusted?
ofs Aes fos of ag 3B S usATA BAST N21 (339-13, ast, sas adie Ah
chayt suchayt chit ho-ay rahu ta-o lai pargaas ujaaraa. ||2||
When you are conscious in your consciousness, you shall be enlightened and illuminated. ||2||
oS wg ef 7 anise gat SAS MigU B uret Il (339-13, ast, sas aete Fh)
na-o ghar daykh jo kaaman bhoolee basat anoop na paa-ee.
Seeing the nine openings of the body, the soul-bride is led astray; she does not obtain that incomparable thing.
TIS TaT SS WS HA CAS ST AHS SNUB (339-14, ast, sas alts Fh)
kahat kabeer navai ghar moosay dasvai™ tat samaa-ee. ||3]|22||73]| Says Kabeer, the nine openings of the body are being plundered; rise up to the Tenth Gate, and discover the true essence. ||3]||22||73]||
ast Il (339-14) ga-orhee. Gauree:
Het dfs meg & ASE niorat Il (339-14, aGst, sas adie Th) maa-ee mohi avar na jaani-o aanaanaa",. O mother, I do not know any other, except Him.
fre Foote WH To wefs oH SAfs HS Yor I TIS Il (339-15, ast, sas ade FH) siv sankaad jaas gun gaavahi taas baseh moray paraanaanaa’. rahaa-o.
My breath of life resides in Him, whose praises are sung by Shiva and Sanak and so many others. ||Pause| |
fase yarn fomrs ae afHs aaa Hae ufo fomrarat Il (339-16, a@at, sas afte Hf)
hirday pargaas gi-aan gur gammit gagan mandal meh Dhi-aanaanaa’".
My heart is illuminated by spiritual wisdom; meeting the Guru, I meditate in the Sky of the Tenth Gate.
fae da 3 Fue a Ho fon wie AY ara IA (339-16, west, sas adte A)
bikhai rog bhai banDhan bhaagay man nij ghar sukh jaanaanaa. ||1] |
The diseases of corruption, fear and bondage have run away; my mind has come to know peace in its own true home. ||1||
ea Ais ofs ats ute Ys SAP Hold & wiraTsT Il (339-17, ast, sas ate Fh
ayk sumat rat jaan maan parabh doosar maneh na aanaanaa.
Imbued with a balanced single-mindedness, I know and obey God; nothing else enters my mind.
32S IA se Ho aH fsurfa wes mfsyrarar lI (339-17, a@at, sas adits Ah chandan baas bha-ay man baasan ti-aag ghati-o abhimaanaanaa. ||2||
My mind has become fragrant with the scent of sandalwood; I have renounced egotistical selfishness and conceit. ||2| |
A He ae fomrfe AA oS TH YS FT Trae Il (339-18, aat, sas aes Ht)
jo jan gaa-ay Dhi-aa-ay jas thaakur taas parabhoo hai thaanaanaa”.
That humble being, who sings and meditates on the Praises of his Lord and Master, is the dwelling-place of God.
fsa a3 aa SfAG His A a ASH YOTS HESS ISI (339-19, weHt, sas arts Fh
tin bad bhaag basi-o man jaa kai karam parDhaan mathaanaanaa. ||3]|
He is blessed with great good fortune; the Lord abides in his mind. Good karma radiates from his forehead. ||3]|
ofe nafs fre Aon yarfAS Sa Sa ANOS I (339-19, ast, sas acta Hf)
kaat sakat siv sahj pargaasi-o aykai ayk samaanaanaa.
I have broken the bonds of Maya; the intuitive peace and poise of Shiva has dawned within me, and I am merged in oneness with the One.
UST 380
ats ads ad sfe Ho AY FHS Id HS HSS IIIS (340-1, ast, sas ate A) kahi kabeer gur bhayt mahaa sukh bharmat rahay man maanaanaa”. ||4||23||741| Says Kabeer, meeting the Guru, I have found absolute peace. My mind has ceased its wanderings; I am happy. ||4]|23||74||
TH Tat uset Pea oradt ats AI at (340-2) raag ga-orhee poorbee baavan akhree kabeer jee-o kee Raag Gauree Poorbee, Baawan Akhree Of Kabeer Jee:
a AfsenH ass usY TIYyATS I (340-2)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gurparsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
Teo nied GA 3 AS ae feo dt fs It 340-3, aSat yoet, sas ants Hh baavan achhar lok tarai sabh kachh in hee maahi. Through these fifty-two letters, the three worlds and all things are described.
= nag fats afoa Gfe mag feo ufo of ill (340-3, at useht, sas ate Fh) ay akhar khir jaahigay o-ay akhar in meh naahi. ||1]| These letters shall perish; they cannot describe the Imperishable Lord. ||1]||
Ad § Sd wed vee | (340-4, aSat yor, sas ate Fh jahaa bol tah achhar aavaa. Wherever there is speech, there are letters.
Ad MAGS SI HS BITS Il (340-4, aGat vat, sas adits Fh) jah abol tah man na rahaavaa. Where there is no speech, there, the mind rests on nothing.
ao nae ufo F At | 340-4, aGat uae, sas acta Hf) bol abol maDh hai so-ee. He is in both speech and silence.
AA Gg 3 SA GE B AT MM (40-4, west Yosh, sas adits Hh jas oh hai tas lakhai na ko-ee. ||2]| No one can know Him as He is. ||2||
NGI BIC 3C foor as ag 3 & Cuarg Il (340-5, ast uset, sas acta Hh) alah laha-o ta-o ki-aa kaha-o kaha-o ta ko upkaar. If I come to know the Lord, what can I say; what good does it do to speak?
yea ain uf ofe afeG a at Sif Sa fares ISI 340-5, Text yee, sas adits Hh
batak beej meh rav rahi-o jaa ko teen lok bisthaar. ||3]| He is contained in the seed of the banyan-tree, and yet, His expanse spreads across the three worlds. ||3]|
WO SIS Sz = as ae UTES Fe II (340-6, Test yort, sas ats Hh
alah lahantaa bhayd chhai kachh kachh paa-i-o bhayd.
One who knows the Lord understands His mystery, and bit by bit, the mystery disappears.
Cafe se Ho afas ufeG niga nize ISI (340-6, aCat Use, sas aes A)
ulat bhayd man bayDhi-o paa-i-o abhang achhayd. ||4||
Turning away from the world, one's mind is pierced through with this mystery, and one obtains the Indestructible, Impenetrable Lord. ||4]|
3a Sdiafs We fT Fe ys Il 340-7, ast yset, sas adits Fh turak tareekat jaanee-ai hindoo bayd puraan. The Muslim knows the Muslim way of life; the Hindu knows the Vedas and Puraanas.
HO AHSSS ASS Tenia usA farirs WUll (340-7, ast yset, sas ats Hh) man samjhaavan kaarnay kachhoo-ak parhee-ai gi-aan. ||5|| To instruct their minds, people ought to study some sort of spiritual wisdom. ||5]||
Guiars urfe HATS Il (340-8, ast yset, sas adit Hh) o-ankaar aad mai jaanaa. I know only the One, the Universal Creator, the Primal Being.
fafa mg HS stfa B HAT Il (340-8, aCat yset, sas adits Fh likh ar maytai taahi na maanaa. I do not believe in anyone whom the Lord writes and erases.
Guiarg BY AE aet il (340-8, aSat yset, sas ate Fh o-ankaar lakhai ja-o ko-ee. If someone knows the One, the Universal Creator,
Het af Azar o Tet Ell (340-9, ast yset, sas ate Fh so-ee lakh maytnaa na ho-ee. ||6|| he shall not perish, since he knows Him. ||6]|
aa forafe HHS His urSst il (340-9, aGat yout, sas aete Fh) kakaa kiran kamal meh paavaa. KAKKA: When the rays of Divine Light come into the heart-lotus,
AfA faarA Hue Sot niet il (340-9, aGat yset, sas acts Hf) sas bigaas sampat nahee aavaa. the moon-light of Maya cannot enter the basket of the mind.
Mg A Sd AAH GA UST Il (340-10, aGat uset, sas ate Ah ar jay tahaa kusam ras paavaa. And if one obtains the subtle fragrance of that spiritual flower,
WAT XI Afy A AHS |DIl (340-10, aSat yoet, sas ants fh
akah kahaa kahi kaa samjhaavaa. ||7]|| he cannot describe the indescribable; he could speak, but who would understand?
I7II
uur fed aff He ner II (340-10, ast yset, sas adie Hh) khakhaa ihai khorh man aavaa. KHAKHA: The mind has entered this cave.
a3 as 3 eo fen Wer II (340-10, a@et yset, sas ants sh khorhay chhaad na dah dis Dhaavaa. It does not leave this cave to wander in the ten directions.
unAnfs fe fiom afs ad Il (340-11, ret yaet, sas adits Ft) khasmahi jaan khimaa kar rahai. Knowing their Lord and Master, people show compassion;
38 dfe foftonG wre ue wd ICH 40-11, aGst uset, sas adits Hh) ta-o ho-ay nikhi-a-o akhai pad lahai. ||8]| then, they become immortal, and attain the state of eternal dignity. ||8] |
Ta AT X AIS USAT Il (340-11, aCst use, sas ate wh gagaa gur kay bachan pachhaanaa. GAGGA: One who understands the Guru's Word
SHt IS 5 UTet Aor Il 340-12, ast yset, sas asta Ht) doojee baat na Dhar-ee kaanaa. does not listen to anything else.
vo fadan asfs o Wet Il (340-12, a@et yaet, sas aeite Ft) rahai bihamgam kateh na jaa-ee. He remains like a hermit and does not go anywhere,
Wa Td fs Hae JIE CI (340-12, Tat Yost, sas ants Fh agah gahai geh gagan rahaa-ee. ||9|| when he grasps the Ungraspable Lord and dwells in the sky of the Tenth Gate. ||9] |
uur wife wie foHA Aet Il (340-13, west yset, sas ate Hh ghaghaa ghat ghat nimsai so-ee. GHAGHA: He dwells in each and every heart.
we ge ufe aafs 3 Tet Il (340-13, ast yet, sas aes Ht) ghat footay ghat kabeh na ho-ee. Even when the body-pitcher bursts, he does not diminish.
so we Hg wre AG UTS I (340-13, ast Yost, sas ots Ft) taa ghat maahi ghaat ja-o paavaa. When someone finds the Path to the Lord within his own heart,
A we as neue aS UST AO (340-14, aGst yset, sas acts Hh so ghat chhaad avghat kat Dhaavaa. ||10|| why should he abandon that Path to follow some other path? ||10] |
aa feats Hog afs faded HET Il (340-14, a@at yset, sas ate Hh nyanyaa nigrahi sanayhu kar nirvaaro sandayh. NGANGA: Restrain yourself, love the Lord, and dismiss your doubts.
ordt af o arriba us fimreu So Al (340-14, a@st yset, sas ate Fh naahee daykh na bhaajee-ai param si-aanap ayh. ||11|| Even if you do not see the Path, do not run away; this is the highest wisdom. ||11]|
ao sfes fas 3 arch il 340-15, a@et use, sas acta Hf) chachaa rachit chitar hai bhaaree. CHACHA: He painted the great picture of the world.
fa fas 33g fasardt il (340-15, a@at uset, sas ants sf) taj chitrai chaytahu chitkaaree. Forget this picture, and remember the Painter.
faz afey fed mesa il (340-16, a@at yest, sas ate Fh) chitar bachitar ihai avjhayraa. This wondrous painting is now the problem.
fa fas fas aft fasar 192 (340-16, a@xt yset, sas ate Fh) taj chitrai chit raakh chitayraa. ||12]| Forget this picture and focus your consciousness on the Painter. ||12]|
ge fed sgufs ur Il (340-16, a@et uae, sas adits Ht) chhachhaa ihai chhatarpat paasaa. CHHACHHA: The Sovereign Lord of the Universe is here with you.
ala fa o dog ats fax & MITAT II (340-16, ast Yost, sas ote Ft) chhak ke na rahhu chhaad ke na aasaa. Why are you so unhappy? Why don't you abandon your desires?
3 Ho H 3 fea fea ANSTST II (340-17, aGat vast, sas adits Ff) ray man mai ta-o chhin chhin samjhaavaa. O my mind, each and every moment I try to instruct you,
ato ats aS nimy gOS ASI (340-17, aGat uae, sas oats FH) taahi chhaad kat aap baDhaavaa. ||13]| but you forsake Him, and entangle yourself with others. ||13]|
A AG 30 Hes AS I (340-17, aCxt Yast, sas ate Fh jajaa ja-o tan jeevat jaraavai. JAJJA: If someone burns his body while he is still alive,
mae fs was A ure Il (340-18, a@at uae, sas adits Hf) joban jaar jugat so paavai. and burns away the desires of his youth, then he finds the right way.
wn afs ug afe afs Aa Id Il 340-18, aGst yet, sas adits Hf) as jar par jar jar jab rahai. When he burns his desire for his own wealth, and that of others,
sa fe afs Crra@ wd 19811 (340-18, aGat yaet, sas aeite Ff) tab jaa-ay jot ujaara-o lahai. ||14] | then he finds the Divine Light. ||14]|
UST 389
sat Gafs AafS odt War Il 341-1, Test uset, sas ate Ft) jhajhaa urajh surajh nahee jaanaa. JHAJHA: You are entangled in the world, and you do not know how to get untangled.
sas seta ardt usSTsT I (341-1, Test useht, sas adits Ft) rahi-o jhajhak naahee parvaanaa. You hold back in fear, and are not approved by the Lord.
as sf sfi mGao AHSTST Il (341-1, west yset, sas oats Ft) kat jhakh jhakh a-uran samjhaavaa. Why do you talk such nonsense, trying to convince others?
Bag ae sage dt ur|t Ill (341-2, west yset, sas ate Fh) jhagar kee-ay jhagara-o hee paavaa. ||15]| Stirring up arguments, you shall only obtain more arguments. ||15]||
ee foate a we sfoG ofe as Shr ATS Il 341-2, aGat yset, sas ads Ht)
njanjaa nikat jo ghat rahi-o door kahaa taj jaa-ay.
NYANYA: He dwells near you, deep within your heart; why do you leave Him and go far away?
Ww arate Aa Bfene gS ufemis sho All 341-3, ast yest, saz asta Ft) jaa kaaran jag dhoodhi-a-o nayra-o paa-i-a-o taahi. ||16] | I searched the whole world for Him, but I found Him near myself. || 16] |
cer faae wre we Het Il (341-3, aGst use, sas ate Hh) tataa bikat ghaat ghat maahee. TATTA: It is such a difficult path, to find Him within your own heart.
dfs oure Hofes fa o Act I (341-3, aGst yset, sas adits Hf) khol kapaat mahal ke na jaahee. Open the doors within, and enter the Mansion of His Presence.
of niee af% asts 3 AST Il (341-4, aGst use, sas adte A) daykh atal tal kateh na jaavaa. Beholding the Immovable Lord, you shall not slip and go anywhere else.
dd Bufe we uss UST NVI (341-4, aat yaet, sas ate Ft) rahai lapat ghat parcha-o paavaa. ||17]|| You shall remain firmly attached to the Lord, and your heart will be happy. ||17]|
oot fed fe oat Ste Il 4-5, aC yet, sas anita Fh) thathaa ihai door thag neeraa. T'HAT'HA: Keep yourself far away from this mirage.
atte ate He aba dter i 341-5, wat yset, sas ote Ft) neeth neeth man kee-aa Dheeraa. With great difficulty, I have calmed my mind.
fate Ofer Sfamr Aas Ad MST Il (341-5, aCSt yout, sas atte Fh) jin thag thagi-aa sagal jag khaavaa. That cheater, who cheated and devoured the whole world
A od dfamr Ba HS MIST NACI 341-5, Tat Yoel, sas ate Fh so thag thagi-aa tha-ur man aavaa. ||18]| - I have cheated that cheater, and my mind is now at peace. ||18]|
sat 3d Cun 3g Wet Il 41-6, Test Use, sas ots Fh) dadaa dar upjay dar jaa-ee. DADDA: When the Fear of God wells up, other fears depart.
J 30 fe Sg Shor ANTS II 341-6, aCst yset, sas oes Ah) taa dar meh dar rahi-aa samaa-ee. Other fears are absorbed into that Fear.
AG 30 30 3 fefe 3g OT Il 341-7, 7eAt Yosh, sas ats Hh ja-o dar darai taa fir dar laagai. When one rejects the Fear of God, then other fears cling to him.
fosd Jur sg Ga afe sa NIKI (341-7, ast yee, sas aes Ft) nidar hoo-aa dar ur ho-ay bhaagai. ||19]| But if he becomes fearless, the fears of his heart run away. ||19]|
wer fea Fels AT maT Il (341-7, ast yset, saz asta Ht) dhadhaa dhig dhoodheh kat aanaa. DHADHA: Why do you search in other directions?
ges ot ufo Te use Il (341-8, Gat yset, saz aete FH) dhoodhat hee dheh ga-ay paraanaa. Searching for Him like this, the breath of life runs out.
afa Hats Bfe Aa MTS Il 341-8, west yset, sas aets Hh charh sumayr dhoodh jab aavaa. When I returned after climbing the mountain,
fad as afa@ A as Hfs UST NQON (341-8, aGst yset, sas adie Hf) jih garh garhi-o so garh meh paavaa. ||20|| I found Him in the fortress - the fortress which He Himself made. ||20]|
wart fe ISS 3a Sat AT Il (341-9, Test set, sas aets Ht) naanaa ran roota-o nar nayhee karai. NANNA: The warrior who fights on the battle-field should keep up and press on.
o foe a Sfe Aud Il (41-9, a@at yesh, sas adits Fh naa nivai naa fun sanchrai. He should not yield, and he should not retreat.
Ufs ASH St A TE Il (341-9, aSat yset, sas aes Hh Dhan janam taahee ko ganai. Blessed is the coming of one
He Sate sta fe we QUI 41-9, aCst yaet, sas acts sf maarai aykeh taj jaa-ay ghanai. ||21|| who conquers the one and renounces the many. ||21]|
3a nse She og AT Il (341-10, west use, sas adits FH) tataa atar tari-o nah jaa-ee. TATTA: The impassable world-ocean cannot be crossed over;
36 fgsee ufo afa AHTet I 341-10, rat uset, sas ade Ft) tan taribhavan meh rahi-o samaa-ee. the body remains embroiled in the three worlds.
Ag fgsee 36 Hf ANTS Il (341-10, aGSt yout, sas adte Fh) ja-o taribhavan tan maahi samaavaa. But when the Lord of the three worlds enters into the body,
38 s3f0 33 fifemr Ag UST 12211 (341-11, aes uset, sas ate Ah
ta-o tateh tat mili-aa sach paavaa. ||22||
then one's essence merges with the essence of reality, and the True Lord is attained. [|22]|
Bat METI BT Sot UST Il (341-11, aGat yoet, sas oeits Ft)
thathaa athaah thaah nahee paavaa. T'HAT'HA: He is Unfathomable; His depths cannot be fathomed.
6g wears feg fag o TIS I 341-11, west yset, sas adits Hh oh athaah ih thir na rahaavaa. He is Unfathomable; this body is impermanent, and unstable.
as afs goa wigs | 341-12, rat yar, sas acta Hf) thorhai thal thaanak aarambhai. The mortal builds his dwelling upon this tiny space;
fag dt asa Hfeg FF ISI (341-12, ast vast, sas ate FH) bin hee thaabhah mandir thambhai. ||23] | without any pillars, he wishes to support a mansion. ||23]||
cer ofy qf fioAoI ST Il 341-12, west use, sas ots Ft) dadaa daykh jo binsanhaaraa. DADDA: Whatever is seen shall perish.
AA mete SA fe fara i (341-13, ast ust, sas adte Ft) jas adaykh tas raakh bichaaraa. Contemplate the One who is unseen.
cHe vig ast wa aH Il 641-13, a@at yee, sas adits Fh dasvai du-aar kunchee jab deejai. When the key is inserted in the Tenth Gate,
38 vfiors & BIAS aA NQSIl (41-13, Teast yset, sas adte Fh ta-o da-i-aal ko darsan keejai. ||24]| then the Blessed Vision of the Merciful Lord's Darshan is seen. ||24]|
um neato ao fees il (341-14, a@st ust, sas ate Ah
DhaDhaa arDhahi uraDh nibayraa.
DHADHA: When one ascends from the lower realms of the earth to the higher realms of the heavens, then everything is resolved.
waots Saag HFS aAT Il (341-14, aCst yee, sas aets Hh) arDhahi urDhah manjh basayraa. The Lord dwells in both the lower and higher worlds.
mead ats Sau AG vie I (341-14, ast yset, sas ait Ft) arDhah chhaad uraDh ja-o aavaa. Leaving the earth, the soul ascends to the heavens;
38 meats Cau fifemr AY UST QUI (341-15, aGat use, sas ote Ft) ta-o arDhahi uraDh mili-aa sukh paavaa. ||25]| then, the lower and higher join together, and peace is obtained. ||25]||
dot fotr fee fasus wet II (341-15, a@st ust, sas ate Hf) nannaa nis din nirkhat jaa-ee. NANNA: The days and nights go by; I am looking for the Lord.
fasds So Jd Tee Il 341-15, aSat yor, sas ants Fh nirkhat nain rahay ratvaa-ee. Looking for Him, my eyes have become blood-shot.
fosus fosus Aa Ave ur|r Il (341-16, aGat uae, sas ate Fh) nirkhat nirkhat jab jaa-ay paavaa. After looking and looking,when He is finally found,
sa & fosuts fooe fharet QEI (341-16, a@st ust, sas ate Ah
tab lay nirkhahi nirakh milaavaa. ||26]| then the one who was looking merges into the One who was looked for. ||26| |
UUT MU UT St UTST Il (341-16, TESt Yost, sas oeits Ft) Papaa apar paar nahee paavaa. PAPPA: He is limitless; His limits cannot be found.
un rfs fA@ use wer Il (341-17, ast vast, sas aete param jot si-o parcha-o laavaa. I have attuned myself to the Supreme Light.
urs fet faq aget il (341-17, wet yor, sas adits Fh paa™cha-o indree nigreh kar-ee. One who controls his five senses
uy ug UG foseaet Qi G41-17, ast yah, sas afte Ft) paap punn do-oo nirvar-ee. ||27|| rises above both sin and virtue. ||27]||
eet fag goI SH Tet Il (341-18, seat yoet, sas aets Hh) fafaa bin foolah fal ho-ee. FAFFA: Even without the flower, the fruit is produced.
J ee Sa wa AEG aet Il 341-18, weet yoet, sas adits Fh taa fal fank lakhai ja-o ko-ee. One who looks at a slice of that fruit
ofe 5 usel ea fares Il Gai-18, rat yet, sas atts A) doon na par-ee fank bichaarai. and reflects on it, will not be consigned to reincarnation.
J SG SA AS 36 Sg MACH 41-18, aCst yset, sas adits zh) taa fal fank sabhai tan faarai. ||28]| A slice of that fruit slices all bodies. ||28] |
ae fiefs fate fesrer il (341-19, a@at uaet, sas acta ah babaa bindeh bind milaavaa. BABBA: When one drop blends with another drop,
fiefs fife o fasae urs Il (341-19, a@at yseh, sas afte Hf) bindeh bind na bichhuran paavaa. then these drops cannot be separated again.
Hee ae Feat qd il 341-19, weet yast, sas adits Fh) banda-o ho-ay bandagee gahai. Become the Lord's slave, and hold tight to His meditation.
UST 382
gee dfs sa Afa wd WICI (342-1, aet yaet, sas ate Hh) bandak ho-ay banDh suDh lahai. ||29]|
If you turn your thoughts to the Lord, the Lord will take care of you like a relative. ||29]|
3s Seta Se fas Il (342-1, ast yout, sas adie Fh) bhabhaa bhaydeh bhayd milaavaa. BHABHA: When doubt is pierced, union is achieved.
ma 3@ ats SdAG MIST Il (342-1, ret yaet, sas afte Ft) ab bha-o bhaan bharosa-o aavaa. I have shattered my fear, and now I have come to have faith.
a wofe A sists wfour I (342-2, reat yset, sas ate Fh jo baahar so bheetar jaani-aa. I thought that He was outside of me, but now I know that He is within me.
ster se gufs ufsetanr ISOM (342-2, aGat yset, sas aete Fh) bha-i-aa bhayd bhoopat pehchaani-aa. ||30|| When I came to understand this mystery, then I recognized the Lord. ||30]||
HHT HS afoot HS HTS Il (342-2, west yset, sas ats At) mamaa mool gahi-aa man maanai. MAMMA: Clinging to the source, the mind is satisfied.
Hoot off AHS AG AS Il (342-3, aCat use, sas adte Fh marmee ho-ay so man ka-o jaanai. One who knows this mystery understands his own mind.
HS aet Ho fiesst fas i 342-3, a@st yset, sas acta Hf) mat ko-ee man miltaa bilmaavai. Let no one delay in uniting his mind.
Hale Sf 3 AAG US ISU G42-3, west yset, sas ats Fh magan bha-i-aa tay so sach paavai. ||31|| Those who obtain the True Lord are immersed in delight. ||31]||
HHT HS fAG ora 3 Ho ATG fafa of I 42-4, aGst yset, sas adie a)
mamaa man si-o kaaj hai man saaDhay siDh ho-ay.
MAMMA: The mortal's business is with his own mind; one who disciplines his mind attains perfection.
Ho dt Ho fae ad aster Ho AT fife o af— 1321 42-4, ast ysst, sas adits Hh)
man hee man si-o kahai kabeeraa man saa mili-aa na ko-ay. ||32| | Only the mind can deal with the mind; says Kabeer, I have not met anything like the mind. ||32||
feg Ho Hast feg Ho ALG Il 342-5, west ust, sas ats Ht) ih man saktee ih man see-o. This mind is Shakti; this mind is Shiva.
feg He Us 33 a AE I 42-5, aGat vat, sas adits Hh) ih man panch tat ko jee-o. This mind is the life of the five elements.
feg Ho 3 HE Bonfa ad II (342-5, aGet yadt, sas adits Hh ih man lay ja-o unman rahai. When this mind is channeled, and guided to enlightenment,
38 Sie Sa at FS ad 1S3ll (342-6, aCst uset, sas adits Hh) ta-o teen lok kee baatai kahai. ||33]| it can describe the secrets of the three worlds. ||33]|
ua AG Wofs 36 esHis af6 ats ofA afer aE Il (342-6, aGst uset, sas ate Hh ya-yaa ja-o jaaneh ta-o durmat han kar bas kaa-i-aa gaa-o.
YAYYA: If you know anything, then destroy your evil-mindedness, and subjugate the body-village.
we IIS oH St AIS TIS JS Wasil (342-7, ast yset, sas ots HH)
ran roota-o bhaajai nahee soora-o thaara-o naa-o. ||34||
When you are engaged in the battle, don't run away; then, you shall be known as a spiritual hero. ||34||
wa 3A fSan ate Atom I (342-7, aeat use, sas ait Ft) raaraa ras niras kar jaani-aa. RARRA: I have found tastes to be tasteless.
dfe fear A OA ufsefemr Il (342-7, a@at yadt, sas aeite Ft) ho-ay niras so ras pehchaani-aa. Becoming tasteless, I have realized that taste.
fea dA a3 OU FA MST II (342-8, aGat uset, sas ate Ah ih ras chhaaday uh ras aavaa. Abandoning these tastes, I have found that taste.
@a on Ubor feo oA Odt Stet SUI (342-8, west Yost, sas adits Ft) uh ras pee-aa ih ras nahee bhaavaa. ||35]| Drinking in that taste, this taste is no longer pleasing. ||35]||
Or MA fee HS BS ll 342-9, ast yset, sas ante ah lalaa aisay liv man laavai. LALLA: Embrace such love for the Lord in your mind,
Woes 6 ATE UH AG UTS Il (342-9, aGet uset, sas ate ah anat na jaa-ay param sach paavai. that you shall not have to go to any other; you shall attain the supreme truth.
wig AG So UH fee we Il (342-9, aGet uaeh, sas aeita Hf) ar ja-o tahaa paraym liv laavai. And if you embrace love and affection for Him there,
38 nia Bd fs Bas ANS NEI (342-9, aCat yaet, sas aete FH)
ta-o alah lahai leh charan samaavai. ||36] |
then you shall obtain the Lord; obtaining Him, you shall be absorbed in His Feet. ||36]|
ze arg arg fara AYE Il (342-10, reat yo, sas adte Fh) vavaa baar baar bisan sam"aar. WAWA: Time and time again, dwell upon the Lord.
fans Aye 5 wire TS Il (342-10, ret yset, sas atts Ft) bisan sammhaar na aavai haar. Dwelling upon the Lord, defeat shall not come to you.
fe afs A faAase AA aS Il (342-10, Gat yest, sas ate Fh) bal bal jay bisantanaa jas gaavai.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to those, who sing the praises of the Saints, the sons of the Lord.
fena fxs AS dt Ae urs BON (342-11, Test Yost, sas adits Fh visan milay sabh hee sach paavai. ||37]|| Meeting the Lord, total Truth is obtained. ||37]|
ger ardt wraby at AS feg of& i (342-11, a@xt yset, sas adits Fh vaavaa vaahee jaanee-ai vaa jaanay ih ho-ay. WAWA: Know Him. By knowing Him, this mortal becomes Him.
feg og Go na fie Sa feos 6 WS AfE SCI 42-12, aGst yset, sas adits Hf)
ih ar oh jab milai tab milat na jaanai ko-ay. ||38]|
When this soul and that Lord are blended, then, having been blended, they cannot be known separately. ||38]|
AA A dle afe AU Il (342-12, a@xt yest, sas atte Fh) sasSaa SO neekaa kar soDhhu. SASSA: Discipline your mind with sublime perfection.
we ude at as fodug il 342-12, a@st uset, sas adie a) ghat parchaa kee baat niroDhahu. Refrain from that talk which attracts the heart.
we usd AG Cun aE Il (342-13, a@at yoet, sas adits Fh ghat parchai ja-o upjai bhaa-o. The heart is attracted, when love wells up.
ufs sfour 30 fyseE TE Nati 342-13, ast yset, saz asta FH) poor rahi-aa tah taribhavan raa-o. ||39]|| The King of the three worlds is perfectly pervading and permeating there. ||39]|
ua uff ud AG det 11 A aA A Sgfe 3 det Il (342-13, aGet yadt, sas adie Hh) khakhaa khoj parai ja-o ko-ee. jo khojai so bahur na ho-ee.
KHAKHA: Anyone who seeks Him, and by seeking Him, finds Him, shall not be born again.
da afs AG ad stars il (342-14, wat uae, sas atts Ft) khoj boojh ja-o karai beechaaraa. When someone seeks Him, and comes to understand and contemplate Him,
38 SzHS SIS 5 HS MT Ol 342-14, ast uset, sas acta Hh) ta-o bhavjal tarat na laavai baaraa. ||40|| then he crosses over the terrifying world-ocean in an instant. ||40]|
AA" A Ad AA ASS Il (342-15, ast yset, sas acta Hh)
Sasaa SO Sah Sayj Savaarai. SASSA: The bed of the soul-bride is adorned by her Husband Lord;
Het Adt Hea foes il 342-15, ast ysst, sas acta Hh) so-ee sahee sandayh nivaarai. her skepticism is dispelled.
meu AY fs UdH AY UTST Il (342-15, west Use, sas ate Hh) alap sukh chhaad param sukh paavaa. Renouncing the shallow pleasures of the world, she obtains the supreme delight.
3a fea shat Gr AZ ATS SU 42-16, west vast, sas adits sh tab ih taree-a ohu kant kahaavaa. ||41]| Then, she is the soul-bride; He is called her Husband Lord. ||41]|
To ds SE odt WAT I 42-16, aCzt yset, sas adits Hf) haahaa hot ho-ay nahee jaanaa. HAHA: He exists, but He is not known to exist.
wa dt af& safo ne Har Il (342-16, a@at yaet, sas aeite Ff) jab hee ho-ay tabeh man maanaa. When He is known to exist, then the mind is pleased and appeased.
J 3@ Adt we AE set | 342-17, rest yset, sas adits Hf) hai ta-o sahee lakhai ja-o ko-ee. Of course the Lord exists, if one could only understand Him.
aa Got Cg Sg o Tet SQN 42-17, aSst yset, sas adits Hf) tab ohee uho ayhu na ho-ee. ||42|| Then, He alone exists, and not this mortal being. ||42||
PSE HSE ass fed A ST Il (342-17, ast vast, sas ate Hh) liX-o li\-o karat firai sabh log. Everyone goes around saying, "I'll take this, and I'll take that.
wT was ford ag AG Il 642-18, a@st uset, sas acta Hf) taa kaaran bi-aapai baho sog. Because of that, they suffer in terrible pain.
oft aa fre AG fe@ we 1 642-18, ast yset, sas adits Hh) lakhimee bar si-o ja-o li-o laavai. When someone comes to love the Lord of Lakhshmi,
Aa fue As dt AY urs SSll (342-18, ast yadt, sas aete Ft) sog mitai sabh hee sukh paavai. ||43]| his sorrow departs, and he obtains total peace. ||43]|
wat fags yUs TE AZ Il (342-19, west yset, sas ait Ft) khakhaa khirat khapat ga-ay kaytay. KHAKHA: Many have wasted their lives, and then perished.
fags Hus oT ST VS Il (342-19, ast yset, sas ats A) khirat khapat ajahoo™ nah chaytay. Wasting away, they do not remember the Lord, even now.
me Ad AfS AG HoT Id Il (342-19, west yee, sas ante Fh
ab jag jaan ja-o manaa rahai.
But if someone, even now, comes to know the transitory nature of the world and restrain his mind,
Ad ot fasa 30 fag od 88 42-19, rest uset, sas adits Hh) jah kaa bichhuraa tah thir lahai. ||44|| he shall find his permanent home, from which he was separated. ||44||
UST 383
TSS ws He MS Il (343-1, wat ysst, sas adits ah baavan akhar joray aan. The fifty-two letters have been joined together.
Afar 3 ng Sa use Il (343-1, a@st use, sas ate ah) Saki-aa na akhar ayk pachhaan. But people cannot recognize the One Word of God.
AS a Aa sate aI Il (343-1, ast yset, sas ate Fh) sat kaa sabad kabeeraa kahai. Kabeer speaks the Shabad, the Word of Truth.
ufss df A nies Td Il (343-2, a@at yset, sas ate eh pandit ho-ay so anbhai rahai. One who is a Pandit, a religious scholar, must remain fearless.
ufss Bag ag faa Il 343-2, aGzt uset, sas ants sf pandit logah ka-o bi-uhaar. It is the business of the scholarly person to join letters.
frmrods aS 35 ates Il 343-2, west uaet, sas ate Ah gi-aanvant ka-o tat beechaar. The spiritual person contemplates the essence of reality.
wv a Aba Fat sfo Tet Wt G43-3, a@st use, sas adits wf) jaa kai jee-a jaisee buDh ho-ee. According to the wisdom within the mind,
afs ate war Het sul (343-3, ast yesh, sas adits Fh kahi kabeer jaanaigaa so-ee. ||45] | says Kabeer, so does one come to understand. ||45]||
qe Afsars yAfe Il (343-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta ast fast acts Ft at i 43-4) raag ga-orhee thitee’ kabeer jee kee”. Raag Gauree, T'hitee ~ The Lunar Days Of Kabeer Jee:
Hq Il (343-4) salok. Shalok:
ued fast AS Fs Il (343-4, aCst fast, sas ate Hh) pandreh thitee™ saat vaar. There are fifteen lunar days, and seven days of the week.
ats ads ses & UTS Il (343-4, aGst fast, sas adie Hh kahi kabeer urvaar na paar. Says Kabeer, it is neither here nor there.
AWfos fo we AE SE Il (343-5, west fast, sas adte Hh) saaDhik siDh lakhai ja-o bhay-o. When the Siddhas and seekers come to know the Lord's mystery,
my ast ny SS AU (343-5, aSat fast, sas adits ah aapay kartaa aapay day-o. ||1]|| they themselves become the Creator; they themselves become the Divine Lord. ||1]|
fast il (343-5)
thitee™.
T'hitee:
MHTEA fs wiTA feetad Il (343-5, aGat fast, sas ate
ammaavas meh aas nivaarahu. On the day of the new moon, give up your hopes.
Mada TH AHS Il (343-6, a@at fast, sas asia zh) antarjaamee raam samaarahu. Remember the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
ASS UST HY MIE Il (343-6, aCat fast, sas adte A jeevat paavhu mokh du-aar. You shall attain the Gate of Liberation while yet alive.
mose Ade 33 for ATS NA (343-6, aGat fast, sas adie ah
anbha-o sabad tat nij saar. ||1]|
You shall come to know the Shabad, the Word of the Fearless Lord, and the essence of your own inner being. ||1]|
TIO SHS afse Sa Bar il 343-7, west fast, sas adie charan kamal gobind rang laagaa. One who enshrines love for the Lotus Feet of the Lord of the Universe
Ha uAfe se Ho fans df atase Hfs wiafes War IU TIS Il (343-7, aSst frst, sas ate Ht)
sant parsaad bha-ay man nirmal har keertan meh an-din jaagaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
- by the Grace of the Saints, her mind becomes pure; night and day, she remains awake and aware, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||1]|Pause] |
ufget UISH Ady sted Il 343-8, west fast, sas ate Hh parivaa pareetam karahu beechaar. On the first day of the lunar cycle, contemplate the Beloved Lord.
we ufo YS wR! wT | (343-8, ast fast, sas adit zh) ghat meh khaylai aghat apaar. He is playing within the heart; He has no body - He is Infinite.
OS ASUS AS F UTE Il (343-8, aSst fest, sas adits wh kaal kalpanaa kaday na khaa-ay. The pain of death never consumes that person
mife use fs dd ANTE IQ 343-9, ast fast, sas ate th aad purakh meh rahai samaa-ay. ||2| | who remains absorbed in the Primal Lord God. ||2||
sor vs afs WS Nid I (343-9, west fast, gas adie Ff)
dutee-aa duh kar jaanai ang.
On the second day of the lunar cycle, know that there are two beings within the fiber of the body.
Mfr YIN GH AS Ad Il (343-9, a@at fest, sas adits wf) maa-i-aa barahm ramai sabh sang. Maya and God are blended with everything.
ao Gg ad 5 west ATE Il (343-10, aGat fast, sas adie Ah naa oh badhai na ghattaa jaa-ay. God does not increase or decrease.
nae fedae fa ate Sil 343-10, west fast, sas adte A akul niranjan aykai bhaa-ay. ||3|| He is unknowable and immaculate; He does not change. ||3]|
fgshor 33 AN afe femre II (343-10, a@xt fast, sas adit a)
taritee-aa teenay sam kar li-aavai.
On the third day of the lunar cycle, one who maintains his equilibrium amidst the three modes
MTSE HB USH UE UTS Il (343-10, aCat fest, sas ats A) aanad mool param pad paavai. finds the source of ecstasy and the highest status.
WrOnats Gur FATA I (343-11, ast fest, gars ade Ht) saaDhsangat upjai bisvaas. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, faith wells up.
wofe safe Ae YaA ISI (343-11, west fast, sas ate A) baahar bheetar sadaa pargaas. ||4|| Outwardly, and deep within, God's Light is always radiant. ||4]|
Gufs Jus Ho AG TdT Il (343-11, aGat fast, sas adits Ft) cha-othahi chanchal man ka-o gahhu. On the fourth day of the lunar cycle, restrain your fickle mind,
aH AU Afat aad 5 FIT Il (343-12, aGst fast, sas adie rh kaam kroDh sang kabahu na bahhu. and do not ever associate with sexual desire or anger.
HS 8G Hd witufs wiry il (343-12, a@st fast, sas ast jal thal maahay aapeh aap. On land and sea, He Himself is in Himself.
nm Aug MUST AY UI! (43-12, Test fast, sas adits ah) aapai japahu aapnaa jaap. ||5]| He Himself meditates and chants His Chant. ||5] |
ufg uv 33 fener Il (343-13, a@st fast, sas adie zh) paa'chai panch tat bisthaar. On the fifth day of the lunar cycle, the five elements expand outward.
atea athet Aa faBos I 343-13, aSet fast, sas acts A kanik kaaminee jug bi-uhaar. Men are occupied in the pursuit of gold and women.
Uy AO oA ule afF II (343-13, a@at fest, sas adits Fh) paraym suDhaa ras peevai ko-ay. How rare are those who drink in the pure essence of the Lord's Love.
Ad Hee ey efs o de NEN 343-13, west fast, sas adie jaraa maran dukh fayr na ho-ay. ||6]| They shall never again suffer the pains of old age and death. ||6]|
slo ug 3g ad fer OE I (343-14, ast fast, sas atite Fh) chhath khat chakar chhahoo-a™ dis Dhaa-ay. On the sixth day of the lunar cycle, the six chakras run in six directions.
fag usd odt faa aofe il (343-14, ast fast, sas adie th bin parchai nahee thiraa rahaa-ay. Without enlightenment, the body does not remain steady.
efaa vfe fant afs Fag Il (343-14, aGst fast, sas adits Ah dubiDhaa mayt khimaa geh rahhu. So erase your duality and hold tight to forgiveness,
OSH UGH At AGF ATT MDI (343-15, ast fast, sas ats Fh karam Dharam kee sool na sahhu. ||7|| and you will not have to endure the torture of karma or religious rituals. ||7]|
ATS’ Afs afe are ATE Il (343-15, aGst fast, sas adte at) saatai’ sat kar baachaa jaan. On the seventh day of the lunar cycle, know the Word as True,
MSH IH BI uUdSNTts Il (343-15, ast fast, sas ate eh) aatam raam layho parvaan. and you shall be accepted by the Lord, the Supreme Soul.
ge AM fife wfo ge Il (343-16, wat fast, saz ots Ht) chhootai sansaa mit jaahi dukh. Your doubts shall be eradicated, and your pains eliminated,
Ho Adefs wed AY ICI (343-16, aGat fast, sas adits Fh) sunn sarovar paavhu sukh. ||8|| and in the ocean of the celestial void, you shall find peace. ||8]|
MASH MAS US at atten I (343-16, aSst fast, sas asta Ah astamee asat Dhaat kee kaa-i-aa. On the eighth day of the lunar cycle, the body is made of the eight ingredients.
a Hfo mae Ho fafa afer i (343-17, a@st fast, saz adits taa meh akul mahaa niDh raa-i-aa. Within it is the Unknowable Lord, the King of the supreme treasure.
Td TH fame wavs Se Il (343-17, ast fast, sas asta ah gur gam gi-aan bataavai bhayd. The Guru, who knows this spiritual wisdom, reveals the secret of this mystery.
Coat Id MIST wee ICI 43-17, aGat fast, sas adits TH)
ultaa rahai abhang achhayd. ||9||
Turning away from the world, He abides in the Unbreakable and Impenetrable Lord. 91]
oeHt oe Borg aS AE I (343-18, ast fast, sas adie rt) na-umee navai du-aar ka-o saaDh. On the ninth day of the lunar cycle, discipline the nine gates of the body.
Fst HOA Tug ste Il (343-18, aCst fast, sas asta Hh) bahtee mansaa raakho baa™Dh. Keep your pulsating desires restrained.
Se Ho AS aAfs AT Il (343-18, Gat fast, sas adits Ah lobh moh sabh beesar jaahu. Forget all your greed and emotional attachment;
UST 388
Ad Ad Aled MT SB UT NAOM (344-1, west fast, sas adits zh jug jug jeevhu amar fal khaahu. ||10] | you shall live throughout the ages, eating the fruit of immortality. ||10]]|
cAMt vs fer df ne Il 344-1, ast fast, sas adie th dasmee dah dis ho-ay anand. On the tenth day of the lunar cycle, there is ecstasy in all directions.
Be SoH fs ae i 44-1, ae fast, sas aes Ht) chhootai bharam milai gobind. Doubt is dispelled, and the Lord of the Universe is met.
fs AgUt 3S MIGU Il 344-1, ast fast, sas acts Ft) jot saroopee tat anoop. He is the Embodiment of light, the incomparable essence.
WHS OHSS ST St TU NAU (344-2, aGat fast, sas aets Fh amal na mal na chhaah nahee Dhoop. ||11]| He is stainless, without stain, beyond both sunshine and shade. ||11]|
Sarent Sa feA we Il (344-2, a@at fast, sas aes Ah aykaadasee ayk dis Dhaavai. On the eleventh day of the lunar cycle, if you run in the direction of the One,
38 Hat Ha] wafs o nS Il (344-2, aGst fast, sas aste ah) ta-o jonee sankat bahur na aavai. you will not have to suffer the pains of reincarnation again.
Hise fens ster Agta Il (344-3, ast fast, sas adits wh seetal nirmal bha-i-aa sareeraa. Your body will become cool, immaculate and pure.
fs axes urfeur ate 9211 (344-3, ast fast, sas asta Ht) door bataavat paa-i-aa neeraa. ||12|| The Lord was said to be far away, but He is found near at hand. ||12]|
Wo IT Cae As il 344-3, ast fast, sas aets HH) baaras baarah ugvai soor. On the twelfth day of the lunar cycle, twelve suns rise.
mifsfotA aH nisde JT Il 344-4, ast fast, sas aete Fh ahinis baajay anhad toor. Day and night, the celestial bugles vibrate the unstruck melody.
aftr fsF Ba a ul i (344-4, ast fast, sas aets Ft) daykhi-aa tihoo-a™ lok kaa pee-o. Then, one beholds the Father of the three worlds.
mode Steor Ale 3 AG ASI (344-4, west fast, sas adits ah achraj bha-i-aa jeev tay see-o. ||13]| This is wonderful! The human being has become God! ||13]|
SoA Sad MATH TaTE Il (344-5, ast fast, sas adie wh) tayras tayrah agam bakhaan. On the thirteenth day of the lunar cycle, the thirteen holy books proclaim
mag Bau fats AH ufsete I (344-5, aSst fast, sas acta Ah
araDh uraDh bich sam pehchaan.
that you must recognize the Lord in the nether regions of the underworld as well as the heavens.
ate Ba adt ute MMS Il (344-5, ast fast, sas asta A) neech ooch nahee maan amaan. There is no high or low, no honor or dishonor.
faorfue TH Aas AHS IAI (344-6, ast fast, sas adits zh bi-aapik raam sagal saamaan. ||14|| The Lord is pervading and permeating all. ||14]|
sein ues Ba HSEfe Il (344-6, west fast, sas adie Ah cha-udas cha-odah lok majhaar. On the fourteenth day of the lunar cycle, in the fourteen worlds
dH SH ufo Safe Hate Il (344-6, ast fast, sas adie th) rom rom meh baseh muraar. and on each and every hair, the Lord abides.
AS Assy at gag films | 344-7, a@at fast, sas adte A) sat santokh kaa Dharahu Dhi-aan. Center yourself and meditate on truth and contentment.
aaat ada FaH fami quill (344-7, a@et fast, sas ante ah kathnee kathee-ai barahm gi-aan. ||15]| Speak the speech of God's spiritual wisdom. ||15]|
yfsS ust Fe MOA Il (344-7, west fast, sas aeits Fh) pooni-o pooraa chand akaas. On the day of the full moon, the full moon fills the heavens.
UA AS AIA UIA Il (344-7, ast fast, sas adie wh pasrahi kalaa sahj pargaas. Its power is diffused through its gentle light.
wife nifs Hfo df= sfoor ate | 344-8, aGet fest, sas adits Fh aad ant maDh ho-ay rahi-aa theer. In the beginning, in the end, and in the middle, God remains firm and steady.
HY Arad Hfo dHfs ats MAEM (344-8, aCst fast, sas asta Hh) sukh saagar meh rameh kabeer. ||16]|| Kabeer is immersed in the ocean of peace. ||16]|
qe Afsas ure I (344-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta Ast Ze ass AG AO I (344-9) raag ga-orhee vaar kabeer jee-o kay 7. Raag Gauree, The Seven Days Of The Week Of Kabeer Jee:
We as deg a Ts WSS Il (344-9, aSst, sas adits eh baar baar har kay gun gaava-o. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord each and every day.
dd WH se A dfs a wS|s Ul FIC I (344-9, aSat, sas acta wh) gur gam bhayd so har kaa paava-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting with the Guru, you shall come to know the mystery of the Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
mifes ad sats mrds ll (344-10, a@st, sas asta at) aadit karai bhagat aarambh. On Sunday, begin the devotional worship of the Lord,
afent Hed HOA ES Il (344-10, ast, sas adte rh) kaa-i-aa mandar mansaa thambh. and restrain the desires within the temple of the body.
mfofafa ors Aadt we I (344-11, a@et, sas adte at) ahinis akhand surhee jaa-ay. When your attention is focused day and night upon that imperishable place,
38 nisge Se AoA Hfo Ste A (344-11, rest, sas aeite A) ta-o anhad bayn sahj meh baa-ay. ||1]|| then the celestial flutes play the unstruck melody in tranquil peace and poise. ||1]|
Anes AfA vifys 3d Il 644-11, a@Ht, sas adte Fh somvaar sas amrit jharai. On Monday, the Ambrosial Nectar trickles down from the moon.
ous afar nae fart Jd i (344-12, ast, sas adie Hh) chaakhat bayg sagal bikh harai. Tasting it, all poisons are removed in an instant.
Wat dfomt Id BMTST I (344-12, ast, sas adie banee roki-aa rahai du-aar. Restrained by Gurbani, the mind remains indoors;
38 HO H3eTd UleSTTS QI (344-12, west, sas adie rh ta-o man matvaaro peevanhaar. ||2|| drinking in this Nectar, it is intoxicated. ||2| |
Hawes B HHS i (344-13, ast, sas adie Ah mangalvaaray lay maaheet. On Tuesday, understand reality;
Us od at AS SHS I G44-13, ast, sas adits Ah panch chor kee jaanai reet. you must know the way the five thieves work.
we 23° aoe fafs ate il (344-13, a@st, saz adte at) ghar chhoday” baahar jin jaa-ay. Those who leave their own home to go out wandering
Sag ua fon J THE SI (344-13, aeH, sas adie A naatar kharaa risai hai raa-ay. ||3]| shall feel the terrible wrath of the Lord, their King. ||3]|
gusts gfa ad YarA Il (344-14, a@Ht, sas adits Hh buDhvaar buDh karai pargaas. On Wednesday, one's understanding is enlightened.
fade ane ufo of at aA Il (344-14, ast, sas asta Ah hirdai kamal meh har kaa baas. The Lord comes to dwell in the lotus of the heart.
as ffs 88 Sa AH UE Il (344-14, aCHt, sas atts Ft) gur mil do-oo ayk sam Dharai. Meeting the Guru, one comes to look alike upon pleasure and pain,
au ua B AT AT ISI (344-15, aSHt, sas adits Fh) uraDh pank lai sooDhaa karai. ||4|| and the inverted lotus is turned upright. ||4| |
fgonufs fatter efe aofe i 44-15, est, sas ats Ft) barihaspat bikhi-aa day-ay bahaa-ay. On Thursday, wash off your corruption.
Sie tz Sa Afar ote i 44-15, a@st, sas adits Ah teen dayv ayk sang laa-ay. Forsake the trinity, and attach yourself to the One God.
ste odt 30 fgaet HT I 344-15, west, sas oits Ft) teen nadee tah tarikutee maahi. At the confluence of the three rivers of knowledge, right action and devotion, there,
mfofofh AHS Gefs afs ull (344-16, a@st, sas asta Ft)
ahinis kasmal Dhoveh naahi. ||5| | why not wash away your sinful mistakes? ||5]|
Afaz nod F fea afs BS I 44-16, ast, sas adits FH) sukarit sahaarai so ih barat charhai. On Friday, keep up and complete your fast;
motes vifu nmr frG oS Il (344-17, aGH, sas adte an-din aap aap si-o larhai. day and night, you must fight against your own self.
Hout uis@ get AS Il (344-17, a@et, gas adits Ff) surkhee paacha-o raakhai sabai. If you restrain your five senses,
38 ent fenfe 5 UA aa EN (344-17, aGst, sas adits Ff) ta-o doojee darisat na paisai kabai. ||6|| then you shall not cast your glance on another. ||6]|
aed fag afs oe Afe ul Afs St ect we nfo ALE I (344-17, ast, sas acts Ah thaavar thir kar raakhai so-ay. jot dee vatee ghat meh jo-ay. On Saturday, keep the candle of God's Light steady within your heart;
wofe sists sfeor yarn Il (344-18, a@st, sas ate Ah baahar bheetar bha-i-aa pargaas. you will be enlightened, inwardly and outwardly.
Ta GMT Ad AGH AT SA MDI (344-18, agst, sas ate Ah tab hoo-aa sagal karam kaa naas. ||7]|| All your karma will be erased. ||7||
UST B8u
Aa Bd We xfs EAT mS Il (345-1, ast, sas acta Ht) jab lag ghat meh doojee aan. Know that as long as you place your hopes in others,
38 3G Hols 5 HS ATS Il 345-1, aes, sas adie ta-o la-o mahal na laabhai jaan. you shall not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
dHS TH fAG oat FT Il (345-1, aC, sas adits th ramat raam si-o laago rang. When you embrace love for the Lord,
ats adte sa feaHe nig NCHA (345-2, west, sas asta Fh)
kahi kabeer tab nirmal ang. ||8]||1|| says Kabeer, then, you shall become pure in your very fiber. ||8]|1]|
TH Ast Bst Tat SHES AE at (345-3) raag ga-orhee chaytee banee naamday-o jee-o kee Raag Gauree Chaytee, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:
9B Asa YATE II (345-3)
ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
VST UTS STAM Il (345-4, aGst Sst, sas onze wh dayvaa paahan taaree-alay. God makes even stones float.
TH AIS AS GAB 3d NU TIS Il (345-4, aSat 35, sas Ve raam kahat jan kas na taray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
So why shouldn't Your humble slave also float across, chanting Your Name, O Lord? ||1]|Pause| |
IHS aloo fag gu afar forfa vA sIhIS 1 45-4, ast Sst, gas one FH) taareelay ganikaa bin roop kubijaa bi-aaDh ajaamal taaree-alay.
You saved the prostitute, and the ugly hunch-back; You helped the hunter and Ajaamal swim across as well.
Jdo faa Ae SE Has Be Il (345-5, aGat Sat, sas nee A charan baDhik jan tay-oo mukat bha-ay. The hunter who shot Krishna in the foot - even he was liberated.
JG af afs fae TH AT NA (345-5, aGat Sst, sas ane A ha-o bal bal jin raam kahay. ||1]| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to those who chant the Lord's Name. ||1]|
aH AS Ho fees Hen CqAe a@ gH He Il 645-6, aGat 351, sas anes Hh
daasee sut jan bidar sudaamaa ugarsain ka-o raaj dee-ay.
You saved Bidur, the son of the slave-girl, and Sudama; You restored Ugrasain to his throne.
mu de su dla as da Qu ds on & AM SE 3g QUAI G45-6, Test Sat, sas NRE Ht)
jap heen tap heen kul heen karam heen naamay kay su-aamee tay-oo taray. ||2||1]| Without meditation, without penance, without a good family, without good deeds, Naam Dayv's Lord and Master saved them all. ||2||1]|
Ta Ast SeeA A a ue TCSt amrsat (345-8) raag ga-orhee ravidaas jee kay paday ga-orhee gu-aarayree Raag Gauree, Padas Of Ravi Daas Jee, Gauree Gwaarayree:
ae AfsenH aes use TaYyATE I (345-9) ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh gurparsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
Het Hats us Ae feg ast Il (345-9, west, sas afer at) mayree sangat poch soch din raatee. The company I keep is wretched and low, and I am anxious day and night;
HT AGH afeos ASH ASST AU 45-9, TCH, sas sfeeA HH mayraa karam kutiltaa janam kubhaa“tee. ||1|| my actions are crooked, and I am of lowly birth. ||1]|
TH TAS Aba & Aleat Il (345-10, aSst, sas sfeerA Hh) raam gus-ee-aa jee-a kay jeevnaa. O Lord, Master of the earth, Life of the soul,
Hfo 3 fannsg HAS ST NU TIS I (345-10, aSat, sas sheen th) mohi na bisaarahu mai jan tayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. please do not forget me! I am Your humble servant. ||1]||Pause| |
Hot gag faufs AS aAeT AST Il (345-11, ast, sas afeeA AHH mayree harahu bipat jan karahu subhaa-ee. Take away my pains, and bless Your humble servant with Your Sublime Love.
VIE 5 SSE Adhd AS WEST MMi (345-11, ast, sas sfeen FH)
charan na chhaada-o sareer kal jaa-ee. ||2| | I shall not leave Your Feet, even though my body may perish. ||2| |
aT een use Sat AS Il 45-11, a@st, sas sfeem Hh) kaho ravidaas para-o tayree saabhaa. Says Ravi Daas, I seek the protection of Your Sanctuary;
afa fod Ae ats & faara SIA (345-12, aes, sas afer
bayg milhu jan kar na bilaa“baa. ||3]|1]| please, meet Your humble servant - do not delay! |[3||1]|
aH us AIT a SE Il (345-12, wet, sas steer Ff) baygam puraa sahar ko naa-o. Baygumpura, ‘the city without sorrow’, is the name of the town.
ey nig odt fafa OE Il (345-12, rat, sas ofeen Fh) dookh andohu nahee tihi thaa-o. There is no suffering or anxiety there.
ot SAA faa BHD Il (345-13, aSst, sas sfeeA Hh) naa™ tasvees khiraaj na maal. There are no troubles or taxes on commodities there.
ug 3 US'S SdH ASS INA (345-13, ast, sas seen kha-uf na khataa na taras javaal. ||1]| There is no fear, blemish or downfall there. ||1]|
wa Hf ya FS TI uret il (345-13, aSst, sas seen Ht) ab mohi khoob vatan gah paa-ee. Now, I have found this most excellent city.
Cot dfs Het AS set UU TIS il 45-14, ast, sas sfeerA Ht) oohaa"™ khair sadaa mayray bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. There is lasting peace and safety there, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause| |
afen afen Het utsATS I (345-14, a@st, sas sfeen Hh) kaa-im daa-im sadaa paatisaahee. God's Kingdom is steady, stable and eternal.
oH 3 AN Sa A Md Il (345-14, a@st, sas ofeen at dom na saym ayk so aahee. There is no second or third status; all are equal there.
mrareTg Ae HAY Il (345-15, aGst, sas afeen a) aabaadaan sadaa mashoor. That city is populous and eternally famous.
Got Tat aAfs MYT II (345-15, ast, saz steer FH) oohaa™ ganee baseh maamoor. ||2|| Those who live there are wealthy and contented. ||2]|
fs@ f38 Ae asta fAG aS I 345-15, aGH, saz afeern Hf) ti-o ti-o sail karahi ji-o bhaavai. They stroll about freely, just as they please.
HIGH HIG 3 & Mares | (345-16, ast, sas seen Hh mahram mahal na ko atkaavai. They know the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and no one blocks their way.
td eA UTA VHS Il (345-16, aSst, sas sheen Hh)
kahi ravidaas khalaas chamaaraa. Says Ravi Daas, the emancipated shoe-maker:
A UH Addl AMS INST III (345-16, reat, sas steer Th)
jo ham sahree so meet hamaaraa. ||3]|2| | whoever is a citizen there, is a friend of mine. ||3]|2||
qe Afsars yrrfe il (345-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ast sarafs seem A i 345-17) ga-orhee bairaagan ravidaas jee-o. Gauree Bairaagan, Ravi Daas Jee:
we neue sae wet fea fSsqTs IH TH Il 345-17, aGat aoats, saz sfeen Ht)
ghat avghat doogar ghanaa ik nirgun bail hamaar.
The path to God is very treacherous and mountainous, and all I have is this worthless Ox.
gHele fAS fea aost Ast Ue aay Hes WAU (345-18, ast aerate, sas see Ht) ram-ee-ay si-o ik bayntee mayree poonjee raakh muraar. ||1]| I offer this one prayer to the Lord, to preserve my capital. ||1]|
a yond TH AAT cist orem aE F AU TIS I 345-18, aGat Sorats, sas steer ah ko banjaaro raam ko mayraa taa“daa laadi-aa jaa-ay ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Is there any merchant of the Lord to join me? My cargo is loaded, and now I am leaving. ||1||Pause] |
Us BvE
JG sons TH a AOA aI Hg Il 346-1, aSat dorats, saz sheen Fh) ha-o banjaaro raam ko sahj kara-o ba-yaapaar. I am the merchant of the Lord; I deal in spiritual wisdom.
HOH 3H Ug Ofenr fay wet Ars Qi 46-1, west dears, sas sen Ah mai raam naam Dhan laadi-aa bikh laadee sansaar. ||2|| I have loaded the Wealth of the Lord's Name; the world has loaded poison. ||2||
Csea urs & BSI fofy SI nis use Il (346-2, a@at awafls, sas sfeen FH) urvaar paar kay daanee-aa likh layho aal pataal.
O you who know this world and the world beyond: write whatever nonsense you please about me.
Hfo AH SS 3 Baet SHS Ass ANS IlBil G46-2, aGst Avats, sas seer TH)
mohi jam dand na laag-ee tajeelay sarab janjaal. ||3]|
The club of the Messenger of Death shall not strike me, since I have cast off all entanglements. ||3]|
AA dd AHS a Sw fed AAT Il (346-3, weet aoats, sas sheen Ah jaisaa rang kasumbh kaa taisaa ih sansaar. Love of this world is like the pale, temporary color of the safflower.
He sete Ja Hale a ag SETA BHT ISI 646-3, ast Aoats, sas seeA Ff) mayray ram-ee-ay rang majeeth kaa kaho ravidaas chamaar. ||4||1||
The color of my Lord's Love, however, is permanent, like the dye of the madder plant. So says Ravi Daas, the tanner. ||4]|1]|
asst uset seen FIG 46-5) ga-orhee poorbee ravidaas jee-o Gauree Poorbee, Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsars YATE Il (346-5)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ay sfee aA oles ag tH fHen Fs Il 346-6, wat uae, sas seen Fh) koop bhari-o jaisay daadiraa kachh days bidays na boojh. The frog in the deep well knows nothing of its own country or other lands;
MA Hat He fatto faifoor as vist urs BAZ UL (346-6, ast use, sas afeerA Ft) aisay mayraa man bikhi-aa bimohi-aa kachh aaraa paar na soojh. ||1||
just so, my mind, infatuated with corruption, understands nothing about this world or the next. ||1]|
Hae 320 & Steart fea fea can feats At NA JIC I 346-7, Test Uset, sas afer Sagal bhavan kay naa-ikaa ik chhin daras dikhaa-ay jee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O Lord of all worlds: reveal to me, even for an instant, the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1||Pause]|
Heo set Hfs Hae Sct afs wet 6 ATE I (346-7, aGat vast, sas sfeeA Ft) malin bha-ee mat maaDhvaa tayree gat lakhee na jaa-ay. My intellect is polluted; I cannot understand Your state, O Lord.
aay feu gH yaet H AMIS ST AHSTE I G46-8, west yset, sas fee HH) karahu kirpaa bharam chook-ee mai sumat dayh samjhaa-ay. ||2|| Take pity on me, dispel my doubts, and teach me true wisdom. ||2||
nang uefs odt Sul TE TAS MUS Il (346-8, aCet yset, sas sfeera Fh jogeesar paavahi nahee tu-a gun kathan apaar. Even the great Yogis cannot describe Your Glorious Virtues; they are beyond words.
Un safs & arse ag SSA BHT ISU (46-9, rat yadt, sas afeeA Ah paraym bhagat kai kaarnai kaho ravidaas chamaar. ||3||1]| I am dedicated to Your loving devotional worship, says Ravi Daas the tanner. ||3]||1]|
asst Faas (346-10) ga-orhee bairaagan Gauree Bairaagan:
qe Afsars yATfE II (346-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Asafa AS Sz Halt Porufs UAT Il 346-11, ast Seats, sas sfeen FH)
satjug sat taytaa jagee du-aapar poojaachaar.
In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, was Truth; in the Silver Age of Trayta Yuga, charitable feasts; in the Brass Age of Dwaapar Yuga, there was worship.
36 wa 36 fes afe Fem oH nS UI (346-11, TES Aras, sas sfeeA Th) teenou jug teenou dirhay kal kayval naam aDhaar. ||1]|
In those three ages, people held to these three ways. But in the Iron Age of Kali Yuga, the Name of the Lord is your only Support. ||1]|
urg AA ufes Fl 346-1, west doats, sas afer Ah paar kaisay paa-ibo ray. How can I swim across?
HAG AG 6 ad AHSTE Il 346-12, aCat dorats, sas afer Ht) mo sa-o ko-o0 na kahai samjhaa-ay. No one has explained to me,
Ww 3 ore eo feats dl IIS Il 646-12, ast aoats, sas seeA AH jaa tay aavaa gavan bilaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. so that I might understand how I can escape reincarnation. ||1]||Pause| |
ag fafa usn fogubt asst dA As BE Il 346-12, reat avafs, saz sfee A) baho biDh Dharam niroopee-ai kartaa deesai sabh lo-ay. So many forms of religion have been described; the whole world is practicing them.
eS ASH S sete fo AG AS fifo SE QU (46-13, aCet deals, saz afer A) kavan karam tay chhootee-ai jih saaDhay sabh siDh ho-ay. ||2|| What actions will bring emancipation, and total perfection? ||2]|
AGH naan shed Hart Afs Fe uss Il 346-13, aGst Aoats, sas sheen th)
karam akram beechaaree-ai sankaa sun bayd puraan.
One may distinguish between good and evil actions, and listen to the Vedas and the Puraanas,
HAT He fase aA ae fod mifsuts 131 G46-14, a@st avats, sas ofeen Ff) sansaa sad hirdai basai ka-un hirai abhimaan. ||3]|
but doubt still persists. Skepticism continually dwells in the heart, so who can eradicate egotistical pride? ||3]||
wdg Gufa uardhn we sisfe fafafa faore i (346-14, a@et aeats, sas sen Ah baahar udak pakhaaree-ai ghat bheetar bibiDh bikaar.
Outwardly, he washes with water, but deep within, his heart is tarnished by all sorts of vices.
AO ae ud dfed Ay ava fafa faBors igi 346-15, aes aware, sas fee Th)
suDh kavan par ho-ibo such kunchar biDh bi-uhaar. ||4||
So how can he become pure? His method of purification is like that of an elephant, covering himself with dust right after his bath! ||4] |
afe yarn sHot Ae ats Was AS AAS Il (346-15, wat Seats, sas sees ah rav pargaas rajnee jathaa gat jaanat sabh sansaar. With the rising of the sun, the night is brought to its end; the whole world knows this.
USA HS SH SE Aaa JS odt Hg MUll (346-16, aGat aoats, sas seen Ah
paaras maano taabo chhu-ay kanak hot nahee baar. ||5||
It is believed that with the touch of the Philosopher's Stone, copper is immediately transformed into gold. ||5]|
USH USA Te set usa fas fowr|S i (346-16, west Srats, srs seen Fh
param paras gur bhaytee-ai poorab likhat lilaat.
When one meets the Supreme Philosopher's Stone, the Guru, if such pre-ordained destiny is written on one's forehead,
BoHO HO Ho Tt fHS Seas SHS Aur|Y Ell 46-17, west Seats, sas seen FH) unman man man hee milay chhutkat bajar kapaat. ||6]||
then the soul blends with the Supreme Soul, and the stubborn doors are opened wide. [|6]|
safs vats Hfs Afs adt gH due ate fears I 346-17, west aoats, sas sfeen A) bhagat jugat mat sat karee bharam banDhan kaat bikaar.
Through the way of devotion, the intellect is imbued with Truth; doubts, entanglements and vices are cut away.
Het aff afk ne fee ae fosas Sa fers ill 346-18, a@st Avats, sas sfeera th)
so-ee bas ras man milay gun nirgun ayk bichaar. ||7||
The mind is restrained, and one attains joy, contemplating the One Lord, who is both with and without qualities. ||7||
uifoa Aso faqu ate adt o ed FH SA Il 346-19, aGat Soars, sas afer Hf)
anik jatan nigreh kee-ay taaree na tarai bharam faas.
I have tried many methods, but by turning it away, the noose of doubt is not turned away.
Yn sats oot Cur at Ss Seer SSA ITI (346-19, aeat Foats, sas seen Ft) paraym bhagat nahee oopjai taa tay ravidaas udaas. ||8||1||
Love and devotion have not welled up within me, and so Ravi Daas is sad and depressed. ||8||1]|
ua 380 96 ATS on aes usy fos fares nies Hats mist AS aT YATE I (347-1
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TT MTA HIS A We VA BT Il (347-3) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 so dar. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, First House, So Dar ~ That Gate:
Aug 37 aw A wg ag fas af Aga AWS Il (347-4, om, He 1)
so dar tayraa kayhaa so ghar kayhaa jit bahi sarab sam"aalay.
What is that Gate, and what is that Home, in which You sit and take care of all? SA 3ST FS MSA MAU AS 3d BMeSTs Il (347-4, vm, v2 1)
vaajay tayray naad anayk asankhaa kaytay tayray vaavanhaaray.
Countless musical instruments of so many various kinds vibrate there for You; so many are the musicians there for You.
as 33 Ta udt fAS admits a3 3d Weeds Il (347-5, wmv, He 1)
kaytay tayray raag paree si-o kahee-ahi kaytay tayray gaavanhaaray.
There are so many Ragas there for You, along with their accompanying harmonies; so many minstrels sing to You.
refs 306 uGs ust SHSg WS TH GaN VMS Il (347-5, oT, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno pa-un paanee baisantar gaavai raajaa Dharam du-aaray.
The winds sing to You, as do water and fire; the Righteous Judge of Dharma sings at Your Door.
wets 3u6 fas aus fafa refs fats fafa cay Ses I 47-6, vir, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno chit gupat likh jaanan likh likh Dharam veechaaray.
Chitar and Gupat, the recording angels of the conscious and the subconscious, sing to You; they know, and they write, and on the basis of what they write, the Lord of Dharma passes judgement.
wets 3u6 Sing yon 2et Aafe 3d WET ASS Il (347-7, »mr, Hs 1)
gaavni" tuDhno eesar barahmaa dayvee sohan tayray sadaa savaaray.
Shiva and Brahma and the Goddess Parvaati, so beautiful and ever adorned by You, sing to You.
wets suo fie ffenfs 83 tefsur fs oS Il (347-7, om, 8 1)
gaavni" tuDhno indar indaraasan baithay dayviti-aa dar naalay.
The Indras, seated upon their celestial thrones, with the deities at Your Gate, sing to You.
wets 306 fro md niefs refs 30d AG Stes Il (347-8, nmr, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno siDh samaaDhee andar gaavni" tuDhno saaDh beechaaray.
The Siddhas in Samaadhi sing to You, and the Holy Saints, in their contemplative meditation, sing to You.
wets 306 Hat Ast ASset wets sue Se ATS I (347-8, oT, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno jatee satee santokhee gaavan tuDhno veer karaaray.
The celibates, the truthful and the patient beings sing to You, and the mighty warriors sing to You.
Wefs 306 ufss us wT WA AT SST BS I (347-9, wer, He 1)
gaavan tuDhno pandit parhay rakheesur jug jug baydaa naalay.
The scholarly Pandits sing to You, along with the holy Rishis and the readers of the Vedas throughout the ages.
Wefs 306 Hos Ho Hole Ada HE UfEMrs | (347-10, vir, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno mohnee-aa man mohan surag machh pa-i-aalay.
The Mohinis, the heavenly beauties who entice the heart in paradise, in this world and in the nether regions, sing to You.
wets 36 335 Cure 33 AS nionfs Stee FS Il (347-10, »mr, vs 1)
gaavni" tuDhno ratan upaa-ay tayray jaytay athsath tirath naalay.
The fourteen priceless jewels created by You, and the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage, sing to You.
wets 30S AU HIS AT wets SUS wrest VST Ml 347-11, ew, we 1)
gaavni" tuDhno joDh mahaabal sooraa gaavni" tuDhno khaanee chaaray.
The mighty warriors and the divine heroes sing to You, and the four sources of creation sing to You.
wets 306 us Hse qoHSs afe afs Te 33 WS Il (347-11, wT, He 1)
gaavni" tuDhno khand mandal barahmandaa kar kar rakhay tayray Dhaaray.
The continents, the worlds and the solar systems, created and installed by Your Hand, sing to You.
Ret 306 wefe A 30 aefG FS 3d Faqs IAS Il 347-12, vm, He 1)
say-ee tuDhno gaavni" jo tuDh bhaavni" ratay tayray bhagat rasaalay.
They alone sing to You, who are pleasing to Your Will, and who are imbued with the nectar of Your devotional worship.
dfs as 306 wefs AH fefs 5 mrefs coat for dherd Il 347-13, mr, ne 1)
hor kaytay tuDhno gaavan say mai chit na aavan naanak ki-aa beechaaray.
So many others sing to You, they do not come into my mind; how can Nanak think of them?
Het Het Het AY ATfoE ATT ATS Set I 347-13, mA, He 1) so-ee so-ee Sadaa sach saahib saachaa saachee naa-ee. That Lord and Master - He is True, forever True; He is True, and True is His Name.
J ot dat ate o AA agar fAfo goret I (347-14, vir, we 1)
hai bhee hosee jaa-ay na jaasee rachnaa jin rachaa-ee. He who created the creation is True, and He shall always be True; He shall not depart, even when the creation departs.
dat dat ast fASAt wfeor fafs Guret i 347-14, nr, He 1) rangee rangee bhaatee jinsee maa-i-aa jin upaa-ee. He created the world of Maya with its various colors and species.
af afs fy ats mruet fa fSn ct efsnret it 347-15, vir, ve
kar kar daykhai keetaa apnaa ji-o tis dee vadi-aa-ee.
Having created the creation, He Himself watches over it, as it pleases His Greatness.
a fq ae Het aart fefs gan 5 age ATT I 47-15, mT, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee fir hukam na karnaa jaa-ee. Whatever pleases Him, that is what He does. No one can issue any commands to Him.
Ua sgt A ufsag AS ufs afse Soa IIS TATE MAUI (348-1, ne, He 1)
SO paatisaahu saahaa pat saahib naanak rahan rajaa-ee. ||1]|1]| He is the King, the King of Kings, the Emperor of Kings! Nanak lives in surrender to His Will. ||1]]1]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (348-1)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
A usu fadae ofa usy fadre dfs mene wie wpa Il (348-2, vir, He 4)
so purakh niranjan har purakh niranjan har agmaa agam apaaraa.
That Lord is Immaculate; the Lord God is Immaculate. The Lord is Unapproachable, Unfathomable and Incomparable.
Afs fourefs vfs fomrefs 3a at ofs Ad fAaHeT ST Il (348-2, nmr, He 4) sabh Dhi-aavahi sabh Dhi-aavahi tuDh jee har sachay sirjanhaaraa. All meditate, all meditate on You, O Dear Lord, O True Creator.
As Abr Sure At 3 Abort or erarar Il (348-3, wer, He 4) sabh jee-a tumaaray jee too” jee-aa kaa daataaraa. All beings are Yours; You are the Giver of all beings.
dfs foureg Hag at Afs eu feAraeas Il (348-3, mmr, Hs 4) har Dhi-aavahu santahu jee sabh dookh visaaranhaaraa. So meditate on the Lord, O Saints; He is the One who takes away all pain.
dfs wm oars ofa wm Rea Ft for soa AS fess IAI (348-4, mer, He 4)
har aapay thaakur har aapay sayvak jee ki-aa naanak jant vichaaraa. ||1||
The Lord Himself is the Master, and He Himself is His own servant. O Nanak, how insignificant are mortal beings! ||1]|
3 we we nists Ava fedste Ft ofs Sa use AHTET Il (348-4, mmr, He 4)
too” ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar jee har ayko purakh samaanaa.
You are totally pervading within each and every heart; O Lord, You are the One Primal Being, All-permeating.
fefa as fete suct at afs 33 dH fesve II (348-5, vir, He 4) ik daatay ik bhaykhaaree jee sabh tayray choj vidaanaa. Some are givers, and some are beggars; all of this is Your wondrous play!
J omy ast nm sas Ft TE sg fas neg 3 AST Il (348-6, mr, Hs 4)
too” aapay daataa aapay bhugtaa jee ha-o tuDh bin avar na jaanaa.
You Yourself are the Giver, and You Yourself are the Enjoyer. I know of no other than You.
3 USAIN Mig anizs At Sd for Te nef Sarat il (348-6, wer, us 4)
too” paarbarahm bay-ant bay-ant jee tayray ki-aa gun aakh vakhaanaa.
You are the Supreme Lord God, Infinite and Eternal; what Glorious Praises of Yours should I speak and chant?
A Aefe A Aefs 30 Ht He aoa fq ATAEST NI (348-7, vm, He 4) jo sayveh jo sayveh tuDh jee jan naanak tin” kurbaanaa. ||2]| Unto those who serve, unto those who serve You, slave Nanak is a sacrifice. ||2]|
ofs furefa ofs faurefa 30 At A AS Aa Hf AY SAT Il 348-7, vm, He 4)
har Dhi-aavahi har Dhi-aavahi tuDh jee say jan jug meh sukh vaasee.
Those who meditate on the Lord, those who meditate on You, O Dear Lord, those humble beings dwell in peace in this world.
A Has A Has 3e fag ote fimrfeur AS fsa edt AN at ST II (348-8, wer, He 4)
say mukat say mukat bha-ay jin” har Dhi-aa-i-aa jee-o tin tootee jam kee faasee. They are liberated, they are liberated, who meditate on the Lord; the noose of Death is cut away from them.
fie fess fae afs foas@ fourfeor FIG f35 a 3B AS aTSTAT II (348-9, nmr, He 4) jin nirbha-o jin" har nirbha-o Dhi-aa-i-aa jee-o tin kaa bha-o sabh gavaasee. Those who meditate on the Fearless One, on the Fearless Lord, all their fears are dispelled.
fag Afeor faq Afeor Hot of AIG S ofa ats gf AHTAT II (348-9, wer, He 4)
jin" sayvi-aa jin" sayvi-aa mayraa har jee-o tay har har roop samaasee. Those who have served, those who have served my Dear Lord, are absorbed into the Being of the Lord, Har, Har.
A Uo A Ud fae fe fonrfemr He Ae aoa fs af FTA ISI G43-10, vr, He 4) say Dhan say Dhan jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa jee-o jan naanak tin bal jaasee. ||3]| Blessed are they, blessed are they, who have meditated on the Dear Lord; slave Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||3]|
dt safs sat sats gars Ht 3d Bis HiT I 48-11, ve, He 4) tayree bhagat tayree bhagat bhandaar jee bharay bay-ant bay-antaa. Devotion to You, devotion to You, is a treasure, overflowing, infinite and endless.
33 30s 39 sas Aosle 30 at ote nifsa nisa MST I (348-11, nT, He 4) tayray bhagat tayray bhagat salaahan tuDh jee har anik anayk anantaa. Your devotees, Your devotees praise You, O Dear Lord, in many and various ways.
Sot fea Sct nifoa vats ate ur at su Stufs mus Suis I 348-12, mmr, we 4) tayree anik tayree anik karahi har poojaa jee tap taapeh jaapeh bay-antaa. For You, so many, for You, so very many, O Dear Lord, perform worship and adoration; they practice penance and endlessly chant in meditation.
33 mda 3d vida uate ag fAf_fs AAS At afe fafemr YS AIH ATT Il (348-13, view, ve 4)
tayray anayk tayray anayk parheh baho simrit saasat jee kar kiri-aa khat karam karantaa.
For You, many - for You, so very many read the various Simritees and Shaastras; they perform religious rituals and the six ceremonies.
A 3ds A IAs 3G AO Soa Ht A eefa HS ofa SaqSST Vil (348-14, wT, He 4)
say bhagat say bhagat bhalay jan naanak jee jo bhaaveh mayray har bhagvantaa. [41 |
Those devotees, those devotees are good, O servant Nanak, who are pleasing to my Lord God. ||4]|
3 onfe usy nudug asst At 30 AST weg 3 AST Il 48-14, mmr, we 4)
too” aad purakh aprampar kartaa jee tuDh jayvad avar na ko-ee.
You are the Primal Being, the Unrivalled Creator Lord; there is no other as Great as You.
3 WI a Sa Ae Ae Ss Sa At S fags ATT AST Il 48-15, mew, we 4)
too” jug jug ayko sadaa sadaa too” ayko jee too” nihchal kartaa so-ee.
You are the One, age after age; forever and ever, You are One and the same. You are the Eternal, Unchanging Creator.
30 omy ae Het eas At ST ym aafa A Tet Il 48-16, mmr, we 4) tuDh aapay bhaavai so-ee vartai jee too’ aapay karahi so ho-ee. Whatever pleases You comes to pass. Whatever You Yourself do, happens.
su nm fqrfe AS Curet Ft su umd fafa AS det Il (348-16, nr, ne 4)
tuDh aapay sarisat sabh upaa-ee jee tuDh aapay siraj sabh go-ee.
You Yourself created the entire Universe, and having done so, You Yourself shall destroy it all.
HG Sod Te We ads a At HW ASA AT weet MUNI (348-17, ner, He 4) jan naanak gun gaavai kartay kay jee jo sabhsai kaa jaano-ee. ||5||2|| Servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Creator, the Knower of all. ||5]|2||
qe Afsars ATE Il (348-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TT MAT HIS 9 BBuE wey 2 I (348-19) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 cha-upday ghar 2. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Chaupaday, Second House:
Afs eat wimg AS AST I (348-19, wm, He 1) sun vadaa aakhai sabh ko-ee. Hearing, everyone calls You Great,
AES Far Stor Tet I (348-19, nrwr, us 1) kayvad vadaa deethaa ho-ee. but only one who has seen You, knows just how Great You are.
Yar ser atnfs urfe 6 afar safe il (349-1, nar, we 1)
keemat paa-ay na kahi-aa jaa-ay. No one can measure Your Worth, or describe You.
~~
Ae BS 3 TI ANTE AU (349-1, wr, ve 1) kahnai vaalay tayray rahay samaa-ay. ||1|| Those who describe You, remain absorbed in You. ||1]|
zs Hd Aes afod asta aet asta i (349-1, wr, He 1)
vaday mayray saahibaa gahir gambheeraa gunee gaheeraa.
O my Great Lord and Master of Unfathomable Depth, You are the Ocean of Excellence.
aet 5 We 3a ast aes ste Ul TIS I 49-2, new, ve 1) ko-ee na jaanai tayraa kaytaa kayvad cheeraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. No one knows the greatness of Your expanse. ||1]||Pause] |
Afs Hest ful Aafs aHrEeT I (349-2, nmr, He 1) sabh surtee mil surat kamaa-ee. All the contemplators met together and practiced contemplation;
As atts fife ahifs uret i (349-3, urrr, ne 1) sabh keemat mil keemat paa-ee. all the appraisers met together and tried to appraise You.
famirat fomrat Tad TT TET il (349-3, vray, He 1) gi-aanee Dhi-aanee gur gur haa-ee. The theologians, the meditators and the teachers of teachers
aE 6 Wet Sct fq SfSnret 2M 49-3, nmr, vs 1) kahan na jaa-ee tayree til vadi-aa-ee. ||2] | could not express even an iota of Your Greatness. ||2]|
Afs AS Afs su Afs Sfomrebor | (349-4, nmr, He 1) sabh sat sabh tap sabh chang-aa-ee-aa. All Truth, all austerities, all goodness,
for user aor sfanireinit il (349-4, nmr, ue 1) siDhaa purkhaa kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa’. and the greatness of the Siddhas, the beings of perfect spiritual powers
3u fee fact faa o ureor Il (349-4, mmr, He 1) tuDh vin siDhee kinai na paa-ee-aa. - without You, none has attained such spiritual powers.
oath fre ardt ofa soso SBI (349-5, wi, He 1) karam milai naahee thaak rahaa-ee-aa. ||3]| They are obtained by Your Grace; their flow cannot be blocked. ||3]|
MEE Ser fait FIST I (349-5, wma, He 1) aakhan vaalaa ki-aa baychaaraa. What can the helpless speaker do?
frest 33 33 S3T I (349-5, wer, ne 1) siftee bharay tayray bhandaaraa. Your bounties are overflowing with Your Praises.
fa 3 Sfa FSA fame ore Il (349-6, wir, He 1) jis too’ deh tisai ki-aa chaaraa. And the one, unto whom You give - why should he think of any other?
oOt AY ASIST A ISIAM (349-6, wmv, He 1)
naanak sach savaaranhaaraa. ||4||1]| O Nanak, the True Lord is the Embellisher. ||4||1]|
MTAT HIS 1% Il (349-6)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
nina Ate fend Hfs AE Il (349-7, mor, He 1) aakhaa jeevaa visrai mar jaa-o. Chanting the Name, I live; forgetting it, I die.
mrafe mBur Arat OE Il (349-7, nmar, He 1) aakhan a-ukhaa saachaa naa-o. It is so difficult to chant the True Name.
ATS SH ott Ba FH Il (349-7, wm, we 1) saachay naam kee laagai bhookh. If someone feels hunger for the True Name,
fg sa ate setoifs Se UU 349-7, om, He 1D tit bhookhai khaa-ay chalee-ahi dookh. ||1]| then that hunger shall consume his pains. ||1] |
A fax@ fend Hat wife i (49-8, ver, He 1) so ki-o visrai mayree maa-ay. So how could I ever forget Him, O my Mother?
Aa Afos ATS OTE NU TIS I (349-8, vir, He 1) saachaa saahib saachai naa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. True is the Master, and True is His Name. ||1||Pause] |
Ad OH at (36 Sfanret i orf aa atHfs adt uret Il (349-8, ner, Hs 1)
saachay naam kee til vadi-aa-ee. aakh thakay keemat nahee paa-ee.
People have grown weary of trying to appraise the greatness of the True Name, but they have not been able to appraise even an iota of it.
a Afs fife & mee urs i 349-9, or, He 1) jay sabh mil kai aakhan paahi. Even if they were all to meet together and recount them,
za 3 de] ute & AE IQ (349-9, wir, He 1) vadaa na hovai ghaat na jaa-ay. ||2|| You would not be made any greater or lesser. ||2||
o Gg Hd Bd] AM Il (349-10, mmr, ne 1) naa oh marai na hovai sog. He does not die - there is no reason to mourn.
Sa II Fa ST Ill (349-10, wer, we 1) day™daa rahai na chookai bhog. He continues to give, but His Provisions are never exhausted.
TE Sd TT SS ALE il 349-10, mr, nz 1) gun ayho hor naahee ko-ay. This Glorious Virtue is His alone - no one else is like Him;
Oo a dnt at at GE IlBll (349-10, mmr, He 1) naa ko ho-aa naa ko ho-ay. |[3]| there has never been anyone like Him, and there never shall be. ||3]|
Aes orf Ses Sct STS Il (49-11, or, He 1) jayvad aap tayvad tayree daat. As Great as You Yourself are, so Great are Your Gifts.
fate fee af & atst TPS I (349-11, nmr, He 1) jin din kar kai keetee raat. It is You who created day and night as well.
WAH feats 3 HATS Il (349-11, nT, He 1) khasam visaareh tay kamjaat. Those who forget their Lord and Master are vile and despicable.
Soa Se HST ASS NI (349-12, wv, wz 1) naanak naavai baajh sanaat. ||4||2|| O Nanak, without the Name, people are wretched outcasts. ||4||2||
YMTAT HIS 4 Il (349-12)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
A utd Has AX AT HISt MAH AS Il 349-12, ni, we 1) jay dar maa“gat kook karay mahlee khasam sunay. If a beggar cries out at the door, the Master hears it in His Mansion.
we thea are ua Sa Soret SE A (349-13, wm, He 1) bhaavai Dheerak bhaavai Dhakay ayk vadaa-ee day-ay. ||1]| Whether He receives him or pushes him away, it is the Gift of the Lord's Greatness.
[11
Wed Afs 3 UET AST ora ATS oT UU TTS Ul (349-13, wer, Hs 1)
jaanhu jot na poochhahu jaatee aagai jaat na hay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Recognize the Lord's Light within all, and do not consider social class or status; there are no classes or castes in the world hereafter. ||1]|Pause| |
mifu aee nif aafe I 349-14, nr, Hs 1) aap karaa-ay aap karay-i. He Himself acts, and He Himself inspires us to act.
mifu Bon fafs aafe Il (349-14, mr, ue 1) aap ulaamay" chit Dharay-ay. He Himself considers our complaints.
WS ATES AIS Il (349-14, wer, we 1) jaa too’ karanhaar kartaar. Since You, O Creator Lord, are the Doer,
foot Host fom AAT MQ (349-14, wir, He 1) ki-aa muhtaajee ki-aa sansaar. ||2|| why should I submit to the world? ||2||
mify Bure nim SfF il 49-15, wm, He 1) aap upaa-ay aapay day-ay. You Yourself created and You Yourself give.
my gents Hats ASE Il (349-15, nmr, Hs 1) aapay durmat maneh karay-i. You Yourself eliminate evil-mindedness;
ae usAtfe ZA nfs mmfe Il (349-15, wr, He 1) gur parsaad vasai man aa-ay. by Guru's Grace, You come to abide in our minds,
eu mea fegg ATE ISI (349-16, wr, He 1) dukh an"ayraa vichahu jaa-ay. ||3]| and then, pain and darkness are dispelled from within. ||3] |
Arg fume nerf Aste Il (349-16, wma, He 1) saach pi-aaraa aap karay-i. He Himself infuses love for the Truth.
Meat AG ATS 3B STE Il (349-16, wr, He 1) avree ka-o saach na day-ay. Unto others, the Truth is not bestowed.
A for ef sare Boa vid YS s SLE Isis 349-16, wr, He 1)
jay kisai day-ay vakhaanai naanak aagai poochh na lay-ay. ||4]|3]|
If He bestows it upon someone, says Nanak, then, in the world hereafter, that person is not called to account. ||4||3]|
MTAT HIST 4 Il (349-17)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
3S Held We AX w|S Il (349-17, vr, ve 1)
taal madeeray ghat kay ghaat. The urges of the heart are like cymbals and ankle-bells;
Soa To sHfs SHA I (349-17, nrwr, He 1) dolak dunee-aa vaajeh vaaj. the drum of the world resounds with the beat.
SSE SS Als aT ST Il (349-18, mma, He 1) naarad naachai kal kaa bhaa-o. Naarad dances to the tune of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga;
Ast Ast as oats ure IAI (349-18, mmr, He 1) jatee satee kah raakhahi paa-o. ||1]| where can the celibates and the men of truth place their feet? ||1] |
SSA SH feT ATHS Il (349-18, wT, He 1) naanak naam vitahu kurbaan. Nanak is a sacrifice to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
mitt esr ATs AE UU TIS Il (349-19, wer, He 1) anDhee dunee-aa saahib jaan. ||1]| rahaa-o. The world is blind; our Lord and Master is All-seeing. ||1]||Pause] |
ag ung feta sar ute il (349-19, wer, He 1) guroo paashu fir chaylaa khaa-ay. The disciple feeds on the Guru;
of udtfS =A we mre II (349-19, mmr, He 1) taam pareet vasai ghar aa-ay. out of love for bread, he comes to dwell in his home.
ust BuO
AAG efgur Flee UES I (350-1, wer, He 1) jay sa-o var-hi-aa jeevan khaan. If one were to live and eat for hundreds of years,
UAH UETe A fee udSrs NM (350-1, wr, He 1) khasam pachhaanai so din parvaan. ||2|| that day alone would be auspicious, when he recognizes his Lord and Master. ||2| |
zante shot efeor a fe Il (350-1, wr, He 1) darsan daykhi-ai da-i-aa na ho-ay. Beholding the sight of the petitioner, compassion is not aroused.
we fes fee ad 5 af= Il (350-2, nmr, ne 1) la-ay ditay vin rahai na ko-ay. No one lives without give and take.
om fore ad ofa df II (350-2, om, He 1) raajaa ni-aa-o karay hath ho-ay. The king administers justice only if his palm is greased.
ad were SHS AfE SI (350-2, wT, He 1) kahai khudaa-ay na maanai ko-ay. ||3]| No one is moved by the Name of God. ||3]|
HEA HSS BSA SH I 350-3, A, we 1) maanas moorat naanak naam. O Nanak, they are human beings in form and name only;
Adal AS VlT SIH] Il (350-3, ww, He 1) karnee kutaa dar furmaan. by their deeds they are dogs - this is the Command of the Lord's Court.
ae usAtfe ae fone Il (350-3, rrr, He 1) gur parsaad jaanai mihmaan. By Guru's Grace, if one sees himself as a guest in this world,
a fag Vad US HS III (350-3, nTAT, He 1) taa kichh dargeh paavai maan. ||4||4]| then he gains honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|4]|
MTAT HIS 4% Il (350-4)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Aas Hae Ast ofs Sat AS gu ofenr Sat Il (350-4, wr, He 1)
jaytaa sabad surat Dhun taytee jaytaa roop kaa-i-aa tayree.
As much as the Shabad is in the mind, so much is Your melody; as much as the form of the universe is, so much is Your body, Lord.
J MM TAS! MM BAST MST 3 SA ATS Het UA (350-4, wr, we 1)
too” aapay rasnaa aapay basnaa avar na doojaa kaha-o maa-ee. ||1]|
You Yourself are the tongue, and You Yourself are the nose. Do not speak of any other, O my mother. ||1]|
AWfog Hat Sat FT il (350-5, mmr, ne 1) saahib mayraa ayko hai. My Lord and Master is One;
Sa J avet Sa FT UU TIE Il (350-5, ner, we 1) ayko hai bhaa-ee ayko hai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the One and Only; O Siblings of Destiny, He is the One alone. ||1||Pause||
~ SA ~~
mm HT nM ss nm SS SfE i 350-6, ww, we 1) aapay maaray aapay chhodai aapay layvai day-ay. He Himself kills, and He Himself emancipates; He Himself gives and takes.
SAR ~
nmy Sy feat wm oefe kate QIK (350-6, mr, He 1) aapay vaykhai aapay vigsai aapay nadar karay-i. ||2]| He Himself beholds, and He Himself rejoices; He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
21 |
A fag aga’ A af sfoor meg & age AT Il (350-6, mmr, He 1) jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa avar na karnaa jaa-ee. Whatever He is to do, that is what He is doing. No one else can do anything.
HAT Zds SA ad AS Sat Sfsnret SI (350-7, ner, He 1)
jaisaa vartai taiso kahee-ai sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||3]|
As He projects Himself, so do we describe Him; this is all Your Glorious Greatness, Lord. ||3]|
ates aeest ufear He vlot He HSSTer UlSST FI Il (350-7, ver, He 1)
kal kalvaalee maa-i-aa mad meethaa man matvaalaa peevat rahai.
The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is the bottle of wine; Maya is the sweet wine, and the intoxicated mind continues to drink it in.
MM JU as aT sat Brag aYST SS AT IU (350-8, mar, we 1) aapay roop karay baho bhaa™tee™ naanak bapurhaa ayv kahai. ||4]|5|| He Himself assumes all sorts of forms; thus poor Nanak speaks. ||4]|5||
YMTAT HIST 4 Il (350-9)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
aa His UMTSH STE Il (350-9, wim, He 1) vaajaa mat pakhaavaj bhaa-o. Make your intellect your instrument, and love your tambourine;
dfs mee Ae Hfs BE il 350-9, wir, He 1) ho-ay anand sadaa man chaa-o. thus bliss and lasting pleasure shall be produced in your mind.
ea gals Sd su ae ll 350-9, vr, ve 1) ayhaa bhagat ayho tap taa-o. This is devotional worship, and this is the practice of penance.
fez df arag oft afe ur@ All (350-10, nr, He 1) it rang naachahu rakh rakh paa-o. ||1]| So dance in this love, and keep the beat with your feet. ||1]|
US IH ATS ANH Il (350-10, wry, we 1) pooray taal jaanai saalaah. Know that the perfect beat is the Praise of the Lord;
dg Suet YAM Ho HTT NU TIS Il (350-10, wr, He 1) hor nachnaa khusee-aa man maah. ||1]|| rahaa-o. other dances produce only temporary pleasure in the mind. ||1||Pause] |
AS Asy safe efs 3S Il 50-11, wm, He 1) sat santokh vajeh du-ay taal. Play the two cymbals of truth and contentment.
Udt ea Het fess Il (350-11, mA, He 1) pairee vaajaa sadaa nihaal. Let your ankle bells be the lasting Vision of the Lord.
TH SE St SA SS Il (350-11, ww, we 1) raag naad nahee doojaa bhaa-o. Let your harmony and music be the elimination of duality.
fez df areg oft afy ur@ 2i (50-12, »mr, He 1 it rang naachahu rakh rakh paa-o. ||2]| So dance in this love, and keep the beat with your feet. ||2]|
3@ edt de Ho SHS Il (350-12, wer, He 1) bha-o fayree hovai man cheet. Let the fear of God within your heart and mind be your spinning dance,
aofent Bofeur ats atfS il (350-12, nmr, Hs 1) bahdi-aa uth-di-aa neetaa neet. and keep up, whether sitting or standing.
Bete fe WE 3S AMT Il (350-13, ww, He 1) laytan layt jaanai tan su-aahu. To roll around in the dust is to know that the body is only ashes.
fez dfn areg of fy ur Sil (350-13, om, He it rang naachahu rakh rakh paa-o. ||3]| So dance in this love, and keep the beat with your feet. ||3]|
fra Aer Sf ar aS i (350-13, wim, He 1) sikh sabhaa deekhi-aa kaa bhaa-o. Keep the company of the disciples, the students who love the teachings.
aaHfe Heat ATS |S il (350-14, wr, He 1) gurmukh sun-naa saachaa naa-o. As Gurmukh, listen to the True Name.
BSA MMS SI SPT Il (350-14, wer, He 1) naanak aakhan vayraa vayr. O Nanak, chant it, over and over again.
fez dfa ovwg afy af Us gnel (350-14, nr, He 1 it rang naachahu rakh rakh pair. ||4]]6]| So dance in this love, and keep the beat with your feet. ||4]|6]|
YTAT HIS 4 Il (350-15)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
u@e Gufe udt AS Test Ae nest a Ha ahr I (350-15, wer, He 1)
pa-un upaa-ay Dharee sabh Dhartee jal agnee kaa banDh kee-aa.
He created the air, and He supports the whole world; he bound water and fire together.
nig watats Hs aeteur wes ute for est Shem AU (350-15, wr, Hs 1)
anDhulai dehsir moond kataa-i-aa raavan maar ki-aa vadaa bha-i-aa. ||1]||
The blind, ten-headed Raavan had his heads cut off, but what greatness was obtained by killing him? ||1]|
for Bunt Sat wirdt ATE I (350-16, wer, He 1) ki-aa upmaa tayree aakhee jaa-ay. What Glories of Yours can be chanted?
3 Aaa ufs sfoor fos OE NU TIS I (350-16, wr, He too” sarbay poor rahi-aa liv laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are totally pervading everywhere; You love and cherish all. ||1]]Pause| |
aba Gute Fats ofa atet ast ofa famr gar sfemr Il (350-17, vr, ue 1)
jee-a upaa-ay jugat hath keenee kaalee nath ki-aa vadaa bha-i-aa.
You created all beings, and You hold the world in Your Hands; what greatness is it to put a ring in the nose of the black cobra, as Krishna did?
fan 3 usYy Ae AVE adi Aaa fadste afe afer QI (350-17, wer, Hs 1)
kis too’ purakh joroo ka-un kahee-ai sarab nirantar rav rahi-aa. ||2||
Whose Husband are You? Who is Your wife? You are subtly diffused and pervading in all. |[2]|
ote aég Ata eserst gon smse fqAfe afenr i 350-18, wer, He 1)
naal kutamb saath vardaataa barahmaa bhaalan sarisat ga-i-aa.
Brahma, the bestower of blessings, entered the stem of the lotus, with his relatives, to find the extent of the universe.
wid nis o ufee a ot aA efe famr eat sfkmr ISI 50-19, nmr, He 1)
aagai ant na paa-i-o taa kaa kans chhayd ki-aa vadaa bha-i-aa. ||3]|
Proceeding on, he could not find its limits; what glory was obtained by killing Kansa, the king? ||3]|
a30 Gufe ud ute Hfamr dfs sue fa ont after I (350-19, marr, He 1)
ratan upaa-ay Dharay kheer mathi-aa hor bhakhlaa-ay je asee kee-aa.
The jewels were produced and brought forth by churning the ocean of milk. The other gods proclaimed "We are the ones who did this!"
Ua 3uyq
ad aed eu fas efimr Sat Sat SS dor isi GBs1-1, wmv, we 1
kahai naanak chhapai ki-o chhapi-aa aykee aykee vand dee-aa. ||4||7]||
Says Nanak, by hiding, how can the Lord be hidden? He has given each their share, one by one. ||4||7]|
YTAT HIST 4 Il (351-2)
aasaa mehlaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
OSH adsts afe fares TH OH SG IM I 51-2, wer, He 1)
karam kartoot bayl bisthaaree raam naam fal hoo-aa.
The vine of good actions and character has spread out, and it bears the fruit of the Lord's Name.
SH Jy 3s Te Mae SH Hae fedafs ahr Al 351-2, wer, Hs 1)
tis roop na raykh anaahad vaajai sabad niranjan kee-aa. ||1||
The Name has no form or outline; it vibrates with the unstruck Sound Current; through the Word of the Shabad, the Immaculate Lord is revealed. ||1||
ad efimre we FW AST I 51-3, ver, He karay vakhi-aan jaanai jay ko-ee. One can speak on this only when he knows it.
mifys ute Aet al TIS il (351-3, ww, He 1)
amrit peevai so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]||Pause] |
fq ub A HAS se I JS US ST Il 51-4, wm, we 1) jin" pee-aa say masat bha-ay hai tootay banDhan faahay. Those who drink it in are enraptured; their bonds and shackles are cut away.
Ast afs mrat stsfe st Ss wrfeor & GT Ill (351-4, we, ue 1) jotee jot samaanee bheetar taa chhoday maa-i-aa kay laahay. ||2|| When one's light blends into the Divine Light, then the desire for Maya is ended. ||2| |
Ava afs gu so Shimer Aas seo Sat HSMM Il 351-5, wm, we 1) sarab jot roop tayraa daykhi-aa sagal bhavan tayree maa-i-aa. Among all lights, I behold Your Form; all the worlds are Your Maya.
we gfu foo ao sefe ad fete afer sil (51-5, wr, we
raarai roop niraalam baithaa nadar karay vich chhaa-i-aa. ||3]|
Among the tumults and forms, He sits in serene detachment; He bestows His Glance of Grace upon those who are engrossed in the illusion. ||3]|
wet Wag Se Fait Tarts TU mrs il 351-6, wer, Hs 1)
beenaa sabad vajaavai jogee darsan roop apaaraa.
The Yogi who plays on the instrument of the Shabad gains the Blessed Vision of the Infinitely Beautiful Lord.
Rafe niovsfe A AT TST area ad fears ISIC 51-6, wT, He 1D
sabad anaahad so saho raataa naanak kahai vichaaraa. ||4]||8]||
He, the Lord, is immersed in the Unstruck Shabad of the Word, says Nanak, the humble and meek. ||4||8]|
YATAT HIST 4 Il (351-7)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
H ae aera fife arg Il (351-7, nmr, 2 1) mai gun galaa kay sir bhaar. My virtue is that I carry the load of my words upon my head.
Tet ae fAaHeIS | (351-7, oA, He 1) galee galaa sirjanhaar. The real words are the Words of the Creator Lord.
urat ular gat ate Il (351-8, om, He 1) khaanaa peenaa hasnaa baad. How useless are eating, drinking and laughing,
wa oa foe 5 vrefs ofe il (351-8, nr, He 1 jab lag ridai na aavahi yaad. ||1]|| if the Lord is not cherished in the heart! ||1||
38 uses act foo att Il (351-8, nmr, He 1)
ta-o parvaah kayhee ki-aa keejai.
Why should someone care for anything else,
Hoty Ao fxs Shit SA ual TIS il (351-8, om, ne 1
janam janam kichh leejee leejai. ||1|| rahaa-o. if throughout his life, he gathers in that which is truly worth gathering? ||1||Pause||
Ho at HAS HSAs HST Il (351-9, wm, He 1) man kee mat mataagal mataa. The intellect of the mind is like a drunken elephant.
A fae soba AT ws UST Il (351-9, we, He 1)
Whatever one utters is totally false, the most false of the false.
fom HI B ats migetA Il (351-10, »mAr, He 1) ki-aa muhu lai kKeechai ardaas. So what face should we put on to offer our prayer,
uy ug fe Ardt uf ii (351-10, »mr, Hs 1) paap punn du-ay saakhee paas. ||2|| when both virtue and vice are close at hand as witnesses? ||2||
AA 3 aes SA A SE Il (351-10, wr, we 1) jaisaa too” karahi taisaa ko ho-ay. As You make us, so we become.
33 fag gar ard AE I (351-10, »mr, we 1) tujh bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. Without You, there is no other at all.
Hot FJ Hfs Sf Sat & US Ih 51-11, wmv, we jayhee too’ mat deh tayhee ko paavai. As is the understanding which You bestow, so do we receive.
3O wm ore fSS Bars ISI 51-11, nT, He 1 tuDh aapay bhaavai tivai chalaavai. ||3]| As it pleases Your Will, so do You lead us. ||3||
TA TSS USM UPS Il (351-11, wT, He 1) raag ratan paree-aa parvaar. The divine crystalline harmonies, their consorts, and their celestial families
fan fefs Gun nifigs ATS II (51-12, »mr, He 1) tis vich upjai amrit saar. - from them, the essence of Ambrosial Nectar is produced.
SOA ATS at ET US HM Il (351-12, wT, Hz 1) naanak kartay kaa ih Dhan maal. O Nanak, this is the wealth and property of the Creator Lord.
Aa gs SJ Fags ISIC (351-12, wr, we jay ko boojhai ayhu beechaar. ||4]|9|| If only this essential reality were understood! ||4||9]|
YMTAT HIS 4% Il (351-13)
aasaa mehiaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
afe fasur mud wis orfser st fife Adder arg getfeur i 351-13, ver, He 1)
kar kirpaa apnai ghar aa-i-aa taa mil sakhee-aa kaaj rachaa-i-aa.
When by His Grace He came to my home, then my companions met together to celebrate my marriage.
ae efy Hie vise sfeur Ag Zrge orfeur IA 51-14, yr, He 1
khayl daykh man anad bha-i-aa saho vee-aahan aa-i-aa. ||1]||
Beholding this play, my mind became blissful; my Husband Lord has come to marry me. |[1]|
eI eI Hat fasa Mss Il 351-14, rr, ve 1) gaavhu gaavhu kaamnee bibayk beechaar. So sing - yes, sing the songs of wisdom and reflection, O brides.
dud wuts urfior Haizo SSS AU TIS I 351-15, oT, He 1) hamrai ghar aa-i-aa jagjeevan bhataar. ||1|| rahaa-o. My spouse, the Life of the world, has come into my home. ||1]||Pause] |
OT Tors ane Sorg fa dor At Ag fier st fer I 51-15, wr, Hs 1)
guroo du-aarai hamraa vee-aahu je ho-aa jaa‘ saho mili-aa taa™ jaani-aa.
When I was married within the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate, I met my Husband Lord, and I came to know Him.
fg Sa Hf Age sfeur FT ory afeor He wfenr 1211 (351-16, nr, He 1)
tihu lokaa meh sabad ravi-aa hai aap ga-i-aa man maani-aa. ||2||
The Word of His Shabad is pervading the three worlds; when my ego was quieted, my mind became happy. ||2||
wiuat aay vif Hed dof aaH o Tet Il (351-16, mm, He 1) aapnaa kaaraj aap savaaray horan kaaraj na ho-ee. He Himself arranges His own affairs; His affairs cannot be arranged by anyone else.
fag wefa Ag H3y efenr cen 3 TeHfe gS AST BN 51-17, »mr, HE 1)
jit kaaraj sat santokh da-i-aa Dharam hai gurmukh boojhai ko-ee. ||3]|
By the affair of this marriage, truth, contentment, mercy and faith are produced; but how rare is that Gurmukh who understands it! ||3]|
gals Soa Asal at fug Sat AE Il (351-18, mmr, He 1) bhanat naanak sabhnaa kaa pir ayko so-ay. Says Nanak, that Lord alone is the Husband of all.
fan 6 dele ad A AOafs dE ISiIOll Gs51-18, wm, He 1)
jis no nadar karay saa sohagan ho-ay. ||4||10||
She, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, becomes the happy soul-bride. | 4] |10]|
YTAT HIS 4% Il (351-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
fag 36 AHAfe Aofa Aste Il (351-19, wr, He 1)
garihu ban samsar sahj subhaa-ay.
Home and forest are the same, for one who dwells in the balance of intuitive peace and poise.
eanis as set atafs Of= I 51-19, mr, He 1) durmat gat bha-ee keerat thaa-ay. His evil-mindedness departs, and the Praises of God take its place.
Ad ust ATSC Hfy aS Il (351-19, nmr, He 1) sach pa-orhee saacha-o mukh naa™-o. To chant the True Name with one's mouth is the true ladder.
UST Bu2
Afsag Afe ue for ae nal (352-1, wr, He 1) satgur sayv paa-ay nij thaa-o. ||1]| Serving the True Guru, one finds one's own place within the self. ||1]|
HO Ys US UIHS ATS Il (352-1, wrwr, He 1) man chooray khat darsan jaan. To conquer the mind is the knowledge of the six Shaastras.
Ava Ais YsS SASS UU TIS Ul (352-1, wmv, we 1)
sarab jot pooran bhagvaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Divine Light of the Lord God is perfectly pervading. ||1||Pause||
wifae fanrn Su sg AP Il (352-2, mr, He 1) aDhik ti-aas bhaykh baho karai. Excessive thirst for Maya makes people wear all sorts of religious robes.
zu fafimr my sfs ugg Il (352-2, om, He 1) dukh bikhi-aa sukh tan parharai. The pain of corruption destroys the body's peace.
an au nists ae fad il (352-2, mr, He 1) kaam kroDh antar Dhan hirai. Sexual desire and anger steal the wealth of the self within.
vfam dfs of feAsd ili 352-3, um, He 1)
dubiDhaa chhod naam nistarai. ||2||
But by abandoning duality, one is emancipated through the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
frefs ATE AIA MST Il (352-3, nmr, He 1) sifat salaahan sahj anand. In the Lord's Praise and adoration is intuitive peace, poise and bliss.
Fat AS UN afFe il (352-3, »mr, vs 1) sakhaa sain paraym gobind. The Love of the Lord God is one's family and friends.
mm} ad omy sufAe Il 52-3, wm, He 1) aapay karay aapay bakhsind. He Himself is the Doer, and He Himself is the Forgiver.
36 HO ofa ufs mrad fe SI (352-4, mA, He 1 tan man har peh aagai jind. ||3]| My body and mind belong to the Lord; my life is at His Command. ||3]|
36 fears HoT TY ST Il 352-4, mrAr, He 1) jhooth vikaar mahaa dukh dayh. Falsehood and corruption cause terrible suffering.
3y Zo MHaAfs Als YT Il (352-4, nT, He 1) bhaykh varan deeseh sabh khayh. All the religious robes and social classes look just like dust.
a Gun A nr] Ae I (352-5, nr, He 1) jo upjai so aavai jaa-ay. Whoever is born, continues to come and go.
Sea MAfaT SH SATE ISIAA (352-5, yA, He 1) naanak asthir naam rajaa-ay. ||4]|11]|
O Nanak, only the Naam and the Lord's Command are eternal and everlasting. [14] 1221]
YATAT HIST 4 Il (352-5)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
SA AIST TH GU Il (352-5, wm, we 1) ayko sarvar kamal anoop. In the pool is the one incomparably beautiful lotus.
Het fear UTHS JU Il (352-6, wr, He 1) sadaa bigaasai parmal roop. It blossoms continually; its form is pure and fragrant.
Gxs HSt gata TA Il (352-6, wr, He 1) oojal motee choogeh hans. The swans pick up the bright jewels.
Aga AS Hae VIA IAI (352-6, wer, He 1) sarab kalaa jagdeesai a's. ||1|| They take on the essence of the All-powerful Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
a dA A Gun faor Il (352-7, om, He 1) jo deesai so upjai binsai. Whoever is seen, is subject to birth and death.
fag Ae Adefe SHS 3 SA NA TIC I 352-7, ver, He 1D) bin jal sarvar kamal na deesai. ||1]| rahaa-o. In the pool without water, the lotus is not seen. ||1||Pause]|
faser FS urs Sz Il (352-7, om, we 1) birlaa boojhai paavai bhayd. How rare are those who know and understand this secret.
Arar Sis ad fos Fe Il (352-8, nmAr, ne 1) saakhaa teen kahai nit bayd. The Vedas continually speak of the three branches.
ore fie at Aafs mfe Il (352-8, ner, He 1) naad bind kee surat samaa-ay. One who merges into the knowledge of the Lord as absolute and related,
Afsag Afe ugh us UTE QI (352-8, nm, He 1) satgur sayv param pad paa-ay. ||2]|| serves the True Guru and obtains the supreme status. ||2]|
Has TSC df sets I (352-9, ver, we
mukto raata-o rang ravaa‘ta-o.
One who is imbued with the Love of the Lord and dwells continually upon Him is liberated.
wHe IA Ae favs Il (352-9, nmr, Hs 1) raajan raaj sadaa bigsaa‘ta-o. He is the king of kings, and blossoms forth continually.
fan S amafa forsur fs I (352-9, mrrr, He 1)
jis too’ raakhahi kirpaa Dhaar. That one whom You preserve, by bestowing Your Mercy, O Lord,
BSS UTS Safty 3s WM (352-9, MAT, He 1) boodat paahan taareh taar. ||3]| even the sinking stone - You float that one across. ||3]|
fase ufo afs fasee ufo afemr I 352-10, nmr, He 1) taribhavan meh jot taribhavan meh jaani-aa. Your Light is pervading the three worlds; I know that You are permeating the three
worlds.
Cue set wa we Hfo nrfEnr I (352-10, wm, He 1) ulat bha-ee ghar ghar meh aani-aa. When my mind turned away from Maya, I came to dwell in my own home.
nifofafa safs ad fee ofe 1 aaa fsa & wat ute NENA (352-11, ve, He 1)
ahinis bhagat karay liv laa-ay. naanak tin kai laagai paa-ay. ||4]|12]|
Nanak falls at the feet of that person who immerses himself in the Lord's Love, and performs devotional worship night and day. ||4]|12||
YMTAT HIS 4% Il (352-11)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
THs Ast Jats Efe i (352-12, wer, He 1) gurmat saachee hujat door. Receiving the True Teachings from the Guru, arguments depart.
ag3 froreu rat ofs Il (352-12, wr, we 1) bahut si-aanap laagai Dhoor. But through excessive cleverness, one is only plastered with dirt.
Brat HS fixe AV ate il (352-12, wer, He 1) laagee mail mitai sach naa-ay. The filth of attachment is removed by the True Name of the Lord.
ae usAtfe ad fee ote NA (352-12, ner, He 1) gur parsaad rahai liv laa-ay. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, one remains lovingly attached to the Lord. ||1||
T Upfs THT Mae Il (352-13, wr, He 1) hai hajoor haajar ardaas. He is the Presence Ever-present; offer your prayers to Him.
eu AY AY ass Ys UTA A TITS Il (352-13, vm, He 1) dukh sukh saach kartay parabh paas. ||1|| rahaa-o. Pain and pleasure are in the Hands of God, the True Creator. ||1]|Pause] |
TT AHS MTS ATS I (352-13, mTAY, oe 1) koorh kamaavai aavai jaavai. One who practices falsehood comes and goes.
ats aafe erat St mire I (352-14, nmrr, He 1) kahan kathan vaaraa nahee aavai. By speaking and talking, His limits cannot be found.
for Sut AS IT UTS Il (352-14, wm, we 1) ki-aa daykhaa soojh boojh na paavai. Whatever one sees, is not understood.
fag are nfs feufs o mre HQH (352-14, ym, Hs 1) bin naavai man taripat na aavai. ||2|| Without the Name, satisfaction does not enter into the mind. ||2]|
A HON A dfat fenmy | (352-15, mmr, He 1) jo janmay say rog vi-aapay. Whoever is born is afflicted by disease,
TSH Hfeur eft ASN I (352-15, wm, He 1) ha-umai maa-i-aa dookh santaapay. tortured by the pain of egotism and Maya.
A Hoe we A ufs Te I (352-15, wmv, we 1) say jan baachay jo parabh raakhay. They alone are saved, who are protected by God.
Afsag Afe nifys TA TY USI (352-16, wr, He 1) satgur sayv amrit ras chaakhay. ||3]|| Serving the True Guru, they drink in the Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]|
Tose HS Te vifys TA I (352-16, wT, He 1) chalta-o man raakhai amrit chaakhai. The unstable mind is restrained by tasting this Nectar.
Afsag Afe nifiys Fae SH I 352-16, wr, He 1) satgur sayv amrit sabad bhaakhai. Serving the True Guru, one comes to cherish the Ambrosial Nectar of the Shabad.
Ad Aafe Hats afs ure | (352-17, wer, He 1) saachai sabad mukat gat paa-ay. Through the True Word of the Shabad, the state of liberation is obtained.
Sa fess wiry WSS NII (352-17, we, He 1) naanak vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||4||13]| O Nanak, self-conceit is eradicated from within. ||4]]13]|
MTAT HIS 4% Il (352-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
a fafs oer AAS shor Il (352-18, mmr, He 1) jo tin kKee-aa so sach thee-aa. Whatever He has done, has proved to be true.
nifys ou Afsafe eho i (352-18, war, He 1) amrit naam satgur dee-aa. The True Guru bestows the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fase on ordt nfs Sa Il (352-18, wr, He 1) hirdai naam naahee man bhang. With the Naam in the heart, the mind is not separated from the Lord.
motes onfes fumrs Har IA (352-19, »mr, He 1) an-din naal pi-aaray sang. ||1|| Night and day, one dwells with the Beloved. ||1]|
dfs ME Tag wust AseEret | (352-19, ww, He 1) har jee-o raakho apnee sarnaa-ee. O Lord, please keep me in the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
yar 3us ad usAet dfs oA ufeor on uersa a8 fafa uret A TIS I (353-1, rr, He 1)
gur parsaadee har ras paa-i-aa naam padaarath na-o niDh paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the sublime essence of the Lord; I have received the wealth of the Naam and the nine treasures. ||1]|Pause| |
AGH UGH AY ATS aS Il (353-1, wm, He 1) karam Dharam sach saachaa naa-o.
Those whose karma and Dharma - whose actions and faith - are in the True Name of the True Lord
3 a Ae stead WE I (353-2, vA, He 1) taa kai sad balihaarai jaa-o. - Iam forever a sacrifice to them.
A dfs TS A AS UdSTS Il (353-2, we, He 1) jo har raatay say jan parvaan. Those who are imbued with the Lord are accepted and respected.
fae at Hafs ua fears N21 (353-2, »mr, He 1) tin kee sangat param niDhaan. ||2]| In their company, the supreme wealth is obtained. ||2]|
ofa zg fafe ufemr us aret Il (353-3, mmr, He 1) har var jin paa-i-aa Dhan naaree. Blessed is that bride, who has obtained the Lord as her Husband.
dfs fAG TSt Aa Sat Il (353-3, or, He 1) har si-o raatee sabad veechaaree. She is imbued with the Lord, and she reflects upon the Word of His Shabad.
wif 3d Hafs Aw 3S Il (353-3, wAT, He 1) aap tarai sangat kul taarai. She saves herself, and saves her family and friends as well.
Afsag Afe 33 Sted ISI 353-4, nmr, He 1) satgur sayv tat veechaarai. ||3]| She serves the True Guru, and contemplates the essence of reality. ||3]|
Jue wt ufs Ag OE Il (353-4, mmr, He 1) hamree jaat pat sach naa-o. The True Name is my social status and honor.
dH UH HAH AS Sse Il (353-4, wer, He 1)
karam Dharam sanjam sat bhaa-o.
The love of the Truth is my karma and Dharma - my faith and my actions, and my self-control.
Soa HMA UE Ss TE Il (353-5, mew, we 1) naanak bakhsay poochh na ho-ay. O Nanak, one who is forgiven by the Lord is not called to account.
ay AS
SA HS Sa ALE SII (353-5, wr, He 1) doojaa maytay ayko so-ay. ||4||14]| The One Lord erases duality. ||4||14||
MATAT HIS 4% Il (353-5)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
feta vireo fefar Aveta miret I (353-5, wir, He 1) ik aavahi ik jaaveh aa-ee. Some come, and after they come, they go.
fefa ofa a3 dofo AHS II (53-6, nT, He 1) ik har raatay raheh samaa-ee. Some are imbued with the Lord; they remain absorbed in Him.
fefa uate aae xfs SBa 3 wets Il (353-6, nmr, He 1) ik Dharan gagan meh tha-ur na paavahi. Some find no place of rest at all, on the earth or in the sky.
A agHdle dfs om & famrefa all (353-6, wm, He 1) say karamheen har naam na Dhi-aavahi. ||1]| Those who do not meditate on the Name of the Lord are the most unfortunate. ||1]|
as ud 3 ats ffs wet it 353-7, wer, He 1) gur pooray tay gat mit paa-ee. From the Perfect Guru, the way to salvation is obtained.
feg HAS fay 23 ifs s@n@ ae Aaet ofs ute Suret 9A TIC i 53-7, vr, ve 1)
ih sansaar bikh vat at bha-ojal gur sabdee har paar langhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
This world is a terrifying ocean of poison; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord helps us cross over. ||1]]Pause| |
fia AS nity BE ys ALS Il (353-8, wer, Hs 1) jin" ka-o aap la-ay parabh mayl. Those, whom God unites with Himself,
35 a ae B Ave US Il (353-8, nmr, He 1)
tin ka-o kaal na saakai payl. cannot be crushed by death.
aaHfe feaHe sata fund il (353-9, wmv, He 1) gurmukh nirmal raheh pi-aaray. The beloved Gurmukhs remain immaculately pure,
fA Ae nis Gufs GHS fears III (353-9, wr, He 1) ji-o jal ambh oopar kamal niraaray. ||2] | like the lotus in the water, which remains untouched. ||2||
ao so ag fan S AIM I (353-10, wir, He 1) buraa bhalaa kaho kis no kahee-ai. Tell me: who should we call good or bad?
a gon aTenfe Ag BIA II (353-10, wer, He 1) deesai barahm gurmukh sach lahee-ai. Behold the Lord God; the truth is revealed to the Gurmukh.
mag xa aTaHfs Sterg Il 53-10, nmr, Hs 1) akath katha-o gurmat veechaar. I speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord, contemplating the Guru's Teachings.
ffs ag Hafs we ug ISI (53-11, wr, He 1) mil gur sangat paava-o paar. ||3]| I join the Sangat, the Guru's Congregation, and I find God's limits. ||3]|
WAS ae PARAS ag SE Il (353-11, »mr, us 1) saasat bayd simrit baho bhayd. The Shaastras, the Vedas, the Simritees and all their many secrets;
MOAlS HAS Ifd FA Fe Il (353-11, wT, He 1)
athsath majan har ras rayd.
bathing at the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage - all this is found by enshrining the sublime essence of the Lord in the heart.
Tante fesHs HSB Bal Il (353-12, Ar, we 1) gurmukh nirmal mail na laagai. The Gurmukhs are immaculately pure; no filth sticks to them.
Sod fase oH Zs Ufa sat ISIN (53-12, »MAT, He 1)
naanak hirdai naam vaday Dhur bhaagai. ||4||15]]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides in the heart, by the greatest pre- ordained destiny. ||4||15]|
MITAT HIST 4 Il (353-12)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
fate fofe uf sa aa wus orsH aH ferfant I 53-13, nmr, He 1)
niv niv paa-ay laga-o gur apunay aatam raam nihaari-aa.
Bowing down, again and again, I fall at the Feet of my Guru; through Him, I have seen the Lord, the Divine Self, within.
ads ste fose ofa sfenr fose tf dtofonr ail 353-13, mr, He 1)
karat beechaar hirdai har ravi-aa hirdai daykh beechaari-aa. ||1]||
Through contemplation and meditation, the Lord dwells within the heart; see this, and understand. ||1]|
3OI TH ad fSASTA Il (353-14, mT, He 1) bolhu raam karay nistaaraa. So speak the Lord's Name, which shall emancipate you.
ag usAte 339 ofa ws fhe nifsmre af CHivre na soe i 53-14, mr, He 1)
gur parsaad ratan har laabhai mitai agi-aan ho-ay ujee-aaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the jewel of the Lord is found; ignorance is dispelled, and the Divine Light shines forth. ||1||Pause] |
Teal Je AUS oat seta fete IBH SIH 3 AT II (353-15, vA, Hs 1)
ravnee ravai banDhan nahee tooteh vich ha-umai bharam na jaa-ee.
By merely saying it with the tongue, one's bonds are not broken, and egotism and doubt do not depart from within.
Afsag fs 3 TBH J!S ST A BS ure IM 353-15, wr, we
satgur milai ta ha-umai tootai taa ko laykhai paa-ee. ||2||
But when one meets the True Guru, egotism departs, and then, one realizes his destiny. ||2||
dfs af on sats finn utsu AY Aa Cs Os Il (353-16, wr, He 1)
har har naam bhagat pari-a pareetam sukh saagar ur Dhaaray.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet and dear to His devotees; it is the ocean of peace - enshrine it within the heart.
sails 22S AAAS BS fs Tents fe fSAss Sil (353-16, wT, He 1)
bhagat vachhal jagjeevan daataa mat gurmat har nistaaray. ||3] |
The Lover of His devotees, the Life of the World, the Lord bestows the Guru's Teachings upon the intellect, and one is emancipated. ||3]|
Ho fA afs He Us UTS HOA Hots ATE Il (353-17, wr, Hs 1)
man si-o joojh marai parabh paa-ay mansaa maneh samaa-ay.
One who dies fighting against his own stubborn mind finds God, and the desires of the mind are quieted.
Soa faut ad AHS AOA Ste fee SES INSIAEM (353-18, wT, He 1)
naanak kirpaa karay jagjeevan sahj bhaa-ay liv laa-ay. ||4]|16]|
O Nanak, if the Life of the World bestows His Mercy, one is intuitively attuned to the Love of the Lord. ||4||16]|
MITAT HIST 4 Il (353-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
fan a acts neets fan a@ fan AHSTefs AHS Jd Il (353-18, wim, He 1)
kis ka-o kaheh sunaaveh kis ka-o kis samjhaavahi samajh rahay.
Unto whom do they speak? Unto whom do they preach? Who understands? Let them understand themselves.
far usefe ufs afe 9s Afsae Aafe Ashe TF UA (353-19, wr, Hs 1)
kisai parhaaveh parh gun boojhay satgur sabad santokh rahay. ||1]|| Who do they teach? Through study, they come to realize the Lord's Glorious Virtues. Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, they come to dwell in contentment.
[21
UST Bug
MAT SHS IHS AST I (354-1, mr, He 1) aisaa gurmat ramat sareeraa. Through the Guru's Teachings, realize that He is pervading in all bodies;
dfs SH AT He Aad asta NA TIC th 354-1, wm, ne 1) har bhaj mayray man gahir gambheeraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. O my soul, vibrate on the Profound, Unfathomable Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
Mos sda sats afs dar il (354-2, wm, He 1) anat tarang bhagat har rangaa. Loving devotion to the Lord brings endless waves of joy and delight.
mofes Ae fs Te Aa Il 354-2, we, we 1) an-din soochay har gun sangaa. One who dwells with the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day, is sanctified.
firfeer HOH AAS HATE I (354-2, maT, He 1) mithi-aa janam saakat sansaaraa. The birth into the world of the faithless cynic is totally useless.
TH Sals AS Id fears NN (354-2, weAT, He 1) raam bhagat jan rahai niraaraa. ||2|| The humble devotee of the Lord remains unattached. ||2| |
Het ofeor ofs ge afer i 354-3, wr, ue 1) soochee kaa-i-aa har gun gaa-i-aa. The body which sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord is sanctified.
misy dfs ad fee ofenr Il (354-3, nmr, He 1) aatam cheen rahai liv laa-i-aa. The soul remains conscious of the Lord, absorbed in His Love.
mife mug mudug Ste il (354-4, mmr, He 1) aad apaar aprampar heeraa. The Lord is the Infinite Primal Being, beyond the beyond, the priceless jewel.
ote Is Ha HS Utes SI (354-4, wT, He 1) laal rataa mayraa man Dheeraa. ||3]|| My mind is totally content, imbued with my Beloved. ||3]|
aaat Ads xofs A HE il (354-4, wer, He 1) kathnee kaheh kaheh say moo-ay. Those who speak and babble on and on, are truly dead.
A ys efs adt ys FT Il 354-5, wr, ws 1) so parabh door naahee parabh too” hai. God is not far away - O God, You are right here.
AS Fal Stem yrs arfent I (354-5, wer, He 1) sabh jag daykhi-aa maa-i-aa chhaa-i-aa. I have seen that the whole world is engrossed in Maya.
Sa THs SH fonrfEnr isiIwil 54-5, wer, He 1)
naanak gurmat naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4||17]||
O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||17]|
MITAT HIG 9 FFA I (354-6)
aasaa mehlaa 1 titukaa. Aasaa, First Mehl, Ti-Tukas:
aet shag sth uf il (354-6, ner, He 1) ko-ee bheekhak bheekhi-aa khaa-ay. One is a beggar, living on charity;
aet aa sfomr AME I (354-6, wert, v2 1)
ko-ee raajaa rahi-aa samaa-ay. another is a king, absorbed in himself.
for dt He far wns I (354-7, wr, He 1) kis hee maan kisai apmaan. One receives honor, and another dishonor.
ata Crd ud fame Il (354-7, nmr, He 1) dhaahi usaaray Dharay Dhi-aan. The Lord destroys and creates; He is enshrined in His meditation.
33 3 Sst od AfE I 354-7, um, He 1) tujh tay vadaa naahee ko-ay. There is no other as great as You.
fon Sarst sar SE NA (354-7, wT, He 1) kis vaykhaalee changa ho-ay. ||1|| So whom should I present to You? Who is good enough? ||1] |
H St oY ST MMT” Il (354-8, wer, He 1) mai taa’ naam tayraa aaDhaar. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only Support.
J UT AGETY AIST WU! TTS Il (354-8, mv, ws 1) too” daataa karanhaar kartaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are the Great Giver, the Doer, the Creator. ||1]]Pause| |
Ze 3 ues Star AE Il (354-8, ner, He 1) vaat na paava-o veegaa jaa-o. I have not walked on Your Path; I have followed the crooked path.
VIII SHE SST IE il 354-9, new, we 1) dargeh baisan naahee thaa-o. In the Court of the Lord, I find no place to sit.
Ho ot niger wf ar ST Il (354-9, rrr, He 1) man kaa anDhulaa maa-i-aa kaa banDh. I am mentally blind, in the bondage of Maya.
dle wag de fos AT I (354-9, vem, He 1) kheen kharaab hovai nit kanDh. The wall of my body is breaking down, wearing away, growing weaker.
ue Hee St TST MTA Il (354-10, wm, He 1) khaan jeevan kee bahutee aas. You have such high hopes of eating and living
SA SA
By 3d AMA farsA II (354-10, nar, 2 1)
laykhai tayrai saas giraas. ||2|| - your breaths and morsels of food are already counted! ||2| |
mifofofh nig® shu Sfe Il (354-10, ver, 2 1) ahinis anDhulay deepak day-ay. Night and day they are blind - please, bless them with Your Light.
3Gne sas f83 aafe Il (354-10, wr, He 1) bha-ojal doobat chint karay-i. They are drowning in the terrifying world-ocean, crying out in pain.
adfs Hefs A Hofs we 1 IG afead ST a ATE I 354-11, mmr, He 1) kaheh suneh jo maaneh naa-o. ha-o balihaarai taa kai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who chant, hear and believe in the Name.
Sea SA AT Mage Il (354-11, ver, He 1) naanak ayk kahai ardaas. Nanak utters this one prayer;
Mm fils AS 3d UTA SI (354-12, om, He 1) jee-o pind sabh tayrai paas. ||3]| soul and body, all belong to You, Lord. ||3]|
mt gs ofa mit So aS Il 354-12, mr, we 1) jaa‘ too’ deh japee tayraa naa-o. When You bless me, I chant Your Name.
dad SHE Je aE Il (354-12, wr, He 1) dargeh baisan hovai thaa-o. Thus I find my seat in the Court of the Lord.
a sg we ot vonfs Ate I (354-12, mr, ne 1) jaa‘ tuDh bhaavai taa durmat jaa-ay. When it pleases You, evil-mindedness departs,
fomre 330 Hie ZA wMfe | (354-13, wer, He 1) gi-aan ratan man vasai aa-ay. and the jewel of spiritual wisdom comes to dwell in the mind.
Sete ad ST Asad fHs I 354-13, mmr, He 1) nadar karay taa satgur milai. When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then one comes to meet the True Guru.
YSets SSA SSHG 3d MUICH (354-13, wer, we 1) paranvat naanak bhavjal tarai. ||4||18]| Prays Nanak, carry us across the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||18]|
MITA HOST A UsUe I (354-14) aasaa mehlaa 1 panchpaday. Aasaa, First Mehl, Panch-Padas:
eu fag dg ue fae udt ne fae Caan ath ont I 54-14, nr, He 1) duDh bin Dhayn pankh bin pankhee jal bin ut-bhuj kaam naahee. A cow without milk; a bird without wings; a garden without water - totally useless!
for HBSS AH feger nidt aot Sa SH St WAU (354-15, wr, we ki-aa sultaan salaam vihoonaa anDhee kothee tayraa naam naahee. ||1||
What is an emperor, without respect? The chamber of the soul is so dark, without the Name of the Lord. |]1]|
at fenafo ey ATS Sa Il (354-15, wm, He 1) kee visrahi dukh bahutaa laagai. How could I ever forget You? It would be so painful!
ey oa F feAg ast Ul TIS ll (354-16, wer, Hs 1) dukh laagai too™ visar naahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I would suffer such pain - no, I shall not forget You! ||1]|Pause] |
mit nig Hts dA odt ASt USS STH Il (354-16, mA, He 1) akhee anDh jeebh ras naahee kannee pavan na vaajai. The eyes grow blind, the tongue does not taste, and the ears do not hear any sound.
Tet VS UAT vat FES AS SG Ba MN (354-17, we, He 1)
charnee chalai pajootaa aagai vin sayvaa fal laagay. ||2||
He walks on his feet only when supported by someone else; without serving the Lord, such are the fruits of life. ||2]|
wud faced aa safe cut fifes oe addt il (354-17, nr, He 1
akhar birakh baag bhu-ay chokhee sinchit bhaa-o karayhee.
The Word is the tree; the garden of the heart is the farm; tend it, and irrigate it with the Lord's Love.
Hae SH Ba aH Sa fag ATH AA Sat IS 354-18, wT, we 1)
sabhnaa fal laagai naam ayko bin karmaa kaisay layhee. ||3]]|
All these trees bear the fruit of the Name of the One Lord; but without the karma of good actions, how can anyone obtain it? ||3]|
as Hba 33 Afs 3d fee Ae ee fan ot Il (354-18, wir, He 1)
jaytay jee-a taytay sabh tayray vin sayvaa fal kisai naahee.
As many living beings are there are, they are all Yours. Without selfless service, no one obtains any reward.
eu AY atet 3a de fee oS MG Jd Sra ISI (354-19, wT, He 1) dukh sukh bhaanaa tayraa hovai vin naavai jee-o rahai naahee. ||4||
Pain and pleasure come by Your Will; without the Name, the soul does not even exist. [141]
nfs fefs nee diese dg aA Aw te Zt Fas ot I (354-19, vir, He 1 mat vich maran jeevan hor kaisaa jaa jeevaa taa™ jugat naahee. To die in the Teachings is to live. Otherwise, what is life? That is not the way.
Ua Buy
Ad Sod Mes At AT se ST ay Sot MUNAEN (355-1, wr, He 1) kahai naanak jeevaalay jee-aa jah bhaavai tah raakh tuhee. ||5||19]|
Says Nanak, He grants life to the living beings; O Lord, please keep me according to Your Will. ||5]]19]|
YATAT HIST 4 Il (355-2)
aasaa mehiaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
fen qoH He J GSt Il (355-2, wr, He 1) kaa-i-aa barahmaa man hai Dhotee. Let the body be the Brahmin, and let the mind be the loin-cloth;
fomitg AOS fourg aAUTSt Il (355-2, wr, He 1) gi-aan janay-oo Dhi-aan kuspaatee. let spiritual wisdom be the sacred thread, and meditation the ceremonial ring.
dfs SH AA APS S'S Il (355-2, wm, He 1)
har naamaa jas jaacha-o naa-o. I seek the Name of the Lord and His Praise as my cleansing bath.
Od USAT Fath ANTE Al (355-3, wT, He 1) gur parsaadee barahm samaa-o. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, I am absorbed into God. ||1||
uis MAT YOM Shes Il (355-3, ym, Hs 1) paa™day aisaa barahm beechaar. O Pandit, O religious scholar, contemplate God in such a way
oH Afs oH us OH BA TET NU TIE Il (355-3, ver, He 1)
naamay such naamo parha-o naamay chaj aachaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
that His Name may sanctify you, that His Name may be your study, and His Name your wisdom and way of life. ||1]|Pause]|
Mats ASS frag APS FT Ss Il (355-4, wer, He 1) baahar janay-oo jichar jot hai naal. The outer sacred thread is worthwhile only as long as the Divine Light is within.
ast feat om ANTS Il (355-4, mA, He 1)
Dhotee tikaa naam samaal.
So make the remembrance of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, your loin-cloth and the ceremonial mark on your forehead.
me Ga foadt ots il (355-4, wma, He 1) aithai othai nibhee naal. Here and hereafter, the Name alone shall stand by you.
fee ore dfs aan & SFG MQM 55-5, wm, He 1) vin naavai hor karam na bhaal. ||2|| Do not seek any other actions, except the Name. ||2]|
UAT UH Hfear USAT I (355-5, AT, He 1) poojaa paraym maa-i-aa parjaal. Worship the Lord in loving adoration, and burn your desire for Maya.
Sa Fug nies & 3TH Il (355-5, mr, ne 1) ayko vaykhhu avar na bhaal. Behold only the One Lord, and do not seek out any other.
de 33 Ws CA LMT Il (355-6, or, He 1) cheen"ai tat gagan das du-aar. Become aware of reality, in the Sky of the Tenth Gate;
dfs Hf ure us sters ISI (355-6, nmr, He 1) har mukh paath parhai beechaar. ||3]|| read aloud the Lord's Word, and contemplate it. ||3]|
sno SE SaH SE STH Il (355-6, wT, He 1) bhojan bhaa-o bharam bha-o bhaagai. With the diet of His Love, doubt and fear depart.
UTIAT sta FI F BH Il 355-7, wr, we 1) paahroo-araa chhab chor na laagai. With the Lord as your night watchman, no thief will dare to break in.
fsaa foorfe We YX Sa Il (355-7, or, vs 1) tilak lilaat jaanai parabh ayk. Let the knowledge of the One God be the ceremonial mark on your forehead.
3S Yay uiste faaq sil 355-7, wer, we boojhai barahm antar bibayk. ||4|| Let the realization that God is within you be your discrimination. ||4||
MIS Sdt Alfsor ATE I (355-8, yr, He 1) aachaaree nahee jeeti-aa jaa-ay. Through ritual actions, God cannot be won over;
ure us odt atHfs uf& I 355-8, mmr, He 1) paath parhai nahee keemat paa-ay. by reciting sacred scriptures, His value cannot be estimated.
MAE TA BI Seo UfEMT | (355-8, nr, He 1) asat dasee chahu bhayd na paa-i-aa. The eighteen Puraanas and the four Vedas do not know His mystery.
Soa Afsats qoH feurfenr wullIoll 355-9, wm, He 1)
naanak satgur barahm dikhaa-i-aa. ||5||20|| O Nanak, the True Guru has shown me the Lord God. ||5||20]|
MITAT HIST 4% Il (355-9)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Aa WA Sas AS Aet Il (355-9, new, He 1) sayvak daas bhagat jan so-ee. He alone is the selfless servant, slave and humble devotee,
SAT aT TH Tafa Tet i (355-9, wewr, He 1) thaakur kaa daas gurmukh ho-ee. who as Gurmukh, becomes the slave of his Lord and Master.
fafs fafa vst fate efe atet i 355-10, nmr, ne 1) jin sir saajee tin fun go-ee. He, who created the Universe, shall ultimately destroy it.
fH fag gH neg o AST IU 55-10, wr, Hs 1) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ee. ||1]| Without Him, there is no other at all. ||1||
AY 3H ad vale Stents | gente AS AS Poets NAN TIE Il (355-11, ve, He 1) saach naam gur sabad veechaar. gurmukh saachay saachai darbaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Gurmukh reflects upon the True Name; in the True Court, he is found to be true. ||1]|Pause] |
Ae nda Ast MgeEtA I (355-11, mA, He 1) sachaa araj sachee ardaas. The true supplication, the true prayer
HIGlt WAH He ATA Il (355-12, new, He 1)
mahlee khasam sunay saabaas.
- within the Mansion of His Sublime Presence, the True Lord Master hears and applauds these.
Ae sufs gore ALE I (355-12, wer, He 1) sachai takhat bulaavai so-ay. He summons the truthful to His Heavenly Throne
& efsnret ad FOE 21 (355-12, wm, He 1) day vadi-aa-ee karay so ho-ay. ||2| | and bestows glorious greatness upon them; that which He wills, comes to pass. ||2||
37 TS FI TwES Il 55-12, wmv, we 1) tayraa taan toohai deebaan. The Power is Yours; You are my only Support.
Td A AXE AP SAS Il (355-13, ww, ye 1) gur kaa sabad sach neesaan. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is my true password.
Hd JOH A udde ATE I (355-13, nr, He 1) mannay hukam so pargat jaa-ay. One who obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command, goes to Him openly.
Ag dlvré Sta B UTE ISI (355-13, mA, He 1) sach neesaanai thaak na paa-ay. ||3]| With the password of truth, his way is not blocked. ||3]|
ufss usta zurefa Fe Il (355-14, nmr, He 1) pandit parheh vakaaneh vayd. The Pandit reads and expounds on the Vedas,
nists ZAS 6 Wats Sz Il (355-14, oA, He 1) antar vasat na jaaneh bhayd. but he does not know the secret of the thing within himself.
a fag ASt gs 3 TE Il (355-14, wer, Hs 1) gur bin sojhee boojh na ho-ay. Without the Guru, understanding and realization are not obtained;
Anat ofe afar ys Ae ei (355-14, nmr, He 1) saachaa rav rahi-aa parabh so-ay. ||4|| but still God is True, pervading everywhere. ||4]|
for TE mira mrfig Surat | (355-15, ww, Hs 1) ki-aa ha-o aakhaa aakh vakhaanee. What should I say, or speak or describe?
3 nm Avefo Aga fesrat il (355-15, wr, He 1) too” aapay jaaneh sarab vidaanee. Only You Yourself know, O Lord of total wonder.
Soa Sa UI VAS Il (355-15, ww, He 1) naanak ayko dar deebaan. Nanak takes the Support of the Door of the One God.
Tate APT SI ASPS WUNQVAUI (355-16, wma, He 1) gurmukh saach tahaa gudraan. ||5||21]|| There, at the True Door, the Gurmukhs sustain themselves. ||5||21]|
MTAT HIS 4 Il (355-16)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
ad wats to vost Cun fron ey UTeT I 355-16, nr, He 1) kaachee gaagar dayh duhaylee upjai binsai dukh paa-ee. The clay pitcher of the body is miserable; it suffers in pain through birth and death.
feg Aa Aa wad fae sdhn fae ofs ae ute & uret A (355-17, ur, He 1)
ih jag saagar dutar ki-o taree-ai bin har gur paar na paa-ee. ||1]||
How can this terrifying world-ocean be crossed over? Without the Lord - Guru, it cannot be crossed. ||1]|
33 fag nied o act He fimird 3s fag nied o afe Tg I (355-17, wm, He 1)
tujh bin avar na ko-ee mayray pi-aaray tujh bin avar na ko-ay haray.
Without You, there is no other at all, O my Beloved; without you, there is no other at all.
Avat dat gut 3d fsa sar fA sete AS NU TIS Il (355-18, wT, we
sarbee rangee roopee too“hai tis bakhsay jis nadar karay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You are in all colors and forms; he alone is forgiven, upon whom You bestow Your Glance of Grace. ||1]|Pause] |
AA at wf aH 3 te fus fhe fee o UfE Tat II (355-19, nmr, He 1)
saas buree ghar vaas na dayvai pir si-o milan na day-ay buree.
Maya, my mother-in-law, is evil; she does not let me live in my own home. The vicious one does not let me meet with my Husband Lord.
Rot AHS a IG sae AGES Jie aa fagur 3 sets Tat NM (355-19, wm, He 1)
sakhee saajnee kay ha-o charan sarayva-o har gur kirpaa tay nadar Dharee. ||2||
I serve at the feet of my companions and friends; the Lord has showered me with His Mercy, through Guru's Grace. ||2||
ual Bue
ny dtafes uta He efimr SH AT HIS 3 nied AST I 356-1, vir, He 1
aap beechaar maar man daykhi-aa tum saa meet na avar ko-ee.
Reflecting upon my self, and conquering my mind, I have seen that there is no other friend like You.
faG 3 wafs foe ct age ey AY tela aaa At BI 56-2, wer, Hs 1)
ji-o too’ raakhahi tiv hee rahnaa dukh sukh dayveh karahi so-ee. ||3]|
As You keep me, so do I live. You are the Giver of peace and pleasure. Whatever You do, comes to pass. ||3]|
wT Hon e@ faaas fy Te orn fea set I (356-2, mmr, He 1)
aasaa mansaa do-oo binaasat tarihu gun aas niraas bha-ee.
Hope and desire have both been dispelled; I have renounced my longing for the three qualities.
sdhrena gente usa HS Ast at Ge dt ligil 356-3, nr, He 1) turee-aavasthaa gurmukh paa-ee-ai sant sabhaa kee ot lahee. ||4]|
The Gurmukh obtains the state of ecstasy, taking to the Shelter of the Saints' Congregation. ||4]|
fomre fours Aas Afs wu su fan ofa fogs nee mise I 356-4, ner, He 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan saglay sabh jap tap jis har hirdai alakh abhayvaa.
All wisdom and meditation, all chanting and penance, come to one whose heart is filled with the Invisible, Inscrutable Lord.
SOA TH STH HO TS" THis WE AIH AST UNAM (356-4, wrAT, Hs 1) naanak raam naam man raataa gurmat paa-ay sahj sayvaa. ||5||22]|
O Nanak, one whose mind is imbued with the Lord's Name, finds the Guru's Teachings, and intuitively serves. ||5||22||
WTAT HIS 9 UPUe Il (356-5) aasaa mehlaa 1 panchpaday. Aasaa, First Mehl, Panch-Padas:
Hd ASE HT AS A Il (356-5, mor, He 1) moh kutamb moh sabh kaar. Your attachment to your family, your attachment to all your affairs
Hg 3H SHAT Ads Sag IA (356-5, mA, nz 1) moh tum tajahu sagal vaykaar. ||1]|| - renounce all your attachments, for they are all corrupt. ||1]|
HY og SIN SHAT SH Sg Il (356-6, »mr, vs 1) moh ar bharam tajahu tum" beer. Renounce your attachments and doubts, O brother,
AS oH fee ge Adte NU TI I 356-6, ve, He 1 saach naam riday ravai sareer. ||1]| rahaa-o. and dwell upon the True Name within your heart and body. ||1]||Pause] |
Ad oH AT og fafa uret Il (356-7, vm, He 1) sach naam jaa nav niDh paa-ee. When one receives the nine treasures of the True Name,
Je UZ ASU HET MI (356-7, wr, He 1) rovai poot na kalpai maa-ee. ||2]| his children do not weep, and his mother does not grieve. ||2]|
eg fo sa AAT Il (356-7, wr, Hs 1) ayt mohi doobaa sansaar. In this attachment, the world is drowning.
aenfy vet Cad ure Sil (356-7, wer, He 1) gurmukh ko-ee utrai paar. ||3]| Few are the Gurmukhs who swim across. ||3]||
33 dfs fefs gat urfa il 356-8, wm, He 1) ayt mohi fir joonee paahi. In this attachment, people are reincarnated over and over again.
Ho war AH ufs Ate Sil (356-8, mmr, He 1) mohay laagaa jam pur jaahi. ||4|| Attached to emotional attachment, they go to the city of Death. ||4] |
aa cir & Au su ants Il (356-8, nm, He 1) gur deekhi-aa lay jap tap kamaahi. You have received the Guru's Teachings - now practice meditation and penance.
a Hg se ot are ura ull (356-9, mr, He 1) naa moh tootai naa thaa-ay paahi. ||5]| If attachment is not broken, no one is approved. ||5]|
Sets ad STS He ATE Il (356-9, wer, He 1) nadar karay taa ayhu moh jaa-ay. But if He bestows His Glance of Grace, then this attachment departs.
Soa dhe fAS Td ANTE WENQVSI (356-9, nrAT, He 1) naanak har si-o rahai samaa-ay. ||6||23]| O Nanak, then one remains merged in the Lord. ||6||23]|
YTAT HIS 4 Il (356-10)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
mf Ad AT wise MUTT Il (356-10, nA, He 1) aap karay sach alakh apaar. He Himself does everything, the True, Invisible, Infinite Lord.
JS unit J AAAST IA (356-10, mr, 3 1) ha-o paapee too” bakhsanhaar. ||1|| I am a sinner, You are the Forgiver. ||1||
3a stat Ag fae JS ll 356-11, ner, He 1) tayraa bhaanaa sabh kichh hovai. By Your Will, everything come to pass.
Hodle ate nifs fears nan ToS i 356-11, wer, He 1 manhath keechai ant vigovai. ||1|| rahaa-o. One who acts in stubborn-mindedness is ruined in the end. ||1||Pause] |
HoHY oat fs afs femmit i (356-11, wr, He 1) manmukh kee mat koorh vi-aapee. The intellect of the self-willed manmukh is engrossed in falsehood.
fae ofs fuga ufu Hardt ii (56-12, mmr, He 1) bin har simran paap santaapee. ||2| | Without the meditative remembrance of the Lord, it suffers in sin. ||2]|
eons fsurta oo fas BSF Il (356-12, nr, H8 1) durmat ti-aag laahaa kichh layvhu. Renounce evil-mindedness, and you shall reap the rewards.
A Gun A nie mise ISI (356-12, wr, He 1) jo upjai so alakh abhayvhu. ||3]| Whoever is born, comes through the Unknowable and Mysterious Lord. ||3]|
MAT INST AUT AaTet Il (356-13, war, Hs 1) aisaa hamraa sakhaa sahaa-ee. Such is my Friend and Companion;
ad ofa fifeor sats fesret sil (356-13, wr, us 1) gur har mili-aa bhagat darirhaa-ee. ||4| | meeting with the Guru, the Lord, devotion was implanted within me. ||4||
HaISt ASST Set wvr|S | (356-13, we, He 1) saglee’ sa-odee™ totaa aavai. In all other transactions, one suffers loss.
SOA TH SH His SS MUNI (356-14, wTAT, He 1) naanak raam naam man bhaavai. ||5||24|| The Name of the Lord is pleasing to Nanak's mind. ||5||24]|
MAT HIG A BUS Il (356-14) aasaa mehlaa 1 cha-upday. Aasaa, First Mehl, Chau-Padas:
fefenr Sterdt st usGuart Il (356-14, rr, He 1) vidi-aa veechaaree taa™ par-upkaaree. Contemplate and reflect upon knowledge, and you will become a benefactor to others.
at ue oat st Stee SAT NA (356-15, wer, He 1)
jaa‘ panch raasee taa’ tirath vaasee. ||1]|
When you conquer the five passions, then you shall come to dwell at the sacred shrine of pilgrimage. ||1]|
ulus SH A HG BA Il (356-15, wrAr, we 1) ghunghroo vaajai jay man laagai. You shall hear the vibrations of the tinkling bells, when your mind is held steady.
38 AH ad ad HAAG ora NAN TIC Il (356-15, wer, He 1) ta-o jam kahaa karay mo si-o aagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. So what can the Messenger of Death do to me hereafter? ||1||Pause| |
min foaHt 3B femme il 356-16, mmr, He 1) aas niraasee ta-o sani-aasee. When you abandon hope and desire, then you become a true Sannyaasi.
At AS Hat St afer Sait MQM (56-16, mA, He 1) jaa’ jat jogee taa kaa-i-aa bhogee. ||2]| When the Yogi practices abstinence, then he enjoys his body. ||2||
efeur featag fa atest | (356-16, nr, Hz 1)
da-i-aa digambar dayh beechaaree. Through compassion, the naked hermit reflects upon his inner self.
wif Hd Ma ST HTT MSI (356-17, TAT, He 1) aap marai avraa nah maaree. ||3]| He slays his own self, instead of slaying others. ||3] |
Sa 3 dfs SA AIST Il (356-17, wT, we 1) ayk too hor vays bahutayray. You, O Lord, are the One, but You have so many Forms.
Sod We BA 5 Sd ISNQUII (56-17, TT, He 1) naanak jaanai choj na tayray. ||4]|25]| Nanak does not know Your wondrous plays. ||4||25]|
MITAT HIS 4% Il (356-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Sa o Sd Te af Get Il 356-18, new, He 1) ayk na bharee-aa gun kar Dhovaa. I am not stained by only one sin, that could be washed clean by virtue.
Hat Ag Wat JG fafa sf AST NU (356-18, wT, He 1 mayraa saho jaagai ha-o nis bhar sovaa. ||1]| My Husband Lord is awake, while I sleep through the entire night of my life. ||1]|
fe@ fag as fumrdt det il (356-19, wir, He 1) i-o ki-o kant pi-aaree hovaa. In this way, how can I become dear to my Husband Lord?
Ag Aa JC for sfs AS NU TIS I (356-19, ve, He saho jaagai ha-o nis bhar sovaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My Husband Lord remains awake, while I sleep through the entire night of my life. ||1]|Pause] |
ust BUD
nia fumiAt AA MST I (357-1, mmr, He 1) aas pi-aasee Sayjai aavaa. With hope and desire, I approach His Bed,
Mira Ad STS FX S SST MQM (357-1, wer, ue 1) aagai sah bhaavaa ke na bhaavaa. ||2|| but I do not know whether He will be pleased with me or not. ||2]|
fom rat foo dfear dt Het I (357-1, mr, He 1) ki-aa jaanaa ki-aa ho-igaa ree maa-ee. How do I know what will happen to me, O my mother?
Ufe eaHe fae JIS 3 WEST NAN TIC Ul 57-1, vy, ue 1
har darsan bin rahan na jaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, I cannot survive. ||1]|Pause] |
UH & ofan Hat fA S gsrAt Il (357-2, wm, ws 1) paraym na chaakhi-aa mayree tis na bujhaanee. I have not tasted His Love, and my thirst is not quenched.
Tent A ATS US UESTSt ISI (357-2, TAT, He 1) ga-i-aa so joban Dhan pachhutaanee. ||3] | My beautiful youth has run away, and now I, the soul-bride, repent and regret. ||3]|
mA A ATA nA fim I 357-3, marr, He 1 ajai SO jaaga-o aas pi-aasee. Even now, I am held by hope and desire.
3S Cont sa foaAt na TIS il (357-3, ora, ve 1) bha-eelay udaasee raha-o niraasee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am depressed; I have no hope at all. ||1]||Pause| |
ICH afe ad Alas Il (357-4, mr, He 1) ha-umai kho-ay karay seegaar. She overcomes her egotism, and adorns herself;
38 anfs AA dS 3ST II (357-4, nT, He 1) ta-o kaaman sayjai ravai bhataar. ||4|| the Husband Lord now ravishes and enjoys the soul-bride on His Bed. ||4]|
38 stead aS Hfe STS Il (357-4, nmr, He 1) ta-o naanak kantai man bhaavai. Then, O Nanak, the bride becomes pleasing to the Mind of her Husband Lord;
efs zaret mre YAN ANTS INA TITS QE (357-4, we, He 1) chhod vadaa-ee apnay khasam samaavai. ||1]| rahaa-o. ||26]|| she sheds her self-conceit, and is absorbed in her Lord and Master. ||1]||Pause| |26] |
MTAT HIS 4 Il (357-5)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
UzaS US udt fenirat i (357-5, new, we 1) payvkarhai Dhan kharee i-aanee. In this world of my father's house, I, the soul-bride, have been very childish;
fSH Ad at HATS © Fat MAU (357-6, wr, He 1) tis sah kee mai saar na jaanee. ||1|| I did not realize the value of my Husband Lord. ||1]|
Ag Aa Sa VA Sot AST Ml 357-6, wer, Hs 1) saho mayraa ayk doojaa nahee ko-ee. My Husband is the One; there is no other like Him.
Sets aS Hart Tet Ul TIC il 57-6, rawr, nz 1) nadar karay maylaavaa ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. If He bestows His Glance of Grace, then I shall meet Him. ||1]|Pause] |
Ads Ue AS UeTtfsnr i (357-7, om, He 1) saahurrhai Dhan saach pachhaani-aa. In the next world of my in-law's house, I, the the soul-bride, shall realize Truth;
Hota Aste ner fug AEM iQ (357-7, mr, He 1) sahj subhaa-ay apnaa pir jaani-aa. ||2|| I shall come to know the celestial peace of my Husband Lord. ||2]|
ae UsATSt MAT HFS mS I (357-8, vi, He 1) gur parsaadee aisee mat aavai. By Guru's Grace, such wisdom comes to me,
at anf &3 Hfs av] BI 357-8, vir, He 1) taa‘ kaaman kantai man bhaavai. ||3]| so that the soul-bride becomes pleasing to the Mind of the Husband Lord. |[3]|
AIS Soa F SS AT AT Alas Il (357-8, mer, He 1) kahat naanak bhai bhaav kaa karay seegaar. Says Nanak, she who adorns herself with the Love and the Fear of God,
He dt AW Je FST NNQIM (357-9, wewT, He 1) sad hee sayjai ravai bhataar. ||4]|27]| enjoys her Husband Lord forever on His Bed. ||4||27]|
YTAT HIS 4% Il (357-9)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
3 fan a us 3 fan at Het I 357-9, mer, He 1) na kis kaa poot na kis kee maa-ee. No one is anyone else's son, and no one is anyone else's mother.
BO Hfs sath Feet WAU (357-9, wer, Hs 1) jhoothai mohi bharam bhulaa-ee. ||1|| Through false attachments, people wander around in doubt. ||1]|
He Aga IG atst Sa Il (357-10, wm, He 1) mayray saahib ha-o keetaa tayraa. O My Lord and Master, I am created by You.
tS efs mi oS Sa Ul IHS Il 357-10, wer, 4s jaa‘ too’ deh japee naa-o tayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. If You give it to me, I will chant Your Name. ||1]||Pause] |
WIS STS TX FET ll (357-10, weer, Hs 1) bahutay a-ugan kookai ko-ee. That person who is filled with all sorts of sins may pray at the Lord's Door,
w fSq ate SUA AST N21 (357-11, nr, He 1) jaa tis bhaavai bakhsay so-ee. ||2|| but he is forgiven only when the Lord so wills. ||2]|
ae usATSt Fans set Il (357-11, wr, He 1) gur parsaadee durmat kho-ee. By Guru's Grace, evil-mindedness is destroyed.
Ag ta sg Sa At SM 357-11, om, we 1) jah daykhaa tah ayko so-ee. ||3]| Wherever I look, there I find the One Lord. ||3]|
AIS SSX MAT HFS wr} I (357-12, weAr, He 1) kahat naanak aisee mat aavai. Says Nanak, if one comes to such an understanding,
3t ot Ad Afs ANTS NSMNQCH (357-12, mm, He 1) taa’ ko sachay sach samaavai. ||4||28] | then he is absorbed into the Truest of the True. ||4]|28] |
MAT HIG! A BUS Il (357-12) aasaa mehlaa 1 dupday. Aasaa, First Mehl, Du-Padas:
faz Hades 3et8 foe urat urea fRafa ator I 357-13, wer, He 1)
tit saravrarhai bha-eelay nivaasaa paanee paavak tineh kee-aa.
In that pool of the world, the people have their homes; there, the Lord has created water and fire.
Uae HI ua sot TS TH Sar Sa Tas AU (57-13, wer, vs 1)
pankaj moh pag nahee chaalai ham daykhaa tah doobee-alay. ||1||
In the mud of earthly attachment, their feet have become mired, and I have seen them drowning there. ||1||
HO SA 6 VS US HOT Il (357-14, mmr, He 1) man ayk na chaytas moorh manaa. O foolish people, why don't you remember the One Lord?
dfs fangs 33 Te afr a TIS il 57-14, nT, us 1 har bisrat tayray gun gali-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Forgetting the Lord, your virtues shall wither away. ||1]|Pause| |
a 3S Ast Ast odt ufsor Hee HoT ABH Stemi Il (357-15, wr, He 1)
naa ha-o jatee satee nahee parhi-aa moorakh mugDhaa janam bha-i-aa. I am not a celibate, nor am I truthful, nor a scholar; I was born foolish and ignorant.
yeets aad faq at Hae fa SF ardt AAfewr WINQEM 57-15, wer, He 1) paranvat naanak tin" kee sarnaa jin" too” naahee veesri-aa. ||2||29|| Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of those who do not forget You, Lord. ||2]|29]|
MATAT HIST 4 Il (357-16)
aasaa mehiaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
fam we fant ad fant BUeHA Il (357-16, or, He 1) chhi-a ghar chhi-a gur chhi-a updays. There are six systems of philosophy, six teachers, and six doctrines;
TI WT SA FA MSs MAU (357-16, wr, ne 1) gur gur ayko vays anayk. ||1|| but the Teacher of teachers is the One Lord, who appears in so many forms. ||1||
A ufa ags atefs dfe i (357-17, om, He 1) jai ghar kartay keerat ho-ay. That system, where the Praises of the Creator are sung
A ewg ay zaret Sfo all TIS Il (357-17, viv, ve 1) so ghar raakh vadaa-ee tohi. ||1|| rahaa-o. - follow that system; in it rests greatness. ||1]|Pause]|
fene offor usr use fast eet ug sfenr | Ase Sa TAS MSs I 357-17, wmv, He 1) visu-ay chasi-aa gharhee-aa pahraa thitee vaaree maahu bha-i-aa. sooraj ayko rut anayk.
As the seconds, minutes, hours, days, weekdays months and seasons all originate from the one sun,
—
Soa Ads A AS SA IIQNBO!N (357-18, vi, ve 1)
naanak kartay kay kaytay vays. ||2||30]|| O Nanak, so do all forms originate from the One Creator. ||2||30] |
Ue But
qe Afsas ure I (358-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MTA WI 3 HIS 4 Il (358-1)
aasaa ghar 3 mehlaa 1. Aasaa, Third House, First Mehl:
BY SAAT BY SH Sn wy CfS aAafs ASH Il (358-1, wm, He 1)
lakh laskar lakh vaajay nayjay lakh uth karahi salaam.
You may have thousands of armies, thousands of marching bands and lances, and thousands of men to rise and salute you.
out Gufs safefA sat wu Cfo wus HS Il (358-2, nmr, He 1)
lakhaa upar furmaa-is tayree lakh uth raakhahi maan.
Your rule may extend over thousands of miles, and thousands of men may rise to honor you.
a ufs 3a a ue 3st vfs forew AH IA (358-2, or, He 1)
jaa’ pat laykhai naa pavai taa‘ sabh niraafal kaam. ||1||
But, if your honor is of no account to the Lord, then all of your ostentatious show is useless. ||1]||
dfs & on fast Aa GU Il (358-3, nmr, He 1) har kay naam binaa jag DhanDhaa. Without the Name of the Lord, the world is in turmoil.
A aga ANSE sor St A nid niat A TIS Il (358-3, mT, ne 1)
jay bahutaa samjaa-ee-ai bholaa bhee so anDho anDhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Even though the fool may be taught again and again, he remains the blindest of the blind. ||1]]Pause| |
oy udmifs oy Admits uafo oe nirefa we Af I 358-3, mA, He 1)
lakh khatee-ah lakh sanjee-ah khaajeh lakh aavahi lakh jaahi.
You may earn thousands, collect thousands, and spend thousands of dollars; thousands may come, and thousands may go.
at ufs Sa a ue si ha faa fefs us i (358-4, nmr, He 1)
jaa’ pat laykhai naa pavai taa‘ jee-a kithai fir paahi. ||2||
But, if your honor is of no account to the Lord, then where will you go to find a safe haven? ||2||
SY AAS AHSteal GY Ufss usta UTS Il (358-5, yA, He 1)
lakh saasat samjhaavanee lakh pandit parheh puraan.
Thousands of Shaastras may be explained to the mortal, and thousands of Pandits may read the Puraanas to him;
at ufs SY of ue St AS AUISTS IBM 358-5, we, He 1) jaa’ pat laykhai naa pavai taa‘ sabhay kuparvaan. ||3]| but, if his honor is of no account to the Lord, then all of this is unacceptable. ||3]|
Ae oty ufs Gur aafh oH AIT Il (358-6, mmr, we 1) sach naam pat oopjai karam naam kartaar. Honor comes from the True Name, the Name of the Merciful Creator.
wifafoth fase A ZA aTEa Sedt UT NSIVUSAUI (358-6, vA, He 1)
ahinis hirdai jay vasai naanak nadree paar. ||4||1||31]|
If it abides in the heart, day and night, O Nanak, then the mortal shall swim across, by His Grace. ||4]|1||31]|
MITAT HIS 4% Il (358-7)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
det Hat Sa oH ey fefs ufenr 3m Il 358-7, nmr, He 1) deevaa mayraa ayk naam dukh vich paa-i-aa tayl. The One Name is my lamp; I have put the oil of suffering into it.
Cis wate Gg Afr gar AH FAG AB Al Gs8-7, wer, we
un chaanan oh sokhi-aa chookaa jam si-o mayl. ||1]|
Its flame has dried up this oil, and I have escaped my meeting with the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
Bal HS a eats utes i (358-8, we, He 1) lokaa mat ko fakarh paa-ay. O people, do not make fun of me.
oy Hist ats Sas SA TSt B BT UU! TIS Il 58-8, wm, ve 1)
lakh marhi-aa kar aykthay ayk ratee lay bhaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Thousands of wooden logs, piled up together, need only a tiny flame to burn. ||1]|Pause| |
fits usfe Hat an fafeor AY oH ATT Il (358-9, wir, He 1)
pind patal mayree kaysa-o kiri-aa sach naam kartaar.
The Lord is my festive dish, of rice balls on leafy plates; the True Name of the Creator Lord is my funeral ceremony.
me Ge nrd ue ST HIT MOTT IQ (358-9, mm, He 1) aithai othai aagai paachhai ayhu mayraa aaDhaar. ||2| | Here and hereafter, in the past and in the future, this is my support. ||2| |
dial Sorat frefs SHS are TSH TE Il (358-9, rrr, ve 1)
gang banaaras sifat tumaaree naavai aatam raa-o.
The Lord's Praise is my River Ganges and my city of Benares; my soul takes its sacred cleansing bath there.
Ae ores st dha at nifofoth oat av@ Sil 58-10, om, He 1) sachaa naavan taa™ thee-ai jaa" ahinis laagai bhaa-o. ||3]| That becomes my true cleansing bath, if night and day, I enshrine love for You. ||3]|
fea Sat dg efredt gone fe fills wf II 58-10, mmr, Hs 1)
ik lokee hor chhamichharee baraahman vat pind khaa-ay.
The rice balls are offered to the gods and the dead ancestors, but it is the Brahmins who eat them!
aod fils santa ot oad foueth af WgiQN32H 58-11, »mAr, He 1) naanak pind bakhsees kaa kabahoo™ nikhootas naahi. ||4||2||32]| O Nanak, the rice balls of the Lord are a gift which is never exhausted. ||4]|2||32]|
MTAT WT 8 HIG 4 (358-12)
aasaa ghar 4 mehlaa 1 Aasaa, Fourth House, First Mehl:
qe Afsars ATE II (358-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
cefsur wanes & Set ga gy Shea HTS Ml (358-13, wer, we 1)
dayviti-aa darsan kai taa-ee dookh bhookh tirath kee-ay.
The Gods, yearning for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, suffered through pain and hunger at the sacred shrines.
nat Ast vals nfs sos afs afs sare Su SS AI (358-13, wer, He 1)
jogee jatee jugat meh rahtay kar kar bhagvay bhaykh bha-ay. ||1]|
The yogis and the celibates live their disciplined lifestyle, while others wear saffron robes and become hermits. ||1]|
38 arefs wfoat Sf gS Il (358-14, wer, He 1) ta-o kaaran saahibaa rang ratay. For Your sake, O Lord Master, they are imbued with love.
3g BH MSA TU MST ATS 3 AS SI TS AT UU TTS Il (358-14, wey, we 1)
tayray naam anaykaa roop anantaa kahan na jaahee tayray gun kaytay. ||1]| rahaa-o. Your Names are so many, and Your Forms are endless. No one can tell how may Glorious Virtues You have. ||1]||Pause| |
Zd ud He JASt ws efs ferfefs SA TE I (358-15, wT, He 1
dar ghar mehlaa hastee ghorhay chhod vilaa-it days ga-ay.
Leaving behind hearth and home, palaces, elephants, horses and native lands, mortals have journeyed to foreign lands.
ule Uatag wfea afea est soho ae us Il (358-15, wer, He 1)
peer paykaa™bar saalik saadik chhodee dunee-aa thaa-ay pa-ay. ||2||
The spiritual leaders, prophets, seers and men of faith renounced the world, and became acceptable. ||2||
Ae HUA AY JA AA SHS AUS ES VHS BE Il 358-16, new, He 1)
saad sahj sukh ras kas tajee-alay kaaparh chhoday chamarh lee-ay.
Renouncing tasty delicacies, comfort, happiness and pleasures, some have abandoned their clothes and now wear skins.
ele vaede ufs 3d oft 33 VISA BS NSM (358-17, nT, He 1)
dukhee-ay daradvand dar tayrai naam ratay darvays bha-ay. ||3]||
Those who suffer in pain, imbued with Your Name, have become beggars at Your Door. ||3]|
Yost dust Bast sHst fra AS TSt aati (358-17, wer, He 1)
khalrhee khapree lakrhee chamrhee sikhaa soot Dhotee keen"ee.
Some wear skins, and carry begging bowls, bearing wooden staffs, and sitting on deer skins. Others raise their hair in tufts and wear sacred threads and loin-cloths.
3 rfog 3G Ata Sa yse HA ATS AAT IBIAS (358-18, wr, He 1D too” saahib ha-o saa‘gee tayraa paranvai naanak jaat kaisee. ||4]|1]|33]]|
You are the Lord Master, I am just Your puppet. Prays Nanak, what is my social status to be? ||4]|1]]33]|
ua sur
MTAT WT U HIG Y (359-1)
aasaa ghar 5 mehlaa 1 Aasaa, Fifth House, First Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe il (359-2) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sisfs us aus Hfs SA Il 359-2, mr, He 1) bheetar panch gupat man vaasay. The five evil passions dwell hidden within the mind.
fag 3 safe AA sefo BSA NU (359-2, vr, He 1) thir na raheh jaisay bhaveh udaasay. ||1]| They do not remain still, but move around like wanderers. ||1||
Ho Ha efenre Ast fag 5 Fd Il (359-2, mr, v2 1) man mayraa da-i-aal saytee thir na rahai. My soul does not stay held by the Merciful Lord.
Beat auet unit unist wfeor mfr wat Al TIS Il (359-3, mer, He 1)
lobhee kaptee paapee paakhandee maa-i-aa aDhik lagai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It is greedy, deceitful, sinful and hypocritical, and totally attached to Maya. ||1]|Pause] |
So Her aes ufss ait IT il (359-4, wer, Hs 1) fool maalaa gal pahir-ugee haaro. I will decorate my neck with garlands of flowers.
frdar ulsy sa aaGait Atard 12H (359-4, »mr, Hs 1) milaigaa pareetam tab kar-ugee seegaaro. ||2|| When I meet my Beloved, then I will put on my decorations. ||2| |
ug Hat IH Sa Tad | (359-4, we, He 1) panch sakhee ham ayk bhataaro. I have five companions and one Spouse.
ufs walt J Ahora THT ISI (359-5, nmr, He 1) payd lagee hai jee-arhaa chaalanhaaro. ||3]| It is ordained from the very beginning, that the soul must ultimately depart. ||3]|
us Aet fife Teq ATT Il (359-5, wer, ue 1) panch sakhee mil rudan karayhaa. The five companions will lament together.
A UNS YSets SSA Sat SIT NIU 59-5, werAr, we 1) saahu pajootaa paranvat naanak laykhaa dayhaa. ||4||1]|34|| When the soul is trapped, prays Nanak, it is called to account. ||4||1]|34]]|
qe Afsars yATfe il (359-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MITAT UT E HIST Y Il (359-8)
aasaa ghar 6 mehlaa 1. Aasaa, Sixth House, First Mehl:
Ho HSt A Heat Je USES JS AST Wet Il (359-8, wm, we 1) man motee jay gahnaa hovai pa-un hovai soot Dhaaree. If the pearl of the mind is strung like a jewel on the thread of the breath,
for Htarg anfs sfs ufod ae wre fimrdt all (359-8, mmr, He 1)
khimaa seegaar kaaman tan pahirai raavai laal pi-aaree. || 1] |
and the soul-bride adorns her body with compassion, then the Beloved Lord will enjoy His lovely bride. ||1]|
we ag dfs anfs Hat i (359-9, wer, He 1) laal baho gun kaaman mohee. O my Love, I am fascinated by Your many glories;
3d Te dfs 3 mec NU TIC il (359-9, wer, He 1) tayray gun hohi na avree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Your Glorious Virtues are not found in any other. ||1]|Pause]|
ofs ofa wg afe & ufad SHeT Ys Set I (359-10, vw, we
har har haar kanth lay pahirai daamodar dant lay-ee.
If the bride wears the garland of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, around her neck, and if she uses the toothbrush of the Lord;
ad afs agst aaa ufod feo fafa fos aget NI (359-10, nmr, He 1)
kar kar kartaa kangan pahirai in biDh chit Dharay-ee. ||2||
and if she fashions and wears the bracelet of the Creator Lord around her wrist, then she shall hold her consciousness steady. ||2||
HOHeS ae Heat ufsd USHA US Bet Il 359-11, wer, ws 1)
maDhusoodan kar mundree pahirai parmaysar pat lay-ee.
She should make the Lord, the Slayer of demons, her ring, and take the Transcendent Lord as her silken clothes.
Uten ust sore amnfs Alea Ae Set BI 59-11, vm, He 1
Dheeraj Dharhee banDhaavai kaaman sareerang surmaa day-ee. ||3]||
The soul-bride should weave patience into the braids of her hair, and apply the lotion of the Lord, the Great Lover. ||3]]|
Ho Hefe A tue AS atfenr AA AdeT II (359-12, nA, He 1)
man mandar jay deepak jaalay kaa-i-aa sayj karay-ee.
If she lights the lamp in the mansion of her mind, and makes her body the bed of the Lord,
fomre TE Aa AA nTe 3 ovo Sa ATT NSIANISUI (359-12, wm, He 1)
gi-aan raa-o jab sayjai aavai ta naanak bhog karay-ee. ||4||1]|35]|
then, when the King of spiritual wisdom comes to her bed, He shall take her, and enjoy her. ||4||1]|35]|
YMTAT HIST 4% Il (359-13)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
ast de ad aatenr fan for adit set I (359-13, mmr, He 1)
keetaa hovai karay karaa-i-aa tis ki-aa kahee-ai bhaa-ee.
The created being acts as he is made to act; what can be said to him, O Siblings of Destiny?
a fag aga’ A ate sfoor ofS fomr vsaret IU (359-14, mmr, He 1)
jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa keetay ki-aa chaturaa-ee. ||1|| Whatever the Lord is to do, He is doing; what cleverness could be used to affect Him?
[1
3ST JOH FS 3ST STS Il (359-14, nmr, 2 1) tayraa hukam bhalaa tuDh bhaavai. The Order of Your Will is so sweet, O Lord; this is pleasing to You.
Soa St aS fs earet AS at ANTS AU TIT Il (359-14, mr, He 1)
naanak taa ka-o milai vadaa-ee saachay naam samaavai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O Nanak, he alone is honored with greatness, who is absorbed in the True Name. ||1]|Pause] |
faas ufeor ugerer fofimr aofs gan 3 det Il (359-15, mmr, He 1)
kirat pa-i-aa parvaanaa likhi-aa baahurh hukam na ho-ee.
The deeds are done according to pre-ordained destiny; no one can turn back this Order.
AAT fesfimer Sar ufsur Afe o Aa AST QI (359-16, vi, He 1) jaisaa likhi-aa taisaa parhi-aa mayt na sakai ko-ee. ||2| | As it is written, so it comes to pass; no one can erase it. ||2| |
A oO Vdd FIST aS JE us Ha Il (359-16, vr, we 1) jay ko dargeh bahutaa bolai naa-o pavai baajaaree. He who talks on and on in the Lord's Court is Known as a joker.
Asda Tet ua ost adt mr] ATS WSN (359-17, or, He 1) satranj baajee pakai naahee kachee aavai saaree. ||3]|| He is not successful in the game of chess, and his chessmen do not reach their goal.
[I3I|
a a ufsor ufsg alata a Hay Her I 359-17, mmr, He 1) naa ko parhi-aa pandit beenaa naa ko moorakh mandaa. By himself, no one is literate, learned or wise; no one is ignorant or evil.
aet viefs frefs ave a aS adha Fer USIQNBEN G59-18, nA, He 1
bandee andar sifat karaa-ay taa ka-o kahee-ai bandaa. ||4]|2||36]|
When, as a slave, one praises the Lord, only then is he known as a human being. [14] 12] [36] |
MTAT HIS 4% Il (359-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
ad a Age Ho fs Her filter fin TerSE Il (359-18, wr, Hs 1)
gur kaa sabad manai meh mundraa khinthaa khimaa hadhaava-o.
Let the Word of the Guru's Shabad be the ear-rings in your mind, and wear the patched coat of tolerance.
A fas ad so afs Hoe AoA Aa fofo UTS NAN (359-19, wT, He 1)
jo kichh karai bhalaa kar maan-o sahj jog niDh paava-o. ||1]|
Whatever the Lord does, look upon that as good; thus you shall obtain the treasure of Sehj Yoga. ||1]|
UST BEO
we Fas AC Ha Aa Hat USH So fo Hal I (360-1, wr, He 1)
baabaa jugtaa jee-o jugah jug jogee param tant meh joga’,
O father, the soul which is united in union as a Yogi, remains united in the supreme essence throughout the ages.
nifys on fadne ufemr fomrs ofemr sa Sat IU TIS Il (60-1, wT, He 1
amrit naam niranjan paa-i-aa gi-aan kaa-i-aa ras bhoga’. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who has obtained the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Immaculate Lord - his body enjoys the pleasure of spiritual wisdom. ||1]|Pause] |
fre oat ufo urAfs SAC awu fSurait gre i (360-2, mr, He 1)
siv nagree meh aasan baisa-o kalap ti-aagee baada”.
In the Lord's City, he sits in his Yogic posture, and he forsakes his desires and conflicts.
fist Fae Ae ofe Ad nifafef us BE II (360-2, wT, ws 1)
sinyee sabad sadaa Dhun sohai ahinis poorai naada”. ||2| |
The sound of the horn ever rings out its beautiful melody, and day and night, he is filled with the sound current of the Naad. ||2| |
ug deg fomre His Sat easHTS fags II (360-3, wm, He 1)
pat veechaar gi-aan mat dandaa varatmaan bibhoota”.
My cup is reflective meditation, and spiritual wisdom is my walking stick; to dwell in the Lord's Presence is the ashes I apply to my body.
dfs atefs sooth oact genta ue nists 3I Ge0-3, wm, He 1) har keerat rahraas hamaaree gurmukh panth ateeta™. ||3]| The Praise of the Lord is my occupation; and to live as Gurmukh is my pure religion.
[I3I|
Rast Afs THe Afi oar SIs MiSe Il (360-4, mma, He 1)
saglee jot hamaaree sammi-aa naanaa varan anayka".
My arm-rest is to see the Lord's Light in all, although their forms and colors are so numerous.
ag soa Afs saafe Aalt wagqan fee Se IBISISIIN (360-5, wT, He 1) kaho naanak sun bharthar jogee paarbarahm liv ayka™. ||4||3||37]| Says Nanak, listen, O Bharthari Yogi: love only the Supreme Lord God. ||4||3]|37] |
MITAT HIST 4 Il (360-5)
aasaa mehlaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
as ate fomre fomrg afs we afs agat aA UTM II (360-5, rrr, He 1)
gurh kar gi-aan Dhi-aan kar Dhaavai kar karnee kas paa-ee-ai.
Make spiritual wisdom your molasses, and meditation your scented flowers; let good deeds be the herbs.
wot seo UN ot UT fey oth mfHe sore IAI Go0-6, vir, He 1)
bhaathee bhavan paraym kaa pochaa it ras ami-o chu-aa-ee-ai. ||1||
Let devotional faith be the distilling fire, and your love the ceramic cup. Thus the sweet nectar of life is distilled. ||1]|
Wal He sed STH IA Ule AoA da ste Sfmt Il (360-7, wm, He 1)
baabaa man matvaaro naam ras peevai sahj rang rach rahi-aa.
O Baba, the mind is intoxicated with the Naam, drinking in its Nectar. It remains absorbed in the Lord's Love.
mifofofA aot UH fae oat Fag viose afar ail TIS il (60-7, wm, us 1)
ahinis banee paraym liv laagee sabad anaahad gahi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Night and day, remaining attached to the Love of the Lord, the celestial music of the Shabad resounds. ||1||Pause| |
us Arg fimrer Aon fats ulere AT as sels A Il (300-8, wr, He 1)
pooraa saach pi-aalaa sehjay tiseh pee-aa-ay jaa ka-o nadar karay.
The Perfect Lord naturally gives the cup of Truth, to the one upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace.
nifys or erurgt Te for ufe se SS TF Mil (360-9, wmv, we 1) amrit kaa vaapaaree hovai ki-aa mad chhoochhai bhaa-o Dharay. ||2|| One who trades in this Nectar - how could he ever love the wine of the world? ||2]|
Gas at At nifys wet utes dt users sfenr it (360-9, wm, ue 1)
gur kee saakhee amrit banee peevat hee parvaan bha-i-aa.
The Teachings of the Guru, the Ambrosial Bani - drinking them in, one becomes acceptable and renowned.
Ud VIAS a UISH Je Has FAS as far I13I Go0-10, wT, He 1)
dar darsan kaa pareetam hovai mukat baikunthay karai ki-aa. ||3]|
Unto the one who loves the Lord's Court, and the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, of what use is liberation or paradise? ||3] |
fest 3S HE Asai WA ABH B TS Il (360-10, wr, Hs 1)
siftee rataa sad bairaagee joo-ai janam na haarai.
Imbued with the Lord's Praises, one is forever a Bairaagee, a renunciate, and one's life is not lost in the gamble.
ag soa Afs saafe Halt ute nifys os NSNSNSCH (360-11, vm, He 1)
kaho naanak sun bharthar jogee kheevaa amrit Dhaarai. ||4||4]|38]| Says Nanak, listen, O Bharthari Yogi: drink in the intoxicating nectar of the Lord. [14] 14] 138] |
MITAT HIS 4% Il (360-12)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
YIAS YANO oor fyeAste safer I (360-12, wr, He 1) khuraasaan khasmaanaa kee-aa hindusataan daraa-i-aa. Having attacked Khuraasaan, Baabar terrified Hindustan.
nm SAS tet aga AH ats Haw VatfEnr Il 60-12, nm, He 1)
aapai dos na day-ee kartaa jam kar mugal charhaa-i-aa.
The Creator Himself does not take the blame, but has sent the Mugal as the messenger of death.
Sat ng ust agar SF at wae & orfenr Al Go0-13, mr, nz 1) aytee maar pa-ee karlaanay tai‘ kee darad na aa-i-aa. ||1||
There was so much slaughter that the people screamed. Didn't You feel compassion, Lord? ||1]|
KIT F ASS A AST Il (360-13, wr, we 1) kartaa too’ sabhnaa kaa so-ee. O Creator Lord, You are the Master of all.
A AAS AAS AG HS ST Hs JA Oo Tet NU TIC Il (360-14, wr, He 1)
jay saktaa saktay ka-o maaray taa man ros na ho-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
If some powerful man strikes out against another man, then no one feels any grief in their mind. ||1]|Pause] |
Rast Ald HS U Sct MAH AT UDATET I (360-14, wer, He 1)
saktaa seehu maaray pai vagai khasmai saa pursaa-ee.
But if a powerful tiger attacks a flock of sheep and kills them, then its master must answer for it.
330 fearfs feate ast yfeur arg 3 aret I (360-15, mr, He 1)
ratan vigaarh vigo-ay kutee™ mu-i-aa saar na kaa-ee.
This priceless country has been laid waste and defiled by dogs, and no one pays any attention to the dead.
nm afs fees wm Fy Sct efsmret i211 (360-15, vr, He 1) aapay jorh vichhorhay aapay vaykh tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||2|| You Yourself unite, and You Yourself separate; I gaze upon Your Glorious Greatness.
[21 |
Aa a use gst ATE ad His BTS Il (360-16, mT, He 1) jay ko naa-o Dharaa-ay vadaa saad karay man bhaanay. One may give himself a great name, and revel in the pleasures of the mind,
UAH oedt atat nie AS Yd VES Il (360-16, wer, He 1) khasmai nadree keerhaa aavai jaytay chugai daanay. but in the Eyes of the Lord and Master, he is just a worm, for all the corn that he eats.
Hfe fe Hite a fae UTS BSA SH SMS ISIUNSEM (60-17, we, He 1)
mar mar jeevai taa kichh paa-ay naanak naam vakhaanay. ||3]||5||39]|
Only one who dies to his ego while yet alive, obtains the blessings, O Nanak, by chanting the Lord's Name. ||3]|5||39||
Td MTA WI 2 HIG S (360-18) raag aasaa ghar 2 mehlaa 3 Raag Aasaa, Second House, Third Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (360-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs PIAS urs SsaTfaT Il (360-19, maT, He 3) har darsan paavai vadbhaag. The Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan is obtained by great good fortune.
ad a Aafe Ae Safa i (360-19, ww, we 3)
gur kai sabad sachai bairaag. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, true detachment is obtained.
YS BIAS FIs FIST Il (360-19, new, vs 3) khat darsan vartai vartaaraa. The six systems of philosophy are pervasive,
Us BEA
TI A AIAG MH MUTA IAM (61-1, »TAT, He 3) gur kaa darsan agam apaaraa. ||1]| but the Guru's system is profound and unequalled. ||1]|
ae a vane Hats afs df= Il (361-1, nmr, He 3)
gur kai darsan mukat gat ho-ay.
The Guru's system is the way to liberation.
Ara witty ZA fe APE Wall TIC Ul (361-1, new, He 3)
saachaa aap vasai man so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Lord Himself comes to dwell in the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
ad eaAfs Bud AAS | (361-2, mA, He 3) gur darsan uDhrai sansaaraa. Through the Guru's system, the world is saved,
Aa we a fimira il (361-2, nmr, ne 3) jay ko laa-ay bhaa-o pi-aaraa. if it is embraced with love and affection.
a filme ae feaor af= I (361-2, nirr, He 3) bhaa-o pi-aaraa laa-ay virlaa ko-ay. How rare is that person who truly loves the Guru's Way.
Gd a wanle Ae AY SPE NM (61-3, wer, He 3) gur kai darsan sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||2| | Through the Guru's system, everlasting peace is obtained. ||2]|
qd a zaAle HY BTS Il (361-3, wert, He 3) gur kai darsan mokh du-aar. Through the Guru's system, the Door of Salvation is obtained.
Afsag Ae UdeTs AMIE Il (361-3, wr, He 3) satgur sayvai parvaar saaDhaar. Serving the True Guru, one's family is saved.
foad aS afs aret ordt Il (361-4, nr, 2 3) niguray ka-o gat kaa-ee naahee. There is no salvation for those who have no Guru.
Wiese HS Set UTS SI (361-4, mA, He 3) avgan muthay chotaa khaahee. ||3]| Beguiled by worthless sins, they are struck down. ||3]|
ad a Rafe AY Aifs Act Il 61-4, nr, He 3) gur kai sabad sukh saat sareer. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the body finds peace and tranquility.
Tanfy st a wat B ute | Ge1-5, wer, He 3) gurmukh taa ka-o lagai na peer. The Gurmukh is not afflicted by pain.
Anas fSH Sfs B nS Il (361-5, nm, He 3) jamkaal tis nayrh na aavai. The Messenger of Death does not come near him.
Soa TIHfe As AHS ISIUIOMl (361-5, mTAT, He 3)
naanak gurmukh saach samaavai. ||4||1||40|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord. ||4||1]|40]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (61-6)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Rafe Hort fess nity aete Il 61-6, wmv, vs 3) sabad mu-aa vichahu aap gavaa-ay. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad, eradicates his self-conceit from within.
Afsagd Az (3G o SHE Il (361-6, mr, He 3) satgur sayvay til na tamaa-ay. He serves the True Guru, with no iota of self-interest.
foss@ ost Het nfs oF Il (361-7, nmr, He 3) nirbha-o daataa sadaa man ho-ay. The Fearless Lord, the Great Giver, ever abides in his mind.
Ret sat uve afar Af AU (361-7, rrr, He 3) sachee banee paa-ay bhaag ko-ay. ||1|| The True Bani of the Word is obtained only by good destiny. ||1]]|
we Aggy fess wae wh i (361-7, vm, ue 3) gun sangrahu vichahu a-ogun jaahi. So gather merits, and let your demerits depart from within you.
us TT a Hate ANT AU TIE Il (361-8, mmr, we 3) pooray gur kai sabad samaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall be absorbed into the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
TS A Wa Je A TES WE Il Gol-8, ww, ve 3) gunaa kaa gaahak hovai so gun jaanai. One who purchases merits, knows the value of these merits.
ifs Hafe SU SUS il (61-8, wer, ue 3) amrit sabad naam vakhaanai. He chants the Ambrosial Nectar of the Word, and the Name of the Lord.
Arat aret Het TPE il 61-9, wer, He 3) saachee banee soochaa ho-ay. Through the True Bani of the Word, he becomes pure.
Te 3 oH usufs SE QM Ge1-9, nmr, He 3) gun tay naam paraapat ho-ay. ||2]| Through merit, the Name is obtained. ||2||
TE MHA ue B AT Il Goe1-9, wer, He 3) gun amolak paa-ay na jaahi. The invaluable merits cannot be acquired.
Hfs fosHe ATS Aafe ANTE I (361-9, mm, He 3)
man nirmal saachai sabad samaahi. The pure mind is absorbed into the True Word of the Shabad.
A esstat fae oH famrfenr I (361-10, wr, He 3) say vadbhaagee jin" naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. How very fortunate are those who meditate on the Naam,
Ret qeerst Hfs sArfer Sil (361-10, wrt, He 3)
sadaa gundaataa man vasaa-i-aa. ||3]|| and ever enshrine in their minds the Lord, the Giver of merit. ||3]|
A de Age f3q afsors WE I Ge1-11, ver, He 3) jo gun sangrahai tin” balihaarai jaa-o. I am a sacrifice to those who gather merits.
af ATS ATS TE WE Il Goi-11, wer, He 3) dar saachai saachay gun gaa-o. At the Gate of Truth, I sing the Glorious Praises of the True One.
nm &2 Aofa ASE Il (61-11, nmr, He 3) aapay dayvai sahj subhaa-ay. He Himself spontaneously bestows His gifts.
Sea AHS ATE 6 ATE ISUQISAUl (361-12, nT, He 3)
naanak keemat kahan na jaa-ay. ||4||2||41]| O Nanak, the value of the Lord cannot be described. ||4||2||41]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (361-12)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Afsad feta zat efsuret i (361-12, mr, ue 3) satgur vich vadee vadi-aa-ee. Great is the greatness of the True Guru;
fact fees fs fioret 11 (61-12, nmr, Hs 3) chiree vichhunay mayl milaa-ee. He merges in His Merger, those who have been separated for so long.
~~ SN
mma HS Afs HOES I Go1-13, nr, He 3) aapay maylay mayl milaa-ay. He Himself merges the merged in His Merger.
nual StHfs wm urs UI (361-13, mA, He 3) aapnee keemat aapay paa-ay. ||1]| He Himself knows His own worth. ||1]|
ofa at athufs fas fafa df= it (361-13, mr, x: 3) har kee keemat kin biDh ho-ay. How can anyone appraise the Lord's worth?
dfs wrudug wan vided ad a Aafe fs AS afE NA TIE I Go1-14, ner, He 3) har aprampar agam agochar gur kai sabad milai jan ko-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one may merge with the Infinite, Unapproachable and Incomprehensible Lord. ||1||Pause] |
aante otfs we af= i 61-15, nmr, vs 3) gurmukh keemat jaanai ko-ay. Few are the Gurmukhs who know His worth.
fess aafH uarufs af& i (361-15, rr, we 3) virlay karam paraapat ho-ay. How rare are those who receive the Lord's Grace.
Cut wat Bar aE il Go1-15, »mr, He 3) oochee banee oochaa ho-ay. Through the Sublime Bani of His Word, one becomes sublime.
aenfy Aafe sare Af N2QI (361-15, wer, He 3) gurmukh sabad vakhaanai ko-ay. ||2]| The Gurmukh chants the Word of the Shabad. ||2]|
fee ore Buy ae Adis Il (61-16, wm, 2 3) vin naavai dukh darad sareer. Without the Name, the body suffers in pain;
Afsag 32 3 Css ute Il Ge1-16, ner, He 3) satgur bhaytay taa utrai peer. but when one meets the True Guru, then that pain is removed.
fag dd 3S Ty ANTE Il Got-16, nmr, v2 3) bin gur bhaytay dukh kamaa-ay. Without meeting the Guru, the mortal earns only pain.
Houfe sot fs AATE SI (61-17, ne, He 3) manmukh bahutee milai sajaa-ay. ||3]|| The self-willed manmukh receives only more punishment. ||3]|
dfs a any oto ofS om Safe I 61-17, nmr, He 3) har kaa naam meethaa at ras ho-ay. The essence of the Lord's Name is so very sweet;
utes gd ube APE I (361-17, ner, He 3) peevat rahai pee-aa-ay so-ay. he alone drinks it, whom the Lord causes to drink it.
ad facut 3 dfs FA WS Il (361-18, »rT, He 3) gur kirpaa tay har ras paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, the essence of the Lord is obtained.
Soa OTH FS Ms UES ISUSNS2Il (361-18, mA, He 3)
naanak naam ratay gat paa-ay. ||4||3||42||
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, salvation is attained. [14113] 142] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (361-18)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Ae ys ATS afys asts Il (361-19, wm, He 3) mayraa parabh saachaa gahir gambheer. My God is True, deep and profound.
Hes dt AY ATS AT Il (361-19, wm, He 3) sayvat hee sukh saat sareer. Serving Him, the body acquires peace and tranquility.
Rafe 3d AS Adfa ASE Il (361-19, nmr, He 3)
sabad taray jan sahj subhaa-ay. Through the Word of the Shabad, His humble servants easily swim across.
fsa & IN Ae wae UTE NA 61-19, wir, He 3) tin kai ham sad laagah paa-ay. ||1]| I fall at their feet forever and ever. ||1]|
UST BEQ
A Hfs aS dfs da ote Il (362-1, nmr, nH 3) jo man raatay har rang laa-ay. Those being whose minds are imbued and drenched with the Lord's Love
f36 & ASH Hes BY wa 3 Ue cada HS ASE Al FIC Il Ge2-1, nT, nu 3)
tin kaa janam maran dukh laathaa tay har dargeh milay subhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
- their pains of birth and death are taken away. They are automatically ushered into the Court of the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
Aas WS ATS ATES UTES | (362-2, nr, He 3) sabad chaakhai saachaa saad paa-ay. One who has tasted the Shabad, obtains the true flavor.
dfs a on Hfs SATE Il (362-2, vir, He 3) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. The Name of the Lord abides within his mind.
ofa ys Het stor saufe il (362-2, wr, He 3) har parabh sadaa rahi-aa bharpoor. The Lord God is Eternal and All-pervading.
~ SN
mm SS MM SS il (362-3, mA, we 3) aapay nayrhai aapay door. ||2|| He Himself is near, and He Himself is far away. ||2| |
nimafs nit gat AS AE Il (362-3, ver, He 3) aakhan aakhai bakai sabh ko-ay. Everyone talks and speaks through speech;
mm sufh foe APE I (362-3, mmr, He 3) aapay bakhas milaa-ay so-ay. the Lord Himself forgives, and unites us with Himself.
ade aafe & ufeur ate i (362-4, nmr, He 3)
kahnai kathan na paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
By merely speaking and talking, He is not obtained. ad usAtfe ZA nfs mmfe SII (362-4, nmr, He 3)
gur parsaad vasai man aa-ay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, He comes to abide in the mind. ||3]|
aanfe fea my aete il (362-4, mmr, He 3) gurmukh vichahu aap gavaa-ay. The Gurmukh eradicates his self-conceit from within.
dfs dfa aS HI Gate I (362-5, wir, ne 3) har rang raatay moh chukaa-ay. He is imbued with the Lord's Love, having discarded worldly attachment.
mis fSdHe Ws Aa STs Il (362-5, wi, ve 3) at nirmal gur sabad veechaar. He contemplates the utterly Immaculate Word of the Guru's Shabad.
SSA STH ASIST ST IIIS (362-5, MAT, He 3)
naanak naam savaaranhaar. ||4||4||43]| O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is our Salvation. ||4]|4]|43]]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (62-6)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
en ote wat sy UTEMM Il 362-6, mmr, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay lagay dukh paa-i-aa. Attached to the love of duality, one only incurs pain.
fag Ree fase AON TetfEnr Il (362-6, wm, He 3) bin sabdai birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. Without the Word of the Shabad, one's life is wasted away in vain.
Afsag AS ASt dE Il (362-7, nmr, ve 3) satgur sayvai sojhee ho-ay. Serving the True Guru, understanding is obtained,
en STS o Oa AS WAU (362-7, »mw, we 3) doojai bhaa-ay na laagai ko-ay. ||1]| and then, one is not attached to the love of duality. ||1]|
nfs ard AAS UTS Il (362-7, wir, He 3) mool laagay say jan parvaan. Those who hold fast to their roots, become acceptable.
wofes aH oH Afu fase aa Aaet dfs Sa AS NA TIS I (362-7, we, He 3) an-din raam naam jap hirdai gur sabdee har ayko jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Night and day, they meditate within their hearts on the Lord's Name; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they know the One Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
STS wa fesse ATE Il (362-8, nimAr, He 3) daalee laagai nihfal jaa-ay. One who is attached to the branch, does not receive the fruits.
mat ant wig AATE Il (362-8, nimAT, He 3) a‘Dhee’ kammee anDh sajaa-ay. For blind actions, blind punishment is received.
HOHY nit SBT o UTE I (362-9, mm, He 3) manmukh anDhaa tha-ur na paa-ay. The blind, self-willed manmukh finds no place of rest.
fanet at otat fan] ufo uate 211 (362-9, nmr, H3 3)
bistaa kaa keerhaa bistaa maahi pachaa-ay. ||2]| He is a maggot in manure, and in manure he shall rot away. ||2]|
ds At AS AST AY US Il (362-9, nimAr, He 3) gur kee sayvaa sadaa sukh paa-ay. Serving the Guru, everlasting peace is obtained.
Hanes fife afs Te We Il (362-10, nmr, ve 3)
santsangat mil har gun gaa-ay.
Joining the True Congregation, the Sat Sangat, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
OH OTH AT Stes Il (362-10, wv, He 3) naamay naam karay veechaar. One who contemplates the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
witty so ae Cugedy ill (362-10, wr, He 3) aap tarai kul uDhranhaar. ||3]| saves himself, and his family as well. ||3]|
Od at sat STH SAS I (362-11, wm, He 3) gur kee banee naam vajaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, the Naam resounds;
SOA HIG ASE We UES Il (362-11, »AT, He 3)
naanak mahal sabad ghar paa-ay. O Nanak, through the Word of the Shabad, one finds the Mansion of the Lord's Presence within the home of the heart.
asaHfs AS Afe dfs Ale afeEvr I (362-11, wm, He 3) gurmat sat sar har jal naa-i-aa. Under Guru's Instruction, bathe in the Pool of Truth, in the Water of the Lord;
Tons HS AS Vas Tefenr Isiulssil 62-12, wr, ns 3) durmat mail sabh durat gavaa-i-aa. ||4||5||44]| thus the filth of evil-mindedness and sin shall all be washed away. ||4]|5||44]]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (362-12)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
HoH Hote Hfs Hae fearats i (362-13, nm, He 3) manmukh mareh mar maran vigaarheh. The self-willed manmukhs are dying; they are wasting away in death.
SH STS MSH Aursfs il (362-13, wr, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay aatam sanghaareh. In the love of duality, they murder their own souls.
Ha ue ats ate feast i (362-13, mmr, v2 3) mayraa mayraa kar kar vigootaa. Crying out, "Mine, mine!", they are ruined.
MISH 3 Uta SdH fetes AS IA (362-14, mm, He 3) aatam na cheen"ai bharmai vich sootaa. ||1]| They do not remember their souls; they are asleep in superstition. ||1]|
He Hfenr Age Hie ATE Il (362-14, rr, He 3) mar mu-i-aa sabday mar jaa-ay. He alone dies a real death, who dies in the Word of the Shabad.
Grafs fee afe AN weet fen Fa Hf oo of Au S AE NA TIS I (362-14, wir, He 3)
ustat nindaa gur sam jaanaa-ee is jug meh laahaa har jap lai jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru has inspired me to realize, that praise and slander are one and the same; in this world, the profit is obtained by chanting the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
on fege aes af ATE II (362-15, mmr, He 3) naam vihoon garabh gal jaa-ay. Those who lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are dissolved within the womb.
fase ASH TA SITE Il (62-15, wre, ws 3) birthaa janam doojai lobhaa-ay. Useless is the birth of those who are lured by duality.
on faget off AS Aaret I (362-16, wr, v8 3) naam bihoonee dukh jalai sabaa-ee. Without the Naam, all are burning in pain.
Afsafs us FF TSE MMi (62-16, wr, ws 3) satgur poorai boojh bujhaa-ee. ||2| | The Perfect True Guru has given me this understanding. ||2| |
HG BUG ad det ue | (362-16, mirAr, He 3) man chanchal baho chotaa khaa-ay. The fickle mind is struck down so many times.
fag safant oa 6 ute Il (362-17, wm, He 3) aythahu chhurhki-aa tha-ur na paa-ay. Having lost this opportunity, no place of rest shall be found.
das fe fenet at SA Il (362-17, wr, He 3) garabh jon vistaa kaa vaas. Cast into the womb of reincarnation, the mortal lives in manure;
faz wfs HOHY Ad fSeA III (362-17, »rr, He 3) tit ghar manmukh karay nivaas. ||3]| in such a home, the self-willed manmukh takes up residence. ||3]|
mus Afsad AC Ae als AT Il Ge2-18, wT, Hs 3) apunay satgur ka-o sadaa bal jaa-ee. I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru;
aente Ast Afs fest | (362-18, ver, He 3) gurmukh jotee jot milaa-ee. the light of the Gurmukh blends with the Divine Light of the Lord.
feces aet for whe SAT II (362-18, nmr, He 3)
nirmal banee nij ghar vaasaa.
Through the Immaculate Bani of the Word, the mortal dwells within the home of his own inner self.
Soa ISH HS Het Berar SENSU (362-19, »TAT, He 3) naanak ha-umai maaray sadaa udaasaa. ||4]|6||45]| O Nanak, he conquers his ego, and remains forever detached. ||4||6]|45] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (362-19)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Bes nitust ATS Test il (362-19, nA, we 3) laalai aapnee jaat gavaa-ee. The Lord's slave sets aside his own social status.
UST BEB
3O HO Mau Afsad AdSret Il (363-1, wmv, He 3) tan man arpay satgur sarnaa-ee. He dedicates his mind and body to the True Guru, and seeks His Sanctuary.
fase on zat efsnret Il (363-1, nmr, ne 3) hirdai naam vadee vadi-aa-ee. His greatest greatness is that the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is in his heart.
Ret ulsy ys df Aaret All 363-1, »mr, He 3) Sadaa pareetam parabh ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||1|| The Beloved Lord God is his constant companion. ||1]|
A Ore Mes He Il (363-2, ner, He 3) so laalaa jeevat marai. He alone is the Lord's slave, who remains dead while yet alive.
Ha voy ef AH afs we ae usAet Aafe Bag 19 TIT Il (363-2, nm, v2 3)
sog harakh du-ay sam kar jaanai gur parsaadee sabad uDhrai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He looks upon pleasure and pain alike; by Guru's Grace, he is saved through the Word of the Shabad. ||1]||Pause] |
Adal AT UIT SIH Il (363-3, nA, He 3) karnee kaar Dharahu furmaa-ee. He does his deeds according to the Lord's Primal Command.
fag Hae & afte o uret Il (363-3, vir, He 3) bin sabdai ko thaa-ay na paa-ee. Without the Shabad, no one is approved.
Adal Stats SH SAS Il (363-3, nA, He 3) karnee keerat naam vasaa-ee. Singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, the Naam abides within the mind.
~ SA
mmr fe fas B Ure III (363-4, wm, He 3) aapay dayvai dhil na paa-ee. ||2]| He Himself gives His gifts, without hesitation. ||2]| |
Houfa saf 3B AAT Il (363-4, maT, He 3) manmukh bharam bhulai sansaar. The self-willed manmukh wanders around the world in doubt.
fag TH Fat AT SUT Il (363-4, mir, ve 3) bin raasee koorhaa karay vaapaar. Without any capital, he makes false transactions.
fee art cag us o UTE Il (363-4, wir, He 3) vin raasee vakhar palai na paa-ay. Without any capital, he does not obtain any merchandise.
Houta 3m HOH TASTE ISI (363-5, nrmAT, v2 3) manmukh bhulaa janam gavaa-ay. ||3]|| The mistaken manmukh wastes away his life. ||3]|
Afsag AS A oer dE Il (363-5, wer, He 3) satgur sayvay so laalaa ho-ay. One who serves the True Guru is the Lord's slave.
OSH Wt Osu ALE I 63-5, wr, Hs 3) ootam jaatee ootam so-ay. His social status is exalted, and his reputation is exalted.
Ts ust As = So aE I (303-6, wr, vs 3) gur pa-orhee sabh doo oochaa ho-ay. Climbing the Guru's Ladder, he becomes the most exalted of all.
Sea oth Zaret TE NSIDNEN (363-6, wm, He 3)
naanak naam vadaa-ee ho-ay. ||4]|7||46|| O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained. [141171146] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (363-6)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
HOHfe 3S SS AHS Il (363-7, wer, Hs 3) manmukh jhootho jhooth kamaavai. The self-willed manmukh practices falsehood, only falsehood.
UAH AT HIG AE B UTS Il (363-7, nH, ve 3) khasmai kaa mahal kaday na paavai. He never attains the Mansion of the Lord Presence.
SH Bat SAH FHS Il (363-7, mT, we 3) doojai lagee bharam bhulaavai. Attached to duality, he wanders, deluded by doubt.
HHS TT nS ATS WAU (363-7, vir, He 3) mamtaa baaDhaa aavai jaavai. ||1]| Entangled in worldly attachments, he comes and goes. ||1]|
codeat &T HS Su Alas Il (363-8, mma, He 3) duhaaganee kaa man daykh seegaar. Behold, the decorations of the discarded bride!
uz aes ufs fer fag we so Hg unis fears 1 TIS AU (363-8, wr, Hs 3) putar kalat Dhan maa-i-aa chit laa-ay jhooth moh pakhand vikaar. rahaa-o. ||1]| Her consciousness is attached to children, spouse, wealth, and Maya, falsehood, emotional attachment, hypocrisy and corruption. ||1]]Pause| |
Het Aoafe A Ys SS Il (363-9, wi, vs 3) sadaa sohagan jo parabh bhaavai. She who is pleasing to God is forever a happy soul-bride.
Od Aaet Als FST] I (363-9, mew, He 3) gur sabdee seegaar banaavdi. She makes the Word of the Guru's Shabad her decoration.
AA Aas niafes dfs ge] Il (363-9, newt, He 3) sayj sukhaalee an-din har raavai. Her bed is so comfortable; she enjoys her Lord, night and day.
ffs UISH et AY UTS IQII (363-10, wT, Hs 3) mil pareetam sadaa sukh paavai. ||2] | Meeting her Beloved, the obtains eternal peace. ||2||
AW Aovafs Ant fan vfs fips | (363-10, nmr, He 3) saa sohagan saachee jis saach pi-aar. She is a true, virtuous soul-bride, who enshrines love for the True Lord.
nuer fug aa wet Ba offs I (363-11, nmr, He 3) apnaa pir raakhai sadaa ur Dhaar. She keeps her Husband Lord always clasped to her heart.
SA SA
O38 Se Aet Jefe Il (363-11, ww, He 3) nayrhai vaykhai sadaa hadoor. She sees Him near at hand, ever-present.
Aa ys Aga soot souls Si 63-11, wr, Hs 3) mayraa parabh sarab rahi-aa bharpoor. ||3]| My God is all-pervading everywhere. ||3]|
mia ATS TUS ATS Il 363-11, wr, Hs 3) aagai jaat roop na jaa-ay. Social status and beauty will not go with you hereafter.
sa AN
30 Je AT AGH AHS Il (363-12, wm, He 3) tayhaa hovai jayhay karam kamaa-ay. As are the deeds done here, so does one become.
Hae Gs Gar ae il (363-12, »mr, 2 3) sabday oocho oochaa ho-ay. Through the Word of the Shabad, one becomes the highest of the high.
Sod As AHS ALE ISICNBIN (363-12, wr, 43 3)
naanak saach samaavai so-ay. ||4||8||47]|| O Nanak, he is absorbed in the True Lord. ||4]|8]|47]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (363-13)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
sats IS AS Ada ASTE | (363-13, mmr, He 3)
bhagat rataa jan sahj subhaa-ay.
The Lord's humble servant is imbued with devotional love, effortlessly and spontaneously.
ad a 3 AS Afs ANTE I (363-13, wT, He 3) gur kai bhai saachai saach samaa-ay. Through awe and fear of the Guru, he is truly absorbed in the True One.
fas ae ud gals 3 SE I 363-13, wr, Hs 3) bin gur pooray bhagat na ho-ay. Without the Perfect Guru, devotional love is not obtained.
HoHY Fd must ufs safe NAN (363-14, wT, He 3) manmukh runnay apnee pat kho-ay. ||1]| The self-willed manmukhs lose their honor, and cry out in pain. ||1]|
Hd Ho Ufo Afu Aer foMrfe I (363-14, wer, Hs 3) mayray man har jap sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, chant the Lord's Name, and meditate on Him forever.
Het née de feo wat a fee ASt ew ute nan ga I (03-14, ner, ne 3)
sadaa anand hovai din raatee jo ichhai so-ee fal paa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You shall always be in ecstasy, day and night, and you shall obtain the fruits of your desires. ||1||Pause| |
TT Us F YT US Il (363-15, mew, He 3) gur pooray tay pooraa paa-ay. Through the Perfect Guru, the Perfect Lord is obtained,
fase HAE AY SH SATS Il (363-15, TAT, He 3) hirdai sabad sach naam vasaa-ay. and the Shabad, the True Name, is enshrined in the mind.
nisg feaHe nifs Afs SS Il (363-16, wr, He 3) antar nirmal amrit sar naa-ay. One who bathes in the Pool of Ambrosial Nectar becomes immaculately pure within.
Het Ae Ate AME MQM (363-16, wi, He 3) sadaa soochay saach samaa-ay. ||2|| He becomes forever sanctified, and is absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||
Ufs ys Fe Het Tale Il (363-16, wr, Hs 3) har parabh vaykhai sadaa hajoor. He sees the Lord God ever-present.
qs usAte stor saufs il (363-17, mrt, 12 3) gur parsaad rahi-aa bharpoor. By Guru's Grace, he sees the Lord permeating and pervading everywhere.
As we so Sut AE Il (363-17, nmr, He 3) jahaa jaa-o tah vaykhaa so-ay. Wherever I go, there I see Him.
ad fag ost neg 3 Afe SI (363-17, nmr, He 3) gur bin daataa avar na ko-ay. ||3]| Without the Guru, there is no other Giver. ||3]|
OT AST Us FIT Il (363-18, wr, He 3) gur saagar pooraa bhandaar. The Guru is the ocean, the perfect treasure,
BSH ISG AIT MUTT Il (363-18, wIMAT, He 3) ootam ratan javaahar apaar. the most precious jewel and priceless ruby.
Td UATE SFSTT Il (363-18, nA, He 3) gur parsaadee dayvanhaar. By Guru's Grace, the Great Giver blesses us;
Soa FHA WMASI YT ISICISCH (63-18, yA, Hs 3)
naanak bakhsay bakhsanhaar. ||4]||9||48]| O Nanak, the Forgiving Lord forgives us. ||4]||9]|48]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (63-19)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
ag Afeg Afsag AG ALE I (363-19, nmr, He 3) gur saa-ir satgur sach so-ay. The Guru is the Ocean; the True Guru is the Embodiment of Truth.
ud Stat Ta AST TE il (363-19, mr, He 3) poorai bhaag gur sayvaa ho-ay. Through perfect good destiny, one serves the Guru.
Ua BER
Aas faa orf gee Il 364-1, wr, Hs 3) so boojhai jis aap bujhaa-ay. He alone understands, whom the Lord Himself inspires to understand.
Ts UATE AS ATES MAU (364-1, ww, ue 3) gur parsaadee sayv karaa-ay. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, one serves Him. ||1||
fore gfe AS ASt ofF Il (64-1, wir, ne 3) gi-aan ratan sabh sojhee ho-ay. With the jewel of spiritual wisdom, total understanding is obtained.
ag usAtfe nifamre faoR niofes ava Sa AG APE NU TIS I (64-2, ner, He 3)
gur parsaad agi-aan binaasai an-din jaagai vaykhai sach so-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, ignorance is dispelled; one then remains wakeful, night and day, and beholds the True Lord. ||1||Pause| |
Hd DHS Td Aafe ASS Il (364-2, new, vs 3) moh gumaan gur sabad jalaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, attachment and pride are burnt away.
Us TI 3 ASt US I (364-3, mw, we 3) pooray gur tay sojhee paa-ay. From the Perfect Guru, true understanding is obtained.
wists HIG Td Aafe uSrs Il (364-3, ner, He 3) antar mahal gur sabad pachhaanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one realizes the Lord's Presence within.
mize We Jd fag of ANS M211 Ge4-3, mT, He 3)
aavan jaan rahai thir naam samaanay. ||2||
Then, one's coming and going cease, and one becomes stable, absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
HME HoSt I AAT Il (364-4, new, He 3) jaman marnaa hai sansaar. The world is tied to birth and death.
HOHY MS Het HT TAT Il (364-4, nr, He 3)
manmukh achayt maa-i-aa moh gubaar.
The unconscious, self-willed manmukh is enveloped in the darkness of Maya and emotional attachment.
Ud {SST BT FF AHS Il (364-4, meer, we 3) par nindaa baho koorh kamaavai. He slanders others, and practices utter falsehood.
ferret ar ota ferret arfa ATS ISI 64-5, mmr, He 3) vistaa kaa keerhaa vistaa maahi samaavai. ||3]|| He is a maggot in manure, and into manure he is absorbed. ||3]|
HaHats ffs As ASt ure I (364-5, nem, He 3) satsangat mil sabh sojhee paa-ay. Joining the True Congregation, the Sat Sangat, total understanding is obtained.
ad a Hae die sats fesre il 364-5, um, ve 3) gur kaa sabad har bhagat drirh-aa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, devotional love for the Lord is implanted.
Sat HS AST AY OE Il (364-6, mmm, He 3) bhaanaa mannay sadaa sukh ho-ay. One who surrenders to the Lord's Will is peaceful forever.
SSa Afs AHS ALE ISNAONSEN (364-6, nT, 4 3)
naanak sach samaavai so-ay. ||4||10||49]| O Nanak, he is absorbed into the True Lord. ||4||10||49]|
MAT HIS 3 UMUe Il (364-6)
aasaa mehlaa 3 panchpaday. Aasaa, Third Mehl, Panch-Padas:
Rafe Hd FSA AST MSS I (364-7, nA, He 3) sabad marai tis sadaa anand. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad, finds eternal bliss.
Afsag 32 Te AHS i 64-7, ner, ne 3) satgur bhaytay gur gobind. He is united with the True Guru, the Guru, the Lord God.
ot fefa Hd o mite AE I (364-7, mmr, He 3) naa fir marai na aavai jaa-ay. He does not die any more, and he does not come or go.
ud Td 3 Ate ATE NA (364-7, mA, He 3) pooray gur tay saach samaa-ay. ||1|| Through the Perfect Guru, he merges with the True Lord. ||1]|
fg a@ on faftmr fs Sy Il 364-8, um, He 3) jin" ka-o naam likhi-aa Dhur laykh. One who has the Naam, the Name of the Lord, written in his pre-ordained destiny,
3 wofes on Het fourefs ag ud 3 sats fer NA TIS Il (364-8, wrAr, He 3)
tay an-din naam sadaa Dhi-aavahi gur pooray tay bhagat visaykh. ||1]|| rahaa-o. night and day, meditates forever on the Naam; he obtains the wondrous blessing of devotional love from the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
fia aS af ys we fete i (364-9, umn, us 3) jin" ka-o har parabh la-ay milaa-ay. Those, whom the Lord God has blended with Himself
fsq at ae afs adt & ATE Il (364-9, nmr, He 3) tin" kee gahan gat kahee na jaa-ay. - their sublime state cannot be described.
ud Afsaa fest efsnret i (364-10, wer, Hs 3) poorai satgur ditee vadi-aa-ee. The Perfect True Guru has given the Glorious Greatness,
sn uest ofa of AHTET QI (364-10, mmr, He 3)
ootam padvee har naam samaa-ee. ||2]| of the most exalted order, and I am absorbed into the Lord's Name. ||2||
A fae ad A mm mmf It (364-10, ner, He 3) jo kichh karay so aapay aap. Whatever the Lord does, He does all by Himself.
ea wet Hfo af Carty il 64-11, nmr, vs 3) ayk gharhee meh thaap uthaap. In an instant, He establishes, and disestablishes.
ats ats age wify ASS || AAG wes ate & US II (64-11, nT, He 3)
kahi kahi kahnaa aakh sunaa-ay. jay sa-o ghaalay thaa-ay na paa-ay. ||3]|
By merely speaking, talking, shouting and preaching about the Lord, even hundreds of times, the mortal is not approved. ||3]||
faa a us Ua far ag fHeS I 364-12, »mr, we 3) jin" kai potai punn tin"aa guroo milaa-ay. The Guru meets with those, who take virtue as their treasure;
Ag ael de Ade ASS Il (364-12, wm, ve 3) sach banee gur sabad sunaa-ay. they listen to the True Word of the Guru's Bani, the Shabad.
Hot Ase SA Sot SY WE Il (364-12, vr, He 3) jahaa™ sabad vasai tahaa™ dukh jaa-ay. Pain departs, from that place where the Shabad abides.
famris asfe Ans HofA ANTS ISI Ge4-13, mmr, He 3) gi-aan ratan saachai sahj samaa-ay. ||4]| By the jewel of spiritual wisdom, one is easily absorbed into the True Lord. ||4| |
oe AS JT US Sd AE Il (364-13, nw, He 3) naavai jayvad hor Dhan naahee ko-ay. No other wealth is as great as the Naam.
fA 3 SuA ATS ALE Il (364-13, mmr, He 3) jis no bakhsay saachaa so-ay. It is bestowed only by the True Lord.
ud Aafe Hfs SAS Il (364-14, wer, He 3) poorai sabad man vasaa-ay. Through the Perfect Word of the Shabad, it abides in the mind.
SSA STH IS AY UES NUNAUIUON (364-14, mm, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sukh paa-ay. ||5||11||50]| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, peace is obtained. ||5||11]|50]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (64-14)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
foots ad AT TH SVS Il (64-15, nmr, ue 3) nirat kKaray baho vaajay vajaa-ay. One may dance and play numerous instruments;
feg Ho niat dor o fan orfs WETS I (364-15, wir, He 3) ih man anDhaa bolaa hai kis aakh sunaa-ay. but this mind is blind and deaf, so for whose benefit is this speaking and preaching?
isis BF SIH SS SE Il (364-15, mA, He 3) antar lobh bharam anal vaa-o. Deep within is the fire of greed, and the dust-storm of doubt.
det aS o ASt Ute NA 64-16, vm, He 3) deevaa balai na sojhee paa-ay. ||1]|| The lamp of knowledge is not burning, and understanding is not obtained. ||1]||
aenty sats wie wae off Il (364-16, nmr, He 3) gurmukh bhagat ghat chaanan ho-ay. The Gurmukh has the light of devotional worship within his heart.
nimy uarfs feed ys APE NAN TIC I 64-16, vm, Hs 3) aap pachhaan milai parabh so-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Understanding his own self, he meets God. ||1]|Pause] |
aanty fasts ofs wat aE i (364-17, ner, He 3) gurmukh nirat har laagai bhaa-o. The Gurmukh's dance is to embrace love for the Lord;
ud 37% feag niry Tete i (364-17, wert, He 3) pooray taal vichahu aap gavaa-ay. to the beat of the drum, he sheds his ego from within.
Ae YS ATS MM ATS Il (364-17, wm, Hs 3) mayraa parabh saachaa aapay jaan. My God is True; He Himself is the Knower of all.
aa & Rafe nists FIN UES Ill! 64-18, nm, Hs 3) gur kai sabad antar barahm pachhaan. ||2|| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, recognize the Creator Lord within yourself.
[121] aanfa safs nists uifs fimrg i 64-18, nmr, us 3)
gurmukh bhagat antar pareet pi-aar. The Gurmukh is filled with devotional love for the Beloved Lord.
Td H Aa ATA SAT Il (364-19, wrwr, He 3) gur kaa sabad sahj veechaar. He intuitively reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
aenfy sats wats AG APE II (364-19, mr, He 3) gurmukh bhagat jugat sach so-ay. For the Gurmukh, loving devotional worship is the way to the True Lord.
undfs sats fosfs eu df Si (64-19, mr, He 3) pakhand bhagat nirat dukh ho-ay. ||3]| But the dances and the worship of the hypocrites bring only pain. ||3]|
Ua BEéu
Sa gals AS Ales He Il (365-1, nT, He 3) ayhaa bhagat jan jeevat marai. True Devotion is to remain dead while yet alive.
Td USA SSNS 3d Il (365-1, new, vs 3)
gur parsaadee bhavijal tarai. By Guru's Grace, one crosses over the terrible world-ocean.
ad a sete sats ate ute i (365-1, ner, He 3) gur kai bachan bhagat thaa-ay paa-ay. Through the Guru's Teachings, one's devotion is accepted,
dfs MG wrfu SA fs wrf= igi (365-2, ner, He 3) har jee-o aap vasai man aa-ay. ||4|| and then, the Dear Lord Himself comes to dwell in the mind. ||4||
ofe fur ad Afsag fos Il 65-2, nim, He 3) har kirpaa karay satguroo milaa-ay. When the Lord bestows His Mercy, He leads us to meet the True Guru.
fosse sats ofa fAG fas we Il (365-2, nmr, He 3)
nihchal bhagat har si-o chit laa-ay.
Then, one's devotion becomes steady, and the consciousness is centered upon the Lord.
sats 33 fq At APE II (365-3, nmr, He 3) bhagat ratay tin" sachee so-ay. Those who are imbued with Devotion have truthful reputations.
Soa STH TS AY TE NUNIVNUAI (365-3, TAT, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sukh ho-ay. ||5||12||51]|
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, peace is obtained. []5][12][52]|
MAT Ug t aret HIG 2 (365-4)
aasaa ghar 8 kaafee mehlaa 3 Aasaa, Eighth House, Kaafee, Third Mehl:
qe Afsas yATfe il (365-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs a ae Afsag fxs AE ASt Tet I 65-5, vier are, He 3)
har kai bhaanai satgur milai sach sojhee ho-ee.
By the Pleasure of the Lord's Will, one meets the True Guru, and true understanding is obtained.
Gs usAret His SA dla FS ASt WAU (365-5, wr wet, we 3) gur parsaadee man vasai har boojhai so-ee. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, the Lord abides in the mind, and one comes to understand the Lord.
[21
H Ag BST Sa TF meg BS AST I 305-5, wir are, ne 3) mai saho daataa ayk hai avar naahee ko-ee. My Husband Lord, the Great Giver, is One. There is no other at all.
ad fasur 3 uf ZA St AST AY Tet NA TIC Il (365-6, mma aret,, ne 3) gur kirpaa tay man vasai taa sadaa sukh ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's merciful favor, He abides in the mind, and then, a lasting peace ensues. ||1]|Pause] |
fen na Hf foss@ afs on od ure ae Stee Il (365-6, nm art, He 3)
is jug meh nirbha-o har naam hai paa-ee-ai gur veechaar.
In this age, the Lord's Name is fearless; it is obtained by meditative reflection upon the Guru.
fag oe AH a Sho Honfe nig Tes N21 (365-7, nmr art, HH 3) bin naavai jam kai vas hai manmukh anDh gavaar. ||2|| Without the Name, the blind, foolish, self-willed manmukh is under Death's power.
21 |
Uf & HE AG AS AT FS AY Aet Il Go5-8, wer aret, ws 3)
har kai bhaanai jan sayvaa karai boojhai sach so-ee.
By the Pleasure of the Lord's Will, the humble being performs His service, and understands the True Lord.
dfs & ae Ada ove Hfomt AY Tet SI 65-8, nm are, He 3)
har kai bhaanai salaahee-ai bhaanai mani-ai sukh ho-ee. ||3]|
By the Pleasure of the Lord's Will, He is to be praised; surrendering to His Will, peace ensues. ||3]||
Ufs & HE FSH uevse ufenr ufs SSH Tet Il (365-9, war aret, we 3)
har kai bhaanai janam padaarath paa-i-aa mat ootam ho-ee.
By the Pleasure of the Lord's Will, the prize of this human birth is obtained, and the intellect is exalted.
aoa OH Aerts S Taf as Tet usiStnIUil (365-9, »mr art, Hs 3) naanak naam salaahi too’ gurmukh gat ho-ee. ||4]|39]|13]|52||
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; as Gurmukh, you shall be emancipated. ||4||39||13]|52||
MTA HIG 8 WI Q (365-11) aasaa mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas urrfe II (365-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 aos Afsnrg HST AST I (365-12, mmr, we 4) too” kartaa sachiaar maidaa saa‘-ee. You are the True Creator, my Lord Master.
A 3G oe Het Sat AT Ufa Aet IS wet AU TTS il (365-12, wr, ws 4)
jo ta-o bhaavai so-ee theesee jo too’ deh so-ee ha-o paa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
That which is pleasing to Your Will, comes to pass. Whatever You give, that is what I receive. ||1||Pause| |
Ag Sat 3 Ast foorfenr 1 365-12, wer, ue 4) sabh tayree too’ sabhnee Dhi-aa-i-aa. All are Yours; all meditate on You.
fan 3 faut acts fafs on ase urfeor I (365-13, nmr, He 4)
jis no kirpaa karahi tin naam ratan paa-i-aa. He alone, whom You bless with Your Mercy, obtains the jewel of the Naam.
TsaHte war Houfe aetfent i (365-13, wr, He 4) gurmukh laaDhaa manmukh gavaa-i-aa. The Gurmukhs obtain it, and the self-willed manmukhs lose it.
30 vty feefaur urfy frerfemr all (365-14, rrr, He 4)
tuDh aap vichhorhi-aa aap milaa-i-aa. ||1]|
You Yourself separate the mortals, and You Yourself unite them. ||1]| 3 adore As 35 at Hs Il (365-14, wer, we 4)
too” daree-aa-o sabh tujh hee maahi. You are the River - all are within You.
33 fag gar aet OTT Il (365-14, wr, we 4) tujh bin doojaa ko-ee naahi. Other than You, there is no one at all.
aba #3 Afs Sa Bw il (305-15, mmr, ne 4) jee-a jant sabh tayraa khayl. All beings and creatures are your play-things.
ferfa ffs feefsor Adat AB i211 (65-15, nmr, He 4) vijog mil vichhurhi-aa sanjogee mayl. ||2| | The united ones are separated, and the separated ones are re-united. ||2||
fan 3 3 Wetefs et AS ATE Il 65-15, mmr, we 4) jis no too jaanaa-ihi so-ee jan jaanai. That humble being, whom You inspire to understand, understands;
dfs Te Ae ot orfy SwveS I 65-16, wm, v2 4) har gun sad hee aakh vakhaanai. he continually speaks and chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fate ofa Afeor ffs AY ufent Il (365-16, mmr, He 4) jin har sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa. One who serves the Lord, obtains peace.
Hon dt ofa ot Arfenr ISI (365-17, nmr, He 4)
sehjay hee har naam samaa-i-aa. ||3]| He is easily absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||3]|
3 omy ass So ator Ag AE I (365-17, wr, 8 4) too aapay kartaa tayraa kee-aa sabh ho-ay. You Yourself are the Creator; by Your doing, all things come to be.
30 fag gat neg 3 Ate Il 365-17, nmr, ue 4) tuDh bin doojaa avar na ko-ay. Without You, there is no other at all.
3 afs afe sufo wrefa ALE Il 65-18, mmr, oH 4) too kar kar vaykheh jaaneh so-ay. You watch over the creation, and understand it.
Ho Soa Tafa use| dE isiawlusil 65-18, ww, us 4) jan naanak gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||4||1]|53]| O servant Nanak, the Lord is revealed to the Gurmukh. ||4||1]|53]|
ust SEE qe Afsas ure II (366-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Td MTA WI 2 HIS 8 Il (366-1) raag aasaa ghar 2 mehlaa 4. Raag Aasaa, Second House, Fourth Mehl:
fon dt oat abhor fs AS ate set Il (366-1, wr, He 4) kis hee Dharhaa kee-aa mitar sut naal bhaa-ee. Some form alliances with friends, children and siblings.
fan dt ust at ASH Aa Bes ASTET Il (366-2, wer, He 4) kis hee Dharhaa kee-aa kurham sakay naal javaa-ee. Some form alliances with in-laws and relatives.
fon dt cat ator fraers vGudt af nie Anret I 366-2, ni, He 4) kis hee Dharhaa kee-aa sikdaar cha-uDhree naal aapnai su-aa-ee. Some form alliances with chiefs and leaders for their own selfish motives.
dua gat ofa sfomit ANTET IAI (366-3, nTAT, He 4)
hamaaraa Dharhaa har rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1|| My alliance is with the Lord, who is pervading everywhere. ||1]|
JH ote fA cat aor Hat af Sq I 66-3, nmr, 8 4) ham har si-o Dharhaa kee-aa mayree har tayk. I have formed my alliance with the Lord; the Lord is my only support.
H ofs fas uy ust neg 3 act oC afs TE We oe MA AU TTC I G06-3, wT, He 4) mai har bin pakh Dharhaa avar na ko-ee ha-o har gun gaavaa asa‘kh anayk. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Other than the Lord, I have no other faction or alliance; I sing of the countless and endless Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
fre fAS us asta A Af I (366-4, nr, He 4) jin" si-o Dharhay karahi say jaahi. Those with whom you form alliances, shall perish.
BO Us ats UES Il (366-5, wr, Hs 4) jhooth Dharhay kar pachhotaahi. Making false alliances, the mortals repent and regret in the end.
fas 3 sofs nfs de arts I G66-5, wir, He 4) thir na raheh man khot kamaahi. Those who practice falsehood shall not last.
dH dfs fA cat oor fan ot aet ANGE fs II (366-5, nmr, He 4) ham har si-o Dharhaa kee-aa jis kaa ko-ee samrath naahi. ||2|| I have formed my alliance with the Lord; there is no one more powerful than Him.
[12] | 2g Afs us Hfenr Ho UAT Il (366-6, nr, we 4)
ayh sabh Dharhay maa-i-aa moh pasaaree. All these alliances are mere extensions of the love of Maya.
Hfeur ag esta aed il (366-6, wrt, He 4) maa-i-aa ka-o loojheh gaavaaree. Only fools argue over Maya.
Hoth Hata HoH aAt TSH I (366-7, wer, He 4) janam mareh joo-ai baajee haaree. They are born, and they die, and they lose the game of life in the gamble.
JH dfs ust fA JOS USS AS ASH ISll (366-7, new, vs 4) hamrai har Dharhaa je halat palat sabh savaaree. ||3]| My alliance is with the Lord, who embellishes all, in this world and the next. ||3]|
afera ufo us ue es SASS Il 366-7, new, v2 4) kalijug meh Dharhay panch chor jhagrhaa-ay. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the five thieves instigate alliances and conflicts.
ay au BF HT mifswre Swe Il (366-8, mmr, ne 4) kaam kroDh lobh moh abhimaan vaDhaa-ay. Sexual desire, anger, greed, emotional attachment and self-conceit have increased.
fan 3 fau ad fsa ASsHfa fore I Ge6-8, nmr, He 4) jis no kirpaa karay tis satsang milaa-ay. One who is blessed by the Lord's Grace, joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
Jue ofg ust fats Sa us Afs TSE Ill (366-9, wmv, us 4) hamraa har Dharhaa jin ayh Dharhay sabh gavaa-ay. ||4|| My alliance is with the Lord, who has destroyed all these alliances. ||4| |
fifeur eit ar aS afs urs Il 366-9, mmr, He 4) mithi-aa doojaa bhaa-o Dharhay bahi paavai. In the false love of duality, people sit and form alliances.
usfeur fee nicaS winrar nidarg SUS Il (366-9, wire, He 4) paraa-i-aa chhidar atkalai aapnaa aha‘kaar vaDhaavai. They complain about other peoples' faults, while their own self-conceit only increases.
AAT St SAT UTS Il (366-10, mT, He 4) jaisaa beejai taisaa khaavai. As they plant, so shall they harvest.
He soa at fs ust cay AS fkAfe fafs mre NUNNUBII (366-10, »mT, He 4)
jan naanak kaa har Dharhaa Dharam sabh sarisat jin aavai. ||5]|2||54|| Servant Nanak has joined the Lord's alliance of Dharma, which shall conquer the whole world. ||5]|2||54||
MTAT HIG 8 Il (366-11)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
fose Afs afs nfs nifgs afemr 1 66-11, or, He 4)
hirdai sun sun man amrit bhaa-i-aa.
Constantly listening to the Ambrosial Gurbani in the heart, it becomes pleasing to the mind.
qarat dfs moey sarfent All (366-12, mr, He 4) gurbaanee har alakh lakhaa-i-aa. ||1]| Through Gurbani, the Incomprehensible Lord is comprehended. ||1]|
Tanta SH AST Ast Sar Il (366-12, wer, He 4) gurmukh naam sunhu mayree bhainaa. As Gurmukh, listen to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my sisters.
ea ofe sfoor we nists ufy dog as wifys or uA TIS i 66-12, vm, He 4)
ayko rav rahi-aa ghat antar mukh bolhu gur amrit bainaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The One Lord is pervading and permeating deep within the heart; with your mouth, recite the Ambrosial Hymns of the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
Hufs sf UH Ho Fa T Il (366-13, wr, He 4) mai man tan paraym mahaa bairaag. My mind and body are filled with divine love, and great sadness.
Afsag usy ufemrt STS NII (366-13, wT, He 4) satgur purakh paa-i-aa vadbhaag. ||2| | By great good fortune, I have obtained the True Guru, the Primal Being. ||2| |
en ate sefo fay Hfenr ih 366-14, mmr, oH 4)
doojai bhaa-ay bhaveh bikh maa-i-aa.
In the love of duality, the mortals wander through poisonous Maya. TIS Sdt Afsaqs UTEMT ISI (366-14, wr, He 4)
bhaagheen nahee satgur paa-i-aa. ||3]| The unfortunate ones do not meet the True Guru. |[3]|
nifys ofs oA of erfu ubrfemr | (366-15, mmr, He 4) amrit har ras har aap pee-aa-i-aa. The Lord Himself inspires us to drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Elixir.
Gfs us sea ate ufenr nensnuUll (366-15, war, Hs 4)
gur poorai naanak har paa-i-aa. ||4]|3||55|| Through the Perfect Guru, O Nanak, the Lord is obtained. ||4||3]|55]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (366-15)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
He fs sfs UN SH rag Il (366-16, nmr, He 4) mayrai man tan paraym naam aaDhaar. The Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of my mind and body.
OH Aut OH AY ATS IAM (366-16, TAT, He 4) naam japee naamo sukh saar. ||1]| I chant the Naam; the Naam is the essence of peace. ||1]|
OH AUT He AAS AST Il (366-16, nA, He 4) naam japahu mayray saajan sainaa. So chant the Naam, O my friends and companions.
on faa A weg 3 at es ofr Tonfy afs Bar Al TIC Il (366-17, wT, He 4)
naam binaa mai avar na ko-ee vadai bhaag gurmukh har lainaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, there is nothing else for me. By great good fortune, as Gurmukh, I have received the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause| |
on faat odt Atfent ATE I (366-17, nmr, He 4) naam binaa nahee jeevi-aa jaa-ay. Without the Naam, I cannot live.
zs ata aanfy afe uf iQ (366-18, mr, H 4) vadai bhaag gurmukh har paa-ay. ||2|| By great good fortune, the Gurmukhs obtain the Naam. ||2]|
SHdle ateu Hfe HEMI || (366-18, wiTAT, Hs 4) naamheen kaalakh mukh maa-i-aa. Those who lack the Naam have their faces rubbed in the dirt of Maya.
on faar foo for Atefeur Si 66-18, vr, He 4) naam binaa Dharig Dharig jeevaa-i-aa. ||3]| Without the Naam, cursed, cursed are their lives. ||3]|
UST BED
a at ots Sat ats ufeMr | (367-1, vm, us 4) vadaa vadaa har bhaag kar paa-i-aa. The Great Lord is obtained by great good destiny.
Soa TsHfe aH fester isisnuell (367-1, wm, He 4)
naanak gurmukh naam divaa-i-aa. ||4||4||56]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is blessed with the Naam. ||4]|4]|56||
MTAT HIG 8 Il (367-2)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
TE Wet TE ASt Sret Il (367-2, we, He 4)
gun gaavaa gun bolee banee.
I sing His Glorious Praises, and through the Word of His Bani, I speak His Glorious Praises.
aanfe safe ae wife surat All (367-2, wm, He 4) gurmukh har gun aakh vakhaanee. ||1]| As Gurmukh, I chant and recite the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
afu afu any fe sfemr mise Il (367-3, wm, He 4) jap jap naam man bha-i-aa anandaa. Chanting and meditating on the Naam, my mind becomes blissful.
Afs Afs Afsafe an fesfeur sfh we TS usHSeT INA TIC Il (367-3, ue, ve 4) sat sat satgur naam dirhaa-i-aa ras gaa-ay gun parmaanandaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Guru has implanted the True Name of the True Lord within me; I sing His Glorious Praises, and taste the supreme ecstasy. ||1||Pause]|
dfs TE We fs AS BSI Il (367-4, wer, us 4) har gun gaavai har jan logaa. The humble servants of the Lord sing the Lord's Glorious Praises.
zs atta ue ofa feanar IQ Il (367-4, mmr, He 4) vadai bhaag paa-ay har nirjogaa. ||2|| By great good fortune, the detached, absolute Lord is obtained. ||2]|
ae fege wfeor ue urdt i 367-5, wr, He 4)
gun vihoon maa-i-aa mal Dhaaree. Those without virtue are stained by Maya's filth.
fee Te Aofh He nidarct SII (367-5, um, He 4) vin gun janam mu-ay aha™kaaree. ||3]| Lacking virtue, the egotistical die, and suffer reincarnation. ||3]|
Hdtfs Adefs TE usafe AS Il 367-5, wer, He 4) Sareer Sarovar gun pargat kee-ay. The ocean of the body yields pearls of virtue.
Sa THY Hf 33 AES MSUUNUDI (367-6, nm, He 4) naanak gurmukh math tat kadhee-ay. ||4||5]|57]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh churns this ocean, and discovers this essence. ||4]|5]|57]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (367-6)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
oH Hat aH Hfe StS Il (367-6, nmAT, He 4) naam sunee naamo man bhaavai. I listen to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Naam is pleasing to my mind.
zs ata aanfa afe ure Al (367-7, mr, He 4) vadai bhaag gurmukh har paavai. ||1|| By great good fortune, the Gurmukh obtains the Lord. ||1]|
OH AUT TaHfy UdaAT Il (367-7, vir, He 4) naam japahu gurmukh pargaasaa. Chant the Naam, as Gurmukh, and be exalted.
om fast H Us Sdt avet ont Sfemr AS AA fara AU TIC Il (367-7, nm, He 4)
naam binaa mai Dhar nahee kaa-ee naam ravi-aa sabh saas giraasaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, I have no other support; the Naam is woven into all my breaths and morsels of food. ||1]||Pause||
oH Aafs Hat ufo Stet | (367-8, wer, He 4) naamai surat sunee man bhaa-ee. The Naam illuminates my mind; listening to it, my mind is pleased.
A OH ASS A HoT HS AST INQM (367-8, nr, He 4) jo naam sunaavai so mayraa meet sakhaa-ee. ||2]| One who speaks the Naam - he alone is my friend and companion. ||2]|
SHAS TS HF Sa Il (367-9, wer, He 4) naamheen ga-ay moorh nangaa. Without the Naam, the fools depart naked.
ufs ufs He fares Sf usar Si (367-9, mmr, He 4)
pach pach mu-ay bikh daykh patangaa. ||3]||
They burn away to death, chasing the poison of Maya, like the moth chasing the flame. ||3]|
mma ary arf Bart Il (367-10, rrr, He 4) aapay thaapay thaap uthaapay. He Himself establishes, and, having established, disestablishes.
SOA OTH VS Ths mM WSNENUCH (367-10, mTAT, He 4)
naanak naam dayvai har aapay. ||4||6||58]| O Nanak, the Lord Himself bestows the Naam. ||4]|6]|58]|
MITAT HIG 8 Il (367-10)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
aaHte ofa ofa Sf Zaret il (367-10, wer, He 4) gurmukh har har vayl vaDhaa-ee. The vine of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, has taken root in the Gurmukh.
SH Ba Ts TAM FATET Al 67-11, wT, Hs 4) fal laagay har rasak rasaa-ee. ||1|| It bears the fruit of the Lord; its taste is so tasty! ||1]|
dfs ofa om Afu mes SSA Il (367-11, wer, He 4) har har naam jap anat tarangaa. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in endless waves of joy.
afu afu on aenfs Arerdt afer are AHA sfeniar WA TITS ll (367-12, wm, ns 4) jap jap naam gurmat saalaahee maari-aa kaal jamkankar bhu-i-angaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chant and repeat the Naam; through the Guru's Teachings praise the Lord, and slay the horrible serpent of the Messenger of Death. ||1]||Pause||
dfs oe ad fs sats Tae Il (367-12, wr, us 4) har har gur meh bhagat rakhaa-ee. The Lord has implanted His devotional worship in the Guru.
ad so fra SS AS sre Ml (367-13, ver, He 4) gur tuthaa sikh dayvai mayray bhaa-ee. ||2]| When the Guru is pleased, He bestows it upon His Sikh, O my siblings of Destiny. ||2]|
ICH adH foe fafa odt WE I (367-13, ner, He 4) ha-umai karam kichh biDh nahee jaanai. One who acts in ego, knows nothing about the Way.
faG avg of= wa fafs aS SI (367-13, wm, He 4) ji-o kunchar naa-ay khaak sir chhaanai. ||3]| He acts like an elephant, who takes a bath, and then throws dust on his head. ||3]||
A Ss Ta dela SS OT Il (367-14, ww, we 4) jay vad bhaag hoveh vad oochay. If one's destiny is great and exalted,
aaa SH Auld Afs AT NSIONUEN (367-14, mT, He 4) naanak naam jaapeh sach soochay. ||4]|7||59|| O Nanak, one chants the Naam, the Name of the Immaculate, True Lord. ||4||7]||59| |
MTAT HIG 8 Il (367-15)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofa on at His Tu Barret Il (367-15, mir, v2 4) har har naam kee man bhookh lagaa-ee. My mind suffers hunger for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
of Afomt He feus AT Sve AI (67-15, vir, He 4) naam suni-ai man tariptai mayray bhaa-ee. ||1]|| Hearing the Naam, my mind is satisfied, O my Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|
OH AUT He TatAY HTS Il (367-16, nT, He 4) naam japahu mayray gursikh meetaa. Chant the Naam, O my friends, O GurSikhs.
OH AUT OH AY UST BH GUT Tels fs BMS AU FIC Il 67-16, wr, He 4)
naam japahu naamay sukh paavhu naam rakhahu gurmat man cheetaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chant the Naam, and through the Naam, obtain peace; through the Guru's Teachings, enshrine the Naam in your heart and mind. ||1]||Pause| |
SoH OH Hal HO AAT Il (367-17, THT, He 4) naamo naam sunee man sarsaa. Hearing the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind is in bliss.
oH GI & THs fear iQ 367-17, mA, He 4)
naam laahaa lai gurmat bigsaa. ||2] |
Reaping the profit of the Naam, through the Guru's Teachings, my soul has blossomed forth. ||2||
oH feat aASt HT HITT II (367-18, nTAT, He 4) naam binaa kustee moh anDhaa. Without the Naam, the mortal is a leper, blinded by emotional attachment.
AS feses AGH ate Fy UO ISI (367-18, wer, He 4) sabh nihfal karam kee-ay dukh DhanDhaa. ||3]| All his actions are fruitless; they lead only to painful entanglements. ||3] |
dfs ofs ofs AA AU SsaT at I (367-18, mm, He 4) har har har jas japai vadbhaagee. The very fortunate ones chant the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
SSA THs STH fee Bait SiciEOll 367-19, ww, u2 4)
naanak gurmat naam liv laagee. ||4||8||60|| O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, one embraces love for the Naam. [14] 18] |60]|
uat SEt qe Afsas ure I (368-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HIG 8 Ta MMA We E A 3 Il (368-1) mehlaa 4 raag aasaa ghar 6 kay 3. Fourth Mehl, Raag Aasaa, 3 Of Sixth House :
ofa afs 33 Sve Halt Pag SH FS Il (368-1, ww, He 4)
hath kar tant vajaavai jogee thothar vaajai bayn.
You may pluck the strings with your hand, O Yogi, but your playing of the harp is in vain.
gens ofs ge sag rat feg Hour ala sar 3s NA 68-2, wer, Hs 4)
gurmat har gun bolhu jogee ih manoo-aa har rang bhayn. ||1]|
Under Guru's Instruction, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O Yogi, and this mind of yours shall be imbued with the Lord's Love. ||1]|
nat dfs fg HSt Suen i (e8-2, ner, He 4) jogee har dayh matee updays. O Yogi, give your intellect the Teachings of the Lord.
wa Ha ofe ofs Sa sas (SA ra TH MEA NU TIS Il Ge8-2, ver, He 4)
jug jug har har ayko vartai tis aagai ham aadays. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord, the One Lord, is pervading throughout all the ages; I humbly bow down to Him. ||1]||Pause] |
Weta Ta sts as sale fey Hout FS Fs Il (368-3, wv, vs 4)
gaavahi raag bhaat baho boleh ih manoo-aa khaylai khayl.
You sing in so many Ragas and harmonies, and you talk so much, but this mind of yours is only playing a game.
nfo au fies ag aAM Cfs Fe Te Bla I lM (368-4, mmr, we 4)
joveh koop sinchan ka-o basuDhaa uth bail ga-ay char bayl. ||2||
You work the well and irrigate the fields, but the oxen have already left to graze in the jungle. ||2||
afent sad ufo aan dfs seg ofa WH fort As I Ges-4, ner, He 4) kaa-i-aa nagar meh karam har bovhu har jaamai hari-aa khayt.
In the field of the body, plant the Lord's Name, and the Lord will sprout there, like a lush green field.
Hoor wAfag 8B ug reg fe fag AHS AZ Sl Gos-s, mmr, we 4)
manoo-aa asthir bail man jovhu har sinchahu gurmat jayt. ||3]|
O mortal, hook up your unstable mind like an ox, and irrigate your fields with the Lord's Name, through the Guru's Teachings. ||3]|
nat Ham fAfe AS sHdt A Sg HST fSs BH Il Ges-5, wm, He 4)
jogee jangam sarisat sabh tumree jo dayh matee tit chayl.
The Yogis, the wandering Jangams, and all the world is Yours, O Lord. According to the wisdom which You give them, so do they follow their ways.
Wo Soa a ys visa oy Seg HOT UB ISICNEUI (368-6, wT, Hs 4) jan naanak kay parabh antarjaamee har laavhu manoo-aa payl. ||4||9||61]|
O Lord God of servant Nanak, O Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts, please link my mind to You. ||4]|9||61]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (368-7)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
TT I SH UW SH TT x SAS TAT Il (368-7, mirAr, we 4)
kab ko bhaalai ghunghroo taalaa kab ko bajaavai rabaab. How long must one search for angle bells and cymbals, and how long must one play the guitar?
mez WS avg fue oat JG 3a Ba ANSE OH IAI (368-7, wT, He 4)
aavat jaat baar khin laagai ha-o tab lag samaara-o naam. ||1||
In the brief instant between coming and going, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
He ufe wat sats afe iret il (368-8, nmr, He 4) mayrai man aisee bhagat ban aa-ee. Such is the devotional love which has been produced in my mind.
JG ofa fas fue us afo & AAS AA AG feo rio Hfe AST NAN TIS Il (368-8, ne, He 4) ha-o har bin khin pal reh na saka-o jaisay jal bin meen mar jaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord, I cannot live even for an instant, like the fish which dies without water. ||1||Pause]|
aa ag He us AS ates aa t Ta Os BSS Il (368-9, wr, Hs 4)
kab ko-oo maylai panch sat gaa-in kab ko raag Dhun uthaavai.
How long must one tune the five strings, and assemble the seven singers, and how long will they raise their voices in song?
Hos vos fas us VAT Sa Sa GA AT HS TH To We Ill (368-9, new, ns 4) maylat chunat khin pal chasaa laagai tab lag mayraa man raam gun gaavai. ||2|| In the time it takes to select and assemble these musicians, a moment elapses, and my mind sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
as & BS US UATS AG A IE UATE Il (368-10, mmr, ve 4)
kab ko naachai paav pasaarai kab ko haath pasaarai.
How long must one dance and stretch out one's feet, and how long must one reach out with one's hands?
vq ure unTES fan fS5 od Sa oa AST He TH ANTS ISI (368-11, vi, He 4) haath paav pasaarat bilam til laagai tab lag mayraa man raam sam"aarai. ||3]| Stretching out one's hands and feet, there is a moment's delay; and then, my mind meditates on the Lord. ||3]|
ae ag Bae as usr Sa uste a ufS se i Gos-11, wer, ws 4) kab ko-oo logan ka-o patee-aavai lok pateenai naa pat ho-ay. How long must one satisfy the people, in order to obtain honor?
Ho aed df fase Ae fred aT A A Ad AS Afe ISNIONEI (368-12, wr, He 4)
jan naanak har hirdai sad Dhi-aavahu taa jai jai karay sabh ko-ay. ||4||10||62]|
O servant Nanak, meditate forever in your heart on the Lord, and then everyone will congratulate you. ||4||10||62]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (368-13)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
Ashes fresh ofs Ag fife Hats ofs ge ate i (368-13, wer, vs 4)
satsangat milee-ai har saaDhoo mil sangat har gun gaa-ay.
Join the Sat Sangat, the Lord's True Congregation; joining the Company of the Holy, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fomirs 336 afer ufe wee uifamre nite Ate IAI (368-13, mA, He 4)
gi-aan ratan bali-aa ghat chaanan agi-aan anDhayraa jaa-ay. ||1]|
With the sparkling jewel of spiritual wisdom, the heart is illumined, and ignorance is dispelled. ||1]|
dfs AS aed ota af fame i (368-14, wm, He 4) har jan naachahu har har Dhi-aa-ay. O humble servant of the Lord, let your dancing be meditation on the Lord, Har, Har.
MA AS feofo He avet OH HS A Geo UTE NA TIT Il (368-14, nr, He 4)
aisay sant mileh mayray bhaa-ee ham jan kay Dhovah paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If only I cold meet such Saints, O my Siblings of Destiny; I would wash the feet of such servants. ||1]||Pause] |
Uf dfs SH Aud Ho He Males Jia fee BTS I (368-15, wm, He 4)
har har naam japahu man mayray an-din har liv laa-ay.
Meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my mind; night and day, center your consciousness on the Lord.
A feeg Aet ee ureg fafa suo Hat orf iI (368-16, wr, Hs 4)
jo ichhahu so-ee fal paavhu fir bhookh na laagai aa-ay. ||2|| You shall have the fruits of your desires, and you shall never feel hunger again. ||2||
nm dfs mudug agar ofa wim sf garfe i Ges-16, nr, Hs 4)
aapay har aprampar kartaa har aapay bol bulaa-ay.
The Infinite Lord Himself is the Creator; the Lord Himself speaks, and causes us to speak.
Ret AS 38 30 set fag at ufS urefa ate SI Ge8-17, vw, He 4) say-ee sant bhalay tuDh bhaaveh jin” kee pat paavahi thaa-ay. ||3]| The Saints are good, who are pleasing to Your Will; their honor is approved by You.
[I3]|
sod ufo aH dfs ae fA wire fC AY Ute I Ge8-17, nmr, He 4)
naanak aakh na raajai har gun ji-o aakhai ti-o sukh paa-ay.
Nanak is not satisfied by chanting the Lord's Glorious Praises; the more he chants them, the more he is at peace.
sats garg He ais mus Te Waa Zefa & ATE SNIWUESI Bes-18, mA, He 4) bhagat bhandaar dee-ay har apunay gun gaahak vanaj lai jaa-ay. ||4]|11]]63]| The Lord Himself has bestowed the treasure of devotional love; His customers purchase virtues, and carry them home. ||4]|11||63]|
uot set 9B Afsare YATE II (369-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta MITA UT t & Aet HIS 8 Il (369-1) raag aasaa ghar 8 kay kaafee mehlaa 4. Raag Aasaa, Eighth House, Kaafee, Fourth Mehl:
witfent Hes TaD IH SHA I (309-1, wma aret, ns 4) aa-i-aa maran Dhuraahu ha-umai ro-ee-ai. Death is ordained from the very beginning, and yet ego makes us cry.
aanfa an foorfe wmfas Tet Wall G69-2, wm aret, He 4) gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay asthir ho-ee-ai. ||1]| Meditating on the Naam, as Gurmukh, one becomes stable and steady. ||1||
Td ud Wath VHS Alen il (369-2, wv are, He 4) gur pooray saabaas chalan jaani-aa. Blessed is the Perfect Guru, through whom the way of Death is known.
Od SH AAS ASle AHSMt NA TITS Il (369-2, nim are, He 4) laahaa naam so saar sabad samaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The sublime people earn the profit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they are absorbed in the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
yata fear 37 fit wre arfeur I (309-3, nmr aret, 18 4) poorab likhay dayh se aa-ay maa-i-aa. The days of one's life are pre-ordained; they will come to their end, O mother.
Joe win fax ates Gag SoHEMM III (369-3, vm art, ue 4) chalan aj ke kaleh Dharahu furmaa-i-aa. ||2]| One must depart, today or tomorrow, according to the Lord's Primal Order. ||2]|
fager AOH far fAat oH feAtfani i (369-4, wm aret, He 4) birthaa janam tinaa jin"ee naam visaari-aa. Useless are the lives of those, who have forgotten the Naam.
ami dee ala fa feg He Thar 13 69-4, wr are, Hs 4) joo-ai khaylan jag ke ih man haari-aa. ||3]| They play the game of chance in this world, and lose their mind. ||3]|
ftefe nefe AY af fret ag urfeur II (369-5, wma art, Hs 4) jeevan maran sukh ho-ay jin"aa gur paa-i-aa. Those who have found the Guru are at peace, in life and in death.
Soa Ad Aly Afs AHEM ISIIAVUESI (369-5, mTAT aTet, He 4)
naanak sachay sach sach samaa-i-aa. ||4||12||64|| O Nanak, the true ones are truly absorbed into the True Lord. ||4||12||64||
MTAT HIG 8 Il (369-6)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
HoH uerse ute om fomrfenr Il Ge9-6, wr, He 4)
janam padaarath paa-ay naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Having obtained the treasure of this human birth, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ad ugAret afS Afs AHEM IAI (69-6, mA, Hs 4) gur parsaadee bujh sach samaa-i-aa. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, I understand, and I am absorbed into the True Lord. ||1]||
fg ufe fohmer Su fot an aHtfemr i (309-7, nmr, ue 4) jin" Dhur likhi-aa laykh tin"ee naam kamaa-i-aa. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny practice the Naam.
efs AY Afeors Hof serfeor Na TIS Il (09-7, new, He 4) dar sachai sachiaar mahal bulaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Lord summons the truthful to the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||Pause| |
nists ay fears aaHfe ure Il (369-8, nmr, He 4) antar naam niDhaan gurmukh paa-ee-ai. Deep within is the treasure of the Naam; it is obtained by the Gurmukh.
motes on famrfé afs ae are 12H Geo-8, wm, He 4) an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay har gun gaa-ee-ai. ||2| | Night and day, meditate on the Naam, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
nists SAS msa HOHfe odt ust I (309-8, ni, He 4) antar vasat anayk manmukh nahee paa-ee-ai. Deep within are infinite substances, but the self-willed manmukh does not find them.
ICH Tea Tee rf unre Sil Ge9-9, wr, He 4) ha-umai garbai garab aap khu-aa-ee-ai. ||3|| In egotism and pride, the mortal's proud self consumes him. ||3]|
Soa nm mitfly mirfly unireat 1 (369-9, mmAt, He 4) naanak aapay aap aap khu-aa-ee-dai. O Nanak, his identity consumes his identical identity.
aanfs ufs userA AST ure ISIISNEUI (369-10, TAT, He 4) gurmat man pargaas sachaa paa-ee-ai. ||4||13]|65]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, the mind is illumined, and meets the True Lord. [14] 13] [65] |
TI mASd we I AX 2 HIG 8 AUT (369-11) raag aasaavaree ghar 16 kay 2 mehlaa 4 suDhang Raag Aasaavaree, 2 Of Sixteenth House, Fourth Mehl, Sudhang:
qe Afsas ure il (369-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
JG niafes dig oH atese AGE Il (369-12, nmrrect, He 4) ha-o an-din har naam keertan kara-o. Night and day, I sing the Kirtan, the Praises of the Name of the Lord.
Afsafe 4 a ofs on safimr 36 afe fas fas ue ofa 5 AaG NU TTS I Go9-12, mTATSdT, He 4)
satgur mo ka-o har naam bataa-i-aa ha-o har bin khin pal reh na saka-o. ||1]| rahaa- O. The True Guru has revealed to me the Name of the Lord; without the Lord, I cannot live, for a moment, even an instant. ||1]|Pause] |
Jue Wee fangs dfs atese JC aia fas sfo 3 AAS Je fea fas II (369-13, nmrect, He 4) hamrai sarvan simran har keertan ha-o har bin reh na saka-o ha-o ik khin.
My ears hear the Lord's Kirtan, and I contemplate Him; without the Lord, I cannot live, even for an instant.
HA JA Heed fag afo 3 Aa SA ofa AS fag ad ofa AS fas NA Go9-14, wed, He 4) jaisay hans sarvar bin reh na sakai taisay har jan ki-o rahai har sayvaa bin. ||1]|
As the swan cannot live without the lake, how can the Lord's slave live without serving Him? ||1]||
faad us wet en a fee ofa fad uifs wet Ho MRS Il (369-15, wrrredt, Hs 4)
kinhoo™ pareet laa-ee doojaa bhaa-o rid Dhaar kinhoo™ pareet laa-ee moh apmaan. Some enshrine love for duality in their hearts, and some pledge love for worldly attachments and ego.
dfs Ao Ulfs wet fs fagare ue aoa fans fe aie SASS NNIWIEEN (369-15, wTATSaT, H3 4)
har jan pareet laa-ee har nirbaan pad naanak simrat har har bhagvaan. ||2||14||66]| The Lord's servant embraces love for the Lord and the state of Nirvaanaa; Nanak contemplates the Lord, the Lord God. ||2||14||66]|
MTATSdt HIS 8 Il (369-16)
aasaavaree mehlaa 4. Aasaavaree, Fourth Mehl:
Het He UISH IH SaTeg ct ret I 69-17, wmTedt, He 4) maa-ee moro pareetam raam bataavhu ree maa-ee. O mother, my mother, tell me about my Beloved Lord.
JG ofa fas fue us afo 5 AAS HA AdeS Sf Stsret 19 TIS Il (369-17, mrANdt, He 4) ha-o har bin khin pal reh na saka-o jaisay karhal bayl reejhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord, I cannot live for a moment, even an instant; I love Him, like the camel loves the vine. ||1]]Pause| |
HS He Soa fasas sfeG afe cans HIS a Stet II (369-18, wrASdt, He 4)
hamraa man bairaag birkat bha-i-o har darsan meet kai taa-ee.
My mind has become sad and distant, longing for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my Friend.
=.
AA vife ane fae af o Aa SA Hfs ofs faa TIo o WET INA Go9-18, nmATSdt, He 4) jaisay al kamlaa bin reh na sakai taisay mohi har bin rahan na jaa-ee. ||1]| As the bumblebee cannot live without the lotus, I cannot live without the Lord. ||1]|
Ua 390 wy Hefe Aaetas fimrs xfs Aaa ufe ofs TATE Il (370-1, nec, He 4)
raakh saran jagdeesur pi-aaray mohi sarDhaa poor har gusaa-ee. Keep me under Your Protection, O Beloved Master of the Universe; fulfill my faith, O Lord of the World.
Ho aaa a Hie noe dad ofa wane fone feuret NIQnStngsNqIlEDil (370-2, vmTect, H8 4)
jan naanak kai man anad hot hai har darsan nimakh dikhaa-ee. ||2||39||13]|15||67]| Servant Nanak's mind is filled with bliss, when he beholds the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, even for an instant. ||2]|39||13]|15]|67]|
TT MTA WI 2 HIG U (370-4) raag aasaa ghar 2 mehlaa 5 Raag Aasaa, Second House, Fifth Mehl:
98 Afsare YATE II (370-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fafs oret uffs Het fefs urfemr II (370-5, mmr, H8 5) jin laa-ee pareet so-ee fir khaa-i-aa. One who loves her, is ultimately devoured.
fafs Afa Soret fon 3@ sos feerfeur | (370-5, ner, He 5) jin sukh baithaalee tis bha-o bahut dikhaa-i-aa. One who seats her in comfort, is totally terrified by her.
oet Hts ade Ufa frare Il (370-5, nmr, He 5) bhaa-ee meet kutamb daykh bibaaday. Siblings, friends and family, beholding her, argue.
JH uel SAAS WT UPATE IAI (370-6, wiAT, He 5) ham aa-ee vasgat gur parsaaday. ||1]| But she has come under my control, by Guru's Grace. ||1]|
mrt efa fafos Je i (370-6, mr, we 5) aisaa daykh bimohit ho-ay. Beholding her, all are bewitched:
Afoe fio Fees Hou fag Ag Afs Gof FF ual FS il 370-6, wr, Hs 5)
saaDhik siDh surdayv manukhaa bin saaDhoo sabh Dharohan Dharohay. ||1|| rahaa- O. the strivers, the Siddhas, the demi-gods, angels and mortals. All, except the Saadhus, are deceived by her deception. ||1]||Pause| |
fefe feafs Gert faq orf feumt i (370-7, nmr, ue 5) ik fireh udaasee tin” kaam vi-aapai. Some wander around as renunciates, but they are engrossed in sexual desire.
fefa Fafa faradt faq afe 5 nmt i (370-8, »mr, 2 5)
ik sa%cheh girhee tin ho-ay na aapai.
Some grow rich as householders, but she does not belong to them. fefa Ast avefs faq aos ASUS II (370-8, wr, ne 5)
ik satee kahaaveh tin" bahut kalpaapai. Some call themselves men of charity, and she torments them terribly.
dH dfs aa ofa Afsag US] NI (370-8, wer, He 5) ham har raakhay lag satgur paavai. ||2|| The Lord has saved me, by attaching me to the Feet of the True Guru. ||2]|
BU ATS SUAt SHES Il (370-9, mew, He 5) tap kartay tapsee bhoolaa-ay. She leads astray the penitents who practice penance.
ufss Hod Sis AMS I (370-9, rw, us 5) pandit mohay lobh sabaa-ay. The scholarly Pandits are all seduced by greed.
3 Te He Hfowr nrerA Il (370-9, nmr, H8 5) tarai gun mohay mohi-aa aakaas. The world of the three qualities is enticed, and the heavens are enticed.
dH Afsagd Te S Als TE I3ll (370-10, wm, uz 5) ham satgur raakhay day kar haath. ||3]| The True Guru has saved me, by giving me His Hand. |[3]|
fomirat at dfe east ofA Il (370-10, nmr, 2 5) gi-aanee kee ho-ay vartee daas. She is the slave of those who are spiritually wise.
ad HS AS Ad mMaetA Il (370-10, nA, Hs 5) kar jorhay sayvaa karay ardaas. With her palms pressed together, she serves them and offers her prayer:
AS Oe A AS AHS Il (370-11, »T, He 5) jo too” kaheh so kaar kamaavaa. "Whatever you wish, that is what I shall do."
HO SOA WSHY Sls B MTS MSA (370-11, nT, He 5) jan naanak gurmukh nayrh na aavaa. ||4|[1]| O servant Nanak, she does not draw near to the Gurmukh. ||4]|1]|
MTAT HIG U Il (370-11)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AW 3 fufs otat eft i (370-12, mmr, He 5) sasoo tay pir keenee vaakh. I have been separated from my Beloved by Maya (my mother-in-law).
ea frovet Het ef ASP I 370-12, wm, He 5) dayr jithaanee mu-ee dookh santaap. Hope and desire (my younger brother-in-law and sister-in-law) are dying of grief.
wd & fAST at Vat ofS It (370-12, wir, 2 5) ghar kay jithayray kee chookee kaan. I am no longer swayed by the fear of Death (my elder brother-in-law).
fufs sfimr atet Aws AATE AU (70-12, nT, He 5) pir rakhi-aa kKeenee sugharh sujaan. ||1|| I am protected by my All-knowing, Wise Husband Lord. ||1]||
Hog Bat HUN GA urfeMr | (370-13, vm, He 5) sunhu lokaa mai paraym ras paa-i-aa. Listen, O people: I have tasted the elixir of love.
Ine Hd Sct Hurd Afsafs 4 aS of on feetfeur nail TIE tl 370-13, wm, He 5) durjan maaray vairee sanghaaray satgur mo ka-o har naam divaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The evil ones are dead, and my enemies are destroyed. The True Guru has given me the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
yen faurait 3B UifS | 70-14, nmr, He 5) parathmay ti-aagee ha-umai pareet. First, I renounced my egotistical love of myself.
esior faurait Sar SHS 11 (370-14, nr, vs 5) dutee-aa ti-aagee logaa reet. Second, I renounced the ways of the world.
3 ae faorfa vane HIS ANS II 70-14, ym, He 5) tarai gun ti-aag durjan meet samaanay. Renouncing the three qualities, I look alike upon friend and enemy.
sdur ae fufs ATT UBS IQ (370-15, wm, He 5) turee-aa gun mil saaDh pachhaanay. ||2| | And then, the fourth state of bliss was revealed to me by the Holy One. ||2]|
Hoa de" xfs mAs afar Il (370-15, mma, He 5) sahj gufaa meh aasan baaDhi-aa. In the cave of celestial bliss, I have obtained a seat.
AS ASU MSIE SMA Il (370-16, wer, Hs 5) jot saroop anaahad vaaji-aa. The Lord of Light plays the unstruck melody of bliss.
Ho nee Td ASE Stet il (370-16, nm, ns 5) mahaa anand gur sabad veechaar. I am in ecstasy, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
finn fae ast us Aoaf=s ats Bil (370-16, vm, Hs 5) pari-a si-o raatee Dhan sohagan naar. ||3]|| Imbued with my Beloved Husband Lord, I am the blessed, happy soul-bride. ||3]|
HS SSR 88 FIN sg | 370-17, wm, us 5) jan naanak bolay barahm beechaar. Servant Nanak chants the wisdom of God;
A He ane A Gsd ute Il (370-17, wm, He 5) jo sunay kamaavai so utrai paar. one who listens and practices it, is carried across and saved.
Hath o Hd BMS B ANE Il (370-17, nm, He 5) janam na marai na aavai na jaa-ay. He is not born, and he does not die; he does not come or go.
dfs ASt GI Id ANTE NII (370-18, TAT, He 5) har saytee oh rahai samaa-ay. ||4]|2| | He remains blended with the Lord. ||4]||2]|
MTAT HIG U Il (370-18)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
for saat Aleest orfe Il 370-18, nmr, He 5) nij bhagtee seelvantee naar. The bride shows such special devotion, and has such an agreeable disposition.
gfu nigu udt wirafs I (370-18, mmr, H2 5) roop anoop pooree aachaar. Her beauty is incomparable, and her character is perfect.
fas fafa eA A fag AaSsr il (370-19, nim, 8 5) jit garihi vasai so garihu sobhaavantaa. The house in which she dwells is such a praiseworthy house.
Tanta uret fas fess AST WAU (370-19, mmr, He 5) gurmukh paa-ee kinai virlai jantaa. ||1]| But rare are those who, as Gurmukh, attain that state||1||
Hadat aHfe aa ffs TH uret Il 70-19, nmr, 2 5) sukarnee kaaman gur mil ham paa-ee. As the soul-bride of pure actions, I have met with the Guru.
Uat 399 afa ofa ugate ATST IU TIS Il 71-1, wT, He 5)
jaj kaaj parthaa-ay suhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. In worship, marriage and in the next world, such a soul-bride looks beautiful. ||1]|Pause] |
fasg zat fust & Arfa I (371-1, nmr, He 5)
jichar vasee pitaa kai saath. As long as she lived with her father,
fsug a3 ag fed Geta I G71-1, ver, 1: 5) tichar kant baho firai udaas. her Husband wandered around in sadness.
ats Ae AS use HotfeMt Il (371-2, nT, v8 5) kar sayvaa sat purakh manaa-i-aa. I served and surrendered to the Lord, the True Being;
dfs viet wa ufos 37 Aga AY urfeMr QI (371-2, wm, He 5) gur aanee ghar meh taa sarab sukh paa-i-aa. ||2]| the Guru brought my bride to my home, and I obtained total happiness. ||2]|
astd Hedat Ag ASS us i wrfomrorst Aus AGU Il (371-3, wr, He 5) bateeh sulakh-nee sach santat poot. aagi-aakaaree sugharh saroop. She is blessed with all sublime attributes, and her generations are unblemished.
fee ys Ho AS AM | 271-3, wer, u: 5) ichh pooray man kant su-aamee. Her Husband, her Lord and Master, fulfills her heart's desires.
Hae Hset a Horst Sil 71-4, wmv, ve 5)
Sagal santokhee dayr jaythaanee. ||3]|
Hope and desire (my younger brother-in-law and sister-in-law) are now totally content. ||3]|
AS ude'd HT ASA Il (371-4, wr, He 5) sabh parvaarai maahi saraysat. She is the most noble of all the family.
Hat Pet SeI AAS Il (371-4, wm, He 5) matee dayvee dayvar jaysat. She counsels and advises her hope and desire.
ue # fag fas yaret orfe i 371-4, nmr, us 5) Dhan so garihu jit pargatee aa-ay. How blessed is that household, in which she has appeared.
Ho soa AY Af feat= sisi (371-5, wm, He 5) jan naanak sukhay sukh vihaa-ay. ||4]|3]| O servant Nanak, she passes her time in perfect peace and comfort. ||4]|3]|
MAT HIG U Il (371-5)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
HS' ade A uals o Set Il (371-5, wm, He 5) mataa kara-o so pakan na day-ee. Whatever I resolve, she does not allow it to come to pass.
Hie HAN & foafe uset il 371-6, nmr, He 5) seel sanjam kai nikat khalo-ee. She stands blocking the way of goodness and self-discipline.
ZA Ad AT gu fers il 371-6, wr, we 5) vays karay baho roop dikhaavai. She wears many disguises, and assumes many forms,
fafa safe o tet |fy eft saHTS A G71-6, ver, He 5)
garihi basan na day-ee vakh vakh bharmaavai. ||1]|
and she does not allow me to dwell in my own home. She forces me to wander around in different directions. ||1]|
wg at ofefa we SHB SS Il (371-7, rr, He 5) ghar kee naa-ik ghar vaas na dayvai. She has become the mistress of my home, and she does not allow me to live in it.
Aso as Caste uds 19 JIS Il (371-7, ne, v2 5) jatan kara-o urjhaa-ay parayvai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If I try, she fights with me. ||1]|Pause]|
Ud at sat wiret nfs il (371-7, wm, He 5)
Dhur kee bhayjee aa-ee aamar. In the beginning, she was sent as a helper,
3o@ Us HS Afs Be FSsd Il (371-8, ww, He 5) na-o khand jeetay sabh thaan thanantar. but she has overwhelmed the nine continents, all places and interspaces.
fe stefa 5 23 Aa AfsorA i 71-8, nmr, He 5)
tat tirath na chhodai jog sanni-aas.
She has not spared even the river banks, the sacred shrines of pilgrimage, the Yogis and Sannyaasees,
ufs wet fAfAAS Se nifsmrA QU (71-8, vm, He 5) parh thaakay simrit bayd abhi-aas. ||2|| or those who tirelessly read the Simritees and study the Vedas. ||2]|
~
Ad SAG 3d aS FA Il (371-9, mr, nH: 5) jah baisa-o tah naalay baisai. Wherever I sit, she sits there with me.
Aas 326 Hfo AAS USA Il (371-9, »mr, ue 5) Sagal bhavan meh sabal parvaysai. She has imposed her power upon the whole world.
det Aofs uffmr soe & uret Il 71-9, vir, He 5) hochhee saran pa-i-aa rahan na paa-ee. Seeking meager protection, I am not protected from her.
ag Hist 3 & ufs AST SI 71-10, mr, He 5) kaho meetaa ha-o kai peh jaa-ee. ||3]| Tell me, O my friend: unto whom should I turn for protection? ||3]|
Afe Guen Afsae ufo rfenr il 371-10, nmr, H2 5) sun updays satgur peh aa-i-aa. I heard of His Teachings, and so I have come to the True Guru.
dfs ofs ofs oy Hfs 4g feafeor i a7i-u, »mr, x 5) gur har har naam mohi mantar drirh-aa-i-aa. The Guru has implanted the Mantra of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, within me.
fon wie efit ae afe nest i 71-11, nr, He 5)
nij ghar vasi-aa gun gaa-ay anantaa.
And now, I dwell in the home of my own inner self; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
us fxfee aaa se nifssr sil G71-u1, ym, He 5) parabh mili-o naanak bha-ay achintaa. ||4|| I have met God, O Nanak, and I have become care-free. ||4||
we Hat fea ofetex Tat Il (371-12, wm, He 5) ghar mayraa ih naa-ik hamaaree. My home is now my own, and she is now my mistress.
fea orate on afs ate coast dl JaS TA SII B71-12, mmr, He 5)
ih aamar ham gur kee-ay darbaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||4||4||
She is now my servant, and the Guru has made me intimate with the Lord. ||1]|Second Pause] |4]|4 |
MTAT HIG U Il (371-13)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
yen HST fa ust Fars Il (371-13, vm, Hs 5) parathmay mataa je patree chalaava-o. First, they advised me to send a letter.
este He ef Hou UTTSS Il (371-13, wm, He 5) dutee-ay mataa du-ay maanukh pahuchaava-o. Second, they advised me to send two men.
fgste ust fag ag Gurfemr i 371-14, nm, ue 5) taritee-ay mataa kichh kara-o upaa-i-aa. Third, they advised me to make the effort and do something.
HAS fae efs ys act fomrfemr al 71-14, vm, H8 5)
mai sabh kichh chhod parabh tuhee Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]||
But I have renounced everything, and I meditate only on You, God. ||1]| Ho mee nites AoAfeEnt | 371-15, wr, He 5)
mahaa anand achint sehjaa-i-aa. Now, I am totally blissful, carefree and at ease.
TAHS BS He AY ufsMr NAN TIS Il 71-15, wT, He 5) dusman doot mu-ay sukh paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The enemies and evil-doers have perished, and I have obtained peace. ||1||Pause] |
Afsafe 4 aG chor Bue I 371-16, nmr, nH 5) satgur mo ka-o dee-aa updays. The True Guru has imparted the Teachings to me.
a fiz Ag of a 2H Il (371-16, wr, He 5) jee-o pind sabh har kaa days. My soul, body and everything belong to the Lord.
A fae adt A ST STS Il 71-16, ver, He 5) jo kichh karee so tayraa taan. Whatever I do, is by Your Almighty Power.
3 Hat Ge FI PMS Il 71-16, wm, uz 5) too’ mayree ot too‘hai deebaan. ||2]| You are my only Support, You are my only Court. ||2||
306 efs we ys & fs il (371-17, nmr, 48 5) tuDhno chhod jaa-ee-ai parabh kai" Dhar. If I were to renounce You, God, unto whom could I turn?
nS & hat Sot AHAfe Il (371-17, nA, He 5)
aan na bee-aa tayree samsar. There is no other, comparable to You.
3d Hea a fan at ate I (371-17, vm, He 5) tayray sayvak ka-o kis kee kaan. Who else is Your servant to serve?
Wag so fed Fate Si (371-18, wr, He 5) saakat bhoolaa firai baybaan. ||3]| The faithless cynics are deluded; they wander around in the wilderness. ||3]|
Sot efanret adt 3 wfe i 371-18, nmr, He 5) tayree vadi-aa-ee kahee na jaa-ay. Your Glorious Greatness cannot be described.
Ad oo fy Sfo af Ste i 371-18, wm, He 5) jah kah raakh laihi gal laa-ay. Wherever I am, you save me, hugging me close in Your embrace.
SSA VA Sot Ad|Sret Il (371-19, ww, us 5) naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee. Nanak, Your slave, has entered Your Sanctuary.
ufs ondt Ua set eraret SUll G71-19, vm, Hs 5) parabh raakhee paij vajee vaaDhaa-ee. ||4||5|| God has preserved his honor, and congratulations are pouring in. ||4||5||
Ust BI2
MTAT HIG U Il (372-1)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
user Sta ABS AS vtfEnr Il (372-1, vm, H3 5) pardays jhaag sa-uday ka-o aa-i-aa. Having wandered through foreign lands, I have come here to do business.
SAS nigu Het wrarfenr il (372-1, ww, 12 5) vasat anoop sunee laabhaa-i-aa. I heard of the incomparable and profitable merchandise.
Ge Th dfs us vrat il (372-1, ww, ue 5)
gun raas baneh palai aanee.
I have gathered in my pockets my capital of virtue, and I have brought it here with me.
efy 33q feg He Bu|Tat Al (372-2, wm, vs 5) daykh ratan ih man laptaanee. ||1]| Beholding the jewel, this mind is fascinated. ||1]|
ATS Surdst Mis WIE I (372-2, wer, He 5) saah vaapaaree du-aarai aa-ay. I have come to the door of the Trader.
zug ae ABST AIS WAU FI Il (372-2, vrs, vs 5) vakhar kaadhahu sa-udaa karaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please display the merchandise, so that the business may be transacted. ||1]||Pause] |
Afa uotfenr Ard uTfA Il (372-3, nm, H3 5) saahi pathaa-i-aa saahai paas. The Trader has sent me to the Banker.
WMHS I36 Mo THA Il (372-3, wer, He 5) amol ratan amolaa raas. The jewel is priceless, and the capital is priceless.
fene Asst ufenr HIS I (372-3, nr, He 5) visat subhaa-ee paa-i-aa meet. O my gentle brother, mediator and friend
Ae fifemr fags BSF 211 (72-4, nm, us 5) Sa-udaa mili-aa nihchal cheet. ||2| | - I have obtained the merchandise, and my consciousness is now steady and stable.
21 |
38 Sdt SHAT UBS SB UAT Il (372-4, wm, He 5) bha-o nahee taskar pa-un na paanee. I have no fear of thieves, of wind or water.
Hof feast wafa & Arst il 72-4, mr, ve 5) sahj vihaajee sahj lai jaanee. I have easily made my purchase, and I easily take it away.
AS a ufemt ey dt ufemr Il (372-5, mmr, v2 5) sat kai khati-ai dukh nahee paa-i-aa.
I have earned Truth, and I shall have no pain. Adt Fonts whe & orfenr ai 72-5, om, He 5)
sahee salaamat ghar lai aa-i-aa. ||3]| I have brought this merchandise home, safe and sound. ||3]|
firfemr orot SE MIST Il (372-5, vA, He 5) mili-aa laahaa bha-ay anand. I have earned the profit, and I am happy.
US AW ud Safe Il (372-6, wr, Hs 5) Dhan saah pooray bakhsind. Blessed is the Banker, the Perfect Bestower.
feg AGer qonfa fas fess ufeur i 372-6, vir, He 5) ih sa-udaa gurmukh kinai virlai paa-i-aa. How rare is the Gurmukh who obtains this merchandise;
Haat du aed & uitfenr gill 372-6, wr, ws 5) sahlee khayp naanak lai aa-i-aa. ||4]||6|| Nanak has brought this profitable merchandise home. ||4||6| |
MTAT HIG U Il (372-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
TS Meo Hd AS Ferd | (372-7, ww, wz 5) gun avgan mayro kachh na beechaaro. He does not consider my merits or demerits.
oo SfeS gu sa Aters | (372-7, wr, He 5) nah daykhi-o roop rang see“gaaro. He does not look at my beauty, color or decorations.
on mand fas fafa oot AAT Il (372-8, nmr, He 5) chaj achaar kichh biDh nahee jaanee. I do not know the ways of wisdom and good conduct.
ag uate fir AR mist Al (372-8, wim, He 5) baah pakar pari-a sayjai aanee. ||1]|| But taking me by the arm, my Husband Lord has led me to His Bed. ||1]|
Afss Adt afS gus ohrs UAHTAT Il 372-8, wT, He 5) sunibo sakhee kant hamaaro kee-alo khasmaanaa. Hear, O my companions, my Husband, my Lord Master, possesses me.
ag HAsfa wfe wfS afe wruat famr we feg Sa vA NU TI il (372-9, nm, He 5) kar mastak Dhaar raakhi-o kar apunaa ki-aa jaanai ih lok ajaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Placing His Hand upon my forehead, He protects me as His Own. What do these ignorant people know? ||1||Pause] |
Ava dH wre gfe AfsG |i (372-10, wer, He 5) suhaag hamaaro ab hun sohi-o. My married life now appears so beauteous;
as fife wd AS ey Afas I (372-10, nmr, He 5) kant mili-o mayro sabh dukh johi-o. my Husband Lord has met me, and He sees all my pains.
wate HS AST PE Il (372-10, nmAr, uz 5) aa‘gan mayrai sobhaa chand. Within the courtyard of my heart, the glory of the moon shines.
fofa ara fina Fifer mise QI (372-11, wm, He 5) nis baasur pari-a sang anand. ||2]| Night and day, I have fun with my Beloved. ||2]|
WAZ THS Shot HS ll (372-11, ww, v2 5) bastar hamaaray rang chalool. My clothes are dyed the deep crimson color of the poppy.
AIS MSIE Ast afS Fw ll (372-11, wT, we 5) Sagal aabhran sobhaa kanth fool. All the ornaments and garlands around my neck adorn me.
for udt feafe ure Aare fears Il (372-12, nmr, Hs 5) pari-a paykhee darisat paa-ay sagal niDhaan. Gazing upon my Beloved with my eyes, I have obtained all treasures;
eH! Fs at gat ate Si 372-12, uA, He 5) dusat doot kee chookee kaan. ||3]| I have shaken off the power of the evil demons. ||3]|
He yah Aer Ja HS Il (372-12, wer, ue 5) sad khusee-aa sadaa rang maanay. I have obtained eternal bliss, and I constantly celebrate.
38 fofa ant faa ufo fuss | (372-13, nmr, us 5)
na-o niDh naam garih meh tariptaanay.
With the nine treasures of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied in my own home.
ag saa AG fusfs Alert il (372-13, wm, He 5) kaho naanak ja-o pireh seegaaree. Says Nanak, when the happy soul-bride is adorned by her Beloved,
fag Hoes Afar gars UII (372-13, mmAT, He 5) thir sohaagan sang bhataaree. ||4||7|| she is forever happy with her Husband Lord. ||4||7]|
MTAT HIG U Il (372-14)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ag afe ats uA Adar Il (372-14, wT, He 5) daan day-ay kar poojaa karnaa. They give you donations and worship you.
BS U3 Bq vals usa il 372-14, ww, us 5) lait dayt un" mookar parnaa. You take from them, and then deny that they have given anything to you.
fas efs 3H 9 YrOHS WET II (372-14, vim, He 5) jit dar tum" hai baraahman jaanaa. That door, through which you must ultimately go, O Brahmin
fg efs Sot F uss ST NA (372-15, wmT, we 5) tit dar too‘hee hai pachhutaanaaa. ||1|| - at that door, you will come to regret and repent. ||1]|
WMA AINE Fa TET Il (372-15, ww, we 5) aisay baraahman doobay bhaa-ee. Such Brahmins shall drown, O Siblings of Destiny;
feruaa fesefa sfomret dil TIS il 72-15, wT, us 5) niraapraaDh chitvahi buri-aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. they think of doing evil to the innocent. ||1]|Pause]|
nists 33 feafs TeaEe | (372-16, wer, He 5) antar lobh fireh halkaa-ay. Within them is greed, and they wander around like mad dogs.
fea asta fafs ara Bore | (372-16, nmr, v2 5) nindaa karahi sir bhaar uthaa-ay. They slander others and carry loads of sin upon their heads.
Hfeor Hot FS Sra I (372-16, wr, He 5) maa-i-aa moothaa chaytai naahee. Intoxicated by Maya, they do not think of the Lord.
SIH Fo ATS Ta MQM 372-17, wr, ve 5) bharmay bhoolaa bahutee raahee. ||2|| Deluded by doubt, they wander off on many paths. ||2]|
Ws sY AdI WSs Il (372-17, nA, v3 5) baahar bhaykh karahi ghanayray. Outwardly, they wear various religious robes,
niste fafimr Bact us i (372-17, nmr, nH 5) antar bikhi-aa utree ghayray. but within, they are enveloped by poison.
nied Quen uf o FS Il 372-18, wr, Hs 5) avar updaysai aap na boojhai. They instruct others, but do not understand themselves.
WAT ASHE Ad F AS SI (372-18, wm, we 5) aisaa baraahman kahee na seejhai. ||3]| Such Brahmins will never be emancipated. ||3]|
Had HHS YS AHS il 372-18, wi, He 5) moorakh baaman parabhoo samaal. O foolish Brahmin, reflect upon God.
2us Hos 3d FT BTS Il 372-18, wer, H: 5) daykhat sunat tayrai hai naal. He watches and hears, and is always with you.
AT BSA A et Sa Il (372-19, mmr, He 5) kaho naanak jay hovee bhaag. Says Nanak, if this is your destiny,
HS efs TT Bsat ST NICH (372-19, ww, ue 5) maan chhod gur charnee laag. ||4||8]| renounce your pride, and grasp the Guru's Feet. ||4||8]|
MTAT HIG U Il (372-19)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
UST 303
eu II se TS 35 3 HO fSane aia aa Te TE Il 373-1, ww, ws 5)
dookh rog bha-ay gat tan tay man nirmal har har gun gaa-ay.
Pain and disease have left my body, and my mind has become pure; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
se ide fife wg Afar wa He HE aS StS AAS NA 373-1, wm, HE 5)
bha-ay anand mil saaDhoo sang ab mayraa man kat hee na jaa-ay. ||1]|
I am in bliss, meeting with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and now, my mind does not go wandering. ||1]|
sufs ast ae Ast HAE Il (373-2, nim, v2 5)
tapat bujhee gur sabdee maa-ay. My burning desires are quenched, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, O mother.
faofa af su AS HOA ag Ase fife AofA ASE Na TIS il 373-2, wT, v2 5) binas ga-i-o taap sabh sahsaa gur seetal mili-o sahj subhaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The fever of doubt has been totally eliminated; meeting the Guru, I am cooled and soothed, with intuitive ease. ||1]|Pause| |
Wes 3d &a fea afsur uorfe aA ore fagee ate il (373-3, wrt, He 5)
Dhaavat rahay ayk ik boojhi-aa aa-ay basay ab nihchal thaa-ay.
My wandering has ended, since I have realized the One and Only Lord; now, I have come to dwell in the eternal place.
Ags Buss AS SHS BIAS UUs Fd wwf Qi (373-4, wm, He 5)
jagat uDhaaran sant tumaaray darsan paykhat rahay aghaa-ay. ||2||
Your Saints are the Saving Grace of the world; beholding the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, I remain satisfied. ||2||
s+ 5
WOH ty ud AS UE wre uats fosss AT UTS Il (373-4, wer, He 5)
janam dokh paray mayray paachhai ab pakray nihchal saaDhoo paa-ay.
I have left behind the sins of countless incarnations, now that I have grasped the feet of the eternal Holy Guru.
Hon Ufs a] Hares HOM I (373-5, war, He 5) sahj Dhun gaavai mangal manoo-aa. My mind sings the celestial melody of bliss,
ma st aS sfs aS G UTE ISI (373-5, mmr, He 5) ab taa ka-o fun kaal na khaa-ay. ||3]| and death shall no longer consume it. ||3]|
ads ATS ANGE INS AMEE AS Ts ofa TE Il 73-5, nr, us 5)
karan kaaran samrath hamaaray sukh-daa-ee mayray har har raa-ay.
My Lord, the Cause of all causes, is All-powerful, the Giver of peace; He is my Lord, my Lord King.
oy 3a af He aoa Gf ufs He Af AOE SICH (373-6, mm, He 5)
naam tayraa jap jeevai naanak ot pot mayrai sang sahaa-ay. ||4||9]|
Nanak lives by chanting Your Name, O Lord; You are my helper, with me, through and through. ||4]|9||
MTAT HIG U Il (373-7)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
nidare fame fSea Il (373-7, nmr, He 5) arrhaavai billaavai nindak. The slanderer cries out and bewails.
ursgoH ushAg farfeor ner ats ure Sea Al TIS Il (373-7, ver, vs 5) paarbarahm parmaysar bisri-aa apnaa keetaa paavai nindak. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He has forgotten the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord; the slanderer reaps the rewards of his own actions. ||1]|Pause] |
A act CA at Halt de oS BE fROvS | (373-8, nm, He 5) jay ko-ee us kaa sangee hovai naalay la-ay siDhaavai. If someone is his companion, then he shall be taken along with him.
Wede nina BI Core fSea mast wife ABS NAM (373-8, TAT, He 5)
anhodaa ajgar bhaar uthaa-ay nindak agnee maahi jalaavai. ||1]| |
Like the dragon, the slanderer carries his huge, useless loads, and burns in his own fire. ||1]|
UdHAS & word fa df fasts A aoa orf ETS I 373-9, nmr, He 5) parmaysar kai du-aarai je ho-ay biteetai so naanak aakh sunaavai. Nanak proclaims and announces what happens at the Door of the Transcendent Lord.
Sas Ho AG Ae nde J ofa atese ate fear] IQN901 373-10, wm, He 5)
bhagat janaa ka-o sadaa anand hai har keertan gaa-ay bigsaavai. ||2||10||
The humble devotees of the Lord are forever in bliss; singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, they blossom forth. ||2]|10]|
MTAT HIG U Il (373-10)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AG H AG Aas Alara Il (373-11, wer, He 5) ja-o mai kee-o sagal seegaaraa. Even though I totally decorated myself,
38 st Hat HS © USMS Il 73-11, wT, He 5) ta-o bhee mayraa man na patee-aaraa. still, my mind was not satisfied.
mfox AdUs 36 Hfs BSE | (373-11, mA, He 5) anik suganDhat tan meh laava-o. I applied various scented oils to my body,
6g AY f3e ANTS adt USE Il (373-12, nmr, He 5) oh sukh til samaan nahee paava-o. and yet, I did not obtain even a tiny bit of pleasure from this.
Ho ufo fese@ mint nmATeT I (373-12, wrt, He 5) man meh chitva-o aisee aasaa-ee. Within my mind, I hold such a desire,
for tus Ae Ast Het NAM (373-12, um, He 5) pari-a daykhat jeeva-o mayree maa-ee. ||1|| that I may live only to behold my Beloved, O my mother. ||1]]|
Het ast ae@ feg He 3 OS Il (373-13, nmr, He 5) maa-ee kahaa kara-o ih man na Dheerai. O mother, what should I do? This mind cannot rest.
finn usu Sara fas wa TIS it (373-13, vm, us 5) pari-a pareetam bairaag hirai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It is bewitched by the tender love of my Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
any fagus AY Ags FARA I (373-13, wr, Hs 5) bastar bibhookhan sukh bahut bisaykhai. Garments, ornaments, and such exquisite pleasures
Gfe st AS fas o Be Il (373-14, nA, He 5) o-ay bhee jaan-o kitai na laykhai. - I look upon these as of no account.
ufs AST nig HS HIS Il (373-14, wer, He 5) pat sobhaa ar maan mahat. Likewise, honor, fame, dignity and greatness,
mfamrars Aas Aas Il (373-14, oA, He 5) aagi-aakaaree sagal jagat. obedience by the whole world,
fad MAT I HET WS Il (373-15, ver, He 5) garihu aisaa hai sundar laal. and a household as beautiful as a jewel.
YS Bret ST AST (SITS WM (373-15, mA, ws 5) parabh bhaavaa taa sadaa nihaal. ||2|| If I am pleasing to God's Will, then I shall be blessed, and forever in bliss. ||2]|
fine sno nifsx ugard Il (373-15, mT, He 5) binjan bhojan anik parkaar. With foods and delicacies of so many different kinds,
da SHA sos fans | (373-15, wT, He 5) rang tamaasay bahut bisthaar. and such abundant pleasures and entertainments,
TH fhe mg as SHEA Il (373-16, nmr, He 5) raaj milakh ar bahut furmaa-is. power and property and absolute command
He Sdt Ga fener ot wfEfF II (373-16, nim, ne 5) man nahee Dharaapai tarisnaa naa jaa-is. - with these, the mind is not satisfied, and its thirst is not quenched.
faa fos fea fea o foe II (373-17, ver, He 5) bin milbay ih din na bihaavai. Without meeting Him, this day does not pass.
fH YS SAS AY US I 373-17, wm, HE 5) milai parabhoo taa sabh sukh paavai. ||3]| Meeting God, I find peace. ||3]|
ans dns wat fes AE I (373-17, nm, He 5) khojat khojat sunee ih so-ay. By searching and seeking, I have heard this news,
Wonafs fae sfae o afe i 373-18, nmr, He 5)
saaDhsangat bin tari-o na ko-ay.
that without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, no one swims across. faa Hasta sat fSfo Afsag ute Il (373-18, nmr, He 5)
jis mastak bhaag tin satgur paa-i-aa.
One who has this good destiny written upon his forehead, finds the True Guru. udt wit He fyustfeEnr Il (373-18, mmr, He 5)
pooree aasaa man tariptaa-i-aa. His hopes are fulfilled, and his mind is satisfied.
ys fiufeur st gat SST I (373-19, wr, He 5) parabh mili-aa taa chookee danjhaa. When one meets God, then his thirst is quenched.
SSA BU HS 3S HST UA (373-19, wTAT, He 5)
naanak laDhaa man tan manjhaa. ||4||11]| Nanak has found the Lord, within his mind and body. ||4]]11]|
MITA HOS U UTUS Il (373-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5 panchpaday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Panch-Padas:
UST 398
Yan Sot stat ATS Ul (374-1, wer, ws 5) parathmay tayree neekee jaat. First, your social status is high.
esion Sat Hob uifS i 374-1, wm, He 5) dutee-aa tayree manee-ai paa"t. Second, you are honored in society.
fshor 3a Hes BS Il (374-1, vw, ue 5)
taritee-aa tayraa sundar thaan. Third, your home is beautiful.
fags gu Ho fs mfsHTS NAM (374-1, wT, He 5) bigarh roop man meh abhimaan. ||1]| But you are so ugly, with self-conceit in your mind. ||1]|
Avot Agfu wate feats il (374-2, wr, Hs 5) sohnee saroop sujaan bichkhan. O beautiful, attractive, wise and clever woman:
mits asa Hf sat F UA TIS Mt (374-2, ve, vs 5) at garbai mohi faakee too™. ||1]| rahaa-o. you have been trapped by your pride and attachment. ||1]|Pause| |
mts Ast Sot UTS Il (374-3, mim, He 5) at soochee tayree paaksaal. Your kitchen is so clean.
ats fenars UAT for Bes Il (374-3, weAr, He 5) kar isnaan poojaa tilak laal. You take your bath, and worship, and apply the crimson mark upon your forehead;
ae aaafa fa aefa fami i 374-3, nar, ue 5) galee garbeh mukh goveh gi-aan. with your mouth you speak wisdom, but you are destroyed by pride.
Afs fafa det SfS AMIS QM (374-4, mm, He 5) sabh biDh kho-ee lobh su-aan. ||2|| The dog of greed has ruined you in every way. ||2]|
aug ufvafs sats sa ll (374-4, mmAr, He 5) kaapar pahirahi bhogeh bhog. You wear your robes and enjoy pleasures;
ners Adfs Hat Hfs Sa Il (374-4, view, He 5) aachaar karahi sobhaa meh log. you practice good conduct to impress people;
our deo Aaa PARES I (374-4, nmr, He 5) cho-aa chandan suganDh bisthaar. you apply scented oils of sandalwood and musk,
Haft det AT FSH NB 374-5, wer, ve 5) sangee khotaa kroDh chandaal. ||3]| but your constant companion is the demon of anger. ||3]|
Med Afs Sct ufSsast I (374-5, vir, He 5) avar jon tayree panihaaree. Other people may be your water-carriers;
fem cast ufo Sat fraerst i (374-5, nmr, He 5) is Dhartee meh tayree sikdaaree. in this world, you may be a ruler.
Afear gut 33 ufs SH Il (374-6, wrt, 12 5) Su-inaa roopaa tujh peh daam. Gold, silver and wealth may be yours,
Hie faarfsG Sa aH Sil 74-6, nmr, Hs 5) seel bigaari-o tayraa kaam. ||4|| but the goodness of your conduct has been destroyed by sexual promiscuity. ||4]|
Ww ag fenfe ufeor afs ate Il (374-6, um, us 5) jaa ka-o darisat ma-i-aa har raa-ay. That soul, upon whom the Lord has bestowed His Glance of Grace,
A det 3 wet wate i (374-7, nmr, we 5) saa bandee tay la-ee chhadaa-ay. is delivered from bondage.
AGH fa ffs sf cA urfemr II (374-7, nmr, He 5)
saaDhsang mil har ras paa-i-aa.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord's sublime essence is obtained.
AT soa Hes Go afEnr ull 374-7, nmr, us 5)
kaho naanak safal oh kaa-i-aa. ||5]| Says Nanak, how fruitful is that body. ||5]|
Afs gu Als AY ad Haale Il (374-8, wert, He 5) sabh roop sabh sukh banay suhaagan. All graces and all comforts shall come to you, as the happy soul-bride;
mits Hete fasufs FU IOS SAT UII (374-8, me, He 5) at sundar bichkhan too™. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||12!| you shall be supremely beautiful and wise. ||1]|Second Pause] |12]|
MAT HIG U fEaSA 2 Il (374-9)
aasaa mehlaa 5 iktukay 2. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Ik-Tukas 2 :
ates <A fSA Haus NEST Il (374-9, nA, He 5) jeevat deesai tis sarpar marnaa. One who is seen to be alive, shall surely die.
Hor de fsA fesse TIS NA (374-9, ner, He 5) mu-aa hovai tis nihchal rahnaa. ||1]| But he who is dead shall remain ever-lasting. ||1]||
Ales HE HE A AIS Il (374-10, wm, He 5) jeevat mu-ay mu-ay Say jeevay. Those who die while yet alive, shall through this death, live on.
ofa ofa amy wigug Hfe ufeor ag Aaet oA nifys ute Na TIE Il (374-10, wm, He 5) har har naam avkhaDh mukh paa-i-aa gur sabdee ras amrit peevay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. They place the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, as medicine in their mouths, and through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]]|Pause]|
ardt Heat faoth fara Il 74-11, wim, Hs 5) kaachee matukee binas binaasaa. The clay pot of the body shall be broken.
fan ge fRact fon for whe SA QH 374-11, »mr, He 5) jis chhootai tarikutee tis nij ghar vaasaa. ||2]| One who has eliminated the three qualities dwells in the home of his inner self. ||2]|
Gu us A ue ufemrer Il 374-11, wr, Hs 5) oochaa charhai so pavai pa-i-aalaa. One who climbs high, shall fall into the nether regions of the underworld.
Udfe us FSH Bat o ASH ISI (374-12, nA, He 5) Dharan parhai tis lagai na kaalaa. ||3]| One who lies upon the ground, shall not be touched by death. ||3]|
gus fed f3a fas o ufemr it (374-12, wer, He 5) bharmat firay tin kichhoo na paa-i-aa. Those who continue to wander around, achieve nothing.
A wnfad fae dd Ase AH fEnr Sil (374-12, wm, He 5) say asthir jin gur sabad kamaa-i-aa. ||4|| Those who practice the Guru's Teachings, become steady and stable. ||4]|
AG flix Ag of aT HS I (374-13, ver, He 5) jee-o pind sabh har kaa maal. This body and soul all belong to the Lord.
aoa Td ffs se fogs NWUNISI (374-13, nT, He 5)
naanak gur mil bha-ay nihaal. ||5||13]| O Nanak, meeting the Guru, I am enraptured. ||5]|13]||
MTAT HIG U Il (374-14)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
usdt 3c fafa afe wet Il 374-14, nmr, He 5) putree tayree biDh kar thaatee. The puppet of the body has been fashioned with great skill.
wo Afs afe dfeat Het NAM (374-14, mm, He 5) jaan sat kar ho-igee maatee. ||1]| Know for sure that it shall turn to dust. ||1]|
H® AHS MTS TST Il (374-14, wrAr, He 5) mool samaalahu achayt gavaaraa. Remember your origins, O thoughtless fool.
fe36 AB SH foo Tea WAU TIS I (374-15, nm, us 5) itnay ka-o tum" ki-aa garbay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why are you so proud of yourself? ||1]|Pause] |
Sie Aa a feast fone Il (74-15, mmr, He 5) teen sayr kaa dihaarhee mihmaan. You are a guest, given three meals a day;
Med ZAS SB UTI MHS IQIl (74-15, ww, He 5) avar vasat tujh paahi amaan. ||2| | other things are entrusted to you. ||2||
fare’ MAS JAZ USS TH Il (374-16, wr, ue 5) bistaa asat rakat paraytay chaam. you are just excrement, bones and blood, wrapped up in skin
fem Gufs & aS Ms SII (374-16, wr, Hs 5) is oopar lay raakhi-o gumaan. ||3]|| - this is what you are taking such pride in! ||3]|
Ba SAS Isla St Teta US Il (374-17, wT, uz 5) ayk vasat boojheh taa hoveh paak. If you could understand even one thing, then you would be pure.
fag gS F Ae SNUG Ill (374-17, wT, Hs 5) bin boojhay too’ sadaa naapaak. ||4]| Without understanding, you shall be forever impure. ||4| |
AT FSA AT AS ATAS Il (374-17, wm, He 5) kaho naanak gur ka-o kurbaan. Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru;
fan 3 ure ofs use AAS NUN (374-18, nA, He 5) jis tay paa-ee-ai har purakh sujaan. ||5]|14]| through Him, I obtain the Lord, the All-knowing Primal Being. ||5||14||
MAT Hoe u feasa Bue Il (374-18, wT, us 5)
aasaa mehlaa 5 iktukay cha-upday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Ik-Tukas, Chau-Padas:
fea wet fean 4 aS age feos I 374-18, nmr, He 5) ik gharhee dinas mo ka-o bahut dihaaray. One moment, one day, is for me many days.
HO 3 dd AA fee firs 9 (374-19, mmr, nH 5) man na rahai kaisay mila-o pi-aaray. ||1]| My mind cannot survive - how can I meet my Beloved? ||1]|
fea ue feor H AG agg o faa] II (374-19, ner, He 5) ik pal dinas mo ka-o kabahu na bihaavai. I cannot endure one day, even one instant without Him.
UST B0u
ZnS at fs wrA wddt act via Hs A a fusfs fers Na TIC Il (375-1, nm, He 5) darsan kee man aas ghanayree ko-ee aisaa sant mo ka-o pireh milaavai. ||1|| rahaa- O. My mind's desire for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is so great. Is there any Saint who can lead me to meet my Beloved? ||1||Pause]|
afd Udd BI Hdd AHS Il (375-1, wm, He 5) chaar pahar chahu jugah samaanay. The four watches of the day are like the four ages.
dfs set Sa MIT BAS IM (375-2, wer, He 5) rain bha-ee tab ant na jaanay. ||2]| And when night comes, I think that it shall never end. |[2]|
us os fis fueg feast i 375-2, wr, 4: 5) panch doot mil pirahu vichhorhee. The five demons have joined together, to separate me from my Husband Lord.
af afi d2 oe usst 3B 75-2, vmT, He 5) bharam bharam rovai haath pachhorhee. ||3]| Wandering and rambling, I cry out and wring my hands. ||3]|
Ho sea a ofa can fewrfenr I (375-3, vm, us 5) jan naanak ka-o har daras dikhaa-i-aa. The Lord has revealed the Blessed Vision of His Darshan to servant Nanak;
mTsH die UsH AY UTfeMT SIU (375-3, nm, Hs 5) aatam cheeneh param sukh paa-i-aa. ||4||15]| realizing his own self, he has obtained supreme peace. ||4||15]|
MTAT HIG U Il (375-4)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ofa As Hfs usH feurs Il (375-4, wir, Hs 5) har sayvaa meh param niDhaan. In the Lord's service, are the greatest treasures.
ofa Aet Hfe nifys SM NA (375-4, wm, Hs 5) har sayvaa mukh amrit naam. ||1]| Serving the Lord, the Ambrosial Naam comes into one's mouth. ||1]|
ofa Ha Arat Afar AATET I (375-4, nmr, Hs 5) har mayraa saathee sang sakhaa-ee. The Lord is my Companion; He is with me, as my Help and Support.
ofa Afa fauet 30 HeAE FH BUT H AG aT saet UU TH I (375-5, mew, we 5) dukh sukh simree tah ma-ujood jam bapuraa mo ka-o kahaa daraa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. In pain and pleasure, whenever I remember Him, He is present. How can the poor Messenger of Death frighten me now? ||1]||Pause] |
ofa Ast Ge H afs a TE Il (375-5, mA, He 5) har mayree ot mai har kaa taan. The Lord is my Support; the Lord is my Power.
ofa Aa AMT Ho HT StaS i2Il 75-6, nT, Hs 5)
har mayraa sakhaa man maahi deebaan. ||2]| The Lord is my Friend; He is my mind's advisor. ||2||
fs Ast Ut Hat ofs SAT Il (375-6, wr, He 5) har mayree poonjee mayraa har vaysaahu. The Lord is my capital; the Lord is my credit.
agate ag udt ofs HS APT SI (375-7, nmr, He 5) gurmukh Dhan khatee har mayraa saahu. ||3]|| As Gurmukh, I earn the wealth, with the Lord as my Banker. ||3]|
ad fasur 3 feo nfs wire i 375-7, ner, nH 5) gur kirpaa tay ih mat aavai. By Guru's Grace, this wisdom has come.
HS BS Ts ax nifX AHS NIE! (375-7, TAT, He 5) jan naanak har kai ank samaavai. ||4||16]| Servant Nanak has merged into the Being of the Lord. ||4]|16]|
MTAT HIG U Il (375-8)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
us dfs faurs 3 feg He wet Il 375-8, nmr, He 5) parabh ho-ay kirpaal ta ih man laa-ee. When God shows His Mercy, then this mind is focused on Him.
Afsag Afe AS Se ust A (375-8, we, He 5) satgur sayv sabhai fal paa-ee. ||1]| Serving the True Guru, all rewards are obtained. ||1]|
Ho fag sara aatser Afsarg Hat Ya I (375-9, wr, we 5) man ki-o bairaag karhigaa satgur mayraa pooraa. O my mind, why are you so sad? My True Guru is Perfect.
HOT at ast Ag AY fours nifys Afs AE dt says NU TIS Il 375-9, wT, ue 5) mansaa kaa daataa sabh sukh niDhaan amrit sar sad hee bharpooraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Giver of blessings, the treasure of all comforts; His Ambrosial Pool of Nectar is always overflowing. ||1]|Pause] |
VIE AHS fee nists as il (375-10, wm, ns 5) charan kamal rid antar Dhaaray. One who enshrines His Lotus Feet within the heart,
yaret AfS fee a furs 1211 (75-10, »mr, 18 5)
pargatee jot milay raam pi-aaray. ||2]|
meets the Beloved Lord; the Divine Light is revealed to him. ||2|| us Aet ffs Hares arfemr i 375-11, wer, He 5)
panch sakhee mil mangal gaa-i-aa. The five companions have met together to sing the songs of joy.
Mode Wat oe SAEMT SI (375-11, yr, Hs 5) anhad banee naad vajaa-i-aa. ||3]| The unstruck melody, the sound current of the Naad, vibrates and resounds. ||3]|
Td aoa 3a fufeur ats TE Il 75-11, nm, us 5) gur naanak tuthaa mili-aa har raa-ay. O Nanak, when the Guru is totally pleased, one meets the Lord, the King.
Afa sf= feoet Aofa ASE sd (375-12, mm, He 5) sukh rain vihaanee sahj subhaa-ay. ||4]|17]| Then, the night of one's life passes in peace and natural ease. ||4]|17]|
MTAT HIG U Il (375-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ates fasur afs usaret wifi | 375-12, nmr, 8 5) kar kirpaa har pargatee aa-i-aa. Showing His Mercy, the Lord has revealed Himself to me.
ffs Afsae ae ust urfemr Al (375-13, wm, He 5) mil satgur Dhan pooraa paa-i-aa. ||1]| Meeting the True Guru, I have received the perfect wealth. ||1]|
MAT of ae Ad set | (375-13, mmr, He 5) aisaa har Dhan sanchee-ai bhaa-ee. Gather such a wealth of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
ote 3 WS Ale odt sa Aa efs afs asg o AST NU TTS Il 375-13, wm, we 5)
bhaahi na jaalai jal nahee doobai sang chhod kar katahu na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It cannot be burned by fire, and water cannot drown it; it does not forsake society, or go anywhere else. ||1]||Pause| |
sfe 3 ure foufe & ATE Il (375-14, mr, He 5) tot na aavai nikhut na jaa-ay. It does not run short, and it does not run out.
ue wats Ho Sfoor werfe QI 75-15, nm, He 5) khaa-ay kharach man rahi-aa aghaa-ay. ||2] | Eating and consuming it, the mind remains satisfied. ||2||
A Ag Ag fan wis ofs ae AeTeST I (375-15, wir, He 5) so sach saahu jis ghar har Dhan sanchaanaa. He is the true banker, who gathers the wealth of the Lord within his own home.
feR U6 3 AS AG FIAS ISI (375-15, wT, He 5) is Dhan tay sabh jag varsaanaa. ||3]| With this wealth, the whole world profits. ||3] |
fate ofa ue ufeur fam ude fed at BIST Il (375-16, nT, He 5) tin har Dhan paa-i-aa jis purab likhay kaa lahnaa. He alone receives the Lord's wealth, who is pre-ordained to receive it.
HO Sod vifs Sg SH WTS IIUACH (375-16, TAT, He 5) jan naanak ant vaar naam gahnaa. ||4]|18]|
O servant Nanak, at that very last moment, the Naam shall be your only decoration. [14] 118] |
MTAT HIG U Il (375-17)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AA fasts Fe fagrrst Il (375-17, vr, H2 5) jaisay kirsaan bovai kirsaanee. Just like the farmer, He plants His crop,
aet urat ae uarat Ail (375-17, wr, He 5)
kaachee paakee baadh paraanee. ||1] | and, whether it is ripe or unripe, He cuts it down. ||1]|
HOH A AST HMM Il (375-17, wm, He 5) jo janmai so jaanhu moo-aa. Just so, you must know this well, that whoever is born, shall die.
dies sas mAfag 3d shor al TIS Il (375-18, wer, He 5)
govind bhagat asthir hai thee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Only the devotee of the Lord of the Universe becomes stable and permanent. ||1]|Pause] |
feo 3 Haug uBAt TfS Il (375-18, wm, He 5) din tay sarpar pa-usee raat. The day shall certainly be followed by the night.
dfs aet fefs df= uses iH (375-19, wm, 2 5) rain ga-ee fir ho-ay parbhaat. ||2]| And when the night passes, the morning shall again dawn. ||2||
Hfeor vfs AfE Id nS I 75-19, mmr, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi so-ay rahay abhaagay. In the love of Maya, the unfortunate ones remain in sleep.
aa ure & fear wat ISI (375-19, nmr, He 5) gur parsaad ko virlaa jaagay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, a rare few remain awake and aware. ||3]|
Us BE
aT Sea Te Wena als il (376-1, vr, ue 5) kaho naanak gun gaa-ee-ah neet. Says Nanak, sing continually the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
HY Gre af fase BS ISIIEI (376-1, wi, He 5) mukh oojal ho-ay nirmal cheet. ||4]|19]|
Your face shall be radiant, and your consciousness shall be immaculately pure. [1411291]
MTAT HIG U Il (376-1)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
58 fofa 3d Aare fours Il (376-2, vim, He 5) na-o niDh tayrai sagal niDhaan. The nine treasures are Yours - all treasures are Yours.
feet yas TH FSET] WAM (376-2, mT, He 5) ichhaa poorak rakhai nidaan. ||1|| The Fulfiller of desires saves mortals in the end. ||1]]|
3 HS filmed FT art ga I (376-2, wer, 5) too” mayro pi-aaro taa kaisee bhookhaa. You are my Beloved, so what hunger can I have?
3 nfs sfhor wat o Ta UU TTS Ml 376-2, vm, vs 5) too” man vasi-aa lagai na dookhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. When You dwell within my mind, pain does not touch me. ||1||Pause| |
HS Aafy Aet UISES Il (376-3, wT, He 5) jo too™ karahi so-ee parvaan. Whatever You do, is acceptable to me.
And Ass Sa AM SIHS Il 76-3, wiv, ns 5) saachay saahib tayraa sach furmaan. ||2]| O True Lord and Master, True is Your Order. ||2||
WT 30 ge Safe TE WE Il (376-3, wow, ve 5) jaa tuDh bhaavai taa har gun gaa-o. When it is pleasing to Your Will, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
3d wife Wet AT SD four Sil (376-4, wer, He 5) tayrai ghar sadaa sadaa hai ni-aa-o. ||3]| Within Your Home, there is justice, forever and ever. ||3]|
Ard ATS nied Mss Il (376-4, nimAT, He 5) saachay saahib alakh abhayv. O True Lord and Master, You are unknowable and mysterious.
Soa BlEnit Bar AF ISiUQOll (376-4, nwt, uz 5)
naanak laa-i-aa laagaa sayv. ||4||20]| Nanak is committed to Your service. ||4||20||
MTAT HIG U Il (376-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
foafe Hha a Ae dt Aart Il (376-5, wer, we 5) nikat jee-a kai sad hee sangaa. He is near at hand; He is the eternal Companion of the soul.
TVS FS TU ig Fa UI (376-5, wea, ws 5) kudrat vartai roop ar rangaa. ||1|| His Creative Power is all-pervading, in form and color. ||1||
AI BI BT HG FGI Il (376-6, viv, Hz 5) kar"ai na jhurai naa man rovanhaaraa. My mind does not worry; it does not grieve, or cry out.
wifzart nifzars widtes AeT AOHPS WAH TATA AU TITS Il (376-6, wi, He 5) avinaasee avigat agochar sadaa salaamat khasam hamaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Imperishable, Unshakable, Unapproachable and forever safe and sound is my Husband Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
3d UA aS fan at ate il (376-7, um, He 5) tayray daasray ka-o kis kee kaan. Unto whom does Your servant pay homage?
fan at Htet amet orf 1211 (376-7, nmr, He 5) jis kee meeraa raakhai aan. ||2|| His King preserves his honor. ||2] |
A ost ufs ater mrs I (376-7, nr, He 5) jo la-udaa parabh kee-aa ajaat. That slave, whom God has released from the restrictions of social status
fH es a@ fan at TFS ISI (376-8, nmr, He 5) tis la-uday ka-o kis kee taat. ||3]| - who can now hold him in bondage? ||3]||
SHISH SUS Il (376-8, nA, He 5) vaymuhtaajaa vayparvaahu. The Lord is absolutely independent, and totally care-free;
OOt BH AdT dd Bd ISUQAll (76-8, wiv, us 5) naanak daas kahhu gur vaahu. ||4||21|| O servant Nanak, chant His Glorious Praises. ||4||21] |
MTAT HIG U Il (376-9)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs oF efs de aff WS Il (376-9, mmr, He 5) har ras chhod hochhai ras maataa. Forsaking the Lord's sublime essence, the mortal is intoxicated with false essences.
we xfs ZAS aos SfS AST IU (376-9, nm, He 5) ghar meh vasat baahar uth jaataa. ||1]|| The substance is within the home of the self, but the mortal goes out to find it. ||1]|
Hat 3 Wel Ag vif_s Arar Il (376-10, »mr, He 5) sunee na jaa-ee sach amrit kaathaa. He cannot hear the true ambrosial discourse.
The ATS Sot Sar WNT AU FI Il (376-10, »imAr, v2 5) raar karat jhoothee lag gaathaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Attached to false scriptures, he is engaged in argument. ||1]|Pause| |
eng Atos a Ae feast Il (376-10, wim, ns 5) vajahu saahib kaa sayv biraanee. He takes his wages from his Lord and Master, but he serves another.
MA Tod wafes yrat Qi (376-11, vm, us 5) aisay gunah achhaadi-o paraanee. ||2| | With such sins, the mortal is engrossed. ||2||
fH fAS Ba A Ae Tt Halt I (376-11, wm, He 5) tis si-o look jo sad hee sangee. He tries to hide from the One who is always with him.
ath o ure A fefs fefe Haft SI (376-11, »mr, He 5) kaam na aavai so fir fir mangee. ||3]| He begs from Him, again and again. ||3]|
aT aad ys ete fener il (376-12, wr, ws 5) kaho naanak parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Says Nanak, God is merciful to the meek.
fa@ sve (38 afa yfsurer gil2211 (376-12, »mr, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o kar partipaalaa. ||4]|22] | As it pleases Him, He cherishes us. ||4||22||
MTAT HIG U Il (376-13)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ba ure ug ofa & OH Il (376-13, »mT, Hs 5) jee-a paraan Dhan har ko naam. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my soul, my life, my wealth.
eta Bat Sa Afar AH WA (376-13, MA, He 5) eehaa oohaa” un sang kaam. ||1|| Here and hereafter, it is with me, to help me. ||1]|
fag of oH niga AS FT Il (376-13, nmAr, H2 5) bin har naam avar sabh thoraa. Without the Lord's Name, everything else is useless.
fgufs mure off eaAfs He HI UA TIS Il (376-14, wi, Hs 5)
taripat aghaavai har darsan man moraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
My mind is satisfied and satiated by the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1]|Pause] |
sats Sas Taarat BS Il (376-14, wm, vs 5) bhagat bhandaar gurbaanee laal. Gurbani is the jewel, the treasure of devotion.
Tes HOS AHS FSIS UI (376-15, “ITAT, H8 5) gaavat sunat kamaavat nihaal. ||2]| Singing, hearing and acting upon it, one is enraptured. ||2]|
TIE AHS fAG Bai HS Il 376-15, we, Hs 5) charan kamal si-o laago maan. My mind is attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Afsafs 3S aS BS Bll (376-15, ww, ws 5) satgur toothai keeno daan. |[3]| The True Guru, in His Pleasure, has given this gift. ||3]|
Soa AS afa etm ate i (376-16, nmr, us 5) naanak ka-o gur deekhi-aa deen". Unto Nanak, the Guru has revealed these instructions:
ys nifsot ufe wie de WSiQSlil (376-16, wm, He 5) parabh abhinaasee ghat ghat cheen”. ||4]|23]| recognize the Imperishable Lord God in each and every heart. ||4||23]|
MTAT HIG U Il (376-16)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
woe fase sdufe ofan Il (376-17, nmr, H 5) anad binod bharaypur Dhaari-aa. The All-pervading Lord has established joys and celebrations.
MUS ada vif Aettani WAU (376-17, niTAT, He 5) apunaa kaaraj aap savaari-aa. ||1]| He Himself embellishes His own works. ||1||
ud ANG Us StaT at Il (376-17, wT, He 5) poor samagree pooray thaakur kee. Perfect is the Creation of the Perfect Lord Master.
sfoufs wfe oot AS AT at NU TIS I 376-18, nmr, He 5) bharipur Dhaar rahee sobh jaa kee. ||1|| rahaa-o. His magnificent greatness is totally all-pervading. ||1]|Pause]|
om fears at at fagHe@ ALE II (376-18, wer, He 5) naam niDhaan jaa kee nirmal so-ay. His Name is the treasure; His reputation is immaculate.
WMT AIS MST 3 ALE iQ (376-18, wrAr, Hs 5) aapay kartaa avar na ko-ay. |[2|| He Himself is the Creator; there is no other. ||2]|
aba a3 Afs ot at ofa I 376-19, nr, He 5) jee-a jant sabh taa kai haath. All beings and creatures are in His Hands.
ofe sfour ug AS & AE ISI (376-19, vir, He 5) rav rahi-aa parabh sabh kai saath. ||3]| God is pervading in all, and is always with them. ||3]|
ust B09
umd ag udt Fes Beret Il 377-1, wT, x: 5) pooraa gur pooree banat banaa-ee. The Perfect Guru has fashioned His perfect fashion.
Soa sas fest efsniret 82s 377-1, vm, ve 5)
naanak bhagat milee vadi-aa-ee. ||4||24|| O Nanak, the Lord's devotees are blessed with glorious greatness. ||4||24||
MTAT HIS U Il (377-1)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ad a Aafe sored feg He Il (377-2, wr, He 5) gur kai sabad banaavahu ih man. I have shaped this mind in the mold of the Guru's Word.
Td A PIAS AV Us Us INA (377-2, »mA, v2 5)
gur kaa darsan sanchahu har Dhan. ||1]|
Beholding the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I have gathered the wealth of the Lord. ||1]|
Osx ufs Ae fee F wrS i 377-2, »mr, 2 5) ootam mat mayrai ridai too’ aa-o. O sublime understanding, come, enter into my mind,
fore ae ae afer mifs utsn Hfs wat ae nai FE il (377-3, vm, us 5) Dhi-aava-o gaava-o gun govindaa at pareetam mohi laagai naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
that I may meditate and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and love so dearly the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause| |
fgufs mares APS OE I (377-3, wT, Hs 5) taripat aghaavan saachai naa-ay. I am satisfied and satiated by the True Name.
MOHIS HAG AS TITS iil 377-4, rw, Hs 5)
athsath majan sant Dhooraa-ay. ||2||
My cleansing bath at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage is the dust of the Saints. ||2| |
AS fd WSS ATS SS Il (377-4, wow, He 5) sabh meh jaan-o kartaa ayk. I recognize that the One Creator is contained in all.
AGH ffs sf fasta Sil (377-4, om, He 5)
saaDhsangat mil buDh bibayk. ||3]|| Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, my understanding is refined. 131]
QA Ade a efs mifsnre il 377-5, rrr, v2 5) daas sagal kaa chhod abhimaan. I have become the servant of all; I have renounced my ego and pride.
Soa AG Tifa LS BS ISiQull (377-5, wmv, Hz 5) naanak ka-o gur deeno daan. ||4||25]| The Guru has given this gift to Nanak. ||4]|25]|
MTAT HIG U Il (377-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
afa yarn set HAS uct I (377-6, wir, He 5) buDh pargaas bha-ee mat pooree. My intellect has been enlightened, and my understanding is perfect.
a 3 faort eofs edt nul 77-6, mmr, 1 5) taa tay binsee durmat dooree. ||1|| Thus my evil-mindedness, which kept me far from Him, has been removed. ||1] |
MAT TTHfS ure | (377-6, vier, He 5) aisee gurmat paa-ee-alay. Such are the Teachings which I have received from the Guru;
yas ug vin qu vfs foatHS AS set F AU TIS ll 377-6, we, He 5) boodat ghor anDh koop meh niksi-o mayray bhaa-ee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
while I was drowning in the pitch black well, I was saved, O my Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho werd vias at Ava il AT sfes 3s TSA IQ (377-7, mw, ue 5)
mahaa agaah agan kaa saagar. gur bohith taaray ratnaagar. ||2]|
The Guru is the boat to cross over the totally unfathomable ocean of fire; He is treasure of jewels. ||2] |
esd nin fen feo arfemr tl 377-8, mr, He 5) dutar anDh bikham ih maa-i-aa. This ocean of Maya is dark and treacherous.
afs us usae wea feerfenr Si (377-8, mr, ue 5) gur poorai pargat maarag dikhaa-i-aa. ||3]|| The Perfect Guru has revealed the way to cross over it. ||3]|
Wy su ag Cals o Hat II (377-9, ner, He 5) jaap taap kachh ukat na moree. I do not have the ability to chant or practice intense meditation.
Td Sa AdStals Sat NUEll (377-9, wer, He 5) gur naanak sarnaagat toree. ||4||26]| Guru Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||4]|26] |
MITAT Hoe U fsue 2 Il (377-9)
aasaa mehlaa 5 tipday 2. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Ti-Padas:
dfs 3A ules Ae dt FST Il (377-10, wm, He 5) har ras peevat sad hee raataa. One who drinks in the Lord's sublime essence is forever imbued with it,
nite dA fas ufo ofa AST II (377-10, umn, He 5) aan rasaa khin meh leh jaataa. while other essences wear off in an instant.
dfs GA & WS Hfs Het Se Il (377-10, nm, v2 5) har ras kay maatay man sadaa anand. Intoxicated with the Lord's sublime essence, the mind is forever in ecstasy.
wits SAT ufo fem fee All (377-11, wm, He 5) aan rasaa meh vi-aapai chind. ||1]| Other essences bring only anxiety. ||1]|
dfs GA ule MBHAS SST I (377-11, mA, He 5) har ras peevai almasat matvaaraa. One who drinks in the Lord's sublime essence, is intoxicated and enraptured;
wis SA Afs d= FT NU! TIS ll 77-11, ne, 2 5) aan rasaa sabh hochhay ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. all other essences have no effect. ||1||Pause||
ofa oA at ats act 6 we I (377-12, ner, #2 5)
har ras kee keemat kahee na jaa-ay. The value of the Lord's sublime essence cannot be described.
dfs oa ATG ate AME Il (377-12, mA, He 5) har ras saaDhoo haat samaa-ay. The Lord's sublime essence permeates the homes of the Holy.
wre addt fs o AT Il (377-12, new, He 5) laakh karoree milai na kayh. One may spend thousands and millions, but it cannot be purchased.
fanfo uaufs fA dt efs iQ (377-13, wm, He 5) jisahi paraapat tis hee deh. ||2|| He alone obtains it, who is so pre-ordained. ||2| |
Sea Ute se AHS Il (377-13, nm, He 5) naanak chaakh bha-ay bismaad. Tasting it, Nanak is wonder-struck.
SOA Td 3 MEM ATES Il (377-13, AT, He 5) naanak gur tay aa-i-aa saad. Through the Guru, Nanak has obtained this taste.
as Bs as afs 3 ATE Il 77-13, wm, u: 5) eet oot kat chhod na jaa-ay. Here and hereafter, it does not leave him.
Soa ata vfs dA Hf WSINQOI (377-14, nmAT, He 5)
naanak geeDhaa har ras maahi. ||3||27]|| Nanak is imbued and enraptured with the Lord's subtle essence. ||3||27]||
MTAT HIG U Il (377-14)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
an au eg Hg free sea Pants mot Wet Il (377-14, vi, He 5)
kaam kroDh lobh moh mitaavai chhutkai durmat apunee Dhaaree.
If she renounces and eliminates her sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment, and her evil-mindedness and self-conceit as well;
dfe fourat Ae anrefa 3 UISH defa HS finest WA 377-15, »mT, He 5)
ho-ay nimaanee sayv kamaaveh taa pareetam hoveh man pi-aaree. ||1]|
and if, becoming humble, she serves Him, then she becomes dear to her Beloved's Heart. ||1]|
Afe Hefs Ag ave Burst Il 377-16, wr, He 5) sun sundar saaDhoo bachan uDhaaree. Listen, O beautiful soul-bride: By the Word of the Holy Saint, you shall be saved.
eu guy fe Se AOA AY Ueto F AEHfs SSH NU TIS Il (377-16, we, Hs 5)
dookh bhookh mitai tayro sahsaa sukh paavahi too’ sukhman naaree. ||1]| rahaa-o. Your pain, hunger and doubt shall vanish, and you shall obtain peace, O happy soul- bride. ||1]|Pause| |
sae uutg ase Td AS orsn Ag fay faurA foes I 77-17, nmr, He 5)
charan pakhaar kara-o gur sayvaa aatam suDh bikh ti-aas nivaaree.
Washing the Guru's feet, and serving Him, the soul is sanctified, and the thirst for sin is quenched.
ane at dfe afk aad at uefa Hat ofs eur 211 (377-17, vir, He 5)
daasan kee ho-ay daas daasree taa paavahi sobhaa har du-aaree. ||2] |
If you become the slave of the slave of the Lord's slaves, then you shall obtain honor in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
fedt oravg fect fabore orfamr ufs safs dfs surest i 377-18, wer, He 5)
ihee achaar ihee bi-uhaaraa aagi-aa maan bhagat ho-ay tum"aaree.
This is right conduct, and this is the correct lifestyle, to obey the Command of the Lord's Will; this is your devotional worship.
A feg Hy ore Soa A BCnS ute Sars WSNQcil (377-19, wm, v2 5) jo ih mantar kKamaavai naanak so bha-ojal paar utaaree. ||3]|28]|
One who practices this Mantra, O Nanak, swims across the terrifying world-ocean. [131128] |
UST Bot
MAT HIS U BUS Il (378-1)
aasaa mehlaa 5 dupday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:
set usufs Hey SIM Il (378-1, vm, He 5) bha-ee paraapat maanukh dayhuree-aa. You have been blessed with this human body.
dfs foe at feo Sct sdtor 1 (378-1, vir, v2 5) gobind milan kee ih tayree baree-aa. This is your chance to meet the Lord of the Universe.
wefs aa 3d fas 3 AH Il (378-2, nA, He 5) avar kaaj tayrai kitai na kaam. Other efforts are of no use to you.
fires FOHafS SH ASS BH INA! (78-2, wT, Hs 5)
mil saaDhsangat bhaj kayval naam. ||1]||
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, vibrate and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Hd tH Sa SSH SIS A Il (378-2, nirAr, ue 5) sara\jaam laag bhavjal taran kai. Make the effort, and cross over the terrifying world ocean.
Aon fge ws df afer & a TIC lt 378-3, vw, ne 5) janam baritha jaat rang maa-i-aa kai. ||1|| rahaa-o. This human life is passing away in vain, in the love of Maya. ||1||Pause| |
AU 3U AHH Us © AMET Il (378-3, mA, He 5) jap tap sanjam Dharam na kamaa-i-aa. I have not practiced meditation, penance, self-restraint or righteous living;
Az ATMS Atom os ahem Il (378-4, wT, He 5) sayvaa saaDh na jaani-aa har raa-i-aa. I have not served the Holy Saints, and I do not know the Lord, my King.
AT Soa JH Sle AIH Il (378-4, mmr, nz 5) kaho naanak ham neech karammaa. Says Nanak, my actions are vile and despicable;
Hate ud at TUT AFH [IWC 78-4, wiv, vs 5) Saran paray kee raakho sarmaa. ||2||29|| O Lord, I seek Your Sanctuary - please, preserve my honor. ||2||29||
MTAT HIG U Il (378-5)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
35 fag weg oot H AT FS AS HS HTT II G78-5, wT, 8 5) tujh bin avar naahee mai doojaa too’ mayray man maahee. Without You, there is no other for me; You alone are in my mind.
3 AHS Halt ys Hat ae Hho Sat WAU 378-5, wr, He 5) too” saajan sangee parabh mayraa kaahay jee-a daraahee. ||1]| You are my Friend and Companion, God; why should my soul be afraid? ||1||
SHot Ge SH MAT I (378-6, ni, He 5) tumree ot tumaaree aasaa. You are my support, You are my hope.
aos Gos Aes was feng adt FAA farsa UU TIS Il (378-6, wre, He 5)
baithat oothat sovat jaagat visar naahee too” saas giraasaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
While sitting down or standing up, while sleeping or waking, with every breath and morsel of food, I never forget You. ||1||Pause| |
ay ay Aafe ys nual wale Arad feararer il (378-7, nmr, us 5)
raakh raakh saran parabh apnee agan saagar vikraalaa.
Protect me, please protect me, O God; I have come to Your Sanctuary; the ocean of fire is so horrible.
SOSA A AUeTS Alsdd JM SHS GS TUS WIANZOMl (378-7, nT, vs 5)
naanak kay sukh-daatay satgur ham tumray baal gupaalaa. ||2||30]||
The True Guru is the Giver of peace to Nanak; I am Your child, O Lord of the World. ||2||30]|
MTAT HIG U Il (378-8)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
of Aa Be ys sate il (378-8, nmr, ue 5) har jan leenay parabhoo chhadaa-ay. The Lord God has saved me, His slave.
utsn fA@ AS HE fer sry Hr fag ofe Na TIC Il 78-9, wm, He 5) pareetam si-o mayro man maani-aa taap mu-aa bikh khaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My mind has surrendered to my Beloved; my fever has taken poison and died. ||1]|Pause] |
UTE SE ae o fear TH OH TS TE Il (378-9, wm, v5) paalaa taa-oo kachhoo na bi-aapai raam naam gun gaa-ay. Cold and heat do not touch me at all, when I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
sat & fas aE 5 Ha TIS AHS AISTE MAU (378-10, wear, ws 5)
daakee ko chit kachhoo na laagai charan kamal sarnaa-ay. ||1||
My consciousness is not affected by the witch, Maya; I take to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1]|
As ure se faauresr de nif Aafe i (378-10, wim, He 5)
sant parsaad bha-ay kirpaalaa ho-ay aap sahaa-ay.
By the Grace of the Saints, the Lord has shown His Mercy to me; He Himself is my Help and Support.
ae fours fafs are aaa AOA ey fete QA (378-11, wT, He 5)
gun niDhaan nit gaavai naanak sahsaa dukh mitaa-ay. ||2||31]||
Nanak ever sings the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of excellence; his doubts and pains are eliminated. ||2||31]||
MTAT HIG U Il (378-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
m@ug ufeG afs & ar il (378-12, rrr, He 5) a-ukhaDh khaa-i-o har ko naa-o. I have taken the medicine of the Name of the Lord.
AY ure oy faofhor a ail (378-12, nmr, v8 5) sukh paa-ay dukh binsi-aa thaa-o. ||1]| I have found peace, and the seat of pain has been removed. ||1||
ay afenr gets TI UT Il (378-12, mmr, He 5) taap ga-i-aa bachan gur pooray. The fever has been broken, by the Teachings of the Perfect Guru.
woe sfeor Afs fue fears WA TITS i (378-13, wrAT, He 5) anad bha-i-aa sabh mitay visooray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am in ecstasy, and all of my sorrows have been dispelled. ||1]||Pause] |
aba HS Aare AY ufenr | (378-13, mA, He 5) jee-a jant sagal sukh paa-i-aa. All beings and creatures obtain peace,
UTSAIH stad Hie fomrfenr 1IN32I (378-14, wT, Hs 5)
paarbarahm naanak man Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||2||32]| O Nanak, meditating on the Supreme Lord God. ||2||32||
MTAT HIG U Il (378-14)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
es Sd A FH wire Il (378-14, wer, ue 5) baa“chhat naahee so baylaa aa-ee. That time, which the mortal does not wish for, eventually comes.
fae Jan fas gS gsret All (378-15, ner, He 5) bin hukmai ki-o bujhai bujhaa-ee. ||1]| Without the Lord's Command, how can understanding be understood? ||1||
Set Stat fr!t uret i (378-15, mmr, He 5) thadhee taatee mitee khaa-ee. The body is consumed by water, fire and earth.
Gy 5 wer ger set NU TIS ll (378-15, ww, v2 5) oh na baalaa boodhaa bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. But the soul is neither young nor old, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
SOA VTA AT ATSTet Il (378-16, wAT, He 5) naanak daas saaDh sarnaa-ee. Servant Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Holy.
ag yAte s@ ug uget NQNSSI (378-16, nm, Hs 5) gur parsaad bha-o paar paraa-ee. ||2||33]| By Guru's Grace, he has shaken off the fear of death. ||2]|33]|
MTAT HIG U Il (378-16)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Aedt Ae MITSH UIA Il (378-16, “TAT, Hs 5) sadaa sadaa aatam pargaas. Forever and ever, the soul is illumined;
Wanafs of ade fee AU (78-17, ym, He 5) saaDhsangat har charan nivaas. ||1]|| in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, it dwells at the Feet of the Lord. ||1]]|
oH OH fafs Af Ho AT Il (378-17, yr, He 5) raam naam nit jap man mayray. Chant the Lord's Name each and every day, O my mind.
Hise Aifs Ae AY uefa foofeu ats AS HS 3d NA TIC | (78-17, wT, He 5) seetal saat sadaa sukh paavahi kilvikh jaahi sabhay man tayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall find lasting peace, contentment and tranquility, and all your sins shall depart. ||1||Pause] |
AT HSA A at UTS AGH Il (378-18, wrHr, He 5) kaho naanak jaa kay pooran karam. Says Nanak, one who is blessed with perfect good karma,
Afsqd SS UTS USAIN NUS (378-18, ww, He 5)
satgur bhaytay pooran paarbarahm. ||2||34|| meets the True Guru, and obtains the Perfect Supreme Lord God. ||2||34| |
TH Wd A BES Il (378-19, mmAr, He 5) doojay ghar kay cha-utees. Thirty-four Shabads in Second House. ||
MTAT HIG U Il (378-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ww ot ofa Amit ys Fst Il (378-19, wer, us 5)
jaa kaa har su-aamee parabh baylee. She who has the Lord God as her Friend
uar 30K ula wet fefa odt Ist Ail TIS il (379-1, wm, ve 5)
peerh ga-ee fir nahee duhaylee. ||1]| rahaa-o. her pain is dispelled, and she shall not become sad again. ||1||Pause| |
ate fasur sae Afar HSt il (379-1, mr, He 5) kar kirpaa charan sang maylee. Showing His Mercy, He joins her with His Feet,
AY AH MSS ATS UA (379-1, wm, Hs 5) sookh sahj aanand suhaylee. ||1|| and she attains celestial peace, joy and comfort. ||1]|
WOHfa Te wfE wisat i (379-2, ver, He 5)
saaDhsang gun gaa-ay atolee.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, she sings the Glorious Praises of the Immeasurable Lord.
ofa fAHss soa set mst NQNBUII (379-2, wmAT, He 5)
har simrat naanak bha-ee amolee. ||2]||35]| Remembering the Lord in meditation, O Nanak, she becomes invaluable. ||2||35||
MTAT HIG U Il (379-3)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
oH AU Hfeor He HSS S Hos Als HH TS Il (379-3, wer, ws 5)
kaam kroDh maa-i-aa mad matsar ay khaylat sabh joo-ai haaray.
Sexual desire, anger, intoxication with Maya and jealousy - I have lost all of these in the game of chance.
AS Hsy efeor can Ag feo mus fas stafe Ss WA 379-3, vir, He 5)
sat santokh da-i-aa Dharam sach ih apunai garih bheetar vaaray. ||1]|
Purity, contentment, compassion, faith and truthfulness - I have ushered these into the home of my self. ||1]|
HOH HIS Ya Als 3rd Il (379-4, we, He 5) janam maran chookay sabh bhaaray. All the loads of birth and death have been removed.
fos Fifa sfeG He fasHe afs us & fis ufs TS NA TH I (379-4, mew, we 5)
milat sang bha-i-o man nirmal gur poorai lai khin meh taaray. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Joining the Saints' Society, my mind has become pure; the Perfect Guru has saved me in an instant. ||1||Pause] |
AS at 3G df Jd Hon Aas cafe Hts fimrs i 379-5, wer, us 5) sabh kee rayn ho-ay rahai manoo-aa saglay deeseh meet pi-aaray. My mind has become the dust of all, and everyone seems a sweet friend to me.
AS HO dent Hat Stag VS US Als Aba ANTS III (379-6, wm, He 5)
sabh maDhay ravi-aa mayraa thaakur daan dayt sabh jee-a sam"aaray. ||2||
My Lord and Master is contained in all. He gives His Gifts to all beings, and cherishes them. ||2]|
Sa Sa orfu fea Sa Sa I Aa UAT Il (379-6, nA, He 5)
ayko ayk aap ik aykai aykai hai saglaa paasaaray.
He Himself is the One and only; from the One, the One and only, came the expanse of the entire creation.
afu afu d& nae AUG AS Sa oH fimrfe soz Bors BI (379-7, ner, He 5)
jap jap ho-ay sagal saaDh jan ayk naam Dhi-aa-ay bahut uDhaaray. ||3]||
Chanting and meditating, all the humble beings have become Holy; meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, so many have been saved. ||3] |
aad asta fms TASH nig odt fas users Il (379-7, mT, He 5) gahir gambheer bi-ant gusaa-ee ant nahee kichh paaraavaaray. The Lord of the Universe is deep, profound and infinite; He has no end or limitation.
suet far 3 ao we aaa fomrfe fomrfe ys AB oHAATS IBIZEI (379-8, nm, He 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay gun gaavai naanak Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay parabh ka-o namaskaaray. [14] 136] |
By Your Grace, Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises; meditating, meditating, he humbly bows to God. ||4]|36||
MTAT HIG U Il (379-9)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
3 fimiz nifeas niteg feg Ag ST vag” Il 379-9, wer, 3 5) too bi-ant avigat agochar ih sabh tayraa aakaar. You are Infinite, Eternal and Incomprehensible; all this is Your Creation.
fom JH Hs add Vsoet Ai AS fae 3B HSS IAN (379-9, wT, He 5) ki-aa ham jant karah chaturaa-ee jaa‘ sabh kichh tujhai majhaar. ||1]| What clever games can we play, when everything is contained in You? ||1||
He Afsad nus sfea sag Ble ofs il (379-10, wm, He 5) mayray satgur apnay baalik raakho leelaa Dhaar. O my True Guru, protect me, Your child, through the power of Your play.
2d AHS Ae Te Wet AT SAT MH MT AU TIS Il (379-11, nT, us 5)
dayh sumat sadaa gun gaavaa mayray thaakur agam apaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Grant me the good sense to ever sing Your Glorious Praises, O my Inaccessible and Infinite Lord and Master. ||1]|Pause] |
AA Hols Hod Hfs yrst Gg gas OH wierfs I (379-11, nm, He 5)
jaisay janan jathar meh paraanee oh rahtaa naam aDhaar.
The mortal is preserved in the womb of his mother, by the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord;
woe ad ATA ATA ANTS Ot Ud Mots IQH (379-12, nmr, He 5)
anad karai saas saas sam"aarai naa pohai agnaar. ||2]|
he makes merry, and with each and every breath he remembers the Lord, and the fire does not touch him. ||2]|
ug us ug ea ug Ser fea fAS utfSs fees ii 379-12, wir, He 5)
par Dhan par daaraa par nindaa in si-o pareet nivaar.
Others' wealth, others' wives, and the slander of others - renounce your craving for these.
TIS THS Het foe nists qe us & wrae Bil 379-13, wr, Hs 5)
charan kamal sayvee rid antar gur pooray kai aaDhaar. ||3]||
Serve the Lord's Lotus Feet within your heart, and hold to the Support of the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
fag Hes Hoe A cafe o aet Aarfa i (379-14, wr, us 5) garihu mandar mehlaa jo deeseh naa ko-ee sangaar. Houses, mansions and palaces which you see - none of these shall go with you.
Aa Od Aleta ast aS HiT AS SSA SH AHN ISIN (379-14, wm, Hs 5)
jab lag jeeveh kalee kaal meh jan naanak naam sam"aar. ||4]|37]| As long as you live in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O servant Nanak, remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|37]|
MTAT WI 3 HIG U (379-16)
aasaa ghar 3 mehlaa 5 Aasaa, Third House, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsara YATE Il (379-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oH fra ras fos Ast JUST Hart I (379-17, view, 3 5) raaj milak joban garih sobhaa roopvant jo-aanee. Power, property, youth, household, fame and the beauty of youth;
ads Udy JAst nig WSs BS BU F nvat Il (379-17, mw, v2 5)
bahut darab hastee ar ghorhay laal laakh bai aanee.
great wealth, elephants, horses and jewels, purchased with tens of thousands of dollars;
wid edata ath o mre ef vs nifsrHrat Il (379-18, wr, He 5)
aagai dargahi kaam na aavai chhod chalai abhimaanee. ||1]|
hereafter, these shall be of no avail in the Court of the Lord; the proud must depart, leaving them behind. ||1]|
ard Sa fat fas wre Il (379-18, nmr, v2 5) kaahay ayk binaa chit laa-ee-ai. Why center your consciousness on any other than the Lord?
Gos Sos Aes Was Ae Ae fe fore A TIS I (379-18, wer, ws 5)
oothat baithat sovat jaagat sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Sitting down, standing up, sleeping and waking, forever and ever, meditate on the Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
Ho safes Hed wiras ge ufo fAS USTs Il (379-19, nmr, ue 5)
mahaa bachitar sundar aakhaarhay ran meh jitay pavaarhay.
He may have the most wondrous and beautiful arenas, and be victorious on the field of battle.
UST Bto
JG ws ge du 38 nu 3 SS gas Il (380-1, wr, nH: 5) ha-o maara-o ha-o banDha-o chhoda-o mukh tay ayv babaarhay. He may proclaim, "I can kill anyone, I can capture anyone, and I can release anyone."
uifier Jan uSgIH a efs sfemr Sa fers IQI (380-1, ym, Hs 5) aa-i-aa hukam paarbarahm kaa chhod chali-aa ayk dihaarhay. ||2| |
But when the Order comes from the Supreme Lord God, he departs and leaves in a day. ||2||
AGH UH Halfs FI AIS ATET'T B AS Ill (380-2, wow, ve 5)
karam Dharam jugat baho kartaa karnaihaar na jaanai.
He may perform all sorts of religious rituals and good actions, but he does not know the Creator Lord, the Doer of all.
Guen ad of & AHS ST ASE S UE Il (380-2, wT, He 5)
updays karai aap na kamaavai tat sabad na pachhaanai.
He teaches, but does not practice what he preaches; he does not realize the essential reality of the Word of the Shabad.
Star nofenr ota ATH fA@ TASt Ux SS SII (380-3, wer, He 5)
naa“gaa aa-i-aa naa“go jaasee ji-o hastee khaak chhaanai. ||3]|
Naked he came, and naked he shall depart; he is like an elephant, throwing dust on himself. ||3]|
HS Aro Hog Als Hist Sor Sg UAT Il (380-3, wr, He 5) sant sajan sunhu sabh meetaa jhoothaa ayhu pasaaraa. O Saints, and friends, listen to me: all this world is false.
Hat Act afe afs sa ufy uf we aera Il (80-4, mir, He 5)
mayree mayree kar kar doobay khap khap mu-ay gavaaraa.
Continually claiming, "Mine, mine", the mortals are drowned; the fools waste away and die.
as fufs aoa on foorfenr Ate oft fSASTS ISIANSCI (380-4, mA, He 5)
gur mil naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa saach naam nistaaraa. ||4||1]|38] | Meeting the Guru, O Nanak, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the True Name, I am emancipated. ||4]]1]|38]|
TT MTAT UT U HIG U (380-6) raag aasaa ghar 5 mehlaa 5 Raag Aasaa, Fifth House, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (380-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3H ufo Het AAS AAS Uo MIT II (380-7, »mr, He 5) bharam meh so-ee sagal jagat DhanDh anDh. The whole world is asleep in doubt; it is blinded by worldly entanglements.
AS Ara Ths AS MAU (380-7, wer, He 5) ko-0o jaagai har jan. ||1]| How rare is that humble servant of the Lord who is awake and aware. ||1]||
Hot Hast Hate fur ulfS yrs il (380-7, nmr, ue 5)
mahaa mohnee magan pari-a pareet paraan.
The mortal is intoxicated with the great enticement of Maya, which is dearer to him than life.
XS frat fear iM (380-8, wear, Hs 5) ko-oo ti-aagai virlaa. ||2|| How rare is the one who renounces it. ||2]|
TIO AHS vitgu dfs AS HS Il (380-8, ww, we 5) charan kamal aanoop har sant mant. The Lord's Lotus Feet are incomparably beautiful; so is the Mantra of the Saint.
AS Wat AT Bll (380-8, mA, we 5) ko-oo laagai saaDhoo. ||3]| How rare is that holy person who is attached to them. |[3]|
area ATT Afar Aat fares Sfor il (380-8, wr, He 5)
naanak saaDhoo sang jaagay gi-aan rang.
O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the love of divine knowledge is awakened;
TTA fas iSiUSetll |Gs0-9, »mAr, He 5)
vadbhaagay kirpaa. ||4||1]|39]|
the Lord's Mercy is bestowed upon those who are blessed with such good destiny. [14] 11] 139]|
qe Afsara YATE II (380-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta MAT UT € HIS U Il (380-11) raag aasaa ghar 6 mehlaa 5. Raag Aasaa, Sixth House, Fifth Mehl:
HSU Se A Uses AY Ade Hfe Aet I (380-11, mr, we 5)
jo tuDh bhaavai so parvaanaa sookh sahj man so-ee.
Whatever pleases You is acceptable to me; that alone brings peace and ease to my mind.
ATE AGE AHI oNUTT neg STS J AST WA (80-11, wmv, He 5) karan kaaran samrath apaaraa avar naahee ray ko-ee. ||1]|
You are the Doer, the Cause of causes, All-powerful and Infinite; there is none other than You. ||1||
3d HO GAla JA Te Weta Il (380-12, mA, He 5) tayray jan rasak rasak gun gaavahi. Your humble servants sing Your Glorious Praises with enthusiasm and love.
HAS HS fimreu Ae at AS oats aarefs WAU TIS I (380-12, wm, Hz 5)
maslat mataa si-aanap jan kee jo too” karahi karaaveh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
That alone is good advice, wisdom and cleverness for Your humble servant, which You do or cause to be done. ||1]||Pause] |
mMifts ou Sura fimrs ATGAfa TA urfenr II (380-13, wim, He 5)
amrit naam tumaaraa pi-aaray saaDhsang ras paa-i-aa.
Your Name is Ambrosial Nectar, O Beloved Lord; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained its sublime essence.
fgufs wurfe Aet Ae us AY fears ats afenr tH (380-14, wr, HE 5)
taripat aghaa-ay say-ee jan pooray sukh niDhaan har gaa-i-aa. ||2||
Those humble beings are satisfied and fulfilled, singing the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of peace. ||2| |
Wag 2a SHS Aum st aS ordt FFs" I (380-14, nmr, He 5) jaa ka-o tayk tum"aaree su-aamee taa ka-o naahee chintaa. One who has Your Support, O Lord Master, is not afflicted by anxiety.
Ww ag vfeor suet det A ATT 3S TASS II (380-15, mm, ne 5) jaa ka-o da-i-aa tumaaree ho-ee say saah bhalay bhagvantaa. ||3]| One who is blessed by Your Kind Mercy, is the best, the most fortunate king. ||3]]|
SdH Hag G7 Afs fear wa a PIAS UfeMr I (380-15, wer, ne 5)
bharam moh Dharoh sabh niksay jab kaa darsan paa-i-aa.
Doubt, attachment, and deceit have all disappeared, since I obtained the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
safe oH BSA AY alar ofs aM sfat MfEnT ISIAIBOll (380-16, wm, He 5)
vartan naam naanak sach keenaa har naamay rang samaa-i-aa. ||4||1]]40] | Dealing in the Naam, O Nanak, we become truthful, and in the Love of the Lord's Name, we are absorbed. ||4||1 | 40]|
MTAT HI U Il (380-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
HOH HOH at He Ge ust nmuar ast ures Il (380-17, nr, Hs 5)
janam janam kee mal Dhovai paraa-ee aapnaa keetaa paavai.
He washes off the filth of other peoples' incarnations, but he obtains the rewards of his own actions.
oto wy odt wea set AH uf Ae USS UI (80-17, mT, He 5)
eehaa sukh nahee dargeh dho-ee jam pur jaa-ay pachaavai. ||1]||
He has no peace in this world, and he has no place in the Court of the Lord. In the City of Death, he is tortured. ||1]|
feeta nifser HoH aetfeEnr I (380-18, nmr, He 5) nindak ahilaa janam gavaa-i-aa. The slanderer loses his life in vain.
uss 5 AS TY as nia oa o ufenr Ul TIS Il (380-18, mA, we 5) pahuch na saakai kaahoo baatai aagai tha-ur na paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He cannot succeed in anything, and in the world hereafter, he finds no place at all. ||1]|Pause| |
faas ufeor fSea sud at fom Go ad fears Il (380-19, mmr, He 5) kirat pa-i-aa nindak bapuray kaa ki-aa oh karai bichaaraa. Such is the fate of the wretched slanderer - what can the poor creature do?
aw fags wo af 3 wd Gg fan ule as YAS II (380-19, wm, He 5)
tahaa bigootaa jah ko-ay na raakhai oh kis peh karay pukaaraa. ||2]|
He is ruined there, where no one can protect him; with whom should he lodge his complaint? ||2| |
Us Be
Sea at afs asd art WAH SS SET Il (381-1, wi, we 5) nindak kee gat katahoo” naahee khasmai ayvai bhaanaa. The slanderer shall never attain emancipation; this is the Will of the Lord and Master.
A fee ad Hao at f38 A36 AY HST ISI (381-2, »mr, He 5) jo jo nind karay santan kee ti-o santan sukh maanaa. ||3]|| The more the Saints are slandered, the more they dwell in peace. ||3]|
Ast 2a SHS AMM J HIS at Aaret Il (381-2, ww, Hs 5)
santaa tayk tumaaree su-aamee too” santan kaa sahaa-ee.
The Saints have Your Support, O Lord and Master; You are the Saints' Help and Support.
AW soa Hs dfs we fea He garet SIs Gsi-3, wm, He 5)
kaho naanak sant har raakhay nindak dee-ay rurhaa-ee. ||4]|2||41]|
Says Nanak, the Saints are saved by the Lord; the slanderers are drowned in the deep. ||4]|2||41]|
MTAT HIG U Il (81-3)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
add Ufe nisg Ho Hor fe Ca nUS AS Il Gsi-3, we, He 5)
baahar Dho-ay antar man mailaa du-ay tha-ur apunay kho-ay.
He washes outwardly, but within, his mind is filthy; thus he loses his place in both worlds.
Sto arth afa xfo feorfimr urat ufh fk ge a Gsi-4, wer, He 5)
eehaa kaam kroDh mohi vi-aapi-aa aagai mus mus ro-ay. ||1]|
Here, he is engrossed in sexual desire, anger and emotional attachment; hereafter, he Shall sigh and weep. ||1||
difee ane ot nfs J Ta Il Gsi-5, wm, nz 5) govind bhajan kee mat hai horaa. The way to vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe is different.
zat nrdt AT & Heet BH B HoSt ST NA TIS I (381-5, wm, ne 5)
varmee maaree saap na mar-ee naam na sun-ee doraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Destroying the snake-hole, the snake is not killed; the deaf person does not hear the Lord's Name. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfeur ot fasfs dfs aevet sast ATS 3 ATS Il (381-5, nr, He 5)
maa-i-aa kee kirat chhod gavaa-ee bhagtee saar na jaanai.
He renounces the affairs of Maya, but he does not appreciate the value of devotional worship.
ae WAZ aC seals Sa 33 Ad USS III Gsi-6, wm, He 5)
bayd saastar ka-o tarkan laagaa tat jog na pachhaanai. ||2]|
He finds fault with the Vedas and the Shaastras, and does not know the essence of Yoga. ||2]|
Gufs afer HA det want Sele eet wefeEMr I (381-7, mr, He 5)
ughar ga-i-aa jaisaa khotaa dhaboo-aa nadar saraafaa aa-i-aa. He stands exposed, like a counterfeit coin, when inspected by the Lord, the Assayer.
nisonnt As fee AS BAS aT surfer SI GBs81-7, wT, He 5)
antarjaamee sabh kichh jaanai us tay kahaa chhapaa-i-aa. ||3]|
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows everything; how can we hide anything from Him? ||3]]|
afs aufe dfs feHstere froth afenr szarS Il 8-8, wr, Hs 5)
koorh kapat banch nimmunee-aadaa binas ga-i-aa tatkaalay.
Through falsehood, fraud and deceit, the mortal collapses in an instant - he has no foundation at all.
Afs vfs Afs sofa afer mrs fogs Sy ANS ISIS Bsi-s, wT, He 5) sat sat sat naanak kahi-aa apnai hirdai daykh samaalay. ||4||3||42]|
Truly, truly, truly, Nanak speaks; look within your own heart, and realize this. [141 131]42]|
MTAT HIG U Il (81-9)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ben ads dz Ho fess are nrmy foes Il (381-9, mr, nH 5) udam karat hovai man nirmal naachai aap nivaaray. Making the effort, the mind becomes pure; in this dance, the self is silenced.
Us Hat B eas ge Ho fs SAAS AU Gsi-10, ww, ne 5) panch janaa lay vasgat raakhai man meh aykankaaray. ||1]| The five passions are kept under control, and the One Lord dwells in the mind. ||1]|
3a Ho fasts ad To We Il (381-10, wm, ne 5) tayraa jan nirat karay gun gaavai. Your humble servant dances and sings Your Glorious Praises.
THY US 3H ulUT node APE SAS UU TIS Il 3si-11, wm, us 5)
rabaab pakhaavaj taal ghunghroo anhad sabad vajaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He plays upon the guitar, tambourine and cymbals, and the unstruck sound current of the Shabad resounds. ||1]||Pause] |
YeH He Used mus ure niga dsr] Il (3si-u1, nmr, ue 5) parathmay man parboDhai apnaa paachhai avar reejhaavai. First, he instructs his own mind, and then, he leads others.
TH OH AY fade AU HY 3S Aas ASS MQM (381-12, mr, ne 5)
raam naam jap hirdai jaapai mukh tay sagal sunaavai. ||2||
He chants the Lord's Name and meditates on it in his heart; with his mouth, he announces it to all. ||2||
ae Af AG vss us AS fe Shs Be Il (381-12, wT, ws 5)
kar sang saaDhoo charan pakhaarai sant Dhoor tan laavai.
He joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and washes their feet; he applies the dust of the Saints to his body
Ho 36 Mafu Ud Te yMd AS USTSE u| ISll (381-13, wT, He 5)
man tan arap Dharay gur aagai sat padaarath paavai. ||3]||
He surrenders his mind and body, and places them before the Guru; thus, he obtains the true wealth. ||3]|
A A AS Ud of AGO ST aT HOH HS SY SH Il (381-13, ww, He 5)
jo jo sunai paykhai laa-ay sarDhaa taa kaa janam maran dukh bhaagai.
Whoever listens to, and beholds the Guru with faith, shall see his pains of birth and death taken away.
Mt foafs saa foets SSA THe Ae NIISSI Bsi-14, mA, He 5) aisee nirat narak nivaarai naanak gurmukh jaagai. ||4||4]|43] | Such a dance eliminates hell; O Nanak, the Gurmukh remains wakeful. ||4||4]|43]|
MTAT HIG U Il (381-15)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
MOH Psst set FoHat Het S HASTE F I (381-15, wm, Hs 5)
aDham chandaalee bha-ee barahmanee soodee tay sarestaa-ee ray.
The lowly outcaste becomes a Brahmin, and the untouchable sweeper becomes pure and sublime.
USS mTOTH AUAt BIAS Fst wrest F WAU Gsi-15, wrAr, He 5)
paataalee aakaasee sakhnee lahbar boojhee khaa-ee ray. ||1]|
The burning desire of the nether regions and the etheric realms is finally quenched and extinguished. ||1]|
we ot froret ores frravet yar tf savet F Il (381-16, wir, 2 5) ghar kee bilaa-ee avar sikhaa-ee moosaa daykh daraa-ee ray. The house-cat has been taught otherwise, and is terrified upon seeing the mouse.
wn a eh afe ate aate gas fafa waret F UU FHS il (381-17, wmv, we 5)
aj kai vas gur keeno kayhar kookar tineh lagaa-ee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru has put the tiger under the control of the sheep, and now, the dog eats grass. ||1||Pause] |
as goer sug ator shuts wg ure F il (381-17, wrt, 42 5) baajh thoonee-aa chhapraa thaami"-aa neeghari-aa ghar paa-i-aa ray. Without pillars, the roof is supported, and the homeless have found a home.
faa nate 3 wfs6 Hare Bat nrsaH ofenr F QI Gsi-18, wT, He 5) bin jarhee-ay lai jarhi-i jarhaavaa thayvaa achraj laa-i-aa ray. ||2|| Without the jeweller, the jewel has been set, and the wonderful stone shines forth.
21 |
wet ofe 5 ugdads gut fase ufemr F Il (381-18, wrt, He 5)
daadee daad na pahuchanhaaraa choopee nirna-o paa-i-aa ray.
The claimant does not succeed by placing his claim, but by keeping silent, he obtains justice.
Hfs vote sat 3 frasa aa feursa ofeur J SI GBsi-19, nmr, He 5) maal duleechai baithee lay mirtak nain dikhaalan Dhaa-i-aa ray. ||3]| The dead sit on costly carpets, and what is seen with the eyes shall vanish. ||3]|
UST BcQ
Het oes Ad HAST HOSTS O Sa T Il (382-1, wr, wu: 5) so-ee ajaan kahai mai jaanaa jaananhaar na chhaanaa ray. One who claims to know, is ignorant; he does not know the Knower of all.
ag saa afte me Uumrfenr sAfa sAfa fara FJ USIUISSI (382-1, »MAT, He 5)
kaho naanak gur ami-o pee-aa-i-aa rasak rasak bigsaanaa ray. ||4]||5||44]| Says Nanak, the Guru has given me the Ambrosial Nectar to drink in; savoring it and relishing it, I blossom forth in bliss. ||4]|5||44] |
MTAT HIG U Il (382-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
gue afe fans nia must fase ANT II (382-2, mm, He 5)
banDhan kaat bisaaray a-ugan apnaa birad sam"aari-a.
He has cut away my bonds, and overlooked my shortcomings, and so He has confirmed His nature.
Je fours us fus fonret afaa fr@ yfserfanr ai (382-3, wr, us 5)
ho-ay kirpaal maat pit ni-aa-ee baarik ji-o partipaari-aa. ||1||
Becoming merciful to me, like a mother or a father, he has come to cherish me as His own child. ||1||
Taha Ia Te Hubs it (382-3, wer, ue 5) gursikh raakhay gur gopaal. The GurSikhs are preserved by the Guru, by the Lord of the Universe.
afte we Hot sane 3 nual seta foots ai FS Il (382-4, ww, us 5)
kaadh lee-ay mahaa bhavjal tay apnee nadar nihaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He rescues them from the terrible world ocean, casting His Glance of Grace upon them. ||1]]|Pause| |
w ot fanofs aH 3 echt gots uefs AY UTM II (382-4, nmr, He 5)
jaa kai simran jam tay chhutee-ai halat palat sukh paa-ee-ai.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, we escape from the Messenger of Death; here and hereafter, we obtain peace.
AfA forrfa Aug AU SAS Sts OS TE WEA lM Gs2-5, wmv, He 5)
Saas giraas japahu jap rasnaa neet neet gun gaa-ee-ai. ||2||
With every breath and morsel of food, meditate, and chant with your tongue, continually, each and every day; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2] |
safs UH Us UE Ue AGA FY BS Il (382-6, nA, He 5)
bhagat paraym param pad paa-i-aa saaDhsang dukh naathay.
Through loving devotional worship, the supreme status is obtained, and in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sorrows are dispelled.
fen o mf fae 3@ 0 femme afs ua foots WS Ill (3382-6, nmr, 2 5)
chhijai na jaa-ay kichh bha-o na bi-aapay har Dhan nirmal gaathay. ||3]||
I am not worn down, I do not die, and nothing strikes fear in me, since I have the wealth of the Lord's Immaculate Name in my purse. |[3]|
nifs ae ys se Hot fes BS TaSTS Il (382-7, nmr, uz 5)
ant kaal parabh bha-ay sahaa-ee it ut raakhanhaaray.
At the very last moment, God becomes the mortal's Help and Support; here and hereafter, He is the Savior Lord.
urs His dts ug He aaa Ae afar ISIENSUll (382-7, vm, He 5)
paraan meet heet Dhan mayrai naanak sad balihaaray. ||4||6||45]|
He is my breath of life, my friend, support and wealth; O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to Him. ||4||6||45] |
MTAT HIG U Il (382-8)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ww 3 Afog Te as 3s 30 fag fam Ae Il (382-8, wr, He 5)
jaa too’ saahib taa bha-o kayhaa ha-o tuDh bin kis saalaahee.
Since You are my Lord and Master, what is there for me to fear? Other than You, who else should I praise?
aq 3 a Ag fas TH 30 fae SAT SST NU G82-9, vi, He 5)
ayk too’ taa sabh kichh hai mai tuDh bin doojaa naahee. ||1||
You are the One and only, and so do all things exist; without You, there is nothing at all for me. ||1]|
arar fry Sftmit AATE Il (382-9, nmr, He 5) baabaa bikh daykhi-aa sansaar. O Father, I have seen that the world is poison.
ohm asd TAS AS H OH ST yrarg AU TIS Il (382-9, ne, ve 5) rakhi-aa karahu gusaa-ee mayray mai naam tayraa aaDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Save me, O Lord of the Universe! Your Name is my only Support. ||1]|Pause] |
wats fase Ast Ho at dg fan ufo wrfe FETE II (382-10, mA, He 5) jaaneh birthaa sabhaa man kee hor kis peh aakh sunaa-ee-ai. You know completely the condition of my mind; who else could I go to tell of it?
fee oe AS Aa SCafeur any fe AYE UTS QI (382-11, nm, He 5)
vin naavai sabh jag ba-uraa-i-aa naam milai sukh paa-ee-ai. ||2||
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world has gone crazy; obtaining the Naam, it finds peace. ||2]|
for adba for urfa werent fa ager A us At uf I 382-11, nmr, ne 5) ki-aa kahee-ai kis aakh sunaa-ee-ai je kahnaa so parabh jee paas. What shall I say? Unto whom shall I speak? What I have to say, I say to God.
AS fag atst 3a Sas AST Het Sat MTA ISI (382-12, wm, He 5)
sabh kichh keetaa tayraa vartai sadaa sadaa tayree aas. ||3]|| Everything which exists was created by You. You are my hope, forever and ever. ||3]|
A fo eafauret + Sct efanret fes 63 zfs fim i Gs82-12, vr, nu: 5)
jay deh vadi-aa-ee taa tayree vadi-aa-ee it ut tujheh Dhi-aa-o.
If you bestow greatness, then it is Your greatness; here and hereafter, I meditate on You.
Soa X US Ae’ AUSTS H as BT fea aE Vidisell Gs2-13, vw, ne 5)
naanak kay parabh sadaa sukh-daatay mai taan tayraa ik naa-o. ||4||7||46] |
The Lord God of Nanak is forever the Giver of peace; Your Name is my only strength. [141171146]
MTAT HIG U Il (382-14)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ms OU SHS Sa ST Ho" GA Aafg UG Il (382-14, wir, ue 5)
amrit naam tum"aaraa thaakur ayhu mahaa ras janeh pee-o.
Your Name is Ambrosial Nectar, O Lord Master; Your humble servant drinks in this supreme elixir.
HOH ASH Va F BS Vas fAoTHS SoH A A (382-15, wm, we 5)
janam janam chookay bhai bhaaray durat binaasi-o bharam bee-o. ||1]||
The fearful load of sins from countless incarnations has vanished; doubt and duality are also dispelled. ||1]|
IAS UST H AG Il (382-15, mm, v2 5) darsan paykhat mai jee-o. I live by beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Afs afs ave sud Afsad Ho 36 Ha og St ual TIS il 82-15, wm, uz 5)
sun kar bachan tum"aaray satgur man tan mayraa thaar thee-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. Listening to Your Words, O True Guru, my mind and body are cooled and soothed. ||1||Pause] |
suo faut 3 sfe@ ron fg aH 3H orf ate II (382-16, wr, He 5)
tum"ree kirpaa tay bha-i-o saaDhsang ayhu kaaj tum" aap kee-o.
By Your Grace, I have joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; You Yourself have caused this to happen.
feg afs gse ad Ys SHd Aan fatto set HS iQ (382-17, wer, ws 5) dirh kar charan gahay parabh tum"ray sehjay bikhi-aa bha-ee khee-o. ||2]| Holding fast to Your Feet, O God, the poison is easily neutralized. ||2| |
mY fours on ys Sue Sg wifsort AZ StS ii 82-17, wer, 2 5) sukh niDhaan naam parabh tumraa ayhu abhinaasee mantar lee-o. Your Name, O God, is the treasure of peace; I have received this everlasting Mantra.
afa fasur xfs Afsafe vet sry HSsTy Aa Se aE Sil (382-18, mmr, He 5)
kar kirpaa mohi satgur deenaa taap santaap mayraa bair gee-o. ||3]|
Showing His Mercy, the True Guru has given it to me, and my fever and pain and hatred are annulled. ||3||
Ud A HSH tot uret fas ufs mus Afs BE i Gs2-19, wer, ne 5) Dhan so maanas dayhee paa-ee jit parabh apnai mayl lee-o. Blessed is the attainment of this human body, by which God blends Himself with me.
U9 A afena AUHfa atese areha aaa SH ng SE ICID (382-19, mm, He 5) Dhan so kalijug saaDhsang keertan gaa-ee-ai naanak naam aDhaar hee-o. [141181147] |
Blessed, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, is the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.O Nanak, the Naam is my only Support. ||4||8]|47]|
UST 3c3B
MTAT HIG U Il (83-1)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
wat ot 3 Ag fxs Jur neg fax WE fans il (383-1, wm, we 5) aagai hee tay sabh kichh hoo-aa avar ke jaanai gi-aanaa. Everything is pre-ordained; what else can be known through study?
3S Va must alsa safe uUTTAIH SATA MA (383-2, wAr, He 5) bhool chook apnaa baarik bakhsi-aa paarbarahm bhagvaanaa. ||1] | The errant child has been forgiven by the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
Afsag Hat Ae efeurer dfs ee aS afe Sr Il (383-2, wer, He 5) satgur mayraa sadaa da-i-aalaa mohi deen ka-o raakh lee-aa. My True Guru is always merciful; He has saved me, the meek one.
afent ga Ho AY ufeor afe wifys nfs ou cor wa TIS Il (383-3, ym, He 5) kaati-aa rog mahaa sukh paa-i-aa har amrit mukh naam dee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He has cured me of my disease, and I have obtained the greatest peace; He has placed the Ambrosial Name of the Lord in my mouth. ||1]|Pause] |
mfx uu AS Uddin Fas ae HAS SE Il (383-4, we, ne 5)
anik paap mayray parhari-aa banDhan kaatay mukat bha-ay.
He has washed away my countless sins; He has cut away my bonds, and I am liberated.
nig gu yo us 3 ag uate ats xfs BS iM 83-4, wr, He 5) anDh koop mahaa ghor tay baah pakar gur kaadh lee-ay. ||2]| He has taken me by the arm, and pulled me out of the terrible, deep dark pit. ||2||
fesse se Hae 3@ fifemr ag aTaGSTS Il (383-5, nmr, He 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay sagal bha-o miti-aa raakhay raakhanhaaray.
I have become fearless, and all my fears have been erased. The Savior Lord has saved me.
MA afs Sat ys AT ASH AGG ASS IBM (383-5, wim, ue 5) aisee daat tayree parabh mayray kaaraj sagal savaaray. ||3]|| Such is Your generosity, O my God, that You have resolved all my affairs. ||3]|
ae fours Atoa His HS Il (83-6, wim, He 5) gun niDhaan saahib man maylaa. My mind has met with my Lord and Master, the treasure of excellence.
Rafe ufsor seat AIS NICS (383-6, »TAT, He 5)
Saran pa-i-aa naanak sohaylaa. ||4]|9||48]| Taking to His Sanctuary, Nanak has become blissful. ||4]|9||48]|
MTAT HIG U Il (383-7)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
3 fenate st Ag & OT SHS orefs St AS Il (383-7, wr, Hs 5)
too” visrahi taa’ sabh ko laagoo cheet aavahi taa™ sayvaa.
If I forget You, then everyone becomes my enemy. When You come to mind, then they serve me.
MEI 5 AG VA AS AS Wise MSS INU (83-7, wT, Hs 5) avar na ko-oo doojaa soojhai saachay alakh abhayvaa. ||1]|| I do not know any other at all, O True, Invisible, Inscrutable Lord. ||1]|
dfs nre st Het efenrer Bae fom Sarg Il (383-8, we, He 5)
cheet aavai taa™ sadaa da-i-aalaa logan ki-aa vaychaaray.
When You come to mind, You are always merciful to me; what can the poor people do to me?
ao so ag fan s adhn Aas Aba SHS AU TIS Il (383-8, vm, Hs 5) buraa bhalaa kaho kis no kahee-ai saglay jee-a tum"aaray. ||1]| rahaa-o. Tell me, who should I call good or bad, since all beings are Yours? ||1||Pause| |
aot ea Sa oro ae Ufe F gafs I (383-9, mmr, we 5) tayree tayk tayraa aaDhaaraa haath day-ay too™ raakhahi. You are my Shelter, You are my Support; giving me Your hand, You protect me.
fan Wo Gufs Sct frau fA aS fay 5 A srs NM (383-9, wm, we 5)
jis jan oopar tayree kirpaa tis ka-o bip na ko-oo bhaakhai. ||2] |
That humble being, upon whom You bestow Your Grace, is not touched by slander or suffering. ||2]|
6 AY Go efsnret F ys Ht Hie set I (383-10, nmr, ne 5)
oho sukh ohaa vadi-aa-ee jo parabh jee man bhaanee.
That is peace, and that is greatness, which is pleasing to the mind of the Dear Lord God.
3 was Ae fraseat omy FHS ST Het SI (383-11, »mT, He 5)
too daanaa too” sad miharvaanaa naam milai rang maanee. ||3]|
You are all-knowing, You are forever compassionate; obtaining Your Name, I revel in it and make merry. ||3]|
30 ora meeth mt He fils AS Sa Il (383-11, mm, He 5) tuDh aagai ardaas hamaaree jee-o pind sabh tayraa. I offer my prayer to You; my body and soul are all Yours.
AT aoa AS Sot sfsuret act aC o WE Ha INIIONSEN (383-12, ne, He 5) kaho naanak sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee ko-ee naa-o na jaanai mayraa. ||4||10||49]| Says Nanak, this is all Your greatness; no one even knows my name. ||4||10||49]|
MTAT HIG U Il (383-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
afs fasur ys isan AvaAfa ofs ure Il (383-12, »mr, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh antarjaamee saaDhsang har paa-ee-ai.
Show Your Mercy, O God, O Searcher of hearts, that in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I might obtain You, Lord.
afs faers fers zane usa Hoth o iret A (383-13, mm, He 5)
khol kivaar dikhaalay darsan punrap janam na aa-ee-ai. ||1||
When You open Your Door, and reveal the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, the mortal is not relegated to reincarnation again. ||1]|
fHo@ udtsH Hom wud ATs Ta IGS F Il (383-14, wrwr, we 5) mila-o pareetam su-aamee apunay saglay dookh hara-o ray. Meeting with my Beloved Lord aand Master, all my pains are taken away.
ursgqan fats fee nrefter st at Aft saB FT NA TIS ll 83-14, vm, Hs 5) paarbarahm jini" ridai araaDhi-aa taa kai sang tara-o ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am saved and carried across, in the company of those who remember the Supreme Lord God in their hearts. ||1]]Pause| |
Ho Gfenis urea Ard SE Tau Aa Hf SAAT Il (383-15, nA, He 5)
mahaa udi-aan paavak saagar bha-ay harakh sog meh basnaa.
This world is a great wilderness, an ocean of fire, in which mortals abide, in pleasure and pain.
Afsag sfe sfeor He feane afu nifiggs ofe TAS QI (383-16, wim, He 5)
satgur bhayt bha-i-aa man nirmal jap amrit har rasnaa. ||2||
Meeting with the True Guru, the mortal becomes immaculately pure; with his tongue, he chants the Ambrosial Name of the Lord. ||2]||
36 U6 atu aS AS nua ANG FU siftmM Il (383-16, nA, He 5)
tan Dhan thaap kee-o sabh apnaa komal banDhan baa“Dhi-aa.
He preserves his body and wealth, and takes everything as his own; such are the subtle bonds which bind him.
ad usAte se Ao Has dfs de oH maton III 83-17, wT, v8 5)
gur parsaad bha-ay jan muktay har har naam araaDhi-aa. ||3]|
By Guru's Grace, the mortal becomes liberated, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
afy ote ufs muaod A US MUS BE Il (383-17, vw, He 5) raakh lee-ay parabh raakhanhaarai jo parabh apunay bhaanay. God, the Savior, has saved those, who are pleasing to the Will of God.
MG fis Ag SUT US Soa AE ATHS IIIUUOll (383-18, yA, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tum"raa daatay naanak sad kurbaanay. ||4]|11]|50]|
The soul and body are all Yours, O Great Giver; O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice. []4]]11] [50] |
MTAT HIG U Il (383-19)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Hd Hoe Ste 3 scat as vagy sfE ct i 83-19, vir, ne 5)
moh malan need tay chhutkee ka-un anoograhu bha-i-o ree.
You have avoided the slumber of attachment and impurity - by whose favor has this happened?
Ho Hust 30 3 feum) 3a oven ao afes aH a TIS Il (383-19, wer, He 5) mahaa mohnee tuDh na vi-aapai tayraa aalas kahaa ga-i-o ree. ||1|| rahaa-o. The great enticer does not affect you. Where has your laziness gone? ||1||Pause] |
UST Bce
aH au nidarg aad Hath ao efeS dt Il (384-1, nmr, nH 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar gaakhro sanjam ka-un chhuti-o ree. How have you escaped from the treachery of sexual desire, anger and egotism?
Afs og @e mA 3 TdT Aas seq Ble gH Ul (384-2, vm, Hs 5)
sur nar dayv asur tarai gunee-aa saglo bhavan luti-o ree. ||1||
The holy beings, angels and demons of the three qualities, and all the worlds have been plundered. ||1]|
wat nats aos fe WS aet afoot g|e fas gt il (384-2, ww, ws 5)
daavaa agan bahut tarin jaalay ko-ee hari-aa boot rahi-o ree.
The forest fire has burnt down so much of the grass; how rare are the plants which have remained green.
MA AMEE Zale o AAS a at Gur aS 6 afaG gH II (384-3, wer, He 5) aiso samrath varan na saaka-o taa kee upmaa jaat na kahi-o ree. ||2|| He is so All-powerful, that I cannot even describe Him; no one can chant His Praises.
[21 | aad as ufs set o ad faane sag afoS ct Il (384-4, mmr, v2 5)
kaajar koth meh bha-ee na kaaree nirmal baran bani-o ree. In the store-room of the lamp-black, I did not turn black; my color remained immaculate and pure.
Ho Hz We fore aS vivant on Afss st ai (334-4, wer, He 5)
mahaa mantar gur hirdai basi-o achraj naam suni-o ree. ||3]|
The Guru has implanted the Maha Mantra, the Great Mantra, within my heart, and I have heard the wondrous Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
afs fas ys sefs nresas mud safe waret Il 384-5, vm, ue 5)
kar kirpaa parabh nadar avlokan apunai charan lagaa-ee.
Showing His Mercy, God has looked upon me with favor, and He has attached me to His feet.
YH gals aoa AY ufenr Any Aft AHTeT ISIIQNUA (384-5, wT, He 5)
paraym bhagat naanak sukh paa-i-aa saaDhoo sang samaa-ee. ||4]|12]|51]| Through loving devotional worship, O Nanak, I have obtained peace; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am absorbed into the Lord. ||4||12]|51]|
qe Afsas urrfe II (384-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Td MTA WI D HIS U Il (384-7) raag aasaa ghar 7 mehlaa 5. Raag Aasaa, Seventh House, Fifth Mehl:
we doa 3 3fe Afar i (384-7, wT, He 5) laal cholnaa tai tan sohi-aa. That red dress looks so beautiful on your body.
Afar svat St He Afar All (384-7, ner, He 5) surijan bhaanee taa‘ man mohi-aa. ||1|| Your Husband Lord is pleased, and His heart is enticed. ||1]|
ASG Fst St Sat Best il (384-8, wr, vs 5) kavan banee ree tayree laalee. Whose handiwork is this red beauty of yours?
ASS Sar F FSt TH SH UU TIS Il 384-8, veer, wu: 5) kavan rang too™ bha-ee gulaalee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whose love has rendered the poppy so red? ||1]||Pause| |
3H ot Hefe sufo ATT I (384-38, mmr, He 5) tum hee sundar tumeh suhaag. You are so beautiful; you are the happy soul-bride.
3H ufg wee SH ws Sa NII (334-9, wim, nH 5) tum ghar laalan tum ghar bhaag. ||2]| Your Beloved is in your home; good fortune is in your home. ||2]|
J Asest F usTS Il (384-9, we, 2 5) too” satvantee too” parDhaan. You are pure and chaste, you are most distinguished.
3 USH sat sat Ae formrfe SI (384-9, wr, Hs 5) too” pareetam bhaanee tuhee sur gi-aan. ||3]| You are pleasing to Your Beloved, and you have sublime understanding. ||3]|
UtsH srat St Sar TBS Il (384-10, vw, ve 5) pareetam bhaanee taa™ rang gulaal. I am pleasing to my Beloved, and so I am imbued with the deep red color.
ag aod AS ferfe fears IISil (384-10, wm, He 5) kaho naanak subh darisat nihaal. ||4]| Says Nanak, I have been totally blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace. ||4]|
Afe ot Adt fea Tost wes Il (384-10, nmr, He 5) sun ree sakhee ih hamree ghaal. Listen, O companions: this is my only work;
ys vrfy Aterts ASIST S UU TIS SAT UUM (384-11, mA, H2 5)
parabh aap seegaar savaaranhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||1]|52|| God Himself is the One who embellishes and adorns. ||1||Second Pause] |1||52| |
MTAT HIG U Il (384-11)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ey WS Aa IS Efe Il (384-12, wer, we 5) dookh ghano jab hotay door. I suffered in pain, when I thought He was far away;
ua HAS Hfs fest Tefs WA (384-12, wr, He 5) ab maslat mohi milee hadoor. ||1]| but now, He is Ever-present, and I receive His instructions. ||1||
gat fade et AdST Il (384-12, vir, He 5) chukaa nihoraa sakhee sahayree. My pride is gone, O friends and companions;
son afenr afe fus Afar Ast NA TIS Il (384-13, mA, He 5) bharam ga-i-aa gur pir sang mayree. ||1|| rahaa-o. my doubt is dispelled, and the Guru has united me with my Beloved. ||1||Pause]|
foate ifs fmt AA Udt I (384-13, nmr, He 5) nikat aan pari-a sayj Dharee. My Beloved has drawn me near to Him, and seated me on His Bed;
of aaa 3 sfe udt QI (384-13, mmr, He 5) kaan kadhan tay chhoot paree. ||2|| I have escaped the clutches of others. ||2] |
Hefs AS wate Baa i (384-14, nmr, He 5) mandar mayrai sabad ujaaraa. In the mansion of my heart, shines the Light of the Shabad.
mod faset MAN THAT ISI (384-14, wTAT, He 5) anad binodee khasam hamaaraa. ||3]| My Husband Lord is blissful and playful. ||3] |
HASta ava H furs whe wrfeur i 384-14, ner, He 5)
mastak bhaag mai pir ghar aa-i-aa.
According to the destiny written upon my forehead, my Husband Lord has come home to me.
fag ATG Soa Ao ufsMr SiQNUBil (34-15, mTAT, He 5) thir sohaag naanak jan paa-i-aa. ||4]|2]|53]| Servant Nanak has obtained the eternal marriage. ||4]|2||53]|
MTAT HI U Il (384-15)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
As of HIT HS Bal" Il (384-15, wiv, He 5) saach naam mayraa man laagaa. My mind is attached to the True Name.
Bae fA Hat Sor Aa AM (384-16, wrAT, He 5) logan si-o mayraa thaathaa baagaa. ||1|| My dealings with other people are only superficial. ||1]|
Wate AS AIS fA Hse Il (384-16, wert, He 5) baahar soot sagal si-o ma-ulaa. Outwardly, I am on good terms with all;
wifsus sI@ AA AG Hf Bor NA TIS Il (384-16, new, He 5) alipat raha-o jaisay jal meh ka-ulaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. but I remain detached, like the lotus upon the water. ||1||Pause] |
HY at as Aare fAG ATS Il (384-17, wm, He 5) mukh kee baat sagal si-o kartaa. By word of mouth, I talk with everyone;
Fba Afor Ys MUS TSS MQM (384-17, ww, He 5) jee-a sang parabh apunaa Dhartaa. ||2|| but I keep God clasped to my heart. ||2]|
afk mres J ags StI ST Il (384-17, wer, He 5) dees aavat hai bahut bheehaalaa. I may appear utterly terrible,
Has Udo at fET HS TS Bll (84-18, nm, ue 5) sagal charan kee ih man raalaa. ||3]|| but my mind is the dust of all men's feet.
Tor Als TT Us uf it (384-18, mma, we 5) naanak jan gur pooraa paa-i-aa. Servant Nanak has found the Perfect Guru.
Ua Btu
nists sofa a feerfimr igiBiugil (335-1, »mr, He 5)
antar baahar ayk dikhaa-i-aa. ||4]|3]|54|| Inwardly and outwardly, He has shown me the One Lord. ||4]|3]|54||
MTAT HIG U Il (85-1)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ures séior Hafs aster Il (385-1, vA, He 5) paavat ralee-aa joban balee-aa. The mortal revels in joy, in the vigor of youth;
oH fear Het Afar Tah NA (385-1, wmAT, He 5) naam binaa maatee sang ralee-aa. ||1]| but without the Name, he mingles with dust. ||1]|
as ase SAS Ges | (385-2, ww, ue 5) kaan kundlee-aa bastar odhalee-aa. He may wear ear-rings and fine clothes,
AA Aus fe aoa Ul TIS Il (385-2, wm, He 5) sayj sukhlee-aa man garablee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and have a comfortable bed, and his mind may be so proud. ||1||Pause] |
38 adudior ffs afoax eadior il (385-3, mmr, He 5) talai kunchree-aa sir kanik chhatree-aa. He may have elephants to ride, and golden umbrellas over his head;
dfs sats fast & uate Ass IQ (35-3, wr, He 5) har bhagat binaa lay Dharan gadlee-aa. ||2|| but without devotional worship to the Lord, he is buried beneath the dirt. ||2]|
gu Hedhor vifex feAsdior il 3385-4, wr, Hs 5) roop sundree-aa anik istaree-aa. He may enjoy many women, of exquisite beauty;
dfs 3A fae Afs Ane feadinr Si (385-4, mr, He 5) har ras bin sabh su-aad fikree-aa. ||3]| but without the sublime essence of the Lord, all tastes are tasteless. ||3] |
Mfent ser fears fast il (385-4, nmr, He 5) maa-i-aa chhalee-aa bikaar bikhlee-aa. Deluded by Maya, the mortal is led into sin and corruption.
Hefe Sa YS UTY Sfenismr SusnuUll (385-5, wm, us 5)
saran naanak parabh purakh da-i-alee-aa. ||4||4]|55]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the All-powerful, Compassionate Lord. ||4]|4]|55]|
MTAT HIG U Il (385-5)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Sa Fala US WS Afar Il (385-5, nmr, ye 5) ayk bageechaa payd ghan kari-aa. There is a garden, in which so many plants have grown.
nifys on so ufo Sfemit A (85-6, vim, He 5) amrit naam tahaa meh fali-aa. ||1]| They bear the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam as their fruit. ||1]|
MAT asT stars farrat Il (385-6, wr, 2 5) aisaa karahu beechaar gi-aanee. Consider this, O wise one,
vw 3S urn ue fegarat Il (385-6, nmr, He 5) jaa tay paa-ee-ai pad nirbaanee. by which you may attain the state of Nirvaanaa.
uta uta far & xem dife vifigs J set F UM TIS I (85-7, ww, we 5)
aas paas bikhoo-aa kay kuntaa beech amrit hai bhaa-ee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All around this garden are pools of poison, but within it is the Ambrosial Nectar, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
fidord Sa HT Il (385-8, wm, He 5) sinchanhaaray aykai maalee. There is only one gardener who tends it.
wafs xas J US US TH NI (85-8, we, He 5) khabar karat hai paat pat daalee. ||2|| He takes care of every leaf and branch. ||2||
Hae Fonuls wits ASST Il 85-8, wm, He 5) Sagal banaspat aan jarhaa-ee. He brings all sorts of plants and plants them there.
Haat sot foes o aret Sli (385-8, mimAT, He 5) saglee foolee nifal na kaa-ee. ||3]| They all bear fruit - none is without fruit. ||3]|
nifys oe on fafs aa 3 urfenr i 385-9, nmr, He 5) amrit fal naam jin gur tay paa-i-aa. One who receives the Ambrosial Fruit of the Naam from the Guru
Soa aA sdt f3fe ufenr enue (385-9, »mAT, He 5)
naanak daas taree tin maa-i-aa. ||4||5||56]| - O Nanak, such a servant crosses over the ocean of Maya. ||4]|5||56]|
MTAT HIG U Il (385-10)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
TH Slo 3d aH garet Il (385-10, mA, He 5) raaj leelaa tayrai naam banaa-ee. The pleasures of royalty are derived from Your Name.
Aa afer sat atese AWet AU (85-10, rrr, v2 5) jog bani-aa tayraa keertan gaa-ee. ||1]| I attain Yoga, singing the Kirtan of Your Praises. ||1]|
Aaa AMT ads Sd GSB Il 385-11, wm, us 5) sarab sukhaa banay tayrai ol"ai. All comforts are obtained in Your Shelter.
3H a ude Afsag 4B WA TIS ll (385-11, nmr, ue 5) bharam kay parday satgur khol"ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru has removed the veil of doubt. ||1]|Pause]|
JaH Ff Fa FA HE Il (385-11, we, He 5) hukam boojh rang ras maanay. Understanding the Command of the Lord's Will, I revel in pleasure and joy.
Afsad Ae Ho" fesse IS (385-12, mA, He 5) satgur Sayvaa mahaa nirbaanay. ||3]|| Serving the True Guru, I obtain the supreme state of Nirvaanaa. ||2| |
fats 3 WS A farsAs Seat uses Il (385-12, wm, Hs 5) jin too" jaataa so girsat udaasee parvaan. One who recognizes You is recognized as a householder, and as a renunciate.
of gst Het fesse IQ (385-12, mA, He 5) naam rataa so-ee nirbaan. ||2]| Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he dwells in Nirvaanaa. ||3]|
vw ag fife on faarar il (385-13, vr, 2 5) jaa ka-o mili-o naam niDhaanaa. One who has obtained the treasure of the Naam
Sols SSA St AT UT UAT UVIENUSI (385-13, wT, He 5)
bhanat naanak taa kaa poor khajaanaa. ||4||6||57]| - prays Nanak, his treasure-house is filled to overflowing. ||4||6]|57||
MTAT HIG U Il (385-13)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
stefa WE 3 IB IB ATS Il (385-14, nm, He 5) tirath jaa-o ta ha-o ha-o kartay. Journeying to sacred shrines of pilgrimage, I see the mortals acting in ego.
Ufss ue 3 fer gS NA (385-14, wT, He 5) pandit poochha-o ta maa-i-aa raatay. ||1]| If I ask the Pandits, I find them tainted by Maya. ||1]]|
A mAee ested HIST Il (385-14, »imAr, He 5)
so asthaan bataavhu meetaa. Show me that place, O friend,
W a dfs afs ates ats NU TIS I (385-15, vir, He 5) jaa kai har har keertan neetaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are forever sung. ||1]|Pause]|
AWAY Fe uTY US SAI Il (385-15, wiv, ue 5) saastar bayd paap punn veechaar. The Shaastras and the Vedas speak of sin and virtue;
Sala Hata feta fefs mBss iQ (385-15, nmr, He 5) narak surag fir fir a-utaar. ||2|| they say that mortals are reincarnated into heaven and hell, over and over again. ||2||
farsrs ufo fess Barr niars Il (385-16, nmr, He 5)
girsat meh chint udaas ahakaar.
In the householder's life, there is anxiety, and in the life of the renunciate, there is egotism.
AGH Ads Aha a AAT ISI G385-16, nm, He 5) karam karat jee-a ka-o janjaar. ||3]| Performing religious rituals, the soul is entangled. ||3]|
ys fagur 3 He SfA vrfemr I 385-17, wr, He 5) parabh kirpaa tay man vas aa-i-aa. By God's Grace, the mind is brought under control;
aoa THY 3st fSfe wfenr sil (385-17, wm, He 5) naanak gurmukh taree tin maa-i-aa. ||4|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh crosses over the ocean of Maya. ||4]|
WaHfa dfs atese ah Il (385-17, mr, He 5) saaDhsang har keertan gaa-ee-ai. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
feg nines TT 3 ue UU TTS AT NDUUTI GEs-18, wm, Hs 5) ih asthaan guroo tay paa-ee-ai. ||1|] rahaa-o doojaa. ||7||58]| This place is found through the Guru. ||1]|Second Pause]|7||58]|
MTAT HIG U Il (385-18)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
wad ufo WY Bate Sfs AUT Il (385-18, wT, He 5) ghar meh sookh baahar fun sookhaa. Within my home there is peace, and outwardly there is peace as well.
dfs fangs Aare faaTA Tar WA (385-19, AT, He 5) har simrat sagal binaasay dookhaa. ||1|| Remembering the Lord in meditation, all pains are erased. ||1]||
Hae AY At Ss fats mits 1 (385-19, wer, He 5) sagal sookh jaa™ too™ chit aa‘vai". There is total peace, when You come into my mind.
Ua Bté
HOW AU HAS ST TS NU TIS Il (386-1, wT, He 5) SO naam japai jo jan tuDh bhaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone is pleasing to Your Will, who chants the Naam. ||1||Pause| |
36 HO ASG Alu OH ST Il (386-1, ur, He 5) tan man seetal jap naam tayraa. My body and mind are cooled and soothed, chanting the Name of the Lord.
dfs ofs AUS Bd FY ST MQ (386-1, rr, vs 5) har har japat dhahai dukh dayraa. ||2]| Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, the house of pain is demolished. ||2| |
JAH FS ASt uTSs Il 86-2, vw, ws 5) hukam boojhai so-ee parvaan. He alone, who understands the Command of the Lord's Will, is approved.
Ang Aa A al SATS IISIl (386-2, wr, ns 5) saach sabad jaa kaa neesaan. ||3]| The True Shabad of the Word of God is his trademark and insignia. ||3]|
afs us of on feafenr il 386-2, wm, Hs 5) gur poorai har naam drirh-aa-i-aa. The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me.
safs area He His AY Ufeor IsICNUE! (3386-3, nTAT, He 5) bhanat naanak mayrai man sukh paa-i-aa. ||4||8]|59] | Prays Nanak, my mind has found peace. ||4]|8]|59]|
MTAT HIG U Il (386-3)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ad used 3d 3d WET Il Gs6-3, vm, vs 5) jahaa pathaavhu tah tah jaa-ee’. Wherever You send me, there I go.
A SH tg ASt AY UST INA Gs6-4, ner, He 5) jo tum dayh so-ee sukh paa-ee™. ||1]| Whatever You give me, brings me peace. ||1||
oo )
Het od dfee HAT Il (386-4, wer, He 5)
sadaa chayray govind gosaa-ee.
I am forever the chaylaa, the humble disciple, of the Lord of the Universe, the Sustainer of the World.
suet faur 3 feufs mreret wan TIC il (386-4, nmr, ue 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay taripat aghaa-ee™. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Your Grace, I am satisfied and satiated. ||1]|Pause] |
Sue thor Use ure't i 86-5, nmr, He 5) tumraa dee-aa pain"a-o khaa-ee”. Whatever You give me, I wear and eat.
38 yAte ys Aut SHS QI (86-5, wm, Hs 5)
ta-o parsaad parabh sukhee valaa-ee™. ||2]| By Your Grace, O God, my life passes peacefully. ||2||
Ho 36 vise 33 fame Il (386-5, nr, He 5) man tan antar tujhai Dhi-aa-ee™. Deep within my mind and body, I meditate on You.
SHE Be 5 AT SET Bll G8o-6, wm, 5) tum"rai lavai na ko-o0 laa-ee™. ||3]| I recognize none as equal to You. ||3]|
ag aad fos fees forme I 386-6, mmr, v2 5) kaho naanak nit ivai Dhi-aa-ee’, Says Nanak, this is my continual meditation:
afs de Hag afar UST Ist Eoll 86-6, nm, He 5) gat hovai santeh lag paa-ee™. ||4||9||60]| that I may be emancipated, clinging to the Feet of the Saints. ||4]|9||60]|
MTAT HIG U Il (386-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Gos Fos Aes fore I 86-7, wer, H2 5) oothat baithat sovat Dhi-aa-ee-ai. While standing up, and sitting down, and even while asleep, meditate on the Lord.
Hofd Jos Jd Ths TSM Al Gs6-7, wm, He 5) maarag chalat haray har gaa-ee-ai. ||1|| Walking on the Way, sing the Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
Azo Holt nfs aa Il 86-8, wmv, ve 5) sarvan suneejai amrit kathaa. With your ears, listen to the Ambrosial Sermon.
WH Hot His af wiser sa Fa HS ATS BT UU! TTS il Ga6-s, ww, ws 5)
jaas sunee man ho-ay anandaa dookh rog man saglay lathaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Listening to it, your mind shall be filled with bliss, and the troubles and diseases of your mind shall all depart. ||1]|Pause| |
aot ath are wre Aula Il (386-9, »mrT, He 5)
kaaraj kaam baat ghaat japeejai. While you work at your job, on the road and at the beach, meditate and chant.
aa ure of nifgg utt i211 G86-9, wm, us 5) gur parsaad har amrit peejai. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, drink in the Ambrosial Essence of the Lord. ||2]|
feon dfo af atese are Il (386-9, mmr, He 5) dinas rain har keertan gaa-ee-ai. The humble being who sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, day and night,
A Ho AH at S|] o ure ISI (386-10, nmr, He 5) so jan jam kee vaat na paa-ee-ai. ||3]| does not have to go with the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
mS udd fa feHats art Il (386-10, nmr, He 5) aath pahar jis visrahi naahee. One who does not forget the Lord, twenty-four hours a day, is emancipated;
as de soa f3H ofa uret NSiIONEU (86-11, nA, He 5)
gat hovai naanak tis lag paa-ee. ||4||10||61] | O Nanak, I fall at his feet. ||4]|10||61] |
MTAT HIG U Il (86-11)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
W ot firsts AY fSETF Il 86-11, »mT, He 5) jaa kai simran sookh nivaas. Remembering Him in meditation, one abides in peace;
set afore Fu JSS SA INA (86-12, MAT, He 5) bha-ee kali-aan dukh hovat naas. ||1]| one becomes happy, and suffering is ended. ||1]|
Moe AdT US A TS Weg Il (386-12, wr, we 5) anad karahu parabh kay gun gaavhu. Celebrate, make merry, and sing God's Glories.
Afsag “ust Ae Ae Ho'ST IU TIS Il (386-12, wer, ve 5) satgur apnaa sad sadaa manaavahu. ||1|| rahaa-o. Forever and ever, surrender to the True Guru. ||1||Pause] |
Afsad a AY AA AHST Il (336-13, ww, ve 5) satgur kaa sach sabad kamaavahu. Act in accordance with the Shabad, the True Word of the True Guru.
fag whe 8S ys wus ure” IQIl (386-13, »mr, He 5) thir ghar baithay parabh apnaa paavhu. ||2| | Remain steady and stable within the home of your own self, and find God. ||2| |
Ud A Fa B TUT BS Il (336-14, nT, us 5) par kaa buraa na raakho cheet. Do not harbor evil intentions against others in your mind,
3H AG ey odt Tet HIS ISI Gs6-14, nmr, v8 5) tum ka-o dukh nahee bhaa-ee meet. ||3]| and you shall not be troubled, O Siblings of Destiny, O friends. ||3] |
ofa ofa 33 HZ afe Star Il (386-14, vm, v8 5)
har har tant mant gur deen"aa.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the Tantric exercise, and the Mantra, given by the Guru.
feg HY soa mMofes Star IS uIUEil (386-14, wr, He 5) ih sukh naanak an-din cheen"aa. ||4]|11||62|| Nanak knows this peace alone, night and day. ||4||11]|62||
MTAT HIG U Il (886-15)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fan ate aG aet AS Il 86-15, nmr, He 5) jis neech ka-o ko-ee na jaanai. That wretched being, whom no one knows
oy AUS BT VI AS HTS IAI (86-15, wT, He 5) naam japat uho chahu kunt maanai. ||1]| - chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he is honored in the four directions. ||1]|
SHS HAG Ufa fumrs il (386-16, wrAr, Hs 5) darsan maaga-o deh pi-aaray. I beg for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; please, give it to me, O Beloved!
SHat AS AVS ABs 6 37S AU! FIC Il (86-16, nT, vs 5) tumree sayvaa ka-un ka-un na taaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Serving You, who, who has not been saved? ||1]||Pause] |
wa foafe o nite at I (386-17, nr, He 5) jaa kai nikat na aavai ko-ee. That person, whom no one wants to be near
Fares fqrfe Gor & vse vfs Tet 2H Gs6-17, vm, Hs 5) Sagal sarisat u-aa kay charan mal Dho-ee. ||2]| - the whole world comes to wash the dirt of his feet. ||2| |
A UTS AT & MSS AH Il (386-17, mA, we 5) jo paraanee kaahoo na aavat kaam. That mortal, who is of no use to anyone at all
AS yrfe st ot Aub BH BI (386-18, wm, He 5) sant parsaad taa ko japee-ai naam. ||3]|| - by the Grace of the Saints, he meditates on the Naam. ||3]|
AOHfal Ho ASS Aa Il (386-18, MAT, Hz 5) saaDhsang man sovat jaagay. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the sleeping mind awakens.
Ja YS BSA HIS Sa WSIIVUESI (386-18, wm, He 5)
tab parabh naanak meethay laagay. ||4||12||63]| Then, O Nanak, God seems sweet. ||4||12||63]|
MTAT HIG U Il (386-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
xe SN
Sa Sat Sa fers il Gs6-19, nmr, us 5) ayko aykee nain nihaara-o. With my eyes, I behold the One and Only Lord.
Het Het ofg SH AHS Il (386-19, wm, us 5) sadaa sadaa har naam sam"aara-o. ||1|| Forever and ever, I contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
UST BLD
TH TH TH TS WSS Il (387-1, wT, He 5) raam raamaa raamaa gun gaava-o. I sing the Praises of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
As ysty AG & Hat of ofs ow fomre@ F Nd TIS tl Gs7-1, vw, 2 5)
sant partaap saaDh kai sangay har har naam Dhi-aava-o ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By the graceful favor of the Saints, I meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
Hae AH A ot APS UTet Il (387-2, wm, He 5) Sagal samagree jaa kai soot paro-ee. Everything is strung on His string.
we we nists sfenr At 121 G87-2, nmr, He 5) ghat ghat antar ravi-aa so-ee. ||2|| He is contained in each and every heart. ||2]|
Gufs use fas fs ATS Il (387-2, nm, He 5) Opat parla-o khin meh kartaa. He creates and destroys in an instant.
mify neu fede JIS SI 87-3, wT, Hs 5) aap alaypaa nirgun rahtaa. |[3]| He Himself remains unattached, and without attributes. ||3]|
AIS ATSS MSIAMT | (387-3, nwt, He 5) karan karaavan antarjaamee. He is the Creator, the Cause of causes, the Searcher of hearts.
Moe Ad Boa aT AMMT SIISNESI (387-3, nTAT, He 5)
anand karai naanak kaa su-aamee. ||4||13||64]| Nanak's Lord and Master celebrates in bliss. ||4]|13||64||
MTAT HIG U Il (387-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
af HOH A Id FST Il 387-4, wer, He 5) kot janam kay rahay bhavaaray. My wandering through millions of births has ended.
eos ed Alst Sdt TS NA 87-4, vm, nH 5) dulabh dayh jeetee nahee haaray. ||1|| I have won, and not lost, this human body, so difficult to obtain. ||1]|
footers frova va UTE Es II (87-5, mmr, He 5) kilbikh binaasay dukh darad door. My sins have been erased, and my sufferings and pains are gone.
3 Ysls Hae at ofe Ul TIS Il (87-5, wer, Hs 5) bha-ay puneet santan kee Dhoor. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have been sanctified by the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
us & AS Burge Aa Il (87-6, vr, ne 5) parabh kay sant uDhaaran jog. The Saints of God have the ability to save us;
fan 32 fan ufs Ara N21 (387-6, mm, He 5) tis bhaytay jis Dhur sanjog. ||2|| they meet with those of us who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
nfs orée Az afe shor i (387-6, mmr, 2 5)
man aanand mantar gur dee-aa. My mind is filled with bliss, since the Guru gave me the Mantra of the Lord's Name.
fg gst He fess Pr Si 387-6, wm, He 5) tarisan bujhee man nihchal thee-aa. ||3]| My thirst has been quenched, and my mind has become steady and stable. ||3]||
aH uae o@ fafa fafa il (387-7, rr, Hs 5)
naam padaarath na-o niDh siDh.
The wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is for me the nine treasures, and the spiritual powers of the Siddhas.
Soa Td S ust sfo isiasieUll (387-7, wm, ue 5)
naanak gur tay paa-ee buDh. ||4||14]|65]| O Nanak, I have obtained understanding from the Guru. ||4||14]|65] |
MTAT HIG U Il (387-8)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
firct fanrn nifamres nits I 387-8, ver, He 5) mitee ti-aas agi-aan anDhayray. My thirst, and the darkness of ignorance have been removed.
AT AST wey AS WSs MAU (387-8, wT, He 5) saaDh sayvaa agh katay ghanayray. ||1|| Serving the Holy Saints, countless sins are obliterated. ||1]|
HY AOA MISS WT Il (387-8, mA, He 5) sookh sahj aanand ghanaa. I have obtained celestial peace and immense joy.
ad Ast 3 3e Ho fogns aia ate ae ats SH AS AU TIE Il Gs7-9, vm, nu 5) gur sayvaa tay bha-ay man nirmal har har har har naam sunaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Serving the Guru, my mind has become immaculately pure, and I have heard the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
faofaAS Ha at use Zor Il (3387-10, mA, 42 5) binsi-o man kaa moorakh dheethaa. The stubborn foolishness of my mind is gone;
Ys at grat Brat HTS MQM (387-10, wr, He 5) parabh kaa bhaanaa laagaa meethaa. ||2|| God's Will has become sweet to me. ||2] |
TT US FX VIE Td Il (387-10, wrvr, we 5) gur pooray kay charan gahay. I have grasped the Feet of the Perfect Guru,
afe ABH AX UT BI Ill (387-10, mA, He 5) kot janam kay paap lahay. ||3]| and the sins of countless incarnations have been washed away. ||3]||
336 AON fed Aes SMT I (3387-11, nT, He 5) ratan janam ih safal bha-i-aa. The jewel of this life has become fruitful.
AT aod ys Act HfeHr siege (387-11, nmr, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh karee ma-i-aa. ||4||15||66] | Says Nanak, God has shown mercy to me. ||4||15||66]|
MTAT HIG U Il (387-12)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Afsdig wus A Het ATS Il (387-12, nmr, Hs 5) satgur apnaa sad sadaa sam"aaray. I contemplate, forever and ever, the True Guru;
TdT A VIS AA Afa 3S WAU (87-12, wer, He 5) gur kay charan kays sang jhaaray. ||1]|| with my hair, I dust the feet of the Guru. |]1]]|
Wa J HS AMSIS Il (387-12, nA, He 5) jaag ray man jaaganhaaray. Be wakeful, O my awakening mind!
fag ofa weg 3 orefA om sor Hg fife urs A TIE il (387-13, wm, Hs 5)
bin har avar na aavas kaamaa jhoothaa moh mithi-aa pasaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord, nothing else shall be of use to you; false is emotional attachment, and useless are worldly entanglements. ||1]||Pause| |
aad at arat fAS Jat wte i (387-13, wer, 2 5) gur kee banee si-o rang laa-ay. Embrace love for the Word of the Guru's Bani.
ae forours df ee Ate i211 (387-14, vr, He 5) gur kirpaal ho-ay dukh jaa-ay. ||2|| When the Guru shows His Mercy, pain is destroyed. ||2||
ae fag er adt aS il (387-14, wr, v2 5) gur bin doojaa naahee thaa-o. Without the Guru, there is no other place of rest.
Ts VS TI S| BE Sil 387-14, nm, nz 5) gur daataa gur dayvai naa-o. ||3]| The Guru is the Giver, the Guru gives the Name. ||3]|
TI USAIN USHA wfU Il (387-15, wT, He 5) gur paarbarahm parmaysar aap. The Guru is the Supreme Lord God; He Himself is the Transcendent Lord.
MTS Udd SOA TdT AMY NIAENED I (387-15, TAT, He 5)
aath pahar naanak gur jaap. ||4||16||67]|| Twenty-four hours a day, O Nanak, meditate on the Guru. ||4||16]|67] |
MTAT HIG U Il (387-16)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
my us fanarst APY Il (87-16, wm, He 5) aapay payd bisthaaree saakh. He Himself is the tree, and the branches extending out.
must Fst my Ia WAU (387-16, wmAT, He 5) apnee khaytee aapay raakh. ||1]| He Himself preserves His own crop. ||1]|
AS as UNG Sa Get Il (387-16, wm, He 5) jat kat paykha-o aykai ohee. Wherever I look, I see that One Lord alone.
we we nists mm Het 1A TIS il (387-17, mT, He 5) ghat ghat antar aapay so-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Deep within each and every heart, He Himself is contained. ||1||Pause] |
mint Ag faxafe faery il (387-17, wr, 12 5) aapay soor kiran bisthaar. He Himself is the sun, and the rays emanating from it.
Het qua Aet wag i211 (387-17, wer, He 5) so-ee gupat so-ee aakaar. ||2]| He is concealed, and He is revealed. ||2]|
Hage fosae art ar il (387-18, nmr, v2 5) sargun nirgun thaapai naa-o. He is said to be of the highest attributes, and without attributes.
za fife Sa ats oC SI (387-18, wm, He 5) duh mil aykai keeno thaa-o. ||3]| Both converge onto His single point. ||3]|
ag soa dfs gH 3 afer Il (87-18, wT, He 5) kaho naanak gur bharam bha-o kho-i-aa. Says Nanak, the Guru has dispelled my doubt and fear.
MSE TY AF 35 MBEnt SII IEcil (387-19, wer, we 5) anad roop sabh nain alo-i-aa. ||4||17||68]|
With my eyes, I perceive the Lord, the embodiment of bliss, to be everywhere. [14] [17] |68] |
MTAT HIG U Il (387-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Cats frorsu fas o AAT Il (387-19, mmAT, He 5) ukat si-aanap kichhoo na jaanaa. I know nothing of arguments or cleverness.
Ua Sct
feg df= Sa ON SUS INA (388-1, wm, He 5) din rain tayraa naam vakhaanaa. ||1|| Day and night, I chant Your Name. ||1||
H fosde Te ardt fF Il (388-1, wm, He 5) mai nirgun gun naahee ko-ay. I am worthless; I have no virtue at all.
ads AeoTs YS AE Al TIC it (388-1, ym, ve 5) karan karaavanhaar parabh so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. God is the Creator, the Cause of all causes. ||1]|Pause| |
Hae ya nifamra wieterdt il (388-2, via, He 5) moorakh mugaDh agi-aan aveechaaree. I am foolish, stupid, ignorant and thoughtless;
OH 3d at MITA HIS Ord MQM (388-2, »mAT, He 5) naam tayray kee aas man Dhaaree. ||2]| Your Name is my mind's only hope. ||2]|
AU SU AHH AGH © ANT Il (388-2, mmr, Hs 5) jap tap sanjam karam na saaDhaa. I have not practiced chanting, deep meditation, self-discipline or good actions;
OH YS a Hots MIT SII (388-3, AT, He 5) naam parabhoo kaa maneh araaDhaa. ||3]| but within my mind, I have worshipped God's Name. ||3]|
fag 8 Wat HfS Ast Set il 388-3, »mr, we 5) kichhoo na jaanaa mat mayree thoree. I know nothing, and my intellect is inadequate.
fasefs aoa Ge ys Sct ISNACHECH Gss-3, ym, He 5)
binvat naanak ot parabh toree. ||4]|18]|69] | Prays Nanak, O God, You are my only Support. ||4||18]|69]|
MTAT HIG U Il (388-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofa ore efe fea He Il (88-4, vir, v3 5) har har akhar du-ay ih maalaa. These two words, Har, Har, make up my maalaa.
Aus Aus se Ue elena Al (388-4, wm, us 5)
japat japat bha-ay deen da-i-aalaa. ||1]||
Continually chanting and reciting this rosary, God has become merciful to me, His humble servant. ||1]|
ase east Afsag vist Il Gss-5, wm, Hs 5) kara-o bayntee satgur apunee. I offer my prayer to the True Guru.
afe fasur mug Asal H AG tg Ud oe AuAt NU TIS I 388-5, wer, He 5)
kar kirpaa raakho sarnaa-ee mo ka-o dayh haray har japnee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Shower Your Mercy upon me, and keep me safe in Your Sanctuary; please, give me the maalaa, the rosary of Har, Har. ||1]|Pause| |
ofa Hert Ba nis Ud Il (388-6, nmr, He 5) har maalaa ur antar Dhaarai. One who enshrines this rosary of the Lord's Name within his heart,
HOH HIS a BY HSS | (388-6, wm, Hs 5)
janam maran kaa dookh nivaarai. ||2| | is freed of the pains of birth and death. ||2]|
fase AHS ufy afs afs FS I (ss-6, wer, He 5)
hirdai samaalai mukh har har bolai.
The humble being who contemplates the Lord within his heart, and chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har, with his mouth,
H Ho fes 63 asfa 5 38 ISI (388-7, nr, He 5) so jan it ut kateh na dolai. ||3]| never wavers, here or hereafter. ||3]|
AT Bea A Ie OTe Il (388-7, mA, ne 5) kaho naanak jo raachai naa-ay. Says Nanak, one who is imbued with the Name,
dfs Har at a Afar WHE USNACN DON (388-7, wT, 3 5)
har maalaa taa kai sang jaa-ay. ||4||19||70|| goes to the next world with the maalaa of the Lord's Name. ||4]|19]|70]|
MTAT HIG U Il (88-8)
aasaa menhliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fan at AS fae fon ot SE Il Gss-8, wir, He 5) jis kaa sabh kichh tis kaa ho-ay. All things belong to Him - let yourself belong to Him as well.
fsH Ae Bu 3 fanrdt af— Nall Gss-s, nmr, He 5) tis jan layp na bi-aapai ko-ay. ||1]| No stain clings to such a humble being. ||1]|
dfs a Aa Ae Tt HAS Il Gss-9, wm, Hs 5) har kaa sayvak sad hee muktaa. The Lord's servant is liberated forever.
A fae ad Het 3m Fo a nfs fagHe OA at FAST NA TIC Il (388-9, nm, ne 5) jo kichh karai so-ee bhal jan kai at nirmal daas kee jugtaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever He does, is pleasing to His servant; the way of life of His slave is immaculately pure. ||1]|Pause| |
Hae fsurta afs Avet wrfenr i Gss-10, wm, Hs 5) Sagal ti-aag har sarnee aa-i-aa. One who renounces everything, and enters the Lord's Sanctuary
SH AS ao feemy arfenr IQ Gss-10, mmr, He 5) tis jan kahaa bi-aapai maa-i-aa. ||2]| - how can Maya cling to him? ||2]|
om fears AT a HO HM Il (388-11, wT, He 5) naam niDhaan jaa kay man maahi. With the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in his mind,
fsn a fest Aus ofs III (388-11, nm, He 5) tis ka-o chintaa supnai naahi. ||3]| he suffers no anxiety, even in dreams. ||3]|
AT SH TT UT ufo | 388-11, wm, He 5) kaho naanak gur pooraa paa-i-aa. Says Nanak, I have found the Perfect Guru.
SdH Hg Aa fasrfeur iigi2olD All (388-12, »mAr, He 5)
bharam moh sagal binsaa-i-aa. ||4||20||71|| My doubts and attachments have been totally obliterated. ||4||20||71]|
MTAT HIG U Il (388-12)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AG AUHS de yg AT I Gss-12, nmr, ue 5) ja-O suparsan ho-i-o parabh mayraa. When my God is totally pleased with me,
St TY SIH AT AA ST AU (388-13, wm, Hs 5) taa’ dookh bharam kaho kaisay nayraa. ||1|| then, tell me, how can suffering or doubt draw near me? ||1]|
Afs afs te Afe Hrs I Gss-13, ym, He 5) sun sun jeevaa so-ay tum"aaree. Continually listening to Your Glory, I live.
Hfo fesae aG So Card 19 TIS i Gss-13, nmr, Hz 5) mohi nirgun ka-o layho uDhaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am worthless - save me, O Lord! ||1]||Pause] |
fife afeur ey farrdt fF3T I (388-14, wr, He 5) mit ga-i-aa dookh bisaaree chintaa. My suffering has been ended, and my anxiety is forgotten.
ee utfenr afy Afsare HST IQ (388-14, mA, He 5) fal paa-i-aa jap satgur manntaa. ||2]| I have obtained my reward, chanting the Mantra of the True Guru. ||2| |
Het vfs AfSs 3 APE II (388-15, nr, 3 5)
so-ee Sat sat hai so-ay.
He is True, and True is His glory.
fans frnfs sy afe udf 138i Gss-15, vm, He 5)
simar simar rakh kanth paro-ay. ||3]| Remembering, remembering Him in meditation, keep Him clasped to your heart. ||3||
AT BOX AGS SI ATH Il (388-15, wm, ue 5) kaho naanak ka-un uh karmaa. Says Nanak, what action is there left to do,
aw a ufe efaor af SH NSNQUID2I (388-16, wT, He 5)
jaa kai man vasi-aa har naamaa. ||4||21]|72]| by one whose mind is filled with the Lord's Name? ||4]|21||72]|
MTAT HIG U Il (388-16)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
at afa midorfs fears i (388-16, wm, 42 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar vigootay. Sexual desire, anger, and egotism lead to ruin.
dfs fanaa ate ofs Ae FS AU Gss-16, wr, He 5) har simran kar har jan chhootay. ||1|| Meditating on the Lord, the Lord's humble servants are redeemed. ||1]|
Afe gd ufeur we HS Il (388-17, nmr, He 5) so-ay rahay maa-i-aa mad maatay. The mortals are asleep, intoxicated with the wine of Maya.
Was sas fAHes of TS UU TIS Il (388-17, vm, He 5) jaagat bhagat simrat har raatay. ||1]| rahaa-o. The devotees remain awake, imbued with the Lord's meditation. ||1||Pause] |
Ho safh ag rife setfemr I Gss-18, mrt, He 5)
moh bharam baho jon bhavaa-i-aa.
In emotional attachment and doubt, the mortals wander through countless incarnations.
mAfag sas dfs sae fowrfenr 211 (3ss-18, nmr, He 5) asthir bhagat har charan Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||2| | The devotees remain ever-stable, meditating on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||2||
due vig gu fyT AT | (388-18, mA, He 5) banDhan anDh koop garih mayraa. Bound to household and possessions, the mortals are lost in the deep, dark pit.
Has As ssf dfs Sa Sil Gss-19, wm, Hz 5) muktay sant bujheh har nayraa. ||3]| The Saints are liberated, knowing the Lord to be near at hand. ||3]||
AT sed A us Agvet | (388-19, »mr, ue 5) kaho naanak jo parabh sarnaa-ee. Says Nanak, one who has taken to God's Sanctuary,
Sto AY nrat afs ust SilQVNO3il Gss-19, »mAT, Hs 5)
eehaa sukh aagai gat paa-ee. ||4||22||73]| obtains peace in this world, and salvation in the world hereafter. ||4]|22||73]|
Ua are
MTAT HIG U Il (389-1)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
3 AT SIT TH Hts SHS Il (389-1, wT, Hs 5) too mayraa tarang ham meen tumaaray. You are my waves, and I am Your fish.
3 AT SAT TH SF TMS UI (89-1, wT, we 5) too mayraa thaakur ham tayrai du-aaray. ||1|| You are my Lord and Master; I wait at Your Door. ||1||
3 AT AIT IS AA ST Il (389-2, wer, Hs 5) too” mayraa kartaa ha-o sayvak tayraa. You are my Creator, and I am Your servant.
Hef adt ys Tot ATT WAU FITS il (389-2, wm, ue 5) saran gahee parabh gunee gahayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have taken to Your Sanctuary, O God, most profound and excellent. ||1]|Pause| |
3 He Aleg F vrarg I (339-2, wear, we 5) too mayraa jeevan too aaDhaar. You are my life, You are my Support.
asta uf faa ABT III (389-3, mm, He 5) tujheh paykh bigsai ka-ulaar. ||2|| Beholding You, my heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||2]|
3 Hot afs ufs J users Il Ga9-3, mir, v2 5) too mayree gat pat too parvaan. You are my salvation and honor; You make me acceptable.
3 AHSG H 3ST TE MSI 89-3, ww, ws 5) too samrath mai tayraa taan. ||3]| You are All-powerful, You are my strength. ||3]|
mates AUS SH TESA Il (389-4, wmv, He 5) an-din japa-o naam guntaas. Night and day, I chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the treasure of excellence.
Sot at US uf mgetA ISIISIOIl (389-4, wm, He 5)
naanak kee parabh peh ardaas. ||4||23]|74|| This is Nanak's prayer to God. ||4]|23||74||
MTAT HIG U Il (389-5)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
HTS FO AHA Il (389-5, wr, us 5) rovanhaarai jhooth kamaanaa. The mourner practices falsehood;
ofA afk Aa ATS Fa All (89-5, new, ws 5) has has sog karat baygaanaa. ||1]|| he laughs with glee, while mourning for others. ||1]|
X HT aT ot ulfs TSG Il (389-5, wma, Hz 5) ko moo-aa kaa kai ghar gaavan. Someone has died, while there is singing in someone else's house.
so SA 4
a de a ofA ofA uSg IU TIS Il (339-6, nm, He 5) ko rovai ko has has paavan. ||1|| rahaa-o. One mourns and bewails, while another laughs with glee. ||1]||Pause| |
ae fener 3 faaarar il (389-6, nmr, He 5) baal bivasthaa tay birDhaanaa. From childhood to old age,
udts & Hor fefs USS MI (389-6, wT, HE 5) pahuch na mookaa fir pachhutaanaa. ||2|| the mortal does not attain his goals, and he comes to regret in the end. ||2||
fgg we Hfs eas AAS Il (389-7, »mr, He 5) tarihu gun meh vartai sansaaraa. The world is under the influence of the three qualities.
saa Hoa feta fefs mara Sil (389-7, nmr, Hs 5) narak surag fir fir a-utaaraa. ||3]| The mortal is reincarnated, again and again, into heaven and hell. ||3]|
AT Bea A oer | I (389-7, wer, He 5) kaho naanak jo laa-i-aa naam. Says Nanak, one who is attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
He®G HOH 3 a USS ISIQENDUIl (389-8, nim, He 5)
safal janam taa kaa parvaan. ||4||24||75]|| becomes acceptable, and his life becomes fruitful. ||4]|24]|75| |
MTAT HIG U Il (389-8)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Afe adt ys uate o At Il (389-8, nim, He 5) so-ay rahee parabh khabar na jaanee. She remains asleep, and does not know the news of God.
3g sfeur gafe usstst Il (389-9, nmr, v8 5) bhor bha-i-aa bahur pachhutaanee. ||1]| The day dawns, and then, she regrets. ||1||
fur Un Rafa His uo Tas FT I 89-9, wr, us 5) pari-a paraym sahj man anad Dhara-o ree. Loving the Beloved, the mind is filled with celestial bliss.
ys fhod at SOA 3S MOA AT age TH A TIC Il (389-9, wm, ws 5) parabh milbay kee laalsaa taa tay aalas kahaa kara-o ree. ||1|| rahaa-o. You yearn to meet with God, so why do you delay? ||1||Pause] |
ad ufo nifgs nite fantail (389-10, »mr, us 5) kar meh amrit aan nisaari-o. He came and poured His Ambrosial Nectar into your hands,
fants afe gH ufs sfsS 2 (389-11, wr, He 5) khisar ga-i-o bhoom par daari-o. ||2|| but it slipped through your fingers, and fell onto the ground. ||2||
Afe dfs Bret miard ll (389-11, omar, Hs 5) saad mohi laadee aha™kaaray. You are burdened with desire, emotional attachment and egotism;
SH Sd US ATETS Ill (389-11, »m, ne 5) dos naahee parabh karnaihaaray. ||3]|| it is not the fault of God the Creator. ||3]|
AaAfa fs SoH vias | (389-12, nA, He 5) saaDhsang mitay bharam anDhaaray. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the darkness of doubt is dispelled.
Soa HOt fAgHeds NIQUIIDEN (389-12, wmAT, He 5)
naanak maylee sirjanhaaray. ||4||25||76|| O Nanak, the Creator Lord blends us with Himself. ||4]|25]||76| |
MTAT HIG U Il (389-12)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
TIO GHG at nia furs Il (389-13, nmr, He 5) charan kamal kee aas pi-aaray. I long for the Lotus Feet of my Beloved Lord.
Anaad ofA we fess All (389-13, wm, He 5) jamkankar nas ga-ay vichaaray. ||1]| The wretched Messenger of Death has run away from me. ||1]|
3 fats nrefa Sct ufeur it Gs9-13, mrt, He 5) too chit aavahi tayree ma-i-aa. You enter into my mind, by Your Kind Mercy.
fAHes OH Aare sar ufenr nai TI il 89-14, mz, v2 5) simrat naam sagal rog kha-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all diseases are destroyed. ||1]|Pause| |
mifox va Sets meat AE il (389-14, mmr, He 5) anik dookh dayveh avraa ka-o. Death gives so much pain to others,
ugfs 6 Wats AS Sd AS IQ (389-14, wm, He 5) pahuch na saakeh jan tayray ka-o. ||2|| but it cannot even come near Your slave. ||2||
ZA 3d at fim fe wait Il (389-15, war, He 5)
daras tayray kee pi-aas man laagee. My mind thirsts for Your Vision;
HoH Me SA Fat iWSll (389-15, wmv, ws 5) sahj anand basai bairaagee. ||3]| in peaceful ease and bliss, I dwell in detachment. ||3]|
Soa At MgeTA ASIA Il (389-15, MTAT, He 5) naanak kee ardaas suneejai. Hear this prayer of Nanak:
aee oH foe ufo StH SIEM (339-16, nmr, He 5) kayval naam riday meh deejai. ||4]|26]|77] | please, infuse Your Name into his heart. ||4||26]|77]|
MTAT HIG U Il (389-16)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
He fRusts fue AA Il Gs9-16, vi, He 5) man tariptaano mitay janjaal. My mind is satisfied, and my entanglements have been dissolved.
us mua dfemr fase il (89-17, »mr, He 5) parabh apunaa ho-i-aa kirpaal. ||1]| God has become merciful to me. ||1]|
AS yAtE sot gat Il (389-17, wer, ue 5) sant parsaad bhalee banee. By the Grace of the Saints, everything has turned out well.
W & fafs Ag fas 3 uae A Sfemr fess Tat NU TIS I (389-17, we, ws 5)
jaa kai garihi sabh kichh hai pooran so bhayti-aa nirbhai Dhanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. His House is overflowing with all things; I have met Him, the Fearless Master. ||1]|Pause] |
oH festfenr Arq forures Il (389-18, »mAr, Hs 5) naam drirh-aa-i-aa saaDh kirpaal. By the Kind Mercy of the Holy Saints, the Naam has been implanted within me.
fife aret ga Hot fas QM (389-18, mmAT, He 5) mit ga-ee bhookh mahaa bikraal. ||2|| The most dreadful desires have been eliminated. ||2]|
Safa nus atat ets Il (389-19, mmr, He 5) thaakur apunai keenee daat. My Master has given me a gift;
Hote ast Hie det As SI (89-19, wm, He 5) jalan bujhee man ho-ee saa"t. ||3]| the fire has been extinguished, and my mind is now at peace. ||3]|
fufe wet 37% HO AOfA AHS Il (339-19, wm, He 5) mit ga-ee bhaal man sahj samaanaa. My search has ended, and my mind is absorbed in celestial bliss.
Ua 3xto
Soa UfeMit SH UATST IBIQIIDCH (390-1, mT, He 5)
naanak paa-i-aa naam khajaanaa. ||4||27||78]|| Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|27]||78] |
MTAT HIG U Il (90-1)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
oad TAG A at afe mre II (390-1, nm, v8 5) thaakur si-o jaa kee ban aa-ee. Those who are attuned to their Lord and Master
SHO UTS FT MUTE AI (390-2, wm, He 5)
bhojan pooran rahay aghaa-ee. ||1]| are satisfied and fulfilled with the perfect food. ||1]|
es HAT Tle FASS AE Il (390-2, mw, we 5) kachhoo na thoraa har bhagtan ka-o. The Lord's devotees never run short of anything.
ug udus fames Feo aE NA TIE Il (390-2, vm, ve 5) khaat kharchat bilchhat dayvan ka-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. They have plenty to eat, spend, enjoy and give. ||1||Pause| |
WT at Ost MoH TATE Il (390-3, wim, Hs 5) jaa kaa Dnanee agam gusaa-ee. One who has the Unfathomable Lord of the Universe as his Master
HOY at AT AT FHT NII (390-3, nr, ve 5) maanukh kee kaho kayt chalaa-ee. ||2| | - how can any mere mortal stand up to him? ||2] |
Ww at Ae’ GA mA| fret Il (390-3, mr, He 5) jaa kee sayvaa das asat siDhaa-ee. One who is served by the eighteen supernatural powers of the Siddhas
usa feAfe 3 at ward uret SI (390-4, vr, v8 5) palak disat taa kee laagahu paa-ee. ||3]| - grasp his feet, even for an instant. ||3]|
Ww ag efeur ag AS AMM Il (90-4, wim, v2 5) jaa ka-o da-i-aa karahu mayray su-aamee. That one, upon whom You have showered Your Mercy, O my Lord Master
AT Baa Ad fq AH ISWIAcwOe€ll (390-5, wm, He 5)
kaho naanak naahee tin kaamee. ||4||28]|79|| - says Nanak, he does not lack anything. ||4]|28]]|79] |
MTAT HIG U Il (390-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ag H nus Afsag fomrfenr | (390-5, mmr, Ht 5) ja-o mai apunaa satgur Dhi-aa-i-aa. When I meditate on my True Guru,
sane ufs Hot AY uTfeMT IAI (390-6, mmr, He 5) tab mayrai man mahaa sukh paa-i-aa. ||1|| my mind becomes supremely peaceful. ||1]|
fife wet aes faofAG AAT II (390-6, wir, He 5) mit ga-ee ganat binaasi-o sansaa. The record of my account is erased, and my doubts are dispelled.
Ot IS He SS FAST NU FIC Il 90-6, wm, ns 5)
naam ratay jan bha-ay bhagvantaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, His humble servant is blessed with good fortune. ||1]||Pause] |
Ag H nro ATfog SHS I (390-7, wer, He 5) ja-o mai apunaa saahib cheet. When I remember my Lord and Master,
38 38 fxfeG HS HIS QI (90-7, wm, 2 5) ta-o bha-o miti-o mayray meet. ||2]| my fears are dispelled, O my friend. ||2| |
AG H Ge act ys Sct Il 390-7, vm, us 5) ja-o mai ot gahee parabh tayree. When I took to Your Protection, O God,
3t yaa Jet HOAT Hat ISI (390-8, wr, He 5) taa pooran ho-ee mansaa mayree. ||3]| my desires were fulfilled. ||3]|
ofa afes nfs se fe@rAT Il (390-8, nmr, He 5) daykh chalit man bha-ay dilaasaa. Gazing upon the wonder of Your play, my mind has become encouraged.
SSA WA SI SISTAT WSNQACENCOMN (390-8, ne, He 5)
naanak daas tayraa bharvaasaa. ||4||29]||80|| Servant Nanak relies on You alone. ||4||29||80]|
MTAT HIG U Il (390-9)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Motes HAT BA Tare Il (390-9, wrAr, 42 5) an-din moosaa laaj tukaa-ee. Night and day, the mouse of time gnaws away at the rope of life.
farss au ufo ufo fret WAI (390-9, wT, +8 5) girat koop meh khaahi mithaa-ee. ||1|| Falling into the well, the mortal eats the sweet treats of Maya. ||1]|
Hus Ares ofs feast Il (390-10, »mrr, 2 5) sochat saachat rain bihaanee. Thinking and planning, the night of the life is passing away.
mifsa da went & fases wag 3 fans Afsaurat Ul TIS Il (390-10, wr, we 5) anik rang maa-i-aa kay chitvat kabhoo na simrai saringpaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Thinking of the many pleasures of Maya, the mortal never remembers the Lord, the Sustainer of the earth. ||1||Pause| |
gH ot stfeur fosee fag aiftmr 1 390-11, wir, nH 5) darum kee chhaa-i-aa nihchal garihu baa“Dhi-aa. Believing the shade of the tree to be permanent, he builds his house beneath it.
ames ao aiff Aas Ag AifoMr iH (390-11, »mAr, He 5)
kaal kai faas sakat sar saa’Dhi-aa. ||2]|
But the noose of death is around his neck, and Shakti, the power of Maya, has aimed her arrows at him. ||2]|
Me xorg Sdat Hie wrfenr | (390-12, wer, v2 5) baaloo kanaaraa tarang mukh aa-i-aa. The sandy shore is being washed away by the waves,
Aw us fesse afe ufemr 3il 390-12, »mr, H: 5) so thaan moorh nihchal kar paa-i-aa. ||3]| but the fool still believes that place to be permanent. ||3] |
AaHfa Afus afs ae i (390-12, mmr, He 5) saaDhsang japi-o har raa-ay. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, chant the Name of the Lord, the King.
Soa He dfs TS ATE IsiBoical (390-13, mmAr, uz 5) naanak jeevai har gun gaa-ay. ||4]|30||81]|| Nanak lives by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||30||81] |
MAT HO U Bsa € Il (390-13)
aasaa mehlaa 5 dutukay 9. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Du-Tukas 9:
Ca & Afar J AIST AB I (390-13, wm, wi: 5) un kai sang too kartee kayl. With that, you are engaged in playful sport;
8a & fat TH SH Afal AS Il (90-14, mmr, nz 5) un kai sang ham tum sang mayl. with that, I am joined to you.
Ca & Afar SH AS AT Se Il (390-14, wer, ws 5) un" kai sang tum sabh ko-oo lorai. With that, everyone longs for you;
GA faa A HY Sat AT WAU (390-14, wr, HH 5) os binaa ko-oo mukh nahee jorai. ||1]| without it, no one would even look at your face. ||1]|
3 Farait AT ANTES | (390-15, wr, we 5) tay bairaagee kahaa samaa-ay. Where is that detached soul now contained?
fan fas sot east st nai TIS i (390-15, wm, He 5) tis bin tuhee duhayree ree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without it, you are miserable. ||1||Pause] |
Ca a Afar 3 faa Hfa Hate Il (390-15, wm, Hs 5) un" kai sang too garih meh maahar. With that, you are the woman of the house;
Bq & Afar J Tet F AS I (390-16, wm, He 5) un" kai sang too ho-ee hai jaahar. with that, you are respected.
aq x Afar J Tat wats Il (390-16, »mr, He 5) un" kai sang too rakhee papol. With that, you are caressed;
GA faa F scat SH 2M (390-16, wr, ws 5) os binaa too” chhutkee rol. ||2|| without it, you are reduced to dust. ||2]|
Ba & Afar Sa HT HIS Il (390-17, »mT, Hs 5) un" kai sang tayraa maan mahat. With that, you have honor and respect;
Ba & Afar SH AA Aas Il (390-17, wm, H8 5) un" kai sang tum saak jagat. with that, you have relatives in the world.
Ca & Afar Sat As fafa art it (390-17, nin, He 5) un" kai sang tayree sabh biDh thaatee. With that, you are adorned in every way;
GA faa 3 Tet F Het BI (390-18, wm, H:2 5) os binaa too™ ho-ee hai maatee. ||3]| without it, you are reduced to dust. ||3]|
Gg Haat HS & ATE Il (390-18, wr, He 5) oh bairaagee marai na jaa-ay. That detached soul is neither born, nor dies.
JAH AO as AHFE Il (390-18, nim, He 5) hukmay baaDhaa kaar kamaa-ay. It acts according to the Command of the Lord's Will.
nfs fees soa au il (390-19, wr, He 5)
jorh vichhorhay naanak thaap.
O Nanak, having fashioned the body, the Lord unites the soul with it, and separates them again;
Must APs AS yrfU USISAUlc2il (390-19, wm, He 5) apnee kudrat jaanai aap. ||4]|31||82|| He alone knows His All-powerful creative nature. ||4||31||82| |
MTAT HIG U Il (390-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Yar Bq
ot Gg HIST OT TH Sfmt Il (391-1, wm, He 5) naa oh martaa naa ham dari-aa. He does not die, so I do not fear.
ot Gg fash ot IN afer Il Go1-1, nmr, Hs 5) naa oh binsai naa ham karhi-aa. He does not perish, so I do not grieve.
a 8g fesug 3 TH Be Il (391-1, wr, He 5) naa oh nirDhan naa ham bhookhay. He is not poor, so I do not hunger.
a GH EY 3 IN AE SF NA Go1-1, mT, He 5) naa os dookh na ham ka-o dookhay. ||1]| He is not in pain, so I do not suffer. ||1]|
MET 5 AG HIST Il (391-2, ww, Hs 5) avar na ko-0o0 maaranvaaraa. There is no other Destroyer than Him.
Abus Ha AIG Saga AU JIS Il (391-2, ni, nz 5) jee-a-o hamaaraa jee-o daynhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is my very life, the Giver of life. ||1]|Pause] |
ot GA Sue 3 IH AT Il (391-3, wm, He 5) naa us banDhan naa ham baaDhay. He is not bound, so I am not in bondage.
ot QA UU at gH OO Il (391-3, mmr, He 5) naa us DhanDhaa naa ham DhaaDhay. He has no occupation, so I have no entanglements.
o GH HS 6 DH AG HS Il (391-3, mmr, He 5) naa us mail na ham ka-o mailaa. He has no impurities, so I have no impurities.
GA MIST FS IN AS AT Ill (391-3, new, He 5) os anand ta ham sad kaylaa. ||2]| He is in ecstasy, so I am always happy. ||2]|
o GH AY 3 UH AG AT Il 391-4, nmr, He 5) naa us soch na ham ka-o sochaa. He has no anxiety, so I have no cares.
ot GA BU O DH AG UT Il 391-4, wer, He 5) naa us layp na ham ka-o pochaa. He has no stain, so I have no pollution.
o SH Su o TH AS FAST Il (391-4, wer, He 5) naa us bhookh na ham ka-o tarisnaa. He has no hunger, so I have no thirst.
Ww Cg fSdHe 3t IH ABST ISI (91-5, nT, v8 5) jaa uho nirmal taa™ ham jachnaa. ||3]| Since He is immaculately pure, I correspond to Him. ||3]|
oH foe at Sa Gat i 91-5, vir, ve 5) ham kichh naahee aykai ohee. I am nothing; He is the One and only.
EN a Ny Sy, Md UTE SA AST Il (391-5, nA, He 5) aagai paachhai ayko so-ee. Before and after, He alone exists.
Soa Tfs de FH Sa Il (391-6, »mT, vs 5) naanak gur kho-ay bharam bhangaa. O Nanak, the Guru has taken away my doubts and mistakes;
oH Gfe fife de fea Jar siSVQncsil Go1-6, wr, He 5) ham o-ay mil ho-ay ik rangaa. ||4||32||83]| He and I, joining together, are of the same color. ||4||32]||83] |
MTAT HIG U Il (91-6)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
mifoa sifs afs Het ad I 391-7, wm, He 5) anik bhaa“t kar sayvaa karee-ai. Serve Him in many different ways;
MG ye US nat Usb Il (391-7, »mT, Hs 5) jee-o paraan Dhan aagai Dharee-ai. Dedicate your soul, your breath of life and your wealth to Him.
urét ut ad StH nifsHTe Il (391-7, nT, Hs 5) paanee pakhaa kara-o taj abhimaan. Carry water for Him, and wave the fan over Him - renounce your ego.
wife ae ATE ATA IAI (391-8, nA, He 5) anik baar jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. ||1|| Make yourself a sacrifice to Him, time and time again. ||1]|
Aret Aovafe A ys set I (391-8, wm, Hs 5) Saa-ee suhaagan jo parabh bhaa-ee. She alone is the happy soul-bride, who is pleasing to God.
fan a Afar foo ASt Het Wal TIC il (391-8, wr, vs 5) tis kai sang mila-o mayree maa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. In her company, I may meet Him, O my mother. ||1]|Pause| |
ants ant at ufsata il (391-9, nmr, He 5) daasan daasee kee panihaar. I am the water-carrier of the slaves of His slaves.
Ba at = aA Abort of I (301-9, wr, ne 5) un" kee rayn basai jee-a naal. I treasure in my soul the dust of their feet.
HE Sa FS USC Aa Il 391-9, wewr, ve 5) maathai bhaag ta paava-o sang. By that good destiny inscribed upon my forehead, I obtain their society.
firs Amit vrs Sar 2H 91-10, vr, He 5) milai su-aamee apunai rang. ||2|| Through His Love, the Lord Master meets me. ||2||
Ay Sty SSE AS SH Il (391-10, wm, He 5) jaap taap dayva-o sabh naymaa. I dedicate all to Him - chanting and meditation, austerity and religious observances.
ASH OSH Mau AS THT II (391-10, mA, He 5) karam Dharam arpa-o sabh homaa. I offer all to Him - good actions, righteous conduct and incense burning.
aaa He sha deC Fo Il (391-10, nm, ne 5) garab moh taj hova-o rayn. Renouncing pride and attachment, I become the dust of the feet of the Saints.
Ca & Afar fu ys SB ISI Go1-11, vm, we 5) un" kai sang daykh-a-u parabh nain. ||3]| In their society, I behold God with my eyes. ||3]|
fond fone Sct mraa@ il (391-11, wr, ns 5) nimakh nimakh ayhee aaraaDha-o. Each and every moment, I contemplate and adore Him.
feon df= Sa AST ATE Il (91-11, nmr, Hs 5) dinas rain ayh sayvaa saaDha-o. Day and night, I serve Him like this.
se faures gure af#e | 01-12, nmr, ve 5) bha-ay kirpaal gupaal gobind. The Lord of the Universe, the Cherisher of the World, has become merciful;
AUHfa Soar SUAS ISISSICSII (391-12, nT, He 5)
saaDhsang naanak bakhsind. ||4]||33||84|| in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, He forgives us. ||4]|33]|84|
MTAT HIG U Il (391-13)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
us at uifS Aet AY SPE II (391-13, »mr, He 5) parabh kee pareet sadaa sukh ho-ay. In the Love of God, eternal peace is obtained.
us at ulfs ey oat 3 Af Il (391-13, mr, He 5) parabh kee pareet dukh lagai na ko-ay. In the Love of God, one is not touched by pain.
ys at ulfs gen He fe II 91-13, nmr, He 5) parabh kee pareet ha-umai mal kho-ay. In the Love of God, the filth of ego is washed away.
us at ulfs Ae foanes dE NA (391-14, »mr, He 5) parabh kee pareet sad nirmal ho-ay. ||1|| In the Love of God, one becomes forever immaculate. ||1]|
Hog His war un fimrrg il (391-14, om, 18 5) sunhu meet aisaa paraym pi-aar. Listen, O friend: show such love and affection to God,
Aba ure We we niTaTg WU TIS Il (391-14, wr, He 5) jee-a paraan ghat ghat aaDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. the Support of the soul, the breath of life, of each and every heart. ||1||Pause| |
ys at Ulfs se Aas fours Il (391-15, nmr, ue 5) parabh kee pareet bha-ay sagal niDhaan. In the Love of God, all treasures are obtained.
us at ulfs fee faa OH Il 91-15, wim, ne 5) parabh kee pareet ridai nirmal naam. In the Love of God, the Immaculate Naam fills the heart.
us at ulfS Ae ASTSS Il (391-16, vm, Hs 5) parabh kee pareet sad sobhaavant. In the Love of God, one is eternally embellished.
us at ulfs AS fet 3 FES NIN Go1-16, wT, He 5) parabh kee pareet sabh mitee hai chint. ||2] | In the Love of God, all anxiety is ended. ||2]|
us at ulfs feg see Sd Il (391-16, vm, He 5) parabh kee pareet ih bhavjal tarai. In the Love of God, one crosses over this terrible world-ocean.
ys at ulfS AN 3 odt 3d Il (91-17, »mr, He 5) parabh kee pareet jam tay nahee dardi. In the Love of God, one does not fear death.
ys at ulfS Aas Burd il (391-17, vm, 8 5) parabh kee pareet sagal uDhaarai. In the Love of God, all are saved.
ys at ulfs 3S Hard 3 (91-17, »mr, ue 5) parabh kee pareet chalai sangaaray. ||3]|| The Love of God shall go along with you. ||3]|
MTU Aet HHS F FB Il (391-18, wear, ws 5) aaphu ko-ee milai na bhoolai. By himself, no one is united, and no one goes astray.
fan faures fA AGATE Wes I Go1-18, wr, Hs 5) jis kirpaal tis saaDhsang ghoolai. One who is blessed by God's Mercy, joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
AT soa Sd ATHS Il (391-18, »irHr, we 5) kaho naanak tayrai kurbaan. Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to You.
As Ge ys Sq TES NUSSICUI (391-18, wm, He 5) sant ot parabh tayraa taan. ||4||34||85]| O God, You are the Support and the Strength of the Saints. ||4]|34]|85||
MTAT HIG U Il (91-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
gufs af & TH AHEM Il Go1-19, wr, Hs 5) bhoopat ho-ay kai raaj kamaa-i-aa. Becoming a king, the mortal wields his royal authority;
ats afs nage feast Hfemr II (391-19, wm, nH 5) kar kar anrath vihaajee maa-i-aa. oppressing the people, he gathers wealth.
Ua arta
Hus Has set atet il (392-1, »mr, ue 5) sanchat sanchat thailee keen"ee. Gathering it and collecting it, he fills his bags.
ufs GA 3 ate nes AB cat Al (392-1, wm, ws 5) parabh us tay daar avar ka-o deen"ee. ||1]| But God takes it away from him, and gives it to another. ||1]|
AS Tada nig HsdM Il (392-1, wmv, v2 5) kaach gagree-aa ambh majhree-aa. The mortal is like an unbaked clay pot in water;
aes ats Surg nfs udhor wai TIS il (392-2, mirAr, ve 5) garab garab u-aahoo meh paree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. indulging in pride and egotism, he crumbles down and dissolves. ||1||Pause| |
foss@ dfeS sfiur fadar il (392-2, nmr, He 5) nirbha-o ho-i-o bha-i-aa nihangaa. Being fearless, he becomes unrestrained.
dfs 3 urfeS asst Aa Il (392-3, wm, we 5) cheet na aa-i-o kartaa sangaa. He does not think of the Creator, who is ever with him.
GAA AS Ab AAT Il (392-3, nimAr, He 5) laskar jorhay kee-aa sambaahaa. He raises armies, and collects arms.
foattor ga 3 of ae Ara i121 392-3, wm, Hs 5) niksi-aa fook ta ho-ay ga-i-o su-aahaa. ||2|| But when the breath leaves him, he turns to ashes. ||2]|
Ce HET HIG mig Tet Il (392-4, mew, we 5) oochay mandar mahal ar raanee. He has lofty palaces, mansions and queens,
JAfs ws AS fs stat I (392-4, mmr, we 5) hasat ghorhay jorhay man bhaanee. elephants and pairs of horses, delighting the mind;
TS UIST US wg Uo Il (392-4, ww, we 5) vad parvaar poot ar Dhee-aa. he is blessed with a great family of sons and daughters.
Hf ud ufs niat Hr BI (392-4, mr, He 5) mohi pachay pach anDhaa moo-aa. ||3]|| But, engrossed in attachment, the blind fool wastes away to death. ||3]|
frats Cura fsats faarat il (392-5, wm, He 5) jineh upaahaa tineh binaahaa. The One who created him destroys him.
ddl SAT AA AUST Il (392-5, mA, He 5) rang rasaa jaisay supnaahaa. Enjoyments and pleasures are like just a dream.
Het Hast FSA TH HD Il (392-5, mA, He 5) so-ee muktaa tis raaj maal. He alone is liberated, and possesses regal power and wealth,
Sa OA fAA YAH efEnrs IiSiBUullcell (392-6, nm, v2 5)
naanak daas jis khasam da-i-aal. ||4||35||86] | O Nanak, whom the Lord Master blesses with His Mercy. ||4||35||86]|
MTAT HIG U Il (392-6)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
feq fAS UifS act wadt 1 (92-6, wm, u3 5) in" si-o pareet karee ghanayree. The mortal is in love with this,
Ag fishy 3B ea Sat I (392-7, nmr, ne 5) ja-o milee-ai ta-o vaDhai vaDhayree. but the more he has, the more he longs for more.
afte BHSt AE ES ordt Il (392-7, mm, He 5) gal chamrhee ja-o chhodai naahee. It hangs around his neck, and does not leave him.
oa ge Afsag at uret Al (392-7, wr, He 5) laag chhuto satgur kee paa-ee. ||1|| But falling at the feet of the True Guru, he is saved. ||1]]|
Hal HISt JH fSurfer weet 1 (392-8, ver, He 5) jag mohnee ham ti-aag gavaa-ee. I have renounced and discarded Maya, the Enticer of the world.
fosae fife@ ext caret ai TIS Il (392-8, nr, v2 5) nirgun mili-o vajee vaDhaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. I have met the Absolute Lord, and congratulations are pouring in. ||1||Pause| |
MAT Hefs He AS HT Il (92-8, wir, He 5) aisee sundar man ka-o mohai. She is so beautiful, she captivates the mind.
afe urfe fafa afs afs Az I (392-9, nmr, ne 5)
baat ghaat garihi ban ban johai.
On the road, and the beach, at home, in the forest and in the wilderness, she touches us.
Hfs 3fe oat df= & HtSt Il (392-9, wm, He 5) man tan laagai ho-ay kai meethee. She seems so sweet to the mind and body.
aa ure H dct Stet iQI (392-9, wim, He 5) gur parsaad mai khotee deethee. ||2]| But by Guru's Grace, I have seen her to be deceptive. ||2||
masa GA A ZS Sa Il 392-10, wrAr, H2 5) agrak us kay vaday thagaa-oo. Her courtiers are also great deceivers.
sata oat au B HG Il (392-10, wr, Hs 5) chhodeh naahee baap na maa-oo. They do not spare even their fathers or mothers.
Hat nus Sfs & AT Il (392-10, nmr, He 5) maylee apnay un lay baa‘Dhay. They have enslaved their companions.
ad frou 3 H Aas AT ISI (392-11, nA, He 5) gur kirpaa tay mai saglay saaDhay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, I have subjugated them all. ||3]|
ma Hd fs sfeor ne Il (392-11, mr, ue 5) ab morai man bha-i-aa anand. Now, my mind is filled with bliss;
38 ya" ce Als Se Il (392-11, wer, 4: 5) bha-o chookaa tootay sabh fand. my fear is gone, and the noose is cut away.
aT Soa A Asad ufeEni i (392-12, mmr, ve 5) kaho naanak jaa satgur paa-i-aa. Says Nanak, when I met the True Guru,
We Age HA Aet Svea sISENCII (392-12, mm, He 5)
ghar saglaa mai sukhee basaa-i-aa. ||4||36||87]| I came to dwell within my home in absolute peace. ||4||36||87]||
MTAT HIG U Il (892-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
mS Uudd foate afs ATS Il (392-13, »mAT, He 5) aath pahar nikat kar jaanai. Twenty-four hours a day, he knows the Lord to be near at hand;
Us at aha Her HTS Il (392-13, wr, He 5) parabh kaa kee-aa meethaa maanai. he surrenders to the Sweet Will of God.
Pq SH ASS MMU Il (392-13, wr, He 5) ayk naam santan aaDhaar. The One Name is the Support of the Saints;
dfs od AS at Us ST NA (392-13, wir, He 5) ho-ay rahay sabh kee pag chhaar. ||1|| they remain the dust of the feet of all. ||1]|
H3 JS Hog HS SSH I (392-14, wm, nz 5) sant rahat sunhu mayray bhaa-ee. Listen, to the way of life of the Saints, O my Siblings of Destiny;
Gur at HfoHt aaS o AET NAN TIC il (392-14, wr, He 5) u-aa kee mahimaa kathan na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. their praises cannot be described. ||1]||Pause| |
ZIsts A A ASH TH Il (392-15, wr, nz 5) vartan jaa kai kayval naam. Their occupation is the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Moe Ju ates FHA II (392-15, mmAT, He 5) anad roop keertan bisraam. The Kirtan, the Praise of the Lord, the embodiment of bliss, is their rest.
fez AZ Ak SA AHS Il (392-15, wT, H8 5) mitar satar jaa kai ayk samaanai. Friends and enemies are one and the same to them.
us nud faq nieT OATS MQM (392-15, wer, He 5) parabh apunay bin avar na jaanai. ||2|| They know of no other than God. ||2]|
ate afe npr atesdra Il (392-16, wT, He 5) kot kot agh katanhaaraa. They erase millions upon millions of sins.
wa fs ade Ahr & STS Il (392-16, mmAr, He 5) dukh door karan jee-a kay daataaraa. They dispel suffering; they are givers of the life of the soul.
Heats Asa AX Tat Il (392-16, wmv, He 5) soorbeer bachan kay balee. They are so brave; they are men of their word.
aor sudt Hat 2at IZIl (92-17, nr, He 5) ka-ulaa bapuree santee chhalee. ||3]|| The Saints have enticed Maya herself. ||3]|
3 a AT Mefs AIeS | (392-17, wm, nz 5) taa kaa sang baachheh surdayv. Their company is cherished even by the gods and the angels.
WMHU VIA ASS AT at AS I (392-17, nA, vs 5) amogh daras safal jaa kee sayv. Blessed is their Darshan, and fruitful is their service.
ad afs aoa Ad magetA I (392-18, wr, He 5) kar jorh naanak karay ardaas. With his palms pressed together, Nanak offers his prayer:
Hfo HS coe AA TESA ISISINCCI (392-18, nm, He 5)
mohi santeh tahal deejai guntaas. ||4]||37]||88] |
O Lord, Treasure of Excellence, please bless me with the service of the Saints. [14137] 188] |
MTAT HIG U Il (392-19)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Hares AY Af Sat SMH Il (392-19, mr, He 5) Sagal sookh jap aykai naam. All peace and comforts are in the meditation of the One Name.
Has UeH dfs X WE IH Il (392-19, wm, ve 5) sagal Dharam har kay gun gaam. All righteous actions of Dharma are in the singing of the Lord's Glorious Praises.
Ho ufezy AT AT Aa I (392-19, ww, ue 5) mahaa pavitar saaDh kaa sang. The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is so very pure and sacred.
Ua ats
fan Ses Sa YS FF AU (393-1, »mT, us 5) jis bhaytat laagai parabh rang. ||1]| Meeting with them, love for God is embraced. ||1]|
aa ure Gfe mrée ure | (393-1, vr, us 5) gur parsaad o-ay aanand paavai. By Guru's Grace, bliss is obtained.
fan fies ufs af yar So at af fins age 3 FS AU TTC I 93-1, vm, He 5) jis simrat man ho-ay pargaasaa taa kee gat mit kahan na jaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating upon Him in remembrance, the mind is illumined; his state and condition cannot be described. ||1||Pause| |
ZIS SH HAG FSA UAT Il G93-2, mITAT, He 5) varat naym majan tis poojaa. Fasts, religious vows, cleansing baths, and worship to Him;
ae uae fate fifiyfs wat i (93-2, mr, us 5) bayd puraan tin simrit suneejaa. listening to the Vedas, Puraanas, and Shaastras.
Ho uss AT at fSSHG BS Il (393-3, nA, He 5) mahaa puneet jaa kaa nirmal thaan. Extremely pure is he, and immaculate is his place,
Wonafs a a dfs dfs SH NI (393-3, wT, He 5) saaDhsangat jaa kai har har naam. ||2|| who meditates upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Saadh Sangat. ||2]|
yateS A AG Ades So Il (393-4, vw, ne 5) pargati-o so jan saglay bhavan. That humble being becomes renowned all over the world.
ufsz uss 3 at ual FS Il (393-4, nmr, He 5) patit puneet taa kee pag rayn. Even sinners are purified, by the dust of his feet.
vw ag safes af ofs ae il (393-4, mmr, He 5) jaa ka-o bhayti-o har har raa-ay. One who has met the Lord, the Lord our King,
x at afs ffs aaa 3 ATE ISI (93-4, nmr, He 5) taa kee gat mit kathan na jaa-ay. ||3]| his condition and state cannot be described. ||3]|
WTS udd ad Afs forme i (393-5, nmr, He 5) aath pahar kar jorh Dhi-aava-o. Twenty-four hours a day, with palms pressed together, I meditate;
Go ATU at SAAS USS Il (393-5, wir, He 5) un saaDhaa kaa darsan paava-o. I yearn to obtain the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of those Holy Saints.
Hfo adta a@ Sg sere |i (393-5, wer, He 5) mohi gareeb ka-o layho ralaa-ay. Merge me, the poor one, with You, O Lord;
Sod Mis us APSE NISC (393-6, mT, He 5) naanak aa-ay pa-ay sarnaa-ay. ||4||38]|89]| Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||38]|89||
MTAT HIG U Il (393-6)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
MS Udd Bea fEAaTAT Il (393-6, nm, He 5) aath pahar udak isnaanee. Twenty-four hours a day, he takes his cleansing bath in water;
Re dt sa wart Afamrat i (393-7, nmr, ne 5) sad hee bhog lagaa-ay sugi-aanee. he makes continual offerings to the Lord; he is a true man of wisdom.
fase arg 3 Sat Il (393-7, wm, He 5) birthaa kaahoo chhodai naahee. He never leaves anything uselessly.
wots safe fA ward uret IAI (93-7, wim, He 5) bahur bahur tis laagah paa-ee. ||1]| Again and again, he falls at the Lord's Feet. ||1]|
AMfasny TH AST Il (393-8, nimAr, Hs 5) Saalgiraam hamaarai sayvaa. Such is the Saalagraam, the stone idol, which I serve;
UAT nige FG SS UU! TI'S Il 393-8, werAr, Hs 5) poojaa archaa bandan dayvaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. such is my worship, flower-offerings and divine adoration as well. ||1]||Pause| |
ufet AT at HOba VI AS Il (393-8, nar, ne 5) ghantaa jaa kaa sunee-ai chahu kunt. His bell resounds to the four corners of the world.
WAG AT AT HET HAS Il (393-9, nirAr, He 5) aasan jaa kaa sadaa baikunth. His seat is forever in heaven.
W OT veg AS Bula 3S Il (393-9, wer, Hs 5) jaa kaa chavar sabh oopar jhoolai. His chauri, his fly-brush, waves over all.
3a OY Ae UTSTS Il (393-9, wm, Hs 5) taa kaa Dhoop sadaa parfulai. ||2| | His incense is ever-fragrant. ||2| |
ufe wfe Hue dF AT AT Il (393-10, mmr, He 5) ghat ghat sampat hai ray jaa kaa. He is treasured in each and every heart.
WSd AS" Afal J ATA Il (393-10, wr, Hz 5) abhag sabhaa sang hai saaDhaa. The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is His Eternal Court.
WTISt AtISO AT MIST Il (393-10, wrAr, He 5)
aartee keertan sadaa anand.
His Aartee, his lamp-lit worship service, is the Kirtan of His Praises, which brings lasting bliss.
HfoHt Hes Het Sis |Sll (393-10, ww, He 5) mahimaa sundar sadaa bay-ant. ||3]| His Greatness is so beautiful, and ever limitless. ||3]|
fants usufs fSA dt BIS" Il (393-11, wm, He 5) jisahi paraapat tis hee lahnaa. He alone obtains it, who is so pre-ordained;
H3 vdeo Gg wrfES Agar I (393-11, mr, He 5) sant charan oh aa-i-o sarnaa. he takes to the Sanctuary of the Saints’ Feet.
ofa sfs6 afs AsfrIH Il (393-11, mA, He 5) haath charhi-o har saalgiraam. I hold in my hands the Saalagraam of the Lord.
aT aaa Afs ats BMS ISiscticoll (393-12, mA, ne 5)
kaho naanak gur keeno daan. ||4||39||90|| Says Nanak, the Guru has given me this Gift. ||4]|39]|90]|
MITA HIS U UPUeT Il (393-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5 panchpadaa. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Panch-Pada:
fa Us Bet ufsarst il (393-12, wr, us 5) jih paidai lootee panihaaree. That highway, upon which the water-carrier is plundered
A Had HIG FISH MAUI (393-13, wT, He 5) SO maarag santan dooraaree. ||1|| - that way is far removed from the Saints. ||1]|
Asad Us AY Alone I (393-13, wear, Hs 5) satgur poorai saach kahi-aa. The True Guru has spoken the Truth.
on 3d at Has Stet AH ot aa Sto Shor NU TIS Il 393-13, mA, He 5)
naam tayray kee muktay beethee jam kaa maarag door rahi-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Your Name, O Lord, is the Way to Salvation; the road of the Messenger of Death is far away. ||1]|Pause| |
Ad Bos Warst We Il (393-14, wmv, ve 5) jah laalach jaagaatee ghaat. That place, where the greedy toll-collector dwells
fs sot Sa Ae SF MS MQM (93-14, wr, He 5)
door rahee uh jan tay baat. ||2| | - that path remains far removed from the Lord's humble servant. ||2]|
Ad wee ATT WS AG Il (393-15, nA, He 5) jah aavtay bahut ghan saath. There, where so very many caravans of men are caught,
USAIH & ait AT WS (393-15, ww, He 5)
paarbarahm kay sangee saaDh. ||3]| the Holy Saints remain with the Supreme Lord. ||3]|
faz aus As feus Bur || (393-15, nmr, ue 5)
chitar gupat sabh likh-tay laykhaa.
Chitra and Gupat, the recording angels of the conscious and the unconscious, write the accounts of all mortal beings,
Sas Aa aS feAfe 6 UU ISI (393-16, wr, He 5) bhagat janaa ka-o darisat na paykhaa. ||4|| but they cannot even see the Lord's humble devotees. ||4||
OT aoe fra AfsaT UT Il (393-16, »imAr, He 5) kaho naanak jis satgur pooraa. Says Nanak, one whose True Guru is Perfect
SA TA MSIE TT MUNOUMEU (393-16, mAr, we 5)
vaajay taa kai anhad tooraa. ||5||40||91|| - the unblown bugles of ecstasy vibrate for him. ||5||40]|91]|
MTAT HIG U PUT 4 Il (393-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5 dupdaa 1. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Du-Pada 1:
Ag Afar firrfe oH il (393-17, rrr, He 5) saaDhoo sang sikhaa-i-o naam. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Naam is learned;
Ava HOTA UTS TH Il (393-17, wm, He 5) sarab manorath pooran kaam. all desires and tasks are fulfilled.
afs aet fgrat af AAfO mR Il (393-18, mr, He 5) bujh ga-ee tarisnaa har jaseh aghaanay. My thirst has been quenched, and I am satiated with the Lord's Praise.
afu afu ate arfserrS iil (393-18, wr, Hs 5) jap jap jeevaa saarigpaanay. ||1]| I live by chanting and meditating upon the Lord, the Sustainer of the earth. ||1]|
AIS ATS Halse ufsnit il (393-18, wmv, ue 5) karan karaavan saran pari-aa. I have entered the Sanctuary of the Creator, the Cause of all causes.
ag usAte Aon we ufeor fifeur vide ve vfsur 1a TIS Il (393-19, wir, He 5)
gur parsaad sahj ghar paa-i-aa miti-aa anDhayraa chand charhi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, I have entered the home of celestial bliss. Darkness is dispelled, and the moon of wisdom has risen. ||1||Pause| |
Ua arte
WS ALI SI FST Il (394-1, wmv, nz 5) laal javayhar bharay bhandaar. My treasure-house is overflowing with rubies and jewels;
sfe 5 ure afu fedars il (394-1, nim, He 5) tot na aavai jap nirankaar. I meditate on the Formless Lord, and so they never run short.
nifys Age ule AS afe I (394-1, vir, ne 5)
amrit sabad peevai jan ko-ay.
How rare is that humble being, who drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Word of the Shabad.
SSA St at UGH as TE NQNSUICI (394-1, nA, 42 5)
naanak taa kee param gat ho-ay. ||2||41||92|| O Nanak, he attains the state of highest dignity. ||2||41||92] |
MTAT Wg D HIS" U Il (394-2)
aasaa ghar 7 mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Seventh House, Fifth Mehl:
dfs a any fee fos fomret iI (394-2, mr, nH 5) har kaa naam ridai nit Dhi-aa-ee. Meditate continually on the Name of the Lord within your heart.
Halt Arat Fares SaET WAU (394-2, wir, Hs 5) sangee saathee sagal taraa‘-ee. ||1]| Thus you shall save all your companions and associates. ||1] |
Ge As Afa Het FT BS Il (394-3, wry, ne 5) gur mayrai sang sadaa hai naalay. My Guru is always with me, near at hand.
frife fais fA AeT ANTS AU TI tl (394-3, wir, He 5) simar simar tis sadaa sam"aalay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, I cherish Him forever. ||1]|Pause] |
Sat ater Htor arat Il (394-4, mmr, ve 5) tayraa kee-aa meethaa laagai. Your actions seem so sweet to me.
Tfs SH USTIT SSA Hid NISC (394-4, nmAT, He 5)
har naam padaarath naanak maagai. ||2||42||93]| Nanak begs for the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||42]||93] |
MTAT HIG U Il (394-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AY Halls Soot AAT Il (394-5, mA, He 5) saaDhoo sangat tari-aa sansaar. The world is saved by the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ts A SH Hold MUTT IAI (394-5, nim, He 5) har kaa naam maneh aaDhaar. ||1]| The Name of the Lord is the Support of the mind. ||1]|
TIO GHG Ades fuMis Il (394-5, wmv, yz 5) charan kamal gurdayv pi-aaray. The Saints worship and adore the Lotus Feet of the Divine Guru;
una AS of Utfs firs a TIE il (394-6, wr, v2 5) poojeh sant har pareet pi-aaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. they love the Beloved Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
WT ao HASte feof sa Il (94-6, wir, He 5) jaa kai mastak likhi-aa bhaag. She who has such good destiny written upon her forehead,
AT Ba 3 a fag ATT WINS (394-6, ner, He 5) kaho naanak taa kaa thir sohaag. ||2||43||94|| says Nanak, is blessed with the eternal happy marriage with the Lord. ||2]||43]|94| |
MTAT HIG U Il (394-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Het orfamr fus at wait il (394-7, wm, He 5) meethee aagi-aa pir kee laagee. The Order of my Husband Lord seems so sweet to me.
AGate wa at afs fSnrsit il (394-7, wm, nu 5) sa-ukan ghar kee kant ti-aagee. My Husband Lord has driven out the one who was my rival.
fipn Foes Aterfs at | 94-8, wm, ue 5) pari-a sohaagan seegaar karee. My Beloved Husband has decorated me, His happy soul-bride.
Ho He at Sufs Tat MAU (94-8, nim, He 5) man mayray kee tapat haree. ||1|| He has quieted the burning thirst of my mind. ||1]|
36 safe finn afomr afer | (394-8, nmr, He 5) bhalo bha-i-o pari-a kahi-aa maani-aa. It is good that I submitted to the Will of my Beloved Lord.
HY Hod fea we ot afonr i TIS Il (394-9, mmr, He 5) sookh sahj is ghar kaa jaani-aa. rahaa-o. I have realized celestial peace and poise within this home of mine. ||Pause] |
JG det finn farses Il (394-9, nmr, vs 5) ha-o bandee pari-a khijmatdaar. I am the hand-maiden, the attendant of my Beloved Lord.
6g nifsorHt nia mrurg Il (394-9, nmr, He 5) oh abhinaasee agam apaar. He is eternal and imperishable, inaccessible and infinite.
&B uur fmt SHS ure I (394-10, wm, ws 5) lay pakhaa pari-a jhala-o paa-ay. Holding the fan, sitting at His Feet, I wave it over my Beloved.
Sat TS UT FT BS Ml (394-10, wear, we 5) bhaag ga-ay panch doot laavay. ||2]| The five demons who tortured me have run away. ||2| |
oH AG BASES Il (394-10, wert, He 5) naa mai kul naa sobhaavant. I am not from a noble family, and I am not beautiful.
foro Arar fax@ stot AT il (394-11, nmr, ve 5) ki-aa jaanaa ki-o bhaanee kant. What do I know? Why am I pleasing to my Beloved?
Hfo nave ardta fexrat il (394-11, »mar, ne 5) mohi anaath gareeb nimaanee. I am a poor orphan, destitute and dishonored.
as uate IH stot Tat iS (394-11, mA, ns 5) kant pakar ham keenee raanee. ||3]|| My Husband took me in, and made me His queen. ||3]|
Aa Hfy UISH ATA Brel Il (394-12, nmr, us 5) jab mukh pareetam saajan laagaa. When I saw my Beloved's face before me,
AY AOA He UG ATI I (394-12, wer, He 5) sookh sahj mayraa Dhan sohaagaa. I became so happy and peaceful; my married life was blessed.
TI SSA Hot UTS MIAMI (394-12, wer, Hs 5) kaho naanak moree pooran aasaa. Says Nanak, my desires are fulfilled.
Afsag HSt YS TASSAT USUAUICUN (394-13, wT, Hs 5) satgur maylee parabh guntaasaa. ||4]||1||95|| The True Guru has united me with God, the treasure of excellence. ||4]|1]|95]|
MTAT HIG U Il (394-13)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
He feat feafe agfe il 394-13, mmr, we 5) maathai tarikutee darisat karoor. A frown creases her forehead, and her look is evil.
a8 aa foe at SfF il (394-13, wer, ue 5) bolai ka-urhaa jihbaa kee foorh. Her speech is bitter, and her tongue is rude.
Fer gut fg we Efe NA G94-14, wT, He 5) sadaa bhookhee pir jaanai door. ||1]| She is always hungry, and she believes her Husband to be far away. ||1]|
mrt ferst fea afk Guret i (394-14, vm, us 5) aisee istaree ik raam upaa-ee. Such is Maya, the woman, which the One Lord has created.
Cfs AS Aa wfenr gH afs Ta HS TST I TIE Il (394-15, wer, v2 5)
un sabh jag khaa-i-aa ham gur raakhay mayray bhaa-ee. rahaa-o.
She is devouring the whole world, but the Guru has saved me, O my Siblings of Destiny. ||Pause| |
ufe oa@at AS Hal Aft Il (394-15, vir, He 5) paa-ay thag-ulee sabh jag johi-aa. Administering her poisons, she has overcome the whole world.
gout fare Hoe@ Afar | (394-16, nim, ne 5) barahmaa bisan mahaaday-o mohi-aa. She has bewitched Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
aanfe of wat A Aft i (394-16, vr, He 5) gurmukh naam lagay say sohi-aa. ||2]| Only those Gurmukhs who are attuned to the Naam are blessed. ||2]|
ZIS OH Als TA USTTIAT Il (394-16, ww, He 5)
varat naym kar thaakay punharchanaa.
Performing fasts, religious observances and atonements, the mortals have grown weary.
3e Stee Se AS US Il (394-17, ni, vs 5) tat tirath bhavay sabh Dharnaa. They wander over the entire planet, on pilgrimages to the banks of sacred rivers.
A Gad fa Afsae at Aga SII (394-17, wr, v8 5) say ubray je satgur kee sarnaa. ||3]|| But they alone are saved, who seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||3]|
Hfeor Hf AS Aa TUT Il (394-17, wer, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi sabho jag baaDhaa. Attached to Maya, the whole world is in bondage.
ISH UT HOHY HATA II (394-18, wmAT, Hs 5) ha-umai pachai manmukh mooraakhaa. The foolish self-willed manmukhs are consumed by their egotism.
Ts SSA IT UatT IH FA ISIE (394-18, nmr, He 5)
gur naanak baah pakar ham raakhaa. ||4]|2]|96] | Taking me by the arm, Guru Nanak has saved me. ||4]|2||96]|
MTAT HIG U Il (394-19)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Hee va Wa farsts AMMit i 94-19, wir, He 5) sarab dookh jab bisrahi su-aamee. Everything is painful, when one forgets the Lord Master.
Sta Sar arty & yrat MAU 94-19, wr, He 5) eehaa oohaa kaam na paraanee. ||1|| Here and hereafter, such a mortal is useless. ||1||
As fgustA ofs afs oe i (394-19, nmr, ns 5) sant tariptaasay har har Dhayaa-ay. The Saints are satisfied, meditating on the Lord, Har, Har.
yar atu ate fasur nud afe we Ava AY Us SHet SATE I TIS I (395-1, wer, Hs 5)
kar kirpaa apunai naa-ay laa-ay sarab sookh parabh tumree rajaa-ay. rahaa-o. Bestowing Your Mercy, God, You attach us to Your Name; all peace comes by Your Will. ||Pause] |
Hfa des a Ws efe il A AG Hes fos fos Ste MI (395-1, wer, we 5)
sang hovat ka-o jaanat door. so jan martaa nit nit jhoor. ||2]|
The Lord is Ever-present; one who deems Him to be far away, dies again and again, repenting. ||2||
fafs AS fae tr fsn feses ote Il (395-2, nmr, He 5) jin sabh kichh dee-aa tis chitvat naahi. The mortals do not remember the One, who has given them everything.
Ho fafitmr ufo fee dfs wis SII (395-2, nmr, He 5) mahaa bikhi-aa meh din rain jaahi. ||3]| Engrossed in such terrible corruption, their days and nights waste away. ||3]|
ag soa ys fAHag Sa Il (395-3, vm, He 5) kaho naanak parabh simrahu ayk. Says Nanak, meditate in remembrance of the One Lord God.
as wha TI UT Sq NISC (395-3, wea, He 5) gat paa-ee-ai gur pooray tayk. ||4]|3]|97]| Salvation is obtained, in the Shelter of the Perfect Guru. ||4||3]|97]|
MTAT HIG U Il (395-4)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
OH AUS HO 36 AS Taner Il (395-4, wm, ue 5)
naam japat man tan sabh hari-aa.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind and body are totally rejuvenated.
AOHS TY Aas usaf Al (395-4, wrAr, He 5) kalmal dokh sagal parhari-aa. ||1]| All sins and sorrows are washed away. ||1||
Het fee sor AS Set I (395-5, wer, He 5) so-ee divas bhalaa mayray bhaa-ee. How blessed is that day, O my Siblings of Destiny,
dfs ae afte usn ats uret Il TIS Il (395-5, wm, He 5)
har gun gaa-ay param gat paa-ee. rahaa-o.
when the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung, and the supreme status is obtained. ||Pause] |
AY Wot & UA US Il (395-5, wm, He 5) saaDh janaa kay poojay pair. Worshipping the feet of the Holy Saints,
fe ued HS 3 8g QM (395-6, vim, He 5) mitay updareh man tay bair. ||2|| troubles and hatred are eliminated from the mind. ||2] |
a ud ffs sag garfenr Il (395-6, wrt, He 5) gur pooray mil jhagar chukaa-i-aa. Meeting with the Perfect Guru, conflict is ended,
Us es Als eAafs wrfenr ISI (395-6, mmr, He 5) panch doot sabh vasgat aa-i-aa. ||3]| and the five demons are totally subdued. ||3] |
fra Hfe efaer of a SM Il (395-7, wm, v3 5) jis man vasi-aa har kaa naam. One whose mind is filled with the Name of the Lord,
aad fH Sufs asa ISISIECI (395-7, wT, HE 5)
naanak tis oopar kurbaan. ||4||4]|98] | O Nanak - I am a Sacrifice to him. ||4||4||98] |
MTAT HIG U Il (395-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
re SI J WEST Il (395-8, wi, He 5) gaav layhi too gaavanhaaray. O singer, sing of the One,
riba fills & yrs nis II (395-8, wir, He 5) jee-a pind kay paraan aDhaaray. who is the Support of the soul, the body and the breath of life.
W at AS’ Aga AY UTS Il (395-8, nmr, He 5) jaa kee sayvaa sarab sukh paavahi. Serving Him, all peace is obtained.
med arg ufs agfs o ATSfs IAI (395-8, mmr, He 5) avar kaahoo peh bahurh na jaaveh. ||1]|| You shall no longer go to any other. ||1]|
Het wise wioet Afog ao fours fas fas writ | (395-9, nmr, He 5)
sadaa anand anandee saahib gun niDhaan nit nit jaapee-ai.
My Blissful Lord Master is forever in bliss; meditate continually and forever, on the Lord, the treasure of excellence.
afeodt fsa x3 fimrd faa urfe us nfs eribe i TIS i (95-9, wer, ne 5) balihaaree tis sant pi-aaray jis parsaad parabh man vaasee-ai. rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice to the Beloved Saints; by their kind favor, God comes to dwell in the mind. ||Pause| |
WT or erg feu]! Brat Il (395-10, wr, He 5) jaa kaa daan nikhootai naahee. His gifts are never exhausted.
36t StS AS Ada AH Il (395-10, »rmAT, v8 5) bhalee bhaat sabh sahj samaahee. In His subtle way, He easily absorbs all.
a ot SYA 3S He aet Il (395-11, nm, He 5) jaa kee bakhas na maytai ko-ee. His benevolence cannot be erased.
Hf eAret ATat AST QI (395-11, nmr, He 5) man vaasaa-ee-ai Saachaa so-ee. ||2| | So enshrine that True Lord within your mind. ||2]|
Hae Aa fos A a UTS Il (395-11, we, ws 5) Sagal samagree garih jaa kai pooran. His house is filled with all sorts of articles;
Ys A ASA TUF SIS Il (395-12, mew", we 5) parabh kay sayvak dookh na jhooran. God's servants never suffer pain.
Gfe adt fass@ ue ure Il (395-12, mmr, He 5) ot gahee nirbha-o pad paa-ee-ai. Holding to His Support, the state of fearless dignity is obtained.
AfA AA A ae fafa are Si (395-12, mr, He 5) Saas Saas so gun niDh gaa-ee-ai. ||3]| With each and every breath, sing of the Lord, the treasure of excellence. ||3]|
ofa & det as AEM II (395-13, mT, He 5) door na ho-ee kathoo jaa-ee-ai. He is not far from us, wherever we go.
Setd ad 3 ofa afe us I (395-13, umm, we 5) nadar karay taa har har paa-ee-ai. When He shows His Mercy, we obtain the Lord, Har, Har.
mgeth adt ud Te utA I (395-13, wir, He 5) ardaas karee pooray gur paas. I offer this prayer to the Perfect Guru.
Soa Hat She os THA NSNUNEEN (395-14, mmr, He 5) naanak mangai har Dhan raas. ||4]|5||99|| Nanak begs for the treasure of the Lord's Name. ||4]|5||99]|
MTAT HIG U Il (395-14)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
yen fufeur 3a aT Ta Il (95-14, mrAT, He 5) parathmay miti-aa tan kaa dookh. First, the pains of the body vanish;
Ho Hares AG IMT AY I (395-15, wer, He 5) man sagal ka-o ho-aa sookh. then, the mind becomes totally peaceful.
afe fasur aa eS are il (395-15, mmr, ne 5) kar kirpaa gur deeno naa-o. In His Mercy, the Guru bestows the Lord's Name.
afe afe fsa Afsad aS AE A (395-15, wm, He 5) bal bal tis satgur ka-o jaa-o. ||1]| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to that True Guru. ||1]|
Tg us ufes AT set Il (395-16, mmr, He 5) gur pooraa paa-i-o mayray bhaa-ee. I have obtained the Perfect Guru, O my Siblings of Destiny.
da Aa AS ou far Afsae at AsSret il TIS Ml (395-16, mmr, we 5)
rog sog sabh dookh binaasay satgur kee sarnaa-ee. rahaa-o.
All illness, sorrows and sufferings are dispelled, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||Pause] |
Td a BIS fase SAE | (395-17, wT, He 5) gur kay charan hirdai vasaa-ay. The feet of the Guru abide within my heart;
HO fess Aas Ss UTES I (395-17, nA, ve 5) man chintat saglay fal paa-ay. I have received all the fruits of my heart's desires.
wate ast As Jet AMS II (395-17, ner, He 5) agan bujhee sabh ho-ee saa’. The fire is extinguished, and I am totally peaceful.
ats fasur afs stat StS 21 (395-17, nmr, He 5) kar kirpaa gur keenee daat. ||2|| Showering His Mercy, the Guru has given this gift. ||2]|
foae aG af eS ae Il (395-18, wm, He 5) nithaavay ka-o gur deeno thaan. The Guru has given shelter to the shelterless.
fous a afs ats He Il (395-18, nA, He 5) nimaanay ka-o gur keeno maan. The Guru has given honor to the dishonored.
dae afe Aza afs IA Il (395-18, wr, He 5) banDhan kaat sayvak kar raakhay. Shattering his bonds, the Guru has saved His servant.
nifys aot TAS BA MBI (395-19, wm, He 5) amrit baanee rasnaa chaakhay. ||3]| I taste with my tongue the Ambrosial Bani of His Word. ||3]|
ZS SM UA TI VIS Il (395-19, wear, us 5) vadai bhaag pooj gur charnaa. By great good fortune, I worship the Guru's feet.
Rare fsorfar uret ys AST I (395-19, wr, us 5) Sagal ti-aag paa-ee parabh sarnaa. Forsaking everything, I have obtained God's Sanctuary.
Yar ate
Td Soa A a senor efenrar | A AS Mur Het fogs IsiENIOONl (396-1, mT, He 5) gur naanak jaa ka-o bha-i-aa da-i-aalaa. so jan ho-aa sadaa nihaalaa. ||4]|6]|100] | That humble being, O Nanak, unto whom the Guru grants His Mercy, is forever enraptured. ||4]|6]|100] |
MTAT HIG U Il (396-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Afsag AMS chor SfA il (96-2, vir, He 5) satgur saachai dee-aa bhayj. The True Guru has truly given a child.
fag rea Cuffor Apfar i (96-2, vir, He 5)
chir jeevan upji-aa sanjog.
The long-lived one has been born to this destiny. Bed uta orfe aor fase Il (396-2, nmr, H2 5)
udrai maahi aa-ay kee-aa nivaas. He came to acquire a home in the womb,
Hat & Hfs sos faerA I (96-3, mA, He 5) maataa kai man bahut bigaas. ||1]|| and his mother's heart is so very glad. ||1]|
Hho uz sas alse a Il (396-3, we, we 5) jammi-aa poot bhagat govind kaa. A son is born - a devotee of the Lord of the Universe.
yateur Ag ufo fefimr os ar il TITS Il (396-3, wm, us 5) pargati-aa sabh meh likhi-aa Dhur kaa. rahaa-o. This pre-ordained destiny has been revealed to all. ||Pause]|
At HAT Jat sex ASH BMI Il (396-4, wir, ns 5) dasee maasee hukam baalak janam lee-aa. In the tenth month, by the Lord's Order, the baby has been born.
fifeur Aa Hot més shor Il (396-4, nmr, us 5) miti-aa sog mahaa anand thee-aa. Sorrow is dispelled, and great joy has ensued.
Teast At MSE Ie Il (396-5, nmAr, ue 5) gurbaanee sakhee anand gaavai. The companions blissfully sing the songs of the Guru's Bani.
AMS Ass & nfs STS MQ (396-5, mA, He 5) saachay saahib kai man bhaavai. ||2|| This is pleasing to the Lord Master. ||2||
eat Sf ag UlSt TST Il (396-5, wr, ne 5) vaDhee vayl baho peerhee chaalee. The vine has grown, and shall last for many generations.
UdH oer ofa sfa gat Il (396-6, nm, Hs 5) Dharam kalaa har banDh bahaalee. The Power of the Dharma has been firmly established by the Lord.
Ho fefeor Afsag feefenr il (96-6, mmr, H: 5) man chindi-aa satguroo divaa-i-aa. That which my mind wishes for, the True Guru has granted.
se nifes fa fee afer Sil (396-6, nmr, He 5) bha-ay achint ayk liv laa-i-aa. ||3]| I have become carefree, and I fix my attention on the One Lord. ||3]|
fA wag fust Gufs ad aT HES II (396-7, mmr, He 5) ji-o baalak pitaa oopar karay baho maan. As the child places so much faith in his father,
yofenr §8 as a TPE Il (396-7, vr, He 5) bulaa-i-aa bolai gur kai bhaan. I speak as it pleases the Guru to have me speak.
ast at ardt AS Il (396-7, wr, nH 5) gujhee chhannee naahee baat. This is not a hidden secret;
TT SSA Jo" atat STS USUI (96-8, wr, ve 5) gur naanak tuthaa keenee daat. ||4||7||101]| Guru Nanak, greatly pleased, has bestowed this gift. ||4]|7]]101] |
MTAT HIG U Il (396-8)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
TS Us Thm S ITE Il (396-8, miTAr, He 5) gur pooray raakhi-aa day haath. Giving His Hand, the Perfect Guru has protected the child.
yate stent AS aT UTSTY IAI (396-9, wT, Hs 5) pargat bha-i-aa jan kaa partaap. ||1]| The glory of His servant has become manifest. ||1||
Ts as mit ag ag fimret 1 (96-9, mmr, ue 5) gur gur japee guroo gur Dhi-aa-ee. I contemplate the Guru, the Guru; I meditate on the Guru, the Guru.
Aba ot mroeta ag ufs uret i TIS Il (396-9, mmr, ve 5)
jee-a kee ardaas guroo peh paa-ee. rahaa-o. I offer my heart-felt prayer to the Guru, and it is answered. ||Pause]|
Hale ud AMS WTeS Il (396-10, nmr, Hz 5) Saran paray saachay gurdayv. I have taken to the Sanctuary of the True Divine Guru.
UTS Tet ASA AS lM (396-10, wm, Hz 5) pooran ho-ee sayvak sayv. ||2| | The service of His servant has been fulfilled. ||2||
me fils Hag Te yrs Il (396-10, »mr, Hs 5) jee-o pind joban raakhai paraan. He has preserved my soul, body, youth and breath of life.
AI SSA TT AS ATAS MSIUCWAOI (396-11, wr, v2 5) kaho naanak gur ka-o kurbaan. ||3]|8]|102|| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru. ||3]|8]|102]|
MTA Wg t aTSt HIG U (396-12)
aasaa ghar 8 kaafee mehlaa 5 Aasaa, Eighth House, Kaafee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE II (396-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H der g udte Ag Age He Il (396-13, nm ore, He 5) mai bandaa bai khareed sach saahib mayraa. I am Your purchased slave, O True Lord Master.
m€ fils ns fan a AS fas J 3ST NU G96-13, nT are, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tis daa sabh kichh hai tayraa. ||1]| My soul and body, and all of this, everything is Yours. ||1]||
He fore J Uat SI SISTA Il (396-13, wT art, He 5) maan nimaanay too’ Dhanee tayraa bharvaasaa. You are the honor of the dishonored. O Master, in You I place my trust.
faa AS nie Sa TA AST AST NA TIC Il (396-14, wmv are, Hz 5) bin saachay an tayk hai so jaanhu kaachaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the True One, any other support is false - know this well. ||1]|Pause] |
~ aA 5b ° N ST JAH wud J aet nT B UES Il (396-14, nA are, nH 5) tayraa hukam apaar hai ko-ee ant na paa-ay.
Your Command is infinite; no one can find its limit.
fA TT UT SeHt A VS FAVS Mil 396-15, mmr at, vs 5) jis gur pooraa bhaytsee so chalai rajaa-ay. ||2] | One who meets with the Perfect Guru, walks in the Way of the Lord's Will. ||2]|
ssoet fimreut fas af & mmeint I (396-15, nmat are, He 5) chaturaa-ee si-aanpaa kitai kaam na aa-ee-di. Cunning and cleverness are of no use.
Zo Afog A eS Het AY ure ISI (396-16, nat are, He 5)
tuthaa saahib jo dayvai so-ee sukh paa-ee-ai. ||3||
That which the Lord Master gives, by the Pleasure of His Will - that is pleasing to me. [1311
A oY dH anes fas us o FO Il (396-16, wir are, He 5)
jay lakh karam kamaa-ee-ahi kichh pavai na banDhaa.
One may perform tens of thousands of actions, but attachment to things is not satisfied.
HS SS ats OH Ud Ig ent Go NSIAUIOSIl (396-16, »mAT are, He 5) jan naanak keetaa naam Dhar hor chhodi-aa DhanDhaa. ||4]|1||103]| Servant Nanak has made the Naam his Support. He has renounced other entanglements. ||4]|1]|103] |
MTAT HIG U Il (396-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Regs Aa afer ais Aes @ AEF Il (396-17, wm, He 5) sarab sukhaa mai bhaali-aa har jayvad na ko-ee. I have pursued all pleasures, but none is as great as the Lord.
ad 36 3 ure Ae Atos Het IAM (396-18, mm, He 5) gur tuthay tay paa-ee-ai sach saahib so-ee. ||1]| By the Pleasure of the Guru's Will, the True Lord Master is obtained. ||1]|
Berd TT nus AE AS ATA Il (396-18, wirAr, He 5) balihaaree gur aapnay sad sad kurbaanaa. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; I am forever and ever a sacrifice to Him.
on & fens? fea fas oer feg ate Bar NA TI I (396-18, mA, He 5)
naam na visra-o ik khin chasaa ih keejai daanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please, grant me this one blessing, that I may never, even for an instant, forget Your Name. ||1||Pause] |
sae Het Afe d faR dfs ue nists I (96-19, nmr, He 5) bhaagath sachaa so-ay hai jis har Dhan antar. How very fortunate are those who have the wealth of the Lord deep within the heart.
Ua ato
Age Ho We 3 fAR Te Ase fedsts Qi (97-1, wr, 2 5) so chhootai mahaa jaal tay jis gur sabad nirantar. ||2||
They escape from the great noose of death; they are permeated with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
ad at HfoHt fom ao ag fasax AS Ag Il (97-1, wr, ve 5)
gur kee mahimaa ki-aa kahaa gur bibayk sat sar.
How can I chant the Glorious Praises of the Guru? The Guru is the ocean of Truth and clear understanding.
6g orfe garet Fad HA Us USHA |Sll (397-2, mA, He 5)
oh aad jugaadee jugah jug pooraa parmaysar. ||3] |
He is the Perfect Transcendent Lord, from the very beginning, and throughout the ages. ||3]|
oy fomreg Ae Ae of Ufa He Fa Il (397-2, new, He 5)
naam Dhi-aavahu sad sadaa har har man rangay.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, forever and ever, my mind is filled with the Love of the Lord, Har, Har.
ME YS UG TAT I SSA & Aa MUIQUIOI (397-3, ww, ws 5) jee-o paraan Dhan guroo hai naanak kai sangay. ||4]|2||104||
The Guru is my soul, my breath of life, and wealth; O Nanak, He is with me forever. [14] 2] 104 |
MTAT HIG U Il (397-3)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
AST wise wiurg sdt Hfs SA Il (397-3, ner, He 5) saa-ee alakh apaar bhoree man vasai. If the Invisible and Infinite Lord dwells within my mind, even for a moment,
ey tse da wife HST Ig A IAI (397-4, wm, He 5) dookh darad rog maa-ay maidaa habh nasai. ||1]|| then all my pains, troubles, and diseases vanish. ||1]||
JG Zar gags AS mTUS Il (397-4, mA, He 5) ha-o vanjaa kurbaan saa-ee aapnay. I am a Sacrifice to my Lord Master.
de woe wat Hfs 3fo WUE INA TIS Il (397-4, nA, He 5) hovai anad ghanaa man tan jaapnay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating on Him, a great joy wells up within my mind and body. ||1||Pause] |
fea arf Hat AS fSH et I 7397-5, nmr, He 5) bindak gaaleh sunee sachay tis Dhanee. I have heard only a little bit of news about the True Lord Master.
nat J Ae ute He & at aat MQM (397-5, wr, we 5) sookhee hoo’ sukh paa-ay maa-ay na keem ganee. ||2|| I have obtained the peace of all peace, O my mother; I cannot estimate its worth.
21 |
de Une Afe Ufe wASS set I (397-6, ve, He 5) nain pasando so-ay paykh mustaak bha-ee. He is so beautiful to my eyes; beholding Him, I have been bewitched.
H fosafe act afe orfu afs of& wet SI (397-6, nmr, nH 5) mai nirgun mayree maa-ay aap larh laa-ay la-ee. ||3]| I am worthless, O my mother; He Himself has attached me to the hem of His robe.
[I3I|
Fe ASA AAS Js" J AIT Il (397-7, ww, He 5) bayd katayb sansaar habhaa hoo" baahraa. He is beyond the world of the Vedas, the Koran and the Bible.
Soa at USAT fe ATTA IISIIOUI (397-7, wTAT, He 5)
naanak kaa paatisaahu disai jaahraa. ||4]|3]|105] | The Supreme King of Nanak is immanent and manifest. ||4]|3]|105]|
MTAT HIG U Il (397-8)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
oY sas uiraats AUS Ue ut@ il (397-8, nmr, He 5) laakh bhagat aaraaDheh japtay pee-o pee-o. Tens of thousands of devotees worship and adore You, chanting, "Beloved, Beloved."
azo Hats Hoes forage faust AIG IAI (397-8, nmr, He 5)
kavan jugat maylaava-o nirgun bikh-ee jee-o. ||1]||
How shall You unite me, the worthless and corrupt soul, with Yourself. ||1] | Sat 2a afge que efenims ys Il (397-9, wir, us 5)
tayree tayk govind gupaal da-i-aal parabh. You are my Support, O Merciful God, Lord of the Universe, Sustainer of the World.
3 Aga a ave Sct fHAfe AS NA TIE Il (397-9, we, He 5) too” sabhnaa kay naath tayree sarisat sabh. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are the Master of all; the entire creation is Yours. ||1]||Pause] |
Het Aaet HS data Aet JAfs Il (397-10, wm, He 5) sadaa sahaa-ee sant paykheh sadaa hajoor. You are the constant help and support of the Saints, who behold You Ever-present.
on fagafaor A Hate feats feafs iI (397-10, wrt, 12 5)
naam bihoonrhi-aa say marni" visoor visoor. ||2| |
Those who lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall die, engulfed in sorrow and pain. ||2]|
am eAse ate fifenr faq ABS Il (397-10, nmr, He 5) daas daastan bhaa-ay miti-aa tinaa ga-on.
Those servants, who lovingly perform the Lord's service, are freed from the cycle of reincarnation.
fenfour faat oH fsaTat IH ACS ISI (397-11, wr, ws 5) visri-aa jin"aa naam tinaarhaa haal ka-un. ||3]| What shall be the fate of those who forget the Naam? ||3] |
AA UA dfeore SAT AAS AS ll (397-11, vir, ne 5) jaisay pas hari''-aa-o taisaa sansaar sabh. As are the cattle which have strayed, so is the entire world.
soa sue ate fhareg nif us ISIBIIOEN (397-12, vm, He 5) naanak banDhan kaat milaavhu aap parabh. ||4]||4||106]| O God, please cut away Nanak's bonds, and unite him with Yourself. ||4||4]|106] |
MTAT HIG U Il (397-12)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Js aa ferrfs fact fimire afs il (397-12, mmr, ne 5) habhay thok visaar hiko khi-aal kar. Forget all other things, and dwell upon the Lord alone.
Bor od TH Ho 3q maf fs WAM (397-13, wT, He 5) jhoothaa laahi gumaan man tan arap Dhar. ||1|| Lay aside your false pride, and dedicate your mind and body to Him. ||1]|
mS Udd Arete frarads F ll (397-13, wr, Hs 5) aath pahar saalaahi sirjanhaar too”. Twenty-four hours a day, praise the Creator Lord.
met Sot ats fasur agg HA FTE il (397-14, wT, ws 5) jeevaa™ tayree daat kirpaa karahu moo’. ||1|| rahaa-o. I live by Your bountiful gifts - please, shower me with Your Mercy! ||1]|Pause] |
Het ay ante fas we SAS il (397-14, nmr, ne 5) so-ee kamm kamaa-ay jit mukh ujlaa. So, do that work, by which your face shall be made radiant.
Het Bat Ate fr S Sho wer QM (397-15, wm, He 5) so-ee lagai sach jis too deh alaa. ||2|| He alone becomes attached to the Truth, O Lord, unto whom You give it. ||2||
Hd we Hie A we ITA afs I (397-15, vr, H 5) jo na dhahando mool so ghar raas kar. So build and adorn that house, which shall never be destroyed.
fos fofs cafe ae o wf nfs Si (97-15, nmr, He 5) hiko chit vasaa-ay kaday na jaa-ay mar. |[3]| Enshrine the One Lord within your consciousness; He shall never die. ||3]|
fear fimrat am FH Ys stem | (397-16, »mr, H8 5) tin"aa pi-aaraa raam jo parabh bhaani-aa. The Lord is dear to those, who are pleasing to the Will of God.
ad usAte nag Sola SafEni NSIUNIOII (397-16, nT, He 5)
gur parsaad akath naanak vakhaani-aa. ||4]|5]|107]| By Guru's Grace, Nanak describes the indescribable. ||4]|5||107]|
MTAT HIG U Il (397-17)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
faa o fend any A fasfaur il (397-17, »mr, 2 5) jin"aa na visrai naam say kinayhi-aa. What are they like - those who do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord?
3e 5 Weg ute AST Afr A 97-17, wm, He 5) bhayd na jaanhu mool saa‘-ee jayhi-aa. ||1]| Know that there is absolutely no difference; they are exactly like the Lord. ||1]|
He 30 df feos 3H Afa Sfemr I (97-18, vm, 18 5) man tan ho-ay nihaal tum" sang bhayti-aa. The mind and body are enraptured, meeting with You, O Lord.
AY ufeur Ae usAfe ey AS Afent NA TIC il (397-18, wm, He 5)
sukh paa-i-aa jan parsaad dukh sabh mayti-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Peace is obtained, by the favor of the Lord's humble servant; all pains are taken away. ||1]|Pause| |
AS us qoHs Burd (3G F Il (397-19, wer, wz 5) jaytay khand barahmand uDhaaray tin" khay. As many as are the continents of the world, so many have been saved.
fg ufs gor orf us SAS A MM (397-19, wrAr, He 5) jin" man vuthaa aap pooray bhagat say. ||2]| Those, in whose minds You Yourself dwell, O Lord, are the perfect devotees. ||2||
Yar att fan 3 Hd vey Het HSM I (398-1, mT, we 5)
jis no mannay aap so-ee maanee-di. Those whom You approve, are approved.
Use UTY UTeTE AS Set ASA |WBIl G98-1, weA, He 5) pargat purakh parvaan sabh thaa-ee jaanee-ai. ||3|| Such a celebrated and honored person is known everywhere. ||3]|
feon sf= wrafa AHS ATS ATT Il (398-1, wr, He 5) dinas rain aaraaDh sam"aalay saah saah. Day and night, with every breath to worship and adore the Lord
aoa at Sa ufs AT UPSATT SIENIOCI (98-2, wT, He 5)
naanak kee lochaa poor sachay paatisaah. ||4]|6||108] | - please, O True Supreme King, fulfill this, Nanak's desire. ||4||6]|108] |
MTAT HIG U Il (398-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ufe sfoor Wa ofe THe AH ALE Il (98-2, vir, Hs 5) poor rahi-aa sarab thaa-ay hamaaraa khasam so-ay. He, my Lord Master, is fully pervading all places.
eq Atog fats eg gat ata afe A 98-3, wer, Hs 5) ayk saahib sir chhat doojaa naahi ko-ay. ||1]| He is the One Lord Master, the roof over our heads; there is no other than Him. ||1]|
fa@ ave f38 ay arusafenr Il (398-3, mmr, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh raakhanhaari-aa. As it pleases Your Will, please save me, O Savior Lord.
33 fag nied o afe seta forfemr al JIE Il (398-4, wm, He 5)
tujh bin avar na ko-ay nadar nihaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without You, my eyes see no other at all. ||1]|Pause| |
ufsurs yg vif wife wife Arsh i (398-4, nmr, ue 5) partipaalay parabh aap ghat ghat saaree-ai. God Himself is the Cherisher; He takes care of each and every heart.
fan fe gor orfu fan o fears IQI (98-5, nmr, He 5) jis man vuthaa aap tis na visaaree-ai. ||2|| That person, within whose mind You Yourself dwell, never forgets You. ||2||
A fae ad A rfl mime atfenr II (398-5, mmr, He 5) jo kichh karay so aap aapan bhaani-aa. He does that which is pleasing to Himself.
sas a AIST Afar Afar AfEnt SI (98-6, wm, He 5) bhagtaa kaa sahaa-ee jug jug jaani-aa. ||3]| He is known as the help and support of His devotees, throughout the ages. ||3]|
nfu afu afe at oH ae & Fab Il 398-6, mmr, we 5)
jap jap har kaa naam kaday na jhooree-ai.
Chanting and meditating up the Lord's Name, the mortal never comes to regret anything.
Soa VIA flmirA Sat yshA ISUOUIOC (398-7, mA, Hs 5)
naanak daras pi-aas lochaa pooree-ai. ||4]|7]||109] |
O Nanak, I thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; please, fulfill my desire, O Lord. ||4||7]|109] |
MTAT HIG U Il (398-7)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
foor Hefo an ferrfa ares afafemr il (398-7, nmr, He 5) ki-aa soveh naam visaar gaafal gahili-aa. Why are you sleeping, and forgetting the Name, O careless and foolish mortal?
fast fes edurfe Fete safer al 98-8, wm, ue 5) kitee™ it daree-aa-ay vaNnjni" vehdi-aa. ||1]| So many have been washed away and carried off by this river of life. ||1]|
Sfoaat dfs uae Ho vfs Bul | (398-8, mraz, ws 5) bohithrhaa har charan man charh langhee-ai. O mortal, get aboard the boat of the Lord's Lotus Feet, and cross over.
mS UIs Te ate AG Aah WAU TIS ll (398-9, mew, we 5)
aath pahar gun gaa-ay saaDhoo sangee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||
sata sa mda fee ove Afenr Il (398-9, wir, Hs 5) bhogeh bhog anayk vin naavai sunji-aa. You may enjoy various pleasures, but they are useless without the Name.
ofa at sats faa nfs Hfs Sfenr i Go8-10, wm, H2 5)
har kee bhagat binaa mar mar runni-aa. ||2|| Without devotion to the Lord, you shall die in sorrow, again and again. ||2||
aus sa Aaa sf HIE HET Il (398-10, vA, He 5) kaparh bhog suganDh tan mardan maalnaa. You may dress and eat and apply scented oils to your body,
fag fAHas 36 BST AGU BEST ISI (398-10, wm, v2 5)
bin simran tan chhaar sarpar chaalnaa. ||3]|
but without the meditative remembrance of the Lord, your body shall surely turn to dust, and you shall have to depart. ||3]|
Ho foun HATS fees Ufemr i Gos-11, mA, Hs 5) mahaa bikham sansaar virlai paykhi-aa. How very treacherous is this world-ocean; how very few realize this!
Sco dis at Hafe Sy Toa Sfimr IScuIoll 398-11, wm, we 5)
chhootan har kee saran laykh naanak laykhi-aa. ||4]|8]|110]|
Salvation rests in the Lord's Sanctuary; O Nanak, this is your pre-ordained destiny. [14] |8]]110]
MTAT HIG U Il (398-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
afe 3 fan ct Afa ard aed i (398-12, wir, v2 5) ko-ay na kis hee sang kaahay garbee-ai. No one is anyone's companion; why take any pride in others?
faq oH oars sCne sasht Ul (398-12, ww, we 5) ayk naam aaDhaar bha-ojal tarbee-ai. ||1]| With the Support of the One Name, this terrible world-ocean is crossed over. ||1]|
H ada AY 2a FAS AfsaT Ys Il (398-13, wr, 4: 5) mai gareeb sach tayk too’ mayray satgur pooray. You are the True Support of me, the poor mortal, O my Perfect True Guru.
ofa SH TIAS HI HS MHS NA TIE Il Go8-13, wer, Hs 5) daykh tum"aaraa darsano mayraa man Dheeray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, my mind is encouraged. ||1||Pause]|
TH HS AWSw ata o fas TS Il (398-14, wir, He 5) raaj maal janjaal kaaj na kitai gano. Royal powers, wealth, and worldly involvements are of no use at all.
dfs atese wiarg fagee ST US Ill (398-14, wer, He 5)
har keertan aaDhaar nihchal ayhu Dhano. ||2|| The Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is my Support; this wealth is everlasting. ||2||
a3 weer ga 33 uetfenr i G98-15, wr, He 5) jaytay maa-i-aa rang tayt pachhaavi-aa. As many as are the pleasures of Maya, so many are the shadows they leave.
AY a oH fours aaHfy afenr Sil (98-15, wm, He 5) sukh kaa naam niDhaan gurmukh gaavi-aa. ||3]|| The Gurmukhs sing of the Naam, the treasure of peace. ||3]|
Aa get foarg 3 ys ates asts Il (98-15, wr, He 5)
sachaa gunee niDhaan too” parabh gahir gambheeray.
You are the True Lord, the treasure of excellence; O God, You are deep and unfathomable.
MH SSA UAH AT SOA A AMI ISUCNAAAI (398-16, wTAT, 43 5)
aas bharosaa khasam kaa naanak kay jee-aray. ||4||9||111]]| The Lord Master is the hope and support of Nanak's mind. ||4]|9||111]]|
MTAT HIG U Il (398-16)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fan faues vu wh Aon AY UTS I (98-16, nm, He 5) jis simrat dukh jaa-ay sahj sukh paa-ee-ai. Remembering Him, suffering is removed, and celestial peace is obtained.
dfs fear ad afs afs af fret all (98-17, nmr, He 5) rain dinas kar jorh har har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]| Night and day, with your palms pressed together, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
[4
ood a us Afe fAR a AS Afe II (398-17, nmr, He 5) naanak kaa parabh so-ay jis kaa sabh ko-ay. He alone is Nanak's God, unto whom all beings belong.
Hea sour saute AS Ag ALE AU TIS il (398-18, wr, Hs 5) sarab rahi-aa bharpoor sachaa sach so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is totally pervading everywhere, the Truest of the True. ||1]|Pause] |
nists aofs Afat Aavet famre Fa Il (98-18, nmr, He 5)
antar baahar sang sahaa-ee gi-aan jog.
Inwardly and outwardly, He is my companion and my helper; He is the One to be realized.
fsnfs mata Hor fear Aare Fa QI (98-19, nmr, Hs 5) tiseh araaDh manaa binaasai sagal rog. ||2|| Adoring Him, my mind is cured of all its ailments. ||2] |
USI nurs se wale vfs Il (398-19, »mAT, He 5) raakhanhaar apaar raakhai agan maahi. The Savior Lord is infinite; He saves us from the fire of the womb.
yar su Hise dfs af on faHas sufs ATE ISI (399-1, nmr, H8 5)
seetal har har naam simrat tapat jaa-ay. ||3]| The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is soothing and cool; remembering it in meditation, the inner fire is quenched. ||3]|
HY AOA MTSE Wal SSX AS YS Il (399-1, ww, ws 5)
sookh sahj aanand ghanaa naanak jan Dhooraa.
Peace, poise, and immense bliss, O Nanak, are obtained, when one becomes the dust of the feet of the humble servants of the Lord.
adH Aas fafa sé sfent TT YS NSIIONAII (399-2, wTAT, 18 5)
kaaraj saglay siDh bha-ay bhayti-aa gur pooraa. ||4||10||112]|
All of one's affairs are perfectly resolved, meeting with the Perfect Guru. ||4]|10]]112]|
MTAT HIG U Il (399-2)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
dfse aet fears aanfe Arsh Il (399-2, mmr, ne 5)
gobind gunee niDhaan gurmukh jaanee-ai.
The Lord of the Universe is the treasure of excellence; He is known only to the Gurmukh.
ofe furs efiore afs da HSA NA (399-3, nm, He 5) ho-ay kirpaal da-i-aal har rang maanee-ai. ||1]| When He shows His Mercy and Kindness, we revel in the Lord's Love. ||1]|
weg As fers ofa aat ATE I (399-3, wert, nH 5) aavhu sant milaah har kathaa kahaanee-aa. Come, O Saints - let us join together and speak the Sermon of the Lord.
wofes fanad oH 3fa BA Basho Al TITS Il (399-4, nmr, ws 5)
an-din simreh naam taj laaj lokaanee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and ignore the criticism of others. ||1]|Pause] |
afu fu dtet on dS vise wert il (399-4, ner, He 5) jap jap jeevaa naam hovai anad ghanaa. I live by chanting and meditating on the Naam, and so I obtain immense bliss.
fifemr Hg AATY So feEAEr III (399-5, wr, Hs 5) mithi-aa moh sansaar jhoothaa vinsanaa. ||2| | Attachment to the world is useless and vain; it is false, and perishes in the end. ||2| |
TIE GHG Ala Sa fas fess afer It (399-5, wer, nz 5) charan kamal sang nayhu kinai virlai laa-i-aa. How rare are those who embrace love for the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Ue woe Hy fafs of fomrfeor Si 99-6, nmr, He 5) Dhan suhaavaa mukh jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||3|| Blessed and beautiful is that mouth, which meditates on the Lord. ||3]|
HOH Hee BU ae fans fufe ASST II (399-6, nT, He 5) janam maran dukh kaal simrat mit jaav-ee. The pains of birth, death and reincarnation are erased by meditating on the Lord.
ood a AY Afe FH YS SSet ISIAAUIAAI (399-6, nm, He 5) naanak kai sukh so-ay jo parabh bhaav-ee. ||4||11]|113]| That alone is Nanak's joy, which is pleasing to God. ||4]|11]]113]|
MTAT HIG U Il (399-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
witeg His fees df 3A an Afs SUT II (399-7, wir, He 5) aavhu meet ikatar ho-ay ras kas sabh bhunchah. Come, O friends: let us meet together and enjoy all the tastes and flavors.
nifys on ofs ofa mus fife ur Ha IA (399-8, nmr, Hs 5)
amrit naam har har japah mil paapaa munchah. ||1]|
Let us join together and chant the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and so wipe away our sins. ||1]|
33 dead AS Hog 3S fas 3 HT Il 399-8, wer, He 5) tat veechaarahu sant janhu taa tay bighan na laagai. Reflect upon the essence of reality, O Saintly beings, and no troubles shall afflict you.
die se vfs sHaa aenfe AS AT NU TIE Il (399-9, we, He 5) kheen bha-ay sabh taskaraa gurmukh jan jaagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. All of the thieves shall be destroyed, as the Gurmukhs remain wakeful. ||1]|Pause] |
afa adtat usy Bo ICH fas Are” I (399-9, wer, He 5) buDh gareebee kharach laihu ha-umai bikh jaarahu. Take wisdom and humility as your supplies, and burn away the poison of pride.
ATS! Je UST AGT SUT BH MUTT Ql (399-10, »mA, Hs 5)
saachaa hat pooraa sa-udaa vakhar naam vaapaarahu. ||2]|
True is that shop, and perfect the transaction; deal only in the merchandise of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
Ae fiiz us nrefimr Ret ufse3 1 (399-10, mmr, Hs 5) jee-o pind Dhan arpi-aa say-ee pativantay. They alone are accepted and approved, who dedicate their souls, bodies and wealth.
nmuss us Sent fs aw ATT Bll (399-11, wm, He 5) aapnarhay parabh bhaani-aa nit kayl karantay. ||3]| Those who are pleasing to their God, celebrate in happiness. ||3]|
voHfs He A utes faust ufS anst Il (399-11, mmr, nH 5)
durmat mad jo peevtay bikhlee pat kamlee.
Those fools, who drink in the wine of evil-mindedness, become the husbands of prostitutes.
oH SATefs A IS Sa AU MHS ISINIVNAASI (399-11, wT, He 5)
raam rasaa-in jo ratay naanak sach amlee. ||4]|12]|114|| But those who are imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord, O Nanak, are intoxicated with the Truth. ||4]|12]]114]|
MTAT HIG U Il (399-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Bey abhor aster ods gafenr Il (399-12, nr, v8 5) udam kee-aa karaa-i-aa aarambh rachaa-i-aa. I made the effort; I did it, and made a beginning.
om ad afu deer afs Hz fesfeor nai 99-13, wr, He 5)
naam japay jap jeevnaa gur mantar drirh-aa-i-aa. ||1]|
I live by chanting and meditating on the Naam. The Guru has implanted this Mantra within me. ||1]|
ure uss Afsag & fats sou freer 1 (399-13, mmr, ue 5) paa-ay parah satguroo kai jin bharam bidaari-aa. I fall at the Feet of the True Guru, who has dispelled my doubts.
ate fasur yfs nruat Ag AA AStfoor NA TIE il (399-14, wm, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh aapnee sach saaj savaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Bestowing His Mercy, God has dressed me, and decorated me with the Truth. ||1]|Pause] |
aT as BS wits AT Jat FHT Il (399-14, nmr, He 5)
kar geh leenay aapnay sach hukam rajaa-ee.
Taking me by the hand, He made me His own, through the True Order of His Command.
A ufs fest ats AT yse Sfamret III (399-15, wr, Hs 5) jo parabh ditee daat saa pooran vadi-aa-ee. ||2|| That gift which God gave to me, is perfect greatness. ||2]|
He wet Te aebufa Af SH Hardt Il (399-15, wm, He 5)
sadaa sadaa gun gaa-ee-ah jap naam muraaree.
Forever and ever, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and chant the Name of the Destroyer of ego.
an ferfeS afsag yfs forge ordt Sil (399-16, wr, v2 5)
naym nibaahi-o satguroo parabh kirpaa Dhaaree. ||3]|
My vows have been honored, by the Grace of God and the True Guru, who has showered His Mercy. ||3]|
oH Ug TE TS wg ys ata fest i (399-16, mmr, we 5)
naam Dhan gun gaa-o laabh poorai gur ditaa.
The Perfect Guru has given the wealth of the Naam, and the profit of singing the Lord's Glorious Praises.
Zens AS SSA YS ATT MHS USUISUAAUI (399-17, wm, Hs 5)
vanjaaray sant naankaa parabh saahu amitaa. ||4||13]|115]| The Saints are the traders, O Nanak, and the Infinite Lord God is their Banker. ||4]|13]]115]|
MTAT HIG U Il (399-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
W at Sag 3dt YS St A FSSA Il (399-17, mT, vs 5) jaa kaa thaakur tuhee parabh taa kay vadbhaagaa. One who has You as His Master, O God, is blessed with great destiny.
6g Hue Ae At AS FH SE Sa AI (399-18, wm, He 5) oh suhaylaa sad sukhee sabh bharam bha-o bhaagaa. ||1]| He is happy, and forever at peace; his doubts and fears are all dispelled. ||1]|
JH Wad dfs A SAT HS STA II (399-18, mA, He 5) ham chaakar gobind kay thaakur mayraa bhaaraa. I am the slave of the Lord of the Universe; my Master is the greatest of all.
RIS ATS AAS fafa A AfsaT TI WAU TIS Il (399-19, ww, we 5) karan karaavan sagal biDh so satguroo hamaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Creator, the Cause of causes; He is my True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
ST SSH MST FX St aT SS ATM Il (399-19, ww, ws 5) doojaa naahee a-or ko taa kaa bha-o karee-ai. There is no other whom I should fear.
UST SOO
Oe AS HIG uTeha Ha SST SIM IM (400-1, ww, wz 5)
gur sayvaa mahal paa-ee-ai jag dutar taree-ai. ||2]|
Serving the Guru, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is obtained, and the impassable world-ocean is crossed over. ||2||
fenfe Sat ny urebat He Hrfa feast il (400-1, »mr, He 5) darisat tayree sukh paa-ee-ai man maahi niDhaanaa. By Your Glance of Grace, peace is obtained, and the treasure fills the mind.
W aS 3H fagues Se ASA A UPS III (400-2, wm, He 5) jaa ka-o tum kirpaal bha-ay sayvak say parvaanaa. ||3]|| That servant, unto whom You bestow Your Mercy, is approved and accepted. ||3]|
nifys oA dfs atase & feaer utes I (400-2, nmr, ne 5) amrit ras har keertano ko virlaa peevai. How rare is that person who drinks in the Ambrosial Essence of the Lord's Kirtan.
SHd sod fxs fa any fee afu fu MS NSNISNAVEN (400-2, mr, He 5)
vajahu naanak milai ayk naam rid jap jap jeevai. ||4||14]|116]|
Nanak has obtained the commodity of the One Name; he lives by chanting and meditating on it within his heart. ||4]|14]|116]|
MTAT HIG U Il (400-3)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
WT ys at IG Fast A AS 3 Ss Il (400-3, ww, ws 5) jaa parabh kee ha-o chayrulee so sabh tay oochaa. I am God's maid-servant; He is the highest of all.
Ag fag 3 or are Fa nig HT IAI (400-4, wm, Hs 5) sabh kichh taa kaa kaa“dhee-ai thoraa ar moochaa. ||1|| All things, big and small, are said to belong to Him. ||1]|
Fibs urs Hat as Afos at Hse il (400-4, mmr, He 5) jee-a paraan mayraa Dhano saahib kee manee-aa. I surrender my soul, my breath of life, and my wealth, to my Lord Master.
ony far & Crat fA SAT Shor WA TIE il (400-5, wer, we 5) naam jisai kai oojlee tis daasee ganee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through His Name, I become radiant; I am known as His slave. ||1||Pause] |
Suse MST H SE nea Sta I (400-5, vir, v2 5) vayparvaahu anand mai naa-o maanak heeraa. You are Carefree, the Embodiment of Bliss. Your Name is a gem, a jewel.
ort Oet Het AY AT at F HTS MQM (400-6, wm, He 5) rajee Dhaa-ee sadaa sukh jaa kaa too” meeraa. ||2|| One who has You as her Master, is satisfied, satiated and happy forever. ||2| |
Rat Add Har at AHfS fess il (400-6, wim, ue 5)
sakhee sahayree sang kee sumat darirhaava-o.
O my companions and fellow maidens, please implant that balanced understanding within me.
Reg AY ae af 38 fafa ofa wes SI (400-6, wr, He 5) sayvhu saaDhoo bhaa-o kar ta-o niDh har paava-o. ||3]| Serve the Holy Saints lovingly, and find the treasure of the Lord. ||3]|
Hast SH sad AS AIST AS I (400-7, wer, He 5) saglee daasee thaakurai sabh kahtee mayraa. All are servants of the Lord Master, and all call Him their own.
farts Atard Seat SAH AUfs SAS NSIAUNAVII (400-7, wm, He 5)
jisahi seegaaray naankaa tis sukheh basayraa. ||4||15]|117]| She alone dwells in peace, O Nanak, whom the Lord adorns. ||4||15]|117]|
MTAT HIG U Il (400-8)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Hat at dfe aad Sg vrerar fra ct il (400-8, mmr, v2 5) santaa kee ho-ay daasree ayhu achaaraa sikh ree. Become the servant of the Saints, and learn this way of life.
AIS Te TE SSH sat Ufa s firg SH AU (400-8, mr, wz 5) Sagal gunaa gun ootmo bhartaa door na pikh ree. ||1|| Of all virtues, the most sublime virtue is to see your Husband Lord near at hand. ||1]|
feg no Hefe urea afe att nee far ct Il (400-9, mmr, He 5) ih man sundar aapnaa har naam majeethai rang ree. So, dye this mind of yours with the color of the Lord's Love.
fsurfa frureu asst 3 we erate Afar st ual TIS i (400-10, mmr, 3 5)
ti-aag si-aanap chaaturee too” jaan gupaaleh sang ree. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Renounce cleverness and cunning, and know that the Sustainer of the world is with you. ||1]|Pause| |
sds ad A HTShH Sa Aterg sete TH il (400-10, nmr, 2 5) bhartaa kahai so maanee-ai ayhu seegaar banaa-ay ree. Whatever your Husband Lord says, accept that, and make it your decoration.
ea ag ferrdin fg Saar ute gt QM (400-11, wr, ws 5) doojaa bhaa-o visaaree-ai ayhu tambolaa khaa-ay ree. ||2]| Forget the love of duality, and chew upon this betel leaf. | |2]|
qd a Aad afe ctue feo As at AA fae Hl (400-11, nmr, He 5) gur kaa sabad kar deepko ih sat kee sayj bichhaa-ay ree. Make the Word of the Guru's Shabad your lamp, and let your bed be Truth.
nS udd ad Afs Jd 3B se ofe ae FH NI (400-12, wr, He 5)
aath pahar kar jorh rahu ta-o bhaytai har raa-ay ree. ||3]||
Twenty-four hours a day, stand with your palms pressed together, and the Lord, your King, shall meet you. ||3]||
fsA dt un Aterg Ag ATet ofu ores SH it (400-12, wer, 2 5) tis hee chaj seegaar sabh saa-ee roop apaar ree. She alone is cultured and embellished, and she alone is of incomparable beauty.
At Hoafs SSaT A Stet AdSTs TH USUAENAAEH (400-13, nTAT, He 5)
Saa-ee sohagan naankaa jo bhaanee kartaar ree. ||4||16||118]|
She alone is the happy soul-bride, O Nanak, who is pleasing to the Creator Lord. [14] |16]]118]|
MTAT HIG U Il (400-14)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Stas se 3B EE AG HS A SIH Il (400-14, mmm, we 5) deegan dolaa ta-oo la-o ja-o man kay bharmaa. As long as there are doubts in the mind, the mortal staggers and falls.
3H are afe mrue ure PEAS IA (400-14, wm, He 5) bharam kaatay gur aapnai paa-ay bisraamaa. ||1]|| The Guru removed my doubts, and I have obtained my place of rest. ||1]|
Gfe fret Sion 3 Ta FT! I (400-15, wm, 2 5) o-ay bikhaadee dokhee-aa tay gur tay hootay. Those quarrelsome enemies have been overcome, through the Guru.
oH se we Cars GE TN SF SS AU TTS I (400-15, mer, v2 5) ham chhootay ab un"aa tay o-ay ham tay chhootay. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have now escaped from them, and they have run away from me. ||1]|Pause]|
Ha 3a West se dt 3 FO Il (400-15, wmv, He 5) mayraa tayraa jaantaa tab hee tay banDhaa. He is concerned with 'mine and yours’, and so he is held in bondage.
afs at wifamrast 3a Sea ST Il (400-16, wmv, nz 5)
gur kaatee agi-aantaa tab chhutkay fanDhaa. ||2||
When the Guru dispelled my ignorance, then the noose of death was cut away from my neck. ||2]|
Wa Od JAH 6 Ysa Sa Tt BS Taner I 400-16, wm, 2 5) jab lag hukam na boojh-taa tab hee la-o dukhee-aa. As long as he does not understand the Command of God's Will, he remains miserable.
as ffs gan uetteur sa dt 3 Adhr SI (400-17, »mr, He 5)
gur mil hukam pachhaani-aa tab hee tay sukhee-aa. ||3]|
Meeting with the Guru, he comes to recognize God's Will, and then, he becomes happy. ||3]|
ot a PAHS Sub Srdt A HST Il (400-17, wm, He 5) naa ko dusman dokhee-aa naahee ko mandaa. I have no enemies and no adversaries; no one is wicked to me.
Td at AS’ ASA SSA YAH FST NIV UNIAE (400-18, mA, He 5)
gur kee sayvaa sayvko naanak khasmai bandaa. ||4||17||119]|
That servant, who performs the Lord's service, O Nanak, is the slave of the Lord Master. ||4||17||119] |
MTAT HIG U Il (400-18)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
HY Hon woe wer afd atase aS il (400-18, mir, He 5)
sookh sahj aanad ghanaa har keertan gaa-o.
Peace, celestial poise and absolute bliss are obtained, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
add foes AfsagT SF wru|Sr SS MAU (400-19, wrewr, He 5) garah nivaaray satguroo day apnaa naa-o. ||1|| Bestowing His Name, the True Guru removes the evil omens. ||1]||
fers Ts nus Ae Ae af AWS Il (400-19, wm, He 5) balihaaree gur aapnay sad sad bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him.
UST 80K ag feey 38 etour fan ffs Ag Are Na FIC I Go1-1, we, we 5)
guroo vitahu ha-o vaari-aa jis mil sach su-aa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the Guru; meeting Him, I am absorbed into the True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hao wurde fsA aG wate fan dfs & wr] I (401-1, wr, 2 5) sagun apasgun tis ka-o lageh jis cheet na aavai. Good omens and bad omens affect those who do not keep the Lord in the mind.
fen mH ofs 5 ureet FH afe ufs STS QI (401-2, nmr, He 5) tis jam nayrh na aavee jo har parabh bhaavai. ||2|| The Messenger of Death does not approach those who are pleasing to the Lord God.
21 |
Ua we AU su AS AS Cufe SH Il (401-2, wer, He 5) punn daan jap tap jaytay sabh oopar naam. Donations to charity, meditation and penance - above all of them is the Naam.
ofs ofs aAa A AU SA Yas HH SI (401-3, »mr, we 5)
har har rasnaa jo japai tis pooran kaam. |[3]|
One who chants with his tongue the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his works are brought to perfect completion. ||3]|
3 fear 3H Ho Te a feA o shor Il (401-3, wr, ne 5)
bhai binsay bharam moh ga-ay ko disai na bee-aa.
His fears are removed, and his doubts and attachments are gone; he sees none other than God.
aaa aa uTsgqaH feta sy o short usnaAcIoll (401-4, wrAr, He 5)
naanak raakhay paarbarahm fir dookh na thee-aa. ||4]|18]|120]| O Nanak, the Supreme Lord God preserves him, and no pain or sorrow afflicts him any longer. ||4]|18]|120]|
MTA Wg € HIG U (401-5)
aasaa ghar 9 mehlaa 5 Aasaa, Ninth House, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars urfe il (401-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fase@ fesfe Hoa FY US nrat sve fa 5 TSC Il (01-6, vir, ne 5)
chitva-o chitav sarab sukh paava-o aagai bhaava-o ke na bhaava-o.
Contemplating Him within my consciousness, I obtain total peace; but hereafter, will I be pleasing to Him or not?
Sq WS AIG I Wa eA a ula ASS A (401-6, wT, Hs 5) ayk daataar sagal hai jaachik doosar kai peh jaava-o. ||1]| There is only One Giver; all others are beggars. Who else can we turn to? ||1||
IS HIG ITS BASE Il (401-7, wm, He 5) ha-o maaga-o aan lajaava-o. When I beg from others, I am ashamed.
Hae sgufs fa sag aBa AHAfE WSS AU TIC Il (401-7, »mr, 2 5) Sagal chhatarpat ayko thaakur ka-un samsar laava-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The One Lord Master is the Supreme King of all; who else is equal to Him? ||1]|Pause] |
CoG ane afe fs o Wa canS Uf SASS II (401-8, wm, Hs 5)
ooth-o baisa-o reh bhe na saaka-o darsan khoj khojaava-o.
Standing up and sitting down, I cannot live without Him. I search and search for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
quntea Heated Had HSeS Aa'So Aosand faq aS HIG LHSSE IQ (401-8, nmr, H8 5)
barahmaadik sankaadik sanak sanandan sanaatan sanatkumaar tin" ka-o mahal dulbhaava-o. ||2||
Even Brahma and the sages Sanak, Sanandan, Sanaatan and Sanat Kumar, find it difficult to obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||2]|
Wa MH wrarfa sa atHfs ud @ UTS I 401-9, mmr, He 5)
agam agam aagaaDh boDh keemat parai na paava-o.
He is unapproachable and unfathomable; His wisdom is deep and profound; His value cannot be appraised.
sat Hef Afs use at Afsag usy foMre| Bil (401-10, wm, He 5)
taakee saran sat purakh kee satgur purakh Dhi-aava-o. ||3]|
I have taken to the Sanctuary of the True Lord, the Primal Being, and I meditate on the True Guru. |[3]|
sfe6 faurs efeores us oag afes sa Tae I (401-10, nmr, Hs 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal da-i-aal parabh thaakur kaati-o banDh garaava-o.
God, the Lord Master, has become kind and compassionate; He has cut the noose of death away from my neck.
ad soa AG AUHa utes 3 fefs Haft o mT]SS ISNANIVAUI (401-11, mm, He 5)
kaho naanak ja-o saaDhsang paa-i-o ta-o fir janam na aava-o. ||4]|1||121]|
Says Nanak, now that I have obtained the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I Shall not have to be reincarnated again. ||4||1]|121]|
MTAT HIG U Il (401-12)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
nists ree wots wes we afar Aerct Il 401-12, wm, nH 5)
antar gaava-o baahar gaava-o gaava-o jaag savaaree.
Inwardly, I sing His Praises, and outwardly, I sing His Praises; I sing His Praises while awake and asleep.
Afa seo a@ Sa dia afte on & fears all (401-12, »mr, wu 5)
sang chalan ka-o tosaa deen"aa gobind naam kay bi-uhaaree. ||1||
I am a trader in the Name of the Lord of the Universe; He has given it to me as my supplies, to carry with me. ||1]|
wed fanrdt ferret il (401-13, nar, He 5) avar bisaaree bisaaree. I have forgotten and forsaken other things.
oH weg dfs us AE H Sa worst AU TIS lt (401-13, vw, ws 5) naam daan gur poorai dee-o mai ayho aaDhaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has given me the Gift of the Naam; this alone is my Support. ||1]|Pause] |
eufe wes Afe st eG nrafor ufs AHS II (401-14, wr, He 5)
dookhan gaava-o sukh bhee gaava-o maarag panth sam"aaree.
I sing His Praises while suffering, and I sing His Praises while I am at peace as well. I contemplate Him while I walk along the Path.
on fez afe no ufo dor Hat fA gest QI (401-14, vm, He 5) naam darirh gur man meh dee-aa moree tisaa bujhaaree. ||2|| The Guru has implanted the Naam within my mind, and my thirst has been quenched.
[121] feo st wee sat wee we wih AA GHOST II (401-15, wr, He 5)
din bhee gaava-o rainee gaava-O gaava-o Saas Saas rasnaaree. I sing His Praises during the day, and I sing His Praises during the night; I sing them with each and every breath.
AsHafs ufo fara dfe ofe Hes Has Hardt Sl (401-16, vr, v2 5)
satsangat meh bisaas ho-ay har jeevat marat sangaaree. ||3]|
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, this faith is established, that the Lord is with us, in life and in death. ||3]|
Hs soa ag feg we tg us wes AS 3s Sfa art Il (401-16, nr, ve 5)
jan naanak ka-o ih daan dayh parabh paava-o sant rayn ur Dhaaree.
Bless servant Nanak with this gift, O God, that he may obtain, and enshrine in his heart, the dust of the feet of the Saints.
Azol AA 35 VIA UNC HASA TT FIGS NSilIQNIQ2Ml_ (401-17, wm, Hs 5)
sarvanee kathaa nain daras paykha-o mastak gur charnaaree. ||4]|2||122||
Hear the Lord's Sermon with your ears, and behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan with your eyes; place your forehead upon the Guru's Feet. ||4||2]|122] |
qe Afsars yrrfe Il (401-18)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: Aasaa, Tenth House, Fifth Mehl:
MTAT WI YO HIG U Il (401-19) aasaa ghar 10 mehlaa 5.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: Aasaa, Tenth House, Fifth Mehl:
fan 3 3 nAfag ate Hats 3 urge SBT Il (401-19, wm, Hs 5) jis no too" asthir kar maaneh tay paahun do daahaa. That which you believe to be permanent, is a guest here for only a few days.
UST GO2
UZ Aes fats Aes AHat AS ffaor mS" WA (402-1, wT, Hs 5) putar kaltar garih sagal samagree sabh mithi-aa asnaahaa. ||1|| Children, wives, homes, and all possessions - attachment to all of these is false. ||1]|
J HO for asfa FIT I (402-1, ver, vs 5) ray man ki-aa karahi hai haa haa. O mind, why do you burst out laughing?
fenfe ty AA ofadeCst fea mH SHG BS ST AU TIC I (402-1, »m, Hs 5) darisat daykh jaisay harichand-uree ik raam bhajan lai laahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. See with your eyes, that these things are only mirages. So earn the profit of meditation on the One Lord. ||1||Pause]|
AA SHsd ed Gers fea efe wie saT Il (402-2, nr, nH: 5) jaisay bastar dayh odhaanay din do-ay chaar bhoraahaa. It is like the clothes which you wear on your body - they wear off in a few days.
SHS Cus asa wet nifs Fat nirT iI! (402-3, wea, Hs 5) bheet oopray kaytak Dhaa-ee-ai ant orko aahaa. ||2| | How long can you run upon a wall? Ultimately, you come to its end. ||2]|
AA vis as afe The uss fifa afs AST I (402-3, nmr, He 5) jaisay ambh kund kar raakhi-o parat sinDh gal jaahaa. It is like salt, preserved in its container; when it is put into water, it dissolves.
niefa otfamr ursggH at Cfo AH HIS BATS SII (402-4, nmr, He 5)
aavag aagi-aa paarbarahm kee uth jaasee muhat chasaahaa. ||3]|
When the Order of the Supreme Lord God comes, the soul arises, and departs in an instant. ||3||
SX ZX
J Ho Ba Wala Sa FAfs SA Bet ATI Il (402-4, new, v2 5)
ray man laykhai chaaleh laykhai baiseh laykhai laidaa saahaa.
O mind, your steps are numbered, your moments spent sitting are numbered, and the breaths you are to take are numbered.
He atefs ats soa dfs at Cad Afsag BIS Gers NNAUII2SII (402-5, mm, He 5)
sadaa keerat kar naanak har kee ubray satgur charan otaahaa. ||4||1]|123]| Sing forever the Praises of the Lord, O Nanak, and you shall be saved, under the Shelter of the Feet of the True Guru. ||4]|1]|123]|
MTAT HIG U Il (402-6)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
WUne Is 3 set Htadt TS TAS ANSE Il (402-6, wr, He 5)
apusat baat tay bha-ee seeDhree doot dusat sajna-ee.
That which was upside-down has been set upright; the deadly enemies and adversaries have become friends.
nigars ufo ao UTtAS Hele sfo TeSSt WAI (402-6, wm, He 5)
anDhkaar meh ratan pargaasi-o maleen buDh hachhna-ee. ||1]|
In the darkness, the jewel shines forth, and the impure understanding has become pure. |[1||
Ag fac afte set I (402-7, ner, He 5) ja-o kirpaa gobind bha-ee. When the Lord of the Universe became merciful,
HY Hufs afs an ee ure Afsag fet na FIC il (402-7, ver, He 5)
sukh sampat har naam fal paa-ay satgur mil-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I found peace, wealth and the fruit of the Lord's Name; I have met the True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfs fasus a@ afe 5 WSS Has 35 Yaeet Il (402-8, vim, ue 5)
mohi kirpan ka-o ko-ay na jaanat sagal bhavan pargata-ee.
No one knew me, the miserable miser, but now, I have become famous all over the world.
Hf 856 Adt o uss Tf AS BIe ASS |i (402-8, wrAr, ve 5) sang baithno kahee na paavat hun sagal charan sayv-ee. ||2|| Before, no one would even sit with me, but now, all worship my feet. ||2]|
ning nite &G feas Pes Ho Aas fens ofS Tet il (402-9, mmr, vs 5)
aadh aadh ka-o firat dhoondh-tay man sagal tarisan bujh ga-ee.
I used to wander in search of pennies, but now, all the desires of my mind are satisfied.
aq se st ues ot MUHas Alseet ISI (402-9, nmr, He 5)
ayk bol bhee khavto naahee saaDhsangat seetla-ee. ||3]||
I could not bear even one criticism, but now, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am cooled and soothed. ||3]|
Sa Hh TE ACH TUS MSH MSM MraTHeT Il (402-10, nA, Hz 5)
ayk jeeh gun kavan vakhaanai agam agam agma-ee.
What Glorious Virtues of the Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Profound Lord can one mere tongue describe?
ZH UA UA A ad Ho asa Tla AGSet NSNQNISIl (402-10, mA, He 5)
daas daas daas ko karee-ahu jan naanak har sarna-ee. ||4||2||124| | Please, make me the slave of the slave of Your slaves; servant Nanak seeks the Lord's Sanctuary. ||4||2|]124]|
MTAT HIG U Il (402-11)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
THs Bd ae F te dia 32 aS afar Ther It (402-11, wr, ws 5) ray moorhay laahay ka-o too” dheelaa dheelaa totay ka-o bayg Dhaa-i-aa. O fool, you are so slow to earn your profits, and so quick to run up losses.
AAS zug ¥ filsfo ast unit ara Sarfemr Al (402-12, wm, He 5)
sasat vakhar too’ ghinneh naahee paapee baaDhaa raynaa-i-aa. ||1||
You do not purchase the inexpensive merchandise; O sinner, you are tied to your debts. ||1||
Afsad Sot mrAtenr il (402-13, rrr, H8 5) satgur tayree aasaa-i-aa. O True Guru, You are my only hope.
ufss use 3d OU UTaqON A Sa Garfeur na TIC It (402-13, vir, ne 5) patit paavan tayro naam paarbarahm mai ayhaa otaa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Your Name is the Purifier of sinners, O Supreme Lord God; You are my only Shelter. ||1]|Pause] |
dius 2a nafs Casrefa on BS wimarfEnr Il (402-14, wir, He 5)
ganDhan vain suneh urjhaavahi naam lait alkaa-i-aa.
Listening to the evil talk, you are caught up in it, but you are hesitant to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fe fee xB az Surfs ast Cwerfenr i (402-14, wer, 2 5) nind chind ka-o bahut umaahi-o boojhee ultaa-i-aa. ||2|| You are delighted by slanderous talk; your understanding is corrupt. ||2||
Ud US Ud 36 ud St fee orrfa fs Taarfent II (402-15, ni, He 5)
par Dhan par tan par tee nindaa akhaaDh khaahi harkaa-i-aa.
Others' wealth, others' wives and the slander of others - eating the uneatable, you have gone crazy.
Arg UdH fae afe odt ore Afs Hos eafemr SM (402-15, mm, He 5)
saach Dharam si-o ruch nahee aavai sat sunat chhohaa-i-aa. ||3]||
You have not enshrined love for the True Faith of Dharma; hearing the Truth, you are enraged. ||3||
de cfenre faus ys Stag sas Sa Als Bren Ih (402-16, wm, He 5)
deen da-i-aal kirpaal parabh thaakur bhagat tayk har naa-i-aa.
O God, Merciful to the meek, Compassionate Lord Master, Your Name is the Support of Your devotees.
soa nity AE Us OMNES ay wa nrUStEM WSNBNIQUII (402-16, wm, Hs 5)
naanak aahi saran parabh aa-i-o raakh laaj apnaa-i-aa. ||4]|3]|125]| Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary; O God, make him Your Own, and preserve his honor. ||4]|3]|125]|
MTAT HIG U Il (402-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl
fiufeor fer Fifa sues Ho Hfeor afs sa i (402-17, wr, He 5)
mithi-aa sang sang laptaa-ay moh maa-i-aa kar baaDhay.
: They are attached to falsehood; clinging to the transitory, they are trapped in emotional attachment to Maya.
Ad WS A dfs 6 ure widafa se mT NAM (402-18, mmr, He 5)
jah jaano so cheet na aavai aha’-buDh bha-ay aa™Dhay. ||1]|
Wherever they go, they do not think of the Lord; they are blinded by intellectual egotism. ||1]|
Ho Sarat frS o nraa il (402-18, mma, 2 5) man bairaagee ki-o na araaDhay. O mind, O renunciate, why don't you adore Him?
aE dod whe J aA Afar Aare frst at fora na TIS i (402-19, wmv, we 5) kaach kothree maahi too™ bastaa sang sagal bikhai kee bi-aaDhay. ||1|| rahaa-o. You dwell in that flimsy chamber, with all the sins of corruption. ||1]|Pause] |
Het Hat aes fea dfs feos use fue SH maT I (402-19, ver, He 5)
mayree mayree karat din rain bihaavai pal khin chheejai arjaaDhay.
Crying out, "Mine, mine", your days and nights pass away; moment by moment, your life is running out.
UST OZ
AA His Ae Sse Fo Ufa SINT iI (403-1, wer, we 5) jaisay meethai saad lobhaa-ay jhooth DhanDh durgaaDhay. ||2|| The sweet flavors tempt you, and you are occupied by your false and filthy business.
21 |
aH gu mg Bs Ha fea Est ofA Bu|Td II (403-1, vm, 8 5)
kaam kroDh ar lobh moh ih indree ras laptaaDhay.
Your senses are beguiled by sensual pleasures of sex, by anger, greed and emotional attachment.
at sercst usta feos safe safe HOH NI (403-2, wer, He 5) dee-ee bhavaaree purakh biDhaatai bahur bahur janmaaDhay. ||3]| The All-powerful Architect of Destiny has ordained that you shall be reincarnated over
and over again. ||3]|
ag sfeG faure die eu sno 30 ad fife AS Ae wT II (403-2, wr, He 5)
ja-o bha-i-o kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan ta-o gur mil sabh sukh laaDhay.
When the Destroyer of the pains of the poor becomes merciful, then, as Gurmukh, you shall find absolute peace.
ad aod fea dfs fomreS urfa aret Aare Gud iigil (403-3, wr, He 5)
kaho naanak din rain Dhi-aava-o maar kaadhee sagal upaaDhay. ||4||
Says Nanak, meditate on the Lord, day and night, and all your sickness shall be banished. ||4||
fe@ vfuS set use fears | (403-4, nmr, He 5) i-o japi-o bhaa-ee purakh biDhaatay. Meditate in this way, O Siblings of Destiny, on the Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
sfes faure dls eu SHG AGH HIS TY SA NU! FHS TA ISISIIEM (403-4, we, we 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan janam maran dukh laathay. ||1]| rahaa-o doojaa. [14] 14]]126]|
The Destroyer of the pains of the poor has become merciful; He has removed the pains of birth and death. ||1]||Second Pause] |4]|4]|126]|
MTAT HIG U Il (403-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fond aH Aire avafs afe feon eu urefa Il (403-5, mmr, He 5) nimakh kaam su-aad kaaran kot dinas dukh paavahi. For a moment of sexual pleasure, you shall suffer in pain for millions of days.
wot Hos da Hrefs fefs safe sgfs uesefs IA (403-6, wer, He 5)
gharee muhat rang maaneh fir bahur bahur pachhutaavahi. ||1]|
For an instant, you may savor pleasure, but afterwards, you shall regret it, again and again. ||1||
mit ofs ofs af afemr i (403-6, wer, 2 5) anDhay chayt har har raa-i-aa. O blind man, meditate on the Lord, the Lord, your King.
3a A fee 3s vrfeor na TIS I (403-7, ver, He 5) tayraa so din nayrhai aa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. Your day is drawing near. ||1||Pause| |
used ferfe ef 3S nra Sb FX SH Il (403-7, mmr, He 5) palak darisat daykh bhoolo aak neem ko too“mar. You are deceived, beholding with your eyes, the bitter melon and swallow-wort.
~
nv Ha farts fa@ 3 3 3A ct fea us fog QIN (403-7, »mr, He 5)
jaisaa sang bisee-ar si-o hai ray taiso hee ih par garihu. ||2||
But, like the companionship of a poisonous snake, so is the desire for another's spouse. ||2||
aot aafs uy Ags SAS Tt MMHTAT Il (403-8, nimAT, He 5) bairee kaaran paap kartaa basat rahee amaanaa.
For the sake of your enemy, you commit sins, while you neglect the reality of your faith.
efs wo fsa dt fa@ Hat AAS fAE Saar SI (403-9, nmr, He 5) chhod jaahi tin hee si-o sangee saajan si-o bairaanaa. ||3]|| Your friendship is with those who abandon you, and you are angry with your friends.
HI3II Hae AAG feo fafa faurfus A Cafes fAA TT UT Il (403-9, war, Hs 5)
Sagal sansaar ihai biDh bi-aapi-o so ubri-o jis gur pooraa. The entire world is entangled in this way; he alone is saved, who has the Perfect Guru.
AT SSA SS Ata Shes SS uss Asta USNUNIAVII (403-10, wr, Hz 5)
kaho naanak bhav saagar tari-o bha-ay puneet sareeraa. ||4]|5]|127]| Says Nanak, I have crossed over the terrifying world-ocean; my body has become sanctified. ||4]|5||127]|
MAT HO U UE Il (403-10)
aasaa mehlaa 5 dupday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl Dupadas:
Bla as Aet SH UfES Hs Ha HASTA Il (403-11, mmr, He 5) look kamaano so-ee tum" paykhi-o moorh mugaDh mukraanee. O Lord, You behold whatever we do in secrecy; the fool may stubbornly deny it.
ny SHS a B aid fefs we ussrat Al (403-11, mA, He 5) aap kamaanay ka-o lay baa“Dhay fir paachhai pachhutaanee. ||1]| By his own actions, he is tied down, and in the end, he regrets and repents. ||1]|
us Ae AS fafa mist Art II (403-12, wm, we 5) parabh mayray sabh biDh aagai jaanee. My God knows, ahead of time, all things.
SH AMA S TUS Use US Aha at HAT A TIS I (403-12, weer, we 5)
bharam kay moosay too” raakhat pardaa paachhai jee-a kee maanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Deceived by doubt, you may hide your actions, but in the end, you shall have to confess the secrets of your mind. ||1]||Pause] |
fas fas oe fas fsa oat fomr & as UTS I (403-13, nmr, He 5)
jit jit laa-ay tit tit laagay ki-aa ko karai paraanee.
Whatever they are attached to, they remain joined to that. What can any mere mortal do?
auf SI USAIN HuMit area AE Tat NQWENIVCI (403-13, »mT, He 5)
bakhas laihu paarbarahm su-aamee naanak sad kurbaanee. ||2||6||128]| Please, forgive me, O Supreme Lord Master. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. [12] |6]|128]|
MTAT HIG U Il (403-14)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
nus AeA at MMy TS nM SHY AUS Il (403-14, nA, ws 5) apunay sayvak kee aapay raakhai aapay naam japaavai. He Himself preserves His servants; He causes them to chant His Name.
Ad Ad oH fais Rea at so so BfS OS NA (403-14, vir, He 5) jah jah kaaj kirat sayvak kee tahaa tahaa uth Dhaavai. ||1]|| Wherever the business and affairs of His servants are, there the Lord hurries to be.
[111] Aza a@ foact dfe feure il (403-15, nmr, He 5)
sayvak ka-o niktee ho-ay dikhaavai. The Lord appears near at hand to His servant.
A ad oad uly Aza 33a TE mS NU TIE Il (403-15, mm, nz 5)
jo jo kahai thaakur peh sayvak tatkaal ho-ay aavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever the servant asks of his Lord and Master, immediately comes to pass. ||1]|Pause] |
fsH Aza & WG afsodt FH mus YS SS Il (403-16, viv, ne 5) tis sayvak kai ha-o balihaaree jo apnay parabh bhaavai. I am a Sacrifice to that servant, who is pleasing to his God.
fsn at Afe Hat Ho dfemr fsH aaa UPALE MTS INDIE! (403-16, TAT, He 5) tis kee so-ay sunee man hari-aa tis naanak parsan aavai. ||2||7||129]| Hearing of his glory, the mind is rejuvenated; Nanak comes to touch his feet. [2]17][129]|
MTAT WUT WA HIB U_ (403-18)
aasaa ghar 11 mehlaa 5 Aasaa, Eleventh House, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsara yATfe il (403-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
seor su fears ag fafa AAT d Gy SATS I (403-19, mmr, we 5) natoo-aa bhaykh dikhaavai baho biDh jaisaa hai oh taisaa ray. The actor displays himself in many disguises, but he remains just as he is.
uifoa rife gfe gu stsfs Aufs art UssAT FT UA (403-19, wer, He 5)
anik jon bharmi-o bharam bheetar sukheh naahee parvaysaa ray. ||1]||
The soul wanders through countless incarnations in doubt, but it does not come to dwell in peace. ||1]|
UST 808 ATA AS IHS Hist fae ofa dfs mratst FT Il (404-1, nmr, we 5)
Saajan sant hamaaray meetaa bin har har aaneetaa ray. O Saints, my friends and companions, without the Lord, Har, Har, you shall perish.
AaHfa fife sfe ae we feg HoH ueTsE AST ST AU TIS I (404-1, wir, He 5) saaDhsang mil har gun gaa-ay ih janam padaarath jeetaa ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and win this precious treasure of human life. ||1]|Pause| |
3 ae when gan at alot agg ae fate sar Ft (404-2, nw, He 5) tarai gun maa-i-aa barahm kee keen"ee kahhu kavan biDh taree-ai ray. God has created Maya of the three qualities; tell me, how can it be crossed over?
WHS Us wars aradt aT Hat uta Sasha F I (404-3, weer, us 5)
ghooman ghayr agaah gaakhree gur sabdee paar utree-ai ray. ||2||
The whirlpool is awesome and unfathomable; only through the Word of the Guru's Shabad is one carried across. ||2||
ans dns fa stefee sa area feg Ara T Il (404-3, nim, ne 5)
khojat khojat khoj beechaari-o tat naanak ih jaanaa ray.
Searching and searching endlessly, seeking and deliberating, Nanak has realized the true essence of reality.
frnas an fours foniva Ho Hea usta F ISIAUIIBON (404-4, nmr, He 5)
simrat naam niDhaan nirmolak man maanak patee-aanaa ray. ||3||1]||130]| Meditating on the invaluable treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the jewel of the mind is satisfied. ||3]|1]|130]|
MAT He U UE Il (404-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5 dupday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Dupadas:
ae usAtfe Ad Hfe efor A HIS A UTES FI (404-5, ni, He 5) gur parsaad mayrai man vasi-aa jo maaga-o SO paava-o ray. By Guru's Grace, He dwells within my mind; whatever I ask for, I receive.
on dfa feg He fguse age 6 ase We F AU (404-5, wer, Hs 5)
naam rang ih man tariptaanaa bahur na katahoo™ Dhaava-o ray. ||1||
This mind is satisfied with the Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; it does not go out, anywhere, anymore. ||1]||
THT sag AS 3 Ca se fear fA WES F I (404-6, mmr, we 5)
hamraa thaakur sabh tay oochaa rain dinas tis gaava-o ray.
My Lord and Master is the highest of all; night and day, I sing the Glories of His Praises.
fus nfs atu Caruso fH 3 33f7 STSS FT NA TIS Il (404-6, wm, ve 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa tis tay tujheh daraava-o ray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; through Him, I frighten you. ||1]|Pause] |
Aa eu ys nus AMM 3 nieetls dS o US F Il (404-7, nmr, v2 5)
= 4S
jab daykh-a-u parabh apunaa su-aamee ta-o avrahi cheet na paava-o ray. When I behold my God, my Lord and Master, I do not pay any attention to any other.
soa oA ufs urfy ufsatfenr gH 3G Afe feurSG F NQNAUASAI (404-8, mT, He 5) naanak daas parabh aap pehraa-i-aa bharam bha-o mayt likhaava-o ray. ||2||2||131]| God Himself has adorned servant Nanak; his doubts and fears have been dispelled, and he writes the account of the Lord. ||2||2||131]|
MTAT HI U Il (404-9)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
atg ade VI A HIS US PIAS AT 3at J Il (404-9, nim, nz 5)
chaar baran cha-uhaa kay mardan khat darsan kar talee ray.
The four castes and social classes, and the preachers with the six Shaastras on their finger-tips,
Hed Awe Agu frord uvg dt Hfs set FT WAU (404-9, mem, we 5)
sundar sughar saroop si-aanay panchahu hee mohi chhalee ray. ||1||
the beautiful, the refined, the shapely and the wise - the five passions have enticed and beguiled them all. ||1]|
fats fife re Us Hadte uA ABS ast T Il (404-10, wm, Hs 5)
jin mil maaray panch soorbeer aiso ka-un balee ray. Who has seized and conquered the five powerful fighters? Is there anyone strong enough?
fats us ue faera gers Aus feo ast FA TIS il (404-11, wm, Hs 5)
jin panch maar bidaar gudaaray so pooraa ih kalee ray. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He alone, who conquers and defeats the five demons, is perfect in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1]|Pause| |
zat an afh wats adit HIAH SCA Jost F Il (404-11, nmr, He 5)
vadee kom vas bhaageh naahee muhkam fa-uj hathlee ray.
They are so awesome and great; they cannot be controlled, and they do not run away. Their army is mighty and unyielding.
ag aad fais vfs focefeur wronafs & Sst F NNSA (404-12, nA, He 5) kaho naanak tin jan nirdali-aa saaDhsangat kai jhalee ray. ||2||3]|132]|
Says Nanak, that humble being who is under the protection of the Saadh Sangat, crushes those terrible demons. ||2]||3||132||
MTAT HIG U Il (404-13)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
lat Hho ot afs we SSH oie AGG IA Stat F UA TITS ll (404-13, weAr, He 5)
neekee jee-a kee har kathaa ootam aan sagal ras feekee ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Sublime Sermon of the Lord is the best thing for the soul. All other tastes are insipid. ||1||Pause| |
ag afe ufs nfs Ae YS AS meg © fas Setat F AU (404-13, nmr, He 5)
baho gun Dhun mun jan khat baytay avar na kichh laa-eekee ray. ||1]|
The worthy beings, heavenly singers, silent sages and the knowers of the six Shaastras proclaim that nothing else is worthy of consideration. ||1]| |
fardt foodt vrrdt Agadt AOAfa soa ulet J NQNSNASSI (404-14, wer, we 5)
bikhaaree niraaree apaaree sehjaaree saaDhsang naanak peekee ray. ||2||4||133]| It is the cure for evil passions, unique, unequalled and peace-giving; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, drink it in. ||2]]4]]133]|
MTAT HIG U Il (404-15)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
oust fumrdt nifqs ost afe fony 5 He 3 Sat FT UV TIC Mt (404-15, wm, He 5) hamaaree pi-aaree amrit Dhaaree gur nimakh na man tay taaree ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. My Beloved has brought forth a river of nectar. The Guru has not held it back from my mind, even for an instant. ||1]|Pause] |
PIAS USHS AHS ISHS sal dat Aaa F WA (404-16, wer, Hs 5)
darsan parsan sarsan harsan rang rangee kartaaree ray. ||1]|
Beholding it, and touching it, I am sweetened and delighted. It is imbued with the Creator's Love. ||1]|
fe SH Od OH dfs GH od AH Ais afe Soa Cfa TH F NQANUNIBSI (404-16, nA, He 5) khin ram gur gam har dam nah jam har kanth naanak ur haaree ray. ||2]|5]|134]| Chanting it even for a moment, I rise to the Guru; meditating on it, one is not trapped by the Messenger of Death. The Lord has placed it as a garland around Nanak's neck, and within his heart. ||2||5||134]|
MTAT HI U Il (404-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Slat ATG Haat i TITS i (404-17, vray, ns 5) neekee saaDh sangaanee. rahaa-o. The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is exalted and sublime. ||Pause] |
UIT HIS UB WES Wes afer afer Saat AU (404-18, wmv, we 5)
pahar moorat pal gaavat gaavat govind govind vakhaanee. ||1]||
Every day, hour and moment, I continually sing and speak of Govind, Govind, the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
TOs SAS Aes dfs AA ufo Sis Bao Y|TAT MQM (404-18, nm, He 5)
chaalat baisat sovat har jas man tan charan khataanee. ||2||
Walking, sitting and sleeping, I chant the Lord's Praises; I treasure His Feet in my mind and body. ||2]|
TS ISS J SAT TST Soa Aas USt WSNENISUI (404-19, wT, Hs 5) ha’-o ha-uro too thaakur ga-uro naanak saran pachhaanee. ||3||6||135]|
I am so small, and You are so great, O Lord and Master; Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. [13]16]|135]|
ust gou
TH MAT HIG U UWI W2 (405-1)
raag aasaa mehlaa 5 ghar 12 Raag Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Twelfth House:
q@ Afsarg YATE II (405-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fsurfar ares frmrsur sa uTsqaH fedarg il (405-2, mar, He 5) ti-aag sagal si-aanpaa bhaj paarbarahm nirankaar. Renounce all your cleverness and remember the Supreme, Formless Lord God.
Sa AS OH AST Aa CA ST NA (405-2, mmr, He 5) ayk saachay naam baajhahu sagal deesai chhaar. ||1]| Without the One True Name, everything appears as dust. ||1]||
A ug webt Ae Afar il (405-3, mr, ws 5) SO parabh jaanee-ai sad sang. Know that God is always with you.
Ts yA sh Sa ahs x Sar uA TIS il (405-3, wea, ws 5)
gur parsaadee boojhee-ai ayk har kai rang. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, one understands, and is imbued with the Love of the One Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hote AHTE Sa aAdt TAT adt STS Il (405-4, wir, v2 5) saran samrath ayk kayree doojaa naahee thaa-o. Seek the Shelter of the One All-powerful Lord; there is no other place of rest.
Ho sCne Subba Ae ofs Te WE iil (405-4, mw, v2 5)
mahaa bha-ojal langhee-ai sadaa har gun gaa-o. ||2]|
The vast and terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, singing continually the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
HOH Hos foes eu o AH ute OE I 405-4, wm, He 5) janam maran nivaaree-ai dukh na jam pur ho-ay. Birth and death are overcome, and one does not have to suffer in the City of Death.
on fours Ret ue faur ad ys APE SI (405-5, wm, He 5)
naam niDhaan so-ee paa-ay kirpaa karay parabh so-ay. ||3]||
He alone obtains the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, unto whom God shows His Mercy. ||3]|
Sa aq nurg Sa Sa aT fs HI Il (405-5, wewr, He 5) ayk tayk aDhaar ayko ayk kaa man jor. The One Lord is my Anchor and Support; the One Lord alone is the power of my mind.
soa Auba fife Aradafs afe fas nied 3 Ja ISIAUNIBEN (405-6, wr, He 5) naanak japee-ai mil saaDhsangat har bin avar na hor. ||4||1||136]||
O Nanak, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on Him; without the Lord, there is no other at all. ||4]|1]]136]]|
MTAT HIG U Il (405-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
MG He 30 US us a de Als GA Sa Il (405-7, ver, He 5)
jee-o man tan paraan parabh kay dee-ay sabh ras bhog.
The soul, the mind, the body and the breath of life belong to God. He has given all tastes and pleasures.
ate sau Aba est Aafs ages Ha NA (405-7, wer, He 5)
deen banDhap jee-a daataa saran raakhan jog. ||1||
He is the Friend of the poor, the Giver of life, the Protector of those who seek His Sanctuary. ||1]|
He Ho fourfe afe afs a il (405-8, wm, He 5) mayray man Dhi-aa-ay har har naa-o. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Jofs uafs of Hat Sa fre fos ow nan FI i (405-8, wm, v2 5)
halat palat sahaa-ay sangay ayk si-o liv laa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Here and hereafter, He is our Helper and Companion; embrace love and affection for the One Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
ae AAS Ho fowrefa sae AG AAT Il (405-9, wm, He 5) bayd saastar jan Dhi-aavahi taran ka-o sansaar. They meditate on the Vedas and the Shaastras, to swim across the world-ocean.
OSH UGH vida fafour As Gufs SH MIT MQM (405-9, wT, He 5)
karam Dharam anayk kiri-aa sabh oopar naam achaar. ||2||
The many religious rituals, good deeds of karma and Dharmic worship - above all of these is the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
an au nidarg faor fxs Afsarg FS I (405-10, vir, v8 5) kaam kroDh aha\kaar binsai milai satgur dayv. Sexual desire, anger, and egotism depart, meeting with the Divine True Guru.
omy fez ate sats afs at set ys at AS MSI (405-10, mr, He 5)
naam darirh kar bhagat har kee bhalee parabh kee sayv. ||3]||
Implant the Naam within, perform devotional worship to the Lord and serve God - this is good. ||3]||
ade AVE cere sat F fore HES Il (405-11, wr, we 5)
charan saran da-i-aal tayree too’ nimaanay maan.
I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet, O Merciful Lord; You are the Honor of the dishonored.
Ht yr ng SI SSA aT UF SS INSUQUNII I (405-11, wr, us 5)
jee-a paraan aDhaar tayraa naanak kaa parabh taan. ||4||2||137] | You are the Support of my soul, my breath of life; O God, You are Nanak's strength. [14] [2] ]137]]
MTAT HIG U Il (405-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fe sfe Ho gy ufenr fast ATG at Il (405-12, »mr, 3 5)
dol dol mahaa dukh paa-i-aa binaa saaDhoo sang.
He wavers and falters, and suffers such great pain, without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ufe og afte fs oA uragan fea Fa A (405-12, wer, He 5)
khaat laabh gobind har ras paarbarahm ik rang. ||1||
The profit of the sublime essence of the Lord of the Universe is obtained, by the Love of the One Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
dfs & aH AU StS I (405-13, nmr, Hz 5) har ko naam japee-ai neet. Chant continually the Name of the Lord.
Afa Ata foorfe A ys fsorfar mea ustfS Wa TIS il (405-13, vi, He 5) Saas Saas Dhi-aa-ay so parabh ti-aag avar pareet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. With each and every breath, meditate on God, and renounce other love. ||1||Pause] |
ATE ATE ANG A ys Abe ast wef it (405-14, wm, we 5) karan kaaran samrath so parabh jee-a daataa aap. God is the Doer, the All-powerful Cause of causes; He Himself is the Giver of life.
fSurfar Aas frmreur nits udd ys AMY II (405-14, wr, Hs 5) ti-aag sagal si-aanpaa aath pahar parabh jaap. ||2| | So renounce all your cleverness, and meditate on God, twenty-four hours a day. ||2||
Hts mat Hate Hatt Ss via mrs ll (405-15, wry, Hs 5)
meet sakhaa sahaa-ay sangee ooch agam apaar.
He is our best friend and companion, our help and support; He is lofty, inaccessible and infinite.
de AHS SATE fase Aha aX rag ISI (405-15, mm, He 5) charan kamal basaa-ay hirdai jee-a ko aaDhaar. ||3]|| Enshrine His Lotus Feet within your heart; He is the Support of the soul. ||3]|
ate fasur ys uTsygH TE SI AA AE Il (405-16, wr, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh paarbarahm gun tayraa jas gaa-o. Show Your Mercy, O Supreme Lord God, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises.
Hea AY at efenret afu Ate ateaq |S ISISNICIl (405-16, wm, Hs 5)
sarab sookh vadee vadi-aa-ee jap jeevai naanak naa-o. ||4||3]|138]| Total peace, and the greatest greatness, O Nanak, are obtained by living to chant the Name of the Lord. ||4||3]|138] |
MTAT HIG U Il (405-17)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Cay ase ageg Sas Yes AY Afar il (405-17, mr, Hs 5)
udam kara-o karaavahu thaakur paykhat saaDhoo sang.
I make the effort, as You cause me to do, my Lord and Master, to behold You in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
of ofa oH saeg dats wmy dt ys sfar All (405-18, wir, ne 5)
har har naam charaavahu rangan aapay hee parabh rang. ||1||
I am imbued with the color of the Love of the Lord, Har, Har; God Himself has colored me in His Love. ||1]|
Ho Hid TH STH APY II (405-18, nmr, He 5) man meh raam naamaa jaap. I chant the Lord's Name within my mind.
afa fasur zag Hd fose df AaSt orf an TI il (405-18, mA, He 5)
kar kirpaa vashu mayrai hirdai ho-ay sahaa-ee aap. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Bestow Your Mercy, and dwell within my heart; please, become my Helper. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfe Afe oH SHTe UISH Ys UNS at BE Il (405-19, mr, us 5) sun sun naam tumaaraa pareetam parabh paykhan kaa chaa-o. Listening continually to Your Name, O Beloved God, I yearn to behold You.
Ua go€ efeor agg faa mud ag fed HSTE ATE 2H (406-1, wir, He 5)
da-i-aa karahu kiram apunay ka-o ihai manorath su-aa-o. ||2]| Please, be kind to me - I am just a worm. This is my object and purpose. ||2| |
39 US 37 F yg Ne THe SA fag ota Il (406-1, wm, H: 5) tan Dhan tayraa too™ parabh mayraa hamrai vas kichh naahi. My body and wealth are Yours; You are my God - nothing is in my power.
fig fas aufs f38 f3@ soe Sa cor wis SII (406-2, nmr, nH 5) ji-o ji-o raakhahi ti-o ti-o rahnaa tayraa dee-aa khaahi. ||3]| As You keep me, so do I live; I eat what You give me. |[3]|
HOH WOH & footed ae HAG Us AS Ofs I (406-2, wer, Hs 5)
janam janam kay kilvikh kaatai majan har jan Dhoor.
The sins of countless incarnations are washed away, by bathing in the dust of the Lord's humble servants.
ote sats Sau 3C OA fe aaa Ae Tafa ISISIIEI (406-3, wm, He 5) bhaa-ay bhagat bharam bha-o naasai har naanak sadaa hajoor. ||4]|4]|139]| By loving devotional worship, doubt and fear depart; O Nanak, the Lord is Ever- present. ||4||4]|139] |
MTAT HIG U Il (406-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
WOH Midd TIA SoA ue fA HAS Sa Il (406-4, wir, Hs 5)
agam agochar daras tayraa so paa-ay jis mastak bhaag.
The Blessed Vision of Your Darshan is unapproachable and incomprehensible; he alone obtains it, who has such good destiny recorded upon his forehead.
mifu fount four yfs ordt Afsatfs suffer afs STH AU (406-4, wm, He 5)
aap kirpaal kirpaa parabh Dhaaree satgur bakhsi-aa har naam. ||1||
The Merciful Lord God has bestowed His Mercy, and the True Guru has granted the Lord's Name. ||1]|
aera Cufanit aaes Il (406-5, wmv, He 5) kalijug uDhaari-aa gurdayv. The Divine Guru is the Saving Grace in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
HS U3 ue fa Hue dS Als Bar Sat AZ UU TTS il (406-5, ww, ws 5)
mal moot moorh je mughad hotay sabh lagay tayree sayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Even those fools and idiots, stained with feces and urine, have all taken to Your service. ||1]||Pause| |
3 urfu asst AS fqAfe uss AS ufo Stor ATE Il (406-6, mmr, He 5)
too aap kartaa sabh sarisat Dhartaa sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay.
You Yourself are the Creator, who established the entire world. You are contained in all.
Ten oat fare dur vs ult ust wrfe QU (406-7, ver, He 5)
Dharam raajaa bismaad ho-aa sabh pa-ee pairee aa-ay. ||2||
The Righteous Judge of Dharma is wonder-struck, at the sight of everyone falling at the Lord's Feet. ||2] |
ASaT 33" worug set afera SSH Far wT I (406-7, mmr, we 5)
satjug taraytaa du-aapar bhanee-ai kalijug ootmo jugaa maahi.
The Golden Age of Sat Yuga, the Silver Age of Trayta Yuga, and the Brass Age of Dwaapar Yuga are good; but the best is the Dark Age, the Iron Age, of Kali Yuga.
wifs ag ad A uifs ag ue aet o uasha far ate Sil (406-8, mmr, He 5) ah kar karay so ah kar paa-ay ko-ee na pakrhee-ai kisai thaa-ay. ||3|| As we act, so are the rewards we receive; no one can take the place of another. ||3]|
dfs HG ret acts fa sas 3d wets Sa Sa fase Il (406-8, nm, nH 5)
har jee-o so-ee karahi je bhagat tayray jaacheh ayhu tayraa birad.
O Dear Lord, whatever Your devotees ask for, You do. This is Your Way, Your very nature.
ad Afs aoa we Ha wufsor Ast Ufs ofe SIA ISIUNION (406-9, mT, He 5)
kar jorh naanak daan maagai apni-aa santaa deh har daras. ||4||5||140] |
With my palms pressed together, O Nanak, I beg for this gift; Lord, please bless Your Saints with Your Vision. ||4||5||140] |
TTD MTAT HIG U WI YW (406-11)
raag aasaa mehlaa 5 ghar 13 Raag Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Thirteenth House:
qe Afsas ure Il (406-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsaqd AIS SHS Il (406-12, wr, uz 5) satgur bachan tum"aaray. O True Guru, by Your Words,
fodae faHss NU TIS i (406-12, nim, He 5) nirgun nistaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. even the worthless have been saved. ||1]||Pause| |
Ho" fauret vHe nuset 3 usts Aas IAI (406-12, rr, He 5)
mahaa bikhaadee dusat apvaadee tay puneet sangaaray. ||1]|
Even the most argumentative, vicious and indecent people, have been purified in Your company. ||1]|
HOH 3€3 Safa uss f3q s AH Bars 112M! (406-13, nr, us 5)
janam bhavantay narak parhantay tin” kay kul uDhaaray. ||2]|
Those who have wandered in reincarnation, and those who have been consigned to hell - even their families have been redeemed. ||2]|
afe 5 WS afe o HTS A UddeS Tia Ens ISI (406-13, mmr, He 5)
ko-ay na jaanai ko-ay na maanai say pargat har du-aaray. ||3]|
Those whom no one knew, and those whom no one respected - even they have become famous and respected at the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
azo Bunt eG aze zaret aaa fue fue Ss SnAalASAll (406-14, wm, He 5)
kavan upmaa day-o kavan vadaa-ee naanak khin khin vaaray. ||4]|1]|141]|
What praise, and what greatness should I attribute to You? Nanak is a sacrifice to You, each and every moment. ||4[|1]|141]|
MTAT HIG U Il (406-15)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Wed Ae FF NU TIS Il (406-15, wrAT, He 5) baavar so-ay rahay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The crazy people are asleep. ||1||Pause] |
Ho aca fad on HS fifemr aoe TT NU (406-15, mmr, He 5)
moh kutamb bikhai ras maatay mithi-aa gahan gahay. ||1]|
They are intoxicated with attachment to their families and sensory pleasures; they are held in the grip of falsehood. ||1]|
fas Hoda AUS viITSée Born nfo uf AS AT NI (406-16, nA, He 5)
mithan manorath supan aanand ulaas man mukh sat kahay. ||2||
The false desires, and the dream-like delights and pleasures - these, the self-willed manmukhs call true. ||2]|
ifs SU ues Hal fe HSH B BI ISI (406-16, »mT, He 5)
amrit naam padaarath sangay til maram na lahay. |[3]|
The wealth of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is with them, but they do not find even a tiny bit of its mystery. ||3]|
ate farsur we ASH area AafsS mT WSN (406-17, wT, He 5)
kar kirpaa raakhay satsangay naanak saran aahay. ||4]||2||142||
By Your Grace, O Lord, You save those, who take to the Sanctuary of the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||4]||2||142]|
MITAT Ho@T U fsue Il (406-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5 tipday. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Tipadas:
Gor YH fust nai TI il (406-18, war, ue 5) ohaa paraym piree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I seek the Love of my Beloved. ||1||Pause||
aot HSA IH HSS BB 5d ST St MAUI (406-18, war, He 5)
kanik maanik gaj motee-an laalan nah naah nahee. ||1]| Gold, jewels, giant pearls and rubies - I have no need for them. ||1]|
SH 6 Sd O JAH © AS Il (406-18, “TAT, Hs 5) raaj na bhaag na hukam na saadan. Imperial power, fortunes, royal command and mansions
UST GOI
fxs fxs & TST MQ (407-1, wm, He 5) kichh kichh na chaahee. ||2|| - I have no desire for these. ||2]|
TIOo AIHS HSS FS Il (407-1, wer, nz 5) charnan sarnan santan bandan. The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet, and dedication to the Saints
Ha AY urdt il (407-1, wr, He 5) sukho sukh paahee. - these bring me peace and pleasure.
Soa Sufs Tat ll (407-1, wr, He 5) naanak tapat haree. O Nanak, my burning fire has been put out,
fs yn fudt SSIS (407-2, wr, us 5) milay paraym piree. ||3]|3||143]| obtaining the Love of the Beloved. ||3]|3]|143] |
MTAT HI U Il (407-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
dats fearfes Sfear a TIS i (407-2, ver, ve 5) gureh dikhaa-i-o lo-inaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru has revealed Him to my eyes. ||1||Pause] |
tists Sata ufe wife wife wfe Sat Sat Hfsar WAU (407-3, wer, we 5)
eeteh ooteh ghat ghat ghat ghat too‘hee too“hee mohinaa. ||1]|
Here and there, in each and every heart, and each and every being, You, O Fascinating Lord, You exist. ||1||
xa NA
ade Ada UGS usar Sa Sa Afgar lI (407-3, MITA, He 5)
kaaran karnaa Dhaaran Dharnaa aykai aykai sohinaa. ||2|| You are the Creator, the Cause of causes, the Support of the earth; You are the One and only, Beauteous Lord. ||2||
H36 UdHS Sfeudt tans aoa Afe Afy Afear ISISIISIl (407-4, mM, He 5)
santan parsan balihaaree darsan naanak sukh sukh so-inaa. ||3||4||144]| Meeting the Saints, and beholding the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, Nanak is a sacrifice to them; he sleeps in absolute peace. ||3||4||144] |
MTAT HI U Il (407-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs of SH MAST Il (407-5, nmr, Hs 5) har har naam amolaa. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is priceless.
6g AOA AIS WAU TIS Il (407-5, wm, Hs 5) oh sahj suhaylaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. It brings peace and poise. ||1||Pause] |
fa Hoet ef o vet Ge moras MISS AU (407-5, ver, He 5)
sang sahaa-ee chhod na jaa-ee oh agah atolaa. ||1||
The Lord is my Companion and Helper; He shall not forsake me or leave me. He is unfathomable and unequalled. ||1]|
utsy svet ary He Het sarse at Gest III (407-6, vir, ne 5) pareetam bhaa-ee baap moro maa-ee bhagtan kaa ol"aa. ||2|| He is my Beloved, my brother, father and mother; He is the Support of His devotees.
21 |
nod oafeor aa 3 ufemr aoa feg afs a Far NSNUNISUIL (407-6, »mT, He 5)
alakh lakhaa-i-aa gur tay paa-i-aa naanak ih har kaa chol"aa. ||3||5||145]|
The Invisible Lord is seen through the Guru; O Nanak, this is the wondrous play of the Lord. ||3||5]|145] |
MTAT HI U Il (407-7)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
must sats feats il (407-7, nmr, He 5) aapunee bhagat nibaahi. Please help me sustain my devotion.
Sag nes orf Al FI il (407-8, wr, vz 5) thaakur aa-i-o aahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Lord Master, I have come to You. ||1||Pause| |
on uesg df Aareg fost sao SATS NA (407-8, vir, He 5)
naam padaarath ho-ay sakaarath hirdai charan basaahi. ||1]||
With the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, life becomes fruitful. Lord, please place Your Feet within my heart. ||1]|
SJ Hast SI AAS TUT AS Aarfs iil (407-8, wer, ne 5)
ayh muktaa ayh jugtaa raakho sant sangaahi. ||2]|
This is liberation, and this is the best way of life; please, keep me in the Society of the Saints. ||2| |
oH fomre@ Hoffa AHTSE Broad Jig AS Ah ISNENISEN (407-9, wm, Hs 5)
naam Dhi-aava-o sahj samaava-o naanak har gun gaahi. ||3||6||146] | Meditating on the Naam, I am absorbed in celestial peace; O Nanak, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]||6||146]|
MTAT HIG U Il (407-10)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
SAT BIE AIS Il (407-10, ww, Hs 5) thaakur charan suhaavay. The Feet of my Lord and Master are so Beautiful!
dfs ASS US NAN TIS Il (407-10, wr, He 5)
har santan paavay. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Lord's Saints obtain them. ||1||Pause] |
my detent Ae antfeur ae afA SA aS NA (407-10, wm, He 5)
aap gavaa-i-aa sayv kamaa-i-aa gun ras ras gaavay. ||1||
They eradicate their self-conceit and serve the Lord; drenched in His Love, they sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]||
Sata mma aan fumimAT nits & SS MQM (407-11, mT, He 5)
aykeh aasaa daras pi-aasaa aan na bhaavay. ||2]|
They place their hopes in Him, and they thirst for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. Nothing else is pleasing to them. ||2||
efeor sodt four as feast ooo afs af AS WSIDNABII (407-12, nmr, He 5)
da-i-aa tuhaaree ki-aa jant vichaaree naanak bal bal jaavay. ||3||7||147]| This is Your Mercy, Lord; what can Your poor creatures do? Nanak is devoted, a sacrifice to You. ||3]|7||147]|
MTAT HIS U Il (407-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Sa frafe Ho HTT A TIS Il (407-13, nT, He 5) ayk simar man maahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remember the One Lord in meditation within your mind. ||1]]Pause| |
on fimreg fot srreg fan fag & oct A (407-13, vm, He 5)
naam Dhi-aavahu ridai basaavhu tis bin ko naahee. ||1]|
Meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and enshrine Him within your heart. Without Him there is no other. ||1]|
us Heat ore Asa se urehat Aas wa AST MQM (407-13, vir, ne 5) parabh sarnee aa-ee-ai sarab fal paa-ee-ai saglay dukh jaahee. ||2]| Entering God's Sanctuary, all rewards are obtained, and all pains are taken away. ||2]|
Hime & est usy feast area ufe wie mrdt ISICHASTH (407-14, nA, He 5) jee-an ko daataa purakh biDhaataa naanak ghat ghat aahee. ||3||8||148] |
He is the Giver of all beings, the Architect of Destiny; O Nanak, He is contained in each and every heart. ||3||8]|148]|
MTAT HIG U Il (407-15)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ofs faAsS AMT AU TIS I (407-15, wm, He 5) har bisrat so moo-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. One who forgets the Lord is dead. ||1||Pause] |
ony fomre Hee es urs AAG Web Jue A (407-15, wm, Hs 5)
naam Dhi-aavai sarab fal paavai so jan sukhee-aa hoo-aa. ||1]|
One who meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, obtains all rewards. That person becomes happy. ||1]||
TH ATS IG ATH aHS afaS afesat fH AT MM (407-16, wr, 3 5)
raaj kahaavai ha-o karam kamaavai baaDhi-o nalinee bharam soo-aa. ||2]|
One who calls himself a king, and acts in ego and pride, is caught by his doubts, like a parrot in a trap. ||2]|
ag aed fan Afsag sfeur A Ae fesse sor WSntnasell (407-17, wer, He 5) kaho naanak jis satgur bhayti-aa so jan nihchal thee-aa. ||3||9||149]|
Says Nanak, one who meets the True Guru, becomes permanent and immortal. [13]19] [149] |
MTAT HIG U WT AW (407-18)
aasaa mehlaa 5 ghar 14 Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Fourteenth House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (407-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
GJ SI SS Il (407-19, nm, He 5) oh nayhu navaylaa. That love is forever fresh and new,
nue utsn fae afar sd UA TI il (407-19, wm, v8 5) apunay pareetam si-o laag rahai. ||1|| rahaa-o. which is for the Beloved Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
A Us SS HOfH B MIS Il (407-19, »mr, He 5) jo parabh bhaavai janam na aavai. One who is pleasing to God shall not be reincarnated again.
ofa UH safs ofa Utfs Fs AI (407-19, »mT, He 5)
har paraym bhagat har pareet rachai. ||1]|
He remains absorbed in the loving devotional worship of the Lord, in the Love of the Lord. ||1]|
ust got us fa fuatt fea He SH Il (408-1, »mr, Hs 5)
parabh sang mileejai ih man deejai. He is blended with God, by dedicating his mind to Him.
Soa OTH FHS vrsot efer eT NAUAUIWOI (408-1, wT, He 5)
naanak naam milai apnee da-i-aa karahu. ||2||1]|150]|
Bless Nanak with Your Name, O Lord - please, shower Your Mercy upon him! [12] [1] [150] |
MTAT HIG U Il (408-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
firs aH fimrd 3H fag dled & 5 as NA TTC Il (408-2, mmr, v2 5)
mil raam pi-aaray tum bin Dheeraj ko na karai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please, come to me, O Beloved Lord; without You, no one can comfort me. ||1]|Pause] |
fafyfs AAS aT AGH AHS ys SHe VaA fas AY Jrdt AU (408-3, wm, He 5)
simrit saastar baho karam kamaa-ay parabh tumray daras bin sukh naahee. ||1]|
One may read the Simritees and the Shaastras, and perform all sorts of religious rituals; and yet, without the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, God, there is no peace at all. |[1]|
@ds 3H AA af wa oroa AT Halse YS Afel SA NQUVNAWAM (408-3, wm, He 5)
varat naym sanjam kar thaakay naanak saaDh saran parabh sang vasai. ||2||2||151]| People have grown weary of observing fasts, vows and rigorous self-discipline; Nanak abides with God, in the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||2||2||151]|
MTAT HIG U WT WU USS (408-5)
aasaa mehlaa 5 ghar 15 parh-taal Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Fifteenth House, Partaal:
qe Afsara yATfe il (408-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
faors Hfeur wfe AES AS FSS MTS Il (408-6, mT, He 5)
bikaar maa-i-aa maad so-i-o soojh boojh na aavai.
He sleeps, intoxicated by corruption and Maya; he does not come to realize or understand.
uate an Aft Cotes se dt wife WS IA (408-6, mm, He 5)
pakar kays jam uthaari-o tad hee ghar jaavai. ||1||
Seizing him by the hair, the Messenger of Death pulls him up; then, he comes to his senses. ||1]|
os faftimr fae oat fafa fes fos curct i (408-7, nmr, He 5)
lobh bikhi-aa bikhai laagay hir vit chit dukhaahee.
Those who are attached to the poison of greed and sin grab at the wealth of others; they only bring pain on themselves.
fas Saat a wis HS uA wWefs ot NU TI Il (408-7, ner, Hs 5)
khin bhangunaa kai maan maatay asur jaaneh naahee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They are intoxicated by their pride in those things which shall be destroyed in an instant; those demons do not understand. ||1]||Pause| |
ae WAZ Ae uasty AS SS SI I (408-8, wer, ve 5) bayd saastar jan pukaareh sunai naahee doraa. The Vedas, the Shaastras and the holy men proclaim it, but the deaf do not hear it.
foufe oat ofs nor ussteS Hfs Sar MQM (408-8, mmr, we 5)
nipat baajee haar mookaa pachhutaa-i-o man bhoraa. ||2||
When the game of life is over, and he has lost, and he breathes his last, then the fool regrets and repents in his mind. ||2||
B'S Ade dd exfy sfaur eles Sa B ufsr i (408-9, nr, we 5)
daan sagal gair vajeh bhari-aa deevaan laykhai na pari-aa. He paid the fine, but it is in vain - in the Court of the Lord, his account is not credited.
Wo wats ad Ger Afe a 3 afanr NBII (408-9, wir, nH 5) jay“h kaaraj rahai olaa so-ay kaam na kari-aa. ||3]| Those deeds which would have covered him - those deeds, he has not done. ||3]||
MA Aa dfs afs ferfee 3B Sa atefs afenr tl (408-10, mmr, v2 5)
aiso jag mohi gur dikhaa-i-o ta-o ayk keerat gaa-i-aa.
The Guru has shown me the world to be thus; I sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the One Lord.
HS 36 Sfx fayrou Aafe Sos ier US NANIUI (408-10, wm, He 5)
maan taan taj si-aanap saran naanak aa-i-aa. ||4||1]|152]| Renouncing his pride in strength and cleverness, Nanak has come to the Lord's Sanctuary. ||4]|1]|152]|
MTAT HIG U Il (408-11)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
aunts afee ae il (408-11, mmr, nH 5) baapaar govind naa-ay. Dealing in the Name of the Lord of the Universe,
A AS Hoe finn ure Ta we vs are FI aS UU JIS Il (408-11, wr, we 5) saaDh sant manaa-ay pari-a paa-ay gun gaa-ay panch naad toor bajaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
and pleasing the Saints and holy men, obtain the Beloved Lord and sing His Glorious Praises; play the sound current of the Naad with the five instruments. ||1]|Pause] |
fast ue Hone vane nig aTfsor afse fAC Il (408-12, mmr, He 5)
kirpaa paa-ay sehjaa-ay darsaa-ay ab raati-aa govind si-o.
Obtaining His Mercy, I easily gained the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; now, I am imbued with the Love of the Lord of the Universe.
As Afe uifs ara Fa BBS BES AU (408-13, wm, we 5) sant sayv pareet naath rang laalan laa-ay. ||1]| Serving the Saints, I feel love and affection for my Beloved Lord Master. ||1]|
ad fomrg His fee gone adt wre Aone Hie fours ure I (408-13, nmr, ue 5)
gur gi-aan man drirh-aa-ay rahsaa-ay nahee aa-ay sehjaa-ay man niDhaan paa-ay. The Guru has implanted spiritual wisdom within my mind, and I rejoice that I shall not have to come back again. I have obtained celestial poise, and the treasure within my mind.
AS Set HS at AH AT I (408-14, wert, He 5) sabh tajee manai kee kaam karaa. I have renounced all of the affairs of my mind's desires.
fag fas fas fag sfenr His aga fumrA oreit II 408-14, nmr, v8 5)
chir chir chir chir bha-i-aa man bahut pi-aas laagee.
It has been so long, so long, so long, so very long, since my mind has felt such a great thirst.
dfs zane feureg fs SH FSET Il (408-15, mmr, He 5) har darsano dikhaavhu mohi tum bataavhu. Please, reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, and show Yourself to me.
Soa te Hofs wre afe SS NIANVNAWSIl (408-15, wT, He 5)
naanak deen saran aa-ay gal laa-ay. ||2||2||153]| Nanak the meek has entered Your Sanctuary; please, take me in Your embrace. [12] 2] [153]|
MTAT HIG U Il (408-16)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
aS fee WI Ss I (408-16, wr, we 5) ko-oo bikham gaar toradi. Who can destroy the fortress of sin,
nin flair Go HT SdH StS TSF UU TIC il (408-16, wr, v2 5) aas pi-aas Dhoh moh bharam hee tay horai. ||1|| rahaa-o. and release me from hope, thirst, deception, attachment and doubt? ||1]||Pause] |
aH au 3&3 He feo famrfa So NA (408-17, vr, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh maan ih bi-aaDh chhorai. ||1|| How can I escape the afflictions of sexual desire, anger, greed and pride? ||1||
H3Afa on dfa ae afee wes il (408-17, vir, He 5)
satsang naam rang gun govind gaava-o.
In the Society of the Saints, love the Naam, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
wofes ys fame I (408-18, wr, ne 5) andino parabh Dhi-aava-o. Night and day, meditate on God.
3H Sifs ats fers I (408-18, nmr, Hs 5) bharam bheet jeet mitaava-o. I have captured and demolished the walls of doubt.
fafa on stead HS NQNSNIUBI (408-18, wT, He 5) niDh naam naanak morai. ||2||3||154|| O Nanak, the Naam is my only treasure. ||2]||3||154]|
MTAT HIG U Il (408-19)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
any au Be fsora i 408-19, wr, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh ti-aag. Renounce sexual desire, anger and greed;
fs fafa afe ant il (408-19, »mAr, He 5) man simar gobind naam. remember the Name of the Lord of the Universe in your mind.
Ufs SHS ASS AH IA TIS Il (408-19, wr, ue 5) har bhajan safal kaam. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meditation on the Lord is the only fruitful action. ||1||Pause| |
ua gor
3fa we Ha fears fiufeor afl oH TH TH II (409-1, vir, He 5)
taj maan moh vikaar mithi-aa jap raam raam raam.
Renounce pride, attachment, corruption and falsehood, and chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
HO ASAT aA Bats BAT MAU (409-1, ww, we 5) man santnaa kai charan laag. ||1|| O mortal, attach yourself to the Feet of the Saints. ||1]|
ys due de efeurs ufss ures ursqon ofa sae fifa Fra Il (409-2, mr, Hs 5) parabh gopaal deen da-i-aal patit paavan paarbarahm har charan simar jaag.
God is the Sustainer of the world, Merciful to the meek, the Purifier of sinners, the Transcendent Lord God. Awaken, and meditate on His Feet.
ats SHS SSX UTS ST NUSUWUI (409-2, wrAr, He 5)
kar bhagat naanak pooran bhaag. ||2||4]|155]| Perform His devotional worship, O Nanak, and your destiny shall be fulfilled. [12]14] [155] |
MTAT HIG U Il (409-3)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Jay Aa Soa wdet Vw at ferfEES nan TIS il (409-3, wer, vs 5) harakh sog bairaag anandee khayl ree dikhaa-i-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Pleasure and pain, detachment and ecstasy - the Lord has revealed His Play. ||1]|Pause] |
fused & foss fuad fuad Cf afeG i (409-4, wir, ws 5)
khinhoo-a™ bhai nirbhai khinhoo-a™ khinhoo-a™ uth Dhaa-i-o. One moment, the mortal is in fear, and the next moment he is fearless; in a moment, he gets up and departs.
faed aA sae fuod faag sft ATES NAN (409-4, wr, Hs 5) khinhoo-a™ ras bhogan khinhoo-a™ khinhoo taj jaa-i-o. ||1]| One moment, he enjoys pleasures, and the next moment, he leaves and goes away.
[111] faed Fa su ag ur feed SIHTEE II (409-5, mmr, we 5)
khinhoo-a™ jog taap baho poojaa khinhoo-a" bharmaa-i-o. One moment, he practices Yoga and intense meditation, and all sorts of worship; the next moment, he wanders in doubt.
fad fasur AT Ao SSa Tis Jaq SSS NUN WEll (409-5, wer, Hs 5) khinhoo-a™ kirpaa saaDhoo sang naanak har rang laa-i-o. ||2||5||156]|
One moment, O Nanak, the Lord bestows His Mercy and blesses him with His Love, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||5]|156] |
Ta MITAT HIG U We ID MATS (409-7) raag aasaa mehlaa 5 ghar 17 aasaavaree Raag Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Seventeenth House, Aasaavaree:
qe Afsara yATfe il (409-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aifae afse afs at il (409-8, nm wraredt, ue 5) gobind gobind kar haa”. Meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.
ofa ofa nfs fumrfa at il (409-8, umat nmAredt, He 5) har har man pi-aar haa". Cherish the Beloved Lord, Har, Har, in your mind.
afe afumr A fats ufe dF Il (409-8, »mAt mrrredt, He 5) gur kahi-aa so chit Dhar haa”. The Guru says to install it in your consciousness.
mie fa@ 3fo efa at il (409-8, »mar nrAredt, He 5) an si-o tor fayr haa’. Turn away from others, and turn to Him.
MA Bee utes dt At NA TIS I (409-9, wat nrATSCH, He 5) aisay laalan paa-i-o ree sakhee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Thus you shall obtain your Beloved, O my companion. ||1||Pause]|
Uan Ho Afs Ti il (409-9, wat wrAredt, 13 5) pankaj moh sar haa". In the pool of the world is the mud of attachment.
UT St BB Tfs Til (409-9, wma nrA!dH, He 5) pag nahee chalai har haa’. Stuck in it, his feet cannot walk towards the Lord.
TSS HF ofa Tt i (409-9, wer wrATETH, He 5) gahdi-o moorh nar haa’. The fool is stuck;
miso Bure afte Tt il (409-10, wma net, He 5) anin upaav kar haa", he cannot do anything else.
38 foan Aafe u dt ret il (409-10, wm wed, He 5) ta-o niksai saran pai ree sakhee. ||1]|| Only by entering the Lord's Sanctuary, O my companion, will you be released. ||1||
fag fas fos faa Tt il (409-10, wma nrAredt, He 5) thir thir chit thir haa’. Thus your consciousness shall be stable and steady and firm.
ag fay AHAfe Tt Il (409-11, wm wed, He 5) ban garihu samsar haa”. Wilderness and household are the same.
nists Sa fus at il (409-11, vm ned, He 5) antar ayk pir haa". Deep within dwells the One Husband Lord;
ads moa Ufs Tt i (409-11, wat weed, He 5) baahar anayk Dhar haa”. outwardly, there are many distractions.
THOS A Afs TT il (409-11, wma mrAredt, He 5) raajan jog kar haa’. Practice Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success.
AT SSA Ba Sait ct At ANAM (409-11, »mAr wrATSdH, He 5)
kaho naanak log agolee ree sakhee. ||2||1]|157]| Says Nanak, this is the way to dwell with the people, and yet remain apart from them. [2] [1] [157]]
MTATSdt HIST U Il (409-12)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl:
HOAT Sa HS Tt Il (409-12, wmrredt, He 5) mansaa ayk maan haa”. Cherish one desire only:
ad fAS 33 famrfs TF Il (409-12, nmrrect, H8 5) gur si-o nayt Dhi-aan haa”. meditate continually on the Guru.
fez AS H3 farts ot il (409-13, wrrredt, Hs 5) darirh sant mant gi-aan haa’. Install the wisdom of the Saints' Mantra.
Ae Ta Bats Tt il (409-13, wrvredt, ns 5) sayvaa gur charaan haa’. Serve the Feet of the Guru,
38 fish as faurfs HS Har NU TITS I (409-13, mares, He 5) ta-o milee-ai gur kirpaan mayray manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. and you shall meet Him, by Guru's Grace, O my mind. ||1]|Pause| |
Ze MS SIS T Il (409-14, mrAredt, He 5) tootay an bharaan haa”. All doubts are dispelled,
sfeS Aga ats ai il (409-14, nrAredt, He 5) ravi-o sarab thaan haa’. and the Lord is seen to be pervading all places.
Blas AH sfenrfs Ti Il (409-14, wmAredt, He 5) lahi-o jam bha-i-aan haa”. The fear of death is dispelled,
ute us ate dt il (409-14, nmArect, 2 5) paa-i-o payd thaan haa”. and the primal place is obtained.
3B gat Fae ahs WAM (409-15, mATEdt, He 5) ta-o chookee sagal kaan. ||1]| Then, all subservience is removed. ||1]|
de fan Hefs Tt Il (409-15, mmAredt, H2 5) lahno jis mathaan haa". One who has such destiny recorded upon his forehead, obtains it;
3 urea ute uate dt il (409-15, mmAredt, He 5) bhai paavak paar paraan haa”. he crosses over the terrifying ocean of fire.
fon ute fSAfs ate dt il (409-15, »mrredt, He 5) nij ghar tiseh thaan haa™. He obtains a place in the home of his own self,
Ufs TA TAs HS Tt il (409-16, wmATNdt, He 5) har ras raseh maan haa". and enjoys the most sublime essence of the Lord's essence.
oret fan sufs TF Il (409-16, nme, He 5) laathee tis bhukaan haa”. His hunger is appeased;
Soa Hdfa AHPES FJ HAST MQNQNAUCH (409-16, mmATESH, He 5)
naanak sahj samaa-i-o ray manaa. ||2||2||158]| Nanak, he is absorbed in celestial peace, O my mind. ||2||2]]158] |
MITATSdt HIST U Il (409-17)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa ofa afe aat TF il (409-17, nme, 3 5) har har har gunee haa”. Sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
mba AoA gat Ti il (409-17, »mAredt, v2 5) japee-ai sahj Dhunee haa”. Meditate on the celestial music.
AY dHo sat Tt il (409-17, nraredt, u2 5) saaDhoo rasan bhanee haa". The tongues of the holy Saints repeat it.
sco fafa Fat T il (409-17, »rredt, He 5) chhootan biDh sunee haa". I have heard that this is the way to emancipation.
urshat es ust AT HST NA TIC Il (409-18, mrAredt, He 5) paa-ee-ai vad punee mayray manaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This is found by the greatest merit, O my mind. ||1]||Pause||
ants AS Hot Tl (409-18, wrAedt, He 5) khojeh jan munee haa”. The silent sages search for Him.
Aa a ys gst Tt Il (409-18, wmrredt, us 5) sarab kaa parabh Dhanee haa”. God is the Master of all.
eos als Fat FT il (409-19, nmAredt, us 5) dulabh kal dunee haa’. It is so difficult to find Him in this world, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
wa faorat oF il (409-19, wrrredt, He 5) dookh binaasanee haa”. He is the Dispeller of distress.
Ys UTS MAST HF HoT AI (409-19, wrest, HE 5) parabh pooran aasnee mayray manaa. ||1|| God is the Fulfiller of desires, O my mind. ||1]|
Ho A ASM Ti Il (409-19, mmAredt, v2 5) man so sayvee-ai haa’. O my mind, serve Him.
UST 8qo
mod masehat Tt il (410-1, nmrredt, 13 5) alakh abhayvee-ai haa’, He is unknowable and inscrutable.
3 fA uifs afe at i (410-1, »mredt, ne 5) taa™ si-o pareet kar haa”. Enshrine love for Him.
faofA o ate Hts dt il (410-1, »mrredt, v2 5) binas na jaa-ay mar haa". He does not perish, or go away, or die.
ad 3 Wont FT il (410-1, wrest, He 5) gur tay jaani-aa haa’. He is known only through the Guru.
SSA HS HSM AT HST NWSE (410-1, wmATSNSH, He 5)
naanak man maani-aa mayray manaa. ||2||3||159]| Nanak, my mind is satisfied with the Lord, O my mind. ||2]|3]|159]|
MITATSdSt HIB U Il (410-2)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl:
Sat Ge TT Tt il (410-2, nmrredt, ve 5)
aykaa ot gahu haa”. Grab hold of the Support of the One Lord.
Id A Ase AT Tt il (410-2, wraredt, us 5)
gur kaa sabad kaho haa”. Chant the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
mtfamt ARS AT Tt Il (410-3, wmAredt, nH 5) aagi-aa sat saho haa”. Submit to the Order of the True Lord.
Hota faars BI Tt il (410-3, mre, 2 5) maneh niDhaan lahu haa’. Receive the treasure in your mind.
Rafa ANTeha HS HAT UU TITS il (410-3, wrATSdH, He 5) sukheh samaa-ee-ai mayray manaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Thus you shall be absorbed in peace, O my mind. ||1]]Pause||
Aes AHS Ti Il (410-3, mmAredt, He 5) jeevat jo marai haa”. One who is dead while yet alive,
Pad A Sd Til (410-4, wired, ns 5) dutar so tarai haa’. crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
AS at So GE Tt il (410-4, nmrredt, He 5) sabh kee rayn ho-ay haa”. One who becomes the dust of all
fass@ ag Afe at i (410-4, nirect, He 5) nirbha-o kaha-o so-ay haa", - he alone is called fearless.
fue niefamr at it (410-4, mmrredt, He 5) mitay andaysi-aa haa”. His anxieties are removed
Hs Quefiar AT Har MAU (410-4, »mATedt, He 5) sant updaysi-aa mayray manaa. ||1]| by the Teachings of the Saints, O my mind. ||1]|
fA AS OH AY Tt Il (410-5, nmrredt, He 5) jis jan naam sukh haa’. That humble being, who takes happiness in the Naam, the Name of the Lord
fan fate o ae SY Tt Il (410-5, nmre|dt, He 5) tis nikat na kaday dukh haa". - pain never draws near him.
a dfs dfs AA OAS TT Il (410-5, mmredt, He 5) jo har har jas sunay haa. One who listens to the Praise of the Lord, Har, Har,
Ag ao f3H HS Ti Il (410-6, vredt, He 5) sabh ko tis mannay haa”. is obeyed by all men.
He® A otfenr at il (410-6, nme, us 5) safal so aa-i-aa haa’. How fortunate it is that he came into the world;
SSA YS Stent HF HOT NUSUAEON (410-6, »mATEdH, Hs 5)
naanak parabh bhaa-i-aa mayray manaa. ||2||4]|160] | Nanak, he is pleasing to God, O my mind. ||2||4||160]|
MITATSdt HIG U Il (410-7)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl:
ffs afe aA area ot il (410-7, nmredt, He 5) mil har jas gaa-ee-ai haa’. Meeting together, let us sing the Praises of the Lord,
UdH us ure Ti il (410-7, »mAredt, He 5) param pad paa-ee-ai haa’. and attain the supreme state.
Gor oA FH faa Tt (410-7, nmredt, He 5) u-aa ras jo biDhay haa’. Those who obtain that sublime essence,
3 a@ Aare fra TT Il (410-8, wrrredt, He 5) taa ka-o sagal siDhay haa’. obtain all of the spiritual powers of the Siddhas.
mates AtaM Tt il (410-8, wmATedt, He 5) an-din jaagi-aa haa™. They remain awake and aware night and day;
SSA TSStaM AT HST UU! TIS Il (410-8, nmAredt, He 5) naanak badbhaagi-aa mayray manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Nanak, they are blessed by great good fortune, O my mind. ||1||Pause] |
HS ua Get at it (410-8, nmaredt, H2 5) sant pag Dho-ee-ai haa”. Let us wash the feet of the Saints;
ZaHfs wet Ti i (410-9, nmAredt, ve 5) durmat kho-ee-ai haa”. our evil-mindedness shall be cleansed.
DAT 3G dE Ti Il (410-9, marred, He 5) daasah rayn ho-ay haa”. Becoming the dust of the feet of the Lord's slaves,
fmm gu oa af ai Il (410-9, nmrredt, He 5) bi-aapai dukh na ko-ay haa”. one shall not be afflicted with pain.
sast Hate UT TT Il (410-9, nmATedt, He 5) bhagtaa™ saran par haa”. Taking to the Sanctuary of His devotees,
HOt @ AE HT Tt Il (410-10, wmaredt, vs 5) janam na kaday mar haa". he is no longer subject to birth and death.
mAfag A SS Tt ll (410-10, mre, v2 5) asthir say bha-ay haa’. They alone become eternal,
dfs ots fag Af SE HFT HAST AM (410-10, »mATESdt, He 5) har har jin" jap la-ay mayray manaaa. ||1]| who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind. ||1]|
AAS HIS S TF il (410-10, wrrredt, He 5) Saajan meet too” haa”. You are my Friend, my Best Friend.
omy fearfe Hf at i (410-11, »rrredt, He 5) naam drirh-aa-ay moo™ haa". Please, implant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
fan faa ofe af at it (410-11, nmredt, He 5) tis bin naahi ko-ay haa™. Without Him, there is not any other.
Hofs wrafa Afe gt (410-11, ned, 3 5) maneh araaDh so-ay haa". Within my mind, I worship Him in adoration.
fond o fad TF ll (410-11, »mrrect, He 5) nimakh na veesrai haa”. I do not forget Him, even for an instant.
f3H fae fa AS dt Il (410-12, vrredt, He 5) tis bin ki-o sarai haa’. How can I live without Him?
Fd AC ATH AS TT i (410-12, nrc, vs 5) gur ka-o kurbaan jaa-o haa”. I am a sacrifice to the Guru.
SSA AU SS HS HT NAUUNIEAUI (410-12, wired, He 5)
naanak japay naa-o mayray manaa. ||2||5||161|| Nanak, chant the Name, O my mind. ||2]|5]|161]|
MITATSdSt HIB U Il (410-13)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl:
AIS ATS F Tt il (410-13, wre, ws 5) kaaran karan too™ haa’. You are the Creator, the Cause of causes.
Mg SAS H Tt Il (410-13, wrAredt, Hs 5) avar naa sujhai moo™ haa”. I cannot think of any other.
adfa A debs Tt il (410-13, wmredt, He 5) karahi so ho-ee-ai haa™. Whatever You do, comes to pass.
Rofa Afa FehH gt il (410-13, mmredt, He 5) sahj sukh so-ee-ai haa™. I sleep in peace and poise.
Uten Hfe SS Tt Il (410-14, nrmrredt, v2 5) Dheeraj man bha-ay haa”. My mind has become patient,
us & Ufs ue AT HST NA TIC Ut (410-14, nerve, Hs 5) parabh kai dar pa-ay mayray manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. since I fell at God's Door, O my mind. ||1]|Pause] |
ATG AeA TF Il (410-14, rrrect, He 5) saaDhoo sangmay haa”. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
UIs AAA T Il (410-14, »mAEct, Hs 5) pooran sanjmay haa”. I gained perfect control over my senses.
Wa 3 eS MM Tt Il (410-15, wedi, He 5) jab tay chhutay aap haa". Ever since I rid myself of my self-conceit,
3a 3 fee Su TF Il (410-15, nme, He 5) tab tay mitay taap haa”. my sufferings have ended.
farsur argh at Il (410-15, mre, He 5) kirpaa Dhaaree-aa haa", He has showered His Mercy upon me.
ufS Ta qed AT HAT MAU (410-15, »rATSaHt, He 5) pat rakh banvaaree-aa mayray manaa. ||1]| The Creator Lord has preserved my honor, O my mind. ||1||
feg mY ATShH Ti I (410-16, »mrect, He 5) ih sukh jaanee-ai haa™. Know that this is the only peace;
dfs Ad A HTSDH Tt Il (410-16, mmAedt, He 5) har karay so maanee-ai haa’. accept whatever the Lord does.
Her ofa afe at il (410-16, mmrrect, v3 5) mandaa naahi ko-ay haa’. No one is bad.
Ha at Io de Tt i (410-16, nmAredt, 3 5) sant kee rayn ho-ay haa”. Become the dust of the Feet of the Saints.
nm fA Ta Ti il (410-16, wmAredt, He 5) aapay jis rakhai haa’. He Himself preserves those
ofa nifgs Ae AT HAT QI (410-17, nirredt, ue 5) har amrit so chakhai mayray manaa. ||2]| who taste the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, O my mind. ||2]|
fan ot afa afe at il (410-17, nmrect, v8 5) jis kaa naahi ko-ay haa™. One who has no one to call his own
fA or yg AS Tt Il (410-17, »mredt, He 5) tis kaa parabhoo so-ay haa™. - God belongs to him.
Wisdafs FS Tt il (410-17, wrwedt, ve 5) antargat bujhai haa™. God knows the state of our innermost being.
AS fae fSA AS Tl (410-18, »mAredt, He 5) sabh kichh tis sujhai haa’. He knows everything.
ufss Buarfa SJ Tt il (410-18, wmrredt, He 5) patit uDhaar layho haa’. Please, Lord, save the sinners.
Sa MISA ST AT HAT NSIUENAEI (410-18, wTATSTH, He 5)
naanak ardaas ayhu mayray manaa. ||3||6||162|| This is Nanak's prayer, O my mind. ||3|]6||162||
mTATedt Hoe u fEasar il (410-19)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5 iktukaa. Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl, Ik-Tukas:
Gf ugeHhor Tt il (410-19, wmAredt, He 5) o-ay pardaysee-aa haa”. O my stranger soul,
Hos HefAmr at ai TIS Il (410-19, wrrrect, He 5) sunat sandaysi-aa haa™. ||1|| rahaa-o. listen to the call. ||1]]Pause| |
Ww fAG afe TI Tt il (410-19, nmAredt, He 5) jaa si-o rach rahay haa’. Whatever you are attached to,
UST 8qAA
AS a Sth Te Tl (411-1, »mrect, He 5) sabh ka-o taj ga-ay haa’. you shall have to leave it all behind.
Hust fa@ se ot i (411-1, »mrredt, ns 5) supnaa ji-o bha-ay haa”. These things seem like only a dream,
ofa oH fate BE NA (411-1, vmTest, He 5) har naam jini" la-ay. ||1]| to one who takes the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Ufa Sh MS Bat Tt il (411-1, wmAScH, Hs 5) har taj an lagay haa’, Forsaking the Lord, and clinging to another,
ASHfs His Sat TT il (411-2, wmrrect, He 5) janmeh mar bhagay haa”. they run toward death and reincarnation.
Uf dfs Als BI Tt il (411-2, vec, He 5) har har jan lahay haa’. But those humble beings, who attach themselves to the Lord, Har, Har,
AleS A TT Tt Il (411-2, nmAredt, v2 5) jeevat say rahay haa”. continue to live.
fants furs df& ot i (411-2, vmrredt, He 5) jisahi kirpaal ho-ay haa™. One who is blessed with the Lord's Mercy,
SOA SAS ATE NANDNWSNVSIAN (411-2, nASdt, ve 5) naanak bhagat so-ay. ||2||7]||163]|232| | O Nanak, becomes His devotee. ||2||7||163]|232]|
qe Afsars ure i (411-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TAH MTAT HIG € Il (411-4) raag aasaa mehlaa 9. Raag Aasaa, Ninth Mehl:
fase as@ aBo fAG Ho at I (411-4, nmr, He 9) birthaa kaha-o ka-un si-o man kee. Who should I tell the condition of the mind?
Sts qfAS eA gy fA Wes oT oas Ts at AU TIS ll (411-5, wm, v2 9)
lobh garsi-o das hoo dis Dhaavat aasaa laagi-o Dhan kee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Engrossed in greed, running around in the ten directions, you hold to your hopes of wealth. ||1]|Pause| |
HY & dfs gags VY USS AS AGS HO Ho at Il (411-5, wer, He 9)
sukh kai hayt bahut dukh paavat sayv karat jan jan kee.
For the sake of pleasure, you suffer such great pain, and you have to serve each and every person.
eurats eurfa pore fa Sus Sd AU TH BHo at NU (411-6, mmr, He 9) du-aareh du-aar su-aan ji-o dolat nah suDh raam bhajan kee. ||1]| You wander from door to door like a dog, unconscious of the Lord's meditation. ||1]|
HOA HSH MASE USS BH O BA JHo at ll (411-7, wT, #2 9)
maanas janam akaarath khovat laaj na lok hasan kee.
You lose this human life in vain, and You are not even ashamed when others laugh at you.
Soa die AA fas adt wes anfs faa 3a aft NQNVN2SSIl (411-7, mT, He 9)
naanak har jas ki-o nahee gaavat kumat binaasai tan kee. ||2||1||233]| O Nanak, why not sing the Lord's Praises, so that you may be rid of the body's evil disposition? ||2||1||233]|
Ta MITAT HIG A MASUeMT UT 2 (411-9) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa ghar 2 Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars yArfe It (411-9) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
@sfa meufe reefs Are il (411-10, wr, He 1) utar avghat sarvar n"aavai. He descends the treacherous precipice, to bathe in the cleansing pool;
Wa 3 88 Tig TE We Il (411-10, ww, ve bakai na bolai har gun gaavai. without speaking or saying anything, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
AS witarat Afs ANTS Il (411-10, nA, He 1) jal aakaasee sunn samaavai. Like water vapor in the sky, he remains absorbed in the Lord.
dH AS 318 Ho SA UTS NU (411-10, »mr, He 1) ras sat jhol mahaa ras paavai. ||1]| He churns the true pleasures to obtain the supreme nectar. ||1||
MAT foMigs HOT Ms He Il (411-11, mr, He 1) aisaa gi-aan sunhu abh moray. Listen to such spiritual wisdom, O my mind.
steufs of stor As SBT NU TIS Ul (411-11, nT, Hs 1) bharipur Dhaar rahi-aa sabh tha-uray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Lord is totally pervading and permeating all places. ||1||Pause]|
Ag ¥3 3H 6 WS ASS Il (411-12, »mr, vs 1) sach barat naym na kaal santaavai.
One who makes Truthfulness his fast and religious vows, does not suffer the pain of death.
Afsas Aafe Ad ABS Il (411-12, mA, ne 1) satgur sabad karoDh jalaavai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he burns away his anger.
date feet Afa ware Il (411-12, ver, He 1) gagan nivaas samaaDh lagaavai. He dwells in the Tenth Gate, immersed in the Samaadhi of deep meditation.
UTSH UdtA UPH UE UTS INQ (411-13, wT, He 1)
paaras paras param pad paavai. ||2|| Touching the philosopher's stone, he obtains the supreme status. ||2||
Ag Ho aes 33 FHSS I (411-13, mT, He 1D) sach man kaaran tat bilovai. For the benefit of the mind, churn the true essence of reality;
Had Adefa HS BTS Il (411-13, wm, we 1) subhar sarvar mail na Dhovai. bathing in the over-flowing tank of nectar, filth is washed away.
A fA@ ast SA DS I 411-14, oor, He 1) jai si-o raataa taiso hovai. We become like the One with whom we are imbued.
WN AIS AT A Je NSM 411-14, wT, He 1) aapay kartaa karay so hovai. ||3]| Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. ||3]||
ad foe Ase wate gETS I (411-14, om, He 1) gur hiv seetal agan bujhaavai. The Guru is cool and soothing like ice; He puts out the fire of the mind.
As Hats fags vars Il (411-14, wr, He 1) sayvaa surat bibhoot charhaavai. Smear your body with the ashes of dedicated service,
Zane wif AoA us mS I (411-15, ner, He 1) darsan aap sahj ghar aavai. and live in the home of peace - make this your religious order.
fSdHs at SS SHS II (411-15, new, He 1) nirmal banee naad vajaavai. ||4|| Let the Immaculate Bani of the Word be your playing of the flute. ||4]|
mista fame HOT SA ATS I (411-15, nmr, He 1) antar gi-aan mahaa ras saaraa. Spiritual wisdom within is the supreme, sublime nectar.
Ste HAS TS SIT I (411-16, wr, uz 1) tirath majan gur veechaaraa. Contemplation of the Guru is one's bathing at holy places of pilgrimage.
nists UAT AS HIS Il (411-16, wr, He 1) antar poojaa thaan muraaraa. Worship and adoration within is the Lord's dwelling.
nat fs frereearar Hull (411-16, mT, He 1) jotee jot milaavanhaaraa. ||5|| He is the One who blends one's light with the Divine Light. ||5]|
afm ofror vfs Sa afe it (411-17, nr, 4 1) ras rasi-aa mat aykai bhaa-ay. He delights in the delightful wisdom of loving the One Lord.
sus fost us ANE I (411-17, vr, He 1) takhat nivaasee panch samaa-ay. He is one of the self-elect - he merges with the Lord, who occupies the throne.
as SHE MAM SATE Il (411-17, nT, He 1) kaar kKamaa-ee khasam rajaa-ay. He performs his works in obedience to the Will of his Lord and Master.
Migs oe 6 Ofer ATE NEM (411-18, mT, He 1) avigat naath na lakhi-aa jaa-ay. ||6|| The Unknowable Lord cannot be understood. ||6||
mS Hid Cur Ae S ete il 411-18, wm, we 1) jal meh upjai jal tay door. The lotus originates in the water, and yet it remains distinct from the water.
me fe Afs sfoor saute il 4-18, wm, He 1) jal meh jot rahi-aa bharpoor. Just so, the Divine Light pervades and permeates the water of the world.
fon 3s far nme afs i (411-19, »mr, He 1) kis nayrhai kis aakhaa door. Who is near, and who is far away?
fofa ae arer Sf Jefe WOM (41-19, wer, He 1) niDh gun gaavaa daykh hadoor. ||7]|| I sing the Glories of the Lord, the treasure of virtue; I behold Him ever-present. ||7]|
wists aofs nizd o AfE Il (411-19, nmr, He 1) antar baahar avar na ko-ay. Inwardly and outwardly, there is none other than Him.
UST 8AQ
a fs oe A efe SE I (412-1, or, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so fun ho-ay. Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass.
Afs saafs Soa Ad Hers Il (412-1, we, He 1) sun bharthar naanak kahai beechaar. Listen, O Bharthari Yogi - Nanak speaks after deliberation;
fSdHS SHAT wa, WCU (412-1, AT, He 1) nirmal naam mayraa aaDhaar. ||8]|1]| the Immaculate Name is my only Support. ||8]|1]|
YATAT HIST 4 Il (412-2)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Afs wu Afs Su AS Boge Il (412-2, vr, He 1) sabh jap sabh tap sabh chaturaa-ee. All meditation, all austerities, and all clever tricks,
Cais sah Ths & uret I (412-2, »mr, He 1) oojharh bharmai raahi na paa-ee. lead one to wander in the wilderness, but he does not find the Path.
fag a3 &t ate & uret I (412-2, wm, 3 1) bin boojhay ko thaa-ay na paa-ee. Without understanding, he is not approved;
om fage He Set UU (412-3, wr, He 1) naam bihoonai maathay chhaa-ee. ||1]|| without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, ashes are thrown upon one's head. ||1] |
Ara el Aa rte faorAT Il (412-3, rr, He 1) saach Dhanee jag aa-ay binaasaa. True is the Master; the world comes and goes.
scfm yret qoute SAT NA TITS Ml (412-3, wewr, He 1) chhootas paraanee gurmukh daasaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The mortal is emancipated, as Gurmukh, as the Lord's slave. ||1]]Pause| |
Aa Hfs sar qgst MAT I (412-4, ne, He 1) jag mohi baaDhaa bahutee aasaa. The world is bound by its attachments to the many desires.
TaHst feta se SSA Il (412-4, wr, He 1) gurmatee ik bha-ay udaasaa. Through the Guru's Teachings, some become free of desire.
Mists OH AHS USIAT I (412-4, rrr, He 1) antar naam kamal pargaasaa. Within them is the Naam, and their heart lotus blossoms forth.
fq AS ardt AH St STAT QI (412-5, wm, He 1) tin" ka-o naahee jam kee taraasaa. ||2|| They have no fear of death. ||2]|
na fan fas annfe fasardt il (412-5, wr, we 1) jag tari-a jit kaaman hitkaaree. The men of the world are conquered by woman; they love the ladies.
UZ ASS Sat SH FEATS i (412-5, wmv, ws 1)
putar kaltar lag naam visaaree. Attached to children and wife, they forget the Naam.
fase AOH Tefen aH ISH I (412-6, wm, He 1) birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa baajee haaree. They waste this human life in vain, and lose the game in the gamble.
Afsag AS Adet AS WI (412-6, rr, He 1) satgur sayvay karnee saaree. ||3]| Serving the True Guru is the best occupation. ||3]|
Wd ICH Ad ATS Il (412-7, ve, v2 1) baahrahu ha-umai kahai kahaa-ay. One who speaks egotistically in public,
MUIT HAS BU Ae B BES Il (412-7, vw, ne 1) andrahu mukat layp kaday na laa-ay. never attains liberation within.
Hho Hg ae Aafe ABS Il (412-7, we, He maa-i-aa moh gur sabad jalaa-ay. One who burns away his attachment to Maya, by the Word of the Guru's Shabad,
fesHe on Ae fase fomre igi (412-8, wr, He nirmal naam sad hirdai Dhi-aa-ay. | |4| | meditates forever within his heart on the Immaculate Naam. ||4||
Wes ae otf TIS | (412-8, me, ve 1) Dhaavat raakhai thaak rahaa-ay. He restrains his wandering mind, and keeps it under control.
fra Has aafh fiere I (412-8, ner, He 1) sikh sangat karam milaa-ay. The company of such a Sikh is obtained only by Grace.
Os fag 3B wirS WS Il (412-8, mr, we 1)
gur bin bhoolo aavai jaa-ay.
Without the Guru, he goes astray and continues coming and going. Seta ad Arfar fiers ull (412-9, om, He 1)
nadar karay sanjog milaa-ay. ||5|| Bestowing His Mercy, the Lord unites him in Union. ||5||
Js AIG 6 ator WT I (412-9, wm, He 1) roorho kaha-o na kahi-aa jaa-ee. I cannot describe the Beauteous Lord.
Mag AA od AHfS uret Il (412-9, nr, ve 1) akath katha-o nah keemat paa-ee. I speak the unspoken; I cannot estimate His value.
AS Ta So AY TAT Il (412-10, mmr, He 1) sabh dukh tayray sookh rajaa-ee. All pain and pleasure come by Your Will.
Afs wa AS APS set MEM (412-10, we, He 1) sabh dukh maytay saachai naa-ee. ||6|| All pain is eradicated by the True Name. ||6]|
ad fae erat uct fe SH Il (412-10, wr, He 1) kar bin vaajaa pag bin taalaa. He plays the instrument without hands, and dances without feet.
A Hae 38 ST Ag fear i (412-11, or, He 1) jay sabad bujhai taa sach nihaalaa. But if he understands the Word of the Shabad, then he shall behold the True Lord.
nists ATS AS AY BT Il (412-11, wm, He 1) antar saach sabhay sukh naalaa. With the True Lord within the self, all happiness comes.
Sets AT TA TASH WDM (412-11, vm, He 1) nadar karay raakhai rakhvaalaa. ||7|| Showering His Mercy, the Preserving Lord preserves him. ||7]|
fgsee AS mY TSS Ml (412-12, wer, we 1) taribhavan soojhai aap gavaavai. He understands the three worlds; he eliminates his self-conceit.
wet gS Afs AHS Il (412-12, wer, Hs 1) banee boojhai sach samaavai. He understands the Bani of the Word, and he is absorbed into the True Lord.
Hae sted Sa eS STI I (412-12, ver, He 1) sabad veechaaray ayk liv taaraa. Contemplating the Shabad, he enshrines love for the One Lord.
SSA US ASSISTS NCHA (412-12, wervr, ve 1)
naanak Dhan savaaranhaaraa. ||8||2|| O Nanak, blessed is the Lord, the Embellisher. ||8]|2| |
MATAT HIS 4% Il (412-13)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Buy mY foes fesfie He WN (412-13, mm, He 1) laykh asa‘kh likh likh maan. There are innumerable writings; those who write them take pride in them.
Hf ufo A Hefs Sere I (412-13, wer, He 1) man maanee-ai sach surat vakhaan. When one's mind accepts the Truth, he understands, and speaks of it.
aaet seat ufs ufs Sg Il (412-14, wert, ne 1) kathnee badnee parh parh bhaar. Words, spoken and read again and again, are useless loads.
BY MAY MSY MUTT WAU (412-14, mA, He 1) laykh asa‘kh alaykh apaar. ||1|| There are innumerable writings, but the Infinite Lord remains unwritten. ||1]|
MT AE S St ATE Il (412-14, wer, He 1) aisaa saachaa too” ayko jaan. Know that such a True Lord is the One and only.
HHE HIS JAH USTS UU TIS Il (412-15, ww, He 1) jaman marnaa hukam pachhaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Understand that birth and death come according to the Lord's Will. ||1]|Pause| |
Hfeor Hfo Aer svar AHA I (412-15, mar, He 1) maa-i-aa mohi jag baaDhaa jamkaal. Because of attachment to Maya, the world is bound by the Messenger of Death.
ator se SH AHS I (412-15, wr, He 1) baa‘Dhaa chhootai naam sam"aal. These bonds are released when one remembers the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ts AMS MST & TFS Il (412-16, vr, ue 1) gur sukh-daata avar na bhaal. The Guru is the Giver of peace; do not look for any other.
Jats uals feardt 3a ots NI (412-16, wm, He 1) halat palat nibhee tuDh naal. ||2|| In this world, and the next, He shall stand by you. ||2]|
Rafe Hd st Sa fee Be I (412-16, wer, 42 1) sabad marai taa™ ayk liv laa-ay. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad, embraces love for the One Lord.
WIT Bd St SIH VaTS Il (412-17, mw, v2 1) achar charai taa’ bharam chukaa-ay. One who eats the uneatable, has his doubts dispelled.
Heo HAS His OH SATE Il (412-17, wT, He 1) jeevan mukat man naam vasaa-ay. He is Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive; the Naam abides in his mind.
aenfy aff 3 vfs ANS SN (412-17, om, He 1) gurmukh ho-ay ta sach samaa-ay. ||3]|| Becoming Gurmukh, he merges into the True Lord. ||3]|
fafe Od AAT aes MATA II (412-18, mmr, He 1) jin Dhar saajee gagan akaas. The One who created the earth and the Akaashic ethers of the sky,
fafe AS aot atu Cerf i) (412-18, wr, He 1) jin sabh thaapee thaap uthaap. established all; He establishes and disestablishes.
Rea fadsts wmy wifi it (412-18, »mrr, He 1) sarab nirantar aapay aap. He Himself is permeating all.
far 3 ys Ser orfY BI (412-19, wm, He 1) kisai na poochhay bakhsay aap. ||4|| He does not consult anyone; He Himself forgives. ||4| |
JUS Ag Hea He ll (412-19, rrr, ve 1) too pur saagar maanak heer. You are the Ocean, over-flowing with jewels and rubies.
3 fesse AG Tat ats I (412-19, we, He 1) too nirmal sach gunee gaheer. You are immaculate and pure, the true treasure of virtue.
UST gqAs
HY HS Se Te ube Il (413-1, rr, we 1) sukh maanai bhaytai gur peer. Peace is enjoyed, meeting the Guru, the Spiritual Teacher.
Sa Afog Sa Sete NUM (413-1, we, He 1 ayko saahib ayk vajeer. ||5|| The Lord is the only Master; He is the only Minister. ||5||
Ag set Has IG HT Wl (413-1, or, He jag bandee muktay ha-o maaree. The world is held in bondage; he alone is emancipated, who conquers his ego.
far famirat feaer mirardt i (413-1, mmr, He 1) jag gi-aanee virlaa aachaaree. How rare in the world is that wise person, who practices this.
afar ufss feaer Sterct il (413-2, nmr, He 1) jag pandit virlaa veechaaree. How rare in this world is that scholar who reflects upon this.
fag Afsag se AS fed nidard NEN (413-2, ner, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay sabh firai aha‘kaaree. ||6]| Without meeting the True Guru, all wander in ego. ||6]|
Aa edb Aber AS afe It (413-2, nmr, He 1) jag dukhee-aa sukhee-aa jan ko-ay. The world is unhappy; only a few are happy.
Ag dat sat Te SE i (413-3, wer, He 1)
jag rogee bhogee gun ro-ay.
The world is diseased, from its indulgences; it weeps over its lost virtue. na Gun faorn ufS af& II (413-3, om, He 1)
jag upjai binsai pat kho-ay. The world wells up, and then subsides, losing its honor.
Tenfe Te gS AE WO (413-3, wer, Hs 1) gurmukh hovai boojhai so-ay. ||7]|| He alone, who becomes Gurmukh, understands. ||7]||
Hout Hf afs mers Il (413-4, mmr, He 1) mahgho mol bhaar afaar. His price is so costly; His weight is unbearable.
MES MSG ATHSt UT Il (413-4, wr, He 1)
atal achhal gurmatee Dhaar.
He is immovable and undeceivable; enshrine Him in your mind, through the Guru's Teachings.
ofe fxs ave sfearg Il (413-4, mmr, He 1) bhaa-ay milai bhaavai bha-ikaar. Meet Him through love, become pleasing to Him, and act in fear of Him.
SOA ST Ad Meg ICUS (413-4, omar, we 1) naanak neech kahai beechaar. ||8]|3]| Nanak the lowly says this, after deep contemplation. ||8]|3]|
YATAT HIST 4 Il (413-5)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Sa Hd ud fife defs i (413-5, wer, He 1) ayk marai panchay mil roveh. When someone dies, the five passions meet and mourn his death.
JH wfe Aafe He Gets I (413-5, ner, He 1) ha-umai jaa-ay sabad mal Dhoveh. Overcoming self-conceit, he washes off his filth with the Word of the Shabad.
AHfS afs Aon wis defs i (413-6, wm, He 1) samajh soojh sahj ghar hoveh. One who knows and understands, enters the home of peace and poise.
fag 3S Aaret ufs deta wal (413-6, wer, we bin boojhay saglee pat khoveh. ||1]| Without understanding, he loses all his honor. ||1]|
ae ud aCe Je Got i (413-6, nmr, He 1) ka-un marai ka-un rovai ohee. Who dies, and who weeps for him?
ade ase ASA fafs Sct a ToS (413-7, ve, He karan kaaran sabhsai sir tohee. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Lord, Creator, Cause of causes, You are over the heads of all. ||1]|Pause]|
He a@ de gy ae i (413-7, wer, we 1) moo-ay ka-o rovai dukh ko-ay. Who weeps over the pain of the dead?
oy
A de fan deo of Il 413-7, wr, He 1) SO rovai jis baydan ho-ay. Those who weep, do so over their own troubles.
fan dist we ys APE I (413-8, mer, He 1) jis beetee jaanai parabh so-ay. God knows the condition of those who are so affected.
WN AIS AT A AE li (413-8, mr, ve 1) aapay kartaa karay so ho-ay. |[2|| Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. ||2||
ASS HIST BSF FIST Il (413-8, nA, He 1) jeevat marnaa taaray tarnaa. One who remains dead while yet alive, is saved, and saves others as well.
A AGIA UGH Tfs ASST I (413-8, mA, He 1)
jai jagdees param gat sarnaa.
Celebrate the Victory of the Lord; taking to His Sanctuary, the supreme status is obtained.
IG afeadt Afsaqs FIST Il (413-9, wi, He 1) ha-o balihaaree satgur charnaa. I am a Sacrifice to the feet of the True Guru.
ad Sfeg Aafe ¥ SIS MSI (413-9, mT, He 1)
gur bohith sabad bhai tarnaa. ||3]|
The Guru is the boat; through the Shabad of His Word, the terrifying world-ocean is crossed over. ||3]|
foss@ urfy fadste fs II (413-9, nmr, ne 1) nirbha-o aap nirantar jot. He Himself is Fearless; His Divine Light is contained in all.
fag ae Asa Afar SS Il (413-10, wer, Hs 1) bin naavai sootak jag chhot. Without the Name, the world is defiled and untouchable.
zonfs faor fomr afa ofS Il (413-10, om, He 1)
durmat binsai ki-aa kahi rot. Through evil-mindedness, they are ruined; why should they cry out and weep?
Hoth He fas sats Ast gil (413-10, »mr, He 1) janam moo-ay bin bhagat sarot. ||4|| They are born only to die, without hearing the music of devotional worship. ||4| |
He a@ Ag defo HIS I (413-11, »mr, He 1) moo-ay ka-o sach roveh meet. Only one's true friends mourn one's death.
3 ae defo stat ats I (413-11, vr, He 1) tarai gun roveh neetaa neet. Those under the sway of the three dispositions continue to mourn on and on.
ey AY Uddld AdfA ASS Il (413-11, wm, He 1) dukh sukh parhar sahj sucheet. Disregarding pain and pleasure, center your consciousness on the Lord.
36 Ho ABus fans udtfS Wuil (413-12, nmr, Hs 1) tan man sa-opa-o krisan pareet. ||5] | Dedicate your body and mind to the Love of the Lord. ||5]|
Sisafs Sa niSa MAY I (413-12, nT, He 1) bheetar ayk anayk asa™kh. The One Lord dwells within the various and countless beings.
GH UdH FT AY MAY I (413-12, wer, He 1) karam Dharam baho sankh asa‘kh.
There are so many rituals and religious faiths, their number is innumerable.
fag 3 sat OH fade I (413-13, om, He 1) bin bhai bhagtee janam biranth. Without the Fear of God, and devotional worship, one's life is in vain.
dfs we wets fife use Mell (413-13, wer, He 1)
har gun gaavahi mil parmaaranth. ||6|| Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the supreme wealth is obtained. ||6]|
mf He HS St wef I (413-13, »mAT, He 1) aap marai maaray bhee aap. He Himself dies, and He Himself kills.
mfu Cure afu Cerf it (413-14, nmr, He 1) aap upaa-ay thaap uthaap. He Himself establishes, and having established, disestablishes.
fqrfe Curet Ast 3 ATS (413-14, wer, He 1) Sarisat upaa-ee jotee too jaat. He created the Universe, and by His Divine Nature, instilled His Divine Light into it.
Hag stots frase odt afS WO (413-14, om, us 1 sabad veechaar milan nahee bharaat. ||7|| One who reflects upon the Word of the Shabad, meets the Lord, without doubt. ||7]||
AS uals se Aa ae | (413-15, mr, ws 1) sootak agan bhakhai jag khaa-ay. Pollution is the burning fire, which is consuming the world.
Asa Ale afe As ot ate i (413-15, wr, we 1) sootak jal thal sabh hee thaa-ay. Pollution is in the water, upon the land, and everywhere.
Boa Asta ASH HSA Il (413-15, we, He 1) naanak sootak janam mareejai. O Nanak, people are born and die in pollution.
ae usATSt dfs GA ula CII (413-16, wr, He 1) gur parsaadee har ras peejai. ||8]|4|| By Guru's Grace, they drink in the Lord's sublime elixir. ||8]|4||
TT MTAT HIST 4% Il (413-16)
raag aasaa mehlaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
nity Stag A uae THe Il (413-16, nmr, He 1) aap veechaarai so parkhay heeraa. One who contemplates his own self, tests the worth of the jewel.
Sa fenfe SI TT UT I (413-16, wr, He 1) ayk darisat taaray gur pooraa. With a single glance, the Perfect Guru saves him.
GT HS HS SHO Ths A (413-17, wer, He 1) gur maanai man tay man Dheeraa. ||1]| When the Guru is pleased, one's mind comforts itself. || 1] |
MAT ATS Aevet AS Il (413-17, mA, He 1) aisaa saahu saraafee karai. He is such a banker, who tests us.
Ant sefe Sa fos St VU TIS ih (413-17, mA, ne 1)
saachee nadar ayk liv tarai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
By His True Glance of Grace, we are blessed with the Love of the One Lord, and are saved. ||1]||Pause| |
Ust oH fede ATT Il (413-18, wr, He 1) poonjee naam niranjan saar. The capital of the Naam is immaculate and sublime.
fssHe Afs gat UaTs | (413-18, mer, He 1) nirmal saach rataa paikaar. That peddler is rendered pure, who is imbued with the Truth.
frefs AoA wis TI AIST MQ (413-18, war, ue 1) sifat sahj ghar gur kartaar. ||2| | Praising the Lord, in the house of poise, he attains the Guru, the Creator. ||2]|
MAT HOA Hate ABS Il (413-19, wrar, He 1) aasaa mansaa sabad jalaa-ay. One who burns away hope and desire through the Word of the Shabad,
IH Safes AT ATS Il (413-19, Ar, Hz 1) raam naraa-in kahai kahaa-ay. chants the Lord's Name, and inspires others to chant it as well.
Td 3 VS HIG We UES ISI (413-19, we, Hz 1) gur tay vaat mahal ghar paa-ay. ||3]| Through the Guru, he finds the Path home, to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
[I3I|
UST 8AB
aes afer AS MSU I (414-1, wr, He 1) kanchan kaa-i-aa jot anoop. His body becomes golden, by the Lord's Incomparable Light.
FISTS VS" AGG AGU Ml (414-1, weer, we 1) taribhavan dayvaa sagal saroop. He beholds the divine beauty in all the three worlds.
HAUG US APY MS NI (414-1, wr, He 1) mai so Dhan palai saach akhoot. ||4| | That inexhaustible wealth of Truth is now in my lap. ||4||
us Sie of whe ANTS Il (414-2, mmr, He 1)
panch teen nav chaar samaavai.
In the five elements, the three worlds, the nine regions and the four directions, the Lord is pervading.
Use dae ae Ute gov] Il (414-2, wer, He 1) Dharan gagan kal Dhaar rahaavai. He supports the earth and the sky, exercising His almighty power.
wofe WSC Cafe use] Wull (414-2, nr, He 1) baahar jaata-o ulat paraavai. ||5]| He turns the outgoing mind around. ||5||
Hoe dfs o omit AS I 414-3, wm, He 1) moorakh ho-ay na aakhee soojhai. The fool does not realize what he sees with his eyes.
foe" SA Sot afoot FS | (414-3, wer, vs 1) jihvaa ras nahee kahi-aa boojhai. He does not taste with his tongue, and does not understand what is said.
fag a HST Fat AG BS El (414-3, wer, we 1) bikh kaa maataa jag si-o loojhai. ||6|| Intoxicated with poison, he argues with the world. ||6] |
OSH Hafs SSH FS Il (414-3, om, we 1) ootam sangat ootam hovai. In the uplifting society, one is uplifted.
TE AG We nies GS Il (414-4, wer, we 1) gun ka-o Dhaavai avgan Dhovai. He chases after virtue and washes off his sins.
fae Td AS AIH o Je MDM (414-4, wer, He 1) bin gur sayvay sahj na hovai. ||7|| Without serving the Guru, celestial poise is not obtained. ||7||
TST SH ALIS WS Il (414-4, vir, He 1) heeraa naam javayhar laal. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a diamond, a jewel, a ruby.
Ho Hat o FSA aT He I (414-5, wir, He 1) man motee hai tis kaa maal. The pearl of the mind is the inner wealth.
Soa Usa Sets fogs WCUUM (414-5, nTAT, He 1) naanak parkhai nadar nihaal. ||8]||5]]| O Nanak, the Lord tests us, and blesses us with His Glance of Grace. ||8]|5||
YATAT HIST 4 Il (414-5)
aasaa mehiaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
aaHfe famie fame Hfs HTS Il (414-5, mmr, He 1) gurmukh gi-aan Dhi-aan man maan. The Gurmukh obtains spiritual wisdom, meditation and satisfaction of the mind.
Taf Host HIG USTs Il (414-6, wir, He 1) gurmukh mahlee mahal pachhaan. The Gurmukh realizes the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
aanfe Aafs Aa SATS IAI (414-6, nm, He 1) gurmukh surat sabad neesaan. ||1]|| The Gurmukh is attuned to the Word of the Shabad, as his Insignia. ||1]|
MA UM sats Sher Il (414-6, ym, vs 1) aisay paraym bhagat veechaaree. Such is the loving devotional worship of the Lord's contemplation.
Tafa APS SH HATS NA TIS Il (414-7, wer, He 1) gurmukh saachaa naam muraaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Gurmukh realizes the True Name, the Destroyer of ego. ||1||Pause| |
mfotefA feaHe ate AAS Il (414-7, rr, He 1) ahinis nirmal thaan suthaan. Day and night, he remains immaculately pure, and abides in the sublime place.
ste 326 fesaee fomire il (414-8, nmr, He 1) teen bhavan nihkayval gi-aan. He gains the wisdom of the three worlds.
A's TI 3S JAH Usrs MQM (414-8, vr, ys 1) saachay gur tay hukam pachhaan. ||2| | Through the True Guru, the Command of the Lord's Will is realized. ||2]|
Ara Jay odt FSA Ag il (414-8, wer, He 1 saachaa harakh naahee tis sog. He enjoys true pleasure, and suffers no pain.
nifys fame Hot SA Sa Il (414-9, wer, He 1) amrit gi-aan mahaa ras bhog. He enjoys the ambrosial wisdom, and the highest sublime essence.
Us AHST Wet AT Ba NSM (414-9, wewr, we 1 panch samaa-ee sukhee sabh log. ||3]|| He overcomes the five evil passions, and becomes the happiest of all men. ||3]|
Rast vfs Sat AS AST I (414-9, ver, He 1 saglee jot tayraa sabh ko-ee. Your Divine Light is contained in all; everyone belongs to You.
mmy Afs fees Feat i 414-9, nmr, He 1) aapay jorh vichhorhay so-ee. You Yourself join and separate again.
WM ATS AT A Tet Mil (414-10, ww, Hs 1) aapay kartaa karay so ho-ee. ||4|| Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. ||4||
ata Gard Jat ANTS Il (414-10, nmr, He 1) dhaahi usaaray hukam samaavai. He demolishes, and He builds; by His Order, he merges us into Himself.
Jan zas F fSA SS I (414-10, ver, He 1) hukmo vartai jo tis bhaavai. Whatever is pleasing to His Will, happens.
a fag ua afe o ure Ul (414-11, or, He 1D gur bin pooraa ko-ay na paavai. ||5|| Without the Guru, no one obtains the Perfect Lord. ||5]]|
wed fasta 6 Aafs uate Il (414-11, nr, He 1) baalak biraDh na surat paraan. In childhood and old age, he does not understand.
ste rate as mifsrfs i (414-11, wer, Hs 1) bhar joban boodai abhimaan. In the prime of youth, he is drowned in his pride.
faa ore fomr woth faefs nel (414-12, ner, He 1) bin naavai ki-aa lahas nidaan. ||6|| Without the Name, what can the fool obtain? | |6] |
fA a MS US Aol & ATS Il (414-12, wer, He 1) jis kaa an Dhan sahj na jaanaa. He does not know the One who blesses him with nourishment and wealth.
sat sero fefs USS Il (414-12, ver, He 1) bharam bhulaanaa fir pachhutaanaa. Deluded by doubt, he later regrets and repents.
mes Sat BGs AST" DN (414-13, vr, He 1) gal faahee ba-uraa ba-uraanaa. ||7]|| The noose of death is around the neck of that crazy madman. ||7]|
33s Ag cfmr 38 sts sa i (414-13, wer, He 1) boodat jag daykhi-aa ta-o dar bhaagay. I saw the world drowning, and I ran away in fear.
Afsafs ae A SSSI Il (414-13, new, Hz 1) satgur raakhay say vadbhaagay. How very fortunate are those who have been saved by the True Guru.
SSA TT At VISt BS UCWEN (414-14, ni, He 1)
naanak gur kee charnee laagay. ||8]||6|| O Nanak, they are attached to the feet of the Guru. ||8]|6]|
YATAT HIST 4 Il (414-14)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Tete ats SHS wists il (414-14, evr, ve 1) gaavahi geetay cheet aneetay. They sing religious songs, but their consciousness is wicked.
va Hate aoefs MS Il (414-15, nr, He 1) raag sunaa-ay kahaaveh beetay. They sing the songs, and call themselves divine,
fag are His SS mists WAU (414-15, wr, He bin naavai man jhooth aneetay. ||1]| but without the Name, their minds are false and wicked. ||1]|
AT VI HS TIT We Il (414-15, wr, He 1) kahaa chalhu man rahhu gharay. Where are you going? O mind, remain in your own home.
qonfa on ofh fgusA das ured AofA Te AU TIS Mh (414-15, ym, Hs 1) gurmukh raam naam tariptaasay khojat paavhu sahj haray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukhs are satisfied with the Lord's Name; searching, they easily find the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
an au xfs Ho Ate I (414-16, vir, He 1) kaam kroDh man moh sareeraa. Sexual desire, anger and emotional attachment fill the mind and body;
BI BF nidarg A ut Il (414-16, er, He 1) lab lobh aha‘kaar so peeraa. greed and egotism lead only to pain.
oH OTH fag faS He Ota MQ (414-17, rr, He 1) raam naam bin ki-o man Dheeraa. ||2]| How can the mind be comforted without the Lord's Name? ||2| |
wists SSE ATT UTS Il (414-17, nA, He 1) antar naavan saach pachhaanai. One who cleanses himself within, knows the True Lord.
niga at afs ToHfa WE Il (414-17, or, He 1) antar kee gat gurmukh jaanai. The Gurmukh knows the condition of his innermost being.
Arg Hae fie HIG 3 UES ISI (414-18, wT, He 1)
saach sabad bin mahal na pachhaanai. ||3]|| Without the True Word of the Shabad, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is not realized. ||3||
fadars Hfo nites ANTS Il (414-18, nimAT, He 1) nirankaar meh aakaar samaavai. One who merges his form into the Formless Lord,
MAS oe AE Ate fears il (414-19, wer, He 1) akal kalaa sach saach tikaavai. abides in the True Lord, the Powerful, beyond power.
H Sd dds Alo odt mr] ISI (414-19, nmr, He 1) so nar garabh jon nahee aavai. ||4| | Such a person does not enter into the womb of reincarnation again. ||4| |
Hat ay fH So AE I (414-19, ner, He 1) jahaa™ naam milai tah jaa-o. Go there, where you may obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
UST gAu
Td UATE ATH AHS Il (415-1, vray, He 1) gur parsaadee karam kamaa-o. By Guru's Grace, perform good deeds.
OH TST Te TS WS Ul (415-1, war, ys 1) naamay raataa har gun gaa-o. ||5|| Imbued with the Naam, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||5]|
aa AS 3 TY USS II (415-1, ww, He 1) gur sayvaa tay aap pachhaataa. Serving the Guru, I have come to understand myself.
Mis ou sfhor AMES I (415-1, wT, He 1) amrit naam vasi-aa sukh-daata. The Ambrosial Naam, the Giver of Peace, abides within my mind.
mates aat SH TST MEM (415-2, we, He 1) an-din banee naamay raataa. ||6|| Night and day, I am imbued with the Word of the Guru's Bani, and the Naam. ||6]|
AT YS GS 3 A Ba ll (415-2, wm, us 1) mayraa parabh laa-ay taa ko laagai. When my God attaches someone to Him, only then is that person attached.
ICH HS AGS AH ll (415-2, mer, He 1) ha-umai maaray sabday jaagai. Conquering ego, he remains awake to the Word of the Shabad.
me GS AST AY MIE NDI (415-3, mT, He 1) aithai othai sadaa sukh aagai. ||7]|| Here and hereafter, he enjoys lasting peace. ||7]|
Ho due fafa odt WE I (415-3, mm, He 1) man chanchal biDh naahee jaanai. The fickle mind does not know the way.
Houfe Ho AGE O USS Il (415-3, vA, He 1) manmukh mailaa sabad na pachhaanai. The filthy self-willed manmukh does not understand the Shabad.
TaHfe Sans SH STS NCH (415-4, me, He 1) gurmukh nirmal naam vakhaanai. ||8| | The Gurmukh chants the Immaculate Naam. ||8]|
dfs ME ura act wgetA il (415-4, om, ne 1) har jee-o aagai karee ardaas. I offer my prayer to the Lord,
AY Ao Aalfs ofS fSeA I (415-4, wr, 8 1) saaDhoo jan sangat ho-ay nivaas. that I might dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
footed gu are of OH USA ICI (415-5, nmr, we 1) kilvikh dukh kaatay har naam pargaas. ||9|| There, sins and sufferings are erased, and one is illumined with the Lord's Name. ||9]|
ats ates nirarg USS I (415-5, nim, Hs 1) kar beechaar aachaar paraataa. In reflective meditation, I have come to love good conduct.
Afsag seat Sa AST Il (415-5, ne, He 1) satgur bachnee ayko jaataa. Through the Word of the True Guru, I recognize the One Lord.
SOA TH STH HS TS NAOMI! (415-6, nA, He 1)
naanak raam naam man raataa. ||10]|7]| O Nanak, my mind is imbued with the Lord's Name. ||10]|7]|
MATAT HIST 4% Il (415-6)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
HO HAG AAS SSS I (415-6, nar, ws 1) man maigal saakat dayvaanaa. The mind of the faithless cynic is like a crazy elephant.
ae dfs wfeor Hfo Tarar Il (415-7, mm, He 1) ban khand maa-i-aa mohi hairaanaa. It wanders around the forest, distracted by attachment to Maya.
fes Os fa ae a TY I (415-7, vr, ve 1) it ut jaahi kaal kay chaapay. It goes here and there, hounded by death.
Tent afa wd we MMT NU (415-7, ve, He 1 gurmukh khoj lahai ghar aapay. ||1]| The Gurmukh seeks, and finds his own home. ||1]]|
faa ad Aad HO odt SCT Il (415-8, nrAr, He 1) bin gur sabdai man nahee tha-uraa. Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind finds no place of rest.
fausg aH any offs fasne nize fourag JEN aa NU TIS Ih (415-8, vir, He 1 simrahu raam naam at nirmal avar ti-aagahu ha-umai ka-uraa. ||1]| rahaa-o. Remember in meditation the Lord's Name, the most pure and sublime; renounce your bitter egotism. ||1]||Pause] |
feg He HAG AIT faS FIAT Il (415-9, nmr, Hs 1) ih man mugaDh kahhu ki-o rahsee. Tell me, how can this stupid mind be rescued?
fae AHS AH ST Sy AAT Il (415-9, nr, He 1) bin samjhay jam kaa dukh sahsee. Without understanding, it shall suffer the pains of death.
nm SuA Afsag AS Il (415-9, mar, He 1) aapay bakhsay satgur maylai. The Lord Himself forgives us, and unites us with the True Guru.
aw ACA HTS AG US Il (415-10, mA, nz 1) kaal kantak maaray sach paylai. ||2|| The True Lord conquers and overcomes the tortures of death. ||2| |
feg He ASH fT HS TSH Il (415-10, ni, He 1) in man karmaa ih man Dharmaa. This mind commits its deeds of karma, and this mind follows the Dharma.
feg Ho Uv 3S 3 HOH Il (415-10, wr, ne 1) ih man panch tat tay janmaa. This mind is born of the five elements.
Way Bast feg Ho HA Il 415-11, wr, we saakat lobhee ih man moorhaa. This foolish mind is perverted and greedy.
THs SH AU HS FS" MBI (415-11, ww, we Y gurmukh naam japai man roorhaa. ||3]| Chanting the Naam, the mind of the Gurmukh becomes beautiful. ||3]|
Tanfe He was Het Il (415-11, mA, He 1) gurmukh man asthaanay so-ee. The mind of the Gurmukh finds the Lord's home.
aonfy fasefs Ast Tet i (415-12, ver, He 1) gurmukh taribhavan sojhee ho-ee. The Gurmukh comes to know the three worlds.
feg Ho Halt Sat Sy Sry Wt 415-12, wr, He 1) ih man jogee bhogee tap taapai. This mind is a Yogi, an enjoyer, a practicer of austerities.
qTonfe HS afs ys wm igi (415-12, wer, us 1) gurmukh cheen"ai har parabh aapai. ||4]| The Gurmukh understands the Lord God Himself. | |4| |
HO Saat IH fsurait i (415-13, wm, ve 1) man bairaagee ha-umai ti-aagee. This mind is a detached renunciate, forsaking egotism.
wie whe HOA efaar walt Il (415-13, mA, He 1)
ghat ghat mansaa dubiDhaa laagee. Desire and duality afflict each and every heart.
on safes qoute ae Il (415-13, mr, He 1) raam rasaa-in gurmukh chaakhai. The Gurmukh drinks in the Lord's sublime essence;
ofa wig Host ofe ufs are ull (415-14, nr, we 1)
dar ghar mahlee har pat raakhai. ||5|| at His Door, in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, He preserves his honor. ||5||
fed Ho Ta AS Aa I (415-14, wm, He 1) ih man raajaa soor sangraam. This mind is the king, the hero of cosmic battles.
feg He fess aonfa oft i (415-14, wm, He 1) ih man nirbha-o gurmukh naam. The mind of the Gurmukh becomes fearless through the Naam.
HS Us mus SfA ate I (415-15, wer, He 1) maaray panch apunai vas kee-ay. Overpowering and subduing the five passions,
J@H ah feas ate ate Wel (415-15, wr, He 1) ha-umai garaas ikat thaa-ay kee-ay. ||6|| holding ego in its grip, it confines them to one place. ||6]|
TaHfe Ia Anime nie fSmra il (415-15, wmv, He 1) gurmukh raag su-aad an ti-aagay. The Gurmukh renounces other songs and tastes.
anf fe HS Sast Aa Il (415-16, nT, Hs 1) gurmukh ih man bhagtee jaagay. The mind of the Gurmukh is awakened to devotion.
mode Afe Hfont Aa Stars il (415-16, wmv, He 1)
anhad sun maani-aa sabad veechaaree.
Hearing the unstruck music of the sound current, this mind contemplates the Shabad, and accepts it.
mits dfs se fedardt WO (415-16, wT, He 1) aatam cheeneh bha-ay nirankaaree. ||7|| Understanding itself, this soul becomes attuned to the Formless Lord. ||7]|
feg Ho faone ef wie Fett I (415-17, vr, He 1 ih man nirmal dar ghar so-ee. This mind becomes immaculately pure, in the Court and the Home of the Lord.
aenty sats a uf set it (415-17, wir, ve gurmukh bhagat bhaa-o Dhun ho-ee. The Gurmukh shows his love through loving devotional worship.
mfstafA dfs AA Te UsATE Il (415-17, wm, He 1) ahinis har jas gur parsaad. Night and day, by Guru's Grace, sing the Lord's Praises.
wife wie A ys orfe warfe UCI (415-18, wm, He 1)
ghat ghat so parabh aad jugaad. ||8]| God dwells in each and every heart, since the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages. ||8]|
oH oAtefe feg HS HST Il (415-18, wT, He 1) raam rasaa-in ih man maataa. This mind is intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord;
Hea dates aTaHfe AST Ml (415-19, mmr, He 1) sarab rasaa-in gurmukh jaataa. The Gurmukh realizes the essence of totality.
Bas IS WI BIS (SSA I (415-19, wr, v8 1) bhagat hayt gur charan nivaasaa. For the sake of devotional worship, he dwells at the Guru's Feet.
Soa dfs AS A VALS SAT CNC (415-19, »AT, He 1)
naanak har jan kay daasan daasaa. ||9||8]| Nanak is the humble servant of the slave of the Lord's slaves. ||9]|8] |
UST 8A
MTAT HIS 4 Il (416-1)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
36 faan us at at aM I (416-1, ner, He 1) tan binsai Dhan kaa ko kahee-ai. When the body perishes, whose wealth is it?
fag TI IH BH AS BIA I (416-1, ve, # 1)
bin gur raam naam kat lahee-ai. Without the Guru, how can the Lord's Name be obtained?
TH BH US Afar AMET I (416-2, nA, He 1) raam naam Dhan sang sakhaa-ee. The wealth of the Lord's Name is my Companion and Helper.
mfatofA fedHe ofa fs Bet All (416-2, wm, He 1 ahinis nirmal har liv laa-ee. ||1]|| Night and day, center your loving attention on the Immaculate Lord. ||1]|
oH OTH fag ASG THT Il (416-2, nT, He 1) raam naam bin kavan hamaaraa. Without the Lord's Name, who is ours?
HY eu AH afe on 3 ese mm aufA firresora NA TTS I (416-3, me, He 1)
sukh dukh sam kar naam na chhoda-o aapay bakhas milaavanhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I look upon pleasure and pain alike; I shall not forsake the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The Lord Himself forgives me, and blends me with Himself. ||1]||Pause||
ASX AHSt TS HSI Il (416-3, wr, uz 1) kanik kaamnee hayt gavaaraa. The fool loves gold and women.
efaar wat oH FEATS Il (416-4, wm, He 1) dubiDhaa laagay naam visaaraa. Attached to duality, he has forgotten the Naam.
fan 3 aHAfs on ATS Il (416-4, wr, He 1) jis too’ bakhsahi naam japaa-ay. O Lord, he alone chants the Naam, whom You have forgiven.
Ss 3 Ota Aa TS WES iil (416-4, ww, ws 1) doot na laag sakai gun gaa-ay. ||2|| Death cannot touch one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
Ts TI SS TH TUS I (416-5, wr, ve 1) har gur daataa raam gupaalaa. The Lord, the Guru, is the Giver; the Lord, the Sustainer of the World.
fa@ are f38 ay oferta Il (416-5, vir, He ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh da-i-aalaa. If it is pleasing to Your Will, please preserve me, O Merciful Lord.
aanfe au Ae Hf stfemr It (416-5, nmr, He 1) gurmukh raam mayrai man bhaa-i-aa. As Gurmukh, my mind is pleased with the Lord.
da fee wy ofr Tofemr SI (416-6, mmr, He 1) rog mitay dukh thaak rahaa-i-aa. ||3]|| My diseases are cured, and my pains are taken away. ||3]||
ned 3 MGug SZ oO HST Il (416-6, nm, He 1)
avar na a-ukhaDh tant na manntaa. There is no other medicine, Tantric charm or mantra.
dfs ofs finse feof FST Il (416-6, or, ne 1) har har simran kilvikh hantaa. Meditative remembrance upon the Lord, Har, Har, destroys sins.
3 urfu garefa omy feral (416-7, »mr, Hs 1) too” aap bhulaaveh naam visaar. You Yourself cause us to stray from the path, and forget the Naam.
3 omy arafa forsur ofs Sil (416-7, mmr, He 1) too” aapay raakhahi kirpaa Dhaar. ||4]| Showering Your Mercy, You Yourself save us. ||4]]|
TT SIH SE fe SA Il (416-7, me, He 1) rog bharam bhayd man doojaa. The mind is diseased with doubt, superstition and duality.
ad fag sath wuts AY BAT Il (416-8, wer, He 1) gur bin bharam jaapeh jap doojaa. Without the Guru, it dwells in doubt, and contemplates duality.
mife use TT SAA G Sus Il (416-8, nT, Hs 1) aad purakh gur daras na daykheh. The Guru reveals the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the Primal Lord.
fee qd Aad Aon fa Bufo ull (416-8, wm, He 1) vin gur sabdai janam ke laykheh. ||5|| Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, what use is human life? ||5||
efy man dd farprfe i (416-9, nmr, ue 1) daykh achraj rahay bismaad. Beholding the Marvellous Lord, I am wonder-struck and astonished.
wife whe AS 6d AGH ANTE Il (416-9, nr, He 1) ghat ghat sur nar sahj samaaDh. In each and every heart, of the angels and holy men, He dwells in celestial Samaadhi.
steufs wfs TI HS HST I (416-9, wr, He 1) bharipur Dhaar rahay man maahee. I have enshrined the All-pervading Lord within my mind.
3H AHAfd nied & SS MEM (416-10, nr, He 1) tum samsar avar ko naahee. ||6|| There is no one else equal to You. ||6||
Ww at safs JS HfY OH Il (416-10, wm, He 1) jaa kee bhagat hayt mukh naam. For the sake of devotional worship, we chant Your Name.
HS 3a ot Aafs IM Il (416-10, wr, He 1) sant bhagat kee sangat raam. The Lord's devotees dwell in the Society of the Saints.
806 3d Aafa fomre i (416-11, omar, v2 1) banDhan toray sahj Dhi-aan. Breaking his bonds, one comes to meditate on the Lord.
ge gente afe ae famre li (416-11, »mr, we 1) chhootai gurmukh har gur gi-aan. ||7]| The Gurmukhs are emancipated, by the Guru-given knowledge of the Lord. ||7]||
oT AMES Sy ASA Ba I (416-11, mr, we 1) naa jamdoot dookh tis laagai. The Messenger of Death cannot touch him with pain;
A AO TH OH fos Wal I (416-12, ner, He 1) jo jan raam naam liv jaagai. the Lord's humble servant remains awake to the Love of the Naam.
sats 22e sas dfs Afar i (416-12, wm, He 1) bhagat vachhal bhagtaa har sang. The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He dwells with His devotees.
Sot Hafs Se Ts for CUE (416-12, ver, He 1) naanak mukat bha-ay har rang. ||8]|9]| O Nanak, they are liberated, through the Love of the Lord. ||8]|9]|
MAT HI@ 9 feasat Il (416-13)
aasaa mehlaa 1 iktukee. Aasaa, First Mehl, Ik-Tukee:
Gd AS A SAT AS Il (416-13, mr, ne 1) gur sayvay so thaakur jaanai. One who serves the Guru, knows his Lord and Master.
ey fle Ay Aafe UES NA (416-13, »mr, He 1) dookh mitai sach sabad pachhaanai. ||1]| His pains are erased, and he realizes the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
TH Aug At Het AAT Il (416-14, wm, He 1) raam japahu mayree sakhee sakhainee. Meditate on the Lord, O my friends and companions.
Afsag Afe tug ys Sot Ul FICS Ml (416-14, we, ue 1) satgur sayv daykhhu parabh nainee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Serving the True Guru, you shall behold God with your eyes. ||1]||Pause| |
dae ws fust AArfe i (416-14, war, He 1) banDhan maat pitaa sansaar. People are entangled with mother, father and the world.
due AS afer nig ats QU (416-15, omar, He 1) banDhan sut kanniaa ar naar. ||2| | They are entangled with sons, daughters and spouses. ||2||
Hus ATH UGH IE aha i (416-15, rr, ve 1) banDhan karam Dharam ha-o kee-aa. They are entangled with religious rituals, and religious faith, acting in ego.
aus us ASS fs Sot WSN (416-15, wer, nz 1) banDhan put kalat man bee-aa. ||3]|| They are entangled with sons, wives and others in their minds. ||3]|
due fxsdt aafs fasnre il (416-16, wr, Hz 1) banDhan kirkhee karahi kirsaan. The farmers are entangled by farming.
ICH So Ad Ta Hat SS ISI (416-16, ww, He 1) ha-umai dann sahai raajaa mangai daan. ||4| |
People suffer punishment in ego, and the Lord King exacts the penalty from them. [41 |
dae Aer niscterst Il (416-16, rrr, He 1) banDhan sa-udaa anveechaaree. They are entangled in trade without contemplation.
fsufs ardt wfeor Ho Une Ul (416-17, wT, He 1) tipat naahee maa-i-aa moh pasaaree. ||5]|| They are not satisfied by attachment to the expanse of Maya. ||5||
ue AS Hefs os ATE Il (416-17, wer, He 1) banDhan saah sa‘cheh Dhan jaa-ay. They are entangled with that wealth, amassed by bankers.
fas sfs sats a uset af Ell (416-17, um, He 1) bin har bhagat na pav-ee thaa-ay. ||6]|| Without devotion to the Lord, they do not become acceptable. ||6||
qUS FE AE MGA Il (416-18, mar, He 1) banDhan bayd baad aha‘kaar. They are entangled with the Vedas, religious discussions and egotism.
gufs faon Ha fears DI (416-18, wm, He 1) banDhan binsai moh vikaar. ||7]|| They are entangled, and perish in attachment and corruption. ||7| |
SSA TH SH ASE Il (416-18, nT, Hs 1) naanak raam naam sarnaa-ee. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Name.
Afsafe Ia Fa UST NCIION (416-19, wT, He 1) satgur raakhay banDh na paa-ee. ||8]||10|| One who is saved by the True Guru, does not suffer entanglement. ||8]||10]|
UST 8AD
Ta MITAT HIG A MASUeMT We 2 (417-1) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa ghar 3 Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, Third House:
qe Afsars ure il (417-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fe fate Rafe udtor vat ute HOT Ml (417-2, »mr, He 1) jin sir sohan patee-aa maa‘gee paa-ay sanDhoor. Those heads adorned with braided hair, with their parts painted with vermillion
A fra ast Hotta ae fetes wre ofs i (417-2, »mr, we 1) say sir kaatee munnee-ani" gal vich aavai Dhoorh. - those heads were shaved with scissors, and their throats were choked with dust.
Hoe viefs detor ofe safe o freee Tefs uA (417-2, wr, He 1) mehlaa andar hodee-aa hun bahan na milni" hadoor. ||1|| They lived in palatial mansions, but now, they cannot even sit near the palaces. ||1]||
MSA AA MESA Il (417-3, vA, Hs 1) aadays baabaa aadays. Hail to You, O Father Lord, Hail to You!
oife use Sa nis o ufemr afe afe eufo SA NU TIS Ul (417-3, om, ne
aad purakh tayraa ant na paa-i-aa kar kar daykheh vays. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Primal Lord. Your limits are not known; You create, and create, and behold the scenes. ||1||Pause] |
Hed Abort Joidior ors Aofe uri i (417-4, mr, He 1) jadahu see-aa vee-aahee-aa laarhay sohan paas. When they were married, their husbands looked so handsome beside them.
dss ofs ureior de ds aS TAA NN (417-4, ver, He YD heedolee charh aa-ee-aa dand khand keetay raas. They came in palanquins, decorated with ivory;
Cugg ural arch 38 fHafe uf QU (417-5, vr, He 1) uprahu paanee vaaree-ai jhalay jhimkan paas. ||2|| water was sprinkled over their heads, and glittering fans were waved above them.
21 |
feg oy wale afoshor wy wale usher Il (417-5, nmr, He 1)
ik lakh lehni" behthee-aa lakh lehni'! kharhee-aa.
They were given hundreds of thousands of coins when they sat, and hundreds of thousands of coins when they stood.
Tat gas Utehat Hrafe AAS MM Il (417-6, wr, ve 1) garee chhuhaaray khaa‘dee-aa maanni" sayjrhee-aa. They ate coconuts and dates, and rested comfortably upon their beds.
faq ates froor ureter sefs HSASMr SH (417-6, wer, He 1) tin" gal silkaa paa-ee-aa tutni" motsaree-aa. ||3]| But ropes were put around their necks, and their strings of pearls were broken. ||3]|
U6 Ae efe Sct de frat wa da ote Ih (417-7, ver, we 1)
Dhan joban du-ay vairee ho-ay jin"ee rakhay rang laa-ay.
Their wealth and youthful beauty, which gave them so much pleasure, have now become their enemies.
es Ss gotten & 3s ufS Tete il (417-7, wer, us 1) dootaa no furmaa-i-aa lai chalay pat gavaa-ay. The order was given to the soldiers, who dishonored them, and carried them away.
A faq ae & efauret A oa] Uf AATE Ist (417-8, om, He
jay tis bhaavai day vadi-aa-ee jay bhaavai day-ay sajaa-ay. ||4| |
If it is pleasing to God's Will, He bestows greatness; if is pleases His Will, He bestows punishment. ||4||
wat = As st ofes fee ARTE I (417-8, nmr, He 1)
ago day jay chaytee-ai taa™ kaa-it milai sajaa-ay.
If someone focuses on the Lord beforehand, then why should he be punished? Wot Hafs Teor Sf SHA TE I (417-9, mmr, v2 1)
saahaa™ surat gavaa-ee-aa rang tamaasai chaa-ay. The kings had lost their higher consciousness, reveling in pleasure and sensuality.
wgeal fefs cet afeg & det wife ull (417-9, mr, He 1) baabarvaanee fir ga-ee ku-ir na rotee khaa-ay. ||5]| Since Baabar's rule has been proclaimed, even the princes have no food to eat. ||5||
feast zeus uneétoifs fear unt ATE I (417-10, mr, He 1)
iknaa vakhat khu-aa-ee-ah ikn"aa poojaa jaa-ay.
The Muslims have lost their five times of daily prayer, and the Hindus have lost their worship as well.
ua fee fovesinr fa@ fea aefa ate it (417-10, nmr, He 1)
cha-ukay vin hindvaanee-aa ki-o tikay kadheh naa-ay.
Without their sacred squares, how shall the Hindu women bathe and apply the frontal marks to their foreheads?
TH 3 wag see gfe wale o HS wETe WEN (417-10, wer, Hs 1)
raam na kabhoo chayti-o hun kahan na milai khudaa-ay. ||6] |
They never remembered their Lord as Raam, and now they cannot even chant Khudaa-i| |6| |
fefar wis mrefo nue fefe ffs ffs uefs Ae I (417-11, or, He
ik ghar aavahi aapnai ik mil mil puchheh sukh.
Some have returned to their homes, and meeting their relatives, they ask about their Safety.
feagr fd foftmr afs afo gefo Be i (417-12, ver, He 1) ikn"aa ayho likhi-aa bahi bahi roveh dukh. For some, it is pre-ordained that they shall sit and cry out in pain.
a fA oe A at soa fom Hey NDNA (417-12, mm, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai naanak ki-aa maanukh. ||7]||11]|
Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass. O Nanak, what is the fate of mankind? [7] 1412]
MTAT HIST 4 Il (417-13)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
aS Aas sao us aT Sct HSTeSH I (417-13, ve, He kahaa so khayl tabaylaa ghorhay kahaa bhayree sehnaa-ee. Where are the games, the stables, the horses? Where are the drums and the bugles?
ad A sae weds ag A we aeSret Il (417-13, vir, He 1) kahaa so taygband gaadayrarh kahaa so laal kavaa-ee. Where are the sword-belts and chariots? Where are those scarlet uniforms?
as A wish ua sa wre ferfo art wal (417-14, ver, ne 1) kahaa so aarsee-aa muh bankay aithai diseh naahee. ||1]| Where are the rings and the beautiful faces? They are no longer to be seen here. ||1]|
feg Aa Sa J TAT Ih 417-14, wer, ws 1) ih jag tayraa too gosaa-ee. This world is Yours; You are the Lord of the Universe.
ea ust nfs afy Gant wg fs SS set nd TIS Wt (417-14, ver, we
ayk gharhee meh thaap uthaapay jar vand dayvai bhaa‘-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
In an instant, You establish and disestablish. You distribute wealth as it pleases You. ||1]|Pause] |
Adi A We VI Hsu HIG AT A Fa ASE Ih (417-15, wer, ve 1)
kahaa™ so ghar dar mandap mehlaa kahaa so bank saraa-ee.
Where are the houses, the gates, the hotels and palaces? Where are those beautiful way-stations?
ad AAA Aare ote fan fy ote o uret Il (417-16, nmr, He 1)
kahaa™ so sayj sukhaalee kaaman jis vaykh need na paa-ee.
Where are those beautiful women, reclining on their beds, whose beauty would not allow one to sleep?
aS Aus Seat Jat Sehr set Het QM (417-16, nmr, He 1)
kahaa so paan tambolee harmaa ho-ee-aa chhaa-ee maa-ee. ||2]|
Where are those betel leaves, their sellers, and the haremees? They have vanished like shadows. ||2||
fen Ad wafe wet feast fefe AG wet wrest I (417-17, nT, He
is jar kaaran ghanee vigutee in jar ghanee khu-aa-ee.
For the sake of this wealth, so many were ruined; because of this wealth, so many have been disgraced.
unt arsg de ost Hfesor Ate & AST I (417-17, ver, He paapaa baajhahu hovai naahee mu-i-aa saath na jaa-ee. It was not gathered without sin, and it does not go along with the dead.
fan 6 orf unre agar uf we sfamret Bi (417-18, wer, He jis no aap khu-aa-ay kartaa khus la-ay changi-aa-ee. ||3]| Those, whom the Creator Lord would destroy - first He strips them of virtue. ||3]|
aat J ute gota sae at te afer Ofer i (417-18, wer, Hs 1)
kotee hoo peer varaj rahaa-ay jaa meer suni-aa Dhaa-i-aa.
Millions of religious leaders failed to halt the invader, when they heard of the Emperor's invasion.
yar sat We HoH AS fan Hes yfe ufe afes gorfeor th (418-1, ner, He 1)
thaan mukaam jalay bij mandar muchh muchh ku-ir rulaa-i-aa. He burned the rest-houses and the ancient temples; he cut the princes limb from limb, and cast them into the dust.
act Hae & dur nia fas o use orem Isl (418-1, wm, He 1) ko-ee mugal na ho-aa anDhaa kinai na parchaa laa-i-aa. ||4|| None of the Mugals went blind, and no one performed any miracle. ||4]|
HIG usar set Bae JE vfs Sa Favret Il (418-2, ww, ve 1)
mugal pathaanaa bha-ee larhaa-ee ran meh tayg vagaa-ee.
The battle raged between the Mugals and the Pat'haans, and the swords clashed on the battlefield.
Gat sua ste yoret Gat oats fesret i (418-2, or, ne 1) on"ee tupak taan chalaa-ee on"ee hasat chirhaa-ee. They took aim and fired their guns, and they attacked with their elephants.
fe ot det esas uret far Haar srvet UI (418-3, nmr, He 1)
jin" kee cheeree dargeh paatee tin"aa marnaa bhaa-ee. ||5]|
Those men whose letters were torn in the Lord's Court, were destined to die, O Siblings of Destiny. ||5]|
fea fizeret nea saaret sfemrat sagt Il (418-3, vir, He 1) ik hindvaanee avar turkaanee bhati-aanee thakuraanee. The Hindu women, the Muslim women, the Bhattis and the Rajputs
feagr uve fa ua ure feaat SA HATA Il (418-4, nmr, us 1)
ikn"aa payran sir khur paatay iknaa vaas masaanee.
- some had their robes torn away, from head to foot, while others came to dwell in the cremation ground.
faa & da wat o mrfemr faq fas df= fearet wel (418-4, »mr, we 1) jin" kay bankay gharee na aa-i-aa tin" ki-o rain vihaanee. ||6]| Their husbands did not return home - how did they pass their night? ||6]|
nM ad ATS as fan o wife Have Il (418-5, vi, He 1) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa kis no aakh sunaa-ee-ai. The Creator Himself acts, and causes others to act. Unto whom should we complain?
ey AY 3d ate de fan & we ImreMM Il (418-5, wmv, ¥ 1) dukh sukh tayrai bhaanai hovai kis thai jaa-ay roo-aa-ee-ai. Pleasure and pain come by Your Will; unto whom should we go and cry?
Jont gath vere fear soa fesfimor uret DONATI (418-6, nA, He 1)
hukmee hukam chalaa-ay vigsai naanak likhi-aa paa-ee-ai. ||7||12||
The Commander issues His Command, and is pleased. O Nanak, we receive what is written in our destiny. ||7||12||
qe Afsars yArfe Il (418-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT avet HIG A We t mMACUeMT II (418-7)
aasaa kaafee mehlaa 1 ghar 8 asatpadee-aa. Aasaa, Kaafee, First Mehl, Eighth House, Ashtapadees:
AA afefs afest SA HATE Il (418-7, wat art, He 1) jaisay go-il go-ilee taisay sansaaraa. As the shepherd is in the field for only a short time, so is one in the world.
az anreta wrent stats we aa UA (418-8, mA art, He 1) koorh kamaaveh aadmee baa“Dheh ghar baaraa. ||1|| Practicing falsehood, they build their homes. ||1]|
Wag Wag Afsd Ber Sev UU TIS il (418-8, we are, ws 1)
jaagahu jaagahu sootiho chali-aa vanjaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Wake up! Wake up! O sleepers, see that the travelling merchant is leaving. ||1]|Pause] |
als als we sidbufs A goer Tet I (418-9, wer aret, ne 1) neet neet ghar baa‘Dhee-ah jay rahnaa ho-ee. Go ahead and build your houses, if you think you will stay here forever and ever.
flix ud HG sort AWS Get QM (418-9, vir are, He 1) pind pavai jee-o chalsee jay jaanai ko-ee. ||2|| The body shall fall, and the soul shall depart; if only they knew this. ||2] |
Cat Gat for agg I SA Het I (418-9, nm ore, He ohee ohee ki-aa karahu hai hosee so-ee. Why do you cry out and mourn for the dead? The Lord is, and shall always be.
3H sega GAS 3H AG AGE Jet ISI (418-10, wT aet, Hs 1) tum rovhugay os no tum" ka-o ka-un ro-ee. ||3]| You mourn for that person, but who will mourn for you? |[3]|
um fufeg sets SH AZ AHS Il (418-10, wer are, ws 1)
DhanDhaa pitihu bhaa-eeho tum" koorh kamaavahu.
You are engrossed in worldly entanglements, O Siblings of Destiny, and you are practicing falsehood.
Gg 3 Heel as dt SN BA ASST ISI (418-11, vi ae, ne 1)
oh na sun-ee kat hee tum" lok sunavhu. ||4]|
The dead person does not hear anything at all; your cries are heard only by other people. ||4]|
fan 3 AS oat ATS At | (418-11, wat ovat, He VD jis tay sutaa naankaa jaagaa-ay so-ee. Only the Lord, who causes the mortal to sleep, O Nanak, can awaken him again.
Aug FS yry|Nr st ote Tet WUll (418-11, wr at, He 1) jay ghar boojhai aapnaa taa™ need na ho-ee. ||5]| One who understands his true home, does not sleep. ||5] |
A vee & viewr fas AU as Il (418-12, nm ore, He jay chaldaa lai chali-aa kichh sampai naalay. If the departing mortal can take his wealth with him,
3 Ug Ag ef a gsg Mes WEN (418-12, ver ore, we 1)
taa Dhan sanchahu daykh kai boojhhu beechaaray. ||6||
then go ahead and gather wealth yourself. See this, reflect upon it, and understand. [16] |
Zoq ATT HAASE BI HS USS ST Il (418-12, mr art, we 1) vanaj karahu makhsood laihu mat pachhotaavahu. Make your deals, and obtain the true merchandise, or else you shall regret it later.
MGuE 3d TE AdT MA SZ uUMST IDI (418-13, we aret, He 1)
a-ugan chhodahu gun karahu aisay tat paraavahu. ||7||
Abandon your vices, and practice virtue, and you shall obtain the essence of reality. [711
UsH Sf AS ate afs MAT faxsA AHSCT Il (418-13, wer are, He 1) Dharam bhoom sat beej kar aisee kiras kamaavahu. Plant the seed of Truth in the soil of Dharmic faith, and practice such farming.
ot aurdt Wenig BI B AST NCH (418-14, vir ares, ne 1) taa vaapaaree jaanee-ahu laahaa lai jaavhu. ||8]| Only then will you be known as a merchant, if you take your profits with you. ||8]||
OH de Asay fees TS sas i (418-14, wer at, we 1)
karam hovai satgur milai boojhai beechaaraa.
If the Lord shows His Mercy, one meets the True Guru; contemplating Him, one comes to understand.
OH VUE He OH OH faSaa IN (418-15, mma are, He 1) naam vakhaanai sunay naam naamay bi-uhaaraa. ||9]| Then, one chants the Naam, hears the Naam, and deals only in the Naam. ||9||
fAG wo se foe ae vodt wiret i (418-15, mmr aret, He 1) ji-o laahaa totaa tivai vaat chaldee aa-ee. As is the profit, so is the loss; this is the way of the world.
A fsH ae coat At Sfsnret NAONIII (418-16, wT are, He 1) jo tis bhaavai naankaa saa-ee vadi-aa-ee. ||10]|13]| Whatever pleases His Will, O Nanak, is glory for me. ||10]|13]|
YTAT HIS 4% Il (418-16)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Ts Ast Fer t Shf{t AS I (418-16, wer, Hs 1) chaaray kundaa dhoodhee-aa ko neem"ee maidaa. I have searched in the four directions, but no one is mine.
A 3g oe Aloe 5H IG ST UU (418-17, wer, Hs 1) jay tuDh bhaavai saahibaa too mai ha-o taidaa. ||1|| If it pleases You, O Lord Master, then You are mine, and I am Yours. ||1]|
ag dist H otf & A At AGM Il (418-17, vr, He 1) dar beebhaa mai neemi" ko kai karee salaam. There is no other door for me; where shall I go to worship?
fost Hat 3 cet Are yf STH UA TIS Ml (418-17, meer, oe 1) hiko maidaa too Dhanee saachaa mukh naam. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my only Lord; Your True Name is in my mouth. ||1]]Pause| |
fhor Refs fro ute Hrafs fof fafa i (418-18, ver, He 1
siDhaa sayvan siDh peer maageh riDh siDh.
Some serve the Siddhas, the beings of spiritual perfection, and some serve spiritual teachers; they beg for wealth and miraculous powers.
H fea any 3 Jind A ae Sfe 12H (418-18, wer, He
mai ik naam na veesrai saachay gur buDh. ||2||
May I never forget the Naam, the Name of the One Lord. This is the wisdom of the True Guru. ||2]|
Yar gar Hat sat aust faur sefa fersd il (419-1, ver, we 1)
jogee bhogee kaaprhee ki-aa bhaveh disantar. Why do the Yogis, the revellers, and the beggars wander in foreign lands?
Td a Age B dod 33 AG fesse SI (419-1, wT, ve 1)
gur kaa sabad na cheenhee tat saar nirantar. ||3]|
They do not understand the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and the essence of excellence within them. ||3]|
ufss ua Afert fos ugfas yaar il (419-2, mr, we 1)
pandit paaDhay jo-isee nit parheh puraanaa.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, the teachers and astrologers, and those who endlessly read the Puraanas,
nists SAS 3 Weal whe YIN BAST Ill (419-2, mA, He 1) antar vasat na jaanan"ee ghat barahm lukaanaa. ||4|| do not know what is within; God is hidden deep within them. ||4||
fefa sunt ao ufo su aets fos Stee SA Il (419-2, or, Hs 1)
ik tapsee ban meh tap karahi nit tirath vaasaa.
Some penitents perform penance in the forests, and some dwell forever at sacred shrines.
mu & slats SHA ard SS BSA UI (419-3, nT, He 1)
aap na cheeneh taamsee kaahay bha-ay udaasaa. ||5]|| The unenlightened people do not understand themselves - why have they become renunciates? ||5||
fefa fe A360 afe mue A ASt aTefs I (419-3, vir, He 1) ik bind jatan kar raakh-day say jatee kahaaveh. Some control their sexual energy, and are known as celibates.
fag ao Hae 6 Sect Sfh refs wets NEN (419-4, wer, He 1)
bin gur sabad na chhoothee bharam aavahi jaaveh. ||6] |
But without the Guru's Word, they are not saved, and they wander in reincarnation. [16] |
feta faradt Rea AoE ATHSt Ba Il (419-4, wr, ye 1) ik girhee sayvak saaDhikaa gurmatee laagay. Some are householders, servants, and seekers, attached to the Guru's Teachings.
oH Ue feRare fes safe safs A Aa NDI (419-5, wr, He 1)
naam daan isnaan darirh har bhagat so jaagay. ||7]||
They hold fast to the Naam, to charity, to cleansing and purification; they remain awake in devotion to the Lord. ||7]|
dd 3 eg we Wet A ate fires I (419-5, ver, He gur tay dar ghar jaanee-ai so jaa-ay sinjaanai. Through the Guru, the Gate of the Lord's Home is found, and that place is recognized.
SOA OH O SIA ATT HO HS CII (419-6, TAT, He 1) naanak naam na veesrai saachay man maanai. ||8]|14]|
Nanak does not forget the Naam; his mind has surrendered to the True Lord. [18] [141]
YATAT HIS 4 Il (419-6)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
HOT Hold AMES SCHS Afs SISt Il (419-7, nT, He 1)
mansaa maneh samaa-ilay bha-ojal sach tarnaa.
Stilling the desires of the mind, the mortal truly crosses over the terrifying world- ocean.
wife Forte eeors J SAT Sot ATS AU (419-7, vm, He 1)
aad jugaad da-i-aal too thaakur tayree sarnaa. ||1]|
In the very beginning, and throughout the ages, You have been the Merciful Lord and Master; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||1]||
3 US OH Wheat os BIAS Cie Il (419-8, wr, He 1)
too daatou ham jaachikaa har darsan deejai.
You are the Giver, and I am a mere beggar. Lord, please grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
aanfa an fomretat uo Hes Sth A TITS tl (419-8, mr, He 1)
gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai man mandar bheejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukh meditates on the Naam; the temple of his mind resounds with joy. ||1]|Pause] |
Is wey sot 3S ATT USES Il (419-9, weer, Hs 1) koorhaa laalach chhodee-ai ta-o saach pachhaanai. Renouncing false greed, one comes to realize the Truth.
ad a Aafe AHEhy USHTIE WS IQ! (419-9, wr, He 1)
gur kai sabad samaa-ee-ai parmaarath jaanai. ||2||
So let yourself be absorbed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and know this supreme realization. ||2||
feg Ho TH Sst wes Saret i (419-9, nmr, we ih man raajaa lobhee-aa lubh-ta-o lobhaa-ee. This mind is a greedy king, engrossed in greed.
aenty es foedbn ofa fa@ af= ret Sil (419-10, nmr, He 1) gurmukh lobh nivaaree-ai har si-o ban aa-ee. ||3]| The Gurmukh eliminates his greed, and comes to an understanding with the Lord.
[31 aes ast stb fax war urs it (419-10, omar, v2 1)
kalar khaytee beejee-ai ki-o laahaa paavai. Planting the seeds in the rocky soil, how can one reap a profit?
HouY Afs 3 sinet as afs TSS USI (419-11, wer, we 1) manmukh sach na bheej-ee koorh koorh gadaavai. ||4||
The self-willed manmukh is not pleased with Truth; the false are buried in falsehood. [41]
Bee ead nifad wae zu at i (419-11, vr, He 1) laalach chhodahu anDhiho laalach dukh bhaaree. So renounce greed - you are blind! Greed only brings pain.
AMS Afos Hfs SA TBH fees Hrs Ul (419-12, mmr, He 1) saachou saahib man vasai ha-umai bikh maaree. ||5|| When the True Lord dwells within the mind, the poisonous ego is conquered. ||5||
vfam sfs aeeat HAGA Bret II (419-12, wr, Hs 1) dubiDhaa chhod kuvaatarhee mooshugay bhaa-ee. Renounce the evil way of duality, or you shall be plundered, O Siblings of Destiny.
mifofofa ou Hedi Afsas AaeTet WEN (419-13, wT, He 1) ahinis naam salaahee-ai satgur sarnaa-ee. ||6|| Day and night, praise the Naam, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru's protection. ||6]|
HoH uag AG F fog ates Sar il (419-13, »mr, vs 1) manmukh pathar sail hai Dharig jeevan feekaa. The self-willed manmukh is a rock, a stone. His life is cursed and useless.
WS His ast eit nis nists Har WDM (419-14, wr, Hs 1) jal meh kaytaa raakhee-ai abh antar sookaa. ||7]|| No matter now long a stone is kept under water, it still remains dry at its core. ||7]||
fs a oH fours dus ate Shor i (419-14, wr, we har kaa naam niDhaan hai poorai gur dee-aa. The Name of the Lord is the treasure; the Perfect Guru has given it to me.
Sa OH 6 Ad Hfa wifys Uber CUA (419-14, »mT, He 1)
naanak naam na veesrai math amrit pee-aa. ||8]|15]|
O Nanak, one who does not forget the Naam, churns and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||8]|15]|
YATAT HIS 4% Il (419-15)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
US Ved se serfenit Ih (419-15, wir, He 1) chalay chalanhaar vaat vataa-i-aa. The travellers travel from one road to another.
ug fue AAS AGS Sheer WA (419-15, wer, He 1D DhanDh pitay sansaar sach na bhaa-i-aa. ||1|| The world is engrossed in its entanglements, and does not appreciate the Truth. ||1]|
for sei fomr set aa Fate fearfenr il (419-16, wer, He 1)
ki-aa bhavee-ai ki-aa dhoodhee-ai gur sabad dikhaa-i-aa.
Why wander around, and why go searching, when the Guru's Shabad reveals Him to us?
HHS Hg feRnsfaer mus wis wrfeor na TIS | (419-16, wm, He 1) mamtaa moh visarji-aa apnai ghar aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Leaving behind egotism and attachment, I have arrived at my own home. ||1]|Pause| |
Afe fue Afemrg afs 3 ure il (419-17, wr, He 1) sach milai sachiaar koorh na paa-ee-ai. Through Truth, one meets the True One; He is not obtained through falsehood.
Ae fa fos of& safe 3 mre QI (419-17, om, He 1)
sachay si-o chit laa-ay bahurh na aa-ee-ai. ||2||
Centering your consciousness on the True Lord, you shall not have to come into the world again. ||2||
Hfeor a@ foo deg se B AST Il (419-18, wr, Hs 1) mo-i-aa ka-o ki-aa rovhu ro-ay na jaanhoo. Why do you weep for the dead? You do not know how to weep.
deg Ay Aete JAH UST Ill (419-18, wer, we 1)
rovhu sach salaahi hukam pachhaanhoo. ||3]|| Weep by praising the True Lord, and recognize His Command. ||3]||
Jont eng ferfe wrfenr aAreht Il (419-19, omar, He 1)
hukmee vajahu likhaa-ay aa-i-aa jaanee-ai.
Blessed is the birth of one who is destined to abide by the Lord's Command. oro us ufe gay fires gil (419-19, nmr, Hz 1)
laahaa palai paa-ay hukam sinjaanee-ai. ||4|| He obtains the true profit, realizing the Lord's Command. ||4| |
UST 82o
gant uo af esas STEM Ih (420-1, vir, He 1) hukmee paiDhaa jaa-ay dargeh bhaanee-ai. If it pleases the Commander, one goes to His Court, robed in honor.
Jan dt fife we sfe garehy Mull (420-1, mmr, ne 1) hukmay hee sir maar band rabaanee-ai. ||5|| By His Command, God's slaves are hit over the head. ||5]|
oo Ay foore xfs sare i (420-1, mr, He 1) laahaa sach ni-aa-o man vasaa-ee-di. The profit is earned by enshrining Truth and justice in the mind.
foftimr us ufe ae cert Ell (420-2, nmr, ne 1) likhi-aa palai paa-ay garab vanjaa-ee-ai. ||6|| They obtain what is written in their destiny, and overcome pride. ||6||
Honor fafe ure etfs eure il (420-2, wer, He 1)
manmukhee-aa sir maar vaad khapaa-ee-ai. The self-willed manmukhs are hit over the head, and consumed by conflict.
ofa Hot afsmira shy Tere WDM (420-2, wer, He 1) thag muthee koorhi-aar baneh chalaa-ee-ai. || 7] | The cheaters are plundered by falsehood; they are chained and led away. ||7||
Wfog fee safe o UeSTSc Il (420-3, mmr, He 1) saahib ridai vasaa-ay na pachhotaavhee. Enshrine the Lord Master in your mind, and you shall not have to repent.
Tod HdASTs ASE AHS ICI (420-3, ww, yz 1) gunhaa™ bakhsanhaar sabad kamaavahee. ||8] | He forgives our sins, when we practice the Teachings of the Guru's Word. ||8]|
Soa Hal AM TaHfe wrest i (420-4, wrwr, He 1) naanak mangai sach gurmukh ghaalee-ai. Nanak begs for the True Name, which is obtained by the Gurmukh.
H 3s fio neg 3 afe aefa feast NCIIEN (420-4, wr, He 1)
mai tujh bin avar na ko-ay nadar nihaalee-ai. ||9]||16||
Without You, I have no other at all; please, bless me with Your Glance of Grace. [19] 116]
YATAT HIST 4 Il (420-5)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
for Hae set AE A ufs ae TéhrSeT Il (420-5, wm, Hs 1) ki-aa jangal dhoodhee jaa-ay mai ghar ban haree-aavlaa. Why should I go searching in the forests, when the woods of my home are so green?
Afs feet ufs urfe Aafe Bsrear A (420-5, wr, He 1) sach tikai ghar aa-ay sabad utaavalaa. ||1]|| The True Word of the Shabad has instantaneously come and settled in my heart. ||1]|
Ad ta 30 AS weg & ATED I (420-6, mm, He 1) jah daykhaa tah so-ay avar na jaanee-di. Wherever I look, there He is; I know no other.
Ge at arg aHeS HIG uETsMA VU! TIS ll (420-6, ver, He 1) gur kee kaar kamaa-ay mahal pachhaanee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Working for the Guru, one realizes the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||1||Pause| |
nifty fieore AG ST Hie Street II (420-7, mmr, He 1) aap milaavai sach taa man bhaav-ee. The True Lord blends us with Himself, when it is pleasing to His Mind.
3S Aet safe nifer AHrSet MQW (420-7, wmv, ne 1) chalai sadaa rajaa-ay ank samaava-ee. ||2|| One who ever walks in accordance with His Will, merges into His Being. ||2| |
Ret Atos Hfe eA efaor nfs AST I (420-7, wer, He 1) sachaa saahib man vasai vasi-aa man so-ee. When the True Lord dwells in the mind, that mind flourishes.
nm & efsnretor & Sfe o det Sil (420-8, om, He 1) aapay day vadi-aa-ee-aa day tot na ho-ee. ||3]| He Himself grants greatness; His Gifts are never exhausted. ||3] |
Me sa at wad fa waar ur] i (420-8, wer, He 1) abay tabay kee chaakree ki-o dargeh paavai. Serving this and that person, how can one obtain the Lord's Court?
ugg at ast A VS Sd BTS aSTS II (420-9, mA, He 1) pathar kee bayrhee jay charhai bhar naal budaavai. ||4|| If someone embarks on a boat of stone, he shall drown with its cargo. ||4]|
nTUSat Ho Set fg StH BS Il (420-9, nmr, nz 1) aapnarhaa man vaychee-ai sir deejai naalay. So offer your mind, and surrender your head with it.
Dente SAS uStsha ynser wes STB MWUI (420-10, mma, Hz 1) gurmukh vasat pachhaanee-ai apnaa ghar bhaalay. ||5|| The Gurmukh realizes the true essence, and finds the home of his own self. ||5||
HHE Hoet nih fafe agSs afr il (420-10, wer, He 1) jaman marnaa aakhee-ai tin kartai kee-aa. People discuss birth and death; the Creator created this.
my detent xfs od fefs Hse & Sr El (420-11, wm, He 1)
aap gavaa-i-aa mar rahay fir maran na thee-aa. ||6]|
Those who conquer their selfhood and remain dead, shall never have to die again. [16] |
Aret arg AHTSat UT At SIH I (420-11, vr, He 1) saa-ee kaar kamaavnee Dhur kee furmaa-ee. Do those deeds which the Primal Lord has ordered for you.
A Ho Asad @ fee fate ahifs ust ON (420-12, wir, He 1)
jay man satgur day milai kin keemat paa-ee. ||7||
If one surrenders his mind upon meeting the True Guru, who can estimate its value? HI7II
gsar uray A Uat fate atafS uret it (420-12, nmr, ne 1) ratnaa paarakh so Dhanee tin keemat paa-ee. That Lord Master is the Assayer of the jewel of the mind; He places the value on it.
Soa Atos ufs SA ASt Sfsnret WCNIDI (420-12, mT, He 1)
naanak saahib man vasai sachee vadi-aa-ee. ||8||17]| |
O Nanak, True is the Glory of that one, in whose mind the Lord Master dwells. [18] |17]]
MTAT HIS 4% Il (420-13)
aasaa mehlaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
frat ony ferrfoor en soft geet I (420-13, mmr, He 1)
jin"ee naam visaari-aa doojai bharam bhulaa-ee.
Those who have forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are deluded by doubt and duality.
He sts TS Ba for urefa set WAU (420-14, wer, we mool chhod daalee lagay ki-aa paavahi chhaa-ee. ||1|| Those who abandon the roots and cling to the branches, shall obtain only ashes. ||1||
fag are faS sett A AWS FET I (420-14, wr, 8 1) bin naavai ki-o chhootee-ai jay jaanai ko-ee. Without the Name, how can one be emancipated? Who knows this?
genta dfs 3 ect Houta ufS get wa TIS il (420-15, wr, Hs 1)
gurmukh ho-ay ta chhootee-ai manmukh pat kho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who becomes Gurmukh is emancipated; the self-willed manmukhs lose their honor. ||1||Pause| |
frat fa Afeor ust HAS set I (420-15, wr, ws 1
jin"ee ayko sayvi-aa pooree mat bhaa-ee.
Those who serve the One Lord become perfect in their understanding, O Siblings of Destiny.
oife warfe fadrot Ho dfs AgSTet NN (420-15, mmr, He 1)
aad jugaad niranjanaa jan har sarnaa-ee. ||2|| The Lord's humble servant finds Sanctuary in Him, the Immaculate One, from the very beginning, and throughout the ages. ||2| |
Wfog Hat Sa FT neg Set SET Il (420-16, mer, He 1) saahib mayraa ayk hai avar nahee bhaa-ee. My Lord and Master is the One; there is no other, O Siblings of Destiny.
fasur 3 AY ufeor APS usEaTet III (420-16, nT, Hs 1) kirpaa tay sukh paa-i-aa saachay parthaa-ee. ||3]| By the Grace of the True Lord, celestial peace is obtained. ||3]|
ad fag faa 3 ufeG ast ad ATES I (420-17, vir, He 1)
gur bin kinai na paa-i-o kaytee kahai kahaa-ay.
Without the Guru, no one has obtained Him, although many may claim to have done SO.
uify fears seat Adt safs fesre ei (420-17, wer, He 1) aap dikhaavai vaatrhee” sachee bhagat drirh-aa-ay. ||4| He Himself reveals the Way, and implants true devotion within. ||4]|
HOHY A ANSE St Bsfs AES Il (420-18, mA, He 1) manmukh jay samjaa-ee-ai bhee ujharh jaa-ay. Even if the self-willed manmukh is instructed, he stills goes into the wilderness.
fag ofs on & sext His SIa AHS NUM (420-18, wr, HE 1) bin har naam na chhootsee mar narak samaa-ay. ||5|| Without the Lord's Name, he shall not be emancipated; he shall die, and sink into hell.
[1511 Hoty Hd sane ahs SH B BE Il (420-19, new, He 1)
janam marai bharmaa-ee-ai har naam na layvai. He wanders through birth and death, and never chants the Lord's Name.
a ot ahifs a ue faa aa at AS WEN (420-19, wer, He 1) taa kee keemat naa pavai bin gur kee sayvai. ||6|| He never realizes his own value, without serving the Guru. ||6]|
Yat 824 Hot AZ aoe agat St AveT I (421-1, wr, we 1)
jayhee sayv karaa-ee-ai karnee bhee saa-ee. Whatever service the Lord causes us to do, that is just what we do.
wify ad for wmdbat Se efsniet 11 (421-1, omar, ne 1) aap karay kis aakhee-ai vaykhai vadi-aa-ee. ||7|| He Himself acts; who else should be mentioned? He beholds His own greatness. ||7]||
ad at Ae A ad fan orfu age Il (421-1, wer, v2 1) gur kee sayvaa so karay jis aap karaa-ay. He alone serves the Guru, whom the Lord Himself inspires to do so.
aed fig & echt Vaars ufs us WCAC (421-2, wr, Hs 1)
naanak sir day chhootee-ai dargeh pat paa-ay. ||8||18]|
O Nanak, offering his head, one is emancipated, and honored in the Court of the Lord. 18] | 18]
YATAT HIS 4 Il (421-2)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Ts SAT HTs Tat Tat Il 421-2, vw, we
roorho thaakur maahro roorhee gurbaanee.
Beautiful is the Supreme Lord and Master, and beautiful is the Word of the Guru's Bani.
zs ata Afsag fxs ureby ue fogaret ail (421-3, nmr, He 1)
vadai bhaag satgur milai paa-ee-ai pad nirbaanee. ||1]|
By great good fortune, one meets the True Guru, and the supreme status of Nirvaanaa is obtained. ||1]|
H Seaton Seat TH ST AS ll (421-3, wv, we 1) mai ol'gee-aa ol"gee ham chhoroo thaaray. I am the lowest slave of Your slaves; I am Your most humble servant.
fa@ 3 omafe 38 go fe SH THS NU TIS Ml 421-4, me, Hs 1) ji-o too’ raakhahi ti-o rahaa mukh naam hamaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As You keep me, I live. Your Name is in my mouth. ||1]]Pause| |
Zane of fimimat wat ave Hs aver I (421-4, ner, He 1)
darsan kee pi-aasaa ghanee bhaanai man bhaa-ee-ai.
I have such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; my mind accepts Your Will, and so You are pleased with me.
He oag ofa efsnreion are ufs ust 1211 (421-5, wm, He 1) mayray thaakur haath vadi-aa-ee-aa bhaanai pat paa-ee-ai. ||2|| Greatness is in the Hands of my Lord and Master; by His Will, honor is obtained. ||2]|
Aa ef o Wem uists FAST Il (421-5, mmr, we 1D
saacha-o door na jaanee-ai antar hai so-ee. Do not think that the True Lord is far away; He is deep within.
Ag ta 30 ofe ad fats atefs Jet wai 421-6, vr, He 1) jah daykhaa tah rav rahay kin keemat ho-ee. ||3]| Wherever I look, there I find Him pervading; how can I estimate His value? ||3] |
nifty ad wm od Se Sfsniet il (421-6, vir, He 1) aap karay aapay haray vaykhai vadi-aa-ee. He Himself does, and He Himself undoes. He Himself beholds His glorious greatness.
aan af fsaeshy feS ofhifs uret isi (421-6, nmr, nz 1) gurmukh ho-ay nihaalee-ai i-o keemat paa-ee. ||4] | Becoming Gurmukh, one beholds Him, and so, His value is appraised. ||4| |
Atefeor ora fHS Ts ATS AHS Il (421-7, or, He 1) jeevdi-aa laahaa milai gur kaar kamaavai. So earn your profits while you are alive, by serving the Guru.
yota oz fefier st Afsarg ure UI (421-7, mer, He 1) poorab hovai likhi-aa taa satgur paavai. ||5]| If it is so pre-ordained, then one finds the True Guru. |[5]|
HOH Sc fos 3 SaHfs SHES Il (421-8, mmr, He 1) manmukh totaa nit hai bharmeh bharmaa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs continually lose, and wander around, deluded by doubt.
HOHY nit d Bset fa BIAS ues ill 421-8, wm, ne 1
manmukh anDh na chayt-ee ki-o darsan paa-ay. ||6]|
The blind manmukhs do not remember the Lord; how can they obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan? ||6||
So afar orfeor weit ATS fee GS I (421-9, wer, He 1)
taa jag aa-i-aa jaanee-ai saachai liv laa-ay.
One's coming into the world is judged worthwhile only if one lovingly attunes oneself to the True Lord.
ad se uTGA se Ast As fers IDI (421-9, nmr, He 1) gur bhaytay paaras bha-ay jotee jot milaa-ay. || 7] | Meeting the Guru, one becomes invaluable; his light merges into the Light. ||7]||
wifafofh ad foaen arg us at aget Il (421-9, mmr, He 1) ahinis rahai niraalmo kaar Dhur kee karnee. Day and night, he remains detached, and serves the Primal Lord.
Sea of Hsdior as fe vaat CHIEN (421-10, wr, we 1)
naanak naam santokhee-aa raatay har charnee. ||8]|19]| O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Lord's Lotus Feet, are content with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||8]|19]|
YTAT HIS 4% Il (421-10)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
as nds nmi st & nis o AST Il (421-11, mT, He 1) kaytaa aakhan aakhee-ai taa kay ant na jaanaa. No matter how much one may describe the Lord, His limits still cannot be known.
H feafenr ga Sa FH TS ASST NA (421-11, wr, He 1)
mai niDhri-aa Dhar ayk too’ mai taan sataanaa. ||1]|
I am without any support; You, O Lord, are my only Support; You are my almighty power. ||1||
Sos at ngetA I AT ofH AIST Il (421-11, nr, He 1) naanak kee ardaas hai sach naam suhaylaa. This is Nanak's prayer, that he may be adorned with the True Name.
nig afenr Ast uet aad Set Har NA TIS Mt (421-12, wer, He 1)
aap ga-i-aa sojhee pa-ee gur sabdee maylaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When self-conceit is eradicated, and understanding is obtained, one meets the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause] |
ICH Teg TevSha usb Stars il (421-12, nmr, nz 1) ha-umai garab gavaa-ee-ai paa-ee-ai veechaar. Abandoning egotism and pride, one obtains contemplative understanding.
Atoa fA He Hemi S ATT MOTT NI (421-13, wer, He 1) saahib si-o man maani-aa day saach aDhaar. ||2|| When the mind surrenders to the Lord Master, He bestows the support of the Truth.
21 |
wifofofa ath Hsu Ae AS ATE I (421-13, wer, He 1)
ahinis naam santokhee-aa sayvaa sach saa-ee.
Day and night, remain content with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; that is the true service.
a ag faus 3 waet ws gaty gAvet SI (421-14, nr, He 1) taa ka-o bighan na laag-ee chaalai hukam rajaa-ee. ||3]|| No misfortune troubles one who follows the Command of the Lord's Will. ||3]|
JatH set HVS A US MATS Il (421-14, mT, He 1) hukam rajaa-ee jo chalai so pavai khajaanai. One who follows the Command of the Lord's Will is taken into the Lord's Treasury.
He Sea 3 UfSSt FG FSS Ill (421-15, ww, we 1) khotay thavar na paa-inee ralay joothaanai. ||4|| The counterfeit find no place there; they are mixed with the false ones. ||4]|
fos fos vat ATSha A ABST urs Ih (421-15, wer, He 1)
nit nit kharaa samaalee-ai sach sa-udaa paa-ee-ai.
Forever and ever, the genuine coins are treasured; with them, the true merchandise is purchased.
ue sefe & nest B nate A@ret ull (421-15, wm, He 1)
khotay nadar na aavnee lay agan jalaa-ee-ai. ||5|| The false ones are not seen in the Lord's Treasury; they are seized and cast into the fire again. ||5]|
frat osu difser ussy Het I (421-16, mr, He 1) jinee aatam cheeni-aa parmaatam so-ee. Those who understand their own souls, are themselves the Supreme Soul.
ta nifys fase 3 ee nifys Tet WEN (421-16, vr, ne 1) ayko amrit birakh hai fal amrit ho-ee. | |6] | The One Lord is the tree of ambrosial nectar, which bears the ambrosial fruit. | |6]|
nifys oo frst aftr Afs go mruret Wt (421-17, vr, He 1) amrit fal jinee chaakhi-aa sach rahay aghaa-ee. Those who taste the ambrosial fruit remain satisfied with Truth.
fsa" SdH 3 Sz J Us To IAS NDI (421-17, ne, He 1) tinnaa bharam na bhayd hai har rasan rasaa-ee. ||7|| They have no doubt or sense of separation - their tongues taste the divine taste. ||7]|
JatH Aaa wrfeor ve Ae ArT II (421-18, mmAT, He 1)
hukam sanjogee aa-i-aa chal sadaa rajaa-ee.
By His Command, and through your past actions, you came into the world; walk forever according to His Will.
mGafenrd AG Te soo Ag fHS Ssret ICON (421-18, nT, He 1) a-ogani-aaray ka-o gun naankai sach milai vadaa-ee. ||8||20||
Please, grant virtue to Nanak, the virtueless one; bless him with the glorious greatness of the Truth. ||8]|20] |
YATAT HIS 4% Il (421-19)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
He TSC ate afte AS Sefsvr | (421-19, wm, He 1) man raata-o har naa-ay sach vakhaani-aa. One whose mind is attuned to the Lord's Name speaks the truth.
Bat a four ae aT so afer nA (421-19, wr, He 1) lokaa daa ki-aa jaa-ay jaa tuDh bhaani-aa. ||1]| What would the people lose, if I became pleasing to You, O Lord? ||1]|
UST Y22
AG oa MG uses Ag fore Il (422-1, nmr, ne 1) ja-o lag jee-o paraan sach Dhi-aa-ee-ai. As long as there is the breath of life, meditate on the True Lord.
oo dfs ae ate fxs we uh 1a TITS i (422-1, wer, He 1
laahaa har gun gaa-ay milai sukh paa-ee-ai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You shall receive the profit of singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and find peace. ||1]|Pause| |
Hat Sot arg Ufa efemrs F il (422-2, wer, we sachee tayree kaar deh da-i-aal too™. True is Your Service; bless me with it, O Merciful Lord.
UG He sg refs H Sa mG F MQM (422-2, wer, Hs 1) ha-o jeevaa tuDh saalaahi mai tayk aDhaar too™. ||2]| I live by praising You; You are my Anchor and Support. ||2||
ald Aeq VdSG VIE F Wed Il (422-3, wer, we 1) dar sayvak darvaan darad too” jaanhee. I am Your servant, the gate-keeper at Your Gate; You alone know my pain.
sats 3dt JaG VIE TeSct NS (422-3, nr, we 1) bhagat tayree hairaan darad gavaavhee. ||3]|| How wonderful is Your devotional worship! It removes all pains. ||3]|
Tdad OH Jefe TIHfY AEAT Il (422-3, wer, He 1)
dargeh naam hadoor gurmukh jaansee.
The Gurmukhs know that by chanting the Naam, they shall dwell in His Court, in His Presence.
ZO AY USS AGE USTSAt ISI (422-4, wr, He 1) vaylaa sach parvaan sabad pachhaansee. ||4]| True and acceptable is that time, when one recognizes the Word of the Shabad. ||4] |
AS Hsy afe ee srr ofe on ALE Il (422-4, mmr, He 1)
sat santokh kar bhaa-o tosaa har naam say-ay.
Those who practice Truth, contentment and love, obtain the supplies of the Lord's Name.
Hod efs fears AS AY SE ull (422-5, mmr, He 1) manhu chhod vikaar sachaa sach day-ay. ||5]| So banish corruption from your mind, and the True One will grant you Truth. ||5| |
Ae Ae 3g Ae wfenr Ih (422-5, new, we 1) sachay sachaa nayhu sachai laa-i-aa. The True Lord inspires true love in the truthful.
nm ad foure a fsa afenr él (422-5, om, He 1) aapay karay ni-aa-o jo tis bhaa-i-aa. ||6|| He Himself administers justice, as it pleases His Will. ||6]|
Ae At ets fo efemrs Fl (422-6, nmr, v2 1) sachay sachee daat deh da-i-aal hai. True is the gift of the True, Compassionate Lord.
fan At fea af SH MMe J NDI (422-6, ver, He 1) tis sayvee din raat naam amol hai. ||7]| Day and night, I serve the One whose Name is priceless. ||7||
3 83H Ie ty Rea atehor I (422-7, ver, we 1) too” utam ha-o neech sayvak kaa‘dhee-aa. You are so sublime, and I am so lowly, but I am called Your slave.
Soa Geld Add fHS AG Sore WCU VU: (422-7, nr, He 1)
naanak nadar karayhu milai sach vaa“dhee-aa. ||8||21]|
Please, shower Nanak with Your Glance of Grace, that he, the separated one, may merge with You again, O Lord. ||8]|21]|
MITAT HIST 4% Il (422-8)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
mize Arat fa ad farS Hor Tet il (422-8, mmr, ne 1)
aavan jaanaa ki-o rahai ki-o maylaa ho-ee.
How can coming and going, the cycle of reincarnation be ended? And how can one meet the Lord?
HOH HIS a VY We fas AAT SET IAI (422-8, we, He 1) janam maran kaa dukh ghano nit sahsaa do-ee. ||1]| The pain of birth and death is so great, in constant skepticism and duality. ||1]|
fag ae famr dea fee foo vaaet Il (422-9, »mr, vs 1) bin naavai ki-aa jeevnaa fit Dharig chaturaa-ee. Without the Name, what is life? Cleverness is detestable and cursed.
Afsad AG 3 Afenr dfs sats o SST NAN TITS Il (422-9, nar, He 1)
satgur saaDh na sayvi-aa har bhagat na bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who does not serve the Holy True Guru, is not pleased by devotion to the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
WSS WEE SB IT uh TAT UT Il (422-10, wr, vs 1) aavan jaavan ta-o rahai paa-ee-ai gur pooraa. Coming and going is ended only when one finds the True Guru.
TH OH US TH Ue FIBA FH AT MM! (422-10, wer, Hs 1) raam naam Dhan raas day-ay binsai bharam kooraa. ||2| | He gives the wealth and capital of the Lord's Name, and false doubt is destroyed.
[21 |
Ha Ho a@ fife gd ug Ue AA ES I (422-11, mr, we 1) sant janaa ka-o mil rahai Dhan Dhan jas gaa-ay. Joining the humble Saintly beings, let us sing the blessed, blessed Praises of the Lord.
oife use mudua denfa dfs ure Sil 422-11, »mr, He 1)
aad purakh apramparaa gurmukh har paa-ay. ||3]| The Primal Lord, the Infinite, is obtained by the Gurmukh. |[3]|
Sent Ara warfenr ait AAT I (422-12, wer, He 1) natoo-ai saa‘g banaa-i-aa baajee sansaaraa. The drama of the world is staged like the show of a buffoon.
fas use ant cuba Ssas odt ara SII (422-12, ner, He 1)
khin pal baajee daykhee-ai ujhrat nahee baaraa. ||4] |
For an instant, for a moment, the show is seen, but it disappears in no time at all. [141]
ISH Buls AHat SS niTarI Il (422-13, mew, we 1)
ha-umai cha-uparh khaylnaa jhoothay aha‘kaaraa.
The game of chance is played on the board of egotism, with the pieces of falsehood and ego.
AS wd Sd A fae ae Age Stora WU (422-13, wer, He 1) sabh jag haarai so jinai gur sabad veechaaraa. ||5||
The whole world loses; he alone wins, who reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||5||
fa@ vias ofa cat ofs ou DHS Il (422-13, nr, He 1) ji-o anDhulai hath tohnee har naam hamaaradi. As is the cane in the hand of the blind man, so is the Lord's Name for me.
TH OH dfs 2a 3d fofA BBs Aes NEN (422-14, ver, He 1) raam naam har tayk hai nis da-ut savaarai. ||6|| The Lord's Name is my Support, night and day and morning. ||6]|
fas J outa f38 ga ale SH wars I (422-14, mer, Hs 1) ji-o too’ raakhahi ti-o rahaa har naam aDhaaraa. As You keep me, Lord, I live; the Lord's Name is my only Support.
nifs Faret urfemr Ae Hats BnirS WOM (422-15, wer, He 1)
ant sakhaa-ee paa-i-aa jan mukat du-aaraa. ||7||
It is my only comfort in the end; the gate of salvation is found by His humble servants. ||7]||
HOH Hde Su Afemr Af SH HAS I (422-15, vr, He 1)
janam maran dukh mayti-aa jap naam muraaray.
The pain of birth and death is removed, by chanting and meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
BSA BH 6 MAG UT TT SSF UCUQA (422-16, ww, ws 1) naanak naam na veesrai pooraa gur taaray. ||8||22]| O Nanak, one who does not forget the Naam, is saved by the Perfect Guru. ||8]|22| |
MAT HIG! 3B meus we 2 (422-17)
aasaa mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa ghar 2 Aasaa, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe il (422-17) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Was ae fAfyfs Ag 3a AaAS BIS ANAT Il (422-18, nT, Hs 3)
saasat bayd simrit sar tayraa sursaree charan samaanee.
The Shaastras, the Vedas and the Simritees are contained in the ocean of Your Name; the River Ganges is held in Your Feet.
Anat Sie He His Te F Bt Asa fesret Al (422-18, »mv, He 3)
saakhaa teen mool mat raavai too’ taa™ sarab vidaanee. ||1]|
The intellect can understand the world of the three modes, but You, O Primal Lord, are totally astounding. ||1||
J A We AU AS Soa FS vifys gat ua TIS ll (422-19, wm, vs 3) taa kay charan japai jan naanak bolay amrit banee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Servant Nanak meditates on His Feet, and chants the Ambrosial Word of His Bani. ||1]|Pause| |
3am adat an gyre fafa fafa yre vrort i (422-19, ni, ve 3)
taytees karorhee daas tum"aaray riDh siDh paraan aDhaaree.
Three hundred thirty million gods are Your servants. You bestow wealth, and the supernatural powers of the Siddhas; You are the Support of the breath of life.
UST BIZ aa gu 5 A Bue four ate orf Sears ui (423-1, wer, we 3)
taa kay roop na jaahee lakh-nay ki-aa kar aakh veechaaree. ||2|| His beauteous forms cannot be comprehended; what can anyone accomplish by discussing and debating? ||2||
ste ge 33 wa ct nists ws Soom rat th (423-1, vem, v2 3) teen gunaa tayray jug hee antar chaaray tayree-aa khaanee. Throughout the ages, You are the three qualities, and the four sources of creation.
AGH de St USH ue Usha aA mae ATet ISll (423-2, rw, ve 3)
karam hovai taa param pad paa-ee-ai kathay akath kahaanee. |[3]|
If You show Your Mercy, then one obtains the supreme status, and speaks the Unspoken Speech. |[3]]|
3 AIT aor Ag ST four a AS UsTAt Il (423-3, mer, He 3) too” kartaa kee-aa sabh tayraa ki-aa ko karay paraanee. You are the Creator; all are created by You. What can any mortal being do?
W ag sets asta F oruet Aret Afs AHTet SII (423-3, wr, He 3) jaa ka-o nadar karahi too’ apnee saa-ee sach samaanee. ||4]| He alone, upon whom You shower Your Grace, is absorbed into the Truth. ||4||
oy Sad Ag act BS IT ASt nie Fret Il (423-4, ne, He 3) naam tayraa sabh ko-ee layt hai jaytee aavan jaanee. Everyone who comes and goes chants Your Name.
W 3g ate 3 Tent gs Ja Honfy fed ferret nui (423-4, mmr, we 3)
jaa tuDh bhaavai taa gurmukh boojhai hor manmukkh firai i-aanee. ||5]|
When it is pleasing to Your Will, then the Gurmukh understands. Otherwise, the self- willed manmukhs wander in ignorance. ||5||
wd Sz qn ag ce ufs ufs ad Ferd I 423-5, wr, we 3)
chaaray vayd barahmay ka-o dee-ay parh parh karay veechaaree.
You gave the four Vedas to Brahma, for him to read and read continually, and reflect upon.
JT ISH 6 YS BUS Sola Halal MSS MEM (423-5, mA, we 3)
taa kaa hukam na boojhai bapurhaa narak surag avtaaree. ||6||
The wretched one does not understand His Command, and is reincarnated into heaven and hell. ||6]|
Add Add & TH Ale Wels ate wears Il (423-6, vr, vs 3) jugah jugah kay raajay kee-ay gaavahi kar avtaaree. In each and every age, He creates the kings, who are sung of as His Incarnations.
fae st nis 3 ufeor ot ot foor afa vrft Sard DI (423-6, nmr, He 3)
tin bhee ant na paa-i-aa taa kaa ki-aa kar aakh veechaaree. ||7]|| Even they have not found His limits; what can I speak of and contemplate? ||7]|
3 Ae 3a dor Ag AS Ufo 3 ATE Surat Il (423-7, wT, we 3)
too” sachaa tayraa kee-aa sabh saachaa deh ta saach vakhaanee.
You are True, and all that You do is True. If You bless me with the Truth, I will speak on it.
WT a Ag ysefo nuUSt AIA OTH AMTat ICIAIQSI (423-8, wm, He 3) jaa ka-o sach bujhaaveh apnaa sehjay naam samaanee. ||8]||1]|23]|
One whom You inspire to understand the Truth, is easily absorbed into the Naam. [18] [1] 1231]
MITAT HIG 3 Il (423-8)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Afsad Jue San TefEnt | (423-9, wmv, He 3) satgur hamraa bharam gavaa-i-aa. The True Guru has dispelled my doubts.
dfs an fadre vfs sAtfemr il (423-9, nvr, He 3) har naam niranjan man vasaa-i-aa. He has enshrined the Immaculate Name of the Lord within my mind.
Hae dfs Ae AY ue AI (423-9, nmr, He 3) sabad cheen sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. ||1]| Focusing on the Word of the Shabad, I have obtained lasting peace. ||1]|
Afé Ho He 33 famrs il (423-10, vr, He 3) sun man mayray tat gi-aan. Listen, O my mind, to the essence of spiritual wisdom.
deze wor AS fafa we Tonfe unt on fours all TIC Il (423-10, ner, He 3)
dayvan vaalaa sabh biDh jaanai gurmukh paa-ee-ai naam niDhaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Great Giver knows our condition completely; the Gurmukh obtains the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
Afsad se at Sfsnret it (423-11, rrr, ue 3) satgur bhaytay kee vadi-aa-ee. The great glory of meeting the True Guru is
fate HHSt mrate fSAST gSTet | (423-11, wer, Hs 3)
jin mamtaa agan tarisnaa bujhaa-ee. that it has quenched the fire of possessiveness and desire;
Hon HST Sis TE WET 2M (423-11, wT, vs 3) sehjay maataa har gun gaa-ee. ||2|| imbued with peace and poise, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
fee aa us afe o At I (423-12, mmm, He 3) vin gur pooray ko-ay na jaanee. Without the Perfect Guru, no one knows the Lord.
Hfeor vfs St Sst il (423-12, wer, vs 3) maa-i-aa mohi doojai lobhaanee. Attached to Maya, they are engrossed in duality.
aanfa oy fe afe arat 3 (423-12, nmr, He 3) gurmukh naam milai har banee. ||3]| The Gurmukh receives the Naam, and the Bani of the Lord's Word. ||3]|
aa Ae sur fAfs Su AT Il (423-13, wm, He 3) gur sayvaa tapaa’ sir tap saar. Service to the Guru is the most excellent and sublime penance of penances.
dfs MG ufs SA AS wu FEAST Il (423-13, mmr, we 3) har jee-o man vasai sabh dookh visaaranhaar. The Dear Lord dwells in the mind, and all suffering departs.
efs ATS dA AfeMrg iigil 423-13, mA, He 3) dar saachai deesai sachiaar. ||4]| Then, at the Gate of the True Lord, one appears truthful. ||4| |
aa Ae 3 fgsee Ast SE i 423-14, »mr, ve 3) gur sayvaa tay taribhavan sojhee ho-ay. Serving the Guru, one comes to know the three worlds.
wimg uatfs ofa ure APE I (423-14, mmr, He 3) aap pachhaan har paavai so-ay. Understanding his own self, he obtains the Lord.
Ad set HIG usufs SE ull (423-14, wr, He 3) saachee banee mahal paraapat ho-ay. ||5]|| Through the True Word of His Bani, we enter the Mansion of His Presence. ||5| |
ad Ast 3 AS aw Burg Il (423-15, nr, vs 3) gur sayvaa tay sabh kul uDhaaray. Serving the Guru, all of one's generations are saved.
faaHe oH aa Sfa ad Il (423-15, mmr, He 3) nirmal naam rakhai ur Dhaaray. Keep the Immaculate Naam enshrined within your heart.
AM At As wars WEI (423-15, ner, He 3) saachee sobhaa saach du-aaray. ||6|| In the Court of the True Lord, you shall be adorned with True Glory. ||6]|
A zoaat fa afs ASt Be il (423-16, wm, vs 3) say vadbhaagee je gur sayvaa laa-ay. How very fortunate are they, who are committed to the Guru's service.
mofeg Zals AY oH fesTe Il (423-16, wr, He 3)
an-din bhagat sach naam drirh-aa-ay.
Night and day, they are engaged in devotional worship; the True Name is implanted within them.
oH Bud AS ARES IDI (423-16, wT, He 3) naamay uDhray kul sabaa-ay. ||7]| Through the Naam, all of one's generations are saved. ||7]||
SOA ATT Ad SVT Il (423-17, nr, we 3) naanak saach kahai veechaar. Nanak chants the true thought.
dfs a an sug Sfa ate il (423-17, nmr, He 3) har kaa naam rakhahu ur Dhaar. Keep the Name of the Lord enshrined within your heart.
dfs sast TS HY SMT WCW (423-17, weAT, He 3) har bhagtee raatay mokh du-aar. ||8||2||24]| Imbued with devotion to the Lord, the gate of salvation is found. ||8]|2||24||
MTAT HIG 3 Il (423-18)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
WAT MITA AT AS AST | (423-18, newt, He 3) aasaa aas karay sabh ko-ee. Everyone lives, hoping in hope.
TAH FS fora Tet il 423-18, wer, Hs 3) hukmai boojhai niraasaa ho-ee. Understanding His Command, one becomes free of desire.
nit fefs AS et Set Il (423-19, newt, He 3) aasaa vich sutay ka-ee lo-ee. So many are asleep in hope.
A Aa Arar] AST WAU (423-19, mmAT, He 3) SO jaagai jaagaavai so-ee. ||1]| He alone wakes up, whom the Lord awakens. ||1]||
Afsafes ay asfenr fee ae suo ATT I (423-19, ner, He 3)
satgur naam bujhaa-i-aa vin naavai bhukh na jaa-ee.
The True Guru has led me to understand the Naam, the Name of the Lord; without the Naam, hunger does not go away.
UST 828 on fro nafs 33 on fxs fA srret NA TITS I (424-1, mmr, ve 3)
naamay tarisnaa agan bujhai naam milai tisai rajaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Naam, the fire of desire is extinguished; the Naam is obtained by His Will. ||1]]Pause] |
ate atefs AWE UES Il (424-1, nT, Hs 3)
kal keerat sabad pachhaan. In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, realize the Word of the Shabad.
ST SMS Ya MiSHTS Il (424-2, mer, He 3) ayhaa bhagat chookai abhimaan. By this devotional worship, egotism is eliminated.
Afsag Afent dS useTa Il (424-2, wir, 2 3) satgur sayvi-ai hovai parvaan. Serving the True Guru, one becomes approved.
fafs mmr atst fSA SB AS NI (424-2, vir, He 3) jin aasaa keetee tis no jaan. ||2|| So know the One, who created hope and desire. ||2||
faq fomr etn fa Wee ASS I (424-2, ver, He 3) tis ki-aa deejai je sabad sunaa-ay. What shall we offer to one who proclaims the Word of the Shabad?
ate forsur any vfs SATS | (424-3, mrt, He 3) kar kirpaa naam man vasaa-ay. By His Grace, the Naam is enshrined within our minds.
feg fag Sta ry TSS Ih (424-3, vir, ne 3) ih sir deejai aap gavaa-ay. Offer your head, and shed your self-conceit.
TAH FS Ae’ AY UES SI (424-3, weer, Hs 3) hukmai boojhay sadaa sukh paa-ay. ||3]| One who understands the Lord's Command finds lasting peace. ||3]|
wif ad 3 wifyy Kae I (424-4, ni, He 3) aap karay tai aap karaa-ay. He Himself does, and causes others to do.
mma aaHf SH SATE Il (424-4, mmr, He 3) aapay gurmukh naam vasaa-ay. He Himself enshrines His Name in the mind of the Gurmukh.
mify sere mit Hrefar ure Il (424-4, mira, ne 3) aap bhulaavai aap maarag paa-ay. He Himself misleads us, and He Himself puts us back on the Path.
Ae Aafe Afs AWTS Ill (424-5, mmr, He 3) sachai sabad sach samaa-ay. ||4|| Through the True Word of the Shabad, we merge into the True Lord. ||4]|
Hel Hae At J sat Il (424-5, wiry, we 3) sachaa sabad sachee hai banee. True is the Shabad, and True is the Word of the Lord's Bani.
aaHfe afar afar wiry surat i (424-5, mmr, He 3) gurmukh jug jug aakh vakhaanee. In each and every age, the Gurmukhs speak it and chant it.
Houfa Hf soft Sarat i (424-6, nimwr, Hs 3) manmukh mohi bharam bholaanee. The self-willed manmukhs are deluded by doubt and attachment.
fag oe AS fed aGaret MUI (424-6, vir, He 3) bin naavai sabh firai ba-uraanee. ||5]| Without the Name, everyone wanders around insane. ||5||
Sie 320 ufo Sar HEMT I (424-6, nmr, He 3) teen bhavan meh aykaa maa-i-aa. Throughout the three worlds, is the one Maya.
nate ufs ufs gat are festfeur 1 424-7, vir, x2 3) moorakh parh parh doojaa bhaa-o drirh-aa-i-aa. The fool reads and reads, but holds tight to duality.
ad AGH AHS Bu Aatfer  (424-7, view, vs 3)
baho karam kamaavai dukh sabaa-i-aa. He performs all sorts of rituals, but still suffers terrible pain.
Afsag Afe Ae AY UTfeMr EI (424-7, nr, He 3) satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. ||6|| Serving the True Guru, eternal peace is obtained. ||6]||
nifys Hot Fae Serfs i (424-8, vim, ne 3) amrit meethaa sabad veechaar. Reflective meditation upon the Shabad is such sweet nectar.
wofes Sat ICH HAs Il (424-8, mm, He 3) an-din bhogay ha-umai maar. Night and day, one enjoys it, subduing his ego.
Hofa mdfe fagur of il (424-8, nr, He 3) sahj anand kirpaa Dhaar. When the Lord showers His Mercy, we enjoy celestial bliss.
ony 33 Aet Afs fete WD (424-9, mmr, He 3) naam ratay sadaa sach pi-aar. ||7]|| Imbued with the Naam, love the True Lord forever. ||7]|
dfs af usha aa Age Stes i (424-9, ner, He 3) har jap parhee-ai gur sabad veechaar. Meditate on the Lord, and read and reflect upon the Guru's Shabad.
dfs Af usha IBA Hs I (424-9, mmr, He 3) har jap parhee-ai ha-umai maar. Subdue your ego and meditate on the Lord.
ofa mba safe Afs fumrfa i (424-10, nmr, ve 3) har japee-ai bha-ay sach pi-aar. Meditate on the Lord, and be imbued with fear and love of the True One.
Soa OH THs Ca Ofs UCUSNQUI (424-10, wm, He 3)
naanak naam gurmat ur Dhaar. ||8]|3||25]| O Nanak, enshrine the Naam within your heart, through the Guru's Teachings. [18] 13]]25]|
qe Afsars ure it (424-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta MITA HIG 3 nMAcUeM ug t Aret Il (424-11)
raag aasaa mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa ghar 8 kaafee. Raag Aasaa, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Eighth House, Kaafee:
ge 3 ANS Gun fats frat mas geet Ml (424-11, wm art, ws 3) gur tay saa‘t oopjai jin tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ee. Peace emanates from the Guru; He puts out the fire of desire.
qd 3 OH ur sat Sfanret Al 424-12, oma are, He 3)
gur tay naam paa-ee-ai vadee vadi-aa-ee. ||1]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained from the Guru; it is the greatest greatness. ||1]||
Sa BH BS AS Set I (424-12, vit are, He 3) ayko naam chayt mayray bhaa-ee. Keep the One Name in your consciousness, O my Siblings of Destiny.
Aas Hee efy a sfa us AsSTeST NAN TIC Ml (424-12, vi ae, ni 3) jagat jalandaa daykh kai bhaj pa-ay sarnaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Seeing the world on fire, I have hurried to the Lord's Sanctuary. ||1||Pause| |
Ts 3 famrg Sur Ho Sz MST I (424-13, ww aret, ws 3) gur tay gi-aan oopjai mahaa tat beechaaraa.
Spiritual wisdom emanates from the Guru; reflect upon the supreme essence of reality.
ad 3 we eg ufeor sast FF FSS MM (424-13, wT are, nz 3)
gur tay ghar dar paa-i-aa bhagtee bharay bhandaaraa. ||2]|
Through the Guru, the Lord's Mansion and His Court are attained; His devotional worship is overflowing with treasures. ||2]|
Tanta ony firreit gS Sars il (424-14, war art, we 3)
gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai boojhai veechaaraa.
The Gurmukh meditates on the Naam; he achieves reflective meditation and understanding.
aenfy sats Aes 3 nists Age wre NSN (424-14, mma are, He 3)
gurmukh bhagat salaah hai antar sabad apaaraa. ||3]|
The Gurmukh is the Lord's devotee, immersed in His Praises; the Infinite Word of the Shabad dwells within him. |[3]|
aenfy AY Curd ey ae B TET I (424-15, mat are, Hs 3)
gurmukh sookh oopjai dukh kaday na ho-ee. Happiness emanates from the Gurmukh; he never suffers pain.
Tanfy IBH HTdhat Ho fess Tet ei (424-15, nmr art, He 3) gurmukh ha-umai maaree-ai man nirmal ho-ee. ||4|| The Gurmukh conquers his ego, and his mind is immaculately pure. ||4| |
Afsafe fife nmy afer fgsee Ast uret I (424-16, ni art, ne 3)
satgur mili-ai aap ga-i-aa taribhavan sojhee paa-ee.
Meeting the True Guru, self-conceit is removed, and understanding of the three worlds is obtained.
fous afs unfs oot Fat AS fess ull (424-16, mar are, He 3)
nirmal jot pasar rahee jotee jot milaa-ee. ||5]|
The Immaculate Divine Light is pervading and permeating everywhere; one's light merges into the Light. ||5||
ud afs AHSfenr HS SSH Tet I (424-17, wer art, He 3) poorai gur samjhaa-i-aa mat ootam ho-ee. The Perfect Guru instructs, and one's intellect becomes sublime.
nisg Aise Aifs df ont AY Tet NEN (424-17, nr are, He 3) antar seetal saa‘t ho-ay naamay sukh ho-ee. ||6]|
A cooling and soothing peace comes within, and through the Naam, peace is obtained. [16] |
ust Asay st fs At oefs TIT I (424-18, vi ret, Hs 3) pooraa satgur taa™ milai jaa‘ nadar karay-ee. One meets the Perfect True Guru only when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace.
foaofed uu AS adits fefs vy fas & Tet DI (424-18, nm are, He 3)
kilvikh paap sabh katee-ah fir dukh bighan na ho-ee. ||7||
All sins and vices are eradicated, and one shall never again suffer pain or distress. [711
UST Y2u
niu ofa efsnredinn & oH BS Il (425-1, vir adh, nH 3) aapnai hath vadi-aa-ee-aa day naamay laa-ay. Glory is in His Hands; He bestows His Name, and attaches us to it.
Sea OH fours ufo SfAor Sfsnrst uS WCISIQEll (425-1, wm aret, He 3)
naanak naam niDhaan man vasi-aa vadi-aa-ee paa-ay. ||8]||4||26]|
O Nanak, the treasure of the Naam abides within the mind, and glory is obtained. [18] 14] [26] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (425-2)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Afe Ho Hfs eAfe 3 omy orfe fees AS set I (425-2, weer, vs 3)
sun man man vasaa-ay too” aapay aa-ay milai mayray bhaa-ee.
Listen, O mortal: enshrine His Name within your mind; He shall come to meet with you, O my Sibling of Destiny.
wofes Aut safs afs AS fas Bet NU (425-2, ver, He 3) an-din sachee bhagat kar sachai chit laa-ee. ||1]| Night and day, center your consciousness on true devotional worship of the True Lord.
[21
Sa ony fomrfe F AY uefa HS set I (425-3, mmm, we 3) ayko naam Dhi-aa-ay too” sukh paavahi mayray bhaa-ee. Meditate on the One Naam, and you shall find peace, O my Siblings of Destiny.
ISH oA fe ate sat Sfamret ual FHS i (425-3, wer, He 3) ha-umai doojaa door kar vadee vadi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Eradicate egotism and duality, and your glory shall be glorious. ||1]|]Pause| |
fen sast 3 vfs og ufs Ho Bue fee Afsag uret o ATE I (425-4, nor, He 3)
is bhagtee no sur nar mun jan lochday vin satgur paa-ee na jaa-ay.
The angels, humans and silent sages long for this devotional worship, but without the True Guru, it cannot be attained.
Ufss use Afsat fs gs 3 UTE QM (425-5, wm, Hs 3)
pandit parh-day jotikee tin boojh na paa-ay. ||2||
The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the astrologers read their books, but they do not understand. ||2]|
nm & Ag afuGe fas ATE o WET Il (425-5, nm, He 3) aapai thai sabh rakhi-on kichh kahan na jaa-ee. He Himself keeps all in His Hand; nothing else can be said.
nny af A ureint af gs gETet SI (425-5, wm, Hs 3) aapay day-ay so paa-ee-ai gur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||3]| Whatever He gives, is received. The Guru has imparted this understanding to me.
[I3]|
dba az Afs fs & Aso at AST I (425-6, vir, He 3) jee-a jant sabh tis day sabhnaa kaa so-ee. All beings and creatures are His; He belongs to all.
Her for & wind FEAT Tet MI (425-6, wr, He 3) mandaa kis no aakhee-ai jay doojaa ho-ee. ||4|| So who can we call bad, since there is no other? ||4||
fea Jan ease Sar ffs ara Il (425-7, nmr, ne 3)
iko hukam varatdaa aykaa sir kaaraa.
The Command of the One Lord is pervading throughout; duty to the One Lord is upon the heads of all.
nity serat festug nists Se fears ull (425-7, ner, He 3) aap bhavaalee ditee-an antar lobh vikaaraa. ||5|| He Himself has led them astray, and placed greed and corruption within their hearts.
HSI] fea omy aan atfauig asts Stara il (425-8, wert, He 3)
ik aapay gurmukh keeti-an boojhan veechaaraa. He has sanctified those few Gurmukhs who understand Him, and reflect upon Him.
sats st Gar s suring nists Sara WEN (425-8, nm, He 3) bhagat bhee onaa no bakhsee-an antar bhandaaraa. ||6] | He grants devotional worship to them, and within them is the treasure. ||6||
fomrotor 3 AS A Dd Ag ASt det Il (425-9, mmr, nH: 3) gi-aanee-aa no sabh sach hai sach sojhee ho-ee. The spiritual teachers know nothing but the Truth; they obtain true understanding.
Gfe sare fan 2 5 gHal Ay AWefe Het WON (425-9, nmr, He 3)
o-ay bhulaa-ay kisai day na bhuln"ee sach jaanan so-ee. ||7||
They are led astray by Him, but they do not go astray, because they know the True Lord. ||7||
we Hfs us zase Us Storch I (425-9, wer, ws 3)
ghar meh panch varatday panchay veechaaree. Within the homes of their bodies, the five passions are pervading, but here, the five are well-behaved.
ood fas Afsas efi 6 ureat of TBH Het ICNUNQIN (425-10, vm, He 3)
naanak bin satgur vas na aavn"ee naam ha-umai maaree. ||8]|5||27]| O Nanak, without the True Guru, they are not overcome; through the Naam, the ego is conquered. ||8]|5]|27]||
MTAT HIG 8 Il (425-11)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
ud niefs As Za d safe fas rot Il (425-11, ner, He 3) gharai andar sabh vath hai baahar kichh naahee. Everything is within the home of your own self; there is nothing beyond it.
qe usASt urs nists aus wordt WA (425-11, mA, He 3) gur parsaadee paa-ee-ai antar kapat khulaahee. ||1]| By Guru's Grace, it is obtained, and the doors of the inner heart are opened wide.
[411 Afsag 3 ofs urent areF Ih (425-12, nmr, v2 3)
satgur tay har paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee. From the True Guru, the Lord's Name is obtained, O Siblings of Destiny.
nists omy fsurg o ud Afsate chor feast na TIS it (425-12, mmr, we 3)
antar naam niDhaan hai poorai satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The treasure of the Naam is within; the Perfect True Guru has shown this to me. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs & Wg de A BE US IS Sos I (425-13, ne, nz 3)
har kaa gaahak hovai so la-ay paa-ay ratan veechaaraa.
One who is a buyer of the Lord's Name, finds it, and obtains the jewel of contemplation.
nies 4 fea fenfe a Hats FoI MQM (425-13, nA, He 3)
andar kholai dib disat daykhai mukat bhandaaraa. ||2| |
He opens the doors deep within, and through the Eyes of Divine Vision, beholds the treasure of liberation. ||2||
mets HIG nda dfs AG AT SAT Il (425-14, new, He 3) andar mahal anayk heh jee-o karay vasayraa. There are so many mansions within the body; the soul dwells within them.
Ho fefeur ae ufent fefa df o Fa NSM (425-14, nm, He 3)
man chindi-aa fal paa-isee fir ho-ay na fayraa. ||3]|
He obtains the fruits of his mind's desires, and he shall not have to go through reincarnation again. ||3]|
ursdbor za Anis wet aa AST det | (425-15, wer, He 3)
paarkhee-aa vath samaal la-ee gur sojhee ho-ee.
The appraisers cherish the commodity of the Name; they obtain understanding from the Guru.
oH USSG MHS AT TaN urs AST Sil (425-15, mA, He 3) naam padaarath amul saa gurmukh paavai ko-ee. ||4|| The wealth of the Naam is priceless; how few are the Gurmukhs who obtain it. ||4]|
Wd 3S A fowr wd ea wd niefa aret Il (425-16, nr, He 3)
baahar bhaalay so ki-aa lahai vath gharai andar bhaa-ee.
Searching outwardly, what can anyone find? The commodity is deep within the home of the self, O Siblings of Destiny.
SoH ger Ag Aa fed HoHfe ufs Teret Mull (425-16, wr, Hs 3)
bharmay bhoolaa sabh jag firai manmukh pat gavaa-ee. ||5| |
The entire world is wandering around, deluded by doubt; the self-willed manmukhs lose their honor. ||5]|
Wy Uy gs Tuer us ufs Fo" AT I (425-17, mem, we 3) ghar dar chhoday aapnaa par ghar jhoothaa jaa-ee. The false one leaves his own hearth and home, and goes out to another's home.
Jd Sg uaa fag are Ser uret WEN (425-17, wer, Hs 3) chorai vaa‘goo pakrhee-ai bin naavai chotaa khaa-ee. ||6|| Like a thief, he is caught, and without the Naam, he is beaten and struck down. ||6]|
frat we ATS wut A AMS sre I (425-17, nmr, us 3) jin"ee ghar jaataa aapnaa say sukhee-ay bhaa-ee. Those who know their own home, are happy, O Siblings of Destiny.
nists qoH Uuetfenr aa at Sfsnret WOM (425-18, mma, He 3)
antar barahm pachhaani-aa gur kee vadi-aa-ee. ||7||
They realize God within their own hearts, through the glorious greatness of the Guru. II7II
MMI BIg ad for wmibat omy Sfe gTsreF Ih (425-18, mA, He 3)
aapay daan karay kis aakhee-ai aapay day-ay bujhaa-ee.
He Himself gives gifts, and He Himself bestows understanding; unto whom can we complain?
area oH fourfe F efs AS AS Uet ICIENQTI (425-19, wT, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay too” dar sachai sobhaa paa-ee. ||8||6||28]|
O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and you shall obtain glory in the True Court. ||8]|6||28]|
UST BIE
MTAT HIS 3 Il (426-1)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
nm nny uetfsnt ATE Htor STeT II (426-1, vir, He 3) aapai aap pachhaani-aa saad meethaa bhaa-ee. Those who recognize their own selves, enjoy the sweet flavor, O Siblings of Destiny.
ofa afi afin was se frat Ard sret A (426-1, vir, He 3)
har ras chaakhi-ai mukat bha-ay jin"aa saacho bhaa-ee. ||1||
Those who drink in the sublime essence of the Lord are emancipated; they love the Truth. ||1||
Ufe AG fSeaHs fear feaHs Hise SAT I (426-2, wir, He 3) har jee-o nirmal nirmalaa nirmal man vaasaa. The Beloved Lord is the purest of the pure; He comes to dwell in the pure mind.
Tanst Aad fatto arfs Sera a TITS il (426-2, view, Hs 3)
gurmatee salaahee-ai bikhi-aa maahi udaasaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Praising the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings, one remains unaffected by corruption. ||1]|Pause| |
fag Hae wry 3 AUST AS nich Set I (426-3, nm, He 3)
bin sabdai aap na jaap-ee sabh anDhee bhaa-ee.
Without the Word of the Shabad, they do not understand themselves -they are totally blind, O Siblings of Destiny.
aanst wfe wear on nifs AaTet QI (426-3, nmr, He 3)
gurmatee ghat chaannaa naam ant sakhaa-ee. ||2||
Through the Guru's Teachings, the heart is illuminated, and in the end, only the Naam shall be your companion. ||2||
OH dt OTH ZIse SH FISTS Il (426-4, nim, He 3) naamay hee naam varatday naamay vartaaraa. They are occupied with the Naam, and only the Naam; they deal only in the Naam.
wists an fy aH do on Aafe Sterar Sil (426-4, nmr, He 3)
antar naam mukh naam hai naamay sabad veechaaraa. ||3]||
Deep within their hearts is the Naam; upon their lips is the Naam; they contemplate the Word of God, and the Naam. |[3]|
oH Het oH Haba ant Sfsniet I (426-5, ner, He 3)
naam sunee-ai naam mannee-ai naamay vadi-aa-ee.
They listen to the Naam, believe in the Naam, and through the Naam, they obtain glory.
OH AGT Het Het SH HIG UTET ISI (426-5, nmr, He 3)
naam salaahay sadaa sadaa naamay mahal paa-ee. ||4| |
They praise the Naam, forever and ever, and through the Naam, they obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4| |
oH dt wie woe aH AST uret Il (426-5, mA, He 3)
naamay hee ghat chaannaa naamay sobhaa paa-ee.
Through the Naam, their hearts are illumined, and through the Naam, they obtain honor.
on ot AY Gun oH Aearet Ul (426-6, mmr, He 3) naamay hee sukh oopjai naamay sarnaa-ee. ||5]| Through the Naam, peace wells up; I seek the Sanctuary of the Naam. ||5]|
fag oe afe 3 HSht HoHfe ufs Tevet II (426-6, vm, He 3) bin naavai ko-ay na mannee-ai manmukh pat gavaa-ee. Without the Naam, no one is accepted; the self-willed manmukhs lose their honor.
aH ufs aa nrdbufs fase ASH aTeret NEM (426-7, nmr, Hs 3)
jam pur baaDhay maaree-ah birthaa janam gavaa-ee. ||6||
In the City of Death, they are tied down and beaten, and they lose their lives in vain. [16] |
OH at As AS ad ToHfe on gst I (426-7, new, He 3) naamai kee sabh sayvaa karai gurmukh naam bujhaa-ee. Those Gurmukhs who realize the Naam, all serve the Naam.
ong dt on Hobt ont efanret DI (426-8, om, He 3)
naamhu hee naam mannee-ai naamay vadi-aa-ee. ||7||
So believe in the Naam, and only the Naam; through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained. ||7||
fan 6 te fan fHs TaHSt on SETH I (426-8, ner, He 3)
jis no dayvai tis milai gurmatee naam bujhaa-ee.
He alone receives it, unto whom it is given. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam is realized.
aod AS fas we & SAT Us Sat A UTET MCU DIEM (426-9, mem, He 3)
naanak sabh kichh naavai kai vas hai poorai bhaag ko paa-ee. ||8]|7]||29||
O Nanak, everything is under the influence of the Naam; by perfect good destiny, a few obtain it. ||8]|7]||29] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (426-9)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
eodel HIG 3 ufsot 6 Aefe fus ar AME it 426-10, nmr, He 3)
duhaaganee mahal na paa-in"ee na jaanan pir kaa su-aa-o.
The deserted brides do not obtain the Mansion of their Husband's Presence, nor do they know His taste.
feo data a fests sa Te AS UA (426-10, wr, ws 3) fikaa boleh naa niveh doojaa bhaa-o su-aa-o. ||1]| They speak harsh words, and do not bow to Him; they are in love with another. ||1]|
feg Hour fag afe =fA wire il (426-11, wr, Hs 3) ih manoo-aa ki-o kar vas aavai. How can this mind come under control?
qe USAT oath famite HSt ws mrs a TIS il (426-11, new, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee thaakee-ai gi-aan matee ghar aavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, it is held in check; instructed in spiritual wisdom, it returns to its home. ||1||Pause] |
Rodel orfu neditGe ofe un fumirg it (426-12, vir, ne 3) sohaaganee aap savaaree-on laa-ay paraym pi-aar. He Himself adorns the happy soul-brides; they bear Him love and affection.
Afsag & ate vodion on Aafa Atars II (426-12, ner, He 3)
satgur kai bhaanai chaldee-aa naamay sahj seegaar. ||2| |
They live in harmony with the Sweet Will of the True Guru, naturally adorned with the Naam. |[2||
He sefo fug mruet Adt AA ASE Il (426-13, rrr, He 3) sadaa raaveh pir aapnaa sachee sayj subhaa-ay. They enjoy their Beloved forever, and their bed is decorated with Truth.
furs & Ufh Hdter ffs Utsu AY ute BI (426-13, nmr, He 3)
pir kai paraym mohee-aa mil pareetam sukh paa-ay. ||3]||
They are fascinated with the Love of their Husband Lord; meeting their Beloved, they obtain peace. ||3]|
fami niurg Aterg J AaTSst ofe Il (426-13, wrAr, He 3) gi-aan apaar seegaar hai sobhaavantee naar. Spiritual wisdom is the incomparable decoration of the happy soul-bride.
AW Asaet Het furs & dfs fumrfa ei (426-14, ner, He 3)
saa sabhraa-ee sundree pir kai hayt pi-aar. ||4]|
She is so beautiful - she is the queen of all; she enjoys the love and affection of her Husband Lord. ||4||
Hoel fefs da afuGe vd note wrrfs i (426-14, mmr, 2 3)
sohaaganee vich rang rakhi-on sachai alakh apaar.
The True Lord, the Unseen, the Infinite, has infused His Love among the happy soul- brides.
Afsag Aefe nme AS ofe fimrfs nul (426-15, nmr, He 3) satgur sayvan aapnaa sachai bhaa-ay pi-aar. ||5]| They serve their True Guru, with true love and affection. ||5||
Hoget Atarg datfenr ge at afs TS Il (426-15, mA, He 3) sohaaganee seegaar banaa-i-aa gun kaa gal haar. The happy soul-bride has adorned herself with the necklace of virtue.
UH fuse 3fs wea nists gq Steg Well (426-16, vm, Hs 3)
paraym pirmal tan laavnaa antar ratan veechaar. ||6||
She applies the perfume of love to her body, and within her mind is the jewel of reflective meditation. ||6]|
sats 33 A Gow afs ufs Aa SE Il (426-16, »mr, we 3)
bhagat ratay say ootmaa jat pat sabday ho-ay.
Those who are imbued with devotional worship are the most exalted. Their social standing and honor come from the Word of the Shabad.
fag oe AS ate ats do feR|et aot atat OE NDI (426-17, wm, He 3) bin naavai sabh neech jaat hai bistaa kaa keerhaa ho-ay. ||7]| Without the Naam, all are low class, like maggots in manure. ||7||
J 3G aget Ae fed fro Fae IE o ATE II (426-17, ner, He 3) ha-o ha-o kardee sabh firai bin sabdai ha-o na jaa-ay. Everyone proclaims, "Me, me!"; but without the Shabad, the ego does not depart.
Soa of gs faq ICH Tet AS Jd ANTE ICICIZON (426-18, mT, He 3)
naanak naam ratay tin ha-umai ga-ee sachai rahay samaa-ay. ||8]||8]||30|| O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam lose their ego; they remain absorbed in the True Lord. ||8]|8]|30] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (426-19)
aasaa menhliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
He ds A fegne Ae Ast ALE Il (426-19, vir, H 3)
sachay ratay say nirmalay sadaa sachee so-ay.
Those who are imbued with the True Lord are spotless and pure; their reputation is forever true.
me ufe wfs vue vit afar afar ugae SE AI (426-19, wm, He 3)
aithai ghar ghar jaapday aagai jug jug pargat ho-ay. ||1]|
Here, they are known in each and every home, and hereafter, they are famous throughout the ages. ||1]||
UST 92d
& Ho Js IS FS AS ST Bate Il (427-1, wey, ws 3) ay man roorh"ai rangulay too” sachaa rang charhaa-ay. O beauteous and joyful mind, imbue yourself with your true color.
gat wat A feg sa wd SATE NU TTS Mh (427-1, we, 2 3)
roorhee banee jay rapai naa ih rang lahai na jaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
If you imbue yourself with the Beauteous Word of the Guru's Bani, then this color shall never fade away. ||1]||Pause] |
oH ate HS wis mifsnrat en Ste fears il (427-2, wer, ve 3) ham neech mailay at abhimaanee doojai bhaa-ay vikaar. I am lowly, filthy, and totally egotistical; I am attached to the corruption of duality.
afta uvath fife aue Je faone Afs vrs MQH (427-2, wm, He 3)
gur paaras mili-ai kanchan ho-ay nirmal jot apaar. ||2||
But meeting with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone, I am transformed into gold; I am blended with the Pure Light of the Infinite Lord. ||2]|
faa ag afe & dain afe fife da gar@ i 427-3, nr, v2 3)
bin gur ko-ay na rangee-ai gur mili-ai rang charhaa-o.
Without the Guru, no one is imbued with the color of the Lord's Love; meeting with the Guru, this color is applied.
qas ofe ft os frest Afs me SI (427-3, ner, He 3)
gur kai bhai bhaa-ay jo ratay siftee sach samaa-o. ||3]|
Those who are imbued with the Fear, and the Love of the Guru, are absorbed in the Praise of the True Lord. ||3]|
3 faa ofa o waret a He feaHe dfF Il (427-4, nmr, He 3) bhai bin laag na lag-ee naa man nirmal ho-ay. Without fear, the cloth is not dyed, and the mind is not rendered pure.
fag 3 AGH GHTSE FS TS 5 ALS Vil (427-4, wer, He 3) bin bhai karam kamaavnay jhoothay thaa-o na ko-ay. ||4|| Without fear, the performance of rituals is false, and one finds no place of rest. ||4] |
fan 3S wml dat A sunt ASHals fete i (427-5, mr, ne 3)
jis no aapay rangay so rapsee satsangat milaa-ay.
Only those whom the Lord imbues, are so imbued; they join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ud Te 3 ASAals Sur AeA Afs ASS Uli (427-5, wr, Hs 3)
pooray gur tay satsangat oopjai sehjay sach subhaa-ay. ||5]||
From the Perfect Guru, the Sat Sangat emanates, and one easily merges into the Love of the True One. ||5]|
faa Hast vfs oA gafo AA UA ST I (427-6, wir, He 3) bin sangtee sabh aisay raheh jaisay pas dhor. Without the Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all remain like beasts and animals.
fafs ofS fSA o reat faa are Afs So NEN (427-6, nm, He 3) jini" keetay tisai na jaanan"ee bin naavai sabh chor. ||6|| They do not know the One who created them; without the Name, all are thieves. ||6||
fefa ae feosfo nGae feasfo aa & Hof ete I (427-7, nmr, nH 3)
ik gun vihaajheh a-ugan viknahi gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
Some purchase merits and sell off their demerits; through the Guru, they obtain peace and poise.
ad AS 3 oe ufeor sor niefe wre DN (427-7, ner, He 3) gur sayvaa tay naa-o paa-i-aa vuthaa andar aa-ay. ||7]| Serving the Guru, they obtain the Name, which comes to dwell deep within. ||7]|
Aso" at erst Sat J fifa Ga ote It (427-8, nmr, v2 3) sabhnaa kaa daataa ayk hai sir DhanDhai laa-ay. The One Lord is the Giver of all; He assigns tasks to each and every person.
Sea aH ots Hefamis Hee BS fate uci Sai (427-8, wer, He 3)
naanak naamay laa-ay savaari-an sabday la-ay milaa-ay. ||8]|9||31]||
O Nanak, the Lord embellishes us with the Name; attached to the Word of the Shabad, we are merged into Him. ||8]|9||31||
MTAT HIG 3 Il (427-9)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
AS Se 6 Gel fan faut ad A ue il (427-9, nm, ne 3)
sabh naavai no lochdee jis kirpaa karay so paa-ay.
Everyone longs for the Name, but he alone receives it, unto whom the Lord shows His Mercy.
fas oe AS ey d Ay fon fan Nfs SAS A (427-10, ve, He 3)
bin naavai sabh dukh hai sukh tis jis man vasaa-ay. ||1||
Without the Name, there is only pain; he alone obtains peace, whose mind is filled with the Name. ||1]|
3 anig efenres F Sat aS Ih (427-10, mr, we 3) too” bay-ant da-i-aal hai tayree sarnaa-ee. You are infinite and merciful; I seek Your Sanctuary.
qs us 3 ures SH SSnret ul TIS il 427-11, wer, ws 3) gur pooray tay paa-ee-ai naamay vadi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. From the Perfect Guru, the glorious greatness of the Naam is obtained. ||1]||Pause] |
nists wofs fa 3 ag fafa figafe Guret i (427-11, vm, He 3)
antar baahar ayk hai baho biDh sarisat upaa-ee.
Inwardly and outwardly, there is only the One Lord. He has created the world, with its many varieties.
TAH as aafear EAT fH TI set NN (427-12, ve, Hs 3)
hukmay kaar karaa-idaa doojaa kis kahee-ai bhaa-ee. ||2||
According to the Order of His Will, He makes us act. What else can we talk about, O Siblings of Destiny? ||2]|
ya" wMaEse 30 alr fes sot fAfs aes il (427-12, wr, v2 3) bujh-naa abujh-naa tuDh kee-aa ih tayree sir kaar. Knowledge and ignorance are all your making; You have control over these.
feagr aufats nfs afo fefa vaca ue xe afamras SI (427-13, wr, Hs 3)
ikn"aa bakhsihi mayl laihi ik dargeh maar kadhay koorhi-aar. ||3]|
Some, You forgive, and unite with Yourself; while others, the wicked, you strike down and drive out of Your Court. ||3]]|
fefa ufs ufes urea fs 30 SH WES Il (427-13, rr, ve 3) ik Dhur pavit paavan heh tuDh naamay laa-ay. Some, from the very beginning, are pure and pious; You attach them to Your Name.
qe AS 3 AY Cun Ad Aafe ese il (427-14, ww, ws 3)
gur sayvaa tay sukh oopjai sachai sabad bujhaa-ay. ||4||
Serving the Guru, peace wells up; through the True Word of the Shabad, one comes to understand. ||4||
fefa ave adie feust us aed nrfy unre I (427-14, nr, ne 3)
ik kuchal kucheel vikhlee patay naavhu aap khu-aa-ay.
Some are crooked, filthy and vicious; the Lord Himself has led them astray from the Name.
o Ge fafa 6 afa 3 5 Amt feats Gsese ull (427-15, nmr, He 3)
naa on siDh na buDh hai na sanjmee fireh utvataa-ay. ||5]|
They have no intuition, no understanding and no self-discipline; they wander around delirious. ||5]|
sete ad fan vimuat fA S SSSt BS Il (427-15, we, ve 3) nadar karay jis aapnee tis no bhaavnee laa-ay. He grants faith to those whom He has blessed with His Glance of Grace.
AS Hay feo Amit Ho fosne Ase ASS MEM (427-16, nmr, 2 3) sat santokh ih sanjmee man nirmal sabad sunaa-ay. ||6||
This mind finds truth, contentment and self-discipline, hearing the Immaculate Word of the Shabad. ||6] |
Bw ufs a ugemt af ave vis 3 ure il (427-16, »mr, 2 3)
laykhaa parh na pahoochee-ai kath kahnai ant na paa-ay. By reading books, one cannot reach Him; by speaking and talking, His limits cannot be found.
ad 3 afs ure Afe wafe ASt ue WN (427-17, nmr, He 3)
gur tay keemat paa-ee-ai sach sabad sojhee paa-ay. ||7]||
Through the Guru, His value is found; through the True Word of the Shabad, understanding is obtained. ||7]||
feg Ho edt Afa S ae Hate Sata i (427-17, mmr, w: 3) ih man dayhee soDh too” gur sabad veechaar. So reform this mind and body, by contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
sod fen ot fefs on faare J urn ag ao SfS ynrfs Ne NIONSQI (427-18, wT, He 3) naanak is dayhee vich naam niDhaan hai paa-ee-ai gur kai hayt apaar. ||8]|10||32|| O Nanak, within this body is the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; it is found through the Love of the Infinite Guru. ||8||10||32| |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (427-19)
aasaa menhliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Afs gsr Aoveret fast aa & Aafe Aterfs i (427-19, wr, Hs 3)
sach ratee-aa sohaaganee jinaa gur kai sabad seegaar.
The happy soul-brides are imbued with Truth; they are adorned with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
UST G2Qt weg dt A fug ufeor Ad Rafe stefs Nall (428-1, nmr, He 3)
ghar hee so pir paa-i-aa sachai sabad veechaar. ||1||
They find their Husband Lord within their own home, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
meade Tet surfenr ote fAS fee wet Il (428-1, nmr, us 3) avgan gunee bakhsaa-i-aa har si-o liv laa-ee. Through merits, their demerits are forgiven, and they embrace love for the Lord.
ofa zg ufeor anat af vfs forest di TIS il (428-2, vm, ve 3)
har var paa-i-aa kaamnee gur mayl milaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The soul-bride then obtains the Lord as her Husband; meeting the Guru, this union comes about. ||1||Pause] |
fefa fug gefs 3 weat en sath sete it (428-2, »mr, we 3)
ik pir hadoor na jaanan"ee doojai bharam bhulaa-ay.
Some do not know the Presence of their Husband Lord; they are deluded by duality and doubt.
fa ufefs Sraret vet sf feof I (428-3, vm, He 3)
ki-o paa-ini" dohaaganee dukhee rain vihaa-ay. ||2||
How can the forsaken brides meet Him? Their life night passes in pain. ||2]| fas a Hfs Ae Sfhor AST are SHE Il (428-3, wert, He 3)
jin kai man sach vasi-aa sachee kaar kamaa-ay. Those whose minds are filled with the True Lord, perform truthful actions.
mates Aefd Aon fAG AS HT ATE ISI (428-4, wm, He 3)
an-din sayveh sahj si-o sachay maahi samaa-ay. ||3]|
Night and day, they serve the Lord with poise, and are absorbed in the True Lord. 311
STet SoH sare ag ates fay ufo i (428-4, weer, us 3) duhaaganee bharam bhulaa-ee-aa koorh bol bikh khaahi. The forsaken brides wander around, deluded by doubt; telling lies, they eat poison.
fug o wWefe uruer Het AA ee urfs ISI (428-5, nmr, He 3)
pir na jaanan aapnaa sunjee sayj dukh paahi. ||4||
They do not know their Husband Lord, and upon their deserted bed, they suffer in misery. ||4||
Re Afsg Sa I HS Ho SoH serfs Il (428-5, ner, He 3) sachaa saahib ayk hai mat man bharam bhulaahi. The True Lord is the One and only; do not be deluded by doubt, O my mind.
as ufe Ae asta Ag fooHe dfs erro iuil (428-6, wr, He 3)
gur poochh sayvaa karahi sach nirmal man vasaahi. ||5]||
Consult with the Guru, serve the True Lord, and enshrine the Immaculate Truth within your mind. ||5]|
Hoveet Ae fug ufemr JBN wy Tete I (428-6, vir, He 3)
sohaaganee sadaa pir paa-i-aa ha-umai aap gavaa-ay.
The happy soul-bride always finds her Husband Lord; she banishes egotism and self- conceit.
fug ASt nafes afs sdt ASt AA AY UTES MEN (428-7, wer, He 3)
pir saytee an-din geh rahee sachee sayj sukh paa-ay. ||6] |
She remains attached to her Husband Lord, night and day, and she finds peace upon His Bed of Truth. ||6] |
Heat Heat afe Te us fas o ue i (428-7, ner, ve 3) mayree mayree kar ga-ay palai kichh na paa-ay. Those who shouted, "Mine, mine!" have departed, without obtaining anything.
HIG od Soaat nifs Tet ussite Di (428-8, nirwr, vs 3)
mahal naahee dohaaganee ant ga-ee pachhutaa-ay. ||7]||
The separated one does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and departs, repenting in the end. ||7||
A fug Wat Sa d San fae foe oe It (428-8, nr, He 3) So pir mayraa ayk hai aykas si-o liv laa-ay. That Husband Lord of mine is the One and only; I am in love with the One alone.
Soa A AY Bats anal dfs at an Hf SATE ICNAAUISSI (428-9, nT, He 3)
naanak jay sukh lorheh kaamnee har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. ||8]|11||33]| O Nanak, if the soul-bride longs for peace, she should enshrine the Lord's Name within her mind. ||8]|11||33]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (428-9)
aasaa mehlaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
nifys frat sefeGe oA urfeor Hof ASE Il (428-9, wir, ue 3)
amrit jin"aa chhakhaa-i-on ras aa-i-aa sahj subhaa-ay.
Those whom the Lord has caused to drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, naturally, intuitively, enjoy the sublime essence.
Het used 0 fSH S £3 3 SHE NAN (428-10, nr, He 3) sachaa vayparvaahu hai tis no til na tamaa-ay. ||1|| The True Lord is care-free; he does not have even an iota of greed. ||1]|
wis Ae sare ganar ufy ufE it (428-10, wm, Hs 3) amrit sachaa varasdaa gurmukhaa mukh paa-ay. The True Ambrosial Nectar rains down, and trickles into the mouths of the Gurmukhs.
Ho Ae ddiear AIA dfs Te ae NA TIS i (428-11, rr, nz 3)
man sadaa haree-aavlaa sehjay har gun gaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Their minds are forever rejuvenated, and they naturally, intuitively, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
HoHfe Het coral Ufa usior fawerfs | (428-12, nA, He 3)
manmukh sadaa duhaaganee dar kharhee-aa billaahi.
The self-willed manmukhs are forever forsaken brides; they cry out and bewail at the Lord's Gate.
faa’ fue ar pore o urfeG a ufe fetter A oorfa HI (428-12, nmr, He 3)
jin"aa pir kaa su-aad na aa-i-o jo Dhur likhi-aa so kamaahi. ||2||
Those who do not enjoy the sublime taste of their Husband Lord, act according to their pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
aenfe a AY AH AY OH SIE Il (428-13, wer, He 3)
gurmukh beejay sach jamai sach naam vaapaar.
The Gurmukh plants the seed of the True Name, and it sprouts. He deals in the True Name alone.
a fez ood ofenig sast Mf Sas NSN (428-13, we, He 3)
jo it laahai laa-i-an bhagtee day-ay bhandaar. ||3]|
Those whom the Lord has attached to this profitable venture, are granted the treasure of devotional worship. ||3]|
Tanta Ae Aoaat SF sats Aterfs i (428-14, nmr, ne 3)
gurmukh sadaa sohaaganee bhai bhagat seegaar.
The Gurmukh is forever the true, happy soul-bride; she adorns herself with the fear of God and devotion to Him.
mates Teta fug nua Ag safe Bs Ute ISI (428-14, nmr, He 3)
an-din raaveh pir aapnaa sach rakheh ur Dhaar. ||4]|
Night and day, she enjoys her Husband Lord; she keeps Truth enshrined within her heart. ||4]|
frat fug afer omar faqr feeg af AE Il (428-15, wr, He 3) jin"aa pir raavi-aa aapnaa tin"aa vitahu bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who have enjoyed their Husband Lord.
Re fus & Af safe fees wry Tete iui (428-15, wr, Hs 3)
sadaa pir kai sang raheh vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||5|| They dwell forever with their Husband Lord; they eradicate self-conceit from within.
[1511 36 HO ASG HY CxS fue a of fimefa I (428-16, mmr, 2 3)
tan man seetal mukh ujlay pir kai bhaa-ay pi-aar. Their bodies and minds are cooled and soothed, and their faces are radiant, from the love and affection of their Husband Lord.
An Hurst fug se TBH feRar wrfa Well (428-16, vi, ne 3)
sayj sukhaalee pir ravai ha-umai tarisnaa maar. ||6] |
They enjoy their Husband Lord upon His cozy bed, having conquered their ego and desire. ||6||
afe fasur uf urfior ag & ofS refs i (428-17, nr, He 3) kar kirpaa ghar aa-i-aa gur kai hayt apaar. Granting His Grace, He comes into our homes, through our infinite Love for the Guru.
zg ufimr Aoeret Aem Sa Hats WON (428-17, new, He 3) var paa-i-aa sohaaganee kayval ayk muraar. ||7]| The happy soul-bride obtains the One Lord as her Husband. ||7]||
AS dog aunts wfeGe AS ABST Ts Il (428-18, wm, He 3) sabhay gunah bakhsaa-ay la-i-on maylay maylanhaar. All of her sins are forgiven; the Uniter unites her with Himself.
Sot wigs nindha A AfSs ad flmrg” IcCNIVQUSSill (428-18, mmAT, He 3)
naanak aakhan aakhee-ai jay sun Dharay pi-aar. ||8]|12||34||
O Nanak, chant such chants, that hearing them, He may enshrine love for you. 18] 12] [34] |
MTAT HIG 3 Il (428-19)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Afsas 3 Te Sud wT ys AS AE I (428-19, wr, Hs 3) satgur tay gun oopjai jaa parabh maylai so-ay. Merit is obtained from the True Guru, when God causes us to meet Him.
Ua gar
Hon oy foment famrg usate df al (429-1, ner, 2 3)
sehjay naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai gi-aan pargat ho-ay. ||1]|
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with intuitive ease and poise, spiritual wisdom is revealed. ||1]||
& HO HS Wels ae ofa T AST Sy Teles Il (429-1, wr, Hs 3) ay man mat jaaneh har door hai sadaa vaykh hadoor.
O my mind, do not think of the Lord as being far away; behold Him ever close at hand.
He Hee Ae suet Hate shout saute Al TIS i (429-2, mrwr, we 3)
sad sundaa sad vaykh-daa sabad rahi-aa bharpoor. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He is always listening, and always watching over us; the Word of His Shabad is all- pervading everywhere. ||1]|Pause| |
aaHfe wiry ustfanr fsot fea Hie fomrfenr i (429-2, nmr, us 3)
gurmukh aap pachhaani-aa tin"ee ik man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
The Gurmukhs understand their own selves; they meditate single-mindedly on the Lord.
Re gefa fug mmset AS of AY uTfeMr 211 (429-3, mir, He 3) Sadaa raveh pir aapnaa sachai naam sukh paa-i-aa. ||2| | They enjoy their Husband Lord continually; through the True Name, they find peace.
21 |
f Ho 3a a Sd ate Sy ale Seg Il (429-3, mm, v2 3) ay man tayraa ko nahee kar vaykh sabad veechaar. O my mind, no one belongs to you; contemplate the Shabad, and see this.
dfs Haeet sfa uS ufefo ve ears BI (429-4, nm, He 3) har sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-o paa-ihi mokh du-aar. ||3]|| So run to the Lord's Sanctuary, and find the gate of salvation. ||3]|
Rafe Hey Aafe ash Afs ad fee we i 429-4, mmr, ne 3)
sabad sunee-ai sabad bujhee-ai sach rahai liv laa-ay.
Listen to the Shabad, and understand the Shabad, and lovingly focus your consciousness on the True One.
Rae ICH ndha AS Hof AY UTE ISI (429-5, ner, He 3)
sabday ha-umai maaree-ai sachai mahal sukh paa-ay. ||4]|
Through the Shabad, conquer your ego, and in the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, you shall find peace. ||4||
fen na Hf Het on at faa oe AS oO STE Il (429-5, wer, He 3)
is jug meh sobhaa naam kee bin naavai sobh na ho-ay.
In this age, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is glory; without the Name, there is no glory.
fea wfeur at Hat ots feos ret fou 3 oF ull (429-6, ner, He 3) ih maa-i-aa kee sobhaa chaar dihaarhay jaadee bilam na ho-ay. ||5]| The glory of this Maya lasts for only a few days; it disappears in an instant. ||5| |
frat on ferrfeor A He Hfs AAT II (429-6, mmr, He 3) jinee naam visaari-aa say mu-ay mar jaahi. Those who forget the Naam are already dead, and they continue dying.
dfs dA Are 6 ofes faR|t uta AMTfT HEI (429-7, wer, Hs 3)
har ras saad na aa-i-o bistaa maahi samaahi. ||6|| They do not enjoy the sublime essence of the Lord's taste; they sink into the manure. [16] |
fefa mma aafh frerfenig niafes oH OTE Il (429-7, nmr, nH 3)
ik aapay bakhas milaa-i-an an-din naamay laa-ay.
Some are forgiven by the Lord; He unites them with Himself, and keeps them attached to the Naam, night and day.
Ag anes Afs dots Ad As AMS MDI (429-8, mmr, He 3) sach kamaaveh sach raheh sachay sach samaahi. ||7|| They practice Truth, and abide in Truth; being truthful, they merge into Truth. ||7]|
fag Fae Heba 3 Saba Aa sar nigr safe | (429-8, wm, ve 3)
bin sabdai sunee-ai na daykhee-ai jag bolaa an"aa bharmaa-ay.
Without the Shabad, the world does not hear, and does not see; deaf and blind, it wanders around.
fag oe vy urfeet on fhe FSA safe CH (429-9, mmr, He 3) bin naavai dukh paa-isee naam milai tisai rajaa-ay. ||8]| Without the Naam, it obtains only misery; the Naam is received only by His Will. ||8]|
fe set fA@ fas ofeor A Ae fedHe UssS Il (429-9, ni, He 3)
jin banee si-o chit laa-i-aa say jan nirmal parvaan.
Those persons who link their consciousness with the Word of His Bani, are immaculately pure, and approved by the Lord.
soa on fSqr ae B Zing A Ufs AS WS NENINBUI (429-10, wm, He 3) naanak naam tin"aa kaday na veesrai say dar sachay jaan. ||9]|13||35]|
O Nanak, they never forget the Naam, and in the Court of the Lord, they are known as true. ||9||13]|35]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (429-11)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
Aad ot sas vue fag at eet wet SE I (429-11, vr, Hs 3) sabdou hee bhagat jaapday jin" kee banee sachee ho-ay. Through the Word of the Shabad, the devotees are known; their words are true.
feag nity afenr ar vifsor Afe floret SPE NA (429-11, ner, He 3)
vichahu aap ga-i-aa naa-o mani-aa sach milaavaa ho-ay. ||1||
They eradicate ego from within themselves; they surrender to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and meet with the True One. ||1]|
dfs ofs om Ae at ufs of II (429-12, mr, nH 3) har har naam jan kee pat ho-ay. Through the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, His humble servants obtain honor.
Hee fSqr at Hon od f8q wd AS aE NAN TIS ll (429-12, wer, He 3) safal tin"aa kaa janam hai tin" maanai sabh ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. How blessed is their coming into the world! Everyone adores them. ||1]||Pause] |
Jen Ae ats oO nifs ao mifsre I (429-13, wer, He 3) ha-umai mayraa jaat hai at kroDh abhimaan. Ego, self-centeredness, excessive anger and pride are the lot of mankind.
Rafe ued ot ats ate Ast APS fs Sa|TS QW (429-13, wer, He 3)
sabad marai taa jaat jaa-ay jotee jot milai bhagvaan. ||2]|
If one dies in the Word of the Shabad, then he is rid of this, and his light is merged into the Light of the Lord God. ||2]|
ums Afsag stem ASG AGH JHA Il (429-14, wer, He 3) pooraa satgur bhayti-aa safal janam hamaaraa. Meeting with the Perfect True Guru, my life has been blessed.
oH de fafa ufsor sd wre SaaS ISI (429-14, nA, He 3)
naam navai niDh paa-i-aa bharay akhut bhandaaraa. ||3]||
I have obtained the nine treasures of the Naam, and my storehouse is inexhaustible, filled to overflowing. ||3]|
neta fen TAT & surge faar oH fumirar i (429-15, mmr, us 3) aavahi is raasee kay vaapaaree-ay jin"aa naam pi-aaraa. Those who love the Naam come as dealers in the merchandise of the Naam.
qanfa d2 A us ue fear nists Age Sera Sil (429-15, nm, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so Dhan paa-ay tin"aa antar sabad veechaaraa. ||4]|
Those who become Gurmukh obtain this wealth; deep within, they contemplate the Shabad. ||4||
Sast AS & Weal HOH MidardHt I (429-16, nmr, Hs 3)
bhagtee saar na jaanan"ee manmukh aha™kaaree.
The egotistical, self-willed manmukhs do not appreciate the value of devotional worship.
gag uit unrfenig EA at TSH UI (429-16, wer, 8 3)
Dharahu aap khu-aa-i-an joo-ai baajee haaree. ||5] | The Primal Lord Himself has beguiled them; they lose their lives in the gamble. ||5||
faa fimrs safs o deet a ny dfe Adtfe I (429-17, mr, He 3)
bin pi-aarai bhagat na hova-ee naa sukh ho-ay sareer.
Without loving affection, devotional worship is not possible, and the body cannot be at peace.
UM useg ureht ae sat Ho Utfs Well (429-17, vm, Hs 3)
paraym padaarath paa-ee-ai gur bhagtee man Dheer. ||6||
The wealth of love is obtained from the Guru; through devotion, the mind becomes steady. ||6||
fan 6 sats age Aad qd Age Sete Il (429-18, nr, He 3)
jis no bhagat karaa-ay so karay gur sabad veechaar.
He alone performs devotional worship, whom the Lord so blesses; he contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fase Sa oH ZA ICH efsor afe MDI (429-18, nm, nH 3) hirdai ayko naam vasai ha-umai dubiDhaa maar. ||7]|| The One Name abides in his heart, and he conquers his ego and duality. ||7||
sas at afs ufs Sa oH DT wm we AeStfas Il (429-19, vi, He 3)
bhagtaa kee jat pat ayko naam hai aapay la-ay savaar.
The One Name is the social status and honor of the devotees; the Lord Himself adorns them.
Het Ageet SH at fa@ are f3E aren Arfa It (429-19, wir, He 3)
sadaa sarnaa-ee tis kee ji-o bhaavai ti-o kaaraj saar. ||8] |
They remain forever in the Protection of His Sanctuary. As it pleases His Will, He arranges their affairs. ||8] |
Uat 8B0 sats forest nora ot AT ae eters Il (430-1, ner, He 3)
bhagat niraalee alaah dee jaapai gur veechaar. The worship of the Lord is unique - it is known only by reflecting upon the Guru.
Soa oH fuse ZA Ss saat aH ASfe ICNIVISEN (430-1, wm, He 3)
naanak naam hirdai vasai bhai bhagtee naam savaar. ||9||14||36]|
O Nanak, one whose mind is filled with the Naam, through the Lord's Fear and devotion, is embellished with the Naam. ||9||14]|36]|
MTAT HIG 3 Il (430-2)
aasaa mehliaa 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl:
mio SA Hfs sorfeor fae oH ee UTE I (430-2, nr, He 3)
an ras meh bholaa-i-aa bin naamai dukh paa-ay.
He wanders around, engrossed in other pleasures, but without the Naam, he suffers in pain.
Afsag use 3 sfeS fr Het gs gSTS WA (430-3, wr, we 3) satgur purakh na bhayti-o je sachee boojh bujhaa-ay. ||1]| He does not meet the True Guru, the Primal Being, who imparts true understanding.
[1
= HO Hd eS Ta 3A oly ATS UTE Il (430-3, nmr, He 3) ay man mayray baavlay har ras chakh saad paa-ay. O my insane mind, drink in the sublime essence of the Lord, and savor its taste.
wie of oor Ss feats fase HOH TSTS NU TIS il (430-4, wer, ws 3)
an ras laagaa too” fireh birthaa janam gavaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Attached to other pleasures, you wander around, and your life wastes away uselessly. ||1]|Pause] |
fem aa xfs Tone fegHe Ate of safe fee ote I (430-4, nmr, He 3)
is jug meh gurmukh nirmalay sach naam raheh liv laa-ay.
In this age, the Gurmukhs are pure; they remain absorbed in the love of the True Name.
fee aon" fas ureint odt fomr afe afoor ate 2H (430-5, nmr, He 3) vin karmaa kichh paa-ee-ai nahee ki-aa kar kahi-aa jaa-ay. ||2]| Without the destiny of good karma, nothing can be obtained; what can we say or do?
[21] my usaf Hate Hafd Hod StH fears Il (430-5, mmr, He 3)
aap pachhaaneh sabad mareh manhu taj vikaar. He understands his own self, and dies in the Word of the Shabad; he banishes corruption from his mind.
ad Adgeet Sit us SHA AMASTS III (430-6, wr, vs 3) gur sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-ay bakhsay bakhsanhaar. ||3]| He hurries to the Guru's Sanctuary, and is forgiven by the Forgiving Lord. ||3]|
fag oe AY 6 ureha ot ey feed WHE II (430-6, mmr, He 3) bin naavai sukh na paa-ee-ai naa dukh vichahu jaa-ay. Without the Name, peace is not obtained, and pain does not depart from within.
feg Aa wenn Hfs fenrfimr eA sath gore gil (430-7, wr, Hs 3)
ih jag maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapi-aa doojai bharam bhulaa-ay. ||4||
This world is engrossed in attachment to Maya; it has gone astray in duality and doubt. ||4] |
codet fu at ATS 3 ATSdt famr afe aafs Atara Il (430-7, nmr, He 3)
duhaaganee pir kee saar na jaanhee ki-aa kar karahi seegaar.
The forsaken soul-brides do not know the value of their Husband Lord; how can they decorate themselves?
wWofes Het H@dion feafo AA Te F FST MUI (430-8, mma, He 3)
an-din sadaa jaldee-aa fireh sayjai ravai na bhataar. ||5| |
Night and day, they continually burn, and they do not enjoy the Bed of their Husband Lord. ||5||
Hoel Hoe ufemr fees wimg ete Il (430-9, nvr, He 3)
sohaaganee mahal paa-i-aa vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
The happy soul-brides obtain the Mansion of His Presence, eradicating their self- conceit from within.
ad Agel Atardior nue Afs Seba fete Well (430-9, wim, ve 3)
gur sabdee seegaaree-aa apnay seh la-ee-aa milaa-ay. ||6]||
They decorate themselves with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and their Husband Lord unites them with Himself. ||6]|
Hoa" Hod ferfaor wfeor HT TAT Il (430-10, mar, He 3) marnaa manhu visaari-aa maa-i-aa moh gubaar. He has forgotten death, in the darkness of attachment to Maya.
Hone Hfe fs HHfs St Hafs AH fe dfs UME IDI (430-10, »mAT, He 3)
manmukh mar mar jameh bhee mareh jam dar hohi khu-aar. ||7| |
The self-willed manmukhs die again and again, and are reborn; they die again, and are miserable at the Gate of Death. ||7]||
nif frorfenig A fee aa Aafe Sterfe i (430-11, mr, ve 3)
aap milaa-i-an say milay gur sabad veechaar.
They alone are united, whom the Lord unites with Himself; they contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Soa OTH ANTE HY Cus fsa AP Paats NCNQVNWIBIN (430-11, nm, He 3)
naanak naam samaanay mukh ujlay tit sachai darbaar. ||8]|22||15||37] | O Nanak, they are absorbed in the Naam; their faces are radiant, in that True Court. [18] |22]|15][37]|
MAT HIS U MASUeMT Wg 2 (430-13) aasaa mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa ghar 2 Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars ure I (430-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Us Hove Us IAS | Us SATS UT TSS INA (430-13, wr, Hz 5)
panch manaa-ay panch rusaa-ay. panch vasaa-ay panch gavaa-ay. ||1]|
When the five virtues were reconciled, and the five passions were estranged, I enshrined the five within myself, and cast out the other five. ||1]|
fea fafa sag Zor HS Set Il (430-14, wm, us 5) in" biDh nagar vuthaa mayray bhaa-ee. In this way, the village of my body became inhabited, O my Siblings of Destiny.
eos afer ats fomre fesret ail TIS Il (430-14, nmr, ws 5) durat ga-i-aa gur gi-aan darirhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Vice departed, and the Guru's spiritual wisdom was implanted within me. ||1]|Pause] |
Arg UaH at afa ctot ate i (430-15, wrt, He 5)
saach Dharam kee kar deenee vaar. The fence of true Dharmic religion has been built around it.
dd HIGH Td fame stats iii (430-15, wmAr, Hs 5) farhay muhkam gur gi-aan beechaar. ||2|| The spiritual wisdom and reflective meditation of the Guru has become its strong gate.
21] oH YSt stag set HIS I (430-15, nmr, He 5)
naam khaytee beejahu bhaa-ee meet. So plant the seed of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O friends, O Siblings of Destiny.
AGE ATI Td AST ats ill (430-16, wr, us 5) sa-udaa karahu gur sayvhu neet. ||3]| Deal only in the constant service of the Guru. ||3]|
AS AOA AY & Afs TS Il (430-16, mmr, He 5) saat sahj sukh kay sabh haat. With intuitive peace and happiness, all the shops are filled.
ATS Surdt Sa BS ISIl (430-16, mA, He 5) saah vaapaaree aykai thaat. ||4|| The Banker and the dealers dwell in the same place. ||4]|
Ant So A BE o AFT I (430-17, ne, v2 5) jayjee-aa dann ko la-ay na jagaat. There is no tax on non-believers, nor any fines or taxes at death.
Afsate af eet os at Sry WUll (430-17, nmr, Hs 5) satgur kar deenee Dhur kee chhaap. ||5|| The True Guru has set the Seal of the Primal Lord upon these goods. ||5||
ZU OH Ble YU VHreNd Il (430-17, wm, He 5) vakhar naam lad khayp chalaavahu. So load the merchandise of the Naam, and set sail with your cargo.
Bow Tafa wife wireg Well (430-18, wmvr, He 5) lai laahaa gurmukh ghar aavhu. ||6|| Earn your profit, as Gurmukh, and you shall return to your own home. ||6]|
Afsag AS fe SSAS Il (430-18, wiv, ns 5) satgur saahu sikh vanjaaray. The True Guru is the Banker, and His Sikhs are the traders.
Urt SH Sa ATG AHS IDI (430-18, wr, He 5) poonjee naam laykhaa saach sam"aaray. ||7||
Their merchandise is the Naam, and meditation on the True Lord is their account. I7II
A A fe ufe faa Te US AS Il (430-19, mmr, we 5) SO vasai it ghar jis gur pooraa sayv. One who serves the True Guru dwells in this house.
nifaae sdidt SOA SS UCU (430-19, wmAr, He 5)
abichal nagree naanak dayv. ||8]|1]| O Nanak, the Divine City is eternal. ||8]|1]|
UST g3Bq
MATSd HIG U We 2 (431-1)
aasaavaree mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Aasaavaree, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars yArfe i (431-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
He Ho ofa FAG writ US i (431-2, vmredt, us 5) mayray man har si-o laagee pareet. My mind is in love with the Lord.
AUHfa dfs dfs Aus fase Ast SHS uA FITS i (431-2, wrAre|ct, vs 5)
saaDhsang har har japat nirmal saachee reet. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; my lifestyle is pure and true. ||1]|Pause] |
TdAo at funrA wet foses vifex Yyars Il (431-3, wmrredt, we 5)
darsan kee pi-aas ghanee chitvat anik parkaar.
I have such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; I think of him in so many ways.
add Mody usyqan ote fasur og Hats All (431-3, wmATSdH, He 5)
— KAS
karahu anoograhu paarbarahm har kirpaa Dhaar muraar. ||1|| So be Merciful, O Supreme Lord; shower Your Mercy upon me, O Lord, Destroyer of pride. ||1||
Ho udeHt orfenr fife ATG & Afar i (431-4, wiredt, 2 5) man pardaysee aa-i-aa mili-o saaDh kai sang. My stranger soul has come to join the Saadh Sangat.
fan zug a wast A uTeG anifa far MI (431-4, wmTedt, He 5)
jis vakhar ka-o chaahtaa so paa-i-o naameh rang. ||2||
That commodity, which I longed for, I have found in the Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
a3 weer ga oA fafa ata fae orfo il (431-5, wmrredt, He 5) jaytay maa-i-aa rang ras binas jaahi khin maahi. There are so many pleasures and delights of Maya, but they pass away in an instant.
~
sas Js 39 oH fA AY Sufs AS OTe ISI (431-5, nmredt, He 5) bhagat ratay tayray naam si-o sukh bhu'cheh sabh thaa-ay. ||3]| Your devotees are imbued with Your Name; they enjoy peace everywhere. ||3]|
AS Ad vase ud fesse sie x aE il 431-6, mmarect, He 5)
sabh jag chalta-o paykhee-ai nihchal har ko naa-o.
The entire world is seen to be passing away; only the Lord's Name is lasting and stable.
ate fuzret Ava fAG fesse uefa STE Sil (431-6, wmredt, He 5)
kar mitraa-ee saaDh si-o nihchal paavahi thaa-o. ||4||
So make friends with the Holy Saints, so that you may obtain a lasting place of rest. [141]
HS AHS AS so aS Tso APE Il (431-7, »mredt, ue 5)
meet saajan sut banDhpaa ko-oo hot na saath.
Friends, acquaintances, children and relatives - none of these shall be your companion.
Sa foeg IH oH ctor at Us Sa MUI (431-7, »mATedt, He 5) ayk nivaahoo raam naam deenaa kaa parabh naath. ||5]|| The Lord's Name alone shall go with you; God is the Master of the meek. ||5]|
3d AHS Sfsa se ofa Aad ste 3g I (431-8, mmc, He 5)
charan kamal bohith bha-ay lag saagar tari-o tayh.
The Lord's Lotus Feet are the Boat; attached to Them, you shall cross over the world- ocean.
sfeS us Afsag ATS ys FAG ST NEN (431-8, wredt, HE 5) bhayti-o pooraa satguroo saachaa parabh si-o nayh. ||6|| Meeting with the Perfect True Guru, I embrace True Love for God. ||6]|
AM 3d at Wat feng o ATA faretA Il (431-9, nmredt, He 5)
saaDh tayray kee jaachnaa visar na Saas giraas.
The prayer of Your Holy Saints is, "May I never forget You, for even one breath or morsel of food."
A 30 Se A se 3d TS ASA TAA NDI (431-9, wmedt, He 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so bhalaa tayrai bhaanai kaaraj raas. ||7|| Whatever is pleasing to Your Will is good; by Your Sweet Will, my affairs are adjusted.
II7II
AY Ara UlsH fees Sur Ha MISE I (431-10, »mredt, He 5)
sukh saagar pareetam milay upjay mahaa anand.
I have met my Beloved, the Ocean of Peace, and Supreme Bliss has welled up within me.
AT Soa AS eu feS ys SS USHSE NCUAUIM (431-10, »mTedH, Hs 5)
kaho naanak sabh dukh mitay parabh bhaytay parmaanand. ||8]||1||2]|
Says Nanak, all my pains have been eradicated, meeting with God, the Lord of Supreme Bliss. ||8]|1]|2||
MAT Hoe U fagss we 8 eat at AfS (431-11)
aasaa mehlaa 5 birharhay ghar 4 chhantaa kee jat
Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Birharray ~ Songs Of Separation, To Be Sung In The Tune Of The Chhants. Fourth House:
qe Afsare YATE I (431-12)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: ursqan us fandbht fimrd vane aS af Ae dil (431-12, nmr, He 5)
qa au
paarbarahm parabh simree-ai pi-aaray darsan ka-o bal jaa-o. ||1]| Remember the Supreme Lord God, O Beloved, and make yourself a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]|
fan fayes eu strsfo fimrs A fa@ seat ATE 2H (431-12, ner, He 5) jis simrat dukh beesrahi pi-aaray so ki-o tajnaa jaa-ay. ||2]| Remembering Him, sorrows are forgotten, O Beloved; how can one forsake Him? ||2| |
feg 36 at As ufo fimrs uisy fe fee Su (431-13, ver, ue 5) ih tan vaychee sant peh pi-aaray pareetam day-ay milaa-ay. ||3]| I would sell this body to the Saint, O Beloved, if he would lead me to my Dear Lord.
H3II Ae Aters fatter & da sfa eS Het we el (431-14, nm, He 5)
sukh seegaar bikhi-aa kay feekay taj chhoday mayree maa-ay. ||4]| The pleasures and adornments of corruption are insipid and useless; I have forsaken and abandoned them, O my Mother. ||4||
an au 83 sfx ae fimrd Afsag vost ute ull (431-14, nmr, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh taj ga-ay pi-aaray satgur charnee paa-ay. ||5|| Lust, anger and greed left me, O Beloved, when I fell at the Feet of the True Guru.
[5]
AHS oS oH PAS fimrd nos 3 ag ATE Ell (431-15, wr, Hs 5)
jo jan raatay raam si-o pi-aaray anat na kaahoo jaa-ay. ||6]|
Those humble beings who are imbued with the Lord, O Beloved, do not go anywhere else. ||6]]|
dfs oA fAat whmer filmed fgufs ad wurfe WON (431-15, nmr, us 5)
har ras jin"ee chaakhi-aa pi-aaray taripat rahay aaghaa-ay. ||7]|
Those who have tasted the Lord's sublime essence, O Beloved, remain satisfied and satiated. ||7||
ive Aft AT a soa F ATS Us USE NCUAUISI (431-16, »mAT, He 5)
anchal gahi-aa saaDh kaa naanak bhai saagar paar paraa-ay. ||8||1||3]|
One who grasps the Hem of the Gown of the Holy Saint, O Nanak, crosses over the terrible world-ocean. ||8||1||3]|
HOH Hes By ac fimrd aS S| Ufs THE NAN (431-17, ne, He 5)
janam maran dukh katee-ai pi-aaray jab bhaytai har raa-ay. ||1||
The pains of birth and death are removed, O Beloved, when the mortal meets with the Lord, the King. ||1]|
Heg Aw AWS Us He leg Ban feafe NIN (431-17, wT, He 5)
sundar sughar sujaan parabh mayraa jeevan daras dikhaa-ay. ||2]|
God is so Beautiful, so Refined, so Wise - He is my very life! Reveal to me Your Darshan! ||2||
A Aba 33 3 sted fimrd wafy nefa fe wf an «31-18, wm, He 5)
jo jee-a tujh tay beechhuray pi-aaray janam mareh bikh khaa-ay. ||3]|
Those beings who are separated from You, O Beloved, are born only to die; they eat the poison of corruption. ||3] |
fan 3 Hofo A fHs fimrs fA & was ute ei (431-18, wr, we 5) jis too’ mayleh so milai pi-aaray tis kai laaga-o paa-ay. ||4!| He alone meets You, whom You cause to meet, O Beloved; I fall at his feet. ||4] |
A AY Cdn UES fimird ne 3 age 3 ATE UI (431-19, nmr, He 5)
jo sukh darsan paykh-tay pi-aaray mukh tay kahan na jaa-ay. ||5||
That happiness which one receives by beholding Your Darshan, O Beloved, cannot be described in words. ||5]||
Wot UifS o scet filmrd wa Aa Idt ANTE WeEll (431-19, mr, He 5) saachee pareet na tut-ee pi-aaray jug jug rahee samaa-ay. ||6] | True Love cannot be broken, O Beloved; throughout the ages, it remains. ||6]|
UST YBQ
A 30 se A oer fimrd Sct wore TATE DI (432-1, nmr, 2 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so bhalaa pi-aaray tayree amar rajaa-ay. ||7|| Whatever pleases You is good, O Beloved; Your Will is Eternal. ||7||
Soa da gs safes fimrd us AafA Fate WcNQUSIl (432-2, mm, He 5)
naanak rang ratay naaraa-inai pi-aaray maatay sahj subhaa-ay. ||8||2||4]| Nanak, those who are imbued with the Love of the All-Pervading Lord, O Beloved, remain intoxicated with His Love, in natural ease. ||8]|2||4| |
A fafa su dt Wes fumrd fan ufo aT@ Fate IAI (432-2, wm, v8 5) sabh biDh tum hee jaantay pi-aaray kis peh kaha-o sunaa-ay. ||1]| You know all about my condition, O Beloved; who can I speak to about it? ||1||
3 ost hor Aga or Sa fest ufsata ue NM (432-3, mmr, He 5) too” daataa jee-aa sabhnaa kaa tayraa ditaa pahirahi khaa-ay. ||2]| You are the Giver of all beings; they eat and wear what You give them. ||2||
AY ey Sot orfamr fimrd gat ardt we Si (432-3, wer, He 5) sukh dukh tayree aagi-aa pi-aaray doojee naahee jaa-ay. ||3]|| Pleasure and pain come by Your Will, O Beloved; they do not come from any other.
31 AS agets A ast fimrd nieg fags age o ATE NBII (432-4, wir, HH 5)
jo too’ karaaveh so karee pi-aaray avar kichh karan na jaa-ay. ||4]| Whatever You cause me to do, that I do, O Beloved; I cannot do anything else. ||4]|
feo dfs As HOSE fimrs fas Aba of aE null (432-5, ner, He 5)
din rain sabh suhaavanay pi-aaray jit japee-ai har naa-o. ||5||
All my days and nights are blessed, O Beloved, when I chant and meditate on the Lord's Name. ||5]|
At aa aHteat flmrd ufs Hasta Sy fate well (432-5, wr, He 5)
Saa-ee kaar kamaavnee pi-aaray Dhur mastak laykh likhaa-ay. ||6]|
He does the deeds, O Beloved, which are pre-ordained, and inscribed upon his forehead. ||6||
ea vif zaser fimrd wife wfe afar AHTAE IDI (432-6, vir, He 5)
ayko aap varatdaa pi-aaray ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||7||
The One is Himself prevailing everywhere, O Beloved; He is pervading in each and every heart. ||7||
HATS gu 3 Gufs & fumrg saat ats AGSTS UCUSNIN WMI (432-6, wr, He 5) sansaar koop tay uDhar lai pi-aaray naanak har sarnaa-ay. ||8]|3]]22]|15]|2||42|| Lift me up out of the deep pit of the world, O Beloved; Nanak has taken to Your Sanctuary. ||8]|3]|22||15]|2||42||
Ta MMA HIST 9 uct fedt (432-8)
raag aasaa mehlaa 1 patee likhee Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Patee Likhee ~ The Poem Of The Alphabet:
qe Afsars Arte il (432-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AA Afe fate fafo Adit Ase Afos Sa stem I (432-9, wer, He 1) SaSai SO-ay Sarisat jin saajee sabhnaa saahib ayk bha-i-aa. Sassa: He who created the world, is the One Lord and Master of all.
Ags vd fas fag a oer urfeur faq at Hee ster AU (432-9, wir, Hs 1)
sayvat rahay chit jin" kaa laagaa aa-i-aa tin" kaa safal bha-i-aa. ||1]|
Those whose consciousness remains committed to His Service - blessed is their birth and their coming into the world. ||1]|
HO AST FG UF HOT Il (432-10, mA, He 1) man kaahay bhoolay moorh manaa. O mind, why forget Him? You foolish mind!
Aa Sut eet stat 3G ufsor ail TIS Il (432-10, nm, vs 1)
jab laykhaa dayveh beeraa ta-o parhi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When your account is adjusted, O brother, only then shall you be judged wise. ||1]|Pause] |
Seat urfe use J erst wm AST AST I (432-11, mr, He 1) eevrhee aad purakh hai daataa aapay sachaa so-ee. Eevree: The Primal Lord is the Giver; He alone is True.
Sar ne Hfs A TeHfe gs fSH fafs Sy F Tet WIN (432-11, wer, vs 1)
aynaa akhraa meh jo gurmukh boojhai tis sir laykh na ho-ee. ||2]|
No accounting is due from the Gurmukh who understands the Lord through these letters. ||2||
G3 Cunt a at att AT at nig 3 ufeMr I (432-12, wr, Hs 1) oorhai upmaa taa kee keejai jaa kaa ant na paa-i-aa. Ooraa: Sing the Praises of the One whose limit cannot be found.
Aa ads Aet ee urate fast A AHEM SI (432-12, om, Hs 1) sayvaa karahi say-ee fal paavahi jin"ee sach kamaa-i-aa. ||3]| Those who perform service and practice truth, obtain the fruits of their rewards. ||3]|
ae fora as A aet ufsor ufss At Il (432-13, wr, we 1) nyanyai nyi-aan boojhai jay ko-ee parhi-aa pandit so-ee. Nganga: One who understands spiritual wisdom becomes a Pandit, a religious scholar.
Hea Hier nfs Sat We ST ICH ad B et Igil (432-13, om, He 1) sarab jee-aa meh ayko jaanai taa ha-umai kahai na ko-ee. ||4|| One who recognizes the One Lord among all beings does not talk of ego. ||4| |
aa AA Usd Wa Je fee Age Safer i (432-14, wer, ws 1) kakai kays pundar jab hoo-ay vin saaboonai ujli-aa. Kakka: When the hair grows grey, then it shines without shampoo.
TH TH Xt Te ore Her x Hares ata whem Wail (432-14, wer, He 1) jam raajay kay hayroo aa-ay maa-i-aa kai sangal banDh la-i-aa. ||5|| The hunters of the King of Death come, and bind him in the chains of Maya. ||5]|
wd dears AT nite afa udtfe fafa wae Shor i (432-15, ver, He 1) khakhai khundkaar saah aalam kar khareed jin kharach dee-aa. Khakha: The Creator is the King of the world; He enslaves by giving nourishment.
aofs a a As Aa afar wed ar odt Jan ufenr ell (432-16, wm, He 1) banDhan jaa kai sabh jag baaDhi-aa avree kaa nahee hukam pa-i-aa. ||6|| By His Binding, all the world is bound; no other Command prevails. ||6| |
aa afe afte fafs eat aot aifse safe safer i (432-16, nmr, nz 1)
gagai go-ay gaa-ay jin chhodee galee gobid garab bha-i-aa.
Gagga: One who renounces the singing of the songs of the Lord of the Universe, becomes arrogant in his speech.
ufs aid fats ret at ose ard Set aor DI (432-17, ver, He 1
gharh bhaa“day jin aavee saajee chaarhan vaahai ta-ee kee-aa. ||7||
One who has shaped the pots, and made the world the kiln, decides when to put them in it. ||7]|
unl ws ASe A ws Hale TT a wa FT il (432-17, meer, we 1)
ghaghai ghaal sayvak jay ghaalai sabad guroo kai laag rahai.
Ghagha: The servant who performs service, remains attached to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
aa so" A AH ate we feo fafa Afog DS Fd ICI (432-18, we, He 1)
buraa bhalaa jay sam kar jaanai in biDh saahib ramat rahai. ||8]|
One who recognizes bad and good as one and the same - in this way he is absorbed into the Lord and Master. ||8]|
ve ute ez fafo AA US wet ofe Ha II (432-19, mm, He 1) chachai chaar vayd jin saajay chaaray khaanee chaar jugaa. Chacha: He created the four Vedas, the four sources of creation, and the four ages
Wa Aa rat wat salt ufser ufss orf dior ei (432-19, om, ne 1)
jug jug jogee khaanee bhogee parhi-aa pandit aap thee-aa. ||9]|
- through each and every age, He Himself has been the Yogi, the enjoyer, the Pandit and the scholar. ||9]|
UST g3s
ge afenr ost As nists 3a aot SaH IMT Il (433-1, wer, He 1) chhachhai chhaa-i-aa vartee sabh antar tayraa kee-aa bharam ho-aa. Chhachha: Ignorance exists within everyone; doubt is Your doing, O Lord.
SoH Curie gareinig nm Sa aay dnt fq ag fifemr 90 (433-1, wr, Hs 1) bharam upaa-ay bhulaa-ee-an aapay tayraa karam ho-aa tin" guroo mili-aa. ||10]| Having created doubt, You Yourself cause them to wander in delusion; those whom You bless with Your Mercy meet with the Guru. ||10]|
An WO Has AS We BY Vea Shy sfenr Il (433-2, wT, He 1)
jajai jaan mangat jan jaachai lakh cha-oraaseeh bheekh bhavi-aa.
Jajja: That humble being who begs for wisdom has wandered begging through 8.4 million incarnations.
Sa Be Sa VS neg & GAH Ala AU! (433-3, wer, Hs 1)
ayko layvai ayko dayvai avar na doojaa mai suni-aa. ||11]|
The One Lord takes away, and the One Lord gives; I have not heard of any other. []11]|
38 Bfe Hog four yrat A fags tat AS Stour It (433-3, vor, we 1)
jhajhai jhoor marahu ki-aa paraanee jo kichh daynaa so day rahi-aa.
Jhajha: O mortal being, why are you dying of anxiety? Whatever the Lord is to give, He shall keep on giving.
oe ay gan vee fAG Hor a fora ufent 119211 (433-4, nmr, He 1)
day day vaykhai hukam chalaa-ay ji-o jee-aa kaa rijak pa-i-aa. ||12]|
He gives, and gives, and watches over us; according to the Orders which He issues, His beings receive nourishment. ||12||
SS Fels AI A Sa SA AST Sa Ml (433-4, wer, He 1) njanjai nadar karay jaa daykhaa doojaa ko-ee naahee. Nyanya: When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then I do not behold any other.
Sa afe afoot AS at Sa Stor He HTT NASI (433-5, mm, He 1)
ayko rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee ayk vasi-aa man maahee. ||13]|
The One Lord is totally pervading everywhere; the One Lord abides within the mind. [|13]|
Ze eg ag famr uret wat fa nafs far fe doer I (433-5, wir, He 1)
tatai tanch karahu ki-aa paraanee gharhee ke muhat ke uth chalnaa.
Tatta: Why do you practice hypocrisy, O mortal? In a moment, in an instant, you shall have to get up and depart.
WM ASH 8 TST wart a Us SH Tle ATS IAI (433-6, wr, He 1) joo-ai janam na haarahu apnaa bhaaj parhahu tum har sarnaa. ||14|| Don't lose your life in the gamble - hurry to the Lord's Sanctuary. ||14] |
36 ofe east fae nists afs saat fas a fez war Il (433-6, »mr, He 1)
thathai thaadh vartee tin antar har charnee jin" kaa chit laagaa.
T'hat'ha: Peace pervades within those who link their consciousness to the Lord's Lotus Feet.
fas oor Ret Ao fensd 3B usAret AY Ufenr AU (433-7, wm, He 1)
chit laagaa say-ee jan nistaray ta-o parsaadee sukh paa-i-aa. ||15]||
Those humble beings, whose consciousness is so linked, are saved; by Your Grace, they obtain peace. ||15]|
3s Se aad for yreat F fae or AOA VHS I (433-8, ve, ne 1)
dadai damf karahu ki-aa paraanee jo kichh ho-aa so sabh chalnaa.
Dadda: Why do you make such ostentatious shows, O mortal? Whatever exists, shall all pass away.
fSA Aded 3 AY ueg Aaa fodats afe afar 9EN (433-8, wir, He 1)
tisai sarayvhu taa sukh paavhu sarab nirantar rav rahi-aa. ||16] |
So serve Him, who is contained and pervading among everyone, and you shall obtain peace. ||16]|
we ofa Crd nmi faS fan are fos aS I (433-9, wor, He 1)
dhadhai dhaahi usaarai aapay ji-o tis bhaavai tivai karay.
Dhadha: He Himself establishes and disestablishes; as it pleases His Will, so does He act.
af afs 24 gau vere fen fons wT a oefa as IDI (433-9, mmr, He 1)
kar kar vaykhai hukam chalaa-ay tis nistaaray jaa ka-o nadar karay. ||17]| Having created the creation, He watches over it; He issues His Commands, and emancipates those, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace. ||17]|
ae Jes sd we nists of qe we ASt Il (433-10, om, ne 1) naanai ravat rahai ghat antar har gun gaavai so-ee. Nanna: One whose heart is filled with the Lord, sings His Glorious Praises.
nm oofy frore ast usdfl AON o det NACH (433-11, mT, He 1)
aapay aap milaa-ay kartaa punrap janam na ho-ee. ||18]|
One whom the Creator Lord unites with Himself, is not consigned to reincarnation. ||18]|
33 TY SEAS Tom St aT nis o urfSwr t (433-11, wer, we 1) tatai taaroo bhavjal ho-aa taa kaa ant na paa-i-aa. Tatta: The terrible world-ocean is so very deep; its limits cannot be found.
a 3d ot ZHI IH ata ste Sfa sae TEM ACN (433-12, we, He 1) naa tar naa tulhaa ham boodas taar layhi taaran raa-i-aa. ||19] | I do not have a boat, or even a raft; I am drowning - save me, O Savior King! ||19]|
wa ats aéate Het A at aot AS IMM I (433-12, wir, He 1) thathai thaan thaanantar so-ee jaa kaa kee-aa sabh ho-aa. T'hat'ha: In all places and interspaces, He is; everything which exists, is by His doing.
fom soy for ufeor adh FH fsa ave ASt sar Moll (433-13, mT, He 1) ki-aa bharam ki-aa maa-i-aa kahee-ai jo tis bhaavai so-ee bhalaa. ||20|| What is doubt? What is called Maya? Whatever pleases Him is good. ||20||
ve CH 3 UG fan eH aa mmufer Il (433-13, mmr, He 1) dadai dos na day-oo kisai dos karammaa aapni-aa. Dadda: Do not blame anyone else; blame instead your own actions.
AH oer A ufeor SH SA nie OT QUI (433-14, mmr, He 1) jo mai kee-aa so mai paa-i-aa dos na deejai avar janaa. ||21|| Whatever I did, for that I have suffered; I do not blame anyone else. ||21]|
uo ofs as fats est ofa cht fafe ga ator ih (433-14, mer, ue 1)
DhaDhai Dhaar kalaa jin chhodee har cheejee jin rang kee-aa.
Dhadha: His power established and upholds the earth; the Lord has imparted His color to everything.
fan a dot Agat Sort ast Ast Jan ule" 22M (433-15, wer, He 1)
tis daa dee-aa sabhnee lee-aa karmee karmee hukam pa-i-aa. ||22|| His gifts are received by everyone; all act according to His Command. ||22||
86 OT 3a fes Sa a Stor at AYfemr Ih (433-16, mmr, He 1) nannai naah bhog nit bhogai naa deethaa naa sammii-aa. Nanna: The Husband Lord enjoys eternal pleasures, but He is not seen or understood.
TS IG ATHE se AZ 3 aa H fife WISI (433-16, wer, Hs 1)
galee ha-o sohagan bhainay kant na kabahoo™ mai mili-aa. ||23]|
I am called the happy soul-bride, O sister, but my Husband Lord has never met me. [|23]|
ud ufsag usHAg fue AG use ah i (433-17, nmr, He 1)
papai paatisaahu parmaysar vaykhan ka-o parpanch kee-aa.
Pappa: The Supreme King, the Transcendent Lord, created the world, and watches over it.
ea 98 Ag fag we vists wate afe afer QI (433-17, »mr, He 1)
daykhai boojhai sabh kichh jaanai antar baahar rav rahi-aa. ||24| |
He sees and understands, and knows everything; inwardly and outwardly, he is fully pervading. ||24||
ee aot AS Aa SA AH a Hale sfo ofenr It (433-18, nA, He 1)
fafai faahee sabh jag faasaa jam kai sangal banDh la-i-aa.
Faffa: The whole world is caught in the noose of Death, and all are bound by its chains.
ad udAel A od Cad fa ofa Ageats sfA ufeor IQuil (433-18, nmr, He 1)
gur parsaadee say nar ubray je har sarnaagat bhaj pa-i-aa. ||25]||
By Guru's Grace, they alone are saved, who hurry to enter the Lord's Sanctuary. [|25]|
aa ant dws oar wus ats whe Far Il (433-19, wr, He 1) babai baajee khaylan laagaa cha-uparh keetay chaar jugaa. Babba: He set out to play the game, on the chess-board of the four ages.
UST 83g abt As AS AS ats uA arate orf Bar WEN (434-1, ver, we 1)
jee-a jant sabh saaree keetay paasaa dhaalan aap lagaa. ||26]|| He made all beings and creatures his chessmen, and He Himself threw the dice. ||26]|
33 gafs A ee uefs ae usr fre AG SC ufemr I (434-1, nmr, He 1)
bhabhai bhaaleh say fal paavahi gur parsaadee jin" ka-o bha-o pa-i-aa.
Bhabha: Those who search, find the fruits of their rewards; by Guru's Grace, they live in the Fear of God.
HoH fests 5 U3ate HS Bu BBarte Sg ufemr NII (434-2, wer, He 1)
manmukh fireh na cheeteh moorhay lakh cha-oraaseeh fayr pa-i-aa. ||27]|
The self-willed manmukhs wander around, and they do not remember the Lord; the fools are consigned to the cycle of 8.4 million incarnations. ||27]||
HH HY HIS HOHE HsES Stent sa Ssfenr I (434-2, ww, ws mammai moh maran maDhusoodan maran bha-i-aa tab chaytvi-aa. Mamma: In emotional attachment, he dies; he only thinks of the Lord, the Love of
Nectar, when he dies.
afenr stafe med ufsor Hr orrg StAfer Ici (434-3, mm, He 1)
kaa-i-aa bheetar avro parhi-aa mammaa akhar veesri-aa. ||28]|
As long as the body is alive, he reads other things, and forgets the letter 'm', which stands for marnaa - death. ||28]|
WG HOH 3 det ae dt A als AY UES Il (434-4, mor, He 1) ya-yai janam na hovee kad hee jay kar sach pachhaanai. Yaya: He is never reincarnated again, if he recognizes the True Lord.
Tanta wre geufs gs TeHfe Sa AES ICM (434-4, ww, we
gurmukh aakhai gurmukh boojhai gurmukh ayko jaanai. ||29]||
The Gurmukh speaks, the Gurmukh understands, and the Gurmukh knows only the One Lord. ||29]|
ad afe stout Ag nists AS AS AST Il (434-5, mmr, He 1) raarai rav rahi-aa sabh antar jaytay kee-ay jantaa. Rarra: The Lord is contained among all; He created all beings.
Hz Gurfe gt As we ag dvr fse aH Bferr ZO (434-5, ver, He 1)
jant upaa-ay DhanDhai sabh laa-ay karam ho-aa tin naam la-i-aa. ||30||
Having created His beings, He has put them all to work; they alone remember the Naam, upon whom He bestows His Grace. ||30||
3S ote du fate eat Htot wife He ah | (434-6, ver, He 1)
lalai laa-ay DhanDhai jin chhodee meethaa maa-i-aa moh kee-aa.
Lalla: He has assigned people to their tasks, and made the love of Maya seem sweet to them.
ural ulat AH afs HdSt STE Bt A JAH ufeor 3A (434-6, mmr, He 1) khaanaa peenaa sam kar sahnaa bhaanai taa kai hukam pa-i-aa. ||31]||
We eat and drink; we should endure equally whatever occurs, by His Will, by His Command. ||31]|
Ze SHUG ushng sue aG fafe SH athor h 434-7, wer, we 1)
vavai vaasuday-o parmaysar vaykhan ka-o jin vays kee-aa. Wawa: The all-pervading Transcendent Lord beholds the world; He created the form it wears.
zy ud Ag fae we nists wots af sfomr 32H (434-7, ver, He 1
vaykhai chaakhai sabh kichh jaanai antar baahar rav rahi-aa. ||32||
He beholds, tastes, and knows everything; He is pervading and permeating inwardly and outwardly. ||32]|
aa of aafa four urat faafo fomreg fa ong dur 1 fsafs fmreg Afs mreg GA feed TITS Ar WBS (434-8, wer, ve
rhaarhai raarh karahi ki-aa paraanee tiseh Dhi-aavahu je amar ho-aa. tiseh Dhi- aavahu sach samaavahu os vitahu kurbaan kee-aa. ||33]|
Rarra: Why do you quarrel, O mortal? Meditate on the Imperishable Lord, and be absorbed into the True One. Become a sacrifice to Him. ||33]|
wd dg 3 aet ost Ahn Cure fate fara chor it (434-9, vir, ve 1
haahai hor na ko-ee daataa jee-a upaa-ay jin rijak dee-aa.
Haha: There is no other Giver than Him; having created the creatures, He gives them nourishment.
dfs oy fomreg safe oth mreg mates aa ats SH BMF WSVll (434-10, wr, He 1) har naam Dhi-aavahu har naam samaavahu an-din laahaa har naam lee-aa. ||34]| Meditate on the Lord's Name, be absorbed into the Lord's Name, and night and day, reap the Profit of the Lord's Name. ||34]|
uifes orf ad fafs dst A foe age’ A afe sfomr Il (434-11, om, He 1) aa-irhai aap karay jin chhodee jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa. Airaa: He Himself created the world; whatever He has to do, He continues to do.
ad age vs fas we soa Aes fees afoot BUNA (434-11, nm, He 1)
karay karaa-ay sabh kichh jaanai naanak saa-ir iv kahi-aa. ||35||1]]|
He acts, and causes others to act, and He knows everything; so says Nanak, the poet. [135] [11]
Ta MITA HIST BS Ut (434-13)
raag aasaa mehlaa 3 patee Raag Aasaa, Third Mehl, Patee - The Alphabet:
QB Afsars YATE Il (434-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
WG MS AS Ad wifenr are wis ane shew i (434-14, mmr, ne 3)
ayo anyai sabh jag aa-i-aa kaakhai ghanyai kaal bha-i-aa.
Ayo, Angai: The whole world which was created - Kaahkai, Ghangai: It shall pass away.
Seat Bet uy ans ula mae Te Sf Al 434-14, wer, ue 3) reeree lalee paap kamaanay parh avgan gun veesri-aa. ||1|| Reeree, Laalee: People commit sins, and falling into vice, forget virtue. ||1]|
Ho MAT Bar J at ule I (434-15, wr, He 3) man aisaa laykhaa too” kee parhi-aa. O mortal, why have you studied such an account,
Sut tar 3d fafe afoor wai TIC Ul (434-15, ver, ve 3) laykhaa daynaa tayrai sir rahi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. which shall call you to answer for payment? ||1]|Pause| |
frosfen fansfo ardt 63 ot Sa oH fear I (434-16, nmr, He 3)
siDha“nyaa-ee-ai simrahi naahee nannai naa tuDh naam la-i-aa.
Sidhan, Ngaayiyai: You do not remember the Lord. Nanna: You do not take the Lord's Name.
ge dine mifofeth us fas gefo ahh uefa N21 (434-16, wer, 8 3)
chhachhai chheejeh ahinis moorhay ki-o chhooteh jam paakrhi-aa. ||2]| Chhachha: You are wearing away, every night and day; you fool, how will you find release? You are held in the grip of death. |[2||
wa asfs at HS Sah 3B ST OH Aer Ih 434-17, wer, Hs 3) babai boojheh naahee moorhay bharam bhulay tayraa janam ga-i-aa. Babba: You do not understand, you fool; deluded by doubt, you are wasting your life.
wede oe cafes um nie at arg 30 Bfenr ISI (434-17, ne, He 3) anhodaa naa-o Dharaa-i-o paaDhaa avraa kaa bhaar tuDh la-i-aa. ||3]| Without justification, you call yourself a teacher; thus you take on the loads of others.
[I3I|
An afs fos wet Sat He vifs afenr ussefaar Il (434-18, wre, He 3)
jajai jot hir la-ee tayree moorhay ant ga-i-aa pachhutaavhigaa. Jajja: You have been robbed of your Light, you fool; in the end, you shall have to depart, and you shall regret and repent.
ea Hae 3 vole adt fete fete Fat vrefsar sil (434-18, rrr, Hs 3)
ayk sabad too” cheeneh naahee fir fir joonee aavhigaa. ||4]|
You have not remembered the One Word of the Shabad, and so you shall have to enter the womb over and over again. ||4||
3u fafs fofimr A ous ufss nea 6 6 firerfs faftmr II (434-19, nmr, He 3)
tuDh sir likhi-aa so parh pandit avraa no na sikhaal bikhi-aa.
Read that which is written on your forehead, O Pandit, and do not teach wickedness to others.
Us gBy
ufser aor ufemr unt fue & af oefsnr ull (435-1, nr, we 3)
pahilaa faahaa pa-i-aa paaDhay pichho day gal chaatrhi-aa. ||5| | First, the teacher is tied down, and then, the noose is placed around the pupil's neck.
[5] |
AA AnH aes us Sa wS so aate afew I (435-1, wer, Hs 3)
SaSai Sanjam ga-i-o moorhay ayk daan tuDh kuthaa-ay la-i-aa.
Sassa: You have lost your self-discipline, you fool, and you have accepted an offering under false pretenses.
Aref ust Ans ot AT Sot Ss offs wa Sat HOM afemr Ell (435-2, vm, Hs 3)
Saa-ee putree jajmaan kee saa tayree ayt Dhaan khaaDhai tayraa janam ga-i-aa. ||6|| The daughter of the alms-giver is just like your own; by accepting this payment for performing the wedding ceremony, you have cursed your own life. ||6] |
HH nfs fats wet Sot HS IGH est Sa ufeMr I (435-3, mmr, we 3)
mammai mat hir la-ee tayree moorhay ha-umai vadaa rog pa-i-aa.
Mamma: You have been cheated out your intellect, you fool, and you are afflicted with the great disease of ego.
isd MTSH FIN © far wfeor ar yas ser DI (435-3, vir, He 3)
antar aatmai barahm na cheen"i-aa maa-i-aa kaa muhtaaj bha-i-aa. ||7||
Within your innermost self, you do not recognize God, and you compromise yourself for the sake of Maya. ||7]||
aa ath af safi6g Hs HHS oa 30 ofa feAfenr Il (435-4, mmr, we 3)
kakai kaam kroDh bharmi-ohu moorhay mamtaa laagay tuDh har visri-aa. Kakka: You wander around in sexual desire and anger, you fool; attached to possessiveness, you have forgotten the Lord.
usta gefs 3 agg uorsts fee as F sfa Hur ICI (435-4, ome, Hs 3)
parheh guneh too” bahut pukaareh vin boojhay too’ doob mu-aa. ||8]|
You read, and reflect, and proclaim out loud, but without understanding, you are drowned to death. ||8]|
33 Sui Afesg HS wa aS SfeAS Tue Il (435-5, mmr, we 3)
tatai taamas jali-ohu moorhay thathai thaan bharisat ho-aa.
Tatta: In anger, you are burnt, you fool. T'hat'ha: That place where you live, is cursed.
unt ufs ufs feats Jus ve TE o 3g BfeMr ICI (435-6, wT, He 3)
ghaghai ghar ghar fireh too’ moorhay dadai daan na tuDh la-i-aa. ||9]|
Ghagha: You go begging from door to door, you fool. Dadda: But still, you do not receive the gift. ||9]|
uu ute 3 uedt HS uRife F uste stam I (435-6, wr, He 3)
papai paar na pavhee moorhay parpanch too” palach rahi-aa.
Pappa: You shall not be able to swim across, you fool, since you are engrossed in worldly affairs.
Ae orf unrfesg ue feg fafs 33 Sy ufent ION (435-7, wT, ws 3)
sachai aap khu-aa-i-ohu moorhay ih sir tayrai laykh pa-i-aa. ||10||
The True Lord Himself has ruined you, you fool; this is the destiny written on your forehead. ||10]|
33 senle sag HS Wher fete aes sfemr Il (435-7, mr, He 3)
bhabhai bhavjal dubohu moorhay maa-i-aa vich galtaan bha-i-aa.
Bhabha: You have drowned in the terrifying world-ocean, you fool, and you have become engrossed in Maya.
qd usAet Sa Ae Sa wat Hfo ute ufer 9all (435-8, vr, He 3)
gur parsaadee ayko jaanai ayk gharhee meh paar pa-i-aa. ||11]|
One who comes to know the One Lord, by Guru's Grace, is carried across in an instant. ||11]|
ze Set wren HS SHES 3g Safar | (435-9, weer, vs 3) vavai vaaree aa-ee-aa moorhay vaasuday-o tuDh veesri-aa. Wawa: Your turn has come, you fool, but you have forgotten the Lord of Light.
2d Sar 6 BIAlT HS feta F AH & SA UfeMr AI (435-9, mm, He 3)
ayh vaylaa na lehsahi moorhay fir too” jam kai vas pa-i-aa. ||12!|
This opportunity shall not come again, you fool; you shall fall under the power of the Messenger of Death. ||12]|
BS ae 3 sald HS Alsae a Cuen Ale SF fer ii (435-10, wr, v2 3)
jhajhai kaday na jhooreh moorhay satgur kaa updays sun too” vikhaa.
Jhajha: You shall never have to regret and repent, you fool, if you listen to the Teachings of the True Guru, for even an instant.
Afsag as Ts adt act faad a I HC ga N98ll (435-10, nT, He 3)
satgur baajhahu gur nahee ko-ee niguray kaa hai naa-o buraa. ||13]|
Without the True Guru, there is no Guru at all; one who is without a Guru has a bad reputation. ||13]|
uo Wes zoe sy HS nists 33 fours ufsor it (435-11, wr, Hs 3)
DhaDhai Dhaavat varaj rakh moorhay antar tayrai niDhaan pa-i-aa.
Dhadha: Restrain your wandering mind, you fool; deep within you the treasure is to be found.
gente defo a ofe om ulefo nar Aaisfe afta ufemr 9eI 435-11, nr, He 3) gurmukh hoveh taa har ras peeveh jugaa jugantar khaahi pa-i-aa. ||14||
When one becomes Gurmukh, then he drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; throughout the ages, he continues to drink it in. ||14]|
aa aifee fats ats us aet fears 3 urfenr it (435-12, wr, Hs 3)
gagai gobid chit kar moorhay galee kinai na paa-i-aa.
Gagga: Keep the Lord of the Universe in your mind, you fool; by mere words, no one has ever attained Him.
Gs & vse fose eave ys fuss Tos As sath wfEnr AU (435-13, wr, Hs 3)
gur kay charan hirdai vasaa-ay moorhay pichhlay gunah sabh bakhas la-i-aa. ||15]| Enshrine the Guru's feet within your heart, you fool, and all your past sins shall be forgiven. ||15]]|
Te oe A Is FHS 3 Ae AY Tet Il (435-13, weer, we 3)
haahai har kathaa boojh too’ moorhay taa sadaa sukh ho-ee.
Haha: Understand the Lord's Sermon, you fool; only then shall you attain eternal peace.
Houfe usfs 3a ey ord fee Afsag Hats & Tet NEN (435-14, mT, He 3)
manmukh parheh taytaa dukh laagai vin satgur mukat na ho-ee. ||16]||
The more the self-willed manmukhs read, the more pain they suffer. Without the True Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||16]|
wd TH fats ate us fore fay ax fe show Il (435-15, wer, He 3)
raarai raam chit kar moorhay hirdai jin" kai rav rahi-aa.
Rarra: Center your consciousness on the Lord, you fool; abide with those whose hearts are filled with the Lord.
ad usAet frat mH ust fase oH fsat afS wfowr WAI (435-15, wer, He 3) gur parsaadee jin"ee raam pachhaataa nirgun raam tin"ee boojh lahi-aa. ||17]| By Guru's Grace, those who recognize the Lord, understand the absolute Lord. ||17]|
37 nis 3 Aet ofemr nies o Wet ofe afemr | (435-16, nm, He 3) tayraa ant na jaa-ee lakhi-aa akath na jaa-ee har kathi-aa. Your limits cannot be known; the indescribable Lord cannot be described.
ood fag a@ Afsag fufemr faq ar Sur fSafsnr ACUI (435-17, wm, He 3) naanak jin" ka-o satgur mili-aa tin" kaa laykhaa nibrhi-aa. ||18]|1||2||
O Nanak, whose who have met the True Guru, have their accounts settled. []18] [1] [2] |
TY MITA HIG A ST WT 9 (435-18) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 chhant ghar 1 Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Chhant, First House:
qe Afsara YATfE Il (435-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hu wafs geste Ha fug sehr TH I (435-19, wT, He 1) munDh joban baalrhee-ay mayraa pir ralee-aalaa raam. O beautiful young bride, my Beloved Lord is very playful.
ue fus dg wer off uffs afenrer aH II (435-19, mmr, He 1)
Dhan pir nayhu ghanaa ras pareet da-i-aalaa raam.
When the bride enshrines great love for her Husband Lord, He becomes merciful, and loves her in return.
uot Sse U6 fusfs Her df Amit orf us fasur as Il (436-1, wT, He 1)
Dhan pireh maylaa ho-ay su-aamee aap parabh kirpaa karay. The soul-bride meets her Husband Lord, when the Lord Master Himself showers His favor upon her.
At Host Afar fus & AS AS vifys Se Il (436-1, wT, Hs 1)
sayjaa suhaavee sang pir kai saat sar amrit bharay.
Her bed is decorated in the company of her Beloved, and her seven pools are filled with ambrosial nectar.
ate efeor ufeor efiais ane Hate fife ae we il (436-2, nmr, ve 1)
kar da-i-aa ma-i-aa da-i-aal saachay sabad mil gun gaava-o.
Be kind and compassionate to me, O Merciful True Lord, that I may obtain the Word of the Shabad, and sing Your Glorious Praises.
soa’ dfs zg efy faant Ho Hfs Gra All (436-3, mr, ve 1)
naankaa har var daykh bigsee munDh man omaaha-o. ||1]||
O Nanak, gazing upon her Husband Lord, the soul-bride is delighted, and her mind is filled with joy. ||1||
Hu Hof ABSste fea Un fasst IH I (436-3, wT, ue 1) munDh sahj salonrhee-ay ik paraym binantee raam. O bride of natural beauty, offer your loving prayers to the Lord.
H nfs 3fe af are us Hat TSt MH I (436-4, wer, He 1)
mai man tan har bhaavai parabh sangam raatee raam.
The Lord is pleasing to my mind and body; I am intoxicated in my Lord God's Company.
ys Ufh ast ofa fadst oth ofa & aft SA (436-4, vir, 8 1)
parabh paraym raatee har binantee naam har kai sukh vasai.
Imbued with the Love of God, I pray to the Lord, and through the Lord's Name, I abide in peace.
3@ ge usefo & ug refs aed SH ede OF Il (436-5, wr, He 1)
ta-o gun pachhaaneh taa parabh jaaneh gunah vas avgan nasai.
If you recognize His Glorious Virtues, then you shall come to know God; thus virtue Shall dwell in you, and sin shall run away.
3u ws fea fae ato o A auf Hole B MAS Il (436-5, wer, He 1)
tuDh baajh ik til reh na saakaa kahan sunan na Dheej-ay.
Without You, I cannot survive, even for an instant; by merely talking and listening about You, I am not satisfied.
soot fy fy@ afe ued SHS TA He SHAS NI (436-6, mT, ws 1)
naankaa pari-o pari-o kar pukaaray rasan ras man bheej-ay. ||2]|
Nanak proclaims, "O Beloved, O Beloved!" His tongue and mind are drenched with the Lord's sublime essence. ||2||
Raid Hdeatd Ha fg SSATIT IH Il (436-6, TAT, He 1) sakheeho sahaylrheeho mayraa pir vanjaaraa raam. O my companions and friends, my Husband Lord is the merchant.
dfs on zenfaor aff xfs wre IM I (436-7, we, He 1) har naamo vananjrhi-aa ras mol apaaraa raam. I have purchased the Lord's Name; its sweetness and value are unlimited.
Hfs ons As ufs 8 ys are St Ho Sat Il (436-7, vm, us 1)
mol amolo sach ghar dholo parabh bhaavai taa munDh bhalee.
His value is invaluable; the Beloved dwells in His true home. If it is pleasing to God, then He blesses His bride.
fefa xfs afa a asfo séiur IG yardt efs ust I (436-8, rrr, He 1) ik sang har kai karahi ralee-aa ha-o pukaaree dar khalee. Some enjoy sweet pleasures with the Lord, while I stand crying at His door.
ave Ase AHS Alas wif arse ATS Il (436-8, wmv, ve 1) karan kaaran samrath sareeDhar aap kaaraj saar-ay. The Creator, the Cause of causes, the All-powerful Lord Himself arranges our affairs.
Sod Sed Us AUS HAE is ATUTES ISI (436-9, wrAT, He 1)
naanak nadree Dhan sohagan sabad abh saaDhaar-ay. ||3]|
O Nanak, blessed is the soul-bride, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace; she enshrines the Word of the Shabad in her heart. ||3]|
dH ufg Are Afseat us urfents HIST IH II (436-9, mr, He 1)
ham ghar saachaa sohilrhaa parabh aa-i-arhay meetaa raam.
In my home, the true songs of rejoicing resound; the Lord God, my Friend, has come to me;
we da wafsur ne Shs SST IM I (436-10, nr, He 1)
raavay rang raat-rhi-aa man lee-arhaa deetaa raam.
He enjoys me, and imbued with His Love, I have captivated His heart, and given mine to Him.
niuSt He dion ofe za Sor fa are FSG TSS I (436-10, mr, ve 1)
aapnaa man dee-aa har var lee-aa ji-o bhaavai ti-o raav-ay.
I gave my mind, and obtained the Lord as my Husband; as it pleases His Will, He enjoys me.
36 HO fus ora Rafe Hed wis nifys ee uTSe I (436-11, om, He 1)
tan man pir aagai sabad sabhaagai ghar amrit fal paav-ay.
I have placed my body and mind before my Husband Lord, and through the Shabad, I have been blessed. Within the home of my own self, I have obtained the ambrosial fruit.
afa ute 3 urea ag vaso ae fire nfs aS th (436-12, mr, ne 1)
buDh paath na paa-ee-ai baho chaturaa-ee-ai bhaa-ay milai man bhaanay.
He is not obtained by intellectual recitation or great cleverness; only by love does the mind obtain Him.
SOA SAT HIST INS IH SS BAS MSU! (436-12, we, Hz 1) naanak thaakur meet hamaaray ham naahee lokaanay. ||4]|1]| O Nanak, the Lord Master is my Best Friend; I am not an ordinary person. ||4|[1]|
YMTAT HIST 4 Il (436-13)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Wode MoJe SH JE SEATS IH Il (436-13, war, we 1)
anhado anhad vaajai run jhunkaaray raam.
The unstruck melody of the sound current resounds with the vibrations of the celestial instruments.
A HS As He Ast wre fumirs IM | (436-13, mT, He 1) mayraa mano mayraa man raataa laal pi-aaray raam. My mind, my mind is imbued with the Love of my Darling Beloved.
Woes Tat He saat Ho Hats we usr it (436-14, wr, He 1)
an-din raataa man bairaagee sunn mandal ghar paa-i-aa.
Night and day, my detached mind remains absorbed in the Lord, and I obtain my home in the profound trance of the celestial void.
oife use mrudud fume Afsafe wey warfeor i (436-14, wer, He 1)
aad purakh aprampar pi-aaraa satgur alakh lakhaa-i-aa.
The True Guru has revealed to me the Primal Lord, the Infinite, my Beloved, the Unseen.
utafs Safe fag oofes fsa He TST Sters Il (436-15, mr, ne 1)
aasan baisan thir naaraa-in tit man raataa veechaaray.
The Lord's posture and His seat are permanent; my mind is absorbed in reflective contemplation upon Him.
SoA OTH IS Haat mod JE FSaTs MAUI (436-15, wa, we 1)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee anhad run jhunkaaray. ||1]|
O Nanak, the detached ones are imbued with His Name, the unstruck melody, and the celestial vibrations. ||1||
fsa wien fas nent ud ag fas fafa wre IMF I (436-16, vi, He tit agam tit agam puray kaho kit biDh jaa-ee-ai raam. Tell me, how can I reach that unreachable, that unreachable city?
Ae HAH Ate Te" Te Ase AHShA IM Il (436-17, ve, He 1)
sach sanjamo saar gunaa gur sabad kamaa-ee-ai raam.
By practicing truthfulness and self-restraint, by contemplating His Glorious Virtues, and living the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ay Fae anes for wifes arb urehat oat fearar il 436-17, wert, He 1)
sach sabad kamaa-ee-ai nij ghar jaa-ee-ai paa-ee-ai gunee niDhaanaa.
Practicing the True Word of the Shabad, one comes to the home of his own inner being, and obtains the treasure of virtue.
3 ATT He us odt svat fafs ASST UTTTAT II (436-18, MAT, He 1)
tit saakhaa mool pat nahee daalee sir sabhnaa parDhaanaa.
He has no stems, roots, leaves or branches, but He is the Supreme Lord over the heads of all.
my su afe afs HAN aot afe foafa adt ure I (436-18, »mr, Hs 1)
jap tap kar kar sanjam thaakee hath nigrahi nahee paa-ee-ai.
Practicing intensive meditation, chanting and self-discipline, people have grown weary; stubbornly practicing these rituals, they still have not found Him.
aod Ada fees Fates Asa gs TsSht MI (436-19, mmr, we 1)
naanak sahj milay jagjeevan satgur boojh bujhaa-ee-ai. ||2]|
O Nanak, through spiritual wisdom, the Lord, the Life of the world, is met; the True Guru imparts this understanding. ||2]|
Gd Aad doug ss Wo wed TH Il (436-19, wr, He 1) gur saagro ratnaagar tit ratan ghanayray raam. The Guru is the ocean, the mountain of jewels, overflowing with jewels.
UST gBD
afa HAS AUS Ad Ho fesHe HS IH I (437-1, we, He 1) kar majno sapat saray man nirmal mayray raam. Take your bath in the seven seas, O my mind, and become pure.
fans Als are a ys are Us fee Sars i (437-1, vr, ve 1)
nirmal jal n"aa-ay jaa parabh bhaa-ay panch milay veechaaray.
One bathes in the water of purity when it is pleasing to God, and obtains the five virtues by reflective meditation.
an adu aue fatter sfa Ag an Cfa ae Il (437-2, mr, He 1)
kaam karoDh kapat bikhi-aa taj sach naam ur Dhaaray.
Renouncing sexual desire, anger, deceit and corruption, he enshrines the True Name in his heart.
ICH BS Bale wa aa ue ee efor i 437-2, we, we 1)
ha-umai lobh lahar lab thaakay paa-ay deen da-i-aalaa.
When the waves of ego, greed and avarice subside, he finds the Lord Master, Merciful to the meek.
Soa Td AHS Steg adt det AS TI Tus Sil (437-3, new, we 1)
naanak gur samaan tirath nahee ko-ee saachay gur gopaalaa. ||3]||
O Nanak, there is no place of pilgrimage comparable to the Guru; the True Guru is the Lord of the world. |[3]|
JG ag a6 Ufy odt fee fe Marfan IH I (437-3, ver, He 1) ha-o ban bano daykh rahee tarin daykh sabaa-i-aa raam. I have searched the jungles and forests, and looked upon all the fields.
fgsee ssfo dor Ag Aas Aafenr IM It (437-4, om, Hs 1) taribhavno tujheh kee-aa sabh jagat sabaa-i-aa raam. You created the three worlds, the entire universe, everything.
30 Ag oer 3 fag dor sg AS & ret I 437-5, wr, Hs 1) tayraa sabh kee-aa too” thir thee-aa tuDh samaan ko naahee. You created everything; You alone are permanent. Nothing is equal to You.
3 ws As Wea 3a 30 fae faR Ararat Il 437-5, wr, we 1) too” daataa sabh jaachik tayray tuDh bin kis saalaahee. You are the Giver - all are Your beggars; without You, who should we praise?
wMenfamr ae tA ws Sct sats sd FST I (437-6, nm, we 1)
anmangi-aa daan deejai daatay tayree bhagat bharay bhandaaraa.
You bestow Your gifts, even when we do not ask for them, O Great Giver; devotion to You is a treasure over-flowing.
oH OH fag nafs 3 det aaa Ad Stes INSNI (437-6, wm, He 1) raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee naanak kahai veechaaraa. ||4]|2]| Without the Lord's Name, there is no liberation; so says Nanak, the meek. ||4||2||
YATAT HIS 4 Il (437-7)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
Aa HS As HS St oH films TH I (437-7, wT, He 1) mayraa mano mayraa man raataa raam pi-aaray raam. My mind, my mind is attuned to the Love of my Beloved Lord.
Ae Atos orfe use wrdud ors IH Il (437-7, nmr, He 1) sach saahibo aad purakh aprampro Dhaaray raam. The True Lord Master, the Primal Being, the Infinite One, is the Support of the earth.
MEH MTT WUT MUS UTSATH UTUTS Il (437-8, wT, He 1) agam agochar apar apaaraa paarbarahm parDhaano.
He is unfathomable, unapproachable, infinite and incomparable. He is the Supreme Lord God, the Lord above all.
wife qaret I St TAt weg So" AF HS Il (437-8, ww, we 1)
aad jugaadee hai bhee hosee avar jhoothaa sabh maano.
He is the Lord, from the beginning, throughout the ages, now and forevermore; know that all else is false.
ASH UdH at AT B ATS Hols Hats fas ure I (437-9, nm, ne 1)
karam Dharam kee saar na jaanai surat mukat ki-o paa-ee-ai.
If one does not appreciate the value of good deeds and Dharmic faith, how can one obtain clarity of consciousness and liberation?
Soa TaHfy Aafe ue nifofeth on forreint ail 437-9, wer, He 1)
naanak gurmukh sabad pachhaanai ahinis naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Word of the Shabad; night and day, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Ha HS Hat He HSM BY Aare IH Il (437-10, mA, He 1) mayraa mano mayraa man maani-aa naam sakhaa-ee raam. My mind, my mind has come to accept, that the Naam is our only Friend.
ICH HHS HfSor Afar se AST IM I 437-11, we, He 1) ha-umai mamtaa maa-i-aa sang na jaa-ee raam. Egotism, worldly attachment, and the lures of Maya shall not go with you.
Hast fus set AS vsaet Af SAY oS Ml 437-11, ne, He 1)
maataa pit bhaa-ee sut chaturaa-ee sang na sampai naaray.
Mother, father, famliy, children, cleverness, property and spouses - none of these shall go with you.
AMfeg ot ust usafe fore sae 38 Sas Il (437-12, vir, He 1)
saa-ir kee putree parhar ti-aagee charan talai veechaaray.
I have renounced Maya, the daughter of the ocean; reflecting upon reality, I have trampled it under my feet.
uife uate fea vos feerfeor wo Sar so At I 437-12, mr, ne 1) aad purakh ik chalat dikhaa-i-aa jah daykhaa tah so-ee. The Primal Lord has revealed this wondrous show; wherever I look, there I see Him.
Sod dfs at gals 5 esC Hon Sf A TET MQM (437-13, wT, He 1) naanak har kee bhagat na chhoda-o sehjay ho-ay so ho-ee. ||2||
O Nanak, I shall not forsake the Lord's devotional worship; in the natural course, what Shall be, shall be. ||2||
Hat HS Hat He fesHs ATT AHS TH Il (437-13, mo, He 1) mayraa mano mayraa man nirmal saach samaalay raam. My mind, my mind has become immaculately pure, contemplating the True Lord.
meade Afe 3B TS ATH BS TH Il (437-14, we, vs 1) avgan mayt chalay gun sangam naalay raam. I have dispelled my vices, and now I walk in the company of the virtuous.
WeTE Udds aAdet ASH Ufs AS Afsors i (437-14, or, He 1) avgan parhar karnee saaree dar sachai sachi-aaro. Discarding my vices, I do good deeds, and in the True Court, I am judged as true.
wigs Wee ofa soe Tafa sao Ses I (437-15, vir, ve
aavan jaavan thaak rahaa-ay gurmukh tat veechaaro.
My coming and going has come to an end; as Gurmukh, I reflect upon the nature of reality.
AAS Hig AAS Aa Ss Af fee efSnret i (437-15, wer, we
saajan meet sujaan sakhaa too” sach milai vadi-aa-ee.
O my Dear Friend, You are my all-knowing companion; grant me the glory of Your True Name.
Sod OH ISG UdafHor nt aaHfs uret SI (437-16, neAT, He 1)
naanak naam ratan pargaasi-aa aisee gurmat paa-ee. ||3]||
O Nanak, the jewel of the Naam has been revealed to me; such are the Teachings I have received from the Guru. ||3]|
Ag vind nino Ate fedafe ast IM I (437-16, mA, He 1)
sach anjno anjan saar niranjan raataa raam.
I have carefully applied the healing ointment to my eyes, and I am attuned to the Immaculate Lord.
Hfs sfs afe sfoor wales BST ITH I (437-17, ner, He 1) man tan rav rahi-aa jagjeevano daataa raam. He is permeating my mind and body, the Life of the world, the Lord, the Great Giver.
AaHleo wast ute nfs ast Aofa fee Hefenr | (437-17, om, ue 1)
jagjeevan daataa har man raataa sahj milai maylaa-i-aa.
My mind is imbued with the Lord, the Great Giver, the Life of the world; I have merged and blended with Him, with intuitive ease.
AY Ast Ast ot Halls Sets YS AY UeMM Il (437-18, wr, He 1)
saaDh sabhaa santaa kee sangat nadar parabhoo sukh paa-i-aa.
In the Company of the Holy, and the Saints' Society, by God's Grace, peace is obtained.
ofs at sats FS Fara Fa Ho femal (437-18, we, He 1)
har kee bhagat ratay bairaagee chookay moh pi-aasaa.
The renunciates remain absorbed in devotional worship to the Lord; they are rid of emotional attachment and desire.
Sod ICH Hfe ust fess oA BSA ISISI (437-19, wm, He 1)
naanak ha-umai maar pateenay virlay daas udaasaa. ||4]|3]| O Nanak, how rare is that unattached servant, who conquers his ego, and remains pleased with the Lord. ||4]|3]|
Us gst
TY MAT HIG VST WT 2 (438-1) raag aasaa mehlaa 1 chhant ghar 2 Raag Aasaa, First Mehl, Chhant, Second House:
qe Afsars Arte il (438-2) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 raat aet fra oS ret Ae faves AG I (438-2, wer, Hs 1) too” sabhnee thaa-ee jithai ha-o jaa-ee saachaa sirjanhaar jee-o. You are everywhere, wherever I go, O True Creator Lord.
Agar ot ast aan feast ey farrseag AG I (438-2, nim, He 1) sabhnaa kaa daataa karam biDhaataa dookh bisaaranhaar jee-o. You are the Giver of all, the Architect of Destiny, the Dispeller of distress.
eu farrgeag Hom ast AT ar FS Il (438-3, wer, we 1) dookh bisaaranhaar su-aamee keetaa jaa kaa hovai. The Lord Master is the Dispeller of distress; all that happens is by His doing.
ade aésg unr ad Sa ust nfo FS tl (438-3, wer, He 1) kot kotantar paapaa kayray ayk gharhee meh khovai. Millions upon millions of sins, He destroys in an instant.
gn fa dv sa fh sar we we ad sterg AG I (438-4, wm, ne D hans se hansaa bag se bagaa ghat ghat karay beechaar jee-o. He calls a swan a swan, and a crane a crane; He contemplates each and every heart.
3 Agat aet fra 3G wet Ae franes AG UA (438-4, wer, He 1) too” sabhnee thaa-ee jithai ha-o jaa-ee saachaa sirjanhaar jee-o. ||1]| You are everywhere, wherever I go, O True Creator Lord. ||1||
faa fea xfs fomrfeur faq qu ufemr 3 feas Aarfa AIG I (438-5, om, He 1)
jin" ik man Dhi-aa-i-aa tin” sukh paa-i-aa tay virlay sansaar jee-o.
Those who meditate on Him single-mindedly obtain peace; how rare are they in this world.
fso AH Ofs 5 ure Td ASE AHS ag 5 MTe|fa aha AE Il (438-6, um, He 1)
tin jam nayrh na aavai gur sabad kamaavai kabahu na aavahi haar jee-o.
The Messenger of Death does not draw near those who live the Guru's Teachings; they never return defeated.
3 aag 6 Wefa afe ofe we Aafs fSq AH Ofs 3 MS II (438-6, »mr, Hs 1)
tay kabahu na haareh har har gun saareh tin” jam nayrh na aavai.
Those who appreciate the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, never suffer defeat; the Messenger of Death does not even approach them.
HHE HIS qr a Yat A Als Ba US ll (438-7, wT, ws 1) jaman maran tin"aa kaa chookaa jo har laagay paavai. Birth and death are ended for those who are attached to the feet of the Lord.
aaHfs dfs aA ots ee ufenr af ofa am Ba ofa AIG Il (438-8, wm, He 1D)
gurmat har ras har fal paa-i-aa har har naam ur Dhaar jee-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, they obtain the sublime essence of the Lord, and the fruit of the Lord; they enshrine the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in their hearts.
fae fea nfs fomrfenr faq ne ufeor 3 fees Aerts AIG 211 (438-8, nmr, He 1)
jin" ik man Dhi-aa-i-aa tin" sukh paa-i-aa tay virlay sansaar jee-o. ||2]|
Those who meditate on Him single-mindedly obtain peace; how rare are they in this world. ||2||
fafs nas Gurfeor qt afemr PSA fees agers FIG I (438-9, vir, He 1 jin jagat upaa-i-aa DhanDhai laa-i-aa tisai vitahu kurbaan jee-o. He who created the world and assigned all to their tasks - unto Him I am a sacrifice.
T ot Ae adn oa Sin ofa vag urehy wre AIG I (438-10, ner, He 1 taa kee sayv kareejai laahaa leejai har dargeh paa-ee-ai maan jee-o. So serve Him, and gather profit, and you shall obtain honor in the Court of the Lord.
dfs edad We Het He US A OT SA USE Il (438-10, wer, He 1)
har dargeh maan so-ee jan paavai jo nar ayk pachhaanai.
That humble being, who recognizes the One Lord alone, obtains honor in the Court of the Lord.
6g a¢ fofa ue aaHfs af fimre fos fs ae vrf Sure I (438-11, nmr, He 1)
oh nav niDh paavai gurmat har Dhi-aavai nit har gun aakh vakhaanai.
One who meditates on the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings, obtains the nine treasures; he chants and repeats continually the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
uifafath on fA or ata fe SSH use uTTTS AIG I (438-12, wr, Hs 1) ahinis naam tisai kaa leejai har ootam purakh parDhaan jee-o. Day and night, take the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the most sublime Primal Being.
fafs nas Gurfeor qt afenr 3 fSA feeg ages FIG SI (438-12, om, He 1
jin jagat upaa-i-aa DhanDhai laa-i-aa ha-o tisai vitahu kurbaan jee-o. ||3]|
The One who created the world and assigned all to their tasks - I am a sacrifice to Him. ||3]|
oH Sto fa Auf fa5 AY eo Jefe wofa A fafe fe AIG (438-13, mr, He 1)
naam lain se soheh tin sukh fal hoveh maaneh say jin jaahi jee-o.
Those who chant the Naam look beautiful; they obtain the fruit of peace. Those who believe in the Name win the game of life.
fso eo Sfe 5 ore wt faq oe A Aa aS Aho ME I 438-14, ver, He YD
tin fal tot na aavai jaa tis bhaavai jay jug kaytay jaahi jee-o.
Their blessings are not exhausted, if it pleases the Lord, even though numerous ages may pass.
A Fa as ats AyMt fso ee Sfe & mr] I (438-14, ver, He 1)
jay jug kaytay jaahi su-aamee tin fal tot na aavai.
Even though numerous ages may pass, O Lord Master, their blessings are not exhausted.
faq He Bo HdeSt Safa B udet A fa BMH fire I (438-15, ym, Hs 1)
tin" jaraa na marnaa narak na parnaa jo har naam Dhi-aavai.
They do not age, they do not die and fall into hell, if they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
dfs ofs ate fa gate adt aoa uta o ufo AIS Il (438-15, wrAT, He 1)
har har karahi se sookeh naahee naanak peerh na khaahi jee-o.
Those who chant the Lord's Name, Har, Har, do not wither, O Nanak; they are not afflicted by pain.
on fe fa Rafe fsq AY ee defo wofs A fafs vfs HIE ISNA (438-16, vm, He 1 naam laini" se soheh tin" sukh fal hoveh maaneh say jin jaahi jee-o. ||4]|1]|4| Those who chant the Naam look beautiful; they obtain the fruit of peace. Those who believe in the Name win the game of life. ||4]|1]|4]|
qe Afsara yATfe il (438-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MTAT HIS A SS WE 3 Il (438-18)
aasaa mehlaa 1 chhant ghar 3. Aasaa, First Mehl, Chhant, Third House:
3 Afe doer afer at SSA TST IH I (438-18, wi, He 1) too” sun harnaa kaali-aa kee vaarhee-ai raataa raam. Listen, O black deer: why are you so attached to the orchard of passion?
faa eo Hot ute feo fefae TS SST TH I (438-19, nmr, He 1) bikh fal meethaa chaar din fir hovai taataa raam. The fruit of sin is sweet for only a few days, and then it grows hot and bitter.
fefs df sat ua HST OH fag UTSTUS II (438-19, mmr, He 1)
fir ho-ay taataa kharaa maataa naam bin partaapa-ay.
That fruit which intoxicated you has now become bitter and painful, without the Naam.
yar gat 6g Ae Afes Sf wodt fans fre BHAS I (439-1, ner, He 1)
oh jayv saa-ir day-ay lahree bijul jivai chamka-ay. It is temporary, like the waves on the sea, and the flash of lightning.
dfs as or afe ont Afe ssfo fate i (439-1, wr, He 1) har baajh raakhaa ko-ay naahee so-ay tujheh bisaari-aa. Without the Lord, there is no other protector, but you have forgotten Him.
Ay ad So Vs FHS Hale Jaat afm WA (439-2, nT, He 1) sach kahai naanak chayt ray man mareh harnaa kaali-aa. ||1|| Nanak speaks the Truth. Reflect upon it, O mind; you shall die, O black deer. ||1]|
sem ofS sefsur sy ifs sat TH I (439-2, vir, He 1) bhavraa fool bhavanti-aa dukh at bhaaree raam. O bumble bee, you wander among the flowers, but terrible pain awaits you.
H Og ufenr miryar Are atest TH Il (439-3, mmr, oe 1) mai gur poochhi-aa aapnaa saachaa beechaaree raam. I have asked my Guru for true understanding.
dete Aas HS ufenr seg St TSS Il (439-3, wer, vs 1)
beechaar satgur mujhai poochhi-aa bhavar baylee raata-o.
I have asked my True Guru for understanding about the bumble bee, who is so involved with the flowers of the garden.
Had vfsor fig ufsor 3q srefe TSS I (439-3, wer, He 1) sooraj charhi-aa pind parhi-aa tayl taavan taata-o. When the sun rises, the body will fall, and it will be cooked in hot oil.
aH Hf aor ufs set Hae fag Fate Il (439-4, wewr, He 1)
jam mag baaDhaa khaahi chotaa sabad bin baytaali-aa.
You shall be bound and beaten on the road of Death, without the Word of the Shabad, O madman.
Ay ad So Us F Ho Hels Sea afer QM (439-4, we, He 1) sach kahai naanak chayt ray man mareh bhavraa kaali-aa. ||2|| Nanak speaks the Truth. Reflect upon it, O mind; you shall die, O bumble bee. ||2||
Hd Abafser usenion fas uefa AAS TH Il (439-5, ner, He 1) mayray jee-arhi-aa pardaysee-aa kit paveh janjaalay raam. O my stranger soul, why do you fall into entanglements?
Ara’ Afog Hf ZA at eAfs AH ATS TH Il (439-6, mor, He 1) saachaa saahib man vasai kee faaseh jam jaalay raam. The True Lord abides within your mind; why are you trapped by the noose of Death?
Hest fedat de Jat ae sfafea ufemr it (439-6, wi, He 1) machhulee vichhunnee nain runnee jaal baDhik paa-i-aa. The fish leaves the water with tearful eyes, when the fisherman casts his net.
HATS Hfenr Hg Her nifs sau gorfenr I (439-7, nmr, He 1) sansaar maa-i-aa moh meethaa ant bharam chukaa-i-aa. The love of Maya is sweet to the world, but in the end, this delusion is dispelled.
sats ats fos ofe fe fr efs Hog niefimr Il (439-7, mr, He 1)
bhagat kar chit laa-ay har si-o chhod manhu andaysi-aa.
So perform devotional worship, link your consciousness to the Lord, and dispel anxiety from your mind.
Ay ad Sto Us F Ho Hhafsor user BI (439-8, mmr, He 1) sach kahai naanak chayt ray man jee-arhi-aa pardaysee-aa. ||3] | Nanak speaks the Truth; focus your consciousness on the Lord, O my stranger soul.
[I3]|
Sebo ag fesfonr Aer Aaa IMT I (439-8, nrAT, He 1) nadee-aa vaah vichhunni-aa maylaa sanjogee raam. The rivers and streams which separate may sometime be united again.
Wa Wa Ho fer sd a We Halt IH Il (439-9, wor, He 1)
jug jug meethaa vis bharay ko jaanai jogee raam.
In age after age, that which is sweet, is full of poison; how rare is the Yogi who understands this.
cet Hof We fs use Afsag fafs Sfsr i (439-9, wer, He 1)
ko-ee sahj jaanai har pachhaanai satguroo jin chayti-aa.
That rare person who centers his consciousness on the True Guru, knows intuitively and realizes the Lord.
fag on ofa & soft 3s usta Ham wsfsur Il (439-10, nmr, He 1)
bin naam har kay bharam bhoolay pacheh mugaDh achayti-aa.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the thoughtless fools wander in doubt, and are ruined.
dfs om sats 3 fee wet A ifs ost Sfomr Il (439-10, wm, He 1)
har naam bhagat na ridai saachaa say ant Dhaahee runni-aa.
Those whose hearts are not touched by devotional worship and the Name of the True Lord, shall weep and wail loudly in the end.
Ay ad aod Aafe Ad fs fodt feefonr nsnalull 439-11, wm, He 1)
sach kahai naanak sabad saachai mayl chiree vichhunni-aa. ||4||1]|5]|
Nanak speaks the Truth; through the True Word of the Shabad, those long separated from the Lord, are united once again. ||4||1]|5||
qe Afsars yArfe it (439-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT HIS 3 SS WT 4 Il (439-12)
aasaa mehlaa 3 chhant ghar 1. Aasaa, Third Mehl, Chhant, First House:
JH we ATS Afoer AS Hate AoTfeor IMT I (439-12, nA, He 3) ham gharay saachaa sohilaa saachai sabad suhaa-i-aa raam.
Within my home, the true wedding songs of rejoicing are sung; my home is adorned with the True Word of the Shabad.
ue fus He sfeur yfs orfy ferfemr IH I (439-13, nmr, He 3) Dhan pir mayl bha-i-aa parabh aap milaa-i-aa raam. The soul-bride has met her Husband Lord; God Himself has consummated this union.
ufs orfu forfour Ae fs srrfenr anif= AoA HST II (439-13, wir, He 3)
parabh aap milaa-i-aa sach man vasaa-i-aa kaaman sehjay maatee.
God Himself has consummated this union; the soul-bride enshrines Truth within her mind, intoxicated with peaceful poise.
ag Aafe Atardt Afs Herdt HET TS Sfar TST Il (439-14, wear, He 3)
gur sabad seegaaree sach savaaree sadaa raavay rang raatee.
Embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and beautified with Truth, she enjoys her Beloved forever, imbued with His Love.
my gee dfs eg ue ot ofs oA Hfe sAfeMr I (439-14, nmr, He 3)
aap gavaa-ay har var paa-ay taa har ras man vasaa-i-aa.
Eradicating her ego, she obtains her Husband Lord, and then, the sublime essence of the Lord dwells within her mind.
Ad Sod Id Hale Asdt Aelse ASH Aare ii (439-15, nmr, us 3)
kaho naanak gur sabad savaaree safli-o janam sabaa-i-aa. ||1]||
Says Nanak, fruitful and prosperous is her entire life; she is embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
ens wHfe sath gat ate Fg SUS TH Il (439-15, mer, we 3)
doojrhai kaaman bharam bhulee har var na paa-ay raam.
The soul-bride who has been led astray by duality and doubt, does not attain her Husband Lord.
aH Te oat fase ASH ASS IH Il (439-16, wrAr, vs 3) kaaman gun naahee birthaa janam gavaa-ay raam. That soul-bride has no virtue, and she wastes her life in vain.
fase ASH Tee HoHf fenrat mBaedst FF Il (439-16, wr, He 3)
birthaa janam gavaa-ay manmukh i-aanee a-uganvantee jhooray.
The self-willed, ignorant and disgraceful manmukh wastes her life in vain, and in the end, she comes to grief.
witue Afsag Afe Het AY usr st fug fifemr ges il (439-17, wr, He 3)
aapnaa satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa taa pir mili-aa hadooray.
But when she serves her True Guru, she obtains peace, and then she meets her Husband Lord, face to face.
ofa fug feat niesg Het AS Aafe ASS I (439-18, ner, He 3)
daykh pir vigsee andrahu sarsee sachai sabad subhaa-ay.
Beholding her Husband Lord, she blossoms forth; her heart is delighted, and she is beautified by the True Word of the Shabad.
ood fee oe ans sath gorat fife UtSH AY Ue IQH (439-18, »mr, He 3) naanak vin naavai kaaman bharam bhulaanee mil pareetam sukh paa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, without the Name, the soul-bride wanders around, deluded by doubt. Meeting her Beloved, she obtains peace. ||2||
UST 88O fug Afar ants afeor afe fe firesret IH Ih (440-1, mmr, ne 3)
pir sang kaaman jaani-aa gur may! milaa-ee raam. The soul-bride knows that her Husband Lord is with her; the Guru unites her in this union.
nists Aafe fest Hon sufs gsTet IMT I (440-1, mmr, He 3)
antar sabad milee sehjay tapat bujhaa-ee raam.
Within her heart, she is merged with the Shabad, and the fire of her desire is easily extinguished.
Rafe sufs gsret nists Ais nret AoA ofs GA ofr II (440-2, wr, He 3) sabad tapat bujhaa-ee antar saa‘t aa-ee sehjay har ras chaakhi-aa.
The Shabad has quenched the fire of desire, and within her heart, peace and tranquility have come; she tastes the Lord's essence with intuitive ease.
ffs UtsH wue wet da HS AS Aafe Aarftoa Ih (440-2, wm, He 3)
mil pareetam apnay sadaa rang maanay sachai sabad subhaakhi-aa.
Meeting her Beloved, she enjoys His Love continually, and her speech rings with the True Shabad.
ufs ufs ufss Hat aa Set Hats o uret I (440-3, mmr, He 3)
parh parh pandit monee thaakay bhaykhee mukat na paa-ee.
Reading and studying continually, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages have grown weary; wearing religious robes, liberation is not obtained.
Soe fas saat wa sGao Ad Aafe fret SI (440-4, wer, He 3)
naanak bin bhagtee jag ba-uraanaa sachai sabad milaa-ee. ||3]||
O Nanak, without devotional worship, the world has gone insane; through the True Word of the Shabad, one meets the Lord. ||3]|
A a6 Hie woe sfeur ofa AIG Afs fms IMT Il (440-4, nr, He 3) saa Dhan man anad bha-i-aa har jee-o mayl pi-aaray raam. Bliss permeates the mind of the soul-bride, who meets her Beloved Lord.
Wu dfs & off oat ae & Rafe wRs IH I (440-5, wer, He 3)
saa Dhan har kai ras rasee gur kai sabad apaaray raam. The soul-bride is enraptured with the sublime essence of the Lord, through the incomparable Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Rafe wturg fs fumrd Het Te ATS fs SA Il (440-5, wir, vs 3)
sabad apaaray milay pi-aaray sadaa gun saaray man vasay.
Through the incomparable Word of the Guru's Shabad, she meets her Beloved; she continually contemplates and enshrines His Glorious Virtues in her mind.
Aa Adel vt fufa act fife YISH nigar|E OF Il (440-6, um, Hs 3)
Sayj suhaavee jaa pir raavee mil pareetam avgan nasay.
Her bed was adorned when she enjoyed her Husband Lord; meeting with her Beloved, her demerits were erased.
fas ufs on ofe net fomreint Afsest Fa TS Il (440-6, ver, He 3)
jit ghar naam har sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai sohilrhaa jug chaaray.
That house, within which the Lord's Name is continually meditated upon, resounds with the wedding songs of rejoicing, throughout the four ages.
Soa OTH TS Ae wise J ofa fifemr araH ATS ISIE! (440-7, nmr, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sadaa anad hai har mili-aa kaaraj saaray. ||4||1]]6]|
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, we are in bliss forever; meeting the Lord, our affairs are resolved. ||4||1||6]|
qe Afsars yATfe il (440-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT HIG 3 SS WT 3 Il (440-8)
aasaa mehlaa 3 chhant ghar 3. Aasaa, Third Mehl, Chhant, Third House:
Ao He UISH 3H Ad at Safs asd Il (440-8, wm, He 3) Saajan mayray pareetmahu tum sah kee bhagat karayho.
O my beloved friend, dedicate yourself to the devotional worship of your Husband Lord.
Td ACT AST mms SY USTIG BI Il (440-9, nr, ve 3) gur sayvhu sadaa aapnaa naam padaarath layho. Serve your Guru constantly, and obtain the wealth of the Naam.
Safs AdI SH Ad Act A AG fips Bree I (440-9, nmr, He 3)
bhagat karahu tum sahai kayree jo sah pi-aaray bhaav-ay.
Dedicate yourself to the worship of your Husband Lord; this is pleasing to your Beloved Husband.
MTUSt Brat SH Ad 3 fefs Ad YA S MTSE Il (440-10, nmr, He 3)
aapnaa bhaanaa tum karahu taa fir sah khusee na aav-ay.
If you walk in accordance with your own will, then your Husband Lord will not be pleased with you.
sats ave feg wea fara ae word & USS Il (440-10, nmr, He 3)
bhagat bhaav ih maarag bikh-rhaa gur du-aarai ko paav-ay.
This path of loving devotional worship is very difficult; how rare are those who find it, through the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate.
ad sod fan ad fasur A ufe saat fos WSe NAM (440-11, ver, He 3)
kahai naanak jis karay kirpaa so har bhagtee chit laav-ay. ||1]|
Says Nanak, that one, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, links his consciousness to the worship of the Lord. ||1]|
AT Hs Aor JF Fava ate for feasts it (440-11, wer, we 3) mayray man bairaagee-aa too” bairaag kar kis dikhaaveh. O my detached mind, unto whom do you show your detachment?
of Afser faq Ae Ae A ofs TE wWefs il (440-12, wm, Hs 3)
har sohilaa tin" sad sadaa jo har gun gaavahi.
Those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord live in the joy of the Lord, forever and ever.
ats aaa 3 efs unig A Ag Ag fas Wee Il (440-12, wer, ws 3) kar bairaag too’ chhod pakhand so saho sabh kichh jaan-ay. So become detached, and renounce hypocrisy; Your Husband Lord knows everything.
nfs af Hdinifs Sat ret Taufa Joo uETse Il (440-13, nr, He 3)
jal thal mahee-al ayko so-ee gurmukh hukam pachhaan-ay.
The One Lord is pervading the water, the land and the sky; the Gurmukh realizes the Command of His Will.
fafs Jay ueTst odt Aa ASt AGS AY USES Il (440-13, ner, He 3) jin hukam pachhaataa haree kayraa so-ee sarab sukh paav-ay. One who realizes the Lord's Command, obtains all peace and comforts.
fez ad soa A Saat nofes ofa fee Bee MQM (440-14, nm, He 3)
iv kahai naanak so bairaagee an-din har liv laav-ay. ||2]|
Thus says Nanak: such a detached soul remains absorbed in the Lord's Love, day and night. ||2]|
WT HT HS S Wee BT Sd Ala 3d SS Il (440-14, wer, ws 3) jah jah man too” Dhaavdaa tah tah har tayrai naalay. Wherever you wander, O my mind, the Lord is there with you.
Ho fimreu ssh Ts a ASE AH Il (440-15, nA, He 3) man si-aanap chhodee-ai gur kaa sabad samaalay.
Renounce your cleverness, O my mind, and reflect upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afa 33 A AG Het d fea fas ais oH ANTS Il (440-15, mm, He 3)
saath tayrai so saho sadaa hai ik khin har naam samaalhay.
Your Husband Lord is always with you, if you remember the Lord's Name, even for an instant.
~~
HOH HOH & 3d uy aS nifs UH UE UST Il (440-16, mmr, He 3)
janam janam kay tayray paap katay ant param pad paavhay.
The sins of countless incarnations shall be washed away, and in the end, you shall obtain the supreme status.
A ofe Sa ae ol TaHfy Ae AHS Il (440-16, wer, He 3) saachay naal tayraa gandh laagai gurmukh sadaa samaalay. You shall be linked to the True Lord, and as Gurmukh, remember Him forever.
fe@ ad Hag AT HS SF Weer 3g ala SF AST SS MSI (440-17, mew, we 3) i-o kahai naanak jah man too’ Dhaavdaa tah har tayrai sadaa naalay. ||3]| Thus says Nanak: wherever you go, O my mind, the Lord is there with you. ||3]|
Afsas fifo wes dfimr for wife efior mre 1 (440-18, vir, ne 3)
satgur mili-ai Dhaavat thami"-aa nij ghar vasi-aa aa-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, the wandering mind is held steady; it comes to abide in its own home.
oH fers oH BE OTH Id AHS Il (440-18, nT, He 3) naam vihaajhay naam la-ay naam rahay samaa-ay. It purchases the Naam, chants the Naam, and remains absorbed in the Naam.
UaT 88q wes Sfimr afsafe fife exe ears urfeor i (441-1, om, He 3)
Dhaavat thami"-aa satgur mili-ai dasvaa du-aar paa-i-aa. The outgoing, wandering soul, upon meeting the True Guru, opens the Tenth Gate.
fsa nifys sao Aon ufs Cun fas Aafe nas Sf sofemr I (441-1, ome, ue 3) tithai amrit bhojan sahj Dhun upjai jit sabad jagat thami" rahaa-i-aa.
There, Ambrosial Nectar is food and the celestial music resounds; the world is held spell-bound by the music of the Word.
3J MSA SH AST noe J AS dom AME I (441-2, vir, He 3) tah anayk vaajay sadaa anad hai sachay rahi-aa samaa-ay. The many strains of the unstruck melody resound there, as one merges in Truth.
fe@ ad aoa Afsate fifo oes dime for wis efor mre wel (441-2, nmr, ne 3)
i-o kahai naanak satgur mili-ai Dhaavat thami"-aa nij ghar vasi-aa aa-ay. ||4]|
Thus says Nanak: by meeting the True Guru, the wandering soul becomes steady, and comes to dwell in the home of its own self. ||4]|
Ho 3 As AgY T wrUST Hw USES Il (441-3, we, Hs 3) man too” jot saroop hai aapnaa moo! pachhaan. O my mind, you are the embodiment of the Divine Light - recognize your own origin.
HO dfs At 3d ofe FT TaNSt Sa HS I (441-4, vir, we 3) man har jee tayrai naal hai gurmatee rang maan. O my mind, the Dear Lord is with you; through the Guru's Teachings, enjoy His Love.
He ustets St Ag Wels HeE Ales at ASt Tet MN 441-4, ww, ws 3)
mool pachhaaneh taa™ saho jaaneh maran jeevan kee sojhee ho-ee. Acknowledge your origin, and then you shall know your Husband Lord, and so understand death and birth.
Ts usAret Sa Weta st eA SS B Tet I (441-5, wey, we 3) gur parsaadee ayko jaaneh taa™ doojaa bhaa-o na ho-ee. By Guru's Grace, know the One; then, you shall not love any other.
fs Aifs wrest sat earet St Sut uses Il (441-5, nA, He 3) man saa“t aa-ee vajee vaDhaa-ee taa ho-aa parvaan. Peace comes to the mind, and gladness resounds; then, you shall be acclaimed.
feG ad sag Hs SF AS AGU FT mUS HS USS MUI (441-6, wT, ws 3)
i-o kahai naanak man too’ jot saroop hai apnaa mool pachhaan. ||5]|
Thus says Nanak: O my mind, you are the very image of the Luminous Lord; recognize the true origin of your self. ||5||
Ho 3 aefa uifeor arefa ofr Ate Il (441-6, rrr, Hs 3) man too” gaarab ati-aa gaarab ladi-aa jaahi. O mind, you are so full of pride; loaded with pride, you shall depart.
Hfenr Haat Hfonr fete fefe gat seta Ml (441-7, wer, Hs 3)
maa-i-aa mohnee mohi-aa fir fir joonee bhavaahi.
The fascinating Maya has fascinated you, over and over again, and lured you into reincarnation.
ets oar wmf Ha Ho nifs afenr ussted I (441-7, mmr, He 3)
gaarab laagaa jaahi mugaDh man ant ga-i-aa pachhutaavhay.
Clinging to pride, you shall depart, O foolish mind, and in the end, you shall regret and repent.
mwdard fsrat da sar fase HOH Teed Il (441-8, eA, He 3)
aha‘kaar tisnaa rog lagaa birthaa janam gavaavhay.
You are afflicted with the diseases of ego and desire, and you are wasting your life away in vain.
HOHY Hag sats ost wat afeor uss]T I (441-8, nA, He 3)
manmukh mugaDh cheeteh naahee agai ga-i-aa pachhutaavhay.
The foolish self-willed manmukh does not remember the Lord, and shall regret and repent hereafter.
fe@ ad aaa Ho S ela mifenr arate went AST WEI (441-9, wir, Hs 3)
i-o kahai naanak man too™ gaarab ati-aa gaarab ladi-aa jaavhay. ||6]|
Thus says Nanak: O mind, you are full of pride; loaded with pride, you shall depart. [16] |
Ho 3 HS We ale fa UG fas Wee qanfe fener FT Il (441-9, wer, ws 3)
man too’ mat maan karahi je ha-o kichh jaandaa gurmukh nimaanaa hohu.
O mind, don't be so proud of yourself, as if you know it all; the Gurmukh is humble and modest.
nists mfamre JG afo od Af Aafe He UT Il (441-10, nmr, ne 3)
antar agi-aan ha-o buDh hai sach sabad mal khohu.
Within the intellect are ignorance and ego; through the True Word of the Shabad, this filth is washed off.
og fore Asay wat HS fers wiry BarST I (441-11, weer, we 3)
hohu nimaanaa satguroo agai mat kichh aap lakhaavhay.
So be humble, and surrender to the True Guru; do not attach your identity to your ego.
mTUe MIS AIS Aso HS SF yryEt wiry TeST Il (441-11, wear, He 3)
aapnai aha‘kaar jagat jali-aa mat too’ aapnaa aap gavaavhay.
The world is consumed by ego and self-identity; see this, lest you lose your own self as well.
Afsag a ae aafo ars Afsad a ave Ba FT I (441-12, ni, ns 3) satgur kai bhaanai karahi kaar satgur kai bhaanai laag rahu.
Make yourself follow the Sweet Will of the True Guru; remain attached to His Sweet Will.
fe@ ad soa my efs Ay uefa He fener dE JT NDI (441-12, ner, He 3)
i-o kahai naanak aap chhad sukh paavahi man nimaanaa ho-ay rahu. ||7||
Thus says Nanak: renounce your ego and self-conceit, and obtain peace; let your mind abide in humility. ||7]|
Uo A eo fas H Afsag fixfeor A Ag fefs orfeor It (441-13, mmr, He 3)
Dhan so vaylaa jit mai satgur mili-aa so saho chit aa-i-aa.
Blessed is that time, when I met the True Guru, and my Husband Lord came into my consciousness.
Ho mee Add Ssfeur nfs safe Ae urfemr It (441-14, ver, He 3) mahaa anand sahj bha-i-aa man tan sukh paa-i-aa. I became so very blissful, and my mind and body found such a natural peace.
A Ag fefs orfeor ifs sarfeor niece Afs fers Il (441-14, ner, He 3)
so saho chit aa-i-aa man vasaa-i-aa avgan sabh visaaray.
My Husband Lord came into my consciousness; I enshrined Him within my mind, and I renounced all vice.
w fq oat Te usae Je Afsag wef ASS Ih (441-15, mmr, ne 3) jaa tis bhaanaa gun pargat ho-ay satgur aap savaaray. When it pleased Him, virtues appeared in me, and the True Guru Himself adorned me.
A HO ues de frot fea on fefaor ester aE garfemr | (441-15, nmr, He 3)
say jan parvaan ho-ay jin"ee ik naam dirhi-aa dutee-aa bhaa-o chukaa-i-aa.
Those humble beings become acceptable, who cling to the One Name and renounce the love of duality.
fe@ ad aaa Us A eo fas H Afsag fifemr A Ag fefs wrfenr Ich (441-16, nmr, He 3) i-o kahai naanak Dhan so vaylaa jit mai satgur mili-aa so saho chit aa-i-aa. ||8]| Thus says Nanak: blessed is the time when I met the True Guru, and my Husband Lord came into my consciousness. ||8] |
fefa Hs safh 38 fafe vfs nef gare th (441-17, vr, nH 3)
ik jant bharam bhulay tin seh aap bhulaa-ay.
Some people wander around, deluded by doubt; their Husband Lord Himself has misled them.
en ate feats IBH ASH AHS I (441-17, wr, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay fireh ha-umai karam kamaa-ay. They wander around in the love of duality, and they do their deeds in ego.
fate Afs orf gore aHrafa ure f3q aT fas o FATEH Il (441-18, nT, He 3)
tin seh aap bhulaa-ay kumaarag paa-ay tin kaa kichh na vasaa-ee.
Their Husband Lord Himself has misled them, and put them on the path of evil. Nothing lies in their power.
fae at af meats 33 arefe fats fea Fao Foret I (441-18, wT, He 3)
tin kee gat avgat too“hai jaaneh jin ih rachan rachaa-ee. You alone know their ups and downs, You, who created the creation.
Jay So ua ara Taney fawn FSS | (441-19, ner, ne 3) hukam tayraa kharaa bhaaraa gurmukh kisai bujhaa-ay. The Command of Your Will is very strict; how rare is the Gurmukh who understands.
fe@ ad soa four Hs fees wT sa sath SHS CN (441-19, nT, He 3) i-o kahai naanak ki-aa jant vichaaray jaa tuDh bharam bhulaa-ay. ||9||
Thus says Nanak: what can the poor creatures do, when You mislead them into doubt? ||9]|
UST 882 He Hd Afoa ASt Sot Sfsniret il (442-1, nmr, ve 3)
sachay mayray saahibaa sachee tayree vadi-aa-ee. O My True Lord Master, True is Your glorious greatness.
3 USAIN Mig AuMit Sat aeals aTE B AT Il (442-1, wr, we 3)
too” paarbarahm bay-ant su-aamee tayree kudrat kahan na jaa-ee.
You are the Supreme Lord God, the Infinite Lord and Master. Your creative power cannot be described.
Het Sct efsnret a aS su vfs ext HET Sd TS Wed Il (442-2, vir, He 3)
sachee tayree vadi-aa-ee jaa ka-o tuDh man vasaa-ee sadaa tayray gun gaavhay. True is Your glorious greatness; when You enshrine it within the mind, one sings Your Glorious Praises forever.
3d We Wefo w 30 Tea Ae HE fess Wed I (442-3, nmr, He 3)
tayray gun gaavahi jaa tuDh bhaaveh sachay si-o chit laavhay.
He sings Your Glorious Praises, when it is pleasing to You, O True Lord; he centers his consciousness on You.
fAA 3 3 ym Hof A AeHfe Tod ANTE I (442-3, wir, Hs 3) jis no too’ aapay mayleh so gurmukh rahai samaa-ee. One whom You unite with Yourself, as Gurmukh, remains absorbed in You.
fe@ ad aaa Ad Hd Aho Ast Sct Sfenret NAONQNDNUNQNDN (442-4, nmAT, He 3)
i-o kahai naanak sachay mayray saahibaa sachee tayree vadi-aa-ee. [LON21|7 15] 1211711
Thus says Nanak: O my True Lord Master, True is Your Glorious Greatness. HLOU2I/7 1511211711
TTY MAT SS HIS 8 We 9 (442-5)
raag aasaa chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Raag Aasaa, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Asa YATE Il (442-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aes HW Hes ufeor gente aS MH I (442-6, vir, He 4) jeevno mai jeevan paa-i-aa gurmukh bhaa-ay raam. Life - I have found real life, as Gurmukh, through His Love.
ofa ot ofa ony FS AS Ufs SAS TH I (442-6, mmr, He 4)
har naamo har naam dayvai mayrai paraan vasaa-ay raam.
The Lord's Name - He has given me the Lord's Name, and enshrined it within my breath of life.
ofs afe on Ae Uts SAS Ag AAT Sy TSS Ih (442-7, om, He 4)
har har naam mayrai paraan vasaa-ay sabh sansaa dookh gavaa-i-aa.
He has enshrined the Name of the Lord, Har, Har within my breath of Ife, and all my doubts and sorrows have departed.
wifene nigidg ad safe fourfemr ufex ua ue urfemr I (442-7, vir, ne 4)
adisat agochar gur bachan Dhi-aa-i-aa pavitar param pad paa-i-aa.
I have meditated on the invisible and unapproachable Lord, through the Guru's Word, and I have obtained the pure, supreme status.
mode Ufe Safe fos eA aet Afsarg set Il (442-8, wr, v3 4)
anhad Dhun vaajeh nit vaajay gaa-ee satgur banee.
The unstruck melody resounds, and the instruments ever vibrate, singing the Bani of the True Guru.
soa ats adt ufs es Ast Af ANAT NA (442-9, mr, He 4)
naanak daat karee parabh daatai jotee jot samaanee. ||1||
O Nanak, God the Great Giver has given me a gift; He has blended my light into the Light. ||1]|
HoH! HoHfe HE Hdt afe Hem TH I (442-9, mew, He 4)
manmukhaa manmukh mu-ay mayree kar maa-i-aa raam.
The self-willed manmukhs die in their self-willed stubbornness, declaring that the wealth of Maya is theirs.
fas ure fag we vada HS feos wfent aH II (442-10, vr, He 4)
khin aavai khin jaavai durganDh marhai chit laa-i-aa raam.
They attach their consciousness to the foul-smelling pile of filth, which comes for a moment, and departs in an instant.
ofent vada HS fos oar fa da ans feafemr i (442-10, ner, He 4)
laa-i-aa durganDh marhai chit laagaa ji-o rang kasumbh dikhaa-i-aa.
They attach their consciousness to the foul-smelling pile of filth, which is transitory, like the fading color of the safflower.
fag usta fag ueth ee fas va afmrfs serfemr i (442-11, wr, He 4)
khin poorab khin pachham chhaa-ay ji-o chak kum"i-aar bhavaa-i-aa.
One moment, they are facing east, and the next instant, they are facing west; they continue spinning around, like the potter's wheel.
eu uefs vu Hefs safe eu at feof Soret it (442-11, vir, He 4)
dukh khaaveh dukh sa‘cheh bhogeh dukh kee biraDh vaDhaa-ee.
In sorrow, they eat, and in sorrow, they gather things and try to enjoy them, but they only increase their stores of sorrow.
Sod fun Ader sdha A nies Ta ASST QM (442-12, vir, He 4)
naanak bikham suhaylaa taree-ai jaa aavai gur sarnaa-ee. ||2||
O Nanak, one easily crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, when he comes to the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||2||
Ha SAT SAT Sl MGI MISTI IH Il (442-12, wer, He 4) mayraa thaakuro thaakur neekaa agam athaahaa raam. My Lord, my Lord Master is sublime, unapproachable and unfathomable.
dfs urt ofs unt odt As Afsae ATI ITH I (442-13, mir, He 4)
har poojee har poojee chaahee mayray satgur saahaa raam.
The wealth of the Lord - I seek the wealth of the Lord, from my True Guru, the Divine Banker.
fs unt wat oH FAAS TE WS TE TS Il (442-13, ve, ws 4)
har poojee chaahee naam bisaahee gun gaavai gun bhaavai.
I seek the wealth of the Lord, to purchase the Naam; I sing and love the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
te gu AS usta fora AS ATS ANTS I (442-14, mmr, oe 4)
need bhookh sabh parhar ti-aagee sunnay sunn samaavédi.
I have totally renounced sleep and hunger, and through deep meditation, I am absorbed into the Absolute Lord.
zens fea ast orefa oer afs BH B AST I (442-14, ner, He 4) vanjaaray ik bhaatee aavahi laahaa har naam lai jaahay. The traders of one kind come and take away the Name of the Lord as their profit.
soa HO 36 Mafu ae wid fan yrs A UTS ISM (442-15, wir, He 4) naanak man tan arap gur aagai jis paraapat so paa-ay. ||3]| O Nanak, dedicate your mind and body to the Guru; one who is so destined, attains it.
[SII
Tso" ISG USSG AT AT Sam TH Il (442-16, rT, ue 4) ratnaa ratan padaarath baho saagar bhari-aa raam. The great ocean is full of the treasures of jewels upon jewels.
wat qaaat oat fq ofa sfaor TH I (442-16, wir, He 4)
banee gurbaanee laagay tin" hath charhi-aa raam.
Those who are committed to the Word of the Guru's Bani, see them come into their hands.
qaret od fsq ofa sfsur fasiwa Iq MRS I (442-16, »mr, He 4)
gurbaanee laagay tin" hath charhi-aa nirmolak ratan apaaraa.
This priceless, incomparable jewel comes into the hands of those who are committed to the Word of the Guru's Bani.
dfs dfs an nsea ufeor Sct sats sg Fag IN (442-17, we, v2 4)
har har naam atolak paa-i-aa tayree bhagat bharay bhandaaraa.
They obtain the immeasurable Name of the Lord, Har, Har; their treasure is overflowing with devotional worship.
Ae fedie Adty oH efi fea erg nigu fearet il (442-18, mmr, we 4)
samund virol sareer ham daykhi-aa ik vasat anoop dikhaa-ee.
I have churned the ocean of the body, and I have seen the incomparable thing come into view.
qs alee Ge TT I Sa FES ST USUI (442-18, AF, Hs 4)
gur govind govind guroo hai naanak bhayd na bhaa-ee. ||4||1||8]|
The Guru is God, and God is the Guru, O Nanak; there is no difference between the two, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4]|1]|8]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (442-19)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
fSfi fon fof fof Sor nifigs Oat IMT I (442-19, nmr, Hs 4) jhim jhimay jhim jhim varsai amrit Dhaaraa raam. Slowly, slowly, slowly, very slowly, the drops of Ambrosial Nectar trickle down.
UST ges
Tse Tafa sedt IH fumra TH I (443-1, wr, He 4) gurmukhay gurmukh nadree raam pi-aaraa raam. As Gurmukh, the Gurmukh beholds the Lord, the Beloved Lord.
oH Oo flmre Aas festa aH oth Sfsnret il (443-1, rr, He 4)
raam naam pi-aaraa jagat nistaaraa raam naam vadi-aa-ee.
The Name of the Lord, the Emancipator of the world, is dear to him; the Name of the Lord is his glory.
afsafa mu an sfoa aoufa us wuret il (443-2, ner, He 4)
kalijug raam naam bohithaa gurmukh paar laghaa-ee.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the boat, which carries the Gurmukh across.
Jos ues oH oth AIS asHfe Agat ATS Il (443-2, nmr, He 4)
halat palat raam naam suhaylay gurmukh karnee saaree.
This world, and the world hereafter, are adorned with the Lord's Name; the Gurmukh's lifestyle is the most excellent.
sod ats vfeur afs fe oH oft forsrdt Ul (443-3, mmr, He 4) naanak daat da-i-aa kar dayvai raam naam nistaaree. ||1]| O Nanak, bestowing His kindness, the Lord gives the gift of His emancipating Name.
[11
TH OH OH Afmr ey faofeu on Tefen IM I (443-3, mT, He 4)
raamo raam naam japi-aa dukh kilvikh naas gavaa-i-aa raam.
I chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, which destroys my sorrows and erases my sins.
Gd ude Td ude fomrfeor FH fost aH getfeor aM I (443-4, vir, He 4)
gur parchai gur parchai Dhi-aa-i-aa mai hirdai raam ravaa-i-aa raam.
Associating with the Guru, associating with the Guru, I practice meditation; I have enshrined the Lord within my heart.
dfeur an fore usH afs uret AT ag AaSTeT MIS I (443-5, ni, He 4)
ravi-aa raam hirdai param gat paa-ee jaa gur sarnaa-ee aa-ay.
I enshrined the Lord within my heart, and obtained the supreme status, when I came to the Sanctuary of the Guru.
8s fears oe suet foast a Afsafs on fese Il (443-5, mmr, ne 4)
lobh vikaar naav dubdee niklee jaa satgur naam dirhaa-ay.
My boat was sinking under the weight of greed and corruption, but it was uplifted when the True Guru implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
Fit ae afte us chor oH OTH fas we It (443-6, wer, ws 4)
jee-a daan gur poorai dee-aa raam naam chit laa-ay.
The Perfect Guru has given me the gift of spiritual life, and I center my consciousness on the Lord's Name.
wify faure faut afs SS aaa Ts ATSTS NM (443-6, wirAr, He 4)
aap kirpaal kirpaa kar dayvai naanak gur sarnaa-ay. ||2]|
The Merciful Lord Himself has mercifully given this gift to me; O Nanak, I take to the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||2||
aet TH oH Hat fafa aren Afs AIS TH Il (443-7, ni, He 4)
banee raam naam sunee siDh kaaraj sabh suhaa-ay raam.
Hearing the Bani of the Lord's Name, all my affairs were brought to perfection and embellished.
on df fh SAH Tanfe ay fore IH I (443-7, nm, He 4)
romay rom rom romay mai gurmukh raam Dhi-aa-ay raam.
With each and every hair, with each and every hair, as Gurmukh, I meditate on the Lord.
oH omy fomre ufeg dfs ure PSA gy 3 Sftmr aret I (443-8, mmr, we 4) raam naam Dhi-aa-ay pavit ho-ay aa-ay tis roop na raykh-i-aa kaa-ee. I meditate on the Lord's Name, and become pure; He has no form or shape.
TH TH sent we nists As fyAST se TST Il (443-9, mew, we 4)
raamo raam ravi-aa ghat antar sabh tarisnaa bhookh gavaa-ee.
The Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, is permeating my heart deep within, and all of my desire and hunger has disappeared.
Hd 30 Alse Aterg AS dor aeNfs IH YAAT I (443-9, nmr, He 4)
man tan seetal seegaar sabh ho-aa gurmat raam pargaasaa.
My mind and body are totally adorned with peace and tranquility; through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord has been revealed to me.
soe wif niga abhor gH oAfS VALS STAT ISI (443-10, wm, Hs 4)
naanak aap anoograhu kee-aa ham daasan daasan daasaa. ||3]||
The Lord Himself has shown His kind mercy to Nanak; He has made me the slave of the slaves of His slaves. ||3]|
fot OH oH oH ferrfoor A HOHe He MisTat IH Il (443-10, wr, He 4)
jinee raamo raam naam visaari-aa say manmukh moorh abhaagee raam.
Those who forget the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, are foolish, unfortunate, self- willed manmukhs.
fae nisd Ho fenmt fas fas wfeor oreit I It (443-11, ner, He 4)
tin antray moh vi-aapai khin khin maa-i-aa laagee raam.
Within, they are engrossed in emotional attachment; each and every moment, Maya clings to them.
Hfeur He ord us se visait fre TH oH Be Sfmt It (443-12, mmr, ve 4)
maa-i-aa mal laagee moorh bha-ay abhaagee jin raam naam nah bhaa-i-aa.
The filth of Maya clings to them, and they become unfortunate fools - they do not love the Lord's Name.
WOa AIH ada vifsrst sfs TH on Safer i (443-10, new, ns 4)
anayk karam karahi abhimaanee har raamo naam choraa-i-aa.
The egotistical and proud perform all sorts of rituals, but they shy away from the Lord's Name.
Ho fey AH Uy Tder aes He nifomra | (443-13, weer, Hs 4)
mahaa bikham jam panth duhaylaa kaalookhat moh anDhi-aaraa.
The path of Death is very arduous and painful; it is stained with the darkness of emotional attachment.
Soa ToHfe ay fonrfeor st urs Hay Enis SI (443-13, nA, He 4) naanak gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa taa paa-ay mokh du-aaraa. ||4|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, and finds the gate of salvation. ||4||
TH TH SH TT TH TINY WS TH Il (443-14, weer, Hs 4) raamo raam naam guroo raam gurmukhay jaanai raam. The Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, and the Lord Guru, are known by the Gurmukh.
feg Hour fag Gs ufeuret sone fears wife mire TH I (443-14, wir, Hs 4)
ih manoo-aa khin oobh paa-i-aalee bharmadaa ikat ghar aanai raam.
One moment, this mind is in the heavens, and the next, it is in the nether regions; the Guru brings the wandering mind back to one-pointedness.
Ho feas uf ore ns afs ffs we ofs Mt oN SAS I (443-15, vir, He 4)
man ikat ghar aanai sabh gat mit jaanai har raamo naam rasaa-ay.
When the mind returns to one-pointedness, one totally understands the value of salvation, and enjoys the subtle essence of the Lord's Name.
Ao at Un se oH one ufowre Corfs SIS Il (443-16, nmr, He 4)
jan kee paij rakhai raam naamaa par-hilaad uDhaar taraa-ay.
The Lord's Name preserves the honor of His servant, as He preserved and emancipated Prahlaad.
TH TH TH OH Co Te aafsur nig 3 ufeMr I (443-16, wr, He 4)
raamo raam ramo ram oochaa gun kehti-aa ant na paa-i-aa. So repeat continually the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam; chanting His Glorious Virtues, His limit cannot be found.
Soa TH OH Als Sd TH OTH AHTfEMM WU (443-17, wT, He 4)
naanak raam naam sun bheenay raamai naam samaa-i-aa. ||5]||
Nanak is drenched in happiness, hearing the Name of the Lord; he is merged in the Name of the Lord. ||5]|
fas nisd TH OH ZA f80 fest AS Teen IM I (443-17, wT, He 4) jin antray raam naam vasai tin chintaa sabh gavaa-i-aa raam. Those beings, whose minds are filled the Lord's Name, forsake all anxiety.
Afs wee Afs cen fe ufo fefeur A ee urfeer aH II (443-18, nA, He 4) sabh arthaa sabh Dharam milay man chindi-aa so fal paa-i-aa raam. They obtain all wealth, and all Dharmic faith, and the fruits of their minds’ desires.
Ho fefenr ee usar aH oy fomrfeor aH OH TE WE Il (443-19, wer, v2 4)
man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa raam naam Dhi-aa-i-aa raam naam gun gaa-ay.
They obtain the fruits of their hearts' desires, meditating on the Lord's Name, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
zonfs aafa aet afo cet TH of He GE Il (443-19, nm, He 4)
durmat kabuDh ga-ee suDh ho-ee raam naam man laa-ay.
Evil-mindedness and duality depart, and their understanding is enlightened. They attach their minds to the Name of the Lord.
UST Yee
He® HOH Ade AS dor fas IH aM usarfAor I (444-1, mmr, He 4)
safal janam sareer sabh ho-aa jit raam naam pargaasi-aa.
Their lives and bodies become totally blessed and fruitful; the Lord's Name illumines them.
Sa did 3H Ae feo TSt TaHfy for whe Shaye Well (444-1, rrr, He 4)
naanak har bhaj sadaa din raatee gurmukh nij ghar vaasi-aa. ||6||
O Nanak, by continually vibrating upon the Lord, day and night, the Gurmukhs abide in the home of the inner self. ||6]|
fis Fea oH oH walt faq eH fas o ofemr IM I (444-2, mmm, we 4)
jin sarDhaa raam naam lagee tin" doojai chit na laa-i-aa raam.
Those who place their faith in the Lord's Name, do not attach their consciousness to another.
A Udst As ave ate cin fas ae neg & afer IM I (444-3, wer, He 4)
jay Dhartee sabh kanchan kar deejai bin naavai avar na bhaa-i-aa raam.
Even if the entire earth were to be transformed into gold, and given to them, without the Naam, they love nothing else.
oH OH His Stfemr usH AY uUfenr nifs vofenr aries FaTeT II (444-3, nimrT, He 4) raam naam man bhaa-i-aa param sukh paa-i-aa ant chaldi-aa naal sakhaa-ee.
The Lord's Name is pleasing to their minds, and they obtain supreme peace; when they depart in the end, it shall go with them as their support.
TH OH UG Ue Het ot Ta oT AST MN (444-4, meer, oe 4)
raam naam Dhan poonjee sanchee naa doobai naa jaa-ee.
I have gathered the capital, the wealth of the Lord's Name; it does not sink, and does not depart.
oH on fen Fa Hf SBT AHATS Sfs B TS I (444-4, ner, He 4)
raam naam is jug meh tulhaa jamkaal nayrh na aavai.
The Lord's Name is the only true support in this age; the Messenger of Death does not draw near it.
Soa TaHfy aH uerst ate faa wrfy flere DM (444-5, wir, He 4) naanak gurmukh raam pachhaataa kar kirpaa aap milaavai. ||7] |
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs recognize the Lord; in His Mercy, He unites them with Himself. ||7] |
oH TH on AS AS Tene whee MH I (444-6, vier, He 4) raamo raam naam satay sat gurmukh jaani-aa raam. True, True is the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam; the Gurmukh knows the Lord.
Aza ad Ae oar fats Hoe se mrafu vatfemr IM I (444-6, nr, He 4)
sayvko gur sayvaa laagaa jin man tan arap charhaa-i-aa raam.
The Lord's servant is the one who commits himself to the Guru's service, and dedicates his mind and body as an offering to Him.
Ho 36 Mefumrt aga Hfe Aefamr as Aza ate fee I (444-7, nmr, He 4)
man tan arpi-aa bahut man sarDhi-aa gur sayvak bhaa-ay milaa-ay.
He dedicates his mind and body to Him, placing great faith in Him; the Guru lovingly unites His servant with Himself.
dior org Abort or ast us TT FS UTS Il (444-7, never, ne 4) deenaa naath jee-aa kaa daataa pooray gur tay paa-ay. The Master of the meek, the Giver of souls, is obtained through the Perfect Guru.
Og fig fry Tg FT Sa TS SueA BHe I (444-8, weer, us 4)
guroo sikh sikh guroo hai ayko gur updays chalaa-ay.
The Guru's Sikh, and the Sikh's Guru, are one and the same; both spread the Guru's Teachings.
TH OH HS fase FS Soa fos ATS UCUQNCN (444-8, nT, He 4)
raam naam mant hirdai dayvai naanak milan subhaa-ay. ||8]|2||9] |
The Mantra of the Lord's Name is enshrined within the heart, O Nanak, and we merge with the Lord so easily. ||8]|2||9||
qe Afsare YATE Il (444-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT SS HIG 8 We 2 Il (444-10)
aasaa chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 2. Aasaa, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
ofa ate asst eu fiomng ufss weg ats oH AIG I (444-10, wr, He 4)
har har kartaa dookh binaasan patit paavan har naam jee-o.
The Creator Lord, Har, Har, is the Destroyer of distress; the Name of the Lord is the Purifier of sinners.
ofa AS set usn ats uret afs Say ate ats any AG Mh (444-11, wr, He 4)
har sayvaa bhaa-ee param gat paa-ee har ootam har har kaam jee-o.
One who lovingly serves the Lord, obtains the supreme status. Service to the Lord, Har, Har, is more exalted than anything.
ofs SSH ay mbt fs ay ofe muha wafers TS (444-11, wer, we 4)
har ootam kaam japee-ai har naam har japee-ai asthir hovai.
Chanting the Name of the Lord is the most exalted occupation; chanting the Name of the Lord, one becomes immortal.
HOH Hds Ve VU He AoA dt Ale AS Il (444-12, nmr, He 4)
janam maran dovai dukh maytay sehjay hee sukh sovai.
The pains of both birth and death are eradicated, and one comes to sleep in peaceful ease.
dfs ofs fasur weg oars ofa mbt wrsn ony AIG I (444-13, mmr, He 4)
har har kirpaa Dhaarahu thaakur har japee-ai aatam raam jee-o.
O Lord, O Lord and Master, shower Your Mercy upon me; within my mind, I chant the Name of the Lord.
dfs ots asst eu fiomng ufss ureg ais oH ATS NA (444-13, wr, He 4)
har har kartaa dookh binaasan patit paavan har naam jee-o. ||1]|
The Creator Lord, Har, Har, is the Destroyer of distress; the Name of the Lord is the Purifier of sinners. ||1]|
ofs on uersg afeafa Sau afs mult Afsae ae AG I (444-14, wir, ws 4)
har naam padaarath kalijug ootam har japee-ai satgur bhaa-ay jee-o.
The wealth of the Lord's Name is the most exalted in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; chant the Lord's Name according to the Way of the True Guru.
qanfy ofa usta aenfy afa wet ofs wus Aes ey ATE AIG I (444-15, mmr, He 4) gurmukh har parhee-ai gurmukh har sunee-ai har japat sunat dukh jaa-ay jee-o.
As Gurmukh, read of the Lord; as Gurmukh, hear of the Lord. Chanting and listening to the Lord's Name, pain departs.
dfs ofs oH Afr ey faofior ofs au usH AY UTfeMr I (444-15, mmr, He 4)
har har naam japi-aa dukh binsi-aa har naam param sukh paa-i-aa.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, pains are removed. Through the Name of the Lord, supreme peace is obtained.
Afsas famre afeor ufe wee vifamre nite aetfenr I (444-16, nr, He 4)
satgur gi-aan bali-aa ghat chaanan agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-i-aa.
The spiritual wisdom of the True Guru illumines the heart; this Light dispels the darkness of spiritual ignorance.
dfs ofa on fset »rafoor fre HASta ute feet ue AIG I (444-17, nmr, He 4)
har har naam tinee aaraaDhi-aa jin mastak Dhur likh paa-ay jee-o.
They alone meditate on the Lord's Name, Har, Har, upon whose foreheads such destiny is written.
ofs oy uersg afeafa Sau afs ruby Afsae se AIG IN (444-17, wer, He 4)
har naam padaarath kalijug ootam har japee-ai satgur bhaa-ay jee-o. ||2||
The wealth of the Lord's Name is the most exalted in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; chant the Lord's Name according to the Way of the True Guru. ||2]|
dfs ofa Hf Sfeur usH AY ufenr ate oro ue faces AG I (444-18, mmr, He 4)
har har man bhaa-i-aa param sukh paa-i-aa har laahaa pad nirbaan jee-o.
One whose mind loves the Lord, Har, Har, obtains supreme peace. He reaps the profit of the Lord's Name, the state of Nirvaanaa.
ofa utfs soret ofa ay Aaret SH Yat niSS ATS ATG I (444-19, wer, He 4)
har pareet lagaa-ee har naam sakhaa-ee bharam chookaa aavan jaan jee-o.
He embraces love for the Lord, and the Lord's Name becomes his companion. His doubts, and his comings and goings are ended.
Ua ggu
mee Wat gH 3G sar ate ats ats Te afenr I (445-1, wr, Hs 4)
aavan jaanaa bharam bha-o bhaagaa har har har gun gaa-i-aa.
His comings and goings, doubts and fears come to an end, and he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
HOH HOH & fxofeu eu Cad ofa ofa ath AHeMT I (445-1, nmr, He 4)
janam janam kay kilvikh dukh utray har har naam samaa-i-aa.
The sins and pains of countless incarnations are washed away, and he merges into the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fre ofe fourfeur ufe aa fafa ufeur foo Hee ASH Uses AIG I (445-2, nmr, He 4) jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa Dhur bhaag likh paa-i-aa tin safal janam parvaan jee-o.
Those who are blessed by such pre-ordained destiny, meditate on the Lord, and their lives become fruitful and approved.
dfs ofs nfs Sfeor us AY ufenr ate oe ue fora AIG SI (445-3, nmr, He 4)
har har man bhaa-i-aa param sukh paa-i-aa har laahaa pad nirbaan jee-o. ||3]||
One whose mind loves the Lord, Har, Har, obtains supreme peace. He reaps the profit of the Lord's Name, the state of Nirvaanaa. ||3]|
fig afe Hie Barat 3 AS USMS 3 BSH ale ofe Sa AS Mt (445-3, wer, He 4)
jin" har meeth lagaanaa tay jan parDhaanaa tay ootam har har log jee-o. Celebrated are those people, unto whom the Lord seems sweet; how exalted are those people of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs om zat ofa om Feet a Aaet fs GA Sa AIG I (445-4, nmr, ne 4)
har naam vadaa-ee har naam sakhaa-ee gur sabdee har ras bhog jee-o.
The Lord's Name is their glorious greatness; the Lord's Name is their companion and helper. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they enjoy the sublime essence of the Lord.
dfs oA 3a Ho fara esaret ofs dA urfemr Ih (445-5, nim, He 4)
har ras bhog mahaa nirjog vadbhaagee har ras paa-i-aa.
They enjoy the sublime essence of the Lord, and remain totally detached. By great good fortune, they obtain the sublime essence of the Lord.
A Ug = AS use us fo TeHfs oH fimrfemr Ih (445-5, mr, Hs 4)
say Dhan vaday sat purkhaa pooray jin gurmat naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
So very blessed and truly perfect are those, who through Guru's Instruction meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
We HSA FS Hat ua AY His yor Aa feria AG Ul (445-6, weer, Hs 4)
jan naanak rayn mangai pag saaDhoo man chookaa sog vijog jee-o.
Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of the Holy; his mind is rid of sorrow and separation.
fig afe Hie Sarat 3 AS UST 3 BSH ale ale ST AS USNSNIOMl (445-6, mT, He 4) jin" har meeth lagaanaa tay jan parDhaanaa tay ootam har har log jee-o. ||4]|3]|10]| Celebrated are those people, unto whom the Lord seems sweet; how exalted are those people of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|3]|10]]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (445-7)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
Asafa As Hsu Adts ua wd aay fame AE I (445-8, mmr, He 4)
satjug sabh santokh sareeraa pag chaaray Dharam Dhi-aan jee-o.
In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, everyone embodied contentment and meditation; religion stood upon four feet.
fs safe af aefa usH AY urefo af fase afs ae famre FIG I (445-8, vir, He 4) man tan har gaavahi param sukh paavahi har hirdai har gun gi-aan jee-o.
With mind and body, they sang of the Lord, and attained supreme peace. In their hearts was the spiritual wisdom of the Lord's Glorious Virtues.
ae famre uevse dfs ofs fasase Hat aoufa Tet i (445-9, vir, He 4)
gun gi-aan padaarath har har kirtaarath sobhaa gurmukh ho-ee.
Their wealth was the spiritual wisdom of the Lord's Glorious Virtues; the Lord was their success, and to live as Gurmukh was their glory.
nists aofe ofe ys Sa SAT neg o ET I (445-10, mT, He 4)
antar baahar har parabh ayko doojaa avar na ko-ee.
Inwardly and outwardly, they saw only the One Lord God; for them there was no other second.
dfs ofs foe wet ofa om Aeret afs waa US HS FIG I (445-10, nr, He 4)
har har liv laa-ee har naam sakhaa-ee har dargeh paavai maan jee-o.
They centered their consciousness lovingly on the Lord, Har, Har. The Lord's Name was their companion, and in the Court of the Lord, they obtained honor.
Asafa As Hsu Ade ua ws caH fomre AE WAN (445-11, om, He 4)
satjug sabh santokh sareeraa pag chaaray Dharam Dhi-aan jee-o. ||1]|
In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, everyone embodied contentment and meditation; religion stood upon four feet. ||1]|
33a Wa orfenr uists Ag ufeor AS HAN ae oe FIG I (445-11, mr, He 4)
taytaa jug aa-i-aa antar jor paa-i-aa jat sanjam karam kamaa-ay jee-o.
Then came the Silver Age of Trayta Yuga; men's minds were ruled by power, and they practiced celibacy and self-discipline.
ua ue fufimr 3 ua fefomr nfs fase ao wate AIG II (445-12, vir, ne 4)
pag cha-uthaa khisi-aa tarai pag tiki-aa man hirdai kroDh jalaa-ay jee-o.
The fourth foot of religion dropped off, and three remained. Their hearts and minds were inflamed with anger.
fs fose au no farsa fasu oefs ofS ey urfeer It (445-13, ner, He 4)
man hirdai kroDh mahaa bisloDh nirap Dhaaveh larh dukh paa-i-aa.
Their hearts and minds were filled with the horribly poisonous essence of anger. The kings fought their wars and obtained only pain.
Wists HHS" Jaq Barat IGH midars Safer | (445-13, ww, Hs 4)
antar mamtaa rog lagaanaa ha-umai aha‘kaar vaDhaa-i-aa.
Their minds were afflicted with the illness of egotism, and their self-conceit and arrogance increased.
dfs ofs four ot He oats faa aonfs afe ath ofo ate AIG I (445-14, vir, He 4) har har kirpaa Dhaaree mayrai thaakur bikh gurmat har naam leh jaa-ay jee-o.
If my Lord, Har, Har, shows His Mercy, my Lord and Master eradicates the poison by the Guru's Teachings and the Lord's Name.
337 Wa orfenr uists Ag ufeor AS HAN ae oe FIG QM (445-15, nmr, He 4)
taytaa jug aa-i-aa antar jor paa-i-aa jat sanjam karam kamaa-ay jee-o. ||2] |
Then came the Silver Age of Trayta Yuga; men's minds were ruled by power, and they practiced celibacy and self-discipline. ||2||
Wa enrug wrfeor sof sorfenr af aut arg Cute AE Wt (445-15, mr, v2 4) jug du-aapur aa-i-aa bharam bharmaa-i-aa har gopee kaan" upaa-ay jee-o.
The Brass Age of Dwaapar Yuga came, and people wandered in doubt. The Lord created the Gopis and Krishna.
su satus svufs wa Us uidsts mifs fafomt aH aHTE AIG Il (445-16, wer, nH 4) tap taapan taapeh jag punn aarambheh at kiri-aa karam kamaa-ay jee-o. The penitents practiced penance, they offered sacred feasts and charity, and performed many rituals and religious rites.
fafoor agH antfenr ua efe funorfemr ef ua fea feorfe AIG II (445-17, nmr, He 4) kiri-aa Karam kamaa-i-aa pag du-ay khiskaa-i-aa du-ay pag tikai tikaa-ay jee-o. They performed many rituals and religious rites; two legs of religion dropped away, and only two legs remained.
Ho WO HO ag ale fefs IBA ud uSte AIG I (445-18, ym, Hs 4)
mahaa juDh joDh baho keen"ay vich ha-umai pachai pachaa-ay jee-o.
So many heroes waged great wars; in their egos they were ruined, and they ruined others as well.
ae tents ag AG fHorfenr fife Afsas He of Ae AG I (445-18, nr, He 4) deen da-i-aal gur saaDh milaa-i-aa mil satgur mal leh jaa-ay jee-o.
The Lord, Compassionate to the poor, led them to meet the Holy Guru. Meeting the True Guru, their filth is washed away.
Wa enrug orfeor sof sorfenr afs aut arg Curfe FG WS (445-19, mer, He 4)
jug du-aapur aa-i-aa bharam bharmaa-i-aa har gopee kaan" upaa-ay jee-o. ||3]| The Brass Age of Dwaapar Yuga came, and the people wandered in doubt. The Lord created the Gopis and Krishna. ||3]|
Uat sve afera ofa aor ua 3 farcior ua aGer feat feorfe AIG I (446-1, vir, ne 4)
kalijug har kee-aa pag tarai khiskee-aa pag cha-uthaa tikai tikaa-ay jee-o. The Lord ushered in the Dark Age, the Iron Age of Kali Yuga; three legs of religion were lost, and only the fourth leg remained intact.
ad Age antfenr meug oe ufeor ote atets of As ute AE I (446-2, nmr, He 4) gur sabad kamaa-i-aa a-ukhaDh har paa-i-aa har keerat har saa‘t paa-ay jee-o. Acting in accordance with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the medicine of the Lord's Name is obtained. Singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, divine peace is obtained.
dfs atefs ofS uret afs on earet afs ofs aH BS AHEM I (446-2, vr, He 4)
har keerat rut aa-ee har naam vadaa-ee har har naam khayt jamaa-i-aa.
The season of singing the Lord's Praise has arrived; the Lord's Name is glorified, and the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, grows in the field of the body.
aera ate att fas ae As BT He Teer Il (446-3, weer, Hs 4)
kalijug beej beejay bin naavai sabh laahaa mool gavaa-i-aa.
In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, if one plants any other seed than the Name, all profit and capital is lost.
We sola Tg us ufenr vfs fase aH wate AG i (446-4, wer, Hs 4)
jan naanak gur pooraa paa-i-aa man hirdai naam lakhaa-ay jee-o.
Servant Nanak has found the Perfect Guru, who has revealed to him the Naam within his heart and mind.
aera dfs amr ua 3 func ug war fea fearfe AG NSUsNAal (446-4, vir, He 4) kaljug har kee-aa pag tarai khiskee-aa pag cha-uthaa tikai tikaa-ay jee-o. ||4||4]|11]| The Lord ushered in the Dark Age, the Iron Age of Kali Yuga; three legs of religion were lost, and only the fourth leg remained intact. ||4]|4]|11]|
MITAT HIG 8 Il (446-5)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
dfs atefs His svet usH afs uret ofa nfs 3fo Hie ware AIG Il (446-5, nmr, He 4)
har keerat man bhaa-ee param gat paa-ee har man tan meeth lagaan jee-o.
One whose mind is pleased with the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, attains the supreme status; the Lord seems so sweet to her mind and body.
dfs of oA ufenr asnfs afs fourfeur ufe HASsfa aa USS AIG Il (446-6, nT, Hs 4) har har ras paa-i-aa gurmat har Dhi-aa-i-aa Dhur mastak bhaag puraan jee-o.
She obtains the sublime essence of the Lord, Har, Har; through the Guru's Teachings, she meditates on the Lord, and the destiny written on her forehead is fulfilled.
fs HASfa oa afs oth aoa dfs on ofs Te afeMr I (446-7, vir, He 4)
Dhur mastak bhaag har naam suhaag har naamai har gun gaa-i-aa.
By that high destiny written on her forehead, she chants the Name of the Lord, her Husband, and through the Name of the Lord, she sings the Lord's Glorious Praises.
HASfa Hat Uifs ag yaret afs on afe Hofer I (446-8, ni, He 4)
mastak manee pareet baho pargatee har naamai har sohaa-i-aa.
The jewel of immense love sparkles on her forehead, and she is adorned with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
at Afs fret ys ufenr fife Afsas Home HTS AIG I (446-8, wer, Hs 4)
jotee jot milee parabh paa-i-aa mil satgur manoo-aa maan jee-o.
Her light blends with the Supreme Light, and she obtains God; meeting the True Guru, her mind is satisfied.
dfs atefs ufs aret usn afs uret ofa fs 3fo Hie ware AI NU (446-9, nmr, ue 4) har keerat man bhaa-ee param gat paa-ee har man tan meeth lagaan jee-o. ||1]| One whose mind is pleased with the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, attains the supreme status; the Lord seems sweet to her mind and body. ||1]|
fg ofe AA arfeur usH ue UfeMr S BSH AG UsUTS FIG II (446-10, mmr, He 4)
har har jas gaa-i-aa param pad paa-i-aa tay ootam jan parDhaan jee-o.
Those who sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, obtain the supreme status; they are the most exalted and acclaimed people.
fq dH ude Ades fia fas ua dea faa fe He ware AIG I (446-10, mmr, He 4)
tin" ham charan sarayveh khin khin pag Dhovah jin har meeth lagaan jee-o.
I bow at their feet; each and every moment, I wash the feet of those, unto whom the Lord seems sweet.
ofa Hier ofenr usH AY ufenr fe sar SST BTS Il (446-11, rr, He 4)
har meethaa laa-i-aa param sukh paa-i-aa mukh bhaagaa ratee chaaray.
The Lord seems sweet to them, and they obtain the supreme status; their faces are radiant and beautiful with good fortune.
gents dfs arfeor ofa oe Cfs urfenr af oor afe are I (446-12, vr, He 4) gurmat har gaa-i-aa har haar ur paa-i-aa har naamaa kanth Dhaaray.
Under Guru's Instruction, they sing the Lord's Name, and wear the garland of the Lord's Name around their necks; they keep the Lord's Name in their throats.
AS &a fenfe Ang afs Fa AT mS IH UES AIG I (446-12, nmr, He 4)
sabh ayk darisat samat kar daykhai sabh aatam raam pachhaan jee-o.
They look upon all with equality, and recognize the Supreme Soul, the Lord, pervading among all.
ofa ofe AA arfeur usH ue Ufeer Ss BSH AG UTUTS FIG QI (446-13, wT, He 4)
har har jas gaa-i-aa param pad paa-i-aa tay ootam jan parDhaan jee-o. ||2]|
Those who sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, obtain the supreme status; they are the most exalted and acclaimed people. ||2| |
AsAafs ufs set fs aAo srret fete Hats afs on af AE II (446-14, ver, He 4) satsangat man bhaa-ee har rasan rasaa-ee vich sangat har ras ho-ay jee-o.
One whose mind is pleased with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, savors the sublime essence of the Lord; in the Sangat, is this essence of the Lord.
dfs ofs wrafoor aa Aafe fearfaor dt nied o afe AIG II (446-14, vir, He 4)
har har aaraaDhi-aa gur sabad vigaasi-aa beejaa avar na ko-ay jee-o.
He meditates in adoration upon the Lord, Har, Har, and through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he blossoms forth. He plants no other seed.
neg 3 af afe nifys Afe fafs Udo A fafa AS I (446-15, or, Hs 4)
avar na ko-ay har amrit so-ay jin pee-aa so biDh jaanai.
There is no Nectar, other than the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar. One who drinks it in, knows the way.
ug U6 Ts us ys wfenr ofa Hats SH UES Il (446-16, mmr, He 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo pooraa parabh paa-i-aa lag sangat naam pachhaanai.
Hail, hail to the Perfect Guru; through Him, God is found. Joining the Sangat, the Naam is understood.
oH Afe oH mrad fag oH meg 3 afte MI Il (446-16, nmr, He 4)
naamo sayv naamo aaraaDhai bin naamai avar na ko-ay jee-o.
I serve the Naam, and I meditate on the Naam. Without the Naam, there is no other at all.
AsAafs ufs set fs aAo srret fete Hats ofs on af AE SI (446-17, ue, He 4) satsangat man bhaa-ee har rasan rasaa-ee vich sangat har ras ho-ay jee-o. ||3]| One whose mind is pleased with the Sat Sangat, savors the sublime essence of the Lord; in the Sangat, is this essence of the Lord. ||3]|
dfs cer us Weg ude JH Sag afe Seg Aafe Aste AG I (446-18, wm, ws 4)
har da-i-aa parabh Dhaarahu paakhan ham taarahu kadh layvhu sabad subhaa-ay jee- O. O Lord God, shower Your Mercy upon me; I am just a stone. Please, carry me across, and lift me up with ease, through the Word of the Shabad.
Hu diets oa fouss aH WS ae ats ys ute AIG Il (446-18, wr, He 4)
moh cheekarh faathay nighrat ham jaatay har baa‘h parabhoo pakraa-ay jee-o.
I am stuck in the swamp of emotional attachment, and I am sinking. O Lord God, please, take me by the arm.
yufs ata uaoet Con HIS uret TT BaNt AG Bar Il (446-19, weAr, He 4)
parabh baa‘h pakraa-ee ootam mat paa-ee gur charnee jan laagaa.
God took me by the arm, and I obtained the highest understanding; as His slave, I grasped the Guru's feet.
Us 88D ofe dfs oH Afuor orator yf HAS Sa AST I (447-1, wrAr, He 4)
har har naam japi-aa aaraaDhi-aa mukh mastak bhaag sabhaagaa. I chant and meditate in adoration upon the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, according to the good destiny written upon my forehead.
Ho sa die fasur ost xfs ofa ofa Hier ote AG Nl (447-1, ver, He 4)
jan naanak har kirpaa Dhaaree man har har meethaa laa-ay jee-o.
The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak, and the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, seems so sweet to his mind.
dfs cfeor us Weg ude JH Sag afe Seg Aafe Hates AG WSNUNII (447-2, vm, He
4)
har da-i-aa parabh Dhaarahu paakhan ham taarahu kadh layvhu sabad subhaa-ay jee- o. |[4]]5]]12]|
O Lord God, shower Your Mercy upon me; I am just a stone. Please, carry me across,
and lift me up with ease, through the Word of the Shabad. ||4]|5||12] |
MTAT HIG 8 Il (447-3)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
Hfs aH AUS oie de Hie Ho ahs sas Aa Hfe WES AG I (447-3, nmr, He 4)
man naam japaanaa har har man bhaanaa har bhagat janaa man chaa-o jee-o. One who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har in his mind - the Lord is pleasing to his mind. In the mind of the devotees there is a great yearning for the Lord.
A ne uf He fq nifys ule nfs war aeHfS SS AIG I (447-4, vm, Hs 4)
jo jan mar jeevay tin" amrit peevay man laagaa gurmat bhaa-o jee-o.
Those humble beings who remain dead while yet alive, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar; through the Guru's Teachings, their minds embrace love for the Lord.
Hfs ofs ofs ee ag ad une Hes HAS AY eT Il (447-4, ner, He 4)
man har har bhaa-o gur karay pasaa-o jeevan mukat sukh ho-ee.
Their minds love the Lord, Har, Har, and the Guru is Merciful to them. They are Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive, and they are at peace.
dtefe nafs ofs of Ads Hfs ofs afs fase FEF Il (447-5, nmr, He 4)
jeevan maran har naam suhaylay man har har hirdai so-ee.
Their birth and death, through the Name of the Lord, are illustrious, and in their hearts and minds, the Lord, Har, Har, abides.
Hfe afs of efor asnfs safe afer ate ofa gr aera Ure ATE I (447-6, nmr, He 4) man har har vasi-aa gurmat har rasi-aa har har ras gataak pee-aa-o jee-o.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, abides in their minds, and through the Guru's Teachings, they savor the Lord, Har, Har; they drink in the sublime essence of the Lord with abandon.
Hfs aH AUS dfs de Hfe He ahs sas Ao He TS AG A (447-6, nmr, He 4) man naam japaanaa har har man bhaanaa har bhagat janaa man chaa-o jee-o. ||1]| One who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in his mind - the Lord is pleasing to his mind. In the mind of the devotees there is such a great yearning for the Lord. ||1]|
afa Hee 3 atfenr fos nity wafer HS AH ua B ATE AE UN 447-7, ue, He 4) jag maran na bhaa-i-aa nit aap lukaa-i-aa mat jam pakrai lai jaa-ay jee-o.
The people of the world do not like death; they try to hide from it. They are afraid that the Messenger of Death may catch them and take them away.
ofa nists wats ofs ys Sa feg thre sft 3 ate FIG I (447-8, mr, He 4) har antar baahar har parabh ayko ih jee-arhaa rakhi-aa na jaa-ay jee-o. Inwardly and outwardly, the Lord God is the One and Only; this soul cannot be concealed from Him.
faG HG ait fs ens Sata fan at ens AS AE AE I (447-9, ver, He 4)
ki-o jee-o rakheejai har vasat lorheejai jis kee vasat so lai jaa-ay jee-o.
How can one keep one's soul, when the Lord wishes to have it? All things belong to Him, and He shall take them away.
HOH ATE use ate SIH Als wisua ag ote AE I (447-9, mmr, He 4)
manmukh karan palaav kar bharmay sabh a-ukhaDh daaroo laa-ay jee-o.
The self-willed manmukhs wander around in pathetic lamentation, trying all medicines and remedies.
fan at SAS Us we Aut Ao Sud Age ante AG I (447-10, mr, He 4)
jis kee vasat parabh la-ay su-aamee jan ubray sabad kamaa-ay jee-o.
God, the Master, unto whom all things belong, shall take them away; the Lord's servant is redeemed by living the Word of the Shabad.
Afa Hoe 3 atfenr fos wry warfeor HS AH uad B ATE AIG QM (447-10, wm, He 4) jag maran na bhaa-i-aa nit aap lukaa-i-aa mat jam pakrai lai jaa-ay jee-o. ||2|| The people of the world do not like death; they try to hide from it. They are afraid that the Messenger of Death may catch them and take them away. ||2]|
Ufa Hee feurfior aeufa Aofemr Ae Cad afe ofe fomrfs AIG (447-11, om, He 4) Dhur maran likhaa-i-aa gurmukh sohaa-i-aa jan ubray har har Dhi-aan jee-o. Death is pre-ordained; the Gurmukhs look beauteous, and the humble beings are saved, meditating on the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs Hat uret ofa ath efsmret ofs cea Ud ae ATG I (447-12, nmr, He 4) har sobhaa paa-ee har naam vadi-aa-ee har dargeh paiDhay jaan jee-o. Through the Lord they obtain honor, and through the Lord's Name, glorious greatness. In the Court of the Lord, they are robed in honor.
dfs vag Ud ofs an Ald ofs oH 3 AY Ufo I (447-13, ver, He 4)
har dargeh paiDhay har naamai seeDhay har naamai tay sukh paa-i-aa.
Robed in honor in the Court of the Lord, in the perfection of the Lord's Name, they obtain peace through the Lord's Name.
HOH Hd Se BU He Ufa TH St ANfEMT I (447-13, nm, He 4)
janam maran dovai dukh maytay har raamai naam samaa-i-aa.
The pains of both birth and death are eliminated, and they merge into the Name of the Lord.
dfs aS us dfs Sa Je als Ae ys Sa ANS AE I (447-14, vir, Hs 4)
har jan parabh ral ayko ho-ay har jan parabh ayk samaan jee-o.
The Lord's servants meet with God and merge into Oneness. The Lord's servant and God are one and the same.
fs nee ferfeur aenfa Aofeor AS Gad afe afs fomrfs AE a (447-15, ner, He 4) Dhur maran likhaa-i-aa gurmukh sohaa-i-aa jan ubray har har Dhi-aan jee-o. ||3]| Death is pre-ordained; the Gurmukhs look beauteous, and the humble beings are saved, meditating on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
nag Gun fon faofh faorR ofa aaufa mmfag df AG I (447-15, vir, He 4)
jag upjai binsai binas binaasai lag gurmukh asthir ho-ay jee-o.
The people of the world are born, only to perish, and perish, and perish again. Only by attaching oneself to the Lord as Gurmukh, does one become permanent.
ag 43 fere ofs safe ore af nifigs afs uf ofe AIG Il (447-16, wr, H2 4)
gur mantar drirh-aa-ay har rasak rasaa-ay har amrit har mukh cho-ay jee-o.
The Guru implants His Mantra within the heart, and one savors the sublime essence of the Lord; the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord trickles into his mouth.
ofa nifys oa urfeer yor Htefemr fefs wofs Hae o Tet I (447-17, om, He 4)
har amrit ras paa-i-aa mu-aa jeevaa-i-aa fir baahurh maran na ho-ee.
Obtaining the Ambrosial Essence of the Lord, the dead are restored to life, and do not die again.
dfs ofa an one ue ufenr ofe of Ar] et I (447-17, nmr, He 4) har har naam amar pad paa-i-aa har naam samaavai so-ee.
Through the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, one obtains the immortal status, and merges into the Lord's Name.
Ho aoa BH niurg 2a d faa oe nied o afe AE II (447-18, wer, He 4)
jan naanak naam aDhaar tayk hai bin naavai avar na ko-ay jee-o.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the only Support and Anchor of servant Nanak; without the Naam, there is nothing else at all.
aa Gur faon faofh for ofa aeufa omfag af AG IsnENIsi (447-19, nmr, He 4) jag upjai binsai binas binaasai lag gurmukh asthir ho-ay jee-o. ||4]|6]]13]|
The people of the world are born, only to perish, and perish, and perish again. Only by attaching oneself to the Lord as Gurmukh, does one become permanent.
[14] 161] 13]
UST est
MAT HIS 8 BS Il (448-1)
aasaa mehlaa 4 chhant. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, Chhant:
a Ha dfee man uae urte fade fadara AIG Il (448-1, mmr, He 4)
vadaa mayraa govind agam agochar aad niranjan nirankaar jee-o.
My Lord of the Universe is great, unapproachable, unfathomable, primal, immaculate and formless.
wT ot afs adt 5 vet mfifs efsuret Ha afse mre wre FIG I (448-1, vr, He 4)
taa kee gat kahee na jaa-ee amit vadi-aa-ee mayraa govind alakh apaar jee-o.
His condition cannot be described; His Glorious Greatness is immeasurable. My Lord of the Universe is invisible and infinite.
Ties MIBU MUTT nUdUT nim MMS ATS Il (448-2, nimAT, He 4) govind alakh apaar aprampar aap aapnaa jaanai. The Lord of the Universe is invisible, infinite and unlimited. He Himself knows Himself.
foor fea Hz fears adinifo # so nrfs Sars I (448-3, nmr, v2 4) ki-aa ih jant vichaaray kahee-ahi jo tuDh aakh vakhaanai. What should these poor creatures say? How can they speak of and describe You?
fan 3 oefs aefs SF net A Gente as Steg AIG I (448-3, mmm, we 4) jis no nadar karahi too’ apnee so gurmukh karay veechaar jee-o. That Gurmukh who is blessed by Your Glance of Grace contemplates You.
a Ha dfes man nav urfe fade fadara AE Nal (448-4, nm, ne 4)
vadaa mayraa govind agam agochar aad niranjan nirankaar jee-o. ||1]|
My Lord of the Universe is great, unapproachable, unfathomable, primal, immaculate and formless. ||1]|
3 urfe us oRidug asst So ug & ufemr ae AIG Il (448-5, wer, Hs 4) too” aad purakh aprampar kartaa tayraa paar na paa-i-aa jaa-ay jee-o. You, O Lord, O Primal Being, are the Limitless Creator; Your limits cannot be found.
3 ud wu uists Ava fedste As ufs sfoor AHS FIG I (448-5, wm, Hs 4)
too” ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay jee-o.
You are pervading and permeating each and every heart, everywhere, You are contained in all.
we nists UsqIH USHA 3 at nis B urfeMr I (448-6, wer, He 4)
ghat antar paarbarahm parmaysar taa kaa ant na paa-i-aa.
Within the heart is the Transcendent, Supreme Lord God, whose limits cannot be found.
fH Jy 3 3u mifeAe mdse TaHfe view werfenr | (448-6, mmr, He 4)
tis roop na raykh adisat agochar gurmukh alakh lakhaa-i-aa. He has no form or shape; He is unseen and unknown. The Gurmukh sees the unseen Lord.
Het nidfe ad fes wat AoA at ANTE ATE I 448-7, um, He 4)
sadaa anand rahai din raatee sehjay naam samaa-ay jee-o.
He remains in continual ecstasy, day and night, and is spontaneously absorbed into the Naam.
3 urfe use oridug asst Soa ug & ufemr ae AE QU (448-8, wr, He 4) too” aad purakh aprampar kartaa tayraa paar na paa-i-aa jaa-ay jee-o. ||2|| You, O Lord, O Primal Being, are the Limitless Creator; Your limits cannot be found.
121] 3 Afs ushAg Ae nifsat afe afe get fours AG Il (448-2, mmr, Hs 4)
too” sat parmaysar sadaa abhinaasee har har gunee niDhaan jee-o. You are the True, Transcendent Lord, forever imperishable. The Lord, Har, Har, is the treasure of virtue.
ofs af ys Sa nig 3 aet F wm yay AAS AIG II (448-9, vir, we 4)
har har parabh ayko avar na ko-ee too™ aapay purakh sujaan jee-o.
The Lord God, Har, Har, is the One and only; there is no other at all. You Yourself are the all-knowing Lord.
yay AAS J USUG SO AST iss 3 Ae Il (448-10, weer, ws 4)
purakh sujaan too” parDhaan tuDh jayvad avar na ko-ee.
You are the all-knowing Lord, the most exalted and auspicious; there is no other as great as You.
30 Hag Ag Sd easta F wm aafs A TET I (448-10, wT, ws 4) tayraa sabad sabh too™hai varteh too” aapay karahi so ho-ee. The Word of Your Shabad is pervading in all; whatever You do, comes to pass.
dfs AS fo sfeur Sat Het Tafa whim afe an FIG NN (448-11, ner, He 4)
har sabh meh ravi-aa ayko so-ee gurmukh lakhi-aa har naam jee-o.
The One Lord God is permeating all; the Gurmukh comes to understand the Lord's Name.
3 Afs ushAg Ae nifsomt afs ate gat fours FIG NSN (448-11, wr, He 4)
too” sat parmaysar sadaa abhinaasee har har gunee niDhaan jee-o. ||3]| You are the True, Transcendent Lord, forever imperishable. The Lord, Har, Har, is the treasure of virtue. ||3]|
Ag 30 Ass" AS Sat Sfsnret fAS ae SS vote AIS It (448-12, vir, we 4)
sabh too™hai kartaa sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-ay jee-o.
You are the Creator of all, and all greatness is Yours. As it pleases Your Will, so do we act.
3g wm are fae vorefa ne 3d Aafe mfe AIG I (448-13, mmr, He 4) tuDh aapay bhaavai tivai chalaaveh sabh tayrai sabad samaa-ay jee-o. As it pleases Your Will, so do we act. All are merged into Your Shabad.
AS Rafe AS AT 3g aS 3d Aafe sfsnret Il (448-13, vir, He 4) sabh sabad samaavai jaa‘ tuDh bhaavai tayrai sabad vadi-aa-ee. When it pleases Your Will, we obtain greatness through Your Shabad.
aeanfe afa urea wiry cere Hae sfomt ANTE IN (448-14, mmr, He 4)
gurmukh buDh paa-ee-ai aap gavaa-ee-ai sabday rahi-aa samaa-ee.
The Gurmukh obtains wisdom, and eliminates his self-conceit, and remains absorbed in the Shabad.
30 Age nites ToHfa ut aoa of Ae AIG I (448-14, mmr, He 4)
tayraa sabad agochar gurmukh paa-ee-ai naanak naam samaa-ay jee-o.
The Gurmukh obtains Your incomprehensible Shabad; O Nanak, he remains merged in the Naam.
Ag 30 Aas AS Sat Sfsnret fAS are Fe vars AS usnoNIVSll (448-15, mmr, we 4) sabh too‘hai kartaa sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-ay jee-o.
41171 [141]
You are the Creator of all, and all greatness is Yours. As it pleases Your Will, so do we act. ||4]|7]|14]|
qe Afsars yATfe il (448-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT HIS 8 SS We Il (448-17) aasaa mehlaa 4 chhant ghar 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, Chhant, Fourth House:
ofa nifys fas Sfee He Uf Tsar IH TA I (448-17, wT, Hs 4)
har amrit bhinnay lo-inaa man paraym ratannaa raam raajay.
My eyes are wet with the Nectar of the Lord, and my mind is imbued with His Love, O Lord King.
He ot anect wfeur aee Afar Il (448-18, nmr, He 4) man raam kasvatee laa-i-aa kanchan sovinnaa. The Lord applied His touch-stone to my mind, and found it one hundred per cent gold.
Tents sft voter Hae HE 3S FFs I (448-18, weer, Hs 4)
gurmukh rang chalooli-aa mayraa man tano bhinnaa.
As Gurmukh, I am dyed in the deep red of the poppy, and my mind and body are drenched with His Love.
ua get
HG sod HAla Safemt AS ASH Us Gar IAI (449-1, »mAT, He 4) jan naanak musak jhakoli-aa sabh janam Dhan Dhannaa. ||1|| Servant Nanak is drenched with His Fragrance; blessed, blessed is his entire life. || 1] |
dfs UH aat Ho HM nrehas web IH TH I (449-1, wm, us 4)
har paraym banee man maari-aa anee-aalay anee-aa raam raajay.
The Bani of the Lord's Love is the pointed arrow, which has pierced my mind, O Lord King.
fan oret ute fudu ot A ATS Ado I (449-2, vir, He 4) jis laagee peer piramm kee so jaanai jaree-aa. Only those who feel the pain of this love, know how to endure it.
Hee Hats A umiba nfs Ate Hor It (449-2, vir, He 4)
jeevan mukat so aakhee-ai mar jeevai maree-aa.
Those who die, and remain dead while yet alive, are said to be Jivan Mukta, liberated while yet alive.
Ho soa Alsag Af oe Aa Esa SoM MQM (449-3, wm, ve 4)
jan naanak satgur mayl har jag dutar taree-aa. ||2||
O Lord, unite servant Nanak with the True Guru, that he may cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
oH Hau Ham AsSTast fe alse Jar TH TA Il (449-3, mew, we 4)
ham moorakh mugaDh sarnaagatee mil govind rangaa raam raajay.
I am foolish and ignorant, but I have taken to His Sanctuary; may I merge in the Love of the Lord of the Universe, O Lord King.
afs us ote ufenr afe sats fea Har il (449-4, wer, Hs 4)
gur poorai har paa-i-aa har bhagat ik mangaa.
Through the Perfect Guru, I have obtained the Lord, and I beg for the one blessing of devotion to the Lord.
Ha Ho 30 Aafe fearfimr Afu nies Sdar Il (449-4, nmr, He 4)
mayraa man tan sabad vigaasi-aa jap anat tarangaa.
My mind and body blossom forth through the Word of the Shabad; I meditate on the Lord of infinite waves.
ffs HS Ho dfs ufeor oto ASAE SI (449-5, nm, He 4)
mil sant janaa har paa-i-aa naanak satsangaa. ||3]||
Meeting with the humble Saints, Nanak finds the Lord, in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||3]|
do tfenres Afe dost af ys ots Theor TH TH II (449-5, wr, He 4) deen da-i-aal sun bayntee har parabh har raa-i-aa raam raajay. O Merciful to the meek, hear my prayer, O Lord God; You are my Master, O Lord King.
JG HIG Hafe ate aH at Ufa ofa Hie Ufenr I (449-6, wer, He 4) ha-o maaga-o saran har naam kee har har mukh paa-i-aa. I beg for the Sanctuary of the Lord's Name, Har, Har; please, place it in my mouth.
sats zee fe fase 3 ofa oA aerfeor I (449-6, nmr, He 4) bhagat vachhal har birad hai har laaj rakhaa-i-aa. It is the Lord's natural way to love His devotees; O Lord, please preserve my honor!
HO Soa Ads ast dfs ot SateMMr NSUCUAUI (449-7, wr, He 4)
jan naanak sarnaagatee har naam taraa-i-aa. ||4||8]|15]| Servant Nanak has entered His Sanctuary, and has been saved by the Name of the Lord. ||4]|8]|15]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (449-8)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
genta gfe gefenr ofa AAS BO TH TH Il (449-8, wer, He 4)
gurmukh dhoondh dhoodhaydi-aa har sajan laDhaa raam raajay.
As Gurmukh, I searched and searched, and found the Lord, my Friend, my Sovereign Lord King.
ave afeur ae as fete ofa ofa fro il (449-8, umn, He 4) kanchan kaa-i-aa kot garh vich har har siDhaa. Within the walled fortress of my golden body, the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed.
of ofa dite a0 F Ha HO 36 fear Il (449-9, mmr, He 4) har har heeraa ratan hai mayraa man tan viDhaa. The Lord, Har, Har, is a jewel, a diamond; my mind and body are pierced through.
uf ata es ofa ufenr soa ofA TU IA (449-9, wr, He 4)
Dhur bhaag vaday har paa-i-aa naanak ras guDhaa. ||1]||
By the great good fortune of pre-ordained destiny, I have found the Lord. Nanak is permeated with His sublime essence. ||1||
Ug we fos ust HU Fale Set IH TA I (449-10, mm, He 4) panth dasaavaa nit kharhee munDh joban baalee raam raajay. I stand by the roadside, and ask the way; I am just a youthful bride of the Lord King.
dfs ots an sate ag ofa Hata Tat Il (449-10, mA, He 4)
har har naam chaytaa-ay gur har maarag chaalee.
The Guru has caused me to remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; I follow the Path to Him.
He nfs sfs om wrorg J IGN fae ATT I (449-11, mmr, He 4)
mayrai man tan naam aaDhaar hai ha-umai bikh jaalee.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of my mind and body; I have burnt away the poison of ego.
Ho saa Afsag Af ote ate fifeur goers iQ (449-11, wm, He 4)
jan naanak satgur mayl har har mili-aa banvaalee. ||2||
O True Guru, unite me with the Lord, unite me with the Lord, adorned with garlands of flowers. ||2]|
qantas fumird ure firs 4 fodt fees It TH I (449-12, vir, He 4)
gurmukh pi-aaray aa-ay mil mai chiree vichhunay raam raajay.
O my Love, come and meet me as Gurmukh; I have been separated from You for so long, Lord King.
Ha Ho 36 SIS Satfamr afs Se ofA (FS Nl (449-12, ne, ne 4) mayraa man tan bahut bairaagi-aa har nain ras bhinnay. My mind and body are sad; my eyes are wet with the Lord's sublime essence.
A ofe ys fimrs eff ag fife ofa He HS I (449-13, om, He 4) mai har parabh pi-aaraa das gur mil har man mannay. Show me my Lord God, my Love, O Guru; meeting the Lord, my mind is pleased.
TS HTY aS Belo area Ths AH WS (449-13, wer, Hs 4) ha-o moorakh kaarai laa-ee-aa naanak har kammay. ||3]| I am just a fool, O Nanak, but the Lord has appointed me to perform His service. ||3]|
as nifys fest todt nifys gaax IH TH Il (449-14, vw, ne 4)
gur amrit bhinnee dayhuree amrit burkay raam raajay.
The Guru's body is drenched with Ambrosial Nectar; He sprinkles it upon me, O Lord King.
faa aaaret nfs svete nifiyfs sf sex il (449-14, om, He 4)
jinaa gurbaanee man bhaa-ee-aa amrit chhak chhakay.
Those whose minds are pleased with the Word of the Guru's Bani, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar again and again.
Ts 3S The ufeor Fax UX Ua Il (449-15, we, Hs 4)
gur tuthai har paa-i-aa chookay Dhak Dhakay.
As the Guru is pleased, the Lord is obtained, and you shall not be pushed around any more.
dfs AS ofa afe afer soa aha fea NSNENIE! (449-15, wT, He 4)
har jan har har ho-i-aa naanak har ikay. ||4]|9||16]|
The Lord's humble servant becomes the Lord, Har, Har; O Nanak, the Lord and His servant are one and the same. ||4||9]|16]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (449-16)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
fe nifys safs saa 3 as Asa WA TH TA Il (449-16, vm, v8 4)
har amrit bhagat bhandaar hai gur satgur paasay raam raajay.
The treasure of Ambrosial Nectar, the Lord's devotional service, is found through the Guru, the True Guru, O Lord King.
ag Afsag AS AD od fie Of afe TA Ih (449-17, mmr, 2 4)
gur satgur sachaa saahu hai sikh day-ay har raasay.
The Guru, the True Guru, is the True Banker, who gives to His Sikh the capital of the Lord.
U6 US Zens Sen J TT AT AHA I (449-17, wer, we 4) Dhan Dhan vanjaaraa vanaj hai gur saahu saabaasay. Blessed, blessed is the trader and the trade; how wonderful is the Banker, the Guru!
He soa ag fsat ufenr fro ufs feus feat fear dil (449-18, mr, He 4)
jan naanak gur tin"ee paa-i-aa jin Dhur likhat lilaat likhaasay. ||1||
O servant Nanak, they alone obtain the Guru, who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads. ||1||
Ag AY THs FS Vel AS AS SSN TH TH Il (449-18, wer, ws 4) sach saahu hamaaraa too” Dhanee sabh jagat vanjaaraa raam raajay. You are my True Banker, O Lord; the whole world is Your trader, O Lord King.
AS ais 30 fer fefs sexs ofs ara Il (449-19, ver, He 4) sabh bhaa‘day tuDhai saaji-aa vich vasat har thaaraa. You fashioned all vessels, O Lord, and that which dwells within is also Yours.
a uefs ais fefe eA A faas foor det aT Sar Il (449-19, wrAT, He 4)
jo paavahi bhaa™day vich vasat saa niklai ki-aa ko-ee karay vaychaaraa.
Whatever You place in that vessel, that alone comes out again. What can the poor creatures do?
Uat guo Ho soa ag ofa sufhor afs sats Fara MQM (450-1, wer, ne 4)
jan naanak ka-o har bakhsi-aa har bhagat bhandaaraa. ||2|| The Lord has given the treasure of His devotional worship to servant Nanak. ||2]|
oH for ge 33 feass AuMit F nnrs wrurs IH TA Il (450-2, mA, oe 4)
ham ki-aa gun tayray vithreh su-aamee too” apar apaaro raam raajay.
What Glorious Virtues of Yours can I describe, O Lord and Master? You are the most infinite of the infinite, O Lord King.
dfs om Wedd feg Tf Sa TA nTOTE II (450-2, nmr, He 4) har naam saalaahah din raat ayhaa aas aaDhaaro. I praise the Lord's Name, day and night; this alone is my hope and support.
TH Hae fas 3 WET fos ursT UTP Il (450-3, wr, Hs 4) ham moorakh kichhoo-a na jaanhaa kiv paavah paaro. I am a fool, and I know nothing. How can I find Your limits?
He sod df at aA dS ofa BA Ufsad SII (450-3, nrAr, He 4) jan naanak har kaa daas hai har daas panihaaro. ||3]|| Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord, the water-carrier of the slaves of the Lord.
[I3]|
fa sre fC afr & aH Aafs YS mrs TH TA I (450-4, vm, He 4)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh lai ham saran parabh aa-ay raam raajay.
As it pleases You, You save me; I have come seeking Your Sanctuary, O God, O Lord King.
oH 3fs fearss fear ats ofs oA TAS I (450-4, wer, He 4) ham bhool vigaarhah dinas raat har laaj rakhaa-ay. I am wandering around, ruining myself day and night; O Lord, please save my honor!
oH wfea 3 ag fust oS HPS AHSTE Il (450-5, mmr, He 4)
ham baarik too™ gur pitaa hai day mat samjhaa-ay.
I am just a child; You, O Guru, are my father. Please give me understanding and instruction.
He sod UH dle aifenr afe UA THES ISIION ADI (450-5, nT, He 4)
jan naanak daas har kaa“dhi-aa har paij rakhaa-ay. ||4]]10]|17]| Servant Nanak is Known as the Lord's slave; O Lord, please preserve his honor! [14] [10] ]17]]
MTAT HIG 8 Il (450-6)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
fe HASta ufs ats feftimr fser Afsag fife ant IH II (450-6, nm, He 4)
jin mastak Dhur har likhi-aa tinaa satgur mili-aa raam raajay.
Those who have the blessed pre-ordained destiny of the Lord written on their foreheads, meet the True Guru, the Lord King.
mfamitg nite afenr as famirg wife afer i (450-7, nmr, He 4)
agi-aan anDhayraa kati-aa gur gi-aan ghat bali-aa.
The Guru removes the darkness of ignorance, and spiritual wisdom illuminates their hearts.
dfs om ao ues fefs safe o afer Il (450-7, nmr, He 4)
har laDhaa ratan padaaratho fir bahurh na chali-aa.
They find the wealth of the jewel of the Lord, and then, they do not wander any longer.
Ho Baa OH niattonr wirata ote fife All (450-8, nA, He 4)
jan naanak naam aaraaDhi-aa aaraaDh har mili-aa. ||1]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and in meditation, he meets the Lord. ||1||
frat nT ofa oH 3 SfS6 A ad Ala mre IH TH Il (450-8, we, He 4)
jinee aisaa har naam na chayti-o say kaahay jag aa-ay raam raajay.
Those who have not kept the Lord's Name in their consciousness - why did they bother to come into the world, O Lord King?
fed HSH HOH Uses J OW fear fase AS AS I (450-9, nA, He 4)
in maanas janam dulambh hai naam binaa birthaa sabh jaa-ay.
It is so difficult to obtain this human incarnation, and without the Naam, it is all futile and useless.
dfs es ofa on 3 SAS wrat sar foot we I (450-9, ner, He 4)
hun vatai har naam na beeji-o agai bhukhaa ki-aa khaa-ay.
Now, in this most fortunate season, he does not plant the seed of the Lord's Name; what will the hungry soul eat, in the world hereafter?
HoHu & fefs HoH J Baa Ts SS NMI (450-10, mr, He 4) manmukhaa no fir janam hai naanak har bhaa-ay. ||2| | The self-willed manmukhs are born again and again. O Nanak, such is the Lord's Will.
21 |
3 ofs 3a Ag & Als 50 Bue TH TA Il (450-10, mmr, He 4) too” har tayraa sabh ko sabh tuDh upaa-ay raam raajay. You, O Lord, belong to all, and all belong to You. You created all, O Lord King.
fae ofa fan 2 fae ont Afs voto vere Il (450-11, mmr, He 4) kichh haath kisai dai kichh naahee sabh chaleh chalaa-ay. Nothing is in anyone's hands; all walk as You cause them to walk.
faa 3 Hofe flmrd A sg fhofs A of nfs se I (450-11, wr, w8 4)
jin" too’ mayleh pi-aaray say tuDh mileh jo har man bhaa-ay.
They alone are united with You, O Beloved, whom You cause to be so united; they alone are pleasing to Your Mind.
Ho soa Afsagd stent da oth SIS UI (450-12, nm, He 4)
jan naanak satgur bhayti-aa har naam taraa-ay. ||3]|
Servant Nanak has met the True Guru, and through the Lord's Name, he has been carried across. ||3]||
act we wait aret act ag ofs afe act ofa ofe SA TH TA I (450-12, ner, He 4) ko-ee gaavai raagee naadee baydee baho bhaat kar nahee har har bheejai raam raajay.
Some sing of the Lord, through musical Ragas and the sound current of the Naad, through the Vedas, and in so many ways. But the Lord, Har, Har, is not pleased by these, O Lord King.
fro nisfs aue fearg od fsar df& fom ate I (450-13, mmr, ne 4)
jinaa antar kapat vikaar hai tinaa ro-ay ki-aa keejai.
Those who are filled with fraud and corruption within - what good does it do for them to cry out?
dfs asst Ag fae vee fafs dar ge Sta Il (450-14, mmr, 2 4)
har kartaa sabh kichh jaandaa sir rog hath deejai.
The Creator Lord knows everything, although they may try to hide their sins and the causes of their diseases.
faa’ soa deny fase ag J ufe safs afs SH NSIC (450-14, nm, He 4)
jinaa naanak gurmukh hirdaa suDh hai har bhagat har leejai. ||4||11||18]| O Nanak, those Gurmukhs whose hearts are pure, obtain the Lord, Har, Har, by devotional worship. ||4||11]|18]|
MITAT HIG 8 Il (450-15)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
faa nists ofe afs ulfs 3 3 Ao Aw fiers TH TA II (450-15, ome, He 4)
jin antar har har pareet hai tay jan sugharh si-aanay raam raajay.
Those whose hearts are filled with the love of the Lord, Har, Har, are the wisest and most clever people, O Lord King.
A aded of via due St ud dfs STS Il (450-16, ne, He 4) jay baahrahu bhul chuk bolday bhee kharay har bhaanay. Even if they misspeak outwardly, they are still very pleasing to the Lord.
dfs Hat 6 dg HS art afs He SHS I (450-16, nm, He 4) har santaa no hor thaa-o naahee har maan nimaanay. The Lord's Saints have no other place. The Lord is the honor of the dishonored.
Ho Soa oH chars J ofa Sve ASS WAU (450-17, ym, He 4)
jan naanak naam deebaan hai har taan sataanay. ||1]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Royal Court for servant Nanak; the Lord's power is his only power. ||1]]|
fra vfs ad Ha ABsas ATS ATS TH TH Il (450-17, wr, we 4) jithai jaa-ay bahai mayraa satguroo so thaan suhaavaa raam raajay. Wherever my True Guru goes and sits, that place is beautiful, O Lord King.
Tart Aare ster & ufs yf wer il (450-18, wer, Hs 4) gusikhee™ so thaan bhaali-aa lai Dhoor mukh laavaa. The Guru's Sikhs seek out that place; they take the dust and apply it to their faces.
athe at ures afte uet fae afe ony famirer Il (450-18, nr, 8 4)
gursikhaa kee ghaal thaa-ay pa-ee jin har naam Dhi-aavaa. The works of the Guru's Sikhs, who meditate on the Lord's Name, are approved.
faq sod Afsag ufsor fo ofs UA AIST MI (450-19, wr, He 4)
jin" naanak satgur pooji-aa tin har pooj karaavaa. ||2]|
Those who worship the True Guru, O Nanak - the Lord causes them to be worshipped in turn. |[2||
qa ufs afs ulfs 3 af on ofa Sct I TH I (450-19, vir, ne 4)
gursikhaa man har pareet hai har naam har tayree raam raajay.
The Guru's Sikh keeps the Love of the Lord, and the Name of the Lord, in his mind. He loves You, O Lord, O Lord King.
UST BUI ats Aefo us Afsag su Ate ofo AST Ml (451-1, wer, He 4)
kar sayveh pooraa satguroo bhukh jaa-ay leh mayree. He serves the Perfect True Guru, and his hunger and self-conceit are eliminated.
Tare at su AS Tet foe fue da ute wot it (451-1, wer, He 4)
gursikhaa kee bhukh sabh ga-ee tin pichhai hor khaa-ay ghanayree.
The hunger of the Gursikh is totally eliminated; indeed, many others are satisfied through them.
Ho Boa dia US sift fefs sfe o ure ofa us ast Sil (451-2, nm, He 4)
jan naanak har punn beeji-aa fir tot na aavai har punn kayree. ||3] |
Servant Nanak has planted the Seed of the Lord's Goodness; this Goodness of the Lord shall never be exhausted. ||3]|
Torr ufs saretur fas Hat Afsag for TH TH Ml (451-3, wT, He 4)
gursikhaa man vaaDhaa-ee-aa jin mayraa satguroo dithaa raam raajay.
The minds of the Gursikhs rejoice, because they have seen my True Guru, O Lord King.
att afs ae He] dfs oH at A at Tatra Hf far I (451-3, mmr, He 4)
ko-ee kar gal sunaavai har naam kee so lagai gursikhaa man mithaa.
If someone recites to them the story of the Lord's Name, it seems so sweet to the mind of those Gursikhs.
dfs waa Tafha Uses faa Hat AfsaT SST Il (451-4, wm, vs 4)
har dargeh gursikh painaa-ee-ah jin"aa mayraa satgur tuthaa.
The Gursikhs are robed in honor in the Court of the Lord; my True Guru is very pleased with them.
He aed ofa ofa dfenr ote afe Hf Zar USNIVNAEN (451-4, mmAT, He 4)
jan naanak har har ho-i-aa har har man vuthaa. ||4||12]|19]| Servant Nanak has become the Lord, Har, Har; the Lord, Har, Har, abides within his mind. ||4]|12]|19]|
MTAT HIG 8 Il (451-5)
aasaa mehlaa 4. Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:
far sfeur Ha ust Afsag fa fe on fears TH TH II (451-5, wT, He 4)
jin"aa bhayti-aa mayraa pooraa satguroo tin har naam darirh-aavai raam raajay. Those who meet my Perfect True Guru - He implants within them the Name of the Lord, the Lord King.
fan at fgnar gu As Gad A fe ony fire II (451-6, nmr, He 4) tis kee tarisnaa bhukh sabh utrai jo har naam Dhi-aavai. Those who meditate on the Lord's Name have all of their desire and hunger removed.
A ofs ofa on fourfee faq aH Sfs & IS II (451-6, vir, Hs 4)
jo har har naam Dhi-aa-iday tin” jam nayrh na aavai.
Those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - the Messenger of Death cannot even approach them.
He sed ag dfs far afs fas wu of oy ofe oth Sas A (451-7, ni, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har kirpaa kar nit japai har naam har naam taraavai. ||1||
O Lord, shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, that he may ever chant the Name of the Lord; through the Name of the Lord, he is saved. ||1]|
frat aaufa on fomrfenr fsor fefa fare o cet IH TH Il (451-8, vm, He 4)
jinee gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tinaa fir bighan na ho-ee raam raajay.
Those who, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, meet no obstacles in their path, O Lord King.
frat Afsag usy Horfenr fse uA Ag aet I (451-8, mmr, we 4) jinee satgur purakh manaa-i-aa tin poojay sabh ko-ee. Those who are pleasing to the almighty True Guru are worshipped by everyone.
faat Afsag furs Afeor fSqr AY AS Tet I (451-9, wm, He 4) jin"ee satgur pi-aaraa sayvi-aa tin"aa sukh sad ho-ee. Those who serve their Beloved True Guru obtain eternal peace.
faa’ area Afsag sfenr faqr fifemr afe Ret I (451-9, »mr, He 4) jin"aa naanak satgur bhayti-aa tin"aa mili-aa har so-ee. ||2|| Those who meet the True Guru, O Nanak - the Lord Himself meets them. ||2]|
faa nists aaufs uifs 3 fsq af sueoet TH TH Il (451-10, vr, Hs 4)
jin"aa antar gurmukh pareet hai tin” har rakhanhaaraa raam raajay.
Those Gurmukhs, who are filled with His Love, have the Lord as their Saving Grace, O Lord King.
faq at fer cet famr ad fag ofa ony filmes it (451-11, »mr, He 4) tin" kee nindaa ko-ee ki-aa karay jin" har naam pi-aaraa. How can anyone slander them? The Lord's Name is dear to them.
fie ofa ASt Ho Hot AS SAS Su HTT Il (451-11, vA, He 4)
jin har saytee man maani-aa sabh dusat jhakh maaraa.
Those whose minds are in harmony with the Lord - all their enemies attack them in vain.
Ho saa OH fomrfeur ais THsTS NWI (451-12, nA, He 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa har rakhanhaaraa. ||3]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Lord Protector.
[I3]|
dfs Fa Fa sas Cursor Ua gee orfeor TH TA I 451-12, vr, He 4)
har jug jug bhagat upaa-i-aa paij rakh-daa aa-i-aa raam raajay.
In each and every age, He creates His devotees and preserves their honor, O Lord King.
JdandA FH|e die Hfomr ysare Sofemr It (451-13, vr, ve 4)
harnaakhas dusat har maari-aa parahlaad taraa-i-aa. The Lord killed the wicked Harnaakhash, and saved Prahlaad.
mdash fSeeer fufs ef ane@ ufe afemr il (451-13, nmr, ve 4)
aha‘kaaree-aa nindkaa pith day-ay naamday-o mukh laa-i-aa.
He turned his back on the egotists and slanderers, and showed His Face to Naam Dayv.
He Soa MAT dfs Afenr nifs we wafer siIllOll (451-14, mT, He 4) jan naanak aisaa har sayvi-aa ant la-ay chhadaa-i-aa. ||4]|13]|20||
Servant Nanak has so served the Lord, that He will deliver him in the end. [14] ]13]|20]|
MTAT HIS! 8 SS We U (451-15)
aasaa mehlaa 4 chhant ghar 5 Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, Chhant, Fifth House:
qe Afsas ure I (451-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hd HO UdeAt = furs nS we i (451-16, mr, ue 4) mayray man pardaysee vay pi-aaray aa-o gharay. O my dear beloved stranger mind, please come home!
ofs ag froreg AS fiers ufs SA TST Il (451-16, wer, Hs 4)
har guroo milaavhu mayray pi-aaray ghar vasai haray.
Meet with the Lord-Guru, O my dear beloved, and He will dwell in the home of your self.
Sfar seer reg AS filming ofa farsut AT I (451-17, wer, 2 4) rang ralee-aa maanhu mayray pi-aaray har kirpaa karay. Revel in His Love, O my dear beloved, as the Lord bestows His Mercy.
TT or SOA furs HS TS WAI (451-17, we, He 4) gur naanak tuthaa mayray pi-aaray maylay haray. ||1]| As Guru Nanak is pleased, O my dear beloved, we are united with the Lord. ||1]|
HUM 3 wftmr ve fimrd ar ae I (451-18, nmr, He 4) mai paraym na chaakhi-aa mayray pi-aaray bhaa-o karay. I have not tasted divine love, O my dear beloved, within my heart.
Hfs fgHa 6 ast He fimirg fos nA A Il (451-18, wr, us 4) man tarisnaa na bujhee mayray pi-aaray nit aas karay. The mind's desires are not quenched, O my dear beloved, but I still hold out hope.
fos wae We He fumrd AH ATA fod II (451-18, nr, He 4)
nit joban jaavai mayray pi-aaray jam saas hiray.
Youth is passing away, O my dear beloved, and death is stealing away the breath of life.
aa Hat Aoafe He fimird soa afa Sfs as MQM (451-19, wrAT, He 4)
bhaag manee sohagan mayray pi-aaray naanak har ur Dhaaray. ||2||
The virtuous bride realizes the good fortune of her destiny, O my dear beloved; O Nanak, she enshrines the Lord within her heart. ||2| |
UST BU fus sf HS Bfe|E Hs films ofa Fe fAS Il (452-1, mm, He 4)
pir rati-arhay maiday lo-in mayray pi-aaray chaatrik boond jivai. My eyes are drenched with the Love of my Husband Lord, O my dear beloved, like the song-bird with the rain drop.
Ho Alse dor AS firs ale Fe ut i (452-1, ww, we 4)
man seetal ho-aa mayray pi-aaray har boond peevai.
My mind is cooled and soothed, O my dear beloved, by drinking in the rain drops of the Lord.
3fs fags ware He fumrd Ste & ue fos i (452-2, nmr, nH: 4)
tan birahu jagaavai mayray pi-aaray need na pavai kivai.
Separation from my Lord keeps my body awake, O my dear beloved; I cannot sleep at all.
fs ANE SA AS fimrs aaa Ag fe WSN (452-2, wT, He 4)
har sajan laDhaa mayray pi-aaray naanak guroo livai. ||3]|
Nanak has found the Lord, the True Friend, O my dear beloved, by loving the Guru. 311
ofs 33 sHs He fimrs soba FZ I (452-3, ner, He 4) charh chayt basant mayray pi-aaray bhalee-a rutay. In the month of Chayt, O my dear beloved, the pleasant season of spring begins.
fus asfanig Ae furs witafe ofS BSF i (452-3, wert, He 4) pir baajh-rhi-ahu mayray pi-aaray aa“gan Dhoorh lutay. But without my Husband Lord, O my dear beloved, my courtyard is filled with dust.
Hfs wir Gstat Ae fimrs ef& So AS II (452-3, mmr, He 4)
man aas udeenee mayray pi-aaray du-ay nain jutay.
But my sad mind is still hopeful, O my dear beloved; my eyes are both fixed upon Him.
qd soa efy feant Hs fumrd fa@ HS AS ISI (452-4, wir, He 4)
gur naanak daykh vigsee mayray pi-aaray ji-o maat sutay. ||4]|
Beholding the Guru, Nanak is filled with wondrous joy, like a child, gazing upon his mother. ||4| |
fe oto xer xorstor Hg fumrg Afsarg Herehor Il (452-4, wr, Hs 4) har kee-aa kathaa kahaanee-aa mayray pi-aaray satguroo sunaa-ee-aa. The True Guru has preached the sermon of the Lord, O my dear beloved.
ad feefaurg 3G ulat He fimre fats afe Heeb I (452-5, mmr, He 4) gur vitrhi-ahu ha-o gholee mayray pi-aaray jin har maylaa-ee-aa. I am a Sacrifice to the Guru, O my dear beloved, who has united me with the Lord.
Afs ort ofa ydhort He flmrd ufs fefentat se urfent I (452-6, wir, ue 4)
sabh aasaa har pooree-aa mayray pi-aaray man chindi-arhaa fal paa-i-aa.
The Lord has fulfilled all my hopes, O my dear beloved; I have obtained the fruits of my heart's desires.
dfs 35a" AS fimrd Ae Sta OTH AHEM UII (452-6, wm, He 4)
har tuth-rhaa mayray pi-aaray jan naanak naam samaa-i-aa. ||5||
When the Lord is pleased, O my dear beloved, servant Nanak is absorbed into the Naam. |[5]|
flmirg ofs fe UH S YBAT Il (452-7, nm, Hs 4) pi-aaray har bin paraym na khaylsaa. Without the Beloved Lord, there is no play of love.
fag uret aa fas afer fumiat Sarr I (452-7, mmr, He 4) ki-o paa-ee gur jit lag pi-aaraa daykhsaa. How can I find the Guru? Grasping hold of Him, I behold my Beloved.
ofa asa Afs ag nfs aout H@AT II (452-8, wr, He 4) har daat-rhay mayl guroo mukh gurmukh maylsaa. O Lord, O Great Giver, let me meet the Guru; as Gurmukh, may I merge with You.
ad sea utenr Ae fumrd ufs HASfa Sy AT MENISNQVAUI (452-8, vA, He 4) gur naanak paa-i-aa mayray pi-aaray Dhur mastak laykh saa. ||6]|14]|21]|
Nanak has found the Guru, O my dear beloved; such was the destiny inscribed upon his forehead. ||6||14]|21] |
qe Afsars yArfe Il (452-10) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TT MAT HIG U SS We A Il (452-10) raag aasaa mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 1. Raag Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, First House:
Woe MoE wat H A Ys StS TH Il (452-10, wm, He 5) ando anad ghanaa mai so parabh deethaa raam. Joy - great joy! I have seen the Lord God!
afimat ofimiat 4 ofs aA Het IH I (452-11, mmr, He 5) chaakhi-arhaa chaakhi-arhaa mai har ras meethaa raam. Tasted - I have tasted the sweet essence of the Lord.
ofa 3H Hot Ha ufo gor AfsaT Zo" AoA sfeEwr I (452-11, wm, He 5)
har ras meethaa man meh voothaa satgur toothaa sahj bha-i-aa.
The sweet essence of the Lord has rained down in my mind; by the pleasure of the True Guru, I have attained peaceful ease.
fag efA orfenr vars afer us eA] Gfe actor afemr i (452-12, nmr, He 5)
garihu vas aa-i-aa mangal gaa-i-aa panch dusat o-ay bhaag ga-i-aa.
I have come to dwell in the home of my own self, and I sing the songs of joy; the five villains have fled.
Hise niure vifys ws AHS AS AAS II (452-13, wm, He 5)
seetal aaghaanay amrit baanay saajan sant baseethaa.
I am soothed and satisfied with the Ambrosial Bani of His Word; the friendly Saint is my advocate.
ag soa ofa faG no wor A us Sat Stor AU (452-13, wm, He 5) kaho naanak har si-o man maani-aa so parabh nainee deethaa. ||1]|| Says Nanak, my mind is in harmony with the Lord; I have seen God with my eyes.
[21
Afons Afons WS Fax SoS IH I (452-14, vir, He 5) sohi-arhay sohi-arhay mayray bank du-aaray raam. Adorned - adorned are my beauteous gates, O Lord.
Ugoss UToSs HS AS fumirs IM I (452-14, mmr, He 5) paahunarhay paahunarhay mayray sant pi-aaray raam. Guests - my guests are the Beloved Saints, O Lord.
Hs fimrd arse AS SHAS afe Ga AST Il (452-14, mA, ve 5)
sant pi-aaray kaaraj saaray namaskaar kar lagay sayvaa.
The Beloved Saints have resolved my affairs; I humbly bowed to them, and committed myself to their service.
mrad Aret nim Het wiry Amt orf Ser i (452-15, nim, us 5)
aapay jaanjee aapay maanjee aap su-aamee aap dayvaa.
He Himself is the groom's party, and He Himself the bride's party; He Himself is the Lord and Master; He Himself is the Divine Lord.
MUS! aa nitty ASS MR UNIS UT Il (452-15, wirAr, Hs 5) apnaa kaaraj aap savaaray aapay Dhaaran Dhaaray. He Himself resolves His own affairs; He Himself sustains the Universe.
AT BSA AT Wa Hfs Hor AT Fa GTS MQM (452-16, mmr, ne 5)
kaho naanak saho ghar meh baithaa sohay bank du-aaray. ||2| |
Says Nanak, my Bridegroom is sitting in my home; the gates of my body are beautifully adorned. ||2| |
oe fod o8 faa Ae we ufo mImET TH I (452-16, wer, H2 5)
nav niDhay na-o niDhay mayray ghar meh aa-ee raam. The nine treasures - the nine treasures come into my home, Lord.
AS fae 4 AS foe ufenr any fomret aH I (452-17, nT, He 5) sabh kichh mai sabh kichh paa-i-aa naam Dhi-aa-ee raam. Everything - I obtain everything, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
om famret Het Fret Hon HeTet aifser i (452-17, nmr, He 5)
naam Dhi-aa-ee sadaa sakhaa-ee sahj subhaa-ee govindaa.
Meditating on the Naam, the Lord of the Universe becomes the one's eternal companion, and he dwells in peaceful ease.
wes feet gat oret ae 3 fem ne FFE I (452-18, vir, Hs 5)
ganat mitaa-ee chookee Dhaa-ee kaday na vi-aapai man chindaa.
His calculations are ended, his wanderings cease, and his mind is no longer afflicted with anxiety.
diet WH node SH nig AS Tevet Il (452-18, nmAr, ve 5)
govind gaajay anhad vaajay achraj sobh banaa-ee.
When the Lord of the Universe reveals Himself, and the unstruck melody of the sound current vibrates, the drama of wondrous splendor is enacted.
NA Lon EN
aT aoa fug AS Aa 3TH oe fafa uet ISI (452-19, mmr, He 5)
kaho naanak pir mayrai sangay taa mai nav niDh paa-ee. ||3]| Says Nanak, when my Husband Lord is with me, I obtain the nine treasures. ||3]|
Heffmis Aafia AS set AS HIST TH I (452-19, mmr, He 5) sarsi-arhay sarsi-arhay mayray bhaa-ee sabh meetaa raam. Over-joyed - over-joyed are all my brothers and friends.
Uar gus font fen wrrat A aoe fife Fist amt I (453-1, nr, He 5)
bikhmo bikham akhaarhaa mai gur mil jeetaa raam. Meeting the Guru, I have won the most arduous battle in the arena of life.
as fife ats afe afe otat set Star SoH TST Ih (453-1, wT, H2 5)
gur mil jeetaa har har keetaa tootee bheetaa bharam garhaa. Meeting the Guru, I am victorious; praising the Lord, Har, Har, the walls of the fortress of doubt have been destroyed.
uf uae Sos feuret Aree Het orf war I (453-2, wir, He 5)
paa-i-aa khajaanaa bahut niDhaanaa saanath mayree aap kharhaa.
I have obtained the wealth of so many treasures; the Lord Himself has stood by my side.
Ret Afomrat A usaret A ufs mre ast il (453-2, nim, v8 5) sO-ee Sugi-aanaa so parDhaanaa jo parabh apnaa keetaa. He is the man of spiritual wisdom, and he is the leader, whom God has made His own.
AI Soa At sf AvMt St AGA SST HIST NINA (453-3, wT, He 5)
kaho naanak jaa’ val su-aamee taa sarsay bhaa-ee meetaa. ||4]|1]|
Says Nanak, when the Lord and Master is on my side, then my brothers and friends rejoice. ||4||1]|
MTAT HI U Il (453-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
mam ote maa ae fos WE & Wet IM Il (453-4, nm, He 5) akthaa har akath kathaa kichh jaa-ay na jaanee raam. Inexpressible is the sermon of the inexpressible Lord; it cannot be known at all.
Afs ad Af 3d fs AS Adi SuSt TH Il (453-4, wma, He 5)
sur nar sur nar mun jan sahj vakhaanee raam.
The demi-gods, mortal beings, angels and silent sages express it in their peaceful poise.
Hon carat mifG wat vee ane dat orfeor Ih (453-5, wr, He 5)
sehjay vakhaanee ami-o banee charan kamal rang laa-i-aa.
In their poise, they recite the Ambrosial Bani of the Lord's Word; they embrace love for the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Afu Ga meu us fadaa Ho fefeor ee urfemr I (453-5, nmr, He 5)
jap ayk alakh parabh niranjan man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa.
Meditating on the One incomprehensible and immaculate Lord, they obtain the fruits of their heart's desires.
fa He Ho feorg gar Ast APS ANAT II (453-6, wr, we 5)
taj maan moh vikaar doojaa jotee jot samaanee.
Renouncing self-conceit, emotional attachment, corruption and duality, their light merges into the Light.
feasts soa aa yAet Het fe Fa Hat WAI (453-6, wm, Hs 5) binvant naanak gur parsaadee sadaa har rang maanee. ||1]| Prays Nanak, by Guru's Grace, one enjoys the Lord's Love forever. ||1] |
dfs Hat dfs AS AMS AS HIS AIST IH I (453-7, wer, He 5) har santaa har sant sajan mayray meet sahaa-ee raam. The Lord's Saints - the Lord's Saints are my friends, my best friends and helpers.
ZsoG Zaat ASHafs ut TH Il (453-7, nT, He 5)
vadbhaagee vadbhaagee satsangat paa-ee raam.
By great good fortune, by great good fortune, I have obtained the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
zea US SH fore wea Ty ASU Il (453-8, wm, Hs 5)
vadbhaagee paa-ay naam Dhi-aa-ay laathay dookh santaapai.
By great good fortune, I obtained it, and I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; my pains and sufferings have been taken away.
Ts Vaal Sa FH 3 sa nimy ferfemr mM} | (453-8, nmr, He 5)
gur charnee laagay bharam bha-o bhaagay aap mitaa-i-aa aapai.
I have grasped the Guru's Feet, and my doubts and fears are gone. He Himself has erased my self-conceit.
afs fasur nS ufs mud feefs asta 3 ATE I (453-9, vir, He 5)
kar kirpaa maylay parabh apunai vichhurh kateh na jaa-ee.
Granting His Grace, God has united me with Himself; no longer do I suffer the pains of separation, and I shall not have to go anywhere.
faodfs aoa BH Sa Ae ofe AsSTet MQM (453-9, nmr, He 5)
binvant naanak daas tayraa sadaa har sarnaa-ee. ||2]| Prays Nanak, I am forever Your slave, Lord; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2]|
dfs ed fs afs Aafs 3a sas films TH Il (453-10, mmr, He 5) har daray har dar sohan tayray bhagat pi-aaray raam. The Lord's Gate - at the Lord's Gate, Your beloved devotees look beautiful.
wat fo set AST AE afsITS TH Il (453-10, wr, He 5) vaaree tin vaaree jaavaa sad balihaaray raam. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, again and again a sacrifice to them.
Re afsad afe SHAaS fas SSS US AST Il (453-11, wm, vs 5) sad balihaaray kar namaskaaray jin bhaytat parabh jaataa. I am forever a sacrifice, and I humbly bow to them; meeting them, I know God.
ufe ufe afe stor As et use usy fast I (453-11, mmr, He 5)
ghat ghat rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee pooran purakh biDhaataa.
The Perfect and All-powerful Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is contained in each and every heart, everywhere.
ag ua urfenr ony fomrfenr amt WOH B TS Il (453-12, vir, ws 5)
gur pooraa paa-i-aa naam Dhi-aa-i-aa joo-ai janam na haaray.
Meeting the Perfect Guru, we meditate on the Naam, and do not lose this life in the gamble.
faodfs aoa Hofs Sct omy fagur ws ZI (453-13, nmr, He 5)
binvant naanak saran tayree raakh kirpaa Dhaaray. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, I seek Your Sanctuary; please, shower Your Mercy upon me, and protect me. |[3]|
Bis Wis TE 3d ASA Wet TH Il (453-13, we, ve 5) bay-antaa bay-ant gun tayray kaytak gaavaa raam. Innumerable - innumerable are Your Glorious Virtues; how many of them can I sing?
3g Vda SI VdE Uls SSarait UTS IH I (453-13, wrAT, He 5) tayray charnaa tayray charan Dhoorh vadbhaagee paavaa raam. The dust of Your feet, of Your feet, I have obtained, by great good fortune.
ofs gat areht He Teveba AGH HIS TY BE Il (453-14, wr, we 5)
har Dhoorhee n"aa-ee-ai mail gavaa-ee-ai janam maran dukh laathay.
Bathing in the Lord's dust, my filth has been washed away, and the pains of birth and death have departed.
nists arate Het Jed USHA YS ATE Il (453-15, mer, we 5) antar baahar sadaa hadooray parmaysar parabh saathay. Inwardly and outwardly, the Transcendent Lord God is ever-present, always with us.
fee wu afore atese safe Ais o UTS II (453-15, wm, He 5)
mitay dookh kali-aan keertan bahurh jon na paavaa.
Suffering departs, and there is peace; singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, one is not consigned to reincarnation again.
faadfs waa aa Hafs sdb wirys YS SST WII (453-16, wm, Hs 5) binvant naanak gur saran taree-ai aapnay parabh bhaavaa. ||4||2||
Prays Nanak, in the Guru's Sanctuary, one swims across, and is pleasing to God. H41|21]
WAT SS HIG UWE 8 (453-17) aasaa chhant mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Aasaa, Chhant, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (453-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ufs BIO AHS Ho Sfanr fas wirae o Her IH TH Il (453-18, ww, He 5)
har charan kamal man bayDhi-aa kichh aan na meethaa raam raajay.
My mind is pierced by the Lord's Lotus Feet; He alone is sweet to my mind, the Lord King.
ffs H3aHafs orafoor afe wfe we ster IH TH Il (453-18, wer, He 5)
mil santsangat aaraaDhi-aa har ghat ghatay deethaa raam raajay.
Joining the Society of the Saints, I meditate on the Lord in adoration; I behold the Lord King in each and every heart.
ofs wife we stor nifys Fo" ABH HIS TY SS Il (453-19, vw, Hs 5)
har ghat ghatay deethaa amrito voothaa janam maran dukh naathay.
I behold the Lord in each and every heart, and the Ambrosial Nectar rains down upon me; the pains of birth and death are gone.
ae feta afeur As eu fhefemr aH fasrt aS I (453-19, wer, 8 5)
gun niDh gaa-i-aa sabh dookh mitaa-i-aa ha-umai binsee gaathay.
Singing the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of virtue, all my pains are erased, and the knot of ego has been untied.
ua sug fy Aon Herel efs 3 Aret His oar Ja HOT I (454-1, »mr, ne 5)
pari-o sahj subhaa-ee chhod na jaa-ee man laagaa rang majeethaa. My Beloved shall not leave me to go anywhere - this is His natural way; my mind is imbued with the lasting color of the Lord's Love.
Us SSA FT BIS AHS fas no B HST AU (454-2, wrwr, Hs 5)
har naanak bayDhay charan kamal kichh aan na meethaa. ||1]|
The Lotus Feet of the Lord have pierced Nanak's mind, and now, nothing else seems sweet to him. ||1]|
fig rst Afe weat 8 on oh HS TH TA Il (454-2, nmr, He 5)
ji-o raatee jal maachhulee ti-o raam ras maatay raam raajay.
Just like the fish which revels in water, I am intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord, my Lord King.
qs us Guethor res ats avs TH TA Il (454-3, mer, we 5)
gur poorai updaysi-aa jeevan gat bhaatay raam raajay.
The Perfect Guru has instructed me, and blessed me with salvation in my life; I love the Lord, my King.
Hee afs Aymit nisernit orfu ste of we I (454-3, nmr, He 5)
jeevan gat su-aamee antarjaamee aap lee-ay larh laa-ay.
The Lord Master, the Searcher of hearts, blesses me with salvation in my life; He Himself attaches me to His Love.
fs 33s UTTIG UTS UTS SfS 3 AST WS Il (454-4, weer, we 5)
har ratan padaaratho pargato poorno chhod na kathoo jaa-ay.
The Lord is the treasure of jewels, the perfect manifestation; He shall not forsake us to go anywhere else.
ys AWS AgY AAS HOM st at fe @ BTS I (454-4, wir, ws 5)
parabh sughar saroop sujaan su-aamee taa kee mitai na daatay.
God, the Lord Master, is so accomplished, beauteous, and all-knowing; His gifts are never exhausted.
HS Afar TSt Hest coat Tfs HS MQM (454-5, wir, He 5) jal sang raatee maachhulee naanak har maatay. ||2| | As the fish is enraptured by the water, so is Nanak intoxicated by the Lord. ||2]|
ogg We ge fas afs yrs mara IH TA Il (454-5, wT, He 5)
chaatrik jaachai boond ji-o har paraan aDhaaraa raam raajay.
As the song-bird yearns for the rain-drop, the Lord, the Lord my King, is the Support of my breath of life.
He unlat AS ars HIS Ase S filma IH TH I (454-6, wT, He 5) maal khajeenaa sut bharaat meet sabhahoo" tay pi-aaraa raam raajay. My Lord King is more beloved than all wealth, treasure, children, siblings and friends.
Asd 3 fimre yoy fara a at afs oot AEM IN (454-6, wir, He 5)
sabhahoo" tay pi-aaraa purakh niraaraa taa kee gat nahee jaanee-ai.
The absolute Lord, the Primal Being, is more beloved than all; His condition cannot be known.
ofs Ath farth o fers aad Ta Aaet Faq HSM I (454-7, mmr, we 5)
har saas giraas na bisrai kabahoo™ gur sabdee rang maanee-ai.
I shall never forget the Lord, for an instant, for a single breath; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I enjoy His Love.
us Udy Hales HS oA ule Af SaH HO EY ST II (454-8, mmr, ve 5)
parabh purakh jagjeevano sant ras peevno jap bharam moh dukh daaraa.
The Primal Lord God is the Life of the Universe; His Saints drink in the Lord's sublime essence. Meditating on Him, doubts, attachments and pains are shaken off.
aga as Fe fas aaa ate fimira ail (454-8, wm, Hs 5) chaatrik jaachai boond ji-o naanak har pi-aaraa. ||3]| As the song-bird yearns for the rain-drop, so does Nanak love the Lord. ||3]|
fH SITSS nus WSIS UT TH TA Il (454-9, weer, He 5) milay naraa-in aapnay maanoratho pooraa raam raajay. Meeting the Lord, my Lord King, my desires are fulfilled.
wot ss SdH at SSS TT AS TH TH Il (454-9, wr, v2 5) dhaathee bheet bharamm kee bhaytat gur sooraa raam raajay. The walls of doubt have been torn down, meeting the Brave Guru, O Lord King.
use Te ure usta feure As fafa ete afer i (454-10, wert, He 5)
pooran gur paa-ay purab likhaa-ay sabh niDh deen da-i-aalaa.
The Perfect Guru is obtained by perfect pre-ordained destiny; God is the Giver of all treasures - He is merciful to the meek.
wife ufo nifs ys Het Hes TT Tus Il (454-10, wm, Hs 5)
aad maDh ant parabh so-ee sundar gur gopaalaa.
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, is God, the most beautiful Guru, the Sustainer of the World.
HY Add Mied wuod ulss Uso AMY Os I (454-11, wr, 2 5)
sookh sahj aanand ghanayray patit paavan saaDhoo Dhooraa.
The dust of the feet of the Holy purifies sinners, and brings great joy, bliss and ecstasy.
ots HS Sats SST HSIG UT MSUUISI (454-11, mT, He 5) har milay naraa-in naankaa maanoratho pooraa. ||4]|1||3]|
The Lord, the Infinite Lord, has met with Nanak, and his desires are fulfilled. 4111311
MAT HIG U SS We E (454-13)
aasaa mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 6 Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Sixth House:
qe Afsars ure il (454-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aq Il (454-14)
salok. Shalok:
Wag se feuns ys ofa ofa Ret AUS I (454-14, vr, Hs 5)
jaa ka-o bha-ay kirpaal parabh har har say-ee japaat.
Those beings, unto whom the Lord God shows His Mercy, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
soa Uifs wat fSq aH fAG Ses AT Aas NA (454-14, wm, He 5)
naanak pareet lagee tin" raam si-o bhaytat saaDh sangaat. ||1||
O Nanak, they embrace love for the Lord, meeting the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
@S Il (454-15) chhant. Chhant:
Ae eu fonret dts wa ea nig adt Ho mat UH Te I (454-15, wir, ne 5)
jal duDh ni-aa-ee reet ab duDh aach nahee man aisee pareet haray.
Just like water, which loves milk so much that it will not let it burn - O my mind, so love the Lord.
we Cafsé mifs anes aH nfo Hae fea fue st ofa fd Il (454-16, mmr, He 5)
ab urjhi-o al kamlayh baasan maahi magan ik khin bhee naahi tarai.
The bumble bee becomes enticed by the lotus, intoxicated by its fragrance, and does not leave it, even for a moment.
fas arfa edb uifs adn Alera ofa aA meet th (454-16, nmr, 18 5)
khin naahi taree-ai pareet haree-ai seegaar habh ras arpee-ai.
Do not let up your love for the Lord, even for an instant; dedicate all your decorations and pleasures to Him.
Wo ey Haba FH Ue geht So AOAfa o Sout I (454-17, vir, 3 5)
jah dookh sunee-ai jam panth bhanee-ai tah saaDhsang na darpee-ai.
Where painful cries are heard, and the Way of Death is shown, there, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall not be afraid.
afs otefs afge aeba Aare yes TU Te I (454-18, wir, ne 5)
kar keerat govind gunee-ai sagal paraachhat dukh haray.
Sing the Kirtan, the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and all sins and sorrows shall depart.
aT soa es dfee ofs & Ho ofe fA Sg adT mT Ho US TS NAM (454-18, wm, He 5) kaho naanak chhant govind har kay man har si-o nayhu karayhu aisee man pareet haray. ||1||
Says Nanak, chant the Hymns of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, O mind, and enshrine love for the Lord; love the Lord this way in your mind. ||1]|
AA Hest ots fea fue st ot Ute He MAT ST APT Il (454-19, mmr, He 5)
jaisee machhulee neer ik khin bhee naa Dheeray man aisaa nayhu karayhu.
As the fish loves the water, and is not content even for an instant outside it, O my mind, love the Lord in this way.
Ua guu
AA ofya filmer fag fag Fe Te ASA ATS AT Il (455-1, wer, we 5)
jaisee chaatrik pi-aas khin khin boond chavai baras suhaavay mayhu.
Like the song-bird, thirsting for the rain-drops, chirping each and every moment to the beautiful rain clouds.
fe uifs ada feg He da ifs oeba fos warct i (455-1, vr, ne 5)
har pareet kareejai ih man deejai at laa-ee-ai chit muraaree.
So love the Lord, and give to Him this mind of yours; totally focus your consciousness on the Lord.
H9 6 ain Hafs ud Pano A afsarct Il (455-2, nmr, v2 5)
maan na keejai saran pareejai darsan ka-o balihaaree.
Do not take pride in yourself, but seek the Sanctuary of the Lord, and make yourself a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Td AYAS fee arg fees US Set ATT AST Il (455-2, nmr, ue 5)
gur suparsannay mil naah vichhunay Dhan daydee saach sanayhaa.
When the Guru is totally pleased, the separated soul-bride is re-united with her Husband Lord; she sends the message of her true love.
A Sot SS Ss oad & ofa fAC ath ST Ho MAT ST APT MQM (455-3, mm, He 5) kaho naanak chhant anant thaakur kay har si-o keejai nayhaa man aisaa nayhu karayhu. ||2]|
Says Nanak, chant the Hymns of the Infinite Lord Master; O my mind, love Him and enshrine such love for Him. ||2||
TAS AS AST fase nirA wet afe feshag sehr i (455-4, wer, ws 5)
chakvee soor sanayhu chitvai aas ghanee kad dinee-ar daykhee-ai.
The chakvi bird is in love with the sun, and thinks of it constantly; her greatest longing is to behold the dawn.
afas nia udifs ve Host Ho dfs da afte Ih (455-4, mma, ne 5)
kokil amb pareet chavai suhaavee-aa man har rang keejee-ai.
The cuckoo is in love with the mango tree, and sings so sweetly. O my mind, love the Lord in this way.
fe uifs ada He 3 ath fea ast & afs urgfeur I (455-5, om, Hs 5)
har pareet kareejai maan na keejai ik raatee kay habh paahuni-aa.
Love the Lord, and do not take pride in yourself; everyone is a guest for a single night.
me four da ote Ha sates oat nes wWefeur Il (455-6, ner, He 5)
ab ki-aa rang laa-i-o moh rachaa-i-o naagay aavan jaavani-aa.
Now, why are you entangled in pleasures, and engrossed in emotional attachment? Naked we come, and naked we go.
fag AQ Heat Usha veet ura cefA He F fast it (455-6, wr, ws 5)
thir saaDhoo sarnee parhee-ai charnee ab tootas moh jo kitee-ai.
Seek the eternal Sanctuary of the Holy and fall at their feet, and the attachments which you feel shall depart.
a aoa es efeares use a ne df oe udifs aa fesinrg See 3 (455-7, ner, He 5) kaho naanak chhant da-i-aal purakh kay man har laa-ay pareet kab dinee-ar daykhee- ai. |[3]|
Says Nanak, chant the Hymns of the Merciful Lord God, and enshrine love for the Lord, O my mind; otherwise, how will you come to behold the dawn? ||3]|
fofa ada AA oe Afs AeeSt He SS Ho mat UNS aA I (455-8, wm, Hs 5)
nis kurank jaisay naad sun sarvanee hee-o divai man aisee pareet keejai.
Like the deer in the night, who hears the sound of the bell and gives his heart - O my mind, love the Lord in this way.
AA safe saa Cost fusts fre fog Ho wre StH I (455-8, wer, He 5)
jaisee tarun bhataar urjhee pireh sivai ih man laal deejai.
Like the wife, who is bound by love to her husband, and serves her beloved - like this, give your heart to the Beloved Lord.
HO weofls ein sa adn fs uA Sa wre Il (455-9, nmr, ne 5)
man laaleh deejai bhog kareejai habh khusee-aa rang maanay.
Give your heart to your Beloved Lord, and enjoy His bed, and enjoy all pleasure and bliss.
fug must urfear gar ors satfenr ofS fife firs fears i (455-10, nmr, us 5)
pir apnaa paa-i-aa rang laal banaa-i-aa at mili-o mitar chiraanay.
I have obtained my Husband Lord, and I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love; after such a long time, I have met my Friend.
ag dor Ant st fsou unt fus Ao weg & SHA I (455-10, vir, He 5)
gur thee-aa saakhee taa ditham aakhee pir jayhaa avar na deesai.
When the Guru became my advocate, then I saw the Lord with my eyes. No one else looks like my Beloved Husband Lord.
aT asd 23 efenrs Hus & Ho Ufa vas adn MAT Ho US aA SNA (455-11, nmr, H8 5)
kaho naanak chhant da-i-aal mohan kay man har charan gaheejai aisee man pareet keejai. ||4|]1]|41]
Says Nanak, chant the Hymns of the merciful and fascinating Lord, O mind. Grasp the lotus feet of the Lord, and enshrine such love for Him in your mind. ||4][1]|4]|
MTAT HI U Il (455-12)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl |
AS Il (455-12)
salok. Shalok:
a6 80 feast vast wet ga niearfa Il (455-12, ner, He 5)
ban ban firtee khojtee haaree baho avgaahi.
From forest to forest, I wandered searching; I am so tired of taking baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Soa se A Aa df ufenr He fs NA (455-13, mT, He 5)
naanak bhaytay saaDh jab har paa-i-aa man maahi. ||1]| O Nanak, when I met the Holy Saint, I found the Lord within my mind. ||1]|
#3 ll (455-13) chhant. Chhant:
Ww a@ dfs mite Hot mide SU Il (455-13, mA, Hs 5) jaa ka-o khojeh asa‘kh munee anayk tapay. Countless silent sages and innumerable ascetics seek Him;
gan afe mravafa fanarat Ara A IN (455-14, wT, Hs 5)
barahmay kot araaDheh gi-aanee jaap japay.
millions of Brahmas meditate and adore Him; the spiritual teachers meditate and chant His Name.
WU STU ATH fefoor ya nifer AUS Fear Il (455-14, wm, Hs 5)
jap taap sanjam kiri-aa poojaa anik soDhan bandnaa.
Through chanting, deep meditation, strict and austere self-discipline, religious rituals, sincere worship, endless purifications and humble salutations,
afe deo SHO Stead HAS fimo AG fedAar Il (455-15, nmr, He 5)
kar gavan basuDhaa teerthah majan milan ka-o niranjanaa.
wandering all over the earth and bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, people seek to meet the Pure Lord.
Hou a9 fs uA Udt Aare SBfa mrss Il (455-15, wr, He 5) maanukh ban tin pasoo pankhee sagal tujheh araaDhatay. Mortals, forests, blades of grass, animals and birds all meditate on You.
cfenrs we df= soa fie AOAafs Sf TS NAN (455-16, wT, He 5)
da-i-aal laal gobind naanak mil saaDhsangat ho-ay gatay. ||1||
The Merciful Beloved Lord, the Lord of the Universe is found; O Nanak, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, salvation is attained. ||1]|
afe fans nists HAT ASTUTE Il (455-16, wer, He 5) kot bisan avtaar sankar jataaDhaar. Millions of incarnations of Vishnu and Shiva, with matted hair
wdfo s3f0 efenrg Hfs 3fe Fs RUS Il (455-17, nT, v8 5) chaaheh tujheh da-i-aar man tan ruch apaar. yearn for You, O Merciful Lord; their minds and bodies are filled with infinite longing.
MUTE MH He SAT Aas UTA YS Tat Il (455-17, ww, us 5)
apaar agam gobind thaakur sagal poorak parabh Dhanee.
The Lord Master, the Lord of the Universe, is infinite and unapproachable; God is the all-pervading Lord of all.
Ho faa ae aoe fimrefs we fog TE gat | (455-18, wer, He 5)
sur siDh gan ganDharab Dhi-aavahi jakh kinnar gun bhanee.
The angels, the Siddhas, the beings of spiritual perfection, the heavenly heralds and celestial singers meditate on You. The Yakhsha demons, the guards of the divine treasures, and the Kinnars, the dancers of the god of wealth chant Your Glorious Praises.
afe fez nda ter AUS Amt AA ares Il (455-18, »mr, ne 5)
kot indar anayk dayvaa japat su-aamee jai jai kaar.
Millions of Indras and countless gods and super-human beings meditate on the Lord Master and celebrate His Praises.
nora aa eens area AAs ffs ars iI (455-19, wr, Hs 5)
anaath naath da-i-aal naanak saaDhsangat mil uDhaar. ||2]|
The Merciful Lord is the Master of the masterless, O Nanak; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved. ||2]|
afe tat wa Refs ofnt wifsa afs i (455-19, mmr, He 5) kot dayvee jaa ka-o sayveh lakhimee anik bhaat. Millions of gods and goddesses of wealth serve Him in so many ways.
at gue aus ye Was maats ue urat fear TAT Il (456-1, nmr, us 5)
gupat pargat jaa ka-o araaDheh pa-un paanee dinas raat. The invisible and visible beings worship Him in adoration, along with wind and water, day and night.
oko AAbag As foMrefs TAT Test ASE I (456-1, wT, He 5) nakhi-atar sasee-ar soor Dhi-aavahi basuDh gagnaa gaav-ay. The stars, the moon and the sun meditate on Him; the earth and the sky sing to Him.
Ha wat Aas Fat Het Het flmrSse | (456-2, wr, He 5) Sagal khaanee sagal banee sadaa sadaa Dhi-aav-ay. All the sources of creation, and all languages meditate on Him, forever and ever.
faiyfs use vss Fed ve AA A ae MUMS Il (456-3, nmr, He 5) simrit puraan chatur baydah khat saastar jaa ka-o japaat. The Simritees, the Puraanas, the four Vedas and the six Shaastras meditate on Him.
ufss ures sas zem coe fkoba Afor AAS SI (456-3, nr, He 5)
patit paavan bhagat vachhal naanak milee-ai sang saat. ||3]|
He is the Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His Saints; O Nanak, He is met in the Society of the Saints. ||3]|
Ast Us ASE TAS 33 sat Il (456-4, wer, 2 5) jaytee parabhoo janaa-ee rasnaa tayt bhanee. As much as God has revealed to us, that much we can speak with our tongues.
Montes HAS Sat og WE aot Il (456-4, nr, v3 5) anjaanat jo sayvai taytee nah jaa-ay ganee. Those unknown ones who serve You cannot be counted.
Mfzas MISS MET SAT AG HS ATs I (456-4, wiv, nz 5)
avigat agnat athaah thaakur sagal manjhay baahraa.
Imperishable, incalculable, and unfathomable is the Lord and Master; He is everywhere, inside and out.
Aga Whaat Sa est od Ula Adit ATI Il (456-5, wi, He 5)
sarab jaachik ayk daataa nah door sangee jaahraa.
We are all beggars, He is the One and only Giver; He is not far away, but is with us, ever-present.
eA sas dior fee Ahr 3 at Bunt fas aet Il (456-5, wm, He 5)
vas bhagat thee-aa milay jee-aa taa kee upmaa kit ganee.
He is in the power of His devotees; those whose souls are united with Him - how can their praises be sung?
feg BS HS Sod UE AA AG Uf Baat ISIQNUI (456-6, nm, He 5)
in daan maan naanak paa-ay sees saaDhah Dhar charnee. ||4]|2]||5||
May Nanak receive this gift and honor, of placing his head on the feet of the Holy Saints. ||4]|2]|5||
MTAT HIG U Il (456-7)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl,
H8a Il (456-7)
salok. Shalok:
Bey agg esaaitd fans fs of aE I (456-7, wm, He 5) udam karahu vadbhaageeho simrahu har har raa-ay. Make the effort, O very fortunate ones, and meditate on the Lord, the Lord King.
aed frm faxes AS AY Jefe sy ese FH ATE A (456-7, wT, w 5)
naanak jis simrat sabh sukh hoveh dookh darad bharam jaa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, remembering Him in meditation, you shall obtain total peace, and your pains and troubles and doubts shall depart. ||1]|
=S Il (456-8) chhant. Chhant:
OH AUS afte SI MSATEM II (456-8, nm, He 5) naam japat gobind nah alsaa-ee-ai. Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe; don't be lazy.
3e3 AY Hal AH fs So ASM I (456-8, mm, He 5)
bhaytat saaDhoo sang jam pur nah jaa-ee-ai.
Meeting with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall not have to go to the City of Death.
eu wde 3 38 fmm on fines Ae Fat Il (456-9, mr, Hs 5)
dookh darad na bha-o bi-aapai naam simrat sad sukhee.
Pain, trouble and fear will not afflict you; meditating on the Naam, a lasting peace is found.
Afa Ata oreo ofs ofe foerfe A ys His Het Il (456-9, »mr, ne 5)
Saas Saas araaDh har har Dhi-aa-ay so parabh man mukhee.
With each and every breath, worship the Lord in adoration; meditate on the Lord God in your mind and with your mouth.
fous vfenies As ae fafa afe efeor Aet rah Il (456-10, nmr, He 5)
kirpaal da-i-aal rasaal gun niDh kar da-i-aa sayvaa laa-ee-ai. O kind and compassionate Lord, O treasure of sublime essence, treasure of excellence, please link me to Your service.
Sod ufenitt vse HU aH Aus afee og MATE NU (456-11, ver, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai charan jampai naam japat gobind nah alsaa-ee-ai. ||1||
Prays Nanak: may I meditate on the Lord's lotus feet, and not be lazy in chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
ure ufss usts aH fedAar Il (456-11, wT, He 5) paavan patit puneet naam niranjanaa. The Purifier of sinners is the Naam, the Pure Name of the Immaculate Lord.
SoH nits feo famrs ae iF I (456-12, mA, Hs 5)
bharam anDhayr binaas gi-aan gur anjnaa.
The darkness of doubt is removed by the healing ointment of the Guru's spiritual wisdom.
qs fomra nine ys fost ate ates Hobos ufo i (456-12, wr, He 5)
gur gi-aan anjan parabh niranjan jal thal mahee-al poori-aa.
By the healing ointment of the Guru's spiritual wisdom, one meets the Immaculate Lord God, who is totally pervading the water, the land and the sky.
fea fous at ot foe efron fe fsrfe feafemr i (456-13, »mr, He 5) ik nimakh jaa kai ridai vasi-aa mitay tiseh visoori-aa. If He dwells within the heart, for even an instant, sorrows are forgotten.
marta so ANTE AMM Ags at SS SAAT Il (456-13, mA, He 5)
agaaDh boDh samrath su-aamee sarab kaa bha-o bhanjnaa.
The wisdom of the all-powerful Lord and Master is incomprehensible; He is the Destroyer of the fears of all.
oo ufenit vee HU use ufss Usts OM fodHar QI (456-14, wm, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai charan jampai paavan patit puneet naam niranjanaa. ||2| |
Prays Nanak, I meditate on the Lord's lotus feet. The Purifier of sinners is the Naam, the Pure Name of the Immaculate Lord. ||2| |
Ge adt drums efemis fart fot i (456-15, vir, He 5)
ot gahee gopaal da-i-aal kirpaa niDhay. I have grasped the protection of the merciful Lord, the Sustainer of the Universe, the treasure of grace.
Hf utr sot vee SHS Aafs fT Wl (456-15, mr, He 5)
mohi aasar tu-a charan tumaaree saran siDhay.
I take the support of Your lotus feet, and in the protection of Your Sanctuary, I attain perfection.
Uf BIo AGS AIS AM ufss Suge Ts Ts ll (456-15, wm, He 5) har charan kaaran karan su-aamee patit uDhran har haray. The Lord's lotus feet are the cause of causes; the Lord Master saves even the sinners.
Aad HATS Se Bars on fAHES FT 3g Il (456-16, mmr, He 5)
Saagar sansaar bhav utaar naam simrat baho taray.
So many are saved; they cross over the terrifying world-ocean, contemplating the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
uife nifs suis dnfs Hot Guage AsHa fat | (456-16, vir, He 5)
aad ant bay-ant khojeh sunee uDhran satsang biDhay.
In the beginning and in the end, countless are those who seek the Lord. I have heard that the Society of the Saints is the way to salvation.
sod ufemitt vse Hu Ge adt aus efimre fur fod ail (456-17, nmr, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai charan jampai ot gahee gopaal da-i-aal kirpaa niDhay. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, I meditate on the Lord's lotus feet, and grasp the protection of the Lord of the Universe, the merciful, the ocean of kindness. ||3]|
gals zee die face orfu satfeur Il (456-18, ner, He 5) bhagat vachhal har birad aap banaa-i-aa. The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; this is His natural way.
Ad Ad AS meats 3d 30 ysetenr Il (456-18, »mr, Hs 5) jah jah sant araaDheh tah tah paragtaa-i-aa. Wherever the Saints worship the Lord in adoration, there He is revealed.
ufs orf ate Anfe Aafa Aste sas ats AMM Il (456-19, wr, Hs 5) parabh aap lee-ay samaa-ay sahj subhaa-ay bhagat kaaraj saari-aa. God blends Himself with His devotees in His natural way, and resolves their affairs.
MOS Us AA Ho Hae Ase sy fern il (456-19, mA, Hs 5)
aanand har jas mahaa mangal sarab dookh visaari-aa.
In the ecstasy of the Lord's Praises, they obtain supreme joy, and forget all their SOrrows.
UST gud
TH3aS YaH Cs fen Sa 30 fenetfent | (457-1, wr, us 5)
chamatkaar pargaas dah dis ayk tah daristaa-i-aa.
The brilliant flash of the One Lord is revealed to them - they behold Him in the ten directions.
Sod ufenitt vse Hu sats zee ofe fase urfu sorfeor ens (457-1, nmr, Hs 5) naanak pa-i-ampai charan jampai bhagat vachhal har birad aap banaa-i-aa. ||4]]3]||6|| Prays Nanak, I meditate on the Lord's lotus feet; the Lord is the Lover of His devotees; this is His natural way. ||4||3]]6||
MTAT HIG U Il (457-2)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
fag H30 ATG Hd @ ASS Il (457-2, we, nH 5) thir santan sohaag marai na jaav-ay. The Husband Lord of the Saints is eternal; He does not die or go away.
wa fafs ofs ag AAS ot Se Il (457-3, om, Hs 5) jaa kai garihi har naahu so sad hee raav-ay. She, whose home is blessed by her Husband Lord, enjoys Him forever.
wifzort wifes A us Ae ese feaHer Il (457-3, vi, ne 5) avinaasee avigat so parabh sadaa navtan nirmalaa. God is eternal and immortal, forever young and immaculately pure.
od Ufs Ae Jefe Sag Ud fen UIE AE AT Il (457-4, mr, He 5)
nah door sadaa hadoor thaakur dah dis pooran sad sadaa.
He is not far away, He is ever-present; the Lord and Master fills the ten directions, forever and ever.
yrouts afs Hfs ars fpr uifS ufsy st]ee I (457-4, vr, us 5)
paraanpat gat mat jaa tay pari-a pareet pareetam bhaav-ay.
He is the Lord of souls, the source of salvation and wisdom. The Love of my Dear Beloved is pleasing to me.
Sos SWS Td sale We fag Aso ATS Hd S WSS NA (457-5, vw, ne 5)
naanak vakhaanai gur bachan jaanai thir santan sohaag marai na jaav-ay. ||1]| Nanak speaks what the Guru's Teachings have led him to know. The Husband Lord of the Saints is eternal; He does not die or go away. ||1||
WAG TH 33g STA MGS WAST Il (457-5, nA, He 5) jaa ka-o raam bhataar taa kai anad ghanaa. One who has the Lord as her Husband enjoys great bliss.
Haest AT atta AS ufs ar Il (457-6, wir, Hs 5) sukhvantee saa naar sobhaa poor banaa. That soul-bride is happy, and her glory is perfect.
He Hos afore afs AA fat AAAS A YS Il (457-6, mr, we 5)
maan mahat kali-aan har jas sang surjan so parabhoo.
She obtains honor, greatness and happiness, singing the Praise of the Lord. God, the Great Being, is always with her.
Hee fafa og fafa fas fats odt Gor AS AE ll (457-7, wm, we 5)
sarab siDh nav niDh tit garihi nahee oonaa sabh kachhoo.
She attains total perfection and the nine treasures; her home lacks nothing. - everything is there.
Hod aot fusfs Hot fags AoE St OT BST I (457-7, ni, He 5)
maDhur baanee pireh maanee thir sohaag taa kaa banaa.
Her speech is so sweet; she obeys her Beloved Lord; her marriage is permanent and everlasting.
Sod Sus Te sale We A A TH Fag BTA MOE WAT MI (457-8, wm, ne 5)
naanak vakhaanai gur bachan jaanai jaa ko raam bhataar taa kai anad ghanaa. ||2|| Nanak chants what he knows through the Guru's Teachings: One who has the Lord as her Husband enjoys great bliss. ||2||
mG Adt AS uTfA AST wraiht Il (457-9, mma, ne 5) aa-o sakhee sant paas sayvaa laagee-ai. Come, O my companions, let us dedicate ourselves to serving the Saints.
une vee ueafs mmy fsnraint i (457-9, nmr, nH 5) peesa-o charan pakhaar aap ti-aagee-ai. Let us grind their corn, wash their feet and so renounce our self-conceit.
3fa wiry fe Hary nity og Arava Il (457-9, nmr, He 5) taj aap mitai santaap aap nah jaanaa-ee-ai. Let us shed our egos, and our troubles shall be removed; let us not display ourselves.
Rafe adin wife St ad A AY UTS I (457-10, nmr, He 5) saran gaheejai maan leejai karay so sukh paa-ee-ai. Let us take to His Sanctuary and obey Him, and be happy with whatever He does.
afs oA oHt sfx Cent ag afs feo Sf wall I (457-10, vr, He 5)
kar daas daasee taj udaasee kar jorh din rain jaagee-ai.
Let us become the slaves of His slaves, and shed our sadness, and with our palms pressed together, remain wakeful day and night.
Sod TUS TT dele We wt At As uA AST waist NSM (457-11, nm, v2 5)
naanak vakhaanai gur bachan jaanai aa-o sakhee sant paas sayvaa laagee-ai. ||3]| Nanak chants what he knows through the Guru's Teachings; come, O my companions, let us dedicate ourselves to serving the Saints. ||3]||
W a HASta sta fit Ret orfSor It (457-12, mmr, He 5)
jaa kai mastak bhaag se sayvaa laa-i-aa.
One who has such good destiny written upon his forehead, dedicates himself to His service.
3 at ude iA fay ATG urfeMr i (457-12, wir, 2 5) taa kee pooran aas jin" saaDhsang paa-i-aa. One who attains the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, has his desires fulfilled.
Hunfa sfs ax df afse figs wfomr it (457-12, vr, H: 5)
saaDhsang har kai rang gobind simran laagi-aa.
In the Saadh Sangat, immerse yourself in the Love of the Lord; remember the Lord of the Universe in meditation.
33H Hg fearg gat Aare fate Forfar i 457-13, mmr, we 5)
bharam moh vikaar doojaa sagal tineh ti-aagi-aa. Doubt, emotional attachment, sin and duality - he renounces them all.
nfs AMS Ade ASS gor nise HAS TE afer ih (457-13, wer, v2 5)
man saat sahj subhaa-o voothaa anad mangal gun gaa-i-aa.
Peace, poise and tranquility fill his mind, and he sings the Lord's Glorious Praises with joy and delight.
Sod ee Td dule We A a HASla aa fH AST Hier ISIS (457-14, wT, He 5) naanak vakhaanai gur bachan jaanai jaa kai mastak bhaag se sayvaa laa-i-aa. 411411711
Nanak chants what he knows through the Guru's Teachings: one who has such good destiny written upon his forehead, dedicates himself to His service. ||4]|4]|7]|
MTAT HI U Il (457-15)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl,
ASE Il (457-15)
salok. Shalok:
dfs ofs on mifsur aE 6 Ad ANAS Il (457-15, mA, ne 5)
har har naam japanti-aa kachh na kahai jamkaal.
If you chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Messenger of Death will have nothing to say to you.
Soa HS BO Aut ae nis fHS Tew All (457-16, nw, ve 5)
naanak man tan sukhee ho-ay antay milai gopaal. ||1]|
O Nanak, the mind and body will be at peace, and in the end, you shall merge with the Lord of the world. ||1]|
#3 Il (457-16) chhant. Chhant:
fee Hao a Af xfs Corfa Se Il (457-16, wer, He 5) mila-o santan kai sang mohi uDhaar layho.
Let me join the Society of the Saints - save me, Lord!
faa ag ag afs afe afe ay Sg Il (457-17, wor, He 5)
bin-o kara-o kar jorh har har naam dayh.
With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer: give me Your Name, O Lord, Har, Har.
dfs SH HAIG sae BAG HG fSniaS SH cfenr i (457-17, wm, us 5)
har naam maaga-o charan laaga-o maan ti-aaga-o tum" da-i-aa.
I beg for the Lord's Name, and fall at His feet; I renounce my self-conceit, by Your kindness.
asd 5 weg Hale wes age H ys ate Hier Il (457-18, wm, Hs 5)
katahoo™ na Dhaava-o saran paava-o karunaa mai parabh kar ma-i-aa.
I shall not wander anywhere else, but take to Your Sanctuary. O God, embodiment of mercy, have mercy on me.
AH “aa mug fedHe Hed AyMt fae Sg i (457-18, wm, ue 5)
samrath agath apaar nirmal sunhu su-aamee bin-o ayhu.
O all-powerful, indescribable, infinite and immaculate Lord Master, listen to this, my prayer.
ad Afs aoa WS Hd HOH Hd fosfs ST NU (457-19, vir, He 5)
kar jorh naanak daan maagai janam maran nivaar layho. ||1||
With palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing: O Lord, let my cycle of birth and death come to an end. ||1]|
Uar gut must Hfsdte fedae mare Ste Il (458-1, wm, He 5)
apraaDhee matiheen nirgun anaath neech. I am a sinner, devoid of wisdom, worthless, destitute and vile.
HS dog aodlo femmes Ha ate Il (458-1, mr, ne 5)
sath kathor kulheen bi-aapat moh keech.
I am deceitful, hard-hearted, lowly and entangled in the mud of emotional attachment.
H® SdH AGH Md HHS" HIS US o mMSES Il (458-1, wT, He 5) mal bharam karam aha‘ mamtaa maran cheet na aav-ay. I am stuck in the filth of doubt and egotistical actions, and I try not to think of death.
afest fase midge ufeur nifamrast BuSree Il (458-2, nvr, He 5) banitaa binod anand maa-i-aa agi-aantaa laptaav-ay. In ignorance, I cling to the pleasures of woman and the joys of Maya.
fart Fag aa AgHr feo feos Afar Hts il (458-3, wer, Hs 5)
khisai joban baDhai jaroo-aa din nihaaray sang meech.
My youth is wasting away, old age is approaching, and Death, my companion, is counting my days.
fasdts aoa nin Sct Aofe ATT ITY BT NQI (458-3, wT, He 5)
binvant naanak aas tayree saran saaDhoo raakh neech. ||2||
Prays Nanak, my hope is in You, Lord; please preserve me, the lowly one, in the Sanctuary of the Holy. ||2]|
SIN ASH MSA AAS HIT AS Il (458-4, wew, He 5) bharmay janam anayk sankat mahaa jon. I have wandered through countless incarnations, suffering terrible pain in these lives.
wufe sfos fsa Afa Hts Sa AS I (458-4, nA, He 5) lapat rahi-o tih sang meethay bhog son. I am entangled in sweet pleasures and gold.
SHS Sd Milos MNES ag YeHT OPES Il (458-4, mmr, vs 5)
bharmat bhaar agnat aa-i-o baho pardayseh Dhaa-i-o.
After wandering around with such great loads of sin, I have come, after wandering through so many foreign lands.
ma Ge ost us Host Aaa AY ofa SEES Il (458-5, nmr, ne 5)
ab ot Dhaaree parabh muraaree sarab sukh har naa-i-o.
Now, I have taken the protection of God, and I have found total peace in the Name of the Lord.
wusTs ys flmrg HS 3 aE Ss IM IS Il (458-5, wT, ws 5)
raakhanhaaray parabh pi-aaray mujh tay kachhoo na ho-aa hon.
God, my Beloved, is my protector; nothing was done, or will ever be done, by myself alone.
HY Hon wide Soa fgur Sot SI FSH ISI (458-6, we, Hs 5)
sookh sahj aanand naanak kirpaa tayree tarai bha-un. ||3]|
I have found peace, poise and bliss, O Nanak; by Your mercy, I swim across the world-ocean. ||3]|
oH Udia Burd sasd HAT ACS Il (458-6, wT, He 5)
naam Dhaareek uDhaaray bhagtah sansaa ka-un.
You saved those who only pretended to believe, so what doubts should Your true devotees have?
Hd Ad udaTd dig dfs AA HOT ASO Ill (458-7, wm, ue 5) jayn kayn parkaaray har har jas sunhu sarvan. By every means possible, listen to the Praises of the Lord with your ears.
Afs Azo ast use famnrat fe fearar ursd | (458-7, wmv, ue 5)
sun sarvan baanee purakh gi-aanee man niDhaanaa paavhay.
Listen with your ears to the Word of the Lord's Bani, the hymns of spiritual wisdom; thus you shall obtain the treasure in your mind.
ofe dfa as ys fers TH & TF Wed | (458-8, viv, ne 5)
har rang raatay parabh biDhaatay raam kay gun gaavhay.
Attuned to the Love of the Lord God, the Architect of Destiny, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
SAU Ode FOdH AGH fous aG A afE uSs Il (458-8, wi, He 5) basuDh kaagad banraaj kalmaa likhan ka-o jay ho-ay pavan. The earth is the paper, the forest is the pen and the wind is the writer,
anis nis 3 afe ufeor adt Soa VIS AGS ISUUINCH (458-9, TAT, He 5)
bay-ant ant na jaa-ay paa-i-aa gahee naanak charan saran. ||4||5||8]| but still, the end of the endless Lord cannot be found. O Nanak, I have taken to the Sanctuary of His lotus feet. ||4]|5]|8] |
MTAT HIG U Il (458-10)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
ud US SASS ST at Aas Tat il (458-10, ww, He 5)
purakh patay bhagvaan taa kee saran gahee. The Primal Lord is the Lord God of all beings. I have taken to His Sanctuary.
fass@ se uae fest Aas Bet Il (458-10, nmr, He 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay paraan chintaa sagal lahee. My life has become fearless, and all my anxieties have been removed.
Hs fust AS Hts AfsHe feR| sou wAfEer | (458-11, om, He 5) maat pitaa sut meet surijan isat banDhap jaani-aa. I know the Lord as my mother, father, son, friend, well-wisher and close relative.
ats afe ofeor afe frocfeer am faxes AS sarfeur | (458-11, om, He 5) geh kanth laa-i-aa gur milaa-i-aa jas bimal sant vakhaani-aa. The Guru has led me to embrace Him; the Saints chant His Pure Praises.
ais Te vida nfo atHfs as 3 ATE at I (458-12, wm, ws 5)
bay-ant gun anayk mahimaa keemat kachhoo na jaa-ay kahee.
His Glorious Virtues are infinite, and His greatness is unlimited. His value cannot be described at all.
ys 8a mifod nie sag Ge area FSA at WAU (458-12, mT, He 5)
parabh ayk anik alakh thaakur ot naanak tis gahee. ||1]|
God is the One and only, the Unseen Lord and Master; O Nanak, I have grasped His protection. ||1]|
mifys so AAS Hovet wef Se Il (458-13, vA, He 5) amrit ban sansaar sahaa-ee aap bha-ay. The world is a pool of nectar, when the Lord becomes our helper.
oH on Ca vg fay & een TE Il (458-13, nT, vs 5) raam naam ur haar bikh kay divas ga-ay. One who wears the necklace of the Lord's Name - his days of suffering are ended.
as SdH Hd fears faon rife ures AS FI Il (458-14, ner, ne 5)
gat bharam moh bikaar binsay jon aavan sabh rahay.
His state of doubt, attachment and sin is erased, and the cycle of reincarnation into the womb is totally ended.
mate Arad se Alse AT vive afd Td ll (458-14, mm, He 5)
agan saagar bha-ay seetal saaDh anchal geh rahay.
The ocean of fire becomes cool, when one grasps the hem of the robe of the Holy Saint.
dfee que eenre Afys af AG afe AAS Il (458-15, wm, He 5)
govind gupaal da-i-aal sammrith bol saaDhoo har jai ja-ay.
The Lord of the Universe, the Sustainer of the World, the merciful all-powerful Lord - the Holy Saints proclaim the victory of the Lord.
area oy fomrfe use ATOHfat ust USH AS NII (458-15, wT, He 5)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay pooran saaDhsang paa-ee param gatay. ||2||
O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, in the perfect Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained the supreme status. ||2||
Ag 2uG 30 Af Sa afe sfonr i (458-16, vir, He 5) jah daykh-a-u tah sang ayko rav rahi-aa. Wherever I look, there I find the One Lord permeating and pervading all.
we we aAt wif fess fas ofan Il (458-16, nmr, He 5)
ghat ghat vaasee aap virlai kinai lahi-aa.
In each and every heart, He Himself dwells, but how rare is that person who realizes this.
me afe Hobe ufs use ote dats AHfomt Il (458-17, wr, H8 5)
jal thal mahee-al poor pooran keet hasat samaani-aa.
The Lord is permeating and pervading the water, the land and the sky; He is contained in the ant and the elephant.
wife nis Hfo Ret aa yAret afomi ih (458-17, vir, Hs 5)
aad antay maDh so-ee gur parsaadee jaani-aa.
In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, He exists. By Guru's Grace, He is known.
qoH uAfer gon ater afee ae fafa vfs afr i (458-18, vm, us 5)
barahm pasri-aa barahm leelaa govind gun niDh jan kahi-aa. God created the expanse of the universe, God created the play of the world. His humble servants call Him the Lord of the Universe, the treasure of virtue.
ffs Aomit visa ofs a aoa afe afar Sil (458-19, mmr, He 5)
simar Su-aamee antarjaamee har ayk naanak rav rahi-aa. ||3]|
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord Master, the Searcher of hearts; O Nanak, He is the One, pervading and permeating all. ||3]|
feo dfs noeat niet fines oH Is Il (458-19, mm, He 5) din rain suhaavarhee aa-ee simrat naam haray. Day and night, become beauteous by remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
uar gut
TIE GHG Afar UifS ABs uy Sg Il (459-1, wer, ws 5) charan kamal sang pareet kalmal paap taray. In love with the Lord's Lotus Feet, corruption and sin depart.
wa gu afse aS Yate Hat fearfenr i (459-1, wr, He 5) dookh bhookh daridar naathay pargat mag dikhaa-i-aa. Pain, hunger and poverty run away, and the path is clearly revealed.
fife Ona on dat nfs SSter urfemr i (459-2, wer, He 5)
mil saaDhsangay naam rangay man lorheedaa paa-i-aa.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is attuned to the Naam, and obtains the desires of the mind.
dfs efy wang fee ust ae AaT Als 3s Il (459-2, »mr, Hs 5)
har daykh darsan ichh punnee kul samboohaa sabh taray.
Beholding the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, desires are fulfilled; all one's family and relatives are saved.
feon df= née niafes fads soa ofa Jd ISIENEN (459-3, nmr, He 5)
dinas rain anand an-din simrant naanak har haray. ||4]|6]||9||
Day and night, he is in bliss, night and day, remembering the Lord in meditation, O Nanak. ||4]|6]|9]|
MAT HIG USS WT D (459-4)
aasaa mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 7 Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Seventh House:
QB Asa yATfe II (459-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS Il (459-5)
salok. Shalok:
AS fase afte sHe fans ATT Hat Il (459-5, wr, Hs 5)
subh chintan gobind raman nirmal saaDhoo sang.
It is the most sublime contemplation, to speak of the Lord of the Universe in the pure Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Soa oH 8 fens fea wat afe fagur saHSS INU (459-5, wim, He 5) naanak naam na visra-o ik gharhee kar kirpaa bhagvant. ||1|| O Nanak, never the Naam, even for a moment; bless me with Your Grace, Lord God!
[21 |
2S Il (459-6) chhant. Chhant:
feat dosha Hale 3S Il (459-6, vir, He 5) bhinnee rainrhee-ai chaamkan taaray. The night is wet with dew, and the stars twinkle in the heavens.
Wats HS Wat AS IH firs Il (459-6, vr, He 5) jaageh sant janaa mayray raam pi-aaray. The Saints remain wakeful; they are the Beloveds of my Lord.
on fumrd Aer rafts on fats miefed Il (459-6, mmr, He 5)
raam pi-aaray sadaa jaageh naam simrahi andino.
The Beloveds of the Lord remain ever wakeful, remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night.
Te AHS fimrg fase ys fang act fea fas Il (459-7, nmr, He 5)
charan kamal Dhi-aan hirdai parabh bisar naahee ik khino.
In their hearts, they meditate on the lotus feet of God; they do not forget Him, even for an instant.
3fa we Hg fears Ho AT ASHE BU ATS Il (459-7, mA, He 5)
taj maan moh bikaar man kaa kalmalaa dukh jaaray.
They renounce their pride, emotional attachment and mental corruption, and burn away the pain of wickedness.
faadfs aoa Ae wats dfs oA AS films IAI (459-8, wT, He 5) binvant naanak sadaa jaageh har daas sant pi-aaray. ||1]| Prays Nanak, the Saints, the beloved servants of the Lord, remain ever wakeful. ||1]|
Het AASshaA orsag afemr it (459-9, nmr, ne 5) mayree sayjrhee-ai aadambar bani-aa. My bed is adorned in splendor.
Hfs nise afer yg nites AfEnt Il (459-9, vm, He 5) man anad bha-i-aa parabh aavat suni-aa. My mind is filled with bliss, since I heard that God is coming.
ys fxs AyMit AUT amit we Hares FA Sa Il (459-9, mm, He 5)
parabh milay su-aamee sukhah gaamee chaav mangal ras bharay.
Meeting God, the Lord and Master, I have entered the realm of peace; I am filled with joy and delight.
nial Afol Ba TU Sa YTS Ho Bo Als Te Il (459-10, mr, ws 5)
ang sang laagay dookh bhaagay paraan man tan sabh haray.
He is joined to me, in my very fiber; my sorrows have departed, and my body, mind and soul are all rejuvenated.
Ho fee uret ys forest Haag AS AS afeur I (459-10, ym, 18 5)
man ichh paa-ee parabh Dhi-aa-ee sanjog saahaa subh gani-aa.
I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires, meditating on God; the day of my wedding is auspicious.
faadts soa fxs Alas Hae mse TA Shem QI (459-11, nr, Hs 5)
binvant naanak milay sareeDhar sagal aanand ras bani-aa. ||2|| Prays Nanak, when I meet the Lord of excellence, I came to experience all pleasure and bliss. ||2||
ffs mdi uefa ag XS otrret Il (459-12, mmr, 2 5) mil sakhee-aa puchheh kaho kant neesaanee. I meet with my companions and say, "Show me the insignia of my Husband Lord."
ofA Un act ag af o AAT II (459-12, wm, Hs 5)
ras paraym bharee kachh bol na jaanee.
I am filled with the sublime essence of His Love, and I do not know how to say anything.
TE Ts Tus nrg aes fea niZ o ured I (459-12, wmv, ns 5)
gun goorh gupat apaar kartay nigam ant na paavhay.
The Glorious Virtues of the Creator are profound, mysterious and infinite; even the Vedas cannot find His limits.
sats afe fomrfe Aomt Aer ofs TE Wed Il (459-13, new, He 5)
bhagat bhaa-ay Dhi-aa-ay su-aamee sadaa har gun gaavhay.
With loving devotion, I meditate on the Lord Master, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
AIS TE Almira use wus ys sat Il (459-13, wr, we 5) Sagal gun sugi-aan pooran aapnay parabh bhaanee. Filled with all virtues and spiritual wisdom, I have become pleasing to my God.
faadts soa df TSt UN AafA AST ISI (459-14, nmr, He 5)
binvant naanak rang raatee paraym sahj samaanee. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, imbued with the color of the Lord's Love, I am imperceptibly absorbed into Him. ||3]|
HY Afses dfs ee wa Il AHA AafhiSs TY SANS Sa Il (459-14, nA, He 5)
sukh sohilrhay har gaavan laagay. saajan sarsi-arhay dukh dusman bhaagay.
When I began to sing the songs of rejoicing to the Lord, my friends became glad, and my troubles and enemies departed.
HY Aun AGA df oth sar ufs wrfy forsur orghor i (459-15, nmr, He 5)
sukh sahj sarsay har naam rahsay parabh aap kirpaa Dhaaree-aa.
My peace and happiness increased; I rejoiced in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and God Himself blessed me with His mercy.
dfs BIE Ba AS Wa fHs ys aoetdu I (459-16, wer, ws 5)
har charan laagay sadaa jaagay milay parabh banvaaree-aa.
I have grasped the Lord's feet, and remaining ever wakeful, I have met the Lord, the Creator.
Hs feen ore Ate ure Aare fofa ys urd i (459-16, wr, ws 5)
subh divas aa-ay sahj paa-ay sagal niDh parabh paagay.
The appointed day came, and I attained peace and poise; all treasures are in the feet of God.
faodfs aoa Hofs Aymit Het ofs AS SH NSIANION (459-17, nmAT, He 5)
binvant naanak saran su-aamee sadaa har jan taagay. ||4]|1||10|| Prays Nanak, the Lord's humble servants always seek the Sanctuary of the Lord and Master. ||4||1]]10]|
MTAT HI U Il (459-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Cis Fe zarSfamr 3 famr fag wfenr It (459-18, vir, 3 5) uth vanj vataa-oorhi-aa tai ki-aa chir laa-i-aa. Rise up and go forth, O traveller; why do you delay?
Hues Ussior fas af Sarfenr ii (459-18, wer, we 5) muhlat punrhee-aa kit koorh lobhaa-i-aa. Your allotted time is now complete - why are you engrossed in falsehood?
as ostfenr ag yfenr aes uy mififsur i (459-19, wir, 8 5) koorhay lubhaa-i-aa Dhohu maa-i-aa karahi paap amiti-aa. You desire that which is false; deceived by Maya, you commit innumerable sins.
30 SAH Ut wHfs Ict arfs aus fafsmr il (459-19, mmr, v2 5)
tan bhasam dhayree jameh hayree kaal bapurhai jiti-aa.
Your body shall become a pile of dust; the Messenger of Death has spotted you, and will conquer you.
UST SEO
He Hag Efs SHt afas uss wfenr | (460-1, nm, He 5)
maal joban chhod vaisee rahi-o painan khaa-i-aa.
Abandoning your wealth and youth, you will have to leave, without any food or clothing.
Sot AHTal Afar Hfomr oo ate fags fretfeur Wail 460-1, mmr, ns 5)
naanak kamaanaa sang juli-aa nah jaa-ay kirat mitaa-i-aa. ||1]|
O Nanak, only your actions shall go with you; the consequences of your actions cannot be erased. ||1||
oag firsa fae uf df= dees i (460-2, nmr, us 5) faathohu mirag jivai paykh rain chandraa-in. Like the deer, captured on a moon-lit night,
Hag va se fos uy aHteS I (460-2, mir, He 5) sookhahu dookh bha-ay nit paap kamaa-in. so does the constant commission of sins turn pleasure into pain.
unt ane eats ot & vs ufs Tefen | (460-2, nvr, He 5)
paapaa kamaanay chhadeh naahee lai chalay ghat galaavi-aa.
The sins you have committed shall not leave you; placing the noose around your neck, they shall lead you away.
TaseSst Shy yor az AAT Ther Il (460-3, ww, 2 5) harichand-uree daykh moothaa koorh sayjaa raavi-aa. Beholding an illusion, you are deceived, and on your bed, you enjoy a false lover.
ofa dfs mots nat aefa sfemr AES II (460-3, nmr, He 5)
lab lobh aha‘kaar maataa garab bha-i-aa samaa-in.
You are intoxicated with greed, avarice and egotism; you are engrossed in self- conceit.
oad fxr uifamrfs fear og fire ures AES MQM (460-4, »mr, He 5)
naanak marig agi-aan binsay nah mitai aavan jaa-in. ||2||
O Nanak, like the deer, you are being destroyed by your ignorance; your comings and goings shall never end. ||2]|
fis He Hor fas we Gard i (460-5, wer, He 5) mithai makh mu-aa ki-o la-ay odaaree. The fly is caught in the sweet candy - how can it fly away?
JASt aafs ufsor fas sit seat Il (460-5, mmr, v2 5)
hastee garat pa-i-aa ki-o taree-ai taaree. The elephant has fallen into the pit - how can it escape?
3de wae sfenr fue ufo wAH fats o mrfEG i 460-5, umm, He 5)
taran duhaylaa bha-i-aa khin meh khasam chit na aa-i-o.
It shall be so difficult to swim across, for one who does not remember the Lord and Master, even for an instant.
war AAT TEs STS ahor myer ufES il (460-6, ww, He 5)
dookhaa sajaa-ee ganat naahee kee-aa apnaa paa-i-o.
His sufferings and punishments are beyond reckoning; he receives the consequences of his own actions.
as ante ya dor ets sta wrt il (460-7, vm, us 5) gujhaa kamaanaa pargat ho-aa eet uteh khu-aaree. His secret deeds are exposed, and he is ruined here and hereafter.
Bsa ASTI IS HS HSHY vidas SII (460-7, wea, ws 5) naanak satgur baajh moothaa manmukho aha‘kaaree. ||3|| O Nanak, without the True Guru, the self-willed egotistical manmukh is defrauded.
[31] ofs & A He Slat Ys at Gaat Il (460-7, wr, ws 5)
har kay daas jeevay lag parabh kee charnee. The Lord's slaves live by holding on to God's feet.
afe warfe oe fH oas Avett Il (460-8, wir, He 5) kanth lagaa-ay lee-ay tis thaakur sarnee. The Lord and Master embraces those who seek His Sanctuary.
ae afa famre fomre murat ory on AuTfemr Il (460-8, wim, He 5)
bal buDh gi-aan Dhi-aan apnaa aap naam japaa-i-aa.
He blesses them with power, wisdom, knowledge and meditation; He Himself inspires them to chant His Name.
Wonafs orfy der orfy wars Safeor i 460-9, vir, v2 5)
saaDhsangat aap ho-aa aap jagat taraa-i-aa.
He Himself is the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and He Himself saves the world.
afy Be susad Het foo agat | (460-9, wir, He 5) raakh lee-ay rakhanhaarai sadaa nirmal karnee. The Preserver preserves those whose actions are always pure.
aod ode 6 Whe aad of AS aa at Agat WSQNAAI (460-10, wr, He 5)
naanak narak na jaahi kabahoo™ har sant har kee sarnee. |]4]|2]|11]| O Nanak, they never have to go to hell; the Lord's Saints are under the Lord's Protection. ||4]|2||11]|
MTAT HIG U Il (460-11)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
Ze AS wren dfs uA ASST I (460-11, mr, v2 5) vanj mayray aalsaa har paas baynantee. Be gone, O my laziness, that I may pray to the Lord.
Te Ag uTuSat us Afat AdSt Il (460-11, vm, He 5) raava-o saho aapnarhaa parabh sang sohantee. I enjoy my Husband Lord, and look beautiful with my God.
Ha Adst a3 AMM fear gat ash | (460-11, mr, ve 5)
sangay sohantee kant su-aamee dinas rainee raavee-ai.
I look beautiful in the Company of my Husband Lord; I enjoy my Lord Master day and night.
Afh Ath feats rte ys Ute of ae ashi i (460-12, nmr, ne 5)
Saas Saas chitaar jeevaa parabh paykh har gun gaavee-ai.
I live by remembering God with each and every breath, beholding the Lord, and singing His Glorious Praises.
fasa orfenr ean ufeor mifh@ ferfe fAST II (460-13, vm, He 5)
birhaa lajaa-i-aa daras paa-i-aa ami-o darisat si‘chantee.
The pain of separation has grown shy, for I have obtained the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; His Ambrosial Glance of Grace has filled me with bliss.
faadfs aoa Hot fea vat fs fa SHS A (460-13, mmr, He 5) binvant naanak mayree ichh punnee milay jis khojantee. ||1]| Prays Nanak, my desires are fulfilled; I have met the One I was seeking. ||1]|
ofA zed fasfeus asst wife mfr | (460-14, nmr, 2 5) nas vanjahu kilvikhahu kartaa ghar aa-i-aa. Run away, O sins; the Creator has entered my home.
Usd VIG stent alee ysrerenr Il (460-14, wm, Hs 5)
dootah dahan bha-i-aa govind paragtaa-i-aa.
The demons within me have been burnt; the Lord of the Universe has revealed Himself to me.
yale Tues afte we ATUAfa sarfsnr | (460-15, nim, He 5)
pargatay gupaal gobind laalan saaDhsang vakhaani-aa.
The Beloved Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the World has revealed Himself; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I chant His Name.
wirgdy Stor mite gor ae yATet AfEMr I (460-15, mmr, He 5)
aacharaj deethaa ami-o voothaa gur parsaadee jaani-aa.
I have seen the Wondrous Lord; He showers His Ambrosial Nectar upon me, and by Guru's Grace, I know Him.
Hfs Aifs wre} sat earet og vis Fret uf I (460-16, nmr, 8 5)
man saat aa-ee vajee vaDhaa-ee nah ant jaa-ee paa-i-aa.
My mind is at peace, resounding with the music of bliss; the Lord's limits cannot be found.
fasdts aoa AY Hof Her ys mrt aefenr MII (460-16, wr, He 5) binvant naanak sukh sahj maylaa parabhoo aap banaa-i-aa. ||2| | Prays Nanak, God brings us to union with Himself, in the poise of celestial peace. ||2| |
Sda © Slofanr fAHsSs STITeS Il (460-17, nA, He 5) narak na deeth-rhi-aa simrat naaraa-in. They do not have to see hell, if they remember the Lord in meditation.
HH UH Ad TS TS UBTWSE Il (460-17, wm, we 5)
jai jai Dharam karay doot bha-ay palaa-in.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma applauds them, and the Messenger of Death runs away from them.
UdH olen AoA Aue ATGHafS Jie SA I (460-18, mm, He 5)
Dharam Dheeraj sahj sukhee-ay saaDhsangat har bhajay.
Dharmic faith, patience, peace and poise are obtained by vibrating upon the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
afs nigqg af ate HI HHS" AS 3A Il (460-18, wm, 18 5) kar anoograhu raakh leenay moh mamtaa sabh tajay. Showering His Blessings, He saves those who renounce all attachments and egotism.
af afs oe afe free afte Aus wrrfEs Il (460-19, nmr, He 5)
geh kanth laa-ay gur milaa-ay govind japat aghaa-in.
The Lord embraces us; the Guru unites us with Him. Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, we are Satisfied.
foods aoa faHfs Aymit Hae oT uATEE ISI (460-19, vir, He 5) binvant naanak simar su-aamee sagal aas pujaa-in. ||3]| Prays Nanak, remembering the Lord and Master in meditation, all hopes are fulfilled.
I3I|
UST BEA
fofa fafa sae TT St AT AST | (461-1, ue, ue 5) niDh siDh charan gahay taa kayhaa kaarhaa. Grasping the Lord's Feet, the treasure of the Siddhas, what suffering can I feel?
Ag fag =fh fAA A YS MAST I (461-1, mr, we 5) sabh kichh vas jisai so parabhoo asaarhaa. Everything is in His Power - He is my God.
ad 3H Ble SH Ue ag Ute HASta TMT I (461-1, nT, v8 5)
geh bhujaa leenay naam deenay kar Dhaar mastak raakhi-aa.
Holding me the the arm, He blesses me with His Name; placing His Hand upon my forehead, He saves me.
HATS Arad od fen ofS afe ga oftmer Il (461-2, nmr, 2 5) sansaar Saagar nah vi-aapai ami-o har ras chaakhi-aa. The world-ocean does not trouble me, for I have drunk the sublime elixir of the Lord.
AUHG OH da Je Als Sar wna | (461-3, nm, He 5)
saaDhsangay naam rangay ran jeet vadaa akhaarhaa.
In the Saadh Sangat, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am victorious on the great battlefield of life.
faodfs aoa nafs Aymit sofs AfY & Gurst ISISNIVI (461-3, wT, He 5)
binvant naanak saran su-aamee bahurh jam na upaarhaa. ||4||3]|12|| Prays Nanak, I have entered the Sanctuary of the Lord and Master; the Messenger of Death shall not destroy me again. ||4||3|]12]|
MITAT HIG U Il (461-4)
aasaa mehliaa 5. Aasaa, Fifth Mehl:
feo ofs aorfens A oomfeG re i (461-4, vir, He 5) din raat kamaa-i-arho so aa-i-o maathai. Those actions you perform, day and night, are recorded upon your forehead.
fan ufA corfees A Sut ATE I (461-4, vir, He 5)
jis paas lukaa-id-rho so vaykhee saathai.
And the One, from whom you hide these actions - He sees them, and is always with you.
Afar ea ageaat ofS ury ane | (461-5, mma, ne 5) sang daykhai karanhaaraa kaa-ay paap kamaa-ee-ai. The Creator Lord is with you; He sees you, so why commit sins?
Alas att oH Bir sate yfs 3 Ab Il (461-5, wer, Hs 5)
sukarit keejai naam leejai narak mool na jaa-ee-ai.
So perform good deeds, and chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; you shall never have to go to hell.
mS Udd dfs oH fAHeT BS Sd AE Il (461-6, mm, nH: 5)
aath pahar har naam simrahu chalai tayrai saathay.
Twenty-four hours a day, dwell upon the Lord's Name in meditation; it alone shall go along with you.
3a WOHafs Ae soa feefs Su AHS AU (461-6, nA, He 5)
bhaj saaDhsangat sadaa naanak miteh dokh kamaatay. ||1]|
So vibrate continually in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, and the sins you committed shall be erased. ||1||
qHeu ate Seg Safa HTH WSS Il (461-7, we, ve 5) valvanch kar udar bhareh moorakh gaavaaraa. Practicing deceit, you fill your belly, you ignorant fool!
AS fae & sfoor ofs SeST ST Il (461-7, vr, 2 5) sabh kichh day rahi-aa har dayvanhaaraa. The Lord, the Great Giver, continues to give you everything.
aarg Ae cfenre Aum ate Hog ferrdat i (461-3, mmr, v2 5)
daataar sadaa da-i-aal su-aamee kaa-ay manhu visaaree-ai.
The Great Giver is always merciful. Why should we forget the Lord Master from our minds?
fee AGH 3H fens ae AMT SSM Il (461-8, wer, we 5) mil saaDhsangay bhaj nisangay kul samoohaa taaree-ai. Join the Saadh Sangat, and vibrate fearlessly; all your relations shall be saved.
fro Afoe tz His AS SAS BH MUTT Il (461-9, nr, He 5)
siDh saaDhik dayv mun jan bhagat naam aDhaaraa.
The Siddhas, the seekers, the demi-gods, the silent sages and the devotees, all take the Naam as their support.
faadfs oon He srt us SA ATST ST IQ (461-9, wm, Hs 5) binvant naanak sadaa bhajee-ai parabh ayk karnaihaaraa. ||2|| Prays Nanak, vibrate continually upon God, the One Creator Lord. ||2]|
de 6 ateel yg UTUST ST Il (461-10, wT, Hs 5) khot na keech-ee parabh parkhanhaaraa. Do not practice deception - God is the Assayer of all.
IZ AUS THUS ASHfs AAT Il (461-10, wr, we 5) koorh kapat kamaavdarhay janmeh sansaaraa. Those who practice falsehood and deceit are reincarnated in the world.
HATE Arad fSat sfour fret Sa forfenr i (461-10, nmr, us 5) sansaar saagar tin"ee tari-aa jin"ee ayk Dhi-aa-i-aa. Those who meditate on the One Lord, cross over the world-ocean.
sft an ay uifse fee ys Aaeet nrfemr i (461-11, wr, v2 5)
taj kaam kroDh anind nindaa parabh sarnaa-ee aa-i-aa.
Renouncing sexual desire, anger, flattery and slander, they enter the Sanctuary of God.
me ate Hobe sfeur Amit Se mtant wrurar Il (461-12, mmr, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al ravi-aa su-aamee ooch agam apaaraa.
The lofty, inaccessible and infinite Lord and Master is pervading the water, the land and the sky.
foods Sa 2a AS at VIS AHS MUTT IBM (461-12, wm, He 5)
binvant naanak tayk jan kee charan kamal aDhaaraa. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, He is the support of His servants; His Lotus Feet are their only sustenance. ||3]||
uy dfaseGast mmfag fs ardt il (461-13, mr, He 5) paykh harichand-urrhee asthir kichh naahee. Behold - the world is a mirage; nothing here is permanent.
Hfent gat AS A Afe o ATS Il (461-13, nmr, He 5) maa-i-aa rang jaytay say sang na jaahee. The pleasures of Maya which are here, shall not go with you.
dfs Afa wat Ae 3d feon Sf AHS II (461-13, vir, He 5)
har sang saathee sadaa tayrai dinas rain samaalee-ai. The Lord, your companion, is always with you; remember Him day and night.
dfs Sa fag ae vies ost HR ssh AH I (461-14, mT, He 5) har ayk bin kachh avar naahee bhaa-o dutee-aa jaalee-ai. Without the One Lord, there is no other; burn away the love of duality.
Hts Hae HS AeeA Us Sa ates Ho HS I (461-15, vir, He 5) meet joban maal sarbas parabh ayk kar man maahee. Know in your mind, that the One God is your friend, youth, wealth and everything.
fasts aaa esata ure Ate Haft AHS ISIBIISI (461-15, vA, Hs 5) binvant naanak vadbhaag paa-ee-ai sookh sahj samaahee. ||4||4]|13]|
Prays Nanak, by great good fortune, we find the Lord, and merge in peace and celestial poise. ||4]|4]|13]|
MAT HIS U SS We € (461-17)
aasaa mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 8 Aasaa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Eighth House:
qe Afsas ure Il (461-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aHe gH Sis ane gH Sis o Stee He feuds J neu niorTga AS Il (461-18, wT, He 5) kamlaa bharam bheet kamlaa bharam bheet hay teekhan mad bipreet hay avaDh akaarath jaat.
Maya is the wall of doubt - Maya is the wall of doubt. It is such a powerful and destructive intoxicant; it corrupts and wastes away one's life.
Tas 5 ws Ta as ula 3 fy HAS Ho va T feaad males WS Il (461-19, wm, Hs 5) gahbar ban ghor gahbar ban ghor hay garih moosat man chor hay dinkaro an-din khaat.
In the terrible, impenetrable world-forest - in the terrible, impenetrable world-forest, the thieves are plundering man's house in broad daylight; night and day, this life is being consumed.
feo us ws fags ys fae fhg us age Us I (461-19, nmr, we 5)
din khaat jaat bihaat parabh bin milhu parabh karunaa patay.
The days of your life are being consumed; they are passing away without God. So meet God, the Merciful Lord.
UST GEQ
HOH HIE MSA SS finn Har fas AE ST AS Il (462-1, »mT, ue 5)
janam maran anayk beetay pari-a sang bin kachh nah gatay.
I passed through so many births and deaths; without Union with the Beloved, I did not obtain salvation.
aS gu gu fomradiat 33 fas Hfs ees HTS Il (462-2, wer, ve 5)
kul roop Dhoop gi-aanheenee tujh binaa mohi kavan maat. I am without the status of high birth, beauty, glory or spiritual wisdom; without You, who is mine, O Mother?
ad rfs soa Hafs mre flor ova odd ATT WS NU (462-2, vir, ne 5)
kar jorh naanak saran aa-i-o pari-a naath narhar karahu gaat. ||1]|
With my palms pressed together, O Nanak, I enter the Lord's Sanctuary; O beloved almighty Lord and Master, please, save me! ||1]||
Hot Fadte Hist nadie 3 Gg feeds Ho 35 le 9 as Hee fim fae JS I (462-3, vor, H8 5)
meenaa jalheen meenaa jalheen hay oh bichhurat man tan kheen hay kat jeevan pari- a bin hot.
Like a fish out of water - like a fish out of water, separated from the Lord, the mind and body perish; how can I live, without my Beloved?
Aouy Af we Aon Afs ae d fy weau Ho 30 UTS 3 Gg afuG AOA AGS I (462-4, MTAT, Hs 5)
sanmukh seh baan sanmukh seh baan hay marig arpay man tan paraan hay oh bayDhi-o sahj sarot.
Facing the arrow head-on - facing the arrow head-on, the deer surrenders his mind, body and breath of life; he is struck by the hunter's soothing music.
finn ulfs aait fhe Sait fas soo for sa fSH ftor II (462-5, vm, 18 5)
pari-a pareet laagee mil bairaagee khin rahan Dharig tan tis binaa.
I have enshrined love for my Beloved. In order to meet Him, I have become a renunciate. Cursed is that body which remains without Him, even for an instant.
UBT o ora fut un ura fasefs niafes ys Hor Il (462-5, vim, ue 5)
palkaa na laagai pari-a paraym paagai chitvant an-din parabh manaa.
My eyelids do not close, for I am absorbed in the love of my Beloved. Day and night, my mind thinks only of God.
Asa TS OH HS SF SdH TSM Aas BST Il (462-6, nmr, ne 5)
sareerang raatay naam maatay bhai bharam dutee-aa sagal khot.
Attuned to the Lord, intoxicated with the Naam, fear, doubt and duality have all left me.
ate Hier efenr efenre use ofs YH steal Has FS Ml (462-6, wm, He 5)
kar ma-i-aa da-i-aa da-i-aal pooran har paraym naanak magan hot. ||2]|
Bestow Your mercy and compassion, O merciful and perfect Lord, that Nanak may be intoxicated with Your Love. ||2||
BMS TAS ws TAS I Hae JA PAS HS J US GHS sa|Ns mms Il (462-7, vor, H8 5)
alee-al gu‘jaat alee-al gu‘jaat hay makrand ras baasan maat hay pareet kamal banDhaavat aap.
The bumble-bee is buzzing - the bumble-bee is buzzing, intoxicated with the honey, the flavor and the fragrance; because of its love for the lotus, it entangles itself.
aga fos flmrn ofa fos fimrA od we dz afefy nfs wr 3 mie utes fans 37 II (462-8, MITAT, Hs 5)
chaatrik chit pi-aas chaatrik chit pi-aas hay ghan boond bachitar man aas hay al peevat binsat taap.
The mind of the rainbird thirsts - the mind of the rainbird thirsts; its mind longs for the beautiful rain-drops from the clouds. Drinking them in, its fever departs.
sur fase wa aTAe fee UH ufo sf wits wer I (462-9, mmr, He 5)
taapaa binaasan dookh naasan mil paraym man tan at ghanaa.
O Destroyer of fever, Remover of pain, please unite me with You. My mind and body have such great love for You.
Hed Usd ANS AMM Ao JAS TE For Il (462-10, wm, He 5)
sundar chatur sujaan su-aamee kavan rasnaa gun bhanaa.
O my beautiful, wise and all-knowing Lord and Master, with what tongue should I chant Your Praises?
ad st Seg aH teg ferfe was fees ur Il (462-10, wr, He 5)
geh bhujaa layvhu naam dayvhu darisat Dhaarat mitat paap.
Take me by the arm, and grant me Your Name. One who is blessed with Your Glance of Grace, has his sins erased.
Sod Hu ufss urea dfs VIA UNS od AST NSM (462-11, wir, He 5)
naanak jampai patit paavan har daras paykhat nah santaap. ||3]|
Nanak meditates on the Lord, the Purifier of sinners; beholding His Vision, he suffers no more. |[3]|
fase fos oa fose@ fos ova 3 af Seg Ase nova J fe TS wets urs Il (462-11, MITAT, He 5)
chitva-o chit naath chitva-o chit naath hay rakh layvhu saran anaath hay mil chaa-o chaa-eelay paraan.
I focus my consciousness on the Lord - I focus my consciousness upon the Lord; I am helpless - please, Keep me under Your Protection. I yearn to meet You, my soul hungers for You.
Hed 30 fours Hes 36 fms 3 He BaO aus famre 3 wha AS TUS HT} Il (462-12, MITAT, He 5)
sundar tan Dhi-aan sundar tan Dhi-aan hay man lubaDh gopaal gi-aan hay jaachik jan raakhat maan.
I meditate on Your beautiful body - I meditate on Your beautiful body; my mind is fascinated by Your spiritual wisdom, O Lord of the world. Please, preserve the honor of Your humble servants and beggars.
ys He Udo oH fadtas Aare fees urstor Il (462-13, vir, He 5) parabh maan pooran dukh bideeran sagal ichh pujantee-aa. God bestows perfect honor and destroys pain; He has fulfilled all my desires.
dfs afs oa fea nea fife avo AW AUS I (462-14, nr, He 5)
har kanth laagay din sabhaagay mil naah sayj suhantee-aa.
How very blessed was that day when the Lord embraced me; meeting my Husband Lord, my bed was beautified.
ys ferfe oct fHS Hast Aas ABHS SS TS Il (462-14, ver, ws 5) parabh darisat Dhaaree milay muraaree sagal kalmal bha-ay haan. When God granted His Grace and met me, all my sins were erased.
fasets aoa Het oA use fHS Aloe Te fears IsNAASll (462-15, wi, He 5) binvant naanak mayree aas pooran milay sareeDhar gun niDhaan. ||4||1]|14]| Prays Nanak, my hopes are fulfilled; I have met the Lord, the Lord of Lakshmi, the treasure of excellence. ||4]|1]|14]|
Asan wes usy forse fares nieve Hats nial AS Ts YAS Il (462-17) ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
YMTAT HIS 4 Il (462-18)
aasaa mehliaa 1. Aasaa, First Mehl:
ad HBat ofs ASA st HIG ufss a fod SS nA TH at Tot Il (462-18)
vaar salokaa naal salok bhee mahlay pahilay kay likhay tunday as raajai kee Dhunee. Vaar With Shaloks, And Shaloks Written By The First Mehl. To Be Sung To The Tune Of 'Tunda-Asraajaa’:
HBA Hs % Il (462-19)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
werd as nrue feGost Ae Sa Il (462-19, wr, Hs 1) balihaaree gur aapnay di-uhaarhee sad vaar. A hundred times a day, I am a sacrifice to my Guru;
fife HSA 3 Pes AS ATS G Balt Ss NA (462-19, wr, He 1) jin maanas tay dayvtay kee-ay karat na laagee vaar. ||1|| He made angels out of men, without delay. ||1||
UST géB
HIS 2 Il (463-1)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
HAG ve Gaeta Han Vato TAT Il (463-1, mmr, Hs 2) jay sa-o chandaa ugvahi sooraj charheh hajaar. If a hundred moons were to rise, and a thousand suns appeared,
SS woe dient ag fae urs nits 12H) (463-1, vir, He 2) aytay chaanan hidi-aa‘ gur bin ghor anDhaar. ||2|| even with such light, there would still be pitch darkness without the Guru. ||2| |
Hs 4 Il (463-2)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
BSA TT B VIAt HfS mTUS AST Il (463-2, meme, we 1) naanak guroo na chaytnee man aapnai suchayt. O Nanak, those who do not think of the Guru, and who think of themselves as clever,
ge fae aura fa@ He niefe 8S I (463-2, wir, we 1) chhutay til boo-aarh ji-o sunjay andar khayt. shall be left abandoned in the field, like the scattered sesame.
as viefs efenr ag aaa AG oT Il (463-3, wer, He 1)
khaytai andar chhuti-aa kaho naanak sa-o naah.
They are abandoned in the field, says Nanak, and they have a hundred masters to please.
semis sams gus st 36 fete Ars ISI (463-3, mmr, Hs 1) falee-ah fulee-ah bapurhay bhee tan vich su-aah. ||3]| The wretches bear fruit and flower, but within their bodies, they are filled with ashes.
131] ugat I (463-4)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
mnie nny Af nmi sfeS ar i (463-4, wer, us 1) aapeen"ai aap saaji-o aapeen"ai rachi-o naa-o. He Himself created Himself; He Himself assumed His Name.
vot aeefs Anat afs uA fS BE Il (463-4, nr, He 1)
duyee kudrat saajee-ai kar aasan ditho chaa-o.
Secondly, He fashioned the creation; seated within the creation, He beholds it with delight.
as ast onfy 3 3fh eet asta UAT Il (463-5, wr, He 1)
daataa kartaa aap too™ tus dayveh karahi pasaa-o. You Yourself are the Giver and the Creator; by Your Pleasure, You bestow Your Mercy.
3 Weel ASA @ SAfs fie ASS il (403-5, wr, we too” jaano-ee sabhsai day laisahi jind kavaa-o. You are the Knower of all; You give life, and take it away again with a word.
afa wmn f36 TE NA (463-5, wer, He 1) kar aasan ditho chaa-o. ||1|| Seated within the creation, You behold it with delight. ||1]|
HB Hs 9 Il (463-6)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
et
Ae 33 Ys AG IHS Il (463-6, ww, ue 1) sachay tayray khand sachay barahmand. True are Your worlds, True are Your solar Systems.
~~
He 3d Bui AS Ma Il (463-6, mA, He 1) sachay tayray lo-a sachay aakaar. True are Your realms, True is Your creation.
~
Hd 3d Ade Ada MSs Il (463-6, nmr, ue 1) sachay tayray karnay sarab beechaar. True are Your actions, and all Your deliberations.
He 3a wg Ast Stare Il (463-7, vir, vs 1) sachaa tayraa amar sachaa deebaan. True is Your Command, and True is Your Court.
Ha 3a" JAH A SINS Il (463-7, vr, He 1) sachaa tayraa hukam sachaa furmaan. True is the Command of Your Will, True is Your Order.
Ha 3a" ATH As SATS Il (463-7, wer, ve 1) sachaa tayraa karam sachaa neesaan. True is Your Mercy, True is Your Insignia.
Ae 30 nimufa we ads Il 463-8, wm, He 1) sachay tuDh aakhahi lakh karorh. Hundreds of thousands and millions call You True.
Ae Afs ats Ad Afs Afe Il (463-8, »mAT, He 1) sachai sabh taan sachai sabh jor. In the True Lord is all power, in the True Lord is all might.
Het Sct fhefs ASt AST Il (463-8, wmAr, He 1) sachee tayree sifat sachee saalaah. True is Your Praise, True is Your Adoration.
Het Sct aeats As UTSATT I (463-9, mmr, He 1) sachee tayree kudrat sachay paatisaah. True is Your almighty creative power, True King.
area Ag fomrfefs Ag Il (463-9, mmr, He 1) naanak sach Dhi-aa-in sach. O Nanak, true are those who meditate on the True One.
A Hf HA A ae feos IA (463-9, wer, He 1) jo mar jammay so kach nikach. ||1]| Those who are subject to birth and death are totally false. ||1]|
He % Il (463-10) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
zat sfanret AT zat STE Il (463-10, »rr, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaa vadaa naa-o. Great is His greatness, as great as His Name.
zat efanret AT Ae fame il (463-10, nmr, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaa sach ni-aa-o. Great is His greatness, as True is His justice.
zat efanret a fags a Il (463-10, mmr, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaa nihchal thaa-o. Great is His greatness, as permanent as His Throne.
zat Sfauret WE nis i (463-11, om, v2 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaanai aalaa-o. Great is His greatness, as He knows our utterances.
zat efsuret o3 vfs aC i (463-11, mr, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee bujhai sabh bhaa-o. Great is His greatness, as He understands all our affections.
zat efanret a ufe & STS I (463-11, or, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaa puchh na daat. Great is His greatness, as He gives without being asked.
zat Sfanret AT mmy vertu i (463-12, mmr, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee jaa aapay aap. Great is His greatness, as He Himself is all-in-all.
SSA ATT © AGSt ATE Il (463-12, wer, vs 1) naanak kaar na kathnee jaa-ay. O Nanak, His actions cannot be described.
ast Adal Ads GATES QM (463-12, wer, He 1)
keetaa karnaa sarab rajaa-ay. ||2|| Whatever He has done, or will do, is all by His Own Will. ||2]|
HIS! 2 Il (463-13)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
feg Ha Ae at d dost Ad ot fete SH I 463-13, mmr, ne 2) ih jag sachai kee hai koth-rhee sachay kaa vich vaas. This world is the room of the True Lord; within it is the dwelling of the True Lord.
feaqr gafh AHfe we feaat IaH Ad FESTA II (463-13, nmr, He 2)
ikn"aa hukam samaa-ay la-ay ikn"aa hukmay karay vinaas.
By His Command, some are merged into Him, and some, by His Command, are destroyed.
feaat ave afe we feaqt ufimr fete feet Il (463-14, nmr, He 2)
ikn"aa bhaanai kadh la-ay ikn"aa maa-i-aa vich nivaas.
Some, by the Pleasure of His Will, are lifted up out of Maya, while others are made to dwell within it.
Se fs orf o aust fa fan wre oF I (463-14, mmr, He 2)
ayv bhe aakh na jaap-ee je kisai aanay raas.
No one can say who will be rescued.
Soa TeHfa weha AT Aas orfy ad UsSaA ISI (463-15, MTA, He 2) naanak gurmukh jaanee-ai jaa ka-o aap karay pargaas. ||3]||
O Nanak, he alone is known as Gurmukh, unto whom the Lord reveals Himself. ||3]|
uGat Il (463-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Soa Hb Curt! a fats are cen safer Il (463-16, nmr, He 2)
naanak jee-a upaa-ay kai likh naavai Dharam bahaali-aa.
O Nanak, having created the souls, the Lord installed the Righteous Judge of Dharma to read and record their accounts.
6a Ad dt Afe foas ufs ef ae Afr I (463-16, vir, He 2) othai sachay hee sach nibrhai chun vakh kadhay jajmaali-aa. There, only the Truth is judged true; the sinners are picked out and separated.
we 6 ufets afsura Ho Ss Safa Ufemr I (463-17, wer, He 2) thaa-o na paa-in koorhi-aar muh kaal"ai dojak chaali-aa. The false find no place there, and they go to hell with their faces blackened.
3d afe a3 A fafe ae ofs ae fh one Stem It (463-17, om, He 2) tayrai naa-ay ratay say jin ga-ay haar ga-ay se thagan vaali-aa. Those who are imbued with Your Name win, while the cheaters lose.
fafa are Ten safer iQ (463-18, MAT, He 2) likh naavai Dharam bahaali-aa. ||2]| The Lord installed the Righteous Judge of Dharma to read and record the accounts.
21 |
Had H2 % Il (463-18)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
feAHte oe fEAHTE SE Il (463-18, wr, He 1) vismaad naad vismaad vayd. Wonderful is the sound current of the Naad, wonderful is the knowledge of the Vedas.
feAHte Aba feAHTE Se Il (463-19, wm, He 1) vismaad jee-a vismaad bhayd. Wonderful are the beings, wonderful are the species.
feAHe gu feAHrS Fa Il (463-19, wr, He 1) vismaad roop vismaad rang. Wonderful are the forms, wonderful are the colors.
fennte ara feats AZ Il (463-19, wer, He 1) vismaad naagay fireh jant. Wonderful are the beings who wander around naked.
Uart gég feAHte ue feAHTE urat Il (464-1, vr, He 1)
vismaad pa-un vismaad paanee. Wonderful is the wind, wonderful is the water.
feAHTe niaret Ysts fesrat I (464-1, vr, He 1) vismaad agnee khaydeh vidaanee. Wonderful is fire, which works wonders.
feAHre dsst feAH]E Uret I (464-1, vr, He 1) vismaad Dhartee vismaad khaanee. Wonderful is the earth, wonderful the sources of creation.
feAHre Ae walls UsTel I (464-2, vrAr, He 1) vismaad saad lageh paraanee. Wonderful are the tastes to which mortals are attached.
fennte Aaa femme feng Il (464-2, ner, He 1) vismaad sanjog vismaad vijog. Wonderful is union, and wonderful is separation.
fennte su feAnTe Sa Il (464-2, vir, He 1) vismaad bhukh vismaad bhog. Wonderful is hunger, wonderful is satisfaction.
fenHe frefs ferme ATS Il (464-3, nim, He 1) vismaad sifat vismaad saalaah. Wonderful is His Praise, wonderful is His adoration.
feAHte Osa fEeAHTS TT Il (464-3, vA, He 1) vismaad ujharh vismaad raah. Wonderful is the wilderness, wonderful is the path.
fenne 33 fern] Ufs I (464-3, nmr, ws 1) vismaad nayrhai vismaad door. Wonderful is closeness, wonderful is distance.
feAHe Se THe Tale Il (464-4, nmr, He 1) vismaad daykhai haajraa hajoor. How wonderful to behold the Lord, ever-present here.
afy feats sfont fen Il (464-4, nmr, He 1) vaykh vidaan rahi-aa vismaad. Beholding His wonders, I am wonder-struck.
BSA ITS UT STA WAU (464-4, were, oe 1) naanak bujhan poorai bhaag. ||1|| O Nanak, those who understand this are blessed with perfect destiny. ||1]|
He 4% Il (464-5) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
aves fern avefs net avafs 3 AY AS I (464-5, vir, He 1)
kudrat disai kudrat sunee-ai kudrat bha-o sukh saar.
By His Power we see, by His Power we hear; by His Power we have fear, and the essence of happiness.
aes usat ora Aeals ATs viTaTT Il (464-5, wer, ve 1)
kudrat paataalee aakaasee kudrat sarab aakaar.
By His Power the nether worlds exist, and the Akaashic ethers; by His Power the entire creation exists.
aes Fz uTSs AST aeafs Aga Seg Il (464-6, nv, us 1)
kudrat vayd puraan kataybaa kudrat sarab veechaar.
By His Power the Vedas and the Puraanas exist, and the Holy Scriptures of the Jewish, Christian and Islamic religions. By His Power all deliberations exist.
aevafs war ute Uae aeafs Aaa fimrg Il (464-6, »mr, us 1)
kudrat khaanaa peenaa pain"an kudrat sarab pi-aar. By His Power we eat, drink and dress; by His Power all love exists.
aevats ast front gait avefs Aha AT] I 464-7, vr, He YD
kudrat jaatee jinsee rangee kudrat jee-a jahaan.
- By His Power come the species of all kinds and colors; by His Power the living beings of the world exist.
aeas sat avafs seer aeals HG nifsHre I (464-7, vr, He 1)
kudrat naykee-aa kudrat badee-aa kudrat maan abhimaan.
By His Power virtues exist, and by His Power vices exist. By His Power come honor and dishonor.
aves ue ural SH3g aeafs cast we I (464-8, vir, He 1) kudrat pa-un paanee baisantar kudrat Dhartee khaak. By His Power wind, water and fire exist; by His Power earth and dust exist.
Ag Sat geals F atfeg AIST ura Set UTE Il (464-8, wr, He 1)
sabh tayree kudrat too” kaadir kartaa paakee naa-ee paak.
Everything is in Your Power, Lord; You are the all-powerful Creator. Your Name is the Holiest of the Holy.
Sod JOH viefs SY SIs SA BT III (464-9, wer, we 1)
naanak hukmai andar vaykhai vartai taako taak. ||2||
O Nanak, through the Command of His Will, He beholds and pervades the creation; He is absolutely unrivalled. ||2||
UgST Il (464-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nie sa sfa & cf safe sg frofemr I (464-9, »mr, vs 1) aapeen"ai bhog bhog kai ho-ay bhasmarh bha-ur siDhaa-i-aa. Enjoying his pleasures, one is reduced to a pile of ashes, and the soul passes away.
zs got wolerg afe Hae wis verfenr Il (464-10, wr, He 1)
vadaa ho-aa duneedaar gal sangal ghat chalaa-i-aa.
He may be great, but when he dies, the chain is thrown around his neck, and he is led away.
wat Adel atefs en afs Sart afs AHSTEMM Il (464-10, ner, He 1) agai karnee keerat vaachee-ai bahi laykhaa kar samjhaa-i-aa. There, his good and bad deeds are added up; sitting there, his account is read.
we o dat ugetet gfe Fett fame gnrfenr It (464-11, omer, we 1) thaa-o na hovee pa-udee-ee hun sunee-ai ki-aa roo-aa-i-aa. He is whipped, but finds no place of rest, and no one hears his cries of pain.
Hfe nid HOH TetfEMr SI (464-12, mT, He 1) man anDhai janam gavaa-i-aa. ||3]| The blind man has wasted his life away. ||3]|
HEX H2 % Il (464-12)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
3 fefe ues 2d HESS I (464-12, ner, He 1) bhai vich pavan vahai sadvaa-o. In the Fear of God, the wind and breezes ever blow.
3 fefe voto we edie’ Il (464-12, nr, He 1) bhai vich chaleh lakh daree-aa-o. In the Fear of God, thousands of rivers flow.
3 fefe mats ae sarfa i (464-13, nmr, He 1) bhai vich agan kadhai vaygaar. In the Fear of God, fire is forced to labor.
3 fefs cast wet ae i (464-13, um, we 1) bhai vich Dhartee dabee bhaar. In the Fear of God, the earth is crushed under its burden.
3 fete fee fed fra ofa il (464-13, ner, He 1) bhai vich ind firai sir bhaar. In the Fear of God, the clouds move across the sky.
3 fefe TA OSH SME I (464-14, nr, He 1) bhai vich raajaa Dharam du-aar. In the Fear of God, the Righteous Judge of Dharma stands at His Door.
3 fete an & fetes FE Il (464-14, wr, He 1) bhai vich sooraj bhai vich chand. In the Fear of God, the sun shines, and in the Fear of God, the moon reflects.
AT Ads VHS 3 MIT I (464-14, nw, ne 1) koh karorhee chalat na ant. They travel millions of miles, endlessly.
3 fefe fro ga Ae OE Il (464-15, ner, He 1) bhai vich siDh buDh sur naath. In the Fear of God, the Siddhas exist, as do the Buddhas, the demi-gods and Yogis.
3 fefa mrs nitemm I (464-15, mmr, He 1) bhai vich aadaanay aakaas. In the Fear of God, the Akaashic ethers are stretched across the sky.
3 fefs FO HIE AT Il (464-15, or, He 1) bhai vich joDh mahaabal soor. In the Fear of God, the warriors and the most powerful heroes exist.
3 fete mrefa Aref UT II (464-15, wr, Hs 1) bhai vich aavahi jaaveh poor. In the Fear of God, multitudes come and go.
Hatter 3G fesftimr fats BY il (464-16, nmr, He 1) sagli-aa bha-o likhi-aa sir laykh. God has inscribed the Inscription of His Fear upon the heads of all.
aoa fesse fadarg AY Sa NA (464-16, mmr, He 1) naanak nirbha-o nirankaar sach ayk. ||1]| O Nanak, the Fearless Lord, the Formless Lord, the True Lord, is One. ||1]]|
He % Il (464-16) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
sod fess fadarg dfg XS IH FSH Il (464-17, new, us 1)
naanak nirbha-o nirankaar hor kaytay raam ravaal.
O Nanak, the Lord is fearless and formless; myriads of others, like Rama, are mere dust before Him.
ash ay aoe AS Fe ss Il (464-17, omer, us 1) kaytee-aa kan" kahaanee-aa kaytay bayd beechaar. There are so many stories of Krishna, so many who reflect over the Vedas.
as outa Has fos Hf usta 3H Il (464-17, wr, He 1) kaytay nacheh mangtay girh murh pooreh taal. So many beggars dance, spinning around to the beat.
aadt aad ufo orfe aefos wars Il (464-18, vr, He 1)
baajaaree baajaar meh aa-ay kadheh baajaar. The magicians perform their magic in the market place, creating a false illusion.
ets TH Teor sofa nis US Il (464-18, wer, we 1) gaavahi raajay raanee-aa boleh aal pataal. They sing as kings and queens, and speak of this and that.
wd cfm & Hes we Sfomt AX IS Il (464-19, rrr, ve 1) lakh taki-aa kay mund-rhay lakh taki-aa kay haar. They wear earrings, and necklaces worth thousands of dollars.
fas fe urdinfa soot A 36 Jefe ere Il (464-19, vir, He 1) jit tan paa-ee-ah naankaa say tan hoveh chhaar. Those bodies on which they are worn, O Nanak, those bodies turn to ashes.
Ua géu
famig & aetet Seba TIS AIS AT Il (465-1, mr, Hz 1) gi-aan na galee-ee dhoodhee-ai kathnaa karrhaa saar. Wisdom cannot be found through mere words. To explain it is as hard as iron.
oath fs st ureit da franfs JAH yrs 12M (465-1, wir, He 1)
karam milai taa paa-ee-ai hor hikmat hukam khu-aar. ||2|| When the Lord bestows His Grace, then alone it is received; other tricks and orders are useless. ||2||
ust Il (465-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sets acts A uMuat ST Sedt Afsag ufeur it (465-2, wm, ve 1) nadar karahi jay aapnee taa nadree satgur paa-i-aa. If the Merciful Lord shows His Mercy, then the True Guru is found.
fg H@ ss Hon sdfimr so Afsafs Ase HefeMr Il (465-2, ver, He 1)
ayhu jee-o bahutay janam bharammi-aa taa satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa.
This soul wandered through countless incarnations, until the True Guru instructed it in the Word of the Shabad.
Afsag Aes BS a Sdt Afs Afenitg Sa Rafer I 465-3, we, He 1 satgur jayvad daataa ko nahee sabh suni-ahu lok sabaa-i-aa. There is no giver as great as the True Guru; hear this, all you people.
Afsafe fiufemt Ag urfemr frat fea wiry aetfémr I (465-4, omer, Hs 1) satgur mili-ai sach paa-i-aa jin"ee vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa. Meeting the True Guru, the True Lord is found; He removes self-conceit from within,
fafs Ad A gstfenr sil (465-4, mmr, He 1) jin sacho sach bujhaa-i-aa. ||4| | and instructs us in the Truth of Truths. ||4]|
HX H2 Y Il (465-5)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
wether AS aruba uge Ae TU Il (465-5, ww, He 1) gharhee-aa sabhay gopee-aa pahar kan" gopaal. All the hours are the milk-maids, and the quarters of the day are the Krishnas.
Te USS ust SHIT VE ASH MEST Il (465-5, meme, we 1) gahnay pa-un paanee baisantar chand sooraj avtaar. The wind, water and fire are the ornaments; the sun and moon are the incarnations.
Raat Usst HS US Sdsfs APs AA I (465-6, wT, He 1) saglee Dhartee maal Dhan vartan sarab janjaal. All of the earth, property, wealth and articles are all entanglements.
area HA fomres fegat ute afenr THATS UU (465-6, mmr, He 1)
naanak musai gi-aan vihoonee khaa-ay ga-i-aa jamkaal. ||1]||
O Nanak, without divine knowledge, one is plundered, and devoured by the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
Hs 4 Il (465-7)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
sfets 3% oule Ta ll (465-7, vr, He 1) vaa-in chaylay nachan gur. The disciples play the music, and the gurus dance.
us verfefs safe fre il (465-7, vir, He 1) pair halaa-in fayrni" sir. They move their feet and roll their heads.
Cfs Sfs aer sre ue I (465-7, vir, He 1) ud ud raavaa jhaatai paa-ay. The dust flies and falls upon their hair.
ZY Sa TA wife ATE Il (465-8, weAT, He 1) vaykhai lok hasai ghar jaa-ay. Beholding them, the people laugh, and then go home.
ddr arate ysts 3 Il (465-8, wr, 8 1) rotee-aa kaaran pooreh taal. They beat the drums for the sake of bread.
my UsTatd Tast ST Il (465-8, wr, He 1) aap pachhaarheh Dhartee naal. They throw themselves upon the ground.
arate athe arefs are ll (465-9, mr, He 1) gaavan gopee-aa gaavan kaan”. They sing of the milk-maids, they sing of the Krishnas.
Tete Ast SH TH Il (465-9, wrAr, He 1) gaavan seetaa raajay raam. They sing of Sitas, and Ramas and kings.
foss@ fadarg AY BMH Il (465-9, vir, He 1) nirbha-o nirankaar sach naam. The Lord is fearless and formless; His Name is True.
A at Ab Aas AIS Il (465-10, wirAr, He 1) jaa kaa kee-aa sagal jahaan. The entire universe is His Creation.
Rea Rete aah Bare i (465-10, wer, He 1) sayvak sayveh karam charhaa-o. Those servants, whose destiny is awakened, serve the Lord.
feat sf= faa ufs a Il (465-10, »mr, Hs 1) bhinnee rain jin"aa man chaa-o. The night of their lives is cool with dew; their minds are filled with love for the Lord.
fret faftimr aa Starts i (465-10, vm, He 1) sikhee sikhi-aa gur veechaar. Contemplating the Guru, I have been taught these teachings;
Seat Aa Bure urs i (465-11, wr, He 1) nadree karam laghaa-ay paar. granting His Grace, He carries His servants across.
AH TIM Fat FH Il (465-11, wer, He 1) koloo charkhaa chakee chak. The oil-press, the spinning wheel, the grinding stones, the potter's wheel,
WS dB AIF MST Il (465-11, Ar, nz 1) thal vaarolay bahut anant. the numerous, countless whirlwinds in the desert,
BS HUTSha Msas Il (465-12, mrAr, 42 1) laatoo maaDhaanee-aa angaah. the spinning tops, the churning sticks, the threshers,
udt sent Sf BATT Il (465-12, nmr, He 1) pankhee bha-udee-aa lain na saah. the breathless tumblings of the birds,
AM ots sevetuifa AT I (465-12, wm, ue 1) soo-ai chaarh bhavaa-ee-ah jant. and the men moving round and round on spindles
Soa SCfent TEs 3 MT Il (465-12, we, He 1) naanak bha-udi-aa ganat na ant. - O Nanak, the tumblers are countless and endless.
due sfa gee AfE Il (465-13, ner, 42 1) banDhan banDh bhavaa-ay so-ay. The Lord binds us in bondage - so do we spin around.
ufemt forsfs od AS aE Il (465-13, wir, He 1) pa-i-ai kirat nachai sabh ko-ay. According to their actions, so do all people dance.
fs ofe JAfs vos A SE I (465-13, mmr, He 1) nach nach haseh chaleh say ro-ay. Those who dance and dance and laugh, shall weep on their ultimate departure.
Cfs a act fra & fo Il (465-14, wr, He 1) ud na jaahee siDh na hohi. They do not fly to the heavens, nor do they become Siddhas.
OVE ATS HS A WE Il (465-14, wey, uz 1) nachan kudan man kaa chaa-o. They dance and jump around on the urgings of their minds.
Soe fag His 3@ fsar nfs STE iQ (465-14, wm, He 1)
naanak jin" man bha-o tin"aa man bhaa-o. ||2||
O Nanak, those whose minds are filled with the Fear of God, have the love of God in their minds as well. ||2]|
UgST Il (465-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oe 3a fadarg 3d of= aft odfa o AEM II (465-15, mm, He 1) naa-o tayraa nirankaar hai naa-ay la-i-ai narak na jaa-ee-ai. Your Name is the Fearless Lord; chanting Your Name, one does not have to go to hell.
mM fis As fSR oS uA rf TeTEM I (465-15, nmr, He 1) jee-o pind sabh tis daa day khaajai aakh gavaa-ee-ai. Soul and body all belong to Him; asking Him to give us sustenance is a waste.
A Safo var mruat af vag ate AES I (465-16, vir, He 1) jay lorheh changa aapnaa kar punnhu neech sadaa-ee-ai. If you yearn for goodness, then perform good deeds and feel humble.
A Adee! UdId Ag TA Ade mrss I (465-16, wir, He 1) jay jarvaanaa parharai jar vays karaydee aa-ee-ai. Even if you remove the signs of old age, old age shall still come in the guise of death.
a Id & sda UTS Wl (465-17, wer, ve ko rahai na bharee-ai paa-ee-ai. | |5|| No one remains here when the count of the breaths is full. ||5]|
HX H2 Y Il (465-17)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
HAGHs' fRefs AdmfSs ufs ufs aefs stars I (465-17, wr, He 1) musalmaanaa sifat saree-at parh parh karahi beechaar. The Muslims praise the Islamic law; they read and reflect upon it.
a2 A fa uefs fete det Sue a cers Il (465-18, vr, ue 1) banday say je paveh vich bandee vaykhan ka-o deedaar. The Lord's bound servants are those who bind themselves to see the Lord's Vision.
fig Wad Aerts carts gf wry il (465-18, mmr, He 1)
hindoo saalaahee saalaahan darsan roop apaar.
The Hindus praise the Praiseworthy Lord; the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, His form is incomparable.
Safe sets niger UAT ofa FA FIAT Il (465-19, wr, He 1)
tirath naaveh archaa poojaa agar vaas behkaar.
They bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, making offerings of flowers, and burning incense before idols.
nat Afs fomrefa AS nied OH ATS Il (465-19, wr, Hs 1) jogee sunn Dhi-aavni" jaytay alakh naam kartaar. The Yogis meditate on the absolute Lord there; they call the Creator the Unseen Lord.
Uat sé
AY Hots oH fade afer a yiraTg Il (466-1, mA, He 1) sookham moorat naam niranjan kaa-i-aa kaa aakaar. But to the subtle image of the Immaculate Name, they apply the form of a body.
Rao vfs Hsu Curd te a Sets il (466-1, nmr, ne 1) satee-aa man santokh upjai daynai kai veechaar. In the minds of the virtuous, contentment is produced, thinking about their giving.
@ & Hala HUA Te" AS Ad AAT Il (466-2, wr, He 1)
day day mangeh sahsaa goonaa sobh karay sansaar.
They give and give, but ask a thousand-fold more, and hope that the world will honor them.
IT Wa S fans uray FAT Il (466-2, wr, we 1) choraa jaaraa tai koorhi-aaraa khaaraabaa vaykaar. The thieves, adulterers, perjurers, evil-doers and sinners
fefa der fe vate were fsar fa aret ae Il (466-3, wm, He 1)
ik hodaa khaa-ay chaleh aithaa-oo tinaa bhe kaa-ee kaar.
- after using up what good karma they had, they depart; have they done any good deeds here at all?
afs af rho udher Snr nrars wires | (466-3, TAT, He 1)
jal thal jee-aa puree-aa lo-aa aakaaraa aakaar.
There are beings and creatures in the water and on the land, in the worlds and universes, form upon form.
Gfe fa vrafa A Sd wets fer fs Sat APS Il (466-4, vir, we 1) o-ay je aakhahi so too“hai jaaneh tinaa bhe tayree saar. Whatever they say, You know; You care for them all.
SOA SIS’ FY ASVTS A SH MUG Il (466-4, Ar, He 1)
naanak bhagtaa bhukh saalaahan sach naam aaDhaar.
O Nanak, the hunger of the devotees is to praise You; the True Name is their only support.
He nidfe gots feg ast qeefsur ur arg AU (466-5, wr, He 1) Sadaa anand raheh din raatee gunvanti-aa paa chhaar. ||1|| They live in eternal bliss, day and night; they are the dust of the feet of the virtuous.
[1
Hs 4% Il (466-5)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fat HASHS at Us uct afimrs Il (466-5, wr, He 1) mitee musalmaan kee payrhai pa-ee kum'i-aar. The clay of the Muslim's grave becomes clay for the potter's wheel.
wis ats fee dot Awet AT ua Il (466-6, wm, He 1) gharh bhaa“day itaa kee-aa jaldee karay pukaar. Pots and bricks are fashioned from it, and it cries out as it burns.
nfs afe d= aust sf sf uefa nifamira il (466-6, nmr, nz 1) jal jal rovai bapurhee jharh jharh paveh angi-aar. The poor clay burns, burns and weeps, as the fiery coals fall upon it.
sod fafe ass ade At A ATE AIS Ill (466-7, er, He 1)
naanak jin kartai kaaran kee-aa so jaanai kartaar. ||2|| O Nanak, the Creator created the creation; the Creator Lord alone knows. ||2||
Uugat Il (466-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fas Afsas fas o utes fae Afsas fas o ufemr I (466-7, umm, He 1)
bin satgur kinai na paa-i-o bin satgur kinai na paa-i-aa.
Without the True Guru, no one has obtained the Lord; without the True Guru, no one has obtained the Lord.
Afsas fefs nu sfi6e afs ude vita Hater | (466-8, mr, He 1)
satgur vich aap rakhi-on kar pargat aakh sunaa-i-aa.
He has placed Himself within the True Guru; revealing Himself, He declares this openly.
Afsas fife ret Has 3 fafs fees Ho gorfeur I (466-8, mmr, He 1) satgur mili-ai sadaa mukat hai jin vichahu moh chukaa-i-aa.
Meeting the True Guru, eternal liberation is obtained; He has banished attachment from within.
@sy fg deg 3 fafo we fre foes went II (466-9, vir, He utam ayhu beechaar hai jin sachay si-o chit laa-i-aa. This is the highest thought, that one's consciousness is attached to the True Lord.
Ades VST ue Ell (466-10, war, He 1) jagjeevan daataa paa-i-aa. ||6|| Thus the Lord of the World, the Great Giver is obtained. ||6]|
HEX H2 Y Il (466-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
J@ fefs orfeur 38 fete afemr il (466-10, nmr, H8 1) ha-o vich aa-i-aa ha-o vich ga-i-aa.
In ego they come, and in ego they go.
u@ fefs afimr 3G fete yr Il (466-10, nmr, He 1) ha-o vich jammi-aa ha-o vich mu-aa.
In ego they are born, and in ego they die.
J@ fefs fest 3 feta ofemr Il (466-11, nmr, He 1)
ha-o vich ditaa ha-o vich la-i-aa. In ego they give, and in ego they take.
J@ fefs ufeur 38 fete afemr il (466-11, nmr, Hs 1) ha-o vich khati-aa ha-o vich ga-i-aa. In ego they earn, and in ego they lose.
UG fefs Afsorg afsorg Il (466-12, wr, He 1) ha-o vich sachiaar koorhi-aar. In ego they become truthful or false.
JG fefs ur ue Ses Il (466-12, vir, He 1) ha-o vich paap punn veechaar. In ego they reflect on virtue and sin.
JG fefs satex Asta MEST Il (466-12, nr, Hz 1) ha-o vich narak surag avtaar. In ego they go to heaven or hell.
u@ fefs dA UG fefe FS i (466-12, nmr, He 1) ha-o vich hasai ha-o vich rovai. In ego they laugh, and in ego they weep.
u@ fefs adm 3 fefe GS i) (466-13, ner, He 1) ha-o vich bharee-ai ha-o vich Dhovai. In ego they become dirty, and in ego they are washed clean.
JG fefs wat fAOAt Fs I (466-13, mr, He 1) ha-o vich jaatee jinsee khovai. In ego they lose social status and class.
UG fefs use 3S fete fmrer il (466-13, wr, He 1) ha-o vich moorakh ha-o vich si-aanaa. In ego they are ignorant, and in ego they are wise.
He Hats at ATS o ATST Il (466-14, MTA, He 1) mokh mukat kee saar na jaanaa. They do not know the value of salvation and liberation.
J@ fefs wienr 36 fetes afeur Il (466-14, mr, He 1) ha-o vich maa-i-aa ha-o vich chhaa-i-aa. In ego they love Maya, and in ego they are kept in darkness by it.
JH afs afe HS Curfemr Il (466-15, mmr, He 1) ha-umai kar kar jant upaa-i-aa. Living in ego, mortal beings are created.
ISH FS BUT AS Il (466-15, wer, we 1) ha-umai boojhai taa dar soojhai. When one understands ego, then the Lord's gate is known.
fare feger af aft BF Il (466-15, mmr, we 1) gi-aan vihoonaa kath kath loojhai. Without spiritual wisdom, they babble and argue.
Soa ToHt feb Sy il (466-15, mer, He 1) naanak hukmee likee-ai laykh. O Nanak, by the Lord's Command, destiny is recorded.
Ad Sufs So Sy WAU (466-16, nT, He 1) jayhaa vaykheh tayhaa vaykh. ||1]| As the Lord sees us, so are we seen. ||1||
HIS! 2 Il (466-16)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
eH Sa ats I IH AIH ANAT Il (466-16, mA, He 2) ha-umai ayhaa jaat hai ha-umai karam kamaahi. This is the nature of ego, that people perform their actions in ego.
GH Set sua fefs fefe wat us i (466-17, wir, ve 2) ha-umai ay-ee banDhnaa fir fir jonee paahi. This is the bondage of ego, that time and time again, they are reborn.
UGH faag Cun fag HAH fea ATE I (466-17, mmr, we 2) ha-umai kithhu oopjai kit sanjam ih jaa-ay. Where does ego come from? How can it be removed?
IGH Sd Jan J uf faafs fears it (466-17, vier, v2 2) ha-umai ayho hukam hai pa-i-ai kirat firaahi. This ego exists by the Lord's Order; people wander according to their past actions.
TSH caw da gd ag st fSA HAT II (466-18, mT, Hs 2) ha-umai deeragh rog hai daaroo bhee is maahi. Ego is a chronic disease, but it contains its own cure as well.
fagu ad A ytuet 3 TT a AaE AHN Il (466-18, wm, He 2) kirpaa karay jay aapnee taa gur kaa sabad kamaahi.
If the Lord grants His Grace, one acts according to the Teachings of the Guru's Shabad.
Soa Ad Hed Hod fes Aah eu ATT IM (466-19, wT, He 2) naanak kahai sunhu janhu it sanjam dukh jaahi. ||2|| Nanak says, listen, people: in this way, troubles depart. ||2||
uGSt Il (466-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ae atst Asdtet frat Ad Ag forfenr I (466-19, nr, 2 2) sayv keetee santokhee-ee™ jin"ee sacho sach Dhi-aa-i-aa. Those who serve are content. They meditate on the Truest of the True.
ust geo Got He Us o afi afs Afas ca aHfeMr It (467-1, mr, He 2)
on"ee mandai pair na rakhi-o kar sukarit Dharam kamaa-i-aa. They do not place their feet in sin, but do good deeds and live righteously in Dharma.
Got vob 33 quar nig urat Sar arf | (467-1, vm, ve 2) on"ee dunee-aa torhay banDhnaa ann paanee thorhaa khaa-i-aa. They burn away the bonds of the world, and eat a simple diet of grain and water.
3 sarin ware fos veto vata Aetfenr il (467-2, wer, v2 2) too” bakhseesee aglaa nit dayveh charheh savaa-i-aa. You are the Great Forgiver; You give continually, more and more each day.
Sfaniret Zar ure DI (467-3, mmr, He 2) vadi-aa-ee vadaa paa-i-aa. ||7]|| By His greatness, the Great Lord is obtained. ||7]||
HX H3 % Il (467-3)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
usa? fagut Ssteat Jet Hut stg I (467-3, or, v8 1) purkhaa" birkhaa™ teerthaa™ tataa’ mayghaa”™ khaytaa“h. Men, trees, sacred shrines of pilgrimage, banks of sacred rivers, clouds, fields,
ctut Suit yset dst zassiT I (467-3, wer, He 1) deepaa” lo-aa’ mandlaa‘ khandaa™ varbhandaa‘h. islands, continents, worlds, solar systems, and universes;
MBH AdH SsgHt ural ASAT Il (467-4, we, He 1)
andaj jayraj ut-bhujaa khaanee saytjaa“h.
the four sources of creation - born of eggs, born of the womb, born of the earth and born of sweat;
A ffs We Goat Hat Hat HST Il (467-4, wT, He 1) so mit jaanai naankaa saraa‘ mayraa™ jantaah. oceans, mountains, and all beings - O Nanak, He alone knows their condition.
Soa HS Curfe a AHS ASST Il (467-5, nA, Hes 1) naanak jant upaa-ay kai sammaalay sabhnaah. O Nanak, having created the living beings, He cherishes them all.
fafe ads agat aint fest fs agat BT Il (467-5, nr, He 1) jin kartai karnaa kee-aa chintaa bhe karnee taah. The Creator who created the creation, takes care of it as well.
A ass fest ad fafs Gurfeor Aa I (467-5, wir, He 1) so kartaa chintaa karay jin upaa-i-aa jag. He, the Creator who formed the world, cares for it.
faq nod Aumfs faq fan chre visa Il (467-6, um, He 1) tis johaaree su-asat tis tis deebaan abhag. Unto Him I bow and offer my reverence; His Royal Court is eternal.
Sa Ad OH fae for fear fort Sar All (467-6, wr, He 1)
naanak sachay naam bin ki-aa tikaa ki-aa tag. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the True Name, of what use is the frontal mark of the Hindus, or their sacred thread? ||1]|
He 4% Il (467-7)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Bd Salt Pamir we US" UPSTES Il (467-7, we, He 1)
lakh naykee-aa chang-aa-ee-aa lakh punnaa parvaan.
Hundreds of thousands of virtues and good actions, and hundreds of thousands of blessed charities,
wy su Gufs Steat AA Ha SAS Il (467-7, or, He 1)
lakh tap upar teerthaa™ sahj jog baybaan.
hundreds of thousands of penances at sacred shrines, and the practice of Sehj Yoga in the wilderness,
wa AISE HATH Fe ufy Sefy UTE Il (467-8, mer, He 1)
lakh soortan sangraam ran meh chhuteh paraan.
hundreds of thousands of courageous actions and giving up the breath of life on the field of battle,
oY Hast oe famre fms usnifs ure uss Il (467-8, vr, He 1)
lakh surtee lakh gi-aan Dhi-aan parhee-ah paath puraan.
hundreds of thousands of divine understandings, hundreds of thousands of divine wisdoms and meditations and readings of the Vedas and the Puraanas
fafs ads adder oot fofimr nee ATE Il (467-9, oT, He 1) jin kartai karnaa kee-aa likhi-aa aavan jaan. - before the Creator who created the creation, and who ordained coming and going,
Sea HSt fufemr AGH AST SATE IQIl (467-9, rT, Hs 1)
naanak matee mithi-aa karam sachaa neesaan. ||2|| O Nanak, all these things are false. True is the Insignia of His Grace. ||2]|
uGat Il (467-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Aa Ato fa FS fate AS AY ZastEMr I (467-10, wer, Hs 1) sachaa saahib ayk too” jin sacho sach vartaa-i-aa. You alone are the True Lord. The Truth of Truths is pervading everywhere.
fan 3 efo fon fre AG Ss fat A oorfEMr I (467-10, wr, He 1) jis too’ deh tis milai sach taa tin"ee sach kamaa-i-aa. He alone receives the Truth, unto whom You give it; then, he practices Truth.
Afsafe fiufemt Ag ufemr fas a fore Ag sAfeMr | (467-11, ver, He 1) satgur mili-ai sach paa-i-aa jin" kai hirdai sach vasaa-i-aa. Meeting the True Guru, Truth is found. In His Heart, Truth is abiding.
Hod AY o ATSat HOH HOH Tefen I 467-12, rr, He 1)
moorakh sach na jaanan"ee manmukhee janam gavaa-i-aa.
The fools do not know the Truth. The self-willed manmukhs waste their lives away in vain.
fefs oor ard nifer HCI (467-12, nr, He 1) vich dunee-aa kaahay aa-i-aa. ||8]| Why have they even come into the world? ||8]||
ABA Hs 1 Il (467-13) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufs ufa ast webits ufs ufs sdhaifo Aa I (467-13, mmr, He 1)
parh parh gadee ladee-ah parh parh bharee-ah saath.
You may read and read loads of books; you may read and study vast multitudes of books.
ufs ufs ast urea ufs ufs asters ws I 467-13, vir, He 1)
parh parh bayrhee paa-ee-ai parh parh gadee-ah khaat.
You may read and read boat-loads of books; you may read and read and fill pits with them.
uss AS ASA AdA Usifs AS HA Il (467-14, wr, He 1)
parhee-ah jaytay baras baras parhee-ah jaytay maas.
You may read them year after year; you may read them as many months are there are.
ust St wiraat ushafs AS ATA Il (467-14, mo, He 1) parhee-ai jaytee aarjaa parhee-ah jaytay saas. You may read them all your life; you may read them with every breath.
Sod Ba fea Ts Ig ICH Suet STs WAU (467-15, nm, He 1)
naanak laykhai ik gal hor ha-umai jhakh-naa jhaakh. ||1]|
O Nanak, only one thing is of any account: everything else is useless babbling and idle talk in ego. |[1]|
He 4% Il (467-15) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fests fosfs ufSmr il (467-15, nmr, 2 1) likh likh parhi-aa. The more one write and reads,
331 afar Il (467-15, ur, He 1) taytaa karhi-aa. the more one burns.
ag Stee sfent il (467-15, wm, ve 1) baho tirath bhavi-aa. The more one wanders at sacred shrines of pilgrimage,
33 Bfent Il (467-16, ner, He 1) tayto lavi-aa. the more one talks uselessly.
as sy ahr Sat ey Shr I (467-16, wm, ue 1) baho bhaykh kee-aa dayhee dukh dee-aa. The more one wears religious robes, the more pain he causes his body.
Ag = Ar nru|r ai Il (467-16, wir, He 1) saho vay jee-aa apnaa kee-aa. O my soul, you must endure the consequences of your own actions.
mo o ufeor Are aetfer i (467-16, omar, He 1) ann na khaa-i-aa saad gavaa-i-aa. One who does not eat the corn, misses out on the taste.
ag ey ufeor gar atfemr Il (467-17, nr, He 1) baho dukh paa-i-aa doojaa bhaa-i-aa. One obtains great pain, in the love of duality.
SAS 6 ufas il (467-17, nmr, He 1) bastar na pahirai. One who does not wear any clothes,
mifafsfA aT I (467-17, nr, we 1) ahinis kahrai. suffers night and day.
Hs fas" Il (467-17, wer, Hs 1) mon vigootaa. Through silence, he is ruined.
fag Arar ae fae AST Il (467-18, mmr, He 1) ki-o jaagai gur bin sootaa. How can the sleeping one be awakened without the Guru?
Uat BUSTEST Il (467-18, mmr, He 1) pag upaytaanaa. One who goes barefoot
niet ait SHAT Il (467-18, uA, He 1)
apnaa kee-aa kamaanaa. suffers by his own actions.
mS HS wet fafa set uret i (467-18, vr, He 1) al mal khaa-ee sir chhaa-ee paa-ee. One who eats filth and throws ashes on his head
Hata nit ufs aeret i (467-19, wer, 48 1) moorakh anDhai pat gavaa-ee. - the blind fool loses his honor.
fee ore fae af & uret Il (467-19, nmr, He 1) vin naavai kichh thaa-ay na paa-ee. Without the Name, nothing is of any use. dd Haat HSt HATE Il (467-19, nA, He 1)
rahai baybaanee marhee masaanee. One who lives in the wilderness, in cemetaries and cremation grounds
nig o Ae fefa ussret Il (467-19, om, He 1) anDh na jaanai fir pachhutaanee. - that blind man does not know the Lord; he regrets and repents in the end.
UST gét
Afsag 32 A AY US Il (468-1, mr, He 1) satgur bhaytay so sukh paa-ay. One who meets the True Guru finds peace.
dfs a on Hfs SATE Il (468-1, vir, He 1) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. He enshrines the Name of the Lord in his mind.
Soa Gels Ad A US Il (468-1, we, we 1) naanak nadar karay so paa-ay. O Nanak, when the Lord grants His Grace, He is obtained.
onN SS
nA nigh 3 fosates ICH Aafe ABS NI (468-2, mT, He 1)
aas andaysay tay nihkayval ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||2||
He becomes free of hope and fear, and burns away his ego with the Word of the Shabad. ||2||
UugSt Il (468-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
sas 3d Hfe ae Ufe Aafe atefs |e Il (468-2, nmr, He 1)
bhagat tayrai man bhaavday dar sohan keerat gaavday.
Your devotees are pleasing to Your Mind, Lord. They look beautiful at Your door, singing Your Praises.
SOA ATH Hdd vfs Sa F BISl WSS Il (468-3, eT, He 1)
naanak karmaa baahray dar dho-a na lehn"ee Dhaavday.
O Nanak, those who are denied Your Grace, find no shelter at Your Door; they continue wandering.
fefa He 3 gSts nimuet nreder niry aTateS I (468-3, mmr, we 1)
ik mool na bujhni" aapnaa anhodaa aap ganaa-iday.
Some do not understand their origins, and without cause, they display their self- conceit.
oG wet a ate wt dfs GSH ws AeteS II (468-4, nmr, He 1) ha-o dhaadhee kaa neech jaat hor utam jaat sadaa-iday. I am the Lord's minstrel, of low social status; others call themselves high caste.
faq Har fa 33 fomrfee ei (468-4, om, ue 1) tin" mangaa je tujhai Dhi-aa-iday. ||9|| I seek those who meditate on You. ||9||
HB Hs 9 Il (468-5) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
IZ TA AF us AZ AS AAP Il (468-5, wr, we 1) koorh raajaa koorh parjaa koorh sabh sansaar. False is the king, false are the subjects; false is the whole world.
as Hsu ay wast AZ FAST Il (468-5, wer, we 1) koorh mandap koorh maarhee koorh baisanhaar. False is the mansion, false are the skyscrapers; false are those who live in them.
as Hea ay gu aT URETY Il (468-5, wer, Hs 1) koorh su-inaa koorh rupaa koorh pain"anhaar. False is gold, and false is silver; false are those who wear them.
ag afeur as AUT AZ TU MU Il (468-6, wer, v2 1) koorh kaa-i-aa koorh kaparh koorh roop apaar. False is the body, false are the clothes; false is incomparable beauty.
ag Hier og stat uflr de arg il (468-6, wr, v8 1) koorh mee-aa koorh beebee khap ho-ay khaar. False is the husband, false is the wife; they mourn and waste away.
afs a3 dg war fenfer xT Il (468-7, wm, He 1) koorh koorhai nayhu lagaa visri-aa kartaar. The false ones love falsehood, and forget their Creator.
fan ate ate SASt AS Hal VHT Il (468-7, rr, ve 1) kis naal keechai dostee sabh jag chalanhaar. With whom should I become friends, if all the world shall pass away?
ag fo ag wha az Sa Ug Il (468-7, wr, M3 1)
koorh mithaa koorh maakhi-o koorh dobay poor.
False is sweetness, false is honey; through falsehood, boat-loads of men have drowned.
seg BS Ast SU MS AS FT MAUI (468-8, mer, we 1) naanak vakhaanai bayntee tuDh baajh koorho koorh. ||1|| Nanak speaks this prayer: without You, Lord, everything is totally false. ||1]|
He 4% Il (468-8) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ag 3 ug Waba at fee Het SE I (468-8, vir, He 1) sach taa par jaanee-ai jaa ridai sachaa ho-ay. One knows the Truth only when the Truth is in his heart.
Is at HS SII 3G aS Tat OFS Il (468-9, mew, we 1) koorh kee mal utrai tan karay hachhaa Dho-ay. The filth of falsehood departs, and the body is washed clean.
Ag 3 ug Webat at Afe od films Il (468-9, nmr, He 1) sach taa par jaanee-ai jaa sach Dharay pi-aar. One knows the Truth only when he bears love to the True Lord.
o@ Afs Ho JAH St UTS HY BITE Il (468-9, wr, He 1) naa-o sun man rehsee-ai taa paa-ay mokh du-aar. Hearing the Name, the mind is enraptured; then, he attains the gate of salvation.
Ag 3 ug Waba wT Aafs ATS ATG II (468-10, nmr, He 1) sach taa par jaanee-ai jaa jugat jaanai jee-o. One knows the Truth only when he knows the true way of life.
uefs afeor wfa & fefs ef agar gE il (468-10, nmr, He 1) Dharat kaa-i-aa saaDh kai vich day-ay kartaa bee-o. Preparing the field of the body, he plants the Seed of the Creator.
Ag 3 ug Waba at fia Ast SE I 4os-u1, ver, He 1 sach taa par jaanee-ai jaa sikh sachee lay-ay. One knows the Truth only when he receives true instruction.
efenr we tha at fas ua we aafe Il (468-11, nmr, He 1) da-i-aa jaanai jee-a kee kichh punn daan karay-i. Showing mercy to other beings, he makes donations to charities.
Ag at ug wWebat A nrsn Stefa ad feSTA II (468-12, wm, He 1)
sach taa™ par jaanee-ai jaa aatam tirath karay nivaas.
One knows the Truth only when he dwells in the sacred shrine of pilgrimage of his own soul.
Afsag 6 ufs & afs ad As fSSA Il (468-12, wer, Hs 1)
satguroo no puchh kai bahi rahai karay nivaas.
He sits and receives instruction from the True Guru, and lives in accordance with His Will.
Ag Aso dfs og uy oe GFE Il (468-13, »mr, He 1) sach sabhnaa ho-ay daaroo paap kadhai Dho-ay. Truth is the medicine for all; it removes and washes away our sins.
Sod ue Fost fas A us FE Ii (468-13, wm, ve 1) naanak vakhaanai bayntee jin sach palai ho-ay. ||2|| Nanak speaks this prayer to those who have Truth in their laps. ||2||
UugST Il (468-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ag Hfdst sot ua A AHS 3 HASfaR BSA Il (468-14, mr, He 1)
daan mahindaa talee khaak jay milai ta mastak laa-ee-ai.
The gift I seek is the dust of the feet of the Saints; if I were to obtain it, I would apply it to my forehead.
aa wey som of fea His mesg forrent i (468-14, mr, oe 1) koorhaa laalach chhadee-ai ho-ay ik man alakh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Renounce false greed, and meditate single-mindedly on the unseen Lord.
eo Sed ue Asa ars SHSM Il (468-15, nr, He 1)
fal tayvayho paa-ee-ai jayvayhee kaar kamaa-ee-ai.
As are the actions we commit, so are the rewards we receive. A de yore feftoor a ofS faqr St urs I (468-15, mmr, He 1)
jay hovai poorab likhi-aa taa Dhoorh tin"aa dee paa-ee-ai. If it is so pre-ordained, then one obtains the dust of the feet of the Saints.
Hfs Gat AS TSTEM INAOM! (468-16, we, He 1) mat thorhee sayv gavaa-ee-ai. ||10|| But through small-mindedness, we forfeit the merits of selfless service. ||10]|
HBA Hs % Il (468-16) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Afs WS AZ edfsur ats area FSH Il (468-16, wer, He 1)
sach kaal koorh varti-aa kal kaalakh baytaal.
There is a famine of Truth; falsehood prevails, and the blackness of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga has turned men into demons.
a difa ufs & we wre fas Cae ahs i 408-16, new, He
bee-o beej pat lai ga-ay ab ki-o ugvai daal.
Those who planted their seed have departed with honor; now, how can the shattered seed sprout?
A fea of 3 Cae ast I ofS TE It (468-17, wer, v3 1) jay ik ho-ay ta ugvai rutee hoo rut ho-ay. If the seed is whole, and it is the proper season, then the seed will sprout.
Soa UT Ha ad Ja o AS Il (468-17, mer, He 1) naanak paahai baahraa korai rang na so-ay. O Nanak, without treatment, the raw fabric cannot be dyed.
3 fefe dfa vareba Aen ug sfe SPE I (468-18, wir, He 1)
bhai vich khumb charhaa-ee-ai saram paahu tan ho-ay.
In the Fear of God it is bleached white, if the treatment of modesty is applied to the cloth of the body.
Tot SIS A TU Ts AE S ALS UA (468-18, wm, He 1) naanak bhagtee jay rapai koorhai so-ay na ko-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, if one is imbued with devotional worship, his reputation is not false. ||1]|
He 4% Il (468-19) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
we uy ute TH HIST AS dor fees Il (408-19, vir, ws 1) lab paap du-ay raajaa mahtaa koorh ho-aa sikdaar. Greed and sin are the king and prime minister; falsehood is the treasurer.
any 33 Afe ueba afo afo ad ates | (468-19, wr, He 1)
kaam nayb sad puchhee-ai bahi bahi karay beechaar.
Sexual desire, the chief advisor, is summoned and consulted; they all sit together and contemplate their plans.
uot gért nidt sats femre feget sta 3d HIETT Il (469-1, mmr, Hs 1)
anDhee rayat gi-aan vihoonee bhaahi bharay murdaar. Their subjects are blind, and without wisdom, they try to please the will of the dead.
fororat outs ea sets gu acts Atrg | (469-1, wir, He 1)
gi-aanee nacheh vaajay vaaveh roop karahi seegaar.
The spiritually wise dance and play their musical instruments, adorning themselves with beautiful decorations.
Cs gate eer arefa HOT oT SAT Il (469-2, wer, we 1) oochay kookeh vaadaa gaavahi joDhaa kaa veechaar. They shout out loud, and sing epic poems and heroic stories.
Hae ufss fooufs gafs AA asta films Il (469-2, wr, He 1)
moorakh pandit hikmat hujat sanjai karahi pi-aar.
The fools call themselves spiritual scholars, and by their clever tricks, they love to gather wealth.
cent aay asfs arevefa Hats He eMrs I (469-3, wir, He 1) Dharmee Dharam karahi gaavaaveh mangeh mokh du-aar. The righteous waste their righteousness, by asking for the door of salvation.
Ast Aeefs Fats 6 Wels ef sols We A Il (469-3, nmr, He 1)
jatee sadaaveh jugat na jaaneh chhad baheh ghar baar.
They call themselves celibate, and abandon their homes, but they do not know the true way Of life.
Ag a ys nm} Te ule o ASt mis I (409-4, ver, He 1) sabh ko pooraa aapay hovai ghat na ko-ee aakhai. Everyone calls himself perfect; none call themselves imperfect.
ufs ugetat fue ureint at oto Sfmt ANY QI (469-4, mmr, He 1) pat parvaanaa pichhai paa-ee-ai taa naanak toli-aa jaapai. ||2|| If the weight of honor is placed on the scale, then, O Nanak, one sees his true weight.
21 |
He 4% Il (469-5)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Tet A eHfa seat Het Se ALE Il (469-5, ner, He 1) vadee so vajag naankaa sachaa vaykhai so-ay. Evil actions become publicly known; O Nanak, the True Lord sees everything.
Haat ster Hot aga ad A SPE Il (469-5, ner, He 1) sabhnee chhaalaa maaree-aa kartaa karay so ho-ay. Everyone makes the attempt, but that alone happens which the Creator Lord does.
wat As BAT To uiat AE ae Il (409-6, ver, He 1)
agai jaat na jor hai agai jee-o navay.
In the world hereafter, social status and power mean nothing; hereafter, the soul is new.
fas at SY ufs ue va ASt afe Sil (469-6, wm, He 1) jin kee laykhai pat pavai changay say-ee kay-ay. ||3]| Those few, whose honor is confirmed, are good. ||3]|
Uugat Il (469-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufs aon frat as sg urfenr st fset aA fomrfenr I (469-7, or, He 1)
Dhur karam jinaa ka-o tuDh paa-i-aa taa tinee khasam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Only those whose karma You have pre-ordained from the very beginning, O Lord, meditate on You.
So Hat a ah fags adt su sat Aas Curfemr I (469-7, nmr, v2 1) aynaa jantaa kai vas kichh naahee tuDh vaykee jagat upaa-i-aa. Nothing is in the power of these beings; You created the various worlds.
feast 3 3 Hfe Sfa fee rug 3g yrfemr | (469-8, wr, 43 1) iknaa no too” may laihi ik aaphu tuDh khu-aa-i-aa. Some, You unite with Yourself, and some, You lead astray.
ad fasur 3 wer fra so wie gstfemr | (469-8, nmr, He 1)
gur kirpaa tay jaani-aa jithai tuDh aap bujhaa-i-aa.
By Guru's Grace You are known; through Him, You reveal Yourself. Hon dt Afs AHEM WAU (469-9, mT, He 1)
sehjay hee sach samaa-i-aa. ||11]| We are easily absorbed in You. ||11]|
HB Hs 4% Il (469-9) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ey ag AY tg sfeor wT AY STH & Tet I (469-9, wr, Hs 1)
dukh daaroo sukh rog bha-i-aa jaa sukh taam na ho-ee.
Suffering is the medicine, and pleasure the disease, because where there is pleasure, there is no desire for God.
3 AIT AIS H ost A IC at o Tet AU (469-10, wm, we too” kartaa karnaa mai naahee jaa ha-o karee na ho-ee. ||1|| You are the Creator Lord; I can do nothing. Even if I try, nothing happens. ||1||
Berd aeats SAM Il (469-10, wma, ue 1) balihaaree kudrat vasi-aa. I am a Sacrifice to Your almighty creative power which is pervading everywhere.
ST nis 3 St ofr NA TIC il 469-11, wer, ne 1) tayraa ant na jaa-ee lakhi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your limits cannot be known. ||1]|Pause| |
mts nfs afs AfS ufo AST wre ae saute Shon Il (469-11, wr, He 1)
jaat meh jot jot meh jaataa akal kalaa bharpoor rahi-aa.
Your Light is in Your creatures, and Your creatures are in Your Light; Your almighty power is pervading everywhere.
3 Ae Afog frefs Horas fafs atst A urfs ufsor I (469-12, wr, Hs 1)
too” sachaa saahib sifat su-aaliha-o jin keetee so paar pa-i-aa.
You are the True Lord and Master; Your Praise is so beautiful. One who sings it, is carried across.
aI aoa ads aot ast A fxs age A ate afar MQM (469-12, mm, He 1) kaho naanak kartay kee-aa baataa jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa. ||2|| Nanak speaks the stories of the Creator Lord; whatever He is to do, He does. ||2| |
H8 2 Il (469-13) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
fal Aad famrs Aad Fe AGE YTIHEST Il (469-13, wr, us 2)
jog sabda™ gi-aan sabda™ bayd sabda™ baraahmaneh.
The Way of Yoga is the Way of spiritual wisdom; the Vedas are the Way of the Brahmins.
ust Aad Ad Hee Ae Aa UT fAST Il (469-14, wer, He 2)
khatree sabda™ soor sabda soodar sabda” paraa kirteh.
The Way of the Khshatriya is the Way of bravery; the Way of the Shudras is service to others.
Hea Aad Sa Hae Aa AWS 3E Il Soa ST aT oA DJ ASt fadna SE Sil (409-14, nmr, ne 2)
sarab sabda™ ayk sabda” jay ko jaanai bhay-o. naanak taa kaa daas hai so-ee niranjan day-o. ||3]|
The Way of all is the Way of the One; Nanak is a slave to one who knows this secret; he himself is the Immaculate Divine Lord. ||3]|
H8 2 Il (469-15) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Sa fans Hea tet Se SS J MSH | (469-15, wer, ve 2) ayk krisan™ sarab dayvaa dayv dayvaa ta aatmaa. The One Lord Krishna is the Divine Lord of all; He is the Divinity of the individual soul.
MSH ASA A at WE 38 Il Seq ST a aA D At feds FE sil (469-15, nmr, ne 2) aatmaa baasdayvsi-y jay ko jaanai bhay-o. naanak taa kaa daas hai so-ee niranjan day-o. ||4||
Nanak is a slave to anyone who understands this mystery of the all-pervading Lord; he himself is the Immaculate Divine Lord. ||4]|
He % Il (469-16) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
as qo AS dd AG faa ae 5 TE I (469-16, wer, He 1)
kumbhay baDhaa jal rahai jal bin kumbh na ho-ay.
Water remains confined within the pitcher, but without water, the pitcher could not have been formed;
fomre at sat He dd a faa fama o OE Null (469-17, vir, He
gi-aan kaa baDhaa man rahai gur bin gi-aan na ho-ay. ||5]||
just so, the mind is restrained by spiritual wisdom, but without the Guru, there is no spiritual wisdom. ||5||
uQat Il (469-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufsor d@ qedarg at Git ATG o HSMM I 469-17, wer, He 1) parhi-aa hovai gunahgaar taa omee saaDh na maaree-di. If an educated person is a sinner, then the illiterate holy man is not to be punished.
AT ws urwat Seg BE usd | (469-18, new, ue 1) jayhaa ghaalay ghaalnaa tayvayho naa-o pachaaree-ai. As are the deeds done, so is the reputation one acquires.
MAT aero Usha fas vac afer ast | (469-18, wer, He 1) aisee kalaa na khaydee-ai jit dargeh ga-i-aa haaree-ai. So do not play such a game, which will bring you to ruin at the Court of the Lord.
ufsor mis Goer Stars nat Sard Il (469-19, wm, He 1) parhi-aa atai omee-aa veechaar agai veechaaree-ai. The accounts of the educated and the illiterate shall be judged in the world hereafter.
Hfo 3S A Mat HTM NAIM (469-19, mmAT, He 1) muhi chalai so agai maaree-ai. ||12]| One who stubbornly follows his own mind shall suffer in the world hereafter. ||12] |
UST 8DO
HBX Hs 9 Il (470-1) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Sea HI Add a fea se fea TAT Il (470-1, vr, He 1) naanak mayr sareer kaa ik rath ik rathvaahu. O Nanak, the soul of the body has one chariot and one charioteer.
Aa Aa ets eaoveinits famrat asta ste il (470-1, vm, He 1) jug jug fayr vataa-ee-ah gi-aanee bujheh taahi. In age after age they change; the spiritually wise understand this.
Asafa Te ASU A UH Mat TASTT Il (470-2, nrAr, nH 1)
satjug rath santokh kaa Dharam agai rathvaahu.
In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, contentment was the chariot and righteousness the charioteer.
33 Ja AS a Ag Mal FAST Il (470-2, wir, ve 1) taraytai rath jatai kaa jor agai rathvaahu. In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yuga, celibacy was the chariot and power the charioteer.
eutufs gq su aT AS Met TARTS Il (470-3, wer, He 1) du-aapur rath tapai kaa sat agai rathvaahu. In the Brass Age of Dwaapar Yuga, penance was the chariot and truth the charioteer.
ASAla TF wales A TZ nist TATSTT WAU (470-3, weer, Hs 1) kaljug rath agan kaa koorh agai rathvaahu. ||1|| In the Iron Age of Kali Yuga, fire is the chariot and falsehood the charioteer. ||1]|
He % Il (470-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AM ad Asad Homi Ae ufo wre wfe gd il AS a Afs ANTS Il (470-4, nm, He 1) saam kahai saytambar su-aamee sach meh aachhai saach rahay. sabh ko sach Samaavai.
The Sama Veda says that the Lord Master is robed in white; in the Age of Truth, everyone desired Truth, abided in Truth, and was merged in the Truth.
for ae sfomr saute il (470-4, om, He 1) rig kahai rahi-aa bharpoor. The Rig Veda says that God is permeating and pervading everywhere;
TH OH Se Hf AT Il (470-5, mr, He 1)
raam naam dayvaa meh soor. among the deities, the Lord's Name is the most exalted.
afe ofent uses ats i (470-5, wer, He 1) naa-ay la-i-ai paraachhat jaahi. Chanting the Name, sins depart;
Soa SE Has ufT Il (470-5, nm, He 1) naanak ta-o mokhantar paahi. O Nanak, then, one obtains salvation.
an nfs afe eat derefs arg fang wren sfemr Il (470-6, ver, He 1) juj meh jor chhalee chandraaval kaan" krisan jaadam bha-i-aa. In the Jujar Veda, Kaan Krishna of the Yaadva tribe seduced Chandraavali by force.
uss aut & orfeur fferas uf gar ator Il (470-6, »mr, vs 1) paarjaat gopee lai aa-i-aa bindraaban meh rang kee-aa. He brought the Elysian Tree for his milk-maid, and revelled in Brindaaban.
ote ufo Fe massS Jur ae yeret nesg stent il 470-7, wr, He 1)
kal meh bayd atharban hoo-aa naa-o khudaa-ee alhu bha-i-aa.
In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Atharva Veda became prominent; Allah became the Name of God.
ale aA & aus ufyd Jaa uStat MHS ahr Il (470-7, vr, ve 1) neel bastar lay kaprhay pahiray turak pathaanee amal kee-aa. Men began to wear blue robes and garments; Turks and Pat'haans assumed power.
ard 2a ge Afenrs Il (470-8, nmr, He 1) chaaray vayd ho-ay sachiaar. The four Vedas each claim to be true.
usta aets f3q ae Sears | (470-8, wm, ve 1) parheh guneh tin” chaar veechaar. Reading and studying them, four doctrines are found.
a@ gafs afs ate ASS || SE BHA HUST US QI (470-8, nm, He 1) bhaa-o bhagat kar neech sadaa-ay. ta-o naanak mokhantar paa-ay. ||2|| With loving devotional worship, abiding in humility, O Nanak, salvation is attained.
[21] uQst Il (470-9)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsas feeg afour fas fifet uA Aafemr It (470-9, mr, He 1)
satgur vitahu vaari-aa jit mili-ai knasam samaali-aa.
I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru; meeting Him, I have come to cherish the Lord Master.
fafs afs Gua famre nine chor feat oat wars feafemr il (470-10, vm, He 1)
jin kar updays gi-aan anjan dee-aa in"ee naytree jagat nihaali-aa.
He has taught me and given me the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom, and with these eyes, I behold the world.
WAH efs BH Ba Sa A Zefanr | (470-10, wer, ws 1)
khasam chhod doojai lagay dubay say vanjaari-aa.
Those dealers who abandon their Lord and Master and attach themselves to another, are drowned.
Afsag 3 afer fess fas Stefan i (470-11, wr, ve 1) satguroo hai bohithaa virlai kinai veechaari-aa. The True Guru is the boat, but few are those who realize this.
ats facut ufe Barfamr 1931 (470-11, mr, He 1) kar kirpaa paar utaari-aa. ||13]| Granting His Grace, He carries them across. ||13]|
ABA Hs 4 Il (470-12) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
fines ge Aofes nfs cow wif we Wl (470-12, vr, He 1) simmal rukh saraa-iraa at deeragh at much. The simmal tree is straight as an arrow; it is very tall, and very thick.
6fe fa orefs orm afe fo fear fers Il (470-12, om, v8 1) o-ay je aavahi aas kar jaahi niraasay kit. But those birds which visit it hopefully, depart disappointed.
ee feat eu saga af & mrefs us Il (470-13, nmr, He 1) fal fikay ful bakbakay kamm na aavahi pat. Its fruits are tasteless, its flowers are nauseating, and its leaves are useless.
fos olet soot ae sfamreter Sz I (470-13, mr, He 1) mithat neevee naankaa gun chang-aa-ee-aa tat. Sweetness and humility, O Nanak, are the essence of virtue and goodness.
AS ao foe wry a ug ad foe o Ate II (470-14, nmr, He 1) sabh ko nivai aap ka-o par ka-o nivai na ko-ay. Everyone bows down to himself; no one bows down to another.
ufs sag sami foe A AT TE lt (470-14, wer, Hs 1)
Dhar taaraajoo tolee-ai nivai so ga-uraa ho-ay.
When something is placed on the balancing scale and weighed, the side which descends is heavier.
must gat foe A Tat frearfs il (470-15, wer, us 1) apraaDhee doonaa nivai jo hantaa miragaahi. The sinner, like the deer hunter, bows down twice as much.
Hifa foefent foo dha ar fee ana Ato al (470-15, nmr, He 1) sees nivaa-i-ai ki-aa thee-ai jaa ridai kusuDhay jaahi. ||1]| But what can be achieved by bowing the head, when the heart is impure? ||1]|
He 4% Il (470-16) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
ufs unset Afomr are Il (470-16, wm, He 1) parh pustak sanDhi-aa baada". You read your books and say your prayers, and then engage in debate;
free UAA Bates AHH Il (470-16, mmr, He 1) sil poojas bagul samaaDha". you worship stones and sit like a stork, pretending to be in Samaadhi.
uf so fasue ATE I (470-16, wr, He 1)
mukh jhooth bibhookhan saara’.
With your mouth you utter falsehood, and you adorn yourself with precious decorations;
sue fsa fired il (470-16, »mr, v8 1) taraipaal tihaal bichaara™. you recite the three lines of the Gayatri three times a day.
aes HT fame fre Il (470-17, or, He 1) gal maalaa tilak lilaata™. Around your neck is a rosary, and on your forehead is a sacred mark;
efe ast aay au Il (470-17, vir, u3 1) du-ay Dhotee bastar kapaata”,. upon your head is a turban, and you wear two loin cloths.
A Welk gon aa I (470-17, wer, He 1) jay jaanas barahma™ karma”. If you knew the nature of God,
Afs dace fans@ aaH Il (470-18, nmr, He 1) sabh fokat nischa-o karma’. you would know that all of these beliefs and rituals are in vain.
aT sod fess fms i (470-18, wm, He 1) kaho naanak nihcha-o Dhi-aavai. Says Nanak, meditate with deep faith;
fee Afsag S| 5 US MQM (470-18, wm, He 1) vin satgur vaat na paavai. ||2|| without the True Guru, no one finds the Way. ||2]|
uGat Il (470-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aus JU Avda sts vob niels ASST Il (470-19, wr, He 1) kaparh roop suhaavanaa chhad dunee-aa andar jaavnaa. Abandoning the world of beauty, and beautiful clothes, one must depart.
He Var wmagar nmy St atSt uTSET Il (470-19, wer, He 1) mandaa changa aapnaa aapay hee keetaa paavnaa. He obtains the rewards of his good and bad deeds.
Jan ote nfs sree ofa StS niet ATSST Il (470-19, wir, He 1)
hukam kee-ay man bhaavday raahi bheerhai agai jaavnaa.
He may issue whatever commands he wishes, but he shall have to take to the narrow path hereafter.
UST gDq
om Hla Whom st EA Us SISST | (471-1, mew, He 1) nangaa dojak chaali-aa taa disai kharaa daraavanaa. He goes to hell naked, and he looks hideous then.
afs maqs UESSST NAW (471-1, wT, He 1) kar a-ugan pachhotaavanaa. ||14]| He regrets the sins he committed. ||14| |
HBX Hs 9 Il (471-2) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
vient aud ASY AS AY ae AS FES Il (471-2, vy, we
da-i-aa kapaah santokh soot jat gandhee sat vat.
Make compassion the cotton, contentment the thread, modesty the knot and truth the twist.
Sg AOS Aba a Tet J us WS I (471-2, wer, He 1) ayhu janay-oo jee-a kaa ha-ee ta paaday ghat. This is the sacred thread of the soul; if you have it, then go ahead and put it on me.
OST Se ST HG Bad BST AS BANE Il (471-3, we, He 1) naa ayhu tutai naa mal lagai naa ayhu jalai na jaa-ay. It does not break, it cannot be soiled by filth, it cannot be burnt, or lost.
Ud A HSH aoa A afe VS UTE I (471-3, mm, He 1)
Dhan so maanas naankaa jo gal chalay paa-ay.
Blessed are those mortal beings, O Nanak, who wear such a thread around their necks.
sats fs mrefeur afs eGa urfemr I (471-4, or, He 1) cha-ukarh mul anaa-i-aa bahi cha-ukai paa-i-aa. You buy the thread for a few shells, and seated in your enclosure, you put it on.
fra af saretor ag qrane fer il (471-4, vir, ue 1) sikhaa kann charhaa-ee-aa gur baraahman thi-aa. Whispering instructions into others' ears, the Brahmin becomes a guru.
6g nor 6g 3a ufeor esa afar A (471-5, vr, He oh mu-aa oh jharh pa-i-aa vaytgaa ga-i-aa. ||1|| But he dies, and the sacred thread falls away, and the soul departs without it. ||1]|
He % Il (471-5) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
we Shor we Asher Se ashor wa IA il 471-5, wer, Hs 1)
lakh choree-aa lakh jaaree-aa lakh koorhee-aa lakh gaal.
He commits thousands of robberies, thousands of acts of adultery, thousands of falsehoods and thousands of abuses.
oY Sam ufsveniion ats fesn Aba ate il (471-6, wr, us 1)
lakh thagee-aa pahinaamee-aa raat dinas jee-a naal.
He practices thousands of deceptions and secret deeds, night and day, against his fellow beings.
3a uray ash se se vefe i (471-6, vr, ve 1) tag kapaahahu katee-ai baam"an vatay aa-ay. The thread is spun from cotton, and the Brahmin comes and twists it.
afs sao fofs wfior Ag & mime urfe I (471-7, vier, He 1)
kuhi bakraa rinni" khaa-i-aa sabh ko aakhai paa-ay.
The goat is killed, cooked and eaten, and everyone then says, "Put on the sacred thread."
dfs usar Ae st fefa uret Faz il (471-7, om, ne 1) ho-ay puraanaa sutee-ai bhee fir paa-ee-ai hor. When it wears out, it is thrown away, and another one is put on.
Sot SI 5 Seat A sla J]S AT QM (471-8, we, He 1) naanak tag na tut-ee jay tag hovai jor. ||2]| O Nanak, the thread would not break, if it had any real strength. ||2||
He % Il (471-8)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
one Hfomt ufs Gur Aerdt AY AS I (471-8, »mr, we 1) naa-ay mani-ai pat oopjai saalaahee sach soot. Believing in the Name, honor is obtained. The Lord's Praise is the true sacred thread.
wade nets ure Sao Sef US MSI (471-9, wr, He 1)
dargeh andar paa-ee-ai tag na tootas poot. ||3]|| Such a sacred thread is worn in the Court of the Lord; it shall never break. ||3]|
Hs 4% Il (471-9) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
3a 6 fet Sao Bra Il (471-9, vir, He 1) tag na indree tag na naaree. There is no sacred thread for the sexual organ, and no thread for woman.
Boa Fa ue fos oat Il (471-9, wer, He 1) bhalkay thuk pavai nit daarhee. The man's beard is spat upon daily.
SI 3 Udt Sao Tet Il (471-10, om, ne 1) tag na pairee tag na hathee. There is no sacred thread for the feet, and no thread for the hands;
3a 6 frdet Sa B Met Il (471-10, wm, He 1) tag na jihvaa tag na akhee. no thread for the tongue, and no thread for the eyes.
SZ My SS Il (471-10, nm, v2 1) vaytgaa aapay vatai. The Brahmin himself goes to the world hereafter without a sacred thread.
Sfe Ud Mea WS Il (471-10, wer, He 1) vat Dhaagay avraa ghatai. Twisting the threads, he puts them on others.
& ats ad Shorg Il (471-11, or, ne 1) lai bhaarh karay vee-aahu. He takes payment for performing marriages;
ate AAS SA IT Il (471-11, wr, uz 1) kadh kaagal dasay raahu. reading their horoscopes, he shows them the way.
Afs gug Sart Sg fess |i 471-11, or, we 1) sun vaykhhu lokaa ayhu vidaan. Hear, and see, O people, this wondrous thing.
Hfs niar BG AAS ISI (471-12, ver, He 1) man anDhaa naa-o sujaan. ||4]| He is mentally blind, and yet his name is wisdom. ||4||
uQat Il (471-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AWfog df= eens fasur ad at ret arg aafErt i (471-12, mr, ne 1) saahib ho-ay da-i-aal kirpaa karay taa saa-ee kaar karaa-isee. One, upon whom the Merciful Lord bestows His Grace, performs His service.
AH Aza Ae ad fan 3 Jan HoOfEAt Il (471-12, mr, ne 1) SO sayvak sayvaa karay jis no hukam manaa-isee. That servant, whom the Lord causes to obey the Order of His Will, serves Him.
Jaty vfomt de uses ST MAH ot HOw UT=AT I (471-13, vir, He
hukam mani-ai hovai parvaan taa khasmai kaa mahal paa-isee.
Obeying the Order of His Will, he becomes acceptable, and then, he obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
UAH ae A ad Hod fefeur A ae UTEAT I 471-14, ver, He 1 khasmai bhaavai so karay manhu chindi-aa so fal paa-isee. One who acts to please His Lord and Master, obtains the fruits of his mind's desires.
ST vag Uo afer quill (471-14, ver, He 1) taa dargeh paiDhaa jaa-isee. ||15]| Then, he goes to the Court of the Lord, wearing robes of honor. ||15]|
Had H2 4 Il (471-14)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ag frrHE aS ag weg dale SIE FAT I (471-15, wm, He 1)
ga-oo biraahman ka-o kar laavhu gobar taran na jaa-ee.
They tax the cows and the Brahmins, but the cow-dung they apply to their kitchen will not save them.
ast fear 3 met ug Hest ust I (471-15, nr, He 1)
Dhotee tikaa tai japmaalee Dhaan malaychhaa™ khaa-ee.
They wear their loin cloths, apply ritual frontal marks to their foreheads, and carry their rosaries, but they eat food with the Muslims.
nists uA usfo Asa AA Faar Bret Il (471-16, mm, Hs 1)
antar poojaa parheh kataybaa sanjam turkaa bhaa-ee.
O Siblings of Destiny, you perform devotional worship indoors, but read the Islamic sacred texts, and adopt the Muslim way of life.
Sts UGS | (471-16, AT, He 1) chhodeelay paakhandaa. Renounce your hypocrisy!
oth oft vfs SHUT UU (471-16, AT, He 1) naam la-i-ai jaahi tarandaa. ||1|| Taking the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall swim across. ||1]|
He 4% Il (471-17) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
HSH We asta fsa Il (471-17, ver, He 1) maanas khaanay karahi nivaaj. The man-eaters say their prayers.
edt zarfete faa ate Sar Il (471-17, wer, He 1) chhuree vagaa-in tin gal taag. Those who wield the knife wear the sacred thread around their necks.
fso uta gone uss Sve il (471-17, wer, He 1) tin ghar barahman pooreh naad. In their homes, the Brahmins sound the conch.
Car fs ref Get AE Il (471-18, vr, He 1) un"aa bhe aavahi 0-ee saad. They too have the same taste.
at TH Far Sur” Il (471-18, mr, we 1) koorhee raas koorhaa vaapaar. False is their capital, and false is their trade.
ag afe asta wireg I 471-18, wer, H2 1) koorh bol karahi aahaar. Speaking falsehood, they take their food.
HGH UGH a ST Shs Il (471-18, wrAT, He 1) saram Dharam kaa dayraa door. The home of modesty and Dharma is far from them.
aod AS Soot saute il 471-19, wert, we 1) naanak koorh rahi-aa bharpoor. O Nanak, they are totally permeated with falsehood.
He fear Sf Tat aaret Ih (471-19, ora, He 1)
mathai tikaa tayrh Dhotee kakhaa-ee.
The sacred marks are on their foreheads, and the saffron loin-cloths are around their waists;
ofa sat AAS AAT I (471-19, ne, Hs 1) hath chhuree jagat kaasaa-ee. in their hands they hold the knives - they are the butchers of the world!
UST YI2
ole eng ufafs def users Il (472-1, om, Hs 1) neel vastar pahir hoveh parvaan. Wearing blue robes, they seek the approval of the Muslim rulers.
HOS WG B UAlT UTE Il (472-1, Fr, He 1) malaychh Dhaan lay poojeh puraan. Accepting bread from the Muslim rulers, they still worship the Puraanas.
natin ar AS! AKT Yat |l (472-1, wr, He 1) abhaakhi-aa kaa kuthaa bakraa khaanaa. They eat the meat of the goats, killed after the Muslim prayers are read over them,
u@a Gufs fort o ATST Il (472-2, nmr, He 1) cha-ukay upar kisai na jaanaa. but they do not allow anyone else to enter their kitchen areas.
2 a UGar aet aT Il (472-2, wer, He 1) day kai cha-ukaa kadhee kaar. They draw lines around them, plastering the ground with cow-dung.
Gufs orf 8S afamra il (472-2, ome, ue upar aa-ay baithay koorhi-aar. The false come and sit within them.
Ha fee 2 He fa) ul fe nig mist fe™ I (472-3, mmr, He 1) mat bhitai vay mat bhitai. ih ann asaadaa fitai. They cry out, "Do not touch our food, or it will be polluted!"
fe fee @3 ate Il (472-3, mmr, He 1) tan fitai fayrh karayn. But with their polluted bodies, they commit evil deeds.
His HS For SIS Ml (472-3, we, ws 1) man joothai chulee bharayn. With filthy minds, they try to cleanse their mouths.
aT aaa Ae fame il (472-3, or, He 1) kaho naanak sach Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Says Nanak, meditate on the True Lord.
Afs de st A UTS NN (472-4, ve, He 1 such hovai taa sach paa-ee-ai. ||2]| If you are pure, you will obtain the True Lord. ||2||
ugat Il (472-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fas niefs ng a Sf oedt dfs verter il (472-4, nmr, ne 1)
chitai andar sabh ko vaykh nadree hayth chalaa-idaa.
All are within Your mind; You see and move them under Your Glance of Grace, O Lord.
my & sfanreinr mm dt aan Aafeer il (472-5, vr, ue 1) aapay day vadi-aa-ee-aa aapay hee karam karaa-idaa. You Yourself grant them glory, and You Yourself cause them to act.
@sd ea es Hest fie fafe da ofeer i (472-5, ver, ve vadahu vadaa vad maydnee siray sir DhanDhai laa-idaa. The Lord is the greatest of the great; great is His world. He enjoins all to their tasks.
defd Bust A Ad HBSS wT AIEET Ih (472-6, nia, Hs 1) nadar upthee jay karay sultaanaa ghaahu karaa-idaa. If he should cast an angry glance, He can transform kings into blades of grass.
efs Hate fou o urfeer El (472-6, vm, He 1) dar mangan bhikh na paa-idaa. ||16]| Even though they may beg from door to door, no one will give them charity. ||16]|
HB Hs 9 Il (472-7)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
A Hoe we Hd we Hfo fusdt Sf I (472-7, nmr, He 1) jay mohaakaa ghar muhai ghar muhi pitree day-ay. The thief robs a house, and offers the stolen goods to his ancestors.
wat ZAS freveha fusdt sa aSfe i (472-7, om, ne 1
agai vasat sinjaanee-ai pitree chor karay-i.
In the world hereafter, this is recognized, and his ancestors are considered thieves as well.
zeit Ja VHS A HAN SIT ASE Il (472-8, wer, ve 1) vadhee-ah hath dalaal kay musfee ayh karay-i. The hands of the go-between are cut off; this is the Lord's justice.
Soa mal A AHS fa ue ws SHE NU (472-8, ner, He 1)
naanak agai so milai je khatay ghaalay day-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, in the world hereafter, that alone is received, which one gives to the needy from his own earnings and labor. ||1||
Hs 4 Il (472-8)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fAG rg fraareat wre arg ST Il (472-9, om, He 1) ji-o joroo sirnaavanee aavai vaaro vaar. As a woman has her periods, month after month,
WO Fo yfy =A fas fos df wrg il (472-9, wer, Hs 1)
joothay joothaa mukh vasai nit nit ho-ay khu-aar.
so does falsehood dwell in the mouth of the false; they suffer forever, again and again.
He &fo 3 nmdtoita safe fa fiist afe i (472-9, ome, we 1D soochay ayhi na aakhee-ahi bahan je pindaa Dho-ay. They are not called pure, who sit down after merely washing their bodies.
He Het ateot fre Hfe efi APE QU (472-10, wm, He 1) soochay say-ee naankaa jin man vasi-aa so-ay. ||2|| Only they are pure, O Nanak, within whose minds the Lord abides. ||2]|
uQat Il (472-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3d use uGs Fa Ja Jat TaN AStfawr Il (472-10, nr, He 1) turay palaanay pa-un vayg har rangee haram savaari-aa. With saddled horses, as fast as the wind, and harems decorated in every way;
aS Hsu wshor ofe 83 afe ufanr | 472-11, omar, ne 1) kothay mandap maarhee-aa laa-ay baithay kar paasaari-aa. in houses and pavilions and lofty mansions, they dwell, making ostentatious shows.
din acts His see fe sate ardt Tham i (472-12, vr, He 1)
cheej karan man bhaavday har bujhan naahee haari-aa.
They act out their minds' desires, but they do not understand the Lord, and so they are ruined.
ats sorfetA ufeur efy Hoes Hae feAtfant i (472-12, nmr, He 1)
kar furmaa-is khaa-i-aa vaykh mahlat maran visaari-aa.
Asserting their authority, they eat, and beholding their mansions, they forget about death.
Ag met rafe afar ADI (472-13, mmr, He 1) jar aa-ee joban haari-aa. ||17]| But old age comes, and youth is lost. ||17]|
ABA Hs V Il (472-13) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
A ats Asa Hob AS 3 ASA TE Il (472-13, wr, He 1) jay kar sootak mannee-ai sabh tai sootak ho-ay. If one accepts the concept of impurity, then there is impurity everywhere.
did wis Bast niefs ater de i (472-14, new, He 1) gohay atai lakrhee andar keerhaa ho-ay. In cow-dung and wood there are worms.
AS WS nis a Aor as B aE I (472-14, ver, He VY jaytay daanay ann kay jee-aa baajh na ko-ay. As many as are the grains of corn, none is without life.
ufser uret FIG o fas ofr AS ae I (472-14, ver, He pahilaa paanee jee-o hai jit hari-aa sabh ko-ay. First, there is life in the water, by which everything else is made green.
Ae fas afs set Asa US SALE Il (472-15, mr, we 1) sootak ki-o kar rakhee-ai sootak pavai raso-ay. How can it be protected from impurity? It touches our own kitchen.
aad Asa 2s 5 Css femrg Cars ae Al (472-15, wm, we 1)
naanak sootak ayv na utrai gi-aan utaaray Dho-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, impurity cannot be removed in this way; it is washed away only by spiritual wisdom. ||1]|
He % Il (472-16)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ho OT Asa BF oT fs AIA AT Il (472-16, wm, we 1) man kaa sootak lobh hai jihvaa sootak koorh. The impurity of the mind is greed, and the impurity of the tongue is falsehood.
mat Asa Suet ud fyor us Us TU Il (472-16, wr, He 1)
akhee sootak vaykh-naa par tari-a par Dhan roop.
The impurity of the eyes is to gaze upon the beauty of another man's wife, and his wealth.
aot Ase afs U ofesarst ufo i (472-17, rrr, ue 1) kannee sootak kann pai laa-itbaaree khaahi. The impurity of the ears is to listen to the slander of others.
Soa SAT mireHt sa AM ufs ATT QM (472-17, wm, He 1) naanak hansaa aadmee baDhay jam pur jaahi. ||2]| O Nanak, the mortal's soul goes, bound and gagged to the city of Death. ||2]|
He 4% Il (472-18) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AS A3a SIH FT SH Bat ALE Il (472-18, wmv, we 1) sabho sootak bharam hai doojai lagai jaa-ay. All impurity comes from doubt and attachment to duality.
HHE HIS JAH J ate nS WHE I (472-18, wor, He 1)
jaman marnaa hukam hai bhaanai aavai jaa-ay.
Birth and death are subject to the Command of the Lord's Will; through His Will we come and go.
uret ular ufeg o fesa fora Herta il (472-19, wr, He 1) khaanaa peenaa pavitar hai diton rijak sambaahi. Eating and drinking are pure, since the Lord gives nourishment to all.
aoe frat asufe sfsur fsqr Asa ots WSN 472-19, »mr, HE 1)
naanak jin"ee gurmukh bujhi-aa tin"aa sootak naahi. ||3]| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs, who understand the Lord, are not stained by impurity. ||3]|
UST gos
u@at Il (473-1 pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsag est afs Aodhan fra fefe esine efsureior th 473-1, ver, He satgur vadaa kar salaahee-ai jis vich vadee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa. Praise the Great True Guru; within Him is the greatest greatness.
Afs HS 3 Seat mrs I (473-1, wer, ne 1) seh maylay taa nadree aa-ee-aa. When the Lord causes us to meet the Guru, then we come to see them.
Ww fSH stat st fs SATS I (473-2, wir, He 1) jaa tis bhaanaa taa man vasaa-ee-aa. When it pleases Him, they come to dwell in our minds.
ats Jay HASta ve fe fess Hts ado afanretor | (473-2, ner, Hs 1)
kar hukam mastak hath Dhar vichahu maar kadhee-aa buri-aa-ee-aa.
By His Command, when He places His hand on our foreheads, wickedness departs from within.
Afs 36 3@ fofo user NACI (473-3, wT, He 1) seh tuthai na-o niDh paa-ee-aa. ||18]| When the Lord is thoroughly pleased, the nine treasures are obtained. ||18]|
HO Hs 9 Il (473-3) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufser wot orfu fe AS For wre | (473-3, we, He 1) pahilaa suchaa aap ho-ay suchai baithaa aa-ay. First, purifying himself, the Brahmin comes and sits in his purified enclosure.
He mat suse afe o fateS wife i 473-4, wer, He 1) suchay agai rakhi-on ko-ay na bhiti-o jaa-ay. The pure foods, which no one else has touched, are placed before him.
He df a Afeor war uate ABA Il (473-4, nT, He 1) suchaa ho-ay kai jayvi-aa lagaa parhan salok. Being purified, he takes his food, and begins to read his sacred verses.
aoe vet Afenr far So war Su Il (473-5, wm, v2 1) kuhthee jaa-ee sati-aa kis ayhu lagaa dokh. But it is then thrown into a filthy place - whose fault is this?
nig tes urat tes SHsg tes Be Une urfemr fess i 473-5, weer, Hs 1)
ann dayvtaa paanee dayvtaa baisantar dayvtaa loon panjvaa paa-i-aa ghirat.
The corn is sacred, the water is sacred; the fire and salt are sacred as well; when the fifth thing, the ghee, is added,
at dor ura ufes I (473-6, mr, He 1) taa ho-aa paak pavit. then the food becomes pure and sanctified.
undt fH8 36 afsur gar usin f3S Il (473-6, vm, He 1)
paapee si-o tan gadi-aa thukaa pa-ee-aa tit.
Coming into contact with the sinful human body, the food becomes so impure that is is spat upon.
fag ufa on 3 Gusts fag oe OA Ute II (473-6, vr, He 1D jit mukh naam na oochrahi bin naavai ras khaahi. That mouth which does not chant the Naam, and without the Name eats tasty foods
Soa fe wat fas yf gar urfa ail 473-7, mr, ne 1) naanak ayvai jaanee-ai tit mukh thukaa paahi. ||1]| - O Nanak, know this: such a mouth is to be spat upon. ||1]|
He 4% Il (473-7) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Sfs rit ofS feHba sf Hare Jorg il (473-8, om, He 1)
bhand jammee-ai bhand nimmee-ai bhand mangan vee-aahu.
From woman, man is born; within woman, man is conceived; to woman he is engaged and married.
33d de GHst F3T VS TT Il (473-8, new, He 1) bhandahu hovai dostee bhandahu chalai raahu. Woman becomes his friend; through woman, the future generations come.
33 Hot ss seh Sis JS Fare Il (473-8, new, ve 1) bhand mu-aa bhand bhaalee-ai bhand hovai banDhaan. When his woman dies, he seeks another woman; to woman he is bound.
A fa@ ver omiba fas aufs gare I (473-9, mrt, He 1) so ki-o mandaa aakhee-ai jit jameh raajaan. So why call her bad? From her, kings are born.
330 dt 35 Cun ¥3 TSS Al Il (473-9, wr, we bhandahu hee bhand oopjai bhandai baajh na ko-ay. From woman, woman is born; without woman, there would be no one at all.
Sod Ss Aa Sa Ae ALE Il (473-10, mmAr, He 1) naanak bhandai baahraa ayko sachaa so-ay. O Nanak, only the True Lord is without a woman.
fas Hf Het Aerdhat svar gst wh I (473-10, wir, He 1) jit mukh sadaa salaahee-ai bhaagaa ratee chaar. That mouth which praises the Lord continually is blessed and beautiful.
area 3 HY Cae fs AP TaMts NII (473-10, wm, HE 1) naanak tay mukh oojlay tit sachai darbaar. ||2]| O Nanak, those faces shall be radiant in the Court of the True Lord. ||2]|
ugat Il (473-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS a mre nituear fan ot A ofs ae Il 473-11, wm, He 1)
sabh ko aakhai aapnaa jis naahee so chun kadhee-ai.
All call You their own, Lord; one who does not own You, is picked up and thrown away.
ats nit wmuar omy dt Sar AS th (473-12, ver, ws 1) keetaa aapo aapnaa aapay hee laykhaa sandhee-ai. Everyone receives the rewards of his own actions; his account is adjusted accordingly.
W dda andt ms afa ot ofes areata Sehr I (473-12, or, He 1)
jaa rahnaa naahee ait jag taa kaa-it gaarab handhee-ai.
Since one is not destined to remain in this world anyway, why should he ruin himself in pride?
Her for 3 wmdiba ufs org Sd ssh | (473-13, ver, ue 1) mandaa kisai na aakhee-ai parh akhar ayho bujhee-ai. Do not call anyone bad; read these words, and understand.
Hoe ahs o BSA AEM (473-13, weer, Hs 1) moorkhai naal na lujhee-ai. ||19] | Don't argue with fools. ||19]]|
ABA Hs % Il (473-13) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Sod fea Sfmt sq Ho fear dE Il (473-14, nmr, He 1) naanak fikai boli-ai tan man fikaa ho-ay. O Nanak, speaking insipid words, the body and mind become insipid.
fea feat Heit fea fet APE II (473-14, mmr, He 1)
fiko fikaa sadee-ai fikay fikee so-ay.
He is called the most insipid of the insipid; the most insipid of the insipid is his reputation.
fear zaarg Heh ufo gar feat ue Ih (473-14, nmr, He 1)
fikaa dargeh satee-ai muhi thukaa fikay paa-ay.
The insipid person is discarded in the Court of the Lord, and the insipid one's face is spat upon.
fear Hay uindbat uret wd ARTE WAU (473-15, vA, Hs 1) fikaa moorakh aakhee-ai paanaa lahai sajaa-ay. ||1|| The insipid one is called a fool; he is beaten with shoes in punishment. || 1] |
He 4% Il (473-15)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
niga 3S UA wate vdtor viele SB il (473-15, wm, oe 1)
andrahu jhoothay paij baahar dunee-aa andar fail.
Those who are false within, and honorable on the outside, are very common in this world.
wonfs sta A ovefs Cad Bd AS I (473-16, wer, He 1)
athsath tirath jay naaveh utrai naahee mail.
Even though they may bathe at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, still, their filth does not depart.
fag ue viefs wafs aes 3 38 AAS I (473-16, nmr, Hs 1)
jin" pat andar baahar gudarh tay bhalay sansaar.
Those who have silk on the inside and rags on the outside, are the good ones in this world.
f8q 3g Sar ga Ast Sus Sats it (473-17, wer, ws 1) tin" nayhu lagaa rab saytee daykhn"ay veechaar. They embrace love for the Lord, and contemplate beholding Him.
dfa oafo sfa defs gu st afe ata it (473-17, wr, He 1)
rang haseh rang roveh chup bhee kar jaahi.
In the Lord's Love, they laugh, and in the Lord's Love, they weep, and also keep silent.
Use OTS fa Ad IS AT ST Il (473-18, nA, He 1) parvaah naahee kisai kayree baajh sachay naah. They do not care for anything else, except their True Husband Lord.
ofs ae Gufs use Har wa Mf S fs Il (473-18, wm, He 1)
dar vaat upar kharach mangaa jabai day-ay ta khaahi.
Sitting, waiting at the Lord's Door, they beg for food, and when He gives to them, they eat.
charg Sa AGH Sak THT SHAG Il (473-19, wer, ve 1)
deebaan ayko kalam aykaa hamaa tum"aa mayl.
There is only One Court of the Lord, and He has only one pen; there, you and I shall meet.
ofs we Sut ulfs se Boat fAS 3H MQM (473-19, wr, He 1)
dar la-ay laykhaa peerh chhutai naankaa ji-o tayl. ||2||
In the Court of the Lord, the accounts are examined; O Nanak, the sinners are crushed, like oil seeds in the press. ||2]|
ust 898 ugat Il (474-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
nmr dt agar at aw omy ot S ash | (474-1, vm, ne 1) aapay hee karnaa kee-o kal aapay hee tai Dhaaree-ai. You Yourself created the creation; You Yourself infused Your power into it.
sufa atst wruet ufe at ualt Ars I (474-1, vier, He 1) daykheh keetaa aapnaa Dhar kachee pakee saaree-ai. You behold Your creation, like the losing and winning dice of the earth.
A otfenr A UOHt AS aSt wiret ers th (474-2, nmr, ne 1) jo aa-i-aa so chalsee sabh ko-ee aa-ee vaaree-ai. Whoever has come, shall depart; all shall have their turn.
fan a Aba use ofa fae wfsa Hog fears Ih (474-2, om, ne 1)
jis kay jee-a paraan heh ki-o saahib manhu visaaree-ai.
He who owns our soul, and our very breath of life - why should we forget that Lord and Master from our minds?
niu get winrar wm dt aa AeTsH MQM (474-3, mA, He 1) aapan hathee aapnaa aapay hee kaaj savaaree-ai. ||20|| With our own hands, let us resolve our own affairs. ||20] |
HSA HIS 2 Il (474-3) salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
BT fast orAat SH Bat AVE il (474-3, mm, He 2) ayh kinayhee aaskee doojai lagai jaa-ay. What sort of love is this, which clings to duality?
Soa MTA ath AE St Td ANTE I (474-4, vir, ne 2) naanak aasak kaa‘dhee-ai sad hee rahai samaa-ay. O Nanak, he alone is called a lover, who remains forever immersed in absorption.
oN oN o
da var afa Hd He Het aE Il (474-4, ner, He 2)
changai changa kar mannay mandai mandaa ho-ay.
But one who feels good only when good is done for him, and feels bad when things go badly
mA fT & wma fa Sa Sas ALE UA (474-5, wer, He 2) aasak ayhu na aakhee-ai je laykhai vartai so-ay. ||1]| - do not call him a lover. He trades only for his own account. ||1]|
HIS 2 Il (474-5)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
ASH Wag ee ad He wer AME Il (474-5, vir, He 2)
Salaam jabaab dovai karay mundhhu ghuthaa jaa-ay.
One who offers both respectful greetings and rude refusal to his master, has gone wrong from the very beginning.
aed Ss Aah ofS o art ue QM (474-6, mmr, we 2) naanak dovai koorhee-aa thaa-ay na kaa-ee paa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, both of his actions are false; he obtains no place in the Court of the Lord.
21 |
Uugat Il (474-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fas Afed qe urea A Afos FET ANTS Il (474-6, mA, He 2)
jit sayvi-ai sukh paa-ee-ai so saahib sadaa sam"aalee-ai.
Serving Him, peace is obtained; meditate and dwell upon that Lord and Master forever.
fas oatst urea nmyet AT ures aot fa wresht il (474-7, vir, ve 2) jit keetaa paa-ee-ai aapnaa saa ghaal buree ki-o ghaalee-ai. Why do you do such evil deeds, that you shall have to suffer so?
Her nfs 3 ateet & St sefa feast i (474-7, nmr, we 2) mandaa mool na keech-ee day lammee nadar nihaalee-ai. Do not do any evil at all; look ahead to the future with foresight.
fa afza ate o adh Sear uTAT Sra I (474-8, nr, He 2) ji-o saahib naal na haaree-ai tavayhaa paasaa dhaalee-ai. So throw the dice in such a way, that you shall not lose with your Lord and Master.
foe ord Bufa wrest QU (474-8, mmr, He 2) kichh laahay upar ghaalee-ai. ||21]|| Do those deeds which shall bring you profit. ||21]|
HSX HIS 2 Il (474-9)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
TAT Bd Wad SS WIT STS Il (474-9, new, vs 2) chaakar lagai chaakree naalay gaarab vaad. If a servant performs service, while being vain and argumentative,
TS Ad WedMit YAH S UTE ATE Il (474-9, nA, He 2) galaa karay ghanayree-aa khasam na paa-ay saad. he may talk as much as he wants, but he shall not be pleasing to his Master.
my dete Ae’ ad St fos UTS HT Il (474-10, nim, Hs 2) aap gavaa-ay sayvaa karay taa kichh paa-ay maan. But if he eliminates his self-conceit and then performs service, he shall be honored.
Soa fAA 6 Gal fH fs Bar A usSS AU (474-10, wT, He 2)
naanak jis no lagaa tis milai lagaa so parvaan. ||1||
O Nanak, if he merges with the one with whom he is attached, his attachment becomes acceptable. ||1]||
HIS 2 Il (474-11)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
a dfs df A Cae Ho a afonr SE It (474-11, om, He 2) jo jee-ay ho-ay so ugvai muh kaa kahi-aa vaa-o. Whatever is in the mind, comes forth; spoken words by themselves are just wind.
ain fay vat nifgs Sag Sg fonr@ wu (474-11, om, us 2)
beejay bikh mangai amrit vaykhhu ayhu ni-aa-o. ||2||
He sows seeds of poison, and demands Ambrosial Nectar. Behold - what justice is this? ||2||
HIS 2 Il (474-12)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
antes feore trast ae & nite af i (474-12, ur, we 2) naal i-aanay dostee kaday na aavai raas. Friendship with a fool never works out right.
Ag We 3d zgs Sug a foorih Il (474-12, vir, He 2) jayhaa jaanai tayho vartai vaykhhu ko nirjaas. As he knows, he acts; behold, and see that it is so.
qng viele ZAS AHS sat TS UTA II (474-13, wm, He 2) vastoo andar vasat samaavai doojee hovai paas. One thing can be absorbed into another thing, but duality keeps them apart.
AWfoa ASt IaH 5 VS Adt ge wseTAA I (474-13, mT, He 2) saahib saytee hukam na chalai kahee banai ardaas. No one can issue commands to the Lord Master; offer instead humble prayers.
afs ane gs de asa frefs fearfA ail (474-14, wr, ws 2)
koorh kamaanai koorho hovai naanak sifat vigaas. ||3]||
Practicing falsehood, only falsehood is obtained. O Nanak, through the Lord's Praise, one blossoms forth. ||3]|
HIS 2 Il (474-14)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
ane feure Ast earg fAG Sg Il (474-14, wm, Hs 2) naal i-aanay dostee vadaaroo si-o nayhu. Friendship with a fool, and love with a pompous person,
urat nivfs ote faG fan a a & Ag Sil (474-15, nmr, He 2) paanee andar leek ji-o tis daa thaa-o na thayhu. ||4]| are like lines drawn in water, leaving no trace or mark. ||4||
HIG 2 Il (474-15)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
of femrat ad oy orfs o Hat THA I (474-15, mmr, He 2) ho-ay i-aanaa karay kamm aan na sakai raas. If a fool does a job, he cannot do it right.
A fea ma dat as set St STA UI (474-16, mmr, He 2) jay ik aDh changee karay doojee bhee vayraas. ||5|| Even if he does something right, he does the next thing wrong. ||5]|
uGat Il (474-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
TAT Bd Dad A Ves WAH StS Ih (474-16, nmr, ns 2) chaakar lagai chaakree jay chalai khasmai bhaa-ay. If a servant, performing service, obeys the Will of his Master,
Tens fA Sd waret Gs erg fs gat Me it (474-17, wm, ws 2) hurmat tis no aglee oh vajahu bhe doonaa khaa-ay. his honor increases, and he receives double his wages.
UAH ad savadt fefa aafs niefa uf i (474-17, nmr, ne 2) khasmai karay baraabaree fir gairat andar paa-ay. But if he claims to be equal to his Master, he earns his Master's displeasure.
Ad TS mae Hd Ufo urat UE Il (474-18, nr, He 2) vajahu gavaa-ay aglaa muhay muhi paanaa khaa-ay. He loses his entire salary, and is also beaten on his face with shoes.
fA a fest wear faq adha Aref i (474-18, nmr, Hz 2) jis daa ditaa khaavnaa tis kahee-ai saabaas. Let us all celebrate Him, from whom we receive our nourishment.
SOA JAH & VHet oS UAH VS ise Q2Il (474-19, wir, He 2) naanak hukam na chal-ee naal khasam chalai ardaas. ||22| |
O Nanak, no one can issue commands to the Lord Master; let us offer prayers instead. [|22]|
HSA HIS 2 Il (474-19)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
fo faddt ats virun 3 i Ure I (474-19, mer, He 2) ayh kinayhee daat aapas tay jo paa-ee-di. What sort of gift is this, which we receive only by our own asking?
UST gou
Soa AT aeHtS Ase 3S A AHS NA (475-1, rT, He 2)
naanak saa karmaat saahib tuthai jo milai. ||1]|
O Nanak, that is the most wonderful gift, which is received from the Lord, when He is totally pleased. ||1]|
HIS! 2 Il (475-1)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
&7 faadt wadt fas 3B MAH 6 AME Il (475-1, wm, He 2) ayh kinayhee chaakree jit bha-o khasam na jaa-ay. What sort of service is this, by which the fear of the Lord Master does not depart?
Soa Aza arent fe ASt VAN ANTE II (475-2, nimAT, He 2) naanak sayvak kaadhee-ai je saytee khasam samaa-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, he alone is called a servant, who merges with the Lord Master. ||2| |
u@at Il (475-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sa MSO AUSt Ts 3k TX USS I (475-3, wmv, Hs 2) naanak ant na jaapn"ee har taa kay paaraavaar. O Nanak, the Lord's limits cannot be known; He has no end or limitation.
mifu age Avast fefs orf aS HS Il (475-3, nmr, He 2) aap karaa-ay saakh-tee fir aap karaa-ay maar. He Himself creates, and then He Himself destroys.
feagt aet Hrtder fefa sat vate fares i (475-3, om, 2 2) ikn"aa galee janjeeree-aa ik turee charheh bisee-aar. Some have chains around their necks, while some ride on many horses.
umfy aoe ad vif g@ & fae adt uae Il (475-4, mmr, He 2) aap karaa-ay karay aap ha-o kai si-o karee pukaar. He Himself acts, and He Himself causes us to act. Unto whom should I complain?
Soa ade’ fafs avr fefa fSn dt agat AS NQSBIl (475-4, wer, He 2)
naanak karnaa jin kee-aa fir tis hee karnee saar. ||23] | O Nanak, the One who created the creation - He Himself takes care of it. ||23]|
HB Hs 9 Il (475-5) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
mnt sts AS wrt ude Ufe Il (475-5, wer, He 1)
aapay bhaa™day saaji-an aapay pooran day-ay.
He Himself fashioned the vessel of the body, and He Himself fills it. feast eu AHTehy fefa ys safe vs Il (475-6, ym, He 1)
ikn"ee duDh samaa-ee-ai ik chul"ai rehni" charhay.
Into some, milk is poured, while others remain on the fire.
fefa foorat u Refs fefa Gufs safe ws Il (475-6, nr, He 1) ik nihaalee pai savni" ik upar rahan kharhay. Some lie down and sleep on soft beds, while others remain watchful.
fSq" Aes Boot faq AG Seals AT MA (475-7, wT, Hs 1) tin"aa savaaray naankaa jin" ka-o nadar karay. ||1|| He adorns those, O Nanak, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
HIS! 2 Il (475-7)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
nm A ad wif pret fas ge mrt it (475-7, mmr, He 2) aapay saajay karay aap jaa-ee bhe rakhai aap. He Himself creates and fashions the world, and He Himself keeps it in order.
fan fefs fa Gurfe a te af Cafu il (475-8, mmr, He 2) tis vich jant upaa-ay kai daykhai thaap uthaap. Having created the beings within it, He oversees their birth and death.
fan 6 adh saat AS fore mim wrfy QI (475-8, ner, He 2) kis no kahee-ai naankaa sabh kichh aapay aap. ||2|| Unto whom should we speak, O Nanak, when He Himself is all-in-all? ||2] |
ugat Il (475-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
zs aber sfsnreinn fas Age’ ATE © ATE Il (475-9, wer, He 2) vaday kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa kichh kahnaa kahan na jaa-ay. The description of the greatness of the Great Lord cannot be described.
A ads ated adty & Hier fara Aarts i (475-9, wir, He 2) so kartaa kaadar kareem day jee-aa rijak sambaahi. He is the Creator, all-lowerful and benevolent; He gives sustenance to all beings.
Wet arg anteat ufe sat FS ute it (475-10, mmr, He 2) Saa-ee kaar kamaavnee Dhur chhodee tinnai paa-ay. The mortal does that work, which has been pre-destined from the very beginning.
aot Sat aaet Ta gat Sat ALE Il (475-10, wer, He 2) naanak aykee baahree hor doojee naahee jaa-ay. O Nanak, except for the One Lord, there is no other place at all.
A ad fa fA safe Ign AG (475-10, mA, He 2) So karay je tisai rajaa-ay. ||24||1]|| suDhu He does whatever He wills. ||24||1]|| Sudh]|
qe Ae aes usy foss@ faseg vires Hats migat AS aayArfe i (475-12) ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gurparsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ta MITAT Brat Sas at il (475-13)
raag aasaa banee bhagtaa kee. Raag Aasaa, The Word Of The Devotees:
add Me oHes Ate sheen AIG I (475-13) kabeer jee-o naamday-o jee-o ravidaas jee-o. Kabeer, Naam Dayv And Ravi Daas.
mitt At oats AIG (475-13) aasaa saree kabeer jee-o. Aasaa, Kabeer Jee:
Gd vse ota TH fases yes ao AS wfeor it (475-14, we, sas aets Fh gur charan laag ham binvataa poochhat kah jee-o paa-i-aa. Falling at the Feet of the Guru, I pray, and ask Him, "Why was man created?
aze ate wa Cun fion agg dfs AHSTEMr NA (475-14, wm, sas adte 7)
kavan kaaj jag upjai binsai kahhu mohi samjhaa-i-aa. ||1||
What deeds cause the world to come into being, and be destroyed? Tell me, that I may understand."||1||
ee aay cfenr xfs natal weg fry Fs Aas SS Il (475-15, wer, sas adits Fh)
dayv karahu da-i-aa mohi maarag laavhu jit bhai banDhan tootai.
O Divine Guru, please, show Mercy to me, and place me on the right path, by which the bonds of fear may be cut away.
HOH HIS TA Sz AGH AY Aba ASH S Fe UU TIS Il (475-15, ww, sas ots Ht) janam maran dukh fayrh karam sukh jee-a janam tay chhootai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The pains of birth and death come from past actions and karma; peace comes when the soul finds release from reincarnation. ||1||Pause| |
Hfenr SA eT Sat Ss nig HS Als 3 BE Il (475-16, ww, sas ots Ht)
maa-i-aa faas banDh nahee faarai ar man sunn na lookay.
The mortal does not break free from the bonds of the noose of Maya, and he does not seek the shelter of the profound, absolute Lord.
ur ug fosae o dtfaur feo fafa nifsS o ya NIN 475-17, wr, saz aete FH)
aapaa pad nirbaan na cheen’i-aa in biDh abhi-o na chookay. ||2||
He does not realize the dignity of the self, and Nirvaanaa; because of this, his doubt does not depart. ||2]|
aot 5 Sur Gurt we sre nse fageSr i (475-17, vier, sas adits Fh
kahee na upjai upjee jaanai bhaav abhaav bihoonaa. The soul is not born, even though he thinks it is born; it is free from birth and death.
Be ning at Ho afa ont 3G Ae Aafe fee Stet SI (475-18, nm, sas adits Ah
udai asat kee man buDh naasee ta-o sadaa sahj liv leenaa. ||3]|| When the mortal gives up his ideas of birth and death, he remains constantly absorbed in the Lord's Love. ||3]|
fa@ ufsfis fita a@ first 3 Cea os faarear I (475-18, vm, sas adie A) ji-o partibimb bimb ka-o milee hai udak kumbh bigraanaa. As the reflection of an object blends in the water when the pitcher is broken,
ag ade mA Te 3H Sar 3B Ho Afs ANTST SIA (475-19, nmr, sas ate Fh kaho kabeer aisaa gun bharam bhaagaa ta-o man sunn samaanaa”. ||4||1]| says Kabeer, just so virtue dispels doubt, and then the soul is absorbed in the profound, absolute Lord. ||4||1]|
UST gdE
YTAT Il (476-1) aasaa. Aasaa:
aa Ae 3 3 Oso fsad ufefe Sar (476-1, vr, gas adits Ff) gaj saadhay tai tai Dhotee-aa tihray paa-in tag. They wear loin cloths, three and a half yards long, and triple-wound sacred threads.
arat faa Hunn Be ofa feaa il (476-1, wr, sas acta Ht) galee jin"aa japmaalee-aa lotay hath nibag. They have rosaries around their necks, and they carry glittering jugs in their hands.
6fe ofa & AS 6 wmdinfs Heath & Sat Al (476-2, vr, sas ate FH) o-ay har kay sant na aakhee-ahi baanaaras kay thag. ||1]|| They are not called Saints of the Lord - they are thugs of Benares. ||1]]|
MA AS 3H AG Sets Il (476-2, oer, sas adie Ah aisay sant na mo ka-o bhaaveh. Such 'saints' are not pleasing to me;
ser fAG ust aearefs NA TIC i (476-2, or, sas ate FH) daalaa si-o paydaa gatkaavahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. they eat the trees along with the branches. ||1||Pause||
we Hid vaets Gufs wat af Aref Il (476-3, wer, sas atte Fh)
baasan maa‘j charaaveh oopar kaathee Dho-ay jalaaveh.
They wash their pots and pans before putting them on the stove, and they wash the wood before lighting it.
aa dfe aefs efe ys ATS HEA Mets NQN (476-3, wmM, sas ats Ht) basuDhaa khod karahi du-ay chool"ay saaray maanas khaaveh. ||2]| They dig up the earth and make two fireplaces, but they eat the whole person! ||2||
6fe unit Ae feafo musa Hug wus ATT Il (476-4, om, sas ate Fh)
O-ay paapee sadaa fireh apraaDhee mukhahu apras kahaaveh. Those sinners continually wander in evil deeds, while they call themselves touch- nothing saints.
Re Aer feafo mifsrst nae ace saets Sil (476-5, om, sas ate Fh)
sadaa sadaa fireh abhimaanee sagal kutamb dubaaveh. ||3]| They wander around forever and ever in their self-conceit, and all their families are drowned. ||3]|
fas a ofenr fas dt oar SA AGH ANTS II (476-5, vir, sas adie Fh) jit ko laa-i-aa tit hee laagaa taisay karam kamaavai. He is attached to that, to which the Lord has attached him, and he acts accordingly.
ag ade fan Afsag Se usd Hoth o MTS ISIN (476-6, wT, sas ate Th kaho kabeer jis satgur bhaytai punrap janam na aavai. ||4]|2]|| Says Kabeer, one who meets the True Guru, is not reincarnated again. ||4||2||
YTAT Il (476-6) aaSaa. Aasaa:
afy fear Ae ater il AW Aarst ufe wifigs Star il (476-6, »mr, sas adits FH)
baap dilaasaa mayro keen"aa. sayj sukhaalee mukh amrit deen"aa.
My Father has comforted me. He has given me a cozy bed, and placed His Ambrosial Nectar in my mouth.
faR wu a fas Hog feArst il (476-7, or, sas ate Ff) tis baap ka-o ki-o manhu visaaree. How could I forget that Father from my mind?
mat afenr o at ast WU (476-7, we, sas asta Ah
aagai ga-i-aa na baajee haaree. ||1|| When I go to the world hereafter, I shall not lose the game. ||1]|
Het Hat Het TG war AUT I (476-8, nT, sas adie FH) mu-ee mayree maa-ee ha-o kharaa sukhaalaa. Maya is dead, O mother, and I am very happy.
ufsa@ adt vast Bat B us NA TIE Il (476-8, wr, sas acta Ah pahira-o nahee daglee lagai na paalaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I do not wear the patched coat, nor do I feel the chill. ||1]|Pause] |
afe fsa amu fafe 3 afeor i 476-8, ver, gas adits a) bal tis baapai jin ha-o jaa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to my Father, who gave me life.
Us 3 Ha Aa vartfeur | (476-9, or, sas adie ah panchaa tay mayraa sang chukaa-i-aa. He put an end to my association with the five deadly sins.
us fs ure sf AS Il (476-9, vir, sas adie Fh) panch maar paavaa tal deenay. I have conquered those five demons, and trampled them underfoot.
ofa faHafs Ha HS ZO SHS MQ (476-9, vr, sas adie FH) har simran mayraa man tan bheenay. ||2]| Remembering the Lord in meditation, my mind and body are drenched with His Love.
[21 |
fust DHS SS AAT I (476-10, vr, sas adits Ft)
pitaa hamaaro vad gosaa-ee.
My Father is the Great Lord of the Universe.
fan fus ufs 38 fae afe Wet II (476-10, nmr, sas ate A)
tis pitaa peh ha-o ki-o kar jaa-ee. How shall I go to that Father?
Afsad fH8 3 Haat fearfenr i (476-10, omer, sas ate Ff)
satgur milay ta maarag dikhaa-i-aa. When I met the True Guru, He showed me the Way.
was fust Ad fe Steer BI (476-11, vr, gas adie Ff) jagat pitaa mayrai man bhaa-i-aa. ||3]| The Father of the Universe is pleasing to my mind. ||3]|
IS Us 3a F TY AT Il 476-11, wer, sas aes Fh ha-o poot tayraa too” baap mayraa. I am Your son, and You are my Father.
Sa BIT FIT SAT Il (476-11, vr, sas adie tt) aykai thaahar duhaa basayraa. We both dwell in the same place.
aT aate Als Sat ghemr i (476-12, wmv, sas ata Fh) kaho kabeer jan ayko boojhi-aa. Says Kabeer, the Lord's humble servant knows only the One.
gs ure HAS fas Afr sisi (476-12, »mr, sas adits A) gur parsaad mai sabh kichh soojhi-aa. ||4]|3]| By Guru's Grace, I have come to know everything. ||4]|3]|
YTAT Il (476-12) aasaa. Aasaa:
feas usts sfs Gaae aga feas use safe ust Il (476-12, nmr, sas ate A) ikat patar bhar urkat kurkat ikat patar bhar paanee. In one pot, they put a boiled chicken, and in the other pot, they put wine.
uth uta us Helm 8S sifs sae SF get NAN (476-13, nm, sas adte Hh)
aas paas panch jogee-aa baithay beech nakat day raanee. ||1]||
The five Yogis of the Tantric ritual sit there, and in their midst sits the noseless one, the shameless queen. ||1]||
BAS SE SSMS ASS Il (476-14, wmv, sas sets Ht) naktee ko thangan baadaa doo”. The bell of the shameless queen, Maya, rings in both worlds.
foots faraatt oret 3 Wal TIS Il (476-14, wer, sas aets Fh) kineh bibaykee kaatee too™. ||1|| rahaa-o. Some rare person of discriminating wisdom has cut off your nose. ||1]|Pause]|
Hares Ho Saxet A SAT Aa Hs MSTA Il (476-14, vr, sas adte Ft)
Sagal maahi naktee kaa vaasaa sagal maar a-uhayree. Within all dwells the noseless Maya, who kills all, and destroys them.
Hater at IG afoe sont frofo adt fSA Sst MQ (476-15, nmr, sas ate FH)
Sagli-aa kee ha-o bahin bhaanjee jineh baree tis chayree. ||2|| She says, "I am the sister, and the daughter of the sister of everyone; I am the hand- maiden of one who marries me."||2||
JHd saat as fadat wma AS ATS I (476-15, nmr, sas adits rh hamro bhartaa bado bibaykee aapay sant kahaavai. My Husband is the Great One of discriminating wisdom; He alone is called a Saint.
6g gH we afey ms dnd foafe & wre ISI (476-16, wir, sas ade Th) oh hamaarai maathai kaa-im a-or hamrai nikat na aavai. ||3]| He stands by me, and no one else comes near me. ||3]||
wag aret wag act ate afe & stat Il (476-16, nmr, sas aes Ft)
naakahu kaatee kaanahu kaatee kaat koot kai daaree.
I have cut off her nose, and cut off her ears, and cutting her into bits, I have expelled her.
ad ads Hs at Safe Sie Sa at fumrct sisi (476-17, wer, sas adits Th
kaho kabeer santan kee bairan teen lok kee pi-aaree. ||4||4| | Says Kabeer, she is the darling of the three worlds, but the enemy of the Saints. [41141 |
MITAT Il (476-18)
aasaa. Aasaa:
fat St Sut Afsurst ag Stee SHS Il (476-18, wr, sas atte Fh)
jogee jatee tapee sani-aasee baho tirath bharmanaa.
The Yogis, celibates, penitents and Sannyaasees make pilgrimages to all the sacred places.
Ofas vias Hfs Aevas nifs SB HIS UU (476-18, wer, sas alte Fh
lu‘jit mujit mon jataaDhar ant ta-oo marnaa. ||1||
The Jains with shaven heads, the silent ones, the beggars with matted hair - in the end, they all shall die. ||1]|
3 3 ASS THA Il (476-19, ora, sas ate Ft) taa tay sayvee-alay raamnaa. Meditate, therefore, on the Lord.
dHat TH BH fos AT a AT AI AHS AU! TIC Il (476-19, wT, sas adits FH) rasnaa raam naam hit jaa kai kahaa karai jamnaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
What can the Messenger of Death do to one whose tongue loves the Name of the Lord? ||1||Pause| |
nia fda fsa wofs ag ag faeragar Il (476-19, nmr, sas adits Ah
aagam nirgam jotik jaaneh baho baho bi-aakarnaa.
Those who know the Shaastras and the Vedas, astrology and the rules of grammar of many languages;
UST BDI
33 HZ AS nigua wats nifs 3B HIST QM (477-1, wr, sas ate Fh) tant mantar sabh a-ukhaDh jaaneh ant ta-oo marnaa. ||2||
those who know Tantras and mantras and all medicines - even they shall die in the end. ||2]|
TH 3a og Sg fhurne ag Hefs THe Il (477-1, ve, sas adits A)
raaj bhog ar chhatar singhaasan baho sundar ramnaa.
Those who enjoy regal power and rule, royal canopies and thrones, many beautiful women,
UTS SUT HAAR deo ifs 3B Has SM 477-2, we, sas sets Fh) paan kapoor subaasak chandan ant ta-oo marnaa. ||3]| betel nuts, camphor and fragrant sandalwood oil - in the end, they too shall die. ||3]|
ae uae ffs AS dA ag o Basar Il 477-2, or, sas ata Fh)
bayd puraan simrit sabh khojay kahoo na oobarnaa.
I have searched all the Vedas, Puraanas and Simritees, but none of these can save anyone.
ag adie fe@ mnfo Hu Afe HOH Hea ISU (477-3, om, sas ate FA) kaho kabeer i-o raameh jampa-o mayt janam marnaa. ||4||5|| Says Kabeer, meditate on the Lord, and eliminate birth and death. ||4||5]|
YTAT Il (477-3) aasaa. Aasaa:
ae saat ase UMTSH An IH BAS Il (477-4, view, sas adits Fh)
feel rabaabee balad pakhaavaj ka-oo-aa taal bajaavai.
The elephant is the guitar player, the ox is the drummer, and the crow plays the cymbals.
ufafs doo" TeT os SAT safs aS AU (477-4, oT, sas ate Ft)
pahir cholnaa gadhaa naachai bhaisaa bhagat karaavai. ||1]|
Putting on the skirt, the donkey dances around, and the water buffalo performs devotional worship. ||1||
TH TH Aad Fs USES | (477-5, wT, sas adie Ft) raajaa raam kakree-aa baray pakaa-ay. The Lord, the King, has cooked the cakes of ice,
fas FISTS US UU TIS Ml (477-5, wer, sas sets FH) kinai boojhanhaarai khaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. but only the rare man of understanding eats them. ||1]|Pause] |
Sfs fy wfs ure sere ula ceed femire i 477-5, nmr, sas adie rh
baith singh ghar paan lagaavai ghees gal-uray li-aavai.
Sitting in his den, the lion prepares the betel leaves, and the muskrat brings the betel nuts.
ufs ufs HAS Hae aefs aeor AY SATS MQ (477-6, wer, sas aeite Fh) ghar ghar musree mangal gaavahi kachhoo-aa sankh bajaavai. ||2||
Going from house to house, the mouse sings the songs of joy, and the turtle blows on the conch-shell. ||2| |
aA a us sae afer Afes Hsu se il (477-6, wer, sas ata Fh)
bans ko poot bee-aahan chali-aa su-inay mandap chhaa-ay.
The son of the sterile woman goes to get married, and the golden canopy is spread out for him.
gu afer Hefe act AA fw Te we Bi 477-7, wer, sas alts Fh)
roop kanniaa sundar bayDhee sasai singh gun gaa-ay. ||3]||
He marries a beautiful and enticing young woman; the rabbit and the lion sing their praises. ||3]||
ads ads Hod J Hag atet uses wfeor | (477-7, oer, sas adits ah kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu keetee parbat khaa-i-aa. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints - the ant has eaten the mountain.
Teor ad vias fs SIG Sat Aa AaeMr sill (477-8, wer, sas alta Fh) kachhoo-aa kahai angaar bhe lora-o lookee sabad sunaa-i-aa. ||4||6]||
The turtle says, "I need a burning coal, also." Listen to this mystery of the Shabad. [14] 16] |
YTAT Il (477-9) aaSaa. Aasaa:
dent Sq gosta wrod Sat frAfs ers i (477-9, vw, sas ats Ht) batoo-aa ayk bahtar aaDhaaree ayko jisahi du-aaraa. The body is a bag with seventy-two chambers, and one opening, the Tenth Gate.
oe Us ot fyenit wat A ait Afar Are A (477-9, »mr, sas adits Fh)
navai khand kee parithmee maagai so jogee jag saaraa. ||1||
He alone is a real Yogi on this earth, who asks for the primal world of the nine regions. ||1]|
MAT Hat SE fefa ur il (477-10, ner, gas adie Ah aisaa jogee na-o niDh paavai. Such a Yogi obtains the nine treasures.
35 A YIN B Hale sas UU TIS Il (477-10, or, sas ats FH) tal kaa barahm lay gagan charaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He lifts his soul up from below, to the skies of the Tenth Gate. ||1]|Pause] |
fifer fomrs fours afs Feat Fae svar Hie ws | (477-10, wmv, sas alte Ft) khinthaa gi-aan Dhi-aan kar soo-ee sabad taagaa math ghaalai.
He makes spiritual wisdom his patched coat, and meditation his needle. He twists the thread of the Word of the Shabad.
uv 33 at afe frearet ae & Wefa TS U1 (477-11, ver, gas adie Ff) panch tat kee kar mirgaanee gur kai maarag chaalai. ||2| | Making the five elements his deer skin to sit on, he walks on the Guru's Path. ||2||
cfeur eget ofenr ate get ferfe at mats ABS Il (477-12, ver, sas ats Ft) da-i-aa faahuree kaa-i-aa kar Dhoo-ee darisat kee agan jalaavai.
He makes compassion his shovel, his body the firewood, and he kindles the fire of divine vision.
fan a or we fee nists vg Fa TSt WS BI (477-12, vr, gas adits Hh)
tis kaa bhaa-o la-ay rid antar chahu jug taarhee laavai. ||3||
He places love within his heart, and he remains in deep meditation throughout the four ages. ||3]]|
AS qase TH OH J fan aot fils UsTAT I 477-13, vr, gas adie th sabh jogtan raam naam hai jis kaa pind paraanaa. All Yoga is in the Name of the Lord; the body and the breath of life belong to Him.
ag adte A fase ord Sf Aart StATST SIDI (477-13, om, sas adie Ah kaho kabeer jay kirpaa Dhaarai day-ay sachaa neesaanaa. ||4||7|| Says Kabeer, if God grants His Grace, He bestows the insignia of Truth. ||4]|7]|
YTAT Il (477-14) aaSaa. Aasaa:
fie 33a aa Ss ne fats Sa Ta Taret il 477-14, om, sas aes Ht)
hindoo turak kahaa tay aa-ay kin ayh raah chalaa-ee.
Where have the Hindus and Muslims come from? Who put them on their different paths?
feo ufo Afs faerie cere fans cua fate uret nal 477-14, nmr, sas adte Ff)
dil meh soch bichaar kavaaday bhisat dojak kin paa-ee. ||1]| Think of this, and contemplate it within your mind, O men of evil intentions. Who will go to heaven and hell? ||1]|
Ht 3 Aeo ASS gash I (477-15, vw, sas adie rh kaajee tai kavan katayb bakhaanee. O Qazi, which book have you read?
UZS TSS MA AS HS faod vats s AST UU TIS ll (477-15, wm, sas alts Ft)
parh"at gunat aisay sabh maaray kinhoo™ khabar na jaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Such scholars and students have all died, and none of them have discovered the inner meaning. ||1]|Pause| |
Rats Hod afs Hofs adh HS aeCar are Il (477-16, ur, gas adie Hf)
sakat sanayhu kar sunat karee-ai mai na bad-ugaa bhaa-ee.
Because of the love of woman, circumcision is done; I don't believe in it, O Siblings of Destiny.
ag 3 yee dfs saa ada nme dt afe ATeT QN (477-17, om, sas adie Hh ja-o ray khudaa-ay mohi turak karaigaa aapan hee kat jaa-ee. ||2|| If God wished me to be a Muslim, it would be cut off by itself. ||2||
Hofs ate saa A dfear m@as at foo adh i 477-17, or, gas adie Ah sunat kee-ay turak jay ho-igaa a-urat kaa ki-aa karee-ai. If circumcision makes one a Muslim, then what about a woman?
neg Hate ots 3s es 33 foe Tt gdh 3 477-18, wer, sas aes A) araDh sareeree naar na chhodai taa tay hindoo hee rahee-ai. ||3]|
She is the other half of a man's body, and she does not leave him, so he remains a Hindu. ||3]|
ats asa TH an BCS HOH Ads J SS Il (477-18, ur, gas adie Hf)
chhaad katayb raam bhaj ba-uray julam karat hai bhaaree.
Give up your holy books, and remember the Lord, you fool, and stop oppressing others so badly.
add uadt 2a TH at saa ad ufsast SNC (477-19, unr, gas adie FH)
kabeerai pakree tayk raam kee turak rahay pachihaaree. ||4||8]| Kabeer has grasped hold of the Lord's Support, and the Muslims have utterly failed. [14] 18] |
MITAT Il (477-19)
aasaa. Aasaa:
Wa SI 3B ce “fe est sa AS AS Ae Il (477-19, wer, sas ats A) jab lag tayl deevay mukh baatee tab soojhai sabh ko-ee. As long as the oil and the wick are in the lamp, everything is illuminated.
UST got
35 AS ast STs Hat Heg Tet WAU (478-1, wr, sas alts Ft) tayl jalay baatee thehraanee soonnaa mandar ho-ee. ||1|| But when the oil is burnt, the wick goes out, and the mansion becomes desolate. ||1]|
J a@d sfo udt o Te aet Il (478-1, vir, sas adie th ray ba-uray tuhi gharee na raakhai ko-ee. O mad-man, no one will keep you, for even a moment.
3 oH oy Af Het NU TIS I (478-2, wer, sas adits Ft) too’ raam naam jap so-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meditate on the Name of that Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
a at Hs fust ag at a ao Use af Het Il (478-2, nmr, gas adie FH) kaa kee maat pitaa kaho kaa ko kavan purakh kee jo-ee. Tell me, whose mother is that, whose father is that, and which man has a wife?
we ge AG ASS YS ae AT Tet MQ (478-3, vw, sas sets Ft)
ghat footay ko-oo baat na poochhai kaadhahu kaadhahu ho-ee. ||2]|
When the pitcher of the body breaks, no one cares for you at all. Everyone says, "Take him away, take him away!"||2||
oat Fat Hest SS ior B TES set Il (478-3, om, sas adits Ah dayhuree baithee maataa rovai khatee-aa lay ga-ay bhaa-ee. Sitting on the threshold, his mother cries, and his brothers take away the coffin.
we fecare fadior dz dH feaor wet ISI (478-4, om, sas adits Ah
lat chhitkaa-ay tiree-aa rovai hans ikaylaa jaa-ee. ||3]||
Taking down her hair, his wife cries out in sorrow, and the swan-soul departs all alone. ||3]|
ads add AST J HST SF AT a BET I (478-4, oe, sas adie Ah kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu bhai saagar kai taa-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints, about the terrifying world-ocean.
fen se ffs Fou SF AH odt Je TATE III (478-5, nmr, sas adie Hf) is banday sir julam hot hai jam nahee hatai gusaa-ee. ||4]||9||
This human suffers torture and the Messenger of Death will not leave him alone, O Lord of the World. ||4]|9]|
PSA (478-5) dutukay Du-Tukas
qe Afsara yATfe Il (478-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mit At oats AG a Bue feasa il (478-6, vr, sas ate Ht) aasaa saree kabeer jee-o kay cha-upday iktukay. Aasaa Of Kabeer Jee, Chau-Padas, Ik-Tukas:
Hod Ae nis odt ufenr il 478-6, ner, sas adits fh) sanak sanand ant nahee paa-i-aa. Sanak and Sanand, the sons of Brahma, could not find the Lord's limits.
ae us ufs gan AON Tefen A (478-7, vm, sas ate Fh) bayd parhay parh barahmay janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1|| Brahma wasted his life away, continually reading the Vedas. ||1]|
dfs a faseat faseg AS avet Il (478-7, umn, sas ate Fh) har kaa bilovanaa bilovahu mayray bhaa-ee. Churn the churn of the Lord, O my Siblings of Destiny.
Hofa faseg AA 33 5 Wet NA TIS I 478-7, om, sas adits Hh sahj bilovahu jaisay tat na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Churn it steadily, so that the essence, the butter, may not be lost. ||1]|Pause] |
36 afa Heat He ufo faset I (478-8, nm, sas adie A) tan kar matukee man maahi bilo-ee. Make your body the churning jar, and use the stick of your mind to churn it.
fen Heol nfs Hae HAST NN (478-8, unr, gas ate Ff) is matukee meh sabad sanjo-ee. ||2|| Gather the curds of the Word of the Shabad. ||2||
afa at faseat Ho at stare Il (478-9, umm, sas asta Ah)
har kaa bilovanaa man kaa beechaaraa. The churning of the Lord is to reflect upon Him within your mind.
aa ure ure nifgs oer 311 (478-9, »mr, sas ants sf) gur parsaad paavai amrit Dhaaraa. ||3]|| By Guru's Grace, the Ambrosial Nectar flows into us. ||3]|
aI ats sels Ad A HTS Il (478-9, umn, sas adits Ah kaho kabeer nadar karay jay mee‘raa. Says Kabeer, if the Lord, our King casts His Glance of Grace,
TH OH Bla SSs Sta NSUAIIOM (478-10, wT, sas ate Ah
raam naam lag utray teeraa. ||4||1]]10]| one is carried across to the other side, holding fast to the Lord's Name. ||4||1]|10]|
YTAT Il (478-10) aasaa. Aasaa:
ast Hat 3% foyer il (478-10, om, sas aete Fh) baatee sookee tayl nikhootaa. The wick has dried up, and the oil is exhausted.
Hees MH SS U AS AU (478-10, wT, sas ats A) mandal na baajai nat pai sootaa. ||1|| The drum does not sound, and the actor has gone to sleep. ||1]||
afs aet nate 3 feathS Gor i (478-11, or, sas anita Ah) bujh ga-ee agan na niksi-o Dhoo"-aa. The fire has gone out, and no smoke is produced.
ote stor Sq weg odt Bor Ul TIS Ml (478-11, wer, sas aets Fh rav rahi-aa ayk avar nahee doo-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The One Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere; there is no other second. ||1]|Pause| |
eet S35 aA THA Il (478-12, view, sas ats A) tootee tant na bajai rabaab. The string has broken, and the guitar makes no sound.
3f% frarfsS mrs ary NI (478-12, om, sas sete Fh) bhool bigaari-o apnaa kaaj. ||2|| He mistakenly ruins his own affairs. ||2||
aaat seat AIS ATSS Il AHS udt 3B fanfes wes Sil (478-12, oer, sas adits Fh) kathnee badnee kahan kahaavan. samajh paree ta-o bisri-o gaavan. ||3]|
When one comes to understand, he forgets his preaching, ranting and raving, and arguing. ||3]||
RIS Sats UT A eT I fs 3 ots USN US FSI USNQUVUI (478-13, wm, sas alts Fh kahat kabeer panch jo chooray. tin tay naahi param pad dooray. ||4]|2]|11]|
Says Kabeer, the state of supreme dignity is never far from those who conquer the five demons of the body passions. ||4||2]|11]|
YTAT Il (478-14) aasaa. Aasaa:
HS wusa aes J AS Il (478-14, vor, sas adits Ff) sut apraaDh karat hai jaytay. As many mistakes as the son commits,
Hoot sts o aUfA SS WAU (478-14, vr, sas adits Ah jannee cheet na raakhas taytay. ||1]| his mother does not hold them against him in her mind. ||1]]|
aHebr 3G ata Sa il (478-14, nmr, sas ate Ah raam-ee-aa ha-o baarik tayraa. O Lord, I am Your child.
ad 6 Usth Mae AT NU TIC il (478-15, wer, sas asta Fh) kaahay na khandas avgan mayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why not destroy my sins? ||1|]Pause| |
a oifs gu ad afe afer | (478-15, ver, sas adits FA) jay at karop karay kar Dhaa-i-aa. If the son, in anger, runs away,
a at dfs o auf wrfenr 2 I (478-15, nor, sas adte Ah
taa bhee cheet na raakhas maa-i-aa. ||2| | even then, his mother does not hold it against him in her mind. ||2]|
fos safe Ho ufsG THT Il (478-16, nia, sas asta Ht) chint bhavan man pari-o hamaaraa. My mind has fallen into the whirlpool of anxiety.
on fast aA Ssafh ura ISI (478-16, wir, sas adie Th naam binaa kaisay utras paaraa. ||3]|| Without the Naam, how can I cross over to the other side? ||3]|
ef fans ufs Het Asta Il (478-17, ver, sas adits eh deh bimal mat sadaa sareeraa. Please, bless my body with pure and lasting understanding, Lord;
Hofa Adfat To Je ata USUI (478-17, wer, gars adits rh
sahj sahj gun ravai kabeeraa. ||4||3]|12|| in peace and poise, Kabeer chants the Praises of the Lord. ||4||3]|12]|
YTAT Il (478-17) aaSaa. Aasaa:
JA SHS HST Ste Il (478-17, view, sas adits Ft) haj hamaaree gomtee teer. My pilgrimage to Mecca is on the banks of the Gomati River;
ad safe uisag ute il (478-18, wer, sas ate Hh
jahaa baseh peetambar peer. ||1]| the spiritual teacher in his yellow robes dwells there. ||1]|
ag ag fort ya aes F Il (478-18, wer, sas ats Ht) vaahu vaahu ki-aa khoob gaavtaa hai. Waaho! Waaho! Hail! Hail! How wondrously he sings.
dfs a on Ae Hfe SSS UU TIC I (478-18, wm, sas adits Fh) har kaa naam mayrai man bhaavtaa hai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Name of the Lord is pleasing to my mind. ||1]||Pause] |
ua gor
Se Arse aot Yea Il (479-1, nem, sas asta A
naarad saarad karahi khavaasee. Naarada the sage, and Shaarada the goddess of knowledge, serve the Lord.
uf Sat stat asa SAT QU (479-1, wer, sas adie a)
paas baithee beebee kavlaa daasee. ||2|| The goddess Lakhshmi sits by Him as His slave. ||2||
AS Her fe" TH Il (479-2, wr, sas adits Ft) kanthay maalaa jihvaa raam. The mala is around my neck, and the Lord's Name is upon my tongue.
HIJA OH B B AGE AGH ISll (479-2, wr, sas ade rh saha's naam lai lai kara-o salaam. ||3]|
I repeat the Naam, the Name of the Lord, a thousand times, and bow in reverence to Him. ||3]]|
AIS Aas TH TS WSS Il (479-2, veer, sas aete FH) kahat kabeer raam gun gaava-o. Says Kabeer, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord;
fig Joa SS AHTSS ISISIISI (479-3, wm, sas ate Fh) hindoo turak do-oo samjhaava-o. ||4||4]|13]| I teach both Hindus and Muslims. ||4||4]|13]|
nin At adte Ae a Usue € TIX U (479-4) aasaa saree kabeer jee-o kay panchpaday 9 dutukay 5 Aasaa, Kabeer Jee, 9 Panch-Padas, 5 Du-Tukas:
qe Afsars yrrfe Il (479-4) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ust 33 nfwat ust ust FIG I (479-5, vir, gars adie Th paatee torai maalini paatee paatee jee-o. You tear off the leaves, O gardener, but in each and every leaf, there is life.
fAA ude aS ust 3d A ude feat 9 (479-5, wir, sas adie rh jis paahan ka-o paatee torai so paahan nirjee-o. ||1]| That stone idol, for which you tear off those leaves - that stone idol is lifeless. ||1]|
Bot HBSt T SS ll (479-5, we, sas ats Ht) bhoolee maalnee hai ay-o. In this, you are mistaken, O gardener.
Afsag wast J SE AU TIC Il (479-6, ne, sas adits Ah satgur jaagtaa hai day-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. The True Guru is the Living Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
qo ust fang stdt SB HATES I (479-6, wer, sas aets Ft)
barahm paatee bisan daaree fool sankarday-o. Brahma is in the leaves, Vishnu is in the branches, and Shiva is in the flowers.
ifs t= ysty Safo aafo fan at AG QU (479-6, »mr, sas adits Ft) teen dayv partakh toreh karahi kis kee say-o. ||2]| When you break these three gods, whose service are you performing? ||2]|
unis afe & Hats stat & & SSt US il 479-7, wer, sas atte Fh)
paakhaan gadh kai moorat keen"ee day kai chhaatee paa-o.
The sculptor carves the stone and fashions it into an idol, placing his feet upon its chest.
A Sd Hols At I 3S agETS WS SI (479-7, wm, sas aes A) jay ayh moorat saachee hai ta-o garh"anhaaray khaa-o. ||3]| If this stone god was true, it would devour the sculptor for this! ||3]|
arg ufofs nig BUA AAT AA Il (479-8, no, sas ate Fh) bhaat pahit ar laapsee karkaraa kaasaar. Rice and beans, candies, cakes and cookies
saoTs ster eR Has & HY ST III (479-8, wer, sas adits Fh) bhoganhaaray bhogi-aa is moorat kay mukh chhaar. ||4| | - the priest enjoys these, while he puts ashes into the mouth of the idol. ||4]|
Hfote sat AT Soa" JH SHS ota ll (479-9, new, sas aets Fh maalin bhoolee jag bhulaanaa ham bhulaanay naahi. The gardener is mistaken, and the world is mistaken, but I am not mistaken.
ag aa TH oH ae faur ats ofa TE NUNANISI (479-9, vr, sas ate A
kaho kabeer ham raam raakhay kirpaa kar har raa-ay. ||5||1]|14]| Says Kabeer, the Lord preserves me; the Lord, my King, has showered His Blessings upon me. ||5]]1]]14]|
MITAT Il (479-10)
aaSaa. Aasaa:
WII FA Wsus HS SA YA ae Su 3 AE Il (479-10, oT, sas adie FH)
baarah baras baalpan beetay bees baras kachh tap na kee-o.
Twelve years pass in childhood, and for another twenty years, he does not practice self-discipline and austerity.
SA TGA ae Ue 6 ur feta ussa fafa sfES Wall (479-10, wer, sas aete Fh)
tees baras kachh dayv na poojaa fir pachhutaanaa biraDh bha-i-o. ||1]|
For another thirty years, he does not worship God in any way, and then, when he is old, he repents and regrets. ||1]||
Hot HSt ATS HOH AES Il (479-11, ver, sas asta Hh mayree mayree kartay janam ga-i-o. His life wastes away as he cries out, "Mine, mine!"
Weg Afe oH sees nan TIS I (479-11, vr, sas adie Hf) saa-ir sokh bhuja™ bali-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. The pool of his power has dried up. ||1||Pause] |
Ha Adefs ute dors we fs ga sa AT Ml (479-12, wm, sas aes Ht)
sookay sarvar paal banDhaavai loonai khayt hath vaar karai.
He makes a dam around the dried-up pool, and with his hands, he makes a fence around the harvested field.
mwfe sg sda0 8 aes Het was wag fed QI (479-12, »mr, sas ast Ah
aa-i-o chor turantah lay ga-i-o mayree raakhat mugaDh firai. ||2]|
When the thief of Death comes, he quickly carries away what the fool had tried to preserve as his own. ||2||
JdIo AA AT AUS Ba Sat aly MAT Ad Il (479-13, we, sas adie th)
charan sees kar kampan laagay nainee neer asaar bahai.
His feet and head and hands begin to tremble, and the tears flow copiously from his eyes.
fade ave AU ddl foan sa J Gan at MMA a ISI (479-13, wm, sas adie Tt) jihvaa bachan suDh nahee niksai tab ray Dharam kee aas karai. ||3]| His tongue has not spoken the correct words, but now, he hopes to practice religion!
[I3]|
dfs HG faur ad foe we oe afe fs oH AE Il (479-14, om, sas adie Ah
har jee-o kirpaa karai liv laavai laahaa har har naam lee-o.
If the Dear Lord shows His Mercy, one enshrines love for Him, and obtains the Profit of the Lord's Name.
ad usAet ofs ag uteG nis vofeur are sfeG sil (479-15, om, sas ate Hf)
gur parsaadee har Dhan paa-i-o antay chaldi-aa naal chali-o. ||4]|
By Guru's Grace, he receives the wealth of the Lord's Name, which alone shall go with him, when he departs in the end. ||4| |
TIS Ta HST FAST nig US Sent BB AMES Il 479-15, wmv, sas adits HH) kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu an Dhan kachhoo-ai lai na ga-i-o. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints - he shall not take any other wealth with him.
mret see atures afte at fer Hea ef vies nunQnqwUil (479-16, wer, sas ase Ah
aa-ee talab gopaal raa-ay kee maa-i-aa mandar chhod chali-o. ||5]|2]|15]| When the summons comes from the King, the Lord of the Universe, the mortal departs, leaving behind his wealth and mansions. ||5||2]|15]|
MITAT Il (479-17)
aasaa. Aasaa:
ag da ure udag arg uy feera I (479-17, wir, sas ate Fh)
kaahoo deen"ay paat patambar kaahoo palagh nivaaraa.
To some, the Lord has given silks and satins, and to some, beds decorated with cotton ribbons.
NT Tat Hest SS AT ws USS AU (479-17, wer, sas alts Ft) kaahoo garee godree naahee kaahoo khaan paraaraa. ||1|| Some do not even have a poor patched coat, and some live in thatched huts. ||1]|
wifoed ee 6 at FHS Il (479-18, om, sas ada Ah ahirakh vaad na keejai ray man. Do not indulge in envy and bickering, O my mind.
Hfas afe afe Ste F Ho NU TIC Il (479-18, oT, sas adits Ah sukarit kar kar leejai ray man. ||1|| rahaa-o. By continually doing good deeds, these are obtained, O my mind. ||1]||Pause] |
SHS Sa FT Het aut ag fafa wat wet i (479-18, mmr, sas atts Ft) kum"aarai ayk jo maatee goonDhee baho biDh baanee laa-ee. The potter works the same clay, and colors the pots in different ways.
arg His HSt Hoses arg femrfa waret iI (479-19, wer, gars alts Ft) kaahoo meh motee muktaahal kaahoo bi-aaDh lagaa-ee. ||2|| Into some, he sets pearls, while to others, he attaches filth. ||2| |
AHfs Ug Tas aS Chor ya aT UG HS Il (479-19, ww, sas ats Ht) soomeh Dhan raakhan ka-o dee-aa mugaDh kahai Dhan mayraa. God gave wealth to the miser for him to preserve, but the fool calls it his own.
UST gto
WH & 33 He Hla ord fis ufo ad feds Sil (480-1, wr, sas ats Ht)
jam kaa dand moond meh laagai khin meh karai nibayraa. ||3]|
When the Messenger of Death strikes him with his club, in an instant, everything is settled. ||3]|
ofs 7G SSH say AES urfamr ufS AY UTeT II (480-2, wir, sas ata Fh)
har jan ootam bhagat sadaavai aagi-aa man sukh paa-ee.
The Lord's humble servant is called the most exalted Saint; he obeys the Command of the Lord's Order, and obtains peace.
a faq ae vfs afs we ave Hife Srret ISI (480-2, nmr, gas ate Fh) jo tis bhaavai sat kar maanai bhaanaa man vasaa-ee. ||4|
Whatever is pleasing to the Lord, he accepts as True; he enshrines the Lord's Will within his mind. ||4| |
I KAT HoT J Asg Ast Ast FSt il 480-3, ww, sas ats Hh) kahai kabeer sunhu ray santahu mayree mayree jhoothee. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints - it is false to call out, "Mine, mine."
fasae ate vers & HES Sat Tarst set NUNSIAEl (480-3, wer, gars welts Ft)
chirgat faar chataaraa lai ga-i-o taree taagree chhootee. ||5||3]|16] | Breaking the bird cage, death takes the bird away, and only the torn threads remain. [15] 131/16] |
YTAT Il (480-4) aasaa. Aasaa:
JH HAals weet FS SH THA HE STS Il (480-4, oT, sas adie Ah ham maskeen khudaa-ee banday tum raajas man bhaavai. I am Your humble servant, Lord; Your Praises are pleasing to my mind.
ned mete de at Afos As odt SINS IAI (480-4, ym, sas adits Ah
alah aval deen ko saahib jor nahee furmaavai. ||1||
The Lord, the Primal Being, the Master of the poor, does not ordain that they should be oppressed. ||1]|
at sour afs odt mre Ul TS Il (480-5, unr, sas adie Th kaajee boli-aa ban nahee aavai. ||1]| rahaa-o. O Qazi, it is not right to speak before Him. ||1||Pause]|
ow Ud fea and aon fanfs & Tet Il 480-5, wir, sas adie Th
rojaa Dharai nivaaj gujaarai kalmaa bhisat na ho-ee.
Keeping your fasts, reciting your prayers, and reading the Kalma, the Islamic creed, Shall not take you to paradise.
Aafe ae we dt sists A afe WS Set QI (480-6, »mr, sas ade Ah satar kaabaa ghat hee bheetar jay kar jaanai ko-ee. ||2]| The Temple of Mecca is hidden within your mind, if you only knew it. ||2]|
fora Het A four fos aot nia@fs ATS Il (480-6, ur, sas adits Th)
nivaaj so-ee jo ni-aa-o bichaarai kalmaa aklahi jaanai.
That should be your prayer, to administer justice. Let your Kalma be the knowledge of the unknowable Lord.
uragd HfA HAS fees sa 38 cto USTs ISI (4380-7, ur, sas adits Hf)
paachahu mus muslaa bichhaavai tab ta-o deen pachhaanai. ||3]|
Spread your prayer mat by conquering your five desires, and you shall recognize the true religion. ||3]|
WAH uss Sdn ate Aba ufo fs Het ate Stet Il (4380-7, nT, sas adits A
khasam pachhaan taras kar jee-a meh maar manee kar feekee. Recognize Your Lord and Master, and fear Him within your heart; conquer your egotism, and make it worthless.
nity Fofe ned a@ we 3a df fsAs Adtet Neil (480-28, ur, gas adie FH)
aap janaa-ay avar ka-o jaanai tab ho-ay bhisat sareekee. ||4] | As you see yourself, see others as well; only then will you become a partner in heaven. ||4||
Het Sa Su Ue Ste St Hf YIH UsTAT Il (480-9, wor, sas alts Ft)
maatee ayk bhaykh Dhar naanaa taa meh barahm pachhaanaa.
The clay is one, but it has taken many forms; I recognize the One Lord within them all.
ad ade fers efs afe tua fAG He HST NUNS! (480-9, wm, sas adie AH
kahai kabeeraa bhisat chhod kar dojak si-o man maanaa. ||5||4]|17]| Says Kabeer, I have abandoned paradise, and reconciled my mind to hell. ||5]|4]|17]|
MITAT Il (480-10)
aasaa. Aasaa:
Tae sate fex Fe o Ae |S AT A AHS Il (480-10, wr, sas ats Ht)
gagan nagar ik boond na barkhai naad kahaa jo samaanaa.
From the city of the Tenth Gate, the sky of the mind, not even a drop rains down. Where is the music of the sound current of the Naad, which was contained in it?
UTSHIH USHA HO us JA S fAa|Sr A (480-10, wm, sas adits Fh
paarbarahm parmaysur maaDho param hans lay siDhaanaa. ||1]||
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, the Master of wealth has taken away the Supreme Soul. ||1]|
We ses 3 aT Te edt a Afal Jos Il (480-11, vor, sas adie FH) baabaa boltay tay kahaa ga-ay dayhee kay sang rahtay. O Father, tell me: where has it gone? It used to dwell within the body,
Hofs ufo FH fess ads Aa IST ATS NU! TTS I (480-11, vr, sas adits FH) surat maahi jo nirtay kartay kathaa baartaa kahtay. ||1|| rahaa-o. and dance in the mind, teaching and speaking. ||1]|Pause| |
aneodd aa ates fats feg Hee altar it (480-12, vm, sas adits Fh bajaavanhaaro kahaa ga-i-o jin ih mandar keen"aa. Where has the player gone - he who made this temple his own?
And Age Hels odt Cun fife SH AS Star QM (480-12, ver, sas asta HH) saakhee sabad surat nahee upjai khinch tayj sabh leen"aa. ||2]| No story, word or understanding is produced; the Lord has drained off all the power.
21 |
Azo0 faas se Af 3a et a aH TT Il (480-13, var, sas ate Ah)
saravnan bikal bha-ay sang tayray indree kaa bal thaakaa.
The ears, your companions, have gone deaf, and the power of your organs is exhausted.
TIO Jd Ad Bafa ud TF HUT 3 fEaA FST ISI 480-13, ur, saz adie Th)
charan rahay kar dharak paray hai mukhahu na niksai baataa. ||3] |
Your feet have failed, your hands have gone limp, and no words issue forth from your mouth. |[3]|
Fa UT TS AS SAKT nM TUS FHS Il (480-14, wer, sas alte Fh)
thaakay panch doot sabh taskar aap aapnai bharamtay.
Having grown weary, the five enemies and all the thieves have wandered away according to their own will.
Wa Ho aed SI Tat Sq AS Ole FHS Sil (480-14, »mr, sas ats A)
thaakaa man kunchar ur thaakaa tayj soot Dhar ramtay. ||4]|
The elephant of the mind has grown weary, and the heart has grown weary as well; through its power, it used to pull the strings. ||4]|
frosa 3 GA de se fey set AS Se Il (480-15, »mv, sas ata Fh)
mirtak bha-ay dasai band chhootay mitar bhaa-ee sabh chhoray.
He is dead, and the bonds of the ten gates are opened; he has left all his friends and brothers.
ads adta A ufe fowre Hes Fue SFT NUNUNACTH (480-15, um, sas adie A)
kahat kabeeraa jo har Dhi-aavai jeevat banDhan toray. ||5||5]|18]| Says Kabeer, one who meditates on the Lord, breaks his bonds, even while yet alive. [5115] 118] |
MTA fEaSS 8 Il (480-16)
aasaa iktukay 4. Aasaa, 4 Ik-Tukas:
Hauat 3 Cuts adt sehr i (480-16, wm, sas ats Ht)
sarpanee tay oopar nahee balee-aa. No one is more powerful than the she-serpent Maya,
fate gon" fang HITE sehr NA (480-17, wr, sas ate Fh)
jin barahmaa bisan mahaaday-o chhalee-aa. ||1]||
who deceived even Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. ||1]|
Hg Hg Huot fears vfs ust il (480-17, »mr, sas adits Fh)
maar maar sarpanee nirmal jal paithee.
Having bitten and struck them down, she now sits in the immaculate waters. fate fasee sabres as yAte stot Al FICS Il (480-17, vr, sas aete FH)
jin taribhavan dasee-alay gur parsaad deethee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, I have seen her, who has bitten the three worlds. ||1||Pause]| Ruat Aquat fom xag set il (480-18, wr, sas onits Ft)
sarpanee sarpanee ki-aa kahhu bhaa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, why is she called a she-serpent?
fate Arg uetfonr fates Aust uret iQI (480-18, um, sas ota Ah
jin saach pachhaani-aa tin sarpanee khaa-ee. ||2|| One who realizes the True Lord, devours the she-serpent. ||2| |
AUuat 3 ote Ss Sdt MST Il (480-19, wert, sas aete FH) sarpanee tay aan chhoochh nahee avraa. No one else is more frivolous than this she-serpent.
Rust Ast ao ad ANT ISI (480-19, vr, sas adits Fh sarpanee jeetee kahaa karai jamraa. ||3]||
When the she-serpent is overcome, what can the Messengers of the King of Death do? ||3]|
UST Yt
fea Fuat 3 at ast Tet Il (481-1, ve, sas asta A) ih sarpanee taa kee keetee ho-ee. This she-serpent is created by Him.
ae nie fomr fen 3 det Weil (481-1, unr, gas adie Hf) bal abal ki-aa is tay ho-ee. ||4|| What power or weakness does she have by herself? ||4]|
fea aHSt 3 SAS Aste Il (481-1, ver, sas adie Hh)
in bastee taa basat sareeraa. If she abides with the mortal, then his soul abides in his body.
Od YAS Ad Sd ASST NUNENAEN (481-2, vm, sas ots Ah
gur parsaad sahj taray kabeeraa. ||5||6||19]| By Guru's Grace, Kabeer has easily crossed over. ||5||6||19]|
YTAT Il (481-2) aasaa. Aasaa:
as Anis aC fAfyfs Hoe Il (481-2, om, sas adte A) kahaa su-aan ka-o simrit sunaa-ay. Why bother to read the Simritees to a dog?
ad Aas ufos ots TS WE WAU (481-3, wT, sas adie Hh) kahaa saakat peh har gun gaa-ay. ||1|| Why bother to sing the Lord's Praises to the faithless cynic? ||1]|
TH TH TH OH fH Td I (481-3, vir, gas ate Fh) raam raam raam ramay ram rahee-ai. Remain absorbed in the Lord's Name, Raam, Raam, Raam.
Was fag sf odt aha 1 FHS il 481-3, ww, sas ats Ah) saakat si-o bhool nahee kahee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Do not bother to speak of it to the faithless cynic, even by mistake. ||1]|Pause] |
AGH TI TUT VIS Il (481-4, mira, sas aes rh) ka-oo-aa kahaa kapoor charaa-ay. Why offer camphor to a crow?
ad farts aS eg UbweS iQ 481-4, wer, sas aete Fh kah bisee-ar ka-o dooDh pee-aa-ay. ||2|| Why give the snake milk to drink? ||2| |
AsHats fife fase afa det i c4si-4, nmr, sas adie A)
satsangat mil bibayk buDh ho-ee.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, discriminating understanding is attained.
UTSH udfh BI ave ASt 3 481-5, wmv, gas adie Ff) paaras paras lohaa kanchan so-ee. ||3]|| That iron which touches the Philosopher's Stone becomes gold. ||3]||
Was AMG AS Ad ATE Il (481-5, wm, sas ate zh) saakat su-aan sabh karay karaa-i-aa. The dog, the faithless cynic, does everything as the Lord causes him to do.
a ofa fofimr A asH oorfeMr Neil (481-5, wr, sas ate Ff) jo Dhur likhi-aa so karam kamaa-i-aa. ||4|| He does the deeds pre-ordained from the very beginning. ||4||
nifys & & shy fat it si-6, »mr, sas adie Ff) amrit lai lai neem sinchaa-ee. If you take Ambrosial Nectar and irrigate the neem tree with it,
ads ade Gur tt AIA 3 AST NUNDNON (481-6, nT, gas ate FH)
kahat kabeer u-aa ko sahj na jaa-ee. ||5||7||20|| still, says Kabeer, its natural qualities are not changed. ||5||7||20||
YTAT Il (481-7) aasaa. Aasaa:
Sat AT ae AHS At wet i 4si-7, vr, gas adie Ff) lankaa saa kot samund see khaa-ee. A fortress like that of Sri Lanka, with the ocean as a moat around it
faa gee we wats o uTet IA (481-7, ner, sas asta Hh)
tin raavan ghar khabar na paa-ee. ||1]| - there is no news about that house of Raavan. ||1]|
fomr HraI@ fos fas o FIST Il (481-7, ver, sas adits eh ki-aa maaga-o kichh thir na rahaa-ee. What shall I ask for? Nothing is permanent.
us 65 BieS Aa Wet NA TIC Il 4si-3, om, sas ate A daykhat nain chali-o jag jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I see with my eyes that the world is passing away. ||1]|Pause| |
fea BY US AS BY est Il (481-8, om, sas ads Fh ik lakh poot savaa lakh naatee. Thousands of sons and thousands of grandsons
fag Teo we chor o ast IQ (481-8, wr, sas adte Ah
tin raavan ghar dee-aa na baatee. ||2|| - but in that house of Raavan, the lamps and wicks have gone out. ||2| |
Je AG A a Sus FAST Il (481-9, wr, sas alte Fh) chand sooraj jaa kay tapat raso-ee. The moon and the sun cooked his food.
SHS A a aud Get Sil (481-9, wr, sas adie rh) baisantar jaa kay kapray Dho-ee. ||3]| The fire washed his clothes. ||3]|
Tans TH oth aAret Il (481-9, wm, sas adte A) gurmat raamai naam basaa-ee. Under Guru's Instructions, one whose mind is filled with the Lord's Name,
mAfag Id o AST AT Il (481-10, wT, sas ats Fh) asthir rahai na katahoo" jaa-ee. ||4|| becomes permanent, and does not go anywhere. ||4]|
ads add AST F Bet Il (481-10, wr, sas aete Ah kahat kabeer sunhu ray lo-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, people:
oH OH fas nafs 5 Tet NUNCHQU (481-10, ym, sas adits Ah
raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee. ||5||8]|21]| without the Lord's Name, no one is liberated. ||5||8||21] |
YTAT Il (481-11) aasaa. Aasaa:
ufser us fuedt Het i G4si-11, wm, sas ots Fh pahilaa poot pichhairee maa-ee. First, the son was born, and then, his mother.
TT Sa VS at uret Al (48i-u1, wear, sas adit rh gur laago chaylay kee paa-ee. ||1|| The guru falls at the feet of the disciple. ||1||
Sg nds HoT 3H set Il (481-11, »mr, sas adits FH) ayk achambha-o sunhu tum" bhaa-ee. Listen to this wonderful thing, O Siblings of Destiny!
cus fy saes aret Ul TIC Ul (481-12, ver, sas asta zh) daykhat singh charaavat gaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I saw the lion herding the cows. ||1]|Pause||
He at Hest Sdeta feriret i (481-12, or, sas ate FH) jal kee machhulee tarvar bi-aa-ee. The fish of the water gives birth upon a tree.
sus asa & Tet fart 12H (481-13, om, sas aes Ah daykhat kutraa lai ga-ee bilaa-ee. ||2]| I saw a cat carrying away a dog. ||2||
38 3 ar Culs Ae Il (481-13, wmv, sas ate Fh) talai ray baisaa oopar soolaa. The branches are below, and the roots are above.
(SA & UPS Ba SH FH MSM (481-13, wer, sas sets FH) tis kai payd lagay fal foolaa. ||3]| The trunk of that tree bears fruits and flowers. ||3]]|
us ofe SA Vaso AST Il (481-14, or, sas adie rh) ghorai char bhais charaavan jaa-ee. Riding a horse, the buffalo takes him out to graze.
Wofe 8@ aifs wife niet gil (481-14, om, sas ate Ah baahar bail gon ghar aa-ee. ||4|| The bull is away, while his load has come home. ||4] |
IS He FT EA UE TS Il (481-14, wer, sas sets Ft) kahat kabeer jo is pad boojhai. Says Kabeer, one who understands this hymn,
TH SHS fSH Ag fas AS NUNC (4g1-14, wm, sas ais Ft) raam ramat tis sabh kichh soojhai. ||5||9||22]| and chants the Lord's Name, comes to understand everything. ||5||9||22||
weln sGue sar usue wir At adte AIG & fue ct Bsa O feazar 9 (4si-15)
baa-ees cha-upday tathaa panchpaday aasaa saree kabeer jee-o kay tipday 8 dutukay 7 iktukaa 1
22 Chau-Padas And Panch-Padas, Aasaa Of Kabeer Jee, 8 Tri-Padas, 7 Du-Tukas, 1 Ik- Tuka:
qe Afsas ure II (481-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fiz 3 fafo fitz ater mate as gofenr | 481-17, om, sas adits Ff) bind tay jin pind kee-aa agan kund rahaa-i-aa. The Lord created the body from sperm, and protected it in the fire pit.
A HA HST Bets ator safe weit Hear IA (481-17, vr, sas ate A)
das maas maataa udar raakhi-aa bahur laagee maa-i-aa. ||1]| For ten months He preserved you in your mother's womb, and then, after you were born, you became attached to Maya. ||1]|
yrot ard ag Sfs oa 336 HoH fer I (4si-is, »mr, sas adits Fh) paraanee kaahay ka-o lobh laagay ratan janam kho-i-aa. O mortal, why have you attached yourself to greed, and lost the jewel of life?
yaa Fath aeH sfh ster act sfeur wa FHS i (4si-18, yr, sas aes Ft) poorab janam karam bhoom beej naahee bo-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You did not plant the seeds of good actions in the earth of your past lives. ||1]|Pause] |
afsa 3 faafa sfeur dor A dfemr il (481-19, umn, sas adie Th) baarik tay biraDh bha-i-aa honaa so ho-i-aa. From an infant, you have grown old. That which was to happen, has happened.
Ww aH unfe 32 uad safe ard dfeur 211 (481-19, wm, sas adie Ah
jaa jam aa-ay jhot pakrai tabeh kaahay ro-i-aa. ||2]|
When the Messenger of Death comes and grabs you by your hair, why do you cry out then? ||2]|
UST Bt2
Hee at oA adfe AH foods ATAT I (482-1, om, sas adits 7) jeevnai kee aas karahi jam nihaarai saasaa. You hope for long life, while Death counts your breaths.
watadt AAS ast Sfs ahs UAT SIU QSIl (482-1, ym, sas ate FH)
baajeegaree sansaar kabeeraa chayt dhaal paasaa. ||3||1||23]| The world is a game, O Kabeer, so throw the dice consciously. ||3||1||23]|
YTAT Il (482-2) aaSaa. Aasaa:
3o dat He US au ats JE USE 3S Fast I (482-2, new, gas adie Ah
tan rainee man pun rap kar ha-o paacha-o tat baraatee.
I make my body the dying vat, and within it, I dye my mind. I make the five elements my marriage guests.
an ofe fh sets Sa nrsn fsa Sf TST NU (482-2, om, sas ate A raam raa-ay si-o bhaavar laiha-o aatam tih rang raatee. ||1]| I take my marriage vows with the Lord, my King; my soul is imbued with His Love.
[11
re re dt vast HaSV Il (482-3, wr, sas acts fh gaa-o gaa-o ree dulhanee mangalchaaraa. Sing, sing, O brides of the Lord, the marriage songs of the Lord.
Ag fys ore TH TH F3Tg UU TITS Il (482-3, wer, sas atta Ft) mayray garih aa-ay raajaa raam bhataaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord, my King, has come to my house as my Husband. ||1||Pause| |
ots aHe ufo set afe S YH famirs Sara il (482-4, nmr, sas oeita Hh)
naabh kamal meh baydee rach lay barahm gi-aan uchaaraa.
Within the lotus of my heart, I have made my bridal pavilion, and I have spoken the wisdom of God.
TH Te A ea UTES MM ASST THT |QMl (482-4, wer, sas sets Ft) raam raa-ay so doolahu paa-i-o as badbhaag hamaaraa. ||2| | I have obtained the Lord King as my Husband - such is my great good fortune. ||2]|
Af od nfs Ho aGsa ore afe SSR Barat I (482-5, umn, gas adie Hf)
sur nar mun jan ka-utak aa-ay kot taytees ujaanaa”.
The angles, holy men, silent sages, and the 330,000,000 deities have come in their heavenly chariots to see this spectacle.
afa adte xfs fimrfs vs J use Sa FASTA SUV (482-5, we, sas adits Th)
kahi kabeer mohi bi-aahi chalay hai purakh ayk bhagvaanaa. ||3]|2||24|| Says Kabeer, I have been taken in marriage by the One Supreme Being, the Lord God. [31121]24]|
YTAT Il (482-6) aaSaa. Aasaa:
AA at edt AAG at flmrdt AS & oH SIC FT Il (482-6, mT, sas ade Fh)
saas kee dukhee sasur kee pi-aaree jayth kay naam dara-o ray.
I am bothered by my mother-in-law, Maya, and loved by my father-in-law, the Lord. I fear even the name of my husband's elder brother, Death.
Ret HISt Soe Asst tea a feats ATS F NA (482-7, vr, sas adie Hh)
sakhee sahaylee nanad gahaylee dayvar kai bireh jara-o ray. ||1||
O my mates and companions, my husband's sister, misunderstanding has seized me, and I am burning with the pain of separation from my husband's younger brother, divine knowledge. ||1]|
Het Hfs aSdt H oH ferfe faa fafa sofs ga F Il (482-7, om, sas asta Ah mayree mat ba-uree mai raam bisaari-o kin biDh rahan raha-o ray. My mind has gone insane, since I forgot the Lord. How can I lead a virtuous lifestyle?
AW SHS 30 Sdt Une feg eu aT AG aT F NIU TIC Il (482-8, ni, gas adits th) sayjai ramat nain nahee paykha-o ih dukh kaa sa-o kaha-o ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. He rests in the bed of my mind, but I cannot see Him with my eyes. Unto whom should I tell my sufferings? ||1]|Pause] |
ay Areal ad Baet Hfeor AE HSS Il (482-9, om, sas aes Ah baap saavkaa karai laraa-ee maa-i-aa sad matvaaree. My step-father, egotism, fights with me, and my mother, desire, is always intoxicated.
aS set a na Afa dst 3a IC org fim N21 (482-9, nmr, sas adits Ah baday bhaa-ee kai jab sang hotee tab ha-o naah pi-aaree. ||2||
When I stayed with my elder brother, meditation, then I was loved by my Husband Lord. ||2||
ads ade us a Sas Sass HOH TetfeMr Il (482-10, nm, sas adits Ah)
kahat kabeer panch ko jhagraa jhagrat janam gavaa-i-aa.
Says Kabeer, the five passions argue with me, and in these arguments, my life is wasting away.
Bot Went Ag AE efor HTH SHS AY UTeMt SNBIQUIL (482-10, wm, sas ats Ht) jhoothee maa-i-aa sabh jag baaDhi-aa mai raam ramat sukh paa-i-aa. ||3]|3]|25]]| The false Maya has bound the whole world, but I have obtained peace, chanting the Name of the Lord. ||3]|3]|25]|
YTAT Il (482-11) aasaa. Aasaa:
oH ufs AS safe fos Ser afe ASS SHS Il (482-11, wer, sas ate Fh)
ham ghar soot taneh nit taanaa kanth janay-oo tumaaray.
In my house, I constantly weave the thread, while you wear the thread around your neck, O Brahmin.
3H 38 ae usg atest afig fee HS NA (482-11, vr, sas adits A)
tum" ta-o bayd parhahu gaa-itaree gobind ridai hamaaray. ||1||
You read the Vedas and sacred hymns, while I have enshrined the Lord of the Universe in my heart. ||1]|
Het fase fang oo aates fase safe afer i (482-12, nmr, sas ate Ff)
mayree jihbaa bisan nain naaraa-in hirdai baseh gobindaa.
Upon my tongue, within my eyes, and within my heart, abides the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.
WH Gud Aa YstA aed Sa for ao HAST AU TIS ll (482-13, ver, sas alta Fh) jam du-aar jab poochhas bavray tab ki-aa kahas mukandaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When you are interrogated at Death's door, O mad-man, what will you say then? ||1]|Pause] |
TH UT SH WMS TAS ASH AGH TASS Il (482-13, wv, sas ats Ht)
ham goroo tum gu-aar gusaa-ee janam janam rakhvaaray.
I am a cow, and You are the herdsman, the Sustainer of the World. You are my Saving Grace, lifetime after lifetime.
aad outs Cats vateg AA MAH THE II (482-14, »mr, sas atts Ft) kabahoo™ na paar utaar charaa-ihu kaisay khasam hamaaray. ||2]| You have never taken me across to graze there - what sort of a herdsman are You?
21 |
3 OHO H OAa He gsg He fama I (482-14, wm, sas ate Fh) too” baam"an mai kaaseek julhaa boojhhu mor gi-aanaa. You are a Brahmin, and I am a weaver of Benares; can You understand my wisdom?
3H 38 We gufs TH Uf AG He fora NSISIQEN (482-15, wr, sas adits Fh tum" ta-o jaachay bhoopat raajay har sa-o mor Dhi-aanaa. ||3||4]|26]| You beg from emperors and kings, while I meditate on the Lord. ||3]|4]|26]|
MTAT Il (482-15)
aasaa. Aasaa:
afa aieg MAT AUS AAT Hee AUS AHS Il (482-16, nr, sas adits Ah jag jeevan aisaa supnay jaisaa jeevan supan samaana’. The life of the world is only a dream; life is just a dream.
Ag afa gH afe cat efs usH fears Il (482-16, nm, sas adit Ah
saach kar ham gaath deenee chhod param niDhaana”. ||1|| Believing it to be true, I grasped at it, and abandoned the supreme treasure. ||1] |
oer afemr Ho fas alte il (482-17, »mr, sas acta Ft) baabaa maa-i-aa moh hit keen”. O Father, I have enshrined love and affection for Maya,
fate famre a3q fate Ste Ail FITS il (482-17, wmv, sas adie Ah) jin gi-aan ratan hir leen". ||1|| rahaa-o. which has taken the jewel of spiritual wisdom away from me. ||1||Pause] |
30 Ufa usa Bas un 3 Se wef Il (482-17, nr, gas adie Ah
nain daykh patang urjhai pas na daykhai aag.
The moth sees with its eyes, but it still becomes entangled; the insect does not see the fire.
as SHO Hag 8s afea AHS afar MQH (482-18, ym, sas adits Ah kaal faas na mugaDh chaytai kanik kaamin laag. ||2]| Attached to gold and woman, the fool does not think of the noose of Death. ||2||
afa faes faore usafs sa5 Sta AE Il (482-18, nm, sas adits Ah kar bichaar bikaar parhar taran taaran so-ay. Reflect upon this, and abandon sin; the Lord is a boat to carry you across.
afs ade Aarlee mA eShot ont Af NBNUIQON (482-19, um, sas adte FH)
kahi kabeer jagjeevan aisaa dutee-a naahee ko-ay. ||3]|5||27]|| Says Kabeer, such is the Lord, the Life of the World; there is no one equal to Him. H3115]127]|
MITAT Il (482-19)
aasaa. Aasaa:
UST sts
mG H gu ate ass we sfs Ty Tet Il (483-1, nm, sas aes Fh)
ja-o mai roop kee-ay bahutayray ab fun roop na ho-ee. In the past, I have taken many forms, but I shall not take form again.
Tar 33 AA AS Tat TH OH af Tet AU (483-1, wr, sas adits Fh)
taagaa tant saaj sabh thaakaa raam naam bas ho-ee. ||1] |
The strings and wires of the musical instrument are worn out, and I am in the power of the Lord's Name. |]1||
ma Hf age B Mie Il (483-2, vem, sas asta Ah ab mohi naachno na aavai. Now, I no longer dance to the tune.
Hat He Heder B aATS NU TIS I (493-2, vr, gas adte FH) mayraa man mandaree-aa na bajaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. My mind no longer beats the drum. ||1]]Pause| |
ay ty Hfeor & aat fyAa aaa set i (483-2, wer, sas ats Hh)
kaam kroDh maa-i-aa lai jaaree tarisnaa gaagar footee.
I have burnt away sexual desire, anger and attachment to Maya, and the pitcher of my desires has burst.
OH seo stent I uss Teor SIH AG set Il (483-3, wer, sas alta Fh) kaam cholnaa bha-i-aa hai puraanaa ga-i-aa bharam sabh chhootee. ||2|| The gown of sensuous pleasures is worn out, and all my doubts have been dispelled.
21 |
Ava 33 Sa ats Wont ga are faarer il (483-3, wer, gars alte Ft) sarab bhoot aykai kar jaani-aa chookay baad bibaadaa. I look upon all beings alike, and my conflict and strife are ended.
af oate H yst ure se TH UTATET NSUENITI (483-4, wT, sas ate Fh)
kahi kabeer mai pooraa paa-i-aa bha-ay raam parsaadaa. ||3||6||28]| Says Kabeer, when the Lord showed His Favor, I obtained Him, the Perfect One. [13116] [28] |
YTAT Il (483-5) aasaa. Aasaa:
on Ud HOS MOT AyTefs Aha Hurd | (483-5, newt, sas adie rh rojaa Dharai manaavai alhu su-aadat jee-a sanghaarai. You keep your fasts to please Allah, while you murder other beings for pleasure.
nur fy med adt SY ad A SY HTS AU (483-5, new, sas ete Th)
aapaa daykh avar nahee daykhai kaahay ka-o jhakh maarai. ||1]||
You look after your own interests, and so not see the interests of others. What good is your word? ||1]|
ant Afsg ea sdt ufo sa Afe faets 5 Se Il (493-6, nmr, sas adits Ah kaajee saahib ayk tohee meh tayraa soch bichaar na daykhai.
O Qazi, the One Lord is within you, but you do not behold Him by thought or contemplation.
uafs 3 ats te & BBs STS HON MBA NU TIC Il (483-6, nH, sas adits Ah
khabar na karahi deen kay ba-uray taa tay janam alaykhai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You do not care for others, you are a religious fanatic, and your life is of no account at all. ||1]]Pause| |
AY ASe sus nie ate use odt det Il (493-7, vr, gas adie fh) saach katayb bakhaanai alhu naar purakh nahee ko-ee. Your holy scriptures say that Allah is True, and that he is neither male nor female.
Ud To ad ae ad ne few nfs wate o Tet QI (433-7, wr, gas adie Ah
padhay gunay naahee kachh ba-uray ja-o dil meh khabar na ho-ee. ||2]|
But you gain nothing by reading and studying, O mad-man, if you do not gain the understanding in your heart. ||2]|
WEI Te Hae we stats fase So fees i (483-8, new, sas adie th alhu gaib sagal ghat bheetar hirdai layho bichaaree. Allah is hidden in every heart; reflect upon this in your mind.
foe saa od nfs Sa ad Sale Yost ISUONQEN (483-8, wer, sas alte Fh) hindoo turak duhoo-a% meh aykai kahai kabeer pukaaree. ||3]|7||29||
The One Lord is within both Hindu and Muslim; Kabeer proclaims this out loud. 31171129]
mT il fSuet i faRsae I (483-9)
aasaa. tipdaa. iktukaa. Aasaa, Ti-Pada, Ik-Tuka:
ate fiarg fies & sre I (483-9, umn, sas ante Ft) kee-o singaar milan kay taa-ee. I have decorated myself to meet my Husband Lord.
ofa 3 fee AaHlea AAST WAU (483-10, wT, sas ats Ah
har na milay jagjeevan gusaa-ee. ||1||
But the Lord, the Life of the Word, the Sustainer of the Universe, has not come to meet me. ||1||
dfs ad fus 3@ of at sade I (483-10, »mr, sas ate Ah har mayro pir ha-o har kee bahuree-aa. The Lord is my Husband, and I am the Lord's bride.
TH aS H 35a BIST AU TIS I (483-10, vr, gas adie FH) raam baday mai tanak lahuree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord is so great, and I am infinitesimally small. ||1||Pause||
ue fug Sa Af SAS Il (483-11, wT, sas adie Th) Dhan pir aykai sang basayraa. The bride and the Groom dwell together.
An Sa U feos IT NN (483-11, vr, gas ate Fh) sayj ayk pai milan duhayraa. ||2]| They lie upon the one bed, but their union is difficult. ||2||
Ufs Ades A ube SS i (483-11, wma, sas adte Hh) Dhan suhaagan jo pee-a bhaavai. Blessed is the soul-bride, who is pleasing to her Husband Lord.
ats ade fefs aot & nie NSICHBON (483-12, um, sas adie A)
kahi kabeer fir janam na aavai. ||3]|8]|30]| Says Kabeer, she shall not have to be reincarnated again. ||3]|8]|30||
mit At oats AG & TUE (483-13) aasaa saree kabeer jee-o kay dupday Aasaa Of Kabeer Jee, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars urrfe il (483-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dtd dar afa ues ne Aan sfoor ANTE I (483-14, ne, sas adie Th
heerai heeraa bayDh pavan man sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ee.
When the Diamond of the Lord pierces the diamond of my mind, the fickle mind waving in the wind is easily absorbed into Him.
Ra afs fete dt act afsas seot Ho uret Al (483-14, ur, gas adie Hf)
Sagal jot in heerai bayDhee satgur bachnee mai paa-ee. ||1] |
This Diamond fills all with Divine Light; through the True Guru's Teachings, I have found Him. ||1]|
ofa at Aa mate ast Il (483-15, nem, sas ade af)
har kee kathaa anaahad baanee. The sermon of the Lord is the unstruck, endless song.
JA of die af uerst ual TIS ll (493-15, wm, sas adits Ff) hans hu-ay heeraa lay-ay pachhaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Becoming a swan, one recognizes the Diamond of the Lord. ||1]||Pause||
afs ade cto wm ef war Ho Jat ANTS II (483-15, nm, sas asta ah)
kahi kabeer heeraa as daykhi-o jag mah rahaa samaa-ee. Says Kabeer, I have seen such a Diamond, permeating and pervading the world.
gust die yae sfeS Aa ae aH chor feast WINWUSUI (483-16, ver, sas adie FH) guptaa heeraa pargat bha-i-o jab gur gam dee-aa dikhaa-ee. ||2||1||31]| The hidden diamond became visible, when the Guru revealed it to me. ||2||1]|31]|
YTAT Il (483-17) aasaa. Aasaa:
ufsst agfu arts aeust ATS Ueto get i (483-17, wr, sas aes Ft)
pahilee karoop kujaat kulakhnee saahurai pay-ee-ai buree.
My first wife, ignorance, was ugly, of low social status and bad character; she was evil in my home, and in her parents' home.
wa at Agfu AAS HeUSt HOA Sets ast A (483-17, wm, sas ats Fh)
ab kee saroop sujaan sulakhnee sehjay udar Dharee. ||1]|| My present bride, divine understanding, is beautiful, wise and well-behaved; I have taken her to my heart. ||1||
Sot Ast Het Het ufsst sat i (483-18, wr, sas adits Ft) bhalee saree mu-ee mayree pahilee baree. It has turned out so well, that my first wife has died.
Ad AG Mee Ast ora at Test NAN TIC Il (483-18, wT, sas ate A jug jug jeeva-o mayree ab kee Dharee. ||1|| rahaa-o. May she, whom I have now married, live throughout the ages. ||1]||Pause| |
aT ads Aa SIs wrest ast at ATG |feS Il (483-19, wm, sas asta et) kaho kabeer jab lahuree aa-ee badee kaa suhaag tari-o. Says Kabeer, when the younger bride came, the elder one lost her husband.
SIs Afar set ore HS Hat nis afsS NIQNIQU32i1 (483-19, wmv, gas adte FH)
lahuree sang bha-ee ab mayrai jaythee a-or Dhari-o. ||2||2||32|| The younger bride is with me now, and the elder one has taken another husband. [2112] |32]|
UST Sty
YTAT Il (484-1) aasSaa. Aasaa:
Het sodhor ot cob BE i (484-1, omar, sas adie wh mayree bahuree-aa ko Dhanee-aa naa-o. My daughter-in-law was first called Dhannia, the woman of wealth,
Bate aH ASM aS il (484-1, ver, sas ate ah lay raakhi-o raam janee-aa naa-o. ||1]| but now she is called Raam-jannia, the servant of the Lord. ||1]|
feq Hsia Ha we Gost | (484-1, vm, gas adits FH) in" mundee-an mayraa ghar DhunDhraavaa. These shaven-headed saints have ruined my house.
facets TH THBuT Se IU TIS Il (484-2, wer, gas atts Fh)
bitvahi raam ram-oo-aa laavaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. They have caused my son to start chanting the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause] |
AIS adts Hod Hat Het Il (484-2, nmr, sas adits Ah kahat kabeer sunhu mayree maa-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O mother:
feq Hse Het ATS Teet INSU (484-3, we, sas ate Fh) in" mundee-an mayree jaat gavaa-ee. ||2||3||33]| these shaven-headed saints have done away with my low social status. ||2||3]|33]]|
YTAT Il (484-3) aasaa. Aasaa:
Tg 3g st agdior ulue fats are il (484-3, wm, sas atts Ft) rahu rahu ree bahuree-aa ghoonghat jin kaadhai. Stay, stay, O daughter-in-law - do not cover your face with a veil.
MS at aa Bat F mrs UU! TIS ll (484-4, new, sas acta wh ant kee baar lahaigee na aadhai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. In the end, this shall not bring you even half a shell. ||1]|Pause||
ulus orfe et Sat mira i (484-4, wer, sas aes Ft) ghoonghat kaadh ga-ee tayree aagai. The one before you used to veil her face;
8a at afe sto fafS wat Al (484-4, wer, sas adie Th) un kee gail tohi jin laagai. ||1]| do not follow in her footsteps. ||1]|
ulus are oft fed asret Il (484-5, om, gars ata Fh) ghoonghat kaadhay kee ihai badaa-ee. The only merit in veiling your face is
fea GA ug ag 3S mret MQM (484-5, we, sas aete Fh) din das paa‘ch bahoo bhalay aa-ee. ||2|| that for a few days, people will say, "What a noble bride has come". ||2||
ulue So 38 ule ATT Il (484-5, nr, sas ats At) ghoonghat tayro ta-o par saachai. Your veil shall be true only if
fs ae ae ges wig HS ISI (484-6, wer, sas ats Ht) har gun gaa-ay koodeh ar naachai. ||3]|| you skip, dance and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
TIS THT AT Ta AS Il (484-6, we, gars aeite Ft) kahat kabeer bahoo tab jeetai. Says Kabeer, the soul-bride shall win,
dfs To Wes Fon fasts NSNAISIl (484-6, wm, sas ate Fh har gun gaavat janam biteetai. ||4]|1]|34|| only if she passes her life singing the Lord's Praises. ||4]|1]|34]|
YTAT Il (484-7) aasaa. Aasaa:
AIS FO B ATES Sat Il (484-7, nmr, sas adie FH) karvat bhalaa na karvat tayree. I would rather be cut apart by a saw, than have You turn Your back on me.
Bd Ws AS faost Hat Wl (484-7, wr, sas adits Ah laag galay sun bintee mayree. ||1|| Hug me close, and listen to my prayer. ||1||
Je sat Hy Mfe fimirs Il (484-7, ur, sas adits Ah ha-o vaaree mukh fayr pi-aaray. I am a Sacrifice to You - please, turn Your face to me, O Beloved Lord.
adds FH aC ad AB ws NU! TIC I (494-8, vier, sas adits FH) karvat day mo ka-o kaahay ka-o maaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Why have You turned Your back to me? Why have You killed me? ||1]||Pause| |
Ag 36 diets nig B HIE Il (484-8, om, sas adte HH) ja-o tan cheereh ang na mora-o. Even if You cut my body apart, I shall not pull my limbs away from You.
fiz ud 38 ulfS 5 SaC NI (484-9, nmr, sas adits Fh pind parai ta-o pareet na tora-o. ||2|| Even if my body falls, I shall not break my bonds of love with You. ||2]| |
dH 3H ote sf odt aet Il (484-9, oer, sas adits Ah ham tum beech bha-i-o nahee ko-ee. Between You and I, there is no other.
sufs A as ofa OH Het ISI (484-9, om, sas adits Ah tumeh so kant naar ham so-ee. |[3]| You are the Husband Lord, and I am the soul-bride. ||3]|
AIS Ads HoT J Bet Il (484-10, wir, sas aaa rh) kahat kabeer sunhu ray lo-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O people:
We Suet usstfs & det WSNIQNBUll (484-10, wer, gas adie Ff)
ab tumree parteet na ho-ee. ||4]|2]|35]| now, I place no reliance in you. ||4||2||35]|
YTAT Il (484-10) aasaa. Aasaa:
Tat FT AT HSH B AST Il (484-10, wer, sas arate Fh) koree ko kaahoo maram na jaanaa”. No one knows the secret of God, the Cosmic Weaver.
Ag Aa “tts soteS svat A TIS Il (484-11, ver, sas ate Ah sabh jag aan tanaa-i-o taanaa™. ||1]| rahaa-o. He has stretched out the fabric of the whole world. ||1]|Pause] |
Aa 3H As & Se UTS Il (484-11, vr, sas adits Hh jab tum sun lay bayd puraanaa”™. When you listen to the Vedas and the Puraanas,
3a JH fesog uAfss Sot NA (484-11, vir, sas asta Fh) tab ham itnak pasri-o taanaa”. ||1|| you shall know that the whole world is only a small piece of His woven fabric. ||1]|
ues niovH ot Ada FSH Il (484-12, ner, sas asta Ah
Dharan akaas kee kargah banaa-ee. He has made the earth and sky His loom.
Je Aad ofS AG eret MN (484-12, »mr, sas ata A) chand sooraj du-ay saath chalaa-ee. ||2]| Upon it, He moves the two bobbins of the sun and the moon. ||2||
urst rife as fea atot so SiSt He HAT II (484-13, nmr, gas ate Fh)
paa-ee jor baat ik keenee tah taa“tee man maanaa’.
Placing my feet together, I have accomplished one thing - my mind is pleased with that Weaver.
Hod we nus dat we dt TH usta ISI (484-13, vm, sas ate FH) jolaahay ghar apnaa cheen"aa™ ghat hee raam pachhaanaa”. ||3]| I have come to understand my own home, and recognize the Lord within my heart.
[I3]|
ATs ads asad Sat ll (484-14, new, sas adits rh kahat kabeer kaargah toree. Says Kabeer, when my body workshop breaks,
HS AS fhe sat Siansel (484-14, wer, gars alte Ft) sootai soot milaa-ay koree. ||4]|3||36|| the Weaver shall blend my thread with His thread. ||4||3]|36]|
YTAT Il (484-14) aaSaa. Aasaa:
nists He A Stee are fSH Sad 5 Wat Il (484-14, om, sas adie Ah
antar mail jay tirath naavai tis baikunth na jaanaa”.
With filth within the heart, even if one bathes at sacred places of pilgrimage, still, he shall not go to heaven.
BA USES SE F TS SST TH MGS WAU (484-15, wmv, sas aelts Ff) lok pateenay kachhoo na hovai naahee raam ayaanaa. ||1]| Nothing is gained by trying to please others - the Lord cannot be fooled. ||1]|
UAT TH Sa St SST il (494-15, wer, sas aes Fh) poojahu raam ayk hee dayvaa. Worship the One Divine Lord.
Frat SSE TST At AS UA! TIS Il (484-15, wmv, sas ate Ah saachaa naavan gur kee sayvaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The true cleansing bath is service to the Guru. ||1||Pause]|
HS a Hale A als de fos fas Asa sets Il (484-16, wm, sas adte A)
jal kai majan jay gat hovai nit nit may‘duk naaveh.
If salvation can be obtained by bathing in water, then what about the frog, which is always bathing in water?
AA Asa 3A Gfe og fefs fefs Fat wrefe QI (484-16, nr, sas adits Th) jaisay may‘duk taisay o-ay nar fir fir jonee aavahi. ||2]| As is the frog, so is that mortal; he is reincarnated, over and over again. ||2| |
Hod Ged Hd Tarath oda 3 Sifonr Aret Il (484-17, or, sas adie Ah manhu kathor marai baanaaras narak na baa‘chi-aa jaa-ee. If the hard-hearted sinner dies in Benaares, he cannot escape hell.
dfs & HS Hd TSS 3 Hae AS Soe NSM (484-18, wir, sas adie th
har kaa sant marai haarhambai ta saglee sain taraa-ee. ||3]|
And even if the Lord's Saint dies in the cursed land of Haramba, still, he saves all his family. ||3]|
feon o dfs ae odt AAG 3a SA fadars | (484-18, wr, sas adit Hh) dinas na rain bayd nahee saastar tahaa basai nirankaaraa.
Where there is neither day nor night, and neither Vedas nor Shaastras, there, the Formless Lord abides.
afta ate ad fsrfo fomreg aefonr HATS ISIS (484-19, or, sas adits Ah
kahi kabeer nar tiseh Dhi-aavahu baavri-aa sansaaraa. ||4||4]|37]| Says Kabeer, meditate on Him, O mad-men of the world. ||4||4]|37]|
uar stu qe Afsars yrfe il (485-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
miTAT arat At SHES At at (495-1 aasaa banee saree naamday-o jee kee Aasaa, The Word Of The Reverend Naam Dayv Jee:
Ba nda fanrua ysa AS SUS 33 At Il (485-2, wer, sas see Fh)
ayk anayk bi-aapak poorak jat daykh-a-u tat so-ee.
In the one and in the many, He is pervading and permeating; wherever I look, there He is.
fer fag ates faxfas faser gS Set AI (495-2, wer, sas one Ft) maa-i-aa chitar bachitar bimohit birlaa boojhai ko-ee. ||1|| The marvellous image of Maya is so fascinating; how few understand this. ||1]|
Ag dfae d Ag dfse J afie fag adt Aet I (485-3, or, sas ones A) sabh gobind hai sabh gobind hai gobind bin nahee ko-ee. God is everything, God is everything. Without God, there is nothing at all.
fo)
Hg &q Hfe AS AGA AA Gf UfS ys Aet NU TIS Il (485-3, wer, sas ones FH)
soot ayk man sat saha’s jaisay ot pot parabh so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As one thread holds hundreds and thousands of beads, He is woven into His creation. ||1]|Pause| |
HS 3da nig So FeaeT nw 3S fF B Tet Il (485-4, oe, sas one FH) jal tarang ar fayn budbudaa jal tay bhinn na ho-ee. The waves of the water, the foam and bubbles, are not distinct from the water.
feg unig ursqan at ster fasas nite 3 det NQH (485-4, omer, sas ane fh
ih parpanch paarbarahm kee leelaa bichrat aan na ho-ee. ||2||
This manifested world is the playful game of the Supreme Lord God; reflecting upon it, we find that it is not different from Him. ||2]|
fiufemr sau nig Hus Hoge Afs ueTsE AEM I (485-5, nT, gas one Th) mithi-aa bharam ar supan manorath sat padaarath jaani-aa. False doubts and dream objects - man believes them to be true.
Hfas Hon aad Guent AIS Tt Ho H fom ISI (485-5, omer, sas ane Fh)
sukarit mansaa gur updaysee jaagat hee man maani-aa. ||3]|
The Guru has instructed me to try to do good deeds, and my awakened mind has accepted this. ||3]|
ads SHES safe at guar Sug fee shed i (485-6, vr, sas one th) kahat naamday-o har kee rachnaa daykhhu ridai beechaaree. Says Naam Dayv, see the Creation of the Lord, and reflect upon it in your heart.
we we nists As fodafs aem Sa HIS WIA (485-6, wT, sas ones Ah
ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar kayval ayk muraaree. ||4]|1]| In each and every heart, and deep within the very nucleus of all, is the One Lord. [4] 111 |
YTAT Il (485-7) aasaa. Aasaa:
WTS AT BITES Cua sas as fEHaG AE Il (485-7, wer, sas one A) aaneelay kumbh bharaa-eelay oodak thaakur ka-o isnaan kara-o. Bringing the pitcher, I fill it with water, to bathe the Lord.
afeursin wey Ft AS fs IS dos sar ate age NU (485-8, or, sas anes Th) ba-i-aalees lakh jee jal meh hotay beethal bhailaa kaa-ay kara-o. ||1]|
But 4.2 million species of beings are in the water - how can I use it for the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny? ||1]|
AZ WE sa How Sa Il (485-8, wT, sas SHS Ft) jatar jaa-o tat beethal bhailaa. Wherever I go, the Lord is there.
HI MSE AI AS AH NU TI ll (485-9, wer, sas ones FM) mahaa anand karay sad kaylaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. He continually plays in supreme bliss. ||1]|Pause| |
WHS SH UGS HS sas at IG uA ATE Il (485-9, ww, sas snes A) aaneelay fool paro-eelay maalaa thaakur kee ha-o pooj kara-o. I bring flowers to weave a garland, in worshipful adoration of the Lord.
ufse aH wet J sedT How Sor ate aT 12M (485-10, wir, gas anes Ah pahilay baas la-ee hai bhavrah beethal bhailaa kaa-ay kara-o. ||2| |
But the bumble bee has already sucked out the fragrance - how can I use it for the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny? ||2] |
was ey dots utd sas a8 Se AI I (485-10, nmr, sas ane Fh aaneelay dooDh reeDhaa-eelay kheera™ thaakur ka-o naivayd kara-o. I carry milk and cook it to make pudding, with which to feed the Lord.
ufos oy frets aed dos sa are AEG SI (485-11, wr, sas anes Ft)
pahilay dooDh bitaari-o bachhrai beethal bhailaa kaa-ay kara-o. ||3]|
But the calf has already tasted the milk - how can I use it for the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny? ||3]|
as wos Ss alos alow fas AAG st Il (485-1, wr, sas ones Ht) eebhai beethal oobhai beethal beethal bin sansaar nahee. The Lord is here, the Lord is there; without the Lord, there is no world at all.
we waste ont yee ule SoS F Aga Hat SIN (485-12, wm, sas Nee Ft)
thaan thanantar naamaa paranvai poor rahi-o too” sarab mahee. ||4]|2]|
Prays Naam Dayv, O Lord, You are totally permeating and pervading all places and interspaces. ||4||2||
YTAT Il (485-12) aasaa. Aasaa:
Ho Ad aa froa Ast at Il (485-13, om, sas oNee Fh) man mayro gaj jihbaa mayree kaatee. My mind is the yardstick, and my tongue is the scissors.
Hfy ufu ae AN at STAT NA (485-13, ner, gas aes Fh
map map kaata-o jam kee faasee. ||1]|| I measure it out and cut off the noose of death. ||1]|
aT AIS WSt AT AIS UST Il (485-13, ora, sas oee FH) kahaa kara-o jaatee kah kara-o paatee. What do I have to do with social status? What do I have to with ancestry?
oH & oH AUG feo TSt NU TIC Il (495-14, oT, sas one FH) raam ko naam japa-o din raatee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I meditate on the Name of the Lord, day and night. ||1||Pause| |
sale sa Atefe ASE i (485-14, umn, sas ones Fh raa‘gan raa‘ga-o seevan seeva-o. I dye myself in the color of the Lord, and sew what has to be sewn.
oH OH fag wd & ASS IQ (485-14, om, sas one Fh) raam naam bin gharee-a na jeeva-o. ||2]| Without the Lord's Name, I cannot live, even for a moment. ||2]|
sats ase ole A TS WE Il (485-15, nm, sas see bhagat kara-o har kay gun gaava-o. I perform devotional worship, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
MTS Udd MUST YAH fomrS@ 131 (485-15, vm, sas oHee AH aath pahar apnaa khasam Dhi-aava-o. ||3]|| Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on my Lord and Master. ||3||
Afes at et IU a Ura Il (485-16, wr, sas SHE Fh) su-inay kee soo-ee rupay kaa Dhaagaa. My needle is gold, and my thread is silver.
on a fos dfs AG Ba ISUNSI (485-16, nT, sas ses FH) naamay kaa chit har sa-o laagaa. ||4||3]| Naam Dayv's mind is attached to the Lord. ||4]|3]|
YTAT Il (485-16) aasaa. Aasaa:
Ay oy es fay oct SS Il 485-16, vor, sas ane Th saap kunch chhodai bikh nahee chhaadai. The snake sheds its skin, but does not lose its venom.
Bea nfs AA sa fore HS UI (485-17, vm, sas one Ah udak maahi jaisay bag Dhi-aan maadai. ||1|| The heron appears to be meditating, but it is concentrating on the water. ||1||
ard AG ate fame Avar Il (485-17, oA, sas oe Fh) kaahay ka-o keejai Dhi-aan japannaa. Why do you practice meditation and chanting,
Aa 3 AD ot Ho MUST IA TIS Il (485-17, vm, sas ane Fh jab tay suDh naahee man apnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. when your mind is not pure? ||1||Pause] |
fiura 3HO a og We Il (485-18, MITAT, Sas SHES Fh) singhach bhojan jo nar jaanai. That man who feeds like a lion,
MA Tt SaTeS TAS | (485-18, wear, sas aes Ah aisay hee thagday-o bakhaanai. ||2| | is called the god of thieves. ||2]|
oH a AMMHt ots B Sas Il (485-18, wer, sas anee Hh) naamay kay su-aamee laahi lay jhagraa. Naam Dayv's Lord and Master has settled my inner conflicts.
UST StE
oH ATES UG F Sas NSISI (486-1, wT, sas sNee Fh)
raam rasaa-in pee-o ray dagraa. ||3||4|| Drink in the sublime elixir of the Lord, O deceitful one. ||3]|4]|
YTAT Il (486-1) aasaa. Aasaa:
UTSqTH fa SqAt wT 3 O STEHT Il (486-1, vr, sas ones Fh) paarbarahm je cheen"see aasaa tay na bhaavsee. One who recognizes the Supreme Lord God, dislikes other desires.
TH SasT VSS nifss HS IAT NA (486-2, wer, sas oe Ah
raamaa bhagtah chaytee-alay achint man raakhsee. ||1||
He focuses his consciousness on the Lord's devotional worship, and keeps his mind free of anxiety. ||1]|
aA Ho sdfuar J AAT Ava fat A Far Il (486-2, ner, sas anes Ah
kaisay man tarhigaa ray sansaar saagar bikhai ko banaa.
O my mind, how will you cross over the world-ocean, if you are filled with the water of corruption?
Bot Hfenr eft ot Fer FT HST NU TIS I (486-3, wer, gars oe Ft) jhoothee maa-i-aa daykh kai bhoolaa ray manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon the falseness of Maya, you have gone astray, O my mind. ||1]|Pause] |
at a ufs HoH Por ad Cuen Sor Il (486-3, vier, gas one Th)
chheepay kay ghar janam dailaa gur updays bhailaa.
You have given me birth in the house of a calico-printer, but I have found the Teachings of the Guru.
Had & usAte ant afe Sear NQNUI (486-4, we, sas ane Ah
santeh kai parsaad naamaa har bhaytulaa. ||2||5|| By the Grace of the Saint, Naam Dayv has met the Lord. ||2]||5]|
MAT Bet Al Seer AIG at (486-5) aasaa banee saree ravidaas jee-o kee Aasaa, The Word Of The Reverend Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (486-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fear His fear usa aes Sa su ASA II (486-6, »mr, sas fee Fh)
marig meen bharing patang kunchar ayk dokh binaas.
The deer, the fish, the bumble bee, the moth and the elephant are destroyed, each for a single defect.
us ty maa A ufs St at ASA MTA NA (486-6, wT, sas sheen Ft) panch dokh asaaDh jaa meh taa kee kaytak aas. ||1]| So the one who is filled with the five incurable vices - what hope is there for him?
H11|
HG mifsfenr fos ate Il (486-7, ver, sas afer Ft) maaDho abidi-aa hit keen.
O Lord, he is in love with ignorance.
faaa ety Hate Ul JIS ll (486-7, or, sas afeeA FH)
bibayk deep maleen. ||1|| rahaa-o. His lamp of clear wisdom has grown dim. ||1||Pause] |
fgare ifs ores Hse Us UY MAT Il (486-7, ver, sas afer Ft)
tarigad jon achayt sambhav punn paap asoch.
The creeping creatures live thoughtless lives, and cannot discriminate between good and evil.
Hou ness vos fact Aafs Ue lI (436-8, or, sas ofeen Ff)
maanukhaa avtaar dulabh tihee sangat poch. ||2]|
It is so difficult to obtain this human incarnation, and yet, they keep company with the low. |[2]|
Aba #3 AT AO wa AGH a af ATE I (486-8, om, sas ofeeA Ff)
jee-a jant jahaa jahaa lag karam kay bas jaa-ay.
Wherever the beings and creatures are, they are born according to the karma of their past actions.
aS SH MET Sa aE 3 VS Cte isi (486-9, wer, gas sfeera th) kaal faas abaDh laagay kachh na chalai upaa-ay. ||3]| The noose of death is unforgiving, and it shall catch them; it cannot be warded off.
[I3I|
Sean WA COA 3H FH SUS By Ad fami Il (486-9, vm, saz afeen FH) ravidaas daas udaas taj bharam tapan tap gur gi-aan.
O servant Ravi Daas, dispel your sorrow and doubt, and know that Guru-given spiritual wisdom is the penance of penances.
SIS HS F JIS USHSE Add Ses IIA (486-10, wT, sas sheeA Ah
bhagat jan bhai haran parmaanand karahu nidaan. ||4||1|| O Lord, Destroyer of the fears of Your humble devotees, make me supremely blissful in the end. ||4]|1]|
MITAT Il (486-10)
aaSaa. Aasaa:
HZ 33t 39 Aas yrs Il (486-10, wr, sas afeera Ft) sant tujhee tan sangat paraan. Your Saints are Your body, and their company is Your breath of life.
Afsag famre WS AS SST SS NA (486-11, vm, sas afeeA Hh
satgur gi-aan jaanai sant dayvaa dayv. ||1]| By the True Guru-given spiritual wisdom, I know the Saints as the gods of gods. ||1]|
As dt Aafs As ae oA I AS UN WS SA Set SS NU TTC I 486-11, vor, sas oer ci)
sant chee sangat sant kathaa ras. sant paraym maajhai deejai dayvaa dayv. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O Lord, God of gods, grant me the Society of the Saints, the sublime essence of the Saints' conversation, and the Love of the Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
AS nrgTs ASB Hea AST Ha Gearet iM (486-12, ww, sas sfeen Ht)
sant aachran sant cho maarag sant cha olahg olahgnee. ||2||
The Character of the Saints, the lifestyle of the Saints, and the service of the servant of the Saints. ||2]|
m@g fea Ha safs fesnfe Il (486-12, vr, sas afer ah
a-or ik maaga-o bhagat chintaaman.
I ask for these, and for one thing more - devotional worship, which shall fulfill my desires.
Hat BUST MAS unit AE ISI (486-13, nT, sas ofeerA Fh)
janee likhaavahu asant paapee san. ||3]| Do not show me the wicked sinners. ||3]|
deoH se A We APE Il (486-13, vr, sas oe Ah ravidaas bhanai jo jaanai so jaan. Says Ravi Daas, he alone is wise, who knows this:
HS MOstd nisT OT NII (486-13, wT, sas ofeerA a) sant ana™teh antar naahee. ||4||2|| there is no difference between the Saints and the Infinite Lord. ||4]|2]|
YTAT Il (486-14) aasaa. Aasaa:
3H dee UH feds sud Af SHS PAT | (486-14, vr, sas afer Fh) tum chandan ham irand baapuray sang tumaaray baasaa. You are sandalwood, and I am the poor castor oil plant, dwelling close to you.
als gu 3 Gu se o au Aa PSSA A (486-14, wm, sas shee Fh
neech rookh tay ooch bha-ay hai ganDh suganDh nivaasaa. ||1]|
From a lowly tree, I have become exalted; Your fragrance, Your exquisite fragrance now permeates me. ||1||
Hug ASHafs Hale SHH Il (486-15, vr, sas afer Fh) maaDha-o satsangat saran tum"aaree. O Lord, I seek the Sanctuary of the company of Your Saints;
JH MBaS SH Guarat Al TIS Il (486-15, vm, sas seem Fh) ham a-ugan tum" upkaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am worthless, and You are so benevolent. ||1]|Pause] |
3H Mase AUS AUIS IN Us AA als Il (486-16, wr, sas see FH) tum makh-tool supayd sapee-al ham bapuray jas keeraa. You are the white and yellow threads of silk, and I am like a poor worm.
AsAafs fife sha wa AA HOU Hate QI (486-16, nm, sas ofeerA Ft) satsangat mil rahee-ai maaDha-o jaisay maDhup makheeraa. ||2|| O Lord, I seek to live in the Company of the Saints, like the bee with its honey. ||2||
vst Ger ust Ger Ger HOH INST I (486-17, oT, sas afew Ff)
jaatee ochhaa paatee ochhaa ochhaa janam hamaaraa. My social status is low, my ancestry is low, and my birth is low as well.
on oH at Ae 3 aldt afg Seem VHS IISISBII (486-17, nr, sas afer ZH)
raajaa raam kee sayv na keenee kahi ravidaas chamaaraa. ||3||3]| I have not performed the service of the Lord, the Lord, says Ravi Daas the cobbler. H3113]|
MITA Il (486-18)
aaSaa. Aasaa:
av sf A 39 sf&6 feo fee Il (486-18, »mr, sas afer FH) kahaa bha-i-o ja-o tan bha-i-o chhin chhin. What would it matter, if my body were cut into pieces?
un wfe 38 sau 3d AS AU (486-18, wr, sas sheen FH) paraym jaa-ay ta-o darpai tayro jan. ||1|| If I were to lose Your Love, Lord, then Your humble servant would be afraid. ||1]|
33f0 vse mafi=s SSH HO Il (486-18, ue, sas ofeen a) tujheh charan arbind bhavan man. Your lotus feet are the home of my mind.
us ads UTES UES THE UE A TIS Il (486-19, vier, sas seem Ah paan karat paa-i-o paa-i-o raam-ee-aa Dhan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Drinking in Your Nectar, I have obtained the wealth of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hufs faufs ues ufemr ag il (486-19, wr, sas ofeen ah) sampat bipat patal maa-i-aa Dhan. Prosperity, adversity, property and wealth are just Maya.
UST ScD
ST Hfs Hale IS 5 3d AS MQM (487-1, new, sas seen Ah taa meh magan hot na tayro jan. ||2]| Your humble servant is not engrossed in them. ||2| |
Un at Aedt afaS 3g AS Il (487-1, vm, sas sheen FH) paraym kee jayvree baaDhi-o tayro jan. Your humble servant is tied by the rope of Your Love.
ats sean sled FSS TS ISIUIl (487-1, ver, sas shee Ht) kahi ravidaas chootibo kavan gun. ||3]|4|| Says Ravi Daas, what benefit would I get by escaping from it? ||3]|4]|
YTAT Il (487-2) aaSaa. Aasaa:
dfs ofa ofa afe afe ofs og il (487-2, nmr, sas afeern Ff)
har har har har har har haray. The Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, Haray.
dfs faunas AS ae fensfs 3g WAU FIC Il (487-2, vr, sas sfeeA Hh har simrat jan ga-ay nistar taray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Lord, the humble are carried across to salvation. ||1||Pause]|
dfs & OH aate SAT I (487-3, oT, sas afeen FH) har kay naam kabeer ujaagar. Through the Lord's Name, Kabeer became famous and respected.
HOH HOH A AS Ara WAU (487-3, vm, sas sheen Ft) janam janam kay kaatay kaagar. ||1]| The accounts of his past incarnations were torn up. ||1]|
fous oHes ey uborfenr ii 487-3, wer, sas seen Ht) nimat naamday-o dooDh pee-aa-i-aa. Because of Naam Dayv's devotion, the Lord drank the milk he offered.
38 Hal HOH Hae odt urfeur 1211 (487-4, nmr, gas ofeen Ah ta-o jag janam sankat nahee aa-i-aa. ||2|| He shall not have to suffer the pains of reincarnation into the world again. ||2]|
Ho seen TH Sar IST Il (487-4, ner, sas afer Ah jan ravidaas raam rang raataa. Servant Ravi Daas is imbued with the Lord's Love.
fe@ qa usrfe saa odt AST ISNUI (487-5, or, sas afeeA FH)
i-o gur parsaad narak nahee jaataa. ||3]||5|| By Guru's Grace, he shall not have to go to hell. ||3]|5||
Het a UST AA SVS TJ ll (487-5, wer, gas steers th maatee ko putraa kaisay nachat hai. How does the puppet of clay dance?
SX SA XS SA
sy 2a AS 8S eOfes fegs J Al JIS Il (487-5, or, sas seen A) daykhai daykhai sunai bolai da-ori-o firat hai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He looks and listens, hears and speaks, and runs around. ||1||Pause| |
Wa Ae US Se Tse AGS J Il (487-6, nin, sas skeen Ah jab kachh paavai tab garab karat hai. When he acquires something, he is inflated with ego.
Hfeor get 3a deo BAS FT NA (487-6, ym, sas seen fh maa-i-aa ga-ee tab rovan lagat hai. ||1]| But when his wealth is gone, then he cries and bewails. ||1]|
HO 8d AH JA AAs BIS Il (487-7, viv, sas sheen Hh man bach karam ras kaseh lubhaanaa. In thought, word and deed, he is attached to the sweet and tangy flavors.
fasta afenr ate ad AHS IQI (487-7, wer, sas ofeen Hh) binas ga-i-aa jaa-ay kahoo-a‘ samaanaa. ||2|| When he dies, no one knows where he has gone. ||2||
ats seen at Aa Set Il (487-7, vmr, sas sfeem Hh
kahi ravidaas baajee jag bhaa-ee. Says Ravi Daas, the world is just a dramatic play, O Siblings of Destiny.
artes AG fs utfS afs wiret ISIEN (487-8, vr, sas ofeer Ff)
baajeegar sa-o mohi pareet ban aa-ee. ||3]||6|| I have enshrined love for the Lord, the star of the show. ||3]||6]||
MAT Uret Sas US At at (487-9) aasaa banee bhagat Dhannay jee kee Aasaa, The Word Of Devotee Dhanna Jee:
qe Afsars Arte it (487-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
SHS fess ag ASH fess 3g HO US dt Utd Il (487-10, om, sas tor Ft)
bharmat firat baho janam bilaanay tan man Dhan nahee Dheeray.
I wandered through countless incarnations, but mind, body and wealth never remain stable.
wed fay an eau ast Hfs fang ys dtd A TIS ll (487-10, vm, sas dor Ft) laalach bikh kaam lubaDh raataa man bisray parabh heeray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Attached to, and stained by the poisons of sexual desire and greed, the mind has forgotten the jewel of the Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
fay oo His od Ho ad wa fees 6 Aor II (487-11, ver, sas dar FH)
bikh fal meeth lagay man ba-uray chaar bichaar na jaani-aa.
The poisonous fruit seems sweet to the demented mind, which does not know the difference between good and evil.
ao 3 Uifs at nis atSt HOH Hao fefs Stent NU (487-11, wm, sas tor Fh) gun tay pareet badhee an bhaa‘tee janam maran fir taani-aa. ||1]|
Turning away from virtue, his love for other things increases, and he weaves again the web of birth and death. ||1]|
wats wis odt fee feet Hes WS AH SU UE II (487-12, vr, gas dar ah
jugat jaan nahee ridai nivaasee jalat jaal jam fanDh paray.
He does not know the way to the Lord, who dwells within his heart; burning in the trap, he is caught by the noose of death.
fay eo Hfs sd Ho MA UGH Use Us HO FAA QI (487-13, »mr, sas dar Ah
bikh fal sanch bharay man aisay param purakh parabh man bisray. ||2||
Gathering the poisonous fruits, he fills his mind with them, and he forgets God, the Supreme Being, from his mind. ||2]|
fama YsA asta og chor fimirg Hg HS SA HE Il (487-13, wr, sas tar A)
gi-aan parvays gureh Dhan dee-aa Dhi-aan maan man ayk ma-ay.
The Guru has given the wealth of spiritual wisdom; practicing meditation, the mind becomes one with Him.
UH safs Hot AY Afour feufs news Hats Se SI (487-14, vm, sas dor Fh) paraym bhagat maanee sukh jaani-aa taripat aghaanay mukat bha-ay. ||3]| Embracing loving devotional worship for the Lord, I have come to know peace; satisfied and satiated, I have been liberated. ||3]|
Afs more wat AT at mest ys ufserfonr | (487-14, nr, sas dar sh) jot samaa-ay samaanee jaa kai achhlee parabh pehchaani-aa. One who is filled with the Divine Light, recognizes the undeceivable Lord God.
U6 us weer ugetug fife we AS AAEM WSU (487-15, wT, gas tor Ah
Dhannai Dhan paa-i-aa DharneeDhar mil jan sant samaani-aa. ||4||1||
Dhanna has obtained the Lord, the Sustainer of the World, as his wealth; meeting the humble Saints, he merges in the Lord. ||4|[1]|
HIG U Il (487-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
difse dfse afie Af SHES Ho StS Il (487-16, mA, v2 5) gobind gobind gobind sang naamday-o man leenaa. Naam Dayv's mind was absorbed into God, Gobind, Gobind, Gobind.
nie OH & chug SEG oritar di TIE Il (487-16, mw, 2 5) aadh daam ko chheepro ho-i-o laakheenaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The calico-printer, worth half a shell, became worth millions. ||1||Pause] |
gaat 350! fsurfa & ifs saa aeater i (487-17, vir, Hs 5)
bunnaa tannaa ti-aag kai pareet charan kabeeraa.
Abandoning weaving and stretching thread, Kabeer enshrined love for the Lord's lotus feet.
ale Aer Hoda sfeS asta ata Al (487-17, nmr, v2 5) neech kulaa jolaaharaa bha-i-o guneey gaheeraa. ||1|| A weaver from a lowly family, he became an ocean of excellence. ||1||
dean vest dg ats fate foureit wfeor i 4387-18, nmr, nH 5) ravidaas dhuvantaa dhor neet tin ti-aagee maa-i-aa. Ravi Daas, who used to carry dead cows every day, renounced the world of Maya.
udde dum AoHfa ofs Pane uTfeor QIK (487-18, TAT, He 5)
pargat ho-aa saaDhsang har darsan paa-i-aa. ||2||
He became famous in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and obtained the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||2]|
Ho aet qsardior Go wie wie afemr i 487-19, wm, He 5) sain naa-ee butkaaree-aa oh ghar ghar suni-aa. Sain, the barber, the village drudge, became famous in each and every house.
fase shor ursgqay sarst Hfo afer SI (487-19, mr, He 5) hirday vasi-aa paarbarahm bhagtaa meh gani-aa. ||3]| The Supreme Lord God dwelled in his heart, and he was counted among the devotees.
[I3I|
Ua gtt
fea fafa nfs & wed Bfs saSt Gar Il (488-1, rr, He 5) ih biDh sun kai jaatro uth bhagtee laagaa. Hearing this, Dhanna the Jaat applied himself to devotional worship.
fee ysfa aA Gat STS WII (488-1, wm, He 5)
milay partakh gusaa-ee-aa Dhannaa vadbhaagaa. ||4||2|| The Lord of the Universe met him personally; Dhanna was so very blessed. ||4||2| |
3 fess afk at 3 core tHe faafo o woth det II 488-2, wer, 12 5)
ray chit chaytas kee na da-yaal damodar bibahi na jaanas ko-ee. O my consciousness, why don't you remain conscious of the Merciful Lord? How can you recognize any other?
A wef gnis us a@ ass ad A Set NU TTC I (488-2, ver, us 5)
jay Dhaaveh barahmand khand ka-o kartaa karai so ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You may run around the whole universe, but that alone happens which the Creator Lord does. ||1]||Pause| |
Hoot ad Ces Bea nfo fits aor SA EMTS II (488-3, nT, He 5) jannee kayray udar udak meh pind kee-aa das du-aaraa. In the water of the mother's womb, He fashioned the body with ten gates.
efe wore vrais ufo ae MEAT UA THTST IU (488-3, nA, He 5) day-ay ahaar agan meh raakhai aisaa khasam hamaaraa. ||1|| He gives it sustenance, and preserves it in fire - such is my Lord and Master. ||1]|
ant we ufo 36 fan safe ue ute fsa ardt Il (488-4, mmr, He 5)
kummee jal maahi tan tis baahar pankh kheer tin naahee.
The mother turtle is in the water, and her babies are out of the water. She has no wings to protect them, and no milk to feed them.
YIS UIHSE HOTS AMPS SY HS HM MII (488-5, wea, Hs 5)
pooran parmaanand manohar samajh daykh man maahee. ||2||
The Perfect Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss, the Fascinating Lord takes care of them. See this, and understand it in your mind] |2]|
unfs ate gus off gost 37S Ha OTT Il (488-5, wm, He 5) paakhan keet gupat ho-ay rahtaa taa cho maarag naahee. The worm lies hidden under the stone - there is no way for him to escape.
TI US YIS TT AHS Aha Sa USUI (4ss-6, wer, sas dor HH) kahai Dhannaa pooran taahoo ko mat ray jee-a daraa‘hee. ||3]|3]| Says Dhanna, the Perfect Lord takes care of him. Fear not, O my soul. ||3]|3]]|
MAT AY ste AIG at arat (488-7) aasaa saykh fareed jee-o kee banee Aasaa, The Word Of Shaykh Fareed Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe il (488-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
feag Huals fig Aet Afemr | (4ss-s, vm, ie edte Hh) dilahu muhabat jin" say-ee sachi-aa. They alone are true, whose love for God is deep and heart-felt.
fag xfs dg ufe dg fh ate afer Al (488-8, omer, Fu ete Hh)
jin" man hor mukh hor se kaa“dhay kachi-aa. ||1||
Those who have one thing in their heart, and something else in their mouth, are judged to be false. ||1]|
v3 fena vote df ders & I (488-8, nmr, Fe edie Ff) ratay isak khudaa-ay rang deedaar kay. Those who are imbued with love for the Lord, are delighted by His Vision.
fenfoor fag an 3 safe avg aE A TIS Il (488-9, wmv, Au edte MH
visri-aa jin" naam tay bhu-ay bhaar thee-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are a burden on the earth. ||1]|Pause| |
nifty oe off ofe uefa VdSA A il (488-9, nmr, Aer edie Fh
aap lee-ay larh laa-ay dar darvays say.
Those whom the Lord attaches to the hem of His robe, are the true dervishes at His Door.
fo Us Aedt we nre A|Sw A IM (488-10, wrt, Ae edte Fh)
tin Dhan janaydee maa-o aa-ay safal say. ||2]|
Blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them, and fruitful is their coming into the world. ||2||
UISEMT MUTT MH BIS FJ il (488-10, mmr, He edie Fh
parvardagaar apaar agam bay-ant too. O Lord, Sustainer and Cherisher, You are infinite, unfathomable and endless.
faa uss Ag PH Us H ISI (488-10, wr, Ae edie Fh jinaa pachhaataa sach chummaa pair moo". ||3]| Those who recognize the True Lord - I kiss their feet. ||3]|
Sot usd wets 3 aaa Il (488-11, wer, me ede A) tayree panah khudaa-ay too bakhsandgee. I seek Your Protection - You are the Forgiving Lord.
Ay edie ag ta seat Wel 4ss-11, om, Ae |dte Ah saykh fareedai khair deejai bandagee. ||4]|1]| Please, bless Shaykh Fareed with the bounty of Your meditative worship. ||4]|1]|
MTAT Il (488-12)
aasaa. Aasaa:
88 Au edte fimrd nied Bai Il 488-12, wer, Fe edte Ah bolai saykh fareed pi-aaray alah lagay. Says Shaykh Fareed, O my dear friend, attach yourself to the Lord.
feg 35 drt we fonrat ate we NU (488-12, vir, Fe edie Ah ih tan hosee khaak nimaanee gor gharay. ||1|| This body shall turn to dust, and its home shall be a neglected graveyard. ||1]|
wig froret Au edte oto aasbor Hog Hives AU TIS I (488-12, wr, Fe ede A) aaj milaavaa saykh fareed taakim koonjarhee-aa manhu machind-rhee-aa. ||1] | rahaa-o.
You can meet the Lord today, O Shaykh Fareed, if you restrain your bird-like desires which keep your mind in turmoil. ||1]|Pause| |
A ave Hfe veh wht & met Il (488-13, mar, Aer |dte Hh) jay jaanaa mar jaa-ee-ai ghum na aa-ee-ai. If I had known that I was to die, and not return again,
Bot water ofa o niry Serer MI (4ss-14, wer, Au edie Fh jhoothee dunee-aa lag na aap vanjaa-ee-ai. ||2]| I would not have ruined myself by clinging to the world of falsehood. ||2]|
FSA AY TSH SSB FHA Il (488-14, weer, Au |die Fh bolee-ai sach Dharam jhooth na bolee-ai. So speak the Truth, in righteousness, and do not speak falsehood.
A Og CA Se Hotet HSM ISM (488-14, om, Fe ete Ah jo gur dasai vaat mureedaa jolee-ai. ||3]| The disciple ought to travel the route, pointed out by the Guru. |[3]|
26 Sule ute adt Ho Otfenr il (488-15, mmr, Ae ade Hh)
chhail langhanday paar goree man Dheeri-aa.
Seeing the youths being carried across, the hearts of the beautiful young soul-brides are encouraged.
ave Jo uA awefs difamr sil (488-15, wr, Fe |dte Hh)
kanchan vannay paasay kalvat cheeri-aa. ||4]|
Those who side with the glitter of gold, are cut down with a saw. ||4]| Ae dorst afar 3 aet fas afar il (488-16, omar, Fe edte Ah
saykh haiyaatee jag na ko-ee thir rahi-aa. O Shaykh, no one's life is permanent in this world.
fan uiAfs gH 86 aS Sfh afemr ull (4ss-16, vr, Au edie wh jis aasan ham baithay kaytay bais ga-i-aa. ||5|| That seat, upon which we now sit - many others sat on it and have since departed.
[5] |
atsa dat of 38 Arefe fash il (488-17, oer, Fe |dte A)
katik koo‘jaa" chayt da-o saavan bijulee-aa™.
As the swallows appear in the month of Katik, forest fires in the month of Chayt, and lightning in Saawan,
Hers Addo fue af arostott él (4ss-17, ner, Fe edte Ah see-aalay sohandee-aa" pir gal baahrhee-aa™. ||6]| and as the bride's arms adorn her husband's neck in winter;| |6]||
JS vos fears SE HS Il (488-17, oT, Ae edie Hh chalay chalanhaar vichaaraa lay-ay mano. Just so, the transitory human bodies pass away. Reflect upon this in your mind.
detent fant Ha sofemr foe fas ON (488-18, omar, Au |dte A) gandhaydi-aa™ chhi-a maah turhandi-aa hik khino. ||7]| It takes six months to form the body, but it breaks in an instant. ||7]|
fat ue vie edter dec foife TS I 488-18, wm, AY ete Th jimee puchhai asmaan fareedaa khayvat kinn ga-ay. O Fareed, the earth asks the sky, "Where have the boatmen gone?"
WHE dat ots Sant Aha AT WCQ (488-19, nm, Fe edie 7) jaalan goraa™ naal ulaamay jee-a sahay. ||8||2||
Some have been cremated, and some lie in their graves; their souls are suffering rebukes. ||8||2||
yar ect qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nies Has mmol AS aT YATE I (489-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TT TAdt Hos 1 Bue we 9 Il (489-3) raag goojree mehlaa 1 cha-upday ghar 1. Raag Goojaree, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
37 OU adt Boson A He CoA SPE Il (489-4, aaet, He 1) tayraa naam karee channaathee-aa jay man ursaa ho-ay. I would make Your Name the sandalwood, and my mind the stone to rub it on;
asat MT AIS ule nists yA aS Al (489-4, ars, vs 1)
karnee kungoo jay ralai ghat antar poojaa ho-ay. ||1||
for saffron, I would offer good deeds; thus, I perform worship and adoration within my heart. |[1]|
un ate oH foment fag ae urs oe NU TH I (499-5, aA, Hs 1)
poojaa keechai naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai bin naavai pooj na ho-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Perform worship and adoration by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; without the Name, there is no worship and adoration. ||1]||Pause| |
ofa te uursinifs A He OS ae I (489-5, art, He 1)
baahar dayv pakhaalee-ah jay man Dhovai ko-ay.
If one were to wash his heart inwardly, like the stone idol which is washed on the outside,
als wo AG wha He ufemrar TE MQM (489-6, aA, Hs 1)
jooth lahai jee-o maajee-ai mokh pa-i-aanaa ho-ay. ||2||
his filth would be removed, his soul would be cleansed, and he would be liberated when he departs. ||2||
un fafa sfomretor uz urefa wifes Ufa il (489-6, art, 3 1) pasoo mileh chang-aa-ee-aa kharh khaaveh amrit deh. Even beasts have value, as they eat grass and give milk.
on fege orent fgg Hee ag adie SI (489-7, aAet, He 1) naam vihoonay aadmee Dharig jeevan karam karayhi. ||3]| Without the Naam, the mortal's life is cursed, as are the actions he performs. ||3]|
aad ofa 3 Wiang fess AS AHS Il (489-7, gat, He 1)
nayrhaa hai door na jaani-ahu nit saaray sam"aalay.
The Lord is hear at hand - do not think that He is far away. He always cherishes us, and remembers us.
A 22 A Weal ag aa ATS DT SIA (489-8, art, He 1) jo dayvai so khaavnaa kaho naanak saachaa hay. ||4]||1]| Whatever He gives us, we eat; says Nanak, He is the True Lord. ||4||1||
TAS HIS Y Il (489-8) goojree mehlaa 1. Goojaree, First Mehl:
ofs aus 3 yon" Cur se usts fy afe Aete Il (489-8, THe, Hs 1
naabh kamal tay barahmaa upjay bayd parheh mukh kanth savaar.
From the lotus of Vishnu's navel, Brahma was born; He chanted the Vedas with a melodious voice.
Tat uz 3 Wet sual nes WS ad Tata Al (489-9, gat, ne 1)
taa ko ant na jaa-ee lakh-naa aavat jaat rahai gubaar. ||1]|
He could not find the Lord's limits, and he remained in the darkness of coming and going. ||1]|
Utsu fag farsfs AS YTS nts Il (489-10, gat, He 1) pareetam ki-o bisrahi mayray paraan aDhaar. Why should I forget my Beloved? He is the support of my very breath of life.
Ww at sats acts Ae ud ufs Ae Aes as Sets nal TIS it 489-10, aAst, He 1)
jaa kee bhagat karahi jan pooray mun jan sayveh gur veechaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. The perfect beings perform devotional worship to Him. The silent sages serve Him through the Guru's Teachings. ||1]||Pause| |
ofe Aff dua a a fasefs Sor AfS Hae I (489-11, aaet, He 1)
rav sas deepak jaa kay taribhavan aykaa jot muraar.
His lamps are the sun and the moon; the One Light of the Destroyer of ego fills the three worlds.
aonfa af& 7 mfofofa fears Houfe sf wiarfs i (489-11, art, 48
gurmukh ho-ay so ahinis nirmal manmukh rain anDhaar. ||2]|
One who becomes Gurmukh remains immaculately pure, day and night, while the self- willed manmukh is enveloped by the darkness of night. ||2| |
fro mrfa aats fos sare UT Bue far IT I (489-12, aAet, we 1)
siDh samaaDh karahi nit jhagraa duhu lochan ki-aa hayrai.
The Siddhas in Samaadhi are continually in conflict; what can they see with their two eyes?
nists afs Hae ufs wo Afsag sag feds Wil (489-12, art, He 1)
antar jot sabad Dhun jaagai satgur jhagar nibayray. ||3]|
One who has the Divine Light within his heart, and is awakened to the melody of the Word of the Shabad - the True Guru settles his conflicts. ||3] |
Afs og oa nis miat ATS Hols mrursr Il (489-13, gat, He 1) sur nar naath bay-ant ajonee saachai mahal apaaraa. O Lord of angels and men, infinite and unborn, Your True Mansion is incomparable.
Soa Adld fHs Aalto sels Adg fSASTA SII (489-14, TAS, He 1)
naanak sahj milay jagjeevan nadar karahu nistaaraa. ||4||2]]| Nanak merges imperceptibly into the Life of the world; shower Your mercy upon him, and save him. ||4][2||
Ua gxo
TT TAdt HIG 3 we 4 (490-1) raag goojree mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Raag Goojaree, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas ATE I (490-2) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fon fees rea fas af utfs 6 ute Il (490-2, act, us 3)
Dharig ivayhaa jeevnaa jit har pareet na paa-ay. Cursed is that life, in which the Lord's Love is not obtained.
fig afk ofs Sas eH wat ATE UU (490-2, aA, Hs 3)
jit kamm har veesrai doojai lagai jaa-ay. ||1]||
Cursed is that occupation, in which the Lord is forgotten, and one becomes attached to duality. ||1]|
wir Afsag Abt Hor fas Afent afee ulfs Cur »ted feats As ATE I (490-3, aAst, H: 3)
aisaa satgur sayvee-ai manaa jit sayvi-ai govid pareet oopjai avar visar sabh jaa-ay. Serve such a True Guru, O my mind, that by serving Him, God's Love may be produced, and all others may be forgotten.
of ASt fas afs ad Aa a Se o Jeet Hea est UTE NAN TIS Il (490-4, act, ne 3) har saytee chit geh rahai jaraa kaa bha-o na hova-ee jeevan padvee paa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Your consciousness shall remain attached to the Lord; there shall be no fear of old age, and the supreme status shall be obtained. ||1||Pause| |
afie uifs fa fea Aon Cuffor Sy AAT safs got Il (490-4, act, ne 3) gobind pareet si-o ik sahj upji-aa vaykh jaisee bhagat banee. A divine peace wells up from God's Love; behold, it comes from devotional worship.
nny ASt wiry ufeer st ug fess dor Ast APs AHMET QI (490-5, aaet, ne 3)
aap saytee aap khaa-i-aa taa man nirmal ho-aa jotee jot sam-ee. ||2||
When my identity consumed my identical identity, then my mind became immaculately pure, and my light was blended with the Divine Light. ||2| |
fag war wit Afsag 3 ure A Ss AS ate Il (490-6, act, ne 3)
bin bhaagaa aisaa satgur na paa-ee-ai jay lochai sabh ko-ay.
Without good fortune, such a True Guru cannot be found, no matter how much all may yearn for Him.
as at utes feag fos at ret AY aE BI (490-6, aAst, Hs 3) koorhai kee paal vichahu niklai taa sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||3]| If the veil of falsehood is removed from within, then lasting peace is obtained. ||3]||
soa MA Afsad at for Gy Aza AS ad Te ura AG aes i (490-7, aAet, He 3) naanak aisay satgur kee ki-aa oh sayvak sayvaa karay gur aagai jee-o Dharay-ay.
O Nanak, what service can the servant perform for such a True Guru? He should offer his life, his very soul, to the Guru.
Afsas a svat feats ad Afsag wmy four asf usASil (490-8, TAT, Hs 3)
satgur kaa bhaanaa chit karay satgur aapay kirpaa karay-i. ||4||1][|3]|
If he focuses his consciousness on the Will of the True Guru, then the True Guru Himself will bless him. ||4]|1]|3]|
TAS HIS 3 Il (490-8)
goojree mehlaa 3. Goojaree, Third Mehl:
ofs at SH AS aT Vert Ae aT 3 ale Ft i (490-8, aAst, we 3) har kee tum sayvaa karahu doojee sayvaa karahu na ko-ay jee. Serve the Lord; do not serve anyone else.
ofs at Ae 3 Hog fefeur ey urea ert Ae AoH fae Ate Ft A (490-9, aa, Hs 3) har kee sayvaa tay manhu chindi-aa fal paa-ee-ai doojee sayvaa janam birthaa jaa-ay jee. ||1]|
Serving the Lord, you shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires; serving another, your life shall pass away in vain. ||1||
ofa Hat ulfs dfs 3 ofa At afe Hat war aot Ft II (490-10, gaet, He 3)
har mayree pareet reet hai har mayree har mayree kathaa kahaanee jee. The Lord is my Love, the Lord is my way of life, the Lord is my speech and conversation.
qe uAte As Ho Sta Sa AS got AMS NA TIC i (490-10, aH, He 3)
gur parsaad mayraa man bheejai ayhaa sayv banee jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, my mind is saturated with the Lord's Love; this is what makes up my service. ||1]||Pause| |
ofa Ha fAhyfs of Ha AAS ofs Ha soy ole Ha set I (490-11, get, He 3)
har mayraa simrit har mayraa saastar har mayraa banDhap har mayraa bhaa-ee. The Lord is my Simritees, the Lord is my Shaastras; the Lord is my relative and the Lord is my brother.
ofs at H su wat de oth He He fFus safe Ha AS vifs dhe Aart QM (490-12, art,
H8 3)
har kee mai bhookh laagai har naam mayraa man tariptai har mayraa saak ant ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||2||
I am hungry for the Lord; my mind is satisfied with the Name of the Lord. The Lord is my relation, my helper in the end. ||2||
ofs fag da ath ast 3 vatent ate o AT II (490-13, art, He 3)
har bin hor raas koorhee hai chaldi-aa naal na jaa-ee.
Without the Lord, other assets are false. They do not go with the mortal when he departs.
dfg Ha ug Ae Aa TS Ho Ie WE Sa Fret NBII (490-13, ant, He 3) har mayraa Dhan mayrai saath chaalai jahaa ha-o jaa-o tah jaa-ee. ||3]| The Lord is my wealth, which shall go with me; wherever I go, it will go. ||3]|
A ZO HSS WH FS ATH SHE Il (490-14, gAst, ws 3) so jhoothaa jo jhoothay laagai jhoothay karam kamaa-ee. One who is attached to falsehood is false; false are the deeds he does.
TI SHA Tis A Har Jul ATS’ TS H AT SIUM (490-14, aA, vs 3) kahai naanak har kaa bhaanaa ho-aa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ee. ||4||2||4||
Says Nanak, everything happens according to the Will of the Lord; no one has any say in this at all. ||4]|2]|4]|
TAS HIS F Il (490-15)
goojree mehlaa 3. Goojaree, Third Mehl:
Aa uty on ves 3 aaHfe urfeor ae I (490-15, act, ne 3)
jug maahi naam dulambh hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
It is so difficult to obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in this age; only the Gurmukh obtains it.
fag ae nafs 3 deet Sug & feBurfe Nl (490-15, ant, v8 3) bin naavai mukat na hova-ee vaykhhu ko vi-upaa-ay. ||1]| Without the Name, no one is liberated; let anyone make other efforts, and see. ||1]|
afeodt as nue Ae afead ATE Il (490-16, art, He 3) balihaaree gur aapnay sad balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.
Afsa fifeot ofs nfs SA AoA Td ANE NA TIC Il (490-16, THe, He 3)
satgur mili-ai har man vasai sehjay rahai samaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Meeting the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and one remains absorbed in Him. ||1]||Pause] |
a 38 ue wus Fava Cun vfs nrfe i (490-17, aact, ne 3) jaa‘ bha-o paa-ay aapnaa bairaag upjai man aa-ay. When God instills His fear, a balanced detachment springs up in the mind.
aaa 3 fs ue afs fA gd ANE I (490-18, gH, He 3) bairaagai tay har paa-ee-ai har si-o rahai samaa-ay. ||2]| Through this detachment, the Lord is obtained, and one remains absorbed in the Lord.
21 |
Afe vas fa He frefs fefs ws 3 wat wrfe I (490-18, ast, He 3) say-ay mukat je man jineh fir Dhaat na laagai aa-ay. He alone is liberated, who conquers his mind; Maya does not stick to him again.
eHe ents gas ad fesee Ast ute USI (490-19, gASt, Hs 3) dasvai du-aar rahat karay taribhavan sojhee paa-ay. ||3]|| He dwells in the Tenth Gate, and obtains the understanding of the three worlds. ||3]|
ooa Ts 3 Ag dfeor sug fA at safe i (490-19, gat, ve 3) naanak gur tay gur ho-i-aa vaykhhu tis kee rajaa-ay. O Nanak, through the Guru, one becomes the Guru; behold, His Wondrous Will.
Us scq
fey age aes ad ASt AAS ME NSNSNUN (491-1, at, He 3) ih kaaran kartaa karay jotee jot samaa-ay. ||4]|3]|5]| This deed was done by the Creator Lord; one's light merges into the Light. ||4]|3]|5||
TAS HIS 3 I (491-1)
goojree mehlaa 3. Goojaree, Third Mehl:
TH TH AS a ad aft ITH TE Il (491-1, aAet, ne 3)
raam raam sabh ko kahai kahi-ai raam na ho-ay.
Everyone chants the Lord's Name, Raam, Raam; but by such chanting, the Lord is not obtained.
Gs usASt aH Hfs SA St Sw urs ALE Al (491-2, act, ne 3)
gur parsaadee raam man vasai taa fal paavai ko-ay. ||1]|
By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and then, the fruits are obtained. ||1]|
vista afge fr rat Uifs I (491-2, aact, ue 3) antar govind jis laagai pareet. One who enshrines love for God within his mind,
fe faq ae 3 Zing ofa ofe aafo Ae nfs SHS NA TIC I (491-3, aeet, Hs 3) har tis kaday na veesrai har har karahi sadaa man cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
never forgets the Lord; he continually chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har, in his conscious mind. ||1||Pause]|
fase fag a Aue SA wa AS aaa Il (491-3, gat, ne 3)
hirdai jin" kai kapat vasai baahrahu sant kahaahi.
Those whose hearts are filled with hypocrisy, who are called saints only for their outward show
fgAat ufs 3 goet uifs Te uss is QI (491-4, aASt, He 3) tarisnaa mool na chuk-ee ant ga-ay pachhutaahi. ||2| | - their desires are never satisfied, and they depart grieving in the end. ||2||
Wda Shea A ASS Ad ST vise at IH ae B ATE Il (491-4, aH, Hs 3) anayk tirath jay jatan karai taa antar kee ha-umai kaday na jaa-ay. Although one may bathe at many places of pilgrimage, still, his ego never departs.
fan od ot ofa 6 ae cen ofe fsA Sf AATE ISI 491-5, at, He 3)
jis nar kee dubiDhaa na jaa-ay Dharam raa-ay tis day-ay sajaa-ay. ||3]|
That man, whose sense of duality does not depart - the Righteous Judge of Dharma Shall punish him. ||3] |
IH Je Het AS ue Tan gs Ae Il (491-6, TAs, ws 3)
karam hovai so-ee jan paa-ay gurmukh boojhai ko-ee.
That humble being, unto whom God showers His Mercy, obtains Him; how few are the Gurmukhs who understand Him.
oag fess BH HS St ofa SS Het SIE (491-6, aA, He 3) naanak vichahu ha-umai maaray taa™ har bhaytai so-ee. ||4]|4||6]| O Nanak, if one conquers his ego within, then he comes to meet the Lord. ||4]|4]|6]|
TAS HIS 3 Il (491-7)
goojree mehlaa 3. Goojaree, Third Mehl:
fSH Ao ATS Ae Hfs foaee fan a nifsHTS TSS Il (491-7, Taet, vs 3)
tis jan saa“t sadaa mat nihchal jis kaa abhimaan gavaa-ay.
That humble being who eliminates his ego is at peace; he is blessed with an ever- stable intellect.
AHO foons fa qenfa a8 ofa seat fas BS UU (491-7, gat, Hs 3)
so jan nirmal je gurmukh boojhai har charnee chit laa-ay. ||1]|
That humble being is immaculately pure, who, as Gurmukh, understands the Lord, and focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet. ||1]|
ofa df nds Ha A feefs A ae det Il (491-8, aaet, Hs 3)
har chayt achayt manaa jo ichheh so fal ho-ee.
O my unconscious mind, remain conscious of the Lord, and you shall obtain the fruits of your desires.
qe usAet ofs oa uefs utes safe Ae AY det NAN TIS Il (491-9, aH, He 3)
gur parsaadee har ras paavahi peevat raheh sadaa sukh ho-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, you shall obtain the sublime elixir of the Lord; by continually drinking it in, you shall have eternal peace. ||1||Pause]|
Asay se ST uaA Je USA ae 3 UA ATS Il (491-9, aAet, we 3)
satgur bhaytay taa paaras hovai paaras ho-ay ta pooj karaa-ay.
When one meets the True Guru, he becomes the philosopher's stone, with the ability to transform others, inspiring them to worship the Lord.
A OH UA A ee ue dtm SS ATG FSS II (491-10, TAs, ws 3)
jo us poojay so fal paa-ay deekhi-aa dayvai saach bujhaa-ay. ||2| |
One who worships the Lord in adoration, obtains his rewards; instructing others, he reveals the Truth. ||2]|
fee USA UA 3 Jeet feE HS UST MT AHS Il (491-10, Act, we 3)
vin paarsai pooj na hova-ee vin man parchay avraa samjhaa-ay.
Without becoming the philosopher's stone, he does not inspire others to worship the Lord; without instructing his own mind, how can he instruct others?
Gg AES uifomrat vior fo Sy Haar urs WI (491-11, aA, Hs 3) guroo sadaa-ay agi-aanee anDhaa kis oh maarag paa-ay. ||3]|| The ignorant, blind man calls himself the guru, but to whom can he show the way?
[1311 aod fee sect fag o uréint fan oefs aS A US Il (491-12, ast, Hs 3)
naanak vin nadree kichhoo na paa-ee-ai jis nadar karay so paa-ay. O Nanak, without His Mercy, nothing can be obtained. One upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, obtains Him.
Td USA & sfanret nla Hae FISTS WSUUNII (491-12, aA, He 3)
gur parsaadee day vadi-aa-ee apnaa sabad vartaa-ay. ||4||5||7]|
By Guru's Grace, God bestows greatness, and projects the Word of His Shabad. [4115] 171]
Fret Hos 2 UsUe Il (491-13) goojree mehlaa 3 panchpaday. Goojaree, Third Mehl, Panch-Padas:
a oat His Cur at oat HPS ATE I (491-13, aA, Hs 3) naa kaasee mat oopjai naa kaasee mat jaa-ay. Wisdom is not produced in Benares, nor is wisdom lost in Benares.
Afsas fifo nfs Gur st feo Ast ute Wait (491-14, aAet, we 3)
satgur mili-ai mat oopjai taa ih sojhee paa-ay. ||1||
Meeting the True Guru, wisdom is produced, and then, one obtains this understanding. ||1]|
ofs aa 3 Afe 3 Ho Hae Nfs SATE I (491-14, aASt, He 3)
har kathaa too” sun ray man sabad man vasaa-ay.
Listen to the sermon of the Lord, O mind, and enshrine the Shabad of His Word within your mind.
feg ufs 3ct fag ad st san feog AE NA TTC (491-15, gH, He 3)
ih mat tayree thir rahai taa’ bharam vichahu jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If your intellect remains stable and steady, then doubt shall depart from within you. ||1]|Pause] |
ofs uae fee eae 3 fawfed Teta A Il (491-15, aA, Hs 3) har charan ridai vasaa-ay too kilvikh hoveh naas. Enshrine the Lord's lotus feet within your heart, and your sins shall be erased.
us 3 orsut eh acts 3 Stee asta feeA II (491-16, art, Hs 3)
panch bhoo aatmaa vas karahi taa tirath karahi nivaas. ||2||
If your soul overcomes the five elements, then you shall come to have a home at the true place of pilgrimage. ||2||
Houfe feg He Hag J AST fas 3 UTE I (491-16, aH, Hs 3)
manmukh ih man mugaDh hai sojhee kichhoo na paa-ay.
This mind of the self-centered manmukh is so stupid; it does not obtain any understanding at all.
dfs a oH 3 Bset vifs afeur uEste SI (491-17, aAet, He 3) har kaa naam na bujh-ee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ay. ||3]| It does not understand the Name of the Lord; it departs repenting in the end. ||3]|
feg Ho aH Afs Stee fAfyfs aAfsag chor gerfe (491-17, gat, vs 3)
in man kaasee sabh tirath simrit satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay.
In this mind are found Benares, all sacred shrines of pilgrimage and the Shaastras; the True Guru has explained this.
wore stea fan Afar safe fas ofe fase sfoor AME Neil (491-18, gat, He 3)
athsath tirath tis sang raheh jin har hirdai rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||4|| The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage remain with one, whose heart is filled with the Lord. ||4]|
soa Afsas fifot gon sfsor Sa efimr vfs wef i (491-19, gat, v8 3)
naanak satgur mili-ai hukam bujhi-aa ayk vasi-aa man aa-ay. O Nanak, upon meeting the True Guru, the Order of the Lord's Will is understood, and the One Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
ff 30 Se AS AY FAS Sd ANTE UNENCI (491-19, art, He 3)
jo tuDh bhaavai sabh sach hai sachay rahai samaa-ay. ||5||6||8]|
Those who are pleasing to You, O True Lord, are true. They remain absorbed in You. [15116] 18]
UsrT gx2
TAdt Hoe 3 St Ml (492-1)
goojree mehlaa 3 teejaa. Goojaree, Third Mehl:
Sa on fours ufss vfs fry Ag Aet I (492-1, ant, v8 3) ayko naam niDhaan pandit sun sikh sach so-ee. The One Name is the treasure, O Pandit. Listen to these True Teachings.
en afe AST uate uss TSS Ae ey Tet UI (492-1, aAct, we 3)
doojai bhaa-ay jaytaa parheh parhat gunat sadaa dukh ho-ee. ||1||
No matter what you read in duality, reading and contemplating it, you shall only continue to suffer. ||1]|
fs vaet F ofa 3g Ta Hale ASt Tet i (492-2, aA, us 3)
har charnee too” laag rahu gur sabad sojhee ho-ee.
So grasp the Lord's lotus feet; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall come to understand.
fs 3A TAS BY F St HS fesHs Tet ual FHS il (492-3, gAst, we 3)
har ras rasnaa chaakh too” taa™ man nirmal ho-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
With your tongue, taste the sublime elixir of the Lord, and your mind shall be rendered immaculately pure. ||1||Pause] |
Afsas fife ug Asdba so fefs fA suo TE I (492-3, aah, HF: 3)
satgur mili-ai man santokhee-ai taa fir tarisnaa bhookh na ho-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, the mind becomes content, and then, hunger and desire will not trouble you any longer.
on fears ufimr us whe afte 3 af QI (492-4, aret, He 3)
naam niDhaan paa-i-aa par ghar jaa-ay na ko-ay. ||2||
Obtaining the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one does not go knocking at other doors. ||2||
aS Fest A AS HOH ss H AE il (492-4, gHst, we 3) kathnee badnee jay karay manmukh boojh na ho-ay. The self-willed manmukh babbles on and on, but he does not understand.
Tost wie wos ofa oH ure ALE BI (492-5, TAH, He 3) gurmatee ghat chaannaa har naam paavai so-ay. ||3]| One whose heart is illumined, by Guru's Teachings, obtains the Name of the Lord.
[I3I|
Ale WAY 3 3 esd ST feats ws aT Il (492-5, aA, Hs 3)
sun saastar too’ na bujhhee taa fireh baaro baar.
You may listen to the Shaastras, but you do not understand, and so you wander from door to door.
Aad A ory 6 used Afe o Ue fimrg isi (492-6, act, Hs 3) SO moorakh jo aap na pachhaan-ee sach na Dharay pi-aar. ||4| |
He is a fool, who does not understand his own self, and who does not enshrine love for the True Lord. ||4]|
Ae Aas ster ase ae 3 ATE Il (492-6, aA, He 3) sachai jagat dahkaa-i-aa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. The True Lord has fooled the world - no one has any say in this at all.
oa FH fsH we A ad fa fA at ATE NUNDIEN (492-7, gat, He 3) naanak jo tis bhaavai so karay ji-o tis kee rajaa-ay. ||5]|7||9|| O Nanak, He does whatever He pleases, according to His Will. ||5]|7]||9]|
qe Afsars ure I (492-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THT TAdt Hos 8 BuE wy 4 Il (492-8) raag goojree mehlaa 4 cha-upday ghar 1. Raag Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
dfs & AS Afsad AS use Je faaS ag ag uA il (492-8, aact, ue 4)
har kay jan satgur sat purkhaa ha-o bin-o kara-o gur paas.
O Servant of the Lord, O True Guru, O True Primal Being, I offer my prayers to You, O Guru.
JH ald fag Afsad Aderet af efenr oH udarfA All (492-9, gat, He 4)
ham keeray kiram satgur sarnaa-ee kar da-i-aa naam pargaas. ||1]||
I am an insect and a worm; O True Guru, I seek Your Sanctuary; please, be merciful and bestow upon me the Light of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Ae Hts gees HAG aH on usaf Il (492-9, aeet, He 4) mayray meet gurdayv mo ka-o raam naam pargaas. O my Best Friend, O Divine Guru, please illuminate me with the Light of the Lord.
THs SH Ha ure Aurel ofa atafs THdt FIA NU TIS Il (492-10, Tat, He 4) gurmat naam mayraa paraan sakhaa-ee har keerat hamree rahraas. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Instructions, the Naam is my breath of life, and the Praise of the Lord is my occupation. ||1]]Pause| |
ufs Ao & Zasa esd fae die afs Aso ate fimrA Il (492-11, gat, we 4)
har jan kay vadbhaag vadayray jin har har sarDhaa har pi-aas.
The Lord's servants have the greatest good fortune; they have faith in the Lord, Har, Har, and a thirst for the Lord.
ofa of on fixe feusafs ffs Hafs ae userfA i211 (492-11, ast, 8 4)
har har naam milai tariptaasahi mil sangat gun pargaas. ||2| |
Obtaining the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied; joining the Company of the Holy, their virtues shine forth. ||2] |
fag ots afs ofa cA OH 6 Ufenr 3 arate AH UTA II (492-12, art, He 4)
jin" har har har ras naam na paa-i-aa tay bhaagheen jam paas.
Those who have not obtained the essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are most unfortunate; they are taken away by the Messenger of Death.
A Afsad Aefe Hats odt wre foo Ae foo AeA Si (492-13, aact, He 4)
jo satgur saran sangat nahee aa-ay Dharig jeevay Dharig jeevaas. ||3]||
Those who have not sought the Sanctuary of the True Guru and the Company of the Holy - cursed are their lives, and cursed are their hopes of life. ||3]|
fae dfs ae Afsad Aas uret fso ufe HAS fesftmr fet i (492-13, aaet, He 4) jin har jan satgur sangat paa-ee tin Dhur mastak likhi-aa likhaas.
Those humble servants of the Lord, who have obtained the Company of the True Guru, have such pre-ordained destiny written on their foreheads.
Uo Us AsHals fas ofe oA ufeur fife Soa SH UAT SIA (492-14, aA, He 4) Dhan Dhan satsangat jit har ras paa-i-aa mil naanak naam pargaas. ||4||1||
Blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the sublime essence of the Lord is obtained. Meeting with His humble servant, O Nanak, the Naam shines forth. ||4]|1]|
TAS HIS 8 Il (492-15) goojree mehlaa 4. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfee afee uisy ufs uisn fife wsnafs Aafe He AT I (492-15, aAet, He 4)
govind govind pareetam man pareetam mil satsangat sabad man mohai.
The Lord, the Lord of the Universe is the Beloved of the minds of those who join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. The Shabad of His Word fascinates their minds.
af afge afge fomreba As a@ we ef us GI A (492-16, aaet, Hi 4)
jap govind govind Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabh ka-o daan day-ay parabh ohai. ||1||
Chant, and meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the Universe; God is the One who gives gifts to all. ||1]|
Ae set Horn a afse afee afe ne Ho Il (492-16, aaet, He 4)
mayray bhaa-ee janaa mo ka-o govind govind govind man mohai.
O my Siblings of Destiny, the Lord of the Universe, Govind, Govind, Govind, has enticed and fascinated my mind.
dfee afee afe ge we fife aa Wonafs AS AM NAN TIS Il (492-17, aaet, He 4) govind govind govind gun gaavaa mil gur saaDhsangat jan sohai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, Govind, Govind, Govind; joining the Holy Society of the Guru, Your humble servant is beautified. ||1]|Pause] |
AY Arad dfs sats 3 cents aor fafa fafa wat uf GS i (492-18, aAct, He 4)
sukh saagar har bhagat hai gurmat ka-ulaa riDh siDh laagai pag ohai.
Devotional worship to the Lord is an ocean of peace; through the Guru's Teachings, wealth, prosperity and the spiritual powers of the Siddhas fall at our feet.
~
We a oH OM orors ofa oH AUS dla SH Ad QI (492-18, aeet, He 4)
jan ka-o raam naam aaDhaaraa har naam japat har naamay sohai. ||2||
The Lord's Name is the Support of His humble servant; he chants the Lord's Name, and with the Lord's Name he is adorned. ||2||
Ua sts vonfs sada Hfs da oH Has Ire Hfs FT Il (493-1, art, He 4)
durmat bhaagheen mat feekay naam sunat aavai man rohai. Evil-minded, unfortunate and shallow-minded are those who feel anger in their minds, when they hear the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
aGur aa a uifys oA uréta feus fener afe ufe aa Wai (493-2, ast, Hs 4) ka-oo-aa kaag ka-o amrit ras paa-ee-ai tariptai vistaa khaa-ay mukh gohai. ||3]| You may place ambrosial nectar before crows and ravens, but they will be satisfied only by eating manure and dung with their mouths. ||3]|
nifts Ag Asa Afseet fas as Aor JA FT I (493-2, aH, Hs 4)
amrit sar satgur sativaadee jit naatai ka-oo-aa hans hohai.
The True Guru, the Speaker of Truth, is the pool of Ambrosial Nectar; bathing within it, the crow becomes a swan.
ooa US US Ss aaa faq Tens on fee Hw GI USI (493-3, aAet, He 4) naanak Dhan Dhan vaday vadbhaagee jin" gurmat naam ridai mal Dhohai. ||4]|2]| O Nanak, blessed, blessed and very fortunate are those who, through the Guru's Teachings, with the Naam, wash away the filth of their hearts. ||4||2| |
TAS HIS 8 Il (493-4) goojree mehlaa 4. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
ofs Ae SSH OSH wet ufs gals uTBusrs | (493-4, gat, we 4)
har jan ootam ootam banee mukh boleh par-upkaaray.
The humble servants of the Lord are exalted, and exalted is their speech. With their mouths, they speak for the benefit of others.
fi Ho He Heo sats Ast afe fas af fersrs Al (493-4, aaet, He 4)
jo jan sunai sarDhaa bhagat saytee kar kirpaa har nistaaray. ||1]|
Those who listen to them with faith and devotion, are blessed by the Lord; showering His Mercy, He saves them. ||1]|
oH H AG ofa Ae Afes finns I (493-5, aaet, He 4) raam mo ka-o har jan may! pi-aaray. Lord, please, let me meet the beloved servants of the Lord.
Ag yisu urs Afsag ag us oH unit ats foAsts nA TITS il (493-5, aA, ve 4) mayray pareetam paraan satgur gur pooraa ham paapee gur nistaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru, the Perfect Guru, is my Beloved, my very breath of life; the Guru has saved me, the sinner. ||1||Pause] |
asHfy gaat esaa fas ats fs SH nO | (493-6, gat, Hs 4)
gurmukh vadbhaagee vadbhaagay jin har har naam aDhaaray.
The Gurmukhs are fortunate, so very fortunate; their Support is the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofa ofs nifys afs aA uefa TaHfS sas FSS MQM (493-7, THe, Hs 4)
har har amrit har ras paavahi gurmat bhagat bhandaaray. ||2| |
They obtain the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; through the Guru's Teachings, they obtain this treasure-house of devotional worship. ||2]|
fie adn Afsad AS usd 6 Ufenr S arate AfH HTS II (493-7, Tat, He 4)
jin darsan satgur sat purakh na paa-i-aa tay bhaagheen jam maaray.
Those who do not obtain the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the True Primal Being, are most unfortunate; they are destroyed by the Messenger of Death.
A Aas AAS Teas Sts Tes Hat Vet HS HoT TfSmrPg Sil (493-8, grt, Hs 4) say kookar sookar garDhabh paveh garabh jonee da-yi maaray mahaa hati-aaray.
HI3I| They are like dogs, pigs and jackasses; they are cast into the womb of reincarnation, and the Lord strikes them down as the worst of murderers. ||3]|
ale cfenims dg we Gufs afe fasur SI Sas Il (493-9, gTHst, ws 4)
deen da-i-aal hohu jan oopar kar kirpaa layho ubaaray.
O Lord, Kind to the poor, please shower Your mercy upon Your humble servant, and save him.
woe Ho da at Aaeret afe sre ofe farss ISiSil (493-9, gat, He 4)
naanak jan har kee sarnaa-ee har bhaavai har nistaaray. ||4||3]| Servant Nanak has entered the Lord's Sanctuary; if it pleases You, Lord, please save him. ||4][3]]
TAS HIS 8 Il (493-10) goojree mehlaa 4. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
dg there Ha He BST IC niafes aH oH fos ferret II (493-10, aAet, He 4)
hohu da-i-aal mayraa man laavhu ha-o an-din raam naam nit Dhi-aa-ee.
Be Merciful and attune my mind, so that I might meditate continually on the Lord's Name, night and day.
Afs AY Afs awe Afs fours ofs fas afm ey gy AS ofa AST NA (493-11, aaet, He 4) sabh sukh sabh gun sabh niDhaan har jit japi-ai dukh bhukh sabh leh jaa-ee. ||1]| The Lord is all peace, all virtue and all wealth; remembering Him, all misery and hunger depart. ||1]|
Ho Hd Hat TH OH Aa ofa set Il (493-12, aAet, He 4) man mayray mayraa raam naam sakhaa har bhaa-ee. O my mind, the Lord's Name is my companion and brother.
THs TH OH AA Wet nifs ast vad BE ssavet UU TIC Il (493-12, aaet, ue 4) gurmat raam naam jas gaavaa ant baylee dargeh la-ay chhadaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Under Guru's Instruction, I sing the Praises of the Lord's Name; it shall be my help and support in the end, and it shall deliver me in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|Pause||
3 omy ws ys visa afs fas Se He His wet I (493-13, aASt, He 4)
too” aapay daataa parabh antarjaamee kar kirpaa loch mayrai man laa-ee.
You Yourself are the Giver, O God, Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts; by Your Grace, You have infused longing for You in my mind.
H ufs 3f6 Ss walt ale ASt yfs Se yst AfSae ASet IM (493-14, aASt, He 4)
mai man tan loch lagee har saytee parabh loch pooree satgur sarnaa-ee. ||2||
My mind and body long for the Lord; God has fulfilled my longing. I have entered the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||2| |
HEH HOH ufe afe ufeur fas oe fom fgar farger Fret II (493-14, aeet, Hs 4)
maanas janam punn kar paa-i-aa bin naavai Dharig Dharig birthaa jaa-ee.
Human birth is obtained through good actions; without the Name, it is cursed, totally cursed, and it passes away in vain.
on faa 3A oA ey we HY dla Ga ga Hf uTet SI (493-15, gat, He 4)
naam binaa ras kas dukh khaavai mukh feekaa thuk thook mukh paa-ee. ||3]| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains only suffering for his delicacies to eat. His mouth is insipid, and his face is spat upon, again and again. ||3]|
A Ho ofa ys af ofs Age fSa ean ofa ofa & efsmret I (493-16, gas, Hi 4)
jo jan har parabh har har sarnaa tin dargeh har har day vadi-aa-ee.
Those humble beings, who have entered the Sanctuary of the Lord God, Har, Har, are blessed with glory in the Court of the Lord, Har, Har.
Uo Ue Aah ad Us He AG HS aaa Af we ales wet SiS (493-16, TAA, He 4) Dhan Dhan saabaas kahai parabh jan ka-o jan naanak mayl la-ay gal laa-ee. ||4]|4]| Blessed, blessed and congratulations, says God to His humble servant. O servant Nanak, He embraces him, and blends him with Himself. | |4]|4] |
TAS HIS 8 Il (493-17) goojree mehlaa 4. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
Tafa ret Adet At 4 aB teg we afe ys Atetfeur Ih (493-17, aaet, He 4)
gurmukh sakhee sahaylee mayree mo ka-o dayvhu daan har paraan jeevaa-i-aa.
O Gurmukhs, O my friends and companions, give me the gift of the Lord's Name, the life of my very life.
JH ded GS TS Tafa a& fagr mofes safe ys uay fomrfeor wai (493-18, gas, us 4) ham hovah laalay golay gursikhaa kay jin"aa an-din har parabh purakh Dhi-aa-i-aa.
[11] I am the slave, the servant of the Guru's Sikhs, who meditate on the Lord God, the Primal Being, night and day. ||1]|
Ad ufs 3fs fasg aafira ua afer 1 (493-19, gat, ue 4) mayrai man tan birahu gursikh pag laa-i-aa. Within my mind and body, I have enshrined love for the feet of the Guru's Sikhs.
Ae urs Aa aa & fra set H AG agg Buen ate fs firerfeor an TI Il (493-19, aadt, He 4)
mayray paraan sakhaa gur kay sikh bhaa-ee mo ka-o karahu updays har milai milaa-i- aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my life-mates, O Sikhs of the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, instruct me in the Teachings, that I might merge in the Lord's Merger. ||1]|Pause| |
Ua ety
WT of ys oe 3 Tanfy HS fa sua Te Afsas Hfe sen | (494-1, gat, Hs 4)
jaa har parabh bhaavai taa gurmukh maylay jin" vachan guroo satgur man bhaa-i-aa. When it pleases the Lord God, he causes us to meet the Gurmukhs; the Hymns of the Guru, the True Guru, are very sweet to their minds.
saat ad & fre fimrd afe fosarat fogare ug urfemr QI (494-2, gat, ws 4) vadbhaagee gur kay sikh pi-aaray har nirbaanee nirbaan pad paa-i-aa. ||2||
Very fortunate are the beloved Sikhs of the Guru; through the Lord, they attain the supreme state of Nirvaanaa. ||2| |
AsHats aa at ofa fimrdt fre af afs om Her ufs srfemr i (494-3, aaet, ue 4) satsangat gur kee har pi-aaree jin har har naam meethaa man bhaa-i-aa.
The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the Guru, is loved by the Lord. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet and pleasing to their minds.
fae Afsas Aafs Hao ufeor A orate undt afk urfemr 3 (494-3, aaet, He 4) jin satgur sangat sang na paa-i-aa say bhaagheen paapee jam khaa-i-aa. ||3]| One who does not obtain the Association of the True Guru, is a most unfortunate sinner; he is consumed by the Messenger of Death. ||3]||
wif furs feur ys ord ofa nmr aanfa fixe firerfimr 1 (494-4, ast, He 4)
aap kirpaal kirpaa parabh Dhaaray har aapay gurmukh milai milaa-i-aa.
If God, the Kind Master, Himself shows His kindness, then the Lord causes the Gurmukh to merge into Himself.
Ad Soa 88 Te wet qearet ofe of Mrfeor sul (494-5, aeet, ue 4)
jan naanak bolay gun banee gurbaanee har naam samaa-i-aa. ||4]|5||
Servant Nanak chants the Glorious Words of the Guru's Bani; through them, one is absorbed into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|5]|
TAS HIS 8 Il (494-6) goojree mehlaa 4. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:
faa Afsag uy fafs fs us uf 4 a afe Guen ofa He ware II (494-6, ant, He 4) jin satgur purakh jin har parabh paa-i-aa mo ka-o kar updays har meeth lagaavai. One who has found the Lord God through the True Guru, has made the Lord seem so sweet to me, through the His Teachings.
Hd 30 Ase AS dfaer dur esarait fs on fore WA (494-7, gat, He 4)
man tan seetal sabh hari-aa ho-aa vadbhaagee har naam Dhi-aavai. ||1] |
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed, and totally rejuvenated; by great good fortune, I meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
aoet 3H aS aet urf= fs afe om fears i (494-7, aaet, us 4)
bhaa-ee ray mo ka-o ko-ee aa-ay milai har naam darirh-aavai.
O Siblings of Destiny, let anyone who can implant the Lord's Name within me, come and meet with me.
He ulsu ure Ho 39 AS ter Ae ofe ys at fe aa ASS AU TICS I (494-8, aeet, He 4) mayray pareetam paraan man tan sabh dayvaa mayray har parabh kee har kathaa sunaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Unto my Beloved, I give my mind and body, and my very breath of life. He speaks to me of the sermon of my Lord God. ||1]|Pause] |
ited cen aenfs afs ufemr fas afs on ofa fA@ fas we Il (494-9, aact, ne 4) Dheeraj Dharam gurmat har paa-i-aa nit har naamai har si-o chit laavai.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained courage, faith and the Lord. He keeps my mind focused continually on the Lord, and the Name of the Lord.
nifys see Afsag at wat Fas A ufe wifys urs QI (494-9, gat, He 4)
amrit bachan satgur kee banee jo bolai so mukh amrit paavai. ||2||
The Words of the True Guru's Teachings are Ambrosial Nectar; this Amrit trickles into the mouth of the one who chants them. ||2]|
fosHe oH fas He 6 oad THs on AY fs we Il (494-10, geet, He 4)
nirmal naam jit mail na laagai gurmat naam japai liv laavai.
Immaculate is the Naam, which cannot be stained by filth. Through the Guru's Teachings, chant the Naam with love.
on ua faa od oot ufeur A arate He Hfe ATS ISI (494-11, aA, He 4)
naam padaarath jin nar nahee paa-i-aa say bhaagheen mu-ay mar jaavai. ||3]| That man who has not found the wealth of the Naam is most unfortunate; he dies over and over again. ||3]|
MSE HS AAs UWS AS AS AC now ae ala films it (494-11, ast, Hs 4) aanad mool jagjeevan daataa sabh jan ka-o anad karahu har Dhi-aavai.
The source of bliss, the Life of the world, the Great Giver brings bliss to all who meditate on the Lord.
3 ws Ht vfs 3a AS aoa Tene aufA fers eel (494-12, aASt, He 4)
too” daataa jee-a sabh tayray jan naanak gurmukh bakhas milaavai. ||4]|6] |
You are the Great Giver, all beings belong to You. O servant Nanak, You forgive the Gurmukhs, and merge them into Yourself. ||4]|6]|
qe Afsars ute i (494-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TAs HIS 8 We 3 Il (494-15) goojree mehlaa 4 ghar 3. Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Third House:
Het aru us Afs dha & AES i (494-15, art, ws 4) maa-ee baap putar sabh har kay kee-ay.
Mother, father and sons are all made by the Lord; Asat a@ Aody ofa afe SS Al (494-15, act, He 4)
sabhnaa ka-o san-banDh har kar dee-ay. ||1]|| the relationships of all are established by the Lord. ||1]|
THe Fe AS so AS ate Il (494-16, ast, He 4) hamraa jor sabh rahi-o mayray beer. I have given up all my strength, O my brother.
ofg a 39 HO AS Ufa & SHAT ASS NA TIS Il (494-16, aAet, ne 4)
har kaa tan man sabh har kai vas hai sareer. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The mind and body belong to the Lord, and the human body is entirely under His control. ||1]|Pause| |
sas Aa aS AeT wef ahs Bet |i (494-16, aAet, v2 4)
bhagat janaa ka-o sarDhaa aap har laa-ee. The Lord Himself infuses devotion into His humble devotees.
fed fans Cava Tae QU (494-17, TAS, He 4)
vichay garisat udaas rahaa-ee. ||2|| In the midst of family life, they remain unattached. ||2| |
ma nists uifs afs fAG afs miret i (494-17, gat, us 4) jab antar pareet har si-o ban aa-ee.
When inner love is established with the Lord,
3a Ht fag ad AS ofa ys Set BI (494-18, gat, He 4)
tab jo kichh karay so mayray har parabh bhaa-ee. ||3]| then whatever one does, is pleasing to my Lord God. ||3]|
fas ard oft oH ofs we II (494-18, aA, He 4) jit kaarai kamm ham har laa-ay. I do those deeds and tasks which the Lord has set me to;
A OH aad 8 mf AaES SI (494-18, gas, Hs 4) so ham karah jo aap karaa-ay. ||4] | I do that which He makes me to do. ||4]|
fio at sofas He Ys Stet I (494-19, aASt, ms 4) jin kee bhagat mayray parabh bhaa-ee. Those whose devotional worship is pleasing to my God
3 AO Sod TH OH fs Bet NUNUDINAEN (494-19, aA, Hs 4)
tay jan naanak raam naam liv laa-ee. ||5||1||7||16] | - O Nanak, those humble beings center their minds lovingly on the Lord's Name. [5] {2]17]]16]|
Ua ecu
Tad HIS u Bue we A (495-1) goojree mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsars ure I (495-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ard 3 Ho fesets Ben A urate ats AG ufsmr II (495-2, ast, Hs 5)
kaahay ray man chitvahi udam jaa aahar har jee-o pari-aa.
Why, O mind, do you contrive your schemes, when the Dear Lord Himself provides for your care?
AS ued ufo Hs Cure ST aor fara nia afs afar All (495-2, aast, He 5)
sail pathar meh jant upaa-ay taa kaa rijak aagai kar Dhari-aa. ||1]|
From rocks and stones, He created the living beings, and He places before them their sustenance. ||1]||
Ae wag At AsHafs fs fA sfaor 1 (495-3, aA, He 5)
mayray maaDha-o jee satsangat milay se tari-aa.
O my Dear Lord of Souls, one who meets with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is saved.
qd udAte usH ue ufeMt Aa AAS Thor AU TITS Il (495-3, TAT, He 5)
gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa sookay kaasat hari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, he obtains the supreme status, and the dry branch blossoms forth in greenery. ||1||Pause] |
fofe fust Sa AS sfest afe o fan at afar II (495-4, aaet, He 5) janan pitaa lok sut banitaa ko-ay na kis kee Dhari-aa. Mother, father, friends, children, and spouse - no one is the support of any other.
fafa fafs fora Fad sag ard Ho SE afanr III (495-4, aaet, He 5)
Sir sir rijak sambaahay thaakur kaahay man bha-o kari-aa. ||2| |
For each and every individual, the Lord and Master provides sustenance; why do you fear, O my mind? |[2||
Gs Cf ure A amr fSH ue Tas Shar Il (495-5, aA, 5) oodai ood aavai sai kosaa tis paachhai bachray chhari-aa. The flamingoes fly hundreds of miles, leaving their young ones behind.
Co eG NOS AEG Bare HO Hfa fisS afar BI (495-6, aA, Hs 5)
un kavan khalaavai kavan chugaavai man meh simran kari-aa. ||3]|
Who feeds them, and who teaches them to feed themselves? Have you ever thought of this in your mind? ||3]|
As fours 2A mine fRoS Sad AT 3G Ufanr il (495-6, gTAet, ws 5)
sabh niDhaan das asat sidhaan thaakur kar tal Dhari-aa.
All treasures and the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas are held by the Lord and Master in the palm of His hand.
As ood af afs Ae afs Ae Sa nig o uTaefanr SIA (495-7, aA, He 5) jan naanak bal bal sad bal jaa-ee-ai tayraa ant na paraavari-aa. ||4||1]| Servant Nanak is devoted, dedicated, and forever a sacrifice to You - Your vast expanse has no limit. ||4[|1]|
Tad HIS u Bue wg 2 (495-8) goojree mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 2 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (495-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fafooras asta ue aot fez aS AAS I (495-9, gat, He 5) kiri-aachaar karahi khat karmaa it raatay sansaaree. They perform the four rituals and six religious rites; the world is engrossed in these.
nists He 3 Cad TEN faa aa Tet TH UA (495-9, aaet, 8 5)
antar mail na utrai ha-umai bin gur baajee haaree. ||1||
They are not cleansed of the filth of their ego within; without the Guru, they lose the game of life. ||1]|
He oad af Seg foot rst i (495-10, aat, 2 5) mayray thaakur rakh layvhu kirpaa Dhaaree. O my Lord and Master, please, grant Your Grace and preserve me.
afe Ha & fear Aza dfs Aas faGost ai TI il (495-10, ast, He 5)
kot maDhay ko virlaa sayvak hor saglay bi-uhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Out of millions, hardly anyone is a servant of the Lord. All the others are mere traders. ||1]|Pause| |
AAS de fafyfs vfs AO AS Sar ars Yarst | (495-11, gas, Hs 5)
saasat bayd simrit sabh soDhay sabh aykaa baat pukaaree.
I have searched all the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Simritees, and they all affirm one thing:
fas aa Hats 3 aS ure His Sug afs ses Ii (495-11, art, ws 5) bin gur mukat na ko-oo paavai man vaykhhu kar beechaaree. ||2| | without the Guru, no one obtains liberation; see, and reflect upon this in your mind.
[2] MOoAS HAS afd feAaat sfH mre Us ATS Il (495-12, art, Hs 5)
athsath majan kar isnaanaa bharam aa-ay Dhar saaree. Even if one takes cleansing baths at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and wanders over the whole planet,
uifoa Ae aafs feo ast fas Afsas niftmrdt Si (495-12, aaet, 48 5)
anik soch karahi din raatee bin satgur anDhi-aaree. ||3]||
and performs all the rituals of purification day and night, still, without the True Guru, there is only darkness. ||3]||
Wes Wes Ag Ad OES wa mre ale Enis I (495-13, art, He 5)
Dhaavat Dhaavat sabh jag Dhaa-i-o ab aa-ay har du-aaree.
Roaming and wandering around, I have travelled over the whole world, and now, I have arrived at the Lord's Door.
vonfs Afe afa ugarAt Aa atoa ASHfY Sat NSUAI (495-13, TASH, He 5) durmat mayt buDh pargaasee jan naanak gurmukh taaree. ||4||1]|2||
The Lord has eliminated my evil-mindedness, and enlightened my intellect; O servant Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved. ||4||1]|2]|
TAS HIS U i (495-14) goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
ofa ug ATU ofs ug Su fe ug SHS Ther I (495-14, aAet, He 5)
har Dhan jaap har Dhan taap har Dhan bhojan bhaa-i-aa.
The wealth of the Lord is my chanting, the wealth of the Lord is my deep meditation; the wealth of the Lord is the food I enjoy.
foHy 3 fans Ho 3 ofe ofe AOnafS Hfs ue A (495-15, aA, Hs 5)
nimakh na bisara-o man tay har har saaDhsangat meh paa-i-aa. ||1|| I do not forget the Lord, Har, Har, from my mind, even for an instant; I have found Him in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
Het urfe wife ufs ust il (495-15, gAst, He 5) maa-ee khaat aa-i-o ghar pootaa. O mother, your son has returned home with a profit:
fs ug Vos Us ug BA Ta UG WAS AST AU TIS il (495-16, aA, ws 5)
har Dhan chaltay har Dhan baisay har Dhan jaagat sootaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
the wealth of the Lord while walking, the wealth of the Lord while sitting, and the wealth of the Lord while waking and sleeping. ||1]||Pause] |
ofa ue fenos safe ue famre afe Afar ate fomrar il (495-16, ast, He 5)
har Dhan isnaan har Dhan gi-aan har sang laa-ay Dhi-aanaa.
The wealth of the Lord is my cleansing bath, the wealth of the Lord is my wisdom; I center my meditation on the Lord.
dfs ug 300 afe ug ast afe afe as usar QM (495-17, aA, He 5)
har Dhan tulhaa har Dhan bayrhee har har taar paraanaa. ||2||
The wealth of the Lord is my raft, the wealth of the Lord is my boat; the Lord, Har, Har, is the ship to carry me across. ||2||
ust ete ofa as Hat fas feast afe afs afar ter i (496-1, aAet, He 5)
har Dhan mayree chint visaaree har Dhan laahi-aa Dhokhaa. Through the wealth of the Lord, I have forgotten my anxiety; through the wealth of the Lord, my doubt has been dispelled.
ofa as 3 4 de fafa uet ofa ofa afe Gar WSN (496-1, gH, He 5)
har Dhan tay mai nav niDh paa-ee haath chari-o har thokaa. ||3]|
From the wealth of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures; the true essence of the Lord has come into my hands. ||3]|
Weg udeg Sfe 5 mre IHS UBS A Adi Il (496-2, aaet, ne 5)
kaavahu kharchahu tot na aavai halat palat kai sangay.
No matter how much I eat and expend this wealth, it is not exhausted; here and hereafter, it remains with me.
oe une dfs aaa ag chor feg ue ofa dfa Fat uSiQNBi (496-2, aaet, ue 5) laad khajaanaa gur naanak ka-o dee-aa ih man har rang rangay. ||4||2||3]|
Loading the treasure, Guru Nanak has given it, and this mind is imbued with the Lord's Love. ||4]|2[|3]|
TAS HIS U Il (496-3)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
fan fines Afs foofeu anfs fusdt af Cars I (496-3, aaet, He 5) jis simrat sabh kilvikh naaseh pitree ho-ay uDhaaro. Remembering Him, all sins are erased, and ones generations are saved.
A ofs ofa 3H Ae dt ug AT aT nis B urs MAUI (496-4, act, He 5) so har har tum" sad hee jaapahu jaa kaa ant na paaro. ||1]| So meditate continually on the Lord, Har, Har; He has no end or limitation. ||1]|
UST HIST at MITATA I (496-4, art, 42 5) pootaa maataa kee aasees. O son, this is your mother's hope and prayer,
fon 3 fansS 3H aG dfs afs Ae SHO AAS NU TIS Il (496-5, aA, He 5) nimakh na bisara-o tum" ka-o har har sadaa bhajahu jagdees. ||1|| rahaa-o. that you may never forget the Lord, Har, Har, even for an instant. May you ever vibrate upon the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause] |
Afsag 3H a@ of efenre Harifer Sct utfS i (496-5, gat, ne 5)
satgur tum" ka-o ho-ay da-i-aalaa satsang tayree pareet. May the True Guru be kind to you, and may you love the Society of the Saints.
aus ufs ushAg It SHG ates StS III (496-6, aaet, 2 5)
kaaparh pat parmaysar raakhee bhojan keertan neet. ||2]|
May the preservation of your honor by the Transcendent Lord be your clothes, and may the singing of His Praises be your food. ||2]|
nifys uleg Ae fag Fleg ofa fines nee MST Il (496-7, TAT, He 5)
amrit peevhu sadaa chir jeevhu har simrat anad anantaa.
So drink in forever the Ambrosial Nectar; may you live long, and may the meditative remembrance of the Lord give you infinite delight.
Sa SHA UTS HMA oats o feat FIST BI (496-7, TAT, He 5)
rang tamaasaa pooran aasaa kabeh na bi-aapai chintaa. ||3]||
May joy and pleasure be yours; may your hopes be fulfilled, and may you never be troubled by worries. ||3]|
seg sure feg He dee ofa vee" TT ABS I (496-8, aH, He 5) bhavar tum"aaraa ih man hova-o har charnaa hohu ka-ulaa. Let this mind of yours be the bumble bee, and let the Lord's feet be the lotus flower.
aoa aA Ca Afar Buctes fae gets oiyq HEH Isisisil (496-8, aA, Hs 5) naanak daas un sang laptaa-i-o ji-o boo‘deh chaatrik ma-ulaa. ||4]]3||41|
Says servant Nanak, attach your mind to them, and blossom forth like the song-bird, upon finding the rain-drop. ||4||3]|4]|
TAS HIS U Il (496-9)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
HS" Ad UH & Set UTA Tt S AST Il (496-9, TAH, He 5) mataa karai pachham kai taa-ee poorab hee lai jaat. He decides to go to the west, but the Lord leads him away to the east.
fas ufo atu Garusatat nitus ThA HITS IAI (496-10, TAT, 8 5)
khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa aapan haath mataat. ||1]| In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; He holds all matters in His hands.
[21
froreu arg of & wis I (496-10, ant, H 5) si-aanap kaahoo kaam na aat. Cleverness is of no use at all.
sa 5
A niogfus oats He af gat ST TS NU TIS I (496-11, aA, Hs 5) jo anroopi-o thaakur mayrai ho-ay rahee uh baat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever my Lord and Master deems to be right - that alone comes to pass. ||1]|Pause| |
2H OHSS US AS at HOA ats feaA ATA II (496-11, aA, Hs 5) days kamaavan Dhan joran kee mansaa beechay niksay saas. In his desire to acquire land and accumulate wealth, one's breath escapes him.
SAAT 68 YSTA AS fsnrd AH ufs Cfo fara NI (496-12, aASt, He 5) laskar nayb khavaas sabh ti-aagay jam pur ooth siDhaas. ||2||
He must leave all his armies, assistants and servants; rising up, he departs to the City of Death. ||2]|
dfe mdfs Hove at fess nro AG ASS Il (496-12, aH, Hs 5) ho-ay annan manhath kee darirh-taa aapas ka-o jaanaat. Believing himself to be unique, he clings to his stubborn mind, and shows himself off.
A uifse fee afe efs6 Het fefs fefe ws Sil (496-13, ant, He 5)
jo anind nind kar chhodi-o so-ee fir fir khaat. ||3]|
That food, which the blameless people have condemned and discarded, he eats again and again. ||3]|
Hon Hate se fagurer (SA AS at aret STA Il (496-14, aAet, He 5)
sahj subhaa-ay bha-ay kirpaalaa tis jan kee kaatee faas.
One, unto whom the Lord shows His natural mercy, has the noose of Death cut away from him.
AJ aoa dg ud Sfeur UdwEe farsAs Can NSISIUll (496-14, TAT, Hs 5)
kaho naanak gur pooraa bhayti-aa parvaan girsat udaas. ||4]||4||5||
Says Nanak, one who meets the Perfect Guru, is celebrated as a householder as well as a renunciate. ||4||4]|5]|
TAS HIS U I (496-15)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
oH fours fafs vfs afuG fae & dus are I (496-15, aaet, ue 5)
naam niDhaan jin jan japi-o tin kay banDhan kaatay.
Those humble beings who chant the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, have their bonds broken.
am au Hfenr fray wnat feo famrfa 3 TS UA (496-15, aA, He 5)
kaam kroDh maa-i-aa bikh mamtaa ih bi-aaDh tay haatay. ||1]||
Sexual desirer, anger, the poison of Maya and egotism - they are rid of these afflictions. ||1]|
ofa AA AGA far ffs arte i (496-16, at, He 5)
har jas saaDhsang mil gaa-i-o.
One who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and chants the Praises of the Lord,
ag usAte sfe6 Ho fasne Aaa Aa AY ufeMe ai TIS il (496-16, aA, v8 5) gur parsaad bha-i-o man nirmal sarab sukhaa sukh paa-i-a-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. has his mind purified, by Guru's Grace, and he obtains the joy of all joys. ||1]|Pause| |
A fag at Aet 3m HS MAT serfs aHAt I (496-17, TAS, He 5)
jo kichh kee-o so-ee bhal maanai aisee bhagat kamaanee.
Whatever the Lord does, he sees that as good; such is the devotional service he performs.
fey AZ AS Sa AHS Ha Pals Strat Ml (496-18, aA, He 5) mitar satar sabh ayk samaanay jog jugat neesaanee. ||2]| He sees friends and enemies as all the same; this is the sign of the Way of Yoga. ||2||
ude ufs sfoS Fe aet ora o AST AST Il (496-18, gAST, He 5) pooran poor rahi-o sarab thaa-ee aan na katahoo" jaataa. The all-pervading Lord is fully filling all places; why should I go anywhere else?
we we nists Hea fadste df afeG dfar gsr SI (496-19, TAS, He 5)
ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar rang ravi-o rang raataa. ||3]|
He is permeating and pervading within each and every heart; I am immersed in His Love, dyed in the color of His Love. ||3]|
se feu efimres quer st fags & wife mirfemr It (496-19, act, v2 5)
bha-ay kirpaal da-i-aal gupaalaa taa nirbhai kai ghar aa-i-aa.
When the Lord of the Universe becomes kind and compassionate, then one enters the home of the Fearless Lord.
uar eto ates aan fe fas stafs asa Auf AHfeEMr ISNUNEN (497-1, gat, He 5)
kal kalays mitay khin bheetar naanak sahj samaa-i-aa. ||4]|5||6|| His troubles and worries are ended in an instant; O Nanak, he merges in celestial peace. ||4||5||6]|
TAT HIS U Il (497-2)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
fan Hou ufs ase Bast A mrs ef sfanr I (497-2, aAet, He 5) jis maanukh peh kara-o bayntee so apnai dukh bhari-aa. Whoever I approach to ask for help, I find him full of his own troubles.
ursgqan fafs fae mrefimr fate 3@ Aare sfamr Al (497-2, aaet, He 5) paarbarahm jin ridai araaDhi-aa tin bha-o saagar tari-aa. ||1]|
One who worships in his heart the Supreme Lord God, crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
aa ofa fas & & fgar ze aS Il (497-3, act, ne 5) gur har bin ko na baritha dukh kaatai. No one, except the Guru-Lord, can dispel our pain and sorrow.
us Sf ned Aza A det 3 Ss we HIS AA weS IA TIE Il (497-3, aa, He 5) parabh taj avar sayvak jay ho-ee hai tit maan mahat jas ghaatai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Forsaking God, and serving another, one's honor, dignity and reputation are decreased. ||1]|Pause| |
Hor & Hoda Ae AS fas dt orth 3 wrfemr i (497-4, aeet, Hs 5) maa-i-aa kay san-banDh sain saak kit hee kaam na aa-i-aa. Relatives, relations and family bound through Maya are of no avail.
dfs a oH ate ae Sur fH Afar Ho aes SH ufeMr Il (497-5, aA, He 5)
har kaa daas neech kul oochaa tis sang man baachhat fal paa-i-aa. ||2]|
The Lord's servant, although of lowly birth, is exalted. Associating with him, one obtains the fruits of his mind's desires. ||2||
ory atfe fatter & fine a ufs fers 3 gst Il (497-5, aA, Hs 5)
laakh kot bikhi-aa kay binjan taa meh tarisan na boojhee.
Through corruption, one may obtain thousands and millions of enjoyments, but even so, his desires are not satisfied through them.
fAHes oH afe CHa ary vides AST ISI (497-6, aAT, He 5)
simrat naam kot ujee-aaraa basat agochar soojhee. ||3]|
Remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, millions of lights appear, and the incomprehensible is understood. ||3]|
fess fees SHS ours urfemr 3 sae afe ahem II (497-7, aAEt, He 5)
firat firat tum"rai du-aar aa-i-aa bhai bhanjan har raa-i-aa.
Wandering and roaming around, I have come to Your Door, Destroyer of fear, O Lord King.
AY & vas Ufe AS Me AY sa feg ufenr SNE (497-7, aA, Hs 5) saaDh kay charan Dhoor jan baachhai sukh naanak ih paa-i-aa. ||4||6]|7| |
Servant Nanak yearns for the dust of the feet of the Holy; in it, he finds peace. [14] 16] 171]
Tret Hos u UsuET we 2 (497-9)
goojree mehlaa 5 panchpadaa ghar 2 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Panch-Pada, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (497-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ya aes HST a SA Co ets cals xfs nrfeEnr il (497-10, gat, Hs 5) parathmay garabh maataa kai vaasaa oohaa chhod Dharan meh aa-i-aa. First, he came to dwell in his mother's womb; leaving it, he came into the world.
fog Ae Hed aa Hes Ala o AST AMM AI (497-10, ast, He 5) chitar saal sundar baag mandar sang na kachhhoo jaa-i-aa. ||1]| Splendid mansions, beautiful gardens and palaces - none of these shall go with him.
[21
wea AS fiufemr Ss wat | (497-11, gat, He 5) avar sabh mithi-aa lobh labee. All other greeds of the greedy are false.
afs us AG ofs ant Ahr a Sa SAS sat UU TTS il (497-11, aA, ws 5)
gur poorai dee-o har naamaa jee-a ka-o ayhaa vasat fabee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has given me the Name of the Lord, which my soul has come to treasure. ||1]||Pause| |
fene Hts dou AS sve Afar sfest afe ofA ii (497-12, gaat, us 5)
isat meet banDhap sut bhaa-ee sang banitaa rach hasi-aa.
Surrounded by dear friends, relatives, children, siblings and spouse, he laughs playfully.
ma nist mag orf af 3 Ca Uus dt arts fir ii (497-12, act, 2 5)
jab antee a-osar aa-ay bani-o hai un" paykhat hee kaal garsi-aa. ||2]|
But when the very last moment arrives, Death seizes him, while they merely look on.
21 |
ate ate misses frost HU Afar gut aH Il (497-13, art, He 5)
kar kar anrath bihaajhee sampai su-inaa roopaa daamaa.
By continual oppression and exploitation, he accumulates wealth, gold, silver and money,
ast a8 Gy oa fifemr gg Hors sfeG fear 3 (497-13, act, He 5)
bhaarhee ka-o oh bhaarhaa mili-aa hor sagal bha-i-o biraanaa. ||3]|
but the load-bearer gets only paltry wages, while the rest of the money passes on to others. ||3||
ded Hed va Had ag afs aS AS i (497-14, art, ve 5) haivar gaivar rath sambaahay gahu kar keenay mayray. He grabs and collects horses, elephants and chariots, and claims them as his own.
wa 3 det anit ot vata act fea UT USI (497-15, aA, HE 5)
jab tay ho-ee laa‘mee Dhaa-ee chaleh naahee ik pairay. ||4]|
But when he sets out on the long journey, they will not go even one step with him. [41 |
OH US OH AY SH OH ACH Ae Il (497-15, ast, ue 5)
naam Dhan naam sukh raajaa naam kutamb sahaa-ee.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my wealth; the Naam is my princely pleasure; the Naam is my family and helper.
on Hufs afs aaa a@ cet Go Hd oo mrs AT NUNIT (497-16, aA, He 5) naam sampat gur naanak ka-o dee-ee oh marai na aavai jaa-ee. ||5]|1]|8]|
The Guru has given Nanak the wealth of the Naam; it neither perishes, nor comes or goes. ||5|/1]|8]]
TAdt Hos u fsus wey 2 (497-17) goojree mehlaa 5 tipday ghar 2 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Ti-Padas, Second House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (497-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ou fasr Ae ater foe fgAo nafs gSTeT I (497-18, TACT, Hs 5)
dukh binsay sukh kee-aa nivaasaa tarisnaa jalan bujhaa-ee.
My sorrows are ended, and I am filled with peace. The fire of desire within me has been quenched.
on fous Afsag feafenr feat 3 mre AE AU (497-18, aA, 8 5)
naam niDhaan satguroo drirh-aa-i-aa binas na aavai jaa-ee. ||1||
The True Guru has implanted the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me; it neither dies, nor goes anywhere. ||1||
dfs Af ufenr sae FS! Il (497-19, art, He 5) har jap maa-i-aa banDhan tootay. Meditating on the Lord, the bonds of Maya are cut away.
3e faurs efenre ys HS AGHaTs ffs SS UU TIS il (497-19, aA, Hs 5)
bha-ay kirpaal da-i-aal parabh mayray saaDhsangat mil chhootay. ||1|| rahaa-o. When my God becomes kind and compassionate, one joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and is emancipated. ||1]|Pause]|
Ua ett
mS udd dfs & To we safs UH ofA HST II (498-1, aAST, He 5)
aath pahar har kay gun gaavai bhagat paraym ras maataa.
Twenty-four hours a day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, absorbed in loving devotional worship.
Jou Aa eg wife fase AIST USS MQM (498-1, act, He 5) harakh sog duhu maahi niraalaa karnaihaar pachhaataa. ||2||
He remains unaffected by both fortune and misfortune, and he recognizes the Creator Lord. ||2]|
fan at AT f30 ot of Shor Aare Fats ate miret I (498-2, gTASt, He 5)
jis kaa saa tin hee rakh lee-aa sagal jugat ban aa-ee. The Lord saves those who belong to Him, and all pathways are opened to them.
aT aoa us usd eenrer atHfs ade 3 AT MSIUUICN (498-2, TAS, He 5) kaho naanak parabh purakh da-i-aalaa keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||3]|1]|9]| Says Nanak, the value of the Merciful Lord God cannot be described. ||3]|1]|9]|
TAdt HIS u Tus wg 2 (498-4) goojree mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 2 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Second House:
qe Asa yAfe Il (498-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ufsz ufez ote afe nud Aas ATS SHAS Il (498-5, gat, He 5)
patit pavitar lee-ay kar apunay sagal karat namaskaaro.
The Lord has sanctified the sinners and made them His own; all bow in reverence to Him.
wag WS AG us aS Tels GIs Tes INA (498-5, TASH, Hs 5) baran jaat ko-oo poochhai naahee baachheh charan ravaaro. ||1||
No one asks about their ancestry and social status; instead, they yearn for the dust of their feet. ||1]|
AS & OTaAT MA OTH SH Il (498-6, THT, He 5) thaakur aiso naam tum"aaro. O Lord Master, such is Your Name.
Aare fqrfe & vat adits Ao a nia food A TIS Il (498-6, aA, He 5)
Sagal sarisat ko Dhanee kaheejai jan ko ang niraaro. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are called the Lord of all creation; You give Your unique support to Your servant. ||1]|Pause] |
Worf aod sfa uret ofe atese mrad | (498-7, ant, ve 5)
saaDhsang naanak buDh paa-ee har keertan aaDhaaro.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has obtained understanding; singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is his only support.
oHee fsxsug ade oA Hafs sfES Thmrs WINAUIION (498-7, ast, He 5) naamday-o tarilochan kabeer daasro mukat bha-i-o chammi-aaro. ||2||1]|10]|
The Lord's servants, Naam Dayv, Trilochan, Kabeer and Ravi Daas the shoe-maker have been liberated. ||2||1]|10]|
TAS HIS U Il (498-8)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
J Od AG FSIS WS AEG FST Il (498-8, TH, Hs 5) hai naahee ko-oo boojhanhaaro jaanai kavan bhataa. No one understands the Lord; who can understand His plans?
fre fadfs wig Hers Hfs AS afs o Rafa aS NA (498-8, aH, Hs 5) siv biranch ar sagal mon jan geh na sakaahi gataa. ||1]|| Shiva, Brahma and all the silent sages cannot understand the state of the Lord. ||1]|
Ys at via wiarfa aar Il (498-9, aaet, w3 5) parabh kee agam agaaDh kathaa. God's sermon is profound and unfathomable.
Hom nied nied fafa ght saa AGS FIST NU TIC I (498-9, geet, Hs 5)
sunee-ai avar avar biDh bujhee-ai bakan kathan rahtaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He is heard to be one thing, but He is understood to be something else again; He is beyond description and explanation. ||1]|Pause||
nny gast orfy AMMt wire Afar TS I (498-10, gH, we 5)
aapay bhagtaa aap su-aamee aapan sang rataa. He Himself is the devotee, and He Himself is the Lord and Master; He is imbued with Himself.
aoa & us ute sfes F Uf AZ AST NINA (498-10, aA, Hs 5)
naanak ko parabh poor rahi-o hai paykhi-o jatar kataa. ||2||2||11]|
Nanak's God is pervading and permeating everywhere; wherever he looks, He is there. H2]12] [221]
TAS HIS U il (498-11)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
HS HASHS nied fimrou Ae AB aE 3 mMfES it (498-11, art, He 5)
mataa masoorat avar si-aanap jan ka-o kachhoo na aa-i-o. The humble servant of the Lord has no plans, politics or other clever tricks.
Ad Wo MBAg urfe afeG 3 sa so afte fomrfEE Wall (498-12, aAt, He 5) jah jah a-osar aa-ay bani-o hai tahaa tahaa har Dhi-aa-i-o. ||1]| Whenever the occasion arises, there, he meditates on the Lord. ||1]|
ys a safs eee faseteS ii (498-12, gat, ue 5) parabh ko bhagat vachhal birdaari-o. It is the very nature of God to love His devotees;
ad yfsues afea at fanret Fa a os Bates Nd TIC Il (498-13, TAT, 2 5) karay partipaal baarik kee ni-aa-ee jan ka-o laad ladaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. He cherishes His servant, and caresses him as His own child. ||1]]Pause| |
WU 3U AAH ASH UsH ole atese Als WES Il (498-13, gat, we 5)
jap tap sanjam karam Dharam har keertan jan gaa-i-o.
The Lord's servant sings the Kirtan of His Praises as his worship, deep meditation, self-discipline and religious observances.
Rafe ufas aaa oad at ms eg AY UTEE NINSNII (498-14, TAT, He 5)
Saran pari-o naanak thaakur kee abhai daan sukh paa-i-o. ||2||3]|12|| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master, and has received the blessings of fearlessness and peace. ||2||3||12]|
TAS HIS U I (498-15)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
fea wat mrarag fumird fon o afta char il (498-15, aaret, ne 5) din raatee aaraaDhahu pi-aaro nimakh na keejai dheelaa. Worship the Lord in adoration, day and night, O my dear - do not delay for a moment.
Ha Az ate sreot wren faorfar ure Tester WAU (498-15, at, He 5) sant sayvaa kar bhaavnee laa-ee-ai ti-aag maan haatheelaa. ||1]| Serve the Saints with loving faith, and set aside your pride and stubbornness. ||1]|
HIG UTS HS Tair il (498-16, gat, ue 5) mohan paraan maan raageelaa. The fascinating, playful Lord is my very breath of life and honor.
ath afae dbus & Hat ufe HfaG He ster NU TIC i (498-16, THe, He 5) baas rahi-o hee-aray kai sangay paykh mohi-o man leelaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He abides in my heart; beholding His playful games, my mind is fascinated. ||1]|Pause| |
fan faunas ufs dS nse" Css Hog Halter i (498-17, aAet, He 5) jis simrat man hot anandaa utrai manhu jangeelaa. Remembering Him, my mind is in bliss, and the rust of my mind is removed.
fad at HfoH safe 3 AAG SR UT UPS NNIII (498-18, TAT, He 5)
milbay kee mahimaa baran na saaka-o naanak parai pareelaa. ||2||4]|13]|
The great honor of meeting the Lord cannot be described; O Nanak, it is infinite, beyond measure. ||2||4]|13]|
TAT HIS U Il (498-18)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
nfs Fat AASfa ares AS ats afA ura I (498-19, aAet, Hs 5)
mun jogee saastarag kahaavat sabh keen"ay bas apnahee.
They call themselves silent sages, Yogis and scholars of the Shaastras, but Maya has has them all under her control.
Sie te nig afs 33h fse at dafs ag 3 Tat AI (498-19, gH, He 5) teen dayv ar korh tayteesaa tin kee hairat kachh na rahee. ||1]| The three gods, and the 330,000,000 demi-gods, were astonished. ||1]|
ust Beet aeets forty sot As Hat I (499-1, ast, He 5)
balvant bi-aap rahee sabh mahee. The power of Maya is pervading everywhere.
Meg 5 Wot AS HaH Te fasur 3S Bat Ul TIS i (499-1, aA, ws 5) avar na jaanas ko-oo marmaa gur kirpaa tay lahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Her secret is known only by Guru's Grace - no one else knows it. ||1]|Pause] |
Aifs ats ats Afs arat Aa Seq BUST Il (499-2, gTHet, ve 5)
jeet jeet jeetay sabh thaanaa sagal bhavan laptahee.
Conquering and conquering, she has conquered everywhere, and she clings to the whole world.
ag sed ATS sat de Sat vas Tat NQUNUNIEH (499-2, gH, He 5)
kaho naanak saaDh tay bhaagee ho-ay chayree charan gahee. ||2||5||14] |
Says Nanak, she surrenders to the Holy Saint; becoming his servant, she falls at his feet. ||2]|5]]14]|
TAS HIS U Il (499-3)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
efe ag afs adt 86st og wruor fomrfemr I (499-3, aaet, 18 5)
du-ay kar jorh karee baynantee thaakur apnaa Dhi-aa-i-aa.
With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer, meditating on my Lord and Master.
ve efe ad ugHhAte Aare vas fHetfemr IA (499-4, gat, He 5) haath day-ay raakhay parmaysar saglaa durat mitaa-i-aa. ||1|| Giving me His hand, the Transcendent Lord has saved me, and erased all my sins.
[21
Sag ge mirfy efenies i (499-4, ast, ue 5) thaakur ho-ay aap da-i-aal. The Lord and Master Himself has become merciful.
set afore ures gu get F Sas aes TUS AU: TICS Il (499-4, aret, we 5)
bha-ee kali-aan aanand roop hu-ee hai ubray baal gupaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have been emancipated, the embodiment of bliss; I am the child of the Lord of the Universe - He has carried me across. ||1]|Pause||
ffs za oct Hares arfemr oars at AaE Il (499-5, aaet, He 5)
mil var naaree mangal gaa-i-aa thaakur kaa jaikaar.
Meeting her Husband, the soul-bride sings the songs of joy, and celebrates her Lord and Master.
ag aod fsa ad afeodt fats As at aor Burg WINENWUI (499-6, gTAST, He 5)
kaho naanak tis gur balihaaree jin sabh kaa kee-aa uDhaar. ||2||6||15]| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has emancipated everyone. ||2]|6]|15]|
TAS HIS U Il (499-6)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
Hs fust set AS dau fSo a aed GT Il (499-6, aa, He 5) maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banDhap tin kaa bal hai thoraa. Mother, father, siblings, children and relatives - their power is insignificant.
mifsa da fear & ue fas Ata o TS FI WAU (499-7, Tae, us 5) anik rang maa-i-aa kay paykhay kichh saath na chaalai bhoraa. ||1]|| I have seen the many pleasures of Maya, but none goes with them in the end. ||1||
sag 33 fag orfa & Hat Il (499-8, aaet, He 5) thaakur tujh bin aahi na moraa. O Lord Master, other than You, no one is mine.
Hfs nora fords Te ost H orfaG sya Ga Ul TIS il (499-8, aA, He 5) mohi anaath nirgun gun naahee mai aahi-o tum"raa Dhoraa. ||1]| rahaa-o. I am a worthless orphan, devoid of merit; I long for Your Support. ||1||Pause| |
af af afs afs sae sus Sto Ca SH AT Il (499-9, ast, He 5)
bal bal bal bal charan tum"aaray eehaa oohaa tum"aaraa joraa.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Your lotus feet; here and hereafter, Yours is the only power.
AUFfa soa ean utes faofAs nares fads iIWUAEN (499-9, aA, Hs 5)
saaDhsang naanak daras paa-i-o binsi-o sagal nihoraa. ||2||7||16|| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has obtained the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; my obligations to all others are annulled. ||2||7||16]|
TAS HIS U I (499-10)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
WIS A ZH HT sae YS ASt Sa wet il (499-10, gat, ne 5) aal jaal bharam moh tajaavai parabh saytee rang laa-ee.
He rids us of entanglements, doubt and emotional attachment, and leads us to love God.
Ho ag fes Guen fess Hofs AafA TE aret WAI (499-10, ast, ne 5)
man ka-o ih updays darirh-aavai sahj sahj gun gaa-ee. ||1]||
He implants this instruction in our minds, for us to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, in peace and poise. ||1]|
AHS MA AS ATet i (499-11, gast, us 5) Saajan aiso sant sahaa-ee. O friend, the Saintly Guru is such a helper.
fan Se Zefa wfeor da feats 5 aay Are NA TIS Il (499-11, art, He 5)
jis bhaytay tooteh maa-i-aa banDh bisar na kabahoo" jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting Him, the bonds of Maya are released, and one never forgets the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ads ATS wifoa aT st Stat fea saaet Il (499-12, aAet, v2 5)
karat karat anik baho bhaatee neekee ih thahraa-ee.
Practicing, practicing various actions in so many ways, I came to recognize this as the best way.
fife Arg afe AA TS HHA SEAS UPS UTET MICU (499-13, TAS, Hs 5)
mil saaDhoo har jas gaavai naanak bhavjal paar paraa-ee. ||2||8]|17]| Joining the Company of the Holy, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||8]|17]|
TAS HIS U I (499-13)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
fas nfs atu Garusarat ats Ae & at Il (499-13, aaet, v2 5)
khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa keemat jaa-ay na karee. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; His value cannot be described.
om da ad fis stafe ated Afs odt Al (499-14, gat, He 5) raajaa rank karai khin bheetar neechah jot Dharee. ||1]| He turns the king into a beggar in an instant, and He infuses splendor into the lowly.
[21
foment mrs et Tat Il (499-14, aaet, He 5) Dhi-aa-ee-ai apno sadaa haree. Meditate forever on Your Lord.
Ae wider st at aot adha aT Hfs Sa wet WAU TIS Il (499-15, Tat, we 5)
soch andaysaa taa kaa kahaa karee-ai jaa meh ayk gharee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why should I feel worry or anxiety, when I am here for only a short time. ||1]|Pause] |
SHat 2a ys HS Asa Ho Hels SHS ust Il (499-15, aA, Hs 5)
tum"ree tayk pooray mayray satgur man saran tum"aarai paree.
You are my support, O my Perfect True Guru; my mind has taken to the protection of Your Sanctuary.
mds fend afea aod JH SH Tug Os AT MQANENATH (499-16, TAT, He 5) achayt i-aanay baarik naanak ham tum raakho Dhaar karee. ||2]|9||18]|
Nanak, I am a foolish and ignorant child; reach out to me with Your hand, Lord, and save me. ||2||]9]|18]|
TAS HIS U I (499-17)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
3 ast thor Ago at aA HS Ho Ha Il (499-17, art, He 5) too” daataa jee-aa sabhnaa kaa bashu mayray man maahee. You are the Giver of all beings; please, come to dwell within my mind.
Ue GHG fee uty AHS 3d SGH vida oat UU (499-17, TAT, He 5) charan kamal rid maahi samaa-ay tah bharam anDhayraa naahee. ||1]| That heart, within which Your lotus feet are enshrined, suffers no darkness or doubt.
[21
OAT A frye J IaH Il (499-18, art, Hs 5) thaakur jaa simraa too” taahee. O Lord Master, wherever I remember You, there I find You.
afd fasur Aga ufsursa ys AG Aet Aad NA TIS Il (499-18, geet, ws 5)
kar kirpaa sarab partipaalak parabh ka-o sadaa salaahee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Show Mercy to me, O God, Cherisher of all, that I may sing Your Praises forever. ||1]|Pause] |
AYA ATA So OH AHSC 3H dt AG Ys nT II (499-19, aat, He 5) Saas Saas tayraa naam samaara-o tum hee ka-o parabh aahee. With each and every breath, I contemplate Your Name; O God, I long for You alone.
sod 2a set aes at da uA fastat wat MQNIONAVE! (499-19, TAT, He 5)
naanak tayk bha-ee kartay kee hor aas bidaanee laahee. ||2||10]|19]| O Nanak, my support is the Creator Lord; I have renounced all other hopes. [|2]|10]]19]|
UST UOO
TAS HIS U i (500-1)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
afs fasur must van tia AA ae fofh nig Sz I (500-1, aHet, He 5)
kar kirpaa apnaa daras deejai jas gaava-o nis ar bhor.
Show Mercy to me, and grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I sing Your Praises night and day.
aA Hfa aA ua sa fed Hoga HT MAUI (500-2, aAet, He 5) kays sang daas pag jhaara-o ihai manorath mor. ||1]| With my hair, I wash the feet of Your slave; this is my life's purpose. ||1]|
sag 33 fag shor 3 Fa Il (500-2, act, ne 5) thaakur tujh bin bee-aa na hor. O Lord and Master, without You, there is no other at all.
fats fase@ af aA mau fos suet Ss ai TIS Il (500-3, aaet, vz 5)
chit chitva-o har rasan araaDha-o nirkha-o tumree or. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O Lord, in my mind I remain conscious of You; with my tongue I worship You, and with my eyes, I gaze upon You. ||1||Pause| |
cfenres use Hee & oad faaG as ag Afs II (500-3, aAct, ne 5)
da-i-aal purakh sarab kay thaakur bin-o kara-o kar jor.
O Merciful Lord, O Lord and Master of all, with my palms pressed together I pray to You.
OY AU StSg BH SH Cualk mmdt ST MQUAAUIION (500-4, ast, He 5) naam japai naanak daas tumro uDhras aakhee for. ||2||11]|20]|
Nanak, Your slave, chants Your Name, and is redeemed in the twinkling of an eye. [|2]]12][20]|
TAS HIS U Il (500-5)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
quH Ba og ge Ba nret fF Ga 3 wf I (500-5, aAet, ue 5)
barahm lok ar rudr lok aa-ee indar lok tay Dhaa-ay.
Overwhelming the realm of Brahma, the realm of Shiva and the realm of Indra, Maya has come running here.
Aunts a afs o At yf nfs GS uf Wal (500-5, aaet, He 5)
saaDhsangat ka-o johi na saakai mal mal Dhovai paa-ay. ||1||
But she cannot touch the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; she washes and massages their feet. ||1]|
ma Hfs urfe ufsS Aaate i (500-6, ant, ue 5) ab mohi aa-ay pari-o sarnaa-ay. Now, I have come and entered the Lord's Sanctuary.
dA wed ay yas 4 a Afsatfe AE I sste ai Ta il (500-6, act, ne 5) guhaj paavko bahut parjaarai mo ka-o satgur dee-o hai bataa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. This awful fire has burned so many; the True Guru has cautioned me about it. ||1]|Pause] |
fro Afoe nig AY food od Tat ais Gaste il (500-7, aA, we 5)
siDh saaDhik ar jakh-y kinnar nar rahee kanth urjhaa-ay.
It clings to the necks of the Siddhas, and the seekers, the demi-gods, angels and mortals.
Hs ose vig ahr ufs ass A a afe MA SATE QNINVAUI (500-7, aHet, 2 5) jan naanak ang kee-aa parabh kartai jaa kai kot aisee daasaa-ay. ||2||12||21]||
Servant Nanak has the support of God the Creator, who has millions of slaves like her. [|2]]12]]22]|
TAS HIS U i (500-8)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
muna fue d@ afar atefs eaars SAS ureht | (500-8, aeet, vs 5)
apjas mitai hovai jag keerat dargeh baisan paa-ee-ai.
His bad reputation is erased, he is acclaimed all over the world, and he obtains a seat in the Court of the Lord.
AH at 3A oA ofe fas ufo AY noe ASt wife ASDA WAI (00-9, aAet, He 5)
jam kee taraas naas ho-ay khin meh sukh anad saytee ghar jaa-ee-ai. ||1||
The fear of death is removed in an instant, and he goes to the Lord's House in peace and bliss. ||1]|
WT 3 ures 3 feat wet I (500-10, gat, He 5) jaa tay ghaal na birthee jaa-ee-ai. His works do not go in vain.
wie udd frag ys wus Hfs 3fs Aer fret 19 TIE il (500-10, gat, 42 5) aath pahar simrahu parabh apnaa man tan sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, remember your God in meditation; meditate on Him continually in your mind and body. ||1]||Pause| |
Hfa Hate de wu sHs F tfa Ret ys ust I (500-11, aaet, Hs 5)
mohi saran deen dukh bhanjan too” deh so-ee parabh paa-ee-ai.
I seek Your Sanctuary, O Destroyer of the pains of the poor; whatever You give me, God, that is what I receive.
BIE HS FSA da TS ols VAT UA THEA N93 (500-11, TAT, He 5)
charan kamal naanak rang raatay har daasah paij rakhaa-ee-ai. ||2||13]|22|| Nanak is imbued with the love of Your lotus feet; O Lord, please preserve the honor of Your slave. ||2]|13]|22]|
TAS HIS U i (500-12)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
fifa rhs & erst sats SF FIT Il (500-12, gHt, Hz 5)
bisamvbhar jee-an ko daataa bhagat bharay bhandaar.
The all-sustaining Lord is the Giver of all beings; His devotional worship is an overflowing treasure.
Ww at Ae foes 3 des fue nfs ad Burs All (500-13, aA, He 5) jaa kee sayvaa nifal na hovat khin meh karay uDhaar. ||1]| Service to Him is not wasted; in an instant, He emancipates. ||1]||
HO AS BIS AHS Afar TT Il (500-13, THe, Hz 5) man mayray charan kamal sang raach. O my mind, immerse yourself in the Lord's lotus feet.
Aas Aba A a ureats sg aS J AT WAU FI Il (500-14, gAet, ws 5) Sagal jee-a jaa ka-o aaraaDheh taahoo ka-o too” jaach. ||1|| rahaa-o. Seek from Him, who is worshipped by all beings. ||1]|Pause] |
aod Aefe SHS ATS F YS YS MATT I (500-14, ast, we 5)
naanak saran tum"aaree kartay too” parabh paraan aDhaar.
Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, O Creator Lord; You, O God, are the support of my breath of life.
fe Ave fa S Tafs fSA AT AT AAT NUVI (500-15, TAT, He 5) ho-ay sahaa-ee jis too’ raakhahi tis kahaa karay sansaar. ||2]|14]|23]|
He who is protected by You, O Helper Lord - what can the world do to him? [12] ]14][23]|
TAS HIS U i (500-16)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
AS at UA Herat mms il (500-16, gH, He 5) jan kee paij savaaree aap. The Lord Himself has protected the honor of His humble servant.
ofs ofs oH HG af nieug Cafe aes Ag STU NAN TIS Il (500-16, gat, vz 5)
har har naam dee-o gur avkhaDh utar ga-i-o sabh taap. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Guru has given the medicine of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, and all afflictions are gone. ||1||Pause| |
dfeafie sf uatafs vrust farsur ofe il (500-17, ant, H8 5) harigobind rakhi-o parmaysar apunee kirpaa Dhaar. The Transcendent Lord, in His Mercy, has preserved Har Gobind.
fact faurfa Age AY de ofs Te Ae stots Wall 00-17, act, 2 5) mitee bi-aaDh sarab sukh ho-ay har gun sadaa beechaar. ||1||
The disease is over, and there is joy all around; we ever contemplate the Glories of God. ||1]|
uisterg AG HS ATS TS us at SfSnret il (500-18, gas, ws 5)
angeekaar kee-o mayrai kartai gur pooray kee vadi-aa-ee.
My Creator Lord has made me His own; such is the glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru.
nifsse ste udt aa aoa fos fas vas ASE NINQUIIVEII (500-18, aAet, He 5)
abichal neev Dharee gur naanak nit nit charhai savaa-ee. ||2||15||24| | Guru Nanak laid the immovable foundation, which grows higher and higher each day. [12] [15] [241]
TAS HIS U i (500-19)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
aad dfs fre dts 3 OTE il (500-19, aAst, H2 5) kabhoo har si-o cheet na laa-i-o. You never focused your consciousness on the Lord.
Ust UOd um aes farat mute ae fafa on 3 afes nan sae i 01-1, aA, Hs 5)
DhanDhaa karat bihaanee a-uDhahi gun niDh naam na gaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have spent your life engaged in worldly pursuits; you have not sung the Glorious Praises of the treasure of the Naam. ||1]|Pause]|
agst ast Ass aque vifea vals afe ofEE I (S01-1, aAct, He 5) ka-udee ka-udee jorat kaptay anik jugat kar Dhaa-i-o. Shell by shell, you accumulate money; in various ways, you work for this.
fangs ys a3 vu aomifs no Host wfEE ai (So1-2, gas, Hs 5)
bisrat parabh kaytay dukh ganee-ah mahaa mohnee khaa-i-o. ||1]|
Forgetting God, you suffer awful pain beyond measure, and you are consumed by the Great Enticer, Maya. ||1||
Ad nod Aum Ae deg 3 Hf afEs | (501-3, act, ne 5)
karahu anoograhu su-aamee mayray ganhu na mohi kamaa-i-o.
Show Mercy to me, O my Lord and Master, and do not hold me to account for my actions.
afte efenrs feu AY Ava oee dfs APSHES NINIEN QUI (501-3, Tat, He 5) gobind da-i-aal kirpaal sukh saagar naanak har sarnaa-i-o. ||2||16]|25]|
O merciful and compassionate Lord God, ocean of peace, Nanak has taken to Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||2||16]|25]|
TAS HIS U Il (501-4)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
TAS TH IH FES Il (501-4, TASt, He 5) rasnaa raam raam ravant. With your tongue, chant the Lord's Name, Raam, Raam.
efs ore faGers fifaor sa FET sas AUN TIE Il (501-4, act, ne 5) chhod aan bi-uhaar mithi-aa bhaj sadaa bhagvant. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Renounce other false occupations, and vibrate forever on the Lord God. ||1||Pause| |
OU SQ nrg sast SS wrat Sa I (501-5, aHet, He 5)
naam ayk aDhaar bhagtaa eet aagai tayk.
The One Name is the support of His devotees; in this world, and in the world hereafter, it is their anchor and support.
afs four afte dior aa famrg afa fda nail 601-5, art, He 5)
kar kirpaa gobind dee-aa gur gi-aan buDh bibayk. ||1]|
In His mercy and kindness, the Guru has given me the divine wisdom of God, and a discriminating intellect. ||1]|
ade aE AYE Alas Aefs 3 at at i (01-6, ast, ue 5)
karan kaaran samrath sareeDhar saran taa kee gahee.
The all-powerful Lord is the Creator, the Cause of causes; He is the Master of wealth - I seek His Sanctuary.
Hats Fats ses ATG area dhe fafa St NANANEN (01-6, aA, He 5) mukat jugat ravaal saaDhoo naanak har niDh lahee. ||2||17]||26||
Liberation and worldly success come from the dust of the feet of the Holy Saints; Nanak has obtained the Lord's treasure. ||2||17]||26||
Tad HIS U wg 8 Bue (501-8) goojree mehlaa 5 ghar 4 cha-upday Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (501-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ats Aare frmreur AT Aget MTS i (501-9, aadt, we 5) chhaad sagal si-aanpaa saaDh sarnee aa-o. Give up all your clever tricks, and seek the Sanctuary of the Holy Saint.
USYIH USHA YS X TS TS AI (501-9, aA, vz 5) paarbarahm parmaysaro parabhoo kay gun gaa-o. ||1]|| Sing the Glorious Praises of the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord. ||1]|
o fos BIE GHG maga Il (501-9, grt, 3 5) ray chit charan kamal araaDh. O my consciousness, contemplate and adore the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
Ava AY afemre ureta fe Aare Buf ua TIS i (So1-10, aA, Hs 5) sarab sookh kali-aan paavahi mitai sagal upaaDh. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall obtain total peace and salvation, and all troubles shall depart. ||1]]|Pause| |
Hs fust AS HIS avet fon faa dt AfE II (501-10, aeet, 8 5)
maat pitaa sut meet bhaa-ee tis binaa nahee ko-ay.
Mother, father, children, friends and siblings - without the Lord, none of them are real.
as Bs Aba ote Hat Hee sfeor APE QI (so1-11, ars, He 5) eet oot jee-a naal sangee sarab ravi-aa so-ay. ||2| | Here and hereafter, He is the companion of the soul; He is pervading everywhere.
21 |
afe r36 Cure fifamr ae 3 mre oft II (501-11, aaet, He 5) kot jatan upaav mithi-aa kachh na aavai kaam. Millions of plans, tricks, and efforts are of no use, and serve no purpose.
Aefe AG fosner afs df ys & STH NI (01-12, TAS, 8 5)
saran saaDhoo nirmalaa gat ho-ay parabh kai naam. ||3]|
In the Sanctuary of the Holy, one becomes immaculate and pure, and obtains salvation, through the Name of God. ||3]|
MoH eens us Gat Aafe AG Aa Il (501-13, art, M2 5) agam da-i-aal parabhoo oochaa saran saaDhoo jog. God is profound and merciful, lofty and exalted; He gives Sanctuary to the Holy.
fen usufs soo fan fofimr ofs AAA NSNAUQIN (01-13, aA, He 5)
tis paraapat naankaa jis likhi-aa Dhur sanjog. ||4]|1]|27]||
He alone obtains the Lord, O Nanak, who is blessed with such pre-ordained destiny to meet Him. ||4]|1]|27]|
TAS HIS U i (01-14)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
wtus ag Afe Ae dt Hg we ahs i 01-14, aH, ve 5) aapnaa gur sayv sad hee ramhu gun gobind. Serve your Guru forever, and chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Afa afta werfo of ofe ofo af He at f8= UA (501-14, aAet, He 5)
Saas Saas araaDh har har leh jaa-ay man kee chind. ||1]| With each and every breath, worship the Lord, Har, Har, in adoration, and the anxiety of your mind will be dispelled. ||1]|
He Ho Wf YS at |S Il (501-15, TAT, us 5) mayray man jaap parabh kaa naa-o. O my mind, chant the Name of God.
AY Aon nde urets fret fans aS dil TIS il (501-15, aA, Hs 5)
sookh sahj anand paavahi milee nirmal thaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You shall be blessed with peace, poise and pleasure, and you shall find the immaculate place. ||1]||Pause| |
Wonfa Gufs feg He vrs us wirafa Il (So1-16, aASt, He 5)
saaDhsang uDhaar ih man aath pahar aaraaDh.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, redeem your mind, and adore the Lord, twenty-four hours a day.
aM au nidarg faor fixe ars Gurfi 2 (So1-16, act, He 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar binsai mitai sagal upaaDh. ||2]| Sexual desire, anger and egotism will be dispelled, and all troubles shall end. ||2||
Mes Niet mise Aum Adfe 3 at mE it (501-17, aASt, us 5) atal achhayd abhayd su-aamee saran taa kee aa-o. The Lord Master is immovable, immortal and inscrutable; seek His Sanctuary.
Bde OHS mata fase Sa fAe fos w usii (01-17, aA, Hs 5)
charan kamal araaDh hirdai ayk si-o liv laa-o. ||3]|
Worship in adoration the lotus feet of the Lord in your heart, and center your consciousness lovingly on Him alone. ||3||
ursqgatH ufs efeur ost suf ste wrt ii (501-18, aact, v3 5) paarbarahm parabh da-i-aa Dhaaree bakhas leen"ay aap. The Supreme Lord God has shown mercy to me, and He Himself has forgiven me.
Aaa AY ofa oH chor Boa A ys AMY NSIQNICH (501-18, TAT, He 5)
sarab sukh har naam dee-aa naanak so parabh jaap. ||4||2||28]| The Lord has given me His Name, the treasure of peace; O Nanak, meditate on that God. ||4]|2]|28]|
TAS HIS U il (S01-19)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
as yAet ys fimrfenr set Hat Sfe il (s01-19, aAst, Hs 5) gur parsaadee parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa ga-ee sankaa toot. By Guru's Grace, I meditate on God, and my doubts are gone.
UST UO
eu nde 3 fae uu ae foufe nail (502-1, aad, 3 5) dukh anayraa bhai binaasay paap ga-ay nikhoot. ||1]| Pain, ignorance and fear have left me, and my sins have been dispelled. ||1]|
ofs ats oH at fe Uffs I (502-1, aAet, He 5) har har naam kee man pareet. My mind is filled with love for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ffs ra ase afte fore Ho foone SHS an FTE il (502-2, gH, ne 5)
mil saaDh bachan gobind Dhi-aa-ay mahaa nirmal reet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meeting the Holy Saint, under His Instruction, I meditate on the Lord of the Universe, in the most immaculate way. ||1]||Pause| |
AY STU Musa Adal ASS fAHTS SH Il (502-2, Taet, ue 5)
jaap taap anayk karnee safal simrat naam.
Chanting, deep meditation and various rituals are contained in the fruitful meditative remembrance of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ats Mogg rf gd se UTS AH MII (502-3, aASt, HE 5)
kar anoograhu aap raakhay bha-ay pooran kaam. ||2||
Showing His Mercy, the Lord Himself has protected me, and all my works have been brought to fruition. ||2]|
Ata ATH S fag ad FIN YS ANSE I (502-3, aAet, ws 5)
Saas Saas na bisar kabahoo™ barahm parabh samrath.
With each and every breath, may I never forget You, O God, Almighty Lord and Master.
Ge uifoa Tot fom gars niglos AST MAT SI (502-4, aHst, Hs 5)
gun anik rasnaa ki-aa bakhaanai agnat sadaa akath. ||3]|
How can my tongue describe Your countless virtues? They are uncountable, and forever indescribable. ||3]|
de ude foats se cfenre fagur age Il (502-4, aHst, H3 5)
deen darad nivaar taaran da-i-aal kirpaa karan.
You are the Remover of the pains of the poor, the Savior, the Compassionate Lord, the Bestower of Mercy.
mee Udet aH fAHde fes area die die AGS ISISBIQEN (502-5, TAT, Hs 5)
atal padvee naam simran darirh naanak har har saran. ||4||3]|29] |
Remembering the Naam in meditation, the state of eternal dignity is obtained; Nanak has grasped the protection of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|3]|29]|
TAS HIS U i (502-6)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
midafa ag Awe Hfeor Hor Stow Fa I (502-6, aaet, He 5) aha’-buDh baho saghan maa-i-aa mahaa deeragh rog. Intellectual egotism and great love for Maya are the most serious chronic diseases.
ofa on nigug afs ou AS ATE ASS AA MAUI (502-6, ast, He 5)
har naam a-ukhaDh gur naam deeno karan kaaran jog. ||1||
The Lord's Name is the medicine, which is potent to cure everything. The Guru has given me the Naam, the Name of the Lord. |]1]|
His sfs web AS Ofs il (502-7, Ast, Hs 5) man tan baachhee-ai jan Dhoor. My mind and body yearn for the dust of the Lord's humble servants.
ate AaH & wale usa afse Sa ufs uA TIS il (502-7, art, uz 5)
kot janam kay laheh paatik gobind lochaa poor. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With it, the sins of millions of incarnations are obliterated. O Lord of the Universe, please fulfill my desire. ||1]||Pause] |
wife nis Ha wit gorct freras Il (502-8, art, H2 5) aad antay maDh aasaa kookree bikraal. In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, one is hounded by dreadful desires.
ad fame atese afie sue arebat AN AH QI (502-8, TAT, He 5)
gur gi-aan keertan gobind ramna” kaatee-ai jam jaal. ||2||
Through the Guru's spiritual wisdom, we sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and the noose of death is cut away. ||2||
TH AU SF HI HS ACT virer TSS Il (502-9, aA, Hz 5)
kaam kroDh lobh moh moothay sadaa aavaa gavan.
Those who are cheated by sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment suffer reincarnation forever.
us Un safs aus fangs fees Hot TSE BI (502-9, aA, He 5)
parabh paraym bhagat gupaal simran mitat jonee bhavan. ||3]|
By loving devotional worship to God, and meditative remembrance of the Lord of the World, one's wandering in reincarnation is ended. ||3]|
fry uz aes Ae fee Sie Su ABST Il (502-10, aH, He 5) mitar putar kaltar sur rid teen taap jalant. Friends, children, spouses and well-wishers are burnt by the three fevers.
afy oH aor ey foes fre ofa AS AZ ll (502-10, ast, us 5)
jap raam raamaa dukh nivaaray milai har jan sant. ||4||
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, one's miseries are ended, as one meets the Saintly servants of the Lord. ||4]|
Aaa fafa gus uorafs asta odt efe i (502-11, ant, ue 5) sarab biDh bharamtay pukaareh kateh naahee chhot. Wandering around in all directions, they cry out, "Nothing can save us!"
dfs Bde ABE nurs us a fez adt soa Ge WuNsiZoll (502-11, TAS, He 5)
har charan saran apaar parabh kay darirh gahee naanak ot. ||5||4]|30]| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lotus Feet of the Infinite Lord; he holds fast to their Support. ||5]|4]|30]|
TAs HIS U wg 8 TUE (502-13) goojree mehlaa 5 ghar 4 dupday Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsare YATE Il (502-13) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
urate Alas Hes HAS ATE AIS AT Il (502-14, gAst, ws 5)
aaraaDh sareeDhar safal moorat karan kaaran jog.
Worship and adore the Lord of wealth, the fulfilling vision, the Almighty Cause of causes.
TE THe Ase mg nfo fefs 5 FS faGa wait (502-14, grt, ue 5)
gun raman sarvan apaar mahimaa fir na hot bi-og. ||1]|
Uttering His Praises, and hearing of His infinite glory, you shall never suffer separation from Him again. ||1]|
He saerafee Burr il (502-15, gH, we 5) man charnaarbind upaas. O my mind, worship the Lord's Lotus Feet.
ate aan fhes fiefs ofe THES SA UU TIS Il (502-15, TAS, Hs 5)
kal kalays mitant simran kaat jamdoot faas. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating in remembrance, strife and sorrow are ended, and the noose of the Messenger of Death is snapped. ||1]|Pause]|
AZ BIS gs SH Ado ued as B Surg I (502-16, art, nz 5)
satar dahan har naam kahan avar kachh na upaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord, and your enemies shall be consumed; there is no other way.
ats maT ys HS Soa SH AMS NNAUSAUI (502-17, aA, He 5)
kar anoograhu parabhoo mayray naanak naam su-aa-o. ||2]||1||31]|
Show Mercy, O my God, and bestow upon Nanak the taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||1]|31]|
TAS HIS U il (502-17)
goojree mehlaa 5. Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:
3 Ane Aefe & UST eu SAG AY IVE I (502-17, art, we 5)
too” samrath saran ko daataa dukh bhanjan sukh raa-ay.
You are the Almighty Lord, the Giver of Sanctuary, the Destroyer of pain, the King of happiness.
fs aan fee 3 sar fasHe Te ys AE UA (502-18, aAet, He 5)
jaahi kalays mitay bhai bharmaa nirmal gun parabh gaa-ay. ||1]||
Troubles depart, and fear and doubt are dispelled, singing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate Lord God. ||1||
dfee 33 fae neg 5 OE Il (502-18, ast, Hs 5) govind tujh bin avar na thaa-o. O Lord of the Universe, without You, there is no other place.
ate fasur ursqan Avimt wut Sure aTS il TITS ll (502-19, gAt, He 5) kar kirpaa paarbarahm su-aamee japee tumaaraa naa-o. rahaa-o. Show Mercy to me, O Supreme Lord Master, that I may chant Your Name. ||Pause||
Afsaa Afe wat ofs saat ss arfar fee aeait i (502-19, aAdt, He 5)
satgur sayv lagay har charnee vadai bhaag liv laagee.
Serving the True Guru, I am attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet; by great good fortune, I have embraced love for Him.
UST UoZ
ass UIA se AGHA ants sfa fsurait Ii (503-1, gat, ue 5)
kaval pargaas bha-ay saaDhsangay durmat buDh ti-aagee. ||2||
My heart lotus blossoms forth in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I have renounced evil-mindedness and intellectualism. ||2| |
mS udd dfs & Te awe fans Ste Sore I (503-2, aAet, ue 5)
aath pahar har kay gun gaavai simrai deen dai-aalaa.
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, twenty-four hours a day, and remembers the Lord in meditation, who is Kind to the poor,
uifu 33 Hafs AS Gud fasA Aa AAS ISI (503-2, aA, He 5) aap tarai sangat sabh uDhrai binsay sagal janjaalaa. ||3]| saves himself, and redeems all his generations; all of his bonds are released. ||3]|
ade nog 3a us Amt Gf ufs ys Arfa il (503-3, gat, ue 5)
charan aDhaar tayraa parabh su-aamee ot pot parabh saath.
I take the Support of Your Feet, O God, O Lord and Master; you are with me through and through, God.
Rafe ufsS aoa ys Suet & THE fs TS UsiInS2il (503-3, TAS, He 5)
saran pari-o naanak parabh tumree day raakhi-o har haath. ||4]|2||32|| Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, God; giving him His hand, the Lord has protected him. |[4][2]|32]|
TAs mMAcUShT HIS A WT A (503-5) goojree asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Goojaree, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars Arte Il (503-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Sa Sad us sa ahs sans dat We Il (503-6, gat, we 1)
ayk nagree panch chor basee-alay barjat choree Dhaavai.
In the one village of the body, live the five thieves; they have been warned, but they still go out stealing.
f3TeH Hs Te A Soa HY Hats A urs IAI (503-6, Het, He 1)
tarihdas maal rakhai jo naanak mokh mukat so paavai. ||1] |
One who keeps his assets safe from the three modes and the ten passions, O Nanak, attains liberation and emancipation. ||1]||
33g THES gost Il (503-7, THT, we 1) chaytahu baasuday-o banvaalee. Center your mind on the all-pervading Lord, the Wearer of garlands of the jungles.
oy fet must AU FI Il (503-7, gat, He raam ridai japmaalee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Let your rosary be the chanting of the Lord's Name in your heart. ||1]|Pause| |
au HS fan Ava sors ots Fe fAS Ba Il (503-7, aA, He 1)
uraDh mool jis saakh talaahaa chaar bayd jit laagay.
Its roots extend upwards, and its branches reach down; the four Vedas are attached to it.
Hon ate Ave 3 SSA USAIN fHe Arg MQM (503-8, TAS, He 1)
sahj bhaa-ay jaa-ay tay naanak paarbarahm liv jaagay. ||2||
He alone reaches this tree with ease, O Nanak, who remains wakeful in the Love of the Supreme Lord God. ||2]|
urs uf mrafe AT uUTU UT SZ SH I (503-8, THAT, Hs 1)
paarjaat ghar aagan mayrai puhap patar tat daalaa.
The Elysian Tree is the courtyard of my house; in it are the flowers, leaves and stems of reality.
Ava afs fadns AS S3T AIS AAS MBI (503-9, gat, we 1)
sarab jot niranjan sambhoo chhodahu bahut janjaalaa. ||3]||
Meditate on the self-existent, immaculate Lord, whose Light is pervading everywhere; renounce all your worldly entanglements. ||3]|
fs frad3 area fase sag nfeor Aer I (503-9, ant, He 1) sun sikhvantay naanak binvai chhodahu maa-i-aa jaalaa. Listen, O seekers of Truth - Nanak begs you to renounce the traps of Maya.
Hfs ates Sa foe walt usaf ASH 3 AST Isil (503-10, aA, Hs 1)
man beechaar ayk liv laagee punrap janam na kaalaa. ||4]|
Reflect within your mind, that by enshrining love for the One Lord, you shall not be subject to birth and death again. ||4]|
A ag A fig adbus A Se fa WE Tait Wt (503-11, art, we 1
so guroo so sikh kathee-alay so vaid je jaanai rogee.
He alone is said to be a Guru, he alone is said to be a Sikh, and he alone is said to be a physician, who knows the patient's illness.
fsa aefs ay o Uo art da foradt Fait Wu (503-11, aeet, He 1)
tis kaaran kamm na DhanDhaa naahee DhanDhai girhee jogee. ||5||
He is not affected by actions, responsibilities and entanglements; in the entanglements of his household, he maintains the detachment of Yoga. ||5]|
aH au nidarg sHbws Se Hg fSA feo I 503-12, aAet, He 1) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar tajee-alay lobh moh tis maa-i-aa. He renounces sexual desire, anger, egotism, greed, attachment and Maya.
Hfs 33 uifeas fomrfeor as usATet urfemr Ell (503-12, gASt, He 1)
man tat avigat Dhi-aa-i-aa gur parsaadee paa-i-aa. ||6]||
Within his mind, he meditates on the reality of the Imperishable Lord; by Guru's Grace he finds Him. ||6]]|
frmirg fourg AS ots aehas AS do Afs FSI il (503-13, aA, He 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan sabh daat kathee-alay sayt baran sabh dootaa.
Spiritual wisdom and meditation are all said to be God's gifts; all of the demons are turned white before him.
GoH SHS HO 3H SAS AS SS AS MDI (503-13, aAST, He 1)
barahm kamal maDh taas rasaada™ jaagat naahee sootaa. ||7]|
He enjoys the taste of the honey of God's lotus; he remains awake, and does not fall asleep. ||7||
Hd dstd UZ UST Soa ATs Avie | (503-14, gH, us 1)
mahaa gambheer patar paataalaa naanak sarab ju-aa-i-aa.
This lotus is very deep; its leaves are the nether regions, and it is connected to the whole universe.
Guen ag HH uals 3 aes fry sha nifys Uborfenr cal 03-14, aASt, He 1D
updays guroo mam puneh na garbha” bikh taj amrit pee-aa-i-aa. ||8]|1||
Under Guru's Instruction, I shall not have to enter the womb again; I have renounced the poison of corruption, and I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||8]|1]|
TAS HIG F Il (503-15) goojree mehlaa 1. Goojaree, First Mehl:
AS AS Wels ys WS 3 A nis 6 usta AHS Il (503-15, gAst, He 1) kavan kavan jaacheh parabh daatay taa kay ant na pareh sumaar. Those who beg of God the Great Giver - their numbers cannot be counted.
nA su df= nis uists J AMIE AY SSSTS WAU (503-16, HST, He 1) jaisee bhookh ho-ay abh antar too” samrath sach dayvanhaar. ||1|| You, Almighty True Lord, fulfill the desires within their hearts. ||1]|
mM at AU SU HAY A MOE II (503-16, aaet, He 1) ai jee jap tap sanjam sach aDhaar. O Dear Lord, chanting, deep meditation, self-discipline and truth are my foundations.
fe ofa om efo Ay ureht Sct safs ss STS NU TIC lt (503-17, art, ne 1)
har har naam deh sukh paa-ee-ai tayree bhagat bharay bhandaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Bless me with Your Name, Lord, that I may find peace. Your devotional worship is a treasure over-flowing. ||1||Pause] |
Ho Af gafs foe oat Sar Sat Ase srs Il (503-18, aaet, He 1)
sunn samaaDh raheh liv laagay aykaa aykee sabad beechaar.
Some remain absorbed in Samaadhi, their minds fixed lovingly on the One Lord; they reflect only on the Word of the Shabad.
AS 4G Use qag 3d ost mM nimy Alot AIST IQ! (503-18, Tat, ws 1)
jal thal Dnaran gagan tah naahee aapay aap kee-aa kartaar. ||2| |
In that state, there is no water, land, earth or sky; only the Creator Lord Himself exists. ||2] |
ot sfe Hfenr Hae 3 Stent a AeA Veo APS MRIS Il (503-19, art, He 1)
naa tad maa-i-aa magan na chhaa-i-aa naa sooraj chand na jot apaar.
There is no intoxication of Maya there, and no shadow, nor the infinite light of the sun or the moon.
Aaa fenfe See us nists Sar sefa A Fase ATS ISI (503-19, gat, He 1) sarab darisat lochan abh antar aykaa nadar so taribhavan saar. ||3]|
The eyes within the mind which see everything - with one glance, they see the three worlds. ||3||
Ua uos ude urat vfats ffs ater gout fang HOA MATT Il (504-1, gat, Hs 1)
pavan paanee agan tin kee-aa barahmaa bisan mahays akaar. He created air, water and fire, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva - the whole creation.
Ava Wha Ss ys TS US as nS aes Sil (504-2, gat, He 1)
sarbay jaachik too" parabh daataa daat karay apunai beechaar. ||4]|
All are beggars; You alone are the Great Giver, God. You give Your gifts according to Your own considerations. ||4||
afe 33m wefs us ofea 22 Sfe oct STS Il (504-2, Het, He 1)
kot taytees jaacheh parabh naa-ik dayday tot naahee bhandaar.
Three hundred thirty million gods beg of God the Master; even as He gives, His treasures are never exhausted.
CU sts ag 3 AS AO wifys us feos Null (504-3, aA, Hs 1)
oo'Dhai bhaa“dai kachh na samaavai seeDhai amrit parai nihaar. ||5||
Nothing can be contained in a vessel turned upside-down; Ambrosial Nectar pours into the upright one. ||5||
fro mardt nists arate fafa fafa afe aafo Aare Il (504-3, gat, ue 1) siDh samaaDhee antar jaacheh riDh siDh jaach karahi jaikaar. The Siddhas in Samaadhi beg for wealth and miracles, and proclaim His victory.
AA fummn of Ho uists 3A Ae tefs usATS WEN (504-4, gat, He 1) jaisee pi-aas ho-ay man antar taiso jal dayveh parkaar. ||6|| As is the thirst within their minds, so is the water which You give to them. ||6||
aS SI AT Als nus se SS Ades HIS Il (504-5, gTHet, we 1
baday bhaag gur sayveh apunaa bhayd naahee gurdayv muraar.
The most fortunate ones serve their Guru; there is no difference between the Divine Guru and the Lord.
Tas ay at AH Ad Este vise AAT ses DI (504-5, aA, we 1)
taa ka-o kaal naahee jam johai boojheh antar sabad beechaar. ||7]||
The Messenger of Death cannot see those who come to realize within their minds the contemplative meditation of the Word of the Shabad. ||7| |
me sa weg o Ha ofs ufs on fadna cin fimrfa i (504-6, ant, He 1)
ab tab avar na maaga-o har peh naam niranjan deejai pi-aar.
I shall never ask anything else of the Lord; please, bless me with the Love of Your Immaculate Name.
oad wie uifys ne Hat dfs AA eth far of WCQ (504-7, aA, He 1)
naanak chaatrik amrit jal maagai har jas deejai kirpaa Dhaar. ||8||2||
Nanak, the song-bird, begs for the Ambrosial Water; O Lord, shower Your Mercy upon him, and bless him with Your Praise. ||8]|2||
TAS HIS F Il (504-7) goojree mehliaa 1. Goojaree, First Mehl:
m at aot ue wre |fs we fas aa afs odt aret II (504-7, aaet, He 1D
ai jee janam marai aavai fun jaavai bin gur gat nahee kaa-ee. O Dear One, he is born, and then dies; he continues coming and going; without the Guru, he is not emancipated.
Tonfe yret aH TS OH ats ufs uret All (504-8, gAet, Hs
gurmukh paraanee naamay raatay naamay gat pat paa-ee. ||1||
Those mortals who become Gurmukhs are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Name, they obtain salvation and honor. ||1||
ae I IH OTH fos Bret il (504-9, gat, He 1)
bhaa-ee ray raam naam chit laa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, focus your consciousness lovingly on the Lord's Name.
qd usAet ofa ys Ard MAT BH aSTeT UA TITS Il (504-9, ast, He 1)
gur parsaadee har parabh jaachay aisee naam badaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, one begs of the Lord God; such is the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||1||Pause] |
m at ag 3u af fafimr aB aS Ces sqq A SET II (504-9, gat, He 1D ai jee bahutay bhaykh karahi bhikhi-aa ka-o kaytay udar bharan kai taa-ee. O Dear One, so many wear various religious robes, for begging and filling their bellies.
fag ofa safs odt Ay yrst fas aa Tea S AST MQM (504-10, aA, He 1)
bin har bhagat naahee sukh paraanee bin gur garab na jaa-ee. ||2||
Without devotional worship to the Lord, O mortal, there can be no peace. Without the Guru, pride does not depart. ||2||
m At ane Ae fre Gufs oes Fath Hoth Soret il (504-11, art, we D
ai jee kaal sadaa sir oopar thaadhay janam janam vairaa-ee.
O Dear One, death hangs constantly over his head. Incarnation after incarnation, it is his enemy.
We Aafe 33 A we Afsas ys Fst SM (504-11, aA, Hs 1)
saachai sabad ratay say baachay satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||3]|
Those who are attuned to the True Word of the Shabad are saved. The True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||3]|
qs Aseet rifs o Aa TTS Aa Ase Il (504-12, grt, we 1)
gur sarnaa-ee johi na saakai doot na sakai santaa-ee. In the Guru's Sanctuary, the Messenger of Death cannot see the mortal, or torture him.
nifeds ova fodafs a3 foss@ fr@ fee wet gil (504-12, aad, ue 1)
avigat naath niranjan raatay nirbha-o si-o liv laa-ee. ||4||
I am imbued with the Imperishable and Immaculate Lord Master, and lovingly attached to the Fearless Lord. ||4||
m Ae on fess on fae weg Afsag 2a fearet II (504-13, aaet, He 1)
ai jee-o naam dirhahu naamay liv laavhu satgur tayk tikaa-ee.
O Dear One, implant the Naam within me; lovingly attached to the Naam, I lean on the True Guru's Support.
A fsa ae Ret aart fags 3 Afewr Art WUll (504-14, art, He 1D jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee kirat na mayti-aa jaa-ee. ||5|| Whatever pleases Him, He does; no one can erase His actions. ||5||
m Ft otter us Te Aale SHS H vies o Ht Set I (504-14, aA, Hs 1)
ai jee bhaag paray gur saran tum"aaree mai avar na doojee bhaa-ee.
O Dear One, I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Guru; I have no love for any other except You.
we sa Sa Sa uaa urfe qarfe Aaret Ell (504-15, aH, Hs 1)
ab tab ayko ayk pukaara-o aad jugaad sakhaa-ee. ||6]|
I constantly call upon the One Lord; since the very beginning, and throughout the ages, He has been my help and support. ||6||
m at mag UA oH nus at 35 ct AE afs mrt I (504-15, gat, He 1) ai jee raakho paij naam apunay kee tujh hee si-o ban aa-ee. O Dear One, please preserve the Honor of Your Name; I am hand and glove with You.
afs fasu aa ean ferreg I@H Aafe Foret DN (504-16, art, He 1)
kar kirpaa gur daras dikhaavhu ha-umai sabad jalaa-ee. ||7||
Bless me with Your Mercy, and reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Guru. Through the Word of the Shabad, I have burnt away my ego. ||7||
m at famor na fas ad o tA fen war Hfs orf Fret I (504-17, aeet, He
ai jee ki-aa maaga-o kichh rahai na deesai is jag meh aa-i-aa jaa-ee.
O Dear One, what should I ask of You? Nothing appears permanent; whoever comes into this world shall depart.
soe on uesg tn fade afe geet ICSI (504-17, aA, He 1) naanak naam padaarath deejai hirdai kanth banaa-ee. ||8]|3]|| Bless Nanak with the wealth of the Naam, to adorn his heart and neck. ||8]|3]]|
TASt HIS F Il (504-18) goojree mehlaa 1. Goojaree, First Mehl:
m Ht ot gH @3n ate o fon ofa Heeafs fs & Sa Il (504-18, gat, ve 1)
ai jee naa ham utam neech na maDhim har sarnaagat har kay log.
O Dear One, I am not high or low or in the middle. I am the Lord's slave, and I seek the Lord's Sanctuary.
OH ds ASG Aaa Aa fara farsfrs Fa WA 04-19, art, He 1)
naam ratay kayval bairaagee sog bijog bisarjit rog. ||1]|
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am detached from the world; I have forgotten sorrow, separation and disease. ||1]|
set J ad faa 3 gals Stag aft Il (504-19, art, He 1)
bhaa-ee ray gur kirpaa tay bhagat thaakur kee.
O Siblings of Destiny, by Guru's Grace, I perform devotional worship to my Lord and Master.
Uuart you Afsag ofa fore ofe fasne ot aH ots o AH ot Hat NA TIS tl (505-1, gH, He 1)
satgur vaak hirdai har nirmal naa jam kaan na jam kee baakee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
One whose heart is filled with the Hymns of the True Guru, obtains the Pure Lord. He is not under the power of the Messenger of Death, nor does he owe Death anything. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs we dHo seta ys Hat A fH aS AafA Ta I (505-2, gat, ne 1)
har gun rasan raveh parabh sangay jo tis bhaavai sahj haree.
He chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord with his tongue, and abides with God; he does whatever pleases the Lord.
fag ofa on fger afar Flea ofe fag fages Ha wet II (505-2, aASt, He 1)
bin har naam baritha jag jeevan har bin nihfal mayk gharee. ||2||
Without the Lord's Name, life passes in vain in the world, and every moment is useless. ||2||
m Ht ue o@a ant ufs wafe fea afs sdt wet I (505-3, gat, He 1)
ai jee khotay tha-ur naahee ghar baahar nindak gat nahee kaa-ee.
The false have no place of rest, either inside or outside; the slanderer does not find salvation.
dH Ad us HUA 3 He fos fos Bs Set BI (505-4, aaet, He 1)
ros karai parabh bakhas na maytai nit nit charhai savaa-ee. ||3]|
Even if one is resentful, God does not withhold His blessings; day by day, they increase. ||3||
mM ot aa at ots o HS aet AS oats urfu feeet I (505-4, aAet, He 1) ai jee gur kee daat na maytai ko-ee mayrai thaakur aap divaa-ee. No one can take away the Guru's gifts; my Lord and Master Himself has given them.
fSea da as Hu fer fag aa at STS & Set ISI (505-5, aA, He 1)
nindak nar kaalay mukh nindaa jin" gur kee daat na bhaa-ee. ||4]|
The black-faced slanderers, with slander in their mouths, do not appreciate the Guru's gifts. ||4]|
m Ft Hefe ud ys sath fhere fan 3 mgMr get I (505-5, aAt, He 1D
ai jee saran paray parabh bakhas milaavai bilam na aDhoo-aa raa-ee.
God forgives and blends with Himself those who take to His Sanctuary; He does not delay for an instant.
utoe He oe fafa oer Afsarg His freret Null (505-6, aA, He 1) aanad mool naath sir naathaa satgur mayl milaa-ee. ||5]||
He is the source of bliss, the Greatest Lord; through the True Guru, we are united in His Union. ||5||
mM at ret efeore fer af afeur aanfs gufs garet i (505-7, gat, Hs 1)
ai jee sadaa da-i-aal da-i-aa kar ravi-aa gurmat bharman chukaa-ee. Through His Kindness, the Kind Lord pervades us; through Guru's Teachings, our wanderings cease.
ursn Sfe ave ug det AsHals at Sfsuret El (505-7, aH, He 1)
paaras bhayt kanchan Dhaat ho-ee satsangat kee vadi-aa-ee. ||6] |
Touching the philosopher's stone, metal is transformed into gold. Such is the glorious greatness of the Society of the Saints. ||6] |
dfs AG feqne He fenast HAG Afsag set Il (505-8, Tat, He 1)
har jal nirmal man isnaanee majan satgur bhaa-ee.
The Lord is the immaculate water; the mind is the bather, and the True Guru is the bath attendant, O Siblings of Destiny.
uodfu HoH dt Ho Hafs Ast Afs floret ON (505-8, aA, He 1)
punrap janam naahee jan sangat jotee jot milaa-ee. ||7||
That humble being who joins the Sat Sangat shall not be consigned to reincarnation again; his light merges into the Light. ||7]||
3 Is UTY Main Sdeg TH Ut TS Hr Il (505-9, art, He 1)
too” vad purakh agamm tarovar ham pankhee tujh maahee.
You are the Great Primal Lord, the infinite tree of life; I am a bird perched on Your branches.
soe on fadne cin afar afar Aafe Aad WCISI (505-10, art, He 1)
naanak naam niranjan deejai jug jug sabad salaahee. ||8||4|| Grant to Nanak the Immaculate Naam; throughout the ages, he sings the Praises of the Shabad. ||8]|4]|
Ast HIS AUT 8 (505-11) goojree mehlaa 1 ghar 4 Goojaree, First Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (505-11) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sats UH orafas Ag fimmA us fos I (505-12, art, He 1)
bhagat paraym aaraaDhita™ sach pi-aas param hita™,
The devotees worship the Lord in loving adoration. They thirst for the True Lord, with infinite affection.
faowru fas fasstor wu ate fas fos WAM (505-12, Ad, Hs 1)
billaap bilal binantee-aa sukh bhaa-ay chit hita™. ||1]|
They tearfully beg and implore the Lord; in love and affection, their consciousness is at peace. ||1]|
Afu Ho OH dle Aget Il (505-13, gat, He 1) jap man naam har sarnee. Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my mind, and take to His Sanctuary.
AAS Aad Sts SIE TH OH ale Adet UA TIS Il (505-13, Trt, ws 1) Sansaar Saagar taar taaran ram naam kar karnee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's Name is the boat to cross over the world-ocean. Practice such a way of life. ||1]|Pause] |
& Ho fuss as fos as Aafe afe SHE Il (505-13, THe, Hs 1)
ay man mirat subh chi-a‘ta’ gur sabad har ramna”.
O mind, even death wishes you well, when you remember the Lord through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hfs 33 famrs afemre fours ofa on His THE QI (505-14, Tat, He 1)
mat tat gi-aana™ kali-aan niDhaana™ har naam man ramna”. ||2||
The intellect receives the treasure, the knowledge of reality and supreme bliss, by repeating the Lord's Name in the mind. ||2| |
36 fas fes gor gt Aa Ha Hae fos Il (505-15, gat, we 1)
chal chit vit bharmaa bharama’ jag moh magan hita™.
The fickle consciousness wanders around chasing after wealth; it is intoxicated with worldly love and emotional attachment.
fag ou sats fes Hat ae eta AaE FS SI (505-15, aAet, He 1)
thir naam bhagat dirha’ matee gur vaak sabad rata™. ||3]|
Devotion to the Naam is permanently implanted within the mind, when it is attuned to the Guru's Teachings and His Shabad. ||3]||
SIMS SdH 3 Yael Aa AatH fawrfa wi i 05-16, aA, He
bharmaat bharam na chook-ee jag janam bi-aaDh khapa”.
Wandering around, doubt is not dispelled; afflicted by reincarnation, the world is being ruined.
wAeS df fosaes AfS HSt SH SY ISI (505-16, gat, He 1)
asthaan har nihkayvala™ sat matee naam tapa”. ||4]|
The Lord's eternal throne is free of this affliction; he is truly wise, who takes the Naam as his deep meditation. ||4||
feg Aa Ho 33 faorfuSs vy nif HOH HE II (505-17, TAS, He 1D
ih jag moh hayt bi-aapita’ dukh aDhik janam marna”.
This world is engrossed in attachment and transitory love; it suffers the terrible pains of birth and death.
30 Aofe Afsae Gusts af oH foe THE Null (505-17, Act, Hs 1)
bhaj saran satgur oobrahi har naam rid ramna”. ||5||
Run to the Sanctuary of the True Guru, chant the Lord's Name in your heart, and you Shall swim across. ||5] |
aanfs fesse ufs Ho HS ASH Sars | (505-18, aeet, He 1)
gurmat nihchal man man mana” sahj beechaara”.
Following the Guru's Teaching, the mind becomes stable; the mind accepts it, and reflects upon it in peaceful poise.
Ane fase fas rg nists fame g3q ATS NEN (505-18, TAS, Hs 1)
so man nirmal jit saach antar gi-aan ratan saara”. ||6||
That mind is pure, which enshrines Truth within, and the most excellent jewel of spiritual wisdom. ||6||
3 af safs 3g 3eHs Ho fas ofe ofa saat Il (505-19, act, He 1)
bhai bhaa-ay bhagat tar bhavjal manaa chit laa-ay har charnee.
By the Fear of God, and Love of God, and by devotion, man crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, focusing his consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Uat uo ofs om fose ufeg ureg feg Adtg 3G Aget DI 06-1, ars, HD
har naam hirdai pavitar paavan ih sareer ta-o sarnee. ||7|| The Name of the Lord, the most pure and sacred, is within my heart; this body is Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||7]|
wa GS Gls feese afs on tH HS Il (506-1, aad, He 1)
lab lobh lahar nivaarana™ har naam raas mana”.
The waves of greed and avarice are subdued, by treasuring the Lord's Name in the mind.
He He Sot fedHat AT Sa ATS UCUAUUI (506-2, TAS, Hs 1)
man maar tuhee niranjanaa kaho naankaa sarna™. ||8]|1]|5||
Subdue my mind, O Pure Immaculate Lord; says Nanak, I have entered Your Sanctuary. ||8]|1]|5]|
TAS HIS 3 WT A (506-3) goojree mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Goojaree, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsara yATfE Il (506-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fests adt feg He SuTet II (506-4, aAdt, Hs 3) nirat karee ih man nachaa-ee. I dance, and make this mind dance as well.
TS USATET winy aTSTeT Il (506-4, TAS, He 3) gur parsaadee aap gavaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I eliminate my self-conceit.
fas fag we A Nats de a feat Fet Sw uret NA 06-4, aAt, He 3)
chit thir raakhai so mukat hovai jo ichhee so-ee fal paa-ee. ||1]|
One who keeps his consciousness focused on the Lord is liberated; he obtains the fruits of his desires. ||1]|
OT FHS TT a Ma Il (506-5, act, ve 3) naach ray man gur kai aagai. So dance, O mind, before your Guru.
Gd a we Sols so AY usta nis FH BE Sa I TIS ll 06-5, aTAt, ve 3)
gur kai bhaanai naacheh taa sukh paavahi antay jam bha-o bhaagai. rahaa-o.
If you dance according to the Guru's Will, you shall obtain peace, and in the end, the fear of death shall leave you. ||Pause] |
uf sae A sas adhe nruar fimrg nef we i 06-6, gH, He 3)
aap nachaa-ay so bhagat kahee-ai aapnaa pi-aar aap laa-ay.
One whom the Lord Himself causes to dance, is called a devotee. He Himself links us to His Love.
nm are oify Harve fA Ho nit AG nrafar UTS III (506-6, THAT, Hs 3) aapay gaavai aap sunaavai is man anDhay ka-o maarag paa-ay. ||2| | He Himself sings, He Himself listens, and He puts this blind mind on the right path.
[21 | wofes ond Rats foes fre wife ote o det Il (506-7, gast, ue 3)
an-din naachai sakat nivaarai siv ghar need na ho-ee. One who dances night and day, and banishes Shakti's Maya, enters the House of the Lord Shiva, where there is no sleep.
AaSt ufs Aas AS ss STU wed ae Houle sats B Tet SI (506-7, At, He 3) saktee ghar jagat sootaa naachai taapai avro gaavai manmukh bhagat na ho-ee. ||3]|| The world is asleep in Maya, the house of Shakti; it dances, jumps and sings in duality. The self-willed manmukh has no devotion. ||3] |
Afe od feafs uf ast ord ufe Ae fame aterdt i (506-8, art, He 3)
Sur nar virat pakh karmee naachay mun jan gi-aan beechaaree.
The angels, mortals, renunciates, ritualists, silent sages and beings of spiritual wisdom dance.
fro rfoe fae oat od fro route afa Aad sil (506-9, art, ne 3)
siDh saaDhik liv laagee naachay jin gurmukh buDh veechaaree. ||4||
The Siddhas and seekers, lovingly focused on the Lord, dance, as do the Gurmukhs, whose minds dwell in reflective meditation. ||4||
us qos 3 TE os fro wot afe fee SHS Il (506-10, TAH, He 3)
khand barahmand tarai gun naachay jin laagee har liv tumaaree.
The planets and solar systems dance in the three qualities, as do those who bear love for You, Lord.
Aba #3 AS dt ard ovata ust Test UII (506-10, TAS, He 3) jee-a jant sabhay hee naachay naacheh khaanee chaaree. ||5|| The beings and creatures all dance, and the four sources of creation dance. ||5||
A 30 Sefo Ret of fro cena nafe fee we I (506-11, TAS, He 3)
jo tuDh bhaaveh say-ee naacheh jin gurmukh sabad liv laa-ay.
They alone dance, who are pleasing to You, and who, as Gurmukhs, embrace love for the Word of the Shabad.
A gas A 33 famrat fae AG IaH HOTS INEM (506-11, THT, vs 3)
say bhagat say tat gi-aanee jin ka-o hukam manaa-ay. ||6||
They are devotees, with the essence of spiritual wisdom, who obey the Hukam of His Command. ||6]||
eu gafs Ad fh@ foe wt fas Ae safs 3 Tet i (506-12, gat, ve 3)
ayhaa bhagat sachay si-o liv laagai bin sayvaa bhagat na ho-ee.
This is devotional worship, that one loves the True Lord; without service, one cannot be a devotee.
fez He ST ASE sted ST AY US Set DI (506-12, aaet, ne 3)
jeevat marai taa sabad beechaarai taa sach paavai ko-ee. ||7||
If one remains dead while yet alive, he reflects upon the Shabad, and then, he obtains the True Lord. ||7||
Hwheor a nafa sos BA os a feaer Sz shed Il (506-13, aaet, v8 3)
maa-i-aa kai arath bahut lok naachay ko virlaa tat beechaaree.
So many people dance for the sake of Maya; how rare are those who contemplate reality.
Gs usAst Het He ue faa a faut SHS Ic (06-14, act, ne 3)
gur parsaadee so-ee jan paa-ay jin ka-o kirpaa tumaaree. ||8] |
By Guru's Grace, that humble being obtains You, Lord, upon whom You show Mercy. [18]
fea eH Ae dnd AT Sor faoar AfE I (506-14, gat, He 3) ik dam saachaa veesrai saa vaylaa birthaa jaa-ay. If I forget the True Lord, even for an instant, that time passes in vain.
Afs vfs Het AHS wm SUA aS SATE UCM (506-15, aA, He 3)
saahi saahi sadaa samaalee-ai aapay bakhsay karay rajaa-ay. ||9] |
With each and every breath, constantly remember the Lord; He Himself shall forgive you, according to His Will. ||9]|
ret orafs A 30 sefo fa aanfe Ase Sect I (506-15, aA, He 3)
say-ee naacheh jo tuDh bhaaveh je gurmukh sabad veechaaree.
They alone dance, who are pleasing to Your Will, and who, as Gurmukhs, contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
ad sod A AoA AY wets fas AG Sela SHAT NIONAIE! (506-15, THT, He 3) kaho naanak say sahj sukh paavahi jin ka-o nadar tumaaree. ||10||1||6]|
Says Nanak, they alone find celestial peace, whom You bless with Your Grace. []10]/2]]6]|
TAS HIS 8 WT 2 (506-16) goojree mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe fsa YATE II (506-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa fae rhe ofa o Aa fae gee dts wares I (506-17, aA, He 4) har bin jee-araa reh na sakai ji-o baalak kheer aDhaaree. Without the Lord, my soul cannot survive, like an infant without milk.
Wa wigs ys TeHfy urha mus Afsas & sfsarst All (506-17, aA, He 4)
agam agochar parabh gurmukh paa-ee-ai apunay satgur kai balihaaree. ||1||
The inaccessible and incomprehensible Lord God is obtained by the Gurmukh; Iam a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||1]|
Ho F fe ates SI BAH Ml (506-18, TAS, Hs 4) man ray har keerat tar taaree. O my mind, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is a boat to carry you across.
aonfa on ifs ae ureba fre a@ faur surct TIS tl (506-18, aH, He 4) gurmukh naam amrit jal paa-ee-ai jin ka-o kirpaa tumaaree. rahaa-o.
The Gurmukhs obtain the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. You bless them with Your Grace. ||Pause] |
Ua uod Hod Hoes ode Hf Asta mafes Aus dots soe Il (507-1, aA, us 4)
sanak sanandan naarad mun sayveh an-din japat raheh banvaaree. Sanak, Sanandan and Naarad the sage serve You; night and day, they continue to chant Your Name, O Lord of the jungle.
Aves users Ae wre fSe at UA Heat MQM (507-2, gat, ne 4) sarnaagat parahlaad jan aa-ay tin kee paij savaaree. ||2|| Slave Prahlaad sought Your Sanctuary, and You saved his honor. ||2||
nod fodro Sa sas Sar Afs wad Il (507-2, anct, ne 4) alakh niranjan ayko vartai aykaa jot muraaree. The One unseen immaculate Lord is pervading everywhere, as is the Light of the Lord.
Afs Wer J Sat VST Has TS UAT BM (507-3, aA, He 4)
sabh jaachik too ayko daataa maageh haath pasaaree. ||3]|
All are beggars, You alone are the Great Giver. Reaching out our hands, we beg from You. ||3]|
Bas Aa at SSH wet wets moe wer fos fonrdt i (507-3, ant, He 4)
bhagat janaa kee ootam banee gaavahi akath kathaa nit ni-aaree. The speech of the humble devotees is sublime; they sing continually the wondrous, Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
HeG HOH sfenr fs6 aa urfy SI AG Sra MSI (507-4, TAT, we 4) safal janam bha-i-aa tin kayraa aap taray kul taaree. ||4|| Their lives become fruitful; they save themselves, and all their generations. ||4]|
HouY efor esHfs fmm fre nists Ho Tard Il (507-4, aAet, ne 4)
manmukh dubiDhaa durmat bi-aapay jin antar moh gubaaree.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in duality and evil-mindedness; within them is the darkness of attachment.
AS Aa at ae o ote Gfe sa AE UsSTa MUI (507-5, TAS, He 4)
sant janaa kee kathaa na bhaavai o-ay doobay san parvaaree. ||5|| They do not love the sermon of the humble Saints, and they are drowned along with their families. ||5]|
feea foe afs ne ae Gr Hose nfo I (507-6, THe, He 4)
nindak nindaa kar mal Dhovai oh malbhakh maa-i-aaDhaaree.
By slandering, the slanderer washes the filth off others; he is an eater of filth, and a worshipper of Maya.
AS aot at fee feumd a Gaeta & urdt ill (507-6, aAet, He 4)
sant janaa kee nindaa vi-aapay naa urvaar na paaree. ||6]|
He indulges in the slander of the humble Saints; he is neither on this shore, nor the shore beyond. ||6||
fy uag ae ar Ag ass ofe ads AS AG OS I (507-7, aAet, ue 4)
ayhu parpanch khayl kee-aa sabh kartai har kartai sabh kal Dhaaree.
All this worldly drama is set in motion by the Creator Lord; He has infused His almighty strength into all.
fs Fat AY FIs Fa wists Ay fis Saas WI (507-7, aA, we 4)
har ayko soot vartai jug antar soot khinchai aykankaaree. || 7] |
The thread of the One Lord runs through the world; when He pulls out this thread, the One Creator alone remains. ||7]|
dAfs TAS ofA areata dfs Te TAa' sls FA We ll (507-8, gAet, He 4)
rasan rasan ras gaavahi har gun rasnaa har ras Dhaaree.
With their tongues, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and savor Them. They place the sublime essence of the Lord upon their tongues, and savor it.
soa de fas niga o Ha ofa A US fimirst CUA I (07-8, gat, He 4)
naanak har bin avar na maaga-o har ras pareet pi-aaree. ||8||1]|7]|
O Nanak, other than the Lord, I ask for nothing else; I am in love with the Love of the Lord's sublime essence. ||8]|1]||7]||
TAS HIS U WT 2 (507-10) goojree mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (507-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THe His J TH adafs sHo fs FH Il (507-11, TAT, we 5) raajan meh too™ raajaa kahee-ahi bhooman meh bhoomaa. Among kings, You are called the King. Among land-lords, You are the Land-lord.
sag Hfs saaet Sct ane fafs sor WA (507-11, TAS, He 5) thaakur meh thakuraa-ee tayree koman sir komaa. ||1]| Among masters, You are the Master. Among tribes, Yours is the Supreme Tribe. ||1]||
fust AS as Tat waMHT I (507-12, aAet, He 5) pitaa mayro bado Dhanee agmaa. My Father is wealthy, deep and profound.
Crafts aea adn aes Ufey so far NA TIE Il (507-12, aH, He 5)
ustat kavan kareejai kartay paykh rahay bismaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
What praises should I chant, O Creator Lord? Beholding You, I am wonder-struck. ||1]|Pause] |
Ads ufs Adher 3 adhafs ese ffs erst I (507-13, art, 43 5)
sukhee-an meh sukhee-aa too” kahee-ahi daatan sir daataa.
Among the peaceful, You are called the Peaceful One. Among givers, You are the Greatest Giver.
3Ho ufo SHAT Adbafs TAS HiT TS WI (507-13, aA, He 5)
tayjan meh tayjvansee kahee-ahi rasee-an meh raataa. ||2||
Among the glorious, You are said to be the Most Glorious. Among revellers, You are the Reveller. ||2||
He Hfs Ae S admifs sae ufo Sait il (507-14, aASt, Hs 5) sooran meh sooraa too” kahee-ahi bhogan meh bhogee. Among warriors, You are called the Warrior. Among indulgers, You are the Indulger.
qrse ufo 3 as faorst Aare ufo ait WSN (507-14, aA, He 5) garastan meh too™ bado garihsatee jogan meh jogee. ||3]|
Among householders, You are the Great Householder. Among yogis, You are the Yogi. H3II
aso Hfs 3 aes adios wrase ufo wires Il (507-15, TAT, Hs 5)
kartan meh too™ kartaa kahee-ahi aachaaran meh aachaaree.
Among creators, You are called the Creator. Among the cultured, You are the Cultured One.
Ade Hfs S AMS ATT eruraa Hf SUS SI (507-15, aA, He 5) saahan meh too” saachaa saahaa vaapaaran meh vaapaaree. ||4]|
Among bankers, You are the True Banker. Among merchants, You are the Merchant. [141]
eae Hig 3g aa AS UTS Star Il (507-16, gat, Hs 5)
darbaaran meh tayro darbaaraa saran paalan teekaa. Among courts, Yours is the Court. Yours is the Most Sublime of Sanctuaries.
ohn asa ast o web afe o AR Alar ull (507-17, aA, Hs 5)
lakhimee kaytak ganee na jaa-ee-ai gan na saka-o seekaa. ||5|| The extent of Your wealth cannot be determined. Your Coins cannot be counted. ||5]|
one Hf 3a Ys OTH fariao Hfs fararat i (507-17, at, Hs 5)
naaman meh tayro parabh naamaa gi-aanan meh gi-aanee.
Among names, Your Name, God, is the most respected. Among the wise, You are the Wisest.
ase Hf Sct ys Fast feAaTSe Hig fens NEM (507-18, TAS, 3 5)
jugtan meh tayree parabh jugtaa isnaanan meh isnaanee. ||6||
Among ways, Yours, God, is the Best Way. Among purifying baths, Yours is the Most Purifying. ||6] |
fas ufo 3ct ys fro age fAfs aa Il (507-18, aAet, He 5)
siDhan meh tayree parabh siDhaa karman sir karmaa.
Among spiritual powers, Yours, O God, are the Spiritual Powers. Among actions, Yours are the Greatest Actions.
nite Hf Sat ys yrfamat Jano fAfS TAHT WDM (507-19, aA, Hs 5)
aagi-aa meh tayree parabh aagi-aa hukman sir hukmaa. ||7||
Among wills, Your Will, God, is the Supreme Will. Of commands, Yours is the Supreme Command. ||7||
yar uot fa@ sorefs (8 sag AyMit avafs aea TH II (508-1, aH, He 5)
ji-o bolaaveh ti-o bolah su-aamee kudrat kavan hamaaree. As You cause me to speak, so do I speak, O Lord Master. What other power do I have?
WUHf Soa AA fe A ys at mifs fips WCUAUITH (508-1, THAT, He 5)
saaDhsang naanak jas gaa-i-o jo parabh kee at pi-aaree. ||8]|1]|8]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, sing His Praises; they are so very dear to God. ||8]]1]||8]|
TAS HIS U WT 8 (508-3) goojree mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (508-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oa ddd tle soe ulss ures SS Il (508-4, gH, vs 5) naath narhar deen banDhav patit paavan dayv. O Lord, Man-lion Incarnate, Companion to the poor, Divine Purifier of sinners;
3 3H OF faue ae fafa new AoMit AZ A (508-4, aA, He 5)
bhai taraas naas kirpaal gun niDh safal su-aamee sayv. ||1]|
O Destroyer of fear and dread, Merciful Lord Master, Treasure of Excellence, fruitful is Your service. ||1]|
ofa sures aa afFe I (508-5, gH, He 5) har gopaal gur gobind. O Lord, Cherisher of the World, Guru-Lord of the Universe.
Ude Ade thenrs ane ahs Aa se fT NAN TIE Il (508-5, aAet, He 5)
charan saran da-i-aal kaysav taar jag bhav sinDh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet, O Merciful Lord. Carry me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]||Pause| |
OH AU Ido HE HT Bda Hate Ho HAGE Il (508-6, THAT, He 5)
kaam kroDh haran mad moh dahan muraar man makrand.
O Dispeller of sexual desire and anger, Eliminator of intoxication and attachment, Destroyer of ego, Honey of the mind;
HOH Hee foes usetog ufs IY UPHTSE III (508-6, TAT, He 5)
janam maran nivaar DharneeDhar pat raakh parmaanand. ||2]|
set me free from birth and death, O Sustainer of the earth, and preserve my honor, O Embodiment of supreme bliss. ||2||
Aes uifsa sda Hfenr aa fami ofa fee HS il (508-7, aact, ve 5)
jalat anik tarang maa-i-aa gur gi-aan har rid mant.
The many waves of desire for Maya are burnt away, when the Guru's spiritual wisdom is enshrined in the heart, through the Guru's Mantra.
efe nigafa age H fis Afe Use MST ISI (508-7, gat, Hs 5) chhayd aha’-buDh karunaa mai chint mayt purakh anant. ||3]| Destroy my egotism, O Merciful Lord; dispel my anxiety, O Infinite Primal Lord. ||3]|
fAufs ANE us HITS Ys foMTg AGA AHTT II (508-8, aASt, He 5)
simar samrath pal mahoorat parabh Dhi-aan sahj samaaDh.
Remember in meditation the Almighty Lord, every moment and every instant; meditate on God in the celestial peace of Samaadhi.
aie cfnm YAS uss APIA TA AMT ISI (508-8, aA, He 5)
deen da-i-aal parsann pooran jaachee-ai raj saaDh. ||4]|
O Merciful to the meek, perfectly blissful Lord, I beg for the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||41|
Hg fleas eds wirar aAat fers Il (508-9, aA, He 5) moh mithan durant aasaa baasnaa bikaar. Emotional attachment is false, desire is filthy, and longing is corrupt.
gy UGH SdH faefs Ho 3 Gug afe fadara WUll (508-9, aaet, ne 5)
rakh Dharam bharam bidaar man tay uDhar har nirankaar. ||5||
Please, preserve my faith, dispel these doubts from my mind, and save me, O Formless Lord. ||5||
uote orfe gare ofe fafa ds fAat o dts Il (508-10, ant, He 5)
Dhanaadh aadh bhandaar har niDh hot jinaa na cheer.
They have become wealthy, loaded with the treasures of the Lord's riches; they were lacking even clothes.
4s Ha Hs aevy Alas se Te vfs ats wel (508-10, aAet, w2 5)
khal mugaDh moorh kataakh-y sareeDhar bha-ay gun mat Dheer. ||6]||
The idiotic, foolish and senseless people have become virtuous and patient, receiving the Gracious Glance of the Lord of wealth. ||6]|
Meo HAS AaelA Af Ho fe foe usSHS Il (508-11, aAet, w3 5)
jeevan mukat jagdees jap man Dhaar rid parteet.
Become Jivan-Mukta, liberated while yet alive, by meditating on the Lord of the Universe, O mind, and maintaining faith in Him in your heart.
Fiba efenr Hise Asay THE USH TAT SHS WDM (508-12, gAet, He 5)
jee-a da-i-aa ma-i-aa sarbatar ramna™ param hansah reet. ||7]|
Show kindness and mercy to all beings, and realize that the Lord is pervading everywhere; this is the way of life of the enlightened soul, the supreme swan. ||7| |
23 UIAS A<o did AA JAS OH Bare Il (508-12, gat, we 5)
dayt darsan sarvan har jas rasan naam uchaar.
He grants the Blessed Vision of His Darshan to those who listen to His Praises, and who, with their tongues, chant His Name.
Wal Ad SAIS USAS YS FSA Ulss SUT MCUAUQNUNAUIAUIUUDN (508-13, TAS, Hs 5) ang sang bhagvaan parsan parabh naanak patit uDhaar. ||8]|1||2]||5]|1]]1]|2||57]| They are part and parcel, life and limb with the Lord God; O Nanak, they feel the Touch of God, the Savior of sinners. ||8]|1|]2]|5||1]]1]|2]|57]|
Tret ot aa Hoe 3 frees farfon at ea at gat reat (08-14)
goojree kee vaar mehlaa 3 sikandar biraahim kee vaar kee Dhunee gaa-unee Goojaree Ki Vaar, Third Mehl, Sung In The Tune Of The Vaar Of Sikandar & Biraahim:
qe Afsare YATE Il (508-14) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS H8 3 Il (508-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
feg Ads HHS Hor Fige at fafa arfs i (508-15, aadt at era, He 3) ih jagat mamtaa mu-aa jeevan kee biDh naahi. This world perishing in attachment and possessiveness; no one knows the way of life.
GI aA ge A VS St Hes uest wf i (08-15, geet aft era, ue 3) gur kai bhaanai jo chalai taa’ jeevan padvee paahi. One who walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, obtains the supreme status of life.
Gfe et Het HS Hes A Ufa vaet fas wh II (508-16, aAet at era, He 3)
O-ay Sadaa sadaa jan jeevtay jo har charnee chit laahi.
Those humble beings who focus their consciousness on the Lord's Feet, live forever and ever.
soa oedt Hfs ZA TeHfy AafA ANT NA (508-16, aAet at era, He 3)
naanak nadree man vasai gurmukh sahj samaahi. ||1]||
O Nanak, by His Grace, the Lord abides in the minds of the Gurmukhs, who merge in celestial bliss. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (508-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
niefs HOA Fy I wm} ffs Ga Hrs Il (508-17, art aft er, He 3)
andar sahsaa dukh hai aapai sir DnanDhai maar.
Within the self is the pain of doubt; engrossed in worldly affairs, they are killing themselves.
en ote AS aala o Wale wher Ha films Il (508-18, art at =r, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay sutay kabeh na jaageh maa-i-aa moh pi-aar.
Asleep in the love of duality, they never wake up; they are in love with, and attached to Maya.
oH 6 vate Hae 3 aerate fed HOH aT na” Il (508-18, gHet at 7g, He 3)
naam na cheeteh sabad na vichaareh ih manmukh kaa aachaar.
They do not think of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and they do not contemplate the Word of the Shabad. This is the conduct of the self-willed manmukhs.
ua uot
dfs oH 3 Ufeor ASH fase aeteur Sea AH HG AP YMITT WI (509-1, gat at ea, He 3)
har naam na paa-i-aa janam birthaa gavaa-i-aa naanak jam maar karay khu-aar. ||2|| They do not obtain the Lord's Name, and they waste away their lives in vain; O Nanak, the Messenger of Death punishes and dishonors them. ||2||
uGat II (509-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nituat nity BurfeGo seg Tg o At i (509-2, gaat af va, we 3) aapnaa aap upaa-i-on tadahu hor na ko-ee. He created Himself - at that time, there was no other.
HS HAS orf as HAS A Tet Il (509-2, aAet at era, v2 3) mataa masoorat aap karay jo karay so ho-ee. He consulted Himself for advice, and what He did came to pass.
Seg MTA 6 USS IT BTS BEF I (509-2, geet aft ers, Hs 3) tadahu aakaas na paataal hai naa tarai lo-ee. At that time, there were no Akaashic Ethers, no nether regions, nor the three worlds.
seg wnt orf fadarg 3 or Gufs Tet i (509-3, gat at eva, vs 3) tadahu aapay aap nirankaar hai naa opat ho-ee. At that time, only the Formless Lord Himself existed - there was no creation.
fa@ fan are fe ad fan fag neg o Set NA (509-3, aaet of era, He 3) ji-o tis bhaavai tivai karay tis bin avar na ko-ee. ||1|| As it pleased Him, so did He act; without Him, there was no other. ||1]||
H8a H8 3 Il (509-4) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afog Ha wet Sd fe Ae AHME Il (509-4, art at era, ne 3) saahib mayraa sadaa hai disai sabad kamaa-ay. My Master is eternal. He is seen by practicing the Word of the Shabad.
Gg m@aeat ae ofa a mire ar fe II (509-4, ant at erg, He 3) oh a-uhaanee kaday naahi naa aavai naa jaa-ay. He never perishes; He does not come or go in reincarnation.
Het Het A ASA HAS Hfs gd ANTE Il (509-5, gat at evs, Hs 3) sadaa sadaa so sayvee-ai jo sabh meh rahai samaa-ay. So serve Him, forever and ever; He is contained in all.
Meg UAT fas Asha AH S nfs AE Il (509-5, gat aft ers, H8 3) avar doojaa ki-o sayvee-ai jammai tai mar jaa-ay. Why serve another who is born, and then dies?
faves fs ao Hifeor fa uAH 3 Aafs mru|t nredt AG fos OE Il (509-6, aadt at ea, He 3)
nihfal tin kaa jeevi-aa je khasam na jaaneh aapnaa avree ka-o chit laa-ay.
Fruitless is the life of those who do not know their Lord and Master, and who center their consciousness on others.
Sot SS 5 AUST agar ast Sf ANTS WAM (509-7, gat at es, He 3) naanak ayv na jaap-ee kartaa kaytee day-ay sajaa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, it cannot be known, how much punishment the Creator shall inflict on them.
[21
He 8 Il (09-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Fat oH foment As Fas Ag Il (509-7, aaet aft era, He 3) sachaa naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabho vartai sach. Meditate on the True Name; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.
ood Jan afs uses af St Se ures Ag Il (509-8, gaat af era, He 3)
naanak hukam bujh parvaan ho-ay taa fal paavai sach.
O Nanak, by understanding the Hukam of the Lord's Command, one becomes acceptable, and then obtains the fruit of Truth.
Rast Fest as fed JaH “fs 3 gset nia ag fEarwT iI (509-8, gat at es, we 3) kathnee badnee kartaa firai hukmai mool na bujh-ee anDhaa kach nikach. ||2]| He wanders around babbling and speaking, but he does not understand the Lord's Command at all. He is blind, the falsest of the false. ||2]|
Uugat Il (509-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ana fara Gufese fqrct at He Farfenr i (509-9, gat at er, v8 3) sanjog vijog upaa-i-on saristee kaa mool rachaa-i-aa. Creating union and separation, He laid the foundations of the Universe.
goot frfe Asints rst AfS frefemr I (509-9, aaet af ra, ne 3)
hukmee sarisat saajee-an jotee jot milaa-i-aa.
By His Command, the Lord of Light fashioned the Universe, and infused His Divine Light into it.
nat J Ag Woe Afsafe Ae Aetenr | (509-10, gat at rg, we 3) jotee hoo™ sabh chaannaa satgur sabad sunaa-i-aa.
From the Lord of Light, all light originates. The True Guru proclaims the Word of the Shabad.
gun fang Hon 3 Te fafe Go ofemr It (509-10, at af era, He 3)
barahmaa bisan mahays tarai gun sir DhanDhai laa-i-aa.
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, under the influence of the three dispositions, were put to their tasks.
Heat at ue satese sdor AY urfeur iQ (509-11, art at era, He 3) maa-i-aa kaa mool rachaa-i-on turee-aa sukh paa-i-aa. ||2||
He created the root of Maya, and the peace obtained in the fourth state of consciousness. ||2| |
HS H2 3 Il (509-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
A wu A 3u fa Afsag SS I (509-12, aaet aft a, He 3)
SO jap so tap je satgur bhaavai.
That alone is chanting, and that alone is deep meditation, which is pleasing to the True Guru.
Afsaa & av Sfanret urs i (509-12, aaet aft era, ve 3) satgur kai bhaanai vadi-aa-ee paavai. Pleasing the True Guru, glorious greatness is obtained.
eae wiry efs ad Hf ANTS IAI (509-12, aeet at era, He 3) naanak aap chhod gur maahi samaavai. ||1]|| O Nanak, renouncing self-conceit, one merges into the Guru. ||1]|
H8 3 Il (509-13) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
aa ot fra & feaer BS il (509-13, gat at eva, us 3) gur kee sikh ko virlaa layvai. How rare are those who receive the Guru's Teachings.
ood fan uf efsuret FS QI (509-13, gHet at era, 48 3) naanak jis aap vadi-aa-ee dayvai. ||2|| O Nanak, he alone receives it, whom the Lord Himself blesses with glorious greatness.
21 |
uGat Il (509-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hfeor Hg mifamre 3 faa wifs acct i (509-14, aadt af era, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh agi-aan hai bikham at bhaaree.
Emotional attachment to Maya is spiritual darkness; it is very difficult and such a heavy load.
ugg uy ag ofeur fas sdha seat i (509-14, ant at ere, ne 3) pathar paap baho ladi-aa ki-o taree-ai taaree. Loaded with so very many stones of sin, how can the boat cross over?
motes sat sfsur afs ufa Sarat il (509-15, gat ot =a, nH 3)
an-din bhagtee rati-aa har paar utaaree.
Those who are attuned to the Lord's devotional worship night and day are carried across.
qd Aaet Ho fesner JH efs fearct il (509-15, aect oft er, v8 3)
gur sabdee man nirmalaa ha-umai chhad vikaaree.
Under the Instruction of the Guru's Shabad, one sheds egotism and corruption, and the mind becomes immaculate.
ofa afs ony fomren afe ofa farsrat Sil (509-16, at af era, ne 3) har har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai har har nistaaree. ||3]| Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the Lord, Har, Har, is our Saving Grace.
[I3I|
HS Il (509-16)
salok. Shalok:
ats Hats Burs Hast get eAS ae Il (509-16, aAet at era, ne 3) kabeer mukat du-aaraa sankurhaa raa-ee dasvai bhaa-ay. O Kabeer, the gate of liberation is narrow, less than one-tenth of a mustard seed.
He 38 Hae dfe sa foafior fa afe wfe Il (509-17, act ot =a, v8 3) man ta-o maigal ho-ay rahaa niksi-aa ki-o kar jaa-ay. The mind has become as big as an elephant; how can it pass through this gate?
mA Afsae A fH Zor as UATE Il (509-17, ant at es, v8 3) aisaa satgur jay milai tuthaa karay pasaa-o. If one meets such a True Guru, by His Pleasure, He shows His Mercy.
Hats ears Hae AOA wTSS ATS WAU (509-18, aAet at era, He 3) mukat du-aaraa moklaa sehjay aava-o jaa-o. ||1]| Then, the gate of liberation becomes wide open, and the soul easily passes through.
[11|
He 3 Il (509-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
eae Hats wore mifs star oar df A AME Il (509-18, ant at era, ne 3) naanak mukat du-aaraa at neekaa naan"aa ho-ay so jaa-ay. O Nanak, the gate of liberation is very narrow; only the very tiny can pass through.
ISH HO MARS d fas ate feg F Ate il (509-19, art at era, vs 3)
ha-umai man asthool hai ki-o kar vich day jaa-ay. Through egotism, the mind has become bloated. How can it pass through?
Afsad fifeor GBH aet AfS act AS mete I (509-19, aaet aft va, He 3) satgur mili-ai ha-umai ga-ee jot rahee sabh aa-ay. Meeting the True Guru, egotism departs, and one is filled with the Divine Light.
UST UAO
feg Ht Ae NaS I Aon Sfoor ANTE |2QH (10-1, gat aft ea, He 3) ih jee-o sadaa mukat hai sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2|| Then, this soul is liberated forever, and it remains absorbed in celestial bliss. ||2| |
ugat Il (510-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufs HAG Curfe & fA mus atST I (510-1, gat at era, ne 3) parabh sansaar upaa-ay kai vas aapnai keetaa. God created the Universe, and He keeps it under His power.
TES YS 3B ure SA SIHTST I (510-2, gat at ers, ws 3) gantai parabhoo na paa-ee-ai doojai bharmeetaa. God cannot be obtained by counting; the mortal wanders in doubt.
Afsas fiufeot Htez ue af Afs AMIS II (510-2, ant at era, He 3)
satgur mili-ai jeevat marai bujh sach sameetaa.
Meeting the True Guru, one remains dead while yet alive; understanding Him, he is absorbed in the Truth.
Fae J@H deat ofa Afes fester i (510-3, aat af ra, ne 3)
sabday ha-umai kho-ee-ai har mayl mileetaa.
Through the Word of the Shabad, egotism is eradicated, and one is united in the Lord's Union.
AS fas we ad wrfy mmy feast sil (510-3, act at era, v8 3)
sabh kichh jaanai karay aap aapay vigseetaa. ||4]|
He knows everything, and Himself does everything; beholding His Creation, He rejoices. ||4||
H@a H3 3 Ill (510-4)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsas fAG fas 5 ote on 3 SAG ufo wrfe I (510-4, aadt aft era, He 3)
satgur si-o chit na laa-i-o naam na vasi-o man aa-ay.
One who has not focused his consciousness on the True Guru, and into whose mind the Naam does not come
fon feeo Fifenr foor gar ufo urfenr vrfe i (510-4, aAdt at ere, v2 3) Dharig ivayhaa jeevi-aa ki-aa jug meh paa-i-aa aa-ay. - cursed is such a life. What has he gained by coming into the world?
Hor uct off 3d Sa oA ufo um ofa Ate II (510-5, aaet of era, He 3) maa-i-aa khotee raas hai ayk chasay meh paaj leh jaa-ay. Maya is false capital; in an instant, its false covering falls off.
Jag saat 36 fimrg of seq we aHete II (510-5, aAdt at era, ne 3) hathahu chhurhkee tan si-aahu ho-ay badan jaa-ay kumlaa-ay. When it slips from his hand, his body turns black, and his face withers away.
fo Afsas fA@ fos ofenr faq AY efhor His orfe I (510-6, gat ot er, ne 3)
jin satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa tin" sukh vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Those who focus their consciousness on the True Guru - peace comes to abide in their minds.
ofa on fourefs ga fr afe of ad fess we I (510-7, aadt at ea, Hs 3)
har naam Dhi-aavahi rang si-o har naam rahay liv laa-ay.
They meditate on the Name of the Lord with love; they are lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord.
oa Afsdd A ue ACfuor fa tha ufo sfoor AME I (510-7, aect aft era, H8 3) naanak satgur so Dhan sa-upi-aa je jee-a meh rahi-aa samaa-ay.
O Nanak, the True Guru has bestowed upon them the wealth, which remains contained within their hearts.
Ja fA ag nae Sat vs Bate WAU (510-8, aeet aft ers, v8 3) rang tisai ka-o aglaa vannee charhai charhaa-ay. ||1]| They are imbued with supreme love; its color increases day by day. ||1]|
He 2 Il (510-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Her get oaret wafs adt wue|rf— il (510-9, aaet af era, ne 3) maa-i-aa ho-ee naagnee jagat rahee laptaa-ay. Maya is a serpent, clinging to the world.
fen at Ret A ad fSA dt ag feta whe II (510-9, aaet of era, He 3) is kee sayvaa jo karay tis hee ka-o fir khaa-ay. Whoever serves her, she ultimately devours.
Tafa cet areg fSfs His ef wet ute ii (510-9, aadt at Sr, v2 3)
gurmukh ko-ee gaarrhoo tin mal dal laa-ee paa-ay.
The Gurmukh is a snake-charmer; he has trampled her and thrown her down, and crushed her underfoot.
soa Aet Gad fa Afe ad fos Ste iM (510-10, gat at ea, He 3) naanak say-ee ubray je sach rahay liv laa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, they alone are saved, who remain lovingly absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||
ust Il (510-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wet aT yas US HETSAT Il (510-11, aAet at ers, He 3) dhaadhee karay pukaar parabhoo sunaa-isee. The minstrel cries out, and God hears him.
niefe thea af yar ufSet il 10-11, art at ers, v8 3) andar Dheerak ho-ay pooraa paa-isee. He is comforted within his mind, and he obtains the Perfect Lord.
A Ufa fofimr Sy A aH aHfeAt Il (510-11, aAet at era, ne 3) jo Dhur likhi-aa laykh say karam kamaa-isee. Whatever destiny is pre-ordained by the Lord, those are the deeds he does.
WT de UA efeors St HIS we UTEAT I (510-12, gaat aft ra, He 3)
jaa hovai khasam da-i-aal taa mahal ghar paa-isee.
When the Lord and Master becomes Merciful, then one obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence as his home.
Aus Aa ofS ear qoute Hefert ull (510-12, at oft era, v8 3) so parabh mayraa at vadaa gurmukh maylaa-isee. ||5] | That God of mine is so very great; as Gurmukh, I have met Him. ||5]|
HBa H8 3 Il (510-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
AS A AT Sa FT Ae Tt Id Tale Il (510-13, gat at es, we 3) sabhnaa kaa saho ayk hai sad hee rahai hajoor. There is One Lord God of all; He remains ever-present.
aoa JOH 3 Haet st we dt niete Efe Il (510-13, aA at ere, He 3)
naanak hukam na mann-ee taa ghar hee andar door.
O Nanak, if one does not obey the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then within one's own home, the Lord seems far away.
Jan St fsqr Hofert faa AG sets ATE Il (510-14, TAT at ers, He 3) hukam bhee tin"aa manaa-isee jin" ka-o nadar karay-i. They alone obey the Lord's Command, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace.
Jou dfs AY ufeer Un Rovers SE NA 10-14, aAdt at era, He 3) hukam man sukh paa-i-aa paraym suhaagan ho-ay. ||1|| Obeying His Command, one obtains peace, and becomes the happy, loving soul-bride.
[21
He 3 Il (510-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dfs Fast fs net as 3 oes aE i (510-15, gest oft =a, Hs 3)
rain sabaa-ee jal mu-ee kant na laa-i-o bhaa-o.
She who does not love her Husband Lord, burns and wastes away all through the night of her life.
soa Afy eAfs Aoret fre fimre use ofe TE QU (510-15, gat ot ers, 18 3) naanak sukh vasan sohaaganee jin” pi-aaraa purakh har raa-o. ||2||
O Nanak, the soul-brides dwell in peace; they have the Lord, their King, as their Husband. ||2||
UugaT Il (510-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS Aa fefas A efor fe fea BS Il (510-16, aAet at era, He 3) sabh jag fir mai daykhi-aa har iko daataa. Roaming over the entire world, I have seen that the Lord is the only Giver.
Curfe fas o uch afs aan feast Il (510-17, gat at ea, Hs 3) upaa-ay kitai na paa-ee-ai har karam biDhaataa. The Lord cannot be obtained by any device at all; He is the Architect of Karma.
aa Aaet of xfs eA afs ATA AST I (510-17, gat at ers, He 3)
gur sabdee har man vasai har sehjay jaataa.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and the Lord is easily revealed within.
nigeg fener uate ast afe vifts Afs ast il (510-18, gat at era, He 3)
andrahu tarisnaa agan bujhee har amrit sar naataa.
The fire of desire within is quenched, and one bathes in the Lord's Pool of Ambrosial Nectar.
zat efsuret a3 at qanfr Fors WE (510-18, aAet at era, ne 3)
vadee vadi-aa-ee vaday kee gurmukh bolaataa. ||6||
The great greatness of the great Lord God - the Gurmukh speaks of this. ||6] | HS H8 3 Ill (510-19)
salok mehlaa 3.
Shalok, Third Mehl:
ofenr TA for uifs 3 fa ufeor ot afs Ate I (510-19, gat at =a, He 3) kaa-i-aa hans ki-aa pareet hai je pa-i-aa hee chhad jaa-ay.
What love is this between the body and soul, which ends when the body falls? oH 8 ae afe fa wernt ft vatenr ote 3 ATE I (510-19, art at erg, Hs 3)
ays no koorh bol ke khavaalee-ai je chaldi-aa naal na jaa-ay. Why feed it by telling lies? When you leave, it does not go with you.
UST UA
ofenr fret nig t u@e usg ATE II (511-1, ast of a, He 3) kaa-i-aa mitee anDh hai pa-unai puchhahu jaa-ay. The body is merely blind dust; go, and ask the soul.
JG a wfenr Hfoor fefa fefe nirer ae I GSu1-1, aact at =a, Hs 3) ha-o taa maa-i-aa mohi-aa fir fir aavaa jaa-ay. The soul answers, "I am enticed by Maya, and so I come and go, again and again."
SSA JAH 3 WS YAH aT fA go Afe ANTE NA (511-2, gaat aft a, He 3)
naanak hukam na jaato khasam kaa je rahaa sach samaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, I do not know my Lord and Master's Command, by which I would merge in the Truth. ||1]]|
He 3 Il (11-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Sa forse oH Us dg us wire ATE II (511-3, ant ot ere, He 3)
ayko nihchal naam Dhan hor Dhan aavai jaa-ay.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the only permanent wealth; all other wealth comes and goes.
fea ua a@ snag rife o Hee a Gear B ATE I (511-3, aeet oft =a, Hs 3) is Dhan ka-o taskar johi na sak-ee naa ochkaa lai jaa-ay. Thieves cannot steal this wealth, nor can robbers take it away.
feg ofa ug rhh Ast afe sfour Aha os AE Ut (511-4, aeet ot es, He 3) in har Dhan jee-ai saytee rav rahi-aa jee-ai naalay jaa-ay. This wealth of the Lord is embedded in the soul, and with the soul, it shall depart.
ud TT 3 urea HoHfe us o uMS i 1-4, gat at era, vs 3) pooray gur tay paa-ee-ai manmukh palai na paa-ay. It is obtained from the Perfect Guru; the self-willed manmukhs do not receive it.
Ug surg Steat fat arn US Ufa wife WIM (11-5, gat ot erg, vs 3) Dhan vaapaaree naankaa jin"aa naam Dhan khati-aa aa-ay. ||2|| Blessed are the traders, O Nanak, who have come to earn the wealth of the Naam.
21] ugat Il (511-5)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ha Afog vfs ea AY afss asta | (511-5, aAdt aft era, He 3) mayraa saahib at vadaa sach gahir gambheeraa. My Master is so very great, true, profound and unfathomable.
Ag Ad fsA a ef do Ag fSA oe She Il Gi-6, gat af =e, He 3) sabh jag tis kai vas hai sabh tis kaa cheeraa. The whole world is under His power; everything is the projection of Him.
Ts usASt ut fagss ug ater il (511-6, ant at era, ne 3)
gur parsaadee paa-ee-ai nihchal Dhan Dheeraa.
By Guru's Grace, the eternal wealth is obtained, bringing peace and patience to the mind.
frau 3 ofs nfs SA SS TI AT Ml 1-7, gat at srs, we 3) kirpaa tay har man vasai bhaytai gur sooraa. By His Grace, the Lord dwells in the mind, and one meets the Brave Guru.
Teest Maton Ae fag fesse ahs ys WI (511-7, gAt at Ss, we 3) gunvantee salaahi-aa sadaa thir nihchal har pooraa. ||7|| The virtuous praise the ever-stable, permanent, perfect Lord. ||7]||
HS H2 3 Il (511-8) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fog far a difeor A ofs AY usafe faurae vy IBA uy ANTE II Gu-s, aaet aft evs, He 3)
Dharig tin"aa daa jeevi-aa jo har sukh parhar ti-aagday dukh ha-umai paap kamaa-ay. Cursed is the life of those who forsake and throw away the peace of the Lord's Name, and suffer pain instead by practicing ego and sin.
Hou uifemrst wfenr Hfs fend faq as 3 aret ute il (11-9, aadt at era, nH 3)
manmukh agi-aanee maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapay tin" boojh na kaa-ee paa-ay.
The ignorant self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in the love of Maya; they have no understanding at all.
vets uafs Gf AY 3 urefs nifs Te UESTe I (511-9, aAdt af era, He 3)
halat palat o-ay sukh na paavahi ant ga-ay pachhutaa-ay.
In this world and in the world beyond, they do not find peace; in the end, they depart regretting and repenting.
qs usASt & oH fore fsR wen fees Ae I 611-10, aaet aft ra, He 3)
gur parsaadee ko naam Dhi-aa-ay tis ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, one may meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and egotism departs from within him.
aoe fa yata de fetter A as seat wrfe ute nA (si1-10, gat ot era, Hs 3) naanak jis poorab hovai likhi-aa so gur charnee aa-ay paa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, one who has such pre-ordained destiny, comes and falls at the Guru's Feet.
[2
He 3 Il G11-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Houy Sur ae g a fH sats B aS Ul Su-u1, TAt at es, v3 3)
manmukh ooDhaa ka-ul hai naa tis bhagat na naa-o.
The self-willed manmukh is like the inverted lotus; he has neither devotional worship, nor the Lord's Name.
Hast viele ase az A aT T Bure i (511-12, aact at ers, ws 3) saktee andar varatdaa koorh tis kaa hai upaa-o. He remains engrossed in material wealth, and his efforts are false.
fsH a nieg fas 3 faret uf char mre i (511-12, gat aft a, 18 3) tis kaa andar chit na bhij-ee mukh feekaa aalaa-o. His consciousness is not softened within, and the words from his mouth are insipid.
Gfe usth sere a sale Gar niefs az Aur Il 11-13, grt at ee, Hs 3) o-ay Dharam ralaa-ay naa ralni" onaa andar koorh su-aa-o. He does not mingle with the righteous; within him are falsehood and selfishness.
Boa HIS FSS Beret HoHY as safe afs sa Tene se af afs FS Qu Gu-13, aact at aig, H8 3)
naanak kartai banat banaa-ee manmukh koorh bol bol dubay gurmukh taray jap har naa-o. ||2||
O Nanak, the Creator Lord has arranged things, so that the self-willed manmukhs are drowned by telling lies, while the Gurmukhs are saved by chanting the Lord's Name.
[121] ugat Il (511-14)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
fag 3S est dg ufenr fete mre wet II (su1-14, aac at erg, He 3)
bin boojhay vadaa fayr pa-i-aa fir aavai jaa-ee.
Without understanding, one must wander around the cycle of reincarnation, and continue coming and going.
Afsag at Ae 3 atshor wifs afeur ugsret Il (51-15, gat aft eva, He 3)
satgur kee sayvaa na keetee-aa ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ee.
One who has not served the True Guru, shall depart regretting and repenting in the end.
nituat fasur ad ag uretht feag wiry aeret i 11-15, gat ot era, ne 3) aapnee kirpaa karay gur paa-ee-ai vichahu aap gavaa-ee. But if the Lord shows His Mercy, one finds the Guru, and ego is banished from within.
fgna gu feag Gad AY ZA HfS wret II Gu-16, art ot er, He 3) tarisnaa bhukh vichahu utrai sukh vasai man aa-ee. Hunger and thirst depart from within, and peace comes to dwell in the mind.
Het Her Arad fase foe wet wc si-16, ant af era, ve 3) sadaa sadaa salaahee-ai hirdai liv laa-ee. ||8] | Forever and ever, praise Him with love in your heart. ||8]|
HS H3 3 Ill (511-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fa Afsag AS urue fA 6 uA Ag ate I 11-17, gat at es, He 3) je satgur sayvay aapnaa tis no poojay sabh ko-ay. One who serves his True Guru, is worshipped by everyone.
Aso Cure fafs Gur 3 afs on uaufs oe I (511-17, gaat at era, He 3) sabhnaa upaavaa sir upaa-o hai har naam paraapat ho-ay. Of all efforts, the supreme effort is the attainment of the Lord's Name.
vista Ase AfS 2A afy fase Ae AY OE I Gu-is, gat af va, He 3)
antar seetal saat vasai jap hirdai sadaa sukh ho-ay.
Peace and tranquility come to dwell within the mind; meditating within the heart, there comes a lasting peace.
nifys uret nifys Usa area oH savet TE UA (511-19, aeet at ers, He 3)
amrit khaanaa amrit painnaa naanak naam vadaa-ee ho-ay. ||1||
The Ambrosial Amrit is his food, and the Ambrosial Amrit is his clothes; O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained. ||1]|
He 3 Il (11-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
2 Ho ad at fry Afe af wets gat fours i (51-19, aadt at era, He 3) ay man gur kee sikh sun har paavahi gunee niDhaan. O mind, listen to the Guru's Teachings, and you shall obtain the treasure of virtue.
UST UA2
dfs HueTst Hfs SA ICH ATE IMIS Il (512-1, Het aft a, He 3)
har sukh-daata man vasai ha-umai jaa-ay gumaan.
The Lord, the Giver of peace, shall dwell in your mind, and your egotism and pride Shall depart.
Soa oedt uh st mafes war fms iQ (512-1, gAet at es, He 3)
naanak nadree paa-ee-ai taa an-din laagai Dhi-aan. ||2]|
O Nanak, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then, night and day, one centers his meditation on the Lord. ||2||
ust Il (512-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS H3y AS AY od TeHfe ues Il 512-2, aaet aft a, He 3) sat santokh sabh sach hai gurmukh pavitaa. The Gurmukh is totally truthful, content and pure.
nivdg Aue fearg afer He AGA FAST I (512-2, aAet af era, He 3)
andrahu kapat vikaar ga-i-aa man sehjay jitaa.
Deception and wickedness have departed from within him, and he easily conquers his mind.
30 AfS YarA MISE TA fame ales Il (512-3, aAet at era, He 3)
tah jot pargaas anand ras agi-aan gavitaa.
There, the Divine Light and the essence of bliss are manifest, and ignorance is eliminated.
wofes dfs & Te Je TE us| fast il (512-3, aaet at ere, ne 3)
an-din har kay gun ravai gun pargat kitaa.
Night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and manifests the excellence of the Lord.
Agar ast Sa o feat afe fst wei (612-4, aact of eva, ue 3) sabhnaa daataa ayk hai iko har mitaa. ||9]| The One Lord is the Giver of all; the Lord alone is our friend. ||9]|
H@a H3 3 Ill (512-4)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
gon fie A gran adhe fa mtafes ofa fee we I (512-4, aac at =a, He 3)
barahm binday so baraahman kahee-ai je an-din har liv laa-ay.
One who understands God, who lovingly centers his mind on the Lord night and day, is called a Brahmin.
Afsag ue AG HAH AHS ICH sa fSA WE II (512-5, ant at ers, He 3)
satgur puchhai sach sanjam kamaavai ha-umai rog tis jaa-ay.
Consulting the True Guru, he practices Truth and self-restraint, and he is rid of the disease of ego.
dfs ae we TE Aged Ast AfS fee Wt (512-5, gat at er, He 3)
har gun gaavai gun sangrahai jotee jot milaa-ay.
He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and gathers in His Praises; his light is blended with the Light.
fea wa Hfs & fear gon fomrat fa JBN Afe ANTS I (512-6, gat at ere, He 3)
is jug meh ko virlaa barahm gi-aanee je ha-umai mayt samaa-ay.
In this world, one who knows God is very rare; eradicating ego, he is absorbed in God.
ood fSA 6 fifeor ret AY Uren fa miofes ofa on fore A 612-7, aAet at era, He 3) naanak tis no mili-aa sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai je an-din har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, meeting him, peace is obtained; night and day, he meditates on the Lord's Name. |[1]|
He 3 Il (12-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
nists Aue HOHY nifemarst SAS FS SOLES il (512-7, gat at es, we 3) antar kapat manmukh agi-aanee rasnaa jhooth bolaa-ay. Within the ignorant self-willed manmukh is deception; with his tongue, he speaks lies.
aufe ats ofs usy 3 stn fas 28 we Hate I Gi2-8, gat af ea, He 3)
kapat keetai har purakh na bheejai nit vaykhai sunai subhaa-ay.
Practicing deception, he does not please the Lord God, who always sees and hears with natural ease.
en afe afte wa used fay ufeor Ho Forte I (512-8, art at rg, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay jaa-ay jag parboDhai bikh maa-i-aa moh su-aa-ay.
In the love of duality, he goes to instruct the world, but he is engrossed in the poison of Maya and attachment to pleasure.
fey ane Ae ey ure HH He fefs mre AE II 12-9, aaet aft =a, He 3)
it kamaanai sadaa dukh paavai jammai marai fir aavai jaa-ay.
By doing so, he suffers in constant pain; he is born and then dies, and comes and goes again and again.
Hort Hie 3 gat fete fener us uate il (512-10, art at era, v8 3) sahsaa mool na chuk-ee vich vistaa pachai pachaa-ay. His doubts do not leave him at all, and he rots away in manure.
fan 6 faut ad Hat Amit fsa ae at fire Fete II (512-10, aeet at er, 18 3) jis no kirpaa karay mayraa su-aamee tis gur kee sikh sunaa-ay. One, unto whom my Lord Master shows His Mercy, listens to the Guru's Teachings.
ofa oH fore ofa ont are ofa ot ifs Bate QI 12-11, gat af ea, He 3)
har naam Dhi-aavai har naamo gaavai har naamo ant chhadaa-ay. ||2||
He meditates on the Lord's Name, and sings the Lord's Name; in the end, the Lord's Name will deliver him. ||2||
ugat Il (512-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fot JaH HoteGe 3 ud AAS Il (512-11, gAet at Ss, He 3)
jinaa hukam manaa-i-on tay pooray sansaar.
Those who obey the Hukam of the Lord's Command, are the perfect persons in the world.
Afog Reta wut us Hate Sets il (512-12, gat at eg, oe 3) saahib sayvni" aapnaa poorai sabad veechaar. They serve their Lord Master, and reflect upon the Perfect Word of the Shabad.
ofa at Aa wadt Ad Aafe fimrfs ii (512-12, aAct at era, Hs 3) har kee sayvaa chaakree sachai sabad pi-aar. They serve the Lord, and love the True Word of the Shabad.
ofa a Hoe fst ufemr fre IH feag wfe i 512-13, aadt at era, ne 3)
har kaa mahal tin"ee paa-i-aa jin" ha-umai vichahu maar.
They attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, as they eradicate egotism from within.
Soa Tote fife ad Af afs our Ca ofs AON! (512-13, gat at er, He 3)
naanak gurmukh mil rahay jap har naamaa ur Dhaar. ||10||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs remain united with Him, chanting the Name of the Lord, and enshrining it within their hearts. ||10] |
HSE H3 3 Il (512-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aonfy fours Aon ufs Cun Afs oth fas afer Ih 512-14, aact ot era, He 3)
gurmukh Dhi-aan sahj Dhun upjai sach naam chit laa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord; the celestial sound-current resounds within him, and he focuses his consciousness on the True Name.
Tafa mofes ad df as afe a any fe afemr i (512-15, gat aft era, He 3)
gurmukh an-din rahai rang raataa har kaa naam man bhaa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh remains imbued with the Lord's Love, night and day; his mind is pleased with the Name of the Lord.
aonfy ofa zufs aaufy ofa safo aenfe ofs Rafa dar orfer I (512-15, gat oft era, v8 3) gurmukh har vaykheh gurmukh har boleh gurmukh har sahj rang laa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh beholds the Lord, the Gurmukh speaks of the Lord, and the Gurmukh naturally loves the Lord.
ood Texte famre uaufs Je fans nifamrg ote gorfeur | (512-16, art at ea, ne 3) naanak gurmukh gi-aan paraapat hovai timar agi-aan aDhayr chukaa-i-aa.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh attains spiritual wisdom, and the pitch-black darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
fAA 3 aH de ufs us fais gene af ony fimrfenr al (512-17, gat at Ss, v8 3) jis no karam hovai Dhur pooraa tin gurmukh har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]|
One who is blessed by the Perfect Lord's Grace - as Gurmukh, he meditates on the Lord's Name. ||1]|
He 2 Il (512-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag fro o Afes Aafe o wat fimrg Il (512-18, act ot era, He 3)
satgur jinaa na sayvi-o sabad na lago pi-aar.
Those who do not serve the True Guru do not embrace love for the Word of the Shabad.
Hon oy 3 fomrfenr fas orfenr Arf il (512-18, aadt af =a, He 3)
sehjay naam na Dhi-aa-i-aa kit aa-i-aa sansaar.
They do not meditate on the Celestial Naam, the Name of the Lord - why did they even bother to come into the world?
feta fefs Fat uréot fener HET MTT I (512-19, gat at rs, we 3) fir fir joonee paa-ee-ai vistaa sadaa khu-aar. Time and time again, they are reincarnated, and they rot away forever in manure.
as wate wfamr a Ssey o Ug Il (512-19, gat at ers, ws 3) koorhai laalach lagi-aa naa urvaar na paar. They are attached to false greed; they are not on this shore, nor on the one beyond.
UST uas
Soa THe Cad fa yrfu HS agate iQ (513-1, gat at era, ve 3) naanak gurmukh ubray je aap maylay kartaar. ||2| | O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; the Creator Lord unites them with Himself. ||2]|
ust Il (513-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sas Ad efs Ave Ad Aafe TIS Il (513-1, TA at es, Hs 3) bhagat sachai dar sohday sachai sabad rahaa-ay.
The devotees look beauteous in the True Court of the Lord; they abide in the True Word of the Shabad.
ofa ot uffs fsa Suet ofs YH ave Il (513-2, ant at era, He 3) har kee pareet tin oopjee har paraym kasaa-ay. The Lord's Love wells up in them; they are attracted by the Lord's Love.
ofa dfa sofa ret sft TS TAS ols oA fimre i (513-2, gat at er, ve 3)
har rang raheh sadaa rang raatay rasnaa har ras pi-aa-ay.
They abide in the Lord's Love, they remain imbued with the Lord's Love forever, and with their tongues, they drink in the sublime essence of the Lord.
Hes Won fret aenfe ws ofe He fee sre i 513-3, aaet aft wa, we 3)
safal janam jin"ee gurmukh jaataa har jee-o ridai vasaa-ay.
Fruitful are the lives of those Gurmukhs who recognize the Lord and enshrine Him in their hearts.
ws ag fed frowet eA ate unre VU (513-3, gat at ers, H8 3)
baajh guroo firai billaadee doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay. ||11]|
Without the Guru, they wander around crying out in misery; in the love of duality, they are ruined. ||11]|
H@a H2 3 Il (513-4)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
afera xfs oH feure sast ufenr afe GSH UE UTfemr I (513-4, gat ot erg, He 3) kalijug meh naam niDhaan bhagtee khati-aa har utam pad paa-i-aa.
In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the devotees earn the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they obtain the supreme status of the Lord.
Afsas Afe ofa am nfo sAfenr nisfes oH famrfenr | (513-5, gat ot eva, He 3) satgur sayv har naam man vasaa-i-aa an-din naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Serving the True Guru, they enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds, and they meditate on the Naam, night and day.
fes fas aa safe Carat TEN Hg Aerfemr I (513-5, aeet oft =a, He 3)
vichay garih gur bachan udaasee ha-umai moh jalaa-i-aa.
Within the home of their own selves, they remain unattached, through the Guru's Teachings; they burn away egotism and emotional attachment.
nity sfoor ae Aas safer de weet wfemr I 513-6, gASt aft era, He 3)
aap tari-aa kul jagat taraa-i-aa Dhan janaydee maa-i-aa.
They save themselves, and they save the whole world. Blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them.
mA Afsag Ret ue fra ofs Haste afe fof urfemr i 6513-6, geet aft =a, v8 3)
aisaa satgur so-ee paa-ay jis Dhur mastak har likh paa-i-aa.
He alone finds such a True Guru, upon whose forehead the Lord inscribed such pre- ordained destiny.
Ho aod weadt ad vmue feeg fafe afk gor Hrafar urfemr NA (513-7, At ot es, He 3)
jan naanak balihaaree gur aapnay vitahu jin bharam bhulaa maarag paa-i-aa. ||1]| Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to his Guru; when he was wandering in doubt, He placed him on the Path. ||1||
He 3 Il (513-8) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
3 ve Whur af 3 fag ofe dufe usa uefeor | 6513-8, gat aft ea, He 3)
tarai gun maa-i-aa vaykh bhulay ji-o daykh deepak patang pachaa-i-aa.
Beholding Maya with her three dispositions, he goes astray; he is like the moth, which sees the flame, and is consumed.
ufss sfs safe ufimr sufs feu fas fag orf= garfemr II (513-9, ant at era, v2 3) pandit bhul bhul maa-i-aa vaykheh dikhaa kinai kihu aan charhaa-i-aa.
The mistaken, deluded Pandits gaze upon Maya, and watch to see whether anyone has offered them something.
en ate usta fos fatto aed oft yorfenr i (513-9, art ot erg, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay parheh nit bikhi-aa naavhu da-yi khu-aa-i-aa.
In the love of duality, they read continually about sin, while the Lord has withheld His Name from them.
Hat Han Afournt 38 Gar uidarg sg aoe sofenr I 513-10, art at era, ne 3) jogee jangam sani-aasee bhulay on"aa aha‘kaar baho garab vaDhaa-i-aa.
The Yogis, the wandering hermits and the Sannyaasees have gone astray; their egotism and arrogance have increased greatly.
BES SHO 3 Sd AS faftmr Houle Aon Teter I (513-11, at at es, Hs 3)
chhaadan bhojan na laihee sat bhikhi-aa manhath janam gavaa-i-aa.
They do not accept the true donations of clothes and food, and their lives are ruined by their stubborn minds.
esfeor fesg A Ae AMO fafs aeufa ow fomrfemr I (513-11, at at era, He 3) ayt-rhi-aa vichahu so jan samDhaa jin gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Among these, he alone is a man of poise, who, as Gurmukh, meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
AS ated fan 3 orf weveha aT age Afs aafenr QU (513-12, aAdt at ea, Hs 3) jan naanak kis no aakh sunaa-ee-ai jaa Karday sabh karaa-i-aa. ||2||
Unto whom should servant Nanak speak and complain? All act as the Lord causes them to act. ||2||
ugat Il (513-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wor Hg uss I aH AT MPAA I (513-13, gAdt at ere, ne 3) maa-i-aa moh parayt hai kaam kroDh aha‘kaaraa. Emotional attachment to Maya, sexual desire, anger and egotism are demons.
fa FH at frsorg J Sar Gufs AN a ST ATS | (513-13, THe at es, He 3)
ayh jam kee sirkaar hai ayn"aa upar jam kaa dand karaaraa.
Because of them, mortals are subject to death; above their heads hangs the heavy club of the Messenger of Death.
Hou AH Hfer urehate fag AT STS fips il (513-14, gHet at ers, He 3) manmukh jam mag paa-ee-ani" jin" doojaa bhaa-o pi-aaraa. The self-willed manmukhs, in love with duality, are led onto the path of Death.
mH ufs ad His A AE B UAT I (513-14, gat at erg, ws 3) jam pur baDhay maaree-an ko sunai na pookaaraa. In the City of Death, they are tied up and beaten, and no one hears their cries.
fan 6 feu ad fsa ag fxs aanfy forse 9211 (513-15, ast oft =r, 18 3) jis no kirpaa karay tis gur milai gurmukh nistaaraa. ||12||
One who is blessed by the Lord's Grace meets the Guru; as Gurmukh, he is emancipated. ||12]|
HS H8 3 Il (513-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ICH HHS" Hoet HOHE S set UE I (513-15, aaet at era, He 3) ha-umai mamtaa mohnee manmukhaa no ga-ee khaa-ay. By egotism and pride, the self-willed manmukhs are enticed, and consumed.
A fs en fas ofee far fenrfu sat Bu|te Il (513-16, art at ers, H8 3) jo mohi doojai chit laa-iday tinaa vi-aap rahee laptaa-ay. Those who center their consciousness on duality are caught in it, and remain stuck.
qd & Aafe usrehy st So fees ATE I (513-16, aaet aft eva, He 3)
gur kai sabad parjaalee-ai taa ayh vichahu jaa-ay.
But when it is burnt away by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, only then does it depart from within.
36 HO de Cre om SA Hfe wre I (513-17, gat aft ea, He 3)
tan man hovai ujlaa naam vasai man aa-ay.
The body and mind become radiant and bright, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell within the mind.
oo Hf ar yas dfs ou F canta urfeor we al (513-17, aAet at era, ne 3) naanak maa-i-aa kaa maaran har naam hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, the Lord's Name is the antidote to Maya; the Gurmukh obtains it. ||1]|
He 3 Il (613-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
feg Ho asfaor za safimr fag gd 3 wre AE I 613-18, aAdt ot era, He 3)
ih man kayt-rhi-aa jug bharmi-aa thir rahai na aavai jaa-ay.
This mind has wandered through so many ages; it has not remained stable - it continues coming and going.
dfs svat tT sofenig afs uals Ye Cute i 613-19, gaat af era, ne 3)
har bhaanaa taa bharmaa-i-an kar parpanch khayl upaa-ay.
When it is pleasing to the Lord's Will, then He causes the soul to wander; He has set the world-drama in motion.
w ofa aan St ae fs miAfag Jd ANE I (513-19, aeet ot =a, He 3)
jaa har bakhsay taa gur milai asthir rahai samaa-ay.
When the Lord forgives, then one meets the Guru, and becoming stable, he remains absorbed in the Lord.
UST uaAg
SSA HS dt S HS Whoo a fas Hs 6 ATE QU (514-1, aA at Ss, He 3) naanak man hee tay man maani-aa naa kichh marai na jaa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, through the mind, the mind is satisfied, and then, nothing comes or goes.
21 |
u@at Il (514-1 pa-orhee. Pauree:
afin ae murg 3 fet Adait | (514-2, ant oft era, v8 3) kaa-i-aa kot apaar hai milnaa sanjogee. The body is the fortress of the Infinite Lord; it is obtained only by destiny.
ofenr niefs urfy efx afour wm oA Sait i (514-2, gat at ere, Hs 3) kaa-i-aa andar aap vas rahi-aa aapay ras bhogee. The Lord Himself dwells within the body; He Himself is the Enjoyer of pleasures.
uify mats vifsus 3 feara ofa Aait i (514-2, ant oft er, Hs 3) aap ateet alipat hai nirjog har jogee. He Himself remains detached and unaffected; while unattached, He is still attached.
A fsa ae A ad of ad A Sait I (514-3, aaet aft =a, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so karay har karay so hogee. He does whatever He pleases, and whatever He does, comes to pass.
ofa aanfa on fomreht ofa afa ferait 193i (514-3, aaet ot era, v8 3)
har gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai leh jaahi vijogee. ||13]|
The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord's Name, and separation from the Lord is ended. [|13]|
HS H2 3 Il (514-4)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ag ag urfu merfeer aa Reet Ag ALE I (514-4, ant of era, He 3)
vaahu vaahu aap akhaa-idaa gur sabdee sach so-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! The Lord Himself causes us to praise Him, through the True Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ag ag frefs nod 3 Tanta gS ate i (514-5, gat at ea, Hs 3)
vaahu vaahu sifat salaah hai gurmukh boojhai ko-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! is His Eulogy and Praise; how rare are the Gurmukhs who understand this.
ag ag set Ay J Afe firret SE Il (514-5, ant oft era, v8 3) vaahu vaahu banee sach hai sach milaavaa ho-ay. Waaho! Waaho! is the True Word of His Bani, by which we meet our True Lord.
woe eg ag adisur ys ufeor aah uarufS TE UA (514-5, gat at eva, He 3) naanak vaahu vaahu karti-aa parabh paa-i-aa karam paraapat ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, chanting Waaho! Waaho! God is attained; by His Grace, He is obtained.
[21
Hs 3 Il (14-6)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ag Wy Ast TAS" Aale Aah | (514-6, gat at er, He 3) vaahu vaahu kartee rasnaa sabad suhaa-ee. Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the tongue is adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
ud Fate ys fifemr net i 614-7, aaet oft eg, oH 3) poorai sabad parabh mili-aa aa-ee. Through the Perfect Shabad, one comes to meet God.
SST SAT ST HIT AST Il (514-7, Tat at erg, ws 3) vadbhaagee-aa vaahu vaahu muhhu kadhaa-ee. How very fortunate are those, who with their mouths, chant Waaho! Waaho!
ag ay aad Aet We Ave f3q AS use UAE wet I (514-7, TACT ot ea, Hs 3) vaahu vaahu karahi say-ee jan sohnay tin" ka-o parjaa poojan aa-ee.
How beautiful are those persons who chant Waaho! Waaho! ; people come to venerate them.
ag ag adh usufs de aaa Ufe AD AST urTet QU (514-8, aAet at era, He 3)
vaahu vaahu karam paraapat hovai naanak dar sachai sobhaa paa-ee. ||2||
Waaho! Waaho! is obtained by His Grace; O Nanak, honor is obtained at the Gate of the True Lord. |[2||
ugat Il (514-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
and cure afeur ag stats az AAS uifsnrat il (514-9, ant at =a, He 3)
bajar kapaat kaa-i-aa garh" bheetar koorh kusat abhimaanee.
Within the fortress of body, are the hard and rigid doors of falsehood, deception and pride.
SoH 3S Sele o ureat HOH viT nifaMarat Il (514-9, aAet at era, He 3) bharam bhoolay nadar na aavnee manmukh anDh agi-aanee. Deluded by doubt, the blind and ignorant self-willed manmukhs cannot see them.
Gufs fas o wat afs Su aa Surat Il (514-10, grt aft era, 2 3)
upaa-ay kitai na labhnee kar bhaykh thakay bhaykhvaanee.
They cannot be found by any efforts; wearing their religious robes, the wearers have grown weary of trying.
Ga Wat dorchafe afs on Furst i (514-11, gat aft era, He 3)
gur sabdee kholaa-ee-ani" har naam japaanee.
The doors are opened only by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and then, one chants the Name of the Lord.
ofa aH nifys fasy 3 fro ulor 3 fgusrat noel (614-11, art oft era, He 3)
har jee-o amrit birakh hai jin pee-aa tay tariptaanee. ||14| |
The Dear Lord is the Tree of Ambrosial Nectar; those who drink in this Nectar are satisfied. ||14]|
HSE H8 3 Il (514-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ag ag adfsur df= afe feofe i 514-12, aadt at era, ne 3) vaahu vaahu karti-aa rain sukh vihaa-ay. Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the night of one's life passes in peace.
sa AN
ag ag assur Het moe de Ast HE i (514-12, aaet at ere, ve 3)
vaahu vaahu karti-aa sadaa anand hovai mayree maa-ay. Chanting Waaho! Waaho! I am in eternal bliss, O my mother!
ag ag adtsur ate fAG fee ote i (514-13, aadt at era, He 3) vaahu vaahu karti-aa har si-o liv laa-ay. Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, I have fallen in love with the Lord.
ag BT aot FH Sore i (514-13, aac at ere, ne 3)
vaahu vaahu karmee bolai bolaa-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Through the karma of good deeds, I chant it, and inspire others to chant it as well.
ag By Assur Ast ute | (514-13, gat aft era, He 3) vaahu vaahu karti-aa sobhaa paa-ay. Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, one obtains honor.
Soa ST Bg Als FATE NA (514-14, TAS at era, He 3)
naanak vaahu vaahu sat rajaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! is the Will of the True Lord. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (614-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ag Bg wet Ay FT ToHfe wat as I (514-14, aaet oft wa, He 3) vaahu vaahu banee sach hai gurmukh laDhee bhaal. Waaho! Waaho! is the Bani of the True Word. Searching, the Gurmukhs have found it.
ag ag Hae Bud ag ay fase orf il (514-15, ant ot =e, ne 3)
vaahu vaahu sabday uchrai vaahu vaahu hirdai naal.
Waaho! Waaho! They chant the Word of the Shabad. Waaho! Waaho! They enshrine it in their hearts.
ag ag adtsur ots ufeur AoA aATHfe sf I (514-15, aadt at era, He 3) vaahu vaahu karti-aa har paa-i-aa sehjay gurmukh bhaal. Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the Gurmukhs easily obtain the Lord, after searching.
A gaat aoa ofa ofa fae AHS WI (514-16, gAet oft era, He 3)
say vadbhaagee naankaa har har ridai samaal. ||2]|
O Nanak, very fortunate are those who reflect upon the Lord, Har, Har, within their hearts. ||2||
ust Il (514-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
& Hor ifs Ssh fos SF TS I (514-16, Tact at es, us 3) ay manaa at lobhee-aa nit lobhay raataa. O my utterly greedy mind, you are constantly engrossed in greed.
Her Hort Hoel wa fer feast i (514-17, gat oft era, He 3) maa-i-aa mansaa mohnee dah dis firaataa. In your desire for the enticing Maya, you wander in the ten directions.
wat oe wh 3 AfEAt Houta BY UST IN (514-17, aeet at =a, He 3)
agai naa-o jaat na jaa-isee manmukh dukh khaataa.
Your name and social status shall not go with you hereafter; the self-willed manmukh is consumed by pain.
THo dfs aA 3 BUG shar Farst i (514-18, gat oft eva, ne 3)
rasnaa har ras na chakhi-o feekaa bolaataa.
Your tongue does not taste the sublime essence of the Lord; it utters only insipid words.
faa dante nifgs ohm A AS fRusrst AUN (514-18, aTASt aft era, He 3) jinaa gurmukh amrit chaakhi-aa say jan tariptaataa. ||15]| Those Gurmukhs who drink in the Ambrosial Nectar are satisfied. || 15] |
HS H8 3 Il (514-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ag ag fan 3 umin fa we afes ast il (514-19, ant ot =r, v2 3) vaahu vaahu tis no aakhee-ai je sachaa gahir gambheer. Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is True, profound and unfathomable.
ag ag fan 3 umn fa gees HfS ate I 514-19, ant of a, He 3)
vaahu vaahu tis no aakhee-ai je gundaataa mat Dheer.
Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is the Giver of virtue, intelligence and patience.
uar uqu ag ag fan 3 wmin fa as yfo afar mee i (515-1, ant oft era, 18 3)
vaahu vaahu tis no aakhee-ai je sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay. Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is permeating and pervading in all.
ag ag fan 6 wmin fa ter feng warfa il 6515-1, gat aft ea, He 3) vaahu vaahu tis no aakhee-ai je daydaa rijak sabaahi. Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is the Giver of sustenance to all.
saa ag arg fea afe Aad fa Afsara chor feet na 615-2, gat af ea, He 3) naanak vaahu vaahu iko kar salaahee-ai je satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! - praise the One Lord, revealed by the True Guru. ||1]|
He 8 Il (615-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Sg Bg TdHY Ae adld HoHY Hote fay we | (515-3, Tadt at ea, He 3)
vaahu vaahu gurmukh sadaa karahi manmukh mareh bikh khaa-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! The Gurmukhs praise the Lord continually, while the self-willed manmukhs eat poison and die.
Gar ag ag 5 geet oe oft fete i 515-3, aac oft =a, He 3) onaa vaahu vaahu na bhaav-ee dukhay dukh vihaa-ay. They have no love for the Lord's Praises, and they pass their lives in misery.
aanfy nifqs ules erg arg aafe fee oe I 515-4, aaet at era, He 3)
gurmukh amrit peevnaa vaahu vaahu karahi liv laa-ay.
The Gurmukhs drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, and they center their consciousness on the Lord's Praises.
woe Bg ag ads A Ho fons fases ASt ute QU (515-4, gat at era, ne 3)
naanak vaahu vaahu karahi say jan nirmalay taribhavan sojhee paa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, those who chant Waaho! Waaho! are immaculate and pure; they obtain the knowledge of the three worlds. ||2]|
ugat Il (515-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs & we Te fee AS gals sata i 515-5, gat aft es, He 3) har kai bhaanai gur milai sayvaa bhagat baneejai. By the Lord's Will, one meets the Guru, serves Him, and worships the Lord.
ofa & ae ofa nfs SA AOA SA Ube IN (515-5, gat at era, Hs 3)
har kai bhaanai har man vasai sehjay ras peejai.
By the Lord's Will, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and one easily drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord.
dfs & we AY urn afe ar fos Ste Il (515-6, ant af ea, He 3) har kai bhaanai sukh paa-ee-ai har laahaa nit leejai. By the Lord's Will, one finds peace, and continually earns the Lord's Profit.
dfs & sufs aren for wis Aer SALT I (515-6, gat at er, Hs 3)
har kai takhat bahaalee-ai nij ghar sadaa vaseejai.
He is seated on the Lord's throne, and he dwells continually in the home of his own being.
ofs or grat fet Hfowr far ae fest AEN (515-7, aA at =r, He 3) har kaa bhaanaa tinee mani-aa jinaa guroo mileejai. ||16|| He alone surrenders to the Lord's Will, who meets the Guru. ||16]|
HOG H3 3 Ill (515-8) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ag Wg A AS Ae aay fas aS nm of gsfe i (515-8, aadt at era, ve 3)
vaahu vaahu say jan sadaa karahi jin" ka-o aapay day-ay bujhaa-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Those humble beings ever praise the Lord, unto whom the Lord Himself grants understanding.
ag gy adfsur He fase de JOH fees APE I (515-8, gat of =, He 3) vaahu vaahu karti-aa man nirmal hovai ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay. Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, the mind is purified, and egotism departs from within.
ag ag defhy A fos ad A Ho fefenr ae ute II (515-9, aact at er, He 3)
vaahu vaahu gursikh jo nit karay so man chindi-aa fal paa-ay.
The Gurmukh who continually chants Waaho! Waaho! attains the fruits of his heart's desires.
ag ag aafs A Ae Ave ofa fsq & Afor fret 515-9, gat at ea, He 3)
vaahu vaahu karahi say jan sohnay har tin" kai sang milaa-ay.
Beauteous are those humble beings who chant Waaho! Waaho! O Lord, let me join them!
ag ag fost Cum Hug st ag Fg AI Il (515-10, gaat aft ea, He 3) vaahu vaahu hirdai uchraa mukhahu bhee vaahu vaahu karay-o. Within my heart, I chant Waaho! Waaho!, and with my mouth, Waaho! Waaho!
woe Sg ag A aals WS 3g HO fSq AE SE NA (15-11, aA at Se, He 3) naanak vaahu vaahu jo karahi ha-o tan man tin" ka-o day-o. ||1]| O Nanak, those who chant Waaho! Waaho! - unto them I dedicate my body and mind.
[1
He 3 Il (515-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ag ag Afss AY o nifys A aT ore Il (515-11, gat at es, He 3) vaahu vaahu saahib sach hai amrit jaa kaa naa-o. Waaho! Waaho! is the True Lord Master; His Name is Ambrosial Nectar.
fafs Afeor fats ee urfeur o@ fae sfsod WE II (515-12, at oft er, 18 3)
jin sayvi-aa tin fal paa-i-aa ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o.
Those who serve the Lord are blessed with the fruit; I am a sacrifice to them. ag ag dat fours 3 fan 3 Se A ae I 515-12, aaet at era, He 3)
vaahu vaahu gunee niDhaan hai jis no day-ay so khaa-ay. Waaho! Waaho! is the treasure of virtue; he alone tastes it, who is so blessed.
ag ag ale af saug 3 ents ufenr ate It (515-13, at ot erg, Hs 3)
vaahu vaahu jal thal bharpoor hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! The Lord is pervading and permeating the oceans and the land; the Gurmukh attains Him.
ag Vy Tere fos As AdT TI UT ST TT HS Il (515-13, grt at es, we 3)
vaahu vaahu gursikh nit sabh karahu gur pooray vaahu vaahu bhaavai.
Waaho! Waaho! Let all the Gursikhs continually praise Him. Waaho! Waaho! The Perfect Guru is pleased with His Praises.
soa ag ag FH Hf fats ad fSR AHaaT SfF o MTS NQM (515-14, ae aft Za, He 3) naanak vaahu vaahu jo man chit karay tis jamkankar nayrh na aavai. ||2||
O Nanak, one who chants Waaho! Waaho! with his heart and mind - the Messenger of Death does not approach him. ||2||
UgST Il (515-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofa MG Aa AY d ASt Taaret I (515-15, gTHet aft es, He 3) har jee-o sachaa sach hai sachee gurbaanee. The Dear Lord is the Truest of the True; True is the Word of the Guru's Bani.
Afsag 3 Ay ure Afs Hof AHT|t I (515-15, gat aft ea, He 3)
satgur tay sach pachhaanee-ai sach sahj samaanee.
Through the True Guru, the Truth is realized, and one is easily absorbed in the True Lord.
wofes wats at Aefs Aas Sfe feorst I (515-16, gaet aft era, He 3)
an-din jaageh naa saveh jaagat rain vihaanee.
Night and day, they remain awake, and do not sleep; in wakefulness, the night of their lives passes.
TaHst fs sa ohm A Us usret I (515-16, gAet at era, Hs 3)
gurmatee har ras chaakhi-aa say punn paraanee.
Those who taste the sublime essence of the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings, are the most worthy persons.
fas ae fas 5 ute ufe He mAs NVI (515-17, gat aft a, He 3) bin gur kinai na paa-i-o pach mu-ay ajaanee. ||17]|| Without the Guru, no one has obtained the Lord; the ignorant rot away and die. ||17]||
HS H2 3 Il (515-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ag ag set fadars 0 fSH Aes neg & AE I (515-17, gat aft ea, He 3)
vaahu vaahu banee nirankaar hai tis jayvad avar na ko-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! is the Bani, the Word, of the Formless Lord. There is no other as great as He is.
ag By MeN wag J ey Sy Ae ALE I (515-18, aaet aft er, Hs 3)
vaahu vaahu agam athaahu hai vaahu vaahu sachaa so-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! The Lord is unfathomable and inaccessible. Waaho! Waaho! He is the True One.
ag Bg tugeg J TT MT Ad A OE Il (515-18, gat at es, v2 3)
vaahu vaahu vayparvaahu hai vaahu vaahu karay so ho-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! He is the self-existent Lord. Waaho! Waaho! As He wills, so it comes to pass.
ag ag nifys on 3 aenfe ure Af II (515-19, aaet oft era, 18 3)
vaahu vaahu amrit naam hai gurmukh paavai ko-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! is the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, obtained by the Gurmukh.
ag ag aot urn wrfu fer afe SFE i 615-19, aaet at era, ne 3) vaahu vaahu karmee paa-ee-ai aap da-i-aa kar day-ay. Waaho! Waaho! This is realized by His Grace, as He Himself grants His Grace.
Uast ugqe
soe ag arg Tanfe ut mofes on were Al (516-1, aet at er, v8 3)
naanak vaahu vaahu gurmukh paa-ee-ai an-din naam la-ay-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! This is obtained by the Gurmukhs, who hold tight to the Naam, night and day. ||1]|
He 3 Il (516-1)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fag Afsas Ae ATS oo oreet ert ast ATE I (516-2, aAet at ere, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay saat na aavee doojee naahee jaa-ay.
Without serving the True Guru, peace is not obtained, and the sense of duality does not depart.
A agsa Sd fee agH o ufeor ATE I (516-2, ant ot =a, He 3) jay bahutayraa lochee-ai vin karmai na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. No matter how much one may wish, without the Lord's Grace, He is not found.
faa nists es feorg 3 on ate yore i (516-3, gat at ers, ws 3) jin"aa antar lobh vikaar hai doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay. Those who are filled with greed and corruption are ruined by the love of duality.
HHS HIE 3 Vaet ICH fefs ve ute II (516-3, aA at ee, He 3)
jaman maran na chuk-ee ha-umai vich dukh paa-ay.
They cannot escape birth and death, and with egotism within them, they suffer in misery.
faa’ Afsas fae fas afeur A ust det arfa Il (516-4, aadt oft era, He 3) jin"aa satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa so khaalee ko-ee naahi. Those who center their consciousness on the True Guru, never go empty-handed.
fsa AH at sua 6 Jeet a Gf eu AT I (516-4, gat at ea, Hs 3)
tin jam kee talab na hova-ee naa o-ay dukh sahaahi. They are not summoned by the Messenger of Death, and they do not suffer in pain.
ood TeHfy Cad Ad Aafe AT NI (516-5, ant at era, He 3) naanak gurmukh ubray sachai sabad samaahi. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; they merge in the True Lord. ||2||
UuGSt Il (516-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wet fn 3 wmiht fa wAH og fimrg I (516-5, gat at era, v8 3) dhaadhee tis no aakhee-ai je khasmai Dharay pi-aar. He alone is called a minstrel, who enshrines love for his Lord and Master.
of ust AS Ad Td Aaet Ass Il (516-6, grt ot es, ve 3)
dar kharhaa sayvaa karay gur sabdee veechaar.
Standing at the Lord's Door, he serves the Lord, and reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ae vg wg ufent Ay ae Cs Oe I 16-6, aaet of =a, He 3)
dhaadhee dar ghar paa-isee sach rakhai ur Dhaar.
The minstrel attains the Lord's Gate and Mansion, and he keeps the True Lord clasped to his heart.
wel a Hae mare ofa & ate fimrfa i 616-6, aAct at ea, Hs 3)
dhaadhee kaa mahal aglaa har kai naa-ay pi-aar. The status of the minstrel is exalted; he loves the Name of the Lord.
aeat at Het wad afe fu ats faAsts WAC (516-7, TAT at ee, Hs 3)
dhaadhee kee sayvaa chaakree har jap har nistaar. ||18]|
The service of the minstrel is to meditate on the Lord; he is emancipated by the Lord. ||18]|
HS H8 3 Il (516-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Gad ats gets A AG US niy|r Il (516-8, Het aft evs, He 3) goojree jaat gavaar jaa saho paa-ay aapnaa. The milkmaid's status is very low, but she attains her Husband Lord
ad & Aafe aterfe mofes afs Au ATS II (516-8, Het aft a, He 3)
gur kai sabad veechaar an-din har jap jaapnaa.
when she reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and chants the Lord's Name, night and day.
fan Afsag fs fen se ue A awdst arfa Il (516-9, art at =, He 3) jis satgur milai tis bha-o pavai saa kulvantee naar. She who meets the True Guru, lives in the Fear of God; she is a woman of noble birth.
AT Jou use a3 a fan 6 faur atst aaste il 516-9, aaet of a, He 3)
saa hukam pachhaanai kant kaa jis no kirpaa keetee kartaar.
She alone realizes the Hukam of her Husband Lord's Command, who is blessed by the Creator Lord's Mercy.
Go aart awuet usta gat sats I (516-10, gaat af ea, He 3)
oh kuchjee kulkhanee parhar chhodee bhataar.
She who is of little merit and ill-mannered, is discarded and forsaken by her Husband Lord.
3 uf He achat fags Je Ate Il (516-10, at af eva, ne 3) bhai pa-i-ai mal katee-ai nirmal hovai sareer. By the Fear of God, filth is washed off, and the body becomes immaculately pure.
nists userA His SH de ofs Af Tat aa il 16-11, TAS ot era, Hs 3)
antar pargaas mat ootam hovai har jap gunee gaheer.
The soul is enlightened, and the intellect is exalted, meditating on the Lord, the ocean of excellence.
3 fefs SA 3 ad 8 fete aS ae II 16-11, gat of es, He 3) bhai vich baisai bhai rahai bhai vich kamaavai kaar.
One who dwells in the Fear of God, lives in the Fear of God, and acts in the Fear of God.
me AY efsurehor waa He EMTs Il (516-12, gat at era, He 3)
aithai sukh vadi-aa-ee-aa dargeh mokh du-aar.
He obtains peace and glorious greatness here, in the Lord's Court, and at the Gate of Salvation.
3 3 fess@ uren fife Fat AAS vrs II (616-12, gat ot era, He 3)
bhai tay nirbha-o paa-ee-ai mil jotee jot apaar.
Through the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord is obtained, and one's light merges in the Infinite Light.
SSA YAH Ste AT st fAA S MM SUA ATT MAUI (516-12, grt at ere, ve 3)
naanak khasmai bhaavai saa bhalee jis no aapay bakhsay kartaar. ||1]||
O Nanak, that bride alone is good, who is pleasing to her Lord and Master, and whom the Creator Lord Himself forgives. ||1]|
He 3 Il (16-13)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Het Het Ada AS AC sles AS il (516-13, aAet at era, ne 3) sadaa sadaa salaahee-ai sachay ka-o bal jaa-o. Praise the Lord, forever and ever, and make yourself a sacrifice to the True Lord.
aed Sa Sls TH Bat AT fae ANS AS QU (s16-14, gat at erg, we 3)
naanak ayk chhod doojai lagai saa jihvaa jal jaa-o. ||2||
O Nanak, let that tongue be burnt, which renounces the One Lord, and attaches itself to another. ||2||
UST II (516-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nit nigsg Cutese aS gar other Il (516-14, art at erg, He 3)
ansaa a-utaar upaa-i-on bhaa-o doojaa kee-aa.
From a single particle of His greatness, He created His incarnations, but they indulged in the love of duality.
fAG TA TH aHSe vY AY fos | (516-15, TAS at ea, He 3) ji-o raajay raaj kamaavday dukh sukh bhirhee-aa. They ruled like kings, and fought for pleasure and pain.
Sng qo Age nig fat o Bd I (516-15, gat at ers, He 3) eesar barahmaa sayvday ant tin"ee na lahee-aa. Those who serve Shiva and Brahma do not find the limits of the Lord.
fogs fadarg mresy 3 aonfa yatetor I (516-16, ant oft =r, 18 3) nirbha-o nirankaar alakh hai gurmukh pargatee-aa.
The Fearless, Formless Lord is unseen and invisible; He is revealed only to the Gurmukh.
fsa Aa fera 3 fenruet mAfag afer Ghar AEH (516-16, act at era, 18 3)
tithai sog vijog na vi-aapa-ee asthir jag thee-aa. ||19]|
There, one does not suffer sorrow or separation; he becomes stable and immortal in the world. ||19]||
H@a H8 3 Il (516-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fg Ag fae ures We FAST I MPa” Il (516-17, aact at es, He 3) ayhu sabh kichh aavan jaan hai jaytaa hai aakaar. All these things come and go, all these things of the world.
fafs Sg Sur foftor A dur uses Il (516-17, TAet at era, He 3) jin ayhu laykhaa likhi-aa so ho-aa parvaan. One who knows this written account is acceptable and approved.
Soa At ny Taree A HSA AST WAU (516-18, art at es, we 3) naanak jay ko aap ganaa-idaa so moorakh gaavaar. ||1|| O Nanak, anyone who takes pride in himself is foolish and unwise. ||1]||
He 2 Il (516-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ho aug ulea ag fomrg as wa fds 3a ATE I (s16-18, Ast at Sr, He 3)
man kunchar peelak guroo gi-aan kundaa jah khinchay tah jaa-ay.
The mind is the elephant, the Guru is the elephant-driver, and knowledge is the whip. Wherever the Guru drives the mind, it goes.
Soa JASt as aaa fete fefs sts ute Ii (516-19, gat oft ea, Hs 3)
naanak hastee kunday baahraa fir fir ujharh paa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, without the whip, the elephant wanders into the wilderness, again and again. ||2]||
UgST Il (516-19)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
fan nia maeth fafs Gurfemr 1 (516-19, art at ere, He 3)
tis aagai ardaas jin upaa-i-aa. I offer my prayer to the One, from whom I was created.
UST uyAD
Afsag uuert Afe As Se ufer | (517-1, TAS at ea, He 3) satgur apnaa sayv sabh fal paa-i-aa. Serving my True Guru, I have obtained all the fruits.
nifys afs ao og Aer foerfenr | (517-1, gat at ea, He 3) amrit har kaa naa-o sadaa Dhi-aa-i-aa. I meditate continually on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
AS Aa a Afar ey fetfemr i (517-2, gat of =a, He 3) sant janaa kai sang dukh mitaa-i-aa. In the Society of the Saints, I am rid of my pain and suffering.
saa se mies ots ue fesserfenr QM (517-2, aac at erg, He 3) naanak bha-ay achint har Dhan nihchalaa-i-aa. ||20||
O Nanak, I have become care-free; I have obtained the imperishable wealth of the Lord. ||20]|
HBa H8 3 Il (517-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
afs frome dor we Car fase il 617-3, gASt at =a, He 3) khayt mi-aalaa uchee-aa ghar uchaa nirna-o. Raising the embankments of the mind's field, I gaze at the heavenly mansion.
HIG saat whe Ad ANS uTTfenS il (517-3, at oft era, Hs 3)
mahal bhagtee ghar sarai sajan paahuni-a-o.
When devotion comes to the mind of the soul-bride, she is visited by the friendly guest.
adHo' 3 dH Wst agfs aAdAfT AT Il (517-4, TASt at ere, Hs 3)
barsanaa ta baras ghanaa bahurh barseh kaahi.
O clouds, if you are going to rain, then go ahead and rain; why rain after the season has passed?
oad fee afsose fae conf ufimr He ofa A (517-4, gat ot era, He 3) naanak tin” balihaarnai jin" gurmukh paa-i-aa man maahi. ||1|| Nanak is a sacrifice to those Gurmukhs who obtain the Lord in their minds. ||1]|
He 8 Il (17-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fot A ft steer Ane A fa ofA I 517-5, aact ot es, 8 3) mithaa so jo bhaavdaa sajan so je raas. That which is pleasing is sweet, and one who is sincere is a friend.
eee TeHfe wey wt a nrfy as UPA IQ 517-5, THAT at es, He 3) naanak gurmukh jaanee-ai jaa ka-o aap karay pargaas. ||2|| O Nanak, he is known as a Gurmukh, whom the Lord Himself enlightens. ||2] |
ugat Il (517-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ys uta Ho ot wget J Ae ArT Il (517-6, gat at ere, H2 3) parabh paas jan kee ardaas too sachaa saa™-ee. O God, Your humble servant offers his prayer to You; You are my True Master.
3 Taser Het Het IE su fiomret i 517-6, gAet at es, v2 3) too rakhvaalaa sadaa sadaa ha-o tuDh Dhi-aa-ee. You are my Protector, forever and ever; I meditate on You.
rit a3 Afs Sfoor 3 stom AH II 517-7, at aft es, He 3) jee-a jant sabh tayri-aa too rahi-aa samaa-ee. All the beings and creatures are Yours; You are pervading and permeating in them.
A OA 3d at fee ad fsH wie Uset I (517-7, gat at =a, He 3) jo daas tayray kee nindaa karay tis maar pachaa-ee. One who slanders Your slave is crushed and destroyed.
fos afs miss Jo aoa fat wet IU (517-8, TAT at =a, Hs 3) chintaa chhad achint rahu naanak lag paa-ee. ||21] | Falling at Your Feet, Nanak has renounced his cares, and has become care-free. ||21]|
HBa H8 3 Il (517-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
MIA ATS Ad HT MITAT HS Oo ATE Il (517-8, aAdt at es, He 3) aasaa kartaa jag mu-aa aasaa marai na jaa-ay. Building up its hopes, the world dies, but its hopes do not die or depart.
aaa mA udh Ae fAG fos ote ua (17-9, Tat at es, He 3) naanak aasaa pooree-aa Sachay si-o chit laa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, hopes are fulfilled only by attaching one's consciousness to the True Lord.
[21
He 3 Il (17-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Mia HORT Hf Afent fafs atst AS AE I (517-9, aaet oft era, ne 3) aasaa mansaa mar jaa-isee jin keetee so lai jaa-ay. Hopes and desires shall die only when He, who created them, takes them away.
oe forse & odt asg ofe & of QM (517-10, aAct at er, ne 3) naanak nihchal ko nahee baajhahu har kai naa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, nothing is permanent, except the Name of the Lord. ||2||
Uugat Il (517-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wnt Aas Suess afs ys AY Il (517-10, aAt at =a, He 3) aapay jagat upaa-i-on kar pooraa thaat. He Himself created the world, with His perfect workmanship.
mm ATS omy genet wy ot fs Te| il (517-11, gat at erg, ws 3)
aapay saahu aapay vanjaaraa aapay hee har haat.
He Himself is the true banker, He Himself is the merchant, and He Himself is the store.
mm Ara wm Sfoar wm dt Bers il (517-11, act ot eva, vs 3) aapay saagar aapay bohithaa aapay hee khayvaat. He Himself is the ocean, He Himself is the boat, and He Himself is the boatman.
nny TT sar T wy nm SA wes i (517-12, aast at ea, Hs 3)
aapay gur chaylaa hai aapay aapay dasay ghaat.
He Himself is the Guru, He Himself is the disciple, and He Himself shows the destination.
Ao oto oH fomrfe s Afs footed ars NINA A (517-12, aA at ers, He 3)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay too sabh kilvikh kaat. |]22]|1]| suDhu
O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and all your sins shall be eradicated. ||22||1]|Sudh||
THT TAS MI HIS U (517-14) raag goojree vaar mehlaa 5 Raag Goojaree, Vaar, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yArfe il (517-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS HE U Il (517-15)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
nists ag urace fre Af ae ar il (517-15, aA, 8 5)
antar gur aaraaDh-naa jihvaa jap gur naa-o.
Deep within yourself, worship the Guru in adoration, and with your tongue, chant the Guru's Name.
dat Alsag Uda Agat ASST As SS Il (517-15, gTHet, ws 5) naytree satgur paykh-naa sarvanee sunnaa gur naa-o. Let your eyes behold the True Guru, and let your ears hear the Guru's Name.
Afsag Ast sfsor waa ureba OS i (517-16, aA, He 5) satgur saytee rati-aa dargeh paa-ee-ai thaa-o. Attuned to the True Guru, you shall receive a place of honor in the Court of the Lord.
aT soa facut ad far 3S So ea SE I (517-16, geet, v8 5) kaho naanak kirpaa karay jis no ayh vath day-ay. Says Nanak, this treasure is bestowed on those who are blessed with His Mercy.
Aa Hfs BSH ards fess aet af Wal (517-17, aA, 3 5) jag meh utam kaadhee-ah virlay kay-ee kay-ay. ||1]| In the midst of the world, they are known as the most pious - they are rare indeed.
[1
Hé U Il (17-17) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
wa sueots ory Garang il (517-17, aast, w3 5) rakhay rakhanhaar aap ubaari-an. O Savior Lord, save us and take us across.
Te ot ust ute arn Aetfante Il (517-17, aes, He 5) gur kee pairee paa-ay kaaj savaari-an. Falling at the feet of the Guru, our works are embellished with perfection.
oot orfy efemrs Hog 3 ferrfante Il (517-18, act, 2 5)
ho-aa aap da-i-aal manhu na visaari-an.
You have become kind, merciful and compassionate; we do not forget You from our minds.
AG Aa" a Afe SeHe Shans i (517-18, gH, ue 5)
saaDh janaa kai sang bhavjal taari-an.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, we are carried across the terrifying world-ocean.
Was fSea ene fas uta faefante it (517-19, aAet, He 5) saakat nindak dusat khin maahi bidaari-an. In an instant, You have destroyed the faithless cynics and slanderous enemies.
fan Afoe at 2a Ba HS HT I (517-19, aA, He 5) tis saahib kee tayk naanak manai maahi. That Lord and Master is my Anchor and Support; O Nanak, hold firm in your mind.
UST uAt
fan fines AY of Aas sa ATT QM (si8-1, TAT, He 5)
jis simrat sukh ho-ay saglay dookh jaahi. ||2] |
Remembering Him in meditation, happiness comes, and all sorrows and pains simply vanish. ||2]]|
u@at Il (518-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Was fadHa use mam wrursht | (518-1, act, 2 5) akul niranjan purakh agam apaaree-di. He is without relatives, immaculate, all-powerful, unapproachable and infinite.
Ae Aut Ag Ag feast i (518-1, act, ne 5) sacho sachaa sach sach nihaaree-ai. Truly, the True Lord is seen to be the Truest of the True.
as 3 A fos Sat OI Il (518-2, aAt, we 5) koorh na jaapai kichh tayree Dhaaree-ai. Nothing established by You appears to be false.
ABA f wag AS Cush i (518-2, aaet, us 5)
sabhsai day daataar jayt upaaree-ai.
The Great Giver gives sustenance to all those He has created. feag AfS udfe AfS AAS II (518-2, gAST, He 5)
ikat soot paro-ay jot sanjaaree-ai. He has strung all on only one thread; He has infused His Light in them.
Jan seHe HAS JAH 3H Il (518-3, aAet, ne 5)
hukmay bhavjal manjh hukmay taaree-ai.
By His Will, some drown in the terrifying world-ocean, and by His Will, some are carried across.
us H@ gu fonre Af faa ara Har II (518-3, aaet, ne 5)
parabh jee-o tuDh Dhi-aa-ay so-ay jis bhaag mathaaree-ai.
O Dear Lord, he alone meditates on You, upon whose forehead such blessed destiny is inscribed.
Sct afs ffs wt o wife 38 su afsadht Wal (518-4, aeet, He 5) tayree gat mit lakhee na jaa-ay ha-o tuDh balihaaree-ai. ||1]| Your condition and state cannot be known; I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||
Sq H8 U Il (518-4) salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
WS gAfe frases wifey eAfs Ho HAT II (18-4, art, M8 5)
jaa too’ tuseh miharvaan achint vaseh man maahi.
When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, you automatically come to dwell within my mind.
WS gAfe froses o@ fafa we ufo urfa il (518-5, ast, He 5)
jaa too’ tuseh miharvaan na-o niDh ghar meh paabhi.
When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, I find the nine treasures within the home of my own self.
w 3 gfe frases TT as a HZ core I (18-5, ars, 3 5) jaa too’ tuseh miharvaan taa gur kaa mantar kamaahi. When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, I act according to the Guru's Instructions.
W 3 3Afd fades 3 TSA Afs ANT WA (518-6, aA, He 5) jaa too’ tuseh miharvaan taa naanak sach samaahi. ||1]| When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, then Nanak is absorbed in the True One. ||1]|
He U Il (518-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fast dafs sve ue srfefs SA I 18-7, gat, ue 5) kitee baihni" baihnay much vajaa-in vaj. Many sit on thrones, to the sounds of musical instruments.
Sed Ad 3H fee fan o adr BA MII (518-7, gat, He 5) naanak sachay naam vin kisai na rahee-aa laj. ||2|| O Nanak, without the True Name, no one's honor is safe. ||2||
ust Il (18-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3u fomrfefs ae asa AE Ys Il (518-7, TAT, He 5)
tuDh Dhi-aa-eeni" bayd kataybaa san kharhay.
The followers of the Vedas, the Bible and the Koran, standing at Your Door, meditate on You.
Gest wet 3 we 33 efe us I (518-8, gH, ne 5) gantee ganee na jaa-ay tayrai dar parhay. Uncounted are those who fall at Your Door.
gon 30 fourfefe fee fener i (518-8, gAet, He 5) barahmay tuDh Dhi-aa-eeni" indar indraasanaa. Brahma meditates on You, as does Indra on his throne.
Had fans mess ofa AA Hfe ger II (518-9, gat, He 5) sankar bisan avtaar har jas mukh bhanaa. Shiva and Vishnu, and their incarnations, chant the Lord's Praise with their mouths,
ute fuarag Ae HATES MESES I (518-9, TAS, He 5)
peer pikaabar saykh masaa-ik a-ulee-ay.
as do the Pirs, the spiritual teachers, the prophets and the Shaykhs, the silent sages and the seers.
6fs ufs fedora wife wfe Heate I (518-9, gat, He 5) ot pot nirankaar ghat ghat ma-ulee-ay. Through and through, the Formless Lord is woven into each and every heart.
TaT AS FESTA TSH Sait Il (518-10, TAH, we 5) koorhahu karay vinaas Dharmay tagee-ai. One is destroyed through falsehood; through righteousness, one prospers.
fas fas ofefs orfu fsa fsa watt QI (518-10, aA, He 5) jit jit laa-ihi aap tit tit lagee-ai. ||2|| Whatever the Lord links him to, to that he is linked. ||2||
HS H8 U Il (518-11)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Sfamret nroa ad sfanret df Ag I (is-11, TAS, He 5) chagi-aa-ee™ aalak karay buri-aa-ee™ ho-ay sayr. He is reluctant to do good, but eager to practice evil.
TSA MA aS mirSHt aes |rdt UT WA (518-11, TAT, ws 5) naanak aj kal aavsee gaafal faahee payr. ||1]| O Nanak, today or tomorrow, the feet of the careless fool shall fall into the trap. ||1]|
H8 U Il (518-12) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fashor ada ast dh o fas il (518-12, act, ne 5) kitee-aa kudhang gujhaa thee-ai na hit. No matter how evil my ways are, still, Your Love for me is not concealed.
sed 3 Afs efor Ho Hf AS fy QI (518-12, aA, He 5) naanak tai seh dhaki-aa man meh sachaa mit. ||2||
Nanak: You, O Lord, conceal my short-comings and dwell within my mind; You are my true friend. ||2||
ust Il (518-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
I@ wa 33 efears afe er afer | (518-13, aA, He 5) ha-o maaga-o tujhai da-i-aal kar daasaa goli-aa. I beg of You, O Merciful Lord: please, make me the slave of Your slaves.
o@ fafa ust oa ater Sfomr i (518-13, gat, He 5) na-o niDh paa-ee raaj jeevaa boli-aa. I obtain the nine treasures and royalty; chanting Your Name, I live.
nifys on fears eTAT ufs WaT Il (518-14, aAdt, He 5)
amrit naam niDhaan daasaa ghar ghanaa.
The great ambrosial treasure, the Nectar of the Naam, is in the home of the Lord's Slaves.
fso & Afar foo Azet AA AST Il (518-14, act, He 5) tin kai sang nihaal sarvanee jas sunaa. In their company, I am in ecstasy, listening to Your Praises with my ears.
anne’ faq at ars Ade ufes dE II Sis-14, act, 2 5) kamaavaa tin kee kaar sareer pavit ho-ay. Serving them, my body is purified.
uur urat ulfin fart Ue Ofe WI (518-15, act, He 5)
pakhaa paanee pees bigsaa pair Dho-ay.
I wave the fans over them, and carry water for them; I grind the corn for them, and washing their feet, I am over-joyed.
ntug ag 3 df= ys seta feast I (518-15, aa, Hs 5) aaphu kachhoo na ho-ay parabh nadar nihaalee-ai. By myself, I can do nothing; O God, bless me with Your Glance of Grace.
Hfs fasae fed w@ AS GaN ASMA ISI (518-16, aA, He 5) mohi nirgun dichai thaa-o sant Dharam saalee-ai. ||3]|| I am worthless - please, bless me with a seat in the place of worship of the Saints.
[I3]|
HBA HU Il (518-16)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
AH 3d Vso at aS go Ae Ofe Il (518-16, art, H2 5) Saajan tayray charan kee ho-ay rahaa sad Dhoor. O Friend, I pray that I may remain forever the dust of Your Feet.
aoe AE Zoho UNS HET THs WAM (518-17, aASt, He 5) naanak saran tuhaaree-aa paykha-o sadaa hajoor. ||1|| Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, and beholds You ever-present. ||1]|
Hé8 U Il (518-17) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ufss usls mre dfs ofa saat Ho Ba Il (518-17, gat, He 5) patit puneet asa‘kh hohi har charnee man laag. Countless sinners become pure, by fixing their minds on the Feet of the Lord.
Mons Stee STH US fAA SSA HAS Sa NI (518-18, aA, He 5)
athsath tirath naam parabh jis naanak mastak bhaag. ||2| |
The Name of God is the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage, O Nanak, for one who has such destiny written upon his forehead. ||2]|
UgST Il (518-18)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
fos rubs afh forts o@ usefeara a il (518-18, aadt, ue 5)
nit japee-ai saas giraas naa-o paravdigaar daa.
With every breath and morsel of food, chant the Name of the Lord, the Cherisher. fA 6 ad dH fH & feAser | (is-19, at, He 5)
jis no karay rahamm tis na visaardaa.
The Lord does not forget one upon whom He has bestowed His Grace.
uify Gureaarg wm ot HTPET I (518-19, AST, He 5)
aap upaavanhaar aapay hee maardaa. He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself destroys.
Uar uae
Ag fag we we sfs Steger I (519-1, Het, ne 5) sabh kichh jaanai jaan bujh veechaardaa. The Knower knows everything; He understands and contemplates.
uifoa gu fas ufo Feats urge Il (519-1, aAst, He 5) anik roop khin maahi kudrat Dhaardaa. By His creative power, He assumes numerous forms in an instant.
fan 6 ofe Afs fafa Gorger I (519-2, gat, ue 5) jis no laa-ay sach tiseh uDhaardaa. One whom the Lord attaches to the Truth is redeemed.
fan et d@ ef A ae & TST Il (519-2, gat, Hs 5) jis dai hovai val so kaday na haardaa. One who has God on his side is never conquered.
Het niga dare 3 o@ fA SHAATSET ISI (519-2, aAet, He 5) sadaa abhag deebaan hai ha-o tis namaskaardaa. ||4|| His Court is eternal and imperishable; I humbly bow to Him. ||4||
HBa HU Il (519-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
aH au BF ese eta male Aete Il (519-3, aAet, ne 5) kaam kroDh lobh chhodee-ai deejai agan jalaa-ay. Renounce sexual desire, anger and greed, and burn them in the fire.
Htefeur fas art saa Ara a AI (519-3, TAT, He 5) jeevdi-aa nit jaapee-ai naanak saachaa naa-o. ||1]|| As long as you are alive, O Nanak, meditate continually on the True Name. ||1]|
He U Il (519-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fuss frHss ys vTua AS SH ue wiTfT Il (519-4, aA, Hs 5) simrat simrat parabh aapnaa sabh fal paa-ay aahi. Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my God, I have obtained all the fruits.
Sse SH mation ae us chor frets ii (519-4, Ast, Hs 5) naanak naam araaDhi-aa gur poorai dee-aa milaa-ay. ||2| |
O Nanak, I worship the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord. ||2]|
ust I (519-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A uast Aerts fa afs Cuetir i (519-5, ant, ve 5) so muktaa sansaar je gur updaysi-aa. One who has been instructed by the Guru is liberated in this world.
fSA at wet gerfe fee nist i (519-5, at, ne 5) tis kee ga-ee balaa-ay mitay andaysi-aa. He avoids disaster, and his anxiety is dispelled.
fsn a vane fy wars foo oe II (519-6, aaet, He 5) tis kaa darsan daykh jagat nihaal ho-ay. Beholding the blessed vision of his Darshan, the world is over-joyed.
We & Afa feos ura He OfE Il (519-6, act, ne 5)
jan kai sang nihaal paapaa mail Dho-ay.
In the company of the Lord's humble servants, the world is over-joyed, and the filth of sin is washed away.
nifys Ara or@ Ga Ariba i (519-7, aast, us 5)
amrit saachaa naa-o othai jaapee-ai. There, they meditate on the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name.
HS a@ dfe Hsu gar grit i (519-7, gat, ue 5) man ka-o ho-ay santokh bhukhaa Dharaapee-ai. The mind becomes content, and its hunger is satisfied.
fan ufe efor a fsn sae arebt I (519-7, aaet, 8 5) jis ghat vasi-aa naa-o tis banDhan kaatee-ai. One whose heart is filled with the Name, has his bonds cut away.
qa uarte fas feat afs oe urn iull (519-8, act, 8 5) gur parsaad kinai virlai har Dhan khaatee-ai. ||5]| By Guru's Grace, some rare person earns the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||5]|
HBa H8 U Il (519-8)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Hig fase faseat BeH ag@ Cfo ats Il (519-8, gat, ws 5) man meh chitva-o chitvanee udam kara-o uth neet. Within my mind, I think thoughts of always rising early, and making the effort.
ofa atese a nirad afs fy sea & HIS WAU (519-9, aAet, He 5)
har keertan kaa aahro har dayh naanak kay meet. ||1||
O Lord, my Friend, please bless Nanak with the habit of singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||1]|
He U Il (519-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fenfe te ufs whim Hg Sq TST HFS Il (519-10, aAST, HE 5)
darisat Dhaar parabh raakhi-aa man tan rataa mool.
Casting His Glance of Grace, God has saved me; my mind and body are imbued with the Primal Being.
aod F YS sehr Hag feast Af QI (519-10, art, He 5) naanak jo parabh bhaanee-aa mara-o vichaaree sool. ||2|| O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God, have their cries of suffering taken away.
21 |
ugat Il (519-11)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
iba at fase df A as ufs maeth afs i (si9-11, aAt, He 5)
jee-a kee birthaa ho-ay so gur peh ardaas kar. When your soul is feeling sad, offer your prayers to the Guru.
efs fimreu Aas He 36 nrafu ufe I (519-11, aaet, 8 5) chhod si-aanap sagal man tan arap Dhar. Renounce all your cleverness, and dedicate your mind and body to Him.
UAT Ts & Us IHS Ae Als I (519-12, aA, Hs 5) poojahu gur kay pair durmat jaa-ay jar. Worship the Feet of the Guru, and your evil-mindedness shall be burnt away.
AG Aa" & Afar sere fem Sta it (519-12, aast, v8 5)
saaDh janaa kai sang bhavjal bikham tar.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall cross over the terrifying and difficult world-ocean.
Reg Afsag ee nial B Hag Bf Il (519-12, aAet, He 5) sayvhu satgur dayv agai na marahu dar. Serve the True Guru, and in the world hereafter, you shall not die of fear.
fas ufo ad fours SE AST Sts Il (519-13, ast, He 5)
khin meh karay nihaal oonay subhar bhar.
In an instant, he shall make you happy, and the empty vessel shall be filled to overflowing.
He a df H3y fimrebat Ae afs I (519-13, aAet, He 5) man ka-o ho-ay santokh Dhi-aa-ee-ai sadaa har. The mind becomes content, meditating forever on the Lord.
A oar Afsas AS A AS Aa Ufs WEI (519-14, aaet, ne 5)
so lagaa satgur sayv jaa ka-o karam Dhur. ||6]|
He alone dedicates himself to the Guru's service, unto whom the Lord has granted His Grace. ||6||
HBa Hs U Il (519-14)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
weet Hats HseIS AST I (519-14, gat, ue 5) lagrhee suthaan jorhanhaarai jorhee-aa. I am attached to the right place; the Uniter has united me.
SSA Bat BY A nite sue Ve o nt fust WAM (519-15, aA, He 5)
naanak lahree lakh sai aan duban day-ay na maa piree. ||1]||
O Nanak, there are hundreds and thousands of waves, but my Husband Lord does not let me drown. ||1||
He U Il (519-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
afs stves fog Arat won eu Jest afs SH Il (519-15, aA, He 5)
ban bheehaavalai hik saathee laDham dukh hartaa har naamaa.
In the dreadful wilderness, I have found the one and only companion; the Name of the Lord is the Destroyer of distress.
ate afe aAret HS flmird ata UTS AH III (519-16, aA, He 5)
bal bal jaa-ee sant pi-aaray naanak pooran kaamaa”. ||2||
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Beloved Saints, O Nanak; through them, my affairs have been brought to fulfillment. ||2||
ust Il (519-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
urdinifs Afs fsars 33 dfar afsur it (519-17, aaet, ue 5) paa-ee-an sabh niDhaan tayrai rang rati-aa. All treasures are obtained, when we are attuned to Your Love.
6 dat ues 30 8 Aufsmr Il (519-17, aaet, H8 5) na hovee pachhotaa-o tuDh no japti-aa. One does not have to suffer regret and repentance, when he meditates on You.
ugfs 6 Aa af Sct Sa AS I (519-17, aA, He 5) pahuch na sakai ko-ay tayree tayk jan. No one can equal Your humble servant, who has Your Support.
Td ud BI ag AY BT fests Ho I (19-18, TAT, He 5)
gur pooray vaahu vaahu sukh lahaa chitaar man.
Waaho! Waaho! How wonderful is the Perfect Guru! Cherishing Him in my mind, I obtain peace.
ae ufs frefs Sag aot urea 1 (519-18, aA, He 5) gur peh sifat bhandaar karmee paa-ee-ai. The treasure of the Lord's Praise comes from the Guru; by His Mercy, it is obtained.
Afsag sefa foos safe 3 Orebt I (519-19, aaet, 18 5) satgur nadar nihaal bahurh na Dhaa-ee-dai. When the True Guru bestows His Glance of Grace, one does not wander any more.
ae nify efemies afe VAT miTUz I (519-19, gat, He 5) rakhai aap da-i-aal kar daasaa aapnay. The Merciful Lord preserves him - He makes him His own slave.
dfs afs afs afa am Ate Afe AE DI (519-19, AST, He 5) har har har har naam jeevaa sun sunay. ||7]|| Listening, hearing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, I live. ||7]|
UST U2O
HBA HU Il (520-1)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
yn ues 3 vfs fest eae & ufs Hat I (520-1, TAS, 8 5)
paraym patolaa tai seh ditaa dhakan koo pat mayree.
O Husband Lord, You have given me the silk gown of Your Love to cover and protect my honor.
aor dla Aret HST area ATS O Aret Sat UA (520-2, aaet, He 5)
daanaa beenaa saa-ee maidaa naanak saar na jaanaa tayree. ||1]|
You are all-wise and all-knowing, O my Master; Nanak: I have not appreciated Your value, Lord. ||1]|
Hé UY Il 20-2) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
33 fina og fae oon firm o fon aet II (520-2, aAet, He 5)
taidai simran habh kichh laDham bikham na ditham ko-ee.
By Your meditative remembrance, I have found everything; nothing seems difficult to me.
fan ufs se Aa rfog soa Afe o AA At MQM (520-3, ast, He 5) jis pat rakhai sachaa saahib naanak mayt na sakai ko-ee. ||2||
One whose honor the True Lord Master has preserved - O Nanak, no one can dishonor him. |[2]|
ust II (520-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
de AY war efit fomrfert 1 (520-3, gat, He 5) hovai sukh ghanaa da-yi Dhi-aa-i-ai. Meditating on the Lord, there comes a great peace.
#2 gar urfe af ae whet I (520-4, act, 42 5) vanjai rogaa ghaan har gun gaa-i-ai. Multitudes of illnesses vanish, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
niefs eas ofe ufs fats urfent i (520-4, ant, us 5) andar vartai thaadh parabh chit aa-i-ai. Utter peace pervades within, when God comes to mind.
yaa de oA ate vfs SArfeMt Il (520-4, art, we 5) pooran hovai aas naa-ay man vasaa-i-ai. One's hopes are fulfilled, when one's mind is filled with the Name.
afe 3 wat fre wiry arerfemt I (520-5, ant, 18 5) ko-ay na lagai bighan aap gavaa-i-ai. No obstacles stand in the way, when one eliminates his self-conceit.
fame uersg Hf aa 3 urfemt I (520-5, act, He 5)
gi-aan padaarath mat gur tay paa-i-di.
The intellect attains the blessing of spiritual wisdom from the Guru. fefs ue AS da fam wef feet II (520-6, aH, He 5)
tin paa-ay sabhay thok jis aap divaa-i-ai. He receives everything, unto whom the Lord Himself gives.
3 AS a UAH AS Set SfeMt ITI (520-6, aAST, He 5) too” sabhnaa kaa khasam sabh tayree chhaa-i-ai. ||8|| You are the Lord and Master of all; all are under Your Protection. ||8]|
HBa HU Il (520-7)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
oot Sdeat Hat dn o US HfS Hols Sat Ml (520-7, aaet, we 5) nadee tarand-rhee maidaa khoj na khumbhai manjh muhabat tayree. Crossing the stream, my foot does not get stuck - I am filled with love for You.
38 Ag vael HS" Shs ASH ofa Sea SHI Sst WAU (520-7, aA, He 5) ta-o sah charnee maidaa hee-arhaa seetam har naanak tulhaa bayrhee. ||1]| O Lord, my heart is attached to Your Feet; the Lord is Nanak's raft and boat. ||1]|
He U Il (520-8)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
faa fertefaor esHfs Fe fez wirss Aet I (520-8, gat, ve 5) jin"aa disand-rhi-aa durmat vanjai mitar asaadrhay say-ee. The sight of them banishes my evil-mindedness; they are my only true friends.
UG weet Aa AEfenr Ae Sod fess AEt I (520-8, aA, H2 5) ha-o dhoodhaydee jag sabaa-i-aa jan naanak virlay kay-ee. ||2|| I have searched the whole world; O servant Nanak, how rare are such persons! ||2]|
Uugat Il (520-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wire Afog fats Sfaor sas fafenr i (520-9, ant, Hs 5) aavai saahib chit tayri-aa bhagtaa dithi-aa. You come to mind, O Lord and Master, when I behold Your devotees.
He at aéba Ae ATGHfat Sfenr i (520-10, aH, He 5)
man kee katee-ai mail saaDhsang vuthi-aa.
The filth of my mind is removed, when I dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
HOH HIE 3B Admit AS aT Aa AfY II (520-10, gAet, He 5)
janam maran bha-o katee-ai jan kaa sabad jap.
The fear of birth and death is dispelled, meditating on the Word of His humble servant.
gue date AS es Als who sfy Il (520-10, gas, He 5) banDhan kholni" sant doot sabh jaahi chhap. The Saints untie the bonds, and all the demons are dispelled.
fsn fag offs ga fan et As odor I (520-11, aA, Hs 5) tis si-o laa-ini" rang jis dee sabh Dhaaree-aa. They inspire us to love Him, the One who established the entire universe.
Cut F Sat ae fay rash Ih (520-11, art, He 5) oochee hoo™ oochaa thaan agam aapaaree-aa. The seat of the inaccessible and infinite Lord is the highest of the high.
df= fear as afs af Arf fore I (520-12, act, He 5)
rain dinas kar jorh saas saas Dhi-aa-ee-ai.
Night and day, with your palms pressed together, with each and every breath, meditate on Him.
Ww um dfs efeurg st sas Aa ure CN (520-12, gaet, He 5) jaa aapay ho-ay da-i-aal taa‘ bhagat sang paa-ee-ai. ||9]| When the Lord Himself becomes merciful, then we attain the Society of His devotees.
[9I|
HBa HU Il (520-13)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ate festes JHA GHA gar usher at I (520-13, art, we 5)
baar vidaanrhai hummas Dhummas kookaa pa-ee-aa raahee.
In this wondrous forest of the world, there is chaos and confusion; shrieks emanate from the highways.
3@ Ag ASt wast Sct Sta niBe ASt as TAS WAU (520-13, gat, He 5)
ta-o sah saytee lagrhee doree naanak anad saytee ban gaahee. ||1|| I am in love with You, O my Husband Lord; O Nanak, I cross the jungle joyfully. ||1]|
He U Il (520-14)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Het ana fSaqr Afar fe Afar wht BS i (520-14, gH, ve 5) sachee baisak tin"aa sang jin sang japee-ai naa-o. The true society is the company of those who meditate on the Name of the Lord.
fsq Afar Hal o ateet Soa fro wirret AME QI (520-14, act, He 5) tin" sang sang na keech-ee naanak jinaa aapnaa su-aa-o. ||2|| Do not associate with those, O Nanak, who look out only for their own interests. ||2]|
Ugat Il (520-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AT aor ude fas Afsag sfent il (520-15, art, He 5) saa vaylaa parvaan jit satgur bhayti-aa. Approved is that time, when one meets the True Guru.
out AG Ag fefs su a Sfemr Il (520-16, Ast, He 5) ho-aa saaDhoo sang fir dookh na tayti-aa. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he does not suffer pain again.
utfeur foaue ae fete aats 6 Sfent il (520-16, aAst, we 5) paa-i-aa nihchal thaan fir garabh na layti-aa. When he attains the eternal place, he does not have to enter the womb again.
Seat uitfenr feg Aas FIAfemt il (520-17, gASt, w2 5) nadree aa-i-aa ik sagal barahmayti-aa. He comes to see the One God everywhere.
33 fomrg oe fomrg ferfe AAfent II (520-17, aAdt, He 5)
tat gi-aan laa-ay Dhi-aan darisat samayti-aa.
He focuses his meditation on the essence of spiritual wisdom, and withdraws his attention from other sights.
AS wUba au fa wag SSfenr it (520-17, aact, ne 5) sabho japee-ai jaap je mukhahu bolayti-aa. All chants are chanted by one who chants them with his mouth.
Jan afs fears Afa Hafan It (520-18, TAT, H8 5)
hukmay bujh nihaal sukh sukhayti-aa.
Realizing the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he becomes happy, and he is filled with peace and tranquility.
uate us ure A agfs o Ufemt AON (520-18, TAA, He 5)
parakh khajaanai paa-ay say bahurh na khoti-aa. ||10]||
Those who are assayed, and placed in the Lord's treasury, are not declared counterfeit again. ||10]|
HBA Hs U Il (520-19)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
feed Had ue o Selo AUS Il (520-19, TART, He 5) vichhohay jamboor khavay na vanjan gaakh-rhay. The pincers of separation are so painful to endure.
AA Uat fete sea AY AYT A AI (520-19, aA, m3 5)
jay so Dhanee milann naanak sukh sambooh sach. ||1]|
If only the Master would come to meet me! O Nanak, I would then obtain all the true comforts. ||1]|
UST U2RQ
He U Il (521-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fant eHet ureha Stas ge ofs it 521-1, gat, He 5) jimee vasandee paanee-ai eeDhan rakhai bhaahi. The earth is in the water, and the fire is contained in the wood.
ood AAG utfe a at wirefes TZ SF MQM (521-1, Tat, He 5) naanak so saho aahi jaa kai aadhal habh ko. |[2|| O Nanak, yearn for that Lord, who is the Support of all. ||2] |
ust Il (521-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
33 aS AH 30 St ass Il (521-2, aa, us 5) tayray keetay kamm tuDhai hee gochray. The works which You have done, O Lord, could only have been performed by You.
Ret eas afar fa ahor so gs Wt (521-2, aaet, 8 5) so-ee vartai jag je kee-aa tuDh Dhuray. That alone happens in the world, which You, O Master, have done.
fanny 3& fame ef avets Sar ii (521-2, art, us 5) bisam bha-ay bismaad daykh kudrat tayree-aa. I am wonderstruck beholding the wonder of Your Almighty Creative Power.
Rafe ud Scat on afe afs df Asbo I (521-3, act, ue 5) saran paray tayree daas kar gat ho-ay mayree-aa. I seek Your Sanctuary - I am Your slave; if it is Your Will, I shall be emancipated.
33 ofa fours are fSH Ufo II (521-3, aaet, He 5) tayrai hath niDhaan bhaavai tis deh. The treasure is in Your Hands; according to Your Will, You bestow it.
fan 6 of efemre af on Afe Sfo i (521-4, aaet, He 5) jis no ho-ay da-i-aal har naam say-ay layhi. One, upon whom You have bestowed Your Mercy, is blessed with the Lord's Name.
Ma nigisd Bis nfs o ure I (521-4, gH, ue 5) agam agochar bay-ant ant na paa-ee-ai. You are unapproachable, unfathomable and infinite; Your limits cannot be found.
fan 3 dfs faurs A om fire 9A (521-4, aA, He 5) jis no hohi kirpaal so naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||11] |
One, unto whom You have been compassionate, meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||11]|
HBA HU Il (521-5)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ase fedis aor 3 ref Abr I (521-5, TAS, He 5) karh-chhee-aa fira‘ni" su-aa-o na jaanni" sunjee-aa. The ladles cruise through the food, but they do not know the taste of it.
Ret nu feAfs soa gS YN SA NAM (521-5, aA, He 5) say-ee mukh disa™ni" naanak ratay paraym ras. ||1]|
I long to see the faces of those, O Nanak, who are imbued with the essence of the Lord's Love. ||1||
He U Il (521-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
art Boy da ssh Cars i 521-6, aaet, 8 5) khojee laDham khoj chhadee-aa ujaarh. Through the Tracker, I discovered the tracks of those who ruined my crops.
3 vfs fest af aoa 4S 8 fenet QI (521-6, aad, Hs 5) tai seh ditee vaarh naanak khayt na chhij-ee. ||2|| You, O Lord, have put up the fence; O Nanak, my fields shall not be plundered again.
[21] uQat Il (521-7)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
wrafag Ae Afe AS fee faa uf I (521-7, aaet, 8 5) aaraaDhihu sachaa so-ay sabh kichh jis paas. Worship in adoration that True Lord; everything is under His Power.
co’ fAfoor wAH orfu fas ufo ad IA II (521-7, oat, 43 5) duhaa siri-aa khasam aap khin meh karay raas. He Himself is the Master of both ends; in an instant, He adjusts our affairs.
fSurag Aare Cure fSH at Ge ag Il (521-8, art, v8 5) ti-aagahu sagal upaav tis kee ot gahu. Renounce all your efforts, and hold fast to His Support.
u@ Heat sft Het T AY BI Il (21-8, aA, Hs 5) pa-o sarnaa-ee bhaj sukhee hoo™ sukh lahu. Run to His Sanctuary, and you shall obtain the comfort of all comforts.
OSH UH 33 fame AS Aa OE i (521-9, aaet, He 5)
karam Dharam tat gi-aan santaa sang ho-ay.
The karma of good deeds, the righteousness of Dharma and the essence of spiritual wisdom are obtained in the Society of the Saints.
mut nifys on furs 3 wat afE I 21-9, aaet, He 5) japee-ai amrit naam bighan na lagai ko-ay. Chanting the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, no obstacle shall block your way.
fan 3 orfy efemre fsa nfs sfomr il (521-9, gat, He 5)
jis no aap da-i-aal tis man vuthi-aa.
The Lord abides in the mind of one who is blessed by His Kindness. uréinfs Afs fours Atfofa sfonr 92H (521-10, art, 48 5)
paa-ee-ani" sabh niDhaan saahib tuthi-aa. ||12]|
All treasures are obtained, when the Lord and Master is pleased. ||12||
HBA H8 U Il (521-10)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
BUN BIETT AIH Ade Ht fir il (521-11, ast, ve 5) laDham labhanhaar karam karando maa piree. I have found the object of my search - my Beloved took pity on me.
fea franerg aaa fami @ Urb Ail (521-11, ast, H8 5) iko sirjanhaar naanak bi-aa na pasee-ai. ||1]| There is One Creator; O Nanak, I do not see any other. ||1]|
He U Il (521-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
urufsor ues ae Haver Afe & Wl (521-12, gadt, ue 5) paaprhi-aa pachhaarh baan sachaavaa sa‘ni" kai. Take aim with the arrow of Truth, and shoot down sin.
ae Hg fests soa ey o Steet QM (521-12, gat, ne 5) gur mantarhaa chitaar naanak dukh na theev-ee. ||2]| Cherish the Words of the Guru's Mantra, O Nanak, and you shall not suffer in pain.
[21] ugat Il (521-12)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
ag ag franeas urdtng arfe mirfy i (521-13, art, He 5) vaahu vaahu sirjanhaar paa-ee-an thaadh aap. Waaho! Waaho! The Creator Lord Himself has brought about peace and tranquility.
riba Hz frases fSR S ET af I (521-13, aaet, He 5)
jee-a jant miharvaan tis no sadaa jaap.
He is Kind to all beings and creatures; meditate forever on Him. cent urdt Anata got fares faery il (521-13, gAdt, H3 5)
da-i-aa Dhaaree samrath chukay bil bilaap. The all-powerful Lord has shown Mercy, and my cries of suffering are ended.
oo SU ey THT US TI YSU Il (521-14, art, we 5) nathay taap dukh rog pooray gur partaap. My fevers, pains and diseases are gone, by the Grace of the Perfect Guru.
aisinig vmuat su ata foettt afr it (521-14, art, 3 5) keetee-an aapnee rakh gareeb nivaaj thaap. The Lord has established me, and protected me; He is the Cherisher of the poor.
nny ofenig gate das Aare arty i (521-15, grt, we 5) aapay la-i-an chhadaa-ay banDhan sagal kaap. He Himself has delivered me, breaking all my bonds.
faAe gst orm ust He ASfe gris i (521-15, gat, He 5) tisan bujhee aas punnee man santokh Dharaap. My thirst is quenched, my hopes are fulfilled, and my mind is contented and satisfied.
zat J est ors uA fra Bu 8 Ufs uf ISI (521-16, aAST, He 5)
vadee hoo" vadaa apaar khasam jis layp na punn paap. ||13]|
The greatest of the great, the Infinite Lord and Master - He is not affected by virtue and vice. ||13]|
HBA He U Il (521-16)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Wag se fauns ys ofa ofa ASt AUS Il (521-16, aAet, HW 5) jaa ka-o bha-ay kirpaal parabh har har say-ee japaat. They alone meditate on the Lord God, Har, Har, unto whom the Lord is Merciful.
soa Us wat fo oH fAG Ses ATG Aas NA (521-17, TAT, He 5)
naanak pareet lagee tin raam si-o bhaytat saaDh sangaat. ||1]|
O Nanak, they enshrine love for the Lord, meeting the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
H8 U Il (21-17) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
TH THI sasaitd vfs af noose APE WN (521-17, THe, He 5)
raam ramhu badbhaageeho jal thal mahee-al so-ay.
Contemplate the Lord, O very fortunate ones; He is pervading in the water, the land and the sky.
oad oth nati furs o wrat af NN (521-18, aAet, He 5)
naanak naam araaDhi-ai bighan na laagai ko-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, worshipping the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal encounters no misfortune. ||2||
UugaT Il (521-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
sas a afer users 3 waa us ate il (521-19, gAet, Hs 5) bhagtaa kaa boli-aa parvaan hai dargeh pavai thaa-ay. The speech of the devotees is approved; it is accepted in the Court of the Lord.
SIs" Sat Sa FS Afs STE Il (521-19, grt, us 5) bhagtaa tayree tayk ratay sach naa-ay. Your devotees take to Your Support; they are imbued with the True Name.
fan 6 afe faure fA or ey AME Il (521-19, art, 2 5) jis no ho-ay kirpaal tis kaa dookh jaa-ay. One unto whom You are Merciful, has his sufferings depart.
Ua u2Q2 Sas 33 fens Gar fas ute i (522-1, gat, He 5)
bhagat tayray da-i-aal on"aa mihar paa-ay. O Merciful Lord, You bless Your devotees with Your Grace.
ey Use es dq B Us PA HAE I (522-1, aaet, Hs 5) dookh darad vad rog na pohay tis maa-ay. Suffering, pain, terrible disease and Maya do not afflict them.
sas fy worg ae afe ate i (522-2, aaet, v8 5)
bhagtaa ayhu aDhaar gun govind gaa-ay.
This is the Support of the devotees, that they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Het Het fee ofs feet fer fomrfe ii (522-2, aact, v2 5) sadaa sadaa din rain iko ik Dhi-aa-ay. Forever and ever, day and night, they meditate on the One and Only Lord.
ulefs nits ou Ae SA as mute 98I (6522-2, TAS, He 5)
peevat amrit naam jan naamay rahay aghaa-ay. ||14|
Drinking in the Ambrosial Amrit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, His humble servants remain satisfied with the Naam. ||14]|
HBa HE U Il (522-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
afe faus fsa oars fan 6 fers a i (522-3, gAet, He 5) kot bighan tis laagtay jis no visrai naa-o. Millions of obstacles stand in the way of one who forgets the Name.
oa nofes faous fae Fe whe ae Nail 622-4, aAt, He 5) naanak an-din bilpatay ji-o sunjai ghar kaa-o. ||1]|| O Nanak, night and day, he croaks like a raven in a deserted house. ||1||
He U Il (522-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
frst fireret at chat Aret AovSt ofS I (522-4, aHet, He 5) piree milaavaa jaa thee-ai saa-ee suhaavee rut. Beauteous is that season, when I am united with my Beloved.
wat HIS od SAS Broa TSH fos MQM (522-5, ast, ne 5)
gharhee muhat nah veesrai naanak ravee-ai nit. ||2| |
I do not forget Him for a moment or an instant; O Nanak, I contemplate Him constantly. ||2]|
uGSt II (522-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hedts eho fas 3 Is | SSH Asal TS Us ASMA I (522-5, aA, Hs 5)
soorbeer varee-aam kinai na horhee-ai. fa-uj sataanee haath panchaa jorhee-ai. Even brave and mighty men cannot withstand the powerful and overwhelming army which the five passions have gathered.
oA ost mus Shs wHaM I (522-6, art, He 5) das naaree a-uDhoot dayn chamorhee-ai. The ten organs of sensation attach even detached renunciates to sensory pleasures.
fafs fafe Sfe serfs Sd Sar BSA I (522-6, aA, us 5) jin jin laini" ralaa-ay ayho aynaa lorhee-ai. They seek to conquer and overpower them, and so increase their following.
3 ae fea & aff fad & HSH I (522-7, aaet, He 5)
tarai gun in kai vas kinai na morhee-ai.
The world of the three dispositions is under their influence; no one can stand against them.
SoH ae Hfeur uret ag fas fafa Ss It (522-7, aact, 2 5) bharam kot maa-i-aa khaa-ee kaho kit biDh torhee-ai. So tell me - how can the fort of doubt and the moat of Maya be overcome?
Tg us urate fran ee Sat i (522-8, ars, ws 5) gur pooraa aaraaDh bikham dal forhee-ai. Worshipping the Perfect Guru, this awesome force is subdued.
J@ fan mia fea of ga ag FSA NWI (522-8, aA, He 5) ha-o tis agai din raat rahaa kar jorhee-ai. ||15]| I stand before Him, day and night, with my palms pressed together. ||15]|
HBa HU Il (522-9)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
faafeu AS Gscfs als lS TE WE i (522-9, ast, ue 5) kilvikh sabhay utran neet neet gun gaa-o. All sins are washed away, by continually singing the Lord's Glories.
afe ae Surfs sea faAS SS AU (522-9, At, He 5) kot kalaysaa oopjahi naanak bisrai naa-o. ||1]| Millions of afflictions are produced, O Nanak, when the Name is forgotten. ||1]|
H8 U Il (522-10) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
area Afsats sfent ust Te Fats i (522-10, art, we 5) naanak satgur bhayti-ai pooree hovai jugat. O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, one comes to know the Perfect Way.
JHfeur vsfenr Usfeor ursfenr fed Je nafs QM (522-10, TA, ue 5) hasandi-aa khaylandi-aa painandi-aa khaavandi-aa vichay hovai mukat. ||2] | While laughing, playing, dressing and eating, he is liberated. ||2]|
Uugat Il (522-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A Afsag ue ue fafe sen as Sfaor tt (522-11, aaet, He 5) so satgur Dhan Dhan jin bharam garh torhi-aa. Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has demolished the fortress of doubt.
A Afsag ag ag fats ofe fA@ afer i (522-11, act, v8 5) so satgur vaahu vaahu jin har si-o jorhi-aa. Waaho! Waaho! - Hail! Hail! to the True Guru, who has united me with the Lord.
on fours ore ag ef eg Il (522-12, gAst, Hs 5) naam niDhaan akhut gur day-ay daroo-o. The Guru has given me the medicine of the inexhaustible treasure of the Naam.
Ho Ja faces fs faesS it (522-12, Ast, He 5) mahaa rog bikraal tinai bidaroo-o. He has banished the great and terrible disease.
uffeur an feurg ages wae | (522-13, gat, He 5) paa-i-aa naam niDhaan bahut khajaani-aa. I have obtained the great treasure of the wealth of the Naam.
fist ASH niuTg wy Ustonit Il (522-13, aA, He 5) jitaa janam apaar aap pachhaani-aa. I have obtained eternal life, recognizing my own self.
HfoHt adt 3 Ae AT AMIE SS Il (522-13, THT, He 5) mahimaa kahee na jaa-ay gur samrath dayv. The Glory of the all-powerful Divine Guru cannot be described.
TI WIFIH USHAT MUSUT MiG MIST AEM (522-14, TAT, He 5)
gur paarbarahm parmaysur aprampar alakh abhayv. ||16]|
The Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, infinite, unseen and unknowable. ||16||
HS HE U Il (522-14)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Cen aster Me FS orefemr AY FT I (522-15, ast, He 5) udam karaydi-aa jee-o too’ kamaavdi-aa sukh bhunch. Make the effort, and you shall live; practicing it, you shall enjoy peace.
fourfefenr 3 ys fie asa Bsdt FFF NAM (522-15, AST, HE 5) Dhi-aa-idi-aa too’ parabhoo mil naanak utree chint. ||1]| Meditating, you shall meet God, O Nanak, and your anxiety shall vanish. ||1]|
H8 U Il (522-16) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HS fase afse sHe fesHs AY Aa Il (522-16, gat, He 5)
subh chintan gobind raman nirmal saaDhoo sang.
Bless me with sublime thoughts, O Lord of the Universe, and contemplation in the immaculate Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
saa oH 8 fene fea wat afe forsur sas NI (522-16, TASH, He 5)
naanak naam na visra-o ik gharhee kar kirpaa bhagvant. ||2]|
O Nanak, may I never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, for even an instant; be merciful to me, Lord God. ||2] |
Uugat Il (522-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3a atst afe 3 ard Sau I (522-17, act, ue 5) tayraa keetaa ho-ay ta kaahay darpee-ai. Whatever happens is according to Your Will, so why should I be afraid?
fan fife wuba a fsa Ate mau I (522-17, gat, Hs 5)
jis mil japee-ai naa-o tis jee-o arpee-ai.
Meeting Him, I meditate on the Name - I offer my soul to Him. nif fafs faors rrfoas SAMS I (522-18, Het, He 5)
aa-i-ai chit nihaal saahib baysumaar. When the Infinite Lord comes to mind, one is enraptured.
fan 6 ud age fan afe fodars Il (522-18, aaet, He 5) tis no pohay kavan jis val nirankaar. Who can touch one who has the Formless Lord on his side?
Ag fae fan a efh o aet aaa Il (522-19, act, 2 5) sabh kichh tis kai vas na ko-ee baahraa. Everything is under His control; no one is beyond Him.
A saat yfe gar Afs ATT II (522-19, get, He 5) so bhagtaa man vuthaa sach samaaharaa. He, the True Lord, dwells in the minds of His devotees.
39 @A fimrfefs sa F Tu Shor | (522-19, TAS, He 5) tayray daas Dhi-aa-in tuDh too” rakhan vaali-aa. Your slaves meditate on You; You are the Savior, the Protector Lord.
UST U2s
fats Aso" AHeE Sele foafemr ADI (523-1, TAT, He 5) sir sabhnaa samrath nadar nihaali-aa. ||17]| You are the Almighty Overlord of all; You bless us with Your Glance of Grace. ||17] |
HBa HU Il (523-1)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
OH AU He Ss Ho VAS HH feet ii (523-1, gH, ue 5)
kaam kroDh mad lobh moh dusat baasnaa nivaar.
Take away my sexual desire, anger, pride, greed, emotional attachment and evil desires.
of SI Ys nie soa Ae MsIts WAU (523-2, gTASt, He 5)
raakh layho parabh aapnay naanak sad balihaar. ||1]|| Protect me, O my God; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||1]|
He U Il (523-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
uifenr uifemr ug wor USfeor Ag vig Il (523-3, aadt, He 5)
khaa'di-aa khaa“di-aa muhu ghathaa painandi-aa sabh ang.
By eating and eating, the mouth is worn out; by wearing clothes, the limbs grow weary.
ood faa for a Hifenr fas Afs o Bat Fa iI! (523-3, aA, He 5)
naanak Dharig tinaa daa jeevi-aa jin sach na lago rang. ||2|| O Nanak, cursed are the lives of those who are not attuned to the Love of the True Lord. ||2]|
ugat Il (523-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fa@ faG 3a gan fee f Tear il (523-4, aaet, He 5) ji-o ji-o tayraa hukam tivai ti-o hovnaa. As is the Hukam of Your Command, so do things happen.
Ad Aa sufo orf so fe wssET Il (523-4, TAH, He 5) jah jah rakheh aap tah jaa-ay kharhovanaa. Wherever You keep me, there I go and stand.
on 3d ao df Pans Geer Il (523-5, gH, He 5) naam tayrai kai rang durmat Dhovnaa. With the Love of Your Name, I wash away my evil-mindedness.
afy afu su fedars sau SE ear | (523-5, aAet, He 5) jap jap tuDh nirankaar bharam bha-o khovnaa. By continually meditating on You, O Formless Lord, my doubts and fears are dispelled.
A 39 dfa a3 A Afs o ASST I (523-5, gadt, He 5) jo tayrai rang ratay say jon na jovnaa. Those who are attuned to Your Love, shall not be trapped in reincarnation.
nists wate fea SE mssSt Il (523-6, THe, Hs 5) antar baahar ik nain alovanaa. Inwardly and outwardly, they behold the One Lord with their eyes.
faat uarst Jou fq ae & FSET Il (523-6, Tat, us 5) jin"ee pachhaataa hukam tin" kaday na rovnaa. Those who recognize the Lord's Command never weep.
o@ Stead SUAIA Ho Hf UTSET NACI (523-6, TAT, He 5) naa-o naanak bakhsees man maahi parovanaa. ||18]|
O Nanak, they are blessed with the gift of the Name, woven into the fabric of their minds. ||18] |
HBa HU Il (523-7)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Htefeur 6 Sf3E Hor aes US I (523-7, TASH, Hs 5)
jeevdi-aa na chayti-o mu-aa raland-rho khaak.
Those who do not remember the Lord while they are alive, shall mix with the dust when they die.
Soa Sb Afar Teh AS HF SUA MAUI (523-8, TAT, He 5) naanak dunee-aa sang gudaari-aa saakat moorh napaak. ||1|| O Nanak, the foolish and filthy faithless cynic passes his life engrossed in the world.
[21
He U Il (523-8)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Atgfenr of sfsor udfemr af sfar i (523-8, TAS, we 5)
jeevandi-aa har chayti-aa marandi-aa har rang.
One who remembers the Lord while he is alive, shall be imbued with the Lord's Love when he dies.
HOH USTIE Shor sea AT Afar iQ (523-9, aAt, we 5)
janam padaarath taari-aa naanak saaDhoo sang. ||2||
The precious gift of his life is redeemed, O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2]|
Uugat Il (523-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nite Faret orf gue stfemr | (523-9, gat, ws 5)
aad jugaadee aap rakhan vaali-aa.
From the beginning, and through the ages, You have been our Protector and Preserver.
Ay oH ada'g Ay UAT | (523-10, aadt, Hs 5) sach naam kartaar sach pasaari-aa. True is Your Name, O Creator Lord, and True is Your Creation.
Ca adt 3 dfs we wife Afemr I (523-10, gat, Hs 5) oonaa kahee na ho-ay ghatay ghat saari-aa. You do not lack anything; You are filling each and every heart.
fades AHse vimy ot wrfer | (523-10, gat, w3 5) miharvaan samrath aapay hee ghaali-aa. You are merciful and all-powerful; You Yourself cause us to serve You.
fe His gor orfu A Ret Aer I (523-11, gat, Hs 5) jin" man vuthaa aap say sadaa sukhaali-aa. Those whose minds in which You dwell are forever at peace.
nm gaq sate wmy ot urfemr il (523-11, aAct, w3 5) aapay rachan rachaa-ay aapay hee paali-aa. Having created the creation, You Yourself cherish it.
AS fee wma orf ants mnrfanr | (523-12, act, ue 5) sabh kichh aapay aap bay-ant apaari-aa. You Yourself are everything, O infinite, endless Lord.
Ts us at Sax Toa AH UAE (523-12, At, He 5) gur pooray kee tayk naanak samm"aali-aa. ||19]| Nanak seeks the Protection and Support of the Perfect Guru. ||19]|
HBa HU Il (523-12)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
wife ufo mig nifs usHAfe afer i (523-13, at, He 5) aad maDh ar ant parmaysar rakhi-aa. In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, the Transcendent Lord has saved me.
Afsata fest afs on nifys ofimr i (523-13, aact, He 5)
satgur ditaa har naam amrit chakhi-aa.
The True Guru has blessed me with the Lord's Name, and I have tasted the Ambrosial Nectar.
Aa Ag wturg nofes dfs Te FS ll (523-13, act, ne 5)
saaDhaa sang apaar an-din har gun ravai.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day.
ure Hoga Als Hot SI Fe Il (523-14, aH, He 5) paa-ay manorath sabh jonee nah bhavai. I have obtained all my objectives, and I shall not wander in reincarnation again.
Ag fas ass ofa age FA I (523-14, aadt, He 5) sabh kichh kartay hath kaaran jo karai. Everything is in the Hands of the Creator; He does what is done.
aed Hat ae Hat ofs SF UU (523-15, TAS, Hs 5)
naanak mangai daan santaa Dhoor tarai. ||1]|
Nanak begs for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Holy, which shall deliver him. [21]
H8 U Il (23-15) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fan 6 vfs eAfe fafs Gurfemr I (523-15, aaet, us 5) tis no man vasaa-ay jin upaa-i-aa. Enshrine Him in your mind, the One who created you.
fate afs fomrfenr unH fate AY urfeni II (523-15, aASt, He 5) jin jan Dhi-aa-i-aa khasam tin sukh paa-i-aa. Whoever meditates on the Lord and Master obtains peace.
He@ AOH UdeTg ATHY wrfemr | (523-16, TAT, He 5) safal janam parvaan gurmukh aa-i-aa. Fruitful is the birth, and approved is the coming of the Gurmukh.
gon sfs foo wath sarfemr I (523-16, art, He 5)
hukmai bujh nihaal khasam furmaa-i-aa.
One who realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command shall be blessed - so has the Lord and Master ordained.
fan dur url furs A og Santis I (523-17, TAS, He 5) jis ho-aa aap kirpaal so nah bharmaa-i-aa. One who is blessed with the Lord's Mercy does not wander.
A ft fea unfh Ret AY urfemr tt (523-17, gat, He 5) jo jo ditaa khasam so-ee sukh paa-i-aa. Whatever the Lord and Master gives him, with that he is content.
Sod faAfs efenires gee IaH FHS Il (523-18, gASt, He 5)
naanak jisahi da-i-aal bujhaa-ay hukam mit.
O Nanak, one who is blessed with the kindness of the Lord, our Friend, realizes the Hukam of His Command.
fants gore orfy ufo xfs AHfo fSs NI (523-18, TAS, He 5)
jisahi bhulaa-ay aap mar mar jameh nit. ||2||
But those whom the Lord Himself causes to wander, continue to die, and take reincarnation again. ||2]|
Ugat Il (523-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sea Hs saat fag fexe o FES i (523-19, aAet, He 5) nindak maaray tatkaal khin tikan na ditay. The slanderers are destroyed in an instant; they are not spared for even a moment.
ys aA a ey 6 ufe Hate |fs Hat AS Il (523-19, gat, He 5)
parabh daas kaa dukh na khav sakahi farh jonee jutay.
God will not endure the sufferings of His slaves, but catching the slanderers, He binds them to the cycle of reincarnation.
UST ULB He ae using AH Halal HS Il (524-1, Tat, He 5)
mathay vaal pachhaarhi-an jam maarag mutay. Grabbing them by the hair on their heads, the Lord throws them down, and leaves them on the path of Death.
ofa oat faoorfamr safe uife AS I (524-1, aA, He 5) dukh lagai billaani-aa narak ghor sutay. They cry out in pain, in the darkest of hells.
afs ofe an aftimig area dfs AS QO (524-1, TASH, He 5) kanth laa-ay daas rakhi-an naanak har satay. ||20|| But hugging His slaves close to His Heart, O Nanak, the True Lord saves them. ||20]|
HBa Hs U Il (524-2)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
TH AUG eased Ales ats yas APE I (524-2, aad, Hs 5)
raam japahu vadbhaageeho jal thal pooran so-ay. Meditate on the Lord, O fortunate ones; He is pervading the waters and the earth.
oad oft fire furs o orat af NA (524-3, aAet, He 5)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-ai bighan na laagai ko-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and no misfortune shall strike you. ||1]|
He U Il (524-3)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
afe faus fsa oars fan 6 fend a i 524-3, andt, He 5) kot bighan tis laagtay jis no visrai naa-o. Millions of misfortunes block the way of one who forgets the Name of the Lord.
oat nafes faous fa@ He whe ae Qn (524-4, aaet, He 5) naanak an-din bilpatay ji-o sunjai ghar kaa-o. ||2|| O Nanak, like a crow in a deserted house, he cries out, night and day. ||2||
ugat Il (524-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ffs fife esrg Hose uf Il (524-4, art, He 5) simar simar daataar manorath poori-aa.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance of the Great Giver, one's heart's desires are fulfilled.
fee Yat xfs wim ae feafaor il (524-5, ast, Hu: 5) ichh punnee man aas ga-ay visoori-aa. The hopes and desires of the mind are realized, and sorrows are forgotten.
urfeur am fours fA S SBE Il (524-5, aaet, He 5)
paa-i-aa naam niDhaan jis no bhaaldaa.
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained; I have searched for it for so long.
fs first Afar HfS afore wrest | (524-5, gat, He 5) jot milee sang jot rahi-aa ghaaldaa. My light is merged into the Light, and my labors are over.
HY Aon nite gd fsg ule i (524-6, gAst, we 5) sookh sahj aanand vuthay tit ghar. I abide in that house of peace, poise and bliss.
WISE ATE TI ASH O Sd" Hf Il (524-6, aHet, ws 5) aavan jaan rahay janam na tahaa mar. My comings and goings have ended - there is no birth or death there.
Atos Red fea fea fenetfenr i (524-7, aAdt, us 5) saahib sayvak ik ik daristaa-i-aa. The Master and the servant have become one, with no sense of separation.
qd yAtS soa Afs AHEM NUM AT (524-7, ast, He 5)
gur parsaad naanak sach samaa-i-aa. ||21||1||2|] suDhu By Guru's Grace, Nanak is absorbed in the True Lord. ||21]|1]|2||Sudh]|
TH TAdt sas at at (524-7) raag goojree bhagtaa kee banee Raag Goojaree, The Words Of The Devotees:
qe Afsars Arte il (524-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
At oats AS ar BBuer weg 2 FAT Il (524-8) saree kabeer jee-o kaa cha-upadaa ghar 2 doojaa. Chau-Padas Of Kabeer Jee, Second House:
ofa ue efe fia aa He 3a AA TS Tet Il (524-8, gat, sas adits Fh
chaar paav du-ay sing gung mukh tab kaisay gun ga-eehai.
With four feet, two horns and a mute mouth, how could you sing the Praises of the Lord?
Gos dos So ufsd Fa AT HS BATT UI (524-9, gAst, gars welts Ft)
oothat baithat thaygaa parihai tab kat mood luka-eehai. ||1]|
Standing up and sitting down, the stick shall still fall on you, so where will you hide your head? ||1||
ofa fas 8% fas getd il 624-9, gat, sas ate Hh har bin bail biraanay hu-eehai. Without the Lord, you are like a stray 0x;
Se HaS Se aS AVS & SA weTT NU TIS Il (524-9, ant, sas alte Fh
faatay naakan tootay kaaDhan koda-o ko bhus kha-eehai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
with your nose torn, and your shoulders injured, you shall have only the straw of coarse grain to eat. ||1]||Pause| |
Ard fea Sms 8o Hd ning o US mets I (524-10, gat, sas ate Fh saaro din dolat ban mahee-aa ajahu na payt agh-eehai. All day long, you shall wander in the forest, and even then, your belly will not be full.
AS 3ISS A AT SHS A nus uetd iil (624-11, get, sas ats sh
jan bhagtan ko kaho na maano kee-o apno pa-eehai. ||2]|
You did not follow the advice of the humble devotees, and so you shall obtain the fruits of your actions. ||2| |
eu AY aes Ho Sf gs uifsa fs SaHeTT I (524-11, gat, sas adits Ff)
dukh sukh karat mahaa bharam boodo anik jon bharam-eehai.
Enduring pleasure and pain, drowned in the great ocean of doubt, you shall wander in numerous reincarnations.
336 HoH ufes ys fanfes feg mag as utd ISI (524-12, aAdt, sas ats Hh
ratan janam kho-i-o parabh bisri-o ih a-osar kat pa-eehai. ||3]|
You have lost the jewel of human birth by forgetting God; when will you have such an opportunity again? ||3]||
gu3 fess 350 & af fae afs faa Sfo faoetd I 6524-12, andt, sas adits Hh
bharmat firat taylak kay kap ji-o gat bin rain bih-eehai.
You turn on the wheel of reincarnation, like an ox at the oil-press; the night of your life passes away without salvation.
TIS Tas TH OH fag HS US UsTel SUA (524-13, gat, sas alta Fh)
kahat kabeer raam naam bin moond Dhunay pachhut-eehai. ||4||1||
Says Kabeer, without the Name of the Lord, you shall pound your head, and regret and repent. ||4||1||
TAS We 3 il (524-14) goojree ghar 3. Goojaree, Third House:
uff ufa ce oete at Het I (524-14, aaet, sas ate Ft) mus mus rovai kabeer kee maa-ee. Kabeer's mother sobs, cries and bewails
& afea an rtefa swyaret Al (524-14, gat, sas ate a) ay baarik kaisay jeeveh raghuraa-ee. ||1]| - O Lord, how will my grandchildren live? ||1]|
ool Foo AF SHE 9 aah Il (524-14, ant, sas adits wh) tannaa bunnaa sabh taji-o hai kabeer. Kabeer has given up all his spinning and weaving,
ofa a 3TH fate ate Aste NU TIS Ih 524-15, gat, sas ate FH)
har kaa naam likh lee-o sareer. ||1|| rahaa-o. and written the Name of the Lord on his body. ||1]|Pause] |
Aa Bd Sa aI At il (524-15, gat, sas ate Ah jab lag taagaa baaha-o bayhee. As long as I pass the thread through the bobbin,
3a od faAd TH AST I 524-16, gAdt, sas ate Fh tab lag bisrai raam sanayhee. ||2]| I forget the Lord, my Beloved. ||2]|
Gat Hfs Het ATS AerT Il (524-16, Tat, sas ats Fh ochhee mat mayree jaat julaahaa. My intellect is lowly - I am a weaver by birth,
ofa a om ofa H rs SI (624-16, gat, sas ats Hh) har kaa naam lahi-o mai laahaa. ||3]| but I have earned the profit of the Name of the Lord. |[3]|
ads adte Hog Hat Het Ml (524-17, aadt, sas aeits Ft) kahat kabeer sunhu mayree maa-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O my mother
JH fea a ast Sq TUTE NII (524-17, Tat, sas aes A)
hamraa in kaa daataa ayk raghuraa-ee. ||4||2|| - the Lord alone is the Provider, for me and my children. ||4]|2||
UST Udy
Gast At ones Ata ue we A (525-1 goojree saree naamdayv jee kay paday ghar 1 Goojaree, Padas Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:
qe Afsars ure il (525-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
at oq efs 3 aea Barat I (525-2, gat, sas see A) jou raaj deh ta kavan badaa-ee. If You gave me an empire, then what glory would be in it for me?
a sty Harefa 3 foo wife art WA (525-2, gat, sas ante eh jou bheekh mangaaveh ta ki-aa ghat jaa-ee. ||1]| If You made me beg for charity, what would it take away from me? ||1||
3 dfs 3a Ho HS UE fegHag Il (6525-2, Ast, sas ane Fh)
too” har bhaj man mayray pad nirbaan.
Meditate and vibrate upon the Lord, O my mind, and you shall obtain the state of Nirvaanaa.
aofs o dfs 3a reo ATS AU TTS Il (525-3, aA, sas n= Hh) bahur na ho-ay tayraa aavan jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall not have to come and go in reincarnation any longer. ||1||Pause] |
AS 3 Guret san garet I (525-3, geet, sas anes Hh sabh tai upaa-ee bharam bhulaa-ee. You created all, and You lead them astray in doubt.
fan 3 tefa fSAfs gst QI (625-3, aA, sas SHE Fh) jis too’ dayveh tiseh bujhaa-ee. ||2|| They alone understand, unto whom You give understanding. ||2]|
Afsag fies 3 AOA AT I (525-4, aed, sas see Fh)
satgur milai ta sahsaa jaa-ee. Meeting the True Guru, doubt is dispelled.
fon 3S uA BAT Sets o MTT ISI (525-4, gH, sas aH A kis ha-o pooja-o doojaa nadar na aa-ee. ||3]| Who else should I worship? I can see no other. ||3]|
Sa urag at aE i (525-5, gat, sas anes Fh) aykai paathar keejai bhaa-o. One stone is lovingly decorated,
eH Uae Tdhat UTS ll (525-5, gAt, sas one Fh) doojai paathar Dharee-ai paa-o. while another stone is walked upon.
A 6g 28 3 Gg St SS Il 525-5, aad, sas one Hf) jay oh day-o ta oh bhee dayvaa. If one is a god, then the other must also be a god.
afs SHES TH ais at AST SIAN (525-5, TAS, sas ones Ft)
kahi naamday-o ham har kee sayvaa. ||4|[1]| Says Naam Dayv, I serve the Lord. ||4|[1]|
TAS WT Y Il (525-6) goojree ghar 1. Goojaree, First House:
HB 3 Be UT HS USHSE 8S st ret i (525-6, aact, sas sree FH)
malai na laachhai paar malo paramlee-o baitho ree aa-ee.
He does not have even a trace of impurity - He is beyond impurity. He is fragrantly scented - He has come to take His Seat in my mind.
nites fas o ufeG aes AE ct aet WA 625-6, gAdt, sas see Fh)
aavat kinai na paykhi-o kavnai jaanai ree baa-ee. ||1]| No one saw Him come - who can know Him, O Siblings of Destiny? ||1]|
ase ad fate gst THetor nrawe st set ual FHS il (525-7, gat, sas ones FH) ka-un kahai kin boojhee-ai rama-ee-aa aakul ree baa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Who can describe Him? Who can understand Him? The all-pervading Lord has no ancestors, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
faG oro Udbus da faafeG o vet I (525-8, anet, sas nee Fh ji-o aakaasai pankhee-alo khoj nirkhi-o na jaa-ee. As the path of a bird's flight across the sky cannot be seen,
fA AG HS Hes Ha US B AT MQ (525-8, gASt, sas ones Ah ji-o jal maajhai maachhlo maarag paykh-no na jaa-ee. ||2|| and the path of a fish through the water cannot be seen;||2||
fA ororr uss figar feAST Sfmt Il (525-9, gat, sas one Fh ji-o aakaasai gharhoo-alo marig tarisnaa bhari-aa. As the mirage leads one to mistake the sky for a pitcher filled with water
oH 3 Homi des fafs st6 Afoor Si (625-9, Ast, sas one FH)
naamay chay su-aamee beethlo jin teenai jari-aa. ||3]|2||
- so is God, the Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, who fits these three comparisons. 31121 |
Gadt At seen At a ue we = (525-10) goojree saree ravidaas jee kay paday ghar 3 Goojaree, Padas Of Ravi Daas Jee, Third House:
qe Afsars ure I (525-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
eU 3 ded Fad fetes il (525-11, aac, sas afeen A) dooDh ta bachhrai thanhu bitaari-o. The calf has contaminated the milk in the teats.
$8 ses Ae Hife faarfoS nail (525-11, Ast, sas sheen A) fool bhavar jal meen bigaari-o. ||1]| The bumble bee has contaminated the flower, and the fish the water. ||1||
Het fee uA ao S VIS Il (525-11, grt, sas seen Fh) maa-ee gobind poojaa kahaa lai charaava-o. O mother, where shall I find any offering for the Lord's worship?
Mies 5 SG GU 3 USS AU FIC Il (525-12, gust, sas seen FH) avar na fool anoop na paava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I cannot find any other flowers worthy of the incomparable Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Herad 83 I sfeniar i (525-12, gact, sas afew Hf) mailaagar bayr"ay hai bhu-i-angaa. The snakes encircle the sandalwood trees.
fay nifits safe fea Har QU (625-12, gadt, sas sfeen FH) bikh amrit baseh ik sangaa. ||2]| Poison and nectar dwell there together. ||2||
gu tu setaets aA i (525-13, great, sas afeen Fh) Dhoop deep na-eebaydeh baasaa. Even with incense, lamps, offerings of food and fragrant flowers,
aA UA aes Sot SA BI (525-13, TAS, sas Tee Ft) kaisay pooj karahi tayree daasaa. ||3]|| how are Your slaves to worship You? ||3]||
3g HO MUS UA VISE Il (525-14, Taet, sas seen Ft) tan man arpa-o pooj charaava-o. I dedicate and offer my body and mind to You.
aa usrte fadte we ieil (525-14, aadt, sas afer Hf) gur parsaad niranjan paava-o. ||4]| By Guru's Grace, I attain the immaculate Lord. ||4||
UAT niga ofa 3 Sot Il (525-14, gAst, sas afer Ft) poojaa archaa aahi na toree. I cannot worship You, nor offer You flowers.
afs sfeern ae afs Het NUN (525-15, aA, sas fee Fh)
kahi ravidaas kavan gat moree. ||5||1]| Says Ravi Daas, what shall my condition be hereafter? ||5||1]|
Grat At Fsvs ME a ue we A (25-16) goojree saree tarilochan jee-o kay paday ghar 1 Goojaree, Padas Of Trilochan Jee, First House:
qe Afsare YATE II (525-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nisg Hie foaHe odt ator wots Su Cert il (525-17, aAdt, sas feBus Hh)
antar mal nirmal nahee keenaa baahar bhaykh udaasee.
You have not cleansed the filth from within yourself, although outwardly, you wear the dress of a renunciate.
fase ane ufe gon 3 da ard sfeur Afsmrat al 625-17, ant, sas fxdus Hh)
hirdai kamal ghat barahm na cheen"aa kaahay bha-i-aa sani-aasee. ||1]|
In the heart-lotus of your self, you have not recognized God - why have you become a Sannyaasee? ||1||
UST ur
SIH FSt FA VST Il (526-1, at, sas feBus Hh bharmay bhoolee ray jai chandaa. Deluded by doubt, O Jai Chand,
Odt odt Samr usHSS UU TIS il (526-1, Trt, sas fyBes HH) nahee nahee cheen"i-aa parmaanandaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. you have not realized the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss. ||1]|Pause] |
wis whe ufear fits sof fiter Her uefa i (526-2, aact, sas fy8us Ah
ghar ghar khaa-i-aa pind baDhaa-i-aa khinthaa munda maa-i-aa.
You eat in each and every house, fattening your body; you wear the patched coat and the ear-rings of the beggar, for the sake of wealth.
oft HATE at SAH Beret as fas SZ 5 UfeMr NN (526-2, aAet, saz fxdes Fh bhoom masaan kee bhasam lagaa-ee gur bin tat na paa-i-aa. ||2| |
You apply the ashes of cremation to your body, but without a Guru, you have not found the essence of reality. ||2]|
afe mug 3 af sug 3 afe faseg uret Il (526-3, ant, sas frdua fh)
kaa-ay japahu ray kaa-ay taphu ray kaa-ay bilovahu paanee.
Why bother to chant your spells? Why bother to practice austerities? Why bother to churn water?
wu aan fafa Guret A finreg fogaret 131 (526-3, ant, sas fyBus FH) lakh cha-oraaseeh jini" upaa-ee so simrahu nirbaanee. ||3]| Meditate on the Lord of Nirvaanaa, who has created the 8.4 million species of beings.
[1311 afe aise ausion J nionfs ate feardt i (526-4, aact, sas fy8ue Ah
kaa-ay kamandal kaaprhee-aa ray athsath kaa-ay firaa-ee. Why bother to carry the water-pot, O saffron-robed Yogi? Why bother to visit the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage?
aefs fReuG Ho 3 uret as foo ag fa UT BNA (626-4, ant, sas frBes HH badat tarilochan sun ray paraanee kan bin gaahu ke paahee. ||4||1]|
Says Trilochan, listen, mortal: you have no corn - what are you trying to thresh? [41121]
TAT i (526-5) goojree. Goojaree:
nifs ats a went fans wit fest Hfs AHS I 626-5, At, sas fBEs Ht) ant kaal jo lachhmee simrai aisee chintaa meh jay marai. At the very last moment, one who thinks of wealth, and dies in such thoughts,
Hau rife af ef mise Al (526-6, aAct, sas fees Fh) sarap jon val val a-utarai. ||1]| shall be reincarnated over and over again, in the form of serpents. ||1]|
mot aret aifre on HAS Stas TIC Il (526-6, aac, sas fdas Fh
aree baa-ee gobid naam mat beesrai. rahaa-o.
O sister, do not forget the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||Pause| |
nifs ants a frst fans vit fest ufo A He I (526-7, gat, sas fyBEs HH)
ant kaal jo istaree simrai aisee chintaa meh jay marai.
At the very last moment, he who thinks of women, and dies in such thoughts, ane ffs ef ef mBss MQM (526-7, gat, sas feBus Hh)
baysvaa jon val val a-utarai. ||2]|
Shall be reincarnated over and over again as a prostitute. ||2||
nifs orfe At ofa fre wirt fos ufo AHS I 626-8, aAet, sas fyBus HA)
ant kaal jo larhikay simrai aisee chintaa meh jay marai. At the very last moment, one who thinks of his children, and dies in such thoughts,
Had als sf fs miss Sl (526-8, gat, sas frbes Hh) sookar jon val val a-utarai. ||3]| Shall be reincarnated over and over again as a pig. ||3]|
nifs ats a Hes fans ott fest ufo AH I (526-9, gadt, sas feds Hh) ant kaal jo mandar simrai aisee chintaa meh jay marai. At the very last moment, one who thinks of mansions, and dies in such thoughts,
U3 Afs ef sf mBss ei (526-9, gadt, sas fyBea A) parayt jon val val a-utarai. ||4|| Shall be reincarnated over and over again as a goblin. ||4||
nifs ofs osfees find nit fest fs A He II (526-10, gat, sas feBus Fh ant kaal naaraa-in simrai aisee chintaa meh jay marai. At the very last moment, one who thinks of the Lord, and dies in such thoughts,
aefs fseug 3 od HAST Usa J a fee SA NUNN (526-10, gaet, sas fyBus FA) badat tilochan tay nar muktaa peetambar vaa kay ridai basai. ||5||2|| says Trilochan, that man shall be liberated; the Lord shall abide in his heart. ||5]|2]|
Tat At Aes ME a uN wT 8 (526-12) goojree saree jaidayv jee-o kaa padaa ghar 4 Goojaree, Padas Of Jai Dayv Jee, Fourth House:
qe Afsare YATE II (526-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
usHife useful vfs urfe are gS I (526-13, aadt, sas ABE Hh)
parmaad purakhmanopima” sat aad bhaav rata”.
In the very beginning, was the Primal Lord, unrivalled, the Lover of Truth and other virtues.
usHegs udfafs ud Afefsfs Aga TS WU (526-13, gAdt, sas AVE HH) parmad-bhuta” parkarit para’ jadchint sarab gata™. ||1]|
He is absolutely wonderful, transcending creation; remembering Him, all are emancipated. ||1]|
ATH TH BH HST Il (526-14, gat, sas ABS sh kayval raam naam manorma”, Dwell only upon the beauteous Name of the Lord,
afe nif s3 Hfent i (526-14, gaet, sas AR Fh bad amrit tat ma-i-a™. the embodiment of ambrosial nectar and reality.
6 Udy AAHGSS AH Hate Hee Stent uA TIC il (526-14, Het, sas Ae HH
na danot jasmarnayn janam jaraaDh maran bha-i-a™. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Remembering Him in meditation, the fear of birth, old age and death will not trouble you. ||1]|Pause||
feefa mrfe usec wa AALS Alas fas i 626-15, gust, sas Fee Fh)
ichhas jamaad paraabh-ya" jas savast sukarit kirt-a™.
If you desire to escape the fear of the Messenger of Death, then praise the Lord joyfully, and do good deeds.
3e 3S aS Afni usH YASH MQM (526-16, gAdt, sas Fee FM)
bhav bhoot bhaav sam-bi-yam parma” parsanmida”. ||2| |
In the past, present and future, He is always the same; He is the embodiment of supreme bliss. ||2| |
Sate fenfe ug fad nfefafa wrage il (526-16, gat, sas Ae Hh)
lobhaad darisat par gariha’ jadibiDh aacharna”.
If you seek the path of good conduct, forsake greed, and do not look upon other men's property and women.
sf AAS eafas IHSt SH BAUS AGS MBI (526-17, TAS, sas AV= HH) taj sakal duhkarit durmatee bhaj chakarDhar sarna”. ||3]| Renounce all evil actions and evil inclinations, and hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord.
HI3I|
dfs sas for fosazer foe AHS ASAT Il (526-17, TAS, sas Fee Ah
har bhagat nij nihkayviaa rid karmanaa bachsaa. Worship the immaculate Lord, in thought, word and deed.
rare fet ware fa Bs fae SuAr gil (526-18, Ast, sas AV= HH)
jogayn ki‘ jagayn ki’ daadayn ki™ tapsaa. ||4}|
What is the good of practicing Yoga, giving feasts and charity, and practicing penance? ||4||
afde afeefs afl og Ho fafa ud ii (526-18, gadt, saz Ae Fh
gobind gobindayt jap nar sakal siDh pada”.
Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the Universe, O man; He is the source of all the spiritual powers of the Siddhas.
Hee nfES SA Age SF FSI AGS TS MUNI (526-19, gat, sas AVE Fh
jaidayv aa-i-o tas safuta’ bhav bhoot sarab gata™. ||5||1||
Jai Dayv has openly come to Him; He is the salvation of all, in the past, present and future. ||5||1]|
yar uId 9B ATS on aes usy fos fares nies Has mot AS aT YATE I (527-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TY Seaad HIS 8 We A Il (527-3) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 4 ghar 1. Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fourth Mehl, First House:
AeA HS FS Sas (SS Ba I (527-4, Fectarst 2 4)
sayvak jan banay thaakur liv laagay.
Those who become the humble servants of the Lord and Master, lovingly focus their minds on Him.
Af SHS AA AIS THs fSo He Sa ASH NU! TIS Il (527-4, Secturst He 4)
jo tumraa jas kahtay gurmat tin mukh bhaag sabhaagay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who chant Your Praises, through the Guru's Teachings, have great good fortune recorded upon their foreheads. ||1||Pause| |
ce Hfeor & due Sd fs TH OH fos Ba Il (527-5, Fecterdt us 4)
tootay maa-i-aa kay banDhan faahay har raam naam liv laagay.
The bonds and shackles of Maya are shattered, by lovingly focusing their minds on the Name of the Lord.
JHs He HfsG ae Hole gH faAN set ufee Brat NU (527-5, Fectarst He 4) hamraa man mohi-o gur mohan ham bisam bha-ee mukh laagay. ||1]| My mind is enticed by the Guru, the Enticer; beholding Him, I am wonder-struck. ||1]|
Raat dfs Het niftordt as fees farsur AEH Il (527-6, Beafarst He 4)
Saglee rain so-ee anDhi-aaree gur kichant kirpaa jaagay.
I slept through the entire dark night of my life, but through the tiniest bit of the Guru's Grace, I have been awakened.
Ws Soa & US Hes AMM xfs sn Afs weg S GAT MUU (527-6, Sectors He 4) jan naanak kay parabh sundar su-aamee mohi tum sar avar na laagay. ||2||1]| O Beautiful Lord God, Master of servant Nanak, there is none comparable to You. 2] 111
Seu Il (527-7) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
He Hes ATT fs fors Tet Il (527-7, Sectors ne 4) mayro sundar kahhu milai kit galee. Tell me - on what path will I find my Beauteous Lord?
dfs & AS Fs ST HS JH Ue ofa vot uA TIS ll (527-8, Featarst ue 4) har kay sant bataavhu maarag ham peechhai laag chalee. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Saints of the Lord, show me the Way, and I shall follow. ||1]|Pause] |
fi~n & sao AUS dhs fea ws got Fd sat Il 627-8, Fectaret Hs 4) pari-a kay bachan sukhaanay hee-arai ih chaal banee hai bhalee. I cherish in my heart the Words of my Beloved; this is the best way.
Bed Hod oasg set Ga Hefe afe sf fret Wil (627-9, Zectarst He 4)
laturee maDhuree thaakur bhaa-ee oh sundar har dhul milee. ||1]|
The bride may be hunch-backed and short, but if she is loved by her Lord Master, she becomes beautiful, and she melts in the Lord's embrace. ||1]|
ea fy@ medio As finn at FH are furs A sat I (527-10, Fectarst ue 4)
ayko pari-o sakhee-aa sabh pari-a kee jo bhaavai pir saa bhalee.
There is only the One Beloved - we are all soul-brides of our Husband Lord. She who is pleasing to her Husband Lord is good.
Soa ade four ad feos aia ae fos The Gat NNN (527-10, Feats He 4) naanak gareeb ki-aa karai bichaaraa har bhaavai tit raahi chalee. ||2||2]|| What can poor, helpless Nanak do? As it pleases the Lord, so does he walk. ||2||2| |
Sears Il (527-11) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
He He fe afe ofa afe ssh I (527-11, Sectors He 4) mayray man mukh har har har bolee-ai. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
Tents sf vee TSt ofa YH stat Fst uA TIS il (527-11, Secterst we 4)
gurmukh rang chaloolai raatee har paraym bheenee cholee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of the poppy. His shawl is saturated with the Lord's Love. ||1]|Pause| |
JG fea@ feast ures wes fan aafe afs FHM I (527-12, Sectors He 4)
ha-o fira-o divaanee aaval baaval tis kaaran har dholee-ai.
I wander around here and there, like a madman, bewildered, seeking out my Darling Lord.
aet HS Aa utsH fire gn fA at Tes TSM WAU (527-13, Sectors ve 4) ko-ee maylai mayraa pareetam pi-aaraa ham tis kee gul golee-ai. ||1]| I shall be the slave of the slave of whoever unites me with my Darling Beloved. ||1]|
Afsag use Hoveg must df nifgs ut SwpH I (527-13, Feature 4) satgur purakh manaavahu apunaa har amrit pee jholee-ai.
So align yourself with the Almighty True Guru; drink in and savor the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord.
qe unte qo soa ufeor afs wor So SH NQUSI (527-14, ectarst Hs 4)
gur parsaad jan naanak paa-i-aa har laaDhaa dayh tolee-ai. ||2||3]| By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak has obtained the wealth of the Lord within. ||2]||3]|
Szaarat Il (527-15) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
ma JH vat SAT ufg Te Il (527-15, Featarst He 4) ab ham chalee thaakur peh haar. Now, I have come, exhausted, to my Lord and Master.
Wa UH Aetle ys at oret grey ys ars HT UU TIS ll (527-15, Sectors ws 4)
jab ham saran parabhoo kee aa-ee raakh parabhoo bhaavai maar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Now that I have come seeking Your Sanctuary, God, please, either save me, or kill me. ||1]]Pause] |
UST ude
Bao at vaoet ror 3 sxsfe ats i 528-1, Feaforst He 4) lokan kee chaturaa-ee upmaa tay baisantar jaar. I have burnt in the fire the clever devices and praises of the world.
aet sor a are got ae IH 39 MIE FT SHS NA (528-1, Sectors He 4) ko-ee bhalaa kaha-o bhaavai buraa kaha-o ham tan dee-o hai dhaar. ||1]|
Some speak good of me, and some speak ill of me, but I have surrendered my body to You. ||1||
A wes Aafs oad US Suet fSH aa foro Of II (528-2, Secturst He 4)
Ca
jo aavat saran thaakur parabh tumree tis raakho kirpaa Dhaar. Whoever comes to Your Sanctuary, O God, Lord and Master, You save by Your Merciful Grace.
Ho Sa Ade SHS Se ME Tug GA Hats NGI (528-2, Fealardt He 4) jan naanak saran tumaaree har jee-o raakho laaj muraar. ||2||4| |
Servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord; O Lord, please, protect his honor! ||2]|4] |
Sears Il (528-3) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
dfs ge we JG fSH afoot Il (528-3, Sectardt ne 4) har gun gaavai ha-o tis balihaaree. I am a sacrifice to one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ofa ofa ret wa ae wane fan food oH HATS NU TIS I (528-4, Sectors He 4) daykh daykh jeevaa saaDh gur darsan jis hirdai naam muraaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I live by continuously beholding the Blessed Vision of the Holy Guru's Darshan; within His Mind is the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
3H ufeg ures use ys Hom 3H faS ate fog Fost Il (528-4, decturst He 4) tum pavitar paavan purakh parabh su-aamee ham ki-o kar milah joothaaree. You are pure and immaculate, O God, Almighty Lord and Master; how can I, the impure one, meet You?
oud wife dg fe Tg Is FT TH Aan afanrat UU (528-5, Seaterst ws 4) hamrai jee-ay hor mukh hor hot hai ham karamheen khoorhi-aaree. ||1]|
I have one thing in my mind, and another thing on my lips; I am such a poor, unfortunate liar! ||1] |
JHat HE OH dfs AyMmt fee nists eA| FASTA Il (528-6, Feataret ue 4)
hamree mudar naam har su-aamee rid antar dusat dustaaree.
I appear to chant the Lord's Name, but within my heart, I am the most wicked of the wicked.
fa@ sre (38 aug HuMit Ho sea Aafs SHS QUI (528-6, Seatarst ne 4) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho su-aamee jan naanak saran tum"aaree. ||2||5||
As it pleases You, save me, O Lord and Master; servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. 2115] |
eeaurdt tl (528-7)
dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
dfs & oH fear Hefs I oaet I (528-7, Becta He 4) har kay naam binaa sundar hai naktee. Without the Name of the Lord, the beautiful are just like the noseless ones.
fA@ Sar & ufs us AMS ofA oH ufeG F gat UU FHS Ml (528-8, Secterst ws 4) ji-o baysu-aa kay ghar poot jamat hai tis naam pari-o hai Dharkatee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Like the son, born into the house of a prostitute, his name is cursed. ||1]|Pause| |
fas & fase ofa afe Homi 3 fas gu FaeNt Il (528-8, Fecterst ws 4)
jin kai hirdai naahi har su-aamee tay bigarh roop bayrkatee.
Those who do not have the Name of their Lord and Master within their hearts, are the most wretched, deformed lepers.
faG fara ag wat we Gg ofe aang J FAST IAI (528-9, Sectaret Hs 4)
ji-o niguraa baho baataa jaanai oh har dargeh hai bharsatee. ||1]|
Like the person who has no Guru, they may know many things, but they are cursed in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
fro a@ efenre dur Aa AMMit fear ATG AST Ua Vat Il (528-10, Sectardt ne 4) jin ka-o da-i-aal ho-aa mayraa su-aamee tinaa saaDh janaa pag chaktee. Those, unto whom my Lord Master becomes Merciful, long for the feet of the Holy.
soa ufss ufes fife Hats ag Afsag ues Sat MQNEN BAT 4 (528-10, Fectarst He 4)
naanak patit pavit mil sangat gur satgur paachhai chhuktee. ||2||6|| chhakaa 1 O Nanak, the sinners become pure, joining the Company of the Holy; following the Guru, the True Guru, they are emancipated. ||2||6|| First Set of Six] |
Sz HIG UWE 2 (528-12) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara YATfE Il (528-12) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het Ta veel fas SSM I 528-13, Fectarst us 5) maa-ee gur charnee chit laa-ee-ai. O mother, I focus my consciousness on the Guru's feet.
us df faure ane usarA Ae Aer ofa fore 9 TIS il (528-13, Sectors ue 5) parabh ho-ay kirpaal kamal pargaasay sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. As God shows His Mercy, the lotus of my heart blossoms, and forever and ever, I meditate on the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
wists fa aofs Sa AS ufo Sa AHS I (528-14, Sectors He 5) antar ayko baahar ayko sabh meh ayk samaa-ee-ai. The One Lord is within, and the One Lord is outside; the One Lord is contained in all.
ufe neufe sfenr As set afe uss Fou fears WAU (528-14, Sectors we 5)
ghat avghat ravi-aa sabh thaa-ee har pooran barahm dikhaa-ee-ai. ||1]| |
Within the heart, beyond the heart, and in all places, God, the Perfect One, is seen to be permeating. ||1]|
Cxsfs asta Aza His aS Sa nig B AST UEM Il (528-15, ecterdt we 5)
ustat karahi sayvak mun kaytay tayraa ant na kathoo paa-ee-ai.
So many of Your servants and silent sages sing Your Praises, but no one has found Your limits.
Hues wu SHO Homi Ho soa Ae af ASA NINA (528-15, Secfardt He 5) sukh-daatay dukh bhanjan su-aamee jan naanak sad bal jaa-ee-ai. ||2||1||
O Giver of peace, Destroyer of pain, Lord and Master - servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||1]|
Sears Il (528-16) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
Het JSgTS A TEM Il (528-16, Feafarst 13 5) maa-ee honhaar so ho-ee-di. O mother, whatever is to be, shall be.
ots sfoS guar us must ad org ao debt A TIS i (528-17, Seataret us 5) raach rahi-o rachnaa parabh apnee kahaa laabh kahaa kho-ee-ai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. God pervades His pervading creation; one gains, while another loses. ||1]|]|Pause| |
aI sale wre fat Aa Aa TAS aa SEMA I (528-17, Seatarst ws 5)
kah fooleh aanand bikhai sog kab hasno kab ro-ee-ai.
Sometimes he blossoms in bliss, while at other times, he suffers in mourning. Sometimes he laughs, and sometimes he weeps.
Ta HS se nifsnrat aa AY Afar Get WA (528-18, Secterdt we 5)
kabhoo mail bharay abhimaanee kab saaDhoo sang Dho-ee-ai. ||1]|
Sometimes he is filled with the filth of ego, while at other times, he washes it off in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
af 3 He Ys a abort SAS BS MBEMH Il (528-18, Seats we 5) ko-ay na maytai parabh kaa kee-aa doosar naahee alo-ee-ai. No one can erase the actions of God; I cannot see any other like Him.
ag soa fA as afsodt fro urfe fe Aeba NIN (528-19, Sectors He 5) kaho naanak tis gur balihaaree jih parsaad sukh so-ee-ai. ||2||2|| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru; by His Grace, I sleep in peace. ||2||2]|
Ua yore
Sears Il (529-1) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
Het HSS AV SF Sas Il (529-1, Seatac H: 5) maa-ee sunat soch bhai darat. O mother, I hear of death, and think of it, and I am filled with fear.
He 39 3nC mifsrar Hale Aum at uss NA TIS ll (529-1, Seatarst ve 5)
mayr tayr taja-o abhimaanaa saran su-aamee kee parat. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Renouncing 'mine and yours' and egotism, I have sought the Sanctuary of the Lord and Master. ||1]|Pause] |
A A od Het 3m HOS ats o AT AH ATS Il (529-2, Feature nz 5) jo jo kahai so-ee bhal maan-o naahi na kaa bol karat. Whatever He says, I accept that as good. I do not say "No" to what He says.
fou 3 fans de ve 3 fangs ret JO Has NAM (529-2, Fectarst He 5) nimakh na bisara-o hee-ay moray tay bisrat jaa-ee ha-o marat. ||1|| Let me not forget Him, even for an instant; forgetting Him, I die. ||1]|
Huet ude ys ads Het sgs fewrou AGS Il (529-3, Fecforst ne 5) sukh-daa-ee pooran parabh kartaa mayree bahut i-aanap jarat. The Giver of peace, God, the Perfect Creator, endures my great ignorance.
fosats agfu aadte asa JG vise Ju AMM SIT NUSI (529-3, Fecturet He 5) nirgun karoop kulheen naanak ha-o anad roop su-aamee bharat. ||2||3]|
I am worthless, ugly and of low birth, O Nanak, but my Husband Lord is the embodiment of bliss. ||2]|3]|
Sears Il (529-4) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
Ho dfs ates afs Ae” Il (529-4, ectardt ue 5) man har keerat kar sadahoo’. O my mind, chant forever the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
Tes Hos AUS Surg AIS nasat AST WU TIS Il (529-5, Feats ws 5)
gaavat sunat japat uDhaarai baran abranaa sabhahoo". ||1|| rahaa-o.
By singing, hearing and meditating on Him, all, whether of high or low status, are saved. ||1||Pause| |
md 3 CufaS sot ANTES fea fafa wat Sag Il (529-5, tectorst nH: 5) jah tay upji-o tahee samaa-i-o ih biDh jaanee tabahoo". He is absorbed into the One from which he originated, when he understands the Way.
aw Aw feo edt dt sg 5 UTES aT UA (529-6, Sects He 5) jahaa jahaa ih dayhee Dhaaree rahan na paa-i-o kabahoo". ||1|| Wherever this body was fashioned, it was not allowed to remain there. ||1]|
AY omfee 3 SoH faa faurs Je YS AAT Il (529-6, deatarst we 5) sukh aa-i-o bhai bharam binaasay kirpaal hoo-ay parabh jabhoo. Peace comes, and fear and doubt are dispelled, when God becomes Merciful.
AI HSA HT UT HaTe ATHfa Sh SAT iI (529-7, Featardt ue 5)
kaho naanak mayray pooray manorath saaDhsang taj labahoo™. ||2]|4]|
Says Nanak, my hopes have been fulfilled, renouncing my greed in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||4]|
Sead Il (529-8) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
Ho faS nud ys SSC Il (529-8, Sectardt ws 5) man ji-o apunay parabh bhaava-o. O my mind, act as it pleases God.
tug alg ote uifs oa df& adty sere@ All TIS Il (529-8, Feataret Hs 5)
neechahu neech neech at naan"aa ho-ay gareeb bulaava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Become the lowest of the low, the very least of the tiny, and speak in utmost humility. ||1]|Pause] |
nifsa mised Hfear & fase st fae utfS wes Il (529-9, Seatardt ue 5) anik adambar maa-i-aa kay birthay taa si-o pareet ghataava-o. The many ostentatious shows of Maya are useless; I withhold my love from these.
fa@ wus Aymit wy HS St Hf AST UTS NAN (529-9, Secfardt He 5) ji-o apuno su-aamee sukh maanai taa meh sobhaa paava-o. ||1]|| As something pleases my Lord and Master, in that I find my glory. ||1]|
SHS SH IE WHS at HS Al SIG AHS Il (529-10, Seaturdt uz 5)
daasan daas rayn daasan kee jan kee tahal kamaava-o.
I am the slave of His slaves; becoming the dust of the feet of his slaves, I serve His humble servants.
Hoa AY afsnret Sad HES HUT FHSS NQUUI (629-11, Fecturst He 5) sarab sookh badi-aa-ee naanak jeeva-o mukhahu bulaava-o. ||2||5||
I obtain all peace and greatness, O Nanak, living to chant His Name with my mouth. 21151]
eeaurdt il (529-11)
dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
us At 36 une gH Sta I (529-11, Fectarst He 5) parabh jee ta-o parsaad bharam daari-o. Dear God, by Your Grace, my doubts have been dispelled.
suet faut 3 As a wre He Hfo fed dtefes wan TIC it 529-12, Sectarst ns 5) tumree kirpaa tay sabh ko apnaa man meh ihai beechaari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Your Mercy, all are mine; I reflect upon this in my mind. ||1]||Pause] |
afe uaa fee Sot Aer waAfe ey SstaS i (529-12, Sectors we 5)
kot paraaDh mitay tayree sayvaa darsan dookh utaari-o.
Millions of sins are erased, by serving You; the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan drives away sorrow.
oy Aus Ho AY Utes fest ga fess wall (529-13, Fectorst He 5)
naam japat mahaa sukh paa-i-o chintaa rog bidaari-o. ||1]||
Chanting Your Name, I have obtained supreme peace, and my anxieties and diseases have been cast out. ||1]|
aH ty BF 3S fee AG Afar fartaS i (529-13, secterst ws 5)
kaam kroDh lobh jhooth nindaa saaDhoo sang bisaari-o.
Sexual desire, anger, greed, falsehood and slander are forgotten, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Hear ga are frou fofa oon vrfu Bars NEI (529-14, Feefarst He 5)
maa-i-aa banDh kaatay kirpaa niDh naanak aap uDhaari-o. ||2||6|| The ocean of mercy has cut away the bonds of Maya; O Nanak, He has saved me. [12] 16] |
Sears Il (529-15) dayvganDhaaree. Dayv-Gandhaaree:
Ho Hares fAwireu gt il (529-15, Featurst us 5) man sagal si-aanap rahee. All the cleverness of my mind is gone.
AIS ATSGIS HM} soa Ge aot wal TIS il (529-15, Featarst nz 5)
karan karaavanhaar su-aamee naanak ot gahee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord and Master is the Doer, the Cause of causes; Nanak holds tight to His Support. ||1]||Pause| |
wiry Hfe ue Aaeret fea ufs ATG at II (529-16, Feast He 5)
aap mayt pa-ay sarnaa-ee ih mat saaDhoo kahee.
Erasing my self-conceit, I have entered His Sanctuary; these are the Teachings spoken by the Holy Guru.
ys at orfamr ufs AY ufear say nda Bt UA (529-16, Sectarst ws 5) parabh kee aagi-aa maan sukh paa-i-aa bharam aDhayraa lahee. ||1|| Surrendering to the Will of God, I attain peace, and the darkness of doubt is dispelled.
[2
WS yste AMM us Hd AafE SH vest I (529-17, Sectardt us 5) jaan parbeen su-aamee parabh mayray saran tumaaree ahee. I know that You are all-wise, O God, my Lord and Master; I seek Your Sanctuary.
fas ufo af Caruso aeafs StH B Udt NQUDI (529-17, Featarst He 5)
khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaray kudrat keem na pahee. ||2||7||
In an instant, You establish and disestablish; the value of Your Almighty Creative Power cannot be estimated. ||2||7]|
Seaurdt HIG U Il (529-18)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs yo YS HATS Il (529-18, Seafarst we 5) har paraan parabhoo sukh-daatay. The Lord God is my praanaa, my breath of life; He is the Giver of peace.
Ts YAS AT AS UU TIS Il (529-19, Seaturst us 5) gur parsaad kaahoo jaatay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, only a few know Him. ||1]||Pause] |
HZ SHS SHe UlsH fo AB ao US I (529-19, Sectarst Hs 5) sant tumaaray tumray pareetam tin ka-o kaal na khaatay. Your Saints are Your Beloveds; death does not consume them.
dfat SHS BS SET TH OH AA HS INA (529-19, Sectors He 5)
rang tumaarai laal bha-ay hai raam naam ras maatay. ||1]|
They are dyed in the deep crimson color of Your Love, and they are intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
UST UZBO
Ho faofas afe tu gar ys fenfe sadt TS Il (530-1, Secturdt ue 5)
mahaa kilbikh kot dokh rogaa parabh darisat tuhaaree haatay.
The greatest sins, and millions of pains and diseases are destroyed by Your Gracious Glance, O God.
Hes wa afs afs ofs rfenr aaa TI VIS UTS MICH (530-1, Seafardt He 5) sovat jaag har har har gaa-i-aa naanak gur charan paraatay. ||2||8]||
While sleeping and waking, Nanak sings the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har; he falls at the Guru's feet. ||2]|8]|
Seaurdt U il (530-2) dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Aus as as Ufa Seat il (530-2, ecturdt us 5) SO parabh jat kat paykhi-o nainee. I have seen that God with my eyes everywhere.
Huet Ahais & esr nifys ar at Sat wan TIS i 30-3, Seatarst us 5) sukh-daa-ee jee-an ko daataa amrit jaa kee bainee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Giver of peace, the Giver of souls, His Speech is Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause] |
wifes nite Ast afenr Aha ee ad Set Il (530-3, Secfardt ne 5) agi-aan aDhayraa santee kaati-aa jee-a daan gur dainee. The Saints dispel the darkness of ignorance; the Guru is the Giver of the gift of life.
afa fasur afs aS nus Aes Alse Jat NU (530-4, Sectors He 5)
kar kirpaa kar leeno apunaa jaltay seetal honee. ||1||
Granting His Grace, the Lord has made me His own; I was on fire, but now I am cooled. ||1||
aay UsH fas Cufa o wre og Curt fase aget Il (530-4, Feciardt ns 5)
karam Dharam kichh upaj na aa-i-o nah upjee nirmal karnee.
The karma of good deeds, and the Dharma of righteous faith, have not been produced in me, in the least; nor has pure conduct welled up in me.
ats fimrou HAN SSA Ba TT at Boat NUNC (530-5, eaturst ve 5)
chhaad si-aanap sanjam naanak laago gur kee charnee. ||2||9|| Renouncing cleverness and self-mortification, O Nanak, I fall at the Guru's feet. 21/911
Vegas U il (530-6)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
os TH OH AU BI Il (530-6, Fectarst He 5) har raam naam jap laahaa. Chant the Lord's Name, and earn the profit.
as wefs AY AJA MST ATS AH A SIT UNA TITS Il (530-6, Seatarst ve 5)
gat paavahi sukh sahj anandaa kaatay jam kay faahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You shall attain salvation, peace, poise and bliss, and the noose of Death shall be cut away. ||1]|Pause| |
dns dns Ufa stots ofs As Aor fs mT I (530-7, Featarst He 5)
khojat khojat khoj beechaari-o har sant janaa peh aahaa.
Searching, searching, searching and reflecting, I have found that the Lord's Name is with the Saints.
fsqr usufs eg foorar faa & aot fears Il (530-7, Fectarst ne 5) tin"aa paraapat ayhu niDhaanaa jin" kai karam likhaahaa. ||1]| They alone obtain this treasure, who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1]|
A asst A ufses AEt Us ATT Il (530-8, tectorst He 5) say badbhaagee say pativantay say-ee pooray saahaa. They are very fortunate and honorable; they are the perfect bankers.
Hed Aus Agu 3 ssa faa ate afs aH feAra NNIOM (530-8, Fecturct He 5) sundar sugharh saroop tay naanak jin" har har naam visaahaa. ||2]|10]|
They are beautiful, so very wise and handsome; O Nanak, purchase the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||10||
Vezaurdt U il (530-9)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Ad Matta nr|ra Il (530-9, Featurst He 5) man kah ahakaar afaaraa. O mind, why are you so puffed up with egotism?
esau wufes mures stsfe FCA A erat A TIS Il (530-10, Secfarst we 5) durganDh apvitar apaavan bheetar jo deesai so chhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever is seen in this foul, impure and filthy world, is only ashes. ||1]|Pause] |
fate ater fsa frufe usrat Ae ure fafe ars Il (530-10, Sectardt Hs 5)
jin kee-aa tis simar paraanee jee-o paraan jin Dhaaraa.
Remember the One who created you, O mortal; He is the Support of your soul, and the breath of life.
farts faorta med suetefa His AoHfs Ha STS WAI (530-11, Seatarst He 5)
tiseh ti-aag avar laptaavahi mar janmeh mugaDh gavaaraa. ||1]||
One who forsakes Him, and attaches himself to another, dies to be reborn; he is such an ignorant fool! ||1]|
nig aa fia Hfs diet ys Tug USI Il (530-11, Featurst ue 5)
anDh gung pingul mat heenaa parabh raakho raakhanhaaraa.
I am blind, mute, crippled and totally lacking in understanding; O God, Preserver of all, please preserve me!
ade ATeSIg AHse fant soa As fasrar NINA (530-12, Feafarst 3 5)
karan karaavanhaar samrathaa ki-aa naanak jant bichaaraa. ||2||11]| The Creator, the Cause of causes is all-powerful; O Nanak, how helpless are His beings! ||2||11]|
eeaurdt U il (530-13)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
A Ys 3d J 3 Sg Il (530-13, Sectors we 5)
so parabh nayrai hoo tay nayrai. God is the nearest of the near.
fife fomrfe fe ao afie feo df AS ASs NU TIS Il (5630-13, Featurst He 5) simar Dhi-aa-ay gaa-ay gun gobind din rain saajh savayrai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remember Him, meditate on Him, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, day and night, evening and morning. ||1||Pause| |
Gug 2 vas AY Afar ofe ofs BH AUS I (530-14, Sectardt we 5)
uDhar dayh dulabh saaDhoo sang har har naam japayrai.
Redeem your body in the invaluable Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
udt 5 HIS 6 UAT fasag are fests fas TSF NU (530-14, Seatarst He 5)
gharee na muhat na chasaa bilambahu kaal niteh nit hayrai. ||1]|
Do not delay for an instant, even for a moment. Death is keeping you constantly in his vision. ||1]]
nig fae 3 ares aes far odt wife 3g i (530-15, ecturst Hs 5)
anDh bilaa tay kaadhahu kartay ki-aa naahee ghar tayrai.
Lift me up out of the dark dungeon, O Creator Lord; what is there which is not in Your home?
oH nurg St BSA A nse AY WSF MUA (530-16, ectardt we 5)
naam aDhaar deejai naanak ka-o aanad sookh ghanayrai. ||2||12]|
Bless Nanak with the Support of Your Name, that he may find great happiness and peace. ||2||12]|
Za 2 Il (530-16) chhakay 2. Second Set of Six] |
Veaurdt U il (530-16)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ho ad ffs on mafas i (530-16, tecfarst Hs 5) man gur mil naam araaDhi-o. O mind, meet with the Guru, and worship the Naam in adoration.
AY Add wtoe Haws dA lea oT He afaS Ul TIS Il (530-17, Secterdt we 5) sookh sahj aanand mangal ras jeevan kaa mool baaDhi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You shall obtain peace, poise, bliss, joy and pleasure, and lay the foundation of eternal life. ||1]|Pause||
afe fasur mua am ate are afer afar Il (530-18, tecfardt He 5)
kar kirpaa apunaa daas keeno kaatay maa-i-aa faaDhi-o.
Showing His Mercy, the Lord has made me His slave, and shattered the bonds of Maya.
a@ safs afte ae afse AN a Hea AOS NU (530-18, Sectors He 5)
bhaa-o bhagat gaa-ay gun gobid jam kaa maarag saaDhi-o. ||1]||
Through loving devotion, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, I have escaped the Path of Death. ||1]|
sfe6 nog fufeS Hee unis uese wfa 1) (530-19, eataret Hs 5) bha-i-o anoograhu miti-o morchaa amol padaarath laaDhi-o. When he became Merciful, the rust was removed, and I found the priceless treasure.
afesd Bad GY FI HT StaT na mrarfaS NINA (530-19, Featarst He 5) balihaarai naanak lakh bayraa mayray thaakur agam agaaDhi-o. ||2||13]|
O Nanak, I am a Sacrifice, a hundred thousand times, to my unapproachable, unfathomable Lord and Master. ||2||13]|
UST usyq
eeardt U Il (531-1)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Het FH Us a TS We || Aes orfenr Hes eB 3 a UTaAaH fos we NU TIC It (531-1, Veaurdt He 5)
maa-ee jo parabh kay gun gaavai. safal aa-i-aa jeevan fal taa ko paarbarahm liv laavai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O mother, how fruitful is the birth of one who sings the Glories of God, and enshrines love for the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|Pause] |
Heg AWS Ag A as A AY Ag US Il (531-2, Fecterdt ws 5)
sundar sugharh soor so baytaa jo saaDhoo sang paavai.
Beautiful, wise, brave and divine is one who obtains the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
oH Burg ad dfs dha safe o Ht OS NAN (531-3, Seafardt He 5)
naam uchaar karay har rasnaa bahurh na jonee Dhaavai. ||1]|
He chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with his tongue, and does not have to wander in reincarnation again. ||1||
UIs FI sent Hs 30 Hla wre o feAN!t wrS I (531-3, Fectarst we 5) pooran barahm ravi-aa man tan meh aan na daristee aavai. The Perfect Lord God pervades his mind and body; he does not look upon any other.
dd ST Sdt Ses Ao Ala aoa fA ofS SS NNIH (531-4, Seatarst He 5)
narak rog nahee hovat jan sang naanak jis larh laavai. ||2]|14]|
Hell and disease do not afflict one who joins the Company of the Lord's humble servants, O Nanak; the Lord attaches him to the hem of His robe. ||2||14||
Seaurdt U il (531-5) dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
JUS AUS dt Caste ii (531-5, Secfarct nz 5) chanchal supnai hee urjhaa-i-o. His fickle mind is entangled in a dream.
fest 5 38 cag voor faas sfeS Af HES uA TIS il (531-5, Sectors ws 5)
itnee na boojhai kabhoo chalnaa bikal bha-i-o sang maa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He does not even understand this much, that someday he shall have to depart; he has gone crazy with Maya. ||1]||Pause] |
QAM da Aa sia afer fafimr Sa CurfEE ih 531-6, Sectarst v2 5)
kusam rang sang ras rachi-aa bikhi-aa ayk upaa-i-o.
He is engrossed in the delight of the flower's color; he strives only to indulge in corruption.
8s He Hfe AY ofe HS Sf sor CfS afeS Wall (531-6, Featurst w: 5) lobh sunai man sukh kar maanai bayg tahaa uth Dhaa-i-o. ||1|| Hearing about greed, he feels happy in his mind, and he runs after it. ||1]|
fess fess ag3 AY UTEG As enrs mfEE I (531-7, Fecferdt ne 5)
firat firat bahut saram paa-i-o sant du-aarai aa-i-o.
Wandering and roaming all around, I have endured great pain, but now, I have come to the door of the Saint.
ast faut ursgqath Amit area Bt ANTES QUAIL (531-7, Fectarst He 5)
karee kirpaa paarbarahm su-aamee naanak lee-o samaa-i-o. ||2||15]| Granting His Grace, the Supreme Lord Master has blended Nanak with Himself. [12] ]45]|
Sead U Il (531-8) dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ada Aa TT BIS" Il (531-8, Seaiurst uz 5) sarab sukhaa gur charnaa. All peace is found in the Guru's feet.
afsHs stds Hofs Hues feo wrAs Hfs Saat AU TITS Ml (531-9, Seatarst He 5)
kalimal daaran maneh saaDhaaran ih aasar mohi tarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. They drive away my sins and purify my mind; their Support carries me across. ||1]|Pause| |
UAT niga Het dea fed cas Hfs ASST Il (531-9, ects us 5) poojaa archaa sayvaa bandan ihai tahal mohi karnaa. This is the labor which I perform: worship, flower-offerings, service and devotion.
faa He de user safe o Ads UTS IA (531-10, Sedturdt Hz 5) bigsai man hovai pargaasaa bahur na garbhai parnaa. ||1|| My mind blossoms forth and is enlightened, and I am not cast into the womb again.
[21 |
Hes Hols usAS Hse at fed fomrar aaa I (531-10, Fectarst ws 5) safal moorat parsa-o santan kee ihai Dhi-aanaa Dharnaa. I behold the fruitful vision of the Saint; this is the meditation I have taken.
safes faus sag soa AS ufsG AG at AGS NEN (531-11, Feafarst He 5) bha-i-o kirpaal thaakur naanak ka-o pari-o saaDh kee sarnaa. ||2||16]|
The Lord Master has become Merciful to Nanak, and he has entered the Sanctuary of the Holy. ||2]|16] |
Sezaurdt HIG U Il (531-12)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
mud ofa ufo feast adh il (531-12, eectarst He 5) apunay har peh bintee kahee-ai. Offer your prayer to your Lord.
ate uese noe Hae feta wa Aon fafa wort a TIS i (531-12, eaters we 5) chaar padaarath anad mangal niDh sookh sahj siDh lahee-ai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You shall obtain the four blessings, and the treasures of bliss, pleasure, peace, poise and the spiritual powers of the Siddhas. ||1]||Pause] |
He faurfa ofa saot oa SA ys vise aA Il (531-13, Sectarst ne 5)
maan ti-aag har charnee laaga-o tis parabh anchal gahee-ai.
Renounce your self-conceit, and grasp hold of the Guru's feet; hold tight to the hem of God's robe.
Wig 3 Od uae Aad 3 Adfe AM at mrt All (531-13, Sectors He 5)
aa'ch na laagai agan saagar tay saran su-aamee kee ahee-ai. ||1]|
The heat of the ocean of fire does not affect one who longs for the Lord and Master's Sanctuary. ||1]|
afe usa no mfasue safe safe ys Ad Il (531-14, Secfarst He 5)
kot paraaDh mahaa akrit-ghan bahur bahur parabh sahee-ai.
Again and again, God puts up with the millions of sins of the supremely ungrateful ones.
ATS H UIs USHAT SHA (SA ATSI MA NWI (531-15, Fectarst ws 5) karunaa mai pooran parmaysur naanak tis saranhee-ai. ||2||17]|
The embodiment of mercy, the Perfect Transcendent Lord - Nanak longs for His Sanctuary. ||2||17]]|
Veaurdt U il (531-15)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Td A BIS fot USSAT | (531-16, Fectarst Hz 5) gur kay charan ridai parvaysaa. Place the Guru's feet within your heart,
da Aa Als wu feo Sse Aas ASAT AU TIS Il (531-16, Fectarct ws 5) rog sog sabh dookh binaasay utray sagal kalaysaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
and all illness, sorrow and pain shall be dispelled; all suffering shall come to an end. ||1]|Pause| |
HOH HoH & faofsa onfs afe HAS fERaTe Il (531-16, Zeafarst He 5)
janam janam kay kilbikh naaseh kot majan isnaanaa.
The sins of countless incarnations are erased, as if one has taken purifying baths at millions of sacred shrines.
oy fourg Wes ae dfse wa Aofa fomrar ail (531-17, Fectardt He 5)
naam niDhaan gaavat gun gobind laago sahj Dhi-aanaa. ||1]||
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and centering one's mind in meditation on Him.
[21
afa fasur mua em até sue Sfe fea Il (531-18, Secfardt v2 5)
kar kirpaa apunaa daas keeno banDhan tor niraaray.
Showing His Mercy, the Lord has made me His slave; breaking my bonds, He has saved me.
afu afu on Ate Sct aret Soa STA afSIS NQNACH (531-18, Feafarst He 5)
jap jap naam jeevaa tayree banee naanak daas balihaaray. ||2||18]| I live by chanting and meditating on the Naam, and the Bani of Your Word; slave Nanak is a sacrifice to You. ||2||18]|
Za 3 Il (531-19) chhakay 3. Third Set of Six]|
Sze HIG U I (531-19) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Het ys & BIG FSIS | (531-19, Seatarst us 5)
maa-ee parabh kay charan nihaara-o. O mother, I long to see the Feet of God.
UST UB2
Add Mod AH HS Ho 3 Aa 5 TIE NU! TIS Il (532-1, Sectors ne 5)
karahu anoograhu su-aamee mayray man tay kabahu na daara-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Be Merciful to me, O my Lord and Master, that I might never forsake them from my mind. ||1||Pause] |
Ag ofs oret yft HASha aH au fay ASE Il (532-1, Secterdt we 5)
saaDhoo Dhoor laa-ee mukh mastak kaam kroDh bikh jaara-o.
Applying the dust of the feet of the Holy to my face and forehead, I burn away the poison of sexual desire and anger.
AS 3 Sd MSH ae HOS Ho Hig fg AY USE IA (532-2, Sectardt He 5) sabh tay neech aatam kar maan-o man meh ih sukh Dhaara-o. ||1|| I judge myself to be the lowest of all; in this way, I instill peace within my mind. ||1||
To Wed SAT MifISAt AGH Aas STIS | (532-3, Featardt vs 5)
gun gaavah thaakur abhinaasee kalmal saglay jhaara-o.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Imperishable Lord and Master, and I shake off all my sins.
oH fours area eS ure afe ofe Cfs as NQNIEN (532-3, Feciuret He 5) naam niDhaan naanak daan paava-o kanth laa-ay ur Dhaara-o. ||2||19]|
I have found the gift of the treasure of the Naam, O Nanak; I hug it close, and enshrine it in my heart. ||2]]19]|
Sz HIG U Il (532-4) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
ys MG UNG SIA SHS | (532-4, Sectardt ws 5) parabh jee-o paykha-o daras tumaaraa. Dear God, I long to behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Hed foure og fe sat aba ye S fume a TIC lt 532-4, Seatardt us 5)
sundar Dhi-aan Dhaar din rainee jee-a paraan tay pi-aaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cherish this beautiful meditation day and night; You are dearer to me than my soul, dearer than life itself. ||1]||Pause||
AAG ae uss mifesa fafyfs sa aherst i (532-5, Fectorst ne 5)
saastar bayd puraan avilokay simrit tat beechaaraa.
I have studied and contemplated the essence of the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Puraanas.
dat area yous ude SeHw BuTSTS Al (532-6, Featurst uz 5)
deenaa naath paraanpat pooran bhavjal uDhranhaaraa. ||1||
Protector of the meek, Lord of the breath of life, O Perfect One, carry us across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|
uife Fate sas Hoe AeA St ot fit wrest | (532-6, Sectaret ne 5)
aad jugaad bhagat jan sayvak taa kee bikhai aDhaaraa.
Since the very beginning, and throughout the ages, the humble devotees have been Your servants; in the midst of the world of corruption, You are their Support.
fe Ae at ofs we fs ate USHA VISIT MINION (532-7, Featarst ws 5) tin jan kee Dhoor baachhai nit naanak parmaysar dayvanhaaraa. ||2||20]||
Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of such humble beings; the Transcendent Lord is the Giver of all. |]2]|20] |
Vezaurdt HIG U Il (532-8)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
3ST Ae IH aAfEf=e HST Il (532-8, Seafardt He 5) tayraa jan raam rasaa-in maataa. Your humble servant, O Lord, is intoxicated with Your sublime essence.
yn oF fofa a as Curt ef 5 AST AST NU TIS I (532-8, Seatarst ws 5)
paraym rasaa niDh jaa ka-o upjee chhod na kathoo jaataa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who obtains the treasure of the Nectar of Your Love, does not renounce it to go somewhere else. ||1]||Pause| |
aos dfs ofe Aes afe afe afs GA SAS WS Il (532-9, Seatac He 5)
baithat har har sovat har har har ras bhojan khaataa.
While sitting, he repeats the Lord's Name, Har, Har; while sleeping, he repeats the Lord's Name, Har, Har; he eats the Nectar of the Lord's Name as his food.
MOIS Stee HAS ats ATT Gast SS UU (532-9, Seatarst we 5)
athsath tirath majan keeno saaDhoo Dhooree naataa. ||1]|
Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy is equal to taking cleansing baths at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1]|
He® WOH dfs Ao a Cufsmr fafs até ACs feast Il (532-10, Seafurst He 5) safal janam har jan kaa upji-aa jin keeno sa-ut biDhaataa. How fruitful is the birth of the Lord's humble servant; the Creator is his Father.
HS AHI & Sus SSX UIS FIN USS WANA (532-11, Featardt wz 5)
Sagal samooh lai uDhray naanak pooran barahm pachhaataa. ||2||21]||
O Nanak, one who recognizes the Perfect Lord God, takes all with him, and saves everyone. ||2||21]|
Vezaurdt HIG U Il (532-11)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Het aa fas famre o ure I (532-11, Featarst ne 5) maa-ee gur bin gi-aan na paa-ee-ai. O mother, without the Guru, spiritual wisdom is not obtained.
uifsa yors feas framers fess odt Great 19 TIE il (532-12, Fecfarst uz 5)
anik parkaar firat billaatay milat nahee gosaa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They wander around, weeping and crying out in various ways, but the Lord of the World does not meet them. ||1]||Pause| |
Ho da Aa 36 sfas ag Fat sane Il (532-13, Secfaret ne 5)
moh rog sog tan baaDhi-o baho jonee bharmaa-ee-ai.
The body is tied up with emotional attachment, disease and sorrow, and so it is lured into countless reincarnations.
feas 6 ure fag AsHafs far ora we ret WAU (532-13, Bectardt He 5)
tikan na paavai bin satsangat kis aagai jaa-ay roo-aa-ee-ai. ||1||
He finds no place of rest without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; to whom should he go and cry? ||1||
ad nod”y Homi Hat AG wae fas GEM Il (532-14, Sectarst ne 5)
karai anoograhu su-aamee mayraa saaDh charan chit laa-ee-ai. When my Lord and Master shows His Mercy, we lovingly focus our consciousness on the feet of the Holy.
Hae ug ae fuse stafs aoa fe cath AHS NQNQM (532-15, Feataret He 5) sankat ghor katay khin bheetar naanak har daras samaa-ee-ai. ||2||22| |
The most horrible agonies are dispelled in an instant, O Nanak, and we merge in the Blessed Vision of the Lord. ||2||22||
Seaurdt HIG U Il (532-15)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
oad Je nef eens Il (532-16, Fectaret uz 5) thaakur ho-ay aap da-i-aal. The Lord and Master Himself has become Merciful.
set afore nise gu det d Cad aes TVS i JTS I (532-16, Sectors ws 5)
bha-ee kali-aan anand roop ho-ee hai ubray baal gupaal. rahaa-o.
I have been emancipated, and I have become the embodiment of bliss; I am the Lord's child - He has saved me. ||Pause| |
efe ag afs adt 86st uegqan vfs fomrfeor 1 (532-17, eeafarst ne 5)
du-ay kar jorh karee baynantee paarbarahm man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer; within my mind, I meditate on the Supreme Lord God.
og tf ae ushafs Aa eas feetfenr NA (532-17, Feafarst He 5) haath day-ay raakhay parmaysur saglaa durat mitaa-i-aa. ||1]| Giving me His hand, the Transcendent Lord has eradicated all my sins. ||1]|
zd odt ffs vas afenr oad at Aas Il (532-18, Seafardt He 5)
var naaree mil mangal gaa-i-aa thaakur kaa jaikaar.
Husband and wife join together in rejoicing, celebrating the Victory of the Lord Master.
aT aoa We aC afs Shit FH ASST ad Burg QNQSil (532-18, ectorst He 5)
kaho naanak jan ka-o bal jaa-ee-ai jo sabhnaa karay uDhaar. ||2||23]| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the humble servant of the Lord, who emancipates everyone. ||2||23]|
uot uss qe Afsare YATE Il (533-1)
ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
SzaarSt HIG U Il (533-2) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
mus Afsad ufo fae afont il (533-2, teaturdt He 5) apunay satgur peh bin-o kahi-aa. I offer my prayer to my True Guru.
se fours vfeors vu Ho HT AAS vieAa afar i TIS Il (533-2, eaters ve 5) bha-ay kirpaal da-i-aal dukh bhanjan mayraa sagal andaysraa ga-i-aa. rahaa-o. The Destroyer of distress has become kind and merciful, and all my anxiety is over. | |Pause| |
JH unit unist Sst JHs ToS vieaS AS Afomt | (533-3, Secturst we 5)
ham paapee paakhandee lobhee hamraa gun avgun sabh sahi-aa.
I am a sinner, hypocritical and greedy, but still, He puts up with all of my merits and demerits.
ag HAsfa of afs feet He BAS A ufer A (533-3, Featardt He 5)
kar mastak Dhaar saaj nivaajay mu-ay dusat jo kha-i-aa. ||1]|
Placing His hand on my forehead, He has exalted me. The wicked ones who wanted to destroy me have been killed. ||1]|
usGuardt Aaa Aust ASG PIAS AHEM Il (533-4, Sectardt ue 5)
par-upkaaree sarab saDhaaree safal darsan sehaj-i-aa. He is generous and benevolent, the beautifier of all, the embodiment of peace; the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is so fruitful!
aI aoa fasdie AG VST BIE AHS Bs Afar NIANQSll_ (533-5, Zeatorst He 5) kaho naanak nirgun ka-o daataa charan kamal ur Dhari-aa. ||2||24]|
Says Nanak, He is the Giver to the unworthy; I enshrine His Lotus Feet within my heart. ||2||24]|
Vezaurdt HIS U Il (533-5)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
MSE SE YS IHS Il (533-6, Secturdt ws 5) anaath naath parabh hamaaray. My God is the Master of the masterless.
Rafe orfeS guags i TIS Il 533-6, Seaturst ue 5) Saran aa-i-o raakhanhaaray. rahaa-o. I have come to the Sanctuary of the Savior Lord. ||Pause] |
Aaa uma TY HIS Il (533-6, Seatarst us 5) sarab paakh raakh muraaray. Protect me on all sides, O Lord;
mira UTS nist SS NUL (533-6, Seatardt us 5) aagai paachhai antee vaaray. ||1]|| protect me in the future, in the past, and at the very last moment. ||1]|
wa fase@ 3a 379 Il (533-7, Seatarst ne 5) jab chitva-o tab tuhaaray. Whenever something comes to mind, it is You.
Go AH As HS AMS IQ (533-7, Seaiarst He 5) un sam"aar mayraa man saDhaaray. ||2|| Contemplating Your virtues, my mind is sanctified. ||2||
Afs We TI Asad Il (533-7, Feafarst uz 5) sun gaava-o gur bachnaaray. I hear and sing the Hymns of the Guru's Word.
af af WE AT SEATS ISI (533-8, Seafardt ns 5) bal bal jaa-o saaDh darsaaray. ||3]|| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy. ||3]|
Ho Hig TUS Sa MATT Il (533-8, Feaiaret us 5) man meh raakha-o ayk asaaray. Within my mind, I have the Support of the One Lord alone.
SS UT HT IST'S IUQUI (533-8, Seafarst uz 5) naanak parabh mayray karnaihaaray. ||4||25]|| O Nanak, my God is the Creator of all. ||4]|25]|
Sze HIG U Il (533-9) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
ys fed HSTe AS Il (533-9, Secfarst we 5) parabh ihai manorath mayraa. God, this is my heart's desire:
four fours efsors dfs dit afs A360 aT Ta | TIE Il (533-9, ectorst nz 5)
kirpaa niDhaan da-i-aal mohi deejai kar santan kaa chayraa. rahaa-o.
O treasure of kindness, O Merciful Lord, please make me the slave of your Saints. | |Pause| |
UTSIAS BAS AS Baal foH WAT TAA USS Il (533-10, Secfardt ws 5)
paraatehkaal laaga-o jan charnee nis baasur daras paava-o.
In the early hours of the morning, I fall at the feet of Your humble servants; night and day, I obtain the Blessed Vision of their Darshan.
36 HO Mafu AIG AS AS GAS Ts TS WES NA (633-10, Featarst vs 5)
tan man arap kara-o jan sayvaa rasnaa har gun gaava-o. ||1||
Dedicating my body and mind, I serve the humble servant of the Lord; with my tongue, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
Afa fa fase ys nro AsAfa fos dba i 933-11, Fectarst us 5)
Saas Saas Simra-o parabh apunaa satsang nit rahee-ai.
With each and every breath, I meditate in remembrance on my God; I live continually in the Society of the Saints.
faq MUTT SH US Ha Se Soa fEgT Bd NQANEN (533-12, Seatarst He 5)
ayk aDhaar naam Dhan moraa anad naanak ih lahee-ai. ||2||26]||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only support and wealth; O Nanak, from this, I obtain bliss. ||2||26| |
TY Veo HIS Uwe 2 (533-13) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe fsa YATE II (533-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hist oA afe AIG ure I (533-14, Sectors He 5) meetaa aisay har jee-o paa-ay. O friend, such is the Dear Lord whom I have obtained.
efs o wel He dt Aa mates as fife we Na TIS I (533-14, Seaturst He 5)
chhod na jaa-ee sad hee sangay an-din gur mil gaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He does not leave me, and He always keeps me company. Meeting the Guru, night and day, I sing His Praises. ||1]||Pause| |
fifes Hdog Ava Adar forfa o AST AS Il (533-15, Sectarst ws 5)
mili-o manohar sarab sukhainaa ti-aag na kathoo jaa-ay.
I met the Fascinating Lord, who has blessed me with all comforts; He does not leave me to go anywhere else.
uifsa mifsa ats ag ue fut dH 3 AMAPS Ge AU (533-15, Sectors He 5)
anik anik bhaat baho paykhay pari-a rom na samsar laa-ay. ||1||
I have seen the mortals of many and various types, but they are not equal to even a hair of my Beloved. ||1]|
Hefs og AS VMs MiSIS JS SS HE Il (533-16, Teatarst He 5)
mandar bhaag sobh du-aarai anhat run jhun laa-ay.
His palace is so beautiful! His gate is so wonderful! The celestial melody of the sound current resounds there.
aT Soa Ae da wre fas fot aS AS TS WANA (533-16, Featarst ue 5) kaho naanak sadaa rang maanay garih pari-a theetay sad thaa-ay. ||2||1||27]|
Says Nanak, I enjoy eternal bliss; I have obtained a permanent place in the home of my Beloved. ||2||1]|27]|
eeaurdt U il (533-17)
dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
PIAS OH AG HG Me Il (533-17, Seafardt He 5) darsan naam ka-o man aachhai. My mind longs for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and His Name.
afk orfeG 3 Aare ae 3 orfs ufse AS urs NA TIC Ul (533-17, Seataret us 5) bharam aa-i-o hai sagal thaan ray aahi pari-o sant paachhai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have wandered everywhere, and now I have come to follow the Saint. ||1]|Pause] |
fan JG ASt fan vredt A fen]? A ae Il (533-18, Seturst He 5)
kis ha-o sayvee kis aaraaDhee jo distai so gaachhai.
Whom should I serve? Whom should I worship in adoration? Whoever I see shall pass away.
UST UBY
AUHats at Adat udht BIE Fo HO Me MAU (534-1, Featurst we 5)
saaDhsangat kee sarnee paree-ai charan rayn man baachhai. ||1]|
I have sought the Sanctuary of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; my mind longs for the dust of their Feet. ||1]|
Hafs o Wat To odt aet Ho ese HE wr| I (534-1, Seaturst ne 5) jugat na jaanaa gun nahee ko-ee mahaa dutar maa-ay aachhai. I do not know the way, and I have no virtue. It is so difficult to escape from Maya!
uife ufeS soa ad vast 3B Cod Aas FITS NQNVNQCH (534-2, Featurst vs 5)
aa-ay pa-i-o naanak gur charnee ta-o utree sagal duraachhai. ||2||2||28]| Nanak has come and fallen at the Guru's feet; all of his evil inclinations have vanished. [12] 12] |28]|
Szaarat U Il (534-3) dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
nifyst finn aIe JIS Il (534-3, Fecfarst uz 5) amritaa pari-a bachan tuhaaray. O Beloved, Your Words are Ambrosial Nectar.
mits Hes HoHTS fimrs Asg Hf fess NU TIS I (534-3, Secterst we 5)
at sundar manmohan pi-aaray sabhhoo maDh niraaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O supremely beautiful Enticer, O Beloved, You are among all, and yet distinct from all. ||1]|Pause] |
TH 3 WIC Hols 5 WIC Hf UPS GIS AHS Il (534-4, Sectardt ws 5)
raaj na chaaha-o mukat na chaaha-o man pareet charan kamlaaray.
I do not seek power, and I do not seek liberation. My mind is in love with Your Lotus Feet.
gon HOA fio fs fer dfs oars St SSATS AU (534-4, Seataret He 5)
barahm mahays siDh mun indraa mohi thaakur hee darsaaray. || 1] |
Brahma, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra - I seek only the Blessed Vision of my Lord and Master's Darshan. ||1]|
ate unird onfee oad nafs ufsS HS TS Il (534-5, Secturst ue 5)
deen du-aarai aa-i-o thaakur saran pari-o sant haaray.
I have come, helpless, to Your Door, O Lord Master; I am exhausted - I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints.
aT soa ys fHS STs HS Atse fHaATS QUIEN (634-5, Featarst Hs 5)
kaho naanak parabh milay manohar man seetal bigsaaray. ||2||3||29]|
Says Nanak, I have met my Enticing Lord God; my mind is cooled and soothed - it blossoms forth in joy. ||2]|3||29]|
Vezaurdt HIS U Il (534-6)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs af rea utes Cotas Il (534-6, tectaret He 5) har jap sayvak paar utaari-o. Meditating on the Lord, His servant swims across to salvation.
ae eens se us nus aofs Ath odt HES NA TIS Il (534-7, Featardt us 5) deen da-i-aal bha-ay parabh apnay bahurh janam nahee maari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. When God becomes merciful to the meek, then one does not have to suffer reincarnation, only to die again. ||1||Pause| |
AUHAH Te Wed dfs X ISS HOH odt Tha i (534-7, Seafarst nz 5)
saaDhsangam gun gaavah har kay ratan janam nahee haari-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and he does not lose the jewel of this human life.
ys ao ate fad ag sfoor aes AMT CurfaS Al (534-8, ecterdt ue 5)
parabh gun gaa-ay bikhai ban tari-aa kulah samooh uDhaari-o. ||1]|
Singing the Glories of God, he crosses over the ocean of poison, and saves all his generations as well. ||1]|
3do AHS aftr fee state wtA fasth GatsS i 534-9, seatarst ue 5)
charan kamal basi-aa rid bheetar saas giraas uchaari-o.
The Lotus Feet of the Lord abide within his heart, and with every breath and morsel of food, he chants the Lord's Name.
Soa Ge adt AAeIAT UST UST SfeItsS NSO (534-9, Feafardt ns 5)
naanak ot gahee jagdeesur punah punah balihaari-o. ||2||4||30]| Nanak has grasped the Support of the Lord of the Universe; again and again, he is a sacrifice to Him. ||2||4]|30] |
TY Sead HIS uw s (534-11) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (534-11) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ads fed aa su NUS Jas fears NU TIS Nh (534-12, Featarst ns 5)
karat firay ban bhaykh mohan rahat niraar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Some wander around the forests, wearing religious robes, but the Fascinating Lord remains distant from them. ||1]|Pause] |
AAS AS'SS als sla Wes HS Hf VIS WS NA (534-12, Sectarst uz 5)
kathan sunaavan geet neekay gaavan man meh Dhartay gaar. ||1]||
They talk, preach, and sing their lovely songs, but within their minds, the filth of their sins remains. ||1]||
mifs Hed ag vse fiors fafenr THAT UT IQ (534-13, Zecfaret He 5)
at sundar baho chatur si-aanay bidi-aa rasnaa chaar. ||2||
They may be very beautiful, extremely clever, wise and educated, and they may speak very sweetly. ||2]|
He Hd As 30 fasefas Sy Hea YS WS BI (534-13, Becta He 5)
maan moh mayr tayr bibarjit ayhu maarag khanday Dhaar. ||3]|
To forsake pride, emotional attachment, and the sense of 'mine and yours’, is the path of the double-edged sword. ||3]|
ag sod fats sens sds ys fag AS Aas USUAISU 634-14, Sectors ne 5) kaho naanak tin bhavjal taree-alay parabh kirpaa sant sangaar. ||4||1]|31]|
Says Nanak, they alone swim across the terrifying world-ocean, who, by God's Grace, join the Society of the Saints. ||4]|1]|31]|
THY SeaAoS HIS Uwe U (534-15) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 5 Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:
96 Afsara yATfe Il (534-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H ufas st Ga HIG ASS So I (534-16, Seats we 5) mai paykhi-o ree oochaa mohan sabh tay oochaa. I have seen the Lord to be on high; the Fascinating Lord is the highest of all.
wis 6 AHAfS AS ord Els TI TH HT UU! TTS I (534-16, Seatarst ws 5) aan na samsar ko-oo laagai dhoodh rahay ham moochaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
No one else is equal to Him - I have made the most extensive search on this. ||1]|Pause] |
ag ais nfs as Was AT Sot maT Il (534-17, Sectors we 5) baho bay-ant at bado gaahro thaah nahee aghoochaa. Utterly infinite, exceedingly great, deep and unfathomable - He is lofty, beyond reach.
3fs 3 ya Hfs 3 Heba as urs HS TS MAUI (534-17, Beaters Hs 5) tol na tulee-ai mol na mulee-ai kat paa-ee-ai man roochaa. ||1||
His weight cannot be weighed, His value cannot be estimated. How can the Enticer of the mind be obtained? ||1||
aA ort nifsa ser fag TI Sdt UTE Il (534-18, Fectarst ws 5) khoj asankhaa anik tapanthaa bin gur nahee pahoochaa. Millions search for Him, on various paths, but without the Guru, none find Him.
aT Baa frou adt sag ffs AT FA FT NUS (534-18, Sectors He 5)
kaho naanak kirpaa karee thaakur mil saaDhoo ras bhoonchaa. ||2||1||32||
Says Nanak, the Lord Master has become Merciful. Meeting the Holy Saint, I drink in the sublime essence. ||2]|1]|32]|
Us usy
Seaurdt HIG U Il (535-1)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Hoag fafa Ufa gar act St AS I (535-1, Secterdt ue 5) mai baho biDh paykhi-o doojaa naahee ree ko-oo. I have looked in so many ways, but there is no other like the Lord.
us du As sists sfenr ule ses As BS VU TIS Il (535-1, Fecturst ws 5)
khand deep sabh bheetar ravi-aa poor rahi-o sabh lo-oo. ||1]| rahaa-o.
On all the continents and islands, He is permeating and fully pervading; He is in all worlds. ||1||Pause]|
METH MH TES HfIHT HO Fle Als AG il (535-2, estar we 5)
agam agammaa kavan mahimmaa man jeevai sun so-oo.
He is the most unfathomable of the unfathomable; who can chant His Praises? My mind lives by hearing news of Him.
ots nASH ote Adar Hats se ASSIS UI (535-3, Feats nz 5) chaar aasram chaar barannaa mukat bha-ay sayvto-oo. ||1]||
People in the four stages of life, and in the four social classes are liberated, by serving You, Lord. ||1]|
dfs rae feafeur usn ug ufenr esi we AY TE Il (535-3, Fecturst Hs 5)
gur sabad drirh-aa-i-aa param pad paa-i-aa dutee-a ga-ay sukh ho-oo.
The Guru has implanted the Word of His Shabad within me; I have attained the supreme status. My sense of duality has been dispelled, and now, I am at peace.
AI HSA Fz AG Stor afs fafa uret AIAG WINNS (535-4, ectardt we 5)
kaho naanak bhav saagar tari-aa har niDh paa-ee sahjo-oo. ||2]|2||33]|| Says Nanak, I have easily crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, obtaining the treasure of the Lord's Name. ||2||2||33]|
TY Seaod HIS u we € (535-5) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 6 Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:
qe Afsars Arte Il (535-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Sa I dfs Sa WS Il (535-6, eciurst He 5) aykai ray har aykai jaan. Know that there is One and only One Lord.
Sa J TaHfe WS Ul TIS il (535-6, Fecturst nz 5) aykai ray gurmukh jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Gurmukh, know that He is One. ||1||Pause] |
ard JHS IG SH FHg } Set Sent Fg sfeot Aa aS WAU (535-6, Sectardt ws 5)
kaahay bharmat ha-o tum bharmahu na bhaa-ee ravi-aa ray ravi-aa sarab thaan. ||1|| Why are you wandering around? O Siblings of Destiny, don't wander around; He is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||1||
fa@ SH3g ane uetfe fae HAN Odt AGH AMS I (535-7, ecturdt He 5) ji-o baisantar kaasat majhaar bin sanjam nahee kaaraj saar. As the fire in the forest, without control, cannot serve any purpose
fae ad 6 ued dfs At at Enis Il (535-7, Sectors He 5) bin gur na paavaigo har jee ko du-aar. - just so, without the Guru, one cannot attain the Gate of the Lord.
fife Hafs sfa uifers ag area ue F UGH fours NQNUIBSIl (535-8, Sectardt He 5)
mil sangat taj abhimaan kaho naanak paa-ay hai param niDhaan. ||2||1]|34]| Joining the Society of the Saints, renounce your ego; says Nanak, in this way, the supreme treasure is obtained. ||2||1]|34]|
Seaurdt U il (535-9) dayvganDhaaree 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Wet o wet ST at TS UA TIS Il (535-9, Seaturst us 5)
jaanee na jaa-ee taa kee gaat. ||1]|| rahaa-o. His state cannot be known. ||1||Pause| |
ag uuTs@ 0G afe vsaet faAHa faAH age aTTS WAU (535-9, Featarst ue 5)
kah paykhaara-o ha-o kar chaturaa-ee bisman bismay kahan kahaat. ||1||
How can I behold Him through clever tricks? Those who tell this story are wonder- struck and amazed. ||1]||
ae duss fra mg Afar Il (535-10, tecfardt Hz 5) gan ganDharab siDh ar saaDhik. The servants of God, the celestial singers, the Siddhas and the seekers,
Afg ad eS YIN Fone Il (535-10, Secfardt nz 5) sur nar dayv barahm barahmaadik. the angelic and divine beings, Brahma and those like Brahma,
vad de Cuas fea TS Il (535-11, Fectarst He 5) chatur bayd uchrat din raat. and the four Vedas proclaim, day and night,
MoH MGT SAT wMiTarT | (535-11, Sectarst Hs 5) agam agam thaakur aagaaDh. that the Lord and Master is inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable.
Ts Mis Anis sq BSA Ado o Wet ud usts NIAWQUBUI (535-11, Featurst He 5) gun bay-ant bay-ant bhan naanak kahan na jaa-ee parai paraat. ||2||2||35]| Endless, endless are His Glories, says Nanak; they cannot be described - they are beyond our reach. ||2]|2]|35]|
Sze HIG U Il (535-12) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
fomre ae AIST Il (535-12, Sectardt He 5) Dhi-aa-ay gaa-ay karnaihaar. I meditate, and sing of the Creator Lord.
38 ad AY HoH mde mifon Sst I Sa ANTS NU TIS Il (535-12, Feciaret v2 5) bha-o naahee sukh sahj anandaa anik ohee ray ayk samaar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I have become fearless, and I have found peace, poise and bliss, remembering the infinite Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
Hee HOS TT AS HS I (535-13, ectardt we 5) safal moorat gur mayrai maathai. The Guru, of the most fruitful image, has placed His hand upon my forehead.
AS as UNG 35 3S AS I 6535-13, Fecturdt nz 5) jat kat paykha-o tat tat saathai. Wherever I look, there, I find Him with me.
TIO AHS AT YTS MUST NA (535-14, Seatarst us 5) charan kamal mayray paraan aDhaar. ||1]| The Lotus Feet of the Lord are the Support of my very breath of life. ||1]|
AHI MET Fat YS HS Il (535-14, Seaturst ws 5) samrath athaah badaa parabh mayraa. My God is all-powerful, unfathomable and utterly vast.
we we nists Atos Sa Il (535-14, Fecturst He 5) ghat ghat antar saahib nayraa. The Lord and Master is close at hand - He dwells in each and every heart.
Tal Aas WAS US SSA A aT nig G UTSSTT NIUBIUBEM (535-15, Seatardt we 5) taakee saran aasar parabh naanak jaa kaa ant na paaraavaar. ||2||3||36||
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary and the Support of God, who has no end or limitation. [12] 13] 136] |
Sezaurdt HIST U Il (535-15)
dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5. Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:
Bact J HS BwdNt F Il (535-16, Featurst ns 5) ultee ray man ultee ray. Turn away, O my mind, turn away.
Has fAS afa Ba!t F Il (535-16, Fectardst He 5) Saakat si-o kar ultee ray. Turn away from the faithless cynic.
3S at 3 39 UdS Zeal J Ho Seat J Was Ala o scat F AU TTS I (535-16, Featerst Hs 5)
jhoothai kee ray jhooth pareet chhutkee ray man chhutkee ray saakat sang na chhutkee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
False is the love of the false one; break the ties, O my mind, and your ties shall be broken. Break your ties with the faithless cynic. ||1]]Pause] |
fA@ one sta deg TS A UA oreet FM (535-17, dectarst ws 5) ji-o kaajar bhar mandar raakhi-o jo paisai kaalookhee ray. One who enters a house filled with soot is blackened.
vag ots ofa afes 3 fan ae fife soot fyaNt F NAM (535-17, esters we 5) Dhoorahu hee tay bhaag ga-i-o hai jis gur mil chhutkee tarikutee ray. ||1]|
Run far away from such people! One who meets the Guru escapes from the bondage of the three dispositions. ||1]|
Hag ee faurs faur fafa Aa ny AS Aft o HEAT ST Il (535-18, Secfardt He 5) maaga-o daan kirpaal kirpaa niDh mayraa mukh saakat sang na jutsee ray.
I beg this blessing of You, O Merciful Lord, ocean of mercy - please, don't bring me face to face with the faithless cyincs.
Ua use
Ws Soa TH OA a adnig AT Hs AT usr dfs FHA F NINSNBON (536-1, Seated ws 5) jan naanak daas daas ko karee-ahu mayraa moond saaDh pagaa hayth rulsee ray. 211411371]
Make servant Nanak the slave of Your slave; let his head roll in the dust under the feet of the Holy. ||2||4]|37]|
TY Sead HIS Uwe D (536-3) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 5 ghar 7 Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (536-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AS feo & ANeE UE feed 3B sfs sis WE II (536-4, Sectorst He 5)
sabh din kay samrath panth bithulay ha-o bal bal jaa-o.
You are all-powerful, at all times; You show me the Way; I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to You.
Wea SEH HBS Sd VIS Cat a UE NA TIE I (536-4, Sectardt we 5) gaavan bhaavan santan torai charan uvaa kai paa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your Saints sing to You with love; I fall at their feet. ||1]||Pause]|
WHS WHS AIH AB ATS H Sa MST GU SS UU (536-5, Secterct ws 5)
jaasan baasan sahj kayl karunaa mai ayk anant anoopai thaa-o. ||1]|
O Praiseworthy Lord, Enjoyer of celestial peace, Embodiment of mercy, One Infinite Lord, Your place is so beautiful. ||1]|
fafa fafa fofa ag 3a Harieo Aa Sa MISA SS Il (536-5, Secturdt ue 5)
riDh siDh niDh kar tal jagjeevan sarab naath anaykai naa-o.
Riches, supernatural spiritual powers and wealth are in the palm of Your hand. O Lord, Life of the World, Master of all, infinite is Your Name.
efent Hfeur fasur asa a Afs Afs AA ATSTE NQUNANISCHENSSI (636-6, Fectarst He 5)
da-i-aa ma-i-aa kirpaa naanak ka-o sun sun jas jeevaa-o. ||2]||1]|38]|6||44]| Show Kindness, Mercy and Compassion to Nanak; hearing Your Praises, I live. [12] 111138] 1611441]
qe Afsars yATfe Il (536-8)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta Veaurst Hos € Il (536-8) raag dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 9. Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:
Wd HO 3a 6 AIG A Il (536-8, Featurst 2 9) yeh man naik na kahi-o karai. This mind does not follow my advice one tiny bit.
Hie frrefe ofaS mruat At eoHfs 3 3 |g A TIC Il (536-8, Featurst ne 9)
seekh sikhaa-ay rahi-o apnee see durmat tay na tarai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am so tired of giving it instructions - it will not refrain from its evil-mindedness. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfe wfeor & sf aed ufs aA ofs Bud Il (536-9, Seaturst ne 9) mad maa-i-aa kai bha-i-o baavro har jas neh uchrdi. It has gone insane with the intoxication of Maya; it does not chant the Lord's Praise.
afs unig Has a soa nus Beg Sg AI (536-10, Feafaret He 9) kar parpanch jagat ka-o dahkai apno udar bharai. ||1|| Practicing deception, it tries to cheat the world, and so it fills its belly. ||1]|
Hore us fas af o AG afes ars UP Il (536-10, Fecterst Hs 9) Su-aan poochh ji-o ho-ay na sooDho kahi-o na kaan Dharai. Like a dog's tail, it cannot be straightened; it will not listen to what I tell it.
AT Sa SA TH OM fas ATS ATA AS QUA (536-11, Fecturdt He 9) kaho naanak bhaj raam naam nit jaa tay kaaj sarai. ||2||1]]|
Says Nanak, vibrate forever the Name of the Lord, and all your affairs shall be adjusted. ||2||1]|
Szaardt HIS € Il (536-11) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 9. Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:
AS fag Hes a faeos Il (536-11, Featarst v2 9) sabh kichh jeevat ko bivhaar. All things are mere diversions of life:
Hs fus set AS sou mg ofa fas at afs NA TIS Ul (536-12, Featarst ue 9) maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banDhap ar fun garih kee naar. ||1]| rahaa-o. mother, father, siblings, children, relatives and the wife of your home. ||1||Pause| |
36 3 urs ds Aa fonrd eas UfS ara II (536-12, Fectorst He 9) tan tay paraan hot jab ni-aaray tayrat parayt pukaar. When the soul is separated from the body, then they will cry out, calling you a ghost.
mig ust &B afo ge we 3 SS foots WAU (536-13, Sectors we 9) aaDh gharee ko-oo neh raakhai ghar tay dayt nikaar. ||1|| No one will let you stay, for even half an hour; they drive you out of the house. ||1||
fiat fart fa@ war sear ae tug fee fafa | 536-13, Feataret us 9)
marig tarisnaa ji-o jag rachnaa yeh daykhhu ridai bichaar.
The created world is like an illusion, a mirage - see this, and reflect upon it in your mind.
ad asa SH TH OH fas WS IS Bors QI (536-14, Sectors He 9) kaho naanak bhaj raam naam nit jaa tay hot uDhaar. ||2||2|| Says Nanak, vibrate forever the Name of the Lord, which shall deliver you. ||2[|2||
Szaurdt HIT € Il (536-15) dayvganDhaaree mehlaa 9. Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:
Aas H Zot Sat YS il (536-15, Seaford we 9) jagat mai jhoothee daykhee pareet. In this world, I have seen love to be false.
mus dt AY fAG AS oa for aa fant HIS IAN TIC Il (536-15, Featarst He 9)
apnay hee sukh si-o sabh laagay ki-aa daaraa ki-aa meet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whether they are spouses or friends, all are concerned only with their own happiness. ||1]|Pause] |
HIG Hee AS aus J fos fAE THE dS I (536-16, Fectorst He 9) mayra-o mayra-o sabhai kahat hai hit si-o baaDhi-o cheet. All say, "Mine, mine", and attach their consciousness to you with love.
nifs ate Hat oo A fea nga F SHS UA (536-16, Seaterst Hs 9) ant kaal sangee nah ko-oo ih achraj hai reet. ||1||
But at the very last moment, none shall go along with you. How strange are the ways of the world! ||1]|
Ho Hae ving od ASS fry t THIS Sts I (536-17, Fectorct us 9)
man moorakh ajhoo nah samjhat sikh dai haari-o neet.
The foolish mind has not yet reformed itself, although I have grown weary of continually instructing it.
woe SCnS ufg ud AE TS UST A AST MAUSWENSCUBIN (536-17, Featarct ve 9) naanak bha-ojal paar parai ja-o gaavai parabh kay geet. ||2]|3]|6||38]|47]|
O Nanak, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, singing the Songs of God. [12] 13] 161138] 1471]
Uar uso qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nieve Hels nigel AS Te YAS I (537-1
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
va fardat sGue HIG UWE 2 Il (537-3) raag bihaagarhaa cha-upday mehlaa 5 ghar 2. Raag Bihaagraa, Chau-Padas, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
SSS Harder Il (537-4, faararsr, we 5)
dootan sangree-aa. To associate with your arch enemies,
sfentafe sAdber |l (537-4, faorast, Hs 5) bhu-i-angan basree-aa. is to live with poisonous snakes;
mioax Gud Ail (537-4, forest, He 5)
anik upree-aa. ||1]| I have made the effort to shake them off. ||1]|
38 4 af afe ado il 537-4, frovasr, He 5) ta-o mai har har karee-aa. Then, I repeated the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
38 AY Hand A TIS Il (537-4, feovasr, He 5) ta-o sukh sehjaree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. and I obtained celestial peace. ||1||Pause]|
fas Hodmr i nie aG Asher I (537-5, faorasr, ue 5)
mithan mohree-aa. an ka-o mayree-aa. False is the love of the many emotional attachments,
feta wre firdhor i (537-5, frase, He 5)
vich ghooman ghiree-aa. ||2|| which suck the mortal into the whirlpool of reincarnation. ||2]|
Hares FSSA Il (537-6, frararst, He 5) Sagal batree-aa. All are travellers,
fasy fea sor i 637-6, foes, v8 5) birakh ik taree-aa. who have gathered under the world-tree,
ag sats usb Sil (537-6, frovasr, ns 5) baho banDheh paree-aa. ||3]|| and are bound by their many bonds. ||3]|
fag ATG Aedhr Il (537-6, faves, He 5) thir saaDh safree-aa. Eternal is the Company of the Holy,
Ad atese TIM Il (537-6, forasr, He 5) jah keertan haree-aa. where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
SOA APSd MA SUV! (537-7, faorasr, H2 5)
naanak sarnaree-aa. ||4||1|| Nanak seeks this Sanctuary. ||4]|1]|
qe Afsars yArfe il (537-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
wa fast Hoe € Il (537-8) raag bihaagarhaa mehlaa 9. Raag Bihaagraa, Ninth Mehl:
ofs at as af AS AS Il (537-8, fora, He 9) har kee gat neh ko-oo jaanai. No one knows the state of the Lord.
nat Ast Sut ufe TS ng aT Sa frorsS UU TIS Ih (537-8, frorasr, 2 9)
jogee jatee tapee pach haaray ar baho log si-aanay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Yogis, the celibates, the penitents, and all sorts of clever people have failed. ||1]|Pause| |
feo ufo TE da a aget TE da ate aS Il (537-9, fora, He 9) chhin meh raa-o rank ka-o kar-ee raa-o rank kar daaray. In an instant, He changes the beggar into a king, and the king into a beggar.
SS sd 3d AuoS GI TT a fHSTS NA (537-9, fora, v8 9) reetay bharay bharay sakhnaavai yeh taa ko bivhaaray. ||1|| He fills what is empty, and empties what is full - such are His ways. ||1]|
must Hfenr orf unre mirufs SUSI Il (537-10, fravasr, He 9) apnee maa-i-aa aap pasaaree aapeh daykhanhaaraa. He Himself spread out the expanse of His Maya, and He Himself beholds it.
arar gy Ud ag dat AS S Id fora lM (537-10, frase, v3 9)
naanaa roop Dharay baho rangee sabh tay rahai ni-aaraa. ||2||
He assumes so many forms, and plays so many games, and yet, He remains detached from it all. ||2]|
Maes “RUT nee fedao fad As Ha SoHMES It 537-11, frorarsr, He 9)
agnat apaar alakh niranjan jih sabh jag bharmaa-i-o.
Incalculable, infinite, incomprehensible and immaculate is He, who has misled the entire world.
Ads SdH Sta aoa yal vate sta fas ote Sui (537-12, feos, we 9)
Sagal bharam taj naanak paraanee charan taahi chit laa-i-o. ||3]|1]|2]| Cast off all your doubts; prays Nanak, O mortal, focus your consciousness on His Feet. HSI2112II
wa faraast 25 HIS 8 WT A (537-13) raag bihaagarhaa chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Raag Bihaagraa, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (537-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs ofa on foment Act feste Touts an MHS TH I 637-14, feorasr, He 4)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai mayree jindurhee-ay gurmukh naam amolay raam. Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul; as Gurmukh, meditate on the invaluable Name of the Lord.
dfs off ator af ne flmre ne afe afk oft Saw TH I 537-14, frost, He 4)
har ras beeDhaa har man pi-aaraa man har ras naam jhakolay raam.
My mind is pierced through by the sublime essence of the Lord's Name. The Lord is dear to my mind. With the sublime essence of the Lord's Name, my mind is washed clean.
Ust ust
Tas He SaTeha Ast Hse iss 3 aT 3B TH I (538-1, frome, we 4)
gurmat man thehraa-ee-ai mayree jindurhee-ay anat na kaahoo dolay raam. Under Guru's Instructions, hold your mind steady; O my soul, do not let it wander anywhere.
Ho fefens ee ufeur ofa us Te SSa Heat FB TH AU (538-2, frase, ue 4)
man chindi-arhaa fal paa-i-aa har parabh gun naanak banee bolay raam. ||1]||
One who utters the Bani of the Praises of the Lord God, O Nanak, obtains the fruits of his heart's desires. ||1]|
qonfs nfs nifys goa Hat freste ufy nifigs Se mwres IM I (538-2, frost, ve 4) gurmat man amrit vuth-rhaa mayree jindurhee-ay mukh amrit bain alaa-ay raam. Under Guru's Instruction, the Ambrosial Name abides within the mind, O my soul; with your mouth, utter the words of ambrosia.
nifys wet sas Aor at Het fest] ufo Hee afe fee we MMH I 638-3, frost, He 4) amrit banee bhagat janaa kee mayree jindurhee-ay man sunee-ai har liv laa-ay raam. The Words of the devotees are Ambrosial Nectar, O my soul; hearing them in the mind, embrace loving affection for the Lord.
fadt fegor ofa ys urfemr af fifeor Rafa AeTe IH I (538-4, forest, Hs 4) chiree vichhunnaa har parabh paa-i-aa gal mili-aa sahj subhaa-ay raam. Separated for so very long, I have found the Lord God; He holds me close in His loving embrace.
He ated His wise Sfeur do Net fHeste niogs Wee STS IN NII (538-4, faorasr, u2 4) jan naanak man anad bha-i-aa hai mayree jindurhee-ay anhat sabad vajaa-ay raam.
21] Servant Nanak's mind is filled with bliss, O my soul; the unstruck sound-current of the Shabad vibrates within. ||2]|
Fat Adel Ader At feste aet afe ys urf= fers ar i (538-5, fora, ue 4)
sakhee sahaylee mayree-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ko-ee har parabh aan milaavai raam. If only my friends and companions would come and unite me with my Lord God, O my soul.
JG He 228 fSH orua Het fHeste afe us at afs aa HES TH II (538-6, feos, He 4) ha-o man dayva-o tis aapnaa mayree jindurhee-ay har parabh kee har kathaa sunaavai raam.
I offer my mind to the one who recites the sermon of my Lord God, O my soul.
aenfy Ae mata ofs Hat feste Ho fefenst ewe urs IM II (538-7, fara, He 4) gurmukh sadaa araaDh har mayree jindurhee-ay man chindi-arhaa fal paavai raam. As Gurmukh, ever worship the Lord in adoration, O my soul, and you shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires.
Sod SH Ui AdStast Hot fHeste esarat oH fomrs IH SBI (538-7, feos, He 4) naanak bhaj har sarnaagatee mayree jindurhee-ay vadbhaagee naam Dhi-aavai raam.
[SII O Nanak, hurry to the Lord's Sanctuary; O my soul, those who meditate on the Lord's Name are very fortunate. ||3]|
afs faa ys orfe fie Het feste aaHfs oH UsEA IM II (538-8, froasr, He 4)
kar kirpaa parabh aa-ay mil mayree jindurhee-ay gurmat naam pargaasay raam.
By His Mercy, God comes to meet us, O my soul; through the Guru's Teachings, He reveals His Name.
u@ ofs as Csteor Act fHeste fae ne fae GHS CEA TH I (538-9, fora, He 4) ha-o har baajh udeenee-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ji-o jal bin kamal udaasay raam. Without the Lord, Iam so sad, O my soul - as sad as the lotus without water.
afs us Horfenr vet fieste ofa AAS ofs ys UTA TH II (538-10, foros, Hs 4)
gur poorai maylaa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay har sajan har parabh paasay raam. The Perfect Guru has united me, O my soul, with the Lord, my best friend, the Lord God.
U6 U6 Ig dfs ethor Hat frigste AS atea oH faarA TH SIA (538-10, fares, 48 4) Dhan Dhan guroo har dasi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jan naanak naam bigaasay raam. 41121]
Blessed, blessed is the Guru, who has shown me the Lord, O my soul; servant Nanak blossoms forth in the Name of the Lord. ||4||1]|
Ta fA ast HIS 8 Il (538-11) raag bihaagarhaa mehlaa 4. Raag Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
nifys ofe ofa on o Nat este vifys Tenfs ue I I 6538-11, feos, ne 4)
amrit har har naam hai mayree jindurhee-ay amrit gurmat paa-ay raam.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar, O my soul; through the Guru's Teachings, this Nectar is obtained.
JH Hfeor fay 3 At feste ofa nifiqfs fay ofa WE MMH I 538-12, feos, He 4) ha-umai maa-i-aa bikh hai mayree jindurhee-ay har amrit bikh leh jaa-ay raam. Pride in Maya is poison, O my soul; through the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name, this poison is eradicated.
HO Hat dfeor dfeur vet fest] afs af on ferme OH I 6538-13, frovast, He 4) man sukaa hari-aa ho-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay har har naam Dhi-aa-ay raam. The dry mind is rejuvenated, O my soul, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs aa es fafa ufeor act feste Ao soa ofH AHS TH INI (5638-14, frost, He 4) har bhaag vaday likh paa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jan naanak naam samaa-ay raam.
[1II The Lord has given me the pre-ordained blessing of high destiny, O my soul; servant Nanak merges in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
dfs Ast Ho Sfior Ast fest] fa wea ofa ea dts IH I (538-14, forest, He 4) har saytee man bayDhi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ji-o baalak lag duDh kheeray raam. My mind is attached to the Lord, O my soul, like the infant, sucking his mother's milk.
ofe fag nfs 5 ureba Het feste fae wha ve fae 29 TH I (538-15, fora, Hs 4) har bin saa‘t na paa-ee-ai mayree jindurhee-ay ji-o chaatrik jal bin tayray raam. Without the Lord, I find no peace, O my soul; I am like the song-bird, crying out without the rain drops.
Afsagd Avat we u@ Hat fieste Te eA fe ys AT IM I (538-16, fos, He 4) satgur sarnee jaa-ay pa-o mayree jindurhee-ay gun dasay har parabh kayray raam. Go, and seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru, O my soul; He shall tell you of the Glorious Virtues of the Lord God.
Ho soa ofa Hofer At fest wis SH Age WET TH INQ (538-17, faovast, He 4) jan naanak har maylaa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ghar vaajay sabad ghanayray raam. [2] |
Servant Nanak has merged into the Lord, O my soul; the many melodies of the Shabad resound within his heart. ||2]|
Houfa w@H fees Act feste fay aa IBA AS MMH Il (538-17, feos, He 4) manmukh ha-umai vichhurhay mayree jindurhee-ay bikh baaDhay ha-umai jaalay raam.
Through egotism, the self-willed manmukhs are separated, O my soul; bound to poison, they are burnt by egotism.
fag ut aufs ory sarfenr Ht fest] fC Hou Afs sfA aS IM I (538-18, frees, H8 4) ji-o pankhee kapot aap ban"aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ti-o manmukh sabh vas
kaalay raam. Like the pigeon, which itself falls into the trap, O my soul, all the self-willed manmukhs fall under the influence of death.
A Hfo wieur fag ofee Het fieste A Hone He fas IH I (538-19, frre, oe 4)
jo mohi maa-i-aa chit laa-iday mayree jindurhee-ay say manmukh moorh bitaalay raam.
Those self-willed manmukhs who focus their consciousness on Maya, O my soul, are foolish, evil demons.
Ua use
Ae of ate Adeast Het este Ts soa Ths THSTS TH ISI (539-1, fara, He 4) jan taraahi taraahi sarnaagatee mayree jindurhee-ay gur naanak har rakhvaalay raam. HI3I|
The Lord's humble servants beseech and implore Him, and enter His Sanctuary, O my soul; Guru Nanak becomes their Divine Protector. ||3]|
dfs Ho dfs fae Cad Hot fete of wa es ofe ufeor TH II (539-2, frost, He 4) har jan har liv ubray mayree jindurhee-ay Dhur bhaag vaday har paa-i-aa raam. The Lord's humble servants are saved, through the Love of the Lord, O my soul; by their pre-ordained good destiny, they obtain the Lord.
dfs of on Us 3 Hot fest ae dee Rafe safeor MH II (539-2, fares, He 4) har har naam pot hai mayree jindurhee-ay gur khayvat sabad taraa-i-aa raam. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the ship, O my soul, and the Guru is the helmsman. Through the Word of the Shabad, He ferries us across.
dfs ofs usy efeure 3 Het fieste ae Afsas vio werfeur aH II (539-3, frees, He 4) har har purakh da-i-aal hai mayree jindurhee-ay gur satgur meeth lagaa-i-aa raam. The Lord, Har, Har, is all-powerful and very kind, O my soul; through the Guru, the True Guru, He seems so sweet.
ats facut Afs aost of ofs AS Soa OH fonrfenr IH INSII (6539-4, frost, Hs 4) kar kirpaa sun bayntee har har jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa raam. ||4||2| | Shower Your Mercy upon me, and hear my prayer, O Lord, Har, Har; please, let servant Nanak meditate on Your Name. ||4||2||
fasarst HIST 8 Il (539-5)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 4. Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
afa Afas atefs on 3 Het fete ofs atefs afs ufs ors IMT IN (539-5, fora, HH 4) jag sukarit keerat naam hai mayree jindurhee-ay har keerat har man Dhaaray raam. In this world, the best occupation is to sing the Praises of the Naam, O my soul. Singing the Praises of the Lord, the Lord is enshrined in the mind.
dfs of on ufes 3 Hot fest] afu ofe afe an Gord aM I (539-6, frase, He 4) har har naam pavit hai mayree jindurhee-ay jap har har naam uDhaaray raam. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is immaculate and pure, O my soul. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, one is saved.
AS faofea uu eu afenr Ast fHeste Ho anf of Bars IM I (539-6, fora, He 4) sabh kilvikh paap dukh kati-aa mayree jindurhee-ay mal gurmukh naam utaaray raam. All sins and errors are erased, O my soul; with the Naam, the Gurmukh washes off this filth.
es Yat ofs fimrfeor Ae sea TH Hee Ha feHss TH NA (539-7, froras, He 4)
vad punnee har Dhi-aa-i-aa jan naanak ham moorakh mugaDh nistaaray raam. ||1]| By great good fortune, servant Nanak meditates on the Lord; even fools and idiots like me have been saved. ||1]|
A dfs om foorfee ret fest] foor us eAafs mre aM I (539-8, feos, He 4) jo har naam Dhi-aa-iday mayree jindurhee-ay tinaa panchay vasgat aa-ay raam. Those who meditate on the Lord's Name, O my soul, overpower the five passions.
wists oe fofa ay 3 Act fHeste ae Afsag ney Bas IM I (539-9, feos, He 4) antar nav niDh naam hai mayree jindurhee-ay gur satgur alakh lakhaa-ay raam.
The nine treasures of the Naam are within, O my soul; the Great Guru has made me see the unseen Lord.
Ofs wrt Hon usher Het fete ofe fifeor gu As AS TH I (539-9, faorasr, Hs 4) gur aasaa mansaa pooree-aa mayree jindurhee-ay har mili-aa bhukh sabh jaa-ay raam.
The Guru has fulfilled my hopes and desires, O my soul; meeting the Lord, all my hunger is satisfied.
ufs HASte ofs ufs foftimr Hat este Ae asa dfs TE WS TH Ill (539-10, feos, ve 4)
Dhur mastak har parabh likhi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jan naanak har gun gaa-ay raam. ||2||
O servant Nanak, he alone sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O my soul, upon whose forehead God has inscribed such pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
JH unt seedion Hat figste usedt oar urfer IM I (539-11, frre, He 4) ham paapee balvanchee-aa mayree jindurhee-ay pardarohee thag maa-i-aa raam. I am a deceitful sinner, O my soul, a cheat, and a robber of others' wealth.
zsoat Te went nat fieste afe us afs fufs wfenr a I (639-12, fora, v8 4) vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay gur poorai gat mit paa-i-aa raam. But, by great good fortune, I have found the Guru, O my soul; through the Perfect Guru, I have found the way to salvation.
afe nifys ofa ufs sfimor Het fteste fefs nee sofs ater amt I (539-12, feast, 142 4)
gur amrit har mukh cho-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay fir mardaa bahurh jeevaa-i-aa raam. The Guru has poured the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name into my mouth, O my soul, and now, my dead soul has come to life again.
He aoa Afsad FH fks Hot fieste foo a AS eu Tetfeor MM BI (639-13, fara, He 4) jan naanak satgur jo milay mayree jindurhee-ay tin kay sabh dukh gavaa-i-aa raam.
I3II O servant Nanak: those who meet the True Guru, O my soul, have all of their pains taken away. ||3]||
mits Osu ofs on o Hat fieste fas wfimt uy Tes TH I (539-14, frwarsr, we 4) at ootam har naam hai mayree jindurhee-ay jit japi-ai paap gavaatay raam. The Name of the Lord is sublime, O my soul; chanting it, one's sins are washed away.
ufss ufegz afe ofa ate Hat freste og ast vg afar AS IM IN (539-15, frovarsr, He 4) patit pavitar gur har kee-ay mayree jindurhee-ay chahu kundee chahu jug jaatay raam.
The Guru, the Lord, has purified even the sinners, O my soul; now, they are famous and respected in the four directions and throughout the four ages.
JH HS AS Cad Hat fHeste ofa nififS afe Afs aS IH Il (539-15, fora, He 4) ha-umai mail sabh utree mayree jindurhee-ay har amrit har sar naatay raam.
The filth of egotism is totally wiped away, O my soul, by bathing in the Ambrosial Pool of the Lord's Name.
must unt Gad Act fHeste Aa aoa fas ofs TS TH ISIS (539-16, faorast, He 4) apraaDhee paapee uDhray mayree jindurhee-ay jan naanak khin har raatay raam. [41131]
Even sinners are carried across, O my soul, if they are imbued with the Lord's Name, even for an instant, O servant Nanak. ||4]|3]|
faaarst HIST 8 Il (539-17)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 4. Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
JG afsadt fq a Hat fieste faa afe ofs a mars IH I 539-17, feos, ne 4) ha-o balihaaree tin" ka-o mayree jindurhee-ay jin" har har naam aDhaaro raam.
I am a sacrifice, O my soul, to those who take the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afe Afsafs on feafeor vat fest] feu s@re seeoS TH Il (539-18, frovasr, He 4) gur satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay bikh bha-ojal taaranhaaro raam. The Guru, the True Guru, implanted the Name within me, O my soul, and He has carried me across the terrifying world-ocean of poison.
fro fea nfs ofs fourfeur Act fieste fsa AS Hat Hard IMT II (539-19, fava, He 4) jin ik man har Dhi-aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay tin sant janaa jaikaaro raam. Those who have meditated one-pointedly on the Lord, O my soul - I proclaim the Victory of those saintly beings.
Uat uso area ofa Af AY ufenr Het frigate Afs gu faeseas TH WAU (540-1, froma, we 4)
naanak har jap sukh paa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay sabh dookh nivaaranhaaro raam.
[111 Nanak has found peace, meditating on the Lord, O my soul; the Lord is the Destroyer of all pain. ||1]|
AW dhe ue Us od Adt feste ae we ale ys AT IH I (540-1, fora, He 4)
saa rasnaa Dhan Dhan hai mayree jindurhee-ay gun gaavai har parabh kayray raam. Blessed, blessed is that tongue, O my soul, which sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord God.
3 Azo 38 Asda ofo Het fHeste afe atese nafs afs 3S IM Ih (540-2, fora, He 4) tay sarvan bhalay sobhneek heh mayree jindurhee-ay har keertan suneh har tayray raam.
Sublime and splendid are those ears, O my soul, which listen to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
A Ata sor ufeg ure 0 Net faeste A afe oa ae Us MMH II (540-3, fora, He 4) so sees bhalaa pavitar paavan hai mayree jindurhee-ay jo jaa-ay lagai gur pairay raam.
Sublime, pure and pious is that head, O my soul, which falls at the Guru's Feet.
as fees aoa afer At fest fafs afe afs oH fess TH IQ (540-4, faorasr, He 4) gur vitahu naanak vaari-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jin har har naam chitayray raam.
[2] | Nanak is a sacrifice to that Guru, O my soul; the Guru has placed the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in my mind. ||2]|
3 3 38 uses of Het fests A AG Afsag Suto TH I (540-4, frovarsr, Hs 4)
tay naytar bhalay parvaan heh mayree jindurhee-ay jo saaDhoo satgur daykheh raam. Blessed and approved are those eyes, O my soul, which gaze upon the Holy True Guru.
3 Uns udls ufeg ofa Hat fieste A fe vA afe afs Sufs MMH Ih 540-5, fraser, He 4) tay hasat puneet pavitar heh mayree jindurhee-ay jo har jas har har laykheh raam. Sacred and sanctified are those hands, O my soul, which write the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
SH AS & ua fos urbafs Hat feste A Hef UeH BeAfT TH I (540-6, frorarsr, Hs 4) tis jan kay pag nit poojee-ah mayree jindurhee-ay jo maarag Dharam chalayseh raam. I worship continually the feet of that humble being, O my soul, who walks on the Path of Dharma - the path of righteousness.
aod fsa fee afer Act feeste afe vfs ofs on HSAfT IMT ISI (540-7, frorarsr, He 4) naanak tin vitahu vaari-aa mayree jindurhee-ay har sun har naam manayseh raam.
31] Nanak is a sacrifice to those, O my soul, who hear of the Lord, and believe in the Lord's Name. ||3]|
Usfs use rary oO dt fHeste As ofa ofa on ftmres Mt I (540-8, frovasr, He 4) Dharat paataal aakaas hai mayree jindurhee-ay sabh har har naam Dhi-aavai raam. The earth, the nether regions of the underworld, and the Akaashic ethers, O my soul, all meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
u@s ual Sad Hot fest] fos afe afe afs AA TS IM I (540-8, faorasr, He 4) pa-un paanee baisantaro mayree jindurhee-ay nit har har har jas gaavai raam. Wind, water and fire, O my soul, continually sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
ze fae Ag orarg 3 Adt fHeste fe afe ofe an fms IH II (540-9, feos, ne 4) van tarin sabh aakaar hai mayree jindurhee-ay mukh har har naam Dhi-aavai raam. The woods, the meadows and the whole world, O my soul, chant with their mouths the Lord's Name, and meditate on the Lord.
soa 3 dg ufs Uatfenr Act feste A Tents safs He BS TH Isisil (540-10, fara, H8 4)
naanak tay har dar pain"aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jo gurmukh bhagat man laavai raam. ||4]|4||
O Nanak, one who, as Gurmukh, focuses his consciousness on the Lord's devotional worship - O my soul, he is robed in honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|4]|
faaarst HIS 8 Il (540-11)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 4. Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
fas ofs ofa oH 3 ofS Heat freste 3 Hou Hs fore TH I (540-11, foros, Hs 4)
jin har har naam na chayti-o mayree jindurhee-ay tay manmukh moorh i-aanay raam. Those who do not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul - those self- willed manmukhs are foolish and ignorant.
a Hfo wieor fos ofee Act fest] A nifs qe ueTS TH I (540-12, frorasr, ne 4)
jo mohi maa-i-aa chit laa-iday mayree jindurhee-ay say ant ga-ay pachhutaanay raam. Those who attach their consciousness to emotional attachment and Maya, O my soul, depart regretfully in the end.
dfs waa set a wale Nat fete A HONE uu wars IH I (540-13, faovasr, ne 4) har dargeh dho-ee naa lahni" mayree jindurhee-ay jo manmukh paap lubhaanay raam.
They find no place of rest in the Court of the Lord, O my soul; those self-willed manmukhs are deluded by sin.
Ho soa ad ffs Cad Het fret] safe vfu ofe ath MATS IMT NA (540-13, faorarsr, He 4) jan naanak gur mil ubray mayree jindurhee-ay har jap har naam samaanay raam.
H11I O servant Nanak, those who meet the Guru are saved, O my soul; chanting the Name of the Lord, they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Afs ate fhe Afsag ag Het fieste A ofs afs oy fess IH I (540-14, frre, we 4) sabh jaa-ay milhu satguroo ka-o mayree jindurhee-ay jo har har naam darirh-aavai raam.
Go, everyone, and meet the True Guru; O my soul, He implants the Name of the Lord, Har, har, within the heart.
dfs nufeur fus feo o atnet Hot fest] na for ATU ATS mS for B mS IM I (540-15, fasrarat, Hs 4)
har japdi-aa khin dhil na keej-ee mayree jindurhee-ay mat ke jaapai saahu aavai ke na aavai raam.
Do not hesitate for an instant - meditate on the Lord, O my soul; who knows whether he shall draw another breath?
AT or A Has AT ust A HVS Aes d Hat fieste fag ofs He fats mrs IH I (540-16, faararat, Hs 4)
saa vaylaa So moorat saa gharhee so muhat safal hai mayree jindurhee-ay jit har mayraa chit aavai raam.
That time, that moment, that instant, that second is so fruitful, O my soul, when my Lord comes into my mind.
He area Hy fourfenr Act freste AHetag 3fF B vrs TH IQ (540-17, faorast, He 4) jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jamkankar nayrh na aavai raam. 2] |
Servant Nanak has meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my soul, and now, the Messenger of Death does not draw near him. ||2]|
dfs 24 Ae fos AS fae Act fess A sd fafs uu AHS TH Il (540-18, fara, He 4) har vaykhai sunai nit sabh kichh mayree jindurhee-ay so darai jin paap kamtay raam. The Lord continually watches, and hears everything, O my soul; he alone is afraid, who commits sins.
fan visa foset AO o Het fieste fefs afs Afs 3a Afe WS TH Il (540-19, faorarst, He 4) jis antar hirdaa suDh hai mayree jindurhee-ay tin jan sabh dar sut ghatay raam. One whose heart is pure within, O my soul, casts off all his fears.
dfs fase ath ustfrmr Act faeste Afs su HS BAS GUS TH Il (540-19, frost, He 4) har nirbha-o naam pateeji-aa mayree jindurhee-ay sabh jhakh maaran dusat kuptay raam.
One who has faith in the Fearless Name of the Lord, O my soul - all his enemies and attackers speak against him in vain.
UST U8A
Gg us sola Afeor Het fests fats ust orf vfs ws IH WSN (41-1, frome, ws 4) gur pooraa naanak sayvi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jin pairee aan sabh ghatay raam.
SII
Nanak has served the Perfect Guru, O my soul, who causes all to fall at His feet. ||3]|
A mint afe fos Adhd Het feste A AS e Atos SST IH I (541-2, frorarsr, ws 4) So aisaa har nit sayvee-ai mayree jindurhee-ay jo sabh doo saahib vadaa raam. Serve such a Lord continuously, O my soul, who is the Great Lord and Master of all.
frat fea ufo fea orefoor Ast fest] fear ardt fart ct fos BST IMT I 541-3, faves, He 4)
jin"ee ik man ik araaDhi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay tinaa naahee kisai dee kichh chadaa raam.
Those who single-mindedly worship Him in adoration, O my soul, are not subservient to anyone.
ae Afen ofs noe ufenr Het fest] su neg Afs fSee vist 7 I (541-4, faorasr, He 4) gur sayvi-ai har mahal paa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay jhakh maaran sabh nindak ghandaa raam.
Serving the Guru, I have obtained the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, O my soul; all the slanderers and trouble-makers bark in vain.
Ho soa oy fourfenr Act fest] of HAsfa afe fof zat ITH NSNUI (541-4, fares, H8 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay Dhur mastak har likh chhadaa raam. ||4]|5||
Servant Nanak has meditated on the Name, O my soul; such is the pre-ordained destiny which the Lord written on his forehead. ||4]|5]|
fasarst HIST 8 Il (541-5)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 4. Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
Afs tha 33 3 ease He ofs ys F Weta A Ae SHSM TH I (541-6, fare, He 4) sabh jee-a tayray too" varatdaa mayray har parabh too” jaaneh jo jee-ay kamaa-ee-ai raam.
All beings are Yours - You permeate them all. O my Lord God, You know what they do in their hearts.
dfs nists wofe of Jd Adt fest] AS Sa nfs Haast IM II (541-6, fora, He 4)
har antar baahar naal hai mayree jindurhee-ay sabh vaykhai man mukraa-ee-ai raam. The Lord is with them, inwardly and outwardly, O my soul; He sees everything, but the mortal denies the Lord in his mind.
Hone 8 ofe vfs 3 Het frigate As faset wes Teehat TH I (541-7, frovarsr, Hs 4) manmukhaa no har door hai mayree jindurhee-ay sabh birthee ghaal gavaa-ee-ai raam.
The Lord is far away from the self-willed manmukhs, O my soul; all their efforts are in vain.
Ho Soa TeHfa fomrfeor Ast feste afs THe oedt wrest a7 AU (641-8, frost, He 4)
jan naanak gurmukh Dhi-aa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay har haajar nadree aa-ee-ai raam. ||1]|
Servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, meditates on the Lord, O my soul; he beholds the Lord ever-present. ||1]|
A sas A Aza Nt fests A us AS Hie HS IH Ih 541-9, foray, Hs 4)
say bhagat say sayvak mayree jindurhee-ay jo parabh mayray man bhaanay raam. They are devotees, and they are servants, O my soul, who are pleasing to the Mind of my God.
A dfs waa voter Ast feste orfofeth fe ANTS IMT I (541-9, fora, He 4) say har dargeh painaa-i-aa mayree jindurhee-ay ahinis saach samaanay raam. They are robed in honor in the Court of the Lord, O my soul; night and day, they remain absorbed in the True Lord.
fo a Afa He Cad Act reste df aS sefs StS TH I 541-10, faorast, He 4)
tin kai sang mal utrai mayree jindurhee-ay rang raatay nadar neesaanay raam.
In their company, the filth of one's sins is washed away, O my soul; imbued with the Lord's Love, one comes to bear the Mark of His Grace.
aod at ys aost Het fests fife AG Afr mre IH MI (41-11, froras, v2 4) naanak kee parabh bayntee mayree jindurhee-ay mil saaDhoo sang aghaanay raam.
[2] | Nanak offers his prayer to God, O my soul; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he is satisfied. ||2]|
3 ana afu afie dt feste afu ofa af fener Ae IH I Ga41-11, fora, He 4)
hay rasnaa jap gobindo mayree jindurhee-ay jap har har tarisnaa jaa-ay raam.
O tongue, chant the Name of God; O my soul, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, your desires shall be extinguished.
fan efeor ag Ha ursgqan Nat feste fsa nfs ou SAS IM I (541-12, feos, Hs 4) jis da-i-aa karay mayraa paarbarahm mayree jindurhee-ay tis man naam vasaa-ay raam.
He, unto whom my Supreme Lord God shows Mercy, O my soul, enshrines the Name in his mind.
fan Se ua Afsag Hat fest A af us feta ue a I 641-13, fra, He 4)
jis bhaytay pooraa satguroo mayree jindurhee-ay so har Dhan niDh paa-ay raam. One who meets the Perfect True Guru, O my soul, obtains the treasure of the Lord's wealth.
zat Hats fxs Act fieste aoa ofs Te WE TH USBI (541-14, feos, He 4) vadbhaagee sangat milai mayree jindurhee-ay naanak har gun gaa-ay raam. |[3]|
By great good fortune, one joins the Company of the Holy, O my soul. O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
we Boats ae soon Hat fHeste usqaH YS VS TH I (541-14, feos, ne 4)
thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa mayree jindurhee-ay paarbarahm parabh daataa raam. In the places and interspaces, O my soul, the Supreme Lord God, the Great Giver, is pervading.
Tor nig o ure Het frigate use use faarst IH I (541-15, favors, He 4) taa kaa ant na paa-ee-ai mayree jindurhee-ay pooran purakh biDhaataa raam. His limits cannot be found, O my soul; He is the Perfect Architect of Destiny.
Rea Hor ufsunser Hat feste fa@ area furs yrst aM I (541-16, faorarsr, ne 4) sarab jee-aa partipaaldaa mayree jindurhee-ay ji-o baalak pit maataa raam. He cherishes all beings, O my soul, as the mother and father cherish their child.
Hon fimreu od fed Het fieste Ae soa Tenfe AST TH ISINEN (541-16, faorasr, He 4) sahas si-aanap nah milai mayree jindurhee-ay jan naanak gurmukh jaataa raam. [14116]
By thousands of clever tricks, He cannot be obtained, O my soul; servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, has come to know the Lord. ||4||6]|
sat 4% Il (541-17)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six||
faorast HIST U BI ws A (541-18)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 1 Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, First House:
qe Afsars ure Il (541-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs a Sa nis tfmr As we Me A ad A OUaH fone IH II 541-19, feos, He 5) har kaa ayk achambha-o daykhi-aa mayray laal jee-o jo karay so Dharam ni-aa-ay raam.
I have seen one miracle of the Lord, O my Dear Beloved - whatever He does is righteous and just.
dfs ga orarat ufeGS AT we HG ures We AAS TH Il (541-19, frorast, He 5)
har rang akhaarhaa paa-i-on mayray laal jee-o aavan jaan sabaa-ay raam.
The Lord has fashioned this beautiful arena, O my Dear Beloved, where all come and go.
Uast us2 mize 3 We" fSefo dur fate Hele fraror i (542-1, faorasr, He 5)
aavan ta jaanaa tineh kee-aa jin maydan sirjee-aa. The One who fashioned the world causes them to come and go.
feast fs Afsag Hote gare feta sof 3% feafemr I (542-2, faras, H8 5)
iknaa mayl satgur mahal bulaa-ay ik bharam bhoolay firdi-aa.
Some meet the True Guru - the Lord invites them into the Mansion of His Presence; others wander around, deluded by doubt.
Mig 3a Sd Wels J AS fo sfomm ANTS Il (542-2, freee, He 5) ant tayraa too‘hai jaaneh too” sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay. You alone know Your limits; You are contained in all.
AY ad Sod Hed A3d dfs eas Wan fonreS Al (542-3, faorasr, ne 5) sach kahai naanak sunhu santahu har vartai Dharam ni-aa-ay. ||1|| Nanak speaks the Truth: listen, Saints - the Lord dispenses even-handed justice. ||1]|
nied frog Hats AS oe A afs af oH Maa IM II (542-3, fara, He 5)
aavhu milhu sahayleeho mayray laal jee-o har har naam araaDhay raam.
Come and join me, O my beautiful dear beloveds; let's worship the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ats Aeg ud Afsag He HS AG AH a HSE AM IH Il (542-4, faorasr, He 5)
kar sayvhu pooraa satguroo mayray laal jee-o jam kaa maarag saaDhay raam. Let's serve the Perfect True Guru, O my dear beloveds, and clear away the Path of Death.
Hea faust afo aenfy fe esas Het ure I (542-5, frorarst, v2 5) maarag bikh-rhaa saaDh gurmukh har dargeh sobhaa paa-ee-ai.
Having cleared the treacherous path, as Gurmukhs, we shall obtain honor in the Court of the Lord.
fro ag fears uag fafimr foor df= feo fre arent I (542-5, fora, He 5)
jin ka-o biDhaatai Dharahu likhi-aa tin"aa rain din liv laa-ee-ai.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, lovingly focus their consciousness on the Lord, night and day.
ICH HHS He Set AT Afar fiefs ANT I (542-6, frovasr, He 5)
ha-umai mamtaa moh chhutaa jaa sang mili-aa saaDhay.
Self-conceit, egotism and emotional attachment are eradicated when one joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
He Ad Boa HAS Int ofa ahs SH MST MQM (542-6, faovast, He 5)
jan kahai naanak mukat ho-aa har har naam araaDhay. ||2||
Says servant Nanak, one who contemplates the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is liberated. ||2||
ad ffsg As feag of ns we ME visa use UAT TH I (542-7, feos, Hs 5)
kar jorhihu sant ikatar ho-ay mayray laal jee-o abhinaasee purakh poojayhaa raam. Let's join hands, O Saints; let's come together, O my dear beloveds, and worship the imperishable, Almighty Lord.
ag fafa yar deer Hs oe AG fed HE Jo AS wads TH I (542-8, frovasr, ws 5) baho biDh poojaa khojee-aa mayray laal jee-o ih man tan sabh arpayhaa raam.
I sought Him through uncounted forms of adoration, O my dear beloveds; now, I dedicate my entire mind and body to the Lord.
HO 36 U6 AS Ys AT four & uA GaSe Il (542-8, ferovarsr, He 5)
man tan Dhan sabh parabhoo kayraa ki-aa ko pooj charhaava-ay.
The mind, body and all wealth belong to God; so what can anyone offer to Him in worship?
fan dfe furs efimres aomit A ous nif AATSe Ih (542-9, forest, He 5)
jis ho-ay kirpaal da-i-aal su-aamee so parabh ank samaav-ay.
He alone merges in the lap of God, unto whom the Merciful Lord Master becomes compassionate.
aa HASfa aff fan a fSH ae ate AST Il (542-10, frovast, He 5)
bhaag mastak ho-ay jis kai tis gur naal sanayhaa.
One who has such pre-ordained destiny written on his forehead, comes to bear love for the Guru.
Wo ad aoe fife ronafs ofs afe SH UAT WSN (542-10, fara, He 5)
jan kahai naanak mil saaDhsangat har har naam poojayhaa. ||3]|
Says servant Nanak, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, let's worship the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
wd fen das oH fed AS we ME afe ufentart wis mre TH I (542-11, faorasr, He 5) dah dis khojat ham firay mayray laal jee-o har paa-i-arhaa ghar aa-ay raam.
I wandered around, searching in the ten directions, O my dear beloveds, but I came to find the Lord in the home of my own being.
dfs Hes ofa He Afr AS we AE ofs fSR nfo sfoor ANS IH I (542-11, faorasr, He 5)
har mandar har jee-o saaji-aa mayray laal jee-o har tis meh rahi-aa samaa-ay raam. The Dear Lord has fashioned the body as the temple of the Lord, O my dear beloveds; the Lord continues to dwell there.
Aaa AHTat orf Aydt aenfy usa|e dfenr il (642-12, frorast, v2 5)
sarbay Samaanaa aap Ssu-aamee gurmukh pargat ho-i-aa.
The Lord and Master Himself is pervading everywhere; through the Guru, He is revealed.
fifenr nite gy ater oif@ fs aA Sfemr il (542-13, foros, we 5)
miti-aa aDhayraa dookh naathaa ami-o har ras cho-i-aa.
Darkness is dispelled, and pains are removed, when the sublime essence of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar trickles down.
Ast eat Sor Ant ugg AS SS Il (542-13, feos, ve 5) jahaa daykhaa tahaa su-aamee paarbarahm sabh thaa-ay. Wherever I look, the Lord and Master is there. The Supreme Lord God is everywhere.
He ad aed Afsate frerfeor ofs ufeniat wis mre WSN (542-14, fares, He 5)
jan kahai naanak satgur milaa-i-aa har paa-i-arhaa ghar aa-ay. ||4||1]|
Says servant Nanak, meeting the True Guru, I have found the Lord, within the home of my own being. ||4]|1]|
Ta fast HIS U Il (542-15)
raag bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5. Raag Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
mifs UlsH He HIS We ATar UTS MOST ITH I (542-15, frorarsr, Hs 5)
at pareetam man mohnaa ghat sohnaa paraan aDhaaraa raam.
He is dear to me; He fascinates my mind; He is the ornament of my heart, the support of the breath of life.
Hed Hat ores dures efenre at mrs murat IH Il (542-15, faorarst, He 5)
sundar sobhaa laal gopaal da-i-aal kee apar apaaraa raam.
The Glory of the Beloved, Merciful Lord of the Universe is beautiful; He is infinite and without limit.
aus fears afiz ome frog as fanrebor i (542-16, frovarst, v2 5)
gopaal da-i-aal gobind laalan milhu kant nimaanee-aa.
O Compassionate Sustainer of the World, Beloved Lord of the Universe, please, join with Your humble soul-bride.
30 SdHO UA UdHO Sd ole Safe fearstor I (542-17, feos, He 5)
nain tarsan daras parsan nah need rain vihaanee-aa.
My eyes long for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; the night passes, but I cannot Sleep.
fomits nite oH fito Se Aare Alera il (542-17, faorast, ve 5)
gi-aan anjan naam binjan bha-ay sagal seegaaraa.
I have applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my food. These are all my decorations.
Soa ufenitt Hs HU Afs AZT THT AU (542-18, faovasr, ne 5) naanak pa-i-ampai sant jampai may! kant hamaaraa. ||1] | Prays Nanak, let's meditate on the Saint, that he may unite us with our Husband Lord.
[111 ory Bargd dfs afs AS Ba od FHS IM II (542-18, frorast, He 5)
laakh ulaahanay mohi har jab lag nah milai raam. I endure thousands of reprimands, and still, my Lord has not met with me.
fims aG ag@ Cure fas TH BI VS IM Il (542-19, fara, He 5) milan ka-o kara-o upaav kichh hamaaraa nah chalai raam. I make the effort to meet with my Lord, but none of my efforts work.
36 fas fas wifes fim fag ase fact o dtby I (542-19, frovarar, ve 5)
chal chit bit anit pari-a bin kavan biDhee na Dheejee-ai.
Unsteady is my consciousness, and unstable is my wealth; without my Lord, I cannot be consoled.
Ua uss we ue Alers feed ofe as fag fas Ate tl (543-1, faorasr, v2 5)
khaan paan seegaar birthay har kant bin ki-o jeejee-ai. Food, drink and decorations are useless; without my Husband Lord, how can I survive?
nimat fummat dfs fesbas afs 3 Aethat fea FS I (543-1, frost, He 5)
aasaa pi-aasee rain dinee-ar reh na sakee-ai ik tilai.
I yearn for Him, and desire Him night and day. I cannot live without Him, even for an instant.
cog ufenit HS oat Se urfe Ha furs fs QM (543-2, fora, He 5) naanak pa-i-ampai sant daasee ta-o parsaad mayraa pir milai. ||2]| Prays Nanak, O Saint, Iam Your slave; by Your Grace, I meet my Husband Lord. ||2]|
An 2a fyS Afr Pa o usb IH I (543-2, frat, He 5) Sayj ayk pari-o sang daras na paa-ee-ai raam. I share a bed with my Beloved, but I do not behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Wizde Hfo nda as Hots gore IM I (543-3, frost, He 5) avgan mohi anayk kat mahal bulaa-ee-ai raam. I have endless demerits - how can my Lord call me to the Mansion of His Presence?
feats fourat miata foe frog us farsur fed II (543-3, frorvarsr, ne 5)
nirgun nimaanee anaath binvai milhu parabh kirpaa niDhay.
The worthless, dishonored and orphaned soul-bride prays, "Meet with me, O God, treasure of mercy."
3H Sis det Hof Het ys user Us og fod I (543-4, fovea, He 5)
bharam bheet kho-ee-ai sahj so-ee-ai parabh palak paykhat nav niDhay.
The wall of doubt has been shattered, and now I sleep in peace, beholding God, the Lord of the nine treasures, even for an instant.
fafa res mire Hoe ure fife Fifar Hares arefbat i (543-5, fovea, He 5)
garihi laal aavai mahal paavai mil sang mangal gaa-ee-ai.
If only I could come into the Mansion of my Beloved Lord's Presence! Joining with Him, I sing the songs of joy.
Soa ufenitt Hs Agel Hfs ean feurehr Sil (5643-5, faves, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai sant sarnee mohi daras dikhaa-ee-ai. ||3||
Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints; please, reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3]|
Hae & usAtfe ofe ofe ufeer aH Ih (543-6, frovasr, He 5) santan kai parsaad har har paa-i-aa raam. By the Grace of the Saints, I have obtained the Lord, Har, Har.
fee uat ufo Aifs sufs gstfeer ant I (543-6, fora, 2 5) ichh punnee man saat tapat bujhaa-i-aa raam. My desires are fulfilled, and my mind is at peace; the fire within has been quenched.
Heo WH feon se AOS moe Haw FA Wor I (543-7, frovasr, He 5)
Saflaa so dinas rainay suhaavee anad mangal ras ghanaa.
Fruitful is that day, and beauteous is that night, and countless are the joys, celebrations and pleasures.
Yate TUS difae Bea ACS THAT TE FST Il (543-7, faorarar, Hs 5)
pargatay gupaal gobind laalan kavan rasnaa gun bhanaa.
The Lord of the Universe, the Beloved Sustainer of the World, has been revealed. With what tongue can I speak of His Glory?
3H Bs Hz fears ae fife wet Hares arfeur ih 543-8, frovasr, He 5)
bharam lobh moh bikaar thaakay mil sakhee mangal gaa-i-aa.
Doubt, greed, emotional attachment and corruption are taken away; joining with my companions, I sing the songs of joy.
Sod ufenitt Hs AU fafs afe afe Aafa frerfeor SII (543-3, frorarsr, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai sant jampai jin har har sanjog milaa-i-aa. ||4||2||
Prays Nanak, I meditate on the Saint, who has led me to merge with the Lord, Har, Har. ||4][2]|
faararst HIST U Il (543-9)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
ats fasu Ts USAIN UT wiofeg SH SarSr TH Il (543-9, fara, He 5)
kar kirpaa gur paarbarahm pooray an-din naam vakhaanaa raam.
Shower Your Mercy upon me, O Guru, O Perfect Supreme Lord God, that I might chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, night and day.
nifys rat Coo ofe aA for oat Sa arat IH IN (543-10, frat, He 5)
amrit banee uchraa har jas mithaa laagai tayraa bhaanaa raam.
I speak the Ambrosial Words of the Guru's Bani, praising the Lord. Your Will is sweet to me, Lord.
afe efeur nffor dune afie afe ardt o3 fire i (543-10, faorast, He 5)
kar da-i-aa ma-i-aa gopaal gobind ko-ay naahee tujh binaa.
Show kindness and compassion, O Sustainer of the Word, Lord of the Universe; without You, I have no other.
FHGE ME MU UTS AIG Sq UG SH HoT Il (543-11, farses, He 5) samrath agath apaar pooran jee-o tan Dhan tum" manaa. Almighty, sublime, infinite, perfect Lord - my soul, body, wealth and mind are Yours.
Hoe HAT nara FIG Tots StS mA Il (543-12, frorasr, v2 5) moorakh mugaDh anaath chanchal balheen neech ajaanaa. I am foolish, stupid, masterless, fickle, powerless, lowly and ignorant.
faadts soa Hafe Sat aft SI wrse AST UU (543-12, feos, He 5)
binvant naanak saran tayree rakh layho aavan jaanaa. ||1||
Prays Nanak, I seek Your Sanctuary - please save me from coming and going in reincarnation. ||1]|
AQ Adal uh fs HE Te aes afe stot TH I (543-13, fara, He 5)
saaDhah sarnee paa-ee-ai har jee-o gun gaavah har neetaa raam.
In the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints, I have found the Dear Lord, and I constantly sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ufs saso ot ufs ste was fe Ae AS Ufss UstsT TH II (543-13, faavarsr, He 5)
Dhoor bhagtan kee man tan laga-o har jee-o sabh patit puneetaa raam.
Applying the dust of the devotees to the mind and body, O Dear Lord, all sinners are sanctified.
ufsa uatst ofa faq Afar fae forse urfemr i (543-14, frat, He 5)
patitaa puneetaa hohi tin" sang jin" biDhaataa paa-i-aa. The sinners are sanctified in the company of those who have met the Creator Lord.
oH TS Ab as fos efs vats Aetemr I (543-15, forest, He 5)
naam raatay jee-a daatay nit deh charheh savaa-i-aa.
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are given the gift of the life of the soul; their gifts increase day by day.
fafa fafa ae fofa of afu fast sy AIST I (543-15, fora, 2 5)
riDh siDh nav niDh har jap jinee aatam jeetaa.
Wealth, the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, and the nine treasures come to those who meditate on the Lord, and conquer their own soul.
faodfs aoa esafa usta ATG ATS HIST QI (543-16, fora, He 5) binvant naanak vadbhaag paa-ee-ah saaDh saajan meetaa. ||2| |
Prays Nanak, it is only by great good fortune that the Holy Saints, the Lord's companions, are found, O friends. ||2||
faat Ag Zefsor ofs AG A Us ATI IH Il (543-16, fro, He 5) jinee sach vananji-aa har jee-o say pooray saahaa raam. Those who deal in Truth, O Dear Lord, are the perfect bankers.
a3 una fo ufs afe Me ale atesg Bo IH I (543-17, frost, He 5)
bahut khajaanaa tinn peh har jee-o har keertan laahaa raam.
They possess the great treasure, O Dear Lord, and they reap the profit of the Lord's Praise.
aM au 3 Se fama A Ae us fAG afsur I (543-17, fora, He 5) kaam kroDh na lobh bi-aapai jo jan parabh si-o raati-aa. Sexual desire, anger and greed do not cling to those who are attuned to God.
ea Wofs fa wofs TH a Sar HAS Ih (543-18, frovarsr, He 5)
ayk jaaneh ayk maaneh raam kai rang maati-aa.
They know the One, and they believe in the One; they are intoxicated with the Lord's Love.
Sta HS vdat us Adal ufo fsar Surat | (543-18, faorasr, He 5)
lag sant charnee parhay sarnee man tinaa omaahaa.
They fall at the Feet of the Saints, and seek their Sanctuary; their minds are filled with joy.
faadfs aoa faa oH US ASt AS ATT BI (543-19, frorast, He 5) binvant naanak jin naam palai say-ee sachay saahaa. ||3]| Prays Nanak, those who have the Naam in their laps are the true bankers. ||3]||
Sod Het fandha ofa we aT at aw ardt IM I (543-19, faorast, He 5) naanak so-ee simree-ai har jee-o jaa kee kal Dhaaree raam. O Nanak, meditate on that Dear Lord, who supports all by His almighty strength.
UST uss
qanfy Hod o nd ofa HIG aga Use HATS TH I (544-1, frorasr, He 5) gurmukh manhu na veesrai har jee-o kartaa purakh muraaree raam. In their minds, the Gurmukhs do not forget the Dear Lord, the Primal Creator Lord.
ey da 3 38 faery frat afe afs fimrfenr it (544-2, frorarsr, 3 5) dookh rog na bha-o bi-aapai jin"ee har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Pain, disease and fear do not cling to those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
As ure 3d sen@ uate fesftoar urfeor it (544-2, frovas, 2 5)
sant parsaad taray bhavjal poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa.
By the Grace of the Saints, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and obtain their pre-ordained destiny.
ent caret nfo ANS niet fife use wurst Il (544-3, frovarar, v8 5)
vajee vaDhaa-ee man saa™t aa-ee mili-aa purakh apaaree.
They are congratulated and applauded, their minds are at peace, and they meet the infinite Lord God.
faadfs aoa frnfs afe ofa fee vat THT IBISI (544-3, froarsr, He 5)
binvant naanak simar har har ichh punnee hamaaree. ||4]|3]|
Prays Nanak, by meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, my desires are fulfilled. ||4]|3]|
fara HIG U WT 2 (544-5) bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe As ong ae YATfE I (544-5) ik-o‘kaar sat naam gur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
zu AY dose fit UH war Il (544-6, frovasr, ue 5) vaDh sukh rainrhee-ay pari-a paraym lagaa. O peaceful night, grow longer - I have come to enshrine love for my Beloved.
we Fy Steste USA Aer ual" Il (544-6, fares, He 5) ghat dukh need-rhee-ay parsa-o sadaa pagaa. O painful sleep, grow shorter, so that I may constantly grasp His Feet.
ual Ufs ateS Het AE oH SA Saat Il (544-6, frovars, Hs 5)
pag Dhoor baachha-o sadaa jaacha-o naam ras bairaaganee.
I long for the dust of His Feet, and beg for His Name; for His Love, I have renounced the world.
finn dfat ast ATA HST HoT eas fSnraat i (544-7, frrarsr, He 5)
pari-a rang raatee sahj maatee mahaa durmat ti-aaganee.
I am imbued with the Love of my Beloved, and I am naturally intoxicated with it; I have forsaken my awful evil-mindedness.
afta ar Stat YH stat fae ulsH A Her Il (544-7, fora, Hs 5)
geh bhujaa leen"ee paraym bheenee milan pareetam sach magaa.
He has taken me by the arm, and I am saturated with His Love; I have met my Beloved on the Path of Truth.
foods aoa ofs fasur go@ vaed Afar Bar WAU (544-8, froarsr, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa raha-o charnah sang lagaa. ||1]||
Prays Nanak, please Lord, shower Your Mercy on me, that I may remain attached to Your Feet. ||1]|
Aadt Aut Heald us a Tals ward I (544-9, frosts, ue 5) mayree sakhee sahaylrheeho parabh kai charan lagah. O my friends and companions, let us remain attached to the Feet of God.
nfs fyot dH wer ofe at sats Hate i (544-9, frovarsr, He 5) man pari-a paraym ghanaa har kee bhagat mangah. Within my mind is great love for my Beloved; I beg for the Lord's devotional worship.
ofa safs ureint ys fore arf fsb afe Far I (544-9, fravarar, He 5)
har bhagat paa-ee-ai parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai jaa-ay milee-ai har janaa.
The Lord's devotional worship is obtained, meditating on God. Let us go and meet the humble servants of the Lord.
H'9 Hg fears srt raf sq ue feg Hor Il (544-10, fora, He 5)
maan moh bikaar tajee-ai arap tan Dhan ih manaa.
Renounce pride, emotional attachment and corruption, and dedicate this body, wealth and mind to Him.
as usd uss Te AysS FH Sis afs ate ffs sar il (544-11, fara, Hs 5)
bad purakh pooran gun sampooran bharam bheet har har mil bhagah.
The Lord God is great, perfect, glorious, absolutely perfect; meeting the Lord, Har, Har, the wall of doubt is torn down.
fradfs oon fs Hz Ate ofs oy fos fos fos Fug QM 44-1, fares, He 5)
binvant naanak sun mantar sakhee-ay har naam nit nit nit japah. ||2| |
Prays Nanak, hear these teachings, O friends - chant the Lord's Name constantly, over and over again. ||2| |
dfs ofa Ae Afs Sa HS I (544-12, feovasr, ve 5) har naar suhaaganay sabh rang maanay. The Lord's bride is a happy wife; she enjoys all pleasures.
ais 3 Snet us use fae i (544-12, frovasr, He 5) raa‘d na bais-ee parabh purakh chiraanay. She does not sit around like a widow, because the Lord God lives forever.
oo eu ure ys fomre Ufs 3 aerator I (544-13, foros, we 5) nah dookh paavai parabh Dhi-aavai Dhan tay badbhaagee-aa. She does not suffer pain - she meditates on God. She is blessed, and very fortunate.
Hu Aofa Refs faofse def on afk cfr wafer il (544-13, forest, 2 5)
sukh sahj soveh kilbikh khoveh naam ras rang jaagee-aa.
She sleeps in peaceful ease, her sins are erased, and she wakes to the joy and love of the Naam.
fife YH soar ofa on ada fi~at ase HIS STE I (544-14, firorarsr, we 5)
mil paraym rahnaa har naam gahnaa pari-a bachan meethay bhaanay.
She remains absorbed in her Beloved - the Lord's Name is her ornament. The Words of her Beloved are sweet and pleasing to her.
faodfs aoa Ho fee uret ofs fH use fogs NBII (544-15, frost, He 5)
binvant naanak man ichh paa-ee har milay purakh chiraanay. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, I have obtained my mind's desires; I have met my eternal Husband Lord. ||3]|
fez fafa Afses as mSeT I (544-15, fraser, He 5) tit garihi sohilrhay kod anandaa. The songs of bliss resound, and millions of pleasures are found in that house;
fs 3fs safe sfomr ys USHTSET I (544-16, frost, Hs 5) man tan rav rahi-aa parabh parmaanandaa. the mind and body are permeated by God, the Lord of supreme bliss.
dfs a3 mds efenrs Aloe afie ufss Curse I (544-16, froars, 8 5)
har kant anant da-i-aal sareeDhar gobind patit uDhaarano.
My Husband Lord is infinite and merciful; He is the Lord of wealth, the Lord of the Universe, the Saving Grace of sinners.
ufs faur oct ofs nad 3 fit ATES SSS I (544-17, fovea, ne 5)
parabh kirpaa Dhaaree har muraaree bhai sinDh saagar taarno.
God, the Giver of mercy, the Lord, the Destroyer of pride, carries us across the terrifying world-ocean of poison.
A Hofe vie faq afs oe feo fase Aomit Het I (544-17, fora, He 5)
jo saran aavai tis kanth laavai ih birad su-aamee sandaa.
The Lord lovingly embraces whoever comes to the Lord's Sanctuary - this is the way of the Lord and Master.
faodfs aoa dfs as fifeor Fe aw AIS NIU (544-18, froast, He 5)
binvant naanak har kant mili-aa sadaa kayl karandaa. ||4]|1]||4|| Prays Nanak, I have met my Husband Lord, who plays with me forever. ||4]|1||4]|
faaarst HIST U Il (544-19)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs Bde Ade 3d AT feeA Hat Il (544-19, fara, He 5) har charan sarovar tah karahu nivaas manaa. The Lord's Feet are the Pools of Ambrosial Nectar; your dwelling is there, O my mind.
UST ugu
ats HAO Ufa Ad Als faofse SA Hor Il (545-1, frovarsr, He 5)
kar majan har saray sabh kilbikh naas manaa.
Take your cleansing bath in the Ambrosial Pool of the Lord, and all of your sins shall be wiped away, O my soul.
afe Ae HHS dfse ANS Sy Mids SA Il 545-1, frost, He 5)
kar sadaa majan gobind sajan dukh anDhayraa naasay.
Take your cleansing ever in the Lord God, O friends, and the pain of darkness shall be dispelled.
HOH Hs 3 Ue fSA AG AS AH A SA Il (545-2, faovasr, ve 5) janam maran na ho-ay tis ka-o katai jam kay faasay. Birth and death shall not touch you, and the noose of Death shall be cut away.
fe ATGAG SH at SI YTS MTA I (545-2, frost, we 5)
mil saaDhsangay naam rangay tahaa pooran aaso.
So join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and be imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; there, your hopes shall be fulfilled.
faadfs aoa whe faa af sae GHG fos IAI (545-2, fora, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa har charan kamal nivaaso. ||1] |
Prays Nanak, shower Your Mercy upon me, O Lord, that I might dwell at Your Lotus Feet. ||1]|
3d noe fase AT nije Sead IH Il (545-3, fora, ws 5)
tah anad binod sadaa anhad jhunkaaro raam.
There is bliss and ecstasy there always, and the unstruck celestial melody resounds there.
ffs arefa AS Aa Us aT Has IH I (545-4, frost, ue 5) mil gaavahi sant janaa parabh kaa jaikaaro raam. Meeting together, the Saints sing God's Praises, and celebrate His Victory.
ffs HS arefs uA stefs ofs UN TA Sfar fab I (545-4, fava, He 5)
mil sant gaavahi khasam bhaaveh har paraym ras rang bhinnee-aa.
Meeting together, the Saints sing the Praises of the Lord Master; they are pleasing to the Lord, and saturated with the sublime essence of His love and affection.
dfs os ufeor nmy fetfemr fhe fact feefonr i (645-5, frorarst, He 5)
har laabh paa-i-aa aap mitaa-i-aa milay chiree vichhunni-aa.
They obtain the profit of the Lord, eliminate their self-conceit, and meet Him, from whom they were separated for so long.
afs ga ale efeor ate ys Sa na nurs I (545-5, frase, ue 5)
geh bhujaa leenay da-i-aa keen"ay parabh ayk agam apaaro.
Taking them by the arm, He makes them His own; God, the One, inaccessible and infinite, bestows His kindness.
faadfs aoa Het foo AY Hae JS SSavs MQM (545-6, frase, vz 5) binvant naanak sadaa nirmal sach sabad run jhunkaaro. ||2]|
Prays Nanak, forever immaculate are those who sing the Praises of the True Word of the Shabad. ||2| |
Afé zasraior af ifs aret IH I (545-6, fava, He 5) sun vadbhaagee-aa har amrit banee raam. Listen, O most fortunate ones, to the Ambrosial Bani of the Word of the Lord.
fro a@ acth fet far foe Ant IH I (545-7, foes, He 5) jin ka-o karam likhee tis ridai samaanee raam. He alone, whose karma is so pre-ordained, has it enter into his heart.
noe aoet fsat wet fan vif ys forsur a Il (545-7, fares, Hs 5) akath kahaanee tinee jaanee jis aap parabh kirpaa karay. He alone knows the Unspoken Speech, unto whom God has shown His Mercy.
wing dbo fete o Hor ate ASAT EU Td Il (545-8, fravarsr, He 5)
amar thee-aa fir na moo-aa kal kalaysaa dukh haray.
He becomes immortal, and shall not die again; his troubles, disputes and pains are dispelled.
dfs Aafe uret sta 3 aTet ys UifS Hfs fe Stet Il (545-8, favs, He 5)
har saran paa-ee taj na jaa-ee parabh pareet man tan bhaanee.
He finds the Sanctuary of the Lord; he does not forsake the Lord, and does not leave. God's Love is pleasing to his mind and body.
fasdfs aoa Ae aren ufesg nifys aret Sil (545-9, fava, He 5) binvant naanak sadaa gaa-ee-ai pavitar amrit banee. ||3]| Prays Nanak, sing forever the Sacred Ambrosial Bani of His Word. ||3]|
HO 36 WSs se fas ATE F WEST IM Il (545-10, faovasr, He 5) man tan galat bha-ay kichh kahan na jaa-ee raam. My mind and body are intoxicated - this state cannot be described.
fan 3 Cuffs fafe Shor AHTST IH I (545-10, forest, He 5) jis tay upji-arhaa tin lee-aa samaa-ee raam. We originated from Him, and into Him we shall merge once again.
ffs gon Hat Gfs ust Cea Cefa mrfer It (545-11, froarsr, He 5) mil barahm jotee ot potee udak udak samaa-i-aa. I merge into God's Light, through and through, like water merging into water.
me ate Hdbate Sa sfenr oo EA feRefenr i (545-11, froas, v2 5) jal thal mahee-al ayk ravi-aa nah doojaa daristaa-i-aa. The One Lord permeates the water, the land and the sky - I do not see any other.
afe fafe fgsefe ufs usa atHfs age & ATT I (545-12, frovarst, 42 5)
ban tarin taribhavan poor pooran keemat kahan na jaa-ee.
He is totally permeating the woods, meadows and the three worlds. I cannot express His worth.
fasdfs aoa orfu we fafs Sa ges geret ISIQNUIl (545-12, faorasr, HF 5)
binvant naanak aap jaanai jin ayh banat banaa-ee. ||4]|2||5|| Prays Nanak, He alone knows - He who created this creation. ||4]|2||5||
faaarst HIB U Il (545-13)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
das AS feafs ys yrs mars IH I (545-13, frost, He 5) khojat sant fireh parabh paraan aDhaaray raam. The Saints go around, searching for God, the support of their breath of life.
STs 36 ule sfenr fae fees flmrs aM Ih (545-14, forest, He 5) taan tan kheen bha-i-aa bin milat pi-aaray raam. They lose the strength of their bodies, if they do not merge with their Beloved Lord.
us freg fimrd yffer oe afs efeor afs ofS striht i (545-14, frase, ue 5)
parabh milhu pi-aaray ma-i-aa Dhaaray kar da-i-aa larh laa-ay leejee-ai.
O God, my Beloved, please, bestow Your kindness upon me, that I may merge with You; by Your Mercy, attach me to the hem of Your robe.
ofa on wus Aug AoMit ofe ean Ue HM IN (545-15, fora, He 5)
deh naam apnaa japa-o su-aamee har daras paykhay jeejee-ai.
Bless me with Your Name, that I may chant it, O Lord and Master; beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live.
AHI UTS Het fess Sy wan wears Il (545-16, faavas", He 5)
samrath pooran sadaa nihchal ooch agam apaaray.
He is all-powerful, perfect, eternal and unchanging, exalted, unapproachable and infinite.
fasdis aoa ute fasur frog ure fim A (545-16, frre, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa milhu paraan pi-aaray. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, bestow Your Mercy upon me, O Beloved of my soul, that I may merge with You. ||1]]|
AU SU Fds als US AG BIST TH Il (545-17, fovast, uz 5) jap tap barat keenay paykhan ka-o charnaa raam. I have practiced chanting, intensive meditation and fasting, to see Your Feet, O Lord.
sufs 5 ass 38 fas Aymit Ag|et MH I (545-17, fara, He 5) tapat na kateh bujhai bin su-aamee sarnaa raam. But still, my burning is not quenched, without the Sanctuary of the Lord Master.
us Rafe Sct afe act AAs Aree STH I (545-18, fora, Hs 5)
parabh saran tayree kaat bayree sansaar saagar taaree-ai.
I seek Your Sanctuary, God - please, cut away my bonds and carry me across the world-ocean.
noe fosafs ae 5 WS" Ha Te nae 3 sted I (545-18, faorasr, nu 5)
anaath nirgun kachh na jaanaa mayraa gun a-ugan na beechaaree-ai.
I am masterless, worthless, and I know nothing; please do not count up my merits and demerits.
ae efor dues UISH AMEE ASS ATST I (545-19, fora, we 5)
deen da-i-aal gopaal pareetam samrath kaaran karnaa.
O Lord, Merciful to the meek, Sustainer of the world, O Beloved, Almighty Cause of causes.
aod ose ois xe Hat Ay Ate ahs ale Baer MI (545-19, forms, Hs 5)
naanak chaatrik har boond maagai jap jeevaa har har charnaa. ||2||
Nanak, the song-bird, begs for the rain-drop of the Lord's Name; meditating on the Feet of the Lord, Har, Har, he lives. ||2||
Ua uge
wifinn Aded ule ofs afs ST IH II (546-1, fara, He 5)
ami-a Sarovaro pee-o har har naamaa raam.
Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar from the pool of the Lord; chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hao Afar fe Af use THT IH I (546-1, fare, He 5)
santeh sang milai jap pooran kaamaa raam.
In the Society of the Saints, one meets the Lord; meditating on Him, one's affairs are resolved.
AS OH yas By fadtas ote fore Hod & SAP Il (546-2, fora, Hs 5)
sabh kaam pooran dukh bideeran har nimakh manhu na beesrai.
God is the One who accomplishes everything; He is the Dispeller of pain. Never forget Him from your mind, even for an instant.
WTS niofeS Ae ATS Aa TS AaetAG Il (546-2, fares, He 5)
aanand an-din sadaa saachaa sarab gun jagdeesrai.
He is blissful, night and day; He is forever True. All Glories are contained in the Lord in the Universe.
mMdes Gu MUS STAT MG AT a UTHT I (546-3, faovarsr, He 5) agnat ooch apaar thaakur agam jaa ko Dhaamaa. Incalculable, lofty and infinite is the Lord and Master. Unapproachable is His home.
faodts aaa Act fees use FHS Alsat IH SI (546-4, froma, v2 5) binvant naanak mayree ichh pooran milay sareerang raamaa. ||3]|| Prays Nanak, my desires are fulfilled; I have met the Lord, the Greatest Lover. ||3]|
at afea na eer Afs WeaTS TH Il (546-4, frovasr, He 5)
ka-ee kotik jag falaa sun gaavanhaaray raam.
The fruits of many millions of charitable feasts come to those who listen to and sing the Lord's Praise.
dfs os SH AUS AG AS 3S TH Il (546-5, frovast, ns 5) har har naam japat kul saglay taaray raam. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all one's generations are carried across.
ofa SH Aus ATS yet St at Hf fers ar Il (546-5, frrrarsr, ue 5) har naam japat sohant paraanee taa kee mahimaa kit ganaa. Chanting the Name of the Lord, one is beautified; what Praises of His can I chant?
ofa fang ot ue furs fasdfs eaAe AE HOT Il (546-6, fravasr, He 5)
har bisar naahee paraan pi-aaray chitvant darsan sad manaa.
I shall never forget the Lord; He is the Beloved of my soul. My mind constantly yearns for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
HS feen ore ats afe we ys Cs mia MRT Il (546-6, fara, H8 5)
subh divas aa-ay geh kanth laa-ay parabh ooch agam apaaray.
Auspicious is that day, when God, the lofty, inaccessible and infinite, hugs me close in His embrace.
faadts soa Aes AS fas ys fess wifS fimrs ISISIEN (546-7, feos, Hs 5) binvant naanak safal sabh kichh parabh milay at pi-aaray. ||4||3||6]|
Prays Nanak, everything is fruitful - I have met my supremely beloved Lord God. [14] 13] 161]
faararst HIS U BT Il (546-8)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5 chhant. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
MS WE Tafsnr se FIs IH Il (546-8, foes, ue 5) an kaa-ay raat-rhi-aa vaat duhaylee raam. Why are you imbued with the love of another? That path is very dangerous.
ury antefent Sat afe 3 Fat IH Il (546-8, faoarsr, He 5) paap kamaavdi-aa tayraa ko-ay na baylee raam. O sinner, no one is your friend.
ae 3 sat de 3a AST UeseST Il (546-9, feovast, He 5) ko-ay na baylee ho-ay tayraa sadaa pachhotaavhay. No one shall be your friend, and you shall forever regret your actions.
To TUS o Aufs sAat fete aeT A fed wired I (546-9, faorast, ve 5)
gun gupaal na jaapeh rasnaa fir kadahu say dih aavhay.
You have not chanted with your tongue the Praises of the Sustainer of the World; when will these days come again?
ded fees 3d US ASS AH Hfa TS feast Il (546-10, fra, He 5)
tarvar vichhunay nah paat jurh-tay jam mag ga-un ikaylee.
The leaf, separated from the branch, shall not be joined with it again; all alone, it falls on its way to death.
faods soo fag an dfs & Aer fegs TIS NA (546-10, frost, Hs 5) binvant naanak bin naam har kay sadaa firat duhaylee. ||1] | Prays Nanak, without the Lord's Name, the soul wanders, forever suffering. ||1]|
3 qed ofa asfs AS We Wet TH I (546-11, fara, ws 5) too” valvanch look karahi sabh jaanai jaanee raam. You are practicing deception secretly, but the Lord, the Knower, knows all.
Sul UH Sfeur fae uls wret TH Il (546-11, faovasr, He 5)
laykhaa Dharam bha-i-aa til peerhay ghaanee raam.
When the Righteous Judge of Dharma reads your account, you shall be squeezed like a sesame seed in the oil-press.
fags one wu Ag usat nifea Afs syfemr i (546-12, fora, Hs 5)
kirat kamaanay dukh saho paraanee anik jon bharmaa-i-aa.
For the actions you committed, you shall suffer the penalty; you shall be consigned to countless reincarnations.
Ho Hust Afal TS" TSo ASH Teter I (546-12, feos, He 5)
mahaa mohnee sang raataa ratan janam gavaa-i-aa.
Imbued with the love of Maya, the great enticer, you shall lose the jewel of this human life.
fean cfs & OH ST mS ata fAmiret I (546-13, forest, He 5) ikas har kay naam baajhahu aan kaaj si-aanee. Except for the One Name of the Lord, you are clever in everything else.
faads area du fafimr sof Hfo waret QM (546-13, frovarsr, He 5)
binvant naanak laykh likhi-aa bharam mohi lubhaanee. ||2| |
Prays Nanak, those who have such pre-ordained destiny are attracted to doubt and emotional attachment. ||2]|
dy o afe ad mifaswe feefs ufeur i (646-14, frost, v2 5) beech na ko-ay karay akrit-ghan vichhurh pa-i-aa. No one advocates for the ungrateful person, who is separated from the Lord.
me ud afea HHaate uals fen I (546-14, frovasr, He 5) aa-ay kharay kathin jamkankar pakarh la-i-aa. The hard-hearted Messenger of Death comes and seizes him.
uds verfenr nat antfenr HoT Haat ahsmM Il (546-15, faorarst, He 5)
pakrhay chalaa-i-aa apnaa kamaa-i-aa mahaa mohnee raati-aa.
He seizes him, and leads him away, to pay for his evil deeds; he was imbued with Maya, the great enticer.
Go dfee qonfy 3 Afor sus dy afte wfsnr i (546-15, frovasr, He 5)
gun govind gurmukh na japi-aa tapat tham” gal laati-aa.
He was not Gurmukh - he did not chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; and now, the hot irons are put to his chest.
aH ofa mdarta Hor ufe famrg uss Il (546-16, faorarsr, Hs 5)
kaam kroDh aha‘kaar moothaa kho-ay gi-aan pachhutaapi-aa.
He is ruined by sexual desire, anger and egotism; deprived of spiritual wisdom, he comes to regret.
faods aoa Aria sor ofs AY TAS o Af ISI (546-17, fara, He 5)
binvant naanak sanjog bhoolaa har jaap rasan na jaapi-aa. ||3]|| Prays Nanak, by his cursed destiny he has gone astray; with his tongue, he does not chant the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
33 fag & ondt us TUSTIN Il (546-17, fora, He 5) tujh bin ko naahee parabh raakhanhaaraa raam. Without You, God, no one is our savior.
ufss Gurge ofa fase Surat IM I (546-18, frorarsr, He 5) patit uDhaaran har birad tumaaraa raam. It is Your Nature, Lord, to save the sinners.
ufss Guards Hafe Aymit fur fafa efenirer i (546-18, frovarst, v3 5)
patit uDhaaran saran su-aamee kirpaa niDh da-i-aalaa.
O Savior of sinners, I have entered Your Sanctuary, O Lord and Master, Compassionate Ocean of Mercy.
nig gu 3 Sug ads AS we yfsurar il (546-19, fora, He 5) anDh koop tay uDhar kartay sagal ghat partipaalaa. Please, rescue me from the deep, dark pit, O Creator, Cherisher of all hearts.
Hale Sct afe Ho sat fea oH Sfo mars Il (546-19, frovarst, ne 5)
saran tayree kat mahaa bayrhee ik naam deh aDhaaraa.
I seek Your Sanctuary; please, cut away these heavy bonds, and give me the Support of the One Name.
UST usd
faods sod ag tf mug afte cto efenra Isl (547-1, frrasr, H 5)
binvant naanak kar day-ay raakho gobind deen da-i-aaraa. ||4||
Prays Nanak, please, give me Your Hand and save me, O Lord of the Universe, Merciful to the meek. ||4| |
A fea ree afenr afte ys fherfenr aH I (547-1, foros, we 5) so din safal gani-aa har parabhoo milaa-i-aa raam. That day is judged to be fruitful, when I merged with my Lord.
Afs AY udafenr va ets user IH I (547-2, faovast, 18 5) sabh sukh pargati-aa dukh door paraa-i-aa raam. Total happiness was revealed, and pain was taken far away.
HY Aon vio fase Ae dt ao gue fos awe It (547-2, faorasr, v2 5)
sukh sahj anad binod sad hee gun gupaal nit gaa-ee-ai.
Peace, tranquility, joy and eternal happiness come from constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Sustainer of the World.
SH WOH fxs da sats fs o Ore I (547-3, faorast, He 5)
bhaj saaDhsangay milay rangay bahurh jon na Dhaa-ee-ai.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I lovingly remember the Lord; I shall not wander again in reincarnation.
ats af we Aofa Ase vets niag wrfenr | (547-3, frovasr, He 5)
geh kanth laa-ay sahj subhaa-ay aad ankur aa-i-aa.
He has naturally hugged me close in His Loving Embrace, and the seed of my primal destiny has sprouted.
fases aoa orfu fifeor agfs aso 3 emer NUNS (5647-4, fare, 48 5)
binvant naanak aap mili-aa bahurh kathoo na jaa-i-aa. ||5||4||7]| Prays Nanak, He Himself has met me, and He shall never again leave me. ||5||4||7]||
fasrarst HIS U BS Il (547-5)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5 chhant. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
Hod soso Aymit AT IH I 547-5, faovasr, He 5) sunhu banantee-aa su-aamee mayray raam. Listen to my prayer, O my Lord and Master.
an SAS
afe mya ad Sst 3d SF TH I (547-5, frost, He 5) kot apraaDh bharay bhee tayray chayray raam. I am filled with millions of sins, but still, I am Your slave.
zu dso fasu age Huds afs ASAT SAAT Il (547-6, faorast, He 5)
dukh haran kirpaa karan mohan kal kalayseh bhanjnaa.
O Destroyer of pain, Bestower of Mercy, Fascinating Lord, Destroyer of sorrow and strife,
Hafs Sct of Sg Het Aga H fEdHar I (547-6, faorasr, He 5)
saran tayree rakh layho mayree sarab mai niranjanaa.
I have come to Your Sanctuary; please preserve my honor. You are all-pervading, O Immaculate Lord.
Hos ues Af As a Ys Sag FS 3s Il (547-7, fara, ue 5) sunat paykhat sang sabh kai parabh nayrhoo tay nayray. He hears and beholds all; God is with us, the nearest of the near.
mMaetA soa Afs AoMt safe SI we X FF NA (547-7, faovasr, us 5) ardaas naanak sun su-aamee rakh layho ghar kay chayray. ||1]| O Lord and Master, hear Nanak's prayer; please save the servants of Your household.
[1
3 AHGE Ae OH clo Sard IH Il (547-8, fora, H8 5) too samrath sadaa ham deen bhaykhaaree raam. You are eternal and all-powerful; Iam a mere beggar, Lord.
Hfeor Hfs Hare afe SI HITS IM I (547-8, fora, v2 5) maa-i-aa mohi magan kadh layho muraaree raam. I am intoxicated with the love of Maya - save me, Lord!
ots vfs faorfs aha wifsa su aHSYS Il (547-8, fara, He 5)
lobh mohi bikaar baaDhi-o anik dokh kamaavanay.
Bound down by greed, emotional attachment and corruption, I have made so many mistakes.
mifsus das JIS ATS Aho wus uss i (547-9, frsrarsr, us 5)
alipat banDhan rahat kartaa kee-aa apnaa paavnay.
The creator is both attached and detached from entanglements; one obtains the fruits of his own actions.
afs nioqg ufss ues sg xfs gHS TSH IN (547-9, frorasr, He 5)
kar anoograhu patit paavan baho jon bharamtay haaree.
Show kindness to me, O Purifier of sinners; Iam so tired of wandering through reincarnation.
fasdis aoa eA ole a ys Aha UTS mrarat MQ (547-10, frost, He 5) binvant naanak daas har kaa parabh jee-a paraan aDhaaree. ||2||
Prays Nanak, I am the slave of the Lord; God is the Support of my soul, and my breath of life. ||2||
3 ANGE Sst Het HPS Fat IH Il (547-10, fra, 2 5) too samrath vadaa mayree mat thoree raam. You are great and all-powerful; my understanding is so inadequate, O Lord.
urate nifxasust ude ferfe Sot It Il (547-11, faovas", v2 5) paaleh akirat-ghanaa pooran darisat tayree raam. You cherish even the ungrateful ones; Your Glance of Grace is perfect, Lord.
marta aft murs axes Hfo sty Ae S AST Il (547-11, fara, He 5) agaaDh boDh apaar kartay mohi neech kachhoo na jaanaa. Your wisdom is unfathomable, O Infinite Creator. I am lowly, and I know nothing.
339 fsorfa Ags ast uA ate fenrar il (547-12, frovas, He 5) ratan ti-aag sangrehan ka-udee pasoo neech i-aanaa. Forsaking the jewel, I have saved the shell; I am a lowly, ignorant beast.
fsurfa vost Ho vote cu afe af At I (547-12, frost, He 5)
ti-aag chaltee mahaa chanchal dokh kar kar joree.
I have kept that which forsakes me, and is very fickle, continually committing sins, again and again.
Soa Hale ANTE AM Un gag Het SII (647-13, fares, He 5) naanak saran samrath su-aamee paij raakho moree. ||3]| Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, Almighty Lord and Master; please, preserve my honor.
[131] Ww 3 dtefanr fate orf fhorfenr aH I (547-13, forest, He 5)
jaa tay veechhurhi-aa tin aap milaa-i-aa raam. I was separated from Him, and now, He has united me with Himself.
AQ AGA dfs Te afer IH I (547-14, foes, v2 5) saaDhoo sangmay har gun gaa-i-aa raam. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ae ae afee ne ota afemire H uga| SE Il (547-14, faorarst, He 5)
gun gaa-ay govid sadaa neekay kali-aan mai pargat bha-ay.
Singing the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the ever-sublime blissful Lord is revealed to me.
A Hot Afr us a nirus ys afs BS il (547-15, faves, ue 5) Sayjaa suhaavee sang parabh kai aapnay parabh kar la-ay. My bed is adorned with God; my God has made me His own.
efs fos mies de safe sa 3 fer ih (547-15, fora, 4 5) chhod chint achint ho-ay bahurh dookh na paa-i-aa. Abandoning anxiety, I have become carefree, and I shall not suffer in pain any longer.
Soa VHS Ufy Ate afte ae fofa arfenr nsnyieil (547-16, faoarst, He 5) naanak darsan paykh jeevay govind gun niDh gaa-i-aa. ||4]|5||8||
Nanak lives by beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the ocean of excellence. ||4]|5||8]|
fasrarst HIS U BS Il (547-17)
bihaagarhaa mehlaa 5 chhant. Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
Sf Aasnifsur nfs as ost IH I (547-17, fares, 2 5) bol suDharmeerhi-aa mon kat Dhaaree raam. O you of sublime faith, chant the Lord's Name; why do you remain silent?
3 ost ef sfemr wfeor faSast IH I (547-17, faoas, u2 5) too naytree daykh chali-aa maa-i-aa bi-uhaaree raam. with your eyes, you have seen the treacherous ways of Maya.
Hfa 3d ae 0 WS faa affe ant It (547-18, fora, He 5) sang tayrai kachh na chaalai binaa gobind naamaa. Nothing shall go along with you, except the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
GA SA AedG JU AIG VS AH Il (547-18, faoas", v2 5) days vays suvran roopaa sagal oonay kaamaa. Land, clothes, gold and silver - all of these things are useless.
uz aeyz 3 Af Ast gAS vite feardt i (547-19, frorarsr, ne 5)
putar kaltar na sang sobhaa hasat ghor vikaaree.
Children, spouse, worldly honors, elephants, horses and other corrupting influences Shall not go with you.
faods area fag ATOHGH Ae fifaor AAS WAM (547-19, frost, He 5)
binvant naanak bin saaDhsangam sabh mithi-aa sansaaree. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the whole world is false. ||1]|
Ust ugt
oHe fas Afeur 3 ate so Was AS BS TH I (548-1, frorarsr, vs 5) raajan ki-o so-i-aa too need bharay jaagat kat naahee raam. O king, why are you sleeping? Why don't you wake up to reality?
Hfeur xo ge aS fawardt IM Il (548-1, faorarsr, He 5) maa-i-aa jhooth rudan kaytay billaahee raam. It is useless to cry and whine about Maya, but so many cry out and bewail.
fasofs a3 Ho He fas oH fs a AY SAT I (548-2, faovasr, He 5)
billaahi kaytay mahaa mohan bin naam har kay sukh nahee.
So many cry out for Maya, the great enticer, but without the Name of the Lord, there is no peace.
HOA frorsu Cure Ga AT SSS 3d AS Il (548-2, fora, ue 5)
sahas si-aanap upaav thaakay jah bhaavat tah jaahee.
Thousands of clever tricks and efforts will not succeed. One goes wherever the Lord wills him to go.
uife nis ufo use Haas ute wife wird I (548-3, fara, He 5)
aad antay maDh pooran sarbatar ghat ghat aahee.
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, He is all-pervading everywhere; He is in each and every heart.
faods area fas AGH A ufs ASt whe AST MQM (548-3, faovarsr, He 5)
binvant naanak jin saaDhsangam say pat saytee ghar jaahee. ||2| |
Prays Nanak, those who join the Saadh Sangat go to the house of the Lord with honor. ||2]|
oeufs ate qfoG Asa frie IH Il (548-4, fares, ue 5)
narpat jaan garahi-o sayvak si-aanay raam.
O king of mortals, know that your palaces and wise servants shall be of no use in the end.
Houd Sexe HI USTs IH I (548-4, fora, 2 5)
sarpar veechhurhanaa mohay pachhutaanay raam.
You shall certainly have to separate yourself from them, and their attachment shall make you feel regret.
Tsdesdt fr gor aa omAfafs urshat i (548-5, frase, He 5)
harichand-uree daykh bhoolaa kahaa asthit paa-ee-ai.
Beholding the phantom city, you have gone astray; how can you now find stability? faa on ufs & ute guar mfg HOH TSE I (548-5, fora, He 5)
bin naam har kay aan rachnaa ahilaa janam gavaa-ee-ai. Absorbed in things other than the Name of the Lord, this human life is wasted in vain.
US IS aes 8 fRAS Fs oT aH Yas famrs I (548-6, frovasr, v3 5)
ha-o ha-o karat na tarisan boojhai nah kaa“m pooran gi-aanay.
Indulging in egotistical actions, your thirst is not quenched. Your desires are not fulfilled, and you do not attain spiritual wisdom.
faodfs aoa faa on ofa & Afanr uss ISI (548-7, fro, He 5) binvant naanak bin naam har kay kayti-aa pachhutaanay. ||3]| Prays Nanak, without the Name of the Lord, so many have departed with regret. ||3]|
uf miggqd mtusr afs stat IH Il (548-7, frat, ue 5) Dhaar anugraho apnaa kar leenaa raam. Showering His blessings, the Lord has made me His own.
ar ats ate BG AY Hae Stat IH Il (548-8, faoraer, Hs 5)
bhujaa geh kaadh lee-o saaDhoo sang deenaa raam.
Grasping me by the arm, He has pulled me out of the mud, and He has blessed me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ACHAT Sis MIT Ads AGHS SY AS Il (548-8, firorarsr, He 5) saaDhsangam har araaDhay sagal kalmal dukh jalay. Worshipping the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, all my sins and sufferings are burnt away.
Ho" UsH Hee fafoor Aft Sd A VS il (548-9, feovasr, ve 5)
mahaa Dharam sudaan kiri-aa sang tayrai say chalay.
This is the greatest religion, and the best act of charity; this alone shall go along with you.
dHot mad Sa Aum aie ath He So Stat Il (548-9, frovasr, we 5)
rasnaa araaDhai ayk su-aamee har naam man tan bheenaa.
My tongue chants in adoration the Name of the One Lord and Master; my mind and body are drenched in the Lord's Name.
Sod fan 3 da fare A AGS Te usta ISUENE (548-10, frovasr, He 5)
naanak jis no har milaa-ay so sarab gun parbeenaa. ||4||6||9]]| O Nanak, whoever the Lord unites with Himself, is filled with all virtues. ||4]|6]|9] |
fasas ot Sao HIG (548-11)
bihaagarhay kee vaar mehlaa 4 Vaar Of Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure il (548-11) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa Hs 3 Il (548-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ad At 3 AY Usha dg & AY o ofS Il (548-12, faorasr, He 3) gur sayvaa tay sukh paa-ee-ai hor thai sukh na bhaal. Serving the Guru, peace is obtained; do not search for peace anywhere else.
ad a Aafe He Seba Het SA ofa arte Il (548-12, frovasr, He 3)
gur kai sabad man bhaydee-ai sadaa vasai har naal.
The soul is pierced by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. The Lord dwells ever with the soul.
Sot OH fsar a fHS faa ois Sa sete foots Wall (548-13, faovarsr, He 3)
naanak naam tinaa ka-o milai jin har vaykhai nadar nihaal. ||1]|
O Nanak, they alone obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord, who are blessed by the Lord with His Glance of Grace. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (48-13) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
frefs unat gun od fAA SUA A usd Ute Il (548-13, fora, He 3)
sifat khajaanaa bakhas hai jis bakhsai so kharchai khaa-ay.
The treasure of the Lord's Praise is such a blessed gift; he alone obtains it to spend, unto whom the Lord bestows it.
Afsad fag sfa 3 ureet AS aa ATH ANTE Il (548-14, frorarsr, He 3)
satgur bin hath na aavee sabh thakay karam kamaa-ay.
Without the True Guru, it does not come to hand; all have grown weary of performing religious rituals.
Soa HOH Ads Uodts J mat gear for we QM (548-15, frovasr, ne 3)
naanak manmukh jagat Dhanheen hai agai bhukhaa ke khaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs of the world lack this wealth; when they are hungry in the next world, what will they have to eat there? ||2||
ust Il (548-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS Sot 3 ASA a AS SU Cure I (548-15, fara, He 3) sabh tayree too sabhas daa sabh tuDh upaa-i-aa. All are Yours, and You belong to all. You created all.
Asa fefs 3 ease 3 Ast fimrfenr | 48-16, faovarst, nH 3) sabhnaa vich too varatdaa too sabhnee Dhi-aa-i-aa. You are pervading within all - all meditate on You.
fA a 3 sats ate fete A sg nfs stfeMr I (548-16, frre, He 3) tis dee too bhagat thaa-ay paa-ihi jo tuDh man bhaa-i-aa. You accept the devotional worship of those who are pleasing to Your Mind.
A ofs us are A dba Afs aafe Sar aafenr Ih (548-17, fovea, ne 3) jo har parabh bhaavai so thee-ai sabh karan tayraa karaa-i-aa. Whatever pleases the Lord God happens; all act as You cause them to act.
Hof fs Asa 3 Zs" A OAS Hat at UA see efenr A (548-17, fare, He 3) salaahihu har sabhnaa tay vadaa jo sant janaa™ kee paij rakh-daa aa-i-aa. ||1|| Praise the Lord, the greatest of all; He preserves the honor of the Saints. ||1]|
HBa Hs 3 Il (548-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Sod famrot Aa ats Afar Ast AS AfE I (548-18, frovast, He 3) naanak gi-aanee jag jeetaa jag jeetaa sabh ko-ay. O Nanak, the spiritually wise one has conquered all others.
on ated fafa 3 Aon df A OE II (548-19, fares, He 3)
naamay kaaraj siDh hai sehjay ho-ay so ho-ay.
Through the Name, his affairs are brought to perfection; whatever happens is by His Will.
aenfs fs wee 3 verte & Aa AfE I (548-19, frovasr, He 3) gurmat mat achal hai chalaa-ay na sakai ko-ay. Under Guru's Instruction, his mind is held steady; no one can make him waver.
sas a of nisiars Ad ASH HavST SE I (548-19, fara, He 3) bhagtaa kaa har angeekaar karay kaaraj suhaavaa ho-ay. The Lord makes His devotee His own, and his affairs are adjusted.
uar ust
HoH HoT sorenig fefs wa SF uidarg il (549-1, frovasr, ws 3)
manmukh moolhu bhulaa-i-an vich lab lobh aha“kaar.
The self-willed manmukhs have been led astray from the very beginning; within them lurks greed, avarice and ego.
Saat adfent niafes aed Aafe o ad ters Il (549-2, fora, He 3)
jhagrhaa kardi-aa an-din gudrai sabad na karai veechaar.
Their nights and days pass in argument, and they do not reflect upon the Word of the Shabad.
Afa nfs aes fafa wet Safe AS fears I (549-2, frost, He 3) suDh mat kartai hir la-ee bolan sabh vikaar. The Creator has taken away their subtle intellect, and all their speech is corrupt.
fes fas o Hsdbafs nists fanart ag mare wiurg I (549-3, froarar, ve 3)
ditai kitai na santokhee-an antar tarisnaa bahut ag-yaan anDhaar.
No matter what they are given, they are not satisfied; within them is desire, and the great darkness of ignorance.
SOA HSHU ae Sector sat frat wfenr Hf fins Wail (549-3, faorarst, He 3)
naanak manmukhaa naalahu tutee-aa bhalee jinaa maa-i-aa mohi pi-aar. ||1||
O Nanak, it is right to break with the self-willed manmukhs; to them, the love of Maya is sweet. ||1]|
He 8 Il (549-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fsq 3@ AA foor ad fae Afsag fafs xese Il (549-4, faovasr, He 3)
tin" bha-o sansaa ki-aa karay jin satgur sir kartaar.
What can fear and doubt do to those, who have given their heads to the Creator, and to the True Guru?
Ufs fae ot UA geet mM TST Il (549-5, faorasr, ne 3)
Dhur tin kee paij rakh-daa aapay rakhanhaar.
He who has preserved honor from the beginning of time, He shall preserve their honor as well.
ffs Uisu AY ufemr AS Rafe Sterfa I (549-5, frovarar, He 3)
mil pareetam sukh paa-i-aa sachai sabad veechaar.
Meeting their Beloved, they find peace; they reflect upon the True Word of the Shabad.
Sa AYES Afent nmy uTUsT GT IIQIl (549-6, fravasr, He 3) naanak sukh-daata sayvi-aa aapay parkhanhaar. ||2]| O Nanak, I serve the Giver of Peace; He Himself is the Assessor. ||2]|
ust Il (549-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
rit a3 Afs Sfoor 3 ASST TH Il (549-6, fora, He 3)
jee-a jant sabh tayri-aa too sabhnaa raas.
All beings are Yours; You are the wealth of all.
fan 3 3 tfo fSn Ag fag fs aet a Ade ost SO UA II (549-7, fro, H 3)
jis no too deh tis sabh kichh milai ko-ee hor sareek naahee tuDh paas. One unto whom You give, obtains everything; there is no one else to rival You.
3 fea ast ASA & ate ule meet I (549-7, fra, He 3) too iko daataa sabhas daa har peh ardaas. You alone are the Great Giver of all; I offer my prayer unto You, Lord.
fan dt 30 ae fSA at 3 ifs Sfo A AS ATMA Il (549-8, frre, He 3) jis dee tuDh bhaavai tis dee too man laihi so jan saabaas. One with whom You are pleased, is accepted by You; how blessed is such a person!
Ag 30 UH Fase SY AY 30 UTA IQN (549-8, fava, He 3)
sabh tayraa choj varatdaa dukh sukh tuDh paas. ||2||
Your wondrous play is pervading everywhere. I place my pain and pleasure before You. |[2]|
HBa H8 3 Il (549-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aenfy Ad see Ufs Ad Afenis Il (549-9, frat, He 3) gurmukh sachai bhaavday dar sachai sachiaar.
The Gurmukhs are pleasing to the True Lord; they are judged to be true in the True Court.
AH Hfe née To Td a Ase Sees Il (549-9, frovasr, He 3)
Saajan man aanand hai gur kaa sabad veechaar.
The minds of such friends are filled with bliss, as they reflect upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nists Hae zAfent ey afenrt wee alot agatfs Il (549-10, frovasr, He 3)
antar sabad vasaa-i-aa dukh kati-aa chaanan kee-aa kartaar.
They enshrine the Shabad within their hearts; their pain is dispelled, and the Creator blesses them with the Divine Light.
Soa TUS guAt »myat fargur afs All (549-10, frararst, He 3)
naanak rakhanhaaraa rakhsee aapnee kirpaa Dhaar. ||1|| O Nanak, the Savior Lord shall save them, and shower them with His Mercy. ||1||
He 3 Il (49-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Td at At Bad F af ars ANTE I (549-11, frorasr, He 3) gur kee sayvaa chaakree bhai rach kaar kamaa-ay. Serve the Guru, and wait upon Him; as you work, maintain the Fear of God.
AS SA A EN
Ad Ae 3d de A VS fA SATE II (549-11, fares, He 3) jayhaa sayvai tayho hovai jay chalai tisai rajaa-ay. As you serve Him, you will become like Him, as you walk according to His Will.
area Ag fas nif F neg o Ht ATE NIN (549-12, frovarsr, Hs 3) naanak sabh kichh aap hai avar na doojee jaa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, He Himself is everything; there is no other place to go. ||2||
UgST Il (549-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sot sfouret 3d Wee JO ASS neg 3 MET I (549-12, frwars, we 3) tayree vadi-aa-ee toohai jaandaa tuDh jayvad avar na ko-ee. You alone know Your greatness - no one else is as great as You.
30 Aes dg Ada Je T omit SO AST Jd Tet I (549-13, frase, ws 3)
tuDh jayvad hor sareek hovai taa aakhee-ai tuDh jayvad toohai ho-ee.
If there were some other rival as great as You, then I would speak of him. You alone are as great as You are.
fats 3 Afeor fats Ay urfeor og fA ct Str ae foot AST Il (549-14, fares, He 3) jin too sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa hor tis dee rees karay ki-aa ko-ee. One who serves You obtains peace; who else can compare to You?
3 35S wae AHI Gag ay 3g wa Hae 6 Ja Als ust AS Tet Il (549-14, faorasr, ws 3) too bhannan gharhan samrath daataar heh tuDh agai mangan no hath jorh khalee sabh ho-ee.
You are all-powerful to destroy and create, O Great Giver; with palms pressed together, all stand begging before You.
30 Aes Wag H aet aefs 5 ureet Su ASA 6 wo fer dst cesst USS uset AS Bet MBI (549-15, faararst, He 3)
tuDh jayvad daataar mai ko-ee nadar na aavee tuDh sabhsai no daan ditaa khandee varbhandee paataalee pur-ee sabh lo-ee. ||3]|
I see none as great as You, O Great Giver; You give in charity to the beings of all the continents, worlds, solar systems, nether regions and universes. ||3] |
HBa Hs 3 Il (549-16)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hfs usstfs 3 oreinn Aofe & wat STE Il (549-16, frovasr, ne 3) man parteet na aa-ee-aa sahj na lago bhaa-o. O mind, you have no faith, and you have not embraced love for the Celestial Lord;
Rae Ae o uteG Hols fomr ae ate il (549-17, frorast, He 3)
sabdai saad na paa-i-o manhath ki-aa gun gaa-ay.
you do not enjoy the sublime taste of the Word of the Shabad - what Praises of the Lord will you stubborn-mindedly sing?
Sos uifent A udete J fa Tonfe Afs ATE NA (549-17, faorasr, He 3) naanak aa-i-aa so parvaan hai je gurmukh sach samaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, his coming alone is approved, who, as Gurmukh, merges into the True Lord.
[21
Hs 3 Il (549-18) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
MTUST MIT B UsTE HAM nisat nefly TUS I (549-18, frwarsr, we 3) aapnaa aap na pachhaanai moorhaa avraa aakh dukhaa-ay. The fool does not understand his own self; he annoys others with his speech.
He oH unafs 3 adie nid feefs Sar wes I (549-19, frees, He 3)
mundhai dee khaslat na ga-ee-aa anDhay vichhurh chotaa khaa-ay.
His underlying nature does not leave him; separated from the Lord, he suffers cruel blows.
Afsag a 3 Sfs 3 wis ad nif ATES II (549-19, fora, He 3)
satgur kai bhai bhann na gharhi-o rahai ank samaa-ay.
Through the fear of the True Guru, he has not changed and reformed himself, so that he might merge in the lap of God.
UST UUO
Moheg HUA ae o ga fag Fae SY UTES Il (550-1, foros, we 3)
an-din sahsaa kaday na chookai bin sabdai dukh paa-ay.
Night and day, his doubts never stop; without the Word of the Shabad, he suffers in pain.
any au 83 nists Aa fos dor aes feae I (550-1, faorasr, He 3)
kaam kroDh lobh antar sablaa nit DhanDhaa karat vihaa-ay.
Sexual desire, anger and greed are so powerful within him; he passes his life constantly entangled in worldly affairs.
vd ag tus Afs aa fed Ha SS MS I (550-2, fara, He 3)
charan kar daykhat sun thakay dih mukay nayrhai aa-ay.
His feet, hands, eyes and ears are exhausted; his days are numbered, and his death is immanent.
Het oH & Sd Hor fas of o fafa ure I (550-2, fares, He 3)
sachaa naam na lago meethaa jit naam nav niDh paa-ay.
The True Name does not seem sweet to him - the Name by which the nine treasures are obtained.
Ales Hd He Sfo He Si HST US Ih (550-3, fara, He 3)
jeevat marai marai fun jeevai taa” mokhantar paa-ay.
But if he remains dead while yet alive, then by so dying, he truly lives; thus, he attains liberation.
ufs adH 6 UTES use fee aot fart ure | (550-3, fravarst, nH 3)
Dhur karam na paa-i-o paraanee vin karmaa ki-aa paa-ay.
But if he is not blessed with such pre-ordained karma, then without this karma, what can he obtain?
Gd a Ae AHS Jus as His Ase US Il (550-4, farasr, He 3)
gur kaa sabad samaal too moorhay gat mat sabday paa-ay.
Meditate in remembrance on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you fool; through the Shabad, you shall obtain salvation and wisdom.
Soa Alsdd se dt we A fess my TASES IQ (550-4, frost, He 3) naanak satgur tad hee paa-ay jaa‘ vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, he alone finds the True Guru, who eliminates self-conceit from within. ||2]|
uGSt II (550-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan 2 fefs efor na Amt fSA 6 fa nite fart as ot BSA I (550-5, frase, ns 3) jis dai chit vasi-aa mayraa su-aamee tis no ki-o andaysaa kisai galai daa lorhee-ai. One whose consciousness is filled with my Lord Master - why should he feel anxious about anything?
dfs FuES Aso aes at fSR 3 fourfefenr fas fares wet wo HSA I (550-6, faorasr, He 3)
har sukh-daata sabhnaa galaa kaa tis no Dhi-aa-idi-aa kiv nimakh gharhee muhu morhee-ai.
The Lord is the Giver of Peace, the Lord of all things; why would we turn our faces away from His meditation, even for a moment, or an instant?
fate ofa fomrfenr fSn 6 AeS afore de fos AS Ao ot Hafs wf adh we ASM II (550-6, faararst, Hs 3)
jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa tis no sarab kali-aan ho-ay nit sant janaa kee sangat jaa-ay bahee- ai muhu jorhee-ai.
One who meditates on the Lord obtains all pleasures and comforts; let us go each and every day, to sit in the Saints' Society.
Afs wu gu da ae dfs Aza a Afs HS A FS SSM I (550-7, faorasr, 2 3)
sabh dukh bhukh rog ga-ay har sayvak kay sabh jan kay banDhan torhee-ai.
All the pain, hunger, and disease of the Lord's servant are eradicated; the bonds of the humble beings are torn away.
dfs fas 3 dur ufs sas afe sas wo a nfs SS AAS Sf AS BSA Ill (550-8, fares, Hs 3)
har kirpaa tay ho-aa har bhagat har bhagat janaa kai muhi dithai jagat tari-aa sabh lorhee-ai. ||4||
By the Lord's Grace, one becomes the Lord's devotee; beholding the face of the Lord's humble devotee, the whole world is saved and carried across. ||4||
HBa H8 3 Il (550-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
AY dha ale we fats afe at Are @ urfenr I (550-9, frorarsr, He 3) Saa rasnaa jal jaa-o jin har kaa su-aa-o na paa-i-aa. Let that tongue, which has not tasted the Name of the Lord, be burnt.
Soa THe’ Aafe sve fafs ofe ofe xfs safer Wal (550-10, frorarst, v8 3)
naanak rasnaa sabad rasaa-ay jin har har man vasaa-i-aa. ||1||
O Nanak, one whose mind is filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his tongue savors the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 2 Il (550-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
AY dha Ale ae fats ofe a ae ferrfanr il (550-11, forest, He 3) Saa rasnaa jal jaa-o jin har kaa naa-o visaari-aa. Let that tongue, which has forgotten the Name of the Lord, be burnt.
Soa TIHfy sHo' dfs AU ofa a of fummfanr ii (550-11, faorasr, He 3) naanak gurmukh rasnaa har japai har kai naa-ay pi-aari-aa. ||2| |
O Nanak, the tongue of the Gurmukh chants the Lord's Name, and loves the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
Uugat Il (550-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs nm SAT Asa Sas Ta mM aI ATES Il (550-12, faorasr, He 3)
har aapay thaakur sayvak bhagat har aapay karay karaa-ay.
The Lord Himself is the Master, the servant and the devotee; the Lord Himself is the Cause of causes.
dfs wit Sy fear om fas av] fos we I (550-12, faorasr, He 3) har aapay vaykhai vigsai aapay jit bhaavai tit laa-ay. The Lord Himself beholds, and He Himself rejoices. As He wills, so does He enjoin us.
ofa feast raf ure nig ofa feast Ssfs ure Il (550-13, fravarsr, ns 3)
har iknaa maarag paa-ay aapay har iknaa ujharh paa-ay.
The Lord places some on the Path, and the Lord leads others into the wilderness. dfs Ae Afse AY Suen afs Sa VHS ASE I (550-13, feos, He 3)
har sachaa saahib sach tapaavas kar vaykhai chalat sabaa-ay. The Lord is the True Master; True is His justice. He arranges and beholds all His plays.
qe use ad He Soa dia AS A TS WES NUM (550-14, faovast, we 3)
gur parsaad kahai jan naanak har sachay kay gun gaa-ay. ||5||
By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak speaks and sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. (5)
HBa H8 3 Il (550-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
VIeHt & Went feaer A SISA Il (550-15, faovasr, He 3) darvaysee ko jaansee virlaa ko darvays. How rare is the dervish, the Saintly renunciate, who understands renunciation.
A ufs wis de Hare fos Hes foo SA Il (550-15, faorasr, H2 3)
jay ghar ghar handhai mangdaa Dhig jeevan Dhig vays.
Cursed is the life, and cursed are the clothes, of one who wanders around, begging from door to door.
A oma vider sta ad aenfe fatter a@ il (550-16, frost, He 3)
jay aasaa andaysaa taj rahai gurmukh bhikhi-aa naa-o.
But, if he abandons hope and anxiety, and as Gurmukh receives the Name as his charity,
fsA & vse ursnifs area JC sfseos AE NU (550-16, frovasr, He 3) tis kay charan pakhaalee-ah naanak ha-o balihaarai jaa-o. ||1]| then Nanak washes his feet, and is a sacrifice to him. ||1]|
H8 3 Il (550-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
aod 3sdeg Sa ew ele vides mit il (550-17, fra, Hs 3) naanak tarvar ayk fal du-ay pankhayroo aahi. O Nanak, the tree has one fruit, but two birds are perched upon it.
wes WS 8 UA o ug UU Ste i (550-17, fovasr, He 3) aavat jaat na deeshee naa par pankhee taahi. They are not seen coming or going; these birds have no wings.
ag dat oA Sfamr wate ad fegare Il (550-18, faorast, He 3)
baho rangee ras bhogi-aa sabad rahai nirbaan.
One enjoys so many pleasures, while the other, through the Word of the Shabad, remains in Nirvaanaa.
dfs ah af TS Soa ASH AS SAS IlQil (550-18, faorasr, He 3)
har ras fal raatay naankaa karam sachaa neesaan. ||2]||
Imbued with the subtle essence of the fruit of the Lord's Name, O Nanak, the soul bears the True Insignia of God's Grace. ||2]|
Uugat Il (550-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm dest wim od aoe wirfy HafE uA} I (550-19, forest, ns 3)
aapay Dhartee aapay hai raahak aap jammaa-ay peesaavai.
He Himself is the field, and He Himself is the farmer. He Himself grows and grinds the corn.
umfy uae ify sis Of udA nmi dt sfa we] I (550-19, fora, He 3)
aap pakaavai aap bhaa“day day-ay parosai aapay hee bahi khaavai.
He Himself cooks it, He Himself puts the food in the dishes, and He Himself sits down to eat.
UST uuy
nM AS omy = fear wm} vot FaS I (551-1, farrasr, ve 3)
aapay jal aapay day chhingaa aapay chulee bharaavai.
He Himself is the water, He Himself gives the tooth-pick, and He Himself offers the mouthwash.
nm Hats Afe gos wma feer gas | (551-1, fara, He 3) aapay sangat sad bahaalai aapay vidaa karaavai. He Himself calls and seats the congregation, and He Himself bids them goodbye.
fA 3 faxsures de ofa nmi fSA 3 Jou Hae MEN (551-2, fora, He 3)
jis no kirpaal hovai har aapay tis no hukam manaavai. ||6]|
One whom the Lord Himself blesses with His Mercy - the Lord causes him to walk according to His Will. ||6] |
HBa H8 3 Il (551-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
dH UsH Afs Foor uy Us ASAT Il (551-3, froarst, He 3)
karam Dharam sabh banDhnaa paap punn san-banDh.
Rituals and religions are all just entanglements; bad and good are bound up with them.
HHS HY A SUS UZ AST A UT Il (551-3, foray, He 3)
mamtaa moh so banDhnaa putar kaltar so DhanDh.
Those things done for the sake of children and spouse, in ego and attachment, are just more bonds.
Ag tur so Aedt afer at AST I (551-3, frovasr, ve 3) jah daykhaa tah jayvree maa-i-aa kaa san-banDh. Wherever I look, there I see the noose of attachment to Maya.
Sod AY oH fag ease eas nig NU (551-4, fora, He 3) naanak sachay naam bin vartan vartai anDh. ||1|| O Nanak, without the True Name, the world is engrossed in blind entanglements. ||1]|
He 8 Il (51-4) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
wid woe st dt a Afsag fs ate il 551-4, faorasr, ne 4) anDhay chaanan taa thee-ai jaa satgur milai rajaa-ay. The blind receive the Divine Light, when they merge with the Will of the True Guru.
gue 33 Afe eA nifamrg moe Ate I 551-5, forest, He 4) banDhan torhai sach vasai agi-aan aDhayraa jaa-ay. They break their bonds, and dwell in Truth, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
AS fae 24 fSA ot fafs dior sq AA I 551-5, fara, He 4) sabh kichh daykhai tisai kaa jin kee-aa tan saaj. They see that everything belongs to the One who created and fashioned the body.
Sod Hafs ASS At AIST TY GA QM (551-6, faovasr, v2 4) naanak saran kartaar kee kartaa raakhai laaj. ||2|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Creator - the Creator preserves his honor. ||2||
Uugat Il (551-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hed om ae aor af ags seg ufe o ASa shor | 551-6, fora, ne 4)
jadahu aapay thaat kee-aa bahi kartai tadahu puchh na sayvak bee-aa.
When the Creator, sitting all by Himself, created the Universe, he did not consult with any of His servants;
Seg for &t BS for t SS At oes G TA alae Il (551-7, frovarsr, He 4)
tadahu ki-aa ko layvai ki-aa ko dayvai jaa‘ avar na doojaa kee-aa.
so what can anyone take, and what can anyone give, when He did not create any other like Himself?
fefs wm nas Gurfeor ags we Asa aA dot | 551-8, foes, He 4) fir aapay jagat upaa-i-aa kartai daan sabhnaa ka-o dee-aa. Then, after fashioning the world, the Creator blessed all with His blessings.
nm AS yerenig TaHfy wmt nifigs uber it (551-8, fora, ue 4)
aapay sayv banaa-ee-an gurmukh aapay amrit pee-aa.
He Himself instructs us in His service, and as Gurmukh, we drink in His Ambrosial Nectar.
uify fadars wrarg J mm wm ad A aha WON (551-9, fares, He 4)
aap nirankaar aakaar hai aapay aapay karai so thee-aa. ||7||
He Himself is formless, and He Himself is formed; whatever He Himself does, comes to pass. ||7]|
HBa H8 3 Il (551-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aanfy ys Aefo Ae Are miofes Aafa fumrts i (551-9, feos, ws 3)
gurmukh parabh sayveh sad saachaa an-din sahj pi-aar.
The Gurmukhs serve God forever; night and day, they are steeped in the Love of the True Lord.
Re nidfe awefs qe AS mata Cafa Cfs ofa i (551-10, frovasr, 2 3)
sadaa anand gaavahi gun saachay araDh uraDh ur Dhaar.
They are in bliss forever, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; in this world and in the next, they keep Him clasped to their hearts.
nists utsy efor ufs aan fof aesta i (551-11, fora, 48 3) antar pareetam vasi-aa Dhur karam likhi-aa kartaar. Their Beloved dwells deep within; the Creator pre-ordained this destiny.
aoa nity frofemig nit farsur ofs IAI (551-11, faaarsr, He 3) naanak aap milaa-i-an aapay kirpaa Dhaar. ||1|| O Nanak, He blends them into Himself; He Himself showers His Mercy upon them.
[11
Hs 3 Il (551-12) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
afm afemt o urdha nafes gd Het Te ate i (551-12, faorasr, v2 3)
kahi-ai kathi-ai na paa-ee-ai an-din rahai sadaa gun gaa-ay.
By merely talking and speaking, He is not found. Night and day, sing His Glorious Praises continually.
fee agH fas o ute s@fa He foarte II (551-12, frorarst, He 3) vin karmai kinai na paa-i-o bha-uk mu-ay billaa-ay. Without His Merciful Grace, no one finds Him; many have died barking and bewailing.
qd a Aafe He 36 fen orfu eA nfs orfe i 551-13, fara, 2 3) gur kai sabad man tan bhijai aap vasai man aa-ay.
When the mind and body are saturated with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord Himself comes to dwell in his mind.
Soa Seat urSha mm we fate iii (551-13, frovasr, He 3) naanak nadree paa-ee-ai aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, by His Grace, He is found; He unites us in His Union. ||2| |
ugat Il (551-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm tz use Afs AAS orf ae orfu StH Il (551-14, fares, He 3)
aapay vayd puraan sabh saasat aap kathai aap bheejai.
He Himself is the Vedas, the Puraanas and all the Shaastras; He Himself chants them, and He Himself is pleased.
nm dt afs un aes nity unig as I (551-15, fra, Hs 3) aapay hee bahi poojay kartaa aap parpanch kareejai. He Himself sits down to worship, and He Himself creates the world.
umfy usfeafs urfu fasfeast nm mere aeta i (551-15, faorasr, Hs 3)
aap parvirat aap nirvirtee aapay akath katheejai.
He Himself is a householder, and He Himself is a renunciate; He Himself utters the Unutterable.
nm us Ag wify aee orfu mifsus Taste Il (651-16, faovarst, He 3)
aapay punn sabh aap karaa-ay aap alipat varteejai.
He Himself is all goodness, and He Himself causes us to act; He Himself remains detached.
mm AY By VS ATS MM SUA AA MCI (551-16, frovasr, He 3) aapay sukh dukh dayvai kartaa aapay bakhas kareejai. ||8]|| He Himself grants pleasure and pain; the Creator Himself bestows His gifts. ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (551-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Aa niga Ag sls 35 3S ate Se TASTES I (551-17, fare, we 3)
saykhaa andrahu jor chhad too bha-o kar jhal gavaa-ay.
O Shaykh, abandon your cruel nature; live in the Fear of God and give up your madness.
qd a3 as fons 8 fete fogs ute it (551-17, faorasr, He 3)
gur kai bhai kaytay nistaray bhai vich nirbha-o paa-ay.
Through the Fear of the Guru, many have been saved; in this fear, find the Fearless Lord.
Ho aeg Fate sfe FATS SA fe we I (551-18, fra, we 3)
man kathor sabad bhayd too” saat vasai man aa-ay.
Pierce your stone heart with the Word of the Shabad; let peace and tranquility come to abide in your mind.
Hist fefs ara anal AT MAH UTS STE I (551-18, fora, He 3)
saa™tee vich kaar kamaavnee saa khasam paa-ay thaa-ay.
If good deeds are done in this state of peace, they are approved by the Lord and Master.
sod aH afa fas o utes usd famist ATE NAM (51-19, fares, He 3)
naanak kaam kroDh kinai na paa-i-o puchhahu gi-aanee jaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, through sexual desire and anger, no one has ever found God - go, and ask any wise man. ||1||
He 2 Il (551-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
UST UU
HoHY Hear Ho I of & wat filma Ih (552-1, faorasr, He 3)
manmukh maa-i-aa moh hai naam na lago pi-aar.
The self-willed manmukh is emotionally attached to Maya - he has no love for the Naam.
TT AHS AZ ATS AT AS MTT I (552-1, froras, vs 3) koorh kamaavai koorh sangrahai koorh karay aahaar. He practices falsehood, gathers in falsehood, and makes falsehood his sustenance.
fag urfemr ug Afs nafs nis df AS aT Il (552-1, faorasr, He 3)
bikh maa-i-aa Dhan sanch mareh antay ho-ay sabh chhaar.
He collects the poisonous wealth of Maya, and then dies; in the end, it is all reduced to ashes.
dH UdH AY HAH acts nists Be fears Il (552-2, frost, v2 3)
karam Dharam such sanjam karahi antar lobh vikaar.
He practices religious rituals, purity and austere self-discipline, but within, there is greed and corruption.
Sod fa HoHY AHS A ate a ue eaals HE ws WII (552-3, frovast, He 3)
naanak je manmukh kamaavai so thaa-ay naa pavai dargahi ho-ay khu-aar. ||2||
O Nanak, whatever the self-willed manmukh does, is not acceptable; in the Court of the Lord, he is dishonored. ||2||
ust II (552-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mm} uret wm grat nm) Ys ZIss AT Il (552-3, frovasr, vs 3)
aapay khaanee aapay banee aapay khand varbhand karay.
He Himself created the four sources of creation, and He Himself fashioned speech; He Himself formed the worlds and solar systems.
wmfy Ae orf J Aa umd dt fefs dae ae I (552-4, frovasr, He 3) aap samund aap hai saagar aapay hee vich ratan Dharay. He Himself is the ocean, and He Himself is the sea; He Himself puts the pearls in it.
wify oe ad fra faa faA 3 Tenfe ad Js I (552-4, fara, He 3) aap lahaa-ay karay jis kirpaa jis no gurmukh karay haray. By His Grace, the Lord enables the Gurmukh to find these pearls.
nm s@ne vuify d sfoar wm age orf 3g Il (552-5, faorasr, He 3)
aapay bha-ojal aap hai bohithaa aapay khayvat aap taray.
He Himself is the terrifying world-ocean, and He Himself is the boat; He Himself is the boatman, and He Himself ferries us across.
MN AI ATS AIT MSY 3 TA FS AT UCI (552-6, frrarsr, we 3) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa avar na doojaa tujhai saray. ||9|| The Creator Himself acts, and causes us to act; no one else can equal You, Lord. ||9]|
HBa Hs 3 Il (552-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag at Ret Hew J A a ad fos Oe I (552-6, fara, He 3) satgur kee sayvaa Safal hai jay ko karay chit laa-ay. Fruitful is service to the True Guru, if one does so with a sincere mind.
oy uerag urea nifds ZA Hfe mrfe it (552-7, fara, 2 3) naam padaarath paa-ee-ai achint vasai man aa-ay. The treasure of the Naam, is obtained, and the mind comes to be free of anxiety.
HOH Has BU ae GBH HAST ATE I (552-7, froarst, He 3)
janam maran dukh katee-ai ha-umai mamtaa jaa-ay.
The pains of birth and death are eradicated, and the mind is rid of egotism and self- conceit.
GSH ueet urha AS gd ANTE Il (552-8, foes, He 3) utam padvee paa-ee-ai sachay rahai samaa-ay. One achieves the ultimate state, and remains absorbed in the True Lord.
aad ute fia ag feftimr fsa Afsag fifemr wrfe Wail (552-8, frovarsr, He 3) naanak poorab jin ka-o likhi-aa tinaa satgur mili-aa aa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, the True Guru comes and meets those who have such pre-ordained destiny.
[11
He 8 Il (652-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ony ast Afsag 3 afeaa sfoe ae i (552-9, froma, He 3)
naam rataa satguroo hai kalijug bohith ho-ay.
The True Guru is imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He is the boat in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
dante de A ute ue far niefa wet ALE I (552-9, faoarst, He 3) gurmukh hovai so paar pavai jinaa andar sachaa so-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh crosses over; the True Lord dwells within him.
OY ANS OH Had on ct ufs de Il (552-10, fora, ne 3)
naam sam"aalay naam sangrahai naamay hee pat ho-ay.
He remembers the Naam, he gathers in the Naam, and he obtains honor through the Naam.
Soa Afsag ufenr axafh usufs dE ih (552-10, faorarst, He 3) naanak satgur paa-i-aa karam paraapat ho-ay. ||2]| Nanak has found the True Guru; by His Grace, the Name is obtained. ||2| |
ugat Il (552-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nmr uraR orf os oo wrfy alse aye Il (552-11, frovasr, ne 3)
aapay paaras aap Dhaat hai aap keeton kanchan.
He Himself is the Philosopher's Stone, He Himself is the metal, and He Himself is transformed into gold.
MM} Sag ASX wm wm dt uy Yse Il (552-11, feos, ve 3)
aapay thaakur sayvak aapay aapay hee paap khandan.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, He Himself is the servant, and He Himself is the Destroyer of sins.
nm Afs we sae AMM omy dt As vive Il (552-12, froarst, He 3) aapay sabh ghat bhogvai su-aamee aapay hee sabh anjan. He Himself enjoys every heart; the Lord Master Himself is the basis of all illusion.
oify fada orf Ag Sst wm agente SAS Il (552-12, frorarsr, He 3)
aap bibayk aap sabh baytaa aapay gurmukh bhanjan.
He Himself is the discerning one, and He Himself is the Knower of all; He Himself breaks the bonds of the Gurmukhs.
Wo HSA Wold o IA SU AGS FJ Ts AUST FG NON (552-13, froras, vs 3)
jan naanak saalaahi na rajai tuDh kartay too har sukh-daata vadan. ||10]||
Servant Nanak is not satisfied by merely praising You, O Creator Lord; You are the Great Giver of peace. ||10]|
HO H3 8 Il (552-14) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
fae Afsag AS dba a Gaart AS aeH ants I (552-14, faoasr, He 4)
bin satgur sayvay jee-a kay banDhnaa jaytay karam kamaahi.
Without serving the True Guru, the deeds which are done are only chains binding the soul.
fag Afsaa AS dea 3 uredt Hfe HHfs refs AT I (552-14, fora, He 4)
bin satgur sayvay thavar na paavhee mar jameh aavahi jaahi.
Without serving the True Guru, they find no place of rest. They die, only to be born again - they continue coming and going.
fag Afsas Ae feat Soe oH 3 ZA fs mMfe I (552-15, faorast, He 4)
bin satgur sayvay fikaa bolnaa naam na vasai man aa-ay.
Without serving the True Guru, their speech is insipid. They do not enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the mind.
sod fas Afsag AS AH ufs aa Hino ufo ars Cfo Ata NAM (552-16, frovasr, He 4) naanak bin satgur sayvay jam pur baDhay maaree-ah muhi kaalai uth jaahi. ||1]|
O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, they are bound and gagged, and beaten in the City of Death; they depart with blackened faces. ||1||
He 2 Il (552-16)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fefa Afsas ot Ret asf wadt afs aH wat fimrg I (552-16, frovasr, He 3) ik satgur kee sayvaa karahi chaakree har naamay lagai pi-aar. Some wait upon and serve the True Guru; they embrace love for the Lord's Name.
SOA HOH Asas nituUaSt AG a aate SUT iQIl (552-17, froasr, vs 3) naanak janam savaaran aapnaa kul kaa karan uDhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, they reform their lives, and redeem their generations as well. ||2]|
UgST Il (552-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm BEA vif FT ua wm} wes use AG mrs Il (552-18, faovast, He 3)
aapay chaatsaal aap hai paaDhaa aapay chaatrhay parhan ka-o aanay.
He Himself is the school, He Himself is the teacher, and He Himself brings the students to be taught.
nmr fst HST Dd wm mm area ad fires Il (552-18, fares, He 3)
aapay pitaa maataa hai aapay aapay baalak karay si-aanay.
He Himself is the father, He Himself is the mother, and He Himself makes the children wise.
fea & ufs 33 Ag um fea F nm ad fers il (552-19, faovast, He 3)
ik thai parh bujhai sabh aapay ik thai aapay karay i-aanay.
In one place, He teaches them to read and understand everything, while in another place, He Himself makes them ignorant.
feaa niefs Hofs gore aT onfy 3d Hf AS STS I (552-19, fora, He 3)
iknaa andar mahal bulaa-ay jaa aap tayrai man sachay bhaanay.
Some, You summon to the Mansion of Your Presence within, when they are pleasing to Your Mind, O True Lord.
ust ys
frat nim aaufa & efanret A Ao Ast esas WS AAU (553-1, frovasr, He 3)
jinaa aapay gurmukh day vadi-aa-ee say jan sachee dargahi jaanay. ||11]|
That Gurmukh, whom You have blessed with greatness - that humble being is known in Your True Court. ||11]|
HSA HITS F Il (553-2) salok mardaanaa 1. Shalok, Mardaanaa:
tS AH AH HE Hot uleeTg Il (553-2, farses, HaETs) kal kalvaalee kaam mad manoo-aa peevanhaar.
The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is the vessel, filled with the wine of sexual desire; the mind is the drunkard.
au aedt Hf act uleret midarg Il (553-2, frost, neers) kroDh katoree mohi bharee peelaavaa aha™kaar. Anger is the cup, filled with emotional attachment, and egotism is the server.
HAGA FS wa at ut ut af ynrg i (653-3, fara, wees") majlas koorhay lab kee pee pee ho-ay khu-aar. Drinking too much in the company of falsehood and greed, one is ruined.
Adal SUE AS Ts AY As ale AST Il (553-3, frost, wees)
karnee laahan sat gurh sach saraa kar saar.
So let good deeds be your distillery, and Truth your molasses; in this way, make the most excellent wine of Truth.
ae Hs ate Ate fu ASH HA MITTS II 553-4, fora, Hees") gun manday kar seel ghi-o saram maas aahaar. Make virtue your bread, good conduct the ghee, and modesty the meat to eat.
aanfy uehat area ua atts fears A (553-4, faorast, HaETST) gurmukh paa-ee-ai naankaa khaaDhai jaahi bikaar. ||1]| As Gurmukh, these are obtained, O Nanak; partaking of them, one's sins depart. ||1]|
HITT 1% Il (553-5) mardaanaa 1. Mardaanaa:
afent arofe ning He HAGA FFAS US Il (553-5, faa, wees)
kaa-i-aa laahan aap mad majlas tarisnaa Dhaat.
The human body is the vat, self-conceit is the wine, and desire is the company of drinking buddies.
Hon! aedt afs sat Ulwres WHATS Il (553-5, froras, woes)
mansaa katoree koorh bharee peelaa-ay jamkaal.
The cup of the mind's longing is overflowing with falsehood, and the Messenger of Death is the cup-bearer.
fez fe utS araar sas udinifa fore II (553-6, forest, Hees)
it mad peetai naankaa bahutay khatee-ah bikaar.
Drinking in this wine, O Nanak, one takes on countless sins and corruptions.
fomra ds Wes Hs 3B HA ITE Il (553-6, frost, HeeTST)
gi-aan gurh saalaah manday bha-o maas aahaar.
So make spiritual wisdom your molasses, the Praise of God your bread, and the Fear of God the meat you eat.
Sod fey SHO AY DA OH MME IQ (553-7, feos, HeETST) naanak ih bhojan sach hai sach naam aaDhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, this is the true food; let the True Name be your only Support. ||2]|
atat odfe ny He vifys far at ore i (553-7, forarsr, neers")
kaa‘yaa™ laahan aap mad amrit tis kee Dhaar.
If the human body is the vat, and self-realization is the wine, then a stream of Ambrosial Nectar is produced.
ABHats fAG Hoy afe fae acct nifigs act ut ut aefa fears SI (553-8, frat, Hees) satsangat si-o maylaap ho-ay liv katoree amrit bharee pee pee kateh bikaar. ||3|| Meeting with the Society of the Saints, the cup of the Lord's Love is filled with this Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, one's corruptions and sins are wiped away. ||3]|
UuGSt II (553-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm} Afs od We Tosa nM} u| VaAS at rat | (553-9, faoras, neeTs")
aapay sur nar gan ganDharbaa aapay khat darsan kee banee.
He Himself is the angelic being, the heavenly herald, and the celestial singer. He Himself is the one who explains the six schools of philosophy.
nm} fae Had HORT wm aaHfa mee aITAt I (553-9, faorast, Hees)
aapay siv sankar mahaysaa aapay gurmukh akath kahaanee.
He Himself is Shiva, Shankara and Mahaysh; He Himself is the Gurmukh, who speaks the Unspoken Speech.
nny Halt wma gait wm Afenmet fed feast i (553-10, farrast, Hee)
aapay jogee aapay bhogee aapay sani-aasee firai bibaanee.
He Himself is the Yogi, He Himself is the Sensual Enjoyer, and He Himself is the Sannyaasee, wandering through the wilderness.
nm orf aAfe nif Guer wm Aug AgY fAMrat il (553-10, fara, woes)
aapai naal gosat aap updaysai aapay sugharh saroop si-aanee.
He discusses with Himself, and He teaches Himself; He Himself is discrete, graceful and wise.
nue dq ats Fa nm ym Ago Aor art FT ArSt N9QI (553-11, ferret, HeETST)
aapnaa choj kar vaykhai aapay aapay sabhnaa jee-aa kaa hai jaanee. ||12]| Staging His own play, He Himself watches it; He Himself is the Knower of all beings. [|12]|
HSq H8 3 Ill (553-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ea Afr users 3 fig af us Ae fats mre i (553-12, fora, He 3) ayhaa sanDhi-aa parvaan hai jit har parabh mayraa chit aavai.
That evening prayer alone is acceptable, which brings the Lord God to my consciousness.
ofs fag utfs Gur Hfeor He ABS Il (553-12, frorarsr, Hs 3) har si-o pareet oopjai maa-i-aa moh jalaavai. Love for the Lord wells up within me, and my attachment to Maya is burnt away.
qs usAet efaar He Hout wiAfag Afoor as as i (553-13, frovarsr, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee dubiDhaa marai manoo-aa asthir sanDhi-aa karay veechaar.
By Guru's Grace, duality is conquered, and the mind becomes stable; I have made contemplative meditation my evening prayer.
Soa Afar ad Hondt HG o fea ufs HH OE MrT NA (553-13, faorasr, He 3)
naanak sanDhi-aa karai manmukhee jee-o na tikai mar jammai ho-ay khu-aar. ||1||
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukh may recite his evening prayers, but his mind is not centered on it; through birth and death, he is ruined. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (53-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fyS fyS asst Ag Aa fedt Hat fumMrA o ATE II (553-14, fares, Hs 3)
pari-o pari-o kartee sabh jag firee mayree pi-aas na jaa-ay.
I wandered over the whole world, crying out, "Love, O Love!", but my thirst was not quenched.
sod Afsafe fifeot Act fimmr set fus urfeor wie orf ii (653-15, faorasr, He 3) naanak satgur mili-ai mayree pi-aas ga-ee pir paa-i-aa ghar aa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, my desires are satisfied; I found my Beloved, when I returned to my own home. ||2||
UBST Il (553-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm} 33 UH SS AS ym omy orag BA stem I (553-16, frorarst, He 3)
aapay tant param tant sabh aapay aapay thaakur daas bha-i-aa.
He Himself is the supreme essence, He Himself is the essence of all. He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the servant.
nM BA nS edo Curfenig uirf gon orf ae went I (553-16, fora, Hs 3) aapay das ath varan upaa-i-an aap barahm aap raaj la-i-aa.
He Himself created the people of the eighteen castes; God Himself acquired His domain.
Nb
mm HTS nM SS nm gaA aT Stew Ih (553-17, frost, He 3)
aapay maaray aapay chhodai aapay bakhsay karay da-i-aa.
He Himself kills, and He Himself redeems; He Himself, in His Kindness, forgives us. He is infallible
uf ngs 3 38 aa dt AS AY SureH Ag few Il (553-17, fara, He 3) aap abhul na bhulai kab hee sabh sach tapaavas sach thi-aa. - He never errs; the justice of the True Lord is totally True.
wnt fat ase genfy fsa niees ert SoH afeMr Ill (553-18, frovas, He 3)
aapay jinaa bujhaa-ay gurmukh tin andrahu doojaa bharam ga-i-aa. ||13]| Those whom the Lord Himself instructs as Gurmukh - duality and doubt depart from within them. ||13]|
ABA Hs U Il (553-19)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ay 3 fanaa WoHfa 3 sf BS Ae Il 553-19, faorast, He 5)
har naam na simrahi saaDhsang tai tan udai khayh.
That body, which does not remember the Lord's Name in meditation in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall be reduced to dust.
fate ost fA Ss AEet aaa fee miB|at ST UU (553-19, frras, Hs 5)
jin keetee tisai na jaan-ee naanak fit aloonee dayh. ||1]|
Cursed and insipid is that body, O Nanak, which does not know the One who created it. |[1]]
UST UUs
He U Il (554-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ufe zafs vaerafie THAT AU TUT Il (554-1, frovarst, He 5)
ghat vaseh charnaarbind rasnaa japai gupaal.
Let the Lotus Feet of the Lord abide within your heart, and with your tongue, chant God's Name.
ood A ys fash fsa edt aS urfes WU (554-1, frorarsr, ne 5) naanak so parabh simree-ai tis dayhee ka-o paal. ||2|| O Nanak, meditate in remembrance on God, and nurture this body. ||2]|
Uugat Il (554-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
md Monts stea asst ify ad feAaS Il (554-2, frovarsr, ns 5)
aapay athsath tirath kartaa aap karay isnaan.
The Creator Himself is the sixty-eight sacred places of pilgrimage; He Himself takes the cleansing bath in them.
nm Hate eos ANA erfy purfefs ony I (654-2, frorarsr, He 5)
aapay sanjam vartai savaamee aap japaa-ihi naam.
He Himself practices austere self-discipline; the Lord Master Himself causes us to chant His Name.
nity efeore df 38 dso orf ad AS BE Il (554-3, fora, He 5)
aap da-i-aal ho-ay bha-o khandan aap karai sabh daan.
He Himself becomes merciful to us; the Destroyer of fear Himself gives in charity to all.
fan & denfa urfy ase A Ae dt coats US HIG II (554-4, fora, He 5) jis no gurmukh aap bujhaa-ay so sad hee dargahi paa-ay maan. One whom He has enlightened and made Gurmukh, ever obtains honor in His Court.
fan ot Un ge ofa omit A Ae aie ATS NABI (554-4, feos, He 5) jis dee paij rakhai har su-aamee so sachaa har jaan. ||14] |
One whose honor the Lord Master has preserved, comes to know the True Lord. [|14]|
HOG H2 3 Il (554-5)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
sod fag Afsad 3] Ha vig DT nid AIH ANTE Ih (554-5, fora, He 3) naanak bin satgur bhaytay jag anDh hai anDhay karam kamaa-ay. O Nanak, without meeting the True Guru, the world is blind, and it does blind deeds.
Rae fa@ fos 5 weet fas AY eA ufo wrfe Ih (554-5, fora, He 3)
sabdai si-o chit na laav-ee jit sukh vasai man aa-ay.
It does not focus its consciousness on the Word of the Shabad, which would bring peace to abide in the mind.
aHfh war Ae fed wifofefh wes faofe i (554-6, fara, He 3)
taamas lagaa sadaa firai ahinis jalat bihaa-ay.
Always afflicted with the dark passions of low energy, it wanders around, passing its days and nights burning.
nf fSH se A abt aoe fos 3 ATE UA (554-7, fears, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||1]| Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass; no one has any say in this. ||1||
He 3 Il (654-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag sortenr ardt SI ATT ll (554-7, fara, nH 3) satguroo furmaa-i-aa kaaree ayh karayhu. The True Guru has commanded us to do this:
Gg word afe a wfss AWS Il (554-7, foros, Hs 3) guroo du-aarai ho-ay kai saahib sammaalayhu. through the Guru's Gate, meditate on the Lord Master.
Afag Ae dof J SdH a SCs ale a nists ATS UT Il (554-8, frorarsr, Hs 3)
saahib sadaa hajoor hai bharmai kay chha-urh kat kai antar jot Dharayhu.
The Lord Master is ever-present. He tears away the veil of doubt, and installs His Light within the mind.
fs HT SH nifys FT wT SI BT I (554-9, fora, ws 3) har kaa naam amrit hai daaroo ayhu laa-ayhu. The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar - take this healing medicine!
Afsag a svat fefs Teg HAH AS ST Il (554-9, faovarsr, He 3)
satgur kaa bhaanaa chit rakhahu sanjam sachaa nayhu.
Enshrine the Will of the True Guru in your consciousness, and make the True Lord's Love your self-discipline.
Soa ma Aa nivfs TuHt mat ofa fAG Aw AGT IQ (554-9, fos, He 3) naanak aithai sukhai andar rakhsee agai har si-o kayl karayhu. ||2]|
O Nanak, you shall be kept in peace here, and hereafter, you shall celebrate with the Lord. ||2]|
ust II (554-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
my stg noTsd FeAufs nmy St SH BES Il (554-10, frovasr, vs 3) aapay bhaar athaarah banaspat aapay hee fal laa-ay. He Himself is the vast variety of Nature, and He Himself makes it bear fruit.
nm Het urfu AS fe wm ot ufo ure I (554-11, forest, He 3)
aapay maalee aap sabh sinchai aapay hee muhi paa-ay.
He Himself is the Gardener, He Himself irrigates all the plants, and He Himself puts them in His mouth.
my ast nny garst wm SfE fe|ere ih (554-11, foray, ue 3)
aapay kartaa aapay bhugtaa aapay day-ay divaa-ay.
He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer; He Himself gives, and causes others to give.
mm Afse wm J amar wm sfowrt ANTS I (554-12, forest, He 3)
aapay saahib aapay hai raakhaa aapay rahi-aa samaa-ay.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the Protector; He Himself is permeating and pervading everywhere.
Ho aoa esniet nme ais aes at fan d fe 5 SHS NWI (554-12, fares, He 3) jan naanak vadi-aa-ee aakhai har kartay kee jis no til na tamaa-ay. ||15]|
Servant Nanak speaks of the greatness of the Lord, the Creator, who has no greed at all. ||15]|
HBa H8 3 Il (554-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HSH Sfont wifent HER Stam nme I (554-13, frovasr, He 3) maanas bhari-aa aani-aa maanas bhari-aa aa-ay. One person brings a full bottle, and another fills his cup.
fag ut HfS efe df wae ue fete orf il (554-14, faa, Hi 3) jit peetai mat door ho-ay baral pavai vich aa-ay. Drinking the wine, his intelligence departs, and madness enters his mind;
mtual ustent & ustect MAH Ue Ue Il (554-14, fora, He 3)
aapnaa paraa-i-aa na pachhaan-ee khasmahu Dhakay khaa-ay.
he cannot distinguish between his own and others, and he is struck down by his Lord and Master.
fas uts unH fend voor fies ARTE II (554-15, fra, He 3)
jit peetai khasam visrai dargeh milai sajaa-ay.
Drinking it, he forgets his Lord and Master, and he is punished in the Court of the Lord.
Bor He uf o ubeet A oat uf SATE I (554-15, fuera, He 3) jhoothaa mad mool na peech-ee jay kaa paar vasaa-ay. Do not drink the false wine at all, if it is in your power.
Sod Sed Ay He Usha Afsag fs fan wrfe I (554-16, fora, He 3)
naanak nadree sach mad paa-ee-ai satgur milai jis aa-ay.
O Nanak, the True Guru comes and meets the mortal; by His Grace, one obtains the True Wine.
He Afoa & df gd Host UT] GTE NAM (554-16, frorasr, He 3)
Sadaa saahib kai rang rahai mahlee paavai thaa-o. ||1]|
He shall dwell forever in the Love of the Lord Master, and obtain a seat in the Mansion of His Presence. ||1]|
He 8 Il (654-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
feg nas des He wT fA 3 AST SE I 554-17, feos, He 3) ih jagat jeevat marai jaa is no sojhee ho-ay. When this world comes to understand, it remains dead while yet alive.
wv ffs Refemr st Af sfoor ware st Afo Sf II 6554-17, fora, He 3)
jaa tini" savaali-aa taa’ sav rahi-aa jagaa-ay taa™ suDh ho-ay.
When the Lord puts him to sleep, he remains asleep; when He wakes him up, he regains consciousness.
Sod sels ad A tual Afsag HS AE I (554-18, frovast, He 3)
naanak nadar karay jay aapnee satgur maylai so-ay.
O Nanak, when the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, He causes him to meet the True Guru.
aa unte des He 3 fefs Hee © SE NN (554-18, frovasr, Hs 3) gur parsaad jeevat marai taa fir maran na ho-ay. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, remain dead while yet alive, and you shall not have to die again.
21 |
UgST Il (554-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan a ats AS fae de SAS uses OTS fa At I (554-19, frovasr, He 3)
jis daa keetaa sabh kichh hovai tis no parvaah naahee kisai kayree. By His doing, everything happens; what does He care for anyone else?
dfs HE Sa fest AS a we AS HSH aS Sct Il 554-19, foes, He 3) har jee-o tayraa ditaa sabh ko khaavai sabh muhtaajee kadhai tayree. O Dear Lord, everyone eats whatever You give - all are subservient to You.
UST yy
fa 30 6 Wed AAS fae ue fan d faa fodna act i (555-1, frovasr, He 3)
je tuDh no saalaahay so sabh kichh paavai jis no kirpaa niranjan kayree.
One who praises You obtains everything; You bestow Your Mercy upon him, O Immaculate Lord.
Het AS Ae zens fats eug ofenr af ou Us Sct Il (555-2, frovasr, He 3)
so-ee saahu sachaa vanjaaraa jin vakhar ladi-aa har naam Dhan tayree.
He alone is a true banker and trader, who loads the merchandise of the wealth of the Your Name, O Lord.
Afs fA o Werfog Ad fafs eA sre at wife fesrst Sat WIEN (555-2, fora, v8 3) sabh tisai no saalaahihu santahu jin doojay bhaav kee maar vidaaree dhayree. ||16]|| O Saints, let everyone praise the Lord, who has destroyed the pile of the love of duality. ||16]|
H8a Il (555-3)
salok. Shalok:
adie Hest Hest Ha Hor ufs fe 6 WS APE I (555-3, feorasr, sas asta Ah kabeeraa martaa martaa jag mu-aa mar bhe na jaanai ko-ay. Kabeer, the world is dying - dying to death, but no one knows how to truly die.
MAT Hast A He Safe o Heat SE NA (555-4, feorasr, gars adits Th aisee marnee jo marai bahur na marnaa ho-ay. ||1] | Whoever dies, let him die such a death, that he does not have to die again. ||1]|
He 3 Il (655-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fom Hat fas Haat AAT Meet SE Nh (555-4, frovasr, He 3) ki-aa jaanaa kiv marhagay kaisaa marnaa ho-ay. What do I know? How will I die? What sort of death will it be?
a afe afsa Hod 3 tad St Afoer Ha|St SE I (555-5, fara, He 3) jay kar saahib manhu na veesrai taa sahilaa marnaa ho-ay. If I do not forget the Lord Master from my mind, then my death will be easy.
He 3 Ads 3d Hifenr SS AS Ale I (555-5, faoasr, He 3) marnai tay jagat darai jeevi-aa lorhai sabh ko-ay. The world is terrified of death; everyone longs to live.
Gs USA Hes Hs TaH FS ALE Il (555-6, frrars, we 3) gur parsaadee jeevat marai hukmai boojhai so-ay. By Guru's Grace, one who dies while yet alive, understands the Lord's Will.
Soa MAt Hast H Hd ST Ae Ales SE NM (555-6, faorasr, He 3) naanak aisee marnee jo marai taa sad jeevan ho-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, one who dies such a death, lives forever. ||2]|
ust Il (555-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aw onfy fue de ofs Aomit at ome ar ofs rf Aare I (555-7, fara, He 3)
jaa aap kirpaal hovai har su-aamee taa aapnaa™ naa-o har aap japaavai.
When the Lord Master Himself becomes merciful, the Lord Himself causes His Name to be chanted.
nm Afsag Af AY eS nmyst Asa vrfu afe ar] I (555-8, frase, He 3)
aapay satgur mayl sukh dayvai aapnaa™ sayvak aap har bhaavai.
He Himself causes us to meet the True Guru, and blesses us with peace. His servant is pleasing to the Lord.
niufsor Azar at wif Ua se wimufsnr garst at Ust urs i (555-8, faorasr, 2 3) aapni-aa sayvkaa kee aap paij rakhai aapni-aa bhagtaa kee pairee paavai.
He Himself preserves the honor of His servants; He causes others to fall at the feet of His devotees.
aan ofe 3 ofs a dior ofs AS Asa OfF o MTS I (555-9, faovasr, He 3)
Dharam raa-ay hai har kaa kee-aa har jan sayvak nayrh na aavai.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma is a creation of the Lord; he does not approach the humble servant of the Lord.
A dfs ot fimra A Ago ot fimre do ast sf sfx mre ATS NADI (555-10, fara, He 3) jo har kaa pi-aaraa so sabhnaa kaa pi-aaraa hor kaytee jhakh jhakh aavai jaavai. []17]|
One who is dear to the Lord, is dear to all; so many others come and go in vain. []17]|
HBa Hs 3 Il (555-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
TH TH ads AS Ha fed aH B ufeor Ae I (555-10, fora, He 3)
raam raam kartaa sabh jag firai raam na paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
The entire world roams around, chanting, "Raam, Raam, Lord, Lord", but the Lord cannot be obtained like this.
Wa Midies mifs zat mise o Sfeor ATE I (555-11, forest, He 3)
agam agochar at vadaa atul na tuli-aa jaa-ay.
He is inaccessible, unfathomable and so very great; He is unweighable, and cannot be weighed.
atts fas 3 ureter fas © afer ae i (555-12, fares, He 3) keemat kinai na paa-ee-aa kitai na la-i-aa jaa-ay. No one can evaluate Him; He cannot be purchased at any price.
ad a Rafe sfenr feo fafa efi vfs orfe i (555-12, faorarst, He 3)
gur kai sabad bhaydi-aa in biDh vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, His mystery is known; in this way, He comes to dwell in the mind.
soa nifu mn J ad fase 3 afomr ANTE I (555-13, frovasr, He 3)
naanak aap amay-o hai gur kirpaa tay rahi-aa samaa-ay.
O Nanak, He Himself is infinite; by Guru's Grace, He is known to be permeating and pervading everywhere.
mim fife fifes sfonr mmr fife orfe Ail (655-13, fora, He 3) aapay mili-aa mil rahi-aa aapay mili-aa aa-ay. ||1]| He Himself comes to blend, and having blended, remains blended. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (55-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
= Ho feg us oH J fas Ae Het AY OE I (555-14, fares, He 3) ay man ih Dhan naam hai jit sadaa sadaa sukh ho-ay. O my soul, this is the wealth of the Naam; through it, comes peace, forever and ever.
Se Hfs 3 oreet oro AE Tt TS il (555-14, frovarsr, He 3) totaa mool na aavee laahaa sad hee ho-ay. It never brings any loss; through it, one earns profits forever.
ut usfent Sfe 3 weet Het Ae Go SE I (555-15, fovea, He 3) khaaDhai kharchi-ai tot na aavee sadaa sadaa oh day-ay. Eating and spending it, it never decreases; He continues to give, forever and ever.
Hom His 3 Jeet Tes ae B AE i (555-15, faorasr, we 3) sahsaa mool na hova-ee haanat kaday na ho-ay. One who has no skepticism at all never suffers humiliation.
Soa TeHfa uh AT aS sets ASE iQ (555-16, frovasr, 2 3)
naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai jaa ka-o nadar karay-i. ||2||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh obtains the Name of the Lord, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace. ||2||
UBST Il (555-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
MM} AS we nied wmt ot arte il (555-16, faovasr, He 3) aapay sabh ghat andray aapay hee baahar. He Himself is deep within all hearts, and He Himself is outside them.
my Tus ZIser nm Tt ATafs A (555-17, faovasr, He 3) aapay gupat varatdaa aapay hee jaahar. He Himself is prevailing unmanifest, and He Himself is manifest.
aa est aeg afe zafsor Horefe i (555-17, faorarst, He 3) jug chhateeh gubaar kar varti-aa sunnaahar. For thirty-six ages, He created the darkness, abiding in the void.
6a fz use 3 AAS wm of oddfa I (555-18, fora, He 3) othai vayd puraan na saastaa aapay har narhar. There were no Vedas, Puraanas or Shaastras there; only the Lord Himself existed.
ao sat of orf As es ot arate Il (555-18, fara, He 3) baithaa taarhee laa-ay aap sabh doo hee baahar. He Himself sat in the absolute trance, withdrawn from everything.
nual fifa orfu Areet wmy St ATT WAC (555-19, fraser, 8 3)
aapnee mit aap jaandaa aapay hee ga-uhar. ||18]| Only He Himself knows His state; He Himself is the unfathomable ocean. ||18] |
HBa H8 3 Il (555-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
JGH fefs AAS HoT Hee He|T ATE Il (555-19, frovasr, He 3) ha-umai vich jagat mu-aa mardo mardaa jaa-ay. In egotism, the world is dead; it dies and dies, again and again.
ar uu fraud fefs du 3 fseg o Sset fa ada iat ATE I (556-1, feos, He 3)
jichar vich damm hai tichar na chayt-ee ke karayg agai jaa-ay. As long as there is breath in the body, he does not remember the Lord; what will he do in the world hereafter?
fomrat dfe A oso of mifamret nig ante I (556-1, forest, v2 3) gi-aanee ho-ay so chaytann ho-ay agi-aanee anDh kamaa-ay. One who remembers the Lord is a spiritual teacher; the ignorant one acts blindly.
Soa Sa aHS A AHS wit uTS ATE AI (556-2, frees, He 3)
naanak aythai kamaavai so milai agai paa-ay jaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, whatever one does in this world, determines what he shall receive in the world hereafter. ||1]|
He 3 Il (656-2)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ufs wAH at gan ufeor fee Afsag Sfaur 3 ATE I (556-3, forest, He 3)
Dhur khasmai kaa hukam pa-i-aa vin satgur chayti-aa na jaa-ay.
From the very beginning, it has been the Will of the Lord Master, that He cannot be remembered without the True Guru.
Afsafe fufemt nists af= afoor wer afoor fe] ofe I (556-3, forest, He 3)
satgur mili-ai antar rav rahi-aa sadaa rahi-aa liv laa-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, he realizes that the Lord is permeating and pervading deep within him; he remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Love.
oft off Aet ANTE CH @ faoa ATE Il (556-4, frorarsr, He 3)
dam dam sadaa samaaldaa damm na birthaa jaa-ay.
With each and every breath, he constantly remembers the Lord in meditation; not a single breath passes in vain.
HOH HIS a 3G afenr Ales ueSt UTE Il (556-4, farsa, He 3) janam maran kaa bha-o ga-i-aa jeevan padvee paa-ay. His fears of birth and death depart, and he obtains the honored state of eternal life.
sod feg Hose fSn 3 fe fan 6 faa ad aAfE NQM (556-5, frovasr, He 3)
naanak ih martabaa tis no day-ay jis no kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, He bestows this rank upon that mortal, upon whom He showers His Mercy.
21 |
Uugat Il (556-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mm aot dtfenr nmy ugarat Il (556-6, faa, He 3)
aapay daanaa™ beeni-aa aapay parDhaanaa”.
He Himself is all-wise and all-knowing; He Himself is supreme. mint gu feareer nid ote fomrat il (56-6, faavas", He 3)
aapay roop dikhaaldaa aapay laa-ay Dhi-aanaa’. He Himself reveals His form, and He Himself enjoins us to His meditation.
nm Hot Zaset wm aa farat it (556-6, faorasr, ne 3) aapay monee varatdaa aapay kathai gi-aanaa”. He Himself poses as a silent sage, and He Himself speaks spiritual wisdom.
aQat fan o waet Agat dt STAT Il (556-7, faorast, He 3) ka-urhaa kisai na lag-ee sabhnaa hee bhaanaa. He does not seem bitter to anyone; He is pleasing to all.
Grafs safs o Hoh AE AS ATA NACH (556-7, fora, He 3) ustat baran na sakee-ai sad sad kurbaanaa. ||19]| His Praises cannot be described; forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||19]|
HX H3 Y Il (556-8)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
at niefs arear frat a mBsrg il (556-8, froasr, He 1) kalee andar naankaa jinnaa™ daa a-utaar. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Nanak, the demons have taken birth.
us frost dba fost ag far a frorerg Al (556-8, fara, He 1)
put jinooraa Dhee-a jinnooree joroo jinna daa sikdaar. ||1]||
The son is a demon, and the daughter is a demon; the wife is the chief of the demons. ||1]|
He 4% Il (656-9)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fos HS 3B oract Ara Il 556-9, fora, 48 1) hindoo moolay bhoolay akhutee jaa‘hee. The Hindus have forgotten the Primal Lord; they are going the wrong way.
arate afer fit un astat i vid sat nig niarg il (556-9, fares, Hs 1) naarad kahi-aa se pooj karaa‘hee. anDhay gungay anDh anDhaar.
As Naarad instructed them, they are worshipping idols. They are blind and mute, the blindest of the blind.
UTag & UAfd Ha Tes Ml (556-10, feast, He 1) paathar lay poojeh mugaDh gavaar. The ignorant fools pick up stones and worship them.
6fa wT urfu Sa SH AT SISTT NMI (556-10, faorasr, v8 1) ohi jaa aap dubay tum kahaa taranhaar. ||2| | But when those stones themselves sink, who will carry you across? ||2||
Uugat Il (556-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag fag 33 SA I 5 AT ATT I (556-11, foros, oe 1) sabh kihu tayrai vas hai too sachaa saahu. Everything is in Your power; You are the True King.
BIS IS Sa SX A UT SAT ll (556-11, forms, we 1)
bhagat ratay rang ayk kai pooraa vaysaahu.
The devotees are imbued with the Love of the One Lord; they have perfect faith in Him.
nifys sno on ofa ofa ofa AS UE Il (556-12, foes, He 1) amrit bhojan naam har raj raj jan khaahu. The Name of the Lord is the ambrosial food; His humble servants eat their fill.
Afs uersa urenife fAHeE A BT Il (556-12, frost, H8 1) sabh padaarath paa-ee-an simran sach laahu. All treasures are obtained - meditative remembrance on the Lord is the true profit.
AS films urTaqan Bsa Ts nig wa WOM (556-13, frase, Hs 1)
sant pi-aaray paarbarahm naanak har agam agaahu. ||20] |
The Saints are very dear to the Supreme Lord God, O Nanak; the Lord is unapproachable and unfathomable. ||20| |
HBa 8 3 Il (556-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
AS fae Jan weet AS fxs JAN ATE I (556-13, frost, He 3) sabh kichh hukmay aavdaa sabh kichh hukmay jaa-ay. Everything comes by the Lord's Will, and everything goes by the Lord's Will.
Ao Hay nmug We nior nig SHAE Il (556-14, faararsr, Hs 3) jay ko moorakh aaphu jaanai anDhaa anDh kamaa-ay. If some fool believes that he is the creator, he is blind, and acts in blindness.
Sod Jan a Tenfy a8 fan d fase ad save Al (556-14, faorasr, He 3)
naanak hukam ko gurmukh bujhai jis no kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command; the Lord showers His Mercy upon him. ||1]|
He 3 Il (556-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
A dat wafs Aue fan 3 qenfe oy uaufs SE I 556-15, frorasr, He 3) SO jogee jugat so paa-ay jis no gurmukh naam paraapat ho-ay. He alone is a Yogi, and he alone finds the Way, who, as Gurmukh, obtains the Naam.
fsH Halt at oadt AS a SA St AaB OE I (556-16, faoras, He 3)
tis jogee kee nagree sabh ko vasai bhaykhee jog na ho-ay.
In the body-village of that Yogi are all blessings; this Yoga is not obtained by outward show.
Soa MAT feaer a Halt fan wife usa]| dE MQM (556-16, frovasr, He 3) naanak aisaa virlaa ko jogee jis ghat pargat ho-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, such a Yogi is very rare; the Lord is manifest in his heart. ||2]|
UgST Il (556-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mm HS Curfimig wmy mrarg | (556-17, fraser, He 3) aapay jant upaa-i-an aapay aaDhaar. He Himself created the creatures, and He Himself supports them.
MM AEH Seb MM UATE Il (556-17, frorarsr, 43 3) aapay sookham bhaalee-ai aapay paasaar. He Himself is seen to be subtle, and He Himself is obvious.
wify feast dfe gd mm es us|Ts Il (556-18, farovasr, He 3) aap ikaatee ho-ay rahai aapay vad parvaar. He Himself remains a solitary recluse, and He Himself has a huge family.
SOA Hat VS Ths AS GSTS Il (556-18, faovasr, He 3) naanak mangai daan har santaa raynaar. Nanak asks for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints of the Lord.
TT TIT F ABS F SST T MIU AT il (556-18, fravarsr, we 3) hor daataar na sujh-ee too dayvanhaar. ||21]|1]| suDh. I cannot see any other Giver; You alone are the Giver, O Lord. ||21]|1|| Sudh] |
Ua uud 9B ATS on aes usy fesse fares nieve Hafs migot AS Te YATE I (557-1
ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TT ZSIA HIS YW Il (557-3) raag vad-hans mehlaa 1 ghar 1. Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, First House:
WHS MHS 3 uigs Het ote o AE Il 557-4, esdu, He 1)
amlee amal na ambrhai machhee neer na ho-ay.
To the addict, there is nothing like the drug; to the fish, there is nothing else like water.
A gs Afs mrue faq ae AS Afe IAI (557-4, edu, He 1) jo ratay seh aapnai tin bhaavai sabh ko-ay. ||1]| Those who are attuned to their Lord - everyone is pleasing to them. ||1]||
IG at Jer ya Fer 3E wfss aX aS UU TIC Ml (557-4, edu, we 1)
ha-o vaaree vanjaa khannee-ai vanjaa ta-o saahib kay naavai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice, cut apart into pieces, a sacrifice to Your Name, O Lord Master. ||1]|Pause| |
Whog Hefes gust nifys AT ar oS I (557-5, asda, He 1) saahib safli-o rukh-rhaa amrit jaa kaa naa-o. The Lord is the fruitful tree; His Name is ambrosial nectar.
fae ub 3 fgus se 3 fSo afead AE IQ (557-6, esdu, He 1) jin pee-aa tay taripat bha-ay ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. ||2|| Those who drink it in are satisfied; I am a sacrifice to them. ||2||
H at oefs 3 nredt eats adinit ote i (557-6, esdH, 42 1) mai kee nadar na aavhee vaseh habhee-aa™ naal. You are not visible to me, although You dwell with everyone.
for faofeor fag od a Ae Stsfe uf Sil 657-7, esdz, He 1)
tikhaa tihaa-i-aa ki-o lahai jaa sar bheetar paal. ||3]|
How can the thirst of the thirsty be quenched, with that wall between me and the pond? ||3]|
aoe So wer 3 AfeE HTH II (6557-7, esdH, He 1)
naanak tayraa baanee-aa too saahib mai raas. Nanak is Your merchant; You, O Lord Master, are my merchandise.
Ho 3 Ga st od AW frefs act mae SIA (557-8, esdH, He 1) man tay Dhokhaa taa lahai jaa sifat karee ardaas. ||4||1]| My mind is cleansed of doubt, only when I praise You, and pray to You. ||4]|1]|
SSH HIS Y Il (557-8)
vad-hans mehlaa 1. Wadahans, First Mehl:
Teest Ag Tent fosafe aa ate i (557-8, esdH, ue 1) gunvantee saho raavi-aa nirgun kookay kaa-ay. The virtuous bride enjoys her Husband Lord; why does the unworthy one cry out?
A Deest St od oT St AG Tee WE NA (557-9, esda, H2 1) jay gunvantee thee rahai taa bhee saho raavan jaa-ay. ||1]| If she were to become virtuous, then she too could enjoy her Husband Lord. ||1]|
Aa ay sre at us neat TS At UA TIS ll (557-9, edu, we 1)
mayraa kant reesaaloo kee Dhan avraa raavay jee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My Husband Lord is loving and playful; why should the soul-bride enjoy anyone else? ||1]|Pause| |
adat aHE A aby A He Oar aE I (557-10, asda, He 1) karnee kaaman jay thee-ai jay man Dhaagaa ho-ay. If the soul-bride does good deeds, and strings them on the thread of her mind,
Hed His o urn ota feats udf— QI (557-10, esdH, He 1)
maanak mul na paa-ee-ai leejai chit paro-ay. ||2| |
she obtains the jewel, which cannot be purchased for any price, strung upon the thread of her consciousness. ||2]|
TT PAST S FSi wma nso Il (557-11, esdH, He 1)
raahu dasaa-ee na julaa aakhaa’ ambrhee-aas.
I ask, but do not follow the way shown to me; still, I claim to have reached my destination.
3 Ad ote mane fas ate wa SA WSN (557-11, esdH, 8 1)
tai sah naal akoo-anaa ki-o theevai ghar vaas. ||3]||
I do not speak with You, O my Husband Lord; how then can I come to have a place in Your home? |[3]|
Soa Sat MIST TAT ast AE il (557-12, esd, vs 1) naanak aykee baahraa doojaa naahee ko-ay. O Nanak, without the One Lord, there is no other at all.
3 Ad Sal A dd St AG Te AS NSN (557-12, esdH, He 1) tai sah lagee jay rahai bhee saho raavai so-ay. ||4]||2||
If the soul-bride remains attached to You, then she shall enjoy her Husband Lord. [41121]
SSI HIG YU We 2 Il (557-13) vad-hans mehlaa 1 ghar 2. Wadahans, First Mehl, Second House:
Hot ge se wfeor se Wes orfenr | 6557-13, esdH, He 1) moree run jhun laa-i-aa bhainay saavan aa-i-aa. The peacocks are singing so sweetly, O sister; the rainy season of Saawan has come.
3d Hu aes Aes fate Sat Ss Baer Il 557-13, essa, ve tayray munDh kataaray jayvdaa tin lobhee lobh lubhaa-i-aa.
Your beauteous eyes are like a string of charms, fascinating and enticing the soul- bride.
3d wane feeg daha Jer 3d oH feed AaHeS I (557-14, esdH, He 1)
tayray darsan vitahu khannee-ai vanjaa tayray naam vitahu kurbaano.
I would cut myself into pieces for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; I am a sacrifice to Your Name.
WT H WE ahr gd 3g fag AT Aa HS Il (557-14, esde, He 1) jaa too taa mai maan kee-aa hai tuDh bin kayhaa mayraa maano. I take pride in You; without You, what could I be proud of?
ga 36 us fre Ho AE ast AS MT Il (557-15, eadH, we 1)
choorhaa bhann palangh si-o munDhay san baahee san baahaa.
So smash your bracelets along with your bed, O soul-bride, and break your arms, along with the arms of your couch.
SS 2H adele HO AG TS Mia I (557-15, SdH, 2 1)
aytay vays karaydee-ay munDhay saho raato avraahaa.
In spite of all the decorations which you have made, O soul-bride, your Husband Lord is enjoying someone else.
Uet yt
a Hobs o Fsbo Bt A SaTSshT I (558-1, esdH, He 1)
naa manee-aar na choorhee-aa naa say vangoorhee-aahaa.
You don't have the bracelets of gold, nor the good crystal jewelry; you haven't dealt with the true jeweller.
A Ad afe 3 Baler Awe fA TosT I (558-1, esdH, 42 1) jo sah kanth na lagee-aa jalan se bahrhee-aahaa. Those arms, which do not embrace the neck of the Husband Lord, burn in anguish.
Afs Ader Ag Tefs aetor v@ eat & fs AST II (558-2, asda, He 1)
sabh sahee-aa saho raavan ga-ee-aa ha-o daaDhee kai dar jaavaa.
All my companions have gone to enjoy their Husband Lord; which door should I, the wretched one, go to?
MHS IG udt Hunt S AT Sfx F SET Il (558-2, esdu, ve 1) ammaalee ha-o kharee suchjee tai sah ayk na bhaavaa. O friend, I may look very attractive, but I am not pleasing to my Husband Lord at all.
HS Tevet uchor sd Ha ATS I (558-3, esdH, Hs 1) maath gu‘daa-ee™ patee-aa bharee-ai maag sanDhooray. I have woven my hair into lovely braids, and saturated their partings with vermillion;
Mat Tet & Hote Hee feats feAs il (558-3, esdH, He 1)
agai ga-ee na mannee-aa mara-o visoor visooray.
but when I go before Him, I am not accepted, and I die, suffering in anguish. H deet AS Aa Jor Jas Fog UAT Il (558-4, asda, we
mai rovandee sabh jag runaa runnrhay vanhu pankhayroo. I weep; the whole world weeps; even the birds of the forest weep with me.
fea 5 gat Hd 3a ot fees fafs w@ fuss feest i (558-4, esdH, He 1)
ik na runaa mayray tan kaa birhaa jin ha-o pirahu vichhorhee.
The only thing which doesn't weep is my body's sense of separateness, which has separated me from my Lord.
Hue vitfenr st afer 4 Ae afar SfE I (558-5, esdn, He 1)
supnai aa-i-aa bhee ga-i-aa mai jal bhari-aa ro-ay.
In a dream, He came, and went away again; I cried so many tears. uife o Hat 35 afe fimrd Sf a Hat afe I (558-5, esdH, He 1)
aa-ay na sakaa tujh kan pi-aaray bhayj na sakaa ko-ay. I can't come to You, O my Beloved, and I can't send anyone to You.
mG AStat steste HS Ag Sar ALE Il (558-6, esdH, He 1) aa-o sabhaagee need-rhee-ay mat saho daykhaa so-ay. Come to me, O blessed sleep - perhaps I will see my Husband Lord again.
3 mfga at as fa wre ag Beat fom SH I (558-6, asda, He 1)
tai saahib kee baat je aakhai kaho naanak ki-aa deejai.
One who brings me a message from my Lord and Master - says Nanak, what shall I give to Him?
Hig ze af Snes cin fee fra AS adh Il 558-7, asda, He 1)
sees vadhay kar baisan deejai vin sir sayv kareejai.
Cutting off my head, I give it to Him to sit upon; without my head, I shall still serve Him.
faG o Hein Hhast 3 eta AT AG sfenr fester NANI (658-7, esdH, He
ki-o na mareejai jee-arhaa na deejai jaa saho bha-i-aa vidaanaa. ||1]|3]|
Why haven't I died? Why hasn't my life just ended? My Husband Lord has become a stranger to me. ||1]]3]|
SIA HIG 3 WIA (558-9) vad-hans mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Wadahans, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas ure II (558-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hfs HS AS fas Hor sie GS Ho Jet o SE Il (558-10, ada, He 3)
man mailai sabh kichh mailaa tan Dhotai man hachhaa na ho-ay.
When the mind is filthy, everything is filthy; by washing the body, the mind is not cleaned.
fea nas soft gefenr feaw gs ate NA (558-10, esd, He 3) ih jagat bharam bhulaa-i-aa virlaa boojhai ko-ay. ||1]| This world is deluded by doubt; how rare are those who understand this. ||1]||
mf Ho AS J St GH Ml (558-11, esdH, we 3) jap man mayray too ayko naam. O my mind, chant the One Name.
Afsafe dor 4 as So fears nal TIC Il 558-11, esd, He 3) satgur dee-aa mo ka-o ayhu niDhaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru has given me this treasure. ||1||Pause]|
fror & one A fre feet fh afe corte i (558-11, edu, ne 3)
siDhaa kay aasan jay sikhai indree vas kar kamaa-ay.
Even if one learns the Yogic postures of the Siddhas, and holds his sexual energy in check,
Ho at HS 3 Css IGH AG 3 ANTE NI (558-12, esdH, He 3) man kee mail na utrai ha-umai mail na jaa-ay. ||2] | still, the filth of the mind is not removed, and the filth of egotism is not eliminated.
[21 | fen Ho aG da AH ao odt fee Afsag at AaSTE I (558-12, esdH, He 3)
is man ka-o hor sanjam ko naahee vin satgur kee sarnaa-ay. This mind is not controlled by any other discipline, except the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
Asate fifeer Gact set age fas 5 ATE ISI (558-13, sadn, 8 3) satgur mili-ai ultee bha-ee kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||3]| Meeting the True Guru, one is transformed beyond description. ||3]|
safs aoa Afsagd ag feed nd ae a Aafe feta Ate Af Ih (558-14, esdH, He 3)
bhanat naanak satgur ka-o mildo marai gur kai sabad fir jeevai ko-ay.
Prays Nanak, one who dies upon meeting the True Guru, shall be rejuvenated through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
HHS at He sd feg He Jet TE SINAN (558-14, esdH, He 3)
mamtaa kee mal utrai ih man hachhaa ho-ay. ||4]|1]|
The filth of his attachment and possessiveness shall depart, and his mind shall become pure. ||4]|1]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Ill (558-15)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
edt Asad ASba edt A|t SE Il (558-15, esdn, v2 3) nadree satgur sayvee-ai nadree sayvaa ho-ay. By His Grace, one serves the True Guru; by His Grace, service is performed.
oedt fea Ho SfA ure oedt He foone de NA (558-15, esdH, He 3) nadree ih man vas aavai nadree man nirmal ho-ay. ||1|| By His grace, this mind is controlled, and by His Grace, it becomes pure. ||1||
Hd Ho Ufs Ae ALE Il (558-16, esdH, He 3) mayray man chayt sachaa so-ay. O my mind, think of the True Lord.
ea Bate oT AY uefa fete gy a HB FS ual FS i (558-16, esdH, He 3)
ayko cheeteh taa sukh paavahi fir dookh na moolay ho-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Think of the One Lord, and you shall obtain peace; you shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||1||Pause]|
Sedt Hfa a Ateba edt Hae SA nfs omfe It (558-17, esdH, He 3)
nadree mar kai jeevee-ai nadree sabad vasai man aa-ay.
By His Grace, one dies while yet alive, and by His Grace, the Word of the Shabad is enshrined in the mind.
edt JAH Fst Jan Jd ANTE NI (558-17, esd, He 3)
nadree hukam bujhee-ai hukmay rahai samaa-ay. ||2| |
By His Grace, one understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and by His Command, one merges into the Lord. ||2||
fafe fase ofs oA 6 ofaS Ar fag] Ale AE I (558-18, eadH, He 3)
jin jihvaa har ras na chakhi-o saa jihvaa jal jaa-o.
That tongue, which does not savor the sublime essence of the Lord - may that tongue be burned off!
MS TA Ae ofa Tot sy fer EA ste Wall (558-18, esdH, Hs 3)
an ras saaday lag rahee dukh paa-i-aa doojai bhaa-ay. ||3]||
It remains attached to other pleasures, and through the love of duality, it suffers in pain. ||3]|
Hao Sela Sa J mM aa Ase Il (558-19, esdH, v2 3) sabhnaa nadar ayk hai aapay farak karay-i. The One Lord grants His Grace to all; He Himself makes distinctions.
Soa Asdte fife eo ufeor on sarvet Sf SI (658-19, esdH, He 3)
naanak satgur mili-ai fal paa-i-aa naam vadaa-ee day-ay. ||4||2||
O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, the fruits are obtained, and one is blessed with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam. ||4]|2||
U|T yur
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (559-1)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Whar Hg Tag d ae fag famre o Tet I (559-1, asda, He 3) maa-i-aa moh gubaar hai gur bin gi-aan na ho-ee. Emotional attachment to Maya is darkness; without the Guru, there is no wisdom.
Hafe wat fo afsur eA ued feaet wail (559-2, sda, we 3)
sabad lagay tin bujhi-aa doojai paraj vigo-ee. ||1]||
Those who are attached to the Word of the Shabad understand; duality has ruined the people. ||1]|
Ho Hd THs Adal AT Il (559-2, esdH, vs 3) man mayray gurmat karnee saar. O my mind, under Guru's Instruction, do good deeds.
Ae Aer dfs ys gets a uefa He Ss UA TIS Il (559-3, esdu, ve 3)
sadaa sadaa har parabh raveh taa paavahi mokh du-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Dwell forever and ever upon the Lord God, and you shall find the gate of salvation. ||1]|Pause] |
qe a fours Sa Tomy SfE at a US I (559-3, asda, ve 3) gunaa kaa niDhaan ayk hai aapay day-ay taa ko paa-ay. The Lord alone is the treasure of virtue; He Himself gives, and then one receives.
fag oe AS feest aa a afte fee QI (559-4, esdH, He 3)
bin naavai sabh vichhurhee gur kai sabad milaa-ay. ||2| |
Without the Name, all are separated from the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one meets the Lord. ||2||
Hot Het age wile Te fSor af fag a wrfenr i (559-4, esdH, He 3) mayree mayree karday ghat ga-ay tinaa hath kihu na aa-i-aa. Acting in ego, they lose, and nothing comes into their hands.
Asate fiufeon vfs fs Afs of Porfemr SI (559-5, esdH, He 3) satgur mili-ai sach milay sach naam samaa-i-aa. ||3]| Meeting the True Guru, they find Truth, and merge into the True Name. ||3]|
WITAT HOA Sd Adte J nists Afs Wave Il (559-5, esdH, He 3) aasaa mansaa ayhu sareer hai antar jot jagaa-ay. Hope and desire abide in this body, but the Lord's Light shines within as well.
Soa HOHfa Fa J TaHfe Hats ATS IgiSil (559-6, esdH, v2 3) naanak manmukh banDh hai gurmukh mukat karaa-ay. ||4||3]|
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs remain in bondage; the Gurmukhs are liberated. [4113] |
SSH HIS 3 Il (559-7)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Hoget Ae Hu Cro ad a AafA WASTE Il (559-7, esdu, He 3)
sohaaganee sadaa mukh ujlaa gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
The faces of the happy soul-brides are radiant forever; through the Guru, they are peacefully poised.
He fug veto nruer feed nimy Tete AU (559-7, eadH, He 3) Sadaa pir raaveh aapnaa vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||1|| They enjoy their Husband Lord constantly, eradicating their ego from within. ||1]|
He Ho SF ae ats on fone i (559-8, esdq, nH: 3) mayray man too har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Asate H ag ofa dor see nai Ta Il (559-8, esda, He 3) satgur mo ka-o har dee-aa bujhaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. The True Guru has led me to understand the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
coat dior fasordinn fear noe o ue Il (559-9, eda, He 3)
duhaaganee kharee-aa billaadee-aa tinaa mahal na paa-ay.
The abandoned brides cry out in their suffering; they do not attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
en ote agut gy uefa mirat ATE MQM (559-9, esdH, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay karoopee dookh paavahi aagai jaa-ay. ||2| |
In the love of duality, they appear so ugly; they suffer in pain as they go to the world beyond. ||2||
Test fos we se fase om SATE I (559-10, esdu, v2 3)
gunvantee nit gun ravai hirdai naam vasaa-ay.
The virtuous soul-bride constantly chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord; she enshrines the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within her heart.
m@aedst anat eu ora famete Sil (559-10, esdH, He 3) a-uganvantee kaamnee dukh laagai billaa-ay. ||3]|| The unvirtuous woman suffers, and cries out in pain. ||3]|
Asa! & gag Fa FT AoMt age’ fag 3 ATE Il (559-11, eda, ws 3) sabhnaa kaa bhataar ayk hai su-aamee kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. The One Lord and Master is the Husband Lord of all; His Praises cannot be expressed.
Soa nM a atlas SH BlEnio BTS Isisil (559-11, esdH, Hs 3) naanak aapay vayk keeti-an naamay la-i-an laa-ay. ||4||4|| O Nanak, He has separated some from Himself, while others are to His Name. ||4||4]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (559-12)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Mitts ou Ae Hot war as Aset ATE wefemr I (559-12, esdu, He 3)
amrit naam sad meethaa laagaa gur sabdee saad aa-i-aa.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam is always sweet to me; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I come to taste it.
Het wat AofA ANat ofe AE Hfe SAfeEnr NA (559-13, edn, He 3)
sachee banee sahj samaanee har jee-o man vasaa-i-aa. ||1]| | Through the True Word of the Guru's Bani, I am merged in peace and poise; the Dear Lord is enshrined in the mind. ||1]|
dfs afs fasur Asag frefemr i (559-13, e3dH, H 3) har kar kirpaa satguroo milaa-i-aa. The Lord, showing His Mercy, has caused me to meet the True Guru.
ud Asafa of ony fomrfenr na TIS il (559-14, esd, vs 3) poorai satgur har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Perfect True Guru, I meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
Won Fe wel usarAt afer Ae UATE II (559-14, esdH, He 3) barahmai bayd banee pargaasee maa-i-aa moh pasaaraa. Through Brahma, the hymns of the Vedas were revealed, but the love of Maya spread.
HIE famrat eas ufs nus SHA FIT MGA |! (559-15, esdH, ve 3) mahaaday-o gi-aanee vartai ghar aapnai taamas bahut aha“kaaraa. ||2||
The wise one, Shiva, remains absorbed in himself, but he is engrossed in dark passions and excessive egotism. ||2||
faAg Ae ness gor fag ofa St AAS Il (559-15, esdH, Hs 3) kisan sadaa avtaaree rooDhaa kit lag tarai sansaaraa. Vishnu is always busy reincarnating himself - who will save the world?
Tents famris 33 Fa nists ya HI TIT Il (559-16, esdH, He 3)
gurmukh gi-aan ratay jug antar chookai moh gubaaraa. ||3]|
The Gurmukhs are imbued with spiritual wisdom in this age; they are rid of the darkness of emotional attachment. ||3]|
Asad Ae 3 fensrat Taf Sd HATS Il (559-16, ZsdH, He 3)
satgur sayvaa tay nistaaraa gurmukh tarai sansaaraa.
Serving the True Guru, one is emancipated; the Gurmukh crosses over the world- ocean.
AM ofe gs Saat ufefe Ha eur Ill (559-17, esdH, He 3)
saachai naa-ay ratay bairaagee paa-in mokh du-aaraa. ||4]|
The detached renunciates are imbued with the True Name; they attain the gate of Salvation. ||4| |
Sa Ay ds AS nists Ase ad ufsurer Il (559-17, esdq, ne 3) ayko sach vartai sabh antar sabhnaa karay partipaalaa. The One True Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere; He cherishes everyone.
Sod fean fas H nied 3 Wal Aso cles cfenrer UIUll (559-18, esdH, He 3) naanak ikas bin mai avar na jaanaa sabhnaa deevaan da-i-aalaa. ||5||5||
O Nanak, without the One Lord, I do not know any other; He is the Merciful Master of all. |[5][5]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (559-19)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
dante AY HAM SS fomre il (559-19, esdH, He 3) gurmukh sach sanjam tat gi-aan. The Gurmukh practices true self-discipline, and attains the essence of wisdom.
Tanfe ATS wa fore All (559-19, esd, He 3) gurmukh saachay lagai Dhi-aan. ||1]| The Gurmukh meditates on the True Lord. ||1]|
UST Ugo
aH HS AS SH ANTS Il (560-1, esdH, He 3) gurmukh man mayray naam samaal. As Gurmukh, O my mind, remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
He foad 3S 3d ofS il TIE Il (560-1, esde, v2 3) sadaa nibhai chalai tayrai naal. rahaa-o.
It shall stand by you always, and go with you. ||Pause| | aenfy ats ufs Ag AE I (560-1, esdH, He 3)
gurmukh jaat pat sach so-ay. The True Lord is the social status and honor of the Gurmukh.
qonfa nists Aaret us ofE QI (560-2, esdH, He 3)
gurmukh antar sakhaa-ee parabh ho-ay. ||2|| Within the Gurmukh, is God, his friend and helper. ||2| |
aenty fan 6 orf ad A fe I (560-2, esdH, He 3) gurmukh jis no aap karay so ho-ay. He alone becomes Gurmukh, whom the Lord so blesses.
aanfe orfy eset 2S APE SBI (560-2, esdH, He 3) gurmukh aap vadaa-ee dayvai so-ay. ||3]| He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with greatness. ||3]|
aaHfy Age AY Adat AT Il (560-3, esda, ns 3) gurmukh sabad sach karnee saar. The Gurmukh lives the True Word of the Shabad, and practices good deeds.
Dante Soa UdeTS ATTY IE (560-3, esdH, He 3) gurmukh naanak parvaarai saaDhaar. ||4||6] | The Gurmukh, O Nanak, emancipates his family and relations. ||4]|6] |
SSIA HIS 3 Il (560-4)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
TAS de Ate weit Af ASTE Il (560-4, esdH, v2 3) rasnaa har saad lagee sahj subhaa-ay. My tongue is intuitively attracted to the taste of the Lord.
Ho fgufsor afs am forte ai (560-4, esda, ue 3) man taripti-aa har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| My mind is satisfied, meditating on the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Het AY Are Aafe Start il (560-5, asda, He 3) sadaa sukh saachai sabad veechaaree. Lasting peace is obtained, contemplating the Shabad, the True Word of God.
mus Asad feed Aer afer Al TIC Il (560-5, esdH, 2 3) aapnay satgur vitahu sadaa balihaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
mt HSsdior Sot fee we Il (560-5, esdH, He 3) akhee santokhee-aa ayk liv laa-ay. My eyes are content, lovingly focused on the One Lord.
Ho Asfaor sat aS Tete iM (560-6, esdH, v3 3) man santokhi-aa doojaa bhaa-o gavaa-ay. ||2|| My mind is content, having forsaken the love of duality. ||2]|
a0 Adifa ny de Aafe dfs ate Il (s60-6, esdH, He 3) dayh sareer sukh hovai sabad har naa-ay. The frame of my body is at peace, through the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord.
oH USHS fase dfont AHTE SII (560-7, sdH, H2 3) naam parmal hirdai rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||3]| The fragrance of the Naam permeates my heart. ||3]|
Sa MASA AA SST Il (560-7, esdH, He 3) naanak mastak jis vadbhaag. O Nanak, one who has such great destiny written upon his forehead,
Td at set AIA SIT UID (560-7, esdH, He 3)
gur kee banee sahj bairaag. ||4]||7]||
through the Bani of the Guru's Word, easily and intuitively becomes free of desire. [41171 |
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (560-8)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
ud Ts 3 oH ufeur ATS Il (560-8, esdH, 42 3) pooray gur tay naam paa-i-aa jaa-ay. From the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained.
Ae Aafe Afs ANTS IAI (560-8, esdH, He 3) sachai sabad sach samaa-ay. ||1]|| Through the Shabad, the True Word of God, one merges in the True Lord. |]1]|
SHO 3H fours J ute il (560-8, esdz, v2 3) ay man naam niDhaan too paa-ay. O my soul, obtain the treasure of the Naam,
nus aa at Hfs & SATE ai TIC Il (60-9, esdu, ve 3) aapnay gur kee man lai rajaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. by submitting to the Will of your Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
ad a Rafe fesg Hw TASTE Il (560-9, esdH, He 3) gur kai sabad vichahu mail gavaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, filth is washed away from within.
fSdHS SH ZA Hfs we IK (560-10, zsdH, He 3) nirmal naam vasai man aa-ay. ||2|| The Immaculate Naam comes to abide within the mind. ||2| |
SoH ger fed AAT Il (560-10, esdH, Hs 3) bharmay bhoolaa firai sansaar. Deluded by doubt, the world wanders around.
Hf HOH AH Ad WNIT” SII (560-10, esdH, He 3) mar janmai jam karay khu-aar. ||3]| It dies, and is born again, and is ruined by the Messenger of Death. ||3]]|
soa A east fae dfs oH fowrfenr it (s60-11, esdH, ve 3) naanak say vadbhaagee jin har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. O Nanak, very fortunate are those who meditate on the Name of the Lord.
ad usATSt xfs SAE NICH (560-11, esdH, He 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-i-aa. ||4||8]| By Guru's Grace, they enshrine the Name within their minds. ||4]|8]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (560-12)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
IGH oe ate feda 3 ufe o enfa fea ofF II (560-12, esdu, He 3) ha-umai naavai naal viroDh hai du-ay na vaseh ik thaa-ay. Ego is opposed to the Name of the Lord; the two do not dwell in the same place.
JGH fefs Ret os Jeet a HO foe ATE NAN (560-12, esdH, He 3) ha-umai vich sayvaa na hova-ee taa man birthaa jaa-ay. ||1]| In egotism, selfless service cannot be performed, and so the soul goes unfulfilled.
[21
ofe of Ho AS J TT aT AaE AHS Il (560-13, esdH, He 3) har chayt man mayray too gur kaa sabad kamaa-ay. O my mind, think of the Lord, and practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Jan Hofs a afe fxs a feos JOH ATE 1 TIS I (560-13, eada, He 3)
hukam maneh taa har milai taa vichahu ha-umai jaa-ay. rahaa-o.
If you submit to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then you shall meet with the Lord; only then will your ego depart from within. ||Pause||
ICH AS Add J ICH Gufs GE Il (560-14, esau, He 3) ha-umai sabh sareer hai ha-umai opat ho-ay. Egotism is within all bodies; through egotism, we come to be born.
GH ea" TAG J ICH fefe afs o AA AE NMI (560-14, esda, He 3) ha-umai vadaa gubaar hai ha-umai vich bujh na sakai ko-ay. ||2]| Egotism is total darkness; in egotism, no one can understand anything. ||2| |
JGH fefs safs o deet gau o afsur we I (560-15, esau, He 3)
ha-umai vich bhagat na hova-ee hukam na bujhi-aa jaa-ay.
In egotism, devotional worship cannot be performed, and the Hukam of the Lord's Command cannot be understood.
oGH fefs HE ga 3 an 3 ZA nfs onfe Sil (560-15, esdH, He 3)
ha-umai vich jee-o banDh hai naam na vasai man aa-ay. |[3]|
In egotism, the soul is in bondage, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to abide in the mind. ||3]|
soa Asdfe fxfent eH wet st Ae efhor Hf wrfe I (560-16, esdH, ne 3)
naanak satgur mili-ai ha-umai ga-ee taa sach vasi-aa man aa-ay.
O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, egotism is eliminated, and then, the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind]|
Ag ante Af dd Ad Afe AHTE NICNII (560-17, SsdH, He 3)
sach kamaavai sach rahai sachay sayv samaa-ay. ||4||9||12] |
One starts practicing truth, abides in truth and by serving the True One gets absorbed in Him. |]4]]9]|12]|
ZSdH HIS 8 WI A (560-18)
vad-hans mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (560-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AW 8a Sa YS SAT Il (560-19, esdy, us 4) Sayj ayk ayko parabh thaakur. There is one bed, and One Lord God.
aanfe sfe TS AY ATES MAUI (560-19, esdH, He 4) gurmukh har raavay sukh saagar. ||1]| The Gurmukh enjoys the Lord, the ocean of peace. ||1]|
A ys fess UH Hfs nITAT II (560-19, edu, H8 4) mai parabh milan paraym man aasaa. My mind longs to meet my Beloved Lord.
UST uEA
Gg us Hore Aa utsy a ste She wus TI aS WA NU IHS I (561-1, esda, we 4) gur pooraa maylaavai mayraa pareetam ha-o vaar vaar aapnay guroo ka-o jaasaa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru leads me to meet my Beloved; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to my Guru. ||1]||Pause| |
H nzae saute ASS Il (561-1, sadn, Hs 4) mai avgan bharpoor sareeray. My body is over-flowing with corruption;
JG faS afs fren mre YS Us MQM (61-2, esdH, He 4) ha-o ki-o kar milaa apnay pareetam pooray. ||2]| how can I meet my Perfect Beloved? ||2||
fafs qeest Aa utsy urfemr i (561-2, esdu, He 4) jin gunvantee mayraa pareetam paa-i-aa. The virtuous ones obtain my Beloved;
AH Te dt WE fa for Act afer Si (561-3, esdH, He 4) say mai gun naahee ha-o ki-o milaa mayree maa-i-aa. ||3]| I do not have these virtues. How can I meet Him, O my mother? |[3]|
J ats af war Bure ggSs Il (561-3, esdu, v3 4) ha-o kar kar thaakaa upaav bahutayray. I am so tired of making all these efforts.
SoA Ada TUT Ts AT NU (561-3, esdH, He 4) naanak gareeb raakho har mayray. ||4||1|| Please protect Nanak, the meek one, O my Lord. ||4]||1]|
SSSA HIS 8 Ill (561-4)
vad-hans mehlaa 4. Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
ha ofs ys Hes HATS SB ret Il (561-4, eada, He 4) mayraa har parabh sundar mai saar na jaanee. My Lord God is so beautiful. I do not know His worth.
ug af ys efS TA Sarat WAU (561-4, esdH, ws 4) ha-o har parabh chhod doojai lobhaanee. ||1|| Abandoning my Lord God, I have become entangled in duality. ||1]|
J8 fa ats fus a8 fees feuret il Go1-5, esda, He 4) ha-o ki-o kar pir ka-o mila-o i-aanee. How can I meet with my Husband? I don't know.
a fu ae A Aoafe Aret fue a fxs fimret 19a Toe tl 561-5, esau, v2 4) jo pir bhaavai saa sohagan saa-ee pir ka-o milai si-aanee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
She who pleases her Husband Lord is a happy soul-bride. She meets with her Husband Lord - she is so wise. ||1]]Pause||
H fefe en 7G fae afe furs ur|et Il (561-6, asda, He 4) mai vich dos ha-o ki-o kar pir paavaa. I am filled with faults; how can I attain my Husband Lord?
3d nda fimrd 3G fug fats o nir|er QI (561-6, esdH, He 4) tayray anayk pi-aaray ha-o pir chit na aavaa. ||2]| You have many loves, but I am not in Your thoughts, O my Husband Lord. ||2]|
fafs fus afeor AT set Aas Il (561-7, esdH, H8 4) jin pir raavi-aa saa bhalee suhaagan. She who enjoys her Husband Lord, is the good soul-bride.
AH Te ot 9G fomr adt eaafs Sil 661-7, esdH, ue 4) say mai gun naahee ha-o ki-aa karee duhaagan. ||3]|| I don't have these virtues; what can I, the discarded bride, do? ||3]|
fos Aoafs wet fug TS Il (561-8, esdH, He 4) nit suhaagan sadaa pir raavai. The soul-bride continually, constantly enjoys her Husband Lord.
H andes ae cot afe we Sil 61-8, esdH, He 4) mai karamheen kab hee gal laavai. ||4|| I have no good fortune; will He ever hold me close in His embrace? ||4||
3 fug qees 3B niGafenra I Go1-8, esdH, 43 4) too pir gunvantaa ha-o a-oguni-aaraa. You, O Husband Lord, are meritorious, while I am without merit.
H fosae suf soa SUS NUN (561-9, ZsdH, He 4) mai nirgun bakhas naanak vaychaaraa. ||5||2|| I am worthless; please forgive Nanak, the meek. ||5]|2]|
ZSIH HIS 8 WI 2 (561-10) vad-hans mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars YATE II (561-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H nfs est win od faG afs ofs cane UST Il (561-11, esdH, He 4)
mai man vadee aas haray ki-o kar har darsan paavaa.
Within my mind there is such a great yearning; how will I attain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?
JG Wh ust mid Asad Td ufe Ho HAT AHSTST | (561-11, eadH, He 4) ha-o jaa-ay puchhaa apnay satgurai gur puchh man mugaDh samjhaavaa. I go and ask my True Guru; with the Guru's advice, I shall teach my foolish mind.
3" HO AHS Ts Aaet ole ale Aer fire i (561-12, esdu, v3 4)
bhoolaa man samjhai gur sabdee har har sadaa Dhi-aa-ay.
The foolish mind is instructed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and meditates forever on the Lord, Har, Har.
Sod fan oefs ad Ha filma A ofa veat fos BES A 661-12, asda, He 4)
naanak jis nadar karay mayraa pi-aaraa so har charnee chit laa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, one who is blessed with the Mercy of my Beloved, focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet. ||1]|
UG Afs 2A act fus wale A ofs Ys ATS SST Il (561-13, eda, us 4)
ha-o sabh vays karee pir kaaran jay har parabh saachay bhaavaa.
I dress myself in all sorts of robes for my Husband, so that my True Lord God will be pleased.
FA fug fimra 4 aefe 3 2a 3 fae afe dhe ur|T II (561-14, esdH, He 4)
SO pir pi-aaraa mai nadar na daykhai ha-o ki-o kar Dheeraj paavaa.
But my Beloved Husband Lord does not even cast a glance in my direction; how can I be consoled?
fan arate o@ Atere Aterdt A furs gat Aa mre I (561-14, esdH, He 4)
jis kaaran ha-o seegaar seegaaree so pir rataa mayraa avraa.
For His sake, I adorn myself with adornments, but my Husband is imbued with the love of another.
Soa US US Us Heats fats fue afenrat AT AST IQ (561-15, esdH, He 4) naanak Dhan Dhan Dhan sohagan jin pir raavi-arhaa sach savraa. ||2||
O Nanak, blessed, blessed, blessed is that soul-bride, who enjoys her True, Sublime Husband Lord. ||2]|
o@ wife ust Aaa AOafs SHt fae fug uferst ys HT II (561-16, esdq, He 4)
ha-o jaa-ay puchhaa sohaag suhaagan tusee ki-o pir paa-i-arhaa parabh mayraa.
I go and ask the fortunate, happy soul-bride, "How did you attain Him - your Husband Lord, my God?"
H Gufe sete act fufs wre H sfemiat Hat Sa I 61-16, esde, 3 4)
mai oopar nadar karee pir saachai mai chhodi-arhaa mayraa tayraa.
She answers, "My True Husband blessed me with His Mercy; I abandoned the distinction between mine and yours.
AZ Ho 30 He ag ofs us ao fey wreafa SE fsb I (561-17, esdq, He 4)
sabh man tan jee-o karahu har parabh kaa it maarag bhainay milee-ai.
Dedicate everything, mind, body and soul, to the Lord God; this is the Path to meet Him, O sister."
ntusat ug oefe afs te Soa Afs ASt GHA SI (1-18, esdH, He 4) aapnarhaa parabh nadar kar daykhai naanak jot jotee ralee-ai. ||3] | If her God gazes upon her with favor, O Nanak, her light merges into the Light. ||3]|
A ofa ys ath ef HoT fSH HO Se MUST SST Il (61-18, ada, He 4) jo har parabh kaa mai day-ay sanayhaa tis man tan apnaa dayvaa. I dedicate my mind and body to the one who brings me a message from my Lord God.
fos ua edt Ae corer fan nora urat SST I (561-19, esdH, 2 4) nit pakhaa fayree sayv kamaavaa tis aagai paanee dhovaa”. I wave the fan over him every day, serve him and carry water for him.
fos fos Ae adt ofs Ae at A ofs of aE ASS I (561-19, eadH, He 4)
nit nit sayv karee har jan kee jo har har kathaa sunaa-ay.
Constantly and continuously, I serve the Lord's humble servant, who recites to me the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.
UST ug2
U9 U9 Ag Ts Afsag yT aoa His MTA UTS ISI (562-1, eadH, He 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo gur satgur pooraa naanak man aas pujaa-ay. | |4| | Hail, hail unto the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru, who fulfills Nanak's heart's desires. ||4||
ag Ane Ha Af oe fas ffs afe om fomr|r i (562-2, esdH, ue 4)
gur sajan mayraa mayl haray jit mil har naam Dhi-aavaa.
O Lord, let me meet the Guru, my best friend; meeting Him, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
qs Afsae wag ofe afte yst ate ASt afs TS ae I (562-2, esda, we 4)
gur satgur paashu har gosat poochhaa” kar saa“jhee har gun gaavaa".
I seek the Lord's sermon from the Guru, the True Guru; joining with Him, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ae we fos fas ne ofs & HO He oH Af= Sa Il (562-3, esdu, He 4)
gun gaavaa nit nit sad har kay man jeevai naam sun tayraa.
Each and every day, forever, I sing the Lord's Praises; my mind lives by hearing Your Name.
Sod fas tor fend Ha Hom fsa 23 nfs ate AE Ae Null 62-4, esdH, He 4) naanak jit vaylaa visrai mayraa su-aamee tit vaylai mar jaa-ay jee-o mayraa. ||5||
O Nanak, that moment when I forget my Lord and Master - at that moment, my soul dies. ||5]|
dfs gus a AS aet Ge A Se fan vrfy fers I (562-4, esda, ne 4)
har vaykhan ka-o sabh ko-ee lochai so vaykhai jis aap vikhaalay.
Everyone longs to see the Lord, but he alone sees Him, whom the Lord causes to see Him.
fan 3 oefa ad Aa fimre A afe ofs WET ANTS Il (562-5, esdH, He 4)
jis no nadar karay mayraa pi-aaraa so har har sadaa samaalay.
One upon whom my Beloved bestows His Glance of Grace, cherishes the Lord, Har, Har forever.
A dfa ofs oy Ae Wet AHS fA Asa ys Hat ffemr i (502-5, esdu, us 4)
so har har naam sadaa sadaa samaalay jis satgur pooraa mayraa mili-aa.
He alone cherishes the Lord, Har, Har, forever and ever, who meets my Perfect True Guru.
Sa did Ao ofa fea Je afs afu afe ASt sfowr NENaUsil (562-6, esdH, H3 4)
naanak har jan har ikay ho-ay har jap har saytee rali-aa. ||6||1||3]]| O Nanak, the Lord's humble servant and the Lord become One; meditating on the Lord, he blends with the Lord. ||6]|1]|3]|
SSI HIS U WET A (562-8)
vad-hans mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas ure II (562-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mits Sar st aT SIA I (562-9, esdH, He 5) at oochaa taa kaa darbaaraa. His Darbaar, His Court, is the most lofty and exalted.
MS OTST fs UTSTSTAS Il (562-9, SdH, He 5) ant naahee kichh paaraavaaraa. It has no end or limitations.
afte afe afe we ue Il (562-9, eadH, 42 5) kot kot kot lakh Dhaavai. Millions, millions, tens of millions seek,
fg fq ST aT HIG BS US NA (562-9, esdH, He 5) ik til taa kaa mahal na paavai. ||1|| but they cannot find even a tiny bit of His Mansion. ||1]|
Hvet AGE A Sar fas ys HS NA FIC | (562-10, esdu, ne 5) suhaavee ka-un so vaylaa jit parabh maylaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. What is that auspicious moment, when God is met? ||1]|Pause| |
BY saIs A AG nists il (562-10, esdH, He 5) laakh bhagat jaa ka-o aaraaDheh. Tens of thousands of devotees worship Him in adoration.
ore sulAd su dt Avafs Il (562-11, esdH, He 5) laakh tapeesar tap hee saaDheh. Tens of thousands of ascetics practice austere discipline.
BY HAAS ATS Aa Il (562-11, esdH, us 5) laakh jogeesar kartay jogaa. Tens of thousands of Yogis practice Yoga.
wy Sans Safa Far iQ (562-11, esdH, uz 5)
laakh bhogeesar bhogeh bhogaa. ||2|| Tens of thousands of pleasure seekers seek pleasure. ||2||
ufe ufe zAfs aefo Gat Il (562-12, esdH, He 5) ghat ghat vaseh jaaneh thoraa. He dwells in each and every heart, but only a few know this.
d act AHS UdET ST Il (562-12, esdH, He 5) hai ko-ee saajan pardaa toraa. Is there any friend who can rip apart the screen of separation?
ad Aso A fe fga]etar Il (562-12, esdu, He 5) kara-o jatan jay ho-ay miharvaanaa. I can only make the effort, if the Lord is merciful to me.
a as cet MG Aga ISI (562-13, esdH, He 5) taa ka-o day-ee jee-o kurbaanaa. ||3]| I sacrifice my body and soul to Him. ||3]|
fess fess Hae ufo wrfenr I (562-13, esdH, He 5) firat firat santan peh aa-i-aa. After wandering around for so long, I have finally come to the Saints;
Tu SH THT AAG fhefemr i (562-13, e3dH, Hu: 5) dookh bharam hamaaraa sagal mitaa-i-aa. all of my pains and doubts have been eradicated.
Hotes gefeur ys uifys So Il (562-14, sda, Hs 5)
mahal bulaa-i-aa parabh amrit bhoonchaa.
God summoned me to the Mansion of His Presence, and blessed me with the Ambrosial Nectar of His Name.
aT soa YS Ha Sor usa (562-14, esdq, 2 5) kaho naanak parabh mayraa oochaa. ||4||1|| Says Nanak, my God is lofty and exalted. ||4||1]|
SSH HIS U Il (562-15)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
US A ee fas IHS ATS Il (562-15, eadu, ue 5) Dhan so vaylaa jit darsan karnaa. Blessed is that time, when the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is given;
JG seas AfsaqT TIS WAU (562-15, esdH, He 5)
ha-o balihaaree satgur charnaa. ||1]|| I am a Sacrifice to the feet of the True Guru. ||1]|
Abt & US YISH YS AT Il (562-15, esdy, He 5) jee-a kay daatay pareetam parabh mayray. You are the Giver of souls, O my Beloved God.
He Ae ys on fess A TIS Il (562-16, esdu, He 5) man jeevai parabh naam chitayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. My soul lives by reflecting upon the Name of God. ||1||Pause||
Ag Hy sure nifiys aret il (562-16, esdH, v2 5) sach mantar tumaaraa amrit banee. True is Your Mantra, Ambrosial is the Bani of Your Word.
Hise usu ferfe AATet IQ (562-17, eadH, He 5) seetal purakh darisat sujaanee. ||2|| Cooling and soothing is Your Presence, all-knowing is Your gaze. ||2| |
Ad Jay sua sufs feet Il (562-17, ada, He 5) sach hukam tumaaraa takhat nivaasee. True is Your Command; You sit upon the eternal throne.
wife o are Ha ys wifsert Sil (562-17, esdu, Hs 5) aa-ay na jaavai mayraa parabh abhinaasee. ||3]| My eternal God does not come or go. ||3]|
SH fkodes BA IH Stor Il (562-18, esdH, v2 5) tum miharvaan daas ham deenaa. You are the Merciful Master; I am Your humble servant.
Soa Afsy souls Ber Sil (562-18, esdA, ue 5)
naanak saahib bharpur leenaa. ||4||2||
O Nanak, the Lord and Master is totally permeating and pervading everywhere. [141121]
SSA HIS U Il (562-19)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
3 Mig a faa WE Il (502-19, esdH, we 5) too bay-ant ko virlaa jaanai. You are infinite - only a few know this.
as yAfe & Aafe uss WAU (562-19, esdq, ve 5) gur parsaad ko sabad pachhaanai. ||1]|| By Guru's Grace, some come to understand You through the Word of the Shabad.
[21] Aza at meee fms il (562-19, esdH, v2 5)
sayvak kee ardaas pi-aaray. Your servant offers this prayer, O Beloved:
Ua ugs
Af Ate ys BIE SHS NU TIC Il (563-1, esda, He 5) jap jeevaa parabh charan tumaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I live by meditating on Your Feet, God. ||1]||Pause] |
cfenire usd AT YS VS Il (563-1, eadH, ws 5) da-i-aal purakh mayray parabh daatay. O my Merciful and Almighty God, O Great Giver,
farts Feed fos SH AS IQ (63-1, esdH, He 5) jisahi janaavhu tineh tum jaatay. ||2]| he alone knows You, whom You so bless. ||2||
Het Het AST award il (563-2, eadH, He 5)
sadaa sadaa jaa-ee balihaaree. Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to You.
fes 63 tu Ge syst Ill (503-2, esdz, H2 5) it ut daykh-a-u ot tumaaree. ||3]| Here and hereafter, I seek Your Protection. ||3]|
Hfa fase Te fas 5 AST I (563-2, edu, 8 5) mohi nirgun gun kichhoo na jaataa. I am without virtue; I know none of Your Glorious Virtues.
oad ATG Sf He TST BIBI (563-3, e3dH, He 5) naanak saaDhoo daykh man raataa. ||4]|3]| O Nanak, seeing the Holy Saint, my mind is imbued with You. ||4|[3]]|
SdH Hs U Il (563-3)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
nisaaHt A YS UST Il (563-3, esd, we 5) antarjaamee so parabh pooraa. God is perfect - He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
ag efe Ag ot Os NA (563-4, ead, HE 5) daan day-ay saaDhoo kee Dhooraa. ||1]| He blesses us with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1]|
ate fasur ys dts afenirar i (563-4, asda, ue 5) kar kirpaa parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Bless me with Your Grace, God, O Merciful to the meek.
Sat Ce yas Turse Ul FS i (563-4, eadH, ws 5) tayree ot pooran gopaalaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I seek Your Protection, O Perfect Lord, Sustainer of the World. ||1]|Pause] |
me afe Hobos sfour sous Il (563-5, 23dH, H2 5) jal thal mahee-al rahi-aa bharpooray. He is totally pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.
foate SA ardt Ys FFI MM (563-5, esdH, us 5) nikat vasai naahee parabh dooray. ||2|| God is near at hand, not far away. ||2||
fan 3 oefa ad A fame Il (563-5, esdx, H2 5) jis no nadar kKaray so Dhi-aa-ay. One whom He blesses with His Grace, meditates on Him.
MTS UIT Tid X TE WE IBll (563-6, esdH, He 5) aath pahar har kay gun gaa-ay. ||3]|| Twenty-four hours a day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
ba AS Aas ufsurs il (563-6, esdu, ue 5) jee-a jant saglay partipaaray. He cherishes and sustains all beings and creatures.
Hate ufsG sax dfs Bris ISISil (563-6, esdH, He 5)
saran pari-o naanak har du-aaray. ||4||4| | Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door. ||4]|4] |
SSIA HIS U Il (563-7)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
3 es TT nizarmt I (563-7, sda, 3 5) too vad daataa antarjaamee. You are the Great Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
As fo stem use ys Amit Ail (563-7, 23dH, He 5) sabh meh ravi-aa pooran parabh su-aamee. ||1]| God, the Perfect Lord and Master, is permeating and pervading in all. ||1]|
He ys USH STH MOST II (563-8, eadH, 3 5) mayray parabh pareetam naam aDhaaraa. The Name of my Beloved God is my only support.
J@ Afe Af= Alt OH SHT INA TIS Il (563-8, esdH, He 5) ha-o sun sun jeevaa naam tumaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I live by hearing, continually hearing Your Name. ||1||Pause| |
sot Hafe AfsagT HS UT I (563-8, esdH, He 5) tayree saran satgur mayray pooray. I seek Your Sanctuary, O my Perfect True Guru.
He fesne df ASt US MM (563-9, esdH, Hs 5) man nirmal ho-ay santaa Dhooray. ||2|| My mind is purified by the dust of the Saints. ||2] |
do aHG fase Sfs as Il (563-9, esdH, nH 5) charan kamal hirdai ur Dhaaray. I have enshrined His Lotus Feet within my heart.
3d Pans AS At afSIS ISI (563-9, esdH, He 5) tayray darsan ka-o jaa-ee balihaaray. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3]|
ate faxsur 33 TS WT Il (563-10, esdH, ve 5) kar kirpaa tayray gun gaavaa. Show mercy unto me, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises.
oTOX OH AUS AY UST SIUM (563-10, ZSdH, He 5) naanak naam japat sukh paavaa. ||4]|5|| O Nanak, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I obtain peace. ||4]|5]|
SSI HIS U Il (563-11)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
Aone dfs nifys utes il (503-11, esdu, Hs 5)
saaDhsang har amrit peejai.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord.
a AG He Saag SA UI (563-11, eadH, we 5) naa jee-o marai na kabhoo chheejai. ||1|| The soul does not die, nor does it ever waste away. ||1]||
Boa TS YS UTEhA Il (563-11, eadH, ws 5) vadbhaagee gur pooraa paa-ee-ai. By great good fortune, one meets the Perfect Guru.
as far 3 ys fomreat di TH I (563-12, esd, 3 5) gur kirpaa tay parabhoo Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, one meditates on God. ||1||Pause| |
ISO ASI Ts HSA BS Il (563-12, esdH, He 5)
ratan javaahar har maanak laalaa. The Lord is the jewel, the pearl, the gem, the diamond.
frnfs fants ys se fSTTH QI (563-13, eadH, He 5) simar simar parabh bha-ay nihaalaa. ||2|| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I am in ecstasy. ||2]|
AS AS UNS AY AGS Il (563-13, esd, He 5) jat kat paykha-o saaDhoo sarnaa. Wherever I look, I see the Sanctuary of the Holy.
dfs Te ate fesHs HS ATS" IBM (563-13, esdH, He 5) har gun gaa-ay nirmal man karnaa. ||3]| Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my soul becomes immaculately pure. ||3]|
uz we nists Hat Amit gor il (563-14, esdH, ne 5) ghat ghat antar mayraa su-aamee voothaa. Within each and every heart, dwells my Lord and Master.
Tar SH ule YF Zo" ISIEll (563-14, esdH, ve 5)
naanak naam paa-i-aa parabh toothaa. ||4||6]|
O Nanak, one obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, when God bestows His Mercy. [14116] |
ZSIA HIS U Il (563-14)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
feng atdt ys ate efenrar | (503-15, esdy, He 5) visar naahee parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Do not forget me, O God, Merciful to the meek.
Sot Hafe use fasurr NU TIE i (563-15, esd, He 5) tayree saran pooran kirpaalaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect, Compassionate Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
wd fefs wrefs A aS AIST Il (563-15, 30H, He 5) jah chit aavahi so thaan suhaavaa. Wherever You come to mind, that place is blessed.
fas tor fensfs st oat TST INA (563-16, esdH, v2 5)
jit vaylaa visrahi taa laagai haavaa. ||1]| The moment I forget You, I am stricken with regret. ||1]|
3d rho 3 Ae ot Aret I (563-16, esdH, He 5) tayray jee-a too sad hee saathee. All beings are Yours; You are their constant companion.
HATS Ad 3 AS ST Tat QM (563-17, sada, He 5) sansaar saagar tay kadh day haathee. ||2]| Please, give me Your hand, and pull me up out of this world-ocean. ||2||
MISE Aral SH Tt AMT I (563-17, ead, ve 5) aavan jaanaa tum hee kee-aa. Coming and going are by Your Will.
fan 3 safe fH we o shor SI (663-17, esdH, He 5) jis too raakhahi tis dookh na thee-aa. ||3]| One whom You save is not afflicted by suffering. ||3]|
3 a Afog neg o Ife Il (563-18, edn, 3 5) too ayko saahib avar na hor. You are the One and only Lord and Master; there is no other.
faa ad aoa ad fe SIDI (563-18, 23dH, He 5) bin-o karai naanak kar jor. ||4]|7]| Nanak offers this prayer with his palms pressed together. ||4||7||
SdH Hs U Il (563-19)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
3 Warefa st det ATE Il (563-19, eadH, He 5) too jaanaa-ihi taa ko-ee jaanai. When You allow Yourself to be known, then we know You.
so dot an Sues INA (563-19, SsdH, v2 5) tayraa dee-aa naam vakhaanai. ||1]| We chant Your Name, which You have given to us. ||1]|
3 uede aeafs Sct far na TIS il (563-19, esdH, ve 5) too achraj kudrat tayree bismaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. You are wonderful! Your creative potency is amazing! ||1]||Pause| |
UST uEs
30 nM ATES MMT ATS Il (564-1, eadH, us 5) tuDh aapay kaaran aapay karnaa. You Yourself are the Cause of causes, You Yourself are the Creator.
JAH HHS JAH HIST IQ (564-1, esdu, v2 5) hukmay jaman hukmay marnaa. ||2| | By Your Will, we are born, and by Your Will, we die. ||2||
OH ST HS 3H MUTA I (564-1, esdH, He 5) naam tayraa man tan aaDhaaree. Your Name is the Support of our mind and body.
SSA VA FHA SHAT MIC (564-2, esdH, He 5) naanak daas bakhsees tumaaree. ||3]||8]| This is Your blessing to Nanak, Your slave. ||3]||8]|
ZSIH HIS UW 2 (564-3)
vad-hans mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara YATE Il (564-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ae nists Se fhe at firs 3S fas ut Ts ys I (564-4, esdz, vs 5)
mayrai antar lochaa milan kee pi-aaray ha-o ki-o paa-ee gur pooray.
Deep within me, there is a longing to meet my Beloved; how can I attain my Perfect Guru?
AAG de doin awa afs o Aa fas ate I (564-4, asda, He 5) jay sa-o khayl khaylaa-ee-ai baalak reh na sakai bin kheeray. Even though a baby may play hundreds of games, he cannot survive without milk.
He nists gu 3 Bad niet AAG SHH Als Il (564-5, eadH, He 5)
mayrai antar bhukh na utrai ammaalee jay sa-o bhojan mai neeray.
The hunger within me is not satisfied, O my friend, even though I am served hundreds of dishes.
Ae fe sfs Un fudH a fas zane fa noe dts All (564-5, ede, He 5)
mayrai man tan paraym piramm kaa bin darsan ki-o man Dheeray. ||1||
My mind and body are filled with love for my Beloved; how can my soul find relief, without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan? ||1]|
Afs AWE He UTSH set H Afes fy AeETST I (504-6, esdz, He 5)
sun sajan mayray pareetam bhaa-ee mai maylihu mitar sukh-daata.
Listen, O my dear friends and siblings - lead me to my True Friend, the Giver of peace.
6g Hho ot Hat AS ave we fos Here Ufs ahor srst I (564-7, esdH, He 5) oh jee-a kee mayree sabh baydan jaanai nit sunaavai har kee-aa baataa. He knows all the troubles of my soul; every day, he tells me stories of the Lord.
JG fea fug fsa fag sto o not fa wisa AG aC fawarst I (564-7, exdu, He 5)
ha-o ik khin tis bin reh na sakaa ji-o chaatrik jal ka-o billaataa.
I cannot live without Him, even for an instant. I cry out for Him, just as the song-bird cries for the drop of water.
JG four ge 3d Afa AHS H fssae AG afy SS M1 (564-8, edu, He 5)
ha-o ki-aa gun tayray saar samaalee mai nirgun ka-o rakh laytaa. ||2]| Which of Your Glorious Virtues should I sing? You save even worthless beings like me.
[21 IG set Gstat as a niret A fug afe Sat Sear Ih (564-9, esdu, ne 5)
ha-o bha-ee udeenee kant ka-o ammaalee so pir kad nainee daykhaa. I have become depressed, waiting for my Husband Lord, O my friend; when shall my eyes behold my Husband?
Afs gH sae fend faa fus fas & Bar il (564-9, esdu, He 5)
sabh ras bhogan visray bin pir kitai na laykhaa.
I have forgotten how to enjoy all pleasures; without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.
feg aug 3f6 3 Aeeet afa o AAS IG SAT Il (564-10, eada, nH 5) in kaaparh tan na sukhva-ee kar na saka-o ha-o vaysaa. These clothes do not please my body; I cannot dress myself.
frat Fat oe afenr fume fSe niet IH MTSAT BI (564-10, esdH, He 5) jinee sakhee laal raavi-aa pi-aaraa tin aagai ham aadaysaa. ||3]| I bow to those friends of mine, who have enjoyed their Beloved Husband Lord. ||3]|
H Afs Aters gaetfenr niet fae fus oft & wire I (564-11, eadH, He 5)
mai sabh seegaar banaa-i-aa ammaalee bin pir kaam na aa-ay.
I have adorned myself with all sorts of decorations, O my friend, but without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.
W Af @Ss 6 Ue niet at foe Hee AS WE Il (564-12, eadH, 2 5)
jaa seh baat na puchhee-aa ammaalee taa birthaa joban sabh jaa-ay.
When my Husband does not care for me, O my friend, then my youth passes, totally useless.
U6 U6 3 Asal npret fae Ag dfowr AME I (564-12, esdu, He 5)
Dhan Dhan tay sohaaganee ammaalee jin saho rahi-aa samaa-ay.
Blessed, blessed are the happy soul-brides, O my friend, who are blended with their Husband Lord.
JG afer fae Aart ninnst fsa aA Get AE UTS ISI (564-13, esdH, He 5) ha-o vaari-aa tin sohaaganee ammaalee tin kay Dhovaa sad paa-ay. ||4|| I am a sacrifice to those happy soul-brides; I wash their feet again and again. ||4]|
ATs VA SoH AT vines fSeg A Alen Ys TI I (564-13, esdH, we 5)
jichar doojaa bharam saa ammaalee tichar mai jaani-aa parabh dooray.
As long as I suffered from duality and doubt, O my friend, I thought God was far away.
Wt fufeur ust Afsag inst St MAT HOAT AS UT Il (504-14, e3dH, 2 5)
jaa mili-aa pooraa satguroo ammaalee taa aasaa mansaa sabh pooray.
But when I met the Perfect True Guru, O my friend, then all my hopes and desires were fulfilled.
H Aga Aa AY urfemr niet fug Asa sfonr seus Il (564-15, esdH, we 5)
mai sarab sukhaa sukh paa-i-aa ammaalee pir sarab rahi-aa bharpooray.
I have obtained all pleasures and comforts, O my friend; my Husband Lord is all- pervading everywhere.
He aoa dfs da wien wrst ag Asad a Slat UST NUNAIEN (564-15, esdH, He 5)
jan naanak har rang maani-aa ammaalee gur satgur kai lag pairay. ||5||1||9]| Servant Nanak enjoys the Lord's Love, O my friend; I fall at the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||5]|1]|9]|
SdH HIS 3 wneud (564-17)
vad-hans mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa Wadahans, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (564-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het wel AY Ufe AY Ase Sos Il (564-18, esdH, He 3)
sachee banee sach Dhun sach sabad veechaaraa.
True is the Bani of His Word, and True is the melody; True is contemplative meditation on the Word of the Shabad.
Moles AY AS WTa’ US UG SSS JHA INA (564-18, sadn, He 3) an-din sach salaahnaa Dhan Dhan vadbhaag hamaaraa. ||1]| Night and day, I praise the True Lord. Blessed, blessed is my great good fortune. ||1]|
Ho Hd ATS OH feeg af AE Il (564-19, edu, u8 3) man mayray saachay naam vitahu bal jaa-o. O my mind, let yourself be a sacrifice to the True Name.
anf om df gofs at uefa Het are NAN TIS I (564-19, esdH, He 3)
daasan daasaa ho-ay raheh taa paavahi sachaa naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. If you become the slave of the Lord's slaves, you shall obtain the True Name. ||1]|Pause] |
usr ueu fave Adt Afs gst Sq HO AS OE Il (565-1, asda, He 3)
jihvaa sachee sach ratee tan man sachaa ho-ay. True is the tongue which is imbued with Truth, and true are the mind and body.
faa A dg Howe wWaAfs HOH AS fF II (565-1, esdH, He 3) bin saachay hor salaahnaa jaaseh janam sabh kho-ay. ||2| | By praising any other than the True Lord, one's whole life is wasted. ||2||
Ag ust Ag atA|St APS Sars | (565-2, ead, us 3) sach khaytee sach beejnaa saachaa vaapaaraa. Let Truth be the farm, Truth the seed, and Truth the merchandise you trade.
Motes BI AY oH UG Safs Sd FTI MBI (565-2, esdu, nz 3)
an-din laahaa sach naam Dhan bhagat bharay bhandaaraa. ||3]|
Night and day, you shall earn the profit of the Lord's Name; you shall have the treasure overflowing with the wealth of devotional worship. ||3] |
Ag ust AY Us|sl AY Sa ofa oS Il (565-3, esdH, He 3)
sach khaanaa sach painnaa sach tayk har naa-o.
Let Truth be your food, and let Truth be your clothes; let your True Support be the Name of the Lord.
fan 6 aun fSH fxs Host US TS iigil 565-3, esdH, He 3)
jis no bakhsay tis milai mahlee paa-ay thaa-o. ||4||
One who is so blessed by the Lord, obtains a seat in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4||
uefa AY Weta Ad fefs Fat ufs 3 ura II (565-4, esdH, He 3)
aavahi sachay jaaveh sachay fir joonee mool na paahi.
In Truth we come, and in Truth we go, and then, we are not consigned to reincarnation again.
aan ef ave Afemrs of ATS fs AS Mull (565-4, esd, He 3) gurmukh dar saachai sachiaar heh saachay maahi samaahi. ||5|| The Gurmukhs are hailed as True in the True Court; they merge in the True Lord.
[5] |
M3g Ae Ho Ae At fhefs Hate il 565-5, esdH, He 3)
antar sachaa man sachaa sachee sifat sanaa-ay.
Deep within they are True, and their minds are True; they sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Ae ae AY Ae Afsas afsod WE NEI (565-5, esdH, He 3) sachai thaan sach salaahnaa satgur balihaarai jaa-o. ||6|| In the true place, they praise the True Lord; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||6] |
Ay 2a Hag Ag fas Ae ote fumrg Il (565-6, esdz, 12 3) sach vaylaa moorat sach jit sachay naal pi-aar. True is the time, and true is the moment, when one falls in love with the True Lord.
Ag Sus" AY Ss" AV AT wag WDM (565-6, esdu, ve 3)
sach vaykh-naa sach bolnaa sachaa sabh aakaar. ||7||
Then, he sees Truth, and speaks the Truth; he realizes the True Lord pervading the entire Universe. ||7]|
Soa Ad AS 3 Hs wry we fvfe it (65-7, esdH, 2 3) naanak sachai maylay taa milay aapay la-ay milaa-ay. O Nanak, one merges with the True Lord, when He merges with Himself.
fa@ are F386 set omy ad safe CIA (665-7, esdH, He 3) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakhsee aapay karay rajaa-ay. ||8]|1|| As it pleases Him, He preserves us; He Himself ordains His Will. ||8]]1]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (565-8)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Hour wo fen wee Gy aA oie TE We Il (565-8, esdH, us 3)
manoo-aa dah dis Dhaavdaa oh kaisay har gun gaavai.
His mind wanders in the ten directions - how can he sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord?
feet feurfu aot mfteret an au fas Aas NI (505-8, esdz, He 3)
indree vi-aap rahee aDhikaa-ee kaam kroDh nit santaavai. ||1]|
The sensory organs are totally engrossed in sensuality; sexual desire and anger constantly afflict him. ||1]|
SJ BT AIA TE TelH Il (565-9, esdH, He 3) vaahu vaahu sehjay gun raveejai. Waaho! Waaho! Hail! Hail! Chant His Glorious Praises.
on oy fem Aa Hf ves o TeHfs ofe om UA NU TIE I (505-9, ead, He 3)
raam naam is jug meh dulabh hai gurmat har ras peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain in this age; under Guru's Instruction, drink in the subtle essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Rag dfs Ho feos de a ofs A TE We Il (565-10, esdH, ve 3)
sabad cheen man nirmal hovai taa har kay gun gaavai.
Remembering the Word of the Shabad, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and then, one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
TaHSt wit wry ues 3 fer wife SAT UTS [QM (565-10, SdH, He 3)
gurmatee aapai aap pachhaanai taa nij ghar vaasaa paavai. ||2||
Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand his own self, and then, he comes to dwell in the home of his inner self. ||2||
SHON Ae df gS AS dfs A Te WE I (565-11, essa, nz 3)
ay man mayray sadaa rang raatay sadaa har kay gun gaa-o.
O my mind, be imbued forever with the Lord's Love, and sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
dfs fagne Ae AYES Hfe fefeor ae ure SII (65-11, esdH, He 3)
har nirmal sadaa sukh-daata man chindi-aa fal paa-o. ||3]|
The Immaculate Lord is forever the Giver of peace; from Him, one receives the fruits of his heart's desires. ||3]|
oH ate A BSH se afe at AgeTet Il (565-12, esdH, He 3) ham neech say ootam bha-ay har kee sarnaa-ee. I am lowly, but I have been exalted, entering the Sanctuary of the Lord.
ugg seeT as Sat Ast SfSnret sil 565-13, esdH, ue 3) paathar dubdaa kaadh lee-aa saachee vadi-aa-ee. ||4|| He has lifted up the sinking stone; True is His glorious greatness. ||4]|
fay A nifys se ments sfo uret it (565-13, sda, He 3)
bikh say amrit bha-ay gurmat buDh paa-ee.
From poison, I have been transformed into Ambrosial Nectar; under Guru's Instruction, I have obtained wisdom.
MAT USHS Se nists SHST SASH UII (565-13, esdH, H 3)
akahu parmal bha-ay antar vaasnaa vasaa-ee. ||5||
From bitter herbs, I have been transformed into sandalwood; this fragrance permeates me deep within. ||5||
HSH HOH VSS DT Aa Hfs wfent wrfe I (565-14, eda, He 3) maanas janam dulambh hai jag meh khati-aa aa-ay. This human birth is so precious; one must earn the right to come into the world.
ud ata Afsag fs afe ony forte él (565-14, esdx, 3 3) poorai bhaag satgur milai har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||6|| By perfect destiny, I met the True Guru, and I meditate on the Lord's Name. ||6||
HoH 38 fay sat uifser HoH Tefenr i (565-15, e3dH, He 3)
manmukh bhoolay bikh lagay ahilaa janam gavaa-i-aa.
The self-willed manmukhs are deluded; attached to corruption, they waste away their lives in vain.
ofs & SH AS AY Ae ATS Hae & SEM MDI (565-15, esd, He 3) har kaa naam sadaa sukh saagar saachaa sabad na bhaa-i-aa. ||7||
The Name of the Lord is forever an ocean of peace, but the manmukhs do not love the Word of the Shabad. ||7]|
Hud dfs ofs Ag a ad fess fase sArfenr It (565-16, esdH, He 3)
mukhahu har har sabh ko karai virlai hirdai vasaa-i-aa.
Everyone can chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har with their mouths, but only a few enshrine it within their hearts.
oad fra & fase efi He Hats fq urfeor cit (565-17, esdq, ne 3)
naanak jin kai hirdai vasi-aa mokh mukat tin” paa-i-aa. ||8||2||
O Nanak, those who enshrine the Lord within their hearts, attain liberation and emancipation. ||8]|2||
SSIH HIG VSS (565-18)
vad-hans mehlaa 1 chhant Wadahans, First Mehl, Chhant:
qe fsa YATE Il (565-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofenr afs fearfs ara arehat il (565-19, sade, 3 1) kaa-i-aa koorh vigaarh kaahay naa-ee-ai. Why bother to wash the body, polluted by falsehood?
SST A UdSTS AD AHEM Il (565-19, esdH, He 1) naataa so parvaan sach kamaa-ee-di. One's cleansing bath is only approved, if he practices Truth.
ag Ave viefa df Are sty Are ure I (565-19, esd, He 1) jab saach andar ho-ay saachaa taam saachaa paa-ee-di.
When there is Truth within the heart, then one becomes True, and obtains the True Lord.
uart uéé fod asg nafs ont Sfe dfs Tevet Il (566-1, esdH, H2 1)
likhay baajhahu surat naahee bol bol gavaa-ee-ai. Without pre-ordained destiny, understanding is not attained; talking and babbling, one wastes his life away.
fra ate adh sor adit wets nae ferent i (566-1, esdz, He 1)
jithai jaa-ay bahee-ai bhalaa kahee-ai surat sabad likhaa-ee-ai.
Wherever you go and sit, speak well, and write the Word of the Shabad in your consciousness.
ofenr afs fearfs aa arebt Ul (606-2, edn, 43 1) kaa-i-aa koorh vigaarh kaahay naa-ee-ai. ||1]| Why bother to wash the body which is polluted by falsehood? ||1]|
SH afer age A SS aoe Il (566-2, esda, ve 1) taa mai kahi-aa kahan jaa tujhai kahaa-i-aa. When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak.
nifys ofa a an AS Hfs Sfemr I (566-3, eada, He 1) amrit har kaa naam mayrai man bhaa-i-aa. The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is pleasing to my mind.
on Hot Hota oar Efe Sot wfonr il (566-3, esdH, He 1)
naam meethaa maneh laagaa dookh dayraa dhaahi-aa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, seems so sweet to my mind; it has destroyed the dwelling of pain.
AY Ho Hfe urfe efor at 3 safer Il (506-4, esda, He 1) sookh man meh aa-ay vasi-aa jaam tai furmaa-i-aa. Peace came to dwell in my mind, when You gave the Order.
sete 30 maeth Hot fife wry Burfemr I (566-4, esdH, He 1)
nadar tuDh ardaas mayree jinn aap upaa-i-aa.
It is Yours to bestow Your Grace, and it is mine to speak this prayer; You created Yourself.
SH afer age A SS aoe Il (566-5, esd, He 1) taa mai kahi-aa kahan jaa tujhai kahaa-i-aa. ||2|| When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak. ||2| |
Zot UAH ATES fags AHS Il (566-5, eSdH, He 1) vaaree khasam kadhaa-ay kirat kamaavanaa. The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done.
Ha fan 3 orf saat ureat I (566-5, esdH, H2 1) mandaa kisai na aakh jhagrhaa paavnaa. Do not speak ill of others, or get involved in arguments.
6d UTfe Saat AyitH Ast orf my Terear Il (566-6, esdH, He 1) nah paa-ay jhagrhaa su-aam saytee aap aap vanjaavanaa. Do not get into arguments with the Lord, or you shall ruin yourself.
fa ote Hats afs Adtet ate foo gnirear I (566-6, sda, v3 1) jis naal sangat kar sareekee jaa-ay ki-aa roo-aavanaa. If you challenge the One, with whom you must abide, you will cry in the end.
A ef Avet Hafs agat orf ardt Sr]ar Il (566-7, esdH, He 1) jo day-ay sahnaa maneh kahnaa aakh naahee vaavnaa. Be satisfied with what God gives you; tell your mind not to complain uselessly.
Zot UAH ATES fags ASST BI (566-7, esdH, v2 1) vaaree khasam kadhaa-ay kirat kamaavanaa. ||3]| The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done.
[131] As Cureing orfu nmi sefs ad Il (566-8, esdH, He 1)
sabh upaa-ee-an aap aapay nadar karay. He Himself created all, and He blesses then with His Glance of Grace.
aQat af& 3 Hat HloT AS Hd Il (506-8, edn, He 1) ka-urhaa ko-ay na maagai meethaa sabh maagai. No one asks for that which is bitter; everyone asks for sweets.
Ag afe Hie vfs Se UAH STS A AG Il (566-8, eSdH, He 1) sabh ko-ay meethaa mang daykhai khasam bhaavai so karay. Let everyone ask for sweets, and behold, it is as the Lord wills.
fas Ua We nda adel OH 3B © AHA Il (566-9, eadH, He 1)
kichh punn daan anayk karnee naam tul na samasray.
Giving donations to charity, and performing various religious rituals are not equal to the contemplation of the Naam.
SToat fas ay fixfemr aay dur ofs ae Il (566-10, esdH, He 1)
naankaa jin naam mili-aa karam ho-aa Dhur kaday.
O Nanak, those who are blessed with the Naam have had such good karma pre- ordained.
AS Gureing orfu nmi sefs AT ISI (566-10, esdH, He 1) sabh upaa-ee-an aap aapay nadar karay. ||4||1]| He Himself created all, and He blesses them with His Glance of Grace. ||4]]1]|
SSIA HIS A Il (566-11)
vad-hans mehlaa 1. Wadahans, First Mehl:
add Cent Sat SH Tara | (566-11, sada, uz 1) karahu da-i-aa tayraa naam vakhaanaa. Show mercy to me, that I may chant Your Name.
As Curent orf mm Aga AHTST Il (566-11, 23dH, He 1) sabh upaa-ee-ai aap aapay sarab samaanaa. You Yourself created all, and You are pervading among all.
Ava Auer orfu sa Sure aa weer I (566-11, sada, we sarbay Samaanaa aap toohai upaa-ay DhanDhai laa-ee-aa. You Yourself are pervading among all, and You link them to their tasks.
fefa a3 ct ate aH fea fae sever Il (566-12, esdH, v8 1) ik tujh hee kee-ay raajay iknaa bhikh bhavaa-ee-aa. Some, You have made kings, while others go about begging.
Se HI 35 ar plot Ss sath gor|ar Il (566-12, asda, He 1)
lobh moh tujh kee-aa meethaa ayt bharam bhulaanaa.
You have made greed and emotional attachment seem sweet; they are deluded by this delusion.
He efenr agg niuet StH SH SUSTAIN (566-13, eadH, He 1)
sadaa da-i-aa karahu apnee taam naam vakhaanaa. ||1|| Be ever merciful to me; only then can I chant Your Name. ||1]|
oY Sad ATS AST H nfs SST Il (566-13, SSdH, He 1) naam tayraa hai saachaa sadaa mai man bhaanaa. Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind.
wy afenr AY rte ANTE Il (566-14, esdH, He 1) dookh ga-i-aa sukh aa-ay samaanaa. My pains are dispelled, and I am permeated with peace.
Wels Afs OF AWS AAS Il (566-14, adn, He 1) gaavan sur nar sugharh sujaanaa. The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You.
Afs od AWS AAS Wefs A Sd fe SST Il (566-15, SdH, He 1)
sur nar sugharh sujaan gaavahi jo tayrai man bhaavhay.
The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You; they are pleasing to Your Mind.
Hfenr Hd ssfo odt uifser ABH TSTST Il (566-15, esdH, He 1)
maa-i-aa mohay cheeteh naahee ahilaa janam gavaavhay.
Enticed by Maya, they do not remember the Lord, and they waste away their lives in vain.
fefa Hz Ha 3 S3fs HS A orfenr FSA AST I (566-16, esdH, 48 1) ik moorh mugaDh na cheeteh moolay jo aa-i-aa tis jaanaa. Some fools and idiots never think of the Lord; whoever has come, shall have to go.
oY Sa Het Are Afe H fs Stat III (566-16, ZsdH, He 1) naam tayraa sadaa saachaa so-ay mai man bhaanaa. ||2]| Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind. ||2]|
3m wuz ATS nis Sat set il (566-17, esdu, us 1) tayraa vakhat suhaavaa amrit tayree banee. Beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar.
Hea Aets TC ats war AS uasrat Il (566-17, esdH, He 1) sayvak sayveh bhaa-o kar laagaa saa-o paraanee. Your servants serve You with love; these mortals are attached to Your essence.
AG yrat fear wren frat wifys urfemr i (566-17, esda, ue 1)
Saa-O paraanee tinaa laagaa jinee amrit paa-i-aa.
Those mortals are attached to Your essence, who are blessed with the Ambrosial Name.
any 3d afe as fos vats Aetfenr I (566-18, esdH, He 1) naam tayrai jo-ay raatay nit charheh savaa-i-aa. Those who are imbued with Your Name, prosper more and more, day by day.
fea acy aH 3 df AN ATH & Sa UETet Il (566-18, esdH, He 1
ik karam Dharam na ho-ay sanjam jaam na ayk pachhaanee.
Some do not practice good deeds, or live righteously; nor do they practice self- restraint. They do not realize the One Lord.
us AVS" Ae Sa nifys Sat get Sil (566-19, esdu, ue 1) vakhat suhaavaa sadaa tayraa amrit tayree banee. ||3]| Ever beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]|
IG sfeadt ATS BS Il (566-19, esdH, He 1) ha-o balihaaree saachay naavai. I am a Sacrifice to the True Name.
Us ued
TH 3ST AGT O We Il (567-1, e3dH, He 1) raaj tayraa kabahu na jaavai. Your rule shall never end.
TH 3 3a Het fesse SI AGT 3 WSS Il (567-1, edu, He 1) raajo ta tayraa sadaa nihchal ayhu kabahu na jaav-ay. Your rule is eternal and unchanging; it shall never come to an end.
sa 4
wag 3 3a Afe de Afe AofA ASS Il (567-2, esd, He 1) chaakar ta tayraa so-ay hovai jo-ay sahj samaav-ay. He alone becomes Your servant, who contemplates You in peaceful ease.
SAHG 3 TY B Ba HS UY Sls B MSS Il (567-2, esse, v3 1)
dusman ta dookh na lagai moolay paap nayrh na aav-ay. Enemies and pains shall never touch him, and sin shall never draw near him.
JG afsodt HET det Sa ZT FSS IVI (567-2, esd, ve 1) ha-o balihaaree sadaa hovaa ayk tayray naav-ay. ||4]| I am forever a sacrifice to the One Lord, and Your Name. ||4||
Had Waste sas SHS I ates aaa AMM SS EMTS I (567-3, esdH, He 1)
jugah jugantar bhagat tumaaray. keerat karahi su-aamee tayrai du-aaray.
Throughout the ages, Your devotees sing the Kirtan of Your Praises, O Lord Master, at Your Door.
Aufs 3 Ara SA HIS Il (567-4, esdH, ue 1) jaapeh ta saachaa ayk muraaray. They meditate on the One True Lord.
ATat Had StH vue aH Hfs SASS Il (567-4, eadH, He 1) saachaa muraaray taam jaapeh jaam man vasaavhay. Only then do they meditate on the True Lord, when they enshrine Him in their minds.
3H sort s3f0 ahr AHH Sg Va] Il (567-4, esdH, He 1) bharmo bhulaavaa tujheh kee-aa jaam ayhu chukaavhay. Doubt and delusion are Your making; when these are dispelled,
Td usdAet agg fast SI AH Bars Il (567-5, esda, uz 1) gur parsaadee karahu kirpaa layho jamahu ubaaray. then, by Guru's Grace, You grant Your Grace, and save them from the noose of Death.
Aad Haste SIS SHS WU (567-5, esdH, He 1) jugah jugantar bhagat tumaaray. ||5]| Throughout the ages, they are Your devotees. ||5]|
~ AA
Zs Ae ATS nie MUTT Il (567-6, eadH, H2 1) vaday mayray saahibaa alakh apaaraa. O my Great Lord and Master, You are unfathomable and infinite.
fa@ afs as@ sSst JG nrfit o ATT II (507-6, esdu, He 1) ki-o kar kara-o baynantee ha-o aakh na jaanaa. How should I make and offer my prayer? I do not know what to say.
etd Add St ATT USS Il (567-6, esdH, He 1) nadar karahi taa saach pachhaanaa. If You bless me with Your Glance of Grace, I realize the Truth.
Ard usvat of Sot fy wef gsr] Il (567-7, esdn, He 1) saacho pachhaanaa taam tayraa jaam aap bujhaavhay. Only then do I come to realize the Truth, when You Yourself instruct me.
wu gu HATE Me HVAT ST YaST Il (567-7, esdH, He 1) dookh bhookh sansaar kee-ay sahsaa ayhu chukaavhay. The pain and hunger of the world are Your making; dispel this doubt.
faadfs aoa wf AOA aS Td sera Il (567-8, esdH, He 1) binvant naanak jaa-ay sahsaa bujhai gur beechaaraa. Prays Nanak, ones skepticism is taken away, when he understands the Guru's wisdom.
zs Afog J orfu mee nrr|at IEll (567-8, 2sdH, He 1) vadaa saahib hai aap alakh apaaraa. ||6]| The Great Lord Master is unfathomable and infinite. ||6]|
a
3d da Bea Ts Shs Il (567-9, esdu, v2 1) tayray bankay lo-in dant reesaalaa. Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful.
Hue oa fro SHS SH Il (567-9, esdH, v2 1) sohnay nak jin lammrhay vaalaa. Your nose is so graceful, and Your hair is so long.
ave atfenrt Afes at Ber Il (567-9, eadH, He 1) kanchan kaa-i-aa su-inay kee dhaalaa. Your body is so precious, cast in gold.
Heo wer fans Hes HUT SAT Adel Il (567-10, e3dH, He 1) sovann dhaalaa krisan maalaa japahu tusee sahayleeho. His body is cast in gold, and He wears Krishna's mala; meditate on Him, O sisters.
AH ents o dg uso fre HET HIST Il (567-10, esdH, He 1) jam du-aar na hohu kharhee-aa sikh sunhu mahayleeho. You shall not have to stand at Death's door, O sisters, if you listen to these teachings.
JA SAT Sal Sa Bd HO at ATH Il (567-11, S3dH, He 1)
hans hansaa bag bagaa lahai man kee jaalaa.
From a crane, you shall be transformed into a swan, and the filth of your mind shall be removed.
da Bes Fs Svs IDI (567-11, esdH, we 1) bankay lo-in dant reesaalaa. ||7| | Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful. || 7] |
Sot WS ATS HOTS aret I (567-11, esdH, He 1) tayree chaal suhaavee maDhuraarhee banee. Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet.
adele afore Saws WTA I (567-12, esd, He 1) kuhkan kokilaa taral ju-aanee. You coo like a songbird, and your youthful beauty is alluring.
soe Pret orfy grat fes Ho at UTES Il (567-12, esdH, 2 1) tarlaa ju-aanee aap bhaanee ichh man kee pooree-ay. Your youthful beauty is so alluring; it pleases You, and it fulfills the heart's desires.
Asa fa ua ud fork fofh wrfr wry AOTe Il (567-12, eadH, Hs 1) saarang ji-o pag Dharai thim thim aap aap sanDhoora-ay. Like an elephant, You step with Your Feet so carefully; You are satisfied with Yourself.
Ala wat fed ust Cea afar srt th 567-13, esa, ne 1)
Sareerang raatee firai maatee udak gangaa vaanee.
She who is imbued with the Love of such a Great Lord, flows intoxicated, like the waters of the Ganges.
faodts arog oH dfs a Sct we ATS HOTT Set CII (667-13, esdH, He 1)
binvant naanak daas har kaa tayree chaal suhaavee maDhuraarhee banee. ||8]|2]| Prays Nanak, I am Your slave, O Lord; Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet. ||8]|2]|
@SdA HIG 3 ES (567-15) vad-hans mehlaa 3 chhant Wadahans, Third Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsars yATfE Il (567-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nus fus & df gst Hee HaTSSt Ars | (567-16, esdH, v2 3) aapnay pir kai rang ratee mu-ee-ay sobhaavantee naaray. Let yourself be imbued with the Love of your Husband Lord, O beautiful, mortal bride.
Ae Fate fife oct Hete fug ae af& fumirs it (567-16, edu, ve 3)
sachai sabad mil rahee mu-ee-ay pir raavay bhaa-ay pi-aaray.
Let yourself remain merged in the True Word of the Shabad, O mortal bride; savor and enjoy the Love of your Beloved Husband Lord.
Re ae fimrdt afs rect af afs fA@ Sa serfeur I (567-17, esdu, v2 3)
sachai bhaa-ay pi-aaree kant savaaree har har si-o nayhu rachaa-i-aa.
The Husband Lord embellishes His beloved bride with His True Love; she is in love with the Lord, Har, Har.
ny aetfeor st fug ufeor ag a Rafe AHtfeor I (567-17, esdH, He 3)
aap gavaa-i-aa taa pir paa-i-aa gur kai sabad samaa-i-aa.
Renouncing her self-centeredness, she attains her Husband Lord, and remains merged in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
AT uo Aafe weet UH aAret nists yifs fimrdt ii (567-18, esda, He 3)
saa Dhan sabad suhaa-ee paraym kasaa-ee antar pareet pi-aaree.
That soul bride is adorned, who is attracted by His Love, and who treasures the Love of her Beloved within her heart.
atea AT US Afe wet fufs wm Ars Arfo Ae|Tdt NA (567-18, esdH, v3 3) naanak saa Dhan mayl la-ee pir aapay saachai saahi savaaree. ||1]|| O Nanak, the Lord blends that soul bride with Himself; the True King adorns her. ||1]|
fosdeesate fug ef4 Jed IH Il (567-19, sda, Hs 3) nirgunvant-rhee-ay pir daykh hadooray raam. O worthless bride, see your Husband Lord ever-present.
qoute frat afer wete fug afe stor ssugd TH Il (567-19, e3dH, He 3)
gurmukh jinee raavi-aa mu-ee-ay pir rav rahi-aa bharpooray raam.
One who, as Gurmukh, enjoys her Husband Lord, O mortal bride, knows Him to be all- pervading everywhere.
Ust uét
fug ofe sfonr sous Sy dae afar Afar Sa AST I (568-1, esd, Hs 3)
pir rav rahi-aa bharpooray vaykh hajooray jug jug ayko jaataa.
The Lord is all-pervading everywhere; behold Him ever-present. Throughout the ages, know Him as the One.
Ue set sat fug Aofa ae fifemr aan feast I (568-2, esdu, 2 3)
Dhan baalee bholee pir sahj raavai mili-aa karam biDhaataa.
The young, innocent bride enjoys her Husband Lord; she meets Him, the Architect of karma.
fafs ofs sa ofior Fate Aaftmr ats Afs Tot SIUT I (568-2, esdH, He 3)
jin har ras chaakhi-aa sabad subhaakhi-aa har sar rahee bharpooray.
One who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord, and utters the sublime Word of the Shabad, remains immersed in the Lord's Ambrosial Pool.
area aHfs AT fs aS Hae FI TET MQM (568-3, esdH, Hs 3)
naanak kaaman saa pir bhaavai sabday rahai hadooray. ||2||
O Nanak, that soul bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, who, through the Shabad, remains in His Presence. ||2||
Aoset Ave ysg Hele frat fees wry aefenr Il (568-3, sade, He 3)
sohaaganee jaa-ay poochhahu mu-ee-ay jinee vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa.
Go and ask the happy soul-brides, O mortal bride, who have eradicated their self- conceit from within.
fus a gon 3 ufe Hele frat fess wry B aetfenr Il (568-4, esd, He 3)
pir kaa hukam na paa-i-o mu-ee-ay jinee vichahu aap na gavaa-i-aa.
Those who have not eradicated their self-conceit, O mortal bride, do not realize the Hukam of their Husband Lord's Command.
frat omy aetfeur fsot fue ufeor da fa@ aetor wre I 668-5, esdu, v2 3)
jinee aap gavaa-i-aa tinee pir paa-i-aa rang si-o ralee-aa maanai.
Those who eradicate their self-conceit, obtain their Husband Lord; they delight in His Love.
Ret df Tat AIA HST niofes SH TUS Il (508-5, esdH, He 3)
sadaa rang raatee sehjay maatee an-din naam vakhaanai.
Ever imbued with His Love, in perfect poise and grace, she repeats His Name, night and day.
anfs eat nists foe wait ofs a Un Aetfenr Il (568-6, esdH, H2 3)
qa =
kaaman vadbhaagee antar liv laagee har kaa paraym subhaa-i-aa. Very fortunate is that bride, who focuses her consciousness on Him; her Lord's Love is so sweet to her.
Soa AH AIA Ist fale Ag Alers qatfEnr Sil os-6, esdu, us 3)
naanak kaaman sehjay raatee jin sach seegaar banaa-i-aa. ||3]|
O Nanak, that soul-bride who is adorned with Truth, is imbued with her Lord's Love, in the state of perfect poise. ||3]|
ISH Hs HES J VS TT A HS Il (568-7, sda, we 3) ha-umai maar mu-ee-ay too chal gur kai bhaa-ay. Overcome your egotism, O mortal bride, and walk in the Guru's Way.
dfs zg Tets Ae Hele for wuts SAT UTES I (568-7, esdH, He 3)
har var raaveh sadaa mu-ee-ay nij ghar vaasaa paa-ay.
Thus you shall ever enjoy your Husband Lord, O mortal bride, and obtain an abode in the home of your own inner being.
fon ufs SA ue AE SAS Ae ATs Sat Il (508-8, esdH, He 3)
nij ghar vaasaa paa-ay sabad vajaa-ay sadaa suhaagan naaree.
Obtaining an abode in the home of her inner being, she vibrates the Word of the Shabad, and is a happy soul-bride forever.
fug sani Ha ser niafes afs Herd I (508-9, esdH, He 3)
pir ralee-aalaa joban baalaa an-din kant savaaree.
The Husband Lord is delightful, and forever young; night and day, He embellishes His bride.
dfs 2g Aaa HASta Sa AY Hate ATES I (568-9, esdH, He 3)
har var sohaago mastak bhaago sachai sabad suhaa-ay.
Her Husband Lord activates the destiny written on her forehead, and she is adorned with the True Shabad.
sod aHfs afe df rst A VS Afsag SS NGI (568-10, esdH, He 3)
naanak kaaman har rang raatee jaa chalai satgur bhaa-ay. ||4||1]|
O Nanak, the soul-bride is imbued with the Love of the Lord, when she walks according to the Will of the True Guru. ||4[|1]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Ill (568-10)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Dente AS aug se A AIA ota TH Il (568-10, esdH, He 3) gurmukh sabh vaapaar bhalaa jay sehjay keejai raam. All dealings of the Gurmukh are good, if they are accomplished with poise and grace.
Motes oH euehn ora dfs GA UIA TH Il (568-11, sadn, He 3)
an-din naam vakhaanee-ai laahaa har ras peejai raam.
Night and day, he repeats the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and he earns his profits, drinking in the subtle essence of the Lord.
od dfs dA Sin die Ten niafes oH SUS Il (568-11, esdH, He 3)
laahaa har ras leejai har raaveejai an-din naam vakhaanai.
He earns the profit of the subtle essence of the Lord, meditating on the Lord, and repeating the Naam, night and day.
Ge Hafs weds feasfa nr wiry use I (568-12, esdq, Hs 3) gun sangrahi avgan viknahi aapai aap pachhaanai. He gathers in merits, and eliminates demerits, and realizes his own self.
qanfs uret eat efsuret we Rafe oA UIA II (568-13, esdH, He 3)
gurmat paa-ee vadee vadi-aa-ee sachai sabad ras peejai.
Under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with glorious greatness; he drinks in the essence of the True Word of the Shabad.
Sod dfs at sats farst aanfe fess ath al 68-13, esdH, He 3)
naanak har kee bhagat niraalee gurmukh virlai keejai. ||1]|
O Nanak, devotional worship of the Lord is wonderful, but only a few Gurmukhs perform it. ||1]|
aenfy ast ofs nists dtiba afe ota Adife AHS TH I (568-14, esda, He 3) gurmukh khaytee har antar beejee-ai har leejai sareer jamaa-ay raam. As Gurmukh, plant the crop of the Lord within the field of your body, and let it grow.
mus us viele TA SY J OI SB UTHE TH Il (568-14, sadn, ws 3)
aapnay ghar andar ras bhunch too laahaa lai parthaa-ay raam.
Within the home of your own being, enjoy the Lord's subtle essence, and earn profits in the world hereafter.
oo uae dfs xfs ere ag ast Sura I (568-15, esdH, He 3)
laahaa parthaa-ay har man vasaa-ay Dhan khaytee vaapaaraa.
This profit is earned by enshrining the Lord within your mind; blessed is this farming and trade.
ofs on fomre His sre gS Ta MT Il (508-15, esda, we 3)
har naam Dhi-aa-ay man vasaa-ay boojhai gur beechaaraa.
Meditating on the Lord's Name, and enshrining Him within your mind, you shall come to understand the Guru's Teachings.
HOH Ust gen ats ae fAAS Fu So AES Il (568-16, esdz, He 3)
manmukh khaytee vanaj kar thaakay tarisnaa bhukh na jaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs have grown weary of this farming and trade; their hunger and thirst will not go away.
Soa OH fa Ho viele Ad Aafe ASS IQ! (568-16, esdH, He 3)
naanak naam beej man andar sachai sabad subhaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, plant the seed of the Name within your mind, and adorn yourself with the True Word of the Shabad. ||2| |
dfs enrfs A AS Oa faa HASfa Het SSS IH Il (568-17, esdH, He 3)
har vaapaar say jan laagay jinaa mastak manee vadbhaago raam.
Those humble beings engage in the Lord's Trade, who have the jewel of such pre- ordained destiny upon their foreheads.
TaHst HO for wis efor AS Aafe Fas IH Il (568-18, esdH, ve 3)
gurmatee man nij ghar vasi-aa sachai sabad bairaago raam.
Under Guru's Instruction, the soul dwells in the home of the self; through the True Word of the Shabad, she becomes unattached.
Hf HASfa sat vfs Soa wfs gs Stet Il (508-18, sda, v2 3)
mukh mastak bhaago sach bairaago saach ratay veechaaree.
By the destiny written upon their foreheads, they become truly unattached, and by reflective meditation, they are imbued with Truth.
on faa As Ha S@ao Ase IJGH HTT II (568-19, asda, He 3)
naam binaa sabh jag ba-uraanaa sabday ha-umai maaree.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is insane; through the Shabad, the ego is conquered.
AMS Rafe ofa Hfs Cun aenfe SH Aga Il (568-19, esdH, He 3)
saachai sabad laag mat upjai gurmukh naam sohaago.
Attached to the True Word of the Shabad, wisdom comes forth. The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Husband Lord.
Uar ues
Soa Aafe fus sO sHo dfs TS HASla SH SI (569-1, esdH, He 3)
naanak sabad milai bha-o bhanjan har raavai mastak bhaago. ||3]|
O Nanak, through the Shabad, one meets the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, and by the destiny written on her forehead, she enjoys Him. ||3]|
ast een AS Jou 3 Jan fs Sfenret TH II (569-1, esd, nH: 3)
khaytee vanaj sabh hukam hai hukmay man vadi-aa-ee raam.
All farming and trading is by Hukam of His Will; surrendering to the Lord's Will, glorious greatness is obtained.
TINS JAH gst TaH Afs fraret TH I (509-2, esdy, vs 3)
gurmatee hukam boojhee-ai hukmay may! milaa-ee raam.
Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand the Lord's Will, and by His Will, he is united in His Union.
Jath foret Aafa AHTEt Gas aT AaE wMUTS Il (569-2, eadH, He 3)
hukam milaa-ee sahj samaa-ee gur kaa sabad apaaraa.
By His Will, one merges and easily blends with Him. The Shabads of the Guru are incomparable.
Het efanret aa 3 uel Ae ASST ST Il (569-3, esdu, vs 3) sachee vadi-aa-ee gur tay paa-ee sach savaaranhaaraa. Through the Guru, true greatness is obtained, and one is embellished with Truth.
38 sno ufeor ory cetfeur aenfy Afs floret II (569-3, esdu, 2 3)
bha-o bhanjan paa-i-aa aap gavaa-i-aa gurmukh may! milaa-ee.
He finds the Destroyer of fear, and eradicates his self-conceit; as Gurmukh, he is united in His Union.
AT sod aH fedne wan nidigd JAN dont ANT III (569-4, ZsdH, He 3)
kaho naanak naam niranjan agam agochar hukmay rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||4||2||
Says Nanak, the Name of the immaculate, inaccessible, unfathomable Commander is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4]|2]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (569-5)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Ho Afr J Ae Ay ANS ATS Il (569-5, esdH, He 3) man mayri-aa too sadaa sach samaal jee-o. O my mind, contemplate the True Lord forever.
utue ufs 3 Afy zafs ufo o Ae WHATS AIG II (509-5, esdz, Hs 3)
aapnai ghar too sukh vaseh pohi na sakai jamkaal jee-o.
Dwell in peace in the home of your own self, and the Messenger of Death shall not touch you.
aS WS AH afd 6 Aa ATS Aafe fee we Il (509-6, esda, He 3)
kaal jaal jam johi na saakai saachai sabad liv laa-ay.
The noose of the Messenger of Death shall not touch you, when you embrace love for the True Word of the Shabad.
He Ald Ist HO fSdHS MTSE WS TIS Il (569-6, esdH, He 3)
Sadaa sach rataa man nirmal aavan jaan rahaa-ay.
Ever imbued with the True Lord, the mind becomes immaculate, and its coming and going is ended.
en ate soft feast Houta Hot AHL II (09-7, esdz, 3 3)
doojai bhaa-ay bharam vigutee manmukh mohee jamkaal. The love of duality and doubt have ruined the self-willed manmukh, who is lured away by the Messenger of Death.
XI HSA Ae HO HF J AST A AHS MAUI (509-7, esdH, Hs 3) kahai naanak sun man mayray too sadaa sach samaal. ||1|| Says Nanak, listen, O my mind: contemplate the True Lord forever. ||1]|
Ho Afar nists 3d fare 3 aafs SAS 3 ats Il (569-8, esdH, H2 3) man mayri-aa antar tayrai niDhaan hai baahar vasat na bhaal. O my mind, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside.
noe A Sf 3 Tanta seta feats Il (509-9, esda, Hu 3)
jo bhaavai so bhunch too gurmukh nadar nihaal.
Eat only that which is pleasing to the Lord, and as Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace.
aanfa sefs foots Ha Ad vista afe on AYTet II (569-9, eadH, He 3)
gurmukh nadar nihaal man mayray antar har naam sakhaa-ee.
As Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace, O my mind; the Name of the Lord, your help and support, is within you.
Hone nig femrs fege eA ate unmet il (569-10, sadn, He 3)
manmukh anDhulay gi-aan vihoonay doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs are blind, and devoid of wisdom; they are ruined by the love of duality.
fag ae & Se SS AS at AHA I (569-10, esdH, Hs 3) bin naavai ko chhootai naahee sabh baaDhee jamkaal. Without the Name, no one is emancipated. All are bound by the Messenger of Death.
aoa nists 38 fours 3 3 Hale SAT o SH QM (569-11, esd, ws 3) naanak antar tayrai niDhaan hai too baahar vasat na bhaal. ||2|| O Nanak, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside. ||2| |
Ho Afent HoH ueTsE ute a fefa Afs war SUT Il (569-11, esdH, He 3) man mayri-aa janam padaarath paa-ay kai ik sach lagay vaapaaraa.
O my mind, obtaining the blessing of this human birth, some are engaged in the trade of Truth.
Afsag Refs wmyet nists APE MUTT Il (569-12, esdH, He 3)
satgur sayvan aapnaa antar sabad apaaraa.
They serve their True Guru, and the Infinite Word of the Shabad resounds within them.
nists Age wurst ofa on filma on 08 fofar uret II (569-12, esdH, He 3)
antar sabad apaaraa har naam pi-aaraa naamay na-o niDh paa-ee.
Within them is the Infinite Shabad, and the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Naam, the nine treasures are obtained.
Hou Hfeor He fenmy ef Hanh eA ufs Tevet Il (509-13, esdH, He 3)
manmukh maa-i-aa moh vi-aapay dookh santaapay doojai pat gavaa-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya; they suffer in pain, and through duality, they lose their honor.
JH wf Afs Aafe ANTS Afs gs nifaeret I (569-13, esdH, He 3)
ha-umai maar sach sabad samaanay sach ratay aDhikaa-ee.
But those who conquer their ego, and merge in the True Shabad, are totally imbued with Truth.
Soa HSA ASH Vos 3 Alsat gs Feet ISI (509-14, esdH, we 3)
naanak maanas janam dulambh hai satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||3]|
O Nanak, it is so difficult to obtain this human life; the True Guru imparts this understanding. ||3]|
Ho Hd Afsagd Aele nual A AS Ssarat IH Il (569-15, esdH, He 3) man mayray satgur sayvan aapnaa say jan vadbhaagee raam. O my mind, those who serve their True Guru are the most fortunate beings.
A HO Hofs nmyaet A Use Haat TH Il (569-15, esdH, He 3) jo man maareh aapnaa say purakh bairaagee raam. Those who conquer their minds are beings of renunciation and detachment.
A Ho Saat Afe foe wait wmyar wy uetfent Il (569-16, esdH, He 3)
say jan bairaagee sach liv laagee aapnaa aap pachhaani-aa.
They are beings of renunciation and detachment, who lovingly focus their consciousness on the True Lord; they realize and understand their own selves.
nfs fesse ifs gat asf AoA oH SarfEnm Il (569-16, e3dH, He 3)
mat nihchal at goorhee gurmukh sehjay naam vakhaani-aa.
Their intellect is steady, deep and profound; as Gurmukh, they naturally chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fea ans fosardt ufemr ifs fumirdt Hone Afe Td misTa I (569-17, esdH, He 3)
ik kaaman hitkaaree maa-i-aa mohi pi-aaree manmukh so-ay rahay abhaagay. Some are lovers of beautiful young women; emotional attachment to Maya is very dear to them. The unfortunate self-willed manmukhs remain asleep.
oR HoH Aetd TI must A UT FSSA ISI (569-18, esdH, He 3) naanak sehjay sayveh gur apnaa say pooray vadbhaagay. ||4||3]| O Nanak, those who intuitively serve their Guru, have perfect destiny. ||4]|3]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (569-18)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
336 uesa Zeruits Afsafe dor gsTSt IM I (569-18, esdH, 8 3)
ratan padaarath vanjee-ah satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ee raam.
Purchase the jewel, the invaluable treasure; the True Guru has given this understanding.
og og dfs sats 3 ae nfo Tat ANET TH Il (569-19, esdH, He 3)
laahaa laabh har bhagat hai gun meh gunee samaa-ee raam.
The profit of profits is the devotional worship of the Lord; one's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord.
UST UDO
ae ufo aet ANTS fan urfu ase aro sats AAS I (570-1, esdH, 42 3)
gun meh gunee samaa-ay jis aap bujhaa-ay laahaa bhagat saisaaray.
One's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord; he comes to understand his own self. He earns the profit of devotional worship in this world.
fag sast AY o det en uls det Tents oy mers Il (570-1, esa, we 3)
bin bhagtee sukh na ho-ee doojai pat kho-ee gurmat naam aDhaaray.
Without devotion, there is no peace; through duality, one's honor is lost, but under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with the Support of the Naam.
Zug SH Ae wes dD fAA 6 SS Surfs HS Il (570-2, asda, H: 3)
vakhar naam sadaa laabh hai jis no ayt vaapaar laa-ay.
He ever earns the profit of the merchandise of the Naam, whom the Lord employs in this Trade.
336 UesE Zenmits at Afsag Sf sss WAU (570-2, esdH, He 3)
ratan padaarath vanjee-ah jaa™ satgur day-ay bujhaa-ay. ||1||
He purchases the jewel, the invaluable treasure, unto whom the True Guru has given this understanding. ||1]|
When Hg As wy dD Met feg eruTst IM I (570-3, esdH, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabh dukh hai khotaa ih vaapaaraa raam. The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal.
as afe fay weet ag sata feara IH I (570-3, esde, Hs 3) koorh bol bikh khaavnee baho vaDheh vikaaraa raam. Speaking falsehood, one eats poison, and the evil within increases greatly.
ag zufo fears Hom fea HATS fag oS ufs det i (570-4, esdH, He 3)
baho vaDheh vikaaraa sahsaa ih sansaaraa bin naavai pat kho-ee.
The evil within increases greatly, in this world of doubt; without the Name, one's honor is lost.
ufs uf ufss we erafe fag gS AY 3 Tet Il (570-4, esd, we 3)
parh parh pandit vaad vakaaneh bin boojhay sukh na ho-ee.
Reading and studying, the religious scholars argue and debate; but without understanding, there is no peace.
WISE Wal Fe o ga Hfeor Ha fms il (570-5, esdH, Hs 3) aavan jaanaa kaday na chookai maa-i-aa moh pi-aaraa. Their comings and goings never end; emotional attachment to Maya is dear to them.
Hheor Hg AS Bu d det feg STS NM (570-6, esdH, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabh dukh hai khotaa ih vaapaaraa. ||2|| The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal. ||2]|
ue ud Afs usados fsa AS A Vas TH Il (570-6, esdH, He 3) khotay kharay sabh parkhee-an tit sachay kai darbaaraa raam. The counterfeit and the genuine are all assayed in the Court of the True Lord.
We waa Aes Bs aafs ySS TH I (570-7, esd, Hs 3) khotay dargeh sutee-an oobhay karan pukaaraa raam. The counterfeit are cast out of the Court, and they stand there, crying out in misery.
83 agts yors Ha area" HOHE HOH Teter I (570-7, esd, He 3)
oobhay karan pukaaraa mugaDh gavaaraa manmukh janam gavaa-i-aa.
They stand there, crying out in misery; the foolish, idiotic, self-willed manmukhs have wasted their lives.
fafior wrfenr fate Aes serfenr ATS OM G Stem I (570-8, sadn, He 3)
bikhi-aa maa-i-aa jin jagat bhulaa-i-aa saachaa naam na bhaa-i-aa.
Maya is the poison which has deluded the world; it does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
HOHY Ast of Sg af SY US AAMT Il (570-8, esdH, He 3)
manmukh santaa naal vair kar dukh khatay sansaaraa.
The self-willed manmukhs are resentful toward the Saints; they harvest only pain in this world.
ae ug usdinifs fsa A BISTa TH ISI (570-9, esdH, He 3) khotay kharay parkhee-an tit sachai darvaaraa raam. ||3]| The counterfeit and the genuine are assayed in that True Court of the Lord. ||3]|
uify as far undba de ase fas 3 AT TH I (570-9, esdH, we 3) aap karay kis aakhee-ai hor karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ee raam. He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything.
fas we fos ofert fae fan ct efsnret aH II (570-10, esd, HH 3) jit bhaavai tit laa-isee ji-o tis dee vadi-aa-ee raam. As He pleases, He engages us; such is His glorious greatness.
fag for ot efsuret orf aoret edinmy 3 SHt aet Il (570-10, esdx, nH: 3)
ji-o tis dee vadi-aa-ee aap karaa-ee varee-aam na fusee ko-ee.
Such is His glorious greatness - He Himself causes all to act; no one is a warrior or a coward.
AaHles Vest aay feast mm saw eT It (570-11, esdH, He 3)
jagjeevan daataa karam biDhaataa aapay bakhsay so-ee.
The Life of the World, the Great Giver, the Architect of karma - He Himself grants forgiveness.
qe uA niry Tevet sea af ufs uret i (570-12, esdu, ve 3)
gur parsaadee aap gavaa-ee-ai naanak naam pat paa-ee.
By Guru's Grace, self-conceit is eradicated, O Nanak, and through the Naam, honor is obtained.
uifu as fan uindba de ase fas 5 WET SII (570-12, esdH, Hs 3) aap karay kis aakhee-ai hor karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ee. ||4||4]]| He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything. ||4||4]|
ZSIH HIS 3 Il (570-13)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Ret AGert ofa aH J AMT UTS IM I (570-13, ESdH, He 3) sachaa sa-udaa har naam hai sachaa vaapaaraa raam. The True merchandise is the Lord's Name. This is the true trade.
TaHst ots ou seria wifs Hw wr|evst TH I (570-13, esdH, He 3) gurmatee har naam vanjee-ai at mol afaaraa raam. Under Guru's Instruction, we trade in the Lord's Name; its value is very great.
mifs HS west AS eure vfs enofg wa Seat I (570-14, zsdH, He 3)
at mol afaaraa sach vaapaaraa sach vaapaar lagay vadbhaagee.
The value of this true trade is very great; those who are engaged in the true trade are very fortunate.
nates aafs sast aS Af oft foe orait I (570-14, esdu, He 3)
antar baahar bhagtee raatay sach naam liv laagee.
Inwardly and outwardly, they are imbued with devotion, and they enshrine love for the True Name.
oefg ad ASt AY ue Ta a Aafe Stara Il (570-15, asda, He 3)
nadar karay so-ee sach paa-ay gur kai sabad veechaaraa.
One who is blessed with the Lord's Favor, obtains Truth, and reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Soe of gs faq dt Ay ufeor APS A STAT WAI (570-15, esdH, He 3) naanak naam ratay tin hee sukh paa-i-aa saachai kay vaapaaraa. ||1] |
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Name find peace; they deal only in the True Name. |[1]|
SCH Whar He FT Her He Sd TH Il (570-16, esd, He 3) ha’-umai maa-i-aa mail hai maa-i-aa mail bhareejai raam. Egotistical involvement in Maya is filth; Maya is overflowing with filth.
TaHst HO fears srs ofs aA Ula TH Il (570-17, essa, He 3)
gurmatee man nirmalaa rasnaa har ras peejai raam.
Under Guru's Instruction, the mind is made pure and the tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.
dHo' dfs oA ule visg Sta Ave Hate ster i (570-17, esdu, He 3)
rasnaa har ras peejai antar bheejai saach sabad beechaaree.
The tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord, and deep within, the heart is drenched with His Love, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
nists user nififs sfeor Rae orfe ubt ufSadt i (570-18, esdH, 2 3)
antar khoohtaa amrit bhari-aa sabday kaadh pee-ai panihaaree.
Deep within, the well of the heart is overflowing with the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar; the water-carrier draws and drinks in the water of the Shabad.
fan oefe ad ASt Afs oa TAS TH TetH Il (570-18, esdH, He 3)
jis nadar karay so-ee sach laagai rasnaa raam raveejai.
One who is blessed with the Lord's favor is attuned to the Truth; with his tongue, he chants the Lord's Name.
Sod at gs A feos da IH HS SdH MQM (570-19, edu, He 3)
naanak naam ratay say nirmal hor ha-umai mail bhareejai. ||2] |
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are immaculate. The others are full of the filth of egotism. ||2] |
Ufss rset Afs ufs ufs aae far ufs aafs yore TH Il (570-19, esdH, He 3)
pandit jotkee sabh parh parh kookday kis peh karahi pukaaraa raam.
All the religious scholars and astrologers read and study, and argue and shout. Who are they trying to teach?
UST Udy
Hear Hg vists He ore Wf a Sarat IH I (571-1, esdH, He 3) maa-i-aa moh antar mal laagai maa-i-aa kay vaapaaraa raam. The filth of attachment to Maya clings to their hearts; they deal in Maya alone.
Miser a surg Aas fume nirefs afte ey uret Il 571-2, esdH, 2 3) maa-i-aa kay vaapaaraa jagat pi-aaraa aavan jaan dukh paa-ee. They love to deal in Maya in this world; coming and going, they suffer in pain.
fay or otter fire fA@ orar fat ufo AHTEt II 71-2, sda, He 3)
bikh kaa keerhaa bikh si-o laagaa bistaa maahi samaa-ee. The worm of poison is addicted to poison; it is immersed in manure.
a ufs foftmr Afe ore af& 6 Hea Il (571-3, esdH, He 3) jo Dhur likhi-aa so-ay kamaavai ko-ay na maytanhaaraa. He does what is pre-ordained for him; no one can erase his destiny.
aod oH os fsa Ae AY Ufeor dfs Hee afa HS WTS MBI (571-3, esdH, He 3) naanak naam ratay tin sadaa sukh paa-i-aa hor moorakh kook mu-ay gaavaaraa. ||3]|| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, lasting peace is found; the ignorant fools die screaming. ||3]|
Hfeor Hfs He dfamr vfs Afa o aret IH II 6571-4, esdH, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi man rangi-aa mohi suDh na kaa-ee raam.
Their minds are colored by emotional attachment to Maya; because of this emotional attachment, they do not understand.
qantas feg uo satot sa da AE TH I (571-5, sda, He 3) gurmukh ih man rangee-ai doojaa rang jaa-ee raam. The soul of the Gurmukh is imbued with the Lord's Love; the love of duality departs.
oH dg wet Ate AHS Als SI SST Il (571-5, esdH, He 3)
doojaa rang jaa-ee saach samaa-ee sach bharay bhandaaraa.
The love of duality departs, and the soul merges in Truth; the warehouse is overflowing with Truth.
Tenfa de Het gs Afs ASIST ST I (571-6, esdH, Hs 3)
gurmukh hovai so-ee boojhai sach savaaranhaaraa.
One who becomes Gurmukh, comes to understand; the Lord embellishes him with Truth.
Mm HS A ofa fs Te ATS fas F WE Il 6571-6, esd, 3 3)
aapay maylay so har milai hor kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay.
He alone merges with the Lord, whom the Lord causes to merge; nothing else can be said or done.
Sod fee oe sath sorfenr fefa ath gs da we ISiUll (671-6, esdq, He 3) naanak vin naavai bharam bhulaa-i-aa ik naam ratay rang laa-ay. ||4]|5]|
O Nanak, without the Name, one is deluded by doubt; but some, imbued with the Name, enshrine love for the Lord. ||4]|5]|
SIA HIS 3 Il (571-7)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
= Ho Afeor wret ae HATS J nifs Afs fagsat at Il 6571-7, esd, 2 3)
ay man mayri-aa aavaa ga-on sansaar hai ant sach nibayrhaa raam.
O my mind, the world comes and goes in birth and death; only the True Name shall emancipate you in the end.
nm Ae aufA we fefe df o far IM Il (571-8, esdH, He 3)
aapay sachaa bakhas la-ay fir ho-ay na fayraa raam.
When the True Lord Himself grants forgiveness, then one does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again.
fefs dfe 5 ea nifs Afe feds qoute fs Sfsnret i 6571-8, esdq, x2 3)
fir ho-ay na fayraa ant sach nibayrhaa gurmukh milai vadi-aa-ee.
He does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again, and he is emancipated in the end; as Gurmukh, he obtains glorious greatness.
Ard df TS HdA HS AH Jd ANTS Il (571-9, esau, H: 3)
saachai rang raatay sehjay maatay sehjay rahay samaa-ee.
Imbued with love for the True Lord, he is intoxicated with celestial bliss, and he remains absorbed in the Celestial Lord.
Re Hfs stent Ay eater Rafe gs nifs feats il (571-10, esdH, He 3)
sachaa man bhaa-i-aa sach vasaa-i-aa sabad ratay ant nibayraa.
The True Lord is pleasing to his mind; he enshrines the True Lord in his mind; attuned to the Word of the Shabad, he is emancipated in the end.
Sa OTH IS A Ale AHS Sdls B Senls SAT MAI (571-10, esdH, He 3)
naanak naam ratay say sach samaanay bahur na bhavjal fayraa. ||1]|
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam, merge in the True Lord; they are not cast into the terrifying world-ocean again. ||1]|
Hfeor Ho Ag se TTA SS yet IH Il (571-11, esda, we 3)
maa-i-aa moh sabh baral hai doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee raam.
Emotional attachment to Maya is total madness; through the love of duality, one is ruined.
Hat fust Ag JZ I IS UBeTST TH I 571-11, esdu, v2 3) maataa pitaa sabh hayt hai haytay palchaa-ee raam. Mother and father - all are subject to this love; in this love, they are entangled.
ds uBeet usta anret af o Aa AST I (571-12, asda, He 3) haytay palchaa-ee purab kamaa-ee mayt na sakai ko-ee.
They are entangled in this love, on account of their past actions, which no one can erase.
fafs fqrfe vst A afs 28 fSn Aes meg 3 Ae I 671-12, edu, ne 3) jin sarisat saajee so kar vaykhai tis jayvad avar na ko-ee. The One who created the Universe, beholds it; no other is as great as He.
Houfe vio sfu sfu uu fas Age AMPS © met I 571-13, esdH, He 3)
manmukh anDhaa tap tap khapai bin sabdai saa‘t na aa-ee.
The blind, self-willed manmukh is consumed by his burning rage; without the Word of the Shabad, peace is not obtained.
sod fag oe AS aet ger wfeor Hfs wns QU (571-14, esdH, He 3)
naanak bin naavai sabh ko-ee bhulaa maa-i-aa mohi khu-aa-ee. ||2||
O Nanak, without the Name, everyone is deluded, ruined by emotional attachment to Maya. ||2]|
fg Ad Aes efy a sfa ue of Agavet IM Il (571-14, esdu, He 3) ayhu jag jaltaa daykh kai bhaj pa-ay har sarnaa-ee raam. Seeing that this world on fire, I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Lord.
Maen AST Ts us nra se Seg Sy Fret TH Il (571-15, essa, we 3)
ardaas karee™ gur pooray aagai rakh layvhu dayh vadaa-ee raam.
I offer my prayer to the Perfect Guru: please save me, and bless me with Your glorious greatness.
af Seg Averett of SH eae 30 ASS MST B BST Il (571-15, eada, ue 3)
rakh layvhu sarnaa-ee har naam vadaa-ee tuDh jayvad avar na daataa.
Preserve me in Your Sanctuary, and bless me with the glorious greatness of the Name of the Lord; there is no other Giver as great as You.
AS oa A esa afar Afar Sa AST I 571-16, esdH, He 3)
sayvaa laagay say vadbhaagay jug jug ayko jaataa.
Those who are engaged in serving You are very fortunate; throughout the ages, they know the One Lord.
AS AS HAH aH one fag ae afs odt uret Il 571-16, esda, ne 3)
jat sat sanjam karam kamaavai bin gur gat nahee paa-ee.
You may practice celibacy, truth, austere self-discipline and rituals, but without the Guru, you shall not be emancipated.
Sod fSH S Hae ase HATE ue ofa AgSret ISI (571-17, esdH, He 3)
naanak tis no sabad bujhaa-ay jo jaa-ay pavai har sarnaa-ee. ||3]||
O Nanak, he alone understands the Word of the Shabad, who goes and seeks the Lord's Sanctuary. ||3]|
A ofa His efe A Gun da Hts o St TH I (571-18, esdH, Hs 3) jo har mat day-ay saa oopjai hor mat na kaa-ee raam. That understanding, imparted by the Lord, wells up; there is no other understanding.
nists wots Fa 3 nm efo geet IH Il (571-18, esdz, v2 3)
antar baahar ayk too aapay deh bujhaa-ee raam.
Deep within, and beyond as well, You alone are, O Lord; You Yourself impart this understanding.
my ets asret nied & avet aaHfy afs GA Thm I 71-19, esdH, He 3)
aapay deh bujhaa-ee avar na bhaa-ee gurmukh har ras chaakhi-aa.
One whom He Himself blesses with this understanding, does not love any other. As Gurmukh, he tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.
ofa Ard Het d Are ATS Aafe Aarfimr I (571-19, esdH, He 3) dar saachai sadaa hai saachaa saachai sabad subhaakhi-aa.
In the True Court, he is forever True; with love, he chants the True Word of the Shabad.
Usk UD we Hid fon we ufeur Afsae efe earet i (572-1, esdz, He 3)
ghar meh nij ghar paa-i-aa satgur day-ay vadaa-ee. Within his home, he finds the home of his own being; the True Guru blesses him with glorious greatness.
Sod AH atH gs Aet How ufefe nfs users AY AT ISIEN (572-1, esdH, He 3)
naanak jo naam ratay say-ee mahal paa-in mat parvaan sach saa-ee. ||4||6]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; their understanding is true, and approved. ||4||6||
SSSA HIG 8 BS (572-3)
vad-hans mehlaa 4 chhant Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsars yATfe i (572-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
We fs AS vfs Afsafe utfs ware It I (572-4, esd, He 4) mayrai man mayrai man satgur pareet lagaa-ee raam. My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love.
ofa ofa ofa ofa an AS vfs SAST IM I 572-4, esde, He 4) har har har har naam mayrai man vasaa-ee raam. He has enshrined the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, within my mind.
ofs ofs oy Ae vfs sAret Afs eu feAraeaT Il (572-5, edn, He 4)
har har naam mayrai man vasaa-ee sabh dookh visaaranhaaraa.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, dwells within my mind; He is the Destroyer of all pain.
TT TI ZIAG ufeur us ug AfsaqT THI Il (572-5, esdH, He 4)
vadbhaagee gur darsan paa-i-aa Dhan Dhan satguroo hamaaraa.
By great good fortune, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; blessed, blessed is my True Guru.
Gos aos Afsag Aes fs Afen AS ret I 6572-6, esdu, Hs 4)
oothat baithat satgur sayvah jit sayvi-ai saa‘t paa-ee.
While standing up and sitting down, I serve the True Guru; serving Him, I have found peace.
Ae fs AS vfs Afsas UlfS waret NA (572-6, esdu, He 4) mayrai man mayrai man satgur pareet lagaa-ee. ||1]| My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love. ||1]||
JC Ate 3G Ale Afsae fy AGA IM Il (572-7, esdH, He 4) ha-o jeevaa ha-o jeevaa satgur daykh sarsay raam. I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru.
dfs ont ofa om feae afu afe ofa on fea aH II (572-7, esdq, He 4)
har naamo har naam drirh-aa-ay jap har har naam vigsay raam.
The Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, He has implanted within me; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I blossom forth.
afuy ofa afs oH AHS usarA dfs aH ae fofa uret II (572-8, esdH, H2 4)
jap har har naam kamal pargaasay har naam nava™ niDh paa-ee.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and through the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.
ICH da afeor vy oe ofe Hof Af waret I (572-8, esdu, He 4)
ha-umai rog ga-i-aa dukh laathaa har sahj samaaDh lagaa-ee.
The disease of egotism has been eradicated, suffering has been eliminated, and I have entered the Lord's state of celestial Samaadhi.
dfs oy eset Asad 3 uret AY Afsagd SS HS UPA Il (572-9, esdH, He 4)
har naam vadaa-ee satgur tay paa-ee sukh satgur dayv man parsay. I have obtained the glorious greatness of Name of the Lord from the True Guru; beholding the Divine True Guru, my mind is at peace.
JG Ate 9G Ale Afsag Sfy AGA MQ (572-10, esdH, He 4) ha-o jeevaa ha-o jeevaa satgur daykh sarsay. ||2|| I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru. ||2]|
aet unfe aet ifs frore He AfsaT UST TH I (572-10, esdH, Hs 4)
ko-ee aan ko-ee aan milaavai mayraa satgur pooraa raam.
If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru.
JG Ho 36 JE HO 36 Ue (SH At]| ASS TH Il (572-11, esdu, He 4)
ha-o man tan ha-o man tan dayvaa tis kaat sareeraa raam.
My mind and body, my mind and body - I cut my body into pieces, and I dedicate these to Him.
JG Ho 36 ate ae fan Bet A Asad Fes ASS Il (572-11, esdu, He 4)
ha-o man tan kaat kaat tis day-ee jo satgur bachan sunaa-ay.
Cutting my mind and body apart, cutting them into pieces, I offer these to the one, who recites to me the Words of the True Guru.
He nfs Sara sfeur sat ffs aa confs Ae ue Il (572-12, esdH, He 4)
mayrai man bairaag bha-i-aa bairaagee mil gur darsan sukh paa-ay.
My unattached mind has renounced the world; obtaining the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, it has found peace.
ofe oe far agg HUES ty ASAT VIS TH UT Il (572-13, esdH, He 4)
har har kirpaa karahu sukh-daatay dayh satgur charan ham Dhooraa.
O Lord, Har, Har, O Giver of Peace, please, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the dust of the feet of the True Guru.
aet unfe aet nite fore He ASAT UT USI (572-13, sade, Hs 4)
ko-ee aan ko-ee aan milaavai mayraa satgur pooraa. ||3]||
If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru. ||3]|
Od ASS TS ASS VST H neg B aASt TH Il 6572-14, esd, He 4) gur jayvad gur jayvad daataa mai avar na ko-ee raam. A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other.
dfs aS dfs we te ofa usy fodne At IM I (572-14, asda, He 4)
har daano har daan dayvai har purakh niranjan so-ee raam.
He blesses me with the gift of the Lord's Name, the gift of the Lord's Name; He is the Immaculate Lord God.
dfs ots on frat wrattmr fe a ey SeH SE Sa Il (572-15, eadH, He 4)
har har naam jinee aaraaDhi-aa tin kaa dukh bharam bha-o bhaagaa.
Those who worship in adoration the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - their pain, doubts and fears are dispelled.
Rea we foe esoat fae TS Taat HS Ba Il (572-15, esda, us 4)
sayvak bhaa-ay milay vadbhaagee jin gur charnee man laagaa.
Through their loving service, those very fortunate ones, whose minds are attached to the Guru's Feet, meet Him.
ag aaa dfe orf free fife afsag use AY Jet I (572-16, esdH, He 4)
kaho naanak har aap milaa-ay mil satgur purakh sukh ho-ee.
Says Nanak, the Lord Himself causes us to meet the Guru; meeting the Almighty True Guru, peace is obtained.
Td ASS TT ASS VST H nies B Et MSNA (572-17, esse, He 4) gur jayvad gur jayvad daataa mai avar na ko-ee. ||4||1|| A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other. ||4||1]|
@SIH HIS 8 Il (572-17)
vad-hans mehlaa 4. Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
JG ag fas JC aa faa uct fonret IMF II (572-17, esdH, He 4) ha"-u gur bin ha’-u gur bin kharee nimaanee raam. Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored.
Ades AdHleo VS as Af AHS TH Il (572-18, edu, He 4)
jagjeevan jagjeevan daataa gur mayl samaanee raam.
The Life of the World, the Life of the World, the Great Giver has led me to meet and merge with the Guru.
Afsag vfs of oth AHrat Afu ofa afe on fomrfenr it (672-18, esda, He 4)
satgur mayl har naam samaanee jap har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Meeting with the True Guru, I have merged into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and meditate on it.
fan oefe 3G dfs geet A ANE fe wis wfenr I (572-19, esdH, He 4)
jis kaaran ha’-u dhoondh dhoodhaydee so sajan har ghar paa-i-aa.
I was seeking and searching for Him, the Lord, my best friend, and I have found Him within the home of my own being.
UST udB
a fefy afs Sa Ast ofs MSH TY UsTet Il 673-1, esq, He 4) ayk darisat har ayko jaataa har aatam raam pachhaanee. I see the One Lord, and I know the One Lord; I realize Him within my soul.
JC ad fas JC aa faa uct fonret NA (573-1, esdu, He 4) ha"-u gur bin ha‘’-u gur bin kharee nimaanee. ||1]| Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored. ||1||
fot Afsag fas Afsag ufenr fso afe ys Afs fore IH II (573-2, edu, He 4)
jinaa satgur jin satgur paa-i-aa tin har parabh may! milaa-ay raam.
Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union.
faq use faq use Aded GH a fq A US TH I (573-2, esds, we 4) tin charan tin charan sarayveh ham laagah tin kai paa-ay raam. Their feet, their feet, I adore; I fall at their feet.
dfs ofg vse Aded f80 a faa Afsag usy ys UfeMr I (573-3, esdz, ws 4)
har har charan sarayveh tin kay jin satgur purakh parabh Dha-yaa-i-aa.
O Lord, Har, Har, I adore the feet of those who meditate on the True Guru, and the Almighty Lord God.
3 ses visa ast Hew ufs afs when i (573-4, esdH, ue 4)
too vaddaataa antarjaamee mayree sarDhaa poor har raa-i-aa.
You are the Greatest Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; please, reward my faith, O Lord King.
aoa His Ast Asa ust mates TH TE WES Il 973-4, esdH, He 4)
gursikh mayl mayree sarDhaa pooree an-din raam gun gaa-ay.
Meeting the Gursikh, my faith is rewarded; night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fo Afsag fae Afsag ufenr fq afe ys Afe fers QI (573-5, esau, ue 4)
jin satgur jin satgur paa-i-aa tin har parabh mayl milaa-ay. ||2||
Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union. |[2||
JG adt JG at gate vs films MH I 573-6, essa, 2 4) ha-u vaaree ha’-u vaaree gursikh meet pi-aaray raam. I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends.
dfs ont ofa om Hee Aa USH OH MOS TH II (573-6, esdH, He 4)
har naamo har naam sunaa-ay mayraa pareetam naam aDhaaray raam.
They chant the Lord's Name, the Lord's Name; the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only Support.
dfs afs oH Ha ure Aurel f3A fas wat foHy odt Fet I (573-7, eadH, Hs 4)
har har naam mayraa paraan sakhaa-ee tis bin gharhee nimakh nahee jeevaa’. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the companion of my breath of life; without it, I cannot live for an instant or a moment.
ofa ofe faur ad Ayes" Tents wifigs utet il (573-7, esdu, H3 4)
har har kirpaa karay sukh-daata gurmukh amrit peevaa’,
The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of peace, shows His Mercy, and the Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
ofa nmag Reo oe fhore af nmi nrfu Aes Il (573-8, sadn, He 4) har aapay sarDhaa laa-ay milaa-ay har aapay aap savaaray. The Lord blesses him with faith, and unites him in His Union; He Himself adorns him.
J adt SG act gafke Hts flmrs 311 6573-8, esda, nH 4) ha’-u vaaree ha-u vaaree gursikh meet pi-aaray. ||3]| I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends. ||3]|
dfs wm afs mmr usy fade Aet IH Il (573-9, esdH, He 4) har aapay har aapay purakh niranjan so-ee raam. The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God.
dfs nmt af wm HS ad A St TH Il (6573-9, esdH, He 4)
har aapay har aapay maylai karai so ho-ee raam.
The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, unites us with Himself; that which He does, comes to pass.
A ofa ys ae At dS leg 6 Ager AT Il (573-10, adn, He 4)
jo har parabh bhaavai so-ee hovai avar na karnaa jaa-ee.
Whatever is pleasing to the Lord God, that alone comes to pass; nothing else can be done.
a3 fimreu ofeur 6 Fret ats aa As GSTS Il (573-10, esd, Hx 4)
bahut si-aanap la-i-aa na jaa-ee kar thaakay sabh chaturaa-ee.
Even by very clever tricks, He cannot be obtained; all have grown weary of practicing cleverness.
qa uAte Ao Soa Shir 4 afe fas weg 3 Aet Il (573-11, eada, He 4)
gur parsaad jan naanak daykhi-aa mai har bin avar na ko-ee.
By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak beholds the Lord; without the Lord, I have no other at all.
dfs wma afs wm usy fadae At ISI (573-11, zsdH, He 4) har aapay har aapay purakh niranjan so-ee. ||4||2|| The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God. ||4||2]|
SIH HIS 8 Il (573-12)
vad-hans mehlaa 4. Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
dfs Afsasd sts Afsae Hf dfs Afsas sae IH SEM IM I (573-12, esdH, He 4)
har satgur har satgur mayl har satgur charan ham bhaa-i-aa raam.
The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me.
fans nifamre aefeur as famre nine afe ufeer ant i 6573-13, esdx, He 4) timar agi-aan gavaa-i-aa gur gi-aan anjan gur paa-i-aa raam.
The darkness of my ignorance was dispelled, when the Guru applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes.
qs femrs ving Afsag ufeor uifemrs wits fasrA Il (573-14, eda, He 4)
gur gi-aan anjan satguroo paa-i-aa agi-aan anDhayr binaasay.
The True Guru has applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled.
Afsad Afe usH ue ufeer ote Afumr AMA fersrA Il (573-14, esdH, He 4)
satgur Sayv param pad paa-i-aa har japi-aa saas giraasay.
Serving the Guru, I have obtained the supreme status; I meditate on the Lord with every breath, and every morsel of food.
fae a@ ofs ufs faa ost 3 Afsaa Aer orfenr | (573-15, esda, ue 4)
jin ka’-u har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree tay satgur sayvaa laa-i-aa.
Those, upon whom the Lord God has bestowed His Grace, are committed to the service of the True Guru.
dfs Afsad sts Afsae Af ofe Asad Bae TH SEM AI (573-15, esdH, He 4)
har satgur har satgur mayl har satgur charan ham bhaa-i-aa. ||1||
The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me. ||1]|
na Afsag Ae Afsag fimra H as fas IE o WET TH I (573-16, edu, He 4) mayraa satgur mayraa satgur pi-aaraa mai gur bin rahan na jaa-ee raam. My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live.
dfs SH ofa aH Ve Ha ifs Meet TH I (573-17, essa, He 4)
har naamo har naam dayvai mayraa ant sakhaa-ee raam.
He gives me the Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, my only companion in the end.
ofa ofa oH Aa nifs Aeret afs Afsafe on fesfenr I (573-17, esdq, He 4)
har har naam mayraa ant sakhaa-ee gur satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my only companion in the end; the Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
fre us ces det Fat act fsa of afs ath safeur | (573-18, esdH, v2 4)
jithai put kalatar ko-ee baylee naahee tithai har har naam chhadaa-i-aa.
There, where neither child nor spouse shall accompany you, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har shall emancipate you.
U6 U6 Afsag use fadae fas fife ofs on famret I (573-19, esdu, He 4)
Dhan Dhan satgur purakh niranjan jit mil har naam Dhi-aa-ee.
Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, the Immaculate, Almighty Lord God; meeting Him, I meditate on the Name of the Lord.
Ha Afsag Ha Afsag fimrs H ae fas ToS 3 AT QM (573-19, sade, He 4) mayraa satgur mayraa satgur pi-aaraa mai gur bin rahan na jaa-ee. ||2|| My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live. ||2||
UST UI
frat vane fast cane Afsagd use o Ufa aH I 574-1, esdH, He 4)
jinee darsan jinee darsan satgur purakh na paa-i-aa raam.
Those who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God,
fs0 faves faq faves AOH AS fyer aetfenr IM I (574-2, asda, He 4) tin nihfal tin nihfal janam sabh baritha gavaa-i-aa raam. they have fruitlessly, fruitlessly wasted their whole lives in vain.
foses Fon fSo far aefeur 3 AAS HE His ST Il (574-2, esdH, He 4)
nihfal janam tin baritha gavaa-i-aa tay saakat mu-ay mar jhooray.
They have wasted away their whole lives in vain; those faithless cynics die a regretful death.
ufs de safe uersta sa sade ofs Es Il (574-3, asda, ue 4)
ghar hodai ratan padaarath bhookhay bhaagheen har dooray.
They have the jewel-treasure in their own homes, but still, they are hungry; those unlucky wretches are far away from the Lord.
dfs dfs fs5 a ean 3 Adm fHat dfs afe oH o fonrfenr Il 6574-3, esdu, He 4)
har har tin kaa daras na karee-ahu jinee har har naam na Dhi-aa-i-aa.
O Lord, please, let me not see those who do not meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
frdt ane frst eaHo Afsas use o ufEMr BI 6574-4, esdH, He 4)
jinee darsan jinee darsan satgur purakh na paa-i-aa. ||3]||
and who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God. ||3]|
JH ofa gH aga ee ate ut BSSt IM I 6574-5, sda, ne 4) ham chaatrik ham chaatrik deen har paas baynantee raam. I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord.
as ffs aa Afs Ha fumes oH Afsaed AaT SaSt TH Il (574-5, esd, us 4)
gur mil gur mayl mayraa pi-aaraa ham satgur karah bhagtee raam.
If only I could meet the Guru, meet the Guru, O my Beloved; I dedicate myself to the devotional worship of the True Guru.
dfs ae Afsad add sast At afs ys fagur os Il (574-6, esdu, He 4) har har satgur karah bhagtee jaa" har parabh kirpaa Dhaaray. I worship the Lord, Har, Har, and the True Guru; the Lord God has granted His Grace.
Had fag meg 3 act ast ag Afsag ys INS Il (574-7, esd, He 4)
mai gur bin avar na ko-ee baylee gur satgur paraan ham"aaray.
Without the Guru, I have no other friend. The Guru, the True Guru, is my very breath of life.
ag soa dfs oH fester ats ofa any ofa Ast Wl (574-7, esdH, He 4)
kaho naanak gur naam darirh"aa-i-aa har har naam har satee.
Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted the Naam within me; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the True Name.
JH afga gH asa ee afte utA BSSt ISISI (574-8, esdu, Hs 4) ham chaatrik ham chaatrik deen har paas baynantee. ||4]|3]|| I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord. ||4||3]|
SSIA HIS 8 Il (574-9)
vad-hans mehlaa 4. Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
dfs fasur ofs fas afe Afsag Af AYETST IH Il (574-9, esdu, 8 4)
har kirpaa har kirpaa kar satgur mayl sukh-daata raam.
O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace.
JH Usd JH Usd Afsad wt ais ast TH Il (574-9, esdH, HE 4) ham poochhah ham poochhah satgur paas har baataa raam. I go and ask, I go and ask from the True Guru, about the sermon of the Lord.
Afsas uta ofs as ued fats ou uerse urfemr I (574-10, esdH, He 4)
satgur paas har baat poochhah jin naam padaarath paa-i-aa.
I ask about the sermon of the Lord from the True Guru, who has obtained the treasure of the Naam.
uf wad fos agg fadst afs Afsafs ue satfemr It (574-10, esdH, He 4)
paa-ay lagah nit karah binantee gur satgur panth bataa-i-aa.
I bow at His Feet constantly, and pray to Him; the Guru, the True Guru, has shown me the Way.
Het sas eu AY ANS ate We ofa dfs ath afs TST I 6574-11, esdH, we 4)
so-ee bhagat dukh sukh samat kar jaanai har har naam har raataa.
He alone is a devotee, who looks alike upon pleasure and pain; he is imbued with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs fasur ats fas ats ag Afsag Af AMETST NAN (574-12, esdH, He 4)
har kirpaa har kirpaa kar gur satgur mayl sukh-daata. ||1]||
O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace. ||1]|
Afe aenfy afs aenfy ath vfs fan JOH ur aH Il 6574-12, esdu, He 4)
sun gurmukh sun gurmukh naam sabh binsay ha’-umai paapaa raam.
Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated.
afu ofs afs afu ofs ofs an ofenis Afar Sea MH I 6574-13, esda, nH 4)
jap har har jap har har naam lathi-arhay jag taapaa raam.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the troubles of the world vanish.
dfs dfs on frat rato fae x ee uy feers Il (574-14, esdH, He 4)
har har naam jinee aaraaDhi-aa tin kay dukh paap nivaaray.
Those who contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are rid of their suffering and sins.
Afsats famirs usa ofa tet AHA nfs fees I (574-14, esdH, He 4)
satgur gi-aan kharhag hath deenaa jamkankar maar bidaaray.
The True Guru has placed the sword of spiritual wisdom in my hands; I have overcome and slain the Messenger of Death.
ofa ufs faut ost Hues SU Ba uy ASN I (574-15, esdu, He 4)
har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree sukh-daatay dukh laathay paap santaapaa.
The Lord God, the Giver of peace, has granted His Grace, and I am rid of pain, sin and disease.
Afs aeaufa Afe aanfe an vfs faor SEH ur QU (574-15, esd, He 4)
sun gurmukh sun gurmukh naam sabh binsay ha‘-umai paapaa. ||2]|
Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated. ||2||
afu ofs ofs afu ofs ofs ay He His afer aM I (574-16, esd, He 4)
jap har har jap har har naam mayrai man bhaa-i-aa raam.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so pleasing to my mind.
Hfa aanfa ufa aaufa afu Afs dar eter amr Il 6574-17, esdH, He 4)
mukh gurmukh mukh gurmukh jap sabh rog gavaa-i-aa raam.
Speaking as Gurmukh, speaking as Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated.
aanfa fu vfs ca aetfenr mas se Aste | (574-17, esdH, He 4)
gurmukh jap sabh rog gavaa-i-aa arogat bha-ay sareeraa.
As Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated, and the body becomes free of disease.
mofes Hon AH ofs oat ofs Afr afos aster Il (574-18, esdH, He 4)
an-din sahj samaaDh har laagee har japi-aa gahir gambheeraa.
Night and day, one remains absorbed in the Perfect Poise of Samaadhi; meditate on the Name of the Lord, the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord.
ats oats on faa fomrfenr fae usH ueTse UTfeur I 574-18, eda, Hs 4)
jaat ajaat naam jin Dhi-aa-i-aa tin param padaarath paa-i-aa.
Whether of high or low social status, one who meditates on the Naam obtains the supreme treasure.
afu ofs ofs afu ofs ofs ay He His Stfeor SI (574-19, esdH, He 4)
jap har har jap har har naam mayrai man bhaa-i-aa. ||3]|
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind. ||3]|
Uuat udu dfs wag of wag fasu ate fas SI Sas IH Il 6575-1, esda, v3 4)
har Dhaarahu har Dhaarahu kirpaa kar kirpaa layho ubaaray raam. Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, O Lord, and save me.
JH unit gH unit fogae de SHS IM Il (575-1, sadn, us 4) ham paapee ham paapee nirgun deen tum"aaray raam. I am a sinner, I am a worthless sinner, I am meek, but I am Yours, O Lord.
oH unt fesae tte SHS dfs tore Agatfeur Ih 6575-2, esd, He 4)
ham paapee nirgun deen tum"aaray har dai-aal sarnaa-i-aa.
I am a worthless sinner, and Iam meek, but I am Yours; I seek Your Sanctuary, O Merciful Lord.
3 Uy SHO Aes AMeTST TH Ua So SaEMM I (575-2, asda, us 4)
too dukh bhanjan sarab sukh-daata ham paathar taray taraa-i-aa.
You are the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of absolute peace; I am a stone - carry me across and save me.
Afsad sfe TH SA ufent AS Baa OTH Burs Il (575-3, esdH, 2 4)
satgur bhayt raam ras paa-i-aa jan naanak naam uDhaaray.
Meeting the True Guru, servant Nanak has obtained the subtle essence of the Lord; through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he is saved.
df wag of wag fasu ate facut SI Cas IH ISisil (575-4, esdH, v3 4) har Dhaarahu har Dhaarahu kirpaa kar kirpaa layho ubaaray raam. ||4]|4]| Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, Lord, and save me. ||4||4||
SdH HIE 8 ust (575-5)
vad-hans mehlaa 4 ghorhee-aa Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Ghorees ~ The Wedding Procession Songs:
qe Afsars yArfe il (575-5) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ed sale at of Curetor aM I (575-6, eadH, He 4) dayh tayjan jee raam upaa-ee-aa raam. This body-horse was created by the Lord.
Uo HSH HOH Ufs uTehor TH Il 575-6, esdH, He 4) Dhan maanas janam punn paa-ee-aa raam. Blessed is human life, which is obtained by virtuous actions.
HSH HOH Zs US UfSor 2a A ave Vast Il (575-6, esdu, v2 4)
maanas janam vad punnay paa-i-aa dayh so kanchan changrhee-aa.
Human life is obtained only by the most virtuous actions; this body is radiant and golden.
Tents da veo ure ofa afe afs ae Fase Il (575-7, esda, we 4)
gurmukh rang chaloolaa paavai har har har nav rangrhee-aa.
The Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of the poppy; he is imbued with the new color of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har.
fd 20 A dat fas ofe ant afe ofs ath AIST I 575-7, esa, He 4)
ayh dayh so baa™kee jit har jaapee har har naam suhaavee-aa.
This body is so very beautiful; it chants the Name of the Lord, and it is adorned with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Zao ust SH AMET HS Boa STH Burson Al (575-8, eadH, He 4)
vadbhaagee paa-ee naam sakhaa-ee jan naanak raam upaa-ee-aa. ||1]|
By great good fortune, the body is obtained; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is its companion; O servant Nanak, the Lord has created it. ||1]|
zo ue ate afs Gar TH I 6575-9, esdH, He 4) dayh paava-o jeen bujh changa raam. I place the saddle on the body-horse, the saddle of realization of the Good Lord.
ofs Sur Ht fae sfentar TH I 575-9, esdH, He 4) charh langhaa jee bikham bhu-i-angaa raam. Riding this horse, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
fey sfenier nos scar aanfa uf Bure | (575-9, esdH, v2 4)
bikham bhu-i-angaa anat tarangaa gurmukh paar langhaa-ay.
The terrifying world-ocean is rocked by countless waves, but the Gurmukh is carried across.
dfs sfofa of saat Su ag vee Aafe Soe | (575-10, esau, v2 4)
har bohith charh vadbhaagee langhai gur khayvat sabad taraa-ay.
Embarking upon the boat of the Lord, the very fortunate ones cross over; the Guru, the Boatman, carries them across through the Word of the Shabad.
wofes df dfa ofa ae ae ofa dat ofa Sar il (575-11, esd, He 4)
an-din har rang har gun gaavai har rangee har rangaa.
Night and day, imbued with the Lord's Love, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord's lover loves the Lord.
Ho aed fasars ue ufemr ofs sn dfs us Var MQ (575-11, eda, He 4)
jan naanak nirbaan pad paa-i-aa har utam har pad changa. ||2||
Servant Nanak has obtained the state of Nirvaanaa, the state of ultimate goodness, the state of the Lord. ||2]|
asi He af fame festfent ant I (575-12, eadH, He 4) karhee-aal mukhay gur gi-aan drirh-aa-i-aa raam. For a bridle in my mouth, the Guru has implanted spiritual wisdom within me.
3f6 UH dfs wag ofent TH I (575-12, esau, ue 4) tan paraym har chaabak laa-i-aa raam. He has applied the whip of the Lord's Love to my body.
3fs un ofe ofs of aaa Ho fae aanfe FfSur th 6575-13, edu, He 4)
tan paraym har har laa-ay chaabak man jinai gurmukh jeeti-aa.
Applying the whip of the Lord's Love to his body, the Gurmukh conquers his mind, and wins the battle of life.
nus Ware Fae ure nifus ofs aA utfsur I 6575-13, esdH, He 4)
agh-rho gharhaavai sabad paavai api-o har ras peeti-aa.
He trains his untrained mind with the Word of the Shabad, and drinks in the rejuvenating essence of the Lord's Nectar.
Afe Ae wat afs surat ofa da sat safenr Il 6575-14, asda, us 4)
sun sarvan banee gur vakhaanee har rang turee charhaa-i-aa.
Listen with your ears to the Word, uttered by the Guru, and attune your body-horse to the Lord's Love.
Ho Hog Ug fast He Soa utes Surfer sil (675-14, esdH, ue 4) mahaa maarag panth bikh-rhaa jan naanak paar langhaa-i-aa. ||3]| Servant Nanak has crossed over the long and treacherous path. ||3]|
ust Safe to Th Gurr aM Il (575-15, esdH, v2 4) ghorhee tayjan dayh raam upaa-ee-aa raam. The transitory body-horse was created by the Lord.
fas ofa us AU AT Oe Ue seer aH I (575-15, esd, He 4) jit har parabh jaapai saa Dhan Dhan tukhaa-ee-aa raam. Blessed, blessed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God.
fas ofs us A AT de AeA ofe ufeor fags FSET I (575-16, eada, He 4)
jit har parabh jaapai saa Dhan saabaasai Dhur paa-i-aa kirat jurhandaa.
Blessed and acclaimed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God; it is obtained by the merits of past actions.
ofs tafe ust fens sure fe Toufa use I 575-17, esdH, He 4)
charh dayharh ghorhee bikham laghaa-ay mil gurmukh parmaanandaa.
Riding the body-horse, one crosses over the terrifying world ocean; the Gurmukh meets the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss.
ofs ofs org safer us fife AS Fat Ae mMret Il (575-17, esdH, He 4)
har har kaaj rachaa-i-aa poorai mil sant janaa janj aa-ee.
The Lord, Har, Har, has perfectly arranged this wedding; the Saints have come together as a marriage party.
Ho soa dle zg ufeor Hae fife HS Aor Soret UNSNANUI (575-18, esdH, He 4)
jan naanak har var paa-i-aa mangal mil sant janaa vaaDhaa-ee. ||4||1||5|| Servant Nanak has obtained the Lord as his Spouse; joining together, the Saints sing the songs of joy and congratulations. ||4]|1]|5]|
ZSIH HIS 8 Il (575-19)
vad-hans mehlaa 4. Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
ZI Shoat Ufa o€ Sait IM Il (575-19, sada, Hs 4) dayh tayjnarhee har nav rangee-aa raam. The body is the Lord's horse; the Lord imbues it with the fresh and new color.
Os famrg ag ate Hato IH I (575-19, edu, ue 4) gur gi-aan guroo har mangee-aa raam. From the Guru, I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom.
ust ude fomrrs Hat fs ae vat afe oy afs ffs Arey I (576-1, esa, 2 4)
gi-aan mangee har kathaa changee har naam gat mit jaanee-aa. I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom, and the Lord's sublime sermon; through the Name of the Lord, I have come to know His value and His state.
AS HOH Hele aor aes ofa oH of Sure I 576-1, asda, He 4) sabh janam safli-o kee-aa kartai har raam naam vakhaanee-aa. The Creator has made my life totally fruitful; I chant the Name of the Lord.
ofa oH on Aerts ofe ys ats sats dfs AS Hair I (576-2, esd, v8 4)
har raam naam salaahi har parabh har bhagat har jan mangee-aa.
The Lord's humble servant begs for the Lord's Name, for the Lord's Praises, and for devotional worship of the Lord God.
HO Ad Boa Hed H3d dfs gals aie Gator All (576-2, esd, ue 4)
jan kahai naanak sunhu santahu har bhagat govind changee-aa. ||1]|
Says servant Nanak, listen, O Saints: devotional worship of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, is sublime and good. ||1]|
ZI AVS le Afeat TH Il (576-3, esdH, He 4) dayh kanchan jeen suvinaa raam. The golden body is saddled with the saddle of gold.
afs ofa ofs oH ISat IM Il (576-3, esda, 2 4) jarh har har naam ratannaa raam.
It is adorned with the jewel of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afs on a0 dfs ufemr ofs fee af Te AY WE I (576-4, eadH, He 4)
jarh naam ratan govind paa-i-aa har milay har gun sukh ghanay.
Adorned with the jewel of the Naam, one obtains the Lord of the Universe; he meets the Lord, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and obtains all sorts of comforts.
ad Age ufeor afe on fourfeor esareit ofs dar afe ge Il (576-4, esdu, He 4)
gur sabad paa-i-aa har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa vadbhaagee har rang har banay.
He obtains the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and he meditates on the Name of the Lord; by great good fortune, he assumes the color of the Lord's Love.
dfs fxs Homi nizernit of sese ofs se Fair il 6576-5, esdH, He 4)
har milay su-aamee antarjaamee har navtan har nav rangee-aa.
He meets his Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; His body is ever-new, and His color is ever-fresh.
SSS SWS SH WE dfs on dfs us Hal IQI (576-6, esdu, He 4) naanak vakhaanai naam jaanai har naam har parabh mangee-aa. ||2|| Nanak chants and realizes the Naam; he begs for the Name of the Lord, the Lord God.
[21] ase wa ate nian user aH Il (576-6, esdH, He 4)
karhee-aal mukhay gur ankas paa-i-aa raam. The Guru has placed the reins in the mouth of the body-horse.
Ho HAS Td Rafe |fA wrfeor IM Il (576-7, esdH, H2 4) man maigal gur sabad vas aa-i-aa raam. The mind-elephant is overpowered by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ho zrafs wtfenr usH ue user AT ue afs fumes i (576-7, esdH, He 4)
man vasgat aa-i-aa param pad paa-i-aa saa Dhan kant pi-aaree.
The bride obtains the supreme status, as her mind is brought under control; she is the beloved of her Husband Lord.
nists UH war ofs ASt ufs AD fs ys ard Il (576-8, esdu, ue 4)
antar paraym lagaa har saytee ghar sohai har parabh naaree.
Deep within her inner self, she is in love with her Lord; in His home, she is beautiful - she is the bride of her Lord God.
ofa df ast AoA Hest ofe us afte ofe urfeMr I (576-8, asda, Hs 4)
har rang raatee sehjay maatee har parabh har har paa-i-aa.
Imbued with the Lord's Love, she is intuitively absorbed in bliss; she obtains the Lord God, Har, Har.
Sod Ho dig HH ads J essa ofa afe fomrfenr si 676-9, esda, He 4)
naanak jan har daas kahat hai vadbhaagee har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||3]|
Servant Nanak, the Lord's slave, says that only the very fortunate meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
oo wat at fas dfs fen at Il (576-10, esda, 42 4) dayh ghorhee jee jit har paa-i-aa raam. The body is the horse, upon which one rides to the Lord.
fife Afsae it Hae afer an I (576-10, esdH, He 4) mil satgur jee mangal gaa-i-aa raam. Meeting with the True Guru, one sings the songs of joy.
dfs arfe Hae TH oH Ufa AS ASA At Il (576-10, esdH, He 4)
har gaa-ay mangal raam naamaa har sayv sayvak sayvkee.
Sing the songs of joy to the Lord, serve the Name of the Lord, and become the servant of His servants.
us af ure da Host ofs da we Fa at Il (576-11, zada, He 4)
parabh jaa-ay paavai rang mahlee har rang maanai rang kee.
You shall go and enter the Mansion of the Beloved Lord's Presence, and lovingly enjoy His Love.
qe TH we fs Ase ote TaHst nfs fomrfenr | 6576-11, eda, He 4)
gun raam gaa-ay man subhaa-ay har gurmatee man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, so pleasing to my mind; following the Guru's Teachings, I meditate on the Lord within my mind.
He soa ofa fagur ot to wat ofS ofa usr eine (576-12, esdH, He 4)
jan naanak har kirpaa Dhaaree dayh ghorhee charh har paa-i-aa. ||4]|2||6|| The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; mounting the body-horse, he has found the Lord. ||4]|2]|6]|
Td VSIA HIS U es WT 8 (576-14) raag vad-hans mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 4 Raag Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (576-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad fufs oor at ou fume aM Ih (576-15, esd, v8 5) gur mil laDhaa jee raam pi-aaraa raam. Meeting with the Guru, I have found my Beloved Lord God.
feg 36 He fesat ad SS TH Il (576-15, eadH, Hi: 5) in tan man dit-rhaa vaaro vaaraa raam. I have made this body and mind a sacrifice, a sacrificial offering to my Lord.
36 HO fest ene fast got aie AHTAT I (576-15, esdH, He 5)
tan man ditaa bhavjal jitaa chookee kaa“n jamaanee.
Dedicating my body and mind, I have crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, and shaken off the fear of death.
wAfag dor nifigs uber sfour mires Aret il (576-16, eda, He 5)
asthir thee-aa amrit pee-aa rahi-aa aavan jaanee.
Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, I have become immortal; my comings and goings have ceased.
A wg oo Aofa AHO dfs at SH MOTE Il (576-16, esdH, He 5)
so ghar laDhaa sahj samDhaa har kaa naam aDhaaraa.
I have found that home, of celestial Samaadhi; the Name of the Lord is my only Support.
OWT SSA Ae HE TH TAT us AE SHAS MAUI (576-17, eadH, He 5) kaho naanak sukh maanay ralee-aa™ gur pooray ka‘-u namaskaaraa. ||1]| Says Nanak, I enjoy peace and pleasure; I bow in reverence to the Perfect Guru. ||1]|
Afs AME Ft HSS HIST IM I (576-17, esa, He 5) sun sajan jee maidrhay meetaa raam. Listen, O my friend and companion
afs 43 APE AY St IH Il (576-18, esdH, He 5) gur mantar sabad sach deetaa raam. - the Guru has given the Mantra of the Shabad, the True Word of God.
Ag Fae foorfenr Hares arfenr gat HOT MEAT Il (576-18, edn, He 5) sach sabad Dhi-aa-i-aa mangal gaa-i-aa chookay manhu adaysaa. Meditating on this True Shabad, I sing the songs of joy, and my mind is rid of anxiety.
Aus ufeor ass o afeur Aer Ae Afer SAT Il (576-19, esdu, 8 5) so parabh paa-i-aa kateh na jaa-i-aa sadaa sadaa sang baisaa. I have found God, who never leaves; forever and ever, He sits with me.
ys At sat Ae Hat ufs dfs US Ad HST Il (576-19, esdy, ue 5)
parabh jee bhaanaa sachaa maanaa parabh har Dhan sehjay deetaa.
One who is pleasing to God receives true honor. The Lord God blesses him with wealth.
UST UDI
ad aaa fsH Ae afeodt Sat VS Asot FT SST NM (577-1, esd, He 5)
kaho naanak tis jan balihaaree tayraa daan sabhnee hai leetaa. ||2||
Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to such a humble being. O Lord, You bless all with Your bountiful blessings. ||2]|
38 star st fZufs mews IH | (577-2, edu, He 5) ta-o bhaanaa taa™ taripat aghaa-ay raam. When it pleases You, then I am satisfied and satiated.
He dior Ser AS RAS ASS TH I (577-2, edu, us 5) man thee-aa thandhaa sabh tarisan bujhaa-ay raam. My mind is soothed and calmed, and all my thirst is quenched.
Ho Shor Ser gat Sot fer aTT MAST Il (577-2, esdH, He 5)
man thee-aa thandhaa chookee danjhaa paa-i-aa bahut khajaanaa.
My mind is soothed and calmed, the burning has ceased, and I have found so many treasures.
fru Aza Afs Sue Bd JG ASAT A ATH Il (577-3, essa, ve 5) sikh sayvak sabh bhunchan lagay ha"-u satgur kai kurbaanaa. All the Sikhs and servants partake of them; I am a sacrifice to my True Guru.
fess se uAN df aS AH at SA FEES I (577-3, esdq, 2 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay khasam rang raatay jam kee taraas bujhaa-ay.
I have become fearless, imbued with the Love of my Lord Master, and I have shaken off the fear of death.
Soa BVH Ae Af Aza Sct sats ad for we iS (5677-4, esdH, He 5)
naanak daas sadaa sang sayvak tayree bhagat kara-o liv laa-ay. ||3]|
Slave Nanak, Your humble servant, lovingly embraces Your meditation; O Lord, be with me always. ||3]|
uct wirat t HOA HS TH I 577-5, e3dH, He 5) pooree aasaa jee mansaa mayray raam. My hopes and desires have been fulfilled, O my Lord.
Hfo fosae HIG Afs Te 3d TH Il 6577-5, esse, v2 5) mohi nirgun jee-o sabh gun tayray raam. I am worthless, without virtue; all virtues are Yours, O Lord.
Afs Te 3d Sag He fas ufe 3o AHS I (577-5, esdu, He 5) sabh gun tayray thaakur mayray kit mukh tuDh saalaahee. All virtues are Yours, O my Lord and Master; with what mouth should I praise You?
Te ueaTS AT fas 3 Stofoor gafh Sr fas wrt il (577-6, esdH, He 5) gun avgun mayraa kichh na beechaari-aa bakhas lee-aa khin maahee. You did not consider my merits and demerits; you forgave me in an instant.
08 fofa urét sat earet SH visde FT Il (577-6, esdH, H 5)
na-o niDh paa-ee vajee vaaDhaa-ee vaajay anhad tooray.
I have obtained the nine treasures, congratulations are pouring in, and the unstruck melody resounds.
aT Sa H eg ule ufeor AS we At Aas feAT ISNA (577-7, esdH, He 5)
kaho naanak mai var ghar paa-i-aa mayray laathay jee sagal visooray. ||4||1||
Says Nanak, I have found my Husband Lord within my own home, and all my anxiety is forgotten. ||4||1]|
HS Il (577-8) Salok. Shalok:
foor Hee ay Zels usE Setar Il (577-8, esdH, vs 5) ki-aa sunaydo koorh vanjan pavan jhulaari-aa. Why do you listen to falsehood? It shall vanish like a gust of wind.
Sod Heid 3 uses HW Hee A Tat UU (577-8, esdu, v2 5) naanak sunee-ar tay parvaan jo sunayday sach Dhanee. ||1]|| O Nanak, those ears are acceptable, which listen to the True Master. ||1]|
#3 Il (577-9) chhant. Chhant:
fae ufs unret fas us Aeet Afsor aH I (577-9, esdu, 48 5) tin ghol ghumaa-ee jin parabh sarvanee suni-aa raam. I am a Sacrifice to those who listen with their ears to the Lord God.
A Adfa Ad fae dfs dfs grat stent TH Il (577-9, esdH, He 5)
say sahj suhaylay jin har har rasnaa bhani-aa raam.
Blissful and comfortable are those, who with their tongues chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
A Adfa HIS Ted MHS Aas Burge wre | (577-10, esd, v2 5)
say sahj suhaylay gunah amolay jagat uDhaaran aa-ay.
They are naturally embellished, with priceless virtues; they have come to save the world.
3 Sfea Aad ys vse" AS us BwveS I (577-10, esdu, us 5) bhai bohith saagar parabh charnaa kaytay paar laghaa-ay. God's Feet are the boat, which carries so many across the terrifying world-ocean.
fro a@ faur adt Hd oafe faq at Sat 3 alent I 6577-11, asda, He 5)
jin ka‘-u kirpaa karee mayrai thaakur tin kaa laykhaa na gani-aa.
Those who are blessed with the favor of my Lord and Master, are not asked to render their account.
ag soa fH uifes unret fafe ys AeNSt Afsor A (677-11, edz, He 5) kaho naanak tis ghol ghumaa-ee jin parabh sarvanee suni-aa. ||1|| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who listen to God with their ears. ||1]|
HSE Il (577-12)
salok. Shalok:
Stee Set fso fimrn 3 FS H wet I 577-12, esdH, we 5) lo-in lo-ee dith pi-aas na bujhai moo ghanee. With my eyes, I have seen the Light of the Lord, but my great thirst is not quenched.
saa A must fimife frat fare ye fst wail 677-13, esdq, ne 5) naanak say akh-rhee-aa” bi-ann jinee disando maa piree. ||1|| O Nanak, those eyes are different, which behold my Husband Lord. ||1]|
ZS Il (577-13) chhant. Chhant:
frat afs ys fear fq agae IH | (577-13, esa, v8 5) jinee har parabh dithaa tin kurbaanay raam. I am a Sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God.
A ATS SIT STS TH Il (577-14, esdH, He 5) say saachee dargeh bhaanay raam. In the True Court of the Lord, they are approved.
oats HS A usaS dfs ASt Sf TS Il (577-14, sada, He 5)
thaakur maanay say parDhaanay har saytee rang raatay.
They are approved by their Lord and Master, and acclaimed as supreme; they are imbued with the Lord's Love.
ofa dAfo mure AofA ANTS ute whe geht ATS Il (577-14, esd, He 5)
har raseh aghaa-ay sahj samaa-ay ghat ghat rama-ee-aa jaatay.
They are satiated with the sublime essence of the Lord, and they merge in celestial peace; in each and every heart, they see the all-pervading Lord.
Act AAS AS A AMS SAT ms SS Il (577-15, edu, nu 5)
Say-ee Sajan sant say sukhee-ay thaakur apnay bhaanay.
They alone are the friendly Saints, and they alone are happy, who are pleasing to their Lord and Master.
ag soa fro ofa ys fsor foo & AE ATHS IM! (577-16, esdu, 2 5) kaho naanak jin har parabh dithaa tin kai sad kurbaanay. ||2|| Says Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God. ||2]||
Hq Il (577-16)
Salok. Shalok:
ed niordt nig Het oH fegetor Il (577-16, sda, H 5) dayh anDhaaree anDh sunjee naam vihoonee-aa. The body is blind, totally blind and desolate, without the Naam.
Soa HES HOH A wie Sot AG Tat NAM (577-17, esdH, 2 5) naanak safal jannam jai ghat vuthaa sach Dhanee. ||1]|
O Nanak, fruitful is the life of that being, within whose heart the True Lord and Master abides. ||1]|
23 Il (577-17) chhant. Chhant:
fae vba get fas Aa ofs us Stor IM I (577-17, edu, ue 5) tin khannee-ai vanjaa™ jin mayraa har parabh deethaa raam. I am cut into pieces as a sacrifice, to those who have seen my Lord God.
Ae ofy murs ofe ofa nifs Hor amt il (577-18, eadq, ue 5)
jan chaakh aghaanay har har amrit meethaa raam.
His humble servants partake of the Sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, and are satiated.
ofa Hats Htor ys Jor HS For AY se Il (577-18, esdH, He 5)
har maneh meethaa parabhoo toothaa ami-o voothaa sukh bha-ay.
The Lord seems sweet to their minds; God is merciful to them, His Ambrosial Nectar rains down upon them, and they are at peace.
=u on SdH faon 30 3 af Radin Stns A AE Il (577-19, ede, He 5)
dukh naas bharam binaas tan tay jap jagdees eesah jai ja-ay.
Pain is eliminated and doubt is dispelled from the body; chanting the Name of the Lord of the World, their victory is celebrated.
Ha vos fas aa Us 3 A Se Il (577-19, edu, 8 5)
moh rahat bikaar thaakay panch tay sang tootaa.
They are rid of emotional attachment, their sins are erased, and their association with the five passions is broken off.
UST ude
aT saa fsa daha ger fae ule Ha als ys FS" SM (578-1, esd, 2 5) kaho naanak tin khannee-ai vanjaa jin ghat mayraa har parabh voothaa. ||3]|
Says Nanak, I am every bit a sacrifice to those, within whose hearts my Lord God abides. ||3]|
HS Il (578-1) salok. Shalok:
A Sate TH Aza ASt aifenr Il (578-1, esdu, v2 5) jo lorheeday raam sayvak say-ee kaa“dhi-aa. Those who long for the Lord, are said to be His servants.
Sea We Afs At AHS B SAT NA (578-2, esdH, He 5) naanak jaanay sat saa‘-ee sant na baahraa. ||1|| Nanak knows this Truth, that the Lord is not different from His Saint. ||1]|
#Z Il (578-2) chhant. Chhant:
ffs Ae Feld Mets" IM Il (578-2, ead, He 5) mil jal jaleh khataanaa raam. As water mixes and blends with water,
Afar vat xfs fesrar amy Il (578-3, esdH, H2 5) sang jotee jot milaanaa raam. so does one's light mix and blend with the Lord's Light.
AMS use yas aes orf wrufs ATEhA Il (578-3, esdH, He 5) sammaa-ay pooran purakh kartay aap aapeh jaanee-ai. Merging with the perfect, all-powerful Creator, one comes to know his own self.
3d Hf Aafa Mrfa wait Sa Sa Sash Il (578-4, asda, ve 5)
tah sunn sahj samaaDh laagee ayk ayk vakhaanee-ai.
Then, he enters the celestial state of absolute Samaadhi, and speaks of the One and Only Lord.
mtfu gust yrfu Hast wif wiry SUS | (578-4, esdH, He 5) aap guptaa aap muktaa aap aap vakhaanaa. He Himself is unmanifest, and He Himself is liberated; He Himself speaks of Himself.
oa 3H 3 Te fon fils Aw Fels YeTs III (578-5, esdH, He 5)
naanak bharam bhai gun binaasay mil jal jaleh Khataanaa. ||4]|2||
O Nanak, doubt, fear and the limitations of the three qualities are dispelled, as one merges into the Lord, like water blending with water. ||4]|2]|
SSA HIS U Il (578-5)
vad-hans mehlaa 5. Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
US ATE ATE AHIA TH Ill (578-5, esdH, v2 5) parabh karan kaaran samrathaa raam. God is the all-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes.
TY Ads Age f Ta TH Il (578-6, esdH, He 5) rakh jagat sagal day hathaa raam. He preserves the whole world, reaching out with His hand.
ANGE Ade" Ha AM fort fof Aeerst I (578-6, eadH, v2 5)
samrath sarnaa jog su-aamee kirpaa niDh sukh-daata.
He is the all-powerful, safe Sanctuary, Lord and Master, Treasure of mercy, Giver of peace.
JG agaret oA 3d frst Sa USS I (578-7, esdH, H2 5) ha’-u kurbaanee daas tayray jinee ayk pachhaataa. I am a Sacrifice to Your slaves, who recognize only the One Lord.
zo fave & WE afm age 3 Maa Il (578-7, esdH, He 5) varan chihan na jaa-ay lakhi-aa kathan tay akthaa. His color and shape cannot be seen; His description is indescribable.
faadfs soa Heg feast us ATE AGS ASA NA (578-7, eda, He 5) binvant naanak sunhu bintee parabh karan kaaran samrathaa. ||1]| Prays Nanak, hear my prayer, O God, Almighty Creator, Cause of causes. ||1]|
Sts Ahr SI J ATS TH Il (578-8, esd, v2 5) ayhi jee-a tayray too kartaa raam. These beings are Yours; You are their Creator.
ys ve ddd FH Ids" TH Il (578-8, esdH, He 5) parabh dookh darad bharam hartaa raam. God is the Destroyer of pain, suffering and doubt.
3H eu wae fost fas ufa afe Sy ete eure il (578-9, esda, we 5)
bharam dookh darad nivaar khin meh rakh layho deen dai-aalaa.
Eliminate my doubt, pain and suffering in an instant, and preserve me, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.
HS fust Hort AAS AS AS Ss Turse | (578-9, eadH, we 5)
maat pitaa su-aam sajan sabh jagat baal gopaalaa.
You are mother, father and friend, O Lord and Master; the whole world is Your child, O Lord of the World.
A Hofs ore ae fous ure A safes Hof 6 HaST II (578-10, eadq, He 5)
jo saran aavai gun niDhaan paavai so bahurh janam na martaa.
One who comes seeking Your Sanctuary, obtains the treasure of virtue, and does not have to enter the cycle of birth and death again.
fasdts aoa oH Sa Als Aba SF J ATS MI (578-10, esdH, us 5)
binvant naanak daas tayraa sabh jee-a tayray too kartaa. ||2| | Prays Nanak, I am Your slave. All beings are Yours; You are their Creator. ||2||
MTS Udd Ufa fomreint gt I (578-11, esdH, He 5) aath pahar har Dhi-aa-ee-ai raam. Meditating on the Lord, twenty-four hours a day,
Ho fefenrst ee urent aH I (578-11, esdH, He 5) man ichhi-arhaa fal paa-ee-ai raam. the fruits of the heart's desires are obtained.
Ho fee ure ys foment fkefo AH & STAT I (578-12, esdu, He 5)
man ichh paa-ee-ai parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai miteh jam kay taraasaa.
Your heart's desires are obtained, meditating on God, and the fear of death is dispelled.
dfs afenr va Harfenr set UTS MAT II (578-12, esdH, He 5)
gobid gaa-i-aa saaDh sangaa-i-aa bha-ee pooran aasaa.
I sing of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and my hopes are fulfilled.
fa He Ho fears Aas ys a HfH SSM I (578-13, esdH, we 5) taj maan moh vikaar saglay parabhoo kai man bhaa-ee-dai.
Renouncing egotism, emotional attachment and all corruption, we become pleasing to the Mind of God.
faodfs aoa feon sat net afe ofa foment Sil (5678-13, esdH, He 5) binvant naanak dinas rainee sadaa har har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||3] | Prays Nanak, day and night, meditate forever on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]]|
ofa aafs mods SH TH Il (578-14, esdH, 3 5) dar vaajeh anhat vaajay raam. At the Lord's Door, the unstruck melody resounds.
ufe wfe of afe ara IM Il (578-14, esdH, He 5)
ghat ghat har gobind gaajay raam. In each and every heart, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, sings.
dfs an Aer fran warn vias So il (578-15, esdu, 3 5)
govid gaajay sadaa biraajay agam agochar oochaa.
The Lord of the Universe sings, and abides forever; He is unfathomable, profoundly deep, lofty and exalted.
Ge anis fas aE 3 Wet af B AA UTe Il (578-15, esdH, v3 5) gun bay-ant kichh kahan na jaa-ee ko-ay na sakai pahoochaa. His virtues are infinite - none of them can be described. No one can reach Him.
nif Cure orfy ufsuns Aba As Afs A Il (578-16, esdH, Hs 5)
aap Upaa-ay aap partipaalay jee-a jant sabh saajay.
He Himself creates, and He Himself sustains; all beings and creatures are fashioned by Him.
faodfs aoa AY of saat efs nfs niBde SH ISISI (578-16, esdH, He 5)
binvant naanak sukh naam bhagtee dar vajeh anhad vaajay. ||4||3]| Prays Nanak, happiness comes from devotional worship of the Naam; at His Door, the unstruck melody resounds. ||4|[3]|
Td SIA HIS VWs U mere (578-18) raag vad-hans mehlaa 1 ghar 5 alaahanee-aa Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, Fifth House, Alaahanees ~ Songs Of Mourning:
qe Afsare YATE Il (578-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Uo fade Ae ufsag fafs wa do ofeor I 678-19, esdH, He 1) Dhan sirandaa sachaa paatisaahu jin jag DhanDhai laa-i-aa. Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks.
Hues ust uet sdt Wola wis seorfenr I (578-19, esdH, He 1)
muhlat punee paa-ee bharee jaanee-arhaa ghat chalaa-i-aa.
When one's time is up, and the measure is full, this dear soul is caught, and driven off.
Ua uot wot wfs vorfeur feftimr urfenr Jd Ste ATS Il (579-1, esdH, He 1)
jaanee ghat chalaa-i-aa likhi-aa aa-i-aa runnay veer sabaa-ay. This dear soul is driven off, when the pre-ordained Order is received, and all the relatives cry out in mourning.
aifenr SA dint teat Ai fea US Ad HES Il (579-1, esdH, He 1)
kaa’-i-aa hans thee-aa vaychhorhaa jaa™ din punnay mayree maa-ay.
The body and the swan-soul are separated, when one's days are past and done, O my mother.
Ad fetter so urfeer Ao uate arfenr Il (579-2, esda, He 1) jayhaa likhi-aa tayhaa paa-i-aa jayhaa purab kamaa-i-aa. As is one's pre-ordained Destiny, so does one receive, according to one's past actions.
U9 fade ne usar fafs wa do afer all (579-2, esdq, He 1) Dhan sirandaa sachaa paatisaahu jin jag DhanDhai laa-i-aa. ||1] | Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks.
[111 Wfog frags He sets Ase Sg ufenirar th (579-3, esdH, He 1)
saahib simrahu mayray bhaa-eeho sabhnaa ayhu pa-i-aanaa. Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way.
ee dor gar atte fear nat ATUS ATET Il (579-3, e3dH, 8 1)
aythai DhanDhaa koorhaa chaar dihaa aagai sarpar jaanaa.
These false entanglements last for only a few days; then, one must surely move on to the world hereafter.
wid Haus Ast fa fora ard agg ate Il (579-4, asda, He 1)
aagai sarpar jaanaa ji-o mihmaanaa kaahay gaarab keejai.
He must surely move on to the world hereafter, like a guest; so why does he indulge in ego?
fas Afen waa AY ue on fA aT SIA Il (579-4, esdH, He 1 jit sayvi-ai dargeh sukh paa-ee-ai naam tisai kaa leejai. Chant the Name of the Lord; serving Him, you shall obtain peace in His Court.
Md TAH 3 VS HS fate fats famr fear ii (579-5, esdu, we
aagai hukam na chalai moolay sir sir ki-aa vihaanaa.
In the world hereafter, no one's commands will be obeyed. According to their actions, each and every person proceeds.
Whoa finfeg HS oveIS ASST ST ufemr|St II (579-6, esdH, He 1
saahib simrihu mayray bhaa-eeho sabhnaa ayhu pa-i-aanaa. ||2||
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way. ||2||
A fsa ae AYES A dhe dies Sg AAS Il (579-6, esdu, ne 1)
jo tis bhaavai samrath so thee-ai heelrhaa ayhu sansaaro.
Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him.
afs afs udbufs afe sfomr ares fasnedd Il (579-7, esdH, He 1) jal thal mahee-al rav rahi-aa saachrhaa sirjanhaaro. The True Creator Lord is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the air.
Wet fated ds niee nud St at nig @ ufemr I 6579-7, esdH, He 1) saachaa sirjanhaaro alakh apaaro taa kaa ant na paa-i-aa. The True Creator Lord is invisible and infinite; His limits cannot be found.
uifenr fso at Hee sfenr d fea His frat fomrfemr i 579-8, esda, He 1) aa-i-aa tin kaa safal bha-i-aa hai ik man jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa. Fruitful is the coming of those, who meditate single-mindedly on Him.
aod ofa Card wm Jaf AeTsSTs Il (579-8, esdH, He 1) dhaahay dhaahi usaaray aapay hukam savaaranhaaro. He destroys, and having destroyed, He creates; by His Order, He adorns us.
A fsa ae AHS A ahh dea Sg AAS ISI (579-9, eadq, He 1)
jo tis bhaavai samrath so thee-ai heelrhaa ayhu sansaaro. ||3]||
Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him. ||3]|
Soa Sat gar Are A de ore fimrd i (579-9, esdu, v2 1) naanak runnaa baabaa jaanee-ai jay rovai laa-ay pi-aaro. Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love.
wee arate arar Seba dee Aas fears i (579-10, asda, He 1) vaalayvay kaaran baabaa ro-ee-ai rovan sagal bikaaro. One who weeps for the sake of worldly objects, O Baba, weeps totally in vain.
dee Hae food ee HATS Whar arafs FS Il (579-10, esdH, v2 1)
rovan sagal bikaaro gaafal sansaaro maa-i-aa kaaran rovai.
This weeping is all in vain; the world forgets the Lord, and weeps for the sake of Maya.
Jar He fag AS ot feg 3q Ss FS Il (579-11, esda, we 1) changa mandaa kichh soojhai naahee ih tan ayvai khovai. He does not distinguish between good and evil, and wastes away this life in vain.
me utfent Ag a AA afs aay wierd Il (579-11, esdH, Hs 1) aithai aa-i-aa sabh ko jaasee koorh karahu ahankaaro. Everyone who comes here, shall have to leave; to act in ego is false.
Soa Sat gar Area A de ore fimrd igual (679-12, esdq, He 1) naanak runnaa baabaa jaanee-ai jay rovai laa-ay pi-aaro. ||4||1|| Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love. ||4]|1]|
SSI HIS Y Il (579-13)
vad-hans mehlaa 1. Wadahans, First Mehl:
weg frog HIStd AVS SH BET Il (579-13, esdH, He 1) aavhu milhu sahayleeho sachrhaa naam la-ayhaa”. Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name.
ded faas 35 a nmuar Afog AMTST? Il (579-13, zsdH, He 1)
rovah birhaa tan kaa aapnaa saahib sam"aalayhaa”.
Let us weep over the body's separation from the Lord and Master; let us remember Him in contemplation.
Afog AYfed UE feofes mer fs Ga AST I (579-14, eadH, He 1)
saahib sam"aalih panth nihaalih asaa bhe othai jaanaa.
Let us remember the Lord and Master in contemplation, and keep a watchful eye on the Path. We shall have to go there as well.
fA ot oer fae dt Sor dur fSA at arar Il (579-14, esd, He 1) jis kaa kee-aa tin hee lee-aa ho-aa tisai kaa bhaanaa. He who has created, also destroys; whatever happens is by His Will.
a fats afe ufemr 7 omiat vrfeor ont fr Joo ATI Il (579-15, esdH, He 1 jo tin kar paa-i-aa so aagai aa-i-aa asee ke hukam karayhaa. Whatever He has done, has come to pass; how can we command Him?
weg frog AIS AVS SH BET INA (579-15, esdH, He 1) aavhu milhu sahayleeho sachrhaa naam la-ayhaa. ||1|| Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name. ||1]|
Hde 3 He Bat mba A fe we MAT aE I (579-16, esdH, He 1) maran na mandaa lokaa aakhee-ai jay mar jaanai aisaa ko-ay. Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die.
Afeg mfog Aye wruer UE Ader mia SE Il (579-16, esda, ne 1)
sayvihu saahib samrath aapnaa panth suhaylaa aagai ho-ay.
Serve your Almighty Lord and Master, and your path in the world hereafter will be easy.
Ufa HIS Weg St ew uT|eg rat fs esret Il (579-17, esdH, He
panth suhaylai jaavhu taa™ fal paavhu aagai milai vadaa-ee.
Take this easy path, and you shall obtain the fruits of your rewards, and receive honor in the world hereafter.
se fh@ weg Afs Mreg Zi ufs Sa ust I (579-17, asda, we 1)
bhaytai si-o jaavhu sach samaavahu taa” pat laykhai paa-ee.
Go there with your offering, and you shall merge in the True Lord; your honor shall be confirmed.
Hoot Ate usd UAH Seg da fAG ger HE I (579-18, esdH, He 1
mahlee jaa-ay paavhu khasmai bhaavahu rang si-o ralee-aa maanai.
You shall obtain a place in the Mansion of the Lord Master's Presence; being pleasing to Him, you shall enjoy the pleasures of His Love.
HIE 3 He Bar mdb A et Hfs AS MQM (579-19, esdH, He 1) maran na mandaa lokaa aakhee-ai jay ko-ee mar jaanai. ||2] | Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die. ||2] |
Hee HE Afeor ga oA fe Heals UTES Il (579-19, esdH, He 1) maran munsaa soori-aa hak hai jo ho-ay maran parvaano. The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God.
UST UcCO
He Het ora wmdhafs wears urefa ArSt HE Il (580-1, e3dH, He 1)
sooray say-ee aagai aakhee-ahi dargeh paavahi saachee maano.
They alone are acclaimed as brave warriors in the world hereafter, who receive true honor in the Court of the Lord.
edad He uefa ufs FAG refs ora TY S Ba Il (580-1, esdH, we 1)
dargeh maan paavahi pat si-o jaaveh aagai dookh na laagai.
They are honored in the Court of the Lord; they depart with honor, and they do not suffer pain in the world hereafter.
afa &a fomrefa st ee uefa fas Afeat 3B sed Il (680-2, asda, He 1)
kar ayk Dhi-aavahi taa™ fal paavahi jit sayvi-ai bha-o bhaagai.
They meditate on the One Lord, and obtain the fruits of their rewards. Serving the Lord, their fear is dispelled.
Ga sdt ATE Ho fs TTEt nM ATS ATE Il (580-2, esdH, we 1)
oochaa nahee kahnaa man meh rahnaa aapay jaanai jaano.
Do not indulge in egotism, and dwell within your own mind; the Knower Himself knows everything.
Hv HEA Afar ga oA fe Hef UTSTES SII (580-3, esd, He 1) maran munsaa” soori-aa hak hai jo ho-ay mareh parvaano. ||3]| The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God. ||3]|
Sod fans war deha set d fs AAS I (580-4, esdH, He 1) naanak kis no baabaa ro-ee-ai baajee hai ih sansaaro. Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play.
atst y Afog wmuert avafs ad shed | (580-4, esdH, v2 1) keetaa vaykhai saahib aapnaa kudrat karay beechaaro. The Lord Master beholds His work, and contemplates His creative potency.
aves ators urge urd fafs oor A ATE Il (580-5, esdH, He 1)
kudrat beechaaray Dhaaran Dhaaray jin kee-aa so jaanai.
He contemplates His creative potency, having established the Universe. He who created it, He alone knows.
Mm SY nM} FS nM JAH USE Il (580-5, sda, we 1)
aapay vaykhai aapay boojhai aapay hukam pachhaanai.
He Himself beholds it, and He Himself understands it. He Himself realizes the Hukam of His Command.
fate fas ohor Aet We St aT Ty wes Il (580-5, esdH, Hs 1) jin kichh kee-aa so-ee jaanai taa kaa roop apaaro. He who created these things, He alone knows. His subtle form is infinite.
Sod fans war deha set J feg AAT UIQ (580-6, esdH, He 1) naanak kis no baabaa ro-ee-ai baajee hai ih sansaaro. ||4||2|| Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play. ||4||2]|
ZSIA HIG Y Tat Il (580-7) vad-hans mehlaa 1 dakh-nee. Wadahans, First Mehl, Dakhanee:
Ag fader Ae ATE AVS Udeea Il (580-7, esdH Tet, He 1) sach sirandaa sachaa jaanee-ai sachrhaa parvadgaaro. The True Creator Lord is True - know this well; He is the True Sustainer.
fate nme wing Afar AST nw MUTE Il (580-7, zadH UST, He 1) jin aapeenai aap saaji-aa sachrhaa alakh apaaro. He Himself fashioned His Own Self; the True Lord is invisible and infinite.
efe us afs feefania a fae ulg nite Il (580-8, esd wet, He 1)
du-ay purh jorh vichhorhi-an gur bin ghor anDhaaro.
He brought together, and then separated, the two grinding stones of the earth and the sky; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
Hag ve frafmig uifatatt ses Sars Ul (580-8, sada eect, we 1)
sooraj chand sirji-an ahinis chalat veechaaro. ||1]|
He created the sun and the moon; night and day, they move according to His Thought. ||1]|
Hua Wg AY 3 Ava Uf filmes i TIS il (580-9, esa weet, vs 1)
sachrhaa saahib sach too sachrhaa deh pi-aaro. rahaa-o.
O True Lord and Master, You are True. O True Lord, bless me with Your Love. | |Pause| |
30 frat Heat eu AY PesTs Il (580-9, sda wet, we 1) tuDh sirjee maydnee dukh sukh dayvanhaaro. You created the Universe; You are the Giver of pain and pleasure.
ont uae fafa fa wfior He fumrd i (580-10, esda weet, He 1) naaree purakh sirji-ai bikh maa-i-aa moh pi-aaro. You created woman and man, the love of poison, and emotional attachment to Maya.
urat arat Sobor Sf Hho mars I (580-10, ede weet, He 1)
khaanee banee tayree-aa deh jee-aa aaDhaaro.
The four sources of creation, and the power of the Word, are also of Your making. You give Support to all beings.
aqvafs sug sofenr Afe feazeod 12H (580-11, esda weet, He 1) kudrat takhat rachaa-i-aa sach nibayrhanhaaro. ||2]|| You have made the Creation as Your Throne; You are the True Judge. ||2]|
wer ae frafor 3 fag aIETs Il (580-11, esda eet, He 1) aavaa gavan sirji-aa too thir karnaihaaro. You created comings and goings, but You are ever-stable, O Creator Lord.
Hue Host orf afer sfag Ae faord I 680-12, esda weet, He 1 jaman marnaa aa-ay ga-i-aa baDhik jee-o bikaaro. In birth and death, in coming and going, this soul is held in bondage by corruption.
33a on ferrfoor ass four fH we I (580-12, 23dH Buet, He 1)
bhoodrhai naam visaari-aa boodrhai ki-aa tis chaaro. The evil person has forgotten the Naam; he has drowned - what can he do now?
ae efs fay ofenr nieae at Zens ISI (580-13, eda weMt, He 1) gun chhod bikh ladi-aa avgun kaa vanjaaro. ||3]| Forsaking merit, he has loaded the poisonous cargo of demerits; he is a trader of sins.
[I3]|
Res ure fsor wSiot gat AS AIST Il (580-13, eadH wut, He 1) sad-rhay aa-ay tinaa jaanee-aa hukam sachay kartaaro. The beloved soul has received the Call, the Command of the True Creator Lord.
ont use fedfour feefaur Hosa Il (580-14, esd weet, He 1)
naaree purakh vichhunni-aa vichhurhi-aa maylanhaaro.
The soul, the husband, has become separated from the body, the bride. The Lord is the Re-uniter of the separated ones.
TU 3 We Age gath act fAfs aes i (80-14, eade weet, Hs 1)
roop na jaanai sohnee-ai hukam baDhee sir kaaro.
No one cares for your beauty, O beautiful bride.; the Messenger of Death is bound only by the Lord Commander's Command.
wea frsfa o west Safe dz fimrd igi 680-15, sda weet, He 1)
baalak biraDh na jaannee torhan hayt pi-aaro. ||4]|
He does not distinguish between young children and old people; he tears apart love and affection. ||4||
5G Ud Sa Jah Ad JA aAfenr Hers Il (580-15, esda weet, He 1)
na-o dar thaakay hukam sachai hans ga-i-aa gainaaray.
The nine doors are closed by the True Lord's Command, and the swan-soul takes flight into the skies.
AT Us set Hot Bfo feaetor frasast ninos a Il (580-16, eadH wut, we 1)
saa Dhan chhutee muthee jhooth viDh-nee-aa miratkarhaa annynarhay baaray. The body-bride is separated, and defrauded by falsehood; she is now a widow - her husband's body lies dead in the courtyard.
Hots Het He HES HID Jot Ss Aes Il (580-16, esdH wet, ve 1)
Surat mu-ee mar maa-ee-ay mahal runnee dar baaray.
The widow cries out at the door, "The light of my mind has gone out, O my mother, with his death."
ded AT HIS AY A TE ATS Uli (580-17, esdH weet, nz 1)
rovhu kant mahayleeho sachay kay gun saaray. ||5||
So cry out, O soul-brides of the Husband Lord, and dwell on the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||5||
fe nfs wet oatfemr aufs ufe nies il (580-17, esdH weet, He 1) jal mal jaanee naavaali-aa kaparh pat ambaaray. Her loved one is cleansed, bathed in water, and dressed in silken robes.
SA eH Adt web Us He He AMS Il (580-18, esdH wut, He 1)
vaajay vajay sachee baanee-aa panch mu-ay man maaray.
The musicians play, and the Bani of the True Lord's Words are sung; the five relatives feel as if they too are dead, so deadened are their minds.
Wat fegos Ha Hee Sfenr fya Ales AAS Il (580-18, cada Tuet, He 1)
jaanee vichhunnrhay mayraa maran bha-i-aa Dharig jeevan sansaaray. "Separation from my beloved is like death to me!" cries the widow. "My life in this world is cursed and worthless!"
Hes He A em fus AUS Jf filmrs NEN 80-19, eda weet, He
jeevat marai so jaanee-ai pir sachrhai hayt pi-aaray. ||6| |
But she alone is approved, who dies, while yet still alive; she lives for the sake of the Love of her Beloved. ||6]|
SH deg deze nretd Sls HOt HATS Il (580-19, esdH uct, we 1)
tusee rovhu rovan aa-eeho jhooth muthee sansaaray.
So cry out in mourning, you who have come to mourn; this world is false and fraudulent.
UST UTA JG Host Ud weer fufs sient feasars Il (581-1, esda weet, He YD
ha-o muth-rhee DhanDhai Dhaavanee-aa pir chhodi-arhee viDhankaaray. I too have been defrauded, chasing after worldly entanglements; my Husband Lord has forsaken me - I practice the evil deeds of a wife without a spouse.
ufs ufs ey Hos gs TS flrs i 681-1, esdy wut, Hs 1)
ghar ghar kant mahaylee-aa roorhai hayt pi-aaray.
In each and every home, are the brides of the Husband Lord; they gaze upon their Handsome Lord with love and affection.
H fug Ay Are JC safest of gas DI (581-2, esda weet, He 1
mai pir sach salaahnaa ha-o rehsi-arhee naam bhataaray. ||7||
I sing the Praises of my True Husband Lord, and through the Naam, the Name of my Husband Lord, I blossom forth. ||7] |
ate fufemt tq usfenr AT US Ag Aters Il (581-2, cada weet, He 1)
gur mili-ai vays palti-aa saa Dhan sach seegaaro.
Meeting with the Guru, the soul-bride's dress is transformed, and she is adorned with Truth.
weg frog AdStd fed franeT Ss Il (581-3, cada wet, He 1)
aavhu milhu sahayleeho simrahu sirjanhaaro.
Come and meet with me, O brides of the Lord; let's meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord.
webufs af Aoaret AY ASIST Il (581-3, eadH wat, He 1) ba-ee-ar naam sohaaganee sach savaaranhaaro.
Through the Naam, the soul-bride becomes the Lord's favorite; she is adorned with Truth.
Teg ats o fags Soa FIN Shes ICUS (581-4, eadq weet, ne 1) gaavhu geet na birharhaa naanak barahm beechaaro. ||8]|3]| Do not sing the songs of separation, O Nanak; reflect upon God. ||8]|3]|
SSIA HI Y Il (581-4)
vad-hans mehlaa 1. Wadahans, First Mehl:
fafs aa frofa mrfenr A foe aeafs ASST NN (581-4, esdH, He 1)
jin jag siraj samaa-i-aa so saahib kudrat jaanovaa.
The One who creates and dissolves the world - that Lord and Master alone knows His creative power.
Hest vfs o sam ule ufe Aa USES Il (581-5, 23TH, Hs 1)
sachrhaa door na bhaalee-ai ghat ghat sabad pachhaanovaa.
Do not search for the True Lord far away; recognize the Word of the Shabad in each and every heart.
Ay Hae usted ele o Weg fale So Toa ITH Il (581-6, esdH, He 1)
sach sabad pachhaanhu door na jaanhu jin ayh rachnaa raachee.
Recognize the Shabad, and do not think that the Lord is far away; He created this creation.
oy fomre st Ay ure fae ore fuss aret Il 681-6, esdn, nH: 1)
naam Dhi-aa-ay taa sukh paa-ay bin naavai pirh kaachee.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains peace; without the Naam, he plays a losing game.
fafs anit fafa are Het fam & Ad SUS Il (581-7, asda, v2 1)
jin thaapee biDh jaanai so-ee ki-aa ko kahai vakhaano.
The One who established the Universe, He alone knows the Way; what can anyone say?
fafs aa afy eatfeor ae A ATfos Us|Ts NAM (581-7, esdH, He 1) jin jag thaap vataa-i-aa jaalo so saahib parvaano. ||1||
The One who established the world cast the net of Maya over it; accept Him as your Lord and Master. ||1]||
aa nifemt 3 Sfs seat mao Ud I AATSST Il (581-8, esdH, He 1)
baabaa aa-i-aa hai uth chalnaa aDh panDhai hai sansaarovaa.
O Baba, he has come, and now he must get up and depart; this world is only a way- station.
fafs fafa Aes fofimr eu my uate Sede Il 81-8, esdz, v2 1)
sir sir sachrhai likhi-aa dukh sukh purab veechaarovaa.
Upon each and every head, the True Lord writes their destiny of pain and pleasure, according to their past actions.
eu AY dot Aa aor A fead Abort SS Il 81-9, esdu, He 1)
dukh sukh dee-aa jayhaa kee-aa so nibhai jee-a naalay.
He bestows pain and pleasure, according to the deeds done; the record of these deeds stays with the soul.
Ad AGH ATE ATS Ht ATT F I Il (581-9, esdH, v2 1)
jayhay karam karaa-ay kartaa doojee kaar na bhaalay.
He does those deeds which the Creator Lord causes him to do; he attempts no other actions.
uify foreu Ud adt afs Jan esteeTs Il (581-10, esdH, He 1)
aap niraalam DhanDhai baaDhee kar hukam chhadaavanhaaro.
The Lord Himself is detached, while the world is entangled in conflict; by His Command, He emancipates it.
mig af cater are fim er afte fearg QI (581-10, esd, 2 1)
aj kal kardi-aa kaal bi-aapai doojai bhaa-ay vikaaro. ||2| |
He may put this off today, but tomorrow he is seized by death; in love with duality, he practices corruption. ||2||
AH Hea Ue 3 Aset Css nig Taser Il (581-11, esdH, He 1) jam maarag panth na sujh-ee ujharh anDh gubaarovaa. The path of death is dark and dismal; the way cannot be seen.
OHS Se SHS a SsHo Uda Il (581-11, esdH, He 1) naa jal layf tulaa-ee-aa naa bhojan parkaarovaa. There is no water, no quilt or mattress, and no food there.
sno oC 5 Se urat BT aus Ales Il (581-12, esdH, He 1) bhojan bhaa-o na thandhaa paanee naa kaaparh seegaaro. He receives no food there, no honor or water, no clothes or decorations.
ae Hae fae we SS a CA we as Il (581-12, esdH, He 1)
gal sangal sir maaray oobhou naa deesai ghar baaro.
The chain is put around his neck, and the Messenger of Death standing over his head strikes him; he cannot see the door of his home.
fea a ad HHfs at ues ffs arg Il 581-13, eda, He 1)
ib kay raahay jamman naahee pachhutaanay sir bhaaro.
The seeds planted on this path do not sprout; bearing the weight of his sins upon his head, he regrets and repents.
fag APS & Sot owt ATS Sg Herd ISI (81-13, esd, He 1) bin saachay ko baylee naahee saachaa ayhu beechaaro. ||3]| Without the True Lord, no one is his friend; reflect upon this as true. ||3]|
we defo defo A Aeifs fife SS TE ASST I (581-14, esdH, He 1
baabaa roveh raveh so jaanee-ahi mil rovai gun saarayvaa.
O Baba, they alone are known to truly weep and wail, who meet together and weep, chanting the Praises of the Lord.
de Hfenr Host Gust GeSTSST Il (581-14, eSdH, He 1) rovai maa-i-aa muth-rhee DhanDh-rhaa rovanhaarayvaa. Defrauded by Maya and worldly affairs, the weepers weep.
dm de HG 3 Ue AUSSI AAS Il (581-15, 2sdH, v2 1)
DhanDhaa rovai mail na Dhovai supnantar sansaaro.
They weep for the sake of worldly affairs, and they do not wash off their own filth; the world is merely a dream.
fA@ antag SdH 38 Blo HOt nidarg Il (581-15, esdH, He 1)
ji-o baajeegar bharmai bhoolai jhooth muthee ahankaaro.
Like the juggler, deceiving by his tricks, one is deluded by egotism, falsehood and illusion.
MME HSA UTSSITS MMT ATH ANTE Il (581-15, 2sdH, v2 1) aapay maarag paavanhaaraa aapay karam kamaa-ay. The Lord Himself reveals the Path; He Himself is the Doer of deeds.
ony a3 afs us Ta asa ATA ASS III (8i-16, esdH, He 1D
naam ratay gur poorai raakhay naanak sahj subhaa-ay. ||4]|4]|
Those who are imbued with the Naam, are protected by the Perfect Guru, O Nanak; they merge in celestial bliss. ||4]|4]|
SSIA HIS Y Il (581-17)
vad-hans mehlaa 1. Wadahans, First Mehl:
we utfent 3 Cfs saat feg Aa SS UATE Il (581-17, esdz, Hs 1) baabaa aa-i-aa hai uth chalnaa ih jag jhooth pasaarovaa. O Baba, whoever has come, will rise up and leave; this world is merely a false show.
Hel wg Avs Ae Ay vat Afeniser il (581-17, esdH, He 1)
sachaa ghar sachrhai sayvee-ai sach kharaa sachi-aarovaa.
One's true home is obtained by serving the True Lord; real Truth is obtained by being truthful.
afs off at afte 3 wat vid BI 3 SS Il (81-18, esdH, He 1)
koorh lab jaa‘ thaa-ay na paasee agai lahai na thaa-o.
By falsehood and greed, no place of rest is found, and no place in the world hereafter is obtained.
nists ore 3 ang adhn fa He wis aE i Gsi-1s, esdH, He 1) antar aa-o na baishu kahee-ai ji-o sunjai ghar kaa-o. No one invites him to come in and sit down. He is like a crow in a deserted home.
HHE HIE Sa" Seat fHOA Aa ASS Il (81-19, esdH, v2 1)
jaman maran vadaa vaychhorhaa binsai jag sabaa-ay.
Trapped by birth and death, he is separated from the Lord for such a long time; the whole world is wasting away.
ofa co Hfeer Aas setter ae ya IMTS AL (581-19, esdH, we 1)
lab DhanDhai maa-i-aa jagat bhulaa-i-aa kaal kharhaa roo-aa-ay. ||1||
Greed, worldly entanglements and Maya deceive the world. Death hovers over its head, and causes it to weep. ||1]|
Ust uc2 wa niteg sete ate fos fife ffs to wit J i (582-1, esdH, ve 1)
baabaa aavhu bhaa-eeho gal milah mil mil dayh aaseesaa hay. Come, O Baba, and Siblings of Destiny - let's join together; take me in your arms, and bless me with your prayers.
wal Ava’ HG O gat UlSH Aho Sa MAT TI (582-2, esd, ne 1)
baabaa sachrhaa mayl na chuk-ee pareetam kee-aa dayh aseesaa hay.
O Baba, union with the True Lord cannot be broken; bless me with your prayers for union with my Beloved.
mrt ted sats aded firfeor at fom AS I (582-2, esdH, He 1)
aaseesaa dayvho bhagat karayvho mili-aa kaa ki-aa maylo.
Bless me with your prayers, that I may perform devotional worship service to my Lord; for those already united with Him, what is there to unite?
fefa 3% ateg Bog Teg Ts Aaet AY YS Il (582-3, esde, ws 1)
ik bhoolay naavhu thayhhu thaavhu gur sabdee sach khaylo.
Some have wandered away from the Name of the Lord, and lost the Path. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the true game.
AH Hata odt Ave" Rafe AHS afar Afar ATS SA (582-3, esdH, He 1)
jam maarag nahee jaanaa sabad samaanaa jug jug saachai vaysay.
Do not go on Death's path; remain merged in the Word of the Shabad, the true form throughout the ages.
AHS Ae fod Anat ae fife FS SA MQM (582-4, esda, He 1)
saajan sain milhu sanjogee gur mil kholay faasay. ||2||
Through good fortune, we meet such friends and relatives, who meet with the Guru, and escape the noose of Death. ||2]|
war staat otfent Aa Hfs ey AY By fearfEnr Il (582-4, esdu, He 1) baabaa naa‘grhaa aa-i-aa jag meh dukh sukh laykh likhaa-i-aa. O Baba, we come into the world naked, into pain and pleasure, according to the
record of our account.
fof Aro at 28 Aga usta aHfEnM Il (582-5, esdH, He 1)
likhi-arhaa saahaa naa talai jayhrhaa purab kamaa-i-aa.
The call of our pre-ordained destiny cannot be altered; it follows from our past actions.
afa Ard fatter nifigs fatter fas ofeor fsa oar Il (582-5, sada, ne 1)
bahi saachai likhi-aa amrit bikhi-aa jit laa-i-aa tit laagaa.
The True Lord sits and writes of ambrosial nectar, and bitter poison; as the Lord attaches us, so are we attached.
anfenrdt ane ue ag gait afe Star Il (582-6, esdH, He 1)
kamani-aaree kaaman paa-ay baho rangee gal taagaa.
The Charmer, Maya, has worked her charms, and the multi-colored thread is around everyone's neck.
dat ufs sfeur ue det aS AT Het afer th 582-7, esd, He 1)
hochhee mat bha-i-aa man hochhaa gurh saa makhee khaa-i-aa.
Through shallow intellect, the mind becomes shallow, and one eats the fly, along with the sweets.
oO Hoare oifenr afs stsfe ota dfa verfenr Sil (582-7, eda, He 1)
naa marjaad aa-i-aa kal bheetar naa‘go banDh chalaa-i-aa. ||3]| Contrary to custom, he comes into the Dark Age of Kali Yuga naked, and naked he is bound down and sent away again. ||3]||
wa deg A fan deat worst fo user FT Il 6582-8, esda, He 1) baabaa rovhu jay kisai rovnaa jaanee-arhaa banDh pathaa-i-aa hai. O Baba, weep and mourn if you must; the beloved soul is bound and driven off.
fof Su o Achat efe Tergat wrfenr FT Il (582-8, eda, He 1)
likhi-arhaa laykh na maytee-ai dar haakaararhaa aa-i-aa hai.
The pre-ordained record of destiny cannot be erased; the summons has come from the Lord's Court.
vars nitfenr a fsa afeor gs IzeTS Il (582-9, esdH, v2 1) haakaaraa aa-i-aa jaa tis bhaa-i-aa runnay rovanhaaray. The messenger comes, when it pleases the Lord, and the mourners begin to mourn.
us set ath defo ute mifs fins Il (582-9, edu, ve 1) put bhaa-ee bhaateejay roveh pareetam at pi-aaray. Sons, brothers, nephews and very dear friends weep and wail.
3 d2 qe Ata ANS a Hd 5 HfEMr BS I (582-10, asda, He 1)
bhai rovai gun saar samaalay ko marai na mu-i-aa naalay.
Let him weep, who weeps in the Fear of God, cherishing the virtues of God. No one dies with the dead.
Soa Ha Afar AS fare defy AY AHS IINUI (582-10, esdH, He 1)
naanak jug jug jaan sijaanaa roveh sach samaalay. ||4]||5||
O Nanak, throughout the ages, they are known as wise, who weep, remembering the True Lord. ||4]|5||
ZSdH HIS 3 HIST SH (582-12)
vad-hans mehlaa 3 mehlaa teejaa Wadahans, Third Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE Il (582-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
us Ava ofa Aedhba arse Ag fxs ATE AT Il (582-13, esdu, ve 3) parabh sachrhaa har salaahee-ai kaaraj sabh kichh karnai jog. Praise God, the True Lord; He is all-powerful to do all things.
AT Us 33 8 Gag SAet F ae FS AT Il (582-13, asda, vs 3) saa Dhan rand na kabhoo bais-ee naa kaday hovai sog. The soul-bride shall never be a widow, and she shall never have to endure suffering.
ys
o ae de Ad wales JA Sal AT US Hole AHet Il (582-14, esdH, He 3)
naa kaday hovai sog an-din ras bhog saa Dhan mahal samaanee.
She shall never suffer - night and day, she enjoys pleasures; that soul-bride merges in the Mansion of her Lord's Presence.
fafs fy@ ast aon feast 8S wifigs aret i (582-14, esdz, us 3)
jin pari-o jaataa karam biDhaataa bolay amrit banee.
She knows her Beloved, the Architect of karma, and she speaks words of ambrosial sweetness.
Tesh qe Asfs wus as AHTafs ot ae Bal feria il (582-15, esdH, He 3) gunvantee-aa gun saareh apnay kant samaaleh naa kaday lagai vijogo.
The virtuous soul-brides dwell on the Lord's virtues; they keep their Husband Lord in their remembrance, and so they never suffer separation from Him.
Hest fug Word As fas Ade Aa AU (582-15, esdH, He 3) sachrhaa pir salaahee-ai sabh kichh karnai jogo. ||1|| So praise your True Husband Lord, who is all-powerful to do all things. ||1]|
Rust Afoa Rafe uereha mm we fare | (582-16, esdH, He 3)
sachrhaa saahib sabad pachhaanee-ai aapay la-ay milaa-ay.
The True Lord and Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad; He blends all with Himself.
AT ue finn & dfar ast feag mmy TSS Il (582-16, esd, He 3)
saa Dhan pari-a kai rang ratee vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
That soul-bride is imbued with the Love of her Husband Lord, who banishes her self- conceit from within.
feud nig ae fefs ae o we aonfa Sat AST II (582-17, sda, He 3)
vichahu aap gavaa-ay fir kaal na khaa-ay gurmukh ayko jaataa.
Eradicating her ego from within herself, death shall not consume her again; as Gurmukh, she knows the One Lord God.
anfs fee vot nists feat fifeor varies BST Il (582-18, esdH, He 3)
kaaman ichh punnee antar bhinnee mili-aa jagjeevan daataa.
The desire of the soul-bride is fulfilled; deep within herself, she is drenched in His Love. She meets the Great Giver, the Life of the World.
Hae dfa ast wate west fue & nif ANTES II (582-18, esd, 2 3)
sabad rang raatee joban maatee pir kai ank samaa-ay.
Imbued with love for the Shabad, she is like a youth intoxicated; she merges into the very being of her Husband Lord.
Hust Afoe Aafe uerehat mm we feOS II (582-19, esdH, H2 3)
sachrhaa saahib sabad pachhaanee-ai aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||2||
The True Lord Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad. He blends all with Himself. ||2| |
frat wruet xy ustfent 3G fe ue AST AS Il (582-19, esdH, Hs 3) jinee aapnaa kant pachhaani-aa ha-o tin poochha-o santaa jaa-ay. Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him.
UST ucs
ny fs Aet adt fus Ava fs AofA ASS I 583-1, asda, He 3)
aap chhod sayvaa karee pir sachrhaa milai sahj subhaa-ay.
Renouncing ego, I serve them; thus I meet my True Husband Lord, with intuitive ease.
fug Ao fe ore wre ane ate Aafe os TST Il (583-1, esd, He 3) pir sachaa milai aa-ay saach kamaa-ay saach sabad Dhan raatee.
The True Husband Lord comes to meet the soul-bride who practices Truth, and is imbued with the True Word of the Shabad.
ae 3 dis Ae Aoafe nists AGA AHH Il (583-2, esdH, HH: 3)
kaday na raa‘d sadaa sohagan antar sahj samaaDhee.
She shall never become a widow; she shall always be a happy bride. Deep within herself, she dwells in the celestial bliss of Samaadhi.
fug sfoor gsaus Sy Jes IT HE Aol ASS Il (583-2, edu, ve 3)
pir rahi-aa bharpooray vaykh hadooray rang maanay sahj subhaa-ay.
Her Husband Lord is fully pervading everywhere; beholding Him ever-present, she enjoys His Love, with intuitive ease.
frat wruet ty ustfent a@ fo us AST AS SII (583-3, edn, He 3) jinee aapnaa kant pachhaani-aa ha-o tin poochha-o santaa jaa-ay. ||3]|| Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him.
1311 fuss fedotor st frog A Afsad ward AS UES Il (583-4, eadH, He 3)
pirahu vichhunnee-aa bhee milah jay satgur laagah saachay paa-ay. The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the Feet of the True Guru.
Afsag Het efenre J nieae wate AES Il (583-4, esdH, He 3)
satgur sadaa da-i-aal hai avgun sabad jalaa-ay.
The True Guru is forever merciful; through the Word of His Shabad, demerits are burnt away.
wigae Hate ASS eA aS aes AG dt Afe TST Il (583-5, esdH, He 3)
a-ogun sabad jalaa-ay doojaa bhaa-o gavaa-ay sachay hee sach raatee.
Burning away her demerits through the Shabad, the soul-bride eradicates her love of duality, and remains absorbed in the True, True Lord.
Ae Aafe Ae AY ufeor TEN Tet sarSHt Il (583-5, asda, He 3)
sachai sabad sadaa sukh paa-i-aa ha-umai ga-ee bharaatee.
Through the True Shabad, everlasting peace is obtained, and egotism and doubt are dispelled.
fug fosnHfes Ae Hues Boa Hate fare il (583-6, esdu, v2 3)
pir nirmaa-il sadaa sukh-daata naanak sabad milaa-ay.
The Immaculate Husband Lord is forever the Giver of peace; O Nanak, through the Word of His Shabad, He is met.
fuss fedsinr st feos A Afsas wars AS US IIA (583-7, esdH, He 3)
pirahu vichhunnee-aa bhee milah jay satgur laagah saachay paa-ay. ||4]||1]||
The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the feet of the True Guru. ||4]|1]|
SSH HIS 3 Ill (583-7)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Afsuig as Hoste fue Afeg Aafe tes i 583-7, esdH, He 3)
suni-ahu kant mahayleeho pir sayvihu sabad veechaar.
Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad.
nigdecst fug o weet Hot de a3 ferfa il (583-3, esdH, He 3)
avganvantee pir na jaan-ee muthee rovai kant visaar.
The worthless bride does not know her Husband Lord - she is deluded; forgetting her Husband Lord, she weeps and wails.
de az Ante Ae Te Ate o fug Hd B WE Il (583-8, esdH, He 3)
rovai kant sammaal sadaa gun saar naa pir marai na jaa-ay.
She weeps, thinking of her Husband Lord, and she cherishes His virtues; her Husband Lord does not die, and does not leave.
qoufa ast Aafe uerst Ars Ufe ANTS II (583-9, esdq, He 3)
gurmukh jaataa sabad pachhaataa saachai paraym samaa-ay.
As Gurmukh, she knows the Lord; through the Word of His Shabad, He is realized; through True Love, she merges with Him.
fafe »ruer fug odt ast agH faorst af Hot afsurd I 683-9, esdq, H2 3)
jin apnaa pir nahee jaataa karam biDhaataa koorh muthee koorhi-aaray.
She who does not know her Husband Lord, the Architect of karma, is deluded by falsehood - she herself is false.
Afsuig as Hoste fue Afeg Aafe Stes |All (583-10, esd, v2 3)
suni-ahu kant mahayleeho pir sayvihu sabad veechaaray. ||1||
Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad. ||1]|
Ag wa orf GurfeGe ures AWS AAT Il (583-11, 23dH, He 3) sabh jag aap upaa-i-on aavan jaan sansaaraa. He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes.
Hear Hg uorfens Hfe HH Sts SST Il (583-11, esdH, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh khu-aa-i-an mar jammai vaaro vaaraa.
The love of Maya has ruined the world; people die, to be re-born, over and over again.
dfs HH ed erat zufa fears famras feget Het Il (583-12, esdH, He 3)
mar jammai vaaro vaaraa vaDheh bikaaraa gi-aan vihoonee moothee.
People die to be re-born, over and over again, while their sins increase; without spiritual wisdom, they are deluded.
fag Fae fug o utes Aon Teves se nreaqfenrst Bat I (583-12, esd, 3 3)
bin sabdai pir na paa-i-o janam gavaa-i-o rovai avguni-aaree jhoothee.
Without the Word of the Shabad, the Husband Lord is not found; the worthless, false bride wastes her life away, weeping and wailing.
fug wales fan 6 dent de as fers Il (583-13, esdq, He 3)
pir jagjeevan kis no ro-ee-ai rovai kant visaaray.
He is my Beloved Husband Lord, the Life of the World - for whom should I weep? They alone weep, who forget their Husband Lord.
Ag Aa orf GurfeGe ree We AAS MQM (583-14, esdH, He 3) sabh jag aap upaa-i-on aavan jaan sansaaray. ||2|| He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes. ||2||
A fug net Ae dt wet gd ot Gg He BAS Il (583-14, esdH, He 3) So pir sachaa sad hee saachaa hai naa oh marai na jaa-ay. That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave.
got fed us fenreior Fs 8st SA TS I (583-15, essa, 3 3)
bhoolee firai Dhan i-aanee-aa rand baithee doojai bhaa-ay.
The ignorant soul-bride wanders in delusion; in the love of duality, she sits like a widow.
3s Bot eH TS Hfeur fs gy ure yrs we 3q SIA Il (583-15, esdH, Hs 3)
rand baithee doojai bhaa-ay maa-i-aa mohi dukh paa-ay aav ghatai tan chheejai. She sits like a widow, in the love of duality; through emotional attachment to Maya, she suffers in pain. She is growing old, and her body is withering away.
A fag urfenr Ag fag AA ey oer ote A Il (583-16, esd, Hs 3)
jo kichh aa-i-aa sabh kichh jaasee dukh laagaa bhaa-ay doojai.
Whatever has come, all that shall pass away; through the love of duality, they suffer in pain.
THUS 3 AS Went Ag OS ofa Bs fez we Il (583-16, esdH, we 3)
jamkaal na soojhai maa-i-aa jag loojhai lab lobh chit laa-ay.
They do not see the Messenger of Death; they long for Maya, and their consciousness is attached to greed.
A fug wet we dt ret of Go He 3 WES ISI (583-17, esdH, He 3) SO pir saachaa sad hee saachaa naa oh marai na jaa-ay. ||3]| That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave.
[131 fefa defo fusfs fedotor nidt ar wre furs oS I (583-17, 2sdH, He 3)
ik roveh pireh vichhunnee-aa anDhee naa jaanai pir naalay. Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them.
ae usAet Aro furs fs wists WET ANTS Il (583-18, esdH, He 3)
gur parsaadee saachaa pir milai antar sadaa samaalay.
By Guru's Grace, they may meet with their True Husband, and cherish Him always deep within.
fug nists AHS Ae d aS HOHfe AST ET I (583-18, esdz, Hs 3)
pir antar samaalay sadaa hai naalay manmukh jaataa dooray.
She cherishes her Husband deep within herself - He is always with her; the self-willed manmukhs think that He is far away.
fey 36 38 gorfeur ath 3 nrfenr fats WAH o AST TET Il (583-19, esdH, we 3)
ih tan rulai rulaa-i-aa kaam na aa-i-aa jin khasam na jaataa hadooray.
This body rolls in the dust, and is totally useless; it does not realize the Presence of the Lord and Master.
UST UcCY
Soa AT US fxs feoret fug nists Wet ANTS Il (584-1, esdH, He 3)
naanak saa Dhan milai milaa-ee pir antar sadaa samaalay.
O Nanak, that soul-bride is united in Union; she cherishes her Beloved Husband forever, deep within herself.
fefa defo fusfs fedotur nidt 5 AS fug J oS SII (84-1, esdH, He 3)
ik roveh pireh vichhunnee-aa anDhee na jaanai pir hai naalay. ||4||2||
Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them. ||4]|2]|
SdH Hs 3 Il (584-2)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
defo fusfs fedotor H fug AEST DT Het BS Il (584-2, esdH, He 3)
roveh pireh vichhunnee-aa mai pir sachrhaa hai sadaa naalay.
Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me.
frat see At Wheor Afsag Aefs SH AHS Il (584-3, eadH, He 3)
jinee chalan sahee jaani-aa satgur sayveh naam samaalay.
Those who know that they must depart, serve the True Guru, and dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hel oH AHS Afsagd J ae Afsag Afe we ufeMr | (584-3, esd, He 3)
sadaa naam samaalay satgur hai naalay satgur sayv sukh paa-i-aa.
They dwell constantly upon the Naam, and the True Guru is with them; they serve the True Guru, and so obtain peace.
Rae ae uifa AY Cfe ots fefe ures we o dfeur I (584-4, esdx, ne 3)
sabday kaal maar sach ur Dhaar fir aavan jaan na ho-i-aa.
Through the Shabad, they kill death, and enshrine the True Lord within their hearts; they shall not have to come and go again.
Re Afog At set Su Sets fogs Il (584-4, esdH, v2 3)
sachaa saahib sachee naa-ee vaykhai nadar nihaalay.
True is the Lord and Master, and True is His Name; bestowing His Gracious Glance, one is enraptured.
defa fuss feesior H fug AVS T AST BS INA (584-5, esdH, He 3)
roveh pirahu vichhunnee-aa mai pir sachrhaa hai sadaa naalay. ||1]||
Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me. ||1]|
yg He Afog AST Gerd fee fot utsH filmed I (84-6, edn, v2 3) parabh mayraa saahib sabh doo oochaa hai kiv milaa‘ pareetam pi-aaray. God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved?
Afsafe Hat 3t Aofa frat fus ahr Sa wes Il (584-6, esdu, He 3)
satgur maylee taa™ sahj milee pir raakhi-aa ur Dhaaray.
When the True Guru united me, then I was naturally united with my Husband Lord, and now, I keep Him clasped to my heart.
Ret Gg urd og ate fimrd Afsas 3 fug fer I 6284-7, asda, He 3)
sadaa ur Dhaaray nayhu naal pi-aaray satgur tay pir disai.
I constantly, lovingly cherish my Beloved within my heart; through the True Guru, I see my Beloved.
Hho Ho at ae der fsa Uo ua far II (584-7, esd, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh kaa kachaa cholaa tit paiDhai pag khisai. The cloak of Maya's love is false; wearing it, one slips and loses his footing.
fus df ast A Het sor fas ut for foes II (584-8, esdH, He 3)
pir rang raataa so sachaa cholaa tit paiDhai tikhaa nivaaray.
That cloak is true, which is dyed in the color of the Love of my Beloved; wearing it, my inner thirst is quenched.
yg He Afeg AS = Gord fas fer utsH flrs 12H (584-8, eda, v8 3) parabh mayraa saahib sabh doo oochaa hai ki-o milaa pareetam pi-aaray. ||2|| God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved?
121] H ug Ag ustent da got nizafenrs i (584-9, edn, ws 3)
mai parabh sach pachhaani-aa hor bhoolee avgani-aaray. I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray.
H Ae ae fug nue Aes Aafe Stes Il (584-9, asda, He 3)
mai sadaa raavay pir aapnaa sachrhai sabad veechaaray.
I dwell constantly upon my Beloved Husband Lord, and reflect upon the True Word of the Shabad.
Ae Rafe atod df wat ord fife afsas utsy urfemr it (584-10, esdu, ve 3)
sachai sabad veechaaray rang raatee naaray mil satgur pareetam paa-i-aa.
The bride reflects upon the True Shabad, and is imbued with His Love; she meets with the True Guru, and finds her Beloved.
nists sft ast Aon Hest afeor sAHG Ty AafeMr Il (584-11, esdH, Hs 3)
antar rang raatee sehjay maatee ga-i-aa dusman dookh sabaa-i-aa.
Deep within, she is imbued with His Love, and intoxicated with delight; her enemies and sufferings are all taken away.
MUS TI AS 3q Ho UA St He sta RAS su fees i (584-11, sda, we 3)
apnay gur ka’-u tan man deejai taa” man bheejai tarisnaa dookh nivaaray. Surrender body and soul to your Guru, and then you shall become happy; your thirst and pain shall be taken away.
H fug Ag ustfenr da gat wafers SI (584-12, esde, we 3) mai pir sach pachhaani-aa hor bhoolee avgani-aaray. ||3]| I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray.
[I3I|
Res orfu wars Gurfeur as fae urs niord i (584-13, esdu, v2 3)
sachrhai aap jagat upaa-i-aa gur bin ghor anDhaaro.
The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
nifu frre wrfy fs nm efe fimird i (6584-13, esdx, He 3)
aap milaa-ay aap milai aapay day-ay pi-aaro.
He Himself unites, and causes us to unite with Him; He Himself blesses us with His Love.
nm efe fumird Hofa erurd Taft HOH ASS Il (584-14, esdH, He 3)
aapay day-ay pi-aaro sahj vaapaaro gurmukh janam savaaray.
He Himself blesses us with His Love, and deals in celestial peace; the life of the Gurmukh is reformed.
U6 Aa Hfs wrfeor wry aetfenr efs Ars Afemrd I (584-14, esdH, He 3)
Dhan jag meh aa-i-aa aap gavaa-i-aa dar saachai sachi-aaro.
Blessed is his coming into the world; he banishes his self-conceit, and is acclaimed as true in the Court of the True Lord.
fomrfs asfs wie wae dnt area am fimird Il (584-15, esd, He 3)
gi-aan ratan ghat chaanan ho-aa naanak naam pi-aaro.
The light of the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines within his heart, O Nanak, and he loves the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Res orfy nas Gourfeur ae fae urs niard eiSil (584-15, esdH, He 3)
sachrhai aap jagat upaa-i-aa gur bin ghor anDhaaro. ||4|[3]|
The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. ||4||3]|
SSIA HIS 3B Il (584-16)
vad-hans mehlaa 3. Wadahans, Third Mehl:
feg Adlg Andt do fen 3 AE UTE MTS II 584-16, esd, He 3) ih sareer jajree hai is no jar pahuchai aa-ay. This body is frail; old age is overtaking it.
af aa A Gad dg Hfe AH mS AS IN (584-17, edu, He 3)
gur raakhay say ubray hor mar jammai aavai jaa-ay.
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going.
dfs ufa aHfo wrefs wefs nifs ae uesets fae oe AY o det Il (584-17, esd, He 3) hor mar jameh aavahi jaaveh ant ga-ay pachhutaavahi bin naavai sukh na ho-ee. Others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going, and in the end, they depart regretfully. Without the Name, there is no peace.
Me OHS ASS uve Hone d ufs vet Il (584-18, esdq, 2 3)
aithai kamaavai so fal paavai manmukh hai pat kho-ee.
As one acts here, so does he obtain his rewards; the self-willed manmukh loses his honor.
an ufs ug ving Ho Tag o fsa SEB SSH I (584-18, esdH, He 3)
jam pur ghor anDhaar mahaa gubaar naa tithai bhain na bhaa-ee.
In the City of Death, there is pitch darkness, and huge clouds of dust; neither sister nor brother is there.
feg Adlg Andt dD fen 3 AE UTS MITT NAN (584-19, esdH, He 3) ih sareer jajree hai is no jar pahuchai aa-ee. ||1]|| This body is frail; old age is overtaking it. ||1]|
afent ave st dba at afsag we fore Il (584-19, exda, He 3) kaa-i-aa kanchan taa™ thee-ai jaa” satgur la-ay milaa-ay. The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself.
Uar uty 3H wfeur feag achat Aes oth AHS II (585-1, esdH, He 3)
bharam maa-i-aa vichahu katee-ai sachrhai naam samaa-ay. Doubt and Maya have been removed from within me, and I am merged in the Naam, the True Name of the Lord.
Ae of mye ufs ae ae fife uisn AY Ue II 685-1, esdz, He 3)
sachai naam samaa-ay har gun gaa-ay mil pareetam sukh paa-ay.
Merged in the True Name of the Lord, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; meeting my Beloved, I have found peace.
Ret nate ad feg ast fees SCH We Il (585-2, esda, He 3) sadaa anand rahai din raatee vichahu ha‘-umai jaa-ay. I am in constant bliss, day and night; egotism has been dispelled from within me.
frat usdt off oft fos ofeur fo a JO oa ue It 585-2, asda, 2 3) jinee purkhee har naam chit laa-i-aa tin kai ha‘-u laaga-o paa-ay.
I fall at the feet of those who enshrine the Naam within their consciousness. aifenr ave at dba at Afsag we foe IQH (585-3, esda, He 3)
kaa’-i-aa kanchan taa™ thee-ai jaa satgur la-ay milaa-ay. ||2|| The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself. ||2] |
HAD Ay Aodht A Afsag ef ges I (585-4, esda, He 3) so sachaa sach salaahee-ai jay satgur day-ay bujhaa-ay. We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding.
faa Afsas soft sereior fomr yo SAPS wre WES Il (585-4, esd, He 3)
bin satgur bharam bhulaanee-aa ki-aa muhu daysan aagai jaa-ay.
Without the True Guru, they are deluded by doubt; going to the world hereafter, what face will they display?
for efs ug We nieafs use Sa SY ANTS Il (585-5, esdH, He 3)
ki-aa dayn muhu jaa-ay avgun pachhutaa-ay dukho dukh kamaa-ay.
What face will they show, when they go there? They will regret and repent for their sins; their actions will bring them only pain and suffering.
ony aston A dfar weer furs & nifor AHS II (585-5, eadH, He 3)
naam ratee-aa say rang chaloolaa pir kai ank samaa-ay.
Those who are imbued with the Naam are dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love; they merge into the Being of their Husband Lord.
SH AES vied 5 ASST few vrat ad AES Il (585-6, sda, we 3)
tis jayvad avar na soojh-ee kis aagai kahee-ai jaa-ay. I can conceive of no other as great as the Lord; unto whom should I go and speak?
AH AU Ay Ao A Afsag Sf gee ISI 685-6, esdH, He 3) so sachaa sach salaahee-ai jay satgur day-ay bujhaa-ay. ||3]| We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding. ||3]|
fast Avast AY Aefoor JC fe ware urs Il 585-7, esd, v2 3) jinee sachrhaa sach sahaali-aa ha'-u tin laaga-o paa-ay. I fall at the feet of those who praise the Truest of the True.
A Ho Ad fodHe 36 fifeur He AS AS I 6585-7, esdH, He 3)
say jan sachay nirmalay tin mili-aa mal sabh jaa-ay.
Those humble beings are true, and immaculately pure; meeting them, all filth is washed off.
fso fufeor He AS We AS Afs oS Ad Agfa ASS Il (585-8, esdH, He 3)
tin mili-aa mal sabh jaa-ay sachai sar naa-ay sachai sahj subhaa-ay.
Meeting them, all filth is washed off; bathing in the Pool of Truth, one becomes truthful, with intuitive ease.
on fadae wan vided Afsafe dorm gee Ih (585-9, esdu, He 3)
naam niranjan agam agochar satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay.
The True Guru has given me the realization of the Naam, the Immaculate Name of the Lord, the unfathomable, the imperceptible.
woes sats acts sft aS Sta Afs ANTES Il (585-9, 2sdH, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahi rang raatay naanak sach samaa-ay.
Those who perform devotional worship to the Lord night and day, are imbued with His Love; O Nanak, they are absorbed in the True Lord.
fot Avs Ag fomrfeor JS fsa a wa ues igisil 585-10, esdH, He 3) jinee sachrhaa sach Dhi-aa-i-aa ha‘-u tin kai laaga-o paa-ay. ||4||4]| I fall at the feet of those who meditate on the Truest of the True. ||4||4]|
SIA At VS HIS 8 Bat gost at fe areat (585-11)
vad-hans kee vaar mehlaa 4 lalaa’ behleemaa kee Dhun gaavnee Vaar Of Wadahans, Fourth Mehl: To Be Sung In The Tune Of Lalaa-Behleemaa:
qe Afsare YATE Il (585-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa H8 3 Il (585-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Rafe g3 es JAD AG on fa OTe I (585-12, eada, He 3)
sabad ratay vad hans hai sach naam ur Dhaar.
The great swans are imbued with the Word of the Shabad; they enshrine the True Name within their hearts.
Ag Hqufa Ae Afs safe AS oty fimrfa ii (585-12, esdq, ne 3) sach sangr-hahi sad sach raheh sachai naam pi-aar. They gather Truth, remain always in Truth, and love the True Name.
He fesHe HS 3 Baet oefe atst aes I (585-13, esdH, He 3)
sadaa nirmal mail na lag-ee nadar keetee kartaar.
They are always pure and immaculate - filth does not touch them; they are blessed with the Grace of the Creator Lord.
Sod JC fsa a afaage A uiofes Aufs Hate IAI (585-13, esdH, He 3) naanak ha-o tin kai balihaarnai jo an-din jaapeh muraar. ||1|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who, night and day, meditate on the Lord. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (585-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
H vfoor es dA STH aor Aa I (585-14, esdH, He 3) mai jaani-aa vad hans hai taa mai kee-aa sang. I thought that he was a great swan, so I associated with him.
A Fel ga sua 3 Aaty B Set wig NM (585-15, esdH, He 3)
jay jaanaa bag bapurhaa ta janam na daydee ang. ||2||
If I had known that he was only a wretched heron from birth, I would not have touched him. |[2||
He 2 Il (585-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
oA Sf sdfemr gat fe wor ar@ I (585-15, eadH, He 3) hansaa vaykh tarandi-aa bagaa™ bhe aa-yaa chaa-o. Seeing the swans swimming, the herons became envious.
sfa ue aa aus fg 3f% Gufs we Sil 685-16, esdH, He 3)
dub mu-ay bag bapurhay sir tal upar paa-o. ||3]|
But the poor herons drowned and died, and floated with their heads down, and their feet above. ||3]|
UBST Il (585-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 omy ot orfu orfu o orf arse afer I 85-16, esda, ue 3) too aapay hee aap aap hai aap kaaran kee-aa. You Yourself are Yourself, all by Yourself; You Yourself created the creation.
3 omy orfy fadarg Ft neg o Sher I (585-17, esda, we 3) too aapay aap nirankaar hai ko avar na bee-aa. You Yourself are Yourself the Formless Lord; there is no other than You.
3 ATE AIS AHI F J aad A SMT I (585-17, essa, ve 3) too karan kaaran samrath hai too karahi so thee-aa. You are the all-powerful Cause of causes; what You do, comes to be.
3 neHhfamr ag sear ABT Abo Il (585-17, esdH, He 3) too anmangi-aa daan dayvnaa sabhnaahaa jee-aa. You give gifts to all beings, without their asking.
Afs wag Afsag eo a0 fafe ae ate on ufe Sor A 85-18, sda, He 3)
sabh aakhahu satgur vaahu vaahu jin daan har naam mukh dee-aa. ||1]| Everyone proclaims, "Waaho! Waaho! Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has given the supreme gift of the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
UST ucEé
HOa H3 3 Il (586-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
3 fefs ng urarg J foss@ ofa MG AE I 86-1, esdu, He 3) bhai vich sabh aakaar hai nirbha-o har jee-o so-ay. The entire universe is in fear; only the Dear Lord is fearless.
Afsafe Afent ais ufs <A fsa sO ae o SE Il (586-1, asda, He 3)
satgur sayvi-ai har man vasai tithai bha-o kaday na ho-ay.
Serving the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and then, fear cannot stay there.
ZAHS vy fSn 3d Sfs 5 ure UfT 3 Aa ALE Il (586-2, esdH, H2 3)
dusman dukh tis no nayrh na aavai pohi na sakai ko-ay. Enemies and pain cannot come close, and no one can touch him.
aente ufs tofoor A faq ae FOOTE II (586-2, esdu, He 3)
gurmukh man veechaari-aa jo tis bhaavai so ho-ay.
The Gurmukh reflects upon the Lord in his mind; whatever pleases the Lord - that alone comes to pass.
Soa MM St ufs Tut aan Aes AE IA (586-3, esdH, He 3) naanak aapay hee pat rakhsee kaaraj savaaray so-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, He Himself preserves one's honor; He alone resolves our affairs. ||1]|-
He 3 Il (686-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fefa AME 3e fefa of Te soe st Sfs ATT II (536-3, esd, He 3)
ik sajan chalay ik chal ga-ay rahday bhee fun jaahi.
Some friends are leaving, some have already left, and those remaining will eventually leave.
frat Afsag 3 Afes A urfe Te uss Il (586-4, esdu, 2 3)
jinee satgur na sayvi-o say aa-ay ga-ay pachhutaahi.
Those who do not serve the True Guru, come and go regretting.
aoa Ald ds A 6 feests Afsag Afe ANAT NI (536-4, esdH, Hs 3)
naanak sach ratay say na vichhurheh satgur sayv samaahi. ||2]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to Truth are not separated; serving the True Guru, they merge into the Lord. ||2||
UuGSt II (586-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan fsbo afsaa Ane fan uists ofs aeardt Il (686-5, esdx, He 3)
tis milee-ai satgur sajnai jis antar har gunkaaree.
Meet with that True Guru, the True Friend, within whose mind the Lord, the virtuous One, abides.
fan first Afsas UISH fafs JOH fess Ht I (86-6, esdu, Hs 3) tis milee-ai satgur pareetamai jin ha‘-umai vichahu maaree. Meet with that Beloved True Guru, who has subdued ego from within himself.
A Afsdg us ug ue 3 ffs afs Suen @ As fAfy Herd I (586-6, esdz, v2 3)
so satgur pooraa Dhan Dhan hai jin har updays day sabh sarisat savaaree. Blessed, blessed is the Perfect True Guru, who has given the Lord's Teachings to reform the whole world.
fos afm H3g TH oH SCH@ fay set Il (5386-7, esdq, He 3)
nit japi-ahu santahu raam naam bha-ojal bikh taaree.
O Saints, meditate constantly on the Lord's Name, and cross over the terrifying, poisonous world-ocean.
afs us ofs Guethor aa fecfanig 3G Ae Set QI (586-7, esdH, 3 3) gur poorai har updaysi-aa gur vitrhi-ahu ha’-u sad vaaree. ||2|| The Perfect Guru has taught me about the Lord; I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru.
21
H8a H3 3 Il (586-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsad at Het wadt Wet TJ AY APS ll (586-8, esdH, Hs 3)
satgur kee sayvaa chaakree sukhee hoo” sukh saar. Service to, and obedience to the True Guru, is the essence of comfort and peace.
me fete efsnrdion waar He Enis Il (586-9, esdH, He 3) aithai milan vadi-aa-ee-aa dargeh mokh du-aar. Doing so, one obtains honor here, and the door of salvation in the Court of the Lord.
Ret as aHeat AY USS AY OH MOE I (586-9, esdH, He 3)
sachee kaar kamaavnee sach painan sach naam aDhaar.
In this way, perform the tasks of Truth, wear Truth, and take the Support of the True Name.
Ret Hafs vfs fxs AS ate fumrg i (586-10, esdu, ve 3) sachee sangat sach milai sachai naa-ay pi-aar. Associating with Truth, obtain Truth, and love the True Name.
Ae Aafe gay Het efe Ae Afenis Il (586-10, esdH, He 3)
sachai sabad harakh sadaa dar sachai sachiaar.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, be always happy, and you shall be acclaimed as True in the True Court.
sod Afsad at Aet A ad fHA 6 oefs Ad ATS NA (586-11, esdH, He 3)
naanak satgur kee sayvaa so karai jis no nadar karai kartaar. ||1]|
O Nanak, he alone serves the True Guru, whom the Creator has blessed with His Glance of Grace. ||1||
He 3 Il (586-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dd ferret wadt fon ates fog SA I (586-11, esdq, v8 3) hor vidaanee chaakree Dharig jeevan Dharig vaas. Cursed is the life, and cursed is the dwelling, of those who serve another.
nifys fs fay oat fry year fas fA II (586-12, esda, ne 3)
amrit chhod bikh lagay bikh khatnaa bikh raas.
Abandoning the Ambrosial Nectar, they turn to poison; they earn poison, and poison is their only wealth.
fry uvet fy Us|et fou & uf fararr Il (586-12, edu, He 3)
bikh khaanaa bikh painnaa bikh kay mukh giraas.
Poison is their food, and poison is their dress; they fill their mouths with morsels of poison.
me we wy aHear ufeur safe feera I (586-13, esdH, He 3) aithai dukho dukh kamaavanaa mu-i-aa narak nivaas. In this world, they earn only pain and suffering, and dying, they go to abide in hell.
HOHY Hfs HS Ase 3 West aH adie fey Il (586-13, esdH, He 3)
manmukh muhi mailai sabad na jaannee kaam karoDh vinaas.
The self-willed manmukhs have filthy faces; they do not know the Word of the Shabad; in sexual desire and anger they waste away.
Afsag a 38 efsur Houle ay 3 mre THA II (586-14, esdH, He 3)
satgur kaa bha-o chhodi-aa manhath kamm na aavai raas.
They forsake the Fear of the True Guru, and because of their stubborn ego, their efforts do not come to fruition.
an ufs sa Hdboafs & 3 AS MeSH I 586-14, esdH, He 3) jam pur baDhay maaree-ah ko na sunay ardaas. In the City of Death, they are bound and beaten, and no one hears their prayers.
oat usta fatto area aaHfe oth foerA MQM (586-15, esdH, He 3)
naanak poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa gurmukh naam nivaas. ||2]|
O Nanak, they act according to their pre-ordained destiny; the Gurmukh abides in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
UBST Il (586-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A Afsag Afeg Aa Ae fafs afe ofe ony feafemr I (586-16, esdz, 18 3)
so satgur sayvihu saaDh jan jin har har naam drirh-aa-i-aa.
Serve the True Guru, O Holy people; He implants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in our minds.
A Afsag ung feor ots fats Aeiovg Harel FefEnT II (586-16, esdH, Hs 3)
so satgur poojahu dinas raat jin jagannaath jagdees japaa-i-aa.
Worship the True Guru day and night; He leads us the meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Master of the Universe.
A Afsag tug fea fonu fouu fats ofs ot afe ug astfemr | (536-17, esdx, 2 3)
so satgur daykhhu ik nimakh nimakh jin har kaa har panth bataa-i-aa.
Behold the True Guru, each and every moment; He shows us the Divine Path of the Lord.
fsx Afsas at As ust ued fafe Ho nits vorfeur I (586-18, esdH, He 3)
tis satgur kee sabh pagee pavahu jin moh anDhayr chukaa-i-aa.
Let everyone fall at the feet of the True Guru; He has dispelled the darkness of emotional attachment.
H Asad avg Afs Us Ue fafo afe safs garg Safeor SI (586-18, esdH, He 3)
so satgur kahhu sabh Dhan Dhan jin har bhagat bhandaar lahaa-i-aa. ||3]||
Let everyone hail and praise the True Guru, who has led us to find the treasure of the Lord's devotional worship. ||3]|
HSE H2 3 Il (586-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsafe fife su aet Sut gu & ATE I 586-19, esdH, He 3)
satgur mili-ai bhukh ga-ee bhaykhee bhukh na jaa-ay.
Meeting with the True Guru, hunger departs; by wearing the robes of a beggar, hunger does not depart.
UST UCD ef aa wuts wife fed mat gat fre ARTE I (587-1, esdx, v3 3)
dukh lagai ghar ghar firai agai doonee milai sajaa-ay. Afflicted with pain, he wanders from house to house, and in the world hereafter, he receives double punishment.
wets Add o utes Aon dt B ute il (587-1, esde, v2 3) andar sahj na aa-i-o sehjay hee lai khaa-ay. Peace does not come to his heart - he is not content to eat what comes his way.
Houle fan 3 Haet Bat BY Hote Il (587-2, esdu, ve 3) manhath jis tay mangnaa lainaa dukh manaa-ay. With his stubborn mind, he begs, and grabs, and annoys those who give.
fen 34 aed faad sor frag & ZaATE Il (587-2, esdu, He 3)
is bhaykhai thaavhu girho bhalaa jithahu ko varsaa-ay.
Instead of wearing these beggar's robes, it is better to be a householder, and give to others.
Rafe 33 far ASt uet eA sath FHTES I (587-3, esdz, v3 3)
sabad ratay tinaa sojhee pa-ee doojai bharam bhulaa-ay.
Those who are attuned to the Word of the Shabad, acquire understanding; the others wander, deluded by doubt.
ufemt fasts azar aIet aE 3 ATE I (587-3, esd, v3 3) pa-i-ai kirat kamaavanaa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. They act according to their past actions; it is useless to talk to them.
soa A fsA sets A SS fas at ufs uefa aE AI (587-4, esdu, HH: 3) naanak jo tis bhaaveh say bhalay jin kee pat paavahi thaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, those who are pleasing unto the Lord are good; He upholds their honor.
[21|
He 3 Il (587-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsafe Afemt Wet AY HOH Hee SY ATE Il (587-4, esdH, He 3)
satgur sayvi-ai sadaa sukh janam maran dukh jaa-ay.
Serving the True Guru, one finds a lasting peace; the pains of birth and death are removed.
fas ufs o deat wifes ZA His orfe il (587-5, esda, ue 3) chintaa mool na hova-ee achint vasai man aa-ay. He is not troubled by anxiety, and the carefree Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
wists Stee famre 3 Afsate dor asfe it (587-5, esda, He 3)
antar tirath gi-aan hai satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay.
Deep within himself, is the sacred shrine of spiritual wisdom, revealed by the True Guru.
HS wet Ho feos dvr nifys Afs Stefa of= I (587-6, esdq, ve 3)
mail ga-ee man nirmal ho-aa amrit sar tirath naa-ay.
His filth is removed, and his soul becomes immaculately pure, bathing in the sacred shrine, the pool of Ambrosial Nectar.
Ave fos Ane AS Aafe ASE Il (5687-6, esdH, He 3)
sajan milay sajnaa sachai sabad subhaa-ay. The friend meets with the True Friend, the Lord, through the love of the Shabad.
we dt udet ufeur Ast APS flrerfe I 6587-7, esdH, He 3)
ghar hee parchaa paa-i-aa jotee jot milaa-ay.
Within the home of his own being, he finds the Divine Self, and his light blends with the Light.
undfs AHaTS o eset & at ufs gee ll 6587-7, asda, 2 3) pakhand jamkaal na chhod-ee lai jaasee pat gavaa-ay. The Messenger of Death does not leave the hypocrite; he is led away in dishonor.
Soa OTH Is A Cad Ad fAC fees STE QI (6687-8, esdu, He 3)
naanak naam ratay say ubray sachay si-o liv laa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are saved; they are in love with the True Lord. ||2]|
Uugat Il (587-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
faz wh sog AsHast fre afe a ofs on fase I (587-8, esd, v2 3)
tit jaa-ay bahhu satsangtee jithai har kaa har naam bilo-ee-ai.
Go, and sit in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the Name of the Lord is churned.
Hon ot ofa an 3g dfs 33 5 MEH Il (5387-9, eda, He 3) sehjay hee har naam layho har tat na kho-ee-ai. In peace and poise, contemplate the Lord's Name - don't lose the essence of the Lord.
fos vfumrg afs afs fear ofS ofs eaarg SEM I 587-9, esdH, He 3)
nit japi-ahu har har dinas raat har dargeh dhoo-ee-ai.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, constantly, day and night, and you shall be accepted in the Court of the Lord.
Aue ua Asay fan fe HASta fete festeint i (587-10, esdx, 2 3)
SO paa-ay pooraa satguroo jis Dhur mastak lilaat likho-ee-ai.
He alone finds the Perfect True Guru, on whose forehead such a pre-ordained destiny is written.
fH aa a vfs onnarg add fafo afe at of are TBEM Isl (587-10, esdH, v2 3) tis gur ka-u sabh namaskaar karahu jin har kee har gaal galo-ee-ai. ||4|| Let everyone bow in worship to the Guru, who utters the sermon of the Lord. ||4| |
HBa H8 3 Il (587-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Ane fuse Ane fae Asad ote flmrg il (587-11, esdH, He 3) sajan milay sajnaa jin satgur naal pi-aar. The friends who love the True Guru, meet with the Lord, the True Friend.
ffs utsu fat fourfenr AS Uft fimrg i 687-12, edz, Hi 3) mil pareetam tinee Dhi-aa-i-aa sachai paraym pi-aar. Meeting their Beloved, they meditate on the True Lord with love and affection.
Ho dt 3 HO Wout ag a Aafe wees Il (587-12, esd, H2 3)
man hee tay man maani-aa gur kai sabad apaar.
Their minds are appeased by their own minds, through the incomparable Word of the Guru's Shabad.
efs Ane fee 3 feests fa orfu AS ase I (587-13, edn, He 3)
ayhi sajan milay na vichhurheh je aap maylay kartaar.
These friends are united, and will not be separated again; they have been united by the Creator Lord Himself.
feast eaHo at ussifs o uireior Aafe 3 aafa Seg Il (587-13, esdH, He 3)
iknaa darsan kee parteet na aa-ee-aa sabad na karahi veechaar. Some do not believe in the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; they do not contemplate the Shabad.
fegfaor or four fees frat ea ate flmrg il (587-14, esda, H: 3) vichhurhi-aa kaa ki-aa vichhurhai jinaa doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar. The separated ones are in love with duality - what more separation can they suffer?
HOHY Ast eASt aafsur fea whe il (687-15, esdH, H: 3)
manmukh saytee dostee thorh-rhi-aa din chaar. Friendship with the self-willed manmukhs lasts for only a few short days.
fen udist szet feou 3 Jeet fs cast vate fear Il (587-15, edu, He 3) is pareetee tutdee vilam na hova-ee it dostee chalan vikaar. This friendship is broken in an instant; this friendship leads to corruption.
frat niefs AY at SC ardt ath o aafa fimrg Il (587-16, esdH, He 3) jinaa andar sachay kaa bha-o naahee naam na karahi pi-aar. They do not fear the True Lord within their hearts, and they do not love the Naam.
sod fsa fAG fomr ote cast fa urfu sere agate Al (587-16, esdH, He 3) naanak tin si-o ki-aa keechai dostee je aap bhulaa-ay kartaar. ||1]|| O Nanak, why become friends with those whom the Creator Lord Himself has misled?
[2
Hs 3 Il (87-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fefa net feas dfa safo fsa a 3G Ae Sfeos WE II (587-17, esdu, He 3) ik sadaa iktai rang raheh tin kai ha-o sad balihaarai jaa-o. Some remain constantly imbued with the Lord's Love; I am forever a sacrifice to them.
36 HO US maut fSe ae fate fate wae ute il (587-18, esd, 2 3) tan man Dhan arpee tin ka-o niv niv laaga-o paa-ay. I dedicate my mind, soul and wealth to them; bowing low, I fall at their feet.
fo fufeor He Hsdba fanart gu AS ATE I (587-18, esdq, He 3) tin mili-aa man santokhee-ai tarisnaa bhukh sabh jaa-ay. Meeting them, the soul is satisfied, and one's hunger and thirst all depart.
aoa otH gs Aue Ae Ad fAE fee STE NII 687-19, zadH, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sukhee-ay sadaa sachay si-o liv laa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are happy forever; they lovingly focus their minds on the True Lord. ||2||
UugST Il (587-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan ad a@ 38 atenr fats afs at afs aar ASST Il (587-19, ada, He 3) tis gur ka-o ha-o vaari-aa jin har kee har kathaa sunaa-ee. I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who recites the sermon of the Lord's Teachings.
Ua utt fSH ad aG Ae afsoge fafs ofs AST ges Taret Il (588-1, esdH, He 3)
tis gur ka-o sad balihaarnai jin har sayvaa banat banaa-ee. I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru, who has led me to serve the Lord.
A Afsag flmre ve of o fra faa HS we sare Il (588-2, esdH, He 3) so satgur pi-aaraa mayrai naal hai jithai kithai maino la-ay chhadaa-ee. That Beloved True Guru is always with me; wherever I may be, He will save me.
fan as a@ wrenh 3 fafo ofs ASt ust Il (588-2, esdq, H: 3) tis gur ka-o saabaas hai jin har sojhee paa-ee. Most blessed is that Guru, who imparts understanding of the Lord.
Soa We fee afonr fate ofa oH tt As HS at MTA USTET IUIl (588-3, esdH, He 3) naanak gur vitahu vaari-aa jin har naam dee-aa mayray man kee aas puraa-ee. ||5|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has given me the Lord's Name, and fulfilled the desires of my mind. ||5]|
HBa He 3 Il (588-4)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fgAo at afs Het vfs ale ad uae Il (588-4, adn, ue 3)
tarisnaa daaDhee jal mu-ee jal jal karay pukaar.
Consumed by desires, the world is burning and dying; burning and burning, it cries out.
Afsas Atse A fe fee AS 3 Ht Se Il 88-4, esdH, He 3) satgur seetal jay milai fir jalai na doojee vaar. But if it meets with the cooling and soothing True Guru, it does not burn any longer.
ood fee are fags@ a odt favg Aafe 3 ad Seg NU (588-5, esdH, He 3)
naanak vin naavai nirbha-o ko nahee jichar sabad na karay veechaar. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the Name, and without contemplating the Word of the Shabad, no one becomes fearless. ||1]|
He 8 Il (88-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
sut mate 3 aset fost I Ho Hf I (588-5, 2sdH, He 3)
bhaykhee agan na bujh-ee chintaa hai man maahi.
Wearing ceremonial robes, the fire is not quenched, and the mind is filled with anxiety.
cot ut Au o Hd f3E ford AGH oorfs Il (688-6, zsdH, He 3)
varmee maaree saap na marai ti-o niguray karam kamaahi.
Destroying the snake's hole, the snake is not killed; it is just like doing deeds without a Guru.
Afsag wat Adm Age ZA fs wMfe I (588-6, esdH, He 3) satgur daataa sayvee-ai sabad vasai man aa-ay. Serving the Giver, the True Guru, the Shabad comes to abide in the mind.
He 30 Alse AS of feAo raise gste i (588-7, esdu, Hs 3)
man tan seetal saat ho-ay tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ay.
The mind and body are cooled and soothed; peace ensues, and the fire of desire is quenched.
Ret fafs Fet AY df wt fees mre Tete i (588-7, esdq, ne 3)
sukhaa sir sadaa sukh ho-ay jaa vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
The supreme comforts and lasting peace are obtained, when one eradicates ego from within.
aenfy Gent A ad fa Afs od fos Of I 688-8, esdH, He 3)
gurmukh udaasee so karay je sach rahai liv laa-ay.
He alone becomes a detached Gurmukh, who lovingly focuses his consciousness on the True Lord.
fos fe o deat ofa oth sar mrurfe i (588-8, esd, m2 3)
chintaa mool na hova-ee har naam rajaa aaghaa-ay.
Anxiety does not affect him at all; he is satisfied and satiated with the Name of the Lord.
aed oH fast sa seit IBH usta use iil (sss-9, esda, we 3) naanak naam binaa nah chhootee-ai ha-umai pacheh pachaa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, without the Naam, no one is saved; they are utterly ruined by egotism. ||2]|
Uugat Il (588-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
frat ofa af on famrfenr fsat ufenis Aga AUT Il (588-10, esdH, 8 3) jinee har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tinee paa-i-arhay sarab sukhaa. Those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, obtain all peace and comforts.
Ag HoH fsa at Aes J fas Ufa A OH at nfs Balt Su Il (588-10, esd, v2 3) sabh janam tinaa kaa safal hai jin har kay naam kee man laagee bhukhaa. Fruitful is the entire life of those, who hunger for the Name of the Lord in their minds.
frat ad & safe yrafoor fae ferfs ae Afs eer Il (88-11, eda, v2 3)
jinee gur kai bachan aaraaDhi-aa tin visar ga-ay sabh dukhaa.
Those who worship the Lord in adoration, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, forget all their pains and suffering.
3 Hs 38 Tene J fro ost fos uset ger I (588-11, esdH, He 3) tay sant bhalay gursikh hai jin naahee chint paraa-ee chukhaa. Those Gursikhs are good Saints, who care for nothing other than the Lord.
ug U9 fae a ag o faA nits ee ofa war He NEN (588-12, esdq, He 3) Dhan Dhan tinaa kaa guroo hai jis amrit fal har laagay mukhaa. ||6]|
Blessed, blessed is their Guru, whose mouth tastes the Ambrosial Fruit of the Lord's Name. ||6]|
HBa H8 3 Il (588-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
afe ufo AH Hes J JEN as OTE Il (588-13, esda, He 3)
kal meh jam jandaar hai hukmay kaar kamaa-ay.
In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Messenger of Death is the enemy of life, but he acts according to the Lord's Command.
afa aa A Gad Hone fe ANTE Il (588-13, sda, He 3)
gur raakhay say ubray manmukhaa day-ay sajaa-ay.
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while the self-willed manmukhs receive their punishment.
THOS SA Ag aftr fA eT eI o AE Il (588-14, esse, Hs 3)
jamkaalai vas jag baa“Dhi-aa tis daa faroo na ko-ay.
The world is under the control, and in the bondage of the Messenger of Death; no one can hold him back.
fafs aH ats A AS aenfe Bu o SPE Il (588-14, esdH, He 3) jin jam keetaa so sayvee-ai gurmukh dukh na ho-ay. So serve the One who created Death; as Gurmukh, no pain shall touch you.
Soa TaHfe AH AS ad fas nfs AST GE NA (588-15, esdH, H 3) naanak gurmukh jam sayvaa karay jin man sachaa ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, Death serves the Gurmukhs; the True Lord abides in their minds. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (588-15) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
So afenr dfa act fae Hae wy IGH dao ATE Il (588-15, eda, He 3)
ayhaa kaa-i-aa rog bharee bin sabdai dukh ha-umai rog na jaa-ay.
This body is filled with disease; without the Word of the Shabad, the pain of the disease of ego does not depart.
Afsag fxs a fears de of aH rife SAE Il (588-16, eda, H2 3)
satgur milai taa nirmal hovai har naamo man vasaa-ay.
When one meets the True Guru, then he becomes immaculately pure, and he enshrines the Lord's Name within his mind.
aoa oH furfeur Ayes eu feAfent AOA ASE WI (588-17, esdH, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa sukh-daata dukh visri-aa sahj subhaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Peace-Giving Lord, his pains are automatically forgotten. ||2||
Uugat Il (588-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fife AaHieo Cuefhor fsa as a IG AST wafer | (588-17, sda, He 3)
jin jagjeevan updaysi-aa tis gur ka-o ha-o sadaa ghumaa-i-aa. I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has taught me about the Lord, the Life of the World.
fH Ta as we dsm fafs HonES of oH Hefenr I (588-18, esdH, 3 3) tis gur ka-o ha-o khannee-ai jin maDhusoodan har naam sunaa-i-aa. I am every bit a sacrifice to the Guru, the Lover of Nectar, who has revealed the
Name of the Lord.
fan aa a u@ ae fafs o@H fou AS Sq TetfeT I 88-19, esd, v2 3) tis gur ka-o ha-o vaarnai jin ha-umai bikh sabh rog gavaa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to the Guru, who has totally cured me of the fatal disease of egotism.
fan Afsag aG es uo J fafs niece afe wat AHSfEMr I (88-19, esdH, He 3) tis satgur ka-o vad punn hai jin avgan kat gunee samjhaa-i-aa.
Glorious and great are the virtues of the Guru, who has eradicated evil, and instructed me in virtue.
Uar uct H Afsag fae aG Sfeur fae & uf HAsfa ova feta urfemr 1D (589-1, esd, Ht 3)
so satgur tin ka-o bhayti-aa jin kai mukh mastak bhaag likh paa-i-aa. ||7]|| The True Guru meets with those upon whose foreheads such blessed destiny is recorded. ||7||
ASG H3 3 Ill (589-2) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
sats acts Hates aanfy safs wet fF I (589-2, esdH, nH: 3)
bhagat karahi marjeevrhay gurmukh bhagat sadaa ho-ay.
They alone worship the Lord, who remain dead while yet alive; the Gurmukhs worship the Lord continually.
Gat a@ uf sats uo suffer nfe & Aa Ae Il (589-2, eda, He 3)
onaa ka-o Dhur bhagat khajaanaa bakhsi-aa mayt na sakai ko-ay.
The Lord blesses them with the treasure of devotional worship, which no one can destroy.
ae faure nfs urfemr Sat Ae APE II (589-3, esdu, He 3) gun niDhaan man paa-i-aa ayko sachaa so-ay. They obtain the treasure of virtue, the One True Lord, within their minds.
soa TaHfy fife ad fefe fees ae o TPE NAM (589-3, esd, He 3)
naanak gurmukh mil rahay fir vichhorhaa kaday na ho-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs remain united with the Lord; they shall never be separated again. ||1]|
He 3 Il (689-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsad at Ae 3 ator fomr Go ad Seg il (589-4, esda, ve 3) satgur kee sayv na keenee-aa ki-aa oh karay veechaar. He does not serve the True Guru; how can he reflect upon the Lord?
Hee ATS 3 weet fay Hr ser” il (589-5, esdH, we 3)
sabdai saar na jaan-ee bikh bhoolaa gaavaar.
He does not appreciate the value of the Shabad; the fool wanders in corruption and sin.
mifamrat nig ag ATH SHS EH Ste filmy il (589-5, esdy, vs 3)
agi-aanee anDh baho karam kamaavai doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar.
The blind and ignorant perform all sorts of ritualistic actions; they are in love with duality.
wede ny defee aH Hf ad faq wns Il (589-6, esdH, He 3)
anhodaa aap ganaa-iday jam maar karay tin khu-aar.
Those who take unjustified pride in themselves, are punished and humiliated by the Messenger of Death.
Sod fan S nmdiby AT nm guASTT QM (589-6, esdH, He 3) naanak kis no aakhee-ai jaa aapay bakhsanhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, who else is there to ask? The Lord Himself is the Forgiver. ||2||
uGat Il (589-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 as Ag fas Weer Afs Aha Surg Il (589-7, esdq, 2 3) too kartaa sabh kichh jaandaa sabh jee-a tumaaray. You, O Creator, know all things; all beings belong to You.
fan 3 oe fq 3 Ais Sia for AS fears Il (589-7, esda, we 3)
jis too bhaavai tis too may! laihi ki-aa jant vichaaray.
Those who are pleasing to You, You unite with Yourself; what can the poor creatures do?
3 ASE AIS ANTE 3 Ay fHaAETS Il (589-8, esdH, 2 3) too karan kaaran samrath hai sach sirjanhaaray. You are all-powerful, the Cause of causes, the True Creator Lord.
fan 3 Aefe fimrfoor A sg fhe Tanfe Sars i (589-8, esd, 3 3)
jis too mayleh pi-aari-aa so tuDh milai gurmukh veechaaray.
Only those unite with you, Beloved Lord, whom you approve and who meditate on Guru's Word.
Je seas Afsag nrue fafo Ha The nisY Bas ICI (589-9, esdu, He 3) ha-o balihaaree satgur aapnay jin mayraa har alakh lakhaaray. ||8]| I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru, who has allowed me to see my unseen Lord. ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (589-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Isor uTsy A Ie A ISal ad Ser” Il (589-10, sadn, nu: 3) ratnaa paarakh jo hovai so ratnaa karay veechaar. He is the Assayer of jewels; He contemplates the jewel.
Tso" ATS B ATSSt mifamrrst nig viarg | (589-10, esdH, v2 3) ratnaa saar na jaan-ee agi-aanee anDh anDhaar. He is ignorant and totally blind - he does not appreciate the value of the jewel.
330 TI HT AAS I FS FTETT Il (589-11, e3dH, ve 3) ratan guroo kaa sabad hai boojhai boojhanhaar. The Jewel is the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Knower alone knows it.
Hae wig dete ufe Aufs aS yng i (89-11, esd, 43 3) moorakh aap ganaa-iday mar jameh ho-ay khu-aar. The fools take pride in themselves, and are ruined in birth and death.
Sod Iso A Gd fan Tenfe wa fimrg il (589-12, esdH, ve 3) naanak ratnaa so lahai jis gurmukh lagai pi-aar. O Nanak, he alone obtains the jewel, who, as Gurmukh, enshrines love for it.
Ret Het ay Gud afe ani fos faGag Il (589-12, sda, ne 3)
sadaa sadaa naam uchrai har naamo nit bi-uhaar.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, forever and ever, make the Name of the Lord your daily occupation.
faur ad A mruat st ofs ser Ba offs IAI (589-13, sda, He 3)
kirpaa karay jay aapnee taa har rakhaa ur Dhaar. ||1]| If the Lord shows His Mercy, then I keep Him enshrined within my heart. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (589-13) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag at Ae o ater ofs of o oa fumra I 89-13, esda, He 3) satgur kee sayv na keenee-aa har naam na lago pi-aar. They do not serve the True Guru, and they do not embrace love for the Lord's Name.
HS 3H Weg Gfe dee Gf orfu ws Agee Il (589-14, esdH, He 3) mat tum jaanhu o-ay jeevday o-ay aap maaray kartaar. Do not even think that they are alive - the Creator Lord Himself has killed them.
ISH Fst sa FT SMe EH ATH SHAS Il (589-14, esd, ws 3) ha-umai vadaa rog hai bhaa-ay doojai karam kamaa-ay. Egotism is such a terrible disease; in the love of duality, they do their deeds.
Sa HOHty Atefenr He die feAfomr sy ute QI (589-15, esdH, He 3)
naanak manmukh jeevdi-aa mu-ay har visri-aa dukh paa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs are in a living death; forgetting the Lord, they suffer in pain. ||2]|
UgST Il (589-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan visg fase AU 3 fSR Ho AG Afs SHAATT Il (589-15, esda, He 3) jis antar hirdaa suDh hai tis jan ka-o sabh namaskaaree. Let all bow in reverence, to that humble being whose heart is pure within.
fan viefs any foure 3 fsH Ho AS JE afHat II (589-16, edu, He 3)
jis andar naam niDhaan hai tis jan ka-o ha-o balihaaree.
I am a Sacrifice to that humble being whose mind is filled with the treasure of the Naam.
fan viefs afa fade o ofs on Hat II (589-17, asda, He 3) jis andar buDh bibayk hai har naam muraaree. He has a discriminating intellect; he meditates on the Name of the Lord.
A Afsag Ase ao fis 3 AS fSafa fimrdt i (539-17, esde, He 3) so satgur sabhnaa kaa mit hai sabh tiseh pi-aaree. That True Guru is a friend to all; everyone is dear to Him.
AZ TSH TH uAfeor aa af atest Cll (539-18, esdH, v8 3)
sabh aatam raam pasaari-aa gur buDh beechaaree. ||9]|
The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is pervading everywhere; reflect upon the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings. ||9]|
HBa H8 3 Il (589-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
faa Afsaa Ae Aba a sua fefs IGH AGH as II (589-18, esdH, He 3) bin satgur sayvay jee-a kay banDhnaa vich ha-umai karam kamaahi. Without serving the True Guru, the soul is in the bondage of deeds done in ego.
fag Afsad Az oCa o uredt nfs AHfo wT|fa AT I (589-19, zsdH, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay tha-ur na paavhee mar jameh aavahi jaahi.
Without serving the True Guru, one finds no place of rest; he dies, and is reincarnated, and continues coming and going.
fag Afsas Ae feat Soest So ZA Ho Hf Il (589-19, eadH, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay fikaa bolnaa naam na vasai man maahi.
Without serving the True Guru, one's speech is vapid and insipid; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not abide in his mind.
ua uto sod fas Afsag AS AH ufs aa Hdnifs Hf as Cfo ais All (590-1, esdH, He 3)
naanak bin satgur sayvay jam pur baDhay maaree-an muhi kaalai uth jaahi. ||1]| O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, they are bound and beaten in the City of Death; they arise and depart with blackened faces. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (590-2)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
wae net dfs fas HW fire SAP I (590-2, esdH, He 1) jaala-o aisee reet jit mai pi-aaraa veesrai. Burn away those rituals which lead you to forget the Beloved Lord.
sot Aet sot udtfs fas afoa ASt ufS gd MQM (590-2, esdu, He 1) naanak saa-ee bhalee pareet jit saahib saytee pat rahai. ||2|| O Nanak, sublime is that love, which preserves my honor with my Lord Master. ||2]|
ust II (590-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofa fea ast Ae ate fea foment i (590-3, esda, ne 1) har iko daataa sayvee-ai har ik Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Serve the One Lord, the Great Giver; meditate on the One Lord.
ofa feat ast vatht He fefenm ureint i (590-4, esdx, He 1) har iko daataa mangee-ai man chindi-aa paa-ee-ai. Beg from the One Lord, the Great Giver, and you shall obtain your heart's desires.
A EA UA Hath ST wr HATED Il (590-4, esda, we 1) jay doojay paashu mangee-ai taa laaj maraa-ee-ai. But if you beg from another, then you shall be shamed and destroyed.
fafs Afeur fafs eo ufeur fan Ae at AS su TSE I (590-4, esd, He 1)
jin sayvi-aa tin fal paa-i-aa tis jan kee sabh bhukh gavaa-ee-ai.
One who serves the Lord obtains the fruits of his rewards; all of his hunger is satisfied.
sod fse fees afenr fro niafes fase afs any foment 9011 (590-5, esdH, He 1) naanak tin vitahu vaari-aa jin an-din hirdai har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||10]|
Nanak is a sacrifice to those, who night and day, meditate within their hearts on the Name of the Lord. ||10]|
HS H3 3 Ill (590-6) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
sas Aa a orfu sor Hat fimirst nm afenig AS OTE Il (590-6, esdH, He 3)
bhagat janaa ka‘-u aap tuthaa mayraa pi-aaraa aapay la-i-an jan laa-ay.
He Himself is pleased with His humble devotees; my Beloved Lord attaches them to Himself.
ufsAdt Sas Aa aS fesing fafs sz AST ofs gSte Il (590-7, esdu, us 3) paatisaahee bhagat janaa ka-o ditee-an sir chhat sachaa har banaa-ay.
The Lord blesses His humble devotees with royalty; He fashions the true crown upon their heads.
He AYle fasHs Afsad at ara AHS I (590-7, esdH, He 3)
sadaa sukhee-ay nirmalay satgur kee kaar kamaa-ay.
They are always at peace, and immaculately pure; they perform service for the True Guru.
on Sfe 5 umitate fats Hofe fefs gat us i (590-8, esdH, 2 3)
raajay O-ay na aakhee-ahi bhirh mareh fir joonee paahi.
They are not said to be kings, who die in conflict, and then enter again the cycle of reincarnation.
aed fee ae sat set feats Aa ufs o urfa NA (590-9, edu, H8 3)
naanak vin naavai nakee™ vadhee" fireh sobhaa mool na paahi. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the Name of the Lord, they wander about with their noses cut off in disgrace; they get no respect at all. ||1]|
He 3 Il (90-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afe fafiet Ave 3 ures frog aenfy Aafe & wd Il (590-9, esdH, He 3)
sun sikhi-ai saad na aa-i-o jichar gurmukh sabad na laagai.
Hearing the teachings, he does not appreciate them, as long as he is not Gurmukh, attached to the Word of the Shabad.
Afsafe Afen on Hfs eA feed gH SB Sra I (590-10, eadu, He 3)
satgur sayvi-ai naam man vasai vichahu bharam bha-o bhaagai.
Serving the True Guru, the Naam comes to abide in the mind, and doubts and fears run away.
Aad Afsad 3 We 3d de oT Ate aH fs HAH Il (590-10, esd, He 3)
jayhaa satgur no jaanai tayho hovai taa sach naam liv laagai.
As he knows the True Guru, so he is transformed, and then, he lovingly focuses his consciousness on the Naam.
aoa Ooty fxs efsuret afs ef Aafs nrdt iQ (590-11, esdH, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee har dar sohan aagai. ||2| |
O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained; he shall be resplendent in the Court of the Lord hereafter. ||2||
Uugat Il (590-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
gers fs of us 3 ag yAS yrefs Il (590-12, esdz, 3 3)
gursikhaa™ man har pareet hai gur poojan aavahi.
The minds of the Gursikhs are filled with the love of the Lord; they come and worship the Guru.
dfs om zens da fAG oe ats aH B Wefd Il (590-12, edu, He 3)
har naam vana\jahi rang si-o laahaa har naam lai jaaveh. They trade lovingly in the Lord's Name, and depart after earning the profit of the Lord's Name.
daha x He Cae ote waa stefs Il (590-13, esdH, He 3) gursikhaa kay mukh ujlay har dargeh bhaaveh. The faces of the Gursikhs are radiant; in the Court of the Lord, they are approved.
dd Afsag sde dfs oH a esorait fra Te ATS agefs Il (590-13, esa, He 3)
gur satgur bohal har naam kaa vadbhaagee sikh gun saa‘jh karaaveh.
The Guru, the True Guru, is the treasure of the Lord's Name; how very fortunate are the Sikhs who share in this treasure of virtue.
fsa gefreart &@ 3G afer A sofemr Bofeur afe on famrefs Adil (590-14, esdH, H2 3) tinaa gursikhaa ka‘-u ha-o vaari-aa jo bahdi-aa uth-di-aa har naam Dhi-aavahi. ||11]| I am a Sacrifice to those Gursikhs who, sitting and standing, meditate on the Lord's Name. ||11]|
HBa H8 3 Il (590-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Sot oH fours 3 TaHfe ufenr ate It (590-15, esdH, He 3)
naanak naam niDhaan hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the treasure, which the Gurmukhs obtain.
Hone ufs det ca 3 Asal nid SCfa He faworte Ill (690-15, esdH, He 3) manmukh ghar hodee vath na jaannee anDhay bha-uk mu-ay billaa-ay. ||1]|
The self-willed manmukhs are blind; they do not realize that it is within their own home. They die barking and crying. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (590-16) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ave afer feauet A Afe afi Afs walt Il (590-16, esdH, H: 3)
kanchan kaa-i-aa nirmalee jo sach naam sach laagee.
That body is golden and immaculate, which is attached to the True Name of the True Lord.
foone ifs fadae ufeor asufs gu 38 raft II (590-17, esdq, v2 3)
nirmal jot niranjan paa-i-aa gurmukh bharam bha-o bhaagee.
The Gurmukh obtains the Pure Light of the Luminous Lord, and his doubts and fears run away.
Soa TIHfy Ae AY uets mofes ahs Favait Qi (590-17, esdH, He 3)
naanak gurmukh sadaa sukh paavahi an-din har bairaagee. ||2]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs find lasting peace; night and day, they remain detached, while in the Love of the Lord. ||2||
UugST Il (590-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A aefae ue Us d frat as Guen Afsur af dat il (590-18, esdH, He 3)
say gursikh Dhan Dhan hai jinee gur updays suni-aa har kannee.
Blessed, blessed are those Gursikhs, who, with their ears, listen to the Guru's Teachings about the Lord.
afe Afsafs on feafemr fate JOH vfs Fat Il (590-19, eadq, ne 3)
gur satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa tin ha‘-umai dubiDhaa bhannee.
The Guru, the True Guru, implants the Naam within them, and their egotism and duality are silenced.
fag ofa ore &t fg ardt Stata fsor afe Hat I (590-19, edz, H2 3)
bin har naavai ko mitar naahee veechaar dithaa har jannee.
There is no friend, other than the Name of the Lord; the Lord's humble servants reflect upon this and see.
Ua uty fast aefreat ag ofa Hane J feat Afsae at ae Hat Il (591-1, esdH, He 3)
jinaa gursikhaa ka-o har santusat hai tinee satgur kee gal mannee. Those Gursikhs, with whom the Lord is pleased, accept the Word of the True Guru.
A conte ony fourfee feat vat seats Sat 92 (591-1, edu, He 3)
jo gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-iday tinee charhee chavgan vannee. ||12]||
Those Gurmukhs who meditate on the Naam are imbued with the four-fold color of the Lord's Love. ||12||
HBa H8 3 Il (591-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hou afeg agu 3 fas are oa BT Il (591-2, sda, we 3)
manmukh kaa-ir karoop hai bin naavai nak naahi.
The self-willed manmukh is cowardly and ugly; lacking the Name of the Lord, his nose is cut off in disgrace.
wofes Ut fenrfimr qué st AY orf Il (591-3, esdH, He 3)
an-din DhanDhai vi-aapi-aa supnai bhee sukh naahi.
Night and day, he is engrossed in worldly affairs, and even in his dreams, he finds no peace.
soa TeHfy defs + Casts ofs 5 aa BU ATtS NA (591-3, esdH, He 3)
naanak gurmukh hoveh taa ubrahi naahi ta baDhay dukh sahaahi. ||1]|
O Nanak, if he becomes Gurmukh, then he shall be saved; otherwise, he is held in bondage, and suffers in pain. ||1]|
He 8 Il (691-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
aenfy Ae ef Ave Ts a Age ats I (591-4, esdH, He 3)
gurmukh sadaa dar sohnay gur kaa sabad kamaahi.
The Gurmukhs always look beautiful in the Court of the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
wists Aifs Ae AY Ufs AS AST ute Il (591-4, esdH, He 3)
antar saat sadaa sukh dar sachai sobhaa paahi.
There is a lasting peace and happiness deep within them; at the Court of the True Lord, they receive honor.
Soa Tf dfs SH ute ATA Afs ANTS IQ (591-5, esdH, He 3)
naanak gurmukh har naam paa-i-aa sehjay sach samaahi. ||2] | O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are blessed with the Name of the Lord; they merge imperceptibly into the True Lord. ||2]|
ugat Il (591-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
gant yfsete afu afe af uret i (591-6, esdu, ue 3) gurmukh par-hilaad jap har gat paa-ee. As Gurmukh, Prahlaad meditated on the Lord, and was saved.
aaHty Fata ats ath fee wet il (591-6, esdH, He 3) gurmukh janak har naam liv laa-ee. As Gurmukh, Janak lovingly centered his consciousness on the Lord's Name.
aanfa affafe ofa Gun ASE II (591-6, esdH, nH 3) gurmukh basist har updays sunaa-ee. As Gurmukh, Vashisht taught the Teachings of the Lord.
fas ag ofa on 6 fas ufemr AS aret II (591-7, esdu, He 3) bin gur har naam na kinai paa-i-aa mayray bhaa-ee. Without the Guru, no one has found the Lord's Name, O my Siblings of Destiny.
aanfy safe safs afe rf eoet 1931 (691-7, zada, He 3) gurmukh har bhagat har aap lahaa-ee. ||13]| The Lord blesses the Gurmukh with devotion. ||13]|
HO H8 3 Il (591-8) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag at usstfs o uireion Aafe & ore BTS Il (591-8, esdH, ne 3)
satgur kee parteet na aa-ee-aa sabad na laago bhaa-o.
One who has no faith in the True Guru, and who does not love the Word of the Shabad,
GAS AY 6 Cun Se AG TST TSE WE Il (591-9, esdu, He 3) os no sukh na upjai bhaavai sa-o gayrhaa aava-o jaa-o. shall find no peace, even though he may come and go hundreds of times.
Soa ToHfe Aafa fs AS fAG fee SS nail (91-9, esdu, 2 3)
naanak gurmukh sahj milai sachay si-o liv laa-o. |[1]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh meets the True Lord with natural ease; he is in love with the Lord. ||1]|
He 2 Il (591-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
= Ho MA Afsad dfA og fas Afedt Aon HeS BY ATE II (591-10, esdH, He 3)
ay man aisaa satgur khoj lahu jit sayvi-ai janam maran dukh jaa-ay.
O mind, search for such a True Guru, by serving whom the pains of birth and death are dispelled.
Hom His 3 Jeet IBH ate ASTE Il (591-10, esdH, ws 3)
sahsaa mool na hova-ee ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay.
Doubt shall never afflict you, and your ego shall be burnt away through the Word of the Shabad.
as at ute feag faa Ag ZA His orfe il (591-11, sda, we 3)
koorhai kee paal vichahu niklai sach vasai man aa-ay.
The veil of falsehood shall be torn down from within you, and Truth shall come to dwell in the mind.
nist Aifs Hf AY df AS AAfH are aM I (591-11, esdH, He 3)
antar saa‘t man sukh ho-ay sach sanjam kaar kamaa-ay.
Peace and happiness shall fill your mind deep within, if you act according to truth and self-discipline.
aed us aeth Afsag fs ale ME fas as TATE MN (591-12, esda, He 3) naanak poorai karam satgur milai har jee-o kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, by perfect good karma, you shall meet the True Guru, and then the Dear Lord, by His Sweet Will, shall bless you with His Mercy. ||2||
UgaT Il (591-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan a ufs chase ofa dé fSH at Hot fefe nas AS wrfeor | (591-13, eadH, He 3)
jis kai ghar deebaan har hovai tis kee muthee vich jagat sabh aa-i-aa. The whole world comes under the control of one whose home is filled with the Lord, the King.
fA ag seat far et ardt fe dteafe vfs orfs Ut urfeor tt (591-13, esd, He 3)
tis ka-o talkee kisai dee naahee har deebaan sabh aan pairee paa-i-aa.
He is subject to no one else's rule, and the Lord, the King, causes everyone to fall at his feet.
Hen fomrg cred act aff sfx faas afa dtaeg act fas wrfemr ih 591-14, esda, He 3) maansaa ki-ahu deebaanahu ko-ee nas bhaj niklai har deebaanahu ko-ee kithai jaa-i-
aa.
One may run away from the courts of other men, but where can one go to escape the Lord's Kingdom?
A mt ofs thre efor sas a fase fafs soe use nfs vfs sarst niet wmetfenr Il (591-15, @3dH, H3 3)
so aisaa har deebaan vasi-aa bhagtaa kai hirdai tin rahday khuhday aan sabh bhagtaa agai khalvaa-i-aa.
The Lord is such a King, who abides in the hearts of His devotees; He brings the others, and makes them stand before His devotees.
dfs oe at efanret ach usvufs de aan fees fas fomrfeor ae (591-16, eda, H: 3)
har naavai kee vadi-aa-ee karam paraapat hovai gurmukh virlai kinai Dhi-aa-i-aa. [|14]|
The glorious greatness of the Lord's Name is obtained only by His Grace; how few are the Gurmukhs who meditate on Him. ||14]|
HSa H8 3 Il (591-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fag Afsaed AS Aas Hor fase AON TSTe Il (591-17, esa, us 3)
bin satgur sayvay jagat mu-aa birthaa janam gavaa-ay.
Without serving the True Guru, the people of the world are dead; they waste their lives away in vain.
en ote ifs oy oar His AH wre ATE I (591-17, esdH, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay at dukh lagaa mar jammai aavai jaa-ay.
In love with duality, they suffer terrible pain; they die, and are reincarnated, and continue coming and going.
fenet niefs am o fete fetes aot ute Il (91-18, eadH, v8 3) vistaa andar vaas hai fir fir joonee paa-ay. They live in manure, and are reincarnated again and again.
Sod fas are AH Hen nifs afeor usste NA (591-18, esdH, He 3)
naanak bin naavai jam maarsee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, without the Name, the Messenger of Death punishes them; in the end, they depart regretting and repenting. ||1||
He 3 Il (591-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fen na ufos use Sa do da Aare ats Aare I (591-19, eadH, He 3) is jag meh purakh ayk hai hor saglee naar sabaa-ee. In this world, there is one Husband Lord; all other beings are His brides.
Ua ura
Afs we sae nifsus Id vise o Beet AT I (592-1, eda, He 3)
sabh ghat bhogvai alipat rahai alakh na lakh-naa jaa-ee.
He enjoys the hearts of all, and yet He remains detached; He is unseen; He cannot be described.
ud afe Safer Ae ASt uTet I (592-1, sda, we 3)
poorai gur vaykhaali-aa sabday sojhee paa-ee.
The Perfect Guru reveals Him, and through the Word of His Shabad, we come to understand Him.
usd Refs A use defa fast IGN Aafe ABST I (592-2, esd, He 3)
purkhai sayveh say purakh hoveh jinee ha-umai sabad jalaa-ee.
Those who serve their Husband Lord, become like Him; their egos are burnt away by His Shabad.
fSA a Adla dt adt a a Aca SIH Il (592-2, eadH, ve 3) tis kaa sareek ko nahee naa ko kantak vairaa-ee. He has no rival, no attacker, no enemy.
fades TH Jd Het fSH aa ot mr] Bt AT II (592-3, asda, He 3) nihchal raaj hai sadaa tis kayraa naa aavai naa jaa-ee. His rule is unchanging and eternal; He does not come or go.
moles AeA AS’ Ad Tis AS A TS WET Il (592-3, esdH, ue 3)
an-din sayvak sayvaa karay har sachay kay gun gaa-ee. Night and day, His servant serves Him, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
aoa ef feathor sf AS at Sfanret QI (692-4, esdH, He 3) naanak vaykh vigsi-aa har sachay kee vadi-aa-ee. ||2|| Beholding the Glorious Greatness of the True Lord, Nanak blossoms forth. ||2]|
Uugat Il (592-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fro & dfs om efron ne fose ofa ani fae AB suST ST Il (592-4, esd, He 3)
jin kai har naam vasi-aa sad hirdai har naamo tin ka‘-u rakhanhaaraa.
Those whose hearts are forever filled with the Name of the Lord, have the Name of the Lord as their Protector.
ofs ony fust ofs ont Hest ofg ony Aaret fH THE Il (592-5, edz, H? 3)
har naam pitaa har naamo maataa har naam sakhaa-ee mitar hamaaraa.
The Lord's Name is my father, the Lord's Name is my mother; the Lord's Name is my helper and friend.
dfs ae of ae ofa ae ate HA@fs afe on THT aAdeT fas ATT Il (592-5, esdH, He 3) har naavai naal galaa har naavai naal maslat har naam hamaaree kardaa nit saaraa. My conversation is with the Lord's Name, and my counseling is with the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name always takes care of me.
dfs oy ad Hats mifS flmrdt afs oH aw af SH USS II (592-6, esdH, He 3)
har naam hamaaree sangat at pi-aaree har naam kul har naam parvaaraa.
The Lord's Name is my most beloved society, the Lord's Name is my ancestry, and the Lord's Name is my family.
Ho soa aC ofe an ate afs cr afe vets uefs net ad feAsta WII (592-7, =sdH, H8 3)
jan naanak ka‘-u har naam har gur dee-aa har halat palat sadaa karay nistaaraa. [|45]]
The Guru, the Lord Incarnate, has bestowed upon servant Nanak the Name of the Lord; in this world, and in the next, the Lord ever saves me. ||15]|
H@q H3 3 Ill (592-8) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fro x@ Afsag Sfeur A fs atefs Ae arts I (592-8, esdH, He 3) jin ka‘-u satgur bhayti-aa say har keerat sadaa kamaati. Those who meet the True Guru, ever sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
wifes dfs on fo a Hfs efron AS Aafe morte Il (592-9, esdx, He 3)
achint har naam tin kai man vasi-aa sachai sabad samaahi.
The Lord's Name naturally fills their minds, and they are absorbed in the Shabad, the Word of the True Lord.
ae Curafa nmuet Hu ueet wmy urfa Il (592-9, esa, He 3) kul uDhaareh aapnaa mokh padvee aapay paahi. They redeem their generations, and they themselves obtain the state of liberation.
ursqon fs5 a8 Hane sfeor A ae vast Ae urs Il (592-10, esdx, ne 3) paarbarahm tin ka‘-u santusat bha-i-aa jo gur charnee jan paahi. The Supreme Lord God is pleased with those who fall at the Guru's Feet.
He sod dg at aA d ate faa ofs oa sets IAI (592-10, esdH, He 3) jan naanak har kaa daas hai kar kirpaa har laaj rakhaahi. ||1]|| Servant Nanak is the Lord's slave; by His Grace, the Lord preserves his honor. ||1] |
He 3 Il (592-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
UGH niefs usa J usa usta feafe i (592-11, esdq, He 3) ha’-umai andar kharhak hai kharhkay kharhak vihaa-ay. In egotism, one is assailed by fear; he passes his life totally troubled by fear.
UGH eat da FT Hfe HH mr] ATE II (592-12, eada, He 3)
ha’-umai vadaa rog hai mar jammai aavai jaa-ay.
Egotism is such a terrible disease; he dies, to be reincarnated - he continues coming and going.
fra ag usta feftimr fsa Asag fufeer ys nrfe i (592-12, esdH, He 3) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tinaa satgur mili-aa parabh aa-ay. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny meet with the True Guru, God Incarnate.
Soa Td usAet Gad ICH Rafe AOE NN (592-13, esd, He 3)
naanak gur parsaadee ubray ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, they are redeemed; their egos are burnt away through the Word of the Shabad. ||2] |
Uugat Il (592-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofg oH OHS us mifsas wiaieg nifsort use fast II (592-13, esdq, ne 3)
har naam hamaaraa parabh abigat agochar abhinaasee purakh biDhaataa.
The Lord's Name is my immortal, unfathomable, imperishable Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
ofg SH IH Aes ofa SH IN un sha SH SHS TS Il (592-14, esdH, He 3)
har naam ham sarayveh har naam ham poojah har naamay hee man raataa.
I serve the Lord's Name, I worship the Lord's Name, and my soul is imbued with the Lord's Name.
fs oH Aes Ae vies 3 AS Tle oH Mifs Base I (592-15, esde, vs 3)
har naamai jayvad ko-ee avar na soojhai har naamo ant chhadaataa.
I know of no other as great as the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name shall deliver me in the end.
dfs on thor afs usGuerdt ug de ag a fst HIST II (592-15, esdH, He 3)
har naam dee-aa gur par-upkaaree Dhan Dhan guroo kaa pitaa maataa. The Generous Guru has given me the Lord's Name; blessed, blessed are the Guru's mother and father.
JG Afsag nus AC Het SHAT fas fixfemt ofs on H AST IME! (592-16, esd, He 3) ha"-u satgur apunay ka‘-u sadaa namaskaaree jit mili-ai har naam mai jaataa. ||16]| I ever bow in humble reverence to my True Guru; meeting Him, I have come to know the Lord's Name. ||16]|
HS H8 3 Il (592-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aenfy Az 3 ator ofa oth o wat fume Il (592-17, esdu, He 3) gurmukh sayv na keenee-aa har naam na lago pi-aar. One who does not serve the Guru as Gurmukh, who does not love the Lord's Name,
Rae Are & oMfes Hfa HOH Sd ST Il (592-17, Eade, He 3)
sabdai saad na aa-i-o mar janmai vaaro vaar.
and who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, shall die, and be reborn, over and over again.
HoHfe nig 3 eset fas wrfenr Aeris I (592-18, esdH, He 3)
manmukh anDh na chayt-ee kit aa-i-aa saisaar.
The blind, self-willed manmukh does not think of the Lord; why did he even come into the world?
aoe fro a sets ad A TaHfy Su ute ill (592-18, esd, v2 3)
naanak jin ka-o nadar karay say gurmukh langhay paar. ||1||
O Nanak, that Gurmukh, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, crosses over the world-ocean. ||1]||
He 3 Il (592-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
feat Afsag Was dg Aa AS Hfs fur i (592-19, esdz, 3 3)
iko satgur jaagtaa hor jag sootaa mohi pi-aas. Only the Guru is awake; the rest of the world is asleep in emotional attachment and desire.
Afsag Refs avife A A aS Afe oth TestA Il (592-19, esdH, He 3)
satgur Sayvan jaagann say jo ratay sach naam guntaas.
Those who serve the True Guru and remain wakeful, are imbued with the True Name, the treasure of virtue.
Ua ucts HoHfe nig 3s ssa Aaty ufs dfs feof i (593-1, esdH, H2 3)
manmukh anDh na chaytnee janam mar hohi binaas. The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not think of the Lord; they are ruined through birth and death.
area Tanta fat on fourfeur fro ag uf yaa feftmrtA 20 (93-1, esdH, Hs 3) naanak gurmukh tinee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa jin ka‘-u Dhur poorab likhi-aas. ||2]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is their destiny, pre-ordained by the Primal Lord God. ||2||
ust II (593-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs OH THE SHO eatd users fas wit mH aS feufS set I (593-2, esdz, He 3) har naam hamaaraa bhojan chhateeh parkaar jit khaa-i-ai ham ka-o taripat bha-ee. The Lord's Name is my food; eating the thirty-six varieties of it, I am satisfied and satiated.
dfs ou dHS Use fas fefs Sa o deg da Uses at TNS AaT Te I (593-3, esdH, nH: 3) har naam hamaaraa painan jit fir nangay na hovah hor painan kee hamaaree saraDh ga-ee.
The Lord's Name is my clothing; wearing it, I shall never be naked again, and my desire to wear other clothing is gone.
dfs OU DHS Zen dfs aH erg dfs SH at TH AE Afsafa aaaat Het I (593-4, ZSdH, H2 3)
har naam hamaaraa vanaj har naam vaapaar har naamai kee ham ka™-u satgur kaarkunee dee-ee.
The Lord's Name is my business, the Lord's Name is my commerce; the True Guru has blessed me with its use.
dfs aH at oH Set fofmr AS AH ot rarest of= aTet Il (593-5, esdH, H2 3) har naamai kaa ham laykhaa likhi-aa sabh jam kee aglee kaan ga-ee. I record the account of the Lord's Name, and I shall not be subject to death again.
dfs a any ante fad fees fomrfenr faa x ufe aah usufs fous uet 911 (593-5, @sdH, He 3)
har kaa naam gurmukh kinai virlai Dhi-aa-i-aa jin ka‘-u Dhur karam paraapat likhat pa-ee. ||17]|
Only a few, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Lord's Name; they are blessed by the Lord, and receive their pre-ordained destiny. ||17]|
HBa H8 3 Il (593-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
mas uifamrat nig F eA ate ATH AHS I (593-7, sadn, He 3) jagat agi-aanee anDh hai doojai bhaa-ay karam kamaa-ay. The world is blind and ignorant; in the love of duality, it engages in actions.
en ofS AS AH as VY Bat She OTE Il (593-7, esd, ws 3)
doojai bhaa-ay jaytay karam karay dukh lagai tan Dhaa-ay.
But those actions which are performed in the love of duality, cause only pain to the body.
qs use AY Cur A Ts a Awe SHAE Il (593-8, esda, we 3)
gur parsaadee sukh oopjai jaa gur kaa sabad kamaa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, peace wells up, when one acts according to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hot wat AGH ad niafes oH fowM= i (593-8, esdu, He 3)
sachee banee karam karay an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay.
He acts according to the True Word of the Guru's Bani; night and day, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oad fis ure we fas aa age fos & ATE NA (593-9, esdH, He 3)
naanak jit aapay laa-ay tit lagay kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, as the Lord Himself engages him, so is he engaged; no one has any say in this matter. ||1]|
He 8 Il (693-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dH ufs OH UAT AUT DT Safs sd FST | (593-9, eadH, ne 3)
ham ghar naam khajaanaa sadaa hai bhagat bharay bhandaaraa.
Within the home of my own being, is the everlasting treasure of the Naam; it is a treasure house, overflowing with devotion.
Asad BST Hh at Ae le SeST ST Il (593-10, esdH, ve 3) satgur daataa jee-a kaa sad jeevai dayvanhaaraa. The True Guru is the Giver of the life of the soul; the Great Giver lives forever.
Wofes atdse Het adfy Td a Aafe mrs Il (593-10, 2sdH, He 3)
an-din keertan sadaa karahi gur kai sabad apaaraa.
Night and day, I continually sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise, through the Infinite Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hae Tg a Ae Custy FT AT FIST SST I I (593-11, esdH, He 3)
sabad guroo kaa sad uchrahi jug jug vartaavanhaaraa.
I recite continually the Guru's Shabads, which have been effective throughout the ages.
feg Hout Ae Afa SA ASA AT SUT I (593-11, esdH, ve 3) in manoo-aa sadaa sukh vasai sehjay karay vaapaaraa. This mind ever abides in peace, dealing in peace and poise.
nists as famre dfs d3q 9 Hafs ATSST ST Il (593-12, esdH, He 3) antar gur gi-aan har ratan hai mukat karaavanhaaraa. Deep within me is the Guru's Wisdom, the Lord's jewel, the Bringer of liberation.
&
aoa fAA S sefe ad A UTS A de] Ufa Afenia IH (593-12, esdH, HH: 3) naanak jis no nadar karay so paa-ay so hovai dar sachi-aaraa. ||2||
O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace obtains this, and is judged to be True in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
UugST Il (593-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
U9 Uo A aetAy adn A Afsad seat ate ufeMr It (593-13, esdx, He 3)
Dhan Dhan so gursikh kahee-ai jo satgur charnee jaa-ay pa-i-aa.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who goes and falls at the Feet of the True Guru.
Uo Uo A aefae adm fate afs ane yf a afar I (593-14, esdH, He 3)
Dhan Dhan so gursikh kahee-ai jin har naamaa mukh raam kahi-aa.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who with his mouth, utters the Name of the Lord.
U9 Ue A aatAy adon fan ofe of Afent nfs nee sfeor I (593-14, esd, He 3)
Dhan Dhan so gursikh kahee-ai jis har naam suni-ai man anad bha-i-aa.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, whose mind, upon hearing the Lord's Name, becomes blissful.
Uo Uo A aatay adhn fafs Afsas Ae ate ofs oy ofemr It (593-15, esd, He 3) Dhan Dhan so gursikh kahee-ai jin satgur sayvaa kar har naam la-i-aa.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who serves the True Guru, and so obtains the Lord's Name.
fan dehy &@ JG net aHAad FH TT a ave Tafhy visor Ici (593-16, esdH, He 3)
tis gursikh ka‘-u ha’-u sadaa namaskaaree jo gur kai bhaanai gursikh chali-aa. ||18]| I bow forever in deepest respect to that Sikh of the Guru, who walks in the Way of the Guru. ||18]|
H@q H8 3 Ill (593-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Houle fas 3 UTE AS Ga ATH AHTE Il (593-17, esdH, He 3)
manhath kinai na paa-i-o sabh thakay karam kamaa-ay.
No one has ever found the Lord through stubborn-mindedness. All have grown weary of performing such actions.
Hoole su afs sane wy ufeor eA STE Il (593-17, sadn, ws 3)
manhath bhaykh kar bharamday dukh paa-i-aa doojai bhaa-ay.
Through their stubborn-mindedness, and by wearing their disguises, they are deluded; they suffer in pain from the love of duality.
fafa fafa AS HI ID OH G GA Ufo wrfe I (593-18, esdH, He 3)
riDh siDh sabh moh hai naam na vasai man aa-ay.
Riches and the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas are all emotional attachments; through them, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to dwell in the mind.
qd Aet 3 Ho fens de mifamre nite Ate I (593-18, esdH, He 3)
gur sayvaa tay man nirmal hovai agi-aan anDhayraa jaa-ay.
Serving the Guru, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled.
oH Wo us usae It SSA AoA ANTS AU (593-19, esdH, He 3)
naam ratan ghar pargat ho-aa naanak sahj samaa-ay. ||1||
The jewel of the Naam is revealed in the home of one's own being; O Nanak, one merges in celestial bliss. ||1]|
He 2 Il (593-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ua|r ug
Rae Ae 3 orfes oth o oar fumra Il (594-1, esd, 2 3)
sabdai saad na aa-i-o naam na lago pi-aar.
One who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, who does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
dna! feat soe" fos fas df unig Il (594-1, esdH, He 3) rasnaa fikaa bolnaa nit nit ho-ay khu-aar. and who speaks insipid words with his tongue, is ruined, again and again.
sod fasts ufset area afe & AZET ST IQ (594-1, esdH, He 3) naanak kirat pa-i-ai kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, he acts according to the karma of his past actions, which no one can erase.
21 |
Uugat Il (594-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
U9 U6 AS yay Asay oye fag fifemt TH aS AMS niet I (594-2, esda, v3 3) Dhan Dhan sat purakh satguroo hamaaraa jit mili-ai ham ka-o saa‘t aa-ee. Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have found peace.
U9 U6 AS yay Asay ous fas fifemt oH fs sats uret Il (594-3, ead, ws 3) Dhan Dhan sat purakh satguroo hamaaraa jit mili-ai ham har bhagat paa-ee. Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have attained the Lord's devotional worship.
U6 U6 of sas Afsag oe fAA ot Ast S TH ae oh fos wet Il (594-4, esdH, He 3) Dhan Dhan har bhagat satguroo hamaaraa jis kee sayvaa tay ham har naam liv laa- ee.
Blessed, blessed is the Lord's devotee, my True Guru; serving Him, I have come to enshrine love for the Name of the Lord.
U9 U6 fe famrat Afsag oe fats et fs TH AS AS AH fenfe feuet i (594-4, SSdH, H3 3) 7
Dhan Dhan har gi-aanee satguroo hamaaraa jin vairee mitar ham ka-o sabh sam darisat dikhaa-ee.
Blessed, blessed is the Knower of the Lord, my True Guru; He has taught me to look upon friend and foe alike.
ue U9 Afsag fey ours fats of om FAC THrdt yifs saret AE (594-5, esdH, He 3) Dhan Dhan satguroo mitar hamaaraa jin har naam si-o hamaaree pareet banaa-ee. [|19]|
Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, my best friend; He has led me to embrace love for the Name of the Lord. ||19]|
HB Hs 9 Il (594-6)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ws ot Hfa feet fug fas So AHS II (594-6, esdu, He 1)
ghar hee munDh vidays pir nit jhooray samm"aalay.
The soul-bride is at home, while the Husband Lord is away; she cherishes His memory, and mourns His absence.
fuofenr feo o deat A Shofs aA as NAM (594-7, edz, H 1) mildi-aa‘ dhil na hova-ee jay nee-at raas karay. ||1]| She shall meet Him without delay, if she rids herself of duality. ||1]|
He 4% Il (694-7) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
TSX Wet Asher as udifs ase it 94-7, esdH, v2 1) naanak gaalee koorhee-aa baajh pareet karay-i. O Nanak, false is the speech of one who acts without loving the Lord.
fsug We sor afs frag SS SE QI (594-8, esdz, we 1) tichar jaanai bhalaa kar jichar layvai day-ay. ||2|| He judges things to be good, only as long as the Lord gives and he receives. ||2||
ust Il (594-8)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
fafs Sure Aba fate ofe afimr i (594-8, esdu, He 1)
jin upaa-ay jee-a tin har raakhi-aa.
The Lord, who created the creatures, also protects them. nifys Ae oe sxe oftmr II (594-9, esdu, Hs 1)
amrit sachaa naa-o bhojan chaakhi-aa. I have tasted the food of Ambrosial Nectar, the True Name.
fsufs so nrunfe fet sath il (594-9, eadH, He 1) tipat rahay aaghaa-ay mitee bhabhaakhi-aa. I am satisfied and satiated, and my hunger is appeased.
Ag niets fea eas fas feas wfimr i (594-9, asda, He 1) sabh andar ik vartai kinai virlai laakhi-aa. The One Lord is pervading in all, but rare are those who realize this.
Ho aod se fos ys at urftmt [2011 (594-10, esdH, He 1) jan naanak bha-ay nihaal parabh kee paakhi-aa. ||20|| Servant Nanak is enraptured, in the Protection of God. ||20]||
HS H8 3 Il (594-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsaqd 6 AS a Sue AS Aas AAT Il (594-11, edu, He 3) satgur no sabh ko vaykh-daa jaytaa jagat sansaar. All the living beings of the world behold the True Guru.
fs6 nafs 5 Jeet frag nafe o ad Steg Il (594-11, esa, H2 3)
dithai mukat na hova-ee jichar sabad na karay veechaar.
One is not liberated by merely seeing Him, unless one contemplates the Word of His Shabad.
ICH HS 3 vaet ath o Bal films I (594-12, esdH, He 3) ha-umai mail na chuk-ee naam na lagai pi-aar. The filth of ego is not removed, and he does not enshrine love for the Naam.
fefa mma safh feerfentg efor sta fears il (594-12, esdH, He 3)
ik aapay bakhas milaa-i-an dubiDhaa taj vikaar.
The Lord forgives some, and unites them with Himself; they forsake their duality and sinful ways.
aoa fete vane efy xfs fue Afsas dfs flmrfs Nall (594-13, esdx, He 3)
naanak ik darsan daykh mar milay satgur hayt pi-aar. ||1||
O Nanak, some behold the Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan, with love and affection; conquering their ego, they meet with the Lord. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (94-13) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag 6 Afes you nin aera il (594-13, sadn, He 3) satguroo na sayvi-o moorakh anDh gavaar. The foolish, blind clown does not serve the True Guru.
SH StS BIZ TY WI ASST AT YSTS Il (594-14, esde, vs 3) doojai bhaa-ay bahut dukh laagaa jaltaa karay pukaar. In love with duality, he endures terrible suffering, and burning, he cries out in pain.
fro orefe ag ferrfoor Ao Quad nist Sg Il (594-14, ede, we 3)
jin kaaran guroo visaari-aa say na upkaray antee vaar.
He forgets the Guru, for the sake of mere objects, but they will not come to his rescue in the end.
SSA TINS AY ufeMt SAA FAAST ST NMI (594-15, esdH, v2 3)
naanak gurmatee sukh paa-i-aa bakhsay bakhsanhaar. ||2||
Through the Guru's Instructions, Nanak has found peace; the Forgiving Lord has forgiven him. ||2]|
ust Il (594-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 omy orfy orf Ag aes aet aa ofe A ness TIA I (594-15, esd, v3 3)
too aapay aap aap sabh kartaa ko-ee doojaa ho-ay so avro kahee-ai.
You Yourself, all by Yourself, are the Creator of all. If there were any other, then I would speak of another.
dfs wm 83 vrfu gore ofa wm afs afs afe gdh Il (594-16, esdn, He 3)
har aapay bolai aap bulaavai har aapay jal thal rav rahee-ai.
The Lord Himself speaks, and causes us to speak; He Himself is pervading the water and the land.
dfs nmd urd ofa nm gs ue ofa Agat ufS adit | (594-17, esdH, v2 3)
har aapay maarai har aapay chhodai man har sarnee parh rahee-ai.
The Lord Himself destroys, and the Lord Himself saves. O mind, seek and remain in the Lord's Sanctuary.
dfs fas aet wife dete 5 Aa Ho df fafse fore df ad i (594-17, esdu, nH 3)
har bin ko-ee maar jeevaal na sakai man ho-ay nichind nisal ho-ay rahee-ai. Other than the Lord, no one can kill or rejuvenate. O mind, do not be anxious - remain fearless.
Gofeur gofemr Afsor Ae Het of oH fore AS asa Tenfy safe She NIU AT (594-18, S3dH, He 3)
uth-di-aa bahdi-aa suti-aa sadaa sadaa har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai jan naanak gurmukh har lahee-ai. ||21||1]] suDhu
While standing, sitting, and sleeping, forever and ever, meditate on the Lord's Name; O servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, you shall attain the Lord. ||21||1||Sudh]|
Uuar uty I ATS on aes yay fos faves urs Hats mot AS TT YATE I (595-1)
ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Hafe HIS 9 we 1 BUS Il (595-3) sorath mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday. Sorat'h, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
Haat Hdat wifenr Seat ABST Il (595-4, Fafs, Hs 1) sabhnaa marnaa aa-i-aa vaychhorhaa sabhnaah. Death comes to all, and all must suffer separation.
ued ate fhorfeor ora foes fears Il (595-4, ats, He 1)
puchhahu jaa-ay si-aani-aa aagai milan kinaah.
Go and ask the clever people, whether they shall meet in the world hereafter. fas Aa Atos Jad est eo fFarT NAM (595-4, Fats, He 1)
jin mayraa saahib veesrai vadrhee vaydan tinaah. ||1]||
Those who forget my Lord and Master shall suffer in terrible pain. ||1]| at wefog Ara ALE Il (595-5, Fafs, He 1)
bhee saalaahihu saachaa so-ay.
So praise the True Lord,
Ww ot oefs Ae AY SE I TTS I (595-5, Fafs, ne 1)
jaa kee nadar sadaa sukh ho-ay. rahaa-o.
by whose Grace peace ever prevails. ||Pause] |
zx afa Ararat 3 ot GAT APE II (595-6, Fafs, ne 1)
vadaa kar salaahnaa hai bhee hosee so-ay. Praise Him as great; He is, and He shall ever be.
ABS! WS Sq J HSA UTS & AE I (595-6, Halo, ws 1) sabhnaa daataa ayk too maanas daat na ho-ay. You alone are the Great Giver; mankind cannot give anything.
A fA oe A at da fa FS SE NN (595-6, Hats, He jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai rann ke runnai ho-ay. ||2|| Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass; what good does it do to cry out in protest?
21 |
Uest Gufs de as ast aet safe I (595-7, Fats, He 1)
Dhartee upar kot garh kaytee ga-ee vajaa-ay.
Many have proclaimed their sovereignty over millions of fortresses on the earth, but they have now departed.
a mAs o Heat fa ofa oar UTE I (595-7, Fats, He 1) jo asmaan na maavnee tin nak nathaa paa-ay. And those, whom even the sky could not contain, had ropes put through their noses.
A Ho Wels Holo ard flor uf all (595-8, Aefe, He 1)
jay man jaaneh soolee-aa kaahay mithaa khaahi. ||3]||
O mind, if you only knew the torment in your future, you would not relish the sweet pleasures of the present. |[3]|
soa MBTE ASS SS Tot Arts Il (595-8, Fels, He 1)
naanak a-ogun jayt-rhay taytay galee janjeer.
O Nanak, as many as are the sins one commits, so many are the chains around his neck.
A we dfe 3 adinife A avet A SAS Il (595-9, Fate, He 1)
jay gun hon ta katee-an say bhaa-ee say veer.
If he possesses virtues, then the chains are cut away; these virtues are his brothers, his true brothers.
Mal Te o Homifs ufe ae Subs SIAM (595-9, Fats, He 1)
agai ga-ay na mannee-an maar kadhahu vaypeer. ||4]||1||
Going to the world hereafter, those who have no Guru are not accepted; they are beaten, and expelled. ||4]|1]|
Rafe Hoe 4 We Y Il (595-10)
sorath mehlaa 1 ghar 1. Sorat’h, First Mehl, First House:
Ho wat fxsAet Adel ASH urat So YS Il (595-10, Fafs, uz 1)
man haalee kirsaanee karnee saram paanee tan khayt.
Make your mind the farmer, good deeds the farm, modesty the water, and your body the field.
OM on ASsy Ae gy adtet SA Il (595-10, Fats, He 1)
naam beej santokh suhaagaa rakh gareebee vays.
Let the Lord's Name be the seed, contentment the plow, and your humble dress the fence.
aC aH af HHA A We SS SY INA (595-11, Fats, He 1) bhaa-o karam kar jammsee say ghar bhaagath daykh. ||1]| Doing deeds of love, the seed shall sprout, and you shall see your home flourish. ||1]|
oar Hifior Af & ofF I (595-11, Hats, He 1) baabaa maa-i-aa saath na ho-ay. O Baba, the wealth of Maya does not go with anyone.
fefs wfenr Aa for feaer as ate i TIS i (595-12, Fats, we 1) in maa-i-aa jag mohi-aa virlaa boojhai ko-ay. rahaa-o. This Maya has bewitched the world, but only a rare few understand this. ||Pause| |
VE Je ale nae AY OH afd SE Il (595-12, Aafs, us 1)
haan hat kar aarjaa sach naam kar vath.
Make your ever-decreasing life your shop, and make the Lord's Name your merchandise.
Hofs Ae afs sisns fan fefe fSA Ss Fe II (595-13, Fats, He D
surat soch kar bhaadsaal tis vich tis no rakh.
Make understanding and contemplation your warehouse, and in that warehouse, store the Lord's Name.
zenmfanr faG zen afe & SI HS TA MQM (595-13, Aefs, 2 1) vanjaari-aa si-o vanaj kar lai laahaa man has. ||2]| Deal with the Lord's dealers, earn your profits, and rejoice in your mind. ||2]|
Afs AAS ACead AS US FS VS Il (595-14, Fafo, we 1) sun Saasat sa-udaagree sat ghorhay lai chal. Let your trade be listening to scripture, and let Truth be the horses you take to sell.
ddd FO vfamreor HS He ATSfs AS Il (595-14, Fafs, ue 1)
kharach bann chang-aa-ee-aa mat man jaaneh kal.
Gather up merits for your travelling expenses, and do not think of tomorrow in your mind.
fadarg a ofh wis a Af wafs HIG Bll (595-15, Aefs, 2 1)
nirankaar kai days jaahi taa sukh laheh mahal. ||3]|
When you arrive in the land of the Formless Lord, you shall find peace in the Mansion of His Presence. ||3]|
one fas afa wadt Hfs an afe AH Il (595-15, Hafs, He 1)
laa-ay chit kar chaakree man naam kar kamm.
Let your service be the focusing of your consciousness, and let your occupation be the placing of faith in the Naam.
UsT ute
9 adorn afs weat 3 a nim US Il (596-1, afs, He 1) bann badee-aa kar Dhaavnee taa ko aakhai Dhan. Let your work be restraint from sin; only then will people call you blessed.
Sot SU ovle af vs VETS SH NII (596-1, Fah, we 1)
naanak vaykhai nadar kar charhai chavgan vann. ||4||2||
O Nanak, the Lord shall look upon you with His Glance of Grace, and you shall be blessed with honor four times over. ||4]|2]|
Hafs Hs 9 BSA Il (596-2) sorath mehlaa 1 cha-utukay. Sorat'h, First Mehl, Chau-Tukas:
Hf ary a Set Stat AAS VST ASTeT Il (596-2, Fale, He 1)
maa-ay baap ko baytaa neekaa sasurai chatur javaa-ee.
The son is dear to his mother and father; he is the wise son-in-law to his father-in- law.
ae afer & ary fimirer aret & wifS ove I (596-2, Fats, He 1) baal kanniaa kou baap pi-aaraa bhaa-ee kou at bhaa-ee. The father is dear to his son and daughter, and the brother is very dear to his brother.
Jay sfeor wag we efor fue ufo set ust I (596-3, Fafs, nz 1)
hukam bha-i-aa baahar ghar chhodi-aa khin meh bha-ee paraa-ee.
By the Order of the Lord's Command, he leaves his house and goes outside, and in an instant, everything becomes alien to him.
on ue feHos 3 HoH faz sie ofs GHet IAI (596-3, Fats, He 1)
naam daan isnaan na manmukh tit tan Dhoorh Dhumaa-ee. ||1]|
The self-willed manmukh does not remember the Name of the Lord, does not give in charity, and does not cleanse his consciousness; his body rolls in the dust. ||1||
Ho Hout oH AMET II (596-4, Hafs, He 1) man maani-aa naam sakhaa-ee. The mind is comforted by the Comforter of the Naam.
ufe us as & stead fats Ast gs gsret I TIS ll (596-4, Fafs, ue 1)
paa-ay para-o gur kai balihaarai jin saachee boojh bujhaa-ee. rahaa-o.
I fall at the Guru's feet - Iam a sacrifice to Him; He has given me to understand the true understanding. ||Pause] |
na fas so Ulfs He Sfamr AS FAG ee Tet Il (596-5, Fafo, we 1)
jag si-o jhooth pareet man bayDhi-aa jan si-o vaad rachaa-ee.
The mind is impressed with the false love of the world; he quarrels with the Lord's humble servant.
Hear Hae uifofafa Hal AS OH o BS He fey UT II (596-5, af, He 1)
maa-i-aa magan ahinis mag johai naam na layvai marai bikh khaa-ee. Infatuated with Maya, night and day, he sees only the worldly path; he does not chant the Naam, and drinking poison, he dies.
due efs ga fasardt Hae Hats o niet II (596-6, Fafs, He 1)
ganDhan vain rataa hitkaaree sabdai surat na aa-ee.
He is imbued and infatuated with vicious talk; the Word of the Shabad does not come into his consciousness.
dfa 3 Ts ofA oot Sfomr Hofer ufS aeet NM (596-7, Aafs, He 1)
rang na raataa ras nahee bayDhi-aa manmukh pat gavaa-ee. ||2| |
He is not imbued with the Lord's Love, and he is not impressed by the taste of the Name; the self-willed manmukh loses his honor. ||2| |
A Ast His Ad o Uta fAga IA St Tet Il (596-7, Fas, He 1)
saaDh sabhaa meh sahj na chaakhi-aa jinbaa ras nahee raa-ee.
He does not enjoy celestial peace in the Company of the Holy, and there is not even a bit of sweetness on his tongue.
HO 36 Ue mua’ afd Wont eg at wats & UTE II (596-8, afs, He 1) man tan Dhan apunaa kar jaani-aa dar kee khabar na paa-ee.
He calls his mind, body and wealth his own; he has no knowledge of the Court of the Lord.
mit Hife afer nifomre ua va fen o aTet II (596-8, Fats, He 1
akhee meet chali-aa anDhi-aaraa ghar dar disai na bhaa-ee.
Closing his eyes, he walks in darkness; he cannot see the home of his own being, O Siblings of Destiny.
AH efs gor 68s & ure must aha aHreT BI (596-9, Fafs, He 1)
jam dar baaDhaa tha-ur na paavai apunaa kee-aa kamaa-ee. ||3] |
Tied up at Death's door, he finds no place of rest; he receives the rewards of his own actions. ||3]|
eld Ad ST net Sut ATa™ AAS B WET Il (596-10, Fafs, ue 1)
nadar karay taa akhee vaykhaa kahnaa kathan na jaa-ee.
When the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then I see Him with my own eyes; He is indescribable, and cannot be described.
aot afe vfs nafe Hod wifys foe SAE I (596-10, Fafs, Hs 1)
kannee sun sun sabad salaahee amrit ridai vasaa-ee.
With my ears, I continually listen to the Word of the Shabad, and I praise Him; His Ambrosial Name abides within my heart.
foss@ fadarg faseg use Af ANTE I (596-11, Fefs, Hs 1)
nirbha-o nirankaar nirvair pooran jot samaa-ee.
He is Fearless, Formless and absolutely without vengeance; I am absorbed in His Perfect Light.
Soa Id fs SIH B Sa Ale of Sfsnret sisi 596-11, Fafs, He 1)
naanak gur vin bharam na bhaagai sach naam vadi-aa-ee. ||4||3]|
O Nanak, without the Guru, doubt is not dispelled; through the True Name, glorious greatness is obtained. ||4||3]|
Hafs Hos 9 BSH Il (596-12)
sorath mehlaa 1 dutukay. Sorat'h, First Mehl, Du-Tukas:
uz Usst uz urat THE ois az Beara I (596-12, Aafs, He 1)
purh Dhartee purh paanee aasan chaar kunt cha-ubaaraa.
In the realm of land, and in the realm of water, Your seat is the chamber of the four directions.
HIG See at Has Sor Hf SS SAAS UI (596-13, Fels, we 1)
Sagal bhavan kee moorat aykaa mukh tayrai taksaalaa. ||1]| Yours is the one and only form of the entire universe; Your mouth is the mint to fashion all. ||1]|
He wfsa 3a dA fester | (596-13, Fafs, He 1) mayray saahibaa tayray choj vidaanaa. O my Lord Master, Your play is so wonderful!
ate af Hdbufe stoufs ste mm Aga AHTST Il TIC Il (596-13, Fats, us 1)
jal thal mahee-al bharipur leenaa aapay sarab samaanaa. rahaa-o.
You are pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky; You Yourself are contained in all. ||Pause| |
We A Se So Als SHS Sat gy faAsT Il (596-14, Hafs, we 1) jah jah daykhaa tah jot tumaaree tayraa roop kinayhaa. Wherever I look, there I see Your Light, but what is Your form?
feag ofu fests usear afe & fan dt ATT NI (596-15, Fefs, He 1D ikat roop fireh parchhannaa ko-ay na kis hee jayhaa. ||2|| You have one form, but it is unseen; there is none like any other. ||2]|
wisn AIA CsaHn ASA 3d AS AST Il (596-15, Fats, He 1)
andaj jayraj ut-bhuj saytaj tayray keetay jantaa.
The beings born of eggs, born of the womb, born of the earth and born of sweat, all are created by You.
eq use H Se sftmr 3 Age HT TST MSI (596-16, Fafs, Hs 1) ayk purab mai tayraa daykhi-aa too sabhnaa maahi ravantaa. ||3]| I have seen one glory of Yours, that You are pervading and permeating in all. ||3]|
33 Te as H Sa 6 lent Hee fas SH Il (596-16, Fafs, ws
tayray gun bahutay mai ayk na jaani-aa mai moorakh kichh deejai.
Your Glories are so numerous, and I do not know even one of them; I am such a fool - please, give me some of them!
ysefs ood Afs HS Afoe SaeT UT SIA III (596-17, Fats, 48 1) paranvat naanak sun mayray saahibaa dubdaa pathar leejai. ||4||4]|
Prays Nanak, listen, O my Lord Master: I am sinking like a stone - please, save me! [141141 |
Hafs HIS Y Il (596-17)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
vg unit ufsz usn unist 5 fesHe fedardt il (596-17, Fafs, Hs 1)
ha-o paapee patit param paakhandee too nirmal nirankaaree.
I am a wicked sinner and a great hypocrite; You are the Immaculate and Formless Lord.
nifys ofa usH ofA aS oas Aafe SHH AU (596-18, Fats, He 1)
amrit chaakh param ras raatay thaakur saran tumaaree. ||1||
Tasting the Ambrosial Nectar, I am imbued with supreme bliss; O Lord and Master, I seek Your Sanctuary. ||1]|
TIS FH HE ASHE Il (596-19, Hafs, we 1) kartaa too mai maan nimaanay. O Creator Lord, You are the honor of the dishonored.
HS HIS BH US US ATS Ale ANTS Il JIE Il (596-19, ahs, He 1)
maan mahat naam Dhan palai saachai sabad samaanay. rahaa-o.
In my lap is the honor and glory of the wealth of the Name; I merge into the True Word of the Shabad. ||Pause| |
3 UT TH Bs Ge J AGT TH TEST Il (596-19, iafo, ns 1)
too pooraa ham ooray hochhay too ga-uraa ham ha-uray.
You are perfect, while I am worthless and imperfect. You are profound, while I am trivial.
Us uo
33 dt Ho v3 “iota users dfs dAat Af HO F NI (597-1, Fats, He 1)
tujh hee man raatay ahinis parbhaatay har rasnaa jap man ray. ||2]|
My mind is imbued with You, day and night and morning, O Lord; my tongue chants Your Name, and my mind meditates on You. ||2||
3H AMS JH SH Ot aS Ale ste Sfo APS Il (597-2, Fafs, He 1)
tum saachay ham tum hee raachay sabad bhayd fun saachay.
You are True, and I am absorbed into You; through the mystery of the Shabad, I shall ultimately become True as well.
mifofota of 33 A Ae His AGH A AS ISI (597-2, Fafo, v2 1)
ahinis naam ratay say soochay mar janmay say kaachay. ||3]||
Those who are imbued with the Naam day and night are pure, while those who die to be reborn are impure. ||3]|
wed 3 tA fan Wot fsAfs Adta 3 et Il (597-3, Fats, He 1) avar na deesai kis saalaahee tiseh sareek na ko-ee. I do not see any other like the Lord; who else should I praise? No one is equal to Him.
ysets cog GAS aA aSHfS wor Het sul (597-3, Fats, He 1) paranvat naanak daasan daasaa gurmat jaani-aa so-ee. ||4]||5|| Prays Nanak, I am the slave of His slaves; by Guru's Instruction, I know Him. ||4||5]|
Hats HIS % Il (597-4) sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
MEE MUTT IH nididd Bt FSH AS S ATH Il (597-4, Aatls, Hs 1)
alakh apaar agamm agochar naa tis kaal na karmaa.
He is unknowable, infinite, unapproachable and imperceptible. He is not subject to death or karma.
wfs oats ost HSS of fSA Te a Sa NAM (597-5, af, He 1) jaat ajaat ajonee sambha-o naa tis bhaa-o na bharmaa. ||1|| His caste is casteless; He is unborn, self-illumined, and free of doubt and desire. ||1]|
Ard Afsnirg feed ATAS Il (597-5, Fafs, ue 1) saachay sachiaar vitahu kurbaan. I am a Sacrifice to the Truest of the True.
ot fA gu zag oot Sfwr Are Aafe StS | TTS I (597-5, Fafs, we Y
naa tis roop varan nahee raykh-i-aa saachai sabad neesaan. rahaa-o.
He has no form, no color and no features; through the True Word of the Shabad, He reveals Himself. ||Pause] |
o faq ws fust aS dau a fH AH 6 OT Il (597-6, Fafs, He
naa tis maat pitaa sut banDhap naa tis kaam na naaree.
He has no mother, father, sons or relatives; He is free of sexual desire; He has no wife.
nae fade wud udug Aaet AfS SHS II (597-7, Fafs, He 1)
akul niranjan apar parampar saglee jot tumaaree. ||2]|
He has no ancestry; He is immaculate. He is infinite and endless; O Lord, Your Light is pervading all. ||2]|
we we nists yoy warfemr ufe wie afs Aaret I (597-7, Fafs, Hs 1) ghat ghat antar barahm lukaa-i-aa ghat ghat jot sabaa-ee. Deep within each and every heart, God is hidden; His Light is in each and every heart.
and Aue HAS TaHst fogs SSt Get Bll (597-8, Fafs, nz 1)
bajar kapaat muktay gurmatee nirbhai taarhee laa-ee. ||3]|
The heavy doors are opened by Guru's Instructions; one becomes fearless, in the trance of deep meditation. ||3]|
as @urfe ave fafs Ha eras Fafs Aart | (597-8, Fels, He 1)
jant upaa-ay kaal sir jantaa vasgat jugat sabaa-ee.
The Lord created all beings, and placed death over the heads of all; all the world is under His Power.
Afsag Afe uensg uefs scfs HAE AHH III (597-9, Aafe, He 1)
satgur sayv padaarath paavahi chhooteh sabad kamaa-ee. ||4|
Serving the True Guru, the treasure is obtained; living the Word of the Shabad, one is emancipated. ||4||
He aS Arg AHS feas Haat Il (597-9, iafs, Hs 1)
soochai bhaadai saach samaavai virlay soochaachaaree.
In the pure vessel, the True Name is contained; how few are those who practice true conduct.
33 AG usH 33 fherfeor coat Aafs SHS WUE (597-10, Fats, He 1)
tantai ka-o param tant milaa-i-aa naanak saran tumaaree. ||5||6||
The individual soul is united with the Supreme Soul; Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||5||6||
Hafs HIS Y Il (597-11)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
fa@ via fas urehat f3@ Aas He fimrA I (597-11, Fats, He 1) ji-o meenaa bin paanee-ai ti-o saakat marai pi-aas. Like a fish without water is the faithless cynic, who dies of thirst.
f3@ ofs fae Hdba F Hot A fase WS ATA NA (597-11, Fats, He 1) ti-o har bin maree-ai ray manaa jo birthaa jaavai saas. ||1]|| So shall you die, O mind, without the Lord, as your breath goes in vain. ||1]|
Ho ¢ TH OH AA SEE Il (597-12, Aafs, He 1) man ray raam naam jas lay-ay. O mind, chant the Lord's Name, and praise Him.
faa as fea on fae woG ag HS ofe SE 1 TIC Il (597-12, Fah, ne
bin gur ih ras ki-o laha-o gur maylai har day-ay. rahaa-o.
Without the Guru, how will you obtain this juice? The Guru shall unite you with the Lord. ||Pause| |
Ha Ao fe Hast aenfa Stee SE i (597-13, Fats, He
sant janaa mil sangtee gurmukh tirath ho-ay.
For the Gurmukh, meeting with the Society of the Saints is like making a pilgrimage to a sacred shrine.
wWonfs Stee HAST Td PIA usufs SE QM (597-13, Aafs, He 1
athsath tirath majnaa gur daras paraapat ho-ay. ||2||
The benefit of bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage is obtained by the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||2| |
fa@ Hat AS PIT sy BS AS ASY Ml (597-14, Fats, He 1 ji-o jogee jat baahraa tap naahee sat santokh. Like the Yogi without abstinence, and like penance without truth and contentment,
fs ant fas todt AH Hd nists Se BI (597-14, Fafs, He 1) ti-o naamai bin dayhuree jam maarai antar dokh. |[3]| so is the body without the Lord's Name; death will slay it, because of the sin within.
SII
Was Un 3 ureha ofs ura Afsara Ste Il (597-15, Aafs, us 1)
saakat paraym na paa-ee-ai har paa-ee-ai satgur bhaa-ay.
The faithless cynic does not obtain the Lord's Love; the Lord's Love is obtained only through the True Guru.
AY ey ast ag fed ag aoa frefs ATE SIDI (597-15, Aafs, He 1)
sukh dukh daataa gur milai kaho naanak sifat samaa-ay. ||4]||7]|
One who meets with the Guru, the Giver of pleasure and pain, says Nanak, is absorbed in the Lord's Praise. ||4||7]||
Hafs HIS Y Il (597-16)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
3 ys ast ate fs us on ad Surat AG Il (597-16, Fafo, He 1)
too parabh daataa daan mat pooraa ham thaaray bhaykhaaree jee-o.
You, God, are the Giver of gifts, the Lord of perfect understanding; I am a mere beggar at Your Door.
H for wa fae fas o soet ofs th on fine FIG NAN (597-17, Fats, He
mai ki-aa maaga-o kichh thir na rahaa-ee har deejai naam pi-aaree jee-o. ||1|| What should I beg for? Nothing remains permanent; O Lord, please, bless me with Your Beloved Name. ||1]|
whe ute sf afar seers Il (597-17, Fats, He 1)
ghat ghat rav rahi-aa banvaaree.
In each and every heart, the Lord, the Lord of the forest, is permeating and pervading.
vfs af Hdinifs qus zs ad vat ef foot AE 1 TITS Ih (597-18, Aafs, Hes jal thal mahee-al gupto vartai gur sabdee daykh nihaaree jee-o. rahaa-o.
In the water, on the land, and in the sky, He is pervading but hidden; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is revealed. ||Pause] |
Has ufeais nee fetes afs Afsafs fasur ost AIG i (597-18, Fafs, He 1)
marat pa-i-aal akaas dikhaa-i-o gur satgur kirpaa Dhaaree jee-o.
In this world, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in the Akaashic Ethers, the Guru, the True Guru, has shown me the Lord; He has showered me with His Mercy.
A Yay minal J st dot we stafe ty Hast AE QI (597-19, Fats, He 1)
so barahm ajonee hai bhee honee ghat bheetar daykh muraaree jee-o. ||2]|
He is the unborn Lord God; He is, and shall ever be. Deep within your heart, behold Him, the Destroyer of ego. ||2||
dar uct WOH Hes aS feg wg aus fefs eA sats fers AIG I (598-1, Fats, we D
janam maran ka-o ih jag bapurho in doojai bhagat visaaree jee-o. This wretched world is caught in birth and death; in the love of duality, it has forgotten devotional worship of the Lord.
Afsag fee 3 Tons uUrsht Pas Tet TST AIG BI (98-1, Aafs, He D
satgur milai ta gurmat paa-ee-ai saakat baajee haaree jee-o. ||3]|
Meeting the True Guru, the Guru's Teachings are obtained; the faithless cynic loses the game of life. ||3]|
Afsag sue sfs foas safe 5 aes HEH MI II (598-2, Aafs, He 1)
satgur banDhan torh niraaray bahurh na garabh majhaaree jee-o.
Breaking my bonds, the True Guru has set me free, and I shall not be cast into the womb of reincarnation again.
Soe fame sso userfior ofa ufs sfimr fadarct AIG siti (98-3, Aafs, He 1) naanak gi-aan ratan pargaasi-aa har man vasi-aa nirankaaree jee-o. ||4||8]|
O Nanak, the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines forth, and the Lord, the Formless Lord, dwells within my mind. ||4]|8]|
Hafs HIS Y Il (598-4)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
fan H@ fofo arefs su Afar wre A nifys aa uct AE I (598-4, Fafs, He 1)
jis jal niDh kaaran tum jag aa-ay so amrit gur paahee jee-o.
The treasure of the Name, for which you have come into the world - that Ambrosial Nectar is with the Guru.
ead 2H su vsoet vfam feg ae ardt AIG NAM (598-4, Fefs, He 1 chhodahu vays bhaykh chaturaa-ee dubiDhaa ih fal naahee jee-o. ||1]| Renounce costumes, disguises and clever tricks; this fruit is not obtained by duplicity.
[21|
Ho ¢ fag IT HS AS ATS AIG I (598-5, Fats, us 1) man ray thir rahu mat kat jaahee jee-o. O my mind, remain steady, and do not wander away.
Tos Fes aTs vy uefa ule vifys we Hat AME i TTS il (598-5, Fels, 4s baahar dhoodhat bahut dukh paavahi ghar amrit ghat maahee jee-o. rahaa-o.
By searching around on the outside, you shall only suffer great pain; the Ambrosial Nectar is found within the home of your own being. ||Pause] |
weds efs ae aG weg afe neae usstdt AIG I (598-6, Fats, He 1)
avgun chhod gunaa ka-o Dhaavahu kar avgun pachhutaahee jee-o.
Renounce corruption, and seek virtue; committing sins, you shall only come to regret and repent.
He “und at And 3 Aeta fete fefe ate gardt AG NM (598-7, Fafs, He 1
Sar apsar kee saar na jaaneh fir fir Keech budaahee jee-o. ||2]|
You do not know the difference between good and evil; again and again, you sink into the mud. ||2||
nists HS BF aT 3S Tole areg at A i (598-7, iafo, ws 1)
antar mail lobh baho jhoothay baahar naavhu kaahee jee-o.
Within you is the great filth of greed and falsehood; why do you bother to wash your body on the outside?
fase aH Aud Ae Tenfy visa at afs sect AME SI (98-8, Fafs, He 1)
nirmal naam japahu sad gurmukh antar kee gat taahee jee-o. ||3]|
Chant the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord always, under Guru's Instruction; only then will your innermost being be emancipated. ||3]|
usofe 83 fea az frag AY Ts avast Sw urdt AG Il (598-9, Fats, we 1)
parhar lobh nindaa koorh ti-aagahu sach gur bachnee fal paahee jee-o.
Let greed and slander be far away from you, and renounce falsehood; through the True Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall obtain the true fruit.
fa@ ave f3@ aug ofa HIG Ho oa Aafe Aart ATG SICH (598-9, Fats, He 1)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho har jee-o jan naanak sabad salaahee jee-o. ||4||9||
As it pleases You, You preserve me, Dear Lord; servant Nanak sings the Praises of Your Shabad. ||4||9]|
Rafe Hoe 9 Uwue I (598-10)
sorath mehlaa 1 panchpaday. Sorat'h, First Mehl, Panch-Padas:
MUS UG HAS Tf o Aas at UT WE AIS Ba Il (598-10, Hats, ws 1)
apnaa ghar moosat raakh na saakeh kee par ghar johan laagaa.
You cannot save your own home from being plundered; why do you spy on the houses of others?
wg tg ufs A IA outs A TaHfe Asa Bar UI (598-11, Fats, He 1)
ghar dar raakhahi jay ras chaakhahi jo gurmukh sayvak laagaa. ||1]|
That Gurmukh who joins himself to the Guru's service, saves his own home, and tastes the Lord's Nectar. ||1]|
HO J AHS AS HS BA Il (598-12, Fale, ve 1) man ray samajh kavan mat laagaa. O mind, you must realize what your intellect is focused on.
omy ferfa ne gn S36 fefe uesfo waar i JIE Il (598-12, Aefs, 2 1)
naam visaar an ras lobhaanay fir pachhutaahi abhaagaa. rahaa-o.
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one is involved with other tastes; the unfortunate wretch shall come to regret it in the end. ||Pause] |
nes a@ Jau ws a defs fg BY AY BS Wa Il (598-13, Fale, He 1) aavat ka-o harakh jaat ka-o roveh ih dukh sukh naalay laagaa. When things come, he is pleased, but when they go, he weeps and wails; this pain
and pleasure remains attached to him.
nm eu AY Sf Sar] Toute A mesa Il (598-13, Aefs, He 1)
aapay dukh sukh bhog bhogaavai gurmukh so anraagaa. ||2| |
The Lord Himself causes him to enjoy pleasure and endure pain; the Gurmukh, however, remains unaffected. ||2||
ofs aA Gufs neg four adi fats uber A fyustar i (698-14, Fafs, Hs 1)
har ras oopar avar ki-aa kahee-ai jin pee-aa so tariptaagaa.
What else can be said to be above the subtle essence of the Lord? One who drinks it in is satisfied and satiated.
Hor Hfos fafs feo on afer A AES Bas Ba Il (598-14, Aafs, 2 1 maa-i-aa mohit jin ih ras kho-i-aa jaa saakat durmat laagaa. ||3]|
One who is lured by Maya loses this juice; that faithless cynic is tied to his evil- mindedness. ||3]|
Ho a HG ugoufs edt edt Hfs SE ANTE Il (598-15, Fafs, He 1)
man kaa jee-o pavanpat dayhee dayhee meh day-o samaagaa.
The Lord is the life of the mind, the Master of the breath of life; the Divine Lord is contained in the body.
A 3 fa 3 ofa oA Wet Ho fRus aa fee Wa sil (598-16, Fafs, Hs 1)
jay too deh ta har ras gaa-ee man tariptai har liv laagaa. ||4]|
If You so bless us, Lord, then we sing Your Praises; the mind is satisfied and fulfilled, lovingly attached to the Lord. ||4]|
Wonafs ufs afs aA urea af fife AH SS Sa I (598-16, Fafs, Hz 1) saaDhsangat meh har ras paa-ee-ai gur mili-ai jam bha-o bhaagaa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the subtle essence of the Lord is obtained; meeting the Guru, the fear of death departs.
Soa TH OH Alu Tenfy de us MASA Sa WUINAOM (598-17, Fats, He 1)
naanak raam naam jap gurmukh har paa-ay mastak bhaagaa. ||5||10]|
O Nanak, chant the Name of the Lord, as Gurmukh; you shall obtain the Lord, and realize your pre-ordained destiny. ||5||10]|
Hafs HIS Y Il (598-18)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
Ava Fier fafs Sy ua” fas SY sot Fet A Ut (598-18, Fels, we 1
sarab jee-aa sir laykh Dhuraahoo bin laykhai nahee ko-ee jee-o.
Destiny, pre-ordained by the Lord, looms over the heads of all beings; no one is without this pre-ordained destiny.
uify ney aves afs ea gath vere At AG NAN (598-18, Fats, He 1)
aap alaykh kudrat kar daykhai hukam chalaa-ay so-ee jee-o. ||1]|
Only He Himself is beyond destiny; creating the creation by His creative power, He beholds it, and causes His Command to be followed. ||1]|
Ho J TH Aug AY et Il (598-19, Fafs, ne 1) man ray raam japahu sukh ho-ee. O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and be at peace.
wifofofh ad a Udo AdeT dfs est gas ASt i TIS I (598-19, Fah, He 1)
ahinis gur kay charan sarayvhu har daataa bhugtaa so-ee. rahaa-o.
Day and night, serve at the Guru's feet; the Lord is the Giver, and the Enjoyer. ||Pause] |
Uar ure
A nists A wate tag weg o SAT ae AIG I (599-1, Hafs, we jo antar so baahar daykhhu avar na doojaa ko-ee jee-o. He is within - see Him outside as well; there is no one, other than Him.
qonfy &a ferfe afs tug whe whe afs ANet AG QI (599-2, Hats, He 1)
gurmukh ayk darisat kar daykhhu ghat ghat jot samo-ee jee-o. ||2||
As Gurmukh, look upon all with the single eye of equality; in each and every heart, the Divine Light is contained. ||2]|
vos ofa sug utes wud as fife fea ufs det AIG II (599-2, Fats, He
chaltou thaak rakhahu ghar apnai gur mili-ai ih mat ho-ee jee-o.
Restrain your fickle mind, and keep it steady within its own home; meeting the Guru, this understanding is obtained.
afy mfene so@ farnet vy faad AY det Ae SII (599-3, Fas, He 1D
daykh adrist raha-o bismaadee dukh bisrai sukh ho-ee jee-o. ||3]|
Seeing the unseen Lord, you shall be amazed and delighted; forgetting your pain, you Shall be at peace. ||3]|
uted mfu@ us wy ure for wife ear det AIS II (599-4, afs, He 1
peevhu api-o param sukh paa-ee-ai nij ghar vaasaa ho-ee jee-o.
Drinking in the ambrosial nectar, you shall attain the highest bliss, and dwell within the home of your own self.
HOH Hee SE SHS eM usa Hon 3B det AMI Isl (599-4, Fats, He 1)
janam maran bhav bhanjan gaa-ee-ai punrap janam na ho-ee jee-o. ||4||
So sing the Praises of the Lord, the Destroyer of the fear of birth and death, and you Shall not be reincarnated again. ||4||
33 fodne afs Aaret Ad Se o aet HIG I (599-5, Fafs, we 1»
tat niranjan jot sabaa-ee soha™ bhayd na ko-ee jee-o.
The essence, the immaculate Lord, the Light of all - I am He and He is me - there is no difference between us.
WUTUT USAIN USHA sa Te fife Het HIE UUNaall (599-5, Fats, He 1)
aprampar paarbarahm parmaysar naanak gur mili-aa so-ee jee-o. ||5||11]|
The Infinite Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God - Nanak has met with Him, the Guru. ||5||11]|
Rafe Hoe 4 we B (599-7)
sorath mehlaa 1 ghar 3 Sorat’h, First Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsara yATfe il (599-7)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ww fSH stet Se Tt ST I (599-8, Hafe, us 1) jaa tis bhaavaa tad hee gaavaa. When I am pleasing to Him, then I sing His Praises.
St WS A SH UTS II (599-8, Fale, ue 1) taa gaavay kaa fal paavaa. Singing His Praises, I receive the fruits of my rewards.
~
We a Se Tet i) AT My SS eT AU (599-8, af, ne 1) gaavay kaa fal ho-ee. jaa aapay dayvai so-ee. ||1]| The rewards of singing His Praises are obtained when He Himself gives them. ||1]|
Ho Hd Td seat fof uret il (599-9, Fafs, we 1) man mayray gur bachnee niDh paa-ee. O my mind, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the treasure is obtained;
3 3 Ad Hts Som AHS Il JIE Il (599-9, Fafs, He 1) taa tay sach meh rahi-aa samaa-ee. rahaa-o. this is why I remain immersed in the True Name. ||Pause]|
ad Ad nists wait Il (599-9, afs, ne 1) gur saakhee antar jaagee. When I awoke within myself to the Guru's Teachings,
at gue Hfs faureft Il (599-10, Aafs, He 1) taa chanchal mat ti-aagee. then I renounced my fickle intellect.
aa Aret at Brora Il (599-10, Fafs, ue 1) gur saakhee kaa ujee-aaraa. When the Light of the Guru's Teachings dawned,
3 fifent Aare nigra 12H (599-10, Hats, He 1) taa miti-aa sagal anDh-yaaraa. ||2]| and then all darkness was dispelled. ||2]|
TT VISt HS Bal Il (599-10, Aafs, uz 1) gur charnee man laagaa. When the mind is attached to the Guru's Feet,
3 AH OT HIT Sa Il (599-11, Aafe, Hs 1) taa jam kaa maarag bhaagaa. then the Path of Death recedes.
3 fete fogs urfemr I (599-11, Fats, He 1)
bhai vich nirbha-o paa-i-aa.
Through the Fear of God, one attains the Fearless Lord; 3 Hon & us mrfemr Sil (599-11, Fats, He 1)
taa sahjai kai ghar aa-i-aa. ||3]|| then, one enters the home of celestial bliss. ||3] |
seals HSA FS FX atarat Il (599-12, Fafo, vs 1) bhanat naanak boojhai ko beechaaree. Prays Nanak, how rare are those who reflect and understand,
feR Aa Hf Agel ATS Il (599-12, Fafs, He 1 is jag meh karnee saaree. the most sublime action in this world.
adeat atafs FH i (599-12, Favs, us 1) karnee keerat ho-ee. The noblest deed is to sing the Lord's Praises,
aT nt fifemr At WSNAUAI (599-12, Fafs, He 1) jaa aapay mili-aa so-ee. ||4]]1]]12|| and so meet the Lord Himself. ||4||1]|12]|
Hofe Hoe 3 we (599-14)
sorath mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Sorat'h, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars ure I (599-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Rea Az acts Afs Sat fo Hae ATS weer | (599-15, als, He 3) sayvak sayv karahi sabh tayree jin sabdai saad aa-i-aa. All of Your servants, who relish the Word of Your Shabad, serve You.
ad fasur 3 fasHe dur fafe fees wry aetfemr Il (599-15, Aafs, He 3) gur kirpaa tay nirmal ho-aa jin vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, they become pure, eradicating self-conceit from within.
wofes Te Wefs fos AS Td a ASfe Fafa NAM (599-16, ets, He 3)
an-din gun gaavahi nit saachay gur kai sabad suhaa-i-aa. ||1||
Night and day, they continually sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; they are adorned with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
He Stags JH Thea Aafs SHH Il (599-16, Fah, us 3) mayray thaakur ham baarik saran tumaaree. O my Lord and Master, I am Your child; I seek Your Sanctuary.
Sa AT AY 3 AEH orf Haat | TTS Il (599-17, Favs, ns 3)
ayko sachaa sach too kayval aap muraaree. rahaa-o.
You are the One and Only Lord, the Truest of the True; You Yourself are the Destroyer of ego. ||Pause] |
Was dd fast us ufemr Hae TBH HH Il (599-17, Hats, ne 3)
jaagat rahay tinee parabh paa-i-aa sabday ha-umai maaree.
Those who remain wakeful obtain God; through the Word of the Shabad, they conquer their ego.
fasdt nfs Ae ots AS Beat fama 33 staat I (599-18, Fafs, He 3)
girhee meh sadaa har jan udaasee gi-aan tat beechaaree.
Immersed in family life, the Lord's humble servant ever remains detached; he reflects upon the essence of spiritual wisdom.
Afsag Afe Ae AY Ufenr ofs ahr Bs ardt IQ (599-18, Fafs, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa har raakhi-aa ur Dhaaree. ||2||
Serving the True Guru, he finds eternal peace, and he keeps the Lord enshrined in his heart. ||2]|
feg Hour zs feft weer en ate ynrfenr II (599-19, Fafs, He 3) in manoo-aa dah dis Dhaavdaa doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-i-aa. This mind wanders in the ten directions; it is consumed by the love of duality.
UST EOO
HOHY Hag dfs ou 3 US fase AGH Tefen Il (600-1, Fats, He 3)
manmukh mugaDh har naam na chaytai birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa.
The foolish self-willed manmukh does not remember the Lord's Name; he wastes away his life in vain.
Afsag 32 aT OE ue JBH He Varfenr SII (600-1, Aafs, He 3)
satgur bhaytay taa naa-o paa-ay ha-umai moh chukaa-i-aa. ||3]|
But when he meets the True Guru, then he obtains the Name; he sheds egotism and emotional attachment. ||3]|
dfs WS AMS AY anefs Te a Hale Stet Il (600-2, als, He 3)
har jan saachay saach kamaaveh gur kai sabad veechaaree.
The Lord's humble servants are True - they practice Truth, and reflect upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nm Afs we ufs AS ATE afr Ba at Il (600-2, Fafs, Hs 3)
aapay mayl la-ay parabh saachai saach rakhi-aa ur Dhaaree.
The True Lord God unites them with Himself, and they keep the True Lord enshrined in their hearts.
Soa Beg as Hfs uret Sa THA THA IIA (600-3, Fate, v2 3)
naanak naavhu gat mat paa-ee ayhaa raas hamaaree. ||4||1]| O Nanak, through the Name, I have obtained salvation and understanding; this alone is my wealth. ||4]]1]|
Rafe HIS 3 Il (600-3)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
sats uaa sase a cor a afe ae Ag ALS Il (600-4, Fats, He 3)
bhagat khajaanaa bhagtan ka-o dee-aa naa-o har Dhan sach so-ay.
The True Lord has blessed His devotees with the treasure of devotional worship, and the wealth of the Lord's Name.
WMS BH UG ae fous ont fas o ahifs AE I 00-4, Hafs, He 3) akhut naam Dhan kaday nikhutai naahee kinai na kKeemat ho-ay. The wealth of the Naam, shall never be exhausted; no one can estimate its worth.
om ufs HY CAS de ata ufeur AG ALE IAI (600-5, Aafs, He 3) naam Dhan mukh ujlay ho-ay har paa-i-aa sach so-ay. ||1]| With the wealth of the Naam, their faces are radiant, and they attain the True Lord.
[1
Ho Ad Td Agel Ife ufenr ATE Il (600-5, Fafs, us 3) man mayray gur sabdee har paa-i-aa jaa-ay. O my mind, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is found.
faa Hae Ha soe feset vans fe HATE | TIE I 00-6, Fafs, He 3)
bin sabdai jag bhuldaa firdaa dargeh milai sajaa-ay. rahaa-o.
Without the Shabad, the world wanders around, and receives its punishment in the Court of the Lord. ||Pause||
fen oct niefs us oa eAfo an au SF HT nara | (600-6, Aafs, v2 3)
is dayhee andar panch chor vaseh kaam kroDh lobh moh aha™kaaraa.
Within this body dwell the five thieves: sexual desire, anger, greed, emotional attachment and egotism.
nifys Befs Hoy odt gsfs afe 3 Ae YAS II (600-7, Hats, Hs 3)
amrit looteh manmukh nahee boojheh ko-ay na sunai pookaaraa.
They plunder the Nectar, but the self-willed manmukh does not realize it; no one hears his complaint.
nitt Aas vig PIS IS TT TAT lil (600-8, Fafs, ws 3)
anDhaa jagat anDh vartaaraa baajh guroo gubaaraa. ||2||
The world is blind, and its dealings are blind as well; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. ||2||
Jen Ae afe afs fears fag vs 3 voter ats I (600-8, Aafs, He 3)
ha-umai mayraa kar kar vigutay kihu chalai na chaldi-aa naal.
Indulging in egotism and possessiveness, they are ruined; when they depart, nothing goes along with them.
aenfy de A on fomre Aet ofe or AHS II (600-9, Aafs, Hs 3)
gurmukh hovai so naam Dhi-aavai sadaa har naam samaal.
But one who becomes Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, and ever contemplates the Lord's Name.
Het wat of qe we oedt sefa feats Sil (600-9, Aas, ne 3)
sachee banee har gun gaavai nadree nadar nihaal. ||3]|
Through the True Word of Gurbani, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord; blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace, he is enraptured. ||3]|
Afsad fame Ae wife wee wing fAfs afeRra Il (600-10, Aas, He 3)
satgur gi-aan sadaa ghat chaanan amar sir baadisaahaa.
The spiritual wisdom of the True Guru is a steady light within the heart. The Lord's decree is over the heads of even kings.
motes sats ads fea TSt TH SH A BT Il (600-10, Favs, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahi din raatee raam naam sach laahaa.
Night and day, the Lord's devotees worship Him; night and day, they gather in the true profit of the Lord's Name.
Soa oH ot farsa Aafe gs Ufa ura ISI (600-11, Aafs, He 3)
naanak raam naam nistaaraa sabad ratay har paahaa. ||4]|2]| O Nanak, through the Lord's Name, one is emancipated; attuned to the Shabad, he finds the Lord. ||4]|2]|
Rafe Hs 3 Il (600-12)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
ants aH de at ofs ue fees mre Tevet Il (600-12, Fats, He 3)
daasan daas hovai taa har paa-ay vichahu aap gavaa-ee.
If one becomes the slave of the Lord's slaves, then he finds the Lord, and eradicates ego from within.
SIs a aa dfs wide J niafes als Te Tet Il (600-12, Fafs, v2 3)
bhagtaa kaa kaaraj har anand hai an-din har gun gaa-ee. The Lord of bliss is his object of devotion; night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Rafe gs Ae fea gait ofs fAG Jd ANTET IAI (600-13, Fas, H2 3)
sabad ratay sadaa ik rangee har si-o rahay samaa-ee. ||1]|
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, the Lord's devotees remain ever as one, absorbed in the Lord. ||1]|
dfs ME ASt Sets SHS Il (600-13, Fafs, He 3) har jee-o saachee nadar tumaaree. O Dear Lord, Your Glance of Grace is True.
witufsor aA > faut afte fiers mag UA IHS I TIS Il (600-14, Fafs, ne 3) aapni-aa daasaa no kirpaa kar pi-aaray raakho paij hamaaree. rahaa-o. Show mercy to Your slave, O Beloved Lord, and preserve my honor. ||Pause| |
Rafe Hardt Het IG Ate TaHSt SS Sra Il (600-15, Fafs, He 3)
sabad salaahee sadaa ha-o jeevaa gurmatee bha-o bhaagaa.
Continually praising the Word of the Shabad, I live; under Guru's Instruction, my fear has been dispelled.
As yg AT vifs Ayes ag Afeor fez wer i (600-15, Aafs, He 3)
mayraa parabh saachaa at su-aali-o gur sayvi-aa chit laagaa.
My True Lord God is so beautiful! Serving the Guru, my consciousness is focused on Him.
Aa’ Hae Het AY sel A AS Males AM II (600-16, Fats, He 3)
saachaa sabad sachee sach banee so jan an-din jaagaa. ||2||
One who chants the True Word of the Shabad, and the Truest of the True, the Word of His Bani, remains wakeful, day and night. ||2||
HS" asty Het AYES ASH aT nis o UTfEMT II (600-16, Fale, He 3) mahaa gambheer sadaa sukh-daata tis kaa ant na paa-i-aa. He is so very deep and profound, the Giver of eternal peace; no one can find His limit.
ud Te at Aer atat wifes ofa vfs eArfemr 11 (600-17, Hafe, 12 3)
pooray gur kee sayvaa keenee achint har man vasaa-i-aa. Serving the Perfect Guru, one becomes carefree, enshrining the Lord within the mind.
Ho 36 fosHe Ae Ay vise fees SoH Vorfemr ISI (600-17, Fats, He 3)
man tan nirmal sadaa sukh antar vichahu bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||3] |
The mind and body become immaculately pure, and a lasting peace fills the heart; doubt is eradicated from within. ||3]|
dfs a Hea Het Ug feast a ue Ta Sera Il (600-18, Fafs, ne 3)
har kaa maarag sadaa panth vikh-rhaa ko paa-ay gur veechaaraa.
The Way of the Lord is always such a difficult path; only a few find it, contemplating the Guru.
dfs & df Tat Hae HST IGH SH fears I (600-19, Fats, He 3)
har kai rang raataa sabday maataa ha-umai tajay vikaaraa.
Imbued with the Lord's Love, and intoxicated with the Shabad, he renounces ego and corruption.
Soa otH gst fea doit Aafe AeTsSTTST ISI (600-19, Aafs, 43 3)
naanak naam rataa ik rangee sabad savaaranhaaraa. ||4]|3]| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, and the Love of the One Lord, he is embellished with the Word of the Shabad. ||4||3]|
UST €oQ
Hafs HIS 3 Il (601-1)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
dfs HE su 3 AST Hod fimrs frag we nists I AMAT II (601-1, Fats, He 3)
har jee-o tuDh no sadaa saalaahee pi-aaray jichar ghat antar hai saasaa.
Dear Beloved Lord, I praise You continually, as long as there is the breath within my body.
fea ug fag fensts 3 Homi Wes FIA USAT II (01-1, Fefs, He 3)
ik pal khin visrahi too su-aamee jaana-o baras pachaasaa.
If I were to forget You, for a moment, even for an instant, O Lord Master, it would be like fifty years for me.
JH HS HIT Ae A set TT a Hales YAMA AU (601-2, Fafs, ws 3)
ham moorh mugaDh sadaa say bhaa-ee gur kai sabad pargaasaa. ||1]|
I was always such a fool and an idiot, O Siblings of Destiny, but now, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, my mind is enlightened. ||1||
dfs ME SH wry ST Tsret Il (601-3, Aafs, ve 3) har jee-o tum aapay dayh bujhaa-ee. Dear Lord, You Yourself bestow understanding.
ofa ME su feed Stour Ae St 3d on feeg afs Wet Il TTS Il (01-3, Fafs, ns 3)
har jee-o tuDh vitahu vaari-aa sad hee tayray naam vitahu bal jaa-ee. rahaa-o.
Dear Lord, I am forever a sacrifice to You; I am dedicated and devoted to Your Name. | |Pause| |
dH Aafe ne Hate ute ates ovet Hae dt Hats uret i (601-4, Aafs, vs 3)
ham sabad mu-ay sabad maar jeevaalay bhaa-ee sabday hee mukat paa-ee.
I have died in the Word of the Shabad, and through the Shabad, I am dead while yet alive, O Siblings of Destiny; through the Shabad, I have been liberated.
Hae Ho 36 fasne dor ofa efron nfs miret Il (601-4, Fale, He 3)
sabday man tan nirmal ho-aa har vasi-aa man aa-ee.
Through the Shabad, my mind and body have been purified, and the Lord has come to dwell within my mind.
Hae dd os fas He TS oe FAS afont ANS III (01-5, Fats, v8 3) sabad gur daataa jit man raataa har si-o rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||2| |
The Guru is the Giver of the Shabad; my mind is imbued with it, and I remain absorbed in the Lord. |[2||
Rae 6 Weld A vid 88 A fas wre AAS Il (ol-6, Fafs, ne 3)
sabad na jaaneh say annay bolay say kit aa-ay sansaaraa.
Those who do not know the Shabad are blind and deaf; why did they even bother to come into the world?
dfs oH 3 fer fase Hon Tetfenr Hf ed SST I (601-6, Aas, v2 3)
har ras na paa-i-aa birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa jameh vaaro vaaraa.
They do not obtain the subtle essence of the Lord's elixir; they waste away their lives, and are reincarnated over and over again.
fara’ & ats fone ufo ANTE HOHY Ha PAST ISll (601-7, Aafs, ue 3)
bistaa kay keerhay bistaa maahi samaanay manmukh mugaDh gubaaraa. ||3]|
The blind, idiotic, self-willed manmukhs are like maggots in manure, and in manure they rot away. ||3]|
nm afs fa nrafar we avet fon fas neg 3 aet Il (601-8, Aafs, He 3)
aapay kar vaykhai maarag laa-ay bhaa-ee tis bin avar na ko-ee.
The Lord Himself creates us, watches over us, and places us on the Path, O Siblings of Destiny; there is no one other than Him.
nf Ufe fofimr A afe 5 AS set AGS ag A TET Il (601-8, Fale, He 3)
jo Dhur likhi-aa so ko-ay na maytai bhaa-ee kartaa karay so ho-ee.
No one can erase that which is pre-ordained, O Siblings of Destiny; whatever the Creator wills, comes to pass.
area OH Shor Ho uists set neg 5 BAT At III (01-9, Hats, Hs 3)
naanak naam vasi-aa man antar bhaa-ee avar na doojaa ko-ee. ||4||4||
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the mind; O Siblings of Destiny, there is no other at all. ||4]|4]|
Hafs HIS 3 Il (601-10)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
gente sats acts ys seo niofeg aH FUE | (601-10, Fale, He 3)
gurmukh bhagat karahi parabh bhaaveh an-din naam vakhaanay.
The Gurmukhs practice devotional worship, and become pleasing to God; night and day, they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
sas at Are ate urfy oufs A Sd His STS Il (01-10, Fats, He 3) bhagtaa kee saar karahi aap raakhahi jo tayrai man bhaanay. You Yourself protect and take care of Your devotees, who are pleasing to Your Mind.
3 Gers Fate uss TE ats Tat AWE NA (o1-11, Favs, u2 3)
too gundaataa sabad pachhaataa gun kahi gunee samaanay. ||1||
You are the Giver of virtue, realized through the Word of Your Shabad. Uttering Your Glories, we merge with You, O Glorious Lord. ||1]|
Ho Hd dfs ME Ae ANTS Il (601-11, Aas, He 3) man mayray har jee-o sadaa samaal.
O my mind, remember always the Dear Lord.
nis ate 3a aot de net foad 3d ate il TIT Il (601-12, Fafs, v2 3)
ant kaal tayraa baylee hovai sadaa nibhai tayrai naal. rahaa-o.
At the very last moment, He alone shall be your best friend; He shall always stand by you. ||Pause| |
THe Vast Ae’ ag antefs a gSts Fears Il (601-12, fafs, ve 3)
dusat cha-ukarhee sadaa koorh kamaaveh naa boojheh veechaaray.
The gathering of the wicked enemies shall always practice falsehood; they do not contemplate understanding.
foe vAct 3 fafs ee ufemr saan sufs fers Il (601-13, Fafs, v2 3)
nindaa dustee tay kin fal paa-i-aa harnaakhas nakheh bidaaray.
Who can obtain fruit from the slander of evil enemies? Remember that Harnaakhash was torn apart by the Lord's claws.
ufsere Ho He dfs we ae ofa HE we Cas iM (601-14, Favs, us 3)
par-hilaad jan sad har gun gaavai har jee-o la-ay ubaaray. ||2]|
Prahlaad, the Lord's humble servant, constantly sang the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and the Dear Lord saved him. ||2]|
nun aS ag ser ate Aafs HoOHfe HIS o AT Il (601-14, Fafs, He 3)
aapas ka-o baho bhalaa kar jaaneh manmukh mat na kaa-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs see themselves as being very virtuous; they have absolutely no understanding at all.
Ag Fo ot fee fend AAS AOH aAeTet Il Co1-15, Hats, Hs 3)
saaDhoo jan kee nindaa vi-aapay jaasan janam gavaa-ee.
They indulge in slander of the humble spiritual people; they waste their lives away, and then they have to depart.
TH OH ae Vals ot nifs Te usset ll (601-15, Fafs, ne 3)
raam naam kaday cheeteh naahee ant ga-ay pachhutaa-ee. ||3]|
They never think of the Lord's Name, and in the end, they depart, regretting and repenting. ||3||
HES WOH Saat a alst as AST nrfy Be Il (601-16, Aafs, vs 3)
safal janam bhagtaa kaa keetaa gur sayvaa aap laa-ay.
The Lord makes the lives of His devotees fruitful; He Himself links them to the Guru's service.
Hae IS AIA HS moles dle T= WE Il (601-16, Aafs, vs 3)
sabday raatay sehjay maatay an-din har gun gaa-ay.
Imbued with the Word of the Shabad, and intoxicated with celestial bliss, night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Sod UH Ad Fost WS war fse a ues sill (601-17, Fafs, ne 3) naanak daas kahai baynantee ha-o laagaa tin kai paa-ay. ||4||5|| Slave Nanak utters this prayer: O Lord, please, let me fall at their feet. ||4||5]|
Rafe Has 3 Il (601-18)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
A fry mer dou od oct fa aa a oe fefe vre Il (01-18, Fafs, He 3)
so sikh sakhaa banDhap hai bhaa-ee je gur kay bhaanay vich aavai.
He alone is a Sikh, a friend, a relative and a sibling, who walks in the Way of the Guru's Will.
we se HVS set feats Gat w| Il (601-18, Fafs, Hz 3)
aapnai bhaanai jo chalai bhaa-ee vichhurh chotaa khaavai.
One who walks according to his own will, O Siblings of Destiny, suffers separation from the Lord, and shall be punished.
fag Afsag AY ae 3 ure ret fefa fefs ussTe IAI (1-19, Fats, He 3)
bin satgur sukh kaday na paavai bhaa-ee fir fir pachhotaavai. ||1]|
Without the True Guru, peace is never obtained, O Siblings of Destiny; again and again, he regrets and repents. ||1]|
dfs X SA AIS Set Il (01-19, Fats, us 3) har kay daas suhaylay bhaa-ee. The Lord's slaves are happy, O Siblings of Destiny.
UST E02
HOH Fon a fafa eu are nim fs feoret i TITS Il (602-1, Fafs, He 3)
janam janam kay kilbikh dukh kaatay aapay may! milaa-ee. rahaa-o.
The sins and sorrows of countless lifetimes are eradicated; the Lord Himself unites them in His Union. ||Pause| |
feg aca Ag Hht a due set sath gar AAT II (602-1, Fats, He 3)
ih kutamb sabh jee-a kay banDhan bhaa-ee bharam bhulaa sai'saaraa.
All of these relatives are like chains upon the soul, O Siblings of Destiny; the world is deluded by doubt.
fag ae dus gefa adt Taufe He EMT I (602-2, iafs, Hs 3)
bin gur banDhan tooteh naahee gurmukh mokh du-aaraa.
Without the Guru, the chains cannot be broken; the Gurmukhs find the door of salvation.
AGH adfs dd Ade o Uetete Hfs ASHfa Sg ST IQIl (602-2, Aafs, He 3)
karam karahi gur sabad na pachhaaneh mar janmeh vaaro vaaraa. ||2]|
One who performs rituals without realizing the Word of the Guru's Shabad, shall die and be reborn, again and again. ||2||
IG Aa Aa uals sfoor set afe o fan dt AT I (602-3, Fafs, He 3)
ha-o mayraa jag palach rahi-aa bhaa-ee ko-ay na kis hee kayraa.
The world is entangled in egotism and possessiveness, O Siblings of Destiny, but no one belongs to anyone else.
qenfy Hoe ufefs ae wef for wis df& sAs Il (602-4, Fats, Hs 3)
gurmukh mahal paa-in gun gaavan nij ghar ho-ay basayraa.
The Gurmukhs attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, singing the Glories of the Lord; they dwell in the home of their own inner being.
me Fs A umy usta ae us ofA AT III (602-4, Fels, 2 3) aithai boojhai so aap pachhaanai har parabh hai tis kayraa. ||3]|| One who understands here, realizes himself; the Lord God belongs to him. ||3]|
Afsag Ae fens 3 set fee star far urehit Il 02-5, Fafs, ws 3)
satguroo sadaa da-i-aal hai bhaa-ee vin bhaagaa ki-aa paa-ee-ai. The True Guru is forever merciful, O Siblings of Destiny; without good destiny, what can anyone obtain?
ea sels afe 24 AS Gufs AT HS Sa sy ure I 602-6, Favs, ws 3)
ayk nadar kar vaykhai sabh oopar jayhaa bhaa-o tayhaa fal paa-ee-ai.
He looks alike upon all with His Glance of Grace, but people receive the fruits of their rewards according to their love for the Lord.
Soa OH ZA Ho Niste fess ny Tevet ISIEN (602-6, Fats, He 3)
naanak naam vasai man antar vichahu aap gavaa-ee-ai. ||4]|6] |
O Nanak, when the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell within the mind, then self-conceit is eradicated from within. ||4]||6]]|
Hafs HIS 3 F3a Il (602-7) sorath mehlaa 3 choutukay. Sorat'h, Third Mehl, Chau-Tukas:
Het sats Afsagd 3 de Ast fase set il (602-7, Fats, ue 3)
sachee bhagat satgur tay hovai sachee hirdai banee.
True devotional worship is obtained only through the True Guru, when the True Word of His Bani is in the heart.
Afsag AS Het AY UTS TBH Aafe AHTAT II (602-8, Fafs, He 3)
satgur sayvay sadaa sukh paa-ay ha-umai sabad samaanee.
Serving the True Guru, eternal peace is obtained; egotism is obliterated through the Word of the Shabad.
fag aa AS sats 3 dat da gat fed fenr|t 1 (02-8, Hats, ws 3)
bin gur saachay bhagat na hovee hor bhoolee firai i-aanee.
Without the Guru, there is no true devotion; otherwise, people wander around, deluded by ignorance.
Houta feats Ae eu uefa fa He fee uret AI (602-9, Fats, H2 3)
manmukh fireh sadaa dukh paavahi doob mu-ay vin paanee. ||1]|
The self-willed manmukhs wander around, suffering in constant pain; they drown and die, even without water. ||1]|
amet J Hel JIT AdSret Il (602-9, Fats, He 3) bhaa-ee ray sadaa rahhu sarnaa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, remain forever in the Lord's Sanctuary, under His Protection.
ntuat sefa ad ufs ae ofs ont & Sfenret | TIS I (602-10, Fafs, 2 3)
aapnee nadar karay pat raakhai har naamo day vadi-aa-ee. rahaa-o.
Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He preserves our honor, and blesses us with the glory of the Lord's Name. ||Pause| |
ud TT 3 ory uss Hale AS SIT Il (602-10, Fels, we 3) pooray gur tay aap pachhaataa sabad sachai veechaaraa.
Through the Perfect Guru, one comes to understand himself, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
fase HaHiee Ae efhor sfA aH AT mara | (602-11, Fafs, He 3)
hirdai jagjeevan sad vasi-aa taj kaam kroDh aha‘kaaraa.
The Lord, the Life of the world, ever abides in his heart, and he renounces sexual desire, anger and egotism.
Het date stent As oret fase SH west Il (602-11, Fats, we 3)
sadaa hajoor ravi-aa sabh thaa-ee hirdai naam apaaraa.
The Lord is ever-present, permeating and pervading all places; the Name of the Infinite Lord is enshrined within the heart.
afa afa aat Hate usrat are Her Hota fumiar IQ (602-12, Fafs, He 3)
jug jug banee sabad pachhaanee naa-o meethaa maneh pi-aaraa. ||2]|
Throughout the ages, through the Word of His Bani, His Shabad is realized, and the Name becomes so sweet and beloved to the mind. ||2]|
Afsag Afe fate oH Uses" ASG HOH Ala wrfEnt | (602-12, Fats, us 3)
satgur sayv jin naam pachhaataa safal janam jag aa-i-aa.
Serving the Guru, one realizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord; fruitful is his life, and his coming into the world.
dfe oa wf Ae He fxufsur ge ae get nrfenr | 602-13, Hats, He 3)
har ras chaakh sadaa man taripti-aa gun gaavai gunee aghaa-i-aa.
Tasting the sublime elixir of the Lord, his mind is satisfied and satiated forever; singing the Glories of the Glorious Lord, he is fulfilled and satisfied.
aHS yaa Het Siar PS" MOTE ASE sAfEm | 02-14, Fafs, ue 3)
kamal pargaas sadaa rang raataa anhad sabad vajaa-i-aa.
The lotus of his heart blossoms forth, he is ever imbued with the Lord's Love, and the unstruck melody of the Shabad resounds within him.
36 HO fedHe fesHe seat Ad Afs ANTfEMT III (602-14, Fefs, He 3)
tan man nirmal nirmal banee sachay sach samaa-i-aa. ||3] |
His body and mind become immaculately pure; his speech becomes immaculate as well, and he merges in the Truest of the True. ||3]|
TH oH at afs af 3 as ASH fee AH II (602-15, Fafs, He 3)
raam naam kee gat ko-ay na boojhai gurmat ridai samaa-ee.
No one knows the state of the Lord's Name; through the Guru's Teachings, it comes to abide in the heart.
aenfy de A Ha ues dfs afh GAS TATE II (602-15, ats, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so mag pachhaanai har ras rasan rasaa-ee.
One who becomes Gurmukh, understands the Path; his tongue savors the sublime essence of the Lord's Nectar.
\ SA
AU 3U AAH AS Td 3S de fase oH SAT Il (602-16, Fale, He 3)
jap tap sanjam sabh gur tay hovai hirdai naam vasaa-ee.
Meditation, austere self-discipline and self-restraint are all obtained from the Guru; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide within the heart.
Soa OTH ANTOls A AS Hole vfs APS ufs ust IBID (602-16, Fats, He 3) naanak naam samaaleh say jan sohan dar saachai pat paa-ee. ||4]|7]||
O Nanak, those humble beings who praise the Naam are beautiful; they are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||4]|7]|
Hafs H3 3 3a Il (602-17) sorath mehlaa 3 dutukay. Sorat'h, Third Mehl, Du-Tukas:
Afsas fifeot Gadt set set Ales He St gs UTE Il (602-17, afs, Hs 3)
satgur mili-ai ultee bha-ee bhaa-ee jeevat marai taa boojh paa-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, one turns away from the world, O Siblings of Destiny; when he remains dead while yet alive, he obtains true understanding.
A ag A fry 3 oet fag Ast AS forte ai (02-18, Fats, ws 3)
so guroo so sikh hai bhaa-ee jis jotee jot milaa-ay. ||1]| He alone is the Guru, and he alone is a Sikh, O Siblings of Destiny, whose light merges in the Light. ||1]|
Ho J ate ofa ASt fee STE Il (02-19, Fafs, He 3) man ray har har saytee liv laa-ay. O my mind, be lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ho dfs Afu oto oat svet Tonfa ure afe ate I TIE Il (602-19, Fats, He 3)
man har jap meethaa laagai bhaa-ee gurmukh paa-ay har thaa-ay. rahaa-o. Chanting the Name of the Lord, it seems so sweet to the mind, O Siblings of Destiny; the Gurmukhs obtain a place in the Court of the Lord. ||Pause| |
ust €o3 fas aa ifs o Cun set Honfe EA STE I (603-1, Fafs, Hs 3)
bin gur pareet na oopjai bhaa-ee manmukh doojai bhaa-ay. Without the Guru, love for the Lord does not well up, O Siblings of Destiny; the self- willed manmukhs are engrossed in the love of duality.
3u aefs HoH aaH ata set us fas 5 UTS iil (603-1, Fats, m2 3)
tuh kuteh manmukh karam karahi bhaa-ee palai kichhoo na paa-ay. ||2||
Actions performed by the manmukh are like the threshing of the chaff - they obtain nothing for their efforts. ||2||
ad firfeon on vfs afenr aret vrdt ulfS fimrfa it (603-2, Hats, n2 3)
gur mili-ai naam man ravi-aa bhaa-ee saachee pareet pi-aar.
Meeting the Guru, the Naam comes to permeate the mind, O Siblings of Destiny, with true love and affection.
He dfs a Te de TSH TT a fs wnmfs 3 03-2, Aafs, He 3)
sadaa har kay gun ravai bhaa-ee gur kai hayt apaar. ||3]|
He always sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, with infinite love for the Guru. ||3]|
nitfent A udes J avet fa aa AS feos ote Il (603-3, afs, ne 3)
aa-i-aa So parvaan hai bhaa-ee je gur sayvaa chit laa-ay.
How blessed and approved is his coming into the world, O Siblings of Destiny, who focuses his mind on serving the Guru.
soa oH ofa usb set aa Aaet NOTE Iigitil (603-3, Aas, ne 3)
naanak naam har paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee gur sabdee maylaa-ay. ||4]||8] |
O Nanak, the Name of the Lord is obtained, O Siblings of Destiny, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and we merge with the Lord. ||4]|8]|
Hafs HIS 3 We Y Il (603-4)
sorath mehlaa 3 ghar 1. Sorat'h, Third Mehl, First House:
fsdt rat fysee feurfimr aret aanfa gs gS II (603-4, ats, 12 3)
tihee gunee taribhavan vi-aapi-aa bhaa-ee gurmukh boojh bujhaa-ay.
The three worlds are entangled in the three qualities, O Siblings of Destiny; the Guru imparts understanding.
oH on ofa set set ued famrsor ATE Al (603-5, Fats, we 3)
raam naam lag chhootee-ai bhaa-ee poochhahu gi-aanee-aa jaa-ay. ||1||
Attached to the Lord's Name, one is emancipated, O Siblings of Destiny; go and ask the wise ones about this. ||1]|
Ho 3 3 We efs va fas we I (603-5, Fafs, ue 3)
man ray tarai gun chhod cha-uthai chit laa-ay.
O mind, renounce the three qualities, and focus your consciousness on the fourth state.
dfs HE 3d His GA oe HET Ue a TE TE | TTS Il (603-6, Fale, ne 3)
har jee-o tayrai man vasai bhaa-ee sadaa har kay gun gaa-ay. rahaa-o.
The Dear Lord abides in the mind, O Siblings of Destiny; ever sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||Pause||
oH 3 Afs Gun set one fenfent xfs ATE Il (603-6, Fats, He 3)
naamai tay sabh oopjay bhaa-ee naa-ay visri-ai mar jaa-ay.
From the Naam, everyone originated, O Siblings of Destiny; forgetting the Naam, they die away.
mifamrat Aas vig F set AS TE HITE MMI (603-7, Fats, we 3) agi-aanee jagat anDh hai bhaa-ee sootay ga-ay muhaa-ay. ||2]| The ignorant world is blind, O Siblings of Destiny; those who sleep are plundered.
21 |
asHte Aa A Gad set sane ute Bate I (603-8, Fafs, nH 3)
gurmukh jaagay say ubray bhaa-ee bhavjal paar utaar.
Those Gurmukhs who remain awake are saved, O Siblings of Destiny; they cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
na fs oo dfs on 3 set fase aime Ca whe Ill (603-8, Aafs, He 3)
jag meh laahaa har naam hai bhaa-ee hirdai rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||3]||
In this world, the Name of the Lord is the true profit, O Siblings of Destiny; keep it enshrined within your heart. ||3]|
ad Adeet Cad sret TH oth fos STE Il (603-9, Aafs, He 3)
gur sarnaa-ee ubray bhaa-ee raam naam liv laa-ay.
In the Guru's Sanctuary, O Siblings of Destiny, you shall be saved; be lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name.
Soa o sat a saga set fas ofa ute Ao uTe Isiitil (03-9, Fats, ve 3) naanak naa-o bayrhaa naa-o tulharhaa bhaa-ee jit lag paar jan paa-ay. ||4||9]|
O Nanak, the Name of the Lord is the boat, and the Name is the raft, O Siblings of Destiny; setting out on it, the Lord's humble servant crosses over the world-ocean. [4119] |
Hafs Hos 3 We 4 Il (603-10)
sorath mehlaa 3 ghar 1. Sorat'h, Third Mehl, First House:
Afsag AY Ag Aa vise Ig & AY oH Il (603-10, Aas, He 3)
satgur sukh saagar jag antar hor thai sukh naahee.
The True Guru is the ocean of peace in the world; there is no other place of rest and peace.
ICH Aas ef dfa feurfimr ufs AON FS OTS NA (603-11, Fats, He 3)
ha-umai jagat dukh rog vi-aapi-aa mar janmai rovai Dhaahee. ||1||
The world is afflicted with the painful disease of egotism; dying, only to be reborn, it cries out in pain. ||1]|
yret Afsag Afe AY UTE II (603-11, Hef, He 3) paraanee satgur sayv sukh paa-ay. O mind, serve the True Guru, and obtain peace.
Afsag Aefs 3 AY wefs of 3 Whar HOH TASTE il TTS Il (603-12, Fale, uz 3) satgur sayveh taa sukh paavahi naahi ta jaahigaa janam gavaa-ay. rahaa-o.
If you serve the True Guru, you shall find peace; otherwise, you shall depart, after wasting away your life in vain. ||Pause] |
3 Te WS ag AN Ores afe GA AE 3 urfeEMr I (603-12, Fafs, He 3)
tarai gun Dhaat baho karam kamaaveh har ras saad na aa-i-aa.
Led around by the three qualities, he does many deeds, but he does not come to taste and savor the subtle essence of the Lord.
Hftor saue acts afest fas as ey urfenr iI (03-13, Fats, Hs 3)
sanDhi-aa tarpan karahi gaa-itaree bin boojhay dukh paa-i-aa. ||2| |
He says his evening prayers, and makes offerings of water, and recites his morning prayers, but without true understanding, he still suffers in pain. ||2||
Afsag Az A esa fan 3 wry fers I (603-14, af, He 3)
satgur sayvay so vadbhaagee jis no aap milaa-ay.
One who serves the True Guru is very fortunate; as the Lord so wills, he meets with the Guru.
dfs oA ut Ao Ae fgusTA fess ny Te ISIl (603-14, Hef, us 3)
har ras pee jan sadaa tariptaasay vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||3]||
Drinking in the sublime essence of the Lord, His humble servants remain ever satisfied; they eradicate self-conceit from within themselves. ||3]|
feg na via AS nig ane fag TT Ha B UES Il (603-15, Aafs, He 3) ih jag anDhaa sabh anDh kamaavai bin gur mag na paa-ay. This world is blind, and all act blindly; without the Guru, no one finds the Path.
Soa Afsagd fxs 3 ondt Fe wed niefe AT UES ISAO! (603-15, Fefs, He 3)
naanak satgur milai ta akhee vaykhai gharai andar sach paa-ay. ||4||10]|
O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, one sees with his eyes, and finds the True Lord within the home of his own being. ||4]|10] |
Rafe HIS 3 Il (603-16)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
fae Afsad AS AIST SY Bar AT Vs SINT Il (603-16, Aafs, ue 3)
bin satgur sayvay bahutaa dukh laagaa jug chaaray bharmaa-ee.
Without serving the True Guru, he suffers in terrible pain, and throughout the four ages, he wanders aimlessly.
dH to 3H AT AG BS Ase Ufo Fst IAI (603-17, Fats, ve 3)
ham deen tum jug jug daatay sabday deh bujhaa-ee. ||1||
I am poor and meek, and throughout the ages, You are the Great Giver - please, grant me the understanding of the Shabad. ||1]|
ofa ME faur agg 3H fumrs Il (603-17, Fafs, He 3) har jee-o kirpaa karahu tum pi-aaray. O Dear Beloved Lord, please show mercy to me.
Afsag os vfs fuoreg of oH Seg nos || TIC Il (603-18, Fats, He 3)
satgur daataa may! milaavhu har naam dayvhu aaDhaaray. rahaa-o.
Unite me in the Union of the True Guru, the Great Giver, and give me the support of the Lord's Name. ||Pause] |
Hon He efaat Hof AHTet uTfeM SH MUTE || (603-18, Aafs, He 3)
mansaa maar dubiDhaa sahj samaanee paa-i-aa naam apaaraa.
Conquering my desires and duality, I have merged in celestial peace, and I have found the Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord.
dfs oA ote He feane dur faofsa aeSTS II (603-19, Fats, He 3)
har ras chaakh man nirmal ho-aa kilbikh kaatanhaaraa. ||2| |
I have tasted the sublime essence of the Lord, and my soul has become immaculately pure; the Lord is the Destroyer of sins. ||2]|
Uuat €og Rafe Hog fefs Hes He dt a fefe nee B Tet Il (604-1, Fale, we 3)
sabad marahu fir jeevhu sad hee taa fir maran na ho-ee. Dying in the Word of the Shabad, you shall live forever, and you shall never die again.
nifqs om Ae Hfs Het aS ure set WII (604-1, Fafs, us 3) amrit naam sadaa man meethaa sabday paavai ko-ee. ||3]|
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam is ever-sweet to the mind; but how few are those who obtain the Shabad. ||3]|
as afs out ofa ue fan ae fq et I (604-2, Fafs, ne 3)
daatai daat rakhee hath apnai jis bhaavai tis day-ee.
The Great Giver keeps His Gifts in His Hand; He gives them to those with whom He is pleased.
Sea OtH gs AY uUfeor vaag wWufs ASt ISI (604-2, Fafs, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sukh paa-i-aa dargeh jaapeh say-ee. ||4||11]|
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, they find peace, and in the Court of the Lord, they are exalted. ||4||11]|
Rafe HIS 3 Il (604-3)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
Afsag Ae 3 Hon Ufs Cun afs xfs se ct ue Il (604-3, Aafs, He 3)
satgur sayvay taa sahj Dhun upjai gat mat tad hee paa-ay.
Serving the True Guru, the divine melody wells up within, and one is blessed with wisdom and salvation.
dfs a SH AM His SA SH STH ANTE IAI (604-4, Fafs, ws 3)
har kaa naam sachaa man vasi-aa naamay naam samaa-ay. ||1]|
The True Name of the Lord comes to abide in the mind, and through the Name, one merges in the Name. ||1]|
fag Afsad AS A Sa Il (604-4, Fafs, ve 3) bin satgur sabh jag ba-uraanaa. Without the True Guru, the whole world is insane.
Houfe nia AE 3 WE FS SoH Fora i TIS Il (604-5, Fafs, ws 3)
manmukh anDhaa sabad na jaanai jhoothai bharam bhulaanaa. rahaa-o.
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not realize the Word of the Shabad; they are deluded by false doubts. ||Pause] |
3 ae Whur sath gerfemr IBN Fae ANS II (604-5, Aafs, He 3)
tarai gun maa-i-aa bharam bhulaa-i-aa ha-umai banDhan kamaa-ay.
The three-faced Maya had led them astray in doubt, and they are snared by the noose of egotism.
HHE HE fra Gufs Ss aes Fis TY UTS II (604-6, Hafs, ws 3)
jaman maran sir oopar oobha-o garabh jon dukh paa-ay. ||2||
Birth and death hang over their heads, and being reborn from the womb, they suffer in pain. ||2]|
3 We zosts Aas AAS ICH fefs ufS det II (604-6, Fafs, He 3) tarai gun varteh sagal sansaaraa ha-umai vich pat kho-ee. The three qualities permeate the whole world; acting in ego, it loses its honor.
dente de war ue ws an ath AY det ISI (604-7, Fats, He 3)
gurmukh hovai cha-uthaa pad cheenai raam naam sukh ho-ee. ||3]||
But one who becomes Gurmukh comes to realize the fourth state of celestial bliss; he finds peace through the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
3 Te Als 33 5 om aeT AF aala A TET Il (604-8, Hate, Hs 3)
tarai gun sabh tayray too aapay kartaa jo too karahi so ho-ee.
The three qualities are all Yours, O Lord; You Yourself created them. Whatever You do, comes to pass.
soa TH StH feHsra Hae ICH Bet ISI (604-8, Fats, He 3)
naanak raam naam nistaaraa sabday ha-umai kho-ee. ||4]|12]|
O Nanak, through the Lord's Name, one is emancipated; through the Shabad, he is rid of egotism. ||4]|12]|
Hofe HIG 8 WIA (604-10)
sorath mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsaa ure II (604-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mma orf zaser fumirar mid orf nrg Il (604-11, Fafs, He 4)
aapay aap varatdaa pi-aaraa aapay aap apaahu. My Beloved Lord Himself pervades and permeates all; He Himself is, all by Himself.
Zens Aa vrfu d filma nmy Are ATT II (604-11, Fats, He 4) vanjaaraa jag aap hai pi-aaraa aapay saachaa saahu. My Beloved Himself is the trader in this world; He Himself is the true banker.
md fen Surdor flmirg nmt AG SAT Al (604-12, Fafs, He 4) aapay vanaj vapaaree-aa pi-aaraa aapay sach vaysaahu. ||1]|| My Beloved Himself is the trade and the trader; He Himself is the true credit. ||1]|
afu He dfs dfs SH AB Il (604-12, Fafs, He 4) jap man har har naam salaah. O mind, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, and praise His Name.
qe four 3 ureha filmes nifys war wars i TIE I (604-12, Fafs, ue 4)
gur kirpaa tay paa-ee-ai pi-aaraa amrit agam athaah. rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the Beloved, Ambrosial, unapproachable and unfathomable Lord is obtained. ||Pause] |
nm Afs As Suet fimre yf FH orf wTT Il (604-13, Fafs, He 4)
aapay sun sabh vaykh-daa pi-aaraa mukh bolay aap muhaahu.
The Beloved Himself sees and hears everything; He Himself speaks through the mouths of all beings.
mma @sfs ufeer fumra vrfu fears ag Il 604-14, Fafs, He 4) aapay ujharh paa-idaa pi-aaraa aap vikhaalay raahu. The Beloved Himself leads us into the wilderness, and He Himself shows us the Way.
nm dt Ag wef d fms nm} Sug|rg iQ (604-14, Aafs, He 4) aapay hee sabh aap hai pi-aaraa aapay vayparvaahu. ||2|| The Beloved Himself is Himself all-in-all; He Himself is carefree. ||2]|
nm oorfy Gurfeer fimra ffs nmr das we Il (604-15, Fats, He 4)
aapay aap upaa-idaa pi-aaraa sir aapay DhanDh-rhai laahu.
The Beloved Himself, all by Himself, created everything; He Himself links all to their tasks.
mf aoe ATast fume vuirfu urd Hie ATT Il (604-15, Fafs, us 4)
aap karaa-ay saakh-tee pi-aaraa aap maaray mar jaahu. The Beloved Himself creates the Creation, and He Himself destroys it.
mm} use urset filmer nm urfg Surg ill (604-16, Aafs, ve 4) aapay patan paat-nee pi-aaraa aapay paar langhaahu. ||3]|| He Himself is the wharf, and He Himself is the ferryman, who ferries us across. ||3]]|
nm Arad Sfser fimrs ag age vrfu vers | (604-16, Fats, He 4)
aapay saagar bohithaa pi-aaraa gur khayvat aap chalaahu.
The Beloved Himself is the ocean, and the boat; He Himself is the Guru, the boatman who steers it
nny ot ofs Suet fimre afe sa Fe ufSarg Il (604-17, Aafs, u2 4)
aapay hee charh langh-daa pi-aaraa kar choj vaykhai paatisaahu.
. The Beloved Himself sets sail and crosses over; He, the King, beholds His wondrous play.
nmr oorfy efenies J fimre AS aoa safA fers SIU (604-17, Fats, He 4)
aapay aap da-i-aal hai pi-aaraa jan naanak bakhas milaahu. ||4]||1]|
The Beloved Himself is the Merciful Master; O servant Nanak, He forgives and blends with Himself. ||4]]1]|
Rafe Hoe 8 VBEr II (604-18) sorath mehlaa 4 cha-uthaa. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
MM nisH AdH ASH CssH wm ds omy AS BLE I (04-18, Aafs, He 4)
aapay andaj jayraj saytaj ut-bhuj aapay khand aapay sabh lo-ay.
He Himself is born of the egg, from the womb, from sweat and from the earth; He Himself is the continents and all the worlds.
Mm AZ nm} ag Heer afs Hast Aas use i (604-19, Fats, we 4)
aapay soot aapay baho manee-aa kar saktee jagat paro-ay.
He Himself is the thread, and He Himself is the many beads; through His Almighty Power, He has strung the worlds.
Ua gou
ning dt Asurg F flare As fis Vfo Sat FE Ail (605-1, Fafs, ue 4)
aapay hee soot-Dhaar hai pi-aaraa soot khinchay dheh dhayree ho-ay. ||1]|
He holds the thread, and when He withdraws the thread, the beads scatter into heaps. ||1]|
He HoH ofa fae neg 3 aE Il (605-1, Fats, nH 4) mayray man mai har bin avar na ko-ay. O my mind, there is no other than the Lord for me.
Afsas fefs on fours 3 flere afe efemr nifgs yfe sf 1 TIC i (05-2, Fafs, us 4) satgur vich naam niDhaan hai pi-aaraa kar da-i-aa amrit mukh cho-ay. rahaa-o.
The treasure of the Beloved Naam is within the True Guru; in His Mercy, he pours the Ambrosial Nectar into my mouth. ||Pause] |
Wn We af Ass 3 filmra ug nm ad A SE Il (605-2, Hats, He 4)
aapay jal thal sabhat hai pi-aaraa parabh aapay karay so ho-ay.
The Beloved Himself is in all the oceans and lands; whatever God does, comes to pass.
Aso fara AME flies sat nie & afE I (605-3, Fafs, Hs 4) sabhnaa rijak samaahadaa pi-aaraa doojaa avar na ko-ay. The Beloved brings nourishment to all; there is no other than Him.
nmy ae derfeer films wm} ad A APE MQM (605-3, Fats, He 4) aapay khayl khaylaa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay karay so ho-ay. ||2|| The Beloved Himself plays, and whatever He Himself does, comes to pass. ||2||
nmr ot orf fear fimre nmi faane AE Il (605-4, Aafs, He 4)
aapay hee aap nirmalaa pi-aaraa aapay nirmal so-ay.
The Beloved Himself, all by Himself, is immaculate and pure; He Himself is immaculate and pure.
nmy atts urfser fimra nmi ad A FE Il (605-5, Fats, He 4) aapay keemat paa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay karay so ho-ay. The Beloved Himself determines the value of all; whatever He does comes to pass.
mm ney & odin fumire orf were ATE SII (605-5, Aes, He 4) aapay alakh na lakhee-ai pi-aaraa aap lakhaavai so-ay. ||3]| The Beloved Himself is unseen - He cannot be seen; He Himself causes us to see.
[31 nmi afed asta o fimra faq Aes nreg 3 AfE II (605-6, Fafs, Hz 4)
aapay gahir gambheer hai pi-aaraa tis jayvad avar na ko-ay. The Beloved Himself is deep and profound and unfathomable; there is no other as great as He.
Afs we wm sae fume fefe odt usu AS ALE II (605-6, Fafs, H2 4)
sabh ghat aapay bhogvai pi-aaraa vich naaree purakh sabh so-ay.
The Beloved Himself enjoys every heart; He is contained within every woman and man.
Soa Tus case films Toufe use| FE sii (605-7, Aafs, ue 4)
naanak gupat varatdaa pi-aaraa gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||4||2||
O Nanak, the Beloved is pervading everywhere, but He is hidden; through the Guru, He is revealed. ||4||2||
Rafe HIS 8 Il (605-7)
sorath mehlaa 4. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
nm dt Ag wrfu d filma omy arf Sart Il (605-8, Aafs, Hs 4)
aapay hee sabh aap hai pi-aaraa aapay thaap uthaapai.
He Himself, the Beloved, is Himself all-in-all; He Himself establishes and disestablishes.
nny Sfe fearrer fume af cH FA YS nM I (605-8, Hats, ue 4)
aapay vaykh vigsadaa pi-aaraa kar choj vaykhai parabh aapai.
The Beloved Himself beholds, and rejoices; God Himself works wonders, and beholds them.
nm efs fefs Ass o fimre nmt aaufie AN NI (605-9, Fafs, 2 4)
aapay van tin sabhat hai pi-aaraa aapay gurmukh jaapai. ||1||
The Beloved Himself is contained in all the woods and meadows; as Gurmukh, He reveals Himself. ||1]|
afu Ho ofa afs om aft Gy Il (605-9, Has, He 4)
jap man har har naam ras Dharaapai.
Meditate, O mind, on the Lord, Har, Har; through the sublime essence of Lord's Name, you Shall be satisfied.
wifys ou Ho dA Hie ag Aaet oft AM | TIC Il (605-10, Hafs, He 4)
amrit naam mahaa ras meethaa gur sabdee chakh jaapai. rahaa-o.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, is the sweetest juice; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, its taste is revealed. ||Pause] |
nm Steg soos fume orf 3S YS mM I (605-10, Fafs, ue 4)
aapay tirath tulharhaa pi-aaraa aap tarai parabh aapai.
The Beloved is Himself the place of pilgrimage and the raft; God Himself ferries Himself across.
nm AS Zafeer fumrs AS Ha Hest dfs mm Il (605-11, Fats, Hs 4) aapay jaal vataa-idaa pi-aaraa sabh jag machhulee har aapai. The Beloved Himself casts the net over all the world; the Lord Himself is the fish.
urfy nige 3 geet fmra neg o TAT AM NQM (605-11, Fats, He 4)
aap abhul na bhul-ee pi-aaraa avar na doojaa jaapai. ||2||
The Beloved Himself is infallible; He makes no mistakes. There is no other like Him to be seen. ||2||
nmt fist are 3 fumre ufe urfy sae mm I (605-12, Fats, nz 4)
aapay sinyee naad hai pi-aaraa Dhun aap vajaa-ay aapai.
The Beloved Himself is the Yogi's horn, and the sound current of the Naad; He Himself plays the tune.
nm Fat use J fimr|et nmr dt Su 3TH Il (605-12, Fats, v2 4)
aapay jogee purakh hai pi-aaraa aapay hee tap taapai.
The Beloved Himself is the Yogi, the Primal Being; He Himself practices intense meditation.
nm Afsag orf d sor CueA ad Ys MM III (605-13, Fafs, He 4)
aapay satgur aap hai chaylaa updays karai parabh aapai. ||3]|
He Himself is the True Guru, and He Himself is the disciple; God Himself imparts the Teachings. ||3]|
nm a murfeer filma vm dt AU AT I (605-14, Aafs, He 4)
aapay naa-o japaa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay hee jap jaapai.
The Beloved Himself inspires us to chant His Name, and He Himself practices meditation.
nm nifgs vrfu od filme mm dt SA MIM II (605-14, Fas, He 4) aapay amrit aap hai pi-aaraa aapay hee ras aapai. The Beloved Himself is the Ambrosial Nectar; He Himself is the juice of it.
nny nif Aare fimrs AS soa dfs afA GU BSI (605-15, Fats, Hs 4)
aapay aap salaahadaa pi-aaraa jan naanak har ras Dharaapai. ||4]||3]| The Beloved Himself praises Himself; servant Nanak is satisfied, with the sublime essence of the Lord. ||4||3]|
Hafe HIS 8 Il (605-15)
sorath mehlaa 4. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
nny ast urfu saat yfs umt Sf Serer I (605-15, tafe, ue 4)
aapay kandaa aap taraajee parabh aapay tol tolaa-i-aa.
God Himself is the balance scale, He Himself is the weigher, and He Himself weighs with the weights.
MY ATT nM SSATS MY SSH ATfEnk Il (605-16, Fafs, us 4) aapay saahu aapay vanjaaraa aapay vanaj karaa-i-aa. He Himself is the banker, He Himself is the trader, and He Himself makes the trades.
nmy cast AMS fumrd fue Za vatfemr 4 (605-16, Fats, He 4)
aapay Dhartee saajee-an pi-aarai pichhai tank charhaa-i-aa. ||1||
The Beloved Himself fashioned the world, and He Himself counter-balances it with a gram. ||1||
Hd Ho fe ofa fomrfe AY urfeMT I (605-17, Fats, H8 4) mayray man har har Dhi-aa-ay sukh paa-i-aa. My mind meditates on the Lord, Har, Har, and finds peace.
ofs afs an fears & fumre af ud Htor fen 1 TIS il (605-17, afs, ws 4)
har har naam niDhaan hai pi-aaraa gur poorai meethaa laa-i-aa. rahaa-o.
The Name of the Beloved Lord, Har, Har, is a treasure; the Perfect Guru has made it seem sweet to me. ||Pause| |
mma dest erty A@ fume nm ad xafeni I (605-18, Fafs, Hs 4)
aapay Dhartee aap jal pi-aaraa aapay karay karaa-i-aa.
The Beloved Himself is the earth, and He Himself is the water; He Himself acts, and causes others to act.
nm gat ease filmes we Het Sf gerfemr II (605-19, Fats, He 4)
aapay hukam varatdaa pi-aaraa jal maatee banDh rakhaa-i-aa. The Beloved Himself issues His Commands, and keeps the water and the land bound down.
my dt 38 urfeer filme sf sadt Ag Tetfeur |1211 (605-19, Hafs, Hz 4)
aapay hee bha-o paa-idaa pi-aaraa bann bakree seehu hadhaa-i-aa. ||2||
The Beloved Himself instills the Fear of God; He binds the tiger and the goat together. [21]
Us €o€ nm ame witty ofa fumre fefs ame nafs sefeni il (606-1, Fats, He 4)
aapay kaasat aap har pi-aaraa vich kaasat agan rakhaa-i-aa. The Beloved Lord Himself is the firewood, and He Himself keeps the fire within the wood.
nmr dt urfu zaser fimre 3 nafs & Aa HefEmr I (606-2, Fats, Hz 4)
aapay hee aap varatdaa pi-aaraa bhai agan na sakai jalaa-i-aa.
The Beloved Lord Himself, all by Himself, permeates them, and because of the Fear of God, the fire cannot burn the wood.
nm uife Atefeer fms avg Be Afs wetfenr 311 (606-2, Aafs, nz 4) aapay maar jeevaa-idaa pi-aaraa saah laiday sabh lavaa-i-aa. ||3]|| The Beloved Himself kills and revives; all draw the breath of life, given by Him. ||3]|
nmt ave dare o fimre nmi ard ofenr I (606-3, Fale, He 4) aapay taan deebaan hai pi-aaraa aapay kaarai laa-i-aa. The Beloved Himself is power and presence; He Himself engages us in our work.
fa orf sere f@ san fimrd fa afe ys HS Sher II (606-4, Fafs, He 4) ji-o aap chalaa-ay ti-o chalee-ai pi-aaray ji-o har parabh mayray bhaa-i-aa. As the Beloved makes me walk, I walk, as it pleases my Lord God.
nm Hat Hs od flmrs AS Soa enfs safeEnr Igisil (606-4, Fats, Hs 4)
aapay jantee jant hai pi-aaraa jan naanak vajeh vajaa-i-aa. ||4||4||
The Beloved Himself is the musician, and the musical instrument; servant Nanak vibrates His vibration. ||4]||4||
Hafs HIS 8 Il (606-5) sorath mehlaa 4. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
wnt fqrfe Gurfser flmrs ats ASH FE TAS Il (606-5, Hafs, ue 4)
aapay sarisat upaa-idaa pi-aaraa kar sooraj chand chaanaan.
The Beloved Himself created the Universe; He made the light of the sun and the moon.
wify fosfeur sre 3 fume urfl faurfenr HTS II (606-6, Fafs, He 4)
aap nitaani-aa taan hai pi-aaraa aap nimaani-aa maan.
The Beloved Himself is the power of the powerless; He Himself is the honor of the dishonored.
nifty efeur ats seer fumirat nit AUS AATE IAI (606-6, Fafs, H8 4)
aap da-i-aa kar rakh-daa pi-aaraa aapay sugharh sujaan. ||1]||
The Beloved Himself grants His Grace and protects us; He Himself is wise and all- knowing. ||1||
Hd Ho Af TH BH SATE Il (606-7, Fats, u3 4) mayray man jap raam naam neesaan. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and receive His Insignia.
AsHats fife fourfe 3 afe afe aofs 3 ures WE Il ITS Il (606-7, Fas, us 4) satsangat mil Dhi-aa-ay too har har bahurh na aavan jaan. rahaa-o.
Join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; you Shall not have to come and go in reincarnation again. ||Pause| |
my dt qe zaser fumrrar ny Tt uTSTS Il (606-8, Aafs, ue 4) aapay hee gun varatdaa pi-aaraa aapay hee parvaan. The Beloved Himself pervades His Glorious Praises, and He Himself approves them.
mma aun aateer filma nid Ag StATE Il (606-9, Fats, u3 4)
aapay bakhas karaa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay sach neesaan.
The Beloved Himself grants His forgiveness, and He Himself bestows the Insignia of Truth.
mma Jaf zaser fimirer nim Tt STHTE III (606-9, Fafs, He 4) aapay hukam varatdaa pi-aaraa aapay hee furmaan. ||2|| The Beloved Himself obeys His Will, and He Himself issues His Command. ||2| |
nm sats sav J fimrat wy SS AES Il (606-10, Fafs, He 4) aapay bhagat bhandaar hai pi-aaraa aapay dayvai daan. The Beloved Himself is the treasure of devotion; He Himself gives His gifts.
nm Ae aafeer fina urfly fees HTS Il (606-10, ats, He 4)
aapay sayv karaa-idaa pi-aaraa aap divaavai maan.
The Beloved Himself commits some to His service, and He Himself blesses them with honor.
my stat ofeer filma nit gat feure i3Il (06-11, Aafs, He 4)
aapay taarhee laa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay gunee niDhaan. ||3]|| The Beloved Himself is absorbed in Samaadhi; He Himself is the treasure of excellence. ||3||
nmy zat rf d filma nmy dt usar Il (606-11, Fafs, He 4) aapay vadaa aap hai pi-aaraa aapay hee parDhaan. The Beloved Himself is the greatest; He Himself is supreme.
mma atts user fulmirat nm 3% USES Il (606-12, Fats, u3 4) aapay keemat paa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay tul parvaan. The Beloved Himself appraises the value; He Himself is the scale, and the weights.
MTU nse sofea filma As ssa AE ATAES ISIUll (606-12, Favs, nz 4)
aapay atul tulaa-idaa pi-aaraa jan naanak sad kurbaan. ||4||5||
The Beloved Himself is unweighable - He weighs Himself; servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||4]|5]|
Rafe HIS 8 Il (606-13)
sorath mehlaa 4. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
mma Ae ofeer fumrat nm gafs Burs Il (606-13, Fats, v3 4)
aapay sayvaa laa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay bhagat omaahaa.
The Beloved Himself commits some to His service; He Himself blesses them with the joy of devotional worship.
mrad ae aretfeer fumirar nin Aafe AHI Il (606-14, Fats, He 4) aapay gun gaavaa-idaa pi-aaraa aapay sabad samaahaa.
The Beloved Himself causes us to sing His Glorious Praises; He Himself is absorbed in the Word of His Shabad.
mma Sule orfu feast nm Sy furs Al (606-14, Fafs, He 4)
aapay laykhan aap likhaaree aapay laykh likhaahaa. ||1]]|
He Himself is the pen, and He Himself is the scribe; He Himself inscribes His inscription. ||1]|
Hd Ho Au IH BM BHT Il (606-15, Fafs, He 4) mayray man jap raam naam omaahaa. O my mind, joyfully chant the Name of the Lord.
noes nis dé essa & ats ys als oa il TFS I (606-15, Fale, we 4)
an-din anad hovai vadbhaagee lai gur poorai har laahaa. rahaa-o.
Those very fortunate ones are in ecstasy night and day; through the Perfect Guru, they obtain the profit of the Lord's Name. ||Pause] |
ming aut are o fimirar ats my A TarI Il (606-16, Fats, we 4)
aapay gopee kaan hai pi-aaraa ban aapay ga-oo charaahaa.
The Beloved Himself is the milk-maid and Krishna; He Himself herds the cows in the woods.
MM} Aree Hea fimirst wm SA SHIT Il (606-16, Hafs, He 4)
aapay saaval sundraa pi-aaraa aapay vans vajaahaa.
The Beloved Himself is the blue-skinned, handsome one; He Himself plays on His flute.
azéir us orfy nafeer hima ats aes gf usa MQM (606-17, Fafs, He 4) kuvlee-aa peerh aap maraa-idaa pi-aaraa kar baalak roop pachaahaa. ||2||
The Beloved Himself took the form of a child, and destroyed Kuwalia-peer, the mad elephant. ||2||
mify npatat urfer filme af fe nrfu SAT Il (606-17, Fafs, He 4)
aap akhaarhaa paa-idaa pi-aaraa kar vaykhai aap chojaahaa.
The Beloved Himself sets the stage; He performs the plays, and He Himself watches them.
ats wed gu Gufee fimra UTI AA AA HIT Il (606-18, Hats, Hs 4)
kar baalak roop upaa-idaa pi-aaraa chandoor kans kays maaraahaa.
The Beloved Himself assumed the form of the child, and killed the demons Chandoor, Kansa and Kaysee.
nny dt ae orf o fimrs ae FS HS HAUT III (606-18, Favs, ws 4)
aapay hee bal aap hai pi-aaraa bal bhannai moorakh mugDhaahaa. ||3]||
The Beloved Himself, by Himself, is the embodiment of power; He shatters the power of the fools and idiots. ||3]|
Ag nmy Aas Suse furs sth md Fats Tara Il (606-19, Fafs, He 4)
sabh aapay jagat upaa-idaa pi-aaraa vas aapay jugat hathaahaa.
The Beloved Himself created the whole world. In His hands He holds the power of the ages.
ua €oD af Heat wird urfeer films fa ys fits SE AT II (607-1, Fafs, He 4)
gal jayvrhee aapay paa-idaa pi-aaraa ji-o parabh khinchai ti-o jaahaa. The Beloved Himself puts the chains around their necks; as God pulls them, must they go.
A aaa A uvAt fimrd afu ara sats ANTS IBIEN (607-1, Fats, He 4)
jo garbai so pachsee pi-aaray jap naanak bhagat samaahaa. ||4||6]|
Whoever harbors pride shall be destroyed, O Beloved; meditating on the Lord, Nanak is absorbed in devotional worship. ||4]|6]|
Hafs Hs 8 FSA Il (607-2) sorath mehlaa 4 dutukay. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl, Du-Tukas:
mifed Aon fees zy ufeur Houta aan ad widardt Il (607-2, Fats, H2 4)
anik janam vichhurhay dukh paa-i-aa manmukh karam karai ahakaaree. Separated from the Lord for countless lifetimes, the self-willed manmukh suffers in pain, engaged in acts of egotism.
AY udAs ot ys ufemr afre Aafe SH AI (07-3, afs, Hs 4) saaDhoo parsat hee parabh paa-i-aa gobid saran tumaaree. ||1]| Beholding the Holy Saint, I found God; O Lord of the Universe, I seek Your Sanctuary.
[21|
difse ulfs wait mifs fimrdt i (607-4, Fats, Hs 4) gobid pareet lagee at pi-aaree. The Love of God is very dear to me.
Wa ASA se AY Ao fose ffeor ATS Hast 1 TIS Il 07-4, als, ws 4)
jab satsang bha-ay saaDhoo jan hirdai mili-aa saa“t muraaree. rahaa-o. When I joined the Sat Sangat, the Company of the Holy People, the Lord, the embodiment of peace, came into my heart. ||Pause| |
3 fase quy zafs feg TSt Sa Hes ashe Tea Il (607-5, Fats, ue 4)
too hirdai gupat vaseh din raatee tayraa bhaa-o na bujheh gavaaree.
You dwell, hidden, within my heart day and night, Lord; but the poor fools do not understand Your Love.
Afsag use fifeer ys yafenr ae are we Ser IK (607-5, Fafs, us 4)
satgur purakh mili-aa parabh pargati-aa gun gaavai gun veechaaree. ||2||
Meeting with the Almighty True Guru, God was revealed to me; I sing His Glorious Praises, and reflect upon His Glories. ||2||
dante yara sfeor As miret esHfs aft feet i (607-6, Hafs, us 4)
gurmukh pargaas bha-i-aa saat aa-ee durmat buDh nivaaree.
As Gurmukh, I have become enlightened; peace has come, and evil-mindedness has been dispelled from my mind.
MTSH YH sie AY ufeor AsHafs uTY SHS ISI (607-6, Fafs, ue 4)
aatam barahm cheen sukh paa-i-aa satsangat purakh tumaaree. ||3]||
Understanding the relationship of the individual soul with God, I have found peace, in Your Sat Sangat, Your True Congregation, O Lord. ||3]|
used use fifeor ag ufeor fro a faa set SHH I (607-7, Fafs, He 4)
purkhai purakh mili-aa gur paa-i-aa jin ka-o kirpaa bha-ee tumaaree.
Those who are blessed by Your Kind Mercy, meet the Almighty Lord, and find the Guru.
Sod MSS ANA AY ufeor mafes Was Jd qos SIDI (607-8, Aefs, H2 4)
naanak atul sahj sukh paa-i-aa an-din jaagat rahai banvaaree. ||4||7||
Nanak has found the immeasurable, celestial peace; night and day, he remains awake to the Lord, the Master of the Forest of the Universe. ||4]|7]|
Hafe HIS 8 Il (607-9)
sorath mehlaa 4. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
ofa fAG ulfs nisg He aftr ofa fas gE B AT II (607-9, Fats, Hs 4)
har si-o pareet antar man bayDhi-aa har bin rahan na jaa-ee.
The inner depths of my mind are pierced by love for the Lord; I cannot live without the Lord.
fa@ Hest faa ats fon f36 on fae Hie ATET AI (607-9, Fats, He 4) ji-o machhulee bin neerai binsai ti-o naamai bin mar jaa-ee. ||1]| Just as the fish dies without water, I die without the Lord's Name. ||1]|
He ys fasu Ae teg dfs Stet Il (07-10, Hafs, ne 4) mayray parabh kirpaa jal dayvhu har naa-ee. O my God, please bless me with the water of Your Name.
J@ nists on Har fea ast amt dt AS uret 1 TIS Il (607-10, af, nz 4)
ha-o antar naam mangaa din raatee naamay hee saa‘t paa-ee. rahaa-o.
I beg for Your Name, deep within myself, day and night; through the Name, I find peace. ||Pause| |
faG wiga ne faa faoore faa ae fimrn o ATet II (607-11, Fats, He 4)
ji-o chaatrik jal bin billaavai bin jal pi-aas na jaa-ee.
The song-bird cries out for lack of water - without water, its thirst cannot be quenched.
TsHfe AS Ue AY AIA font a= ASret MQM (607-12, Aefs, uz 4)
gurmukh jal paavai sukh sehjay hari-aa bhaa-ay subhaa-ee. ||2||
The Gurmukh obtains the water of celestial bliss, and is rejuvenated, blossoming forth through the blessed Love of the Lord. ||2]|
HoH ga ws fen safe fag ae ey uret Il (607-12, Fale, Hs 4)
manmukh bhookhay dah dis doleh bin naavai dukh paa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs are hungry, wandering around in the ten directions; without the Name, they suffer in pain.
Aaty ud fefs Hat wire vaata fs AATST ISI (607-13, Fats, He 4)
janam marai fir jonee aavai dargahi milai sajaa-ee. ||3]|
They are born, only to die, and enter into reincarnation again; in the Court of the Lord, they are punished. |[3]|
faut asfs a ofs ge aed ofe oF nists ust I (607-13, Fafs, He 4)
kirpaa karahi taa har gun gaavah har ras antar paa-ee.
But if the Lord shows His Mercy, then one comes to sing His Glorious Praises; deep within the nucleus of his own self, he finds the sublime essence of the Lord's elixir.
ood tte efenrs se 3 fena Aafe gsret SITI (607-14, Fafs, Hs 4)
naanak deen da-i-aal bha-ay hai tarisnaa sabad bujhaa-ee. ||4||8]|
The Lord has become Merciful to meek Nanak, and through the Word of the Shabad, his desires are quenched. ||4||8]|
Hafs Hoe 8 Usuer Il (607-15) sorath mehlaa 4 panchpadaa. Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl, Panch-Padas:
weg ud a fafa det fot S fa uret Il (607-15, ats, He 4)
achar charai taa siDh ho-ee siDhee tay buDh paa-ee.
If one eats the uneatable, then he becomes a Siddha, a being of perfect spirituality; through this perfection, he obtains wisdom.
UH & Ad Bd 36 state st gH atten Fret II (607-15, Hafs, us 4) paraym kay sar laagay tan bheetar taa bharam kaati-aa jaa-ee. ||1|| When the arrow of the Lord's Love pierces his body, then his doubt is eradicated. ||1]|
He dfae nud Ae aS Ufo efsniret Il (607-16, Aafs, He 4) mayray gobid apunay jan ka-o deh vadi-aa-ee. O my Lord of the Universe, please bless Your humble servant with glory.
TsHfs TH OH UdIAT Hel JIT AdSvet Il JIE Il (607-16, Fats, v2 4)
gurmat raam naam pargaasahu sadaa rahhu sarnaa-ee. rahaa-o.
Under Guru's Instructions, enlighten me with the Lord's Name, that I may dwell forever in Your Sanctuary. ||Pause] |
feg HATS AS Se Arat HO Hae BS wiArAT Il (607-17, Fats, Hs 4)
ih sansaar sabh aavan jaanaa man moorakh chayt ajaanaa.
This whole world is engrossed in coming and going; O my foolish and ignorant mind, be mindful of the Lord.
dfs ME faur ag TT HOT 3 fa STH AHTST III (607-18, Fats, He 4)
har jee-o kirpaa karahu gur maylhu taa har naam samaanaa. ||2||
O Dear Lord, please, take pity upon me, and unite me with the Guru, that I may merge in the Lord's Name. |[2]|
fan at zg Aet yg we fAA S Ue Ae Il SAS nig nfs MIAH Hides TT us nioy BUS Il (607-18, Hafs, Hz 4)
jis kee vath so-ee parabh jaanai jis no day-ay so paa-ay. vasat anoop at agam agochar gur pooraa alakh lakhaa-ay. ||3] |
Only one who has it knows God; he alone has it, to whom God has given it - so very beautiful, unapproachable and unfathomable. Through the Perfect Guru, the unknowable is known. ||3]|
fats fea ondt Het Are sat at ffenret i (607-19, Favs, Hs 4)
jin in chaakhee so-ee jaanai goongay kee mithi-aa-ee.
Only one who tastes it knows it, like the mute, who tastes the sweet candy, but cannot speak of it.
Ust got
T3G BATE GI SS A A TA BavEt Ill (608-1, Fafs, we 4) ratan lukaa-i-aa lookai naahee jay ko rakhai lukaa-ee. ||4| |
The jewel is concealed, but it is not concealed, even though one may try to conceal it. [141]
Ag fag Sa 3 visa J Agar a Ys Aet Il (608-1, Fats, me 4) sabh kichh tayraa too antarjaamee too sabhnaa kaa parabh so-ee. Everything is Yours, O Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts; You are the Lord God of all.
fan 6 ots adfo A UTE Ho aa nied © ET MUIIEN (608-2, Hats, He 4)
jis no daat karahi so paa-ay jan naanak avar na ko-ee. ||5|[9]|
He alone receives the gift, unto whom You give it; O servant Nanak, there is no one else. ||5]]9]|
Hofs Hoe u we 9 fsa 608-3) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 1 titukay Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, First House, Ti-Tukas:
qe Afsars ATE II (608-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fon JG wet fan vrata As ao atst THT Il (os-4, Hafs, 2 5) kis ha-o jaachee kis aaraaDhee jaa sabh ko keetaa hosee. Who should I ask? Who should I worship? All were created by Him.
foi CA Sat eso AA Wo IAT Il (608-4, Hale, Hs 5)
jo jo deesai vadaa vadayraa so so khaakoo ralsee.
Whoever appears to be the greatest of the great, shall ultimately be mixed with the dust.
fogs fadars se use Afs wu de fafa SAT IAI (603-4, Fats, He 5)
nirbha-o nirankaar bhav khandan sabh sukh nav niDh daysee. ||1]|
The Fearless, Formless Lord, the Destroyer of Fear bestows all comforts, and the nine treasures. ||1||
dfs ME Sat SSt TH Il (608-5, Fale, ue 5) har jee-o tayree daatee raajaa. O Dear Lord, Your gifts alone satisfy me.
HER sust for Arad fom FSA at HISTAT Il TIE Il (608-5, Fafs, He 5)
maanas bapurhaa ki-aa saalaahee ki-aa tis kaa muhtaajaa. rahaa-o. Why should I praise the poor helpless man? Why should I feel subservient to him? | |Pause| |
fate afe fourfeur Ag fos fA ot fA at su Tet Il (608-6, Fafs, He 5) jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa sabh kichh tis kaa tis kee bhookh gavaa-ee. All things come to one who meditates on the Lord; the Lord satisfies his hunger.
MAT US thor ques foufe o aa ct AT II (08-7, Fats, He 5) aisaa Dhan dee-aa sukh-daatai nikhut na kab hee jaa-ee. The Lord, the Giver of peace, bestows such wealth, that it can never be exhausted.
Moe Sfeut AY Adfa AHTe Afsafe Hts fret QIK (608-7, Aafs, H2 5)
anad bha-i-aa sukh sahj samaanay satgur mayl milaa-ee. ||2]|
I am in ecstasy, absorbed in celestial peace; the True Guru has united me in His Union. |[2||
Ho OH Alu oH urea mates OH Surat Il (608-8, Aafs, nH 5)
man naam jap naam aaraaDh an-din naam vakhaanee.
O mind, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; worship the Naam, night and day, and recite the Naam.
Quen Afe AUG H30 a AS got ote AHTet Il (608-8, Hafs, H2 5) updays sun saaDh santan kaa sabh chookee kaan jamaanee. Listen to the Teachings of the Holy Saints, and all fear of death will be dispelled.
fro ag faus dor ys Aa A oa Te at get Sil (08-9, Fafs, ne 5) jin ka-o kirpaal ho-aa parabh mayraa say laagay gur kee banee. ||3]| Those blessed by God's Grace are attached to the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||3]|
ants a@e ad ys Sat 5 Asa Alor fener Il 08-10, Fafs, Hs 5) keemat ka-un karai parabh tayree too sarab jee-aa da-i-aalaa. Who can estimate Your worth, God? You are kind and compassionate to all beings.
AS fag atst Sat eas fom TH Ss TUS Il (608-10, Aafs, Hs 5) sabh kichh keetaa tayraa vartai ki-aa ham baal gupaalaa. Everything which You do, prevails; I am just a poor child - what can I do?
afte SJ Soa AO SHT fas fust us fargursr Sul (608-11, Fefs, Hz 5)
raakh layho naanak jan tumraa ji-o pitaa poot kirpaalaa. ||4||1||
Protect and preserve Your servant Nanak; be kind to him, like a father to his son. [40121]
Hafe HIS u wg V1 Tsa Il (608-11)
sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 1 choutukay. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, First House, Chau-Tukas:
Gd diese Aad set ufo sfs fase are il (6038-12, Fats, He 5)
gur govind salaahee-ai bhaa-ee man tan hirdai Dhaar.
Praise the Guru, and the Lord of the Universe, O Siblings of Destiny; enshrine Him in your mind, body and heart.
Ao Afog Hf ZA set Sat agat ATS Il (608-12, afs, He 5)
saachaa saahib man vasai bhaa-ee ayhaa karnee saar.
Let the True Lord and Master abide in your mind, O Siblings of Destiny; this is the most excellent way of life.
fag sf oH 3 Gur set A 3a TS sr Il (608-13, Hafs, ws 5)
jit tan naam na oopjai bhaa-ee say tan ho-ay chhaar.
Those bodies, in which the Name of the Lord does not well up, O Siblings of Destiny - those bodies are reduced to ashes.
Aunts ag afer set fas Saas nrg IAI (608-13, Fats, He 5)
saaDhsangat ka-o vaari-aa bhaa-ee jin aykankaar aDhaar. ||1] |
I am a Sacrifice to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Siblings of Destiny; they take the Support of the One and Only Lord. ||1]|
Het Ay wae set fan 3 AS fas SE I 08-14, Fats, He 5) so-ee sach araaDhanaa bhaa-ee jis tay sabh kichh ho-ay. So worship and adore that True Lord, O Siblings of Destiny; He alone does everything.
afs us wetenr set fsn fas neg 3 af 1 TIS Il os-14, Fafs, we 5)
gur poorai jaanaa-i-aa bhaa-ee tis bin avar na ko-ay. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has taught me, O Siblings of Destiny, that without Him, there is no other at all. ||Pause| |
on fege ufe ue set aes 3 Ae Tet I (08-15, Fafo, H: 5)
naam vihoonay pach mu-ay bhaa-ee ganat na jaa-ay ganee.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they putrefy and die, O Siblings of Destiny; their numbers cannot be counted.
fee He AY o ureht aret Are nia Tet Il (608-15, Fats, He 5)
vin sach soch na paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee saachaa agam Dhanee.
Without Truth, purity cannot be achieved, O Siblings of Destiny; the Lord is true and unfathomable.
MISS AS & Vat set Sat Tat Hat Il (608-16, Fale, v2 5)
aavan jaan na chuk-ee bhaa-ee jhoothee dunee manee.
Coming and going do not end, O Siblings of Destiny; pride in worldly valuables is false.
aanfa afe Garget set F oS SA Fat MMi (608-16, als, v2 5)
gurmukh kot uDhaardaa bhaa-ee day naavai ayk kanee. ||2||
The Gurmukh saves millions of people, O Siblings of Destiny, blessing them with even a particle of the Name. ||2]|
fifqfs AAS Afoor aet fee Afsas sou 3 ATE I Gos-17, ats, He 5)
simrit saasat soDhi-aa bhaa-ee vin satgur bharam na jaa-ay.
I have searched through the Simritees and the Shaastras, O Siblings of Destiny - without the True Guru, doubt does not depart.
mfoa aH afa afoot aret fefs fefs dae ute il (608-18, Aafs, H2 5)
anik karam kar thaaki-aa bhaa-ee fir fir banDhan paa-ay.
They are so tired of performing their many deeds, O Siblings of Destiny, but they fall into bondage again and again.
wd ast Adio aret fee vfsag ardt ATE I (0s-18, afs, He 5)
chaaray kundaa soDhee-aa bhaa-ee vin satgur naahee jaa-ay.
I have searched in the four directions, O Siblings of Destiny, but without the True Guru, there is no place at all.
Ua €or zoo Te ufemr set afs afs on fomrfe Si (609-1, Fats, 12 5)
vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa bhaa-ee har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||3] | By great good fortune, I found the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, and I meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
Ag Het d fasnor avet foo Are ALE I (609-1, ats, He 5) sach sadaa hai nirmalaa bhaa-ee nirmal saachay so-ay. The Truth is forever pure, O Siblings of Destiny; those who are true are pure.
seta ad fra nmuat avet fSH uavufs aE II (609-2, Fats, He 5)
nadar karay jis aapnee bhaa-ee tis paraapat ho-ay.
When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, O Siblings of Destiny, then one obtains Him.
afe Ho AHS Usha oct feaer act afF II (609-2, Hats, He 5) kot maDhay jan paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee virlaa ko-ee ko-ay. Among millions, O Siblings of Destiny, hardly one humble servant of the Lord is found.
Soa Jat Afs oth set Afs Ho So fens FE iI (609-3, Fats, He 5)
naanak rataa sach naam bhaa-ee sun man tan nirmal ho-ay. ||4||2||
Nanak is imbued with the True Name, O Siblings of Destiny; hearing it, the mind and body become immaculately pure. ||4||2||
Hafe HIG U T3a Il (609-3) sorath mehlaa 5 dutukay. Sorat’h, Fifth Mehl, Du-Tukas:
AG BE TE niaG feg HS 3B 5G foe TIT Il (09-4, Hafs, ws 5) ja-o la-o bhaa-o abhaa-o ih maanai ta-o la-o milan dooraa-ee. As long as this person believes in love and hate, it is difficult for him to meet the Lord.
MTS niTUSt ads atest SE OE ste faust ail (609-4, Fats, 12 5)
aan aapnaa karat beechaaraa ta-o la-o beech bikhaa-ee. ||1]|
As long as he discriminates between himself and others, he will distance himself from the Lord. ||1]|
Hae MAT eT TTF Il (609-5, Aafs, v2 5) maaDhvay aisee dayh bujhaa-ee. O Lord, grant me such understanding,
AZ AG ae Ge veo dg fend HIS BAe Il TIC Il (09-5, Aafs, He 5)
sayva-o saaDh gaha-o ot charnaa nah bisrai muhat chasaa-ee. rahaa-o.
that I might serve the Holy Saints, and seek the protection of their feet, and not forget them, for a moment, even an instant. ||Pause] |
J HS HAO nies due fos SH MAT fee o nT II (609-6, Fats, He 5)
ray man mugaDh achayt chanchal chit tum aisee ridai na aa-ee.
O foolish, thoughtless and fickle mind, such understanding did not come into your heart.
yous fsurfa ore 3 afer Batse Afar Favet M1 (609-6, afs, ws 5)
paraanpat ti-aag aan too rachi-aa urjhi-o sang bairaa-ee. ||2]|
Renouncing the Lord of Life, you have become engrossed in other things, and you are involved with your enemies. ||2| |
Aa 3 ford wry 3 ant Aonafs sf uret i (609-7, af, He 5)
Sog na bi-aapai aap na thaapai saaDhsangat buDh paa-ee.
Sorrow does not afflict one who does not harbor self-conceit; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have attained this understanding.
Has at gaat fe Ase AA ueo sare Sil (609-7, Fafs, ne 5) saakat kaa baknaa i-o jaan-o jaisay pavan jhulaa-ee. ||3]|| Know that the babbling of the faithless cynic is like wind passing by. ||3]|
afe usa mates feg Ho AIS AE B ATT Il (609-8, Fale, 3 5) kot paraaDh achhaadi-o ih man kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ee. This mind is inundated by millions of sins - what can I say?
HS SSA Ue Hale vie ys AT Sut Tug Soret iSiiSil (609-9, Hale, us 5)
jan naanak deen saran aa-i-o parabh sabh laykhaa rakhahu uthaa-ee. ||4]|3]| Nanak, Your humble servant has come to Your Sanctuary, God; please, erase all his accounts. ||4||3]|
Rafe HIS U Il (609-9)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ux aesz Ba fas safest wrfemr ABET Il (609-9, Fafs, us 5) putar kaltar lok garih banitaa maa-i-aa sanbanDhayhee. Children, spouses, men and women in one's household, are all bound by Maya.
wiz at aa a us o SH AS fixfemr mAs IAI (609-10, Hats, He 5) ant kee baar ko kharaa na hosee sabh mithi-aa asnayhee. ||1]]| At the very last moment, none of them shall stand by you; their love is totally false.
[21
J od aS UlsT Sat Il (609-10, af, 2 5) ray nar kaahay paporahu dayhee. O man, why do you pamper your body so?
Cfs wea oH wed fea aH TH AST Il TIS Il (609-11, Fats, we 5)
ood jaa-igo Dhoom baadro ik bhaajahu raam sanayhee. rahaa-o.
It shall disperse like a cloud of smoke; vibrate upon the One, the Beloved Lord. | |Pause| |
Sie Hfsur afs edt atat Ae aaT SANT I (609-11, Fafs, 2 5)
teen sanyi-aa kar dayhee keenee jal kookar bhasmayhee.
There are three ways in which the body can be consumed - it can be thrown into water, given to the dogs, or cremated to ashes.
dfs md fas ufo or age args faAsTt III (609-12, Fafs, Hs 5)
ho-ay aamro garih meh baithaa karan kaaran bisrohee. ||2||
He considers himself to be immortal; he sits in his home, and forgets the Lord, the Cause of causes. ||2]|
wifsa afs afs Hale AA avd Sat Ud Il (609-12, Hats, He 5)
anik bhaat kar manee-ay saajay kaachai taag parohee.
In various ways, the Lord has fashioned the beads, and strung them on a slender thread.
fe wea AS wus fefs ue uss ISI (609-13, Fafs, He 5) toot jaa-igo soot baapuray fir paachhai pachhutohee. ||3] | The thread shall break, O wretched man, and then, you shall repent and regret. ||3]||
fafs 3H fron fafa ned fon fomred feo dSct I 09-13, Fats, He 5)
jin tum sirjay siraj savaaray tis Dhi-aavahu din rainayhee.
He created you, and after creating you, He adorned you - meditate on Him day and night.
Hs woe us fas ost 4 Afsag Ge aadt Isisil (609-14, Rats, He 5)
jan naanak parabh kirpaa Dhaaree mai satgur ot gahayhee. ||4||4||
God has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; I hold tight to the Support of the True Guru. ||4]|4||
Rafe Hgsr U Il (609-15)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
ag us sfeS essa Hota sfeur ugaAr Il (609-15, Hafs, H2 5) gur pooraa bhayti-o vadbhaagee maneh bha-i-aa pargaasaa. I met the True Guru, by great good fortune, and my mind has been enlightened.
ae & UTISTS VA MUS AYTa a SISTA AU (609-15, Fats, we 5) ko-ay na pahuchanhaaraa doojaa apunay saahib kaa bharvaasaa. ||1]|| No one else can equal me, because I have the loving support of my Lord and Master.
[21|
MUS Afsad a afd Il (609-16, Aafs, He 5) apunay satgur kai balihaarai. I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru.
Wid AY Ue AY Hoa wifes mrSe IHS Il TIS Il (609-16, Fafs, v2 5)
aagai sukh paachhai sukh sahjaa ghar aanand hamaarai. rahaa-o.
I am at peace in this world, and I shall be in celestial peace in the next; my home is filled with bliss. ||Pause] |
Ms Aes Het MAH JHE Il (609-17, Hats, He 5) antarjaamee karnaihaaraa so-ee khasam hamaaraa. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Creator, my Lord and Master.
foss@ se ag vdat war fa TH BMH nMOS III (609-17, afs, He 5) nirbha-o bha-ay gur charnee laagay ik raam naam aaDhaaraa. ||2||
I have become fearless, attached to the Guru's feet; I take the Support of the Name of the One Lord. ||2||
HES VIAS TS Has ys FT Bt TeGTT Il (609-18, Hafs, ws 5)
safal darsan akaal moorat parabh hai bhee hovanhaaraa.
Fruitful is the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; the Form of God is deathless; He is and Shall always be.
afe warfe nud Ae ae not ulfS filma BI (609-19, Fats, He 5)
kanth lagaa-ay apunay jan raakhay apunee pareet pi-aaraa. ||3]||
He hugs His humble servants close, and protects and preserves them; their love for Him is sweet to Him. |[3]|
zat efsuret vrsan Ast araq orfenr TA Il (609-19, Aafs, He 5)
vadee vadi-aa-ee achraj sobhaa kaaraj aa-i-aa raasay.
Great is His glorious greatness, and wondrous is His magnificence; through Him, all affairs are resolved.
Uat EO
asa A TT us sfeS Aas sy FASTA ISU (610-1, Fefs, He 5) naanak ka-o gur pooraa bhayti-o saglay dookh binaasay. ||4||5|| Nanak has met with the Perfect Guru; all his sorrows have been dispelled. ||4]|5| |
Rafe HIS U Il (610-1)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ate a ue AS Aor dat a STS AS Sait i (610-1, Fats, ws 5)
sukhee-ay ka-o paykhai sabh sukhee-aa rogee kai bhaanai sabh rogee.
To the happy person, everyone seems happy; to the sick person, everyone seems sick.
AE ATS AMM wirus af Adait Al (610-2, Fafs, He 5) karan karaavanhaar su-aamee aapan haath sanjogee. ||1]| The Lord and Master acts, and causes us to act; union is in His Hands. ||1]|
Ho Ae fafs oye sou Tes 1 A a ove afe 5 ge fafs AAS YH UST I TTS I (610-2, Aafe, He 5)
man mayray jin apunaa bharam gavaataa. tis kai bhaanai ko-ay na bhoolaa jin saglo barahm pachhaataa. rahaa-o.
O my mind, no one appears to be mistaken, to one who has dispelled his own doubts; he realizes that everyone is God. ||Pause| |
Ha Afa WT at Ho Ase Go We Aart oiet Il (10-3, Fale, He 5) sant sang jaa kaa man seetal oh jaanai saglee thaa“dhee. One whose mind is comforted in the Society of the Saints, believes that all are joyful.
IH dfa a at He faorfus Go Aofh He famSt NI (10-4, Fafs, He 5) ha-umai rog jaa kaa man bi-aapat oh janam marai billaatee. ||2|| One whose mind is afflicted by the disease of egotism, cries out in birth and death.
21 |
famits ning AT at Sst ufsor 3st AG ATs YSAT Il (610-5, Hafs, He 5)
gi-aan anjan jaa kee naytree parhi-aa taa ka-o sarab pargaasaa.
Everything is clear to one whose eyes are blessed with the ointment of spiritual wisdom.
mifamnts nite AStA adt safe sats SHS ISI (610-5, Fafs, Hs 5)
agi-aan anDhayrai soojhas naahee bahurh bahurh bharmaataa. ||3]|
In the darkness of spiritual ignorance, he sees nothing at all; he wanders around in reincarnation, over and over again. ||3]|
Afe Fost Aomit wus area feg AY HT II (610-6, Fats, He 5) sun baynantee su-aamee apunay naanak ih sukh maagai. Hear my prayer, O Lord and Master; Nanak begs for this happiness:
We aesg ST AY Wels STAT HS Sa Ell (10-6, Fats, we 5)
jah keertan tayraa saaDhoo gaavahi tah mayraa man laagai. ||4||6||
whereever Your Holy Saints sing the Kirtan of Your Praises, let my mind be attached to that place. ||4||6]|
Rafe Has U Il (610-7)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
30 H30 A US HS0 AT HS ASS AT AM I (610-7, af, He 5)
tan santan kaa Dhan santan kaa man santan kaa kee-aa.
My body belongs to the Saints, my wealth belongs to the Saints, and my mind belongs to the Saints.
Aa yAtfe ofa on fomrfeor Aaa aA Sa sh All (610-8, Fafs, ue 5)
sant parsaad har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa sarab kusal tab thee-aa. ||1]|
By the Grace of the Saints, I meditate on the Lord's Name, and then, all comforts come to me. ||1]|
H30 faa nied & ast Sr Il (610-8, Fats, v2 5) santan bin avar na daataa bee-aa. Without the Saints, there are no other givers.
Aon ale ud AY at A Ursa otha i TIS I (610-9, Fafs, we 5) jo jo saran parai saaDhoo kee so paargaraamee kee-aa. rahaa-o. Whoever takes to the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints, is carried across. ||Pause| |
afe uaa fhefo ne Ret ofa ates af ae I 10-9, Fafs, v2 5)
kot paraaDh miteh jan sayvaa har keertan ras gaa-ee-ai.
Millions of sins are erased by serving the humble Saints, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with love.
Sto AY via HY GAS Ae a Ha Para uTeht Ml (10-10, Hats, ws 5)
eehaa sukh aagai mukh oojal jan kaa sang vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. ||2||
One finds peace in this world, and one's face is radiant in the next world, by associating with the humble Saints, through great good fortune. ||2||
TAS SA usa TE YIS AS at AIA Sut aT I 610-11, Fafs, ws 5)
rasnaa ayk anayk gun pooran jan kee kaytak upmaa kahee-ai.
I have only one tongue, and the Lord's humble servant is filled with countless virtues; how can I sing his praises?
WOH uididd He vifsat Aafs Hse at Bd Sli (610-11, Fats, He 5)
agam agochar sad abhinaasee saran santan kee lahee-ai. ||3]|
The inaccessible, unapproachable and eternally unchanging Lord is obtained in the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||3]|
fasae ate nova must Ge Hae at nid il (10-12, Fats, He 5)
nirgun neech anaath apraaDhee ot santan kee aahee.
I am worthless, lowly, without friends or support, and full of sins; I long for the Shelter of the Saints.
yas He fas vig gu nfs soa ST fora usildil (10-12, Fats, Hs 5)
boodat moh garih anDh koop meh naanak layho nibaahee. ||4||7| |
I am drowning in the deep, dark pit of household attachments - please save me, Lord! [41171]
Rafe Hoe u we 4 Il (610-13)
sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 1. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, First House:
W ot fase efor 3 aes T at 3 MMA UATE II (610-13, Fafs, He 5) jaa kai hirdai vasi-aa too kartay taa kee tai‘ aas pujaa-ee. O Creator Lord, You fulfill the desires of those, within whose heart You abide.
aA nus a Z fences adt use ute ufs Set AN (10-14, Fats, He 5) daas apunay ka-o too visrahi naahee charan Dhoor man bhaa-ee. ||1]| Your slaves do not forget You; the dust of Your feet is pleasing to their minds. ||1]|
Sot naa AG ARS G AE Il (610-14, Fats, ve 5) tayree akath kathaa kathan na jaa-ee. Your Unspoken Speech cannot be spoken.
qe foas wues Hot As S Bu gsret i TIS Il (610-15, Fafs, ve 5)
gun niDhaan sukh-daatay su-aamee sabh tay ooch badaa-ee. rahaa-o.
O treasure of excellence, Giver of peace, Lord and Master, Your greatness is the highest of all. ||Pause] |
A A Osu aes oF yet AAT SH fesfe ret I (610-15, afs, He 5) so so karam karat hai paraanee jaisee tum likh paa-ee. The mortal does those deeds, and those alone, which You ordained by destiny.
Rea A 3H AS Sot eaAS Sf mwret IQ (610-16, Fate, vs 5)
sayvak ka-o tum sayvaa deenee darsan daykh aghaa-ee. ||2||
Your servant, whom You bless with Your service, is satisfied and fulfilled, beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2]|
Hea fadsfe sufo AHS A aS so orfu Fsret II (10-16, Fafs, He 5)
sarab nirantar tumeh samaanay jaa ka-o tuDh aap bujhaa-ee.
You are contained in all, but he alone realizes this, whom You bless with understanding.
aa usrte fifeS nifamrar yste Se AS Stet SI (10-17, Aafs, ve 5) gur parsaad miti-o agi-aanaa pargat bha-ay sabh thaa-ee. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, his spiritual ignorance is dispelled, and he is respected everywhere.
H3II Het famrat Aet fomrat Aet use ASTeT I (610-17, Fats, He 5)
so-ee gi-aanee so-ee Dhi-aanee so-ee purakh subhaa-ee. He alone is spiritually enlightened, he alone is a meditator, and he alone is a man of good nature.
ad aoa fan se efenrer st a He 3 feats o WEST ISIC (610-18, Fafs, He 5) kaho naanak jis bha-ay da-i-aalaa taa ka-o man tay bisar na jaa-ee. ||4||8]|
Says Nanak, one unto whom the Lord becomes Merciful, does not forget the Lord from his mind. ||4||8] |
Rafe HIS U Il (610-19)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Hae AH dfs fenmit ca Ss aa ats il (10-19, Fafs, Hz 5)
Sagal samagree mohi vi-aapee kab oochay kab neechay.
The whole creation is engrossed in emotional attachment; sometimes, one is high, and at other times, low.
AY 8 det og Asa" Gala FB UTS IAI (610-19, Fats, He 5) suDh na ho-ee-ai kaahoo jatnaa orhak ko na pahoochay. || 1] | No one can be purified by any rituals or devices; they cannot reach their goal. ||1]|
UST EAQ
Hd Ho AG Aas Seas Il (611-1, Fats, He 5) mayray man saaDh saran chhutkaaraa. O my mind, emancipation is attained in the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints.
fag Ts us ASH Hs 3 Bet fefe ures as ga i TTS Il 11-1, Fels, us 5)
bin gur pooray janam maran na rah-ee fir aavat baaro baaraa. rahaa-o.
Without the Perfect Guru, births and deaths do not cease, and one comes and goes, over and over again. ||Pause||
6g FH SdH gare ads fsa nfs CafSE Aa AAS Il (611-2, Hafs, v2 5) oh jo bharam bhulaavaa kahee-at tin meh urjhi-o sagal sansaaraa. The whole world is entangled in what is called the delusion of doubt.
UIs SIS UTE AMM a Asa Fa S fSnirs Qi 11-3, Fats, we 5) pooran bhagat purakh su-aamee kaa sarab thok tay ni-aaraa. ||2]| The perfect devotee of the Primal Lord God remains detached from everything. ||2]|
Ses aat ag as So YAH a aor | (611-3, Fats, we 5)
ninda-o naahee kaahoo baatai ayhu khasam kaa kee-aa.
Don't indulge in slander for any reason, for everything is the creation of the Lord and Master.
Ww ag faur act ufs xs fife AOAafS oe Sor 3 1-4, Aafs, Hs 5)
jaa ka-o kirpaa karee parabh mayrai mil saaDhsangat naa-o lee-aa. ||3]|
One who is blessed with the Mercy of my God, dwells on the Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. |[3]|
UTSYIH USHA Afsdd Aso" ATS Burs | (61-4, Fafs, we 5) paarbarahm parmaysur satgur sabhnaa karat uDhaaraa. The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, the True Guru, saves all.
aI Sa Ts fag aot sda feg uss 3g sos siti Gu-s, Fels, us 5)
kaho naanak gur bin nahee taree-ai ih pooran tat beechaaraa. ||4||9]|
Says Nanak, without the Guru, no one crosses over; this is the perfect essence of all contemplation. ||4]|9] |
Rafe HIS U Il (611-6)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
dns dns fa stots ont aH SS ATT Il (11-6, Aafs, n2 5)
khojat khojat khoj beechaari-o raam naam tat saaraa.
I have searched and searched and searched, and found that the Lord's Name is the most sublime reality.
fafa ae fond mafomr aayfe ufa Sarat Al G11-6, Fafs, He 5)
kilbikh kaatay nimakh araaDhi-aa gurmukh paar utaaraa. ||1||
Contemplating it for even an instant, sins are erased; the Gurmukh is carried across and saved. ||1]|
dfs 3A uleg use famrat il 1-7, Fafs, He 5) har ras peevhu purakh gi-aanee. Drink in the sublime essence of the Lord's Name, O man of spiritual wisdom.
Afe fe no fufs ng ure AY ifs sat Wl TTS il Gu-7, Fels, ws 5)
sun sun mahaa taripat man paavai saaDhoo amrit baanee. rahaa-o. Listening to the Ambrosial Words of the Holy Saints, the mind finds absolute fulfillment and satisfaction. ||Pause] |
Hafs gafs wafs AY Ue Ags AM aT VST II (11-2, Fafs, He 5)
mukat bhugat jugat sach paa-ee-ai sarab sukhaa kaa daataa.
Liberation, pleasures, and the true way of life are obtained from the Lord, the Giver of all peace.
mys BA Ag sals WE VS uss YsY fears NI (611-8, Fafs, ws 5)
apunay daas ka-o bhagat daan dayvai pooran purakh biDhaataa. ||2|| The Perfect Lord, the Architect of Destiny, blesses His slave with the gift of devotional worship. |[2||
Azat Heba sor area fase forent Fet 1 11-9, Fats, He 5)
sarvanee sunee-ai rasnaa gaa-ee-ai hirdai Dhi-aa-ee-ai so-ee.
Hear with your ears, and sing with your tongue, and meditate within your heart on Him.
ATE ATE ANTE AM wr S far s aet Sil (1-10, Aafs, us 5)
karan kaaran samrath su-aamee jaa tay baritha na ko-ee. ||3]|
The Lord and Master is all-powerful, the Cause of causes; without Him, there is nothing at all. ||3]|
zs aft Io FOX weer agg fur fours Il (11-10, Hats, He 5)
vadai bhaag ratan janam paa-i-aa karahu kirpaa kirpaalaa.
By great good fortune, I have obtained the jewel of human life; have mercy on me, O Merciful Lord.
AUHfa Soa Te We fad Het TUS IsiIoll (1-11, Fats, we 5) saaDhsang naanak gun gaavai simrai sadaa gopaalaa. ||4]|10]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and contemplates Him forever in meditation. ||4]|10]|
Rafe HIS U Il (611-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
af fenars fanfs ys wruat Hoe 36 3S niga Il (11-11, Fafs, ve 5)
kar isnaan simar parabh apnaa man tan bha-ay arogaa.
After taking your cleansing bath, remember your God in meditation, and your mind and body shall be free of disease.
afe fas we ys Ade! YS SS Arar AI (11-12, Fafs, ve 5) kot bighan laathay parabh sarnaa pargatay bhalay sanjogaa. ||1]| Millions of obstacles are removed, in the Sanctuary of God, and good fortune dawns.
[11
ys aet Hae Hatem il 11-13, Aafs, us 5) parabh banee sabad subhaakhi-aa. The Word of God's Bani, and His Shabad, are the best utterances.
Weg eg usd fas set aT us 3 Theme i ITS i Cu-13, Fels, v3 5)
gaavhu sunhu parhahu nit bhaa-ee gur poorai too raakhi-aa. rahaa-o.
So constantly sing them, listen to them, and read them, O Siblings of Destiny, and the Perfect Guru shall save you. ||Pause] |
Aa Atos offs eset salts sem efenrar Il 1-14, Fafs, ue 5)
saachaa saahib amit vadaa-ee bhagat vachhal da-i-aalaa.
The glorious greatness of the True Lord is immeasurable; the Merciful Lord is the Lover of His devotees.
Ast ot Un seer orfenr orfe fase yfsurer QU (1-14, Fafs, ue 5)
santaa kee paij rakh-daa aa-i-aa aad birad partipaalaa. ||2]|
He has preserved the honor of His Saints; from the very beginning of time, His Nature is to cherish them. ||2||
ofa nifys ou sno fos gag Hee Sor Hf urTS|T Il (11-15, Fats, He 5)
har amrit naam bhojan nit bhunchahu sarab vaylaa mukh paavhu.
So eat the Ambrosial Name of the Lord as your food; put it into your mouth at all times.
Ad HS Sy Ag oS Te afse fos Weg Sil (611-15, Fale, He 5)
jaraa maraa taap sabh naathaa gun gobind nit gaavhu. ||3]|
The pains of old age and death shall all depart, when you constantly sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||3]|
Hat meeta AM Ad Asa aor afs niet Il 11-16, Fats, He 5) sunee ardaas su-aamee mayrai sarab kalaa ban aa-ee. My Lord and Master has heard my prayer, and all my affairs have been resolved.
use set AAS Ha nists Ta soa at Sfsnret saa (11-16, Fats, u2 5) pargat bha-ee saglay jug antar gur naanak kee vadi-aa-ee. ||4||11|| The glorious greatness of Guru Nanak is manifest, throughout all the ages. ||4||11]|
Hofe Hoe u wg 2 veue (11-18) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 2 cha-upday Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsas ure Il (611-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Sa fust San a TH Haar FHT TT Tet Il 11-19, Fafs, w2 5) ayk pitaa aykas kay ham baarik too mayraa gur haa-ee. The One God is our father; we are the children of the One God. You are our Guru.
Afe Hist HE oe af afs wat afe wane a fearet Al (11-19, Fats, nH 5)
sun meetaa jee-o hamaaraa bal bal jaasee har darsan dayh dikhaa-ee. ||1]|| Listen, friends: my soul is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You; O Lord, reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1]|
ust E92 fe Hts odt aS afe Are I 12-1, Aefe, He 5)
sun meetaa Dhooree ka-o bal jaa-ee. Listen, friends: I am a sacrifice to the dust of Your feet.
feg He 3a Te I TTS Il (612-1, Fats, ns 5) in man tayraa bhaa-ee. rahaa-o. This mind is yours, O Siblings of Destiny. ||Pause] |
ure HOST His His Get feg HS 3 FX SAT Il (612-1, Fale, ws 5) paav malovaa mal mal Dhovaa ih man tai koo daysaa. I wash your feet, I massage and clean them; I give this mind to you.
Afe Hist 38 Sct Ageret orfeor us fea tg SueAr iil (612-2, Fafs, ws 5) sun meetaa ha-o tayree sarnaa-ee aa-i-aa parabh mila-o dayh updaysaa. ||2|| Listen, friends: I have come to Your Sanctuary; teach me, that I might unite with God.
21 | HS 3 ote Hale udth Ad A IS HoveH Il (612-3, Fate, He 5)
maan na keejai saran pareejai karai so bhalaa manaa-ee-ai. Do not be proud; seek His Sanctuary, and accept as good all that He does.
Afe Hist He fils AS so mrauin fE@ wane aie AIG ure SI 612-3, Fats, He 5)
sun meetaa jee-o pind sabh tan arpeejai i-o darsan har jee-o paa-ee-ai. ||3||
Listen, friends: dedicate your soul, body and your whole being to Him; thus you shall receive the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||3]|
sfe6 nioqgy yrte Hae & ofa ant F Hoe Il (612-4, Hats, ne 5)
bha-i-o anoograhu parsaad santan kai har naamaa hai meethaa.
He has shown mercy to me, by the Grace of the Saints; the Lord's Name is sweet to me.
Ho aoa a afs faa odt As nae fadHe StS ISIN (612-5, Fats, He 5)
jan naanak ka-o gur kirpaa Dhaaree sabh akul niranjan deethaa. ||4]|1]|12]|
The Guru has shown mercy to servant Nanak; I see the casteless, immaculate Lord everywhere. ||4||1]|12]|
Rafe Has U Il (612-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
afe qos & Sag AyMit Hee Alor a erst FI 612-5, Fafs, He 5) kot barahmand ko thaakur su-aamee sarab jee-aa kaa daataa ray. God is the Lord and Master of millions of universes; He is the Giver of all beings.
yfsurs fos rf AHS fea Tae sot Hate AST ST UA (12-6, Fats, Hs 5)
paratipaalai nit saar samaalai ik gun nahee moorakh jaataa ray. ||1||
He ever cherishes and cares for all beings, but the fool does not appreciate any of His virtues. ||1]|
dfs wrata & War gs Il (12-7, Fats, He 5) har aaraaDh na jaanaa ray. I do not know how to worship the Lord in adoration.
ofs of Ts AT ATT F Il (612-7, Fafs, ue 5) har har gur gur kartaa ray. I can only repeat, "Lord, Lord, Guru, Guru."
dfs HE an ufsG eA | TI I (612-7, Fale, ue 5) har jee-o naam pari-o raamdaas. rahaa-o. O Dear Lord, I go by the name of the Lord's slave. ||Pause| |
ae vfenrs fgues Ae ATS ATa Wet sduTt F Il (612-8, Hafs, Hs 5)
deen da-i-aal kirpaal sukh saagar sarab ghataa bharpooree ray.
The Compassionate Lord is Merciful to the meek, the ocean of peace; He fills all hearts.
Ues ASS Ae Hat H Hae hour Tat F UI (612-8, Fats, we 5)
paykhat sunat sadaa hai sangay mai moorakh jaani-aa dooree ray. ||2||
He sees, hears, and is always with me; but I am a fool, and I think that He is far away. ||2||
dfs fimiz o@ fufs afs aa for ae afE AA TF Il (612-9, Fats, He 5)
har bi-ant ha-o mit kar varna-o ki-aa jaanaa ho-ay kaiso ray.
The Lord is limitless, but I can only describe Him within my limitations; what do I know, about what He is like?
XIG Fost Afsas nys Huse Sy BueA F SII (612-9, Fafs, Hs 5) kara-o bayntee satgur apunay mai moorakh dayh updayso ray. ||3]| I offer my prayer to my True Guru; I am so foolish - please, teach me! ||3]|
H yee at asa as go afe ust for F Il 612-10, Hate, He 5) mai moorakh kee kaytak baat hai kot paraaDhee tari-aa ray. I am just a fool, but millions of sinners just like me have been saved.
ad ood fae Afenr ufior A fefs aesth o ufemr F NSNNISI (12-10, Aafs, He 5) gur naanak jin suni-aa paykhi-aa say fir garbhaas na pari-aa ray. ||4]|2]|13]| Those who have heard, and seen Guru Nanak, do not descend into the womb of reincarnation again. ||4||2||13]|
Rafe HIS U Il (612-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fast as a sags nitnd 3 fhe Afs afemr il (612-11, Aefs, nH: 5) jinaa baat ko bahut andaysro tay mitay sabh ga-i-aa. Those things, which caused me such anxiety, have all vanished.
Hon AS nig AMS set Cu ane faaAfenr Al 612-12, Hafs, Hs 5)
sahj sain ar sukhman naaree ooDh kamal bigsa-i-aa. ||1] |
Now, I sleep in peace and tranquility, and my mind is in a state of deep and profound peace; the inverted lotus of my heart has blossomed forth. ||1] |
ug msdn stent il (612-13, Aafs, He 5) daykhhu achraj bha-i-aa. Behold, a wondrous miracle has happened!
fag oad a Hos warfa afta A fee afe efeor | Toe I 12-13, Fats, He 5)
jih thaakur ka-o sunat agaaDh boDh so ridai gur da-i-aa. rahaa-o.
That Lord and Master, whose wisdom is said to be unfathomable, has been enshrined within my heart, by the Guru. ||Pause| |
ne vs Hfs ads Ases 3 sfentea stent Il (612-13, Hale, ue 5) jo-ay doot mohi bahut santaavat tay bha-i-aanak bha-i-aa. The demons which tormented me so much, have themselves become terrified.
ads Fost TY SAT 3 IH Sat AGSEMT INI 12-14, Fats, ue 5) karahi bayntee raakh thaakur tay ham tayree sarna-i-aa. ||2|| They pray: please, save us from your Lord Master; we seek your protection. ||2]|
Ad gag afae a ufemr fro yrufs fsa ofemr I 12-15, Fafs, He 5)
jah bhandaar gobind kaa khuli-aa jih paraapat tih la-i-aa.
When the treasure of the Lord of the Universe is opened, those who are pre-destined, receive it.
faq Iso HAS ate dat Nae Ho So Ase fewr I3il (612-15, Aefs, He 5)
ayk ratan mo ka-o gur deenaa mayraa man tan seetal thi-aa. ||3]|
The Guru has given me the one jewel, and my mind and body have become peaceful and tranquil. ||3]|
ea de afte uifys Gs FT new mT 3 HT Il (612-16, Hats, we 5)
ayk boond gur amrit deeno taa atal amar na mu-aa.
The Guru has blessed me with the one drop of Ambrosial Nectar, and so I have become stable, unmoving and immortal - I shall not die.
sats gad ate Sa AG ASU fefs Sa nfs o Bent ISIBNIII (612-16, Fafs, Hs 5)
bhagat bhandaar gur naanak ka-o sa-upay fir laykhaa mool na la-i-aa. ||4]|3]|14]| The Lord blessed Guru Nanak with the treasure of devotional worship, and did not call him to account again. ||4||3]|14]|
Rafe HIS U Il (612-17)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
3do THE fAG A aT He Stat A AS fgufs mwret | (612-17, Fafo, He 5)
charan kamal si-o jaa kaa man leenaa say jan taripat aghaa-ee.
Those whose minds are attached to the lotus feet of the Lord - those humble beings are satisfied and fulfilled.
ae une fan fee o efi 3 og fare feuret all (612-18, Fats, ne 5)
gun amol jis ridai na vasi-aa tay nar tarisan tarikhaa-ee. ||1]|
But those, within whose hearts the priceless virtue does not abide - those men remain thirsty and unsatisfied. ||1]|
dfs wired niga maeret I (612-19, Hafs, ne 5) har aaraaDhay arog andaa-ee. Worshipping the Lord in adoration, one becomes happy, and free of disease.
fan 6 fend Hat aH ASdt fSR we aes AE niet | TIT I 12-19, Fafs, v2 5)
jis no visrai mayraa raam sanayhee tis laakh baydan jan aa-ee. rahaa-o.
But one who forgets my Dear Lord - know him to be afflicted with tens of thousands of illnesses. | |Pause] |
UST €93
fag Ho Ge adt ys Sat A AMIS Us AG|S Il (613-1, Fafs, ns 5) jih jan ot gahee parabh tayree say sukhee-ay parabh sarnay. Those who hold tightly to Your Support, God, are happy in Your Sanctuary.
fra oo fanfoor usy faorst 3 eden ufo TSS NM (613-1, Fafs, ue 5)
jih nar bisri-aa purakh biDhaataa tay dukhee-aa meh gannay. ||2||
But those humble beings who forget the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, are counted among the most miserable beings. ||2||
fra as He ys foe wet fsa Ho mdse IA afar Il (613-2, Hafs, H 5)
jih gur maan parabhoo liv laa-ee tih mahaa anand ras kari-aa.
One who has faith in the Guru, and who is lovingly attached to God, enjoys the delights of supreme ecstasy.
fro ys ferfs aa 3 aHeret 3 saa ule ufo uf SI (613-2, iafs, 8 5) jih parabhoo bisaar gur tay baymukhaa-ee tay narak ghor meh pari-aa. ||3]| One who forgets God and forsakes the Guru, falls into the most horrible hell. ||3]|
fas a ofenr fas dt oar 3A ot ZasTe Il (613-3, Fats, He 5) jit ko laa-i-aa tit hee laagaa taiso hee vartaaraa. As the Lord engages someone, so he is engaged, and so does he perform.
Soa AU Uddt Ase at fee SS Has Vaors ISIS (613-4, Fats, u3 5)
naanak sah pakree santan kee ridai bha-ay magan charnaaraa. ||4||4]|15]| Nanak has taken to the Shelter of the Saints; his heart is absorbed in the Lord's feet. 4114) [251]
Rafe Has U Il (613-4)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
aH Hfs oat Baste Ho fs wifsnrat I (613-5, Fats, v2 5) raajan meh raajaa urjhaa-i-o maanan meh abhimaanee. As the king is entangled in kingly affairs, and the egotist in his own egotism,
Sao ufo Sat Sates (SC ale df gs farrst wall (613-5, Aafs, v8 5)
lobhan meh lobhee lobhaa-i-o ti-o har rang rachay gi-aanee. ||1]|
and the greedy man is enticed by greed, so is the spiritually enlightened being absorbed in the Love of the Lord. ||1]|
dfs AS a fedt ATS Il (613-6, Fats, H2 5)
har jan ka-o ihee suhaavai.
This is what befits the Lord's servant.
ufy foafe afs Ae Afsas ofe atests ct feuss i TIE Il (613-6, Fas, ne 5)
paykh nikat kar sayvaa satgur har keertan hee tariptaavai. rahaa-o. Beholding the Lord near at hand, he serves the True Guru, and he is satisfied through
the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||Pause] |
mines fAS ont Buetes sus sf fim i (613-7, afs, u2 5) amlan si-o amlee laptaa-i-o bhooman bhoom pi-aaree. The addict is addicted to his drug, and the landlord is in love with his land.
ute Afar afaa 3 sto ys AS MA fasardt II (613-7, ats, ue 5) kheer sang baarik hai leenaa parabh sant aisay hitkaaree. ||2|| As the baby is attached to his milk, so the Saint is in love with God. ||2]|
fafeor ufo frenint sfeur So Sfa AY urefs I (613-8, Aafs, H2 5) bidi-aa meh bidu-ansee rachi-aa nain daykh sukh paavahi. The scholar is absorbed in scholarship, and the eyes are happy to see.
AA Hat Ate warat fC ofs Ae dfs TE Wefa Sil (613-8, Fats, He 5)
jaisay rasnaa saad lubhaanee ti-o har jan har gun gaavahi. ||3]||
As the tongue savors the tastes, so does the humble servant of the Lord sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
AA SY SAt AT UTA Aas Wer at AMM il (613-9, Fafs, Hz 5) jaisee bhookh taisee kaa poorak sagal ghataa kaa su-aamee. As is the hunger, so is the fulfiller; He is the Lord and Master of all hearts.
soa fimin adit cans at ys fife nisarmit snUIell (613-10, Fats, He 5)
naanak pi-aas lagee darsan kee parabh mili-aa antarjaamee. ||4||5||16]| Nanak thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; he has met God, the Inner- knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||4||5||16] |
Hafs HIS U Il (613-10)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
TH HS SH CAS ass TH fess JF AST Il (613-10, Fafs, Hz 5)
ham mailay tum oojal kartay ham nirgun too daataa.
We are filthy, and You are immaculate, O Creator Lord; we are worthless, and You are the Great Giver.
JH Hse SH Usd frmre J ATA ae a fares A (13-11, Fafs, H2 5) ham moorakh tum chatur si-aanay too sarab kalaa kaa gi-aataa. ||1]|| We are fools, and You are wise and all-knowing. You are the knower of all things.
[2
HG TH MAS MAT Il (613-12, Rafe, He 5) maaDho ham aisay too aisaa. O Lord, this is what we are, and this is what You are.
JH unit SH uny use sla StaT SAT Il TIS I (613-12, Fahy, nz 5)
ham paapee tum paap khandan neeko thaakur daysaa. rahaa-o.
We are sinners, and You are the Destroyer of sins. Your abode is so beautiful, O Lord and Master. ||Pause| |
3H AS AA AA fost AIG fils SF yA I (613-12, Hafs, ue 5)
tum sabh saajay saaj nivaajay jee-o pind day paraanaa.
You fashion all, and having fashioned them, You bless them. You bestow upon them soul, body and the breath of life.
fasasord Te odt act SH US Sg fTsSTAT IQ (613-13, Fels, He 5)
nirgunee-aaray gun nahee ko-ee tum daan dayh miharvaanaa. ||2||
We are worthless - we have no virtue at all; please, bless us with Your gift, O Merciful Lordand Master. ||2]|
3H AdT 3G" JH 3S 5 ASd SH Ae Het elena Il 613-13, Aafs, He 5)
tum karahu bhalaa ham bhalo na jaanah tum sadaa sadaa da-i-aalaa.
You do good for us, but we do not see it as good; You are kind and compassionate, forever and ever.
SH AYES usu fears SH IU MUS BSH ISI (613-14, Fats, vs 5)
tum sukh-daa-ee purakh biDhaatay tum raakho apunay baalaa. ||3]|
You are the Giver of peace, the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny; please, save us, Your children! ||3]|
3H fours nies Afssts tha Hs vfs ATS I 613-15, Fats, He 5) tum niDhaan atal sulitaan jee-a jant sabh jaachai. You are the treasure, eternal Lord King; all beings and creatures beg of You.
AT asa JH fed Jews Ty Ass A UTES NUENVW I (613-15, Fats, He 5)
kaho naanak ham ihai havaalaa raakh santan kai paachhai. ||4]|6]|17]| Says Nanak, such is our condition; please, Lord, keep us on the Path of the Saints. [14] |6][17]|
Hafs HIS U wg 2 Il (613-16) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 2. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
HS das Hf wtus fAHeS F 3d SH TUS Il (613-16, Fate, v3 5)
maat garabh meh aapan simran day tah tum raakhanhaaray.
In our mother's womb, You blessed us with Your meditative remembrance, and You preserved us there.
urea Aad Ma Bdfd Hfs SIT SkISITS INA (613-17, Fats, He 5)
paavak saagar athaah lahar meh taarahu taaranhaaray. ||1]||
Through the countless waves of the ocean of fire, please, carry us across and save us, O Savior Lord! |]1]|
HG 3 tag fafs Ha Il (613-17, Fafs, Hs 5) maaDhou too thaakur sir moraa. O Lord, You are the Master above my head.
ata Sar gag Ta | TTS Il (613-18, Fale, ws 5) eehaa oohaa tuhaaro Dhoraa. rahaa-o. Here and hereafter, You alone are my Support. ||Pause] |
ats a@ AS AHS adeag FFE AS Il (613-18, als, He 5)
keetay ka-o mayrai sammaanai karanhaar tarin jaanai.
He looks upon the creation like a mountain of gold, and sees the Creator as a blade of grass.
3 UST HIS aS AaTSt WE Sf YS HS Ml (613-18, Favs, ws 5)
too daataa maagan ka-o saglee daan deh parabh bhaanai. ||2||
You are the Great Giver, and we are all mere beggars; O God, You give gifts according to Your Will. ||2||
fas ufo nies fas ufo niga nigeH VHS SHS Il (613-19, Aafs, v2 5)
khin meh avar khinai meh avraa achraj chalat tumaaray.
In an instant, You are one thing, and in another instant, You are another. Wondrous are Your ways!
Js Ts Afos asts Ss want wars Sil (613-19, Fafs, Hz 5) roorho goorho gahir gambheero oochou agam apaaray. ||3]|| You are beautiful, mysterious, profound, unfathomable, lofty, inaccessible and infinite.
[I3]|
uar E98 WUHfa AG sHfo frofeS 3B Hat syrdt sret Il (614-1, Fats, v2 5)
saaDhsang ja-o tumeh milaa-i-o ta-o sunee tumaaree banee. When You brought me to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, then I heard the Bani of Your Word.
moe Sent ues dt stead ysty us fSgarat ISIDIACI (14-2, Hafs, us 5)
anad bha-i-aa paykhat hee naanak partaap purakh nirbaanee. ||4||7||18]| Nanak is in ecstasy, beholding the Glory of the Primal Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||4]|7]|18]|
Rafe Has U Il (614-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
JH 30 at 3 firs JH AZo Sat Ads Il (614-2, Fale, He 5)
ham santan kee rayn pi-aaray ham santan kee sarnaa.
I am the dust of the feet of the Beloved Saints; I seek the Protection of their Sanctuary.
H3 dNdt Ge Asal AS INS TTS™ AU (614-3, Fafs, ne 5) sant hamaaree ot sataanee sant hamaaraa gahnaa. ||1]| The Saints are my all-powerful Support; the Saints are my ornament and decoration.
[21
JH A306 fA afs iret Il (614-3, ef, v2 5) ham santan si-o ban aa-ee. I am hand and glove with the Saints.
uate fesfmr uret i (614-4, Fats, He 5) poorab likhi-aa paa-ee. I have realized my pre-ordained destiny.
feg He Sa TST Il TTS Il (614-4, Fafs, uz 5) ih man tayraa bhaa-ee. rahaa-o. This mind is yours, O Siblings of Destiny. ||Pause] |
H36 fA@ Adt Se Vat Aso fAG faBaa I 14-4, Fafs, v2 5) santan si-o mayree layvaa dayvee santan si-o bi-uhaaraa. My dealings are with the Saints, and my business is with the Saints.
H30 fAG oH oot wfenr afs sats sd FST MQM (614-5, Fefs, He 5)
santan si-o ham laahaa khaati-aa har bhagat bharay bhandaaraa. ||2||
I have earned the profit with the Saints, and the treasure filled to over-flowing with devotion to the Lord. ||2]|
Has H aS ust AGut 3B Ssfaur Ho a Tar Il 14-5, Fale, Hs 5) santan mo ka-o poonjee sa-upee ta-o utri-aa man kaa Dhokhaa. The Saints entrusted to me the capital, and my mind's delusion was dispelled.
Ten afe we as add AG ate Aas Ba Bll (614-6, Fale, v2 5) Dharam raa-ay ab kahaa karaigo ja-o faati-o saglo laykhaa. ||3]| What can the Righteous Judge of Dharma do now? All my accounts have been torn
up. |/3]|
Ho moe se AY Ufeor Ase A UPATS Il (614-6, Hafs, He 5) mahaa anand bha-ay sukh paa-i-aa santan kai parsaaday. I have found the greatest bliss, and I am at peace, by the Grace of the Saints.
aT soa ofa fAG Ho Hfour dsfar gS faATS ISUCIVEN (614-7, Fale, He 5) kaho naanak har si-o man maani-aa rang ratay bismaaday. ||4||8]|19]|
Says Nanak, my mind is reconciled with the Lord; it is imbued with the wondrous Love of the Lord. ||4]|8]|19]|
Hafs Hs U Il (614-8)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
nat AHGt Sug J ad Sat ot els Wat Il (614-8, Aafo, us 5) jaytee samagree daykhhu ray nar taytee hee chhad jaanee. All the things that you see, O man, you shall have to leave behind.
oH on Afa afe fabora uefa ue fagarat Ill (614-8, Fefs, Hs 5)
raam naam sang kar bi-uhaaraa paavahi pad nirbaanee. ||1]||
Let your dealings be with the Lord's Name, and you shall attain the state of Nirvaanaa. ||1]|
films 3 HT AYTST Il (614-9, Hats, Hs 5) pi-aaray too mayro sukh-daata. O my Beloved, You are the Giver of peace.
afs us dor Quen 3H dt Afar usrst i TIS Il (614-9, Fafs, ws 5) gur poorai dee-aa updaysaa tum hee sang paraataa. rahaa-o. The Perfect Guru has given me these Teachings, and I am attuned to You. ||Pause] |
aH au 8s Hd vifsro so fs AY oot Ure II (614-10, Hats, He 5)
kaam kroDh lobh moh abhimaanaa taa meh sukh nahee paa-ee-ai.
In sexual desire, anger, greed, emotional attachment and self-conceit, peace is not to be found.
UT 35 J AAS at HS Ho SE nise Haws AY UTM NI (14-10, Fafs, 3 5)
hohu rayn too sagal kee mayray man ta-o anad mangal sukh paa-ee-ai. ||2||
So be the dust of the feet of all, O my mind, and then you shall find bliss, joy and peace. ||2||
wes @ 36 nisd fafa WS 3 at afs Ho AS Il (614-11, Fafs, He 5)
ghaal na bhaanai antar biDh jaanai taa kee kar man sayvaa.
He knows the condition of your inner self, and He will not let your work go in vain - serve Him, O mind.
ate unt dfh fea Hour vias Has TIES SI (614-11, Fas, we 5)
kar poojaa hom ih manoo-aa akaal moorat gurdayvaa. ||3]|
Worship Him, and dedicate this mind unto Him, the Image of the Undying Lord, the Divine Guru. |[3]|
difee anes efenrs nae uraq7H fadars | (614-12, Aafs, ue 5)
gobid daamodar da-i-aal maaDhvay paarbarahm nirankaaraa.
He is the Lord of the Universe, the Compassionate Lord, the Supreme Lord God, the Formless Lord.
OY casts SH TSS SUH FSA UTS MOT WIENOM (614-13, Fats, He 5)
naam vartan naamo vaalayvaa naam naanak paraan aDhaaraa. ||4||9||20||
The Naam is my merchandise, the Naam is my nourishment; the Naam, O Nanak, is the Support of my breath of life. ||4]|9]|20||
Rafe HIS U Il (614-13)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
frasa aB ufeG sfs AA faess orfs frerfeor II (614-14, Fafs, He 5) mirtak ka-o paa-i-o tan saasaa bichhurat aan milaa-i-aa. He infuses the breath into the dead bodies, and he reunited the separated ones.
UA uss Ha se AS ote oar fe afer Ul (614-14, ats, ws 5)
pasoo parayt mugaDh bha-ay sarotay har naamaa mukh gaa-i-aa. ||1]|
Even beasts, demons and fools become attentive listeners, when He sings the Praises of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
ud TT at Sy TSF I (614-15, Fafo, uz 5) pooray gur kee daykh vadaa-ee. Behold the glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru.
a at ais age B Wet Il TTS Il (614-15, Fafs, ue 5) taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee. rahaa-o. His worth cannot be described. ||Pause| |
wu Aa a ete so nis]e Hares far Il 614-15, Fafs, Hs 5)
dookh sog kaa Dhaahi-o dayraa anad mangal bisraamaa.
He has demolished the abode of sorrow and disease, and brought bliss, joy and happiness.
Ho ates Se MHS miss us TS HT MM (614-16, Favs, vs 5)
man baa'chhat fal milay achintaa pooran ho-ay kaamaa. ||2]|
He effortlessly awards the fruits of the mind's desire, and all works are brought to perfection. ||2||
So AY nat HY Cae fife Te nee WE Il (614-16, Fafs, 3 5)
eehaa sukh aagai mukh oojal mit ga-ay aavan jaanay.
He finds peace in this world, and his face is radiant in the world hereafter; his comings and goings are finished.
fass@ se fase on efimr ngs Afsag & Hfe STS ISI (614-17, Aas, He 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay hirdai naam vasi-aa apunay satgur kai man bhaanay. ||3]|
He becomes fearless, and his heart is filled with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; his mind is pleasing to the True Guru. |[3]|
Gos Sos ole TE We Ty VIE FH TM Il (614-18, Halo, ws 5)
oothat baithat har gun gaavai dookh darad bharam bhaagaa.
Standing up and sitting down, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord; his pain, sorrow and doubt are dispelled.
AI FSA ST A UT AGH A aT TT Vast HO SS ISIIONQU (614-18, Fats, us 5) kaho naanak taa kay poor karammaa jaa kaa gur charnee man laagaa. ||4]|10]|21] |
Says Nanak, his karma is perfect; his mind is attached to the Guru's feet. ||4]|10][22]|
Rafe Hager U Il (614-19)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
339 ets aGst Afar wa WS AEs ure Il 14-19, Halo, ws 5) ratan chhaad ka-udee sang laagay jaa tay kachhoo na paa-ee-di. Forsaking the jewel, he is attached to the shell; nothing will come of it.
User €qy
YIS UIYIH USHAT AS HS Aer fore AU 15-1, Fats, we 5) pooran paarbarahm parmaysur mayray man sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1||
O my mind, meditate forever on the Perfect, Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord. ||1]|
frag afs ofa oH ust Il (15-1, Fafs, He 5) simrahu har har naam paraanee. Meditate in remembrance on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O mortal.
faorn ardt fa uifamrat i ToS i (615-2, Fafs, we 5) binsai kaachee dayh agi-aanee. rahaa-o. Your frail body shall perish, you ignorant fool. ||Pause| |
fit fgror nig AUS Hoda St at as B savet | (15-2, Hafs, us 5) marig tarisnaa ar supan manorath taa kee kachh na vadaa-ee. Illusions and dream-objects possess nothing of greatness.
oH sro fae oth 3 orefh Afar o og ATT II (615-3, Fels, Hs 5) raam bhajan bin kaam na aavas sang na kaahoo jaa-ee. ||2|| Without meditating on the Lord, nothing succeeds, and nothing will go along with you.
21 |
IG 3G ass feote meget Hha a aM & altar Il (615-3, afs, He 5) ha-o ha-o karat bihaa-ay avradaa jee-a ko kaam na keenaa. Acting in egotism and pride, his life passes away, and he does nothing for his soul.
Wes Wes od fgusthor TH oH Odt Tar BI (615-4, Fats, 2 5) Dhaavat Dhaavat nah tariptaasi-aa raam naam nahee cheenaa. ||3]||
Wandering and wandering all around, he is never satisfied; he does not remember the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
Are faorg fad GA HTS wine US afs SF Il (615-4, Fats, He 5)
saad bikaar bikhai ras maato asa‘kh khatay kar fayray.
Intoxicated with the taste of corruption, cruel pleasures and countless sins, he is consigned to the cycle of reincarnation.
soa at us uty fasst weg neaTe AT NSUAUII (615-5, Fafs, ue 5) naanak kee parabh paahi binantee kaatahu avgun mayray. ||4||11||22|| Nanak offers his prayer to God, to eradicate his demerits. ||4]|11]|22]|
Rafe Has U Il (615-6)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
TE Weg yas nifsont amy ga fay AT Il (15-6, Fafs, ws 5)
gun gaavhu pooran abhinaasee kaam kroDh bikh jaaray.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Perfect, Imperishable Lord, and the poison of sexual desire and anger shall be burnt away.
Ho fay orate & Aras ATG Afar Sars All (615-6, Fats, ws 5)
mahaa bikham agan ko saagar saaDhoo sang uDhaaray. ||1]|
You shall cross over the awesome, arduous ocean of fire, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
ud afe AfeS say HITT II (15-7, Fats, ue 5) poorai gur mayti-o bharam anDhayraa. The Perfect Guru has dispelled the darkness of doubt.
3H UH Sails Ys ST Il FIC Il (15-7, Hafs, ws 5) bhaj paraym bhagat parabh nayraa. rahaa-o. Remember God with love and devotion; He is near at hand. ||Pause| |
dfs ofs oH fours SA Unt Ho So Fd nwret Il (615-7, Fats, H3 5)
har har naam niDhaan ras pee-aa man tan rahay aghaa-ee.
Drink in the sublime essence, the treasure of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and your mind and body shall remain satisfied.
Ws as ufe sus UsHAG AS nS AT AT NM (15-8, Hale, ws 5)
jat kat poor rahi-o parmaysar kat aavai kat jaa-ee. ||2||
The Transcendent Lord is totally permeating and pervading everywhere; where would He come from, and where would He go? ||2| |
AU Su HAH fomrs sa ast fan Hfe SA Ture Il (615-9, ats, He 5)
jap tap sanjam gi-aan tat baytaa jis man vasai gopaalaa.
One whose mind is filled with the Lord, is a person of meditation, penance, self- restraint and spiritual wisdom, and a knower of reality.
oH 336 fale canta ufeor st at Use war SII (15-9, Fafs, He 5) naam ratan jin gurmukh paa-i-aa taa kee pooran ghaalaa. ||3]|| The Gurmukh obtains the jewel of the Naam; his efforts come to perfect fruition. ||3]|
ate GOA fue eu Aas aet AH St STAT Il (615-10, Fats, v8 5)
kal kalays mitay dukh saglay kaatee jam kee faasaa.
All his struggles, sufferings and pains are dispelled, and the noose of death is cut away from him.
ag aad ufs fagur urdt Ha 35 3S fAaAT INSNINZI (615-10, Hafs, Hs 5)
kaho naanak parabh kirpaa Dhaaree man tan bha-ay bigaasaa. ||4||12||23]| Says Nanak, God has extended His Mercy, and so his mind and body blossom forth. [|4]]12][23]|
Hafe HIS U Il (615-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
AVE ATEN ST YF VS ursqgH ys AnMt Il (15-11, Fafs, ws 5)
karan karaavanhaar parabh daataa paarbarahm parabh su-aamee.
God is the Doer, the Cause of causes, the Great Giver; God is the Supreme Lord and Master.
Aa Aba ate efenrer A yg visa All (15-12, Fats, ue 5) saglay jee-a kee-ay da-i-aalaa so parabh antarjaamee. ||1|| The Merciful Lord created all beings; God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
[21
Hat aT dur orf AaeT Il (615-12, Fats, He 5) mayraa gur ho-aa aap sahaa-ee. My Guru is Himself my friend and support.
AY Add nse Haws SA orden set asvet il TIS Il (615-13, Fafs, ws 5) sookh sahj aanand mangal ras achraj bha-ee badaa-ee. rahaa-o. I am in celestial peace, bliss, joy, pleasure and wondrous glory. ||Pause| |
ad at Aafs ue S A ATS Pads HTS Il (615-13, af, He 5)
gur kee saran pa-ay bhai naasay saachee dargeh maanay.
Seeking the Sanctuary of the Guru, my fears have been dispelled, and I am accepted in the Court of the True Lord.
Te Wes orate on ofs mrs mys FS Ml (615-14, Fafs, we 5)
gun gaavat aaraaDh naam har aa-ay apunai thaanay. ||2||
Singing His Glorious Praises, and worshipping in adoration the Name of the Lord, I have reached my destination. ||2]|
A A og ad AS CAsfs Hats AG fim I (615-14, Fafs, nH 5)
jai jai kaar karai sabh ustat sangat saaDh pi-aaree.
Everyone applauds and congratulates me; the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is dear to me.
He aeots we ys wus fale use UA Aetet ISI (615-15, Fats, ue 5) sad balihaar jaa-o parabh apunay jin pooran paij savaaree. ||3]||
I am forever a sacrifice to my God, who has totally protected and preserved my honor. ||3]|
ante famre on afs Gus fats fafs cane ufemr i 615-15, Fats, nH 5)
gosat gi-aan naam sun uDhray jin jin darsan paa-i-aa.
They are saved, who receive the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; they listen to the spiritual dialogue of the Naam.
ses fours SSK UT MUS noe Ast ufs yer IsIZQSll (615-16, Fafs, He 5) bha-i-o kirpaal naanak parabh apunaa anad saytee ghar aa-i-aa. ||4||13]|24]|
Nanak's God has become Merciful to him; he has arrived home in ecstasy. [14] |13][24]|
Rafe Has U Il (615-17)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
us ot nafs nae 3 oa eu fHOA AY UfeMr I 615-17, Fats, He 5) parabh kee saran sagal bhai laathay dukh binsay sukh paa-i-aa. In God's Sanctuary, all fears depart, suffering disappears, and peace is obtained.
efenrs dor ursqay Amt us Afsag forfenr nai (615-18, Fats, we 5)
da-i-aal ho-aa paarbarahm su-aamee pooraa satgur Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]|
When the Supreme Lord God and Master becomes merciful, we meditate on the Perfect True Guru. ||1]|
ys AG 5 AS Afeg VST Il (15-18, Fats, we 5) parabh jee-o too mayro saahib daataa. O Dear God, You are my Lord Master and Great Giver.
afs fas ys tte ef ae wes df ast | TIE Il (615-19, Fafs, ue 5)
kar kirpaa parabh deen da-i-aalaa gun gaava-o rang raataa. rahaa-o.
By Your Mercy, O God, Merciful to the meek, imbue me with Your Love, that I might sing Your Glorious Praises. ||Pause| |
Afsata on foare feafenr fest wars fart i (15-19, Fats, ue 5)
satgur naam niDhaan drirh-aa-i-aa chintaa sagal binaasee.
The True Guru has implanted the treasure of the Naam within me, and all my anxieties have been dispelled.
ua €9€ ate fasur nud afs stat nfs efaur nifsatt i211 (616-1, Aefs, He 5)
kar kirpaa apuno kar leenaa man vasi-aa abhinaasee. ||2|| By His Mercy, He has made me His own, and the imperishable Lord has come to dwell within my mind. ||2||
J ag frag 5 a8 oa A Afsate mys TH II (616-1, Fafs, H8 5) taa ka-o bighan na ko-oo laagai jo satgur apunai raakhay. No misfortune afflicts one who is protected by the True Guru.
Tds HS FA fee nists vifts afs TA TS ISI (16-2, Aafs, we 5)
charan kamal basay rid antar amrit har ras chaakhay. |[3]|
The Lotus Feet of God come to abide within his heart, and he savors the sublime essence of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]|
afg Het Hea ys nus fafs Ho at fee uAret Il 16-2, Fafs, us 5) kar sayvaa sayvak parabh apunay jin man kee ichh pujaa-ee. So, aS a servant, serve your God, who fulfills your mind's desires.
Soa UH Sa seas fafs uss UA TUT ISIISIQUIl (16-3, Hafs, Hs 5)
naanak daas taa kai balihaarai jin pooran paij rakhaa-ee. ||4]|14]|25]| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to the Perfect Lord, who has protected and preserved his honor. ||4]|14||25]|
Rafe Has U Il (616-4)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Hear Ho Hae viftmrd PeaTT FAS Il (616-4, Fafs, He 5)
maa-i-aa moh magan anDhi-aarai dayvanhaar na jaanai.
Infatuated with the darkness of emotional attachment to Maya, he does not know the Lord, the Great Giver.
mM fits wf fafs sfoor ae wus af HS NU (616-4, Fafs, He 5)
jee-o pind saaj jin rachi-aa bal apuno kar maanai. ||1]|
The Lord created his body and fashioned his soul, but he claims that his power is his own. ||1]|
Ho Hs fy safes ys AymMit Il (16-5, Fafe, w2 5) man moorhay daykh rahi-o parabh su-aamee. O foolish mind, God, your Lord and Master is watching over you.
nt fag aafo Het Het WE Tso ASM Tat Il TIS Il (616-5, Fale, vs 5) jo kichh karahi so-ee so-ee jaanai rahai na kachhoo-ai chhaanee. rahaa-o. Whatever you do, He knows; nothing can remain concealed from Him. ||Pause] |
fave’ Aure Se Hfe HS Cur nifser fara Il (616-6, Fafs, He 5)
jihvaa su-aad lobh mad maato upjay anik bikaaraa.
You are intoxicated with the tastes of the tongue, with greed and pride; countless sins spring from these.
ads rife SaHS Vy wfeor IH Fae A srg 2M! (616-7, Fafs, ne 5)
bahut jon bharmat dukh paa-i-aa ha-umai banDhan kay bhaaraa. ||2]|
You wandered in pain through countless incarnations, weighed down by the chains of egotism. ||2]|
ofe fares nifoa use ufo ua ea Afar Stat Il (616-7, Aas, v2 5)
day-ay kivaarh anik parh-day meh par daaraa sang faakai.
Behind closed doors, hidden by many screens, the man takes his pleasure with another man's wife.
faz dug wa Bu wales sa aCe use Sat Ga ISI (616-8, Aafs, ne 5)
chitar gupat jab laykhaa maageh tab ka-un parh-daa tayraa dhaakai. ||3]|
When Chitr and Gupt, the celestial accountants of the conscious and subconscious, call for your account, who will screen you then? |[3]|
ale efeure use eu sHa SH fag Ge o aet Il (616-8, Hats, Hu 5)
deen da-i-aal pooran dukh bhanjan tum bin ot na kaa-ee.
O Perfect Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pain, without You, I have no shelter at all.
ate Sy AAS Arad Hf Soa US APSE ISIWIEM (616-9, ats, He 5) kaadh layho sansaar saagar meh naanak parabh sarnaa-ee. ||4||15||26]|
Please, lift me up out of the world-ocean; O God, I have come to Your Sanctuary. [14] ]15]|26]|
Rafe HIS U Il (616-10)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
USgIH duit Hoel aa atase AYE Il (616-10, Hafs, ve 5)
paarbarahm ho-aa sahaa-ee kathaa keertan sukh-daa-ee.
The Supreme Lord God has become my helper and friend; His sermon and the Kirtan of His Praises have brought me peace.
Gd ud at wet Afu woe aag fos yrat IA (16-10, Fats, v2 5) gur pooray kee banee jap anad karahu nit paraanee. ||1|| Chant the Word of the Perfect Guru's Bani, and be ever in bliss, O mortal. ||1]|
ofa APS fAHaT SET Il (616-11, Fafs, He 5) har saachaa simrahu bhaa-ee. Remember the True Lord in meditation, O Siblings of Destiny.
AUAfa Ae AY uréha ote fants o xag AT I TIS I (16-11, Fels, Hz 5) saaDhsang sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai har bisar na kabhoo jaa-ee. rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, eternal peace is obtained, and the Lord is never forgotten. ||Pause] |
nifys ou ushAg Sa HF fie A FS I 16-12, Fats, ne 5) amrit naam parmaysar tayraa jo simrai so jeevai. Your Name, O Transcendent Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar; whoever meditates on it, lives.
fan 6 aot usufs de A Ae feaHe AS MQM (616-12, Fats, He 5)
jis no karam paraapat hovai so jan nirmal theevai. ||2||
One who is blessed with God's Grace - that humble servant becomes immaculate and pure. |[2||
faus fans Als Fu SHAS Td Baal HS Ba Il (616-13, Aafs, ue 5)
bighan binaasan sabh dukh naasan gur charnee man laagaa.
Obstacles are removed, and all pains are eliminated; my mind is attached to the Guru's feet.
Te Wes mgs uifsarst wofes ais sfor war Sil (616-14, Fats, Hz 5)
gun gaavat achut abhinaasee an-din har rang jaagaa. ||3]|
Singing the Glorious Praises of the immovable and imperishable Lord, one remains awake to the Lord's Love, day and night. ||3]|
Ho fee Het ee ure ofa at Aa AIST Il (616-14, Fafs, ue 5) man ichhay say-ee fal paa-ay har kee kathaa suhaylee.
He obtains the fruits of his mind's desires, listening to the comforting sermon of the Lord.
wife nifs ufo asa AG A Us Tor Fat ISIIENQIN (616-15, Favs, He 5)
aad ant maDh naanak ka-o so parabh ho-aa baylee. ||4]|16||27]||
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, God is Nanak's best friend. [14] |16]|27]|
Rafe Hager u UsUeET Il (616-15)
sorath mehlaa 5 panchpadaa. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Panch-Padas:
faon Hg Ha wg Sa fHGA wnsst at IAI 16-16, Fats, He 5)
binsai moh mayraa ar tayraa binsai apnee Dhaaree. ||1]|
May my emotional attachment, my sense of mine and yours, and my self-conceit be dispelled. ||1]|
Hag fea qsreg act Il (616-16, Aafs, v2 5) santahu ihaa bataavhu kaaree. O Saints, show me such a way,
fas JGH aaa foest Ui TIE I (16-16, Fats, He 5) jit ha-umai garab nivaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. by which my egotism and pride might be eliminated. ||1||Pause| |
Ava 33 UIqTH ate Hist Tet Aas Fara | (16-17, Aafs, v3 5) sarab bhoot paarbarahm kar maani-aa hovaa” sagal raynaaree. ||2|| I see the Supreme Lord God in all beings, and I am the dust of all. ||2]|
ues ys AG nus Hat va SHS Hrs 3 (16-17, afs, ws 5) paykhi-o parabh jee-o apunai sangay chookai bheet bharmaaree. ||3]| I see God always with me, and the wall of doubt has been shattered. ||3]|
migug oH fssHs Ae vifys uett TT Tur sil (16-18, Fats, we 5)
a-ukhaDh naam nirmal jal amrit paa-ee-ai guroo du-aaree. ||4||
The medicine of the Naam, and the Immaculate Water of Ambrosial Nectar, are obtained through the Guru's Gate. ||4] |
ad ated fra Haste fofimr fsa ae fife da fees NUN IcH (16-19, Fats, nH 5) kaho naanak jis mastak likhi-aa tis gur mil rog bidaaree. ||5||17]|28]|
Says Nanak, one who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead, meets with the Guru, and his diseases are cured. ||5||17||28]|
User EAD
Hofe Hos Uwe 2 BUS (17-1) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 2 dupday Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars ure il (617-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hae eAUls xfs Hise Aas eT xfs ulbor il 17-2, Hafs, uz 5) Sagal banaspat meh baisantar sagal dooDh meh ghee-aa. Fire is contained in all firewood, and butter is contained in all milk.
Gz ate ufo AfS Anat we wie Hag Fh NA (617-2, Fats, He 5) ooch neech meh jot samaanee ghat ghat maaDha-o jee-aa. ||1|| God's Light is contained in the high and the low; the Lord is in the hearts of all beings.
[1211 Hag wife wfe sfomr marta | (617-3, afs, nz 5)
santahu ghat ghat rahi-aa samaahi-o. O Saints, He is pervading and permeating each and every heart.
uae ufe sfoS Aga Hfe Ale af stor urfeS nai TIS il (617-3, Fafs, ws 5)
pooran poor rahi-o sarab meh jal thal rama-ee-aa aahi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Lord is completely permeating everyone, everywhere; He is diffused in the water and the land. ||1]|Pause| |
ae faue asa AA ae Afsats san VarES Il (617-4, Aafs, u2 5)
gun niDhaan naanak jas gaavai satgur bharam chukaa-i-o.
Nanak sings the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of excellence; the True Guru has dispelled his doubt.
Hae fesat Het mur AS xfs sfont AMTES WINUICI (617-4, Fats, He 5) sarab nivaasee sadaa alaypaa sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-i-o. ||2||1||29]|
The Lord is pervading everywhere, permeating all, and yet, He is unattached from all. 211] 129]|
Rafe Has U Il (617-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
wa fants df wider fear HoH HeE S Sut Il (617-5, Fats, He 5)
jaa kai simran ho-ay anandaa binsai janam maran bhai dukhee.
Meditating on Him, one is in ecstasy; the pains of birth and death and fear are removed.
ofg uese o¢ fafa uefa agate o feAat get NAM (617-6, Fafs, us 5)
chaar padaarath nav niDh paavahi bahur na tarisnaa bhukhee. ||1]|
The four cardinal blessings, and the nine treasures are received; you shall never feel hunger or thirst again. ||1]|
W A OH Bs J At Il (617-6, Fels, us 5) jaa ko naam lait too sukhee. Chanting His Name, you shall be at peace.
Ath AA foMres sag AB Ho 30 As Het INA TIS I (617-7, Fale, us 5)
Saas saas Dhi-aavahu thaakur ka-o man tan jee-aray mukhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
With each and every breath, meditate on the Lord and Master, O my soul, with mind, body and mouth. ||1]||Pause] |
Rifs uefa defo no Hise mrafe & nists get i (617-7, Fats, He 5)
saa“t paavahi hoveh man seetal agan na antar Dhukhee.
You shall find peace, and your mind shall be soothed and cooled; the fire of desire Shall not burn within you.
Gd soa a ys ferfeur vfs afe fysefe Tat WINNSON (617-8, Fats, He 5)
gur naanak ka-o parabhoo dikhaa-i-aa jal thal taribhavan rukhee. ||2||2||30]|
The Guru has revealed God to Nanak, in the three worlds, in the water, the earth and the woods. ||2||2||30||
Rafe Hae U Il (617-9)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
aH a0 Ss 36 fee fea 3 urfu gsr Il (617-9, Fats, ue 5) kaam kroDh lobh jhooth nindaa in tay aap chhadaavahu.
Sexual desire, anger, greed, falsehood and slander - please, save me from these, O Lord.
fea sisg 3 fee a wag niu foafe yore INA (617-9, Hafs, Hs 5) ih bheetar tay in ka-o daarahu aapan nikat bulaavhu. ||1]| Please eradicate these from within me, and call me to come close to You. ||1||
must fafa orf ASST Il (617-10, Fats, v3 5) apunee biDh aap janaavhu. You alone teach me Your Ways.
Ufs AS HIG MST WAU TIS I (617-10, Fafs, ue 5) har jan mangal gaavhu. ||1]|| rahaa-o. With the Lord's humble servants, I sing His Praises. ||1]|]Pause| |
fang odt aag de 3 feo fafa He ufo ureg I 617-11, afs, 12 5)
bisar naahee kabhoo hee-ay tay ih biDh man meh paavhu.
May I never forget the Lord within my heart; please, instill such understanding within my mind.
Gg us sfeS eset He Sa aS F WeT NQUBUWBUI (617-11, Fats, ws 5)
gur pooraa bhayti-o vadbhaagee jan naanak kateh na Dhaavahu. ||2]||3||31||
By great good fortune, servant Nanak has met with the Perfect Guru, and now, he will not go anywhere else. ||2]|3]|31]|
Rafe Has U Il (617-12)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
wo fhnofs AS as Usha frat we o Fret II (617-12, Fafs, He 5)
jaa kai simran sabh kachh paa-ee-ai birthee ghaal na jaa-ee.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, all things are obtained, and one's efforts shall not be in vain.
fsa ys faurfa ned as weg FAS Hfs sfoor AMET AI (617-13, Fats, He 5) tis parabh ti-aag avar kat raachahu jo sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1|| Forsaking God, why do you attach yourself to another? He is contained in everything.
[2
dfs ofe fined AS Tus Il (617-13, Fafs, He 5) har har simrahu sant gopaalaa. O Saints, meditate in remembrance on the World-Lord, Har, Har.
AOAfa ffs on fmreg uss FS ws IU TIE il (617-14, Fats, ws 5)
saaDhsang mil naam Dhi-aavahu pooran hovai ghaalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; your efforts shall be rewarded. ||1]||Pause] |
Afs AHS fofs ufsurs yn Afss afes we i (617-14, Fafs, He 5) Saar Samaalai nit paratipaalai paraym sahit gal laavai. He ever preserves and cherishes His servant; with Love, He hugs him close.
AJ Soa US Sue fangs was Hleg AA US MNS (617-15, Fats, He 5) kaho naanak parabh tumray bisrat jagat jeevan kaisay paavai. ||2||4||32|| Says Nanak, forgetting You, O God, how can the world find life? ||2||4||32| |
Hafs HIS U Il (617-16)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
mifsardt Hors & est fangs AS Hw det I (617-16, Aafs, ns 5) abhinaasee jee-an ko daataa simrat sabh mal kho-ee. He is imperishable, the Giver of all beings; meditating on Him, all filth is removed.
ae fous sase ag saste fase urs Het AI (617-16, Fats, He 5)
gun niDhaan bhagtan ka-o bartan birlaa paavai ko-ee. ||1]|
He is the treasure of excellence, the object of His devotees, but rare are those who find Him. ||1]|
Ad Ho Af ae sus ys At | (617-17, Fafs, ue 5) mayray man jap gur gopaal parabh so-ee. O my mind, meditate on the Guru, and God, the Cherisher of the world.
W ot Hefe ufent Ay ub eats ga o Tet IU TIS ll (17-17, Fale, ws 5) jaa kee saran pa-i-aa” sukh paa-ee-ai baahurh dookh na ho-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Seeking His Sanctuary, one finds peace, and he shall not suffer in pain again. ||1]|Pause] |
zoo AGHA usufs fsa ses VaHfS Get I (617-18, Fats, nz 5)
vadbhaagee saaDhsang paraapat tin bhaytat durmat kho-ee.
By great good fortune, one obtains the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Meeting them, evil-mindedness is eliminated.
Uat Eat
fae at ufs ase oA ae fie ofs oy fee udet NQNUNSSI (18-1, Hats, v2 5) tin kee Dhoor naanak daas baachhai jin har naam ridai paro-ee. ||2]||5||33]|
Slave Nanak yearns for the dust of the feet of those, who have woven the Lord's Name into their hearts. ||2||5||33]|
Rafe HIS U Il (618-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
WOH ASH & wy feed HAT HE AUS Il (618-2, Hafs, ws 5)
janam janam kay dookh nivaarai sookaa man saDhaarai.
He dispels the pains of countless incarnations, and lends support to the dry and Shrivelled mind.
ZdIAS ses 335 foos ats at aH ates IAI (618-2, Aafs, He 5) darsan bhaytat hot nihaalaa har kaa naam beechaarai. ||1] |
Beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, one is enraptured, contemplating the Name of the Lord. |]1]|
Aa Fe TT Heer il (is-3, Fats, we 5) mayraa baid guroo govindaa. My physician is the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
dfs ofs om miGug yfy te are AH at Pa Al TIC Il (618-3, Fale, ve 5) har har naam a-ukhaDh mukh dayvai kaatai jam kee fanDhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He places the medicine of the Naam into my mouth, and cuts away the noose of Death. ||1]|Pause| |
AHTE Use ysS fas nmy ATeTST Il (618-4, Fafs, v3 5)
samrath purakh pooran biDhaatay aapay karnaihaaraa.
He is the all-powerful, Perfect Lord, the Architect of Destiny; He Himself is the Doer of deeds.
must aA offs orf Cafe aad SH MOS IQNENSIl (618-4, Fafs, He 5)
apunaa daas har aap ubaari-aa naanak naam aDhaaraa. | |2||6||34|| The Lord Himself saves His slave; Nanak takes the Support of the Naam. ||2||6]|34]|
Rafe HIS U Il (618-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
nisd at afs su dt wot ss dt ute fead I (618-5, Aafs, ne 5) antar kee gat tum hee jaanee tujh hee paahi nibayro. Only You know the state of my innermost self; You alone can judge me.
aufA Sg Afos ys mus wy us afe SF IA (is-5, Aafs, He 5)
bakhas laihu saahib parabh apnay laakh khatay kar fayro. ||1]||
Please forgive me, O Lord God Master; I have committed thousands of sins and mistakes. ||1]|
ys at 5 AS SAT SF Il (18-6, Fale, ws 5) parabh jee too mayro thaakur nayro. O my Dear Lord God Master, You are always near me.
dfs vse AGE Hfs SF NU! TIS ll (is-6, Aafs, ns 5) har charan saran mohi chayro. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O Lord, please bless Your disciple with the shelter of Your feet. ||1]|Pause] |
SANS Bis Hom Ss Tat TI I (18-7, Fels, us 5) baysumaar bay-ant su-aamee oocho gunee gahayro. Infinite and endless is my Lord and Master; He is lofty, virtuous and profoundly deep.
ae fra ats nus wad 3B aod aT feds NQNDNSUI (18-7, Fefs, He 5)
kaat silak kKeeno apuno daasro ta-o naanak kahaa nihoro. ||2||7||35]|
Cutting away the noose of death, the Lord has made Nanak His slave, and now, what does he owe to anyone else? ||2||7||35||
Fafs H8 U Il (618-8)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
se faurs ag Ha AIS HSTA UES Il (18-8, Hafs, ws 5)
bha-ay kirpaal guroo govindaa sagal manorath paa-ay.
The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, became merciful to me, and I obtained all of my mind's desires.
wAfas se ofa ofa ueet aif X TE WE IA (618-9, Aafs, ve 5)
asthir bha-ay laag har charnee govind kay gun gaa-ay. ||1]||
I have become stable and steady, touching the Lord's Feet, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||1]||
38 AHIS YT Il (18-9, af, ws 5) bhalo samoorat pooraa. It is a good time, a perfectly auspicious time.
ANS AoA MTSe SH Af SH viSIe ST UU TIS Il (18-9, Hafs, we 5)
saa“t sahj aanand naam jap vaajay anhad tooraa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am in celestial peace, tranquility and ecstasy, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the unstruck melody of the sound current vibrates and resounds. ||1]||Pause] |
fxs Aum utsn wus wae Hes AYETeT II (18-10, Fafs, He 5)
milay su-aamee pareetam apunay ghar mandar sukh-daa-ee.
Meeting with my Beloved Lord and Master, my home has become a mansion filled with happiness.
dfs oH fours soa Ao Ufeor Aart fs UATET NITIBEI (618-10, Fafs, v3 5)
har naam niDhaan naanak jan paa-i-aa saglee ichh pujaa-ee. ||2]||8||36||
Servant Nanak has attained the treasure of the Lord's Name; all his desires have been fulfilled. ||2||8||36]|
Rafe HIS U Il (618-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Td a Bsa aA foe stats AS Bye yfs AS Il (618-11, Fafs, ws 5) gur kay charan basay rid bheetar subh lakhan parabh keenay. The Guru's feet abide within my heart; God has blessed me with good fortune.
Be igure ude udHAT oH fours Hie TA WA (18-12, Fats, H2 5)
bha-ay kirpaal pooran parmaysar naam niDhaan man cheenay. ||1]|
The Perfect Transcendent Lord became merciful to me, and I found the treasure of the Naam within my mind. ||1||
He TT Tues HIS Il (618-12, Fale, v2 5) mayro gur rakhvaaro meet. My Guru is my Saving Grace, my only best friend.
VE Vat & sfsnret AS sts ats AU TTS Il Cis-13, Favs, we 5)
doon cha-oonee day vadi-aa-ee sobhaa neetaa neet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Over and over again, He blesses me with double, even four-fold, greatness. ||1]|Pause] |
ba As ufs Aare Burs AAG TuETS Il (618-13, Fale, Hs 5) jee-a jant parabh sagal uDhaaray darsan daykhanhaaray. God saves all beings and creatures, giving them the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Gd ud at wvan sanret Ha AE ASIST NNCISIIN (is-14, Fefe, He 5)
gur pooray kee achraj vadi-aa-ee naanak sad balihaaray. ||2||9||37]|| Wondrous is the glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. |[2]|9][37]|
Rafe Has U Il (618-15)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Hufs as ant ua fedHe ast Ma MRS II (618-15, Fats, He 5)
sanchan kara-o naam Dhan nirmal thaatee agam apaar.
I gather in and collect the immaculate wealth of the Naam; this commodity is inaccessible and incomparable.
faofe fase orée nu neg ule Hleg fre uses IAM (618-15, Fats, He 5) bilachh binod aanand sukh maanhu khaa-ay jeevhu sikh parvaar. ||1||
Revel in it, delight in it, be happy and enjoy peace, and live long, O Sikhs and brethren. ||1]|
Ts X GIS AHS MUS Il (618-16, Hafs, ue 5) har kay charan kamal aaDhaar. I have the support of the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
As unfe ufe we sfog ofs Sw fay AAS NA TIC Il (is-16, Aafs, He 5)
sant parsaad paa-i-o sach bohith charh langha-o bikh sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By the Grace of the Saints, I have found the boat of Truth; embarking on it, I sail across the ocean of poison. ||1]||Pause] |
3e igure ude nifsost wuts attat ATS Il (618-17, Fafs, He 5) bha-ay kirpaal pooran abhinaasee aapeh keenee saar. The perfect, imperishable Lord has become merciful; He Himself has taken care of me.
ufes uflt Stoat FHSS BOA STH AHS NQUIONSCI (618-17, Fats, He 5)
paykh paykh naanak bigsaano naanak naahee sumaar. ||2||10||38]| Beholding, beholding His Vision, Nanak has blossomed forth in ecstasy. O Nanak, He is beyond estimation. ||2||10||38]|
Rafe HIS U Il (618-18)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
dfs us uust ae ost AS we Curt efenr I (is-18, Aefs, Hs 5)
gur poorai apnee kal Dhaaree sabh ghat upjee da-i-aa.
The Perfect Guru has revealed His power, and compassion has welled up in every heart.
mmy Afs zavet alot TAS YH AS ster |All (618-19, Fats, He 5)
aapay mayl vadaa-ee keenee kusal khaym sabh bha-i-aa. ||1]||
Blending me with Himself, He has blessed me with glorious greatness, and I have found pleasure and happiness. ||1]|
ASAT Us AT 3 I (618-19, Aafs, Hs 5) satgur pooraa mayrai naal. The Perfect True Guru is always with me.
yar Ear
uTggaH Afy Het fSaTs Il TIE I (619-1, Aafs, ve 5) paarbarahm jap sadaa nihaal. rahaa-o. Meditating on the Supreme Lord God, I am forever in ecstasy. ||Pause| |
wists wots ae waste AS aS Us ASt Il (619-1, Aafs, ns 5) antar baahar thaan thanantar jat kat paykha-o so-ee. Inwardly and outwardly, in all places and interspaces, wherever I look, He is there.
Sod Td uUfES esarait fon Aes meg & AT NQAUVUISBEN (619-2, Fafs, He 5) naanak gur paa-i-o vadbhaagee tis jayvad avar na ko-ee. ||2||11]|39]|
Nanak has found the Guru, by great good fortune; no one else is as great as He. [12] ]12][39]|
Rafe Hager U Il (619-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
AY Hore afemre Hon Ufs ys at UIE ferfant II (619-2, Fafs, Hs 5)
sookh mangal kali-aan sahj Dhun parabh kay charan nihaari-aa.
I have been blessed with peace, pleasure, bliss, and the celestial sound current, gazing upon the feet of God.
auosd mtu afsa Afsafs sy Catfani 9 (19-3, Fats, He 5) raakhanhaarai raakhi-o baarik satgur taap utaari-aa. ||1]|| The Savior has saved His child, and the True Guru has cured his fever. ||1]|
Gad Afsad at AdSret Il (619-4, Aafs, He 5) ubray satgur kee sarnaa-ee. I have been saved, in the True Guru's Sanctuary;
Ww at Az 3 fast wet il TIS Il 19-4, Fafs, ue 5) jaa kee sayv na birthee jaa-ee. rahaa-o. service to Him does not go in vain. ||1||Pause] |
us ufo Ae safe fs Ae Ys wud se elena Il (619-4, Aafo, H2 5)
ghar meh sookh baahar fun sookhaa parabh apunay bha-ay da-i-aalaa.
There is peace within the home of one's heart, and there is peace outside as well, when God becomes kind and compassionate.
aed frurg 3 wa AG Ha ys dur farsuTS WWIMBOll (619-5, Fafs, Hs 5) naanak bighan na laagai ko-oo mayraa parabh ho-aa kirpaalaa. ||2||12||40] |
O Nanak, no obstacles block my way; my God has become gracious and merciful to me. |[2]|12||40]|
Rafe HIS U Il (619-6)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ag Hfat sfeur His SEH SH ISO AA Wet Il (619-6, Hafs, us 5)
saaDhoo sang bha-i-aa man udam naam ratan jas gaa-ee.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, my mind became excited, and I sang the Praises of the jewel of the Naam.
fife aet fea frnfe niést Ararg Sfamr set IAI (619-6, Fafs, v2 5)
mit ga-ee chintaa simar anantaa saagar tari-aa bhaa-ee. ||1]|
My anxiety was dispelled, meditating in remembrance on the Infinite Lord; I have crossed over the world ocean, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|
fase ofa & vse SAS II (619-7, Fale, He 5) hirdai har kay charan vasaa-ee. I enshrine the Lord's Feet within my heart.
He ufeor non ufs Curt dar urfs flrevet 1 TIS Il (619-7, Fafs, v2 5)
sukh paa-i-aa sahj Dhun upjee rogaa ghaan mitaa-ee. rahaa-o.
I have found peace, and the celestial sound current resounds within me; countless diseases have been eradicated. | |Pause] |
for qe 3d urfy surat ais ATE 3 AT Il (619-8, Fale, He 5)
ki-aa gun tayray aakh vakhaanaa keemat kahan na jaa-ee.
Which of Your Glorious Virtues can I speak and describe? Your worth cannot be estimated.
Sot SIs se nifaenat must ys shen Aget NIUIBISAI (619-9, Fats, us 5)
naanak bhagat bha-ay abhinaasee apunaa parabh bha-i-aa sahaa-ee. ||2||13||41|| O Nanak, the Lord's devotees become imperishable and immortal; their God becomes their friend and support. ||2||13]|41]|
Hafs H8 U Il (619-9)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
qe sen da Afs ow ufs mus farsur art I (619-9, Fafs, ne 5) ga-ay kalays rog sabh naasay parabh apunai kirpaa Dhaaree. My sufferings have come to an end, and all diseases have been eradicated.
mS Udd Mita AMMt uss wre THAT MAU (619-10, Fafs, H2 5)
aath pahar aaraaDhahu su-aamee pooran ghaal hamaaree. ||1||
God has showered me with His Grace. Twenty-four hours a day, I worship and adore my Lord and Master; my efforts have come to fruition. ||1]|
dfs ME J AY Aus TH Il (19-11, Fafs, Hs 5) har jee-o too sukh sampat raas. O Dear Lord, You are my peace, wealth and capital.
ofy Sg set AT aS us via mrsetH I TIE Il (19-11, Fats, ne 5) raakh laihu bhaa-ee mayray ka-o parabh aagai ardaas. rahaa-o. Please, save me, O my Beloved! I offer this prayer to my God. ||Pause| |
A HAIG Het Het USS mus YAN SAAT Il (619-11, af, He 5) jO maaga-o so-ee so-ee paava-o apnay khasam bharosaa. Whatever I ask for, I receive; I have total faith in my Master.
aT sa TT uT sfeS ffeS Aas wSAT NUIWISI (619-12, Fafs, Hs 5)
kaho naanak gur pooraa bhayti-o miti-o sagal andaysaa. ||2||14||42]|
Says Nanak, I have met with the Perfect Guru, and all my fears have been dispelled. [12] 14] [42] |
Rafe Has U Il (619-13)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
frufs fants ag Afsag rua Aare ey ferent Il (619-13, Hats, 12 5)
simar simar gur satgur apnaa saglaa dookh mitaa-i-aa.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my Guru, the True Guru, all pains have been eradicated.
ay da Te ad sual Ho fee ew ue AI 19-13, Fats, He 5)
taap rog ga-ay gur bachnee man ichhay fal paa-i-aa. ||1]|
The fever and the disease are gone, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, and I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires. ||1]|
AT TT US HAST Il (619-14, Fafs, we 5) mayraa gur pooraa sukh-daata. My Perfect Guru is the Giver of peace.
ATE ATE AHI Hot uss use feast il Ja il (19-14, Fats, v2 5)
karan kaaran samrath su-aamee pooran purakh biDhaataa. rahaa-o.
He is the Doer, the Cause of causes, the Almighty Lord and Master, the Perfect Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny. | |Pause] |
Mow fase Hae Te Weg Ts SSA SE LfEniar Il 619-15, als, ve 5)
anand binod mangal gun gaavhu gur naanak bha-ay da-i-aalaa.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord in bliss, joy and ecstasy; Guru Nanak has become kind and compassionate.
A A ad se Aa Stale Tut USAIN TUS NQUWISI (619-16, Aafs, Hs 5)
jai jai kaar bha-ay jag bheetar ho-aa paarbarahm rakhvaalaa. ||2]||15||43]| Shouts of cheers and congratulations ring out all over the world; the Supreme Lord God has become my Savior and Protector. ||2]|15]|43]|
Rafe HIS U Il (619-16)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
THe Wes o Teme aet ner fase uete il (19-16, Fats, us 5) hamree ganat na ganee-aa kaa-ee apnaa birad pachhaan. He did not take my accounts into account; such is His forgiving nature.
ve fe oa ats wus Het Het Sa HES NAM (619-17, Fats, He 5)
haath day-ay raakhay kar apunay sadaa sadaa rang maan. ||1]|
He gave me His hand, and saved me and made me His own; forever and ever, I enjoy His Love. ||1]|
Anat Atos Ae fHoIsSS Il (619-18, Fats, us 5) saachaa saahib sad miharvaan. The True Lord and Master is forever merciful and forgiving.
ag ufeor He Afsats ud Jet Ava afore il TIS Il (619-18, Favs, we 5) banDh paa-i-aa mayrai satgur poorai ho-ee sarab kali-aan. rahaa-o. My Perfect Guru has bound me to Him, and now, I am in absolute ecstasy. ||Pause] |
mG ufé fils fafe aftr fest Uae ure Il (619-19, Fafs, He 5)
jee-O paa-ay pind jin saaji-aa ditaa painan khaan.
The One who fashioned the body and placed the soul within, who gives you clothing and nourishment
nue oA at urfu Un It Soak AS ATAS IQA (619-19, Hafs, He 5)
apnay daas kee aap paij raakhee naanak sad kurbaan. ||2||16||44] | - He Himself preserves the honor of His slaves. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. [12] 16] [44] |
UST E2o
Hafs HIS U Il (620-1)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
vas aetfeur ofa ufs mm Ag HATS Carfamr Il (620-1, Fats, He 5)
durat gavaa-i-aa har parabh aapay sabh sansaar ubaari-aa.
The Lord God Himself has rid the whole world of its sins, and saved it.
ursgatH ufs fasur ordt ora fase AHTfaM IAI (620-2, Hafs, He 5)
paarbarahm parabh kirpaa Dhaaree apnaa birad samaari-aa. ||1]||
The Supreme Lord God extended His mercy, and confirmed His innate nature. ||1] |
det TH TH at TUS I (620-2, Aas, v2 5) ho-ee raajay raam kee rakhvaalee. I have attained the Protective Sanctuary of the Lord, my King.
HY Hon woe TE Weg HG 3g Sa Aaa il JIS Il (620-3, Fafo, we 5)
sookh sahj aanad gun gaavhu man tan dayh sukhaalee. rahaa-o.
In celestial peace and ecstasy, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and my mind, body and being are at peace. ||Pause| |
ufss Gorge Afsag Ha Hfo fSA at SISTA II (620-3, Fats, He 5) patit uDhaaran satgur mayraa mohi tis kaa bharvaasaa. My True Guru is the Savior of sinners; I have placed my trust and faith in Him.
auf we Afs Ad Afofs Afs Soa at MSSTAT NNW INBUIl (620-4, Aafs, He 5) bakhas la-ay sabh sachai saahib sun naanak kee ardaasaa. ||2||17||45]|
The True Lord has heard Nanak's prayer, and He has forgiven everything. [12]]17] 145] |
Hafe Hgsr U Il (620-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
auf ursqan usHAfs Aa sar fers i (620-5, avs, ue 5)
bakhsi-aa paarbarahm parmaysar saglay rog bidaaray.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, has forgiven me, and all diseases have been cured.
Td ud at Adet Cad AGH AGS ASS INU (620-5, Fale, ws 5)
gur pooray kee sarnee ubray kaaraj sagal savaaray. ||1||
Those who come to the Sanctuary of the True Guru are saved, and all their affairs are resolved. ||1]|
ofa Ale fifa on nrarfs Il (620-6, Aafs, He 5)
har jan simri-aa naam aDhaar.
The Lord's humble servant meditates in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is his only support.
sy Catoor Afsafs us nruet fasur ofs i TIE il (620-6, Fats, we 5)
taap utaari-aa satgur poorai apnee kirpaa Dhaar. rahaa-o. The Perfect True Guru extended His Mercy, and the fever has been dispelled. ||Pause] |
Het nee add He filmed afe afee afe afimr it (620-7, Fats, v2 5) sadaa anand karah mayray pi-aaray har govid gur raakhi-aa. So celebrate and be happy, my beloveds - the Guru has saved Hargobind.
zat efsuret SHA ATS at ATS Aas AS THM NIANATIEI (620-7, Fats, v2 5)
vadee vadi-aa-ee naanak kartay kee saach sabad sat bhaakhi-aa. ||2||18]|46] | Great is the glorious greatness of the Creator, O Nanak; True is the Word of His Shabad, and True is the sermon of His Teachings. ||2]|18]|46]|
Rafe Has U Il (620-8)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
se furs Homi As fess Ave veate Il (620-8, Aafs, Hs 5) bha-ay kirpaal su-aamee mayray tit saachai darbaar. My Lord and Master has become Merciful, in His True Court.
Afsafe su aefeor set otfe uet Aarts Il (620-9, Fafs, He 5)
satgur taap gavaa-i-aa bhaa-ee thaa“dh pa-ee sansaar.
The True Guru has taken away the fever, and the whole world is at peace, O Siblings of Destiny.
mus hat as ym ge Anfs at gests all 620-9, ats, ve 5)
apnay jee-a jant aapay raakhay jameh kee-o hattaar. ||1||
The Lord Himself protects His beings and creatures, and the Messenger of Death is out of work. ||1]|
dfs & uae fee Sfa ofs il (620-10, Fats, He 5) har kay charan ridai ur Dhaar. Enshrine the Lord's feet within your heart.
Ret Het us fandba set eu faofa wero Ul TIC i (620-10, Fafs, ve 5)
sadaa sadaa parabh simree-ai bhaa-ee dukh kilbikh kaatanhaar. ||1]| rahaa-o. Forever and ever, meditate in remembrance on God, O Siblings of Destiny. He is the Eradicator of suffering and sins. ||1]|Pause] |
fA at vet Gud set fats afer Ag afte II (620-11, Fefs, Hs 5) tis kee sarnee oobrai bhaa-ee jin rachi-aa sabh ko-ay. He fashioned all beings, O Siblings of Destiny, and His Sanctuary saves them.
ATE ATE ANGE A set Ae Ast AE Il (620-12, Hale, ve 5)
karan kaaran samrath so bhaa-ee sachai sachee so-ay.
He is the Almighty Creator, the Cause of causes, O Siblings of Destiny; He, the True Lord, is True.
area ys foment set He 3G Ase TE NQUIENBIN (620-12, Fats, we 5)
naanak parabhoo Dhi-aa-ee-ai bhaa-ee man tan seetal ho-ay. ||2||19||47]||
Nanak: meditate on God, O Siblings of Destiny, and your mind and body shall be cool and calm. ||2||19||47]|
Rafe Has U Il (620-13)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Had dfs ofa an fomret i (620-13, Fafs, v2 5) santahu har har naam Dhi-aa-ee. O Saints, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
HY Ara us feHas ot Ho fefenrsr se uret 9 TIC Il (620-13, Fafs, ue 5)
sukh saagar parabh visra-o naahee man chindi-arhaa fal paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Never forget God, the ocean of peace; thus you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause| |
Afsafe us sy aetenr wrret farsur art il (620-14, iafs, ws 5) satgur poorai taap gavaa-i-aa apnee kirpaa Dhaaree. Extending His Mercy, the Perfect True Guru has dispelled the fever.
UTsqIH ys se cfenrer oy fufenr AS ude IAI (620-15, Hafs, He 5)
paarbarahm parabh bha-ay da-i-aalaa dukh miti-aa sabh parvaaree. ||1]| The Supreme Lord God has become kind and compassionate, and my whole family is now free of pain and suffering. ||1]|
Ava fours Has SA gu ahs at SH wud Il (620-15, Hats, Hs 5)
sarab niDhaan mangal ras roopaa har kaa naam aDhaaro.
The Treasure of absolute joy, sublime elixir and beauty, the Name of the Lord is my only Support.
soa ufs set usnAfs Cufemr AS AAT NNONSCI (620-16, Fats, He 5)
naanak pat raakhee parmaysar uDhri-aa sabh sansaaro. ||2||20]|48] | O Nanak, the Transcendent Lord has preserved my honor, and saved the whole world. ||2||20]|48]|
Rafe Has U Il (620-17)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ha Afsagd Tusa Iu I (620-17, Fafs, ue 5) mayraa satgur rakhvaalaa ho-aa. My True Guru is my Savior and Protector.
ufs faur ys oa & afar afe aifee oe fadur na Tae Ml 620-17, Fafs, ve 5) Dhaar kirpaa parabh haath day raakhi-aa har govid navaa niro-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Showering us with His Mercy and Grace, God extended His Hand, and saved Hargobind, who is now safe and secure. ||1]||Pause| |
ay afenr yfs urfy fretfeor Aa at oA Turet II (620-18, Fafs, us 5) taap ga-i-aa parabh aap mitaa-i-aa jan kee laaj rakhaa-ee. The fever is gone - God Himself eradicated it, and preserved the honor of His servant.
WoHafs 3 AS ee ue Afsas a afH AT NA (620-18, Hats, He 5)
saaDhsangat tay sabh fal paa-ay satgur kai bal jaa‘-ee. ||1]|
I have obtained all blessings from the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; Iama sacrifice to the True Guru. ||1]|
JSS UBT US US ASS GHT TS neadS 3 shot | (620-19, Fafs, us 5)
halat palat parabh dovai savaaray hamraa gun avgun na beechaari-aa.
God has saved me, both here and hereafter. He has not taken my merits and demerits into account.
UST E24
MES FIO SHA Id SI ASG Ad HASl(a Tha [IAVVAUISEll (621-1, Fats, us 5)
atal bachan naanak gur tayraa safal kar mastak Dhaari-aa. ||2||21]|49]| Your Word is eternal, O Guru Nanak; You placed Your Hand of blessing upon my forehead. ||2||21]|49]|
Rafe Hae U Il (621-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
riba Hg Afs fsn & ate Het AS Ae I 621-2, Fafs, ne 5)
jee-a jantar sabh tis kay kee-ay so-ee sant sahaa-ee.
All beings and creatures were created by Him; He alone is the support and friend of the Saints.
MUS ASA at wy Ie yss set aSTet AU (621-2, afs, ws 5)
apunay sayvak kee aapay raakhai pooran bha-ee badaa-ee. ||1||
He Himself preserves the honor of His servants; their glorious greatness becomes perfect. ||1||
USAIN UT HT SMH Il (621-3, Fafs, ue 5) paarbarahm pooraa mayrai naal. The Perfect Supreme Lord God is always with me.
afs us ust As od de Ava fers al TTS il (621-3, Fafs, we 5)
gur poorai pooree sabh raakhee ho-ay sarab da-i-aal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has perfectly and totally protected me, and now everyone is kind and compassionate to me. ||1||Pause] |
motes soa oH fimre Abr yrs ar ast | (621-4, tafe, He 5)
an-din naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay jee-a paraan kaa daataa.
Night and day, Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He is the Giver of the soul, and the breath of life itself.
nud BA ag afe oe ae fA@ afea fus HST NQNQANUOM (621-4, Fats, He 5) apunay daas ka-o kanth laa-ay raakhai ji-o baarik pit maataa. ||2||22||50] |
He hugs His slave close in His loving embrace, like the mother and father hug their child. ||2]|22||50| |
Hofe Hoe u we 3 Ueue (21-6) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 3 cha-upday Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Third House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yATfe II (621-6) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fife usa odt HOA garfemr I (621-7, Fafs, He 5) mil panchahu nahee sahsaa chukaa-i-aa. Meeting with the council, my doubts were not dispelled.
fraeag od ustorfenr | (621-7, Fats, v3 5) sikdaarahu nah patee-aa-i-aa. The chiefs did not give me satisfaction.
Bruseg mira Sa Il (621-7, Fale, ve 5) umraavahu aagai jhayraa. I presented my dispute to the noblemen as well.
ffs TH TH festa Al (621-7, Aafs, ue 5) mil raajan raam nibayraa. ||1]| But it was only settled by meeting with the King, my Lord. ||1]||
WME FES AST O Wet Il (621-8, Hafo, v2 5) ab dhoodhan katahu na jaa-ee. Now, I do not go searching anywhere else,
disse sf TS GASH | TI | (621-8, Fafs, v2 5) gobid bhaytay gur gosaa-ee. rahaa-o. because I have met the Guru, the Lord of the Universe. ||Pause] |
nitfent ys TIA Il (621-8, Fats, Hs 5) aa-i-aa parabh darbaaraa. When I came to God's Darbaar, His Holy Court,
at Haret fet yaar il (21-9, Hafs, He 5) taa saglee mitee pookaaraa. then all of my cries and complaints were settled.
Bata nituat uret il (621-9, Fats, H3 5) labaDh aapnee paa-ee. Now that I have attained what I had sought,
TAS mS AS Wet 2M 21-9, Hats, ve 5) taa kat aavai kat jaa-ee. ||2|| where should I come and where should I go? ||2||
30 Ara fourfe fora il (621-9, Aafs, He 5) tah saach ni-aa-ay nibayraa. There, true justice is administered.
Ga AH Sag AH BT Il (621-10, Hafs, w2 5) oohaa sam thaakur sam chayraa. There, the Lord Master and His disciple are one and the same.
msart ATS Il (621-10, Fats, He 5) antarjaamee jaanai. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, Knows.
fag sos urfu uss SII (621-10, Aafs, He 5) bin bolat aap pachhaanai. ||3]| Without our speaking, He understands. ||3]|
Hea BS A TH Il (621-11, Fafs, we 5) sarab thaan ko raajaa. He is the King of all places.
3I M6de Ae MAH Il (621-11, Aafs, Hs 5) tah anhad sabad agaajaa. There, the unstruck melody of the Shabad resounds.
f3A ufs fom ssaet Il (621-11, Fafs, He 5) tis peh ki-aa chaturaa-ee. Of what use is cleverness when dealing with Him?
THE SSA nimy TSTET USUAUUA (21-11, Fafs, He 5)
mil naanak aap gavaa-ee. ||4]|1]|51]| Meeting with Him, O Nanak, one loses his self-conceit. ||4]|1]|51]|
Rafe HIS U Il (621-12)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fase on ere” I (621-12, efs, He 5) hirdai naam vasaa-iho. Enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart;
ufs &3 ag fomrfer i @21-12, Fefs, He 5) ghar baithay guroo Dhi-aa-iho. sitting within your own home, meditate on the Guru.
dfs us Ag afer i (621-13, Fats, ue 5) gur poorai sach kahi-aa. The Perfect Guru has spoken the Truth;
A AY ATS font AU (621-13, Fats, He 5) so sukh saachaa lahi-aa. ||1|| the True Peace is obtained only from the Lord. ||1]|
nua de ag feogetsr i (621-13, Fafs, He 5) apunaa ho-i-o gur miharvaanaa. My Guru has become merciful.
moe AY afemire Hares fAG uta ure afs feroa il IIS Il (21-13, Hats, Hs 5)
anad sookh kali-aan mangal si-o ghar aa-ay kar isnaanaa. rahaa-o.
In bliss, peace, pleasure and joy, I have returned to my own home, after my purifying bath. ||Pause| |
Arat aa Sfsniret i (621-14, Fafs, He 5) saachee gur vadi-aa-ee. True is the glorious greatness of the Guru;
a at atts ATE & WET Il 21-14, Fafs, He 5) taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee. His worth cannot be described.
fafa Arat UTSATT Il (621-15, Fafs, He 5) sir saahaa paatisaahaa. He is the Supreme Overlord of kings.
ad Feo HS SHI Ql (621-15, Fats, ue 5) gur bhaytat man omaahaa. ||2|| Meeting with the Guru, the mind is enraptured. ||2||
AS UTES BE Il (621-15, Hafs, uz 5) Sagal paraachhat laathay. All sins are washed away,
ffs AraHafs & ATE I (621-15, Fafs, He 5) mil saaDhsangat kai saathay. meeting with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ae fours dfs aH Il (621-16, Aafs, He 5) gun niDhaan har naamaa. The Lord's Name is the treasure of excellence;
fy uss TS AH USI (621-16, Fats, He 5)
jap pooran ho-ay kaamaa. ||3]|| chanting it, one's affairs are perfectly resolved. ||3]|
afs ate Hats ena II (621-16, Aafs, H2 5) gur keeno mukat du-aaraa. The Guru has opened the door of liberation,
AS fiqrfe ad Aas Il (621-17, Fafs, ue 5) sabh sarisat karai jaikaaraa. and the entire world applauds Him with cheers of victory.
oa YF AT AE Il (621-17, Aafs, ue 5) naanak parabh mayrai saathay. O Nanak, God is always with me;
HOH HIS F BA ISUQWUM! (621-17, Fats, u2 5)
janam maran bhai laathay. ||4||2||52|| my fears of birth and death are gone. ||4||2||52||
Rafe HIS U Il (621-18)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
afs ys fsa ost il (621-18, Hafs, Hs 5) gur poorai kirpaa Dhaaree. The Perfect Guru has granted His Grace,
yfs ydt Ss THA Il (621-18, Fale, 3 5) parabh pooree loch hamaaree. and God has fulfilled my desire.
ata ferare fafa mire il (621-18, Fats, 2 5) kar isnaan garihi aa-ay. After taking my bath of purification, I returned to my home,
Moe Haws AY UTE IU (621-19, Aas, He 5) anad mangal sukh paa-ay. ||1|| and I found bliss, happiness and peace. ||1||
Had TH oft fansdit il (621-19, Fats, He 5) santahu raam naam nistaree-ai. O Saints, salvation comes from the Lord's Name.
Gos sos ale afe firme nates Afas adit ual TTS il (21-19, afs, ws 5)
oothat baithat har har Dhi-aa-ee-ai an-din sukarit karee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
While standing up and sitting down, meditate on the Lord's Name. Night and day, do good deeds. ||1||Pause| |
UST EQ2
HZ OT Haq UH at uCSt a SsaTait UES Il (622-1, Fafs, we 5)
sant kaa maarag Dharam kee pa-orhee ko vadbhaagee paa-ay.
The way of the Saints is the ladder of righteous living, found only by great good fortune.
afe HoH & faofsu an afe vaat fos SES Il (622-1, Fats, He 5)
kot janam kay kilbikh naasay har charnee chit laa-ay. ||2||
The sins of millions of incarnations are washed away, by focusing your consciousness on the Lord's feet. ||2] |
Cxstfs agg Het ys ius fats udt ae ITH II (622-2, Fafo, He 5) ustat karahu sadaa parabh apnay jin pooree kal raakhee. So sing the Praises of your God forever; His almighty power is perfect.
ba As Afs se ufez Afsae at AG ANH ISI (622-3, Fafs, He 5) jee-a jant sabh bha-ay pavitaraa satgur kee sach saakhee. ||3]| All beings and creatures are purified, listening to the True Teachings of the True Guru.
[I3I|
faus faovHs Afs gu aTAo Afsafe an fesfenr || (622-3, Hafs, He 5)
bighan binaasan sabh dukh naasan satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa.
The True Guru has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me; it is the Eliminator of obstructions, the Destroyer of all pains.
we uy ge Afs wes Ho aoa Afy wie wrfeor IsisiUsil (622-4, Aafs, He 5)
kho-ay paap bha-ay sabh paavan jan naanak sukh ghar aa-i-aa. ||4]|3||53]| All of my sins were erased, and I have been purified; servant Nanak has returned to his home of peace. ||4]|3]|53]|
Rafe HIS U Il (622-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ate TSt ATI Il (622-5, Fafs, ue 5) saahib gunee gahayraa. O Lord Master, You are the ocean of excellence.
We BART AF Sa Il (622-5, Fale, us 5) ghar laskar sabh tayraa. My home and all my possessions are Yours.
FHSS TST AUB Il (622-5, Aafs, He 5) rakhvaalay gur gopaalaa. The Guru, the Lord of the world, is my Savior.
Afs Aba se afenitar All (622-5, Hafs, us 5) sabh jee-a bha-ay da-i-aalaa. ||1|| All beings have become kind and compassionate to me. ||1]|
Afu nafe JIS TT TIS Il (622-6, Fafs, uz 5) jap anad raha-o gur charnaa. Meditating on the Guru's feet, I am in bliss.
38 asta odt Ys Ada Il JTS Il (622-6, af, us 5) bha-o kateh nahee parabh sarnaa. rahaa-o. There is no fear at all, in God's Sanctuary. ||Pause| |
Sfoor ort fae Hast I (622-6, Fafs, 2 5) tayri-aa daasaa ridai muraaree. You dwell in the hearts of Your slaves, Lord.
ufs uifsae ate SArdt Il (622-7, Hafs, us 5) parabh abichal neev usaaree. God has laid the eternal foundation.
3G UG Sami Sa Il (622-7, Fale, vs 5) bal Dhan takee-aa tayraa. You are my strength, wealth and support.
3 HF SAT AT M2 (622-7, Halo, ws 5) too bhaaro thaakur mayraa. ||2|| You are my Almighty Lord and Master. ||2||
fafe fafs ATaraT utfemr I (622-8, Fats, H2 5) jin jin saaDhsang paa-i-aa. Whoever finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
A ufs urfu safemr i (622-8, Hats, ue 5) SO parabh aap taraa-i-aa. is saved by God Himself.
ate fasut oH SA Sit Il (622-8, Fats, He 5) kar kirpaa naam ras dee-aa. By His Grace, He has blessed me with the sublime essence of the Naam.
GAS YH AS SM Sil (622-8, Aas, He 5) kusal khaym sabh thee-aa. ||3]| All joy and pleasure then came to me. ||3]|
Je YS ATT I (622-9, Fats, we 5) ho-ay parabhoo sahaa-ee. God became my helper and my best friend;
AS Gf wait ut Il (622-9, Hafs, Hs 5) sabh uth laagee paa-ee. everyone rises up and bows down at my feet.
Afa Ata yg foment 11 622-9, Hats, Hs 5) Saas Saas parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. With each and every breath, meditate on God;
dfs HAS soa Web gisiugsil (622-9, Fats, He 5) har mangal naanak gaa-ee-ai. ||4||4||54|| O Nanak, sing the songs of joy to the Lord. ||4]||4]|54]|
Rafe HIS U Il (622-10)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
HY AIH MST Il (622-10, Fafs, Hs 5) sookh sahj aanandaa. Celestial peace and bliss have come,
us fife fs srSer i (622-10, Aafs, He 5) parabh mili-o man bhaavandaa. meeting God, who is so pleasing to my mind.
ud afs fase ost I (622-11, Hafs, Hs 5) poorai gur kirpaa Dhaaree. The Perfect Guru showered me with His Mercy,
3 as set Tra NA (622-11, Aafs, 42 5)
taa gat bha-ee hamaaree. ||1]| and I attained salvation. ||1]|
dfs at YH sats He Slat Il (622-11, Fafs, ws 5) har kee paraym bhagat man leenaa. My mind is absorbed in loving devotional worship of the Lord,
fos FH nisgs stat il JIS i (622-11, Aafs, 2 5)
nit baajay anhat beenaa. rahaa-o.
and the unstruck melody of the celestial sound current ever resounds within me. | |Pause| |
dfs use at Ge AsTat Il (622-12, Fats, He 5) har charan kee ot sataanee. The Lord's feet are my all-powerful shelter and support;
AS gat ats Barat i (622-12, Fats, we 5) sabh chookee kaan lokaanee. my dependence on other people is totally finished.
Hates St ue | (622-12, Aafs, He 5) jagjeevan daataa paa-i-aa. I have found the Life of the world, the Great Giver;
dfs sAfa sAfA TE aE i2K1 (622-13, Aafs, He 5)
har rasak rasak gun gaa-i-aa. ||2|| in joyful rapture, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
ys atten AH At STAT Il (622-13, Hafs, He 5) parabh kaati-aa jam kaa faasaa. God has cut away the noose of death.
HO UTS TSt MAT Il (622-13, Fats, we 5) man pooran ho-ee aasaa. My mind's desires have been fulfilled;
Ad Uat 3a ASt Il (622-14, Fale, He 5) jah paykhaa tah so-ee. wherever I look, He is there.
fe ys fae neg o wet BI (622-14, Hats, He 5) har parabh bin avar na ko-ee. |[3]| Without the Lord God, there is no other at all. ||3]|
ata fasur yfs ad i (622-14, Fate, 3 5) kar kirpaa parabh raakhay. In His Mercy, God has protected and preserved me.
Afs HOH HOH BY BE Il (622-14, Fafs, 2 5) sabh janam janam dukh laathay. I am rid of all the pains of countless incarnations.
fegs@ oy famrfeur I (622-15, Fafs, H2 5) nirbha-o naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. I have meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Fearless Lord;
mMcS HY STAT ure HSNUNUUI! (622-15, Hats, He 5)
atal sukh naanak paa-i-aa. ||4]|5||55]| O Nanak, I have found eternal peace. ||4]|5]|55]|
Rafe HIS U Il (622-15)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Otfes USt ATS Il (622-16, Fafs, us 5) thaadh paa-ee kartaaray. The Creator has brought utter peace to my home;
avy efs afeor used Il (622-16, Fats, H3 5) taap chhod ga-i-aa parvaaray. the fever has left my family.
afs ys F Tat Il (622-16, Hats, Hs 5) gur poorai hai raakhee. The Perfect Guru has saved us.
Hate Ad at Stat WAU (622-16, Fats, vs 5) saran sachay kee taakee. ||1]| I sought the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||1]|
USHAg wif Gor TaSTH I (622-17, Fafs, ue 5) parmaysar aap ho-aa rakhvaalaa. The Transcendent Lord Himself has become my Protector.
Rifs Aon AY fas nfo Gun Ho dur AST AUST || TIE Il (622-17, Aafs, v2 5) saat sahj sukh khin meh upjay man ho-aa sadaa sukhaalaa. rahaa-o. Tranquility, intuitive peace and poise welled up in an instant, and my mind was comforted forever. ||Pause] |
dfs afs oH SAS Vg il (622-18, Fafs, 2 5) har har naam dee-o daaroo. The Lord, Har, Har, gave me the medicine of His Name,
fate Rarer sar firey il (22-18, Hats, He 5) tin saglaa rog bidaaroo. which has cured all disease.
muet farsur ars Il (622-18, Fafs, He 5) apnee kirpaa Dhaaree. He extended His Mercy to me,
fafe Aart aS Aerdt ilQi (622-18, Aafs, ve 5)
tin saglee baat savaaree. ||2|| and resolved all these affairs. ||2||
ufs wruar fase AHtfamit II (622-19, Hafs, He 5) parabh apnaa birad samaari-aa. God confirmed His loving nature;
THT TE MeTe G statfanr il (622-19, Aafs, us 5) hamraa gun avgun na beechaari-aa. He did not take my merits or demerits into account.
as a Age sfeS Ardt i (622-19, Aafs, us 5) gur kaa sabad bha-i-o saakhee. The Word of the Guru's Shabad has become manifest,
Yat €23 fate Aast BA st ISI (623-1, Fafs, Hz 5)
tin saglee laaj raakhee. ||3]|| and through it, my honor was totally preserved. ||3]||
Safer Fst Sa Il (623-1, Fale, v2 5) bolaa-i-aa bolee tayraa. I speak as You cause me to speak;
3 AfgE Tat TTT Il (623-1, FAafs, uz 5) too saahib gunee gahayraa. O Lord and Master, You are the ocean of excellence.
Afu Stax SH AG At Il (623-1, Aafs, Hs 5) jap naanak naam sach saakhee. Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, according to the Teachings of Truth.
MUS BA at UA It ISIENUEN (623-2, Fats, He 5) apunay daas kee paij raakhee. ||4||6||56|| God preserves the honor of His slaves. ||4||6]|56] |
Rafe HIS U Il (623-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fefs aga" UsTY USM Il (623-2, Aafs, He 5) vich kartaa purakh khalo-aa. The Creator Lord Himself stood between us,
=e 8 fear Iu Il (623-3, Fale, He 5) vaal na vingaa ho-aa. and not a hair upon my head was touched.
HAS Td rey TA Il (623-3, Aafs, He 5) majan gur aa“daa raasay. The Guru made my cleansing bath successful;
fu fs ofa fated oA IAI (623-3, Hafe, He 5) jap har har kilvikh naasay. ||1]| meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, my sins were erased. ||1||
H3d THEA AdSg Bla Il (623-4, Aafs, v2 5) santahu raamdaas sarovar neekaa. O Saints, the purifying pool of Ram Das is sublime.
foe A ae soe Cog Gor 9 Ht ae NAN TTC Il (623-4, als, ws 5)
jo naavai so kul taraavai uDhaar ho-aa hai jee kaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whoever bathes in it, his family and ancestry are saved, and his soul is saved as well. ||1]|Pause] |
A A OS Ad We Il (623-5, Aafs, ws 5) jai jai kaar jag gaavai. The world sings cheers of victory,
Ho fefents fs urs Il (623-5, Fats, we 5) man chindi-arhay fal paavai. and the fruits of his mind's desires are obtained.
Adt Fonts of wre i uruet ys fore iI (623-5, ats, H2 5) sahee salaamat naa-ay aa-ay. apnaa parabhoo Dhi-aa-ay. ||2| | Whoever comes and bathes here, and meditates on his God, is safe and sound. ||2| |
HS Aded Bre Il (623-6, Fats, Hz 5) sant Sarovar naavai. One who bathes in the healing pool of the Saints,
A AO UdH ats ures Il (623-6, als, He 5) SO jan param gat paavai. that humble being obtains the supreme status.
Hd 3 nite ATT I (623-6, Hafs, He 5) marai na aavai jaa-ee. He does not die, or come and go in reincarnation;
ofa ofa oH famret Sil (623-6, Fafs, He 5) har har naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||3]| he meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
feg gon faerg A OATS Il (623-7, Hats, He 5) ih barahm bichaar so jaanai. He alone knows this about God,
fan efeors df saer I (623-7, Fafs, ne 5) jis da-i-aal ho-ay bhagvaanai. whom God blesses with His kindness.
Wat SSX YS AdSret Il (623-7, Fafs, ws 5) baabaa naanak parabh sarnaa-ee. Baba Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God;
AS fest aes feet ISNONUDI (623-7, Fats, Hs 5) sabh chintaa ganat mitaa-ee. ||4]|7||57]|| all his worries and anxieties are dispelled. ||4||7||57]|
Rafe HIS U Il (623-8)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
uraqaty foardt uct i (623-8, Aafe, x2 5) paarbarahm nibaahee pooree. The Supreme Lord God has stood by me and fulfilled me,
aet as a Idiur Sat Il (623-8, Fats, 2 5) kaa-ee baat na rahee-aa ooree. and nothing is left unfinished.
dfs sie ote feAss Il (623-9, Aafs, He 5) gur charan laa-ay nistaaray. Attached to the Guru's feet, I am saved;
dfs of SH ANT IAI (623-9, Hafs, He 5) har har naam sam"aaray. ||1|| I contemplate and cherish the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
MUS BWA OT AST GUSTS Il (623-9, Hate, 43 5) apnay daas kaa sadaa rakhvaalaa. He is forever the Savior of His slaves.
ate fasur nus ats aa urs fust faS ure Al TIS Il (623-10, Fafs, He 5)
kar kirpaa apunay kar raakhay maat pitaa ji-o paalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Bestowing His Mercy, He made me His own and preserved me; like a mother or father, He cherishes me. ||1]||Pause] |
zasrat Afsag ufEmr Il (623-10, Fats, He 5) vadbhaagee satgur paa-i-aa. By great good fortune, I found the True Guru,
fafe AH ot Ue firetfemr II (623-11, Fafs, Hs 5) jin jam kaa panth mitaa-i-aa. who obliterated the path of the Messenger of Death.
dfs sats ote fas War i (623-11, Fats, vs 5) har bhagat bhaa-ay chit laagaa. My consciousness is focused on loving, devotional worship of the Lord.
afy dtefs A SSSA III (623-11, Fats, v2 5)
jap jeeveh say vadbhaagaa. ||2]|| One who lives in this meditation is very fortunate indeed. ||2]|
ofa nifgs aet are] il (623-11, tafe, ne 5) har amrit banee gaavai. He sings the Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani,
AT at Yast BS Il (623-12, Hafs, ws 5) saaDhaa kee Dhooree naavai. and bathes in the dust of the feet of the Holy.
MUST STH MN Shai Il (623-12, Fafs, Hz 5) apunaa naam aapay dee-aa. He Himself bestows His Name.
Ys Adeds Ty BM Bil (623-12, Aafs, ws 5) parabh karanhaar rakh lee-aa. ||3]| God, the Creator, saves us. ||3]||
Ufs PIAS YTS MUTT Il (623-13, Fafs, us 5) har darsan paraan aDhaaraa. The Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan is the support of the breath of life.
feg use fans ates II (623-13, Fafe, H 5) ih pooran bimal beechaaraa. This is the perfect, pure wisdom.
ate faxgur nisaat Il (623-13, Aafs, He 5) kar kirpaa antarjaamee. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, has granted His Mercy;
SA BOA Adfe AMM ISICHUTI (623-13, Aafs, Hs 5)
daas naanak saran su-aamee. ||4||8||58]| slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master. ||4||8]|58] |
Rafe HIS U Il (623-14)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fs ys vast oem I (623-14, Fafs, He 5) gur poorai charnee laa-i-aa. The Perfect Guru has attached me to His feet.
dfs Afar Aovet urfemr II (623-14, Fats, H2 5) har sang sahaa-ee paa-i-aa. I have obtained the Lord as my companion, my support, my best friend.
Ad Web SIT ATS I (623-15, Hafs, ne 5) jah jaa-ee-ai tahaa suhaylay. Wherever I go, I am happy there.
afd fasur yfs HS Il (23-15, Hafe, Hs 5) kar kirpaa parabh maylay. ||1|| By His Kind Mercy, God united me with Himself. ||1]|
Ufs TE Weg Ae ASEH Il (623-15, Fafs, ue 5) har gun gaavhu sadaa subhaa-ee. So sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord with loving devotion.
Ho feet AAS Se uTeT Aha a Afar AaTST NU TIS I (623-16, Fafs, ne 5)
man chinday saglay fal paavhu jee-a kai sang sahaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You shall obtain all the fruits of your mind's desires, and the Lord shall become the companion and the support of your soul. ||1]|Pause] |
STINSS YTS MUTT | (623-16, Aafs, us 5)
naaraa-in paraan aDhaaraa. The Lord is the support of the breath of life.
JH AS Hot FSS Il (623-16, Hafs, 2 5) ham sant janaa™ raynaaraa. I am the dust of the feet of the Holy people.
ufss usts afte BS Il (623-17, Fafs, He 5) patit puneet kar leenay. I am a sinner, but the Lord made me pure.
ate fasur afs AA BS N21 623-17, Fats, He 5) kar kirpaa har jas deenay. ||2|| By His Kind Mercy, the Lord blessed me with His Praises. ||2||
USAIN Ad Yfsursr il (623-17, Fafs, ws 5) paarbarahm karay partipaalaa. The Supreme Lord God cherishes and nurtures me.
He riba Afer Tass Il (623-18, Hats, He 5) sad jee-a sang rakhvaalaa. He is always with me, the Protector of my soul.
dfs fea sfe atese ae Il (623-18, Fats, H2 5) har din rain keertan gaa-ee-ai. Singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises day and night,
adfs o Hat ue ISI (623-18, Fats, He 5) bahurh na jonee paa-ee-ai. ||3]| I shall not be consigned to reincarnation again. ||3]|
fam f= usy feast Il (623-19, Fats, He 5) jis dayvai purakh biDhaataa. One who is blessed by the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny,
dfs 3A fo Tt AST Il (623-19, Fate, v2 5) har ras tin hee jaataa. realizes the subtle essence of the Lord.
Anaad Sfs 6 urfenr I (623-19, Aes, He 5) jamkankar nayrh na aa-i-aa. The Messenger of Death does not come near him.
HY aod Adal ufenr situ (623-19, Fats, us 5)
sukh naanak sarnee paa-i-aa. ||4]|9||59|| In the Lord's Sanctuary, Nanak has found peace. ||4||9||59]|
Ust E2Qe
Rafe Hae U Il (624-1)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
afs ys atst yet i (624-1, Favs, we 5) gur poorai keetee pooree. The Perfect Guru has made me perfect.
ys ate afoot sauct i (624-1, Fats, 12 5) parabh rav rahi-aa bharpooree. God is totally pervading and permeating everywhere.
OH GAS sfeor feAarar il (624-2, af, us 5) khaym kusal bha-i-aa isnaanaa. With joy and pleasure, I take my purifying bath.
UTSYIH feeg ATAS |All (624-2, Hafs, ue 5) paarbarahm vitahu kurbaanaa. ||1] | I am a Sacrifice to the Supreme Lord God. ||1||
Td X BIS ASG fee UT Il (624-2, Aafs, ue 5) gur kay charan kaval rid Dhaaray. I enshrine the lotus feet of the Guru within my heart.
fauls 5 od foe a at aH AaS ASS UI TIC Il (624-3, Aafs, v2 5) bighan na laagai til kaa ko-ee kaaraj sagal savaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Not even the tiniest obstacle blocks my way; all my affairs are resolved. ||1]||Pause] |
ffs ATG SaHAS BS il (624-3, Hats, ue 5) mil saaDhoo durmat kho-ay. Meeting with the Holy Saints, my evil-mindedness was eradicated.
ufss uals AS JE Il (624-3, af, ne 5) patit puneet sabh ho-ay. All the sinners are purified.
THETA AdST BS Il (624-4, Aafs, nz 5) raamdaas sarovar naatay. Bathing in the sacred pool of Guru Ram Das,
AS BS UY AHS III (624-4, Aafs, uz 5) sabh laathay paap kamaatay. ||2|| all the sins one has committed are washed away. ||2]|
qe dfse fas web i (624-4, Aafs, ne 5) gun gobind nit gaa-ee-ai. So sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe;
AraHfar fifes forent i) (624-5, Fats, He 5) saaDhsang mil Dhi-aa-ee-ai. joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on Him.
Ho Stes SH UTS Il (624-5, Fats, He 5) man baa™chhat fal paa-ay. The fruits of your mind's desires are obtained
TI uT fee fomre Si (624-5, Fafs, us 5) gur pooraa ridai Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]|| by meditating on the Perfect Guru within your heart. ||3]|
TST AUB MTSE | (624-5, Hales, He 5) gur gopaal aanandaa. The Guru, the Lord of the World, is blissful;
afu vfu HS UsHTSeET Il (624-6, Fafs, He 5) jap jap jeevai parmaanandaa. chanting, meditating on the Lord of supreme bliss, He lives.
HS Baa OH famrfer il (624-6, Fafs, ns 5) jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ys nual fase safemr ISIIONEOll (624-6, Hafs, He 5) parabh apnaa birad rakhaa-i-aa. ||4||10||60|| God has confirmed His innate nature. ||4||10]|60]|
Ta Aafs HIS U Il (624-7)
raag sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
vd fen sz Hu wer we etfs sHfax SIEGE Il (624-7, Aafs, uz 5)
dah dis chhatar maygh ghataa ghat daaman chamak daraa-i-o.
In the ten directions, the clouds cover the sky like a canopy; through the dark clouds, lightning flashes, and I am terrified.
An feast ote og dod fug useth fkofe& all (624-7, Fafs, ns 5) sayj ikaylee need nahu nainah pir pardays siDhaa-i-o. ||1]| By bed is empty, and my eyes are sleepless; my Husband Lord has gone far away.
[21
dfs odt Heng HEE Il (624-8, Fale, He 5) hun nahee sandaysaro maa-i-o. Now, I receive no messages from Him, O mother!
ta and fafa aga we 3a vad usd ofeS 1) TIE I 624-8, af, v2 5)
ayk kosro siDh karat laal tab chatur paatro aa-i-o. rahaa-o.
When my Beloved used to go even a mile away, He would send me four letters. ||Pause] |
fa fans feg oe fimrd nea gat AueEs | (624-9, afs, v2 5)
ki-o bisrai ih laal pi-aaro sarab gunaa sukh-daa-i-o.
How could I forget this Dear Beloved of mine? He is the Giver of peace, and all virtues.
Hefs ofs a ve forse So alfa sf mrfES 2M (624-10, Fats, He 5) mandar char kai panth nihaara-o nain neer bhar aa-i-o. ||2|| Ascending to His Mansion, I gaze upon His path, and my eyes are filled with tears.
[21 | u@ 3G Sis sfeS 3 ate Has tH feaeteEs i (624-10, Hafs, 2 5)
ha-o ha-o bheet bha-i-o hai beecho sunat days niktaa-i-o. The wall of egotism and pride separates us, but I can hear Him nearby.
seh a us use fag Us aves nai (24-11, Fats, we 5)
bhaa‘bheeree kay paat pardo bin paykhay dooraa-i-o. ||3]|
There is a veil between us, like the wings of a butterfly; without being able to see Him, He seems so far away. ||3]|
sfeS frau Ava & Sag Aad ey fretEs i 24-11, Fels, u 5) bha-i-o kirpaal sarab ko thaakur sagro dookh mitaa-i-o. The Lord and Master of all has become merciful; He has dispelled all my sufferings.
ad aoa ICH sis afe det 3G efeurg sos uTeE ISI (624-12, Aafs, He 5)
kaho naanak ha-umai bheet gur kho-ee ta-o da-i-aar beethlo paa-i-o. ||4||
Says Nanak, when the Guru tore down the wall of egotism, then, I found my Merciful Lord and Master. ||4]|
Ag sfus wien HEE Il (624-12, Aefs, v2 5) sabh rahi-o andaysro maa-i-o. All my fears have been dispelled, O mother!
A WIS A Ag frotSs i (624-13, Fafs, ue 5) jo chaahat so guroo milaa-i-o. Whoever I seek, the Guru leads me to find.
Hea For fafa wes i oS SAT UAUIEA (624-13, Fats, H8 5)
sarab gunaa niDh raa-i-o. rahaa-o doojaa. ||11||61]| The Lord, our King, is the treasure of all virtue. ||Second Pause||11]|61]|
Rafe Hae U Il (624-14)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
aet ads set ea fodarg wuerdt | (624-14, als, He 5)
ga-ee bahorh bandee chhorh nirankaar dukh-daaree.
The Restorer of what was taken away, the Liberator from captivity; the Formless Lord, the Destroyer of pain.
ASH © Wel UGH B AST Got HfEnmard | (624-14, Fafs, ne 5)
karam na jaanaa Dharam na jaanaa lobhee maa-i-aaDhaaree.
I do not know about karma and good deeds; I do not know about Dharma and righteous living. I am so greedy, chasing after Maya.
oy ufes sas afee a fea ag UA SHH NAN (624-15, Fats, He 5) naam pari-o bhagat govind kaa ih raakho paij tumaaree. ||1]| I go by the name of God's devotee; please, save this honor of Yours. ||1]|
ofa AS forfeor 3 HTS Il (624-15, Fats, H2 5) har jee-o nimaani-aa too maan. O Dear Lord, You are the honor of the dishonored.
fodifror da ad Aa adfge sdt avofs a ages | TTS I (624-16, Fafs, 2 5) nicheeji-aa cheej karay mayraa govind tayree kudrat ka-o kurbaan. rahaa-o.
You make the unworthy ones worthy, O my Lord of the Universe; I am a sacrifice to Your almighty creative power. ||Pause] |
AA woo ate ASTet Ge ws AHS Il (624-16, Fafs, He 5) jaisaa baalak bhaa-ay subhaa-ee lakh apraaDh kamaavai. Like the child, innocently making thousands of mistakes
afa Quen fssa sg ast sofs fust af we I (624-17, Fats, He 5) kar updays jhirhkay baho bhaatee bahurh pitaa gal laavai.
- his father teaches him, and scolds him so many times, but still, he hugs him close in his embrace.
fued vias sufh we ys nrat Hrefar urs MQM (624-17, Fafs, He 5) pichhlay a-ogun bakhas la-ay parabh aagai maarag paavai. ||2||
Please forgive my past actions, God, and place me on Your path for the future. ||2||
dfs visor vs fafa ae a fan ufo orfs FETS I (624-18, Fats, He 5)
har antarjaamee sabh biDh jaanai taa kis peh aakh sunaa-ee-ai.
The Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows all about my state of mind; so who else should I go to and speak to?
ade aafe 3 stn dfie dfs aS Un Tae I (624-19, Fafs, v2 5)
kahnai kathan na bheejai gobind har bhaavai paij rakhaa-ee-ai.
The Lord, the Lord of the Universe, is not pleased by mere recitation of words; if it is pleasing to His Will, He preserves our honor.
wed Ge H Aare eat fea Sct Ge gave SII (624-19, Aafs, He 5) avar ot mai saglee daykhee ik tayree ot rahaa-ee-ai. ||3|| I have seen all other shelters, but Yours alone remains for me. ||3]|
Us €Qu
df efi frsurs ux Sa wm) Ae FSSt Il (625-1, Fafs, us 5)
ho-ay da-i-aal kirpaal parabh thaakur aapay sunai baynantee.
Becoming kind and compassionate, God the Lord and Master Himself listens to my prayer.
um Asay His free AS ga Ho at FIST Il (625-1, Hats, Hs 5)
pooraa satgur mayl milaavai sabh chookai man kee chintee.
He unites me in Union with the Perfect True Guru, and all the cares and anxieties of my mind are dispelled.
dfs of om mene nie ufeor we area Afy SHAT ISIE (625-2, Fafs, He 5)
har har naam avkhad mukh paa-i-aa jan naanak sukh vasantee. ||4||12||62|| The Lord, Har, Har, has placed the medicine of the Naam into my mouth; servant Nanak abides in peace. ||4||12||62||
Rafe Has U Il (625-3)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fants fafa ys se niser eu ABA As BS Il (625-3, Fats, ue 5)
simar simar parabh bha-ay anandaa dukh kalays sabh naathay.
Remembering, remembering God in meditation, bliss ensues, and one is rid of all suffering and pain.
To Wes fmrss UF MUS AGHA AS AS IU (625-3, Aafs, ws 5)
gun gaavat Dhi-aavat parabh apnaa kaaraj saglay saa™thay. ||1]|
Singing the Glorious Praises of God, and meditating on Him, all my affairs are brought into harmony. ||1]|
AHS BH SHS Il (625-4, Hafs, us 5) jagjeevan naam tumaaraa. Your Name is the Life of the world.
ad ud HS Cue af sGne ufs Sarat | TIS Il (625-4, Have, wu 5)
gur pooray dee-o updaysaa jap bha-ojal paar utaaraa. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has taught me, that by meditating, I cross over the terrifying world- ocean. ||Pause]|
30 Hast Hafs ys 3d Ag fas AIST ST Il 625-5, Hafs, ws 5) toohai mantree suneh parabh toohai sabh kichh karnaihaaraa. You are Your own advisor; You hear everything, God, and You do everything.
3 omy est nm} gars for feg HZ fears Il (625-6, Hafs, wu: 5)
too aapay daataa aapay bhugtaa ki-aa ih jant vichaaraa. ||2||
You Yourself are the Giver, and You Yourself are the Enjoyer. What can this poor creature do? ||2]|
four Te 3d uty surat ahifs ATE B WET Il (625-6, Fafs, He 5)
ki-aa gun tayray aakh vakhaanee keemat kahan na jaa-ee.
Which of Your Glorious Virtues should I describe and speak of? Your value cannot be described.
Ufa uf Ate us mus orseA SHfo eset SI (625-7, Hats, He 5)
paykh paykh jeevai parabh apnaa achraj tumeh vadaa-ee. ||3]|
I live by beholding, beholding You, O God. Your glorious greatness is wonderful and amazing! ||3||
afs nogqg orfu ys Ant ufs fs otet ust i (625-7, af, He 5)
Dhaar anoograhu aap parabh savaamee pat mat keenee pooree. Granting His Grace, God my Lord and Master Himself saved my honor, and my intellect has been made perfect.
Het Het stad afeadt HESS AS Ost ISIISNESIl (625-8, Fats, we 5)
sadaa sadaa naanak balihaaree baachha-o santaa Dhooree. ||4||13]|63]| Forever and ever, Nanak is a sacrifice, longing for the dust of the feet of the Saints. [14] |13]]63]|
Hafs Hs U Il (625-9)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
TT UT SHAATS Il (625-9, Fafo, ue 5) gur pooraa namaskaaray. I bow in reverence to the Perfect Guru.
yfs AS aA Aes Il (625-9, Aafs, us 5) parabh sabhay kaaj savaaray. God has resolved all my affairs.
ofa met farsur art Il (625-9, Fafs, He 5) har apnee kirpaa Dhaaree. The Lord has showered me with His Mercy.
Ys Yds UA Aetat UU (625-9, Fafs, Hs 5) parabh pooran paij savaaree. ||1]|| God has perfectly preserved my honor. ||1]|
nus BA a SES Aa Il (625-10, Fats, He 5) apnay daas ko bha-i-o sahaa-ee. He has become the help and support of His slave.
HIS Hava ate ass Sat ws B aret i TIS Il (625-10, Halo, uz 5) Sagal manorath keenay kartai oonee baat na kaa-ee. rahaa-o. The Creator has achieved all my goals, and now, nothing is lacking. ||Pause| |
ads usta ave feetfemr il (625-11, Fafs, He 5) kartai purakh taal divaa-i-aa. The Creator Lord has caused the pool of nectar to be constructed.
fue ofa sat nfenr i (625-11, Fas, He 5) pichhai lag chalee maa-i-aa. The wealth of Maya follows in my footsteps,
Sfe 5 AST mire Il (625-11, Fafs, 2 5) tot na kathoo aavai. and now, nothing is lacking at all.
AT YS ASIST SS MM (625-11, Fels, us 5) mayray pooray satgur bhaavai. ||2]| This is pleasing to my Perfect True Guru. ||2]|
fifa fafa efenrer i (625-12, Fafs, v2 5) simar simar da-i-aalaa. Remembering, remembering the Merciful Lord in meditation,
Afs Aba se frsurer il (625-12, af, ve 5) sabh jee-a bha-ay kirpaalaa. all beings have become kind and compassionate to me.
A A OS TASH Il (625-12, af, ne 5) jai jai kaar gusaa-ee. Hail! Hail to the Lord of the world,
fafe ust ges geTet SI (625-12, Fafs, x2 5) jin pooree banat banaa-ee. ||3]|| who created the perfect creation. ||3]|
3 es Ao HT Il 25-13, Rafe, Hs 5) too bhaaro su-aamee moraa. You are my Great Lord and Master.
feg Ug ueTsa 3a Il (625-13, Hats, He 5) ih punn padaarath tayraa. These blessings and wealth are Yours.
Ho saa Sa fomrfenr i (625-13, Fafs, ue 5) jan naanak ayk Dhi-aa-i-aa. Servant Nanak has meditated on the One Lord;
Hes sor ua ufemr siIsiles il (625-14, Aafs, He 5)
sarab falaa punn paa-i-aa. ||4||14]|64]| he has obtained the fruitful rewards for all good deeds. ||4||14||64||
Hofe Hoe Uwe 3 BUS (625-15) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 3 dupday Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl, Third House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsare YATE Il (625-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THA Adeta BS Il (625-16, Aafs, ne 5) raamdaas sarovar naatay. Bathing in the nectar tank of Ram Das,
Afs 3d uTy AHS Il (625-16, Fafs, Hz 5) sabh utray paap kamaatay. all sins are erased.
fooHe d& afs fenorar Il (625-16, Hats, He 5) nirmal ho-ay kar isnaanaa. One becomes immaculately pure, taking this cleansing bath.
Os ys SS SS WAU (625-16, Fats, we 5) gur poorai keenay daanaa. ||1|| The Perfect Guru has bestowed this gift. ||1]|
Afg GAG YH yfs ard Il (625-17, Fafs, us 5) sabh kusal khaym parabh Dhaaray. God has blessed all with peace and pleasure.
Adt Aonfs vfs da Cars TT a Hae Ses I TIC Il (625-17, Fahy, ne 5)
sahee salaamat sabh thok ubaaray gur kaa sabad veechaaray. rahaa-o. Everything is safe and sound, as we contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. | |Pause| |
AGH fal HS Bret il (625-18, Fefs, us 5) saaDhsang mal laathee. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, filth is washed off.
UTSqIH sfeG Art il (625-18, Aafs, He 5) paarbarahm bha-i-o saathee. The Supreme Lord God has become our friend and helper.
Sa OH forte it (625-18, Fafs, He 5) naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
nie usd Ys usm WINUEUI (625-18, Hafs, He 5) aad purakh parabh paa-i-aa. ||2||1]|65]| He has found God, the Primal Being. ||2||1]|65]|
Rafe HIS U Il (625-19)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fas uvaqon fefs urfemr 1 A we eft sAfemr I (625-19, Fafs, He 5) jit paarbarahm chit aa-i-aa. so ghar da-yi vasaa-i-aa. The Supreme Lord God has established that home, in which He comes to mind.
Yat EINE
AY Aad Te ute il St AGA" Aare feetfemr Ail (626-1, Fats, He 5) sukh saagar gur paa-i-aa. taa sahsaa sagal mitaa-i-aa. ||1]| I found the Guru, the ocean of peace, and all my doubts were dispelled. ||1]|
ofs & SH at Ssniet I (626-1, tafe, vs 5) har kay naam kee vadi-aa-ee. This is the glorious greatness of the Naam.
MTS UIT TE Et Il (626-1, Fats, us 5) aath pahar gun gaa-ee. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing His Glorious Praises.
Ts us 3 uret il JIS Il (626-2, Fafo, ve 5) gur pooray tay paa-ee. rahaa-o. I obtained this from the Perfect Guru. ||Pause] |
ys at moa TTret Il (626-2, Fats, ws 5) parabh kee akath kahaanee. God's sermon is inexpressible.
Ae safe nifys aret i (626-2, Hats, ue 5) jan boleh amrit banee. His humble servants speak words of Ambrosial Nectar.
SOA VA Furat Il (626-3, Hats, Hz 5) naanak daas vakhaanee. Slave Nanak has spoken.
TS UF F AST NQUUEEN (626-3, Fats, w2 5) gur pooray tay jaanee. ||2||2||66]| Through the Perfect Guru, it is known. ||2||2||66]|
Rafe HIS U Il (626-3)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
witat AY ofa sor il (626-3, Fats, He 5) aagai sukh gur dee-aa. The Guru has blessed me with peace here,
Ue AAS YH ate amr il (626-4, Aafs, He 5) paachhai kusal khaym gur kee-aa. and the Guru has arranged peace and pleasure for me hereafter.
Hea fears AY utfemit Il (626-4, Fafs, He 5) sarab niDhaan sukh paa-i-aa. I have all treasures and comforts,
ad wuar fee fomrfenr ail 626-4, Fats, He 5) gur apunaa ridai Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]| meditating on the Guru in my heart. ||1]|
mus Afsad at Senet il (626-4, Fafs, H2 5) apnay satgur kee vadi-aa-ee. This is the glorious greatness of my True Guru;
Ho fee Sw uret Il (626-5, Fats, He 5) man ichhay fal paa-ee. I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires.
Had fee feo vs Aevet I Ta Il (626-5, Fafs, Hs 5) santahu din din charhai savaa-ee. rahaa-o. O Saints, His Glory increases day by day. ||Pause| |
iba Ws Afs se efenrer ufs nus afs FHS Il (626-5, Fafs, ue 5)
jee-a jant sabh bha-ay da-i-aalaa parabh apnay kar deenay.
All beings and creatures have become kind and compassionate to me; my God has made them so.
Hon Hate fxs dure soa As usts NQUSIEDI (626-6, Fats, He 5) sahj subhaa-ay milay gopaalaa naanak saach pateenay. ||2||3||67]||
Nanak has met with the Lord of the world with intuitive ease, and with Truth, he is pleased. ||2||3||67||
Rafe Has U Il (626-7)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Td A ARE TASS Il (626-7, Fafs, uz 5) gur kaa sabad rakhvaaray. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is my Saving Grace.
sat wfarse THT Il (626-7, Aafs, He 5) cha-ukee cha-ugirad hamaaray. It is a guardian posted on all four sides around me.
TH OTH HO Bal Il (626-7, Hafs, ue 5) raam naam man laagaa. My mind is attached to the Lord's Name.
AH ote ats Sta IAI (626-8, Fats, He 5) jam lajaa-ay kar bhaagaa. ||1]| The Messenger of Death has run away in shame. ||1]|
ys Ht J HT AYETST Il (626-8, Hats, Hs 5) parabh jee too mayro sukh-daata. O Dear Lord, You are my Giver of peace.
au ate ad Ho fesne use yay feast il TIS Il (626-8, Fale, Hs 5)
banDhan kaat karay man nirmal pooran purakh biDhaataa. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Lord, the Architect of Destiny, has shattered my bonds, and made my mind immaculately pure. ||Pause| |
Soa US MASH Il (626-9, Hafs, us 5) naanak parabh abhinaasee. O Nanak, God is eternal and imperishable.
3 at Ae & faaet AAT Il (626-9, Aafs, He 5) taa kee sayv na birthee jaasee. Service to Him shall never go unrewarded.
Moe Add SI VAT Il (626-9, Aafs, Hs 5) anad karahi tayray daasaa. Your slaves are in bliss;
fy uss Tet MMAT QUIET (26-10, Fats, He 5)
jap pooran ho-ee aasaa. ||2||4||68]| chanting and meditating, their desires are fulfilled. ||2||4||68] |
Hafe HIS U Il (626-10)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ts MUS Alsat il (626-10, Fafs, Hs 5) gur apunay balihaaree. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru.
fats use UA Aetet Il (626-10, Hats, ws 5) jin pooran paij savaaree. He has totally preserved my honor.
Ho fefenr ee urfemr Il (626-11, Fats, He 5) man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa. I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires.
Ug muol Het flmrfeni 14 (626-11, Aafs, us 5) parabh apunaa sadaa Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]|| I meditate forever on my God. ||1]|
Had fan fag nied & aet Il (626-11, Fats, He 5) santahu tis bin avar na ko-ee. O Saints, without Him, there is no other at all.
ade AGE ys Het i TIS Il (626-12, Fafs, us 5) karan kaaran parabh so-ee. rahaa-o. He is God, the Cause of causes. ||Pause]|
ufs mud ed AS Il 626-12, Hale, ve 5) parabh apnai var deenay. My God has given me His Blessing.
Hares Aba SA ats Il (626-12, Fafs, v2 5) Sagal jee-a vas keenay. He has made all creatures subject to me.
Ho Staa OH famrfer i (626-13, Fels, nH 5) jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
J Aas Te freer WIWUNECH (626-13, Aafs, v2 5) taa saglay dookh mitaa-i-aa. ||2||5||69]| and all his sorrows depart. ||2]|5||69||
Rafe HIS U Il (626-13)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
ay aetenr afs ug Il (626-13, Fats, 12 5) taap gavaa-i-aa gur pooray. The Perfect Guru has dispelled the fever.
SA MSIE 3 Il (626-14, afe, He 5) vaajay anhad tooray. The unstruck melody of the sound current resounds.
Hea atemite ufs ats Il (626-14, Hafs, ue 5) sarab kali-aan parabh keenay. God has bestowed all comforts.
ate fasur mify StS Wl (626-14, Aafs, v3 5) kar kirpaa aap deenay. ||1]| In His Mercy, He Himself has given them. ||1]]|
eo Afsafe orf Tevet I (626-15, Favs, ne 5) baydan satgur aap gavaa-ee. The True Guru Himself has eradicated the disease.
fru As Afs AeA de afe afe on fomret 11 TIC Il (626-15, Fafs, v2 5)
sikh sant sabh sarsay ho-ay har har naam Dhi-aa-ee. rahaa-o.
All the Sikhs and Saints are filled with joy, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||Pause| |
a Hafa A Be|fs i (626-15, Aefs, He 5) jo mangeh so layveh. They obtain that which they ask for.
us mufenr Hat FefT Il (626-16, Fats, Hs 5) parabh apni-aa santaa dayveh. God gives to His Saints.
ofa afee ufs afimr 1 (626-16, #afs, ue 5) har govid parabh raakhi-aa. God saved Hargobind.
HS Sea ATS Aster WIWEWIOM (626-16, Fafs, Hs 5)
jan naanak saach subhaakhi-aa. ||2||6||70|| Servant Nanak speaks the Truth. ||2||6||70||
Rafe Hades U Il (626-17)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Ret aate A SO SS Il (626-17, Aafs, v2 5) so-ee karaa-ay jo tuDh bhaavai. You make me do what pleases You.
Hfo froreu ag 3 MTS Il (626-17, Hafs, Hs 5) mohi si-aanap kachhoo na aavai. I have no cleverness at all.
JH ata 3B AIST Il (626-17, Aafs, He 5) ham baarik ta-o sarnaa-ee. I am just a child - I seek Your Protection.
ufs mmd Ur gare? IAI (626-18, Fas, He 5) parabh aapay paij rakhaa-ee. ||1]| God Himself preserves my honor. ||1||
Hat HS fust of ahem I (626-18, Fats, H8 5) mayraa maat pitaa har raa-i-aa. The Lord is my King; He is my mother and father.
afd fasur ufsume oar adt Sa aafenr || JIS Il (626-18, Hafs, Hs 5) kar kirpaa partipaalan laagaa karee™ tayraa karaa-i-aa. rahaa-o. In Your Mercy, You cherish me; I do whatever You make me do. ||Pause]|
Aba HS 3d US Il (626-19, Fafs, He 5) jee-a jant tayray Dhaaray. The beings and creatures are Your creation.
us sot ofa SHrg Il (626-19, Fats, ne 5) parabh doree haath tumaaray. O God, their reins are in Your hands.
iia’ £22
fa Ages A ATS Il (627-1, Fats, He 5) je karaavai so karnaa. Whatever You cause us to do, we do.
SSA WA Sot APS NWOUWDA (627-1, Fats, we 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa. ||2||7||71]| Nanak, Your slave, seeks Your Protection. ||2||7||71||
Rafe Has U Il (627-1)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
dfs om fee udfemr Il (627-1, Fafs, v2 5) har naam ridai paro-i-aa. I have woven the Lord's Name into the fabric of my heart.
AS aq IHS dfeMr | (627-2, Fats, He 5) sabh kaaj hamaaraa ho-i-aa. All my affairs are resolved.
YS Tat HS Bal Il (627-2, Hafs, us 5) parabh charnee man laagaa. His mind is attached to God's feet,
UTS AT A STA NU (627-2, Fats, H2 5) pooran jaa kay bhaagaa. ||1]| whose destiny is perfect. ||1]|
ffs Arorfar ofa fomrfemr | (627-2, Aafs, 42 5) mil saaDhsang har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meditate on the Lord.
ms ude Matas ofs ofa ne fefeor ee ufenr i TIE I (627-3, Fafs, He 5)
aath pahar araaDhi-o har har man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa. rahaa-o.
Twenty-four hours a day, I worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har; I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires. ||Pause]|
Us Usa vias Atami il (627-4, Fafs, Hs 5) paraa poorbalaa ankur jaagi-aa. The seeds of my past actions have sprouted.
TH OTH HO Stam Il (627-4, Fate, us 5) raam naam man laagi-aa. My mind is attached to the Lord's Name.
Hfs 3fs ofs wath ANTS Il (627-4, Fafs, He 5) man tan har daras samaavai. My mind and body are absorbed into the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
SOA UH AS TE WS NANCW OM (627-4, Hafs, wz 5) naanak daas sachay gun gaavai. ||2]||8]|72|| Slave Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||2||8]|72]|
Hafe HIS U Il (627-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
as fife ys festanr il (627-5, afs, 1 5) gur mil parabhoo chitaari-aa. Meeting with the Guru, I contemplate God.
ada Afs Aetfami Il (627-5, Fats, He 5) kaaraj sabh savaari-aa. All of my affairs have been resolved.
Het AB MBE I (627-6, Fafs, ue 5) mandaa ko na alaa-ay. No one speaks ill of me.
AS AA AT ASS INU (627-6, Fafs, 2 5) sabh jai jai kaar sunaa-ay. ||1]| Everyone congratulates me on my victory. ||1]||
Hag Adt Aafs AMM i (627-6, Fats, ue 5) santahu saachee saran su-aamee. O Saints, I seek the True Sanctuary of the Lord and Master.
riba a3 Afs ofa fA a A ug vise i Ta Il 627-6, als, ue 5)
jee-a jant sabh haath tisai kai so parabh antarjaamee. rahaa-o.
All beings and creatures are in His hands; He is God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||Pause||
asa Als ASS Il (627-7, Hafs, us 5) kartab sabh savaaray. He has resolved all of my affairs.
yfs mre fase ANTS Il (627-7, Hafs, He 5) parabh apunaa birad samaaray. God has confirmed His innate nature.
ufs3 Uso YS SH Il (627-7, Hafs, ue 5) patit paavan parabh naamaa. God's Name is the Purifier of sinners.
HO SOA AE ATATST IQUCUIZI (627-8, Aafs, Hs 5)
jan naanak sad kurbaanaa. ||2||9||73]|| Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||9]]73]|
Hafe HIS U Il (627-8)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
uTsgath ATA Asani Il (627-8, Hafs, us 5) paarbarahm saaj savaari-aa. The Supreme Lord God created and embellished him.
feg sya ag Catan il 627-9, Fats, 12 5) ih lahurhaa guroo ubaari-aa. The Guru has saved this small child.
Moe ATT fs HST Il (627-9, Fafs, H2 5) anad karahu pit maataa. So celebrate and be happy, father and mother.
USHA Abt A VST WAI (627-9, Fats, v3 5) parmaysar jee-a kaa daataa. ||1]|| The Transcendent Lord is the Giver of souls. ||1]|
HS fasefe GA SHS Il (627-9, Fafs, He 5) subh chitvan daas tumaaray. Your slaves, O Lord, focus on pure thoughts.
wufo UA SA nus at aan vif Aes I TITS Il (627-10, Fale, v2 5)
raakhahi paij daas apunay kee kaaraj aap savaaray. rahaa-o.
You preserve the honor of Your slaves, and You Yourself arrange their affairs. | |Pause| |
Ha ys us guardt il (627-10, Hafs, Hs 5) mayraa parabh par-upkaaree. My God is so benevolent.
ude ae fats urdt i (627-10, Hats, H 5) pooran kal jin Dhaaree. His Almighty Power is manifest.
Sa Adel mfEnit i (627-11, Aafs, uz 5) naanak sarnee aa-i-aa. Nanak has come to His Sanctuary.
Ho fefenr ae urfemr NQNION DBI (627-11, Aafs, He 5) man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa. ||2||10||74| | He has obtained the fruits of his mind's desires. ||2]|10||74]|
Rafe Has U Il (627-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Het Het Ifg ANY Il (627-12, Fafs, 2 5) sadaa sadaa har jaapay. Forever and ever, I chant the Lord's Name.
Ys Toa TT MY Il (627-12, Hafs, uz 5) parabh baalak raakhay aapay. God Himself has saved my child.
Hise ota FISH Il (627-12, Fafs, n3 5) seetiaa thaak rahaa-ee. He healed him from the smallpox.
fous we afs set Al (627-12, Fafs, He 5) bighan ga-ay har naa-ee. ||1]| My troubles have been removed through the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Aa ys dor Aer efeniar | (627-13, als, ue 5) mayraa parabh ho-aa sadaa da-i-aalaa. My God is forever Merciful.
Moet Hel SIs MUS at AS Aba Sfenr fagurer il JIC il (627-13, Fats, us 5)
ardaas sunee bhagat apunay kee sabh jee-a bha-i-aa kirpaalaa. rahaa-o.
He heard the prayer of His devotee, and now all beings are kind and compassionate to him. ||Pause] |
YS ATE ATE AHA Il (627-14, Aafo, ue 5) parabh karan kaaran samraathaa. God is Almighty, the Cause of causes.
ofa fAHss AZ SY Be Il (627-14, Aafs, us 5) har simrat sabh dukh laathaa. Remembering the Lord in meditation, all pains and sorrows vanish.
mus UA at Het Fst Il (627-14, Fats, v2 5) apnay daas kee sunee baynantee. He has heard the prayer of His slave.
AS soa Afe ASSt MQNAVUIDUI (627-15, Fas, He 5)
sabh naanak sukh savantee. ||2||11||75|| O Nanak, now everyone sleeps in peace. ||2||11]|75]|
Rafe Hades U Il (627-15)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Muar Te faire il (627-15, Fats, 12 5) apnaa guroo Dhi-aa-ay. I meditated on my Guru.
fife ane Ast wife mire Il (627-15, Fats, He 5) mil kusal saytee ghar aa-ay. I met with Him, and returned home in joy.
SH at Saniret I (627-16, Hats, ue 5) naamai kee vadi-aa-ee. This is the glorious greatness of the Naam.
fsH atts ATE B WET IAI (627-16, Fats, u3 5) tis keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||1]| Its value cannot be estimated. ||1]|
Had ofa ofa afe wrarag Il (627-16, Fefs, n2 5) santahu har har har aaraaDhahu. O Saints, worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
dfs urate As fos ust aren Aas ATG Il TIT Il (627-17, ahs, v2 5)
har aaraaDh sabho kichh paa-ee-ai kaaraj saglay saaDhahu. rahaa-o.
Worship the Lord in adoration, and you shall obtain everything; your affairs shall all be resolved. ||Pause] |
UH sats Ys Bait il (627-17, Favs, ue 5) paraym bhagat parabh laagee. He alone is attached in loving devotion to God,
A ure fAA saat I (627-18, Aafs, He 5) SO paa-ay jis vadbhaagee. who realizes his great destiny.
HO Staa OH fomrfenr i (627-18, Fafs, Hs 5) jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fafe Aaa Aa Swe UTPEMT [NIANAIDEI (627-18, Fas, He 5)
tin sarab sukhaa fal paa-i-aa. ||2||12]|76]| He obtains the rewards of all joys and peace. ||2||12]|76]|
Rafe Hae U Il (627-19)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
udHAfs fest Far il (627-19, Aefs, He 5) parmaysar ditaa bannaa. The Transcendent Lord has given me His support.
eu Ja at Sa Far Il (627-19, Aafs, v2 5) dukh rog kaa dayraa bhannaa. The house of pain and disease has been demolished.
noe Adfs Sd Brat Il (627-19, Aafs, H3 5) anad karahi nar naaree. The men and women celebrate.
dfs ots ufs fagur ost All (627-19, Fats, u3 5)
har har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree. ||1|| The Lord God, Har, Har, has extended His Mercy. ||1||
UST €Qe
Hag AY dot AS aret Il (628-1, als, He 5) santahu sukh ho-aa sabh thaa-ee. O Saints, there is peace everywhere.
Ug Uda USHAG se stor Agat Wet I TIS Il (628-1, Fafs, u2 5)
paarbarahm pooran parmaysar rav rahi-aa sabhnee jaa-ee. rahaa-o. The Supreme Lord God, the Perfect Transcendent Lord, is pervading everywhere. | |Pause| |
Ud at sat niet Il (628-2, Aafs, He 5) Dhur kee banee aa-ee. The Bani of His Word emanated from the Primal Lord.
fate Raret fos fixevet II (628-2, Fafs, He 5) tin saglee chint mitaa-ee. It eradicates all anxiety.
efenres use fagerar Il (628-2, Aafs, v3 5) da-i-aal purakh miharvaanaa. The Lord is merciful, kind and compassionate.
Ts SSK ATT FATS [INAVIUDIN (628-3, Fas, ue 5)
har naanak saach vakhaanaa. ||2||13]|77]|| Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the True Lord. ||2||13]|77]||
Hafs HIS U Il (628-3)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
me GA Tues Il (628-3, Aafs, He 5) aithai othai rakhvaalaa. Here and hereafter, He is our Savior.
ys Afsad de afenirar Il (628-3, tafe, ne 5) parabh satgur deen da-i-aalaa. God, the True Guru, is Merciful to the meek.
SA MUS nT TE Il (628-4, Fats, v3 5) daas apnay aap raakhay. He Himself protects His slaves.
whe whe Aa AS All (628-4, Aafs, Hs 5) ghat ghat sabad subhaakhay. ||1]|| In each and every heart, the Beautiful Word of His Shabad resounds. ||1] |
Gs a dE Cuts afs At I (28-4, Fafo, v2 5) gur kay charan oopar bal jaa-ee. I am a Sacrifice to the Guru's Feet.
feon sfe Ata ATA AHS Use Asst get I TIS Il 28-5, Hale, ws 5)
dinas rain saas saas samaalee pooran sabhnee thaa-ee. rahaa-o.
Day and night, with each and every breath, I remember Him; He is totally pervading and permeating all places. ||Pause| |
wif AIST ut Il (628-5, Fafs, He 5) aap sahaa-ee ho-aa. He Himself has become my help and support.
He Het Sn Il (628-6, Hats, He 5) sachay daa sachaa dho-aa. True is the support of the True Lord.
Sot sats efsnret il (628-6, Fafs, H2 5) tayree bhagat vadi-aa-ee. Glorious and great is devotional worship to You.
uret SSX US AdSTSt MUAUOCI (628-6, Hafs, us 5)
paa-ee naanak parabh sarnaa-ee. ||2||14||78]| Nanak has found God's Sanctuary. ||2]|14]|78]|
Rafe HIS U Il (628-7)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Afsaqd UT BET Il (628-7, Fafs, He 5) satgur pooray bhaanaa. When it was pleasing to the Perfect True Guru,
3 Aft SH THTST Il (628-7, Fats, He 5) taa japi-aa naam ramaanaa. then I chanted the Naam, the Name of the Pervading Lord.
dfs forsur ardt Il (628-7, Fats, H2 5) gobind kirpaa Dhaaree. The Lord of the Universe extended His Mercy to me,
uf ardt Un TTS AI (628-7, Fats, 2 5) parabh raakhee paij hamaaree. ||1|| and God saved my honor. ||1]|
dfs X BIG AST AYETEeT Il (628-8, Fafs, ue 5) har kay charan sadaa sukh-daa-ee. The Lord's feet are forever peace-giving.
fn feefs Fat co uefa faset wr & Fret NA TIC Il (628-8, Fale, He 5) jo ichheh so-ee fal paavahi birthee aas na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever fruit one desires, he receives; his hopes shall not go in vain. ||1]|Pause] |
faur ad fan yroufs est Het AS TE We Il (628-9, Hafs, ne 5)
kirpaa karay jis paraanpat daataa so-ee sant gun gaavai.
That Saint, unto whom the Lord of Life, the Great Giver, extends His Mercy - he alone sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
UH gas st at He Stet urTagqaH Hfs SS QI (628-9, Fafs, ue 5) paraym bhagat taa kaa man leenaa paarbarahm man bhaavai. ||2| |
His soul is absorbed in loving devotional worship; his mind is pleasing to the Supreme Lord God. ||2]|
WTS Udd dfs at AA dear fat Saat Brat Il (628-10, Aafs, He 5)
aath pahar har kaa jas ravnaa bikhai thag-uree laathee.
Twenty-four hours a day, he chants the Praises of the Lord, and the bitter poison does not affect him.
Afar fresfe sor Hed Ags AS AG se ATH ISI (628-10, Fafs, He 5)
sang milaa-ay lee-aa mayrai kartai sant saaDh bha-ay saathee. ||3]|
My Creator Lord has united me with Himself, and the Holy Saints have become my companions. ||3]||
ag ats Be AsaA ete nirufo wiry feorfenr Il (628-11, Fats, v3 5) kar geh leenay sarbas deenay aapeh aap milaa-i-aa. Taking me by the hand, He has given me everything, and blended me with Himself.
AI HSA AVA aa YS UT AfsaT ufenr wsqiloei (628-11, Aafs, Hs 5) kaho naanak sarab thok pooran pooraa satgur paa-i-aa. ||4]|15]||79||
Says Nanak, everything has been perfectly resolved; I have found the Perfect True Guru. ||4]|15]|79]|
Rafe HIS U Il (628-12)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
adtat get THTSt Il (628-12, Fats, vs 5) gareebee gadaa hamaaree. Humility is my spiked club.
Yor Aas IS Srdt Il (628-13, Aafs, ue 5) khannaa sagal rayn chhaaree. My dagger is to be the dust of all men's feet.
fen niet & & fea Fardt Il (628-13, Fefs, He 5) is aagai ko na tikai vaykaaree. No evil-doer can withstand these weapons.
TT UT ST AS ATS WAU (628-13, Aafo, v2 5) gur pooray ayh gal saaree. ||1]|| The Perfect Guru has given me this understanding. ||1]|
dfs dfs aH Hse at Get il (628-13, Fefs, ns 5) har har naam santan kee otaa. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the support and shelter of the Saints.
a find fSn at afs de Cuafe Aas et Ul TIC Il (628-14, Fafs, v2 5)
jo simrai tis kee gat hovai uDhrahi saglay kotaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who remembers the Lord in meditation, is emancipated; millions have been saved in this way. ||1||Pause| |
Hz Afat AA afer i (628-14, Fale, He 5) sant sang jas gaa-i-aa. In the Society of the Saints, I sing His Praises.
feg use of as urfemr Il (628-15, Fats, 12 5) ih pooran har Dhan paa-i-aa. I have found this, the perfect wealth of the Lord.
aT saa nimy fetfemit | (628-15, Aafs, v3 5) kaho naanak aap mitaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, I have eradicated my self-conceit.
AZ USAIN Set wien [INGEN CON (628-15, Hafs, He 5)
sabh paarbarahm nadree aa-i-aa. ||2||16||80|| I see the Supreme Lord God everywhere. ||2||16||80||
Rafe HIS U Il (628-16)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
afs us ust atet il (628-16, Fafs, Hz 5) gur poorai pooree keenee. The Perfect Guru has done it perfectly.
aun must ats eat il (628-16, Aafs, He 5) bakhas apunee kar deenee. He blessed me with forgiveness.
fos mee AY uTfemt Il (628-17, Fafs, He 5) nit anand sukh paa-i-aa. I have found lasting peace and bliss.
Bre Aa Aat SATE IA (628-17, Aafs, He 5) thaav saglay sukhee vasaa-i-aa. ||1]|| Everywhere, the people dwell in peace. ||1]|
Uf at sats SH VST Il (628-17, Favs, He 5) har kee bhagat fal daatee. Devotional worship to the Lord is what gives rewards.
afs us fasu afs dat fees fas at St 1 Ta i 28-17, Fats, wu 5)
gur poorai kirpaa kar deenee virlai kin hee jaatee. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru, by His Grace, gave it to me; how rare are those who know this. | |Pause| |
TsTat WET SET I (628-18, Fafs, vs 5) gurbaanee gaavah bhaa-ee. Sing the Word of the Guru's Bani, O Siblings of Destiny.
6g Hes Het AYeTeT Il (628-18, afs, us 5) oh safal sadaa sukh-daa-ee. That is always rewarding and peace-giving.
Sa OH fowrfenr il (628-19, Favs, Hs 5) naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. Nanak has meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
uate fesfimor urfemi INA ITAUI (28-19, Fats, He 5) poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa. ||2]|17||81|| He has realized his pre-ordained destiny. ||2||17]||81]|
Hafe Has U Il (628-19)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Yar gar
TT UT MITIT | (629-1, Hafs, He 5) gur pooraa aaraaDhay. I worship and adore the Perfect Guru.
ASH Aas AT Il (629-1, Aafs, He 5) kaaraj saglay saaDhay. All my affairs have been resolved.
Aas HSTa UT Il (629-1, Fafs, Hz 5)
sagal manorath pooray. All desires have been fulfilled.
WA MSIE SF WAU (629-1, Fafo, v2 5) baajay anhad tooray. ||1]| The unstruck melody of the sound current resounds. ||1]|
Had TH Aus AY ue | (629-1, Aefs, He 5) santahu raam japat sukh paa-i-aa. O Saints, meditating on the Lord, we obtain peace.
AS mAatS FA AY Aon Aas oy fretfenr nai TIS i (629-2, Hats, we 5)
sant asthaan basay sukh sehjay saglay dookh mitaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the home of the Saints, celestial peace is pervading; all pain and suffering is dispelled. ||1]]Pause| |
Gs ud at arat il (629-2, Fafe, nH 5) gur pooray kee banee. The Word of the Perfect Guru's Bani
UTSYTH HS Brat Il (629-3, Hafs, us 5) paarbarahm man bhaanee. is pleasing to the Mind of the Supreme Lord God.
Soa VTA Turat Il (629-3, Aafs, He 5) naanak daas vakhaanee. Slave Nanak speaks
fSSHS MAT ATSt WNACUCI (629-3, Fafs, H3 5)
nirmal akath kahaanee. ||2||18]|82| | the Unspoken, immaculate sermon of the Lord. ||2]|18]|82]|
Hafe HIS U Il (629-4)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Se WES HA H MTS Il (629-4, Fale, os 5) bhookhay khaavat laaj na aavai. The hungry man is not ashamed to eat.
f3@ ofa Ho dfs TE We NA (629-4, Fafs, v2 5) ti-o har jan har gun gaavai. ||1]| Just so, the humble servant of the Lord sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
MUS aH AG fas niwarent Il (629-4, Fats, He 5) apnay kaaj ka-o ki-o alkaa-ee-ai. Why are you so lazy in your own affairs?
fag fiefs aad HY SAS Ae Ae AY UTED I TIS Il 629-5, Fafo, ws 5)
jit simran dargeh mukh oojal sadaa sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remembering Him in meditation, your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord; you shall find peace, forever and ever. ||1||Pause| |
fa@ anit arf war] Il (629-5, Hats, He 5) ji-o kaamee kaam lubhaavai. Just as the lustful man is enticed by lust,
f3@ afs oA fs AA SS INQI (629-6, Fafs, He 5) ti-o har daas har jas bhaavai. ||2|| so is the Lord's slave pleased with the Lord's Praise. ||2| |
fa nat ais Busts Il (629-6, Aafs, He 5) ji-o maataa baal laptaavai. Just as the mother holds her baby close,
f3@ famrat oH AHS ISI (629-6, Fats, He 5) ti-o gi-caanee naam kamaavai. ||3]|| so does the spiritual person cherish the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
TT ys S UTS Il (629-7, Fale, 2 5) gur pooray tay paavai. This is obtained from the Perfect Guru.
HS BSA OH fore sieicsil (629-7, Fafs, ne 5)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aavai. ||4||19]|83]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|19]|83]|
Rafe Hos U Il (629-7)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
AY Alife wig witfenr || (629-8, Fats, He 5) sukh saad ghar aa-i-aa. Safe and sound, I have returned home.
feea a Hf atfemr Il (629-8, Hafs, 2 5) nindak kai mukh chhaa-i-aa. The slanderer's face is blackened with ashes.
ud afs ufsarenr il (629-8, Fafs, 42 5) poorai gur pehraa-i-aa. The Perfect Guru has dressed in robes of honor.
faon eu Aafent All (629-8, Fafs, u2 5) binsay dukh sabaa-i-aa. ||1]| All my pains and sufferings are over. ||1]|
Hag Ard at efanret | (629-9, Fats, He 5) santahu saachay kee vadi-aa-ee. O Saints, this is the glorious greatness of the True Lord.
fafe mradn AS garTet Al FIG Il (629-9, Fats, He 5) jin achraj sobh banaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He has created such wonder and glory! ||1||Pause| |
38 Afoa & ss Il (629-9, Fels, He 5) bolay saahib kai bhaanai. I speak according to the Will of my Lord and Master.
SH eat YIN SUS Il (629-10, Aafs, Hs 5) daas banee barahm vakhaanai. God's slave chants the Word of His Bani.
SSA YS AYeTeT Il (629-10, Hafs, ws 5) naanak parabh sukh-daa-ee. O Nanak, God is the Giver of peace.
fafe ust Fes TSTEt NQUNONCSI (629-10, Fafs, H2 5)
jin pooree banat banaa-ee. ||2||20||84|| He has created the perfect creation. ||2]|20||84| |
Rafe HIS U Il (629-11)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
us muat fee fore iI (629-11, Hats, He 5) parabh apunaa ridai Dhi-aa-ay. Within my heart, I meditate on God.
wa Adt Aes wre Il (629-11, Fats, 42 5)
ghar sahee salaamat aa-ay. I have returned home safe and sound.
Hay sfeur HATS Il (629-11, Aafs, v2 5) santokh bha-i-aa sansaaray. The world has become contented.
as us S IS WAU (629-12, Fats, we 5) gur poorai lai taaray. ||1]| The Perfect Guru has saved me. ||1]|
H3g us Ha Aer efenter | (629-12, Fale, us 5) santahu parabh mayraa sadaa da-i-aalaa. O Saints, my God is forever merciful.
WUS TAs at Tes B TSet Ia gH TUS Ul TIE il (629-12, Fale, ve 5)
apnay bhagat kee ganat na gan-ee raakhai baal gupaalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord of the world does not call His devotee to account; He protects His children. ||1]|Pause| |
ofa on foe Sf ad Il (629-13, Aas, H2 5) har naam ridai ur Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Lord's Name within my heart.
fafs AS Ga Aes Il (629-13, Aafs, He 5) tin sabhay thok savaaray. He has resolved all my affairs.
afs us 3fh Sur i (29-13, Fats, we 5) gur poorai tus dee-aa. The Perfect Guru was pleased, and blessed me,
fefs area Su Short NIANVUICUIl (629-14, Fafs, He 5)
fir naanak dookh na thee-aa. ||2]|21]|85]| and now, Nanak shall never again suffer pain. ||2||21||85| |
Rafe Has U Il (629-14)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
afa ufs sfs efamr Het I (629-14, Fats, He 5) har man tan vasi-aa so-ee. The Lord abides in my mind and body.
A A OT Ad AF Ae Il (629-15, Hats, ne 5) jai jai kaar karay sabh ko-ee. Everyone congratulates me on my victory.
Gs ud at Sfsnret il (629-15, Fafs, v2 5) gur pooray kee vadi-aa-ee. This is the glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru.
a at abafs at & ATT IAI (629-15, Hats, He 5)
taa kee keemat kahee na jaa-ee. ||1]| His value cannot be described. ||1||
IG agag Wet 3g aS Il (629-15, Aafs, H2 5) ha-o kurbaan jaa-ee tayray naavai. I am a Sacrifice to Your Name.
fan 6 auth Sfo He flmrd A AA Sa Te NA TIS Il (629-16, Aafs, v2 5) jis no bakhas laihi mayray pi-aaray so jas tayraa gaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone, whom You have forgiven, O my Beloved, sings Your Praises. ||1||Pause||
3 as HMA Aa Il (629-16, als, He 5) too” bhaaro su-aamee mayraa. You are my Great Lord and Master.
Hat SgSTAT ST Il (629-17, Fats, He 5) jantaa’ bharvaasaa tayraa. You are the support of the Saints.
SSA YS APSE Il (629-17, Hale, ue 5) naanak parabh sarnaa-ee. Nanak has entered God's Sanctuary.
Hf fSex SX SET NQANQUCEN (629-17, Fats, He 5)
mukh nindak kai chhaa-ee. ||2||22||86|| The faces of the slanderers are blackened with ashes. ||2||22]||86| |
Rafe HIS U Il (629-18)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Mid HY HS HIST Il (629-18, ats, He 5) aagai sukh mayray meetaa. Peace in this world, O my friends,
ue mitoe yfs atSt Il (629-18, Hafs, us 5) paachhay aanad parabh keetaa. and bliss in the world hereafter - God has given me this.
UuSHAts Fes FEret Il (629-18, Aafs, us 5) parmaysur banat banaa-ee. The Transcendent Lord has arranged these arrangements;
fefs SHS ASJ Jat AU (629-18, Fafs, Hz 5) fir dolat kathoo naahee. ||1|| I shall never waver again. ||1||
Ars Atos FAG Ho HfonI II (629-19, Fafs, He 5) saachay saahib si-o man maani-aa. My mind is pleased with the True Lord Master.
dfs naa fadats wfonr all Fas Il (629-19, Fats, nz 5) har sarab nirantar jaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I know the Lord to be pervading all. ||1]|Pause| |
Ua E30
AS Aba 3a elena Il (630-1, Aafs, He 5) sabh jee-a tayray da-i-aalaa. All beings are Yours, O Merciful Lord.
MUS SIs Asta yfsurer il (630-1, Hafs, ue 5) apnay bhagat karahi partipaalaa. You cherish Your devotees.
mMadH Sat Sfanret i (630-1, af, v3 5) achraj tayree vadi-aa-ee. Your glorious greatness is wonderful and marvellous.
fos SSA BH foMrest MAUIBICIIN (630-1, Fafs, Hz 5)
nit naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||2||23]|87]| Nanak ever meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|23||87]|
Hafe HIS U Il (630-2)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
ofe Sates AS Il (630-2, Aafs, He 5) naal naraa-in mayrai. The Lord is always with me.
FHES 3 TS BT Il (630-2, Fats, we 5) jamdoot na aavai nayrai. The Messenger of Death does not approach me.
afs ofe ys Ie Il (630-3, Hafs, He 5) kanth laa-ay parabh raakhai. God holds me close in His embrace, and protects me.
Afsag ot AT APY IU (630-3, Hafs, He 5) satgur kee sach saakhai. ||1] | True are the Teachings of the True Guru. ||1]|
afs ys ust atst I (630-3, Hafs, Hs 5) gur poorai pooree keetee. The Perfect Guru has done it perfectly.
AHo Hf feats AAS SA AG AHS SASt IAI TIS Il (630-3, Fafs, He 5)
dusman maar vidaaray saglay daas ka-o sumat deetee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He has beaten and driven off my enemies, and given me, His slave, the sublime understanding of the neutral mind. ||1]|Pause] |
yfs Aa BS FATE Il (630-4, Aafs, ue 5) parabh saglay thaan vasaa-ay. God has blessed all places with prosperity.
Afy Arf fefe mire Il (630-4, Fafs, He 5) sukh saad fir aa-ay. I have returned again safe and sound.
SSA US ATES Il (630-5, Hale, ue 5) naanak parabh sarnaa-ay. Nanak has entered God's Sanctuary.
fafs Aas dar fevS NQNQSICCI (630-5, Aafs, He 5) jin saglay rog mitaa-ay. ||2||24||88]| It has eradicated all disease. ||2||24]|88] |
Hafs HIS U Il (630-5)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Hee Aa at erst Afsag St at AaSt UTM Il (630-5, Fale, He 5) sarab sukhaa kaa daataa satgur taa kee sarnee paa-ee-ai. The True Guru is the Giver of all peace and comfort - seek His Sanctuary.
IAG FSS IS MST Vy afenr als TEMA Al (630-6, Fats, we 5)
darsan bhaytat hot anandaa dookh ga-i-aa har gaa-ee-ai. ||1||
Beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, bliss ensues, pain is dispelled, and one sings the Lord's Praises. ||1||
dfs 3A uted Stet Il (630-7, af, He 5) har ras peevhu bhaa-ee. Drink in the sublime essence of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
oy HU oH oraag Te us at Asaret il TIS il (630-7, Hale, ws 5)
naam japahu naamo aaraaDhahu gur pooray kee sarnaa-ee. rahaa-o.
Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; worship the Naam in adoration, and enter the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru. ||Pause] |
feta uavufs fra ofe feftimr Aet uss Set I 30-7, afs, Hs 5)
tiseh paraapat jis Dhur likhi-aa so-ee pooran bhaa-ee.
Only one who has such pre-ordained destiny receives it; he alone becomes perfect, O Siblings of Destiny.
soa at Sst us At oth ga fos Bet NQNQUIITEN (630-8, Fafs, He 5)
naanak kee baynantee parabh jee naam rahaa liv laa-ee. ||2||25||89|| Nanak's prayer, O Dear God, is to remain lovingly absorbed in the Naam. ||2]||25||89]|
Hafe HIS U Il (630-9)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
ade adee de nizarmt Ao wus at Is Il (630-9, Hafs, nH 5)
karan karaavan har antarjaamee jan apunay kee raakhai.
The Lord is the Cause of Causes, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; He preserves the honor of His servant.
AA ag IZ Aa Ssts AAG TI FA VA IAI (630-9, Hale, ws 5)
jai jai kaar hot jag bheetar sabad guroo ras chaakhai. ||1||
He is hailed and congratulated throughout the world, and he tastes the sublime essence of the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
ys Ft Sat Ge TAT II (630-10, Fafs, He 5) parabh jee tayree ot gusaa-ee. Dear God, Lord of the world, You are my only support.
3 ANGE Asls a rst mS uss SH fiomret 1 TIS Il (630-10, Fafs, ve 5)
too samrath saran kaa daataa aath pahar tum" Dhi-aa-ee. rahaa-o.
You are all-powerful, the Giver of Sanctuary; twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on You. ||Pause] |
He SHO ad US So SA Hier ST Il (630-11, Fafs, He 5) jo jan bhajan karay parabh tayraa tisai andaysaa naahee. That humble being, who vibrates upon You, O God, is not afflicted by anxiety.
Asad sso oa 3G fufenr ae ase WE HS HTS NM (630-11, Fats, He 5)
satgur charan lagay bha-o miti-aa har gun gaa-ay man maahee. ||2||
Attached to the Feet of the True Guru, his fear is dispelled, and within his mind, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
AY dH wTSe wsd Afsas chor fewrAr il (630-12, Hats, we 5) sookh sahj aanand ghanayray satgur dee-aa dilaasaa. He abides in celestial peace and utter ecstasy; the True Guru has comforted him.
fafe ufs wre Aart ASt yas Tet MMA BI (630-12, Hats, Hs 5) jin ghar aa-ay sobhaa saytee pooran ho-ee aasaa. ||3]| He has returned home victorious, with honor, and his hopes have been fulfilled. ||3] |
um ag udt fs aT at UTS YS A AMT Il (630-13, Fafo, v2 5) pooraa gur pooree mat jaa kee pooran parabh kay kaamaa. Perfect are the Teachings of the Perfect Guru; Perfect are the actions of God.
ad sat ota shee se Aa Af Sa Js Tis SH NSINENCON (630-14, Fats, H2 5)
gur charnee laag tari-o bhav saagar jap naanak har har naamaa. ||4||26]|90]| Grasping hold of the Guru's feet, Nanak has crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|26||90]|
Rafe Hae U Il (630-14)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
safe fascues de wu SH wm AS fafa art II (630-15, Hafs, Hz 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan aapay sabh biDh thaatee.
Becoming merciful, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor has Himself devised all devices.
fas His ofa BE AG wySt TT us Bat aret Al 30-15, Fafs, Hz 5)
khin meh raakh lee-o jan apunaa gur poorai bayrhee kaatee. ||1]||
In an instant, He has saved His humble servant; the Perfect Guru has cut away his bonds. ||1]|
He Ho Ts afee Ae fom I 30-16, Fats, He 5) mayray man gur govind sad Dhi-aa-ee-ai. O my mind, meditate forever on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
Has aOn fuefs fen 3a 3 He fefeur ee ureht 11 TIC Il (630-16, Aafs, v2 5)
Sagal kalays miteh is tan tay man chindi-aa fal paa-ee-ai. rahaa-o.
All illness shall depart from this body, and you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||Pause] |
ht a3 AT a Afs ate Ys Set wa Rural (630-17, Fafe, we 5) jee-a jant jaa kay sabh keenay parabh oochaa agam apaaraa. God created all beings and creatures; He is lofty, inaccessible and infinite.
AGHA Soa SH foorfeur ya CAS se IAS WINOICAUI (630-17, Fale, ws 5) saaDhsang naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa mukh oojal bha-ay darbaaraa. ||2||27||91]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; his face is radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||2||27]|91]|
Rafe Has U Il (630-18)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
fina nruar Aret Il (630-18, Fafs, He 5) simra-o apunaa saa‘-ee. I meditate in remembrance on my Lord.
feon dfo ne fimet Il (630-19, Fats, He 5) dinas rain sad Dhi-aa-ee. Day and night, I ever meditate on Him.
oa efe fafs ae Il (630-19, Aafs, He 5) haath day-ay jin raakhay. He gave me His hand, and protected me.
dfs SH HI FA BY INAll (630-19, Aafs, He 5) har naam mahaa ras chaakhay. ||1]|| I drink in the most sublime essence of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Yat €34
mud Td Gufs AAG Il (631-1, Fafo, wu 5) apnay gur oopar kurbaan. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru.
se faxsus uss ys US Hh Je fhagers il TIS I (631-1, Fels, we 5)
bha-ay kirpaal pooran parabh daatay jee-a ho-ay miharvaan. rahaa-o.
God, the Great Giver, the Perfect One, has become merciful to me, and now, all are kind to me. ||Pause| |
SOA AS ATS ET Il (631-1, af, ue 5) naanak jan sarnaa-ee. Servant Nanak has entered His Sanctuary.
fats use UA Tue I (631-2, Fefs, Hs 5) jin pooran paij rakhaa-ee. He has perfectly preserved his honor.
Aas wa feet il (631-2, Fats, w2 5) saglay dookh mitaa-ee. All suffering has been dispelled.
HY Sag AF TS NQWVCIEI (631-2, Fats, ns 5) sukh bhunchahu mayray bhaa-ee. ||2||28]|92]| So enjoy peace, O my Siblings of Destiny! ||2]|28]|92]|
Rafe Has U Il (631-3)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
Hod faast oad AS Aba HST SI OS Il 631-3, Aafe, ne 5) sunhu binantee thaakur mayray jee-a jant tayray Dhaaray. Hear my prayer, O my Lord and Master; all beings and creatures were created by You.
TY UA OH nUS at ATS AT SHIT NAUl (631-3, Aals, ws 5) raakh paij naam apunay kee karan karaavanhaaray. ||1]| You preserve the honor of Your Name, O Lord, Cause of causes. ||1] |
ys AG wAHTAT ate fimid Il (631-4, afs, He 5) parabh jee-o khasmaanaa kar pi-aaray. O Dear God, Beloved, please, make me Your own.
Yd 3G TH AS Il FIC Il (631-4, Aafs, us 5) buray bhalay ham thaaray. rahaa-o. Whether good or bad, I am Yours. ||Pause| |
Hat yard ANTE AMM sae afte Aes Il (631-4, Fafs, ns 5)
sunee pukaar samrath su-aamee banDhan kaat savaaray.
The Almighty Lord and Master heard my prayer; cutting away my bonds, He has adorned me.
ufofs fraur@ Aga AS HS SSA YAS UTS IQAUACUCSI (631-5, Fas, ws 5)
pahir sirpaa-o sayvak jan maylay naanak pargat pahaaray. ||2||29]|93]|
He dressed me in robes of honor, and blended His servant with Himself; Nanak is revealed in glory throughout the world. ||2||29||93]|
Rafe Hos U Il (631-6)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
dba Ha Afs ef afs eS Aza Afs wears Il (631-6, Fats, He 5) jee-a jant sabh vas kar deenay sayvak sabh darbaaray. All beings and creatures are subservient to all those who serve in the Lord's Court.
niatarg aS ys mus sz fafa ufs Bsrs Ail (31-6, Fats, He 5) angeekaar kee-o parabh apunay bhav niDh paar utaaray. ||1] | Their God made them His own, and carried them across the terrifying world-ocean.
[21
H36 & AGH Ads Aes Il (631-7, Aafs, u3 5) santan kay kaaraj sagal savaaray. He resolves all the affairs of His Saints.
do tens feu feu fafa use WAH DHS Il TIS Il (631-7, Fafo, v2 5)
deen da-i-aal kirpaal kirpaa niDh pooran khasam hamaaray. rahaa-o.
He is merciful to the meek, kind and compassionate, the ocean of kindness, my Perfect Lord and Master. | |Pause] |
mig FS utes AS wet Ca o AST IST Il (631-8, Aafs, 3 5) aa-o baith aadar sabh thaa-ee oon na katahoo" baataa. I am asked to come and be seated, everywhere I go, and I lack nothing.
sats frarG AS AS nus YSU FSA YS AST IQAUSONCSI (31-9, Fats, He 5)
bhagat sirpaa-o dee-o jan apunay partaap naanak parabh jaataa. ||2||30||94||
The Lord blesses His humble devotee with robes of honor; O Nanak, the Glory of God is manifest. ||2]|30]|94]|
Rafe Hoe *€ (631-10)
sorath mehlaa 9 Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
qe Afsaa ure II (631-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 Ho TH fAC ats ifs I (631-11, Fafs, ws 9) ray man raam si-o kar pareet. O mind, love the Lord.
Azo afi ae Hee wig WE aA aS ai FaE Il (631-11, Aafs, ne 9)
sarvan gobind gun sun-o ar gaa-o rasnaa geet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With your ears, hear the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and with your tongue, sing His song. ||1]||Pause| |
afa AaHafs fang HO dfs ufss uals Il (631-11, Rats, He 9)
kar saaDhsangat simar maaDho hohi patit puneet.
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meditate in remembrance on the Lord; even a sinner like yourself will become pure.
ane fame fa ufo 38 He uns HIS IAI (631-12, Fefs, He 9) kaal bi-aal ji-o pari-o dolai mukh pasaaray meet. ||1]| Death is on the prowl, with its mouth wide open, friend. ||1]|
nia of efe Sfo afk 3 ANfS gue dH II (631-13, Fafs, ne 9)
aaj kaal fun tohi garas hai samajh raakha-o cheet.
Today or tomorrow, eventually it will seize you; understand this in your consciousness.
ad aoa TH Sfa B WS MBA MS NIA (631-13, Aafs, Hs 9)
kahai naanak raam bhaj lai jaat a-osar beet. ||2||1]|
Says Nanak, meditate, and vibrate upon the Lord; this opportunity is slipping away! [21121]
Rafe Hoar € Il (631-14)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Ho at He dt ufo aot Il (631-14, Aafs, He 9) man kee man hee maahi rahee. The mind remains in the mind.
o df sn 6 Stee AS Vet ats at NAN TIE Il (631-14, Fats, 2 9)
naa har bhajay na tirath sayvay chotee kaal gahee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He does not meditate on the Lord, nor does he perform service at sacred shrines, and so death seizes him by the hair. ||1]|Pause] |
ag HS us va Huts Us yds AS Hat Il 31-15, Fafs, Hs 9) daaraa meet poot rath sampat Dhan pooran sabh mahee. Wife, friends, children, carriages, property, total wealth, the entire world
nied Aare fixffor & wee SHO TH A Adt IA (31-15, Fats, He 9) avar Sagal mithi-aa ay jaan-o bhajan raam ko sahee. ||1]| - know that all of these things are false. The Lord's meditation alone is true. ||1]|
fess fess so3 Fa Tt HOA VT GT Il (631-16, Fafs, Hs 9)
firat firat bahutay jug haari-o maanas dayh lahee.
Wandering, wandering around for so many ages, he has grown weary, and finally, he obtained this human body.
Soa Ads fees at adr fAnss AT odt IQ (631-16, Aafs, He 9)
naanak kahat milan kee baree-aa simrat kahaa nahee. ||2||2|| Says Nanak, this is the opportunity to meet the Lord; why don't you remember Him in meditation? ||2]||2||
Rafe Hae € Il (631-17)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Ho J ABS AHS SF Beat Il 631-17, Fafs, ws 9) man ray ka-un kumat tai leenee. O mind, what evil-mindedness have you developed?
ug aa fSfenr oA sfeG aH sats afs atat al Fa Il (631-17, Fats, nz 9)
par daaraa nindi-aa ras rachi-o raam bhagat neh keenee. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are engrossed in the pleasures of other men's wives, and slander; you have not worshipped the Lord at all. ||1||Pause] |
Hafs ue wfeG 3 oufs us Hee AG Ofemr Il (631-18, Aafs, He 9) mukat panth jaani-o tai naahan Dhan joran ka-o Dhaa-i-aa. You do not know the way to liberation, but you run all around chasing wealth.
ust E82 nifs Hat arg Sot ctor fase wiry sorfenr Wail (632-1, Fats, wu 9)
ant sang kaahoo nahee deenaa birthaa aap banDhaa-i-aa. ||1]| In the end, nothing shall go along with you; you have entrapped yourself in vain. ||1]|
a ofa SHG 6 dd AS Ales dd CufAG ae famrar Il (632-1, Fats, He 9)
naa har bhaji-o na gur jan sayvi-o nah upji-o kachh gi-aanaa.
You have not meditated or vibrated upon the Lord; you have not served the Guru, or His humble servants; spiritual wisdom has not welled up within you.
we dt ufs fedne 3d 3 dHSs Cfenrar 211 (632-2, Hafs, ne 9)
ghat hee maahi niranjan tayrai tai khojat udi-aanaa. ||2||
The Immaculate Lord is within your heart, and yet you search for Him in the wilderness. ||2| |
ads HOH saHS 3 The wmfag fs odt uret Il (632-2, Hafs, nH 9)
bahut janam bharmat tai haari-o asthir mat nahee paa-ee.
You have wandered through many many births; you are exhausted but have still not found a way out of this endless cycle.
HOA Ud ue ue dle SH BSA AS FSET III (632-3, Fats, He 9)
maanas dayh paa-ay pad har bhaj naanak baat bataa-ee. ||3||3]| Now that you have obtained this human body, meditate on the Lord's Feet; Nanak advises with this advice. ||3]||3||
Rafe Hae € Il (632-4)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
HS 3 us at Hale fess il (632-4, Fafs, ue 9) man ray parabh kee saran bichaaro. O mind, contemplate the Sanctuary of God.
fad fanss doo At Gudt a at AA Ba os NAN TIS Il (632-4, Fafs, ne 9)
jih simrat gankaa see uDhree taa ko jas ur Dhaaro. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating on Him in remembrance, Ganika the prostitute was saved; enshrine His Praises within your heart. ||1||Pause]|
nies Stes ot Ww a fintafe vig fess ue urfemr I (632-5, Fats, He 9)
atal bha-i-o Dharoo-a jaa kai simran ar nirbhai pad paa-i-aa.
Meditating on Him in remembrance, Dhroo became immortal, and obtained the state of fearlessness.
eu gest fea fafa & Homi 3 ard farefeor al (632-5, Aefs, He 9) dukh hartaa ih biDh ko su-aamee tai kaahay bisraa-i-aa. ||1]| The Lord and Master removes suffering in this way - why have you forgotten Him?
[21
ma dt Aste at fase fafa a aad S eT Il (632-6, Fale, v2 9)
jab hee saran gahee kirpaa niDh gaj garaah tay chhootaa.
As soon as the elephant took to the protective Sanctuary of the Lord, the ocean of mercy, he escaped from the crocodile.
HOH BH AT BS as TH ass sas f3T FST iil (632-7, Fafs, ns 9)
mahmaa naam kahaa la-o barna-o raam kahat banDhan tih tootaa. ||2]|
How much can I describe the Glorious Praises of the Naam? Whoever chants the Lord's Name, his bonds are broken. ||2||
MATHS UTdt Aa AS feHy HT fSeASTS Il (632-7, Aafs, He 9) ajaamal paapee jag jaanay nimakh maahi nistaaraa. Ajaamal, known throughout the world as a sinner, was redeemed in an instant.
Sod aS Vs fsanis 3 st Csafs urs SII (32-8, Fafs, He 9)
naanak kahat chayt chintaaman tai bhee utreh paaraa. ||3||4||
Says Nanak, remember the Chintaamani, the jewel which fulfills all desires, and you too shall be carried across and saved. ||3||4] |
Rafe Hager € Il (632-8)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
urat aBe Bure ad Il (632-9, Aafs, ue 9) paraanee ka-un upaa-o karai. What efforts should the mortal make,
W 3 safs oH at ue FH IH TP NU TIC I 632-9, Fafs, Hs 9) jaa tay bhagat raam kee paavai jam ko taraas harai. ||1|| rahaa-o. to attain devotional worship of the Lord, and eradicate the fear of death? ||1||Pause] |
age aH fafeor ag ant usH ABs efs ATE II (632-9, Hats, He 9)
ka-un karam bidi-aa kaho kaisee Dharam ka-un fun kar-ee.
Which actions, what sort of knowledge, and what religion - what Dharma should one practice?
aCe oH ad wa fhud se Aa AE saet IU (632-10, Fats, He 9)
ka-un naam gur jaa kai simrai bhav saagar ka-o tar-ee. ||1]|
What Name of the Guru should one remember in meditation, to cross over the terrifying world-ocean? ||1]|
ae H fa ay faar fafa ats AU afs ures I (632-11, Fafs, v2 9)
kal mai ayk naam kirpaa niDh jaahi japai gat paavai.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Name of the One Lord is the treasure of mercy; chanting it, one obtains salvation.
m@g UdH 3 a AH ordfe fea fafa Se gsr] NN (632-11, Fafs, ne 9) a-or Dharam taa kai sam naahan ih biDh bayd bataavai. ||2|| No other religion is comparable to this; so speak the Vedas. ||2||
HY ey dds Ae faseut A a AIS TATE Il (632-12, Aafs, v2 9)
sukh dukh rahat sadaa nirlaypee jaa ka-o kahat gusaa-ee. He is beyond pain and pleasure, forever unattached; He is called the Lord of the world.
A 3H dt ufo sa fodats soa voufs fonret SiUll (632-12, Aafs, He 9) so tum hee meh basai nirantar naanak darpan ni-aa-ee. ||3]|5|| He dwells deep within your inner self, O Nanak, like the image in a mirror. ||3]|5||
Rafe Hoe € Il (632-13)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Het H fats fafa su TATET II (632-13, Aafs, H2 9) maa-ee mai kihi biDh lakha-o gusaa-ee. O mother, how can I see the Lord of the world?
Ho Ho uifamrfs fsufs H He sfoS Casret a TIS Il (632-13, Fafs, 2 9)
mahaa moh agi-aan timar mo man rahi-o urjhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the utter darkness of emotional attachment and spiritual ignorance, my mind remains entangled. ||1||Pause] |
Hdl® HSH SdH dt SdH MEG ag mAfag HFS uret Il (632-14, Aafs, v2 9) Sagal janam bharam hee bharam kho-i-o nah asthir mat paa-ee. Deluded by doubt, I have wasted my whole life; I have not obtained a stable intellect.
fattiernas sfoS for rAd od Sct MOET IAI (632-15, Fafe, He 9)
bikhi-aaskat rahi-o nis baasur nah chhootee aDhmaa-ee. ||1]|
I remain under the influence of corrupting sins, night and day, and I have not renounced wickedness. ||1]|
HUA Fad Set ater od ates ys get Il 632-15, Fale, ne 9)
saaDhsang kabhoo nahee keenaa nah keerat parabh gaa-ee.
I never joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and I did not sing the Kirtan of God's Praises.
Ws ssa H ots aS TS The SI AIaret WUEM (632-16, Aafs, Hs 9) jan naanak mai naahi ko-oo gun raakh layho sarnaa-ee. ||2||6]| O servant Nanak, I have no virtues at all; keep me in Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||2||6||
Rafe Hae € Il (632-17)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Het Ho He Sf ats Il (632-17, Fats, He 9) maa-ee man mayro bas naahi. O mother, my mind is out of control.
fon aad fairs a oes fats fafa da sfs nan gor Il (632-17, Fats, ne 9) nis baasur bikhi-an ka-o Dhaavat kihi biDh roka-o taahi. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Night and day, it runs after sin and corruption. How can I restrain it? ||1]|Pause] |
ae use frfyfs & Hs vfs fone o te SAS II (632-18, Fafs, Hs 9)
bayd puraan simrit kay mat sun nimakh na hee-ay basaavai.
He listens to the teachings of the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, but he does not enshrine them in his heart, even for an instant.
ud us ud ae fh ofeS fase HoH fas IAI (632-18, Fats, He 9) par Dhan par daaraa si-o rachi-o birthaa janam siraavai. ||1]| Engrossed in the wealth and women of others, his life passes away uselessly. ||1] |
Hfe ufeor & sfeS wed ASS od ae farrar Il (632-19, Fats, ue 9)
mad maa-i-aa kai bha-i-o baavro soojhat nah kachh gi-aanaa.
He has gone insane with the wine of Maya, and does not understand even a bit of spiritual wisdom.
we dt stafs ans fadHo Sto HAH B ATS MQM! (632-19, Aafs, He 9) ghat hee bheetar basat niranjan taa ko maram na jaanaa. ||2|| Deep within his heart, the Immaculate Lord dwells, but he does not know this secret.
21 |
Uuar 33 wa dt Aafe ATG at wre wants Aare faaret Il 633-1, Fats, nz 9)
jab hee saran saaDh kee aa-i-o durmat sagal binaasee. When I came to the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints, all my evil-mindedness was dispelled.
3a soa vise fesnis act AN at SH SIDI (633-2, Rafts, 43 9)
tab naanak chayti-o chintaaman kaatee jam kee faasee. ||3]|7]|| Then, O Nanak, I remembered the Chintaamani, the jewel which fulfills all desires, and the noose of Death was snapped. ||3]|7||
Rafe Hae € Il (633-2)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
J od fea Ast ba ofs I (633-2, Aafs, He 9) ray nar ih saachee jee-a Dhaar. O man, grasp this Truth firmly in your soul.
Ad® Ads J AA AUS fHSnS BAS 5 AST NA TIC Il (633-3, Fels, He 9) Sagal jagat hai jaisay supnaa binsat lagat na baar. ||1]| rahaa-o. The whole world is just like a dream; it will pass away in an instant. ||1]||Pause] |
ag ifs aaret afe ufe gos adt fea ote II (633-3, Hafs, nH 9)
baaroo bheet banaa-ee rach pach rahat nahee din chaar.
Like a wall of sand, built up and plastered with great care, which does not last even a few days,
3A dt fea qu wieor & BafSG aa TST NA (633-4, Fats, He 9) taisay hee ih sukh maa-i-aa kay urjhi-o kahaa gavaar. ||1|| just so are the pleasures of Maya. Why are you entangled in them, you ignorant fool?
[21] wing AHS as faafsS ofate sft 8 oH HIS Il (633-5, Hafs, Hs 9)
ajhoo samajh kachh bigri-o naahin bhaj lay naam muraar. Understand this today - it is not yet too late! Chant and vibrate the Name of the Lord.
ad aed for ns AUS as ates Sfo uate NICH (633-5, Aafs, Hs 9) kaho naanak nij mat saaDhan ka-o bhaakhi-o tohi pukaar. ||2||8]||
Says Nanak, this is the subtle wisdom of the Holy Saints, which I proclaim out loud to you. ||2||8]|
Hafse Hoar € Il (633-6) sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
fea afar vts 3 SfuS det i (633-6, afs, ne 9) ih jag meet na daykhi-o ko-ee. In this world, I have not found any true friend.
Ags was wus Af ofa eu Hf Afa o Tet ual TIE il 33-6, Fale, He 9)
Sagal jagat apnai sukh laagi-o dukh mai sang na ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The whole world is attached to its own pleasures, and when trouble comes, no one is with you. ||1||Pause]|
ag HIS us Host Aad Uo AE ara Il (633-7, Fats, H2 9) daaraa meet poot sanbanDhee sagray Dhan si-o laagay. Wives, friends, children and relatives - all are attached to wealth.
va dt fssae ef og aB Ha ats AS sa INU (633-7, Fats, He 9) jab hee nirDhan daykhi-o nar ka-o sang chhaad sabh bhaagay. ||1|| When they see a poor man, they all forsake his company and run away. ||1||
ae as fimr He as a@ fea fA ST BarfEG Il (633-8, Fale, ue 9) kahoo™ kahaa yi-aa man ba-uray ka-o in si-o nayhu lagaa-i-o. So what should I say to this crazy mind, which is affectionately attached to them?
dla oa Hae S SHo AA ST a fanatES i121 (633-9, Fats, 2 9)
deenaa naath sakal bhai bhanjan jas taa ko bisraa-i-o. ||2]|
The Lord is the Master of the meek, the Destroyer of all fears, and I have forgotten to praise Him. ||2||
Hore us fA sfeS 3 Aug ATT ASS H ata Il (633-9, Fats, we 9)
su-aan poochh ji-o bha-i-o na sooDha-o bahut jatan mai keen-o.
Like a dog's tail, which will never straighten out, the mind will not change, no matter how many things are tried.
Soa OH fase at TUT SH SIGS BOSE ISIC 633-10, Fafs, 2 9) naanak laaj birad kee raakho naam tuhaara-o leen-o. ||3||9||
Says Nanak, please, Lord, uphold the honor of Your innate nature; I chant Your Name. |[3][9]|
Rafe Hae € Il (633-11)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Ho 3 afes & TT SueHw Il 633-11, Aafs, nz 9) man ray gahi-o na gur updays. O mind, you have not accepted the Guru's Teachings.
as sf n@ us Hates sae ats SA NAN TIE I (633-11, Fats, He 9)
kahaa bha-i-o ja-o mood mudaa-i-o bhagva-o keeno bhays. ||1|| rahaa-o. What is the use of shaving your head, and wearing saffron robes? ||1||Pause] |
We ets at 3od ofas ASH uaa” HES Il (633-12, Fafs, Hs 9) saach chhaad kai jhoothah laagi-o janam akaarath kho-i-o. Abandoning Truth, you cling to falsehood; your life is uselessly wasting away.
afa uss Gea for ufuS un at fonret AEE Wail (33-12, Aafs, H2 9) kar parpanch udar nij pokhi-o pas kee ni-aa-ee so-i-o. ||1|| Practicing hypocrisy, you fill your belly, and then sleep like an animal. ||1]|
TH SHO at afs Sot At Hem ae fas Il (633-13, Aafs, He 9)
raam bhajan kee gat nahee jaanee maa-i-aa haath bikaanaa.
You do not know the Way of the Lord's meditation; you have sold yourself into Maya's hands.
Cafs sfuS faftions Af aGa ou aso faAaar IQ (633-13, Fafs, Hs 9)
urajh rahi-o bikhi-an sang ba-uraa naam ratan bisraanaa. ||2||
The madman remains entangled in vice and corruption; he has forgotten the jewel of the Naam. ||2]|
aus oes 3 S36 afte faoa ma frravat Il (633-14, Fats, He 9)
rahi-o achayt na chayti-o gobind birthaa a-oDh siraanee.
He remains thoughtless, not thinking of the Lord of the Universe; his life is uselessly passing away.
aT aaa dg fase uses 38 Het ust NSIION (633-15, Aafe, He 9)
kaho naanak har birad pachhaana-o bhoolay sadaa paraanee. ||3||10]|
Says Nanak, O Lord, please, confirm your innate nature; this mortal is continually making mistakes. ||3]|10]|
Rafe Haar € Il (633-15)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
A Sd SUH VU Odt HS Il (633-15, Hale, He 9) jo nar dukh mai dukh nahee maanai. That man, who in the midst of pain, does not feel pain,
HY Add nig F dt A A Avs HST HTS NA TIS Il (633-16, afs, ne 9)
sukh sanayhu ar bhai nahee jaa kai kanchan maatee maanai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
who is not affected by pleasure, affection or fear, and who looks alike upon gold and dust;||1]|Pause| |
od féfeur oo Grafs wa Be HT mfr Il (633-16, Fefs, He 9)
nah nindi-aa nah ustat jaa kai lobh moh abhimaanaa.
Who is not swayed by either slander or praise, nor affected by greed, attachment or pride;
Jay Aa 3 ad fanra@ ofa ne wRUnTaT IAI (633-17, Fats, He 9) harakh sog tay rahai ni-aara-o naahi maan apmaanaa. ||1|| who remains unaffected by joy and sorrow, honor and dishonor; || 1] |
WITAT HOA! Hares fSurdt wal 3 Id feaAr Il (633-17, Aafs, ne 9) aasaa mansaa Sagal ti-aagai jag tay rahai niraasaa. who renounces all hopes and desires and remains desireless in the world;
am au fag usA orofe fsa we qoH fSeAT III (633-18, afs, He 9) kaam kroDh jih parsai naahan tih ghat barahm nivaasaa. ||2|| who is not touched by sexual desire or anger - within his heart, God dwells. ||2||
as fasu fag og a atot fsa fea wats ueErat Il (633-19, Fafs, n2 9) gur kirpaa jih nar ka-o keenee tih ih jugat pachhaanee. That man, blessed by Guru's Grace, understands this way.
Soa Bo ses afte fre fas ust Afar ust SUVA (633-19, Aafs, He 9) naanak leen bha-i-o gobind si-o ji-o paanee sang paanee. ||3]||11]| O Nanak, he merges with the Lord of the Universe, like water with water. ||3]|11]|
UST €3g
Rafe Haar € Il (634-1)
sorath mehlaa 9. Sorat'h, Ninth Mehl:
Utsu AG SI Ho Hd Il (634-1, Fafs, ws 9) pareetam jaan layho man maahee. O dear friend, know this in your mind.
wus AY AG ct Aa Ss & aT & ars AU TIS i (634-1, Fels, us 9) apnay sukh si-o hee jag faa‘Dhi-o ko kaahoo ko naahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The world is entangled in its own pleasures; no one is for anyone else. ||1]||Pause] |
AY H vite agg fife dos sas ug fetA wes II (634-2, Fafs, Hs 9) sukh mai aan bahut mil baithat rahat chahoo dis ghayrai. In good times, many come and sit together, surrounding you on all four sides.
faufs udt As ot Ha stss ABS yr]Ss SF AI (634-3, Fafs, we 9) bipat paree sabh hee sang chhaadit ko-oo na aavat nayrai. ||1]| But when hard times come, they all leave, and no one comes near you. ||1]|
we at afs ass fos a fA HET JIS Ha wait Il 634-3, Fafs, nz 9) ghar kee naar bahut hit jaa si-o sadaa rahat sang laagee. Your wife, whom you love so much, and who has remained ever attached to you,
wa dt dA set feo atfeur Us Us af seit QI (634-4, Hafs, He 9) jab hee hans tajee ih kaa‘-i-aa parayt parayt kar bhaagee. ||2|| runs away crying, "Ghost! Ghost!", as soon as the swan-soul leaves this body. ||2| |
fea fafa a faGorg afe 3 wt fAG So BATES II (634-4, Fats, v2 9) ih biDh ko bi-uhaar bani-o hai jaa si-o nayhu lagaa-i-o. This is the way they act - those whom we love so much.
nis ae aoa fag ofa At AS ahh & mrfES NSUIVNISE ll (634-5, Fas, we 9)
ant baar naanak bin har jee ko-oo kaam na aa-i-o. ||3]|12||139]| At the very last moment, O Nanak, no one is any use at all, except the Dear Lord. [|3]12]]139]|
Hafs HIs 9 We 9 MAeudoT Besat (634-7) sorath mehlaa 1 ghar 1 asatpadee-aa cha-utukee Sorat'h, First Mehl, First House, Ashtapadees, Chau-Tukas:
qe Afsas yrrfe I (634-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
efam 3 us@ fa fas dg 3 uAS He HATE B FET II (634-8, Hafs, He
dubiDhaa na parha-o har bin hor na pooja-o marhai masaan na jaa-ee.
I am not torn by duality, because I do not worship any other than the Lord; I do not visit tombs or crematoriums.
fgAHo ofs 3 ud wis Ave fZAOT OTH ASTeT Il (634-8, Fafs, He 1)
tarisnaa raach na par ghar jaavaa tarisnaa naam bujhaa-ee.
I do not enter the houses of strangers, engrossed in desire. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, has satisfied my desires.
ud stats wg ag feufeur AofA TS HO Set II (634-9, Fafs, H2 1)
ghar bheetar ghar guroo dikhaa-i-aa sahj ratay man bhaa-ee.
Deep within my heart, the Guru has shown me the home of my being, and my mind is imbued with peace and poise, O Siblings of Destiny.
3 wry wer wig star 3 eeta ufs ATEt NA (634-9, Fats, He 1)
too aapay daanaa aapay beenaa too dayveh mat saa-ee. ||1]||
You Yourself are all-knowing, and You Yourself are all-seeing; You alone bestow intelligence, O Lord. ||1]|
HO Safa ase saat Aafe Ho Sftmr Act HEF II (634-10, Fafs, ne 1)
man bairaag rata-o bairaagee sabad man bayDhi-aa mayree maa-ee.
My mind is detached, imbued with detachment; the Word of the Shabad has pierced my mind, O my mother.
wists afs fodste set wre mrfza fh fos wet 1 Toe I 634-10, Aafs, He
antar jot nirantar banee saachay saahib si-o liv laa-ee. rahaa-o.
God's Light shines continually within the nucleus of my deepest self; I am lovingly attached to the Bani, the Word of the True Lord Master. ||Pause] |
WAY Saat Adfs Soa A saat fa wAH sv] Il (634-11, Fats, ne 1)
asa‘kh bairaagee kaheh bairaag so bairaagee je khasmai bhaavai.
Countless detached renunciates talk of detachment and renunciation, but he alone is a true renunciate, who is pleasing to the Lord Master.
fase Hafe Het Ss afer qa at avs AHS Il (634-12, Aefs, nz 1)
hirdai sabad sadaa bhai rachi-aa gur kee kaar kamaavai.
The Word of the Shabad is ever in his heart; he is absorbed in the Fear of God, and he works to serve the Guru.
Sa VS HOT o 38 Wey Sa IS Il (634-12, Halo, vs 1)
ayko chaytai manoo-aa na dolai Dhaavat varaj rahaavai.
He remembers the One Lord, his mind does not waver, and he restrains its wanderings.
Hon HST Het dfa Tat AS A TS We Ill (634-13, Fafs, ve 1)
sehjay maataa sadaa rang raataa saachay kay gun gaavai. ||2||
He is intoxicated with celestial bliss, and is ever imbued with the Lord's Love; he sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||2]|
Hoor ue fie Aas oth SA AY Set II (634-13, Fafs, Hs 1)
manoo-aa pa-un bind sukhvaasee naam vasai sukh bhaa-ee.
The mind is like the wind, but if it comes to rest in peace, even for an instant, then he shall abide in the peace of the Name, O Siblings of Destiny.
fre 33 AZ Afs ws Als gst sho Feet I (634-14, Fats, we
jinbaa naytar sotar sach raatay jal boojhee tujheh bujhaa-ee.
His tongue, eyes and ears are imbued with Truth; O Lord, You quench the fires of desire.
min foaH dd Saat for wife sSt wet il (634-14, Fats, He 1)
aas niraas rahai bairaagee nij ghar taarhee laa-ee.
In hope, the renunciate remains free of hopes; in the home of his own inner self, he is absorbed in the trance of deep meditation.
fetter oft oA Asut nifitgs AofA Ulmret SI 34-15, Fafs, He 1)
bhikhi-aa naam rajay santokhee amrit sahj pee-aa-ee. ||3]||
He remains content, satisfied with the charity of the Naam; he drinks in the Ambrosial Amrit with ease. ||3]|
vfam fats sag 5 dat Wa Ba et Tet Il (634-15, Fafs, Hs 1) dubiDhaa vich bairaag na hovee jab lag doojee raa-ee. There is no renunciation in duality, as long as there is even a particle of duality.
AZ AG Sa Fy Sa WS leg F A set Il (634-16, Fafs, oe 1)
sabh jag tayraa too ayko daataa avar na doojaa bhaa-ee.
The whole world is Yours, Lord; You alone are the Giver. There is not any other, O Siblings of Destiny.
HoHfe a3 ofa Het foerAt qantas & SfEnret | (634-16, Aafs, He 1)
manmukh jant dukh sadaa nivaasee gurmukh day vadi-aa-ee.
The self-willed manmukh dwells in misery forever, while the Lord bestows greatness upon the Gurmukh.
WUT MUTT MSH nididd Ae aly o uret Iigil (634-17, Hats, He 1) apar apaar agamm agochar kahnai keem na paa-ee. ||4||
God is infinite, endless, inaccessible and unfathomable; His worth cannot be described. ||4||
Ho AMfa Ho usHTaE Sife see ufs OH II (634-17, Fefs, He
sunn samaaDh mahaa parmaarath teen bhavan pat naama”.
The consciousness in deep Samaadhi, the Supreme Being, the Lord of the three worlds - these are Your Names, Lord.
HASfa Su Ar afar Hat fafs fafs Su AIH I 634-18, Aafs, He
mastak laykh jee-aa jag jonee sir sir laykh sahaama”.
The creatures born into this world have their destiny inscribed upon their foreheads; they experience according to their destinies.
OSH AAG ATE nm nmt gafs fesnt i (634-18, Fafs, ue 1)
karam sukaram karaa-ay aapay aapay bhagat darirh-aam.
The Lord Himself causes them to do good and bad deeds; He Himself makes them steadfast in devotional worship.
His Hf afs wd SHS uM fare miami ull (634-19, Fats, we 1)
man mukh jooth lahai bhai maana™ aapay gi-aan agaama’. ||5||
The filth of their mind and mouth is washed off when they live in the Fear of God; the inaccessible Lord Himself blesses them with spiritual wisdom. ||5]|
Uuat €3u fro wftimr Aet Are arefe fa atat fixfenret i (635-1, Fafs, He
jin chaakhi-aa say-ee saad jaanan ji-o gungay mithi-aa-ee. Only those who taste it know its sweet taste, like the mute, who eats the candy, and only smiles.
mae at fom aba set we Het gAvet I (635-1, Fats, He 1)
akthai kaa ki-aa kathee-ai bhaa-ee chaala-o sadaa rajaa-ee.
How can I describe the indescribable, O Siblings of Destiny? I shall follow His Will forever.
Td VS HS a fs de] foad nfs o aret Il (635-2, Fale, He 1)
gur daataa maylay taa mat hovai niguray mat na kaa-ee.
If one meets with the Guru, the Generous Giver, then he understands; those who have no Guru cannot understand this.
fAG vore f38 was aet da fomr & ad Voge NEN 635-2, Fafs, He 1)
ji-o chalaa-ay ti-o chaalah bhaa-ee hor ki-aa ko karay chaturaa-ee. ||6||
As the Lord causes us to act, so do we act, O Siblings of Destiny. What other clever tricks can anyone try? ||6||
fefa sath sore fefa sast TS ST AB murs | (635-3, Aafs, He 1)
ik bharam bhulaa-ay ik bhagtee raatay tayraa khayl apaaraa.
Some are deluded by doubt, while others are imbued with devotional worship; Your play is infinite and endless.
fas su we sa ce ufeor FJ gat vETeaaT I (635-3, Fale, He 1)
jit tuDh laa-ay tayhaa fal paa-i-aa too hukam chalaavanhaaraa.
As You engage them, they receive the fruits of their rewards; You alone are the One who issues Your Commands.
Aa adt A fas de wnvet AIG fils Trg I (635-4, Fale, He 1) sayvaa karee jay kichh hovai apnaa jee-o pind tumaaraa. I would serve You, if anything were my own; my soul and body are Yours.
Afsafe fixfemt four atat nifys ou nrara IDI (635-4, Fats, He 1
satgur mili-ai kirpaa kKeenee amrit naam aDhaaraa. ||7||
One who meets with the True Guru, by His Grace, takes the Support of the Ambrosial Naam. ||7||
dost Shor qe usafior ge fs famirs fomrs il (635-5, Fats, He 1)
gagnantar vaasi-aa gun pargaasi-aa gun meh gi-aan Dhi-aana”.
He dwells in the heavenly realms, and his virtues radiantly shine forth; meditation and spiritual wisdom are found in virtue.
oH fs aS Ad ATS SS BT SUS Il (635-6, Fals, He 1)
naam man bhaavai kahai kahaavai tato tat vakhaana’,
The Naam is pleasing to his mind; he speaks it, and causes others to speak it as well. He speaks the essential essence of wisdom.
Rae de ule ated ast fag Age Aa SBT Il (635-6, Hale, He 1)
sabad gur peeraa gahir gambheeraa bin sabdai jag ba-uraana”.
The Word of the Shabad is his Guru and spiritual teacher, profound and unfathomable; without the Shabad, the world is insane.
Us Fat AT AS AY SSX HO HS MUTI (635-7, Fats, we 1)
pooraa bairaagee sahj subhaagee sach naanak man maana”. ||8||1||
He is a perfect renunciate, naturally at ease, O Nanak, whose mind is pleased with the True Lord. ||8]|1]|
Hafe Hoe 9 fasat i (635-7) sorath mehlaa 1 titukee. Sorat'h, First Mehl, Ti-Tukas:
MAT HORT Hust set AGH GsH Haart Il (635-8, Aafs, ve 1)
aasaa mansaa banDhnee bhaa-ee karam Dharam banDhkaaree.
Hope and desire are entrapments, O Siblings of Destiny. Religious rituals and ceremonies are traps.
urfu ufs wa afer aret fear any ferrdt Il (635-8, Aes, ne 1
paap punn jag jaa-i-aa bhaa-ee binsai naam visaaree.
Because of good and bad deeds, one is born into the world, O Siblings of Destiny; forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he is ruined.
feo wfenr afar Haat ave AGH AS Sard All (635-9, Fats, Hz 1)
in maa-i-aa jag mohnee bhaa-ee karam sabhay vaykaaree. ||1]||
This Maya is the enticer of the world, O Siblings of Destiny; all such actions are corrupt. ||1||
Afs ufss aa ardt Il (635-9, Fats, Hz 1) sun pandit karmaa kaaree. Listen, O ritualistic Pandit:
fag asf AY Cun set A nrsH 3g atest i TIS il 35-10, Fats, we 1)
jit karam sukh oopjai bhaa-ee so aatam tat beechaaree. rahaa-o. that religious ritual which produces happiness, O Siblings of Destiny, is contemplation of the essence of the soul. ||Pause] |
HHS Se aa us SS AGH Add AAT Il (635-10, afs, v2 1)
saasat bayd bakai kharho bhaa-ee karam karahu sansaaree.
You may stand and recite the Shaastras and the Vedas, O Siblings of Destiny, but these are just worldly actions.
undfs HE 3 yaet set nists He feast | (635-11, Fats, ue 1)
pakhand mail na chook-ee bhaa-ee antar mail vikaaree.
Filth cannot be washed away by hypocrisy, O Siblings of Destiny; the filth of corruption and sin is within you.
feo fafa set wardt set St fra & srt 2H (635-11, Fats, we D
in biDh doobee maakuree bhaa-ee oodee sir kai bhaaree. ||2||
This is how the spider is destroyed, O Siblings of Destiny, by falling head-long in its own web. ||2||
eons wat feast set eA ate ynret il (635-12, Fels, we
durmat ghanee vigootee bhaa-ee doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee.
So many are destroyed by their own evil-mindedness, O Siblings of Destiny; in the love of duality, they are ruined.
fas Afsas an & uve aret fas oH SoH o WET II 635-12, Fats, He 1)
bin satgur naam na paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee bin naamai bharam na jaa-ee.
Without the True Guru, the Name is not obtained, O Siblings of Destiny; without the Name, doubt does not depart.
Afsag Ae 3 AY US Stet nes We Fst SII (635-13, Aafs, He 1)
satgur sayvay taa sukh paa-ay bhaa-ee aavan jaan rahaa-ee. ||3]|
If one serves the True Guru, then he obtains peace, O Siblings of Destiny; his comings and goings are ended. ||3]||
Wg Add Ts 3 Gur set Ho foone Ate ANT Il (635-13, Fats, we 1)
saach sahj gur tay oopjai bhaa-ee man nirmal saach samaa-ee.
True celestial peace comes from the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny; the immaculate mind is absorbed into the True Lord.
Gg Ae A gs get aa fae Ha 3 uret Il (635-14, Fafo, vs 1)
gur sayvay so boojhai bhaa-ee gur bin mag na paa-ee.
One who serves the Guru, understands, O Siblings of Destiny; without the Guru, the way is not found.
fan nists Sg fa aH ane set as Safe fay wet sil (635-14, Fats, He
jis antar lobh ke karam kamaavai bhaa-ee koorh bol bikh khaa-ee. | |4||
What can anyone do, with greed within? O Siblings of Destiny, by telling lies, they eat poison. ||4] |
ufss udt feet set fea foaxs 3a il (635-15, Fafs, He 1) pandit dahee vilo-ee-ai bhaa-ee vichahu niklai tath. O Pandit, by churning cream, butter is produced.
AS Haba We Saha aret feg Aa So Se Il (635-16, Fale, He 1)
jal mathee-ai jal daykhee-ai bhaa-ee ih jag ayhaa vath.
By churning water, you shall only see water, O Siblings of Destiny; this world is like that.
as fag soft feadint set ufe wife SB niey ull (635-16, Fafs, 4s 1)
gur bin bharam vigoochee-ai bhaa-ee ghat ghat day-o alakh. ||5||
Without the Guru, he is ruined by doubt, O Siblings of Destiny; the unseen Divine Lord is in each and every heart. ||5]|
fey Aa Ta AS t TS Ba feR aa HTS Il 635-17, Fels, we 1)
ih jag taago soot ko bhaa-ee dah dis baaDho maa-ay.
This world is like a thread of cotton, O Siblings of Destiny, which Maya has tied on all ten sides.
fag as ais o Scat set arat AGH AHS I (635-17, Fafo, v2 1)
bin gur gaath na chhoot-ee bhaa-ee thaakay karam kamaa-ay.
Without the Guru, the knots cannot be untied, O Siblings of Destiny; I am so tired of religious rituals.
feg na soft gserfeur aret ager fos & ATE NEM (635-18, Fats, He 1)
ih jag bharam bhulaa-i-aa bhaa-ee kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||6||
This world is deluded by doubt, O Siblings of Destiny; no one can say anything about it. ||6]|
ad fifeen 38 nfs ZA aet S HIST AY BY Il (635-18, Aefs, He 1)
gur mili-ai bha-o man vasai bhaa-ee bhai marnaa sach laykh.
Meeting with the Guru, the Fear of God comes to abide in the mind; to die in the Fear of God is one's true destiny.
HAS Be vamreine set waa oH fEAy Il (635-19, Fefs, ns 1
majan daan chang-aa-ee-aa bhaa-ee dargeh naam visaykh.
In the Court of the Lord, the Naam is far superior to ritualistic cleansing baths, charity and good deeds, O Siblings of Destiny.
art é3€ ag vied fafs on feafenr set vfs efror gar Sy IDI (636-1, Fafs, He 1)
gur ankas jin naam drirh-aa-i-aa bhaa-ee man vasi-aa chookaa bhaykh. ||7]| One who implants the Naam within himself, through the Guru's halter - O Siblings of Destiny, the Lord dwells in his mind, and he is free of hypocrisy. ||7]|
feg 36 We ATS a ae Sug OH NMG Il (636-1, Fale, He 1)
ih tan haat saraaf ko bhaa-ee vakhar naam apaar.
This body is the jeweller's shop, O Siblings of Destiny; the incomparable Naam is the merchandise.
feg eug exec A fes oet aa Aafe ad Sherg Il (636-2, Fafs, ue 1
ih vakhar vaapaaree so darirhai bhaa-ee gur sabad karay veechaar.
The merchant secures this merchandise, O Siblings of Destiny, by contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
US surg staat set AS AT Marg ICI (636-2, Fafs, ve 1) Dhan vaapaaree naankaa bhaa-ee may! karay vaapaar. ||8||2||
Blessed is the merchant, O Nanak, who meets the Guru, and engages in this trade. [81 |2]|
Hafs HIS % Il (636-3)
sorath mehlaa 1. Sorat'h, First Mehl:
frat Afsag Afeor fimrg f3q a ATE 3d Il (636-3, Fats, He 1) jin"ee satgur sayvi-aa pi-aaray tin" kay saath taray. Those who serve the True Guru, O Beloved, their companions are saved as well.
fsar arr @ ureint fimrrd niflys GAS Ja Il (636-4, Fafs, He 1)
tin"aa thaak na paa-ee-ai pi-aaray amrit rasan haray.
No one blocks their way, O Beloved, and the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar is on their tongue.
gs ae & faa fimrs srg sefa AS WAI (636-4, Fats, He
booday bhaaray bhai binaa pi-aaray taaray nadar karay. ||1||
Without the Fear of God, they are so heavy that they sink and drown, O Beloved; but the Lord, casting His Glance of Grace, carries them across. ||1]||
St 3d Wee films st Sat AST Il (636-5, Fats, ue 1) bhee toohai salaahnaa pi-aaray bhee tayree saalaah. I ever praise You, O Beloved, I ever sing Your Praises.
fee sfoa 3 saba fimrd act ufe age a TIC Il (636-5, Aefs, 42 1)
vin bohith bhai dubee-ai pi-aaray kanDhee paa-ay kahaah. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the boat, one is drowned in the sea of fear, O Beloved; how can I reach the distant shore? ||1]||Pause| |
Aad Werder films gH nig 3 AE Il (636-6, Hats, He 1) Saalaahee salaahnaa pi-aaray doojaa avar na ko-ay. I praise the Praiseworthy Lord, O Beloved; there is no other one to praise.
Ad ys Aeros A ss fimrs nafe ss da aE i (36-6, Aafs, Hs 1)
mayray parabh saalaahan say bhalay pi-aaray sabad ratay rang ho-ay.
Those who praise my God are good, O Beloved; they are imbued with the Word of the Shabad, and His Love.
fan at Hats A fre flmrd aA S 3a FOE NI (636-7, Fats, He 1) tis kee sangat jay milai pi-aaray ras lai tat vilo-ay. ||2|| If I join them, O Beloved, I can churn the essence and so find joy. ||2||
ufs ugetat Ars at fumid SH AST SATS Il (636-7, Fats, He 1)
pat parvaanaa saach kaa pi-aaray naam sachaa neesaan.
The gateway to honor is Truth, O Beloved; it bears the Insignia of the True Name of the Lord.
nifent fafa & veer fimrd ont JOH UES | (636-8, Fafs, He 1)
aa-i-aa likh lai jaavnaa pi-aaray hukmee hukam pachhaan.
We come into the world, and we depart, with our destiny written and pre-ordained, O Beloved; realize the Command of the Commander.
as fag IaH 3 yeh flrs APS ATT Sv ISI (636-8, Hale, Hs 1)
gur bin hukam na boojhee-ai pi-aaray saachay saachaa taan. ||3]||
Without the Guru, this Command is not understood, O Beloved; True is the Power of the True Lord. ||3]|
Jan niefs fSfimr fumird gan Bes uefa Il (636-9, Aas, He 1)
hukmai andar nimmi-aa pi-aaray hukmai udar majhaar.
By His Command, we are conceived, O Beloved, and by His Command, we grow in the womb.
TaH viets Afr fimrs Bu fra x Sh 1 (636-9, Fafs, Hs 1) hukmai andar jammi-aa pi-aaray ooDha-o sir kai bhaar. By His Command, we are born, O Beloved, head-first, and upside-down.
qenfy esas weba fimrd 3S aren Af Ii (636-10, Fats, He 1)
gurmukh dargeh jaanee-ai pi-aaray chalai kaaraj saar. ||4||
The Gurmukh is honored in the Court of the Lord, O Beloved; he departs after resolving his affairs. ||4]|
Jan niet urfeor filmi gan Ave AE II 636-11, Fats, He hukmai andar aa-i-aa pi-aaray hukmay jaado jaa-ay. By His Command, one comes into the world, O Beloved, and by His Will, he goes.
Jan sf vordht fimrd Houf od AATE II (636-11, Fats, He 1)
hukmay baneh chalaa-ee-ai pi-aaray manmukh lahai sajaa-ay.
By His Will, some are bound and gagged and driven away, O Beloved; the self-willed manmukhs suffer their punishment.
Jan Aafe uerehy fimrs esas Uo ate iull (636-12, Fats, He 1)
hukmay sabad pachhaanee-ai pi-aaray dargeh paiDhaa jaa-ay. ||5||
By His Command, the Word of the Shabad, is realized, O Beloved, and one goes to the Court of the Lord robed in honor. ||5||
Jan wes Teen fimrs Jor IBH SfE I (636-12, af, He 1)
hukmay ganat ganaa-ee-ai pi-aaray hukmay ha-umai do-ay.
By His Command, some accounts are accounted for, O Beloved; by His Command, some suffer in egotism and duality.
Jan se seve fimrsd nreafs wat dE i (636-13, Fats, He 1)
hukmay bhavai bhavaa-ee-ai pi-aaray avgan muthee ro-ay.
By His Command, one wanders in reincarnation, O Beloved; deceived by sins and demerits, he cries out in his suffering.
gan fret As ot fimrd Ae fH efsnret SE NEN (636-13, Fats, He 1
hukam sinjaapai saah kaa pi-aaray sach milai vadi-aa-ee ho-ay. | |6||
If he comes to realize the Command of the Lord's Will, O Beloved, then he is blessed with Truth and Honor. ||6||
nmafs mGur nmdibat fimrs fe webt AG oS Il (636-14, Fats, He 1) aakhan a-ukhaa aakhee-ai pi-aaray ki-o sunee-ai sach naa-o. It is so difficult to speak it, O Beloved; how can we speak, and hear, the True Name?
faat A Aefoor fimrd 3 fsq sfsos AE Il (636-14, Fafs, He 1) jin"ee so salaahi-aa pi-aaray ha-o tin” balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who praise the Lord, O Beloved.
oe fxs Hodhot fimrd sect vfs fieerS Di (36-15, Fats, He 1)
naa-o milai santokhee-aa™ pi-aaray nadree mayl milaa-o. ||7||
I have obtained the Name, and I am satisfied, O Beloved; by His Grace, I am united in His Union. ||7]||
afenr ade A dba fimrd no HASTSl Ofs I (636-16, Fats, He 1) kaa-i-aa kaagad jay thee-ai pi-aaray man masvaanee Dhaar. If my body were to become the paper, O Beloved, and my mind the inkpot;
Bos’ Sule Au at filmrd sie qe feud stats il 36-16, Aafs, He 1)
laltaa laykhan sach kee pi-aaray har gun likhahu veechaar.
and if my tongue became the pen, O Beloved, I would write, and contemplate, the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Ug Burd stoat fimrd Arg fod Sfa ofa csi (636-17, Fats, He 1)
Dhan laykhaaree naankaa pi-aaray saach likhai ur Dhaar. ||8]|3]|
Blessed is that scribe, O Nanak, who writes the True Name, and enshrines it within his heart. ||8||3]|
Rafe Hoe 9 ufser zzat Il (636-17)
sorath mehlaa 1 pahilaa dutukee. Sorat'h, First Mehl, Du-Tukas:
3 Tews fess set fosHs at He aE il 636-18, Fels, oe 1)
too gundaatou nirmalo bhaa-ee nirmal naa man ho-ay.
You are the Giver of virtue, O Immaculate Lord, but my mind is not immaculate, O Siblings of Destiny.
dH nus fosae set 35 dt S Te ALE NU (636-18, Rats, Hes 1D
ham apraaDhee nirgunay bhaa-ee tujh hee tay gun so-ay. ||1||
I am a worthless sinner, O Siblings of Destiny; virtue is obtained from You alone, Lord. ||1]|
He Ys J Aas ate Sy Il (636-19, Fafs, we 1) mayray pareetamaa too kartaa kar vaykh. O my Beloved Creator Lord, You create, and You behold.
o@ unit unison aret nfo sfe am ferry Il TI Il (636-19, Aafs, He 1
ha-o paapee paakhandee-aa bhaa-ee man tan naam visaykh. rahaa-o.
I am a hypocritical sinner, O Siblings of Destiny. Bless my mind and body with Your Name, O Lord. ||Pause]|
ust €39 fu wfeor fos difour aret vsaret ufs fF I (637-1, Fafs, He 1)
bikh maa-i-aa chit mohi-aa bhaa-ee chaturaa-ee pat kho-ay. The poisonous Maya has enticed the consciousness, O Siblings of Destiny; through clever tricks, one loses his honor.
fas nfs oad Afs eA set A ae famre AAE 12H 637-1, Fats, He 1)
chit meh thaakur sach vasai bhaa-ee jay gur gi-aan samo-ay. ||2| |
The True Lord and Master abides in the consciousness, O Siblings of Destiny, if the Guru's spiritual wisdom permeates it. ||2||
Ts Fs urd set IS WS VS Il (637-2, Fafo, vs 1)
roorhou roorhou aakhee-ai bhaa-ee roorhou laal chalool.
Beautiful, beautiful, the Lord is called, O Siblings of Destiny; beautiful, like the deep crimson color of the poppy.
AHO dfs fre avait set efs ule AY gw Sl (637-2, Fels, ue 1)
jay man har si-o bairaagee-ai bhaa-ee dar ghar saach abhool. ||3]|
If man loves the Lord with detachment, O Siblings of Destiny, he is judged to be true and infallible in the Lord's court and home. ||3]|
usat wrotA 3 set ufs uta 3 Te famirg il 37-3, Aafs, w2 1)
paataalee aakaas too bhaa-ee ghar ghar too gun gi-aan.
You are pervading the realms of the underworld and the heavenly skies; Your wisdom and glories are in each and every heart.
as fifent Ay ufenr set gor HoT TH Ill (637-3, Fats, ws
gur mili-ai sukh paa-i-aa bhaa-ee chookaa manhu gumaan. ||4] |
Meeting with the Guru, one finds peace, O Siblings of Destiny, and pride is dispelled from the mind. ||4||
fe His afer aba avet St Hor sq dfE I (637-4, Fats, He 1)
jal mal kaa-i-aa maajee-ai bhaa-ee bhee mailaa tan ho-ay.
Scrubbing with water, the body can be cleaned, O Siblings of Destiny, but the body becomes dirty again.
fomrfs Ho ofa seh set Ho 3a faane fF Ilull (637-5, afs, Hz 1)
gi-aan mahaa ras naa-ee-ai bhaa-ee man tan nirmal ho-ay. ||5]|
Bathing in the supreme essence of spiritual wisdom, O Siblings of Destiny, the mind and body become pure. ||5||
Set Ser Uri set for Has for Vfa il (637-5, Hafs, we 1)
dayvee dayvaa poojee-ai bhaa-ee ki-aa maaga-o ki-aa deh.
Why worship gods and goddesses, O Siblings of Destiny? What can we ask of them? What can they give us?
uve ifs urs set Aw ufo gata Sf Nell (637-6, Hats, Hs
paahan neer pakhaalee-ai bhaa-ee jal meh booDheh tayhi. ||6]|
The stone gods are washed with water, O Siblings of Destiny, but they just sink in the water. ||6||
qs fag uisy 3 odin aret wa gs ufs afe II (637-6, Hats, ue
gur bin alakh na lakhee-ai bhaa-ee jag boodai pat kho-ay.
Without the Guru, the unseen Lord cannot be seen, O Siblings of Destiny; the world is drowning, having lost its honor.
He oad ofa earn ave A are 3 SFE MDI (637-7, Fafs, He 1)
mayray thaakur haath vadaa-ee-aa bhaa-ee jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||7]|| Greatness is in the hands of my Lord and Master, O Siblings of Destiny; as He is pleased, He gives. ||7||
geinifs §8 Host set Are ad fue ae Il (637-7, Fats, He 1)
ba-ee-ar bolai meethulee bhaa-ee saach kahai pir bhaa-ay.
That soul-bride, who talks sweetly and speaks the Truth, O Siblings of Destiny, becomes pleasing to her Husband Lord.
fasd Sct nfs eAt set oft adt afe ate itil (637-8, Fats, He 1)
birhai bayDhee sach vasee bhaa-ee aDhik rahee har naa-ay. ||8]|
Pierced by His Love, she abides in Truth, O Siblings of Destiny, deeply imbued with the Lord's Name. ||8||
AS & nia nimyat ave} TT S FS AWS Il (637-9, Aals, He 1)
sabh ko aakhai aapnaa bhaa-ee gur tay bujhai sujaan.
Everyone calls God his own, O Siblings of Destiny, but the all-knowing Lord is known only through the Guru.
A aa A Gad set AaE Ae StATS ICI! (637-9, Hats, Hs 1
jo beeDhay say oobray bhaa-ee sabad sachaa neesaan. ||9] |
Those who are pierced by His Love are saved, O Siblings of Destiny; they bear the Insignia of the True Word of the Shabad. ||9]|
Hug mfaa nash set urea dua ute il 637-10, Fats, He 1 eeDhan aDhik sakaylee-ai bhaa-ee paavak ranchak paa-ay. A large pile of firewood, O Siblings of Destiny, will burn if a small fire is applied.
fas ue an fee eA avet Toa foes Hate QOH (637-10, Fats, He 1)
khin pal naam ridai vasai bhaa-ee naanak milan subhaa-ay. ||10]||4||
In the same way, if the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells in the heart for a moment, even for an instant, O Siblings of Destiny, then one meets the Lord with ease, O Nanak. ||10]|4||
Rafe Hoe 3 we 9 fasat (637-12)
sorath mehlaa 3 ghar 1 titukee Sorat'h, Third Mehl, First House, Ti-Tukas:
qe Asa YATE II (637-12)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sas Ut Ae Ss seer ofe AE ufs J suet orem Il (637-13, Aafo, He 3)
bhagtaa dee sadaa too rakh-daa har jee-o Dhur too rakh-daa aa-i-aa.
You always preserve the honor of Your devotees, O Dear Lord; You have protected them from the very beginning of time.
yfoare AS su ofy we ofe Ae JaeraA He UsTfEMT II (637-13, Fafs, He 3) par-hilaad jan tuDh raakh la-ay har jee-o harnaakhas maar pachaa-i-aa. You protected Your servant Prahlaad, O Dear Lord, and annihilated Harnaakhash.
Tene } ussifs 3 ofa Ate Hone sath gerfeor NA (637-14, Fats, He 3)
gurmukhaa no parteet hai har jee-o manmukh bharam bhulaa-i-aa. ||1||
The Gurmukhs place their faith in the Dear Lord, but the self-willed manmukhs are deluded by doubt. ||1]|
ofa At Sa Sat Sfsnret Il (637-15, Fafs, ue 3) har jee ayh tayree vadi-aa-ee. O Dear Lord, this is Your Glory.
sas at UA Ty 3 AM sas Set Asaret il TIE il (637-15, Halo, vs 3)
bhagtaa kee paij rakh too su-aamee bhagat tayree sarnaa-ee. rahaa-o.
You preserve the honor of Your devotees, O Lord Master; Your devotees seek Your Sanctuary. ||Pause] |
SIs 3 FH fs o ASA aS 5 OS AT Il (637-15, Fale, He 3)
bhagtaa no jam johi na saakai kaal na nayrhai jaa-ee.
The Messenger of Death cannot touch Your devotees; death cannot even approach them.
ass TH BH HS SfAor oH dt Hats uret Il 37-16, Fafs, He 3)
kayval raam naam man vasi-aa naamay hee mukat paa-ee.
The Name of the Lord alone abides in their minds; through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they find liberation.
fafa fafa As sas veet walt TT a Hof ASST NI (637-16, Aafs, He 3)
riDh siDh sabh bhagtaa charnee laagee gur kai sahj subhaa-ee. ||2||
Wealth and all the spiritual powers of the Siddhis fall at the feet of the Lord's devotees; they obtain peace and poise from the Guru. ||2]|
HOHe 6 udstls & oret nists Ss AMT I (637-17, Fale, He 3) manmukhaa no parteet na aavee antar lobh su-aa-o. The self-willed manmukhs have no faith; they are filled with greed and self-interest.
dante fore nae 3 SsfeS afs of 6 war aE Il (637-18, Fats, He 3)
gurmukh hirdai sabad na baydi-o har naam na laagaa bhaa-o.
They are not Gurmukh - they do not understand the Word of the Shabad in their hearts; they do not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Is TUS uA Sa WAT HOHY Star mare Zi! (637-18, Fafs, v2 3)
koorh kapat paaj leh jaasee manmukh feekaa alaa-o. ||3]|
Their masks of falsehood and hypocrisy shall fall off; the self-willed manmukhs speak with insipid words. ||3]||
sas fefe orfu zaser ys Ft sat J J AST Il (637-19, Fats, He 3)
bhagtaa vich aap varatdaa parabh jee bhagtee hoo too jaataa.
You are pervading through Your devotees, O Dear God; through Your devotees, You are known.
Hfeor Ho As BA I Sat 5 Sa yay fase | 637-19, Fats, we 3)
maa-i-aa moh sabh lok hai tayree too ayko purakh biDhaataa.
All the people are enticed by Maya; they are Yours, Lord - You alone are the Architect of Destiny.
Uuar é3t ICH wf Hon Hofs AHTal Td A Aafe uETSTe ISll (638-1, Aafs, v2 3)
ha-umai maar mansaa maneh samaanee gur kai sabad pachhaataa. ||4]| Overcoming my egotism and quieting the desires within my mind, I have come to realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4| |
wifes aH ast ys fs & fas af a oH fumirat i (638-2, Fafo, Hs 3) achint kamm karahi parabh tin kay jin har kaa naam pi-aaraa. God automatically does the work of those who love the Name of the Lord.
aa usAte Ae fe efhor Als AH ASSETS Il (638-2, Aafs, uz 3) gur parsaad sadaa man vasi-aa sabh kaaj savaaranhaaraa. By Guru's Grace, he ever dwells in their minds, and He resolves all their affairs.
Gor at dtm ad fears fro afs ys 3d Tues IUll 638-3, ats, He 3) onaa kee rees karay so viguchai jin har parabh hai rakhvaaraa. ||5|| Whoever challenges them is destroyed; they have the Lord God as their Savior. ||5||
faa Afsaa Ae fas 3 ufenr Honfe sCfa He frmaret II (638-3, Fats, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay kinai na paa-i-aa manmukh bha-uk mu-ay billaa-ee.
Without serving the True Guru, no one finds the Lord; the self-willed manmukhs die crying out in pain.
mets Wels S6a 3 uefa ey ufo Efe AHS Il (638-4, Fafs, He 3) aavahi jaaveh tha-ur na paavahi dukh meh dukh samaa-ee. They come and go, and find no place of rest; in pain and suffering, they perish.
aonfa dz A nifigs ule AoA ATfS ANT IIEI (638-5, Fas, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so amrit peevai sehjay saach samaa-ee. ||6] |
But one who becomes Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar, and is easily absorbed in the True Name. ||6]|
fag Afsad AS HOH 3 ES A da AH Ad mifGaTet II (638-5, Fate, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay janam na chhodai jay anayk karam karai aDhikaa-ee.
Without serving the True Guru, one cannot escape reincarnation, even by performing numerous rituals.
az uate 3 ae aurafa faa ofa ufs aes II (638-6, Fats, He 3) vayd parheh tai vaad vakaaneh bin har pat gavaa-ee. Those who read the Vedas, and argue and debate without the Lord, lose their honor.
Ae Afsag Avet fra wet sfa scfo Te ATS IDI (638-6, Fats, He 3)
sachaa satgur saachee jis banee bhaj chhooteh gur sarnaa-ee. ||7||
True is the True Guru, and True is the Word of His Bani; in the Guru's Sanctuary, one is saved. ||7||
fas ofa nfs efhor A efs AS efe ATS Afra Il (638-7, Fats, He 3)
jin har man vasi-aa say dar saachay dar saachai sachi-aaraa.
Those whose minds are filled with the Lord are judged as true in the Court of the Lord; they are hailed as true in the True Court.
Gar at Ast afa afa det afe & HeST ST Il (638-8, Aefs, He 3) onaa dee sobhaa jug jug ho-ee ko-ay na maytanhaaraa. Their praises echo throughout the ages, and no one can erase them.
Sod fa a Ae afeud faa ofa Thme Sfs ara CIA (638-8, Fafs, He 3)
naanak tin kai sad balihaarai jin har raakhi-aa ur Dhaaraa. ||8]|1|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who enshrine the Lord within their hearts. [8] [11]
Hafs HIe 3 Bat Il (638-9)
sorath mehlaa 3 dutukee. Sorat'h, Third Mehl, Du-Tukas:
foafenr 3 um sufh we set Afsag at Ret OTE Il (638-9, Aafs, He 3)
niguni-aa no aapay bakhas la-ay bhaa-ee satgur kee sayvaa laa-ay.
He Himself forgives the worthless, O Siblings of Destiny; He commits them to the service of the True Guru.
Afsas at Ae SSH F set TH aTH fas STE dl (38-10, Fafs, vs 3)
satgur kee sayvaa ootam hai bhaa-ee raam naam chit laa-ay. ||1||
Service to the True Guru is sublime, O Siblings of Destiny; through it, one's consciousness is attached to the Lord's Name. ||1]|
ofa ME mmd aah forte 1 (638-10, Aafs, Hs 3)
har jee-o aapay bakhas milaa-ay. The Dear Lord forgives, and unites with Himself.
Teds TH wus set us Afsate we sorte i TTS i (638-11, afs, vs 3)
gunheen ham apraaDhee bhaa-ee poorai satgur la-ay ralaa-ay. rahaa-o.
I am a sinner, totally without virtue, O Siblings of Destiny; the Perfect True Guru has blended me. ||Pause| |
age age nua sufimig fimrd ars nafe <terfa il (638-11, Fats, He 3)
ka-un ka-un apraaDhee bakhsi-an pi-aaray saachai sabad veechaar.
So many, SO many sinners have been forgiven, O beloved one, by contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
sGne ute Cafnig act Afsag SS US QM (638-12, Aefs, H2 3)
bha-ojal paar utaari-an bhaa-ee satgur bayrhai chaarh. ||2| |
They got on board the boat of the True Guru, who carried them across the terrifying world-ocean, O Siblings of Destiny. ||2]|
Hod 3 aus se set TT uTaA fs foe i (638-13, ats, ws 3)
manoorai tay kanchan bha-ay bhaa-ee gur paaras mayl milaa-ay.
I have been transformed from rusty iron into gold, O Siblings of Destiny, united in Union with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone.
ny efs o@ nfs efhor aret Fat AfS fHOte SI 638-13, Aefs, He 3)
aap chhod naa-o man vasi-aa bhaa-ee jotee jot milaa-ay. ||3]|
Eliminating my self-conceit, the Name has come to dwell within my mind, O Siblings of Destiny; my light has merged in the Light. ||3]|
IG ad We wee aet Afsaeg a Ae afsod WE Il (638-14, Fafs, He 3)
ha-o vaaree ha-o vaarnai bhaa-ee satgur ka-o sad balihaarai jaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice, I am a sacrifice, O Siblings of Destiny, I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru.
on fours fate fest svet aaHfs AofA ANTS ISI (638-14, Fefs, He 3)
naam niDhaan jin ditaa bhaa-ee gurmat sahj samaa-o. ||4||
He has given me the treasure of the Naam; O Siblings of Destiny, through the Guru's Teachings, I am absorbed in celestial bliss. ||4]|
as fag Ao 3 Cun set uss famrsbor ATE I (638-15, Fats, we 3)
gur bin sahj na oopjai bhaa-ee poochhahu gi-aanee-aa jaa-ay.
Without the Guru, celestial peace is not produced, O Siblings of Destiny; go and ask the spiritual teachers about this.
Afsad at Ae Het ats set fea ny TSE WUll (638-16, Fafs, He 3)
satgur kee sayvaa sadaa kar bhaa-ee vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||5||
Serve the True Guru forever, O Siblings of Destiny, and eradicate self-conceit from within. ||5||
TIS 38 Gur set 3B aget AY ATT Il (638-16, Hats, ws 3)
gurmatee bha-o oopjai bhaa-ee bha-o karnee sach saar.
Under Guru's Instruction, the Fear of God is produced, O Siblings of Destiny; true and excellent are the deeds done in the Fear of God.
Un ueeg urdhit set AT OH MUO” Ell (638-17, Fats, He 3)
paraym padaarath paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee sach naam aaDhaar. ||6||
Then, one is blessed with the treasure of the Lord's Love, O Siblings of Destiny, and the Support of the True Name. ||6] |
a Afsag Aefs wmuet aret fsa a IE was ute I (638-17, Aafs, He 3) jo satgur sayveh aapnaa bhaa-ee tin kai ha-o laaga-o paa-ay. I fall at the feet of those who serve their True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.
HOH Aes niet set aw st Set UATE DI (638-18, Fafs, v2 3)
janam savaaree aapnaa bhaa-ee kul bhee la-ee bakhsaa-ay. ||7]|
I have fulfilled my life, O Siblings of Destiny, and my family has been saved as well. HI7II
Ay wel A Ase Jd aet aa faa 3S SE II (638-18, Fats, He 3)
sach banee sach sabad hai bhaa-ee gur kirpaa tay ho-ay.
The True Word of the Guru's Bani, and the True Word of the Shabad, O Siblings of Destiny, are obtained only by Guru's Grace.
Soa OH fd Hfe ZA Set fan faus o ord AE NCI (38-19, Aas, He 3)
naanak naam har man vasai bhaa-ee tis bighan na laagai ko-ay. ||8||2]|
O Nanak, with the Name of the Lord abiding in one's mind, no obstacles stand in one's way, O Siblings of Destiny. ||8]|2] |
Yar Ear
Hafs HIG 3 Il (639-1)
sorath mehlaa 3. Sorat'h, Third Mehl:
Ufs AG Fae Aue set us arfat fHoTe I (639-1, Fats, He 3)
har jee-o sabday jaapdaa bhaa-ee poorai bhaag milaa-ay.
The Dear Lord is realized through the Word of His Shabad, O Siblings of Destiny, which is found only by perfect destiny.
He" AY Aoaat set mrafes gstor da ote all (639-1, fats, v2 3)
sadaa sukh sohaaganee bhaa-ee an-din ratee-aa rang laa-ay. ||1]|
The happy soul-brides are forever in peace, O Siblings of Destiny; night and day, they are attuned to the Lord's Love. ||1]|
ofs At 3 omy sa Tate il 39-2, Hafo, v2 3) har jee too aapay rang charhaa-ay. O Dear Lord, You Yourself color us in Your Love.
Tes wes dia wisd set ais ASt da ote | TIC Il (639-2, als, v2 3)
gaavhu gaavhu rang raatiho bhaa-ee har saytee rang laa-ay. rahaa-o.
Sing, continually sing His Praises, imbued with His Love, O Siblings of Destiny; be in love with the Lord. ||Pause||
ad at arg anteat arvet ny efs fos we il (639-3, Fats, v2 3)
gur kee kaar kamaavnee bhaa-ee aap chhod chit laa-ay.
Work to serve the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny; abandon self-conceit, and focus your consciousness.
He’ Hon fefe eu o waet aet ofa orfu eA nfs orfe iQ 639-4, Aafs, Hs 3)
sadaa sahj fir dukh na lag-ee bhaa-ee har aap vasai man aa-ay. ||2| |
You shall be in peace forever, and you shall not suffer in pain any longer, O Siblings of Destiny; the Lord Himself shall come and abide in your mind. ||2||
fug at JaH 6 Weel ae AT awa Aots Il (639-4, Fafs, us 3)
pir kaa hukam na jaan-ee bhaa-ee saa kulkhanee kunaar.
She who does not know the Will of her Husband Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, is an ill- mannered and bitter bride.
Houle are anteat sret fee are afamrfs ail (39-5, Has, ws 3)
manhath kaar kamaavnee bhaa-ee vin naavai koorhi-aar. ||3]||
She does things with a stubborn mind, O Siblings of Destiny; without the Name, she is false. ||3]|
A wets fro HASta oa J avet ate AS FIT Il (639-5, Aals, He 3)
say gaavahi jin mastak bhaag hai bhaa-ee bhaa-ay sachai bairaag.
They alone sing the Lord's Praises, who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads, O Siblings of Destiny; through the Love of the True Lord, they find detachment.
mates TS Te sets TSH foes Ta fos Ba ISil (639-6, Aafs, He 3)
an-din raatay gun raveh bhaa-ee nirbha-o gur liv laag. ||4]|
Night and day, they are imbued with His Love; they utter His Glorious Praises, O Siblings of Destiny, and they lovingly focus their consciousness on the Fearless Guru. [141]
Hao Hfa Htevser aret A AST fea TAS II (639-7, Fats, He 3) sabhnaa maar jeevaaldaa bhaa-ee so sayvhu din raat. He kills and revives all, O Siblings of Destiny; serve Him, day and night.
A fa@ Hog feardhn oret fan et est d Sts ull (39-7, Fats, Hs 3)
so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai bhaa-ee jis dee vadee hai daat. ||5||
How can we forget Him from our minds, O Siblings of Destiny? His gifts are glorious and great. ||5||
HoHfe Het SHat Set Vaas Srdt a il (639-8, Hafs, ve 3)
manmukh mailee dummnee bhaa-ee dargeh naahee thaa-o.
The self-willed manmukh is filthy and double-minded, O Siblings of Destiny; the finds no place of rest in the Court of the Lord.
Toufy de 5 Te se set fife Ulsn wrfs AHS Ell (639-8, Fats, ne 3)
gurmukh hovai ta gun ravai bhaa-ee mil pareetam saach samaa-o. ||6]|
But if she becomes Gurmukh, then she chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny; the meets her True Beloved, and merges in Him. ||6]|
Us HoH dfs 3 Bs set four ug Sat ATE Il (39-9, afte, He 3)
ayt janam har na chayti-o bhaa-ee ki-aa muhu daysee jaa-ay.
In this life, she has not focused her consciousness on the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny; how can she show her face when she leaves?
fast udct Hofese set fafimr S Sate iD 39-9, Aafs, Hs 3)
kirhee pavandee muhaa-i-on bhaa-ee bikhi-aa no lobhaa-ay. ||7]|
In spite of the warning calls which were sounded, she has been plundered, O Siblings of Destiny; she yearned only for corruption. ||7]|
oH AH Af ZAfs set HET AY ATS Ade Il (639-10, Fafs, Hs 3)
naam samaaleh sukh vaseh bhaa-ee sadaa sukh saa“t sareer.
Those who dwell upon the Naam, O Siblings of Destiny, their bodies are ever peaceful and tranquil.
aoa oH AHS 3 set wridus Tet dts cS (639-11, Have, we 3)
naanak naam samaal too bhaa-ee aprampar gunee gaheer. ||8]|3]||
O Nanak, dwell upon the Naam; the Lord is infinite, virtuous and unfathomable, O Siblings of Destiny. ||8]|3]|
Hofs HIS u we I nAeUdMIT (639-12) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 1 asatpadee-aa Sorat’h, Fifth Mehl, First House, Ashtapadees:
qe fsa YATE II (639-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AS Ada frofs Curfeur set ATE ATS ANGE Il (639-13, Fafs, uz 5)
sabh jag jineh upaa-i-aa bhaa-ee karan kaaran samrath.
The One who created the whole world, O Siblings of Destiny, is the Almighty Lord, the Cause of causes.
AG fils fafs wafer set 2 afe wrret Se Il (639-13, Rats, He 5) jee-o pind jin saaji-aa bhaa-ee day kar apnee vath. He fashioned the soul and the body, O Siblings of Destiny, by His own power.
fats adh fr hy set agst Sa nies II (639-14, Hale, He 5)
kin kahee-ai ki-o daykhee-ai bhaa-ee kartaa ayk akath.
How can He be described? How can He be seen, O Siblings of Destiny? The Creator is One; He is indescribable.
Gg afe Aad set faA 3 AU Ze AI (639-14, Fafs, Hs 5)
gur govind salaahee-ai bhaa-ee jis tay jaapai tath. ||1]|
Praise the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, O Siblings of Destiny; through Him, the essence is known. ||1]|
He He Aub ofa SaASST Il (639-15, Fefs, uz 5) mayray man japee-ai har bhagvantaa. O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord God.
OH Ug Uf Ae MUS TU TIE aT IST Il TTS Il (639-15, Fale, ws 5)
naam daan day-ay jan apnay dookh darad kaa hantaa. rahaa-o.
He blesses His servant with the gift of the Naam; He is the Destroyer of pain and suffering. ||Pause] |
wa ufa As fre Jd avet a8 fafa sd FT II (639-16, Hafs, He 5)
jaa kai ghar sabh kichh hai bhaa-ee na-o niDh bharay bhandaar.
Everything is in His home, O Siblings of Destiny; His warehouse is overflowing with the nine treasures.
fA at ahHfs a us set Sar na MRIS Il (639-16, Fafs, He 5)
tis kee kKeemat naa pavai bhaa-ee oochaa agam apaar.
His worth cannot be estimated, O Siblings of Destiny; He is lofty, inaccessible and infinite.
Aba #3 yfsurse set fos fos AsET ATT Il (639-17, Fafs, Hs 5)
jee-a jant partipaaldaa bhaa-ee nit nit kardaa saar.
He cherishes all beings and creatures, O Siblings of Destiny; he continually takes care of them.
Asay ua scm set Hate fherezos |QI (639-17, Fats, we 5)
satgur pooraa bhaytee-ai bhaa-ee sabad milaavanhaar. ||2]||
So meet with the Perfect True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, and merge in the Word of the Shabad. ||2| |
Ae vse Hddinifa set gH 3G IS OH Il (639-18, als, He 5) sachay charan sarayvee-ah bhaa-ee bharam bha-o hovai naas. Adoring the feet of the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, doubt and fear are dispelled.
fife HS Ast Ho Hiba ovet ofa a ati feeTA II (639-18, Aafs, Hs 5)
mil sant sabhaa man maa‘jee-ai bhaa-ee har kai naam nivaas.
Joining the Society of the Saints, cleanse your mind, O Siblings of Destiny, and dwell in the Name of the Lord.
fie nite nifamrast set GHG JS UPA II (639-19, Aafs, v2 5)
mitai anDhayraa agi-aantaa bhaa-ee kamal hovai pargaas.
The darkness of ignorance shall be dispelled, O Siblings of Destiny, and the lotus of your heart shall blossom forth.
qs svat AY Cun set Als Sw AfsaT UA ISI (639-19, Hats, Hs 5)
gur bachnee sukh oopjai bhaa-ee sabh fal satgur paas. ||3]|
By the Guru's Word, peace wells up, O Siblings of Destiny; all fruits are with the True Guru. |[3]|
UaT E8O
Ha sa sot set Tet AS at fe il (640-1, afs, ws 5)
mayraa tayraa chhodee-ai bhaa-ee ho-ee-ai sabh kee Dhoor.
Give up your sense of mine and yours, O Siblings of Destiny, and become the dust of the feet of all.
ufe ufe qoH uAfoor set Ue Ae TAfs Il (640-1, Fafs, Hs 5)
ghat ghat barahm pasaari-aa bhaa-ee paykhai sunai hajoor.
In each and every heart, God is contained, O Siblings of Destiny; He sees, and hears, and is ever-present with us.
fag fefs fers ueqay set fag fefs Heb sfa it (640-2, Hats, we 5)
jit din visrai paarbarahm bhaa-ee tit din maree-ai jhoor.
On that day when one forgets the Supreme Lord God, O Siblings of Destiny, on that day, one ought to die crying out in pain.
TIS ATS AHIG Set Asa Aer souls sil (640-3, af, ws 5)
karan karaavan samratho bhaa-ee sarab kalaa bharpoor. ||4]|
He is the all-powerful Cause of Causes, O Siblings of Destiny; he is totally filled with all powers. ||4]|
UM use oH J svet efor Ha feo II (640-3, Fafe, He 5)
paraym padaarath naam hai bhaa-ee maa-i-aa moh binaas.
The Love of the Name is the greatest treasure, O Siblings of Destiny; through it, emotional attachment to Maya is dispelled.
faq ae at fs we set fase ant feeTA II (640-4, Hats, He 5)
tis bhaavai taa mayl la-ay bhaa-ee hirdai naam nivaas.
If it is pleasing to His Will, then He unites us in His Union, O Siblings of Destiny; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in the mind.
ToHfa ane yarnha set fae JS usaA Il (640-4, Fafs, us 5)
gurmukh kamal pargaasee-ai bhaa-ee ridai hovai pargaas.
The heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth, O Siblings of Destiny, and the heart is illumined.
yae sfeor ugsTy ys set H@femr ats MaTA NUT (640-5, Hafe, He 5)
pargat bha-i-aa partaap parabh bhaa-ee ma-oli-aa Dharat akaas. ||5||
The Glory of God has been revealed, O Siblings of Destiny, and the earth and sky have blossomed forth. ||5| |
afs us Astro set nifafath war aS il 640-5, Hafs, us 5)
gur poorai santokhi-aa bhaa-ee ahinis laagaa bhaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has blessed me with contentment, O Siblings of Destiny; day and night, I remain attached to the Lord's Love.
dHat IH Je AST sve} Are ATE AMIE Il (640-6, Hafs, ne 5)
rasnaa raam ravai sadaa bhaa-ee saachaa saad su-aa-o.
My tongue continually chants the Lord's Name, O Siblings of Destiny; this is the true taste, and the object of human life.
adel Afé Af Atfenr set forse ufeut ae Il (640-6, Aafe, H 5)
karnee sun sun jeevi-aa bhaa-ee nihchal paa-i-aa thaa-o.
Listening with my ears, I hear and so I live, O Siblings of Destiny; I have obtained the unchanging, unmoving state.
fan udsifs & meet aret A bast Afs WE NEI (640-7, afs, 2 5)
jis parteet na aavee bhaa-ee so jee-arhaa jal jaa-o. ||6||
That soul,which does not place its faith in the Lord shall burn, O Siblings of Destiny. [16] |
ad Te He Atos set 3G fs & safe WE Il (640-7, Fale, He 5)
baho gun mayray saahibai bhaa-ee ha-o tis kai bal jaa-o.
My Lord and Master has so many virtues, O Siblings of Destiny; I am a sacrifice to Him.
6g fosaeiors user svet Uf faare a il 640-8, Fafs, us 5)
oh nirgunee-aaray paaldaa bhaa-ee day-ay nithaavay thaa-o.
He nurtures even the most worthless, O Siblings of Destiny, and gives home to the homeless.
fora Hard ATA AA set Tat AT aT aE Il (640-9, Hafe, we 5)
rijak sambaahay saas saas bhaa-ee goorhaa jaa kaa naa-o.
He gives us nourishment with each and every breath, O Siblings of Destiny; His Name is everlasting.
fAR ae Aa seit set UT PSA ASHE IDI (640-9, Fafs, Hs 5)
jis gur saachaa bhaytee-ai bhaa-ee pooraa tis karmaa-o. ||7||
One who meets with the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, does so only by perfect destiny. ||7||
fSH fag wat 3 Aten set Aaa oer saufe Il (640-10, Has, Hs 5)
tis bin gharhee na jeevee-ai bhaa-ee sarab kalaa bharpoor.
Without Him, I cannot live, even for an instant, O Siblings of Destiny; He is totally filled with all powers.
AMA faeth 3 feAd set Uae Ae Tafs I (640-10, Fats, we 5)
Saas giraas na visrai bhaa-ee paykha-o sadaa hajoor.
With every breath and morsel of food, I will not forget Him, O Siblings of Destiny; I behold Him ever-present.
A Afar frerfeor set Aa afoot saute Il (640-11, Hafs, H2 5)
saaDhoo sang milaa-i-aa bhaa-ee sarab rahi-aa bharpoor.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meet Him, O Siblings of Destiny; He is totally pervading and permeating everywhere.
frat Ulfs o site set A fos fos Hoe Sfa II (640-11, Fats, 12 5)
jinaa pareet na lagee-aa bhaa-ee say nit nit marday jhoor. ||8]|
Those who do not embrace love for the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, always die crying out in pain. ||8]|
nuts ofe safer set SCH TU AAT Il (640-12, Fale, He 5)
anchal laa-ay taraa-i-aa bhaa-ee bha-ojal dukh sansaar.
Grasping hold of the hem of His robe, O Siblings of Destiny, we are carried across the world-ocean of fear and pain.
afa fasur sefs forfemr aret alse nial mrs I (640-12, Aafs, 2 5)
kar kirpaa nadar nihaali-aa bhaa-ee keeton ang apaar.
By His Glance of Grace, He has blessed us, O Siblings of Destiny; He shall be with us until the very end.
Ho 36 Ase dfenr aret SHS BMH MME Il (640-13, Fats, He 5)
man tan seetal ho-i-aa bhaa-ee bhojan naam aDhaar.
My mind and body are soothed and calmed, O Siblings of Destiny, nourished by the food of the Naam.
aoa fsH Adetast oe fa faofa aeSTST WENA (640-13, Fats, Hz 5)
naanak tis sarnaagatee bhaa-ee je kilbikh kaatanhaar. ||9||1]| Nanak has entered His Sanctuary, O Siblings of Destiny; the Lord is the Destroyer of sins. ||9]|1]|
Hafe Hae U Il (640-14)
sorath mehlaa 5. Sorat'h, Fifth Mehl:
HS aes eu Aad fumird sa wrvet BY Aurfemr I (640-14, Fafs, ne 5)
maat garabh dukh saagro pi-aaray tah apnaa naam japaa-i-aa.
The womb of the mother is an ocean of pain, O Beloved; even there, the Lord causes His Name to be chanted.
wofe ate fay under fimird wrfeor He earfenr | (640-15, Fats, He 5)
baahar kaadh bikh pasree-aa pi-aaray maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-i-aa.
When he emerges, he finds corruption pervading everywhere, O Beloved, and he becomes increasingly attached to Maya.
fAR 3 ats aH orf fumre fsa ua ae frerfenr II (640-16, Fafs, Hs 5)
jis no keeto karam aap pi-aaray tis pooraa guroo milaa-i-aa. One whom the Lord blesses with His kind favor, O Beloved, meets the Perfect Guru.
A oreo AA Af filmes oH ont fee orfemr III (640-16, Fafs, He 5)
SO aaraaDhay Saas Saas pi-aaray raam naam liv laa-i-aa. ||1||
He worships the Lord in adoration with each and every breath, O Beloved; he is lovingly attached to the Lord's Name. ||1||
Hfs safe Sct fa 3d fimrd nfs sfs Sat Sa I (640-17, Fats, He 5)
man tan tayree tayk hai pi-aaray man tan tayree tayk.
You are the support of my mind and body, O Beloved; You are the support of my mind and body.
3u fag nied 5 adod” fimrd nisarnit Sa i ToS Il (640-17, Fale, He 5)
tuDh bin avar na karanhaar pi-aaray antarjaamee ayk. rahaa-o.
There is no other Creator except for You, O Beloved; You alone are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||Pause] |
afe HoH Sfh urfeur fimrd nifsa rife wy ute I (640-18, Fafs, He 5)
kot janam bharam aa-i-aa pi-aaray anik jon dukh paa-ay.
After wandering in doubt for millions of incarnations, he comes into the world, O Beloved; for uncounted lifetimes, he has suffered in pain.
Ara Afog fenfoor fumird gost fs ARTE I (640-19, Fafs, He 5)
saachaa saahib visri-aa pi-aaray bahutee milai sajaa-ay.
He has forgotten his True Lord and Master, O Beloved, and so he suffers terrible punishment.
fie se us Afsag fimrs A ora ATS OTE Il (40-19, Fats, ue 5)
jin bhaytai pooraa satguroo pi-aaray say laagay saachai naa-ay.
Those who meet with the Perfect True Guru, O Beloved, are attached to the True Name.
UST E8A
fsor fue echat fimrd FART AgSTtE QI (641-1, Fats, He 5)
tinaa pichhai chhutee-ai pi-aaray jo saachee sarnaa-ay. ||2||
We are saved by following those, O Beloved, who seek the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||2]|
fot afa & ufemr fimrd fate safe atst Fa il (641-1, Fats, v2 5) mithaa kar kai khaa-i-aa pi-aaray tin tan keetaa rog. He thinks that his food is so sweet, O Beloved, but it makes his body ill.
aga dfe ufsrfenr filmi fSn 3 Cufamr Aa I (641-2, Fats, He 5) ka-urhaa ho-ay patisati-aa pi-aaray tis tay upji-aa sog. It turns out to be bitter, O Beloved, and it produces only sadness.
sa sure gotens fimrd Osd at feria il (41-2, Fats, He 5)
bhog bhunchaa-ay bhulaa-i-an pi-aaray utrai nahee vijog.
The Lord leads him astray in the enjoyment of pleasures, O Beloved, and so his sense of separation does not depart.
A ad vfs Corfamr fimrd fsa ud ufeor AAS ISI (641-3, Fats, He 5) jo gur may! uDhaari-aa pi-aaray tin Dhuray pa-i-aa sanjog. ||3]| Those who meet the Guru are saved, O Beloved; this is their pre-ordained destiny.
[I3]|
Hfeor orate nifenr fimrd fats 3 uefa ufs I (41-3, Fafo, x2 5)
maa-i-aa laalach ati-aa pi-aaray chit na aavahi mool.
He is filled with longing for Maya, O Beloved, and so the Lord does not ever come into his mind.
fe 3 fenafs usqan Homi A se Fe OFF Il (641-4, Hats, ws 5)
jin too visrahi paarbarahm su-aamee say tan ho-ay Dhoorh.
Those who forget You, O Supreme Lord Master, their bodies turn to dust. fasere oats agstenr firs Css SS AG Il 641-5, Fafo, ws 5)
billaat karahi bahutayri-aa pi-aaray utrai naahee sool.
They cry out and scream horribly, O Beloved, but their torment does not end. A ae Afe Aetonr fimrs fs a afr HS sil (641-5, Fats, we 5)
jo gur mayl savaari-aa pi-aaray tin kaa rahi-aa mool. ||4||
Those who meet the Guru, and reform themselves, O Beloved, their capital remains intact. ||4||
Has Ag & otaet flmrs A art urfa SATE I (641-6, Hafs, nz 5)
saakat sang na keej-ee pi-aaray jay kaa paar vasaa-ay.
As far as possible, do not associate with the faithless cynics, O Beloved.
fan fife afe fers fimrd A ufs as Cfo ATE I 641-6, Fafs, He 5)
jis mili-ai har visrai pi-aaray so muhi kaalai uth jaa-ay.
Meeting with them, the Lord is forgotten, O Beloved, and you rise and depart with a blackened face.
HoHfe set oo fs fumed esas fs ARTE Il (641-7, ahs, He 5)
manmukh dho-ee nah milai pi-aaray dargeh milai sajaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh finds no rest or shelter, O Beloved; in the Court of the Lord, they are punished.
A as His Aetanr fimrs fsor ust ute iil (641-7, Hafs, ws 5)
jo gur mayl savaari-aa pi-aaray tinaa pooree paa-ay. ||5||
Those who meet with the Guru, and reform themselves, O Beloved, their affairs are resolved. ||5]|
Han AGA froreu fumrd fea o vat ofe i 641-8, Fafs, He 5)
sanjam sahas si-aanpaa pi-aaray ik na chalee naal.
One may have thousands of clever tricks and techniques of austere self-discipline, O Beloved, but not even one of them will go with him.
A any afie 3 fimrd fae afe oat ats Il 641-9, Fats, He 5)
jo baymukh gobind tay pi-aaray tin kul laagai gaal.
Those who turn their backs on the Lord of the Universe, O Beloved, their families are stained with disgrace.
det SAS 3 WS films az o vat ats Il (641-9, iafs, ws 5)
hodee vasat na jaatee-aa pi-aaray koorh na chalee naal.
They do not realize that they do have Him , O Beloved; falsehood will not go with them.
Afsag frat free fms Ara aH ANT MEI (641-10, Fats, H2 5) satgur jinaa milaa-i-on pi-aaray saachaa naam samaal. ||6]| Those who meet with the True Guru, O Beloved, dwell upon the True Name. ||6]||
AS Hay fomre fomre fimrs fan 6 sefs ad Il (641-10, Fafs, He 5)
sat santokh gi-aan Dhi-aan pi-aaray jis no nadar karay. When the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, O Beloved, one is blessed with Truth, contentment, wisdom and meditation.
woes dese Te se fiers wifes us ss Il 41-11, Fale, ws 5)
an-din keertan gun ravai pi-aaray amrit poor bharay.
Night and day, he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, O Beloved, totally filled with Ambrosial Nectar.
eu Aad fso Sfumr flmrs sense urfe us | (641-11, Fale, He 5)
dukh saagar tin langhi-aa pi-aaray bhavjal paar paray.
He crosses over the sea of pain, O Beloved, and swims across the terrifying world- ocean.
fan sve fon nfs Sfo films Ret WET Us NDI (641-12, Fafs, He 5)
jis bhaavai tis mayl laihi pi-aaray say-ee sadaa kharay. ||7]||
One who is pleasing to His Will, He unites with Himself, O Beloved; he is forever true. II7II
Aye usy efenre eC fimrd sas fSA a TS Il (641-12, Rafe, 48 5)
samrath purakh da-i-aal day-o pi-aaray bhagtaa tis kaa taan.
The all-powerful Divine Lord is compassionate, O Beloved; He is the Support of His devotees.
faq Asset ofa ue fimrs fa nisaAmit AS Il (641-13, Fats, He 5) tis sarnaa-ee dheh pa-ay pi-aaray je antarjaamee jaan. I seek His Sanctuary, O Beloved; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Jos uss Aetont filmirg HASla AE SIATS Il (641-14, Fafs, He 5)
halat palat savaari-aa pi-aaray mastak sach neesaan.
He has adorned me in this world and the next, O Beloved; He has placed the Emblem of Truth upon my forehead.
Aus ae 3 dnd fimrd soa AE AIHES INCI (641-14, Fafs, ne 5) so parabh kaday na veesrai pi-aaray naanak sad kurbaan. ||8]|2]| I shall never forget that God, O Beloved; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||8]|2||
Hofe HIG u we 2 wneud (641-16) sorath mehlaa 5 ghar 2 asatpadee-aa Sorat’h, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsas ure II (641-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ure ufaG nig Se sherfes foefs snfamt ATO Il (641-17, Fats, nH 5)
paath parhi-o ar bayd beechaari-o nival bhu-angam saaDhay.
They read scriptures, and contemplate the Vedas; they practice the inner cleansing techniques of Yoga, and control of the breath.
usd Hot fA Ha 3 salaG nifoe msefa sat A (641-17, Aafs, v2 5)
panch janaa si-o sang na chhutki-o aDhik aha’-buDh baaDhay. ||1||
But they cannot escape from the company of the five passions; they are increasingly bound to egotism. ||1]|
fumirg feo fafa fms o Wet H Ate AIH niSaT Il (641-18, Fats, He 5)
pi-aaray in biDh milan na jaa-ee mai kee-ay karam anaykaa.
O Beloved, this is not the way to meet the Lord; I have performed these rituals so many times.
ofs ufsS aomit & eurd cin aft fader i TIE Il 41-18, Aafs, He 5)
haar pari-o su-aamee kai du-aarai deejai buDh bibaykaa. rahaa-o.
I have collapsed, exhausted, at the Door of my Lord Master; I pray that He may grant me a discerning intellect. | |Pause| |
Hfs sfe@ acurst afaS aa fefaS ao nrdt il (641-19, Fafs, 42 5)
mon bha-i-o karpaatee rahi-o nagan firi-o ban maahee. One may remain silent and use his hands as begging bowls, and wander naked in the forest.
3e Stee AS Usst SS efsor Sea SH MI 641-19, Fafs, He 5)
tat tirath sabh Dhartee bharmi-o dubiDhaa chhutkai naahee. ||2||
He may make pilgrimages to river banks and sacred shrines all over the world, but his sense of duality will not leave him. ||2]|
UST E82
Ho ana Stee ate afAS fafs ages TIES Il (642-1, Fels, He 5)
man kaamnaa tirath jaa-ay basi-o sir karvat Dharaa-ay.
His mind's desires may lead him to go and dwell at sacred places of pilgrimage, and offer his head to be sawn off;
Ho at HG 3 Sad fea fafa A we ASS ATE ISI (642-2, Fafs, nu: 5)
man kee mail na utrai ih biDh jay lakh jatan karaa-ay. ||3]||
but this will not cause the filth of his mind to depart, even though he may make thousands of efforts. ||3]|
afsa afhat ded ded sg fafa ee esa II (642-2, ahs, He 5) kanik kaaminee haivar gaivar baho biDh daan daataaraa. He may give gifts of all sorts - gold, women, horses and elephants.
nis SAS sft ag isu oo fHesha ale Era sil (642-3, Fale, Hs 5) ann bastar bhoom baho arpay nah milee-ai har du-aaraa. ||4||
He may make offerings of corn, clothes and land in abundance, but this will not lead him to the Lord's Door. ||4||
UM MIT HLS SST US AGH FF FIT Il (642-3, Fats, us 5)
poojaa archaa bandan dand-ut khat karmaa rat rahtaa.
He may remain devoted to worship and adoration, bowing his forehead to the floor, practicing the six religious rituals.
JG 3G aes dus Hfs fer og fieeha feo FAST NU (642-4, Fats, He 5)
ha-o ha-o karat banDhan meh pari-aa nah milee-ai ih jugtaa. ||5||
He indulges in egotism and pride, and falls into entanglements, but he does not meet the Lord by these devices. ||5] |
na fho urns veanits & st afs afe afar i (642-4, Fats, He 5)
jog siDh aasan cha-oraaseeh ay bhee kar kar rahi-aa.
He practices the eighty-four postures of Yoga, and acquires the supernatural powers of the Siddhas, but he gets tired of practicing these.
zat ora fefs fefs aon fs fAG Ha 3 afomr EI (642-5, Hats, He 5)
vadee aarjaa fir fir janmai har si-o sang na gahi-aa. ||6||
He lives a long life, but is reincarnated again and again; he has not met with the Lord. [16] |
TH Sle SHS at Jat afm JAH niSTI Il (642-6, Aafs, ue 5)
raaj leelaa raajan kee rachnaa kari-aa hukam afaaraa.
He may enjoy princely pleasures, and regal pomp and ceremony, and issue unchallenged commands.
An Adal Veo Sut Baa UT AT ENTS IDI! (642-6, Hafs, ne 5)
sayj sohnee chandan cho-aa narak ghor kaa du-aaraa. ||7| |
He may lie on beautiful beds, perfumed with sandalwood oil, but this will led him only to the gates of the most horrible hell. ||7]|
dfs atefs AaHafs 3 fafs AHS A ATH Il (642-7, Fale, He 5)
har keerat saaDhsangat hai sir karman kai karmaa.
Singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is the highest of all actions.
ag ood fsq sfeG uaufs fan usa fed at Ba" ICI (642-7, Fats, us 5) kaho naanak tis bha-i-o paraapat jis purab likhay kaa lahnaa. ||8]|| Says Nanak, he alone obtains it, who is pre-destined to receive it. ||8]||
3d Aaa feo dat HST I (642-8, Fafs, He 5) tayro sayvak ih rang maataa. Your slave is intoxicated with this Love of Yours.
sfes fours da eu sag ate ofa attests fed HE TST Nl ITS SA UUM (642-8, Fats, H8 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan har har keertan ih man raataa. rahaa-o doojaa. [11131]
The Destroyer of the pains of the poor has become merciful to me, and this mind is imbued with the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||Second Pause||1]|3]|
Ta Hafs Sd HIG 8 at (642-10)
raag sorath vaar mahlay 4 kee Vaar Of Raag Sorat'h, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfE II (642-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ABA Hs Y Il (642-11)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Hofe Het HoSat A AS His SE Il (642-11, Aafs, 2 D sorath sadaa suhaavanee jay sachaa man ho-ay.
Sorat’h is always beautiful, if it brings the True Lord to dwell in the mind of the soul- bride.
at HG 3 as Hfe His AS ALE I (642-11, ats, He 1)
dandee mail na kat man jeebhai sachaa so-ay.
Her teeth are clean and her mind is not split by duality; the Name of the True Lord is on her tongue.
AA Usha & sat Afsaag Afe fora Il (642-12, efs, nz 1)
sasurai pay-ee-ai bhai vasee satgur sayv nisang.
Here and hereafter, she abides in the Fear of God, and serves the True Guru without hesitation.
uddfa aus Fi fus fires yAt we furs Afr II (642-12, Fafs, 2 1)
parhar kaparh jay pir milai khusee raavai pir sang.
Discarding worldly adornments, she meets her Husband Lord, and she celebrates joyfully with Him.
Het Hardt ar uf ae BAG UST Il (642-12, Fafs, ne 1)
Sadaa seegaaree naa-o man kaday na mail patang.
She is adorned forever with the Name in her mind, and she does not have even an iota of filth.
ded HO HE Ufa AR Oo 3g {AA II (642-13, Fafo, He 1)
dayvar jayth mu-ay dukh sasoo kaa dar kis.
Her husband's younger and elder brothers, the corrupt desires, have died, suffering in pain; and now, who fears Maya, the mother-in-law?
A fus aS Sta AGH Het AT A NA (642-13, Aafs, ne 1)
jay pir bhaavai naankaa karam manee sabh sach. ||1]||
If she becomes pleasing to her Husband Lord, O Nanak, she bears the jewel of good karma upon her forehead, and everything is Truth to her. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (642-14) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Hofe sf Aoeat wT ofs oH PSS Il (642-14, Fafs, ve 4) sorath taam suhaavanee jaa har naam dhandholay. Sorat’h is beautiful only when it leads the soul-bride to seek the Lord's Name.
Td UTY Hote nTySt TIHSt dfs dfs FS Il (642-14, Fale, we 4) gur purakh manaavai aapnaa gurmatee har har bolay.
She pleases her Guru and God; under Guru's Instruction, she speaks the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofa ufi anet feor ofS ofa ast afe sft SB Ml (642-15, Fafs, ve 4)
har paraym kasaa-ee dinas raat har ratee har rang cholay.
She is attracted to the Lord's Name, day and night, and her body is drenched in the color of the Love of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs AAT usY 3 Beet AS Chm AAS HSS Il (642-15, Fale, He 4)
har jaisaa purakh na labh-ee sabh daykhi-aa jagat mai tolay.
No other being like the Lord God can be found; I have looked and searched over the whole world.
afs Afsafs on fesfeur Hg vias o aT 3B Il (642-16, Fats, we 4)
gur satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa man anat na kaahoo dolay.
The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam within me; my mind does not waver any more.
HO ood dfs a OH TD Td Afsad A HG AS Ill (642-17, Fats, ne 4) jan naanak har kaa daas hai gur satgur kay gol golay. ||2|| Servant Nanak is the Lord's slave, the slave of the slaves of the Guru, the True Guru.
21] UugaT Il (642-17)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 um frafe ass franerfour Il (642-17, ats, 12 4)
too aapay sisat kartaa sirjanhaari-aa. You Yourself are the Creator, the Fashioner of the world.
3u nm ae safe su mify Aetfaemr Il (642-18, Aafs, He 4) tuDh aapay khayl rachaa-ay tuDh aap savaari-aa. You Yourself have arranged the play, and You Yourself arrange it.
ast agst mrfy wef Sareatfanr Il (642-18, Fafs, 2 4)
daataa kartaa aap aap bhoganhaari-aa. You Yourself are the Giver and the Creator; You Yourself are the Enjoyer.
Ag 30 Age eas Curesatfer I (642-19, Aafs, He 4)
sabh tayraa sabad vartai upaavanhaari-aa.
The Word of Your Shabad is pervading everywhere, O Creator Lord. JC THe Ae Had as AS Shant All (642-19, Aafs, He 4)
ha-o gurmukh sadaa salaahee gur ka-o vaari-aa. ||1]|| As Gurmukh, I ever praise the Lord; I am a sacrifice to the Guru. ||1]|
Ua €8B
HS H2 3 Il (643-1) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
UGH AES fs He sf wre SA TE il 643-1, Fale, ws 3)
ha-umai jaltay jal mu-ay bharam aa-ay doojai bhaa-ay.
In the flames of egotism, he is burnt to death; he wanders in doubt and the love of duality.
ud Asafa wf Se mrue Us ute Il 643-1, Fels, He 3) poorai satgur raakh lee-ay aapnai pannai paa-ay. The Perfect True Guru saves him, making him His own.
fey Ha AES Sect urfeur as a Aafe ASTE II (643-2, Aafs, He 3)
ih jag jaltaa nadree aa-i-aa gur kai sabad subhaa-ay.
This world is burning; through the Sublime Word of the Guru's Shabad, this comes to be seen.
Hafe dS A AIG Se Soa AP AH IAI (643-2, Aafs, He 3)
sabad ratay say seetal bha-ay naanak sach kamaa-ay. ||1||
Those who are attuned to the Shabad are cooled and soothed; O Nanak, they practice Truth. |} 1]|
He 3 Il (643-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hefaé Afsag Afeort Us ASH UPSTE Il (643-3, Fels, Hs 3)
Safli-o satgur sayvi-aa Dhan janam parvaan.
Service to the True Guru is fruitful and rewarding; blessed and acceptable is such a life.
fro Afsag dtefenr ufeor o feAd ASt use ATE Il (643-3, Fafs, He 3) jinaa satgur jeevdi-aa mu-i-aa na visrai say-ee purakh sujaan. Those who do not forget the True Guru, in life and in death, are truly wise people.
ae Curd wma’ A AG Je USS Il (643-4, Halo, we 3) kul uDhaaray aapnaa so jan hovai parvaan. Their families are saved, and they are approved by the Lord.
TsHfY HE Alec UdeTS Tilo HOH AalH Hat Il (643-4, Fafs, Hs 3)
gurmukh mu-ay jeevday parvaan heh manmukh janam maraahi.
The Gurmukhs are approved in death as in life, while the self-willed manmukhs continue the cycle of birth and death.
Sod HE os wmdinifa fa qe a Aafe ANT IQI (643-5, Aafs, Hs 3)
naanak mu-ay na aakhee-ahi je gur kai sabad samaahi. ||2]|
O Nanak, they are not described as dead, who are absorbed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
ust Il (643-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs use fodne Afe af oy foment | 43-6, af, He 3) har purakh niranjan sayv har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Serve the Immaculate Lord God, and meditate on the Lord's Name.
ASAats ATT Bla Ts STH AHEM I (643-6, Hafs, we 3) satsangat saaDhoo lag har naam samaa-ee-ai. Join the Society of the Holy Saints, and be absorbed in the Lord's Name.
fs Sat Sat aT H Has SSM Il 643-6, Fels, we 3) har tayree vadee kaar mai moorakh laa-ee-ai. O Lord, glorious and great is service to You; I am so foolish
IG da Ba 3a H IaH SoHE Il (643-7, Fafs, ne 3) ha-o golaa laalaa tuDh mai hukam furmaa-ee-ai.
- please, commit me to it. Iam Your servant and slave; command me, according to Your Will.
o@ qanfa arg anret fa afs ANSE QI (643-7, Fats, He 3) ha-o gurmukh kaar kamaavaa je gur samjaa-ee-ai. ||2|| As Gurmukh, I shall serve You, as Guru has instructed me. ||2| |
HS H3 3 Il (643-8) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
yota foto orear fa aes uit fesftmimy i (643-8, Fats, ue 3) poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa je kartai aap likhi-aas. He acts according to pre-ordained destiny, written by the Creator Himself.
Ho Saget urhug fenfour TESA Il (643-9, Fale, He 3)
moh thag-ulee paa-ee-an visri-aa guntaas.
Emotional attachment has drugged him, and he has forgotten the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
Hy Weg AG Hee en ste yfenrA I (643-9, Fafs, us 3) mat jaanhu jag jeevdaa doojai bhaa-ay mu-i-aas. Don't think that he is alive in the world - he is dead, through the love of duality.
frat asf an 3 Sf A safe 3 foot uA I (643-9, Fafs, nH 3)
jinee gurmukh naam na chayti-o say bahan na milnee paas.
Those who do not meditate on the Lord, as Gurmukh, are not permitted to sit near the Lord.
ey or ag mifs wet us aes 3 Ae Set AHA II (643-10, Fats, He 3)
dukh laagaa baho at ghanaa put kalat na saath ko-ee jaas.
They suffer the most horrible pain and suffering, and neither their sons nor their wives go along with them.
Bat fete ug aver dum niefs BS ATA Il (643-11, Aafs, He 3) lokaa vich muhu kaalaa ho-aa andar ubhay saas. Their faces are blackened among men, and they sigh in deep regret.
HOHe 6 a & fendt vfa afenr SAA II (643-11, Fale, He 3) manmukhaa no ko na vishee chuk ga-i-aa vaysaas. No one places any reliance in the self-willed manmukhs; trust in them is lost.
Soa THU S AY vier frat nists oH FSSA IAI (643-12, Fats, He 3)
naanak gurmukhaa no sukh aglaa jinaa antar naam nivaas. ||1]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs live in absolute peace; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides within them. ||1]|
He 3 Il (643-12)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
A Ae A Ane fa aenfe frefs wate il (643-12, Fafs, ne 3)
say sain say sajnaa je gurmukh mileh subhaa-ay.
They alone are relatives, and they alone are friends, who, as Gurmukh, join together in love.
Afsad a stat niofes ada A Afs Jd AHTE Il (643-13, Aafs, He 3)
satgur kaa bhaanaa an-din karahi say sach rahay samaa-ay.
Night and day, they act according to the True Guru's Will; they remain absorbed in the True Name.
en ote oa ANE 3 umdinits fA nifsHe oats Fars Il (643-13, Hafs, we 3)
doojai bhaa-ay lagay sajan na aakhee-ahi je abhimaan karahi vaykaar.
Those who are attached to the love of duality are not called friends; they practice egotism and corruption.
HOHY MTU AMTsat ASH B Aald ASts ll (643-14, Fafs, v2 3) manmukh aap su-aarthee kaaraj na sakahi savaar. The self-willed manmukhs are selfish; they cannot resolve anyone's affairs.
area sta fetter area afe 5 ASST EY Il (643-15, Fafs, us 3) naanak poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||2|| O Nanak, they act according to their pre-ordained destiny; no one can erase it. ||2]|
UuGSt II (643-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
30 wm Aas Cure & orf ae gerfemr Ih (643-15, Aafs, He 3) tuDh aapay jagat upaa-ay kai aap khayl rachaa-i-aa. You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself arranged the play of it.
3 ae »rfu frofor wfemr Hg earfemr II (643-16, Fats, He 3) tarai gun aap Sirji-aa maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-i-aa. You Yourself created the three qualities, and fostered emotional attachment to Maya.
fefs JH Sur Hatha fefs wre afeur i (643-16, Fah, He 3)
vich ha-umai laykhaa mangee-ai fir aavai jaa-i-aa.
He is called to account for his deeds done in egotism; he continues coming and going in reincarnation.
frat fe urfu faut ag A afs AHSTfEMT II (643-17, Aefs, He 3) jinaa har aap kirpaa karay say gur samjhaa-i-aa. The Guru instructs those whom the Lord Himself blesses with Grace.
aferdt Ts nus Het Het wAfEnt IBIl (643-17, Fafs, Hs 3)
balihaaree gur aapnay sadaa sadaa ghumaa-i-aa. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||3]|
HSa H3 3 Il (643-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hfeor HHS Huet fats fee tot Aa afer I 643-18, Fafs, He 3) maa-i-aa mamtaa mohnee jin vin dantaa jag khaa-i-aa. The love of Maya is enticing; without teeth, it has eaten up the world.
HoHY ua Tanta Cad frat Afs oth fas afer Il (643-18, Fafs, He 3)
manmukh khaaDhay gurmukh ubray jinee sach naam chit laa-i-aa.
The self-willed manmukhs are eaten away, while the Gurmukhs are saved; they focus their consciousness on the True Name.
fag oe na ane fed qanfe aedt urfemr I (643-19, Fats, He 3) bin naavai jag kamlaa firai gurmukh nadree aa-i-aa. Without the Name, the world wanders around insane; the Gurmukhs come to see this.
uar ge um aafsor feses AoH aster AYES His B SATEMM II (644-1, Fafs, us 3)
DhanDhaa karti-aa nihfal janam gavaa-i-aa sukh-daata man na vasaa-i-aa. Involved in worldly affairs, he wastes his life in vain; the peace-giving Lord does not come to abide in his mind.
aoa oH fsa as fufemr faa as ute fete ufemr ail 44-1, Fefs, ve 3) naanak naam tinaa ka-o mili-aa jin ka-o Dhur likh paa-i-aa. ||1]| O Nanak, they alone obtain the Name, who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1]|
He 3 Il (644-2)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
we ot xfs nifys sous o HOHE ATE & ufenr I (644-2, Fale, Hs 3)
ghar hee meh amrit bharpoor hai manmukhaa saad na paa-i-aa.
The home within is filled with Ambrosial Nectar, but the self-willed manmukh does not get to taste it.
fa@ ast fog 3 We gHe sath gerfenr II (644-3, Fats, oe 3)
ji-o kastooree mirag na jaanai bharmadaa bharam bhulaa-i-aa.
He is like the deer, who does not recognize its own musk-scent; it wanders around, deluded by doubt.
nifys sfx fey Had ass rfl unrfemr I (644-3, Fafs, He 3)
amrit taj bikh sangrahai kartai aap khu-aa-i-aa.
The manmukh forsakes the Ambrosial Nectar, and instead gathers poison; the Creator Himself has fooled him.
aonfy fed Ast uet fsa niefs gon feerfemr I (644-4, Fas, He 3)
gurmukh virlay sojhee pa-ee tinaa andar barahm dikhaa-i-aa.
How rare are the Gurmukhs, who obtain this understanding; they behold the Lord God within themselves.
36 HO Ase dfeor gna ofa AS wrfemr Il (644-4, Fafs, Hs 3)
tan man seetal ho-i-aa rasnaa har saad aa-i-aa.
Their minds and bodies are cooled and soothed, and their tongues enjoy the sublime taste of the Lord.
Hee dt ae Cur pee Afs frerfenr 1 44-5, afs, vs 3)
sabday hee naa-o oopjai sabday mayl milaa-i-aa.
Through the Word of the Shabad, the Name wells up; through the Shabad, we are united in the Lord's Union.
fag Hae AS Ha aGae fase HON Teter Il (644-5, Fats, Hs 3) bin sabdai sabh jag ba-uraanaa birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. Without the Shabad, the whole world is insane, and it loses its life in vain.
nifys fa Ae I Soa ToHfe urfer I (644-6, Fafs, He 3) amrit ayko sabad hai naanak gurmukh paa-i-aa. ||2|| The Shabad alone is Ambrosial Nectar; O Nanak, the Gurmukhs obtain it. ||2||
UugSt II (644-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A dfs use wiain 3 ag fas fafa ure i (644-7, Fafe, He 3) so har purakh agamm hai kaho kit biDh paa-ee-ai. The Lord God is inaccessible; tell me, how can we find Him?
SH Jy 3 3u mfeA ag Aa fas foment 1 644-7, iafo, vs 3)
tis roop na raykh adrist kaho jan ki-o Dhi-aa-ee-ai.
He has no form or feature, and He cannot be seen; tell me, how can we meditate on Him?
fadarg fadue ofa men fomr afo ae arent Il (644-8, Fefs, v2 3) nirankaar niranjan har agam ki-aa kahi gun gaa-ee-ai.
The Lord is formless, immaculate and inaccessible; which of His Virtues should we speak of and sing?
fan orf ase wrfu A ofs Hofer uve II (644-2, Fafs, nH 3) jis aap bujhaa-ay aap so har maarag paa-ee-ai. They alone walk on the Lord's Path, whom the Lord Himself instructs.
afs us Safer ge AST usm Il (644-9, Fats, we 3) gur poorai vaykhaali-aa gur sayvaa paa-ee-ai. ||4|| The Perfect Guru has revealed Him to me; serving the Guru, He is found. ||4] |
HS H8 3 Il (644-9) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fAG 36 ae Uist Ty s Sat Sho Il (644-9, Hats, ws 3)
ji-o tan koloo peerhee-ai rat na bhoree dayhi.
It is as if my body has been crushed in the oil-press, without yielding even a drop of blood;
MG Ze vO dsht As Aes Sfs i (644-10, Fale, He 3)
jee-o vanjai cha-o khannee-ai sachay sand-rhai nayhi.
it is as if my soul has been cut apart into pieces for the sake of the Love of the True Lord;
Soa HS o VaSt Tt mS ZT INA (644-10, Aafs, He 3) naanak mayl na chuk-ee raatee atai dayh. ||1]| O Nanak, still, night and day, my Union with the Lord is not broken. ||1]|
He 3 Il (644-11) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
AHS HS dae dq we Ho SE I (644-11, Fafs, ne 3) Sajan maidaa rangulaa rang laa-ay man lay-ay. My Friend is so full of joy and love; He colors my mind with the color of His Love,
fAG wets aus da st urdfa il (644-11, Aafs, He 3) ji-o maajeethai kaprhay rangay bhee paahayhi. like the fabric which is treated to retain the color of the dye.
Soa ST Oo SSd far 5 Bd AT lll (644-11, Fats, He 3) naanak rang na utrai bi-aa na lagai kayh. ||2]| O Nanak, this color does not depart, and no other color can be imparted to this fabric.
21] UgST Il (644-12)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs urfy eas urfu ofs wrfy gefeer i (644-12, Fafs, v2 3)
har aap vartai aap har aap bulaa-idaa.
The Lord Himself is pervading everywhere; the Lord Himself causes us to chant His Name.
ofa »mt fafe neta fafa do orfeer i 644-12, Aafs, ue 3) har aapay sarisat savaar sir DhanDhai laa-idaa. The Lord Himself created the creation; He commits all to their tasks.
feast sat ofe fefa nrfy unrfee|r i 644-13, Fafs, He 3) iknaa bhagtee laa-ay ik aap khu-aa-idaa. He engages some in devotional worship, and others, He causes to stray.
feast Hata ute fet Gsfs user i (644-13, Fafs, He 3) iknaa maarag paa-ay ik ujharh paa-idaa. He places some on the Path, while He leads others into the wilderness.
Ho soa oH fore Tenfe qe afee|r ull (644-14, Aafs, uz 3)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay gurmukh gun gaa-idaa. ||5||
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; as Gurmukh, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||5]|
HS H2 3 Il (644-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag ot Ae HES TA a ad fos OTE Il (644-15, Fats, ne 3)
satgur kee sayvaa Safal hai jay ko karay chit laa-ay.
Service to the True Guru is fruitful and rewarding, if one performs it with his mind focused on it.
fe fofeur ee ureet JBH fess ATE I (644-15, Fats, He 3) man chindi-aa fal paavnaa ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay. The fruits of the mind's desires are obtained, and egotism departs from within.
due 33 Hats df Ad Jd ANTE Il (644-16, Fats, He 3) banDhan torhai mukat ho-ay sachay rahai samaa-ay. His bonds are broken, and he is liberated; he remains absorbed in the True Lord.
fen na fs on vniog 3 ToHfe eA nfo morte I (644-16, Aafs, He 3) is jag meh naam alabh hai gurmukh vasai man aa-ay.
It is so difficult to obtain the Naam in this world; it comes to dwell in the mind of the Gurmukh.
Soa A Id Aets mmyat ge fSo afsos WE AU (644-17, Fafs, v2 3) naanak jo gur sayveh aapnaa ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. ||1|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to one who serves his True Guru. ||1]|
He8 3 Il (644-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hon He wits oT EH Bat ATE il 644-17, Fats, we 3)
manmukh man ajit hai doojai lagai jaa-ay.
The mind of the self-willed manmukh is so very stubborn; it is stuck in the love of duality.
fSH 3 AY AUS odt Ba fe feate i 644-18, Hafs, He 3)
tis no sukh supnai nahee dukhay dukh vihaa-ay.
He does not find peace, even in dreams; he passes his life in misery and suffering. ufs wife ufs ufs ufss aa fro mrfo warfe | (644-18, Fafs, He 3)
ghar ghar parh parh pandit thakay siDh samaaDh lagaa-ay. The Pandits have grown weary of going door to door, reading and reciting their
scriptures; the Siddhas have gone into their trances of Samaadhi.
feg Ho af 6 ureet aa AIH ANTE I (644-19, Fafs, He 3) ih man vas na aavee thakay karam kamaa-ay. This mind cannot be controlled; they are tired of performing religious rituals.
syuodt su ate aa nifsAfs Stee ate Il 644-19, Fats, vs 3)
bhaykh-Dhaaree bhaykh kar thakay athisath tirath naa-ay.
The impersonators have grown weary of wearing false costumes, and bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines.
ar égu Ho at ATS & Heol UGH Saf Tare Il (645-1, Fale, ne 3)
man kee saar na jaannee ha-umai bharam bhulaa-ay. They do not know the state of their own minds; they are deluded by doubt and egotism.
ad usAret 3 ufeur esarfa efor vfs wrf= I (645-1, Fafs, v8 3)
gur parsaadee bha-o pa-i-aa vadbhaag vasi-aa man aa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, the Fear of God is obtained; by great good fortune, the Lord comes to abide in the mind.
3 ufemt Ho efA dur eH Aafe Fete I (645-2, Fafs, He 3)
bhai pa-i-ai man vas ho-aa ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay.
When the Fear of God comes, the mind is restrained, and through the Word of the Shabad, the ego is burnt away.
Afs gs A fsaHs Ast Afs fete i (645-2, Aafs, nu: 3) sach ratay say nirmalay jotee jot milaa-ay. Those who are imbued with Truth are immaculate; their light merges in the Light.
Afsafe fife o@ urfeur area Afy AHTE QIK (645-3, Aas, v2 3) satgur mili-ai naa-o paa-i-aa naanak sukh samaa-ay. ||2| | Meeting the True Guru, one obtains the Name; O Nanak, he is absorbed in peace.
21 |
ugat Il (645-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ea gufs we da fea aha AIST Il (645-3, Fats, H 3) ayh bhoopat raanay rang din chaar suhaavanaa. The pleasures of kings and emperors are pleasing, but they last for only a few days.
eg Heer ga ans fue ufo afs Area II (645-4, Fafs, He 3)
ayhu maa-i-aa rang kasumbh khin meh leh jaavnaa.
These pleasures of Maya are like the color of the safflower, which wears off in a moment.
vofeur ats 3 3S fafs uu B ASST II (645-4, Fats, He 3) chaldi-aa naal na chalai sir paap lai jaavnaa.
They do not go with him when he departs; instead, he carries the load of sins upon his head.
At uats sorfeur ates St ust SISST Il (645-5, Fale, us 3) jaa’ pakarh chalaa-i-aa kaal taa’ kharaa daraavanaa. When death seizes him, and marches him away, then he looks absolutely hideous.
6a aor ofa 6 ure fefa ussreat IIE (645-5, Hats, He 3)
oh vaylaa hath na aavai fir pachhutaavnaa. ||6] |
That lost opportunity will not come into his hands again, and in the end, he regrets and repents. ||6||
HOG H2 3 Il (645-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag 3 A Ho fed A ad ey Aaa Il (645-6, Fats, ns 3) satgur tay jo muh firay say baDhay dukh sahaahi. Those who turn their faces away from the True Guru, suffer in sorrow and bondage.
fefa fefs firms 3 urfeat Hnfs 3 fe Af II (645-6, Fats, He 3) fir fir milan na paa-inee jameh tai mar jaahi. Again and again, they are born only to die; they cannot meet their Lord.
Hon da 3 eset vu dt ufo ey ute i (645-7, Fete, v2 3) sahsaa rog na chhod-ee dukh hee meh dukh paahi. The disease of doubt does not depart, and they find only pain and more pain.
Soa oedt aufA Sfa Age Afs fherfs All (645-7, Aafs, ue 3)
naanak nadree bakhas layhi sabday mayl milaahi. ||1]| O Nanak, if the Gracious Lord forgives, then one is united in Union with the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 3 Il (645-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
A Afsag 3 HU fed fsa oBa 5 OE Il (645-8, Fafs, He 3)
jo satgur tay muh firay tinaa tha-ur na thaa-o.
Those who turn their faces away from the True Guru, shall find no place of rest or Shelter.
fag sefs ute uf fed voeafs gear Il (645-8, Fafs, nH 3)
ji-o chhutarh ghar ghar firai duhchaaran badnaa-o.
They wander around from door to door, like a woman forsaken, with a bad character and a bad reputation.
Sea TaHfy syAmits A Afsard Als fHarS iQIl (645-9, Fafs, us 3) naanak gurmukh bakhsee-ah say satgur mayl milaa-o. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are forgiven, and united in Union with the True Guru. ||2]|
UuGSt II (645-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
a Aes Afs Hate A Seno fe afer I (645-9, Aafs, v2 3)
jo sayveh sat muraar say bhavjal tar ga-i-aa.
Those who serve the True Lord, the Destroyer of ego, cross over the terrifying world- ocean.
A aafs afs fs a fsa AH efs afeMr II (645-10, Fafs, ne 3)
jo boleh har har naa-o tin jam chhad ga-i-aa.
Those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are passed over by the Messenger of Death.
A vegas ud wf frat afe Afu afer I 645-10, Fats, He 3) say dargeh paiDhay jaahi jinaa har jap la-i-aa. Those who meditate on the Lord, go to His Court in robes of honor.
ofa Aes Aet use faa afe so HfeMr Il (645-11, Fafs, us 3) har sayveh say-ee purakh jinaa har tuDh ma-i-aa. They alone serve You, O Lord, whom You bless with Grace.
ae ae fimirg fos asHfe gH 3@ afenr IDI (645-11, Hafs, v3 3)
gun gaavaa pi-aaray nit gurmukh bharam bha-o ga-i-aa. ||7||
I sing continually Your Glorious Praises, O Beloved; as Gurmukh, my doubts and fears have been dispelled. ||7||
HS H8 3 Il (645-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
we fefs 3 eAS ues ofs 3H MIS AT Il (645-12, Hats, we 3)
thaalai vich tai vastoo pa-ee-o har bhojan amrit saar.
Upon the plate, three things have been placed; this is the sublime, ambrosial food of the Lord.
fas wd He fxusit uret He Enis I 645-13, Fats, ne 3) jit knaaDhai man taripat-ee-ai paa-ee-ai mokh du-aar. Eating this, the mind is satisfied, and the Door of Salvation is found.
feg sno vias J Hag Ss as Sets I (645-13, Fats, He 3)
ih bhojan alabh hai santahu labhai gur veechaar.
It is so difficult to obtain this food, O Saints; it is obtained only by contemplating the Guru.
fg Heat fas fees achat Aer cet Efe fe I (645-14, Fafs, ne 3)
ayh mudaavanee ki-o vichahu kadhee-ai sadaa rakhee-ai ur Dhaar.
Why should we cast this riddle out of our minds? We should keep it ever enshrined in our hearts.
og Heeal Afsag ust Tafa wat ats I (645-14, Fafo, ve 3) ayh mudaavanee satguroo paa-ee gursikhaa laDhee bhaal. The True Guru has posed this riddle. The Guru's Sikhs have found its solution.
soa fA ase A OSA of Ufeor genta ws NAM (645-15, Fats, He 3)
naanak jis bujhaa-ay so bujhsee har paa-i-aa gurmukh ghaal. ||1]|
O Nanak, he alone understands this, whom the Lord inspires to understand. The Gurmukhs work hard, and find the Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (645-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
a Ufa HS A fife ao Afsas fAC fos wt II (645-15, Fafs, Hs 3)
jo Dhur maylay say mil rahay satgur si-o chit laa-ay.
Those whom the Primal Lord unites, remain in Union with Him; they focus their consciousness on the True Guru.
unfy feeso A fees eA ate unrte il (645-16, Fafs, Hs 3)
aap vichhorhayn say vichhurhay doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay.
Those whom the Lord Himself separates, remain separated; in the love of duality, they are ruined.
aan fee aan for urétat uate fester SHE NI (645-16, Fafs, He 3)
naanak vin karmaa ki-aa paa-ee-ai poorab likhi-aa kamaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, without good karma, what can anyone obtain? He earns what he is pre- destined to receive. ||2| |
uGat Il (645-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afo Ader AA ets aeeasMM Il (645-17, Aafs, He 3) bahi sakhee-aa jas gaavahi gavanhaaree-aa. Sitting together, the companions sing the Songs of the Lord's Praises.
dfs oH Aetog fos dfs aS afsardinr il (645-18, Fafs, us 3) har naam salaahihu nit har ka-o balihaaree-aa. They praise the Lord's Name continually; they are a sacrifice to the Lord.
frat Afs four of ae faar g@ adior I (645-18, Fas, He 3) jinee sun mani-aa har naa-o tinaa ha-o vaaree-aa. Those who hear, and believe in the Lord's Name, to them I am a sacrifice.
dando ofa Ae fhoresardint il (645-19, Fats, us 3) gurmukhee-aa har mayl milaavanhaaree-aa. O Lord, let me unite with the Gurmukhs, who are united with You.
we fe We feo TS TT SuST SMM ICI (645-19, Fafs, ue 3) ha-o bal jaavaa din raat gur daikhanhaaree-aa. ||8] | I am a Sacrifice to those who, day and night, behold their Guru. ||8] |
HS H2 3 Il (645-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
uot és fee ore Afs sane fos afar Sat Af Il (646-1, Fats, He 3)
vin naavai sabh bharamday nit jag totaa saisaar. Without the Name of the Lord, everyone wanders around the world, losing.
Houfa AGH AHS ICH vig Tag Il (646-1, Aafs, v2 3) manmukh karam kamaavnay ha-umai anDh gubaar. The self-willed manmukhs do their deeds in the pitch black darkness of egotism.
aanfy nifqs ules aoa Hae Starts All (646-2, Fats, us 3) gurmukh amrit peevnaa naanak sabad veechaar. ||1||
The Gurmukhs drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak, contemplating the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 3 Il (646-2) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
\ SA
Hon Wel AdH Ae Il (646-2, Aafs, vs 3) sehjay jaagai sehjay sovai. He wakes in peace, and he sleeps in peace.
aan nisfes Crsfs de i (646-2, afs, ne 3) gurmukh an-din ustat hovai. The Gurmukh praises the Lord night and day.
HOHY SdH ATA Je Il (646-3, Fats, He 3) manmukh bharmai sahsaa hovai. The self-willed manmukh remains deluded by his doubts.
nists fst ste o Ae Il (646-3, Fats, 13 3) antar chintaa need na sovadi. He is filled with anxiety, and he cannot even sleep.
fomirat Arata Hef ASTE Il (646-3, Aafs, He 3) gi-aanee jaageh saveh subhaa-ay. The spiritually wise wake and sleep in peace.
SSA STH Saar sf AE Ill (646-4, Fafs, us 3) naanak naam rati-aa bal jaa-o. ||2]| Nanak is a sacrifice to those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
21 |
UgST Il (646-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A dfs oy fomrefa Fo afe afsur Il (646-4, Fafs, n2 3) say har naam Dhi-aavahi jo har rati-aa. They alone meditate on the Lord's Name, who are imbued with the Lord.
ofa fea fomrets fea fea afe Afsor il (646-4, ats, He 3) har ik Dhi-aavahi ik iko har sati-aa. They meditate on the One Lord; the One and Only Lord is True.
dfs fea vas fea feat Csufsur il (646-5, Fafs, v2 3) har iko vartai ik iko utpati-aa. The One Lord is pervading everywhere; the One Lord created the Universe.
a dfs om famrefa fs 3a Afe whsmr Il (646-5, Fats, He 3) jo har naam Dhi-aavahi tin dar sat ghati-aa. Those who meditate on the Lord's Name, cast out their fears.
Tent Fe vrfy gents afs afumr iti (646-6, Fafs, ne 3)
gurmatee dayvai aap gurmukh har japi-aa. ||9]|
The Lord Himself blesses them with Guru's Instruction; the Gurmukh meditates on the Lord. ||9||
HBa HH 3 Il (646-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
nists famre o urfes fas fore ASt ute II (646-6, afs, He 3)
antar gi-aan na aa-i-o jit kichh sojhee paa-ay.
Spiritual wisdom, which would bring understanding, does not enter into his mind. fee fsor fomr Arendt niat nig ae | (646-7, Aafs, He 3)
vin dithaa ki-aa salaahee-ai anDhaa anDh kamaa-ay. Without seeing, how can he praise the Lord? The blind act in blindness.
Soa AGE Ustehnt oH ZA nfs vrfe IAI (646-7, ats, He 3) naanak sabad pachhaanee-ai naam vasai man aa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, when one realizes the Word of the Shabad, then the Naam comes to abide in the mind. ||1]|
He 3 Il (46-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fear at fea ag fea Age Stes I (646-8, Fafs, ne 3) ikaa banee ik gur iko sabad veechaar. There is One Bani; there is One Guru; there is one Shabad to contemplate.
He AGe Je AY Isat Sd FTP Il (646-8, Fafs, ve 3)
sachaa sa-udaa hat sach ratnee bharay bhandaar.
True is the merchandise, and true is the shop; the warehouses are overflowing with jewels.
ad fasur 3 usinfs A tS SeETT Il (646-9, Fafs, v2 3) gur kirpaa tay paa-ee-an jay dayvai dayvanhaar. By Guru's Grace, they are obtained, if the Great Giver gives them.
Ha AGS wg Het ufent SH MU Il (646-9, Fafs, He 3) sachaa Sa-udaa laabh sadaa khati-aa naam apaar. Dealing in this true merchandise, one earns the profit of the incomparable Naam.
fey fetes nifts yafenr aafh ulmreers Il (646-10, Hafs, Hs 3)
vikh vich amrit pargati-aa karam pee-aavanhaar.
In the midst of poison, the Ambrosial Nectar is revealed; by His Mercy, one drinks it in.
Soa AY ASM Us ASIST IQ (646-10, Aafs, ue 3) naanak sach salaahee-ai Dhan savaaranhaar. ||2| | O Nanak, praise the True Lord; blessed is the Creator, the Embellisher. ||2||
ugat Il (646-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fiat viele Fz FIS AY 3 Set Il (646-11, Fafo, ws 3) jinaa andar koorh vartai sach na bhaav-ee. Those who are permeated by falsehood, do not love the Truth.
AX 8S Ay Fa Als AST Il (646-11, Halo, ue 3) jay ko bolai sach koorhaa jal jaav-ee. If someone speaks the Truth, falsehood is burnt away.
Sfsurdt an afs fas ferret ara ureet Il (646-12, Fats, ws 3) khoorhi-aaree rajai koorh ji-o vistaa kaag khaav-ee. The false are satisfied by falsehood, like the crows who eat manure.
fan dfs df& faure A ay fomreet Il (646-12, Fafs, 2 3)
jis har ho-ay kirpaal so naam Dhi-aava-ee.
When the Lord grants His Grace, then one meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ofa aTsHfe ony mata ag uy afs ATSeT AOI (646-13, Fafs, He 3) har gurmukh naam araaDh koorh paap leh jaav-ee. ||10||
As Gurmukh, worship the Lord's Name in adoration; fraud and sin shall disappear. ||10]|
H@q H2 3 Ill (646-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Rut w@ufanr sGatfenr Sg HO feas ute nrfe Il (646-13, Fafs, He 3)
saykhaa cha-uchaki-aa cha-uvaa-i-aa ayhu man ikat ghar aan.
O Shaykh, you wander in the four directions, blown by the four winds; bring your mind back to the home of the One Lord.
eds sds als 3 TT A AAT USE Il (646-14, Fafs, v2 3) ayharh tayharh chhad too gur kaa sabad pachhaan. Renounce your petty arguments, and realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afsas wit efo u@ AS faxes ATS ATS Il (646-14, afs, He 3)
satgur agai dheh pa-o sabh kichh jaanai jaan.
Bow in humble respect before the True Guru; He is the Knower who knows everything.
MAT HOM Hote 3 dfs ag fHOHTE Il (646-15, Hats, us 3) aasaa mansaa jalaa-ay too ho-ay rahu mihmaan. Burn away your hopes and desires, and live like a guest in this world.
Afsag a ate St vata st waa u|fa HTS II (646-15, Fafs, He 3) satgur kai bhaanai bhee chaleh taa dargeh paavahi maan.
If you walk in harmony with the True Guru's Will, then you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
Sod fa SH 5 Basel fS0 fog Us|e faa TS IAI (646-16, Fats, He 3)
naanak je naam na chaytnee tin Dhig painan Dhig khaan. ||1]|
O Nanak, those who do not contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord - cursed are their clothes, and cursed is their food. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (646-16) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dfs we sfe 6 ureet ahifs age & ATE Il (646-16, Fats, He 3) har gun tot na aavee keemat kahan na jaa-ay. There is no end to the Lord's Glorious Praises; His worth cannot be described.
Soa TaHfe dfs qe defo Te vfs Jd ANTS MQM (646-17, Fats, uz 3) naanak gurmukh har gun raveh gun meh rahai samaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord; they are absorbed in His Glorious Virtues. ||2]|
uGat Il (646-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs dat a ASH afe uct sats afs i (646-18, Aafs, He 3)
har cholee dayh savaaree kadh paiDhee bhagat kar.
The Lord has adorned the coat of the body; He has embroidered it with devotional worship.
dfs we war nifaeret ag ag fafa sts afe il (646-18, Fafs, He 3) har paat lagaa aDhikaa-ee baho baho biDh bhaat kar. The Lord has woven His silk into it, in so many ways and fashions.
aet as asco nists fade afs i (646-19, Hafs, Hs 3) ko-ee boojhai boojhanhaaraa antar bibayk kar. How rare is that man of understanding, who understands, and deliberates within.
Ags eg faaa fan gsre mrt afe il (46-19, iafo, ns 3)
so boojhai ayhu bibayk jis bujhaa-ay aap har.
He alone understands these deliberations, whom the Lord Himself inspires to understand.
Ae ated od fearar qanfe ofa AfS afe NAAll (646-19, Fats, He 3) jan naanak kahai vichaaraa gurmukh har sat har. ||11]| Poor servant Nanak speaks: the Gurmukhs know the Lord, the Lord is True. ||11]|
Us EBD
HOa H3 3 Il (647-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ugafe Anat HoT Use Foe ATS Aa ATS Il (647-1, als, He 3)
parthaa-ay saakhee mahaa purakh bolday saajhee sagal jahaanai.
Great men speak the teachings by relating them to individual situations, but the whole world shares in them.
aenty df A s@ ad mmyet ny UETE Il (647-2, af, v2 3) gurmukh ho-ay so bha-o karay aapnaa aap pachhaanai. One who becomes Gurmukh knows the Fear of God, and realizes his own self.
ae usr Ales Hd ST HS Tt SHO HS Il (647-2, als, ne 3)
gur parsaadee jeevat marai taa man hee tay man maanai.
If, by Guru's Grace, one remains dead while yet alive, the mind becomes content in itself.
fo ag Ho at uasifs adt aaa A four aafs fami il 647-3, Aafs, H2 3)
jin ka-o man kee parteet naahee naanak say ki-aa katheh gi-aanai. ||1]| Those who have no faith in their own minds, O Nanak - how can they speak of spiritual wisdom? ||1]|
He 3 Il (647-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dante fos o ote nifs gu ugst nef I 647-3, Fefs, ns 3)
gurmukh chit na laa-i-o ant dukh pahutaa aa-ay.
Those who do not focus their consciousness on the Lord, as Gurmukh, suffer pain and grief in the end.
Med Wd viftoat afa 3 arvet ute I (647-4, Fafs, ns 3) andrahu baahrahu anDhi-aa™ suDh na kaa-ee paa-ay. They are blind, inwardly and outwardly, and they do not understand anything.
ufss feo at asast AS Has ute A IS fe OTE I (647-4, af, He 3)
pandit tin kee barkatee sabh jagat khaa-ay jo ratay har naa-ay.
O Pandit, O religious scholar, the whole world is fed for the sake of those who are attuned to the Lord's Name.
fio ad & Aafe Aefoor ofs fae gd MAE II (647-5, Fats, He 3) jin gur kai sabad sahaali-aa har si-o rahay samaa-ay. Those who praise the Word of the Guru's Shabad, remain blended with the Lord.
ufss en afte aeats 3 Jeet oT UG US UTE Il 647-6, Halo, Hs 3)
pandit doojai bhaa-ay barkat na hova-ee naa Dhan palai paa-ay.
O Pandit, O religious scholar, no one is satisfied, and no one finds true wealth through the love of duality.
ufs aa Hsu 6 uMfeE mofes wes feafe I (647-6, Fats, He 3)
parh thakay santokh na aa-i-o an-din jalat vihaa-ay. They have grown weary of reading scriptures, but still, they do not find contentment, and they pass their lives burning, night and day.
Ia YS 3 Yat at HAT feag ATE I (647-7, Fave, v2 3) kook pookaar na chuk-ee naa sansaa vichahu jaa-ay. Their cries and complaints never end, and doubt does not depart from within them.
aed oH fegfenr ufs aes BfS WE II (647-7, Hafs, ue 3)
naanak naam vihooni-aa muhi kaalai uth jaa-ay. ||2| |
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they rise up and depart with blackened faces. ||2]|
Uugat Il (647-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs Ane Afs fiers fiefs ve SASH II (647-8, Fats, He 3)
har sajan mayl pi-aaray mil panth dasaa-ee.
O Beloved, lead me to meet my True Friend; meeting with Him, I shall ask Him to show me the Path.
A dfs 2A fis fon JO af ATH I 647-8, Fats, He 3) jo har dasay mit tis ha-o bal jaa-ee. I am a Sacrifice to that Friend, who shows it to me.
ae Ast fo fre act af any ferret I (647-9, Fafs, He 3)
gun saajhee tin si-o karee har naam Dhi-aa-ee. I share His Virtues with Him, and meditate on the Lord's Name.
ofa Adt filmes fos Afe ofs AY UTet II (647-9, Fafs, He 3)
har sayvee pi-aaraa nit sayv har sukh paa-ee. I serve my Beloved Lord forever; serving the Lord, I have found peace.
afoot Afsae fan fafo Ast urTet 19211 (647-9, Aafs, He 3)
balihaaree satgur tis jin sojhee paa-ee. ||12|| I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who has imparted this understanding to me. ||12]|
H@q H2 3 Ill (647-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
uUufss HS 3 vast A te us Aa Ute I (647-10, Aafs, He 3)
pandit mail na chuk-ee jay vayd parhai jug chaar.
O Pandit, O religious scholar, your filth shall not be erased, even if you read the Vedas for four ages.
3 ge whenr ue 3 fete IBH oH fer Il (647-11, afs, He 3)
tarai gun maa-i-aa mool hai vich ha-umai naam visaar.
The three qualities are the roots of Maya; in egotism, one forgets the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ufss 38 SA oa wfeor x rts i (647-11, Fats, we 3) pandit bhoolay doojai laagay maa-i-aa kai vaapaar. The Pandits are deluded, attached to duality, and they deal only in Maya.
nists fSAo gud yee sfamr He TST I (647-11, Fafs, ue 3) antar tarisnaa bhukh hai moorakh bhukhi-aa mu-ay gavaar. They are filled with thirst and hunger; the ignorant fools starve to death.
Afsafe Afed Ay ufeor AS Aafe tes I (647-12, Aafs, He 3)
satgur sayvi-ai sukh paa-i-aa sachai sabad veechaar.
Serving the True Guru, peace is obtained, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
nivag fro gu aet Ad ate flmrfa il (647-12, Fafs, He 3) andrahu tarisnaa bhukh ga-ee sachai naa-ay pi-aar. Hunger and thirst have departed from within me; I am in love with the True Name.
Sa OH IS AIA In faa dfs sme Sfa ofa nail (647-13, Fats, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sehjay rajay jinaa har rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||1]||
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam, who keep the Lord clasped tightly to their hearts, are automatically satisfied. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (47-14) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hone dfs SH o Afent ey Bar gTST MME Il (647-14, Fats, ve 3)
manmukh har naam na sayvi-aa dukh lagaa bahutaa aa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh does not serve the Lord's Name, and so he suffers in horrible pain.
nists mfamre nits Jo Afa o aret uf= Il (647-14, Fafs, He 3) antar agi-aan anDhayr hai suDh na kaa-ee paa-ay. He is filled with the darkness of ignorance, and he does not understand anything.
Hodts Adfa o SAS ger fox viet aE i (647-15, Fats, Hs 3)
manhath sahj na beeji-o bhukhaa ke agai khaa-ay.
Because of his stubborn mind, he does not plant the seeds of intuitive peace; what will he eat in the world hereafter, to satisfy his hunger?
ony fours ferfoor eH war ATE Il (647-15, Fafs, Hs 3) naam niDhaan visaari-aa doojai lagaa jaa-ay. He has forgotten the treasure of the Naam; he is caught in the love of duality.
aTea Tate fats efsureor A md Afs fate i121 (647-16, Aafs, us 3)
naanak gurmukh mileh vadi-aa-ee-aa jay aapay mayl milaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are honored with glory, when the Lord Himself unites them in His Union. ||2]| |
UgST Il (647-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs sHat ofa AA We] Udt HITSAt I (647-16, Hats, He 3) har rasnaa har jas gaavai kharee suhaavanee. The tongue which sings the Lord's Praises, is so very beautiful.
A nfs sfe ufe ofs 8% AT afe ateet Il (647-17, afs, He 3) jo man tan mukh har bolai saa har bhaavnee. One who speaks the Lord's Name, with mind, body and mouth, is pleasing to the Lord.
A denfy ve Ave AT fZusreat Il (647-17, Fafs, He 3) jo gurmukh chakhai saad saa tariptaavnee. That Gurmukh tastes the the sublime taste of the Lord, and is satisfied.
ae we fimrd fas qe af aet AHSTSMt Il (647-18, Aafs, He 3)
gun gaavai pi-aaray nit gun gaa-ay gunee samjhaavanee.
She sings continually the Glorious Praises of her Beloved; singing His Glorious Praises, she is uplifted.
fan de urfy efenre AT Asa TT ysreat Ill 647-18, Fels, Hs 3)
jis hovai aap da-i-aal saa satguroo guroo bulaavanee. ||13]|
She is blessed with the Lord's Mercy, and she chants the Words of the Guru, the True Guru. ||13]|
H@q H2 3 Ill (647-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
onAst fafs fa nian 3 uisefs fa@ fg Sfe 1 647-19, Fats, He 3) hastee sir ji-o ankas hai ahran ji-o sir day-ay. The elephant offers its head to the reins, and the anvil offers itself to the hammer;
Ho 36 ura ate & Cat AS aafe il (647-19, Fats, oe 3) man tan aagai raakh kai oobhee sayv karay-i.
just so, we offer our minds and bodies to our Guru; we stand before Him, and serve Him.
Uuar ést fe@ aonfa mry faerdhn Ag on fiAfe a SFE II (648-1, Fafs, He 3)
i-o gurmukh aap nivaaree-ai sabh raaj sarisat kaa lay-ay.
This is how the Gurmukhs eliminate their self-conceit, and come to rule the whole world.
Soa ToHfe gsha AT wm sets ASE WAU (648-1, Fats, He 3) naanak gurmukh bujhee-ai jaa aapay nadar karay-i. ||1]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands, when the Lord casts His Glance of Grace. ||1||
He 3 Il (648-2) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fae aaHfa any fomrfenr wire 3 ugEere Il (648-2, Fafs, vs 3)
jin gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-i-aa aa-ay tay parvaan.
Blessed and approved is the coming into the world, of those Gurmukhs who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Soa AG Curats nityat Fad urSfT HE Il (648-3, Aafs, ue 3) naanak kul uDhaareh aapnaa dargeh paavahi maan. ||2|| O Nanak, they save their families, and they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2]|
ust II (648-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aToufy Ader fra ag Hover il (648-3, Feafo, ve 3) gurmukh sakhee-aa sikh guroo maylaa-ee-aa. The Guru unites His Sikhs, the Gurmukhs, with the Lord.
fefa Aza as uth fefa afs ard went I (648-4, Fafs, ne 3) ik sayvak gur paas ik gur kaarai laa-ee-aa. The Guru keeps some of them with Himself, and engages others in His Service.
frat ag fuurs ufo fats fsa aC ag evetur Il (648-4, Fafo, ve 3)
jinaa gur pi-aaraa man chit tinaa bhaa-o guroo dayvaa-ee-aa.
Those who cherish their Beloved in their conscious minds, the Guru blesses them with His Love.
ad fire feet fimrg aa first ust aver Il (648-5, Fats, nH 3) gur sikhaa iko pi-aar gur mitaa putaa bhaa-ee-aa. The Guru loves all of His Gursikhs equally well, like friends, children and siblings.
ag Afsag seg Als ae orf ag Heer IVI (648-5, Fats, we 3)
gur satgur bolhu sabh gur aakh guroo jeevaa-ee-aa. ||14||
So chant the Name of the Guru, the True Guru, everyone! Chanting the Name of the Guru, Guru, you shall be rejuvenated. ||14] |
HSq H3 3 Il (648-6) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
SOR OH © VIat mifsmirst nigs med AIH AHI Il (648-6, Hafs, v2 3)
naanak naam na chaytnee agi-aanee anDhulay avray karam kamaahi.
O Nanak, the blind, ignorant fools do not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they involve themselves in other activities.
aM efe ad Hdmifs fefs fen] ufs usta IA (648-7, Aafs, 42 3)
jam dar baDhay maaree-ah fir vistaa maahi pachaahi. ||1] | They are bound and gagged at the door of the Messenger of Death; they are punished, and in the end, they rot away in manure. ||1]|
He 3 Il (48-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Soa Alsdd Agfs ntuUSt A AS Ad UdSS Il (648-7, Aafs, He 3) naanak satgur sayveh aapnaa say jan sachay parvaan. O Nanak, those humble beings are true and approved, who serve their True Guru.
fs & ots AHAE IT Yo" MTSE AE IM (648-8, Fafs, us 3) har kai naa-ay samaa-ay rahay chookaa aavan jaan. ||2]| They remain absorbed in the Name of the Lord, and their comings and goings cease.
[121] ugat II (648-8)
pa-orhee. Pauree: Ug Au Htfenr Hdba nis Treret Il (648-8, Fale, He 3)
Dhan sampai maa-i-aa sanchee-ai antay dukh-daa-ee. Gathering the wealth and property of Maya, brings only pain in the end.
wd Hed HIG Aetdafs fas Ata o AST I (648-9, Fale, He 3) ghar mandar mahal savaaree-ah kichh saath na jaa-ee. Homes, mansions and adorned palaces will not go with anyone.
Jd dat 3d fas ursinifs fas af o niet Il (648-9, Fafs, ne 3) har rangee turay nit paalee-ah kitai kaam na aa-ee. He may breed horses of various colors, but these will not be of any use to him.
We wed feos afa am fhe nifs df Aeret I (648-10, Fats, He 3)
jan laavhu chit har naam si-o ant ho-ay sakhaa-ee.
O human, link your consciousness to the Lord's Name, and in the end, it shall be your companion and helper.
Ho ssa OTH foMrfeor ganfe AY uTet NAUII (648-10, Fats, He 3)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmukh sukh paa-ee. ||15]|
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Gurmukh is blessed with peace. ||15]|
HSE H2 3 Il (648-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fag aH a o uréta us oath urfemr Ae II (648-11, Fats, we 3)
bin karmai naa-o na paa-ee-ai poorai karam paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
Without the karma of good actions, the Name is not obtained; it can be obtained only by perfect good karma.
SOA Seld Ad A MMYSt St THs Als fHOETE IAI (648-12, Fafs, He 3)
naanak nadar karay jay aapnee taa gurmat mayl milaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, if the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then under Guru's Instruction, one is united in His Union. ||1]|
He % Il (648-12) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fea ests fea eanifs feaat as ufo il (648-10, Aafs, us 1) ik dajheh ik dabee-ah iknaa kutay khaahi. Some are cremated, and some are buried; some are eaten by dogs.
fefa urat feta Grdinits fefe st feta dAfe urfs Il (648-13, Fefs, He 1
ik paanee vich ustee-ah ik bhee fir hasan paahi.
Some are thrown into water, while others are thrown into wells.
Sod f= o wut fas wfe mts iQ (648-14, Aafs, Hes naanak ayv na jaap-ee kithai jaa-ay samaahi. ||2|| O Nanak, it is not known, where they go and into what they merge. ||2| |
uGat Il (648-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fso at aor dor arfenr vg ufes ot oth ofs TS II (648-14, Fats, He 1)
tin kaa khaaDhaa paiDhaa maa-i-aa sabh pavit hai jo naam har raatay.
The food and clothes, and all the worldly possessions of those who are attuned to the Lord's Name are sacred.
fae & wa Hed Hoe Aeet Afs ufes ofs frat asHfa Aza fre oifsuras Ate ears II (648-15, Fafe, He 1)
tin kay ghar mandar mahal saraa-ee sabh pavit heh jinee gurmukh sayvak sikh abhi- aagat jaa-ay varsaatay.
All the homes, temples, palaces and way-stations are sacred, where the Gurmukhs, the selfless servants, the Sikhs and the renouncers of the world, go and take their rest.
fo & 33 tHe ussite Afs ufes ofs fret dente fre wo AS Ufs WS II (648-16, Fats, He 1)
tin kay turay jeen khurgeer sabh pavit heh jinee gurmukh sikh saaDh sant charh jaatay.
All the horses, saddles and horse blankets are sacred, upon which the Gurmukhs, the Sikhs, the Holy and the Saints, mount and ride.
f30 & AGH UH aan Als ufes afe A Safe afe afs TH aH aha AS II (648-17, Fats, H2 1)
tin kay karam Dharam kaaraj sabh pavit heh jo boleh har har raam naam har saatay. All the rituals and Dharmic practices and deeds are sacred, for those who utter the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the True Name of the Lord.
fis & us Ug oA Tent fra ae ula WS MEI (48-18, Fels, Hs 1)
jin kai potai punn hai say gurmukh sikh guroo peh jaatay. ||16] |
Those Gurmukhs, those Sikhs, who have purity as their treasure, go to their Guru. ||16]|
HSE H8 3 Il (648-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
SOA SST Ufa Iss UBS AS ATE Il (648-18, Fafs, ve 3) naanak naavhu ghuthi-aa halat palat sabh jaa-ay. O Nanak, forsaking the Name, he loses everything, in this world and the next.
my 3u HAH Ag fot ofenr Hot BA STE Il (48-19, Fafo, ws 3)
jap tap sanjam sabh hir la-i-aa muthee doojai bhaa-ay.
Chanting, deep meditation and austere self-disciplined practices are all wasted; he is deceived by the love of duality.
aH efs aa Hdinifs gost fs ARE NAN (648-19, Fats, He 3)
jam dar baDhay maaree-ah bahutee milai sajaa-ay. ||1||
He is bound and gagged at the door of the Messenger of Death. He is beaten, and receives terrible punishment. ||1]|
Ua Ege
H3 3 Il (649-1) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hat of 2g ane ene of Hg fim il (649-1, Aafs, v2 3) santaa naal vair kamaavday dustaa naal moh pi-aar. They inflict their hatred upon the Saints, and they love the wicked sinners.
mat fue AY odt Hfe HHfs Std ST Il (649-1, Fafs, He 3)
agai pichhai sukh nahee mar jameh vaaro vaar.
They find no peace in either this world or the next; they are born only to die, again and again.
fgne ae 3 gset efsar af unig i (649-2, fafs, He 3) tarisnaa kaday na bujh-ee dubiDhaa ho-ay khu-aar. Their hunger is never satisfied, and they are ruined by duality.
Ho ws fsar fSear fsa Ae vaats Il (649-2, Fafs, ne 3) muh kaalay tinaa nindkaa tit sachai darbaar. The faces of these slanderers are blackened in the Court of the True Lord.
aad oH fegfenr a Ssets o ufs IQI (649-3, Fats, H2 3)
naanak naam vihooni-aa naa urvaar na paar. ||2||
O Nanak, without the Naam, they find no shelter on either this shore, or the one beyond. ||2||
uGSt II (649-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A dfs om famrfee A ofe afe af 3S He HTT II (649-3, Fats, He 3)
jo har naam Dhi-aa-iday say har har naam ratay man maahee.
Those who meditate on the Lord's Name, are imbued with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in their minds.
frat His fats fea nrerftor fsa fear fag gat a ardt Il (49-4, Fats, we 3)
jinaa man chit ik araaDhi-aa tinaa ikas bin doojaa ko naahee.
For those who worship the One Lord in their conscious minds, there is no other than the One Lord.
Ret usu dfs Age fae ufs HASta By fHurdt il (649-5, Fafs, ue 3)
say-ee purakh har sayvday jin Dhur mastak laykh likhaahee.
They alone serve the Lord, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is written.
dfs & Te fos Wee de ge ate Tet AHS Il (649-5, Fafs, He 3)
har kay gun nit gaavday har gun gaa-ay gunee samjhaahee.
They continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and singing the Glories of the Glorious Lord, they are uplifted.
eisuret est Tae Ts us ats oth AHA WWII (649-6, Fats, we 3)
vadi-aa-ee vadee gurmukhaa gur poorai har naam samaahee. ||17]|
Great is the greatness of the Gurmukhs, who, through the Perfect Guru, remain absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||17]|
HSq H3 3 Il (649-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag ot Ret amast fg eta ory Tee i (649-6, Fats, v2 3) satgur kee sayvaa gaakh-rhee sir deejai aap gavaa-ay. It is very difficult to serve the True Guru; offer your head, and eradicate self-conceit.
Rafe nafs fefs o Hef a Ae us AS ate | (649-7, Fafs, ne 3)
sabad mareh fir naa mareh taa sayvaa pavai sabh thaa-ay.
One who dies in the Word of the Shabad shall never have to die again; his service is totally approved.
UTS udfhmt ura de Afe ad fee ote I (649-8, ats, v2 3)
paaras parsi-ai paaras hovai sach rahai liv laa-ay.
Touching the philosopher's stone, one becomes the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold; remain lovingly attached to the True Lord.
fan usta dé foto fA Afsag fees ys nrfe i (649-8, Fafs, ue 3) jis poorab hovai likhi-aa tis satgur milai parabh aa-ay. One who has such pre-ordained destiny, comes to meet the True Guru and God.
Sod Wes Aza 3 fHs fan saA A ue ATE IAI (649-9, Hafs, He 3)
naanak gantai sayvak naa milai jis bakhsay so pavai thaa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, the Lord's servant does not meet Him because of his own account; he alone is acceptable, whom the Lord forgives. ||1]|
He 3 Il (649-9) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HIS THIS 3 Asst Hoe nue AMM I (649-9, Fafs, vs 3)
mahal kumhal na jaannee moorakh apnai su-aa-ay.
The fools do not know the difference between good and bad; they are deceived by their self-interests.
Hae dias 3 HIG Bata HST APS PTE Il (649-10, Hafs, v2 3)
sabad cheeneh taa mahal laheh jotee jot samaa-ay.
But if they contemplate the Word of the Shabad, they obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and their light merges in the Light.
Ret Ad at 3G ufs SA ST AST ASt UTE II (649-10, Fats, He 3) sadaa sachay kaa bha-o man vasai taa sabhaa sojhee paa-ay. The Fear of God is always on their minds, and so they come to understand everything.
Afsag mue ufs coset wm we ffeil (649-11, Fats, He 3) satgur apnai ghar varatdaa aapay la-ay milaa-ay. The True Guru is pervading the homes within; He Himself blends them with the Lord.
aoe Afsats fifemt As ust uet fAA S fase as TATE NQN (649-11, Fats, He 3)
naanak satgur mili-ai sabh pooree pa-ee jis no kirpaa karay rajaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, they meet the True Guru, and all their desires are fulfilled, if the Lord grants His Grace and so wills. ||2||
UgST I (649-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
U9 U6 aa fsa" sas Ao A Ufa aor ofa ufe aafsur Il (649-12, Fats, He 3)
Dhan Dhan bhaag tinaa bhagat janaa jo har naamaa har mukh kehti-aa.
Blessed, blessed is the good fortune of those devotees, who, with their mouths, utter the Name of the Lord.
U6 U6 wa fae AS Aa A Ole HA RSet Hels I (649-13, Fafs, ne 3)
Dhan Dhan bhaag tinaa sant janaa jo har jas sarvanee sunti-aa.
Blessed, blessed is the good fortune of those Saints, who, with their ears, listen to the Lord's Praises.
Us U6 aa fSo" AU Aa dfs atese IMS Tat AS Falsr Il (649-13, Favs, He 3)
Dhan Dhan bhaag tinaa saaDh janaa har keertan gaa-ay gunee jan banti-aa. Blessed, blessed is the good fortune of those holy people, who sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and so become virtuous.
US U6 ata fsat Tene A Tate B Ho frefsnr Il (649-14, Aefs, He 3)
Dhan Dhan bhaag tinaa gurmukhaa jo gursikh lai man jinti-aa.
Blessed, blessed is the good fortune of those Gurmukhs, who live as Gursikhs, and conquer their minds.
AS Tes TT Ta a A Te vaet fra usfsur ATI (649-15, Fats, ws 3)
sabh doo vaday bhaag gursikhaa kay jo gur charnee sikh parh-ti-aa. ||18]|
But the greatest good fortune of all, is that of the Guru's Sikhs, who fall at the Guru's feet. ||18]|
HS H2 3 Il (649-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
qoH fae faR a yang ad Sa Rafe fos ote Il (649-15, als, He 3)
barahm bindai tis daa barahmat rahai ayk sabad liv laa-ay.
One who knows God, and who lovingly focuses his attention on the One Word of the Shabad, keeps his spirituality intact.
d€ faut nossa frot fue waiur feats a afe fase Het SATE II (649-16, ats, nH 3)
nav niDhee athaarah siDhee pichhai lagee-aa fireh jo har hirdai sadaa vasaa-ay. The nine treasures and the eighteen spiritual powers of the Siddhas follow him, who keeps the Lord enshrined in his heart.
faa Afsag ae 5 ure asd afe Steg Il (649-17, fafs, 2 3) bin satgur naa-o na paa-ee-ai bujhahu kar veechaar. Without the True Guru, the Name is not found; understand this, and reflect upon it.
aaa us afar Afsarg fhe AY Ue Fa OS UA (649-17, Fafs, He 3)
naanak poorai bhaag satgur milai sukh paa-ay jug chaar. ||1||
O Nanak, through perfect good destiny, one meets the True Guru, and finds peace, throughout the four ages. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (649-18) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
for asd fomr fafa o HoHY feAS suo ATE Il (49-18, Fats, os 3)
ki-aa gabhroo ki-aa biraDh hai manmukh tarisnaa bhukh na jaa-ay.
Whether he is young or old, the self-willed manmukh cannot escape hunger and thirst.
aenfy Age sfsur Aise de mire Tete Il (649-19, afs, v2 3)
gurmukh sabday rati-aa seetal ho-ay aap gavaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs are imbued with the Word of the Shabad; they are at peace, having lost their self-conceit.
nieg faufs Hafmr fefs gu 3 wat mite I 49-19, Fafs, He 3) andar taripat santokhi-aa fir bhukh na lagai aa-ay. They are satisfied and satiated within; they never feel hungry again.
Ua €uo
sod fa qanfy acs A uses J A at ad fos OTe IK (650-1, Fats, nH 3)
naanak je gurmukh karahi so parvaan hai jo naam rahay liv laa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, whatever the Gurmukhs do is acceptable; they remain lovingly absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (650-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
IG sfeodt fa XE A Toute fra I (650-1, Fats, v2 3) ha-o balihaaree tinn ka‘-u jo gurmukh sikhaa. I am a Sacrifice to those Sikhs who are Gurmukhs.
A dfs oy fomrfee fsa cane firt I (650-2, af, He 3) jo har naam Dhi-aa-iday tin darsan pikhaa. I behold the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of those who meditate on the Lord's Name.
Afe ates dfs Te ge ofa AA fo fear II (650-2, Fats, H3 3)
sun keertan har gun ravaa har jas man likhaa.
Listening to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, I contemplate His virtues; I write His Praises on the fabric of my mind.
dfs oy Herd da fA vfs fates fara il (650-3, Hafs, v2 3) har naam salaahee rang si-o sabh kilvikh krikhaa. I praise the Lord's Name with love, and eradicate all my sins.
U6 US AUS A Adld aS J fea Ha ae Ud fee NACI (650-3, Fats, He 3)
Dhan Dhan suhaavaa so sareer thaan hai jithai mayraa gur Dharay vikhaa. ||19]| Blessed, blessed and beauteous is that body and place, where my Guru places His feet. ||19]|
HS H2 3 Il (650-4) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ad faa famreg o deet ot AY SA ufo wrfe I (650-4, Fats, He 3)
gur bin gi-aan na hova-ee naa sukh vasai man aa-ay.
Without the Guru, spiritual wisdom is not obtained, and peace does not come to abide in the mind.
aad oH fege Hout AAS AON TASTE All (650-5, Fats, He 3)
naanak naam vihoonay manmukhee jaasan janam gavaa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the self-willed manmukhs depart, after having wasted their lives. ||1]|
He 8 Il (650-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fro wfoe ae 6 Afs Une ala ad feS OTE Il (650-5, Aefs, nH 3)
siDh saaDhik naavai no sabh khojday thak rahay liv laa-ay.
All the Siddhas, spiritual masters and seekers search for the Name; they have grown weary of concentrating and focusing their attention.
faa Afsas fas o ute aqonfa fis firefe 1 (650-6, efs, ne 3)
bin satgur kinai na paa-i-o gurmukh milai milaa-ay.
Without the True Guru, no one finds the Name; the Gurmukhs unite in Union with the Lord.
fas oe Use we AS ate J foo fet fos ants Il (650-6, Aafs, He 3)
bin naavai painan khaan sabh baad hai Dhig siDhee Dhig karmaat.
Without the Name, all food and clothes are worthless; cursed is such spirituality, and cursed are such miraculous powers.
AW fafa A ants 3 uifis ad fam StS i 650-7, Fats, He 3)
saa siDh saa karmaat hai achint karay jis daat.
That alone is spirituality, and that alone is miraculous power, which the Carefree Lord spontaneously bestows.
Soa ToHfe dfs an nfs eA Sa fafa Sot aay 2K (650-7, Aes, nu: 3)
naanak gurmukh har naam man vasai ayhaa siDh ayhaa karmaat. ||2| |
O Nanak, the Lord's Name abides in the mind of the Gurmukh; this is spirituality, and this is miraculous power. ||2] |
ust II (650-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
JH wet ofs ys uA & fos Wed dfs TE ST II (650-8, Hafs, we 3)
ham dhaadhee har parabh khasam kay nit gaavah har gun chhantaa.
I am a minstrel of God, my Lord and Master; every day, I sing the songs of the Lord's Glorious Praises.
dfs atese aad dfs AA Hed fA AH AST I (650-9, Hafs, ve 3)
har keertan karah har jas sunah tis kavlaa kantaa.
I sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and I listen to the Praises of the Lord, the Master of wealth and Maya.
dfs est AS Aas feudior Has AS AST Il (650-9, Fats, He 3)
har daataa sabh jagat bhikhaaree-aa mangat jan jantaa.
The Lord is the Great Giver; all the world is begging; all beings and creatures are beggars.
dfs teg we vfenre afe fefe urag fan HST II (650-10, Fafs, ne 3)
har dayvhu daan da-i-aal ho-ay vich paathar kiram jantaa.
O Lord, You are kind and compassionate; You give Your gifts to even worms and insects among the rocks.
Ho soa oH fomrfeor asHfe dazst 2011 (650-10, Fats, H2 3)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmukh Dhanvantaa. ||20||
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; as Gurmukh, he has become truly wealthy. ||20||
H@q H3 3 Ill (650-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Usa! Ysa! HATS at arg 3 niefa feAS fears i (650-11, Fafs, us 3) parh-naa gurh-naa sansaar kee kaar hai andar tarisnaa vikaar. Reading and studying are just worldly pursuits, if there is thirst and corruption within.
UGH fete Afs ufs aa eH STS yr I (650-12, Fats, we 3)
ha-umai vich sabh parh thakay doojai bhaa-ay khu-aar.
Reading in egotism, all have grown weary; through the love of duality, they are ruined.
A ufsor A ufss dio as Aafe ad Steg Il (650-12, Fats, ns 3)
so parhi-aa so pandit beenaa gur sabad karay veechaar.
He alone is educated, and he alone is a wise Pandit, who contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nies UA SZ GI UES HY BIE Il (650-13, Fafs, 2 3) andar khojai tat lahai paa-ay mokh du-aar. He searches within himself, and finds the true essence; he finds the Door of Salvation.
ae foarg safe ufenr AofA ad Ses Il (650-13, Fafs, v8 3) gun niDhaan har paa-i-aa sahj karay veechaar. He finds the Lord, the treasure of excellence, and peacefully contemplates Him.
Us surg ssa fan Tenfe oH wars IAI (650-14, Aefs, He 3)
Dhan vaapaaree naankaa jis gurmukh naam aDhaar. ||1]|
Blessed is the trader, O Nanak, who, as Gurmukh, takes the Name as his only Support. ||1]|
He 3 Il (650-14)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fee Ho Hd afe 5 faset Sug a fee oF II (650-14, afs, ne 3)
vin man maaray ko-ay na sijh-ee vaykhhu ko liv laa-ay.
Without conquering his mind, no one can be successful. See this, and concentrate on it.
suod stedt sf aa ot Sa He Hat ATE II (650-15, Fafs, He 3)
bhaykh-Dhaaree teerthee bhav thakay naa ayhu man maari-aa jaa-ay.
The wandering holy men are tired of of making pilgrimages to sacred shrines; they have not been able to conquer their minds.
dante fy Ho Ales He Afs ad feos OTe Il (650-15, Fats, Hz 3) gurmukh ayhu man jeevat marai sach rahai liv laa-ay.
The Gurmukh has conquered his mind, and he remains lovingly absorbed in the True Lord.
Sod fen Ho at He FEE Css GOH Aafe ATE IQ (650-16, Fats, He 3)
naanak is man kee mal i-o utrai ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, this is how the filth of the mind is removed; the Word of the Shabad burns away the ego. ||2||
UgST I (650-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs ofa AS fkog AS set ofa an feared fea faaar il (650-17, Fats, He 3)
har har sant milhu mayray bhaa-ee har naam darirhaavahu ik kinkaa.
O Saints of the Lord, O my Siblings of Destiny, please meet with me, and implant the Name of the One Lord within me.
dfs ofs Atarg dared dfs Ae dfs aus ufsag fun a Il (650-17, Fats, H8 3)
har har seegaar banaavahu har jan har kaaparh pahirahu khim kaa.
O humble servants of the Lord, adorn me with the decorations of the Lord, Har, Har; let me wear the robes of the Lord's forgiveness.
MAT Aherg HS ys sve ofa oat fume fips ar il (650-18, Fafs, He 3) aisaa seegaar mayray parabh bhaavai har laagai pi-aaraa parim kaa. Such decorations are pleasing to my God; such love is dear to the Lord.
dfs of on Sag feo wat vfs fomfer are fea UBT II (650-18, Fats, He 3)
har har naam bolhu din raatee sabh kilbikh kaatai ik palkaa.
I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, day and night; in an instant, all sins are eradicated.
dfs ofa efeore de fan Gufs A aaHfe ofe Au freer QAI (650-19, Fats, He 3)
har har da-i-aal hovai jis upar so gurmukh har jap jinkaa. ||21]||
That Gurmukh, unto whom the Lord becomes merciful, chants the Lord's Name, and wins the game of life. ||21]|
Ust €uy
HSa H2 3 Ill (651-1) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HOH HOH at fA Ho a He wait ae dor fimrg Il (651-1, Fats, He 3) janam janam kee is man ka-o mal laagee kaalaa ho-aa si-aahu. The filth of countless incarnations sticks to this mind; it has become pitch black.
doa ast Cust o deet AAG Gefs ug Il (651-2, Fale, He 3)
khanlee Dhotee ujlee na hova-ee jay sa-o Dhovan paahu.
The oily rag cannot be cleaned by merely washing it, even if it is washed a hundred times.
qd usAet Ales Hd Cuct de nfs gear Il (651-2, Aafs, He 3)
gur parsaadee jeevat marai ultee hovai mat badlaahu.
By Guru's Grace, one remains dead while yet alive; his intellect is transformed, and he becomes detached from the world.
Sod HS BaAet a feta Hat urs IU (651-3, Fats, He 3) naanak mail na lag-ee naa fir jonee paahu. ||1]| O Nanak, no filth sticks to him, and he does not fall into the womb again. ||1]|
He 3 Il (651-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
J Hat ate eet aret fea San uedt feR Fa HAT II (651-3, Fats, He 3) chahu jugee kal kaalee kaa‘dhee ik utam padvee is jug maahi. Kali Yuga is called the Dark Age, but the most sublime state is attained in this age.
aenty ofs atefs ee ureint fas a afe fosfs urfe i (651-4, Fats, ne 3) gurmukh har keerat fal paa-ee-ai jin ka-o har likh paahi. The Gurmukh obtains the fruit, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; this is his destiny,
ordained by the Lord. Soa Td UA males salts sie Cuats ala sast Hts ANT III (651-4, Fafs, He 3)
naanak gur parsaadee an-din bhagat har uchrahi har bhagtee maahi samaahi. ||2|| O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, he worships the Lord night and day; he chants the Lord's Name, and remains absorbed in the Lord's devotional worship. ||2||
uGat Il (651-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs of Afs ATG Ho Hafs nfs set afe afs sat ats i 651-5, Fats, He 3)
har har mayl saaDh jan sangat mukh bolee har har bhalee baan.
O Lord, unite me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, so that with my mouth, I may speak the sublime Word of the Guru's Bani.
dfs we wet ofs fos vet TaHSt fs Sa HET HAE I (651-6, Fafs, nz 3)
har gun gaavaa har nit chavaa gurmatee har rang sadaa maan.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and constantly chant the Lord's Name; through the Guru's Teachings, I enjoy the Lord's Love constantly.
dfs afu af m@ua wfoor vfs ga aes wart urf= | (651-7, Aafs, v2 3)
har jap jap a-ukhaDh khaaDhi-aa sabh rog gavaatay dukhaa ghaan.
I take the medicine of meditation on the Lord's Name, which has cured all diseases and multitudes of sufferings.
for AA farerth 3 fers A af Ao Us Het ATE II (651-7, af, Hs 3)
jinaa saas giraas na visrai say har jan pooray sahee jaan.
Those who do not forget the Lord, while breathing or eating - know them to be the perfect servants of the Lord.
A Tenfe ofa race fo got AH at AAS ALE QM (651-8, Fats, Hs 3)
jo gurmukh har aaraaDhaday tin chookee jam kee jagat kaan. ||22||
Those Gurmukhs who worship the Lord in adoration end their subservience to the Messenger of Death, and to the world. ||22]|
H@a H2 3 Ill (651-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
J no Card vfaSg afsor aet feaf& i 651-9, Fats, ne 3)
ray jan uthaarai dabi-ohu suti-aa ga-ee vihaa-ay.
O man, you have been tormented by a nightmare, and you have passed your life in Sleep.
Afsag a nae Afs 3 wa nists o CufAG we Il 51-9, Fats, nH 3)
satgur kaa sabad sun na jaagi-o antar na upji-o chaa-o.
You did not wake to hear the Word of the True Guru's Shabad; you have no inspiration within yourself.
Adis Hee Te TIT A AT as B AHAE Il (651-10, Fale, He 3) sareer jala-o gun baahraa jo gur kaar na kamaa-ay. That body burns, which has no virtue, and which does not serve the Guru.
Was ASE fs HIGH EA SME Il (651-10, Fats, we 3) jagat jalandaa dith mai ha-umai doojai bhaa-ay. I have seen that the world is burning, in egotism and the love of duality.
Soa Td Adeet Cad Av nfo Hate forte ail (651-11, Fafs, ue 3)
naanak gur sarnaa-ee ubray sach man sabad Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]||
O Nanak, those who seek the Guru's Sanctuary are saved; within their minds, they meditate on the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 3 Il (651-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Rafe g3 Jen Tet Hast ofe I (651-11, Fats, v2 3)
sabad ratay ha-umai ga-ee sobhaavantee naar.
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, the soul-bride is rid of egotism, and she is glorified.
fus & aS AeT Vs ST afer Alars Il (651-12, Fale, He 3) pir kai bhaanai sadaa chalai taa bani-aa seegaar. If she walks steadily in the way of His Will, then she is adorned with decorations.
An weet Het fug we ais eg ufeor ofa Il (651-12, Fats, v2 3)
Sayj Suhaavee sadaa pir raavai har var paa-i-aa naar.
Her couch becomes beautiful, and she constantly enjoys her Husband Lord; she obtains the Lord as her Husband.
o dfs Hd 3 Ae Sy Ha Ae Hols ata Il (651-13, Aafs, He 3) naa har marai na kaday dukh laagai sadaa suhaagan naar. The Lord does not die, and she never suffers pain; she is a happy soul-bride forever.
oad ofa ys fs wet aa & Sf fimrfs 2H (651-13, Hats, He 3)
naanak har parabh mayl la-ee gur kai hayt pi-aar. ||2||
O Nanak, the Lord God unites her with Himself; she enshrines love and affection for the Guru. ||2||
ust Il (651-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fot ag afimr nmyret 3 og Sfanitdt I (651-14, Fats, He 3) jinaa gur gopi-aa aapnaa tay nar buri-aaree. Those who conceal and deny their Guru, are the most evil people.
dfs ME f35 a BaAS a agg uUfun| afsmrst Il (651-14, Fafs, ue 3) har jee-o tin kaa darsan naa karahu paapisat hati-aaree. O Dear Lord, let me not even see them; they are the worst sinners and murderers.
6fs wis wis feats anu ufs fA@ aaa]| ardt Il (651-15, Fats, ue 3) ohi ghar ghar fireh kusuDh man ji-o Dharkat naaree. They wander from house to house, with impure minds, like wicked, forsaken women.
zsaat Hafs fxs aaufa Ae Il (651-16, Fats, H2 3)
vadbhaagee sangat milay gurmukh savaaree.
But by great good fortune, they may meet the Company of the Holy; as Gurmukhs, they are reformed.
dfs Had Afsasd efeur ats as aS afsast NQSil (651-16, Fats, v3 3)
har maylhu satgur da-i-aa kar gur ka-o balihaaree. ||23]|
O Lord, please be kind and let me meet the True Guru; I am a sacrifice to the Guru. [|23]|
HSE H2 3 Il (651-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
qe AS 3 AY Cun fete ey o Ba me I (651-17, Fats, we 3) gur sayvaa tay sukh oopjai fir dukh na lagai aa-ay. Serving the Guru, peace is produced, and then, one does not suffer in pain.
Hne Hoe fife afer as a fas 3 SATE Il (651-17, Fafs, He 3) jaman marnaa mit ga-i-aa kaalai kaa kichh na basaa-ay. The cycle of birth and death is brought to an end, and death has no power over at all.
dfs Ast He ste sfoor AS sfont ATE Il (651-18, Fafs, He 3) har saytee man rav rahi-aa sachay rahi-aa samaa-ay. His mind is imbued with the Lord, and he remains merged in the True Lord.
sod JC afoot fo as A vals Afsag ste Nall (651-18, Fats, He 3) naanak ha-o balihaaree tinn ka-o jo chalan satgur bhaa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who walk in the Way of the True Guru's Will. ||1]|
He 2 Il (651-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
faa Hae AUB Jeet A ida ad Alare Il (651-19, Aafs, He 3)
bin sabdai suDh na hova-ee jay anayk karai seegaar.
Without the Word of the Shabad, purity is not obtained, even though the soul-bride may adorn herself with all sorts of decorations.
ue Eur furs at ATS & eet EA oe fing il (652-1, Fafs, Hs 3)
pir kee saar na jaan-ee doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar. She does not know the value of her Husband Lord; she is attached to the love of duality.
A GAT AT awa Boa Sat fefs Aots iQ (652-1, Fats, ve 3) saa kusuDh saa kulkhanee naanak naaree vich kunaar. ||2| |
She is impure, and ill-mannered, O Nanak; among women, she is the most evil woman. ||2||
ust II (652-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfa ofa net efeur afe afs sat Fat i (652-2, Favs, we 3) har har apnee da-i-aa kar har bolee bainee. Be kind to me, Lord, that I might chant the Word of Your Bani.
ofa om famret ofa Cua ofa wat Bat Il (652-2, Fale, He 3)
har naam Dhi-aa-ee har uchraa har laahaa lainee.
May I meditate on the Lord's Name, chant the Lord's Name, and obtain the profit of the Lord's Name.
A Aue dfs of feon of fsa Je aaaat I (652-3, Fats, He 3) jo japday har har dinas raat tin ha-o kurbainee. I am a Sacrifice to those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, day and night.
fast Afsag Aa films weftmr faq AS Ta Sat Il (652-3, Aafs, He 3) jinaa satgur mayraa pi-aaraa araaDhi-aa tin jan daykhaa nainee. May I behold with my eyes those who worship and adore my Beloved True Guru.
3G Sfoor nue ag a fats He afs AAS Afeur Aat 2IVsIl (652-4, Fats, we 3)
ha-o vaari-aa apnay guroo ka-o jin mayraa har sajan mayli-aa sainee. ||24||
I am a sacrifice to my Guru, who has united me with my Lord, my friend, my very best friend. ||24]|
H@a H8 8 Il (652-5)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ene fa ulfs 3 afs @He & fis II (652-5, Hats, He 4) har daasan si-o pareet hai har daasan ko mit. The Lord loves His slaves; the Lord is the friend of His slaves.
dfs ane & afh 3 fae Hat a SfA AS Il (652-5, Fats, He 4)
har daasan kai vas hai ji-o jantee kai vas jant.
The Lord is under the control of His slaves, like the musical instrument under the control of the musician.
dfs & aA af fimrfee afe utsn fae Sg Il (652-6, af, us 4) har kay daas har Dhi-aa-iday kar pareetam si-o nayhu. The Lord's slaves meditate on the Lord; they love their Beloved.
fasu af & Hod ys AS Aa vfs SGA NT Il (652-6, Fats, Hs 4) kirpaa kar kai sunhu parabh sabh jag meh varsai mayhu. Please, hear me, O God - let Your Grace rain over the whole world.
A dfs aAo at Cnsfs dA ofa at Sfamret Il (652-7, Fale, He 4) jo har daasan kee ustat hai saa har kee vadi-aa-ee. The praise of the Lord's slaves is the Glory of the Lord.
dfs wmuat efsuret areet Ho at Has Aare Il (652-7, Fats, He 4) har aapnee vadi-aa-ee bhaavdee jan kaa jaikaar karaa-ee. The Lord loves His Own Glory, and so His humble servant is celebrated and hailed.
A dfs Ao oH fourfeer afe afe AS fea ATS II (652-8, Aafs, He 4)
so har jan naam Dhi-aa-idaa har har jan ik samaan.
That humble servant of the Lord meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Lord, and the Lord's humble servant, are one and the same.
He sod dfg at aA dS dfs UA TUT Sale| IAI (652-8, Fats, He 4) jan naanak har kaa daas hai har paij rakhahu bhagvaan. ||1|| Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord; O Lord, O God, please, preserve his honor.
[11
He 8 Il (652-9) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
saa Uifs aret fats And fan fag aoe 5 Wet II (652-9, Hafs, He 4) naanak pareet laa-ee tin saachai tis bin rahan na jaa-ee. Nanak loves the True Lord; without Him, he cannot even survive.
Afsag fees 3 yar uréint ofa af TAS TAT III (652-10, Fats, we 4)
satgur milai ta pooraa paa-ee-ai har ras rasan rasaa-ee. ||2||
Meeting the True Guru, one finds the Perfect Lord, and the tongue enjoys the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||
UST II (652-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
sfe fear ussts Jd dt WeESt Il (652-10, Fats, we 4) rain dinas parbhaat toohai hee gaavnaa. Night and day, morning and night, I sing to You, Lord.
dba HS AsaSs oS Sa fomreat i (652-11, Fale, He 4) jee-a jant sarbat naa-o tayraa Dhi-aavanaa. All beings and creatures meditate on Your Name.
JUST TsTg So fest wear | (652-11, Fats, He 4) too daataa daataar tayraa ditaa khaavnaa. You are the Giver, the Great Giver; we eat whatever You give us.
Sas Wat a Afal uy ASST Il (652-11, als, v2 4) bhagat janaa kai sang paap gavaavnaa. In the congregation of the devotees, sins are eradicated.
Ho Soa Ae Bead sts ss ATSaNt |QUIl (652-12, Fafs, we 4)
jan naanak sad balihaarai bal bal jaavnaa. ||25] | Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, O Lord. ||25]||
ASG H8 8 Il (652-12) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
nists mfamirg set nfs nfo Afsag at usstfS ort Il (652-12, Aefs, He 4)
antar agi-aan bha-ee mat maDhim satgur kee parteet naahee.
He has spiritual ignorance within, and his intellect is dull and dim; he does not place his faith in the True Guru.
wets Aue AS Aue afs we que yufo wut Il (652-13, afs, He 4)
andar kapat sabh kapto kar jaanai kaptay khapeh khapaahee.
He has deceit within himself, and so he sees deception in all others; through his deceptions, he is totally ruined.
Afsag a ovat fofs 3 wire wus Aorfe feast i (652-14, als, He 4)
satgur kaa bhaanaa chit na aavai aapnai su-aa-ay firaa-ee.
The True Guru's Will does not enter into his consciousness, and so he wanders around, pursuing his own interests.
fagur ad A must 3 StSa Hale ANTS MWA (652-14, Fafs, us 4) kirpaa karay jay aapnee taa naanak sabad samaahee. ||1]|| If He grants His Grace, then Nanak is absorbed into the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
He 8 Il (652-15)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Hou fear xfs feud eH ate Hour fag arta il (652-15, Hafs, ws 4)
manmukh maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapay doojai bhaa-ay manoo-aa thir naahi.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya; in the love of duality, their minds are unsteady.
Wofes ASS dots fea TSt IBH vufs uefa Il (652-16, Fafs, H2 4)
an-din jalat raheh din raatee ha-umai khapeh khapaahi.
Night and day, they are burning; day and night, they are totally ruined by their egotism.
nists Ss HoT Tas fsa a foafe o act ats I (652-16, Fats, He 4) antar lobh mahaa gubaaraa tin kai nikat na ko-ee jaahi. Within them, is the total pitch darkness of greed, and no one even approaches them.
6fe orf edt AY aag 3 uefa Fath Hats Hfs AMT II (652-17, Hats, Hs 4)
o-ay aap dukhee sukh kabhoo na paavahi janam mareh mar jaahi.
They themselves are miserable, and they never find peace; they are born, only to die, and die again.
Sot SufA we ug AT fa ad vat fos ws iQ (52-17, Fats, us 4)
naanak bakhas la-ay parabh saachaa je gur charnee chit laahi. ||2| |
O Nanak, the True Lord God forgives those, who focus their consciousness on the Guru's feet. ||2]|
UgST Il (652-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HS sas uses A fs stfemr Il (652-18, Fats, He 4)
sant bhagat parvaan jo parabh bhaa-i-aa.
That Saint, that devotee, is acceptable, who is loved by God. Aet fasue Az frat ofs fourfenr i 652-18, Fafs, 2 4)
say-ee bichkhan jant jinee har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Those beings are wise, who meditate on the Lord.
nifys ou fours SHo ufemr II (652-19, Hats, He 4) amrit naam niDhaan bhojan khaa-i-aa. They eat the food, the treasure of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
As Aa at Ufs HASTA wfeur I (652-19, Fats, He 4) sant janaa kee Dhoor mastak laa-i-aa. They apply the dust of the feet of the Saints to their foreheads.
uot gus Soa se USS Ta Stefa ote EI (653-1, Fats, vs 4)
naanak bha-ay puneet har tirath naa-i-aa. ||26|| O Nanak, they are purified, bathing in the sacred shrine of the Lord. ||26]|
HSq H8 8 Il (653-1)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dante nists Aifs 3 nfs sfs at AHfE I (653-1, Fats, He 4)
gurmukh antar saat hai man tan naam samaa-ay.
Within the Gurmukh is peace and tranquility; his mind and body are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oH fese on us oft ad fee oe II (653-2, Aafs, He 4)
naamo chitvai naam parhai naam rahai liv laa-ay.
He contemplates the Naam, he studies the Naam, and he remains lovingly absorbed in the Naam.
oy ueTae ufemr fest aet fate Il (653-2, Hats, He 4) naam padaarath paa-i-aa chintaa ga-ee bilaa-ay. He obtains the treasure of the Naam, and his anxiety is dispelled.
Afsate fife ou Cur frat gu As ATE Il (653-3, Fefs, Hs 4)
satgur mili-ai naam oopjai tisnaa bhukh sabh jaa-ay.
Meeting with the Guru, the Naam wells up, and his thirst and hunger are completely relieved.
SSR OTH sist oH us ut— All (653-3, Fale, ve 4) naanak naamay rati-aa naamo palai paa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, he gathers in the Naam. ||1||
He 8 Il (653-4) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Afsaa uate fa wfenr gf aftr we ef afenr it (653-4, Fafs, ue 4)
satgur purakh je maari-aa bharam bharmi-aa ghar chhod ga-i-aa.
One who is cursed by the True Guru, abandons his home, and wanders around aimlessly.
6A fue eH cast Ho ater nat Sfent Il (653-4, Fats, He 4) os pichhai vajai fakrhee muhu kaalaa aagai bha-i-aa. He is jeered at, and his face is blackened in the world hereafter.
GA nige TIS HIT fSas fos Sq ASS HT II (653-5, Fats, we 4) os aral baral muhhu niklai nit jhagoo sutdaa mu-aa. He babbles incoherently, and foaming at the mouth, he dies.
foor de fan dt é ats at ofs fees GA & Sd Aa ufeMT I (653-5, Fafs, He 4) ki-aa hovai kisai hee dai keetai jaa‘ Dhur kirat os daa ayho jayhaa pa-i-aa. What can anyone do? Such is his destiny, according to his past deeds.
fra Gg wife fsa Go yor ay as faA 3 BTS Il (653-6, iafs, He 4) jithai oh jaa-ay tithai oh jhoothaa koorh bolay kisai na bhaavai. Wherever he goes, he is a liar, and by telling lies, he not liked by anyone.
zug avet efanret af Hag Homi nus at AAT aSt ad SAT ASH UTS I (653-7, Fale, He 4) vaykhhu bhaa-ee vadi-aa-ee har santahu su-aamee apunay kee jaisaa ko-ee karai taisaa ko-ee paavai.
O Siblings of Destiny, behold this, the glorious greatness of our Lord and Master, O Saints; as one behaves, so does he receive.
fg Fon sherg Je ofa AS nial FHS Soa Mf Hares MQM (653-7, Fafs, Hs 4)
ayhu barahm beechaar hovai dar saachai ago day jan naanak aakh sunaavai. ||2| | This shall be God's determination in His True Court; servant Nanak predicts and proclaims this. ||2| |
uGat Il (653-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs AY so ag sues afte fes il (653-8, Fats, us 4)
gur sachai baDhaa thayhu rakhvaalay gur ditay.
The True Guru has established the village; the Guru has appointed its guards and protectors.
UIs Tet MTA TT BaNt HO IS Il (653-9, Fats, ue 4) pooran ho-ee aas gur charnee man ratay. My hopes are fulfilled, and my mind is imbued with the love of the Guru's Feet.
afs faurfs anifs nea Afs JS Il (653-9, Hats, He 4) gur kirpaal bay-ant avgun sabh hatay. The Guru is infinitely merciful; He has erased all my sins.
af met facut ofe mue ate fs Il (653-9, afs, He 4) gur apnee kirpaa Dhaar apnay kar litay. The Guru has showered me with His Mercy, and He has made me His own.
Soa Ae aod fAA Td a Te fES iQDIl (653-10, Aafs, ue 4) naanak sad balihaar jis gur kay gun itay. ||27]| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has countless virtues. ||27]|
HEX H2 Y Il (653-11)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
wT ot afte Sftmr ufe wre far ath uls i (653-11, Fafs, ne 1)
taa kee rajaa-ay laykhi-aa paa-ay ab ki-aa keejai paa'day.
By His Command, we receive our pre-ordained rewards; so what can we do now, O Pandit?
Jay dur wAG se af foafsur defo dior AHS WU (653-11, Fafs, He 1) hukam ho-aa haasal taday ho-ay nibrhi-aa handheh jee-a kamaa“day. ||1]| When His Command is received, then it is decided; all beings move and act accordingly. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (653-12) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Sfx OG YAH Ja fags Ua = Il (653-12, Fats, He 2)
nak nath khasam hath kirat Dhakay day.
The string through the nose is in the hands of the Lord Master; one's own actions drive him on.
Ad Be St We BSaT AT TJ IlQil (653-12, Fale, vs 2) jahaa daanay tahaa™ khaanay naankaa sach hay. ||2]| Wherever his food is, there he eats it; O Nanak, this is the Truth. ||2] |
UugST Il (653-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS oer vify ate gosto Il (653-13, Fafs, vs 2) sabhay galaa aap thaat bahaalee-on. The Lord Himself puts everything in its proper place.
my seq sate nmr dt urfse il (653-13, Fafs, He 2)
aapay rachan rachaa-ay aapay hee ghaali-on.
He Himself created the creation, and He Himself destroys it.
nnd Ha Cure orfu yfsutee il (653-14, Fats, ue 2)
aapay jant upaa-ay aap partipaali-on.
He Himself fashions His creatures, and He Himself nourishes them. aA wa afe ofe sets farfeBe Il (653-14, Aafs, He 2)
daas rakhay kanth laa-ay nadar nihaali-on. He hugs His slaves close in His embrace, and blesses them with His Glance of Grace.
SA SIT AS niSe SS TAT AGS MCI (653-15, Hafe, we 2) naanak bhagtaa sadaa anand bhaa-o doojaa jaali-on. ||28||
O Nanak, His devotees are forever in bliss; they have burnt away the love of duality. ||28]|
Sq H3 3 Ill (653-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
= Ho ate At fourfe s fea fe fea fats ae ii (653-15, Hats, 12 3) ay man har jee Dhi-aa-ay too ik man ik chit bhaa-ay. O mind, meditate on the Dear Lord, with single-minded conscious concentration.
ofa abort Het Het Sfsurenr UfE o ueSTHE II (653-16, Fafs, He 3)
har kee-aa sadaa sadaa vadi-aa-ee-aa day-ay na pachhotaa-ay.
The glorious greatness of the Lord shall last forever and ever; He never regrets what He gives.
u@ fs & Ae afsose fas Afet AYE UTE II (653-16, Hats, He 3) ha-o har kai sad balihaarnai jit sayvi-ai sukh paa-ay. I am forever a sacrifice to the Lord; serving Him, peace is obtained.
soa TaHfy fife ad ICH Aafe ASE NAM (653-17, Fats, He 3)
naanak gurmukh mil rahai ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||1]]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh remains merged with the Lord; he burns away his ego through the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (653-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
mma Aet ofenig mm gun Age Il (653-18, Fats, He 3) aapay sayvaa laa-i-an aapay bakhas karay-i. He Himself enjoins us to serve Him, and He Himself blesses us with forgiveness.
Aso at Ht fu wif J ym ATS age Il (653-18, Fefs, H2 3) sabhnaa kaa maa pi-o aap hai aapay saar karay-i. He Himself is the father and mother of all; He Himself cares for us.
soa ony fourfefs fae for ufs aR D Wa Aa AST OE MQM (653-18, Aas, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-in tin nij ghar vaas hai jug jug sobhaa ho-ay. ||2| |
O Nanak, those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abide in the home of their inner being; they are honored throughout the ages. ||2]|
UgST Il (653-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 AE AIS ANY dfs aIs H TB fas neg 3 At Il (653-19, Fels, Hs 3)
too karan kaaran samrath heh kartay mai tujh bin avar na ko-ee.
You are the Creator, all-powerful, able to do anything. Without You, there is no other at all.
UST €ug
su um frafe fradiot umd |efe det i (654-1, Fats, ue 3) tuDh aapay sisat sirjee-aa aapay fun go-ee. You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself shall destroy it in the end.
Ag fea Hee ZIse" A AS A Tet I (654-1, Fats, He 3)
sabh iko sabad varatdaa jo karay so ho-ee.
The Word of Your Shabad alone is pervading everywhere; whatever You do, comes to pass.
efauret aanfa efe ys afs ure Het Il (654-2, Fats, ne 3) vadi-aa-ee gurmukh day-ay parabh har paavai so-ee. God blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness, and then, he finds the Lord.
qanfe aaa wrafimr vfs wmag da ds Ue ag ASt NQCNAU AT (654-2, Fats, ve 3) gurmukh naanak aaraaDhi-aa sabh aakhahu Dhan Dhan Dhan gur so-ee. ||29||1]| suDhu
As Gurmukh, Nanak worships and adores the Lord; let everyone proclaim, "Blessed, blessed, blessed is He, the Guru!"||29|]1]|Sudh| |
wa Hafs wet sas aate Ft at wa 9 654-4) raag sorath banee bhagat kabeer jee kee ghar 1 Raag Sorat'h, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee, First House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (654-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
a3 uff ufa foe He Soa He fg SET Il (654-5, Hafo, sas adits Fh) but pooj pooj hindoo moo-ay turak moo-ay sir naa-ee. Worshipping their idols, the Hindus die; the Muslims die bowing their heads.
Gf & wd Ge S ws 3H AS ET o wet AI (654-5, Fafe, saz aes Fh)
o-ay lay jaaray o-ay lay gaaday tayree gat duhoo na paa-ee. ||1||
The Hindus cremate their dead, while the Muslims bury theirs; neither finds Your true state, Lord. ||1]|
HO 3 AAS MIT TIT Il (654-6, Hale, sas aeite Fh) man ray sansaar anDh gahayraa. O mind, the world is a deep, dark pit.
vg fen unfes 3 AH RST NU TIC Il (654-6, Aafs, sas adits rh chahu dis pasri-o hai jam jayvraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. On all four sides, Death has spread his net. ||1]|Pause]|
afas us ufs afast He aus sens AT II (654-6, Fafs, sas alts Ff)
kabit parhay parh kabitaa moo-ay kaparh kaydaarai jaa-ee.
Reciting their poems, the poets die; the mystical ascetics die while journeying to Kaydaar Naat'h.
ne wfs of Hat He Set ats feats o uret QI (654-7, Fels, sas ata Fh) jataa Dhaar Dhaar jogee moo-ay tayree gat ineh na paa-ee. ||2|| The Yogis die, with their matted hair, but even they do not find Your state, Lord. ||2||
wda Af Afs TH He als B Ags SAH I (654-7, Fafs, sas aes Fh) darab sanch sanch raajay moo-ay gad lay kanchan bhaaree. The kings die, gathering and hoarding their money, burying great quantities of gold.
ae us ufs ufss ue gu ef Sf ard Sil (654-8, Fats, sas sete Ht)
bayd parhay parh pandit moo-ay roop daykh daykh naaree. ||3]|
The Pandits die, reading and reciting the Vedas; women die, gazing at their own beauty. ||3]|
oH oH fag AS fers tug foots Adte Il (654-8, Hef, sas adits Fh raam naam bin sabhai bigootay daykhhu nirakh sareeraa. Without the Lord's Name, all come to ruin; behold, and know this, O body.
dfs & on fae fate afs uret afo Buen aate ISA (654-9, Aafs, sas adte Ah
har kay naam bin kin gat paa-ee kahi updays kabeeraa. ||4]||1||
Without the Name of the Lord, who can find salvation? Kabeer speaks the Teachings. [4] 141
wa Ada sa df SAH 3g Jd faa BH wet Il (654-10, als, sas adits Th)
jab jaree-ai tab ho-ay bhasam tan rahai kiram dal khaa-ee.
When the body is burnt, it turns to ashes; if it is not cremated, then it is eaten by armies of worms.
ad wats ste uss J fur 36 at fed geet NA (654-10, Aefs, sas adits Ah kaachee gaagar neer parat hai i-aa tan kee ihai badaa-ee. ||1||
The unbaked clay pitcher dissolves, when water is poured into it; this is also the nature of the body. ||1]|
ad setor fess sfemr sfemr il (654-11, Fats, sas ata Fh) kaahay bha-ee-aa firtou fooli-aa fooli-aa. Why, O Siblings of Destiny, do you strut around, all puffed up with pride?
Wa GA HA Gan HY dos A fee aA ster NU TTS Il (654-11, Aafs, sas aes Fh)
jab das maas uraDh mukh rahtaa so din kaisay bhooli-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Have you forgotten those days, when you were hanging, face down, for ten months? ||1]|Pause] |
fag no Hit 38 Aofs oA fs Afs Te ar Il (654-12, Aefs, sas aes Ah ji-o maDh maakhee ti-o sathor ras jor jor Dhan kee-aa. Like the bee which collects honey, the fool eagerly gathers and collects wealth.
Host FT BI BI ad FF TIS fa Shor Iii (654-12, Fels, sas alts Fh)
martee baar layho layho karee-ai bhoot rahan ki-o dee-aa. ||2]|
At the time of death, they shout, "Take him away, take him away! Why leave a ghost lying around?"||2||
od BG dt ats Af set wid AHS AIST Il (654-13, Aafe, sas adte FH) dayhuree la-o baree naar sang bha-ee aagai sajan suhaylaa. His wife accompanies him to the threshold, and his friends and companions beyond.
Howe 3G AS Sa ads sf urd JA mas Ill (654-14, Aafs, sas adits Fh)
marghat la-o sabh log kutamb bha-i-o aagai hans akaylaa. ||3]|
All the people and relatives go as far as the cremation grounds, and then, the soul- swan goes on alone. ||3]||
AIS Sats Hod F yrst ud HS YA AMM Il (654-14, Fale, sas aete wh)
kahat kabeer sunhu ray paraanee paray kaal garas koo-aa.
Says Kabeer, listen, O mortal being: you have been seized by Death, and you have fallen into the deep, dark pit.
sot wfeur ny dorfenr fas swat Sf AMM III (654-15, Fats, sas sets Ft)
jhoothee maa-i-aa aap banDhaa-i-aa ji-o nalnee bharam soo-aa. ||4]|2||
You have entangled yourself in the false wealth of Maya, like the parrot caught in the trap. ||4][21]
ae ude As HS Als a At AGH at MAT I (654-15, Fale, sas adie FH)
bayd puraan sabhai mat sun kai karee karam kee aasaa.
Listening to all the teachings of the Vedas and the Puraanas, I wanted to perform the religious rituals.
OS TAS AS Ga firs Cfo ufss u vs fear ual (54-16, Aafs, sas alte Fh)
kaal garsat sabh log si-aanay uth pandit pai chalay niraasaa. ||1]||
But seeing all the wise men caught by Death, I arose and left the Pandits; now I am free of this desire. ||1]|
Ho FAs & Sa AA I (654-16, Fels, sas aes Ah man ray sari-o na aykai kaajaa. O mind, you have not completed the only task you were given;
sfAs o swufs TA NU TIC Il (654-17, Fale, sas ate Ft)
bhaji-o na raghoopat raajaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. you have not meditated on the Lord, your King. ||1||Pause||
ao Us we Fa sy ate ae He vfs wien I (654-17, Hale, sas ots Ht)
ban khand jaa-ay jog tap keeno kand mool chun khaa-i-aa.
Going to the forests, they practice Yoga and deep, austere meditation; they live on roots and the fruits they gather.
oral Set Heel Hot AH a US feurfemr IQ (654-18, Aafs, gas adits rh
naadee baydee sabdee monee jam kay patai likhaa-i-aa. ||2]|
The musicians, the Vedic scholars, the chanters of one word and the men of silence, all are listed on the Register of Death. ||2]|
sats arset fee 3 nret ote afe 3q Star Il (654-18, Fels, sas adits Ht)
bhagat naardee ridai na aa-ee kaachh koochh tan deenaa.
Loving devotional worship does not enter into your heart; pampering and adorning your body, you must still give it up.
wa Tarot fsa df sor Cfs afe ufs fomr Stor Sl (654-19, False, gas ate Ff)
raag raagnee dinbh ho-ay baithaa un har peh ki-aa leenaa. ||3]|| You sit and play music, but you are still a hypocrite; what do you expect to receive from the Lord? |[3]|
ufsS args As Aa Gus wts fed FH famrat i (654-19, Hats, sas ats A)
pari-o kaal sabhai jag oopar maahi likhay bharam gi-aanee.
Death has fallen on the whole world; the doubting religious scholars are also listed on the Register of Death.
Ua guy
aT aad AS se WoA YH salfs fag AST SISI (655-1, Fafe, sas ate FH)
kaho kabeer jan bha-ay khaalsay paraym bhagat jih jaanee. ||4||3]|
Says Kabeer, those humble people become pure - they become Khalsa - who know the Lord's loving devotional worship. ||4||3]|
Wg 2 Il (655-2) ghar 2. Second House] |
efe eff Gye wet | 655-2, Aefs, sas aete Ah du-ay du-ay lochan paykhaa. With both of my eyes, I look around;
J@ ats fas nS B Sa Il (655-2, Aafs, sas adits Hh) ha-o har bin a-or na daykhaa. I don't see anything except the Lord.
30 dd da Bet Il (655-2, Fale, sas adte A) nain rahay rang laa-ee. My eyes gaze lovingly upon Him,
MEF WG AIS G AT NA (655-2, Fale, sas asta Ah ab bay gal kahan na jaa-ee. ||1]| and now, I cannot speak of anything else. ||1||
JH SdH aAfent 3B sa Il (655-3, Aafs, sas adie FH) hamraa bharam ga-i-aa bha-o bhaagaa. My doubts were removed, and my fear ran away,
Aa TH OH fs Sear ual FIC Il (655-3, Aafs, sas adits eh jab raam naam chit laagaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. when my consciousness became attached to the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
MHtdd SX FATE Il (655-3, Aals, sas adits wh) baajeegar dank bajaa-ee. When the magician beats his tambourine,
AS Ya SHA MTST I (655-4, Aafs, sas ate Fh) sabh khalak tamaasay aa-ee. everyone comes to see the show.
Meters Aig Aas Il (655-4, Aafs, sas acts Ht) baajeegar savaa"g sakaylaa. When the magician winds up his show,
MUS Fa Te MAT II (655-4, Hafs, sas asta Hh) apnay rang ravai akaylaa. ||2]| then he enjoys its play all alone. ||2||
aaat as SIH S AT Il (655-4, Aafs, sas aete A) kathnee kahi bharam na jaa-ee. By preaching sermons, one's doubt is not dispelled.
AS afa afa sot Baret | (655-5, Rafe, sas acta A) sabh kath kath rahee lukaa-ee. Everyone is tired of preaching and teaching.
Ww as qonfe orfu gsret il (655-5, Aafs, sas aete A) jaa ka-o gurmukh aap bujhaa-ee. The Lord causes the Gurmukh to understand;
a at fase afoor Ane BI (655-5, Fats, sas ate Fh) taa kay hirdai rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||3]| his heart remains permeated with the Lord. ||3]|
ad fows forsur stat il (655-6, Aafs, sas ate aft) gur kichant kirpaa keenee. When the Guru grants even a bit of His Grace,
HS 36 HO Ud dia Slot Il (655-6, Aafs, sas aceite Ah sabh tan man dayh har leenee. one's body, mind and entire being are absorbed into the Lord.
ats axate dfat IST Il (655-6, Fats, sas adte Ah kahi kabeer rang raataa. Says Kabeer, I am imbued with the Lord's Love;
fufeS AaHiea BST ISISI (655-7, Fale, sas ate Ff) mili-o jagjeevan daataa. ||4||4|| I have met with the Life of the world, the Great Giver. ||4||4]|
W & foo FA & Set Il (655-7, Fale, sas aete Fh jaa kay nigam dooDh kay thaataa. Let the sacred scriptures be your milk and cream,
Ae fasea a HET Il (655-7, als, sas adie th samund bilovan ka-o maataa. and the ocean of the mind the churning vat.
a at dg faseoudt Il (655-7, Aafs, sas adie rh taa kee hohu bilovanhaaree. Be the butter-churner of the Lord,
NA Sb
fag He a ate Sat IA (655-8, Fels, sas ate Hh) ki-o maytai go chhaachh tuhaaree. ||1]| and your buttermilk shall not be wasted. ||1]|
od 3 TH 6 AGA SIT Il (655-8, Halo, sas ats Ft) chayree too raam na karas bhataaraa. O soul-bride slave, why don't you take the Lord as your Husband?
Ades UTS MUST WAU TIS Il (655-8, Halo, sas ote Ft) jagjeevan paraan aDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Life of the world, the Support of the breath of life. ||1]|Pause] |
3d Wold 3Bq Ua At Il (655-9, Aafs, sas adits Hh tayray galeh ta-uk pag bayree. The chain is around your neck, and the cuffs are on your feet.
3 UT WI THEM SA Il (655-9, Have, gars alte Ft) too ghar ghar rama-ee-ai fayree. The Lord has sent you wandering around from house to house.
J MAY 5 USA Tat II (655-9, Fale, sas aete Fh) too ajahu na chaytas chayree. And still, you do not meditate on the Lord, O soul-bride, slave.
3 Af aust F Ta MM (655-10, Fels, sas ats Fh) too jam bapuree hai hayree. ||2| | Death is watching you, O wretched woman. ||2]|
YS AIS ATTA Il (655-10, Hale, sas aeita Ft) parabh karan karaavanhaaree. The Lord God is the Cause of causes.
for sat we feast il (655-10, Fafs, sas adits Ah ki-aa chayree haath bichaaree. What is in the hands of the poor soul-bride, the slave?
Aet Aet Araft i (655-10, Fats, sas ate Ft) so-ee SO-ee jaagee. She awakens from her slumber,
fis wet (335 well Sil (655-11, Fale, sas ate Ah
jit laa-ee tit laagee. ||3]|
and she becomes attached to whatever the Lord attaches her. ||3]|| oot 3 AHfs aot F uret Il (655-11, Fale, gas ate Fh)
chayree tai sumat kahaa™ tay paa-ee. O soul-bride, slave, where did you obtain that wisdom,
Ww 3 3H at Sle feet il (655-11, Fafs, sas oeits Ah) jaa tay bharam kee leek mitaa-ee. by which you erased your inscription of doubt?
HOGA aad wont Il (655-11, Aafs, sas adits rh) so ras kabeerai jaani-aa. Kabeer has tasted that subtle essence;
Ad ae uAfe ne Heme ISIUll (655-12, Refs, sas acta Hh) mayro gur parsaad man maani-aa. ||4||5|| by Guru's Grace, his mind is reconciled with the Lord. ||4||5]|
fd aS o Ahot Art Il (655-12, Aafs, sas aete Hh) jih baajh na jee-aa jaa-ee. Without Him, we cannot even live;
AG fs 3 wees mruret Il (655-12, Fels, gars ate th
ja-o milai ta ghaal aghaa-ee. when we meet Him, then our task is completed.
He Ateg 3G ATi Il (655-13, Fels, sas adits Ah sad jeevan bhalo kahaa“hee. People say it is good to live forever,
He fag Alea ardt NA 655-13, Aefo, sas aets Fh) moo-ay bin jeevan naahee. ||1|| but without dying, there is no life. ||1]|
me for adit fame steer il (655-13, Aafs, sas adie rh ab ki-aa kathee-ai gi-aan beechaaraa. So now, what sort wisdom should I contemplate and preach?
fon fosus as faBara 19 TIS Il (655-14, Fels, sas aete FH) nij nirkhat gat bi-uhaaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. As I watch, worldly things dissipate. ||1||Pause| |
uf Xan Bee afer i (655-14, Fels, sas asta Ah ghas ku%kam chandan gaari-aa. Saffron is ground up, and mixed with sandalwood;
fag dog Aas feofenr Il (655-14, #efs, sas adte Hh) bin nainhu jagat nihaari-aa. without eyes, the world is seen.
ufs fust fea afeur il (655-15, Fefe, sas aete rh) poot pitaa ik jaa-i-aa. The son has given birth to his father;
fag SU Sag SATEMT QM (655-15, Fafs, sas asta Ah bin thaahar nagar basaa-i-aa. ||2|| without a place, the city has been established. ||2| |
Wa AS est ures || (655-15, Aafs, sas adie wh) jaachak jan daataa paa-i-aa. The humble beggar has found the Great Giver,
A thor 3 pret urfeur I (655-16, Fate, sas asta at) SO dee-aa na jaa-ee khaa-i-aa. but he is unable to eat what he has been given.
stant Ae 3B HAT Il (655-16, Fats, sas aes Ht) chhodi-aa jaa-ay na mookaa. He cannot leave it alone, but it is never exhausted.
miSdo ufs ATS Jar SII (655-16, Fas, sas aets Fh) a-uran peh jaanaa chookaa. ||3]| He shall not go to beg from others any longer. ||3]|
A Ales HIST WS Il A UD AG AY HTS Il (655-16, Aafs, sas ade Th jo jeevan marnaa jaanai. so panch sail sukh maanai. Those select few, who know how to die while yet alive, enjoy great peace.
add A ue ufeor il 655-17, Aafs, sas adie rh kabeerai so Dhan paa-i-aa. Kabeer has found that wealth;
dfs sea ny fHatfenr SIEM (655-17, Refs, sas ate Fh) har bhaytat aap mitaa-i-aa. ||4||6]| meeting with the Lord, he has erased his self-conceit. ||4||6] |
fom usb foo aah Il (655-17, Aafs, gars adie rh ki-aa parhee-ai ki-aa gunee-ai. What use is it to read, and what use is it to study?
fom Se usat AoA Il (655-18, Aefs, sas aes Ah ki-aa bayd puraanaa™ sunee-ai. What use is it to listen to the Vedas and the Puraanas?
us AS fom det il (655-18, Aefs, sas adte HH) parhay sunay ki-aa ho-ee. What use is reading and listening,
AG Aon 3 fixfeS Aet NA (655-18, Aefs, sas ade Ah ja-o sahj na mili-o so-ee. ||1]| if celestial peace is not attained? ||1]|
os & SH B HUA Teta Il (655-19, Fale, sas aete FH)
har kaa naam na japas gavaaraa. The fool does not chant the Name of the Lord.
foot Aefs ard sat NU TIC Il (655-19, Aals, sas adit rh ki-aa socheh baara™ baaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o. So what does he think of, over and over again? ||1]|Pause] |
nifomrd thug TM Il (655-19, Fats, sas ate Fh) anDhi-aaray deepak chahee-dai. In the darkness, we need a lamp
Yat gue
fea SAS uidigd BIMM Il (656-1, Fale, sas ate Fh) ik basat agochar lahee-ai. to find the incomprehensible thing.
SAS Maid uret Il (656-1, Aafs, sas adte Hf) basat agochar paa-ee. I have found this incomprehensible thing;
wie dua stoi AMET QI (656-1, Fafs, sas ate Ah
ghat deepak rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||2|| my mind is illuminated and enlightened. ||2||
ats xste we Aon Il (656-1, Hafs, sas adits Ht) kahi kabeer ab jaani-aa. Says Kabeer, now I know Him;
wa Wont 3B HS Hon I (656-2, Hafs, sas ate Hh) jab jaani-aa ta-o man maani-aa. since I know Him, my mind is pleased and appeased.
HO HS BI 3 USA Il (656-2, Aafs, sas adie Ft) man maanay log na pateejai. My mind is pleased and appeased, and yet, people do not believe it.
3 ustIn SE famr ath SIDI (656-2, Fats, sas adits Th) na pateejai ta-o ki-aa keejai. ||3]|7|| They do not believe it, so what can I do? ||3]||7]|
fe que He famrst Il (656-3, Fafs, sas adits Ft) hirdai kapat mukh gi-aanee. In his heart there is deception, and yet in his mouth are words of wisdom.
3d a faseth ust AI (656-3, Fats, sas ata Fh) jhoothay kahaa bilovas paanee. ||1]| You are false - why are you churning water? ||1]|
aifeor Hath aCe Tat il (656-3, Rafe, sas ate kaa’-i-aa maa‘jas ka-un gunaa’. Why do you bother to wash your body?
Ag we stafs J Hat NA TIC Il (656-4, Aals, sas adits rh) ja-o ghat bheetar hai malnaa™. ||1]| rahaa-o. Your heart is still full of filth. |]1]]Pause] |
Bat nonfs stae aret il (656-4, als, gars alts Ft) la-ukee athsath tirath n"aa-ee. The gourd may be washed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines,
asIuG 3 5 AT NI (656-4, Fale, sas ate Fh ka-uraapan ta-oo na jaa-ee. ||2|| but even then, its bitterness is not removed. ||2||
ats ats serat il (656-5, Fats, sas adits zh kahi kabeer beechaaree. Says Kabeer after deep contemplation,
3z AT Shs Ha MICH (656-5, Aafs, sas ate Ah
bhav saagar taar muraaree. ||3||8]| please help me cross over the terrifying world-ocean, O Lord, O Destroyer of ego. [13118] |
Hafe (656-6) sorath Sorat'h:
qe Afsas yATfE II (656-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ag uaus afe ud ue fer] I (656-7, Aafs, sas asta Ah baho parpanch kar par Dhan li-aavai. Practicing great hypocrisy, he acquires the wealth of others.
HS war ufs urfs wes UI (656-7, Halse, sas adits Ah sut daaraa peh aan lutaavai. ||1]| Returning home, he squanders it on his wife and children. ||1]|
Ho AS 3B AUS 3 Al Il (656-7, Fels, sas aelts Ht) man mayray bhoolay kapat na keejai. O my mind, do not practice deception, even inadvertently.
nifs fase 3d Aba ufs sta NA TIS Il (656-8, Aafs, sas ate FH) ant nibayraa tayray jee-a peh leejai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. In the end, your own soul shall have to answer for its account. ||1]|Pause| |
feo feo 36 EH AT AOS Il (656-8, Fale, sas adie Ah chhin chhin tan chheejai jaraa janaavai. Moment by moment, the body is wearing away, and old age is asserting itself.
sa Sct Ga act ual o ure IQI1 (656-8, Aafs, sas ate Ft) tab tayree ok ko-ee paanee-o na paavai. ||2]| And then, when you are old, no one shall pour water into your cup. ||2||
ads ads det sdt Sa I 656-9, Fels, sas asta Ah kahat kabeer ko-ee nahee tayraa. Says Kabeer, no one belongs to you.
fase IH at o Hufs Hea NBIC! (656-9, Aals, sas ate rh) hirdai raam kee na jaapeh savayraa. ||3]|9]| Why not chant the Lord's Name in your heart, when you are still young? ||3||9]|
H3gd HO USS AY Soni Il (656-9, Aals, sas asta rh) santahu man pavnai sukh bani-aa. O Saints, my windy mind has now become peaceful and still.
fae Ha usufs afer i go il (656-10, Aafs, sas ade A) kichh jog paraapat gani-aa. rahaa-o. It seems that I have learned something of the science of Yoga. ||Pause] |
ats feuwret Hat i (656-10, Fas, sas adie FH) gur dikhlaa-ee moree. The Guru has shown me the hole,
fas fea uss Jd oat Il (656-10, Aafs, sas adte Hh) jit mirag parhat hai choree. through which the deer carefully enters.
fe Be SISA Il (656-11, Fats, sas alta Hh) moond lee-ay darvaajay. I have now closed off the doors,
WHS MSIE IH Al (656-11, Fale, sas aete Ht) baajee-alay anhad baajay. ||1|| and the unstruck celestial sound current resounds. ||1]|
As AHS Als sar il (656-11, Fels, sas ate FH) kumbh kamal jal bhari-aa. The pitcher of my heart-lotus is filled with water;
Ae Afeur Sst afomr il 656-11, Aafe, sas aete Fh) jal mayti-aa oobhaa kari-aa. I have spilled out the water, and set it upright.
aT wats Ae ASM Il (656-12, Fafs, sas ate Hh) kaho kabeer jan jaani-aa. Says Kabeer, the Lord's humble servant, this I know.
AG Wout 3B Ho HEMT NQIAOM (656-12, Aafs, sas aes FH) ja-o jaani-aa ta-o man maani-aa. ||2||10]| Now that I know this, my mind is pleased and appeased. ||2||10||
Ta Aafs il (656-13) raag sorath. Raag Sorat'h:
3a Sas B Ale Il (656-13, Hafs, sas ots Ht) bhookhay bhagat na keejai. I am so hungry, I cannot perform devotional worship service.
Wd Her must Ser Il (656-13, Aefs, sas adte 7) yeh maalaa apnee leejai. Here, Lord, take back Your mala.
JG Hae Ase Fa Il (656-13, Hafs, sas ate HH) ha-o maaga-o santan raynaa. I beg for the dust of the feet of the Saints.
H ordt fart at Sar AU 656-13, Aafs, sas ade A mai naahee kisee kaa daynaa. ||1]| I do not owe anyone anything. ||1]|
HG aHt 86 SH Ad Il (656-14, Fels, sas ade Ah maaDho kaisee banai tum sangay. O Lord, how can I be with You?
ofy 3 eg 3 BSE Ha I TIC Il 656-14, Hafs, sas ate Hh) aap na dayh ta layva-o mangay. rahaa-o. If You do not give me Yourself, then I shall beg until I get You. ||Pause] |
ufe As Ha Yor Il (656-14, Hale, sas aete Fh) du-ay sayr maa“ga-o choonaa. I ask for two kilos of flour,
ug uftS Afar Bar Il (656-15, Hats, sas alte Fh) paa-o ghee-o sang loonaa. and half a pound of ghee, and salt.
MO AT HIS BS Il (656-15, Aafs, sas ate A) aDh sayr maa'ga-o daalay. I ask for a pound of beans,
H aG ea sus frets I2QI (656-15, Rats, sas adits th mo ka-o don-o vakhat jivaalay. ||2|| which I shall eat twice a day. ||2||
we HI Bure Il (656-15, Rafe, sas aete FH) khaat maa%ga-o cha-upaa-ee. I ask for a cot, with four legs,
fava nies SHES Il (656-16, Fels, sas ate Ah sirhaanaa avar tulaa-ee. and a pillow and mattress.
Cug aS nia tar il (656-16, Hats, sas asta Ht) oopar ka-o maa“ga-o khee“Dhaa. I ask for a quit to cover myself.
Sot safs ad AS ATT Sil (656-16, Fats, sas ate Ff) tayree bhagat karai jan thee‘Dhaa. ||3]| Your humble servant shall perform Your devotional worship service with love. ||3]|
H atdt ost Ba Il (656-16, Fafs, sas asta Ft) mai naahee keetaa labo. I have no greed;
fea a@ 3a H SS Il (656-17, Aafs, saz adits Ah ik naa-o tayraa mai fabo. Your Name is the only ornament I wish for.
ats eats Ho HSM Il (656-17, Refs, sas ate Ft) kahi kabeer man maani-aa. Says Kabeer, my mind is pleased and appeased;
Ho Hfour 38 safe Afenr IsiIll (656-17, Fafs, sas ats Hh) man maani-aa ta-o har jaani-aa. ||4||11]| now that my mind is pleased and appeased, I have come to know the Lord. ||4]|11]|
wa Hofs wet sas one at at wa 2 (656-19) raag sorath banee bhagat naamday jee kee ghar 2 Raag Sorat'h, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:
qe fsa YATE II (656-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aa Sut Ja ASNT Il (656-19, Hale, sas see HH) jab daykhaa tab gaavaa. When I see Him, I sing His Praises.
38 Aa UlsH UST IAI (656-19, Fafs, sas oe AH ta-o jan Dheeraj paavaa. ||1]| Then I, his humble servant, become patient. ||1]|
uat gud ofe Anes J Afsags Sfes SST NA TIS Il (657-1, Aals, sas anes Ah
naad samaa-ilo ray satgur bhaytilay dayvaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting the Divine True Guru, I merge into the sound current of the Naad. ||1]|Pause] |
ad fete fife arg fest il (657-1, Refs, sas ane Ft) jah jhil mil kaar disantaa. Where the dazzling white light is seen,
3d MSde AAS SHST Il (657-2, Aafs, sas see Ah tah anhad sabad bajantaa. there the unstruck sound current of the Shabad resounds.
Aat Afs AHTAT Il (657-2, Fats, sas oS Ah jotee jot samaanee. One's light merges in the Light;
H Od USAT ATO IQ (657-2, Fels, sas SHS FH) mai gur parsaadee jaanee. ||2|| by Guru's Grace, I know this. ||2||
ISS FHS Aodt ll (657-2, Aals, sas onze Fh) ratan kamal kothree. The jewels are in the treasure chamber of the heart-lotus.
SHAS SHS Sat Il 657-3, Fafs, sas snee Hh chamkaar beejul tahee. They sparkle and glitter like lightning.
3d Sat ls Il (657-3, Hale, sas ones Ft) nayrai naahee door. The Lord is near at hand, not far away.
for orsH afer saute SI (657-3, Aas, sas see Fh) nij aatmai rahi-aa bharpoor. ||3]| He is totally permeating and pervading in my soul. ||3]|
Ad Mods AF CATT Il 657-3, Hale, sas anes Fh jah anhat soor uj-yaaraa. Where the light of the undying sun shines,
3d thud AS ee II (657-4, Fale, sas ae Ah tah deepak jalai chhanchhaaraa. the light of burning lamps seems insignificant.
Ts UsATET Aoi Il (657-4, Aafs, sas see Hh) gur parsaadee jaani-aa. By Guru's Grace, I know this.
HO SH Ada AHS ISI (657-4, Fale, sas ones Fh
jan naamaa sahj samaani-aa. ||4]|1]| Servant Naam Dayv is absorbed in the Celestial Lord. ||4]|1]|
wg 8 Aafs Il (657-5) ghar 4 sorath. Fourth House, Sorat'h:
us usAfe ufs & ot ot ufs ate see TF Il (657-5, Hats, sas nee A) paarh parhosan poochh lay naamaa kaa peh chhaan chhavaa-ee ho. The woman next door asked Naam Dayv, "Who built your house?
3 ufa gaat Hat Ga HAS set Sg set FT WAU (657-5, Fale, sas Mee Hh to peh dugnee majooree daiha-o mo ka-o baydhee dayh bataa-ee ho. ||1|| I shall pay him double wages. Tell me, who is your carpenter?"||1||
ot aet Set Sa o ArT Il (657-6, Fale, sas one ree baa-ee baydhee dayn na jaa-ee. O sister, I cannot give this carpenter to you.
ey set afoS ANT Il (657-6, Fels, sas one Ff) daykh baydhee rahi-o samaa-ee. Behold, my carpenter is pervading everywhere.
TMS Set UTS MOTI AU TITS Il (657-6, als, sas see FH) hamaarai baydhee paraan aDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My carpenter is the Support of the breath of life. ||1]]|Pause] |
at ulfs Hast Hat AG aA ais Ses TF Il (657-7, Fels, sas nee HH)
baydhee pareet majooree maa™gai ja-o ko-oo chhaan chhavaavai ho.
This carpenter demands the wages of love, if someone wants Him to build their house.
Sd Aca As 3 3d SE nm Set wr| J Ql 657-7, Fale, sas one th)
log kutamb sabhahu tay torai ta-o aapan baydhee aavai ho. ||2]|
When one breaks his ties with all the people and relatives, then the carpenter comes of His own accord. ||2||
WMA Fat gale o AAG AS nisd AS ofet FT Il (657-8, Aals, sas ane Ah aiso baydhee baran na saaka-o sabh antar sabh thaa’-ee ho. I cannot describe such a carpenter, who is contained in everything, everywhere.
Gd Ho nifys A ohm us aIG 3 AEST T BI (657-8, Fels, sas se Fh)
goo“gai mahaa amrit ras chaakhi-aa poochhay kahan na jaa-ee ho. ||3]|
The mute tastes the most sublime ambrosial nectar, but if you ask him to describe it, he cannot. ||3]|
aa a ae afs Ht ret maf aif g afue F i (657-9, Halo, sas one Fh) baydhee kay gun sun ree baa-ee jalaDh baa“Dh Dharoo thaapi-o ho.
Listen to the virtues of this carpenter, O sister; He stopped the oceans, and established Dhroo as the pole star.
oH & Hort Aba gddt Sa satus yrfus FJ sili (657-10, Als, sas anes Hh naamay kay su-aamee see-a bahoree lank bhabheekhan aapi-o ho. ||4||2||
Naam Dayv's Lord Master brought Sita back, and gave Sri Lanka to Bhabheekhan. [4112] |
Hafe wa 3 Il (657-10)
sorath ghar 3. Sorat'h, Third House:
MeHfsor HES AH Il (657-10, Aafs, sas ose ZH) anmarhi-aa mandal baajai. The skinless drum plays.
fag ASE WIT WH Il (657-11, Fats, sas ane FH) bin saavan ghanhar gaajai. Without the rainy season, the clouds shake with thunder.
aes faa aout det Il (657-11, Fale, sas one Th) baadal bin barkhaa ho-ee. Without clouds, the rain falls,
AG 33 feed det NA (657-11, Aafs, sas anes AH ja-o tat bichaarai ko-ee. ||1|| if one contemplates the essence of reality. ||1]|
H a ffs on AS Il (657-12, Aafs, sas anes Ah mo ka-o mili-o raam sanayhee. I have met my Beloved Lord.
fro fuxfet Fo ASS NU TI Il (657-12, Fafs, sas ane wh) jih mili-ai dayh sudayhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting with Him, my body is made beauteous and sublime. ||1||Pause] |
fife uran aaa dfeur | (657-12, Aafs, sas one FH) mil paaras kanchan ho-i-aa. Touching the philosopher's stone, I have been transformed into gold.
HY HOA! Jaq UdfEut I (657-13, Fale, sas one Th mukh mansaa ratan paro-i-aa. I have threaded the jewels into my mouth and mind.
fon 1C sfeur ZH Sta Il (657-13, Hafs, sas SNS Ft) nij bhaa-o bha-i-aa bharam bhaagaa. I love Him as my own, and my doubt has been dispelled.
TT US HS USE MQM (657-13, Aafo, sas one FH) gur poochhay man patee-aagaa. ||2|| Seeking the Guru's guidance, my mind is content. ||2]|
Ae Stats as AAEM II (657-13, False, sas ones Ah jal bheetar kumbh samaani-aa. The water is contained within the pitcher;
AS TH Sa als Aon Il (657-14, Fafs, sas oe Hh sabh raam ayk kar jaani-aa. I know that the One Lord is contained in all.
Td VS I HS Hone Il (657-14, Aafs, sas see FH) gur chaylay hai man maani-aa. The mind of the disciple has faith in the Guru.
HS oH 3S Uetfour SISK (657-14, Aafs, sas ane Th) jan naamai tat pachhaani-aa. ||3]|3]| Servant Naam Dayv understands the essence of reality. ||3]|3]|
wa Hofs wet sas seen Ht at (657-16) raag sorath banee bhagat ravidaas jee kee Raag Sorat'h, The Word Of Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsare YATE II (657-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Wa TH IS 3a SF OS wa Sat A Sa Il (657-17, Fels, sas afew HH)
jab ham hotay tab too naahee ab toohee mai naahee.
When I am in my ego, then You are not with me. Now that You are with me, there is no egotism within me.
MSS MAH AA Bde Hf Gefa AS ATs AS Hot IA (657-17, Rafs, sas see
anal agam jaisay lahar ma-i odaDh jal kayval jal maa“hee. ||1|| The wind may raise up huge waves in the vast ocean, but they are just water in water. ||1||
Hae for adba FH MAT Il (657-18, als, sas aes Ft) maaDhvay ki-aa kahee-ai bharam aisaa. O Lord, what can I say about such an illusion?
AAT HOH dE o SAT AU TIC Il (657-18, Aals, sas sfeeA th) jaisaa maanee-ai ho-ay na taisaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. Things are not as they seem. ||1|]Pause| |
souls &a fiurafs Afeor Aus sfeur feast i (657-19, Fats, sas ofeerA A) narpat ayk singhaasan so-i-aa supnay bha-i-aa bhikhaaree. It is like the king, who falls asleep upon his throne, and dreams that he is a beggar.
Wes TH faess vy ufeor A afs set THT IQ (657-19, Aafs, sas ofeerA A)
achhat raaj bichhurat dukh paa-i-aa so gat bha-ee hamaaree. ||2|| His kingdom is intact, but separated from it, he suffers in sorrow. Such is my own condition. ||2||
Ue gut
on sfenia ua AA dfs wre as HSH Hofeur | (658-1, Fale, sas afeeA Ah
raaj bhu-i-ang parsang jaisay heh ab kachh maram janaa-i-aa.
Like the story of the rope mistaken for a snake, the mystery has now been explained to me.
Misa Tea AA fH us na AIS AIG 3 wfEr Bil (658-1, Aafs, sas see Fh) anik katak jaisay bhool paray ab kahtay kahan na aa-i-aa. ||3]|
Like the many bracelets, which I mistakenly thought were gold; now, I do not say what I said then. ||3]||
Had fa nda AM As we ga] Aet Il (658-2, Aals, sas sen Ah sarbay ayk anaykai su-aamee sabh ghat bhogvai so-ee. The One Lord is pervading the many forms; He enjoys Himself in all hearts.
afo sen oa U Sd AOA SE A Tet SIA (658-2, Aafs, sas aE Ah
kahi ravidaas haath pai nayrai sehjay ho-ay so ho-ee. ||4||1]|
Says Ravi Daas, the Lord is nearer than our own hands and feet. Whatever will be, will be. ||4]|1]|
AG OH Sd Ho SA IN UN Safe SH FT Il (658-3, Fals, sas fee Ft)
ja-o ham baa‘Dhay moh faas ham paraym baDhan tum baaDhay.
If I am bound by the noose of emotional attachment, then I shall bind You, Lord, with the bonds of love.
MUS FES A ASG ATT TH SS SH MMTT IAI (658-3, Hats, sas afeem FH) apnay chhootan ko jatan karahu ham chhootay tum aaraaDhay. ||1]| Go ahead and try to escape, Lord; I have escaped by worshipping and adoring You.
[21
He ASS Jd AA SAT Il (658-4, Fale, sas afeeA TH) maaDhvay jaanat hahu jaisee taisee. O Lord, You know my love for You.
WE AT AdIa MAT NA TIS Il (658-4, Aafs, sas sheer Ah ab kahaa karhugay aisee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Now, what will You do? ||1||Pause| |
Hie uate aifas org afes sifa at& ag sat il (658-5, Fafs, sas sfeern Hh) meen pakar faa“ki-o ar kaati-o raa“Dh kee-o baho baanee. A fish is caught, cut up, and cooked it in many different ways.
us us af sH6 ale 3B 5 fanfes ust NII (658-5, Hafs, sas afeerA Ft) khand khand kar bhojan keeno ta-oo na bisri-o paanee. ||2|| Bit by bit, it is eaten, but still, it does not forget the water. ||2| |
nimuS au ordt fart t sea a Tia THT Il (658-6, Fale, sas ofeen Ff) aapan baapai naahee kisee ko bhaavan ko har raajaa. The Lord, our King, is father to no one, except those who love Him.
Ho ues AS Has forfus sas adt Han SI (658-6, Aals, sas steer Ah
moh patal sabh jagat bi-aapi-o bhagat nahee santaapaa. ||3]|
The veil of emotional attachment has been cast over the entire world, but it does not bother the Lord's devotee. ||3]|
afa sfeen sats fea at wre feo a fA@ adit | (658-7, Aafs, saz afeern Hf)
kahi ravidaas bhagat ik baadhee ab ih kaa si-o kahee-dai.
Says Ravi Daas, my devotion to the One Lord is increasing; now, who can I tell this to?
W wats TH SH MST A SY MAT Adm Iii (658-8, Hale, sas afeerA Ft)
jaa kaaran ham tum aaraaDhay so dukh ajhoo sahee-ai. ||4]|2]|
That which brought me to worship and adore You - I am still suffering that pain. [41121]
wus HOH Us eo utes fae aS wifasear Il (658-8, Aafs, sas ofeerA A)
dulabh janam punn fal paa-i-o birthaa jaat abibaykai.
I obtained this precious human life as a reward for my past actions, but without discriminating wisdom, it is wasted in vain.
on fe Anat fas vine fio afe safe ag fa BH NU (658-9, Aafs, sas shee Fh raajay indar samsar garih aasan bin har bhagat kahhu kih laykhai. ||1]|
Tell me, without devotional worship of the Lord, of what use are mansions and thrones like those of King Indra? ||1]|
3 Hetss TH TH A FA Il (658-9, Aals, sas sheen Ah
na beechaari-o raajaa raam ko ras. You have not considered the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, our King;
fd dA ue dA stats Ad NA TIS Il (658-10, Aafs, sas sfeeA AH)
jih ras an ras beesar jaahee. ||1]| rahaa-o. this sublime essence shall cause you to forget all other essences. ||1]||Pause] |
wf wine Se JH Wed Av uA fesA ATT Il (658-10, Aals, sas sheen Ah
jaan ajaan bha-ay ham baavar soch asoch divas jaahee.
We do not know what we need to know, and we have become insane. We do not consider what we should consider; our days are passing away.
feet nas fous fraa af usa usgen Sdt IQ (658-11, als, sas sheen FH)
indree sabal nibal bibayk buDh parmaarath parvays nahee. ||2||
Our passions are strong, and our discriminating intellect is weak; we have no access to the supreme objective. ||2||
ads nite neds nis As AHS 6 Ud wus HEMT II (658-12, Hafs, sas afer Ff) kahee-at aan achree-at an kachh samajh na parai apar maa-i-aa.
We say one thing, and do something else; entangled in endless Maya, we do not understand anything.
afo sfeen Bern oH fs usafe ay agg Ahr efer SIS (658-12, Fale, sas sfeeA Th kahi ravidaas udaas daas mat parhar kop karahu jee-a da-i-aa. ||3||3]|
Says Ravi Daas, Your slave, O Lord, I am disillusioned and detached; please, spare me Your anger, and have mercy on my soul. ||3][3]|
HY Ag Hess fests ane afk A a Il (658-13, Hafs, sas afer Fh)
sukh saagar surtar chintaaman kaamDhayn bas jaa kay.
He is the ocean of peace; the miraculous tree of life, the wish-fulfilling jewel, and the Kaamadhayna, the cow which fulfills all desires, all are in His power.
ofa ues nine vA fafa oe fafa ag 36 STA NA (658-13, Aafs, sas afeen ZH)
chaar padaarath asat dasaa siDh nav niDh kar tal taa kay. ||1]| The four great blessings, the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, and the nine treasures, are all in the palm of His hand. ||1]|
ofa ofa ofa 3 nufa SAS Il (658-14, Aafs, sas afer HH)
har har har na jaapeh rasnaa. You do not chant with your tongue the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
med AS fsurfa see TIS" AU TIS Il (658-14, Fafs, sas sfeeA Hh
avar sabh ti-aag bachan rachnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Abandon your involvement in all other words. ||1||Pause] |
oat fimig use se fafa sOsin nua Hitt Il (658-15, Aefs, sas afer FH)
naanaa khi-aan puraan bayd biDh cha-utees akhar maa“hee.
The various Shaastras, Puranaas, and the Vedas of Brahma, are made up of thirty- four letters.
form feats afsG uarese oH oH As STH NI (658-15, Fale, sas sfeeA Ah bi-aas bichaar kahi-o parmaarath raam naam sar naahee. ||2||
After deep contemplation, Vyaas spoke of the supreme objective; there is nothing equal to the Lord's Name. |[2||
Hon Ano Gurfa ges efs as afar fee walt Il (658-16, Aafs, sas afeerA Th)
sahj samaaDh upaaDh rahat fun badai bhaag liv laagee.
Very fortunate are those who are absorbed in celestial bliss, and released from their entanglements; they are lovingly attached to the Lord.
afs sfeen yarn foe ufs HOH Hes F Sait ISISI (658-17, Aafs, sas afeerA Fh
kahi ravidaas pargaas ridai Dhar janam maran bhai bhaagee. ||3||4] |
Says Ravi Daas, enshrine the Lord's Light within your heart, and your fear of birth and death shall run away from you. |[3]|4]|
Ag 3H fafsed 3B TH HT Il (658-17, Aals, sas sfeeA Ah ja-o tum girivar ta-o ham moraa. If You are the mountain, Lord, then I am the peacock.
AG SH Ue SC IN BST VAT NU (658-18, Fels, sas ofeeH Ff) ja-o tum chand ta-o ham bha-ay hai chakoraa. ||1]|| If You are the moon, then I am the partridge in love with it. ||1]|
Hue 3H 3 Sad 3E WH Sdt Safa I (658-18, Aafs, sas shee Hf) maaDhvay tum na torahu ta-o ham nahee toreh. O Lord, if You will not break with me, then I will not break with You.
3H fA@ Sfe aeo fa@ Fafs Na TIE I 658-19, Aafs, sas sfeeA Th tum si-o tor kavan si-o joreh. ||1|| rahaa-o. For, if I were to break with You, with whom would I then join? ||1||Pause] |
AG 3H des 3B IN Fst Il (658-19, Fafs, sas sfeeH Hh) ja-o tum deevraa ta-o ham baatee. If You are the lamp, then I am the wick.
AG 3H Stee 38 TH AST MQM (658-19, Aafs, sas afeeA Hh) ja-o tum tirath ta-o ham jaatee. ||2|| If You are the sacred place of pilgrimage, then I am the pilgrim. ||2]|
Yar Eur
At uf on 3H fAG At I (659-1, Aes, sas afeeA Hh saachee pareet ham tum si-o joree. I am joined in true love with You, Lord.
3H fk Afe wes Afar Sat WSN (659-1, Aals, sas se Ah tum si-o jor avar sang toree. ||3|| I am joined with You, and I have broken with all others. ||3]]|
Ad Ad WE So Sat AS Il (659-2, Aafs, sas sfeeA Hh jah jah jaa-o tahaa tayree sayvaa. Wherever I go, there I serve You.
3H A oag meg B SST ISI (659-2, Aals, sas se Ah tum so thaakur a-or na dayvaa. ||4|| There is no other Lord Master than You, O Divine Lord. ||4]|
SHo SHO Acs AH SAT Il (659-2, Fats, sas afeeA Hh) tumray bhajan kateh jam faa'saa. Meditating, vibrating upon You, the noose of death is cut away.
Safs IS We Beara WUNUI (659-3, AafS, sas afeeA Ah
bhagat hayt gaavai ravidaasaa. ||5||5|| To attain devotional worship, Ravi Daas sings to You, Lord. ||5||5]|
Ae at SHS ues a dat yas FE AT AST Il (659-3, Aafs, sas sheen wh)
jal kee bheet pavan kaa thambhaa rakat bund kaa gaaraa.
The body is a wall of water, supported by the pillars of air; the egg and sperm are the mortar.
JS HA BST a fiine Uet aA fase NAM (659-3, Aafs, sas afeerA Th) haad maas naarhee" ko pinjar pankhee basai bichaaraa. ||1||
The framework is made up of bones, flesh and veins; the poor soul-bird dwells within it. |[1]|
yrat foo Hat fort Sat Il (659-4, Aafs, sas steer Ah paraanee ki-aa mayraa ki-aa tayraa. O mortal, what is mine, and what is yours?
AA sded Uf SAT NU TIC Il (659-4, Fale, gas sfeerA wh) jaisay tarvar pankh basayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The soul is like a bird perched upon a tree. ||1]|Pause| |
wag ag BAe alee Il (659-5, Fale, sas ofeern ah raakho kanDh usaarahu neevaa”. You lay the foundation and build the walls.
Are Sife we Sat Alet IQ (659-5, Aafs, sas sfeeA FH) saadhay teen haath tayree seevaa™. ||2]| But in the end, three and a half cubits will be your measured space. ||2||
aa aes ura fafs Sct i (659-5, False, sas ofeern Hh bankay baal paag sir dayree. You make your hair beautiful, and wear a stylish turban on your head.
feg 36 dfeat SAH at Sat BI (659-6, Aafs, sas sfeerA Th) ih tan ho-igo bhasam kee dhayree. ||3]| But in the end, this body shall be reduced to a pile of ashes. ||3]|
Ce Hes Hed ard Il (659-6, Hats, sas afeer Ht) oochay mandar sundar naaree. Your palaces are lofty, and your brides are beautiful.
oH OT fag TH Tet Sil (659-6, Aafs, sas sfeen FH)
raam naam bin baajee haaree. ||4|| But without the Lord's Name, you shall lose the game entirely. ||4||
Hot ats atat ulfs aitet Get HOH ITS Il (659-6, False, sas afeeA Hh mayree jaat kameenee paa‘t kameenee ochhaa janam hamaaraa. My social status is low, my ancestry is low, and my life is wretched.
3H Adods Ta TH Ue afs SETA BHT IUIEI (659-7, Fels, sas sfeeA Ff)
tum sarnaagat raajaa raam chand kahi ravidaas chamaaraa. ||5||6|| I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Luminous Lord, my King; so says Ravi Daas, the shoemaker. ||5||6||
SHdSt TS B ASEet Il (659-8, Aafs, sas sfeeA AH chamrataa gaa“th na jan-ee. I am a shoemaker, but I do not Know how to mend shoes.
Bd ToS USAT NU! TIE Il (659-8, False, sas seen Ah log gathaavai panhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. People come to me to mend their shoes. ||1]|Pause| |
wig Odt fag Su il (659-8, Aefs, sas ofeer Ft) aar nahee jih topa-o. I have no awl to stitch them;
odt dat aE Gu il (659-8, Fale, sas sheen Ah nahee raa“bee thaa-o ropa-o. ||1|| I have no knife to patch them. ||1]|
BI ails aif wa fa | (659-9, Fats, sas seen Fh) log ganth ganth kharaa bigoochaa. Mending, mending, people waste their lives and ruin themselves.
JG fag aS ATE UTS NM (659-9, Aafs, sas sfeerH Fh) ha-o bin gaa‘thay jaa-ay pahoochaa. ||2]|| Without wasting my time mending, I have found the Lord. ||2||
Tee AU ITH BHT Il (659-9, Aafs, sas afeerA Th) ravidaas japai raam naamaa. Ravi Daas chants the Lord's Name;
Hfo FH FAG ardt aM BID (659-10, Aafs, sas shee Ah
mohi jam si-o naahee kaamaa. ||3]|7]|| he is not concerned with the Messenger of Death. ||3]||7||
wa Hafs wal sas sis at (659-11) raag sorath banee bhagat bheekhan kee Raag Sorat'h, The Word Of Devotee Bheekhan Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (659-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dod Sd Yd 3o Uist Se AA VT Set Il (659-12, Aafs, sas Stus Th)
nainhu neer bahai tan kheenaa bha-ay kays duDh vaanee.
Tears well up in my eyes, my body has become weak, and my hair has become milky- white.
IT aS Aa Sdt Gud ma foor aafs uTSt IU (659-12, Fats, sas Shas Hh)
rooDhaa kanth sabad nahee uchrai ab ki-aa karahi paraanee. ||1||
My throat is tight, and I cannot utter even one word; what can I do now? I am a mere mortal. ||1]|
on ofe dfs se aoe Il (659-13, Fats, sas Sts th) raam raa-ay hohi baid banvaaree. O Lord, my King, Gardener of the world-garden, be my Physician,
MUS Had BI Carct All TTS Il (659-13, Aals, sas Stes wh) apnay santeh layho ubaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. and save me, Your Saint. ||1||Pause] |
Hg ute Adifs Hols I AGA ATA HT II (659-13, Fale, gas Stes Ah maathay peer sareer jalan hai karak karayjay maahee. My head aches, my body is burning, and my heart is filled with anguish.
MAT Seo Gufs udt set at at mBug ardt i (659-14, Fas, sas shia rh) aisee baydan upaj kharee bha-ee vaa kaa a-ukhaDh naahee. ||2|| Such is the disease that has struck me; there is no medicine to cure it. ||2||
ofs a on nifys ae fesHe feg nua Afar ATE I (659-14, Fafs, sas Shs Hh
har kaa naam amrit jal nirmal ih a-ukhaDh jag saaraa.
The Name of the Lord, the ambrosial, immaculate water, is the best medicine in the world.
ad ure ad Ae Stes USS HY EMTS NBII (659-15, Aals, sas Shes Ah gur parsaad kahai jan bheekhan paava-o mokh du-aaraa. ||3]|1|| By Guru's Grace, says servant Bheekhan, I have found the Door of Salvation. ||3]|1]|
MAT oH 336 festa ufs versa fen Il (659-16, Aafs, sas Shia wh)
aisaa naam ratan nirmolak punn padaarath paa-i-aa.
Such is the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the invaluable jewel, the most sublime wealth, which I have found through good deeds.
wifoa Ase af forse ahmr gzq o et surfer Ill (659-16, #afs, sas Stes rh)
anik jatan kar hirdai raakhi-aa ratan na chhapai chhapaa-i-aa. ||1] |
By various efforts, I have enshrined it within my heart; this jewel cannot be hidden by hiding it. ||1]|
Us TS AIS AIS B AT Il (659-17, Fale, sas shes FH) har gun kahtay kahan na jaa-ee. The Glorious Praises of the Lord cannot be spoken by speaking.
AN oN
AA Tat ot ffomret nail TIS i (659-17, Fats, gars shes Ht) jaisay goongay kee mithi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. They are like the sweet candies given to a mute. ||1||Pause] |
JAa JHS HOS AY Azar fas 8S AY Tet Il (659-18, Aafs, sas Stes FH)
rasnaa ramat sunat sukh sarvanaa chit chaytay sukh ho-ee.
The tongue speaks, the ears listen, and the mind contemplates the Lord; they find peace and comfort.
ag ste fe So Ase Ae Sut So AST INQ (659-18, Fats, sas Shus wh) kaho bheekhan du-ay nain santokhay jah daykhaa" tah so-ee. ||2||2|| Says Bheekhan, my eyes are content; wherever I look, there I see the Lord. ||2]|2]|
Yat EEO
USTAdt HIS 1 We A BeUE (660-1) Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
IB ATS on aes usy fos fares urs vals mast AS AT YATE Il (660-2) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
MG ses J wma a fAE adt yas Il (660-4, daTASt, 2 1) jee-o darat hai aapnaa kai si-o karee pukaar. My soul is afraid; to whom should I complain?
wu fers Afenr Het Het VST WAU (660-4, voTASt, He 1) dookh visaaran sayvi-aa sadaa sadaa daataar. ||1]| I serve Him, who makes me forget my pains; He is the Giver, forever and ever. ||1]||
Atog HS Sls Oe AS AST VSG NU! TIS Il (660-4, aarAst, ve 1) saahib mayraa neet navaa sadaa sadaa daataar. ||1|| rahaa-o. My Lord and Master is forever new; He is the Giver, forever and ever. ||1]||Pause] |
wofes Ave Reba nifs eave ALE II (660-5, daTAet, He 1) an-din saahib sayvee-ai ant chhadaa-ay so-ay. Night and day, I serve my Lord and Master; He shall save me in the end.
Afs afs Hat ant us Barat SE QI (660-5, daTASt, He 1) sun sun mayree kaamnee paar utaaraa ho-ay. ||2|| Hearing and listening, O my dear sister, I have crossed over. ||2||
efenis 3g at Sa Il (660-6, uatHet, He 1) da-i-aal tayrai naam taraa. O Merciful Lord, Your Name carries me across.
He ages WE Ul TI i (o0-6, caret, He 1) sad kurbaanai jaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am forever a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause| |
Hea ATS Sa F SAT St ALS il (660-7, warAst, He 1) sarba™ saachaa ayk hai doojaa naahee ko-ay. In all the world, there is only the One True Lord; there is no other at all.
wT ot Aet A ad WAG Sele Ad III (660-7, daTAST, He 1) taa kee sayvaa so karay jaa ka-o nadar karay. ||3]| He alone serves the Lord, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace. ||3]|
30 as fimid Az IT Il (660-7, aaAdt, He 1) tuDh baajh pi-aaray kayv rahaa. Without You, O Beloved, how could I even live?
AW efsnret efo fas ath 33 afar Jat Il (660-8, aaAet, He 1) saa vadi-aa-ee deh jit naam tayray laag rahaa’. Bless me with such greatness, that I may remain attached to Your Name.
ea ordt afe fra ora fimrs ate axa Ul TIS Il (660-8, aaASt, we 1) doojaa naahee ko-ay jis aagai pi-aaray jaa-ay kahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. There is no other, O Beloved, to whom I can go and speak. ||1||Pause| |
Ret Afog nru|ar nied o AE aE Il (660-9, aaTASt, He 1) sayvee saahib aapnaa avar na jaacha’-o ko-ay. I serve my Lord and Master; I ask for no other.
Sod state” d fie fide vu ve dF Isil (660-9, cast, He 1) naanak taa kaa daas hai bind bind chukh chukh ho-ay. ||4|| Nanak is His slave; moment by moment, bit by bit, he is a sacrifice to Him. ||4] |
Whoa 33 oH fees fie fie gu ve TE Na TIE USA (60-10, daAt, He 1D saahib tayray naam vitahu bind bind chukh chukh ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. ||4]|1]|
O Lord Master, I am a sacrifice to Your Name, moment by moment, bit by bit. ||1]|Pause]|4]|1]|
USTAdt HIS % Il (660-11)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
JH uwirent at fea ext HI@LS HIS © AST Il (660-11, dovASt, He 1)
ham aadmee haa” ik damee muhlat muhat na jaanaa.
We are human beings of the briefest moment; we do not know the appointed time of our departure.
sod fase fA Adeg AT a Abt usTEST NAN (660-11, daTAST, He 1) naanak binvai tisai sarayvhu jaa kay jee-a paraanaa. ||1]| Prays Nanak, serve the One, to whom our soul and breath of life belong. ||1]|
mit Alea chofe ef as & fear ai JIS Il (660-12, cast, Hz 1) anDhay jeevnaa veechaar daykh kaytay kay dinaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are blind - see and consider, how many days your life shall last. ||1]|Pause| |
AA HA Ag AIG SHet SH ue filma il (660-12, coms, Hs 1) Saas maas sabh jee-o tumaaraa too mai kharaa pi-aaraa. My breath, my flesh and my soul are all Yours, Lord; You are so very dear to me.
Sod Afeg Se KIT J AD UdSea TT IQ! (660-13, aaTAdt, He 1) naanak saa-ir ayv kahat hai sachay parvadgaaraa. ||2|| Nanak, the poet, says this, O True Lord Cherisher. ||2||
A 3 fan 3 tat He AoE foor & HS TIS Il (660-13, asTASH, Hs 1) jay too kisai na dayhee mayray saahibaa ki-aa ko kadhai gahnaa. If you gave nothing, O my Lord and Master, what could anyone pledge to You?
sod faod A fae unt uate fee at BIaST ISI (660-14, daTAST, He 1) naanak binvai so kichh paa-ee-ai purab likhay kaa lahnaa. ||3]| Nanak prays, we receive that which we are pre-destined to receive. ||3]|
OH YAH a fats o Abat Auet AUS AHS Il (660-15, TTA, He 1) naam khasam kaa chit na kee-aa kaptee kapat kamaanaa. The deceitful person does not remember the Lord's Name; he practices only deceit.
AH eorfa A uals sorfenr St HET UST ST IVI (660-15, TaTAt, He 1) jam du-aar jaa pakarh chalaa-i-aa taa chaldaa pachhutaanaa. ||4|| When he is marched in chains to Death's door, then, he regrets his actions. ||4||
ust E69 Aa GI Vso a soa fxs Hebt fas adit | (661-1, gaat, ve 1)
jab lag dunee-aa rahee-ai naanak kichh sunee-ai kichh kahee-ai. As long as we are in this world, O Nanak, we should listen, and speak of the Lord.
ats dd JH de 3 Ufemr Aiefsmr Hfe adhe UNI (661-1, TaTAS, He 1)
bhaal rahay ham rahan na paa-i-aa jeevti-aa mar rahee-ai. ||5||2]|
I have searched, but I have found no way to remain here; so, remain dead while yet alive. ||5||2]|
USAdt HIS A WT FAT (661-3) Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 ghar doojaa Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas ure II (661-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fag frudt frefonr oot ATE I (661-4, dome, He 1)
ki-o simree sivri-aa nahee jaa-ay.
How can I remember the Lord in meditation? I cannot meditate on Him in remembrance.
su four Hina fawote il (661-4, cart, Hs tapai hi-aa-o jee-arhaa billaa-ay. My heart is burning, and my soul is crying out in pain.
fafa Hed ATeT ALE Il (661-4, darAdt, He 1 Siraj Savaaray saachaa so-ay. The True Lord creates and adorns.
fan fenfon var fag df Nall 661-5, daTASt, He 1) tis visri-ai changa ki-o ho-ay. ||1]|
Forgetting Him, how can one be good? ||1|| foanfs gath & ufenr ate Il (661-5, aaret, He 1)
hikmat hukam na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. By clever tricks and commands, He cannot be found.
fas ats rfs feo Hot Hfe nan TIC Il 61-5, cart, He 1) ki-o kar saach mila-o mayree maa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. How am I to meet my True Lord, O my mother? ||1||Pause| |
wus aH tus aet ATE Il (661-6, aaTAst, He 1) vakhar naam daykhan ko-ee jaa-ay. How rare is the one who goes out, and searches for the merchandise of the Naam.
at a Ua ST a UMTS Il (661-6, UsTAST, He 1) naa ko chaakhai naa ko khaa-ay. No one tastes it, and no one eats it.
Sta ust ot ufs df Il (661-6, cast, He 1) lok pateenai naa pat ho-ay. Honor is not obtained by trying to please other people.
J ufs gd ae AT ALE HQH (661-7, caTAS, He 1) taa pat rahai raakhai jaa so-ay. ||2]| One's honor is preserved, only if the Lord preserves it. ||2]|
Ag fa sg stom ANTE Il (61-7, daTASt, He 1) jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ay. Wherever I look, there I see Him, pervading and permeating.
3g fag ert act ate It o1-7, aaAst, He 1) tuDh bin doojee naahee jaa-ay. Without You, I have no other place of rest.
A a ad ats fomr df Il (661-3, caTAst, He 1) jay ko karay keetai ki-aa ho-ay. He may try, but what can anyone do by his own doing?
faA & SYA Are ALE ISI (661-8, daTACt, He 1) jis no bakhsay saachaa so-ay. ||3]|| He alone is blessed, whom the True Lord forgives. ||3]|
dfe Sfs soe nafs fa 3% I o1-8, caret, He 1) hun uth chalnaa muhat ke taal. Now, I shall have to get up and depart, in an instant, in the clapping of hands.
fom HI SAT TS St ST Il 661-9, aaa, uz 1) ki-aa muhu daysaa gun nahee naal. What face will I show the Lord? I have no virtue at all.
AAT Sets Ad SAT ALE Il (661-9, dsTAet, 42 1) jaisee nadar karay taisaa ho-ay. As is the Lord's Glance of Grace, so it is.
fee sedt Soa odt AE SIU (661-9, oT, He 1)
vin nadree naanak nahee ko-ay. ||4]|1]|3]| Without His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, no one is blessed. ||4]]1]|3]|
USTAdt HIS % Il (661-10)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
Seta ad St fhafamr ATE I (661-10, daTAeH, He 1) nadar karay taa simri-aa jaa-ay. If the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then one remembers Him in meditation.
MISH Be Jd fee ote Il (661-10, aavAdt, He 1) aatmaa darvai rahai liv laa-ay. The soul is softened, and he remains absorbed in the Lord's Love.
WISH USTSHT SA AP Il (661-11, uaAet, He 1) aatmaa paraatamaa ayko karai. His soul and the Supreme Soul become one.
niga at efsar nists He AN (661-11, TaTASt, He 1 antar kee dubiDhaa antar marai. ||1]| The duality of the inner mind is overcome. ||1]|
Td uUsATet urfemr ATE I (661-11, daTASt, He 1) gur parsaadee paa-i-aa jaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, God is found.
dfs faG fos war fefs are o afe NAN TTS I (661-11, cast, He 1)
har si-o chit laagai fir kaal na khaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
One's consciousness is attached to the Lord, and so Death does not devour him. ||1]|Pause] |
sa
Afs fafa de usaA Il (661-12, daTAet, He 1) sach simri-ai hovai pargaas. Remembering the True Lord in meditation, one is enlightened.
a 3 faftmr ufo gd BEA Il (661-12, daTASt, He 1) taa tay bikhi-aa meh rahai udaas. Then, in the midst of Maya, he remains detached.
Afsag at wt efsnret i (661-13, aatHet, He 1) satgur kee aisee vadi-aa-ee. Such is the Glory of the True Guru;
Uz aes fed afs uret iI (661-13, aarrct, He 1) putar kaltar vichay gat paa-ee. ||2]| in the midst of children and spouses, they attain emancipation. ||2||
MAT ASX AST AP Il (661-13, aA, He 1) aisee sayvak sayvaa karai. Such is the service which the Lord's servant performs,
fan at AG fSA urd Us Il (661-14, daTASt, He 1) jis kaa jee-o tis aagai Dharai. that he dedicates his soul to the Lord, to whom it belongs.
Whoa ste A UPSTE Il (661-14, daTASH, He 1) saahib bhaavai so parvaan. One who is pleasing to the Lord and Master is acceptable.
A AZ Vdd US HS ISI (661-14, usAat, He 1) so sayvak dargeh paavai maan. ||3]| Such a servant obtains honor in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
Afsas at Hats fore SAS il (61-14, aot, Hs 1) satgur kee moorat hirdai vasaa-ay. He enshrines the image of the True Guru in his heart.
A fee Aet eo ue Il (661-15, aaTAst, He 1) jo ichhai so-ee fal paa-ay. He obtains the rewards which he desires.
Ara Arfog forsur ad Il (661-15, daTASt, He 1) saachaa saahib kirpaa karai. The True Lord and Master grants His Grace;
A Aea AH 3 AAT 3d III (661-15, ToT, He 1) SO sayvak jam tay kaisaa darai. ||4|| how can such a servant be afraid of death? ||4]|
Bos BoA AT SAV Il (661-16, aaAst, He 1) bhanat naanak karay veechaar. Prays Nanak, practice contemplation,
Frat aat fAG ag fumirg il (61-16, cart, He 1) saachee banee si-o Dharay pi-aar. and enshrine love for the True Word of His Bani.
3 ot ure HY BME Il (661-16, aaAst, He 1) taa ko paavai mokh du-aar. Then, you shall find the Gate of Salvation.
Ay su AS fed APE J AT NUN (661-16, daTAdt, He 1) jap tap sabh ih sabad hai saar. ||5||2||4]| This Shabad is the most excellent of all chanting and austere meditations. ||5||2||4| |
USTAdt HIS 4 Il (661-17)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
MG sus 3 Ms Fs Il (661-17, dat, He 1) jee-o tapat hai baaro baar. My soul burns, over and over again.
sfu sfu wd sos Sarg I (661-17, caAst, He 1) tap tap khapai bahut baykaar. Burning and burning, it is ruined, and it falls into evil.
A sfs oat fenfa wfe il (661-18, daAst, He 1) jai tan banee visar jaa-ay. That body, which forgets the Word of the Guru's Bani,
fA uar gait femafe Nall (661-18, daAst, He 1) ji-o pakaa rogee villaa-ay. ||1]| cries out in pain, like a chronic patient. ||1]|
Ja FS SUS TE I (661-18, gaat, He 1) bahutaa bolan jhakhan ho-ay. To speak too much and babble is useless.
fee 38 We AS AE NAN TIE Il (661-19, doe, He 1) vin bolay jaanai sabh so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Even without our speaking, He knows everything. ||1||Pause] |
fate ae ats mrt oa Il (661-19, carat, Hs 1)
jin kan keetay akhee naak. He created our ears, eyes and nose.
fafs fase fest FB 3S Il (o1-19, uae, He 1) jin jinvaa ditee bolay taat. He gave us our tongue to speak so fluently.
Uar €€2 fafs He afm nrerat UTE Il (662-1, daTASt, He 1)
jin man raakhi-aa agnee paa-ay. He preserved the mind in the fire of the womb;
SH USS MTS AS ATE NI (662-1, aTASt, He 1) vaajai pavan aakhai sabh jaa-ay. ||2|| at His Command, the wind blows everywhere. ||2||
Aa Hg UdS ATES I (662-1, daTASt, He 1) jaytaa moh pareet su-aad. These worldly attachments, loves and pleasurable tastes,
AST ATHY STI VTA Il (662-2, uaTAt, Hs 1) sabhaa kaalakh daagaa daag. all are just black stains.
aa en ufo afer ote I (662-2, uae, He 1) daag dos muhi chali-aa laa-ay. One who departs, with these black stains of sin on his face
VIII SAS oS ATE SII (662-2, daTACH, He 1) dargeh baisan naahee jaa-ay. ||3]| shall find no place to sit in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
ath fs wmgs Sa ar il (662-3, uate, He 1) karam milai aakhan tayraa naa-o. By Your Grace, we chant Your Name.
fas ofa soet dg St AS i (662-3, caret, He 1) jit lag tarnaa hor nahee thaa-o. Becoming attached to it, one is saved; there is no other way.
AX 3a fete FS AS Il (662-3, doTASH, He 1) jay ko doobai fir hovai saar. Even if one is drowning, still, he may be saved.
ood ATS Aa UST ISISWUI (62-3, daa, He 1)
naanak saachaa sarab daataar. ||4||3]|5]| O Nanak, the True Lord is the Giver of all. ||4]|3]|5]|
UsTAdt HIG 4 Il (662-4) Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
Sd AG Ws 5 SIH Il (662-4, daTACt, He 1) chor salaahay cheet na bheejai. If a thief praises someone, his mind is not pleased.
A Bel Ad SSA S Ste Il (662-4, uot, He 1) jay badee karay taa tasoo na chheejai. If a thief curses him, no damage is done.
od at TT 3d B ALE Il (662-5, ustHt, He 1) chor kee haamaa bharay na ko-ay. No one will take responsibility for a thief.
ag abhor var fas FE Nal (662-5, carAst, He 1) chor kee-aa changa ki-o ho-ay. ||1|| How can a thief's actions be good? ||1]|
Afe Ho nid aS afar Il (662-5, varAct, Hs 1) sun man anDhay kutay koorhi-aar. Listen, O mind, you blind, false dog!
fag 38 esha Ars IU TIS il (662-6, aoTAS, Hs 1) bin bolay boojhee-ai sachiaar. ||1]| rahaa-o. Even without your speaking, the Lord knows and understands. ||1]||Pause| |
od Aorfee va fimret i 602-6, caret, He 1) chor su-aali-o chor si-aanaa. A thief may be handsome, and a thief may be wise,
YS a HS SA LAST Il (662-6, uaract, ue 1) khotay kaa mul ayk dugaanaa. but he is still just a counterfeit coin, worth only a shell.
a Afa sdbot ta Jote il (662-7, cast, He 1) jay saath rakhee-ai deejai ralaa-ay.
If it is kept and mixed with other coins,
wv usdha der df APE NN (662-7, dae, He 1)
jaa parkhee-ai khotaa ho-ay jaa-ay. ||2|| it will be found to be false, when the coins are inspected. ||2||
AAT Ad A SAT UTS Il (662-7, goat, He 1) jaisaa karay so taisaa paavai. As one acts, so does he receive.
mify sift mmr dt urs il (662-7, carat, He 1) aap beej aapay hee khaavai. As he plants, so does he eat.
A gfanreiot mmd ate | (662-8, carat, Hs 1) jay vadi-aa-ee-aa aapay khaa-ay. He may praise himself gloriously,
adt Aafs 3d ofe ATE SI (62-8, GoTAST, He 1) jayhee surat tayhai raahi jaa-ay. ||3]| but still, according to his understanding, so is the path he must follow. ||3] |
A AG ashor Az ANZ Il (662-8, vost, He 1) jay sa-o koorhee-aa koorh kabaarh. He may tell hundreds of lies to conceal his falsehood,
ae AS wim AAT Il (662-9, darTAdt, He 1) bhaavai sabh aakha-o sansaar. and all the world may call him good.
3O se] mut UTSTES Il (662-9, daTASt, He 1) tuDh bhaavai aDhee parvaan. If it pleases You, Lord, even the foolish are approved.
SOA We WE AAS IISIEN (662-9, TaTAS, He 1) naanak jaanai jaan sujaan. ||4]|4]|6]| O Nanak, the Lord is wise, Knowing, all-knowing. ||4]|4]|6]|
USTAdt HIS 4% Il (662-10)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
afent ara HG UTSTET Il (662-10, UaTAST, He 1) kaa-i-aa kaagad man parvaanaa. The body is the paper, and the mind is the inscription written upon it.
fra & Bu 5 us fenir|sr I (662-10, das, He 1) sir kay laykh na parhai i-aanaa. The ignorant fool does not read what is written on his forehead.
Gadd Waits StS Be Il (662-11, saat, Hz 1) dargeh gharhee-ahi teenay laykh. In the Court of the Lord, three inscriptions are recorded.
det af o mires SY AU (662-11, daTACH, He 1) khotaa kaam na aavai vaykh. ||1|| Behold, the counterfeit coin is worthless there. ||1]|
soa A fefs gut df Il (662-11, datAst, 4 1) naanak jay vich rupaa ho-ay. O Nanak, if there is silver in it,
ua ya nme AS AE NA TIS I (662-11, daTASt, 2 1) kharaa kharaa aakhai sabh ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. then everyone proclaims, "It is genuine, it is genuine."||1]|]Pause| |
Tet az af He ate i 662-12, wat, ue 1) kaadee koorh bol mal khaa-ay. The Qazi tells lies and eats filth;
QS oS Aber wf i (662-12, asvAct, ne 1) baraahman naavai jee-aa ghaa-ay. the Brahmin kills and then takes cleansing baths.
nat Hafs B AS MIT I (662-12, daTASt, He 1) jogee jugat na jaanai anDh. The Yogi is blind, and does not know the Way.
HS GAS a FT IQ (662-13, uatAst, He 1) teenay ojaarhay kaa banDh. ||2|| The three of them devise their own destruction. ||2||
A dat AH Wats UES I (662-13, daTASH, He 1 SO jogee jo jugat pachhaanai. He alone is a Yogi, who understands the Way.
Td USAT Sa ATES Il (662-13, uaTAS, He 1) gur parsaadee ayko jaanai. By Guru's Grace, he knows the One Lord.
at AH Gwe!t AP Il (662-13, uate, He 1) kaajee so jo ultee karai. He alone is a Qazi, who turns away from the world,
Td UAT ASS Hg Il (662-14, daTASt, He 1) gur parsaadee jeevat marai. and who, by Guru's Grace, remains dead while yet alive.
A OYOHS FH OYIH Ses I (662-14, uomAdt, ne 1) so baraahman jo barahm beechaardi. He alone is a Brahmin, who contemplates God.
wif 3d As AG BS WM (662-14, uatAet, He 1) aap tarai saglay kul taarai. ||3]| He saves himself, and saves all his generations as well. ||3||
aonde Aet fefs GS il (662-15, dae, He 1) daanasband so-ee dil Dhovai. One who cleanses his own mind is wise.
HAGHTS AEt HB BS Il (662-15, uaast, He 1) musalmaan so-ee mal khovai. One who cleanses himself of impurity is a Muslim.
ufsor gS A UTSTES Il (662-15, ort, we 1) parhi-aa boojhai so parvaan. One who reads and understands is acceptable.
fan fats esas a SATE ISNUNDI (662-15, Tae, Hs 1)
jis sir dargeh kaa neesaan. ||4]|5||7|| Upon his forehead is the Insignia of the Court of the Lord. ||4]|5]|7]||
USAdt HIG VW 3 (662-17) Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 ghar 3 Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsare YATE II (662-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aS ad Aa ardt St AS aT Se Il (662-18, uae, He 1) kaal naahee jog naahee naahee sat kaa dhab. No, no, this is not the time, when people know the way to Yoga and Truth.
Woe Aa Sane Je sas" Ss AT UA (662-18, wasrAst, He 1) thaansat jag bharisat ho-ay doobtaa iv jag. ||1]| The holy places of worship in the world are polluted, and so the world is drowning.
[2
AS HiT TH SH ATT Il (662-18, aaa, He 1)
kal meh raam naam saar. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the most sublime.
mat 3 Htefa are uasts sae AB AAS WAU TI i (662-19, dave, He 1) akhee ta meeteh naak pakrheh thagan ka-o sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Some people try to deceive the world by closing their eyes and holding their nostrils closed. ||1||Pause] |
nite ASt oe uasts ASS ffs Sut Il (662-19, aavASt, He 1) aa“t saytee naak pakrheh soojh-tay tin lo-a. They close off their nostrils with their fingers, and claim to see the three worlds.
Yat €é3
Hag Ue AE SAS ST USH MSM II (663-1, owt, 2 1) magar paachhai kachh na soojhai ayhu padam alo-a. ||2|| But they cannot even see what is behind them. What a strange lotus pose this is!
21 |
ust 3 aay efsur Hee aftmr at I (663-1, dot, He 1) khataree-aa ta Dharam chhodi-aa malaychh bhaakhi-aa gahee. The K'shatriyas have abandoned their religion, and have adopted a foreign language.
fqrfe ns fea eae det oan at afs adt SI (663-2, ort, He 1)
sarisat sabh ik varan ho-ee Dharam kee gat rahee. ||3]|
The whole world has been reduced to the same social status; the state of righteousness and Dharma has been lost. ||3||
WAe AA Ata use Auf aefs se nifsnmA | (663-2, caASt, He 1)
asat Saaj saaj puraan soDheh karahi bayd abhi-aas.
They analyze eight chapters of (Panini's) grammar and the Puraanas. They study the Vedas,
faa on dfs & nafs ad Ad SSA BH ISIAUIENCH (663-3, TaTAS, He 1) bin naam har kay mukat naahee kahai naanak daas. ||4||1]|6||8]|
but without the Lord's Name, no one is liberated; so says Nanak, the Lord's slave. [14] 11] 161181]
USTAdt HIS A niTgSt (663-4)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 aartee Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Aartee:
qe” Afar YATE II (663-4)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dae H ae sfe de cha as staat dH Aaa Ht Il (663-5, date, He 1) gagan mai thaal rav chand deepak banay taarikaa mandal janak motee. In the bowl of the sky, the sun and moon are the lamps; the stars in the constellations are the pearls.
UY HOMISS USS Ved AT AIS FIle SHS ASt UI (663-5, saat, ws
Dhoop mal-aanlo pavan chavro karay sagal banraa-ay foolant jotee. ||1]|
The fragrance of sandalwood is the incense, the wind is the fan, and all the vegetation are flowers in offering to You, O Luminous Lord. ||1]|
ant mast dfe se usar Sct nirast | (663-6, aaTAst, 2 1)
kaisee aartee ho-ay bhav khandnaa tayree aartee.
What a beautiful lamp-lit worship service this is! O Destroyer of fear, this is Your Aartee, Your worship service.
Woda AF SHS Sat VU! FIC il 663-6, aaAct, ve 1) anhataa sabad vaajant bhayree. ||1|| rahaa-o. The sound current of the Shabad is the sounding of the temple drums. ||1||Pause| |
HUA 3z 3S 3S 30 VU Slo AG AGA HAS Sat Sa Sa I (663-7, usvASH, He 1)
sahas tav nain nan nain hai tohi ka-o sahas moorat nanaa ayk tohee.
Thousands are Your eyes, and yet You have no eyes. Thousands are Your forms, and yet You have not even one form.
HOA ue fins 50 Sa ue aio fag AGA Ze au fee vas Hat NN (663-7, dare, He 1) sahas pad bimal nan ayk pad ganDh bin sahas tav ganDh iv chalat mohee. ||2| | Thousands are Your lotus feet, and yet You have no feet. Without a nose, thousands are Your noses. I am enchanted with Your play! |[2||
AS nfo Afs Afs do ALE II (663-8, doTAeT, He 1) sabh meh jot jot hai so-ay. The Divine Light is within everyone; You are that Light.
fan a wofs As ufs Woe SE I (663-9, uae, He 1) tis kai chaanan sabh meh chaanan ho-ay. Yours is that Light which shines within everyone.
ae Ant fs usae de Il (663-9, aarAst, He 1) gur saakhee jot pargat ho-ay. By the Guru's Teachings, this Divine Light is revealed.
A fA oS A rest SE ISI (663-9, daTASH, He 1 jo tis bhaavai so aartee ho-ay. ||3]| That which pleases the Lord is the true worship service. ||3]|
dfs WIE AHS Hade Biss HS niafes Hfo nirdt first il (663-10, darAst, Hz 1)
har charan kamal makrand lobhit mano andino mohi aahee pi-aasaa.
My soul is enticed by the honey-sweet lotus feet of the Lord; night and day, I thirst for them.
faut Ae ef aoa aida as df a 3 3d ofh SA ISIAUIDIE! (663-10, ToT, He 1) kirpaa jal deh naanak saaring ka-o ho-ay jaa tay tayrai naam vaasaa. ||4||1]|7||9]| Bless Nanak, the thirsty song-bird, with the water of Your Mercy, that he may come to dwell in Your Name. ||4[|1]|7/|91|
USAdt HIG 3 We 2 TeUS (663-12) Dhanaasree mehlaa 3 ghar 2 cha-upday Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:
qe fsa YATE II (663-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
feg ue nue 3 fous o ATE II (663-13, daTAet, He 3) ih Dhan akhut na nikhutai na jaa-ay. This wealth is inexhaustible. It shall never be exhausted, and it shall never be lost.
ud Afsate thor fete ii 663-13, corrt, He 3) poorai satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ay. The Perfect True Guru has revealed it to me.
mus Afsad AS Ae afs WET Il (663-13, daTASt, He 3) apunay satgur ka-o sad bal jaa-ee. I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru.
ad fas 3 fe Hfs SATE AI (663-14, daTAST, He 3) gur kirpaa tay har man vasaa-ee. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, I have enshrined the Lord within my mind. ||1]|
A ues ofa oft fee ote Il (663-14, aatHet, He 3) say Dhanvant har naam liv laa-ay. They alone are wealthy, who lovingly attune themselves to the Lord's Name.
afs us ofs ug usarfior afe faaur 3 eA ufs ore i TIS Ml 663-14, aarAst, Hs 3) gur poorai har Dhan pargaasi-aa har kirpaa tay vasai man aa-ay. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has revealed to me the Lord's treasure; by the Lord's Grace, it has come to abide in my mind. ||Pause| |
weae afe ae fot AE I 663-15, daTAST, He 3) avgun kaat gun ridai samaa-ay. He is rid of his demerits, and his heart is permeated with merit and virtue.
Us TI & Aah ASE Il (663-15, uot, we 3) pooray gur kai sahj subhaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, he naturally dwells in celestial peace.
ud TT at ArSt aret I (663-16, aaAt, He 3) pooray gur kee saachee banee. True is the Word of the Perfect Guru's Bani.
HY He nists AdfA Anat IQ (663-16, aaTASt, He 3) sukh man antar sahj samaanee. ||2|| They bring peace to the mind, and celestial peace is absorbed within. ||2]|
Sa sd AS SUT Set Il (663-16, aarAt, Hs 3) ayk achraj jan daykhhu bhaa-ee. O my humble Siblings of Destiny, behold this strange and wonderful thing:
efaa fs ofs rife SAT Il (663-17, davAet, He 3) dubiDhaa maar har man vasaa-ee. duality is overcome, and the Lord dwells within his mind.
oH mMHwA & usr ATE I (663-17, daTASt, He 3) naam amolak na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is priceless; it cannot be taken.
ae usrtfe ZA nfs mmfe Sil (663-17, daTASt, He 3) gur parsaad vasai man aa-ay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, it comes to abide in the mind. ||3]|
AS ufs SA ys Sat AE I (663-18, aoTASt, He 3) sabh meh vasai parabh ayko so-ay. He is the One God, abiding within all.
TaHst ufe usae SE il (663-18, cave, He 3) gurmatee ghat pargat ho-ay. Through the Guru's Teachings, He is revealed in the heart.
Hon fafs ys ate ustfenr il (663-18, cov, 8 3) sehjay jin parabh jaan pachhaani-aa. One who intuitively knows and realizes God,
Yat E€8
STOR OTH FHS HS Hfant SIA (64-1, TaTAST, He 3) naanak naam milai man maani-aa. ||4||1]| O Nanak, obtains the Naam; his mind is pleased and appeased. ||4]|1]|
USTAdt HIS 3 Il (664-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
dfs oH US fedHe mFS mrs Il (664-1, daTASt, He 3) har naam Dhan nirmal at apaaraa. The wealth of the Lord's Name is immaculate, and absolutely infinite.
Gd a Aafe 3I FST Il (664-2, ust, He 3) gur kai sabad bharay bhandaaraa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is over-flowing with treasure.
oH U6 faa da AS fay ATES Il (664-2, aatAet, He 3) naam Dhan bin hor sabh bikh jaan. Know that, except for the wealth of the Name, all other wealth is poison.
Hfeor Hfs AS mifSHTS IAI (664-2, TaTAST, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi jalai abhimaan. ||1]| The egotistical people are burning in their attachment to Maya. ||1]|
aan ofs oA oe Ate I (664-3, uae, He 3) gurmukh har ras chaakhai ko-ay. How rare is that Gurmukh who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord.
SA Ae uidse de feg wSt us afar usufs HE i TH i (664-3, asrAst, ws 3)
tis sadaa anand hovai din raatee poorai bhaag paraapat ho-ay. rahaa-o.
He is always in bliss, day and night; through perfect good destiny, he obtains the Name. ||Pause] |
Rae dha zs fsa fF I 604-4, aanAt, He 3) sabad deepak vartai tihu lo-ay. The Word of the Shabad is a lamp, illuminating the three worlds.
A oad A fSaHe df Il (664-4, daTAst, H2 3) jo chaakhai so nirmal ho-ay. One who tastes it, becomes immaculate.
fous af IGH HO OE Il (664-4, darASt, He 3) nirmal naam ha-umai mal Dho-ay. The immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, washes off the filth of ego.
AM safs AST AY SE NI (664-5, daTASt, H2 3) saachee bhagat sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||2|| True devotional worship brings lasting peace. ||2]|
fafs ofs oA whtmr A uf AS SA Il (664-5, darAdt, He 3) jin har ras chaakhi-aa so har jan log. One who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord is the Lord's humble servant.
fH Het Jay od Ke Aa Il (664-5, waract, ve 3) tis sadaa harakh naahee kaday sog. He is forever happy; he is never sad.
nif HAS nia HAT ATS Il (664-6, uavast, 2 3) aap mukat avraa mukat karaavai. He himself is liberated, and he liberates others as well.
dfs om AU dfs 3 AY UTS ISI (64-6, dat, He 3) har naam japai har tay sukh paavai. ||3]| He chants the Lord's Name, and through the Lord, he finds peace. ||3]|
fas Afsaa AS Het fawortE Il (664-6, datASt, He 3) bin satgur sabh mu-ee billaa-ay. Without the True Guru, everyone dies, crying out in pain.
mates ests ATS o UTE Il (664-7, daTASt, He 3) an-din daajheh saat na paa-ay. Night and day, they burn, and find no peace.
Afsag fixes AS fRAS FSS Il (664-7, cost, He 3) satgur milai sabh tarisan bujhaa-ay. But meeting the True Guru, all thirst is quenched.
Sea OTH ATS AY UES III (664-8, TaTAST, He 3) naanak naam saa“t sukh paa-ay. ||4||2]| O Nanak, through the Naam, one finds peace and tranquility. ||4]|2||
USTAdt HIS 3 Il (664-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
Het ug wists SH AHS Il (664-8, dot, He 3) sadaa Dhan antar naam samaalay. Gather in and cherish forever the wealth of the Lord's Name, deep within;
fbn #3 fAafa yfsus i 664-8, covAt, ue 3) jee-a jant jineh partipaalay. He cherishes and nurtures all beings and creatures.
Hats ueae (36 AG US Il (664-9, aatAat, He 3) mukat padaarath tin ka-o paa-ay. They alone obtain the treasure of Liberation,
ofa & aft gS fs SES AU (664-9, aoTASt, He 3) har kai naam ratay liv laa-ay. ||1|| who are lovingly imbued with, and focused on the Lord's Name. ||1]|
ad Aet 3 dfs SH US Ue Il (664-9, aarAat, He 3) gur sayvaa tay har naam Dhan paavai. Serving the Guru, one obtains the wealth of the Lord's Name.
wists usarA dfs oH fomre i TIT Il (664-10, darAdt, He 3)
antar pargaas har naam Dhi-aavai. rahaa-o.
He is illumined and enlightened within, and he meditates on the Lord's Name. ||Pause] |
feg afs da aa ue furs Ste Il (664-10, aorrct, He 3) ih har rang goorhaa Dhan pir ho-ay. This love for the Lord is like the love of the bride for her husband.
Aifs Atarg Te ys ALE Il (664-11, dart, ne 3) saat seegaar raavay parabh so-ay. God ravishes and enjoys the soul-bride who is adorned with peace and tranquility.
UGH fefs ys afe o US I 64-11, daTAt, He 3) ha-umai vich parabh ko-ay na paa-ay. No one finds God through egotism.
HOT SH AGH TES MQM (664-11, asrAst, we 3) moolhu bhulaa janam gavaa-ay. ||2|| Wandering away from the Primal Lord, the root of all, one wastes his life in vain. ||2]|
ad 3 ATS AGH AY Bret Il (664-11, canst, He 3) gur tay saat sahj sukh banee. Tranquility, celestial peace, pleasure and the Word of His Bani come from the Guru.
Aa Avot otH AHTat Il (664-12, aA, He 3)
Sayvaa saachee naam samaanee. True is that service, which leads one to merge in the Naam.
Rafe fs isu Aer fore i (664-12, aarrdt, ue 3) sabad milai pareetam sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. Blessed with the Word of the Shabad, he meditates forever on the Lord, the Beloved.
Ara OtH Sfaniret urs ISI (664-12, datASt, He 3) saach naam vadi-aa-ee paa-ay. ||3]| Through the True Name, glorious greatness is obtained. ||3]|
nm aast afar afar APE I (664-13, danAdt, He 3) aapay kartaa jug jug so-ay. The Creator Himself abides throughout the ages.
Sets Ad Horet SE il (664-13, ustAet, H2 3) nadar karay maylaavaa ho-ay. If He casts His Glance of Grace, then we meet Him.
aeaat 3 dfs fs SAS Il (664-13, dat, He 3) gurbaanee tay har man vasaa-ay. Through the Word of Gurbani, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
soa Aty gs ufs mrfy fHore ISIS (664-14, dot, Hs 3) naanak saach ratay parabh aap milaa-ay. ||4]||3]|| O Nanak, God unites with Himself those who are imbued with Truth. ||4]|3]|
USTAdt HIS 3 STAT Il (664-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3 teejaa. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
Ag Her ne dfe ATE i (664-14, aavAdt, He 3) jag mailaa mailo ho-ay jaa-ay. The world is polluted, and those in the world become polluted as well.
mie FE TH BITE il (664-15, vara, we 3) aavai jaa-ay doojai lobhaa-ay. In attachment to duality, it comes and goes.
en ote AS UaH feaet Il (664-15, aonAdt, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay sabh paraj vigo-ee. This love of duality has ruined the entire world.
Houfa set uf mryot ufsS et Al (664-15, danAct, He 3) manmukh chotaa khaa-ay apunee pat kho-ee. ||1|| The self-willed manmukh suffers punishment, and forfeits his honor. ||1] |
qd Ast 3 Ho fans GE Il (664-16, carr, He 3) gur sayvaa tay jan nirmal ho-ay. Serving the Guru, one becomes immaculate.
nists oH ZA ufs OSH dE I TIS Il 664-16, asvASH, Hs 3)
antar naam vasai pat ootam ho-ay. rahaa-o.
He enshrines the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within, and his state becomes exalted. | |Pause| |
aaHfy Cad af AaEret I (664-16, dart, He 3) gurmukh ubray har sarnaa-ee. The Gurmukhs are saved, taking to the Lord's Sanctuary.
oH OTH TS sats feset Il (664-17, dot, He 3) raam naam raatay bhagat darirhaa-ee. Attuned to the Lord's Name, they commit themselves to devotional worship.
als Ad AS Sanret ure | (664-17, daAst, ns 3)
bhagat karay jan vadi-aa-ee paa-ay.
The Lord's humble servant performs devotional worship, and is blessed with greatness.
Ags TS AY Ad AWE IQ (664-17, daTASt, He 3) saach ratay sukh sahj samaa-ay. ||2|| Attuned to Truth, he is absorbed in celestial peace. ||2] |
AM at ada feaar & WE Il (664-18, darAdt, He 3) saachay kaa gaahak virlaa ko jaan. Know that one who purchases the True Name is very rare.
Gd a Aafe nimy usSrs Il (664-18, aaTAdt, He 3) gur kai sabad aap pachhaan. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he comes to understand himself.
Ardt TA ATS SUT Il (664-18, dart, He 3) saachee raas Saachaa vaapaar. True is his capital, and true is his trade.
A 9 usy faa oft fimrg iil (664-19, donAdt, He 3) so Dhan purakh jis naam pi-aar. ||3]|
Blessed is that person, who loves the Naam. ||3]| fefs yfs Ans fafa Afs we I (664-19, aAdt, 18 3)
tin parabh saachai ik sach laa-ay. God, the True Lord, has attached some to His True Name.
GSH wel HAE ASS Il (664-19, uaTASt, He 3) ootam banee sabad sunaa-ay. They listen to the most sublime Word of His Bani, and the Word of His Shabad.
Yar géy
ys Ad at Art ars Il (665-1, uaTASt, ue 3) parabh saachay kee saachee kaar. True is service to the True Lord God.
Soa STH ASIST ST NII (665-1, TaTAST, He 3)
naanak naam savaaranhaar. ||4]||4|| O Nanak, the Naam is the Embellisher. ||4||4 |
USAdt HIS 3 Il (665-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
a dfs Refs fso safe WE Il (665-1, dam, He 3) jo har sayveh tin bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who serve the Lord.
fso fose ATS HET Hf oe I (665-2, daTAet, He 3) tin hirdai saach sachaa mukh naa-o. The Truth is in their hearts, and the True Name is on their lips.
Ard ATS Ane” Sy ATE Il (665-2, uaTAt, He 3) saacho saach samaalihu dukh jaa-ay. Dwelling upon the Truest of the True, their pains are dispelled.
And Aafe ZA nfs wre al (665-2, daTAdt, He 3) saachai sabad vasai man aa-ay. ||1]| Through the True Word of the Shabad, the Lord comes to dwell in their minds. ||1]|
Teaat AfS HS WSS Il (665-3, ust, He 3) gurbaanee sun mail gavaa-ay. Listening to the Word of Gurbani, filth is washed off,
Hon ofa on Hfe SAS AU TIS Il (665-3, govt, He 3) sehjay har naam man vasaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. and they naturally enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds. ||1]||Pause| |
az AAs feAat vale TIS Il (665-4, usTASt, He 3) koorh kusat tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ay. One who conquers fraud, deceit and the fire of desire
nists AfS HOfA AY UTS II (665-4, TaTAdt, He 3) antar saa‘t sahj sukh paa-ay. finds tranquility, peace and pleasure within.
Td a TS VS BT yy AME I (665-4, devas, nz 3) gur kai bhaanai chalai taa aap jaa-ay. If one walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, he eliminates his self-conceit.
AS HIG US Tig Te ATE l2Ml (665-5, aaAst, ue 3)
saach mahal paa-ay har gun gaa-ay. ||2||
He finds the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
3 Hae FS H AS et Il (665-5, uot, He 3)
na sabad boojhai na jaanai banee.
The blind, self-willed manmukh does not understand the Shabad; he does not know the Word of the Guru's Bani,
Honfe nid ef fearat | (665-5, carr, H2 3) manmukh anDhay dukh vihaanee. and so he passes his life in misery.
Afsag Se 3 AY UTES Il (665-6, daTAST, He 3) satgur bhaytay taa sukh paa-ay. But if he meets the True Guru, then he finds peace,
ICH fess ofa TIES BI (665-6, TaTAST, He 3)
ha-umai vichahu thaak rahaa-ay. ||3]| and the ego within is silenced. ||3]||
fon o ad est fea APE II (665-6, daTAdt, He 3) kis no kahee-ai daataa ik so-ay. Who else should I speak to? The One Lord is the Giver of all.
fogut ad Aafe firoret SfE I (665-7, uaTHdt, He 3) kirpaa karay sabad milaavaa ho-ay. When He grants His Grace, then we obtain the Word of the Shabad.
ffs UTSH ATS TE We Il (665-7, ast, Hs 3) mil pareetam saachay gun gaavaa. Meeting with my Beloved, I sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Soa ATS ATS SST SIU (665-7, use, He 3)
naanak saachay saachaa bhaavaa. ||4]|5]| O Nanak, becoming truthful, I have become pleasing to the True Lord. ||4|[5]|
USTAdt HIS 3 Il (665-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
HO Hd OS fe ATE Il (665-8, daTASt, He 3) man marai Dhaat mar jaa-ay. When the mind is conquered, its turbulent wanderings are stopped.
fag Hoe He aA ofa ue il (665-8, cars, Hs 3) bin man moo-ay kaisay har paa-ay. Without conquering the mind, how can the Lord be found?
feg HO He UG AWE AE Il (665-8, aot, we 3) in man marai daaroo jaanai ko-ay. Rare is the one who knows the medicine to conquer the mind.
Ho Hate Hd FS AG AE All (665-9, ort, Hs 3)
man sabad marai boojhai jan so-ay. ||1||
The mind is conquered through the Word of the Shabad; this is known to the Lord's humble servant. ||1]|
fa 3 Sun dfs & Sfsnret I (665-9, cast, He 3) jis no bakhsay har day vadi-aa-ee. The Lord forgives him, and blesses him with glory.
ad usAtfe ZA nfs miret 11 TIS Il (665-9, aarAct, He 3)
gur parsaad vasai man aa-ee. rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind. ||Pause] |
anf ast ATS AHS | (665-10, aad, He 3) gurmukh karnee kaar kamaavai. The Gurmukh does good deeds,
a fA Ho at AST US Il (665-10, daTASt, He 3) taa is man kee sojhee paavai. and so, he comes to understand this mind.
HO HHS Hares forest Il (665-10, uaTAst, v2 3) man mai mat maigal mikdaaraa. The mind is intoxicated, like the elephant with wine.
Te Man Hs HtevsSTTI IQ (665-11, dat, He 3) gur ankas maar jeevaalanhaaraa. ||2|| The Guru places the harness upon it, and rejuvenates it. ||2]|
HO MATE ATO Ae aeT Il (665-11, dorAdt, He 3) man asaaDh saaDhai jan ko-ee. The mind is undisciplined; only a rare few can discipline it.
MT Bd St fSaHs Te I (665-11, aaAt, He 3) achar charai taa nirmal ho-ee. If someone eats the uneatable, then he becomes immaculate.
aanfy feg He ofenr Aes Il (665-12, dant, He 3) gurmukh ih man la-i-aa savaar. As Gurmukh, his mind is embellished.
ICH fesd SH fears IISII (665-12, aTASt, He 3) ha-umai vichahu tajai vikaar. ||3]| Egotism and corruption are eradicated from within. ||3]|
a Ufa ofimig vfs ffe I (665-12, carAdt, He 3) jo Dhur rakhi-an mayl milaa-ay. Those whom the Primal Lord keeps united in His Union,
ae 3 feats Aafe ANTE II (665-13, dart, H 3) kaday na vichhurheh sabad samaa-ay. shall never be separated from Him; they are merged in the Word of the Shabad.
nituSt Fer nM UT ATE Il (665-13, vad, He 3) aapnee kalaa aapay parabh jaanai. Only God Himself knows His own power.
SOA TSH SH UETe IVIEll (665-13, vaTAst, He 3) naanak gurmukh naam pachhaanai. ||4]||6|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||6]|
USHA HIS 3 Il (665-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
aS UG Held HTH WT Il (665-14, aaTAst, He 3) kaachaa Dhan sa“cheh moorakh gaavaar. The ignorant fools amass false wealth.
HOHY SB UIT IST Il (665-14, aaASt, He 3) manmukh bhoolay anDh gaavaar. The blind, foolish, self-willed manmukhs have gone astray.
fafimr & ufs ret eu OE II (665-15, daTASt, He 3) bikhi-aa kai Dhan sadaa dukh ho-ay. Poisonous wealth brings constant pain.
ot Atfa afte 3 uaufs oe AI (665-15, daTASt, He 3) naa saath jaa-ay na paraapat ho-ay. ||1|| It will not go with you, and it will not yield any profit. ||1]|
Aa US TSHSt UTES Il (665-15, uaTASt, He 3) saachaa Dhan gurmatee paa-ay. True wealth is obtained through the Guru's Teachings.
are ua Sfe mite WE Il TIC Il (665-16, darAct, He 3) kaachaa Dhan fun aavai jaa-ay. rahaa-o. False wealth continues coming and going. ||Pause||
HoHfe 3% Als Hats TET Il (665-16, usTASt, He 3) manmukh bhoolay sabh mareh gavaar. The foolish self-willed manmukhs all go astray and die.
sents sa 5 Caets o ute Il (665-16, aaTAst, He 3)
bhavjal doobay na urvaar na paar.
They drown in the terrifying world-ocean, and they cannot reach either this shore, or the one beyond.
Asay SS UT SAT Il (665-17, daTAST, He 3) satgur bhaytay poorai bhaag. But by perfect destiny, they meet the True Guru;
Ate oS mifofefA Safar iI (665-17, asst, He 3) saach ratay ahinis bairaag. ||2|| imbued with the True Name, day and night, they remain detached from the world.
21 |
SJ Fa Hfs vifys Arst set Il (665-17, dovASt, He 3) chahu jug meh amrit saachee banee. Throughout the four ages, the True Bani of His Word is Ambrosial Nectar.
ud stat ofs STH AHTAt Il (665-18, ToTAST, Hs 3) poorai bhaag har naam samaanee. By perfect destiny, one is absorbed in the True Name.
fra wfoe serfs vfs Sf I (665-18, darAdt, He 3) siDh saaDhik tarseh sabh lo-ay. The Siddhas, the seekers and all men long for the Name.
ud stat uaufs FE Wail (65-18, cot, He 3) poorai bhaag paraapat ho-ay. ||3]| It is obtained only by perfect destiny. ||3]|
AS fae AT ATS DT ALE Il (665-19, oT, He 3) sabh kichh saachaa saachaa hai so-ay. The True Lord is everything; He is True.
GSH YH uate ate Il (65-19, aor, Hi 3) ootam barahm pachhaanai ko-ay. Only a few realize the exalted Lord God.
Ag Are’ Ay vify fesre il (665-19, uanrdt, ue 3) sach saachaa sach aap drirh-aa-ay. He is the Truest of the True; He Himself implants the True Name within.
uot €€€
~ AR ~
Soa nin sy Afs Be ISD (666-1, datAdt, He 3)
naanak aapay vaykhai aapay sach laa-ay. ||4||7]|| O Nanak, the Lord Himself sees all; He Himself links us to the Truth. ||4]|7]|
US'HAdt HIS 3 Il (666-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 3. Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:
ore at atufs ffs adt o ATE II (666-1, daTASt, He 3) naavai kee keemat mit kahee na jaa-ay. The value and worth of the Lord's Name cannot be described.
A Ho Uo fro fea oft foe OE Il (666-2, aarAt, He 3)
say jan Dhan jin ik naam liv laa-ay.
Blessed are those humble beings, who lovingly focus their minds on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hs Ast ATS SST Il (666-2, dart, He 3) gurmat saachee saachaa veechaar. True are the Guru's Teachings, and True is contemplative meditation.
MY FaA = SST WAU (666-2, dart, He 3) aapay bakhsay day veechaar. ||1]| God Himself forgives, and bestows contemplative meditation. ||1]|
dfs SH MedA Us MiMfu ASS Il (666-3, daTAdt, vs 3) har naam achraj parabh aap sunaa-ay. The Lord's Name is wonderful! God Himself imparts it.
oat are fete rane ure Ail TIS Il (666-3, dart, v8 3) kalee kaal vich gurmukh paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Gurmukhs obtain it. ||1]|Pause] |
TH Hoe Hae HS HT I (666-3, TaTHST, He 3) ham moorakh moorakh man maahi. We are ignorant; ignorance fills our minds.
JGH fefs As avs CONTE Il (666-4, daTAST, He 3) ha-umai vich sabh kaar kamaahi. We do all our deeds in ego.
qe UdATS ICH ATE Il (606-4, uaTAt, He 3) gur parsaadee ha’-umai jaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, egotism is eradicated.
mm aa we fate Il (666-4, asd, He 3) aapay bakhsay la-ay milaa-ay. ||2]| Forgiving us, the Lord blends us with Himself. ||2] |
fatimr at ag ass uifsHre Il (666-5, aaTAdt, He 3) bikhi-aa kaa Dhan bahut abhimaan. Poisonous wealth gives rise to great arrogance.
mIats FA B UTS HIG Il (666-5, oA, He 3) aha‘kaar doobai na paavai maan. Drowning in egotism, no one is honored.
nig efs Het AY Jet Il (666-5, aTAAt, He 3) aap chhod sadaa sukh ho-ee. Forsaking self-conceit, one finds lasting peace.
Tents Aad AG At SII (666-6, daAdt, He 3) gurmat saalaahee sach so-ee. ||3]| Under Guru's Instruction, he praises the True Lord. ||3]|
md AH Ast ALE Il (666-6, daTASt, 42 3) aapay Saajay kartaa so-ay. The Creator Lord Himself fashions all.
fH fag TAT neg 3 AfE Il (666-6, oTAt, Hs 3) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ay. Without Him, there is no other at all.
fan Afs we ASt Sed Il (666-6, dat, He 3) jis sach laa-ay so-ee laagai. He alone is attached to Truth, whom the Lord Himself so attaches.
Soa STH AST AY MTA NICH (666-7, TaTAST, He 3) naanak naam sadaa sukh aagai. ||4||8]| O Nanak, through the Naam, lasting peace is attained in the hereafter. ||4]|8]|
Ta UStAdt HIG SWI (666-8) raag Dhanaasiree mehlaa 3 ghar 4 Raag Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsas yATfE II (666-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oH Sta surat 33 3 for ufs F Vs Il (666-9, aaTAST, He 3)
ham bheekhak bhaykhaaree tayray too nij pat hai daataa.
I am just a poor beggar of Yours; You are Your Own Lord Master, You are the Great Giver.
dd Sons aH @y Has Ho AS Ae GG Sa TS AI (666-9, aaTAH, He 3)
hohu dai-aal naam dayh mangat jan ka‘-u sadaa raha-o rang raataa. ||1]|
Be Merciful, and bless me, a humble beggar, with Your Name, so that I may forever remain imbued with Your Love. ||1]|
JG afead WE ATS Sd ont feeT I (666-10, dat, He 3) ha"-u balihaarai jaa-o saachay tayray naam vitahu. I am a Sacrifice to Your Name, O True Lord.
AIS AIS ASH A Sa vie F TA AST AU FIC Il (666-10, wow, Hs 3) karan kaaran sabhnaa kaa ayko avar na doojaa ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The One Lord is the Cause of causes; there is no other at all. ||1]|Pause] |
ads eg ue fasus ag mre foe forsur aft il (666-11, aarAet, v2 3)
bahutay fayr pa-ay kirpan ka-o ab kichh kirpaa keejai.
I was wretched; I wandered through so many cycles of reincarnation. Now, Lord, please bless me with Your Grace.
dg tfenre zane Fg must nit SUA ASA III (666-11, darASt, He 3) hohu da-i-aal darsan dayh apunaa aisee bakhas kareejai. ||2||
Be merciful, and grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; please grant me such a gift. ||2]|
Its HoA SIH US UB TT USATet Aone Il (666-12, aarAst, 42 3)
bhanat naanak bharam pat khool"ay gur parsaadee jaani-aa.
Prays Nanak, the shutters of doubt have been opened wide; by Guru's Grace, I have come to know the Lord.
Wot fee oat 3 stafe Afsasg fAG HO wont NSIC (666-12, ToT, He 3)
saachee liv laagee hai bheetar satgur si-o man maani-aa. ||3]|1]|9|| I am filled to overflowing with true love; my mind is pleased and appeased by the True Guru. ||3]|1]|9]|
USTAdt HIS 8 we VUCUE (666-14) Dhanaasree mehlaa 4 ghar 1 cha-upday Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsas UATE II (666-14)
ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
a ofs Refs Hs sas fse & Afs uy foes Il (666-15, doTASt, He 4) jo har sayveh sant bhagat tin kay sabh paap nivaaree. Those Saints and devotees who serve the Lord have all their sins washed away.
oH Gufs fas ata Amt sy Hats SH first Wail (606-15, aarAst, He 4)
ham oopar kirpaa kar su-aamee rakh sangat tum jo pi-aaree. ||1]||
Have Mercy on me, O Lord and Master, and keep me in the Sangat, the Congregation that You love. ||1]|
dfs TE afd & AAS F5sTaTt Il (666-16, aA, He 4) har gun kahi na saka-o banvaaree. I cannot even speak the Praises of the Lord, the Gardener of the world.
JH unt urag alts sas ate frgur urge JH Set Il TIS Il (666-16, avast, He 4)
ham paapee paathar neer dubat kar kirpaa paakhan ham taaree. rahaa-o. We are sinners, sinking like stones in water; grant Your Grace, and carry us stones across. ||Pause]|
HOH HOH aA oa fay Hae ofa Hafs AT ASS Il (666-17, dot, He 4)
janam janam kay laagay bikh morchaa lag sangat saaDh savaaree.
The rust of poison and corruption from countless incarnations sticks to us; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, it is cleaned away.
fag ave ansfe aE He at afes Bard iQ (666-17, aA, He 4) ji-o kanchan baisantar taa-i-o mal kaatee katit utaaree. ||2|| It is just like gold, which is heated in the fire, to remove the impurities from it. ||2]|
dfs dfs Aus Aus fes ast afu ate ate ate Sfs aeat I (666-18, aaTAet, He 4)
har har japan japa-o din raatee jap har har har ur Dhaaree.
I chant the chant of the Name of the Lord, day and night; I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, and enshrine it within my heart.
ofs ofa afe mug af ua afu afs afe IBH Hat SI (666-19, TaTASt, He 4)
har har har a-ukhaDh jag pooraa jap har har ha-umai maaree. ||3]|
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, is the most perfect medicine in this world; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have conquered my ego. ||3]|
Yat gE
dfs ofs man nrarfa sf wrrdug use wrurdt il (667-1, aarast, H2 4)
har har agam agaaDh boDh aprampar purakh apaaree.
The Lord, Har, Har, is unapproachable, of unfathomable wisdom, unlimited, all- powerful and infinite.
Ho a faut add Hales AS SSA UA ASA NIU (667-1, dave, He 4)
jan ka-o kirpaa karahu jagjeevan jan naanak paij savaaree. ||4||1]|
Show Mercy to Your humble servant, O Life of the world, and save the honor of servant Nanak. ||4]|1||
USHA HIS 8 Il (667-2)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs & HS Aa ofs AUS fs a BY SIH SE Sait | (667-2, ust, Hs 4)
har kay sant janaa har japi-o tin kaa dookh bharam bha-o bhaagee.
The humble Saints of the Lord meditate on the Lord; their pain, doubt and fear have run away.
must Ret vrfy aaet asHfs nists ATat NAM (667-3, TaTAdt, He 4)
apnee sayvaa aap karaa-ee gurmat antar jaagee. ||1||
The Lord Himself inspires them to serve Him; they are awakened within to the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|
dfs & at Fst Saat i (667-3, uaTAdt, He 4) har kai naam rataa bairaagee. Imbued with the Lord's Name, they are unattached to the world.
dfs dfs xa Hat ufo svat aSHfS ate fee wait Al TIS il (667-3, asst, us 4)
har har kathaa sunee man bhaa-ee gurmat har liv laagee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Listening to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, their minds are pleased; through Guru's Instruction, they enshrine love for the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Ha Ao at wf afs Amit SH Sas TH Aral ll (667-4, ast, He 4)
sant janaa kee jaat har su-aamee tum" thaakur ham saa"gee.
God, the Lord and Master, is the caste and social status of His humble Saints. You are the Lord and Master; I am just Your puppet.
Ant Hfs teg ofa AMM TH SA Fea Fora iI (667-5, aarAct, v2 4)
jaisee mat dayvhu har su-aamee ham taisay bulag bulaagee. ||2| | As is the understanding You bless us with, so are the words we speak. ||2||
fom JH fasH arg fox ats SH Ss UTY Farait Il (667-5, aarAst, He 4)
ki-aa ham kiram naan" nik keeray tum" vad purakh vadaagee.
What are we? Tiny worms, and microscopic germs. You are our great and glorious Lord and Master.
SHot afs ffs afs 6 Aad ys DH fa af fhag visrait SI (67-6, dant, He 4)
tum"ree gat mit kahi na sakah parabh ham ki-o kar milah abhaagee. ||3]| I cannot describe Your state and extent. O God, how can we unfortunate ones meet with You? ||3]|
dfs ys Aut fagur oag dH ote afs AS Breit | (667-7, aaAdt, us 4)
har parabh su-aamee kirpaa Dhaarahu ham har har sayvaa laagee.
O God, my Lord and Master, shower me with Your Mercy, and commit me to Your service.
Soa VAS MA AdT YS JH Ug Aa Aaa USI (667-7, dom, He 4) naanak daasan daas karahu parabh ham har kathaa kathaagee. ||4||2||
Make Nanak the slave of Your slaves, God; I speak the speech of the Lord's sermon. [4112] |
USTAdt HIS 8 Il (667-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs & HS Asad AS Use A aS fe als wot Il 07-8, aa, He 4)
har kaa sant satgur sat purkhaa jo bolai har har baanee.
The True Guru is the Lord's Saint, the True Being, who chants the Bani of the Lord, Har, Har.
fH ad He A aS OH fSH a AS Aaaot INA (667-9, dot, He 4) jo jo kahai sunai so muktaa ham tis kai sad kurbaanee. ||1] | Whoever chants it, and listens to it, is liberated; I am forever a sacrifice to him. ||1]|
dfs & AS HST AA aot Il (667-9, carat, He 4) har kay sant sunhu jas kaanee. O Saints of the Lord, listen to the Lord's Praises with your ears.
dfs ofa aa Hog fea fony us Als footed uy afo AST AI TIS Il (667-9, daTAH, Hs 4)
har har kathaa sunhu ik nimakh pal sabh kilvikh paap leh jaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Listen to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, for a moment, for even an instant, and all your sins and mistakes shall be erased. ||1]||Pause| |
mA AS AG fae ufeor Ss es use Ssrat Il (667-10, uaTAst, v2 4) aisaa sant saaDh jin paa-i-aa tay vad purakh vadaanee. Those who find such humble, Holy Saints, are the greatest of the great persons.
fe at ufe Has ys AoMt oH fs Ss BoA iI (667-11, owt, we 4) tin kee Dhoor mangah parabh su-aamee ham har loch luchaanee. ||2|| I beg for the dust of their feet; I long for the longing for God, my Lord and Master.
21 |
fs of Aefes fasy ys Aum fas Afus A fFusTst Il (667-11, daTAS, Hs 4)
har har safli-o birakh parabh su-aamee jin japi-o say tariptaanee.
The Name of God, the Lord and Master, Har, Har, is the fruit-bearing tree; those who meditate on it are satisfied.
dfs ofs uifys ut usr As wet sa gwTSt SI (667-12, dart, Hs 4)
har har amrit pee tariptaasay sabh laathee bhookh bhukhaanee. ||3]||
Drinking in the ambrosia of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am satisfied; all my hunger and thirst is quenched. ||3]|
faa ot eS oa es Ss fSa afe AUG murat Il (667-13, uot, 2 4)
jin kay vaday bhaag vad oochay tin har japi-o japaanee.
Those who are blessed with the highest, loftiest destiny, chant and meditate on the Lord.
fso ufs Hafs vfs us Homi AS SSA SA VAST IBISI (667-13, aT, He 4)
tin har sangat mayl parabh su-aamee jan naanak daas dasaanee. ||4||3]| Let me join their congregation, O God, my Lord and Master; Nanak is the slave of their slaves. ||4||3]|
USTAdt HIS 8 Il (667-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
dH igs nig fae fay ws fae we Ts Tet Il (667-14, deat, 2 4)
ham anDhulay anDh bikhai bikh raatay ki-o chaalah gur chaalee.
I am blind, totally blind, entangled in corruption and poison. How can I walk on the Guru's Path?
Asad fer ad AuSTST IN BS ymS ust |All (667-15, daTASt, He 4)
satgur da-i-aa karay sukh-daata ham laavai aapan paalee. ||1||
If the True Guru, the Giver of peace, shows His kindness, He attaches us to the hem of His robe. ||1]|
Tate HS VoI TI Dt Il (667-15, saw, us 4) gursikh meet chalhu gur chaalee. O Sikhs of the Guru, O friends, walk on the Guru's Path.
A dg ad ASt 3m HS" Ufa ofa ae feast AU TIC il (667-16, davASt, He 4)
jo gur kahai so-ee bhal maanhu har har kathaa niraalee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Whatever the Guru says, accept that as good; the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is unique and wonderful. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs & AS Hed Ao set ag Afeg Sf Sarat i (667-16, aarAct, ve 4) har kay sant sunhu jan bhaa-ee gur sayvihu bayg baygaalee. O Saints of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, listen: serve the Guru, quickly now!
Hsd¢d Afe use dfs wag HS AEg TA fo AST NI (667-17, daTAST, He 4)
satgur sayv kharach har baaDhhu mat jaanhu aaj ke kaal"ee. ||2]|
Let your service to the True Guru be your supplies on the Lord's Path; pack them up, and don't think of today or tomorrow. ||2||
dfs & AS Aug ofa Hua afe AS VS ala Brat Il (667-18, drat, v2 4)
har kay sant japahu har japnaa har sant chalai har naalee.
O Saints of the Lord, chant the chant of the Lord's Name; the Lord's Saints walk with the Lord.
fas ofs afimr A afa de afe fufsur ae awrst ISI (667-18, doTAH, He 4)
jin har japi-aa say har ho-ay har mili-aa kayl kaylaalee. ||3]|
Those who meditate on the Lord, become the Lord; the playful, wondrous Lord meets them. ||3]|
dfs ofa wus afu de Swest afe faa afs qasst Il (667-19, vat, He 4)
har har japan jap loch lochaanee har kirpaa kar banvaalee.
To chant the chant of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, is the longing I long for; have Mercy upon me, O Lord of the world-forest.
Ho aoa Hals AT dfs HSI JH AT HST Ua Tt III (667-19, TaTAST, He 4)
jan naanak sangat saaDh har maylhu ham saaDh janaa pag raalee. ||4||4||
O Lord, unite servant Nanak with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; make me the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4]|4]|
Yar gét
USA HIS 8 Il (668-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofs ge se ois Fumi TH wha faws fewest Il (68-1, caAt, He 4) har har boond bha-ay har su-aamee ham chaatrik bilal billaatee. The Lord, Har, Har, is the rain-drop; I am the song-bird, crying, crying out for it.
dfs af fgur agg ys not uf eg ofa feHurst All (os-2, dant, ws 4)
har har kirpaa karahu parabh apnee mukh dayvhu har nimkhaatee. ||1]|
O Lord God, please bless me with Your Mercy, and pour Your Name into my mouth, even if for only an instant. ||1||
ofa fag ats o AAS fea TSH Il (668-3, aaTAt, He 4) har bin reh na saka-o ik raatee. Without the Lord, I cannot live for even a second.
fa@ fag ons omot ufo aret 3 SC ofe fas on nfs St I TTC Il (66-3, carat, He 4) ji-o bin amlai amlee mar jaa-ee hai ti-o har bin ham mar jaatee. rahaa-o. Like the addict who dies without his drug, I die without the Lord. ||Pause||
3H dfs Aded ifs ward TH fs o Hats Mis HST I (08-4, daTAST, He 4)
tum har sarvar at agaah ham leh na sakahi ant maatee.
You, Lord, are the deepest, most unfathomable ocean; I cannot find even a trace of Your limits.
3 ud ud mudug AoMit fis wag wus ast II (68-5, dat, He 4)
too parai parai aprampar su-aamee mit jaanhu aapan gaatee. ||2||
You are the most remote of the remote, limitless and transcendent; O Lord Master, You alone know Your state and extent. ||2||
fs & AS Aa de MUS Te shar VHS TSH Il (os-5, aoAst, ue 4)
har kay sant janaa har japi-o gur rang chaloolai raatee.
The Lord's humble Saints meditate on the Lord; they are imbued with the deep crimson color of the Guru's Love.
ofs af sats aot oifs Ast ofs APs SSH UrSt ISI (8-6, ToTAeT, He 4) har har bhagat banee at sobhaa har japi-o ootam paatee. ||3]| Meditating on the Lord, they attain great glory, and the most sublime honor. ||3]|
nm Stag nit Aza nerf gos Srst Il (668-6, aarAdt, He 4)
aapay thaakur aapay sayvak aap banaavai bhaatee.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the servant; He Himself creates His environments.
SSA AS SHdt Adeet fg WaT BA Zast ISUUll (668-7, aarAst, He 4) naanak jan tumree sarnaa-ee har raakho laaj bhagaatee. ||4||5||
Servant Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O Lord; protect and preserve the honor of Your devotee. ||4]|5]|
USTAd HIS 8 Il (668-7)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
ASAT A UH AIT SH set fae Seg TH Scaratt Il (668-8, aarAst, He 4)
kalijug kaa Dharam kahhu tum bhaa-ee kiv chhootah ham chhutkaakee.
Tell me, O Siblings of Destiny, the religion for this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. I seek emancipation - how can I be emancipated?
dfs ofs wy ast afs sae afe AfUs sd Sat NII (os-8, ToT, He 4)
har har jap bayrhee har tulhaa har japi-o tarai taraakee. ||1||
Meditation on the Lord, Har, Har, is the boat, the raft; meditating on the Lord, the Swimmer swims across. ||1]||
ofs At OA Tag Tis AS at Il (668-9, dart, H8 4)
har jee laaj rakhahu har jan kee. O Dear Lord, protect and preserve the honor of Your humble servant.
Uf dfs AUS AUST “MUS JH Halt Sats fEarat I TIC il (668-9, aarASt, He 4)
har har japan japaavhu apnaa ham maagee bhagat ikaakee. rahaa-o.
O Lord, Har, Har, please make me chant the chant of Your Name; I beg only for Your devotional worship. ||Pause| |
dfs & Aza A ofa fimrs fae Afus afs gaara Il (668-10, carat, He 4) har kay sayvak say har pi-aaray jin japi-o har bachnaakee. The Lord's servants are very dear to the Lord; they chant the Word of the Lord's Bani.
aw faz qufs Ft fefimr As set AH at Aatt QM (os-11, Tort, He 4)
laykhaa chitar gupat jo likhi-aa sabh chhootee jam kee baakee. ||2]|
The account of the recording angels, Chitr and Gupt, and the account with the Messenger of Death is totally erased. ||2]|
dfs & As Afus nfs afe ofs ofa Hats AG HoT at Il (668-11, daTASt, He 4)
har kay sant japi-o man har har lag sangat saaDh janaa kee.
The Saints of the Lord meditate on the Lord in their minds; they join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
festag Hg fgAa wats gsrat fre vies VE Poot Si (668-12, dart, Hs 4) dinee-ar soor tarisnaa agan bujhaanee siv chari-o chand chandaakee. ||3]| The piercing sun of desires has set, and the cool moon has risen. ||3]|
3H SS UTY SS MH Mga SH My wef ype I (668-12, TaTAST, He 4)
tum vad purakh vad agam agochar tum aapay aap apaakee.
You are the Greatest Being, absolutely unapproachable and unfathomable; You created the Universe from Your Own Being.
Wo soa a@ ys far ate afe GAs OA TATA IBIEl (668-13, Tar, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa keejai kar daasan daas dasaakee. ||4||6]| O God, take pity on servant Nanak, and make him the slave of the slave of Your Slaves. ||4]|6]|
USAdt HIG 8 We U BUS (668-15) Dhanaasree mehlaa 4 ghar 5 dupday Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsara YATE II (668-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Gg ofs dofe nafs GH oH HoHTS OH AUIS I (668-16, daTASt, He 4)
ur Dhaar beechaar muraar ramo ram manmohan naam japeenay.
Enshrine the Lord within your heart, and contemplate Him. Dwell upon Him, reflect upon Him, and chant the Name of the Lord, the Enticer of hearts.
mifeHe ides nrudus Aut afe us yate af AS Ail (668-16, wart, we 4)
adrist agochar aprampar su-aamee gur poorai pargat kar deenay. ||1||
The Lord Master is unseen, unfathomable and unreachable; through the Perfect Guru, He is revealed. ||1]|
TH UGH VEO JH AHS! BHC Ill (668-17, asTAdt, He 4)
raam paaras chandan ham kaasat losat.
The Lord is the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold, and sandalwood, while I am just dry wood and iron.
dfs Afar Idt ASH se dfs ave Veo aS AU TIS i (668-17, aoa, He 4)
har sang haree satsang bha-ay har kanchan chandan keenay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Associating with the Lord, and the Sat Sangat, the Lord's True Congregation, the Lord has transformed me into gold and sandalwood. ||1||Pause||
o@ fant ue dafs uy urag Ha ofs ys fES o USS Il (668-18, oA, 18 4)
nav chhi-a khat boleh mukh aagar mayraa har parabh iv na pateenay.
One may repeat, verbatim, the nine grammars and the six Shaastras, but my Lord God is not pleased by this.
He oa dfs fase Ae fimreg F&C afs ys Aa SHS MNUIDI (668-19, ToT, He 4) jan naanak har hirdai sad Dhi-aavahu i-o har parabh mayraa bheenay. ||2]|1]||7]||
O servant Nanak, meditate forever on the Lord in your heart; this is what pleases my Lord God. ||2]|1]|7]|
USTAdt HIS 8 Il (668-19)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
ar ger Wo ad dfs og ats Ae Afsas fee ofa ats any famret Il (669-1, caTAt, He 4)
gun kaho har lahu kar sayvaa satgur iv har har naam Dhi-aa-ee. Chant His Praises, learn of the Lord, and serve the True Guru; in this way, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs zaag stefs fefs nofy 3 refs afe afe afe fs ANTS NAM (669-1, daTAEH, He 4)
har dargeh bhaaveh fir janam na aavahi har har har jot samaa-ee. ||1]|
In the Court of the Lord, He shall be pleased with you, and you shall not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again; you shall merge in the Divine Light of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||1]|
Afu He oH Jet dfs Ages Het I (609-2, daTAet, He 4) jap man naam haree hohi sarab sukhee. Chant the Name of the Lord, O my mind, and you shall be totally at peace.
ofa AA Gu Asa 3 Gufs ats afs fe Afe Savet Il JTS I (669-2, usAst, He 4)
har jas ooch sabhnaa tay oopar har har har sayv chhadaa-ee. rahaa-o.
The Lord's Praises are the most sublime, the most exalted; serving the Lord, Har, Har, Har, you shall be emancipated. ||Pause| |
dfs four fafa atet afe seafs afe dat sa afs fA ifs afe miret 1 09-3, camrct, us 4) har kirpaa niDh keenee gur bhagat har deenee tab har si-o pareet ban aa-ee.
The Lord, the treasure of mercy, blessed me, and so the Guru blessed me with the Lord's devotional worship; I have come to be in love with the Lord.
ag fos ferrct ofs oy Cf odt aaa fe SS FT AUST QUIT (669-4, TaTAST, He 4) baho chint visaaree har naam ur Dhaaree naanak har bha-ay hai sakhaa-ee. [21/21/18] |
I have forgotten my cares and anxieties, and enshrined the Lord's Name in my heart; O Nanak, the Lord has become my friend and companion. ||2||2||8] |
US'Ad HIS 8 Il (669-5)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs us dfs fey safe afu afer ats sGne ute Bact Il (669-5, aamrdt, He 4)
har parh har likh har jap har gaa-o har bha-ojal paar utaaree.
Read about the Lord, write about the Lord, chant the Lord's Name, and sing the Lord's Praises; the Lord will carry you across the terrifying world-ocean.
Hfs sefe fee fomrfe ofs dfe Han] fee se afs SH HASH INA (669-6, GaTAST, He 4) man bachan ridai Dhi-aa-ay har ho-ay santusat iv bhan har naam muraaree. ||1]|
In your mind, by your words, and within your heart, meditate on the Lord, and He will be pleased. In this way, repeat the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Hfs ub afs AaretA Il (669-6, uaTASt, He 4) man japee-ai har jagdees. O mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the World.
fife Hats A HTS Il (69-7, aomrct, He 4) mil sangat saaDhoo meet. Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O friend.
Hel nde de feo wat afe atefs afe goed il TIE Il (669-7, voradt, He 4)
sadaa anand hovai din raatee har keerat kar banvaaree. rahaa-o.
You shall be happy forever, day and night; sing the Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the world-forest. | |Pause| |
ofa of adt feafe sa sfe6 nfs Gen ofa of on AUG afs set TT II 69-8, dat, H8 4)
har har karee darisat tab bha-i-o man udam har har naam japi-o gat bha-ee hamaaree.
When the Lord, Har, Har, casts His Glance of Grace, then I made the effort in my mind; meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been emancipated.
He aoa at ufs ay Ae Amt aie orfe ufeG 3 Hats Drs WUSICI (669-8, ToT, H: 4)
jan naanak kee pat raakh mayray su-aamee har aa-ay pari-o hai saran tumaaree. 21131191]
Preserve the honor of servant Nanak, O my Lord and Master; I have come seeking Your Sanctuary. ||2||3]|9]|
USA HIB 8 Il (669-9)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
aeons faa go 3am afe ufs ne Afs wots afs HE Sd BC Il (669-10, aarAct, He 4) cha-oraaseeh siDh buDh taytees kot mun jan sabh chaaheh har jee-o tayro naa-o. The eighty-four Siddhas, the spiritual masters, the Buddhas, the three hundred thirty million gods and the silent sages, all long for Your Name, O Dear Lord.
aa unte a fea ure fro a feorfe faftmr ofs s@ All (669-10, caret, He 4)
gur parsaad ko virlaa paavai jin ka-o lilaat likhi-aa Dhur bhaa-o. ||1]|
By Guru's Grace, a rare few obtain it; upon their foreheads, the pre-ordained destiny of loving devotion is written. ||1]|
fu HS TH OH Tle AA SSH AH Il (669-11, OTA, Hs 4)
jap man raamai naam har jas ootam kaam.
O mind, chant the Name of the Lord; singing the Lord's Praises is the most exalted activity.
a wef Hefs Sa AA AMM 3 fsa a Ae afeos WE I Fo II (669-11, daTASt, He 4) jo gaavahi suneh tayraa jas su-aamee ha-o tin kai sad balihaarai jaa-o. rahaa-o.
I am forever a sacrifice to those who sing, and hear Your Praises, O Lord and Master. | |Pause| |
Ages ufsurea ofs aumit HH tg Aet JS ur Il (669-12, ant, ve 4)
sarnaagat partipaalak har su-aamee jo tum dayh so-ee ha-o paa-o.
I seek Your Sanctuary, O Cherisher God, my Lord and Master; whatever You give me, I accept.
de vfenre fau afe da aoa ofa fangs at I TS NUNSINION (669-13, Tae, He 4) deen da-i-aal kirpaa kar deejai naanak har simran kaa hai chaa-o. ||2||4]|10]|
O Lord, Merciful to the meek, give me this blessing; Nanak longs for the Lord's meditative remembrance. ||2]||4||10||
USTAdt HIS 8 Il (669-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
Rea fra une Afs oreta Afs aets ofs ofa SSH arat Il (669-14, aanAst, He 4)
sayvak sikh poojan sabh aavahi sabh gaavahi har har ootam baanee.
All the Sikhs and servants come to worship and adore You; they sing the sublime Bani of the Lord, Har, Har.
afenr Afsur faa ot ofs afe ure fro Afsasg at »rfomr vfs Afs afe rat IA (669-15, Ua'Adt, He 4) gaavi-aa suni-aa tin kaa har thaa-ay paavai jin satgur kee aagi-aa sat sat kar maanee.
H11| Their singing and listening is approved by the Lord; they accept the Order of the True Guru as True, totally True. ||1]|
aed set ofa atefs afa gene Stefe I (669-16, covet, He 4)
bolhu bhaa-ee har keerat har bhavjal tirath.
Chant the Lord's Praises, O Siblings of Destiny; the Lord is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage in the terrifying world-ocean.
of ufs fa at Cou ws 3 Hag ae ae fe Hog Wet Il TIS Il (669-16, cows, Hs 4) har dar tin kee ootam baat hai santahu har kathaa jin janhu jaanee. rahaa-o.
They alone are praised in the Court of the Lord, O Saints, who know and understand the Lord's sermon. ||Pause| |
nm Tg sar d umd nm afs ys 3A fesrat it 669-17, asrAct, ne 4)
aapay gur chaylaa hai aapay aapay har parabh choj vidaanee.
He Himself is the Guru, and He Himself is the disciple; the Lord God Himself plays His wondrous games.
He soa oify fee Het afe fient nies AS fSurfar Go afs srst WINUNIAI (669-17, USAT, He 4)
jan naanak aap milaa-ay so-ee har milsee avar sabh ti-aag ohaa har bhaanee. [2] 15] [2111]
O servant Nanak, he alone merges with the Lord, whom the Lord Himself merges; all the others are forsaken, but the Lord loves him. ||2]|5||11]|
USTAdt HIS 8 Il (669-18)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
fest ys Ava quest ale A a SAT AHA II (669-19, dort, Hs 4)
ichhaa poorak sarab sukh-daata har jaa kai vas hai kaamDhaynaa.
The Lord is the Fulfiller of desires, the Giver of total peace; the Kaamadhaynaa, the wish-fulfilling cow, is in His power.
A met ofa fomreba He Abas a Age AY Uefa HS HAT IA (669-19, TaTAST, He 4) so aisaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai mayray jee-arhay taa sarab sukh paavahi mayray manaa.
H1I| So meditate on such a Lord, O my soul. Then, you shall obtain total peace, O my mind. |]1]|
Us E90
afu He ALS OH Ae ALS OH Il (670-1, daTASt, He 4) jap man sat naam sadaa sat naam. Chant, O my mind, the True Name, Sat Naam, the True Name.
vars uals HY SxS det d fos fomrea ata usy fadrar i TIS Il (670-1, vot, we 4) halat palat mukh oojal ho-ee hai nit Dhi-aa-ee-ai har purakh niranjanaa. rahaa-o.
In this world, and in the world beyond, your face shall be radiant, by meditating continually on the immaculate Lord God. ||Pause| |
Ad dfs frnse stor 30 Burtt as atat esarat afs AUS Il (670-2, davAdt, He 4)
jah har simran bha-i-aa tah upaaDh gat keenee vadbhaagee har japnaa. Wherever anyone remembers the Lord in meditation, disaster runs away from that place. By great good fortune, we meditate on the Lord.
Ho soa ag afe fea nfs cat afu afe SSHw SIS" MANENII (670-3, TavASt, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o gur ih mat deenee jap har bhavjal tarnaa. ||2||6||12|| The Guru has blessed servant Nanak with this understanding, that by meditating on the Lord, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||6||12]|
US'Adt HIB 8 Il (670-4)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 4. Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:
He ATT H dfs BIAS AY SE Il (670-4, darAet, He 4) mayray saahaa mai har darsan sukh ho-ay. O my King, beholding the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, I am at peace.
THe sels JF WSs ATT nied for AS ate il TIS i (670-4, aot, we 4) hamree baydan too jaantaa saahaa avar ki-aa jaanai ko-ay. rahaa-o. You alone know my inner pain, O King; what can anyone else know? ||Pause]|
We Wfsg AY FAs AT So ahr AG Ag ae Il 670-5, aorAct, we 4) saachaa saahib sach too mayray saahaa tayraa kee-aa sach sabh ho-ay. O True Lord and Master, You are truly my King; whatever You do, all that is True.
Bo" for a nnd Ara SAT SST ALE AU (670-6, uot, He 4) jhoothaa kis ka-o aakhee-ai saahaa doojaa naahee ko-ay. ||1]| Who should I call a liar? There is no other than You, O King. ||1]|
Ase fete 3 zase AT Afs s3fs foureta feg TH I 670-6, usTASt, HE 4)
sabhnaa vich too varatdaa saahaa sabh tujheh Dhi-aavahi din raat.
You are pervading and permeating in all; O King, everyone meditates on You, day and night.
iN
Als 35 ot weg Hae Ae ATT 3 Asa aata fea StS III (670-7, aaTAST, He 4) sabh tujh hee thaavhu mangday mayray saahaa too sabhnaa karahi ik daat. ||2|| Everyone begs of You, O my King; You alone give gifts to all. ||2]|
Ag a 33 dt fefe dae AT Se 3 Tole det os Il (670-7, dae, He 4) sabh ko tujh hee vich hai mayray saahaa tujh tay baahar ko-ee naahi. All are under Your Power, O my King; none at all are beyond You.
Afs Hh Sd J ASA ST HS ATT Als 3S ot He ANTM ISI (670-8, Tae, He 4) sabh jee-a tayray too sabhas daa mayray saahaa sabh tujh hee maahi samaahi. ||3]|
All beings are Yours-You belong to all, O my King. All shall merge and be absorbed in You. ||3]|
Aso at 3 oA o Ae fimrs Als s5fs fomrefa AS ATT Il (670-9, dart, He 4) sabhnaa kee too aas hai mayray pi-aaray sabh tujheh Dhi-aavahi mayray saah. You are the hope of all, O my Beloved; all meditate on You, O my King.
fa@ sre (38 sy 5 Ae fimrs AG Ba a USAT SION (670-9, OTA, Hs 4) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too mayray pi-aaray sach naanak kay paatisaah. ||4||7||13]|
As it pleases You, protect and preserve me, O my Beloved; You are the True King of Nanak. ||4]|7||13]|
UsTAdt HIS Uwe VEU (670-11) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 1 cha-upday Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsas ure Il (670-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
az dso wu sno AM sats zee fodard i (670-12, aorAct, 8 5)
bhav khandan dukh bhanjan savaamee bhagat vachhal nirankaaray.
O Destroyer of fear, Remover of suffering, Lord and Master, Lover of Your devotees, Formless Lord.
afe usa fe fas stafe at aanft OU ANTS IU (670-12, daTAt, He 5)
kot paraaDh mitay khin bheetar jaa’ gurmukh naam samaaray. ||1||
Millions of sins are eradicated in an instant when, as Gurmukh, one contemplates the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Aa HS Bar dT TH fimrs Il (670-13, aarAst, v2 5) mayraa man laagaa hai raam pi-aaray. My mind is attached to my Beloved Lord.
ae cfenrts act yfs fase eft até us EIT AU TIE il (670-13, aarAst, He 5)
deen da-i-aal karee parabh kirpaa vas keenay panch dootaaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
God, Merciful to the meek, granted His Grace, and placed the five enemies under my control. ||1]|Pause] |
37 OS ATS TY ATS 33 sas ATls TIM Il (670-14, uot, Hs 5)
tayraa thaan suhaavaa roop suhaavaa tayray bhagat soheh darbaaray.
Your place is so beautiful; Your form is so beautiful; Your devotees look so beautiful in Your Court.
Hea Ar x es AuMit afte fagur BI Bars Qi (670-14, aarwt, us 5) sarab jee-aa kay daatay su-aamee kar kirpaa layho ubaaray. ||2|| O Lord and Master, Giver of all beings, please, grant Your Grace, and save me. ||2||
37 FIG 5 AU gy 5 Biba Sct quals aa sos I (670-15, aot, ws 5)
tayraa varan na jaapai roop na lakhee-ai tayree kudrat ka-un beechaaray.
Your color is not known, and Your form is not seen; who can contemplate Your Almighty Creative Power?
me ate Hobe sfeor Aa ost wa gu farsargd Sli (670-15, da, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al ravi-aa sarab thaa-ee agam roop girDhaaray. ||3]||
You are contained in the water, the land and the sky, everywhere, O Lord of unfathomable form, Holder of the mountain. ||3]|
ates asfe Hae AS Sot SF vison use HIT Il (670-16, daTHt, He 5)
keerat karahi sagal jan tayree too abhinaasee purakh muraaray.
All beings sing Your Praises; You are the imperishable Primal Being, the Destroyer of ego.
fa@ ave f38 aug AM Ao aa Aafe BMS NIU (670-17, daTASH, He 5)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho su-aamee jan naanak saran du-aaray. ||4]|1]|
As it pleases You, please protect and preserve me; servant Nanak seeks Sanctuary at Your Door. ||4][1]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (670-17)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fag AS US SH oD Ho fafs we fA TS gees 1 (670-18, dart, He 5) bin jal paraan tajay hai meenaa jin jal si-o hayt badhaa-i-o. The fish out of water loses its life; it is deeply in love with the water.
one afs faafae 3 sem Cfo naa foafa o ute NA 70-18, dat, He 5)
kamal hayt binsi-o hai bhavraa un maarag nikas na paa-i-o. ||1]|
The bumble bee, totally in love with the lotus flower, is lost in it; it cannot find the way to escape from it. ||1]]|
mwa Ho San fA Hg ata Il (670-19, daTHet, He 5) ab man aykas si-o moh keenaa. Now, my mind has nurtured love for the One Lord.
Hd 3 We Ae dt Aa Afsag Ast star All TICS Il (670-19, cart, ns 5)
marai na jaavai sad hee sangay satgur sabdee cheenaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He does not die, and is not born; He is always with me. Through the Word of the True Guru's Shabad, I know Him. ||1]||Pause| |
Us €94
an dfs avg & aifas Gg us afk sfe6 fers II (671-1, oH, 1 5)
kaam hayt kunchar lai faa‘ki-o oh par vas bha-i-o bichaaraa.
Lured by sexual desire, the elephant is trapped; the poor beast falls into the power of another.
oe ofs fag afeG agar CA dt IS fears MQ 71-1, daAH, He 5)
naad hayt sir daari-o kurankaa us hee hayt bidaaraa. ||2||
Lured by the sound of the hunter's bell, the deer offers its head; because of this enticement, it is killed. ||2||
afy ade afs HfoG wot wfeor a Buea Il (671-2, dare, 18 5)
daykh kutamb lobh mohi-o paraanee maa-i-aa ka-o laptaanaa.
Gazing upon his family, the mortal is enticed by greed; he clings in attachment to Maya.
wifs afeG afs ats mus Cfe efs Haug WAT ISI (671-3, daTAEH, He 5)
at rachi-o kar leeno apunaa un chhod saraapar jaanaa. ||3] |
Totally engrossed in worldly things, he considers them to be his own; but in the end, he shall surely have to leave them behind. ||3]|
faa afte nes Hf oa Gg Weg AST TIT Il (671-3, daTAdt, He 5) bin gobind avar sang nayhaa oh jaanhu sadaa duhaylaa. Know it well, that anyone who loves any other than God, shall be miserable forever.
aT soa Ts fed geres uifSs ys AE As sili (71-4, ao, Hs 5)
kaho naanak gur ihai bujhaa-i-o pareet parabhoo sad kaylaa. ||4]|2]|
Says Nanak, the Guru has explained this to me, that love for God brings lasting bliss. [141121]
USA Hs U Il (671-4) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
afa fagur AG Hfs ant sas 3 Sears I (671-5, aaTASt, v1: 5)
kar kirpaa dee-o mohi naamaa banDhan tay chhutkaa-ay.
Granting His Grace, God has blessed me with His Name, and released me of my bonds.
Ho 3 fanfes Aas dor ag at vast BES NA (671-5, vaTASt, H 5) man tay bisri-o saglo DhanDhaa gur kee charnee laa-ay. ||1]| I have forgotten all worldly entanglements, and I am attached to the Guru's feet. ||1]|
AUHfa fes feast erst Il 671-6, cart, He 5)
saaDhsang chint biraanee chhaadee.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have renounced my other cares and anxieties.
wdafa Ho Ho HHS & ats as ast Ul TIS Il (671-6, aarAt, He 5)
aha‘-buDh moh man baasan day kar gadhaa gaadee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I dug a deep pit, and buried my egotistical pride, emotional attachment and the desires of my mind. ||1]|Pause] |
ot a Ha SAHS Slot at IH fan ax Fare Il (671-7, vaAst, v2 5) naa ko mayraa dusman rahi-aa naa ham kis kay bairaa-ee. No one is my enemy, and I am no one's enemy.
gon ung untes sists Afsag 3 ASt uret QU (671-7, daTASt, He 5) barahm pasaar pasaari-o bheetar satgur tay sojhee paa-ee. ||2|| God, who expanded His expanse, is within all; I learned this from the True Guru. ||2| |
AS a HIS TH mus ala GH ASS a AHS Ill (671-8, GorHSt, He 5) sabh ko meet ham aapan keenaa ham sabhnaa kay saajan. I am a friend to all; I am everyone's friend.
ofa uses Ho o farsa THE AG AS TAS ISI (671-8, TsTAH, He 5)
door paraa-i-o man kaa birhaa taa mayl kee-o mayrai raajan. ||3] |
When the sense of separation was removed from my mind, then I was united with the Lord, my King. ||3]|
fastAS vio nifys sor HAE Bat Ts Htor il (671-9, aarASt, Hs 5)
binsi-o dheethaa amrit voothaa sabad lago gur meethaa.
My stubbornness is gone, Ambrosial Nectar rains down, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad seems so sweet to me.
ale afe Homie Aga fast stag gHer stor IIIS (671-9, daTAST, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al sarab nivaasee naanak rama-ee-aa deethaa. ||4]|3]| He is pervading everywhere, in the water, on the land and in the sky; Nanak beholds the all-pervading Lord. ||4||3]|
USA Hz U Il (671-10)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Wa 3 THs Se AY 3S feon GfE mre Il (671-10, sat, He 5)
jab tay darsan bhaytay saaDhoo bhalay dinas o-ay aa-ay.
Ever since I obtained the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy, my days have been blessed and prosperous.
HI noe Ae ats atese use feorst ue AU (671-11, ToT, He 5)
mahaa anand sadaa kar keertan purakh biDhaataa paa-ay. ||1||
I have found lasting bliss, singing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Primal Lord, the Architect of destiny. ||1]|
ma dfs oH AA Hfe fe Wl (671-11, aA, He 5) ab mohi raam jaso man gaa-i-o. Now, I sing the Praises of the Lord within my mind.
sfes yarn Ae AY Ho Ufo Afsag us UES A TIS il (671-12, cast, we 5) bha-i-o pargaas sadaa sukh man meh satgur pooraa paa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind has been illumined and enlightened, and it is always at peace; I have found the Perfect True Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
ae foag foe stats efor a gy SdH SS ST Il 671-12, voTASt, He 5)
gun niDhaan rid bheetar vasi-aa taa dookh bharam bha-o bhaagaa.
The Lord, the treasure of virtue, abides deep within the heart, and so pain, doubt and fear have been dispelled.
set usufs eAS vidiad IH STH Sa Sar MQM (671-13, aarAdt, v2 5) bha-ee paraapat vasat agochar raam naam rang laagaa. ||2| |
I have obtained the most incomprehensible thing, enshrining love for the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
fes nifsa Ae wie Aa ST HT Fae Il (671-14, devas, He 5)
chint achintaa soch asochaa sog lobh moh thaakaa.
I was anxious, and now I am free of anxiety; I was worried, and now I am free of worry; my grief, greed and emotional attachments are gone.
ICH da fixe faa 3 AH 3 Fe fase SI (71-14, TaTACT, He 5)
ha-umai rog mitay kirpaa tay jam tay bha-ay bibaakaa. ||3]|
By His Grace, I am cured of the disease of egotism, and the Messenger of Death no longer terrifies me. ||3]|
Ts at cas Tg at AS Te at wrfam@ sat | 671-15, vost, H: 5)
gur kee tahal guroo kee sayvaa gur kee aagi-aa bhaanee.
Working for the Guru, serving the Guru and the Guru's Command, all are pleasing to me.
ag aed fafs aH 3 are faH a a aaaret Igisil (671-15, dart, He 5) kaho naanak jin jam tay kaadhay tis gur kai kurbaanee. ||4]|4] |
Says Nanak, He has released me from the clutches of Death; I am a sacrifice to that Guru. ||4]|/4]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (671-16)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fA at 3 HO US AS fSA a ASt AUS AAT Il (671-16, daTAEt, He 5)
jis kaa tan man Dhan sabh tis kaa so-ee sugharh sujaanee.
Body, mind, wealth and everything belong to Him; He alone is all-wise and all- knowing.
fo ct Afeer ey AY He 3@ fafa Stet werst AI (671-17, daTASH, He 5) tin hee suni-aa dukh sukh mayraa ta-o biDh neekee khataanee. ||1]| He listens to my pains and pleasures, and then my condition improves. ||1||
Aba at Sa ot ufs Hat il (671-17, garast, He 5) jee-a kee aykai hee peh maanee. My soul is satisfied with the One Lord alone.
mets A36 ats Jd aISd f3e fe odt AHS Frat il TIC Il 71-17, vat, He 5) avar jatan kar rahay bahutayray tin til nahee keemat jaanee. rahaa-o. People make all sorts of other efforts, but they have no value at all. ||Pause| |
nifys on fosiaa die afe tte Hast Il (71-18, const, H8 5)
amrit naam nirmolak heeraa gur deeno mantaanee.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a priceless jewel. The Guru has given me this advice.
fsa o 38 feg afs sfaS use afe fyusrat QM (671-19, cat, He 5)
digai na dolai darirh kar rahi-o pooran ho-ay tariptaanee. ||2| |
It cannot be lost, and it cannot be shaken off; it remains steady, and I am perfectly satisfied with it. ||2]|
6fe F dts gH 3H ae JS f3o at FS faorot II (671-19, dae, He 5) o-ay jo beech ham tum kachh hotay tin kee baat bilaanee. Those things which tore me away from You, Lord, are now gone.
UST ED2
nang ffs Fat det I at 3 afsa Swat ISI (672-1, daTAH, He 5) alankaar mil thailee ho-ee hai taa tay kanik vakhaanee. ||3]| When golden ornaments are melted down into a lump, they are still said to be gold.
[I3]|
yates afs AOA AY AST SHA nioTs grat Il (672-1, doTASt, He 5)
pargati-o jot sahj sukh sobhaa baajay anhat baanee.
The Divine Light has illuminated me, and I am filled with celestial peace and glory; the unstruck melody of the Lord's Bani resounds within me.
a aod fesse we ato afs at& gorat gill (672-2, cart, v2 5)
kaho naanak nihchal ghar baaDhi-o gur kee-o banDhaanee. ||4||5||
Says Nanak, I have built my eternal home; the Guru has constructed it for me. [4115] |
USTAS HIST U Il (672-3)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ss WS THs Mg SHO ST at fYAo B Fst I 672-3, aarAst, He 5) vaday vaday raajan ar bhooman taa kee tarisan na boojhee. The desires of the greatest of the great kings and landlords cannot be satisfied.
wufe sd Wheat Fa HS BIS AE 3 ASt UI (672-3, aos, 3 5)
lapat rahay maa-i-aa rang maatay lochan kachhoo na soojhee. ||1]|
They remain engrossed in Maya, intoxicated with the pleasures of their wealth; their eyes see nothing else at all. ||1]|
fafimr ufo fas ot feufs a uret il (672-4, canst, 8 5) bikhi-aa meh kin hee taripat na paa-ee. No one has ever found satisfaction in sin and corruption.
fa@ wea Stofs adt gr fag afe ao mret 11 TIE I (672-4, dorAst, He 5)
ji-o paavak eeDhan nahee Dharaapai bin har kahaa aghaa-ee. rahaa-o.
The flame is not satisfied by more fuel; how can one be satisfied without the Lord? | |Pause| |
feg fea ass SHO ag fie T at fe o sar II (672-5, aoTAS, He 5)
din din karat bhojan baho binjan taa kee mitai na bhookhaa.
Day after day, he eats his meals with many different foods, but his hunger is not eradicated.
Ben ad Anis at fonret ard Let ular QI (672-5, davASt, He 5) udam karai su-aan kee ni-aa-ee chaaray kuntaa ghokhaa. ||2|| He runs around like a dog, searching in the four directions. ||2||
THES OH ag arat us fyT ATs Fa Il 672-6, aaAst, Hs 5)
kaamvant kaamee baho naaree par garih joh na chookai.
The lustful, lecherous man desires many women, and he never stops peeking into the homes of others.
feo yfs ad ad uss Aa Bs Hfs AS SI (672-6, ToT, M2 5)
din parat karai karai pachhutaapai sog lobh meh sookai. ||3]|
Day after day, he commits adultery again and again, and then he regrets his actions; he wastes away in misery and greed. ||3]|
ofa ofs on murs winter nifigs Sa foarar il (672-7, caret, He 5)
har har naam apaar amolaa amrit ayk niDhaanaa.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is incomparable and priceless; it is the treasure of Ambrosial Nectar.
HY Ade WSe ASS A FHA TI SAS MIEN (672-7, asa, ws 5)
sookh sahj aanand santan kai naanak gur tay jaanaa. ||4||6]|
The Saints abide in peace, poise and bliss; O Nanak, through the Guru, this is known. [14116] |
UsAat Hs U Il (672-8) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Be 5 HAS aE J gent wT a fete feg wes il (672-8, wow, v3 5) lavai na laagan ka-o hai kachhoo-ai jaa ka-o fir ih Dhaavai. Nothing which this mortal being runs after, can compare to it.
vw aQ afa de feg nifys far ct a@ afs mre al 672-9, daTHdt, He 5) jaa ka-o gur deeno ih amrit tis hee ka-o ban aavai. ||1]| He alone comes to have it, whom the Guru blesses with this Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||
Ww ag urfes Sa aA I we US TS Odt Uf aT a fefs o SAT I ITE II (672-9, Ward, H3 5)
jaa ka-o aa-i-o ayk rasaa. khaan paan aan nahee khuDhi-aa taa kai chit na basaa. rahaa-o.
The desire to eat, to wear new clothes, and all other desires, do not abide in the mind of one who comes to know the subtle essence of the One Lord. ||Pause| |
HefSS HS 39 des afr Sa ge fats uret i (672-10, cont, Hs 5)
ma-uli-o man tan ho-i-o hari-aa ayk boond jin paa-ee.
The mind and body blossom forth in abundance, when one receives even a drop of this Nectar.
wate 6 HAS Crsts T at Afs AE & AT NMI (672-11, daTASt, He 5) baran na saaka-o ustat taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||2| | I cannot express His glory; I cannot describe His worth. ||2]|
wes & fife Az 3 fife fufeS orf wifes i (672-12, cart, He 5)
ghaal na mili-o sayv na mili-o mili-o aa-ay achintaa.
We cannot meet the Lord by our own efforts, nor can we meet Him through service; He comes and meets us spontaneously.
wT ag vfeur adt AS oats fafs qefs MS HST ISI (672-12, daTAST, He 5) jaa ka-o da-i-aa karee mayrai thaakur tin gureh kamaano manntaa. ||3]||
One who is blessed by my Lord Master's Grace, practices the Teachings of the Guru's Mantra. ||3]|
ae nes Aer fasurer Aaa Aho yfsurer il (672-13, aaAdt, Hs 5)
deen dai-aal sadaa kirpaalaa sarab jee-aa partipaalaa. He is merciful to the meek, always kind and compassionate; He cherishes and nurtures all beings.
6fs ufs soa Afar ster fa@ wrst aes Turse SIDI (672-13, daTASt, He 5)
ot pot naanak sang ravi-aa ji-o maataa baal gopaalaa. ||4||7||
The Lord is mingled with Nanak, through and through; He cherishes him, like the mother her child. ||4]|7]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (672-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
ats we aa mus Sufs fats afe afs on feaar Il (672-14, vost, He 5)
baar jaa-o gur apunay oopar jin har har naam darirh-aa-yaa.
I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has implanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within me.
Ho" Gfeure niuars ufo fafs Ato yee fearar Wall (672-15, daTASt, He 5) mahaa udi-aan anDhkaar meh jin seeDhaa maarag dikhaa-yaa. ||1]|| In the utter darkness of the wilderness, He showed me the straight path. ||1]|
THe UTS Ture af i (672-15, wat, ue 5) hamray paraan gupaal gobind. The Lord of the universe, the Cherisher of the world, He is my breath of life.
dia Ca Aaa Sa at frAfs dHrat FFs NA TIS il (672-16, oar, He 5) eehaa oohaa sarab thok kee jisahi hamaaree chind. ||1|| rahaa-o. Here and hereafter, he takes care of everything for me. ||1]||Pause] |
W & fixate Aaa fours HE HOS uls ust Il (672-16, dart, He 5)
jaa kai simran sarab niDhaanaa maan mahat pat pooree.
Meditating on Him in remembrance, I have found all treasures, respect, greatness and perfect honor.
oH 83 afe mu oA sas Hels Als et MQM (672-17, aor, 5)
naam lait kot agh naasay bhagat baachheh sabh Dhooree. ||2||
Remembering His Name, millions of sins are erased; all His devotees long for the dust of His feet. ||2||
Ade Hoda A A wd AS Sa feast Il (672-17, dara, v2 5)
sarab manorath jay ko chaahai sayvai ayk niDhaanaa.
If someone wishes for the fulfillment of all his hopes and desires, he should serve the one supreme treasure.
UTSqTH mMudus Amt fans ufs usar Bil (672-18, dant, He 5) paarbarahm aprampar su-aamee simrat paar paraanaa. ||3]|
He is the Supreme Lord God, infinite Lord and Master; meditating on Him in remembrance, one is carried across. ||3]||
Hise As Ho AY ufenr AsAfar afar Ger i (672-18, ast, us 5)
seetal saat mahaa sukh paa-i-aa satsang rahi-o ol"aa.
I have found total peace and tranquility in the Society of the Saints; my honor has been preserved.
ofa ug Hae dfs on SHo fey soa AS BH ISI (672-19, ToS, He 5)
har Dhan sanchan har naam bhojan ih naanak keeno chol"aa. ||4||8]|
To gather in the Lord's wealth, and to taste the food of the Lord's Name - Nanak has made this his feast. ||4]|8]|
UST E93
USTAdt HIS U Il (673-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fad adat defo Rafter fear anrst SHS I (673-1, aot, He 5) jih karnee hoveh sarmindaa ihaa kamaanee reet. You have made it your habit to practice those deeds which will bring you shame.
AS ot (Ser Aas ot uAT MAT fest fausifS wai 673-1, dent, we 5)
sant kee nindaa saakat kee poojaa aisee darirh-ee bipreet. ||1]|
You slander the Saints, and you worship the faithless cynics; such are the corrupt ways you have adopted. ||1]||
Hfeur HT FB wed TS Il (673-2, usAt, ue 5) maa-i-aa moh bhoolo avrai heet. Deluded by your emotional attachment to Maya, you love other things,
TsseCdt sa va us ¢ fed sag HS NU TIS I 673-2, aaAt, He 5)
harichand-uree ban har paat ray ihai tuhaaro beet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
like the enchanted city of Hari-chandauree, or the green leaves of the forest - such is your way of life. ||1]|Pause] |
des Bu ds td aS AY TsUs SAH Hails Il (673-3, daTAet, He 5)
chandan layp hot dayh ka-o sukh garDhabh bhasam sangeet.
Its body may be anointed with sandalwood oil, but the donkey still loves to roll in the mud.
nifys Afa ofa ga nres fad saat uffS ii (673-3, dant, ue 5)
amrit sang naahi ruch aavat bikhai thag-uree pareet. ||2]|
He is not fond of the Ambrosial Nectar; instead, he loves the poisonous drug of corruption. ||2]|
GSH HS 38 Anat feR Fa nfo ufes usts Il (673-4, daTASt, He 5)
utam sant bhalay sanjogee is jug meh pavit puneet.
The Saints are noble and sublime; they are blessed with good fortune. They alone are pure and holy in this world.
WS Masa AON ULI aS aed MIS ISIl (673-5, TaTACT, He 5)
jaat akaarath janam padaarath kaach baadrai jeet. ||3]|
The jewel of this human life is passing away uselessly, lost in exchange for mere glass. ||3]|
HOH HoH a faofer eu oat afe famrs nine SF eS Il (673-5, aovAdt, ue 5)
janam janam kay kilvikh dukh bhaagay gur gi-aan anjan naytar deet.
The sins and sorrows of uncounted incarnations run away, when the Guru applies the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to the eyes.
AUHfa feo zu 3 foathHe soa Sa ucts ISIC 673-6, dat, He 5)
saaDhsang in dukh tay niksi-o naanak ayk pareet. ||4||9]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have escaped from these troubles; Nanak loves the One Lord. ||4||9]|
USTAdt HIST U Il (673-6)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
urat uat ulAG AS vid Te dfs AA aeT Il (673-7, daTAST, He 5)
paanee pakhaa peesa-o sant aagai gun govind jas gaa-ee.
I carry the water, wave the fan, and grind the corn for the Saints; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Ata Ata He oH ANTS fea fan fofa uret al (673-7, dost, He 5)
Saas Saas man naam sam"aarai ih bisraam niDh paa-ee. ||1]|
With each and every breath, my mind remembers the Naam, the Name of the Lord; in this way, it finds the treasure of peace. ||1]|
3H adg efeur Ag Aret Il (673-8, dart, we 5) tum" karahu da-i-aa mayray saa-ee. Have pity on me, O my Lord and Master.
Mat Hfs aA AT oes Het HET SO forest 19 TIS I (673-8, daTA, He 5)
aisee mat deejai mayray thaakur sadaa sadaa tuDh Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Bless me with such understanding, O my Lord and Master, that I may forever and ever meditate on You. ||1]||Pause] |
SH faur 3 Ha We se faoth Ae sane I (673-9, aaTASH, Hs 5)
tum"ree kirpaa tay moh maan chhootai binas jaa-ay bharmaa-ee.
By Your Grace, emotional attachment and egotism are eradicated, and doubt is dispelled.
woe JU He As HO AS aS UNS AST MII (673-9, usTAST, HE 5)
anad roop ravi-o sabh maDhay jat kat paykha-o jaa-ee. ||2]|
The Lord, the embodiment of bliss, is pervading and permeating in all; wherever I go, there I see Him. ||2]|
3H efenims fasuns feu fofa ufss urso atrret Il (673-10, aarAdt, Hs 5)
tum" da-i-aal kirpaal kirpaa niDh patit paavan gosaa-ee.
You are kind and compassionate, the treasure of mercy, the Purifier of sinners, Lord of the world.
afe Wa mrss oH ure HY S fens gwret Sil (673-10, dat, He 5)
kot sookh aanand raaj paa-ay mukh tay nimakh bulaa-ee. |[3]|
I obtain millions of joys, comforts and kingdoms, if You inspire me to chant Your Name with my mouth, even for an instant. ||3]|
Wy sy sats AT UST TUS a His Bret Il (673-11, TaTAST, He 5)
jaap taap bhagat saa pooree jo parabh kai man bhaa-ee.
That alone is perfect chanting, meditation, penance and devotional worship service, which is pleasing to God's Mind.
oY Hus feAo AS ast 3 Boa fFufs meet siaoll (673-11, Tavs, Hs 5)
naam japat tarisnaa sabh bujhee hai naanak taripat aghaa-ee. ||4||10||
Chanting the Naam, all thirst and desire is satisfied; Nanak is satisfied and fulfilled. | 4] |10]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (673-12)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fafs até efh nud 3 Te see VST AAT Il (673-12, ast, us 5) jin keenay vas apunai tarai gun bhavan chatur sansaaraa. She controls the three qualities and the four directions of the world.
na fenars Stu ae us fomr feg HS fears NA (673-13, TaTAEt, He 5)
jag isnaan taap thaan khanday ki-aa ih jant vichaaraa. ||1]|
She destroys sacrificial feasts, cleansing baths, penances and sacred places of pilgrimage; what is this poor person to do? ||1||
ys at Ge adt 3B gs! I (673-13, daTAS, He 5) parabh kee ot gahee ta-o chhooto. I grasped God's Support and Protection, and then I was emancipated.
Ag yAte ote ofs ote ae fred faurfa sa TS AU TIS il 673-14, ot, He 5)
saaDh parsaad har har har gaa-ay bikhai bi-aaDh tab hooto. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By the Grace of the Holy Saints, I sang the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, and my sins and afflictions were taken away. ||1]||Pause] |
od Haat SI Hu 3 gab od HS Bs Stet I (673-14, uaTAdt, He 5) nah sunee-ai nah mukh tay bakee-ai nah mohai uh deethee. She is not heard - she does not speak with a mouth; she is not seen enticing mortals.
MAT SAT uf—e gare His AS A Brat HTSt MMi (673-15, daTASt, He 5)
aisee thag-uree paa-ay bhulaavai man sabh kai laagai meethee. ||2]|
She administers her intoxicating drug, and so confuses them; thus she seems sweet to everyone's mind. ||2||
ufe ay us fos grat Cfo ute ufs Hf Emr Il (673-15, aA, 2 5)
maa-ay baap poot hit bharaataa un ghar ghar mayli-o doo-aa.
In each and every home, she has implanted the sense of duality in mother, father, children, friends and siblings.
for dt aft urfe fan dt ufo Aas afs ots HMI ISI (673-16, dsTASt, He 5)
kis hee vaaDh ghaat kis hee peh saglay lar lar moo-aa. ||3]| Some have more, and some have less; they fight and fight, to the death. ||3]|
8 afeodt Afsad vitus fats feg vos feafenr Il (673-17, dart, 8 5) ha-o balihaaree satgur apunay jin ih chalat dikhaa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru, who has shown me this wondrous play.
ast sto Ae AAS sas 3 fanmd yfeMr sil (673-17, dot, Hs 5)
goojhee bhaahi jalai sansaaraa bhagat na bi-aapai maa-i-aa. ||4] |
The world is being consumed by this hidden fire, but Maya does not cling to the Lord's devotees. ||4| |
AS yAte Ho" AY Ue Aas BUS AS Il (673-18, ast, we 5)
sant parsaad mahaa sukh paa-i-aa saglay banDhan kaatay.
By the Grace of the Saints, I have obtained supreme bliss, and all my bonds have been broken.
dfs dfs aH Bea US Ufeor orgs ufs B wrfeor w| NUN (673-18, TarTAST, He 5)
har har naam naanak Dhan paa-i-aa apunai ghar lai aa-i-aa khaatay. ||5||11|| Nanak has obtained the wealth of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; having earned his profits, he has now returned home. ||5||11]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (673-19)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
3H Us Stag ufsuTsa Sea WAH DHT? Il (673-19, daTAdt, Hs 5) tum daatay thaakur partipaalak naa-ik khasam hamaaray. You are the Giver, O Lord, O Cherisher, my Master, my Husband Lord.
Uar €98 fone fouy 3H dt yfsumsg JH aise SHS OS NA (674-1, dae, He 5)
nimakh nimakh tum hee partipaalahu ham baarik tumray Dhaaray. ||1]|| Each and every moment, You cherish and nurture me; I am Your child, and I rely upon You alone. ||1]|
frdet Sa ASS TH ATM Il (674-2, usrast, v2 5) jihvaa ayk kavan gun kahee-ai. I have only one tongue - which of Your Glorious Virtues can I describe?
SAH Suis Hum 3d nis o fao dt sdba wai TIC it (674-2, caAct, 2 5) baysumaar bay-ant su-aamee tayro ant na kin hee lahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Unlimited, infinite Lord and Master - no one knows Your limits. ||1]|Pause] |
afe usa gud sg wifsa fact AHST]T II (674-3, daTAet, He 5) kot paraaDh hamaaray khandahu anik biDhee samjhaavhu. You destroy millions of my sins, and teach me in so many ways.
JH vifamrs visu nfs act SH nme fags Te]YT NI (674-3, daTAt, He 5)
ham agi-aan alap mat thoree tum aapan birad rakhaavahu. ||2| |
I am so ignorant - I understand nothing at all. Please honor Your innate nature, and save me! ||2||
SHot Hate SHS MTA SH St AHS AIS Il (674-4, carat, us 5)
tumree saran tumaaree aasaa tum hee sajan suhaylay.
I seek Your Sanctuary - You are my only hope. You are my companion, and my best friend.
~
IU MoI vfenia seq ws A AS SUI 674-4, usast, v2 5) raakho raakhanhaar da-i-aalaa naanak ghar kay golay. ||3||12|| Save me, O Merciful Saviour Lord; Nanak is the slave of Your home. |[3]||12]|
USTAS HIST U Il (674-5)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
unt gas faa fenaat Us Bs BT SS Il (674-5, aaTAS, He 5)
poojaa varat tilak isnaanaa punn daan baho dain.
Worship, fasting, ceremonial marks on one's forehead, cleansing baths, generous donations to charities and self-mortification
ad 5 St HAH Homi sala HS Fo WAU (674-5, aan, ws 5)
kahoo-a™ na bheejai sanjam su-aamee boleh meethay bain. ||1]|
- the Lord Master is not pleased with any of these rituals, no matter how sweetly one may speak. ||1]|
us Ht at OU AUS Ho BS Il (674-6, daTAST, He 5) parabh jee ko naam japat man chain. Chanting the Name of God, the mind is soothed and pacified.
ag yars dnfa vfs st a fea o Wet Bo A TIE Il (674-6, doTASH, Hs 5)
baho parkaar khojeh sabh taa ka-o bikham na jaa-ee lain. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Everyone searches for Him in different ways, but the search is so difficult, and He cannot be found. ||1]|Pause]|
Wu su yuo sam afs Baa sy B Ho Il (674-7, aarHet, ue 5)
jaap taap bharman basuDhaa kar uraDh taap lai gain.
Chanting, deep meditation and penance, wandering over the face of the earth, the performance of austerities with the arms stretched up to the sky
fea fafa og users oad Fa Hafs afs AS QIK (674-7, daTASt, He 5)
ih biDh nah patee-aano thaakur jog jugat kar jain. ||2||
- the Lord is not pleased by any of these means, though one may follow the path of Yogis and Jains. ||2||
nifys on foniea ofe aA fats ufe6 frm fase il (674-8, dard, He 5)
amrit naam nirmolak har jas tin paa-i-o jis kirpain.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord are priceless; he alone obtains them, whom the Lord blesses with His Mercy.
Worfa df ys 32 aoa Afe He Fo NBII (674-9, daTHET, He 5)
saaDhsang rang parabh bhaytay naanak sukh jan rain. ||3||13]|
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak lives in the Love of God; his life-night passes in peace. ||3]||13]]|
USTAd HIST U Il (674-9)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
gue 3 geare ys fore ofs af SH AAS Il (674-10, aaAst, Hs 5)
banDhan tay chhutkaavai parabhoo milaavai har har naam sunaavai.
Is there anyone who can release me from my bondage, unite me with God, recite the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
wAfag ad fore fer Hour agfs o AST WS AU (674-10, dort, He 5) asthir karay nihchal ih manoo-aa bahur na kathoo Dhaavai. ||1]| and make this mind steady and stable, so that it no longer wanders around? ||1]|
J AG MA THe HTS Il (674-11, doTAST, He 5) hai ko-oo aiso hamraa meet. Do I have any such friend?
Hares Anat HE HE SE mrau ngs ss wa TIS it 674-11, aorAct, ne 5) Sagal samagree jee-o hee-o day-o arpa-o apno cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I would give him all my property, my soul and my heart; I would devote my consciousness to him. ||1]|Pause| |
ud US ud 36 ud at fSer fea fae UifS o wet II (674-12, dane, us 5)
par Dhan par tan par kee nindaa in si-o pareet na laagai.
Others' wealth, others' bodies, and the slander of others - do not attach your love to them.
H3d Ha AS Hea ofa atests He AA MQM (674-12, daTAt, He 5)
santeh sang sant sambhaakhan har keertan man jaagai. ||2| |
Associate with the Saints, speak with the Saints, and keep your mind awake to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||2| |
ae fours efeure use ys Aga AY Ufenrer il 674-13, vat, v2 5) gun niDhaan da-i-aal purakh parabh sarab sookh da-i-aalaa. God is the treasure of virtue, kind and compassionate, the source of all comfort.
Had BG BH 3d Boa fAG HST aH TUS MSNA (674-13, daTAH, He 5)
maagai daan naam tayro naanak ji-o maataa baal gupaalaa. ||3||14]| Nanak begs for the gift of Your Name; O Lord of the world, love him, like the mother loves her child. ||3]|14]]|
USTAd HIST U Il (674-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofs Be As Cafe i 674-14, dat, He 5) har har leenay sant ubaar. The Lord saves His Saints.
dfs & oA at fase sfenret fan dt a fefa wis nan ToS it (674-14, aaTAt, He 5) har kay daas kee chitvai buri-aa-ee tis hee ka-o fir maar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who wishes misfortune upon the Lord's slaves, shall be destroyed by the Lord eventually. ||1]|Pause| |
Ae a orfy Aoet dor feea oat Ths i (674-15, aavASt, He 5)
jan kaa aap sahaa-ee ho-aa nindak bhaagay haar.
He Himself is the help and support of His humble servants; He defeats the slanderers, and chases them away.
gus gus Cat dt He wale fafa o Herts Wal (674-16, aorASt, He 5)
bharmat bharmat oohaa™ hee moo-ay baahurh garihi na manjhaar. ||1|| Wandering around aimlessly, they die out there; they never return to their homes again. ||1||
Soa Adfs ufsS vu SHS Ts Ie Ae wets I (674-16, gaat, He 5)
naanak saran pari-o dukh bhanjan gun gaavai sadaa apaar.
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Destroyer of pain; he sings the Glorious Praises of the infinite Lord forever.
fsea at ny aver dum ee esto a vaafa QUI (674-17, ToTHST, He 5) nindak kaa mukh kaalaa ho-aa deen dunee-aa kai darbaar. ||2||15||
The faces of the slanderers are blackened in the courts of this world, and the world beyond. ||2||15]|
ustfAdt Hos U Il (674-18)
Dhanaasiree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
ma ofa TuSTS festant il (674-18, daTAt, He 5) ab har raakhanhaar chitaari-aa. Now, I contemplate and meditate on the Lord, the Saviour Lord.
ufss uals até fas stafs Aare ca feetfoor nail TIS Il (674-18, dae, He 5) patit puneet kee-ay khin bheetar saglaa rog bidaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He purifies sinners in an instant, and cures all diseases. ||1||Pause||
anfe set AG a Hah aH au Ss Her Il (674-19, darAdt, He 5) gosat bha-ee saaDh kai sangam kaam kroDh lobh maari-aa. Talking with the Holy Saints, my sexual desire, anger and greed have been eradicated.
fants frufs uss aateo Hatt Aare Shor Wall (674-19, cont, Hz 5)
simar simar pooran naaraa-in sangee saglay taari-aa. ||1]|
Remembering, remembering the Perfect Lord in meditation, I have saved all my companions. ||1]|
Ua €ou
miGun Hz ye Ho Sa nfs fA ys ofr | 675-1, voTASH, He 5)
a-ukhaDh mantar mool man aykai man bisvaas parabh Dhaari-aa.
The Mul Mantra, the Root Mantra, is the only cure for the mind; I have installed faith in God in my mind.
do 30 die fas aad usd UST Sfeafar QUIEN (675-1, ToT, He 5) charan rayn baa™chhai nit naanak punah punah balihaari-aa. ||2]|16]|
Nanak ever longs for the dust of the Lord's feet; again and again, he is a sacrifice to the Lord. ||2||16]|
USTAd HIST U Il (675-2)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ha wa aH fAG IS Il (675-2, carat, v2 5) mayraa laago raam si-o hayt. I have fallen in love with the Lord.
Afsag Hat Ae Aovet fafo eu at atfent AZ Ul FIC Il (675-3, aatASt, He 5)
satgur mayraa sadaa sahaa-ee jin dukh kaa kaati-aa kayt. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My True Guru is always my help and support; He has torn down the banner of pain. ||1]|Pause] |
ve ef ahs mua afe fase Aare freret Il (675-3, cava, He 5) haath day-ay raakhi-o apunaa kar birthaa sagal mitaa-ee. Giving me His hand, He has protected me as His own, and removed all my troubles.
fSea x HY as ats Ao at wrfu ATTEt A (675-4, TaTASt, He 5)
nindak kay mukh kaalay keenay jan kaa aap sahaa-ee. ||1]|
He has blackened the faces of the slanderers, and He Himself has become the help and support of His humble servant. ||1]|
Aa Afog dor guener of He afe wife i (675-4, darAdt, H2 5)
saachaa saahib ho-aa rakhvaalaa raakh lee-ay kanth laa-ay.
The True Lord and Master has become my Saviour; hugging me close in His embrace, He has saved me.
fogs Se Ae AY HE SOA Tis TS AME MUNA (675-5, aaah, ue 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay sadaa sukh maanay naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||2||17]||
Nanak has become fearless, and he enjoys eternal peace, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||17]|
uStAdt HIS U Il (675-6)
Dhanaasiree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
m@ug 3d oH eters Il (675-6, daTASt, He 5) a-ukhaDh tayro naam da-i-aal. Your Name is the medicine, O Merciful Lord.
fa orga Sct afs act wat S orfu aaa yfsurs a TIS ll (675-6, aaAS, Hs 5) mohi aatur tayree gat nahee jaanee too” aap karahi partipaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am so miserable, I do not know Your state; You Yourself cherish me, Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
fe nod AH A eso ar fosts il (675-7, avr, ue 5)
Dhaar anoograhu su-aamee mayray dutee-aa bhaa-o nivaar.
Take pity on me, O my Lord and Master, and remove the love of duality from within me.
a06 afe Sy nus afte aad wed Ths WAU (675-7, TaTASt, He 5) banDhan kaat layho apunay kar kabhoo na aavah haar. ||1|| Break my bonds, and take me as Your own, so that I may never come to lose. ||1||
3c Fate ufeur a8 ret SF AYE usy fogerg Il (675-8, uot, Hs 5) tayree saran pa-i-aa ha-o jeevaa™ too’ samrath purakh miharvaan. Seeking Your Sanctuary, I live, almighty and merciful Lord and Master.
mS UIT YS AE nigh Saad AE ATA IQUACI (675-9, aatASt, ve 5) aath pahar parabh ka-o aaraaDhee naanak sad kurbaan. ||2]||18]| Twenty-four hours a day, I worship God; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||18]|
Ta USAT HIG U (675-10) raag Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 Raag Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE II (675-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
vo ys afy By Il (675-11, wart, wu 5) haa haa parabh raakh layho. O God, please save me!
wH 3 fag o of AS ANH af fase mrs ony Sg AU! TIE il 75-11, vorAt, we 5) ham tay kichhoo na ho-ay mayray savaamee kar kirpaa apunaa naam dayh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By myself, I cannot do anything, O my Lord and Master; by Your Grace, please bless me with Your Name. ||1]|Pause| |
male AEX ATMS AAT Il (675-12, dstAet, Hz 5) agan kutamb saagar sansaar. Family and worldly affairs are an ocean of fire.
SoH Ho mifamrs vias Wl (675-12, daTASt, He 5) bharam moh agi-aan anDhaar. ||1]|| Through doubt, emotional attachment and ignorance, we are enveloped in darkness.
[21 Gu ate AY Ee Il (675-12, aaTHEt, He 5)
ooch neech sookh dookh. High and low, pleasure and pain.
qth ardt fSASt Te MQM (675-12, vost, He 5) Dharaapas naahee tarisnaa bhookh. ||2|| Hunger and thirst are not satisfied. ||2]|
Hfs aAar fe fat ferrari (675-13, ust, 42 5) man baasnaa rach bikhai bi-aaDh. The mind is engrossed in passion, and the disease of corruption.
Us es Afar Ho MATT WAI (675-13, TaTAST, He 5) panch doot sang mahaa asaaDh. ||3]| The five thieves, the companions, are totally incorrigible. ||3]|
Aba ATS UTS UG ST Il (675-13, uamAdt, us 5) jee-a jahaan paraan Dhan tayraa. The beings and souls and wealth of the world are all Yours.
SSA AS AST Tis SI NSUAUIIEN (675-14, aA, He 5)
naanak jaan sadaa har nayraa. ||4||1]]19]]| O Nanak, know that the Lord is always near at hand. ||4||1]|19]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (675-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
ds we foes org ae Ao at nrfir i (675-14, daTASt, He 5)
deen darad nivaar thaakur raakhai jan kee aap.
The Lord and Master destroys the pain of the poor; He preserves and protects the honor of His servants.
Bde BE oie fafa wy 3 Ae ferrfu NAN 675-15, TaTAS, He 5)
taran taaran har niDh dookh na sakai bi-aap. ||1||
The Lord is the ship to carry us across; He is the treasure of virtue - pain cannot touch Him. ||1]|
AY Afat SAT TUS Il (675-15, oA, Hs 5)
saaDhoo sang bhajahu gupaal.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord of the world.
wis AnH fags 3 AS feo A30 ote ates are Il TIS Il (675-16, uot, Hs 5)
aan sanjam kichh na soojhai ih jatan kaat kal kaal. rahaa-o.
I cannot think of any other way; make this effort, and make it in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||Pause| |
nite nifs efenres use fH faa Sat af I (675-16, aot, 2 5) aad ant da-i-aal pooran tis binaa nahee ko-ay. In the beginning, and in the end, there is none other than the perfect, merciful Lord.
HOH Hd foes afe afu fafa Amit APE QI (675-17, daTAET, He 5)
janam maran nivaar har jap simar su-aamee so-ay. ||2||
The cycle of birth and death is ended, chanting the Lord's Name, and remembering the Lord Master in meditation. ||2||
ae fAfifs aa AAS sas aaa ates Il (675-17, dat, He 5) bayd simrit kathai saasat bhagat karahi beechaar. The Vedas, the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Lord's devotees contemplate Him;
Hafs urea ATOHafs faofa wfe niorg BI (675-18, dae, He 5)
mukat paa-ee-ai saaDhsangat binas jaa-ay anDhaar. ||3]|
liberation is attained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled. ||3]|
TIO GHG MOT AS a TH Urt Sa Il (675-18, aoTASt, He 5)
charan kamal aDhaar jan kaa raas poonjee ayk. The lotus feet of the Lord are the support of His humble servants. They are his only capital and investment.
Yat gE
SE HE hare Ara sad at ys Sa MUON (676-1, daTASt, He 5)
taan maan deebaan saachaa naanak kee parabh tayk. ||4]|2||20||
The True Lord is Nanak's strength, honor and support; He alone is his protection. [14] 12] [20] |
USTAdt HIB U Il (676-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fess fess 32 Fo AG Ud af AHSTEMr I (676-2, aT, 4 5) firat firat bhaytay jan saaDhoo poorai gur samjhaa-i-aa. Wandering and roaming around, I met the Holy Perfect Guru, who has taught me.
nis Hale fafa aif 3 ore afe afs oy fomrfeur all (676-2, cart, 2 5) aan sagal biDh kaa‘m na aavai har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1|| All other devices did not work, so I meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
a 3 xfs ost Ge Tes Il (676-3, dart, Ht 5)
taa tay mohi Dhaaree ot gopaal.
For this reason, I sought the Protection and Support of my Lord, the Cherisher of the Universe.
Aefe ufsS use usHAs fas Aas AAS Il TIS Il (676-3, vaTAct, Hs 5)
saran pari-o pooran parmaysur binsay sagal janjaal. rahaa-o.
I sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, and all my entanglements were dissolved. ||Pause] |
Hoa fos ufeures g Hse Aare femmd He I (676-4, aarAst, He 5)
surag mirat pa-i-aal bhoo mandal sagal bi-aapay maa-ay.
Paradise, the earth, the nether regions of the underworld, and the globe of the world - all are engrossed in Maya.
Abn Burge AS Aw 36 Tis ofa aH forte iI (676-4, daTASH, He 5) jee-a uDhaaran sabh kul taaran har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||2| |
To save your soul, and liberate all your ancestors, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||
Soa OH fadne area urehat Aga fearar il (676-5, aatASt, H 5)
naanak naam niranjan gaa-ee-ai paa-ee-ai sarab niDhaanaa.
O Nanak, singing the Naam, the Name of the Immaculate Lord, all treasures are obtained.
ats fasur fra ef Aomit fase arg AAT SUSU (676-5, TaTAST, He 5)
kar kirpaa jis day-ay su-aamee birlay kaahoo jaanaa. ||3||3]|21||
Only that rare person, whom the Lord and Master blesses with His Grace, comes to know this. ||3]|3]|21]|
USAdt HIG Uwe 2 ue (676-7) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 2 cha-upday Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (676-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
efs ws A aafs uss Il (676-8, TaTASH, He 5) chhod jaahi say karahi paraal. You shall have to abandon the straw which you have collected.
ath & mtefa A HATS Il (676-8, daTASt, He 5) kaam na aavahi say janjaal. These entanglements shall be of no use to you.
Hfa o wats fsa fAG ds Il 676-8, daTASH, He 5) sang na chaaleh tin si-o heet. You are in love with those things that will not go with you.
a Sovet Ret HIS Al 76-8, cart, He 5) jo bairaa-ee say-ee meet. ||1]| You think that your enemies are friends. ||1]|
MA Saf TS HATS Il (676-9, doTASt, He 5) aisay bharam bhulay sansaaraa. In such confusion, the world has gone astray.
HOH ueTag Ufe Tea Il TITS Il (676-9, doTACH, He 5) janam padaarath kho-ay gavaaraa. rahaa-o. The foolish mortal wastes this precious human life. ||Pause] |
ATT UdH Sdt a] Sto Il (676-9, uaTAet, He 5) saach Dharam nahee bhaavai deethaa. He does not like to see Truth and righteousness.
3S Ua fag afe Hat II (676-10, daTASt, He 5) jhooth Dhoh si-o rachi-o meethaa. He is attached to falsehood and deception; they seem sweet to him.
ats fumrdt fenfanr erste il (676-10, daAdt, H2 5) daat pi-aaree visri-aa daataaraa. He loves gifts, but he forgets the Giver.
We St HIS FEST IQ (676-10, daTASt, He 5) jaanai naahee maran vichaaraa. ||2]| The wretched creature does not even think of death. ||2||
ens uset a@ Cfs ge Il (676-11, oH, He 5) vasat paraa-ee ka-o uth rovai. He cries for the possessions of others.
OSH US Aare St FS I (676-11, usrAst, us 5) karam Dharam saglaa ee khovai. He forfeits all the merits of his good deeds and religion.
TSH B FS MSS WS Il (676-11, asTA, Hs 5)
hukam na boojhai aavan jaanay.
He does not understand the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and so he continues coming and going in reincarnation.
uTy Ad ST UESTS II (676-12, uaTAAt, He 5) paap karai taa pachhotaanay. ||3]|| He sins, and then regrets and repents. ||3]||
A 30 Se] A UPSTES Il (676-12, darAdt, He 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so parvaan. Whatever pleases You, Lord, that alone is acceptable.
3d TS BATHS Il (676-12, ust, v2 5) tayray bhaanay no kurbaan. I am a Sacrifice to Your Will.
SOK WNT Fe" HS ST Il (676-12, aarAct, v2 5) naanak gareeb bandaa jan tayraa. Poor Nanak is Your slave, Your humble servant.
ofa afe Aga ys AS WSUAUIQI (676-13, TaTASH, He 5) raakh lay-ay saahib parabh mayraa. ||4]|1]|22]| Save me, O my Lord God Master! ||4||1||22] |
USTAdt HIB U Il (676-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Hfa HAStS US SH MOE Il (676-13, dat, He 5) mohi maskeen parabh naam aDhaar. I am meek and poor; the Name of God is my only Support.
uze a dfs ofs GHares Il (676-14, darAdt, He 5) khaatan ka-o har har rojgaar. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my occupation and earnings.
Hue a@ ofa Sat an Il (676-14, caret, v2 5) sanchan ka-o har ayko naam. I gather only the Lord's Name.
Tors uss 3 wiTS AH MAUI (676-14, daTAH, He 5) halat palat taa kai aavai kaam. ||1]| It is useful in both this world and the next. ||1]|
otH a3 Us sar wes I (676-15, danASt, He 5) naam ratay parabh rang apaar. Imbued with the Love of the Lord God's Infinite Name,
AG Wefs Te Sa fedars il TI i (676-15, aaAt, He 5) saaDh gaavahi gun ayk nirankaar. rahaa-o. the Holy Saints sing the Glorious Praises of the One Lord, the Formless Lord. ||Pause| |
ATG ot Hat wifs HAST Il (676-15, daTAST, He 5) saaDh kee sobhaa at maskeenee. The Glory of the Holy Saints comes from their total humility.
Hs zaet ofa AA sitet Il 676-16, dart, He 5) sant vadaa-ee har jas cheenee. The Saints realize that their greatness rests in the Praises of the Lord.
Woe HIS & Sats afer Il (676-16, aatTASt, v2 5) anad santan kai bhagat govind. Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, the Saints are in bliss.
AY Aso & faort FFF NII (676-16, Ta, He 5) sookh santan kai binsee chind. ||2]| The Saints find peace, and their anxieties are dispelled. ||2]|
Ad AT Hse def eas Il (676-17, usTAS, Hs 5) jah saaDh santan hoveh ikatar. Wherever the Holy Saints gather,
3d dfs AA Wes Se Ales Il (676-17, usTAeH, He 5) tah har jas gaavahi naad kavit. there they sing the Praises of the Lord, in music and poetry.
ATG Ast ufo mise FAA Il (676-17, darAct, 43 5) saaDh sabhaa meh anad bisraam. In the Society of the Saints, there is bliss and peace.
Go Ha A ue fAR HASfa AIM ISI (676-18, aA, He 5) un sang so paa-ay jis mastak karaam. ||3]| They alone obtain this Society, upon whose foreheads such destiny is written. ||3]|
efe ag afs adt maeth Il (676-18, cavrct, 2 5) du-ay kar jorh karee ardaas. With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer.
do uutS AT' PETA Il (676-19, daw, vs 5) charan pakhaar kahaa™ guntaas. I wash their feet, and chant the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
ys efenis fasure dats il (676-19, dart, 18 5) parabh da-i-aal kirpaal hajoor. O God, merciful and compassionate, let me remain in Your Presence.
ao Ale Ast Ofs Sill (676-19, TorA, 2 5) naanak jeevai santaa Dhoor. ||4]|2||23]| Nanak lives, in the dust of the Saints. ||4]|2]|23] |
UST E99 USA Hz U Il (677-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
A as 3d fa YAN ANTS Il (677-1, doTAST, He 5) so kat darai je khasam sam"aarai. One who contemplates his Lord and Master - why should he be afraid?
ats sts ud Hone STS NU! TIS Il (677-1, aA, vs 5) dar dar pachay manmukh vaychaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. The wretched self-willed manmukhs are ruined through fear and dread. ||1||Pause] |
fag Gufs Hrs fust Tees Il (677-2, vot, v2 5) sir Oopar maat pitaa gurdayv. The Divine Guru, my mother and father, is over my head.
HeG Hols wt at fasHs AS Il (677-2, usAst, ue 5) safal moorat jaa kee nirmal sayv. His image brings prosperity; serving Him, we become pure.
Sa fedue wT at TAA I (677-2, darAdt, He 5) ayk niranjan jaa kee raas. The One Lord, the Immaculate Lord, is our capital.
fife AOHafS Jes USaA NU 677-3, TaTAS, He 5)
mil saaDhsangat hovat pargaas. ||1]|
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, we are illumined and enlightened. ||1]|
Abas a VST UTS AS OTS Il (677-3, var, v2 5) jee-an kaa daataa pooran sabh thaa-ay. The Giver of all beings is totally pervading everywhere.
afe aon fiefs afs of= i (677-3, aaTAdt, He 5) kot kalays miteh har naa-ay. Millions of pains are removed by the Lord's Name.
HOH HIS Ade SU SA Il (677-4, darAdt, He 5) janam maran saglaa dukh naasai. All the pains of birth and death are taken away
aonta a a ufe sfs aA QI (677-4, daTAdt, He 5) gurmukh jaa kai man tan baasai. ||2|| from the Gurmukh, within whose mind and body the Lord dwells. ||2]|
fan 3 urfy oe afs afe il (677-4, uA, H: 5) jis no aap la-ay larh laa-ay. He alone, whom the Lord has attached to the hem of His robe,
waar fxs fSR dt ate i 677-5, doTHt, He 5) dargeh milai tisai hee jaa-ay. obtains a place in the Court of the Lord.
Ret gars fa ATS SS Il (677-5, usAst, He 5) say-ee bhagat je saachay bhaanay. They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to the True Lord.
AHA 3 se fSaTS NI (677-5, daTASt, He 5) jamkaal tay bha-ay nikaanay. ||3]|| They are freed from the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
Anat Atos A Ia Il (677-6, aaAdt, He 5) saachaa saahib sach darbaar. True is the Lord, and True is His Court.
atHfs ae ad dterg Il (677-6, aarAct, x 5) keemat ka-un kahai beechaar. Who can contemplate and describe His value?
ufe ufe nists Aas Marg il (677-6, darAdt, He 5) ghat ghat antar sagal aDhaar. He is within each and every heart, the Support of all.
Sod AD AS JST IIS (677-6, dot, He 5) naanak jaachai sant raynaar. ||4]|3]|24]| Nanak begs for the dust of the Saints. ||4]|3]|24]|
USAdt HIS" U (677-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
qe afsars yATfe il (677-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ufs wats 3a SISA J AG A F Afar i (677-9, wort, ue 5)
ghar baahar tayraa bharvaasaa too jan kai hai sang.
At home, and outside, I place my trust in You; You are always with Your humble servant.
afs fas utsyH us nus oH AUG ofa sf WAI (677-9, daTAST, He 5) kar kirpaa pareetam parabh apunay naam japa-o har rang. ||1]| Bestow Your Mercy, O my Beloved God, that I may chant the Lord's Name with love.
[11|
Ho A US MUS AT STE Il (677-10, dart, He 5) jan ka-o parabh apnay kaa taan. God is the strength of His humble servants.
A 3 ate avefs Fumi A HABLS USS I TIS Il (677-10, asa, ws 5)
jo too karahi karaaveh su-aamee saa maslat parvaan. rahaa-o.
Whatever You do, or cause to be done, O Lord and Master, that outcome is acceptable to me. ||Pause| |
ufs usnAg as owes US TUG Te Ardt i (677-11, aarAt, us 5)
pat parmaysar gat naaraa-in Dhan gupaal gun saakhee.
The Transcendent Lord is my honor; the Lord is my emancipation; the glorious sermon of the Lord is my wealth.
Udo Ads S'Sa BA df ofa Ast fea fafa AST NQNANQUII (677-11, doTAST, 42 5)
charan saran naanak daas har har santee ih biDh jaatee. ||2||1||25]| Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's feet; from the Saints, he has learned this way of life. ||2]|1]|25]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (677-12)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Aas Hove ys 3 ure afe ore afe ae il (677-12, are, us 5)
Sagal manorath parabh tay paa-ay kanth laa-ay gur raakhay.
God has fulfilled all my desires. Holding me close in His embrace, the Guru has saved me.
Hag Arad vfs Halse o US fas S SST SA NU (677-13, dat, He 5)
sansaar Saagar meh jalan na deenay kinai na dutar bhaakhay. ||1] |
He has saved me from burning in the ocean of fire, and now, no one calls it impassible. ||1]|
frre & Hf Are EAA II (677-13, moTASt, He 5) jin kai man saachaa bisvaas. Those who have true faith in their minds,
uf Ufa Aomit at Ast yee Het BorA I TIE Il (677-13, darAct, Hi 5) paykh paykh su-aamee kee sobhaa aanad sadaa ulaas. rahaa-o. continually behold the Glory of the Lord; they are forever happy and blissful. ||Pause] |
Jdo Hele use USHA visor AEE Il (677-14, cst, Hs 5)
charan saran pooran parmaysur antarjaamee saakhi-o.
I seek the Sanctuary of the feet of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, the Searcher of hearts; I behold Him ever-present.
mts ofS orrat aS aaa sas oT viagg THE NQNIEN (677-15, TaTAH, HE 5)
jaan boojh apnaa kee-o naanak bhagtan kaa ankur raakhi-o. ||2||2||26]|| In His wisdom, the Lord has made Nanak His own; He has preserved the roots of His devotees. ||2||2||26||
USTAdt HIB U Il (677-15)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Wd Ad UNG 30 Jyfs Bis asT & WET II (677-15, TaTHET, He 5) jah jah paykha-o tah hajoor door katahu na jaa-ee. Wherever I look, there I see Him present; He is never far away.
afe afar Haas HHS Ae fomret al 677-16, dart, He 5) rav rahi-aa sarbatar mai man sadaa Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]| He is all-pervading, everywhere; O my mind, meditate on Him forever. ||1]|
as Ss adt sles A Hat Tah I (677-16, wot, w: 5)
eet oot nahee beechhurhai so sangee ganee-ai.
He alone is called your companion, who will not be separated from you, here or hereafter.
faofa ate A fone ufo A meu AY sSbH I TIC I 677-17, caTASH, nH 5) binas jaa-ay jo nimakh meh so alap sukh bhanee-ai. rahaa-o. That pleasure, which passes away in an instant, is trivial. ||Pause| |
yfsurs nifimrg efe ag 8a 3 Tet Il (677-18, dort, He 5) paratipaalai api-aa-o day-ay kachh oon na ho-ee. He cherishes us, and gives us sustenance; He does not lack anything.
Afh AfA AEST Ha ys At iQ (677-18, dant, ue 5) SaaS SaaS Sammaaltaa mayraa parabh so-ee. ||2]| With each and every breath, my God takes care of His creatures. ||2||
WES Mee mur YS Sa AT aT TU Il 677-18, usTASt, He 5) achhal achhayd apaar parabh oochaa jaa kaa roop. God is undeceiveable, impenetrable and infinite; His form is lofty and exalted.
nfu Afu cata noe AS MPSA MSY ISI (677-19, TaTAST, HE 5)
jap jap karahi anand jan achraj aanoop. ||3]|
Chanting and meditating on the embodiment of wonder and beauty, His humble servants are in bliss. ||3]|
A xfs tg efenre ys fag sHfs mraar Il (677-19, dat, He 5) saa mat dayh da-i-aal parabh jit tumeh araaDhaa. Bless me with such understanding, O Merciful Lord God, that I might remember You.
User got
SSS Ha VS YS IS Ua AUT SISNQIl (678-1, usTAST, He 5)
naanak mangai daan parabh rayn pag saaDhaa. ||4||3||27]|| Nanak begs God for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|3]|27]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (678-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fafe 3H 3H fSafs sore AY AOA Ast wis mre Il (678-2, dart, us 5)
jin tum bhayjay tineh bulaa-ay sukh sahj saytee ghar aa-o.
The One who sent you, has now recalled you; return to your home now in peace and pleasure.
Moe Has To we Aon ufs fesse TH AHS IAI (678-2, daTASH, He 5)
anad mangal gun gaa-o sahj Dhun nihchal raaj kamaa-o. ||1||
In bliss and ecstasy, sing His Glorious Praises; by this celestial tune, you shall acquire your everlasting kingdom. ||1]]|
3H ufg meg HS HIS Il (678-3, darAt, He 5) tum ghar aavhu mayray meet. Come back to your home, O my friend.
Sue set ofe orf foes mrret set fasts 1 ToS I (678-3, aA, He 5)
tumray dokhee har aap nivaaray apdaa bha-ee biteet. rahaa-o.
The Lord Himself has eliminated your enemies, and your misfortunes are past. | |Pause| |
yae ats US AISI SAS SHS Sa Il (678-4, uaTadt, we 5)
pargat keenay parabh karnayhaaray naasan bhaajan thaakay.
God, the Creator Lord, has glorified you, and your running and rushing around has ended.
ufs Hae eats fos eA mus uAfH feerA III (678-4, daTASt, He 5)
ghar mangal vaajeh nit vaajay apunai khasam nivaajay. ||2||
In your home, there is rejoicing; the musical instruments continually play, and your Husband Lord has exalted you. ||2| |
MAfad JY SHI HS aag Ts a gals werfs il (678-5, aot, we 5)
asthir rahhu dolahu mat kabhoo gur kai bachan aDhaar.
Remain firm and steady, and do not ever waver; take the Guru's Word as your Support.
Hi Ug AIS F Hse HY SAS TIT Ill (678-5, cat, He 5)
jai jai kaar sagal bhoo mandal mukh oojal darbaar. ||3||
You shall be applauded and congratulated all over the world, and your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
fae a& Abr fs6 dt ed nmr sfeor AaTet II (678-6, datASt, 4 5)
jin kay jee-a tinai hee fayray aapay bha-i-aa sahaa-ee.
All beings belong to Him; He Himself transforms them, and He Himself becomes their help and support.
Wd AM AISI Soa AY eoniet isisilIcil (6738-6, aerAct, v2 5)
achraj kee-aa karnaihaarai naanak sach vadi-aa-ee. ||4||4||28] |
The Creator Lord has worked a wondrous miracle; O Nanak, His glorious greatness is true. ||4]|4]]28]|
UsAdt HIG Uwe E (678-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 6 Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:
qe Afsas yATfe II (678-8)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: Hod Hs fimrd fao@ ard AIG I 78-9, carAdt, He 5)
sunhu sant pi-aaray bin-o hamaaray jee-o.
Listen, O Dear Beloved Saints, to my prayer.
ofe fag vats 5 arg FIG I TTS I 678-9, usAst, He 5)
har bin mukat na kaahoo jee-o. rahaa-o. Without the Lord, no one is liberated. | |Pause] |
Ho fSsHs GH ate saa 36 Ta nels HAS 3d AT 5 OTH AIG Il 678-9, das, Hs 5) man nirmal karam kar taaran taran har avar janjaal tayrai kaahoo na kaam jee-o.
O mind, do only deeds of purity; the Lord is the only boat to carry you across. Other entanglements shall be of no use to you.
figs ta ursqun Ae feg Guen 4 a afe ca AE WAN (678-10, aoTAEt, He 5) jeevan dayvaa paarbarahm sayvaa ih updays mo ka-o gur deenaa jee-o. ||1|| True living is serving the Divine, Supreme Lord God; the Guru has imparted this teaching to me. ||1]|
fan fa@ 3 oe ds wa fae ont SS nis at ws Go Af & TS Il (678-11, daTASt, 42 5)
tis si-o na laa-ee-ai heet jaa ko kichh naahee beet ant kee baar oh sang na chaalai. Do not fall in love with trivial things; in the end, they shall not go along with you.
nfs sfs 3 orea ofe & UlSH AG AT a fel SS FAG Fe IM (678-12, daAS, He 5) man tan too aaraaDh har kay pareetam saaDh jaa kai sang tayray banDhan chhootai.
2] | Worship and adore the Lord with your mind and body, O Beloved Saint of the Lord; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be released from bondage.
21 |
Td UTZIH Ado fase AHS VIS nid MTA AS USH B Ale Il (678-12, asAdt, nz 5) gahu paarbarahm saran hirdai kamal charan avar aas kachh patal na keejai.
In your heart, hold fast to the Sanctuary of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord God; do not place your hopes in any other support.
Het sas fomrat fomrat sur Het aaa AT a forgur at NSIAIQCI (678-13, ToS, He 5) so-ee bhagat gi-aanee Dhi-aanee tapaa so-ee naanak jaa ka-o kirpaa keejai. 311111291]
He alone is a devotee, spiritually wise, a meditator, and a penitent, O Nanak, who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy. ||3||1]|29]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (678-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Hd BS 3B J 3S FJ 3G Tha Has Il (678-14, usTASt, He 5) mayray laal bhalo ray bhalo ray bhalo har mangnaa. O my dear beloved, it is good, it is better, it is best, to ask for the Lord's Name.
eug uns 6s Hod AU & ao youts fats ay Aa FT HIS I TIS Il (678-15, cont, He 5)
daykhhu pasaar nain sunhu saaDhoo kay bain paraanpat chit raakh sagal hai marnaa. rahaa-o.
Behold, with your eyes wide-open, and listen to the Words of the Holy Saints; enshrine in your consciousness the Lord of Life - remember that all must die.
| |Pause| |
Jeo Unt JA Sa Ads vida fafimr faorg ty nae d da Sa afse a aH sla aT I AT AS Il (678-16, aaTAdt, He 5)
chandan cho-aa ras bhog karat anaykai bikhi-aa bikaar daykh sagal hai feekay aykai gobid ko naam neeko kahat hai saaDh jan.
The application of sandalwood oil, the enjoyment of pleasures and the practice of many corrupt sins - look upon all of these as insipid and worthless. The Name of the Lord of the Universe alone is sublime; so say the Holy Saints.
36 0S nus atu ofs Au 3 fone ATUG meg ee tu as Afar ardt PHar MA (678-17, USAT, He 5)
tan Dhan aapan thaapi-o har jap na nimakh jaapi-o arath darab daykh kachh sang naahee chalnaa. ||1||
You claim that your body and wealth are your own; you do not chant the Lord's Name even for an instant. Look and see, that none of your possessions or riches shall go along with you. ||1||
Wad ag so fats Ge adt HS us faq ot F AH ASS] AO at Aaor Il (678-18, UoeTAdt, Hs 5) -
jaa ko ray karam bhalaa tin ot gahee sant palaa tin naahee ray jam santaavai saaDhoo kee sangnaa.
One who has good karma, grasps the Protection of the hem of the Saint's robe; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Messenger of Death cannot threaten him.
ufee 3 uan fours fufeS 3 nfs Sa fadara GSA HS BAST NNVNBOM (678-19, UaAdTt, H3 5)
paa-i-o ray param niDhaan miti-o hai abhimaan aykai nirankaar naanak man lagnaa. [12] |2]|30]|
I have obtained the supreme treasure, and my egotism has been eradicated; Nanak's mind is attached to the One Formless Lord. ||2]|2]||30||
Yar €or
UsTAdt HIG UW D (679-1) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 7 Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsars ure II (679-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa &a fants Sa frites Sa frie fumrd i (679-2, carat, 2 5)
har ayk simar ayk simar ayk simar pi-aaray.
Meditate in remembrance on the One Lord; meditate in remembrance on the One Lord; meditate in remembrance on the One Lord, O my Beloved.
afs AGA ST HI HI SCAG 3S Il TIC Il (679-2, aarAct, v2 5)
kal kalays lobh moh mahaa bha-ojal taaray. rahaa-o.
He shall save you from strife, suffering, greed, attachment, and the most terrifying world-ocean. ||Pause| |
AfA Af fore fous feor dfs fears Il (679-3, danAet, He 5) Saas Saas nimakh nimakh dinas rain chitaaray. With each and every breath, each and every instant, day and night, dwell upon Him.
Wana Afu fora Hfs fears urs iA (679-3, daTASt, He 5)
saaDhsang jap nisang man niDhaan Dhaaray. ||1]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on Him fearlessly, and enshrine the treasure of His Name in your mind. ||1]||
TIO AHS SHAAS TS dfse ses Il (679-3, asst, ue 5)
charan kamal namaskaar gun gobid beechaaray.
Worship His lotus feet, and contemplate the glorious virtues of the Lord of the Universe.
AY Aor at Jo Soa HAS AY ATS WAUSAU (679-4, dart, He 5) saaDh janaa kee rayn naanak mangal sookh saDhaaray. ||2||1]|31||
O Nanak, the dust of the feet of the Holy shall bless you with pleasure and peace. 214] 1321]
USAdt HIG Uwe t FUE (79-5) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 8 dupday Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Eighth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars Arte il (679-5) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
frna@ fhufs frafs we ure AA ATA AHS II (679-6, daTASt, He 5)
simra-o simar simar sukh paava-o saas saas Samaalay.
Remembering, remembering, remembering Him in meditation, I find peace; with each and every breath, I dwell upon Him.
fea ofa usafa Af Aoet AS as Afr TUS IAI (679-6, TarASt, He 5)
ih lok parlok sang sahaa-ee jat kat mohi rakhvaalay. ||1||
In this world, and in the world beyond, He is with me, as my help and support; wherever I go, He protects me. ||1||
Gd A Faq SA Aba BS Il (679-7, warAct, us 5) gur kaa bachan basai jee-a naalay. The Guru's Word abides with my soul.
mes odt Sa Sag oot SS sho o AA AS UU TIS Il (679-7, usw, Hs 5) jal nahee doobai taskar nahee layvai bhaahi na saakai jaalay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It does not sink in water; thieves cannot steal it, and fire cannot burn it. ||1]|Pause||
fasus x8 ug nigs a fea us BO AA WS Il (679-8, asrAst, Hs 5) nirDhan ka-o Dhan anDhulay ka-o tik maat dooDh jaisay baalay. It is like wealth to the poor, a cane for the blind, and mother's milk for the infant.
Arad Hfs Sfee utes afs cae at fru fours NNAUIB2I (679-8, TATA, He 5) saagar meh bohith paa-i-o har naanak karee kirpaa kirpaalay. ||2||1||32||
In the ocean of the world, I have found the boat of the Lord; the Merciful Lord has bestowed His Mercy upon Nanak. ||2||1]|32]|
USTAdt HIST U Il (679-9)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
se faus cfimre aifie nifgs foe fare 1 (679-9, cart, He 5)
bha-ay kirpaal da-i-aal gobindaa amrit ridai sinchaa-ee.
The Lord of the Universe has become kind and merciful; His Ambrosial Nectar permeates my heart.
oe fafa fafa fafa afe afar adt Ae UTET NAN (679-10, TaTAT, He 5)
nav niDh riDh siDh har laag rahee jan paa-ee. ||1]|
The nine treasures, riches and the miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas cling to the feet of the Lord's humble servant. ||1]|
H30 AC now Hae dt ASH II (679-10, daTAet, He 5) santan ka-o anad sagal hee jaa-ee. The Saints are in ecstasy everywhere.
fafs safe oag sase at afe stom Aa oet NA TITS ll (679-11, dart, He 5)
garihi baahar thaakur bhagtan kaa rav rahi-aa sarab thaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Within the home, and outside as well, the Lord and Master of His devotees is totally pervading and permeating everywhere. ||1||Pause| |
a a@ afe 5 uguoua WT ot nifor TAS I (679-12, daTHEt, He 5) taa ka-o ko-ay na pahuchanhaaraa jaa kai ang gusaa-ee. No one can equal one who has the Lord of the Universe on his side.
AH at 37H fire fan fans coe ony ferret QNQUSSI (679-12, TaTAS, He 5)
jam kee taraas mitai jis simrat naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||2||2||33]| The fear of the Messenger of Death is eradicated, remembering Him in meditation; Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|2||33]]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (679-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
wsaes Tag Shy Tea SHST ifsHrat Il (679-13, asrAst, Hs 5)
darabvant darab daykh garbai bhoomvant abhimaanee.
The rich man gazes upon his riches, and is proud of himself; the landlord takes pride in his lands.
IH WS Ade TH HT f3C als Aa Sa AMM NAM (679-13, doTASt, He 5)
raajaa jaanai sagal raaj hamraa ti-o har jan tayk su-aamee. ||1||
The king believes that the whole kingdom belongs to him; in the same way, the humble servant of the Lord looks upon the support of his Lord and Master. ||1]|
A Ag must Ge AHS Il (679-14, uot, He 5) jay ko-oo apunee ot samaardi. When one considers the Lord to be his only support,
An fas sor dfs cas must ae Sdt TS UU! TI I 679-14, aarAct, Hs 5) jaisaa bit taisaa ho-ay vartai apunaa bal nahee haarai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
then the Lord uses His power to help him; this power cannot be defeated. ||1]|Pause] |
me fauna se fea nm Hafe Aafs ats mire Il (679-15, aatASt, He 5)
aan ti-aag bha-ay ik aasar saran saran kar aa-ay.
Renouncing all others, I have sought the Support of the One Lord; I have come to Him, pleading, "Save me, save me!"
HS MOqd Se Ho fess soa dfs To WS NUS (679-16, dart, He 5)
sant anugrah bha-ay man nirmal naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||2||3||34||
By the kindness and the Grace of the Saints, my mind has been purified; Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]||3]|34||
USTAdt HIST U Il (679-16)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
WT ag de da wa fA Fa ufo A adhrs FAT Il (679-17, vot, 4: 5) jaa ka-o har rang laago is jug meh so kahee-at hai sooraa. He alone is called a warrior, who is attached to the Lord's Love in this age.
MISH fre Aas SA I at A aT ASAT YT UU (679-17, TaTAST, He 5)
aatam jinai sagal vas taa kai jaa kaa satgur pooraa. ||1]|
Through the Perfect True Guru, he conquers his own soul, and then everything comes under his control. ||1]|
UST Eco
Sas aeha mirsH Sfar il (680-1, sat, ue 5) thaakur gaa-ee-ai aatam rang. Sing the Praises of the Lord and Master, with the love of your soul.
Heat use oH fomres ofA AHS Afar A FIC il (so-1, carat, ve 5)
Sarnee paavan naam Dhi-aavan sahj samaavan sang. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who seek His Sanctuary, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are blended with the Lord in celestial peace. ||1||Pause| |
Ho A vde eAfs HS Shas Afar ustst Sat I (680-2, aarAet, He 5)
jan kay charan vaseh mayrai hee-arai sang puneetaa dayhee.
The feet of the Lord's humble servant abide in my heart; with them, my body is made pure.
Wo ot ufe eg far fafa area a AY Sat NQNNSUI (680-2, TaTAST, He 5)
jan kee Dhoor dayh kirpaa niDh naanak kai sukh ayhee. ||2||4]|35]|
O treasure of mercy, please bless Nanak with the dust of the feet of Your humble servants; this alone brings peace. ||2||4||35]||
US'Adt HIB U Il (680-3)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
W306 Ad HOU sdate Gy nisannit WS Il (680-3, daTASt, He 5)
jatan karai maanukh dehkaavai oh antarjaamee jaanai.
People try to deceive others, but the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows everything.
uy ae af Hats ure Su aT foTAS IA (680-4, uot, He 5) paap karay kar mookar paavai bhaykh karai nirbaanai. ||1]|| They commit sins, and then deny them, while they pretend to be in Nirvaanaa. ||1]||
Was Ufs sHfs ys dfs Il (680-4, vat, He 5) jaanat door tumeh parabh nayr. They believe that You are far away, but You, O God, are near at hand.
6s sa Gs 3 Os US oe Sat Mf | TIC Il (680-5, dara, ne 5) ut taakai ut tay ut paykhai aavai lobhee fayr. rahaa-o. Looking around, this way and that, the greedy people come and go. ||Pause] |
Aa BI Se SS HS SIN 3a BAI HAS 3 AT Il 680-5, usAet, He 5) jab lag tutai naahee man bharmaa tab lag mukat na ko-ee. As long as the doubts of the mind are not removed, liberation is not found.
aT aed eens Amit AS sas AS Aet NNUNEI (680-6, ToT, He 5)
kaho naanak da-i-aal su-aamee sant bhagat jan so-ee. ||2]|5||36||
Says Nanak, he alone is a Saint, a devotee, and a humble servant of the Lord, to whom the Lord and Master is merciful. ||2||5]|36] |
USTAdt HIB U Il (680-7)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
oH dfs AG I wus A a HAS ATH II (630-7, aT, He 5)
naam gur dee-o hai apunai jaa kai mastak karmaa.
My Guru gives the Naam, the Name of the Lord, to those who have such karma written on their foreheads.
on fese ou Aue 3 at Fa fa TAHT INI (680-7, TaTHEt, He 5)
naam darirh-aavai naam japaavai taa kaa jug meh Dharmaa. ||1||
He implants the Naam, and inspires us to chant the Naam; this is Dharma, true religion, in this world. ||1||
He AG BH eset As Il (680-8, uatAst, v2 5) jan ka-o naam vadaa-ee sobh. The Naam is the glory and greatness of the Lord's humble servant.
on afs on ufs Ho at HS AOA da NA TIS Il (80-8, daTASt, He 5)
naamo gat naamo pat jan kee maanai jo jo hog. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Naam is his salvation, and the Naam is his honor; he accepts whatever comes to pass. ||1]||Pause| |
OH UG fA AS & US At US ATT Il (680-9, aaTASt, 8 5)
naam Dhan jis jan kai paalai so-ee pooraa saahaa. That humble servant, who has the Naam as his wealth, is the perfect banker.
on fara soa nitars SY UUs BIT NIAWENZIIM (680-9, daTAt, He 5)
naam bi-uhaaraa naanak aaDhaaraa naam paraapat laahaa. ||2||6||37]|| The Naam is his occupation, O Nanak, and his only support; the Naam is the profit he earns. ||2||6||37] |
USTAdt HIB U Il (680-10)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Og USsls se VIA UY HA UT FETs Il (680-10, gaat, Hs 5)
naytar puneet bha-ay daras paykhay maathai para-o ravaal.
My eyes have been purified, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and touching my forehead to the dust of His feet.
afm afk ae we oag a Hd foge SAT Tus NA (680-11, garAst, wz 5)
ras ras gun gaava-o thaakur kay morai hirdai bashu gopaal. ||1]|
With joy and happiness, I sing the Glorious Praises of my Lord and Master; the Lord of the World abides within my heart. ||1]|
SH 36 TuSTS BENS Il (680-11, daTAt, H2 5) tum ta-o raakhanhaar da-i-aal. You are my Merciful Protector, Lord.
Hed Aue sis fust ys dg us fasus dl JS Il 30-12, saws, Hs 5) sundar sughar bay-ant pitaa parabh hohu parabhoo kirpaal. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O beautiful, wise, infinite Father God, be Merciful to me, God. ||1]||Pause| |
Ho moe Has JU SHI ATS MGU TAG Il (680-12, waAt, we 5)
mahaa anand mangal roop tumray bachan anoop rasaal.
O Lord of supreme ecstasy and blissful form, Your Word is so beautiful, so drenched with Nectar.
fuse ude Hae Afsad a Soa Sa us NAWOUSCI (680-13, daTAST, He 5)
hirdai charan sabad satgur ko naanak baa“Dhi-o paal. ||2||7||38]|
With the Lord's lotus feet enshrined in his heart, Nanak has tied the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, to the hem of his robe. ||2]|7||38]|
USTAd HIST U Il (680-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
nust Cats use Sra must Cafs Yas Il (680-14, daTAdt, He 5) apnee ukat khalaavai bhojan apnee ukat khaylaavai. In His own way, He provides us with our food; in His own way, He plays with us.
Ava FY Sa TA SS HS Tt STS AHS Al (680-14, aaTAst, He 5)
sarab sookh bhog ras dayvai man hee naal samaavai. ||1]|
He blesses us with all comforts, enjoyments and delicacies, and he permeates our minds. ||1]|
one fist dtu efenis Il (680-15, aA, He 5) hamray pitaa gopaal da-i-aal. Our Father is the Lord of the World, the Merciful Lord.
fag ae Host afea a@ 3A ct us Us A TIE Il (60-15, aaTHSt, He 5) ji-o raakhai mehtaaree baarik ka-o taisay hee parabh paal. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Just as the mother protects her children, God nurtures and cares for us. ||1]|Pause] |
HIS WHo Ada Te otea Het AMS SST Il (680-16, daAst, Hs 5)
meet saajan sarab gun naa-ik sadaa salaamat dayvaa.
You are my friend and companion, the Master of all excellences, O eternal and permanent Divine Lord.
as Os WS as 3S FH Tt HS Ha AT AS NUCUBE!M (680-16, ass, Hs 5)
eet oot jat kat tat tum hee milai naanak sant sayvaa. ||2||8]|39]| Here, there and everywhere, You are pervading; please, bless Nanak to serve the Saints. ||2]|8]|39] |
USTASt HIB U Il (680-17)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Hs faurs vfeere ees an au fay AS Il (630-17, dorACt, nH: 5)
sant kirpaal da-i-aal damodar kaam kroDh bikh jaaray.
The Saints are kind and compassionate; they burn away their sexual desire, anger and corruption.
TH HS AAS 3q Abie fea Gufs S ws Al (680-18, wont, 3 5) raaj maal joban tan jee-araa in oopar lai baaray. ||1]| My power, wealth, youth, body and soul are a sacrifice to them. ||1||
Hfs 3fe IH oH fazed Il (680-18, daASt, He 5) man tan raam naam hitkaaray. With my mind and body, I love the Lord's Name.
AY Aon noe Hare Afos se fafa ufs Sars | TIE il (680-19, aavAt, H: 5)
sookh sahj aanand mangal sahit bhav niDh paar utaaray. rahaa-o.
With peace, poise, pleasure and joy, He has carried me across the terrifying world- ocean. ||Pause]|
UST Ecq
ufs A aS Ufs Gf sear AT fs AS SATS Il (681-1, daAdt, He 5) Dhan so thaan Dhan o-ay bhavnaa jaa meh sant basaaray. Blessed is that place, and blessed is that house, in which the Saints dwell.
AS Soa Ot AI UIT SAT SIS SI SHAS MQUCUON (81-1, wsTAST, He 5)
jan naanak kee sarDhaa poorahu thaakur bhagat tayray namaskaaray. ||2||9||40]| Fulfill this desire of servant Nanak, O Lord Master, that he may bow in reverence to Your devotees. ||2]||9]]40] |
USTAdt HIG U Il (681-2)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
gate ae no gat 3 nus Bao UTS Il (681-2, dot, H8 5) chhadaa-ay lee-o mahaa balee tay apnay charan paraat. He has saved me from the awful power of Maya, by attaching me to His feet.
Sa OH UG Ho Hs faafh 3 asg ATS A (681-3, ToT, He 5)
ayk naam dee-o man manntaa binas na kathoo jaat. ||1]| He gave my mind the Mantra of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord, which shall never perish or leave me. ||1||
Afsafs us atet ets il Gsi-3, sors, He 5) satgur poorai keenee daat. The Perfect True Guru has given this gift.
dfs safe on AE atese aS set rst AS 1 TITS I (681-3, carat, He 5)
har har naam dee-o keertan ka-o bha-ee hamaaree gaat. rahaa-o.
He has blessed me with the Kirtan of the Praises of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and I am emancipated. ||Pause||
nidherg atG ufs nud sase at at urfS i (681-4, aarrst, He 5) angeekaar kee-o parabh apunai bhagtan kee raakhee paat. My God has made me His own, and saved the honor of His devotee.
Soa VIO Td ys nus AY UTES fea TST NIQNIONSAUI (81-5, TaTAST, Hs 5) naanak charan gahay parabh apnay sukh paa-i-o din raat. ||2||10||41] | Nanak has grasped the feet of his God, and has found peace, day and night. [|2]|10]|42]|
USTAdt HIST U Il (681-5)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
ud Jaa! By Bs fSe fee Ht ass Tera Il Csi-6, wort, us 5)
par harnaa lobh jhooth nind iv hee karat gudaaree.
Stealing the property of others, acting in greed, lying and slandering - in these ways, he passes his life.
fiat fara oir fife Htet fea fa Hofs Arardt All (681-6, darASt, Hs 5)
marig tarisnaa aas mithi-aa meethee ih tayk maneh saaDhaaree. ||1]|
He places his hopes in false mirages, believing them to be sweet; this is the support he installs in his mind. ||1]|
Has at wieder ae fyardt i 81-7, ast, us 5) saakat kee aavradaa jaa-ay barithaaree. The faithless cynic passes his life uselessly.
AA Mae & Ss HAT Sha Tees AHH Sat aera i TIS il Gsi-7, asvAst, ue 5)
jaisay kaagad kay bhaar moosaa took gavaavat kaam nahee gaavaaree. rahaa-o.
He is like the mouse, gnawing away at the pile of paper, making it useless to the poor wretch. ||Pause| |
afe fas ursqan Aum fes due szaret il (81-8, cart, He 5) kar kirpaa paarbarahm su-aamee ih banDhan chhutkaaree. Have mercy on me, O Supreme Lord God, and release me from these bonds.
Yss niT soa YS ASS AT Aa Aa NANAUIS2M si-8, carr, Hs 5)
boodat anDh naanak parabh kaadhat saaDh janaa sangaaree. ||2||11||42|| The blind are sinking, O Nanak; God saves them, uniting them with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||11]|42]|
USA HIB U Il (681-9)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
frfs fates Aart ys nua Als@ 3q He srst Il (si-9, vanrct, ws 5)
simar simar su-aamee parabh apnaa seetal tan man chhaatee.
Remembering, remembering God, the Lord Master in meditation, my body, mind and heart are cooled and soothed.
gu da AY Ug Aba a USAT HS AST IAI (681-10, aTAET, M2 5) roop rang sookh Dhan jee-a kaa paarbarahm morai jaatee. ||1]| The Supreme Lord God is my beauty, pleasure, peace, wealth, soul and social status.
[21
dAo TH TAEtS HST Il (681-11, TaTASHt, He 5) rasnaa raam rasaa-in maatee. My tongue is intoxicated with the Lord, the source of nectar.
da dat TH nus & VIS OHS fofo ast 1 ToS I (Cosi-11, aarAst, nH 5) rang rangee raam apnay kai charan kamal niDh thaatee. rahaa-o. I am in love, in love with the Lord's lotus feet, the treasure of riches. ||Pause]|
fan at rr fo ot af Shor use ys at aest i (si-11, aarHst, He 5) jis kaa saa tin hee rakh lee-aa pooran parabh kee bhaatee. I am His - He has saved me; this is God's perfect way.
Afs SE wm Ayers area The It ust NINIVNSSI Gsi1-12, Tae, He 5)
mayl lee-o aapay sukh-daatai naanak har raakhee paatee. ||2||12||43]| The Giver of peace has blended Nanak with Himself; the Lord has preserved his honor. ||2||12||43]|
USTAdt HIST U Il (681-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Us Ano Als 33 3 foeats yore YSTY SHIT Il (81-13, voTASt, He 5)
doot dusman sabh tujh tay nivrahi pargat partaap tumaaraa.
All demons and enemies are eradicated by You, Lord; Your glory is manifest and radiant.
Ad 3d sas eure Gy 33a SH HT IA (681-14, GarAGt, He 5) jo jo tayray bhagat dukhaa-ay oh tatkaal tum maaraa. ||1|| Whoever harms Your devotees, You destroy in an instant. ||1]|
fasu@ suot Gfa afs sts Il (681-14, carat, He 5) nirkha-o tumree or har neet. I look to You continually, Lord.
Hots Hote dg oH AS ag af Cue HIS II JIC Il (681-14, darAct, He 5)
muraar sahaa-ay hohu daas ka-o kar geh uDhrahu meet. rahaa-o.
O Lord, Destroyer of ego, please, be the helper and companion of Your slaves; take my hand, and save me, O my Friend! ||Pause| |
Hat dost oafe AS uma ate nrfu il 81-15, caTAdt, He 5) sunee bayntee thaakur mayrai khasmaanaa kar aap. My Lord and Master has heard my prayer, and given me His protection.
SOSA MSE SS VU Ta AST Hel Tg ATY MINIS (681-16, Tat, He 5)
naanak anad bha-ay dukh bhaagay sadaa sadaa har jaap. ||2||13||44]| Nanak is in ecstasy, and his pains are gone; he meditates on the Lord, forever and ever. ||2||13]|44] |
USTAdt HIB U Il (681-16)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
vga fer ate am urus fie Gufs ag ofa i @si-16, aamAdt, He 5) chatur disaa keeno bal apnaa sir oopar kar Dhaari-o. He has extended His power in all four directions, and placed His hand upon my head.
fgur cere mesa ats BA oT ey frees A (si-17, ToT, 2 5) kirpaa kataakh-y aviokan keeno daas kaa dookh bidaari-o. ||1]|| Gazing upon me with his Eye of Mercy, He has dispelled the pains of His slave. ||1]|
dfs AS TS Ts GSS i (si-18, cars, ve 5) har jan raakhay gur govind. The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, has saved the Lord's humble servant.
afe ofe neds Afs He efenrs uTe SUAS Il TIE I (si-18, govt, He 5)
kanth laa-ay avgun sabh maytay da-i-aal purakh bakhsand. rahaa-o.
Hugging me close in His embrace, the merciful, forgiving Lord has erased all my sins. | |Pause| |
A Hafs Sag nus 3 Het Het SS I (Cosi-18, carat, He 5) jo maageh thaakur apunay tay so-ee so-ee dayvai. Whatever I ask for from my Lord and Master, he gives that to me.
6b 4A
Soa UH HY S Has Sto Sa AY FS NQUIVISUIl (681-19, ToTAS, He 5) naanak daas mukh tay jo bolai eehaa oohaa sach hovai. ||2||14||45]||
Whatever the Lord's slave Nanak utters with his mouth, proves to be true, here and hereafter. ||2||14]|45]|
Us éc2
USTAdt HIS U Il (682-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
mut wat o tus tet nus fase AHS Il (682-1, daTASt, He 5) a-ukhee gharhee na daykhan day-ee apnaa birad samaalay. He does not let His devotees see the difficult times; this is His innate nature.
ove fe ae nud a@ AfA Af yfsers Al (682-1, daTAdt, He 5)
haath day-ay raakhai apnay ka-o saas saas partipaalay. ||1]|| Giving His hand, He protects His devotee; with each and every breath, He cherishes him. ||1]|
us fA@ ofa foe Hat StS Il (682-2, aaract, uz 5) parabh si-o laag rahi-o mayraa cheet. My consciousness remains attached to God.
uife nifs ug Het Ae Us JHTa HIS Il TITS Il (682-2, carat, He 5)
aad ant parabh sadaa sahaa-ee Dhan hamaaraa meet. rahaa-o.
In the beginning, and in the end, God is always my helper and companion; blessed is my friend. ||Pause] |
Hf faorn se Afoa a vtsaA fy gaet I (682-3, Tarr, us 5) man bilaas bha-ay saahib kay achraj daykh badaa-ee.
My mind is delighted, gazing upon the marvellous, glorious greatness of the Lord and Master.
ofs fins frufs orae afe aoa yfs use UA TareT QUIEN (682-3, BOTA, He 5)
har simar simar aanad kar naanak parabh pooran paij rakhaa-ee. ||2||15||46]| Remembering, remembering the Lord in meditation, Nanak is in ecstasy; God, in His perfection, has protected and preserved his honor. ||2||15||46]]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (682-4)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fan ag fans yroufs esr Het Teg MSE Il (682-4, daTASt, Hs 5) jis ka-o bisrai paraanpat daataa so-ee ganhu abhaagaa. One who forgets the Lord of life, the Great Giver - know that he is most unfortunate.
TIO GHG A aT HS Ta wifi AdSs Ura MAI (682-5, aTAST, H 5)
charan kamal jaa kaa man raagi-o ami-a sarovar paagaa. ||1|| One whose mind is in love with the Lord's lotus feet, obtains the pool of ambrosial nectar. ||1]|
3T HO TH OW Sat AT Il (682-5, daTAST, He 5) tayraa jan raam naam rang jaagaa. Your humble servant awakes in the Love of the Lord's Name.
MoH eft afeur Ag 36 3 UlsH FAG Ho Ger | JTS Il (682-6, dant, ue 5)
aalas chheej ga-i-aa sabh tan tay pareetam si-o man laagaa. rahaa-o.
All laziness has departed from his body, and his mind is attached to the Beloved Lord. | |Pause| |
Ad AT UNS 30g Sates Aas wet xfs Sra Il (682-6, uaTAdt, He 5) jah jah paykha-o tah naaraa-in sagal ghataa meh taagaa. Wherever I look, the Lord is there; He is the string, upon which all hearts are strung.
on Cua ules HS Boa fSnra Als MOT NNVENSIN (682-7, daTAST, He 5)
naam udak peevat jan naanak ti-aagay sabh anuraagaa. ||2||16||47]|| Drinking in the water of the Naam, servant Nanak has renounced all other loves. [12] 1161471]
USTAdt HIB U Il (682-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Wo & UIs TS AH Il 682-8, ust, v3 5) jan kay pooran ho-ay kaam. All the affairs of the Lord's humble servant are perfectly resolved.
aot aes Ho fatimr fs oA ardt TH NA TIS Il (682-8, aotASt, He 5)
kalee kaal mahaa bikhi-aa meh lajaa raakhee raam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the utterly poisonous Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord preserves and protects his honor. ||1||Pause| |
fafa frufs Homit ys mre foafe o mre FM I (82-9, dat, He 5)
simar simar su-aamee parabh apunaa nikat na aavai jaam.
Remembering, remembering God, his Lord and Master in meditation, the Messenger of Death does not approach him.
Hafs Sao AG at Hats AS UTES ais at OTH NA (682-10, daTASt, He 5)
mukat baikunth saaDh kee sangat jan paa-i-o har kaa Dhaam. ||1||
Liberation and heaven are found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; his humble servant finds the home of the Lord. ||1]|
TIS THS Us AS at ast afe Aa FAH I (682-10, uot, He 5)
charan kamal har jan kee thaatee kot sookh bisraam. The Lord's lotus feet are the treasure of His humble servant; in them, he finds millions of pleasures and comforts.
diss ches fins? fea dfs aoa AS ATHS MNWISCI (682-11, TATA, He 5) gobind damodar simra-o din rain naanak sad kurbaan. ||2||17||48]|
He remembers the Lord God in meditation, day and night; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to him. ||2]|17]|48]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (682-12)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ha IH 3 fea BS Il (682-12, aaTASt, He 5) maa‘ga-o raam tay ik daan. I beg for one gift only from the Lord.
HIS Hose use dela fAHSS SHS SH UU TIS il (682-12, wow, v2 5) Sagal manorath pooran hoveh simra-o tumraa naam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
May all my desires be fulfilled, meditating on, and remembering Your Name, O Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
3s SHS fost Af H36 a Aa ur|e Il (682-13, worst, Hs 5) charan tum"aaray hirdai vaaseh santan kaa sang paava-o. May Your feet abide within my heart, and may I find the Society of the Saints.
Ha nate nfs Ho 3 fend wre usd TE Wes IA 82-13, garAst, ve 5)
SOg agan meh man na vi-aapai aath pahar gun gaava-o. ||1||
May my mind not be afflicted by the fire of sorrow; may I sing Your Glorious Praises, twenty-four hours a day. ||1]|
Ants fren ofs ot Aet HOS Ys AUS Il (682-14, voTAST, He 5)
savast bivasthaa har kee sayvaa maDh-ya‘t parabh jaapan.
May I serve the Lord in my childhood and youth, and meditate on God in my middle and old age.
Soa IT Bd USHA HIS AGH F SUS MNACMSE ll (682-14, TATA, He 5)
naanak rang lagaa parmaysar baahurh janam na chhaapan. ||2||18]|49]| O Nanak, one who is imbued with the Love of the Transcendent Lord, is not reincarnated again to die. ||2||18]|49]|
USTAS HIST U Il (682-15)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ha TH 3 Afs Ga Il (682-15, daTAt, He 5) maa‘ga-o raam tay sabh thok. I beg only from the Lord for all things.
HOY a AES AY ureha ys a finrafs He NA TIC It (682-16, dat, He 5)
maanukh ka-o jaachat saram paa-ee-ai parabh kai simran mokh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I would hesitate to beg from other people. Remembering God in meditation, liberation is obtained. ||1]|Pause] |
ue Hfs ne fAfi_fs uset Se uarefs ule II (682-16, cat, He 5)
ghokhay mun jan simrit puraanaa™ bayd pukaareh ghokh.
I have studied with the silent sages, and carefully read the Simritees, the Puraanas and the Vedas; they all proclaim that,
four fifa Afe AG ue SS AIS Ba AU (682-17, goat, v2 5)
kirpaa sinDh sayv sach paa-ee-ai dovai suhaylay lok. ||1||
by serving the Lord, the ocean of mercy, Truth is obtained, and both this world and the next are embellished. ||1]|
nis wos faGors 3 AS faa ais fas Sax I 682-17, dsTHEH, He 5) aan achaar bi-uhaar hai jaytay bin har simran fok. All other rituals and customs are useless, without remembering the Lord in meditation.
Boa HOH HeS S ae fife AG fASA AS WIAUNACNUON (682-18, THT, He 5) naanak janam maran bhai kaatay mil saaDhoo binsay sok. ||2||19||50]|
O Nanak, the fear of birth and death has been removed; meeting the Holy Saint, sorrow is dispelled. ||2||19||50||
USTAdt HIB U Il (682-19)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fgno 38 ofe & ati il (682-19, cand, us 5) tarisnaa bujhai har kai naam. Desire is quenched, through the Lord's Name.
He Hsy de Te svat us fA wat uss fomrg ai TIE Il (682-19, aot, Hs 5)
mahaa santokh hovai gur bachnee parabh si-o laagai pooran Dhi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Great peace and contentment come through the Guru's Word, and one's meditation is perfectly focused upon God. ||1||Pause] |
ar ets Ho ae asts Hfeor a afs faa He tte efenis I (683-1, data, He 5)
mahaa kalol bujheh maa-i-aa kay kar kirpaa mayray deen da-i-aal. Please shower Your Mercy upon me, and permit me to ignore the great enticements of Maya, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.
nue oy fo wfu Ate use of GA at ws NA (683-1, ToT, He 5)
apnaa naam deh jap jeevaa pooran ho-ay daas kee ghaal. ||1]||
Give me Your Name - chanting it, I live; please bring the efforts of Your slave to fruition. ||1||
Ava HSva TH AY TA Ae yA atese ATU SH II (683-2, daTASt, He 5)
sarab manorath raaj sookh ras sad khusee-aa keertan jap naam.
All desires, power, pleasure, joy and lasting bliss, are found by chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and singing the Kirtan of His Praises.
fA & oath foftmr ofs ass ata AS A UTS AH MU2OUUAI (683-3, ToT, He 5) jis kai karam likhi-aa Dhur kartai naanak jan kay pooran kaam. ||2||20||51||
That humble servant of the Lord, who has such karma pre-ordained by the Creator Lord, O Nanak - his efforts are brought to perfect fruition. ||2||20]|51]|
USAT Hs U Il (683-4) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Ao ot atat ursqgaty Ars Il (683-4, dart, Hs 5) jan kee keenee paarbarahm saar. The Supreme Lord God takes care of His humble servant.
foea feag 5 urate HS Cfs TE Borg Ul TTS Il (683-4, aarAct, ws 5)
nindak tikan na paavan moolay ood ga-ay baykaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The slanderers are not allowed to stay; they are pulled out by their roots, like useless weeds. ||1]|Pause] |
Ad AT Pu sg 3g Homi afe 6 uTUST Il (683-5, daTACT, He 5) jah jah daykh-a-u tah tah su-aamee ko-ay na pahuchanhaar. Wherever I look, there I see my Lord and Master; no one can harm me.
A ad wefamr Ae at df afer 33 ers IAI (683-5, doTASt, He 5) jo jo karai avgi-aa jan kee ho-ay ga-i-aa tat chhaar. ||1]| Whoever shows disrespect to the Lord's humble servant, is instantly reduced to ashes.
[21 |
AISI TUS IMT AT aT niZ B UTSTSTT Il (683-6, UarAdt, we 5) karanhaar rakhvaalaa ho-aa jaa kaa ant na paaraavaar. The Creator Lord has become my protector; He has no end or limitation.
ood oH ae ufs nus fSea ares HAT NINVUIU2II (683-6, TaN, He 5)
naanak daas rakhay parabh apunai nindak kaadhay maar. ||2||21]|52]|
O Nanak, God has protected and saved His slaves; He has driven out and destroyed the slanderers. ||2||21||52||
UsAdt HIS Uu wg € UTS (683-8)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 9 parh-taal Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House, Partaal:
qe Afsas ure II (683-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs Bde Ade dfse va SHsT OA NUS AB OH PET Il (683-9, daTAGH, He 5)
har charan saran gobind dukh bhanjnaa daas apunay ka-o naam dayvhu.
O Lord, I seek the Sanctuary of Your feet; Lord of the Universe, Destroyer of pain, please bless Your slave with Your Name.
fenfe ys osg four ats stag sat ag au 3 ate Beg Il TIC I (683-9, usrAst, ue 5) darisat parabh Dhaarahu kirpaa kar taarahu bhujaa geh koop tay kaadh layvhu. rahaa- O. Be Merciful, God, and bless me with Your Glance of Grace; take my arm and save me - pull me up out of this pit! ||Pause||
oH a0 afs nig Hien & do nifsa sur ste she us Il (683-10, cont, m3 5)
kaam kroDh kar anDh maa-i-aa kay banDh anik dokhaa tan chhaad pooray.
He is blinded by sexual desire and anger, bound by Maya; his body and clothes are filled with countless sins.
ys fas ura o Tusos oH fAHoeY Hale AT MAU (683-11, UsTAST, He 5)
parabh binaa aan na raakhanhaaraa naam simraavahu saran sooray. ||1|| Without God, there is no other protector; help me to chant Your Name, Almighty Warrior, Sheltering Lord. ||1]|
ufs3 Gaga tha HS stsat Se Burg odt viz ute I (683-11, dot, He 5)
patit uDhaaranaa jee-a jant taarnaa bayd uchaar nahee ant paa-i-o.
Redeemer of sinners, Saving Grace of all beings and creatures, even those who recite the Vedas have not found Your limit.
Ted AY AGS YIH WoT sails FSH SSA ATES NIUAUIUSI (683-12, davASt, He 5)
gunah sukh saagraa barahm ratnaagaraa bhagat vachhal naanak gaa-i-o. ||2]||1||53]| God is the ocean of virtue and peace, the source of jewels; Nanak sings the Praises of the Lover of His devotees. ||2]|1]|53]]|
USTAdt HIB U Il (683-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Jefs AY uafs AY fos AY fas on df= a HET SIA I (683-13, ToT, He 5)
halat sukh palat sukh nit sukh simrano naam gobind kaa sadaa leejai.
Peace in this world, peace in the next world and peace forever, remembering Him in meditation. Chant forever the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
fuefs ore ury foare wronafs ffs Hor APA Na TIC Il (683-14, darAst, He 5) miteh kamaanay paap chiraanay saaDhsangat mil mu-aa jeejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The sins of past lives are erased, by joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; new life is infused into the dead. ||1]|Pause] |
oH nae fands dfs wfeer net ey ST HITS AT Il (683-14, daTAdt, He 5)
raaj joban bisrant har maa-i-aa mahaa dukh ayhu mahaa™t kahai.
In power, youth and Maya, the Lord is forgotten; this is the greatest tragedy - so say the spiritual sages.
nin flmiA gHe dfs ates ST USTIT STHSS BI NA (683-15, aaAct, we 5)
aas pi-aas raman har keertan ayhu padaarath bhaagvant lahai. ||1||
Hope and desire to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - this is the treasure of the most fortunate devotees. ||1]|
Hof ANGE nae wiv ufss Burge SH Sa Il (683-16, UsTHA, He 5)
saran samrath akath agocharaa patit uDhaaran naam tayraa.
O Lord of Sanctuary, all-powerful, imperceptible and unfathomable - Your Name is the Purifier of sinners.
nisaHt SSA A AM AsaS YTS SAT HT MQUQUUSI (683-16, Tor, Hs 5) antarjaamee naanak kay su-aamee sarbat pooran thaakur mayraa. ||2||2||54||
The Inner-knower, the Lord and Master of Nanak is totally pervading and permeating everywhere; He is my Lord and Master. ||2]||2||54||
USTAdt HIG U We I2 (683-18)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 12 Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Twelfth House:
qe Afsare YATE II (683-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
deat ofa deat Te Wes aus TE i TIC Il (683-19, aarAst, v2 5)
bandnaa har bandnaa gun gaavhu gopaal raa-ay. rahaa-o.
I bow in reverence to the Lord, I bow in reverence. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my King. ||Pause]|
zs ata SS TICS Il (683-19, godt, He 5) vadai bhaag bhaytay gurdayvaa. By great good fortune, one meets the Divine Guru.
afe uaa fie afs AST NA (683-19, ToT, He 5) kot paraaDh mitay har sayvaa. ||1]|| Millions of sins are erased by serving the Lord. ||1]||
UST Ete
TIO FHS AT AT HS IU Il (684-1, usAst, us 5) charan kamal jaa kaa man raapai. One whose mind is imbued with the Lord's lotus feet
Ha mate fsa Ae & fem ii 684-1, caAt, He 5) Sog agan tis jan na bi-aapai. ||2| | is not afflicted by the fire of sorrow. ||2||
Hag Shoot AY Adi Il (684-1, vot, ns 5) Saagar tari-aa saaDhoo sangay. He crosses over the world-ocean in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fags on Aug ofa Ja Sil (684-2, caret, He 5) nirbha-o naam japahu har rangay. ||3]| He chants the Name of the Fearless Lord, and is imbued with the Lord's Love. ||3]||
Ud US ey fas uo SS Il (684-2, garHt, He 5)
par Dhan dokh kichh paap na fayrhay.
One who does not steal the wealth of others, who does not commit evil deeds or sinful acts
AH HVT B ne SS ISI (634-2, daAet, He 5) jam jandaar na aavai nayrhay. ||4|| - the Messenger of Death does not even approach him. ||4]|
fro urate yfs rf gsret i (6384-3, danrdt, we 5) tarisnaa agan parabh aap bujhaa-ee. God Himself quenches the fires of desire.
Soa Sud ys ATSveT MUNUUUI (684-3, ToTATT, He 5)
naanak uDhray parabh sarnaa-ee. ||5||1||55]| O Nanak, in God's Sanctuary, one is saved. ||5||1||55||
USTAd HIST U Il (684-3)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fgufs set Ay SHO ufenr I (684-4, aoTAdt, He 5) taripat bha-ee sach bhojan khaa-i-aa. I am satisfied and satiated, eating the food of Truth.
Hfe 3f6 sAat oH fonrfenr ail 34-4, canst, He 5) man tan rasnaa naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]| With my mind, body and tongue, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Alea Ths Alar Il (684-4, aaTAATt, He 5) jeevnaa har jeevnaa. Life, spiritual life, is in the Lord.
digo ofa af AroAfar Wail TIS i (684-5, aad, He 5)
jeevan har jap saaDhsang. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Spiritual life consists of chanting the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
nifex yarst SAS eS Il (684-5, carat, we 5) anik parkaaree bastar odhaa-ay. He is dressed in robes of all sorts,
Males Abdso Sts TS WES IQ (634-5, vast, He 5) an-din keertan har gun gaa-ay. |[2|| if he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Glorious Praises, day and night. ||2| |
JASt Ja MA MASTS Il (684-6, dart, He 5) hastee rath as asvaaree. He rides upon elephants, chariots and horses,
dfs a naa fae foodt Sil (684-6, aanrdt, He 5) har kaa maarag ridai nihaaree. ||3]| if he sees the Lord's Path within his own heart. ||3]|
Ho 36 nists sae fomrfenr | (6384-6, dart, He 5) man tan antar charan Dhi-aa-i-aa. Meditating on the Lord's Feet, deep within his mind and body,
ofa AY fame soa STA ue ISQNUEI (684-7, TETAS, He 5)
har sukh niDhaan naanak daas paa-i-aa. ||4]|2||56|| slave Nanak has found the Lord, the treasure of peace. ||4||2||56] |
USTAd HIST U Il (684-7)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
Td AX Vso Aba a fSASS I (684-8, aaTAt, ve 5) gur kay charan jee-a kaa nistaaraa. The Guru's feet emancipate the soul.
Ae Ana fafs fue ufs Sta NAN TITS il 6s4-8, caTASt, v2 5) samund saagar jin khin meh taaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o. They carry it across the world-ocean in an instant. ||1]||Pause| |
act dot an as aet Stee orfeur I (684-8, aaract, v2 5) ko-ee ho-aa karam rat ko-ee tirath naa-i-aa. Some love rituals, and some bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
SAT ofa ar any fomrfemr ail (684-9, dant, He 5) daasee™ har kaa naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1|| The Lord's slaves meditate on His Name. ||1||
Yas ASSIST AMM I (684-9, aAdt, ve 5) banDhan kaatanhaar su-aamee. The Lord Master is the Breaker of bonds.
He aed fad nisaAMT IQNSIUDI (684-9, TaTAST, He 5) jan naanak simrai antarjaamee. ||2||3||57]|
Servant Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||2||3]|57]|
USTAd HIS U Il (684-10)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5. Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:
fas yots 3 3e8 Uifs 1 aA 3a at fans SHS na TIS it (84-10, cot, we 5) kitai parkaar na toota-o pareet. daas tayray kee nirmal reet. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The lifestyle of Your slave is so pure, that nothing can break his love for You. ||1]|Pause] |
Abt yrs Ho Ue 3 finer i (684-11, aavAdt, He 5) jee-a paraan man Dhan tay pi-aaraa. He is more dear to me than my soul, my breath of life, my mind and my wealth.
ICH 80 dfs SeeT IT NU (84-11, aT, He 5) ha-umai banDh har dayvanhaaraa. ||1|| The Lord is the Giver, the Restrainer of the ego. ||1]|
TIO AHS FAG aS ST Il (684-12, arr, us 5) charan kamal si-o laaga-o nayhu. I am in love with the Lord's lotus feet.
Sod At ost ST NQUNSNUCH (684-12, dsAST, we 5)
naanak kee baynantee ayh. ||2||4||58]| This alone is Nanak's prayer. ||2||4]|58] |
qe Afsars yATfe Il (634-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
USTAdt Hae € Il (684-14)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 9. Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:
ad J 86 FAS AT Il (684-14, dstAet, He 9) kaahay ray ban khojan jaa-ee. Why do you go looking for Him in the forest?
Raa feet Het mrsur Sot Afar AHTET AU TITS Il (684-14, daTAt, He 9)
sarab nivaasee sadaa alaypaa tohee sang samaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Although he is unattached, he dwells everywhere. He is always with you as your companion. ||1||Pause] |
usu Hfo fa@ aA ans Dd Had Hf AA Set I 684-15, doTASH, He 9) puhap maDh ji-o baas basat hai mukar maahi jaisay chhaa-ee. Like the fragrance which remains in the flower, and like the reflection in the mirror,
3A dt of aA fadsfa we dt dag SST NA (684-15, aT, He 9) taisay hee har basay nirantar ghat hee khojahu bhaa-ee. ||1]|
the Lord dwells deep within; search for Him within your own heart, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|
wofs sisfs ea weg fe aa famre asret | (684-16, caret, He 9)
baahar bheetar ayko jaanhu ih gur gi-aan bataa-ee.
Outside and inside, know that there is only the One Lord; the Guru has imparted this wisdom to me.
He oe fas niu we fe o gH at aret QUAI (684-16, dav, H8 9) jan naanak bin aapaa cheenai mitai na bharam kee kaa-ee. ||2||1]|
O servant Nanak, without knowing one's own self, the moss of doubt is not removed. 21] 11]
USTAdt Hoe ¢€ Il (684-17)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 9. Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:
AG fed Ad SIH SHS Il (684-17, aatASt, uz 9) saaDho ih jag bharam bhulaanaa. O Holy people, this world is deluded by doubt.
oH OH ot faHeS efaor wfeor ofa faorar Nal TITS Il (684-17, TaTAST, He 9)
raam naam kaa simran chhodi-aa maa-i-aa haath bikaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It has forsaken the meditative remembrance of the Lord's Name, and sold itself out to Maya. ||1]|Pause||
HS fust set AS afest at at ofA BUSTAT II (684-18, daTAEH, He 9) maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banitaa taa kai ras laptaanaa. Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse - he is entangled in their love.
Ua ecu
Wa US ysst a He HH mifofafA ad fester A (685-1, daTAET, He 9) joban Dhan parabh-taa kai mad mai ahinis rahai divaanaa. ||1]| In the pride of youth, wealth and glory, day and night, he remains intoxicated. ||1]|
de efimrs Ae eu SHo 3 AG HO o Baar Il (685-1, dot, He 9)
deen da-i-aal sadaa dukh bhanjan taa si-o man na lagaanaa.
God is merciful to the meek, and forever the Destroyer of pain, but the mortal does not center his mind on Him.
WS SSA ACS H fad TSH SE usar WAN (685-2, asvAct, we 9) jan naanak kotan mai kinhoo gurmukh ho-ay pachhaanaa. ||2||2| | O servant Nanak, among millions, only a rare few, as Gurmukh, realize God. ||2||2| |
USTAdt Hse € Il (685-3)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 9. Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:
fsa Hat a8 Aals o ASE Il (685-3, daTASt, He 9) tih jogee ka-o jugat na jaan-o. That Yogi does not know the way.
3 Ho Hfeor HHS efe fro wife ufo use ai TIS Il (685-3, aoTAct, ne 9) lobh moh maa-i-aa mamtaa fun jih ghat maahi pachhaana-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Understand that his heart is filled with greed, emotional attachment, Maya and egotism. ||1]]Pause| |
ud feet Grafs og Ha ode BI ANS Il (685-4, daTAST, He 9) par nindaa ustat nah jaa kai kanchan loh samaano. One who does not slander or praise others, who looks upon gold and iron alike,
Jou Aa 3 Jd wists Hatt Shs gas NA (685-4, TaTASt, He 9) harakh sog tay rahai ateetaa jogee taahi bakhaano. ||1|| who is free from pleasure and pain - he alone is called a true Yogi. ||1||
JUS Ho vs fefA aS wes nee Who Sages Il (685-5, daTASt, 2 9)
chanchal man dah dis ka-o Dhaavat achal jaahi thehraano.
The restless mind wanders in the ten directions - it needs to be pacified and restrained.
ag aed fes fafa & A og Hats Sho SH HTS NII (685-5, TaTAS, He 9) kaho naanak ih biDh ko jo nar mukat taahi tum maano. ||2||3]| Says Nanak, whoever knows this technique is judged to be liberated. ||2]||3||
USTAdt Hs ¢€ Il (685-6)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 9. Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:
ma H aa Cur ag Il (685-6, cae, He 9) ab mai ka-un upaa-o kara-o. Now, what efforts should I make?
fro fafa Ho & AAT ye SB foto utes uss NA TIS Il 85-7, wart, we 9)
jih biDh man ko sansaa chookai bha-o niDh paar para-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
How can I dispel the anxieties of my mind? How can I cross over the terrifying world- ocean? ||1||Pause]|
HOH ufe ag 3G 3 aS 33S nifte Sa Il (685-7, daTACT, HH 9)
janam paa-ay kachh bhalo na keeno taa tay aDhik dara-o.
Obtaining this human incarnation, I have done no good deeds; this makes me very afraid!
HO 8d aH Us Ts Od WS aa Aha As Ts NU (685-8, GaTAAt, He 9)
man bach karam har gun nahee gaa-ay yeh jee-a soch Dhara-o. ||1]|
In thought, word and deed, I have not sung the Lord's Praises; this thought worries my mind. ||1||
asHfs Afs ae fame o CufaS un fas Cea sa I (685-8, cavAdt, He 9)
gurmat sun kachh gi-aan na upji-o pas ji-o udar bhara-o.
I listened to the Guru's Teachings, but spiritual wisdom did not well up within me; like a beast, I fill my belly.
ag aoa ys fase ueoS sa 9G ufss Sa NQUSNCNCNISNUCISIESI (85-9, Ton, H8 9)
kaho naanak parabh birad pachhaana-o tab ha-o patit tara-o.
2114119191113] [58] 141193] |
Says Nanak, O God, please confirm Your Law of Grace; for only then can I, the sinner, be saved. ||2||4]]9]|9]]13][58]|4]]93]|
USTAdt HIG 1 Wg 2 wMACUdMT (685-11)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 ghar 2 asatpadee-aa Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Second House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (685-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
IT AT Isat SIUT Il (685-12, vs Ast, we 1) gur saagar ratnee bharpooray. The Guru is the ocean, filled with pearls.
nifys AS gata adt Fs il 685-12, at, Hs 1) amrit sant chugeh nahee dooray. The Saints gather in the Ambrosial Nectar; they do not go far away from there.
dfs JA Sa vats YS se Il (685-12, vaASt, He 1) har ras chog chugeh parabh bhaavai. They taste the subtle essence of the Lord; they are loved by God.
Heed Hfs SA yours ur] A (685-12, daTAdt, Hs 1) sarvar meh hans paraanpat paavai. ||1]| Within this pool, the swans find their Lord, the Lord of their souls. ||1]|
fom gat gust sust STE Il (685-13, aaa, Hz 1) ki-aa bag bapurhaa chhaprhee naa-ay. What can the poor crane accomplish by bathing in the mud puddle?
ates SH HGS ATE NU TIS I s5-13, dows, Hs 1) keecharh doobai mail na jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. It sinks into the mire, and its filth is not washed away. ||1]||Pause| |
ofa afi sae Ud Stercst Il (685-14, aaAdt, He 1) rakh rakh charan Dharay veechaaree. After careful deliberation, the thoughtful person takes a step.
vfam dfs se fadardt il (685-14, caret, He 1) dubiDhaa chhod bha-ay nirankaaree. Forsaking duality, he becomes a devotee of the Formless Lord.
Hats uersa dfs SA Ia Il (685-14, daTAdt, He 1) mukat padaarath har ras chaakhay. He obtains the treasure of liberation, and enjoys the sublime essence of the Lord.
MISE WE TI Ths TS Qi (685-15, vast, He 1) aavan jaan rahay gur raakhay. ||2|| His comings and goings end, and the Guru protects him. ||2]|
Heed JA afs & AME Il (685-15, usTASt, He 1) sarvar hansaa chhod na jaa-ay. The swan do not leave this pool.
UH sats ats Adtt AHTE Il (685-15, dart, Hs 1) paraym bhagat kar sahj samaa-ay. In loving devotional worship, they merge in the Celestial Lord.
Heed Hfs dA SA Hs Ava Il (685-16, uaTASt, He 1) sarvar meh hans hans meh saagar. The swans are in the pool, and the pool is in the swans.
MAG Aa TT Asst MET |SIl (685-16, aaa, vs 1) akath kathaa gur bachnee aadar. ||3]| They speak the Unspoken Speech, and they honor and revere the Guru's Word. ||3]|
Ho Hae fea ait SF Il (685-16, dort, He 1) sunn mandal ik jogee baisay. The Yogi, the Primal Lord, sits within the celestial sohere of deepest Samaadhi.
ata 3 Used AIT AS AA Il (685-17, vat, He 1) naar na purakh kahhu ko-oo kaisay. He is not male, and He is not female; how can anyone describe Him?
fase nfs ad fos wet i 685-17, caTASt, He 1) taribhavan jot rahay liv laa-ee. The three worlds continue to center their attention on His Light.
Afg 3d SG Ad AdeSret Sil (685-17, aot, He 1) sur nar naath sachay sarnaa-ee. ||4] | The silent sages and the Yogic masters seek the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||4]|
MOS HB MSTA wUr Il (685-18, arr, He 1) aanand mool anaath aDhaaree. The Lord is the source of bliss, the support of the helpless.
aanfy sats Aafa sterst il (685-18, cart, us 1) gurmukh bhagat sahj beechaaree. The Gurmukhs worship and contemplate the Celestial Lord.
Safs ZH F AEST? Il (685-18, uaast, He 1) bhagat vachhal bhai kaatanhaaray. God is the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear.
ICH ufs fxs Ua Os HUI (685-18, TaTAST, He 1) ha-umai maar milay pag Dhaaray. ||5|| Subduing ego, one meets the Lord, and places his feet on the Path. ||5]|
mfoa Ase afs as ASE Il (685-19, aaASt, He 1) anik jatan kar kaal santaa-ay. He makes many efforts, but still, the Messenger of Death tortures him.
Hoe feu Hise Hfo mire i (685-19, dat, He 1) maran likhaa-ay mandal meh aa-ay. Destined only to die, he comes into the world.
Yat éce
HOH ueTsg efaar FS Il (686-1, daTASt, He 1) janam padaarath dubiDhaa khovai. He wastes this precious human life through duality.
nity 3 dtofh afk aft ge HEN (686-1, dart, He 1) aap na cheenas bharam bharam rovai. ||6|| He does not know his own self, and trapped by doubts, he cries out in pain. ||6] |
ase uss AEse Sa Il (636-1, aaAt, Hz 1) kahta-o parh-ta-o sunta-o ayk. Speak, read and hear of the One Lord.
UleH UdH Udalag Sa Il (686-2, uaTAet, He 1) Dheeraj Dharam DharneeDhar tayk. The Support of the earth shall bless you with courage, righteousness and protection.
AS AS HAH fot Me I (686-2, caAst, v2 1) jat sat sanjam ridai samaa-ay. Chastity, purity and self-restraint are infused into the heart,
Bea ue AC A HS USMS IDI (686-2, dot, He 1) cha-uthay pad ka-o jay man patee-aa-ay. ||7]| when one centers his mind in the fourth state. ||7]||
AS fSdHS HS o Ba Il (686-3, aaract, He 1) saachay nirmal mail na laagai. They are immaculate and true, and filth does not stick to them.
ad a Aafe SIH SE TH Il (636-3, aaAst, v2 1)
gur kai sabad bharam bha-o bhaagai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, their doubt and fear depart.
nafs Hots urfe nigu il (86-3, usASt, He 1) soorat moorat aad anoop. The form and personality of the Primal Lord are incomparably beautiful.
SSS WS AT AY ICI (686-3, ToTAST, He 1) naanak jaachai saach saroop. ||8]||1]| Nanak begs for the Lord, the Embodiment of Truth. ||8]|1]|
UsTAdt HIG % Il (686-4) Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
Rafa fxs fixfeor users || (686-4, caret, He 1) sahj milai mili-aa parvaan. That union with the Lord is acceptable, which is united in intuitive poise.
&' SH HIS © MISES ATES Il (686-4, vaTAt, He 1) naa tis maran na aavan jaan. Thereafter, one does not die, and does not come and go in reincarnation.
Sad Hfg VA UA Hfa ALE Il (686-5, darTASt, He 1) thaakur meh daas daas meh so-ay. The Lord's slave is in the Lord, and the Lord is in His slave.
Ad Ta 3d neg & AE IA (686-5, daTASH, He 1) jah daykhaa tah avar na ko-ay. ||1]| Wherever I look, I see none other than the Lord. ||1||
aenfy sats AA wa ue I (686-5, daTAST, He 1) gurmukh bhagat sahj ghar paa-ee-ai. The Gurmukhs worship the Lord, and find His celestial home.
fag ag 32 vfs mre FS 19 TIS Il (686-6, daTASt, He 1) bin gur bhaytay mar aa-ee-ai jaa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without meeting the Guru, they die, and come and go in reincarnation. ||1||Pause] |
A ag aa fr Ava fear] Il (686-6, uamrt, ne 1) sO gur kara-o je saach darirh-aavai. So make Him your Guru, who implants the Truth within you,
wag aes Aafe fare il (686-7, caAt, He 1) akath kathaavai sabad milaavai.
who leads you to speak the Unspoken Speech, and who merges you in the Word of the Shabad.
dfs X Ba wea St AS I (686-7, aaAst, v2 1) har kay log avar nahee kaaraa. God's people have no other work to do;
ASC Stag AS furs 121 (636-7, daTASt, He 1) saacha-o thaakur saach pi-aaraa. ||2|| they love the True Lord and Master, and they love the Truth. |[2]|
36 Hfa HoH He Hf ATS Il (686-8, aTHET, He 1) tan meh manoo-aa man meh saachaa. The mind is in the body, and the True Lord is in the mind.
A Aro fife APS IST Il (686-8, darASt, He 1) So saachaa mil saachay raachaa. Merging into the True Lord, one is absorbed into Truth.
AZ US A Brat UTE Il (6s6-8, aaah, ve 1) sayvak parabh kai laagai paa-ay. God's servant bows at His feet.
Afsag ust fs free Si (so-s, cort, we 1) satgur pooraa milai milaa-ay. ||3]|| Meeting the True Guru, one meets with the Lord. ||3]|
nif fears nmy Fe Il (686-9, usTASt, He 1) aap dikhaavai aapay daykhai. He Himself watches over us, and He Himself makes us see.
dfs & usin OF ST Se Il (686-9, daTASt, He 1) hath na pateejai naa baho bhaykhai. He is not pleased by stubborn-mindedness, nor by various religious robes.
wfs as fafs nifiggs urfemr Il (636-9, aonAdt, He 1) gharh bhaaday jin amrit paa-i-aa. He fashioned the body-vessels, and infused the Ambrosial Nectar into them;
UH sats ufs He Ustrfenr gil (86-10, dart, He 1) paraym bhagat parabh man patee-aa-i-aa. ||4|| God's Mind is pleased only by loving devotional worship. ||4]|
ufs ufs gata det wfs Il (686-10, arr, He 1) parh parh bhooleh chotaa khaahi. Reading and studying, one becomes confused, and suffers punishment.
ag frmreu nirefa Ato il (86-10, dart, He 1) bahut si-aanap aavahi jaahi. By great cleverness, one is consigned to coming and going in reincarnation.
oH AU BE SHO UTE Il (686-11, darTASt, He 1)
naam japai bha-o bhojan khaa-ay.
One who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and eats the food of the Fear of God
aaHfy Aa JI AHTE WUll (6-11, daa, He 1) gurmukh sayvak rahay samaa-ay. ||5] | becomes Gurmukh, the Lord's servant, and remains absorbed in the Lord. ||5||
ufst fret Stee Fo STAT Il (686-11, oTASt, He 1) pooj silaa tirath ban vaasaa. He worships stones, dwells at sacred shrines of pilgrimage and in the jungles,
SINS 3S FE CSA Il (686-12, gaTAt, He 1) bharmat dolat bha-ay udaasaa. wanders, roams around and becomes a renunciate.
His HS Aa fas TE it (686-12, comrt, we 1) man mailai soochaa ki-o ho-ay. But his mind is still filthy - how can he become pure?
Afs fxs ure ufs APE EN (686-12, darAet, He 1) saach milai paavai pat so-ay. ||6|| One who meets the True Lord obtains honor. ||6||
maa! Sarg Adlfs il (686-13, carat, Hs 1) aachaaraa veechaar sareer. One who embodies good conduct and contemplative meditation,
mfe Forte Aofa He Ute I (86-13, daa, He 1)
aad jugaad sahj man Dheer.
his mind abides in intuitive poise and contentment, since the beginning of time, and throughout the ages.
us Uan Hfs afe Burd il (686-13, daTAt, He 1) pal pankaj meh kot uDhaaray. In the twinkling of an eye, he saves millions.
ate fasur aa Hf% fumrs IDI (636-14, damAet, He 1)
kar kirpaa gur mayl pi-aaray. ||7||
Have mercy on me, O my Beloved, and let me meet the Guru. ||7]| far uid us SO AES I (686-14, vant, He 1)
kis aagai parabh tuDh saalaahee. Unto whom, O God, should I praise You?
30 fag ga H ao ard Il 86-14, caTASt, He 1D tuDh bin doojaa mai ko naahee. Without You, there is no other at all.
fag su ae FS ae aAfe Il (686-14, cast, He 1) ji-o tuDh bhaavai ti-o raakh rajaa-ay. As it pleases You, keep me under Your Will.
Soa Ada ofS Te ATE NCUA (686-15, aot, He 1) naanak sahj bhaa-ay gun gaa-ay. ||8||2]| Nanak, with intuitive poise and natural love, sings Your Glorious Praises. ||8]||2||
UsAdt Hs u we € MASeUeT (686-16) Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 ghar 6 asatpadee Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House, Ashtapadee:
qe Afsas YATE Il (636-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A i Fol omes fsa fsa CasteS wen ASH Aaa ufer Il (686-17, daTAt, He 5)
jo jo joonee aa-i-o tih tih urjhaa-i-o maanas janam sanjog paa-i-aa.
Whoever is born into the world, is entangled in it; human birth is obtained only by good destiny.
sat J Ge AO mag & afs we afs faa Hog Je Ther AI 86-17, TaTAST, He 5) taakee hai ot saaDh raakho day kar haath kar kirpaa maylhu har raa-i-aa. ||1]|
I look to Your support, O Holy Saint; give me Your hand, and protect me. By Your Grace, let me meet the Lord, my King. ||1]|
mfod HoH sfH fafs adt uret i (636-18, danAdt, He 5) anik janam bharam thit nahee paa-ee. I wandered through countless incarnations, but I did not find stability anywhere.
ase AS ad wae vas dies At or wea Bg Ft eset NV TIS Il (s6-18, daTAe, He 5) kara-o sayvaa gur laaga-o charan govind jee kaa maarag dayh jee bataa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I serve the Guru, and I fall at His feet, praying, "O Dear Lord of the Universe, please, show me the way."||1||Pause] |
wifsa Cure as wear a afefs as Hat Het aS Ae dt feaS Il (686-19, darAct, He 5) anik upaav kara-o maa-i-aa ka-o bachit Dhara-o mayree mayree karat sad hee vihaavai.
I have tried so many things to acquire the wealth of Maya, and to cherish it in my mind; I have passed my life constantly crying out, "Mine, mine!"
Uat cD
aet mA J sf AS At wd Aa fess oas fAE Ha Fa SS 2M (687-1, cas, nH: 5) ko-ee aiso ray bhaytai sant mayree laahai sagal chint thaakur si-o mayraa rang laavai. 21 |
Is there any such Saint, who would meet with me, take away my anxiety, and lead me to enshrine love for my Lord and Master. ||2]|
us J Age Fe od Ya Ho 8d fea fas o Utefs HS wa & UST Il (687-2, aoTAdt, He 5) parhay ray sagal bayd nah chookai man bhayd ik khin na Dheereh mayray ghar kay panchaa.
I have read all the Vedas, and yet the sense of separation in my mind still has not been removed; the five thieves of my house are not quieted, even for an instant.
at win 3 sas A feer 3 gos fea nifys on He fee fife BI 87-3, donAEt, He 5) ko-ee aiso ray bhagat jo maa-i-aa tay rahat ik amrit naam mayrai ridai sinchaa. ||3] | Is there any devotee, who is unattached to Maya, who may irrigate my mind with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the One Lord? ||3]|
as 3 Stee we nafa He we wa a og fea faq 3 HS II (687-3, Da, He 5) jaytay ray tirath naa-ay aha‘-buDh mail laa-ay ghar ko thaakur ik til na maanai.
In spite of the many places of pilgrimage for people to bathe in, their minds are still stained by their stubborn ego; the Lord Master is not pleased by this at all.
afe uwe@ mona dfs ofs Het nrée famre ninfo Ha Ho fEASS ISI (687-4, daTAST, He 5)
kad paava-o saaDhsang har har sadaa aanand gi-aan anjan mayraa man isnaanai. [41 |
When will I find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy? There, I shall be always in the ecstasy of the Lord, Har, Har, and my mind shall take its cleansing bath in the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom. ||4]|
AIS MAH aS Hout od usts faaadts Sot GE il 87-5, cart, we 5)
Sagal asram keenay manoo-aa nah pateenay bibaykheen dayhee Dho-ay.
I have followed the four stages of life, but my mind is not satisfied; I wash my body, but it is totally lacking in understanding.
aet urdha 3 usy faorst ursqgon & df wat AT Ho at Sans Hw Be Ul (687-6, uoTAdt, Hs 5)
ko-ee paa-ee-ai ray purakh biDhaataa paarbarahm kai rang raataa mayray man kee durmat mal kho-ay. ||5||
If only I could meet some devotee of the Supreme Lord God, imbued with the Lord's Love, who could eradicate the filthy evil-mindedness from my mind. ||5]|
dH UdH Fast foxy 3 Is asst Tafa Tafa us adt 5 Be Il 687-7, usTAt, He 5) karam Dharam jugtaa nimakh na hayt kartaa garab garab parhai kahee na laykhai. One who is attached to religious rituals, does not love the Lord, even for an instant; he is filled with pride, and he is of no account.
fan sé Aes Hols ad Ae ates Te usAte AG Sz_ Ua Mell 87-7, aorAdt, we 5) jis bhaytee-ai safal moorat karai sadaa keerat gur parsaad ko-oo naytarahu paykhai. [16] |
One who meets with the rewarding personality of the Guru, continually sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. By Guru's Grace, such a rare one beholds the Lord with his eyes. ||6||
Hodle A AHS fse 5 Sa us aaG fA fomre we Hfeor F Ost I (687-8, deTAST, He 5) manhath jo kamaavai til na laykhai paavai bagul ji-o Dhi-aan laavai maa-i-aa ray Dhaaree.
One who acts through stubbornness is of no account at all; like a crane, he pretends to meditate, but he is still stuck in Maya.
aot win F Au wet us at ae Hort fon 32 afs SE Mr IDI (687-9, aaAet, He 5) ko-ee aiso ray sukhah daa-ee parabh kee kathaa sunaa-ee tis bhaytay gat ho-ay hamaaree. ||7||
Is there any such Giver of peace, who can recite to me the sermon of God? Meeting him, I would be emancipated. ||7]|
HUH dues ofe are J gue He ad a Aafe HI HS TST Il (687-10, usAdt, ne 5) Suparsan gopaal raa-ay kaatai ray banDhan maa-ay gur kai sabad mayraa man raataa. When the Lord, my King, is totally pleased with me, He will break the bonds of Maya for me; my mind is imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Het Het wre sfes fous adfiz Au aoa wa dfs BIS USS ICH (687-10, TaTAST, He 5) sadaa sadaa aanand bhayti-o nirbhai gobind sukh naanak laaDhay har charan paraataa. ||8]||
I am in ecstasy, forever and ever, meeting the Fearless Lord, the Lord of the Universe. Falling at the Lord's Feet, Nanak has found peace. ||8]|
Hee Aes Set ASG ATT Il (687-11, varAst, wz 5) safal safal bha-ee safal jaatraa. My Yatra, my life pilgrimage, has become fruitful, fruitful, fruitful.
MSS WE Fd HS ATT NU TTS SA UAUSIM (687-12, TaTHt, He 5)
aavan jaan rahay milay saaDhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||1||3]|.
My comings and goings have ended, since I met the Holy Saint. ||1]|Second Pause||1||3||
USAdt HIG VBS (687-13)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1 chhant Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Chhant:
9B Afsarg YATE II (687-13)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
stefa owe WE Steg BH T Il (687-14, dorAEt, He 1
tirath naavan jaa-o tirath naam hai.
Why should I bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage? The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage.
seg Age dies nists famre F Il (687-14, dae, He 1)
tirath sabad beechaar antar gi-aan hai.
My sacred shrine of pilgrimage is spiritual wisdom within, and contemplation on the Word of the Shabad.
ad famrg Aa ae Steg SA UTa AST SATIS Il (687-14, uaa, He 1)
gur gi-aan saachaa thaan tirath das purab sadaa dasaahraa.
The spiritual wisdom given by the Guru is the True sacred shrine of pilgrimage, where the ten festivals are always observed.
JG OH Ue a Ae Wee Cy ys UdalUT Il (687-15, davAct, ue 1)
ha-o naam har kaa sadaa jaacha-o dayh parabh DharneeDharaa.
I constantly beg for the Name of the Lord; grant it to me, O God, Sustainer of the world.
AAS dat SH BI HS wea Ae far il (687-15, cot, we 1)
sansaar rogee naam daaroo mail laagai sach binaa.
The world is sick, and the Naam is the medicine to cure it; without the True Lord, filth Sticks to it.
ad sa fSsHe Ae woe fos ATS Steg HAST IAI (687-16, daTASH, He 1)
gur vaak nirmal sadaa chaanan nit saach tirath majnaa. ||1||
The Guru's Word is immaculate and pure; it radiates a steady Light. Constantly bathe in such a true shrine of pilgrimage. ||1]|
Afs o oat HS for He Teh | (687-16, aaAst, v2 1) saach na laagai mail ki-aa mal Dho-ee-ai. Filth does not stick to the true ones; what filth do they have to wash off?
deta wa udfe fan aG sehr il (687-17, cast, v2 1) guneh haar paro-ay kis ka-o ro-ee-ai. If one strings a garland of virtues for oneself, what is there to cry for?
atofe ud 3d ad Cafe Afs 5 ree I (687-17, carat, He 1)
veechaar maarai tarai taarai ulat jon na aav-ay.
One who conquers his own self through contemplation is saved, and saves others as well; he does not come to be born again.
mifu urge usH fonret ATG ATS SSE Il (687-18, daa, He 1)
aap paaras param Dhi-aanee saach saachay bhaav-ay.
The supreme meditator is Himself the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold. The true man is pleasing to the True Lord.
moe Motes Jay Are wu fowfed usTe Il (687-18, daTAST, He 1) aanand an-din harakh saachaa dookh kilvikh parharay. He is in ecstasy, truly happy, night and day; his sorrows and sins are taken away.
Ag oy ufeur afe feerfeor He ardt AT HS IQ (687-19, daTAST, He 1) sach naam paa-i-aa gur dikhaa-i-aa mail naahee sach manay. ||2]|
He finds the True Name, and beholds the Guru; with the True Name in his mind, no filth sticks to him. ||2]|
Hats Hts fey ust ares Il (687-19, uaTASt, Hs 1) sangat meet milaap pooraa naavno. O friend, association with the Holy is the perfect cleansing bath.
Ua éctt
We Weeds Aste ASS Il (688-1, usAst, v2 1) gaavai gaavanhaar sabad suhaavano. The singer who sings the Lord's Praises is adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
Aeofs AS dfs Afsagd Us ee efear HS Il (688-1, daTASH, He 1)
saalaahi saachay man satgur punn daan da-i-aa matay.
Worship the True Lord, and believe in the True Guru; this brings the merit of making donations to charity, kindness and compassion.
fus Hfa ave ofA oS Set 3 HAH AS AS Il (688-2, usAet, He 1)
pir sang bhaavai sahj naavai baynee ta sangam sat satay.
The soul-bride who loves to be with her Husband Lord bathes at the Triveni, the sacred place where the Ganges, Jamuna and Saraswaati Rivers converge, the Truest of the True.
mata Saag ATS fos ef vs Aetfemr Il (688-2, aaAdt, He 1)
aaraaDh aykankaar saachaa nit day-ay charhai savaa-i-aa.
Worship and adore the One Creator, the True Lord, who constantly gives, whose gifts continually increase.
afs Afa Hist HsHafs af oefa Afs frerfemr Si (ss-3, dart, He 1)
gat sang meetaa santsangat kar nadar may! milaa-i-aa. ||3]|
Salvation is attained by associating with the Society of the Saints, O friend; granting His Grace, God unites us in His Union. |[3]|
AVE Ad AS afe aes nmihy il (688-3, vaast, v2 1) kahan kahai sabh ko-ay kayvad aakhee-ai. Everyone speaks and talks; how great should I say He is?
UG Hay sty wiATS AHS Arbo Il (oss-4, ovASt, Hs 1)
ha-o moorakh neech ajaan samjhaa saakhee-ai.
I am foolish, lowly and ignorant; it is only through the Guru's Teachings that I understand.
Ag aa at Ant nifys anit fez He Hfeor Har i (oss-4, darAdt, He 1)
sach gur kee saakhee amrit bhaakhee tit man maani-aa mayraa.
True are the Teachings of the Guru. His Words are Ambrosial Nectar; my mind is pleased and appeased by them.
ay acts ureta fay ore nafs AS TT AS Il (688-5, aot, we 1)
kooch karahi aavahi bikh laaday sabad sachai gur mayraa.
Loaded down with corruption and sin, people depart, and then come back again; the True Shabad is found through my Guru.
umufs sfe 5 sats gas sfeufs afer Fret Il (688-5, daTASt, He 1) aakhan tot na bhagat bhandaaree bharipur rahi-aa so-ee. There is no end to the treasure of devotion; the Lord is pervading everywhere.
Soa AY Ad Fost HO Hin AY ASt IIA (88-6, GaTAST, He 1) naanak saach kahai baynantee man maa‘jai sach so-ee. ||4]|1]| Nanak utters this true prayer; one who purifies his mind is True. ||4||1]|
USTAdt HIS 4 Il (688-6)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:
Het 33 oe nfs wre od AIG II (ss-7, cast, He 1) jeevaa tayrai naa-ay man aanand hai jee-o. I live by Your Name; my mind is in ecstasy, Lord.
A ATT oe Te aifes F I I (oss-7, dat, He 1)
saacho saachaa naa-o gun govind hai jee-o.
True is the Name of the True Lord. Glorious are the Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
ad famrg ona froneas fats fart fate det i) oss-7, caret, He 1)
gur gi-aan apaaraa sirjanhaaraa jin sirjee tin go-ee.
Infinite is the spiritual wisdom imparted by the Guru. The Creator Lord who created, Shall also destroy.
ugetat ntfenr gah uofenr fs 5 Aa Aet I oss-2, cat, He 1) parvaanaa aa-i-aa hukam pathaa-i-aa fayr na sakai ko-ee. The call of death is sent out by the Lord's Command; no one can challenge it.
nm afs a fife fafs Sa wma Aafs gsret II (ss-9, cast, He 1)
aapay kar vaykhai sir sir laykhai aapay surat bujhaa-ee.
He Himself creates, and watches; His written command is above each and every head. He Himself imparts understanding and awareness.
Soa Afos ma widied tet At oret IAI (688-9, daTASt, He 1)
naanak saahib agam agochar jeevaa sachee naa-ee. ||1]| O Nanak, the Lord Master is inaccessible and unfathomable; I live by His True Name.
[111 3H Afe nied 3 af urfeor afert AIG II (ss-10, deASt, He 1)
tum sar avar na ko-ay aa-i-aa jaa-isee jee-o. No one can compare to You, Lord; all come and go.
gout dfe fass sau vorfert Ae II (6ss-10, carst, nH 1) hukmee ho-ay nibayrh bharam chukaa-isee jee-o. By Your Command, the account is settled, and doubt is dispelled.
Ts SdH VaS nag ATES Ae Hig ATT AHS Il (688-11, daTAHt, He 1)
gur bharam chukaa-ay akath kahaa-ay sach meh saach samaanaa.
The Guru dispels doubt, and makes us speak the Unspoken Speech; the true ones are absorbed into Truth.
mf Cure orf ANTE JaHt JAH UTS Il (688-11, TaTASH, He 1)
aap Upaa-ay aap Samaa-ay hukmee hukam pachhaanaa.
He Himself creates, and He Himself destroys; I accept the Command of the Commander Lord.
Het efaoret aa 3 uret 3 fe nifs Aaet Il (688-12, ort, He 1) sachee vadi-aa-ee gur tay paa-ee too man ant sakhaa-ee. True greatness comes from the Guru; You alone are the mind's companion in the end.
aod Afeg weg TAT oH Se Sfsuret IQ (ss-12, dsTAH, Hs 1) naanak saahib avar na doojaa naam tayrai vadi-aa-ee. ||2||
O Nanak, there is no other than the Lord and Master; greatness comes from Your Name. |[2||
3 Aw franeog nies fidfeor AIG I (ss-13, dort, Hs 1) too sachaa sirjanhaar alakh sirandi-aa jee-o. You are the True Creator Lord, the unknowable Maker.
ea Atos efe wg ae sufenr Ate i (oss-13, cavadt, He 1)
ayk saahib du-ay raah vaad vaDhandi-aa jee-o.
There is only the One Lord and Master, but there are two paths, by which conflict increases.
efe wa vere gah Ae Hofh HoT HATE I oss-14, daTASt, He 1)
du-ay raah chalaa-ay hukam sabaa-ay janam mu-aa sansaaraa.
All follow these two paths, by the Hukam of the Lord's Command; the world is born, only to die.
on faa odt & aot fas wet fife svat Il (688-14, doe, He 1)
naam binaa naahee ko baylee bikh laadee sir bhaaraa.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal has no friend at all; he carries loads of sin on his head.
Tout nrfeur Tau 3 FS Jat ASIETT Il (688-15, aoa, Hs 1)
hukmee aa-i-aa hukam na boojhai hukam savaaranhaaraa. By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he comes, but he does not understand this Hukam; the Lord's Hukam is the Embellisher.
soa Atve Aafe fret Are fraHeS ISI (688-15, ToT, He 1)
naanak saahib sabad sinjaapai saachaa sirjanhaaraa. ||3]|
O Nanak, through the Shabad, the Word of the Lord and Master, the True Creator Lord is realized. ||3]|
sas Huts vaets Aafe Aafeor AE II (688-16, daTAdt, He 1) bhagat soheh darvaar sabad suhaa-i-aa jee-o. Your devotees look beautiful in Your Court, embellished with the Shabad.
safe nifys afs sas sAfeur AIG II (688-16, oTASt, He 1) boleh amrit baan rasan rasaa-i-aa jee-o. They chant the Ambrosial Word of His Bani, savoring it with their tongues.
dHo one of fare ag a Aafe fears Il (688-17, uaTAst, He 1)
rasan rasaa-ay naam tisaa-ay gur kai sabad vikaanay.
Savoring it with their tongues, they thirst for the Naam; they are a sacrifice to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
urafA usfimt urs de at Sd fe STS I (688-17, use, He 1)
paaras parsi-ai paaras ho-ay jaa tayrai man bhaanay.
Touching the philosopher's stone, they become the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold; O Lord, they become pleasing to your mind.
Me ue ufenr ning aetfent feaer famire Start | (688-18, dart, He 1)
amraa pad paa-i-aa aap gavaa-i-aa virlaa gi-aan veechaaree.
They attain the immortal status and eradicate their self-conceit; how rare is that person, who contemplates spiritual wisdom.
Soa Sas Aufe vfs AS AMS A Sard Sil (688-19, dovAt, ve 1) naanak bhagat sohan dar saachai saachay kay vaapaaree. ||4||
O Nanak, the devotees look beautiful in the Court of the True Lord; they are dealers in the Truth. ||4]|
gu fimrr orfa fag efs afer AIS I (s8-19, corr, 48 1) bhookh pi-aaso aath ki-o dar jaa-isaa jee-o. I am hungry and thirsty for wealth; how will I be able to go to the Lord's Court?
yar ect Afsas ues wte on fomrferr AE i (689-1, uoASt, He 1)
satgur poochha-o jaa-ay naam Dhi-aa-isaa jee-o. I shall go and ask the True Guru, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ag oH fomret Ars seret aaHfe ATT USS Il (689-1, daTASH, He 1)
sach naam Dhi-aa-ee saach chavaa-ee gurmukh saach pachhaanaa.
I meditate on the True Name, chant the True Name, and as Gurmukh, I realize the True Name.
diet og ufos fadae mafes an ZuTST Il (689-2, daTASt, He 1)
deenaa naath da-i-aal niranjan an-din naam vakhaanaa.
Night and day, I chant the Name of the merciful, immaculate Lord, the Master of the poor.
adel AT UIT SoH orf wn HS Hat Il (689-2, daTASH, He 1)
karnee kaar Dharahu furmaa-ee aap mu-aa man maaree.
The Primal Lord has ordained the tasks to be done; self-conceit is overcome, and the mind is subdued.
SSA SH Hd" TA Hor fSeAar oH feerst UNI (689-3, Tart, Hs 1) naanak naam mahaa ras meethaa tarisnaa naam nivaaree. ||5||2||
O Nanak, the Naam is the sweetest essence; through the Naam, thirst and desire are stilled. ||5]|2||
UaTAdt SS HIST 4% Il (689-3) Dhanaasree chhant mehlaa 1. Dhanaasaree, Chhant, First Mehl:
furs Aft Hoste wats o urehor IG Il (689-4, uarASt, Hs 1)
pir sang mooth-rhee-ay khabar na paa-ee-aa jee-o.
Your Husband Lord is with you, O deluded soul-bride, but you do are not aware of Him.
HASte fefimiat Sy usta anfenr AIS Il (689-4, cava, He 1)
mastak likhi-arhaa laykh purab kamaa-i-aa jee-o. Your destiny is written on your forehead, according to your past actions.
By 3 facet uate oorfimr fom aret fom drt Il (689-4, carAdt, He 1)
laykh na mit-ee purab kamaa-i-aa ki-aa jaanaa ki-aa hosee.
This inscription of past deeds cannot be erased; what do I know about what will happen?
Tat wats odt df ast vieae afs af SA i 89-5, cat, He 1)
gunee achaar nahee rang raatee avgun bahi bahi rosee.
You have not adopted a virtuous lifestyle, and you are not attuned to the Lord's Love; you sit there, crying over your past misdeeds.
U6 Hae ura at etfeur festa se feo ufsni il (689-6, daAst, He 1)
Dhan joban aak kee chhaa-i-aa biraDh bha-ay din punni-aa.
Wealth and youth are like the shade of the bitter swallow-wort plant; you are growing old, and your days are coming to their end.
aren oH fas coats set sfs fesfanr nail (689-6, conrct, we 1)
naanak naam binaa dohaagan chhootee jhooth vichhunni-aa. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall end up as a discarded, divorced bride; your own falsehood shall separate you from the Lord. ||1]|
gat wg ures as x She VS Il (689-7, aot, we 1) boodee ghar ghaali-o gur kai bhaa-ay chalo. You have drowned, and your house is ruined; walk in the Way of the Guru's Will.
Ara oy fomrfe uefa afa Hos Il (689-7, daAst, He 1)
saachaa naam Dhi-aa-ay paavahi sukh mahlo.
Meditate on the True Name, and you shall find peace in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
dfs om famre st AY ure Udins feo os I (689-8, daTASt, He 1)
har naam Dhi-aa-ay taa sukh paa-ay pay-ee-arhai din chaaray.
Meditate on the Lord's Name, and you shall find peace; your stay in this world shall last only four days.
fon ufe mfe ad AY Ue nofes ate fimrd II (639-8, carat, He 1)
nij ghar jaa-ay bahai sach paa-ay an-din naal pi-aaray.
Sit in the home of your own being, and you shall find Truth; night and day, be with your Beloved.
fee sast ufs oH 5 det Afentg Ba AGES Il (689-9, gost, He 1) vin bhagtee ghar vaas na hovee suni-ahu lok sabaa-ay. Without loving devotion, you cannot dwell in your own home - listen, everyone!
Soa ASA st fug ue TSt ATS FS Ml (689-9, aA, He 1)
naanak sarsee taa pir paa-ay raatee saachai naa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, she is happy, and she obtains her Husband Lord, if she is attuned to the True Name. ||2||
fug ue ae ot furs ar] Ordt FIG II (689-10, dae, He 1) pir Dhan bhaavai taa pir bhaavai naaree jee-o.
If the soul-bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, then the Husband Lord will love His bride.
dfa usu TSt aa & Aafe Sterct FIG II (689-10, dart, Hs 1)
rang pareetam raatee gur kai sabad veechaaree jee-o.
Imbued with the love of her Beloved, she contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ad Aafe starct aa fimrct fate fate sats aget il (689-11, aatrdt, He 1)
gur sabad veechaaree naah pi-aaree niv niv bhagat karay-ee.
She contemplates the Guru's Shabads, and her Husband Lord loves her; in deep humility, she worships Him in loving devotion.
Heer Hg wee UlsH IA fo da aget Il (689-11, caret, Hs 1)
maa-i-aa moh jalaa-ay pareetam ras meh rang karay-ee.
She burns away her emotional attachment to Maya, and in love, she loves her Beloved.
us ATS ASt sf dast wes set He HS I (689-12, danrdt, He 1)
parabh saachay saytee rang rangaytee laal bha-ee man maaree.
She is imbued and drenched with the Love of the True Lord; she has become beautiful, by conquering her mind.
ood Afs eAt Aovafs firs fa ulfs fimrdt ai (9-12, cant, ve 1) naanak saach vasee sohagan pir si-o pareet pi-aaree. ||3]|| O Nanak, the happy soul-bride abides in Truth; she loves to love her Husband Lord.
H3II fus ufs Ad ofe A fuse sree FIG I (689-13, daTAe, He 1)
pir ghar sohai naar jay pir bhaav-ay jee-o. The soul-bride looks so beautiful in the home of her Husband Lord, if she is pleasing to Him.
BS st VS OHH F mree AM Il (689-13, corr, Hs 1) jhoothay vain chavay kaam na aav-ay jee-o. It is of no use at all to speak false words.
SQ X
BO nee OTH o ue a fug Sa Sat Il s9-14, uot, He 1)
jhooth alaavai kaam na aavai naa pir daykhai nainee.
If she speaks false, it is of no use to her, and she does not see her Husband Lord with her eyes.
uieaienrat xfs ferrst get feae set il 89-14, cart, we
avguni-aaree kant visaaree chhootee viDhan rainee.
Worthless, forgotten and abandoned by her Husband Lord, she passes her life-night without her Lord and Master.
qd Aa SHS Sed Sat AT US HIG B UTES Il (689-15, garaet, He 1)
gur sabad na maanai faahee faathee saa Dhan mahal na paa-ay.
Such a wife does not believe in the Word of the Guru's Shabad; she is caught in the net of the world, and does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Soa nM wiry ues dente AafA AHS Iigil (689-15, daTASH, He 1
naanak aapay aap pachhaanai gurmukh sahj samaa-ay. ||4||
O Nanak, if she understands her own self, then, as Gurmukh, she merges in celestial peace. ||4||
us Aoate one fats fus afer Ae II (689-16, carAst, He 1) Dhan sohagan naar jin pir jaani-aa jee-o. Blessed is that soul-bride, who knows her Husband Lord.
on fas afsorta ag onrfenr FIG Il 89-16, caret, He 1)
naam binaa koorhi-aar koorh kamaani-aa jee-o. Without the Naam, she is false, and her actions are false as well.
dfs sas ATS AS Stet SHE sats ys Tt I (689-17, aot, He 1)
har bhagat suhaavee saachay bhaavee bhaa-ay bhagat parabh raatee. Devotional worship of the Lord is beautiful; the True Lord loves it. So immerse yourself in loving devotional worship of God.
fug sso Fafe ser fsH Te Sfat TST II (689-17, caTASt, 2 1) pir ralee-aalaa joban baalaa tis raavay rang raatee. My Husband Lord is playful and innocent; imbued with His Love, I enjoy Him.
ad Aafe fearAt A TSA Swe ufemr Tsar Il (689-18, datAst, ue 1)
gur sabad vigaasee saho raavaasee fal paa-i-aa gunkaaree.
She blossoms forth through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; she ravishes her Husband Lord, and obtains the most noble reward.
sot Ary fos efsnret fue wis Ad odt NUS (689-18, deTAST, He 1)
naanak saach milai vadi-aa-ee pir ghar sohai naaree. ||5||3]|
O Nanak, in Truth, she obtains glory; in her Husband's home, the soul-bride looks beautiful. ||5]|3]|
User Exo
UaTAdt SS HIS 8 WIA (690-1) Dhanaasree chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Dhanaasaree, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars yATfe II (690-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs ME faur ad at any foment FIG I (690-2, carat, He 4)
har jee-o kirpaa karay taa naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai jee-o.
When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, one meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Afsag fxs nofe ofa TE weit FIG Il (690-2, aoe, He 4)
satgur milai subhaa-ay sahj gun gaa-ee-ai jee-o.
Meeting the True Guru, through loving faith and devotion, one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ae afte fear Ae niofes AT orfu ATS STE Il (690-3, darAet, He 4)
gun gaa-ay vigsai sadaa an-din jaa aap saachay bhaav-ay.
Singing His Glorious Praises continually, night and day, one blossoms forth, when it is pleasing to the True Lord.
was ICH SA Hfenr Hof ofH ANTSS II (690-3, GarAdt, He 4)
aha‘kaar ha-umai tajai maa-i-aa sahj naam samaav-ay.
Egotism, self-conceit and Maya are forsaken, and he is intuitively absorbed into the Naam.
nity ast ad Het urfu fe J ure I (690-4, aanAt, He 4) aap kartaa karay so-ee aap day-ay ta paa-ee-dai. The Creator Himself acts; when He gives, then we receive.
dfs Me fur ad at ony foment FIG Wall (690-4, darASt, He 4) har jee-o kirpaa karay taa naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai jee-o. ||1]| When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, we meditate on the Naam. ||1]|
niefs ATS ST Us Asad FIG Il (690-5, dove, Hs 4) andar saachaa nayhu pooray satigurai jee-o. Deep within, I feel true love for the Perfect True Guru.
u@ fan At feo TIS H ae & Stns MP II (690-5, daTASt, He 4) ha-o tis sayvee din raat mai kaday na veesrai jee-o. I serve Him day and night; I never forget Him.
ae 6 fenrdt nates AHS AT OTH Bet ST Ale Il (690-6, darAt, He 4)
kaday na visaaree an-din sam"aaree jaa naam la-ee taa jeevaa.
I never forget Him; I remember Him night and day. When I chant the Naam, then I live.
Azal Het 3 feg He feus aenfe nifigs ute II (690-6, corns, H8 4)
sarvanee sunee ta ih man tariptai gurmukh amrit peevaa.
With my ears, I hear about Him, and my mind is satisfied. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
sefd ad 3 Afsagd HS niofes fase afa fared II (690-7, caAdt, He 4)
nadar karay taa satgur maylay an-din bibayk buDh bichrai.
If He bestows His Glance of Grace, then I shall meet the True Guru; my discriminating intellect would contemplate Him, night and day.
niefs ATS ST UT ASAT MI (690-7, dort, Hs 4) andar saachaa nayhu pooray satigurai. ||2| | Deep within, I feel true love for the Perfect True Guru. ||2]|
AsAafs fxs esata a afs aA ree AIG II (690-8, daTASt, He 4)
satsangat milai vadbhaag taa har ras aav-ay jee-o.
By great good fortune, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; then, one comes to savor the subtle essence of the Lord.
wofes ad fee of 3 AafA ASS FIG I (690-8, daTASt, He 4) an-din rahai liv laa-ay ta sahj samaav-ay jee-o. Night and day, he remains lovingly focused on the Lord; he merges in celestial peace.
Hofa ANS ST fe His aS Het SIS Sait Il (690-9, aarAst, He 4)
sahj samaavai taa har man bhaavai sadaa ateet bairaagee.
Merging in celestial peace, he becomes pleasing to the Lord's Mind; he remains forever unattached and untouched.
Jefs uafs Ast wa nists oH oth fee walt I (690-9, danAdt, He 4) halat palat sobhaa jag antar raam naam liv laagee. He receives honor in this world and the next, lovingly focused on the Lord's Name.
Jeu AG ea 3 HAS A UT Ad A HSS Il (690-10, cart, us 4) harakh sog duhaa tay muktaa jo parabh karay so bhaav-ay. He is liberated from both pleasure and pain; he is pleased by whatever God does.
AsAafs fxs esata a afs A ores AIG SII (690-10, darASt, He 4)
satsangat milai vadbhaag taa har ras aav-ay jee-o. ||3]|
By great good fortune, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and then, one comes to savor the subtle essence of the Lord. ||3]|
en afe gy df Hou Af Afar FIG Il (690-11, cot, He 4)
doojai bhaa-ay dukh ho-ay manmukh jam johi-aa jee-o.
In the love of duality, there is pain and suffering; the Messenger of Death eyes the self-willed manmukhs.
ofe ofe ad fea af wfeor ef Hfomr AIG I (690-11, carAet, He 4) haa-ay haa-ay karay din raat maa-i-aa dukh mohi-aa jee-o. They cry and howl, day and night, caught by the pain of Maya.
Hear ef Hfomr IBH Sfoor Hat At ATS feaTSe | (690-12, darAdt, He 4) maa-i-aa dukh mohi-aa ha-umai rohi-aa mayree mayree karat vihaava-ay.
Caught by the pain of Maya, provoked by his ego, he passes his life crying out, "Mine, mine!".
A us tf fsa 33 ont vifs afeor uss Se I (690-13, amet, He 4)
jo parabh day-ay tis chaytai naahee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaava-ay.
He does not remember God, the Giver, and in the end, he departs regretting and repenting.
fag oe a Ata 5 we UZ awy HfEnr fowr I (690-13, dat, He 4)
bin naavai ko saath na chaalai putar kaltar maa-i-aa Dhohi-aa.
Without the Name, nothing shall go along with him; not his children, spouse or the enticements of Maya.
en afe gy df Houfe aft Afar AG isi (90-14, aarAst, Hs 4)
doojai bhaa-ay dukh ho-ay manmukh jam johi-aa jee-o. ||4]|
In the love of duality, there is pain and suffering; the Messenger of Death eyes the self-willed manmukhs. ||4| |
ate fasu ag fhorfe Hoe afe urfemr AIG Il 90-14, aaTAdt, He 4)
kar kirpaa layho milaa-ay mahal har paa-i-aa jee-o.
Granting His Grace, the Lord has merged me with Himself; I have found the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Ret 3d ad xfs us vfs afer FIG II (690-15, carat, Hs 4)
sadaa rahai kar jorh parabh man bhaa-i-aa jee-o.
I remain standing with my palms pressed together; I have become pleasing to God's Mind.
us Hfe are at gat ANTS TaN Nfs AY Uf II (690-15, Tat, He 4)
parabh man bhaavai taa hukam samaavai hukam man sukh paa-i-aa.
When one is pleasing to God's Mind, then he merges in the Hukam of the Lord's Command; surrendering to His Hukam, he finds peace.
wofes AUS dd fea ast Aon oH fomrfenr II (690-16, datASt, He 4)
an-din japat rahai din raatee sehjay naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Night and day, he chants the Lord's Name, day and night; intuitively, naturally, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
on om fiat efanret soa on vfs SSeS II (690-17, daTASt, He 4)
naamo naam milee vadi-aa-ee naanak naam man bhaav-ay.
Through the Naam, the glorious greatness of the Naam is obtained; the Naam is pleasing to Nanak's mind.
ats facut ag fhorfe Hoe safe ures ATG UII (690-17, daTASt, He 4)
kar kirpaa layho milaa-ay mahal har paav-ay jee-o. ||5||1]|
Granting His Grace, the Lord has merged me with Himself; I have found the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||5||1]|
UST Exsq
USAdt HIG UBS (691-1)
Dhanaasree mehlaa 5 chhant Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsas ure I (691-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsas de efenrs fan Afar af ast AIG II (691-2, aanAdt, He 5) satgur deen da-i-aal jis sang har gaavee-ai jee-o. The True Guru is merciful to the meek; in His Presence, the Lord's Praises are sung.
nifys ofs a an ATaAfar abt AE I (691-2, danas, Hs 5)
amrit har kaa naam saaDhsang raavee-ai jee-o.
The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is chanted in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
3a Afar Ag fea ney ASH HIS TA SHE Il (691-3, ust, He 5)
bhaj sang saaDhoo ik araaDhoo janam maran dukh naas-ay.
Vibrating, and worshipping the One Lord in the Company of the Holy, the pains of birth and death are removed.
ufs aan fofimr Are fafaor aet AH at SHE I (691-3, doTASt, He 5)
Dhur karam likhi-aa saach sikhi-aa katee jam kee faas-ay.
Those who have such karma pre-ordained, study and learn the Truth; the noose of Death is removed from their necks.
3 3IH BS Sel WS FH fs “fs o mS I (691-4, dav, we 5)
bhai bharam naathay chhutee gaathay jam panth mool na aavee-ai.
Their fears and doubts are dispelled, the knot of death is untied, and they never have to walk on Death's path.
faadfs aoa ufe fasur net af ae art A (691-5, aaTASt, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa sadaa har gun gaavee-ai. ||1||
Prays Nanak, shower me with Your Mercy, Lord; let me sing Your Glorious Praises forever. ||1]|
foufour ug fa on fadae AIG II (691-5, carAdt, He 5) niDhri-aa Dhar ayk naam niranjano jee-o. The Name of the One, Immaculate Lord is the Support of the unsupported.
3 US WIG ATT TU FAS MME Il (691-6, aTASH, Hs 5) too daataa daataar sarab dukh bhanjno jee-o. You are the Giver, the Great Giver, the Dispeller of all sorrow.
wy Iss Ass" HUT Hom Aafe ATG wrfeEnr it (691-6, usAt, He 5)
dukh harat kartaa sukhah su-aamee saran saaDhoo aa-i-aa.
O Destroyer of pain, Creator Lord, Master of peace and bliss, I have come seeking the Sanctuary of the Holy;
HATS Aa HoT feast us Sa nfs safenr | (691-6, cart, v2 5) sansaar saagar mahaa bikh-rhaa pal ayk maahi taraa-i-aa. please, help me to cross over the terrifying and difficult world-ocean in an instant.
ufe afoot Aaa aet ae farirg SSt iS I (691-7, TaTAT, He 5)
poor rahi-aa sarab thaa-ee gur gi-aan naytree anjno.
I saw the Lord pervading and permeating everywhere, when the healing ointment of the Guru's wisdom was applied to my eyes.
faadfs aoa Het fidt Hea TU SF SAS II (691-8, darAdt, He 5)
binvant naanak sadaa simree sarab dukh bhai bhanjno. ||2||
Prays Nanak, remember Him forever in meditation, the Destroyer of all sorrow and fear. ||2||
nifu ole afs ofe fagur ordior AIG Il (691-8, carr, 8 5)
aap lee-ay larh laa-ay kirpaa Dhaaree-aa jee-o.
He Himself has attached me to the hem of His robe; He has showered me with His Mercy.
Hfs fasae ate move ys ma mrurdhar AIG Il (691-9, amet, He 5) mohi nirgun neech anaath parabh agam aapaaree-aa jee-o. I am worthless, lowly and helpless; God is unfathomable and infinite.
cfenis Aer fours Animt ate arueafamr il (691-9, carat, He 5)
da-i-aal sadaa kirpaal su-aamee neech thaapanhaari-aa.
My Lord and Master is always merciful, kind and compassionate; He uplifts and establishes the lowly.
dba az Afs ef 3d Hae Sct Afar th 91-10, dae, He 5) jee-a jant sabh vas tayrai sagal tayree saari-aa. All beings and creatures are under Your power; You take care of all.
mfu asst orfu garst orf Aare stars Il (691-10, cana, v3 5)
aap kartaa aap bhugtaa aap sagal beechaaree-aa.
He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer; He Himself is the Contemplator of all.
faods area ge ae He ofs AU AUG goed ISI (691-11, daTASt, He 5)
binvant naanak gun gaa-ay jeevaa har jap japa-o banvaaree-aa. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, singing Your Glorious Praises, I live, chanting the Chant of the Lord, the Lord of the world-forest. ||3] |
3d VIA mug aH mHswet AE Il (691-11, daTASt, He 5) tayraa daras apaar naam amola-ee jee-o. The Blessed Vision of Your Darshan is incomparable; Your Name is utterly priceless.
fofs aufs 33 SA use nist AE II (691-12, daTASt, He 5) nit jaapeh tayray daas purakh atola-ee jee-o. O my Incomputable Lord, Your humble servants ever meditate on You.
HS dHo sor wrfy Zor ate safe ASt wfSor I (691-12, aoASt, He 5)
sant rasan voothaa aap toothaa har raseh say-ee maati-aa.
You dwell on the tongues of the Saints, by Your own pleasure; they are intoxicated with Your sublime essence, O Lord.
TT VIS Bat HI Sa Ae niales Atami il (691-13, aarAt, vs 5)
gur charan laagay mahaa bhaagay sadaa an-din jaagi-aa.
Those who are attached to Your feet are very blessed; night and day, they remain always awake and aware.
Re Ae fingsa Amit wf Af ae swet | (691-13, aarAst, us 5)
sad sadaa simartab-y su-aamee Saas saas gun bol-ee.
Forever and ever, meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master; with each and every breath, speak His Glorious Praises.
fasts aoa ofs AG OH YS MABE SAU (691-14, TaTAST, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhoor saaDhoo naam parabhoo amola-ee. ||4||1]|
Prays Nanak, let me become the dust of the feet of the Saints. God's Name is invaluable. ||4]]1]|
Tad USA set Sas ast At At (691-15)
raag Dhanaasree banee bhagat kabeer jee kee Raag Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (691-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hod Hoe HA ANTS Il AYSfal Sd HSH O Aor IAI (691-16, uaTHSt, sas adte 7) sanak sanand mahays samaanaa". saykhnaag tayro maram na jaanaa". ||1|| Beings like Sanak, Sanand, Shiva and Shaysh-naaga - none of them know Your mystery, Lord. ||1||
Hanafs oH fot arrest AU TIC Il (691-16, carat, sas adie rh santsangat raam ridai basaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. In the Society of the Saints, the Lord dwells within the heart. ||1]|Pause] |
Jou"s Afs age AHS I Asufs ssuls odt Ta AAT IM (691-17, usTASt, sas aete Fh hanoomaan sar garurh samaanaa”. surpat narpat nahee gun jaanaa”. ||2]|
Beings like Hanumaan, Garura, Indra the King of the gods and the rulers of humans - none of them know Your Glories, Lord. ||2]|
ofa ae ng fAf_fS usar 1 aHoufs ase Sdt AST BI (691-17, usTHSt, sas adits Ah chaar bayd ar simrit puraanaa™. kamlaapat kaviaa nahee jaanaa”. | |3]|
The four Vedas, the Simritees and the Puraanas, Vishnu the Lord of Lakshmi and Lakshmi herself - none of them know the Lord. |[3]|
afo ade A SdH ont I ua ofa TH Td Heat NSN (91-18, daTAS, sas ate FH)
kahi kabeer so bharmai naahee. pag lag raam rahai sarnaa‘hee. ||4||1]|
Says Kabeer, one who falls at the Lord's feet, and remains in His Sanctuary, does not wander around lost. ||4]|1]|
User x2
feo 3 udd udd 3 ud mre we 3a ath Il (692-1, uae, gas adits Ff) din tay pahar pahar tay gharee-aa™ aav ghatai tan chheejai. Day by day, hour by hour, life runs its course, and the body withers away.
ane uddt fed afua fa@ agg ace fafa ate A (92-1, cast, sas adits Ah kaal ahayree firai baDhik ji-o kahhu kavan biDh keejai. ||1] | Death, like a hunter, a butcher, is on the prowl; tell me, what can we do? ||1||
A feg nee Brel Il (692-2, uaradt, sas adie rt) so din aavan laagaa. That day is rapidly approaching.
Hs fust aret AS afest cag AG FT aT aT UU! TIS Il (692-2, wordt, sas alte Fh) maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banitaa kahhu ko-oo hai kaa kaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse - tell me, who belongs to whom? ||1]|Pause] |
Wa Sa nis cent ufo FIs MMU UAB YS Il (692-3, vast, gas alte Ft) jab lag jot kaa-i-aa meh bartai aapaa pasoo na boojhai. As long as the light remains in the body, the beast does not understand himself.
WI Ad Hes UE AIS BIS As B AS Il (692-3, ust, sas aes A) laalach karai jeevan pad kaaran lochan kachhoo na soojhai. ||2|| He acts in greed to maintain his life and status, and sees nothing with his eyes. ||2| |
as ads Hog J ust SST HS A SIM Il (692-4, usadt, sas ants Fh kahat kabeer sunhu ray paraanee chhodahu man kay bharmaa. Says Kabeer, listen, O mortal: Renounce the doubts of your mind.
azs OH AU ¢ UTol Udg Sa at APT SII (692-4, uaa, sas ate Ah
kayval naam japahu ray paraanee parahu ayk kee sarnaa”, ||3||2]|
Chant only the One Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortal, and seek the Sanctuary of the One Lord. ||3]|2]|
Af Ho TC sas aE WS STAG MSI AT Il (692-5, use, as adie Th)
jo jan bhaa-o bhagat kachh jaanai taa ka-o achraj kaaho.
That humble being, who Knows even a little about loving devotional worship - what surprises are there for him?
fa@ ne We Hfo Ufh 3 fear FS efs fife Had IAI (692-5, daTAdt, sas adits Th
ji-o jal jal meh pais na niksai ti-o dhur mili-o julaaho. ||1||
Like water, dripping into water, which cannot be separated out again, so is the weaver Kabeer, with softened heart, merged into the Lord. ||1]|
dfs & Ba H BE nfs a ST I (692-6, ust, sas adie Ff) har kay logaa mai ta-o mat kaa bhoraa. O people of the Lord, I am just a simple-minded fool.
Ag 36 ont safo asta Heh aa fads di TIS Il (692-6, uarAst, sas adte 7)
ja-o tan kaasee tajeh kabeeraa rama-ee-ai kahaa nihoraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
If Kabeer were to leave his body at Benares, and so liberate himself, what obligation would he have to the Lord? ||1]||Pause| |
RIS aay HoT 3 Set sath B FHI At Il (692-7, aot, sas ais Fh) kahat kabeer sunhu ray lo-ee bharam na bhoolahu ko-ee. Says Kabeer, listen, O people - do not be deluded by doubt.
foro aH four Sug Hag TH fee AG Tet INS (692-8, aaTASt, sas ats Hh)
ki-aa kaasee ki-aa ookhar maghar raam ridai ja-o ho-ee. ||2]|3]|
What is the difference between Benares and the barren land of Maghar, if the Lord is within one's heart? ||2||3]|
fia ta fe Safa A I 692-8, ust, sas ate Hh indar lok siv lokeh jaibo. Mortals may go to the Realm of Indra, or the Realm of Shiva,
Ge su afa sofa Me IU (692-8, dsTHSt, sas adits Th) ochhay tap kar baahur aibo. ||1]| but because of their hypocrisy and false prayers, they must leave again. ||1]|
fomr Hta@ fos fag oat Il (692-9, uaAdt, sas adie Ft) ki-aa maa‘ga-o kichh thir naahee. What should I ask for? Nothing lasts forever.
TH OH TY HO HTT NA FIC Il (692-9, asad, sas aete FH)
raam naam rakh man maahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Enshrine the Lord's Name within your mind. ||1||Pause] |
Hat oa fas afsnret il (692-9, usadt, sas acta Ff) sobhaa raaj bibhai badi-aa-ee. Fame and glory, power, wealth and glorious greatness
nifs 3 OY Hat ATE iil (692-10, ust, sas sets Ht) ant na kaahoo sang sahaa-ee. ||2]| - none of these will go with you or help you in the end. ||2]|
UZ ASS BeHt HfEnr | (692-10, asad, sas atta FH) putar kaltar lachhmee maa-i-aa. Children, spouse, wealth and Maya
feo 3 ag aed AY UfeMr ISI 692-10, caTASt, sas adie Ah in tay kaho kavnai sukh paa-i-aa. ||3]|| - who has ever obtained peace from these? ||3]|
dS Aas weg dt AMT I (692-11, uaadt, sas asta Fh
kahat kabeer avar nahee kaamaa. Says Kabeer, nothing else is of any use.
JHd HO US TH A SH IBIS (692-11, dat, sas adie A)
hamrai man Dhan raam ko naamaa. ||4||4]| Within my mind is the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||4]|4]|
oH fAHfs oH fats an finite avet I (692-12, uaAet, sas adits Fh
raam simar raam simar raam simar bhaa-ee.
Remember the Lord, remember the Lord, remember the Lord in meditation, O Siblings of Destiny.
TH 3H fuss fas gas uiftoret 19 TIS Il (692-12, uaASt, sas aete Ft) raam naam simran bin boodtay aDhikaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Without remembering the Lord's Name in meditation, a great many are drowned. ||1]|Pause| |
afes' AS 20 ag Aufs AYETet I (692-13, usTHSt, sas adits Fh
banitaa sut dayh garayh sampat sukh-daa-ee.
Your spouse, children, body, house and possessions - you think these will give you peace.
feg Hag ofe 3d OS eT Met IAI (692-13, UsTASH, sas atte Fh) in" mai kachh naahi tayro kaal avaDh aa-ee. ||1]| But none of these shall be yours, when the time of death comes. ||1]|
MATHS TA aoa ulfss AH ats Il (692-13, uaa, sas acta Ah ajaamal gaj ganikaa patit karam keenay. Ajaamal, the elephant, and the prostitute committed many sins,
38 Sst uta ud TH OH SS 2M (692-14, usASt, sas aets Fh tay-oo utar paar paray raam naam leenay. ||2|| but still, they crossed over the world-ocean, by chanting the Lord's Name. ||2] |
Had Fad Als FA IS WHA SB Met Il (692-14, vost, sas ata Fh) sookar kookar jon bharamay ta-oo laaj na aa-ee. You have wandered in reincarnation, as pigs and dogs - did you feel no shame?
oH on as nifys ard fay uret SI (692-15, ust, sas ate Ah) raam naam chhaad amrit kaahay bikh khaa-ee. ||3]|| Forsaking the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, why do you eat poison? ||3]|
3fa San aan fafa foda TH BH Sat Il (692-15, usa, sas adits FH) taj bharam karam biDh nikhayDh raam naam layhee. Abandon your doubts about do's and dont's, and take to the Lord's Name.
ad uAte AS add TH afd ASdt ISNUll (692-16, deat, sas ate Hh)
gur parsaad jan kabeer raam kar sanayhee. ||4]|5|| By Guru's Grace, O servant Kabeer, love the Lord. ||4||5]|
USsAdt Fat SIs SHS At At (692-17)
Dhanaasree banee bhagat naamdayv jee kee Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsare YATE Il (692-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Tost ats t ste yet Gufs visu se il (692-18, usAst, sas see Ft) gahree kar kai neev khudaa-ee oopar mandap chhaa-ay. They dig deep foundations, and build lofty palaces.
Has 3 & nifuoret fats fe ufs HS awe Ul (692-18, asst, sas see Fh) maarkanday tay ko aDhikaa-ee jin tarin Dhar moond balaa-ay. ||1||
Can anyone live longer than Markanda, who passed his days with only a handful of straw upon his head? ||1]|
JH AIS TH AST Il (692-19, vat, sas ane rh) hamro kartaa raam sanayhee. The Creator Lord is our only friend.
ad J od dg ads Ig faath Ate sot Sat NU TTS Il 692-19, usAst, sas one FH) kaahay ray nar garab karat hahu binas jaa-ay jhoothee dayhee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O man, why are you so proud? This body is only temporary - it shall pass away. ||1]|Pause] |
Ua xs
Het Hat ase ass wards A svet Il (693-1, carat, gas anes Ah
mayree mayree kaira-o kartay durjoDhan say bhaa-ee.
The Kaurvas, who had brothers like Duryodhan, used to proclaim, "This is ours! This is ours!"
WIT AAS SI VS a Vat farsse wet Il 93-1, vost, sas anes FH)
baarah jojan chhatar chalai thaa dayhee girjhan khaa-ee. ||2| |
Their royal procession extended over sixty miles, and yet their bodies were eaten by vultures. ||2||
Hea Afes at Sart dst Tea A nifaaret i (693-1, asad, gas anise wh) sarab so-in kee lankaa hotee raavan say aDhikaa-ee. Sri Lanka was totally rich with gold; was anyone greater than its ruler Raavan?
as sf efs aig oet fits ufo set uaret I3I1 (693-2, caret, sas aH A)
kahaa bha-i-o dar baa’Dhay haathee khin meh bha-ee paraa-ee. ||3]| What happened to the elephants, tethered at his gate? In an instant, it all belonged to someone else. ||3]|
coat fAG ass sad Wee F SH UES Il (693-3, asad, sas ones FH) durbaasaa si-o karat thag-uree jaadav ay fal paa-ay. The Yaadvas deceived Durbaasaa, and received their rewards.
fgur adt Ho mus Bug aHEes oie Ta WES UIA (93-3, usTASt, sas one FH) kirpaa karee jan apunay oopar naamday-o har gun gaa-ay. ||4||1]|
The Lord has shown mercy to His humble servant, and now Naam Dayv sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|1]|
2A aaate xfs afk atet uss at fle av] I (693-4, aad, sas ones ah
das bairaagan mohi bas keen"ee panchahu kaa mit naava-o.
I have brought the ten sensory organs under my control, and erased every trace of the five thieves.
Rafe df a3 nifys vfs fay a ofa aes All (693-4, aad, sas anes Hh)
satar do-ay bharay amrit sar bikh ka-o maar kadhaava-o. ||1||
I have filled the seventy-two thousand nerve channels with Ambrosial Nectar, and drained out the poison. ||1]|
Ue aofe o neg ure Il (693-5, atAdt, sas anise Th) paachhai bahur na aavan paava-o. I shall not come into the world again.
nifys set we 3 Gus mrs a AHSTSS NU TIE Il (693-5, uA, sas see A)
amrit banee ghat tay uchara-o aatam ka-o samjhaava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I chant the Ambrosial Bani of the Word from the depths of my heart, and I have instructed my soul. ||1]|Pause| |
and aod Hfs d tot afe fists ofa ue€ il (693-6, uaadt, sas ane Ff)
bajar kuthaar mohi hai chheenaa’ kar minat lag paava-o.
I fell at the Guru's feet and begged of Him; with the mighty axe, I have chopped off emotional attachment.
H36 & JH Cae Asa saso 3 saUSG Ill (693-6, asad, sas one FH)
santan kay ham ultay sayvak bhagtan tay darpaava-o. ||2||
Turning away from the world, I have become the servant of the Saints; I fear no one except the Lord's devotees. ||2]|
fea HATS 3 3a dt see AE Hfenr BT Burs Il (693-7, aarAct, sas oes Ft) ih sansaar tay tab hee chhoota-o ja-o maa-i-aa nah laptaava-o. I shall be released from this world, when I stop clinging to Maya.
Hho oy aes Hfe a fsa sf zaAS USE ISI (693-8, dae, sas oN Th) maa-i-aa naam garabh jon kaa tih taj darsan paava-o. ||3]|
Maya is the name of the power which causes us to be born; renouncing it, we obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||3]|
fez afe safs asfo FH Ho fsa SC Hae varTe II (693-8, uaTASt, sas ae FH) it kar bhagat karahi jo jan tin bha-o sagal chukhaa-ee-dai. That humble being, who performs devotional worship in this way, is rid of all fear.
AIS SHEE wale fomr gong fea Han afe ure sili (693-9, gaat, sas oS Th
kahat naamday-o baahar ki-aa bharmahu ih sanjam har paa-ee-ai. ||4]|2|| Says Naam Dayv, why are you wandering around out there? This is the way to find the Lord. ||4||2]|
Hdets AA ole Toot af ast AIS Il (693-9, uaa, sas SHE Ft) maarvaarh jaisay neer baalhaa bay! baalhaa karhalaa. As water is very precious in the desert, and the creeper weeds are dear to the camel,
fa@ ada fafa oe seo fC He His THEM INU (693-10, dae, sas STS Fh) ji-o kurank nis naad baalhaa ti-o mayrai man raam-ee-aa. ||1||
and the tune of the hunter's bell at night is enticing to the deer, so is the Lord to my mind. ||1]|
37 OY IS BU Is ls Fa Fs AS THEM UI TTS Il 693-11, ast, sas Nee FA) tayraa naam roorho roop roorho at rang roorho mayro raam-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your Name is so beautiful! Your form is so beautiful! Your Love is so very beautiful, O my Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
fag uset a@ fle woo AnH TH AA FeIT Il (693-1, aoa, sas one Hh) ji-o Dharnee ka-o indar baalhaa kusam baas jaisay bhavralaa. As rain is dear to the earth, and the flower's fragrance is dear to the bumble bee,
fAG afae ag nig aaa fS8 AS His HSMM N21 (693-12, daTHSt, sas SHS Fh) ji-o kokil ka-o amb baalhaa ti-o mayrai man raam-ee-aa. ||2|| and the mango is dear to the cuckoo, so is the Lord to my mind. ||2]|
TAS AG AA AY MGI HS Ades TAS Il (693-13, cod, sas see Fh)
chakvee ka-o jaisay soor baalhaa maan sarovar hansulaa.
As the sun is dear to the chakvi duck, and the lake of Man Sarovar is dear to the swan,
fag sget aG as wos fs AS His ST BI (693-13, dave, sas oN Th) ji-o tarunee ka-o kant baalhaa ti-o mayrai man raam-ee-aa. ||3]|| and the husband is dear to his wife, so is the Lord to my mind. |[3]|
ofa a@ AA Ug Seo wfsa He AA HOU Il (693-14, cat, sas anes Fh baarik ka-o jaisay kheer baalhaa chaatrik mukh jaisay jalDharaa. As milk is dear to the baby, and the raindrop is dear to the mouth of the rainbird,
Hest aG AA ale Tea fSE AS nfs THe IIgI 693-14, daTASt, sas SNe FH) machhulee ka-o jaisay neer baalhaa ti-o mayrai man raam-ee-aa. ||4|| and as water is dear to the fish, so is the Lord to my mind. ||4||
Afos fro Aare ufs wats fags aT SSS Il (693-15, usTASt, sas ones FH) saaDhik siDh sagal mun chaaheh birlay kaahoo deethulaa. All the seekers, Siddhas and silent sages seek Him, but only a rare few behold Him.
HG See 3d BH ToT SE on HfS Fos NUNS (693-15, TaTAST, sas SHE Th Sagal bhavan tayro naam baalhaa ti-o naamay man beethulaa. ||5|[3]|
Just as Your Name is dear to all the Universe, so is the Lord dear to Naam Dayv's mind. ||5]|[3]|
ufos ude UsIA TST Il (693-16, usTAdt, sas snee Ft) pahil puree-ay pundrak vanaa. First of all, the lotuses bloomed in the woods;
33 JA Ags Wat Il (693-16, usAdt, sas oee FH) taa chay hansaa saglay janaa™. from them, all the swan-souls came into being.
far 3 Wo ofa as SST STIS AI (693-17, TaTASt, sas SNe Fh) krisnaa tay jaan-oo har har naachantee naachnaa. ||1|| Know that, through Krishna, the Lord, Har, Har, the dance of creation dances. ||1]|
ufos USATPaS Il (693-17, uaTAdt, sas ane Fh) pahil pursaabiraa. First of all, there was only the Primal Being.
WES UTATEHS | (693-17, uaTAdt, sas SHS FH) athon pursaadmaraa. From that Primal Being, Maya was produced.
MA MA BAe Il (693-18, dead, sas oe Fh)
asgaa as usgaa. All that is, is His.
ofs at sara ore fifdt xfs Ararat A TIS | (693-18, daa, sas one Fh
har kaa baagraa naachai pinDhee meh saagraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. In this Garden of the Lord, we all dance, like water in the pots of the Persian wheel. ||1]|Pause] |
Stdat aut Hak Il (693-18, daTAdt, sas ane FH) naachantee gopee jannaa. Women and men both dance.
Seo 3 AI Kar Il (693-19, usadt, sas anes Ah na-ee-aa tay bairay kanna. There is no other than the Lord.
3IT O T Il (693-19, uaAdt, sas SHES AT) tarak na chaa. Don't dispute this,
gH a Il (693-19, uaadt, sas aes Ft) bharmee-aa chaa. and don't doubt this.
aAe qIeal nets Hele Sa nie AG IQ (693-19, aavAdt, sas ose AH kaysvaa bach-unee a-ee-ay ma-ee-ay ayk aan jee-o. ||2]| The Lord says, "This creation and I are one and the same."||2||
UST Exy
fiftt Gaae HATE Il (694-1, daTAdt, sas anes Hh
pinDhee ubhkalay sansaaraa.
Like the pots on the Persian wheel, sometimes the world is high, and sometimes it is low.
oft sft mre 3H 8 TnIT Il (694-1, daa, sas oes Ah bharam bharam aa-ay tum chay du-aaraa. Wandering and roaming around, I have come at last to Your Door.
3 FS FT Il (694-1, ust, sas see Fh too kun ray. "Who are you?"
Het i ont ul SAT I (694-1, amet, sas one mai jee. naamaa. ho jee. "I am Naam Dayv, Sir."
niter 3 foetsal AH AIST NBII (694-2, uaa, sas oTee Fh
aalaa tay nivaarnaa jam kaarnaa. ||3||4|| O Lord, please save me from Maya, the cause of death. ||3]|4]|
ufss urea HUG fade ST Il (694-2, usAdt, sas one FH) patit paavan maaDha-o birad tayraa. O Lord, You are the Purifier of sinners - this is Your innate nature.
ufe 3 2 uf Ho fro fourfes afe ys Ha A (694-2, cad, sas ones Fh Dhan tay vai mun jan jin Dhi-aa-i-o har parabh mayraa. ||1]|| Blessed are those silent sages and humble beings, who meditate on my Lord God.
[2
Ae He wail & ofe alse Taoo at il (694-3, ust, sas one Fh) mayrai maathai laagee lay Dhoor gobind charnan kee. I have applied to my forehead the dust of the feet of the Lord of the Universe.
Afs od fs Ao fsog 3 Efe NA TIS Il (694-3, usTAt, sas see Fh sur nar mun jan tinhoo tay door. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This is something which is far away from the gods, mortal men and silent sages. ||1]|Pause] |
de at efenre Ht aaa usd Il (694-4, uaadt, sas ae Ff) deen kaa da-i-aal maaDhou garab parhaaree. O Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pride
Udo Ade oH af fSardt IQNUIl (694-4, usHet, sas oHee Fh)
charan saran naamaa bal tihaaree. ||2||5|| - Naam Dayv seeks the Sanctuary of Your feet; he is a sacrifice to You. ||2||5||
USAdt Sas dee At at (694-6)
Dhanaasree bhagat ravidaas jee kee Dhanaasaree, Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsas ATE II (694-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dH Afs ete efeere 3 3H Afe we users fomr ath Il (694-7, uaTAdt, sas afer FH) ham sar deen da-i-aal na tum sar ab patee-aar ki-aa keejai.
There is none as forlorn as I am, and none as Compassionate as You; what need is there to test us now?
wat 3a HT HG HS HS AE UTS eh UA (694-7, vor, sas afeeA Ft)
bachnee tor mor man maanai jan ka-o pooran deejai. ||1||
May my mind surrender to Your Word; please, bless Your humble servant with this perfection. ||1]|
J afe afe We THe args Il (694-8, cod, sas afeeA Hh) ha-o bal bal jaa-o rama-ee-aa kaarnay. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lord.
AGS ACH MAS I TIC Il (694-8, usradt, sas steer HH kaaran kavan abol. rahaa-o. O Lord, why are You silent? ||Pause| |
ads AOH fags & HUG feg AGH SHS Be Il (694-8, usd, sas sfeerA Ft)
bahut janam bichhuray thay maaDha-o ih janam tum"aaray laykhay.
For so many incarnations, I have been separated from You, Lord; I dedicate this life to You.
ats seen orn ofa mee fea sfeG TIA SH NIA (694-9, uaTAt, sas ofeeA F) kahi ravidaas aas lag jeeva-o chir bha-i-o darsan daykhay. ||2||1]|
Says Ravi Daas: placing my hopes in You, I live; it is so long since I have gazed upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2||1]|
fas frag as 3a uifesas Aes aot AAA Ufs TUS Il (694-10, ust, sas ofeeA Fh) chit simran kara-o nain avilokano sarvan baanee sujas poor raakha-o.
In my consciousness, I remember You in meditation; with my eyes, I behold You; I fill my ears with the Word of Your Bani, and Your Sublime Praise.
HO A HUA ase veo fos us aHS ifs TH OH SUC IA (694-10, doTAt, sas afeem Ft) man so maDhukar kara-o charan hirday Dhara-o rasan amrit raam naam bhaakha-o.
[11| My mind is the bumble bee; I enshrine Your feet within my heart, and with my tongue, I chant the Ambrosial Name of the Lord. ||1||
Hat ulfs afte fae fafs we ii (694-11, candt, sas afeera ah mayree pareet gobind si-o jin ghatai. My love for the Lord of the Universe does not decrease.
H 3@ Hf Haat wet Ahr AS NU TIS Nl (694-10, covet, sas sfeerA th) mai ta-o mol mahgee la-ee jee-a satai. ||1|| rahaa-o. I paid for it dearly, in exchange for my soul. ||1]|Pause] |
Aunts fast ae Sct Gur sre fag gals aot af Sat il (694-12, asAdt, sas feern Ht) saaDhsangat binaa bhaa-o nahee oopjai bhaav bin bhagat nahee ho-ay tayree. Without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, love for the Lord does not well up; without this love, Your devotional worship cannot be performed.
ad sfeen fea dost uf fAG UA Tag TA IH Ae QUI (694-13, dead, sas seH aft)
kahai ravidaas ik bayntee har si-o paij raakho raajaa raam mayree. ||2||2||
Ravi Daas offers this one prayer unto the Lord: please preserve and protect my honor, O Lord, my King. ||2]|2]|
oH 3d nTast HAS HTS Il (694-13, deat, sas ofeern FH) naam tayro aartee majan muraaray. Your Name, Lord, is my adoration and cleansing bath.
ofa & oH fag FS ATS UAT AU TIC il 694-14, cat, sas sheen Fh) har kay naam bin jhoothay sagal paasaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Name of the Lord, all ostentatious displays are useless. ||1]||Pause| |
OH 3d MTHS OH 3d CoA OW 3a and B fEead Il (694-14, usAdt, sas afer Ah naam tayro aasno naam tayro ursaa naam tayraa kaysro lay chhitkaaray.
Your Name is my prayer mat, and Your Name is the stone to grind the sandalwood. Your Name is the saffron which I take and sprinkle in offering to You.
oy 3a niger on 3d des wih WU oH B s3f7 AS TS NU (694-15, aA, gas see Hf)
naam tayraa ambhulaa naam tayro chandno ghas japay naam lay tujheh ka-o chaaray. ||1]||
Your Name is the water, and Your Name is the sandalwood. The chanting of Your Name is the grinding of the sandalwood. I take it and offer all this to You. ||1]|
oH So det oy 3d Fst aH 3d 3G B fs UT? I (694-16, uot, gas fee Th) naam tayraa deevaa naam tayro baatee naam tayro tayl lay maahi pasaaray. Your Name is the lamp, and Your Name is the wick. Your Name is the oil I pour into it.
oH 3d at Hfs waret SEG Cfryrd Seo AAS IQ (694-16, uaAdt, sas sfeern th) naam tayray kee jot lagaa-ee bha-i-o uji-aaro bhavan saglaaray. ||2||
Your Name is the light applied to this lamp, which enlightens and illuminates the entire world. ||2| |
OH 3d TT SH SB HS BS MSGI AIS ASS Il (694-17, usvAdt, sas fren Ht)
naam tayro taagaa naam fool maalaa bhaar athaarah sagal joothaaray.
Your Name is the thread, and Your Name is the garland of flowers. The eighteen loads of vegetation are all too impure to offer to You.
3d aor safe famr mau on 3a Sct Ved Fag ISI (694-18, caAdt, sas steer ah) tayro kee-aa tujheh ki-aa arpa-o naam tayraa tuhee chavar dholaaray. ||3]|
Why should I offer to You, that which You Yourself created? Your Name is the fan, which I wave over You. ||3]|
ZA MS" MSHS Ud uel fed zasfs J AAG AAS I (694-18, usTAdt, sas sfeerA Th)
das athaa athsathay chaaray khaanee ihai vartan hai sagal sansaaray.
The whole world is engrossed in the eighteen Puraanas, the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and the four sources of creation.
ad seen oy 3d ntact Afs on J Ufs Sa STS ISISI (694-19, daa, sas afer Ah kahai ravidaas naam tayro aartee sat naam hai har bhog tuhaaray. ||4]|3]||
Says Ravi Daas, Your Name is my Aartee, my lamp-lit worship-service. The True Name, Sat Naam, is the food which I offer to You. ||4]|3]|
uat éxtu UsTAat set sarst at fyBIs (695-1)
Dhanaasree banee bhagtaa" kee tarilochan Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Trilochan Jee:
qe Afsas ure II (695-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aatee fSeth ofe gat aed Il (695-2, aaAst, sas fybus FM) naaraa-in nindas kaa-ay bhoolee gavaaree. Why do you slander the Lord? You are ignorant and deluded.
efas Afas ad aay ct NU TIC I (695-2, uaHet, sas fy8u~ TH) dukarit sukarit thaaro karam ree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Pain and pleasure are the result of your own actions. ||1||Pause] |
Had HAStax SHS" AIAG fEAo'S F Il (695-3, usTHSt, sas fxBuo Ah sankraa mastak bastaa sursaree isnaan ray. The moon dwells in Shiva's forehead; it takes its cleansing bath in the Ganges.
OS AS HO ffs Asa UTS F I (695-3, dav, sas fyBes A) kul jan maDhay mili-yo saarag paan ray. Among the men of the moon's family, Krishna was born;
AGH ats asa Hel] cH IAI (695-3, dae, sas fr8us karam kar kalank mafeetas ree. ||1|| even so, the stains from its past actions remain on the moon's face. ||1]|
fag or dug At st oF Horse uet ote TIS STS AIST | (695-4, usAct, sas fySus Ht)
bisav kaa deepak savaamee taa chay ray su-aarthee pankhee raa-ay garurh taa chay baaDhvaa.
Aruna was a charioteer; his master was the sun, the lamp of the world. His brother was Garuda, the king of birds;
aH afe nge fifa gt I (695-5, uaHdt, sas fysuo Ah karam kar arun pingulaa ree. ||2|| and yet, Aruna was made a cripple, because of the karma of his past actions. ||2]|
uifsa ufsa ses fase arg dt stefa Stefa gust ad 3 urg ct Il (695-5, aad, sas fgsue rt)
anik paatik hartaa taribhavan naath ree tirath tirath bharmataa lahai na paar ree. Shiva, the destroyer of countless sins, the Lord and Master of the three worlds, wandered from sacred shrine to sacred shrine; he never found an end to them.
aH ats aus HeletA st SI (695-6, aad, sas fxBus FH) karam kar kapaal mafeetas ree. ||3]| And yet, he could not erase the karma of cutting off Brahma's head. ||3]|
nifys AA de afer asus frufs Horas Set F oa Il (695-6, uaadt, sas fyBus Ah amrit sasee-a Dhayn lachhimee kalpatar sikhar sunaagar nadee chay naatha’. Through the nectar, the moon, the wish-fulfilling cow, Lakshmi, the miraculous tree of life, Sikhar the sun's horse, and Dhanavantar the wise physician - all arose from the ocean, the lord of rivers;
aH ats ug HelefA ct Sil (695-7, cat, sas fe8ua karam kar khaar mafeetas ree. ||4|| and yet, because of its karma, its saltiness has not left it. ||4]]|
ahs sa as Gusts wes se Afs fans orfs TAS Ist | (695-7, ust, sas fy8us Th daaDheelay lankaa garh upaarheelay raavan ban sal bisal aan tokheelay haree. Hanuman burnt the fortress of Sri Lanka, uprooted the garden of Raawan, and brought healing herbs for the wounds of Lachhman, pleasing Lord Raamaa;
aH ats aeSet HetefA st ull (695-8, aA, sas fe8us Ah karam kar kachh-utee mafeetas ree. ||5|| and yet, because of his karma, he could not be rid of his loin cloth. ||5]|
yaad fas aon 6 fhe at we date a 8 fs AAs TH F SNH Il 95-8, asTAS, sas
fgaae Hh
poorbalo kirat karam na mitai ree ghar gayhan taa chay mohi jaapee-alay raam chay N
naama..
The karma of past actions cannot be erased, O wife of my house; this is why I chant
the Name of the Lord.
gefs fRsIS TH Ht MENA (695-9, ToT, sas fBEs Fh badat tarilochan raam jee. ||6||1]| So prays Trilochan, Dear Lord. ||6|]|1]]|
At AE I (695-9) saree sain. Sri Sain:
gu ety fiys Ate virsst il (695-10, uomndt, sas Fe Ft) Dhoop deep gharit saaj aartee. With incense, lamps and ghee, I offer this lamp-lit worship service.
BIS AG AHS Ust IAll (695-10, aarAdt, sas He Fh) vaarnay jaa-o kamlaa patee. ||1]|| I am a Sacrifice to the Lord of Lakshmi. ||1]|
Hae dfs Hae i fas Hae oat oH TE & NA TIE Il (695-10, aaAct, sas Ae th manglaa har manglaa. nit mangal raajaa raam raa-ay ko. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Hail to You, Lord, hail to You! Again and again, hail to You, Lord King, Ruler of all! ||1]|Pause] |
Cay this fess ast Il (695-11, vaHet, saz Ae Fh ootam dee-araa nirmal baatee. Sublime is the lamp, and pure is the wick.
Sot fadHe SHS ust II (695-11, uaASt, sas Ae Ff) tuhee™ niranjan kamlaa paatee. ||2|| You are immaculate and pure, O Brilliant Lord of Wealth! ||2||
IH Sas THOSE AS Il (695-12, aad, sas Ae Ah raamaa bhagat raamaanand jaanai. Raamaanand knows the devotional worship of the Lord.
UIS UTHSS BUS MBI (695-12, asad, sas Fe Fh) pooran parmaanand bakhaanai. ||3]|| He says that the Lord is all-pervading, the embodiment of supreme joy. ||3]|
Hee Hats 3 She BFS I (695-12, vsTAst, sas Fe Fh)
madan moorat bhai taar gobinday.
The Lord of the world, of wondrous form, has carried me across the terrifying world- ocean.
HO Sé SH UGH INI (695-12, deTAdt, sas Ae Ah sain bhanai bhaj parmaananday. ||4]|2]| Says Sain, remember the Lord, the embodiment of supreme joy! ||4]||2]|
ufur Il (695-13) peepaa. Peepaa:
ang tar afin tee orion Aa AST II (695-13, caAdt, gars Uhr Ff)
kaa-ya-o dayvaa kaa-i-a-o dayval kaa-i-a-o jangam jaatee.
Within the body, the Divine Lord is embodied. The body is the temple, the place of pilgrimage, and the pilgrim.
afeag gu dy setae afenS uns ust 14 (695-13, vaAst, gars ube Fh) kaa-i-a-o Dhoop deep na-eebaydaa kaa-i-a-o pooja-o paatee. ||1||
Within the body are incense, lamps and offerings. Within the body are the flower offerings. ||1]|
afer ag us dns oe fafa uret il (695-14, caradt, gars ube Ah kaa-i-aa baho khand khojtay nav niDh paa-ee. I searched throughout many realms, but I found the nine treasures within the body.
o ae oifed at as wes oH at vost NA TITS Il (695-14, aarAst, sas Uhr Fh) naa kachh aa-ibo naa kachh jaa-ibo raam kee duhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Nothing comes, and nothing goes; I pray to the Lord for Mercy. ||1]||Pause] |
A ons Aet fis AMA A US Il (695-15, uoTAdt, gars ube A)
jo barahmanday so-ee pinday jo khojai so paavai.
The One who pervades the Universe also dwells in the body; whoever seeks Him, finds Him there.
ub yse un 33 9 Afsag df wars NQUSI (695-15, dae, sas Uhr Fh
peepaa paranvai param tat hai satgur ho-ay lakhaavai. ||2||3]|
Peepaa prays, the Lord is the supreme essence; He reveals Himself through the True Guru. |{2|[3]|
War Il (695-16) Dhannaa. Dhannaa:
HUB SI TIS | (695-16, uaAdt, sas tar rh) gopaal tayraa aartaa. O Lord of the world, this is Your lamp-lit worship service.
fH Ho SHdt safs ads foo A aH ASIST NA TIS Il (695-16, aaAdt, sas tar FH) jo jan tumree bhagat karantay tin kay kaaj savaarataa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You are the Arranger of the affairs of those humble beings who perform Your devotional worship service. ||1|]Pause| |
anes Alor Hae wit Il (695-17, uaAdt, sas dar Fh) daal seeDhaa maaga-o ghee-o. Lentils, flour and ghee - these things, I beg of You.
JHS yA ad fos AIG Il (695-17, darAt, sas dar Ah hamraa khusee karai nit jee-o. My mind shall ever be pleased.
ude gree Stat il Mota HAG AS At aT AI (695-18, UaTASt, sas tor Ft) pan"ee-aa chhaadan neekaa. anaaj maga-o sat see kaa. ||1|| Shoes, fine clothes, and grain of seven kinds - I beg of You. ||1]|
TG SA HAG Seat Il (695-18, usvAst, sas dar Ft) ga-oo bhais maga-o laavayree. A milk cow, and a water buffalo, I beg of You,
fea safe act dart i (695-18, cart, sas tar Ft) ik taajan turee changayree. and a fine Turkestani horse.
we ot aitafs ait il (695-19, aaAdt, sas dar rt) ghar kee geehan changee. A good wife to care for my home
HS Wat Se Halt USI (695-19, uatast, sas tar rt) jan Dhannaa layvai mangee. ||2||4|| - Your humble servant Dhanna begs for these things, Lord. ||2||4||
uot ete
ASA HIS 8 WI I VUE (696-1) jaitsaree mehlaa 4 ghar 1 cha-upday Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsas yATfE II (696-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
He dined 339 ony dfs afhor afe we ofa He HET II (696-3, AoA, He 4)
mayrai hee-arai ratan naam har basi-aa gur haath Dhari-o mayrai maathaa.
The Jewel of the Lord's Name abides within my heart; the Guru has placed His hand on my forehead.
HOH HOH & faofay vu Cad afa on UG fas wre IAI (696-3, AsAET, He 4)
janam janam kay kilbikh dukh utray gur naam dee-o rin laathaa. ||1||
The sins and pains of countless incarnations have been cast out. The Guru has blessed me with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and my debt has been paid off.
[21
Hd HO 3H TH OT Als MISE Il (696-4, AoA, He 4) mayray man bhaj raam naam sabh arthaa. O my mind, vibrate the Lord's Name, and all your affairs shall be resolved.
afs us ofs on feafenr fag are leg freer i TIC Il 696-4, ASA, Hs 4)
gur poorai har naam drirh-aa-i-aa bin naavai jeevan birthaa. rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me; without the Name, life is useless. ||Pause| |
fag Oa us se FT HoH 3 Ho HEMT fos SE Il 96-5, ASAST, He 4)
bin gur moorh bha-ay hai manmukh tay moh maa-i-aa nit faathaa.
Without the Guru, the self-willed manmukhs are foolish and ignorant; they are forever entangled in emotional attachment to Maya.
fa AY Bde o AS aay fa AS AGH MATE IQIl (696-5, AIAST, HE 4) tin saaDhoo charan na sayvay kabhoo tin sabh janam akaathaa. ||2|| They never serve the feet of the Holy; their lives are totally useless. ||2| |
fae AY vse ATG ua Ae 35 AelSs AGH AGT Il (696-6, AsASt, He 4)
jin saaDhoo charan saaDh pag sayvay tin safli-o janam sanaathaa.
Those who serve at the feet of the Holy, the feet of the Holy, their lives are made fruitful, and they belong to the Lord.
Ha@ att @H OA OHA a Ufa cfer Ofe HaISTaT Il (696-7, AIACT, He 4)
mo ka-o keejai daas daas daasan ko har da-i-aa Dhaar jagannaathaa. ||3]||
Make me the slave of the slave of the slaves of the Lord; bless me with Your Mercy, O Lord of the Universe. ||3]]|
JH ngs fomradte uifsmrst fas weg Hrafar war il (696-7, ASAT, He 4) ham anDhulay gi-aanheen agi-aanee ki-o chaalah maarag panthaa. I am blind, ignorant and totally without wisdom; how can I walk on the Path?
JH ngs a Td vive tin Ho Soa vo fisar SIU (696-8, AsAST, He 4)
ham anDhulay ka-o gur anchal deejai jan naanak chalah milanthaa. ||4]|1]|
I am blind - O Guru, please let me grasp the hem of Your robe, so that servant Nanak may walk in harmony with You. ||4]|1]|
HSA HIS 8 Il (696-9) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
dat we nniwa dF ad fas aaa Htat aN I (696-9, ASAT, He 4)
heeraa laal amolak hai bhaaree bin gaahak meekaa kaakhaa.
A jewel or a diamond may be very valuable and heavy, but without a purchaser, it is worth only straw.
Iss WIS TT AY SG sa ase fas Hw Al (696-9, AsASH, He 4)
ratan gaahak gur saaDhoo daykhi-o tab ratan bikaano laakhaa. ||1]|
When the Holy Guru, the Purchaser, saw this jewel, He purchased it for hundreds of thousands of dollars. ||1]|
He nfs aus dte of aa I (696-10, HAST, v8 4) mayrai man gupat heer har raakhaa. The Lord has kept this jewel hidden within my mind.
de cents frees ag Ay afe fifemt dig usr 1 TIS I (696-10, AsAt, m2 4) deen da-i-aal milaa-i-o gur saaDhoo gur mili-ai heer paraakhaa. rahaa-o.
The Lord, merciful to the meek, led me to meet the Holy Guru; meeting the Guru, I came to appreciate this jewel. ||Pause| |
HOHY aot mfemirg nits fo wfs Ie o GMA Il (696-11, ASAT, He 4)
manmukh kothee agi-aan anDhayraa tin ghar ratan na laakhaa.
The rooms of the self-willed manmukhs are dark with ignorance; in their homes, the jewel is not visible.
3 Gof sofh He aerct Hfeor guia fey TAT MI (696-12, ASA, He 4) tay oojharh bharam mu-ay gaavaaree maa-i-aa bhu-ang bikh chaakhaa. ||2|| Those fools die, wandering in the wilderness, eating the poison of the snake, Maya.
21 |
dfs ofs AG Hag AS ata dfs ATG AafE TH Ia II (696-12, ABHET, He 4)
har har saaDh maylhu jan neekay har saaDhoo saran ham raakhaa.
O Lord, Har, Har, let me meet the humble, holy beings; O Lord, keep me in the Sanctuary of the Holy.
fg vidas AsT US AMM gH us Star SH UT ZI (696-13, AsAST, He 4) har angeekaar karahu parabh su-aamee ham paray bhaag tum paakhaa. ||3]| O Lord, make me Your own; O God, Lord and Master, I have hurried to Your side.
[I3I|
fsa font ae orfy sured SH ST MG FT UTA Il (696-14, ASA, 2 4) jinvaa ki-aa gun aakh vakhaaneh tum vad agam vad purkhaa.
What Glorious Virtues of Yours can I speak and describe? You are great and unfathomable, the Greatest Being.
Ho saa die fasu udt us Fas Ts Ia WSNI (696-14, AsAeH, He 4)
jan naanak har kirpaa Dhaaree paakhaan dubat har raakhaa. ||4]|2]| The Lord has bestowed His Mercy on servant Nanak; He has saved the sinking stone. [141121]
User Exo
ASAT HE 8 Il (697-1) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
oH ata sent 3 Wod ats ffs So Hoe Ha feurat II (697-1, AsAET, He 4)
ham baarik kachhoo-a na jaanah gat mit tayray moorakh mugaDh i-aanaa.
I am Your child; I know nothing about Your state and extent; I am foolish, idiotic and ignorant.
ofs fas ofe ata fs Osu af tA Ha first AI (97-2, ASAT, He 4)
har kirpaa Dhaar deejai mat ootam kar leejai mugaDh si-aanaa. ||1]|
O Lord, shower me with Your Mercy; bless me with an enlightened intellect; I am foolish - make me clever. ||1]|
HT HS nir@Abat Sursrar il (697-2, HsAet, us 4) mayraa man aalsee-aa ughlaanaa. My mind is lazy and sleepy.
ofs ofs vite freofes ag rg fife Arg cue wera I TIE Il (697-3, AsAS, He 4)
har har aan milaa-i-o gur saaDhoo mil saaDhoo kapat khulaanaa. rahaa-o.
The Lord, Har, Har, has led me to meet the Holy Guru; meeting the Holy, the shutters have been opened wide. ||Pause||
aa fis fas ulfs wareg AS dhs AS UISH oy UTA I (697-4, AsAST, He 4)
gur khin khin pareet lagaavahu mayrai hee-arai mayray pareetam naam paraanaa.
O Guru, each and every instant, fill my heart with love; the Name of my Beloved is my breath of life.
faa oe ufe wren AS oars fae ont onfs Barat iQil (697-4, AaAH, He 4)
bin naavai mar jaa-ee-ai mayray thaakur ji-o amlee amal IJubhaanaa. ||2|| Without the Name, I would die; the Name of my Lord and Master is to me like the drug to the addict. ||2||
fo Hfs ulfs wait afs act fsa ufs sar UsTAT Il (697-5, ASAT, Hs 4)
jin man pareet lagee har kayree tin Dhur bhaag puraanaa.
Those who enshrine love for the Lord within their minds fulfill their pre-ordained destiny.
f36 JH Ude Ade fas fue fAo dia Hts Bara iSil (697-5, AaAST, He 4) tin ham charan sarayveh khin khin jin har meeth lagaanaa. ||3]| I worship their feet, each and every instant; the Lord seems very sweet to them. ||3]|
dfs ofs four ot He oats AS faefour fost firesrat II (697-6, AAT, He 4)
har har kirpaa Dhaaree mayrai thaakur jan bichhuri-aa chiree milaanaa.
My Lord and Master, Har, Har, has showered His Mercy upon His humble servant; separated for so long, he is now re-united with the Lord.
U6 U6 Afsag fafs on fesfenr AG sod fA ATA ISIS (697-7, ASAT, He 4) Dhan Dhan satgur jin naam drirh-aa-i-aa jan naanak tis kurbaanaa. ||4||3]| Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord within me; servant Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||4]|3]|
HSA HIS 8 Il (697-8) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
Afsagd AHS usY es ufenr aie gAfax GAfA Sw Brera Il (697-8, AsAH, He 4)
satgur saajan purakh vad paa-i-aa har rasak rasak fal laagibaa.
I have found the True Guru, my Friend, the Greatest Being. Love and affection for the Lord has blossomed forth.
Heo sfimia afAe 3 yet aa seat fan afe ofear Ail (697-9, AaHEt, He 4) maa-i-aa bhu-i-ang garsi-o hai paraanee gur bachnee bis har kaadhibaa. ||1]|| Maya, the snake, has seized the mortal; through the Word of the Guru, the Lord neutralizes the venom. ||1||
HT HO TH OH SA Utara Il (697-9, Ase, He 4) mayraa man raam naam ras laagibaa. My mind is attached to the sublime essence of the Lord's Name.
ofa até ufss ufeg fife Aa ae af on afs on ofr I TIE I (697-10, Aare, He 4) har kee-ay patit pavitar mil saaDh gur har naamai har ras chaakhibaa. rahaa-o. The Lord has purified the sinners, uniting them with the Holy Guru; now, they taste the Lord's Name, and the sublime essence of the Lord. ||Pause] |
U9 ug essa fifes ag Ag fife AG fee Coufs wfarer Il (697-10, Hans, He 4)
Dhan Dhan vadbhaag mili-o gur saaDhoo mil saaDhoo liv unman laagibaa.
Blessed, blessed is the good fortune of those who meet the Holy Guru; meeting with the Holy, they lovingly center themselves in the state of absolute absorption.
fgHor wate ast AS uret of fasHe fesHe Te Wear Ii2I1 (697-11, ASAT, He 4) tarisnaa agan bujhee saa“t paa-ee har nirmal nirmal gun gaa-ibaa. ||2||
The fire of desire within them is quenched, and they find peace; they sing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate Lord. ||2||
f35 a aa Ute ufs ue fro Asad Pen & UTEAT Il (697-12, AsAet, He 4)
tin kay bhaag kheen Dhur paa-ay jin satgur daras na paa-ibaa.
Those who do not obtain the Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan, have misfortune pre-ordained for them.
3 en ofe uefa qs Aat Ag foe AH fSo WEA N3i 97-13, AAT, He 4)
tay doojai bhaa-ay paveh garabh jonee sabh birthaa janam tin jaa-ibaa. ||3]||
In the love of duality, they are consigned to reincarnation through the womb, and they pass their lives totally uselessly. ||3]|
dfs @g fauna ufs Teg AU ud Ae JH Ufa He BarfEs Il (697-13, AsAet, He 4)
har dayh bimal mat gur saaDh pag sayvah ham har meeth lagaa-ibaa.
O Lord, please, bless me with pure understanding, that I may serve the Feet of the Holy Guru; the Lord seems sweet to me.
He soa de AT ud Ha die df vfenre feetea gigi (697-14, ASAT, He 4)
jan naanak rayn saaDh pag maagai har ho-ay da-i-aal divaa-ibaa. | |4||4||
Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of the Holy; O Lord, be Merciful, and bless me with it. ||4]|4]|
HSA HIG 8 Il (697-15) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
fro ofa fase ay 3 ofA fsa nS ath ofa gist II (697-15, AAT, He 4)
jin har hirdai naam na basi-o tin maat keejai har baa‘jhaa.
The Lord's Name does not abide within their hearts - their mothers should have been sterile.
fso Het 2a fests fas ae Gfe ufu ufy He ats AI (697-15, AsAEH, He 4)
tin sunjee dayh fireh bin naavai o-ay khap khap mu-ay karaa‘jhaa. ||1||
These bodies wander around, forlorn and abandoned, without the Name; their lives waste away, and they die, crying out in pain. ||1]|
He Ho Afu TH BMH Ts HST Il (697-16, AAS, He 4) mayray man jap raam naam har maajhaa. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord within you.
ofa ofe farts faur ufs ost afs fame StS He AHST Il TIE Il (697-16, Aart, He 4) har har kirpaal kirpaa parabh Dhaaree gur gi-aan dee-o man samjhaa. rahaa-o. The Merciful Lord God, Har, Har, has showered me with His Mercy; the Guru has imparted spiritual wisdom to me, and my mind has been instructed. ||Pause]|
ofs atefs aeafa ue Say afs urea AfSae HST II (697-17, Aart, He 4)
har keerat kaljug pad ootam har paa-ee-ai satgur maajhaa.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise brings the most noble and exalted status; the Lord is found through the True Guru.
Je seas Asad nus fate TUS SH UATE IQ (697-18, HsAST, He 4) ha-o balihaaree satgur apunay jin gupat naam pargaajhaa. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru, who has revealed the Lord's hidden Name to me.
[21] zane ATG fHfse essere Afs fosfea ae TSS I (697-19, AsAet, He 4)
darsan saaDh mili-o vadbhaagee sabh kilbikh ga-ay gavaajhaa. By great good fortune, I obtained the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy; it removes all stains of sin.
Afsag A ufenr es erat dfe ale AT TS AS Il (697-19, AsAH, He 4)
satgur saahu paa-i-aa vad daanaa har kee-ay baho gun saajhaa. ||3]|
I have found the True Guru, the great, all-knowing King; He has shared with me the many Glorious Virtues of the Lord. ||3]|
ar ett fre a@ faur act aartefes fs Cfa ofsG Ha HST II (698-1, HAT, He 4)
jin ka-o kirpaa karee jagjeevan har ur Dhaari-o man maajhaa. Those, unto whom the Lord, the Life of the world, has shown Mercy, enshrine Him within their hearts, and cherish Him in their minds.
UdH of ufs wae ad AS SOA BUT AHS IISIUII (698-1, ASHE, He 4)
Dharam raa-ay dar kaagad faaray jan naanak laykhaa samjhaa. ||4]|5|| The Righteous Judge of Dharma, in the Court of the Lord, has torn up my papers; servant Nanak's account has been settled. ||4]|5||
ASAT HIS 8 Il (698-2) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
ASAas AT Uet ESS HS VHS SES mga Il (698-2, ASAT, we 4)
satsangat saaDh paa-ee vadbhaagee man chaltou bha-i-o aroorhaa.
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I found the Holy, by great good fortune; my restless mind has been quieted.
nous Ufs eats fos eat ofe nifgs ove aff Sts IAI (698-3, AsAS, He 4)
anhat Dhun vaajeh nit vaajay har amrit Dhaar ras leerhaa. ||1]|
The unstruck melody ever vibrates and resounds; I have taken in the sublime essence of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, showering down. ||1]|
Ae Ho Au gH oH Tle Tat Il (698-4, ABHET, He 4) mayray man jap raam naam har roorhaa. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the beauteous Lord.
Ad ufe sfs uifS weret Afsafe afs fifee wfe star i ga Il (698-4, Azact, ne 4) mayrai man tan pareet lagaa-ee satgur har mili-o laa-ay jhapeerhaa. rahaa-o.
The True Guru has drenched my mind and body with the Love of the Lord, who has met me and lovingly embraced me. ||Pause| |
Was do se 0 wfenr fay Aefo of Aellst Il (698-5, AaAet, He 4)
saakat banDh bha-ay hai maa-i-aa bikh sa‘cheh laa-ay jakeerhaa.
The faithless cynics are bound and gagged in the chains of Maya; they are actively engaged, gathering in the poisonous wealth.
ofa & mrafa wats og Fafa AHaTS Aofs ffs utst 12H (os-5, AsAet, He 4)
har kai arath kharach nah saakeh jamkaal saheh sir peerhaa. ||2]|
They cannot spend this in harmony with the Lord, and so they must endure the pain which the Messenger of Death inflicts upon their heads. ||2||
faa dfs ofefa Adty sarfeur ae AG ag He oe ufe Tat II (698-6, ASAE, He 4) jin har arath sareer lagaa-i-aa gur saaDhoo baho sarDhaa laa-ay mukh Dhoorhaa. The Holy Guru has dedicated His Being to the Lord's service; with great devotion, apply the dust of His feet to your face.
vos uals afs Ast uefa ofa Fa war Hfs TS Sil (698-7, ASA, Hs 4)
halat palat har sobhaa paavahi har rang lagaa man goorhaa. ||3]|
In this world and the next, you shall receive the Lord's honor, and your mind shall be imbued with the permanent color of the Lord's Love. ||3]|
dfs ofa vfs His AS ATT TN ATG AST aT ATT Il (698-7, ABHET, He 4)
har har mayl mayl jan saaDhoo ham saaDh janaa kaa keerhaa.
O Lord, Har, Har, please unite me with the Holy; compared to these Holy people, I am just a worm.
Ao ston US wait ua ATG ae ffs ATT uTarS ofS HS HAT IIEI (698-8, ASAT, He 4) jan naanak pareet lagee pag saaDh gur mil saaDhoo paakhaan hari-o man moorhaa. [141161]
Servant Nanak has enshrined love for the feet of the Holy Guru; meeting with this Holy One, my foolish, stone-like mind has blossomed forth in lush profusion. ||4||6] |
HSA HIG 8 We 2 (698-10) jaitsaree mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (698-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs ofa frags aH murs II (698-11, AeA, Hs 4) har har simrahu agam apaaraa. Remember in meditation the Lord, Har, Har, the unfathomable, infinite Lord.
fan faHes eu fie THE II (698-11, ASAT, He 4) jis simrat dukh mitai hamaaraa. Remembering Him in meditation, pains are dispelled.
dfs ofs Afsag usy froreg afe fifo re Tet TH NU (698-11, ASAT, He 4) har har satgur purakh milaavhu gur mili-ai sukh ho-ee raam. ||1|| O Lord, Har, Har, lead me to meet the True Guru; meeting the Guru, I am at peace.
[1|
Ufs TE Wed HTS INST Il (698-12, Aart, 2 4) har gun gaavhu meet hamaaray. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O my friend.
ofa ots SH sug Ba Us Il (698-12, AA, He 4) har har naam rakhahu ur Dhaaray. Cherish the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in your heart.
ofa ofs nifqs suo Hevea ae fifemt usa] Tet IH NI (698-13, AsAKT, He 4)
har har amrit bachan sunavhu gur mili-ai pargat ho-ee raam. ||2||
Read the Ambrosial Words of the Lord, Har, Har; meeting with the Guru, the Lord is revealed. ||2||
HOHES Tis HA YTS I (698-13, AsAT, we 4) maDhusoodan har maaDho paraanaa. The Lord, the Slayer of demons, is my breath of life.
Ad ufs sf nifgs Hle warar i (698-14, Asst, us 4) mayrai man tan amrit meeth lagaanaa. His Ambrosial Amrit is so sweet to my mind and body.
dfs ofs efor agg ag Hed use fadHe ASt IM SI (698-14, HAST, He 4) har har da-i-aa karahu gur maylhu purakh niranjan so-ee raam. ||3]||
O Lord, Har, Har, have mercy upon me, and lead me to meet the Guru, the immaculate Primal Being. ||3]|
dfs ots SH Ae’ AYSTST || (698-15, ASAT, Hs 4) har har naam sadaa sukh-daata. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is forever the Giver of peace.
dfs & fa Ha HS TS Il (698-15, AAS, He 4) har kai rang mayraa man raataa. My mind is imbued with the Lord's Love.
dfs dfs Ho use Td ASI Td soa OTH AY det TH IBIAUIDI (698-15, AaAT, He 4)
har har mahaa purakh gur maylhu gur naanak naam sukh ho-ee raam. ||4||1]|7]|
O Lord Har, Har, lead me to meet the Guru, the Greatest Being; through the Name of Guru Nanak, I have found peace. ||4||1]|7]|
ASA Hs 8 Il (698-16) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofa ofa afs SH AUT Il (698-16, AsAH, He 4) har har har har naam japaahaa. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har.
THY SH At B BI Il (698-17, ASAT, v2 4) gurmukh naam sadaa lai laahaa. As Gurmukh, ever earn the profit of the Naam.
ofa fs ofs ofe sats fesreg ofa ofa ou Gara TH IAI (698-17, HAF, He 4)
har har har har bhagat darirhaavahu har har naam omaahaa raam. ||1||
Implant within yourself devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har; sincerely dedicate yourself to the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
dfs ofa SH efenre fons i (698-18, HAT, He 4) har har naam da-i-aal Dhi-aahaa. Meditate on the Name of the Merciful Lord, Har, Har.
dfs & df AST TS WaT I (698-18, AIAST, v2 4) har kai rang sadaa gun gaahaa. WIth love, forever sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
dfs ofs ofs wa units ureg fife ASAfa SHI IH NI (698-18, AsAST, He 4)
har har har jas ghoomar paavhu mil satsang omaahaa raam. ||2||
Dance to the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har; meet with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, with sincerity. ||2]|
m@ Aut ofs Af fara Il (698-19, Aart, He 4) aa-o sakhee har mayl milaahaa. Come, O companions - let us unite in the Lord's Union.
Afs ofs aa SH B BI Il (698-19, AIAST, v2 4) sun har kathaa naam lai laahaa. Listening to the sermon of the Lord, earn the profit of the Naam.
ar exe dfs ofs four ofe aa Hog afe fifo afs Gra a1 BI (699-1, AsAT, He 4)
har har kirpaa Dhaar gur maylhu gur mili-ai har omaahaa raam. ||3]| O Lord, Har, Har, be merciful to me, and lead me to meet the Guru; meeting the Guru, a sincere yearning for the Lord wells up in me. |[3]|
ate atefs AA Mia nTETIT II (699-1, ASAT, He 4) kar keerat jas agam athaahaa. Praise Him, the unfathomable and inaccessible Lord.
fags fas IH SH ArerT Il (699-2, HaAST, He 4) khin khin raam naam gaavaahaa. Each and every moment, sing the Lord's Name.
Ha os for frst ae as ofa aaa sats Gra ITH ISNVICI (699-2, AsA, He 4) mo ka-o Dhaar kirpaa milee-ai gur daatay har naanak bhagat omaahaa raam. H4112|18]|
Be merciful, and meet me, O Guru, Great Giver; Nanak yearns for the Lord's devotional worship. ||4]|2||8||
HSA HE 8 Il (699-3) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
ofA aA TH GAS ABT Il (699-3, Aart, He 4) ras ras raam rasaal salaahaa. With love and energetic affection, praise the Lord, the storehouse of Nectar.
HO TH of Star B Ba Il (699-3, AIACT, He 4) man raam naam bheenaa lai laahaa. My mind is drenched with the Lord's Name, and so it earns this profit.
fs fue safs ass feg ast asHfs sats GH IH INA (99-4, ASAT, He 4)
khin khin bhagat karah din raatee gurmat bhagat omaahaa raam. ||1]|
Each and every moment, worship Him in devotion, day and night; through the Guru's Teachings, sincere love and devotion well up. ||1]|
ofs ofa we dfs MUTT Il (699-4, AsAe, He 4) har har gun govind japaahaa. Chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, Har, Har.
HO 36 Aifs AaT B GT Il (699-5, ASH, He 4) man tan jeet sabad lai laahaa. Conquering mind and body, I have earned the profit of the Shabad.
Tens us vs eA ureta nfs sf afs Gara IH Mil (699-5, AsASt, He 4)
gurmat panch doot vas aavahi man tan har omaahaa raam. ||2||
Through the Guru's Teachings, the five demons are over-powered, and the mind and body are filled with a sincere yearning for the Lord. ||2]|
SH G36 Tid SH AUT Il (699-6, Han, He 4) naam ratan har naam japaahaa. The Name is a jewel - chant the Lord's Name.
dfs Te WE AST B BT Il (699-6, ASH, He 4) har gun gaa-ay sadaa lai laahaa. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and forever earn this profit.
ae venir faur afe wad ofs ofs on Gara TH ISI (699-6, AsAST, He 4)
deen da-i-aal kirpaa kar maaDho har har naam omaahaa raam. ||3] |
O Lord, merciful to the meek, be kind to me, and bless me with sincere longing for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
afu AaretA AUG HS HTT Il (699-7, AsAST, He 4) jap jagdees japa-o man maahaa. Meditate on the Lord of the world - meditate within your mind.
dfs dfs Aaa Afa Ba Il (699-7, AsAH, He 4) har har jagannaath jag laahaa. The Lord of the Universe, Har, Har, is the only real profit in this world.
Ug US es Sad ys AS Af Soa Sals SHI TH III (699-7, AsAt, He 4) Dhan Dhan vaday thaakur parabh mayray jap naanak bhagat omaahaa raam. 41131191]
Blessed, blessed, is my Great Lord and Master God; O Nanak, meditate on Him, worship Him with sincere love and devotion. ||4]|3]|9]|
ASAT HIS 8 Il (699-8) jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
wmy Halt Has WaT Il (699-8, ASAT, He 4) aapay jogee jugat jugaahaa. He Himself is the Yogi, and the way throughout the ages.
my feds StS Ba Il (699-9, Aart, He 4) aapay nirbha-o taarhee laahaa. The Fearless Lord Himself is absorbed in Samaadhi.
nmr ot orfy wrfu eas omy arty Garat TH AU (699-9, AsAS, ne 4)
aapay hee aap aap vartai aapay naam omaahaa raam. ||1||
He Himself, all by Himself, is all-pervading; He Himself blesses us with sincere love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
mm ety But shurg Il (699-10, ASAT, He 4) aapay deep lo-a deepaahaa. He Himself is the lamp, and the Light pervading all the worlds.
nm} Afsagd AHS HAI Il (699-10, AsASH, He 4) aapay satgur samund mathaahaa. He Himself is the True Guru; He Himself churns the ocean.
mmy Hfa Hfa 33 awe Af oy I3q SHIT TH III (699-10, AsAet, H2 4)
aapay math math tat kadhaa-ay jap naam ratan omaahaa raam. ||2||
He Himself churns it, churning up the essence; meditating on the jewel of the Naam, sincere love comes to the surface. ||2||
Ret fog ffs ae aera II (699-11, Aart, He 4) sakhee milhu mil gun gaavaahaa. O my companions, let us meet and join together, and sing His Glorious Praises.
aaHfe aH Aug dfs Ba Il (699-11, AsASt, He 4) gurmukh naam japahu har laahaa. As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, and earn the profit of the Lord's Name.
ofa ofs sats fest ufs set ofa ofa oH Gua IH NBII (699-12, AsAS, He 4)
har har bhagat darirh-ee man bhaa-ee har har naam omaahaa raam. ||3]|| Devotional worship of the Lord, Har, Har, has been implanted within me; it is pleasing to my mind. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, brings a sincere love. ||3]|
MY TS Wat Bw AI Il (699-12, ASAT, He 4) aapay vad daanaa vad saahaa. He Himself is supremely wise, the greatest King.
asnfa ust ou fear Il (699-13, ASAT, He 4) gurmukh poonjee naam visaahaa. As Gurmukh, purchase the merchandise of the Naam.
ofa ofs af agg ys aS TE BOA OU Gg TH IVilSiAoll (699-13, Asxet, ve 4) har har daat karahu parabh bhaavai gun naanak naam omaahaa raam. ||4||4]|10]| O Lord God, Har, Har, bless me with such a gift, that Your Glorious Virtues seem pleasing to me; Nanak is filled with sincere love and yearning for the Lord.
[14] 141] 10]|
HSASt HIS g Il (699-14)
jaitsaree mehlaa 4. Jaitsree, Fourth Mehl:
fife AsHafs Afer aaa | (699-14, Aart, He 4) mil satsangat sang guraahaa. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and associating with the Guru,
Urt oH TaHfa SAT Il (699-14, ASAST, He 4) poonjee naam gurmukh vaysaahaa. the Gurmukh gathers in the merchandise of the Naam.
dfs ofs far ofe HORE ffs ASHfet HI IH MAI (699-15, ASAT, Hs 4)
har har kirpaa Dhaar maDhusoodan mil satsang omaahaa raam. ||1||
O Lord, Har, Har, Destroyer of demons, have mercy upon me; bless me with a sincere yearning to join the Sat Sangat. ||1]|
dfs Te set ASfE ASTI || (699-15, ASA, He 4) har gun banee sarvan sunaahaa. Let me hear with my ears the Banis, the Hymns, in praise of the Lord;
ats fasur Afsarg fHera il (699-16, AsASt, He 4) kar kirpaa satguroo milaahaa. be merciful, and let me meet the True Guru.
TE Wed Te Iod wat dfs Te Af SHIT IM II (699-16, ASAT, He 4)
gun gaavah gun bolah banee har gun jap omaahaa raam. ||2||
I sing His Glorious Praises, I speak the Bani of His Word; chanting His Glorious Praises, a sincere yearning for the Lord wells up. ||2||
Afs Stee Fas Aa US SHIT Il (699-17, AsAet, He 4)
sabh tirath varat jag punn tolaahaa.
I have tried visiting all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage, fasting, ceremonial feasts and giving to charities.
dfs of SH 3 UAfT UAT Il (699-17, 3A, He 4) har har naam na pujeh pujaahaa. They do not measure up to the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs ofs mae 36 mfs oct Tens fy Gra MMH II (699-17, AsAeT, He 4)
har har atul tol at bhaaree gurmat jap omaahaa raam. ||3]|
The Lord's Name is unweighable, utterly heavy in weight; through the Guru's Teachings, a sincere yearning to chant the Name has welled up in me. ||3]|
Afs aH UsH Ths SH AUT Il (699-18, ASAT, He 4) sabh karam Dharam har naam japaahaa. All good karma and righteous living are found in meditation on the Lord's Name.
fosfed He uTy TerT Il (699-18, ASAT, He 4) kilvikh mail paap Dhovaahaa. It washes away the stains of sins and mistakes.
ais fens dg we Cufs ty SHA OH SHI TH NSIUNAI (699-19, ASAT, Hs 4) deen da-i-aal hohu jan oopar dayh naanak naam omaahaa raam. ||4]|5]|11]|
Be merciful to meek, humble Nanak; bless him with sincere love and yearning for the Lord. ||4][5]]11]|
UST DOO
SAS HIS UWE 3 (700-1)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars yrfe I (700-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aet aS aee eto afar Hts Il (700-2, Aan, He 5) ko-ee jaanai kavan eehaa jag meet. Does anyone know, who is our friend in this world?
fan ofe faurs Aet fafa gs a at fone SHS ua FHS il (700-2, ASA, ws 5)
jis ho-ay kirpaal so-ee biDh boojhai taa kee nirmal reet. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone understands this, whom the Lord blesses with His Mercy. Immaculate and unstained is his way of life. ||1]||Pause] |
Hs fust afest AS dou fere Hts nig set Il Usa ASH & AHS Adait nists a o ATT NAll (700-3, Wat, Hs 5)
maat pitaa banitaa sut banDhap isat meet ar bhaa-ee. poorab janam kay milay Sanjogee anteh ko na sahaa-ee. ||1||
Mother, father, spouse, children, relatives, lovers, friends and siblings meet, having been associated in previous lives; but none of them will be your companion and support in the end. ||1]|
Hats Hs afoa we dt Ho dao at Her Il (700-4, HsAeH, He 5) mukat maal kanik laal heeraa man ranjan kee maa-i-aa. Pearl necklaces, gold, rubies and diamonds please the mind, but they are only Maya.
vo aes faost nreafs a ufs HS o urfemr QI (700-4, AaAET, He 5) haa haa karat bihaanee avDhahi taa meh santokh na paa-i-aa. ||2|| Possessing them, one passes his life in agony; he obtains no contentment from them.
21 |
JAS Ja Mi uso 3H Tel FH VITA Il (700-5, AAC, He 5) hasat rath asav pavan tayj Dhanee bhooman chaturaa"gaa. Elephants, chariots, horses as fast as the wind, wealth, land, and armies of four kinds
fa o wee feo ufo aemt Cfe fates atar Sil (700-5, #aASt, Hs 5) sang na chaali-o in meh kachhoo-ai ooth siDhaa-i-o naagaa. ||3]| - none of these will go with him; he must get up and depart, naked. ||3]|
dfs & As fut utsn ys & a a ofa afe are I (700-6, AsHet, He 5) har kay sant pari-a pareetam parabh kay taa kai har har gaa-ee-ai. The Lord's Saints are the beloved lovers of God; sing of the Lord, Har, Har, with them.
aod Ste AY nid He Cre Afa Hse & ure SIU (700-7, HsAt, He 5)
naanak eehaa sukh aagai mukh oojal sang santan kai paa-ee-ai. | |4||1]|
O Nanak, in the Society of the Saints, you shall obtain peace in this world, and in the next world, your face shall be radiant and bright. ||4]|1]|
ASA HIS U We 3 BUS (700-8) jaitsaree mehlaa 5 ghar 3 dupday Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Third House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsas yArfe I (700-8) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ag Hen adi fut adh i (700-9, Asnet, ve 5) dayh sandaysaro kahee-a-o pari-a kahee-a-o. Give me a message from my Beloved - tell me, tell me!
far set 4 ag fafa Hos aog ATafS AShHe 9a TIC Il (700-9, aA, He 5)
bisam bha-ee mai baho biDh suntay kahhu suhaagan sahee-a-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am wonder-struck, hearing the many reports of Him; tell them to me, O my happy sister soul-brides. ||1]|Pause| |
a ads AS Hols was x ATS AS HIM I (700-10, AIAG, 2 5)
ko kahto sabh baahar baahar ko kahto sabh mahee-a-o.
Some say that He is beyond the world - totally beyond it, while others say that He is totally within it.
ado 3 A fess 5 odhn Haas AS ssdhaS Wall (700-10, Ast, He 5)
baran na deesai chihan na lakhee-ai suhaagan saat boojhhee-a-o. ||1]|
His color cannot be seen, and His pattern cannot be discerned. O happy soul-brides, tell me the truth! ||1||
Hea feet ufe ufe SH Su adt muds Il (700-11, AsAeHt, 2 5)
sarab nivaasee ghat ghat vaasee layp nahee alaphee-a-o.
He is pervading everywhere, and He dwells in each and every heart; He is not stained - He is unstained.
SOA AIS HOT J Bd AS GAS A SAMA NQUAUIM (700-11, ASA, He 5) naanak kahat sunhu ray logaa sant rasan ko bashee-a-o. ||2||1]||2| | Says Nanak, listen, O people: He dwells upon the tongues of the Saints. ||2]|1]|2||
ASA Hs U Il (700-12)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
me afs ate ys aE a FIC il (700-12, AsAeH, He 5) Dheera-o sun Dheera-o parabh ka-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am calmed, calmed and soothed, hearing of God. ||1||Pause||
rt ute Ho 36 Ag Maue alee ufe ys aS ste All (700-13, FaAet, we 5)
jee-a paraan man tan sabh arpa-o neera-o paykh parabh ka-o neera-o. ||1||
I dedicate my soul, my breath of life, my mind, body and everything to Him: I behold God near, very near. ||1]|
SANS By as est Hots adtse uf ys AS Ii (700-13, AsAST, ue 5) baysumaar bay-ant bad daataa maneh gaheera-o paykh parabh ka-o. ||2|| Beholding God, the inestimable, infinite and Great Giver, I cherish Him in my mind.
21 |
A WIG Aet Het wes oA HOAT UTS AfU YS A USI (700-14, AsAcT, we 5) jo chaaha-o so-ee so-ee paava-O aasaa mansaa poora-o jap parabh ka-o. ||3]| Whatever I wish for, I receive; my hopes and desires are fulfilled, meditating on God.
[I3I|
qs ure ato Hie efron ef o aag SIS ats YS AS ISIQUSI (700-15, ASAE, He 5) gur parsaad naanak man vasi-aa dookh na kabhoo jhoora-o bujh parabh ka-o. 41121131]
By Guru's Grace, God dwells in Nanak's mind; he never suffers or grieves, having realized God. ||4]|2||3]|
HSASt HIS U Il (700-15)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
Bates" AHS AS Il (700-16, ATAST, He 5) lorheedarhaa saajan mayraa. I seek my Friend the Lord.
ufs wis Hae aed ata ufe wie fsAfs ava WA TIS i (700-16, ASAT, Hz 5)
ghar ghar mangal gaavhu neekay ghat ghat tiseh basayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In each and every home, sing the sublime songs of rejoicing; He abides in each and every heart. ||1||Pause| |
fa maa ef mreag fad o aT FI Il (700-16, AZAST, He 5)
sookh araaDhan dookh araaDhan bisrai na kaahoo bayraa.
In good times, worship and adore Him; in bad times, worship and adore Him; do not ever forget Him.
ony Aus ate Ae Care fasr SoH HITT UU (700-17, AsAST, He 5)
naam japat kot soor ujaaraa binsai bharam anDhayraa. ||1]|
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the light of millions of suns shines forth, and the darkness of doubt is dispelled. ||1||
ats aoate Agot AST A CIA A Sa Il (700-17, ASHE, He 5) thaan thanantar sabhnee jaa-ee jo deesai so tayraa. In all the spaces and interspaces, everywhere, whatever we see is Yours.
H3Afa ue FH atSa fsH safe o det FT ST NVNBUSI (700-18, AsAT, He 5) satsang paavai jo naanak tis bahur na ho-ee hai fayraa. ||2||3]|4]|
One who finds the Society of the Saints, O Nanak, is not consigned to reincarnation again. ||2]||3]|4]|
UST D0
ASAd HIS Uwe 8 BUS (701-1) jaitsaree mehlaa 5 ghar 4 dupday Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars yArfe il (701-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mah AY utes aa vefa il (701-2, AsAet, He 5) ab mai sukh paa-i-o gur aaga-y. Now, I have found peace, bowing before the Guru.
sit frou fes ferrst ord SfS6 3 fSorfa na TIS il (701-2, AsAet, Hs 5)
tajee si-aanap chint visaaree aha™ chhodi-o hai ti-aaga-y. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have abandoned cleverness, quieted my anxiety, and renounced my egotism. ||1]|Pause] |
Ag fu 38 Age fo Hohe 3 Aafs ufsG ae ofa i (701-3, HAT, He 5)
ja-o daykh-a-u ta-o sagal mohi mohee-a-o ta-o saran pari-o gur bhaag.
When I looked, I saw that everyone was enticed by emotional attachment; then, I hurried to the Guru's Sanctuary.
afe fasur zoe dfs ofe 38 af est Het far Wal (701-3, HsAST, He 5)
kar kirpaa tahal har laa-i-o ta-o jam chhodee moree laag. ||1||
In His Grace, the Guru engaged me in the Lord's service, and then, the Messenger of Death gave up pursuing me. ||1]|
sfeG wag ued a AG HS SS Ss aha Il (701-4, AsAeH, Ht: 5) tari-o saagar paavak ko ja-o sant bhaytay vad bhaag. I swam across the ocean of fire, when I met the Saints, through great good fortune.
Ho aoa Ade AY UES He fa vat fos Sha NIANVWUI (701-4, ASAT, He 5) jan naanak sarab sukh paa-ay moro har charnee chit laag. ||2||1||5||
O servant Nanak, I have found total peace; my consciousness is attached to the Lord's feet. ||2]]1][5]|
HSA HIS U Il (701-5)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
Ho ufo Afsard fomre Ua Il (701-5, ASAT, He 5) man meh satgur Dhi-aan Dharaa. Within my mind, I cherish and meditate on the True Guru.
fefsS fomrg 43 ofs oor ys AE fer aa Na TTS il (701-6, AsAt, we 5)
darirhhi-o gi-aan mantar har naamaa parabh jee-o ma-i-aa karaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He has implanted within me spiritual wisdom and the Mantra of the Lord's Name; Dear God has shown mercy to me. ||1||Pause| |
OS WS Mg HI AA Sea AHfT SI Il (701-6, AsAH, He 5)
kaal jaal ar mahaa janjaalaa chhutkay jameh daraa.
Death's noose and its mighty entanglements have vanished, along with the fear of death.
mfes vu dds Ade agetufs afyG vas MAT AU (701-7, HaAST, H2 5)
aa-i-o dukh haran saran karunaapat gahi-o charan aasraa. ||1||
I have come to the Sanctuary of the Merciful Lord, the Destroyer of pain; I am holding tight to the Support of His feet. ||1]|
are gu sfee Arana se fafa uta ust Il (701-7, ASAST, He 5)
naav roop bha-i-o saaDhsang bhav niDh paar paraa.
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, has assumed the form of a boat, to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
miu utG as at sar AT SSA MAT AS QUEM (701-8, AeA, v8 5)
api-o pee-o gat thee-o bharmaa kaho naanak ajar jaraa. ||2]|2||6||
I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, and my doubts are shattered; says Nanak, I can bear the unbearable. ||2||2||6||
ASAD HIS U Il (701-9)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
Ww ag se afee Aaet Il (701-9, HAT, He 5) jaa ka-o bha-ay govind sahaa-ee. One who has the Lord of the Universe as his help and support
AY Aon nie wae fA = aS femrfa s aret ail TIES il (701-9, Asst, we 5) sookh sahj aanand sagal si-o vaa ka-o bi-aaDh na kaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. is blessed with all peace, poise and bliss; no afflictions cling to him. ||1||Pause] |
ants As Afar sofo mau og fenmd Bo He II (701-10, aH, He 5)
deeseh sabh sang raheh alaypaa nah vi-aapai un maa-ee.
He appears to keep company with everyone, but he remains detached, and Maya does not cling to him.
Sa df 33 a 83 Afsag 3 sfo wet Al (701-10, HzAet, He 5)
aykai rang tat kay baytay satgur tay buDh paa-ee. ||1]|
He is absorbed in love of the One Lord; he understands the essence of reality, and he is blessed with wisdom by the True Guru. ||1]||
efeor uffor fagur oad at ASt AS Aart Il (701-11, AsAet, He 5)
da-i-aa ma-i-aa kirpaa thaakur kee say-ee sant subhaa-ee.
Those whom the Lord and Master blesses with His kindness, compassion and mercy are the sublime and sanctified Saints.
fs0 a Hfa aaa forsdha fas afm afk ofa To wet NQNBNDN (701-11, FIAT, He 5)
tin kai sang naanak nistaree-ai jin ras ras har gun gaa-ee. ||2||3||7|| Associating with them, Nanak is saved; with love and exuberant joy, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||3]|7]||
HSAS HIS U Il (701-12)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
dfse reo YS Ts IU Il (701-13, AIA, He 5) gobind jeevan paraan Dhan roop. The Lord of the Universe is my existence, my breath of life, wealth and beauty.
nifamre Ho Halse Hot ust niftmrs Hfs shy wa TIC it (701-13, AsAet, He 5)
agi-aan moh magan mahaa paraanee anDhi-aaray meh deep. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The ignorant are totally intoxicated with emotional attachment; in this darkness, the Lord is the only lamp. ||1||Pause]|
He® edHé SHI Ys UISH GIS AHS MOU Il (701-14, ASAT, He 5)
safal darsan tumraa parabh pareetam charan kamal aanoop.
Fruitful is the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Beloved God; Your lotus feet are incomparably beautiful!
uifea ag aa@ fsa dea Hols BSS TU UA (701-14, AsACT, Hs 5) anik baar kara-o tih bandan maneh char"aava-o Dhoop. ||1]| So many times, I bow in reverence to Him, offering my mind as incense to Him. ||1]|
ofs ufsS Sud ys eurd fex afs adt SHS Ba I (701-15, HBAS, He 5) haar pari-o tum"rai parabh du-aarai darirh"u kar gahee tum"aaree look. Exhausted, I have fallen at Your Door, O God; I am holding tight to Your Support.
ate SJ Soa MUS AC HATS USA TX TAU INUIT (701-15, AIA, Hs 5) kaadh layho naanak apunay ka-o sansaar paavak kay koop. ||2]||4||8]|
Please, lift Your humble servant Nanak up, out of the pit of fire of the world. [21141181]
HSAS HIS U Il (701-16)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
act Ae ofa fae Se fs Il (701-16, AsHeH, He 5) ko-ee jan har si-o dayvai jor. If only someone would unite me with the Lord!
3do WI sas HS BAS cafe yrs wrafs NA TIC it (701-16, AsASTt, He 5)
charan gaha-o baka-o subh rasnaa deejeh paraan akor. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I hold tight to His feet, and utter sweet words with my tongue; I make my breath of life an offering to Him. ||1]||Pause||
Ho 36 fosHe ads fomrd afs fits Aor AAfs I (701-17, HaAET, He 5)
man tan nirmal karat ki-aaro har sinchai suDhaa sanjor.
I make my mind and body into pure little gardens, and irrigate them with the sublime essence of the Lord.
fur oA xfs Hae oS feo 3 Ho fafimr 3 Sfo NAN (01-18, #sAST, He 5)
i-aa ras meh magan hot kirpaa tay mahaa bikhi-aa tay tor. ||1||
I am drenched with this sublime essence by His Grace, and the powerful hold of Maya's corruption has been broken. ||1]|
nifeS nafs de eu SH fase suet Efe i (701-18, AsHet, He 5)
aa-i-o saran deen dukh bhanjan chitva-o tum"ree or.
I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Destroyer of the suffering of the innocent; I keep my consciousness focused on You.
UST DOQ
mig ug ue fines Amit & ys sea Fue Efe NQNUNEN (702-1, AsAST, He 5)
abhai pad daan simran su-aamee ko parabh naanak banDhan chhor. ||2||5||9]| Bless me with the gifts of the state of fearlessness, and meditative remembrance, Lord and Master; O Nanak, God is the Breaker of bonds. ||2||5]|9]|
ASAS HIS U Il (702-2)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
diga feses AAS AT Il (702-2, ASA, 3 5) chaatrik chitvat barsat may™h. The rainbird longs for the rain to fall.
faur fig age ys weg ofs Un safs a ST NU TIS I (702-2, AsAt, He 5)
kirpaa sinDh karunaa parabh Dhaarahu har paraym bhagat ko nay“h. ||1|| rahaa-o. O God, ocean of mercy, shower Your mercy on me, that I may yearn for loving devotional worship of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
mifod HY VaSt odt Bras mee use Uf ST Il (702-3, AaAeH, He 5)
anik sookh chakvee nahee chaahat anad pooran paykh day"h.
The chakvi duck does not desire many comforts, but it is filled with bliss upon seeing the dawn.
ms Bure 3 Ales Hie fae AG HIST ST NA (702-3, HsAMT, He 5) aan upaav na jeevat meenaa bin jal marnaa tayh. ||1]| The fish cannot survive any other way - without water, it dies. ||1]|
JH mara ara dig Adal must faut AST ll (702-4, Ast, He 5)
ham anaath naath har sarnee apunee kirpaa karay“h.
I am a helpless orphan - I seek Your Sanctuary, O My Lord and Master; please bless me with Your mercy.
TIE GHG Boa nad fan fas nto o AT IQMUENAON (702-5, ASAT, He 5)
charan kamal naanak aaraaDhai tis bin aan na kay“h. ||2||6||10] |
Nanak worships and adores the Lord's lotus feet; without Him, there is no other at all. [12] |6]|210]|
HSAS HIS U Il (702-5)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
Hfs 3fe aff Id HS YTS Il (702-5, AsASt, He 5) man tan bas rahay mayray paraan. The Lord, my very breath of life, abides in my mind and body.
ate fase Ag Afar SS UTS Use AAS IA TIS Il (702-6, AA, Hs 5)
kar kirpaa saaDhoo sang bhaytay pooran purakh sujaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Bless me with Your mercy, and unite me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O perfect, all-knowing Lord God. ||1]||Pause] |
UH SaSdt fe a uret So aA UbAe ardt Il (702-6, AsHet, ve 5)
paraym thag-uree jin ka-o paa-ee tin ras pee-a-o bhaaree.
Those, unto whom You give the intoxicating herb of Your Love, drink in the supreme sublime essence.
oT at aHfs ade 3 Wet Avals Aeo THA MAUI (702-7, ATA, He 5) taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee kudrat kavan ham"aaree. ||1|| I cannot describe their value; what power do I have? ||1]||
ofe oe of BA Ho MUS Bud Buds Il (702-8, Aan, He 5)
laa-ay la-ay larh daas jan apunay uDhray uDhaaranhaaray.
The Lord attaches His humble servants to the hem of His robe, and they swim across the world-ocean.
ug faufs fants faufs AY ute area Hats BTS NIWOUAUI (702-8, ABA, 18 5)
parabh simar simar simar sukh paa-i-o naanak saran du-aaray. ||2||7||11]| Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, peace is obtained; Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of Your Door. ||2]|7||11]|
HSA HIS U Il (702-9)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
me nifex ASH Bf Adel Il (702-9, ASAT, He 5) aa-ay anik janam bharam sarnee. After wandering through so many incarnations, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
Gug ed nig qu 3 weg nyt vaet IU TIS I (702-9, AaAct, Hs 5)
uDhar dayh anDh koop tay laavhu apunee charnee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Save me - lift my body up out of the deep, dark pit of the world, and attach me to Your feet. ||1]|Pause| |
fame fomirg fae ATH o AST tds fSedHs Adet Il (702-10, HsAAT, He 5)
gi-aan Dhi-aan kichh karam na jaanaa naahin nirmal karnee.
I do not know anything about spiritual wisdom, meditation or karma, and my way of life is not clean and pure.
Wands & wists weg fan set we saat WAU (702-11, ASAE, He 5)
saaDhsangat kai anchal laavhu bikham nadee jaa-ay tarnee. ||1||
Please attach me to the hem of the robe of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; help me to cross over the terrible river. ||1]|
HY Aufs wfeor oA HS fea odt Ho Hfs Ugat I (702-11, ASAT, He 5)
sukh sampat maa-i-aa ras meethay ih nahee man meh Dharnee.
Comforts, riches and the sweet pleasures of Maya - do not implant these within your mind.
dfs vane fsufs aoa SA USS Tis SH Fa wMSset MIANCIII (702-12, AsAST, He 5) har darsan taripat naanak daas paavat har naam rang aabharnee. ||2||8]|12]|
Slave Nanak is satisfied and satiated by the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; his only ornamentation is the love of the Lord's Name. ||2||8]|12]|
HSA HIS U Il (702-13)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl:
dfs Ae fanag fase INH I (702-13, AIAST, He 5) har jan simrahu hirdai raam. O humble servants of the Lord, remember the Lord in meditation within your heart.
ofs Fe AG vue foarte 5 ors YSIS TH A HH IU TIS Il (702-13, ASA, Hs 5)
har jan ka-o apdaa nikat na aavai pooran daas kay kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Misfortune does not even approach the Lord's humble servant; the works of His slave are perfectly fulfilled. ||1]|Pause] |
afe faurs faonfs of Ae fesse adfee oH Il (702-14, ASAE, He 5)
kot bighan binsahi har sayvaa nihchal govid Dhaam.
Millions of obstacles are removed, by serving the Lord, and one enters into the eternal dwelling of the Lord of the Universe.
Ses 3S AG 3C fas a neg FEST AH MAUI (702-14, ASH, He 5)
bhagvant bhagat ka-o bha-o kichh naahee aadar dayvat jaam. ||1||
The Lord's devotee is very fortunate; he has absolutely no fear. Even the Messenger of Death pays homage to him. ||1]|
ofa due vite At adgat At Het fHoAS wH II (702-15, ASAE, He 5)
taj gopaal aan jo karnee so-ee so-ee binsat khaam.
Forsaking the Lord of the world, he does other deeds, but these are temporary and transitory.
TIS THE fase TT SHA AY AHT fAATH UNINC (702-16, ATA, Hs 5)
charan kamal hirdai gahu naanak sukh samooh bisraam. ||2||9||13]|
Grasp the Lord's lotus feet, and hold them in your heart, O Nanak; you shall obtain absolute peace and bliss. ||2]|9]|13]|
ASA Hs * (702-17) jaitsaree mehlaa 9 Jaitsree, Ninth Mehl: One Universal Creator God.
qe Afsara yATfE il (702-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3S He Wher BastES i (702-18, SAS, He 9) bhooli-o man maa-i-aa urjhaa-i-o. My mind is deluded, entangled in Maya.
An aH AG wes ofa fsa foo mre FOES Na TIS I (702-18, AsATF, 2 9) jo jo karam kee-o laalach lag tih tih aap banDhaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever I do, while engaged in greed, only serves to bind me down. ||1||Pause| |
AHS 3 udt fad on afeG nA Ufe & faRaTES I (702-19, AzHeT, 12 9)
samajh na paree bikhai ras rachi-o jas har ko bisraa-i-o.
I have no understanding at all; I am engrossed in the pleasures of corruption, and I have forgotten the Praises of the Lord.
Hf Aomit Af ofse so dAe aS OfeE All (702-19, AzAET, He 9)
Sang su-aamee so jaani-o naahin ban khojan ka-o Dhaa-i-o. ||1]|
The Lord and Master is with me, but I do not know Him. Instead, I run into the forest, looking for Him. ||1]|
UST D038
336 TH we Ht a stsfe a a famre & UTES I (703-1, AzAeT, He 9)
ratan raam ghat hee kay bheetar taa ko gi-aan na paa-i-o.
The Jewel of the Lord is deep within my heart, but I do not have any knowledge of Him.
Ho od Sdes Sno fas fage HOH T]ETES QUAM (703-1, ASAT, He 9)
jan naanak bhagvant bhajan bin birthaa janam gavaa-i-o. ||2||1]|
O servant Nanak, without vibrating, meditating on the Lord God, human life is uselessly wasted and lost. ||2||1]|
HSA HIS € Il (703-2) jaitsaree mehlaa 9. Jaitsree, Ninth Mehl:
dfs 7 Tf Sg uls AST Il (703-2, ASAT, He 9) har joo raakh layho pat mayree. O Dear Lord, please, save my honor!
AH a 3H safe Cs nists nafs at faa fofa Sct na TIC it (703-2, HaHet, He 9)
jam ko taraas bha-i-o ur antar saran gahee kirpaa niDh tayree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The fear of death has entered my heart; I cling to the Protection of Your Sanctuary, O Lord, ocean of mercy. ||1||Pause] |
Ho ufss Hag Sat efs ATS uUTY Me TST Il (703-3, ASAT, He 9)
mahaa patit mugaDh lobhee fun karat paap ab haaraa.
I am a great sinner, foolish and greedy; but now, at last, I have grown weary of committing sins.
3 Hea a fares ofus fsa fest 3g ATS NA (703-4, ASA, He 9) bhai marbay ko bisrat naahin tih chintaa tan jaaraa. ||1]| I cannot forget the fear of dying; this anxiety is consuming my body. ||1]|
ate Cure Hats a arate es fefh as Cfo afenr I (703-4, Aart, He 9) kee-ay upaav mukat kay kaaran dah dis ka-o uth Dhaa-i-aa. I have been trying to liberate myself, running around in the ten directions.
we dt sisfs aA fadho 3 ot HoH & Ufemr II (703-5, ASAT, He 9)
ghat hee bheetar basai niranjan taa ko maram na paa-i-aa. ||2]|
The pure, immaculate Lord abides deep within my heart, but I do not understand the secret of His mystery. ||2]|
ofus Te atve ae AU Su ABS AGH ma ale Il (703-5, ASAT, He 9)
naahin gun naahin kachh jap tap ka-un karam ab keejai.
I have no merit, and I know nothing about meditation or austerities; what should I do now?
ood ofs ufeS Asoafs mis Be YS SA SII (703-6, Ase, Hs 9)
naanak haar pari-o sarnaagat abhai daan parabh deejai. ||3]||2||
O Nanak, I am exhausted; I seek the shelter of Your Sanctuary; O God, please bless me with the gift of fearlessness. ||3]|2||
HSA HIS € Il (703-7)
jaitsaree mehlaa 9. Jaitsree, Ninth Mehl:
HO 3 ATS ae fers Il (703-7, AsAHt, He 9) man ray saachaa gaho bichaaraa. O mind, embrace true contemplation.
aH 3m fag fixfemr we Aad fea HATS NA TIS Il (703-7, ASAT, He 9) raam naam bin mithi-aa maano sagro ih sansaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord's Name, know that this whole world is false. ||1]|Pause] |
W aG Hat das oS UES ofa fsT UTS II (703-8, ASAE, He 9) jaa ka-o jogee khojat haaray paa-i-o naahi tih paaraa. The Yogis are tired of searching for Him, but they have not found His limit.
A Rom 3H foafe users gu su 3 fener All (703-8, AsAt, He 9)
SO Su-aamee tum nikat pachhaano roop raykh tay ni-aaraa. ||1||
You must understand that the Lord and Master is near at hand, but He has no form or feature. ||1||
UES OH AAS H Us t AAT StI ASS Il (703-9, As, He 9)
paavan naam jagat mai har ko kabhoo naahi sambhaaraa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord is purifying in the world, and yet you never remember it.
Sot Adfe ufsS wa dea Tug fags STS WUBI (703-9, HzAeH, He 9)
naanak saran pari-o jag bandan raakho birad tuhaaraa. ||2||3]|
Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the One, before whom the whole world bows down; please, preserve and protect me, by Your innate nature. ||2||3]|
ASAd HIS UES WTA (703-11)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5 chhant ghar 1 Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, First House:
qe Afsars ure II (703-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ha Il (703-12)
salok. Shalok:
cane fumrat fear ats fase niafes ats il (703-12, #3, He 5)
darsan pi-aasee dinas raat chitva-o an-din neet.
I am thirsty for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, day and night; I yearn for Him constantly, night and day.
ufs aue afs Heer area ofa Afar HIS UA (703-12, HaAet, He 5) kholi" kapat gur maylee-aa naanak har sang meet. ||1|| Opening the door, O Nanak, the Guru has led me to meet with the Lord, my Friend.
[2
#3 Il (703-13) chhant. Chhant:
Afs ws dnd Ane fea ase FSsor I (703-13, MsAH, He 5) sun yaar hamaaray sajan ik kara-o banantee-aa. Listen, O my intimate friend - I have just one prayer to make.
fSH HIe oe films 3O fea aster It (703-13, AsAeH, He 5) tis mohan laal pi-aaray ha-o fira-o khojantee-aa. I have been wandering around, searching for that enticing, sweet Beloved.
faq off fimrd fra uct Gard fea Sot cane StH I (703-14, ASHE, He 5)
tis das pi-aaray sir Dharee utaaray ik bhoree darsan deejai.
Whoever leads me to my Beloved - I would cut off my head and offer it to him, even if I were granted the Blessed Vision of His Darshan for just an instant.
30 dHS finn da dara fea fq st ar ash I (703-14, Aare, He 5)
nain hamaaray pari-a rang rangaaray ik til bhee naa Dheereejai.
My eyes are drenched with the Love of my Beloved; without Him, I do not have even a moment's peace.
us fA@ Ho Slo fae ae Hot ofa fae fats | (703-15, Aart, Hs 5)
parabh si-o man leenaa ji-o jal meenaa chaatrik jivai tisantee-aa.
My mind is attached to the Lord, like the fish to the water, and the rainbird, thirsty for the raindrops.
Wo Soa Ts uT ute Aart fear ges WAU (703-15, AsASt, Hs 5) jan naanak gur pooraa paa-i-aa saglee tikhaa bujhantee-aa. ||1]| Servant Nanak has found the Perfect Guru; his thirst is totally quenched. ||1]|
org = fipa as dbo y act o Ad I (703-16, ASAT, He 5)
yaar vay pari-a habhay sakhee-aa moo kahee na jayhee-aa.
O intimate friend, my Beloved has all these loving companions; I cannot compare to any of them.
we = fra s faa ws 38 fam fesdior il (703-17, ASAE, 8 5)
yaar vay hik doo™ hik chaarhai ha-o kis chitayhee-aa.
O intimate friend, each of them is more beautiful than the others; who could consider me?
fox ¢ fof as nifex fimre fos ase sar faerAT Il (703-17, HBAS, He 5)
hik doo™ hik chaarhay anik pi-aaray nit karday bhog bilaasaa.
Each of them is more beautiful than the others; countless are His lovers, constantly enjoying bliss with Him.
for fy nfs we BSer 3B afe uct TESA Il (703-18, Hat, He 5)
tinaa daykh man chaa-o uthandaa ha-o kad paa-ee guntaasaa.
Beholding them, desire wells up in my mind; when will I obtain the Lord, the treasure of virtue?
fot Het we dtrfeur wS fSn ura He Sor Il (703-18, AsAeT, He 5) jinee maidaa laal reejhaa-i-aa ha-o tis aagai man day‘hee-aa. I dedicate my mind to those who please and attract my Beloved.
aod ad Afe fae Aoafe y of fsa furs adhe 12H (703-19, AaAct, He 5)
naanak kahai sun bin-o suhaagan moo das dikhaa pir kayhee-aa. ||2||
Says Nanak, hear my prayer, O happy soul-brides; tell me, what does my Husband Lord look like? ||2]|
ag = fug mrue arat fore Stet SET I (703-19, ATA, He 5)
yaar vay pir aapan bhaanaa kichh neesee chhandaa.
O intimate friend, my Husband Lord does whatever He pleases; He is not dependent on anyone.
UST D208
We F 3 Tent weg H UA CAT Il (704-1, AZAET, He 5) yaar vay tai raavi-aa laalan moo das dasandaa. O intimate friend, you have enjoyed your Beloved; please, tell me about Him.
wee 3 ufsor wry Teteor A Ue Sta METS Il (704-1, ASAT, He 5)
laalan tai paa-i-aa aap gavaa-i-aa jai Dnan bhaag mathaanay.
They alone find their Beloved, who eradicate self-conceit; such is the good destiny written on their foreheads.
ag uats oats 3G fudt Te nee & Usre Il (704-2, ASAT, He 5)
baa“h pakarh thaakur ha-o ghiDhee gun avgan na pachhaanay.
Taking me by the arm, the Lord and Master has made me His own; He has not considered my merits or demerits.
qe og 3 feo ga we sefenr fan ge fos AIST Il (704-2, AzAST, He 5)
gun haar tai paa-i-aa rang laal banaa-i-aa tis habho kichh suhandaa.
She, whom You have adorned with the necklace of virtue, and dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love - everything looks beautiful on her.
Ho aed Ufe Aas ASH faA Aft S3ts SHST ISI (704-3, AsAeT, He 5) jan naanak Dhan suhaagan saa-ee jis sang bhataar vasandaa. ||3]| O servant Nanak, blessed is that happy soul-bride, who dwells with her Husband Lord.
[I3I|
ag = fos AY Hat ATH uTet II (704-4, AaAT, He 5) yaar vay nit sukh sukhaydee saa mai paa-ee. O intimate friend, I have found that peace which I sought.
ZI Sater wrfenr sat sare | (704-4, ASA, He 5)
var lorheedaa aa-i-aa vajee vaaDhaa-ee.
My sought-after Husband Lord has come home, and now, congratulations are pouring in.
Ho" Hae JIA Sor fug efeore AE os Fair il (704-5, AsAeT, He 5)
mahaa mangal rahas thee-aa pir da-i-aal sad nav rangee-aa.
Great joy and happiness welled up, when my Husband Lord, of ever-fresh beauty, showed mercy to me.
es ata ufeor afe frerfeor aa & ASH Il (704-5, ASAT, He 5)
vad bhaag paa-i-aa gur milaa-i-aa saaDh kai satsangee-aa.
By great good fortune, I have found Him; the Guru has united me with Him, through the Saadh Sangat, the True Congregation of the Holy.
MTAT HOA Hales Uat fit nifor ni fesret il (704-6, HSAs, He 5)
aasaa mansaa Sagal pooree pari-a ank ank milaa-ee.
My hopes and desires have all been fulfilled; my Beloved Husband Lord has hugged me close in His embrace.
faodfs aoa AY Aeet ATH aa fife uret IAI (704-6, ASAT, He 5) binvant naanak sukh sukhaydee saa mai gur mil paa-ee. ||4]|1]| Prays Nanak, I have found that peace which I sought, meeting with the Guru. ||4]]1]|
ASAd HIS U We 2 ZF (704-7) jaitsaree mehlaa 5 ghar 2 chhant Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Chhant:
qe Afsara yATfe il (704-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS Il (704-8) salok. Shalok:
Ca wan wus ys TAG 3B AVE wis Il (704-8, ASHE, v2 5)
oochaa agam apaar parabh kathan na jaa-ay akath.
God is lofty, unapproachable and infinite. He is indescribable - He cannot be described.
Sod US AdStast TUS AC AHA INA (704-8, AsASt, ws 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee raakhan ka-o samrath. ||1|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, who is all-powerful to save us. ||1]|
23 Il (704-9) chhant. Chhant:
fA@ weg f3@ ay afe ys Sfmt Il (704-9, Aart, we 5) ji-o jaanhu ti-o raakh har parabh tayri-aa. Save me, any way You can; O Lord God, I am Yours.
aS Wee wiry neds Afemr il (704-9, AsAeH, He 5) kaytay gan-o asa‘kh avgan mayri-aa. My demerits are uncountable; how many of them should I count?
MAY nize us Se fasyfs AE Zs Il (704-10, AaAT, He 5)
asa‘kh avgan khatay fayray nitparat sad bhoolee-ai.
The sins and crimes I committed are countless; day by day, I continually make mistakes.
Ho Hare faces wife SB YATE wash Il (704-10, HSAs, Hs 5)
moh magan bikraal maa-i-aa ta-o parsaadee ghoolee-ai.
I am intoxicated by emotional attachment to Maya, the treacherous one; by Your Grace alone can I be saved.
oa ads frog frat ys Oo I 3 Sfawr Il (704-11, AIA, He 5)
look karat bikaar bikh-rhay parabh nayr hoo tay nayri-aa.
Secretly, I commit hideous sins of corruption, even though God is the nearest of the near.
faodfs aoa efeor ued ofe gene Sfamr Al (704-11, ASAT, He 5)
binvant naanak da-i-aa Dhaarahu kaadh bhavjal fayri-aa. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, shower me with Your Mercy, Lord, and lift me up, out of the whirlpool of the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
Se Il (704-12)
salok. Shalok:
foots 3 ue mine Te Co ys a AS i (704-12, Aart, we 5)
nirat na pavai asa“kh gun oochaa parabh kaa naa-o.
Countless are His virtues; they cannot be enumerated. God's Name is lofty and exalted.
Sod at Sesion fxs fears aS 211 (704-12, HAT, v2 5) naanak kee banantee-aa milai nithaavay thaa-o. ||2]| This is Nanak's humble prayer, to bless the homeless with a home. ||2||
#S Il (704-13) chhant. Chhant:
GAS ost oS at ufa ASM Il (704-13, ASA, Hs 5) doosar naahee thaa-o kaa peh jaa-ee-ai. There is no other place at all - where else should I go?
mS ude ad Afs A ys former 1 (704-13, Hart, ne 5) aath pahar kar jorh so parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Twenty-four hours a day, with my palms pressed together, I meditate on God.
fomrfe A yg Ae mot Hota fen ure Il (704-14, AsAet, He 5) Dhi-aa-ay so parabh sadaa apunaa maneh chindi-aa paa-ee-ai. Meditating forever on my God, I receive the fruits of my mind's desires.
fa He Hg fearg wnt Sa fAG fee went il (704-14, Asrt, Hs 5)
taj maan moh vikaar doojaa ayk si-o liv laa-ee-ai.
Renouncing pride, attachment, corruption and duality, I lovingly center my attention on the One Lord.
maf He 3G US ura nity Hares frevet I (704-15, ASA, Hs 5) arap man tan parabhoo aagai aap sagal mitaa-ee-ai. Dedicate your mind and body to God; eradicate all your self-conceit.
faodfs aoa we foour afte at Ane IQ (704-15, HsAST, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa saach naam samaa-ee-ai. ||2||
Prays Nanak, shower me with Your mercy, Lord, that I may be absorbed in Your True Name. |[2||
HS Il (704-16)
salok. Shalok:
J Ho St ag fomren As fafa a a Tf II (704-16, AZAeT, He 5) ray man taa ka-o Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabh biDh jaa kai haath. O mind, meditate on the One, who holds everything in His hands.
TH BH US AeA Bea foad ATE SII (704-16, ASAT, He 5) raam naam Dhan sanchee-ai naanak nibhai saath. ||3]| Gather the wealth of the Lord's Name; O Nanak, it shall always be with You. ||3]|
ZS Il (704-17) chhant. Chhant:
Adis yg Sa TAS ats aE il (704-17, AaAST, He 5) saathee-arhaa parabh ayk doosar naahi ko-ay. God is our only True Friend; there is not any other.
we woste wrt Ate af us ALS Il (704-17, ASA, He 5)
thaan thanantar aap jal thal poor so-ay.
In the places and interspaces, in the water and on the land, He Himself is pervading everywhere.
me ate Hobos ufs sfoor Aga est Ys Tat Il (704-18, ASAT, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al poor rahi-aa sarab daataa parabh Dhanee.
He is totally permeating the water, the land and the sky; God is the Great Giver, the Lord and Master of all.
aus dss nis adt anis Te 3 a far aot Il (704-18, ASA, He 5)
gopaal gobind ant naahee bay-ant gun taa kay ki-aa ganee.
The Lord of the world, the Lord of the universe has no limit; His Glorious Virtues are unlimited - how can I count them?
3H Adfe Aum was amit fsa faa mre ofa afe Il (704-19, Aan, He 5)
bhaj saran su-aamee sukhah gaamee tis binaa an naahi ko-ay.
I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Lord Master, the Bringer of peace; without Him, there is no other at all.
faadfs aoa efor oeg fam usufs ant df= SI (704-19, AsHeH, He 5)
binvant naanak da-i-aa Dhaarahu tis paraapat naam ho-ay. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, that being, unto whom the Lord shows mercy - he alone obtains the Naam. ||3]|
ust Dou
HS Il (705-1)
salok. Shalok:
fafs fa fesfeor AOA urfeur It (705-1, A3aRST, 12 5) chit je chitvi-aa so mai paa-i-aa. Whatever I wish for, that I receive.
aa OH furs Ay Fae Sil (705-1, HsAAT, He 5) naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay sukh sabaa-i-aa. ||4|| Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Nanak has found total peace. ||4]|
#Z Il (705-2) chhant. Chhant:
ma Ho ste afemr A Afar fH Il (705-2, ASAST, He 5)
ab man chhoot ga-i-aa saaDhoo sang milay.
My mind is now emancipated; I have joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
qanty oy ofeor Ast fs FS Il (705-2, ASA, He 5) gurmukh naam la-i-aa jotee jot ralay. As Gurmukh, I chant the Naam, and my light has merged into the Light.
ofa on fans fie faofae ast sufs murfenr Il (705-3, AsAet, He 5)
har naam simrat mitay kilbikh bujhee tapat aghaani-aa.
Remembering the Lord's Name in meditation, my sins have been erased; the fire has been extinguished, and I am satisfied.
ad 3H Ble efenr ate nrus afe Hem Il (705-3, Aart, He 5)
geh bhujaa leenay da-i-aa keenay aapnay kar maani-aa.
He has taken me by the arm, and blessed me with His kind mercy; He has accepted me His own.
& nifa oe ofa fore HOH Hes TU AG Il (705-4, HAST, v2 5)
lai ank laa-ay har milaa-ay janam marnaa dukh jalay.
The Lord has hugged me in His embrace, and merged me with Himself; the pains of birth and death have been burnt away.
faadfs aoa efeor ost Afs ate fea us SII (705-4, HsAST, Hs 5)
binvant naanak da-i-aa Dhaaree mayl leenay ik palay. ||4||2||
Prays Nanak, He has blessed me with His kind mercy; in an instant, He unites me with Himself. ||4]|2] |
HSA BS Hs U Il (705-5)
jaitsaree chhant mehlaa 5. Jaitsree, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
ure HAY arate nifemm il (705-5, ASAT, Hs 5) paaDhaanoo sansaar gaarab ati-aa. The world is like a temporary way-station, but it is filled with pride.
ass UT Moa Her Fat afer il (705-5, AsASt, He 5) kartay paap anayk maa-i-aa rang rati-aa. People commit countless sins; they are dyed in the color of the love of Maya.
Ss xfs vifarfs gs HoE BSS nrVe Il (705-6, Azrt, v3 5)
lobh mohi abhimaan booday maran cheet na aav-ay.
In greed, emotional attachment and egotism, they are drowning; they do not even think of dying.
ug fg fagarg safest Sa as faose Il (705-6, AaAet, He 5)
putar mitar bi-uhaar banitaa ayh karat bihaava-ay.
Children, friends, worldly occupations and spouses - they talk of these things, while their lives are passing away.
uf feen ore fet ure ey UsH Es fSfonr Il (705-7, AsASt, HE 5)
puj divas aa-ay likhay maa-ay dukh Dharam dootah dithi-aa.
When their pre-ordained days have run their course, O mother, they behold the Messengers of the Righteous Judge of Dharma, and they suffer.
fags aan & fe aoa of OH UG Set Ufemr NAN (705-7, AsAST, 42 5)
kirat Karam na mitai naanak har naam Dhan nahee khati-aa. ||1|| The karma of their past deeds cannot be erased, O Nanak, if they have not earned the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Ben asta mda als SH S edt Il (705-8, HsAeT, 2 5)
udam karahi anayk har naam na gaavhee. He makes all sorts of efforts, but he does not sing the Lord's Name.
sonfs xfs ote Hfs AOHfs mredt Il (705-8, AsAST, He 5) bharmeh jon asa‘kh mar janmeh aavhee. He wanders around in countless incarnations; he dies, only to be born again.
UA Udt AS JIT TSS AE B MSE Il (705-9, ASAT, we 5) pasoo pankhee sail tarvar ganat kachhoo na aav-ay. As beasts, birds, stones and trees - their number cannot be known.
aia sefA sar safe ofr mrrat use Il (705-9, ASAT, He 5)
beej bovas bhog bhogeh kee-aa apnaa paav-ay.
As are the seeds he plants, so are the pleasures he enjoys; he receives the consequences of his own actions.
TSH HOH TIS AM YS wef F Sect Il (705-10, AA, He 5)
ratan janam harant joo-ai parabhoo aap na bhaavhee.
He loses the jewel of this human life in the gamble, and God is not pleased with him at all.
faadfs soa saufa gue fag Sa feas o uredt IQII (705-10, HAH, He 5) binvant naanak bharmeh bharmaa-ay khin ayk tikan na paavhee. ||2]| Prays Nanak, wandering in doubt, he does not find any rest, even for an instant. ||2| |
nae afenr fastfs ag yf Sobor i (705-11, AsAST, v2 5) joban ga-i-aa biteet jar mal baithee-aa. Youth has passed, and old age has taken its place.
ad aufs fra 3% Se 3 Stfomr Il (705-11, Aare, He 5) kar kampeh sir dol nain na deethi-aa. The hands tremble, the head shakes, and the eyes do not see.
od 6 GA fae sxe SA efs wfeor wher It (705-12, AzAET, He 5)
nah nain deesai bin bhajan eesai chhod maa-i-aa chaali-aa.
The eyes do not see, without vibrating and meditating on the Lord; he must leave behind the attractions of Maya, and depart.
afm 3 Hofs fafa ua arafa fae Aft He So Afr Il (705-12, AsAT, He 5)
kahi-aa na maaneh sir khaak chhaaneh jin sang man tan jaali-aa.
He burnt his mind and body for his relatives, but now, they do not listen to him, and they throw dust on his head.
Ala sat wire use 3d fey Ho Hfs sfoni Il (705-13, HAT, He 5) sareeraam rang apaar pooran nah nimakh man meh voothi-aa. Love for the infinite, Perfect Lord does not abide in his mind, even for an instant.
faodts area afe ors fear ae o Bfonr BI (705-14, AZAST, He 5) binvant naanak kot kaagar binas baar na jhoothi-aa. ||3]| Prays Nanak, the fort of paper is false - it is destroyed in an instant. ||3]|
TIO AHS Adete aod nifEmr il (705-14, AsAet, 2 5) charan kamal sarnaa-ay naanak aa-i-aa. Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Lord's lotus feet.
wag 3 HA ufs orf safeur Ih (705-15, AsHet, He 5) dutar bhai sansaar parabh aap taraa-i-aa. God Himself has carried Him across the impassable, terrifying world-ocean.
fife AHS sx Alas afs vigt ys At Sfanr I (705-15, Aart, we 5)
mil saaDhsangay bhajay sareeDhar kar ang parabh jee taari-aa.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I vibrate and meditate on the Lord; God has made me His own, and saved me.
dfs Hs BE oH He neg ae o Satan Il (705-15, AsAeT, us 5)
har maan lee-ay naam dee-ay avar kachh na beechaari-aa.
The Lord has approved of me, and blessed me with His Name; He did not take anything else into consideration.
ae faare nrg stad Hfe Sster ure Il (705-16, ASAT, He 5)
gun niDhaan apaar thaakur man lorheedaa paa-i-aa.
I have found the infinite Lord and Master, the treasure of virtue, which my mind had yearned for.
faadfs oo Ae feus afs an sxe wfeur ISQUSI (705-17, Aare, U8 5) binvant naanak sadaa tariptai har naam bhojan khaa-i-aa. ||4||2||3]|
Prays Nanak, I am satisfied forever; I have eaten the food of the Lord's Name. 41/2] 13]
HSA HIS U Sd ABat os (705-18)
jaitsaree mehlaa 5 vaar salokaa naaial Jaitsree, Fifth Mehl, Vaar With Shaloks:
qe Afsare YATE Il (705-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H8a Il (705-19)
salok. Shalok:
wife ude ufo use vifs Yse UTHAST Il (705-19, AaAT, Hs 5)
aad pooran maDh pooran ant pooran parmaysureh.
In the beginning, He was pervading; in the middle, He is pervading; in the end, He will be pervading. He is the Transcendent Lord.
fAHSfS AS APay FHS BSA MUGAS ATEATT |AUI (705-19, ASH, He 5)
simrant sant sarbatar ramna™ naanak aghnaasan jagdeesureh. ||1||
The Saints remember in meditation the all-pervading Lord God. O Nanak, He is the Destroyer of sins, the Lord of the universe. ||1]|
UST DOE
UUs Hos HaSS Ho Hfa fesha AE Il (706-1, AsASt, He 5) paykhan sunan sunaavano man meh darirh-ee-ai saach. See, hear, speak and implant the True Lord within your mind.
ufe sfoS Haag H ate ofa Sar TT iM (706-1, AsA, Hs 5) poor rahi-o sarbatar mai naanak har rang raach. ||2| | He is all-pervading, permeating everywhere; O Nanak, be absorbed in the Lord's Love.
21] ust I (706-2)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs Sa fadne web vs nists Aet I (706-2, aA, He 5) har ayk niranjan gaa-ee-ai sabh antar so-ee. Sing the Praise of the One, the Immaculate Lord; He is contained within all.
ATE ATE ANIA YS A AT A Tet Il (706-2, Aswct, ue 5) karan kaaran samrath parabh jo karay so ho-ee. The Cause of causes, the Almighty Lord God; whatever He wills, comes to pass.
fas nfs afu Garver fan faa odt det I (706-3, HAT, He 5) khin meh thaap uthaapadaa tis bin nahee ko-ee. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; without Him, there is no other.
us qos uses cy sfenr AS Bet I (706-3, AsAet, Hs 5) khand barahmand paataal deep ravi-aa sabh lo-ee. He pervades the continents, solar systems, nether worlds, islands and all worlds.
fan urfy ase A SSHt fasHe Ho ASt IAI (706-4, HAST, He 5)
jis aap bujhaa-ay so bujhsee nirmal jan so-ee. ||1||
He alone understands, whom the Lord Himself instructs; he alone is a pure and unstained being. ||1]|
H8a Il (706-4)
salok. Shalok:
Tels Abt FIST HS TIT MABUS Il (706-4, ASAT, He 5) rachant jee-a rachnaa maat garabh asthaapna”. Creating the soul, the Lord places this creation in the womb of the mother.
AfA Af ffs ooo Ho mais & fHOTAS IA (706-5, ASAT, He 5)
Saas Saas simrant naanak mahaa agan na binaasna’. ||1||
With each and every breath, it meditates in remembrance on the Lord, O Nanak; it is not consumed by the great fire. ||1]|
HY 38 Us Bud exe ages ate I (706-5, AAT, He 5) mukh talai pair upray vasando kuhtharhai thaa-ay. With its head down, and feet up, it dwells in that slimy place.
Soa A Uet fa ferrfas uate fan & ate ilQi (706-6, AsAeH, He 5) naanak so Dhanee ki-o visaar-i-o uDhrahi jis dai naa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, how could we forget the Master? Through His Name, we are saved. ||2]|
ugat Il (706-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
gas faz afs fefimr nafs Bea Hes Il (706-6, Aan, H2 5) rakat bind kar nimmi-aa agan udar majhaar. From egg and sperm, you were conceived, and placed in the fire of the womb.
Bau Hu ade faas cafe uifs aerfe Il (706-7, AsAH, He 5) uraDh mukh kucheel bikal narak ghor gubaar. Head downwards, you abided restlessly in that dark, dismal, terrible hell.
fe fines 3 o Fale Hfs sis Ba fs Il (706-7, ZA, He 5)
har simrat too naa jaleh man tan ur Dhaar.
Remembering the Lord in meditation, you were not burnt; enshrine Him in your heart, mind and body.
fran aod fafs sftimr fsr f3e 3 ferrfs il (706-8, Aart, He 5)
bikham thaanahu jin rakhi-aa tis til na visaar.
In that treacherous place, He protected and preserved you; do not forget Him, even for an instant.
ys fangs AY ae ofa AAO AON The NI (706-8, AaAeT, He 5) parabh bisrat sukh kaday naahi jaaseh janam haar. ||2|| Forgetting God, you shall never find peace; you shall forfeit your life, and depart. ||2||
H8a Il (706-9)
salok. Shalok:
Ho feet BS ATE ATA MITA YTST Il (706-9, ASAT, He 5) man ichhaa daan karna™ sarbatar aasaa poornah. He grants our hearts’ desires, and fulfills all our hopes.
use afe aera ys fhufs soar oT TIST WAI (706-9, AaAT, He 5)
kha“dna’ kal kalayseh parabh simar naanak nah poornah. ||1]|
He destroys pain and suffering; remember God in meditation, O Nanak - He is not far away. ||1]|
dfs da wats faa Af 3 fAG wet ST I (706-10, H3AeTH, He 5) habh rang maaneh jis sang tai si-o laa-ee-ai nayhu. Love Him, with whom you enjoy all pleasures.
H Ag fide 5 fens ooa fafs Hes afemr ST NI (706-11, AIA, He 5) so saho bind na visra-o naanak jin sundar rachi-aa dayh. ||2]|
Do not forget that Lord, even for an instant; O Nanak, He fashioned this beautiful body. ||2||
ust Il (706-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AMG urs Sq US Sor SS GA ST Il (706-11, AaAet, He 5)
jee-o paraan tan Dhan dee-aa deenay ras bhog.
He gave you your soul, breath of life, body and wealth; He gave you pleasures to enjoy.
fas Hes sa mA Se safe 3B Aa Il (706-12, Are, ve 5)
garih mandar rath as dee-ay rach bhalay sanjog.
He gave you households, mansions, chariots and horses; He ordained your good destiny.
AS af6s" AHS Aa MS ys Seq Aa Il (706-12, AsAet, ue 5)
sut banitaa saajan sayvak dee-ay parabh dayvan jog.
He gave you your children, spouse, friends and servants; God is the all-powerful Great Giver.
dfs fies 30 HS dfour afs afo festa Il (706-13, HAST, He 5)
har simrat tan man hari-aa leh jaahi vijog. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the body and mind are rejuvenated, and sorrow departs.
WonHfa dfs ae gH fear Afs Fa SI (706-13, AsAe, He 5)
saaDhsang har gun ramhu binsay sabh rog. ||3]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, chant the Praises of the Lord, and all your sickness shall vanish. ||3]|
Ha Il (706-14)
salok. Shalok:
Ae WS0 Ade Heat nisa Sens Il (706-14, Hart, v2 5) kutamb jatan karna’ maa-i-aa anayk udmah. For his family, he works very hard; for the sake of Maya, he makes countless efforts.
ufe safs we He aoa ys faAss 3 YSST NU (706-14, Aanct, ve 5)
har bhagat bhaav heena™ naanak parabh bisrat tay paraytah. ||1]|
But without loving devotional worship of the Lord, O Nanak, he forgets God, and then, he is a mere ghost. ||1]|
sesh At ulfs FH oret fmia fA@ I (706-15, Aart, He 5)
tutrhee-aa saa pareet jo laa-ee bi-ann si-o.
That love shall break, which is established with any other than the Lord. Sa Aut dfs Art ASt Sor WIM (706-15, Aart, He 5)
naanak sachee reet saa'-ee saytee rati-aa. ||2||
O Nanak, that way of life is true, which inspires love of the Lord. ||2]|
UgST Il (706-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan fares 30 SAH df as Afs US Il (706-16, H3AeH, He 5) jis bisrat tan bhasam ho-ay kahtay sabh parayt. Forgetting Him, one's body turns to dust, and everyone calls him a ghost.
fas fas ufs SHS o tedt fas fAG Aet JZ Il (706-16, AsAet, ne 5)
khin garih meh basan na dayvhee jin si-o so-ee hayt.
And those, with whom he was so much in love - they do not let him stay in their home, even for an instant.
afa nada vag Afeor A arefa AZ Il (706-17, ASAE, He 5) kar anrath darab sanchi-aa so kaaraj kayt. Practicing exploitation, he gathers wealth, but what use will it be in the end?
AA Sit A Ge AGH feg Bs Il (706-17, AAT, v2 5) jaisaa beejai so lunai karam ih khayt. As one plants, so does he harvest; the body is the field of actions.
mifaxgsure ofa fenfamr Aot SIAZ ISil (706-18, ATAST, He 5) akirat-ghanaa har visri-aa jonee bharmayt. ||4|| The ungrateful wretches forget the Lord, and wander in reincarnation. ||4| |
Ha Il (706-18)
salok. Shalok:
afe ae fenaré nifsx Aue ufezsd Il (706-18, tart, v8 5)
kot daan isnaana”™ anik soDhan pavitartah.
The benefits of millions of charitable donations and cleansing baths, and countless ceremonies of purification and piety,
Gudfs ooa afa afe gHat Aaa uy fees NA (706-19, HAST, He 5) uchrant naanak har har rasnaa sarab paap bimuchtay. ||1]|
O Nanak, are obtained by chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har with one's tongue; all sins are washed away. ||1]|
fae atsy wer sot festy ste il (706-19, AsAet, Hs 5) eeDhan keetomoo ghanaa bhoree diteem bhaahi. I gathered together a great stack of firewood, and applied a tiny flame to light it.
UST DOD
Hfs ZHeSs AY Ad Soa Vs Sus Sots iil (707-1, AsAet, v2 5) man vasand-rho sach saho naanak habhay dukh-rhay ulaahi. ||2|| When the True Lord and Master abides in one's mind, O Nanak, all sins are dispelled.
21 |
u@at Il (707-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afe mur Afs am dfs fangs af 3G il (707-1, Aan, He 5) kot aghaa sabh naas hohi simrat har naa-o. Millions of sins are totally erased, by meditating on the Lord's Name.
Ho fee co unis afe & TE WS il (707-2, HzAeH, He 5)
man chinday fal paa-ee-ah har kay gun gaa-o.
The fruits of one's heart's desires are obtained, by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
HOH Hde SF Acmafs fesse AT AE Il (707-2, ASAT, He 5)
janam maran bhai katee-ah nihchal sach thaa-o.
The fear of birth and death is eradicated, and one's eternal, unchanging true home is obtained.
ysfa d= fottimr afs sae ANE Il (707-3, ASACt, He 5) poorab hovai likhi-aa har charan samaa-o. If it is so pre-ordained, one is absorbed in the Lord's lotus feet.
ate fasur ys afy Sg soa ales ATE Ul (707-3, ASAT, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh raakh layho naanak bal jaa-o. ||5||
Bless me with Your mercy, God - please preserve and save me! Nanak is a sacrifice to You. |[5||
H8a Il (707-4)
salok. Shalok:
fad sear wrurg His fara AM AT Il (707-4, Hart, He 5) garih rachnaa apaara™ man bilaas su-aada" rasah. They are involved in their beautiful houses, and the pleasures of the mind's desires.
ay od frndfs aoa 3 AS far|e fang A (707-4, AsAet, HE 5)
kadaa‘ch nah simrant naanak tay jant bistaa kirmeh. ||1]|
They never remember the Lord in meditation; O Nanak, they are like maggots in manure. ||1]|
Hv msg Us fag fs HaEfs ST Il (707-5, HAT, He 5) much adambar habh kihu manjh muhabat nayh. They are engrossed in ostentatious displays, lovingly attached to all their possessions.
A et A fed SSA A 3G AT MMi (707-5, AsAST, He 5) so saa’-ee jai‘ visrai naanak so tan khayh. ||2|| That body which forgets the Lord, O Nanak, shall be reduced to ashes. ||2| |
uQat Il (707-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hed AA MSA AY TA SAS UT Il (707-6, ABACH, we 5) sundar sayj anayk sukh ras bhogan pooray. He may enjoy a beautiful bed, countless pleasures and all sorts of enjoyments.
fas Afes veo Hato ofe HSt HS il (707-6, AaHet, He 5)
garih so-in chandan suganDh laa-ay motee heeray.
He may possess mansions of gold, studded with pearls and rubies, plastered with fragrant sandalwood oil.
Ho fee Aa Heer fos atta feAg Il (707-6, ASHE, He 5) man ichhay sukh maandaa kichh naahi visooray. He may relish in the pleasures of his mind's desires, and have no anxiety at all.
A us fats o rect fener & ats Il (707-7, AaHet, He 5) so parabh chit na aavee vistaa kay keeray. But if he does not remember God, he is like a maggot in manure.
faa ofa ant 3 Aifs of& fas fafa ne ots NEN (707-7, H3He, He 5)
bin har naam na saa‘t ho-ay kit biDh man Dheeray. ||6]|
Without the Lord's Name, there is no peace at all. How can the mind be comforted? [16] |
H8a Il (707-8) salok. Shalok:
os 0
Udo aH fadd ds Sait wa fers il (707-8, AsAST, He 5) charan kamal biraha” khojant bairaagee dah disah. One who loves the Lord's lotus feet searches for Him in the ten directions.
fsoras cue gu HEMT ssa wee JU AT HAH IAI (707-8, ASAST, He 5)
ti-aagant kapat roop maa-i-aa naanak aanand roop saaDh sangmah. ||1||
He renounces the deceptive illusion of Maya, and joins the blissful form of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
Hfs Het uf Guat Sst JS SMT Il (707-9, ASAT, He 5)
man saa‘-ee mukh uchraa vataa habhay lo-a.
The Lord is in my mind, and with my mouth I chant His Name; I seek Him in all the lands of the world.
area os nisad afanr Afe tet ASt APE 2H (707-10, #aAct, He 5)
naanak habh adambar koorhi-aa sun jeevaa sachee so-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, all ostentatious displays are false; hearing the Praises of the True Lord, I live. ||2]|
ust Il (707-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ans Jet Sust ste Afs fear il (707-10, HAT, He 5) bastaa tootee jhumprhee cheer sabh chhinnaa. He dwells in a broken-down shack, in tattered clothes,
mfs 3 ufs 3 wed Cfenre afiiar il (707-11, asnct, He 5) jaat na pat na aadro udi-aan bharminnaa. with no social status, no honor and no respect; he wanders in the wilderness,
fg o feo us guile fos Aa & far Il (707-11, ASAT, He 5) mitar na ith Dhan roopheen kichh saak na sinnaa. with no friend or lover, without wealth, beauty, relatives or relations.
oa Haret fqafe ar afs of He fear il (707-11, ASAE, He 5)
raajaa saglee sarisat kaa har naam man bhinnaa.
Even so, he is the king of the whole world, if his mind is imbued with the Lord's Name.
fA at ufs He Bus ys afe AYAAt IDI (707-12, SAS, He 5)
tis kee Dhoorh man uDhrai parabh ho-ay suparsannaa. ||7]||
With the dust of his feet, men are redeemed, because God is very pleased with him. II7II
Ha Il (707-12)
salok. Shalok:
mfod Ber TA IA GU SI VHS SUS MAG Il (707-13, ASAT, He 5)
anik leelaa raaj ras roopa’ chhatar chamar takhat aasna”,
The various sorts of pleasures, powers, joys, beauty, canopies, cooling fans and thrones to sit on
TES HS uifemrs nid ssa AUS Hass HMM AU (707-13, ASAST, He 5)
rachant moorh agi-aan anDhah naanak supan manorath maa-i-aa. ||1]]|
- the foolish, ignorant and blind are engrossed in these things. O Nanak, desire for Maya is just a dream. ||1]||
Hue dfs ga wfenr fet wast HT Il (707-14, AaAeH, He 5)
supnai habh rang maani-aa mithaa lagrhaa moh.
In a dream, he enjoys all sorts of pleasures, and emotional attachment seems so sweet.
aoa BH fegetor Hefs wfenr FT QI (707-14, Ast, Hs 5) naanak naam vihoonee-aa sundar maa-i-aa Dharoh. ||2||
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the beauty of Maya's illusion is fake. ||2]|
ust Il (707-15)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
Hue Ast fas vote wen il (707-15, ASAT, He 5)
supnay saytee chit moorakh laa-i-aa.
The fool attaches his consciousness to the dream.
fend IH IA Sa Was suefEnr | (707-15, AIAST, v2 5)
bisray raaj ras bhog jaagat bhakhlaa-i-aa.
When he awakes, he forgets the power, pleasures and enjoyments, and he is sad. witaat aet feof ca afer i (707-16, A3AeH, He 5)
aarjaa ga-ee vihaa-ay DhanDhai Dhaa-i-aa. He passes his life chasing after worldly affairs.
UTS SEB OH Hfsor HEMT I (707-16, ASAT, He 5) pooran bha-ay na kaam mohi-aa maa-i-aa. His works are not completed, because he is enticed by Maya.
foo Sars HS AT orf gerfSmr cil (707-16, AsAST, He 5) ki-aa vaychaaraa jant jaa aap bhulaa-i-aa. ||8]| What can the poor helpless creature do? The Lord Himself has deluded him. ||8]|
H8a Il (707-17)
salok. Shalok:
aHfs Aaa Sao fass fyast oe YseT Il (707-17, Aan, ve 5) basant savarag lokah jittay parithvee nav khandnah. They may live in heavenly realms, and conquer the nine regions of the world,
fands ofa serag area 3 yret Cfenre SaHET IAI (707-17, AaAct, He 5)
bisrant har gopaalah naanak tay paraanee udi-aan bharamneh. ||1]|
but if they forget the Lord of the world, O Nanak, they are just wanderers in the wilderness. ||1]|
agsa as sHfor fefs 5 wren ar Il (707-18, 3A, He 5)
ka-utak kod tamaasi-aa chit na aavas naa-o.
In the midst of millions of games and entertainments, the Lord's Name does not come to their minds.
Sot Ast SIA Hoa Cus ASt a iQ (707-18, ASA, He 5) naanak korhee narak baraabaray ujarh so-ee thaa-o. ||2||
O Nanak, their home is like a wilderness, in the depths of hell. ||2]|
ust Il (707-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ho sfenire Sfente sald afe HSM Il (707-19, Ast, He 5) mahaa bha-i-aan udi-aan nagar kar maani-aa. He sees the terrible, awful wilderness as a city.
36 Anat ufé AG afs AfomT II (707-19, HIATT, H2 5) jhooth samagree paykh sach kar jaani-aa. Gazing upon the false objects, he believes them to be real.
UST Dot
aH afa udarfa feats tetfomr i (708-1, #sAKt, 2 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar fireh dayvaani-aa. Engrossed in sexual desire, anger and egotism, he wanders around insane.
fafs oar FH 33 3 UES for I (708-1, Aare, He 5)
sir lagaa jam dand taa pachhutaani-aa.
When the Messenger of Death hits him on the head with his club, then he regrets and repents.
fag us aeee fed Aster Xi (708-2, AsAet, Hs 5) bin pooray gurdayv firai saitaani-aa. ||9]| Without the Perfect, Divine Guru, he roams around like Satan. ||9]|
H8a Il (708-2)
salok. Shalok:
TH AUS TU AUS UH AUS AG TSAI Il (708-2, ASAT, we 5)
raaj kapta’ roop kapta’ Dhan kapta™ kul garabteh.
Power is fraudulent, beauty is fraudulent, and wealth is fraudulent, as is pride of ancestry.
Huts faftmr 2é fad aoa fag ofa Afar o BS UA (708-3, AAT, He 5)
sa‘chant bikhi-aa chhala” chhidara™ naanak bin har sang na chaaltay. ||1]|
One may gather poison through deception and fraud, O Nanak, but without the Lord, nothing shall go along with him in the end. ||1]]|
Xo 4
udges at 36 Sut fery AgeSt Il (708-3, AAT, He 5) paykhand-rho kee bhul tummaa disam sohnaa. Beholding the bitter melon, he is deceived, since it appears so pretty
WE BF Bes HS soa Aa o Wwet feo II (7038-4, ASAT, He 5)
adh na lahand-rho mul naanak saath na jul-ee maa-i-aa. ||2| |
But it is not worth even a shell, O Nanak; the riches of Maya will not go along with anyone. ||2||
ust Il (708-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
vofent oe 5 3S A fx Ari il (708-4, AsAt, He 5) chaldi-aa naal na chalai so ki-o sanjee-ai. It shall not go along with you when you depart - why do you bother to collect it?
fA at ag four ase faR 3 SFM Il (708-5, AsAS, He 5)
tis kaa kaho ki-aa jatan jis tay vanjee-ai.
Tell me, why do you try so hard to acquire that which you must leave behind in the end?
ofa fanfom fae feusS at ue dr Il (708-5, AsHet, ne 5) har bisri-ai ki-o tariptaavai naa man ranjee-ai. Forgetting the Lord, how can you be satisfied? Your mind cannot be pleased.
ys efs mis oat sata ANF II (708-6, AsAST, He 5) parabhoo chhod an laagai narak samanjee-dai. One who forsakes God, and attaches himself to another, shall be immersed in hell.
og faurs venir aoa SC SAhH 19011 (708-6, AsAeH, He 5) hohu kirpaal da-i-aal naanak bha-o bhanjee-ai. ||10|| Be kind and compassionate to Nanak, O Lord, and dispel his fear. ||10]|
H8a Il (708-7)
salok. Shalok:
ou OH AY finde oe 3a GA fine os fim? FE HEMT II (708-7, ASA, He 5)
nach raaj sukh mista‘ nach bhog ras mista’ nach mista" sukh maa-i-aa.
Princely pleasures are not sweet; sensual enjoyments are not sweet; the pleasures of Maya are not sweet.
fund ArOAfa ofs sea eA fHAS YS SAAS INA (708-7, ASAE, He 5)
mista” saaDhsang har naanak daas mista’ parabh darsana”. ||1||
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is sweet, O slave Nanak; the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan is sweet. ||1]|
Bas AST Hs HST Tsu I (708-8, ASA, Hs 5) lagrhaa so nayhu man majhaahoo rati-aa. I have enshrined that love which drenches my soul.
feas Ae dfx soa fost A Tat II (708-8, #aAeT, He 5) viDh-rho sach thok naanak mith-rhaa so Dhanee. ||2|| I have been pierced by the Truth, O Nanak; the Master seems so sweet to me. ||2||
ust Il (708-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ote fag ag & wat sasG AE rHfor Il (708-9, AAS, He 5) har bin kachhoo na laag-ee bhagtan ka-o meethaa. Nothing seems sweet to His devotees, except the Lord.
mo Aue Als etomr ats fasee stor il (708-9, Aart, He 5) aan su-aad sabh feeki-aa kar nirna-o deethaa. All other tastes are bland and insipid; I have tested them and seen them.
mfamrs SIH Sy afent aT FS SAS Il (708-10, ASAT, He 5) agi-aan bharam dukh kati-aa gur bha-ay baseethaa. Ignorance, doubt and suffering are dispelled, when the Guru becomes one's advocate.
TIO AHS HO Sfamr fa da Hele | (708-10, ASA, He 5)
charan kamal man bayDhi-aa ji-o rang majeethaa.
The Lord's lotus feet have pierced my mind, and I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love.
mg ye 3g HO Ys fHOR Afs Fo" NAA (708-11, ASAST, He 5) jee-o paraan tan man parabhoo binsay sabh jhoothaa. ||11]|| My soul, breath of life, body and mind belong to God; all falsehood has left me. ||11||
H8a Il (708-11)
salok. Shalok:
fans AS od Fle HIG 3a fourfa ofa Hw Hse II (708-11, FsAet, He 5)
ti-akat jala‘ nah jeev meena” nah ti-aag chaatrik maygh mandlah.
Leaving the water, the fish cannot live; the rainbird cannot live without the raindrops from the clouds.
We Uy ada oe nifse Fae AA AST Il (708-12, ASAT, He 5)
baan bayDhanch kurank naada”™ al banDhan kusam baasnah.
The deer is enticed by the sound of the hunter's bell, and shot through with the arrow; the bumble bee is entangled in the fragrance of the flowers.
TIO AHS JSS AST FSA IS @ TIS MAUI (708-12, ASA, He 5) charan kamal rachant santeh naanak aan na ruchtay. ||1]| The Saints are entranced by the Lord's lotus feet; O Nanak, they desire nothing else.
[21
HY suG usa sts ura 3 3 fes Il (708-13, ASAE, He 5)
mukh daykhaa-oo palak chhad aan na day-oo chit.
Show me Your face, for even an instant, Lord, and I will not give my consciousness to any other.
dive Han fan cat ofa aoa Ast fies 2H (708-13, AsAeT, He 5) jeevan sangam tis Dhanee har naanak jantaa™ mit. ||2|| My life is with the Lord Master, O Nanak, the Friend of the Saints. ||2]|
ugat Il (708-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fag neat fo ureha fa@ Hies ures Il (708-14, ASAE, He 5) ji-o machhulee bin paanee-ai ki-o jeevan paavai. How can the fish live without water?
ae fegat aya fa afe fyusrs il (708-15, AeA, He 5) boond vihoonaa chaatriko ki-o kar tariptaavai. Without the raindrops, how can the rainbird be satisfied?
oe adaty Sfimr Aon Sfs we Il (708-15, ASAT, He 5) naad kura‘keh bayDhi-aa sanmukh uth Dhaavai. The deer, entranced by the sound of the hunter's bell, runs straight to him;
Seg Sot GAH aA at fife wy FOS Il (708-15, ATAST, He 5) bhavar lobhee kusam baas kaa mil aap banDhaavai. the bumble bee is greedy for the flower's fragrance; finding it, he traps himself in it.
fs@ Ha Hor of ulfs 3 fe San mS 9211 (708-16, AsAST, He 5)
ti-o sant janaa har pareet hai daykh daras aghaavai. ||12||
Just so, the humble Saints love the Lord; beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, they are satisfied and satiated. ||12]|
Ha Il (708-16)
salok. Shalok:
fasefs sao ane ATA ATA mea” II (708-16, ASAST, He 5)
chitvant charan kamla™ saas saas araaDhneh.
They contemplate the Lord's lotus feet; they worship and adore Him with each and every breath.
od faAdhs SH nes FSA MTA UTS USHA IAI (708-17, ASA, He 5)
nah bisrant naam achut naanak aas pooran parmaysureh. ||1||
They do not forget the Name of the imperishable Lord; O Nanak, the Transcendent Lord fulfills their hopes. ||1]|
Hisat Ha Hsfo usar o StS HIST Il (708-18, ASAT, He 5) seet-rhaa man manjhaahi palak na theevai baahraa. He is woven into the fabric of my mind; He is not outside of it, even for an instant.
Soa wnat farts ret Us AT Tat MQM (708-18, AsAT, He 5) naanak aasrhee nibaahi sadaa paykhando sach Dhanee. ||2]| O Nanak, the True Lord and Master fulfills my hopes, and always watches over me.
[21] UugST I (708-18)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
MASS MITA TATET Usha Il (708-19, ASAST, He 5) aasaavantee aas gusaa-ee pooree-ai. My hopes rest in You, O Lord of the universe; please, fulfill them.
fifes ses aie o ag SoM I (708-19, AeA, He 5) mil gopaal gobind na kabhoo jhooree-ai. Meeting with the Lord of the world, the Lord of the universe, I shall never grieve.
ed van His TE ale wf fersha I (708-19, Asrt, Hs 5)
dayh daras man chaa-o leh jaahi visooree-ai.
Grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, the desire of my mind, and my worries Shall be over.
Ua dort
dfs ufeg Adty Taat TIM Il (709-1, ASAST, He 5) ho-ay pavitar sareer charnaa Dhooree-ai. By body is sanctified, by the dust of Your feet.
USAIN TIS HET TATA Al (709-1, AsA, Hz 5) paarbarahm gurdayv sadaa hajooree-ai. ||13]| O Supreme Lord God, Divine Guru, You are always with me, ever-present. ||13]|
H8a Il (709-1)
salok. Shalok:
dHo' Gudfs on Age Hots ASE nifq3T II (709-2, Hart, He 5)
rasnaa uchrant naama” sarvana™ sunant sabad amritah.
With my tongue, I chant the Lord's Name; with my ears, I listen to the Ambrosial Word of His Shabad.
soa fo Ae afsad faat fame ursqaHET IU (709-2, aA, He 5) naanak tin sad balihaara™ jinaa Dhi-aan paarbrahmanenh. ||1]| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who meditate on the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
dfs Aare oH fan At IS II (709-3, ASAT, He 5) habh koorhaavay kamm ikas saa-ee baahray. All concerns are false, except those of the One Lord.
Sot ASt Uo fro fussst AS fAE NI (709-3, AaAT, He 5) naanak say-ee Dhan jinaa pirharhee sach si-o. ||2|| O Nanak, blessed are those, who are in love with their True Lord. ||2||
ust Il (709-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
He safest fsar fa Has dfs Aa Il (709-4, AsASt, He 5) sad balihaaree tinaa je suntay har kathaa. I am forever a sacrifice to those who listen to the sermon of the Lord.
ud 3 usare foerefs Ys HAT Il (709-4, ASAE, He 5) pooray tay parDhaan nivaaveh parabh mathaa. Those who bow their heads before God are perfect and distinguished.
dfs aA feufs Suis Aafs A Ta Il (709-4, AsAH, He 5) har jas likheh bay-ant soheh say hathaa. Those hands, which write the Praises of the infinite Lord are beautiful.
vo uals ufesz Tals YS Ua Il (709-5, ABA, Hs 5) charan puneet pavitar chaaleh parabh pathaa. Those feet which walk on God's Path are pure and holy.
Hat Afar Garg Ager SY BA NASI (709-5, AsASH, He 5) jantaa™ sang uDhaar saglaa dukh lathaa. ||14]| In the Society of the Saints, they are emancipated; all their sorrows depart. ||14]|
HS Il (709-6) salok. Shalok:
Tet Ces ase als THE Ana UIST Il (709-6, ASAT, Hs 5)
bhaavee udot karna™ har ramna™ sanjog poornah.
One's destiny is activated, when one chants the Lord's Name, through perfect good fortune.
TUG TIA Fe ASS HSA A HIST IU (709-6, AIACH, we 5)
gopaal daras bhayta™ safal naanak so mahoorteh. ||1]|
Fruitful is that moment, O Nanak, when one obtains the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Lord of the Universe. ||1] |
aH 3 Rat ute Ae fHSst J aT Il (709-7, ABA, He 5) keem na sakaa paa-ay sukh mitee hoo baahray. Its value cannot be estimated; it brings peace beyond measure.
Sod AT SHat users fas fuses ur fst QW (709-7, AsAet, He 5) naanak saa vaylrhee parvaan jit miland-rho maa piree. ||2|| O Nanak, that time alone is approved, when my Beloved meets with me. ||2| |
ugat Il (709-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AW 2or ag a@e do fas ys a@ uret Il (709-8, Aardt, v2 5) saa vaylaa kaho ka-un hai jit parabh ka-o paa-ee. Tell me, what is that time, when I shall find God?
A Hos 3m Ang 3 fas fees TAT Il (709-8, AzAct, we 5)
so moorat bhalaa sanjog hai jit milai gusaa-ee.
Blessed and auspicious is that moment, and that destiny, when I shall find the Lord of the Universe.
nie ude ofa famrfe & Ho fee unt II (709-9, ASAT, He 5) aath pahar har Dhi-aa-ay kai man ichh pujaa-ee. Meditating on the Lord, twenty-four hours a day, my mind's desires are fulfilled.
zs ata AsHa dfe fofe war uret Il (709-9, AsAT, He 5)
vadai bhaag satsang ho-ay niv laagaa paa-ee.
By great good fortune, I have found the Society of the Saints; I bow and touch their feet.
Hfs zane at flmirrm od otoe afe ATeT INQUII (709-10, AzAdT, 43 5)
man darsan kee pi-aas hai naanak bal jaa-ee. ||15]| My mind thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||15]|
Ha Il (709-10)
salok. Shalok:
ufss uals affes nea tu feetsET Il (709-10, AaAST, He 5) patit puneet gobindah sarab dokh nivaarneh. The Lord of the Universe is the Purifier of sinners; He is the Dispeller of all distress.
Aefe Ad saeod AUS Sa he Ts TF NA (709-11, AsAST, He 5)
saran soor bhagvaaneh japant naanak har har haray. ||1]|
The Lord God is Mighty, giving His Protective Sanctuary; Nanak chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
ese gs ry was Baet UTA II (709-11, AZAST, He 5) chhadi-o habh aap lagrho charnaa paas. Renouncing all self-conceit, I hold tight to the Lord's Feet.
Sos BY SY BSA YS Ueifemr MQM (709-12, AIA, He 5) nath-rho dukh taap naanak parabh paykhandi-aa. ||2|| My sorrows and troubles have departed, O Nanak, beholding God. ||2||
ust Il (709-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afs 3 efeors ef us eorfenr il (709-12, AsAEH, He 5) mayl laihu da-i-aal dheh pa-ay du-aari-aa. Unite with me, O Merciful Lord; I have fallen at Your Door.
of Seg ce afenre gus ag Thar | (709-13, ASA, He 5) rakh layvhu deen da-i-aal bharmat baho haari-aa. O Merciful to the meek, save me. I have wandered enough; now I am tired.
sats zee 3a fase safe ufss Borfanr I (709-13, Aart, He 5) bhagat vachhal tayraa birad har patit uDhaari-aa. It is Your very nature to love Your devotees, and save sinners.
33 fag ont afe faa Hfo Afar Il (709-14, ASHE, He 5) tujh bin naahee ko-ay bin-o mohi saari-aa. Without You, there is no other at all; I offer this prayer to You.
ag afs Sg efenre Aare AAEM AEM (709-14, aA, He 5) kar geh layho da-i-aal saagar sansaari-aa. ||16]|| Take me by the hand, O Merciful Lord, and carry me across the world-ocean. ||16]|
HBa Il (709-15)
salok. Shalok:
Ha Gude efeors mrad dures ataesed Il (709-15, HIAST, v2 5)
sant uDhran da-i-aala" aasra‘ gopaal keeratneh.
The Merciful Lord is the Savior of the Saints; their only support is to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
fodHs HS Hae Ge sax USHATT INAUl (709-15, AsAT, Hs 5)
nirmala™ sant sangayn ot naanak parmaysureh. ||1||
One becomes immaculate and pure, by associating with the Saints, O Nanak, and taking the Protection of the Transcendent Lord. ||1||
Jeo Ue o Hee gs nfs 3 feet WH II (709-16, AAT, Hs 5)
chandan chand na sarad rut mool na mit-ee ghaa“m.
The burning of the heart is not dispelled at all, by sandalwood paste, the moon, or the cold season.
Hise ae aoa Mes Ts SH MQM (709-16, AsAT, He 5) seetal theevai naankaa japand-rho har naam. ||2|| It only becomes cool, O Nanak, by chanting the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (709-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
TIO GH at Ge Bud Aas Ao Ill (709-17, Aart, ve 5)
charan kamal kee ot uDhray sagal jan. Through the Protection and Support of the Lord's lotus feet, all beings are saved.
Afs ussTy aifee fags se He Il (709-17, ASAE, He 5) sun partaap govind nirbha-o bha-ay man. Hearing of the Glory of the Lord of the Universe, the mind becomes fearless.
fe 3 nie Hf Afsmr BY We Il (709-18, ASAT, He 5) tot na aavai mool sanchi-aa naam Dhan. Nothing at all is lacking, when one gathers the wealth of the Naam.
Hz wot fAG Ha ust SS us Il (709-18, AIA, He 5) sant janaa si-o sang paa-ee-ai vadai pun. The Society of the Saints is obtained, by very good deeds.
mS udd ofa fourfe afe AA fos AS ADI (709-18, AsAT, He 5)
aath pahar har Dhi-aa-ay har jas nit sun. ||17]|
Twenty-four hours a day, meditate on the Lord, and listen continually to the Lord's Praises. ||17]||
H8a Il (709-19)
salok. Shalok:
efor age vu Jde Buse OH algsed Il (709-19, AsAAT, He 5)
da-i-aa karna™ dukh harna® ucharna’ naam keeratneh.
The Lord grants His Grace, and dispels the pains of those who sing the Kirtan of the Praises of His Name.
Sfente usd SAI Bor fous o Hen IAI (709-19, AsAeT, 8 5)
da-i-aal purakh bhagvaaneh naanak lipat na maa-i-aa. ||1]| When the Lord God shows His Kindness, O Nanak, one is no longer engrossed in Maya. ||1]|
UST 990
ofs qeest afs net ses ys wef it (710-1, Asst, He 5) bhaahi baland-rhee bujh ga-ee rakhand-rho parabh aap. The burning fire has been put out; God Himself has saved me.
fafs Guret Heat aoa A us APY QIN (710-1, AsAEt, He 5) jin upaa-ee maydnee naanak so parabh jaap. ||2|| Meditate on that God, O Nanak, who created the universe. ||2||
u@at Il (710-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WT ys ge ufone o fmm fer Il (710-2, ASHE, He 5) jaa parabh bha-ay da-i-aal na bi-aapai maa-i-aa. When God becomes merciful, Maya does not cling.
afe mur a on ofa fea fomrfenr I (710-2, Aan, He 5) kot aghaa ga-ay naas har ik Dhi-aa-i-aa. Millions of sins are eliminated, by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
focus se Adts Ao Udt ofeur Il (710-3, ABA, He 5)
nirmal bha-ay sareer jan Dhooree naa-i-aa.
The body is made immaculate and pure, bathing in the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servants.
Ho 36 3S Ase yas ys ule Il (710-3, Aart, we 5) man tan bha-ay santokh pooran parabh paa-i-aa. The mind and body become contented, finding the Perfect Lord God.
3d ade Afa Sa ase wafer NAc (710-4, AsAST, Hs 5) taray kutamb sang log kul sabaa-i-aa. ||18]| One is saved, along with his family, and all his ancestors. ||18]|
H8a Il (710-4)
salok. Shalok:
qs aie rvs Ts Ts uss sateed il (710-4, As, us 5)
gur gobind gopaal gur gur pooran naaraa-ineh.
The Guru is the Lord of the Universe; the Guru is the Lord of the world; the Guru is the Perfect Pervading Lord God.
ad cents ANGE Td Id aoa ufss Burged IU (710-5, Ase, He 5)
gur da-i-aal samrath gur gur naanak patit uDhaarneh. ||1||
The Guru is compassionate; the Guru is all-powerful; the Guru, O Nanak, is the Saving Grace of sinners. ||1]|
sen fen umerg afe sfoa sfaons | (710-5, AsASt, He 5)
bha-ojal bikham asgaahu gur bohithai taari-am.
The Guru is the boat, to cross over the dangerous, treacherous, unfathomable world- ocean.
aoa UT ATH Asad Baet Blam iM (710-6, ASAST, He 5) naanak poor karamm satgur charnee lagi-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, by perfect good karma, one is attached to the feet of the True Guru. ||2]|
ust Il (710-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Uo Us ade fan Afar dfs AU Il (710-6, AsAET, 42 5) Dhan Dhan gurdayv jis sang har japay. Blessed, blessed is the Divine Guru; associating with Him, one meditates on the Lord.
ad faus Fa se 3 nigae Afs SU Il (710-7, AsAet, He 5) gur kirpaal jab bha-ay ta avgun sabh chhapay. When the Guru becomes merciful, then all one's demerits are dispelled.
USAIH Uses Slog Ss a Il (710-7, AsMt, ws 5) paarbarahm gurdayv neechahu uch thapay. The Supreme Lord God, the Divine Guru, uplifts and exalts the lowly.
ate fraa eu Hfenr ats ots wu SA Il (710-8, AsAet, He 5) kaat silak dukh maa-i-aa kar leenay ap dasay. Cutting away the painful noose of Maya, He makes us His own slaves.
TE We Bis IAS fs AA MAVEN (710-8, ASAT, Hz 5) gun gaa-ay bay-ant rasnaa har jasay. ||19]|| With my tongue, I sing the Glorious Praises of the infinite Lord God. ||19]|
H8a Il (710-9)
salok. Shalok:
fenes 8a Hois Sa FST Sa SATIT Il (710-9, AsHet, ws 5) darista“t ayko sunee-ant ayko vartant ayko narhareh. I see only the One Lord; I hear only the One Lord; the One Lord is all-pervading.
OH UWS AMS Steg Bers use faut xsd IAI (710-9, ASAT, He 5) naam daan jaachant naanak da-i-aal purakh kirpaa karah. ||1]| Nanak begs for the gift of the Naam; O Merciful Lord God, please grant Your Grace.
[21
foa Aet fox Hue ofa fear ufo wget Il (710-10, Hane, He 5)
hik sayvee hik sammlaa har ikas peh ardaas.
I serve the One Lord, I contemplate the One Lord, and to the One Lord, I offer my prayer.
STH Zug US Afent soa Ast IA QI (710-10, AsAAT, Hz 5)
naam vakhar Dhan sanchi-aa naanak sachee raas. ||2| |
Nanak has gathered in the wealth, the merchandise of the Naam; this is the true capital. ||2||
ust Il (710-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ys efenre anis use fea Fo Il (710-11, AsAST, He 5) parabh da-i-aal bay-ant pooran ik ayhu. God is merciful and infinite. The One and Only is all-pervading.
AS fas ord urfy eA aI aT Il (710-11, ASA, He 5) sabh kichh aapay aap doojaa kahaa kayhu. He Himself is all-in-all. Who else can we speak of?
mf add ys aS wm} nifly ST Il (710-12, AaAet, ws 5) aap karahu parabh daan aapay aap layho. God Himself grants His gifts, and He Himself receives them.
MISE Wal Jan AS fesse 30 AT Il (710-12, Aart, v2 5)
aavan jaanaa hukam sabh nihchal tuDh thayhu.
Coming and going are all by the Hukam of Your Will; Your place is steady and unchanging.
Soa Hat VS ate fagur oH ST MONA (710-13, ASAT, He 5) naanak mangai daan kar kirpaa naam dayh. ||20]|1]| Nanak begs for this gift; by Your Grace, Lord, please grant me Your Name. ||20]|1]|
ASA aret Sast at (710-14) jaitsaree banee bhagtaa kee Jaitsree, The Word Of The Devotees:
qe Afsas Are Il (710-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
OE Ae F ASE Il (710-15, ASA, sas seen A) naath kachhoo-a na jaan-o. O my Lord and Master, I know nothing.
Ho Hear a ofe forse nan go@ il (710-15, Asad, sas ofeen Hh man maa-i-aa kai haath bikaana-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My mind has sold out, and is in Maya's hands. ||1]|Pause| |
3H admis J AAS TT AMM | (710-15, AsAct, sas sheen Ah tum kahee-at hou jagat gur su-aamee. You are called the Lord and Master, the Guru of the World.
JH ads afoera aX AH AU (710-16, AsASt, sas sfeeA Ah
ham kahee-at kalijug kay kaamee. ||1]| I am called a lustful being of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1]|
feo uve Hd Ho F faarfeS II (710-16, AgAdt, sas sfeerA Th) in panchan mayro man jo bigaari-o. The five vices have corrupted my mind.
Us us dfs Ft 3 visa UTSE IQH (710-16, AeA, sas se Ah pal pal har jee tay antar paari-o. ||2]| Moment by moment, they lead me further away from the Lord. ||2]|
As fus 33 Fy at TAT Il (710-17, Asn, sas seen FH) jat daykh-a-u tat dukh kee raasee. Wherever I look, I see loads of pain and suffering.
win 3 uate foo se Ant SI (710-17, AsAt, sas sfeeA Hh) ajou™ na pat-yaa-ay nigam bha-ay saakhee. ||3]| I do not have faith, even though the Vedas bear witness to the Lord. ||3]|
aan ofs Sxrufs anit Ate cats AOA sar THA ust (710-17, AsAet, sas afeeH Hh) gotam naar umaapat savaamee. sees Dharan sahas bhag gaa‘mee. ||4]|
Shiva cut off Brahma's head, and Gautam's wife and the Lord Indra mated; Brahma's head got stuck to Shiva's hand, and Indra came to bear the marks of a thousand female organs. ||4||
fes 36 ue ag afs HS Il (710-18, AaAt, sas see A) in dootan khal baDh kar maari-o. These demons have fooled, bound and destroyed me.
as food wing sot TS ull (710-18, Asad, sas steer Hh) bado nilaaj ajhoo nahee haari-o. ||5|| I am very shameless - even now, I am not tired of them. ||5]|
afs sien aT AA ate Il (710-19, AsHet, sas sieeTA FA) kahi ravidaas kahaa kaisay keejai. Says Ravi Daas, what am I to do now?
faa suaa Hofe at at StH NEN (710-19, AZAt, sas sheeA Ah bin raghunaath saran kaa kee leejai. ||6||1]| Without the Sanctuary of the Lord's Protection, who else's should I seek? ||6||1]|
UatT 299 IB ATS on aes usy fos fares vires Has oral AS as YATE 711-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ta Sst HIS 8 We A Il (711-3) raag todee mehlaa 4 ghar 1. Raag Todee, Chau-Padas, Fourth Mehl, First House:
ofs faa ofa & AA HO AS Il (711-4, 2H, v8 4) har bin reh na sakai man mayraa. Without the Lord, my mind cannot survive.
He utsn urs afe us ag HS agfs 6 senfH ST UU TTS Il (711-4, Fat, ws 4)
mayray pareetam paraan har parabh gur maylay bahur na bhavjal fayraa. ||1|| rahaa- 0. If the Guru unites me with my Beloved Lord God, my breath of life, then I shall not have to face the wheel of reincarnation again in the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause] |
Ad dis Bs wait ys act afe sag ofa ys Ta Wi (711-5, Fst, ne 4)
mayrai hee-arai loch lagee parabh kayree har nainhu har parabh hayraa.
My heart is gripped by a yearning for my Lord God, and with my eyes, I behold my Lord God.
Afsafe efeorts afs on fexfenr afs ug afg ys AT NA (711-5, Zat, v8 4) satgur da-i-aal har naam drirh-aa-i-aa har paaDhar har parabh kayraa. ||1||
The merciful True Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me; this is the Path leading to my Lord God. ||1]|
ofa dat afs on ys ufeur ofe afge afs ys aa I (711-6, 23%, us 4) har rangee har naam parabh paa-i-aa har govind har parabh kayraa. Through the Lord's Love, I have found the Naam, the Name of my Lord God, the Lord
of the Universe, the Lord my God. dfs fase ufs sf oto aren ufy HASfa Sa Pars QU (711-7, 2s4, He 4)
har hirdai man tan meethaa laagaa mukh mastak bhaag changayraa. ||2|| The Lord seems so very sweet to my heart, mind and body; upon my face, upon my forehead, my good destiny is inscribed. ||2||
6s fears frat He oar dfs fenfoor use Pars Il (711-7, 2s, He 4)
lobh vikaar jinaa man laagaa har visri-aa purakh changayraa.
Those whose minds are attached to greed and corruption forget the Lord, the good Lord God.
Gfe Hone Hs nifemrat adios fae HAS Sa Hea USI (711-8, Zt, Hs 4)
o-ay manmukh moorh agi-aanee kahee-ahi tin mastak bhaag mandayraa. ||3]|| Those self-willed manmukhs are called foolish and ignorant; misfortune and bad destiny are written on their foreheads. ||3]|
faaa ufo Afsas 3 uret as fame TI YS AT Il (711-9, Sst, v2 4)
bibayk buDh satgur tay paa-ee gur gi-aan guroo parabh kayraa.
From the True Guru, I have obtained a discriminating intellect; the Guru has revealed the spiritual wisdom of God.
As ood SH TT 3 uUfenr ofs HASIA sa fers USA (711-9, 2st, He 4)
jan naanak naam guroo tay paa-i-aa Dhur mastak bhaag likhayraa. ||4||1]| Servant Nanak has obtained the Naam from the Guru; such is the destiny inscribed upon his forehead. ||4||1]|
Sat HIS UWE VEUS (711-11) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 1 dupday Todee, Fifth Mehl, First House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (711-11) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ASG MET 3 AY Arat ll (711-12, est, we 5) santan avar na kaahoo jaanee. The Saints do not know any other.
augers Ae dia of a A a uTg AM I TTS Mt (711-12, 24, ve 5)
bayparvaah sadaa rang har kai jaa ko paakh su-aamee. rahaa-o.
They are carefree, ever in the Lord's Love; the Lord and Master is on their side. | |Pause| |
Cu AHA Sas Ss wed BAY Sat Il (711-12, 2st, we 5) ooch samaanaa thaakur tayro avar na kaahoo taanee. Your canopy is so high, O Lord and Master; no one else has any power.
MA og fife sase a of ad dfar fomrst Wall (71-13, S37, He 5)
aiso amar mili-o bhagtan ka-o raach rahay rang gi-aanee. ||1||
Such is the immortal Lord and Master the devotees have found; the spiritually wise remain absorbed in His Love. ||1]|
da Aa eu AS Hat dha Hofs St fecevat Il (711-14, est, ne 5)
rog sog dukh jaraa maraa har janeh nahee niktaanee.
Disease, sorrow, pain, old age and death do not even approach the humble servant of the Lord.
foss@ df ad fee Sa BHA Tha HE Ht NANA (711-14, 2st, He 5) nirbha-o ho-ay rahay liv aykai naanak har man maanee. ||2||1]|
They remain fearless, in the Love of the One Lord; O Nanak, they have surrendered their minds to the Lord. ||2||1]|
Sst HIS U Il (711-15)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
ofa fangs Ae ynist il (711-15, 237, v8 5) har bisrat sadaa khu-aaree. Forgetting the Lord, one is ruined forever.
Tag car ag fmm wa a Ge sat i TTC Wh 711-15, 237, 1 5) taa ka-o Dhokhaa kahaa bi-aapai jaa ka-o ot tuhaaree. rahaa-o. How can anyone be deceived, who has Your Support, O Lord? ||Pause| |
UST 292 faa finde A Heo aoa Hau AA MAST Il (712-1, 237, He 5)
bin simran jo jeevan balnaa sarap jaisay arjaaree. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, life is like a burning fire, even if one lives long, like a snake.
de USS A TH ANS nifs voa TSH WAM (712-1, 2st, He 5)
nav khandan ko raaj kamaavai ant chalaigo haaree. ||1||
One may rule over the nine regions of the earth, but in the end, he shall have to depart, losing the game of life. ||1]|
ae fous ae fse ct ave A a@ fase ot I (712-2, 237, v2 5)
gun niDhaan gun tin hee gaa-ay jaa ka-o kirpaa Dhaaree.
He alone sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the treasure of virtue, upon whom the Lord showers His Grace.
A Ader ds CA How Sea fSH Shoo NNN (712-2, 2a, He 5) so sukhee-aa Dhan us janmaa naanak tis balihaaree. ||2||2|| He is at peace, and his birth is blessed; Nanak is a sacrifice to him. ||2||2]|
est HIS Uwe 2 Veue (712-4) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 2 cha-upday Todee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:
qe afsars yArfe it (712-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afeg 3 He vs fern ote I (712-5, 237, He 5) Dhaa-i-o ray man dah dis Dhaa-i-o. The mind wanders, wandering in the ten directions.
Heer nae Horfe afs Hf fSfs ufs orf sereS gre i (712-5, Sat, ne 5) maa-i-aa magan su-aad lobh mohi-o tin parabh aap bhulaa-i-o. rahaa-o.
It is intoxicated by Maya, enticed by the taste of greed. God Himself has deluded it. | |Pause| |
dfs ag ofs aA WOHafs fA fea Hos 3 feT Ho BEE Il (712-6, 237, He 5)
har kathaa har jas saaDhsangat si-o ik muhat na ih man laa-i-o.
He does not focus his mind, even for a moment, on the Lord's sermon, or the Lord's Praises, or the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
faafé ufs ga ans a ua fas Ataf WES Nal (712-6, 2st, Hs 5)
bigsi-o paykh rang kasumbh ko par garih johan jaa-i-o. ||1]]|
He is excited, gazing on the transitory color of the safflower, and looking at other men's wives. ||1]|
3do AHS fas aC 3 ate og AS use HOTEE I (712-7, 2st, v2 5) charan kamal si-o bhaa-o na keeno nah sat purakh manaa-i-o. He does not love the Lord's lotus feet, and he does not please the True Lord.
wes ag wets ag ast fag Sat awe FHTEE II (712-7, 2a4, v2 5)
Dhaavat ka-o Dhaaveh baho bhaatee ji-o taylee balad bharmaa-i-o. ||2||
He runs around chasing the fleeting objects of the world, in all directions, like the ox around the oil press. ||2]|
oH ue feHos 3 ale fea fony 3 atefs WES Il (712-8, 257, Hz 5)
naam daan isnaan na kee-o ik nimakh na keerat gaa-i-o.
He does not practice the Naam, the Name of the Lord; nor does he practice charity or inner cleansing.
aa Bfo oe Ho Shs oa Sf mrss sil (712-9, est, 4: 5)
naanaa jhooth laa-ay man tokhi-o nah boojhi-o apnaa-i-o. ||3]|
He does not sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, even for an instant. Clinging to his many falsehoods, he does not please his own mind, and he does not understand his own self. ||3]|
usuard 3 aad ate odt Afsarg Afe fomrfEs i 712-9, 2st, nH 5)
par-upkaar na kabhoo kee-ay nahee satgur sayv Dhi-aa-i-o.
He never does good deeds for others; he does not serve or meditate on the True Guru.
us es ofe Hats aAfe uses HE HPSS Bil (712-10, 23%, Hs 5)
panch doot rach sangat gosat matvaaro mad maa-i-o. ||4||
He is entangled in the company and the advice of the five demons, intoxicated by the wine of Maya. ||4]|
as sost AUHafs ofs sats zee Afs mMfEG II (712-10, 2a4, v2 5)
kara-o bayntee saaDhsangat har bhagat vachhal sun aa-i-o.
I offer my prayer in the Saadh Sangat; hearing that the Lord is the Lover of His devotees, I have come.
Soa Sta ufss sf ue ay SH nyateEs UNAS (712-11, 2st, we 5)
naanak bhaag pari-o har paachhai raakh laaj apunaa-i-o. ||5]|1]|3]|
Nanak runs after the Lord, and pleads, "Protect my honor, Lord, and make me Your own."||5][1]]3]|
Sat HIST U Il (712-12)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Hoy fae x8 fase orfenr il (712-12, est, H8 5) maanukh bin boojhay birthaa aa-i-aa. Without understanding, his coming into the world is useless.
mfoad AH Ald so aes fas fhasa Gerfeor i Tae i (712-12, 2a4, He 5)
anik saaj seegaar baho kartaa ji-o mirtak odhaa-i-o. rahaa-o.
He puts on various ornaments and many decorations, but it is like dressing a corpse. | |Pause| |
ufe ofe faus AH ate feas adt 3 wfenr I (712-13, 2st, v2 5) Dhaa-ay Dhaa-ay kirpan saram keeno ikatar karee hai maa-i-aa. With great effort and exertion, the miser works to gather in the riches of Maya.
ag Ug ddl Hae AS fas ct ofa o mrfeor All (712-14, 237, nH 5)
daan punn nahee santan sayvaa kit hee kaaj na aa-i-aa. ||1||
He does not give anything in charity or generosity, and he does not serve the Saints; his wealth does not do him any good at all. ||1]|
ats ntsde Aedt AA AHS aS goer I (712-14, Sst, ue 5) kar aabhran savaaree sayjaa kaaman thaat banaa-i-aa. The soul-bride puts on her ornaments, embellishes her bed, and fashions decorations.
Ha 3 ute nus sas Ufa Ufe wey ure HH (712-15, 234, He 5)
sang na paa-i-o apunay bhartay paykh paykh dukh paa-i-aa. ||2||
But if she does not obtain the company of her Husband Lord, the sight of these decorations only brings her pain. ||2| |
Ae feo Hast aes SI HAS srfenr i (712-15, 2st, ws 5) saaro dinas majooree kartaa tuhu mooslahi chharaa-i-aa. The man works all day long, threshing the husks with the pestle.
ae sfe6 aarct fauret we a arf & mrfenr Sil (712-16, 234, v2 5) khayd bha-i-o baygaaree ni-aa-ee ghar kai kaam na aa-i-aa. ||3]|| He is depressed, like a forced laborer, and so he is of no use to his own home. |[3]|
sf nioqy wag us a fA fase ony sArfemr It (712-16, ZeF, 2 5)
bha-i-o anoograhu jaa ka-o parabh ko tis hirdai naam vasaa-i-aa.
But when God shows His Mercy and Grace, He implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within the heart.
Wonafs & ue ufone we aoa dfs aA ufeor giQuesil (712-17, SF, v2 5) saaDhsangat kai paachhai pari-a-o jan naanak har ras paa-i-aa. ||4||2||4||
Search the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, and find the sublime essence of the Lord. ||4]|2||4]|
Sat HIST U Il (712-18)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
faut fafa srg foe afs ats Il (712-18, 23%, He 5) kirpaa niDh bashu ridai har neet. O Lord, ocean of mercy, please abide forever in my heart.
srt af agg usera oat ys Afor utfSs TIS il (712-18, 23%, us 5)
taisee buDh karahu pargaasaa laagai parabh sang pareet. rahaa-o.
Please awaken such understanding within me, that I may be in love with You, God. | |Pause| |
A SH ot wes UT HASIA SS BSS Il (712-19, Zt, w2 5) daas tumaaray kee paava-o Dhooraa mastak lay lay laava-o. Please, bless me with the dust of the feet of Your slaves; I touch it to my forehead.
Ho ufss 3 33 uslst afe atese Ts Wes NA (712-19, 234, v2 5)
mahaa patit tay hot puneetaa har keertan gun gaava-o. ||1]|
I was a great sinner, but I have been made pure, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||1||
Uat 993 nitfamort SHot Hot ware at& sag svS@ Il (713-1, 2st, v2 5)
aagi-aa tumree meethee laaga-o kee-o tuhaaro bhaava-o. Your Will seems so sweet to me; whatever You do, is pleasing to me.
A 3 ofa sot feg Rus mrs 5 AST Wes NM (713-1, 2st, ws 5) jo too deh tahee ih tariptai aan na kathoo Dhaava-o. ||2|| Whatever You give me, with that I am satisfied; I shall chase after no one else. ||2]|
He dt foafe we us Aomit nae se df sd It (713-2, 237, ue 5)
sad hee nikat jaan-o parabh su-aamee sagal rayn ho-ay rahee-ai.
I know that my Lord and Master God is always with me; I am the dust of all men's feet.
Wg Hats df usufs st ys myst SIMA MI (713-3, Sst, He 5) saaDhoo sangat ho-ay paraapat taa parabh apunaa lahee-ai. ||3]| If I find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I shall obtain God. ||3]|
Het Het JH ud SHS J YS THe Ht Il (713-3, 2st, we 5) sadaa sadaa ham chhohray tumray too parabh hamro meeraa. Forever and ever, Iam Your child; You are my God, my King.
Soa afex SH HS fust ufy aH SHS ate ISISINUI (713-4, 2st, He 5)
naanak baarik tum maat pitaa mukh naam tumaaro kheeraa. ||4||3||5]|
Nanak is Your child; You are my mother and father; please, give me Your Name, like milk in my mouth. ||4]|3]|5]]|
Sst HIS U We 2 BUS (713-5) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 2 dupday Todee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars yArfe it (713-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HIS BS SAT SH Il (713-6, Zt, Hs 5) maaga-o daan thaakur naam. I beg for the Gift of Your Name, O my Lord and Master.
Weg aE He Afar 3s TS HHS feu TE aH UU TTS ll (713-6, 2st, we 5)
avar kachhoo mayrai sang na chaalai milai kirpaa gun gaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Nothing else shall go along with me in the end; by Your Grace, please allow me to sing Your Glorious Praises. ||1]|Pause| |
TH HS niSsa Sa JA Aas Sded at SH Il (713-6, Sat, v2 5)
raaj maal anayk bhog ras sagal tarvar kee chhaam.
Power, wealth, various pleasures and enjoyments, all are just like the shadow of a tree.
ofe ofe ag fafa a8 we Aa forse aN NAN (713-7, 234, He 5) Dhaa-ay Dhaa-ay baho biDh ka-o Dhaavai sagal niraarath kaam. ||1|| He runs, runs, runs around in many directions, but all of his pursuits are useless. ||1]|
fag dfge neg A we UA AAS aS FT UM II (713-8, 254, He 5) bin govind avar jay chaaha-o deesai sagal baat hai khaam. Except for the Lord of the Universe, everything he desires appears transitory.
AW Soa AS IS Ha AT HS ure FAA NQUNAUIEN (713-8, 234, He 5)
kaho naanak sant rayn maaga-o mayro man paavai bisraam. ||2||1||6||
Says Nanak, I beg for the dust of the feet of the Saints, so that my mind may find peace and tranquility. ||2||1||6||
Sst HIST U Il (713-9)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
us at a on Hofs AS Il (713-9, Sat, He 5) parabh jee ko naam maneh saDhaarai. The Naam, the Name of the Dear Lord, is the Support of my mind.
fit yrs AY fA HS aS aasts ST TS UU! TIS I (713-9, 2st, ws 5)
jee-a paraan sookh is man ka-o bartan ayh hamaarai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It is my life, my breath of life, my peace of mind; for me, it is an article of daily use. ||1]|Pause] |
oy ats an Hot ufs J aH He UdENTS Il (713-10, Sst, He 5) naam jaat naam mayree pat hai naam mayrai parvaarai. The Naam is my social status, the Naam is my honor; the Naam is my family.
oy Aaet Het AS Afar af aH H AG SASS IAI (713-10, 2st, He 5)
naam sakhaa-ee sadaa mayrai sang har naam mo ka-o nistaarai. ||1]| The Naam is my companion; it is always with me. The Lord's Name is my emancipation. ||1]|
fad far adhrs ATS VHS 3 AS Aa Il (713-11, Sst, Hz 5)
bikhai bilaas kahee-at bahutayray chalat na kachhoo sangaaray.
Sensual pleasures are talked about a lot, but none of them goes along with anyone in the end.
fene HIS OH Soa a Ts OH AS FSS NQNQUDI (713-12, ZF, v2 5) isat meet naam naanak ko har naam mayrai bhandaarai. ||2]|2||7]|| The Naam is Nanak's dearest friend; the Lord's Name is my treasure. ||2]||2]||7]||
Sat He U Il (713-12)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
ala Te WS fedt Far ii (713-12, Sst, ne 5) neekay gun gaa-o mithee rog. Sing the sublime Praises of the Lord, and your disease shall be eradicated.
He Cae Ho fesHe det 3d 3d ad Sta Sa Sa AU TTS ll (713-13, Sst, vs 5)
mukh oojal man nirmal ho-ee hai tayro rahai eehaa oohaa log. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your face shall become radiant and bright, and your mind shall be immaculately pure. You shall be saved here and hereafter. ||1]|Pause] |
vde uate as ae AS Hols vaTSE Fa Il (713-13, 2st, v2 5) charan pakhaar kara-o gur sayvaa maneh charaava-o bhog. I wash the Guru's feet and serve Him; I dedicate my mind as an offering to Him.
afs wmug ge vidas ue ASt A Ta NA (713-14, 2st, H2 5) chhod aapat baad aha‘kaaraa maan so-ee jo hog. ||1|| Renounce self-conceit, negativity and egotism, and accept what comes to pass. ||1||
Hs 206 Aet 3 oar fam Haste fetter feeder il (713-14, 234, v2 5)
sant tahal so-ee hai laagaa jis mastak likhi-aa likhog.
He alone commits himself to the service of the Saints, upon whose forehead such destiny is inscribed.
AI SHA Sa fH TA nig F ATS AT MQUBIUCI (713-15, 23%, ws 5) kaho naanak ayk bin doojaa avar na karnai jog. ||2||3||8|| Says Nanak, other than the One Lord, there is not any other able to act. ||2]|3]|8]|
Sat HIS U Il (713-16)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Afsag ures Aafs Sat Il (713-16, Fst, v8 5) satgur aa-i-o saran tuhaaree. O True Guru, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
fH AY omy ole AS fest orfs THT AU TTS Ml (713-16, Bat, Hz 5)
milai sookh naam har sobhaa chintaa laahi hamaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Grant me the peace and glory of the Lord's Name, and remove my anxiety. ||1]|Pause| |
Med 3 AS Bat ose The ulsS 3B wurst I (713-17, 2st, ws 5)
avar na soojhai doojee thaahar haar pari-o ta-o du-aaree.
I cannot see any other place of shelter; I have grown weary, and collapsed at Your door.
Sur sf ned seg TH fasas SI Sars A 713-17, 2st, ws 5)
laykhaa chhod alaykhai chhootah ham nirgun layho ubaaree. ||1||
Please ignore my account; only then may I be saved. I am worthless - please, save me! ||1]|
He sufie Het feogear Agar SfE wordt Il (713-18, ZzF, v2 5) sad bakhsind sadaa miharvaanaa sabhnaa day-ay aDhaaree. You are always forgiving, and always merciful; You give support to all.
Sod UA AS we ules why Sg feg ae NQNSNEN (713-18, 2st, He 5)
naanak daas sant paachhai pari-o raakh layho ih baaree. ||2||4||9]| Slave Nanak follows the Path of the Saints; save him, O Lord, this time. ||2]|4]|9]|
Sat HIS U Il (713-19)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
dHo' ave are fafa ates i (713-19, Sst, He 5) rasnaa gun gopaal niDh gaa-in. My tongue sings the Praises of the Lord of the world, the ocean of virtue.
AS Hod JIA His CufAS Aas eu utes WA TIS il (713-19, 2st, w 5)
saat sahj rahas man upji-o saglay dookh palaa-in. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Peace, tranquility, poise and delight well up in my mind, and all sorrows run away. ||1]|Pause| |
UST 998 a Hafo Het Het urefu Afe ofs A vas GATES I (714-1, B37, 12 5)
jo maageh so-ee so-ee paavahi sayv har kay charan rasaa-in. Whatever I ask for, I receive; I serve at the Lord's feet, the source of nectar.
HOH HIE PIT S Scld SEAS Aas SIVEES AM (714-2, 2st, wz 5)
janam maran duhhoo tay chhooteh bhavjal jagat taraa-in. ||1||
I am released from the bondage of birth and death, and so I cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
ans dns 3s dteofes on afee uses it (714-2, 3%, nu 5)
khojat khojat tat beechaari-o daas govind paraa-in.
Searching and seeking, I have come to understand the essence of reality; the slave of the Lord of the Universe is dedicated to Him.
nifaont aH sfs A oToa Het fafa sates IIQNUNAON (714-3, Sst, He 5)
abhinaasee khaym chaaheh jay naanak sadaa simar naaraa-in. ||2||5||10]| If you desire eternal bliss, O Nanak, ever remember the Lord in meditation. [12] 15] [20] |
Sat HIST U Il (714-4)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
feea as frou 3 feS il (714-4, 234, v2 5) nindak gur kirpaa tay haati-o. The slanderer, by Guru's Grace, has been turned away.
ursqgH ys se efemresr fre & af fag fe wan sae it (714-4, Zt, ue 5) paarbarahm parabh bha-ay da-i-aalaa siv kai baan sir kaati-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Supreme Lord God has become merciful; with Shiva's arrow, He shot his head off. ||1]|Pause| |
aS WS AH Hf o AA AY at ver ae I (714-5, Sat, v2 5) kaal jaal jam johi na saakai sach kaa panthaa thaati-o. Death, and the noose of death, cannot see me; I have adopted the Path of Truth.
us uses fag fayes adt TH I36 US Ut|S AU (714-5, Sst, He 5)
khaat kharchat kichh nikhutat naahee raam ratan Dhan khaati-o. ||1]|
I have earned the wealth, the jewel of the Lord's Name; eating and spending, it is never used up. ||1]|
SAH 33 dnt fas Sst3fs nner ahr urfenr i (714-6, 23H, wu 5)
bhasmaa bhoot ho-aa khin bheetar apnaa kee-aa paa-i-aa.
In an instant, the slanderer was reduced to ashes; he received the rewards of his own actions.
wig fad ad AS Soa AT Sa BA ASE NANEWAUI (714-6, Sat, He 5) aagam nigam kahai jan naanak sabh daykhai lok sabaa-i-aa. ||2||6||11||
Servant Nanak speaks the truth of the scriptures; the whole world is witness to it. [12] 6] [221]
Sat He U Il (714-7) todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
fxsua 36 HO fawfed sg Il (714-7, 287, He 5) kirpan tan man kilvikh bharay. O miser, your body and mind are full of sin.
WoHfa sxe ats AyMit was a fea TI VU! TIS Il (714-8, Sat, vs 5)
saaDhsang bhajan kar su-aamee dhaakan ka-o ik haray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, vibrate, meditate on the Lord and Master; He alone can cover your sins. ||1]|Pause] |
uifsa fee soa & seas aH 6 ATS AT Il (714-8, Fst, v2 5) anik chhidar bohith kay chhutkat thaam na jaahee karay. When many holes appear in your boat, you cannot plug them with your hands.
fan at Sfog fSq wired dS Afr us AU (714-9, 237, He 5)
jis kaa bohith tis aaraaDhay khotay sang kharay. ||1]|
Worship and adore the One, to whom your boat belongs; He saves the counterfeit along with the genuine. ||1]|
Tet AS Goes wd SE So st F as il (714-9, Fat, we 5) galee sail uthaavat chaahai o-ay oohaa hee hai Dharay. People want to lift up the mountain with mere words, but it just stays there.
ng Hats aaa fas ost us Tug Aafs Us NINN (714-10, 2st, Hs 5) jor sakat naanak kichh naahee parabh raakho saran paray. ||2||7||12||
Nanak has no strength or power at all; O God, please protect me - I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2||7]||12]|
Sat HIS U Il (714-11)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Ts X BIG AHS Hfs fomrS i (714-11, 237, 2 5) har kay charan kamal man Dhi-aa-o. Meditate on the lotus feet of the Lord within your mind.
afte aod fus as dat m@ug ofs & SC Nd TIS th (714-11, 237, v2 5)
kaadh kuthaar pit baat hantaa a-ukhaDh har ko naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Name of the Lord is the medicine; it is like an axe, which destroys the diseases caused by anger and egotism. ||1||Pause| |
36 avy fasseas vu Jat AY TA II (714-12, 2a4, v2 5)
teenay taap nivaaranhaaraa dukh hantaa sukh raas.
The Lord is the One who removes the three fevers; He is the Destroyer of pain, the warehouse of peace.
Tas frug 5 AB wad Wat Ys ora msetA AU (714-12, 237, 48 5) taa ka-o bighan na ko-oo laagai jaa kee parabh aagai ardaas. ||1]|| No obstacles block the path of one who prays before God. ||1]||
As une de arate Age AGS YS SA Il (714-13, 2st, ue 5)
sant parsaad baid naaraa-in karan kaaran parabh ayk.
By the Grace of the Saints, the Lord has become my physician; God alone is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
ae aft uss AAETS Boa Se Ts SX NANCHISM (714-13, Sat, H2 5)
baal buDh pooran sukh-daata naanak har har tayk. ||2||8]|13]|
He is the Giver of perfect peace to the innocent-minded people; O Nanak, the Lord, Har, Har, is my support. ||2]|8]|13]|
Sat HIS U Il (714-14)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofs SH Ae AS AMY Il (714-14, Zat, He 5) har har naam sadaa sad jaap. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, forever and ever.
wf nigdg uUsggH AMM sAet atat wrfr wa TITS i (714-14, Sst, ue 5)
Dhaar anoograhu paarbarahm su-aamee vasdee keenee aap. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Showering His Kind Mercy, the Supreme Lord God Himself has blessed the town. ||1]|Pause] |
fan & A fefa foo dt mrs faor Aa ASU Il (714-15, Sat, He 5) jis kay say fir tin hee sam"aalay binsay sog santaap. The One who owns me, has again taken care of me; my sorrow and suffering is past.
og dfs me Ho mus dfs de Het aay AU (714-16, 237, He 5)
haath day-ay raakhay jan apnay har ho-ay maa-ee baap. ||1]||
He gave me His hand, and saved me, His humble servant; the Lord is my mother and father. ||1]|
ba Hs de frogeo wor orct afe re Il (714-16, 237, He 5)
jee-a jant ho-ay miharvaanaa da-yaa Dhaaree har naath.
All beings and creatures have become kind to me; my Lord and Master blessed me with His Kind Mercy.
Soa Adle Ud GU SHS AT aT FS UTSTY MANCINI! (714-17, Sst, He 5)
naanak saran paray dukh bhanjan jaa kaa bad partaap. ||2||9||14|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Destroyer of pain; His glory is so great! [12] 19] 1141]
Sat HIS U Il (714-17)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Ant Aafe ufsS esas il (714-18, est, 8 5) Savaamee saran pari-o darbaaray. O Lord and Master, I seek the Sanctuary of Your Court.
afe musa use & us 35 fas ao Bord 19 ToS Ih (714-18, 237, nH 5)
kot apraaDh khandan kay daatay tujh bin ka-un uDhaaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Destroyer of millions of sins, O Great Giver, other than You, who else can save me? ||1]|Pause] |
UHS YAS FI udaTS Ass mga Hers Il (714-19, 237, ne 5) khojat khojat baho parkaaray sarab arath beechaaray. Searching, searching in so many ways, I have contemplated all the objects of life.
AGHfa usH afs uch ufenr afe df gs WAM (714-19, 2st, He 5)
saaDhsang param gat paa-ee-ai maa-i-aa rach banDh haaray. ||1]|
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the supreme state is attained. But those who are engrossed in the bondage of Maya, lose the game of life. ||1||
uat 99u 3ds TH Afar Uifs fs wat afs AS fs firs i (715-1, 2e7, ve 5)
charan kamal sang pareet man laagee sur jan milay pi-aaray. My mind is in love with the Lord's lotus feet; I have met the Beloved Guru, the noble, heroic being.
Sod Moe ad dia Afu Af AAS dar fees NANAONAT (715-1, 3H, He 5)
naanak anad karay har jap jap saglay rog nivaaray. ||2||10||15]| Nanak celebrates in bliss; chanting and meditating on the Lord, all sickness has been cured. ||2||10]]15]|
est Hos u we 3 Veue (715-3) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 3 cha-upday Todee, Fifth Mehl, Third House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yArfe it (715-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oo wuleS 3 us aE 3 Sat Il (715-4, Fat, we 5) haa™ haa™ lapti-o ray moorh"ay kachhoo na thoree. Oh! Oh! You cling to Maya, you fool; this is not a trivial matter.
3d dt A Wat Het Wh TIC I (715-4, 24, ve 5) tayro nahee so jaanee moree. rahaa-o. That which you consider to be yours, is not yours. ||Pause| |
MUS TH & BS fiegnr it (715-4, Bat, Hs 5) aapan raam na cheeno khinoo-aa. You do not remember your Lord, even for an instant.
Use A must HOM IAI (715-5, Sst, He 5) jo paraa-ee so apnee manoo-aa. ||1|| That which belongs to others, you believe to be your own. ||1]||
oH Halt A fs © SANTEE Il (715-5, 2st, He 5)
naam sangee so man na basaa-i-o.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is always with you, but you do not enshrine it within your mind.
efs wh ag fag ofeS iI (715-5, 23%, we 5) chhod jaahi vaahoo chit laa-i-o. ||2| | You have attached your consciousness to that which you must eventually abandon.
[21]
A Afes fas gu fSATEE Il (715-6, 2st, He 5)
so sanchi-o jit bhookh tisaa-i-o.
You collect that which will bring you only hunger and thirst. nifqs ou SA dt ufEG Sil (715-6, Zz, 42 5)
amrit naam tosaa nahee paa-i-o. ||3]| You have not obtained the supplies of the Ambrosial Naam. ||3]|
aH ofa Ha afy usr il (715-6, eat, He 5) kaam kroDh moh koop pari-aa. You have fallen into the pit of sexual desire, anger and emotional attachment.
aa ure area & Sf Weel (715-7, Zt, 42 5) gur parsaad naanak ko tari-aa. ||4||1]|16]]| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, a rare few are saved. ||4]|1]|16]]|
Sat HIS U Il (715-7)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
TH Sa Tdt Tat il (715-7, 2st, v2 5) hamaarai aykai haree haree. I have only the One Lord, my God.
mo ned frets 6 adt il TIS Il (715-7, 237, v8 5) aan avar sinjaan na karee. rahaa-o. I do not recognize any other. ||Pause| |
zs ata ag murat ute Il (715-8, eat, v2 5) vadai bhaag gur apunaa paa-i-o. By great good fortune, I have found my Guru.
afs 4 a@ afs on fesfeS nail (715-8, 234, ue 5) gur mo ka-o har naam darirhaa-i-o. ||1]| The Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me. ||1]|
dfs ofs APY ST YT SH Il (715-9, Fat, us 5)
har har jaap taap barat naymaa.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my meditation, austerity, fasting and daily religious practice.
ofa ofa famrfe ane Afs AH QI (715-9, Fst, He 5) har har Dhi-aa-ay kusal sabh khaymaa. ||2|| Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, I have found total joy and bliss. ||2]|
mas fasors wats af aa Il (715-9, 237, v2 5) aachaar bi-uhaar jaat har gunee-aa. The Praises of the Lord are my good conduct, occupation and social class.
HS moe ates Ufs ASM ISI (715-10, Fst, He 5) mahaa anand keertan har sunee-aa. ||3]|| Listening to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, I am in absolute ecstasy. ||3] |
ag aod fafs oag ufenr i Ag fag fsA a fy ufo wrfemr ISIQNADI (715-10, 2st, nH 5)
kaho naanak jin thaakur paa-i-aa. sabh kichh tis kay garih meh aa-i-aa. ||4||2]||17]| Says Nanak, everything comes to the homes of those who have found their Lord and Master. ||4]|2||17]|
Sat HIS U We 8 Ue (715-12) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 4 dupday Todee, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars ure i (715-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O45 SA
IS HO Ta Sa BF Il (715-13, Sst, we 5) roorho man har rango lorhai. My beautiful mind longs for the Love of the Lord.
ret ofa ats 3 afe i TIE it (715-13, 234, v2 5) gaalee har neehu na ho-ay. rahaa-o. By mere words, the Lord's Love does not come. ||Pause| |
JS Feet wane orate set stat war i (715-13, est, we 5)
ha-o dhoodhaydee darsan kaaran beethee beethee paykhaa.
I have searched for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, looking in each and every street.
as ffs sou aetfemr FA (715-14, 237, v8 5) gur mil bharam gavaa-i-aa hay. ||1]| Meeting with the Guru, my doubts have been dispelled. ||1||
feo afa uret H AY aad By fares gfe Ha I (715-14, 2st, Hs 5)
in buDh paa-ee mai saaDhoo kannahu laykh likhi-o Dhur maathai.
I have obtained this wisdom from the Holy Saints, according to the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon my forehead.
fea fafa aoa safe Sz male WIANANACI (715-15, Z3t, we 5)
ih biDh naanak har nain alo-ay. ||2||1]|18]| In this way, Nanak has seen the Lord with his eyes. ||2||1]|18]|
Sat HIS U Il (715-15)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Tafa asses Has HS F il (715-15, Fat, we 5) garab gahilarho moorh-rho hee-o ray. My foolish heart is in the grip of pride.
HE HosH cSt HES 11 Stag fouret Hfo afas F 1 TIC il (715-16, 234, v2 5)
hee-o mahraaj ree maa-i-o. deehar ni-aa-ee mohi faaki-o ray. rahaa-o. By the Will of my Lord God, Maya, like a witch, has swallowed my soul. ||Pause]|
We We WE Ae BS fag BIS AS UTES F I (715-16, S34, we 5)
ghano ghano ghano sad lorhai bin lahnay kaithai paa-i-o ray.
More and more, he continually yearns for more; but unless he is destined to receive, how can he obtain it?
HoH J aE ag fA oats fossas ots AAES F AM (715-17, ZH, we 5)
mahraaj ro gaath vaahoo si-o lubh-rhi-o nihbhaagrho bhaahi sanjo-i-o ray. ||1]|
He is entangled in wealth, bestowed by the Lord God; the unfortunate one attaches himself to the fire of desires. ||1]]|
Afe Ho Ald ATO AS Aa aS Aas yes ffeS F il (715-17, est, ws 5)
sun man seekh saaDhoo jan saglo thaaray saglay paraachhat miti-o ray.
Listen, O mind, to the Teachings of the Holy Saints, and all your sins shall be totally washed away.
Wa Ge HITH dt Wosls Aa aoa Test & uss F NQNQNACEN (715-18, Sst, He 5)
jaa ko lahno mahraaj ree gaath-rhee-o jan naanak garbhaas na pa-orhi-o ray.
[2] 12]]19]|
One who is destined to receive from the Lord, O servant Nanak, shall not be cast into the womb of reincarnation again. ||2||2||19]|
UST D9
Sat HIS U We U BUS (716-1) todee mehlaa 5 ghar 5 dupday Todee, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsas ure II (716-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MA TS AS ys at ate Il (716-2, Fst, ue 5) aiso gun mayro parabh jee keen. Such is the blessing my God has bestowed upon me.
Us ty nig od da fea 3a 3 Haw Ufs aa I TTS Il (716-2, Sst, Hz 5)
panch dokh ar aha" rog ih tan tay sagal door keen. rahaa-o.
He has totally banished the five evils and the illness of egotism from my body. | |Pause| |
due ste éfe fator 3 aa dt aE HS dd Ho Il (716-3, 234, v2 5)
banDhan tor chhor bikhi-aa tay gur ko sabad mayrai hee-arai deen.
Breaking my bonds, and releasing me from vice and corruption, He has enshrined the Word of the Guru's Shabad within my heart.
TY nag He ae 3 Stetes Yn afas Hfa aie a sts AU (716-3, 23%, ws 5)
roop anroop moro kachh na beechaari-o paraym gahi-o mohi har rang bheen. ||1]| The Lord has not considered my beauty or ugliness; instead, He has held me with love. Iam drenched with His Love. ||1]|
ufuS wee ure dts we vise fest gaa uste Il (716-4, 2st, He 5)
paykhi-o laalan paat beech kho-ay anad chitaa harkhay pateen.
I behold my Beloved, now that the curtain has been torn away. My mind is happy, pleased and satisfied.
fan ct a fag Aet ys ora A oag fSA St a Ths NQNAUON (716-5, Fat, 2 5) tis hee ko garihu so-ee parabh naanak so thaakur tis hee ko Dheen. ||2||1]|20]| My house is His; He is my God. Nanak is obedient to His Lord and Master. ||2||1]|20||
Sat HIST U Il (716-5)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Het HS HO at YS Il (716-6, Sst, w8 5) maa-ee mayray man kee pareet. O my mother, my mind is in love.
Edt AGH UsH AU Sat aH an fans 3 SHS 1) TTS Il (716-6, Sa4, v2 5)
ayhee karam Dharam jap ayhee raam naam nirmal hai reet. rahaa-o.
This is my karma and my Dharma; this is my meditation. The Lord's Name is my immaculate, unstained way of life. ||Pause] |
ure nung dies Us He Bus AG eans ys Slfs Il (716-6, 2at, He 5)
paraan aDhaar jeevan Dhan morai daykhan ka-o darsan parabh neet.
The Support of my breath of life, the wealth of my life, is to gaze upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan.
We we SA Aft HS Ho MUS ACH ofa Ae ats NA (716-7, 2s4, He 5)
baat ghaat tosaa sang morai man apunay ka-o mai har sakhaa keet. ||1]|
On the road, and on the river, these supplies are always with me. I have made my mind the Lord's companion. ||1]||
Ha uAtfe se Ho feaHe ate fas nus afs ats Il (716-8, 234, us 5)
sant parsaad bha-ay man nirmal kar kirpaa apunay kar leet.
By the Grace of the Saints, my mind has become immaculate and pure. In His mercy, He has made me His own.
fits frites aoa AY ufenr orfe warfe sase & HTS MANU (716-8, 237, 8 5) simar simar naanak sukh paa-i-aa aad jugaad bhagtan kay meet. ||2||2||21|| Remembering, remembering Him in meditation, Nanak has found peace. From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, He is the friend of His devotees.
[2] 12]]21]|
Sat HIST U Il (716-9)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
ys Ht fee AT YTS Il (716-9, Fst, us 5) parabh jee mil mayray paraan. Dear God, please meet me; You are my breath of life.
fang odt fons dhag 3 nus sas AB use Be Il TIS Il (716-10, 2st, we 5)
bisar nahee nimakh hee-aray tay apnay bhagat ka-o pooran daan. rahaa-o.
Do not let me forget You from my heart, even for an instant; please, bless Your devotee with Your gift of perfection. | |Pause] |
deg SoH TY AS UlsH visa Aus AAS II (716-10, 237, v8 5)
khovhu bharam raakh mayray pareetam antarjaamee sugharh sujaan.
Dispel my doubt, and save me, O my Beloved, all-knowing Lord, O Inner-knower, O Searcher of hearts.
afe aH aH ug He nifys ferfe wag ys HT INA (716-11, ZF, He 5)
kot raaj naam Dhan mayrai amrit darisat Dhaarahu parabh maan. ||1||
The wealth of the Naam is worth millions of kingdoms to me; O God, please bless me with Your Ambrosial Glance of Grace. ||1]||
WS UId TAS To We AA ule nwrefs AHTE aS Il (716-11, 2st, Hs 5)
aath pahar rasnaa gun gaavai jas poor aghaaveh samrath kaan.
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing Your Glorious Praises. They totally satisfy my ears, O my all-powerful Lord.
Sot Aafe As A WS AST AS SSA ATAS MQUSWQ2M (716-12, 27, us 5)
tayree saran jee-an kay daatay sadaa sadaa naanak kurbaan. ||2||3||22|| I seek Your Sanctuary, O Lord, O Giver of life to the soul; forever and ever, Nanak is a sacrifice to You. ||2]|3||22] |
Sat HIS U Il (716-13)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
ys 3d ua at ufs il (716-13, 2st, H 5)
parabh tayray pag kee Dhoor. O God, I am the dust of Your feet.
de cfenre YIsH Hanus afs fas Het So ufs i TIS il (716-13, Sst, ws 5)
deen da-i-aal pareetam manmohan kar kirpaa mayree lochaa poor. rahaa-o.
O merciful to the meek, Beloved mind-enticing Lord, by Your Kind Mercy, please fulfill my yearning. ||Pause| |
ao fer afe sfoor AR SHo niger wet Tats Il (716-14, Zt, Hs 5)
dah dis rav rahi-aa jas tumraa antarjaamee sadaa hajoor.
In the ten directions, Your Praises are permeating and pervading, O Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts, O Lord ever-present.
WH SHe FA Wels AIS A AS AAT 3 HIS Blo UU (716-14, Sst, ws 5)
jo tumraa jas gaavahi kartay say jan kabahu na martay jhoor. ||1]|
Those who sing Your Praises, O Creator Lord, those humble beings never die or grieve. ||1]|
dg a0 faor wheor a ATG Hats fee faa I (716-15, est, 2 5)
DhanDh banDh binsay maa-i-aa kay saaDhoo sangat mitay bisoor.
The worldly affairs and entanglements of Maya disappear, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; all sorrows are taken away.
AY Aufs sa feR Aba & fag ois area AS FT MUNI (716-16, Fat, HW 5)
sukh sampat bhog is jee-a kay bin har naanak jaanay koor. ||2||4]|23]| The comforts of wealth and the enjoyments of the soul - O Nanak, without the Lord, know them to be false. ||2||4]|23]|
Sat HE U Il (716-16)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Het HE He at fumMrA Il (716-17, 237, He 5) maa-ee mayray man kee pi-aas. O my mother, my mind is so thirsty.
fea fag sft o AAG fag UlsH Bane tus AG urd His MTA I TIE Il (716-17, 2st, v2 5) ik khin reh na saka-o bin pareetam darsan daykhan ka-o Dhaaree man aas. rahaa-o. I cannot survive, even for an instant, without my Beloved. My mind is filled with the
desire to behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||Pause] |
frns@ on fadna ads Ho 36 3 Afs fawfed oF Il (716-18, 2st, He 5)
simra-O naam niranjan kartay man tan tay sabh kilvikh naas.
I meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the immaculate Creator Lord; all the sins and errors of my mind and body are washed away.
UIs USAIN AYES nifsoAt fas A a ATA AI (716-18, Bet, Hs 5)
pooran paarbarahm sukh-daatay abhinaasee bimal jaa ko jaas. ||1||
The Perfect Supreme Lord God, the eternal, imperishable Giver of peace - spotless and pure are His Praises. ||1||
AS ure He us Have ate fasur sf TESA Il (716-19, Fst, us 5)
sant parsaad mayray poor manorath kar kirpaa bhaytay guntaas.
By the Grace of the Saints, my desires have been fulfilled; in His Mercy, the Lord, the treasure of virtue, has met me.
UST 29D
AYS Hon AY His Cus afe AT SSA UTA NNUNIWII (717-1, 23%, He 5)
saa™t sahj sookh man upji-o kot soor naanak pargaas. ||2||5||24]|
Peace and tranquility, poise and pleasure, have welled up within my mind; millions of suns, O Nanak, illuminate me. ||2||5||24] |
Sat HIS U Il (717-1)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
dfs fs ufss ures Il (717-1, 237, v2 5) har har patit paavan. The Lord, Har, Har, is the Purifier of sinners;
ba urs HS AYES nisaAMt Ho a SSH I TIC i (717-2, Fat, ne 5)
jee-a paraan maan sukh-daata antarjaamee man ko bhaavan. rahaa-o.
He is the soul, the breath of life, the Giver of peace and honor, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; He is pleasing to my mind. ||Pause] |
Hed AWS vag AS 8s foe GA fe SAS TS Wes Il (717-2, 2st, v2 5)
sundar sugharh chatur sabh baytaa rid daas nivaas bhagat gun gaavan.
He is beautiful and wise, clever and all-knowing. He dwells within the hearts of His Slaves; His devotees sing His Glorious Praises.
fooHs gu migu Aomt aan sfh ste A urea UA (717-3, 23%, 48 5)
nirmal roop anoop su-aamee karam bhoom beejan so khaavan. ||1]||
His form is immaculate and pure; He is the incomparable Lord and Master. Upon the field of actions and karma, whatever one plants, one eats. ||1]|
fans fry se fare ore 3 at EAT BES Il (717-4, est, nH: 5) bisman bisam bha-ay bismaadaa aan na bee-o doosar laavan. I am amazed, and wonder-struck by His wonder. There is none other than Him.
ono fate fAHfs AA AIST BOM VTA Het af ASS MQUENQUI (717-4, 2st, He 5) rasnaa simar simar jas jeevaa naanak daas sadaa bal jaavan. ||2||6]|25] | Meditating in remembrance on His Praises with my tongue, I live; slave Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2]|6]|25]|
Sat HIST U Il (717-5)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Het HEM BH Il (717-5, Zat, Hz 5) maa-ee maa-i-aa chhal. O my mother, Maya is so misleading and deceptive.
fge at mats Hwy at efeor afre sro fae Ja a Ae I TIC I (717-5, Sat, 2 5)
tarin kee agan maygh kee chhaa-i-aa gobid bhajan bin harh kaa jal. rahaa-o. Without meditating on the Lord of the Universe, it is like straw on fire, or the shadow of a cloud, or the running of the flood-waters. ||Pause| |
efs fimrou ag vaoet eff ag Afs ATG fa US Il (717-6, 234, He 5)
chhod si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee du-ay kar jorh saaDh mag chal.
Renounce your cleverness and all your mental tricks; with your palms pressed together, walk on the Path of the Holy Saints.
frufs Aomit unison wou ea ot feg SSH Sw AU (717-7, est, H2 5)
simar su-aamee antarjaamee maanukh dayh kaa ih ootam fal. ||1]|
Remember the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; this is the most sublime reward of this human incarnation. ||1]|
Fe ahmra AGS AT AS Sadie ANTS Sdt YS Il (717-7, Yat, n2 5)
bayd bakhi-aan karat saaDhoo jan bhaagheen samjhat nahee khal.
The Holy Saints preach the teachings of the Vedas, but the unfortunate fools do not understand them.
UH sols Te AS Ska Tle fAHals FIs SS HS MUDNENW (717-8, Fat, w3 5)
paraym bhagat raachay jan naanak har simran dahan bha-ay mal. ||2||7||26|| Servant Nanak is absorbed in loving devotional worship; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, one's dirt is burnt away. ||2||7]|26] |
Sat HIST U Il (717-9)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Het TIS AT HTS Il (717-9, Fst, ve 5) maa-ee charan gur meethay. O mother, the Guru's feet are so sweet.
zs aa te ushnd afe car PIAS Td StS Il FICS Il (717-9, 234, ve 5)
vadai bhaag dayvai parmaysar kot falaa darsan gur deethay. rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, the Transcendent Lord has blessed me with them. Millions of rewards come from the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||Pause] |
Ts Wes ngs ifort an au feon He GS Il (717-10, 24, v2 5)
gun gaavat achut abhinaasee kaam kroDh binsay mad dheethay.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the imperishable, indestructible Lord, sexual desire, anger and stubborn pride vanish.
mAfag se ATS df TS HOH HIS Agfa odt US WAU (717-10, st, He 5)
asthir bha-ay saach rang raatay janam maran baahur nahee peethay. ||1]| Those who are imbued with the Love of the True Lord become permanent and eternal; birth and death do not grind them down any more. ||1||
fag ofa sno da SA AS AS ceure WS Als BS Il (717-11, 2st, H2 5)
bin har bhajan rang ras jaytay sant da-i-aal jaanay sabh jhoothay.
Without the Lord's meditation, all joys and pleasures are totally false and worthless; by the Kind Mercy of the Saints, I know this.
oH 33g UTES Aa aoa OH fags VS Als HS MNCNIN (717-12, 2st, He 5) naam ratan paa-i-o jan naanak naam bihoon chalay sabh moothay. ||2||8]|27]|
Servant Nanak has found the jewel of the Naam; without the Naam, all must depart, cheated and plundered. ||2||8]||27]|
Sat HIS U Il (717-12)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
AUHfa ofs dfs ay festa il (717-13, 2a, He 5)
saaDhsang har har naam chitaaraa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hofa wide de fea Test niag 38 TNS I TIC I (717-13, 254, v2 5)
sahj anand hovai din raatee ankur bhalo hamaaraa. rahaa-o.
I am in peaceful poise and bliss, day and night; the seed of my destiny has sprouted. | |Pause| |
Ts us sfeS asarat Wt nis o UTI Il (717-13, Sst, ws 5) gur pooraa bhayti-o badbhaagee jaa ko ant na paaraavaaraa. I have met the True Guru, by great good fortune; He has no end or limitation.
ag afs afte oe Ae nua fae Aas AAS UU (717-14, 2a, He 5)
kar geh kaadh lee-o jan apunaa bikh saagar sansaaraa. ||1]||
Taking His humble servant by the hand, He pulls him out of the poisonous world- ocean. ||1||
HOH HdO AS Td svat Sls B AAS GMT Il (717-15, SsA, v2 5)
janam maran kaatay gur bachnee bahurh na sankat du-aaraa.
Birth and death are ended for me, by the Word of the Guru's Teachings; I shall no longer pass through the door of pain and suffering.
Sa Astle Tt AMM at UST UST SHAS NQNCMQCH (717-15, Fst, He 5)
naanak saran gahee su-aamee kee punah punah namaskaaraa. ||2||9||28]| Nanak holds tight to the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master; again and again, he bows in humility and reverence to Him. ||2||9||28]|
Sat HIST U Il (717-16)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
Het AT HO A AY Il (717-16, Sst, He 5) maa-ee mayray man ko sukh. O my mother, my mind is at peace.
afe mde aa AY sae ofa fangs faor AS Fy NA TIC It (717-16, Ze, v2 5) kot anand raaj sukh bhugvai har simrat binsai sabh dukh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I enjoy the ecstasy of millions of princely pleasures; remembering the Lord in meditation, all pains have been dispelled. ||1]|Pause| |
afe HoH & faafsu anf frngs uso So HO AY Il (717-17, 2aF, 2 5)
kot janam kay kilbikh naaseh simrat paavan tan man sukh.
The sins of millions of lifetimes are erased, by meditating on the Lord; becoming pure, my mind and body have found peace.
af Agu use set orAT BING Ses Ssdt Su AI (717-18, Yat, He 5)
daykh saroop pooran bha-ee aasaa darsan bhaytat utree bhukh. ||1]||
Gazing upon the Lord's form of perfect beauty, my hopes have been fulfilled; attaining the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my hunger has been appeased. ||1]|
ats uesa wine Ho fAfo andes usAs Uf ofe Ty Il (717-18, 2st, He 5)
chaar padaarath asat mahaa siDh kaamDhayn paarjaat har har rukh.
The four great blessings, the eight supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, the wish-fulfilling Elysian cow, and the wish-fulfilling tree of life - all these come from the Lord, Har, Har.
Sa Aste Wt AY Ad ASH HS fefs Tas > TY MQANIONQCN (717-19, Fst, He 5)
naanak saran gahee sukh saagar janam maran fir garabh na Dhukh. |[2||10]|29] |
O Nanak, holding tight to the Sanctuary of the Lord, the ocean of peace, you shall not suffer the pains of birth and death, or fall into the womb of reincarnation again. [|2]|10]|29]|
UST 99
Sat HIS U Il (718-1)
todee mehlaa 5. Todee, Fifth Mehl:
ofs ofa sae foe Ba ars Il (718-1, 234, v2 5) har har charan ridai ur Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Lord's Feet within my heart.
frifs Aomit Afsas Mus ASA ASS IHS AU! TIS Il (718-1, Fst, He 5)
simar su-aamee satgur apunaa kaaraj safal hamaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Contemplating my Lord and Master, my True Guru, all my affairs have been resolved. ||1]|Pause] |
Ys we uA UNAS af atefs Jz ses I (718-2, est, we 5)
punn daan poojaa parmaysur har keerat tat beechaaray.
The merits of giving donations to charity and devotional worship come from the Kirtan of the Praises of the Transcendent Lord; this is the true essence of wisdom.
To WS MSS AY UlEnt Stag Mia MUTT NA (718-2, Zt, Hz 5)
gun gaavat atul sukh paa-i-aa thaakur agam apaaray. ||1]||
Singing the Praises of the unapproachable, infinite Lord and Master, I have found immeasurable peace. || 1] |
A We usgutH mud até fo a arate ae o ates Il (718-3, Set, Hs 5)
jo jan paarbarahm apnay keenay tin kaa baahur kachh na beechaaray.
The Supreme Lord God does not consider the merits and demerits of those humble beings whom He makes His own.
oH 330 Afe Afu fu Ate Ufa Sea AS HES NANAUIBOM (718-4, Fst, H2 5)
naam ratan sun jap jap jeevaa har naanak kanth majhaaray. ||2||11]|30]| Hearing, chanting and meditating on the jewel of the Naam, I live; Nanak wears the Lord as his necklace. ||2||11]|30||
Sst Host € (718-5)
todee mehlaa 9 Todee, Ninth Mehl:
qe Afsas urfe II (718-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AIG AT ntust mMOHTeHT Il (718-6, 237, uz 9) kaha-o kahaa apnee aDhmaa-ee. What can I say about my base nature?
CafsG aaa AHA & GA od Alafs YS Wet NA FICS I (718-6, Fat, v8 9)
urjhi-o kanak kaamnee kay ras nah keerat parabh gaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am entangled in the love of gold and women, and I have not sung the Kirtan of God's Praises. ||1]||Pause]|
Wa 3d ag AY ATS x ST AE Ta Surret ii 718-7, Fst, we 9) jag jhoothay ka-o saach jaan kai taa si-o ruch upjaa-ee. I judge the false world to be true, and I have fallen in love with it.
de au finfes sot aag IS 7 Afr Aart WAI (718-7, 23%, 43 9)
deen banDh simri-o nahee kabhoo hot jo sang sahaa-ee. ||1]|
I have never contemplated the friend of the poor, who shall be my companion and helper in the end. ||1]]|
Hale dsfoS wfeur 4 fen fefs act o He ot avet Il (718-8, 2st, nH 9) magan rahi-o maa-i-aa mai nis din chhutee na man kee kaa-ee. I remain intoxicated by Maya, night and day, and the filth of my mind will not depart.
ats aoa ma ats nos ats fae safe at APSTST MQNAISAUN (718-8, 237, v2 9)
kahi naanak ab naahi anat gat bin har kee sarnaa-ee. ||2||1]||31]| Says Nanak, now, without the Lord's Sanctuary, I cannot find salvation in any other way. |[2]|1]|32]|
est wat sasi at (718-10)
todee banee bhagtaa™ kee
Todee, The Word Of The Devotees:
qe Afsare YATE Il (718-10)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: cet 8S fase tet FS Shs i (718-11, 2st, sas one Fh)
ko-ee bolai nirvaa ko-ee bolai door. Some say that He is near, and others say that He is far away.
WS ot HSS Bs vafs WAU (718-11, est, sas one Fh) jal kee maachhulee charai khajoor. ||1]| We might just as well say that the fish climbs out of the water, up the tree. ||1]|
aie 3 sage ofeS ll (718-11, 2st, sas nee kaa‘-ay ray bakbaad laa-i-o. Why do you speak such nonsense?
fats ofs ute feats sufe nai grS i cis-11, 2st, sas ones Ah jin har paa-i-o tineh chhapaa-i-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. One who has found the Lord, keeps quiet about it. ||1]]|Pause] |
ufss df & Fe gas Il (718-12, 2st, gas ane Ah pandit ho-ay kai bayd bakhaanai. Those who become Pandits, religious scholars, recite the Vedas,
Hay SHES THT AS QUA (718-12, Sst, sas one Hh) moorakh naamday-o raameh jaanai. ||2||1|| but foolish Naam Dayv knows only the Lord. ||2||1]|
ACS a ASA SoG TH oH BS Tt Il (718-13, 2st, sas ane Th) ka-un ko kalank rahi-o raam naam layt hee. Whose blemishes remain, when one chants the Lord's Name?
ufss ufes se TH ATS Tt NU TTS I (718-13, Fst, sas oes Hh) patit pavit bha-ay raam kahat hee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Sinners become pure, chanting the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause] |
oH Afal SHES AS AC ystamr nret | (718-14, 2st, sas see FH) raam sang naamdayv jan ka-o partagi-aa aa-ee. With the Lord, servant Naam Dayv has come to have faith.
eae Fs Id ad a Stee WET AI (718-14, 2st, sas see Hh)
aykaadasee barat rahai kaahay ka-o tirath jaa-ee’. ||1||
I have stopped fasting on the eleventh day of each month; why should I bother to go on pilgrimages to sacred shrines? ||1]|
Zofs SHES Afas AHfS SE Il (718-14, 2st, sas snee Hh bhanat naamday-o sukarit sumat bha-ay. Prays Naam Dayv, I have become a man of good deeds and good thoughts.
Tents my afs d & o Safe TS UI (718-15, 2st, sas ane wh gurmat raam kahi ko ko na baikunth ga-ay. ||2]|2]|
Chanting the Lord's Name, under Guru's Instructions, who has not gone to heaven? H21|21|
se ge ae wre NA TIC | (718-15, 2st, sas onze AH teen chhanday khayl aachhai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Here is a verse with a three-fold play on words. ||1||Pause]|
AST A us Jist ore TH A we Ast T Il (718-16, 2st, sas anes AH kumbhaar kay ghar haa‘dee aachhai raajaa kay ghar saa‘dee go. In the potter's home there are pots, and in the king's home there are camels.
WHS & wd dat ore dist vist gist TNA (718-16, 2st, sas ones AD
baaman kay ghar raa‘dee aachhai raa“dee saa‘dee haa‘dee go. ||1]|
In the Brahmin's home there are widows. So here they are: haandee, saandee, raandee. ||1||
wale a we dt vite sng na Ata gi Il (718-17, 2st, sas ane Ah
baanee-ay kay ghar hee“g aachhai bhaisar maathai see“g go.
In the home of the grocer there is asafoetida; on the forehead of the buffalo there are horns.
2eG HO Sta wre Sta Ala da F Qi (718-17, 2st, sas one wh dayval maDhay leeg aachhai leeg seeg heeg go. ||2|| In the temple of Shiva there are lingams. So here they are: heeng, seeng, leeng. ||2| |
Sot A us 3B we AAS HO 8H T Il (718-18, 2st, sas ane wh taylee kai ghar tayl aachhai jangal maDhay bayl go. In the house of the oil-presser there is oil; in the forest there are vines.
Hot XU AG nie AG AG 3H T Ill (718-18, 2st, gas one th) maalee kay ghar kayl aachhai kayl bayl tayl go. ||3]| In the gardener's home there are bananas. So here they are: tayl, bayl, kayl. ||3]|
Hat HO afse wre daw Ho fiom dl (718-19, 2st, sas ane Th jantaa’ maDhay gobind aachhai gokal maDhay si-aam go. The Lord of the Universe, Govind, is within His Saints; Krishna, Shyaam, is in Gokal.
oH HO IH ote oH fhoms afie T Susi (718-19, 2st, sas ane TH) naamay maDhay raam aachhai raam si-aam gobind go. ||4]||3]| The Lord, Raam, is in Naam Dayv. So here they are: Raam, Shyaam, Govind. ||4]|3]|
Yar 09
Ta FISt HIS 8 wg 9 TUS (719-1) raag bairaarhee mehlaa 4 ghar 1 dupday Raag Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars ure il (719-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hfs Ho mae aa Ths BMH Il (719-3, Fast, He 4) sun man akath kathaa har naam. Listen, O mind, to the Unspoken Speech of the Lord's Name.
fafa afo fafa Fa uefo oH TSHfS Tie TH IH NA TIS Il (719-3, FaSH, He 4)
riDh buDh siDh sukh paavahi bhaj gurmat har raam raam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Riches, wisdom, supernatural spiritual powers and peace are obtained, by vibrating, meditating on the Lord God, under Guru's Instruction. ||1]||Pause] |
oer fms usta AA SSH Ue VAS Wels TH Il (719-4, FavsH, we 4)
naanaa khi-aan puraan jas ootam khat darsan gaavahi raam.
Numerous legends, the Puraanas, and the six Shaastras, sing the sublime Praises of the Lord.
Had afs 3am fortes act wieS afs HH IN (719-4, Sot, He 4)
sankar krorh taytees Dhi-aa-i-o nahee jaani-o har marmaam. ||1||
Shiva and the three hundred thirty million gods meditate on the Lord, but they do not know the secret of His mystery. ||1]|
Afs dd We aye AA Wefs AS Wes AS Sun Il (719-5, Fast, ue 4)
Sur nar gan ganDharab jas gaavahi sabh gaavat jayt upaam. The angelic and divine beings, and the celestial singers sing His Praises; all Creation sings of Him.
Soe faut act ofs fas a8 3 AS 3S The IM MUNA (719-5, Fast, v2 4) naanak kirpaa karee har jin ka-o tay sant bhalay har raam. ||2||1||
O Nanak, those whom the Lord blesses with His Kind Mercy, become the good Saints of the Lord God. ||2||1]|
Hast HIS 8 Il (719-6) bairaarhee mehlaa 4. Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
Ho fife HS Fat AA WEG | (719-6, Jeet, He 4) man mil sant janaa jas gaa-i-o. O mind, those who meet the Lord's humble servants, sing His Praises.
dfs uf ao Ie Ufa ate afs Asaf we feeteS nan gr i (719-7, Fost, He 4)
har har ratan ratan har neeko gur satgur daan divaa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
They are blessed with the gift of the jewel of the Lord, Har, Har, the sublime jewel of the Lord, by the Guru, the True Guru. ||1||Pause] |
fSH We AC HO 30 AS Vee fafa ate ofa oH Hates Il (719-8, Fast, He 4)
tis jan ka-o man tan sabh dayva-o jin har har naam sunaa-i-o.
I offer my mind, body and everything to that humble being who recites the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ue Hfeor Au fsa 28 fafo afe Hts feerfeS nai ci9-8, Sat, He 4)
Dhan maa-i-aa sampai tis dayva-o jin har meet milaa-i-o. ||1]||
I offer my wealth, the riches of Maya and my property to that one who leads me to meet the Lord, my friend. ||1]|
fas fafes faur act natnfs sa of afe afe aA forte it (719-9, Fast, v2 4)
khin kichint kirpaa karee jagdeesar tab har har har jas Dhi-aa-i-o.
When the Lord of the world bestowed just a tiny bit of His Mercy, for just an instant, then I meditated on the Praise of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
He aoa aC ofa sf AMM ey ICH ga TSTES NUM (719-10, Fast, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har bhaytay su-aamee dukh ha-umai rog gavaa-i-o. ||2||2||
The Lord and Master has met servant Nanak, and the pain of the sickness of egotism has been eliminated. ||2||2| |
Hast HIS 8 Il (719-10)
bairaarhee mehlaa 4. Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
dfs AS TH BH TS We Il (719-11, Sos, v2 4) har jan raam naam gun gaavai. The Lord's humble servant sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
A act fee ad ofa Ho at mus Te Bb TSS NU TIT Ml (719-11, Sars, vs 4)
jay ko-ee nind karay har jan kee apunaa gun na gavaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Even if someone slanders the Lord's humble servant, he does not give up his own goodness. ||1]||Pause] |
A fas ad Amy Amit af wm arg on] Il (719-12, ast, He 4)
jo kichh karay so aapay su-aamee har aapay kaar kamaavai.
Whatever the Lord and Master does, He does by Himself; the Lord Himself does the deeds.
dfs wt dt uf tS Amit afe omy sf ger] Al (719-12, aos, He 4)
har aapay hee mat dayvai su-aamee har aapay bol bulaavai. ||1||
The Lord and Master Himself imparts understanding; the Lord Himself inspires us to speak. ||1]|
UST D2o
ofs omy us 33 fares fete os ve orfy ure it (720-1, Soret, He 4)
har aapay panch tat bisthaaraa vich Dhaatoo panch aap paavai.
The Lord Himself directs the evolution of the world of the five elements; He Himself infuses the five senses into it.
Ho SS AfsagT HS omy dfs wm} sag YaTS MUI (720-2, Fash, ne 4)
jan naanak satgur maylay aapay har aapay jhagar chukhaavai. ||2]||3||
O servant Nanak, the Lord Himself unites us with the True Guru; He Himself resolves the conflicts. ||2||3]|
Hast HIS 8 il (720-2) bairaarhee mehlaa 4. Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
Afu He TH BH FEASTS Il (720-2, Fast, He 4) jap man raam naam nistaaraa. Chant the Name of the Lord, O mind, and you shall be emancipated.
az aésg a uy Afs ue ofe sense ue Bara 9d TIC I (720-3, Sas, ve 4)
kot kotantar kay paap sabh khovai har bhavjal paar utaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord shall destroy all the sins of millions upon millions of incarnations, and carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]||Pause] |
afenr safe sas dfs Ayumi ofs fass@ foses fadarar il (720-4, sast, v2 4) kaa-i-aa nagar basat har su-aamee har nirbha-o nirvair nirankaaraa.
In the body-village, the Lord Master abides; the Lord is without fear, without vengeance, and without form.
dfs faafe sHs ae oefe 3 ore afe oor ge Sara A (720-4, AoA, He 4) har nikat basat kachh nadar na aavai har laaDhaa gur veechaaraa. ||1||
The Lord is dwelling near at hand, but He cannot be seen. By the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is obtained. ||1]|
dfs wry ATS Aas G39 Ste Ue ory aor UAVS I (720-5, Fast, He 4)
har aapay saahu saraaf ratan heeraa har aap kee-aa paasaaraa.
The Lord Himself is the banker, the jeweller, the jewel, the gem; the Lord Himself created the entire expanse of the creation.
sod fan faut ad A ofa aH fers A ATT Ae SEATS NII (720-6, aS, He 4) naanak jis kirpaa karay so har naam vihaajhay so saahu sachaa vanjaaraa. ||2||4]|
O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Kind Mercy, trades in the Lord's Name; He alone is the true banker, the true trader. ||2||4||
HaISt HIS 8 Il (720-6) bairaarhee mehlaa 4. Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
afu Ho afa fedae fedarer il (720-7, Fast, nz 4) jap man har niranjan nirankaaraa. Meditate, O mind, on the immaculate, formless Lord.
Ret Het dfs fomrehat Fuerst AT aT NIT o UTSTSTST NA TIS ll (720-7, aos, He 4) sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai sukh-daata jaa kaa ant na paaraavaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Forever and ever, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace; He has no end or limitation. ||1]]Pause| |
wate ae ufo Gan fee oar af aad Bea pista Il (720-8, Aast, ne 4)
agan kunt meh uraDh liv laagaa har raakhai udar manjhaaraa.
In the fiery pit of the womb, when you were hanging upside-down, the Lord absorbed You in His Love, and preserved You.
A nt of Aged Ae HS Ufa nifs ESvSST SI AU (720-8, Fast, v2 4) so aisaa har sayvhu mayray man har ant chhadaavanhaaraa. ||1|| So serve such a Lord, O my mind; the Lord shall deliver you in the end. |[1]|
wo fose afimor Aa afe afs faq Ae AB ATT BHAA Il (720-9, Sas, He 4)
jaa kai hirdai basi-aa mayraa har har tis jan ka-o karahu namaskaaraa.
Bow down in reverence to that humble being, within whose heart the Lord, Har, Har, abides.
dfs fasur 3 urea afe AU SOA SH MUTE NQUNUI (720-10, Fast, He 4)
har kirpaa tay paa-ee-ai har jap naanak naam aDhaaraa. ||2||5||
By the Lord's Kind Mercy, O Nanak, one obtains the Lord's meditation, and the support of the Naam. ||2]||5]|
Hast HIS 8 Il (720-10) bairaarhee mehlaa 4. Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
afu He ofa ofa on fos forte it (720-11, ses, He 4) jap man har har naam nit Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; meditate on it continually.
A feats Aet ee uefa fefa gy o wat mrfe uA TIS il (720-11, ast, vs 4)
jo ichheh so-ee fal paavahi fir dookh na laagai aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires, and pain shall never touch you again. ||1||Pause]|
AAU A 3y A ys um fig ofa fAG US ware I (720-12, dart, vs 4)
SO jap so tap saa barat poojaa jit har si-o pareet lagaa-ay.
That is chanting, that is deep meditation and austerity, that is fasting and worship, which inspires love for the Lord.
fag ofa ifs os us AS sot fea fas ufo fants AS ATE NAN (720-12, east, 3 4) bin har pareet hor pareet sabh jhoothee ik khin meh bisar sabh jaa-ay. ||1]| Without the Lord's Love, every other love is false; in an instant, it is all forgotten. ||1]|
3 aig nea ae ut fog ats adt o ATE I (720-13, Sars, Hs 4)
too bay-ant sarab kal pooraa kichh keemat kahee na jaa-ay. You are infinite, the Master of all power; Your value cannot be described at all.
oa Hofs surct ofa He are fSe sate nel (720-14, aot, ve 4) naanak saran tum"aaree har jee-o bhaavai tivai chhadaa-ay. ||2||6|| Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; as it pleases You, save him. ||2||6||
Ta FISt HIS Uwe (720-15) raag bairaarhee mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Bairaaree, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (720-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hs Hot fife afs wR ates i (720-16, Fast, v2 5) sant janaa mil har jas gaa-i-o. Meeting with the humble Saints, sing the Praises of the Lord.
afe AON a Ta ASTSS AU TIS il (720-16, Fast, uz 5)
kot janam kay dookh gavaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. The pains of millions of incarnations shall be eradicated. ||1]||Pause] |
A os Het nfs ute il (720-16, Fast, He 5) jo chaahat so-ee man paa-i-o. Whatever your mind desires, that you shall obtain.
ate fasur ofs any feete& nail (720-17, sat, Hs 5) kar kirpaa har naam divaa-i-o. ||1]|| By His Kind Mercy, the Lord blesses us with His Name. ||1]|
Hoe We ote at Saret il (720-17, Fest, He 5) sarab sookh har naam vadaa-ee. All happiness and greatness are in the Lord's Name.
Ts YAS SEa HS UST NAUAIDI (720-17, Fast, 8 5)
gur parsaad naanak mat paa-ee. ||2||1||7]| By Guru's Grace, Nanak has gained this understanding. ||2||1]]|7]|
UST 92
Ta fSsaT HIS 4 We 9 (721-1) raag tilang mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Tilang, First Mehl, First House:
qe ATS on aes usy fos fares ners Has mst AS aT YATE I 721-2) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Wa MdH TESH Uf 3 Vd GA Ao AGS Il (721-4, fa, He 1) yak araj guftam pays to dar gos kun kartaar. I offer this one prayer to You; please listen to it, O Creator Lord.
Ta THs AHH J Ants UTSeITS WAU (721-4, fader, Hs 1) hakaa kabeer kareem too bay-aib parvardagaar. ||1]|| You are true, great, merciful and spotless, O Cherisher Lord. ||1]|
Pot HAH Sot Soata few eat il (721-5, fear, v2 1) dunee-aa mukaamay faanee tehkeek dil daanee. The world is a transitory place of mortality - know this for certain in your mind.
HH AS uf nate fasess fee sfe a wat ual TIS Ml (721-5, fsa, v2 1)
mam sar moo-ay ajraa-eel girafteh dil haych na daanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death, has caught me by the hair on my head, and yet, I do not know it at all in my mind. ||1]|Pause]|
Ho fund ued fared an 3A PASSE II (721-6, fda, He 1 jan pisar padar biraadaraa™ kas nays dasta‘geer. Spouse, children, parents and siblings - none of them will be there to hold your hand.
uifag fimiessH GA 5 Ue ¥ Ase Saas MQM (721-6, fsa, we 1)
aakhir bi-aftam kas na daarad choo” savad takbeer. ||2]|
And when at last I fall, and the time of my last prayer has come, there shall be no one to rescue me. ||2||
Aa dH TASH Ud Jet aden set fimre il (721-7, Pada, v2 1) sab roj gastam dar havaa kardaym badee khi-aal. Night and day, I wandered around in greed, contemplating evil schemes.
Wd 3 Sat AST ATEH HH St fast mge|s ISI (721-7, ssa, xe 1 gaahay na naykee kaar kardam mam ee" chinee ahvaal. ||3]| I never did good deeds; this is my condition. ||3]|
qeaus JH ¥ ale ales Fond Aaa Il (721-8, fda, uz 1) badbakhat ham cho bakheel gaafil baynajar baybaak. I am unfortunate, miserly, negligent, shameless and without the Fear of God.
SOA WIE AS SI Sg Was Ur ures IIA (721-8, fsa, He 1) naanak bugoyad jan turaa tayray chaakraa™ paa khaak. ||4||1|| Says Nanak, I am Your humble servant, the dust of the feet of Your slaves. ||4||1]|
fSSaT HIS A We 2 (721-10) tilang mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Tilang, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas ure il (721-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
38 37 Stat uoSl HS BS Il (721-10, fda, uz bha-o tayraa bhaa“g khalrhee mayraa cheet.
The Fear of You, O Lord God, is my marijuana; my consciousness is the pouch which holds it.
H tear sfeor mists Il (721-10, fsa, 42 mai dayvaanaa bha-i-aa ateet. I have become an intoxicated hermit.
AT HA IAG at FH Ml (721-11, fsa, 8 1)
kar kaasaa darsan kee bhookh.
My hands are my begging bowl; I am so hungry for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
H ofa nar atst ats Al (721-11, fsa, v2 1) mai dar maaga-o neetaa neet. ||1]| I beg at Your Door, day after day. ||1]|
38 cao at aa ANTE I (721-11, fsdar, He 1) ta-o darsan kee kara-o samaa-ay. I long for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
H ofa wars stftoor uf nan TIS Wt (721-12, fsa, He 1) mai dar maagat bheekhi-aa paa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am a beggar at Your Door - please bless me with Your charity. ||1||Pause] |
ants aAH faa daar Aaa Adtet BsEST Il (721-12, Pada, 48 1) kaysar kusam mirgamai harnaa sarab sareeree charh"naa. Saffron, flowers, musk oil and gold embellish the bodies of all.
dee sas dfs fest Asa UH ATS MQM (721-13, fsa, He 1) chandan bhagtaa jot inayhee sarbay parmal karnaa. ||2|| The Lord's devotees are like sandalwood, which imparts its fragrance to everyone.
21 |
funn ue sist ad & ATE Il (721-13, fsda, He 1) ghi-a pat bhaa‘daa kahai na ko-ay. No one says that ghee or silk are polluted.
MAT Sas FIG Hfs GE il (721-14, fsa, ne 1) aisaa bhagat varan meh ho-ay. Such is the Lord's devotee, no matter what his social status is.
3d oft fae ad foe oe Il (721-14, fda, He 1)
tayrai naam nivay rahay liv laa-ay.
Those who bow in reverence to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, remain absorbed in Your Love.
Soe f3e efe stor ute SUA (721-14, fsa, He 1) naanak tin dar bheekhi-aa paa-ay. ||3]|1]|2|| Nanak begs for charity at their door. ||3]|1]|2]|
fSSaT HIS A We 2 (721-16) tilang mehlaa 1 ghar 3 Tilang, First Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsas ure Il (721-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
feg 36 Whar ufoor fimrd sige aff Fare I (721-16, fsa, He 1) ih tan maa-i-aa paahi-aa pi-aaray leet-rhaa lab rangaa-ay. This body fabric is conditioned by Maya, O beloved; this cloth is dyed in greed.
UST 22
Hd AS 3 oS Bos fimrd fa ua AA AS NA (722-1, fda, He 1)
mayrai kant na bhaavai cholrhaa pi-aaray ki-o Dhan sayjai jaa-ay. ||1]|
My Husband Lord is not pleased by these clothes, O Beloved; how can the soul-bride go to His bed? ||1]|
Je ages We frogets IG aaas WE I (722-1, fda, He 1) ha’-u kurbaanai jaa-o miharvaanaa ha‘-u kurbaanai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice, O Dear Merciful Lord; I am a sacrifice to You.
Je ages We fsa a Sfs A Sa oS Il (722-2, fda, He 1 ha’-u kurbaanai jaa-o tinaa kai lain jo tayraa naa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who take to Your Name.
&fe A 3a oe fsa a SC Ae aes WE NU TIC Il (722-2, fsSa, ne 1) lain jo tayraa naa-o tinaa kai ha‘-u sad kurbaanai jaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Unto those who take to Your Name, I am forever a sacrifice. ||1||Pause] |
afer gafs A dba fimrs urea are ete i (722-3, fda, v2 1
kaa-i-aa ranyan jay thee-ai pi-aaray paa-ee-ai naa-o majeeth.
If the body becomes the dyer's vat, O Beloved, and the Name is placed within it as the dye,
Gad Se A IS AtoT MAT Ia o StS MQM (722-3, fsa, ne 1)
ranyan vaalaa jay ranyai saahib aisaa rang na deeth. ||2||
and if the Dyer who dyes this cloth is the Lord Master - O, such a color has never been seen before! ||2]|
fro & 38 ass fimrd as fSor & uf I (722-4, fsda, He jin kay cholay rat-rhay pi-aaray kant tinaa kai paas. Those whose shawls are so dyed, O Beloved, their Husband Lord is always with them.
ufs fSar at FO fHS At ag see at MaeTA BN (722-4, fsa, He 1)
Dhoorh tinaa kee jay milai jee kaho naanak kee ardaas. ||3]||
Bless me with the dust of those humble beings, O Dear Lord. Says Nanak, this is my prayer. ||3]|
My AA omy dat wm sete Aste i (722-5, fda, v2 1)
aapay Saajay aapay rangay aapay nadar karay-i.
He Himself creates, and He Himself imbues us. He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
sea HHfe as sre nia dt gee SUAS (722-5, fssa, He 1)
naanak kaaman kantai bhaavai aapay hee raavay-ay. ||4||1||3]|
O Nanak, if the soul-bride becomes pleasing to her Husband Lord, He Himself enjoys her. [4] [11131]
facet H8 9 Il (722-6) tilang mehlaa 1. Tilang, First Mehl:
feurosté Heat ate adfs il (722-6, fssa, He 1) i-aanrhee-ay maanrhaa kaa-ay karayhi.
O foolish and ignorant soul-bride, why are you so proud? ntuss uf dfs dat at o Hf I (722-6, fda, He 1)
aapnarhai ghar har rango kee na maaneh. Within the home of your own self, why do you not enjoy the Love of your Lord?
Ag 33 Us Anse sag foo sete il (722-7, fesa, v2 1)
saho nayrhai Dhan kammlee-ay baahar ki-aa dhoodhayhi.
Your Husband Lord is so very near, O foolish bride; why do you search for Him outside?
3 dor efs Aeeinn Sat ave at afe Atard Il (722-7, fda, He 1)
bhai kee-aa deh salaa-ee-aa nainee bhaav kaa kar seegaaro.
Apply the Fear of God as the maascara to adorn your eyes, and make the Love of the Lord your ornament.
a Aoafs wet oat wv Ag ad fimrs 9 (722-8, fda, He 1)
taa sohagan jaanee-ai laagee jaa saho Dharay pi-aaro. ||1]|
Then, you shall be known as a devoted and committed soul-bride, when you enshrine love for your Husband Lord. ||1]|
fimrat act foo ad AT US ATO Sve Il (722-8, fsa, He 1) i-aanee baalee ki-aa karay jaa Dhan kant na bhaavai. What can the silly young bride do, if she is not pleasing to her Husband Lord?
ATE UST Ad AIST AT US HIG B US Il (722-9, fsda, He 1)
karan palaah karay bahutayray saa Dhan mahal na paavai.
She may plead and implore so many times, but still, such a bride shall not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
fee aot fas unt odt FH IST OS Il (722-9, fyda, He 1
vin karmaa kichh paa-ee-ai naahee jay bahutayraa Dhaavai.
Without the karma of good deeds, nothing is obtained, although she may run around frantically.
Ba BST Midatg at HSt wfenr urfs AHreSt Il (722-9, fsSar, we 1)
lab lobh aha‘kaar kee maatee maa-i-aa maahi samaanee. She is intoxicated with greed, pride and egotism, and engrossed in Maya.
feat ast Ag ure act set anf femirat 1211 (722-10, fsa, He 1) inee baatee saho paa-ee-ai naahee bha-ee kaaman i-aanee. ||2|| She cannot obtain her Husband Lord in these ways; the young bride is so foolish!
[21 | wf ugg Aoaat ao fast ast Ag ure It (722-11, fadar, He 1)
jaa-ay puchhahu sohaaganee vaahai kinee baatee saho paa-ee-di. Go and ask the happy, pure soul-brides, how did they obtain their Husband Lord?
fi fae ad A ae ats Hebd fronts Jan varehy Il (722-11, fda, He 1)
jo kichh karay so bhalaa kar maanee-ai hikmat hukam chukhaa-ee-ai.
Whatever the Lord does, accept that as good; do away with your own cleverness and self-will.
Wa uff uevse uch 3C uaat fas wea i (722-12, faba, v8 1) jaa kai paraym padaarath paa-ee-ai ta-o charnee chit laa-ee-ai. By His Love, true wealth is obtained; link your consciousness to His lotus feet.
Ag ad A a 39 HO Un MAT USHS BEA Il (722-12, fda, v2 1)
saho kahai so keejai tan mano deejai aisaa parmal laa-ee-ai.
As your Husband Lord directs, so you must act; surrender your body and mind to Him, and apply this perfume to yourself.
ee aufs Aoaet Se fest ast AT ust 31 (722-13, fda, He ayv kaheh sohaaganee bhainay inee baatee saho paa-ee-ai. ||3]| So speaks the happy soul-bride, O sister; in this way, the Husband Lord is obtained.
H3II nig aes st Ag uTeht mis art sae Il (722-13, fda, He 1)
aap gavaa-ee-ai taa saho paa-ee-ai a-or kaisee chaturaa-ee. Give up your selfhood, and so obtain your Husband Lord; what other clever tricks are of any use?
Ag dete afe ea A feg Ba ans 5G fofo ut i (722-14, fsda, v2 1)
saho nadar kar daykhai so din laykhai kaaman na-o niDh paa-ee.
When the Husband Lord looks upon the soul-bride with His Gracious Glance, that day is historic - the bride obtains the nine treasures.
mtue as funrdt at Aovafs area AT ASSET I (722-14, Pada, He 1)
aapnay kant pi-aaree saa sohagan naanak saa sabhraa-ee.
She who is loved by her Husband Lord, is the true soul-bride; O Nanak, she is the queen of all.
MA df TSt Aon at Ht mifofefa ache Aret | (722-15, fsa, 42
aisay rang raatee sahj kee maatee ahinis bhaa-ay samaanee.
Thus she is imbued with His Love, intoxicated with delight; day and night, she is absorbed in His Love.
Hefs Ate Agu faoufe adh AT fret sisi (722-15, fsa, He 1)
sundar saa-ay saroop bichkhan kahee-ai saa si-aanee. ||4||2||4|| She is beautiful, glorious and brilliant; she is known as truly wise. ||4||2||4]|
fSSa HIS 4 Il (722-16) tilang mehlaa 1. Tilang, First Mehl:
AA H ne YAH at Hat SHS adt fama FHS Il (722-16, fda, He jaisee mai aavai khasam kee banee taisrhaa karee gi-aan vay laalo. As the Word of the Forgiving Lord comes to me, so do I express it, O Lalo.
uy at He B aaa Ofer Ast Hat BS SF HS I (722-17, fsda, He
paap kee janj lai kaablahu Dhaa-i-aa joree mangai daan vay laalo.
Bringing the marriage party of sin, Babar has invaded from Kaabul, demanding our land as his wedding gift, O Lalo.
ASH UeH fe afu wee ag fed usage S HS Il (722-17, fda, we
saram Dharam du-ay chhap khalo-ay koorh firai parDhaan vay laalo.
Modesty and righteousness both have vanished, and falsehood struts around like a leader, O Lalo.
aH aHar at aes dat nae US ASS SBS Il (722-18, fsdar, v2 1)
kaajee-aa baamnaa kee gal thakee agad parhai saitaan vay laalo.
The Qazis and the Brahmins have lost their roles, and Satan now conducts the marriage rites, O Lalo.
HASH St usts ase ane ufo asf yee F HS Il (722-19, fda, He 1) musalmaanee-aa parheh kataybaa kasat meh karahi khudaa-ay vay laalo. The Muslim women read the Koran, and in their misery, they call upon God, O Lalo.
wf Hast df foeersion fs ot Ba of! F HS Il (722-19, fda, v2
jaat sanaatee hor hidvaanee-aa ayhi bhee laykhai laa-ay vay laalo.
The Hindu women of high social status, and others of lowly status as well, are put into the same category, O Lalo.
UST IIB
us & Afys aes Soa Bs oT aT UTS SHS UI (723-1, fada, we khoon kay sohilay gavee-ah naanak rat kaa kungoo paa-ay vay laalo. ||1]|
The wedding songs of murder are sung, O Nanak, and blood is sprinkled instead of saffron, O Lalo. ||1]|
Whoa a TE SS We HA ust fefs nrg HAS Il (723-1, fda, He D
saahib kay gun naanak gaavai maas puree vich aakh masolaa.
Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord and Master in the city of corpses, and voices this account.
fafs Guret dfat gevet Sor Sy ef fEata I (723-2, Pada, v2 1)
jin upaa-ee rang ravaa-ee baithaa vaykhai vakh ikaylaa.
The One who created, and attached the mortals to pleasures, sits alone, and watches this.
He A Ave AY SuUSA AVS fanrG ada HAS Il (723-2, fsda, He 1)
sachaa so saahib sach tapaavas sachrhaa ni-aa-o karayg masolaa.
The Lord and Master is True, and True is His justice. He issues His Commands according to His judgement.
afer aus za Za dA feensts ANAT Fr I (723-3, fda, He 1
kaa-i-aa kaparh tuk tuk hosee hindusataan samaalsee bolaa.
The body-fabric will be torn apart into shreds, and then India will remember these words.
wets niosd ats Hse Ja st Bont Hae aT Va Il (723-4, fsdar, He 1)
aavan ath-tarai jaan sataanvai hor bhee uthsee marad kaa chaylaa.
Coming in seventy-eight (1521 A.D.), they will depart in ninety-seven (1540 A.D.), and then another disciple of man will rise up.
Ae at sat aoa mrad Ag AStert Ae at Sor INSU (723-4, fsa, He 1D
sach kee banee naanak aakhai sach sunaa-isee sach kee baylaa. ||2||3]|5]| Nanak speaks the Word of Truth; he proclaims the Truth at this, the right time. 2113] 151]
faeq HIS 8 We 2 (723-6) tilang mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Tilang, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe afsara yArfe Il (723-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afs wire Jaf YAH JatH As Zasat Il (723-6, fsa, v2 4)
sabh aa-ay hukam khasmaahu hukam sabh vartanee.
Everyone comes by Command of the Lord and Master. The Hukam of His Command extends to all.
Ag Atos ATS aw AS dfs Tot Al (723-7, fssa, H2 4) sach saahib saachaa khayl sabh har Dhanee. ||1]|| True is the Lord and Master, and True is His play. The Lord is the Master of all. ||1]|
Hogg AY AS Gufs af at i (723-7, fsa, He 4) saalaahihu sach sabh oopar har Dhanee. So praise the True Lord; the Lord is the Master over all.
fan ot af dia fan Sa IS aati JIC Il (723-7, fda, He 4) jis naahee ko-ay sareek kis laykhai ha-o ganee. rahaa-o. No one is equal to Him; am I of any account? ||Pause] |
u@e urat Ugst mrarA we Hea ofa got Il (723-8, fda, He 4) pa-un paanee Dhartee aakaas ghar mandar har banee. Air, water, earth and sky - the Lord has made these His home and temple.
fefs eas aaa orf sq ag foro aSt NNAUI (723-8, Fada, He 4) vich vartai naanak aap jhooth kaho ki-aa ganee. ||2||1]|
He Himself is pervading everywhere, O Nanak. Tell me: what can be counted as false? 2] 111
fsear HIS 8 Il (723-9)
tilang mehlaa 4. Tilang, Fourth Mehl:
fos foes aon one seve Bans II (723-9, fsda, He 4) nit nihfal karam kamaa-ay bafaavai durmatee-aa. The evil-minded person continually does fruitless deeds, all puffed up with pride.
Wa we Zev ats 3S 3a WS Aa fash WA (723-10, Fada, v3 4)
jab aanai valvanch kar jhooth tab jaanai jag jitee-aa. ||1]|
When he brings home what he has acquired, by practicing deception and falsehood, he thinks that he has conquered the world. ||1||
MAT at AAS 3 VS Ts SH Il (723-10, fsSar, He 4) aisaa baajee saisaar na chaytai har naamaa. Such is the drama of the world, that he does not contemplate the Lord's Name.
fas ufa fash As Bo HS Ho fomrfe mr | TTS Ml (723-10, fsa, ws 4)
khin meh binsai sabh jhooth mayray man Dhi-aa-ay raamaa. rahaa-o.
In an instant, all this false play shall perish; O my mind, meditate on the Lord. | |Pause| |
AW or fats 6 ore fag urfe axeq ae TA Il (723-11, fsa, ne 4) saa vaylaa chit na aavai jit aa-ay kantak kaal garsai. He does not think of that time, when Death, the Torturer, shall come and seize him.
fH Soa Ge eote fan faa afte fase SA QUI (723-12, fs8a, He 4)
tis naanak la-ay chhadaa-ay jis kirpaa kar hirdai vasai. ||2||2|| O Nanak, the Lord saves that one, within whose heart the Lord, in His Kind Mercy, dwells. ||2]|2]|
fsa HIS U WT A (723-13) tilang mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Tilang, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (723-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
WA HI ATE TSH Tobe il (723-13, fsa, we 5) khaak noor karda™ aalam dunee-aa-ay. The Lord infused His Light into the dust, and created the world, the universe.
WAHT fat aus wire deff wee ail (723-14, fsa, He 5) asmaan jimee darkhat aab paidaa-is khudaa-ay. ||1|| The sky, the earth, the trees, and the water - all are the Creation of the Lord. ||1]|
Se DAH de sore il (723-14, fsa, v3 5)
banday chasam deeda”™ fanaa-ay. O human being, whatever you can see with your eyes, shall perish.
Sh bot HeeTS UTeal Wes Jere I TIS il (723-14, fsa, ve 5) dunee’-aa murdaar khurdanee gaafal havaa-ay. rahaa-o. The world eats dead carcasses, living by neglect and greed. ||Pause] |
Has IVS ITH AHSAl HIeTS SHITE I (723-15, fsa, v2 5) gaibaan haivaan haraam kustanee murdaar bakhoraa-ay. Like a goblin, or a beast, they kill and eat the forbidden carcasses of meat.
fee aan Aa ated Sra AATE MQM (723-15, fsSar, He 5)
dil kabaj kabjaa kaadro dojak sajaa-ay. ||2||
So control your urges, or else you will be seized by the Lord, and thrown into the tortures of hell. ||2]|
zot foumufs fagreat vous fro urate il (723-16, fsa, H2 5)
valee ni-aamat biraadaraa darbaar milak khaanaa-ay. Your benefactors, presents, companions, courts, lands and homes
Aa nnsete sHsel 3a fe ad fete Si (723-16, fda, He 5)
jab ajraa-eel bastanee tab chay kaaray bidaa-ay. ||3]|| - when Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death seizes you, what good will these be to you then? ||3]|
TSH HHH Ade UT MGT Il (723-17, fsSa, He 5) havaal maaloom karda”™ paak alaah. The Pure Lord God knows your condition.
aa Soa maenth uff VISA FETT ISA (723-17, fsa, He 5) bugo naanak ardaas pays darvays bandaah. ||4||1|| O Nanak, recite your prayer to the holy people. ||4]|1]|
f3Ga WI 2 HIS U Il (723-18) tilang ghar 2 mehlaa 5. Tilang, Second House, Fifth Mehl:
30 fag gar ardt a= il (723-18, fda, H8 5) tuDh bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. There is no other than You, Lord.
3 xaag aaa A AE Il (723-18, faba, Hs 5) too kartaar karahi so ho-ay. You are the Creator; whatever You do, that alone happens.
3m Fa Sct nfs Sax Il (723-18, faSar, He 5) tayraa jor tayree man tayk. You are the strength, and You are the support of the mind.
Het Het Af Steaq SA UA (723-19, fssar, us 5) Sadaa sadaa jap naanak ayk. ||1]| Forever and ever, meditate, O Nanak, on the One. ||1||
AS Sufs usqIH BST Il (723-19, fedar, He 5) sabh oopar paarbarahm daataar. The Great Giver is the Supreme Lord God over all.
Sot 2a 3a rar” Il TTS Il (723-19, fada, He 5) tayree tayk tayraa aaDhaar. rahaa-o. You are our support, You are our sustainer. ||Pause| |
UST 928
3 3d J IeSTs Il MH marta Ss wmars il (724-1, faba, 42 5)
hai toohai too hovanhaar. agam agaaDh ooch aapaar.
You are, You are, and You shall ever be, O inaccessible, unfathomable, lofty and infinite Lord.
a 30 Refs fsa 38 ey ata Il (724-1, faa, nH 5) jo tuDh sayveh tin bha-o dukh naahi. Those who serve You, are not touched by fear or suffering.
Ts USAT SSA TS WET Ml (724-2, fsa, us 5) gur parsaad naanak gun gaahi. ||2| | By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
fA A Sa gu Il Te feos aes migu il (724-2, fda, vs 5)
jo deesai so tayraa roop. gun niDhaan govind anoop.
Whatever is seen, is Your form, O treasure of virtue, O Lord of the Universe, O Lord of incomparable beauty.
fife fife ffs Ae APE I (724-3, fs8a, He 5)
simar simar simar jan so-ay.
Remembering, remembering, remembering the Lord in meditation, His humble servant becomes like Him.
Soa ao usufs dE Wil (724-3, fsa, He 5) naanak karam paraapat ho-ay. ||3]| O Nanak, by His Grace, we obtain Him. ||3]|
fate Afuor fsA a afer il (724-3, fsa, v8 5) jin japi-aa tis ka-o balihaar. I am a Sacrifice to those who meditate on the Lord.
fSA ot Afar 3d HATS Il (724-4, fsa, He 5) tis kai sang tarai sansaar. Associating with them, the whole world is saved.
TI SSA YS BI ufs i (724-4, faba, ws 5) kaho naanak parabh lochaa poor. Says Nanak, God fulfills our hopes and aspirations.
AS Aa at aeS Ofe sili (724-4, fda, Hs 5) sant janaa kee baachha-o Dhoor. ||4]|2]| I long for the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4]|2]|
fssa HIS U We 3 Il (724-4)
tilang mehlaa 5 ghar 3. Tilang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
fuaseg Atos foseS I (724-5, fadar, He 5) miharvaan saahib miharvaan. Merciful, the Lord Master is Merciful.
Atog Ha fHosers Il (724-5, fsdar, vs 5) saahib mayraa miharvaan. My Lord Master is Merciful.
Aba Aas aS efE Ve il JIS ll (724-5, fsa, ue 5) jee-a sagal ka-o day-ay daan. rahaa-o. He gives His gifts to all beings. ||Pause] |
3 wd safe yer 3g Tae faAETS Il (724-6, faba, v8 5) too kaahay doleh paraanee-aa tuDh raakhaigaa sirjanhaar. Why do you waver, O mortal being? The Creator Lord Himself shall protect you.
fats uefeta J thor Aet Sfe mrarg WU (724-6, fda, Hs 5) jin paidaa-is too kee-aa so-ee day-ay aaDhaar. ||1|| He who created you, will also give you nourishment. ||1| |
fafs Guret Heat Het ATT ATS Il (724-7, Pasar, He 5) jin upaa-ee maydnee so-ee kardaa saar. The One who created the world, takes care of it.
whe wie nme fear at AS USSEaT MQM (724-7, fsdar, v3 5) ghat ghat maalak dilaa kaa sachaa parvardagaar. ||2|| In each and every heart and mind, the Lord is the True Cherisher. ||2||
avafs ahh o Area Sat SusST Il (724-8, fda, He 5) kudrat keem na jaanee-ai vadaa vayparvaahu.
His creative potency and His value cannot be known; He is the Great and carefree Lord.
ats de 3 dealt frag we ufs ATT SI (724-8, fedar, 48 5) kar banday too bandagee jichar ghat meh saahu. ||3]|| O human being, meditate on the Lord, as long as there is breath in your body. ||3]||
3 AHS nag vides A fils Sot wh I (724-8, faba, Hs 5)
too samrath akath agochar jee-o pind tayree raas.
O God, You are all-powerful, inexpressible and imperceptible; my soul and body are Your capital.
dH Sot AY Ufeor Ae SSA at MTSTA SII (724-9, fsa, He 5)
raham tayree sukh paa-i-aa sadaa naanak kee ardaas. ||4||3]| By Your Mercy, may I find peace; this is Nanak's lasting prayer. ||4]|3]]|
fsa HIS U We 3 Il (724-10)
tilang mehlaa 5 ghar 3. Tilang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
ads AeISt HAS Il (724-10, fsa, v2 5) kartay kudratee mustaak. O Creator, through Your creative potency, I am in love with You.
do war 8a sot AS ua TS UT i TIS Il (724-10, fedar, wu: 5)
deen dunee-aa ayk toohee sabh khalak hee tay paak. rahaa-o.
You alone are my spiritual and temporal Lord; and yet, You are detached from all Your creation. ||Pause]|
fas uta afy Carrer nirgsH SI IU Il (724-11, fdar, v2 5) khin maahi thaap uthaapadaa aacharaj tayray roop. In an instant, You establish and disestablish. Wondrous is Your form!
aCe We vos 3d nifomrd fo Shy A (724-11, fsa, He 5) ka-un jaanai chalat tayray anDhi-aaray meh deep. ||1]|| Who can Know Your play? You are the Light in the darkness. ||1||
ufe UAH Yea ANS Med fHodes WETE Il (724-12, fsdar, 2 5) khud khasam khalak jahaan alah miharvaan khudaa-ay. You are the Master of Your creation, the Lord of all the world, O Merciful Lord God.
feon df= fa sa nied A fa safer ATE QM (724-12, fsda, He 5) dinas rain je tuDh araaDhay so ki-o dojak jaa-ay. ||2]| One who worships You day and night - why should he have to go to hell? ||2]|
masts arg se fan Sa" nro” I (724-13, fadar, Hz 5)
ajraa-eel yaar banday jis tayraa aaDhaar.
Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death, is the friend of the human being who has Your support, Lord.
Tod SAA AAG wis SI AS Safe cers Sil (724-13, fsa, H2 5) gunah us kay sagal aafoo tayray jan daykheh deedaar. ||3]| His sins are all forgiven; Your humble servant gazes upon Your Vision. ||3]||
vor da feores Ade A AY Sa Se Il (724-14, fda, ue 5)
dunee-aa cheej filhaal saglay sach sukh tayraa naa-o.
All worldly considerations are for the present only. True peace comes only from Your Name.
ad fle aoa afsur Het SAH IS SII (724-14, fsa, 12 5) gur mil naanak boojhi-aa sadaa aykas gaa-o. ||4||4||
Meeting the Guru, Nanak understands; He sings only Your Praises forever, O Lord. [41141 |
fsear HIS U Il (724-15)
tilang mehlaa 5. Tilang, Fifth Mehl:
Htat wat fees AS il (724-15, fda, He 5) meeraa™ daanaa’ dil soch. Think of the Lord in your mind, O wise one.
Hoes fs sfs SA AY ATS Set He NA TIC Il (724-15, fda, He 5)
muhabtay man tan basai sach saah bandee moch. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Enshrine love for the True Lord in your mind and body; He is the Liberator from bondage. ||1]||Pause]|
aes cers afza ae odt fEA aT HG Il (724-16, fsa, He 5) deednay deedaar saahib kachh nahee is kaa mol. The value of seeing the Vision of the Lord Master cannot be estimated.
Ue UsseTS J ule WAY BS MISH AI (724-16, fsSar, we 5)
paak parvardagaar too khud khasam vadaa atol. ||1]||
You are the Pure Cherisher; You Yourself are the great and immeasurable Lord and Master. ||1]|
eAdict efs feared sot Zot Sat il (724-17, fda, He 5)
dastgeeree deh dilaavar toohee toohee ayk.
Give me Your help, O brave and generous Lord; You are the One, You are the Only Lord.
AIST AES ATE WHA SHA Sot SA NQUUI (724-17, fsa, us 5)
kartaar kudrat karan khaalak naanak tayree tayk. ||2||5|| O Creator Lord, by Your creative potency, You created the world; Nanak holds tight to Your support. ||2]|5||
fSSaT HIS A We 2 (724-19) tilang mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Tilang, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yArfe il (724-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fafs ator fafs afi for adh J are | (724-19, faba, He 1)
jin kee-aa tin daykhi-aa ki-aa kahee-ai ray bhaa-ee.
The One who created the world watches over it; what more can we say, O Siblings of Destiny?
UST D2Qu
nm are ad wify fafs eat Foret wall (725-1, fssa, ne 1) aapay jaanai karay aap jin vaarhee hai laa-ee. ||1]| He Himself knows, and He Himself acts; He laid out the garden of the world. ||1]|
ofem fimrd ot afer fas wet AY det 1 TTC Il (725-1, Pada, He 1) raa-isaa pi-aaray kaa raa-isaa jit sadaa sukh ho-ee. rahaa-o. Savor the story, the story of the Beloved Lord, which brings a lasting peace. ||Pause] |
fafs df as 3 ofenr AT ue F Sret Il (725-2, fsdar, ne 1)
jin rang kant na raavi-aa saa pachho ray taanee.
She who does not enjoy the Love of her Husband Lord, shall come to regret and repent in the end.
vg ues fag ue wa dfs feorat NQI (725-2, fda, He 1)
haath pachhorhay sir Dhunai jab rain vihaanee. ||2||
She wrings her hands, and bangs her head, when the night of her life has passed away. ||[2||
Yess" ot HS Wa Yotatt ATS Il (725-3, faa, He 1) pachhotaavaa naa milai jab chookaigee saaree. Nothing comes from repentance, when the game is already finished.
s fefs fimra aint wa ureait edt Si (725-3, fda, He 1) taa fir pi-aaraa raavee-ai jab aavaigee vaaree. ||3]|| She shall have the opportunity to enjoy her Beloved, only when her turn comes again.
HI3II as Shr Aaerat HS Sat ST I (725-3, fda, ve
kant lee-aa sohaaganee mai tay vaDhvee ayh. The happy soul-bride attains her Husband Lord - she is so much better than I am.
AE HS 6 uieal a At SA UT ISI (725-4, fsa, He 1) say gun mujhai na aavnee kai jee dos Dharayh. ||4|| I have none of her merits or virtues; whom should I blame? ||4]|
frat Fat Ag wenn fse ysCait AS I (725-4, fsSar, He 1) jinee sakhee saho raavi-aa tin poochh-ugee jaa-ay. I shall go and ask those sisters who have enjoyed their Husband Lord.
ufe oar dost age Sait ve sae ull (725-5, Fada, He 1) paa-ay laga-o bayntee kara-o lay-ugee panth bataa-ay. ||5|| I touch their feet, and ask them to show me the Path. ||5]|
JAH UES BHAT SE VS Be Il (725-5, fssa, ue 1)
hukam pachhaanai naankaa bha-o chandan laavai.
She who understands the Hukam of His Command, O Nanak, applies the Fear of God as her sandalwood oil;
ae ane ants ad 38 fimrd a ure iléll (725-6, fsdar, v2 1) gun kaaman kaaman karai ta-o pi-aaray ka-o paavai. ||6|| she charms her Beloved with her virtue, and so obtains Him. ||6] |
a fefs fiufemr A fife sfoor fifeor adh J AST I (725-6, fda, He 1)
jo dil mili-aa so mil rahi-aa mili-aa kahee-ai ray so-ee.
She who meets her Beloved in her heart, remains united with Him; this is truly called union.
A dso Sd TSt HS o Tet IDI (725-7, fda, He 1) jay bahutayraa lochee-ai baatee mayl na ho-ee. ||7]|| As much as she may long for Him, she shall not meet Him through mere words. ||7]|
ws fis efs ws ag foe foe aB eS I (725-7, fda, v2 1) Dhaat milai fun Dhaat ka-o liv livai ka-o Dhaavai. As metal melts into metal again, so does love melt into love.
ad usATSt Aeha SE nes ur| Ici (725-8, Fada, v2 1)
gur parsaadee jaanee-ai ta-o anbha-o paavai. ||8]|
By Guru's Grace, this understanding is obtained, and then, one obtains the Fearless Lord. ||8]|
uot sat df ufs ug ATS OATS Il (725-8, fsda, He 1)
paanaa vaarhee ho-ay ghar khar saar na jaanai.
There may be an orchard of betel nut trees in the garden, but the donkey does not appreciate its value.
THe JS HAT a SA SH USES ICI (725-8, fda, Hs 1) rasee-aa hovai musak kaa tab fool pachhaanai. | |9| | If someone savors a fragrance, then he can truly appreciate its flower. ||9||
mifu ute A soar gH aft ANTS I (725-9, faba, He 1) api-o peevai jo naankaa bharam bharam samaavai. One who drinks in the ambrosia, O Nanak, abandons his doubts and wanderings.
Hon Aon fife od wprat ue urs AON (725-9, fsSar, He 1)
sehjay sehjay mil rahai amraa pad paavai. ||10||1||
Easily and intuitively, he remains blended with the Lord, and obtains the immortal status. ||10||1]|
fsear HIS 8 Il (725-10)
tilang mehlaa 4. Tilang, Fourth Mehl:
dfs aor ae ager afs xfs Were Il (725-10, fsa, v3 4) har kee-aa kathaa kahaanee-aa gur meet sunaa-ee-aa. The Guru, my friend, has told me the stories and the sermon of the Lord.
word Td wus Te aS af AS AU (725-11, fsa, v2 4) balihaaree gur aapnay gur ka-o bal jaa-ee-aa. ||1]| I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; to the Guru, I am a sacrifice. ||1]||
unfe fue cafes orfe fe sus ag & fms i TIS il (725-11, Sa, 2 4)
aa-ay mil gursikh aa-ay mil too mayray guroo kay pi-aaray. rahaa-o.
Come, join with me, O Sikh of the Guru, come and join with me. You are my Guru's Beloved. ||Pause| |
dfs a Te oe gee A TT F wes I (725-12, Fada, v2 4)
har kay gun har bhaavday say guroo tay paa-ay.
The Glorious Praises of the Lord are pleasing to the Lord; I have obtained them from the Guru.
fo aa at stat Hfomr feo wht wht AS QI (725-12, fsa, He 4) jin gur kaa bhaanaa mani-aa tin ghum ghum jaa-ay. ||2] | I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to those who surrender to, and obey the Guru's Will. ||2]|
fae Afsag fumre efor fae a IS sat i (725-13, fada, He 4) jin satgur pi-aaraa daykhi-aa tin ka-o ha-o vaaree. I am dedicated and devoted to those who gaze upon the Beloved True Guru.
fie Td at atst Tact fo Ae afar Bil (725-13, fasa, H2 4)
jin gur kee keetee chaakree tin sad balihaaree. ||3]|| I am forever a sacrifice to those who perform service for the Guru. ||3]|
dfs of 3a BH I BU HeST ST I (725-14, fda, He 4) har har tayraa naam hai dukh maytanhaaraa. Your Name, O Lord, Har, Har, is the Destroyer of sorrow.
ad Aa 3 ursha Tafa farsa gil (725-14, fsa, He 4) gur sayvaa tay paa-ee-ai gurmukh nistaaraa. ||4|| Serving the Guru, it is obtained, and as Gurmukh, one is emancipated. ||4| |
A dfs aH fonrfee 3 AS Use II (725-15, fs8a, He 4)
jo har naam Dhi-aa-iday tay jan parvaanaa.
Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Name, are celebrated and acclaimed.
faa fees soa Shoat Ae HET ATH WU (725-15, fear, He 4) tin vitahu naanak vaari-aa sadaa sadaa kurbaanaa. ||5|| Nanak is a sacrifice to them, forever and ever a devoted sacrifice. ||5||
A ofg 3at Gxsfs 3 Ft afs Ys are I (725-15, fsa, He 4) saa har tayree ustat hai jo har parabh bhaavai. O Lord, that alone is Praise to You, which is pleasing to Your Will, O Lord God.
A donfe fimrs Age faq af So ure INEM (725-16, fda, He 4) jo gurmukh pi-aaraa sayvday tin har fal paavai. | |6] | Those Gurmukhs, who serve their Beloved Lord, obtain Him as their reward. ||6||
frat dfs Ast fusat fsqr Aba ys ars Il (725-16, faba, He 4) jinaa har saytee pirharhee tinaa jee-a parabh naalay. Those who cherish love for the Lord, their souls are always with God.
6fe afu afu fumes ates offs a ANS IDI (725-17, fda, He 4)
O-ay jap jap pi-aaraa jeevday har naam samaalay. ||7||
Chanting and meditating on their Beloved, they live in, and gather in, the Lord's Name. ||7||
fe dante filme Afeor fq a wht wfeur it (725-17, fsa, v8 4) jin gurmukh pi-aaraa sayvi-aa tin ka-o ghum jaa-i-aa. I am a sacrifice to those Gurmukhs who serve their Beloved Lord.
6fe orfu ee users fAG AS Has eStfeor Ici (725-18, fsdar, v8 4)
o-ay aap chhutay parvaar si-o sabh jagat chhadaa-i-aa. ||8]|
They themselves are saved, along with their families, and through them, all the world is saved. ||8]|
afs fimrd ofa Afeur ag Us Te Ws Il (725-19, fsda, He 4) gur pi-aarai har sayvi-aa gur Dhan gur Dhanno. My Beloved Guru serves the Lord. Blessed is the Guru, Blessed is the Guru.
af dfs wea effer ag ua es US ICI (725-19, fda, He 4) gur har maarag dasi-aa gur punn vad punno. ||9|| The Guru has shown me the Lord's Path; the Guru has done the greatest good deed.
[9I|
UST DIE
Aa Doha Tg Ase A US usa Il (726-1, fsa, He 4) jo gursikh gur sayvday say punn paraanee. Those Sikhs of the Guru, who serve the Guru, are the most blessed beings.
Ho sod fae aG ator Ae HET ATaTSt IAOM (726-1, Fada, He 4) jan naanak tin ka-o vaari-aa sadaa sadaa kurbaanee. ||10]|| Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them; He is forever and ever a sacrifice. ||10||
aTsHty Rat AVS A vertu ofa ser Il (726-2, Fada, u2 4) gurmukh sakhee sahaylee-aa say aap har bhaa-ee-aa. The Lord Himself is pleased with the Gurmukhs, the fellowship of the companions.
dfs edad Uareor ofe wef af wretor 99 (726-2, fsa, He 4)
har dargeh painaa-ee-aa har aap gal laa-ee-aa. ||11]|
In the Lord's Court, they are given robes of honor, and the Lord Himself hugs them close in His embrace. ||11]||
A aonfa on famrfee fae zane ete Il (726-3, fda, He 4)
jo gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-iday tin darsan deejai.
Please bless me with the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of those Gurmukhs, who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oH fa & vee uae OFS ules uifs uty NII (726-3, far, He 4)
ham tin kay charan pakhaalday Dhoorh ghol ghol peejai. ||12||
I wash their feet, and drink in the dust of their feet, dissolved in the wash water. []12]|
ure Aurdt ashor Hf stshar rer Il (726-4, fsdar, v2 4) paan supaaree khaatee-aa mukh beerhee-aa laa-ee-aa. Those who eat betel nuts and betel leaf and apply lipstick,
dfs dfs ae 3 336 AH uals sereint 9311 (726-4, fsdar, He 4)
har har kaday na chayti-o jam pakarh chalaa-ee-aa. ||13]|
but do not contemplate the Lord, Har, Har - the Messenger of Death will seize them and take them away. ||13]|
fas dfs ont ofa sfamr fose fs od | f8a AH 3fs 3 rect Tafhu ae fimrs 11981 (726-5, f38a, H3 4)
jin har naamaa har chayti-aa hirdai ur Dhaaray. tin jam nayrh na aavee gursikh gur pi- aaray. ||14||
The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and keep Him enshrined in their hearts. The Guru's Sikhs are the Guru's Beloveds. ||14||
dfs a ay foure 3 aet Tanfe WS Il (726-6, fda, He 4) har kaa naam niDhaan hai ko-ee gurmukh jaanai. The Name of the Lord is a treasure, known only to the few Gurmukhs.
sod fas Afsag sfeur dfat seer HS MAUI (726-6, f8a, He 4) naanak jin satgur bhayti-aa rang ralee-aa maanai. ||15]|| O Nanak, those who meet with the True Guru, enjoy peace and pleasure. ||15]|
Afsag ast wmdba sth ad uA I (726-7, fsa, ve 4) satgur daataa aakhee-ai tus karay pasaa-o. The True Guru is called the Giver; in His Mercy, He grants His Grace.
8 ad fees ne afoemr fats fesat aS MEI (726-7, Fada, He 4) ha-o gur vitahu sad vaari-aa jin dit-rhaa naa-o. ||16|| I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has blessed me with the Lord's Name. ||16]|
AUG gy Wat od ala Sf AST Il (726-8, faba, Hs 4) so Dhan guroo saabaas hai har day-ay sanayhaa. Blessed, very blessed is the Guru, who brings the Lord's message.
Je efi ef ag feafior gs Afsae Sa NII (726-8, fsa, He 4)
ha-o vaykh vaykh guroo vigsi-aa gur satgur dayhaa. ||17]|
I gaze upon the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru embodied, and I blossom forth in bliss. []17]|
Gd TAS nifys soet ofe of ATS Il (726-9, Fada, He 4)
gur rasnaa amrit boldee har naam suhaavee.
The Guru's tongue recites Words of Ambrosial Nectar; He is adorned with the Lord's Name.
fre Afs fret ag vfoor faa gu AS ATS ICI (726-9, fsa, He 4) jin sun sikhaa gur mani-aa tinaa bhukh sabh jaavee. ||18]| Those Sikhs who hear and obey the Guru - all their desires depart. ||18]|
dfs oa Hea wind ag fas fafa avert II (726-10, fda, He 4) har kaa maarag aakhee-ai kaho kit biDh jaa-ee-ai. Some speak of the Lord's Path; tell me, how can I walk on it?
ofs ofs 3a oH ID ofs usg B ASA NAC (726-10, fsda, He 4) har har tayraa naam hai har kharach lai jaa-ee-ai. ||19] | O Lord, Har, Har, Your Name is my supplies; I will take it with me and set out. ||19]|
fe aan ofs orafaor A ATS SS SS Il (726-11, fsa, v8 4) jin gurmukh har aaraaDhi-aa say saah vad daanay. Those Gurmukhs who worship and adore the Lord, are wealthy and very wise.
J@ Afsad a Ae Shoot ag safe ANS IlQOll (726-11, fsa, H2 4)
ha-o satgur ka-o sad vaari-aa gur bachan samaanay. ||20] |
I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru; I am absorbed in the Words of the Guru's Teachings. ||20] |
3 oa 3 Aas Jd HT HT Il (726-12, faba, He 4) too thaakur too saahibo toohai mayraa meeraa. You are the Master, my Lord and Master; You are my Ruler and King.
30 HS Sot Feat J Tat TST IU (726-12, fda, v3 4)
tuDh bhaavai tayree bandagee too gunee gaheeraa. ||21]||
If it is pleasing to Your Will, then I worship and serve You; You are the treasure of virtue. ||21]|
nm ofs fea da od wm ag ait i (726-13, fda, v2 4)
aapay har ik rang hai aapay baho rangee.
The Lord Himself is absolute; He is The One and Only; but He Himself is also manifested in many forms.
A fSA aS BHAT ATS TS Vait MQM (726-13, fsa, v2 4) jo tis bhaavai naankaa saa-ee gal changee. ||22||2|| Whatever pleases Him, O Nanak, that alone is good. ||22||2||
faea Hoar € atet (726-14) tilang mehlaa 9 kaafee Tilang, Ninth Mehl, Kaafee:
qe Afsare YATE Il (726-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dso" 3 3G 33 B fofh fefe A yrat Il (726-15, faa, He 9) chaytnaa hai ta-o chayt lai nis din mai paraanee. If you are conscious, then be conscious of Him night and day, O mortal.
feo fea mBu faorg 3 ge we fAB ust NU TTS I (726-15, fsa, we 9)
chhin chhin a-oDh bihaat hai footai ghat ji-o paanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Each and every moment, your life is passing away, like water from a cracked pitcher. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs To ahs & aredt Hau nifamarar Il (726-16, fsa, 48 9) har gun kaahi na gaavhee moorakh agi-aanaa. Why do you not sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you ignorant fool?
3S Salty Sta & SfI HIG USAT IAI (726-16, fsSar, He 9) jhoothai laalach laag kai neh maran pachhaanaa. ||1|| You are attached to false greed, and you do not even consider death. ||1]|
wing ae faafes sot F Ys Ts We il (726-17, fda, v3 9) ajhoo kachh bigri-o nahee jo parabh gun gaavai. Even now, no harm has been done, if you will only sing God's Praises.
ad aaa fsa so 3 fogs us urs QUAI (726-17, fda, v2 9)
kaho naanak tih bhajan tay nirbhai pad paavai. ||2||1|| Says Nanak, by meditating and vibrating upon Him, you shall obtain the state of fearlessness. ||2||1]|
fsear Hae € I (726-18)
tilang mehlaa 9. Tilang, Ninth Mehl:
Wa OI I Ha Aa BI AT aes Afr Il (726-18, fsa, v2 9) jaag layho ray manaa jaag layho kahaa gaafal so-i-aa. Wake up, O mind! Wake up! Why are you sleeping unaware?
A 30 Cuffmr Aa dt A st Af 3 afer na TTS I (726-18, fda, He 9)
jo tan upji-aa sang hee so bhee sang na ho-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
That body, which you were born with, shall not go along with you in the end. ||1]|Pause] |
Hs fust AS 80 Ae fos wT AAG ator Il (726-19, faba, He 9) maat pitaa sut banDh jan hit jaa si-o keenaa. Mother, father, children and relatives whom you love,
mG gies wa ta 3 ste mats A Star AU (726-19, fader, 8 9) jee-o chhooti-o jab dayh tay daar agan mai deenaa. ||1|| will throw your body into the fire, when your soul departs from it. ||1]|
Uat 929 Hes o8 fagog 3 Ha AG SH WOE Il (727-1, far, H: 9)
jeevat la-o bi-uhaar hai jag ka-o tum jaan-o. Your worldly affairs exist only as long as you are alive; know this well.
Soa Tie Tse MMe BS AS ASS ANSE MQ (727-1, fssar, v2 9) naanak har gun gaa-ay lai sabh sufan samaana-o. ||2||2] | O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; everything is like a dream. ||2]|2]|
fsear Hoe € Il (727-2)
tilang mehlaa 9. Tilang, Ninth Mehl:
dfs AAS Hot af B A Hat dD Sg Il (727-2, fsda, He 9) har jas ray manaa gaa-ay lai jo sangee hai tayro. Sing the Lord's Praises, O mind; He is your only true companion.
m@ng stfs6 as od afo we B AS NU TIC Il (727-2, fda, He 9) a-osar beeti-o jaat hai kahi-o maan lai mayro. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your time is passing away; listen carefully to what I say. ||1]||Pause] |
Hufs ga ue oH fA mifs 3g warfES 1 (727-3, fda, He 9) sampat rath Dhan raaj si-o at nayhu lagaa-i-o. You are so in love with property, chariots, wealth and power.
aS SA Ae ales ust AS ses ustES ail (727-4, fsdar, He 9) kaal faas jab gal paree sabh bha-i-o paraa-i-o. ||1|| When the noose of death tightens around your neck, they will all belong to others.
[21
ms 3s x Fed F arg faarfaS i (727-4, faba, we 9) jaan boojh kai baavray tai kaaj bigaari-o. Know this well, O madman - you have ruined your affairs.
ul aes Hates odt og aaa foetsS ii (727-4, fsa, 2 9)
paap karat sukchi-o nahee nah garab nivaari-o. ||2||
You did not restrain yourself from committing sins, and you did not eradicate your ego. ||2]|
fas fafa aa Guefior AAS F Sve I (727-5, Fada, 2 9) jih biDh gur updaysi-aa so sun ray bhaa-ee. So listen to the Teachings imparted by the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.
Soa AIS uals X TT YS ATS SUSI (727-5, fssa,, v2 9) naanak kahat pukaar kai gahu parabh sarnaa-ee. ||3]|3]| Nanak proclaims: hold tight to the Protection and the Sanctuary of God. ||3]||3]|
fasa set sas at adte At (727-7) tilang banee bhagtaa kee kabeer jee Tilang, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yrrfe i (727-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ae asa feesa set few at feag 6 ATE II (727-7, faba, sas adits Hh)
bayd katayb iftaraa bhaa-ee dil kaa fikar na jaa-ay.
The Vedas and the Scriptures are only make-believe, O Siblings of Destiny; they do not relieve the anxiety of the heart.
Ca BH aad AS agT Ths Jafs yee NAM (727-8, fda, sas aets Fh)
tuk dam karaaree ja-o karahu haajir hajoor khudaa-ay. ||1]|
If you will only center yourself on the Lord, even for just a breath, then you shall see the Lord face-to-face, present before you. ||1]|
ae da feo ga dn o fea usrrat wife I (727-8, fda, sas adie th)
banday khoj dil har roj naa fir paraysaanee maahi.
O human being, search your own heart every day, and do not wander around in confusion.
fea F voor frog He eAsatdt ats nail JIC i (727-9, fsa, sas aete FH) ih jo dunee-aa sihar maylaa dasatgeeree naahi. ||1]| rahaa-o. This world is just a magic-show; no one will be holding your hand. ||1]|Pause||
eda ufs ufs unt df aeae we sorfo Il (727-9, fda, sas adie Ff)
darog parh parh khusee ho-ay baykhabar baad bakaahi.
Reading and studying falsehood, people are happy; in their ignorance, they speak nonsense.
Ug Ay wad waa fore frum vats ato 2H (727-10, fsa, sas aes Ff)
hak sach khaalak khalak mi-aanay si-aam moorat naahi. ||2||
The True Creator Lord is diffused into His creation; He is not just the dark-skinned Krishna of legends. ||2| |
MAS firs Sda edo TAS ATES Fe Il (727-10, fda, sas wets FH) asmaan mi-yaanay lahang daree-aa gusal kardan bood. Through the Tenth Gate, the stream of nectar flows; take your bath in this.
ats sag atenH of BAH AT So HBAS ISI (727-11, fsa, sas ats A)
kar fakar daa-im laa-ay chasmay jah tahaa ma-ujood. ||3]| Serve the Lord forever; use your eyes, and see Him ever-present everywhere. ||3]|
MT US UT IT A AIS A SAS AE il (727-11, fsda, sas ata Fh) alaah paaka™ paak hai sak kara-o jay doosar ho-ay. The Lord is the purest of the pure; only through doubt could there be another.
ads agH ad a Bg ad WS AE SINAN (727-12, fsa, sas ate Th) kabeer karam kareem kaa uho karai jaanai so-ay. ||4||1]| O Kabeer, mercy flows from the Merciful Lord; He alone knows who acts. ||4]]1]|
SHS HA Il (727-12) naamdayv jee. Naam Dayv Jee:
H nus at 2a Sa BH Years I (727-12, fda, sas anes Ah mai anDhulay kee tayk tayraa naam khundkaaraa. I am blind; Your Name, O Creator Lord, is my only anchor and support.
H asta H HAs Sot aN mors A TTC Il (727-13, fda, sas SHe HH) mai gareeb mai maskeen tayraa naam hai aDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am poor, and I am meek. Your Name is my only support. ||1||Pause] |
TSH TH wrsrd J AST il (727-13, fsa, sas Hee Fh kareemaa™ raheemaa”™ alaah too ganee". O beautiful Lord, benevolent and merciful Lord, You are so wealthy and generous.
THT date efa UfA F HOt WA (727-14, fda, sas HE Fh haajraa hajoor dar pays too” manee”. ||1]| You are ever-present in every presence, within and before me. ||1]|
ade 3 fede 3 fries 3 gat Il (727-14, fsda, sas one FH) daree-aa-o too dihand too bisee-aar too Dhanee. You are the river of life, You are the Giver of all; You are so very wealthy.
ofa Sfs Sa F fears & Sat MQM (727-14, fda, sas ove Fh) deh layhi ayk too™ digar ko nahee. ||2|| You alone give, and You alone take away; there is no other at all. ||2]|
3 wats dat H tery fomr ast il (727-15, faba, sas one FH) too” daanaa™ too” beenaa™ mai beechaar ki-aa karee. You are wise, You are the supreme seer; how could I make You an object of thought?
on 3 Aum une J Ist ANU (727-15, fda, sas SHE Fh) naamay chay su-aamee bakhsand too™ haree. ||3]|1||2||
O Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, You are the merciful Lord of forgiveness. HS1121I
JO Wet JS Wet ufAuat Il (727-16, fsa, sas onee FH) halay yaaraa™ halay yaaraa‘ khusikhabree. Hello, my friend, hello my friend. Is there any good news?
af afe aie 3G af afs AG I (727-16, fsa, sas a= FH) bal bal jaa‘-o ha-o bal bal jaa‘-o. I am a Sacrifice, a devoted sacrifice, a dedicated and devoted sacrifice, to You.
Slat Sot faarst wre Sat aS ul FIC il (727-16, fsa, sas see FH) neekee tayree bigaaree aalay tayraa naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Slavery to You is so sublime; Your Name is noble and exalted. ||1]||Pause| |
OW nH AA Jest aA A FMT Il (727-17, fsda, sas see Hh) kujaa aamad kujaa raftee kujaa may ravee. Where did you come from? Where have You been? And where are You going?
whoo sardt at gaet WAU (727-17, Pada, sas oes Hh) davaarikaa nagree raas bugo-ee. ||1]| Tell me the truth, in the holy city of Dwaarikaa. ||1]|
ug Sat uast HS SSI FH Ul (727-17, fsa, sas one Fh) khoob tayree pagree meethay tayray bol. How handsome is your turban! And how sweet is your speech.
Sra Sas AI AX AGB MU (727-18, fsba, sas ove FH) davaarikaa nagree kaahay kay magol. ||2]| Why are there Moghals in the holy city of Dwaarikaa? ||2| |
Set TAT MISH Sas yak | (727-18, fsa, sas SNe Ft) chandee™ hajaar aalam aykal khaanaa”. You alone are the Lord of so many thousands of worlds.
dH fast fsa ASS aot Sil (727-18, fssa, sas He FH) ham chinee paatisaah saa‘viay barnaa”. | |3]| You are my Lord King, like the dark-skinned Krishna. ||3]|
mAUfs anufs odd ofse Il (727-19, faba, sas see FH) aspat gajpat narah narind. You are the Lord of the sun, Lord Indra and Lord Brahma, the King of men.
on & AM Hts HAE NSIS (727-19, fda, sas oe FH) naamay kay savaamee meer mukand. ||4]|2||3]| You are the Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, the King, the Liberator of all. ||4]|2]|3]|
Ua 92 qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nieve Hats oral AS aT YATE I (728-1)
ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TH Adt HIS 9 BUS wg 4 (728-3) raag soohee mehlaa 1 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Soohee, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
sist of afh gy teg 3B ea aS Weg Il (728-4, Het, Hs 1) bhaa‘daa Dho-ay bais Dhoop dayvhu ta-o dooDhai ka-o jaavhu. Wash the vessel, sit down and anoint it with fragrance; then, go out and get the milk.
ey asn ofs Hats mee afe fear AHS INA (728-4, Het, He 1)
dooDh karam fun surat samaa-in ho-ay niraas jamaavahu. ||1]|
Add the rennet of clear consciousness to the milk of good deeds, and then, free of desire, let it curdle. ||1]|
AU 3 Sa SH Il (728-5, wat, He 1) japahu ta ayko naamaa. Chant the Name of the One Lord.
mets FSIS AH UU TIS ll (728-5, Wet, He 1) avar niraafal kaamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. All other actions are fruitless. ||1]|Pause| |
feg He diet ofa aaa fs S3E ate B ures It (728-5, wat, He ih man eetee haath karahu fun naytara-o need na aavai. Let your mind be the handles, and then churn it, without sleeping.
dAa oH Hug 3a Hebe feo fafa nifys ur|g IN (728-6, wet, He 1D
rasnaa naam japahu tab mathee-ai in biDh amrit paavhu. ||2||
If you chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord ,with your tongue, then the curd will be churned. In this way, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained. ||2]|
Ho Hue fas AS Afs aes Seo ust fRufS as il (728-7, wat, He 1)
man sampat jit sat sar naavan bhaavan paatee taripat karay.
Wash your mind in the pool of Truth, and let it be the vessel of the Lord; let this be your offering to please Him.
un UTS Aaa A AS fea fafa fog sez IT USI (728-7, Fat, Hs 1)
poojaa paraan sayvak jay sayvay in” biDh saahib ravat rahai. ||3]|
That humble servant who dedicates and offers his life, and who serves in this way, remains absorbed in his Lord and Master. ||3]||
ase ats ad afs wefs 3H Afs nies 3 AEF I (728-8, wat, He 1)
kahday kaheh kahay kahi jaaveh tum sar avar na ko-ee.
The speakers speak and speak and speak, and then they depart. There is no other to compare to You.
safs de Soa AS HU VE At AS Het USA (728-8, Fat, He 1)
bhagat heen naanak jan jampai ha-o saalaahee sachaa so-ee. ||4||1]|
Servant Nanak, lacking devotion, humbly prays: may I sing the Praises of the True Lord. ||4||1]|
Hot HIS A WT 2 (728-10) soohee mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Soohee, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (728-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nists ZA S sofa Ate I (728-11, Fat, He 1) antar vasai na baahar jaa-ay. Deep within the self, the Lord abides; do not go outside looking for Him.
nifs dfs ard fas fe nail (728-11, Fat, He 1) amrit chhod kaahay bikh khaa-ay. ||1]| You have renounced the Ambrosial Nectar - why are you eating poison? ||1||
MAT fame AUT Ho AT Il (728-11, wat, He 1) aisaa gi-aan japahu man mayray. Meditate on such spiritual wisdom, O my mind,
on i. We
deg Tas AS AT NU! TIC Wt (728-12, wet, He hovhu chaakar saachay kayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. and become the slave of the True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
famirg fomrg AZ aet Fe Il (728-12, wt, He 1) gi-aan Dhi-aan sabh ko-ee ravai. Everyone speaks of wisdom and meditation;
safe sifomr Ag Ad Se MQM (728-12, wet, He 1) baa‘Dhan baa“Dhi-aa sabh jag bhavai. | |2|| but bound in bondage, the whole world is wandering around in confusion. ||2||
Ast ad A wag SE Il (728-13, wet, He 1) sayvaa karay so chaakar ho-ay. One who serves the Lord is His servant.
nfs afs Hdtnifs afe afoor AE 13H (728-13, et, Hs 1) jal thal mahee-al rav rahi-aa so-ay. ||3]| The Lord is pervading and permeating the water, the land, and the sky. ||3]|
TH Sdt Sat ga dt AE i (728-13, wet, He 1) ham nahee changay buraa nahee ko-ay. I am not good; no one is bad.
ysets arog 3rd AE SUA (728-14, Bet, He 1) paranvat naanak taaray so-ay. ||4]|1]|2]| Prays Nanak, He alone saves us! ||4||1][2]|
Us oa
Hot HIS A wg E (729-1) soohee mehlaa 1 ghar 6 Soohee, First Mehl, Sixth House:
qe Afsars ure il (729-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Cns as fawae uifeH arest HA II (729-2, Het, He 1) ujal kaihaa chilkanaa ghotim kaalrhee mas. Bronze is bright and shiny, but when it is rubbed, its blackness appears.
afsor afs 3 Sse AAG Ge FSA NA (729-2, Fe, He D Dhoti-aa jooth na utrai jay sa-o Dhovaa tis. ||1|| Washing it, its impurity is not removed, even if it is washed a hundred times. ||1]|
Ane Ret af A safeor ais aes I (729-2, at, He 1) sajan say-ee naal mai chaldi-aa naal chala‘ni". They alone are my friends, who travel along with me;
fra Sur Haha fsa us ferfe nan sre it (729-3, wet, us 1)
jithai laykhaa mangee-ai tithai kharhay disann. ||1|| rahaa-o.
and in that place, where the accounts are called for, they appear standing with me. ||1]|Pause] |
aS Hsu nso ung fesdbora il (729-3, wet, He 1) kothay mandap maarhee-aa paashu chitvee-aahaa. There are houses, mansions and tall buildings, painted on all sides;
wdior afk o ureat feag ANSharT MQM (729-4, wat, He 1) dhathee-aa kamm na aavn"ee vichahu sakh-nee-aahaa. ||2]| but they are empty within, and they crumble like useless ruins. ||2| |
war Yat aus Stee HfS SAS i (729-4, wet, us 1) bagaa bagay kaprhay tirath manjh vasa“ni". The herons in their white feathers dwell in the sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
wife wfe Hhat ures sat ot ads SI (729-5, Fat, He 1) ghut ghut jee-aa khaavnay bagay naa kahee-ani”. ||3]| They tear apart and eat the living beings, and so they are not called white. ||3]|
fue gy Adty H HAS Mfr safe II (729-5, wat, He 1) simmal rukh sareer mai maijan daykh bhula“ni”. My body is like the simmal tree; seeing me, other people are fooled.
A ae af 5 ureat 3 ae 3fs dfs ei (729-6, get, we 1) say fal kamm na aavn"ee tay gun mai tan ha‘ni". ||4]| Its fruits are useless - just like the qualities of my body. ||4||
nigs ag Cofeur sae Be ATS Il (729-6, wet, we
anDhulai bhaar uthaa-i-aa doogar vaat bahut.
The blind man is carrying such a heavy load, and his journey through the mountains is SO long.
met Bat ot BI ge afs Sur fas ull (729-7, Fat, us 1)
akhee lorhee naa lahaa ha-o charh langhaa kit. ||5]|
My eyes can see, but I cannot find the Way. How can I climb up and cross over the mountain? ||5||
wad sfamreior niga frmireu fas i (729-7, wet, ue chaakree-aa chang-aa-ee-aa avar si-aanap kit. What good does it do to serve, and be good, and be clever?
aoa oH AH 3 aor sets fAT WENAISI (729-8, Fat, He 1) naanak naam samaal too’ baDhaa chhuteh jit. ||6]]1||3]|
O Nanak, contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and you shall be released from bondage. ||6]]1]|3]|
Hot HIS Y Il (729-8)
soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
Au su a ay ase fas Gufs FIs Il (729-8, wt, He 1) jap tap kaa banDh bayrhulaa jit langheh vahaylaa. Build the raft of meditation and self-discipline, to carry you across the river.
a Adeg a Cee MAT UE ATH |AUI (729-9, wet, Hs 1)
naa sarvar naa oochhlai aisaa panth suhaylaa. ||1]|
There will be no ocean, and no rising tides to stop you; this is how comfortable your path shall be. ||1]]|
3a 8a oY HAloa gst Net dor AS Ja SH UU TIS il (729-9, wat, us 1)
tayraa ayko naam manjeeth-rhaa rataa mayraa cholaa sad rang dholaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your Name alone is the color, in which the robe of my body is dyed. This color is permanent, O my Beloved. ||1]|Pause| |
AHS 3S fimrfanr fas Har Tet it (729-10, wet, we 1) Saajan chalay pi-aari-aa ki-o maylaa ho-ee. My beloved friends have departed; how will they meet the Lord?
A ve defs dosha ASar Aet WW (729-10, wet, ne 1) jay gun hoveh ganth-rhee-ai maylaygaa so-ee. ||2|| If they have virtue in their pack, the Lord will unite them with Himself. ||2]|
fifeor dfs 3 ates A firfemor Tet i (729-11, et, He 1)
mili-aa ho-ay na veechhurhai jay mili-aa ho-ee.
Once united with Him, they will not be separated again, if they are truly united. wiret aGe foefaur 3 Ara Het Wi (729-11, Fat, He 1)
aavaa ga-on nivaari-aa hai saachaa so-ee. ||3]| The True Lord brings their comings and goings to an end. ||3]||
JGH us foster Ast SF Sar il (729-12, wet, He 1) ha-umai maar nivaari-aa seetaa hai cholaa. One who subdues and eradicates egotism, sews the robe of devotion.
Gs asst ee urfeor AT a wifys For sil (729-12, wet, we 1) gur bachnee fal paa-i-aa sah kay amrit bolaa. ||4]|
Following the Word of the Guru's Teachings, she receives the fruits of her reward, the Ambrosial Words of the Lord. ||4||
SSA Ad AVG AG yar filmes i (729-12, wet, ve 1) naanak kahai sahayleeho saho kharaa pi-aaraa. Says Nanak, O soul-brides, our Husband Lord is so dear!
JH Ad adhor abot Ars WAH DHS MUIQIGI (729-13, Fat, He 1)
ham sah kayree-aa daasee-aa saachaa khasam hamaaraa. ||5||2||4]| We are the servants, the hand-maidens of the Lord; He is our True Lord and Master. 51121141]
Hot HIS 4% Il (729-14) soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
faa ag sis ar@ for AeTaAt Il (729-14, Het, He 1) jin ka-o bhaa“dai bhaa-o tinaa savaarasee. Those whose minds are filled with love of the Lord, are blessed and exalted.
Hat ad uATS eH fEATSAT Il (729-14, Fat, He 1) sookhee karai pasaa-o dookh visaarasee. They are blessed with peace, and their pains are forgotten.
HOA HS Oty AUT STAT MAI (729-14, Het, H2 1) sahsaa moolay naahi sarpar taarsee. ||1]| He will undoubtedly, certainly save them. ||1]|
fsqr fhfeur ag urfe fre a stftimr ii (729-15, wet, ues tin"aa mili-aa gur aa-ay jin ka-o leekhi-aa. The Guru comes to meet those whose destiny is so pre-ordained.
ifs ofa ar ar@ SS etftmr i (729-15, wat, ue 1) amrit har kaa naa-o dayvai deekhi-aa. He blesses them with the Teachings of the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
vote Asad ate seta o Str iI (729-16, wet, He 1)
chaaleh satgur bhaa-ay bhaveh na bheekhi-aa. ||2]| Those who walk in the Will of the True Guru, never wander begging. ||2||
W aS Hoe dale eA foe far Il (729-16, Fat, Hs 1)
jaa ka-o mahal hajoor doojay nivai kis.
And one who lives in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, why should he bow down to any other?
afg wserat os HS us FSA I (729-16, Het, He 1) dar darvaanee naahi moolay puchh tis. The gate-keeper at the Lord's Gate shall not stop him to ask any questions.
ge aa Safe wfos sete far SI (729-17, At, He 1D
chhutai taa kai bol saahib nadar jis. ||3]|
And one who is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace - by his words, others are emancipated as well. ||3||
ws oie orf fA ordt SAT HS APE Mt (729-17, wet, He
ghalay aanay aap jis naahee doojaa matai ko-ay.
The Lord Himself sends out, and recalls the mortal beings; no one else gives Him advice.
ofa Gard Ata we AS AE II (729-18, wat, Hs 1) dhaahi usaaray saaj jaanai sabh so-ay. He Himself demolishes, constructs and creates; He knows everything.
oe sad SUA Sedt ae SE NGUSNUN (729-18, At, He 1)
naa-o naanak bakhsees nadree karam ho-ay. ||4||3]|5]| O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord is the blessing, given to those who receive His Mercy, and His Grace. ||4||3]|5]]|
UST DB0
Hot HIS 9 I (730-1) soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
sist var Afe Ff fSH SveAt II (730-1, aat, He 1) bhaa‘daa hachhaa so-ay jo tis bhaavsee. That vessel alone is pure, which is pleasing to Him.
sist nfs Hote Ost get o SEAT II (730-1, gat, Hs 1) bhaa“daa at maleen Dhotaa hachhaa na ho-isee. The filthiest vessel does not become pure, simply by being washed.
GT word ae ASt ufSAt I (730-2, wet, He D guroo du-aarai ho-ay sojhee paa-isee. Through the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate, one obtains understanding.
Ss enrd afe gar deat i (730-2, wet, ue 1) ayt du-aarai Dho-ay hachhaa ho-isee. By being washed through this Gate, it becomes pure.
AS va or Sherg orf sasfEAt Il (730-2, wet, He 1) mailay hachhay kaa veechaar aap vartaa-isee. The Lord Himself sets the standards to differentiate between the dirty and the pure.
HS ot WE Ate nat USAT I (730-3, gat, Hs 1) mat ko jaanai jaa-ay agai paa-isee. Do not think that you will automatically find a place of rest hereafter.
Ad aan anfe So afeAt il (730-3, wet, He 1) jayhay karam kamaa-ay tayhaa ho-isee. According to the actions one has committed, so does the mortal become.
nifys ofs a a orf saatert i (730-3, wet, us 1) amrit har kaa naa-o aap vartaa-isee. He Himself bestows the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
sfour ufs fAG AoH Aette sat SEAT Il (730-4, Fat, we 1
chali-aa pat si-o janam savaar vaajaa vaa-isee.
Such a mortal departs with honor and renown; his life is embellished and redeemed, and the trumpets resound with his glory.
HEH four zara fag Sa ASETEAt II (730-4, Fat, He 1) maanas ki-aa vaychaaraa tihu lok sunaa-isee. Why speak of poor mortals? His glory shall echo throughout the three worlds.
soa mify foaes Afs AH SSA NUISIEN (730-5, Fat, He 1)
naanak aap nihaal sabh kul taarsee. ||1]|4]|6|| O Nanak, he himself shall be enraptured, and he shall save his entire ancestry. [12114116] |
Hot HIS 4 Il (730-5) soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
fat Se Hae Sait TS aE i (730-5, wet, we 1) jogee hovai jogvai bhogee hovai khaa-ay. The Yogi practices yoga, and the pleasure-seeker practices eating.
sur 32 su ad Stefa nfs ufs ate Wall (730-6, gat, He 1)
tapee-aa hovai tap karay tirath mal mal naa-ay. ||1||
The austere practice austerities, bathing and rubbing themselves at sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1]|
30 Aes Heth aret A aA ad wate al TIE Il (730-6, wat, ne 1)
tayraa sad-rhaa suneejai bhaa-ee jay ko bahai alaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Let me hear some news of You, O Beloved; if only someone would come and sit with me, and tell me. ||1]|Pause| |
AA dit ASS A ue A Ue Il (730-7, At, Hs 1) jaisaa beejai so lunay jo khatay so khaa-ay. As one plants, so does he harvest; whatever he earns, he eats.
Wid Us o Uzet A AES StATS ATE IM (730-7, Fat, He 1)
agai puchh na hova-ee jay san neesaanai jaa-ay. ||2| |
In the world hereafter, his account is not called for, if he goes with the insignia of the Lord. ||2||
3A AA ardbat AAT ara GHME I (730-8, wet, He 1) taiso jaisaa kaadhee-ai jaisee kaar kamaa-ay. According to the actions the mortal commits, so is he proclaimed.
A 2H fefs 3 orect A en foe ate ISI (730-8, At, He 1D jo dam chit na aavee so dam birthaa jaa-ay. ||3]| And that breath which is drawn without thinking of the Lord, that breath goes in vain.
[SII
feg 3g Sat & adt A ax we fearf= It (730-8, At, He 1) ih tan vaychee bai karee jay ko la-ay vikaa-ay. I would sell this body, if someone would only purchase it.
soa ath o ureet fas sfs ost Aa oS NIU (730-9, Bat, He 1)
naanak kamm na aavee jit tan naahee sachaa naa-o. ||4]|5||7]|
O Nanak, that body is of no use at all, if it does not enshrine the Name of the True Lord. ||4||5]|71|
Hat HIS Y WT D (730-10) soohee mehlaa 1 ghar 7 Soohee, First Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsas urrfe il (730-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nad o fie fa o 33 Aa Oo SAH VSS Il (730-11, Bat, He 1D
jog na khinthaa jog na dandai jog na bhasam charhaa-ee-ai.
Yoga is not the patched coat, Yoga is not the walking stick. Yoga is not smearing the body with ashes.
na 6 Het Hf uate Fa o fet ett i (730-11, et, we D
jog na mundee moond mudaa-i-ai jog na sinyee vaa-ee-ai.
Yoga is not the ear-rings, and not the shaven head. Yoga is not the blowing of the horn.
nino ufo fodafs sdba aa wats fee ust WAI (730-12, et, He 1)
anjan maahi niranjan rahee-ai jog jugat iv paa-ee-ai. ||1]|
Remaining unblemished in the midst of the filth of the world - this is the way to attain Yoga. ||1]|
oat Hao Tet i (730-12, wet, Hs 1) galee jog na ho-ee. By mere words, Yoga is not attained.
ea fenfe af AHAfs we Halt adh Het WAN FITS il (730-13, gat, ue 1)
ayk darisat kar samsar jaanai jogee kahee-ai so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who looks upon all with a single eye, and knows them to be one and the same - he alone is known as a Yogi. ||1||Pause] |
nad o Mofe Hat HATS Hao SST BSA I (730-13, Fat, us 1) jog na baahar marhee masaanee jog na taarhee laa-ee-ai. Yoga is not wandering to the tombs of the dead; Yoga is not sitting in trances.
na o efn fersts sfent ta o Stefa area i (730-14, wat, He 1)
jog na days disantar bhavi-ai jog na tirath naa-ee-ai.
Yoga is not wandering through foreign lands; Yoga is not bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
nino ufo fadafs sdbt aa wats fee ures QI (730-14, Fat, He 1)
anjan maahi niranjan rahee-ai jog jugat iv paa-ee-ai. ||2||
Remaining unblemished in the midst of the filth of the world - this is the way to attain Yoga. ||2]|
Asay Se St HOA SS Wey sal TISAI (730-15, Hat, oe 1) satgur bhaytai taa sahsaa tootai Dhaavat varaj rahaa-ee-ai. Meeting with the True Guru, doubt is dispelled, and the wandering mind is restrained.
fosg 3d Hon Ufs ool we dt user urea I (730-15, wat, He 1) nijhar jharai sahj Dhun laagai ghar hee parchaa paa-ee-ai. Nectar rains down, celestial music resounds, and deep within, wisdom is obtained.
nino ufo fadafs sdba Aa wats fee urehH 13 (730-16, wat, Hs 1)
anjan maahi niranjan rahee-ai jog jugat iv paa-ee-ai. ||3]|
Remaining unblemished in the midst of the filth of the world - this is the way to attain Yoga. ||3]||
ood Htefaor ufs sdba maT ar aHTEDA I (730-17, wet, Hs 1) naanak jeevti-aa mar rahee-ai aisaa jog kamaa-ee-ai. O Nanak, remain dead while yet alive - practice such a Yoga.
an asd fist eH 38 fags ue ue Il (730-17, wet, He
vaajay baajhahu sinyee vaajai ta-o nirbha-o pad paa-ee-ai.
When the horn is blown without being blown, then you shall attain the state of fearless dignity.
nine Hfs fedafs shat rar Aafs SB urshs WSN (730-18, Fat, He 1)
anjan maahi niranjan rahee-ai jog jugat ta-o paa-ee-ai. ||4||1]|8]|
Remaining unblemished in the midst of the filth of the world - this is the way to attain Yoga. ||4]|11|8]|
Hat HIS 4 Il (730-18) soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
ACE SIH ACE J 3a ACS ASS FBT Il (730-18, Fat, ue 1) ka-un taraajee kavan tulaa tayraa kavan saraaf bulaavaa. What scale, what weights, and what assayer shall I call for You, Lord?
ABE Tg a ula citer Se a uf He AIST UI (730-19, Fat, Hs 1)
ka-un guroo kai peh deekhi-aa layvaa kai peh mul karaavaa. ||1]|
From what guru should I receive instruction? By whom should I have Your value appraised? ||1]|
UST 939
AS wre AM Sa nig o ATE I (731-1, wet, He D mayray laal jee-o tayraa ant na jaanaa. O my Dear Beloved Lord, Your limits are not Known.
3 rf afe Hohe sfoufe stat F umd Aga AMET AU TIES il (731-1, wet, we too” jal thal mahee-al bharipur leenaa too” aapay sarab samaanaaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You pervade the water, the land, and the sky; You Yourself are All-pervading. ||1]|Pause| |
Ho Saat fos sar Sat AS AGS AHS Il (731-2, Wet, ws 1)
man taaraajee chit tulaa tayree sayv saraaf kamaavaa.
Mind is the scale, consciousness the weights, and the performance of Your service is the appraiser.
we dt sisfe A Ag Sat feo fafa fos gore HN (731-2, Bet, He
ghat hee bheetar so saho tolee in biDh chit rahaavaa. ||2| |
Deep within my heart, I weigh my Husband Lord; in this way I focus my consciousness. ||2| |
WN AS 3B saat mM SHsT SH Il (731-3, Fat, ue 1)
aapay kandaa tol taraajee aapay tolanhaaraa.
You Yourself are the balance, the weights and the scale; You Yourself are the weigher.
~ SA
mnt SH MM FS My J FSAI UM (731-3, Fat, He 1) aapay daykhai aapay boojhai aapay hai vanjaaraa. ||3]| You Yourself see, and You Yourself understand; You Yourself are the trader. ||3]|
niger ote afs usent fire nie foe ATS I (731-4, Bet, He 1D anDhulaa neech jaat pardaysee khin aavai til jaavai. The blind, low class wandering soul, comes for a moment, and departs in an instant.
J at Hats sea sae fa ate Hat urs SUNN (731-4, Fat, He 1) taa kee sangat naanak rahdaa ki-o kar moorhaa paavai. ||4]|2]||9|| In its company, Nanak dwells; how can the fool attain the Lord? ||4||2||9]|
TH Adt HIS 8 WY (731-6) raag soohee mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (731-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
His TH OH uTSfour ae Hate TT TI S Il (731-7, Het, we 4)
man raam naam aaraaDhi-aa gur sabad guroo gur kay.
My mind worships and adores the Lord's Name, through the Guru, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afs feet ufs sfe udher As Yo" ST AH S NA (731-7, Bet, He 4) sabh ichhaa man tan pooree-aa sabh chookaa dar jam kay. ||1]|
All the desires of my mind and body have been fulfilled; all fear of death has been dispelled. ||1]|
Hd HO DE WeST TH OH Als = Il (731-8, wat, we 4) mayray man gun gaavhu raam naam har kay. O my mind, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
afs 36 He ussfomr afe uber oA Tea AU FITS Il (731-8, Fat, Hs 4)
gur tuthai man parboDhi-aa har pee-aa ras gatkay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
And when the Guru is pleased and satisfied, the mind is instructed; it then joyfully drinks in the subtle essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
AsHats S3sH Afsaa aat Ts ae ala ys & Il (731-9, wet, ws 4)
satsangat ootam satgur kayree gun gaavai har parabh kay.
The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the True Guru, is sublime and exalted. They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God.
ofa fasu of Hog ASHafs TH GsT Ua AS & II (731-9, wat, Hs 4)
har kirpaa Dhaar maylhu satsangat ham Dhovah pag jan kay. ||2]|
Bless me with Your Mercy, Lord, and unite me with the Sat Sangat; I wash the feet of Your humble servants. ||2||
TH OH AS I TH OH IA THs GA GAS Il (731-10, Het, He 4)
raam naam sabh hai raam naamaa ras gurmat ras raskay.
The Lord's Name is all. The Lord's Name is the essence of the Guru's Teachings, the juice, the sweetness of it.
dfs uifqs ofe we ufenr AS oret fA FSA & USI (731-10, wet, He 4)
har amrit har jal paa-i-aa sabh laathee tis tis kay. ||3]|
I have found the Ambrosial Nectar, the Divine Water of the Lord's Name, and all my thirst for it is quenched. ||3]|
JHat ats uts ag Afsag JH SfeS fag TT Ss Il (731-11, wet, ue 4)
hamree jaat paat gur satgur ham vaychi-o sir gur kay.
The Guru, the True Guru, is my social status and honor; I have sold my head to the Guru.
HS SOA OH ulss TI UH AI TUT GA AS F SIA (731-12, wet, Hs 4)
jan naanak naam pari-o gur chaylaa gur raakho laaj jan kay. ||4|[1]|
Servant Nanak is called the chaylaa, the disciple of the Guru; O Guru, save the honor of Your servant. ||4||1]|
Hot HIS 8 Il (731-12) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofs on afr usdsn Afs faon Soe Tour I (731-12, wet, He 4)
har har naam bhaji-o purkhotam sabh binsay daalad dalghaa.
I chant and vibrate the Name of the Lord God, the Supreme Being, Har, Har; my poverty and problems have all been eradicated.
38 HoH Hea Afes as Aaet dfs mmfag Afe Ay AMEE NAN (731-13, Bet, He 4)
bha-o janam marnaa mayti-o gur sabdee har asthir sayv sukh samghaa. ||1]|
The fear of birth and death has been erased, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; serving the Unmoving, Unchanging Lord, I am absorbed in peace. ||1]|
He Ho 3a TH OH nfs fugu It (731-14, At, Hs 4) mayray man bhaj raam naam at pirghaa. O my mind, vibrate the Name of the most Beloved, Darling Lord.
Hue 36 mefu ofes ae urd fag 2fe HE nfs nour na TIC Wt (731-14, wet, He 4) mai man tan arap Dhari-o gur aagai sir vaych lee-o mul mahghaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have dedicated my mind and body, and placed them in offering before the Guru; I have sold my head to the Guru, for a very dear price. ||1]||Pause] |
souls oa da oA Hef fag are uafs us Afs aeur Il (731-15, at, He 4)
narpat raajay rang ras maaneh bin naavai pakarh kharhay sabh kalghaa.
The kings and the rulers of men enjoy pleasures and delights, but without the Name of the Lord, death seizes and dispatches them all.
aan ofe fafa 33 ware fefs uss S Ta SHUT III (731-16, wat, He 4)
Dharam raa-ay sir dand lagaanaa fir pachhutaanay hath falghaa. ||2| |
The Righteous Judge of Dharma strikes them over the heads with his staff, and when the fruits of their actions come into their hands, then they regret and repent. ||2| |
dfs TY IY AS fasH SHS Adetals use yfsusur il (731-16, wet, us 4)
har raakh raakh jan kiram tumaaray sarnaagat purakh partipalaghaa.
Save me, save me, Lord; I am Your humble servant, a mere worm. I seek the Protection of Your Sanctuary, O Primal Lord, Cherisher and Nourisher.
@dAS AS UT AY US US Be ule AS SHU MSM (731-17, wet, Hs 4)
darsan sant dayh sukh paavai parabh loch poor jan tumghaa. ||3]||
Please bless me with the Blessed Vision of the Saint's Darshan, that I may find peace. O God, please fulfill the desires of Your humble servant. ||3]|
3H ANGE UTE SS US AMM H ae ain we ofa fexur It (731-17, wat, He 4)
tum samrath purakh vaday parabh su-aamee mo ka-o keejai daan har nimghaa.
You are the All-powerful, Great, Primal God, my Lord and Master. O Lord, please bless me with the gift of humility.
He soa ony fs AY UTS TH OM feeg AS WHUT IIH (731-18, Bat, He 4)
jan naanak naam milai sukh paavai ham naam vitahu sad ghumghaa. ||4||2|| Servant Nanak has found the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and is at peace; I am forever a sacrifice to the Naam. ||4]|2||
Hot HIS g Il (731-19)
soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ont of ds 3 ofe Se HAS FH Il (731-19, Fat, He 4) har naamaa har rany hai har rany majeethai rany. The Lord's Name is the Love of the Lord. The Lord's Love is the permanent color.
afs 36 ofs da afar fete safe o Tet SB UA (731-19, wat, He 4)
gur tuthai har rang chaarhi-aa fir bahurh na hovee bhany. ||1||
When the Guru is totally satisfied and pleased, He colors us with the Lord's Love; this color shall never fade away. ||1]|
UST 932
Ad Ho oe TH OTH afte FH Ml (732-1, gat, ue 4) mayray man har raam naam kar rany. O my mind, enshrine love for the Name of the Lord.
afs 36 ofs Quefimr afs sfeur aE fers ai TIS Il (732-1, Fat, He 4)
gur tuthai har updaysi-aa har bhayti-aa raa-o nisany. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru, satisfied and pleased, taught me about the Lord, and my Sovereign Lord King met with me at once. ||1]|Pause| |
Hu fenret Hout fefa mree Arar nis II (732-2, At, He 4)
munDh i-aanee manmukhee fir aavan jaanaa any.
The self-willed manmukh is like the ignorant bride, who comes and goes again and again in reincarnation.
dfs ys fats 3 ures nfs eA SE AIGS MQM (732-2, wet, He 4)
har parabh chit na aa-i-o man doojaa bhaa-o sahlanny. ||2||
The Lord God does not come into her consciousness, and her mind is stuck in the love of duality. ||2||
JH HG 3d Baader fe sag niait wis I (732-3, wet, He 4)
ham mail bharay duhchaaree-aa har raakho angee any.
I am full of filth, and I practice evil deeds; O Lord, save me, be with me, merge me into Your Being!
ate nfs Afs oeorfenr vfs ore faafeu us SI (732-3, Fat, He 4)
gur amrit sar navlaa-i-aa sabh laathay kilvikh pany. ||3]|
The Guru has bathed me in the pool of Ambrosial Nectar, and all my dirty sins and mistakes have been washed away. ||3]|
ofe der ae efenis ys ASHals He AS I (732-4, wet, He 4)
har deenaa deen da-i-aal parabh satsangat maylhu sany.
O Lord God, Merciful to the meek and the poor, please unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ffs Hats ofs da ufenr AS Sea Hie 3fs Fs WISI (732-5, Fat, He 4)
mil sangat har rang paa-i-aa jan naanak man tan rany. ||4|[3]| Joining the Sangat, servant Nanak has obtained the Lord's Love; my mind and body are drenched in it. ||4]|3]|
Hot HIS g Il (732-5) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ufs acts fas aue anrefa foger AO & Tet I (732-6, Het, He 4)
har har karahi nit kapat kamaaveh hirdaa suDh na ho-ee.
One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, while constantly practicing deception, shall never become pure of heart.
wofes AGH adfs HIST AUS AY S Tet IA (732-6, Hat, He 4)
an-din karam karahi bahutayray supnai sukh na ho-ee. ||1||
He may perform all sorts of rituals, night and day, but he shall not find peace, even in dreams. ||1||
famret as fas safs 3 det i (732-7, wat, He 4) gi-aanee gur bin bhagat na ho-ee. O wise ones, without the Guru, there is no devotional worship.
ad Jd ae 5 Vs A Bs AF aet Vl TIS il (732-7, get, us 4)
korai rang kaday na charhai jay lochai sabh ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The untreated cloth does not take up the dye, no matter how much everyone may wish it. |]1]|Pause| |
WY SU AAH FIST AT UAT HOH FT 3 AT Il (732-8, ASH, we 4)
jap tap sanjam varat karay poojaa manmukh rog na jaa-ee.
The self-willed manmukh may perform chants, meditations, austere self-discipline, fasts and devotional worship, but his sickness does not go away.
nists da Ho nifsHrer eA StS wet WU (732-8, Fat, He 4)
antar rog mahaa abhimaanaa doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee. ||2||
Deep within him is the sickness of excessive egotism; in the love of duality he is ruined. ||2||
Tos SU As BITS Hour wa fet aS i (732-9, wet, ws 4)
baahar bhaykh bahut chaturaa-ee manoo-aa dah dis Dhaavai.
Outwardly, he wears religious robes and he is very clever, but his mind wanders in the ten directions.
UGH faurfimr Fae 3 ste fefs fefa Tat ws USI (732-9, At, He 4)
ha-umai bi-aapi-aa sabad na cheen’ai fir fir joonee aavai. ||3]|
Engrossed in ego, he does not remember the Word of the Shabad; over and over again, he is reincarnated. ||3]|
aed Sele ad A YS A AG OH fms it (732-10, wet, vs 4)
naanak nadar karay so boojhai so jan naam Dhi-aa-ay.
O Nanak, that mortal who is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace, understands Him; that humble servant meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ys USA Sat FS SAA HT AHS ISisil (732-10, Fat, Hs 4) gur parsaadee ayko boojhai aykas maahi samaa-ay. | |4||4| |
By Guru's Grace, he understands the One Lord, and is absorbed into the One Lord. [141141]
Hot HIG 8 We 2 (732-12) soohee mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfE il (732-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Tans oat ofa dAret i (732-13, et, He 4) gurmat nagree khoj khojaa-ee. Following the Guru's Teachings, I searched and searched the body-village;
dfs fs SH ueTag uTet WAN (732-13, Fat, He 4) har har naam padaarath paa-ee. ||1|| I found the wealth of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
Ad ufs ofe ofa AMS sAret i (732-13, et, He 4) mayrai man har har saa™t vasaa-ee. The Lord, Har, Har, has enshrined peace within my mind.
fare nafs ast fis nists afs fife As su aeet WAN TIS I (732-14, wet, He 4) tisnaa agan bujhee khin antar gur mili-ai sabh bhukh gavaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The fire of desire was extinguished in an instant, when I met the Guru; all my hunger has been satisfied. ||1]|Pause] |
ofs HE Wet ater Ast HST Ml (732-14, wet, ws 4) har gun gaavaa jeevaa mayree maa-ee. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I live, O my mother.
Afsafs efenrfs ae ay fesret QI (732-15, Fat, He 4) satgur da-i-aal gun naam darirhaa-ee. ||2|| The Merciful True Guru implanted the Glorious Praises of the Naam within me. ||2| |
wg ofe ys fire ee Feet il (732-15, Fat, He 4) ha-o har parabh pi-aaraa dhoodh dhoodhaa-ee. I search for and seek out my Beloved Lord God, Har, Har.
AsAats ffs afs TA uret SI (732-16, Fat, He 4)
satsangat mil har ras paa-ee. ||3]|
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have obtained the subtle essence of the Lord. ||3]|
Ufs HASfa Sy fea afs uct i (732-16, Adt, Hs 4) Dhur mastak laykh likhay har paa-ee. By the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon my forehead, I have found the Lord.
TT SSA 3S AS ofa get USNAUUll (732-16, wet, He 4) gur naanak tuthaa maylai har bhaa-ee. ||4]|1]|5]|
Guru Nanak, pleased and satisfied, has united me with the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny. 401211511
Hot HIS 8 Il (732-17) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ofa faur ad Hfs afs Fa BS il (732-17, wet, He 4) har kirpaa karay man har rang laa-ay. Showering His Mercy, the Lord imbues the mind with His Love.
aaufy ofa afe oth AHS I (732-17, Bat, v8 4) gurmukh har har naam samaa-ay. ||1]| | The Gurmukh merges in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
ofa Sfa TS He Fa HES Il (732-18, wat, ue 4) har rang raataa man rang maanay. Imbued with the Lord's Love, the mortal enjoys the pleasure of His Love.
He nfafe ao fea TSt us TT a Hale ANTS NU TIS Il (732-18, Wat, Hs 4)
sadaa anand rahai din raatee pooray gur kai sabad samaanay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He remains always blissful, day and night, and he merges into the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause]|
ofs da AG BI AS at | (732-19, wet, He 4) har rang ka-o lochai sabh ko-ee. Everyone longs for the Lord's Love;
TaHfs Faq BHI Tet lM (732-19, wat, ws 4) gurmukh rang chaloolaa ho-ee. ||2]| the Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of His Love. ||2| |
HoHfe Hag og aa SE Il (732-19, Fat, He 4) manmukh mugaDh nar koraa ho-ay. The foolish, self-willed manmukh is left pale and uncolored.
UST 933
sa 4
AAG Bd da 5 de aE BN (733-1, Fa, Hs 4) jay sa-o lochai rang na hovai ko-ay. ||3]| Even if he wishes it a hundred times, he does not obtain the Lord's Love. ||3]|
oefs ad ST AfsagT ures Il (733-1, gat, ne 4) nadar karay taa satgur paavai. But if the Lord blesses him with His Glance of Grace, then he meets the True Guru.
ood ofa aff ofa df ANTS NSIQHEN (733-1, Fe, Hs 4)
naanak har ras har rang samaavai. ||4||2||6]| Nanak is absorbed into the subtle essence of the Lord's Love. ||4||2||6]|
Hot HIG 8 Il (733-2) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
fave ofs ofA got mre i (733-2, wet, v3 4) jinvaa har ras rahee aghaa-ay. My tongue remains satisfied with the subtle essence of the Lord.
aToufa ute Aofa ANTE All (733-2, Bt, He 4) gurmukh peevai sahj samaa-ay. ||1]| The Gurmukh drinks it in, and merges in celestial peace. ||1||
dfs GA AS Bug A Set Il (733-2, Fat, He 4) har ras jan chaakhahu jay bhaa-ee. If you taste the subtle essence of the Lord, O humble Siblings of Destiny,
38 as nas Ae Saret AU TIC I (733-3, wet, 8 4) ta-o kat anat saad lobhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. then how can you be enticed by other flavors? ||1]|Pause| |
Dans JA aug Ss os | (733-3, wet, ws 4) gurmat ras raakho ur Dhaar. Under Guru's Instructions, keep this subtle essence enshrined in your heart.
ofe aff TS Sfa Hats QU (733-4, Fat, He 4)
har ras raatay rang muraar. ||2||
Those who are imbued with the subtle essence of the Lord, are immersed in celestial bliss. ||2]|
HoHfe af sa aftr o ATE I (733-4, Bet, He 4) manmukh har ras chaakhi-aa na jaa-ay. The self-willed manmukh cannot even taste the subtle essence of the Lord.
IH ad gost fs AE NSH (733-4, Bet, He 4) ha-umai karai bahutee milai sajaa-ay. ||3]| He acts out in ego, and suffers terrible punishment. ||3]|
oefs ad 3 ofs TA UTS II (733-5, Bat, He 4)
nadar karay taa har ras paavai.
But if he is blessed with the Lord's Kind Mercy, then he obtains the subtle essence of the Lord.
ood dfa aff ofa T= WS WSUS (733-5, Fat, He 4)
naanak har ras har gun gaavai. ||4]|3]|7|| O Nanak, absorbed in this subtle essence of the Lord, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4|[3]|71|
Hot HIG 8 We E (733-6) soohee mehlaa 4 ghar 6 Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Sixth House:
qe Afsas urrfe I (733-6) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ate ats of aufsor SSH uest ute I (733-7, wat, He 4)
neech jaat har japti-aa utam padvee paa-ay.
When someone of low social class chants the Lord's Name, he obtains the state of highest dignity.
usd fae oH AS fans Ssfeur wife fA ATE WA (733-7, At, He 4) poochhahu bidar daasee sutai kisan utri-aa ghar jis jaa-ay. ||1|| Go and ask Bidar, the son of a maid; Krishna himself stayed in his house. ||1]|
fd at naa Aa Ha AS set fas AOA eu sy AS Blo ATS NA TIS Il (733-8, Fat, He 4)
har kee akath kathaa sunhu jan bhaa-ee jit sahsaa dookh bhookh sabh leh jaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Listen, O humble Siblings of Destiny, to the Unspoken Speech of the Lord; it removes all anxiety, pain and hunger. ||1]||Pause| |
deaA oH Grafs ad ate atefs for fea ae il (733-9, wet, ne 4)
ravidaas chamaar ustat karay har keerat nimakh ik gaa-ay.
Ravi Daas, the leather-worker, praised the Lord, and sang the Kirtan of His Praises each and every instant.
ufss mts @3u sfeor ofa goo ue ufat orf Qi (733-9, wat, us 4)
patit jaat utam bha-i-aa chaar varan pa-ay pag aa-ay. ||2]|
Although he was of low social status, he was exalted and elevated, and people of all four castes came and bowed at his feet. ||2]| |
one ulfs adit ofs ASt Sa she ad gore it (733-10, wet, we 4) naamday-a pareet lagee har saytee lok chheepaa kahai bulaa-ay. Naam Dayv loved the Lord; the people called him a fabric dyer.
ust gone fufs & 23 ofs oHee Sor nfs we Si (733-10, Fat, He 4)
khatree baraahman pith day chhoday har naamday-o lee-aa mukh laa-ay. ||3] |
The Lord turned His back on the high-class Kh'shaatriyas and Brahmins, and showed His face to Naam Dayv. ||3]|
fi36 sas dig Azar “fy nionfs Stee f35 fsea Tete il (733-11, wet, ws 4)
jitnay bhagat har sayvkaa mukh athsath tirath tin tilak kadhaa-ay.
All of the devotees and servants of the Lord have the tilak, the ceremonial mark, applied to their foreheads at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
He sod fsa ag niafes ugA A faut ad dia ae ISNAITH (733-12, Bat, He 4)
jan naanak tin ka-o an-din parsay jay kirpaa karay har raa-ay. ||4||1]|8]|
Servant Nanak shall touch their feet night and day, if the Lord, the King, grants His Grace. ||4[|1]|8]|
Hot HIS 8 Il (733-12)
soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
fsat nists afs wrafimr faa a@ uf fesfimr fess fore i (733-13, Fat, Hs 4)
tin"ee antar har aaraaDhi-aa jin ka-o Dhur likhi-aa likhat lilaaraa.
They alone worship and adore the Lord deep within, who are blessed with such pre- ordained destiny from the very beginning of time.
fae at stat aet fomr ad fas a nit ad Hat fs ITS WAI (733-13, wet, He 4) tin kee bakheelee ko-ee ki-aa karay jin kaa ang karay mayraa har kartaaraa. ||1]| What can anyone do to undermine them? My Creator Lord is on their side. ||1]|
ofa ofe fourfe uo AS Ho fourfe ais HOH HOH & Afs Eu foerseraT NU TIS i (733- 14, Adt, He 4)
har har Dhi-aa-ay man mayray man Dhi-aa-ay har janam janam kay sabh dookh nivaaranhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
So meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind. Meditate on the Lord, O mind; He is the Eliminator of all the pains of reincarnation. ||1]|Pause] |
ufs sas Aa a author afe vifys sats sara I (733-15, wet, He 4)
Dhur bhagat janaa ka-o bakhsi-aa har amrit bhagat bhandaaraa.
In the very beginning, the Lord blessed His devotees with the Ambrosial Nectar, the treasure of devotion.
Hay de A Go at dn ae (3H Tals uBls He aT MQM (733-16, Fat, Hs 4) moorakh hovai so un kee rees karay tis halat palat muhu kaaraa. ||2||
Anyone who tries to compete with them is a fool; his face shall be blackened here and hereafter. ||2||
A gas A Aeat frat ofa ony fimirar il (733-16, Hat, H8 4)
say bhagat say sayvkaa jinaa har naam pi-aaraa.
They alone are devotees, and they alone are selfless servants, who love the Lord's Name.
fsa at Aer 3 ofa ureha fafa fSea aX us Sra BI (733-17, wat, He 4)
tin kee sayvaa tay har paa-ee-ai sir nindak kai pavai chhaaraa. ||3]|
By their selfless service, they find the Lord, while ashes fall on the heads of the Slanderers. ||3||
fan ufe feast Aet WE FAS Ts ssa ules aaT Stora il (733-17, wt, we 4)
jis ghar virtee so-ee jaanai jagat gur naanak poochh karahu beechaaraa.
He alone knows this, who experiences it within the home of his own self. Ask Guru Nanak, the Guru of the world, and reflect upon it.
ag ulst orfe sarfe suist fas 3 ufe6 afs Rea afe forse ISIC (733-18, At, H8 4)
chahu peerhee aad jugaad bakheelee kinai na paa-i-o har sayvak bhaa-ay nistaaraa. 41121191]
Throughout the four generations of the Gurus, from the beginning of time and throughout the ages, no one has ever found the Lord by back-biting and undermining. Only by serving the Lord with love, is one emancipated. ||4]|2||9||
Hat HIS g Il (733-19) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
fra ofe mrad fsa ofe firg Aaet I (733-19, at, He 4)
jithai har aaraaDhee-ai tithai har mit sahaa-ee.
Wherever the Lord is worshipped in adoration, there the Lord becomes one's friend and helper.
ust 938 ad fas 3 ofa ufs eA das fafa ofenr o Fret NU (734-1, Bet, He 4)
gur kirpaa tay har man vasai horat biDh la-i-aa na jaa-ee. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind; He cannot be obtained in any other way. ||1||
ofa ag Adbt sre i (734-1, et, He 4) har Dhan sanchee-ai bhaa-ee. So gather in the wealth of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny,
fa vafs uefs ofs of Aeret nd TIS Ml (734-2, wet, Hs 4)
je halat palat har ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
so that in this world and the next, the Lord shall be your friend and companion. ||1]|Pause] |
AsHast Afa ofa ae udbat da & day Cure af us fas 3 wet I (734-2, wet, Hs 4) satsangtee sang har Dhan khatee-ai hor thai horat upaa-ay har Dhan kitai na paa-ee. In the company of the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, you shall earn the wealth of the Lord; this wealth of the Lord is not obtained anywhere else, by any other means, at all.
dfs 336 & eurdion ufs ao us fers ad a ence ata afs us afer o ret III (734-3, Hot, He 4)
har ratnai kaa vapaaree-aa har ratan Dhan vihaajhay kachai kay vaapaaree-ay vaak har Dhan la-i-aa na jaa-ee. ||2||
The dealer in the Lord's Jewels purchases the wealth of the Lord's jewels; the dealer in cheap glass jewels cannot acquire the Lord's wealth by empty words. ||2||
ufg ug 33q Hedg Head dia ud ots nifys 28 eS ala sat afe fee wet I (734-4, et, H8 4)
har Dhan ratan javayhar maanak har Dhanai naal amrit vaylai vatai har bhagtee har liv laa-ee.
The Lord's wealth is like jewels, gems and rubies. At the appointed time in the Amrit Vaylaa, the ambrosial hours of the morning, the Lord's devotees lovingly center their attention on the Lord, and the wealth of the Lord.
ofs ug nifys 23 =3 a Sifter sas ute uate ad fous art il (734-5, wet, He 4)
har Dhan amrit vaylai vatai kaa beeji-aa bhagat khaa-ay kharach rahay nikhutai naahee.
The devotees of the Lord plant the seed of the Lord's wealth in the ambrosial hours of the Amrit Vaylaa; they eat it, and spend it, but it is never exhausted.
vofs uafs ofs ud at saat a@ first sfsnret 31 (734-6, Fat, He 4)
halat palat har Dhanai kee bhagtaa ka-o milee vadi-aa-ee. ||3]|
In this world and the next, the devotees are blessed with glorious greatness, the wealth of the Lord. ||3]|
ofs ug foss@ Ae Het oAfag 3 Are feg fs ug wast SAA eh AHES fan a Tefen o AT Il (734-6, wet, Hs 4)
har Dhan nirbha-o sadaa sadaa asthir hai saachaa ih har Dhan agnee taskarai paanee- ai jamdootai kisai kaa gavaa-i-aa na jaa-ee.
The wealth of the Fearless Lord is permanent, forever and ever, and true. This wealth of the Lord cannot be destroyed by fire or water; neither thieves nor the Messenger of Death can take it away.
dfs us a@ Guar afs 3 rect FH Warst SS 3 Baret sil (734-7, Tet, us 4)
har Dhan ka-o uchkaa nayrh na aavee jam jaagaatee dand na lagaa-ee. ||4]| Thieves cannot even approach the Lord's wealth; Death, the tax collector cannot tax it. ||4]|
Arast uy af & fafimr ug Afar fsa fea feu ofes o AreT I (734-7, Bet, He 4) saaktee paap kar kai bikhi-aa Dhan sanchi-aa tinaa ik vikh naal na jaa-ee.
The faithless cynics commit sins and gather in their poisonous wealth, but it shall not go along with them for even a single step.
Jos fefs Was eds se Jag gala afenr nat uafs Was Ufs wag Set o uret iu (734-8, Hot, He 4)
haltai vich saakat duhaylay bha-ay hathahu chhurhak ga-i-aa agai palat saakat har dargeh dho-ee na paa-ee. ||5||
In this world, the faithless cynics become miserable, as it slips away through their hands. In the world hereafter, the faithless cynics find no shelter in the Court of the Lord. ||5||
fen afs us at Arg ofa orf do Hag fan S tf A afs US fe weret Il (734-9, wat, He 4) is har Dhan kaa saahu har aap hai santahu jis no day-ay so har Dhan lad chalaa-ee. The Lord Himself is the Banker of this wealth, O Saints; when the Lord gives it, the mortal loads it and takes it away.
fen ofa us a Sat ae 3 nreet Ho Boa aA ate ASt ut NENSIION (734-10, Bat, He 4) is har Dhanai kaa totaa kaday na aavee jan naanak ka-o gur sojhee paa-ee. ||6]|3]|10]|
This wealth of the Lord is never exhausted; the Guru has given this understanding to servant Nanak. ||6||3]|10]|
Hot HIS 8 Il (734-11) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
fan 6 ofa AUS df A dfs qe" ge A Sas A uss s Il (734-11, wet, He 4)
jis no har suparsan ho-ay so har gunaa ravai so bhagat so parvaan.
That mortal, with whom the Lord is pleased, repeats the Glorious Praises of the Lord; he alone is a devotee, and he alone is approved.
fSn at yfour foor sash fan & fase efi afs use saree AU (734-12, Bat, He 4) tis kee mahimaa ki-aa varnee-ai jis kai hirdai vasi-aa har purakh bhagvaan. ||1]|
How can his glory be described? Within his heart, the Primal Lord, the Lord God,
abides. ||1]|
dfs qe wet He ote Afsag ate fiers wan FHS i (734-13, wet, Hs 4)
govind gun gaa-ee-ai jee-o laa-ay satguroo naal Dhi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; focus your meditation on the True Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
A Afsag A AS Afsae at Aes od fAA S ure usH fears I (734-13, wet, Hs 4) so satguroo saa Sayvaa satgur kee safal hai jis tay paa-ee-ai param niDhaan. He is the True Guru - service to the True Guru is fruitful and rewarding. By this service, the greatest treasure is obtained.
Aen oe Aas THs uefa gaau Adee A fSeges Ag vifamirs iI (734-14, At, He 4) jo doojai bhaa-ay saakat kaamnaa arath durganDh sarayvday so nihfal sabh agi-aan.
2] | The faithless cynics in their love of duality and sensual desires, harbor foul-smelling urges. They are totally useless and ignorant. ||2||
fan 6 ussifs dé fsA or arfenr efe ue A ure Baa HIG Il (734-15, Het, ue 4) jis no parteet hovai tis kaa gaavi-aa thaa-ay pavai so paavai dargeh maan. One who has faith - his singing is approved. He is honored in the Court of the Lord.
A fag usstst auet ast ast unt ize Ca a Cate wear So TTS NSM (734-16, Fat, Hs 4)
jo bin parteetee kaptee koorhee koorhee akhee meetday un kaa utar jaa-igaa jhooth gumaan. ||3]|
Those who lack faith may close their eyes, hypocritically pretending and faking devotion, but their false pretenses shall soon wear off. ||3]|
na mG fiz Ag 3a F vist usy sa|G Il (734-17, et, Hs 4)
jaytaa jee-o pind sabh tayraa too” antarjaamee purakh bhagvaan.
My soul and body are totally Yours, Lord; You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, my Primal Lord God.
GAS TH Ad AS Soa AT F aaleta sa aS at Sftmrge ususnvai (734-17, wet, ws 4) daasan daas kahai jan naanak jayhaa too™ karaa-ihi tayhaa ha-o karee vakhi-aan. 4141 ]211]
So speaks servant Nanak, the slave of Your slaves; as You make me speak, so do I speak. ||4||4||11]|
UST Bu
Hot HIG 8 WT D (735-1) soohee mehlaa 4 ghar 7 Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (735-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3d azo ao Te afe af are gy Atos Tat foarar il (735-2, Het, He 4)
tayray kavan kavan gun kahi kahi gaavaa too saahib gunee niDhaanaa.
Which, which of Your Glorious Virtues should I sing and recount, Lord? You are my Lord and Master, the treasure of excellence.
Sut fot wale 5 AAG F oaT SU SASS AU (735-2, Feat, He 4)
tumree mahimaa baran na saaka-o too” thaakur ooch bhagvaanaa. ||1||
I cannot express Your Glorious Praises. You are my Lord and Master, lofty and benevolent. ||1]|
A ofe ofa ou oa Het il (735-3, wet, us 4) mai har har naam Dhar so-ee. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my only support.
fa sre f38 ay AS Afoe HSS fae neg o aet NAN TIC I (735-3, wat, He 4) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh mayray saahib mai tujh bin avar na ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. If it pleases You, please save me, O my Lord and Master; without You, I have no other at all. ||1]|Pause| |
H se thre 3d He Aum Hg wrat mfserth I (735-4, wet, He 4)
mai taan deebaan toohai mayray su-aamee mai tuDh aagai ardaas.
You alone are my strength, and my Court, O my Lord and Master; unto You alone I pray.
Hog a arnt faa ufs as@ Fst Na ey AY 3S St uta MQM (735-4, At, He 4) mai hor thaa-o naahee jis peh kara-o baynantee mayraa dukh sukh tujh hee paas.
[2] | There is no other place where I can offer my prayers; I can tell my pains and pleasures only to You. ||2||
fed cast fed urat fefa ane nrafe odte II (735-5, at, He 4) vichay Dhartee vichay paanee vich kaasat agan Dhareejai. Water is locked up in the earth, and fire is locked up in wood.
woet fy fears af oe uo ofe wf gH 38 ofa aA ISI (735-6, Fat, Hs 4)
bakree singh iktai thaa-ay raakhay man har jap bharam bha-o door keejai. ||3]| The sheep and the lions are kept in one place; O mortal, meditate on the Lord, and your doubts and fears shall be removed. ||3]|
ofa at efsuret tug Hag dfs fourfanr wre See I (735-6, et, us 4)
har kee vadi-aa-ee daykhhu santahu har nimaani-aa maan dayvaa-ay.
So behold the glorious greatness of the Lord, O Saints; the Lord blesses the dishonored with honor.
fA aest vee 38 3 Gufs ore (SE soa WU Aa AAS fe Ag UST US ISNUIII (735-7, Hot, He 4)
ji-o Dhartee charan talay tay oopar aavai ti-o naanak saaDh janaa jagat aan sabh pairee paa-ay. ||4]|1||12]|
As dust rises from underfoot, O Nanak, so does the Lord make all people fall at the feet of the Holy. ||4]|1]|12]]|
Hot HIS Il (735-8)
soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
3 aos Ag fas wm wets fomr sg ufs wef Here I (735-8, Fat, Hs 4) too” kartaa sabh kichh aapay jaaneh ki-aa tuDh peh aakh sunaa-ee-ai. You Yourself, O Creator, know everything; what can I possibly tell You?
aw so 30 Ag fag AS AT aA as ST UEMH INA (735-9, Het, He 4) buraa bhalaa tuDh sabh kichh soojhai jayhaa ko karay tayhaa ko paa-ee-ai. ||1]| You know all the bad and the good; as we act, so are we rewarded. ||1]||
Ae Afva J visa of fafa Aveta i (735-9, wet, He 4) mayray saahib too” antar kee biDh jaaneh. O my Lord and Master, You alone know the state of my inner being.
aw so 3y Ag fas AS 30 ae fe greta NU TIS I (735-10, Ft, we 4) buraa bhalaa tuDh sabh kichh soojhai tuDh bhaavai tivai bulaaveh. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You know all the bad and the good; as it pleases You, so You make us speak. ||1]|Pause| |
Ag Hg Wher Ade afe dior fefe Sct wey sats aaret Il (735-10, wet, He 4)
sabh moh maa-i-aa sareer har kee-aa vich dayhee maanukh bhagat karaa-ee.
The Lord has infused the love of Maya into all bodies; through this human body, there comes the opportunity to worship the Lord with devotion.
feas Afsag Hf Ay tefo fefa Houfe do fueret 2H (735-11, Bt, He 4)
iknaa satgur mayl sukh dayveh ik manmukh DhanDh pitaa-ee. ||2| |
You unite some with the True Guru, and bless them with peace; while others, the self- willed manmukhs, are engrossed in worldly affairs. ||2||
Ag a 3a 3 Asa a Hs ass 30 Asa ffs fefimr Sy i (735-12, wat, Hs 4)
sabh ko tayraa too” sabhnaa kaa mayray kartay tuDh sabhnaa sir likhi-aa laykh.
All belong to You, and You belong to all, O my Creator Lord; You wrote the words of destiny on the forehead of everyone.
Ad J sefe asta Sa a de fag sect ard A Sy WSN (735-12, at, Hs 4)
jayhee too” nadar karahi tayhaa ko hovai bin nadree naahee ko bhaykh. ||3]|
As You bestow Your Glance of Grace, so are mortals made; without Your Gracious Glance, no one assumes any form. ||3]|
Sct sfuret 3d wets As 30s fos fore i (735-13, wat, oe 4) tayree vadi-aa-ee too‘hai jaaneh sabh tuDhno nit Dhi-aa-ay. You alone know Your Glorious Greatness; everyone constantly meditates on You.
fAR 3 30 Se fSn S FS Hale Ae Soa A aS US USNINII (735-14, Feat, Hs 4)
jis no tuDh bhaavai tis no too’ mayleh jan naanak so thaa-ay paa-ay. ||4]|2||13]| That being, with whom You are pleased, is united with You; O servant Nanak, only such a mortal is accepted. ||4]|2||13]|
Hot HIS 8 Il (735-14) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
faa & nists efhor Aa ofe ofa fo & Afs Fa ASS Ih (735-15, Fat, ue 4)
jin kai antar vasi-aa mayraa har har tin kay sabh rog gavaa-ay.
Those beings, within whose inner selves my Lord, Har, Har, dwells - all their diseases are cured.
3 Has 3 fas afa om fomrfenr faq ules usH UE UTS IAI (735-15, Bet, He 4)
tay mukat bha-ay jin har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tin pavit param pad paa-ay. ||1]|
They alone become liberated, who meditate on the Name of the Lord; they obtain the supreme status. ||1]||
AS IH dfs Ae mise SS ll (735-16, wet, us 4) mayray raam har jan aarog bha-ay. O my Lord, the Lord's humble servants become healthy.
Td aeSt fro Afr As fe afs fso aA IEH Fa Te Al TIS I (735-16, wet, Hs 4)
gur bachnee jinaa japi-aa mayraa har har tin kay ha-umai rog ga-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who meditate on my Lord, Har, Har, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, are rid of the disease of ego. ||1||Pause] |
gun fang Hoe 3 Te dail fefs IBH ara aHret I (735-17, Feat, He 4)
barahmaa bisan mahaaday-o tarai gun rogee vich ha-umai kaar kamaa-ee. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva suffer from the disease of the three gunas - the three qualities; they do their deeds in egotism.
fafs ate fsnfa o safe sus afe genta Ast uret QI (735-18, wt, He 4)
jin kee-ay tiseh na cheeteh bapurhay har gurmukh sojhee paa-ee. ||2||
The poor fools do not remember the One who created them; this understanding of the Lord is only obtained by those who become Gurmukh. ||2]|
J@H dfa Ag Has famrfimr feo AB HOH HeS FY SH Il (735-18, Fat, He 4)
ha-umai rog sabh jagat bi-aapi-aa tin ka-o janam maran dukh bhaaree.
The entire world is afflicted by the disease of egotism. They suffer the terrible pains of birth and death.
Uast D3 qs ust & fea se A Ae As IE afsaet WSN (736-1, et, He 4)
gur parsaadee ko virlaa chhootai tis jan ka-o ha-o balihaaree. ||3]|| By Guru's Grace, a few rare ones are saved; I am a sacrifice to those humble beings.
131] fate frafe Ast Het afe wre St aT TU Rus Il (736-2, wet, He 4)
jin sisat saajee so-ee har jaanai taa kaa roop apaaro. The One who created the Universe, that Lord alone knows. His beauty is incomparable.
oad nm af ofe fran qoute gon sted ISISNISI (736-2, Hat, He 4)
naanak aapay vaykh har bigsai gurmukh barahm beechaaro. ||4||3||14||
O Nanak, the Lord Himself gazes upon it, and is pleased. The Gurmukh contemplates God. ||4]|3] [141]
Hot HIS 8 Il (736-3) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ats age Hoa sret fos atte A afa Aeth II (736-3, wt, He 4)
keetaa karnaa sarab rajaa-ee kichh keechai jay kar sakee-ai.
All that happens, and all that will happen, is by His Will. If we could do something by ourselves, we would.
nus ater fas 5 Je fAS fs sre FE Taha wal (736-3, wet, Hs 4) aapnaa keetaa kichhoo na hovai ji-o har bhaavai ti-o rakhee-ai. ||1]| By ourselves, we cannot do anything at all. As it pleases the Lord, He preserves us.
[21 |
Ae ofs HE Ag ax 3d SAA II (736-4, At, He 4) mayray har jee-o sabh ko tayrai vas. O my Dear Lord, everything is in Your power.
WAT Hg ond A fae afs mH We fA ae fSe sufA NAN TIS Il (736-4, Het, He 4) asaa jor naahee jay kichh kar ham saakah ji-o bhaavai tivai bakhas. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have no power to do anything at all. As it pleases You, You forgive us. ||1]|Pause] |
Ag He fis dor 3g wm 3g mm ard orfemr I (736-5, Bat, He 4) sabh jee-o pind dee-aa tuDh aapay tuDh aapay kaarai laa-i-aa. You Yourself bless us with soul, body and everything. You Yourself cause us to act.
Ad J ISH aes 33 A AH SHS AT 30 Ofe fot ws lM (736-6, Fat, Hs 4) jayhaa too’ hukam karahi tayhay ko karam kamaavai jayhaa tuDh Dhur likh paa-i-aa. 2] |
As You issue Your Commands, so do we act, according to our pre-ordained destiny.
[121] us 33 afe 30 fkafe AS At aet 2a afee A fae atest TS It (736-6, wet, He 4)
panch tat kar tuDh sarisat sabh saajee ko-ee chhayvaa kari-o jay kichh keetaa hovai. You created the entire Universe out of the five elements; if anyone can create a sixth, let him.
feas Afsag dfs 3 asrefs fefa Houfa aafa fA FS SI (736-7, Ft, He 4)
iknaa satgur mayl too” bujhaaveh ik manmukh karahi se rovai. ||3]|
You unite some with the True Guru, and cause them to understand, while others, the self-willed manmukhs, do their deeds and cry out in pain. |[3]|
har kee vadi-aa-ee ha-o aakh na saakaa ha-o moorakh mugaDh neechaan. I cannot describe the glorious greatness of the Lord; I am foolish, thoughtless, idiotic and lowly.
We ood a@ ofe suf & HS Amt Ageafs ufsMr miATS IBISIIUIEIl (736-8, At, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har bakhas lai mayray su-aamee sarnaagat pa-i-aa ajaan.
[14] 14] ]15] [241]
Please, forgive servant Nanak, O my Lord and Master; I am ignorant, but I have entered Your Sanctuary. ||4]|4]|15]|24||
TH Ast HIS U We A (736-10) raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsara YATE Il (736-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aitafs AA ast uret i (736-11, gat, ue 5) baajeegar jaisay baajee paa-ee. The actor stages the play,
oer gu sy feawret il (736-11, gat, 48 5) naanaa roop bhaykh dikhlaa-ee. playing the many characters in different costumes;
Aa Gate aS urarar ii (736-11, wet, 42 5) saa‘g utaar thami"a-o paasaaraa. but when the play ends, he takes off the costumes,
3a Sa SAKAI WAU (736-11, wat, He 5) tab ayko aykankaaraa. ||1]| and then he is one, and only one. ||1]|
aee gu fentes faartes i (736-12, Fat, H2 5) kavan roop daristi-o binsaa-i-o. How many forms and images appeared and disappeared?
asts aes 6g as 3 orfeS ua sIS it (736-12, wet, v8 5) kateh ga-i-o uho kat tay aa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Where have they gone? Where did they come from? ||1]||Pause] |
me 3 Gots nifoax Sdar Il (736-13, Het, Hs 5) jal tay ootheh anik tarangaa. Countless waves rise up from the water.
asa SUS AS AT Fa Il (736-13, Het, Hs 5) kanik bhookhan keenay baho rangaa. Jewels and ornaments of many different forms are fashioned from gold.
ata aif efuG ag ugara il (736-13, wet, us 5) beej beej daykhi-o baho parkaaraa. I have seen seeds of all kinds being planted
SB UTA JF SAAS MII (736-13, at, we 5) fal paakay tay aykankaaraa. ||2]| - when the fruit ripens, the seeds appear in the same form as the original. ||2||
AdA wet Hf Sa MATA Il (736-14, Wet, He 5) sahas ghataa meh ayk aakaas. The one sky is reflected in thousands of water jugs,
we Se 3 Cot YarA Il (736-14, At, HE 5) ghat footay tay ohee pargaas. but when the jugs are broken, only the sky remains.
SdH BS Ha Htfemr fears Il (736-14, wat, He 5) bharam lobh moh maa-i-aa vikaar. Doubt comes from greed, emotional attachment and the corruption of Maya.
~*~
GH se 3 SAT ISI (736-15, Hat, Hs 5) bharam chhootay tay aykankaar. ||3]|| Freed from doubt, one realizes the One Lord alone. ||3]|
6g uifsot fasrs ardt i (736-15, wat, He 5) oh abhinaasee binsat naahee. He is imperishable; He will never pass away.
OT at MTS ST A Aa Il (736-15, Fat, He 5) naa ko aavai naa ko jaahee. He does not come, and He does not go.
Gifs us TBH Hw Tet Il (736-16, Fat, Hs 5) gur poorai ha-umai mal Dho-ee. The Perfect Guru has washed away the filth of ego.
aT aod Het usn afs Tet wsiail (736-16, wat, 4 5) kaho naanak mayree param gat ho-ee. ||4]|1]| Says Nanak, I have obtained the supreme status. ||4]|1]|
Hot HIS U Il (736-16)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
atst Bafa A ys dE Il (736-16, at, He 5) keetaa lorheh so parabh ho-ay. Whatever God wills, that alone happens.
35 fag gar ardt ae i (736-17, Feat, Hs 5) tujh bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. Without You, there is no other at all.
WHO Ae (SA uss AH Il (736-17, Ae, He 5) jo jan sayvay tis pooran kaaj. The humble being serves Him, and so all his works are perfectly successful.
OA nus at IAT BA MAU (736-17, wat, Hs 5) daas apunay kee raakho laaj. ||1]| O Lord, please preserve the honor of Your slaves. ||1]|
sot nafs use efenrer il (736-18, Fat, 8 5) tayree saran pooran da-i-aalaa. I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect, Merciful Lord.
33 fag age ad ufsurar dil FITS Il (736-18, wet, ue 5) tujh bin kavan karay partipaalaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without You, who would cherish and love me? ||1||Pause| |
me ate Hobos sfour saute i (736-18, Het, He 5) jal thal mahee-al rahi-aa bharpoor. He is permeating and pervading the water, the land and the sky.
foafe =A ardt us fe il (736-19, Hat, He 5) nikat vasai naahee parabh door. God dwells near at hand; He is not far away.
Ba USS AEB UTE Il (736-19, Het, we 5) lok patee-aarai kachhoo na paa-ee-di. By trying to please other people, nothing is accomplished.
Afs wat St TBH ASM III (736-19, Bet, He 5) saach lagai taa ha-umai jaa-ee-ai. | |2| | When someone is attached to the True Lord, his ego is taken away. ||2||
USl 93BD
fan 6 ofe we A Bred I (737-1, Fat, He 5) jis no laa-ay la-ay so laagai. He alone is attached, whom the Lord Himself attaches.
fame ase nista fsa Ara Il (737-1, At, He 5) gi-aan ratan antar tis jaagai. The jewel of spiritual wisdom is awakened deep within.
Tons Ate UsH UE UTES Il (737-1, Fat, He 5) durmat jaa-ay param pad paa-ay. Evil-mindedness is eradicated, and the supreme status is attained.
Td USAT OH forreS SI (737-2, Fat, He 5) gur parsaadee naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
efe ag afs ag meet il (737-2, gat, ne 5) du-ay kar jorh kara-o ardaas. Pressing my palms together, I offer my prayer;
3o ae ot nrefa THA II (737-2, Fat, He 5) tuDh bhaavai taa aaneh raas. if it pleases You, Lord, please bless me and fulfill me.
afd fasur must sarst Otel (737-3, wet, Hs 5) kar kirpaa apnee bhagtee laa-ay. Grant Your Mercy, Lord, and bless me with devotion.
Ao sa YS Ae fowrfe sii (737-3, wet, ws 5) jan naanak parabh sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. ||4]|2|| Servant Nanak meditates on God forever. ||4||2] |
Hot Hos U Il (737-4)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ug Aas At Ys UES Il (737-4, Fat, He 5) Dhan sohaagan jo parabhoo pachhaanai. Blessed is that soul-bride, who realizes God.
HS JR SH MSHS Il (737-4, wat, He 5) maanai hukam tajai abhimaanai. She obeys the Hukam of His Order, and abandons her self-conceit.
finn fA ast seer HS WAU (737-4, Bat, He 5) pari-a si-o raatee ralee-aa maanai. ||1|| Imbued with her Beloved, she celebrates in delight. ||1]|
Afs Ate ys foe starsat il (737-5, Fat, He 5) sun sakhee-ay parabh milan neesaanee. Listen, O my companions - these are the signs on the Path to meet God.
He 36 mafu sf oA Barat uA TIC Il (737-5, wat, He 5) man tan arap taj laaj lokaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Dedicate your mind and body to Him; stop living to please others. ||1]||Pause] |
Fat HISt AB ANSTS Il (737-6, Het, Hs 5) sakhee sahaylee ka-o samjhaavai. One soul-bride counsels another,
Het are FH YS BS ll (737-6, wt, ue 5) so-ee kamaavai jo parabh bhaavai. to do only that which pleases God.
AT Havas nif AHS MQM (737-6, Wet, He 5) saa sohagan ank samaavai. ||2]| Such a soul-bride merges into the Being of God. ||2]|
Tafa qTIat HIG B US Il (737-6, wet, us 5) garab gahaylee mahal na paavai. One who is in the grip of pride does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
fefs ugare wa of= fae i (737-7, Bet, Hi 5) fir pachhutaavai jab rain bihaavai. She regrets and repents, when her life-night passes away.
aaHSs Houfe Fy urs BI (737-7, Bet, He 5) karamheen manmukh dukh paavai. ||3]| The unfortunate self-willed manmukhs suffer in pain. ||3]|
fasS adt # Aver Efe Il (737-8, Fat, He 5) bin-o karee jay jaanaa door. I pray to God, but I think that He is far away.
ys nifaat stom saufa i (737-8, get, 12 5) parabh abhinaasee rahi-aa bharpoor. God is imperishable and eternal; He is pervading and permeating everywhere.
We HSA We Vf Tefs sisi (737-8, At, we 5) jan naanak gaavai daykh hadoor. ||4]|3]| Servant Nanak sings of Him; I see Him Ever-present everywhere. ||4]|3]|
Hot HIS U Il (737-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fag sf afs ata 38 we at ate il (737-9, At, He 5)
garihu vas gur keenaa ha-o ghar kee naar.
The Giver has put this household of my being under my own control. I am now the mistress of the Lord's Home.
oA oHt ats cat sats Il (737-9, At, Hs 5) das daasee kar deenee bhataar. My Husband Lord has made the ten senses and organs of actions my slaves.
Hans AHat H we at wet i (737-9, wat, 48 5) Sagal samagree mai ghar kee jorhee. I have gathered together all the faculties and facilities of this house.
wir fumrat fus xB Sst wal (737-10, wet, us 5) aas pi-aasee pir ka-o lorhee. ||1]| I am thirsty with desire and longing for my Husband Lord. ||1]|
RG AT TS AS furs It (737-10, Feat, ue 5) kavan kahaa gun kant pi-aaray. What Glorious Virtues of my Beloved Husband Lord should I describe?
Hus Agu fens HIST UU TIS Il (737-10, Fat, we 5)
sugharh saroop da-i-aal muraaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He is All-knowing, totally beautiful and merciful; He is the Destroyer of ego. ||1]|Pause| |
AS Alters 3@ ning urfeor it (737-11, Fat, 48 5)
sat seegaar bha-o anjan paa-i-aa.
I am adorned with Truth, and I have applied the mascara of the Fear of God to my eyes.
nifys on See yf ufeor i (737-11, wt, ne 5) amrit naam tambol mukh khaa-i-aa. I have chewed the betel-leaf of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
AIS FAS WIS FS ATS Il (737-12, Wet, uz 5) kangan bastar gahnay banay suhaavay. My bracelets, robes and ornaments beautifully adorn me.
U6 AS AY ure A fug whe mS HQI (737-12, Bet, He 5)
Dhan sabh sukh paavai jaa” pir ghar aavai. ||2||
The soul-bride becomes totally happy, when her Husband Lord comes to her home. [21]
Te WHE afe as stsrfenr | (737-12, wet, ue 5)
gun kaaman kar kant reejhaa-i-aa.
By the charms of virtue, I have enticed and fascinated my Husband Lord. afm ats ato afs sau garfenr Il (737-13, Fat, He 5)
vas kar leenaa gur bharam chukaa-i-aa. He is under my power - the Guru has dispelled my doubts.
As 3 Gor Heg AS Il (737-13, wat, He 5) sabh tay oochaa mandar mayraa. My mansion is lofty and elevated.
AS oHfe fsuratt fyS YtSH As USI (737-13, Ft, He 5) sabh kaaman ti-aagee pari-o pareetam mayraa. ||3]| Renouncing all other brides, my Beloved has become my lover. ||3]|
yafent Ag ats Bebra it (737-14, wet, Hs 5) pargati-aa soor jot ujee-aaraa. The sun has risen, and its light shines brightly.
Ad feeret Aaa wera | (737-14, Fat, He 5) sayj vichhaa-ee saraDh apaaraa. I have prepared my bed with infinite care and faith.
Oe Sa WS AA Tee nrfEnr ih (737-15, wt, ve 5) nav rang laal sayj raavan aa-i-aa. My Darling Beloved is new and fresh; He has come to my bed to enjoy me.
Ao ated fus os ffs AY ufenr Iss (737-15, Fat, Hs 5)
jan naanak pir Dhan mil sukh paa-i-aa. ||4||4]|
O Servant Nanak, my Husband Lord has come; the soul-bride has found peace. [41141
Hot HIS U Il (737-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Cufas He fra ys Set i (737-16, Fat, He 5) umki-o hee-o milan parabh taa-ee. An intense yearning to meet God has welled up in my heart.
das sfae Su fina wet i (737-16, wt, He 5)
khojat chari-o daykh-a-u pari-a jaa-ee.
I have gone out searching to find my Beloved Husband Lord. Hos AeA finn fafa AA feeret i (737-16, wet, us 5)
sunat sadaysro pari-a garihi sayj vichhaa-ee. Hearing news of my Beloved, I have laid out my bed in my home.
oft gf ures 38 sefs o uret IAI (737-17, Bet, He 5) bharam bharam aa-i-o ta-o nadar na paa-ee. ||1|| Wandering, wandering all around, I came, but I did not even see Him. |[1]|
fare fafr Shas ats fens i (737-17, wt, He 5) kin biDh hee-aro Dheerai nimaano. How can this poor heart be comforted?
fie AH JE 35 ITS NU TIC i (737-17, wet, us 5) mil saajan ha-o tujh kurbaano. ||1|| rahaa-o. Come and meet me, O Friend; I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause| |
Sal Aa feet Us XS Il (737-18, wet, He 5) aykaa sayj vichhee Dhan kantaa. One bed is spread out for the bride and her Husband Lord.
uo Ast fug Ae AST Il (737-18, et, Hs 5) Dhan sootee pir sad jaagantaa. The bride is asleep, while her Husband Lord is always awake.
Ul HES US HSSSe Il (737-18, wt, He 5) pee-o madro Dhan matvantaa. The bride is intoxicated, as if she has drunk wine.
Ue Wat A fg SSS MMI (737-19, Fat, He 5) Dhan jaagai jay pir bolantaa. ||2|| The soul-bride only awakens when her Husband Lord calls to her. ||2||
set foaAt sos feo wat Il (737-19, Fdt, He 5) bha-ee niraasee bahut din laagay. She has lost hope - so many days have passed.
2A feHsa H Aas Sra il (737-19, wet, ue 5) days disantar mai saglay jhaagay. I have travelled through all the lands and the countries.
UST oBt
fis JIG 3 USE fag ua Ura Il (738-1, et, He 5) khin rahan na paava-o bin pag paagay. I cannot survive, even for an instant, without the feet of my Beloved.
fe furs ys fsa Asa SI (738-1, dt, He 5) ho-ay kirpaal parabh milah sabhaagay. ||3]|| When God becomes Merciful, I become fortunate, and then I meet Him. ||3]|
ste faurs ASAfa fHerfemr i (738-1, Fat, Hs 5) bha-i-o kirpaal satsang milaa-i-aa. Becoming Merciful, He has united me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ast sufs wate fug ufemr i (738-2, get, 12 5)
boojhee tapat ghareh pir paa-i-aa.
The fire has been quenched, and I have found my Husband Lord within my own home.
Hae Atarg gfe usta Hofer | (738-2, wet, He 5) Sagal seegaar hun mujheh suhaa-i-aa. I am now adorned with all sorts of decorations.
ag soa dfs sdH yarfenr sil (738-2, wat, Hs 5) kaho naanak gur bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||4]| Says Nanak, the Guru has dispelled my doubt. ||4||
Ag tur sg fg J set I (738-3, wat, He 5) jah daykhaa tah pir hai bhaa-ee. Wherever I look, I see my Husband Lord there, O Siblings of Destiny.
aes aure St HG STITT NU TIS SAT UI (738-3, Wet, Hs 5) khol"i-o kapaat taa man thahraa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||5|| When the door is opened, then the mind is restrained. ||1]||Second Pause] |5| |
Hot HIS U Il (738-4) soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
foor ae 33 Afs ANTS Hfo fesse X BSS Il (738-4, wet, He 5)
ki-aa gun tayray saar sam"aalee mohi nirgun kay daataaray.
What virtues and excellences of Yours should I cherish and contemplate? I am worthless, while You are the Great Giver.
a udte four ad ssoet feg at€ fills AS aS NI (738-4, Het, He 5)
bai khareed ki-aa karay chaturaa-ee ih jee-o pind sabh thaaray. ||1]||
I am Your slave - what clever tricks could I ever try? This soul and body are totally Yours||1]|
ws dale ulSu HoHdS 3a PIAS AC IN Bs AU TI'S Il (738-5, wat, He 5)
laal rangeelay pareetam manmohan tayray darsan ka-o ham baaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O my Darling, Blissful Beloved, who fascinates my mind - I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1||Pause||
ys wat dfs de Sudt SH Ae Ae Guard Il (738-6, wt, ue 5)
parabh daataa mohi deen bhaykhaaree tum" sadaa sadaa upkaaray.
O God, You are the Great Giver, and I am just a poor beggar; You are forever and ever benevolent.
A fag ant fa WS TS NT SAT MAM MRT III (738-6, At, He 5)
so kichh naahee je mai tay hovai mayray thaakur agam apaaray. ||2||
I cannot accomplish anything by myself, O my Unapproachable and Infinite Lord and Master. ||2]|
fom Ag AHS fomr ats disre fafa fag urs aA I (738-7, wet, He 5)
ki-aa sayv kamaava-o ki-aa kahi reejhaava-o biDh kit paava-o darsaaray.
What service can I perform? What should I say to please You? How can I gain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan?
ffs adt ut nig 3 adh He SdH Baas ISI (738-7, Fat, He 5) mit nahee paa-ee-ai ant na lahee-ai man tarsai charnaaray. ||3]||
Your extent cannot be found - Your limits cannot be found. My mind longs for Your Feet. ||3]|
ure@ we dle df nae yfy acl AS Sas Il (738-8, wet, He 5)
paava-o daan dheeth ho-ay maaga-o mukh laagai sant raynaaray.
I beg with persistence to receive this gift, that the dust of the Saints might touch my face.
Ao aoa aS ats faa ot ufs me efe feAss silell (738-9, Ft, He 5)
jan naanak ka-o gur kirpaa Dhaaree parabh haath day-ay nistaaray. ||4||6]||
The Guru has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; reaching out with His Hand, God has delivered him. ||4]|6||
Hot Hos U We 3 (738-10)
soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (738-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ae Gat Hae ATS Il (738-11, Fat, ue 5) sayvaa thoree maagan bahutaa. His service is insignificant, but his demands are very great.
HIG 3 US ATS UTS NA (738-11, wet, He 5)
mahal na paavai kahto pahutaa. ||1||
He does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, but he says that he has arrived there||1||
A finn ue fae at Shr i (738-11, get, He 5) jo pari-a maanay tin kee reesaa. He competes with those who have been accepted by the Beloved Lord.
IS YTe at TSA AU TITS il (738-11, Fat, H2 5) koorhay moorakh kee haatheesaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is how stubborn the false fool is! ||1]|Pause| |
au fears AY B AHS Il (738-12, wt, He 5) bhaykh dikhaavai sach na kamaavai. He wears religious robes, but he does not practice Truth.
AIS Hat foafe e mrs QU (738-12, Fat, ue 5)
kahto mahlee nikat na aavai. ||2| |
He says that he has found the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, but he cannot even get near it. ||2]|
misty Reve yfEnit ar HST Il (738-12, Wet, 2 5) ateet sadaa-ay maa-i-aa kaa maataa. He says that he is unattached, but he is intoxicated with Maya.
fs oct uifs ad yf ast BH (738-13, Fat, He 5) man nahee pareet kahai mukh raataa. ||3]| There is no love in his mind, and yet he says that he is imbued with the Lord. ||3]|
ag soa us fas Hate Il (738-13, At, He 5) kaho naanak parabh bin-o suneejai. Says Nanak, hear my prayer, God:
TIS FST Ht Has ate gil (738-13, wet, ne 5) kuchal kathor kaamee mukat keejai. ||4|| I am silly, stubborn and filled with sexual desire - please, liberate me! ||4||
TAS TY at Sfsniret |i (738-14, Wet, He 5) darsan daykhay kee vadi-aa-ee. I gaze upon the glorious greatness of the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
3H AYES usd HaTet HA Tare er IVI (738-14, Ast, He 5) tum" sukh-daatay purakh subhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||1||7]| You are the Giver of Peace, the Loving Primal Being. ||1]||Second Pause] |1]|7| |
Hot HIS U Il (738-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
gs oH a Cle wsfenr it (738-15, Fat, Hs 5) buray kaam ka-o ooth khalo-i-aa. He gets up early, to do his evil deeds,
OH at Ser UU Afer ail (738-15, Fat, He 5) naam kee baylaa pai pai so-i-aa. ||1]| but when it is time to meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, then he sleeps.
[21
MBA nust FS 3 fens i (738-16, wet, Hs 5) a-osar apnaa boojhai na i-aanaa. The ignorant person does not take advantage of the opportunity.
Her Ha sar wu|Tsr AU TIE il (738-16, Fat, ue 5) maa-i-aa moh rang laptaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is attached to Maya, and engrossed in worldly delights. ||1]|Pause| |
Bs Bale aS feat sf For i (738-16, Fat, Hs 5) lobh lahar ka-o bigas fool baithaa. He rides the waves of greed, puffed up with joy.
AY HO oT edJH O BIST HII (738-17, Hot, He 5) saaDh janaa kaa daras na deethaa. ||2]| He does not see the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy. ||2| |
TAT B ANS vifamirg Tes Il (738-17, et, we 5) kabhoo na samjhai agi-aan gavaaraa. The ignorant clown will never understand.
aofs safe wufe HATS NA TIS Al (738-17, wet, He 5) bahur bahur lapti-o janjaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Again and again, he becomes engrossed in entanglements. ||1]||Pause| |
fred ore age Af= Stat Il (738-18, Wet, He 5) bikhai naad karan sun bheenaa. He listens to the sounds of sin and the music of corruption, and he is pleased.
dfs FA Hos MOA Hie ator SI (738-18, Fat, He 5) har jas sunat aalas man keenaa. ||3]|| His mind is too lazy to listen to the Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
fenfe odt J Uys vit il (738-19, get, He 5) darisat naahee ray paykhat anDhay. You do not see with your eyes - you are so blind!
efs ws 33 Afs Uo NU TIS ll (738-19, Fat, Hs 5) chhod jaahi jhoothay sabh DhanDhay. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall have to leave all these false affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
AT Sst US HA ASA I (738-19, wt, ue 5) kaho naanak parabh bakhas kareejai. Says Nanak, please forgive me, God.
Ua oat
afs fas Hfs Arora eA ell (739-1, wet, He 5)
kar kirpaa mohi saaDhsang deejai. ||4||
Have Mercy upon me, and bless me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. [141]
38 fas uta Ae Teh For Il (739-1, get, He 5) ta-o kichh paa-ee-ai ja-o ho-ee-ai raynaa. He alone obtains something, who becomes the dust under the feet of all.
fants gsr fH oN Bar NU! TIS WINCH (739-1, Fat, He 5) jisahi bujhaa-ay tis naam lainaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. ||2||8]| And he alone repeats the Naam, whom God causes to understand. ||1||Pause]|2]|8]|
Hot HIS U Il (739-2)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
we Hfs Sag Sets o mS I (739-2, Bet, He 5) ghar meh thaakur nadar na aavai. Within the home of his own self, he does not even come to see his Lord and Master.
as ufo ude B Bears IA (739-2, Het, ue 5) gal meh paahan lai latkaavai. ||1]| And yet, around his neck, he hangs a stone god. ||1||
SIH Fo AAS fEgst il (739-3, wet, we 5) bharmay bhoolaa saakat firtaa. The faithless cynic wanders around, deluded by doubt.
alg fase uf ufu Hest nan Tae i (739-3, wet, ne 5) neer birolai khap khap martaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He churns water, and after wasting his life away, he dies. ||1]||Pause| |
fA UTE AE SAT ATS Il (739-3, wet, us 5) jis paahan ka-o thaakur kahtaa. That stone, which he calls his god,
6g uve & CA AG SHS II (739-4, Fat, Hs 5) oh paahan lai us ka-o dubtaa. ||2| | that stone pulls him down and drowns him. ||2||
TIM SE TIM Il (739-4, Het, we 5) gunahgaar loon haraamee. O sinner, you are untrue to your own self;
UTE BSB USfaant iB (739-4, wet, ue 5) paahan naav na paargiramee. ||3]|| a boat of stone will not carry you across. ||3]|
ad ffs aoa SAT AST Il (739-5, Fat, He 5) gur mil naanak thaakur jaataa. Meeting the Guru, O Nanak, I know my Lord and Master.
me ate Hobe use feast SSI (739-5, Het, H2 5)
jal thal mahee-al pooran biDhaataa. ||4]|3]|9|| The Perfect Architect of Destiny is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky. ||4]|3]]9]|
Hot HIG U Il (739-6)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
WS Tent xeo ast ct il (739-6, wet, ws 5) laalan raavi-aa kavan gatee ree. How have you enjoyed your Dear Beloved?
Ret asteg HBfo HSt st UA (739-6, Bat, Hs 5) sakhee bataavhu mujheh matee ree. ||1]| O sister, please teach me, please show me. ||1]|
Hua Hoe Avet il mus UlsH & sfar Fst uA TIS i (739-6, wet, we 5)
soohab soohab soohvee. apnay pareetam kai rang ratee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Crimson, crimson, crimson - this is the color of the soul-bride who is imbued with the Love of her Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
ure HOSE fat So sate Il (739-7, wet, us 5) paav malova-o sang nain bhateeree. I wash Your Feet with my eye-lashes.
Ast usted AG sat FH QM (739-7, wet, ws 5) jahaa pathaavhu jaa™-o tatee ree. ||2|| Wherever You send me, there I will go. ||2||
AU 3u AAH 2 Ast St Il (739-8, Fat, He 5) jap tap sanjam day-o jatee ree. I would trade meditation, austerity, self-discipline and celibacy,
fea fouy frareg Hfs yroust dt SI (739-8, gt, 48 5) ik nimakh milaavhu mohi paraanpatee ree. ||3]| if I could only meet the Lord of my life, for even an instant. ||3]]|
He sve mdafa gst FH il (739-8, wet, He 5) maan taan aha’-buDh hatee ree. She who eradicates her self-conceit, power and arrogant intellect,
AT aod ATaest tt sisiIoll (739-9, wet, He 5)
saa naanak sohaagvatee ree. ||4||4||10]| O Nanak, is the true soul-bride. ||4||4]|10]|
Hot Has U Il (739-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
3 ea F YS mars Il (739-9, Het, He 5) too” jeevan too™ paraan aDhaaraa. You are my Life, the very Support of my breath of life.
33 ot ufe ufe He ATaTST INA (739-10, Fat, He 5) tujh hee paykh paykh man saaDhaaraa. ||1|| Gazing upon You, beholding You, my mind is soothed and comforted. ||1||
3 AAG FS UISH As Il (739-10, et, He 5) too” saajan too” pareetam mayraa. You are my Friend, You are my Beloved.
fests 6 fansts arg Fa NAM TIS il (739-10, et, w2 5) chiteh na bisrahi kaahoo bayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I shall never forget You. ||1||Pause] |
¥ udte g@ wad 3a Il (739-11, wat, ne 5) bai khareed ha-o daasro tayraa. I am Your indentured servant; I am Your slave.
J TI SAT Tat TIT MI (739-11, Feat, Hz 5) too” bhaaro thaakur gunee gahayraa. ||2|| You are my Great Lord and Master, the treasure of excellence. ||2| |
afe aA AT a Baas Il (739-11, Wet, He 5) kot daas jaa kai darbaaray. There are millions of servants in Your Court - Your Royal Darbaar.
fore fou SA fseq Ss ISI (739-11, Fat, He 5) nimakh nimakh vasai tin” naalay. ||3]| Each and every instant, You dwell with them. ||3]|
JG fag ardt Ag fas ST Il (739-12, wat, ws 5)
ha-o kichh naahee sabh kichh tayraa. I am nothing; everything is Yours.
6fs ufs asa Afar SAS USNUNAAll (739-12, Het, He 5)
ot pot naanak sang basayraa. ||4||5||11]| Through and through, You abide with Nanak. ||4||5||11]|
Hot HIS U Il (739-13)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Ha HIG AT a CT Ems Il (739-13, wet, He 5) sookh mahal jaa kay ooch du-aaray. His Mansions are so comfortable, and His gates are so lofty.
3X yfo eats sas fumirs A (739-13, Fat, He 5) taa meh vaaseh bhagat pi-aaray. ||1]| Within them, His beloved devotees dwell. ||1]|
Hon ae ys at wits Het i (739-13, Fat, He 5) sahj kathaa parabh kee at meethee. The Natural Speech of God is so very sweet.
feos ay BIg Stet Ul TIS i (739-14, wet, Hs 5) virlai kaahoo naytarahu deethee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. How rare is that person, who sees it with his eyes. ||1]]Pause| |
3d ats Bre mars Aa il (739-14, wet, ne 5)
tah geet naad akhaaray sangaa.
There, in the arena of the congregation, the divine music of the Naad, the sound current, is sung.
Cx As asta Ths Ja NM (739-14, Fet, He 5) oohaa sant karahi har rangaa. ||2|| There, the Saints celebrate with their Lord. ||2] |
3d HIE 6 HSS AT GS TSM Il (739-15, et, Hs 5) tah maran na jeevan sog na harkhaa. Neither birth nor death is there, neither pain nor pleasure.
ATS OH at nifys Saar USI (739-15, wet, He 5) saach naam kee amrit varkhaa. ||3]| The Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name rains down there. ||3]|
dn am fer gs 3 Arat Il (739-15, wet, He 5) guhaj kathaa ih gur tay jaanee. From the Guru, I have come to know the mystery of this speech.
soe 88 ofa dfs sat usiEnIil (739-16, wet, Hs 5)
naanak bolai har har banee. ||4]|6]|12|| Nanak speaks the Bani of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]]6]|12]|
Hot HIS U Il (739-16)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Ww a wath uu afe Bars Il (739-16, Fat, ue 5) jaa kai daras paap kot utaaray. By the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, millions of sins are erased.
323 Afa fey SSAs 3ST UAL (739-17, wet, He 5) bhaytat sang ih bhavjal taaray. ||1]| Meeting with them, this terrifying world-ocean is crossed over||1] |
Gfe AMS Gfe Hts fumrs I (739-17, Fat, 8 5) O-ay Saajan o-ay meet pi-aaray. They are my companions, and they are my dear friends,
Af oH a af on fess NU TIS tl (739-17, Fat, He 5)
jo ham ka-o har naam chitaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. who inspire me to remember the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause] |
WT oT Had HOS AY Ard Il (739-18, Wet, Hs 5) jaa kaa sabad sunat sukh saaray. Hearing the Word of His Shabad, I am totally at peace.
wW at cde ANES fees 2M (739-18, Fat, He 5) jaa kee tahal jamdoot bidaaray. ||2|| When I serve Him, the Messenger of Death is chased away. ||2]|
Ww oft Ute feR Hofs AUT Il (739-18, et, Hs 5) jaa kee Dheerak is maneh saDhaaray. His comfort and consolation soothes and supports my mind.
wa fiefs wa Cree SII (739-19, Bet, He 5) jaa kai simran mukh ujlaaray. ||3|| Remembering Him in meditation, my face is radiant and bright. ||3] |
ys a Asa ufs nif Aes I (739-19, wet, He 5) parabh kay sayvak parabh aap savaaray. God embellishes and supports His servants.
Hafe sod f3q Ae afsas ISIN (739-19, Fat, Hs 5)
saran naanak tin" sad balihaaray. ||4]|7||13]| Nanak seeks the Protection of their Sanctuary; he is forever a sacrifice to them. 411711231]
UST DBO
Hot HIS U Il (740-1)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
de 6 Uefa Afs og SST Il (740-1, wat, ws 5) rahan na paavahi sur nar dayvaa. The angelic beings and demi-gods are not permitted to remain here.
Cis frars afte yf AS AST AU (740-1, Bet, He 5)
ooth siDhaaray kar mun jan sayvaa. ||1]| The silent sages and humble servants also must arise and depart. ||1]|
Aes ud fAat afe afte fimrfenr i (740-2, Fat, Hs 5) jeevat paykhay jin"ee har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Only those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, are seen to live on.
Wonfa feat Fare ufemr ua TIS il (740-2, wet, us 5)
saaDhsang tin"ee darsan paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1]]Pause| |
afeArT AS Surdt HIAT Il (740-3, Het, us 5) baadisaah saah vaapaaree marnaa. Kings, emperors and merchants must die.
A GA A oats waar II (740-3, Bet, Hs 5) jo deesai so kaaleh kharnaa. ||2|| Whoever is seen shall be consumed by death. ||2]|
as Hf wufe Buetat Il (740-3, wet, Hs 5) koorhai mohi lapat laptaanaa. Mortal beings are entangled, clinging to false worldly attachments.
efs sfouor = fefs ugsrar SII (740-4, At, He 5) chhod chali-aa taa fir pachhutaanaa. ||3]| And when they must leave them behind, then they regret and grieve. ||3]|
faut faure SSX AG ATT VTS Il (740-4, wet, ws 5) kirpaa niDhaan naanak ka-o karahu daat. O Lord, O treasure of mercy, please bless Nanak with this gift,
oH So mt feg aS NSITIASH (740-5, Fat, Hs 5) naam tayraa japee din raat. ||4||8]|14]| that he may chant Your Name, day and night. ||4||8]|14] |
Hot Hos U Il (740-5)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
we we nists sHfo SATS Il (740-5, gat, He 5) ghat ghat antar tumeh basaaray. You dwell deep within the heart of each and every being.
Has AHat AS SHS WAM (740-5, Het, He 5) Sagal Samagree soot tumaaray. ||1|| The entire universe is strung on Your Thread. ||1||
S YISH SF yrs mms I (740-6, Fat, HE 5) too” pareetam too” paraan aDhaaray. You are my Beloved, the Support of my breath of life.
3H ot ufe uf He fears NA TIE Il (740-6, wet, ue 5) tum hee paykh paykh man bigsaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Beholding You, gazing upon You, my mind blossoms forth. ||1]|Pause] |
ifs rife aft aft sft aS i (740-7, wet, He 5)
anik jon bharam bharam bharam haaray.
Wandering, wandering, wandering through countless incarnations, I have grown so weary.
Ge adt wa ATG Aas MQM (740-7, wat, He 5)
ot gahee ab saaDh sangaaray. ||2|| Now, I hold tight to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2]|
MEH MigTT wise nurs Il (740-7, wet, Hs 5) agam agochar alakh apaaray. You are inaccessible, incomprehensible, invisible and infinite.
soe fans feo sas USNC (740-8, Bet, He 5) naanak simrai din rainaaray. ||3]|9||15]| Nanak remembers You in meditation, day and night. ||3||9||15]|
Hot HIS U Il (740-8)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
AS AH Her seni i (740-8, Fat, He 5) kavan kaaj maa-i-aa vadi-aa-ee. What is the use of the glory of Maya?
Ww aG fasns aa 5 aret IA (740-8, Fat, He 5) jaa ka-o binsat baar na kaa-ee. ||1]| It disappears in no time at all. ||1]|
fey Hus’ Hes Sdt AS Il (740-9, wat, He 5) ih supnaa sovat nahee jaanai. This is a dream, but the sleeper does not know it.
mes faene vfs su|s UI TIS Il (740-9, wat, He 5) achayt bivasthaa meh laptaanai. ||1|| rahaa-o. In his unconscious state, he clings to it. ||1]]Pause||
Hot Hfa HfaG aera il (740-10, wet, Hs 5) mahaa mohi mohi-o gaavaaraa. The poor fool is enticed by the great attachments of the world.
uas ues Sfs fast Qi (740-10, Fat, H2 5) paykhat paykhat ooth siDhaaraa. ||2|| Gazing upon them, watching them, he must still arise and depart. ||2||
Cz 3 Ca a oT TaEATT II (740-10, Hat, H2 5) ooch tay ooch taa kaa darbaaraa. The Royal Court of His Darbaar is the highest of the high.
aet Hs fasts Surat Bil (740-10, Fat, He 5) ka-ee jant binaahi upaaraa. ||3] | He creates and destroys countless beings. ||3]|
SAT Tut ST a Tet Il (740-11, wet, He 5) doosar ho-aa naa ko ho-ee. There has never been any other, and there shall never be.
fy aed YS Sa At USIAONIE! (740-11, Fe, He 5)
jap naanak parabh ayko so-ee. ||4||10||16]| O Nanak, meditate on the One God. ||4||10||16]|
Hot Hos U Il (740-11)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
frnfs frnfs st xB IG Fer it (740-12, wat, v8 5) simar simar taa ka-o ha-o jeevaa. Meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, I live.
SS
BIE SHS 33 Gf afe uber Al (740-12, wat, He 5)
charan kamal tayray Dho-ay Dho-ay peevaa. ||1]| I wash Your Lotus Feet, and drink in the wash water. ||1]|
A ofa Aa visa i (740-12, wet, us 5) so har mayraa antarjaamee. He is my Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Sas Hat a Afar Amit uA TIS il (740-13, wet, we 5) bhagat janaa kai sang su-aamee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My Lord and Master abides with His humble devotees. ||1||Pause| |
Afe Af nifgs ony forest I (740-13, gat, Hs 5) sun sun amrit naam Dhi-aavaa. Hearing, hearing Your Ambrosial Naam, I meditate on it.
MTS UIT SF TS AST MM (740-13, Bet, ws 5) aath pahar tayray gun gaavaa. ||2|| Twenty-four hours a day, I sing Your Glorious Praises. ||2| |
Ufa uf ster His mrSer il (740-14, wet, He 5) paykh paykh leelaa man aanandaa. Beholding, beholding Your divine play, my mind is in bliss.
TE MUST YS USHSET ISI (740-14, get, us 5) gun apaar parabh parmaanandaa. ||3]| Your Glorious Virtues are infinite, O God, O Lord of supreme bliss. ||3]|
wa fines ae 3B o fmm I (740-14, Het, He 5) jaa kai simran kachh bha-o na bi-aapai. Meditating in remembrance on Him, fear cannot touch me.
He Het HTS Ts A USUAUAI (740-15, at, He 5)
Sadaa sadaa naanak har jaapai. ||4||11]|17]| Forever and ever, Nanak meditates on the Lord. ||4||11||17]|
Hot HIS U Il (740-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
aa & sate foe fms ost i (740-15, wat, He 5) gur kai bachan ridai Dhi-aan Dhaaree. Within my heart, I meditate on the Word of the Guru's Teachings.
dAa' AY AUG weet IA (740-16, wat, Hs 5) rasnaa jaap japa-o banvaaree. ||1|| With my tongue, I chant the Chant of the Lord. ||1]|
HeG Hols Uso award Il (740-16, Hat, ve 5) safal moorat darsan balihaaree. The image of His vision is fruitful; I am a sacrifice to it.
JIE AHS HS YS MUS WAN TITS il (740-17, Bet, ws 5)
charan kamal man paraan aDhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
His Lotus Feet are the Support of the mind, the Support of the very breath of life. ||1]|Pause] |
AWUAfa ASH HIE feerst il (740-17, Fat, us 5) saaDhsang janam maran nivaaree. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the cycle of birth and death is ended.
nifys aa Afe aa murat MQM (740-17, Bet, He 5) amrit kathaa sun karan aDhaaree. ||2| | To hear the Ambrosial Sermon is the support of my ears. ||2]|
OH AU BT HI SHH Il (740-18, wet, ue 5) kaam kroDh lobh moh tajaaree. I have renounced sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment.
fez oH ug fenaTS Ast ISI (740-18, Bet, Hs 5)
darirh naam daan isnaan suchaaree. ||3]||
I have enshrined the Naam within myself, with charity, true cleansing and righteous conduct. ||3]|
ag aod feg 33 aterdt il (740-18, wet, ue 5) kaho naanak ih tat beechaaree. Says Nanak, I have contemplated this essence of reality;
oH OH Afy ute Csr NsNIQUATI (740-19, Fat, Hs 5)
raam naam jap paar utaaree. ||4||12||18]| chanting the Name of the Lord, I am carried across. ||4||12]||18]|
Hot HIS U Il (740-19)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
&fs Hfa Hares wrraat | (740-19, wet, ue 5) lobh mohi magan apraaDhee. The sinner is absorbed in greed and emotional attachment.
UST 989
aed at AS ACH WU (741-1, wet, we 5) karanhaar kee sayv na saaDhee. ||1|| He has not performed any service to the Creator Lord. ||1||
ufs3 Uso YS BH SHS Il (741-1, Wet, 3 5) patit paavan parabh naam tumaaray. O God, Your Name is the Purifier of sinners.
afy ag xfs fesashors WA TIS Ul (741-1, wet, He 5) raakh layho mohi nirgunee-aaray. ||1]| rahaa-o. I am worthless - please save me! ||1||Pause| |
3 ast ys visa il (741-2, wet, Hs 5)
too” daataa parabh antarjaamee. O God, You are the Great Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
adt fd HOY mifsHrat iM (741-2, wet, Hs 5) kaachee dayh maanukh abhimaanee. ||2|| The body of the egotistical human is perishable. ||2||
Aire are Stoy He HfeEmi I (741-2, wat, He 5)
su-aad baad eerakh mad maa-i-aa. Tastes and pleasures, conflicts and jealousy, and intoxication with Maya
fea Afar ofa 335 ASH Tetfenr WS (741-3, Fat, He 5) in sang laag ratan janam gavaa-i-aa. ||3]| - attached to these, the jewel of human life is wasted. ||3]|
eu so Aanles ofa Thenr i (741-3, wet, Hs 5) dukh bhanjan jagjeevan har raa-i-aa. The Sovereign Lord King is the Destroyer of pain, the Life of the world.
Hae fsurfar soa Adee ISIISIAEll (741-3, Fat, He 5) Sagal ti-aag naanak sarnaa-i-aa. ||4||13]|19]| Forsaking everything, Nanak has entered His Sanctuary. ||4]|13]|19||
Hot HIS U Il (741-4)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ues wus adbas vior Hobus HObA Bret Il (741-4, wat, ne 5) paykhat chaakhat kahee-at anDhaa sunee-at sunee-ai naahee. He sees with his eyes, but he is called blind; he hears, but he does not hear.
foate ers AG we Fs ut uy AHS UI (741-5, Ft, Hs 5)
nikat vasat ka-o jaanai dooray paapee paap kamaahee. ||1]|
And the One who dwells near at hand, he thinks that He is far away; the sinner is committing sins. ||1]|
A fae afe fas gefo usat il (741-5, gat, ne 5) so kichh kar jit chhuteh paraanee. Do only those deeds which will save you, O mortal being.
ofe of on afu nifgs arat nq TIS (741-5, wet, He 5)
har har naam jap amrit baanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and the Ambrosial Word of His Bani. ||1]|Pause| |
Ws HIG At Sar TSM I (741-6, at, ue 5) ghor mahal sadaa rang raataa. You are forever imbued with the love of horses and mansions.
Afat SHS As B AST MI (741-6, Fa, ws 5) sang tum"aarai kachhoo na jaataa. ||2|| Nothing shall go along with you. ||2||
sufa usta Het ar BIST II (741-7, Bet, Hs 5) rakheh pochaar maatee kaa bhaa‘daa. You may clean and decorate the vessel of clay,
mifs acts fies AH StS BN (741-7, FH, Hs 5) at kucheel milai jam daa‘daa. ||3]| but it is so very filthy; it shall receive its punishment from the Messenger of Death.
[I3]|
am afa afs Hfo war i (741-7, wat, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh mohi baaDhaa. You are bound by sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment.
Ho" aes His fewss AST ISI (741-8, At, He 5)
mahaa garat meh nighrat jaataa. ||4|| You are sinking down into the great pit. ||4| |
soe at maetA AStA Il (741-8, At, He 5) naanak kee ardaas suneejai. Hear this prayer of Nanak, O Lord;
BIS UTS YS HS BH MUNWION (741-8, Fat, Hs 5) doobat paahan parabh mayray leejai. ||5||14]|20]| I am a stone, sinking down - please, rescue me! ||5||14]|20||
Hot HIS U Il (741-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Hes He FS ys ARE II (741-9, Het, He 5) jeevat marai bujhai parabh so-ay. One who remains dead while yet alive understands God.
fen Ae asf uarufs af Nail (741-9, Bet, He 5)
tis jan karam paraapat ho-ay. ||1]|
He meets that humble being according to the karma of his past actions. ||1]| Afs wae fe Fag sdb i (741-9, wet, ne 5)
sun saajan i-o dutar taree-dai. Listen, O friend - this is how to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
fife Arg afe oH Basha A TIS Ut (741-10, wet, 8 5) mil saaDhoo har naam uchree-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meet with the Holy, and chant the Lord's Name]]|1]|Pause] |
Sa faa SH Sot AS Il (741-10, Het, He 5) ayk binaa doojaa nahee jaanai. There is no other to know, except for the One Lord.
we we nists USAIN UES MQM (741-11, Fat, He 5) ghat ghat antar paarbarahm pachhaanai. ||2|| So realize that the Supreme Lord God is within each and every heart. ||2||
A fag ad Het 3m HS Il (741-11, At, He 5) jo kichh karai so-ee bhal maanai. Whatever He does, accept that as good.
wife nis at aHfs ATS USI (741-11, Fat, He 5) aad ant kee keemat jaanai. ||3]|| Know the value of the beginning and the end. |[3]|
ag sod (SH AS award i (741-12, wet, He 5) kaho naanak tis jan balihaaree. Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to that humble being,
Wa fore serfs Hast SNWUQAUl (741-12, wet, He 5) jaa kai hirdai vaseh muraaree. ||4]|15||21]| within whose heart the Lord dwells. ||4||15||21||
Hot HIS U Il (741-12)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
WI UIAAT AST Il (741-12, wat, ue 5) gur parmaysar karnaihaar. The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the Creator Lord.
Rae fAfe aS S viarg WAU (741-13, wet, ue 5) Sagal sarisat ka-o day aaDhaar. ||1|| He gives His Support to the entire Universe. ||1]|
TI AX TIS AHS HOS forafe it (741-13, Fat, ns 5) gur kay charan kamal man Dhi-aa-ay. Meditate within your mind on the Lotus Feet of the Guru.
wy ude fen 3a 3 Ae NAN TTS i (741-13, Fat, ve 5) dookh darad is tan tay jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Pain and suffering shall leave this body. ||1||Pause||
Sere SAS AAT AS Il (741-14, wet, we 5) bhavjal doobat satgur kaadhai. The True Guru saves the drowning being from the terrifying world-ocean.
HOH AGH OT SST APS MM (741-14, wet, ws 5) janam janam kaa tootaa gaadhai. ||2]| He reunites those who were separated for countless incarnations. ||2]|
ad at At aag feg ats i (741-15, wet, ue 5) gur kee sayvaa karahu din raat. Serve the Guru, day and night.
AY Aon Hie wire APS WI (741-15, Fet, Hs 5) sookh sahj man aavai saa™t. ||3]| Your mind shall come to have peace, pleasure and poise. ||3]|
Afsag at Jz esarait urs ih (741-15, wet, ve 5) satgur kee rayn vadbhaagee paavai. By great good fortune, one obtains the dust of the feet of the True Guru.
SSA TI A Ae ss AS USUI (741-16, wet, He 5)
naanak gur ka-o sad bal jaavai. ||4]|16]|22|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||4]|16]|22]|
Hot HIS U Il (741-16)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
qs nus Cute aes wehat ih (741-16, At, we 5) gur apunay oopar bal jaa-ee-ai. I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru.
mie usd dfs ofs AA SM UA (741-17, Fat, He 5) aath pahar har har jas gaa-ee-ai. ||1]| Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
fre A ys wruat Amit i (741-17, wet, He 5) simra-o so parabh apnaa su-aamee. Meditate in remembrance on God, your Lord and Master.
Aas Wet a nissaHt Ui TIS il (741-17, wet, ue 5) sagal ghataa kaa antarjaamee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts. ||1]|Pause| |
BIE AHS FAS arait ytfS i (741-18, wet, ws 5) charan kamal si-o laagee pareet. So love the Lord's Lotus Feet,
Ardt use fase SHS QU (741-18, get, He 5) saachee pooran nirmal reet. ||2|| and live a lifestyle which is true, perfect and spotless. ||2||
AS yAfe SA Ho Hat Il (741-18, gt, He 5) sant parsaad vasai man maahee. By the Grace of the Saints, the Lord comes to dwell within the mind,
HOH HOH & forsfee ATS USI (741-19, At, Hs 5) janam janam kay kilvikh jaahee. ||3]| and the sins of countless incarnations are eradicated. ||3]|
ate fasur ys dts afenier it (741-19, wet, 8 5) kar kirpaa parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Please be Merciful, O God, O Merciful to the meek.
SSX Ha AS FSS UIA (741-19, wet, Hs 5)
naanak maagai sant ravaalaa. ||4||17||23]| Nanak begs for the dust of the Saints. ||4]|17]|23]|
UST 982
Hot HIS U Il (742-1)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
dAS Ute Het TT ST il (742-1, wet, ue 5) darsan daykh jeevaa gur tayraa. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live.
YsS TSH TE ys AS AU (742-1, wet, Hs 5) pooran karam ho-ay parabh mayraa. ||1]|| My karma is perfect, O my God. ||1]|
feg asst Afe ys AS Il (742-2, wat, ne 5) ih baynantee sun parabh mayray. Please, listen to this prayer, O my God.
efs on afe nue 8s NA TIS ll (742-2, Fat, He 5) deh naam kar apnay chayray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please bless me with Your Name, and make me Your chaylaa, Your disciple. ||1]|Pause] |
nual Aafe TY YS VS Il (742-2, Wet, ue 5) apnee saran raakh parabh daatay. Please keep me under Your Protection, O God, O Great Giver.
aa ure fas fears AS MQM (742-3, Het, He 5) gur parsaad kinai virlai jaatay. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, a few people understand this. ||2| |
Hog fas@ ys Ad HIST I (742-3, wet, Hs 5) sunhu bin-o parabh mayray meetaa. Please hear my prayer, O God, my Friend.
BIE AHS SAfs AST BST SM (742-3, wet, ue 5) charan kamal vaseh mayrai cheetaa. ||3]| May Your Lotus Feet abide within my consciousness. ||3]|
SSA SA AI msetA I (742-4, wet, ue 5) naanak ayk karai ardaas. Nanak makes one prayer:
feAg ad uss TESA USUACNSIl (742-4, Fat, He 5) visar naahee pooran guntaas. ||4||18]|24]| may I never forget You, O perfect treasure of virtue. ||4]|18]|24]|
Hot Hoe U Il (742-4)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Hy AHS AS sou set i (742-5, wat, ue 5) meet saajan sut banDhap bhaa-ee. He is my friend, companion, child, relative and sibling.
AS as UNG ofa Afar AaEt NU (742-5, Bet, He 5) jat kat paykha-o har sang sahaa-ee. ||1]| Wherever I look, I see the Lord as my companion and helper. ||1||
afs Hat ufs Ast aS dfs SH Il (742-5, Fat, He 5) jat mayree pat mayree Dhan har naam. The Lord's Name is my social status, my honor and wealth.
AY Add vied fAASH AU TIS Il (742-6, Fet, He 5) sookh sahj aanand bisraam. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is my pleasure, poise, bliss and peace. ||1||Pause| |
ursqanH Afu ufofs AAT Il (742-6, wet, Hs 5) paarbarahm jap pahir sanaah. I have strapped on the armor of meditation on the Supreme Lord God.
afe mrea fam sus arfa iQ (742-6, gt, 48 5) kot aavaDh tis bayDhat naahi. ||2]| It cannot be pierced, even by millions of weapons. ||2||
dfs BIS AGE TS AS IHS Il (742-7, Wet, us 5) har charan saran garh kot hamaarai. The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet is my fortress and battlement.
ans aca AH fH o fees SI (742-7, Fat, He 5) kaal kantak jam tis na bidaarai. ||3]|| The Messenger of Death, the torturer, cannot demolish it. ||3]|
SOA BA Het afsarat il (742-7, wet, ue 5) naanak daas sadaa balihaaree. Slave Nanak is forever a sacrifice
ABA AS TH TH HIS USUNAENQUI (742-8, Ft, He 5) sayvak sant raajaa raam muraaree. ||4||19]|25||
to the selfless servants and Saints of the Sovereign Lord, the Destroyer of ego. [14] [19] [25]
Hot HIS U Il (742-8)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
TE aus ys a fos aa it (742-8, wat, ue 5) gun gopaal parabh kay nit gaahaa. Where the Glorious Praises of God, the Lord of the world are continually sung,
mod fase Has AY STI NA (742-9, Bat, He 5) anad binod mangal sukh taahaa. ||1]|| there is bliss, joy, happiness and peace. ||1]|
3B AMS ys Wes AT Il (742-9, Wat, we 5) chal sakhee-ay parabh raavan jaahaa. Come, O my companions - let us go and enjoy God.
AT AST at Vsat UTI UNA TIT Il (742-9, watt, ns 5)
saaDh janaa kee charnee paahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Let us fall at the feet of the holy, humble beings. ||1]|Pause] |
ats dost Ae Ufs sera i (742-10, Hat, H2 5) kar bayntee jan Dhoor baachhaahaa. I pray for the dust of the feet of the humble.
HOH HOH & forsfet Brat QI (742-10, Fat, He 5) janam janam kay kilvikh laahaa™. ||2| | It shall wash away the sins of countless incarnations. ||2||
HO 36 US AE wigura Il (742-11, Fat, we 5) man tan paraan jee-o arpaahaa. I dedicate my mind, body, breath of life and soul to God.
ofa fifa finifa ue He Hers WBN (742-11, Fat, He 5) har simar simar maan moh kataahaa”. ||3]|
Remembering the Lord in meditation, I have eradicated pride and emotional attachment. ||3]|
ae afenrs add SSATT Il (742-11, Ft, He 5) deen da-i-aal karahu utsaahaa. O Lord, O Merciful to the meek, please give me faith and confidence,
Soa UA Td AGEs AMT ISIQONEM (742-12, At, Hs 5)
naanak daas har saran samaahaa. ||4||20||26]| so that slave Nanak may remain absorbed in Your Sanctuary. ||4||20]|26| |
Hot Hos U Il (742-12)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
YAS og AT AS SAT Il (742-12, wat, ue 5) baikunth nagar jahaa sant vaasaa. The city of heaven is where the Saints dwell.
Ys BIE AHS foe nfo fSSTAT NA (742-13, Bet, He 5)
parabh charan kamal rid maahi nivaasaa. ||1] | They enshrine the Lotus Feet of God within their hearts. ||1]|
Hfe Ho 36 35 AY feuwreS i (742-13, wet, us 5) sun man tan tujh sukh dikhlaava-o. Listen, O my mind and body, and let me show you the way to find peace,
ofa mifaa fina 33 Sq STSS NU TIC i (742-13, wet, us 5) har anik binjan tujh bhog bhunchaava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. so that you may eat and enjoy the various delicacies of the Lord] |1]||Pause] |
Mis SH SI Ho HTT Il (742-14, wet, He 5) amrit naam bhunch man maahee. Taste the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your mind.
MISH ATS STA AIS O ASH MQM (742-14, Wet, He 5) achraj saad taa kay barnay na jaahee. ||2|| Its taste is wondrous - it cannot be described. ||2| |
8s Hor fee afs welt il (742-15, wet, Hs 5) lobh moo-aa tarisnaa bujh thaakee. Your greed shall die, and your thirst shall be quenched.
USAIN at AsfE AS Bat USBI (742-15, Fat, He 5) paarbarahm kee saran jan taakee. ||3]| The humble beings seek the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God. ||3]|
HOH HOH A F Ho fEes I (742-15, wat, ue 5) janam janam kay bhai moh nivaaray. The Lord dispels the fears and attachments of countless incarnations.
Soa UA YS fas ar USUIUI I (742-16, Fat, Hs 5)
naanak daas parabh kirpaa Dhaaray. ||4||21]|27]| God has showered His Mercy and Grace upon slave Nanak. ||4]|21]|27]||
Hot HIS U Il (742-16)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
mifsx star aA x udafanM Il (742-16, Fat, He 5) anik bee“g daas kay parhari-aa. God covers the many shortcomings of His slaves.
afd fasur yfs rar ofan Ail (742-17, Fat, Hs 5) kar kirpaa parabh apnaa kari-aa. ||1|| Granting His Mercy, God makes them His own. ||1]|
sufa sate StS AS ws Il (742-17, wet, He 5) tumeh chhadaa-ay lee-o jan apnaa. You emancipate Your humble servant,
Cafs ufsS We Aa AUST uA FI il (742-18, wet, He 5) urajh pari-o jaal jag supnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. and rescue him from the noose of the world, which is just a dream. ||1||Pause] |
ugas eu Hot fees Il (742-18, wet, Hs 5)
parbat dokh mahaa bikraalaa. Even huge mountains of sin and corruption
fas fo fe ote efenrer ii (742-18, At, He 5) khin meh door kee-ay da-i-aalaa. ||2|| are removed in an instant by the Merciful Lord. ||2||
Fat gat farufs mifS arat il (742-19, wet, ue 5) sog rog bipat at bhaaree. Sorrow, disease and the most terrible calamities
fs set afl on Hardt SI (742-19, Fat, He 5) door bha-ee jap naam muraaree. ||3]| are removed by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
fenfe fa ate fs ofe i (742-19, Bet, Hs 5) darisat Dhaar leeno larh laa-ay. Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He attaches us to the hem of His robe.
UST 983
Us VIE AI SSA AGSTE WSNIIAUWQCH (743-1, wat, ue 5)
har charan gahay naanak sarnaa-ay. ||4||22||28]| Grasping the Lord's Feet, O Nanak, we enter His Sanctuary. ||4||22||28]|
Hot HIS U Il (743-1) soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ae safe vot HOES I (743-1, wet, He 5) deen chhadaa-ay dunee jo laa-ay. One who withdraws from God's Path, and attaches himself to the world,
oot Aaet yo ATES UU (743-2, wet, He 5) duhee saraa-ee khunaamee kahaa-ay. ||1]| is known as a sinner in both worlds. ||1]|
A fSH are A USSTE Il (743-2, Hat, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so parvaan. He alone is approved, who pleases the Lord.
ntyat Feats MM ATS NA TITS Il (743-2, wet, us 5) aapnee kudrat aapay jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only He Himself knows His creative omnipotence. ||1||Pause]|
Het UdH US SH" ATS Il (743-3, wt, ue 5) sachaa Dharam punn bhalaa karaa-ay. One who practices truth, righteous living, charity and good deeds,
ae & SA vot o WS IQ (743-3, Fat, Hs 5) deen kai tosai dunee na jaa-ay. ||2]| has the supplies for God's Path. Worldly success shall not fail him. ||2| |
Aaa fadats Sa Aa il (743-3, wet, ue 5) sarab nirantar ayko jaagai. Within and among all, the One Lord is awake.
fas fas ofeor fas fsa & od SI (743-4, Bat, He 5) jit jit laa-i-aa tit tit ko laagai. ||3]| As He attaches us, so are we attached. ||3]||
Wa nidies AT Afss AT I (743-4, wet, He 5) agam agochar sach saahib mayraa. You are inaccessible and unfathomable, O my True Lord and Master.
St 88 Forfeur Sq WiIVIell (743-4, wet, ue 5) naanak bolai bolaa-i-aa tayraa. ||4||23]|29]| Nanak speaks as You inspire him to speak. ||4]|23||29]|
Hot HIS U Il (743-5)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
yrsdats afs aH Burdt il (743-5, wet, He 5) paraatehkaal har naam uchaaree. In the early hours of the morning, I chant the Lord's Name.
as Ss at Ge Ferd WAU (743-5, wet, He 5) eet oot kee ot savaaree. ||1]| I have fashioned a shelter for myself, hear and hereafter. ||1]|
Het Het wubdt af on Il (743-6, wet, us 5) sadaa sadaa japee-ai har naam. Forever and ever, I chant the Lord's Name,
yas def HS AX AH NU TIS Il (743-6, Fat, ws 5) pooran hoveh man kay kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. and the desires of my mind are fulfilled. ||1]||Pause| |
us mifsat df= fee ar il (743-6, gat, He 5) parabh abhinaasee rain din gaa-o. Sing the Praises of the Eternal, Imperishable Lord God, night and day.
nes Hos fesse urefs aE iM (743-7, Wet, H2 5) jeevat marat nihchal paavahi thaa-o. ||2]| In life, and in death, you shall find your eternal, unchanging home. ||2||
A Ag Afe fas sfe 3 wrest (743-7, wet, Hs 5) so saahu sayv jit tot na aavai. So serve the Sovereign Lord, and you shall never lack anything.
ws udes Afy nafe fears SI (743-7, Bet, He 5) khaat kharchat sukh anad vihaavai. ||3]| While eating and consuming, you shall pass your life in peace. ||3] |
Hales use ATGAfer urfeMr i (743-8, wt, He 5)
jagjeevan purakh saaDhsang paa-i-aa.
O Life of the World, O Primal Being, I have found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ad yAtYE St6a oH fowrfenr isi2siSoll (743-8, Wet, He 5)
gur parsaad naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4||24||30]| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [14] |24]|30]|
Hot HIS U Il (743-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Gd ud Aa se Sfemrs I (743-9, wet, we 5) gur pooray jab bha-ay da-i-aal. When the Perfect Guru becomes merciful,
wu faor use set wr IA (743-9, Het, He 5) dukh binsay pooran bha-ee ghaal. ||1|| my pains are taken away, and my works are perfectly completed. ||1]|
uf Ufa Ftet SIA SHS Il (743-10, Wet, ws 5) paykh paykh jeevaa daras tum"aaraa. Gazing upon, beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live;
TIE AHS AST aH Il (743-10, Wet, ws 5) charan kamal jaa-ee balihaaraa. I am a Sacrifice to Your Lotus Feet.
33 fag Sag ASG IHS UU! TIS Il (743-10, Het, ue 5) tujh bin thaakur kavan hamaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without You, O my Lord and Master, who belongs to me? ||1||Pause| |
AWonats fA ulfs af=s wiret i (743-11, wet, He 5) saaDhsangat si-o pareet ban aa-ee. I have fallen in love with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
usa aot fears ufs uret i (743-11, Fat, He 5) poorab karam likhat Dhur paa-ee. ||2|| by the karma of my past actions and my pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
fu afs dfs SH Mga UPSTU Il (743-11, Fat, He 5) jap har har naam achraj partaap. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; how wondrous is His glory!
mts & ATafs StS STUY SI (743-12, et, Hs 5) jaal na saakeh teenay taap. ||3]| The three types of illness cannot consume it. ||3]|
foHy 3 farts af age SHS Il (743-12, Wet, w3 5) nimakh na bisrahi har charan tum"aaray. May I never forget, even for an instant, the Lord's Feet.
SSS Hat Ve firs SiQuiSal (743-13, wat, He 5)
naanak maagai daan pi-aaray. ||4||25||31|| Nanak begs for this gift, O my Beloved. ||4||25||31] |
Hot HIS U Il (743-13)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
A Ada aag AS furs it (743-13, et, ue 5) say sanjog karahu mayray pi-aaray. May there be such an auspicious time, O my Beloved,
fz dAa as aH Gas UU (743-14, wat, ws 5)
jit rasnaa har naam uchaaray. ||1]|| when, with my tongue, I may chant the Lord's Name||1]||
Hfe dost ys ce elena i (743-14, Fat, He 5) sun bayntee parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Hear my prayer, O God, O Merciful to the meek.
AY Wets TS Ae SAH UA TITS Il (743-14, wat, ws 5)
saaDh gaavahi gun sadaa rasaalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Holy Saints ever sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||1]|Pause] |
flea gu fAHsE Ys ST Il (743-15, Fet, He 5) jeevan roop simran parabh tayraa. Your meditation and remembrance is life-giving, God.
fan faut asto aAfo fA ST MQM (743-15, Fat, He 5)
jis kirpaa karahi baseh tis nayraa. ||2|| You dwell near those upon whom You show mercy. ||2| |
AS at FU SI SH MIT Il (743-15, Het, He 5) jan kee bhookh tayraa naam ahaar. Your Name is the food to satisfy the hunger of Your humble servants.
J UT YS SSETT IS (743-16, Fat, Hs 5)
too” daataa parabh dayvanhaar. ||3]| You are the Great Giver, O Lord God. ||3]|
TH SHS AIS AY HTS Il (743-16, wat, He 5) raam ramat santan sukh maanaa. The Saints take pleasure in repeating the Lord's Name.
SSA VISIT AA NSUENBI (743-16, wet, He 5)
naanak dayvanhaar sujaanaa. ||4||26||32|| O Nanak, the Lord, the Great Giver, is All-knowing. ||4||26]|32]|
Hot HIS U Il (743-17)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ast WS ae feAfe o UT Il (743-17, Fat, 8 5) bahtee jaat kaday darisat na Dhaarat. Your life is slipping away, but you never even notice.
fifaur Ha dufs fas use NA (743-17, Bet, He 5) mithi-aa moh banDheh nit paarach. ||1]| You are constantly entangled in false attachments and conflicts. ||1]|
Hae 3H feo fos dat il (743-18, At, He 5) maaDhvay bhaj din nit rainee. Meditate, vibrate constantly, day and night, on the Lord.
HOH uese Als dfs Aget NA TIS Il (743-18, Fat, He 5)
janam padaarath jeet har sarnee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You shall be victorious in this priceless human life, in the Protection of the Lord's Sanctuary. ||1]|Pause] |
aes faors 88 ag sas I TH 336 fee fe adt WIT NIN (743-18, FSH, He 5)
karat bikaar do-oo kar jhaarat. raam ratan rid til nahee Dhaarat. ||2||
You eagerly commit sins and practice corruption, but you do not enshrine the jewel of the Lord's Name within your heart, even for an instant. ||2| |
gde uve Afar mu fraret il (743-19, et, ue 5) bharan pokhan sang a-oDh bihaanee. Feeding and pampering your body, your life is passing away,
ust 988 A Wael at afs odt Aret BI (744-1, Aet, Hs 5)
jai jagdees kee gat nahee jaanee. ||3]|| but you do not experience the state of victory of the Lord of the Universe. ||3]|
Hafs ANSE wigiss AMM Il (744-1, wet, Hs 5) saran samrath agochar su-aamee. So enter the Sanctuary of the All-powerful, Unfathomable Lord and Master.
ug saad ys nisaAMt SII (744-1, et, He 5) uDhar naanak parabh antarjaamee. ||4||27||33]| O God, O Searcher of hearts, please, save Nanak! ||4||27]|33]|
Hot Hos U Il (744-2)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
AOHfat St J ATA ll (744-2, wt, ue 5) saaDhsang tarai bhai saagar. Cross over the terrifying world-ocean in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
dfs ofa om fants Taras Al (744-2, Fat, ue 5) har har naam simar ratnaagar. ||1|| Remember in meditation the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the source of jewels. ||1]|
fants frufs ater oratee il (744-3, wet, v3 5) simar simar jeevaa naaraa-in. Remembering, remembering the Lord in meditation, I live.
eu da Aa Als faor ae us fife uy sree A TIS I (744-3, wet, He 5)
dookh rog sog sabh binsay gur pooray mil paap tajaa-in. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All pain, disease and suffering is dispelled, meeting the Perfect Guru; sin has been eradicated. ||1]||Pause| |
Heo ueet ofa ar are il (744-4, wat, we 5)
jeevan padvee har kaa naa-o.
The immortal status is obtained through the Name of the Lord; HO 36 fSdHs Arg Ane iQ (744-4, wet, us 5)
man tan nirmal saach su-aa-o. ||2|| the mind and body become spotless and pure, which is the true purpose of life. ||2] |
mS UTS USAT forme i (744-4, wet, ue 5) aath pahar paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Twenty-four hours a day, meditate on the Supreme Lord God.
yota fers dfs a ureht Sil (744-5, Het, Hs 5) poorab likhat ho-ay taa paa-ee-ai. ||3||
By pre-ordained destiny, the Name is obtained. ||3]| Rofe ue Af cto efenirer il (744-5, wat, w3 5)
Saran pa-ay jap deen da-i-aalaa. I have entered His Sanctuary, and I meditate on the Lord, Merciful to the meek.
SSA WS AS FSH NSWACUSI (744-5, wat, ue 5)
naanak jaachai sant ravaalaa. ||4||28]|34]| Nanak longs for the dust of the Saints. ||4]|28]|34||
Hot Host U Il (744-6)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
WT AT ATH O ATSt TST Il (744-6, Hat, n2 5) ghar kaa kaaj na jaanee roorhaa. The beautiful one does not know the work of his own home.
BS Uo ses Ha A (744-6, Ft, He 5) jhoothai DhanDhai rachi-o moorhaa. ||1|| The fool is engrossed in false attachments. ||1]|
fas 3 wets fS3 FS Ba I (744-6, Feat, Hs 5) jit too’ laaveh tit tit lagnaa. As You attach us, so we are attached.
WS tf ST SS AUST UU TIS Il (744-7, Het, Hs 5) jaa too’ deh tayraa naa-o japnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. When You bless us with Your Name, we chant it. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs & OA Te ASt TS I (744-7, et, He 5) har kay daas har saytee raatay. The Lord's slaves are imbued with the Love of the Lord.
oH sAtefE miofeg HTS MQM (744-8, Fat, Hs 5) raam rasaa-in an-din maatay. ||2|| They are intoxicated with the Lord, night and day. ||2]|
ag uate yfs mint are i (744-8, Wet, He 5) baah pakar parabh aapay kaadhay. Reaching out to grasp hold of our arms, God lifts us up.
HOH HOH A Fe AS MSI (744-8, Het, 42 5) janam janam kay tootay gaadhay. ||3]|| Separated for countless incarnations, we are united with Him again. ||3]|
Cug Aum ys farsur arg Il (744-9, wat, Hs 5) uDhar su-aamee parabh kirpaa Dhaaray. Save me, O God, O my Lord and Master - shower me with Your Mercy.
SSA UA Td Ads MTT ISIQENBUI (744-9, Fat, He 5)
naanak daas har saran du-aaray. ||4||29||35]|| Slave Nanak seeks Sanctuary at Your Door, O Lord. ||4||29]|35]|
Hot HIS U Il (744-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
As yAte fesse we ufenr i (744-10, Fat, He 5) sant parsaad nihchal ghar paa-i-aa. By the Grace of the Saints, I have found my eternal home.
Hea AY feta sot Sotenr Al (744-10, wet, He 5) sarab sookh fir nahee dolaa-i-aa. ||1]| I have found total peace, and I shall not waver again. ||1]|
ag fomrfe afs sae fs Ste Il (744-10, get, He 5) guroo Dhi-aa-ay har charan man cheen"ay. I meditate on the Guru, and the Lord's Feet, within my mind.
33 aas mAfag ate A TTS Ul (744-11, wet, ne 5) taa tay kartai asthir keen"ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. In this way, the Creator Lord has made me steady and stable. ||1]||Pause| |
TE Wes wigs vifaarat il (744-11, wet, ws 5) gun gaavat achut abhinaasee. I sing the Glorious Praises of the unchanging, eternal Lord God,
3S aret FH at SAT QM (744-11, Fat, He 5) taa tay kaatee jam kee faasee. ||2| | and the noose of death is snapped. ||2| |
afd fasur ats wis we il (744-12, wet, 2 5) kar kirpaa leenay larh laa-ay. Showering His Mercy, he has attached me to the hem of His robe.
Hel nde Sod TE WS NSUSOUBEN (744-12, Fat, ve 5) sadaa anad naanak gun gaa-ay. ||3||30||36|| In constant bliss, Nanak sings His Glorious Praises. ||3]||30||36]||
Hot HIS U Il (744-13)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
wits ae AT at set i (744-13, wet, He 5) amrit bachan saaDh kee banee. The Words, the Teachings of the Holy Saints, are Ambrosial Nectar.
af nu fA at afs de ofa ofa on fos aAe Serot IU TIS Il (744-13, wat, He 5)
jo jo japai tis kee gat hovai har har naam nit rasan bakhaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whoever meditates on the Lord's Name is emancipated; he chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with his tongue. ||1]|Pause| |
Tt AS AX fe ABA Il (744-14, wet, ws 5) kalee kaal kay mitay kalaysaa. The pains and sufferings of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga are eradicated,
Sat SH Ho Hf USSAT NA (744-14, Het, He 5) ayko naam man meh parvaysaa. ||1]| when the One Name abides within the mind. ||1]|
Ag Ufa Hf HAS Bet Ih (744-14, Fet, He 5) saaDhoo Dhoor mukh mastak laa-ee. I apply the dust of the feet of the Holy to my face and forehead.
Soa Sud Ts AT ASST NAUSAUISIM (744-15, wet, 2 5)
naanak uDhray har gur sarnaa-ee. ||2||31||37]|| Nanak has been saved, in the Sanctuary of the Guru, the Lord. ||2]|31]|37]|
Hot HIS U We B I (744-15)
soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 3. Soohee, Fifth Mehl: Third House:
afer ae aw efeorer il (744-15, wet, Hs 5) gobindaa gun gaa-o da-i-aalaa. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the Merciful Lord.
UIAG TT udS farsursr il TIS Il (744-16, Het, we 5)
darsan dayh pooran kirpaalaa. rahaa-o.
Please, bless me with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Perfect, Compassionate Lord. ||Pause| |
ata fasur 3H ot yfsurer il (744-16, wet, 3 5) kar kirpaa tum hee partipaalaa. Please, grant Your Grace, and cherish me.
Me fis AS SHS HHT NA (744-16, Bet, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tumraa maalaa. ||1]|| My soul and body are all Your property. ||1]||
nifqs ou BS Af over I (744-17, wat, He 5) amrit naam chalai jap naalaa. Only meditation on the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, will go along with you.
SSA AWS AT FSH NIWSIUSCH (744-17, wet, ue 5)
naanak jaachai sant ravaalaa. ||2||32||38]| Nanak begs for the dust of the Saints. ||2||32]||38] |
Hot Has U Il (744-18)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fH fag SAT neg & Et I (744-18, Fet, He 5) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ee. Without Him, there is no other at all.
~ ok N
my GH AST ASt WAU (744-18, Fat, He 5) aapay thammai sachaa so-ee. ||1]| The True Lord Himself is our anchor. ||1||
dfs fs SH HS war | (744-18, wat, Hs 5) har har naam mayraa aaDhaar. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is our only support.
ATE AGE AHA MUTT WAU TIC il (744-19, wet, ws 5) karan kaaran samrath apaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Creator, the Cause of causes, is All-powerful and Infinite. ||1]||Pause||
AS da firere er foam I (744-19, wet, He 5) sabh rog mitaavay navaa niro-aa. He has eradicated all illness, and healed me.
TS TU MMI Tir WIWBSUBEM (744-19, Fat, ue 5)
naanak rakhaa aapay ho-aa. ||2||33]|39]| O Nanak, He Himself has become my Savior. ||2||33]|39] |
UST By
Hot HIS U Il (745-1)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
TIHS AG Be AF Aet Il (745-1, wet, us 5) darsan ka-o lochai sabh ko-ee. Everyone longs for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
us star uaTufs Tet i TIS il (745-1, wet, ws 5) poorai bhaag paraapat ho-ee. rahaa-o. By perfect destiny, it is obtained. ||Pause| |
from Hea 3fa ate fa niet il (745-2, wet, Hs 5) si-aam sundar taj need ki-o aa-ee. Forsaking the Beautiful Lord, how can they go to sleep?
Ho HISt FS Bet WAU (745-2, wat, uz 5) mahaa mohnee dootaa laa-ee. ||1|| The great enticer Maya has led them down the path of sin. ||1]|
Un fad ass aAret I (745-2, wet, Hs 5) paraym bichhohaa karat kasaa-ee. This butcher has separated them from the Beloved Lord.
fose #3 fsa efor & uret II (745-3, Het, He 5) nirdai jant tis da-i-aa na paa-ee. ||2]| This merciless one shows no mercy at all to the poor beings. ||2||
mfsx ASH atshors SIH I (745-3, At, Hs 5) anik janam beetee-an bharmaa-ee. Countless lifetimes have passed away, wandering aimlessly.
ufg SH 6 8S BST Het BI (745-3, At, He 5) ghar vaas na dayvai dutar maa-ee. ||3]|| The terrible, treacherous Maya does not even allow them to dwell in their own home.
[131] fee dfs mruer athor uret il (745-4, at, ue 5)
din rain apnaa kee-aa paa-ee. Day and night, they receive the rewards of their own actions.
fan tH 5 tin fags seret igi (745-4, wat, ne 5) kis dos na deejai kirat bhavaa-ee. ||4|| Don't blame anyone else; your own actions lead you astray. ||4| |
Afe AHS AS AS Set I (745-4, wet, He 5)
sun saajan sant jan bhaa-ee. Listen, O Friend, O Saint, O humble Sibling of Destiny:
BIE AGE FSA AS uct WUNSSUSOll (745-5, Fat, Hs 5)
charan saran naanak gat paa-ee. ||5||34]|40]| in the Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet, Nanak has found Salvation. ||5||34||40] |
TH Ast HIS Uwe 8 (745-6) raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (745-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sat Avett Stuct AT ufo Ts Me it (745-7, wet, us 5) bhalee suhaavee chhaapree jaa meh gun gaa-ay. Even a crude hut is sublime and beautiful, if the Lord's Praises are sung within it.
fas dt ath 3 uGaud fas ofe faRaeS nA TITS Ul (745-7, wet, He 5) kit hee kaam na Dha-ulhar jit har bisraa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those mansions where the Lord is forgotten are useless. ||1]|Pause]|
woe adtat AGAfa fs us fats wire I (745-8, wet, He 5)
anad gareebee saaDhsang jit parabh chit aa-ay.
Even poverty is bliss, if God comes to mind in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Afe WE Sg asus Her BuV|rs |All (745-8, wat, ws 5) jal jaa-o ayhu badpanaa maa-i-aa laptaa-ay. ||1]| This worldly glory might just as well burn; it only traps the mortals in Maya. ||1||
ulne Ulf Gfe anit Ae He ASeeS I (745-9, wat, He 5)
peesan pees odh kaamree sukh man santokhaa-ay.
One may have to grind corn, and wear a coarse blanket, but still, one can find peace of mind and contentment.
MA oa 3 fas ate fas oo fyusS MQM (745-9, et, He 5) aiso raaj na kitai kaaj jit nah tariptaa-ai. ||2| | Even empires are of no use at all, if they do not bring satisfaction. ||2]|
ode fess df a at Gy Ast wes I (745-9, wet, ue 5)
nagan firat rang ayk kai oh sobhaa paa-ay.
Someone may wander around naked, but if he loves the One Lord, he receives honor and respect.
ure uéad frafanr fas af Bae Wil (745-10, wet, us 5) paat patambar birthi-aa jih rach lobhaa-ay. ||3]| Silk and satin clothes are worthless, if they lead to greed. ||3]|
Ag fae suo ofa ys orf ad ATS Il (745-10, wat, He 5) sabh kichh tum"rai haath parabh aap karay karaa-ay. Everything is in Your Hands, God. You Yourself are the Doer, the Cause of causes.
AYA ATA fAHTS JI STO BS UTES USUUSAUI (745-11, wat, ws 5) Saas Saas simrat rahaa naanak daan paa-ay. ||4]|1]|41]|
With each and every breath, may I continue to remember You. Please, bless Nanak with this gift. ||4]|1]|41]|
Hot HIS U Il (745-11)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ofg a& AZ use us fA a ufSar|a Il (745-12, wet, He 5) har kaa sant paraan Dhan tis kaa panihaaraa. The Lord's Saint is my life and wealth. I am his water-carrier.
get HIS AS AAG S ha FS flora wa TIS il (745-12, wet, wu 5) bhaa-ee meet sut sagal tay jee-a hoo" tay pi-aaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is dearer to me than all my siblings, friends and children. ||1]|Pause| |
an a ate daa HS Beg ease Il (745-13, wat, Hs 5) kaysaa kaa kar beejnaa sant cha-ur dhulaava-o. I make my hair into a fan, and wave it over the Saint.
Hin fors@ see ste ufs ufe we nal (745-13, Bet, He 5) sees nihaara-o charan tal Dhoor mukh laava-o. ||1|| I bow my head low, to touch his feet, and apply his dust to my face. ||1]|
fue ade aost ass ete at fone it (745-14, wet, ws 5) misat bachan bayntee kara-o deen kee ni-aa-ee. I offer my prayer with sweet words, in sincere humility.
3fa uifsuTg Adel us ofa ae fofa uret Qu (745-14, wet, us 5)
taj abhimaan sarnee para-o har gun niDh paa-ee. ||2||
Renouncing egotism, I enter His Sanctuary. I have found the Lord, the treasure of virtue. ||2||
NEGAS UST UST AIG AS AT VSATT Il (745-15, wet, He 5) avlokan punah punah kara-o jan kaa darsaar. I gaze upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's humble servant, again and again.
nifys ase Ho ufo fis FES are as BI (745-15, wet, He 5) amrit bachan man meh sincha-o banda-o baar baar. ||3]|
I cherish and gather in His Ambrosial Words within my mind; time and time again, I bow to Him. ||3]|
fase@ His mrt as Ae a Ag HAI Il (745-16, wat, He 5) chitva-o man aasaa kara-o jan kaa sang maaga-o. In my mind, I wish, hope and beg for the Society of the Lord's humble servants.
Soa aC ys cent afg oA sat SAC iSiIN82Iii (745-16, wet, He 5)
naanak ka-o parabh da-i-aa kar daas charnee laaga-o. ||4||2||42]| Be Merciful to Nanak, O God, and lead him to the feet of Your slaves. ||4||2||42] |
Hot HIS U Il (745-17)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fats Hd qoHs ds svg ufo ure il (745-17, wet, He 5) jin mohay barahmand khand taahoo meh paa-o. She has enticed the worlds and solar systems; I have fallen into her clutches.
ofa ag feg faust AE Sg nua aS ud TIS i (745-17, wat, ns 5)
raakh layho ih bikh-ee jee-o dayh apunaa naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Lord, please save this corrupt soul of mine; please bless me with Your Name. ||1]|Pause] |
W 3 odt & Bet ota ure AE I (745-18, Fat, Hs 5) jaa tay naahee ko sukhee taa kai paachhai jaa-o. She has not brought anyone peace, but still, I chase after her.
efs wo a Aare a@ feta fefe sue nail (745-18, At, He 5) chhod jaahi jo sagal ka-o fir fir laptaa-o. ||1]| She forsakes everyone, but still, I cling to her, again and again. ||1]|
+ a
add faut ages 39 dfs T= WE I (745-19, wat, ws 5)
karahu kirpaa karunaapatay tayray har gun gaa-o.
Have Mercy on me, O Lord of Compassion; please let me sing Your Glorious Praises, O Lord.
soa at YS Fst ATA AHS |INBISSI (745-19, Fat, He 5)
naanak kee parabh bayntee saaDhsang samaa-o. ||2||3]|43]|
This is Nanak's prayer, O Lord, that he may join and merge with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||3]|43]|
UST OBE
TY ASt HIS Uwe U UTI (746-2)
raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 5 parh-taal Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House, Partaal:
qe Afsara Arte il (746-2) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ulfs uifs adorn Hae wrest Il (746-3, at, He 5) pareet pareet guree-aa mohan laalnaa. Love of the enticing Beloved Lord is the most glorious love.
afu ne dfiz Sa nied odt & BY AS og Hols as vfam at ado ai TTC Il (746-3, Hot, He 5)
jap man gobind aykai avar nahee ko laykhai sant laag maneh chhaad dubiDhaa kee kuree-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Meditate, O mind, on the One Lord of the Universe - nothing else is of any account. Attach your mind to the Saints, and abandon the path of duality. ||1]|Pause] |
fosda ddhor Aad Udmr nifsa aod fea fea 8s fae adr Il (746-4, Bet, He 5) nirgun haree-aa sargun Dharee-aa anik khothree-aa bhinn bhinn bhinn bhin karee-aa. The Lord is absolute and unmanifest; He has assumed the most sublime manifestation. He has fashioned countless body chambers of many, varied, different, myriad forms.
fefa Ho aeedr Il (746-5, wat, He 5) vich man kotvaree-aa. Within them, the mind is the policeman;
for Hete fisher i (746-5, wt, He 5) nij mandar piree-aa. my Beloved lives in the temple of my inner self.
II MTSE ATM I (746-5, Wat, 3 5) tahaa aanad karee-aa. He plays there in ecstasy.
Od Hd SI As MAU (746-6, Fat, He 5) nah maree-aa nah jaree-aa. ||1|| He does not die, and he never grows old. ||1]||
fagste adr ag fafa fedur ug a fadbor i (746-6, wet, 8 5)
kirtan juree-aa baho biDh firee-aa par ka-o hiree-aa.
He is engrossed in worldly activities, wandering around in various ways. He steals the property of others,
ferror firdhor il (746-6, wet, 8 5) bikhnaa ghiree-aa. and is surrounded by corruption and sin.
me ATG Aft usar il (746-7, wet, Hs 5) ab saaDhoo sang paree-aa. But now, he joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
ofa eurs usb i (746-7, wt, ue 5) har du-aarai kharee-aa. and stands before the Lord's Gate.
TIAG AIA Il (746-7, wet, us 5) darsan karee-aa. He obtains the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Soa TS fsbo it (746-7, wet, us 5) naanak gur miree-aa. Nanak has met the Guru;
wate & fedhor WQNAissil (746-8, Fat, He 5)
bahur na firee-aa. ||2||1]|44]| he shall not be reincarnated again. ||2||1]|44]|
Hot HIS U Il (746-8)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ofA HSE AS mmarsr Il (746-8, wt, Hs 5) raas mandal keeno aakhaaraa. The Lord has made this world a stage;
Fas Aft sf uTATST UA TIS I (746-8, et, ue 5) saglo saaj rakhi-o paasaaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He fashioned the expanse of the entire creation. ||1]|Pause] |
ag fafa gu da murat Il (746-9, Het, Hs 5) baho biDh roop rang aapaaraa. He fashioned it in various ways, with limitless colors and forms.
ue yAt sar odt Ta il (746-9, wet, us 5) paykhai khusee bhog nahee haaraa. He watches over it with joy, and He never tires of enjoying it.
Afs 3A BS SAS feast Al (746-9, Bat, He 5) sabh ras lait basat niraaraa. ||1|| He enjoys all the delights, and yet He remains unattached. ||1]|
adg fade att HY O HTATST Il (746-10, Fat, He 5) baran chihan naahee mukh na maasaaraa. He has no color, no sign, no mouth and no beard.
AIS & At YB JIT Il (746-10, wat, we 5) kahan na jaa-ee khayl tuhaaraa. I cannot describe Your play.
SSA FE AT FISTS MNQUSUI (746-10, wat, us 5)
naanak rayn sant charnaaraa. ||2]||2||45]| Nanak is the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||2||2]|45]|
Hot HIS U Il (746-11)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
3@ 4 orfenr raat mrfemr Ih (746-11, Bet, He 5) ta-O mai aa-i-aa Ssarnee aa-i-aa. I have come to You. I have come to Your Sanctuary.
SdA orfenr fasur uirfemr i (746-11, wet, Hs 5) bharosai aa-i-aa kirpaa aa-i-aa. I have come to place my faith in You. I have come seeking Mercy.
fa@ are f8@ aug Homi wea aefe uofemr Na TIS I (746-12, AeA, v8 5)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho su-aamee maarag gureh pathaa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
If it pleases You, save me, O my Lord and Master. The Guru has placed me upon the Path. ||1]|Pause||
Ho sg Hf | AA usG sorfer Al (746-12, wet, He 5) mahaa dutar maa-i-aa. jaisay pavan jhulaa-i-aa. ||1|| Maya is very treacherous and difficult to pass through. It is like a violent wind-storm.
[21] Af Afs dt safer | (746-13, wet, Hs 5)
sun sun hee daraa-i-aa. I am so afraid to hear
Ass YHSfEn |W (746-13, Fat, ue 5) karro Dharamraa-i-aa. ||2]| that the Righteous Judge of Dharma is so strict and stern. ||2||
fas via gurfemr i (746-14, At, Hs 5) garih anDh koopaa-i-aa. The world is a deep, dark pit;
Ueq AasteEnit Sil (746-14, wet, He 5) paavak sagraa-i-aa. ||3]| it is all on fire. ||3]|
at Ge Arafeni | (746-14, wet, ue 5) gahee ot saDhaa-i-aa. I have grasped the Support of the Holy Saints.
Soa Ths forrfenr i (746-14, Fat, He 5) naanak har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Nanak meditates on the Lord.
me Hus ufsMr SIBIEll (746-15, At, He 5) ab mai pooraa paa-i-aa. ||4||3||46]| Now, I have found the Perfect Lord. ||4]|3]|46]|
TH Ast HIS u wg E (746-16) raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 6 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:
qe Afsars YATE Il (746-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsag uth sSshor fees BM wars I (746-17, Wet, He 5) satgur paas banantee-aa milai naam aaDhaaraa. I offer this prayer to the True Guru, to bless me with the sustenance of the Naam.
Jor Ae ufsArg sry afer HATS NU (746-17, Bat, He 5) tuthaa sachaa paatisaahu taap ga-i-aa sansaaraa. ||1|| When the True King is pleased, the world is rid of its diseases. ||1]|
sis at ca SF HST at Ge F AT fraAST ST AU TIE Il (746-17, Fat, He 5)
bhagtaa kee tayk too’ santaa kee ot too” sachaa sirjanhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are the Support of Your devotees, and the Shelter of the Saints, O True Creator Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Ay 3dt AHadt AY Sa IAT Il (746-18, Fat, He 5) sach tayree saamagree sach tayraa darbaaraa. True are Your devices, and True is Your Court.
Ag 39 udifonr Ag So UTATST IQII (746-19, Fat, He 5) sach tayray khaajni-aa sach tayraa paasaaraa. ||2|| True are Your treasures, and True is Your expanse. ||2]|
3T ITY MAH FT vIGUY Sa TIAT Il (746-19, Hat, Hs 5) tayraa roop agamm hai anoop tayraa darsaaraa. Your Form is inaccessible, and Your Vision is incomparably beautiful.
JG avaat Sfour Aeat fag ofa amy fimirat SII (746-19, Fat, Hs 5) ha-o kurbaanee tayri-aa sayvkaa jin" har naam pi-aaraa. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to Your servants; they love Your Name, O Lord. ||3]|
UST 8D
AS feet usher at urfenr mtn wrurat i (747-1, wet, He 5)
sabhay ichhaa pooree-aa jaa paa-i-aa agam apaaraa. All desires are fulfilled, when the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord is obtained.
ag soe fkfenr usgqgH sfoor saat a afHara ISUUISII (747-2, Fat, He 5) gur naanak mili-aa paarbarahm tayri-aa charnaa ka-o balihaaraa. ||4]|1]||47]||
Guru Nanak has met the Supreme Lord God; I am a sacrifice to Your Feet. [14] 1111471]
TH Ast HIS Uwe D (747-3) raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 7 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (747-3) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3o stat 3d Hatfefe fA 3S ofa efemrer il (747-4, Aet, He 5) tayraa bhaanaa toohai manaa-ihi jis no hohi da-i-aalaa. He alone obeys Your Will, O Lord, unto whom You are Merciful.
Wet sats A SU oS J ae ror yfsurer WAU (747-4, wet, Hs 5)
saa-ee bhagat jo tuDh bhaavai too” sarab jee-aa partipaalaa. ||1]|
That alone is devotional worship, which is pleasing to Your Will. You are the Cherisher of all beings. |[1]|
AS TH aE Ast Sa SHH Ml (747-5, wat, ne 5) mayray raam raa-ay santaa tayk tum"aaree. O my Sovereign Lord, You are the Support of the Saints.
A 30 oe A uses His Ste Sd mS NU TIS ll (747-5, wet, ws 5) jo tuDh bhaavai so parvaan man tan toohai aDhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever pleases You, they accept. You are the sustenance of their minds and bodies. ||1]|Pause] |
3 ufeure furs fgur fafa HOAT UTETST Il (747-6, Ft, He 5) too” da-i-aal kirpaal kirpaa niDh mansaa pooranhaaraa. You are kind and compassionate, the treasure of mercy, the fulfiller of our hopes.
gas 30 Afs yeufs ylsH J sase at fips 12M (747-6, Fat, Hs 5)
bhagat tayray sabh faraanpat pareetam too™ bhagtan kaa pi-aaraa. ||2||
You are the Beloved Lord of life of all Your devotees; You are the Beloved of Your devotees. ||2] |
3 orerg wurg ifs Gar aet weg 3 Sat BS Il (747-7, wet, 3 5) too athaahu apaar at oochaa ko-ee avar na tayree bhaatay. You are unfathomable, infinite, lofty and exalted. There is no one else like You.
fea naeth gut Aumt ferAg ardt AWeTS BI (747-7, Bat, Hs 5)
in ardaas hamaaree su-aamee visar naahee sukh-daatay. ||3]||
This is my prayer, O my Lord and Master; may I never forget You, O Peace-giving Lord. ||3]|
feo df= fa ath ae ae A AMM So sre I (747-8, wat, ne 5)
din rain saas saas gun gaavaa jay su-aamee tuDh bhaavaa.
Day and night, with each and every breath, I sing Your Glorious Praises, if it is pleasing to Your Will.
OY 37 AY Sa Hol ATs FS UST UIUISCH (747-8, Fat, He 5)
naam tayraa sukh naanak maagai saahib tuthai paavaa. ||4||1||48]|
Nanak begs for the peace of Your Name, O Lord and Master; as it is pleasing to Your Will, I shall attain it. ||4]|1]|48]|
Hot HIS U Il (747-9)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fensts act fas 3 aa AS SI AT Il (747-9, wat, we 5) visrahi naahee jit too kabhoo so thaan tayraa kayhaa. Where is that place, where You are never forgotten, Lord?
wits ud fas su fomret faa de Far WAU (747-10, wat, He 5)
aath pahar jit tuDh Dhi-aa-ee nirmal hovai dayhaa. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, they meditate on You, and their bodies become spotless and pure. ||1]|
AS IH VE A aE se mefeur Ih (747-10, wat, He 5) mayray raam ha-o so thaan bhaalan aa-i-aa.
O my Lord, I have come searching for that place.
dns ans sfeor wona fsq Aeeet urfeor a TIS Ul (747-11, Feat, He 5)
khojat khojat bha-i-aa saaDhsang tin” sarnaa-ee paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
After seeking and searching, I found Sanctuary in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]||Pause] |
ae us ufs gan ad fea fsq adt aS uret it (747-11, Wet, He 5)
bayd parhay parh barahmay haaray ik til nahee keemat paa-ee.
Reading and reciting the Vedas, Brahma grew weary, but he did not find even a tiny bit of God's worth.
WMfos fio feafs faowrs 3 St HT Het QU (747-12, Het, He 5) saaDhik siDh fireh billaatay tay bhee mohay maa-ee. ||2| | The seekers and Siddhas wander around bewailing; they too are enticed by Maya.
21 |
CA MST TH HE FIs HSS MBTT I (747-12, et, us 5)
das a-utaar raajay ho-ay vartay mahaadayv a-uDhootaa.
There were ten regal incarnations of Vishnu; and then there was Shiva, the renunciate.
faq st nis 5 utes Sa ore aat fagst SI (747-13, Het, He 5)
tin" bhee ant na paa-i-o tayraa laa-ay thakay bibhootaa. ||3]|
He did not find Your limits either, although he grew weary of smearing his body with ashes. ||3]||
Hon AY Mies SH FA dd Ast Haw ahem il (747-13, FSH, He 5)
sahj sookh aanand naam ras har santee mangal gaa-i-aa.
Peace, poise and bliss are found in the subtle essence of the Naam. The Lord's Saints sing the songs of joy.
Hee vane sfeS ag aoa J fs 3f6 af afe fourfenr eiQusei (747-14, wet, He 5)
safal darsan bhayti-o gur naanak taa man tan har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4]|2||49]| I have obtained the Fruitful Vision of Guru Nanak's Darshan, and with my mind and body I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|2||49]|
Hot HIS U Il (747-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
OSH UH us A Cafe fSe AH AEST BE Il (747-15, wet, we 5)
karam Dharam pakhand jo deeseh tin jam jaagaatee lootai.
The religious rites, rituals and hypocrisies which are seen, are plundered by the Messenger of Death, the ultimate tax collector.
favre atesg weg ass at fone fines fs SS UA (747-16, wet, we 5)
nirbaan keertan gaavhu kartay kaa nimakh simrat jit chhootai. ||1]|
In the state of Nirvaanaa, sing the Kirtan of the Creator's Praises; contemplating Him in meditation, even for an instant, one is saved. ||1]|
Hag Wag ufs Sash i (747-16, zat, us 5) santahu saagar paar utree-ai. O Saints, cross over the world-ocean.
A FIs AHS H36 AA Ts usAt SdhH WAU TIE I (747-16, wat, us 5) jay ko bachan kamaavai santan kaa so gur parsaadee taree-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
One who practices the Teachings of the Saints, by Guru's Grace, is carried across. ||1]|Pause] |
afe stea Hae fenora fen afs ufo He sa I (747-17, Bet, He 5)
kot tirath majan isnaanaa is kal meh mail bhareejai.
Millions of cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage only fill the mortal with filth in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Worfa Ht dfs qe ae A fens afe StH QM (747-18, wat, ne 5)
saaDhsang jo har gun gaavai so nirmal kar leejai. ||2||
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, becomes spotlessly pure. ||2]|
ae ase fafiyfs Afs AAS fee ufsor Hats o Tet I (747-18, wet, He 5)
bayd katayb simrit sabh saasat in” parhi-aa mukat na ho-ee.
One may read all the books of the Vedas, the Bible, the Simritees and the Shaastras, but they will not bring liberation.
ea weg A donfe au fA at fase Aet Si (747-19, wat, He 5) ayk akhar jo gurmukh jaapai tis kee nirmal so-ee. ||3]|| One who, as Gurmukh, chants the One Word, acquires a spotlessly pure reputation.
I3I|
ust FHS AE SA Suen VI Fda AG AMS Il (747-19, wet, we 5)
khatree baraahman sood vais updays chahu varnaa ka-o saajhaa.
The four castes - the Kh'shaatriyas, Brahmins, Soodras and Vaishyas - are equal in respect to the teachings.
UST Ot
aTonfa om wu Bud A ats nfo wie wie Soa HST NSISIUON (748-1, At, He 5) gurmukh naam japai uDhrai so kal meh ghat ghat naanak maajhaa. ||4||3||50||
One who, as Gurmukh, chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is saved. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Nanak, God is permeating the hearts of each and every being. [14] 13] [50] |
Hot HIS U Il (748-2)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
A fag ad Aet ys wafs Gf oH oH Sfa TS I (748-2, Het, ne 5)
jo kichh karai so-ee parabh maaneh o-ay raam naam rang raatay.
Whatever God causes to happen is accepted, by those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord's Name.
faq at Hat Asst wet fas ys a vas UTS Al (748-3, wat, He 5) tin" kee sobhaa sabhnee thaa-ee jin" parabh kay charan paraatay. ||1|| Those who fall at the Feet of God are respected everywhere. ||1]|
AS oH dfs As Aes B Et i (748-3, wet, ue 5) mayray raam har santaa jayvad na ko-ee. O my Lord, no one is as great as the Lord's Saints.
sas afe met ys nud fA@ afs af udborfs Het wan TIS i (748-3, wet, us 5) bhagtaa ban aa-ee parabh apnay si-o jal thal mahee-al so-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The devotees are in harmony with their God; He is in the water, the land, and the sky. ||1]|Pause] |
afe murdt HsAfa Gud AH St a Sfs B wis I (748-4, wet, He 5)
kot apraaDhee satsang uDhrai jam taa kai nayrh na aavai.
Millions of sinners have been saved in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; the Messenger of Death does not even approach them.
HOH HOH ot fsefsur dé fSq afe fAG orf= fires NI (748-5, Fat, He 5)
janam janam kaa bichhurhi-aa hovai tin" har si-o aan milaavai. ||2]|
Those who have been separated from the Lord, for countless incarnations, are reunited with the Lord again. ||2]|
wfeor Ho sau SE are HS Aefs FH mrs I (748-5, Bet, He 5)
maa-i-aa moh bharam bha-o kaatai sant saran jo aavai.
Attachment to Maya, doubt and fear are eradicated, when one enters the Sanctuary of the Saints.
Av Hose afs wired A A363 urs BI (748-6, Fat, Hs 5) jayhaa manorath kar aaraaDhay so santan tay paavai. ||3]| Whatever wishes one harbors, are obtained from the Saints. ||3]|
Ae at HfoHt ASA ISS A UST MUS SE Il (748-6, wat, ue 5) jan kee mahimaa kaytak barna-o jo parabh apnay bhaanay.
How can I describe the glory of the Lord's humble servants? They are pleasing to their God.
ag aod fae Afsag sfenr A AS 3 Fe fears ISNSNUA (748-7, Bet, He 5)
kaho naanak jin satgur bhayti-aa say sabh tay bha-ay nikaanay. ||4]|4]|51]||
Says Nanak, those who meet the True Guru, become independent of all obligations. 414) [521]
Hot HIS U Il (748-8)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
HS nafs 3 30 Te et ad ue Sat Agave Il (748-8, wat, ws 5)
mahaa agan tay tuDh haath day raakhay pa-ay tayree sarnaa-ee.
Giving me Your Hand, You saved me from the terrible fire, when I sought Your Sanctuary.
37 He se fee nists Ja get MTA Yaret IAI (748-8, Fat, Hs 5)
tayraa maan taan rid antar hor doojee aas chukaa-ee. ||1|| Deep within my heart, I respect Your strength; I have abandoned all other hopes.
[41] Ae on ofe 3g foes mrfet Cas i (748-9, Wet, He 5)
mayray raam raa-ay tuDh chit aa-i-ai ubray. O my Sovereign Lord, when You enter my consciousness, I am saved.
Sot ea SSSA SHT AU SH SHS Bus A TIS Il (748-9, wet, we 5)
tayree tayk bharvaasaa tum"raa jap naam tum"aaraa uDhray. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my support. I count on You. Meditating on You, I am saved. ||1||Pause| |
nig gus afte se sy orfy se forsurer i (748-10, get, 3 5) anDh koop tay kaadh lee-ay tum" aap bha-ay kirpaalaa. You pulled me up out of the deep, dark pit. You have become merciful to me.
Afg AHS Aga AY ate orf ad yfsurer MQM (748-11, At, Hs 5) saar sam"aal sarab sukh dee-ay aap karay partipaalaa. ||2]| You care for me, and bless me with total peace; You Yourself cherish me. ||2| |
nituat sefs AT USHA 8S ate save Il (748-11, wet, He 5)
aapnee nadar karay parmaysar banDhan kaat chhadaa-ay.
The Transcendent Lord has blessed me with His Glance of Grace; breaking my bonds, He has delivered me.
ntuat safs yfs ory aoet mm Aet BES BI (748-12, wet, us 5)
aapnee bhagat parabh aap karaa-ee aapay sayvaa laa-ay. ||3]| God Himself inspires me to worship Him; He Himself inspires me to serve Him. ||3]|
33H afeor s Ha faa fifenr Aare feAe Il (748-12, Fat, He 5)
bharam ga-i-aa bhai moh binaasay miti-aa sagal visooraa.
My doubts have gone, my fears and infatuations have been dispelled, and all my Sorrows are gone.
seed tent ast HUES Sfenr ASAT UT USUUNUM (748-13, Fat, Hs 5)
naanak da-i-aa karee sukh-daatai bhayti-aa satgur pooraa. ||4||5||52||
O Nanak, the Lord, the Giver of peace has been merciful to me. I have met the Perfect True Guru. ||4]|5]|52]|
Hot HIS U Il (748-14)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Wa ag 8 AG 3a for ase AS AGH als wrfEnr | (748-14, Fat, 2 5)
jab kachh na see-o tab ki-aa kartaa kavan karam kar aa-i-aa.
When nothing existed, what deeds were being done? And what karma caused anyone to be born at all?
nue ae uirfu afs fe oats seq Tare WA (748-14, wat, He 5)
apnaa khayl aap kar daykhai thaakur rachan rachaa-i-aa. ||1] |
The Lord Himself set His play in motion, and He Himself beholds it. He created the Creation. ||1]|
AS oH Tf us Ss aE 3 Tet Ml (748-15, wat, He 5) mayray raam raa-ay mujh tay kachhoo na ho-ee. O my Sovereign Lord, I cannot do anything at all by myself.
nny asst orf age Aaa fadsfs et nan TIS i (748-15, et, ue 5) aapay kartaa aap karaa-ay sarab nirantar so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He Himself is the Creator, He Himself is the Cause. He is pervading deep within all. ||1]|Pause] |
Test Tat o se AST aS Sa fEnrat i (748-16, wat, we 5)
gantee ganee na chhootai kathoo kaachee dayh i-aanee.
If my account were to be judged, I would never be saved. My body is transitory and ignorant.
fur aay ys aged Sat Tun feast QI (748-16, at, He 5) kirpaa karahu parabh karnaihaaray tayree bakhas niraalee. ||2|| Take pity upon me, O Creator Lord God; Your Forgiving Grace is singular and unique.
21 |
ba Ha AS 3d ats wife whe sat foe I (748-17, wat, He 5) jee-a jant sabh tayray keetay ghat ghat tuhee Dhi-aa-ee-ai. You created all beings and creatures. Each and every heart meditates on You.
3c afs ffs 30 wets aeafs ah & ureter 3M (748-17, Bet, He 5)
tayree gat mit toohai jaaneh kudrat keem na paa-ee-ai. ||3]| Your condition and expanse are known only to You; the value of Your creative omnipotence cannot be estimated. ||3]|
fogae Hag vine vifamrst AGH OSH Sdt AST Il (748-18, Wet, Hs 5)
nirgun mugaDh ajaan agi-aanee karam Dharam nahee jaanaa.
I am worthless, foolish, thoughtless and ignorant. I know nothing about good actions and righteous living.
efor agy Soa TE We for wa Sa svar WSUENUSI (748-19, Het, He 5)
da-i-aa karahu naanak gun gaavai mithaa lagai tayraa bhaanaa. ||4||6||53]|
Take pity on Nanak, that he may sing Your Glorious Praises; and that Your Will may seem sweet to him. ||4||6]|53] |
Hot HIS U Il (748-19)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Ua oe
aos de AS SHS fae whe us ahs aA Il (749-1, At, Hs 5)
bhaagtharhay har sant tum"aaray jin" ghar Dhan har naamaa.
Your Saints are very fortunate; their homes are filled with the wealth of the Lord's Name.
udete aet Aet fea wire Hee fq A ATH MAU (749-1, et, He 5) parvaan ganee say-ee ih aa-ay safal tinaa kay kaamaa. ||1]| Their birth is approved, and their actions are fruitful. ||1]|
AS oH dfs Ae a IS sles wT I (749-2, Bah, He 5) mayray raam har jan kai ha-o bal jaa-ee. O my Lord, I am a sacrifice to the humble servants of the Lord.
an a afd veg yore vos ule ufe wet ua TIS il (749-2, wet, He 5)
kaysaa kaa kar chavar dhulaavaa charan Dhoorh mukh laa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I make my hair into a fan, and wave it over them; I apply the dust of their feet to my face. ||1||Pause] |
HOH HIE Pag Hfs adt AS UTCuardt mre Il (749-3, Fet, ue 5) janam maran duhhoo meh naahee jan par-upkaaree aa-ay. Those generous, humble beings are above both birth and death.
ba we 2 sat ofefe fe fae Sfo fires QU (749-3, wat, ne 5)
jee-a daan day bhagtee laa-in har si-o lain milaa-ay. ||2||
They give the gift of the soul, and practice devotional worship; they inspire others to meet the Lord. ||2||
Ae wg Adt ufsASt AG ASt FS Il (749-4, At, us 5) sachaa amar sachee paatisaahee sachay saytee raatay. True are their commands, and true are their empires; they are attuned to the Truth.
Hel AY Adt efanret fan oa A Sf ATS ISI (749-4, Bat, Hs 5)
sachaa sukh sachee vadi-aa-ee jis kay say tin jaatay. ||3]|
True is their happiness, and true is their greatness. They know the Lord, to whom they belong. ||3]|
uur act urat der ofa Aa & Ubpe Ulf HST II (749-5, Fat, He 5)
pakhaa fayree paanee dhovaa har jan kai peesan pees kamaavaa.
I wave the fan over them, carry water for them, and grind corn for the humble servants of the Lord.
soa at us uA FSst SI AS SUS UST INIDNUBIL (749-5, at, Hs 5)
naanak kee parabh paas baynantee tayray jan daykhan paavaa. ||4]|7||54||
Nanak offers this prayer to God - please, grant me the sight of Your humble servants. [411711541]
Hot HIS U Il (749-6)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
USAIN USHAT Afsas My AIST Il (749-6, wet, us 5)
paarbarahm parmaysar satgur aapay karnaihaaraa.
The True Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God; He Himself is the Creator Lord.
ge fs Sct Req Ha 33 TIA AS alsa AU (749-7, Het, Hs 5)
charan Dhoorh tayree sayvak maagai tayray darsan ka-o balihaaraa. ||1]|| Your servant begs for the dust of Your feet. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1]|
Ae on ofe fa omafa FE gdb i (749-7, wet, us 5) mayray raam raa-ay ji-o raakhahi ti-o rahee-ai. O my Sovereign Lord, as You keep me, so do I remain.
30 aS ST OM Aurefe AY 3a fest wdht AN TIC I (749-8, wat, He 5) tuDh bhaavai taa naam japaaveh sukh tayraa ditaa lahee-ai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. When it pleases You, I chant Your Name. You alone can grant me peace. ||1]|Pause| |
vats gas gafs Sct Ae fm S orf aafeta il (749-8, wet, H 5)
mukat bhugat jugat tayree sayvaa jis too” aap karaa-ihi.
Liberation, comfort and proper lifestyle come from serving You; You alone cause us to serve You.
30 aS AT aasg Sa F wma WaT arfeta iM (749-9, wet, Hs 5)
tahaa baikunth jah keertan tayraa too’ aapay sarDhaa laa-ihi. ||2]|
That place is heaven, where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung. You Yourself instill faith into us. ||2]|
fafa ffs fafa on rte sq He df fear Il (749-9, Bat, He 5)
simar simar simar naam jeevaa tan man ho-ay nihaalaa.
Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Naam, I live; my mind and body are enraptured.
Bde SHS 33 fe afe ute He Afsas ce efenrar ISI (749-10, wt, He 5)
charan kamal tayray Dho-ay Dho-ay peevaa mayray satgur deen da-i-aalaa. ||3]||
I wash Your Lotus Feet, and drink in this water, O my True Guru, O Merciful to the meek. |[3]|
avers Wel Gn gor Hae fas SHS Bord veer | (749-11, wet, He 5) kurbaan jaa-ee us vaylaa suhaavee jit tumrai du-aarai aa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to that most wonderful time when I came to Your Door.
aaa a ys se fuer Afsag us ufeHr sIcNUUll (749-11, Fet, He 5)
naanak ka-o parabh bha-ay kirpaalaa satgur pooraa paa-i-aa. ||4||8]|55] | God has become compassionate to Nanak; I have found the Perfect True Guru. [14] 18] [55] |
Hot Hos U Il (749-12)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
30 fafs ore Ho nidser firm ferafa A fs AES I (749-12, Bet, Hs 5) tuDh chit aa-ay mahaa anandaa jis visrahi so mar jaa-ay.
When You come to mind, I am totally in bliss. One who forgets You might just as well be dead.
vfenrg deta fra Gufs ass A su Aer fore Wail (749-13, wet, Hs 5)
da-i-aal hoveh jis oopar kartay so tuDh sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]|
That being, whom You bless with Your Mercy, O Creator Lord, constantly meditates on You. |/1||
He Aga SH He fenret il (749-13, wet, He 5) mayray saahib too’ mai maan nimaanee. O my Lord and Master, You are the honor of the dishonored such as me.
ween adt us nus wird Afs afs Ate Sct sat wa TIC i (749-14, wet, He 5) ardaas karee parabh apnay aagai sun sun jeevaa tayree banee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I offer my prayer to You, God; listening, listening to the Word of Your Bani, I live. ||1]|Pause] |
vue Ufs 33 Fe at de 33 Tans AS ale ArT II (749-14, Het, Hs 5)
charan Dhoorh tayray jan kee hovaa tayray darsan ka-o bal jaa-ee.
May I become the dust of the feet of Your humble servants. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
nifys avo fee Cfa ost SC fasur 3 Hat uret II (749-15, wat, He 5)
amrit bachan ridai ur Dhaaree ta-o kirpaa tay sang paa-ee. ||2||
I enshrine Your Ambrosial Word within my heart. By Your Grace, I have found the Company of the Holy. ||2]|
nisg at afs 30 ufo AS SO Aes neg o et Il (749-16, Fat, He 5) antar kee gat tuDh peh saaree tuDh jayvad avar na ko-ee. I place the state of my inner being before You; there is no other as great as You.
fan 6 ofe Sfo A od sas SoS Het Sil (749-16, wat, ve 5) jis no laa-ay laihi so laagai bhagat tuhaaraa so-ee. ||3]| He alone is attached, whom You attach; he alone is Your devotee. ||3]|
efe ag afs wae fea wor wfafa 3S ur|r Il (749-17, Bat, ne 5)
du-ay kar jorh maaga-o ik daanaa saahib tuthai paavaa.
With my palms pressed together, I beg for this one gift; O my Lord and Master, if it pleases You, I shall obtain it.
AYA ATA STON MTS HTS UTI TS Wet USUCNUENM (749-17, wet, we 5) Saas Saas naanak aaraaDhay aath pahar gun gaavaa. ||4||9||56]|
With each and every breath, Nanak adores You; twenty-four hours a day, I sing Your Glorious Praises. ||4||9]|56] |
Hot HIS U Il (749-18)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fan & fs Gufs 3 emit A ea AAT Ure Il (749-18, et, He 5) jis kay sir oopar too’ su-aamee so dukh kaisaa paavai. When You stand over our heads, O Lord and Master, how can we suffer in pain?
afs 3 we Hfemr yfe yest Haart SHS @ mS AU (749-19, Bat, He 5)
bol na jaanai maa-i-aa mad maataa marnaa cheet na aavai. ||1||
The mortal being does not know how to chant Your Name - he is intoxicated with the wine of Maya, and the thought of death does not even enter his mind. ||1]|
Ae TH ae F AS a AS 3g Il (749-19, wat, we 5) mayray raam raa-ay too” santaa kaa sant tayray. O my Sovereign Lord, You belong to the Saints, and the Saints belong to You.
UST DUO
33 Aea ag 3@ fae art AH dt mre SF NA TIC ll (750-1, Heat, He 5)
tayray sayvak ka-o bha-o kichh naahee jam nahee aavai nayray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your servant is not afraid of anything; the Messenger of Death cannot even approach him. ||1||Pause] |
A 33 df a3 Anmt Sq a HOH HES FY SA Il (750-1, Fat, He 5)
jo tayrai rang raatay su-aamee tin" kaa janam maran dukh naasaa.
Those who are attuned to Your Love, O my Lord and Master, are released from the pains of birth and death.
Sat sun 3 Ae aet Afsae at few QI (750-2, wat, He 5) tayree bakhas na maytai ko-ee satgur kaa dilaasaa. ||2|| No one can erase Your Blessings; the True Guru has given me this assurance. ||2| |
oy fourfefs AY eo uTfefs mre use miTaTafs II (750-2, Hat, H8 5)
naam Dhi-aa-in sukh fal paa-in aath pahar aaraaDheh.
Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, obtain the fruits of peace. Twenty-four hours a day, they worship and adore You.
3d Hafs 33 saSA Us BA| B ATafT BI (750-3, Bet, Hs 5) tayree saran tayrai bharvaasai panch dusat lai saaDheh. ||3]| In Your Sanctuary, with Your Support, they subdue the five villains. ||3]|
famitg fimirg fas ASH & ATS" ATS B Arat Sat Il (750-3, wet, He 5)
gi-aan Dhi-aan kichh karam na jaanaa saar na jaanaa tayree.
I know nothing about wisdom, meditation and good deeds; I know nothing about Your excellence.
AS 3 es" Alsag soa fale ae ant Hat ISNAONUI (750-4, Fat, He 5) sabh tay vadaa satgur naanak jin kal raakhee mayree. ||4]|10||57]||
Guru Nanak is the greatest of all; He saved my honor in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. [14] [10] [571]
Hot HIS U Il (750-5)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Hae fsurfar aa Adal witfenr grag ISI Il (750-5, Fat, He 5) Sagal ti-aag gur sarnee aa-i-aa raakho raakhanhaaray.
Renouncing everything, I have come to the Guru's Sanctuary; save me, O my Savior Lord!
fas 3 wefe P35 TH orate fomr Sfo AT fears NAM (750-5, Fet, He 5) jit too laaveh tit ham laagah ki-aa ayhi jant vichaaray. ||1]|| Whatever You link me to, to that I am linked; what can this poor creature do? ||1]|
Ae TH At F ys nisarmt il (750-6, wet, we 5) mayray raam jee too” parabh antarjaamee. O my Dear Lord God, You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
ate fasur gees vfeniesr ge wet fos AMM ai FIC il (750-6, wet, us 5)
kar kirpaa gurdayv da-i-aalaa gun gaavaa nit su-aamee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Be Merciful to me, O Divine, Compassionate Guru, that I may constantly sing the Glorious Praises of my Lord and Master. ||1]||Pause] |
mis udd ys ust fimreba aa ute se sdb I (750-7, wet, Hs 5)
aath pahar parabh apnaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai gur parsaad bha-o taree-ai.
Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on my God; by Guru's Grace, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
nity faorfar debt AS dat Htefsur FES ydba QU (750-8, Fat, He 5)
aap ti-aag ho-ee-ai sabh raynaa jeevti-aa i-o maree-ai. ||2||
Renouncing self-conceit, I have become the dust of all men's feet; in this way, I die, while I am still alive. ||2]|
HeS HOH (SA a Aa Stsfs AGAfa oS AMT II (750-8, Het, He 5)
safal janam tis kaa jag bheetar saaDhsang naa-o jaapay.
How fruitful is the life of that being in this world, who chants the Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Hae Hose (SA & use fAA efeor as YS mM Sil (750-9, wet, Hs 5) sagal manorath tis kay pooran jis da-i-aa karay parabh aapay. ||3]| All desires are fulfilled, for the one who is blessed with God's Kindness and Mercy.
[31 aoe tfenrs fgues ys AoMt Sct Aafe efenrar il (750-10, wet, 48 5)
deen da-i-aal kirpaal parabh su-aamee tayree saran da-i-aalaa. O Merciful to the meek, Kind and Compassionate Lord God, I seek Your Sanctuary.
afs farsur must SH St Soa AT FSH WSUAUIUCI (750-10, et, He 5) kar kirpaa apnaa naam deejai naanak saaDh ravaalaa. ||4||11||58]|
Take pity upon me, and bless me with Your Name. Nanak is the dust of the feet of the Holy. |]4]|11]|58]|
TH Ast oAcudr HI A WT Y (750-12) raag soohee asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Ashtapadee, First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (750-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afs wigae H TE Sdt Ae Il (750-13, wat, we sabh avgan mai gun nahee ko-ee. I am totally without virtue; I have no virtue at all.
fag afs &3 frsrer Tet WAN (750-13, Het, He 1) ki-o kar kant milaavaa ho-ee. ||1]| How can I meet my Husband Lord? ||1]|
x oN JN OTH JUG AA SST Il (750-13, Fat, He 1) naa mai roop na bankay nainaa. I have no beauty, no enticing eyes.
oO aS Va MS SST NU TIC Ut (750-13, Het, ws 1) naa kul dhang na meethay bainaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I do not have a noble family, good manners or a sweet voice. ||1]||Pause] |
Hofa Atera amnfe afe wire i (750-14, wat, 48 1) sahj seegaar kaaman kar aavai. The soul-bride adorns herself with peace and poise.
ST Aas A aS SS MQM (750-14, wt, ue 1) taa sohagan jaa kantai bhaavai. ||2|| But she is a happy soul-bride, only if her Husband Lord is pleased with her. ||2| |
o fH gu 3 Shim aret il (750-15, Fat, He 1 naa tis roop na raykh-i-aa kaa-ee. He has no form or feature;
nifs o Atog frafemr ATeT ISI (750-15, Fat, He 1) ant na saahib simri-aa jaa-ee. ||3]| at the very last instant, he cannot suddenly be contemplated. ||3]|
Hots Hfs ardt Boat Il (750-15, Fat, He 1) surat mat naahee chaturaa-ee. I have no understanding, intellect or cleverness.
afd fasur ys weg uret isil (750-16, Het, 48 1) kar kirpaa parabh laavhu paa-ee. ||4]| Have Mercy upon me, God, and attach me to Your Feet. ||4||
udt fimiret &T S Sat Il (750-16, et, ue 1) kharee si-aanee kant na bhaanee. She may be very clever, but this does not please her Husband Lord.
Hfenr arait safH Foret iWull (750-16, wet, Hs 1) maa-i-aa laagee bharam bhulaanee. ||5|| Attached to Maya, she is deluded by doubt. ||5||
ICH wet Bt xT AH Il (750-17, Fat, Hs 1) ha-umai jaa-ee taa kant samaa-ee. But if she gets rid of her ego, then she merges in her Husband Lord.
38 amnfe fimirg og fafa uret WEll (750-17, Ft, He 1) ta-o kaaman pi-aaray nav niDh paa-ee. ||6|| Only then can the soul-bride obtain the nine treasures of her Beloved. ||6]|
mfod HoH fasds ey uf i (750-17, wet, us 1) anik janam bichhurat dukh paa-i-aa. Separated from You for countless incarnations, I have suffered in pain.
ag ats Sg YlsH ys TfeMr MDI (750-18, Fat, He 1) kar geh layho pareetam parabh raa-i-aa. ||7]|| Please take my hand, O my Beloved Sovereign Lord God. ||7]||
sefs area Ag J St SAT II (750-18, Het, He 1) bhanat naanak saho hai bhee hosee. Prays Nanak, the Lord is, and shall always be.
A ave fimrg 3 TSA NCU (750-19, wet, He 1) jai bhaavai pi-aaraa tai raavaysee. ||8]|1]| She alone is ravished and enjoyed, with whom the Beloved Lord is pleased. ||8]|1]|
UST uy
Hot Hoe Aug € (751-1) soohee mehlaa 1 ghar 9 Soohee, First Mehl, Ninth House:
qe Afsars ure il (751-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
as dat as x asfaur fea ofe Ae i (751-2, wet, He kachaa rang kasumbh kaa thorh-rhi-aa din chaar jee-o. The color of safflower is transitory; it lasts for only a few days.
fee ae gf gotor ofa Hot afsorfs AIG I (751-2, wet, Hs 1) vin naavai bharam bhulee-aa thag muthee koorhi-aar jee-o. Without the Name, the false woman is deluded by doubt and plundered by thieves.
He Ast sso WOH 6 Eat Sa AS NAM (751-3, Fat, He D sachay saytee rati-aa janam na doojee vaar jee-o. ||1]| But those who are attuned to the True Lord, are not reincarnated again. ||1]|
da a for gaba A as da ote AE it (751-3, wet, we
rangay kaa ki-aa rangee-ai jo ratay rang laa-ay jee-o.
How can one who is already dyed in the color of the Lord's Love, be colored any other color?
dae ser Agby we fA fos of HE Na TIC Ut (751-3, wet, He D rangan vaalaa sayvee-ai sachay si-o chit laa-ay jee-o. ||1]| rahaa-o. So serve God the Dyer, and focus your consciousness on the True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
wa ast A seta fas war ug ofa AIG I (751-4, Bet, He 1)
chaaray kundaa jay bhaveh bin bhaagaa Dhan naahi jee-o.
You wander around in the four directions, but without the good fortune of destiny, you shall never obtain wealth.
wigate Hot A feats afta ate o ute AG II (751-5, et, He 1)
avgan muthee jay fireh baDhik thaa-ay na paahi jee-o.
If you are plundered by corruption and vice, you shall wander around, but like a fugitive, you shall find no place of rest.
ats we A Gad Aafe gs Ho Hf AIG MQM (751-5, Aet, Hs gur raakhay say ubray sabad ratay man maahi jee-o. ||2||
Only those who are protected by the Guru are saved; their minds are attuned to the Word of the Shabad. ||2] |
fae fra & aus HS fas asa IE II (751-6, et, He 1) chitay jin kay kaprhay mailay chit kathor jee-o. Those who wear white clothes, but have filthy and stone-hearted minds,
fo yfa on 3 Gur en fend oa AG I (751-6, Fat, Hs 1)
tin mukh naam na oopjai doojai vi-aapay chor jee-o.
may chant the Lord's Name with their mouths, but they are engrossed in duality; they are thieves.
He 3 ysfo wru|e A uM A Se AIG SM (751-7, Bet, He 1) mool na boojheh aapnaa say pasoo-aa say dhor jee-o. ||3]| They do not understand their own roots; they are beasts. They are just animals! ||3]|
fos fos uxt He ad fos fos Hat AY AIG I (751-7, Bet, He 1)
nit nit khusee-aa man karay nit nit mangai sukh jee-o.
Constantly, continually, the mortal seeks pleasures. Constantly, continually, he begs for peace.
ass fats 3 ureet fefs fefs wats gu AIG II (751-8, wet, He 1)
kartaa chit na aavee fir fir lageh dukh jee-o.
But he does not think of the Creator Lord, and so he is overtaken by pain, again and again.
AY vy wart nfs ZA fess sfe ant gu Ae ell (751-8, Bat, He 1)
sukh dukh daataa man vasai tit tan kaisee bhukh jee-o. ||4||
But one, within whose mind the Giver of pleasure and pain dwells - how can his body feel any need? ||4||
Tat ear sodhy fafs ws Hers AIG i (751-9, wet, He 1)
baakee vaalaa talbee-ai sir maaray jandaar jee-o.
One who has a karmic debt to pay off is summoned, and the Messenger of Death smashes his head.
Bu Hal tear ue ate seg Ate i 751-9, wet, we
laykhaa mangai dayvnaa puchhai kar beechaar jee-o.
When his account is called for, it has to be given. After it is reviewed, payment is demanded.
Ae ot foe Gad gun suneag AIG Hull (751-10, Fat, He 1) sachay kee liv ubrai bakhsay bakhsanhaar jee-o. ||5|| Only love for the True One will save you; the Forgiver forgives. ||5||
Wie & ote fsa wet 3 ufe we AIG I (751-10, Fat, He 1) an ko keejai mit-rhaa khaak ralai mar jaa-ay jee-o. If you make any friend other than God, you shall die and mingle with the dust.
ag da efy sorfimr afs af wre arf AG I 751-11, Fat, He 1)
baho rang daykh bhulaa-i-aa bhul bhul aavai jaa-ay jee-o.
Gazing upon the many games of love, you are beguiled and bewildered; you come and go in reincarnation.
see ys 3 echt sedt Als free AIG Wen (751-11, Het, He 1D nadar parabhoo tay chhutee-ai nadree may! milaa-ay jee-o. ||6|| Only by God's Grace can you be saved. By His Grace, He unites in His Union. ||6]|
ares fama fegfenr aa fas famrg o ates AG I (751-12, Het, He 1)
gaafal gi-aan vihooni-aa gur bin gi-aan na bhaal jee-o.
O careless one, you are totally lacking any wisdom; do not seek wisdom without the Guru.
fisats feadha ga sor ef& ofes AIG I (751-12, Bat, He 1)
khinchotaan viguchee-ai buraa bhalaa du-ay naal jee-o.
By indecision and inner conflict, you shall come to ruin. Good and bad both pull at you.
fag Fae 3 ofsur AS Hot AHorfs AG NDI (751-13, At, He 1)
bin sabdai bhai rati-aa sabh johee jamkaal jee-o. ||7||
Without being attuned to the Word of the Shabad and the Fear of God, all come under the gaze of the Messenger of Death. ||7]|
fafs afs age Ofaor ASA Sfe wrorg FIG II (751-13, Bat, He D jin kar kaaran Dhaari-aa sabhsai day-ay aaDhaar jee-o. He who created the creation and sustains it, gives sustenance to all.
A fa@ nog ferrdha Aer pet wsrg AIG I (751-14, Bat, He 1) so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai sadaa sadaa daataar jee-o. How can you forget Him from your mind? He is the Great Giver, forever and ever.
Soa OH B SnAg fours mrarg HE CUA (751-14, Bet, He 1)
naanak naam na veesrai niDhaaraa aaDhaar jee-o. ||8]|1]|2||
Nanak shall never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Support of the unsupported. ||8]|1[|2||
Hot Hos 9 aret WT IO (751-16) soohee mehlaa 1 kaafee ghar 10 Soohee, First Mehl, Kaafee, Tenth House:
qe Afsas yAfe II (751-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HSH HOH Bos TaHfe uf i (751-17, wet art, 42 1) maanas janam dulambh gurmukh paa-i-aa. This human birth is so difficult to obtain; the Gurmukh obtains it.
He 36 df yds A Afsas Sher NA (751-17, Ast wet, Hs 1)
man tan ho-ay chulambh jay satgur bhaa-i-aa. ||1]|
The mind and body are dyed in the deep red color of devotional love, if it pleases the True Guru. ||1]|
3S HOH Aete Sug Ay B Il (751-17, wat ae, ve 1)
chalai janam savaar vakhar sach lai.
He departs with his life embellished and successful, taking the merchandise of the True Name.
ufs ue warts Afsag Aafe S NU TIS I (751-18, Fat wet, He 1)
pat paa-ay darbaar satgur sabad bhai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He is honored in the Darbaar, the Royal Court, of the Lord, through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, and the Fear of God. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfs 3fo Ag Rots ATS iS Sher I (751-18, Fat wet, Hs 1)
man tan sach salaahi saachay man bhaa-i-aa.
One who praises the True Lord with his mind and body, pleases the Mind of the True Lord.
UST D2
ates Tat He HSM TT UST ue I (752-1, Fat wet, He 1) laal rataa man maani-aa gur pooraa paa-i-aa. ||2|| Attuned to the Beloved Lord, the mind is appeased, and finds the Perfect Guru. ||2]|
UG He ae Ate nists 3 SA Ml (752-1, Fat wet, 3 1) ha-o jeevaa gun saar antar too vasai. I live, by cherishing Your Glorious Virtues; You dwell deep within me.
3 eAfa Ho He Aon SA IA MSI (752-2, Fat wet, He 1) too” vaseh man maahi sehjay ras rasai. ||3]| You dwell within my mind, and so it naturally celebrates in joyful delight. ||3]|
Hae HS ANSE wTgS ABA | (752-2, yest art, ue 1) moorakh man samjhaa-ay aakha-o kayt-rhaa. O my foolish mind, how can I teach and instruct you?
aanfy ofs ae ate dfa garsar sil (752-2, wet art, He 1)
gurmukh har gun gaa-ay rang rangayt-rhaa. ||4||
As Gurmukh, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and so become attuned to His Love. ||4]|
fos fos fae mri UtsH nmsar Il (752-3, Adt aret, He 1)
nit nit ridai samaal pareetam aapnaa.
Continually, continuously, remember and cherish your Beloved Lord in your heart. A vote de ofs ost ey ASTUST NUN (752-3, Bet aret, Hs 1)
jay chaleh gun naal naahee dukh santaapanaa. ||5|| For if you depart with virtue, then pain shall never afflict you. ||5] |
HoH Safh gore o PSH Sao Il (752-4, et oret, He 1)
manmukh bharam bhulaanaa naa tis rang hai.
The self-willed manmukh wanders around, deluded by doubt; he does not enshrine love for the Lord.
Hon dfe fesrar nfs sfs Sad WEN (752-4, wet wet, He 1) marsee ho-ay vidaanaa man tan bhang hai. ||6] | He dies as a stranger to his own self, and his mind and body are spoiled. ||6||
Ts at arg aHfE ara wuts mrs it (752-5, Ast art, we 1) gur kee kaar kKamaa-ay laahaa ghar aani-aa. Performing service to the Guru, you shall go home with the profit.
deaat fosae Aafe ustfenr Oil (752-5, wt aret, we 1)
gurbaanee nirbaan sabad pachhaani-aa. ||7]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, and the Shabad, the Word of God, the state of Nirvaanaa is attained. ||7]||
fea stead at mgeth A IO SSA I (752-6, Fat aet, He 1) ik naanak kee ardaas jay tuDh bhaavsee. Nanak makes this one prayer: if it pleases Your Will,
Hedi on foen afs ae Wert CNV (752-6, Aet ae, He 1) mai deejai naam nivaas har gun gaavsee. ||8||1||3]|
bless me with a home in Your Name, Lord, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises. H8I121/3II
Hat HIS 4 Il (752-7)
soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
fa@ urafs So ue sfs warebat i (752-7, wat, Hs 1) ji-o aaran lohaa paa-ay bhann gharhaa-ee-ai. As iron is melted in the forge and re-shaped,
fs@ Was Hat ufe se sere AU (752-7, Het, He 1) ti-o saakat jonee paa-ay bhavai bhavaa-ee-ai. ||1]| so is the godless materialist reincarnated, and forced to wander aimlessly. ||1]|
fag 3S AS TY SY AHS Il (752-8, Fat, Hs 1) bin boojhay sabh dukh dukh kamaavanaa. Without understanding, everything is suffering, earning only more suffering.
J@H ore wfe soft sarSar UA TIE Il (752-8, Fat, He 1) ha-umai aavai jaa-ay bharam bhulaavanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In his ego, he comes and goes, wandering in confusion, deluded by doubt. ||1]|Pause] |
3 aanfy saeag ofa any ferret Ih (752-8, wet, Hs 1) too” gurmukh rakhanhaar har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. You save those who are Gurmukh, O Lord, through meditation on Your Naam.
Hafs ssfo safe Fee are MQM (752-9, wat, He 1)
mayleh tujheh rajaa-ay sabad kamaa-ee-ai. ||2||
You blend with Yourself, by Your Will, those who practice the Word of the Shabad. [21]
3 afs afs safe orf Sfo A Ure II (752-9, Het, He 1D
too” kar kar vaykheh aap deh so paa-ee-ai.
You created the Creation, and You Yourself gaze upon it; whatever You give, is received.
3 cuts ate Carty efs stove Sil (752-10, wet, He 1) too daykheh thaap uthaap dar beenaa-ee-ai. ||3]|| You watch, establish and disestablish; You keep all in Your vision at Your Door. ||3]|
oot defa wa use BavehHt I (752-10, wet, He dayhee hovag khaak pavan udaa-ee-dai. The body shall turn to dust, and the soul shall fly away.
feg faa we mBoaq HOS 3s ure sil (752-11, wat, He 1)
ih kithai ghar a-utaak mahal na paa-ee-ai. ||4]|
So where are their homes and resting places now? They do not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, either. ||4| |
feg det nig ug we yore i (752-11, Fat, He 1) dihu deevee anDh ghor ghab muhaa-ee-ai. In the pitch darkness of broad daylight, their wealth is being plundered.
Teta HA we oe for gnreot WU (752-12, wet, Hs 1) garab musai ghar chor kis roo-aa-ee-ai. ||5|| Pride is looting their homes like a thief; where can they file their complaint? ||5| |
qonfa og 3 ofa afs of ware I (752-12, wet, He 1D
gurmukh chor na laag har naam jagaa-ee-ai.
The thief does not break into the home of the Gurmukh; he is awake in the Name of the Lord.
Rafe foerst orfar af chub wei (752-12, wet, ue 1)
sabad nivaaree aag jot deepaa-ee-ai. ||6|| The Word of the Shabad puts out the fire of desire; God's Light illuminates and enlightens. ||6] |
we Io dfs on afe nafs gers I (752-13, wat, He 1) laal ratan har naam gur surat bujhaa-ee-ai.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a jewel, a ruby; the Guru has taught me the Word of the Shabad.
Ret ad fosany A aeHfs ure WI (752-13, Fat, He 1) sadaa rahai nihkaam jay gurmat paa-ee-ai. ||7]| One who follows the Guru's Teachings remains forever free of desire. ||7]|
ats fed ofa o@ vfs sAebt I (752-14, wet, Hs 1) raat dihai har naa-o man vasaa-ee-ai. Night and day, enshrine the Lord's Name within your mind.
oan Hts free A so seh WCHQUSI (752-14, Fe, He 1) naanak mayl milaa-ay jay tuDh bhaa-ee-ai. ||8]|2]|4]| Please unite Nanak in Union, O Lord, if it is pleasing to Your Will. ||8]|2]|4]|
Hat HIS Y Il (752-15) soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
Hod 3 on ferrfa uifafef ferret i (752-15, wet, He 1)
manhu na naam visaar ahinis Dhi-aa-ee-ai.
Never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, from your mind; night and day, meditate on it.
fa oufs four ofa fae me ure A (752-15, Bet, He 1D ji-o raakhahi kirpaa Dhaar tivai sukh paa-ee-ai. ||1]| As You keep me, in Your Merciful Grace, so do I find peace. ||1]|
H vnigd ufs ou Bact eget I (752-16, wet, He mai anDhulay har naam lakutee tohnee. I am blind, and the Lord's Name is my cane.
vue Afss at 2a B HI Het AU FITS i (752-16, wet, ue 1)
raha-o saahib kee tayk na mohai mohnee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I remain under the Sheltering Support of my Lord and Master; I am not enticed by Maya the enticer. ||1||Pause] |
Ag tus 3g ane af surfer tl (752-17, wt, us 1) jah daykh-a-u tah naal gur daykhaali-aa. Wherever I look, there the Guru has shown me that God is always with me.
nists wate af Hafe footer Qi (752-17, At, He 1)
antar baahar bhaal sabad nihaali-aa. ||2| |
Searching inwardly and outwardly as well, I came to see Him, through the Word of the Shabad. ||2| |
Ret Afsas ste on fadaar il (752-17, gat, He 1)
sayvee satgur bhaa-ay naam niranjanaa.
So serve the True Guru with love, through the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
3u ae fae arfe san 3@ SAS BI (752-18, Bat, He 1) tuDh bhaavai tivai rajaa-ay bharam bha-o bhanjnaa. ||3]| As it pleases You, so by Your Will, You destroy my doubts and fears. ||3]]|
ASHS ot ey ord Ha|St wife S& I (752-18, wet, He 1)
janmat hee dukh laagai marnaa aa-ay kai.
At the very moment of birth, he is afflicted with pain, and in the end, he comes only to die.
HOH HIE UTES Ufa TE wf & igil (752-19, wat, ne 1)
janam maran parvaan har gun gaa-ay kai. ||4|| Birth and death are validated and approved, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. [141]
wg at 3 defa go at AMT I (752-19, wet, He 1) ha-o naahee too hoveh tuDh hee saaji-aa. When there is no ego, there You are; You fashioned all of this.
uot Dus nmg afy Carty Aafe fasta null (753-1, Pet, Hs 1
aapay thaap uthaap sabad nivaaji-aa. ||5]| You Yourself establish and disestablish; through the Word of Your Shabad, You elevate and exalt. ||5]|
Sot SAH gate 3 AN ag afenr i (753-1, FST, He 1) dayhee bhasam rulaa-ay na jaapee kah ga-i-aa. When the body rolls in the dust, it is not known where the soul has gone.
min sfoor maf A feRnre sfemr él (753-2, wet, Hs 1) aapay rahi-aa samaa-ay so vismaad bha-i-aa. ||6|| He Himself is permeating and pervading; this is wonderful and amazing! ||6]|
3 ont ys ofs refs AS 3 Il (753-2, Ae, He too” naahee parabh door jaaneh sabh too hai. You are not far away, God; You know everything.
aenfa ef sets nists st 3 F WI (753-2, Fat, Hs 1) gurmukh vaykh hadoor antar bhee too hai. ||7]||
The Gurmukh sees You ever-present; You are deep within the nucleus of our inner self. ||7]||
Adin on foes nists AifS afe i (753-3, gat, Hs 1) mai deejai naam nivaas antar saa“t ho-ay. Please, bless me with a home in Your Name; may my inner self be at peace.
Te We soa wA Afsag Hfs SE UCUSNUll (753-3, et, He 1)
gun gaavai naanak daas satgur mat day-ay. ||8]|3]|5||
May slave Nanak sing Your Glorious Praises; O True Guru, please share the Teachings with me. ||8]|3]|5]|
TH Ast HIS 2 wg A ACU (753-5) raag soohee mehlaa 3 ghar 1 asatpadee-aa Raag Soohee, Third Mehl, First House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars urrfe il (753-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
on dt 3 Ag fae dur fag Afsag OH © AM I (753-6, Fat, He 3)
naamai hee tay sabh kichh ho-aa bin satgur naam na jaapai.
Everything comes from the Naam, the Name of the Lord; without the True Guru, the Naam is not experienced.
Gd & Age Ho IA Hie fag TS ATE © AME Il (753-6, Hat, He 3)
gur kaa sabad mahaa ras meethaa bin chaakhay saad na jaapai.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the sweetest and most sublime essence, but without tasting it, its flavor cannot be experienced.
aGst Fes HOH aetfenr dofA ardt mm il (753-7, wat, He 3)
ka-udee badlai janam gavaa-i-aa cheenas naahee aapai.
He wastes this human life in exchange for a mere shell; he does not understand his own self.
Taufy JS st Sa WE JOH EY o ASU UU (753-7, wat, He 3)
gurmukh hovai taa ayko jaanai ha-umai dukh na santaapai. ||1]|
But, if he becomes Gurmukh, then he comes to know the One Lord, and the disease of egotism does not afflict him. ||1]|
werd as vue feeg fats Ars fAG fos wet Il (753-8, Fat, Hs 3) balihaaree gur apnay vitahu jin saachay si-o liv laa-ee. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has lovingly attached me to the True Lord.
Rag de witsy udgarfaor AoA foo AHTet UU TIS Il (753-8, Fat, He 3)
sabad cheeneh aatam pargaasi-aa sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Concentrating on the Word of the Shabad, the soul is illumined and enlightened. I remain absorbed in celestial ecstasy. ||1]||Pause] |
qenfa ae qeufe 38 gente AaE ates Il (753-9, wt, we 3)
gurmukh gaavai gurmukh boojhai gurmukh sabad beechaaray. The Gurmukh sings the Praises of the Lord; the Gurmukh understands. The Gurmukh contemplates the Word of the Shabad.
me fis As ae 3 Cun aenfe aan Aes Il (753-10, At, He 3)
jee-o pind sabh gur tay upjai gurmukh kaaraj savaaray.
Body and soul are totally rejuvenated through the Guru; the Gurmukh's affairs are resolved in his favor.
Houfe iar nig are fy ye HATS Il (753-10, gat, He 3) manmukh anDhaa anDh kamaavai bikh khatay sansaaray. The blind self-willed manmukh acts blindly, and earns only poison in this world.
Hfeor dfs wet ey ure fre aa wifS fimrs 2H (753-11, Fat, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi sadaa dukh paa-ay bin gur at pi-aaray. ||2|| Enticed by Maya, he suffers in constant pain, without the most Beloved Guru. ||2| |
Ret Aza A Afsae AS WS AfsaT SES Il (753-11, Fat, He 3)
so-ee Sayvak jay satgur sayvay chaalai satgur bhaa-ay.
He alone is a selfless servant, who serves the True Guru, and walks in harmony with the True Guru's Will.
Ast Hae frefs 3 APS Ara fs SATS I (753-12, wet, Hs 3)
saachaa sabad sifat hai saachee saachaa man vasaa-ay. The True Shabad, the Word of God, is the True Praise of God; enshrine the True Lord within your mind.
Aet aat aanfe wire ICH fess WES I (753-12, Bet, Hs 3) sachee banee gurmukh aakhai ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay. The Gurmukh speaks the True Word of Gurbani, and egotism departs from within.
WM} BST AGH J AS ATS ASE ASS ISI (753-13, wat, He 3) aapay daataa karam hai saachaa saachaa sabad sunaa-ay. ||3]|
He Himself is the Giver, and True are His actions. He proclaims the True Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
ToHfy wes auf ue aout SH AUS | (753-13, Fat, Hs 3)
gurmukh ghaalay gurmukh khatay gurmukh naam japaa-ay.
The Gurmukh works, and the Gurmukh earns; the Gurmukh inspires others to chant the Naam.
Fe nifsus AS df ost ag & AofA ASS I (753-14, wet, He 3)
sadaa alipat saachai rang raataa gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
He is forever unattached, imbued with the Love of the True Lord, intuitively in harmony with the Guru.
HOH Ae ot as Ss fay ste fg we i (753-14, wet, us 3)
manmukh sad hee koorho bolai bikh beejai bikh khaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh always tells lies; he plants the seeds of poison, and eats only poison.
AHantes aor feat ear fag TI ACS SSE III (753-15, wet, us 3)
jamkaal baaDhaa tarisnaa daaDhaa bin gur kavan chhadaa-ay. ||4||
He is bound and gagged by the Messenger of Death, and burnt in the fire of desire; who can save him, except the Guru? ||4]|
Au Steg fas As Afs ores TONY orf gsTS Il (753-15, at, He 3)
sachaa tirath jit sat sar naavan gurmukh aap bujhaa-ay.
True is that place of pilgrimage, where one bathes in the pool of Truth, and achieves self-realization as Gurmukh. The Gurmukh understands his own self.
worse Stee ae wate feure fez oS He AS Il (753-16, wet, He 3)
athsath tirath gur sabad dikhaa-ay tit naatai mal jaa-ay.
The Lord has shown that the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage; bathing in it, filth is washed away.
Ae" Hae Ae dT fSgHs BT HS Bd 6 BE Ill (753-16, Fat, vs 3)
sachaa sabad sachaa hai nirmal naa mal lagai na laa-ay.
True and Immaculate is the True Word of His Shabad; no filth touches or clings to Him.
Aol frefs Het Wars UT TT SF UTS Wl (753-17, Het, v2 3) sachee sifat sachee saalaah pooray gur tay paa-ay. ||5|| True Praise, True Devotional Praise, is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||5]||
36 Ho Ag fag afe fA AT TaHiS ATE B AES Il (753-17, Wat, He 3)
tan man sabh kichh har tis kayraa durmat kahan na jaa-ay.
Body, mind, everything belongs to the Lord; but the evil-minded ones cannot even say this.
Jou de 3 fosns de ICH feag WE I (753-18, wet, He 3)
hukam hovai taa nirmal hovai ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay.
If such is the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then one becomes pure and spotless, and the ego is taken away from within.
ad at AN Aon aedt fFASt mrafe ASS Il (753-18, wet, ws 3)
gur kee saakhee sehjay chaakhee tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ay.
I have intuitively tasted the Guru's Teachings, and the fire of my desire has been quenched.
Gd a Aafe TS AoA HS AoA sfowk ANTS WEI! (753-19, Fat, Hs 3)
gur kai sabad raataa sehjay maataa sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||6] |
Attuned to the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one is naturally intoxicated, merging imperceptibly into the Lord. ||6| |
UST Dug
dfs a on Afs afs we ae & ote fumes I (754-1, wet, ne 3) har kaa naam sat kar jaanai gur kai bhaa-ay pi-aaray. The Name of the Lord is known as True, through the Love of the Beloved Guru.
Fot sfsoret aa 3 uret AS of floras it (754-1, wet, ue 3) sachee vadi-aa-ee gur tay paa-ee sachai naa-ay pi-aaray. True Glorious Greatness is obtained from the Guru, through the Beloved True Name.
ea Ae AS Hfs gas feaer at Sas Il (754-2, wat, Hs 3)
ayko sachaa sabh meh vartai virlaa ko veechaaray.
The One True Lord is permeating and pervading among all; how rare is the one who contemplates this.
nmy His SE 3° auA At Sas ASS WDM (754-2, wet, ws 3)
aapay mayl la-ay taa bakhsay sachee bhagat savaaray. ||7||
The Lord Himself unites us in Union, and forgives us; He embellishes us with true devotional worship. ||7||
AS Ay Ay Ag zas Tenfe aet WE I (754-3, wet, He 3) sabho sach sach sach vartai gurmukh ko-ee jaanai.
All is Truth; Truth, and Truth alone is pervading; how rare is the Gurmukh who knows this.
HUE HIS JOH Sas TaHfe wiry uSré il (754-3, wet, ue 3)
jaman marnaa hukmo vartai gurmukh aap pachhaanai.
Birth and death occur by the Hukam of His Command; the Gurmukh understands his own self.
on fore = Afsag we A fee A Sew ure I (754-4, wat, He 3)
naam Dhi-aa-ay taa satgur bhaa-ay jo ichhai so fal paa-ay.
He meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and so pleases the True Guru. He receives whatever rewards he desires.
ood fsA a AS fas de fa feos wry TSS CIA (754-4, wet, He 3) naanak tis daa sabh kichh hovai je vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||8]|1]| O Nanak, one who eradicates self-conceit from within, has everything. ||8||1]|
Hot HIS 3 Il (754-5)
soohee mehlaa 3. Soohee, Third Mehl:
afior anfs uifs Horfs@ fug =A fAR oS II (754-5, Bat, He 3) kaa-i-aa kaaman at su-aaliha-o pir vasai jis naalay. The body-bride is very beautiful; she dwells with her Husband Lord.
fugs AY 3 Ae Aafe Ad at AAE ANTS Il (754-5, wet, us 3)
pir sachay tay sadaa suhaagan gur kaa sabad sam"aalay.
She becomes the happy soul-bride of her True Husband Lord, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ofa at safs wer sft ast TEN fees AS A (754-6, At, He 3)
har kee bhagat sadaa rang raataa ha-umai vichahu jaalay. ||1]||
The Lord's devotee is forever attuned to the Lord's Love; her ego is burnt away from within. ||1]|
aT AT us TI at areat i (754-7, wet, He 3) vaahu vaahu pooray gur kee banee. Waaho! Waaho! Blessed, blessed is the Word of the Perfect Guru's Bani.
ud as 3 Sunt ate AHTet AUN TIC il (754-7, wet, He 3)
pooray gur tay upjee saach samaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It wells up and springs forth from the Perfect Guru, and merges into Truth. ||1]|Pause] |
afin nivfs Ag fae ZA US NIH UST I (754-7, wet, He 3) kaa-i-aa andar sabh kichh vasai khand mandal paataalaa. Everything is within the Lord - the continents, worlds and nether regions.
afer niefs nares St SA Ase as yfsurer il (754-8, gat, ue 3)
kaa-i-aa andar jagjeevan daataa vasai sabhnaa karay partipaalaa.
The Life of the World, the Great Giver, dwells within the body; He is the Cherisher of all.
afent aHfe Het Adsl aH STH ANTS IQ (754-9, wet, He 3) kaa-i-aa kaaman sadaa suhaylee gurmukh naam sam"aalaa. ||2]| The body-bride is eternally beautiful; the Gurmukh contemplates the Naam. ||2]|
ofenr niefs um ZA niey 6 aftr Are II (754-9, Bet, Hs 3) kaa-i-aa andar aapay vasai alakh na lakhi-aa jaa-ee. The Lord Himself dwells within the body; He is invisible and cannot be seen.
HOHY Hag gs sd sata svete AT I (754-10, Fat, Hs 3)
manmukh mugaDh boojhai naahee baahar bhaalan jaa-ee.
The foolish self-willed manmukh does not understand; he goes out searching for the Lord externally.
Afsag Ae Ae AY ure Afsate ney fest ByTet SII (754-10, Fat, He 3)
satgur sayvay sadaa sukh paa-ay satgur alakh ditaa lakhaa-ee. ||3]|
One who serves the True Guru is always at peace; the True Guru has shown me the Invisible Lord. ||3]|
ofan niefs Io uese Sas FS STM I (754-11, Fat, ue 3)
kaa-i-aa andar ratan padaarath bhagat bharay bhandaaraa.
Within the body there are jewels and precious treasures, the over-flowing treasure of devotion.
fen afeur niefs o@ds fyet ve ues aArST Il (754-11, wet, He 3) is kaa-i-aa andar na-ukhand parithmee haat patan baajaaraa. Within this body are the nine continents of the earth, its markets, cities and streets.
fea afeur niefs on 38 fafa uth aa & Aafe Sera ell (754-12, Fat, He 3)
is kaa-i-aa andar naam na-o niDh paa-ee-ai gur kai sabad veechaaraa. ||4||
Within this body are the nine treasures of the Naam; contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is obtained. ||4| |
afer niefs Sf Jars nm SeET ST Il (754-13, gat, He 3) kaa-i-aa andar tol tulaavai aapay tolanhaaraa. Within the body, the Lord estimates the weight; He Himself is the weigher.
fey Ho 33q Hed Hea (SA a HS w|rs I (754-13, Het, He 3) ih man ratan javaahar maanak tis kaa mol afaaraa. This mind is the jewel, the gem, the diamond; it is absolutely priceless.
Hfs fas dt on urn ardt om ureint ae aherar ull (754-14, wat, ne 3)
mol kit hee naam paa-ee-ai naahee naam paa-ee-ai gur beechaaraa. ||5]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, cannot be purchased at any price; the Naam is obtained by contemplating the Guru. ||5]|
qTonfa 32 A fear aa ds AS sath sare I (754-14, wet, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so kaa-i-aa khojai hor sabh bharam bhulaa-ee.
One who becomes Gurmukh searches this body; all others just wander around in confusion.
fan 6 tf wet AS ure da for & aT Baa I (754-15, wat, He 3)
jis no day-ay so-ee jan paavai hor ki-aa ko karay chaturaa-ee.
That humble being alone obtains it, unto whom the Lord bestows it. What other clever tricks can anyone try?
afer nivfs 38 ar@ SA aT uA uret HEI (754-15, wat, He 3)
kaa-i-aa andar bha-o bhaa-o vasai gur parsaadee paa-ee. ||6||
Within the body, the Fear of God and Love for Him abides; by Guru's Grace, they are obtained. ||6]|
afenr niefs gout fang HoAT AS Gufs fas AAS Il (754-16, wet, He 3) kaa-i-aa andar barahmaa bisan mahaysaa sabh opat jit sansaaraa.
Within the body, are Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, from whom the whole world emanated.
Ae mmuyar ae safer mrer ASS UAT I (754-17, at, He 3)
sachai aapnaa khayl rachaa-i-aa aavaa ga-on paasaaraa.
The True Lord has staged and contrived His own play; the expanse of the Universe comes and goes.
ud Afsate orf fearfeor Afs oth feASTar WDM (754-17, Hat, Hs 3)
poorai satgur aap dikhaa-i-aa sach naam nistaaraa. ||7||
The Perfect True Guru Himself has made it clear, that emancipation comes through the True Name. ||7]|
A ofeor a Afsag AS AS orf Herc i (754-18, At, He 3) saa kaa-i-aa jo satgur Sayvai sachai aap savaaree. That body, which serves the True Guru, is embellished by the True Lord Himself.
fee are uf Set ot ST AH Ad wr Il (754-18, At, He 3)
vin naavai dar dho-ee naahee taa jam karay khu-aaree.
Without the Name, the mortal finds no place of rest in the Court of the Lord; he shall be tortured by the Messenger of Death.
ood Ay efsniret ure fan 3 ofa fasur ost WCQ (754-19, Fat, Hs 3) naanak sach vadi-aa-ee paa-ay jis no har kirpaa Dhaaree. ||8]|2|| O Nanak, true glory is bestowed, when the Lord showers His Mercy. ||8]|2| |
Ua uy
THT Hat HIS 3 WT IO (755-1) raag soohee mehlaa 3 ghar 10 Raag Soohee, Third Mehl, Tenth House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (755-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
coer o Aveta A Hfs Sent Il (755-2, wet, Hs 3) dunee-aa na saalaahi jo mar vanjsee. Do not praise the world; it shall simply pass away.
Bar o Ate A fe we Stet WAM (755-2, wet, Hs 3) lokaa na saalaahi jo mar khaak thee-ee. ||1|| Do not praise other people; they shall die and turn to dust. ||1||
ag Hd Afoar sg ll (755-2, wet, Hs 3) vaahu mayray saahibaa vaahu. Waaho! Waaho! Hail, hail to my Lord and Master.
Tafa Ae Aedha AST SusSTT NU TIC i (755-3, wet, He 3) gurmukh sadaa salaahee-ai sachaa vayparvaahu. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, forever praise the One who is forever True, Independent and Carefree. ||1]|Pause] |
zor act SASt Hone efs Hefs I (755-3, Fat, He 3) dunee-aa kayree dostee manmukh dajh marann. Making worldly friendships, the self-willed manmukhs burn and die.
AH ufs aa Hrshafs Sar B BSS WW (755-4, wet, ue 3)
jam pur baDhay maaree-ah vaylaa na lahann. ||2| |
In the City of Death, they are bound and gagged and beaten; this opportunity shall never come again. ||2| |
ToHfa AoW Aarsa AS Hate walls Il (755-4, wat, ue 3) gurmukh janam sakaarthaa sachai sabad lagann.
The lives of the Gurmukhs are fruitful and blessed; they are committed to the True Word of the Shabad.
MTSH IH YarfHor AoA Afe sdfs WSI (755-4, et, He 3) aatam raam pargaasi-aa sehjay sukh rahann. ||3]|| Their souls are illuminated by the Lord, and they dwell in peace and pleasure. ||3]||
qe o Hae ferfoor en ate aes I (755-5, wet, Hs 3) gur kaa sabad visaari-aa doojai bhaa-ay rachann. Those who forget the Word of the Guru's Shabad are engrossed in the love of duality.
fanart su 5 Gad niofes nes fedfa isi (755-5, At, Hs 3)
tisnaa bhukh na utrai an-din jalat firann. ||4]|
Their hunger and thirst never leave them, and night and day, they wander around burning. ||4||
erat of eHSt ate Hat Sg ade Il (755-6, At, He 3) dustaa naal dostee naal santaa vair karann. Those who make friendships with the wicked, and harbor animosity to the Saints,
wif 58 aca fae Hae awe Saf Ul (755-6, wet, He 3) aap dubay kutamb si-o saglay kul dobann. ||5]| shall drown with their families, and their entire lineage shall be obliterated. ||5| |
fear sot far ot odt Hone Har adfe Il (755-7, At, He 3) nindaa bhalee kisai kee naahee manmukh mugaDh karann. It is not good to slander anyone, but the foolish, self-willed manmukhs still do it.
HI ws fae feear aaa uifa ues WEN (755-7, Bat, He 3) muh kaalay tin nindkaa narkay ghor pavann. ||6|| The faces of the slanderers turn black, and they fall into the most horrible hell. ||6]|
& Ho AA Als SA deta 3d AIH AHS Il (755-8, wat, He 3) ay man jaisaa sayveh taisaa hoveh tayhay karam kamaa-ay. O mind, as you serve, so do you become, and so are the deeds that you do.
wrfy aft wm ot usar aver fas o ATE DI (755-8, Bet, He 3)
aap beej aapay hee khaavnaa kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||7]||
Whatever you yourself plant, that is what you shall have to eat; nothing else can be said about this. ||7]|
Ho Use at Hat TS fas usate ii (755-9, wet, ue 3) mahaa purkhaa kaa bolnaa hovai kitai parthaa-ay. The speech of the great spiritual beings has a higher purpose.
Gfe vifys ad sous afs Sar fe 3 TAS cI (755-9, FSH, He 3)
o-ay amrit bharay bharpoor heh onaa til na tamaa-ay. ||8]|
They are filled to over-flowing with Ambrosial Nectar, and they have absolutely no greed at all. ||8||
Teas TE Aud wes CueAfs it (755-10, wet, us 3) gunkaaree gun sanghrai avraa updaysayn. The virtuous accumulate virtue, and teach others.
A sara fa Gor ffs ad nates oH wets ICI (755-10, Fat, He 3)
say vadbhaagee je onaa mil rahay an-din naam la-ayn. ||9]|
Those who meet with them are so very fortunate; night and day, they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||9||
om fara Hefs fafs Guret Heat i (755-11, gat, He 3) daysee rijak sambaahi jin upaa-ee maydnee. He who created the Universe, gives sustenance to it.
Sa J wag Ae yrfy gat Aol (755-11, wat, He 3) ayko hai daataar sachaa aap Dhanee. ||10|| The One Lord alone is the Great Giver. He Himself is the True Master. ||10]|
A Ag 39 of 3 aout oefe farts i (755-12, at, He 3) so sach tayrai naal hai gurmukh nadar nihaal. That True Lord is always with you; the Gurmukh is blessed with His Glance of Grace.
nny aur fs we A Us AT ANT NIA (755-12, et, He 3)
aapay bakhsay mayl la-ay so parabh sadaa samaal. ||11||
He Himself shall forgive you, and merge you into Himself; forever cherish and contemplate God. ||11]|
Ho Hor Ag fosHer fa ata fife afe i (755-13, gat, ne 3) man mailaa sach nirmalaa ki-o kar mili-aa jaa-ay. The mind is impure; only the True Lord is pure. So how can it merge into Him?
us ne ST ffs ad JH Aafe AEE NII (755-13, Fat, He 3)
parabh maylay taa mil rahai ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||12]|
God merges it into Himself, and then it remains merged; through the Word of His Shabad, the ego is burnt away. ||12||
A Ag Ae and fog ates Arrfe i (755-14, wet, 8 3) so saho sachaa veesrai Dharig jeevan sansaar. Cursed is the life in this world, of one who forgets her True Husband Lord.
oefs ad ot Stas aanst Sterfa 93 (755-14, wat, He 3)
nadar karay naa veesrai gurmatee veechaar. ||13]|
The Lord grants His Mercy, and she does not forget Him, if she contemplates the Guru's Teachings. ||13]|
Afsag HS 3 ffs go ATG sat Bs os I (755-15, wat, He 3)
satgur maylay taa mil rahaa saach rakhaa ur Dhaar.
The True Guru unites her, and so she remains united with Him, with the True Lord enshrined within her heart.
fifeor df o ates aa a ofS fimrfa iaeil (755-15, gat, He 3)
mili-aa ho-ay na veechhurhai gur kai hayt pi-aar. ||14||
And so united, she will not be separated again; she remains in the love and affection of the Guru. ||14]|
fug Arordt mruet ag & Hafe Shefa Il (755-16, wet, Hs 3) pir saalaahee aapnaa gur kai sabad veechaar. I praise my Husband Lord, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ffs uisu AY ufemr Aarsst ofa quill (755-16, Fat, He 3)
mil pareetam sukh paa-i-aa sobhaavantee naar. ||15]||
Meeting with my Beloved, I have found peace; I am His most beautiful and happy soul-bride. ||15||
HOH HO © fanet ofS HS fafS ase II (755-17, Bet, He 3)
manmukh man na bhij-ee at mailay chit kathor.
The mind of the self-willed manmukh is not softened; his consciousness is totally polluted and stone-hearted.
Au eo ubreint niefs fer facta Mell (755-17, at, He 3)
sapai duDh pee-aa-ee-ai andar vis nikor. ||16] |
Even if the venomous snake is fed on milk, it shall still be filled with poison. ||16|| wif ad for wimdbat mm guASIE Il (755-18, wat, He 3)
aap karay kis aakhee-ai aapay bakhsanhaar.
He Himself does - who else should I ask? He Himself is the Forgiving Lord.
Gd Agel HS Cad 3 AG Sfenr Aterg IAI (755-18, Fat, He 3)
gur sabdee mail utrai taa sach bani-aa seegaar. ||17]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, filth is washed away, and then, one is embellished with the ornament of Truth. ||17]|
Us Due
He Ag Ae Zend Ga as 3 feafs il (756-1, wat, we 3) sachaa saahu sachay vanjaaray othai koorhay na tikann. True is the Banker, and True are His traders. The false ones cannot remain there.
Gor Ag 3 seat ou dt Hfe udfS IACI (756-1, Bet, He 3) onaa sach na bhaav-ee dukh hee maahi pachann. ||18]| They do not love the Truth - they are consumed by their pain. ||18]|
IH Ho Aa fed ufs HH Ss Fe Il (756-2, wat, He 3)
ha-umai mailaa jag firai mar jammai vaaro vaar.
The world wanders around in the filth of egotism; it dies, and is re-born, over and again.
ufem faafs area af 5 AzETS VEN (756-2, Fe, Hs 3) pa-i-ai kirat kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||19]|
He acts in accordance with the karma of his past actions, which no one can erase. []19]|
Ast Hats fife ad at Afs oat fimrg i (756-2, et, He 3) santaa sangat mil rahai taa sach lagai pi-aar. But if he joins the Society of the Saints, then he comes to embrace love for the Truth.
Ag Hod Ag ufe fs Ad AfeErgs MQONl (756-3, At, He 3)
sach salaahee sach man dar sachai sachiaar. ||20||
Praising the True Lord with a truthful mind, he becomes true in the Court of the True Lord. ||20]|
as us ust His J nifofeta ay fomrfe i (756-3, wet, we 3)
gur pooray pooree mat hai ahinis naam Dhi-aa-ay.
The Teachings of the Perfect Guru are perfect; meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night.
JGH As es dad fess ofa TIE QAI (756-4, AH, He 3)
ha-umai mayraa vad rog hai vichahu thaak rahaa-ay. ||21]||
Egotism and self-conceit are terrible diseases; tranquility and stillness come from within. ||21]]|
Tg ATardt niruer fate fofe war ute it (756-4, wat, ws 3)
gur saalaahee aapnaa niv niv laagaa paa-ay. I praise my Guru; bowing down to Him again and again, I fall at His Feet.
36 HO ACUt ura udt fess wry Tete 122K (756-5, wat, He 3) tan man sa-upee aagai Dharee vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||22| |
I place my body and mind in offering unto Him, eradicating self-conceit from within. [|22]|
fisats feadhba fan fre foe wf Il (756-6, at, ne 3) khinchotaan viguchee-ai aykas si-o liv laa-ay. Indecision leads to ruin; focus your attention on the One Lord.
ISH He sfs FT Als TI AHS |S (756-6, Fat, Hz 3) ha-umai mayraa chhad too taa sach rahai samaa-ay. ||23]| Renounce egotism and self-conceit, and remain merged in Truth. ||23] |
Afsas 3 fue fa ofea AS Aafe waifs II (756-6, Fat, He 3)
satgur no milay se bhaa-iraa sachai sabad lagann.
Those who meet with the True Guru are my Siblings of Destiny; they are committed to the True Word of the Shabad.
Afs fxs A feesfs efs AS ferifs Nei (756-7, Fat, He 3)
sach milay say na vichhurheh dar sachai disann. ||24||
Those who merge with the True Lord shall not be separated again; they are judged to be True in the Court of the Lord. ||24||
A set A AMS A AST ASS Il (756-7, wt, He 3) say bhaa-ee say sajnaa jo sachaa sayvann. They are my Siblings of Destiny, and they are my friends, who serve the True Lord.
nieae feats usats ae at AS aie Quill (756-8, Fat, He 3)
avgan vikan pul"ran gun kee saajh kara‘ni™. ||25]|
They sell off their sins and demerits like straw, and enter into the partnership of virtue. ||25]|
Ge at AS AY Sur Ast gals aaa i (756-8, wt, we 3)
gun kee saajh sukh oopjai sachee bhagat karayn.
In the partnership of virtue, peace wells up, and they perform true devotional worship service.
Ag ents aa Aae FAG wea oH BEelS NEM (756-9, At, He 3)
sach vana‘jahi gur sabad si-o laahaa naam la-ayn. ||26||
They deal in Truth, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and they earn the profit of the Naam. ||26] |
Afear gut uu afe afa Heh 3s 3 vofeur of Il (756-9, Hat, He 3)
Su-inaa rupaa paap kar kar sanchee-ai chalai na chaldi-aa naal.
Gold and silver may be earned by committing sins, but they will not go with you when you die.
fee are as 3 VHT AS HSt AHA QI (756-10, Het, He 3)
vin naavai naal na chalsee sabh muthee jamkaal. ||27||
Nothing will go with you in the end, except the Name; all are plundered by the Messenger of Death. ||27]|
HS a SA ofa oH gd fase seg ANTS I (756-11, At, He 3)
man kaa tosaa har naam hai hirdai rakhahu sam“aal.
The Lord's Name is the nourishment of the mind; cherish it, and preserve it carefully within your heart.
fy uae nue 3 gente faad af Qc (756-11, gat, ne 3) ayhu kharach akhut hai gurmukh nibhai naal. ||28]| This nourishment is inexhaustible; it is always with the Gurmukhs. ||28]|
& Ho veg stoor aAAfe ufs mete i (756-11, get, 42 3) ay man moolhu bhuli-aa jaaseh pat gavaa-ay. O mind, if you forget the Primal Lord, you shall depart, having lost your honor.
feg mas Hfs en feerfimr ganst Ag forte ICI (756-12, Fat, Hs 3)
ih jagat mohi doojai vi-aapi-aa gurmatee sach Dhi-aa-ay. ||29]||
This world is engrossed in the love of duality; follow the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the True Lord. ||29]|
ofa at ahifs o ue ofa AA fue o ATE II (756-13, At, He 3)
har kee keemat na pavai har jas likhan na jaa-ay. The Lord's value cannot be estimated; the Lord's Praises cannot be written down.
qd & Aafe He 36 aU ofa fAe gd ANTE BON! (756-13, Fat, He 3)
gur kai sabad man tan rapai har si-o rahai samaa-ay. ||30||
When one's mind and body are attuned to the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one remains merged in the Lord. ||30||
A Ag Ha dae gat Hof ASE Il (756-14, wet, He 3) so saho mayraa rangulaa rangay sahj subhaa-ay. My Husband Lord is playful; He has imbued me with His Love, with natural ease.
onfs da a aa A fis & nif mre ZA (756-14, et, He 3) kaaman rang taa charhai jaa pir kai ank samaa-ay. ||31||
The soul-bride is imbued with His Love, when her Husband Lord merges her into His Being. ||31]||
fact feed st fkafes a Afsag ASfe I (756-15, Fat, Hs 3)
chiree vichhunay bhee milan jo satgur sayvann.
Even those who have been separated for so very long, are reunited with Him, when they serve the True Guru.
nists og fafa on 3 ute usefs o faucet ofs ae AofA sefo SBI (756-15, Fat, He 3) antar nav niDh naam hai khaan kharchan na nikhuta-ee har gun sahj ravann. ||32|| The nine treasures of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are deep within the nucleus of the self; consuming them, they are still never exhausted. Chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, with natural ease. ||32| |
o Gfe Aonfs o Hata of Gfe eu AALS Il (756-16, Fat, He 3) naa O-ay janmeh naa mareh naa o-ay dukh sahann. They are not born, and they do not die; they do not suffer in pain.
afs aa A Cad ofa fAG ae ads SZ (756-16, at, He 3) gur raakhay say ubray har si-o kayl karann. ||33]| Those who are protected by the Guru are saved. They celebrate with the Lord. ||33]|
Ane fxs 3 feests fa niafes fue sas i (756-17, wt, He 3)
sajan milay na vichhurheh je an-din milay rahann.
Those who are united with the Lord, the True Friend, are not separated again; night and day, they remain blended with Him.
fen wa ufo fess wefs Soa AY BIfS WSSUUISI (756-17, Fat, Hs 3)
is jag meh virlay jaanee-ahi naanak sach lahann. ||34||1]|3]| In this world, only a rare few are known, O Nanak, to have obtained the True Lord. [134] [11131]
Hat HIS 3 Il (756-18)
soohee mehlaa 3. Soohee, Third Mehl:
ofs Ft AH we o fs fafa ffemr ate I (756-18, At, He 3) har jee sookham agam hai kit biDh mili-aa jaa-ay. The Dear Lord is subtle and inaccessible; how can we ever meet Him?
qe a Aafe gH act miss SA Hfe ore il (756-19, gat, He 3)
gur kai sabad bharam katee-ai achint vasai man aa-ay. ||1]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, doubt is dispelled, and the Carefree Lord comes to abide in the mind. ||1]|
aanfy ofe afs om mufs Il (756-19, wet, He 3) gurmukh har har naam japann. The Gurmukhs chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ua Dud u@ fo & sfeorse Hf afs Te AE ses NA TIS il (757-1, Fat, v8 3)
ha-o tin kai balihaarnai man har gun sadaa ravann. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord in their minds forever. ||1||Pause] |
Tg Adeg Ho Adeg F Soave uTy Bfe I (757-1, wat, ne 3) gur sarvar maan sarovar hai vadbhaagee purakh laha“ni". The Guru is like the Mansarovar Lake; only the very fortunate beings find Him.
Rea Tents after A GAS SH BdfS iW (757-2, wet, Hs 3)
sayvak gurmukh khoji-aa say hansulay naam lahann. ||2]|
The Gurmukhs, the selfless servants, seek out the Guru; the swan-souls feed there on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
oH fomrfefs ga fAG aanfa arf warfe  (757-2, at, Hs 3) naam Dhi-aa-eeni" rang si-o gurmukh naam laga‘ni". The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, and remain linked to the Naam.
ufe yata de fatter aa grat ifs wef WI (757-3, Fat, Hs 3) Dhur poorab hovai likhi-aa gur bhaanaa man la-ayni". ||3]| Whatever is pre-ordained, accept it as the Will of the Guru. ||3]|
aoa we Ufo ufemr an foare il (757-3, wt, Hs 3) vadbhaagee ghar khoji-aa paa-i-aa naam niDhaan. By great good fortune, I searched my home, and found the treasure of the Naam.
dfs us Safer ys mS TH UES III (757-4, Fat, Hs 3)
gur poorai vaykhaali-aa parabh aatam raam pachhaan. ||4| |
The Perfect Guru has shown God to me; I have realized the Lord, the Supreme Soul. [141]
Asa & yg Sa FT EA weg 3 ale il (757-4, wet, Hs 3) sabhnaa kaa parabh ayk hai doojaa avar na ko-ay. There is One God of all; there is no other at all.
qe usAet ufs eA fss wie usae df ull (757-5, wat, ne 3)
gur parsaadee man vasai tit ghat pargat ho-ay. ||5]|
By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to abide in the mind; in the heart of such a one, He is revealed. ||5||
Ag vison gon 3 yon SA AS ate il (757-5, wat, He 3) sabh antarjaamee barahm hai barahm vasai sabh thaa-ay. God is the Inner-knower of all hearts; God dwells in every place.
Her for 3 nmiba nafs sug fee ofe nei (757-6, wet, us 3)
mandaa kis no aakhee-ai sabad vaykhhu liv laa-ay. ||6]||
So who should we call evil? Behold the Word of the Shabad, and lovingly dwell upon it. ||6]|
ga sor faag nme frag 3 eo HT I (757-6, Fat, He 3) buraa bhalaa tichar aakh-daa jichar hai duhu maahi. He calls others bad and good, as long as he is in duality.
Toufy Sa sfsur San fo AME DI (757-7, Bet, He 3)
gurmukh ayko bujhi-aa aykas maahi samaa-ay. ||7| |
The Gurmukh understands the One and Only Lord; He is absorbed in the One Lord. HI7II
Ae AT us SeAt A Us Ue HE I (757-7, wet, Hs 3) sayvaa saa parabh bhaavsee jo parabh paa-ay thaa-ay. That is selfless service, which pleases God, and which is approved by God.
Ao aod de watt ag vet fos ote WeUQUNSNCH (757-8, Fat, He 3)
jan naanak har aaraaDhi-aa gur charnee chit laa-ay. ||8]|2]|4]|9|| Servant Nanak worships the Lord in adoration; he focuses his consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||8]|2||4]|9]|
Ta Ast wmAcudr HIB 8 We 2 (757-9) raag soohee asatpadee-aa mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Raag Soohee, Ashtapadees, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yArfe il (757-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aet urfs fore Ha utsy fimre o@ fan ufs wiry Soret WA (757-10, Bet, He 4)
ko-ee aan milaavai mayraa pareetam pi-aaraa ha-o tis peh aap vaychaa-ee. ||1||
If only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Darling Beloved; I would sell myself to him. ||1]|
Zang Ufa Sus & Bret Il (757-10, Het, ue 4) darsan har daykhan kai taa-ee. I long for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
faut acfo at Afsag Hats afe afs ay fomret nai ga tl (757-11, wet, us 4)
kirpaa karahi taa satgur mayleh har har naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
When the Lord shows Mercy unto me, then I meet the True Guru; I meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
A AY ef 3 ssfo mot efy st 33 foret QU (757-11, Bet, He 4)
jay sukh deh ta tujheh araaDhee dukh bhee tujhai Dhi-aa-ee. ||2||
If You will bless me with happiness, then I will worship and adore You. Even in pain, I will meditate on You. ||2||
A gu ef 3 fes ot om ee fete qe Horet BN (757-12, Fat, HE 4)
jay bhukh deh ta it hee raajaa dukh vich sookh manaa-ee. ||3]| Even if You give me hunger, I will still feel satisfied; I am joyful, even in the midst of sorrow. ||3]||
36 He ate ate Ag urout fete narat wimg Aare Il (757-12, Fat, He 4)
tan man kaat kaat sabh arpee vich agnee aap jalaa-ee. ||4| |
I would cut my mind and body apart into pieces, and offer them all to You; I would burn myself in fire. ||4]|
uur edt urat der Af @efa A ret Ul (757-13, Het, He 4) pakhaa fayree paanee dhovaa jo dayveh so khaa-ee. ||5| | I wave the fan over You, and carry water for You; whatever You give me, I take. ||5||
eae ade elo ufsor ere afe vfs Sg sfsnret Wel (757-14, wet, ne 4)
naanak gareeb dheh pa-i-aa du-aarai har mayl laihu vadi-aa-ee. ||6]|
Poor Nanak has fallen at the Lord's Door; please, O Lord, unite me with Yourself, by Your Glorious Greatness. ||6]|
ont ote udt oder sf AS Usst fefs HS uret NON (757-14, Bet, He 4)
akhee kaadh Dharee charnaa tal sabh Dhartee fir mat paa-ee. ||7]| Taking out my eyes, I place them at Your Feet; after travelling over the entire earth, I have come to understand this. ||7]|
A ut aoet St 3sfo mat A He aefo St fret Uc (757-15, Fat, 8 4)
jay paas bahaaleh taa tujheh araaDhee jay maar kadheh bhee Dhi-aa-ee. ||8]|
If You seat me near You, then I worship and adore You. Even if You beat me and drive me out, I will still meditate on You. ||8]|
A Sa Hod 3 Sct Gur a fe 3 afs o et EM (757-16, Bat, He 4) jay lok salaahay taa tayree upmaa jay nindai ta chhod na jaa-ee. ||9|| If people praise me, the praise is Yours. Even if they slander me, I will not leave You.
H9I| A 30 af ad oT aet fag nra@ 30 fenfont yfs wet AON (757-16, Fat, He 4)
jay tuDh val rahai taa ko-ee kihu aakha-o tuDh visri-ai mar jaa-ee. ||10]| If You are on my side, then anyone can say anything. But if I were to forget You, then I would die. ||10||
ate ate wet aa Gufs u ust AS Haret WAAL (757-17, Fat, HE 4)
vaar vaar jaa-ee gur oopar pai pairee sant manaa-ee. ||11]||
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to my Guru; falling at His Feet, I surrender to the Saintly Guru. ||11]|
oad fears safer fears ofa 38 FaAS A Bet AI (757-18, Bet, Hs 4)
naanak vichaaraa bha-i-aa divaanaa har ta-o darsan kai taa-ee. ||12]|
Poor Nanak has gone insane, longing for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. |}12]|
sug Svat Hig aA St aT Sus AT III (757-18, Fat, He 4)
jhakharh jhaagee meehu varsai bhee gur daykhan jaa-ee. ||13]|
Even in violent storms and torrential rain, I go out to catch a glimpse of my Guru. []13]|
AMG Ag de sg wes Tafhy Sf ae ufo At U9Vll (757-19, wat, He 4)
samund saagar hovai baho khaaraa gursikh langh gur peh jaa-ee. ||14| |
Even though the oceans and the salty seas are very vast, the GurSikh will cross over it to get to his Guru. ||14]|
fa@ urat ne faa o Hes fC fre ae fas Hfs Fret NOU (757-19, Fat, He 4) ji-o paraanee jal bin hai martaa ti-o sikh gur bin mar jaa-ee. ||15]|| Just as the mortal dies without water, so does the Sikh die without the Guru. ||15]||
Us Dut fag usst As ad AG san fC fe ae fires fearAret AEN (758-1, Bet, He 4)
ji-o Dhartee sobh karay jal barsai ti-o sikh gur mil bigsaa-ee. ||16] | Just as the earth looks beautiful when the rain falls, so does the Sikh blossom forth meeting the Guru. ||16]|
Rea a dfs Reg east afe ate fao@ geret 9911 (758-2, Bat, He 4) sayvak kaa ho-ay sayvak vartaa kar kar bin-o bulaa-ee. ||17]| I long to be the servant of Your servants; I call upon You reverently in prayer. ||17]|
soa at x6st afe ufo aa fife ae AY Uret NACI (758-2, Bet, He 4) naanak kee baynantee har peh gur mil gur sukh paa-ee. ||18]|
Nanak offers this prayer to the Lord, that he may meet the Guru, and find peace. ||18]|
3mm Tg sad om ge feg & s3fo forest AEN (758-3, wet, we 4)
too aapay gur chaylaa hai aapay gur vich day tujheh Dhi-aa-ee. ||19]|
You Yourself are the Guru, and You Yourself are the chaylaa, the disciple; through the Guru, I meditate on You. ||19]|
A 30 Agfa A 3d defo 3g Asa UA THT ON (758-4, AST, He 4) jo tuDh sayveh so toohai hoveh tuDh sayvak paij rakhaa-ee. ||20|| Those who serve You, become You. You preserve the honor of Your servants. ||20]||
33g 3d sat ofe 33 fan we FSH See QUI (758-4, Bat, He 4)
bhandaar bharay bhagtee har tayray jis bhaavai tis dayvaa-ee. ||21]|
O Lord, Your devotional worship is a treasure over-flowing. One who loves You, is blessed with it. ||21]|
fan 3 tf Aet AG Ue da foses AS VST WM (758-5, wet, Hs 4)
jis too’ deh so-ee jan paa-ay hor nihfal sabh chaturaa-ee. ||22||
That humble being alone receives it, unto whom You bestow it. All other clever tricks are fruitless. ||22||
fafa fifa fans ae urro Afeor He ATaret 12QSIl (758-6, Fat, He 4)
simar simar simar gur apunaa so-i-aa man jaagaa-ee. ||23]||
Remembering, remembering, remembering my Guru in meditation, my sleeping mind is awakened. ||23]|
fea wg Hat soa sua ofs wAfs SA ATT MQVSIl (758-6, Bat, He 4) ik daan mangai naanak vaychaaraa har daasan daas karaa-ee. ||24||
Poor Nanak begs for this one blessing, that he may become the slave of the slaves of the Lord. ||24]|
A ag fssa 3 Ho oa A SUA 3 aa Shane Qui (758-7, Fat, He 4)
jay gur jhirhkay ta meethaa laagai jay bakhsay ta gur vadi-aa-ee. ||25]||
Even if the Guru rebukes me, He still seems very sweet to me. And if He actually forgives me, that is the Guru's greatness. ||25||
qonfy safe A afte ue Houfe fae ate o uret EN (758-7, Bet, He 4)
gurmukh boleh so thaa-ay paa-ay manmukh kichh thaa-ay na paa-ee. ||26|| That which Gurmukh speaks is certified and approved. Whatever the self-willed manmukh says is not accepted. ||26||
US kag SIs FIA Tafhy Ts ues Wet Qi (758-8, wet, ne 4) paalaa kakar varaf varsai gursikh gur daykhan jaa-ee. ||27]||
Even in the cold, the frost and the snow, the GurSikh still goes out to see his Guru. [|27]|
Ag feon df= fu ag nue fefs ont ag Us caet WICH (758-9, Fat, He 4)
sabh dinas rain daykh-a-u gur apunaa vich akhee gur pair Dharaa-ee. ||28]| All day and night, I gaze upon my Guru; I install the Guru's Feet in my eyes. ||28]|
wide Cure adt aed aafs ae are A afe uret NQCI (758-9, Bat, He 4)
anayk upaav karee gur kaaran gur bhaavai so thaa-ay paa-ee. ||29] |
I make so many efforts for the sake of the Guru; only that which pleases the Guru is accepted and approved. ||29]|
dfs feon ae sae matt efeor agg AT Aet WZOll (758-10, wat, He 4)
rain dinas gur charan araaDhee da-i-aa karahu mayray saa-ee. ||30||
Night and day, I worship the Guru's Feet in adoration; have Mercy upon me, O my Lord and Master. ||30]||
aod a ME fis ag o as fife fFufs mrewret 134 (758-11, wet, Hs 4)
naanak kaa jee-o pind guroo hai gur mil taripat aghaa-ee. ||31]|
The Guru is Nanak's body and soul; meeting the Guru, he is satisfied and satiated. [131] |
aed a us ufe sfeS I AS aS 3S AAT WSU (758-11, Het, Hs 4)
naanak kaa parabh poor rahi-o hai jat kat tat gosaa-ee. ||32||1]|
Nanak's God is perfectly permeating and all-pervading. Here and there and everywhere, the Lord of the Universe. ||32]]1||
TH Adt HIS 8 mMACUEhAT WT IO (758-13) raag soohee mehlaa 4 asatpadee-aa ghar 10 Raag Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Tenth House:
qe Afsara yATfE il (758-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
niefe Fat Sg orfeur YISH mime Il (758-14, Fat, Hs 4) andar sachaa nayhu laa-i-aa pareetam aapnai. Deep within myself, I have enshrined true love for my Beloved.
36 HO of fore A ag Se AMS AU (758-14, Bet, He 4) tan man ho-ay nihaal jaa gur daykhaa saam"nay. ||1|| My body and soul are in ecstasy; I see my Guru before me. ||1]|
H ofa af on ferrg il (758-14, wat, He 4) mai har har naam visaahu. I have purchased the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Gs us 3 ufeor nfs went weg Al TIS i (758-15, wet, Hs 4)
gur pooray tay paa-i-aa amrit agam athaahu. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have obtained the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Ambrosial Nectar from the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
JG Afsag efu fearon afs oH war fimirg It (758-15, wat, Hs 4)
ha-o satgur vaykh vigsee-aa har naamay lagaa pi-aar.
Gazing upon the True Guru, I blossom forth in ecstasy; I am in love with the Name of the Lord.
fasur afe & Afemig ufsor He EMIT” IQI (758-16, Bat, He 4)
kirpaa kar kai mayli-an paa-i-aa mokh du-aar. ||2||
Through His Mercy, the Lord has united me with Himself, and I have found the Door of Salvation. ||2]|
Afsag faadt om a A fe 5 Bq HS BE Il (758-16, wet, He 4)
satgur birhee naam kaa jay milai ta tan man day-o.
The True Guru is the Lover of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Meeting Him, I dedicate my body and mind to Him.
A usta de fettmr a nifqs Aoft ues wai (758-17, wet, Hs 4) jay poorab hovai likhi-aa taa amrit sahj pee-ay-o. ||3]| And if it is so pre-ordained, then I shall automatically drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
H3II
Afsor ag Wardha Cofenr st ag wre il (758-18, wat, He 4)
suti-aa gur salaahee-ai uth-di-aa bhee gur aalaa-o.
Praise the Guru while you are asleep, and call on the Guru while you are up. aet wir auf A AHS IG St a Ger ur gil (758-18, wet, He 4)
ko-ee aisaa gurmukh jay milai ha-o taa kay Dhovaa paa-o. ||4||
If only I could meet such a Gurmukh; I would wash His Feet. ||4]|
aet mA Ane Sfs ag Huts Se frerfe i (758-19, wet, He 4)
ko-ee aisaa sajan lorh lahu mai pareetam day-ay milaa-ay.
I long for such a Friend, to unite me with my Beloved.
Afsafe fife afe urfemr fifemr Raft Hae ull (758-19, Bet, Hs 4)
satgur mili-ai har paa-i-aa mili-aa sahj subhaa-ay. ||5]|
Meeting the True Guru, I have found the Lord. He has met me, easily and effortlessly.
[5] |
Ua our
Afsag Ag TE OH aH fSH SUS a TS Il (759-1, wet, He 4)
satgur Saagar gun naam kaa mai tis daykhan kaa chaa-o.
The True Guru is the Ocean of Virtue of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I have such a yearning to see Him!
UG fsH fag ust 3 Hes fas Sa nfs WE WEN (759-1, get, He 4) ha-o tis bin gharhee na jeev-oo bin daykhay mar jaa-o. ||6] | Without Him, I cannot live, even for an instant. If I do not see Him, I die. ||6]|
fa Heat fee ureba ad & fas Burfe I (759-2, wet, ne 4) ji-o machhulee vin paanee-ai rahai na kitai upaa-ay. As the fish cannot survive at all without water,
fs@ ofe fas HS 3 eet fas ofa oH Hfe AE DN (759-2, At, He 4) ti-o har bin sant na jeev-ee bin har naamai mar jaa-ay. ||7|| the Saint cannot live without the Lord. Without the Lord's Name, he dies. ||7]|
H Afsas ASt fusoat fa ae fas Het we I (759-3, Fat, He 4)
mai satgur saytee pirharhee ki-o gur bin jeevaa maa-o.
I am so much in love with my True Guru! How could I even live without the Guru, O my mother?
HA geaet ororg 3 aaeat wf oS ci (759-4, gat, ne 4)
mai gurbaanee aaDhaar hai gurbaanee laag rahaa-o. ||8] |
I have the Support of the Word of the Guru's Bani. Attached to Gurbani, I survive. [18] |
ofa fs on aso 9 TE Far SS HAE It (759-4, wet, He 4)
har har naam ratann hai gur tuthaa dayvai maa-ay.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is a jewel; by the Pleasure of His Will, the Guru has given it, O my mother.
Hug Ad on at ofa oth go foe ote Wel (759-5, Bat, He 4)
mai Dhar sachay naam kee har naam rahaa liv laa-ay. ||9|| The True Name is my only Support. I remain lovingly absorbed in the Lord's Name.
[91 |
ae famrg uersa on 0 ofa ont Ofe fearte il (759-5, wat, ne 4)
gur gi-aan padaarath naam hai har naamo day-ay drirh-aa-ay.
The wisdom of the Guru is the treasure of the Naam. The Guru implants and enshrines the Lord's Name.
fan usufs A od Te vast wa wre AON (759-6, Bat, He 4) jis paraapat so lahai gur charnee laagai aa-ay. ||10]| He alone receives it, he alone gets it, who comes and falls at the Guru's Feet. ||10]|
nee aorat UH at & Ubsy mime nrfe i (759-6, wat, He 4)
akath kahaanee paraym kee ko pareetam aakhai aa-ay.
If only someone would come and tell me the Unspoken Speech of the Love of my Beloved.
fH tet HS vimuart fate fate war ute WAU (759-7, Bet, Hs 4)
tis dayvaa man aapnaa niv niv laagaa paa-ay. ||11]|
I would dedicate my mind to him; I would bow down in humble respect, and fall at his feet. ||11]|
AAS Ha Sa J ATT UTY AAS Il (759-7, wet, Hs 4) sajan mayraa ayk too” kartaa purakh sujaan. You are my only Friend, O my All-knowing, All-powerful Creator Lord.
Afsafe Hifs feerfemr HAT HET Sa STS 92M (759-8, Bat, He 4) satgur meet milaa-i-aa mai sadaa sadaa tayraa taan. ||12||
You have brought me to meet with my True Guru. Forever and ever, You are my only strength. ||12||
Afsag Ha Ae AEST or mires B AE Il (759-8, Bet, He 4) satgur mayraa Sadaa sadaa naa aavai na jaa-ay. My True Guru, forever and ever, does not come and go.
6g mifsant usy 3 AS Hfo sf AHTE 981 (759-9, Fat, He 4)
oh abhinaasee purakh hai sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||13] |
He is the Imperishable Creator Lord; He is permeating and pervading among all. ||13]]
TH OH UG Afr Aras Ut IH Il (759-9, Het, He 4)
raam naam Dhan sanchi-aa saabat poonjee raas.
I have gathered in the wealth of the Lord's Name. My facilities and faculties are intact, Safe and sound.
aoa Uses Hfoor Ts UT AIHA NASUAUNNAUI (759-10, Fat, He 4)
naanak dargeh mani-aa gur pooray saabaas. ||14||1]|2]|11]|
O Nanak, I am approved and respected in the Court of the Lord; the Perfect Guru has blessed me! ||14||1]|2||11]|
TH Ast oAcudr HIS U We IV (759-11) raag soohee asatpadee-aa mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Ashtapadees, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars ure I (759-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Cats afa& fatto & Far i (759-12, wet, 48 5) urajh rahi-o bikhi-aa kai sangaa. He is entangled in sinful associations;
Hote fmmas mifsx SIA" WAI (759-12, Bet, He 5) maneh bi-aapat anik tarangaa. ||1|| his mind is troubled by so very many waves. ||1||
AT Ho MH uss I aS Usha UTS USAAT AU TIE Il (759-12, at, Hz 5)
mayray man agam agochar. kat paa-ee-ai pooran parmaysar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O my mind, how can the Unapproachable and Incomprehensible Lord be found? He is the Perfect Transcendent Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hg Hare Hfa afar fammy ii (759-13, At, He 5) moh magan meh rahi-aa bi-aapay. He remains entangled in the intoxication of worldly love.
wifs feat wag Sdt GY MQM (759-13, Fat, He 5) at tarisnaa kabhoo nahee Dharaapay. ||2|| His excessive thirst is never quenched. ||2||
aAfe agg Adlfs Fora Wh (759-14, wet, Hs 5) bas-i karoDh sareer chandaaraa. Anger is the outcaste which hides within his body;
mifamirts & AS HI TAS USI (759-14, Wet, Hs 5) agi-aan na soojhai mahaa gubaaraa. ||3]| he is in the utter darkness of ignorance, and he does not understand. ||3]|
SHS fmius Ad frets Il (759-14, Fet, 2 5) bharmat bi-aapat jaray kivaaraa. Afflicted by doubt, the shutters are shut tight;
We 3 urea ys PIAS |S (759-15, Fat, He 5) jaan na paa-ee-ai parabh darbaaraa. ||4| | he cannot go to God's Court. ||4||
MiTAT MESA af UTM Il (759-15, Bet, He 5) aasaa andaysaa banDh paraanaa. The mortal is bound and gagged by hope and fear;
HIG 3 ure feas fxarar iull (759-15, at, He 5)
mahal na paavai firat bigaanaa. ||5||
he cannot find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and so he wanders around like a stranger. ||5]|
Fars faurfa & eff afe ator i (759-16, wat, 4 5) Sagal bi-aaDh kai vas kar deenaa. He falls under the power of all negative influences;
fess fimin fa@ Ae fag Hor Ell (759-16, Fat, He 5) firat pi-aas ji-o jal bin meenaa. ||6|| he wanders around thirsty like a fish out of water. ||6]|
ag fimrsu Bats 3 Hat I (759-17, Het, Hs 5)
kachhoo si-aanap ukat na moree. I have no clever tricks or techniques;
SA OA SAT YS Sat MDI (759-17, wat, ue 5) ayk aas thaakur parabh toree. ||7|| You are my only hope, O my Lord God Master. ||7||
AIS Fost ASS WA Il (759-17, wet, He 5) kara-o bayntee santan paasay. Nanak offers this prayer to the Saints
Afs SI SSX MISA NCI (759-18, Wet, He 5) mayl laihu naanak ardaasay. ||8]| - please let me merge and blend with You. ||8]||
sfeG faurs Arora urfemr | (759-18, at, Hs 5) bha-i-o kirpaal saaDhsang paa-i-aa. God has shown Mercy, and I have found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ood fFus ys ufsor wu TIS SAT NA (759-18, Fat, He 5)
naanak tariptai pooraa paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||1|| Nanak is satisfied, finding the Perfect Lord. ||1||Second Pause] |1] |
UST DEO
TH Ast HIS Uwe 3 (760-1)
raag soohee mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsas ure II (760-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fleas Ha marl AE Aa ll (760-2, Fat, ue 5) mithan moh agan sok saagar. Attachment to sex is an ocean of fire and pain.
ate fasur Bug dfs Stats WAI (760-2, Bet, 8 5) kar kirpaa uDhar har naagar. ||1|| By Your Grace, O Sublime Lord, please save me from it. ||1]|
JIE AHS Adee SIME Il (760-2, Fat, ne 5) charan kamal sarnaa-ay naraa-in. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
ca Se SIS UITSS NA TIS Il (760-3, wet, ws 5) deenaa naath bhagat paraa-in. ||1]| rahaa-o. He is the Master of the meek, the Support of His devotees. ||1]|Pause| |
MOTE BE SIS F ASS Il (760-3, Wet, ue 5) anaathaa naath bhagat bhai maytan. Master of the masterless, Patron of the forlorn, Eradicator of fear of His devotees.
AGH AHES F SSS III (760-3, Fat, Hs 5) saaDhsang jamdoot na bhaytan. ||2| |
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Messenger of Death cannot even touch them. ||2]|
Alea gu mgu efemirar il (760-4, At, He 5) jeevan roop anoop da-i-aalaa. The Merciful, Incomparably Beautiful, Embodiment of Life.
TSE Tat AEM AH AS MBI (760-4, wt, ue 5)
ravan gunaa katee-ai jam jaalaa. ||3]|
Vibrating the Glorious Virtues of the Lord, the noose of the Messenger of Death is cut away. |[3]|
nifys ou dAS fes ANE II (760-4, Bat, He 5) amrit naam rasan nit jaapai. One who constantly chants the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam with his tongue,
dat gu Hf a fmm isil (760-5, At, He 5) rog roop maa-i-aa na bi-aapai. ||4| | is not touched or affected by Maya, the embodiment of disease. ||4||
afu afte Hatt Afs 3S I (760-5, wat, He 5)
jap gobind sangee sabh taaray.
Chant and meditate on God, the Lord of the Universe, and all of your companions shall be carried across;
UTS odt Us seers UI (760-5, Bat, He 5) pohat naahee panch batvaaray. ||5]| the five thieves will not even approach. ||5||
Ho ae AH yg Sa fire I (760-6, Fat, Hs 5) man bach karam parabh ayk Dhi-aa-ay. One who meditates on the One God in thought, word and deed
Aaa sor Het AG ure ill (760-6, wat, ue 5) sarab falaa so-ee jan paa-ay. ||6]| - that humble being receives the fruits of all rewards. ||6]|
afs nog” wruart yfs ater il (760-6, et, Hs 5) Dhaar anoograhu apnaa parabh keenaa. Showering His Mercy, God has made me His own;
ALG OH Sals FA Star IDI (760-7, Fat, Hs 5)
kayval naam bhagat ras deenaa. ||7||
He has blessed me with the unique and singular Naam, and the sublime essence of devotion. ||7||
wife Hfa nifs ys Aet | (760-7, at, ue 5) aad maDh ant parabh so-ee. In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, He is God.
ood fan fas meg o AST NCNM (760-8, Fat, He 5)
naanak tis bin avar na ko-ee. ||8]|1||2|| O Nanak, without Him, there is no other at all. ||8]|1]|2||
TH Ast Hoe u mAcUdhT wg € (760-9) raag soohee mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa ghar 9 Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Ninth House:
qe Afsas yArfe II (760-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
faa fsfonr He sarin fa@ ure foq Har FIG II (760-10, wet, He 5) jin dithi-aa man rehsee-ai ki-o paa-ee-ai tin" sang jee-o. Gazing upon them, my mind is enraptured. How can I join them and be with them?
HZ AWS Ho fey A fete ys fAG da AIG II (760-10, wet, He 5)
sant sajan man mitar say laa-in parabh si-o rang jee-o.
They are Saints and friends, good friends of my mind, who inspire me and help me tune in to God's Love.
faq fk@ uifs 5 seat aag o dS Sa ME NA (760-11, FAH, He 5) tin" si-o pareet na tut-ee kabahu na hovai bhang jee-o. ||1|| My love for them shall never die; it shall never, ever be broken. ||1]|
uTsqaH ys ats cfeor ge wert 3d f5s AIG I (760-11, Fat, He 5)
paarbarahm parabh kar da-i-aa gun gaavaa tayray nit jee-o.
O Supreme Lord God, please grant me Your Grace, that I might constantly sing Your Glorious Praises.
nife fg HS AAS oH AUT Ho fs AIG NAN TIS Il (760-12, wet, He 5)
aa-ay milhu sant sajnaa naam japah man mit jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Come, and meet with me, O Saints, and good friends; let us chant and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Best Friend of my mind. ||1||Pause]|
Ze Ae o Weet wfenr Afr nig FIG II (760-12, wet, ne 5)
daykhai sunay na jaan-ee maa-i-aa mohi-aa anDh jee-o.
He does not see, he does not hear, and he does not understand; he is blind, enticed and bewitched by Maya.
ae to fesnet az AHS UT AME Il (760-13, At, He 5)
kaachee dayhaa vinsanee koorh kamaavai DhanDh jee-o. His body is false and transitory; it shall perish. And still, he entangles himself in false pursuits.
on fourefs A fafe 3S TT us ASAT AS 2M (760-13, Feat, Hs 5)
naam Dhi-aavahi say jin chalay gur pooray san-banDh jee-o. ||2]|
They alone depart victorious, who have meditated on the Naam; they stick with the Perfect Guru. ||2]|
Jan Fa Hfo orfeur sos gat Adfer AE I (760-14, wet, He 5)
hukmay jug meh aa-i-aa chalan hukam sanjog jee-o.
By the Hukam of God's Will, they come into this world, and they leave upon receipt of His Hukam.
Jan uaty unfeor gat ad sA sa AE I (760-14, Het, He 5)
hukmay parpanch pasri-aa hukam karay ras bhog jee-o.
By His Hukam, the Expanse of the Universe is expanded. By His Hukam, they enjoy pleasures.
fan 6 ass" fend fsnfo feds Aa AG SI (760-15, Bet, He 5) jis no kartaa visrai tiseh vichhorhaa sog jee-o. ||3]| One who forgets the Creator Lord, suffers sorrow and separation. ||3]|
ntuss us sfeur eae Uo afte Ate il (760-16, wet, Hs 5) aapnarhay parabh bhaani-aa dargeh paiDhaa jaa-ay jee-o. One who is pleasing to his God, goes to His Court dressed in robes of honor.
mea AY HY Cre feat on fourfe FE II (760-16, wet, He 5)
aithai sukh mukh ujlaa iko naam Dhi-aa-ay jee-o.
One who meditates on the Naam, the One Name, finds peace in this world; his face is radiant and bright.
neg fest ursgqgafh ag Afeor AS ate AG Sil (760-17, at, He 5)
aadar ditaa paarbarahm gur sayvi-aa sat bhaa-ay jee-o. ||4||
The Supreme Lord confers honor and respect on those who serve the Guru with true love. ||4||
we Boste af sor Aaa Abo yfsurs AG I (760-17, Fat, He 5)
thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa sarab jee-aa partipaal jee-o.
He is pervading and permeating the spaces and interspaces; He loves and cherishes all beings.
Ag unat Afar Sa SH US HS AE Il (760-18, wat, He 5) sach khajaanaa sanchi-aa ayk naam Dhan maal jee-o. I have accumulated the true treasure, the wealth and riches of the One Name.
HS 3 aag 3 tad Wom afe efenrs AE Ul (760-18, Fat, He 5) man tay kabahu na veesrai jaa aapay ho-ay da-i-aal jee-o. ||5|| I shall never forget Him from my mind, since He has been so merciful to me. ||5]|
UST DEQ
wigs Are ofa ae fe gar fadarg AS I (761-1, wet, He 5) aavan jaanaa reh ga-ay man vuthaa nirankaar jee-o. My comings and goings have ended; the Formless Lord now dwells within my mind.
oor nis 3 urea Sar nian wrarg AMG il (761-1, wet, He 5) taa kaa ant na paa-ee-ai oochaa agam apaar jee-o. His limits cannot be found; He is lofty and exalted, inaccessible and infinite.
fan ug nue fend A ufs AA oY era AIG HEN (761-2, Bet, HB 5)
jis parabh apnaa visrai so mar jammai lakh vaar jee-o. ||6||
One who forgets His God, shall die and be reincarnated, hundreds of thousands of times. ||6||
Arg 3g 80 ulsHt fro Hie gor wif ATG I (761-2, wet, He 5) saach nayhu tin pareetamaa jin man vuthaa aap jee-o. They alone bear true love for their God, within whose minds He Himself dwells.
ae Ast fSo Af aA ore use ys ATU AIG II (761-3, At, He 5)
gun saajhee tin sang basay aath pahar parabh jaap jee-o.
So dwell only with those who share their virtues; chant and meditate on God, twenty- four hours a day.
dfat 33 USHA fASA Aa AST AE DI (761-3, wet, He 5)
rang ratay parmaysrai binsay sagal santaap jee-o. ||7]||
They are attuned to the Love of the Transcendent Lord; all their sorrows and afflictions are dispelled. ||7]||
3 aT J aVETT 3d Fa ida ME II (761-4, Hot, He 5)
too” kartaa too” karanhaar toohai ayk anayk jee-o. You are the Creator, You are the Cause of causes; You are the One and the many.
3 ANGE 3 Aaa H 3d fe faae AME Il (761-4, Bet, He 5)
too samrath too sarab mai toohai buDh bibayk jee-o.
You are All-powerful, You are present everywhere; You are the subtle intellect, the clear wisdom.
Soa SH Ae Aut Sas Ao at Sa AG UCUANSH (761-5, Fat, Hs 5)
naanak naam sadaa japee bhagat janaa kee tayk jee-o. ||8]|1]|3]| Nanak chants and meditates forever on the Naam, the Support of the humble devotees. ||8]|1]|3]|
TH Ast Hoe u mAcUcMT UT IO aret (761-6) raag soohee mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa ghar 10 kaafee Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Tenth House, Kaafee:
qe Afsas ure II (761-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A gat A gat AST st Steet ardor Ih (761-7, get aret, us 5)
jay bhulee jay chukee saa-ee™ bhee tahinjee kaadhee-aa.
Even though I have made mistakes, and even though I have been wrong, I am still called Yours, O my Lord and Master.
fat Sg BAS Bar Sho HaT A Shorr A (761-7, Fat wet, He 5) jin"aa nayhu doojaanay lagaa jhoor marahu say vaadhee-aa. ||1]| Those who enshrine love for another, die regretting and repenting. ||1]|
JG at 23 AS UAT Il (761-7, Fat aret, He 5) ha-o naa chhoda-o kant paasraa. I shall never leave my Husband Lord's side.
Her gater wre filmes Sg yfsar mA WAU TIS ll (761-8, Fst aret, He 5) sadaa rangeelaa laal pi-aaraa ayhu mahinjaa aasraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My Beloved Lover is always and forever beautiful. He is my hope and inspiration. ||1]|Pause| |
AWS 3d AS 3H 3B Cula ag Heme I (761-8, Fet wet, we 5) sajan toohai sain too mai tujh upar baho maanee-aa. You are my Best Friend; You are my relative. I am so proud of You.
Ww 3 nets 3 Ae FS foHret Heb MI (761-9, Fet art, He 5) jaa too andar taa sukhay too” nimaanee maanee-aa. ||2]|
And when You dwell within me, I am at peace. I am without honor - You are my honor. ||2]|
A 3 sot fur fears ot EAT Sates il (761-9, Fat art, He 5) jay too tuthaa kirpaa niDhaan naa doojaa vaykhaal. And when You are pleased with me, O treasure of mercy, then I do not see any other.
eo uret H west fos fase Tat AHS SI (761-10, Fat art, He 5)
ayhaa paa-ee moo daat-rhee nit hirdai rakhaa samaal. ||3]||
Please grant me this blessing, that that I may forever dwell upon You and cherish You within my heart. ||3]|
ure Foret uu 38 Sat an fers i (761-10, aot art, He 5)
paav julaa-ee panDh ta-o nainee daras dikhaal.
Let my feet walk on Your Path, and let my eyes behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Aza Het aoe A ag ate fas igi (61-11, qét at, v2 5) sarvanee sunee kahaanee-aa jay gur theevai kirpaal. ||4|| With my ears, I will listen to Your Sermon, if the Guru becomes merciful to me. ||4| |
fast ou ads fudté dys unfs Sf i (761-11, Het wet, ue 5)
kitee lakh karorh piree-ay rom na pujan tayri-aa.
Hundreds of thousands and millions do not equal even one hair of Yours, O my Beloved.
ZA I AY WC af 6 Ao Te Sfawr ull (761-12, Het aet, He 5) too saahee hoo saahu ha-o kahi na sakaa gun tayri-aa. ||5|| You are the King of kings; I cannot even describe Your Glorious Praises. ||5]|
Ader 38 ory Heg af saree Il (761-12, Fot at, He 5) sahee-aa ta-oo asa‘kh manjahu habh vaDhaanee-aa. Your brides are countless; they are all greater than I am.
foa sot sefs farts dfs van da HST MEN (761-13, Fat art, Hs 5)
hik bhoree nadar nihaal deh daras rang maanee-aa. ||6]||
Please bless me with Your Glance of Grace, even for an instant; please bless me with Your Darshan, that I may revel in Your Love. ||6||
A fd Ho Utd footed Fete FF i (761-13, et ara, 8 5)
jai dithay man Dheeree-ai kilvikh va“njni" dooray.
Seeing Him, my mind is comforted and consoled, and my sins and mistakes are far removed.
A fa@ fers w@ A A afer seus IDI (761-14, Fat ore, 8 5)
so ki-o visrai maa-o mai jo rahi-aa bharpooray. ||7||
How could I ever forget Him, O my mother? He is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||7||
fe fourat efa uet fifemr nafs Hefei (761-14, adt art, He 5) ho-ay nimaanee dheh pa-ee mili-aa sahj subhaa-ay. In humility, I bowed down in surrender to Him, and He naturally met me.
uote foto user area HS HITS WCIAUIBII (761-15, Het ae, He 5)
poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa naanak sant sahaa-ay. ||8||1||41|
I have received what was pre-ordained for me, O Nanak, with the help and assistance of the Saints. ||8]]1]|4]|
Hot HIS U Il (761-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
fAfifs de uae uarafs Ue i (761-16, wet, Hs 5) simrit bayd puraan pukaaran pothee-aa. The Simritees, the Vedas, the Puraanas and the other holy scriptures proclaim
om fas Als as wet Fsbo WA (761-16, Ft, we 5) naam binaa sabh koorh gaal"ee hochhee-aa. ||1|| that without the Naam, everything is false and worthless. ||1]|
on fears murg garst Hfs ZA Il (761-16, Het, He 5) naam niDhaan apaar bhagtaa man vasai. The infinite treasure of the Naam abides within the minds of the devotees.
WOH Hee HE BY AY Ale SA UU TIS Ml (761-17, wet, Hs 5)
janam maran moh dukh saaDhoo sang nasai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Birth and death, attachment and suffering, are erased in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||
Hfs afe widerfs Haus dfemr i (761-17, wat, He 5) mohi baad aha™kaar sarpar runni-aa. Those who indulge in attachment, conflict and egotism shall surely weep and cry.
AY 3 uefa His oH fesfour II (761-18, At, He 5) sukh na paa-ini" mool naam vichhunni-aa. ||2|| Those who are separated from the Naam shall never find any peace. ||2||
Hat Hat ofe gafs sinew i (761-18, Ft, ue 5) mayree mayree Dhaar banDhan banDhi-aa. Crying out, "Mine! Mine!", he is bound in bondage.
oda Hata nigsra Hfenr Ufo Bil (761-18, Fat, He 5) narak surag avtaar maa-i-aa DhanDhi-aa. ||3]|| Entangled in Maya, he is reincarnated in heaven and hell. ||3]|
Aus Aus Afo 33 ahefanr i (761-19, gt, 48 5) soDhat soDhat soDh tat beechaari-aa. Searching, searching, searching, I have come to understand the essence of reality.
om fast AY oto Agus Thaw iil (761-19, Fat, He 5)
naam binaa sukh naahi sarpar haari-aa. ||4|| Without the Naam, there is no peace at all, and the mortal will surely fail. ||4]|
UST DEQ wets AT nda His His ASHS Il (762-1, Fat, Hs 5)
aavahi jaahi anayk mar mar janmatay. Many come and go; they die, and die again, and are reincarnated.
fag 33 Ag Ste Hat SIHS MWUIl (762-1, At, He 5)
bin boojhay sabh vaad jonee bharmatay. ||5|| Without understanding, they are totally useless, and they wander in reincarnation.
[51 faq a@ se efenrs fq AG Ha sfenr Il (762-1, Het, Hs 5)
jin" ka-o bha-ay da-i-aal tin" saaDhoo sang bha-i-aa. They alone join the Saadh Sangat, unto whom the Lord becomes Merciful.
nifys ofs a amy fsat wot Afy wer El (762-2, wet, He 5) amrit har kaa naam tin"ee janee jap la-i-aa. ||6]| They chant and meditate on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord. ||6] |
dnfs afe wirte FIT MIST S Il (762-3, Het, us 5) khojeh kot asa‘kh bahut anant kay. Uncounted millions, so many they are endless, search for Him.
fan ase vif Sat fA FT DI (762-3, Bat, He 5) jis bujhaa-ay aap nayrhaa tis hay. ||7|| But only that one, who understands his own self, sees God near at hand. ||7]||
feng atdt Bars niy|St aH ST Il (762-3, wet, He 5) visar naahee daataar aapnaa naam dayh. Never forget me, O Great Giver - please bless me with Your Naam.
Te Wet feg Ts soa WS Sg UCUQUUNIEN (762-4, Fat, us 5) gun gaavaa din raat naanak chaa-o ayhu. ||8||2||5||16]|
To sing Your Glorious Praises day and night - O Nanak, this is my heart-felt desire. [18]]2][5]]16]|
TH Ast HIG A aATHt (762-5)
raag soohee mehlaa 1 kuchjee Raag Soohee, First Mehl, Kuchajee ~ The Ungraceful Bride:
qe Afsars Arte it (762-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
He aunt oprefs sus 3@ fae ng wefs WE A II (762-6, Het, He 1) manj kuchjee ammaavan dosrhay ha-o ki-o saho raavan jaa-o jee-o. I am ungraceful and ill-mannered, full of endless faults. How can I go to enjoy my
Husband Lord? fea = fefa sation ae We Ha a AIG Il (762-6, Fat, Hs 1)
ik doo ik charhandee-aa ka-un jaanai mayraa naa-o jee-o. Each of His soul-brides is better than the rest - who even knows my name?
faat Rat Ag Theor A nist erestefa AIG i (762-7, wet, He 1)
jin"ee sakhee saho raavi-aa say ambee chhaavrhee-ayhi jee-o.
Those brides who enjoy their Husband Lord are very blessed, resting in the shade of the mango tree.
A de HE 6 nredt ge a at SA ase MI I (762-7, At, He 1) Say gun manj na aavnee ha-o kai jee dos Dharay-o jee-o. I do not have their virtue - who can I blame for this?
fomr de 3d feast J fom fomr flyer Sat BTS AG I (762-8, wet, He 1)
ki-aa gun tayray vithraa ha-o ki-aa ki-aa ghinaa tayraa naa-o jee-o.
Which of Your Virtues, O Lord, should I speak of? Which of Your Names should I chant?
feas ef o niga 38 Ae ages 39 WE AMI II (762-8, Het, He 1) ikat tol na ambrhaa ha-o sad kurbaanai tayrai jaa-o jee-o. I cannot even reach one of Your Virtues. I am forever a sacrifice to You.
Afeor gut dae Hat 3 wfsa AIG I (762-9, wat, He D Su-inaa rupaa rangulaa motee tai maanik jee-o. Gold, silver, pearls and rubies are pleasing.
A eng fs fesor 4 fq fe wfeur fas AG I (762-9, Fat, we
say vastoo seh ditee-aa mai tin" si-o laa-i-aa chit jee-o.
My Husband Lord has blessed me with these things, and I have focused my thoughts on them.
Hes feet Hes ues ats aA AIG I (762-10, Fat, Hs 1) mandar mitee sand-rhay pathar keetay raas jee-o. Palaces of brick and mud are built and decorated with stones;
JG Sat sat sdb fen as o Fat uA AIG I (762-10, Fat, Hs 1) ha-o aynee tolee bhulee-as tis kant na baithee paas jee-o. I have been fooled by these decorations, and I do not sit near my Husband Lord.
viats fet aoehor gar afd wife AIS it (762-11, get, He 1) ambar koonjaa kurlee-aa bag bahithay aa-ay jee-o. The cranes shriek overhead in the sky, and the herons have come to rest.
AT ue vet Add foo wg Sat mat AE AIG HN (762-11, Het, Hs 1)
saa Dhan chalee saahurai ki-aa muhu daysee agai jaa-ay jee-o.
The bride has gone to her father-in-law's house; in the world hereafter, what face will she show?
Hat Ast 3% dor gat sesiorA AIS II (762-12, AST, He 1) sutee sutee jhaal thee-aa bhulee vaatrhee-aas jee-o. She kept sleeping as the day dawned; she forgot all about her journey.
3 Ad Seg HSA Se x Ud AIG I (762-12, Fat, we tai sah naalahu mutee-as dukhaa koo™ Dharee-aas jee-o. She separated herself from her Husband Lord, and now she suffers in pain.
30 We H Afs weae fea aoa at maetA AIG I (762-13, Bet, He 1) tuDh gun mai sabh avganaa ik naanak kee ardaas jee-o. Virtue is in You, O Lord; I am totally without virtue. This is Nanak's only prayer:
Afs wot Aol WH Soafs aet as AG NA (762-13, At, He 1)
sabh raatee sohaaganee mai dohaagan kaa-ee raat jee-o. ||1]|
You give all Your nights to the virtuous soul-brides. I know I am unworthy, but isn't there a night for me as well? ||1]|
Hot HIS 9% AeHt Il (762-14)
soohee mehlaa 1 suchjee. Soohee, First Mehl, Suchajee ~ The Noble And Graceful Bride:
WTsTH AZ a Ss Afog Hat TH AME Il (762-14, Ae, we DY
jaa too taa mai sabh ko too saahib mayree raas jee-o.
When I have You, then I have everything. O my Lord and Master, You are my wealth and capital.
3u vists 38 Afa eA S nists AatA AIG I (762-15, Bet, Hs 1) tuDh antar ha-o sukh vasaa too” antar saabaas jee-o. Within You, I abide in peace; within You, I am congratulated.
we sufs zardion ave Stu Both AIG I (762-15, wet, He D
bhaanai takhat vadaa-ee-aa bhaanai bheekh udaas jee-o.
By the Pleasure of Your Will, You bestow thrones and greatness. And by the Pleasure of Your Will, You make us beggars and wanderers.
ae ue fifa Ag ed aHS SS vrorth AIG Ih (762-16, AeA, He 1)
bhaanai thal sir sar vahai kamal fulai aakaas jee-o.
By the Pleasure of Your Will, the ocean flows in the desert, and the lotus blossoms in the sky.
we sens Gul se xfs sdiorfA AE i (762-16, gt, ne
bhaanai bhavjal langhee-ai bhaanai manjh bharee-aas jee-o.
By the Pleasure of Your Will, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean; by the Pleasure of Your Will, he sinks down into it.
we A Ag dae fRefs oa aesth AE I (762-17, Het, He 1)
bhaanai so saho rangulaa sifat rataa guntaas jee-o.
By the Pleasure of His Will, that Lord becomes my Husband, and I am imbued with the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
we Ag stoeor @ urefs fs wetorth AE I (762-17, Bet, He D
bhaanai saho bheehaavalaa ha-o aavan jaan mu-ee-aas jee-o.
By the Pleasure of Your Will, O my Husband Lord, I am afraid of You, and I come and go, and die.
3 Ag aH uses 3 afe ata eta uetorta AIG I (762-18, Fat, He 1D
too saho agam atolvaa ha-o kahi kahi dheh pa-ee-aas jee-o.
You, O my Husband Lord, are inaccessible and immeasurable; talking and speaking of You, I have fallen at Your Feet.
for Hag four afo Het H wane gu fimrtA AIG I (762-19, wet, He
ki-aa maaga-o ki-aa kahi sunee mai darsan bhookh pi-aas jee-o.
What should I beg for? What should I say and hear? I am hungry and thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
dd Aaet Ag ufeor Ag soa at wigetA AG QI (762-19, Fat, He 1)
gur sabdee saho paa-i-aa sach naanak kee ardaas jee-o. ||2]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, I have found my Husband Lord. This is Nanak's true prayer. ||2||
UST DEB
Hot HIS u Tsest Il (763-1)
soohee mehlaa 5 gunvantee. Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Gunvantee ~ The Worthy And Virtuous Bride:
A cA cafes fon fofe fofe wa ufe AIG II (763-1, at, He 5) jo deesai gursikh-rhaa tis niv niv laaga-o paa-ay jee-o. When I see a Sikh of the Guru, I humbly bow and fall at his feet.
nirat fagar Aba at ag Ade ofa foe AIG i (763-2, wet, He 5)
aakhaa birthaa jee-a kee gur sajan deh milaa-ay jee-o.
I tell to him the pain of my soul, and beg him to unite me with the Guru, my Best Friend.
Aet eff Cuena AT HS vias o arg ATS AIG II (763-2, wet, Hs 5)
so-ee das updaysrhaa mayraa man anat na kaahoo jaa-ay jee-o.
I ask that he impart to me such an understanding, that my mind will not go out wandering anywhere else.
feg Ho 3 & SEA H Weg eg ware AI I (763-3, AdH, we 5) ih man tai koo” dayvsaa mai maarag dayh bataa-ay jee-o. I dedicate this mind to you. Please, show me the Path to God.
UG nrfeur gag aie tH Sat 3B AaST= AMG Il (763-3, Het, Hs 5) ha-o aa-i-aa Dhoorahu chal kai mai takee ta-o sarnaa-ay jee-o. I have come so far, seeking the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
Hum st fats xfs Har AS ea Tee AE I (763-4, Bet, He 5) mai aasaa rakhee chit meh mayraa sabho dukh gavaa-ay jee-o. Within my mind, I place my hopes in You; please, take my pain and suffering away!
fez wef 38 seas ag ad Wars oe AIG II (763-4, Bat, He 5) it maarag chalay bhaa-ee-arhay gur kahai so kaar kamaa-ay jee-o. So walk on this Path, O sister soul-brides; do that work which the Guru tells you to do.
fsoret Ho ot Hsat fers eA aS ATS I (763-5, Fet, He 5) ti-aagay’ man kee mat-rhee visaaray’ doojaa bhaa-o jee-o. Abandon the intellectual pursuits of the mind, and forget the love of duality.
fe@ wefs of vanes og wa Sat SS A I (763-5, Het, He 5)
i-o paavahi har darsaavarhaa nah lagai tatee vaa-o jee-o.
In this way, you shall obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; the hot winds shall not even touch you.
JG nrug af o weet H afour AZ JaHTS AIG II (763-6, Het, He 5) ha-o aaphu bol na jaandaa mai kahi-aa sabh hukmaa-o jee-o. By myself, I do not even know how to speak; I speak all that the Lord commands.
dfs safs ume aufior afs sofa ater ure Ate i (763-7, wet, H3 5)
har bhagat khajaanaa bakhsi-aa gur naanak kee-aa pasaa-o jee-o.
I am blessed with the treasure of the Lord's devotional worship; Guru Nanak has been kind and compassionate to me.
A safe 3 feAe gust 8 am feufs morte HE i (763-7, wet, ue 5) mai bahurh na tarisnaa bhukh-rhee ha-o rajaa taripat aghaa-ay jee-o. I shall never again feel hunger or thirst; I am satisfied, satiated and fulfilled.
A ad cn fius fan fate fafe wa ufe HG Si (763-8, Fat, He 5) jo gur deesai sikh-rhaa tis niv niv laaga-o paa-ay jee-o. ||3]| When I see a Sikh of the Guru, I humbly bow and fall at his feet. ||3] |
TH Adt S3 HIS WUT A (763-9) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Chhant, First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (763-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afs wafs HHS Ushas whe uel af aH FIG II (763-9, Bet, He 1)
bhar joban mai mat pay-ee-arhai ghar paahunee bal raam jee-o.
Intoxicated with the wine of youth, I did not realize that I was only a guest at my parents’ home (in this world).
Hat weafs fats fas ae TE 3 AHRot Sf IH AE II (763-10, At, He 1)
mailee avgan chit bin gur gun na samaavanee bal raam jee-o.
My consciousness is polluted with faults and mistakes; without the Guru, virtue does not even enter into me.
TE AS } Weal sath gorat Hae fe aTerfemr Il (763-10, wat, He
gun saar na jaanee bharam bhulaanee joban baad gavaa-i-aa.
I have not known the value of virtue; I have been deluded by doubt. I have wasted away my youth in vain.
J Wg Ug TAS Sd WS fug aT AGA Oo Ser I (763-11, Fat, He 1)
var ghar dar darsan nahee jaataa pir kaa sahj na bhaa-i-aa.
I have not known my Husband Lord, His celestial home and gate, or the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. I have not had the pleasure of my Husband Lord's celestial peace.
Afsas ufe 3 Hata wet ASt sfe feast | (763-12, wet, Hs 1)
satgur poochh na maarag chaalee sootee rain vihaanee.
After consulting the True Guru, I have not walked on the Path; the night of my life is passing away in sleep.
soa waste seu fag fus as qHoret WAU (763-12, Ae, He 1)
naanak baaltan raadaypaa bin pir Dhan kumlaanee. ||1]|
O Nanak, in the prime of my youth, I am a widow; without my Husband Lord, the soul-bride is wasting away. ||1]||
ae ht zg fon ofs eg are fSn at af oH AE II (763-13, Het, He 1)
baabaa mai var deh mai har var bhaavai tis kee bal raam jee-o.
O father, give me in marriage to the Lord; I am pleased with Him as my Husband. I belong to Him.
de stor aa ote fase aat fAA at af aH AE II (763-13, Bet, Hs
rav rahi-aa jug chaar taribhavan banee jis kee bal raam jee-o.
He is pervading throughout the four ages, and the Word of His Bani permeates the three worlds.
fysee ay ve AoE nieTeest TF Il (763-14, wet, He 1)
taribhavan kant ravai sohagan avganvantee dooray.
The Husband Lord of the three worlds ravishes and enjoys His virtuous brides, but He keeps the ungraceful and unvirtuous ones far away.
AAt OAT SAt HOAT ute Som saUs Il (763-14, wet, He 1)
jaisee aasaa taisee mansaa poor rahi-aa bharpooray.
As are our hopes, so are our minds' desires, which the All-pervading Lord brings to fulfillment.
of at ofs A Rae AOafs sis B HS BA Il (763-15, et, Hs 1)
har kee naar so sarab suhaagan raa‘d na mailai vaysay.
The bride of the Lord is forever happy and virtuous; she shall never be a widow, and she shall never have to wear dirty clothes.
ood Hg Are sre Afar afar UtSH 3A QM (763-15, At, He 1) naanak mai var saachaa bhaavai jug jug pareetam taisay. ||2]| O Nanak, I love my True Husband Lord; my Beloved is the same, age after age. ||2]|
re wae dete J st ger ATS af IH FIG II (763-16, At, He 1D
baabaa lagan ganaa-ay ha" bhee vanjaa saahurai bal raam jee-o.
O Baba, calculate that auspicious moment, when I too shall be going to my in-laws' house.
AS Jou safe Ao 28 A Us ad af IH AG II (763-16, Bet, Hs 1)
saahaa hukam rajaa-ay so na talai jo parabh karai bal raam jee-o.
The moment of that marriage will be set by the Hukam of God's Command; His Will cannot be changed.
fass ufeur ass afs ufeur Afe 5 Ae Get I (763-17, at, Hs 1)
kirat pa-i-aa kartai kar paa-i-aa mayt na sakai ko-ee.
The karmic record of past deeds, written by the Creator Lord, cannot be erased by anyone.
Wet a@ sas fouaes afe afemr fag Set i (763-17, wet, He
jaanjee naa-o narah nihkayval rav rahi-aa tihu lo-ee.
The most respected member of the marriage party, my Husband, is the independent Lord of all beings, pervading and permeating the three worlds.
nfs foort sfe feeat arat as FS Il (763-18, Fat, He 1) maa-ay niraasee ro-ay vichhunnee baalee baalai haytay. Maya, crying out in pain, leaves, seeing that the bride and the groom are in love.
Soe ATS Hafe AY HIS TT Baal YF FS USM (763-18, wet, ws
naanak saach sabad sukh mahlee gur charnee parabh chaytay. ||3]||
O Nanak, the peace of the Mansion of God's Presence comes through the True Word of the Shabad; the bride keeps the Guru's Feet enshrined in her mind. |[3]|
Uat Dé8 wate fesat ofs a ure fs ue af oH AIG I (764-1, Bet, He D
baabul dit-rhee door naa aavai ghar pay-ee-ai bal raam jee-o. My father has given me in marriage far away, and I shall not return to my parents' home.
Ton efi des fufs wet wife Adhat afes IH AIS I (764-2, Fat, He 1) rahsee vaykh hadoor pir raavee ghar sohee-ai bal raam jee-o. I am delighted to see my Husband Lord near at hand; in His Home, I am so beautiful.
Are fus Sat Ulsn Fat ofS ust usTS I (764-2, wet, Hs 1)
saachay pir lorhee pareetam jorhee mat pooree parDhaanay.
My True Beloved Husband Lord desires me; He has joined me to Himself, and made my intellect pure and sublime.
Anat Her ats Ader Test as famrs il (764-3, gat, ne 1)
sanjogee maylaa thaan suhaylaa gunvantee gur gi-aanay.
By good destiny I met Him, and was given a place of rest; through the Guru's Wisdom, I have become virtuous.
AZ H3y Ae AY us Ay 8s furs aves I (764-3, wet, Hs 1)
sat santokh sadaa sach palai sach bolai pir bhaa-ay.
I gather lasting Truth and contentment in my lap, and my Beloved is pleased with my truthful speech.
ood fesfs a eu ue aanfs nif AHS IIA (764-4, Bet, He 1)
naanak vichhurh naa dukh paa-ay gurmat ank samaa-ay. ||4||1||
O Nanak, I shall not suffer the pain of separation; through the Guru's Teachings, I merge into the loving embrace of the Lord's Being. ||4||1]|
TY AT HIS 1 Ss WT 2 (764-5) raag soohee mehlaa 1 chhant ghar 2 Raag Soohee, First Mehl, Chhant, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (764-5) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
JH us AAS MITE Il (764-6, Fat, He 1) ham ghar saajan aa-ay. My friends have come into my home.
Ars Afes fare it (764-6, wat, us 1) saachai mayl milaa-ay. The True Lord has united me with them.
Rafa fear afe ufs are us fee wy ufemr I (764-6, At, He 1)
sahj milaa-ay har man bhaa-ay panch milay sukh paa-i-aa.
The Lord automatically united me with them when it pleased Him; uniting with the chosen ones, I have found peace.
Aret eA usufs det fag ASt He ofr I (764-7, wet, He 1D Saa-ee vasat paraapat ho-ee jis saytee man laa-i-aa. I have obtained that thing, which my mind desired.
wofes He sfeur ne weer we Hes ATS Il (764-7, wt, He 1) an-din mayl bha-i-aa man maani-aa ghar mandar sohaa-ay.
Meeting with them, night and day, my mind is pleased; my home and mansion are beautified.
Us Hae ufs nisge SA IH ule AAS MIS AI (764-8, Fat, He 1)
panch sabad Dhun anhad vaajay ham ghar saajan aa-ay. ||1]||
The unstruck sound current of the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrates and resounds; my friends have come into my home. ||1||
nied Hts fumrs i Has are oS Il (764-8, Bet, He 1) aavhu meet pi-aaray. mangal gaavhu naaray. So come, my beloved friends, and sing the songs of joy, O sisters.
Ay Hae Weg 3 ys aeg Afswa Aa BS Il (764-9, wat, He 1) sach mangal gaavhu taa parabh bhaavahu sohilrhaa jug chaaray.
Sing the true songs of joy and God will be pleased. You shall be celebrated throughout the four ages.
nue ufs urfenr afs Fofeor aran Aafe ASS Il (764-9, Fat, He 1)
apnai ghar aa-i-aa thaan suhaa-i-aa kaaraj sabad savaaray.
My Husband Lord has come into my home, and my place is adorned and decorated. Through the Shabad, my affairs have been resolved.
fame Ho SH Sat ving fysee gy feurfenr II (764-10, Aet, He 1)
gi-aan mahaa ras naytree anjan taribhavan roop dikhaa-i-aa.
Applying the ointment, the supreme essence, of divine wisdom to my eyes, I see the Lord's form throughout the three worlds.
Rot fey off Hares areg oH ule AHS yrfemr QI (764-10, wet, He 1)
sakhee milhu ras mangal gaavhu ham ghar saajan aa-i-aa. ||2]|
So join with me, my sisters, and sing the songs of joy and delight; my friends have come into my home. ||2||
He 30 vifyfs fear i (764-11, Fat, Hs D man tan amrit bhinnaa. My mind and body are drenched with Ambrosial Nectar;
nists YH ISS" Il (764-1, wat, He 1) antar paraym ratannaa. deep within the nucleus of my self, is the jewel of the Lord's Love.
nists dq ueTsE Ae USH 3S SASS Il (764-11, Fat, He 1) antar ratan padaarath mayrai param tat veechaaro. This invaluable jewel is deep within me; I contemplate the supreme essence of reality.
Hs 34 3 Aeles ast fife ffs SeeTs Il (764-12, Het, we 1)
jant bhaykh too safli-o daataa sir sir dayvanhaaro.
Living beings are mere beggars; You are the Giver of rewards; You are the Giver to each and every being.
3 WG famrat visa wm arge atta i (764-12, wet, we 1) too jaan gi-aanee antarjaamee aapay kaaran keenaa. You are Wise and All-knowing, the Inner-knower; You Yourself created the creation.
Hog Aut Ho Hufe Hfomr sq He vif_fs Stor Si (764-13, wet, He D
sunhu sakhee man mohan mohi-aa tan man amrit bheenaa. ||3]|
So listen, O my sisters - the Enticer has enticed my mind. My body and mind are drenched with Nectar. ||3]|
WISH IH AAT Il (764-14, Fat, Hs 1) aatam raam sansaaraa. O Supreme Soul of the World,
Ara’ YH SH Il (764-14, wet, ws 1) saachaa khayl tum"aaraa. Your play is true.
Ag YS SH ya yet 30 fag ACS BEES Il (764-14, Fat, we D)
sach khayl tum"aaraa agam apaaraa tuDh bin ka-un bujhaa-ay.
Your play is true, O Inaccessible and Infinite Lord; without You, who can make me understand?
fra wfoe fore as 35 fae AGE ATES Il (764-15, wet, ue 1)
siDh saaDhik si-aanay kaytay tujh bin kavan kahaa-ay.
There are millions of Siddhas and enlightened seekers, but without You, who can call himself one?
are faa se tare He att afs oS Il (764-15, Fat, us 1) kaal bikaal bha-ay dayvaanay man raakhi-aa gur thaa-ay. Death and rebirth drive the mind insane; only the Guru can hold it in its place.
Soa neds Hate Hoes Te Aa ys US USUI (764-16, Fat, Hs 1)
naanak avgan sabad jalaa-ay gun sangam parabh paa-ay. ||4]|1||2||
O Nanak, one who burns away his demerits and faults with the Shabad, accumulates virtue, and finds God. ||4]]1]|2]|
TH Ast HIS A We 3 (764-17) raag soohee mehlaa 1 ghar 3 Raag Soohee, First Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (764-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
weg Anat JG Sul PIAS SI TH Il (764-18, wet, ws 1) aavhu sajnaa ha-o daykhaa darsan tayraa raam. Come, my friend, so that I may behold the blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
ufg nmuss ust Sav A Hfs UE wSa IH Il (764-18, Fat, He 1) ghar aapnarhai kharhee takaa mai man chaa-o ghanayraa raam. I stand in my doorway, watching for You; my mind is filled with such a great yearning.
nfs TE usa Af= us Aa H Sa SSSA Il (764-18, Fat, Hs 1) man chaa-o ghanayraa sun parabh mayraa mai tayraa bharvaasaa. My mind is filled with such a great yearning; hear me, O God - I place my faith in You.
dng fy set fogakes AGH HIS TU SAT Il (764-19, wat, He 1)
darsan daykh bha-ee nihkayval janam maran dukh naasaa.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I have become free of desire; the pains of birth and death are taken away.
ust Du Fat Afs WS Ss Het fifemr ate Ase il (765-1, wet, we
saglee jot jaataa too so-ee mili-aa bhaa-ay subhaa-ay. Your Light is in everyone; through it, You are known. Through love, You are easily met.
soa AHS ag af reba fs fs wfs mire Al (765-1, et, Hs 1)
naanak saajan ka-o bal jaa-ee-ai saach milay ghar aa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to my Friend; He has come home to meet with those who are true. ||1]|
ufs utfenis AAS St US Ut ASAT IH Il (765-2, et, He 1) ghar aa-i-arhay saajnaa taa Dhan kharee sarsee raam. When her Friend comes to her home, the bride is very pleased.
ofa Hfomst Ava Rafe sag ef TAT IH II (765-2, wet, He 1)
har mohi-arhee saach sabad thaakur daykh rahansee raam.
She is fascinated with the True Word of the Lord's Shabad; gazing upon her Lord and Master, she is filled with joy.
Ge Afar Tat ust Aart AT arSt Sar TS i (765-3, wet, Hs 1)
gun sang rahansee kharee sarsee jaa raavee rang raatai.
She is filled with virtuous joy, and is totally pleased, when she is ravished and enjoyed by her Lord, and imbued with His Love.
nede Hf Tat wg sfenr us yates faars il (765-3, wt, we 1)
avgan maar gunee ghar chhaa-i-aa poorai purakh biDhaatai.
Her faults and demerits are eradicated, and she roofs her home with virtue, through the Perfect Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
3Had Hg eat Usfefs ree ad Sas il (765-4, wet, us 1)
taskar maar vasee panchaa-in adal karay veechaaray.
Conquering the thieves, she dwells as the mistress of her home, and administers justice wisely.
Soa TH ay fonsrat asHts fhesfa fimirs QW (765-4, wet, He 1)
naanak raam naam nistaaraa gurmat mileh pi-aaray. ||2| |
O Nanak, through the Lord's Name, she is emancipated; through the Guru's Teachings, she meets her Beloved. ||2||
zg ufeniat areas wit HOA UdT TH Il (765-5, Fat, He 1) var paa-i-arhaa baalrhee-ay aasaa mansaa pooree raam. The young bride has found her Husband Lord; her hopes and desires are fulfilled.
fuls sfenst Hate sat afe afoot og Edt IM Il (765-5, Het, He 1)
pir raavi-arhee sabad ralee rav rahi-aa nah dooree raam.
She enjoys and ravishes her Husband Lord, and blends into the Word of the Shabad, pervading and permeating everywhere; the Lord is not far away.
yg uf o det ufe wife Ret fA at ofa Aaret I (765-6, Fat, He parabh door na ho-ee ghat ghat so-ee tis kee naar sabaa-ee. God is not far away; He is in each and every heart. All are His brides.
nm gabe wnt ge fa far et sfsuret i (765-7, wet, ue 1)
aapay rasee-aa aapay raavay ji-o tis dee vadi-aa-ee.
He Himself is the Enjoyer, He Himself ravishes and enjoys; this is His glorious greatness.
WHE ISS MHB vrurat ata us AG Ure Il (765-7, wet, Hs 1)
amar adol amol apaaraa gur poorai sach paa-ee-ai.
He is imperishable, immovable, invaluable and infinite. The True Lord is obtained through the Perfect Guru.
Sod wnt Hal Anat sefe ad fos went Sil (765-8, wet, He 1)
naanak aapay jog sajogee nadar karay liv laa-ee-ai. ||3]|
O Nanak, He Himself unites in Union; by His Glance of Grace, He lovingly attunes them to Himself. ||3] |
fug Gushn wasn fog Gur frags IH I (765-8, Bet, He 1)
pir uchrhee-ai maarh-rhee-ai tihu lo-aa sirtaajaa raam.
My Husband Lord dwells in the loftiest balcony; He is the Supreme Lord of the three worlds.
JG fann set of Tat niode ASE MaMa ITH II (765-9, Fat, He 1)
ha-o bisam bha-ee daykh gunaa anhad sabad agaajaa raam.
I am amazed, gazing upon His glorious excellence; the unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates and resonates.
Hae shed aget ast IH oH Sle Il (765-9, wt, Hs 1)
sabad veechaaree karnee saaree raam naam neesaano.
I contemplate the Shabad, and perform sublime deeds; I am blessed with the insignia, the banner of the Lord's Name.
on fas ue odt Se SH FSS UTSES Il (765-10, Ht, He 1)
naam binaa khotay nahee thaahar naam ratan parvaano.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the false find no place of rest; only the jewel of the Naam brings acceptance and renown.
ufs HPS ust UST UsSTaT ST HTS Ot AAT Il (765-10, Het, He 1)
pat mat pooree pooraa parvaanaa naa aavai naa jaasee.
Perfect is my honor, perfect is my intellect and password. I shall not have to come or go.
ooa TeHfy wry use ys AA nifesrt sNAUISll (765-11, Fat, He 1)
naanak gurmukh aap pachhaanai parabh jaisay avinaasee. ||4]|1]|3]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands her own self; she becomes like her Imperishable Lord God. ||4]|1]|3]|
qe Afsare YATE Il (765-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TY ATt ST HIS Y Wg 8 Il (765-12) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 1 ghar 4. Raag Soohee, Chhant, First Mehl, Fourth House:
fafs ater fafs tfimr aa dos afer I (765-12, at, He 1)
jin kee-aa tin daykhi-aa jag DhanDh-rhai laa-i-aa.
The One who created the world, watches over it; He enjoins the people of the world to their tasks.
ats 33 whe weet 3fs de chefenr i 765-13, wet, Hs 1) daan tayrai ghat chaannaa tan chand deepaa-i-aa. Your gifts, O Lord, illuminate the heart, and the moon casts its light on the body.
de thriter ots ofe & ey vide Cfe afemr it (765-13, Fat, He 1) chando deepaa-i-aa daan har kai dukh anDhayraa uth ga-i-aa. The moon glows, by the Lord's gift, and the darkness of suffering is taken away.
Te He os of Ad uate Hoe wfear (765-14, wet, He 1)
gun janj laarhay naal sohai parakh mohnee-ai la-i-aa.
The marriage party of virtue looks beautiful with the Groom; He chooses His enticing bride with care.
deg dor Ag Ast Us Aeet wefenr Ih (765-14, Fat, He 1)
veevaahu ho-aa sobh saytee panch sabdee aa-i-aa.
The wedding is performed with glorious splendor; He has arrived, accompanied by the vibrations of the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds.
fafs otter fafs tfimr aa dos ofemr Wal (765-15, Bet, Hs 1)
jin kee-aa tin daykhi-aa jag DhanDh-rhai laa-i-aa. ||1]|
The One who created the world, watches over it; He enjoins the people of the world to their tasks. ||1||
JG afeadt AAT HIST wisstST Il (765-15, wet, Hs ha-o balihaaree saajnaa meetaa avreetaa. I am a Sacrifice to my pure friends, the immaculate Saints.
feg 36 faa fAG afsor He Shas SAS | (765-16, wet, us 1) ih tan jin si-o gaadi-aa man lee-arhaa deetaa. This body is attached to them, and we have shared our minds.
Bhat 3 dot He fas fA@ A AAS fas AAafs Il (765-16, Fat, we 1) lee-aa ta dee-aa maan jin" si-o say sajan ki-o veesrahi. We have shared our minds - how could I forget those friends?
faa fefa orfemr ofa seer aba ASt af sofa (765-17, wet, Hs 1) jin" dis aa-i-aa hohi ralee-aa jee-a saytee geh raheh. Seeing them brings joy to my heart; I keep them clasped to my soul.
Aas We weae 3 aet df star otst i (765-17, wet, ue 1)
Sagal gun avgan na ko-ee hohi neetaa neetaa.
They have all virtues and merits, forever and ever; they have no demerits or faults at all.
I sfeadt AAS HIST MISTS QI (765-18, Ft, Hs 1 ha-o balihaaree saajnaa meetaa avreetaa. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to my pure friends, the immaculate Saints. ||2]|
Ge a de THe afe SH BetA Il (765-18, Fat, Hs 1) gunaa kaa hovai vaasulaa kadh vaas la-eejai. One who has a basket of fragrant virtues, should enjoy its fragrance.
A ge defe wae fife Ars asta il (765-18, wet, Hs 1) jay gun hovni" saajnaa mil saajh kareejai. If my friends have virtues, I will share in them.
Yat DEE
WS adn ded act sfS meas vot I (766-1, wet, He
saajh kareejai gunah kayree chhod avgan chalee-ai.
Let us form a partnership, and share our virtues; let us abandon our faults, and walk on the Path.
ufad uéag af mised nimuar furs Heb I (766-1, et, He 1)
pahiray patambar kar adambar aapnaa pirh malee-ai.
Let us wear our virtues like silk clothes; let us decorate ourselves, and enter the arena.
fra ate adit ser adit Sfs nifigs ut 1 (766-2, at, ue 1)
jithai jaa-ay bahee-ai bhalaa kahee-ai jhol amrit peejai.
Let us speak of goodness, wherever we go and sit; let us skim off the Ambrosial Nectar, and drink it in.
Ge a de THe afe aA Beta Bll (766-2, Fat, He 1) gunaa kaa hovai vaasulaa kadh vaas la-eejai. ||3]| One who has a basket of fragrant virtues, should enjoy its fragrance. ||3]|
wif ad far nmdbat dg ad o Et I (766-3, wet, He 1) aap karay kis aakhee-ai hor karay na ko-ee. He Himself acts; unto whom should we complain? No one else does anything.
minds ST AS AEA A Za Tet I (766-3, Fat, Hz 1) aakhan taa ka-o jaa-ee-ai jay bhoolrhaa ho-ee. Go ahead and complain to Him, if He makes a mistake.
A df gx we adit orf aes fa FH I (766-4, wet, us
jay ho-ay bhoolaa jaa-ay kahee-ai aap kartaa ki-o bhulai.
If He makes a mistake, go ahead and complain to Him; but how can the Creator Himself make a mistake?
He 2a as afomt we menfamr fee i (766-4, Fat, Hs 1) sunay daykhay baajh kahi-ai daan anmangi-aa divai. He sees, He hears, and without our asking, without our begging, He gives His gifts.
ag tfe ost afar feast soar Ag Het II (766-5, wat, He 1)
daan day-ay daataa jag biDhaataa naankaa sach so-ee.
The Great Giver, the Architect of the Universe, gives His gifts. O Nanak, He is the True Lord.
wif ad far nmdbat dg ad o Tet USUAUISI (766-5, Fat, Hs 1) aap karay kis aakhee-ai hor karay na ko-ee. ||4]|1]|4||
He Himself acts; unto whom should we complain? No one else does anything. 4121141]
Hat HIS 4 Il (766-6)
soohee mehlaa 1. Soohee, First Mehl:
Aa He TS" TE ve nfs sve At I (766-6, wat, He 1)
mayraa man raataa gun ravai man bhaavai so-ee.
My mind is imbued with His Glorious Praises; I chant them, and He is pleasing to my mind.
Gd at ust Are at AraT AY Tet I (766-6, At, He 1) gur kee pa-orhee saach kee saachaa sukh ho-ee. Truth is the ladder to the Guru; climbing up to the True Lord, peace is obtained.
Afy Hafa wre Are are ATG at HFS fa ZS Il (766-7, wat, Hs 1)
sukh sahj aavai saach bhaavai saach kee mat ki-o talai.
Celestial peace comes; the Truth pleases me. How could these True Teachings ever be erased?
fers ee Afamrg HHe urfu nrefes fae se I (766-7, wet, He D
isnaan daan sugi-aan majan aap achhli-o ki-o chhalai.
He Himself is Undeceivable; how could He ever be deceived by cleansing baths, charity, spiritual wisdom or ritual bathings?
usus Ho faors Tat TT TUS Set Il (766-8, Hat, we
parpanch moh bikaar thaakay koorh kapat na do-ee.
Fraud, attachment and corruption are taken away, as are falsehood, hypocrisy and duality.
Ae He TS" TE se Hf ave AEF UA (766-8, Bet, He 1)
mayraa man raataa gun ravai man bhaavai so-ee. ||1||
My mind is imbued with His Glorious Praises; I chant them, and He is pleasing to my mind. ||1]|
Afos A Aveda fafs arse thor il (766-9, wat, He 1) saahib so salaahee-ai jin kaaran kee-aa. So praise your Lord and Master, who created the creation.
AS orait ufs Afemt fas nifigs ubor i (766-9, wet, us 1)
mail laagee man maili-ai kinai amrit pee-aa.
Filth sticks to the polluted mind; how rare are those who drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
Hfa nifys uber feg He dor as ufs He aafenr I (766-10, Fat, He 1)
math amrit pee-aa ih man dee-aa gur peh mol karaa-i-aa.
Churn this Ambrosial Nectar, and drink it in; dedicate this mind to the Guru, and He will value it highly.
nitUSa" Us Hof uETSt AT He ANS orfeur | (766-10, Fat, He 1)
aapnarhaa parabh sahj pachhaataa jaa man saachai laa-i-aa. I intuitively realized my God, when I linked my mind to the True Lord.
fan ofs ae ae a fan oer fa@ fees af user I (766-11, wat, He 1)
tis naal gun gaavaa jay tis bhaavaa ki-o milai ho-ay paraa-i-aa.
I will sing the Lord's Glorious Praises with Him, if it pleases Him; how could I meet Him by being a stranger to Him?
Afos A Aves fats Aas Curfemr 2H (766-12, Fat, He 1) saahib so salaahee-ai jin jagat upaa-i-aa. ||2|| So praise your Lord and Master, who created the creation. ||2||
wife afeor at 3 orfes fa@ wire Ast i (766-12, wat, Hs 1)
aa-ay ga-i-aa kee na aa-i-o ki-o aavai jaataa.
When He comes, what else remains behind? How can there be any coming or going then?
Utsuy fAG HE Hor afe ASt IST I (766-13, Fat, He 1) pareetam si-o man maani-aa har saytee raataa. When the mind is reconciled with its Beloved Lord, it is blended with Him.
AWfos df ost As at ast fafs fide at ate Crrfanr it (766-13, Fat, He 1)
saahib rang raataa sach kee baataa jin bimb kaa kot usaari-aa.
True is the speech of one who is imbued with the Love of his Lord and Master, who fashioned the body fortress from a mere bubble.
us 3 afeat orf fide fate Ae o fills Aetfant I (766-14, Het, He 1)
panch bhoo naa-iko aap sirandaa jin sach kaa pind savaari-aa.
He is the Master of the five elements; He Himself is the Creator Lord. He embellished the body with Truth.
oH uieatemrs 3 Als fimrs sO ate AG At Il (766-14, wat, oe 1) ham avgani-aaray too sun pi-aaray tuDh bhaavai sach so-ee. I am worthless; please hear me, O my Beloved! Whatever pleases You is True.
mise Aral of hat Ardt HfS Tet Sil (766-15, wet, ue 1) aavan jaanaa naa thee-ai saachee mat ho-ee. ||3]| One who is blessed with true understanding, does not come and go. ||3]|
wing SAT nish AAT furs Svs I (766-15, Hat, He 1) anjan taisaa anjee-ai jaisaa pir bhaavai. Apply such an ointment to your eyes, which is pleasing to your Beloved.
AHS AS Webs A wrt ANTS I (766-16, Fat, Hs 1) samjhai soojhai jaanee-ai jay aap jaanaavai. I realize, understand and know Him, only if He Himself causes me to know Him.
nity Wate Hofa UTS MMT HOM BES Il (766-16, Fat, He 1) aap jaanaavai maarag paavai aapay manoo-aa layv-ay. He Himself shows me the Way, and He Himself leads me to it, attracting my mind.
AGH HAH ATS nm AHfS AGS niSSe ll (766-17, Fat, He 1)
karam sukaram karaa-ay aapay keemat ka-un abhayva-ay.
He Himself causes us to do good and bad deeds; who can know the value of the Mysterious Lord?
33 43 unig o wet oH fee He HEMT II (766-17, Bet, He 1D
tant mant pakhand na jaanaa raam ridai man maani-aa.
I know nothing of Tantric spells, magical mantras and hypocritical rituals; enshrining the Lord within my heart, my mind is satisfied.
nifiS OH FSA 3 AS Te Aaet Ag ASME isi (766-18, et, He 1)
anjan naam tisai tay soojhai gur sabdee sach jaani-aa. ||4||
The ointment of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is only understood by one who realizes the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||
Ane Jefe virus fas ua we AS I (766-18, at, He 1)
saajan hovan aapnay ki-o par ghar jaahee. I have my own friends; why should I go to the home of a stranger?
AHS TS A & Hal HS HTT Il (766-19, wat, He 1) Saajan raatay sach kay sangay man maahee. My friends are imbued with the True Lord; He is with them, in their minds.
Ho Hfs AHS Aste Tse AGH TSH Aafenr || mole Stee Us UAT OH ATS stfeEnr II (766-19, Ht, H8 1)
man maahi saajan karahi ralee-aa karam Dharam sabaa-i-aa. athsath tirath punn poojaa naam saachaa bhaa-i-aa.
In their minds, these friends celebrate in happiness; all good karma, righteousness and Dharma, the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage, charity and worship, are found in the love of the True Name.
usar DED wif Ar arf Se FSA great orfemr Ih (767-1, wet, Hs 1)
aap saajay thaap vaykhai tisai bhaanaa bhaa-i-aa. He Himself creates, establishes and beholds all, by the Pleasure of His Will.
AMo sia dates Ja we getfeur ull (767-1, wet, He 1) saajan raa‘g rangeelrhay rang laal banaa-i-aa. ||5]|| My friends are happy in the Love of the Lord; they nurture love for their Beloved. ||5]|
nin nia A aba fas uray AS I (767-2, wet, He 1) anDhaa aagoo jay thee-ai ki-o paaDhar jaanai. If a blind man is made the leader, how will he know the way?
wif WA HAS deba fa ag use i (767-2, Wet, He 1)
aap musai mat hochhee-ai ki-o raahu pachhaanai. He is impaired, and his understanding is inadequate; how will he know the way?
fag af we Hoe ure nia at Hfs niaet i (767-3, Het, Hs 1)
ki-o raahi jaavai mahal paavai anDh kee mat anDhlee.
How can he follow the path and reach the Mansion of the Lord's Presence? Blind is the understanding of the blind.
fee oH ofs & AE 3 AS nig FS TUT Il (767-3, wet, He 1)
vin naam har kay kachh na soojhai anDh boodou DhanDhlee.
Without the Lord's Name, they cannot see anything; the blind are drowned in worldly entanglements.
feo of woe we Gun Age ae a nfs SA Il (767-4, Bat, He 1D
din raat chaanan chaa-o upjai sabad gur kaa man vasai.
Day and night, the Divine Light shines forth and joy wells up, when the Word of the Guru's Shabad abides in the mind.
ad rfs ae ufo afe fasst og wag Te TA MEM (767-4, wat, He 1) kar jorh gur peh kar binantee raahu paaDhar gur dasai. ||6]|| With your palms pressed together, pray to the Guru to show you the way. ||6]||
He udeHt A aby AS eH USfeMr I (767-5, At, He 1) man pardaysee jay thee-ai sabh days paraa-i-aa. If the man becomes a stranger to God, then all the world becomes a stranger to him.
fan ufo Hee aost gat fs mrfenr (767-5, Fat, He kis peh khol"a-o ganth-rhee dookhee bhar aa-i-aa. Unto whom should I tie up and give the bundle of my pains?
edt afs orfenr wag Fete age we fafa Hater Il (767-6, Fat, we 1)
dookhee bhar aa-i-aa jagat sabaa-i-aa ka-un jaanai biDh mayree-aa.
The whole world is overflowing with pain and suffering; who can know the state of my inner self?
Wiss Wee ud SIS Sfe o mr] SH Il (767-6, Het, ue 1)
aavnay jaavnay kharay daraavanay tot na aavai fayree-aa.
Comings and goings are terrible and dreadful; there is no end to the rounds of reincarnation.
on fegé Se se a afs nae Hetfemr I (767-7, Fat, He 1) naam vihoonay oonay jhoonay naa gur sabad sunaa-i-aa.
Without the Naam, he is vacant and sad; he does not listen to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ho ude A aha AS eA User DI (767-7, et, He 1)
man pardaysee jay thee-ai sabh days paraa-i-aa. ||7]||
If the mind becomes a stranger to God, then all the world becomes a stranger to him. II7II
Gd Host wife wrue A saute star Il (767-8, wt, He 1)
gur mahlee ghar aapnai so bharpur leenaa.
One who finds the Guru's Mansion within the home of his own being, merges in the All-pervading Lord.
Heq Ae 3t ad AY Aafe uster il (767-8, wat, ue 1) sayvak sayvaa taa™ karay sach sabad pateenaa.
The sevadar performs selfless service when he is pleased, and confirmed in the True Word of the Shabad.
Age usta nia sth A HIG HIS vise I (767-9, Bet, He 1)
sabday pateejai ank bheejai so mahal mehlaa antray.
Confirmed in the Shabad, with her being softened by devotion, the bride dwells in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, deep within her being.
uify asst ad Het ys urfu nifs fadss i (767-9, wat, ue 1) aap kartaa karay so-ee parabh aap ant nirantray. The Creator Himself creates; God Himself, in the end, is endless.
qe Hate Ha st ATE IAS mMoeTE ase Il (767-10, Fat, He 1)
gur sabad maylaa taa™ suhaylaa baajant anhad beenaa.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mortal is united, and then embellished; the unstruck melody of the sound current resounds.
qd Host wife wry A sfaufs ster Ici (767-10, wat, He 1)
gur mahlee ghar aapnai so bharipur leenaa. ||8]|
One who finds the Guru's Mansion within the home of his own being, merges in the All-pervading Lord. ||8]|
atst far Arad afs Fa Ret (767-11, et, Hs 1)
keetaa ki-aa salaahee-ai kar vaykhai so-ee.
Why praise that which is created? Praise instead the One who created it and watches over it.
a at ahfs 5 ue ABS Aet (767-11, wet, ve 1) taa kee keemat na pavai jay lochai ko-ee. His value cannot be estimated, no matter how much one may wish.
afs A ure orf pare urfu niga © TBE Il (767-12, wet, He 1)
keemat so paavai aap jaanaavai aap abhul na bhul-ay.
He alone can estimate the Lord's value, whom the Lord Himself causes to know. He is not mistaken; He does not make mistakes.
AA ag Aste so sels Ts a Hale MABE Il (767-12, wet, He 1) jai jai kaar karahi tuDh bhaaveh gur kai sabad amula-ay.
He alone celebrates victory, who is pleasing to You, through the Invaluable Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hes sty as 85st AY 5 As aret I 767-13, Feat, He 1)
heena-o neech kara-o baynantee saach na chhoda-o bhaa-ee.
I am lowly and abject - I offer my prayer; may I never forsake the True Name, O Sibling of Destiny.
oad fafs afe efor ee nfs Aret ENQNUI (767-13, Fat, He 1)
naanak jin kar daykhi-aa dayvai mat saa-ee. ||9||2||5]|
O Nanak, the One who created the creation, watches over it; He alone bestows understanding. ||9]|2]|5||
TY AT ST HIS 2 WT 2 (767-15) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 3 ghar 2 Raag Soohee, Chhant, Third Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (767-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AY Afoswat ofs fomreg il (767-16, at, Hs 3) sukh sohilrhaa har Dhi-aavahu. Meditate on the Lord, and find peace and pleasure.
aaHfy ais SB urs_ Il (767-16, wet, us 3) gurmukh har fal paavhu. As Gurmukh, obtain the Lord's fruitful rewards.
Toute se ureg aig ony fowreg HOH HOH & EU foes I (767-16, Het, He 3)
gurmukh fal paavhu har naam Dhi-aavahu janam janam kay dookh nivaaray.
As Gurmukh, obtain the fruit of the Lord, and meditate on the Lord's Name; the pains of countless lifetimes shall be erased.
afeodt as vue feeg fats area Afs ASts | (767-17, wt, us 3) balihaaree gur apnay vitahu jin kaaraj sabh savaaray. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has arranged and resolved all my affairs.
dfs ug faut ag fa mug AY SB dfs AS UST Il (767-17, Bet, Hs 3) har parabh kirpaa karay har jaapahu sukh fal har jan paavhu. The Lord God will bestow His Grace, if you meditate on the Lord; O humble servant of
the Lord, you shall obtain the fruit of peace.
SOg Ad Hed HS set AY Afowat afe fimreg Al (767-18, Fat, He 3)
naanak kahai sunhu jan bhaa-ee sukh sohilrhaa har Dhi-aavahu. ||1]|
Says Nanak, listen O humble Sibling of Destiny: meditate on the Lord, and find peace and pleasure. ||1||
Hfe afs Te S16 Adfa ABS Il (767-19, Aat, we 3) sun har gun bheenay sahj subhaa-ay. Hearing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I am intuitively drenched with His Love.
THs AdA STH fore il (767-19, wet, us 3) gurmat sehjay naam Dhi-aa-ay. Under Guru's Instruction, I meditate intuitively on the Naam.
fe ag ufs fafimr fo ag fufeer fs ASH HIE SC Sra Il (767-19, Fat, He 3)
jin ka-o Dhur likhi-aa tin gur mili-aa tin janam maran bha-o bhaagaa.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, meet the Guru, and their fears of birth and death leave them.
tial DEt
nivsd Pants wat wet A AG Tie fee war i (768-1, wat, ue 3)
andrahu durmat doojee kho-ee so jan har liv laagaa.
One who eliminates evil-mindedness and duality from within himself, that humble being lovingly focuses his mind on the Lord.
faa ag faut atet AS HuMit fse nafes afs Te we Il (768-2, wet, Hs 3)
jin ka-o kirpaa kKeenee mayrai su-aamee tin an-din har gun gaa-ay.
Those, upon whom my Lord and Master bestows His Grace, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day.
Hfe Ho S16 Adfa ASS MQIl (768-2, wet, us 3) sun man bheenay sahj subhaa-ay. ||2]| Hearing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I am intuitively drenched with His Love. ||2| |
Aa Hf TH OTH feASTa Il (768-3, Fat, Hs 3) jug meh raam naam nistaaraa. In this age, emancipation comes only from the Lord's Name.
aa 3 Gun Ase Ses Il (768-3, wet, He 3) gur tay upjai sabad veechaaraa. Contemplative meditation on the Word of the Shabad emanates from the Guru.
ad Hag Sea IH oH fimra fan fagur ag A ue Il (768-3, wat, Hs 3)
gur sabad veechaaraa raam naam pi-aaraa jis kirpaa karay so paa-ay. Contemplating the Guru's Shabad, one comes to love the Lord's Name; he alone obtains it, unto whom the Lord shows Mercy.
Hon we ae feg ast fawfeu vfs aee il (768-4, get, ne 3)
sehjay gun gaavai din raatee kilvikh sabh gavaa-ay.
In peace and poise, he sings the Lord's Praises day and night, and all sins are eradicated.
AZ A 37 5 Asa a IG ST J THT Il (768-4, wet, He 3) sabh ko tayraa too sabhnaa kaa ha-o tayraa too hamaaraa. All are Yours, and You belong to all. Iam Yours, and You are mine.
Aa Hf IH OTH feASTS ISI (768-5, Bet, Hs 3) jug meh raam naam nistaaraa. ||3]|| In this age, emancipation comes only from the Lord's Name. |[3]|
AAS wife SS we Hat Il (768-5, wet, Hs 3) Saajan aa-ay vuthay ghar maahee. The Lord, my Friend has come to dwell within the home of my heart;
dfs we Wefs fyufs vrs i (768-5, wet, us 3) har gun gaavahi taripat aghaahee. singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, one is satisfied and fulfilled.
fs ge arte Ae fyuset fete sa F Hat wre Il (768-6, Fat, Hs 3)
har gun gaa-ay sadaa tariptaasee fir bhookh na laagai aa-ay.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, one is satisfied forever, never to feel hunger again.
ao feta un de fe wo at A ofe afs ay fare I (768-6, Hat, Hs 3)
dah dis pooj hovai har jan kee jo har har naam Dhi-aa-ay.
That humble servant of the Lord, who meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is worshipped in the ten directions.
aod oie nm rife fees ofa fag & SAT ST Il (768-7, Ht, He 3) naanak har aapay jorh vichhorhay har bin ko doojaa naahee. O Nanak, He Himself joins and separates; there is no other than the Lord.
AMG wife FS we HST SIAM (768-8, Bet, Hs 3) Saajan aa-ay vuthay ghar maahee. ||4]|1]| The Lord, my Friend has come to dwell within the home of my heart. ||4]|1]|
qe Afsars ATE II (768-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH Adt HIS 2 wg 3 Il (768-9) raag soohee mehlaa 3 ghar 3. Raag Soohee, Third Mehl, Third House:
sas Ho at ofa HE ae afar afar Tet mrs INH II (768-9, At, He 3)
bhagat janaa kee har jee-o raakhai jug jug rakh-daa aa-i-aa raam.
The Dear Lord protects His humble devotees; throughout the ages, He has protected them.
A sag x aenfy de gH Rafe werfeor IMF II (768-10, Fat, He 3)
so bhagat jo gurmukh hovai ha-umai sabad jalaa-i-aa raam.
Those devotees who become Gurmukh burn away their ego, through the Word of the Shabad.
UGH Aafe Ferfeor AS ofs afeor fA et APS at Il (768-11, Fat, He 3)
ha-umai sabad jalaa-i-aa mayray har bhaa-i-aa jis dee saachee banee.
Those who burn away their ego through the Shabad, become pleasing to my Lord; their speech becomes True.
Hut sas dato fea ast aoHfe orf surat i (768-11, Fat, He 3)
sachee bhagat karahi din raatee gurmukh aakh vakhaanee.
They perform the Lord's true devotional service, day and night, as the Guru has instructed them.
sas at we At uifs fSgHs oH Ae Hfs Sfmt I (768-12, Fat, He 3)
bhagtaa kee chaal sachee at nirmal naam sachaa man bhaa-i-aa.
The devotees’ lifestyle is true, and absolutely pure; the True Name is pleasing to their minds.
oo Sas Aufs fs AS frst Ad AG AHEM NA (768-13, Bet, He 3) naanak bhagat soheh dar saachai jinee sacho sach kamaa-i-aa. ||1||
O Nanak, the those devotees, who practice Truth, and only Truth, look beauteous in the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
ofa sas at ws ufs 3 sas of & of ANS TH II (768-13, Bat, He 3)
har bhagtaa kee jaat pat hai bhagat har kai naam samaanay raam.
The Lord is the social class and honor of His devotees; the Lord's devotees merge in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
dfs safs asta feag wry agefs fae Te wigae Use TH Il (768-14, wet, us 3)
har bhagat karahi vichahu aap gavaaveh jin gun avgan pachhaanay raam.
They worship the Lord in devotion, and eradicate self-conceit from within themselves; they understand merits and demerits.
Te uae ues dfs ou sre F gals Hot weil il (768-15, wet, He 3)
gun a-ugan pachhaanai har naam vakhaanai bhai bhagat meethee laagee.
They understand merits and demerits, and chant the Lord's Name; devotional worship is sweet to them.
wofes safs asfs fea ast we ct ufo Sarat | (768-15, wet, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahi din raatee ghar hee meh bairaagee.
Night and day, they perform devotional worship, day and night, and in the home of the self, they remain detached.
ast TS Aet He fase safe AME Sufo A|t |S Il (768-16, wet, us 3)
bhagtee raatay sadaa man nirmal har jee-o vaykheh sadaa naalay.
Imbued with devotion, their minds remain forever immaculate and pure; they see their Dear Lord always with them.
esa A sas dfs & efa ATS miafes SH ANTS III (768-16, Fat, He 3)
naanak say bhagat har kai dar saachay an-din naam sam"aalay. ||2]|
O Nanak, those devotees are True in the Court of the Lord; night and day, they dwell upon the Naam. ||2||
HoHY safs acts fas Afsas fee afsas safs 3 det IM Il (768-17, Bet, He 3) manmukh bhagat karahi bin satgur vin satgur bhagat na ho-ee raam.
The self-willed manmukhs practice devotional rituals without the True Guru, but without the True Guru, there is no devotion.
IH Hfemr sfa fenmd ufs AeHfs ey Tet IH Il (768-18, get, He 3)
ha-umai maa-i-aa rog vi-aapay mar janmeh dukh ho-ee raam.
They are afflicted with the diseases of egotism and Maya, and they suffer the pains of death and rebirth.
nfs Heute vy det eA ate usn feaet fee Ta 3g 3 ASM Il (768-19, Ft, He 3)
mar janmeh dukh ho-ee doojai bhaa-ay paraj vigo-ee vin gur tat na jaani-aa.
The world suffers the pains of death and rebirth, and through the love of duality, it is ruined; without the Guru, the essence of reality is not known.
sats fege Ag Aa sotto ifs afenr ugstont I (768-19, Fat, Hs 3)
bhagat vihoonaa sabh jag bharmi-aa ant ga-i-aa pachhutaani-aa.
Without devotional worship, everyone in the world is deluded and confused, and in the end, they depart with regrets.
uat Dé afe no fas uetfenr ofs out Ag Aet Il (769-1, wet, He 3)
kot maDhay kinai pachhaani-aa har naamaa sach so-ee. Among millions, there is scarcely one who realizes the Name of the True Lord.
aad OTH fxs efaoret eH ote ufS wet Si (769-1, Fat, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee doojai bhaa-ay pat kho-ee. ||3]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained; in the love of duality, all honor is lost. ||3]|
sas a ufs way AT fs Te Ae SS ITH Il (769-2, wat, ue 3)
bhagtaa kai ghar kaaraj saachaa har gun sadaa vakhaanay raam.
In the home of the devotees, is the joy of true marriage; they chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
sats uA nm char ans asa Hs AHTE TH Il (769-3, Fat, He 3)
bhagat khajaanaa aapay dee-aa kaal kantak maar samaanay raam.
He Himself blesses them with the treasure of devotion; conquering the thorny pain of death, they merge in the Lord.
ans aed Hfs ANS Ufa Hfs SS OH fours AG uUfEMT II (769-3, AST, He 3)
kaal kantak maar samaanay har man bhaanay naam niDhaan sach paa-i-aa. Conquering the thorny pain of death, they merge in the Lord; they are pleasing to the Lord's Mind, and they obtain the true treasure of the Naam.
Het nue ae 3 feud ofa dor nafs Aarfemr i (769-4, Bet, v8 3)
sadaa akhut kaday na nikhutai har dee-aa sahj subhaa-i-aa.
This treasure is inexhaustible; it will never be exhausted. The Lord automatically blesses them with it.
fs AS Ss Ae dt Ss Te a Hale ATfEMT II (769-4, Fat, He 3)
har jan oochay sad hee oochay gur kai sabad suhaa-i-aa.
The humble servants of the Lord are exalted and elevated, forever on high; they are adorned with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ood unt sufh fore afar afar Hat urfemr eiUiil (769-5, wat, He 3)
naanak aapay bakhas milaa-ay jug jug sobhaa paa-i-aa. ||4]|1]|2]|
O Nanak, He Himself forgives them, and merges them with Himself; throughout the ages, they are glorified. ||4]|1]|2||
Hot HIS 3 Il (769-6)
soohee mehlaa 3. Soohee, Third Mehl:
Rafe Ad Ay Afoer faa AS a dfs Stars IH Il (769-6, Fat, Hs 3)
sabad sachai sach sohilaa jithai sachay kaa ho-ay veechaaro raam.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, true happiness prevails, there where the True Lord is contemplated.
J@H Afs faofeu ae ATG ofr Bfs Os TH II (769-6, Bat, He 3)
ha-umai sabh kilvikh kaatay saach rakhi-aa ur Dhaaray raam.
Egotism and all sins are eradicated, when one keeps the True Lord enshrined in the heart.
Ag shmr 6g od esg ad fefs gene Sade 3 Tet Il (769-7, Het, v8 3)
sach rakhi-aa ur Dhaaray dutar taaray fir bhavjal taran na ho-ee.
One who keeps the True Lord enshrined in the heart, crosses over the terrible and dreadful world-ocean; he shall not have to cross over it again.
Ae Afsag At set fafs Ag feurfer Aet I (769-8, wet, He 3)
sachaa satgur sachee banee jin sach vikhaali-aa so-ee.
True is the True Guru, and True is the Word of His Bani; through it, the True Lord is seen.
AS We we Afs ANS AY Fa AS At Il (769-8, gt, ve 3)
Saachay gun gaavai sach samaavai sach vaykhai sabh so-ee.
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord merges in Truth; he beholds the True Lord everywhere.
ood Ara AoE ArSt cet Ay farsa Jet Uli (769-9, Bet, Hs 3)
naanak saachaa saahib saachee naa-ee sach nistaaraa ho-ee. ||1]|
O Nanak, True is the Lord and Master, and True is His Name; through Truth, comes emancipation. ||1]|
And Afsafs AS astfeor ufS we AG Het IN II (769-9, Fat, He 3) saachai satgur saach bujhaa-i-aa pat raakhai sach so-ee raam. The True Guru reveals the True Lord; the True Lord preserves our honor.
Ae so SC Ae do AD of AY Jet TH Il (769-10, Bet, He 3)
sachaa bhojan bhaa-o sachaa hai sachai naam sukh ho-ee raam. The true food is love for the True Lord; through the True Name, peace is obtained.
We OTH AY Jet He 3 et Tals o Fat STAT Il (769-10, Fat, Hz 3)
saachai naam sukh ho-ee marai na ko-ee garabh na joonee vaasaa.
Through the True Name, the mortal finds peace; he shall never die, and never again enter the womb of reincarnation.
Ast afs frre afs AHret Afs of usEIAT II (769-11, Bet, He 3)
jotee jot milaa-ee sach samaa-ee sach naa-ay pargaasaa.
His light blends with the Light, and he merges into the True Lord; he is illuminated and enlightened with the True Name.
fadt AY WS" A AS de niofeo Ay fimrfefs It (769-11, Fat, He 3) jinee sach jaataa say sachay ho-ay an-din sach Dhi-aa-in. Those who know the Truth are True; night and day, they meditate on Truth.
oSa Ay OH fro fase efhor o stefs eu ufefs i (769-12, wet, He 3)
naanak sach naam jin hirdai vasi-aa naa veechhurh dukh paa-in. ||2||
O Nanak, those whose hearts are filled with the True Name, never suffer the pains of separation. ||2]|
Ret wet Ad ae wefs faz wie Afoer Tet IH I (769-13, wet, He 3)
sachee banee sachay gun gaavahi tit ghar sohilaa ho-ee raam.
In that home, and in that heart, where the True Bani of the Lord's True Praises are sung, the songs of joy resound.
fegHe Te AS 36 HO ATS fefe ATT UY Us AST IH Il (769-13, wet, He 3)
nirmal gun saachay tan man saachaa vich saachaa purakh parabh so-ee raam. Through the immaculate virtues of the True Lord, the body and mind are rendered True, and God, the True Primal Being, dwells within.
eo 4
AZ Ay @ds Ad 88 A Ag ad A TET I (769-14, wet, He 3)
sabh sach vartai sacho bolai jo sach karai so ho-ee.
Such a person practices only Truth, and speaks only Truth; whatever the True Lord does, that alone comes to pass.
Wd Va JI AY Unf vied & VA AST Il (769-14, wat, we 3) jah daykhaa tah sach pasri-aa avar na doojaa ko-ee. Wherever I look, there I see the True Lord pervading; there is no other at all.
Ae Gur Afs AHS His HOH SAT Tet I (769-15, Het, He 3)
sachay upjai sach samaavai mar janmai doojaa ho-ee.
From the True Lord, we emanate, and into the True Lord, we shall merge; death and birth come from duality.
waa AS fas wm asst orfy aaeS At SI (769-15, gat, He 3) naanak sabh kichh aapay kartaa aap karaavai so-ee. ||3]| O Nanak, He Himself does everything; He Himself is the Cause. ||3]|
Ae say Aufs ders Ad AY SWS TH Il (769-16, wet, Hs 3)
sachay bhagat soheh darvaaray sacho sach vakhaanay raam.
The true devotees look beautiful in the Darbaar of the Lord's Court. They speak Truth, and only Truth.
we nisd Act aret ATS fy use IH II (769-16, Bat, He 3)
ghat antray saachee banee saacho aap pachhaanay raam.
Deep within the nucleus of their heart, is the True Word of the Lord's Bani. Through the Truth, they understand themselves.
nity ustefo St Ay Wefs APS ASt Tet I (769-17, wat, He 3) aap pachhaaneh taa sach jaaneh saachay sojhee ho-ee. They understand themselves, and so know the True Lord, through their true intuition.
Ae" Ade At d AST AS ot AY Det Il (769-17, Fat, He 3) sachaa sabad sachee hai sobhaa saachay hee sukh ho-ee. True is the Shabad, and True is its Glory; peace comes only from Truth.
Afg 33 sas fea Jat SA Sa 3 AT Il (769-18, wet, Hs 3) saach ratay bhagat ik rangee doojaa rang na ko-ee. Imbued with Truth, the devotees love the One Lord; they do not love any other.
soe fan ag HASfa faftmr fsa Ag usufs Tet USNS (769-18, Fat, He 3)
naanak jis ka-o mastak likhi-aa tis sach paraapat ho-ee. ||4]|2]|3]|
O Nanak, he alone obtains the True Lord, who has such pre-ordained destiny written upon his forehead. ||4||2]|3]|
Hat HIS 3 Il (769-19) soohee mehlaa 3. Soohee, Third Mehl:
Aa wd us A se faa Afsag Ao o Tet IH Il (769-19, Bet, He 3)
jug chaaray Dhan jay bhavai bin satgur sohaag na ho-ee raam.
The soul-bride may wander throughout the four ages, but still, without the True Guru, she will not find her True Husband Lord.
UST DIO
fosue TH Ae of as fSH fas neg 5 aet TH Il (770-1, Fat, He 3)
nihchal raaj sadaa har kayraa tis bin avar na ko-ee raam.
The Kingdom of the Lord is permanent, and forever unchanging; there is no other than Him.
fen fag meg o aet Ae Ae Het aenfe Sat afsor It (770-1, at, He 3) tis bin avar na ko-ee sadaa sach so-ee gurmukh ayko jaani-aa. There is no other than Him - He is True forever; the Gurmukh knows the One Lord.
U6 furs Hore dur aanst He font Il (770-2, Fat, He 3) Dhan pir maylaavaa ho-aa gurmatee man maani-aa. That soul-bride, whose mind accepts the Guru's Teachings, meets her Husband Lord.
Afsag firfemr st afs urfemr fas afs are Hats o Tet Il (770-2, wat, ne 3)
satgur mili-aa taa har paa-i-aa bin har naavai mukat na ho-ee.
Meeting the True Guru, she finds the Lord; without the Lord's Name, there is no liberation.
ood aHfs as we nfs ufo AY Tet UA (770-3, Het, He 3)
naanak kaaman kantai raavay man maanee-ai sukh ho-ee. ||1]|
O Nanak, the soul-bride ravishes and enjoys her Husband Lord; her mind accepts Him, and she finds peace. ||1]|
Afsag Afe us Poste ofe eg uefa Het IH I (770-4, At, He 3)
satgur sayv Dhan baalrhee-ay har var paavahi so-ee raam.
Serve the True Guru, O young and innocent bride; thus you shall obtain the Lord as your Husband.
He deta Aoaet fefs Her SAB Tet IH Il (770-4, wat, He 3)
sadaa hoveh sohaaganee fir mailaa vays na ho-ee raam.
You shall be the virtuous and happy bride of the True Lord forever; and you shall never again wear soiled clothes.
fefa Hor 2H 3 det Tene gs set ISH fe User I (770-5, At, He 3)
fir mailaa vays na ho-ee gurmukh boojhai ko-ee ha-umai maar pachhaani-aa.
Your clothes shall never again be soiled; how rare are those few, who, as Gurmukh, recognize this, and conquer their ego.
adat arg ante Aafe AHS nists Sat AfEnr Ih (770-5, wet, Hs 3)
karnee kaar kamaavai sabad samaavai antar ayko jaani-aa.
So make your practice the practice of good deeds; merge into the Word of the Shabad, and deep within, come to know the One Lord.
qonfa ys we feo ast nruer At AS det I (770-6, et, He 3) gurmukh parabh raavay din raatee aapnaa saachee sobhaa ho-ee. The Gurmukh enjoys God, day and night, and so obtains true glory.
oon anfs fug ae uruar ofe sfomr ys Aet II (770-6, wet, He 3)
naanak kaaman pir raavay aapnaa rav rahi-aa parabh so-ee. ||2| |
O Nanak, the soul-bride enjoys and ravishes her Beloved; God is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||2||
Td at ag ad US Tose die eg efe fare TH Il (770-7, wet, v2 3) gur kee kaar karay Dhan baalrhee-ay har var day-ay milaa-ay raam.
Serve the Guru, O young and innocent soul-bride, and he will lead to you meet your Husband Lord.
ofa & df ast 3 anife firs utsy AY Ure IH II (770-8, Feat, He 3)
har kai rang ratee hai kaaman mil pareetam sukh paa-ay raam.
The bride is imbued with the Love of her Lord; meeting with her Beloved, she finds peace.
ffs Uisu AY ue Afs AHS AY Fas AS aet Il (770-8, wat, He 3)
mil pareetam sukh paa-ay sach samaa-ay sach vartai sabh thaa-ee.
Meeting her Beloved, she finds peace, and merges in the True Lord; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.
Ae Atarg ad feg ast anfe Afe AHTET II (770-9, Fat, He 3)
sachaa seegaar karay din raatee kaaman sach samaa-ee.
The bride makes Truth her decorations, day and night, and remains absorbed in the True Lord.
ofe AYES Hate uerst afte ofenr xfs we il (770-9, wat, He 3)
har sukh-daata sabad pachhaataa kaaman la-i-aa kanth laa-ay.
The Lord, the Giver of peace, is realized through His Shabad; He hugs His bride close in His embrace.
SSA HIG HIG USS TSHSt ofa urs Sil (770-10, wet, us 3)
naanak mahlee mahal pachhaanai gurmatee har paa-ay. ||3]|
O Nanak, the bride obtains the Mansion of His Presence; through the Guru's Teachings, she finds her Lord. ||3]|
Aue wet ufs Hat AS ufs orf feet aH I (770-10, wet, M8 3) saa Dhan baalee Dhur maylee mayrai parabh aap milaa-ee raam. The Primal Lord, my God, has united His young and innocent bride with Himself.
TsHst wfe wee dor ug af afour As aet IM I (770-11, Fat, He 3) gurmatee ghat chaanan ho-aa parabh rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee raam. Through the Guru's Teachings, her heart is illumined and enlightened; God is permeating and pervading everywhere.
ys sfe sfour As aret ifs eAret uate fesfior urfer i (770-12, Het, 48 3)
parabh rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee man vasaa-ee poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa.
God is permeating and pervading everywhere; He dwells in her mind, and she realizes her pre-ordained destiny.
An Aust Ad us stat Ay Alerg gatfenr | (770-12, wet, He 3) sayj sukhaalee mayray parabh bhaanee sach seegaar banaa-i-aa. On his cozy bed, she is pleasing to my God; she fashions her decorations of Truth.
omnfs fasHe JGH He det asHfs Afs AMET I (770-13, Bat, He 3)
kaaman nirmal ha-umai mal kho-ee gurmat sach samaa-ee.
The bride is immaculate and pure; she washes away the filth of egotism, and through the Guru's Teachings, she merges in the True Lord.
oad nify froret ass on oe fafa uret guSigil (770-13, Ft, He 3) naanak aap milaa-ee kartai naam navai niDh paa-ee. ||4||3||4||
O Nanak, the Creator Lord blends her into Himself, and she obtains the nine treasure of the Naam. ||4]|3]|4] |
Hot Hae 3 Il (770-14)
soohee mehlaa 3. Soohee, Third Mehl:
dfs Id de Te Weg Ts ATHY we IH Il (770-14, wat, ue 3) har haray har gun gaavhu har gurmukhay paa-ay raam. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har; the Gurmukh obtains the Lord.
wofes Aafe deg mode Hae SAS IH Il (770-15, wat, Hs 3)
andino sabad ravhu anhad sabad vajaa-ay raam.
Night and day, chant the Word of the Shabad; night and day, the Shabad shall vibrate and resound.
mode Hae are ofa AG wie wre afe Te Weg ard Il (770-15, et, He 3)
anhad sabad vajaa-ay har jee-o ghar aa-ay har gun gaavhu naaree.
The unstruck melody of the Shabad vibrates, and the Dear Lord comes into the home of my heart; O ladies, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
wofes safs asfs ae rat AT Ue as fim Il (770-16, wat, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahi gur aagai saa Dhan kant pi-aaree.
That soul-bride, who performs devotional worship service to the Guru night and day, becomes the Beloved bride of her Lord.
Gd a Age efhor we nists A AS Aafe ATS Il (770-16, wet, He 3)
gur kaa sabad vasi-aa ghat antar say jan sabad suhaa-ay.
Those humble beings, whose hearts are filled with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, are adorned with the Shabad.
soe fee uta Ae ot Afser ofa afe fas whe mre WA (770-17, Fat, He 3)
naanak tin ghar sad hee sohilaa har kar kirpaa ghar aa-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, their hearts are forever filled with happiness; the Lord, in His Mercy, enters into their hearts. ||1||
sas His ose sfenr afs oth ad fee we IH Il (770-17, wet, He 3)
bhagtaa man aanand bha-i-aa har naam rahay liv laa-ay raam.
The minds of the devotees are filled with bliss; they remain lovingly absorbed in the Lord's Name.
TINA Ho fess dur fase ofs TE We IA I (770-18, wet, ne 3)
gurmukhay man nirmal ho-aa nirmal har gun gaa-ay raam.
The mind of the Gurmukh is immaculate and pure; she sings the Immaculate Praises of the Lord.
fesHs Te we oH Hfs exe ofa at nifys aret i (770-19, wet, ue 3) nirmal gun gaa-ay naam man vasaa-ay har kee amrit banee.
Singing His Immaculate Praises, she enshrines in her mind the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the Ambrosial Word of His Bani.
fa Hie efror Ret Ao fonsd wife wie Aafe AHTEt II (770-19, et, Hs 3)
jin" man vasi-aa say-ee jan nistaray ghat ghat sabad samaanee.
Those humble beings, within whose minds it abides, are emancipated; the Shabad permeates each and every heart.
ust DD9 33 We Weta Aol AHSfs Hae Afs fers it (771-1, wet, v3 3)
tayray gun gaavahi sahj samaaveh sabday mayl milaa-ay. Singing Your Glorious Praises, they merge naturally into You, O Lord; through the Shabad, they are united in Union with You.
Sa AEG ASH f36 as fa Afsate afe Hrafar uTS WW (771-1, wet, ue 3) naanak safal janam tin kayraa je satgur har maarag paa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, their lives are fruitful; the True Guru places them on the Lord's Path. ||2||
Hanats fA Ae sfeur afte ofe of AME IH Il (771-2, wet, Hs 3)
santsangat si-o mayl bha-i-aa har har naam samaa-ay raam.
Those who join the Society of the Saints are absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dd & Aafe Ae Hes Has 3e of a oth fos SS IH II (771-3, wat, He 3)
gur kai sabad sad jeevan mukat bha-ay har kai naam liv laa-ay raam.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are forever ‘jivan mukta' - liberated while yet alive; they are lovingly absorbed in the Name of the Lord.
ofa oth fos we ats fs frre Hour gst ofa SS Ml (771-3, wet, He 3)
har naam chit laa-ay gur mayl milaa-ay manoo-aa rataa har naalay.
They center their consciousness on the Lord's Name; through the Guru, they are united in His Union. Their minds are imbued with the Lord's Love.
Hees uf Hg gorfemr mafes SH ANTS Il (771-4, At, He 3)
sukh-daata paa-i-aa moh chukaa-i-aa an-din naam sam"aalay.
They find the Lord, the Giver of peace, and they eradicate attachments; night and day, they contemplate the Naam.
Td AGe TS" AIH HST aH Ale SATE Il (771-5, Fat, He 3)
gur sabday raataa sehjay maataa naam man vasaa-ay.
They are imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and intoxicated with celestial peace; the Naam abides in their minds.
oad fae ufs ne dt Afser fa Afsara Afe AAS USI (771-5, et, He 3)
naanak tin ghar sad hee sohilaa je satgur sayv samaa-ay. ||3]||
O Nanak, the homes of their hearts are filled with happiness, forever and always; they are absorbed in serving the True Guru. |[3]|
fag Afsas Aa soft gerfeur ofs at Hoe o ufeuit TH II (771-6, Bat, H8 3)
bin satgur jag bharam bhulaa-i-aa har kaa mahal na paa-i-aa raam.
Without the True Guru, the world is deluded by doubt; it does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
aona feta vfs frerfeur fsa a ge aefenr IM Il (771-6, Ft, He 3) gurmukhay ik mayl milaa-i-aa tin kay dookh gavaa-i-aa raam. As Gurmukh, some are united in the Lord's Union, and their pains are dispelled.
fo a eu aefenr a ofs His wfenr wet arefa Sar TS il (771-7, wet, Hs 3)
tin kay dookh gavaa-i-aa jaa har man bhaa-i-aa sadaa gaavahi rang raatay.
Their pains are dispelled, when it is pleasing to the Lord's Mind; imbued with His Love, they sing His Praises forever.
dfs & Sas Ae AS fess Afar Afr AE Tt AS Il (771-8, Fat, He 3)
har kay bhagat sadaa jan nirmal jug jug sad hee jaatay.
The Lord's devotees are pure and humble forever; throughout the ages, they are forever respected.
At safs asta ef vrufs wie efs AST At I (771-8, et, He 3)
saachee bhagat karahi dar jaapeh ghar dar sachaa so-ee.
They perform true devotional worship service, and are honored in the Lord's Court; the True Lord is their hearth and home.
ood Ae Afse Adt AY sat Hae dt AY Tet sisnUll (771-9, get, He 3) naanak sachaa sohilaa sachee sach banee sabday hee sukh ho-ee. ||4||4[|5]]|
O Nanak, true are their songs of joy, and true is their word; through the Word of the Shabad, they find peace. ||4||4]|5]|
Hot HIS 3S Il (771-10)
soohee mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
A Safty eg Poste 7 as veel fos GS TH Il (771-10, Fe, He 3)
jay lorheh var baalrhee-ay taa gur charnee chit laa-ay raam.
If you long for your Husband Lord, O young and innocent bride, then focus your consciousness on the Guru's feet.
He defa Aoet ofs He Hs oS IH I (71-10, Fat, Hs 3) sadaa hoveh sohaaganee har jee-o marai na jaa-ay raam. You shall be a happy soul bride of your Dear Lord forever; He does not die or leave.
ofa ME He B WE Ts a Hof ASS AT US as fim It (771-11, Fat, He 3)
har jee-o marai na jaa-ay gur kai sahj subhaa-ay saa Dhan kant pi-aaree.
The Dear Lord does not die, and He does not leave; through the peaceful poise of the Guru, the soul bride becomes the lover of her Husband Lord.
Afs Hath wet 3 fess aa a Hate Aterst i (771-11, wet, ue 3)
sach sanjam sadaa hai nirmal gur kai sabad seegaaree.
Through truth and self-control, she is forever immaculate and pure; she is embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
As ys Aro Ae dt Ave fate mm wiry Curfeur i (771-12, Fat, ne 3) mayraa parabh saachaa sad hee saachaa jin aapay aap upaa-i-aa. My God is True, forever and ever; He Himself created Himself.
Soa Aer fug we nimyar fats aa saat fos wfeor wai (771-13, Fat, ve 3) naanak sadaa pir raavay aapnaa jin gur charnee chit laa-i-aa. ||1||
O Nanak, she who focuses her consciousness on the Guru's feet, enjoys her Husband Lord. ||1]|
fug ufeniat geste niofes Ada HTSt IH II (771-13, Fat, H8 3)
pir paa-i-arhaa baalrhee-ay an-din sehjay maatee raam.
When the young, innocent bride finds her Husband Lord, she is automatically intoxicated with Him, night and day.
Tost ufs moe sfeur fsz3 sf He o TS MH I 771-14, wet, ve 3)
gurmatee man anad bha-i-aa tit tan mail na raatee raam.
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, her mind becomes blissful, and her body is not tinged with filth at all.
faz 3fs He 6 wat of ufs ast He ys Afs frre 771-14, Bet, U8 3)
tit tan mail na raatee har parabh raatee mayraa parabh may! milaa-ay.
Her body is not tinged with filth at all, and she is imbued with her Lord God; my God unites her in Union.
mofeg Te dfs ys muar fess miry Tee Il (771-15, wet, vz 3) an-din raavay har parabh apnaa vichahu aap gavaa-ay. Night and day, she enjoys her Lord God; her egotism is banished from within.
ToHfs ufenr Rafa frerfeur ore Yfsy gst il (771-15, wet, v2 3)
gurmat paa-i-aa sahj milaa-i-aa apnay pareetam raatee.
Through the Guru's Teachings, she easily finds and meets Him. She is imbued with her Beloved.
ost 3H fee efsuret yg TS Sf TS I 771-16, wet, Hs 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee parabh raavay rang raatee. ||2||
O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, she obtains glorious greatness. She ravishes and enjoys her God; she is imbued with His Love. ||2| |
fug we df waste fuse a Hoe fse ufeor aH I (71-17, Fat, H8 3)
pir raavay rang raat-rhee-ay pir kaa mahal tin paa-i-aa raam.
Ravishing her Husband Lord, she is imbued with His Love; she obtains the Mansion of His Presence.
A Ad uifs fosne ost fafs feeg wry aefemr at i 0771-17, at, He 3)
so saho at nirmal daataa jin vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa raam.
She is utterly immaculate and pure; the Great Giver banishes self-conceit from within her.
fess Ho vorfeor at afe afemr ofa anifs ufs set I (771-18, wet, He 3)
vichahu moh chukaa-i-aa jaa har bhaa-i-aa har kaaman man bhaanee.
The Lord drives out attachment from within her, when it pleases Him. The soul bride becomes pleasing to the Lord's Mind.
wofes Te we fos AS aa nea ae I (771-19, wet, He 3)
an-din gun gaavai nit saachay kathay akath kahaanee.
Night and day, she continually sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; she speaks the Unspoken Speech.
Aa wd Ae Sa sas fag as fas o urfeor It (771-19, wat, He 3)
jug chaaray saachaa ayko vartai bin gur kinai na paa-i-aa.
Throughout the four ages, the One True Lord is permeating and pervading; without the Guru, no one finds Him.
ust 992 ood da se df wat fafs afs ASt fas afeor Si (772-1, FAt, He 3)
naanak rang ravai rang raatee jin har saytee chit laa-i-aa. ||3]| O Nanak, she revels in joy, imbued with His Love; she focuses her consciousness on the Lord. ||3]|
omnfs ufs Afseat AAS fs firs ae ih (772-1, wet, He 3)
kaaman man sohilrhaa saajan milay pi-aaray raam.
The mind of the soul bride is very happy, when she meets her Friend, her Beloved Lord.
TIHSt Ho fosHs dur ofa wfimr Sfs as IH Il (772-2, wat, ne 3)
gurmatee man nirmal ho-aa har raakhi-aa ur Dhaaray raam.
Through the Guru's Teachings, her mind becomes immaculate; she enshrines the Lord within her heart.
dfs Thimr Sfs urd nus ataH Aetd AsHSt The AST Il (772-2, wet, us 3)
har raakhi-aa ur Dhaaray apnaa kaaraj savaaray gurmatee har jaataa.
Keeping the Lord enshrined within her heart, her affairs are arranged and resolved; through the Guru's Teachings, she knows her Lord.
utsfi Hfs afer He Aa urfeer aan feast Il (772-3, Het, He 3) pareetam mohi la-i-aa man mayraa paa-i-aa karam biDhaataa. My Beloved has enticed my mind; I have obtained the Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
Afsag Afe Ae AY ufenr ofs sft Hfs Has I (772-4, wet, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa har vasi-aa man muraaray.
Serving the True Guru, she finds lasting peace; the Lord, the Destroyer of pride, dwells in her mind.
oa Afs wet afs nus ae a Rafe ASS NBNUIEN (772-4, At, He 3) naanak mayl la-ee gur apunai gur kai sabad savaaray. ||4]|5||6||
O Nanak, she merges with her Guru, embellished and adorned with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||5||6||
Hot HIS 3 Il (772-5)
soohee mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsest ofa oH on ae Aget Stes IN Il (772-5, Fat, He 3)
sohilrhaa har raam naam gur sabdee veechaaray raam.
The song of joy is the Naam, the Name of the Lord; contemplate it, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ofg He 36 Tenfe Sth oH OH fins TH Il (772-6, Bat, He 3) har man tano gurmukh bheejai raam naam pi-aaray raam. The mind and body of the Gurmukh is drenched with the Lord, the Beloved Lord.
oH oH fimrdg Afs aw Curd IH OTH Hfe arat I (772-6, Fat, He 3)
raam naam pi-aaray sabh kul uDhaaray raam naam mukh banee.
Through the Name of the Beloved Lord, all one's ancestors and generations are redeemed; chant the Lord's Name with your mouth.
mee We dd AY Ufeor ufs mode Asfs AHTat Il (772-7, Bat, us 3)
aavan jaan rahay sukh paa-i-aa ghar anhad surat samaanee.
Comings and goings cease, peace is obtained, and in the home of the heart, one's awareness is absorbed in the unstruck melody of the sound current.
ofa afs a urfeur ofa ug stem fasur ors Il (772-7, Het, He 3)
har har ayko paa-i-aa har parabh naanak kirpaa Dhaaray. I have found the One and only Lord, Har, Har. The Lord God has showered His Mercy upon Nanak.
Afseat ofg TH OU ae Aaet Sars WAU (772-8, wet, ue 3)
sohilrhaa har raam naam gur sabdee veechaaray. ||1]|
The song of joy is the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, contemplate it. ||1]|
oH atet ys vis Ca fas ats fufemor AS IM I (772-8, At, He 3) ham neevee parabh at oochaa ki-o kar mili-aa jaa-ay raam. I am lowly, and God is lofty and exalted. How will I ever meet Him?
af Het ag frsu ot ofs & Aafe Aes IH Il (772-9, Ft, He 3)
gur maylee baho kirpaa Dhaaree har kai sabad subhaa-ay raam.
The Guru has very mercifully blessed me and united me with the Lord; through the Shabad, the Word of the Lord, I am lovingly embellished.
fs Rafe Hae wiry aes gar fAG aes HS I (772-9, wat, He 3)
mil sabad subhaa-ay aap gavaa-ay rang si-o ralee-aa maanay.
Merging in the Word of the Shabad, I am lovingly embellished; my ego is eradicated, and I revel in joyous love.
An AaTet AT ys atten ate ofa ath AHS Il (772-10, Wet, Hs 3)
sayj sukhaalee jaa parabh bhaa-i-aa har har naam samaanay.
My bed is so comfortable, since I became pleasing to God; I am absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ood Avafe A esarat A ws AfsasT eS | (772-11, wet, ue 3) naanak sohagan saa vadbhaagee jay chalai satgur bhaa-ay.
O Nanak, that soul bride is so very blessed, who walks in harmony with the True Guru's Will.
oH atet ys ifs Ca fas ats fiufemr Ae IM NM (772-11, Ft, He 3) ham neevee parabh at oochaa ki-o kar mili-aa jaa-ay raam. ||2]| I am lowly, and God is lofty and exalted. How will I ever meet Him? ||2| |
ufe we Asa fefs Sa Sa TH FIST TH I (772-12, wat, He 3) ghat ghatay sabhnaa vich ayko ayko raam bhataaro raam. In each and every heart, and deep within all, is the One Lord, the Husband Lord of all.
feast yg ufs eA feos His mrad FH Il (772-12, Het, Hs 3) iknaa parabh door vasai iknaa man aaDhaaro raam. God dwells far away from some, while for others, He is the Support of the mind.
feast Ho otord franead esorat ag urfemr i 0772-13, wet, us 3)
iknaa man aaDhaaro sirjanhaaro vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa.
For some, the Creator Lord is the Support of the mind; He is obtained by great good fortune, through the Guru.
ufe wfe ofs ys fa Bom aeufe wey werfemr (772-13, at, He 3)
ghat ghat har parabh ayko su-aamee gurmukh alakh lakhaa-i-aa.
The One Lord God, the Master, is in each and every heart; the Gurmukh sees the unseen.
Hon noe duit Ho Hen area YIN Sters il (772-14, wet, us 3) sehjay anad ho-aa man maani-aa naanak barahm beechaaro. The mind is satisfied, in natural ecstasy, O Nanak, contemplating God.
ufe we Asa fefs Sa Sa TH SIS TH BI (772-14, Feat, ue 3) ghat ghatay sabhnaa vich ayko ayko raam bhataaro raam. ||3]| In each and every heart, and deep within all, is the One Lord, the Husband Lord of all.
[131] ag Ade Afsag ost afe afe oth AMfemr IM I (772-15, Fat, He 3)
gur sayvan satgur daataa har har naam samaa-i-aa raam. Those who serve the Guru, the True Guru, the Giver, merge in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofs uf te H us TT at TH unit HAs aafemr TH I (772-16, Het, Hs 3)
har Dhoorh dayvhu mai pooray gur kee ham paapee mukat karaa-i-aa raam.
O Lord, please bless me with the dust of the feet of the Perfect Guru, so that I, a sinner, may be liberated.
unt Has age niy deve fon wife ure Sar | (72-16, Fat, He 3)
paapee mukat karaa-ay aap gavaa-ay nij ghar paa-i-aa vaasaa.
Even sinners are liberated, by eradicating their egotism; they obtain a home within their own heart.
fade gut afy df= ferret aanfs of yaar it (772-17, Bat, v2 3)
bibayk buDhee sukh rain vihaanee gurmat naam pargaasaa.
With clear unerstanding, the night of their lives passes peacefully; through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam is revealed to them.
dfs as nse sfenr fea TSt soa ate His Bare i (772-17, wet, us 3)
har har anad bha-i-aa din raatee naanak har meeth lagaa-ay.
Through the Lord, Har, Har, I am in ecstasy, day and night. O Nanak, the Lord seems sweet.
ag Ade Afsag ost afe afe oth AMS ISIENONUNONAIN (772-18, Bet, Hs 3) gur sayvan satgur daataa har har naam samaa-ay. ||4]||6]|7]||5||7||12]|
Those who serve the Guru, the True Guru, the Giver, merge in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]]6]]7] [5] [7] [221]
UST DIB
TY AT HIS 8 SF WIA (773-1) raag soohee mehlaa 4 chhant ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Chhant, First House:
qe Afsars Arte i (773-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsag use fhofe nrede feast ae get af TH AG I (773-2, Bet, He 4)
satgur purakh milaa-ay avgan viknaa gun ravaa bal raam jee-o.
If only I could meet the True Guru, the Primal Being. Discarding my faults and sins, I would chant the Lord's Glorious Praises.
dfs afs omy fomrfe ageat fos fos ger af aH AIG II (773-2, Bat, He 4)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ay gurbaanee nit nit chavaa bal raam jee-o.
I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. Continuously, continually, I chant the Word of the Guru's Bani.
Toaat Ae Het wait uy fears eter i (773-3, wet, us 4)
gurbaanee sad meethee laagee paap vikaar gavaa-i-aa. Gurbani always seems so sweet; I have eradicated the sins from within.
IH da afer 38 ser AoA Fafa fherfemr 1 (773-3, Fat, He 4) ha-umai rog ga-i-aa bha-o bhaagaa sehjay sahj milaa-i-aa. The disease of egotism is gone, fear has left, and I am absorbed in celestial peace.
offer AA ad Aafe Aust famre sfs afe Sa i (773-4, at, He 4)
kaa-i-aa sayj gur sabad sukhaalee gi-aan tat kar bhogo.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the bed of my body has become cozy and beautiful, and I enjoy the essence of spiritual wisdom.
wofes Afa ure fos ashor area ofa Arar UA (773-5, at, He 4)
an-din sukh maanay nit ralee-aa naanak Dhur sanjogo. ||1]|
Night and day, I continually enjoy peace and pleasure. O Nanak, this is my pre- ordained destiny. ||1]|
AS Hsu afs ee aan aanet urfeor afes aH FIG I (773-5, wat, He 4)
sat santokh kar bhaa-o kurham kurhmaa-ee aa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
The soul-bride is lovingly embellished with truth and contentment; her Father, the Guru, has come to engage her in marriage to her Husband Lord.
AZ Hot afs AS aaaet areretor afes aH AS I (773-6, wat, He 4) sant janaa kar mayl gurbaanee gaavaa-ee-aa bal raam jee-o. Joining with the humble Saints, I sing Gurbani.
wet aa aet usn afs uret ue fee Aofeur 1 (773-6, Het, He 4)
banee gur gaa-ee param gat paa-ee panch milay sohaa-i-aa.
Singing the Guru's Bani, I have obtained the supreme status; meeting with the Saints, the self-elect, Iam blessed and adorned.
afoot acy HHS Sfs oret unis say aetfemr It (773-7, wat, He 4)
ga-i-aa karoDh mamtaa tan naathee pakhand bharam gavaa-i-aa.
Anger and attachment have left my body and run away; I have eradicated hypocrisy and doubt.
I@H utes get AY ufeor mrdas se Ate Il (773-8, wt, He 4)
ha-umai peer ga-ee sukh paa-i-aa aarogat bha-ay sareeraa. The pain of egotism is gone, and I have found peace; my body has become healthy and free of disease.
Td USAT YIN USS SSA Tet Ata Qi (773-8, Fat, ue 4) gur parsaadee barahm pachhaataa naanak gunee gaheeraa. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, I have realized God, the ocean of virtue. ||2]|
Houfy fesst ef Hoe 3 ure ate Tet af oH ATS Il (773-9, Bet, He 4)
manmukh vichhurhee door mahal na paa-ay bal ga-ee bal raam jee-o.
The self-willed manmukh is separated, far away from God; she does not obtain the Mansion of His Presence, and she burns.
nists HHS afs ag fers afs wet afe oH AG II (773-9, Het, He 4)
antar mamtaa koor koorh vihaajhay koorh la-ee bal raam jee-o.
Egotism and falsehood are deep within her; deluded by falsehood, she deals only in falsehood.
TT AUS SHS HIT EY ure fee Afsaqs Ha o urfemr il (773-10, wet, Hs 4)
koorh kapat kamaavai mahaa dukh paavai vin satgur mag na paa-i-aa.
Practicing fraud and falsehood, she suffers terrible pain; without the True Guru, she does not find the way.
sa ufa gH arerct fg fre ce urfemr II (773-10, at, He 4)
ujharh panth bharmai gaavaaree khin khin Dhakay khaa-i-aa.
The foolish soul-bride wanders along dismal pathways; each and every moment, she is bumped and pushed.
nm tent ad ug ost Afsag use fers I (773-11, Fat, He 4)
aapay da-i-aa karay parabh daataa satgur purakh milaa-ay.
God, the Great Giver, shows His Mercy, and leads her to meet the True Guru, the Primal Being.
HOH HOH ao fees AS HS SSA Adi ASS IBll (773-12, wat, ws 4)
janam janam kay vichhurhay jan maylay naanak sahj subhaa-ay. ||3]|
Those beings who have been separated for countless incarnations, O Nanak, are reunited with the Lord, with intuitive ease. ||3]|
uifeor wae dete fase as Gurion af ar AG I (773-12, Het, He 4)
aa-i-aa lagan ganaa-ay hirdai Dhan omaahee-aa bal raam jee-o.
Calculating the most auspicious moment, the Lord comes into the bride's home; her heart is filled with ecstasy.
ufss ura orfs ust af earch af aH AIG I (773-13, Bet, He 4)
pandit paaDhay aan patee bahi vaachaa-ee-aa bal raam jee-o. The Pandits and astrologers have come, to sit and consult the almanacs.
ust soret His ext earet Fa AAS He wh wire I (773-13, Fat, Hs 4)
patee vaachaa-ee man vajee vaDhaa-ee jab saajan sunay ghar aa-ay.
They have consulted the almanacs, and the bride's mind vibrates with bliss, when she hears that her Friend is coming into the home of her heart.
aet fomrat afs Hat uofeor SI Sz fess il (773-14, wet, ue 4)
gunee gi-aanee bahi mataa pakaa-i-aa fayray tat divaa-ay.
The virtuous and wise men sat down and decided to perform the marriage immediately.
zg ufemr ugy iain nididd AE SeSq 8s AUT Il (773-15, wat, He 4)
var paa-i-aa purakh agamm agochar sad navtan baal sakhaa-ee.
She has found her Husband, the Inaccessible, Unfathomable Primal Lord, who is forever young; He is her Best Friend from her earliest childhood.
oad fasu afs t HS feefs ae o AT BNA (773-15, Fat, He 4)
naanak kirpaa kar kai maylay vichhurh kaday na jaa-ee. ||4]|1]|
O Nanak, he has mercifully united the bride with Himself. She shall never be separated again. ||4||1]|
Hot HIS 8 Il (773-16) soohee mehlaa 4. Soohee, Fourth Mehl:
ofs ufsest we udesst agH featfenr af an ATE II (773-16, Bet, He 4)
har pahilarhee laav parvirtee karam drirh-aa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
In the first round of the marriage ceremony, the Lord sets out His Instructions for performing the daily duties of married life.
Wat YH" Se UsH fesg uy satfenr afs aH AE II (773-17, Bet, He 4)
banee barahmaa vayd Dharam darirh"u paap tajaa-i-aa bal raam jee-o. Instead of the hymns of the Vedas to Brahma, embrace the righteous conduct of Dharma, and renounce sinful actions.
UdH fesg af on fimreg fais ant festfenr i (773-17, get, He 4)
Dharam darirh"u har naam Dhi-aavahu simrit naam drirh-aa-i-aa.
Meditate on the Lord's Name; embrace and enshrine the contemplative remembrance of the Naam.
Afisag Tg us yraag vfs faofed uy aetfenr it (773-18, Fat, He 4)
satgur gur pooraa aaraaDhahu sabh kilvikh paap gavaa-i-aa.
Worship and adore the Guru, the Perfect True Guru, and all your sins shall be dispelled.
Hon ise dor esarait Hf ofa afs ote afemr i (773-18, Fat, He 4)
sahj anand ho-aa vadbhaagee man har har meethaa laa-i-aa.
By great good fortune, celestial bliss is attained, and the Lord, Har, Har, seems sweet to the mind.
UST D8
He Ad sSd we ufsst orgs ae safer Al (774-1, gat, He 4)
jan kahai naanak laav pahilee aarambh kaaj rachaa-i-aa. ||1]||
Servant Nanak proclaims that, in this, the first round of the marriage ceremony, the marriage ceremony has begun. ||1||
ofs enat ore Afsags use frefeur af an FIG II (774-2, Het, He 4)
har doojrhee laav satgur purakh milaa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
In the second round of the marriage ceremony, the Lord leads you to meet the True Guru, the Primal Being.
foas@ 3 He dfs eH He aefeur af oH AE I (774-2, wet, He 4) nirbha-o bhai man ho-ay ha-umai mail gavaa-i-aa bal raam jee-o. With the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord in the mind, the filth of egotism is eradicated.
fone 38 ufenr ate ae afenr ofa St TH Tes Il (774-3, wt, we 4)
nirmal bha-o paa-i-aa har gun gaa-i-aa har vaykhai raam hadooray.
In the Fear of God, the Immaculate Lord, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and behold the Lord's Presence before you.
of orsu oy untae Aum Aga sfour saug Il (774-3, Het, He 4)
har aatam raam pasaari-aa su-aamee sarab rahi-aa bharpooray.
The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is the Lord and Master of the Universe; He is pervading and permeating everywhere, fully filling all spaces.
nists wafs ofa us Sat ffs afe we Hares ae Il (774-4, wet, Hs 4)
antar baahar har parabh ayko mil har jan mangal gaa-ay.
Deep within, and outside as well, there is only the One Lord God. Meeting together, the humble servants of the Lord sing the songs of joy.
AS SSA TH SS VHet node AGS SAS MQM (774-5, wet, He 4)
jan naanak doojee laav chalaa-ee anhad sabad vajaa-ay. ||2||
Servant Nanak proclaims that, in this, the second round of the marriage ceremony, the unstruck sound current of the Shabad resounds. ||2||
ofa strat we His we sfeor Sarai afes ny FE I 074-5, wat, He 4)
har teejrhee laav man chaa-o bha-i-aa bairaagee-aa bal raam jee-o. In the third round of the marriage ceremony, the mind is filled with Divine Love.
Hz Ho ofa He dfs ufeur ssaraior af an Ate Il (774-6, dt, Hs 4)
sant janaa har mayl har paa-i-aa vadbhaagee-aa bal raam jee-o.
Meeting with the humble Saints of the Lord, I have found the Lord, by great good fortune.
fase dfs ufeur ofs ae arfeur fa sat ofa aat il (774-7, wet, ne 4)
nirmal har paa-i-aa har gun gaa-i-aa mukh bolee har banee.
I have found the Immaculate Lord, and I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. I speak the Word of the Lord's Bani.
AS vot esarat fear ofe aehy mera aoret i (774-7, wat, Hs 4)
sant janaa vadbhaagee paa-i-aa har kathee-ai akath kahaanee.
By great good fortune, I have found the humble Saints, and I speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
fose ofa ofs of ufs Curt ofa mba HAsfa ara AIG I (774-8, Bet, He 4)
hirdai har har har Dhun upjee har japee-ai mastak bhaag jee-o.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, vibrates and resounds within my heart; meditating on the Lord, I have realized the destiny inscribed upon my forehead.
Ae Soa 88 Shit we fe Cun nfs Soa AM Si (774-8, wet, ne 4)
jan naanak bolay teejee laavai har upjai man bairaag jee-o. ||3]|
Servant Nanak proclaims that, in this, the third round of the marriage ceremony, the mind is filled with Divine Love for the Lord. ||3]|
dfs vast oe His Aan sfeor ofe urfenr af aH ATE II (774-9, wet, He 4)
har cha-utharhee laav man sahj bha-i-aa har paa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
In the fourth round of the marriage ceremony, my mind has become peaceful; I have found the Lord.
asufy fhfeur Ase af Hie sfs Hite afenr af oH AIG II (774-10, Bet, He 4) gurmukh mili-aa subhaa-ay har man tan meethaa laa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
As Gurmukh, I have met Him, with intuitive ease; the Lord seems so sweet to my mind and body.
dfs Hot orfeur He ys stent nates ata fs wet il (774-10, wet, ws 4)
har meethaa laa-i-aa mayray parabh bhaa-i-aa an-din har liv laa-ee.
The Lord seems so sweet; I am pleasing to my God. Night and day, I lovingly focus my consciousness on the Lord.
Ho fefeur ee urfenr Amit af oth sat sare i (774-11, wet, He 4)
man chindi-aa fal paa-i-aa su-aamee har naam vajee vaaDhaa-ee.
I have obtained my Lord and Master, the fruit of my mind's desires. The Lord's Name resounds and resonates.
ofa ufs safes on safer us fase orf fearrt it (774-12, wet, ue 4)
har parabh thaakur kaaj rachaa-i-aa Dhan hirdai naam vigaasee.
The Lord God, my Lord and Master, blends with His bride, and her heart blossoms forth in the Naam.
We Soa 88 wet we ofa ufo ys nifeorit igi 774-12, wet, ue 4) jan naanak bolay cha-uthee laavai har paa-i-aa parabh avinaasee. ||4]|2| |
Servant Nanak proclaims that, in this, the fourth round of the marriage ceremony, we have found the Eternal Lord God. ||4||2]|
qe Afsars yrrfe il (774-14) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TY AT ST HIS 8 We 2 Il (774-15)
raag soohee chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 2. Raag Soohee, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
aanfe af Te WE Il (774-15, et, He 4) gurmukh har gun gaa-ay. The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord;
fase SHS SATE I (774-15, wt, He 4) hirdai rasan rasaa-ay. in their hearts, and on their tongues, they enjoy and savor His taste.
dfs dAa sAS He ys sve fifeur Af ASS Il (774-15, Wet, He 4)
har rasan rasaa-ay mayray parabh bhaa-ay mili-aa sahj subhaa-ay.
They enjoy and savor His taste, and are pleasing to my God, who meets them with natural ease.
wofes sa sat Afy AS Aafe ad fee we I (774-16, wet, He 4)
an-din bhog bhogay sukh sovai sabad rahai liv laa-ay.
Night and day, they enjoy enjoyments, and they sleep in peace; they remain lovingly absorbed in the Word of the Shabad.
zs ota ag ua ure vistas oH fore i (774-16, wet, Hs 4)
vadai bhaag gur pooraa paa-ee-ai an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay.
By great good fortune, one obtains the Perfect Guru; night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hon Fafa fifeor wate Stoo Afs AME AI (774-17, Bat, He 4)
sehjay sahj mili-aa jagjeevan naanak sunn samaa-ay. ||1]|
In absolute ease and poise, one meets the Life of the World. O Nanak, one is absorbed in the state of absolute absorption. ||1||
Hats As fhe i afe vfs foots oe i (774-18, Fat, ue 4) sangat sant milaa-ay. har sar nirmal naa-ay. Joining the Society of the Saints, I bathe in the Immaculate Pool of the Lord.
foonfs vfs oe He Tee se ufegz Aste Il (774-18, wet, He 4)
nirmal jal naa-ay mail gavaa-ay bha-ay pavit sareeraa.
Bathing in these Immaculate Waters, my filth is removed, and my body is purified and sanctified.
Tonfs He aet gu star TBH foot ute il (774-19, wet, ne 4)
durmat mail ga-ee bharam bhaagaa ha-umai binthee peeraa. The filth of intellectual evil-mindedness is removed, doubt is gone, and the pain of egotism is dispelled.
sete ys ASHats uret fer wha Gor SAT Il (774-19, At, He 4)
nadar parabhoo satsangat paa-ee nij ghar ho-aa vaasaa.
By God's Grace, I found the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. I dwell in the home of my own inner being.
UST Ddu
ofa Has sth SAS TATE SSA BH YSAT MI (775-1, Bet, He 4) har mangal ras rasan rasaa-ay naanak naam pargaasaa. ||2||
My tongue tastes the taste of the Lord's joyous song; O Nanak, the Naam shines forth brightly. ||2]|
nists ge ates i aaHfa on fumes it 775-1, wet, He 4)
antar ratan beechaaray. gurmukh naam pi-aaray.
The Gurmukh loves the Name of the Lord; deep within, she contemplates the jewel of the Naam.
dfs oH fimrd Aafe forss uifamrg nig aefenr i (775-2, Fat, He 4)
har naam pi-aaray sabad nistaaray agi-aan aDhayr gavaa-i-aa.
Those who love the Lord's Name are emancipated through the Word of the Shabad. The darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
fomirg uds sfomr wie wos we Hea Aofeur | (775-2, wat, ue 4)
gi-aan parchand bali-aa ghat chaanan ghar mandar sohaa-i-aa.
Spiritual wisdom burns brilliantly, illuminating the heart; their homes and temples are embellished and blessed.
30 Ho maf Afters sere ofg ys ATS Stem | (775-3, At, Hs 4)
tan man arap seegaar banaa-ay har parabh saachay bhaa-i-aa.
I have made my body and mind into adornments, and dedicated them to the True Lord God, pleasing Him.
A yg ad Het ug ait Soa nifH AHfemr SI (775-4, at, He 4) jo parabh kahai so-ee par keejai naanak ank samaa-i-aa. ||3] | Whatever God says, I gladly do. O Nanak, I have merged into the fiber of His Being.
[I3I|
ofs ufs an soften i (775-4, Adt, Hs 4) har parabh kaaj rachaa-i-aa. The Lord God has arranged the marriage ceremony;
aanfy Sorafe nrfenr i 775-4, wet, us 4) gurmukh vee-aahan aa-i-aa. He has come to marry the Gurmukh.
Zorafe urfeor asta fe ufemr AT us a3 fumes it (775-5, wet, He 4)
vee-aahan aa-i-aa gurmukh har paa-i-aa saa Dhan kant pi-aaree.
He has come to marry the Gurmukh, who has found the Lord. That bride is very dear to her Lord.
As aot fife Hares are afe Ae orf Herat i (775-5, Fat, ue 4)
sant janaa mil mangal gaa-ay har jee-o aap savaaree.
The humble Saints join together and sing the songs of joy; the Dear Lord Himself has adorned the soul-bride.
Afe 30 we aoee fife wre wryse Ae aeret Il (775-6, Fat, He 4)
sur nar gan ganDharab mil aa-ay apoorab janj banaa-ee.
The angels and mortal beings, the heavenly heralds and celestial singers, have come together and formed a wondrous wedding party.
soe ys ufsor HATE of ae He & AT ISIVUISI (775-6, Fat, He 4)
naanak parabh paa-i-aa mai saachaa naa kaday marai na jaa-ee. ||4||1]|3]]| O Nanak, I have found my True Lord God, who never dies, and is not born. ||4]|1]|3]|
TY AT SI HIS 8 We 2 (775-8) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 4 ghar 3 Raag Soohee, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (775-8) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
wed AS Hod Te Wes dfs AT TH Il (775-9, wat, ne 4) aavho sant janhu gun gaavah govind kayray raam. Come, humble Saints, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
aon fife adhn wis eafo Agee Was IH I (775-9, wet, He 4)
gurmukh mil rahee-ai ghar vaajeh sabad ghanayray raam.
Let us gather together as Gurmukh; within the home of our own heart, the Shabad vibrates and resonates.
Hae wWod ds ys 3d J AIS AS Tet Il (775-10, wet, ue 4)
sabad ghanayray har parabh tayray too kartaa sabh thaa-ee.
The many melodies of the Shabad are Yours, O Lord God; O Creator Lord, You are everywhere.
uifafefa rut Ae Arerdt ATS Aafe fee wet i (775-10, At, Hs 4)
ahinis japee sadaa saalaahee saach sabad liv laa-ee.
Day and night, I chant His Praises forever, lovingly focusing on the True Word of the Shabad.
notes Hote so shar TS TH SH fee UAT Il (775-11, Fat, He 4)
an-din sahj rahai rang raataa raam naam rid poojaa.
Night and day, I remain intuitively attuned to the Lord's Love; in my heart, I worship the Lord's Name.
Boa THe SI USES wlST F AS TAT UU (775-11, Fat, Hs 4) naanak gurmukh ayk pachhaanai avar na jaanai doojaa. ||1]| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, I have realized the One Lord; I do not know any other. ||1]|
AS fo afe afer A ys uisarHt IH I (775-12, Bat, He 4) sabh meh rav rahi-aa so parabh antarjaamee raam. He is contained amongst all; He is God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
aa Fate ve afe sfoor A yg Aa AMM IH I (775-12, wat, He 4) gur sabad ravai rav rahi-aa so parabh mayraa su-aamee raam. One who meditates and dwells upon God, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, knows that God, my Lord and Master, is pervading everywhere.
ys Aa Fumi nisernit wfe wie afenr Het MW (775-13, wet, He 4)
parabh mayraa su-aamee antarjaamee ghat ghat ravi-aa so-ee.
God, my Lord and Master, is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; He pervades and permeates each and every heart.
qoHfs Ay uch Aofa ANTS fH faa neg o et I (775-13, Bat, He 4)
gurmat sach paa-ee-ai sahj samaa-ee-ai tis bin avar na ko-ee.
Through the Guru's Teachings, Truth is obtained, and then, one merges in celestial bliss. There is no other than Him.
Hon TE Wet A YS set HM BE fers i (775-14, Fat, ne 4) sehjay gun gaavaa jay parabh bhaavaa aapay la-ay milaa-ay. I sing His Praises with intuitive ease. If it pleases God, He shall unite me with Himself.
ood A ug Aa AN mifafefA on fomre i (775-14, wet, Hs 4)
naanak so parabh sabday jaapai ahinis naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, through the Shabad, God is known; meditate on the Naam, day and night. [21]
fey Hat Bsg HonY ute B uret aM Ih (775-15, wat, He 4) ih jago dutar manmukh paar na paa-ee raam. This world is treacherous and impassable; the self-willed manmukh cannot cross over.
nisd ICH HHS AH FO Beat IH I (775-15, wet, He 4) antray ha-umai mamtaa kaam kroDh chaturaa-ee raam. Within him is egotism, self-conceit, sexual desire, anger and cleverness.
nists ssaet ate o uret fase HOH Tether I (775-16, Fat, He 4) antar chaturaa-ee thaa-ay na paa-ee birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. Within him is cleverness; he is not approved, and his life is uselessly wasted and lost.
AH Hf ey ure dat ure nfs afeor ugsfemr th 0775-17, wat, He 4)
jam mag dukh paavai chotaa khaavai ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-i-aa.
On the Path of Death, he suffers in pain, and must endure abuse; in the end, he departs regretfully.
fag ae & ast at us ace AS set I (775-17, wet, He 4) bin naavai ko baylee naahee put kutamb sut bhaa-ee. Without the Name, he has no friends, no children, family or relatives.
oot Hf Hg UATE mira AA @ ATEt BI (775-18, Het, He 4) naanak maa-i-aa moh pasaaraa aagai saath na jaa-ee. ||3]| O Nanak, the wealth of Maya, attachment and ostentatious shows - none of them
shall go along with him to the world hereafter. ||3]|
3S use wus Afsag ost fas fafa sag TéHhat TH I (775-18, we, Hs 4)
ha-o poochha-o apnaa satgur daataa kin biDh dutar taree-ai raam.
I ask my True Guru, the Giver, how to cross over the treacherous and difficult world- ocean.
Afsag safe vag atefsor fee ndbt IH th 0775-19, wat, ue 4) satgur bhaa-ay chalhu jeevti-aa iv maree-ai raam. Walk in harmony with the True Guru's Will, and remain dead while yet alive.
Htefaor udht sCre sdba aanfa of ANS I (775-19, Bet, He 4)
jeevti-aa maree-ai bha-ojal taree-ai gurmukh naam samaavai.
Remaining dead while yet alive, cross over the terrifying world-ocean; as Gurmukh, merge in the Naam.
ust DDE ust usd ufenr esarait Afs oth fees BS I (776-1, Het, we 4)
pooraa purakh paa-i-aa vadbhaagee sach naam liv laavai. One obtains the Perfect Primal Lord, by great good fortune, lovingly focusing on the True Name.
Hfs ugarA set HE Hfour aH ath sfsniret Il (776-1, wat, H8 4)
mat pargaas bha-ee man maani-aa raam naam vadi-aa-ee.
The intellect is enlightened, and the mind is satisfied, through the glory of the Lord's Name.
ood us ufeor Rafe frorfeor Ast fs fore? snaell (776-2, Fat, He 4)
naanak parabh paa-i-aa sabad milaa-i-aa jotee jot milaa-ee. ||4||1]|4]|
O Nanak, God is found, merging in the Shabad, and one's light blends into the Light. [14] 111141]
Hot HIG 8 WT U (776-4)
soohee mehlaa 4 ghar 5 Soohee, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (776-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Gg AS AS flores A fifeor Het fare sfs aehorA i 0776-5, wet, He 4)
gur sant jano pi-aaraa mai mili-aa mayree tarisnaa bujh ga-ee-aasay.
O humble Saints, I have met my Beloved Guru; the fire of my desire is quenched, and my yearning is gone.
JG Ho 36 te" Afsad HAS YS TETA Il (776-5, wet, us 4)
ha-o man tan dayvaa satigurai mai maylay parabh guntaasay.
I dedicate my mind and body to the True Guru; I pray that may He unite me with God, the treasure of virtue.
UG UG TT Ss UTY TH VA Tle AHA Il (776-6, Ae, He 4) Dhan Dhan guroo vad purakh hai mai dasay har saabaasay.
Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the Supreme Being, who tells me of the most blessed Lord.
essa dfs ufenr AS SSA OH fEarA AN (776-6, Fat, Hs 4)
vadbhaagee har paa-i-aa jan naanak naam vigaasay. ||1|| By great good fortune, servant Nanak has found the Lord; he blossoms forth in the Naam. |[1]|
ag Ane flores H fifeor afe usa We BATT Il (776-7, wat, He 4) gur sajan pi-aaraa mai mili-aa har maarag panth dasaahaa. I have met my Beloved Friend, the Guru, who has shown me the Path to the Lord.
ufs uted fast feefour flee Hafe Te Ys aT" Il (776-7, Ft, Hs 4)
ghar aavhu chiree vichhunni-aa mil sabad guroo parabh naahaa.
Come home - I have been separated from You for so long! Please, let me merge with You, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, O my Lord God.
JG 33 weg udt Sster faAS Ae fag te Ha II (76-8, AST, He 4) ha-o tujh baajhahu kharee udeenee-aa ji-o jal bin meen maraahaa. Without You, I am so sad; like a fish out of water, I shall die.
esata dfs fmrfenr AS SSA OTH AHI III (776-9, Wet, Hs 4)
vadbhaagee har Dhi-aa-i-aa jan naanak naam samaahaa. ||2||
The very fortunate ones meditate on the Lord; servant Nanak merges into the Naam.
21 |
Ho vd feta ofs uf safhmr HoHY sath gafenr II (776-9, Fat, He 4)
man dah dis chal chal bharmi-aa manmukh bharam bhulaa-i-aa.
The mind runs around in the ten directions; the self-willed manmukh wanders around, deluded by doubt.
fos omar fs fase Ho fener su warfemr I (776-10, Fat, He 4)
nit aasaa man chitvai man tarisnaa bhukh lagaa-i-aa.
In his mind, he continually conjures up hopes; his mind is gripped by hunger and thirst.
most ug Ufa efmr fefs fay see afenr Il (776-10, Fat, He 4)
antaa Dhan Dhar dabi-aa fir bikh bhaalan ga-i-aa.
There is an infinite treasure buried within the mind, but still, he goes out, searching for poison.
Wo soa oH Aete 3 fag are ule ufe yfenr Sl (776-11, et, Hs 4)
jan naanak naam salaahi too bin naavai pach pach mu-i-aa. ||3]|
O servant Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; without the Name, he rots away, and wastes away to death. ||3]||
Gg Avg Hoe ule ad afe UN wet He Har I (776-11, AT, He 4)
gur sundar mohan paa-ay karay har paraym banee man maari-aa.
Finding the beautiful and fascinating Guru, I have conquered my mind, through the Bani, the Word of my Beloved Lord.
nd fose afo afa ferfs aet Ho ner fos ferrfanr i (776-12, at, He 4)
mayrai hirdai suDh buDh visar ga-ee man aasaa chint visaari-aa.
My heart has forgotten its common sense and wisdom; my mind has forgotten its hopes and cares.
A uists feo UN at Te Sus HE Afar | (776-13, et, He 4)
mai antar vaydan paraym kee gur daykhat man saaDhaari-aa.
Deep within my self, I feel the pains of divine love. Beholding the Guru, my mind is comforted and consoled.
saat ys vite fee Ao sted fue fue Shar ISNAUUll (776-13, Fat, Hs 4) vadbhaagee parabh aa-ay mil jan naanak khin khin vaari-aa. ||4]|1]|5]| Awaken my good destiny, O God - please, come and meet me! Each and every instant, servant Nanak is a sacrifice to You. ||4]|1]|5]|
Hot S3 HIT 8 Il (776-14)
soohee chhant mehlaa 4. Soohee, Chhant, Fourth Mehl:
Hafan = AS ICH fafimr fafs afs us fhe 3 fester i (776-14, wet, ue 4)
maarayhis vay jan ha-umai bikhi-aa jin har parabh milan na ditee-aa.
Eradicate the poison of egotism, O human being; it is holding you back from meeting your Lord God.
ag ave = gor fefs JGR ura fearshor i (776-15, wet, He 4) dayh kanchan vay vannee-aa in ha-umai maar vigutee-aa. This golden-colored body has been disfigured and ruined by egotism.
Ho wheat 2 AS arse fefs Hout ufSs AAS I (776-15, Fat, Hs 4)
moh maa-i-aa vay sabh kaalkhaa in manmukh moorh sajutee-aa.
Attachment to Maya is total darkness; this foolish, self-willed manmukh is attached to it.
He ood Tenfy Cad as Aaet TBH Schr All (776-16, wet, Hs 4)
jan naanak gurmukh ubray gur sabdee ha-umai chhutee-aa. ||1||
O servant Nanak, the Gurmukh is saved; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is released from egotism. ||1]|
ofA utfag 2 Ao fEA He AG He HA fA fos sBfeur Il (776-16, Fat, He 4) vas aanihu vay jan is man ka-o man baasay ji-o nit bha-udi-aa. Overcome and subdue this mind; your mind wanders around continually, like a falcon.
efy df= & feareior fos uit nm asfenr I (776-17, Bat, He 4) dukh rain vay vihaanee-aa nit aasaa aas karaydi-aa. The mortal's life-night passes painfully, in constant hope and desire.
ag wfeur = AS AS His oA ust aie Befenr Il (776-18, Ae, He 4)
gur paa-i-aa vay sant jano man aas pooree har cha-udi-aa.
I have found the Guru, O humble Saints; my mind's hopes are fulfilled, chanting the Lord's Name.
Ho aod us eg Hat afs mr fos Afe ACfemr II (76-18, Fat, He 4)
jan naanak parabh dayh matee chhad aasaa nit sukh sa-udi-aa. ||2| |
Please bless servant Nanak, O God, with such understanding, that abandoning false hopes, he may always sleep in peace. ||2||
Aue om fats ad oH oho ofs ys AASA met I (776-19, wet, Hs 4) saa Dhan aasaa chit karay raam raaji-aa har parabh sayjrhee-ai aa-ee. The bride hopes in her mind, that her Sovereign Lord God will come to her bed.
Aa sag wan efeore 3 oH ofr afe faaur Sg firesret 1 (776-19, wat, He 4) mayraa thaakur agam da-i-aal hai raam raaji-aa kar kirpaa layho milaa-ee.
My Lord and Master is infinitely compassionate; O Sovereign Lord, be merciful, and merge me into Yourself.
UST IID
Ad fs sfs Bo THA oH Thor afs Aaa An feeret Il (777-1, wat, He 4)
mayrai man tan lochaa gurmukhay raam raaji-aa har sarDhaa sayj vichhaa-ee.
My mind and body long to behold the Guru's face. O Sovereign Lord, I have spread out my bed of loving faith.
Ao Sa Tid ys sabor IH Thor ffeor AofA AsTeT ISI (777-2, At, Hs 4)
jan naanak har parabh bhaanee-aa raam raaji-aa mili-aa sahj subhaa-ee. ||3]|
O servant Nanak, when the bride pleases her Lord God, her Sovereign Lord meets her with natural ease. ||3]|
feas AR dfs us oH ofr ag eA afe ABET Il (777-3, wet, He 4)
ikat sayjai har parabho raam raaji-aa gur dasay har maylay-ee.
My Lord God, my Sovereign Lord, is on the one bed. The Guru has shown me how to meet my Lord.
Hufs sfs un Soa 3 ON Thor ag AS fas aset Il (777-3, wet, He 4)
mai man tan paraym bairaag hai raam raaji-aa gur maylay kirpaa karay-ee.
My mind and body are filled with love and affection for my Sovereign Lord. In His Mercy, the Guru has united me with Him.
JG as feeg ufs uprfeor on ofr He Afsas rat Tet MW (777-4, wt, ne 4)
ha-o gur vitahu ghol ghumaa-i-aa raam raaji-aa jee-o satgur aagai day-ee.
I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, O my Sovereign Lord; I surrender my soul to the True Guru.
TI 30 HE TH Thor AS SSA Tha ASST USUQNENUNONENACH (777-4, et, He 4) gur tuthaa jee-o raam raaji-aa jan naanak har maylay-ee. ||4]|2||6]|5]|7]|6||18]| When the Guru is totally pleased, O servant Nanak, he unites the soul with the Lord, the Sovereign Lord. ||4||2|]6]|5||7||6||18] |
TY Ad ST HIS UWI (777-6) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Soohee, Chhant, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (777-6) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afe wed 3 ave Uf SHAT I (777-7, Feat, He 5) sun baavray too kaa-ay daykh bhulaanaa. Listen, madman: gazing upon the world, why have you gone crazy?
Afe wed 3g aa OES AAS JMS Il (777-7, Het, He 5)
sun baavray nayhu koorhaa laa-i-o kusambh rangaanaa.
Listen, madman: you have been trapped by false love, which is transitory, like the fading color of the safflower.
Tat sf 38 nrg BI 3 HS ales oy HAS Il (777-7, wet, Hs 5)
koorhee daykh bhulo adh lahai na mulo govid naam majeethaa.
Gazing upon the false world, you are fooled. It is not worth even half a shell. Only the Name of the Lord of the Universe is permanent.
ets wer nfs qe Aae dfs aa Hter Il (777-8, At, He 5) theeveh laalaa at gulaalaa sabad cheen gur meethaa.
You shall take on the deep and lasting red color of the poppy, contemplating the sweet Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fifeur xfs Hare St stout so Fifer BueTaT Il (777-8, At, He 5)
mithi-aa mohi magan thee rahi-aa jhooth sang laptaanaa. You remain intoxicated with false emotional attachment; you are attached to falsehood.
Sod te Aofe fasur fafa gy BA Fas A (777-9, wet, Hs 5)
naanak deen saran kirpaa niDh raakh laaj bhagtaanaa. ||1|| Nanak, meek and humble, seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, the treasure of mercy. He preserves the honor of His devotees. ||1||
Hfe aed Afe SAT SE Uda Il (777-10, Fat, ue 5) sun baavray sayv thaakur naath paraanaa. Listen, madman: serve your Lord, the Master of the breath of life.
Afe wed fo urfenr fs ATS II (777-10, Bt, He 5) sun baavray jo aa-i-aa tis jaanaa. Listen, madman: whoever comes, shall go.
fosue os St Afs usert HaHfar fixfes sab II (777-10, At, He 5)
nihchal habh vaisee sun pardaysee satsang mil rahee-ai.
Listen, O wandering stranger: that which you believe to be permanent, shall all pass away; so remain in the Saints' Congregation.
fs uréha svat Afs Saat vee ys ata TIM Wt (777-11, wet, ws 5)
har paa-ee-ai bhaagee sun bairaagee charan parabhoo geh rahee-di.
Listen, renunciate: by your good destiny, obtain the Lord, and remain attached to God's Feet.
fg Ho tin Aa 3 oth Tenfe sf ag Het I (777-11, Bet, He 5)
ayhu man deejai sank na keejai gurmukh taj baho maanaa.
Dedicate and surrender this mind to the Lord, and have no doubts; as Gurmukh, renounce your great pride.
Sod tle ss Fe SWE 3d for Te wef Saar IW (777-12, Fat, ue 5)
naanak deen bhagat bhav taaran tayray ki-aa gun aakh vakhaanaa. ||2||
O Nanak, the Lord carries the meek and humble devotees across the terrifying world- ocean. What Glorious Virtues of Your should I chant and recite? ||2]|
Ale wed four ate Fat HS Il (777-13, Fe, 48 5) sun baavray ki-aa keechai koorhaa maano. Listen, madman: why do you harbor false pride?
Afs wed vg srt Tee ANS Il (777-13, Feat, He 5) sun baavray habh vaisee garab gumaano. Listen, madman: all your egotism and pride shall be overcome.
fesse os wet fifemr ure AS ys ofS SAT II (777-13, FSH, He 5)
nihchal habh jaanaa mithi-aa maanaa sant parabhoo ho-ay daasaa.
What you think is permanent, shall all pass away. Pride is false, so become the slave of God's Saints.
Hes ndba sCre sdht A ate oath fetter 777-14, Fat, He 5)
jeevat maree-ai bha-ojal taree-ai jay theevai karam likhi-aasaa.
Remain dead while still alive, and you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean, if it is your pre-ordained destiny.
ag A vifys uth fan wets Aofs foes Wt 0777-14, Fat, He 5)
gur sayveejai amrit peejai jis laaveh sahj Dhi-aano.
One whom the Lord causes to meditate intuitively, serves the Guru, and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
oo Hafs ufeor af end oC af af AE ATHS ISI (777-15, wet, He 5)
naanak saran pa-i-aa har du-aarai ha-o bal bal sad kurbaano. ||3]|
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to Him. ||3]|
Afs wed ng refs ys A urfer I (777-16, wat, H8 5) sun baavray mat jaaneh parabh mai paa-i-aa. Listen, madman: do not think that you have found God.
Afe wed at ge frat us fomrfenr | (777-16, At, 2 5) sun baavray thee-o rayn jinee parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa. Listen, madman: be the dust under the feet of those who meditate on God.
fafs ys fomrfeur fafe ay urfeur esarait wane urea i 0777-17, wat, He 5)
jin parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa vadbhaagee darsan paa-ee-ai.
Those who meditate on God find peace. By great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of their Darshan is obtained.
GH fours HE Aaare Aart mimy freer i (777-17, wat, ne 5) thee-o nimaanaa sad kurbaanaa saglaa aap mitaa-ee-ai. Be humble, and be forever a sacrifice, and your self-conceit shall be totally eradicated.
6g ug ava AU fafs us oO oH fSaR Ufo my SorfeMr Il (777-18, wt, He 5) oh Dhan bhaag suDhaa jin parabh laDhaa ham tis peh aap vaychaa-i-aa. One who has found God is pure, with blessed destiny. I would sell myself to him.
Sod tle Ade AY Arad IY BA nuStfEnt siall (777-19, Fat, He 5)
naanak deen saran sukh saagar raakh laaj apnaa-i-aa. ||4||1]]|
Nanak, the meek and humble, seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, the ocean of peace. Make him Your own, and preserve his honor. ||4]|1]|
Hot HIS U Il (777-19)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
dfg dE GHG at 2a Afsafe fest sfh & af aH FIG I (777-19, Bet, He 5)
har charan kamal kee tayk satgur ditee tus kai bal raam jee-o.
The True Guru was Satisfied with me, and blessed me with the Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet. I am a sacrifice to the Lord.
UsT D9t ofa nifyfs a3 gars Ag fae 3 wie fA & af a AE II (78-1, Bet, He 5)
har amrit bharay bhandaar sabh kichh hai ghar tis kai bal raam jee-o. The Lord's Ambrosial Nectar is an overflowing treasure; everything is in His Home. I am a Sacrifice to the Lord.
wae Ho SSF AHA ATE ATE YF IT Il (778-2, Het, us 5) baabul mayraa vad samrathaa karan kaaran parabh haaraa. My Father is absolutely all-powerful. God is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
fan frnes ey act o wa sCne ute Sara Il (778-2, Ht, He 5)
jis simrat dukh ko-ee na laagai bha-ojal paar utaaraa.
Remembering Him in meditation, pain does not touch me; thus I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
mite Fate sase at aat Gusts ate afa te il (778-3, wat, He 5)
aad jugaad bhagtan kaa raakhaa ustat kar kar jeevaa.
In the beginning, and throughout the ages, He is the Protector of His devotees. Praising Him continually, I live.
SSA SH Hd" FA Hor niofeg nfo Sfe ute Al (778-3, wat, He 5)
naanak naam mahaa ras meethaa an-din man tan peevaa. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the sweetest and most sublime essence. Night and day, I drink it in with my mind and body. ||1||
ofa nmt we forte fa@ Sear dieet sf an AIG II (778-4, Bat, He 5)
har aapay la-ay milaa-ay ki-o vaychhorhaa theev-ee bal raam jee-o.
The Lord unites me with Himself; how could I feel any separation? I am a sacrifice to the Lord.
fan 6 Sct 2a A Ae Ae Hteet af aH AIG II (778-5, wat, He 5) jis no tayree tayk so sadaa sad jeev-ee bal raam jee-o. One who has Your Support lives forever and ever. I am a Sacrifice to the Lord.
Sat 2a 33 3 et AS franeT eS It (778-5, Fat, Hs 5) tayree tayk tujhai tay paa-ee saachay sirjanhaaraa. I take my support from You alone, O True Creator Lord.
fAA S wet Aet aS MAT US THT Il (778-6, at, Hz 5) jis tay khaalee ko-ee naahee aisaa parabhoo hamaaraa. No one lacks this Support; such is my God.
As vot fife Hares arfemr feg af oA Snr Il (778-6, gat, He 5)
sant janaa mil mangal gaa-i-aa din rain aas tum"aaree.
Meeting with the humble Saints, I sing the songs of joy; day and night, I place my hopes in You.
HeG Van Sfenr TT uT aoa Ae seas iM (778-7, et, we 5)
safal daras bhayti-aa gur pooraa naanak sad balihaaree. ||2]|
I have obtained the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Perfect Guru. Nanak is forever a sacrifice. ||2||
Hufoor Ag ae HS HIS Ay ufeur af aH AIG Il (778-7, wet, He 5) samm'li-aa sach thaan maan mahat sach paa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
Contemplating, dwelling upon the Lord's true home, I receive honor, greatness and truth. I am a sacrifice to the Lord.
Afsag fifeur efenrs ge nifsoat arfenr af aH AIG I (778-8, Fat, He 5)
satgur mili-aa da-i-aal gun abhinaasee gaa-i-aa bal raam jee-o.
Meeting the Merciful True Guru, I sing the Praises of the Imperishable Lord. Iam a sacrifice to the Lord.
ae afge a fos fos yre uty Amir i 778-8, wet, ue 5)
gun govind gaa-o nit nit paraan pareetam su-aamee-aa.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, continually, continuously; He is the Beloved Master of the breath of life.
AS feen ore ata afe we fs nisarior i (778-9, wat, ne 5)
subh divas aa-ay geh kanth laa-ay milay antarjaamee-aa.
Good times have come; the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, has met me, and hugged me close in His Embrace.
AS Ase eafs SH moet Sears Il (778-9, wat, ne 5)
sat santokh vajeh vaajay anhadaa jhunkaaray.
The musical instruments of truth and contentment vibrate, and the unstruck melody of the sound current resounds.
Afs 3 faa Hae Soa US UTe ATeTS ISI (778-10, wat, ne 5)
sun bhai binaasay sagal naanak parabh purakh karnaihaaray. ||3]||
Hearing this, all my fears have been dispelled; O Nanak, God is the Primal Being, the Creator Lord. ||3]|
Cuftmr 33 famrg Aad Ueba fea ofa af aH AIG I (778-10, Fat, He 5)
upji-aa tat gi-aan saahurai pay-ee-ai ik har bal raam jee-o.
The essence of spiritual wisdom has welled up; in this world, and the next, the One Lord is pervading. I am a sacrifice to the Lord.
gon yon fifeor af o Are f¥a afe af aH AIG II (778-11, Het, He 5)
barahmai barahm mili-aa ko-ay na saakai bhinn kar bal raam jee-o.
When God meets the God within the self, no one can separate them. I am a sacrifice to the Lord.
far ua far Feb fore sect mrfeor i (778-12, At, He 5)
bisam paykhai bisam sunee-ai bismaad nadree aa-i-aa.
I gaze upon the Wondrous Lord, and listen to the Wondrous Lord; the Wondrous Lord has come into my vision.
me ate Hdbate use Aum wie ufe stom Afemr ih (778-12, et, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al pooran su-aamee ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-i-aa.
The Perfect Lord and Master is pervading the water, the land and the sky, in each and every heart.
fan 3 Gufsor fsq ufo merfenr ans age & ATES Il (778-13, wat, He 5)
jis tay upji-aa tis maahi samaa-i-aa keemat kahan na jaa-ay.
I have merged again into the One from whom I originated. The value of this cannot be described.
fA & Jos 3 AS BYE Soa fSAfo fore isi (778-14, wet, us 5) jis kay chalat na jaahee lakh-nay naanak tiseh Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||2|| Nanak meditates on Him. ||4]|2]|
TY AT ST HIS UWE 2 (778-15) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Raag Soohee, Chhant, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yArfe il (778-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aise TS WSS Wa Il (778-16, At, us 5) gobind gun gaavan laagay. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
ote dfat wishes Ara Il (778-16, Het, He 5) har rang an-din jaagay. I am awake, night and day, in the Lord's Love.
ofa dfa wat ura svat fee AS fimfar i (778-16, wet, 48 5) har rang jaagay paap bhaagay milay sant pi-aari-aa. Awake to the Lord's Love, my sins have left me. I meet with the Beloved Saints.
TI VIE Sa SIH HAH AH Aas AStfanr il (778-17, wet, u3 5) gur charan laagay bharam bhaagay kaaj sagal savaari-aa. Attached to the Guru's Feet, my doubts are dispelled, and all my affairs are resolved.
Afs Aze set Aafa Arat afe any Afu Sse I (778-17, Fat, He 5)
sun sarvan banee sahj jaanee har naam jap vadbhaagai.
Listening to the Word of the Guru's Bani with my ears, I know celestial peace. By great good fortune, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
fasefs aoa Hafs Amit Me fils ys mrs ail (778-18, wet, Hs 5)
binvant naanak saran su-aamee jee-o pind parabh aagai. ||1||
Prays Nanak, I have entered my Lord and Master's Sanctuary. I dedicate my body and soul to God. ||1||
Mods Had Ads Il (778-18, Fdt, ue 5) anhat sabad suhaavaa. The unstruck melody of the Shabad, the Word of God is so very beautiful.
Ag Has dfs AA AST Il (778-18, wat, He 5) sach mangal har jas gaavaa. True joy comes from singing the Lord's Praises.
ge afte ofs ofa gu oA TIA Bun Hie wet Il (778-19, At, Hs 5)
gun gaa-ay har har dookh naasay rahas upjai man ghanaa.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, pain is dispelled, and my mind is filled with tremendous joy.
Ho 36 foaHe ef vane ou Us a Hfe ser II (778-19, wat, He 5)
man tann nirmal daykh darsan naam parabh kaa mukh bhanaa.
My mind and body have become immaculate and pure, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; I chant the Name of God.
Ua oor
of Fe AY YS nay nus YS SST I (779-1, Hat, Hs 5)
ho-ay rayn saaDhoo parabh araaDhoo aapnay parabh bhaavaa.
I am the dust of the feet of the Holy. Worshipping God in adoration, my God is pleased with me.
faadts soa efemr ursg Het dfs TE WS MM (779-1, wet, He 5)
binvant naanak da-i-aa Dhaarahu sadaa har gun gaavaa. ||2||
Prays Nanak, please bless me with Your Mercy, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises forever. ||2||
ad fife Ararg Sfamr i (779-2, wat, He 5) gur mil saagar tari-aa. Meeting with the Guru, I cross over the world-ocean.
dfs sde Aus fenstomr il (779-2, Fat, He 5) har charan japat nistari-aa. Meditating on the Lord's Feet, I am emancipated.
ufs se fowre Afs oe ure fee nree ATET II (779-3, Wet, 43 5)
har charan Dhi-aa-ay sabh fal paa-ay mitay aavan jaanaa.
Meditating on the Lord's Feet, I have obtained the fruits of all rewards, and my comings and goings have ceased.
safe sats Aste ote afu mrue ys Stet Il (779-3, Fat, He 5)
bhaa-ay bhagat subhaa-ay har jap aapnay parabh bhaavaa.
With loving devotional worship, I meditate intuitively on the Lord, and my God is pleased.
Af Sa nied were yas fSH fas Sat ae I (779-4, wet, Hs 5) jap ayk alakh apaar pooran tis binaa nahee ko-ee. Meditate on the One, Unseen, Infinite, Perfect Lord; there is no other than Him.
faadfs aoa afs san dfeor AS tar sz Het ail (79-4, wat, He 5) binvant naanak gur bharam kho-i-aa jat daykhaa tat so-ee. ||3]| Prays Nanak, the Guru has erased my doubts; wherever I look, there I see Him. ||3]|
ufss ures Ths SH Il (779-5, Fat, Hs 5) patit paavan har naamaa. The Lord's Name is the Purifier of sinners.
UIs AS Hat A ATH Il (779-5, At, He 5) pooran sant janaa kay kaamaa. It resolves the affairs of the humble Saints.
ag AS ufer ys fomrfeur Aare feer Usher it (779-5, wet, He 5) gur sant paa-i-aa parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa sagal ichhaa punnee-aa. I have found the Saintly Guru, meditating on God. All my desires have been fulfilled.
J@ 3vy faon Het ASA Ys fHs fect fesfonr il (779-6, Het, He 5)
ha-o taap binsay sadaa sarsay parabh milay chiree vichhunni-aa.
The fever of egotism has been dispelled, and I am always happy. I have met God, from whom I was separated for so long.
Hfs AS wiret ert caret Hog ae o SAS II (779-7, Bat, He 5)
man saat aa-ee vajee vaDhaa-ee manhu kaday na veesrai.
My mind has found peace and tranquility; congratulations are pouring in. I shall never forget Him from my mind.
faadis aoa Afsafe feafeor wet aH FarIAT ISIAUIZI (779-7, Bet, He 5)
binvant naanak satgur drirh-aa-i-aa sadaa bhaj jagdeesrai. ||4||1]|3]|
Prays Nanak, the True Guru has taught me this, to vibrate and meditate forever on the Lord of the Universe. ||4]|1||3]|
TY AT ST HIS U We 2 (779-9) raag soohee chhant mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Raag Soohee, Chhant, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (779-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 oad Asad H Hat We Sat IH Il (779-10, Fat, Hs 5)
too thaakuro bairaagro mai jayhee ghan chayree raam.
O my Lord and Master, You are unattached; You have so many hand-maidens like me, Lord.
3 Wad WaTaId IS AS SWS Sot TH Il (779-10, Fat, He 5) too” saagro ratnaagro ha-o saar na jaanaa tayree raam. You are the ocean, the source of jewels; I do not know Your value, Lord.
Ag o Wel 5 es wer af fheogHfs Aret Il (779-10, wet, He 5)
Saar na jaanaa too vad daanaa kar mihramat saa"-ee. I do not know Your value; You are the wisest of all; please show Mercy unto me, O Lord.
fasur att AT fs dA ure usa so fomret I (79-11, Fat, 8 5)
kirpaa keejai saa mat deejai aath pahar tuDh Dhi-aa-ee.
Show Your Mercy, and bless me with such understanding, that I may meditate on You, twenty-four hours a day.
dea 6 ata se daa T als Abas Sat i (779-11, get, v2 5) garab na keejai rayn hoveejai taa gat jee-aray tayree. O soul, don't be so arrogant - become the dust of all, and you shall be saved.
AS Gufs aaa oT Stag H AS we Sst IH AU (779-12, wet, Hs 5)
sabh oopar naanak kaa thaakur mai jayhee ghan chayree raam. ||1|| Nanak's Lord is the Master of all; He has so many hand-maidens like me. ||1]|
3H agua mis ated asta 3H fus IN aad MH I (779-12, wet, He 5)
tum" ga-uhar at gahir gambheeraa tum pir ham bahuree-aa raam.
Your depth is profound and utterly unfathomable; You are my Husband Lord, and I am Your bride.
3H eS es es Cs WC fesata sadhor IM I (779-13, Fat, v2 5) tum vaday vaday vad oochay ha-o itneek lahuree-aa raam. You are the greatest of the great, exalted and lofty on high; I am infinitesimally small.
UG fag sat Sa ST wy wrfy HAST I (779-14, Het, Hs 5) ha-o kichh naahee ayko toohai aapay aap sujaanaa. I am nothing; You are the One and only. You Yourself are All-knowing.
nifys ferfe fonu ys Ate Aga Sat TA HTS Il (779-14, wt, He 5)
amrit darisat nimakh parabh jeevaa sarab rang ras maanaa.
With just a momentary Glance of Your Grace, God, I live; I enjoy all pleasures and delights.
Sed Asst VAT ot ufs HBS 3q Tso I (779-15, Wet, Hs 5)
charnah sarnee daasah daasee man ma-ulai tan haree-aa.
I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet; I am the slave of Your slaves. My mind has blossomed forth, and my body is rejuvenated.
SOA SAT AGA ANTE! nits steq AMAT WIM (779-15, Wat, uz 5) naanak thaakur sarab Samaanaa aapan bhaavan karee-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, the Lord and Master is contained amongst all; He does just as He pleases.
21 |
33 Sufe Aa o Het 5d Ha Brat TH Il (779-16, Fat, Hz 5) tujh oopar mayraa hai maanaa toohai mayraa taanaa raam. I take pride in You; You are my only Strength, Lord.
Hos His vsaret Sct S atefa ATT TH Il (779-16, Fet, He 5)
surat mat chaturaa-ee tayree too jaanaa-ihi jaanaa raam.
You are my understanding, intellect and knowledge. I know only what You cause me to know, Lord.
Ret we Het ueré a a sefe fade it (779-17, wet, ne 5)
so-ee jaanai so-ee pachhaanai jaa ka-o nadar siranday.
He alone knows, and he alone understands, upon whom the Creator Lord bestows His Grace.
Houfe get agst Tat erat wefenr SS i (779-17, wet, ue 5)
manmukh bhoolee bahutee raahee faathee maa-i-aa fanday.
The self-willed manmukh wanders along many paths, and is trapped in the net of Maya.
Sas seat A Teest f3e dt AS Fa Hr|St Il (779-18, Fat, He 5)
thaakur bhaanee saa gunvantee tin hee sabh rang maanaa.
She alone is virtuous, who is pleasing to her Lord and Master. She alone enjoys all the pleasures.
Soa at TT FI SAT J HHA A HST MSI (779-18, wat, we 5) naanak kee Dhar toohai thaakur too naanak kaa maanaa. ||3]|| You, O Lord, are Nanak's only support. You are Nanak's only pride. ||3]|
UG sat Jar ust Fer J usagy Ha Gar IH Il (779-19, wat, we 5) ha-o vaaree vanjaa gholee vanjaa too parbat mayraa ol"aa raam. I am a Sacrifice, devoted and dedicated to You; You are my sheltering mountain, Lord.
JG afs Fret wy oY oY adie fafs gH UgET Har IH II (779-19, Bat, He 5)
ha-o bal jaa-ee lakh lakh lakh baree-aa jin bharam pardaa khol"aa raam.
I am a Sacrifice, thousands, hundreds of thousands of times, to the Lord. He has torn away the veil of doubt;
UST OtO
fee niars 3A faors oars fAG Ho HAT II (780-1, Bat, He 5)
mitay anDhaaray tajay bikaaray thaakur si-o man maanaa.
darkness has been eliminated, and I have renounced corruption and sin. My mind is reconciled with my Lord and Master.
ys At sat set foarat ASG AGH UTSTAT Il (780-1, Wat, He 5)
parabh jee bhaanee bha-ee nikaanee safal janam parvaanaa.
I have become pleasing to my Dear God, and I have become carefree. My life is fulfilled and approved.
set oat sat Sat Hats wafs ee As Il (730-2, Fat, He 5)
bha-ee amolee bhaaraa tolee mukat jugat dar khol"aa.
I have become invaluable, of tremendous weight and value. The Door, and the Path of liberation are open to me now.
a soa Je fass@ det A ys Ha Gar siaisil (730-2, Feat, He 5) kaho naanak ha-o nirbha-o ho-ee so parabh mayraa ol"aa. ||4]|1]|41| Says Nanak, I am fearless; God has become my Shelter and Shield. ||4]]1]|41|
Hot HIS U Il (780-3)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
AAG usy Afsagd Ho us fsH fie weg o AST IH Il (780-3, Het, He 5)
Saajan purakh satgur mayraa pooraa tis bin avar na jaanaa raam.
My Perfect True Guru is my Best Friend, the Primal Being. I do not know any other than Him, Lord.
Hs fust aret AS sou Aba yre ufs Sar IH I (780-4, wat, He 5)
maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banDhap jee-a paraan man bhaanaa raam.
He is my mother, father, sibling, child, relative, soul and breath of life. He is so pleasing to my mind, O Lord.
me fis Ag fA a chor Aga TST Says Il (780-4, wet, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tis kaa dee-aa sarab gunaa bharpooray. My body and soul are all His blessings. He is overflowing with every quality of virtue.
niger A ys Hat Asa stant seus Il (780-5, wat, He 5)
antarjaamee so parabh mayraa sarab rahi-aa bharpooray.
My God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. He is totally permeating and pervading everywhere.
3 at Hefs Ase AY Ue JE Asa afemirar |i (780-5, et, He 5)
taa kee saran sarab sukh paa-ay ho-ay sarab kali-aanaa.
In His Sanctuary, I receive every comfort and pleasure. I am totally, completely happy.
He Het ys a@ afsad soa AE ATHST MAUI (780-6, Fat, Hs 5) Sadaa sadaa parabh ka-o balihaarai naanak sad kurbaanaa. ||1]|| Forever and ever, Nanak is a sacrifice to God, forever, a devoted sacrifice. ||1]|
MAT Tg esarat uch fas fifemt ys AM IMA II (780-6, At, He 5) aisaa gur vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai jit mili-ai parabh jaapai raam. By great good fortune, one finds such a Guru, meeting whom, the Lord God is known.
HOH HoH & fated Ssafs afe AS gat fos ae IH I (780-7, Fat, He 5) janam janam kay kilvikh utreh har sant Dhoorhee nit naapai raam.
The sins of countless lifetimes are erased, bathing continually in the dust of the feet of God's Saints.
ofs gat aretha ys fame arate afs o wire Il (780-8, wet, He 5)
har Dhoorhee naa-ee-ai parabhoo Dhi-aa-ee-ai baahurh jon na aa-ee-ai.
Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Lord, and meditating on God, you shall not have to enter into the womb of reincarnation again.
Gd Vaal wa 3H 3C ara nfo fee ew urea 1 (780-8, wet, He 5)
gur charnee laagay bharam bha-o bhaagay man chindi-aa fal paa-ee-ai.
Grasping hold of the Guru's Feet, doubt and fear are dispelled, and you receive the fruits of your mind's desires.
ofs we fas we oy fomre fefs Aa odt Hart Il (780-9, Fat, Hs 5)
har gun nit gaa-ay naam Dhi-aa-ay fir sog naahee santaapai.
Continually singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall no longer suffer in pain and sorrow.
aed A ys Abort at erst yar FAA UTS II (780-10, Fat, Hz 5) naanak so parabh jee-a kaa daataa pooraa jis partaapai. ||2|| O Nanak, God is the Giver of all souls; His radiant glory is perfect! ||2| |
fa od ofa ae fod ofa Ha & SfA mre MMH I (780-10, Bet, Hs 5) har haray har gun niDhay har santan kai vas aa-ay raam. The Lord, Har, Har, is the treasure of virtue; the Lord is under the power of His Saints.
HZ vse Ta As wa fst usn ue wS TH Il (730-11, wet, He 5)
sant charan gur sayvaa laagay tinee param pad paa-ay raam.
Those who are dedicated to the feet of the Saints, and to serving the Guru, obtain the supreme status, O Lord.
udH ue utfent nrg fretfenr afs use fasur urdt I (780-11, Het, He 5)
param pad paa-i-aa aap mitaa-i-aa har pooran kirpaa Dhaaree.
They obtain the supreme status, and eradicate self-conceit; the Perfect Lord showers His Grace upon them.
Hes HoH dor 3@ oar ofa Sfemr Sa Hart I (780-12, wet, He 5)
safal janam ho-aa bha-o bhaagaa har bhayti-aa ayk muraaree.
Their lives are fruitful, their fears are dispelled, and they meet the One Lord, the Destroyer of ego.
fan or AT fse dt Afs shor Ast AS Prfeor II (780-12, At, He 5) jis kaa saa tin hee mayl lee-aa jotee jot samaa-i-aa. He blends into the One, to whom he belongs; his light merges into the Light.
sae on fadne mult fife Afsas AY ufemr SI (780-13, Bet, He 5)
naanak naam niranjan japee-ai mil satgur sukh paa-i-aa. ||3]|
O Nanak, chant the Naam, the Name of the Immaculate Lord; meeting the True Guru, peace is obtained. ||3]|
r@ Hae fos ofa Hog vot fee Aaet IMF II (780-13, At, He 5)
gaa-o manglo nit har janhu punnee ichh sabaa-ee raam.
Sing continually the songs of joy, O humble beings of the Lord; all your desires shall be fulfilled.
dfa JS MUS AyMt ASt Hs B ors AST IM I (780-14, Bat, He 5)
rang ratay apunay su-aamee saytee marai na aavai jaa-ee raam. Those who are imbued with the Love of their Lord and Master do not die, or come or go in reincarnation.
wifsorat ufemr on fomrfeor Aas Hoga UTS Il (780-15, Het, He 5)
abhinaasee paa-i-aa naam Dhi-aa-i-aa sagal manorath paa-ay.
The Imperishable Lord is obtained, meditating on the Naam, and all one's wishes are fulfilled.
HAYS AIA MISE UST UT Vast HS BE Il (780-15, get, ue 5) saa“t sahj aanand ghanayray gur charnee man laa-ay. Peace, poise, and all ecstasy are obtained, attaching one's mind to the Guru's feet.
ufe sfoor ufe ufe nifiat are aSsts ATE Il (780-16, Fat, Hs 5)
poor rahi-aa ghat ghat abhinaasee thaan thanantar saa-ee.
The Imperishable Lord is permeating and pervading each and every heart; He is in all places and interspaces.
AI THA AIA As UT TdT Baal HG Set USiQuull (730-16, wet, we 5) kaho naanak kaaraj saglay pooray gur charnee man laa-ee. ||4||2||5||
Says Nanak, all affairs are perfectly resolved, focusing one's mind on the Guru's Feet. 4121151]
Hot HIS U Il (780-17)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
afd fasur Hd YisH AMM og eufs eaA Sa IH Il (780-17, Fat, 3 5)
kar kirpaa mayray pareetam su-aamee naytar daykheh daras tayraa raam.
Be Merciful, O my Beloved Lord and Master, that I may behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan with my eyes.
org fide tg Hd fimirg HY of wired Hat TH Il (780-18, Wet, Hs 5)
laakh jihvaa dayh mayray pi-aaray mukh har aaraaDhay mayraa raam.
Please bless me, O my Beloved, with thousands of tongues, to worship and adore You with my mouth, O Lord.
fs oraa AH Ue AG oY o fen et Il (780-18, wet, He 5)
har aaraaDhay jam panth saaDhay dookh na vi-aapai ko-ee.
Worshipping the Lord in adoration, the Path of Death is overcome, and no pain or suffering will afflict you.
rife ate Hobafes use Hom AS Sar SS AT Il (780-19, wet, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al pooran su-aamee jat daykhaa tat so-ee.
The Lord and Master is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky; wherever I look, there He is.
3oH Ho fears BS YS SIT 3 BT Il (780-19, at, Hz 5) bharam moh bikaar naathay parabh nayr hoo tay nayraa. Doubt, attachment and corruption are gone. God is the nearest of the near.
UST Oe
oad ag us fasu ata oy tufs eaA Sar UA (781-1, Hat, He 5)
naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa keejai naytar daykheh daras tayraa. ||1||
Please bless Nanak with Your Merciful Grace, O God, that his eyes may behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1]|
afe ase tafe ys utsn of ae webafs mifsarat at I (781-1, wet, Hs 5)
kot karan deejeh parabh pareetam har gun sunee-ah abhinaasee raam.
Please bless me, O Beloved God, with millions of ears, with which I may hear the Glorious Praises of the Imperishable Lord.
fs vfs feg no fase de achat ares at SAT IH IN (781-2, wat, ne 5)
sun sun ih man nirmal hovai katee-ai kaal kee faasee raam.
Listening, listening to these, this mind becomes spotless and pure, and the noose of Death is cut.
aha AH ert fafa wifsorat Hares Hares Afamarar il (781-3, Bet, He 5)
katee-ai jam faasee simar abhinaasee sagal mangal sugi-aanaa.
The noose of Death is cut, meditating on the Imperishable Lord, and all happiness and wisdom are obtained.
ofa ofa mu mbt fee ast ot Rafe fomrar i (781-3, wet, He 5)
har har jap japee-ai din raatee laagai sahj Dhi-aanaa.
Chant, and meditate, day and night, on the Lord, Har, Har. Focus your meditation on the Celestial Lord.
TGHS Su AS ys fests Ho at SIS rH Il (781-4, wet, He 5)
kalmal dukh jaaray parabhoo chitaaray man kee durmat naasee.
The painful sins are burnt away, by keeping God in one's thoughts; evil-mindedness is erased.
aT soa ys fas ata ofs ae webafs nifeert ii (781-4, wet, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh kirpaa keejai har gun sunee-ah avinaasee. ||2||
Says Nanak, O God, please be Merciful to me, that I may listen to Your Glorious Praises, O Imperishable Lord. ||2| |
adfs gAS 3ct cae corefa sae vata ys Hrafa IH I (781-5, Ae, Hs 5)
karorh hasat tayree tahal kamaaveh charan chaleh parabh maarag raam.
Please give me millions of hands to serve You, God, and let my feet walk on Your Path.
3e Wad oe fs Ae A us fSR Tafa IH II 781-6, Het, He 5) bhav saagar naav har sayvaa jo charhai tis taarag raam. Service to the Lord is the boat to carry us across the terrifying world-ocean.
sane Shor ote afs fife Aas HOTA YS Il (781-6, et, Hs 5)
bhavjal tari-aa har har simri-aa sagal manorath pooray.
So cross over the terrifying world-ocean, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har; all wishes shall be fulfilled.
Ho frog TE HY Cur aH visde ST ll (781-7, Het, we 5)
mahaa bikaar ga-ay sukh upjay baajay anhad tooray.
Even the worst corruption is taken away; peace wells up, and the unstruck celestial harmony vibrates and resounds.
HO es SH US AG Aas aH wrurafar il (781-7, wet, ws 5)
man baa'chhat fal paa-ay saglay kudrat keem apaarag.
All the fruits of the mind's desires are obtained; His creative power is infinitely valuable.
ag aed us farsur ata He Het 3s 3d Hrafa SI (781-8, wet, Hs 5)
kaho naanak parabh kirpaa keejai man sadaa chalai tayrai maarag. ||3]|
Says Nanak, please be Merciful to me, God, that my mind may follow Your Path forever. ||3||
fg eg Sa efanret fg ug df esaar TH Il (781-8, wat, He 5)
ayho var ayhaa vadi-aa-ee ih Dhan ho-ay vadbhaagaa raam.
This opportunity, this glorious greatness, this blessing and wealth, come by great good fortune.
fd Ja fd gn sar ofa vast HS Ba IH Il (781-9, Fat, Hs 5)
ayho rang ayho ras bhogaa har charnee man laagaa raam.
These pleasures, these delightful enjoyments, come when my mind is attached to the Lord's Feet.
HO Ba vss US at AGS ATE AGS TUS Il (781-9, gat, we 5)
man laagaa charnay parabh kee sarnay karan kaaran gopaalaa.
My mind is attached to God's Feet; I seek His Sanctuary. He is the Creator, the Cause of causes, the Cherisher of the world.
Ag fas 3ST 3 US AT HS oars So cfemrar I (781-10, Fat, He 5) sabh kichh tayraa too parabh mayraa mayray thaakur deen da-i-aalaa. Everything is Yours; You are my God, O my Lord and Master, Merciful to the meek.
Hfs fasae usu AY Ata ASHfal Ho AE Il (781-10, at, He 5)
mohi nirgun pareetam sukh saagar satsang man jaagaa.
I am worthless, O my Beloved, ocean of peace. In the Saints' Congregation, my mind is awakened.
ag aod ufs fagur atet Bde AHS HS Ba IIBIUEM (781-11, Ft, us 5)
kaho naanak parabh kirpaa keen"ee charan kamal man laagaa. ||4||3]|6]| Says Nanak, God has been Merciful to me; my mind is attached to His Lotus Feet. [14] 13] 161]
Hot Hos U Il (781-12)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
ofa wu dfs Hes Aor AS sas Te Weta MH I (781-12, get, us 5)
har japay har mandar saaji-aa sant bhagat gun gaavahi raam.
Meditating on the Lord, the Lord's Temple has been built; the Saints and devotees sing the Lord's Glorious Praises.
fants frufs Art ys virus Aas uy SALT TH Il (781-12, Wet, He 5)
simar simar Su-aamee parabh apnaa saglay paap tajaaveh raam.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance of God, their Lord and Master, they discard and renounce all their sins.
ofs we fe us ue ufeur ys at SSH art Il (781-13, Fat, He 5)
har gun gaa-ay param pad paa-i-aa parabh kee ootam banee.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the supreme status is obtained. The Word of God's Bani is sublime and exalted.
Hon am ys at vifs Hot aet wie aoret Il (781-14, wet, 8 5)
sahj kathaa parabh kee at meethee kathee akath kahaanee.
God's Sermon is so very sweet. It brings celestial peace. It is to speak the Unspoken Speech.
3H AA HIS US ATT nifsss ste Tut Il (781-14, Wet, Hs 5)
bhalaa sanjog moorat pal saachaa abichal neev rakhaa-ee.
The time and the moment were auspicious, blessed and true, when the eternal foundation of this Temple was placed.
Ho aod us se cfenier Aga aor afE miret AM (781-15, Fat, He 5)
jan naanak parabh bha-ay da-i-aalaa sarab kalaa ban aa-ee. ||1||
O servant Nanak, God has been kind and compassionate; with all His powers, He has blessed me. ||1||
moe Site fos SH UTIATH His TOT IH Il (781-15, et, we 5)
aanandaa vajeh nit vaajay paarbarahm man voothaa raam.
The sounds of ecstasy vibrate through me continuously. I have enshrined the Supreme Lord within my mind.
TIHa AY adet Ast AoA FH Ss Bot TH Il (781-16, wat, we 5)
gurmukhay sach karnee saaree binsay bharam bhai jhoothaa raam.
As Gurmukh, my lifestyle is excellent and true; my false hopes and doubts are dispelled.
mode set adHfy suet AA Afe Afe HS 3q Thor Il (781-16, Fat, He 5)
anhad banee gurmukh vakhaanee jas sun sun man tan hari-aa.
The Gurmukh chants the Bani of the unstruck melody; hearing it, listening to it, my mind and body are rejuvenated.
Aaa Aut f3n dt afs wre a ufs mre afemr il 781-17, wt, He 5) sarab sukhaa tis hee ban aa-ay jo parabh apnaa kari-aa. All pleasures are obtained, by that one whom God makes His Own.
we ufo o¢ fafa sd SoS TH OTH Sa Bar il (781-17, wet, Hs 5)
ghar meh nav niDh bharay bhandaaraa raam naam rang laagaa.
Within the home of the heart are the nine treasures, filled to overflowing. He has fallen in love with the Lord's Name.
Boa AS US ae 3 EAs YTS AT A Sa MM (781-18, wet, Hs 5) naanak jan parabh kaday na visrai pooran jaa kay bhaagaa. ||2]| Servant Nanak shall never forget God; his destiny is perfectly fulfilled. ||2]|
sfeur ufg szufs alot Aaret sufs feat TH Il (781-18, wat, us 5)
chhaa-i-aa parabh chhatarpat keen"ee saglee tapat binaasee raam.
God, the King, has given me shade under His canopy, and the fire of desire has been totally extinguished.
way uy at Sa Bor aay wren Ht IH Il (781-19, Het, He 5) dookh paap kaa dayraa dhaathaa kaaraj aa-i-aa raasee raam. The home of sorrow and sin has been demolished, and all affairs have been resolved.
ofa ufs saufenr fet serfemr Are can Us Sfemi I (781-19, at, Hs 5)
har parabh furmaa-i-aa mitee balaa-i-aa saach Dharam punn fali-aa.
When the Lord God so commands, misfortune is averted; true righteousness, Dharma and charity flourish.
UST OQ
A yg must Aer foment Aes SAS ule il (782-1, Fat, He 5) so parabh apunaa sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai sovat baisat khali-aa. Meditate forever on your God, when you sleep and sit and stand.
ae forse AY Aare Amit vfs af ndborfes Het Wt (782-2, wet, He 5)
gun niDhaan sukh saagar su-aamee jal thal mahee-al so-ee.
The Lord and Master is the treasure of virtue, the ocean of peace; He pervades the water, the land and the sky.
Hs soa ys at Heeet fon fas meg o Aet ISI (782-2, At, He 5) jan naanak parabh kee sarnaa-ee tis bin avar na ko-ee. ||3]| Servant Nanak has entered God's Sanctuary; there is no other than Him. |[3]|
Aa wg sfont ag 37 afont ys UGA dia Tent aH Il (782-3, wet, He 5)
mayraa ghar bani-aa ban taal bani-aa parabh parsay har raa-i-aa raam.
My home is made, the garden and pool are made, and my Sovereign Lord God has met me.
Aa He Afoor Hts AAS ASA Te Hares ais afer IH It (782-3, wet, He 5)
mayraa man sohi-aa meet saajan sarsay gun mangal har gaa-i-aa raam.
My mind is adorned, and my friends rejoice; I sing the songs of joy, and the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ge ae ys fourfe Are Aare fear urehor it (782-4, Het, H2 5) gun gaa-ay parabhoo Dhi-aa-ay saachaa sagal ichhaa paa-ee-aa. Singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord God, all desires are fulfilled.
TI BIS Sal At Aa Hfs SH sae I (782-5, wet, us 5)
gur charan laagay sadaa jaagay man vajee-aa vaaDhaa-ee-aa.
Those who are attached to the Guru's Feet are always awake and aware; His Praises resound and resonate through their minds.
adt sefe Aut AUT amt Jes uss Aen | (782-5, Ast, us 5)
karee nadar su-aamee sukhah gaamee halat palat savaari-aa.
My Lord and Master, the bringer of peace, has blessed me with His Grace; He has arranged this world, and the world hereafter for me.
faadfs aoa fos on aruba Fi fils fafs afer sisi (782-6, At, Hs 5)
binvant naanak nit naam japee-ai jee-o pind jin Dhaari-aa. ||4]|4]|7]|
Prays Nanak, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord forever; He is the Support of the body and soul. ||4]|4||7]|
Hot Hos U Il (782-7)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
3 Wad 3 Ag Sfor afe ofa oH fore aM I (782-7, wat, 48 5)
bhai saagro bhai saagar tari-aa har har naam Dhi-aa-ay raam.
The terrifying world-ocean, the terrifying world-ocean - I have crossed over it, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afvast ofs sae mrad fife Afsas ufs sure a It (782-7, wet, Hs 5)
bohithrhaa har charan araaDhay mil satgur paar laghaa-ay raam.
I worship and adore the Lord's Feet, the boat to carry me across. Meeting the True Guru, I am carried over.
qs Aaet sd gals o Hs Ya nSS ATET Il (782-8, Het, Hz 5)
gur sabdee taree-ai bahurh na maree-ai chookai aavan jaanaa.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I cross over, and I shall not die again; my comings and goings are ended.
A fas ad Aet 3m HOE 3 He AoA ANTST II (782-8, Bat, He 5) jo kichh karai so-ee bhal maan-o taa man sahj samaanaa. Whatever He does, I accept as good, and my mind merges in celestial peace.
eu 5 ud dq 3 fad AY Aa Asal US Il (782-9, wet, Hs 5)
dookh na bhookh na rog na bi-aapai sukh saagar sarnee paa-ay.
Neither pain, nor hunger, nor disease afflicts me. I have found the Sanctuary of the Lord, the ocean of peace.
ofa frnfs fants soa sf ast He at FFs free Wal (782-10, Fat, He 5)
har simar simar naanak rang raataa man kee chint mitaa-ay. ||1]||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Nanak is imbued with His Love; his mind's anxieties are dispelled. ||1||
Hz aot ofs Hz fesfeor afs AAG eHafs AS IH Il (782-10, Fat, He 5)
sant janaa har mantar drirh-aa-i-aa har saajan vasgat keenay raam.
The humble Saints have implanted the Lord's Mantra within me, and the Lord, my Best Friend, has come under my power.
nTUSSt HS wird Ufa ATE Safes LS IA Il (782-11, Fat, He 5)
aapnarhaa man aagai Dhari-aa sarbas thaakur deenay raam.
I have dedicated my mind to my Lord and Master, and offered it to Him, and He has blessed me with everything.
afs muat eat fret Gerat ofa Hefe fas uret i (782-11, wet, He 5)
kar apunee daasee mitee udaasee har mandar thit paa-ee.
He has made me His hand-maiden and slave; my sadness is dispelled, and in the Lord's Temple, I have found stability.
moe fase fines ys Ane fesfs wag 3 AT I (782-12, Het, He 5)
= aS
anad binod simrahu parabh saachaa vichhurh kabhoo na jaa-ee. My joy and bliss are in meditating on my True God; I shall never be separated from Him again.
A esarafe Het Aas IH SH TE BS Il (782-12, wet, ue 5)
saa vadbhaagan sadaa sohagan raam naam gun cheen"ay.
She alone is very fortunate, and a true soul-bride, who contemplates the Glorious Vision of the Lord's Name.
aT soa sete sa TS UH Hot SA SMS Mil (782-13, wet, we 5)
kaho naanak raveh rang raatay paraym mahaa ras bheenay. ||2] |
Says Nanak, I am imbued with His Love, drenched in the supreme, sublime essence of His Love. ||2||
noe fase se fos wate Hors Het THTS TH Il (782-14, wat, He 5) anad binod bha-ay nit sakhee-ay mangal sadaa hamaarai raam. I am in continual bliss and ecstasy, O my companions; I sing the songs of joy forever.
nituss ufs orf Atardt HaTSst ars IN I (782-14, wet, us 5) aapnarhai parabh aap seegaaree sobhaavantee naaray raam. God Himself has embellished her, and she has become His virtuous soul-bride.
Hon Hate se faguresr Te meade o statfanr il (782-15, Fat, He 5)
sahj subhaa-ay bha-ay kirpaalaa gun avgan na beechaari-aa.
With natural ease, He has become Merciful to her. He does not consider her merits or demerits.
afe warfe ste AS nus TH OH Se ofa Il (782-15, wet, He 5)
kanth lagaa-ay lee-ay jan apunay raam naam ur Dhaari-aa.
He hugs His humble servants close in His Loving Embrace; they enshrine the Lord's Name in their hearts.
HS Ho He Aare femmit afe farsur orfs foes it (782-16, Het, Hs 5)
maan moh mad sagal bi-aapee kar kirpaa aap nivaaray.
Everyone is engrossed in arrogant pride, attachment and intoxication; in His Mercy, He has freed me of them.
TI SSA S AAG Shoat YIS AA THT ISI! (782-16, Fat, Hs 5)
kaho naanak bhai saagar tari-aa pooran kaaj hamaaray. ||3]|
Says Nanak, I have crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, and all my affairs are perfectly resolved. ||3]|
Te due weg fos At Aas Hoda US IH Il (782-17, wt, He 5)
gun gopaal gaavhu nit sakheeho sagal manorath paa-ay raam.
Continually sing the Glorious Praises of the World-Lord, O my companions; all your wishes shall be granted.
Hes HOH dor fife A Saarg fomrs TH I (782-17, wet, He 5)
safal janam ho-aa mil saaDhoo aykankaar Dhi-aa-ay raam.
Life becomes fruitful, meeting with the Holy Saints, and meditating on the One God, the Creator of the Universe.
fu Sa ys vida sfeor Aga Hate ster i (782-18, At, 3 5)
jap ayk parabhoo anayk ravi-aa sarab mandal chhaa-i-aa.
Chant, and meditate on the One God, who permeates and pervades the many beings of the whole Universe.
gon unre" gon uAfet Ag you feAet mrfenr I (782-18, Aet, He 5) barahmo pasaaraa barahm pasri-aa sabh barahm daristee aa-i-aa. God created it, and God spreads through it everywhere. Everywhere I look, I see God.
me afe Hott ufs use fH faa odt AS II (782-19, Het, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al poor pooran tis binaa nahee jaa-ay.
The Perfect Lord is perfectly pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky; there is no place without Him.
UST OcB
Ufa zaAG sod faa uirfly we fers USNUITH (783-1, Ft, He 5)
paykh darsan naanak bigsay aap la-ay milaa-ay. ||4]|5||8]|
Beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, Nanak has blossomed forth; the Lord has united him in Union. ||4]|5]|8]|
Hot HIS U Il (783-1)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
nites oad afte Te oe oH AUS AY USM IH I (783-1, wet, Hs 5)
abichal nagar gobind guroo kaa naam japat sukh paa-i-aa raam.
Eternal and immovable is the City of God and Guru; chanting His Name, I have found peace.
HO fee Ret ee ure aes nrfy sAfemr aM I (783-2, wet, He 5) man ichhay say-ee fal paa-ay kartai aap vasaa-i-aa raam. I have obtained the fruits of my mind's desires; the Creator Himself established it.
aes orfy earfior vee AY urfemr us sret fire fear Il (783-3, wet, He 5)
kartai aap vasaa-i-aa sarab sukh paa-i-aa put bhaa-ee sikh bigaasay.
The Creator Himself established it. I have found total peace; my children, siblings and Sikhs have all blossomed forth in bliss.
TE Wels uss UTHAS ASH nrfEnt TA il (783-3, Fat, He 5)
gun gaavahi pooran parmaysur kaaraj aa-i-aa raasay.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, my affairs have come to be resolved.
yg wif Amt om ser nrfy frst mirfiy Hefemr i (783-4, At, He 5)
parabh aap su-aamee aapay rakhaa aap pitaa aap maa-i-aa.
God Himself is my Lord and Master. He Himself is my Saving Grace; He Himself is my father and mother.
ag aod Asad stead fafs Sg ae Aafenr Ul (783-4, At, He 5)
kaho naanak satgur balihaaree jin ayhu thaan suhaa-i-aa. ||1||
Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who has embellished and adorned this place. ||1]|
we Hed dears Ad faa fefe ony fost aH I (783-5, wat, He 5)
ghar mandar hatnaalay sohay jis vich naam nivaasee raam.
Homes, mansions, stores and markets are beautiful, when the Lord's Name abides within.
AS sas dfs on maafs achat AH at STAT IH II (783-5, At, He 5)
sant bhagat har naam araaDheh katee-ai jam kee faasee raam.
The Saints and devotees worship the Lord's Name in adoration, and the noose of Death is cut away.
act AH atAt ufs mifaorat ofa ofa any fame i (783-6, wet, us 5)
kaatee jam faasee parabh abhinaasee har har naam Dhi-aa-ay.
The noose of Death is cut away, meditating on the Name of the Eternal, Unchanging Lord, Har, Har.
AIS AHat uss Tet Ho fee Sw ure it (783-7, wet, ws 5) Sagal samagree pooran ho-ee man ichhay fal paa-ay. Everything is perfect for them, and they obtain the fruits of their mind's desires.
AS Ano Afe Hrefs sehr Sa TaeE FH SAT Il (783-7, wet, Hs 5)
sant sajan sukh maaneh ralee-aa dookh darad bharam naasee.
The Saints and friends enjoy peace and pleasure; their pain, suffering and doubts are dispelled.
Rafe Aes Alsat ud stax Ae ales AAT MQM (783-8, At, He 5)
sabad savaaray satgur poorai naanak sad bal jaasee. ||2]|
The Perfect True Guru has embellished them with the Word of the Shabad; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||2||
ans YAH ot ust det fos fos vs ASTEt IH I (783-8, wet, He 5) daat khasam kee pooree ho-ee nit nit charhai savaa-ee raam. The gift of our Lord and Master is perfect; it increases day by day.
UTsgatH MANTA oho fA Ut sat Sfmt IH Il (783-9, Fat, He 5) paarbarahm khasmaanaa kee-aa jis dee vadee vadi-aa-ee raam. The Supreme Lord God has made me His own; His Glorious Greatness is so great!
wife qarfe sase ar oat A ys sfemr efeniar I (783-9, At, Hs 5)
aad jugaad bhagtan kaa raakhaa so parabh bha-i-aa da-i-aalaa.
From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, He is the Protector of His devotees; God has become merciful to me.
fa #3 Afs Het eve yfs wm afe yfsurer il (783-10, gat, He 5)
jee-a jant sabh sukhee vasaa-ay parabh aapay kar partipaalaa.
All beings and creatures now dwell in peace; God Himself cherishes and cares for them.
zd fen uf sfoor AA Rumi ohfs age o ATeT I (783-11, Bet, He 5)
dah dis poor rahi-aa jas su-aamee keemat kahan na jaa-ee.
The Praises of the Lord and Master are totally pervading in the ten directions; I cannot express His worth.
ag aod Asad stead fats uifsee ate guret Sil (783-11, wet, ws 5) kaho naanak satgur balihaaree jin abichal neev rakhaa-ee. ||3]|| Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to the True Guru, who has laid this eternal foundation.
[131] fare fours use usa dfs fs ae fos Feb IH I (793-12, wet, Hs 5)
gi-aan Dhi-aan pooran parmaysur har har kathaa nit sunee-ai raam. The spiritual wisdom and meditation of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, and the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, are continually heard there.
MOTE BH SIS 3S SHS NSIS SH TSA IH I (783-12, wet, us 5)
anhad choj bhagat bhav bhanjan anhad vaajay Dhunee-ai raam.
The devotees of the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, play endlessly there, and the unstruck melody resounds and vibrates there.
WoJE Sead 35 Sted AS aaAfe foes FS il (783-13, wat, v2 5)
anhad jhunkaaray tat beechaaray sant gosat nit hovai.
The unstruck melody resounds and resonates, and the Saints contemplate the essence of reality; this discourse is their daily routine.
ofa om warafs He AS oets faofee Aas YS Il (783-14, wet, He 5)
har naam araaDheh mail sabh kaateh kilvikh saglay khovai.
They worship the Lord's Name, and all their filth is washed away; they rid themselves of all sins.
3d HOH © Hes! nee Aart Safe © UTeba Hob Il (783-14, wat, He 5)
tah janam na marnaa aavan jaanaa bahurh na paa-ee-ai jonee-ai.
There is no birth or death there, no coming or going, and no entering into the womb of reincarnation again.
ooa Ts uSHAG ufeor fan yAfe fees usha see (733-15, wet, Hs 5)
naanak gur parmaysar paa-i-aa jis parsaad ichh punee-ai. ||4||6||9]|
Nanak has found the Guru, the Transcendent Lord; by His Grace, desires are fulfilled. [14116] 19] |
Hot HIS U Il (783-15)
soohee mehlaa 5. Soohee, Fifth Mehl:
Ast & oats orf wsfeor afs au aaefs urfemr ant il (783-16, Fat, He 5)
santaa kay kaaraj aap khalo-i-aa har kamm karaavan aa-i-aa raam.
The Lord Himself has stood up to resolve the affairs of the Saints; He has come to complete their tasks.
vas ATS 3S HOS fefs nifys Ae Sfeor IH Il (783-16, Fat, Hs 5)
Dharat suhaavee taal suhaavaa vich amrit jal chhaa-i-aa raam.
The land is beautiful, and the pool is beautiful; within it is contained the Ambrosial Water.
nifys ne stent uss AA aofeor Aas HOTA YT Il (783-17, Hat, He 5) amrit jal chhaa-i-aa pooran saaj karaa-i-aa sagal manorath pooray.
The Ambrosial Water is filling it, and my job is perfectly complete; all my desires are fulfilled.
An og sfeur Aa nists we Aas feAT Il (783-17, Het, He 5) jai jai kaar bha-i-aa jag antar laathay sagal visooray. Congratulations are pouring in from all over the world; all my sorrows are eliminated.
ude Usd ngs oifsort AA Se UsAt afenr It (783-18, Fet, He 5)
pooran purakh achut abhinaasee jas vayd puraanee gaa-i-aa.
The Vedas and the Puraanas sing the Praises of the Perfect, Unchanging, Imperishable Primal Lord.
mua fase afm ughAfs atea oH fomrfenr dil (783-19, wet, He 5)
apnaa birad rakhi-aa parmaysar naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||1]| |
The Transcendent Lord has kept His promise, and confirmed His nature; Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
0 fofa fafa fafa dts aes Sfe o mre aret IH II (783-19, Fat, He 5)
nav niDh siDh riDh deenay kartay tot na aavai kaa-ee raam.
The Creator has given me the nine treasures, wealth and spiritual powers, and I do not lack anything.
ust OtB ug uses fuses AY ufenr as at ofS AevSt TH Il (784-1, wet, H3 5)
khaat kharchat bilchhat sukh paa-i-aa kartay kee daat savaa-ee raam. Eating, spending and enjoying, I have found peace; the gifts of the Creator Lord continually increase.
afs Aeet foufe o wet vise urfemr i (784-1, Fat, He 5)
daat savaa-ee nikhut na jaa-ee antarjaamee paa-i-aa.
His gifts increase and shall never be exhausted; I have found the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
afe faurs Aas Cis FS Bus 3S wefer Il (784-2, wet, He 5) kot bighan saglay uth naathay dookh na nayrhai aa-i-aa. Millions of obstacles have all been removed, and pain does not even approach me.
AS AdH yitoe wd front sa Aaret Il (734-2, wt, we 5) saa“t sahj aanand ghanayray binsee bhookh sabaa-ee. Tranquility, peace, poise and bliss in abundance prevail, and all my hunger is satisfied.
Sod Te Wels AH a nived fan sfsnret IH 1 (784-3, wet, we 5)
naanak gun gaavahi su-aamee kay achraj jis vadi-aa-ee raam. ||2||
Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of his Lord and Master, whose Glorious Greatness is wonderful and amazing. ||2]|
fan ot aad fSo dt oor Hew foot Sarat IM I (784-4, Fat, He 5) jis kaa kaaraj tin hee kee-aa maanas ki-aa vaychaaraa raam. It was His job, and He has done it; what can the mere mortal being do?
sas Aufs ofs & ae wets Ae aafa Has IH Il (784-4, Fat, He 5)
bhagat sohan har kay gun gaavahi sadaa karahi jaikaaraa raam.
The devotees are adorned, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; they proclaim His eternal victory.
ae af afi woe Cun Aanafs Afar gat Il (784-5, wet, He 5)
gun gaa-ay gobind anad upjay saaDhsangat sang banee.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, bliss wells up, and we are friends with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fate GeH ahr 313 aa fA at Cunt foo arat il (784-5, wet, us 5)
jin udam kee-aa taal kayraa tis kee upmaa ki-aa ganee.
He who made the effort to construct this sacred pool - how can his praises be recounted?
WonS Stee Us fafaor Ho fSesHs BI Il (734-6, wat, He 5)
athsath tirath punn kiri-aa mahaa nirmal chaaraa.
The merits of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, charity, good deeds and immaculate lifestyle, are found in this sacred pool.
ufs3 ureg fase Hum at6a AA AUS ISI (784-6, Fat, Hs 5)
patit paavan birad su-aamee naanak sabad aDhaaraa. ||3]|
It is the natural way of the Lord and Master to purify sinners; Nanak takes the Support of the Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
ae forse as us ass Cxsfs aBa adta TH Il (784-7, wat, He 5)
gun niDhaan mayraa parabh kartaa ustat ka-un kareejai raam.
The treasure of virtue is my God, the Creator Lord; what Praises of Yours should I sing, O Lord?
Ast at 831 Aomit ow Ho oA SA TH II (784-8, wat, He 5)
santaa kee baynantee su-aamee naam mahaa ras deejai raam.
The prayer of the Saints is, "O Lord and Master, please bless us with the supreme, sublime essence of Your Name."
on dn ae ain fang art fer fas I (784-8, wat, He 5)
naam deejai daan keejai bisar naahee ik khino.
Please, grant us Your Name, grant us this blessing, and do not forget us, even for an instant.
Te due ug saat wet area nrafes Il (784-9, wat, He 5)
gun gopaal uchar rasnaa sadaa gaa-ee-ai andino.
Chant the Glorious Praises of the World-Lord, O my tongue; sing them forever, night and day.
fan ulfS walt on ASt He 3 vifiys SH I (784-9, wet, He 5)
jis pareet laagee naam saytee man tan amrit bheejai.
One who enshrines love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord, his mind and body are drenched with Ambrosial Nectar.
faadfs aoa fee vat uf cane AIT ISIDIION (734-10, wt, He 5)
binvant naanak ichh punnee paykh darsan jeejai. ||4||7||10] |
Prays Nanak, my desires have been fulfilled; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord, I live. ||4]|7]]10]|
TT ATt HIS UST (784-11) raag soohee mehlaa 5 chhant Raag Soohee, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsars urrfe il (784-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fe Soar at of AAS AMM He I (784-12, wet, He 5) mith bolrhaa jee har sajan su-aamee moraa. My Dear Lord and Master, my Friend, speaks so sweetly.
JG Auf sat Ht Gg ae o 8S AST Il (784-12, Fat, He 5) ha-o sammal thakee jee oh kaday na bolai ka-uraa. I have grown weary of testing Him, but still, He never speaks harshly to me.
ACT aS 5 AS UTS FITS MBAS A 3 FITS Il (784-12, Het, ws 5)
ka-urhaa bol na jaanai pooran bhagvaanai a-ugan ko na chitaaray.
He does not know any bitter words; the Perfect Lord God does not even consider my faults and demerits.
ufss ureg ofa fase nee fea fom odt FS WS Il (784-13, Bet, He 5)
patit paavan har birad sadaa-ay ik til nahee bhannai ghaalay.
It is the Lord's natural way to purify sinners; He does not overlook even an iota of service.
we we st Hee feet 3d dt S Sa I (784-14, wet, ue 5)
ghat ghat vaasee sarab nivaasee nayrai hee tay nayraa.
He dwells in each and every heart, pervading everywhere; He is the nearest of the near.
soa BH He Aderats ofa wifys AAS HS UA (784-14, Fat, He 5) naanak daas sadaa sarnaagat har amrit sajan mayraa. ||1|| Slave Nanak seeks His Sanctuary forever; the Lord is my Ambrosial Friend. ||1||
JG fanny set Ft af zane ef mrs il (734-15, wet, Hs 5)
ha-o bisam bha-ee jee har darsan daykh apaaraa.
I am wonder-struck, gazing upon the incomparable Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Ha Hes Ay At IG sas AHS UaT Sr Il (784-15, Fat, Hs 5) mayraa sundar su-aamee jee ha-o charan kamal pag chhaaraa. My Dear Lord and Master is so beautiful; I am the dust of His Lotus Feet.
ys ues Ate Set dle fsa Fes neg o aet Il (784-16, Fat, He 5) parabh paykhat jeevaa thadhee theevaa tis jayvad avar na ko-ee. Gazing upon God, I live, and I am at peace; no one else is as great as He is.
ofa nifs ufo ys sfeor vfs afs netorfs Aet 1 (784-16, wet, 48 5)
aad ant maDh parabh ravi-aa jal thal mahee-al so-ee.
Present at the beginning, end and middle of time, He pervades the sea, the land and the sky.
JdO AHS Afu ATG Stout Sens SSs urs I (784-17, Wet, He 5) charan kamal jap saagar tari-aa bhavjal utray paaraa. Meditating on His Lotus Feet, I have crossed over the sea, the terrifying world-ocean.
aoa Ase UTS USHAT ST MT F USS II (784-17, wet, Hs 5)
naanak saran pooran parmaysur tayraa ant na paaraavaaraa. ||2||
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord; You have no end or limitation, Lord. ||2||
JG fony 3 ea" At afe UtSH Ure mE I (784-18, Wet, Hs 5) ha-o nimakh na chhodaa jee har pareetam paraan aDhaaro.
I shall not forsake, even for an instant, my Dear Beloved Lord, the Support of the breath of life.
afe Afsaa afar Ht Ara mfam sherds Il (784-18, wet, He 5)
gur satgur kahi-aa jee saachaa agam beechaaro.
The Guru, the True Guru, has instructed me in the contemplation of the True, Inaccessible Lord.
ffs rg Star st ony Blot HOH HIS EU BS Il (784-19, wet, He 5)
mil saaDhoo deenaa taa naam leenaa janam maran dukh naathay.
Meeting with the humble, Holy Saint, I obtained the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the pains of birth and death left me.
HOA AY wise wUSss TBH fasot ae Il (784-19, wet, Hs 5)
sahj sookh aanand ghanayray ha-umai binthee gaathay.
I have been blessed with peace, poise and abundant bliss, and the knot of egotism has been untied.
Ua ocy
AS a nfo As I 3 Mole Ta Su 3S Sarg Il (785-1, wet, ws 5) sabh kai maDh sabh hoo tay baahar raag dokh tay ni-aaro. He is inside all, and outside of all; He is untouched by love or hate.
ood OH safe Ageret afs ulsH Hofs Ars SI (785-1, Fat, He 5)
naanak daas gobind sarnaa-ee har pareetam maneh saDhaaro. ||3]|
Slave Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe; the Beloved Lord is the Support of the mind. ||3]|
H uns ans at afs fesse A we usm II (785-2, Het, He 5) mai khojat khojat jee har nihchal so ghar paa-i-aa. I searched and searched, and found the immovable, unchanging home of the Lord.
Afs migz fad Ate st Bde AHS fos wfenr Il (785-2, Fat, He 5)
sabh aDhruv dithay jee-o taa charan kamal chit laa-i-aa.
I have seen that everything is transitory and perishable, and so I have linked my consciousness to the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
us mifsat 3G fs at SH HS © MTS AES II (785-3, Bat, He 5)
parabh abhinaasee ha-o tis kee daasee marai na aavai jaa-ay.
God is eternal and unchanging, and I am just His hand-maiden; He does not die, or come and go in reincarnation.
OSH niga aH Afs ude Hie feet fes UATS Il (785-4, Het, Hs 5)
Dharam arath kaam sabh pooran man chindee ichh pujaa-ay. He is overflowing with Dharmic faith, wealth and success; He fulfills the desires of the mind.
Afs fafyfs qo aets ass fro Afoe vfs AS fimrfemr i (75-4, get, He 5)
sarut simrit gun gaavahi kartay siDh saaDhik mun jan Dhi-aa-i-aa.
The Vedas and the Simritees sing the Praises of the Creator, while the Siddhas, seekers and silent sages meditate on Him.
Sod Adle faut fafa aurt essrait afe afs afenr ns naaal (785-5, wet, 8 5)
naanak saran kirpaa niDh su-aamee vadbhaagee har har gaa-i-aa. ||4]|1||11]| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master, the treasure of mercy; by great good fortune, he sings the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|1]|11]|
qe Afsara yATfe Il (785-6) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ZT Hot at ABat ats HIS 3S Il (785-6)
vaar soohee kee salokaa naal mehlaa 3. Vaar Of Soohee, With Shaloks Of The Third Mehl:
HSa H2 3 Il (785-6) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Ho ef eoaet us fug wee ATE Il (785-6, Ft, He 3)
soohai vays duhaaganee par pir raavan jaa-ay.
In her red robes, the discarded bride goes out, seeking enjoyment with another's husband.
fug sfauor ufe mrue Hot eA SAE Ml (795-7, wet, Hs 3) pir chhodi-aa ghar aapnai mohee doojai bhaa-ay. She leaves the husband of her own home, enticed by her love of duality.
for afe & ufior ag Areg efor Sa Il (785-7, Bet, He 3)
mithaa kar kai khaa-i-aa baho saadahu vaDhi-aa rog.
She finds it sweet, and eats it up; her excessive sensuality only makes her disease worse.
AO 33g ufs efsur fefe war ate fetta il (785-8, at, He 3)
suDh bhataar har chhodi-aa fir lagaa jaa-ay vijog.
She forsakes the Lord, her sublime Husband, and then later, she suffers the pain of separation from Him.
qoufa 32 A usfeur ofe ast fs Aterfs i (785-8, wet, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so palti-aa har raatee saaj seegaar.
But she who becomes Gurmukh, turns away from corruption and adorns herself, attuned to the Love of the Lord.
Hofa Ag fug afeor afs ont Ca orfs il (785-9, Fat, He 3)
sahj sach pir raavi-aa har naamaa ur Dhaar.
She enjoys her celestial Husband Lord, and enshrines the Lord's Name within her heart.
wifamrard Het Haas orf Het aeatfa | (785-9, Fat, He 3)
aagi-aakaaree sadaa sohagan aap maylee kartaar.
She is humble and obedient; she is His virtuous bride forever; the Creator unites her with Himself.
ood fug ufeur ofe vrat Het Hoes fs WA (785-10, Fat, He 3)
naanak pir paa-i-aa har saachaa sadaa sohagan naar. ||1||
O Nanak, she who has obtained the True Lord as her husband, is a happy soul-bride forever. ||1]|
H8 3 Il (785-10) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hose fonrate A Ag Ae™ AHS Il (785-10, At, He 3) soohvee-ay nimaanee-ay so saho sadaa sam"aal. O meek, red-robed bride, keep your Husband Lord always in your thoughts.
SOA AGH Aetats miTuat ae st Sct MH iQ (785-11, wat, ve 3)
naanak janam savaareh aapnaa kul bhee chhutee naal. ||2||
O Nanak, your life shall be embellished, and your generations shall be saved along with you. ||2||
ust Il (785-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm sus TatEGo mirarA UST Il (785-12, Fat, He 3) aapay takhat rachaa-i-on aakaas pataalaa. He Himself established His throne, in the Akaashic ethers and the nether worlds.
JAH Usst Abas Adt GSH ATS Il (785-12, Fdt, He 3) hukmay Dhartee saajee-an sachee Dharam saalaa. By the Hukam of His Command, He created the earth, the true home of Dharma.
uimfy Gufs wuurfee Ag dts efenrer it (785-12, At, Hs 3)
aap upaa-ay khapaa-idaa sachay deen da-i-aalaa. He Himself created and destroys; He is the True Lord, merciful to the meek.
Aso fara Heafoer Sa JaH fear il (785-13, Fat, Hs 3)
sabhnaa rijak sambaahidaa tayraa hukam niraalaa.
You give sustenance to all; how wonderful and unique is the Hukam of Your Command!
nmy nify Fazer mm yfsursr Al (785-13, Fat, Hs 3)
aapay aap varatdaa aapay partipaalaa. ||1|| You Yourself are permeating and pervading; You Yourself are the Cherisher. ||1]|
HS H8 3 Ill (785-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hue 3 Aare wT xfs Sfo AG aS il (795-14, wet, Hs 3)
soohab taa sohaaganee jaa man laihi sach naa-o.
The red-robed woman becomes a happy soul-bride, only when she accepts the True Name.
Afsag wus Hote & IU Vat Se nares SAT SST HS i (785-14, wat, Hs 3)
satgur apnaa manaa-ay lai roop charhee taa aglaa doojaa naahee thaa-o.
Become pleasing to your True Guru, and you shall be totally beautified; otherwise, there is no place of rest.
mT Hlarg wate J Hw oe o Jeet mifafotA wat SS i (785-15, Het, He 3)
aisaa seegaar banaa-ay too mailaa kaday na hova-ee ahinis laagai bhaa-o.
So decorate yourself with the decorations that will never stain, and love the Lord day and night.
eae oats ot far fags 3 niefs AY HY CAer UAH Hfs ANE IAI (7385-16, Bat, He 3) naanak sohagan kaa ki-aa chihan hai andar sach mukh ujlaa khasmai maahi samaa-
ay. |[1]| O Nanak, what is the character of the happy soul-bride? Within her, is Truth; her face is bright and radiant, and she is absorbed in her Lord and Master. ||1]|
H8 3 Il (785-17) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Bar J US AVS AT SA AT Il (785-17, wet, Hs 3) lokaa vay ha-o soohvee soohaa vays karee. O people: I am in red, dressed in a red robe.
art Ag 3 uréba afe afs SA ct Il (785-17, wat, He 3)
vaysee saho na paa-ee-ai Kar kar vays rahee.
But my Husband Lord is not obtained by any robes; I have tried and tried, and given up wearing robes.
Sod feat Ag ufeor fast as at fre wet Il (785-18, Fat, Hs 3) naanak tinee saho paa-i-aa jinee gur kee sikh sunee. O Nanak, they alone obtain their Husband Lord, who listen to the Guru's Teachings.
a faq se A dint fea fafa xs fret 2m (785-18, gat, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai in biDh kant milee. ||2] | Whatever pleases Him, happens. In this way, the Husband Lord is met. ||2||
Uar otE ust Il (786-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
gant fqrfe Adib ag fafs AAS II (786-1, at, Hs 3) hukmee sarisat saajee-an baho bhit sansaaraa. By His Command, He created the creation, the world with its many species of beings.
ST JOH } AN ASS" A Mw MUTA Il (786-1, Bet, He 3) tayraa hukam na jaapee kayt-rhaa sachay alakh apaaraa. I do not know how great Your Command is, O Unseen and Infinite True Lord.
feast 3 3 Afe Sf ae Hate stars I (786-2, Fat, He 3) iknaa no too mayl laihi gur sabad beechaaraa. You join some with Yourself; they reflect on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afs 33 A fesHe IH sft fearar i (786-2, Hat, ue 3)
sach ratay say nirmalay ha-umai taj vikaaraa.
Those who are imbued with the True Lord are immaculate and pure; they conquer egotism and corruption.
fan 3 Hefs A sg fhe Aet Afra II (786-2, Ae, He 3) jis too mayleh so tuDh milai so-ee sachi-aaraa. ||2]| He alone is united with You, whom You unite with Yourself; he alone is true. ||2]|
H8a H8 3 Ill (736-3) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Huse Ao Ag AAT o fe Tans SAT SE Il (786-3, at, Hs 3)
soohvee-ay soohaa sabh sansaar hai jin durmat doojaa bhaa-o.
O red-robed woman, the whole world is red, engrossed in evil-mindedness and the love of duality.
fas ufs 36 Ag faath wfe fas fea o frau at aS Il (786-4, wat, He 3) khin meh jhooth sabh binas jaa-ay ji-o tikai na birakh kee chhaa-o. In an instant, this falsehood totally vanishes; like the shade of a tree, it is gone.
ToHfy os we d fre dfa uate AES I (786-4, wet, He 3) gurmukh laalo laal hai ji-o rang majeeth sachrhaa-o. The Gurmukh is the deepest crimson of crimson, dyed in the permanent color of the
Lord's Love.
Gact nafs fre wha mret ufs sfhor ofa nifigs o@ il (786-5, wet, Hs 3)
ultee sakat sivai ghar aa-ee man vasi-aa har amrit naa-o.
She turns away from Maya, and enters the celestial home of the Lord; the Ambrosial Name of the Lord dwells within her mind.
eae Sead aa urue fas fife afs ae a ail (786-6, wet, He 3)
naanak balihaaree gur aapnay jit mili-ai har gun gaa-o. ||1||
O Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; meeting Him, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (786-6)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ao da fearg J&Z o ure ATE II (786-6, At, He 3) soohaa rang vikaar hai kant na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The red color is vain and useless; it cannot help you obtain your Husband Lord.
feH Boe fas & Jeet Fs Bot EA SAE Il (786-7, wat, we 3) is lahday bilam na hova-ee rand baithee doojai bhaa-ay. This color does not take long to fade; she who loves duality, ends up a widow.
Hu feurat Guat AS Sf SHE it (786-7, Fat, us 3) munDh i-aanee dummnee soohai vays lobhaa-ay. She who loves to wear her red dress is foolish and double-minded.
Rafe Ad da oe afe S ote Aterg sete | (786-8, wet, Hs 3)
sabad sachai rang laal kar bhai bhaa-ay seegaar banaa-ay.
So make the True Word of the Shabad your red dress, and let the Fear of God, and the Love of God, be your ornaments and decorations.
Sot Ae Avael fa vats Afsas se i (786-8, Fat, ue 3)
naanak sadaa sohaaganee je chalan satgur bhaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, she is a happy soul-bride forever, who walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||2]|
uGSt II (786-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nmy nify Gurfieng virfy thafs uret il (786-9, Fat, He 3) aapay aap upaa-i-an aap keemat paa-ee. He Himself created Himself, and He Himself evaluates Himself.
fA ot nis 3 uel ae Hate gst Il (786-9, Fat, Hs 3)
tis daa ant na jaap-ee gur sabad bujhaa-ee.
His limits cannot be known; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is understood.
Hfenr HI TIT T TH SIH Il (786-10, wat, we 3) maa-i-aa moh gubaar hai doojai bharmaa-ee. In the darkness of attachment to Maya, the world wanders in duality.
HoH o@a 3 ufeat fefa mre Aet I (786-10, Bet, He 3) manmukh tha-ur na paa-in"ee fir aavai jaa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs find no place of rest; they continue coming and going.
A fsa oe A dh AS vs TAT BI (786-11, Fat, Hs 3) jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai sabh chalai rajaa-ee. ||3]| Whatever pleases Him, that alone happens. All walk according to His Will. ||3]|
HSE H8 3 Il (736-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Ho ef anfe aout A ys efs ua uae oe fimrg Il (786-11, Fat, He 3) soohai vays kaaman kulkhanee jo parabh chhod par purakh Dharay pi-aar. The red-robed bride is vicious; she forsakes God, and cultivates love for another man.
GA AIS 3 AHH Ae 3 8S HOHfY AIH Yn Il (7386-12, Fat, Hs 3)
os seel na sanjam sadaa jhooth bolai manmukh karam khu-aar.
She has neither modesty or self-discipline; the self-willed manmukh constantly tells lies, and is ruined by the bad karma of evil deeds.
fan usta de fottmr fA Afsag fees s3rg Il (786-12, Het, He 3) jis poorab hovai likhi-aa tis satgur milai bhataar. She who has such pre-ordained destiny, obtains the True Guru has her Husband.
Ao @H Ag Cate us af ufse fir Atarg I (736-13, et, Hs 3)
soohaa vays sabh utaar Dharay gal pahirai khimaa seegaar.
She discards all her red dresses, and wears the ornaments of mercy and forgiveness around her neck.
yeha Ae ag Ast ure (SA UA AT AS AA Il (786-14, wet, Hs 3)
pay-ee-ai saahurai baho sobhaa paa-ay tis pooj karay sabh saisaar.
In this world and the next, she receives great honor, and the whole world worships her.
Go soret far et ot oS faa ae fran” Il (736-14, gat, He 3)
oh ralaa-ee kisai dee naa ralai jis raavay sirjanhaar.
She who is enjoyed by her Creator Lord stands out, and does not blend in with the crowd.
Soa ATH Ae’ Hoel fan vifeat uTY FISTS NA (786-15, Fat, we 3)
naanak gurmukh sadaa suhaaganee jis avinaasee purakh bhartaar. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is the happy soul-bride forever; she has the Imperishable Lord God as her Husband. ||1]|
He 4% Il (786-15) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ho da Aus fort fag sat af Tg il (786-15, wet, He 1) soohaa rang supnai nisee bin taagay gal haar. The red color is like a dream in the night; it is like a necklace without a string.
Het dq Ale a aeHfe gaH shes Il (786-16, wat, He 1) sachaa rang majeeth kaa gurmukh barahm beechaar. The Gurmukhs take on the permanent color, contemplating the Lord God.
Soa UH Hd" Tat Als ghana srg iQ! (786-16, At, Hs 1)
naanak paraym mahaa rasee sabh buri-aa-ee-aa chhaar. ||2]|
O Nanak, with the supreme sublime essence of the Lord's Love, all sins and evil deeds are turned to ashes. ||2]|
UugST Il (786-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
feg na urfu GufeGe afs da festa II (786-17, At, He 1D ih jag aap upaa-i-on kar choj vidaan. He Himself created this world, and staged this wondrous play.
us ws fefs urétnig HI 3S ANS Il (786-17, Fat, He panch Dhaat vich paa-ee-an moh jhooth gumaan. Into the body of the five elements, He infused attachment, falsehood and self-conceit.
wire afe sereba HOHY mifamre Il (786-18, Fat, Hs 1) aavai jaa-ay bhavaa-ee-ai manmukh agi-aan. The ignorant, self-willed manmukh comes and goes, wandering in reincarnation.
feat urfu gateGe asnfe afe famre it (786-18, wet, He 1)
iknaa aap bujhaa-i-on gurmukh har gi-aan.
He Himself teaches some to become Gurmukh, through the spiritual wisdom of the Lord.
sats uo aufAGS dia aH feurS Ill (736-19, wet, He 1)
bhagat khajaanaa bakhsi-on har naam niDhaan. ||4||
He blesses them with the treasure of devotional worship, and the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||4||
H8a H8 3 Il (736-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hodle As 2H afs J 3 fus salt fumrg Il (786-19, Ft, He 3)
soohvee-ay soohaa vays chhad too taa pir lagee pi-aar.
O red-robed woman, discard your red dress, and then, you shall come to love your Husband Lord.
Ua MLD Hd fh fug fas 3 utes Houfe ofS Het arete i (787-1, wt, ue 3)
soohai vays pir kinai na paa-i-o manmukh dajh mu-ee gaavaar. By wearing her red dress, no one has found her Husband Lord; the self-willed manmukh is burnt to death.
Afsate fife ao eq afenr aBH feeg uefa il (787-2, at, Hs 3)
satgur mili-ai soohaa vays ga-i-aa ha-umai vichahu maar.
Meeting the True Guru, she discards her red dress, and eradicates egotism from within.
HO 30 FS" we Iu gHo" gst Te Ata Il (787-2, wat, ne 3)
man tan rataa laal ho-aa rasnaa ratee gun saar.
Her mind and body are imbued with the deep red color of His Love, and her tongue is imbued, singing His Praises and excellences.
Ae Hote nag ufs 3 afte ad Aterg i (787-3, wet, He 3)
sadaa sohagan sabad man bhai bhaa-ay karay seegaar.
She becomes His soul-bride forever, with the Word of the Shabad in her mind; she makes the Fear of God and the Love of God her ornaments and decorations.
Soa SIH Hoe ufenr fug afimer Sa af ual (787-3, wet, He 3)
naanak karmee mahal paa-i-aa pir raakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||1]|
O Nanak, by His Merciful Grace, she obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and keeps Him enshrined in her heart. ||1]|
He 3 Il (787-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HO AT udddT BS ATT Atarg il (787-4, wet, we 3)
munDhay soohaa parahrahu laal karahu seegaar.
O bride, forsake your red dress, and decorate yourself with the crimson color of His Love.
wise Hat Sad Ta Aaet Sears il (737-4, wet, us 3) aavan jaanaa veesrai gur sabdee veechaar.
Your comings and goings shall be forgotten, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hu Aoet Agel fan whe AafA Sag Il (787-5, Fat, He 3)
munDh suhaavee sohnee jis ghar sahj bhataar.
The soul-bride is adorned and beautiful; the Celestial Lord, her Husband, abides in her home.
SSA AT US set TS PSST IQ (787-5, Fat, ue 3)
naanak saa Dhan raavee-ai raavay ravanhaar. ||2||
O Nanak, the bride ravishes and enjoys Him; and He, the Ravisher, ravishes and enjoys her. ||2||
uQat Il (787-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HI FZ ACT FT HOHY HAT FST Il (787-6, Fat, Hs 3) moh koorh kutamb hai manmukh mugaDh rataa. The foolish, self-willed manmukh is engrossed in false attachment to family.
JH Ae afs He fas Aa o fs I (787-6, Fat, He 3)
ha-umai mayraa kar mu-ay kichh saath na litaa.
Practicing egotism and self-conceit, he dies and departs, taking nothing along with him.
fra Gufs mHars 3 Aset SA SAS I (787-6, At, He 3)
sir upar jamkaal na sujh-ee doojai bharmitaa.
He does not understand that the Messenger of Death is hovering over his head; he is deluded by duality.
fete zor ofa 5 uireet Hats ef fast il (787-7, wet, Hs 3)
fir vaylaa hath na aavee jamkaal vas kitaa.
This opportunity will not come into his hands again; the Messenger of Death will seize him.
Aa ofs fafa ufese A adh AHS UII (787-7, Bet, He 3) jayhaa Dhur likh paa-i-on say karam kamitaa. ||5|| He acts according to his pre-ordained destiny. ||5]|
H@a H8 3 Il (787-8)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Astor fs 3 nmibafs a Hfsor afer wale I (787-8, Fat, He 3) satee-aa ayhi na aakhee-an jo marhi-aa lag jala‘ni”. Do not call them 'satee', who burn themselves along with their husbands' corpses.
ood Asher wrebufs fa faad se Hsfe all (787-9, wt, He 3) naanak satee-aa jaanee-ani" je birhay chot mara™ni". ||1|| O Nanak, they alone are known as 'satee', who die from the shock of separation. ||1||
He 3 Il (787-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
St A AShor arebafs Ales Aster safe i (787-9, get, He 3) bhee so satee-aa jaanee-an seel santokh raha“ni". They are also known as 'satee', who abide in modesty and contentment.
Refs Aret nine fas Sfs AHA QI (787-10, at, He 3) sayvan saa-ee aapnaa nit uth sam"aala‘ni™. ||2]| They serve their Lord, and rise in the early hours to contemplate Him. ||2]|
Hs 3 Il (787-10) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
as anes Hosor ASt uifar Aerts | (787-10, wet, He 3) kantaa naal mahaylee-aa saytee ag jalaahi. The widows burn themselves in the fire, along with their husbands’ corpses.
A Feta fug nme at 3fs gu Aa Il (787-11, et, He 3) jay jaaneh pir aapnaa taa tan dukh sahaahi. If they truly knew their husbands, then they suffer terrible bodily pain.
SSA AS 6 Weal A fas nifar Aerts il (737-11, wt, ue 3)
naanak kant na jaannee say ki-o ag jalaahi.
O Nanak, if they did not truly know their husbands, why should they burn themselves in the fire?
oe Hes a HIG vag ot ofA ATE WAN (787-12, Ae, He 3) bhaavai jeeva-o kai mara-o Dhoorahu hee bhaj jaahi. ||3]| Whether their husbands are alive or dead, those wives remain far away from them.
[I3]|
ust Il (787-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
au ey AY ofe Gurfemr dy aas feftmr I (787-12, At, He 3) tuDh dukh sukh naal upaa-i-aa laykh kartai likhi-aa. You created pain along with pleasure; O Creator, such is the writ You have written.
oe Hes da ats oot fH gy o fatto Il (787-13, Hat, He 3) naavai jayvad hor daat naahee tis roop na rikhi-aa. There is no other gift as great as the Name; it has no form or sign.
on mye fears 3 aonfa ufs efi i (787-13, aet, He 3) naam akhut niDhaan hai gurmukh man vasi-aa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is an inexhaustible treasure; it abides in the mind of the Gurmukh.
ate fasur aH tent fefs Sy o fester i (7387-14, wat, v8 3)
kar kirpaa naam dayvsee fir laykh na likhi-aa.
In His Mercy, He blesses us with the Naam, and then, the writ of pain and pleasure is not written.
Rea sf A Ao fhe faa ats Ay Afumr HEM (787-14, Bet, Hs 3)
sayvak bhaa-ay say jan milay jin har jap japi-aa. ||6||
Those humble servants who serve with love, meet the Lord, chanting the Chant of the Lord. ||6]|
HBA Hs 2 Il (787-15)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
frat vee Aten A fa@ asta fears il (787-15, At, Hs 2)
jinee chalan jaani-aa say ki-o karahi vithaar.
They know that they will have to depart, so why do they make such ostentatious displays?
JHE A B AESSl AH ASIST ST NA (787-15, Fat, Hz 2)
chalan saar na jaannee kaaj savaaranhaar. ||1|| Those who do not know that they will have to depart, continue to arrange their affairs. ||1]|
He 2 Il (787-16)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
os wrafs ug Hdbt sea vOS SE I (787-16, Het, v8 2)
raat kaaran Dhan sanchee-ai bhalkay chalan ho-ay.
He accumulates wealth during the night of his life, but in the morning, he must depart.
oad ates o weet fefs ugsre SE QI (787-16, Bet, Hs 2) naanak naal na chal-ee fir pachhutaavaa ho-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, it shall not go along with him, and so he regrets. ||2]|
H3 2 Il (787-17) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
am uct Had BT TES BT Cuarg Il (787-17, wat, He 2) baDhaa chatee jo bharay naa gun naa upkaar. Paying a fine under pressure, does not bring either merit or goodness.
ASt yt Herdha Sox ASH AT IWS (787-17, Fat, He 2) saytee khusee savaaree-ai naanak kaaraj saar. ||3]| That alone is a good deed, O Nanak, which is done by one's own free will. ||3]|
H8 2 Il (787-18) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Hole Soe & fruet A ATS UTS Il (787-18, wet, 3 2)
manhath taraf na jip-ee jay bahutaa ghaalay.
Stubborn-mindedness will not win the Lord to one's side, no matter how much it is tried.
3de fre AS TR TAS Sa Ase Ses igi (787-18, get, ue 2)
taraf jinai sat bhaa-o day jan naanak sabad veechaaray. ||4]|
The Lord is won over to your side, by offering Him your true love, O servant Nanak, and contemplating the Word of the Shabad. ||4]|
ust Il (787-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ass arse fats thor A ATS Het il (787-19, wet, Hs 2) kartai kaaran jin kee-aa so jaanai so-ee. The Creator created the world; He alone understands it.
nny fqrfe Curent umt |fs diet il (787-19, wet, He 2) aapay sSarisat upaa-ee-an aapay fun go-ee. He Himself created the Universe, and He Himself shall destroy it afterwards.
UST Ott Aa wd AS sfe sat fats ahafs det i (78-1, get, ue 2)
jug chaaray sabh bhav thakee kin keemat ho-ee. All have grown weary of wandering throughout the four ages, but none know the Lord's worth.
Afsafe ea ferfemr ufs sfs wy det i c7ss-1, wt, He 2) satgur ayk vikhaali-aa man tan sukh ho-ee. The True Guru has shown me the One Lord, and my mind and body are at peace.
Tafa Ae Aad aes aS A Tet MDI (788-2, wat, He 2) gurmukh sadaa salaahee-ai kartaa karay so ho-ee. ||7]||
The Gurmukh praises the Lord forever; that alone happens, which the Creator Lord does. ||7||
HBA HIST 2 Il (788-2)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
frat 38 f3q of 38 HY 3@ fastens II (788-2, Bet, He 2)
jinaa bha-o tin" naahi bha-o much bha-o nibhvi-aah.
Those who have the Fear of God, have no other fears; those who do not have the Fear of God, are very afraid.
soa Sy uese faz cafe afeurs All (788-3, gat, us 2) naanak ayhu patantaraa tit deebaan ga-i-aah. ||1]|| O Nanak, this mystery is revealed at the Court of the Lord. ||1||
He 2 Il (788-3)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
gae a sae fs Oss a Css I (788-3, wat, ne 2)
turday ka-o turdaa milai udtay ka-o udtaa.
That which flows, mingles with that which flows; that which blows, mingles with that which blows.
Mes AS Aes FHS HE AG Hor I (788-4, Fet, Hs 2) jeevtay ka-o jeevtaa milai moo-ay ka-o moo-aa. The living mingle with the living, and the dead mingle with the dead.
Sod A Aerdimt fafs arse athor lil (788-4, wt, ue 2) naanak so salaahee-ai jin kaaran kee-aa. ||2]| O Nanak, praise the One who created the creation. ||2]|
ust Il (788-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag fimrfefs A AG aa Aafe Sart it (788-5, wet, us 2) sach Dhi-aa-in say sachay gur sabad veechaaree. Those who meditate on the True Lord are true; they contemplate the Word of the
Guru's Shabad. J@H Hfs He fosHer ofa on fa ardt Il (788-5, Hat, He 2)
ha-umai maar man nirmalaa har naam ur Dhaaree. They subdue their ego, purify their minds, and enshrine the Lord's Name within their hearts.
aS Hsu HShor ofa ue arerdt i (788-6, Adt, ue 2) kothay mandap maarhee-aa lag pa-ay gaavaaree. The fools are attached to their homes, mansions and balconies.
fate ote foafo o ATeat HoHfe Tardt i (788-6, Fat, He 2)
jini" kee-ay tiseh na jaannee manmukh gubaaree.
The self-willed manmukhs are caught in darkness; they do not know the One who created them.
fan asfefs A asHt Afeor famr as feast ci (7ss-7, Fat, Hs 2)
jis bujhaa-ihi so bujhsee sachi-aa ki-aa jant vichaaree. ||8]|
He alone understands, whom the True Lord causes to understand; what can the helpless creatures do? ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (788-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
omnfs 38 Aterg afa a ufset az Hote Il (788-7, gat, He 3) kaaman ta-o seegaar kar jaa pahilaa™ kant manaa-ay. O bride, decorate yourself, after you surrender and accept your Husband Lord.
HS AA as 3 oreet SS fase AE I (788-8, gat, He 3)
mat sayjai kant na aavee ayvai birthaa jaa-ay.
Otherwise, your Husband Lord will not come to your bed, and your ornaments will be useless.
amfe fug He Hout 38 afenr Aterg il (788-8, Fat, He 3)
kaaman pir man maani-aa ta-o bani-aa seegaar.
O bride, your decorations will adorn you, only when your Husband Lord's Mind is pleased.
aor 38 users J WT Ag Us fimrg Il (788-9, At, He 3)
kee-aa ta-o parvaan hai jaa saho Dharay pi-aar.
Your ornaments will be acceptable and approved, only when your Husband Lord loves you.
3@ Hhrg 3am JA SHS TC ASE I (788-9, Bat, ne 3) bha-o seegaar tabol ras bhojan bhaa-o karay-i.
So make the Fear of God your ornaments, joy your betel nuts to chew, and love your food.
3o HO ACU as aS 3B aoa Sa ASE AI (788-10, Fat, He 3)
tan man sa-upay kant ka-o ta-o naanak bhog karay-i. ||1]|
Surrender your body and mind to your Husband Lord, and then, O Nanak, He will enjoy you. ||1||
He 3 Il (788-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
NHS SH SHS TAS US aor Atarg I (788-10, wet, ws 3) kaajal fool tambol ras lay Dhan kee-aa seegaar. The wife takes flowers, and fragrance of betel, and decorates herself.
An ag 3 urfes Se sfeor fearg iH (788-11, wet, He 3) sayjai kant na aa-i-o ayvai bha-i-aa vikaar. ||2]| But her Husband Lord does not come to her bed, and so these efforts are useless.
21 |
He 3 Il (788-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ue fug fo 5 uminifs safe fead df& iI (788-11, Het, He 3) Dhan pir ayhi na aakhee-an bahan ikthay ho-ay. They are not said to be husband and wife, who merely sit together.
2a Ffs of Hast os fug adit Ae SI (788-12, Fat, Hs 3) ayk jot du-ay moortee Dhan pir kahee-ai so-ay. ||3]| They alone are called husband and wife, who have one light in two bodies. ||3] |
ust Il (788-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 fas safs 3 deet oft & oat fimrg II (788-13, Bet, Hi 3)
bhai bin bhagat na hova-ee naam na lagai pi-aar.
Without the Fear of God, there is no devotional worship, and no love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Afsate fife 3B Cur s ste ga Ae Il (788-13, Hat, He 3)
satgur mili-ai bha-o oopjai bhai bhaa-ay rang savaar.
Meeting with the True Guru, the Fear of God wells up, and one is embellished with the Fear and the Love of God.
36 HO 3s" da fAe JEN feAor aefa Il (788-14, wt, He 3)
tan man rataa rang si-o ha-umai tarisnaa maar.
When the body and mind are imbued with the Lord's Love, egotism and desire are conquered and subdued.
He 36 fosne nfs Ave Sfeur fans Hate i (788-14, at, He 3)
man tan nirmal at sohnaa bhayti-aa krisan muraar.
The mind and body become immaculately pure and very beautiful, when one meets the Lord, the Destroyer of ego.
3@ a@ ng fSA wT A A eos AA CI (788-15, At, He 3)
bha-o bhaa-o sabh tis daa so sach vartai sansaar. ||9||
Fear and love all belong to Him; He is the True Lord, permeating and pervading the Universe. ||9] |
Had H2 % Il (788-15)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
@g YAH S ey fale of Tas" TH AS Il (788-15, Het, He 1)
vaahu khasam too vaahu jin rach rachnaa ham kee-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! You are wonderful and great, O Lord and Master; You created the creation, and made us.
Arad Gdfs Ae Aa Ses SIA FIT Il (788-16, wat, He 1) Saagar lahar samund sar vayl varas varaahu. You made the waters, waves, oceans, pools, plants, clouds and mountains.
uify usefs urfu afs mite mmarg il (788-16, get, 48 1) aap kharhoveh aap kar aapeenai aapaahu. You Yourself stand in the midst of what You Yourself created.
Toufy As af ue Confs 33 ANT Il (788-17, Fat, He 1)
gurmukh sayvaa thaa-ay pavai unman tat kamaahu.
The selfless service of the Gurmukhs is approved; in celestial peace, they live the essence of reality.
HAats BIT HAs Hfer far MAH SIT Il (788-17, Aet, 4s 1) maskat lahhu majooree-aa mang mang khasam daraahu. They receive the wages of their labor, begging at the Door of their Lord and Master.
aod UT Us Sused 38 ule Cat ata & AUT SUTSTT WAU (788-18, Hat, He 1)
naanak pur dar vayparvaah ta-o dar oonaa naahi ko sachaa vayparvaahu. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Court of the Lord is overflowing and carefree; O my True Carefree Lord, no one returns empty-handed from Your Court. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (788-19)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Gus Hat Ave aso ats Ashe Il (788-19, wet, He 1D ujal motee sohnay ratnaa naal jurhann. The teeth are like brilliant, beautiful pearls, and the eyes are like sparkling jewels.
fso Ag edt ooo fa ge SHE nafs NN (788-19, At, He 1D tin jar vairee naankaa je budhay thee-ay marann. ||2|| Old age is their enemy, O Nanak; when they grow old, they waste away. ||2||
Ua oe
uQat Il (789-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs Ard Ae Ae’ 3q HO AGfu Adte Il (789-1, wet, we 1) har saalaahee sadaa sadaa tan man sa-up sareer. Praise the Lord, forever and ever; dedicate your body and mind to Him.
dd Aaet Ay fear Ae ates asts ll (789-1, Fat, Hs 1)
gur sabdee sach paa-i-aa sachaa gahir gambheer.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have found the True, Profound and Unfathomable Lord.
fs 3fs fase afe afar af dta ote il (789-2, wet, Hs 1) man tan hirdai rav rahi-aa har heeraa heer. The Lord, the jewel of jewels, is permeating my mind, body and heart.
HOH Hee at ey afenr fefs ue o Mtg Il (739-2, wt, ue 1)
janam maran kaa dukh ga-i-aa fir pavai na feer.
The pains of birth and death are gone, and I shall never again be consigned to the cycle of reincarnation.
aaa oH Hots J os Tat TdT WAOM! (739-3, wet, He 1) naanak naam salaahi too har gunee gaheer. ||10]| O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the ocean of excellence. ||10]|
HEX H3 4 Il (789-3)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
oad fea 36 ate fafs afet on ferrfanr iI (789-3, at, He 1)
naanak ih tan jaal jin jali-ai naam visaari-aa.
O Nanak, burn this body; this burnt body has forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
u@et fe uate fue va a nis fas feed af Wall (789-4, wet, He
pa-udee jaa-ay paraal pichhai hath na ambrhai tit nivanDhai taal. ||1]]|
The dirt is piling up, and in the world hereafter, your hand shall not be able to reach down into this stagnant pond to clean it out. ||1]|
He 4% Il (789-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
SSA HS A AH fefent TEs B nitSct il (789-5, wet, we 1) naanak man kay kamm fiti-aa ganat na aavhee. O Nanak, wicked are the uncountable actions of the mind.
fast Go ATH AT SHA St Gar Sot MQM (789-5, wet, He 1)
kitee lahaa sahamm jaa bakhsay taa Dhakaa nahee. ||2||
They bring terrible and painful retributions, but if the Lord forgives me, then I will be spared this punishment. ||2]|
ust I (789-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ae wg vores ats AY SHS Il (739-6, wat, Hs 1) sachaa amar chalaa-i-on kar sach furmaan. True is the Command He sends forth, and True are the Orders He issues.
Re fosee afe sfomr A use AAS Il (789-6, Bet, He 1)
sadaa nihchal rav rahi-aa so purakh sujaan.
Forever unmoving and unchanging, permeating and pervading everywhere, He is the All-knowing Primal Lord.
ae usAst Aeba Ag Aafe stATS Il (739-6, Fat, Hs 1) gur parsaadee sayvee-ai sach sabad neesaan. By Guru's Grace, serve Him, through the True Insignia of the Shabad.
ust ae watfenr ga TIPS HE Il (789-7, Fat, Hs 1) pooraa thaat banaa-i-aa rang gurmat maan. That which He makes is perfect; through the Guru's Teachings, enjoy His Love.
Wa nidieg wed J aenfe afs AS NAVA (789-7, Bet, He 1D agam agochar alakh hai gurmukh har jaan. ||11]| He is inaccessible, unfathomable and unseen; as Gurmukh, know the Lord. ||11]|
HX H2 % Il (789-8)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Sot aed HS at stats ufsir nefE il (789-8, Fat, Hs 1) naanak badraa maal kaa bheetar Dhari-aa aan. O Nanak, the bags of coins are brought in
We ud usdinfs wfos & chefs wai (789-8, wet, Hs 1)
khotay kharay parkhee-an saahib kai deebaan. ||1]|
and placed in the Court of our Lord and Master, and there, the genuine and the counterfeit are separated. ||1]|
He 4% Il (789-9)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
See VS Steet nfs ue 3fs FT I (789-9, wet, we 1)
naavan chalay teerthee man khotai tan chor.
They go and bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, but their minds are still evil, and their bodies are thieves.
fea a ot ofsur ef at usb Fa Il (789-9, Bat, He 1)
ik bhaa-o lathee naati-aa du-ay bhaa charhee-as hor.
Some of their filth is washed off by these baths, but they only accumulate twice as much.
Fofs ast sHat viefs fer fects il (789-10, wet, He 1)
baahar Dhotee toomrhee andar vis nikor.
Like a gourd, they may be washed off on the outside, but on the inside, they are still filled with poison.
AY 3% nieotfsur ga fa Ta Fs MM (789-10, gat, ue 1)
saaDh bhalay annaati-aa chor se choraa chor. ||2||
The holy man is blessed, even without such bathing, while a thief is a thief, no matter how much he bathes. ||2]|
ust Il (789-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nny Ja verfeer Aa Ga afer | (789-11, get, He 1)
aapay hukam chalaa-idaa jag DhanDhai laa-i-aa.
He Himself issues His Commands, and links the people of the world to their tasks. fefa nm dt orfu aofenig ag 3 AY uTfeMr II (789-11, Aet, He 1
ik aapay hee aap laa-i-an gur tay sukh paa-i-aa.
He Himself joins some to Himself, and through the Guru, they find peace.
ad fen feg Ho Weer afs ara goer | (7389-12, wet, He 1)
dah dis ih man Dhaavdaa gur thaak rahaa-i-aa. The mind runs around in the ten directions; the Guru holds it still.
oe 6 AS Suet TaHSt wfenr ih (739-12, wet, us 1) naavai no sabh lochdee gurmatee paa-i-aa. Everyone longs for the Name, but it is only found through the Guru's Teachings.
uf fatter Afe 3 Hote tafe fesfie urfemr 19211 (789-13, Fat, He 1)
Dhur likhi-aa mayt na sakee-ai jo har likh paa-i-aa. ||12||
Your pre-ordained destiny, written by the Lord in the very beginning, cannot be erased. ||12]|
Had H2 4 Il (789-13)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ofe de sus Teas Il (789-13, Fat, we 1) du-ay deevay cha-odah hatnaalay. The two lamps light the fourteen markets.
As Aba S33 ZEA Il (789-14, Fet, He 1) jaytay jee-a taytay vanjaaray. There are just as many traders as there are living beings.
Ys Je Do surg I (789-14, wt, ve 1) khul"ay hat ho-aa vaapaar. The shops are open, and trading is going on;
fuged A VSeEST ET Il (789-14, wet, He 1) jo pahuchai so chalanhaar. whoever comes there, is bound to depart.
UdH Fare ure SATE Il (789-14, Wet, He 1) Dharam dalaal paa-ay neesaan. The Righteous Judge of Dharma is the broker, who gives his sign of approval.
OTH GH BIT UTSTE Il (789-15, Hat, He 1) naanak naam laahaa parvaan. O Nanak, those who earn the profit of the Naam are accepted and approved.
ufs wire Set SraTet I (789-15, Fat, Hs 1) ghar aa-ay vajee vaaDhaa-ee. And when they return home, they are greeted with cheers;
Ae oH at fet sfaniret all (789-15, wet, Hs 1)
sach naam kee milee vadi-aa-ee. ||1]| they obtain the glorious greatness of the True Name. ||1]|
He % Il (789-16) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
wat defs arshor AUET A SS Il (789-16, Fat, He 1) raatee hovan kaalee-aa supaydaa say vann. Even when the night is dark, whatever is white retains its white color.
feg sar su war afer ars Zo Il (789-16, gat, Hs 1)
dihu bagaa tapai ghanaa kaali-aa kaalay vann.
And even when the light of day is dazzlingly bright, whatever is black retains its black color.
nid niet BIT Hae nig famirg il (789-16, Het, He 1) anDhay aklee baahray moorakh anDh gi-aan. The blind fools have no wisdom at all; their understanding is blind.
Soa Sed AId ats F urstT HTS MQM (789-17, wet, ws 1) naanak nadree baahray kabeh na paavahi maan. ||2| | O Nanak, without the Lord's Grace, they will never receive honor. ||2| |
ust Il (789-17)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
afenr ae safenr afs AS MMy I (789-17, wat, He 1)
kaa-i-aa kot rachaa-i-aa har sachai aapay. The True Lord Himself created the body-fortress.
fefa en ate unrfenig TBH fete femme il (799-18, wet, He ik doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-i-an ha-umai vich vi-aapay. Some are ruined through the love of duality, engrossed in egotism.
fey HSA ASH FST AT HOH AS Il (789-18, wet, He 1) ih maanas janam dulambh saa manmukh santaapay. This human body is so difficult to obtain; the self-willed manmukhs suffer in pain.
fan orfu ys A gset faa Afsag ant il (789-19, wat, He 1)
jis aap bujhaa-ay so bujhsee jis satgur thaapay.
He alone understands, whom the Lord Himself causes to understand; he is blessed by the True Guru.
Ag Ad ae soteGe AS Fas MM IAI (789-19, Fat, He 1) sabh jag khayl rachaa-i-on sabh vartai aapay. ||13]| He created the entire world for His play; He is pervading amongst all. ||13]|
Ua oo
Had H2 Y Il (790-1)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
om Wwe dsr ager chars | Sector at SASt Setar ar ws Il (790-1, Het, Hs 1) choraa jaaraa randee-aa kutnee-aa deebaan. vaydeenaa kee dostee vaydeenaa kaa khaan.
Thieves, adulterers, prostitutes and pimps, make friendships with the unrighteous, and eat with the unrighteous.
fest AS & AEST Het SA ASG Il (790-2, wet, He 1) siftee saar na jaannee sadaa vasai Saitaan. They do not know the value of the Lord's Praises, and Satan is always with them.
Teg vets usa st ArT FAG urs il (790-2, wet, Hs 1) gadahu chandan kha-ulee-ai bhee saahoo si-o paan. If a donkey is anointed with sandalwood paste, he still loves to roll in the dirt.
Bea FS afsnt Far Sebo SES I (790-3, wat, we 1) naanak koorhai kati-ai koorhaa tanee-ai taan. O Nanak, by spinning falsehood, a fabric of falsehood is woven.
Is TU aebat Fst USS HE MA (790-3, wat, we 1) koorhaa kaparh kachhee-ai koorhaa painan maan. ||1|| False is the cloth and its measurement, and false is pride in such a garment. ||1]|
He 4% Il (790-4)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
war asa fiat as fet were i (790-4, wet, He baa“gaa burgoo sinyee-aa naalay milee kalaan. The callers to prayer, the flute-players, the horn-blowers, and also the singers
fefa as fefa Has ou Sa users Il (790-4, wat, He 1)
ik daatay ik mangtay naam tayraa parvaan.
- some are givers, and some are beggars; they become acceptable only through Your Name, Lord.
soe frat afs & xfer a@ fsar feed ATAES II (790-5, wat, ne 1) naanak jin"ee sun kai mani-aa ha-o tinaa vitahu kurbaan. ||2|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who hear and accept the Name. ||2||
uQat II (790-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Henn Ho AS az d aS ae afenr i 790-5, wet, we DY maa-i-aa moh sabh koorh hai koorho ho-ay ga-i-aa. Attachment to Maya is totally false, and false are those who go that way.
JH saa ufeGo sas Aa Hfeur II (790-6, Fat, He 1) ha-umai jhagrhaa paa-i-on jhagrhai jag mu-i-aa. Through egotism, the world is caught in conflict and strife, and it dies.
qonfy sas votes fea afe afer il (790-6, wat, us 1)
gurmukh jhagarh chukaa-i-on iko rav rahi-aa.
The Gurmukh is free of conflict and strife, and sees the One Lord, pervading everywhere.
AZ “TSH TH Ustant sBnw sia afenr i (790-7, get, He 1)
sabh aatam raam pachhaani-aa bha-ojal tar ga-i-aa.
Recognizing that the Supreme Soul is everywhere, he crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
fs Arat Afs fefs ofa ath AHfenr 1981 (790-7, Fat, He 1) jot samaanee jot vich har naam sam-i-aa. ||14]| His light merges into the Light, and he is absorbed into the Lord's Name. ||14] |
Had H2 % Il (790-8)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok: First Mehl:
Afsas stftmr efo HS AYE TIS Il (790-8, wat, oe 1) satgur bheekhi-aa deh mai too’ samrath daataar. O True Guru, bless me with Your charity; You are the All-powerful Giver.
JH aes foes an au midarg Il (790-8, wat, He 1) ha-umai garab nivaaree-ai kaam kroDh aha‘kaar. May I subdue and quiet my egotism, pride, sexual desire, anger and self-conceit.
BE BF USHA SH fs nag i (790-9, wet, ue lab lobh parjaalee-ai naam milai aaDhaar. Burn away all my greed, and give me the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
mifafoth sese feoHer Her aad 3 AE Il (790-9, wet, He 1)
ahinis navtan nirmalaa mailaa kabahoo™ na ho-ay.
Day and night, keep me ever-fresh and new, spotless and pure; let me never be soiled by sin.
oad fea fafa edi oefs Sat wy SE NA (790-10, Fat, He 1)
naanak ih biDh chhutee-ai nadar tayree sukh ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, in this way I am saved; by Your Grace, I have found peace. ||1]|
He 4% Il (790-10)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
feat a3 Aare fast ef users il (790-10, Fat, He 1)
iko kant sabaa-ee-aa jitee dar kharhee-aah. There is only the one Husband Lord, for all who stand at His Door.
sed as gsr ysts essa iQ (790-11, wet, Hs 1)
naanak kantai ratee-aa puchheh baat-rhee-aah. ||2||
O Nanak, they ask for news of their Husband Lord, from those who are imbued with His Love. ||2||
He 4% Il (790-11) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AS aS ashor H saefs fas i (790-11, wet, ue 1)
sabhay kantai ratee-aa mai dohaagan kit.
All are imbued with love for their Husband Lord; I am a discarded bride - what good am I?
H 3fs niga S3S yA 3 Ss fas ISI (790-12, Fat, He D
mai tan avgan -ayt-rhay khasam na fayray chit. ||3]|
My body is filled with so many faults; my Lord and Master does not even turn His thoughts to me. |[3]|
He % Il (790-12)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
JG afsadt fo a@ frefs frat & StS I (790-12, wat, ne 1)
ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o sifat jinaa dai vaat. I am a Sacrifice to those who praise the Lord with their mouths.
Afs ast Aoet fea A toate af si (790-13, wet, Hs 1)
sabh raatee sohaaganee ik mai dohaagan raat. ||4]| All the nights are for the happy soul-brides; I am a discarded bride - if only I could have even one night with Him! ||4||
ust Il (790-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afs Has AS BS ofa eta far afs il (790-13, wat, He 1)
dar mangat jaachai daan har deejai kirpaa kar.
I am a beggar at Your Door, begging for charity; O Lord, please grant me Your Mercy, and give to me.
aonfa 3g frafe ae ure ony ofa Il (790-14, wet, He 1) gurmukh layho milaa-ay jan paavai naam har. As Gurmukh, unite me, your humble servant, with You, that I may receive Your Name.
wode Hae safe vat AfSs afe i (790-14, wet, He 1)
anhad sabad vajaa-ay jotee jot Dhar.
Then, the unstruck melody of the Shabad will vibrate and resound, and my light will blend with the Light.
fose ofs ae afe A A Aa ofa Il (790-15, Bat, He 1)
hirdai har gun gaa-ay jai jai sabad har.
Within my heart, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and celebrate the Word of the Lord's Shabad.
Aa Hfs gas orfy of ASt UifS afe aul (790-15, Bet, Hs 1)
jag meh vartai aap har saytee pareet kar. ||15]|
The Lord Himself is pervading and permeating the world; so fall in love with Him! [|15]|
Had H2 % Il (790-16)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
frat o ufeS Un oH aso UTE AE II (790-16, wet, He 1)
jinee na paa-i-o paraym ras kant na paa-i-o saa-o.
Those who do not obtain the sublime essence, the love and delight of their Husband Lord,
He we a urge’ fa urfemr f38 we all (790-16, wet, He 1D
sunjay ghar kaa paahunaa ji-o aa-i-aa ti-o jaa-o. ||1]|
are like guests in a deserted house; they leave just as they have come, empty- handed. ||1]|
He 4% Il (790-17) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AG Gant fed & ast fof ATA I (790-17, wat, He 1) sa-o olaam"ay dinai kay raatee milni" saha’s. He receives hundreds and thousands of reprimands, day and night;
frefs node efs & adalt war FA Il (790-17, Feat, He 1)
sifat salaahan chhad kai karangee lagaa hans.
the swan-soul has renounced the Lord's Praises, and attached itself to a rotting carcass.
fee feex Fifenr fas ufe eorfemr Ue Il (790-18, Fat, Hs 1 fit ivayhaa jeevi-aa jit knaa-ay vaDhaa-i-aa payt. Cursed is that life, in which one only eats to fill his belly.
Soa Ad OH fee AS PANS JZ IM (790-18, wet, He 1) naanak sachay naam vin sabho dusman hayt. ||2]| O Nanak, without the True Name, all one's friends turn to enemies. ||2||
UugST Il (790-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
el qe we fos HoH Aefanr Il (790-19, wat, He 1) dhaadhee gun gaavai nit janam savaari-aa. The minstrel continually sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, to embellish his life.
asf Afe Feta AST Ba far il (790-19, wet, He 1) gurmukh sayv salaahi sachaa ur Dhaari-aa. The Gurmukh serves and praises the True Lord, enshrining Him within his heart.
Yar 9&9
wg Be urs HOG oH fimrfar | (791-1, Fat, He 1) ghar dar paavai mahal naam pi-aari-aa. He obtains his own home and mansion, by loving the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
aanfy ufeor on 3G ad aS Shami Il (791-1, wat, we 1) gurmukh paa-i-aa naam ha-o gur ka-o vaari-aa. As Gurmukh, I have obtained the Naam; I am a sacrifice to the Guru.
3 urfu Aerate orfu franoatanr AEN (791-2, Fat, He 1) too aap savaareh aap sirjanhaari-aa. ||16|| You Yourself embellish and adorn us, O Creator Lord. ||16] |
HX H2 Y Il (791-2)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
cher ae nite we it (791-2, wt, ue 1) deevaa balai anDhayraa jaa-ay. When the lamp is lit, the darkness is dispelled;
ae ure Hfs urat ure i (791-3, wet, we 1) bayd paath mat paapaa khaa-ay. reading the Vedas, sinful intellect is destroyed.
Cae AY 3 AU FE I (791-3, wat, oe 1) ugvai soor na jaapai chand. When the sun rises, the moon is not visible.
Ad famine yarn mifamnrs fez Ul (791-3, wet, He 1) jah gi-aan pargaas agi-aan mitant. Wherever spiritual wisdom appears, ignorance is dispelled.
Ye US AAS at as Il (791-3, wat, ue 1) bayd paath sansaar kee kaar. Reading the Vedas is the world's occupation;
ufg ufs ufss aafs Stes i (791-4, Fat, Hs parh"” parh" pandit karahi beechaar. the Pandits read them, study them and contemplate them.
fag 33 AS df yrs Il (791-4, Ht, He 1) bin boojhay sabh ho-ay khu-aar. Without understanding, all are ruined.
Soa TTHfe SsafA urs wall (791-4, wet, us 1) naanak gurmukh utras paar. ||1]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is carried across. ||1]||
He % Il (791-5) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Rae Ae 3 orfee of 3 wat fimrg i (791-5, wet, ue 1) Sabdai saad na aa-i-o naam na lago pi-aar.
Those who do not savor the Word of the Shabad, do not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ona feat Sua fos fos af& ymrg i (791-5, wet, He rasnaa fikaa bolnaa nit nit ho-ay khu-aar. They speak insipidly with their tongues, and are continually disgraced.
ood ufemt fasts anear afe o HZETS MII (791-6, wet, He 1)
naanak pa-i-ai kirat kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||2||
O Nanak, they act according to the karma of their past actions, which no one can erase. ||2]||
u@at Il (791-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fa ys Arerd niet A AST ure | (791-6, wet, He 1) je parabh saalaahay aapnaa so sobhaa paa-ay. One who praises his God, receives honor.
UGH feag ufs afs Ag His SAS Il (791-7, wet, He D
ha-umai vichahu door kar sach man vasaa-ay.
He drives out egotism from within himself, and enshrines the True Name within his mind.
Ag wel qe Gud Ae AY US Il (791-7, At, He 1)
sach banee gun uchrai sachaa sukh paa-ay.
Through the True Word of the Guru's Bani, he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and finds true peace.
He sfeur fact feefaur aa uate frre i (791-8, get, He 1)
mayl bha-i-aa chiree vichhunni-aa gur purakh milaa-ay.
He is united with the Lord, after being separated for so long; the Guru, the Primal Being, unites him with the Lord.
He Her fee AO d ofa oH fms 19911 (791-8, Bet, He 1) man mailaa iv suDh hai har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||17]||
In this way, his filthy mind is cleansed and purified, and he meditates on the Name of the Lord. ||17]||
HX H2 Y Il (791-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Teor TH SS TE TSA TUlA Hw Il (791-9, wet, He 1)
kaa-i-aa koomal ful gun naanak gupas maal.
With the fresh leaves of the body, and the flowers of virtue, Nanak has weaved his garland.
Sat gat 3G ag nied fa gatifs 37H IAI (791-9, wat, ues aynee fulee ra-o karay avar ke chunee-ah daal. ||1]| The Lord is pleased with such garlands, so why pick any other flowers? ||1||
HIS 2 Il (791-10)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
ood fsa ss 3d fie whe efi az It (791-10, gt, 48 2)
naanak tinaa basant hai jin" ghar vasi-aa kant.
O Nanak, it is the spring season for those, within whose homes their Husband Lord abides.
fae & a3 ferrudt A uifofath feats ABST WI (791-10, Fat, us 2)
jin kay kant disaapuree say ahinis fireh jalant. ||2]|
But those, whose Husband Lord is far away in distant lands, continue burning, day and night. |[2||
ust Il (791-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm} aun tenor ats ad Afsad svat Il (791-11, wet, ue 2)
aapay bakhsay da-i-aa kar gur satgur bachnee.
The Merciful Lord Himself forgives those who dwell upon the Word of the Guru, the True Guru.
wofes At Te Je" HS AV Fuot Il (791-11, wat, He 2)
an-din sayvee gun ravaa man sachai rachnee.
Night and day, I serve the True Lord, and chant His Glorious Praises; my mind merges into Him.
us AT anizg FT nig fas o Bust Il (791-12, Wet, Hs 2) parabh mayraa bay-ant hai ant kinai na lakhnee. My God is infinite; no one knows His limit.
Afsad sdet ofr afs ay fos Aust Il (791-12, Fat, He 2) satgur charnee lagi-aa har naam nit japnee. Grasping hold of the feet of the True Guru, meditate continually on the Lord's Name.
Af fee Ae ufent vfs we fefe ABAt NACH (791-13, At, He 2)
jo ichhai so fal paa-isee sabh gharai vich jachnee. ||18]|
Thus you shall obtain the fruits of your desires, and all wishes shall be fulfilled within your home. ||18]|
HEX H3 Y Il (791-13)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufses sHS rane ufser HefeS APE I (791-13, wet, 48 1) pahil basantai aagman pahilaa ma-uli-o so-ay. Spring brings forth the first blossoms, but the Lord blossoms earlier still.
fas Heft AS Hea fsAfs 5 HEfog AE NA (791-14, Bet, He D jit ma-uli-ai sabh ma-ulee-ai tiseh na ma-ulihu ko-ay. ||1]| By His blossoming, everything blossoms; no one else causes Him to blossom forth.
[11
H8 2 Il (791-15) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
ufses SHS orate fA a aes sterg Il (791-15, at, He 2) pahil basantai aagman tis kaa karahu beechaar. He blossoms forth even earlier than the spring; reflect upon Him.
Soa A Aad fa ASA S arg QM (791-15, Aah, He 2) naanak so salaahee-ai je sabhsai day aaDhaar. ||2| | O Nanak, praise the One who gives Support to all. ||2| |
H8 2 Il (791-16) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
fife fixfemor or fixes fire fer A Of I (791-16, Bt, He 2) mili-ai mili-aa naa milai milai mili-aa jay ho-ay. By uniting, the united one is not united; he unites, only if he is united.
nisd oITSH A FHS fifemr adit AfE BI (791-16, Bet, Hs 2)
antar aatmai jo milai mili-aa kahee-ai so-ay. ||3]|
But if he unites deep within his soul, then he is said to be united. ||3]| ust Il (791-17)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
ofa ofs on Heda AY aS AHS Il (791-17, Wet, Hs 2)
har har naam salaahee-ai sach kaar kamaavai. Praise the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and practice truthful deeds.
eat arg wfamr feta Ast UTS Il (791-17, Het, Hs 2) doojee kaarai lagi-aa fir jonee paavai. Attached to other deeds, one is consigned to wander in reincarnation.
oth sfsur ou ura oH TE We Il (791-18, Fat, ve 2)
naam rati-aa naam paa-ee-ai naamay gun gaavai.
Attuned to the Name, one obtains the Name, and through the Name, sings the Lord's Praises.
aa & Rafe Hardy afs of ANTS Il (791-18, At, He 2) gur kai sabad salaahee-ai har naam samaavai. Praising the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he merges in the Lord's Name.
Afsag As Aes J Aft Sw urs AEN (791-19, Bet, He 2)
satgur sayvaa Safal hai sayvi-ai fal paavai. ||19]| Service to the True Guru is fruitful and rewarding; serving Him, the fruits are obtained. ||19]|
HBA H8 2 Il (791-19)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
far dt aet afe ve fouret fea FT il (791-19, et, Hs 2) kis hee ko-ee ko-ay manj nimaanee ik too. Some people have others, but I am forlorn and dishonored; I have only You, Lord.
Ua DEQ faS o Hott sf wr oa fats o mredt Nal (792-1, wet, He 2)
ki-o na mareejai ro-ay jaa lag chit na aavhee. ||1|| I might as well just die crying, if You will not come into my mind. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (792-1) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
WAY st Ag ofes efy st AHfeGTE II (792-1, at, Hs 2)
jaa‘ sukh taa saho raavi-o dukh bhee sammiaali-o-i.
When there is peace and pleasure, that is the time to remember your Husband Lord. In times of suffering and pain, remember Him then as well.
Soe Ad fimrate fe as flrorer SE QM (792-2, wet, He 2)
naanak kahai si-aanee-ay i-o kant milaavaa ho-ay. ||2|| Says Nanak, O wise bride, this is the way to meet your Husband Lord. ||2||
uGat Il (792-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
JG foor Ad fas Ay zat Sct SfSmret I (792-2, wet, He 2)
ha-o ki-aa saalaahee kiram jant vadee tayree vadi-aa-ee. I am a worm - how can I praise You, O Lord; Your glorious greatness is so great!
3 nan cfenre vain J mrt Sfa feet i (792-3, wet, ws 2)
too agam da-i-aal agamm hai aap laihi milaa-ee.
You are inaccessible, merciful and unapproachable; You Yourself unite us with Yourself.
H 33 fag sat & oot J ifs Aaret II (792-3, Het, Hs 2)
mai tujh bin baylee ko nahee too ant sakhaa-ee.
I have no other friend except You; in the end, You alone will be my Companion and Support.
A 3c neat fee Sfa saret I (792-4, aet, ne 2) jo tayree sarnaagatee tin laihi chhadaa-ee. You save those who enter Your Sanctuary.
soa usgeg od fH fSe 3 SH NONI (792-4, Fat, Hs 2) naanak vayparvaahu hai tis til na tamaa-ee. ||20||1]| O Nanak, He is care-free; He has no greed at all. ||20]|1||
va Ast wet At adte Ae sar ASAT sats at Il (792-6)
raag soohee banee saree kabeer jee-o tathaa sabhnaa bhagtaa kee. Raag Soohee, The Word Of Kabeer Jee, And Other Devotees.
aaT X (792-6)
kabeer kay
Of Kabeer
qe Afsas ure II (792-6)
ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
meste orfe xa SH aAtst Il (792-7, Fat, sas oeita Hh) avtar aa-ay kahaa tum keenaa. Since your birth, what have you done?
TH & SHB AAT BA MAU (792-7, wet, sas alte Ft) raam ko naam na kabhoo leenaa. ||1| | You have never even chanted the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
TH 3 AUT Aeo HS Bea Il (792-7, At, sas aeita Ah) raam na japahu kavan mat laagay. You have not meditated on the Lord; what thoughts are you attached to?
Hfs Afea AS four ag nista NU TIS Il (792-8, wat, sas ate Hh) mar ja-ibay ka-o ki-aa karahu abhaagay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. What preparations are you making for your death, O unfortunate one? ||1]||Pause] |
eu AY afs a ads Htefenr | (792-8, act, sas acta Hf) dukh sukh kar kai kutamb jeevaa-i-aa. Through pain and pleasure, you have taken care of your family.
Host ag fears Fy ue QI (792-8, At, sas ate Fh) martee baar iksar dukh paa-i-aa. ||2|| But at the time of death, you shall have to endure the agony all alone. ||2| |
AS WIS SA AIS YAS I (792-9, get, sas ats wf) kanth gahan tab karan pukaaraa. When you are seized by the neck, then you shall cry out.
afs ade nial SB ANTS USI (792-9, Adt, sas ats Fh kahi kabeer aagay tay na sam"aaraa. ||3||1]| Says Kabeer, why didn't you remember the Lord before this? ||3]|1]|
Hat oats At il (792-10) soohee kabeer jee. Soohee, Kabeer Jee:
BIT AU sar A il (792-10, wet, sas ats sh tharhar kampai baalaa jee-o. My innocent soul trembles and shakes.
ot AOS foot aaAt US 4 (792-10, Bet, sas ate Hh) naa jaan-o ki-aa karsee pee-o. ||1|| I do not know how my Husband Lord will deal with me. ||1]|
of wet ns fee st we il (792-10, act, sas ate Fh) rain ga-ee mat din bhee jaa-ay. The night of my youth has passed away; will the day of old age also pass away?
Sed TS sa 83 ofS ud TIS il (792-1, get, sas alts sh
bhavar ga-ay bag baithay aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My dark hairs, like bumble bees, have gone away, and grey hairs, like cranes, have settled upon my head. ||1]||Pause| |
ard Ade Td Ut Il (792-11, get, sas ante Ah kaachai karvai rahai na paanee. Water does not remain in the unbaked clay pot;
JA sem aren AHBSt II (792-11, Fat, sas ats Ah hans chali-aa kaa-i-aa kumlaanee. ||2] | when the soul-swan departs, the body withers away. ||2||
amis afenr AA aes Alara il (792-12, wet, sas ate fh ku-aar kanniaa jaisay karat seegaaraa. I decorate myself like a young virgin;
fa@ sso HS IS FSI |BIl (792-12, Fe, sas aes Ft) ki-o ralee-aa maanai baajh bhataaraa. ||3]|| but how can I enjoy pleasures, without my Husband Lord? ||3]|
aa Cates gat fusat Il (792-12, wet, sas atta Ah) kaag udaavat bhujaa piraanee. My arm is tired, driving away the crows.
afs adte fea ae frost SilQi (792-13, Fat, sas ots Ah
kahi kabeer ih kathaa siraanee. ||4||2|| Says Kabeer, this is the way the story of my life ends. ||4][2]|
Hat adts AS i (792-13) soohee kabeer jee-o. Soohee, Kabeer Jee:
wine frase Bar Sar il (792-13, wet, sas ate Fh amal siraano laykhaa daynaa. Your time of service is at its end, and you will have to give your account.
mire afoa FS AH Bot Il (792-14, wet, sas aes Fh) aa-ay kathin doot jam laynaa. The hard-hearted Messenger of Death has come to take you away.
for 3 ufenm aor aretfemt I (792-14, act, sas acta st) ki-aa tai khati-aa kahaa gavaa-i-aa. What have you earned, and what have you lost?
vod fasta charts gerfemr Wall (792-14, dt, sas ats Ah chalhu sitaab deebaan bulaa-i-aa. ||1]| Come immediately! You are summoned to His Court! ||1]|
3G tage chefs garfenr Il (792-15, wet, sas oats HH) chal darhaal deevaan bulaa-i-aa. Get going! Come just as you are! You have been summoned to His Court.
Tf SIN Vaad a nefsor Al FIC il (792-15, yet, sas ata Hh
har furmaan dargeh kaa aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Order has come from the Court of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
aI nigetA we fags wat i (792-16, At, sas ots Ah
kara-o ardaas gaav kichh baakee.
I pray to the Messenger of Death: please, I still have some outstanding debts to collect in the village.
8 foafa nrg at ast Il (792-16, Het, sas oats HH) lay-o nibayr aaj kee raatee. I will collect them tonight;
fag St Udy SHS ATE Il (792-16, Aet, sas ait Ft) kichh bhee kharach tum"aaraa saara-o. I will also pay you something for your expenses,
Had foes vate TATE iQ (792-17, wet, sas ate Hh subah nivaaj saraa-ay gujaara-o. ||2|| and I will recite my morning prayers on the way. |[2||
Forfa Ww a dfs da war il Us Us AAS UT ASE Il (792-17, wet, sas adie Hh) saaDhsang jaa ka-o har rang laagaa. Dhan Dhan so jan purakh sabhaagaa. Blessed, blessed is the most fortunate servant of the Lord, who is imbued with the Lord's Love, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
SS SS AG AS AGS Il (792-18, Het, sas aete Fh
eet oot jan sadaa suhaylay. Here and there, the humble servants of the Lord are always happy.
HoH uesg AHS MAS ISIl (792-18, Bet, sas ate Fh janam padaarath jeet amolay. ||3]| They win the priceless treasure of this human life. ||3]|
Was Afeor FoH aetfeur | (792-18, Adt, sas atte Fh) jaagat so-i-aa janam gavaa-i-aa. When he is awake, he is sleeping, and so he loses this life.
HS US Afar afer user I (792-19, Adt, sas atte Ff)
maal Dhan jori-aa bha-i-aa paraa-i-aa. The property and wealth he has accumulated passes on to someone else.
ag ade Set SI FS Il (792-19, yet, sas aete Fh kaho kabeer tay-ee nar bhoolay. Says Kabeer, those people are deluded,
uA farts net fet IS WSS (792-19, Act, sas aets Fh) khasam bisaar maatee sang roolay. ||4||3]| who forget their Lord and Master, and roll in the dust. ||4]|3]|
Uat ots Hat oats AS wfss Il (793-1)
soohee kabeer jee-o lalit. Soohee, Kabeer Jee, Lallit:
wa 30 Azo Afs wa wat Hefs ofenr | (793-1, wet, sas adits Ht)
thaakay nain sarvan sun thaakay thaakee sundar kaa-i-aa.
My eyes are exhausted, and my ears are tired of hearing; my beautiful body is exhausted.
Ag wa dt As Hfs wat Sa S AAlA HEM AI (793-1, Bet, sas aes Ht)
jaraa haak dee sabh mat thaakee ayk na thaakas maa-i-aa. ||1] | Driven forward by old age, all my senses are exhausted; only my attachment to Maya is not exhausted. ||1]|
aed 3 famre dteg o ufemr Il (793-2, at, sas acta ft) baavray tai gi-aan beechaar na paa-i-aa. O mad man, you have not obtained spiritual wisdom and meditation.
fase HOH detent 19 TIS Il (793-2, Fat, sas ate Fh) birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have wasted this human life, and lost. ||1]|Pause| |
3a od ysl fSA Adeg Aa Ga we xfs AAT II (793-3, Bat, sas adits fh tab lag paraanee tisai sarayvhu jab lag ghat meh saasaa. O mortal, serve the Lord, as long as the breath of life remains in the body.
Awe We 3a 3 WA afs a BIS [SSA MQM (793-3, Aet, sas ate Ah) jay ghat jaa-ay ta bhaa-o na jaasee har kay charan nivaasaa. ||2| |
And even when your body dies, your love for the Lord shall not die; you shall dwell at the Feet of the Lord. ||2]|
fAR ag Fag are nists ga fsa fumrrr il (793-4, Het, gars aes Ft) jis ka-o sabad basaavai antar chookai tiseh pi-aasaa. When the Word of the Shabad abides deep within, thirst and desire are quenched.
JaH FS vBuls 4s Ho fafe Vs UTA ISI (793-4, At, sas ats Hh)
hukmai boojhai cha-uparh khaylai man jin dhaalay paasaa. ||3]||
When one understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he plays the game of chess with the Lord; throwing the dice, he conquers his own mind. |[3]|
A He WS sHfe mifsas a fe a AT o SA Il (793-5, Het, sas ats A)
jo jan jaan bhajeh abigat ka-o tin kaa kachhoo na naasaa.
Those humble beings, who know the Imperishable Lord and meditate on Him, are not destroyed at all.
ag ade 3 Ao cag 6 Tes ate A ATSfs UAT IISIISII (793-6, Fat, sas aes Ft)
kaho kabeer tay jan kabahu na haareh dhaal jo jaaneh paasaa. ||4||4]|
Says Kabeer, those humble beings who know how to throw these dice, never lose the game of life. ||4]|4]|
Hot wes oats A II (793-6) soohee lalit kabeer jee-o. Soohee, Lalit, Kabeer Jee:
ea ac us foward Hats Ter Il (793-6, Act oles, sas odie Ft)
ayk kot panch sikdaaraa panchay maageh haalaa.
In the one fortress of the body, there are five rulers, and all five demand payment of taxes.
fat ardt 4 fart ot set wt Sa Tare WAU (793-7, wet afss, sas ants Fh jimee naahee mai kisee kee bo-ee aisaa dayn dukhaalaa. ||1|| I have not farmed anyone's land, so such payment is difficult for me to pay. ||1]|
ofa & Bar Hag alfS SA ucerct Il (793-8, Adt oles, sas ates ah har kay logaa mo ka-o neet dasai patvaaree. O people of the Lord, the tax-collector is constantly torturing me!
Gufs gm afs x as ufs yorfenr fSfs Te Shor Cast 19 TIS il (793-8, Fet wiss, sas ate Ht)
oopar bhujaa kar mai gur peh pukaari-aa tin ha-o lee-aa ubaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Raising my arms up, I complained to my Guru, and He has saved me. ||1||Pause| |
o@ ast GA HAS Wels seis SHS B Sat Il (793-9, adt ales, sas aes A)
na-o daadee das munsaf Dhaaveh ra-ee-at basan na dayhee.
The nine tax-assessors and the ten magistrates go out; they do not allow their subjects to live in peace.
Sot ust Hrufs andt ag farerer SAT 2M (793-9, wet wfss, sas ats Ht) doree pooree maapeh naahee baho bistaalaa layhee. ||2|| They do not measure with a full tape, and they take huge amounts in bribes. ||2]|
wdste we fea usy AHTfenr Bis dort om feuret il (793-10, gt afes, sas ate A) bahtar ghar ik purakh samaa-i-aa un dee-aa naam likhaa-ee.
The One Lord is contained in the seventy-two chambers of the body, and He has written off my account.
UeH wf a vesg Afimor wot far o aret Sil (793-10, act afes, sas adit Hf) Dharam raa-ay kaa daftar soDhi-aa baakee rijam na kaa-ee. ||3]|
The records of the Righteous Judge of Dharma have been searched, and I owe absolutely nothing. ||3]|
Aa a@ nfs aet fees AS TH FT Sa Il (793-11, Adt oes, sas acta zh) santaa ka-o mat ko-ee nindahu sant raam hai ayko. Let no one slander the Saints, because the Saints and the Lord are as one.
ag ade HA ag fear wat ore fadat ISNUIl (793-11, Act oles, sas ate Ft) kaho kabeer mai so gur paa-i-aa jaa kaa naa-o bibayko. ||4||5|| Says Kabeer, I have found that Guru, whose Name is Clear Understanding. ||4]|5]|
va Ast wet At afeerA AIG at (793-13) raag soohee banee saree ravidaas jee-o kee Raag Soohee, The Word Of Sree Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsas urrfe il (793-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ag at ATS Aas AS I (793-14, dt, sas afeerA a) sah kee saar suhaagan jaanai. The happy soul-bride knows the worth of her Husband Lord.
3fa nifere AY debe HS I (793-14, At, sas afeerA fh taj abhimaan sukh ralee-aa maanai. Renouncing pride, she enjoys peace and pleasure.
3o HO RE 6 Hise TE Il (793-14, at, sas fee HH) tan man day-ay na antar raakhai. She surrenders her body and mind to Him, and does not remain separate from Him.
mee aft 6 AS MSH AU (793-14, Adt, sas afeerA HM) avraa daykh na sunai abhaakhai. ||1]| She does not see or hear, or speak to another. ||1||
Aas AS ute usret I (793-15, wet, sas afeera ah so kat jaanai peer paraa-ee. How can anyone know the pain of another,
W a nists vse o ust NU TIS Il (793-15, wat, sas afeeA Fh) jaa kai antar darad na paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. if there is no compassion and sympathy within? ||1]||Pause] |
out coats ef us det il (793-15, get, sas afer Ah) dukhee duhaagan du-ay pakh heenee. The discarded bride is miserable, and loses both worlds;
fafs ara fadata sats o atet il (793-16, act, sas sfeem Hf)
jin naah nirantar bhagat na keenee. she does not worship her Husband Lord.
UT ABS a UT TIT ll (793-16, wet, sas afeea FH) pur salaat kaa panth duhaylaa. The bridge over the fire of hell is difficult and treacherous.
Afal o ATat wea feaer QI (793-16, adt, sas sfeen Hf) sang na saathee gavan ikaylaa. ||2|| No one will accompany you there; you will have to go all alone. ||2||
edb esede eafe wrfeur i (793-17, act, sas fees ah) dukhee-aa daradvand dar aa-i-aa. Suffering in pain, I have come to Your Door, O Compassionate Lord.
wags fumrr aware & urfenr It (793-17, at, sas sheen Ft) bahut pi-aas jabaab na paa-i-aa. I am so thirsty for You, but You do not answer me.
afa sfeem Aafe ys Sct ll (793-18, yet, sas sheen Ah) kahi ravidaas saran parabh tayree. Says Ravi Daas, I seek Your Sanctuary, God;
fA@ wWog f36 ag afs Agt WSN (793-18, Aet, sas afer Ah ji-o jaanhu ti-o kar gat mayree. ||3]|1|| as You know me, so will You save me. ||3]||1]|
Hot Il (793-18) soohee. Soohee:
A feo urefa A fee Act Il (793-18, adt, sas ofa Fh) jo din aavahi so din jaahee. That day which comes, that day shall go.
ade IT JIG fag adt il (793-19, yet, sas sheen Fh) karnaa kooch rahan thir naahee. You must march on; nothing remains stable.
Hdl Bes FI TH St BHT Il (793-19, wet, sas afeera sh sang chalat hai ham bhee chalnaa. Our companions are leaving, and we must leave as well.
vfs azo fis Gufs Heat NU (793-19, Hat, sas sfeeTA At) door gavan sir oopar marnaa. ||1|| We must go far away. Death is hovering over our heads. ||1]|
UST o¢8
for 3 Afeor ara fenrar il (794-1, yet, sas afew Ht) ki-aa too so-i-aa jaag i-aanaa. Why are you asleep? Wake up, you ignorant foo!!
3 Hee afar Ag afe AST NU TIS Il (794-1, wet, sas afeerA Hh tai jeevan jag sach kar jaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You believe that your life in the world is true. ||1]|Pause] |
fafs HG dior A faHe nigereS Il (794-1, Het, sas afer Fh jin jee-o dee-aa so rijak ambraavai. The One who gave you life shall also provide you with nourishment.
AS we sists TS Bares Il (794-2, At, sas sheen Fh) sabh ghat bheetar haat chalaavai. In each and every heart, He runs His shop.
afs sfeat afs A Ha I (794-2, Aet, sas sfeem Fh kar bandigee chhaad mai mayraa. Meditate on the Lord, and renounce your egotism and self-conceit.
fase ony ANMfa AST NU (794-2, wet, sas afeeA Ht) hirdai naam sam"aar savayraa. ||2]| Within your heart, contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord, sometime. ||2]|
HoH fas Us & ASS Il (794-3, Adt, sas afeera ah janam siraano panth na savaaraa. Your life has passed away, but you have not arranged your path.
Ars udt ea fer viftmre | (794-3, act, sas afeerm FH) saa‘jh paree dah dis anDhi-aaraa. Evening has set in, and soon there will be darkness on all sides.
afa sfeen foes feed i (794-3, yet, sas ofeem Ft) kahi ravidaas nidaan divaanay. Says Ravi Daas, O ignorant mad-man,
San Sat Tah SH US MBI (794-4, get, sas seen Ah chaytas naahee dunee-aa fan khaanay. ||3||2]| don't you realize, that this world is the house of death?! ||3]|2||
Hot Il (794-4) soohee. Soohee:
Ge Hea AM TAT I (794-4, Fat, sas afew At) oochay mandar saal raso-ee. You may have lofty mansions, halls and kitchens.
ea wot Sfs Js o Tet WAU (794-5, wet, sas steer Fh ayk gharee fun rahan na ho-ee. ||1|| But you cannot stay in them, even for an instant, after death. ||1]|
fey 36 MAT AA uA at aret Il (794-5, aet, sas afer Hh ih tan aisaa jaisay ghaas kee taatee. This body is like a house of straw.
Af aes wry ots afes Het ail TIS tl (794-5, wet, sas sfeea FH) jal ga-i-o ghaas ral ga-i-o maatee. ||1]| rahaa-o. When it is burnt, it mixes with dust. ||1]||Pause] |
oet du ada Ave i Gfe St rat aS ASS MQM (794-6, Adt, sas sfeen HH) bhaa-ee banDh kutamb sahayraa. o-ay bhee laagay kaadh savayraa. ||2|| Even relatives, family and friends begin to say, "Take his body out, immediately!"| | 2] |
wg at ofa Sats 3G Ball il (794-6, At, sas afeevA Fh) ghar kee naar ureh tan laagee. And the wife of his house, who was so attached to his body and heart,
Cu 38 33 33 afe Sait NSN (794-7, et, sas see Fh uh ta-o bhoot bhoot kar bhaagee. ||3]| runs away, crying out, "Ghost! Ghost!"||3]|
af seen AS Ae Slenr il (794-7, wet, sas seen Ft) kahi ravidaas sabhai jag looti-aa. Says Ravi Daas, the whole world has been plundered,
JH 38 Sa TH ats sfeur ISISI (794-7, Fat, sas sfeerH Fh)
ham ta-o ayk raam kahi chhooti-aa. ||4||3]| but I have escaped, chanting the Name of the One Lord. ||4||3]|
qe Afsara yATfe il (794-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta Ast wat Aa sdte at at il (794-10) raag soohee banee saykh fareed jee kee. Raag Soohee, The Word Of Shaykh Fareed Jee:
fu sfu afs of me Has Il (794-10, aet, Fe ede Fh tap tap luhi luhi haath marora-o. Burning and burning, writhing in pain, I wring my hands.
wets det A Ag BI Il (794-10, get, Fe |edte Hh baaval ho-ee so saho lora-o. I have gone insane, seeking my Husband Lord.
3 Afo Ho Hfs ahr SA Il (794-11, Het, Fe |dte sh tai seh man meh kee-aa ros. O my Husband Lord, You are angry with me in Your Mind.
HS Meade AT SS SA UU (794-11, Fat, Fe |edte Fh mujh avgan sah naahee dos. ||1|| The fault is with me, and not with my Husband Lord. ||1]|
3 Afga at HATS © At I (794-11, Bet, Fe ede A) tai saahib kee mai saar na jaanee. O my Lord and Master, I do not know Your excellence and worth.
mag dfs ue ussrat Al TIS Il (794-11, wet, er |dte A) joban kho-ay paachhai pachhutaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Having wasted my youth, now I come to regret and repent. ||1||Pause]|
ae tee Zs fas TS HS Il (794-12, wet, Fu edhe Fh) kaalee ko-il too kit gun kaalee. O black bird, what qualities have made you black?
nud UIsH & 3G faad At Il (794-12, act, mer die HH) apnay pareetam kay ha-o birhai jaalee. "I have been burnt by separation from my Beloved."
fusts fage asfo HY Ure Il (794-13, Bet, Fe |dte Fh) pireh bihoon kateh sukh paa-ay. Without her Husband Lord, how can the soul-bride ever find peace?
WT ofe furs St ys fee NM (794-13, wet, Fe ste Ft) jaa ho-ay kirpaal taa parabhoo milaa-ay. ||2|| When He becomes merciful, then God unites us with Himself. ||2] |
fens udt Ho feast i (794-13, Het, Fe ste Fh) viDhan khoohee munDh ikaylee. The lonely soul-bride suffers in the pit of the world.
oO ot Arat ot & Fat il (794-14, wet, Fe |dte sh naa ko saathee naa ko baylee. She has no companions, and no friends.
afs fasur yfs AaAfar Het | (794-14, wet, Au edt] Hh) kar kirpaa parabh saaDhsang maylee. In His Mercy, God has united me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
w fefs tut at Hat nies Fat MBI (794-14, Aet, Au |dte Ah) jaa fir daykhaa taa mayraa alhu baylee. ||3]| And when I look again, then I find God as my Helper. ||3]|
Se THs ust Sstet il (794-15, wet, Au |dte Ah) vaat hamaaree kharee udeenee. The path upon which I must walk is very depressing.
dfomg fat aga furetet I (794-15, at, Fe este HH) khanni-ahu tikhee bahut pi-eenee. It is sharper than a two-edged sword, and very narrow.
CA Gufs oF Hea HI Il (794-15, Hat, Ae ste FA) us oopar hai maarag mayraa. That is where my path lies.
AY adter ug AH AST UIA (794-16, Adt, Fe edte Fh saykh fareedaa panth sam"aar savayraa. ||4]|1]| O Shaykh Fareed, think of that path early on. ||4[|1]|
Hot BSs Il (794-16) soohee lalit. Soohee, Lalit:
aa aft 3 AfaS due at Sar il (794-16, Adt wfss, Ae |dte A) bayrhaa banDh na saki-o banDhan kee vaylaa. You were not able to make yourself a raft when you should have.
ofe Aves Fa SSS Sa SIS TIT NA (794-17, wet sles, Au edie sh bhar sarvar jab oochhlai tab taran duhaylaa. ||1|| When the ocean is churning and over-flowing, then it is very difficult to cross over it.
[21
vg 6 ofe ass fs AH Sar UU TIS Il (794-17, get ofes, Fu |dte HH) hath na laa-ay kasumbh-rhai jal jaasee dholaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Do not touch the safflower with your hands; its color will fade away, my dear. ||1]|Pause] |
fea nmits uset Ad AS Fr ll (794-18, wet wfss, Me |dte Ht) ik aapeen"ai patlee sah kayray bolaa. First, the bride herself is weak, and then, her Husband Lord's Order is hard to bear.
em wat 6 nireet fafa df o He IQ (794-18, Adt wfes, Fe edte sh duDhaa thanee na aavee fir ho-ay na maylaa. ||2|| Milk does not return to the breast; it will not be collected again. ||2] |
Ad Sdte AVS AG Meret Il (794-19, get oles, Ae |dte Hh) kahai fareed sahayleeho saho alaa-aysee. Says Fareed, O my companions, when our Husband Lord calls,
JH VGH SHE vifs Sq Sat SAT USBI (794-19, Ft afes, Fe sdte HA) hans chalsee dummnaa ah tan dhayree theesee. ||3]|2]| the soul departs, sad at heart, and this body returns to dust. ||3]|2]|
Uar oxy qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nieve Has mmol AS aT YATE I (795-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ta frases HIS 9 Bue we 9 Il (795-3) raag bilaaval mehlaa 1 cha-upday ghar 1. Raag Bilaaval, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
3 HOSS AT IC Hier Sat aew Faret Il (795-4, fares, He 1) too sultaan kahaa ha-o mee-aa tayree kavan vadaa-ee. You are the Emperor, and I call You a chief - how does this add to Your greatness?
Ag tf A ae AMM H Hse ATE 3 AT AI (795-4, ferorew, HI 1)
jo too deh so kahaa su-aamee mai moorakh kahan na jaa-ee. ||1||
As You permit me, I praise You, O Lord and Master; I am ignorant, and I cannot chant Your Praises. ||1||
3d De Wet Sfo Tse Il (795-5, feeres, ue 1) tayray gun gaavaa deh bujhaa-ee. Please bless me with such understanding, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises.
AA Ae Hfo sas sre AU TIT Il (795-5, faores, ne 1) jaisay sach meh raha-o rajaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. May I dwell in Truth, according to Your Will. ||1]|Pause| |
A fas dur ns fas 33 3 Sct AS Mine II (795-5, frares, He 1) jo kichh ho-aa sabh kichh tujh tay tayree sabh asnaa-ee. Whatever has happened, has all come from You. You are All-knowing.
3a nig o Wet He Afos H vigs fant vsaet MQM (795-6, faores, 2 1) tayraa ant na jaanaa mayray saahib mai anDhulay ki-aa chaturaa-ee. ||2]|
Your limits cannot be known, O my Lord and Master; I am blind - what wisdom do I have? ||2||
fomr 3G ae ad afa Sur H mag 6 Aaa AT Il (795-6, fuares, He 1)
ki-aa ha-o kathee kathay kath daykhaa mai akath na kathnaa jaa-ee.
What should I say? While talking, I talk of seeing, but I cannot describe the indescribable.
A 30 we Het omer faq Sct fret 1311 (795-7, foes, v2 1) jo tuDh bhaavai so-ee aakhaa til tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||3] | As it pleases Your Will, I speak; it is just the tiniest bit of Your greatness. ||3]|
SS Fad IS sara Bar feR 3a Tet Il (795-7, fawres, He 1) aytay kookar ha-o baygaanaa bha-ukaa is tan taa-ee. Among so many dogs, I am an outcast; I bark for my body's belly.
sats dle soa A dfear St UAH oe & ATE SIAM (795-8, faeres, He 1)
bhagat heen naanak jay ho-igaa taa khasmai naa-o na jaa-ee. ||4||1]|
Without devotional worship, O Nanak, even so, still, my Master's Name does not leave me. ||4][1]]
faarTSs HIS A Il (795-9) bilaaval mehlaa 1. Bilaawal, First Mehl:
Ho Hed 36 2A ase” we dt stefa wet Il (795-9, fares, 2 1)
man mandar tan vays kalandar ghat hee tirath naavaa.
My mind is the temple, and my body is the simple cloth of the humble seeker; deep within my heart, I bathe at the sacred shrine.
ea Age AS ute SAS 9 Pols Aol o mS IAI (795-9, fares, He 1)
ayk sabad mayrai paraan basat hai baahurh janam na aavaa. ||1]|
The One Word of the Shabad abides within my mind; I shall not come to be born again. ||1]|
Ho Stour efenre ASt HSt HST II (795-10, faeres, He 1)
man bayDhi-aa da-i-aal saytee mayree maa-ee. My mind is pierced through by the Merciful Lord, O my mother!
ae We ute ustet Il (795-10, frees, He 1) ka-un jaanai peer paraa-ee. Who can know the pain of another?
oH ost fos uset A TIS Il (795-11, frees, ue 1)
ham naahee chint paraa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I think of none other than the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
WH Midied IBY MUTE fest AIT THT Il (795-11, fares, He 1) agam agochar alakh apaaraa chintaa karahu hamaaree. O Lord, inaccessible, unfathomable, invisible and infinite: please, take care of me!
nfs af Hdbafs sfoufs ote wife wife af syst QI (795-12, frees, ne 1)
jal thal mahee-al bharipur leenaa ghat ghat jot tum"aaree. ||2||
In the water, on the land and in sky, You are totally pervading. Your Light is in each and every heart. ||2||
fry ufs AS sfo surdt Hfes ever ST Il (795-12, frorew, He 1)
sikh mat sabh buDh tum"aaree mandir chhaavaa tayray.
All teachings, instructions and understandings are Yours; the mansions and sanctuaries are Yours as well.
33 fag nies 3 We He Whos Te Wet fos 3g INI (795-13, frares, He 1)
tujh bin avar na jaanaa mayray saahibaa gun gaavaa nit tayray. ||3]|
Without You, I know no other, O my Lord and Master; I continually sing Your Glorious Praises. ||3]|
Aba #3 Afs Hefe SHS Asa FFs JO WA I (795-13, faarew, He 1)
jee-a jant sabh saran tum"aaree sarab chint tuDh paasay.
All beings and creatures seek the Protection of Your Sanctuary; all thought of their care rests with You.
A 30 Se Het var fea aaa at migeTA NBII (795-14, faares, He 1) jo tuDh bhaavai so-ee changa ik naanak kee ardaasay. ||4||2|| That which pleases Your Will is good; this alone is Nanak's prayer. ||4]|2||
fares HIS 4 Il (795-14) bilaaval mehlaa 1. Bilaawal, First Mehl:
Md Hae wm StAT® Il (795-15, frees, He 1) aapay sabad aapay neesaan. He Himself is the Word of the Shabad, and He Himself is the Insignia.
MY ASST MM ATA Il (795-15, fess, He 1) aapay surtaa aapay jaan. He Himself is the Listener, and He Himself is the Knower.
nm ats afs SY STS Il (795-15, frees, v2 1) aapay kar kar vaykhai taan. He Himself created the creation, and He Himself beholds His almighty power.
JUST OH UTES INU (795-15, frares, He 1) too daataa naam parvaan. ||1]| You are the Great Giver; Your Name alone is approved. ||1]||
Us ove
MAT oH fade FE Il (796-1, frees, He 1) aisaa naam niranjan day-o. Such is the Name of the Immaculate, Divine Lord.
IS Aha J vised msS UU! TIS I (796-1, fares, He 1) ha-o jaachik too alakh abhay-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am just a beggar; You are invisible and unknowable. ||1||Pause| |
Hfenr Ho deat ots i Sst ante amHfenrfs i (796-1, frees, ws 1) maa-i-aa moh Dharkatee naar. bhoo“dee kaaman kaamani-aar. Love of Maya is like a cursed woman, ugly, dirty and promiscuous.
THA Ju so fea whe Il (796-2, faores, He 1) raaj roop jhoothaa din chaar. Power and beauty are false, and last for only a few days.
oH fs wee niftmrfa 21 (796-2, frees, He 1) naam milai chaanan anDhi-aar. ||2| | But when one is blessed with the Naam, the darkness within is illuminated. ||2||
oft Sat AOAT odt AfE I (796-3, fares, He 1) chakh chhodee sahsaa nahee ko-ay. I tasted Maya and renounced it, and now, I have no doubts.
ay fen ents o df& Il (796-3, fares, He 1) baap disai vayjaat na ho-ay. One whose father is known, cannot be illegitimate.
Sa aC ardt 38 ae I (796-3, fuares, He 1) aykay ka-o naahee bha-o ko-ay. One who belongs to the One Lord, has no fear.
AIS Ad ATS ALE ISI (796-3, fares, He 1) kartaa karay karaavai so-ay. ||3]| The Creator acts, and causes all to act. ||3]|
Rafe HE He HO 3 HMI Il (796-4, faores, He 1) sabad mu-ay man man tay maari-aa. One who dies in the Word of the Shabad conquers his mind, through his mind.
ofa TI HS ATS Ufa Il (796-4, fawres, He 1) thaak rahay man saachai Dhaari-aa. Keeping his mind restrained, he enshrines the True Lord within his heart.
MEI SAS TT aS Slant Il (796-4, fares, v3 1) avar na soojhai gur ka-o vaari-aa. He does not know any other, and he is a sacrifice to the Guru.
Sod oth gs fSeHsttant ISIS (796-5, faares, He 1)
naanak naam ratay nistaari-aa. ||4||3]| O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, he is emancipated. ||4||3]|
fas HIS Y Il (796-5) bilaaval mehlaa 1. Bilaaval, First Mehl:
Td Fat HS ATH fais i (796-5, fares, ue 1) gur bachnee man sahj Dhi-aanay. Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, the mind intuitively meditates on the Lord.
dfs & dfat TS HS HTS Il (796-6, faares, He 1) har kai rang rataa man maanay. Imbued with the Lord's Love, the mind is satisfied.
HOY Sat 3B AVIS Il (796-6, faares, He 1) manmukh bharam bhulay ba-uraanay. The insane, self-willed manmukhs wander around, deluded by doubt.
ofs fas fa sdb aa Aafe ues Ill (796-6, frees, He 1)
har bin ki-o rahee-ai gur sabad pachhaanay. ||1]|
Without the Lord, how can anyone survive? Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is realized. ||1]|
fag Zane aA HSS Hat HET II (796-7, fuses, He 1) bin darsan kaisay jeeva-o mayree maa-ee. Without the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, how can I live, O my mother?
ofs fag Ahora ofa 3 Aa fag Afsafs gs gsret A TIS I (796-7, frees, we 1) har bin jee-araa reh na sakai khin satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord, my soul cannot survive, even for an instant; the True Guru has helped me understand this. ||1]]Pause] |
na us fend JB Hee east Il (796-8, foes, He 1) mayraa parabh bisrai ha-o mara-o dukhaalee. Forgetting my God, I die in pain.
ATA forstA AUG nus dfs sat Il (796-8, frares, He 1) Saas giraas japa-o apunay har bhaalee. With each breath and morsel of food, I meditate on my Lord, and seek Him.
Re Saale dfs oH feast il (796-9, fuses, ue 1) sad bairaagan har naam nihaalee. I remain always detached, but I am enraptured with the Lord's Name.
ma AS Tf Ts Sst MMi (796-9, frares, He 1) ab jaanay gurmukh har naalee. ||2]| Now, as Gurmukh, I know that the Lord is always with me. ||2]|
Wag Aa AIA TT STE Il (796-9, fuerew, ve 1) akath kathaa kahee-ai gur bhaa-ay. The Unspoken Speech is spoken, by the Will of the Guru.
Us Ma mates Sf feat i (796-10, fess, He 1) parabh agam agochar day-ay dikhaa-ay. He shows us that God is unapproachable and unfathomable.
fag ad adat for ara SHAE Il (796-10, fasres, He 1) bin gur karnee ki-aa kaar kamaa-ay. Without the Guru, what lifestyle could we practice, and what work could we do?
ICH Afe 3s Ts ASfe ANTE ISI (796-10, fares, He 1)
ha-umai mayt chalai gur sabad samaa-ay. ||3]|
Eradicating egotism, and walking in harmony with the Guru's Will, I am absorbed in the Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
HouY fees det aH Il (796-11, frees, He 1) manmukh vichhurhai khotee raas. The self-willed manmukhs are separated from the Lord, gathering false wealth.
aonte of fixes Arathi (796-11, fares, He 1) gurmukh naam milai saabaas. The Gurmukhs are celebrated with the glory of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ofa faxsur urdt emAfS BTA Il (796-11, fase, He 1)
har kirpaa Dhaaree daasan daas. The Lord has showered His Mercy upon me, and made me the slave of His slaves.
HS SOA Tid SH US IH ISISII (796-12, faares, He 1)
jan naanak har naam Dhan raas. ||4||4]| The Name of the Lord is the wealth and capital of servant Nanak. ||4||4]|
fase HIS 3 Wed (796-13) bilaaval mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Bilaaval, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars YATE Il (796-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fon fon ufemr foo foo Afeor foo foo arus nifer garfemr I (796-14, fares, He 3) Dharig Dharig khaa-i-aa Dharig Dharig so-i-aa Dharig Dharig kaaparh ang charhaa-i- aa.
Cursed, cursed is the food; cursed, cursed is the sleep; cursed, cursed are the clothes worn on the body.
fon Adts aca Afos fA@ fas of= wAN 3 Urfemr I (796-14, fares, He 3)
Dharig sareer kutamb sahit si-o jit hun khasam na paa-i-aa.
Cursed is the body, along with family and friends, when one does not find his Lord and Master in this life.
u@at ezot fefs wa o ure nifoer HoH Tetfenr Ill (796-15, frees, He 3)
pa-orhee chhurhkee fir haath na aavai ahilaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1]|
He misses the step of the ladder, and this opportunity will not come into his hands again; his life is wasted, uselessly. ||1]|
un 3a@ 9 tet foe wale fats oft & voe fers Il (796-16, frees, 12 3)
doojaa bhaa-o na day-ee liv laagan jin har kay charan visaaray.
The love of duality does not allow him to lovingly focus his attention on the Lord; he forgets the Feet of the Lord.
AIMS WS AS Aza 3d fa a 3 su HSS UU TS Il (796-16, fares, v3 3)
jagjeevan daataa jan sayvak tayray tin kay tai dookh nivaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Life of the World, O Great Giver, you eradicate the sorrows of your humble servants. ||1]|Pause| |
3 feng efeurufs as fomr Sf AZ fees Il (796-17, fares, He 3) too da-i-aal da-i-aapat daataa ki-aa ayhi jant vichaaray. You are Merciful, O Great Giver of Mercy; what are these poor beings?
~
Has 0 Afs 33 3 de mT orf Sees I (796-17, feos, He 3) mukat banDh sabh tujh tay ho-ay aisaa aakh vakhaanay. All are liberated or placed into bondage by You; this is all one can say.
aenfy de A Has Ad HOH Fa fess MQM (796-18, frees, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so mukat kahee-ai manmukh banDh vichaaray. ||2| |
One who becomes Gurmukh is said to be liberated, while the poor self-willed manmukhs are in bondage. ||2||
H AO Has fan Sa foe walt Ae ad als BS Il (796-19, frees, He 3)
so jan mukat jis ayk liv laagee sadaa rahai har naalay.
He alone is liberated, who lovingly focuses his attention on the One Lord, always dwelling with the Lord.
faa of ave afs adt 3 vet Ae wry ASS II (796-19, fuses, H 3) tin kee gahan gat kahee na jaa-ee sachai aap savaaray. His depth and condition cannot be described. The True Lord Himself embellishes him.
Ua oo
3a gore fA HoH adits o Bsets & Us III (797-1, faeres, He 3)
bharam bhulaanay se manmukh kahee-ahi naa urvaar na paaray. |[3]||
Those who wander around, deluded by doubt, are called manmukhs; they are neither on this side, nor on the other side. ||3]|
fA 3 sets ad ASt Ae US Td aT ASE ANTS Il (797-1, frees, He 3)
jis no nadar karay so-ee jan paa-ay gur kaa sabad sam"aalay.
That humble being, who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace obtains Him, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ufa AS Her us FEASTS Il (797-2, faeres, He 3) har jan maa-i-aa maahi nistaaray. In the midst of Maya, the Lord's servant is emancipated.
soa sa de fra HASta oats fs fers ISNA (797-2, faores, He 3)
naanak bhaag hovai jis mastak kaaleh maar bidaaray. ||4]|1]|
O Nanak, one who has such destiny inscribed upon his forehead, conquers and destroys death. ||4]|1]|
fares HIS 3 Il (797-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
mae fx@ Sfemr ate Il (797-3, frees, He 3) atul ki-o toli-aa jaa-ay. How can the unweighable be weighed?
ea df= 3 ASt ute II (797-3, frores, He 3)
doojaa ho-ay ta sojhee paa-ay.
If there is anyone else as great, then he alone could understand the Lord. SA 3 AT Sra AE I (797-4, fares, v3 3)
tis tay doojaa naahee ko-ay. There is no other than Him.
FSA ot atHfS fax SE WAU (797-4, frees, 3 3) tis dee keemat kikoo ho-ay. ||1]| How can His value be estimated? || 1] |
ad uarte ZA yfs mete il (797-4, faeres, He 3) gur parsaad vasai man aa-ay. By Guru's Grace, He comes to dwell in the mind.
a a we vfso we na TIS Il (797-5, fore, ne 3) taa ko jaanai dubiDhaa jaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. One comes to know Him, when duality departs. ||1]||Pause] |
mf Aas AASST WE Il (797-5, fasres, vs 3) aap Saraaf kasvatee laa-ay. He Himself is the Assayer, applying the touch-stone to test it.
mmy use nitty Bore Il (797-5, faares, H2 3) aapay parkhay aap chalaa-ay. He Himself analyzes the coin, and He Himself approves it as currency.
min 3B UT ae il (797-5, fares, He 3) aapay tolay pooraa ho-ay. He Himself weights it perfectly.
mim ATS Sot ALE 2K (797-6, frees, He 3) aapay jaanai ayko so-ay. ||2|| He alone knows; He is the One and Only Lord. ||2]|
Hfenr at gy Ag fA S Sf Il (797-6, fares, v2 3) maa-i-aa kaa roop sabh tis tay ho-ay. All the forms of Maya emanate from Him.
fa 3 HS A fens df Il (797-6, frees, He 3) jis no maylay so nirmal ho-ay. He alone becomes pure and immaculate, who is united with the Lord.
fan 6 oe od fon urfe I (797-7, faares, 2 3) jis no laa-ay lagai tis aa-ay. He alone is attached, whom the Lord attaches.
Ag Ag fee 3° Afs AWTS ISI (797-7, fares, He 3) sabh sach dikhaalay taa sach samaa-ay. ||3]| All Truth is revealed to him, and then, he merges in the True Lord. ||3]|
nmt fee oS FT MMT Il (797-7, faeres, 2 3)
aapay liv Dhaat hai aapay.
He Himself leads the mortals to focus on Him, and He Himself causes them to chase after Maya.
nif gers nim ART Il (797-8, fawres, He 3) aap bujhaa-ay aapay jaapay. He Himself imparts understanding, and He reveals Himself.
nm Afsagd ASE J MM Il (797-8, frees, He 3) aapay satgur sabad hai aapay. He Himself is the True Guru, and He Himself is the Word of the Shabad.
SSA Mite Hare MM |SIQIl (797-8, fawres, He 3) naanak aakh sunaa-ay aapay. ||4||2|| O Nanak, He Himself speaks and teaches. ||4]|2||
faa'Ss HIS 3 Il (797-9) bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
AWfoa 3 Aza AS Afoe 3 fot & AT FI Il (797-9, fares, He 3)
saahib tay sayvak sayv saahib tay ki-aa ko kahai bahaanaa.
My Lord and Master has made me His servant, and blessed me with His service; how can anyone argue about this?
mA fea Sa ae afoot 3 AS Hfs Sa ANAT IAI (797-9, fares, He 3) aisaa ik tayraa khayl bani-aa hai sabh meh ayk samaanaa. ||1]|| Such is Your play, One and Only Lord; You are the One, contained among all. ||1||
Afsafs uss dfs ofh Ayo Il faa AGH Je A Afsag ue nafes oe AoA fama 149i TI Il (797-10, fares, He 3)
satgur parchai har naam samaanaa. jis karam hovai so satgur paa-ay an-din laagai sahj Dhi-aanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When the True Guru is pleased and appeased, one is absorbed in the Lord's Name. One who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy, finds the True Guru; night and day, he automatically remains focused on the Lord's meditation. ||1]|Pause| |
for oat Sct Het ad for ot ad wifsHrar il (797-11, fuses, 2 3) ki-aa ko-ee tayree sayvaa karay ki-aa ko karay abhimaanaa. How can I serve You? How can I be proud of this?
ma uuat afs fists 3 Femi sa wet aa fear sfiparar QM (797-12, faeres, v2 3) jab apunee jot khincheh too su-aamee tab ko-ee kara-o dikhaa vakhi-aanaa. ||2]| When You withdraw Your Light, O Lord and Master, then who can speak and teach?
21 |
nM TT Bar FT nm wm gat fears il (797-12, fears, ne 3)
aapay gur chaylaa hai aapay aapay gunee niDhaanaa.
You Yourself are the Guru, and You Yourself are the chaylaa, the humble disciple; You Yourself are the treasure of virtue.
faG urfu sore foe cet ws fAG afe srs SaSTOT ISI (797-13, fase, He 3) ji-o aap chalaa-ay tivai ko-ee chaalai ji-o har bhaavai bhagvaanaa. ||3]||
As You cause us to move, so do we move, according to the Pleasure of Your Will, O Lord God. ||3]|
RIS HSA JAS Ae ACS WE SI AH Il (797-13, foes, ve 3) kahat naanak too saachaa saahib ka-un jaanai tayray kaamaa”. Says Nanak, You are the True Lord and Master; who can know Your actions?
feao wg nfs & afanret fefa sath sefo mifsHrer ISiSil (797-14, faeres, He 3)
iknaa ghar meh day vadi-aa-ee ik bharam bhaveh abhimaanaa. ||4||3]| Some are blessed with glory in their own homes, while others wander in doubt and pride. ||4]|3]|
fase HIS 3 Il (797-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
us ae water us Sug SAX AHS Il (797-15, fares, He 3)
pooraa thaat banaa-i-aa poorai vaykhhu ayk samaanaa.
The perfect Lord has fashioned the Perfect Creation. Behold the Lord pervading everywhere.
fem uals nfo AS oH at Sfsuret HS A OTT THAT NA (797-15, frees, He 3)
is parpanch meh saachay naam kee vadi-aa-ee mat ko Dharahu gumaanaa. ||1]||
In this play of the world, is the glorious greatness of the True Name. No one should take pride in himself. ||1]|
Afsas ot fan 6 HfS ure A Afsag Hf AHTAT Il (797-16, frees, He 3)
satgur kee jis no mat aavai so satgur maahi samaanaa.
One who accepts the wisdom of the True Guru's Teachings, is absorbed into the True Guru.
fea wat a dior we fon wists ge afs oor NA TIS I (797-17, fares, v2 3)
ih banee jo jee-ahu jaanai tis antar ravai har naamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's Name abides deep within the nucleus of one who realizes the Bani of the Guru's Word within his soul. ||1]|Pause| |
vd Ha a dfs feds oa Hou S Sa feast il (797-17, fuses, v2 3)
chahu jugaa kaa hun nibayrhaa nar manukhaa no ayk niDhaanaa.
Now, this is the essence of the teachings of the four ages: for the human race, the Name of the One Lord is the greatest treasure.
AS AnH Stee Cor nar at can 3 ate ufo atefs afe ant III (797-18, frees, He 3) jat sanjam tirath onaa jugaa kaa Dharam hai kal meh keerat har naamaa. ||2|| Celibacy, self-discipline and pilgrimages were the essence of Dharma in those past ages; but in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Praise of the Lord's Name is the essence of Dharma. ||2]|
afar afar mimi mma gen od Afa Sug Fe ys Il (797-19, frees, ve 3)
jug jug aapo aapnaa Dharam hai soDh daykhhu bayd puraanaa.
Each and every age has its own essence of Dharma; study the Vedas and the Puraanas, and see this as true.
aoufe frat fomrfeur ofe afe afar 3 ud useTaT ISI (797-19, fuses, 12 3)
gurmukh jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa har har jag tay pooray parvaanaa. ||3]|| They are Gurmukh, who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; in this world, they are perfect and approved. ||3]||
UST ote
RIS Sse Ae fs ys we ya nfS mifsurar il (798-1, frees, we 3) kahat naanak sachay si-o pareet laa-ay chookai man abhimaanaa. Says Nanak, loving the True Lord, the mind's egotism and self-conceit is eradicated.
ads Hes AS AY uets Hos UTD fears IISISIl (798-1, fares, He 3)
kahat sunat sabhay sukh paavahi maanat paahi niDhaanaa. ||4||4||
Those who speak and listen to the Lord's Name, all find peace. Those who believe in it, obtain the supreme treasure. ||4]|4] |
faa'Ss HIS 3 Il (798-2) bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
aonfa uifs fan S md we Il (798-2, frees, He 3) gurmukh pareet jis no aapay laa-ay. The Lord Himself attaches the Gurmukh to His Love;
faz ufs faaree aa Aafe ATES Il (798-3, fares, He 3)
tit ghar bilaaval gur sabad suhaa-ay.
joyful melodies permeate his home, and he is embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hae ost arefa wire Il (798-3, fares, ne 3) mangal naaree gaavahi aa-ay. The women come and sing the songs of joy.
firs UfSH Ae AY UTS IAI (798-3, fares, He 3) mil pareetam sadaa sukh paa-ay. ||1|| Meeting with their Beloved, lasting peace is obtained. ||1]||
J@ fa sfsosd fre ofa ifs SAS I (798-4, frees, He 3) ha-o tin balihaarai jin" har man vasaa-ay. I am a Sacrifice to those, whose minds are filled with the Lord.
dfs Ae AG fiifeor AY uha fs Te awe AofA ATS UU! TIC Il (798-4, foes, ne 3) har jan ka-o mili-aa sukh paa-ee-ai har gun gaavai sahj subhaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting with the humble servant of the Lord, peace is obtained, and one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
~
Het dfat as 3d WES Il (798-5, frares, v2 3) sadaa rang raatay tayrai chaa-ay. They are always imbued with Your Joyful Love;
dfs MC wrfu SA fs mie I (798-5, frees, He 3) har jee-o aap vasai man aa-ay. O Dear Lord, You Yourself come to dwell in their minds.
MM} Ast AS dt ure I (798-5, fuses, He 3) aapay sobhaa sad hee paa-ay. They obtain eternal glory.
Tanfe AS Afs feos QI (798-6, farses, He 3) gurmukh maylai may! milaa-ay. ||2| | The Gurmukhs are united in the Lord's Union. ||2]||
Tanta aS Ate Fare | (798-6, fares, He 3) gurmukh raatay sabad rangaa-ay. The Gurmukhs are imbued with the love of the Word of the Shabad.
fon ufs aA afs Te WES Il (798-6, fares, ue 3) nij ghar vaasaa har gun gaa-ay. They abide in the home of their own being, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Sa BSS ols SH se Il (798-7, fares, ve 3) rang chaloolai har ras bhaa-ay. They are dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love; they look so beautiful.
feg da ae 3 Gad ATS AS NBII (798-7, frases, He 3) ih rang kaday na utrai saach samaa-ay. ||3]|| This dye never fades away; they are absorbed in the True Lord. ||3]|
nists Hae fifenr nifemire nite Il (798-7, frees, He 3) antar sabad miti-aa agi-aan anDhayraa. The Shabad deep within the nucleus of the self dispels the darkness of ignorance.
Afsasd farming fife utSsH Ha Il (798-8, fares, ve 3) satgur gi-aan mili-aa pareetam mayraa. Meeting with my Friend, the True Guru, I have obtained spiritual wisdom.
a Afs ws fso safe 5 Sa Il (798-8, fueres, He 3)
jo sach raatay tin bahurh na fayraa.
Those who are attuned to the True Lord, do not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again.
aoa oH fess us TT Ha INU (798-8, frees, He 3) naanak naam drirh-aa-ay pooraa gur mayraa. ||4||5||
O Nanak, my Perfect Guru implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, deep within. [4115] |
fares HIS 3 Il (798-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
ud Ts 3 Sfsnret uret il (798-9, frares, 12 3) pooray gur tay vadi-aa-ee paa-ee. From the Perfect Guru, I have obtained glorious greatness.
mfss on efhor nfs niet Il (798-9, faores, He 3)
achint naam vasi-aa man aa-ee. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, has spontaneously come to abide in my mind.
ICH Hfeur Aafe Fert II (798-10, frees, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa sabad jalaa-ee. Through the Word of the Shabad, I have burnt away egotism and Maya.
ofa AS Td S AST ret IAI (798-10, fares, He 3) dar saachai gur tay sobhaa paa-ee. ||1]| Through the Guru, I have obtained honor in the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
Hata ATE H nies O AH Il (798-10, foes, He 3) jagdees sayva-o mai avar na kaajaa. I serve the Lord of the Universe; I have no other work to do.
Woes Moe Jz Hfe AS TaHfe Hae Sat an foetaT AN TIS Il (798-11, fares, He 3) an-din anad hovai man mayrai gurmukh maaga-o tayraa naam nivaajaa. ||1]| rahaa- O. Night and day, my mind is in ecstasy; as Gurmukh, I beg for the bliss-giving Naam. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho at ussifs He 3 uret Il (798-12, fares, v2 3) man kee parteet man tay paa-ee. From the mind itself, mental faith is obtained.
ud Td 3 Hate Tse I (798-12, frarey, He 3) pooray gur tay sabad bujhaa-ee. Through the Guru, I have realized the Shabad.
Hize HIE A ANAL Se Il (798-12, faores, He 3) jeevan maran ko samsar vaykhai. How rare is that person, who looks upon life and death alike.
adfs SMe OT AH US III (798-13, faares, He 3) bahurh na marai naa jam paykhai. ||2| | She shall never die again, and shall not have to see the Messenger of Death. ||2||
we dt ufs Afs ae fours I (798-13, faares, v2 3) ghar hee meh sabh kot niDhaan. Within the home of the self are all the millions of treasures.
Afsate feae afeur nifsyre il (798-13, frees, He 3) satgur dikhaa-ay ga-i-aa abhimaan. The True Guru has revealed them, and my egotistical pride is gone.
He dt oar Hata fame il (798-14, farses, He 3) sad hee laagaa sahj Dhi-aan. I keep my meditation always focused on the Cosmic Lord.
Mofes Ie Sa SMH Ill (798-14, fase, He 3) an-din gaavai ayko naam. ||3]|| Night and day, I sing the One Name. ||3]|
fem Aa xfs efsmret uret Il (798-14, faorea, ne 3) is jug meh vadi-aa-ee paa-ee. I have obtained glorious greatness in this age,
ud TT 3 oH fart Il (798-15, fares, v2 3) pooray gur tay naam Dhi-aa-ee. from the Perfect Guru, meditating on the Naam.
Ad Sy SI Soni AHTET Il (798-15, fasres, He 3) jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ee. Wherever I look, I see the Lord permeating and pervading.
Het AueTst StHfS odt uret gil (798-15, fawres, ve 3) Sadaa sukh-daata keemat nahee paa-ee. ||4| | He is forever the Giver of peace; His worth cannot be estimated. ||4]|
ud ota TT UST ufenr il (798-16, feeres, ve 3) poorai bhaag gur pooraa paa-i-aa. By perfect destiny, I have found the Perfect Guru.
nists on feure fearfemr Il (798-16, frees, H8 3) antar naam niDhaan dikhaa-i-aa. He has revealed to me the treasure of the Naam, deep within the nucleus of my self.
ad & Age ifs Het wfenr | (798-16, fares, ve 3) gur kaa sabad at meethaa laa-i-aa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is so very sweet.
Sod FFAS ast nfs sie AY UE NUNENSIENION (798-17, faerss, He 3)
naanak tarisan bujhee man tan sukh paa-i-aa. ||5||6||4]|6]|10] | O Nanak, my thirst is quenched, and my mind and body have found peace. [15] 16] 14] ]6]|10]|
Ta fases HIG 8 We SB (798-18) raag bilaaval mehlaa 4 ghar 3 Raag Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsara ure II (798-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Gen Hfs us vise fae Us fSE aT II (798-19, foes, He 4)
udam mat parabh antarjaamee ji-o parayray ti-o karnaa.
Effort and intelligence come from God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; as He wills, they act.
fA@ sour SB ene Sst fC safe Hs AST AI (798-19, faares, He 4)
ji-o natoo-aa tant vajaa-ay tantee ti-o vaajeh jant janaa. ||1||
As the violinist plays upon the strings of the violin, so does the Lord play the living beings. ||1]|
Yat ove
Afu Ho TH SH DAS Il (799-1, fares, He 4) jap man raam naam rasnaa. Chant the Name of the Lord with your tongue, O mind.
HAstfa fous fod ae ufenr afs fase afs ara Al TIS I (799-1, fares, He 4) mastak likhat likhay gur paa-i-aa har hirdai har basnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
According to the pre-ordained destiny written upon my forehead, I have found the Guru, and the Lord abides within my heart. ||1]|Pause| |
Hfeor farsafs gus 3 yrot fy Beg AS mrs Il (799-2, frees, He 4) maa-i-aa girsat bharmat hai paraanee rakh layvhu jan apnaa. Entangled in Maya, the mortal wanders around. Save Your humble servant, O Lord,
fa yfsare seeufh qfAS ofs ate afe Ags IQ (799-2, frees, Hs 4)
ji-o par-hilaad harnaakhas garsi-o har raakhi-o har sarnaa. ||2||
as you saved Prahlaad from the clutches of Harnaakash; keep him in Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||2]|
aes aeo at afs fufs adm afe ate ufss usar il (799-3, fares, H2 4)
kavan kavan kee gat mit kahee-ai har kee-ay patit pavannaa.
How can I describe the state and the condition, O Lord, of those many sinners you have purified?
6g de ta ofa oH oN afs Bales ufsG Agar ISI (799-4, foes, He 4)
oh dhovai dhor haath cham chamray har uDhaari-o pari-o sarnaa. ||3]|
Ravi Daas, the leather-worker, who worked with hides and carried dead animals was saved, by entering the Lord's Sanctuary. ||3]|
ys ae efenre sas se SIS TH Unit ay UST Il (799-4, faores, He 4)
parabh deen da-i-aal bhagat bhav taaran ham paapee raakh papnaa.
O God, Merciful to the meek, carry Your devotees across the world-ocean; Iam a sinner - save me from sin!
Tfs SAS VA VA IN AdiMig Ho SSA VA VAST IIA (799-5, frares, Hs 4)
har daasan daas daas ham karee-ahu jan naanak daas daasannaa. ||4||1]|
O Lord, make me the slave of the slave of Your slaves; servant Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. ||4]|1]|
farses HIS 8 Il (799-5) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
oH Hoe Hag wifamrs HSt Pers UTA MASH II (799-6, frees, He 4) ham moorakh mugaDh agi-aan matee sarnaagat purakh ajnamaa.
I am foolish, idiotic and ignorant; I seek Your Sanctuary, O Primal Being, O Lord beyond birth.
ats fasur afa Se AT SAT JH ura Tio MATH IAI (799-6, faares, He 4)
kar kirpaa rakh layvhu mayray thaakur ham paathar heen akarmaa. ||1||
Have Mercy upon me, and save me, O my Lord and Master; I am a lowly stone, with no good karma at all. ||1]|
He HS SH TH BH TH Il (799-7, faores, He 4) mayray man bhaj raam naamai raamaa. O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord, the Name of the Lord.
qenfs ofs aa uetha dfs faurag fages ane al TIS Il (799-7, frees, v2 4) gurmat har ras paa-ee-ai hor ti-aagahu nihfal kaamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Under Guru's Instructions, obtain the sublime, subtle essence of the Lord; renounce other fruitless actions. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs Ae Aza A Us Se IH fesase gy Butt Il (799-8, faares, He 4)
har jan sayvak say har taaray ham nirgun raakh upmaa.
The humble servants of the Lord are saved by the Lord; I am worthless - it is Your glory to save me.
33 fag weg 5 act AS oa Ufe MA SS AH IMI (799-8, fares, ve 4)
tujh bin avar na ko-ee mayray thaakur har japee-ai vaday karammaa. ||2| |
I have no other than You, O my Lord and Master; I meditate on the Lord, by my good karma. ||2||
ondle fga tes fs Ss TA ATH Il (799-9, fares, 3 4)
naamheen Dharig jeevtay tin vad dookh sahammaa.
Those who lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord, their lives are cursed, and they must endure terrible pain.
Gfe feta feta af seretuifa Hesralt Hs METH SI (799-10, frees, Hs 4)
o-ay fir fir jon bhavaa-ee-ah mand-bhaagee moorh akarmaa. ||3]|
They are consigned to reincarnation over and over again; they are the most unfortunate fools, with no good karma at all. ||3]|
ofs Fe oH nurg 3 uf yaa fer Ss ATH Il (799-10, frorew, He 4)
har jan naam aDhaar hai Dhur poorab likhay vad karmaa.
The Naam is the Support of the Lord's humble servants; their good karma is pre- ordained.
af Afsafe on feafeur AS Soa ASG ASH WII (799-11, fares, He 4) gur satgur naam drirh-aa-i-aa jan naanak safal jannamaa. ||4]|2||
The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam within servant Nanak, and his life is fruitful. ||4]|2||
faa'Ss HIS Il (799-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
Jue fas oa dfs fatter ag eaHfs HS Fa I (799-12, fares, He 4)
hamraa chit lubhat mohi bikhi-aa baho durmat mail bharaa.
My consciousness is lured by emotional attachment and corruption; is is filled with evil-minded filth.
Hat As ats o Aad Us JH fa afe Ha Sa MAUI (799-12, frases, He 4) tum"ree sayvaa kar na sakah parabh ham ki-o kar mugaDh taraa. ||1|| I cannot serve You, O God; I am ignorant - how can I cross over? ||1]|
Hd HS AU ITT SH BIT Il (799-13, fawres, He 4) mayray man jap narhar naam narharaa. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the Lord of man.
Ao Cute fasur yufs oct fife Afsas us us nil TIS Il (799-13, fares, He 4)
jan oopar kirpaa parabh Dhaaree mil satgur paar paraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God has showered His Mercy upon His humble servant; meeting with the True Guru, he is carried across. ||1]|Pause| |
Jud fust oas ys Aumt afs tg HSt AA AT Il (799-14, fares, ne 4) hamray pitaa thaakur parabh su-aamee har dayh matee jas karaa.
O my Father, my Lord and Master, Lord God, please bless me with such understanding, that I may sing Your Praises.
Sud Afar wa A Cus fA Af AS BI Sa QM (799-14, frees, ne 4) tum"rai sang lagay say uDhray ji-o sang kaasat loh taraa. ||2|| Those who are attached to You are saved, like iron which is carried across with wood.
[21] Was 3d det xfs vfon fag ofa afs AS B AT Il (799-15, faores, ue 4)
saakat nar hochhee mat maDhim jin" har har sayv na karaa. The faithless cynics have little or no understanding; they do not serve the Lord, Har, Har.
3 od Sadie Vaud Gf Aofh He fefs HAT INSII (799-16, frees, He 4)
tay nar bhaagheen duhchaaree o-ay janam mu-ay fir maraa. ||3]||
Those beings are unfortunate and vicious; they die, and are consigned to reincarnation, over and over again. ||3]|
faa aG 3H dfs Hog Homi 3 ae ASy TT AT Il (799-16, frares, ne 4)
jin ka-o tum" har maylhu su-aamee tay n"aa-ay santokh gur saraa.
Those whom You unite with Yourself, O Lord and Master, bathe in the Guru's cleansing pool of contentment.
ZoHfs HS Tet of stor AS BSA us UT IIIS (799-17, faeres, 42 4)
durmat mail ga-ee har bhaji-aa jan naanak paar paraa. ||4||3]| Vibrating upon the Lord, the filth of their evil-mindedness is washed away; servant Nanak is carried across. ||4]||3]|
faarse HIG g Il (799-17) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
weg Hs fig Ae avet fife ofe af aa aT Il (799-18, frees, He 4) aavhu sant milhu mayray bhaa-ee mil har har kathaa karahu.
Come, O Saints, and join together, O my Siblings of Destiny; let us tell the Stories of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs ofa an sfee 3 awafa Yee Te Ase Sag IAI (799-18, foes, He 4)
har har naam bohith hai kaljug khayvat gur sabad tarahu. ||1]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the boat in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the boatman to ferry us across. ||1]||
Hd Ho df Te dfs Bsa Il (799-19, fuses, He 4) mayray man har gun har uchrahu. O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Hasta fous fod ao ae fife Hats ufs uss NA TIS Il (799-19, faares, He 4)
mastak likhat likhay gun gaa-ay mil sangat paar parahu. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
According to the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon your forehead, sing the Praises of the Lord; join the Holy Congregation, and cross over the world-ocean. ||1||Pause] |
UST too
afent sad fs TH TA SSH fas ure Suen AS ATT Il (800-1, fares, 2 4) kaa-i-aa nagar meh raam ras ootam ki-o paa-ee-ai updays jan karahu.
Within the body-village is the Lord's supreme, sublime essence. How can I obtain it? Teach me, O humble Saints.
Afsag Afe Aes dfs zane ffs nifgs ofe aA Ubyg III (800-2, frees, He 4) satgur sayv safal har darsan mil amrit har ras pee-ahu. ||2| |
Serving the True Guru, you shall obtain the Fruitful Vision of the Lord's Darshan; meeting Him, drink in the ambrosial essence of the Lord's Nectar. ||2||
ofa ofa an vifys afs Her afs Hag ate feag i (800-2, free, He 4)
har har naam amrit har meethaa har santahu chaakh dikhahu.
The Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so sweet; O Saints of the Lord, taste it, and see.
asntfs ots oA Hie oer fSo fard Afs fae FAT III (800-3, freee, 2 4)
gurmat har ras meethaa laagaa tin bisray sabh bikh rasahu. ||3]|
Under Guru's Instruction, the Lord's essence seems so sweet; through it, all corrupt sensual pleasures are forgotten. ||3]|
TH OH DA OH aATeES Us AST AS AST Il (800-4, frees, 2 4)
raam naam ras raam rasaa-in har sayvhu sant janhu.
The Name of the Lord is the medicine to cure all diseases; so serve the Lord, O humble Saints.
ots uesa wd US THs aoa dla SHI ISIS (800-4, fuses, He 4)
chaar padaarath chaaray paa-ay gurmat naanak har bhajahu. ||4||4]]|
The four great blessings are obtained, O Nanak, by vibrating upon the Lord, under Guru's Instruction. ||4||4||
fasrSs HIS 8 Il (800-5) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
ust FINS AE SH & AMY als HZ Mat Il (00-5, frees, v2 4)
khatree baraahman sood vais ko jaapai har mantar japainee.
Anyone, from any class - Kh'shaatriya, Brahman, Soodra or Vaishya - can chant, and meditate on the Mantra of the Lord's Name.
ag Afsag usage af ung fos Aeg fean As sat IAI (800-5, frerew, He 4)
gur satgur paarbarahm kar poojahu nit sayvhu dinas sabh rainee. ||1]| Worship the Guru, the True Guru, as the Supreme Lord God; serve Him constantly, all day and night. ||1]|
dfs AS tug Afsag Sat Il (800-6, fares, v2 4) har jan daykhhu satgur nainee. O humble servants of the Lord, behold the True Guru with your eyes.
a fees Het es weg af Sag Tas Sat 9 TIC Il (s00-6, free, v2 4)
jo ichhahu so-ee fal paavhu har bolhu gurmat bainee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever you wish for, you shall receive, chanting the Word of the Lord's Name, under Guru's Instruction. ||1||Pause]|
wife Cure fesdinifs agsd AT de fa as Jeat Il (800-7, frases, ue 4) anik upaav chitvee-ah bahutayray saa hovai je baat hovainee. People think of many and various efforts, but that alone happens, which is to happen.
nus se AZ act ae A ad fa AS fats o fasat iM (00-8, frees, He 4)
apnaa bhalaa sabh ko-ee baachhai so karay je mayrai chit na chitainee. ||2]|
All beings seek goodness for themselves, but what the Lord does - that may not be what we think and expect. ||2||
Ho at ufs fsurag dfs Ae Sa AST aSat Il (800-8, frees, He 4)
man kee mat ti-aagahu har jan ayhaa baat kathainee.
So renounce the clever intellect of your mind, O humble servants of the Lord, no matter how hard this may be.
wofes dfs ofs oy fmreg as Afsad at Hfs Sat Sil (so0-9, frees, v2 4)
an-din har har naam Dhi-aavahu gur satgur kee mat lainee. ||3]|
Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; accept the wisdom of the Guru, the True Guru. ||3]|
Hfs AHfS Se fA AuMit oH HS J UTY AIAt Il (800-10, fawres, ws 4)
mat sumat tayrai vas su-aamee ham jant too purakh jantainee.
Wisdom, balanced wisdom is in Your power, O Lord and Master; I am the instrument, and You are the player, O Primal Lord.
Hs Soa & US ATS Hutt fae sre fSS gSat igiuil (00-10, frees, vs 4) jan naanak kay parabh kartay su-aamee ji-o bhaavai tivai bulainee. ||4]|5||
O God, O Creator, Lord and Master of servant Nanak, as You wish, so do I speak. [411511
faa'Ss HIS g Il (800-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
Mise HS fmrfes ustsy nisfes wise nse Il (800-11, frre, Hs 4)
anad mool Dhi-aa-i-o purkhotam an-din anad ananday.
I meditate on the source of bliss, the Sublime Primal Being; night and day, I am in ecstasy and bliss.
UsH of at ofe goret Afs ga AH A Se IA (800-12, fees, He 4)
Dharam raa-ay kee kaan chukaa-ee sabh chookay jam kay chhanday. ||1|| The Righteous Judge of Dharma has no power over me; I have cast off all subservience to the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
afu ue ofs of on afHe 1 (800-12, fuares, He 4) jap man har har naam gobinday. Meditate, O mind, on the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
samt Ts Afsag wfeor Te We USHSe AU! TIS Il (800-13, fares, v2 4) vadbhaagee gur satgur paa-i-aa gun gaa-ay parmaananday. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, I have found the Guru, the True Guru; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of supreme bliss. ||1]|Pause] |
Was Hs Wher & afae fete ufenr feats fede il (800-13, freree, 8 4) saakat moorh maa-i-aa kay baDhik vich maa-i-aa fireh firanday.
The foolish faithless cynics are held captive by Maya; in Maya, they continue wandering, wandering around.
As Aes fass a wa fAG Sut awe SPE I (800-14, frarew, ne 4)
tarisnaa jalat kirat kay baaDhay ji-o taylee balad bhavanday. ||2||
Burnt by desire, and bound by the karma of their past actions, they go round and round, like the ox at the mill press. ||2||
TsHfa AZ oa A Bud esarait AS ATS Il (800-15, fuses, He 4)
gurmukh sayv lagay say uDhray vadbhaagee sayv karanday.
The Gurmukhs, who focus on serving the Guru, are saved; by great good fortune, they perform service.
fae of Afimr fso oe urfenr Afs gs) Hfemr SE ISI (800-15, frees, we 4)
jin har japi-aa tin fal paa-i-aa sabh tootay maa-i-aa fanday. ||3]|
Those who meditate on the Lord obtain the fruits of their rewards, and the bonds of Maya are all broken. ||3]|
nm Sta nim Aza AS nm omfy ae Il (s00-16, frases, ne 4)
aapay thaakur aapay sayvak sabh aapay aap govinday.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the servant. The Lord of the Universe Himself is all by Himself.
We sea wm wif Ag ees fag ae fSe Te ISIE (800-16, faeres, He 4) jan naanak aapay aap sabh vartai ji-o raakhai tivai rahanday. ||4||6]| O servant Nanak, He Himself is All-pervading; as He keeps us, we remain. ||4]|6]|
qe Afsaa YATE Il (800-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta fases HIG 8 USI WT 92 Il (800-19) raag bilaaval mehlaa 4 parh-taal ghar 13. Raag Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Thirteenth House:
aod stot TH oH ufss ur|Ns Il (800-19, faeres, 2 4) bolhu bha-ee-aa raam naam patit paavno. O Siblings of Destiny, chant the Name of the Lord, the Purifier of sinners.
dfs HS FAIS SS Il (800-19, fares, ue 4) har sant bhagat taarno. The Lord emancipates his Saints and devotees.
UST to
dfs sfaud stant i (g01-1, fares, He 4) har bharipuray rahi-aa. The Lord is totally permeating and pervading everywhere;
Afs GS TH SH Il (g01-1, foes, He 4)
jal thalay raam naam. the Name of the Lord is pervading the water and the land.
fos aretha ofs gu faAras AU TIS Il (g01-1, frees, ws 4) nit gaa-ee-ai har dookh bisaarno. ||1|| rahaa-o. So sing continuously of the Lord, the Dispeller of pain. ||1]||Pause||
dfs or J AEG ASH JHA Il (801-2, frees, He 4) har kee-aa hai safal janam hamaaraa. The Lord has made my life fruitful and rewarding.
ofa Afumr ofa eu farsoas Il (g01-2, frarey, He 4) har japi-aa har dookh bisaaranhaaraa. I meditate on the Lord, the Dispeller of pain.
ad sfeur J Hats VST Il (s01-2, fuses, H2 4) gur bhayti-aa hai mukat daataa. I have met the Guru, the Giver of liberation.
Ufs ASt IHS ASG AST Il (801-3, fsres, He 4) har kee-ee hamaaree safal jaataa. The Lord has made my life's journey fruitful and rewarding.
ffs Hast as Wes NAl (g01-3, feerew, He 4) mil sangtee gun gaavno. ||1|| Joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
[21|
HO TH OH afa MITA Il (801-3, fuses, He 4) man raam naam kar aasaa. O mortal, place your hopes in the Name of the Lord,
a8 un faoth far I (801-3, fares, H8 4) bhaa-o doojaa binas binaasaa.
and your love of duality shall simply vanish. fefa nar af foaHt Il (801-4, fares, He: 4)
vich aasaa ho-ay niraasee.
One who, in hope, remains unattached to hope, A Ao fifeor ofe ut I (801-4, frees, 2 4)
so jan mili-aa har paasee. such a humble being meets with his Lord.
act TH OH US Wes Il (g01-4, faores, He 4) ko-ee raam naam gun gaavno. And one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name
He sod FSH ufa SSS NANUDNSNENDNAI (801-5, fuerew, He 4) jan naanak tis pag laavno. ||2||1||7||4]|6]|7||17]| - servant Nanak falls at his feet. ||2||1]|7]|4]16]|7||171|
Ta fase HIs u Beue we % (01-6) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsars yATfe II (801-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Sedt wie fan fAG HT II (801-7, fares, He 5) nadree aavai tis si-o moh. He is attached to what he sees.
fag faba ys mifsart Sfo i (301-7, fares, Hs 5) ki-o milee-ai parabh abhinaasee tohi. How can I meet You, O Imperishable God?
ate fosur dfs Hrafar Ursa Il (801-7, fares, He 5) kar kirpaa mohi maarag paavhu. Have Mercy upon me, and place me upon the Path;
Wants & nists BST Ul (go1-8, frees, He 5)
saaDhsangat kai anchal laavhu. ||1]|
let me be attached to the hem of the robe of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
faG sdba fafimr HATE II (s01-8, frees, He 5) ki-o taree-ai bikhi-aa sansaar. How can I cross over the poisonous world-ocean?
Afsag afog ure urfs nail TIS Il (so1-8, foes, v2 5)
satgur bohith paavai paar. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru is the boat to carry us across. ||1]||Pause| |
uzSs Sod Het Vf il (go1-9, fares, He 5) pavan jhulaaray maa-i-aa day-ay. The wind of Maya blows and shakes us,
Ufs & sas Ae fas AE Il (g01-9, foes, He 5) har kay bhagat sadaa thir say-ay. but the Lord's devotees remain ever-stable.
Jay Aa 3 dJafa fears Il (s01-9, faares, Hu: 5) harakh sog tay raheh niraaraa. They remain unaffected by pleasure and pain.
fas Gufs urfu ag TASS NM (801-9, fuses, v2 5) Sir OOpar aap guroo rakhvaaraa. ||2|| The Guru Himself is the Savior above their heads. ||2| |
ufffar 23 ufeor Age sfeniar Il (s01-10, faeres, He 5) paa-i-aa vayrh maa-i-aa sarab bhu-i-angaa. Maya, the snake, holds all in her coils.
IBN ud cua ef usar Il (go1-10, faeres, Hz 5) ha-umai pachay deepak daykh patangaa. They burn to death in egotism, like the moth lured by seeing the flame.
Hae Alas Ad Sot urS Il (801-11, fuses, H2 5) Sagal seegaar karay nahee paavai. They make all sorts of decorations, but they do not find the Lord.
W of fare ao ag fare 13I (s01-11, frees, H8 5) jaa ho-ay kirpaal taa guroo milaavai. ||3]| When the Guru becomes Merciful, He leads them to meet the Lord. ||3]|
JG fes@ Gent FH fea as eAfenr II (801-11, faares, He 5) ha-o fira-o udaasee mai ik ratan dasaa-i-aa. I wander around, sad and depressed, seeking the jewel of the One Lord.
fosHaad ota fs o Gurfeur | (so1-12, frares, He 5) nirmolak heeraa milai na upaa-i-aa. This priceless jewel is not obtained by any efforts.
dfs a Hed fSH Hfs BG Il (s01-12, frees, H2 5) har kaa mandar tis meh laal. That jewel is within the body, the Temple of the Lord.
ats afer user efy set foo Iigil (go1-12, frees, He 5)
gur kholi-aa parh-daa daykh bha-ee nihaal. ||4||
The Guru has torn away the veil of illusion, and beholding the jewel, I am delighted. [141]
fafs ofior fsa urfeer Are Il (801-13, freee, H2 5) jin chaakhi-aa tis aa-i-aa saad. One who has tasted it, comes to know its flavor;
fa aor He Hfo PARTE Il (801-13, faerew, 3 5) ji-o goongaa man meh bismaad. he is like the mute, whose mind is filled with wonder.
Mioe JU AS Sect nrfenr it (01-14, fuses, ve 5) aanad roop sabh nadree aa-i-aa. I see the Lord, the source of bliss, everywhere.
Ho Soa Tid Te vite AHEM UIA (801-14, frees, He 5)
jan naanak har gun aakh samaa-i-aa. ||5|[1]| Servant Nanak speaks the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and merges in Him. ||5||1]|
faoSs HIS U Il (801-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hee Afeomrs AS TIES Il (801-15, frees, v2 5) sarab kali-aan kee-ay gurdayv. The Divine Guru has blessed me with total happiness.
Aza must BfES AS Il (g01-15, frsres, 2 5) sayvak apnee laa-i-o sayv. He has linked His servant to His service.
fours 3 oat Af meee MISS NAM (801-15, faerew, He 5) bighan na laagai jap alakh abhayv. ||1|| No obstacles block my path, meditating on the incomprehensible, inscrutable Lord.
[11 |
uafs uals set Te WE Il (801-16, fro, us 5) Dharat puneet bha-ee gun gaa-ay. The soil has been sanctified, singing the Glories of His Praises.
eas afer ofa on fomre ail TIS Il (o1-16, frees, v2 5) durat ga-i-aa har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The sins are eradicated, meditating on the Name of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
Agel Set sfent nrfu i (go1-16, fasres, He 5) sabhnee thaa‘-ee ravi-aa aap. He Himself is pervading everywhere;
mife Harte AT aT SS UTS Il (801-17, fares, He 5)
aad jugaad jaa kaa vad partaap.
from the very beginning, and throughout the ages, His Glory has been radiantly manifest.
ad usr 3 df HASTY NQI (s01-17, frees, He 5) gur parsaad na ho-ay santaap. ||2| | By Guru's Grace, sorrow does not touch me. ||2||
TT A VIS Ba Alo HIS Il (g01-17, fasres, vs 5)
gur kay charan lagay man meethay. The Guru's Feet seem so sweet to my mind.
footers af AS wet ZS Il (so1-18, fares, He 5) nirbighan ho-ay sabh thaa'-ee voothay. He is unobstructed, dwelling everywhere.
Afs AY ue AST 3S Sli (801-18, fussy, H: 5) sabh sukh paa-ay satgur toothay. ||3]|| I found total peace, when the Guru was pleased. ||3]|
USAIN YS SS TASS Il (801-18, fasew, v2 5) paarbarahm parabh bha-ay rakhvaalay. The Supreme Lord God has become my Savior.
fra faa ctafo as Il (g01-19, fares, H2 5) jithai kithai deeseh naalay. Wherever I look, I see Him there with me.
SOA BA MAH UfsuTs III (s01-19, frees, vs 5)
naanak daas khasam partipaalay. ||4]||2|| O Nanak, the Lord and Master protects and cherishes His slaves. ||4]|2]|
fase HIS U Il (801-19)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
AY fours ufsy ys Hg Il (so1-19, frees, H3 5) sukh niDhaan pareetam parabh mayray. You are the treasure of peace, O my Beloved God.
UST to2
MASS TE SAT YS 3d Il (802-1, faerew, us 5) agnat gun thaakur parabh tayray. Your Glories are uncounted, O God, my Lord and Master.
Hfa nova Suet Agave Il (802-1, fares, He 5) mohi anaath tumree sarnaa-ee. I am an orphan, entering Your Sanctuary.
ats fagut fs sae famret iil (802-1, freee, He 5) kar kirpaa har charan Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]| Have Mercy on me, O Lord, that I may meditate on Your Feet. ||1]|
efent aad aAg fs mf Il (802-2, frees, He 5) da-i-aa karahu bashu man aa-ay. Take pity upon me, and abide within my mind;
Hfo fosae ata ofs ofe 11 gar Il (902-2, foes, v2 5) mohi nirgun leejai larh laa-ay. rahaa-o. I am worthless - please let me grasp hold of the hem of Your robe. ||1]||Pause] |
us fafs ure St AHt Sts II (802-2, frees, He 5) parabh chit aavai taa kaisee bheerh. When God comes into my consciousness, what misfortune can strike me?
Ufs AA Skt AH Uls Il (802-3, farses, He 5) har sayvak naahee jam peerh. The Lord's servant does not suffer pain from the Messenger of Death.
Haag ou ote fHHas 3A Il (802-3, frases, Hi: 5) sarab dookh har simrat nasay. All pains are dispelled, when one remembers the Lord in meditation;
W a Afal Ae Us SA lll (802-3, fares, He 5) jaa kai sang sadaa parabh basai. ||2|| God abides with him forever. ||2||
ys at aH HfS Sts MiTUT_ Il (s02-4, faares, He 5) parabh kaa naam man tan aaDhaar. The Name of God is the Support of my mind and body.
fangs SH ISS So ST Il (802-4, fares, v2 5) bisrat naam hovat tan chhaar. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the body is reduced to ashes.
ys fats nre use AS AH Il (802-4, faares, He 5) parabh chit aa-ay pooran sabh kaaj. When God comes into my consciousness, all my affairs are resolved.
dfs faATS AS A HISA ISI (802-5, fawres, He 5) har bisrat sabh kaa muhtaaj. ||3]| Forgetting the Lord, one becomes subservient to all. ||3]|
TIS AHS Afar wait utfS i (s02-5, foes, ue 5) charan kamal sang laagee pareet. I am in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
fants wet AS eaHfS SHS I (802-5, fuses, He 5) bisar ga-ee sabh durmat reet. I am rid of all evil-minded ways.
Ho 30 “ists ofa ofa HS Il (802-6, faares, He 5) man tan antar har har mant. The Mantra of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, is deep within my mind and body.
Soa Sse a wis AST MSE IISISII (802-6, fawres, H2 5)
naanak bhagtan kai ghar sadaa anand. ||4||3]|| O Nanak, eternal bliss fills the home of the Lord's devotees. ||4]|3] |
Ta fase HIS u we 2 Wesle a wis Wear (802-7) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 ghar 2 yaanrhee-ay kai ghar gaavnaa Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Second House, To Be Sung To The Tune Of Yaan-Ree-Ay:
qe Afsars yArfe iI (802-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H vfs sct 2a AS fumrs H ufs Sct Sa I (802-8, faares, we 5) mai man tayree tayk mayray pi-aaray mai man tayree tayk. You are the Support of my mind, O my Beloved, You are the Support of my mind.
med froreu fasdion fumirg ae a SH SA INU TIS Il (802-8, fawres, v2 5) avar si-aanpaa birthee-aa pi-aaray raakhan ka-o tum ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All other clever tricks are useless, O Beloved; You alone are my Protector. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsag ua A fH filmes A AG TS fare Il (802-9, frerew, v3 5)
satgur pooraa jay milai pi-aaray so jan hot nihaalaa.
One who meets with the Perfect True Guru, O Beloved, that humble person is enraptured.
ad at Aet A ad fimrd fan 3 dfe efenrer Il (802-9, faeres, nH 5) gur kee sayvaa so karay pi-aaray jis no ho-ay da-i-aalaa. He alone serves the Guru, O Beloved, unto whom the Lord becomes merciful.
HG Hots Tse AoMit Aga ast FIT Il (802-10, fawres, He 5)
safal moorat gurday-o su-aamee sarab kalaa bharpooray.
Fruitful is the form of the Divine Guru, O Lord and Master; He is overflowing with all powers.
Tt TI USHIN USHA HET AT JAS IAI (802-10, faeres, ws 5)
naanak gur paarbarahm parmaysar sadaa sadaa hajooray. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord; He is ever- present, forever and ever. ||1]|
Afs af ate Afe fsar at fas mruat ys ATST Il (802-11, fore, H8 5) sun sun jeevaa so-ay tinaa kee jin" apunaa parabh jaataa. I live by hearing, hearing of those who know their God.
dfs oH maufs on eurefs dfa oH dt He TS Il (802-11, frares, He 5)
har naam araaDheh naam vakaaneh har naamay hee man raataa.
They contemplate the Lord's Name, they chant the Lord's Name, and their minds are imbued with the Lord's Name.
AS AS at AS Ha Us ATH AHS Il (802-12, frwrew, we 5)
sayvak jan kee sayvaa maagai poorai karam kamaavaa.
I am Your servant; I beg to serve Your humble servants. By the karma of perfect destiny, I do this.
Soa ot Fst AyMit SI AS SYS UTST III! (802-13, fares, nz 5)
naanak kee baynantee su-aamee tayray jan daykhan paavaa. ||2||
This is Nanak's prayer: O my Lord and Master, may I obtain the Blessed Vision of Your humble servants. ||2||
esa A arébufs fimrs H3anafs fAat SA Il (802-13, frees, 2 5)
vadbhaagee say kaadhee-ah pi-aaray santsangat jinaa vaaso.
They are said to be very fortunate, O Beloved, who who dwell in the Society of the Saints.
nifys on madht fesHse HS JS UTaA Il (802-14, frees, He 5) amrit naam araaDhee-ai nirmal manai hovai pargaaso. They contemplate the Immaculate, Ambrosial Naam, and their minds are illuminated.
WOH He TY are fimrs ga AH at AE Il (802-14, fares, v3 5)
janam maran dukh kaatee-ai pi-aaray chookai jam kee kaanay.
The pains of birth and death are eradicated, O Beloved, and the fear of the Messenger of Death is ended.
fear ustufs Fane Soa A UT MUS SE ISI (802-15, fares, Hs 5) tinaa paraapat darsan naanak jo parabh apnay bhaanay. ||3]||
They alone obtain the Blessed Vision of this Darshan, O Nanak, who are pleasing to their God. ||3]|
Cu unre ais AM AVE WE TE 3T Il (802-16, frores, we 5)
ooch apaar bay-ant su-aamee ka-un jaanai gun tayray.
O my lofty, incomparable and infinite Lord and Master, who can know Your Glorious Virtues?
wes Busfs Hes Gusts faonfs UT WS Il (802-16, faares, He 5)
gaavtay uDhrahi suntay uDhrahi binsahi paap ghanayray.
Those who sing them are saved, and those who listen to them are saved; all their sins are erased.
UA Uss Ha aS sd uTTS urfs Ssrs Il (802-17, fawres, ws 5) pasoo parayt mugaDh ka-o taaray paahan paar utaarai. You save the beasts, demons and fools, and even stones are carried across.
Sea UA St Ad|eet Ae AST afsas ISIUISI (802-17, fares, v3 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee sadaa sadaa balihaarai. ||4||1||4]| Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; he is forever and ever a sacrifice to You. [14] 111141]
faoSG HIS U Il (802-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fae so dar faurfar dt rete on HoT oA Ut II (802-18, frees, He 5)
bikhai ban feekaa ti-aag ree sakhee-ay naam mahaa ras pee-o.
Renounce the tasteless water of corruption, O my companion, and drink in the supreme nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
faa oA oe afs aet Rat net & d]s FIG I (802-19, fares, He 5)
bin ras chaakhay bud ga-ee saglee sukhee na hovat jee-o.
Without the taste of this nectar, all have drowned, and their souls have not found happiness.
HS HIS 3 Rats dt aret Aa SAT StS Il (802-19, frases, He 5) maan mahat na sakat hee kaa-ee saaDhaa daasee thee-o. You have no honor, glory or power - become the slave of the Holy Saints.
Us tos
ood A efe Ases A ufs mus aE NA (03-1, frees, He 5)
naanak say dar sobhaavantay jo parabh apunai kee-o. ||1||
O Nanak, they alone look beautiful in the Court of the Lord, whom the Lord has made His Own. ||1]|
ofsdesdt fas gy mie fia FAS EH ster Il (803-1, frees, 2 5)
harichand-uree chit bharam sakhee-ay marig tarisnaa darum chhaa-i-aa.
Maya is a mirage, which deludes the mind, O my companion, like the scent-crazed deer, or the transitory shade of a tree.
dole Afar 6 West Ade nifs sfa ASS HfEMT II (803-2, frase, He 5)
chanchal sang na chaaltee sakhee-ay ant taj jaavat maa-i-aa.
Maya is fickle, and does not go with you, O my companion; in the end, it will leave you.
off sae ifs gu aA HS feo Af AY o UfeMr I (803-3, fore, He 5)
ras bhogan at roop ras maatay in sang sookh na paa-i-aa.
He may enjoy pleasures and sensual delights with supremely beautiful women, but no one finds peace in this way.
Ufs ufs dfs Aa He AMS ooo fast oy fomrfenr 1211 (g03-3, freres, He 5)
Dhan Dhan har saaDh jan sakhee-ay naanak jinee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||2||
Blessed, blessed are the humble, Holy Saints of the Lord, O my companion. O Nanak, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
af ang esaTaat AME Ast Afar AHS II (803-4, fares, He 5)
jaa-ay bashu vadbhaagnee sakhee-ay santaa sang samaa-ee-ai.
Go, O my very fortunate companion: dwell in the Company of the Saints, and merge with the Lord.
3d Ba 5 gus sa fmt vas GH fas BEM I (803-5, fares, v3 5)
tah dookh na bhookh na rog bi-aapai charan kamal liv laa-ee-ai.
There, neither pain nor hunger nor disease will afflict you; enshrine love for the Lord's Lotus Feet.
3d HOH 3 HIS B MSE War fogss Aget ure Il (803-5, faores, He 5)
tah janam na maran na aavan jaanaa nihchal sarnee paa-ee-ai.
There is no birth or death there, no coming or going in reincarnation, when you enter the Sanctuary of the Eternal Lord.
Un fads o Hg fmm aaa afe Sa fimreint 11311 (803-6, frees, ue 5)
paraym bichhohu na moh bi-aapai naanak har ayk Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||3] |
Love does not end, and attachment does not grip you, O Nanak, when you meditate on the One Lord. ||3]|
fenfe ofe He afaur fimrg gas AofA ASE II (803-6, frwes, He 5)
darisat Dhaar man bayDhi-aa pi-aaray rat-rhay sahj subhaa-ay.
Bestowing His Glance of Grace, my Beloved has pierced my mind, and I am intuitively attuned to His Love.
AA AoeSt Afr fife UtSH noe Hares TE We Il (803-7, foes, ue 5)
Sayj Suhaavee sang mil pareetam anad mangal gun gaa-ay.
My bed is embellished, meeting with my Beloved; in ecstasy and bliss, I sing His Glorious Praises.
Ret AISt TH fat Tat Hs So fee uTeS Il (803-8, faeres, nu 5)
sakhee sahaylee raam rang raatee man tan ichh pujaa-ay.
O my friends and companions, I am imbued with the Lord's Love; the desires of my mind and body are satisfied.
Toa MdH uveH fAS fifoor aa aE F AES USINUI (803-8, farses, He 5) naanak achraj achraj si-o mili-aa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. ||4||2||5]|
O Nanak, the wonder-struck soul blends with the Wonderful Lord; this state cannot be described. ||4]|2]|5||
Ta fasres HIG UWE (803-10) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsara YATE II (803-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
SA TU AS UAT Il (803-11, frees, we 5) ayk roop saglo paasaaraa. The entire Universe is the form of the One Lord.
mma you vif faBarar il (803-11, frares, He 5) aapay banaj aap bi-uhaaraa. ||1]|| He Himself is the trade, and He Himself is the trader. ||1]|
MA fame fags St urs I (803-11, frees, He 5) aiso gi-aan birlo ee paa-ay. How rare is that one who is blessed with such spiritual wisdom.
AS AS webt sa fen|e 1d TIS Il (903-11, frorew, He 5) jat jat jaa-ee-ai tat daristaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Wherever I go, there I see Him. ||1]||Pause] |
mfoa da fosae fea Far il (803-12, frares, Hz 5)
anik rang nirgun ik rangaa.
He manifests many forms, while still unmanifest and absolute, and yet He has One Form.
MY AS my St SIA Il (803-12, faeres, ve 5)
aapay jal aap hee tarangaa. ||2|| He Himself is the water, and He Himself is the waves. ||2]|
my dt Hee niufs AST Il (803-13, farses, He 5) aap hee mandar aapeh sayvaa. He Himself is the temple, and He Himself is selfless service.
wiry ot uATSt wiry dt Ser USI (803-13, frees, He 5)
aap hee poojaaree aap hee dayvaa. ||3|| He Himself is the worshipper, and He Himself is the idol. ||3]|
wmufs Hat wiry dt Aas" Il (803-13, fares, He 5) aapeh jog aap hee jugtaa. He Himself is the Yoga; He Himself is the Way.
Soa A USF Ae dt HAST USIAIEM (803-14, frares, He 5)
naanak kay parabh sad hee muktaa. ||4||1]|6]| Nanak's God is forever liberated. ||4]|1]|6]|
fasSs HIS U Il (803-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
nif Cures nifty AUS Il (803-14, fasres, He 5) aap upaavan aap saDharnaa. He Himself creates, and He Himself supports.
mify ATS SAS BAT MAUI (803-15, fares, ue 5) aap karaavan dos na lainaa. ||1|| He Himself causes all to act; He takes no blame Himself. ||1] |
MUS BIS MTU Tt ATS Il (803-15, frees, ne 5) aapan bachan aap hee karnaa. He Himself is the teaching, and He Himself is the teacher.
nus fas mru dt Ags NA TIS Il (803-15, fares, He 5) aapan bibha-o aap hee jarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He Himself is the splendor, and He Himself is the experiencer of it. ||1]|Pause] |
mtu ot HAfe mire dt Far Il (803-16, fawres, He 5) aap hee masat aap hee bulnaa. He Himself is silent, and He Himself is the speaker.
MTU Tt MSS O ATET SHS II (803-16, fawres, He 5)
aap hee achhal na jaa-ee chhalnaa. ||2| | He Himself is undeceivable; He cannot be deceived. ||2]|
mu dt dus nifty ugaesr Il (803-16, frees, v2 5) aap hee gupat aap pargatnaa. He Himself is hidden, and He Himself is manifest.
mm ot wufe ute niu mifsuasr Sil (803-17, freee, H3 5)
aap hee ghat ghat aap alipanaa. ||3]| He Himself is in each and every heart; He Himself is unattached. ||3]|
nmy nifeas niu Afat FIAT Il (803-17, frees, H2 5) aapay avigat aap sang rachnaa. He Himself is absolute, and He Himself is with the Universe.
AT sod ys a Als AVAST III I (g03-18, frarew, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh kay sabh jachnaa. ||4||2||7]| Says Nanak, all are beggars of God. ||4||2]||7]|
faTSS HIS U Il (803-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
38 Hed frofs aster i (803-18, frees, 42 5) bhoolay maarag jineh bataa-i-aa. He places the one who strays back on the Path;
MAT TT SseTat urea WA (803-19, frees, He 5) aisaa gur vadbhaagee paa-i-aa. ||1]|| such a Guru is found by great good fortune. ||1]|
frit Hat TH BH fesTs Il (803-19, frees, He 5) simar manaa raam naam chitaaray. Meditate, contemplate the Name of the Lord, O mind.
afm ad fase aa vas firs 119 TIE Il (803-19, foes, v2 5) bas rahay hirdai gur charan pi-aaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Beloved Feet of the Guru abide within my heart. ||1]|Pause] |
ust tog
of afa afs Hfo He Stor Il (804-1, frees, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh mohi man leenaa. The mind is engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment.
gue ate Hats afa ater iI (304-1, freee, He 5) banDhan kaat mukat gur keenaa. ||2|| Breaking my bonds, the Guru has liberated me. ||2||
wu AY Ads Holy Sfo HT Il (804-2, fares, He 5) dukh sukh karat janam fun moo-aa. Experiencing pain and pleasure, one is born, only to die again.
3do FHS af wiTAH cht Sil (804-2, faeres, vs 5) charan kamal gur aasram dee-aa. ||3]| The Lotus Feet of the Guru bring peace and shelter. ||3]|
Mats AIS FSS HATS Il (804-2, faorew, us 5) agan saagar boodat sansaaraa. The world is drowning in the ocean of fire.
Soa IT uals Afsats fSAss ISISIcil (804-3, fawres, He 5)
naanak baah pakar satgur nistaaraa. ||4]|3]||8]| O Nanak, holding me by the arm, the True Guru has saved me. ||4||3]|8]]|
farses HIS U Il (804-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
36 HO U6 Maus AF wus" Il (804-3, fawres, He 5) tan man Dhan arpa-o sabh apnaa. Body, mind, wealth and everything, I surrender to my Lord.
age A Hf fas ofa ofs AUST IAI (804-4, fawres, He 5) kavan so mat jit har har japnaa. ||1|| What is that wisdom, by which I may come to chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har?
[21
ate mma uife& ys Hate Il (804-4, frees, He 5) kar aasaa aa-i-o parabh maagan. Nurturing hope, I have come to beg from God.
3H UYs Ast AS ras Ai TIS Il (804-5, fares, He 5) tum" paykhat sobhaa mayrai aagan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon You, the courtyard of my heart is embellished. ||1]||Pause] |
mfoa Fats afs sags astesE Il (804-5, freq, ve 5)
anik jugat kar bahut beechaara-o.
Trying several methods, I reflect deeply upon the Lord.
AGHfa feH Hafs Burs i211 (804-5, fawres, He 5)
saaDhsang is maneh uDhaara-o. ||2||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, this mind is saved. ||2]| Hfs afa Aas adt TST Il (804-6, fares, v3 5)
mat buDh surat naahee chaturaa-ee.
I have neither intelligence, wisdom, common sense nor cleverness.
ot fish at we floret 11311 (804-6, fuses, He 5) taa milee-ai jaa la-ay milaa-ee. ||3]| I meet You, only if You lead me to meet You. |[3]|
osn
30 Hse Ys VIA ue Il (04-6, fiesew, He 5) nain santokhay parabh darsan paa-i-aa. My eyes are content, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan.
AT sod AES A vrfeor gist (804-7, faves, ue 5) kaho naanak safal so aa-i-aa. ||4||4]|9]| Says Nanak, such a life is fruitful and rewarding. ||4||4||9]|
farses HIS U Il (804-7)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HS fust AS Aa o HEMT II (804-7, frares, He 5) maat pitaa sut saath na maa-i-aa. Mother, father, children and the wealth of Maya, will not go along with you.
AUGHfa AS sy fhetfenr Ail (804-8, fares, He 5) saaDhsang sabh dookh mitaa-i-aa. ||1]|| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all pain is dispelled. ||1]|
ate sfonr yg AS Hfs mM II (804-8, frases, Hs 5) rav rahi-aa parabh sabh meh aapay. God Himself is pervading, and permeating all.
dfs AU TAS" By 6 fend All Ja Il (804-8, fares, He 5)
har jap rasnaa dukh na vi-aapay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord with your tongue, and pain will not afflict you. ||1]|Pause] |
fsa gu ag sufs fenrfumr il (804-9, fase, 12 5) tikhaa bhookh baho tapat vi-aapi-aa. One who is afflicted by the terrible fire of thirst and desire,
Hise se df ofa AA AUT NII (804-9, frees, H2 5) seetal bha-ay har har jas jaapi-aa. ||2]| becomes cool, chanting the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2] |
afe A356 Hsy 3 ufenit Il (804-10, fuares, He 5) kot jatan santokh na paa-i-aa. By millions of efforts, peace is not obtained;
He fgustar of ae afenr 31 (804-10, freee, He 5) man tariptaanaa har gun gaa-i-aa. ||3]|| the mind is satisfied only by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
2g safs ys uisaet Il (804-10, frees, ue 5) dayh bhagat parabh antarjaamee. Please bless me with devotion, O God, O Searcher of hearts.
Soa ot Fst AnMiT SUUNAoll (s04-11, fawrew, He 5)
naanak kee baynantee su-aamee. ||4]|5||10|| This is Nanak's prayer, O Lord and Master. ||4||5||10]|
fase HIS U Il (804-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
TT UT Sarat uTEhat Il (804-11, fawrew, ve 5) gur pooraa vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. By great good fortune, the Perfect Guru is found.
ffs Arg af ony forreot IAI (804-12, frre, M3 5) mil saaDhoo har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]| Meeting with the Holy Saints, meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
UTSYIH YS Sot AGS Il (804-12, fawres, us 5) paarbarahm parabh tayree sarnaa. O Supreme Lord God, I seek Your Sanctuary.
fxofia are SH TT AX Vas AU TIC Il (804-12, fares, v2 5) kilbikh kaatai bhaj gur kay charnaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Guru's Feet, sinful mistakes are erased. ||1||Pause| |
Weta AGH Afs BASS | (804-13, frases, uz 5) avar karam sabh lokaachaar. All other rituals are just worldly affairs;
ffs Arg Afar df= Sars I (804-13, fares, we 5) mil saaDhoo sang ho-ay uDhaar. ||2| | joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved. ||2||
fAfyfs AAS HE shes I (804-14, fares, ne 5) simrit saasat bayd beechaaray. One may contemplate the Simritees, Shaastras and Vedas,
mbt on fas ufs ard Sil (804-14, forse, v2 5)
japee-ai naam jit paar utaaray. ||3]|
but only by chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is one saved and carried across. ||3]||
We oad a@ ys fasur adhit i (304-14, frrew, He 5) jan naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa karee-ai. Have Mercy upon servant Nanak, O God,
Ag ofa fre ford seal (804-15, freres, He 5) saaDhoo Dhoor milai nistaree-ai. | |4]|6]|11]|
and bless him with the dust of the feet of the Holy, that he may be emancipated. [14] 16] [221]
Pass HIS U Il (804-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ad a Age foe ufo star il (904-15, fawres, us 5) gur kaa sabad riday meh cheenaa. I contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad within my heart;
AIS HOTA UTS MATS IAI (804-16, fawreS, He 5) Sagal manorath pooran aaseenaa. ||1]|| all my hopes and desires are fulfilled. ||1]|
AS Hot a HY CAG alae Il (804-16, farores, 3 5) sant janaa kaa mukh oojal keenaa. The faces of the humble Saints are radiant and bright;
ate faxsur mua aH Stat AU TIS Il (804-16, frees, 2 5)
kar kirpaa apunaa naam deenaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
the Lord has mercifully blessed them with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
nig qu S A ata Blase Il (804-17, fawres, ue 5) anDh koop tay kar geh leenaa. Holding them by the hand, He has lifted them up out of the deep, dark pit,
AA OE Aas Yaetor iQ (804-17, frees, He 5) jai jai kaar jagat pargateenaa. ||2|| and their victory is celebrated throughout the world. ||2| |
ate 3 Ba So usta Il (804-17, fares, ue 5) neechaa tay ooch oon pooreenaa. He elevates and exalts the lowly, and fills the empty.
MS SH HOT TA BLOT Sli (804-18, frees, He 5) amrit naam mahaa ras leenaa. ||3]|| They receive the supreme, sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam. ||3]|
Ho 36 feaHe uy Ae dtar Il (804-18, frees, He 5) man tan nirmal paap jal kheenaa. The mind and body are made immaculate and pure, and sins are burnt to ashes.
AT Sod YS SS YALA ISDN (804-18, frarey, He 5) kaho naanak parabh bha-ay parseenaa. ||4||7||12|| Says Nanak, God is pleased with me. ||4]|7||12||
PaaS HIS U Il (804-19) bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hae Hose ureinifs HIST Il (804-19, fuses, He 5)
Sagal manorath paa-ee-ah meetaa. All desires are fulfilled, O my friend,
ust tou
3do SHS fA went Sse INA (805-1, fares, He 5) charan kamal si-o laa-ee-ai cheetaa. ||1]| lovingly centering your consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1]|
3G afeosdt A Ys fares Il (805-1, frees, He 5) ha-o balihaaree jo parabhoo Dhi-aavat. I am a Sacrifice to those who meditate on God.
Hote 38 dfs of as Wes IU TIC Il (805-1, fasres, v2 5) jalan bujhai har har gun gaavat. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The fire of desire is quenched, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause| |
HeG HOH Jes SSS Il (805-2, fuses, ue 5) safal janam hovat vadbhaagee. One's life become fruitful and rewarding, by great good fortune.
AuAfa sus fee walt QI (805-2, faeres, He 5) saaDhsang raameh liv laagee. ||2|| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, enshrine love for the Lord. ||2]|
Hfs ufs Ue AY AOA nde II fea fone & feAT UPHTSHET ISI (805-2, frees, He 5) mat pat Dhan sukh sahj anandaa. ik nimakh na visrahu parmaanandaa. ||3]| Wisdom, honor, wealth, peace and celestial bliss are attained, if one does not forget the Lord of supreme bliss, even for an instant. ||3]|
Ufg ean at fe fimimA west Il (805-3, fasres, He 5) har darsan kee man pi-aas ghanayree. My mind is so very thirsty for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
als soa Asfe ys Sat USITIISI (805-4, frees, Hs 5)
bhanat naanak saran parabh tayree. ||4||8||13]| Prays Nanak, O God, I seek Your Sanctuary. ||4]|8]|13]|
PaaS HIS U Il (805-4)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hfa fase AS aed faa Il (805-4, frees, Hs 5) mohi nirgun sabh gunah bihoonaa. I am worthless, totally lacking all virtues.
efenr ufs nruat ate Start IA (805-5, freee, He 5) da-i-aa Dhaar apunaa kar leenaa. ||1]| Bless me with Your Mercy, and make me Your Own. ||1||
Ha He 36 ofa dufs FofEnr I (805-5, fares, H 5) mayraa man tan har gopaal suhaa-i-aa. My mind and body are embellished by the Lord, the Lord of the World.
ate fasur yg we Hfo wirfeni 4 TIS Il (805-6, faves, He 5)
kar kirpaa parabh ghar meh aa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. Granting His Mercy, God has come into the home of my heart. ||1]|Pause] |
Safs 22H F ASHTS Il (805-6, frases, ve 5) bhagat vachhal bhai kaatanhaaray. He is the Lover and Protector of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear.
HATS Arad wet Sss urs II (805-6, frares, v2 5) sansaar Saagar ab utray paaray. ||2|| Now, I have been carried across the world-ocean. ||2||
ufs3 urea ys fase afe Sfimr il (s05-7, faeres, us 5) patit paavan parabh birad bayd laykhi-aa. It is God's Way to purify sinners, say the Vedas.
UTSHIH A Bog Ufimr Wil (905-7, freses, He 5)
paarbarahm so nainhu paykhi-aa. ||3]|| I have seen the Supreme Lord with my eyes. ||3]|
WoAfa yae SITES Il (805-7, fraves, Hs 5) saaDhsang pargatay naaraa-in. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord becomes manifest.
TX UH Als TY UBTES IICNII! (805-8, fawres, He 5)
naanak daas sabh dookh palaa-in. ||4||9||14]| O slave Nanak, all pains are relieved. ||4||9||14]|
faSH HIS U Il (805-8)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ASH AS UT SHAT AST Il (905-8, frsew, us 5) kavan jaanai parabh tum"ree sayvaa. Who can know the value of serving You, God?
ys nifeorat nee miseT IAI (805-9, fares, He 5) parabh avinaasee alakh abhayvaa. ||1]|| God is imperishable, invisible and incomprehensible. ||1] |
GE Inis ys alsa sts Il (805-9, frovey, ue 5) gun bay-ant parabh gahir gambheeray. His Glorious Virtues are infinite; God is profound and unfathomable.
Ca HIG Homi ys HT Il (805-9, faares, He 5) ooch mahal su-aamee parabh mayray. The Mansion of God, my Lord and Master, is lofty and high.
3 muduT SAT HS AU TIS Il (805-10, frerew, us 5) too aprampar thaakur mayray. ||1]| rahaa-o. You are unlimited, O my Lord and Master. ||1||Pause] |
San fag dt & TA Il (805-10, fares, Hs 5) aykas bin naahee ko doojaa. There is no other than the One Lord.
3H ot Weg Must UAT III (805-10, faeres, 42 5) tum" hee jaanhu apnee poojaa. ||2|| You alone know Your worship and adoration. ||2||
MTU AE S IST FT Il (805-11, fawrew, vs 5) aaphu kachhoo na hovat bhaa-ee. No one can do anything by himself, O Siblings of Destiny.
fan ys 22 A OH uret ISI (805-11, frees, He 5) jis parabh dayvai so naam paa-ee. ||3]|| He alone obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, unto whom God bestows it. ||3] |
AW Soa HAS Us sem I (g05-11, frees, 8 5) kaho naanak jo jan parabh bhaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, that humble being who pleases God,
ae fous ug fs dt urfemr siAONAUil (805-12, frees, Hs 5) gun niDhaan parabh tin hee paa-i-aa. ||4||10||15]| he alone finds God, the treasure of virtue. ||4]|10]|15]]|
faoSs HIS U Il (805-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HS ads Hf IE S Them Il (805-12, fuses, He 5) maat garabh meh haath day raakhi-aa. Extending His Hand, the Lord protected you in your mother's womb.
dfs oF efs fafimr ee ofimr iil (805-13, frees, He 5) har ras chhod bikhi-aa fal chaakhi-aa. ||1]| Renouncing the sublime essence of the Lord, you have tasted the fruit of poison. ||1]|
3H dfae AS efs AA Il (805-13, fares, He 5) bhaj gobid sabh chhod janjaal. Meditate, vibrate on the Lord of the Universe, and renounce all entanglements.
Wa 7H omfe Hurd HS 3a 3g fate we aos AU TIS Il (805-14, ferorew, we 5)
jab jam aa-ay sanghaarai moorhay tab tan binas jaa-ay bayhaal. ||1]| rahaa-o. When the Messenger of Death comes to murder you, O fool, then your body will be shattered and helplessly crumble. ||1||Pause] |
3O HO US must ate afumi Il (805-14, frees, v2 5) tan man Dhan apnaa kar thaapi-aa. You hold onto your body, mind and wealth as your own,
asad fea fond o Aum QI (805-15, fuses, He 5)
karanhaar ik nimakh na jaapi-aa. ||2|| and you do not meditate on the Creator Lord, even for an instant. ||2| |
Ho HT nig gu ular il (805-15, frees, He 5) mahaa moh anDh koop pari-aa. You have fallen into the deep, dark pit of great attachment.
uTggoH Hfenr utes farfenr Sil (s05-15, frees, us 5) paarbarahm maa-i-aa patal bisri-aa. ||3]| Caught in the illusion of Maya, you have forgotten the Supreme Lord. ||3]|
zs ofa ys atese afemr II (805-16, frees, He 5) vadai bhaag parabh keertan gaa-i-aa. By great good fortune, one sings the Kirtan of God's Praises.
ASAfa SSR YF ufEMi SAA ll (805-16, frees, we 5)
satsang naanak parabh paa-i-aa. ||4||11]|16|| In the Society of the Saints, Nanak has found God. ||4]|11]|16]|
PASS HIS U Il (805-17)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HS fust AS sau sret Il (805-17, frees, 2 5) maat pitaa sut banDhap bhaa-ee. Mother, father, children, relatives and siblings
SSA IM UTSHFIH AIT |All (805-17, frees, ve 5) naanak ho-aa paarbarahm sahaa-ee. ||1|| - O Nanak, the Supreme Lord is our help and support. ||1]|
HY AOA MTSE We Il (805-18, fares, He 5) sookh sahj aanand ghanay. He blesses us with peace, and abundant celestial bliss.
Ts us ust a at wat ufo Tata a At o TE UU! TIS Il (805-18, fuses, v2 5) gur pooraa pooree jaa kee banee anik gunaa jaa kay jaahi na ganay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Perfect is the Bani, the Word of the Perfect Guru. His Virtues are so many, they cannot be counted. ||1]||Pause] |
Has ASAH AI YF MME Il (805-19, faarew, ve 5) sagal sara‘jaam karay parabh aapay. God Himself makes all arrangements.
Be HSTE A YS ANY III (805-19, fees, us 5) bha-ay manorath so parabh jaapay. ||2|| Meditating on God, desires are fulfilled. ||2]|
We UH AH HY aT VST II (805-19, fuses, He 5) arath Dharam kaam mokh kaa daataa. He is the Giver of wealth, Dharmic faith, pleasure and liberation.
Us to€ udt set ffs frufs faarst Sil (806-1, fase, 12 5)
pooree bha-ee simar simar biDhaataa. ||3]| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny, I am fulfilled. ||3]|
AaAfa sete Ja HSM i (806-1, faeres, He 5) saaDhsang naanak rang maani-aa. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak enjoys the Lord's Love.
ufs orfenr us afe urfenr isiINI Il (806-1, frees, v8 5) ghar aa-i-aa poorai gur aani-aa. ||4]|12]|17]| He has returned home, with the Perfect Guru. ||4]|12]]17]|
farses HIS U Il (806-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Wa fours usa TSS NAN TI Il (806-2, fawrew, v2 5) sarab niDhaan pooran gurdayv. ||1|| rahaa-o. All treasures come from the Perfect Divine Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs Ts SH AUS 3d Ale Il (806-2, fuses, He 5) har har naam japat nar jeevay. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the man lives.
Hfg yng AAS Od StS IAI (g06-3, frares, He 5) mar khu-aar saakat nar theevay. ||1]| The faithless cynic dies in shame and misery. ||1]|
TH BH IMT TUSTT Il (806-3, fuses, He 5) raam naam ho-aa rakhvaaraa. The Name of the Lord has become my Protector.
BY HSE AAS SIT Ql (806-3, frases, ue 5) jhakh maara-o saakat vaychaaraa. ||2|| The wretched, faithless cynic makes only useless efforts. ||2||
fea afs afs usta wad Il (806-4, fuses, H2 5) nindaa kar kar pacheh ghanayray. Spreading slander, many have been ruined.
fraza an a@ fafa Ug SII (s06-4, foes, He 5) mirtak faas galai sir pairay. ||3]| Their necks, heads and feet are tied by death's noose. ||3]|
AT SSA Auld AS SH Il (306-4, fares, He 5) kaho naanak jaapeh jan naam. Says Nanak, the humble devotees chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
a a fsafe 5 nr] AM ISIASIACI (806-5, fares, 42 5)
taa kay nikat na aavai jaam. ||4||13]|18]| The Messenger of Death does not even approach them. ||4||13]|18]|
og faoee HIS Uwe 8 BUS (806-6) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 ghar 4 dupday Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsas ATE II (806-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
azo Ara fis ys mus Il (806-7, frees, ne 5) kavan sanjog mila-o parabh apnay. What blessed destiny will lead me to meet my God?
us Us fSeHY Het Ths AUS IAI (806-7, faares, He 5) pal pal nimakh sadaa har japnay. ||1|| Each and every moment and instant, I continually meditate on the Lord. ||1]|
Jdo FHS ys a fos fame i (306-7, faves, v2 5) charan kamal parabh kay nit Dhi-aava-o. I meditate continually on the Lotus Feet of God.
ade A Hfs fas UISH USS IA TIS Il (806-8, frares, He 5) kavan so mat jit pareetam paava-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. What wisdom will lead me to attain my Beloved? ||1]||Pause| |
MAT faut ATT Us AT Il (s06-8, frees, He 5) aisee kirpaa karahu parabh mayray. Please, bless me with such Mercy, O my God,
dfs Had AAT AY FF NNAUIAEN (806-8, fawres, 12 5) har naanak bisar na kaahoo bayray. ||2||1||19]| that Nanak may never, ever forget You. ||2||1]|19]|
faTSH HIS U Il (806-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
TIS GHG YS fase fim il (s06-9, fares, ve 5) charan kamal parabh hirdai Dhi-aa-ay. Within my heart, I meditate on the Lotus Feet of God.
da TS Ade AY US IAI (806-9, fuerew, He 5) rog ga-ay saglay sukh paa-ay. ||1]| Disease is gone, and I have found total peace. ||1]|
dfs zu afent Hs ere Il (806-10, frees, He 5) gur dukh kaati-aa deeno daan. The Guru relieved my sufferings, and blessed me with the gift.
HES HOH Alea UTS IA TIS Il (806-10, faares, He 5) safal janam jeevan parvaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. My birth has been rendered fruitful, and my life is approved. ||1||Pause||
nee Fa nifys ys ast il (806-11, frees, He 5) akath kathaa amrit parabh baanee. The Ambrosial Bani of God's Word is the Unspoken Speech.
AI aoa Afy Me famrst MQNQNOM (s06-11, frees, v8 5)
kaho naanak jap jeevay gi-aanee. ||2]|2||20|| Says Nanak, the spiritually wise live by meditating on God. ||2||2||20||
fase HIS U Il (806-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
As uret afs Afsats ud Il (g06-12, fares, He 5) saa™t paa-ee gur satgur pooray. The Guru, the Perfect True Guru, has blessed me with peace and tranquility.
HY Sun aA wade FT AU JIS Il (806-12, faerey, v2 5)
sukh upjay baajay anhad tooray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Peace and joy have welled up, and the mystical trumpets of the unstruck sound current vibrate. ||1||Pause| |
amy uTy AsTu fear Il (806-12, fuares, He 5) taap paap santaap binaasay. Sufferings, sins and afflictions have been dispelled.
ofa fhnas faatea Afs SA IAI (806-13, faares, H8 5)
har simrat kilvikh sabh naasay. ||1]| Remembering the Lord in meditation, all sinful mistakes have been erased. ||1] |
moe add fife Hea oct Il (806-13, frares, He 5) anad karahu mil sundar naaree. Joining together, O beautiful soul-brides, celebrate and make merry.
Ofs SHfa ASt UA AST NNSA (806-13, fares, He 5)
gur naanak mayree paij savaaree. ||2||3||21]| Guru Nanak has saved my honor. ||2]|3]|21]|
Pass HIS U Il (806-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HHS Ho Oo Hf HS Safe afomr ofS fers II (806-14, frees, He 5)
mamtaa moh Dharoh mad maataa banDhan baaDhi-aa at bikraal.
Intoxicated with the wine of attachment, love of worldly possessions and deceit, and bound in bondage, he is wild and hideous.
feo feo fens faors aga mu adt Svar HH A AD IAI (806-15, frees, He 5)
din din chhijat bikaar karat a-oDh faahee faathaa jam kai jaal. ||1]|
Day by day, his life is winding down; practicing sin and corruption, he is trapped by the noose of Death. ||1]|
Sot Aafe ys ete efeniar I (806-15, faeres, us 5) tayree saran parabh deen da-i-aalaa. I seek Your Sanctuary, O God, Merciful to the meek.
Ho fan Arad vfs aret Gusg AT Afor Fev AU TIS Il (806-16, fawrew, 3 5)
mahaa bikham saagar at bhaaree uDhrahu saaDhoo sang ravaalaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have crossed over the terrible, treacherous, enormous world-ocean, with the dust of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]||Pause| |
us AYES AH AMM Ae fis A SHaT HD I (s06-16, fraves, Hs 5)
parabh sukh-daatay samrath su-aamee jee-o pind sabh tumraa maal.
O God, Giver of peace, All-powerful Lord and Master, my soul, body and all wealth are Yours.
3H & 8S AST USHA BSA A UST Het HUTS MUU (806-17, frares, ve 5) bharam kay banDhan kaatahu parmaysar naanak kay parabh sadaa kirpaal. [21141 [22]|
Please, break my bonds of doubt, O Transcendent Lord, forever Merciful God of Nanak. ||2]|4]|22| |
faTSG HIS U Il (806-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ages mse at usHAfs mua fase AHtfamr Il (s06-18, frares, Hs 5) sagal anand kee-aa parmaysar apnaa birad sam"aari-a. The Transcendent Lord has brought bliss to all; He has confirmed His Natural Way.
AG Aa de fours faa Afs usetfamr Ail (806-19, frees, He 5)
saaDh janaa ho-ay kirpaalaa bigsay sabh parvaari-aa. ||1]|
He has become Merciful to the humble, holy Saints, and all my relatives blossom forth in joy. |[1]|
adn Afsafe »rfu Hefei Il (g06-19, fares, He 5) kaaraj satgur aap savaari-aa. The True Guru Himself has resolved my affairs.
Us tod zat ora ofa afee ot Aa Hares afore steorfaor na TIS il (807-1, frerew, ve 5)
vadee aarjaa har gobind kee sookh mangal kali-aan beechaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He has blessed Hargobind with long life, and taken care of my comfort, happiness and well-being. ||1||Pause] |
ze fge fase afar de Aas Ahr Aefenr | (807-1, frares, He 5)
van tarin taribhavan hari-aa ho-ay saglay jee-a saaDhaari-aa.
The forests, meadows and the three worlds have blossomed forth in greenery; He gives His Support to all beings.
Ho fee aoa SH ure uso fees yRfamr NQNUNSII (807-2, fawr~es, He 5)
man ichhay naanak fal paa-ay pooran ichh pujaari-aa. ||2||5||23]|
Nanak has obtained the fruits of his mind's desires; his desires are totally fulfilled. 2] 15] 1231]
fares HIG U Il (807-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fan Gufs des fens I (807-3, faves, wu 5) jis oopar hovat da-i-aal. One who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy,
dfs fies are A ATS NU TIS Il (807-3, fuares, He 5) har simrat kaatai so kaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. passes his time in contemplative meditation. ||1]||Pause| |
ATGHfa SAH GUT Il (807-4, fuarew, Hz 5)
saaDhsang bhajee-ai gopaal.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate, and vibrate upon the Lord of the Universe.
TS WES ZS AH AS IAI (807-4, fwrew, we 5) gun gaavat tootai jam jaal. ||1|| Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the noose of death is cut away. ||1]|
nmy Afsag md yfsurs il (307-4, frees, He 5) aapay satgur aapay partipaal. He Himself is the True Guru, and He Himself is the Cherisher.
SOA AS AT ISS IQNENVWVI (807-4, fuerew, v2 5)
naanak jaachai saaDh ravaal. ||2||6]|24]| Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||2||6||24]|
faTSs HIS U Il (807-5)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Hfs fag afe ofs BN Il (807-5, faeres, He 5) man meh sinchahu har har naam. Irrigate your mind with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
mates Atdso Sts TE WH IU (807-5, fase, ve 5) an-din keertan har gun gaam. ||1|| Night and day, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||1]|
MAT Us ATT Ho AT Il (807-6, frrew, He 5) aisee pareet karahu man mayray. Enshrine such love, O my mind,
MTS UIT YS AST Sd IAI FIG Il (807-6, faores, us 5) aath pahar parabh jaanhu nayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. that twenty-four hours a day, God will seem near to you. ||1||Pause| |
AT BOA AT aA (SING Sa Il (807-7, fuarew, v2 5) kaho naanak jaa kay nirmal bhaag. Says Nanak, one who has such immaculate destiny
Ts BIS Sk AHS BA MQWANQUI (807-7, fasres, ve 5)
har charnee taa kaa man laag. ||2||7||25|| - his mind is attached to the Lord's Feet. ||2||7||25||
farses HIS U Il (807-7)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ja afeur ufs nif aetfemr | (807-8, frees, v8 5) rog ga-i-aa parabh aap gavaa-i-aa. The disease is gone; God Himself took it away.
Sle uet AY AA We mfeA TIS Il (807-8, fase, v2 5) need pa-ee sukh sahj ghar aa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I sleep in peace; peaceful poise has come to my home. ||1]|Pause] |
of ofa SHO weg He STE II (07-8, faores, 2 5) raj raj bhojan kaavahu mayray bhaa-ee. Eat to your fill, O my Siblings of Destiny.
nifys on fee nfs fret all (807-9, frees, He 5) amrit naam rid maahi Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]| Meditate on the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart. ||1]|
TSX TI UT ATS Il (807-9, fares, Hu: 5) naanak gur pooray sarnaa-ee. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru,
fafs mud on at UA guret NCE (807-9, frees, He 5) jin apnay naam kee paij rakhaa-ee. ||2||8]|26] | who has preserved the honor of His Name. ||2]|8]|26]|
fas HIS U Il (807-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Afsad ats a6 maAfas we ae Il TICS Il (807-10, fares, v2 5)
satgur kar deenay asthir ghar baar. rahaa-o.
The True Guru has protected my hearth and home, and made them permanent. | |Pause| |
Af foe ad feo fave at fSR rat dt Hd AaSTS AI (807-11, fares, He 5) jo jo nind karai in garihan kee tis aagai hee maarai kartaar. ||1]| Whoever slanders these homes, is pre-destined by the Creator Lord to be destroyed.
[11
Sod UA ST at ASS AT A ASS MS NUTS NQUCNQII (807-11, faerew, He 5)
naanak daas taa kee sarnaa-ee jaa ko sabad akhand apaar. ||2]||9]||27]|| Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God; the Word of His Shabad is unbreakable and infinite. ||2||9]|27] |
fas HIS U Il (807-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
sy Hay Aa ae faon 3 Ia Il (807-12, fuses, ue 5) taap santaap saglay ga-ay binsay tay rog. The fever and sickness are gone, and the diseases are all dispelled.
USqaH J safhor ASS FA Sa il TIS Il (807-13, fares, vs 5)
paarbarahm too bakhsi-aa santan ras bhog. rahaa-o.
The Supreme Lord God has forgiven you, so enjoy the happiness of the Saints. | |Pause| |
Hea Aa Sot sat Sa He Jo NTs Il (807-13, faarew, He 5) sarab sukhaa tayree mandlee tayraa man tan aarog. All joys have entered your world, and your mind and body are free of disease.
qo wed fas on & feo meus Aa INA (807-14, fares, He 5)
gun gaavhu nit raam kay ih avkhad jog. ||1]|
So chant continuously the Glorious Praises of the Lord; this is the only potent medicine. ||1||
wife sAg we GH Hfs fed 3S Ada Il (807-14, faeres, He 5)
aa-ay bashu ghar days meh ih bhalay sanjog.
So come, and dwell in your home and native land; this is such a blessed and auspicious occasion.
Soa US AUAS Be Bld Te faGar NANVONQCH (807-15, frwew, He 5)
naanak parabh suparsan bha-ay leh ga-ay bi-og. ||2||10||28]|
O Nanak, God is totally pleased with you; your time of separation has come to an end. ||2]|10]|28]|
fasrSs HIS U Il (807-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ag Ala o Todt wifes AAs Il (807-15, frees, 3 5) kaahoo sang na chaalhee maa-i-aa janjaal. The entanglements of Maya do not go along with anyone.
Cfs frors szufs AsG & femrs 1 TIE Il (807-16, faarew, v2 5)
ooth siDhaaray chhatarpat santan kai khi-aal. rahaa-o.
Even kings and rulers must arise and depart, according to the wisdom of the Saints. | |Pause| |
mata a8 fiona feo ug at Bs Il (807-16, farses, He 5) aha’-buDh ka-o binsanaa ih Dhur kee dhaal. Pride goes before the fall - this is a primal law.
ag not Honfs nafs fatter feerars All (807-17, foes, He 5)
baho jonee janmeh mareh bikhi-aa bikraal. ||1]|
Those who practice corruption and sin, are born into countless incarnations, only to die again. ||1||
Afs see ATG adte fos Aufs Tus Il (807-17, fuses, He 5)
sat bachan saaDhoo kaheh nit jaapeh gupaal. The Holy Saints chant Words of Truth; they meditate continually on the Lord of the Universe.
frnifs fruits staat 3d Ufa A FA BS NANAUICI (807-18, fuses, uz 5)
simar simar naanak taray har kay rang laal. ||2||11]|29]| Meditating, meditating in remembrance, O Nanak, those who are imbued with the color of the Lord's Love are carried across. ||2||11]|29]|
fas HIS U Il (807-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hon AHfG nse AY ud afs eto Il (807-19, frees, 2 5) sahj samaaDh anand sookh pooray gur deen. The Perfect Guru has blessed me with celestial Samaadhi, bliss and peace.
Ret Aoet Afar ys nits ae sto il TIS Il (807-19, frorew, ue 5)
sadaa sahaa-ee sang parabh amrit gun cheen. rahaa-o.
God is always my Helper and Companion; I contemplate His Ambrosial Virtues. | |Pause| |
UST coc
AA ag Aas Hfs Seta Afs Aho Il (s0s-1, frees, 18 5) jai jai kaar jagtar meh locheh sabh jee-aa. Triumphant cheers greet me all across the world, and all beings yearn for me.
HYHS se Asad ys ag fag 3 Ahr Ill (s08-1, fares, He 5) suparsan bha-ay satgur parabhoo kachh bighan na thee-aa. ||1]|| The True Guru and God are totally pleased with me; no obstacle blocks my way. ||1]||
W a nig cents Us St aA AS STA Il (808-1, frees, Hs 5) jaa kaa ang da-i-aal parabh taa kay sabh daas. One who has the Merciful Lord God on his side - everyone becomes his slave.
Het Het Sfanreint Sax TT UTA MQNAUBOM (808-2, frees, v2 5)
sadaa sadaa vadi-aa-ee-aa naanak gur paas. ||2||12||30|| Forever and ever, O Nanak, glorious greatness rests with the Guru. ||2||12||30||
Ta fase Hos u wg useue (808-3) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 ghar 5 cha-upday Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsas urrfe II (808-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fs Hae wa Afro fAS ae wea as Il (08-4, fore, us 5) mitar mandal jag saaji-aa ji-o baaloo ghar baar. This perishable realm and world has been made like a house of sand.
faors as 3 wart fAS arare FETT IAI (808-4, fawres, wu: 5) binsat baar na laag-ee ji-o kaagad boo'daar. ||1|| In no time at all, it is destroyed, like the paper drenched with water. ||1]|
Afs Adt HoAT HS Hf AS Su atefa Il (s08-5, fuerew, nH 5) sun mayree mansaa manai maahi sat daykh beechaar. Listen to me, people: behold, and consider this within your mind.
fro rrfoa forsdt soit sfa ae we sre Ul TI Il (g08-5, frees, He 5)
siDh saaDhik girhee jogee taj ga-ay ghar baar. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Siddhas, the seekers, house-holders and Yogis have forsaken their homes and left. ||1]|Pause] |
AAT AUST dfs aT SAT HATS Il (808-6, fueres, He 5) jaisaa supnaa rain kaa taisaa sansaar. This world is like a dream in the night.
fenfens As faariby foo wars aTers IQI (808-6, fey, He 5) daristimaan sabh binsee-ai ki-aa lageh gavaar. ||2| | All that is seen shall perish. Why are you attached to it, you fool? ||2| |
as A avet HIS I Su So UATE II (808-7, fuares, He 5) kahaa so bhaa-ee meet hai daykh nain pasaar. Where are your brothers and friends? Open your eyes and see!
fefa we fefa sents Afs must Sg ISI (808-7, frees, He 5)
ik chaalay ik chaalsahi sabh apnee vaar. ||3]| Some have gone, and some will go; everyone must take his turn. |[3]|
fro ua Afsag Afeor A oAfag ofa eure il (808-7, faees, He 5) jin pooraa satgur sayvi-aa say asthir har du-aar. Those who serve the Perfect True Guru, remain ever-stable at the Door of the Lord.
He sod dig a OAT TY UA Hate NSIAISAI (08-8, fares, He 5) jan naanak har kaa daas hai raakh paij muraar. ||4]|1]|31]|
Servant Nanak is the Lord's slave; preserve his honor, O Lord, Destroyer of ego. [41 121]32]]
Pass HIS U Il (808-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Bao at efsnretor SHsfe ura il (sos-9, fase, v2 5) lokan kee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa baisantar paaga-o. The glories of the world, I cast into the fire.
fa@ fxs furrat nirust 3 8 aaa Al (808-9, faarew, ve 5) ji-o milai pi-aaraa aapnaa tay bol karaaga-o. ||1]| I chant those words, by which I may meet my Beloved. ||1]|
AG us He efeure df 3B sast wa Il (808-10, frees, He 5) ja-o parabh jee-o da-i-aal ho-ay ta-o bhagtee laaga-o. When God becomes Merciful, then He enjoins me to His devotional service.
wufe su He Ha a ffs fea fara nai Ta i (03-10, fares, ue 5)
lapat rahi-o man baasnaa gur mil ih ti-aaga-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
My mind clings to worldly desires; meeting with the Guru, I have renounced them. ||1]|Pause] |
ase Sost nifs wot feg HE Dra il gos-11, frees, ve 5) kara-o bayntee at ghanee ih jee-o homaaga-o. I pray with intense devotion, and offer this soul to Him.
maa nits Afs afar fur ford Aaa iI (sos-11, frees, He 5)
arath aan sabh vaari-aa pari-a nimakh sohaaga-o. ||2|| I would sacrifice all other riches, for a moment's union with my Beloved. ||2]|
Ud Hd Td 3 se SU nig TAS Il (808-12, fuares, ve 5) panch sang gur tay chhutay dokh ar raaga-o. Through the Guru, I am rid of the five villains, as well as emotional love and hate.
foe yarn yore sfemr fof sag ATG ISI (808-12, frees, He 5)
ridai pargaas pargat bha-i-aa nis baasur jaaga-o. ||3]|
My heart is illumined, and the Lord has become manifest; night and day, I remain awake and aware. ||3]||
Rafe Haas orfenr fan HAS Sa Il (s0s-13, frees, He 5) saran sohaagan aa-i-aa jis mastak bhaaga-o. The blessed soul-bride seeks His Sanctuary; her destiny is recorded on her forehead.
ad aoa fate ufeor 3g HS Alera NsilIQN32Kl (8038-13, faeres, He 5) kaho naanak tin paa-i-aa tan man seetlaaga-o. ||4||2]|32]|
Says Nanak, she obtains her Husband Lord; her body and mind are cooled and soothed. ||4]|2||32||
fasSH HIS U Il (808-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
oe da fs ag war fAA A SSSvaM Il (g08-14, frarew, Hz 5) laal rang tis ka-o lagaa jis kay vadbhaagaa. One is dyed in the color of the Lord's Love, by great good fortune.
Hot ae F ISEt ST Bal Va IA (808-15, fares, uz 5) mailaa kaday na hova-ee nah laagai daagaa. ||1]|| This color is never muddied; no stain ever sticks to it. ||1]|
yg ufear Auerehor fife AY af Il (s08-15, fares, He 5) parabh paa-i-aa sukh-daa-ee-aa mili-aa sukh bhaa-ay. He finds God, the Giver of peace, with feelings of joy.
Hofa AWa stad efsur ao ATE 9 ToS Il (808-16, fusrew, He 5)
sahj samaanaa bheetray chhodi-aa nah jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Celestial Lord blends into his soul, and he can never leave Him. ||1||Pause| |
Ad uo od fenruet fete gu o uteri (808-16, frees, He 5) jaraa maraa nah vi-aapa-ee fir dookh na paa-i-aa. Old age and death cannot touch him, and he shall not suffer pain again.
ut ifs mrurfonr afe ong aafenr 11211 (08-17, frares, He 5) pee amrit aaghaani-aa gur amar karaa-i-aa. ||2|| Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, he is satisfied; the Guru makes him immortal. ||2]|
A we fafo ofimer afs any yniar Il (808-17, faeres, v2 5) So jaanai jin chaakhi-aa har naam amolaa. He alone knows its taste, who tastes the Priceless Name of the Lord.
ants adt 3 wehat fomr afs yf Far Sil (s08-18, faeres, Hz 5) keemat kahee na jaa-ee-ai ki-aa kahi mukh bolaa. ||3]|| Its value cannot be estimated; what can I say with my mouth? ||[3]|
HeG UdH 3a uTIATH Te fof Sat aeat il (sos-is, few, v2 5)
safal daras tayraa paarbarahm gun niDh tayree banee.
Fruitful is the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Supreme Lord God. The Word of Your Bani is the treasure of virtue.
ua tor
ueg ufg 3d OH at Saat Aart ISUSNBSI (809-1, fuses, He 5)
paava-o Dhoor tayray daas kee naanak kurbaanee. ||4]|3]||33]| Please bless me with the dust of the feet of Your slaves; Nanak is a sacrifice. [14113] 133]|
fas'SH HIS U Il (809-1) bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
aug niust Hafs us Hfs fersur urd Il (809-2, faeres, v8 5) raakho apnee saran parabh mohi kirpaa Dhaaray. Keep me under Your Protection, God; shower me with Your Mercy.
Ae As 5 ASS Sty HUTT IAI (809-2, fawres, He 5) sayvaa kachhoo na jaan-oo neech moorkhaaray. ||1|| I do not know how to serve You; I am just a low-life fool. ||1]|
Hg aS sO Bug He YISH fms I (809-2, faares, 42 5) maan kara-o tuDh oopray mayray pareetam pi-aaray. I take pride in You, O my Darling Beloved.
JH Must HE SHS SH AUASTS MU FIG Il (809-3, fuses, ue 5) ham apraaDhee sad bhooltay tum" bakhsanhaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a sinner, continuously making mistakes; You are the Forgiving Lord. ||1||Pause| |
JH neaS AT MAY StS 3H fea ess Il (809-3, frorew, He 5) ham avgan karah asa‘kh neet tum" nirgun daataaray. I make mistakes each and every day. You are the Great Giver;
aH Hats ys fsorfar & ATH THT lil (809-4, fares, v2 5)
daasee sangat parabhoo ti-aag ay karam hamaaray. ||2||
I am worthless. I associate with Maya, your hand-maiden, and I renounce You, God; such are my actions. ||2]|
3H teg Ag fae cfeor og TH vifxgsuaTd Il (809-4, freres, us 5)
tum" dayvhu sabh kichh da-i-aa Dhaar ham akirat-ghanaaray.
You bless me with everything, showering me with Mercy; And I am such an ungrateful wretch!
ofa ud So we fA ag ffs WAHT? IIZII (809-5, faores, He 5) laag paray tayray daan si-o nah chit khasmaaray. ||3]| I am attached to Your gifts, but I do not even think of You, O my Lord and Master.
[I3I|
33 3 wofg fas oot SS ASST? Il (809-5, fawres, He 5) tujh tay baahar kichh nahee bhav kaatanhaaray. There is none other than You, O Lord, Destroyer of fear.
aT Soa Adle eens Td SI Ha Sud Igisiseil (809-6, frees, us 5)
kaho naanak saran da-i-aal gur layho mugaDh uDhaaray. ||4]|4||34||
Says Nanak, I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Merciful Guru; I am so foolish - please, save me! ||4||4||34||
fasTSs HIS U Il (809-7)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
SHO aT cit ys nruart foment i (809-7, frees, 3 5) dos na kaahoo deejee-ai parabh apnaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Don't blame anyone else; meditate on your God.
fas Afent Ae df war He Het are il (g09-7, fuses, v2 5) jit sayvi-ai sukh ho-ay ghanaa man so-ee gaa-ee-ai. ||1|| Serving Him, great peace is obtained; O mind, sing His Praises. ||1] |
ad af fumirg 3s first I (809-8, frares, v2 5) kahee-ai kaa-ay pi-aaray tujh binaa. O Beloved, other than You, who else should I ask?
3H tfenirs Anmit As vise TH IU TIS Il (s09-8, faares, us 5) tum" da-i-aal su-aamee sabh avgan hamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my Merciful Lord and Master; I am filled with all faults. ||1]|Pause] |
fA@ SH Jug (38 aT nigg St TT Il (809-9, fears, He 5) ji-o tum" raakho ti-o rahaa avar nahee chaaraa. As You keep me, I remain; there is no other way.
Slater ag Soho fx SH nATS III (809-9, faares, H3 5)
neeDhri-aa Dhar tayree-aa ik naam aDhaaraa. ||2|| You are the Support of the unsupported; You Name is my only Support. ||2]|
A 3H aeg At ser Hfs BSt HAST Il (809-10, frees, ne 5) jo tum" karahu so-ee bhalaa man laytaa muktaa. One who accepts whatever You do as good - that mind is liberated.
Hale AHat Sor Ag Sat AAS" ISI (g09-10, faerew, us 5) Sagal samagree tayree-aa sabh tayree jugtaa. ||3]|| The entire creation is Yours; all are subject to Your Ways. ||3]|
vdeo uns afs Ast AH SAT STS II (809-10, frarew, v2 5) charan pakhaara-o kar sayvaa jay thaakur bhaavai. I wash Your Feet and serve You, if it pleases You, O Lord and Master.
dg faurs vfimrs us Soa TE WS IGUUNSUI (s09-11, fees, He 5)
hohu kirpaal da-i-aal parabh naanak gun gaavai. ||4]|5]|35]|
Be Merciful, O God of Compassion, that Nanak may sing Your Glorious Praises. H4] 15] 135] |
fase HIS U Il (809-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fas oA fra Gud uA Sot SE Il (809-12, frees, 3 5) mirat hasai sir oopray pasoo-aa nahee boojhai. Death hovers over his head, laughing, but the beast does not understand.
we AE nidars Hid HIS! Sdt AS IU (809-12, fares, v3 5) baad saad aha‘kaar meh marnaa nahee soojhai. || 1]| Entangled in conflict, pleasure and egotism, he does not even think of death. ||1]|
Afsag Ae mua ard fers mse Il (809-13, frees, He 5) satgur sayvhu aapnaa kaahay firahu abhaagay. So serve your True Guru; why wander around miserable and unfortunate?
of SAS ITS aT SH SAH Ul TIS Il (809-13, fore, us 5) daykh kasumbhaa rangulaa kaahay bhool laagay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You gaze upon the transitory, beautiful safflower, but why do you get attached to it? ||1]|Pause| |
afe afs uy vag abot ease a STEHT II (809-14, faarew, He 5) kar kar paap darab kee-aa vartan kai taa-ee. You commit sins again and again, to gather wealth to spend.
Het fAG Het set Star SfS AT MII (09-14, fuses, He 5) maatee si-o maatee ralee naagaa uth jaa-ee. ||2|| But your dust shall mix with dust; you shall arise and depart naked. ||2||
WT at ahh AH ad 3 aa fasut il (809-14, fares, Hs 5) jaa kai kee-ai saram karai tay bair biroDhee. Those for whom you work, will become your spiteful enemies.
mis ote sfa wfod ad AST AUT ISI (809-15, fasres, He 5) ant kaal bhaj jaahigay kaahay jalahu karoDhee. ||3]| In the end, they will run away from you; why do you burn for them in anger? |[3]|
aH Se ASt dur faR HASfa ATH Il (809-15, fares, H2 5)
daas rayn so-ee ho-aa jis mastak karmaa.
He alone becomes the dust of the Lord's slaves, who has such good karma upon his forehead.
AT sea Hus se Afsag at Adar ISIENSEI (809-16, farses, He 5) kaho naanak banDhan chhutay satgur kee sarnaa. ||4||6||36]|
Says Nanak, he is released from bondage, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru. [14] 16] |36]|
faSG HIS U Il (809-16)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fiiae uses ufa ud us VSI FATS Il (809-17, frees, He 5) pingul parbat paar paray khal chatur bakeetaa. The cripple crosses over the mountain, the fool becomes a wise man,
nig fysee Afsor as sfe ystst iil (809-17, fareres, nH 5)
anDhulay taribhavan soojhi-aa gur bhayt puneetaa. ||1||
and the blind man sees the three worlds, by meeting with the True Guru and being purified. ||1]|
HfoHt ATT Hat at HOT He HIST Il (809-17, faeres, 3 5) mahimaa saaDhoo sang kee sunhu mayray meetaa. This is the Glory of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; listen, O my friends.
He wet afe ony od foo se BIST NU TIC Il (s09-18, fares, 2 5)
mail kho-ee kot agh haray nirmal bha-ay cheetaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Filth is washed away, millions of sins are dispelled, and the consciousness becomes immaculate and pure. ||1]|Pause| |
mt sats afse at atfe IASt FIST II (809-18, fuses, He 5)
aisee bhagat govind kee keet hastee jeetaa.
Such is devotional worship of the Lord of the Universe, that the ant can overpower the elephant.
A A ote nius FSA ms BE AST III (g09-19, foes, He 5)
jo jo keeno aapno tis abhai daan deetaa. ||2]|
Whoever the Lord makes His own, is blessed with the gift of fearlessness. ||2]| fy faoret df afe6 fee He feetst II (809-19, frares, ne 5)
singh bilaa-ee ho-ay ga-i-o tarin mayr dikheetaa. The lion becomes a cat, and the mountain looks like a blade of grass.
UST tq9o
AH Ads TH vires AG 3 Tot TSlse Sil (810-1, faves, ve 5) saram kartay dam aadh ka-o tay ganee Dhaneetaa. ||3]| Those who worked for half a shell, will be judged very wealthy. ||3]|
aze zaret afs AAG Sis Tots Il (810-1, frees, He 5) kavan vadaa-ee kahi saka-o bay-ant guneetaa. What glorious greatness of Yours can I describe, O Lord of infinite excellences?
afa fasur dfs aH SI Sea VT AAS NIDNBII (810-2, fares, v2 5)
kar kirpaa mohi naam dayh naanak dar sareetaa. ||4||7||37]|| Please bless me with Your Mercy, and grant me Your Name; O Nanak, I am lost without the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||4||7||37] |
fares HIS U Il (810-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
wdata ugar 3s BS IAT Ae Il (s10-3, fuses, H2 5) aha’-buDh parbaad neet lobh rasnaa saad. He is constantly entangled in pride, conflict, greed and tasty flavors.
eufe aufe fafa aftr firfemr faftmrfe 11911 (s10-3, frees, v8 5) lapat kapat garihi bayDhi-aa mithi-aa bikhi-aad. ||1]|| He is involved in deception, fraud, household affairs and corruption. ||1]|
mrt Udt SZ ufs ys Ta uSATE I (810-4, frases, ws 5) aisee paykhee naytar meh pooray gur parsaad. I have seen this with my eyes, by the Grace of the Perfect Guru.
oH fee us Haat oH fas fe nai Jae Il (810-4, fares, v2 5) raaj milakh Dhan jobnaa naamai bin baad. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Power, property, wealth and youth are useless, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
gu gu Aaast aus Sate I (10-5, fares, ue 5) roop Dhoop soganDh-taa kaapar bhogaad. Beauty, incense, scented oils, beautiful clothes and foods
fies Afa ufune 3a de esate IK (810-5, faeres, H2 5) milat sang paapisat tan ho-ay durgaad. ||2|| - when they come into contact with the body of the sinner, they stink. ||2| |
fees fess wou afer fuse Sas Safe Il (810-6, faves, He 5)
firat firat maanukh bha-i-aa khin bhangan dayhaad.
Wandering, wandering around, the soul is reincarnated as a human, but this body lasts only for an instant.
fea mire 3 yfomr ag rife sre SI (810-6, frees, 43 5) ih a-osar tay chooki-aa baho jon bharmaad. ||3]|| Losing this opportunity, he must wander again through countless incarnations. ||3]|
ys fasur 3 ad fxs ofa afe fare Il (810-6, frees, He 5)
parabh kirpaa tay gur milay har har bismaad.
By God's Grace, he meets the Guru; contemplating the Lord, Har, Har, he is wonderstruck.
HY HUH Sse MST SA UTS FE MICAH (810-7, fares, we 5) sookh sahj naanak anand taa kai pooran naad. ||4||8||38]|
He is blessed with peace, poise and bliss, O Nanak, through the perfect sound current of the Naad. ||4]|8]|38]|
fas HIS U Il (810-8)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
do Sf HS Sfoa 3d Aa AS Il (810-8, fuarew, H2 5) charan bha-ay sant bohithaa taray saagar jayt. The feet of the Saints are the boat, to cross over the world-ocean.
Hea ue Cfenra ufo afs ZA SS IAI (810-8, frees, v3 5)
maarag paa-ay udi-aan meh gur dasay bhayt. ||1]|
In the wilderness, the Guru places them on the Path, and reveals the secrets of the Lord's Mystery. ||1]|
ufs ofs af afs afa ad ate ate ofa 3S Il (810-9, faares, He 5) har har har har har haray har har har hayt. O Lord, Har Har Har, Har Har Haray, Har Har Har, I love You.
Gos 8s Aes afs ofa ofa FT Ul TS il (s10-9, fares, we 5)
oothat baithat sovtay har har har chayt. ||1]| rahaa-o.
While standing up, sitting down and sleeping, think of the Lord, Har Har Har. ||1]|Pause] |
Us TI nid Sa AT ATGHAS Il (810-10, fuses, He 5)
panch chor aagai bhagay jab saaDhsangayt.
The five thieves run away, when one joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Urt Wag we og fafa Ast AT iI (810-10, freee, v3 5)
poonjee saabat ghano laabh garihi sobhaa sayt. ||2]|
His investment is intact, and he earns great profits; his household is blessed with honor. ||2]|
faces vine fiurct fea adt 38S Il (810-10, faeres, v2 5) nihchal aasan mitee chint naahee dolayt. His position is unmoving and eternal, his anxiety is ended, and he wavers no more.
oH gore fife afenr ys Us SF ISI (10-11, faerew, He 5) bharam bhulaavaa mit ga-i-aa parabh paykhat nayt. ||3]| His doubts and misgivings are dispelled, and he sees God everywhere. ||3]|
Te Isls Ts afeat qe Admits AT Il (810-11, faares, He 5)
gun gabheer gun naa-ikaa gun kahee-ahi kayt.
The Virtues of our Virtuous Lord and Master are so profound; how many of His Glorious Virtues should I speak?
soa ufeor AOAfa dfs dfs MAST ISUCNSEN (g10-12, frees, He 5)
naanak paa-i-aa saaDhsang har har amrayt. ||4||9||39]| Nanak has obtained the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Company of the Holy. ||4]|9]|39]|
farses HIS U Il (810-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fag AO A Alea SS faaarst il (810-13, frores, we 5) bin saaDhoo jo jeevnaa tayto birthaaree. That life, which has no contact with the Holy, is useless.
feos Afar Afs gH fee afs set HST INAUI (810-13, frorew, He 5)
milat sang sabh bharam mitay gat bha-ee hamaaree. ||1|| Joining their congregation, all doubts are dispelled, and I am emancipated. ||1]|
wv fea 32 ATG Hfs Gur fea afsadt Il (810-14, faares, H2 5)
jaa din bhaytay saaDh mohi u-aa din balihaaree. That day, when I meet with the Holy - I am a sacrifice to that day.
3e HO MUS Ara fefs fefe JE edt Nai ToS I (810-14, faares, He 5) tan man apno jee-araa fir fir ha-o vaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Again and again, I sacrifice my body, mind and soul to them. ||1]||Pause] |
es gavet Hfo 3 fesat fessrct i (810-15, frees, ue 5) ayt chhadaa-ee mohi tay itnee darirh-taaree. They have helped me renounce this ego, and implant this humility within myself.
Hae 36 feg Ho sfeur fart mruareat i211 (810-15, frees, He 5)
Sagal rayn ih man bha-i-aa binsee apDhaaree. ||2||
This mind has become the dust of all men's feet, and my self-conceit has been dispelled. ||2]|
foe fee us saat & fis ufo art il (810-16, faares, v2 5) nind chind par dookhnaa ay khin meh jaaree. In an instant, I burnt away the ideas of slander and ill-will towards others.
cfenr Hfeor nig foate uy adt gaat SI (810-16, frees, v8 5) da-i-aa ma-i-aa ar nikat paykh naahee dooraaree. ||3]|| I see close at hand, the Lord of mercy and compassion; He is not far away at all. ||3]|
30 HO AHISe Se na HAS AAS Il (s10-17, frees, v2 5) tan man seetal bha-ay ab muktay sansaaree. My body and mind are cooled and soothed, and now, I am liberated from the world.
tS WS AS US US SSA TAATS ISUAONBOll (810-17, farses, He 5)
heet cheet sabh paraan Dhan naanak darsaaree. ||4||10||40]|
Love, consciousness, the breath of life, wealth and everything, O Nanak, are in the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||4]|10]|40]|
farses HIS U Il (810-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
2dG AIG SI TA at ua SIE AS Il (810-18, fawes, us 5) tahal kara-o tayray daas kee pag jhaara-o baal. I perform service for Your slave, O Lord, and wipe his feet with my hair.
HASa MUS 3S SE TS ASE GAG IAl (810-18, fawes, 2 5) mastak apnaa bhayt day-o gun sun-o rasaal. ||1]|
I offer my head to him, and listen to the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the source of bliss. ||1]|
3H feos Ha Ho AIG SH fag efenrs II (810-19, frees, 18 5) tum" miltay mayraa man jee-o tum" milhu da-i-aal. Meeting You, my mind is rejuvenated, so please meet me, O Merciful Lord.
fafa aa ufs nee ds feses fase 1a TIE Il (g10-19, faores, v2 5)
nis baasur man anad hot chitvat kirpaal. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Night and day, my mind enjoys bliss, contemplating the Lord of Compassion. ||1]|Pause| |
UST cq
nas Cures ATG ys f3q Bag us Il (811-1, faves, 3 5) jagat uDhaaran saaDh parabh tin" laagahu paal. God's Holy people are the saviors of the world; I grab hold of the hem of their robes.
Ha dit Be Us ASS Us I IIl (sit-1, fees, v8 5)
mo ka-o deejai daan parabh santan pag raal. ||2||
Bless me, O God, with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||2]| Gafs fimrou ag ddt adt AS UWS Il (811-2, faerew, v2 5)
ukat si-aanap kachh nahee naahee kachh ghaal. I have no skill or wisdom at all, nor any work to my credit.
gH Ss Tug He 3 Weg AH A] ISIl (811-2, frees, He 5)
bharam bhai raakho moh tay kaatahu jam jaal. ||3] |
Please, protect me from doubt, fear and emotional attachment, and cut away the noose of Death from my neck. ||3]|
fas@ as@ ages fust yfsure il (s11-3, forse, vs 5) bin-o kara-o karunaapatay pitaa partipaal. I beg of You, O Lord of Mercy, O my Father, please cherish me!
Te We 3d AGA SSX AY AS ISUIUISA (s11-3, frees, He 5)
gun gaava-o tayray saaDhsang naanak sukh saal. ||4||11]|41]|
I sing Your Glorious Praises, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Lord, Home of peace. ||4||11]]41]|
farses HIS U Il (811-4)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ast Sate A asfe 33 fas ae ates Il (s11-4, fares, He 5) keetaa lorheh so karahi tujh bin kachh naahi. Whatever You wish, You do. Without You, there is nothing.
ussTy sya ef a AHES ats AT NA (s11-4, fares, He 5) partaap tum"aaraa daykh kai jamdoot chhad jaahi. ||1|| Gazing upon Your Glory, the Messenger of Death leaves and goes away. ||1||
SHat faur 3 ect FAA MTA I (811-5, faares, v3 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay chhootee-ai binsai aha’mayv. By Your Grace, one is emancipated, and egotism is dispelled.
Ada AH HHT YS UT TIS AU TIS Il (811-5, fawres, v2 5)
sarab kalaa samrath parabh pooray gurdayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God is omnipotent, possessing all powers; He is obtained through the Perfect, Divine Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
das das dffor aH fag aT Il (si1-6, fares, we 5) khojat khojat khoji-aa naamai bin koor. Searching, searching, searching - without the Naam, everything is false.
Mes AY AS AUGAfa YS HOAT UT III (811-6, frerew, Hs 5)
jeevan sukh sabh saaDhsang parabh mansaa poor. ||2||
All the comforts of life are found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; God is the Fulfiller of desires. ||2||
fas fas weg fas fs3 oats froreu AS AST Il (811-7, frees, He 5)
jit jit laavhu tit tit lageh si-aanap sabh jaalee.
Whatever You attach me to, to that I am attached; I have burnt away all my cleverness.
AS AS SH Bau ag He Ste efenrst sil (si-7, fase, ue 5) jat kat tum" bharpoor hahu mayray deen da-i-aalee. ||3]| You are permeating and pervading everywhere, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek.
[I3I|
HS fae 3H 3 Walot Zoot UES Il (g11-8, faares, He 5) sabh kichh tum tay maagnaa vadbhaagee paa-ay. I ask for everything from You, but only the very fortunate ones obtain it.
Sot at mgeth ys Ate TS AES NUIVUSI (sis, faves, ve 5)
naanak kee ardaas parabh jeevaa gun gaa-ay. ||4||12||42|| This is Nanak's prayer, O God, I live by singing Your Glorious Praises. ||4||12||42||
farses HIG U Il (811-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
AUHGSs & TAA AHS Afs SAAT Il (811-9, fueres, us 5) saaDhsangat kai baasbai kalmal sabh nasnaa. Dwelling in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all sins are erased.
ys Ast df afsur 3 3 Tals S YAS Al (s11-9, faarew, ve 5) parabh saytee rang raati-aa taa tay garabh na garsanaa. ||1|| One who is attuned to the Love of God, is not cast into the womb of reincarnation.
[21
oy aes adfse a AS Set TAS Il (s11-10, fares, v2 5) naam kahat govind kaa soochee bha-ee rasnaa. Chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, the tongue becomes holy.
Ho 36 fone det dag a AY AUST NA TIS Il (811-10, faares, He 5) man tan nirmal ho-ee hai gur kaa jap japnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The mind and body become immaculate and pure, chanting the Chant of the Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs oA ous fume Hfs SAB JAS Il (si1-11, fres, v8 5)
har ras chaakhat Dharaapi-aa man ras lai hasnaa.
Tasting the subtle essence of the Lord, one is satisfied; receiving this essence, the mind becomes happy.
ufo yarn yate set Cafe aHe faa II (si1-11, faeres, H2 5)
buDh pargaas pargat bha-ee ulat kamal bigsanaa. ||2||
The intellect is brightened and illuminated; turning away from the world, the heart- lotus blossoms forth. ||2] |
Hise AYS Asy of AS gst FAST I (11-12, freres, we 5) seetal saa“t santokh ho-ay sabh boojhee tarisnaa. He is cooled and soothed, peaceful and content; all his thirst is quenched.
zd fen oes fife ane faoHe ats SAAT ISI (811-12, frees, He 5)
dah dis Dhaavat mit ga-ay nirmal thaan basnaa. ||3]| The mind's wandering in the ten directions is stopped, and one dwells in the immaculate place. ||3]|
TUSIS Thm se FH SAAT Il (811-13, frees, ve 5) raakhanhaarai raakhi-aa bha-ay bharam bhasnaa. The Savior Lord saves him, and his doubts are burnt to ashes.
on fours aoa et ufY AT SeAST ISIASISSI (811-13, faves, He 5)
naam niDhaan naanak sukhee paykh saaDh darsanaa. ||4]||13||43]| Nanak is blessed with the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. He finds peace, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Saints' Darshan. ||4]]13]|43]|
Pass HIS U Il (811-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
urat ua ulq aA a Se dfs feos Il (si1-14, faeres, He 5)
paanee pakhaa pees daas kai tab hohi nihaal.
Carry water for the Lord's slave, wave the fan over him, and grind his corn; then, you Shall be happy.
TA fHou froetdior nfarat Hfo ATH AM (811-15, frees, H2 5)
raaj milakh sikdaaree-aa agnee meh jaal. ||1|| Burn in the fire your power, property and authority. ||1]|
HZ Wot at gua fSR vaat Shar Il (911-15, fares, He 5) sant janaa kaa chhohraa tis charnee laag. Grasp hold of the feet of the servant of the humble Saints.
wurodt ezufs fsa 258 fsurfa nan sr i (11-15, feos, 2 5) maa-i-aaDhaaree chhatarpat tin" chhoda-o ti-aag. ||1|| rahaa-o. Renounce and abandon the wealthy, the regal overlords and kings. ||1||Pause]|
ASS OT ae ga A Aaa fours il (sii-16, frees, we 5) santan kaa daanaa rookhaa so sarab niDhaan. The dry bread of the Saints is equal to all treasures.
fafs ras ests yors 3 fay ANTS IQI (sil-16, frees, H2 5) garihi saakat chhateeh parkaar tay bikhoo samaan. ||2|| The thirty-six tasty dishes of the faithless cynic, are just like poison. ||2||
BIS AS a Bas Sle Has 3 Tet Il (si1-17, fases, v3 5) bhagat janaa kaa loograa odh nagan na ho-ee. Wearing the old blankets of the humble devotees, one is not naked.
Was frau smit ufses ufS vet Si (81-17, fares, He 5) saakat sirpaa-o raysmee pahirat pat kho-ee. ||3]|| But by putting on the silk clothes of the faithless cynic, one loses one's honor. ||3]|
Was fag ufe afar via Steg Je i (si-18, frees, vs 5) saakat si-o mukh jori-ai aDh veechahu tootai. Friendship with the faithless cynic breaks down mid-way.
fs AS ot Ae A ad fes Safa se igi (si-18, frees, we 5) har jan kee sayvaa jo karay it ooteh chhootai. ||4| |
But whoever serves the humble servants of the Lord, is emancipated here and hereafter. ||4||
AS fas 3H StS dor orfu ges gare I (g11-19, frees, v2 5) sabh kichh tum" hee tay ho-aa aap banat banaa-ee. Everything comes from You, O Lord; You Yourself created the creation.
PIAS FSS AT A FSA TS WET UNAS (811-19, faerew, 2 5)
darsan bhaytat saaDh kaa naanak gun gaa-ee. ||5||14]|44] |
Blessed with the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||5||14]|44]|
UST tAQ
farses HIS U Il (812-1)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Azot HOS die ofa Id SAT AA ASE Il (812-1, fares, ve 5) sarvanee sun-o har har haray thaakur jas gaava-o. With my ears, I listen to the Lord, Har, Har; I sing the Praises of my Lord and Master.
H3 ude ad AA ufe ofa an fms Il (812-2, frees, He 5) sant charan kar sees Dhar har naam Dhi-aava-o. ||1]|
I place my hands and my head upon the feet of the Saints, and meditate on the Lord's Name. ||1]|
ate fasur vfemins ys feo fofa fafa ure il (812-2, faeres, 2 5) kar kirpaa da-i-aal parabh ih niDh siDh paava-o. Be kind to me, O Merciful God, and bless me with this wealth and success.
Ha Hot at dear B HE BSE A TIS Il (812-3, fuares, ve 5) sant janaa kee raynukaa lai maathai laava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Obtaining the dust of the feet of the Saints, I apply it to my forehead. ||1]||Pause] |
ale 3 oly nifs ote dfs afs faa yor]? Il (812-3, fuarea, v2 5) neech tay neech at neech ho-ay kar bin-o bulaava-o. I am the lowest of the low, absolutely the lowest; I offer my humble prayer.
ure H@eT nity faurfar ASAfar AHTSE I2QI1 (812-4, fares, v2 5) paav malovaa aap ti-aag satsang samaava-o. ||2|| I wash their feet, and renounce my self-conceit; I merge in the Saints' Congregation.
[121] fA Af oo dnd nis asts o Wee Il (812-4, fears, He 5)
Saas Saas nah veesrai an kateh na Dhaava-o. With each and every breath, I never forget the Lord; I never go to another.
Hes Ho Tg sem wre Hg feevs@ Sil (812-5, frees, v2 5)
safal darsan gur bhaytee-ai maan moh mitaava-o. ||3]|
Obtaining the Fruitful Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I discard my pride and attachment. ||3]|
AS Hsy efeor cen Aterg qar]ee Il (812-5, freres, v2 5) sat santokh da-i-aa Dharam seegaar banaava-o. I am embellished with truth, contentment, compassion and Dharmic faith.
HeS ATaE StS MUS YS SSE ISIUWUINSUI (812-6, fares, He 5) safal suhaagan naankaa apunay parabh bhaava-o. ||4||15||45]| My spiritual marriage is fruitful, O Nanak; Iam pleasing to my God. ||4||15]|45]|
farSs HIS U Il (812-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
WcS Fo AY Aol AS Hig Yyaterfenr Il (812-7, frees, He 5) atal bachan saaDhoo janaa sabh meh paragtaa-i-aa. The words of the Holy are eternal and unchanging; this is apparent to everyone.
fan AS der AGHG fsA 3} Uf TMT INI (812-7, frees, He 5) jis jan ho-aa saaDhsang tis bhaytai har raa-i-aa. ||1]| That humble being, who joins the Saadh Sangat, meets the Sovereign Lord. ||1]|
feo usstfs afge at afu ofa wy urfemr I (812-8, faeres, 1: 5) ih parteet govind kee jap har sukh paa-i-aa. This faith in the Lord of the Universe, and peace, are found by meditating on the Lord.
wifsa ast vfs afs od ag wis & wrfeor nail Ja Il (812-8, faores, nH: 5)
anik baataa sabh kar rahay gur ghar lai aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Everyone is speaking in various ways, but the Guru has brought the Lord into the home of my self. ||1]|Pause] |
Hote ud at Tus ott ATATEMMT Il (g12-9, free, He 5)
saran paray kee raakh-taa naahee sehsaa-i-aa.
He preserves the honor of those who seek His Sanctuary; there is no doubt about this at all.
aoH sf ate on afe niGAg ester iI (812-9, frees, 3 5)
karam bhoom har naam bo-ay a-osar dulbhaa-i-aa. ||2||
In the field of actions and karma, plant the Lord's Name; this opportunity is so difficult to obtain! ||2||
nisart orfy ug AS as AafEr |l (812-10, fraves, Hs 5)
antarjaamee aap parabh sabh karay karaa-i-aa.
God Himself is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; He does, and causes everything to be done.
ufss uals we ad aad fagetfenr SII (812-10, fees, v8 5) patit puneet ghanay karay thaakur birdaa-i-aa. ||3]| He purifies so many sinners; this is the natural way of our Lord and Master. ||3]|
HS 3G Hod Ao HfeMr soHfeMr I (812-11, fares, v2 5) mat bhoolahu maanukh jan maa-i-aa bharmaa-i-aa. Don't be fooled, O mortal being, by the illusion of Maya.
ood fsa ufs sent Ff ufs ufsefeor eIIENEll (12-11, frees, He 5) naanak tis pat raakhsee jo parabh pehraa-i-aa. ||4||16||46]|| O Nanak, God saves the honor of those of whom He approves. ||4||16]|46] |
farses HIS U Il (812-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Het 3 fate Ato afs FIGs ST Il (812-12, fasres, ve 5) maatee tay jin saaji-aa kar durlabh dayh. He fashioned you from clay, and made your priceless body.
mod fgz Ho His wat face feA!eT IAI (812-13, faerew, He 5) anik chhidar man meh dhakay nirmal daristayh. ||1]| He covers the many faults in your mind, and makes you look immaculate and pure.
[21
fa@ ford ys HS 3 fAA a TE ST Il (812-13, feos, us 5) ki-o bisrai parabh manai tay jis kay gun ayh. So why do you forget God from your mind? He has done so many good things for you.
us fa ad fa ure fre A ssbH BT NAN TIE I (812-14, frarew, v2 5)
parabh taj rachay je aan si-o so ralee-ai khayh. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who forsakes God, and blends himself with another, in the end is blended with dust. ||1]]Pause||
finrag frag AA ATA HS faeH APT Il (812-14, faerea, He 5) simrahu simrahu saas saas mat bilam karayh. Meditate, meditate in remembrance with each and every breath - do not delay!
efs yuy ys fA seg Sf AS ST NI (812-15, frees, 3 5) chhod parpanch parabh si-o rachahu taj koorhay nayh. ||2|| Renounce worldly affairs, and merge yourself into God; forsake false loves. ||2]|
fafs mfoa Sa ag da ate J dat Sa Il (812-15, fares, He 5) jin anik ayk baho rang kee-ay hai hosee ayh.
He is many, and He is One; He takes part in the many plays. This is as He is, and shall be.
afg Aat fA USAT Id 3 HfS BI ISI (s12-16, faarew, ve 5) kar sayvaa tis paarbarahm gur tay mat layh. ||3]| So serve that Supreme Lord God, and accept the Guru's Teachings. ||3]|
Cv 3 Su es" AS Afal AIAT Il (812-16, fawres, v2 5) oochay tay oochaa vadaa sabh sang barnayh. God is said to be the highest of the high, the greatest of all, our companion.
OA UA A UAT Soa ats SI ISI (812-17, fares, He 5)
daas daas ko daasraa naanak kar layh. ||4]|17||47]| Please, let Nanak be the slave of the slave of Your slaves. ||4||17]|47]|
farses HIS U Il (812-17)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Sa 2a afee ot fSnrait nie nA Il (812-17, fuses, 2 5) ayk tayk govind kee ti-aagee an aas. The Lord of the Universe is my only Support. I have renounced all other hopes.
AS Gufs ANSE YS UTS TESA MAU (812-18, fuses, Hu: 5) sabh oopar samrath parabh pooran guntaas. ||1|| God is All-powerful, above all; He is the perfect treasure of virtue. ||1]|
We a oH mug J us Agat urs Il (812-18, frees, v8 5)
jan kaa naam aDhaar hai parabh sarnee paahi.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of the humble servant who seeks God's Sanctuary.
USHA AT MITA HSS HS HT AU TIS Il (812-19, faarew, H2 5) parmaysar kaa aasraa santan man maahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. In their minds, the Saints take the Support of the Transcendent Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
wmf ge orfy Set mm yfSurs il (812-19, frerew, v8 5) aap rakhai aap dayvsee aapay partipaarai. He Himself preserves, and He Himself gives. He Himself cherishes.
ua tIZ ae vfenms feu faa Ata Af ATS QI (813-1, frees, He 5)
deen da-i-aal kirpaa niDhay saas saas sam"aarai. ||2]| Merciful to the meek, the treasure of mercy, He remembers and protects us with each and every breath. ||2||
aged A ats sfoor vAret efsniret I (813-1, faerew, 2 5) karanhaar jo kar rahi-aa saa-ee vadi-aa-ee. Whatever the Creator Lord does is glorious and great.
afs us Guetior AY MAH SAT SII (813-2, frees, 3 5)
gur poorai updaysi-aa sukh khasam rajaa-ee. ||3]||
The Perfect Guru has instructed me, that peace comes by the Will of our Lord and Master. ||3]]|
fos nie aes sfx vfs JAH UES II (813-2, frees, He 5)
chint andaysaa ganat taj jan hukam pachhaataa.
Anxieties, worries and calculations are dismissed; the Lord's humble servant accepts the Hukam of His Command.
od faon od afs Ate aoa fa TST NSNACISCI (813-3, frees, 43 5)
nah binsai nah chhod jaa-ay naanak rang raataa. ||4||18]|48]| He does not die, and He does not leave; Nanak is attuned to His Love. ||4||18]|48]|
faoSs HIS U Il (813-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ho 3ufs 3 set ATS USAS UT BS Il (813-3, fuses, He 5) mahaa tapat tay bha-ee saa‘t parsat paap naathay. The great fire is put out and cooled; meeting with the Guru, sins run away.
nig qu Hfs Tes SF aS S IE AU (813-4, fawres, v2 5) anDh koop meh galat thay kaadhay day haathay. ||1|| I fell into the deep dark pit; giving me His Hand, He pulled me out. ||1]]|
f= HS AHA IH BS at Fo Il (813-4, fares, He 5) o-ay hamaaray saajnaa ham un kee rayn. He is my friend; I am the dust of His Feet.
fas ses des wet Hh ae SS NA TIC Il (813-5, faores, ue 5) jin bhaytat hovat sukhee jee-a daan dayn. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting with Him, I am at peace; He blesses me with the gift of the soul. ||1||Pause] |
ud usaer tft fife ure wife i (813-5, frees, v2 5) paraa poorbalaa leekhi-aa mili-aa ab aa-ay. I have now received my pre-ordained destiny.
ans Ala dfs AU st UTS MATE Il (813-6, frees, we 5) basat sang har saaDh kai pooran aasaa-ay. ||2|| Dwelling with the Lord's Holy Saints, my hopes are fulfilled. ||2||
3 faon fag Sa a US AY ATS Il (813-6, faores, He 5) bhai binsay tihu lok kay paa-ay sukh thaan. The fear of the three worlds is dispelled, and I have found my place of rest and peace.
efent adt AHsa afte afAor His oH III (813-7, frees, H2 5)
da-i-aa karee samrath gur basi-aa man naam. ||3]||
The all-powerful Guru has taken pity upon me, and the Naam has come to dwell in my mind. ||3]|
Tar at F SX YS SI IAT Il (813-7, fuses, ue 5) naanak kee too tayk parabh tayraa aaDhaar. O God, You are the Anchor and Support of Nanak.
ATE AGE AHI YS Tig MAH MUTT IIACISE (813-7, foes, He 5)
karan kaaran samrath parabh har agam apaar. ||4||19||49]| He is the Doer, the Cause of causes; the All-powerful Lord God is inaccessible and infinite. ||4]|19]|49]|
farSs HIS U Il (813-8)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Het nate cle dle faa us fares Il (813-8, frores, v8 5) so-ee maleen deen heen jis parabh bisraanaa. One who forgets God is filthy, poor and low.
TISTY 5 Fset wiry TS faarar Al (813-9, fares, vz 5)
karnaihaar na boojh-ee aap ganai bigaanaa. ||1]|
The fool does not understand the Creator Lord; instead, he thinks that he himself is the doer. ||1||
ey se Ale aad AY ys fats mre I (813-9, faares, v3 5) dookh taday jad veesrai sukh parabh chit aa-ay. Pain comes, when one forgets Him. Peace comes when one remembers God.
Hae & née Sg fos afe Te WS NA TIC Il (813-10, frees, v2 5)
santan kai aanand ayhu nit har gun gaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
This is the way the Saints are in bliss - they continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1|]Pause| |
Gs 3 ate ag ate fis Hf at Il (813-10, faery, He 5)
oochay tay neechaa karai neech khin meh thaapai.
The high, He makes low, and the low, he elevates in an instant. nfs adt o Weht Stag UTS MQM (813-11, faeres, v2 5)
keemat kahee na jaa-ee-ai thaakur partaapai. ||2|| The value of the glory of our Lord and Master cannot be estimated. ||2||
Yes Sle Ja gu vas feg urfenr it (813-11, fares, v3 5) paykhat leelaa rang roop chalnai din aa-i-aa. While he gazes upon beautiful dramas and plays, the day of his departure dawns.
Hus at Aust sfenr Afar afer oorfer Sil (813-12, frees, H2 5) supnay kaa supnaa bha-i-aa sang chali-aa kamaa-i-aa. ||3]|| The dream becomes the dream, and his actions do not go along with him. |[3]|
ATE ASE AHS YS Sot Adare Il (813-12, frarew, ve 5) karan kaaran samrath parabh tayree sarnaa-ee. God is All-powerful, the Cause of causes; I seek Your Sanctuary.
dfs fear df= soa AU Ae Ae af Fret IISNONUOl (813-13, frees, He 5)
har dinas rain naanak japai sad sad bal jaa-ee. ||4||20||50||
Day and night, Nanak meditates on the Lord; forever and ever he is a sacrifice. [14] |20]|50]|
fase HIS U Il (813-13)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
WS 2G fea Hin afe ag UT UNETSE I (813-13, foes, He 5) jal dhova-o ih sees kar kar pag pakhlaava-o. I carry water on my head, and with my hands I wash their feet.
ats we oy Sdn can Uf Ate] IAI (813-14, fares, He 5)
baar jaa-o lakh bayree-aa daras paykh jeevaava-o. ||1]|
Tens of thousands of times, I am a sacrifice to them; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, I live. ||1]|
ase HST HS Hf mus ys S uso Il (813-14, faves, ne 5) kara-o manorath manai maahi apnay parabh tay paava-o. The hopes which I cherish in my mind - my God fulfills them all.
SQ Haat AU x aS SHSS VU TIS Il (13-15, fares, ws 5)
day-o soohnee saaDh kai beejan dholaava-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With my broom, I sweep the homes of the Holy Saints, and wave the fan over them. ||1]|Pause] |
nifys Te Hs sos Af= Hafs utses@ It (813-15, frases, ne 5) amrit gun sant boltay sun maneh peelaava-o. The Saints chant the Ambrosial Praises of the Lord; I listen, and my mind drinks it in.
Gor oA ufs AS feufs of fae Fofs TITS II (813-16, frees, He 5)
u-aa ras meh saa‘t taripat ho-ay bikhai jalan bujhaava-o. ||2||
That sublime essence calms and soothes me, and quenches the fire of sin and corruption. ||2]|
ma sats asta Hs Heat fe fife af we i (913-17, frores, 2 5)
jab bhagat karahi sant mandlee tin" mil har gaava-o.
When the galaxy of Saints worship the Lord in devotion, I join them, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
AIS SHAA'S Bas Ao Ufs ufe BSS Wail (813-17, fuses, v2 5) kara-o namaskaar bhagat jan Dhoor mukh laava-o. ||3]|
I bow in reverence to the humble devotees, and apply the dust of their feet to my face. ||3]|
Gos Sos AU aH fed ASH aHSE Il (813-18, frees, 2 5)
oothat baithat japa-o naam ih karam kamaava-o. Sitting down and standing up, I chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is what I do.
Sot at US Fost Ife Ase AHTSE NNQUUAI (s13-18, faves, He 5) naanak kee parabh bayntee har saran samaava-o. ||4]|21]|51] |
This is Nanak's prayer to God, that he may merge in the Lord's Sanctuary. [14]|22][52]|
fasSH HIS U Il (813-19)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
feg Wag Het 3d A Ufa TE WE Il (813-19, fares, He 5) ih saagar so-ee tarai jo har gun gaa-ay. He alone crosses over this world-ocean, who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Wonats & Afat ZA Ssarat UTS WAI (813-19, fares, ne 5)
saaDhsangat kai sang vasai vadbhaagee paa-ay. ||1]||
He dwells with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; by great good fortune, he finds the Lord. ||1]|
Ua tS Afs vfs He SA SH Tet Ao uM Il (814-1, frees, He 5)
sun sun jeevai daas tum" banee jan aakhee. Your slave lives by hearing, hearing the Word of Your Bani, chanted by Your humble servant.
yae set AS Sut vfs Asa at art NA TIC i (814-1, faerew, ne 5) pargat bha-ee sabh lo-a meh sayvak kee raakhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Guru is revealed in all the worlds; He saves the honor of His servant. ||1]|Pause] |
male Arad 3 ater ufs Aafe gSTet Il (814-2, frees, He 5) agan saagar tay kaadhi-aa parabh jalan bujhaa-ee. God has pulled me out of the ocean of fire, and quenched my burning thirst.
Mis oH AS Afser ae se AIT QI (814-2, fawres, ue 5)
amrit naam jal sanchi-aa gur bha-ay sahaa-ee. ||2]|
The Guru has sprinkled the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He has become my Helper. ||2||
HOH HIS BU Aten AY ar arg urfeMr I (814-3, fawres, He 5)
janam maran dukh kaati-aa sukh kaa thaan paa-i-aa.
The pains of birth and death are removed, and I have obtained a resting place of peace.
ael fraax 3H Ho at nus ys ster NBII (814-3, frees, H8 5)
kaatee silak bharam moh kee apnay parabh bhaa-i-aa. ||3]|
The noose of doubt and emotional attachment has been snapped; I have become pleasing to my God. ||3]|
HS adh Weg nied ae AS ys a TE Il (814-4, faores, ue 5) mat ko-ee jaanhu avar kachh sabh parabh kai haath. Let no one think that there is any other at all; everything is in the Hands of God.
Ava AY FSA UE Afal ASS ATA Siu (814-4, fawres, us 5) sarab sookh naanak paa-ay sang santan saath. ||4]|22||52|| Nanak has found total peace, in the Society of the Saints. ||4||22]|52]|
farses HIS U Il (814-5)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
gue are urfy yfs dvr farsure Il (814-5, fares, ue 5) banDhan kaatay aap parabh ho-aa kirpaal. My bonds have been snapped; God Himself has become compassionate.
dle cfenre ys urTaggH St at Sets fogs Ill (814-5, frarew, He 5)
deen da-i-aal parabh paarbarahm taa kee nadar nihaal. ||1]|
The Supreme Lord God is Merciful to the meek; by His Glance of Grace, I am in ecstasy. ||1]|
afs us fasur ast afenr ey Faq Il (814-6, frees, v3 5) gur poorai kirpaa karee kaati-aa dukh rog. The Perfect Guru has shown mercy to me, and eradicated my pains and illnesses.
HO 30 Alse Aut sfeur us fimres Fa NA TIS Il (14-6, faves, ne 5)
man tan seetal sukhee bha-i-aa parabh Dhi-aavan jog. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed, meditating on God, most worthy of meditation. ||1]|Pause] |
m@ug ofa at on o fas da a femme i (814-7, fears, He 5)
a-ukhaDh har kaa naam hai jit rog na vi-aapai.
The Name of the Lord is the medicine to cure all disease; with it, no disease afflicts me.
AUGAfa His ste fos fefs Sy So ANT NI (814-8, fares, Hs 5)
saaDhsang man tan hitai fir dookh na jaapai. ||2||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the mind and body are tinged with the Lord's Love, and I do not suffer pain any longer. ||2||
dfs afa ofs af amin nists fee oret Il (814-8, faares, v2 5)
har har har har jaapee-ai antar liv laa-ee.
I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, lovingly centering my inner being on Him.
footed Gsafs Ag of AG AeSTet ISI (814-9, frees, 8 5) kilvikh utreh suDh ho-ay saaDhoo sarnaa-ee. ||3]| Sinful mistakes are erased and I am sanctified, in the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints.
I3I|
Hos Aus dle oH AA ST at Ute aeret Il (814-9, uae, He 5)
sunat japat har naam jas taa kee door balaa-ee.
Misfortune is kept far away from those who hear and chant the Praises of the Lord's Name.
Ho Hy ood FG Ss A TS Wet SiIswusil (14-10, fawes, v2 5) mahaa mantar naanak kathai har kay gun gaa-ee. ||4||23]|53]|
Nanak chants the Mahaa Mantra, the Great Mantra, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|23]|53]|
faoSs HIS U Il (814-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
3 3 Gun sats us nists df AMS II (814-10, free, He 5) bhai tay upjai bhagat parabh antar ho-ay saa“t. From the Fear of God, devotion wells up, and deep within, there is peace.
on Aus afe or fear gH gS WAN (814-11, frees, He 5) naam japat govind kaa binsai bharam bharaa"t. ||1|| Chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, doubt and delusions are dispelled.
[2
ag us fan sfeur st ot Afe UTSA II (814-11, frees, Hs 5) gur pooraa jis bhayti-aa taa kai sukh parvays. One who meets with the Perfect Guru, is blessed with peace.
Ho at Hfs fanrciha Feb CueA nal TIC Il (814-12, frees, v2 5)
man kee mat ti-aagee-ai sunee-ai updays. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
So renounce the intellectual cleverness of your mind, and listen to the Teachings. ||1]|Pause] |
frnes fhnas fandba Auge BSE Il (814-12, foes, He 5) simrat simrat simree-ai so purakh daataar. Meditate, meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Primal Lord, the Great Giver.
Ho 3 aad 3 Sind A Use MR” IQ! (814-13, foes, v2 5) man tay kabahu na veesrai so purakh apaar. ||2|| May I never forget that Primal, Infinite Lord from my mind. ||2||
Tdo GHS fAG Sa Bar nrssA UIeS Il (814-13, fawres, ue 5) charan kamal si-o rang lagaa achraj gurdayv. I have enshrined love for the Lotus Feet of the Wondrous Divine Guru.
Ww a@ facut agg ys STAG Beg AS Sil (814-14, frees, ws 5) jaa ka-o kirpaa karahu parabh taa ka-o laavhu sayv. ||3]| One who is blessed by Your Mercy, God, is committed to Your service. ||3]|
fofa fears nifigs uber Hfs sfe mre Il (814-14, frees, ue 5)
niDh niDhaan amrit pee-aa man tan aanand.
I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, the treasure of wealth, and my mind and body are in bliss.
SSA AAT © SAA UST UGHSE IVIQsUUSIl (814-15, foes, He 5)
naanak kabahu na veesrai parabh parmaanand. ||4]|24]|54] | Nanak never forgets God, the Lord of supreme bliss. ||4]|24]|54||
Pass HIS U Il (814-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fgne Fst HHS Tet BS SF SINT Il (814-15, fares, ne 5) tarisan bujhee mamtaa ga-ee naathay bhai bharmaa. Desire is stilled, and egotism is gone; fear and doubt have run away.
fafa ut uree sfenr af ate TaH IAI (814-16, frase, He 5)
thit paa-ee aanad bha-i-aa gur keenay Dharmaa. ||1||
I have found stability, and I am in ecstasy; the Guru has blessed me with Dharmic faith. ||1]|
Ts us orator front Hat ute i (814-16, faeres, 42 5) gur pooraa aaraaDhi-aa binsee mayree peer. Worshipping the Perfect Guru in adoration, my anguish is eradicated.
36 HO AS Alse sfeor ufenr Ay ate A TITS Il (814-17, faares, He 5)
tan man sabh seetal bha-i-aa paa-i-aa sukh beer. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My body and mind are totally cooled and soothed; I have found peace, O my brother. ||1]|Pause| |
Hes dfs afu afar uftmr fare] il (814-17, faeres, 42 5)
sovat har jap jaagi-aa paykhi-aa bismaad.
I have awakened from sleep, chanting the Name of the Lord; gazing upon Him, I am filled with wonder.
ut nif fRustiner St ar Misa AMIE QI (814-18, frees, Hs 5) pee amrit tariptaasi-aa taa kaa achraj su-aad. ||2|| Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, I am satisfied. How wondrous is its taste! ||2]|
mify Has Halt St aw aca Cus Il (814-18, frees, ve 5)
aap mukat sangee taray kul kutamb uDhaaray.
I myself am liberated, and my companions swim across; my family and ancestors are also saved.
HES AS Ades At (SINS PIs II (814-19, fears, v2 5) safal sayvaa gurdayv kee nirmal darbaaray. ||3]| Service to the Divine Guru is fruitful; it has made me pure in the Court of the Lord.
I3I|
ate mag mae H fssae Tedte Il (814-19, foes, He 5) neech anaath ajaan mai nirgun gunheen. I am lowly, without a master, ignorant, worthless and without virtue.
Us cay
Soa aS fagur set SH nS aS NSNQUNUUT (815-1, fa@res, He 5)
naanak ka-o kirpaa bha-ee daas apnaa keen. ||4]|25||55|| Nanak has been blessed with God's Mercy; God has made him His Slave. ||4]]25]|55]|
favs HIS U Il (815-1)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ts FAIS A MTA mS art SS Il (815-1, frases, ve 5)
har bhagtaa kaa aasraa an naahee thaa-o.
The Lord is the Hope and Support of His devotees; there is nowhere else for them to go.
we thre uded UG YS ST OE AI (815-2, frase, ue 5) taan deebaan parvaar Dhan parabh tayraa naa-o. ||1|| O God, Your Name is my power, realm, relatives and riches. ||1]|
ate fasur yfs nmuat nud oA ofr Be | (815-2, forse, us 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee apnay daas rakh lee-ay. God has granted His Mercy, and saved His slaves.
feea foe afe ud AHorfs TAS NU TIS Il (815-3, frares, Hs 5)
nindak nindaa kar pachay jamkaal garsee-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The slanderers rot in their slander; they are seized by the Messenger of Death. ||1]|Pause| |
Hat Sq fimreat ws & ara Il (815-3, fares, v3 5) santaa ayk Dhi-aavanaa doosar ko naahi. The Saints meditate on the One Lord, and no other.
San nid Fost sfeor Aa ate iM (815-4, frees, ve 5) aykas aagai bayntee ravi-aa sarab thaa-ay. ||2|| They offer their prayers to the One Lord, who is pervading and permeating all places.
21 |
am usse fe Hat sase at aot Il (915-4, frees, He 5) kathaa puraatan i-o sunee bhagtan kee baanee. I have heard this old story, spoken by the devotees,
Hae PAS 4s Us AS Ao He Hot IlSll (815-5, fares, 2 5)
Sagal dusat khand khand kee-ay jan lee-ay maanee. ||3]||
that all the wicked are cut apart into pieces, while His humble servants are blessed with honor. |[3]|
As Fda aoa Ad UddS AS HM Il (815-5, fares, He 5) sat bachan naanak kahai pargat sabh maahi. Nanak speaks the true words, which are obvious to all.
ys a Asa Adfe ys fq a 3G ots ISIQENUE! (815-6, frees, He 5) parabh kay sayvak saran parabh tin ka-o bha-o naahi. ||4||26||56|| God's servants are under God's Protection; they have absolutely no fear. ||4||26]|56]|
farses HIS U Il (815-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
quo ae AUS A a AG TE Il (815-7, fares, v2 5) banDhan kaatai so parabhoo jaa kai kal haath. God breaks the bonds which hold us; He holds all power in His hands.
MET TH St Seba TT Ths Ss AU (815-7, fawrew, ws 5) avar karam nahee chhootee-ai raakho har naath. ||1]| No other actions will bring release; save me, O my Lord and Master. ||1]|
38 Aserafs Hae uss Ufemrs Il (815-7, frees, 12 5) ta-o sarnaagat maaDhvay pooran da-i-aal. I have entered Your Sanctuary, O Perfect Lord of Mercy.
gfe wh AAS 3 TS TUS AU TIS Il (815-8, fears, ws 5)
chhoot jaa-ay sansaar tay raakhai gopaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those whom You preserve and protect, O Lord of the Universe, are saved from the trap of the world. ||1||Pause| |
mA SdH fears Ha fea ufo Sarar Il (815-8, fares, He 5) aasaa bharam bikaar moh in meh lobhaanaa. Hope, doubt, corruption and emotional attachment - in these, he is engrossed.
3O AH ufe SAt USAIN & AAT QM (815-9, fares, He 5) jhooth samagree man vasee paarbarahm na jaanaa. ||2||
The false material world abides in his mind, and he does not understand the Supreme Lord God. ||2]|
usH Af yse UTE Als Fhe SHS Il (815-9, fares, He 5) param jot pooran purakh sabh jee-a tum"aaray. O Perfect Lord of Supreme Light, all beings belong to You.
fAS 3 wafs (38 To YS Mia MRT ISM (815-10, fueres, H2 5) ji-o too raakhahi ti-o rahaa parabh agam apaaray. ||3]|| As You keep us, we live, O infinite, inaccessible God. ||3] |
ATE ATE AHS YS Cfo muse a Il (815-10, faery, ue 5) karan kaaran samrath parabh deh apnaa naa-o. Cause of causes, All-powerful Lord God, please bless me with Your Name.
Soa sdb WaAfa ofs ofs TE WE NSNIDNUH (815-11, fares, He 5)
naanak taree-ai saaDhsang har har gun gaa-o. ||4]||27||57|| Nanak is carried across in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||27]||57]|
farses HIS U Il (815-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ACG ALG Sdt ustawt Suat usstfs i (gi5-11, fravew, ve 5) kavan kavan nahee patri-aa tum" ree parteet. Who? Who has not fallen, by placing their hopes in you?
Hat Haat Hfowr saat ot SHS WA (815-12, fares, H2 5)
mahaa mohnee mohi-aa narak kee reet. ||1]| You are enticed by the great enticer - this is the way to hell! ||1]|
Ho cds So St faATA F HIT SEH Il (815-12, fuses, v2 5) man khuthar tayraa nahee bisaas too mahaa udmaadaa. O vicious mind, no faith can be placed in you; you are totally intoxicated.
us aw Ug 3B ge AE Gufs wer Al FHS I (815-13, fawres, ws 5) khar kaa paikhar ta-o chhutai ja-o oopar laadaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The donkey's leash is only removed, after the load is placed on his back. ||1]|Pause]|
AU 3U HAN 3H US AH & BY SS Il (815-13, feos, He 5)
jap tap sanjam tum" khanday jam kay dukh daa“d.
You destroy the value of chanting, intensive meditation and self-discipline; you shall suffer in pain, beaten by the Messenger of Death.
frnafa odt Fife wu feger BIS III (815-14, faares, He 5)
simrahi naahee jon dukh nirlajay bhaa“d. ||2||
You do not meditate, so you shall suffer the pains of reincarnation, you shameless buffoon! ||2]|
dfs Af AISt Ho Hts FSA AG Sa Sz Il (815-14, faores, He 5)
har sang sahaa-ee mahaa meet tis si-o tayraa bhayd.
The Lord is your Companion, your Helper, your Best Friend; but you disagree with Him.
aor us scerset CufaS HoT BE ISI (815-15, freres, He 5) beeDhaa panch batvaara-ee upji-o mahaa khayd. ||3]| You are in love with the five thieves; this brings terrible pain. ||3]|
aoa fae H30 Adaast fra He SfA ator Il (815-15, fuses, He 5) naanak tin santan sarnaagatee jin man vas keenaa. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Saints, who have conquered their minds.
36 U6 AGaA vue ufs AS AG Sar ISNQCHUTII (815-16, frees, He 5) tan Dhan sarbas aapnaa parabh jan ka-o deen"aa. ||4||28]|58] | He gives body, wealth and everything to the slaves of God. ||4]|28]|58]|
faTSH HIS U Il (815-16)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Gen ass nroe sfeur fAHeS AY ATE Il (815-17, frares, He 5) udam karat aanad bha-i-aa simrat sukh saar. Try to meditate, and contemplate the source of peace, and bliss will come to you.
fu afu on afee a use Stes MAI (815-17, frees, Hs 5)
jap jap naam gobind kaa pooran beechaar. ||1||
Chanting, and meditating on the Name of the Lord of the Universe, perfect understanding is achieved. ||1||
JIS SHS Id a AUS Tia Aly GE AST Il (815-18, faares, He 5) charan kamal gur kay japat har jap ha-o jeevaa. Meditating on the Lotus Feet of the Guru, and chanting the Name of the Lord, I live.
ursgqon wires Hfy nifgs uber nail TIS I (815-18, farses, ue 5)
paarbarahm aaraaDh-tay mukh amrit peevaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Worshipping the Supreme Lord God in adoration, my mouth drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]]Pause| |
dha az Afs fe SA AS a Hfs Bs Il (815-19, frees, He 5) jee-a jant sabh sukh basay sabh kai man loch. All beings and creatures dwell in peace; the minds of all yearn for the Lord.
usguarg fos fases ardt Ae UT NI (815-19, fares, He 5)
par-upkaar nit chitvatay naahee kachh poch. ||2||
Those who continually remember the Lord, do good deeds for others; they harbor no ill will towards anyone. ||2]|
UST cae
Uo AS SHS Us AG HUA aN II (s16-1, fuses, He 5)
Dhan so thaan basant Dhan jah japee-ai naam.
Blessed is that place, and blessed are those who dwell there, where they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
am atese dfe mifs wor AY Aon faRMH ISI (si6-1, freee, Hs 5)
kathaa keertan har at ghanaa sukh sahj bisraam. ||3]|
The Sermon and the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung there very often; there is peace, poise and tranquility. ||3]|
HO 3 Oe 0 SnAg nova & BE Il (816-2, frees, v2 5) man tay kaday na veesrai anaath ko naath. In my mind, I never forget the Lord; He is the Master of the masterless.
ood US AdSaISt A a AS fas TE NSIQCNUCI (816-2, frerew, He 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee jaa kai sabh kichh haath. ||4]|29||59] | Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God; everything is in His hands. ||4]|29]|59] |
farSs HIS U Il (816-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fats 3 fa afs efsur efs Aa nfs ufenr I (816-3, frees, 8 5)
jin too banDh kar chhodi-aa fun sukh meh paa-i-aa.
The One who bound you in the womb and then released you, placed you in the world of joy.
Re frnfs vaarafi= Hise Jatfenr All (16-3, fares, 42 5) sadaa simar charnaarbind seetal hotaa-i-aa. ||1]| Contemplate His Lotus Feet forever, and you shall be cooled and soothed. ||1||
Atefsor wrest yfeor fore of o mire Il (g16-4, fares, He 5) jeevti-aa athvaa mu-i-aa kichh kaam na aavai. In life and in death, this Maya is of no use.
fats Sg sua sotfeur a@ SA AG Ja SS UU TTS Il (16-4, frorew, we 5) jin ayhu rachan rachaa-i-aa ko-oo tis si-o rang laavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He created this creation, but rare are those who enshrine love for Him. ||1]|Pause] |
3 uret Cro Als aS A WH FS aS Il (816-5, frees, He 5) ray paraanee usan seet kartaa karai ghaam tay kaadhai. O mortal, the Creator Lord made summer and winter; He saves you from the heat.
atet 3 TAS AT SST BS WS MMi (816-5, forew, we 5) keeree tay hastee karai tootaa lay gaadhai. ||2|| From the ant, He makes an elephant; He reunites those who have been separated.
21 |
nian AdH ASH sar ys at fea ferats Il (16-6, faorew, He 5) andaj jayraj saytaj ut-bhujaa parabh kee ih kirat. Eggs, wombs, sweat and earth - these are God's workshops of creation.
fags aH'S5 Has 2 dent ofa faafs Sil (gi6-6, fuses, 12 5)
kirat kKamaavan sarab fal ravee-ai har nirat. ||3]| It is fruitful for all to practice contemplation of the Lord. ||3]|
JH 3 Ae 3 Jeo Aas YS AMT Il (816-7, fares, we 5) ham tay kachhoo na hovnaa saran parabh saaDh. I cannot do anything; O God, I seek the Sanctuary of the Holy.
Hd Hale TU nig 3 FSA TI aS lSISONEOll (816-7, frorew, us 5) moh magan koop anDh tay naanak gur kaadh. ||4||30||60]|
Guru Nanak pulled me up, out of the deep, dark pit, the intoxication of attachment. ||4]|30]|60] |
farses HIS U Il (816-8)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ans dns H fear GAS go ae Il (s16-8, fuera, H 5) khojat khojat mai firaa khoja-o ban thaan. Searching, searching, I wander around searching, in the woods and other places.
WES MSE IST US MA SASS IAI (g16-8, frsrew, He 5) achhal achhayd abhayd parabh aisay bhagvaan. ||1]| He is undeceivable, imperishable, inscrutable; such is my Lord God. ||1]||
ae fu ys mus MISH A Far Il (16-9, frees, He 5) kab daykh-a-u parabh aapnaa aatam kai rang. When shall I behold my God, and delight my soul?
Wale 3 Aust sor SH us Afar ual TIS Il (16-9, frees, ne 5) jaagan tay supnaa bhalaa basee-ai parabh sang. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Even better than being awake, is the dream in which I dwell with God. ||1]]Pause| |
ado MAH AAS HOS PIAS at fuMrA Il (816-10, frares, He 5)
baran aasram saastar sun-o darsan kee pi-aas.
Listening to the Shaastras teaching about the four social classes and the four stages of life, I grow thirsty for the Blessed Vision of the Lord.
TU 3 SU 3 UT 33 SAT MATA III (816-10, faores, H3 5)
roop na raykh na panch tat thaakur abinaas. ||2||
He has no form or outline, and He is not made of the five elements; our Lord and Master is imperishable. ||2||
Gg AY Hae cafe fess Haas I (si6-11, frerew, 2 5) oh saroop santan kaheh virlay jogeesur.
How rare are those Saints and great Yogis, who describe the beautiful form of the Lord.
ate fasur a aS fue ufs afs 3 Stag Sil (16-11, faoree, He 5) kar kirpaa jaa ka-o milay Dhan Dhan tay eesur. |[3]| Blessed, blessed are they, whom the Lord meets in His Mercy. ||3]||
A nists A aad feo 3d SIH Il (816-12, fares, Hi: 5) so antar so baahray binsay tah bharmaa. They know that He is deep within, and outside as well; their doubts are dispelled.
ood fH ys Sfeut AT UTS ATH NSUSUIEUI (816-12, frees, 42 5) naanak tis parabh bhayti-aa jaa kay pooran karmaa. ||4||31]|61]| O Nanak, God meets those, whose karma is perfect. ||4||31||61] |
faTSS HIS U Il (816-13)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ft #3 AYAS se Ufe ys UTI Il (816-13, frerew, He 5) jee-a jant suparsan bha-ay daykh parabh partaap. All beings and creatures are totally pleased, gazing on God's glorious radiance.
ase Sofour Afsag ats wirag wiry Il (816-13, fares, 42 5) karaj utaari-aa satguroo kar aahar aap. ||1|| The True Guru has paid off my debt; He Himself did it. ||1]|
Ws YsES feaTs IS TI AFT YTS Il (816-14, fawrey, v2 5)
khaat kharchat nibhat rahai gur sabad akhoot.
Eating and expending it, it is always available; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is inexhaustible.
ude set AHS SAT Sdt |S AU! TIS i (16-14, fuses, 2 5) pooran bha-ee samagree kabhoo nahee toot. ||1|| rahaa-o. Everything is perfectly arranged; it is never exhausted. ||1]||Pause] |
AUOAfa wiser ofa fafa wimurg il (816-15, fares, 8 5)
saaDhsang aaraaDhnaa har niDh aapaar.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I worship and adore the Lord, the infinite treasure.
UdH Mae Mig AH HY SS St Ig Ml (816-15, fares, us 5)
Dharam arath ar kaam mokh daytay nahee baar. ||2||
He does not hesitate to bless me with Dharmic faith, wealth, sexual success and liberation. ||2]|
sas moots Sa dia afi=s TUG I (816-16, fasres, He 5) bhagat araaDheh ayk rang gobind gupaal. The devotees worship and adore the Lord of the Universe with single-minded love.
TH BH US Afsor AT at Sdt ANT Ill (16-16, frerew, H2 5) raam naam Dhan sanchi-aa jaa kaa nahee sumaar. ||3]| They gather in the wealth of the Lord's Name, which cannot be estimated. ||3]|
Rafe ud ys Soho ys at Sfaniret i (816-17, frees, us 5) Saran paray parabh tayree-aa parabh kee vadi-aa-ee. O God, I seek Your Sanctuary, the glorious greatness of God. Nanak:
Sot Mis SF uUTSha Sis TAT SUSE (816-17, frees, He 5)
naanak ant na paa-ee-ai bay-ant gusaa-ee. ||4||32||62|| Your end or limitation cannot be found, O Infinite World-Lord. ||4||32]|62]|
farSH HIS U Il (816-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
faufs faufs use ys od se TH Il (816-18, fares, H2 5)
simar simar pooran parabhoo kaaraj bha-ay raas.
Meditate, meditate in remembrance of the Perfect Lord God, and your affairs shall be perfectly resolved.
adss ufs aga SA HS6 a UTA NAN TIS Il (816-18, fraresw, He 5)
kartaar pur kartaa vasai santan kai paas. ||1]| rahaa-o.
In Kartaarpur, the City of the Creator Lord, the Saints dwell with the Creator. ||1]|Pause] |
faug 3 aG wast as ufo meget II (816-19, frre, Hs 5) bighan na ko-oo laagtaa gur peh ardaas. No obstacles will block your way, when you offer your prayers to the Guru.
sda difde af sase at ofA IAI (816-19, faares, He 5)
rakhvaalaa gobind raa-ay bhagtan kee raas. ||1]||
The Sovereign Lord of the Universe is the Saving Grace, the Protector of the capital of His devotees. ||1]|
UST tad
Sfe 3 ne ae HIS UsS FT Il (817-1, foes, ve 5) tot na aavai kaday mool pooran bhandaar. There is never any deficiency at all; the Lord's treasures are over-flowing.
3do HS Hfe 3fs SA YS MH MUTT II (817-1, fasrew, ue 5)
charan kamal man tan basay parabh agam apaar. ||2| |
His Lotus Feet are enshrined within my mind and body; God is inaccessible and infinite. ||2||
aAS aHSs Als Aut fos Bo o SA Il (817-2, foes, v2 5) basat kamaavat sabh sukhee kichh oon na deesai. All those who work for Him dwell in peace; you can see that they lack nothing.
AS yAte Sf YS UTS AeA ISI (817-2, frores, He 5) sant parsaad bhaytay parabhoo pooran jagdeesai. ||3]| By the Grace of the Saints, I have met God, the Perfect Lord of the Universe. ||3]|
A A Od As ads AY aS AofeEnr I (817-3, frees, He 5)
jai jai kaar sabhai karahi sach thaan suhaa-i-aa.
Everyone congratulates me, and celebrates my victory; the home of the True Lord is so beautiful!
Afy sae oH fours AY UT Tg ufeMr ISISaiEesil (817-3, frees, 12 5)
jap naanak naam niDhaan sukh pooraa gur paa-i-aa. ||4||33||63]|
Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the treasure of peace; I have found the Perfect Guru. ||4]|33]|63] |
faaSs HIS U Il (817-4)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofa afs mraciba seat vida il (817-4, fuses, v2 5) har har har aaraaDhee-ai ho-ee-ai aarog. Worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har, Har, and you shall be free of disease.
aH at GAfea fate wfaor ga NA TIS Il (817-4, fuares, He 5) raamchand kee lastikaa jin maari-aa rog. ||1]| rahaa-o. This is the Lord's healing rod, which eradicates all disease. ||1||Pause| |
TT us os Aha fos ats Sa Il (817-5, fares, 3 5) gur pooraa har jaapee-ai nit keechai bhog. Meditating on the Lord, through the Perfect Guru, he constantly enjoys pleasure.
WuHnats a eae fiufeor AAT IAI (817-5, faeres, He 5)
saaDhsangat kai vaarnai mili-aa sanjog. ||1]|
I am devoted to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I have been united with my Lord. ||1]|
fan fayes AY ure fear faGar II (817-6, frees, He 5) jis simrat sukh paa-ee-ai binsai bi-og. Contemplating Him, peace is obtained, and separation is ended.
SSA UF AGS IS ATS AGE AT NWSE (917-6, frees, ve 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee karan kaaran jog. ||2||34||64| |
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the All-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes. [12134] 164] |
og fases HIS u BUS We U (817-8) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 5 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Fifth House:
qe Afsas yrrfe il (817-8) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
wets Cure vfs fsurfamr arg ony wfenr Il (817-9, faares, v2 5)
avar upaav sabh ti-aagi-aa daaroo naam la-i-aa.
I have given up all other efforts, and have taken the medicine of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
avy uy Afs fe dar Atse Ho sfemr IAI (817-9, faares, He 5) taap paap sabh mitay rog seetal man bha-i-aa. ||1|| Fevers, sins and all diseases are eradicated, and my mind is cooled and soothed. ||1]|
TT UT orator Aare ey afemr i (817-10, frees, He 5) gur pooraa aaraaDhi-aa saglaa dukh ga-i-aa. Worshipping the Perfect Guru in adoration, all pains are dispelled.
mua Thm must afs Hfemr ai TI il (817-10, frase, v2 5) raakhanhaarai raakhi-aa apnee kar ma-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Savior Lord has saved me; He has blessed me with His Kind Mercy. ||1]|Pause| |
ag uats yfs attenm ater mruafenr il (s17-11, fares, v2 5) baah pakarh parabh kaadhi-aa keenaa apna-i-aa. Grabbing hold of my arm, God has pulled me up and out; He has made me His own.
fra faufs Ho 36 At aoa fessfenr NINAUEUIl (817-11, faares, He 5)
simar simar man tan sukhee naanak nirbha-i-aa. ||2]|1]|65]|| Meditating, meditating in remembrance, my mind and body are at peace; Nanak has become fearless. ||2||1]|65||
farses HIS U Il (817-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ag Ufa HASfa afin any dts ets il (817-12, fuares, He 5) kar Dhar mastak thaapi-aa naam deeno daan. Placing His Hand upon my forehead, God has given me the gift of His Name.
Hee Ast USAT at 3 at Sdt TAS AI (817-13, fares, ne 5)
safal sayvaa paarbarahm kee taa kee nahee haan. ||1]| One who performs fruitful service for the Supreme Lord God, never suffers any loss.
[11
nm dt ys aust gaze at yrfS Il (817-13, faery, He 5) aapay hee parabh raakh-taa bhagtan kee aan. God Himself saves the honor of His devotees.
a a fesefo Aa Ao ABST HS NU TIS Il (817-13, fares, He 5) jo jo chitvahi saaDh jan so laytaa maan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever God's Holy servants wish for, He grants to them. ||1]|Pause] |
Hafe ud ssersee AS UT A YTS Il (817-14, fares, ne 5) saran paray charnaarbind jan parabh kay paraan.
God's humble servants seek the Sanctuary of His Lotus Feet; they are God's very breath of life.
Hofa ASS soa FHS ASt APS ANTS NQNQNEEN (817-14, faores, He 5)
sahj subhaa-ay naanak milay jotee jot samaan. ||2||2]||66] | O Nanak, they automatically, intuitively meet God; their light merges into the Light. [12] |2]|66]|
farses HIS U Il (817-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
TIE GHG A nA eS ufs nrfu i (917-15, ferew, ve 5) charan kamal kaa aasraa deeno parabh aap. God Himself has given me the Support of His Lotus Feet.
Ys Ades AS Ud 3ST aT AS UTSTY IA (817-16, fawrew, us 5) parabh sarnaagat jan paray taa kaa sad partaap. ||1|| God's humble servants seek His Sanctuary; they are respected and famous forever.
[21 |
TUSIST nUTT YS St at fous AS Il (817-16, fawres, vs 5) raakhanhaar apaar parabh taa kee nirmal sayv. God is the unparalleled Savior and Protector; service to Him is immaculate and pure.
TH TH THA ufs ale Ades AI TIC Il (817-17, faores, uz 5)
raam raaj raamdaas pur keen"ay gurdayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Divine Guru has built the City of Ramdaspur, the royal domain of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Ret Het dfs foment fas faurs 5 oe Il (817-17, frees, v2 5) sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai kichh bighan na laagai. Forever and ever, meditate on the Lord, and no obstacles will obstruct you.
SoA OH ABSA StS SANS Sra NQUSIEDI (817-18, faerew, He 5) naanak naam salaahee-ai bha-ay dusman bhaagai. ||2||3||67||
O Nanak, praising the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the fear of enemies runs away. [1213] 167] |
farses HIS U Il (817-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fe 3fe ys wrath fiefs ATG AH II (817-19, frees, He 5) man tan parabh aaraaDhee-ai mil saaDh samaagai. Worship and adore God in your mind and body; join the Company of the Holy.
Cues Ts WvS AA TIS AH Sa WAU (817-19, frores, we 5)
uchrat gun gopaal jas door tay jam bhaagai. ||1||
Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the Messenger of Death runs far away. ||1]|
TH OH A AO AU nBfes AE ATM Il (817-19, frees, He 5)
raam naam jo jan japai an-din sad jaagai.
That humble being who chants the Lord's Name, remains always awake and aware, night and day.
UST cat
33 Hs 30 Het Sa TY 5 Sa NA TICS I (si8-1, faores, v2 5) tant mant nah joh-ee tit chaakh na laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is not affected by charms and spells, nor is he harmed by the evil eye. ||1]|Pause]|
OH AU He HS He fHOA MST Il (818-1, forse, He 5)
kaam kroDh mad maan moh binsay anraagai.
Sexual desire, anger, the intoxication of egotism and emotional attachment are dispelled, by loving devotion.
WTSE Has SH IH Sa SSX APS MUSIECI (818-2, frees, He 5)
aanand magan ras raam rang naanak sarnaagai. ||2||4||68] |
One who enters the Lord's Sanctuary, O Nanak, remains merged in ecstasy in the subtle essence of the Lord's Love. ||2]|4]|68]|
fa'SH HIS U Il (818-3) bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fim gals sf ys a A AT A ATH Il (818-3, frwres, we 5) jee-a jugat vas parabhoo kai jo kahai so karnaa. The living creatures and their ways are in God's power. Whatever He says, they do.
se uns due of 3 fas adt AIS IAI (818-3, frovew, 8 5) bha-ay parsann gopaal raa-ay bha-o kichh nahee karnaa. ||1]|| When the Sovereign Lord of the Universe is pleased, there is nothing at all to fear.
[21
SY 5 Oa AE 3 USAIN fssrs il (sis-4, fares, vi: 5) dookh na laagai kaday tuDh paarbarahm chitaaray. Pain shall never afflict you, if you remember the Supreme Lord God.
Anaad dfs o ureet aafhy fimirs ail ToS Il (s18-4, faares, v2 5)
jamkankar nayrh na aavee gursikh pi-aaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Messenger of Death does not even approach the beloved Sikhs of the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
ade ATE AHI J f3H fag Sdt Fg Il (818-5, forse, n2 5) karan kaaran samrath hai tis bin nahee hor. The All-powerful Lord is the Cause of causes; there is no other than Him.
Soa US AsSaSt ATS HfS AT WQUNUNECH (818-5, frees, He 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee saachaa man jor. ||2||5||69]| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God; the True Lord has given strength to the mind. ||2]|5||69]|
farSs HIS U Il (818-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
frnfs fanfs ug wimgar star Tu ST Il (818-6, frees, He 5) simar simar parabh aapnaa naathaa dukh thaa-o. Remembering, remembering my God in meditation, the house of pain is removed.
far ure fife HoAfa 3 3 safe 3 WS IAI (s18-6, frees, He 5)
bisraam paa-ay mil saaDhsang taa tay bahurh na Dhaa-o. ||1]||
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have found peace and tranquility; I shall not wander away from there again. ||1]||
wafers TI nis BIoe af AE Il (818-7, faores, ue 5) balihaaree gur aapnay charnan” bal jaa-o. I am devoted to my Guru; I am a sacrifice to His Feet.
Moe AY Has Fs UNS To WS AU TIS Il (818-7, frorew, 3 5)
anad sookh mangal banay paykhat gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am blessed with ecstasy, peace and happiness, gazing upon the Guru, and singing the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause| |
am atsse wa ove ufs feg afeS Ayr il (is-s, frees, v2 5)
kathaa keertan raag naad Dhun ih bani-o su-aa-o.
This is my life's purpose, to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and listen to the vibrations of the sound current of the Naad.
Sa US HYAS SE Aes SH US NQNENDOMN (gis-s, foes, ue 5)
naanak parabh suparsan bha-ay baa™chhat fal paa-o. ||2||6||70||
O Nanak, God is totally pleased with me; I have obtained the fruits of my desires. [12] |6]|70]|
farSs HIS U Il (818-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
aA 3d at dost foe ats usaA Il (818-9, fares, H2 5) daas tayray kee bayntee rid kar pargaas. This is the prayer of Your slave: please elighten my heart.
Suet fur 3 ursgqan Sus F 3A IAI (818-10, fraew, He 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay paarbarahm dokhan ko naas. ||1]| By Your Mercy, O Supreme Lord God, please erase my sins. ||1]||
BIO GHG A MTA YS UT TESA Il (818-10, faares, He 5) charan kamal kaa aasraa parabh purakh guntaas. I take the Support of Your Lotus Feet, O God, Primal Lord, treasure of virtue.
alse oH faxes so Aa Ba wie ATA IIA TIS Il (818-10, foes, 2 5)
keertan naam simrat raha-o jab lag ghat saas. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I shall meditate in remembrance on the Praises of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, as long as there is breath in my body. ||1]||Pause| |
Hg fust dou gd J Ava (SSA Il (818-11, frees, He 5) maat pitaa banDhap toohai too sarab nivaas. You are my mother, father and relative; You are abiding within all.
SSA US AGSISt A a fSsHs AA NWDNDAUI (818-11, frees, H8 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee jaa ko nirmal jaas. ||2||7||71|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God; His Praise is immaculate and pure. ||2]|7||71]|
farses HIS U Il (818-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hea fafa ofs arent vfs gor Horefs Il (818-12, fase, v2 5)
sarab siDh har gaa-ee-ai sabh bhalaa manaaveh.
All perfect spiritual powers are obtained, when one sings the Lord's Praises; everyone wishes him well.
AQ AG HY 3 ad Ale SA fHorefs IAI (18-13, frases, He 5) saaDh saaDh mukh tay kaheh sun daas milaaveh. ||1]|
Everyone calls him holy and spiritual; hearing of him, the Lord's slaves come to meet him. | [11]
HY Hon afore TA US Tis ate Il (818-13, freres, 2 5) sookh sahj kali-aan ras poorai gur keen", The Perfect Guru blesses him with peace, poise, salvation and happiness.
Aba Aare tenis se ofe ats oH ste UU! ToS Il (si8-14, fares, ne 5)
jee-a sagal da-i-aal bha-ay har har naam cheen”. ||1]| rahaa-o.
All living beings become compassionate to him; he remembers the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause]|
ufs sfu8 Asaz fs ys Tet ads Il (is-14, fares, v2 5) poor rahi-o sarbatar meh parabh gunee gaheer. He is permeating and pervading everywhere; God is the ocean of virtue.
SSR SIS mse H ufe ys at the ANCHO (818-15, frees, He 5)
naanak bhagat aanand mai paykh parabh kee Dheer. ||2||8||72|| O Nanak, the devotees are in bliss, gazing upon God's abiding stability. ||2||8||72||
fasSs HIS U Il (818-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
maetA Hat wots ufs Je fags il (sis-16, free, 42 5) ardaas sunee daataar parabh ho-ay kirpaal. God, the Great Giver, has become merciful; He has listened to my prayer.
afy Shor wrar Aeat Hf Sex srg AU (sis-16, frases, He 5) raakh lee-aa apnaa sayvko mukh nindak chhaar. ||1|| He has saved His servant, and put ashes into the mouth of the slanderer. ||1]|
gala 3 Ad a HIS AS FT TT aH SA Il (818-16, fares, v3 5) tujheh na johai ko meet jan too” gur kaa daas. No one can threaten you now, O my humble friend, for you are the slave of the Guru.
uTsgoH J Tm S mus TH NU! TIS Il (818-17, frees, Hz 5) paarbarahm too raakhi-aa day apnay haath. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Supreme Lord God reached out with His Hand and saved you. ||1]||Pause| |
Himia at erst Sad Shor odt Tg Il (818-17, fase, v2 5) jee-an kaa daataa ayk hai bee-aa nahee hor. The One Lord is the Giver of all beings; there is no other at all.
Sot at Fost H Sa AT NQUNCNIBI (gis-18, faerew, v2 5) naanak kee banantee-aa mai tayraa jor. ||2]|9]|73]| Nanak prays, You are my only strength, God. ||2]|9]|73]|
farses HIS U Il (818-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HIS gS AAT ITA afFs Il (sis-19, fuses, H2 5) meet hamaaray saajnaa raakhay govind. The Lord of the Universe has saved my friends and companions.
feea frase dfe ae 3H dg fafse na Tae Il (sis-19, frees, He 5) nindak mirtak ho-ay ga-ay tum" hohu nichind. ||1|| rahaa-o. The slanderers have died, so do not worry. ||1]||Pause| |
Aas Hove ufs ate Sf TIS Il (818-19, frees, ve 5) sagal manorath parabh kee-ay bhaytay gurdayv. God has fulfilled all hopes and desires; I have met the Divine Guru.
Yar cart
A A AS Has Hfd AES AT at AS MAUI (819-1, faares, He 5)
jai jai kaar jagat meh safal jaa kee sayv. ||1]|
God is celebrated and acclaimed all over the world; it is fruitful and rewarding to serve Him. ||1]|
Cz yrrg uiaes ofs Afs hr fra TH II (819-1, fueres, H2 5) ooch apaar agnat har sabh jee-a jis haath. Lofty, infinite and immeasurable is the Lord; all beings are in His Hands.
SSA USF ASS AS AS AS ATA ANION DI (819-2, frees, He 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee jat kat mayrai saath. ||2||10||74|| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God; He is with me everywhere. ||2||10||74| |
farses HIS U Il (819-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
TT UT wratimr Je forsurs il (g19-3, faerew, us 5) gur pooraa aaraaDhi-aa ho-ay kirpaal. I worship the Perfect Guru in adoration; He has become merciful to me.
Hag Afs astfenr ZS FH AS IAI (819-3, frees, He 5) maarag sant bataa-i-aa tootay jam jaal. ||1]| The Saint has shown me the Way, and the noose of Death has been cut away. ||1||
eu gu AAT fifenr es YS SH Il (819-3, fares, He 5) dookh bhookh sansaa miti-aa gaavat parabh naam. Pain, hunger and scepticism have been dispelled, singing the Name of God.
Hon AY wise JA uss Als aH INU TIE Il (819-4, faorew, ws 5)
sahj sookh aanand ras pooran sabh kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am blessed with celestial peace, poise, bliss and pleasure, and all my affairs have been perfectly resolved. ||1]|Pause] |
Hots gst Atse se ay ufs nmy Il (819-4, foes, ue 5)
jalan bujhee seetal bha-ay raakhay parabh aap.
The fire of desire has been quenched, and I am cooled and soothed; God Himself saved me.
aTadt Ys AdStast AT AT SST UTS MUAUOUI (819-5, faares, He 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee jaa kaa vad partaap. ||2||11||75]|| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God; His glorious radiance is so great! [12]]42] [75]
faerSs HIS U Il (819-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Usts ATS HES WG UTS SE ATH Il (819-6, fares, v2 5)
Dharat suhaavee safal thaan pooran bha-ay kaam. The earth is beautified, all places are fruitful, and my affairs are perfectly resolved.
38 ator 3H fife afer afenr fos IH INA (819-6, faeres, He 5) bha-o naathaa bharam mit ga-i-aa ravi-aa nit raam. ||1]| Fear runs away, and doubt is dispelled, dwelling constantly upon the Lord. ||1]|
Ag Ae" a Afel SAS AY AoA HAN II (s19-7, frees, He 5) saaDh janaa kai sang basat sukh sahj bisraam. Dwelling with the humble Holy people, one finds peace, poise and tranquility.
Are} wat Hodat fAHSS dfs SH IA TIS Il (819-7, fawes, 2 5)
saa-ee gharhee sulakh-nee simrat har naam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Blessed and auspicious is that time, when one meditates in remembrance on the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
yae se HATS fs feds UTS Il (819-8, frares, Hs 5)
pargat bha-ay sansaar meh firtay pehnaam.
They have become famous throughout the world; before this, no one even knew their names.
Sa (SA APS aISt WE WE AF AS INAIUDEI (819-8, frees, He 5)
naanak tis sarnaagatee ghat ghat sabh jaan. ||2||12||76|| Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the One who knows each and every heart. [|2]|12]|76]|
farses HIS U Il (819-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
da fretfemr orfu ufs Guffor wy ANS II (819-9, frees, He 5) rog mitaa-i-aa aap parabh upji-aa sukh saa‘t. God Himself eradicated the disease; peace and tranquility have welled up.
es ussTY wivA gu dfs atat StS All (si9-10, fawres, 42 5) vad partaap achraj roop har keen"ee daat. ||1]| The Lord blessed me with the gifts of great, glorious radiance and wondrous form.
[11] ats dfefe faur adt afimr Hat Set II (819-10, frees, He 5)
gur govind kirpaa karee raakhi-aa mayraa bhaa-ee. The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, has shown mercy to me, and saved my brother.
on f3A at AeSast A AST AOSTA TITS Il (819-10, fase, He 5)
ham tis kee sarnaagatee jo sadaa sahaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am under His Protection; He is always my help and support. ||1]||Pause| |
fasdt ae o Jeet Ao aft migerh Il (g19-11, fuses, 4 5) birthee kaday na hova-ee jan kee ardaas. The prayer of the Lord's humble servant is never offered in vain.
Boa AT Hes aT YIs TESA MANION (s19-11, fawrew, v3 5)
naanak jor govind kaa pooran guntaas. ||2]||13]|77]||
Nanak takes the strength of the Perfect Lord of the Universe, the treasure of excellence. ||2||13]|77]|
farses HIS U Il (819-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hfa fs ASH fas faAfeor Ales ar VST Il (819-12, fase, He 5)
mar mar janmay jin bisri-aa jeevan kaa daataa.
Those who forget the Giver of life, die, over and over again, only to be reborn and die.
urTsgqaH afs Afeur nofes dfar IS AU (819-13, faorew, He 5)
paarbarahm jan sayvi-aa an-din rang raataa. ||1]|
The humble servant of the Supreme Lord God serves Him; night and day, he remains imbued with His Love. ||1]|
AS Ade MoE WoT UTS Set MTA Il (819-13, frases, He 5) saa“t sahj aanad ghanaa pooran bha-ee aas. I have found peace, tranquility and great ecstasy; my hopes have been fulfilled.
AY ufeor afs ronfa fies TESA NU TIS Il (919-14, frees, ve 5)
sukh paa-i-aa har saaDhsang simrat guntaas. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I have found peace in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the treasure of virtue. ||1]||Pause| |
Afé Homi naeth AS SH visser Il (19-14, fares, Hs 5)
sun su-aamee ardaas jan tum" antarjaamee. O my Lord and Master, please listen to the prayer of Your humble servant; You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
We Fests ae Td soa A AMM NUIWIDCH (819-15, fueres, He 5)
thaan thanantar rav rahay naanak kay su-aamee. ||2||14]|78] | Nanak's Lord and Master is permeating and pervading all places and interspaces. [12] |14]|78]|
fas HIS U Il (819-15)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
TSH BE o SaAet ursyIH AdaSret Il (819-16, faerew, us 5)
taatee vaa-o na lag-ee paarbarahm sarnaa-ee.
The hot wind does not even touch one who is under the Protection of the Supreme Lord God.
BCfase DS TH AT BY Ba S Tet Al (819-16, fares, ne 5)
cha-ugirad hamaarai raam kaar dukh lagai na bhaa-ee. ||1]|
On all four sides I am surrounded by the Lord's Circle of Protection; pain does not afflict me, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]]|
Afsag us sfeur fats ses seret Il (819-17, faeres, 12 5) satgur pooraa bhayti-aa jin banat banaa-ee. I have met the Perfect True Guru, who has done this deed.
TH OH MBug chor Sar fos Bet Al FI Il (819-17, fears, v2 5)
raam naam a-ukhaDh dee-aa aykaa liv laa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He has given me the medicine of the Lord's Name, and I enshrine love for the One Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
ofy ate fate susote AS famrfa feet II (819-18, faeres, H2 5) raakh lee-ay tin rakhanhaar sabh bi-aaDh mitaa-ee. The Savior Lord has saved me, and eradicated all my sickness.
ag aod fagur set ys Se AIST NUANCE (819-18, frees, He 5)
kaho naanak kirpaa bha-ee parabh bha-ay sahaa-ee. ||2||15||79|| Says Nanak, God has showered me with His Mercy; He has become my help and support. ||2]|15||79||
farses HIS U Il (819-19)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
mus aed nif smig uUTSqIH ATES Il (819-19, frores, ue 5)
apnay baalak aap rakhi-an paarbarahm gurdayv.
The Supreme Lord God, through the Divine Guru, has Himself protected and preserved His children.
HY AHS Hon woe SE YTS Set AST AI TIS Il (819-19, fuses, 2 5)
sukh saa“t sahj aanad bha-ay pooran bha-ee sayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Celestial peace, tranquility and bliss have come to pass; my service has been perfect. ||1]|Pause| |
UST C2O
Sas AS at Fost Hat ufs wrfY ii (820-1, fravey, ne 5) bhagat janaa kee bayntee sunee parabh aap. God Himself has heard the prayers of His humble devotees.
da fate Htefemig AT at Ss UTSTU IAI (820-1, frees, He 5) rog mitaa-ay jeevaali-an jaa kaa vad partaap. ||1|| He dispelled my disease, and rejuvenated me; His glorious radiance is so great! ||1||
au THs sufAmrg vrat AG Urs I (820-2, faares, He 5) dokh hamaaray bakhsi-an apnee kal Dhaaree. He has forgiven me for my sins, and interceded with His power.
HO Stes es fefsnie saad ssa WNAENCON (820-2, fasves, He 5)
man baachhat fal diti-an naanak balihaaree. ||2||16||80]| I have been blessed with the fruits of my mind's desires; Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||2]|16]|80] |
Ta fase Host u sue Bue we € (820-4) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 cha-upday dupday ghar 6 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas And Du-Padas, Sixth House:
qe Afsas yArfe iI (820-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ad Hye Azol fes o Hoe I Was ais ae ofs Wes Fas FH mATS AVM TIS Il (820-5, fares, He 5)
mayray mohan sarvanee ih na sunaa-ay. saakat geet naad Dhun gaavat bolat bol ajaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my fascinating Lord, let me not listen to the faithless cynic, singing his songs and tunes, and chanting his useless words. ||1]||Pause] |
Hes Afe Afe AUG ASE Het ATE fagsve Il (920-6, frares, He 5) sayvat sayv sayv saaDh sayva-o sadaa kara-o kirtaa-ay. I serve, serve, serve, serve the Holy Saints; forever and ever, I do this.
ws BS ues usu as fife Hats ofs ge WE IAM (820-6, fuses, H: 5)
abhai daan paava-o purakh daatay mil sangat har gun gaa-ay. ||1||
The Primal Lord, the Great Giver, has blessed me with the gift of fearlessness. Joining the Company of the Holy, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
TAS MI MIT TS TSt So VIA Ja GE Il (820-7, fuses, ue 5)
rasnaa agah agah gun raatee nain daras rang laa-ay.
My tongue is imbued with the Praises of the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord, and my eyes are drenched with the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
og faus de vu sHo Hfs vee fee SAS QI (920-7, frees, He 5)
hohu kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan mohi charan ridai vasaa-ay. ||2||
Be Merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the meek, that I may enshrine Your Lotus Feet within my heart. ||2] |
Asg 38 38 AS Gufs 0 feafe fenee il (320-8, fares, we 5) sabhhoo talai talai sabh oopar ayh darisat daristaa-ay. Beneath all, and above all; this is the vision I saw.
mifsHTg ufe ufe ufe vet w8 4 a Afsaeg HZ fese Sil (920-2, frees, v2 5)
abhimaan kho-ay kho-ay kho-ay kho-ee ha-o mo ka-o satgur mantar drirh-aa-ay. ||3]| I have destroyed, destroyed, destroyed my pride, since the True Guru implanted His Mantra within me. ||3]|
WSS MSS MSG 3d SoM sats caw fasure Il (20-9, faeres, 2 5)
atul atul atul nah tulee-ai bhagat vachhal kirpaa-ay.
Immeasurable, immeasurable, immeasurable is the Merciful Lord; he cannot be weighed. He is the Lover of His devotees.
AH Ade ules Ts SHA NS WS AY UES SIAC (820-10, faaes, He 5)
jo jo saran pari-o gur naanak abhai daan sukh paa-ay. ||4||1||81]|
Whoever enters the Sanctuary of Guru Nanak, is blessed with the gifts of fearlessness and peace. ||4||||1]]81]|
farSs HIS U Il (820-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ys At 5 AS yrs ws Il (820-10, fares, v3 5) parabh jee too mayray paraan aDhaaradi. O Dear God, You are the Support of my breath of life.
SHHaS Ssers sear nifea aa WE as AU TIS Il (820-11, faares, He 5) namaskaar dand-ut bandnaa anik baar jaa-o baarai. ||1|| rahaa-o. I how in humility and reverence to You; so many times, I am a sacrifice. ||1||Pause| |
Gos Sos Aes was feg He ssfs fess II (820-11, frees, v3 5) oothat baithat sovat jaagat ih man tujheh chitaarai. Sitting down, standing up, sleeping and waking, this mind thinks of You.
AY ey feR Ho at fase 3B ot nial ATS IAI (820-12, fares, He 5) sookh dookh is man kee birthaa tujh hee aagai saarai. ||1]| I describe to You my pleasure and pain, and the state of this mind. ||1]|
3 Hat Ge ae ofa ug SH ot SHfa AS Us|Ts II (820-12, faores, He 5) too mayree ot bal buDh Dhan tum hee tumeh mayrai parvaarai. You are my shelter and support, power, intellect and wealth; You are my family.
A SH Add ASt 3m THe Ufe Soa AY BIST MQNQUCM (820-13, frees, He 5)
jo tum karahu so-ee bhal hamrai paykh naanak sukh charnaarai. ||2||2||82|| Whatever You do, I know that is good. Gazing upon Your Lotus Feet, Nanak is at peace. ||2||2||82]|
Pass HIT U Il (820-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HomMs ys 3C Aas Surge il (s20-14, frerew, ue 5) sunee-at parabh ta-o sagal uDhaaran. I have heard that God is the Savior of all.
Ha Hale ufss Afar yrat win Hofs farsa NA TIC I (820-14, fares, 8 5)
moh magan patit sang paraanee aisay maneh bisaaran. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Intoxicated by attachment, in the company of sinners, the mortal has forgotten such a Lord from his mind. ||1]|Pause] |
fs fatoor & qron atet nifys Ho 3 37Io Il (820-15, frees, ne 5)
sanch bikhi-aa lay garaahaj keenee amrit man tay daaran.
He has collected poison, and grasped it firmly. But he has cast out the Ambrosial Nectar from his mind.
aH au Ss 33 fser AS ASy feeTsS IAI (820-16, fuses, He 5)
kaam kroDh lobh rat nindaa sat santokh bidaaran. ||1]|
He is imbued with sexual desire, anger, greed and slander; he has abandoned truth and contentment. ||1]|
feo 3 afe So AS AoMt The us SH AS Il (820-16, frees, He 5)
in tay kaadh layho mayray su-aamee haar paray tum" saaran.
Lift me up, and pull me out of these, O my Lord and Master. I have entered Your Sanctuary.
soa at Sst ys ufs HUA Fa SIS MUSIC (820-17, fraves, Hs 5)
naanak kee baynantee parabh peh saaDhsang rank taaran. ||2||3]||83]| Nanak prays to God: I am a poor beggar; carry me across, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||3]|83]|
fas HIS U Il (820-17)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
H3o0 & ASbas ys at HS Il (820-17, free, v8 5) santan kai sunee-at parabh kee baat. I listen to God's Teachings from the Saints.
am ates ide Hae fe ufs act fear org TAS A TIS I (820-18, faerew, 2 5) kathaa keertan aanand mangal Dhun poor rahee dinas ar raat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's Sermon, the Kirtan of His Praises and the songs of bliss perfectly resonate, day and night. ||1||Pause| |
ate fasur nud yfs até an mud at atet ats Il (320-19, freres, ue 5)
kar kirpaa apnay parabh keenay naam apunay kee keenee daat.
In His Mercy, God has made them His own, and blessed them with the gift of His Name.
mS Usd TS Wes ys a aH Au fH 35 Z WS IAI (820-19, foes, He 5)
aath pahar gun gaavat parabh kay kaam kroDh is tan tay jaat. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of God. Sexual desire and anger have left this body. ||1]|
UST C24
fgufs nue ufy ys vane vifys of dA SAS WS II (821-1, frees, HH 5)
taripat aghaa-ay paykh parabh darsan amrit har ras bhojan khaat.
I am satisfied and satiated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. I eat the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's sublime food.
JIS AIS Soa US Sct ata fasur ASAfa fs WNIT (821-1, frees, He 5)
charan saran naanak parabh tayree kar kirpaa satsang milaat. ||2||4||84|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of Your Feet, O God; in Your Mercy, unite him with the Society of the Saints. ||2]|4]|84]|
farses HIS U Il (821-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ote BS nus AS MME Il (821-2, fwres, He 5) raakh lee-ay apnay jan aap. He Himself has saved His humble servant.
afa fasur af ofa an a6 faofh Te AS Aa AST NA TIS Il (821-3, frees, ne 5)
kar kirpaa har har naam deeno binas ga-ay sabh sog santaap. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In His Mercy, the Lord, Har, Har, has blessed me with His Name, and all my pains and afflictions have been dispelled. ||1]||Pause] |
we dfee weg ats ols AS Ta ISS JAS nis I (821-3, frees, He 5)
gun govind gaavhu sabh har jan raag ratan rasnaa aalaap.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, all you humble servants of the Lord; chant the jewels, the songs of the Lord with your tongue.
afe Hon at feAa foedt on sArfef=s mrs gry Al (821-4, frees, He 5)
kot janam kee tarisnaa nivree raam rasaa-in aatam Dharaap. ||1]|
The desires of millions of incarnations shall be quenched, and your soul shall be satisfied with the sweet, sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]|
UE Wd Hofs HUES Td a sole AU Tis ATT Il (921-5, frees, He 5)
charan gahay saran sukh-daatay gur kai bachan japay har jaap.
I have grasped the Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet; He is the Giver of peace; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, I meditate and chant the Chant of the Lord.
Aad 3d SdH S fHOA AT Soa SAT UTS IQUUNCUll (821-5, frees, He 5) Saagar taray bharam bhai binsay kaho naanak thaakur partaap. ||2||5||85||
I have crossed over the world-ocean, and my doubt and fear are dispelled, says Nanak, through the glorious granduer of our Lord and Master. ||2||5||85||
farSs HIS U Il (821-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
sy atom as franogts Il (821-6, frees, He 5) taap laahi-aa gur sirjanhaar. Through the Guru, the Creator Lord has subdued the fever.
Afsas nud aG afs ret fafo Ua adt AS Aeris NA TIS Il (821-7, frees, v2 5) satgur apnay ka-o bal jaa-ee jin paij rakhee saarai sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am a sacrifice to my True Guru, who has saved the honor of the whole world. ||1]|Pause] |
ag Hasta wfs afer aft tS I (821-7, frees, He 5) kar mastak Dhaar baalik rakh leeno. Placing His Hand on the child's forehead, He saved him.
ufs nifgs on Ho TA SS IAI (821-8, frees, He 5) parabh amrit naam mahaa ras deeno. ||1]| God blessed me with the supreme, sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam. ||1]|
aA at oA ga firgge|rs Il (821-8, fares, H2 5) daas kee laaj rakhai miharvaan. The Merciful Lord saves the honor of His slave.
TT SoA FS CITT USS IMQMNENCE!N (g21-8, fearew, He 5)
gur naanak bolai dargeh parvaan. ||2||6||86] | Guru Nanak speaks - it is confirmed in the Court of the Lord. ||2||6||86]|
Ta fases Hoe u sue Fue we D (821-10) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 cha-upday dupday ghar 7 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas And Du-Padas, Seventh House:
qe Afsars yATfe II (821-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsas Aafe Cars Sher i (g21-11, foes, nu 5) satgur sabad ujaaro deepaa. The Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, is the light of the lamp.
fastaS univers fsa Hefs 339 atoat ust MSU Ul TIS il (821-11, frees, vs 5) binsi-o anDhkaar tih mandar ratan koth-rhee khul"ee anoopaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
It dispels the darkness from the body-mansion, and opens the beautiful chamber of jewels. ||1]]Pause| |
fan fanny sf AG utes ave o ATS Sfanret Il (821-12, fawres, nH 5)
bisman bisam bha-ay ja-o paykhi-o kahan na jaa-ay vadi-aa-ee.
I was wonderstruck and astonished, when I looked inside; I cannot even describe its glory and grandeur.
Hae se Co Afar Hs Sf ufS Burret IU (821-12, faerew, 3 5) magan bha-ay oohaa sang maatay ot pot laptaa-ee. ||1|| I am intoxicated and enraptured with it, and I am wrapped in it, through and through.
[2|
WIS AS Sdt te AAS nidata sdt Fa I (821-13, fares, vs 5)
aal jaal nahee kachhoo janjaaraa aha‘-buDh nahee bhoraa.
No worldly entanglements or snares can trap me, and no trace of egotistical pride remains.
Cua Gu ay o dle IG Sa F He NM (821-13, fares, v3 5)
oochan oochaa beech na kheechaa ha-o tayraa too” moraa. ||2||
You are the highest of the high, and no curtain separates us; I am Yours, and You are mine. ||2||
Saag Sa UATE Sa UT wus Il (821-14, frees, vs 5)
aykankaar ayk paasaaraa aykai apar apaaraa.
The One Creator Lord created the expanse of the one universe; the One Lord is unlimited and infinite.
eq fandias Sa Aya Sa YS ml SI (821-14, fares, He 5)
ayk bistheeran ayk sampooran aykai paraan aDhaaraa. ||3]||
The One Lord pervades the one universe; the One Lord is totally permeating everywhere; the One Lord is the Support of the breath of life. ||3]|
fSoHs fScHS HU As AV AS AV Il (821-15, frees, 2 5)
nirmal nirmal soochaa soocho soochaa soocho soochaa.
He is the most immaculate of the immaculate, the purest of the pure, so pure, so pure.
MES B MS Het Anist aT Far Ss Sar USUAUcl (821-15, fares, ve 5) ant na antaa sadaa bay-antaa kaho naanak oocho oochaa. ||4||1||87]||
He has no end or limitation; He is forever unlimited. Says Nanak, He is the highest of the high. ||4]|1]|87]|
fasTSH HIS U Il (821-16)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fag dfs ath & nes J Il (821-16, faares, He 5) bin har kaam na aavat hay. Without the Lord, nothing is of any use.
wv fh@ wfe wis 3H oa Go Host HoSS FT NU TIC It (821-16, frees, v2 5) jaa si-o raach maach tum" laagay oh mohnee mohaavat hay. ||1]| rahaa-o. You are totally attached to that Enticer Maya; she is enticing you. ||1||Pause]|
afea afhat Aa Aust efs fas ufo Aves F Il (821-17, fares, Hu 5)
kanik kaaminee sayj sohnee chhod khinai meh jaavat hay.
You shall have to leave behind your gold, your woman and your beautiful bed; you Shall have to depart in an instant.
Cafes sfoG fet aA Ufse fas oaGdt wes J NII (821-18, frees, 8 5)
urajh rahi-o indree ras parayri-o bikhai thag-uree khaavat hay. ||1||
You are entangled in the lures of sexual pleasures, and you are eating poisonous drugs. ||1]|
fgs a Heg Ai Aefes ea 3H ASS T Il (821-18, frees, v8 5) tarin ko mandar saaj savaari-o paavak talai jaraavat hay. You have built and adorned a palace of straw, and under it, you light a fire.
MA as Hfe vife Tots Sfs Sf for ures T I (21-19, frerew, 42 5)
aisay garh meh aith hatheelo fool fool ki-aa paavat hay. ||2| |
Sitting all puffed-up in such a castle, you stubborn-minded fool, what do you think you will gain? ||2]|
Us es us ufs OS AA TI STSS T Il (821-19, fares, v3 5)
panch doot mood par thaadhay kays gahay fayraavat hay.
The five thieves stand over your head and seize you. Grabbing you by your hair, they will drive you on.
Us t2Q2 fenfe 3 orefa nig mifamrot Afe afoG He HES T NBII (822-1, fares, He 5)
darisat na aavahi anDh agi-aanee so-ay rahi-o mad maavat hay. ||3]| You do not see them, you blind and ignorant fool; intoxicated with ego, you just keep sleeping. ||3]|
we uns da fanart ut fa eaves F Il (822-1, fueres, v2 5) jaal pasaar chog bisthaaree pankhee ji-o faahaavat hay.
The net has been spread out, and the bait has been scattered; like a bird, you are being trapped.
aT asa Hs aeo aC H Afsag yoy frees FT ISIQICCH (822-2, fares, He 5) kaho naanak banDhan kaatan ka-o mai satgur purakh Dhi-aavat hay. ||4]|2]|88]| Says Nanak, my bonds have been broken; I meditate on the True Guru, the Primal Being. ||4]|2||88]|
faoSs HIS U Il (822-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
dfs dfs SH yrs MST Il (822-3, fawres, He 5) har har naam apaar amolee. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is infinite and priceless.
ure fund vofa nord dH fase@ AA urs Saat a TIS i (922-3, fares, ne 5) paraan pi-aaro maneh aDhaaro cheet chitva-o jaisay paan tambolee. ||1|| rahaa-o. It is the Beloved of my breath of life, and the Support of my mind; I remember it, as the betel leaf chewer remembers the betel leaf. ||1||Pause| |
Hofa AES gate astEs dia ait HS So at Tt Il (822-4, fuses, ue 5)
sahj samaa-i-o gureh bataa-i-o rang rangee mayray tan kee cholee.
I have been absorbed in celestial bliss, following the Guru's Teachings; my body- garment is imbued with the Lord's Love.
finn ufa oat AE esaG ATS INS AST 5 3ST IAI (822-5, fees, He 5)
pari-a mukh laago ja-o vadbhaago suhaag hamaaro katahu na dolee. ||1]|
I come face to face with my Beloved, by great good fortune; my Husband Lord never wavers. ||1]|
gua gus au 3 thr 6S ufs nia vit Afr HES Il (822-5, fareres, He 5)
roop na Dhoop na ganDh na deepaa ot pot ang ang sang ma-ulee. I do not need any image, or incense, or perfume, or lamps; through and through, He is blossoming forth, with me, life and limb.
ag soa fipn set aoae mifs stot Act ast est NANBICEN (822-6, frees, He 5)
kaho naanak pari-a ravee suhaagan at neekee mayree banee khatolee. ||2||3||89|| Says Nanak, my Husband Lord has ravished and enjoyed His soul-bride; my bed has become very beautiful and sublime. ||2]|3]|89]|
fas HIS U Il (822-7)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
difse afse afse Het i (g22-7, faares, v2 5)
gobind gobind gobind ma-ee.
Chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, Gobind, Gobind, Gobind, we become like Him.
Wa 3 se AU tems sa 3 vans efe set NA TIS Il (822-7, fawres, 2 5)
jab tay bhaytay saaDh da-i-aaraa tab tay durmat door bha-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Since I met the compassionate, Holy Saints, my evil-mindedness has been driven far away. ||1]|Pause| |
use ufs sfoS Huss Hise AS fens Tet Il (822-8, fares, v8 5)
pooran poor rahi-o sampooran seetal saa‘t da-i-aal da-ee.
The Perfect Lord is perfectly pervading everywhere. He is cool and calm, peaceful and compassionate.
~
aH au fener oars 35 3 Je Aas wet |All (822-8, foes, ue 5) kaam kroDh tarisnaa ahakaaraa tan tay ho-ay sagal kha-ee. ||1|| Sexual desire, anger and egotistical desires have all been eliminated from my body.
[21 |
AS Hsy efor aan aAfe Hse 3 feg Hs wet Il (922-9, frase, v2 5)
sat santokh da-i-aa Dharam such santan tay ih mant la-ee.
Truth, contentment, compassion, Dharmic faith and purity - I have received these from the Teachings of the Saints.
ad aod fafs nag uetfaur faa a Aaet AS uet IQIICOl (822-10, fuses, He 5)
kaho naanak jin manhu pachhaani-aa tin ka-o saglee sojh pa-ee. ||2||4||90|| Says Nanak, one who realizes this in his mind, achieves total understanding. [1214] |90]|
farSs HIS U Il (822-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fom gH Aba Hs aes safe o ATA Sa IH I (822-11, fares, nu: 5) ki-aa ham jee-a jant baychaaray baran na saakah ayk romaa-ee. What am I? Just a poor living being. I cannot even describe one of Your hairs, O Lord.
qon HUA fro fs fer avis oars Sct afs odt uret A (822-11, fares, ve 5) barahm mahays siDh mun indraa bay-ant thaakur tayree gat nahee paa-ee. ||1]| Even Brahma, Shiva, the Siddhas and the silent sages do not know Your State, O Infinite Lord and Master. ||1]|
fom adba fas aaa o FET II (822-12, faores, He 5) ki-aa kathee-ai kichh kathan na jaa-ee. What can I say? I cannot say anything.
Ad Ad Sa 3d Sot ANS AU TIS Il (822-12, faares, He 5)
jah jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Wherever I look, I see the Lord pervading. ||1||Pause]|
Wo Ho sfeurs wu AH Asha So HS YS Sd ATT Il (922-13, fares, Hs 5)
jah mahaa bha-i-aan dookh jam sunee-ai tah mayray parabh toohai sahaa-ee.
And there, where the most terrible tortures are heard to be inflicted by the Messenger of Death, You are my only help and support, O my God.
Hote ufss afs yao ad ys af aoa aS gs gSTet NQNUNEA (822-13, fore, He 5) saran pari-o har charan gahay parabh gur naanak ka-o boojh bujhaa-ee. ||2||5||91]| I have sought His Sanctuary, and grasped hold of the Lord's Lotus Feet; God has helped Guru Nanak to understand this understanding. ||2||5||91||
Pass HIS U Il (822-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
MH gu uifasAt aes ufss ufes fea fare rush Il (822-14, fares, v3 5) agam roop abhinaasee kartaa patit pavit ik nimakh japaa-ee-ai.
O Inaccessible, Beautiful, Imperishable Creator Lord, Purifier of sinners, let me meditate on You, even for an instant.
waded AfeS usufs se AS VIO VIS HS BSA IAI (822-15, fuares, He 5) achraj suni-o paraapat bhaytulay sant charan charan man laa-ee-ai. || 1] |
O Wondrous Lord, I have heard that You are found by meeting the Saints, and focusing the mind on their feet, their holy feet. ||1]|
fors frit fors Aafiy ure II (22-16, frees, v2 5) kit biDhee-ai kit sanjam paa-ee-ai. In what way, and by what discipline, is He obtained?
ad Hens fas wast fomrehat ai gas I (822-16, faares, He 5) kaho surjan kit jugtee Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Tell me, O good man, by what means can we meditate on Him? ||1]||Pause| |
A HOY Hou at Ae Gg fSH at wet wet |Sfe AS II (822-17, frees, He 5) jo maanukh maanukh kee sayvaa oh tis kee la-ee la-ee fun jaa-ee-ai. If one human being serves another human being, the one served stands by him.
Sod Hale Hefs AY Ata Hfs ca 3d fea SSA NNEC (822-17, frees, He 5) naanak saran saran sukh saagar mohi tayk tayro ik naa-ee-ai. ||2||6||92||
Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary and Protection, O Lord, ocean of peace; He takes the Support of Your Name alone. ||2||6||92||
Pass HIS U Il (822-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HS Adle HS [IG AT Il (822-18, fares, vs 5) sant saran sant tahal karee. I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints, and I serve the Saints.
UY SU nig AIS AAS nies aH S Sle ust WAU TIS Il (822-18, foes, we 5) DhanDh banDh ar sagal janjaaro avar kaaj tay chhoot paree. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am rid of all worldly concerns, bonds, entanglements and other affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
HY AOA Mig WS mide Ts S UTES aH Tat Il (822-19, frwres, we 5) sookh sahj ar ghano anandaa gur tay paa-i-o naam haree. I have obtained peace, poise and great bliss from the Guru, through the Lord's Name.
Ua C23 WMA Ufs oA aa 3 AAS afs us Hat Gale ast NA (823-1, frase, 3 5)
aiso har ras baran na saaka-o gur poorai mayree ulat Dharee. ||1]| Such is the sublime essence of the Lord, that I cannot describe it. The Perfect Guru has turned me away from the world. ||1]]|
UES HIS AS a Hat Sa s ay Aas Sa Il (823-1, frees, v2 5)
paykhi-o mohan sabh kai sangay oon na kaahoo sagal bharee.
I behold the Fascinating Lord with everyone. No one is without Him - He is pervading everywhere.
uae ufs sfoS forsur fof ag ata Het ust udt NQNDNKSI (823-2, frees, He 5) pooran poor rahi-o kirpaa niDh kaho naanak mayree pooree paree. ||2||7||93]|
The Perfect Lord, the treasure of mercy, is permeating everywhere. Says Nanak, I am fully fulfilled. ||2||7||93]|
farses HIS U Il (823-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Ho font xTst IG famit ATS Il (823-3, fasrew, v2 5) man ki-aa kahtaa ha-o ki-aa kahtaa. What does the mind say? What can I say?
We ysis sag ys He SH ora famr aT NU TIS Il (923-3, fares, He 5)
jaan parbeen thaakur parabh mayray tis aagai ki-aa kahtaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are wise and all-knowing, O God, my Lord and Master; what can I say to You? ||1]|Pause] |
node AG sdt ueafs A Ale Hf TST Il (923-4, frarew, He 5) anbolay ka-o tuhee pachhaaneh jo jee-an meh hotaa. You know even what is not said, whatever is in the soul.
J Ho f= as we suas AG Uys dt Afal HOST INU (823-4, faores, He 5)
ray man kaa-ay kahaa la-o dehkahi ja-o paykhat hee sang suntaa. ||1||
O mind, why do you deceive others? How long will you do this? The Lord is with you; He hears and sees everything. ||1]|
MA AfS se Hie mre ne w SF ATS Il (823-5, fares, ve 5) aiso jaan bha-ay man aanad aan na bee-o kartaa. Knowing this, my mind has become blissful; there is no other Creator.
AI SSA Ts se cleus als FIT F AAT BIT MICICSI (823-5, fawres, we 5) kaho naanak gur bha-ay da-i-aaraa har rang na kabhoo lahtaa. ||2||8]|94] |
Says Nanak, the Guru has become kind to me; my love for the Lord shall never wear off. ||2||8||941|
faTSS HIS U Il (823-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fsea nA dt sfa udm Il (823-6, faores, He 5) nindak aisay hee jhar paree-ai. Thus, the slanderer crumbles away.
fea strat Hog SH avet fae area Sts fadha 19 dae Il (923-7, frase, He 5)
in neesaanee sunhu tum bhaa-ee ji-o kaalar bheet giree-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This is the distinctive sign - listen, O Siblings of Destiny: he collapses like a wall of sand. ||1||Pause| |
mg va fee 38 fea Sud 38 Uf Ta TIM Il (923-7, fears, v2 5)
ja-o daykhai chhidar ta-o nindak umaahai bhalo daykh dukh bharee-ai.
When the slanderer sees a fault in someone else, he is pleased. Seeing goodness, he is depressed.
mS Udd fase dt uTd aT feses feses Hh IAI (823-8, frase, He 5)
aath pahar chitvai nahee pahuchai buraa chitvat chitvat maree-ai. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, he plots, but nothing works. The evil man dies, constantly thinking up evil plans. ||1]|
feea ys gofenr ae 3d urfenr fe wa FAG ae Godt Il (823-9, frerew, v3 5) nindak parabhoo bhulaa-i-aa kaal nayrai aa-i-aa har jan si-o baad uthree-ai.
The slanderer forgets God, death approaches him, and he starts to argue with the humble servant of the Lord.
Soa at ara ify ys AMM fomr HoeA aus adh NQNCIKCUII (823-10, frees, He 5)
naanak kaa raakhaa aap parabh su-aamee ki-aa maanas bapuray karee-ai. [211911951]
God Himself, the Lord and Master, is Nanak's protector. What can any wretched person do to him? ||2||9||95]|
faOSS HIS U Il (823-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
MA ATS Sf Us | (823-11, fares, v3 5) aisay kaahay bhool paray. Why do you wander in delusion like this?
oats avets Hate uefs Us Hos Ae Afat Ts UA TIS i (823-11, faores, wu: 5) karahi karaaveh mookar paavahi paykhat sunat sadaa sang haray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. You act, and incite others to act, and then deny it. The Lord is always with you; He sees and hears everything. ||1||Pause| |
ars farsa ave sso Sct Af ds AH fSurfa us II (823-11, fares, He 5)
kaach bihaajhan kanchan chhaadan bairee sang hayt saajan ti-aag kharay.
You purchase glass, and discard gold; you are in love with your enemy, while you renounce your true friend.
dzo aC madea Hor faftmr ufo su|te AS II (823-12, faores, He 5)
hovan ka-uraa anhovan meethaa bikhi-aa meh laptaa-ay jaray. ||1]|
That which exists, seems bitter; that which does not exist, seems sweet to you. Engrossed in corruption, you are burning away. ||1||
nig gu nfo ufs& usat SoH Tard Ha sfa us I (923-13, fares, v2 5)
anDh koop meh pari-o paraanee bharam gubaar moh banDh paray.
The mortal has fallen into the deep, dark pit, and is entangled in the darkness of doubt, and the bondage of emotional attachment.
aT soa ys dS tears Tg 3S HS IT SF MNAONCE! (823-13, frees, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh hot da-i-aaraa gur bhaytai kaadhai baah faray. ||2]|10||96]| Says Nanak, when God becomes merciful, one meets with the Guru, who takes him by the arm, and lifts him out. ||2||10]|96]|
faTSS HIS U Il (823-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HO 36 DAS da ar il (323-14, fares, ve 5) man tan rasnaa har cheen"aa. With my mind, body and tongue, I remember the Lord.
ge naw fre uieA Aaa AY H ae afs Sar ual HS i (823-15, fares, v2 5)
bha-ay anandaa mitay andaysay sarab sookh mo ka-o gur deen"aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am in ecstasy, and my anxieties are dispelled; the Guru has blessed me with total peace. ||1]|Pause| |
feurgu 3 As set frmrou ys Hat ear ater Il (823-15, fares, ve 5)
i-aanap tay sabh bha-ee si-aanap parabh mayraa daanaa beenaa.
My ignorance has been totally transformed into wisdom. My God is wise and all- knowing.
oe af ae nus as ag 5 AIS aE ats AI (823-16, fawrew, we 5) haath day-ay raakhai apnay ka-o kaahoo na kartay kachh kheenaa. ||1]| Giving me His Hand, He saved me, and now no one can harm me at all. ||1]|
af We vans AY & fro YAS as SH Bar Il (923-17, fares, us 5)
bal jaava-o darsan saaDhoo kai jih parsaad har naam leenaa.
I am a Sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Holy; by their Grace, I contemplate the Lord's Name.
TI TSA SAT SIA AT FASE nfs stor WAUAUED I (823-17, fore, we 5)
kaho naanak thaakur bhaarosai kahoo na maani-o man chheenaa. ||2||11]|97]| Says Nanak, I place my faith in my Lord and Master; within my mind, I do not believe in any other, even for an instant. ||2]|11]|97]|
faOSS HIS U Il (823-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
afs ys Het Thr wet il (823-18, faarew, 2 5) gur poorai mayree raakh la-ee. The Perfect Guru has has saved me.
nifys on fee Hfs AS HOH HOH at HS Tet Al TIS I (823-18, fees, ue 5)
amrit naam riday meh deeno janam janam kee mail ga-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He has enshrined the Ambrosial Name of the Lord within my heart, and the filth of countless incarnations has been washed away. ||1]|Pause]|
foes US CHE Faet Ts us a Afi AY I (823-19, fares, v8 5)
nivray doot dusat bairaa-ee gur pooray kaa japi-aa jaap.
The demons and wicked enemies are driven out, by meditating, and chanting the Chant of the Perfect Guru.
UST C28
as ad aet sas ys AT aT aT UTSY IA (824-1, fore, vs 5)
kahaa karai ko-ee baychaaraa parabh mayray kaa bad partaap. ||1||
What can any wretched creature do to me? The radiance of my God is gloriously great. ||1]|
frites frufe frats we ufo sae AHS Ta HS HT Il (824-1, faares, He 5)
simar simar simar sukh paa-i-aa charan kamal rakh man maahee.
Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance, I have found peace; I have enshrined His Lotus Feet within my mind.
wT at Aefe ules Soa TH TS Gufs & ard NIANIICCI (824-2, fares, we 5)
taa kee saran pari-o naanak daas jaa tay oopar ko naahee. ||2||12]|98]| Slave Nanak has entered His Sanctuary; there is none above Him. ||2||12||98]|
fasrSs HIS U Il (824-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Het Het wUbH YS OH Il (824-3, frase, ue 5) sadaa sadaa japee-ai parabh naam. Forever and ever, chant the Name of God.
Ae Ho oe Ty 3 fmt vrs Faas UTS aH AU TTS I (824-3, fares, 2 5) jaraa maraa kachh dookh na bi-aapai aagai dargeh pooran kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. The pains of old age and death shall not afflict you, and in the Court of the Lord hereafter, your affairs shall be perfectly resolved. ||1]||Pause] |
nim faurfa udba fos Haat as 3 urehat Sa feure Il (824-4, frees, v2 5)
aap ti-aag paree-ai nit sarnee gur tay paa-ee-ai ayhu niDhaan.
So forsake your self-conceit, and ever seek Sanctuary. This treasure is obtained only from the Guru.
HOH HIS at Achat SH ATS Baad aT SATS IAM (824-4, fares, He 5)
janam maran kee katee-ai faasee saachee dargeh kaa neesaan. ||1] |
The noose of birth and death is snapped; this is the insignia, the hallmark, of the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
H 3H Ady Het 3H HSS HS 3 Se AMS TH'S Il (824-5, foes, we 5)
jo tum" karahu so-ee bhal maan-o man tay chhootai sagal gumaan.
Whatever You do, I accept as good. I have eradicated all egotistical pride from my mind.
AI FOR St alt ATSet A AT AM AS ATS NNAIVICCI (824-6, frees, v2 5)
kaho naanak taa kee sarnaa-ee jaa kaa kee-aa sagal jahaan. ||2||13]|99]| Says Nanak, I am under His protection; He created the entire Universe. ||2]||13]|99]|
fITSS HIS U Il (824-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HS 36 ists ys wird Il (824-7, frarew, ne 5) man tan antar parabh aahee. Deep within the nucleus of his mind and body, is God.
dfs 7s Wes usguars fos fSR TAS at HS fas aed A ToS Il (824-7, faares, He 5) har gun gaavat par-upkaar nit tis rasnaa kaa mol kichh naahee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He continually sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and always does good for others; his tongue is priceless. ||1]]Pause| |
as AH Cus fas sists AGH ASH at HE Bred Il (824-8, fueres, He 5)
kul samooh uDhray khin bheetar janam janam kee mal laahee.
All his generations are redeemed and saved in an instant, and the filth of countless incarnations is washed away.
frfs faufes Aart ys nua vise Ast fafmr ae ardt ul (824-8, faeres, ue 5) simar simar Su-aamee parabh apnaa anad saytee bikhi-aa ban gaahee. ||1|| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, his Lord and Master, he passes blissfully through the forest of poison. ||1]|
JIS ys a Slog we se AAG ufs us Il (824-9, fares, v3 5) charan parabhoo kay bohith paa-ay bhav saagar paar paraahee. I have obtained the boat of God's Feet, to carry me across the terrifying world-ocean.
HZ Aza sas dfs 3 aA BSA HS Ba FT Sa MANIVIUIOON (824-10, fasres, H2 5) sant sayvak bhagat har taa kay naanak man laagaa hai taahee. ||2||14||100]| The Saints, servants and devotees belong to the Lord; Nanak's mind is attached to Him. ||2||14]|100] |
PASS HIS U Il (824-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Mee Sf Surg Far Il (824-11, fsres, v2 5) Dheera-o daykh tum"aarai rangaa. I am reassured, gazing upon Your wondrous play.
Sot Hom nisermit sot safe Ara & Har ual TIS i (824-11, faares, ws 5)
tuhee su-aamee antarjaamee toohee vaseh saaDh kai sangaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are my Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; You dwell with the Holy Saints. ||1]|Pause| |
fus ufo afu foe oars ate ale 3 asfs THA IAI (824-11, fueres, He 5)
khin meh thaap nivaajay thaakur neech keet tay karahi raajangaa. ||1]||
In an instant, our Lord and Master establishes and exalts. From a lowly worm, He creates a king. ||1||
aay 3 fend de Hs 3 aa TA feat BE Har NQAUGNAOAI (824-12, frees, He 5) kabhoo na bisrai hee-ay moray tay naanak daas ihee daan mangaa. ||2||15||101||
May I never forget You from my heart; slave Nanak prays for this blessing. [|2]]15]]101]|
Pass HIS U Il (824-13)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
MUS UAT Aa TUNG Il (824-13, few, Hs 5) achut poojaa jog gopaal. The imperishable Lord God is worthy of worship and adoration.
He 36 nafu su@ afe wid Aaa Ahr ard ufsurs A TIC I (824-13, fares, He 5) man tan arap rakha-o har aagai sarab jee-aa kaa hai partipaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Dedicating my mind and body, I place them before the Lord, the Cherisher of all beings. ||1]]Pause| |
Hefe AYE nae quest faa fig as efers Il (924-14, frew, He 5)
saran samrath akath sukh-daata kirpaa sinDh bado da-i-aal.
His Sanctuary is All-powerful; He cannot be described; He is the Giver of peace, the ocean of mercy, supremely compassionate.
dfs ofe aa mud a@ fSA So Ba B TST I NA (824-15, fares, He 5)
kanth laa-ay raakhai apnay ka-o tis no lagai na taatee baal. ||1]|
Holding him close in His embrace, the Lord protects and saves him, and then even the hot wind cannot touch him. ||1]|
aHed vfenres AMM ASEH AS AST US HTS Il (824-15, fuarew, He 5) daamodar da-i-aal su-aamee sarbas sant janaa Dhan maal. Our Merciful Lord and Master is wealth, property and everything to His humble Saints.
ood Afyax SIA UT Ha AS AST at fs FSS NNVENIOI (824-16, frees, He 5)
naanak jaachik daras parabh maagai sant janaa kee milai ravaal. ||2]||16]|102] | Nanak, a beggar, asks for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan; please, bless him with the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||2||16||102]|
faBSH HIG U Il (824-17)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
faunas an afe ASe Se Il (824-17, frarew, He 5) simrat naam kot jatan bha-ay. Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is equal to millions of efforts.
AUGAfa fife afs ae we THES AC TA vid UA TIS Il (824-17, faarew, v2 5) saaDhsang mil har gun gaa-ay jamdootan ka-o taraas ahay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and the Messenger of Death will be frightened away. ||1]|Pause] |
HS Usddde A ald His 3fo YS aA VIS Td Il (824-18, faarew, ne 5)
jaytay punahcharan say keen"ay man tan parabh kay charan gahay.
To enshrine the Feet of God in one's mind and body, is to perform all sorts of acts of atonement.
MITES WE SSH SC S'S! HOH HOH & fawfer Bd NU (824-18, frases, Hs 5) aavan jaan bharam bha-o naathaa janam janam kay kilvikh dahay. ||1]| Coming and going, doubt and fear have run away, and the sins of countless incarnations are burnt away. ||1||
foss@ df sng wat Sy uereg esarfat BI Il (824-19, fore, He 5)
nirbha-o ho-ay bhajahu jagdeesai ayhu padaarath vadbhaag lahay.
So become fearless, and vibrate upon the Lord of the Universe. This is true wealth, obtained only by great good fortune.
UST t2u
ats fasu use ys US (SGHS AA BSA BA AT NNW NIOSH (825-1, fares, Hs 5)
kar kirpaa pooran parabh daatay nirmal jas naanak daas kahay. ||2||17||103]|
Be merciful, O Perfect God, Great Giver, that slave Nanak may chant Your immaculate Praises. ||2||17||103]||
farses HIS U Il (825-1)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
HOdt 3 aates IY Il (325-2, frees, 2 5) sulhee tay naaraa-in raakh. The Lord saved me from Sulhi Khan.
HS a TY ad o uggs Awdl ae yor srerag Ul TIS i (825-2, frores, we 5) sulhee kaa haath kahee na pahuchai sulhee ho-ay moo-aa naapaak. ||1|| rahaa-o. The emperor did not succeed in his plot, and he died in disgrace. ||1]||Pause| |
ate aorg uAtH fag afer fue ufo df= afer F ure Il (925-3, faeres, 2 5)
kaadh kuthaar khasam sir kaati-aa khin meh ho-ay ga-i-aa hai khaak.
The Lord and Master raised His axe, and chopped off his head; in an instant, he was reduced to dust. ||1]|
Ha feses feses ufemr fafo afemr fate ear oer Il (825-3, faares, v2 5)
mandaa chitvat chitvat pachi-aa jin rachi-aa tin deenaa Dhaak. ||1]|
Plotting and planning evil, he was destroyed. The One who created him, gave him a push.
ug Hts 06 fag 3 afoG A efs afer AS sTet AE Il (925-4, faores, He 5)
putar meet Dhan kichhoo na rahi-o so chhod ga-i-aa sabh bhaa-ee saak.
Of his sons, friends and wealth, nothing remains; he departed, leaving behind all his brothers and relatives.
ag soa fH ys seat fals Ae a aS YTS TS MANATUAOVI (825-5, foes, we 5) kaho naanak tis parabh balihaaree jin jan kaa keeno pooran vaak. ||2||18]|104|| Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to God, who fulfilled the word of His slave. ||2||18]|104]|
faTSS HIS U Il (825-5)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ud TT at Ut AS Il (825-6, faery, He 5) pooray gur kee pooree sayv. Perfect is service to the Perfect Guru.
nm oofy eas AMM aren aA oot Tees AU TIC I (925-6, faores, v2 5)
aapay aap vartai su-aamee kaaraj raas kee-aa gurdayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Our Lord and Master Himself is Himself all-pervading. The Divine Guru has resolved all my affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
uife Hf ys vifs Amit mur ae ware mrfiy i (325-6, forse, He 5)
aad maDh parabh ant su-aamee apnaa thaat banaa-i-o aap.
In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, God is our only Lord and Master. He Himself fashioned His Creation.
nus Ret at mt we ys AT a SST uTSY MAUI (825-7, faores, us 5) apnay sayvak kee aapay raakhai parabh mayray ko vad partaap. ||1|| He Himself saves His servant. Great is the glorious grandeur of my God! ||1]|
UTSAIH USHHS Afsas SA ate fats Aas AS ll (825-8, frees, ve 5)
paarbarahm parmaysur satgur vas keen"ay jin saglay jant.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord is the True Guru; all beings are in His power.
TIS AHS sod Asset IH oH Af fous HT IUNACENAOUI! (825-8, fawTEs, He 5)
charan kamal naanak sarnaa-ee raam naam jap nirmal mant. ||2||19||105]]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of His Lotus Feet, chanting the Lord's Name, the immaculate Mantra. ||2||19||105]|
faorSs HIS U Il (825-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
sry uTy SF ITY MME II (825-9, fuses, He 5) taap paap tay raakhay aap. He Himself protects me from suffering and sin.
Hise 3e Td saat Ba TH oH foge Hfo ATT NA FIG Il (825-10, frees, He 5) seetal bha-ay gur charnee laagay raam naam hirday meh jaap. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Falling at the Guru's Feet, I am cooled and soothed; I meditate on the Lord's Name within my heart. ||1]||Pause| |
afs fasur srs ufs a Aas Burg oe YS YSU Il (825-10, fares, ue 5)
kar kirpaa hasat parabh deenay jagat uDhaar nav khand partaap.
Granting His Mercy, God has extended His Hands. He is the Emancipator of the World; His glorious radiance pervades the nine continents.
ou fon AY ise Yer FFAS gst Ho 3s A GU IAI (825-11, fares, vs 5) dukh binsay sukh anad parvaysaa tarisan bujhee man tan sach Dharaap. ||1]|| My pain has been dispelled, and peace and pleasure have come; my desire is quenched, and my mind and body are truly satisfied. ||1]|
wore & org Hofs AHeE Hae fqAfe & Het ary Il (825-12, frees, He 5)
anaath ko naath saran samrathaa sagal sarisat ko maa-ee baap. He is the Master of the masterless, All-powerful to give Sanctuary. He is the Mother and Father of the whole Universe.
Safs eH F SHS AMM Te Wes oa MTSU IQNONIOE I (825-12, fares, He 5)
bhagat vachhal bhai bhanjan su-aamee gun gaavat naanak aalaap. ||2||20||106|| He is the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear; Nanak sings and chants the Glorious Praises of his Lord and Master. ||2]||20]|106]|
fas HIS U Il (825-13)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fan 3 Cuffor fro uere Il (825-13, faeree, He 5) jis tay upji-aa tiseh pachhaan. Acknowledge the One, from whom You originated.
uTsgoH UusAAg fourfeer ane 8H de afore Al TIC il (925-14, fares, He 5) paarbarahm parmaysar Dhi-aa-i-aa kusal khaym ho-ay kali-aan. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, I have found peace, pleasure and salvation. ||1]|Pause| |
Gg ust sfeS as gait nisarnit Aus AAS Il (825-14, frerew, v3 5)
gur pooraa bhayti-o bad bhaagee antarjaamee sugharh sujaan.
I met the Perfect Guru, by great good fortune, and so found the wise and all-knowing Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
og dfs ae afs wud as AHS foutfeor & HS IAI (825-15, fares, He 5)
haath day-ay raakhay kar apnay bad samrath nimaani-aa ko maan. ||1||
He gave me His Hand, and making me His own, He saved me; He is absolutely all- powerful, the honor of the dishonored. ||1]|
3H 8 fafa ae fas stsfe nines yore BSS Il (825-15, frees, He 5)
bharam bhai binas ga-ay khin bheetar anDhkaar pargatay chaanaan.
Doubt and fear have been dispelled in an instant, and in the darkness, the Divine Light shines forth.
AfA ATA TS BTS AST AST WEA ATAS MQNVAUIIOII (825-16, faeres, H2 5)
Saas Saas aaraaDhai naanak sadaa sadaa jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. ||2||21]|107]|| With each and every breath, Nanak worships and adores the Lord; forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||2||21]|107]|
farses HIG U Il (825-17)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ee WS TA Ts Aa Il (825-17, fares, v3 5) dovai thaav rakhay gur sooray. Both here and hereafter, the Mighty Guru protects me.
JSS UBS UTYTH ASS HSA TS ATS UT UU! TIS I (825-17, fares, ve 5)
halat palat paarbarahm savaaray kaaraj ho-ay saglay pooray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
God has embellished this world and the next for me, and all my affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1]|Pause| |
ofs afs SY AUS AY AH HAS JSS AY OS Il (925-18, fares, v3 5)
har har naam japat sukh sehjay majan hovat saaDhoo Dhooray.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have found peace and poise, bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy.
wee We dd fafs uet HOH Hee a fe FAAS NA (825-19, faeres, H2 5)
aavan jaan rahay thit paa-ee janam maran kay mitay bisooray. ||1]|
Comings and goings have ceased, and I have found stability; the pains of birth and death are eradicated. ||1||
gH Ss 3d ge STH a Ue ule Sa font sau Il (825-19, fares, Hi: 5)
bharam bhai taray chhutay bhai jam kay ghat ghat ayk rahi-aa bharpooray.
I cross over the ocean of doubt and fear, and the fear of death is gone; the One Lord is permeating and pervading in each and every heart.
US ct2E
aod Aefe ules vu sxe nists wots Uf TAT NQNQIUAOCII (826-1, frees, 3 5) naanak saran pari-o dukh bhanjan antar baahar paykh hajooray. ||2]||22||108] |
Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Destroyer of pain; I behold His Presence deep within, and all around as well. ||2]|22]|108] |
fasSH HIS U Il (826-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
VIAG CUS TU BA Il (826-2, fawres, He 5) darsan daykhat dokh nasay. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, all pains run away.
aad 6 deg fenfe mated aba & Afal SA UU TIS Il (826-2, fares, ne 5) kabahu na hovhu darisat agochar jee-a kai sang basay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please, never leave my vision, O Lord; please abide with my soul. ||1]]|Pause| |
YISH UTS mors AM | (826-3, frerey, He 5) pareetam paraan aDhaar su-aamee. My Beloved Lord and Master is the Support of the breath of life.
ufe ad ys nisaAt Wil (826-3, frees, 3 5) poor rahay parabh antarjaamee. ||1]| God, the Inner-knower, is all-pervading. ||1]|
for ae 3d Af ANTS Il (826-3, fares, He 5) ki-aa gun tayray saar sam"aaree. Which of Your Glorious Virtues should I contemplate and remember?
AA ATA ys s3fo festat QI (826-4, frees, He 5) Saas Saas parabh tujheh chitaaree. ||2|| With each and every breath, O God, I remember You. ||2]|
facut fafa ys de fener Il (326-4, fares, He 5) kirpaa niDh parabh deen da-i-aalaa. God is the ocean of mercy, merciful to the meek;
ba AS at aaa usu SI (326-4, foes, He 5) jee-a jant kee karahu partipaalaa. ||3]| He cherishes all beings and creatures. ||3]||
MTS Udd SI OH AG A Il (826-5, fares, He 5) aath pahar tayraa naam jan jaapay. Twenty-four hours a day, Your humble servant chants Your Name.
sod Ulfs wet ufs nmi ISiQBIAOCll (826-5, fares, He 5)
naanak pareet laa-ee parabh aapay. ||4||23]|109]| You Yourself, O God, have inspired Nanak to love You. ||4||23]|109]|
faTSH HIT U Il (826-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
36 US HS VOS AEM Il (826-6, fuses, vs 5) tan Dhan joban chalat ga-i-aa. Body, wealth and youth pass away.
TH OH OT Snes 5 ale ass fears fafk 3a sfeur NA TIE Il (826-6, frees, He 5) raam naam kaa bhajan na keeno karat bikaar nis bhor bha-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You have not meditated and vibrated upon the Lord's Name; while you commit your sins of corruption in the night, the light of day dawns upon you. ||1||Pause] |
nifsa yas SHo fos ws we dar wht dts ufenr I (926-7, frees, He 5)
anik parkaar bhojan nit khaatay mukh dantaa ghas kheen kha-i-aa.
Continually eating all sorts of foods, the teeth in your mouth crumble, decay and fall out.
Hat Ast ats ats Hoe uy aes og ust efemr AI (826-8, fawres, He 5)
mayree mayree kar kar mooth-o paap karat nah paree da-i-aa. ||1]|
Living in egotism and possessiveness, you are deluded; committing sins, you have no kindness for others. ||1]|
Ho fears us eu Aare fsq ufs yet aes fer II (826-8, frses, 18 5) mahaa bikaar ghor dukh saagar tis meh paraanee galat pa-i-aa. The great sins are the terrible ocean of pain; the mortal is engrossed in them.
Rafe ud ated Aut at aa uate yfs ate went WINISIAIO II (826-9, fares, He 5)
Saran paray naanak su-aamee kee baah pakar parabh kaadh la-i-aa. ||2||24||110]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master; taking him by the arm, God has lifted him up and out. ||2]|24]|110]|
faTSS HIS U Il (826-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
nme yg nitfen SHS Il (826-10, freee, He 5) aapnaa parabh aa-i-aa cheet. God Himself has come into my consciousness.
CHHS PHS Jd SU HGS AAG Sent HS set HTS NAN FI Il (826-10, faerew, v2 5) dusman dusat rahay jhakh maarat kusal bha-i-aa mayray bhaa-ee meet. ||1]| rahaa-o. My enemies and opponents have grown weary of attacking me, and now, I have become happy, O my friends and Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|Pause] |
aet faurfa Gurfa AS ont visitors at agate Il (926-11, frees, Hz 5)
ga-ee bi-aaDh upaaDh sabh naasee angeekaar kee-o kartaar.
The disease is gone, and all misfortunes have been averted; the Creator Lord has made me His own.
ANS AY nig vise wads YISH aH fee Ba The IAI (826-12, frees, 3 5)
saa™t sookh ar anad ghanayray pareetam naam ridai ur haar. ||1||
I have found peace, tranquility and total bliss, enshrining the Name of my Beloved Lord within my heart. ||1||
me fis ug of ys Sct F AHeE Aum Aa Il (826-12, fares, v2 5)
jee-o pind Dhan raas parabh tayree too’ samrath su-aamee mayraa.
My soul, body and wealth are all Your capital; O God, You are my All-powerful Lord and Master.
DA NUS AG TUSIS SSA WH Ae T VI MVAUQUUAAA (826-13, fuses, He 5) daas apunay ka-o raakhanhaaraa naanak daas sadaa hai chayraa. ||2||25||111]|
You are the Saving Grace of Your slaves; slave Nanak is forever Your slave. []2]]25]]111]|
Pass HIS U Il (826-14)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
dfs frfs dur afemirs i (326-14, frees, He 5) gobid simar ho-aa kali-aan. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe, I am emancipated.
firct Gurfa sfemr AY ATe nisgant frnfoor are a TIC Il (e26-14, fares, He 5) mitee upaaDh bha-i-aa sukh saachaa antarjaamee simri-aa jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Suffering is eradicated, and true peace has come, meditating on the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||1]|Pause]|
fA & Abt fate ate AUS Sas AAT AC ATS Se Il (826-15, fuses, He 5)
jis kay jee-a tin kee-ay sukhaalay bhagat janaa ka-o saachaa taan.
All beings belong to Him - He makes them happy. He is the true power of His humble devotees.
A nis at um set s SHS Gufs ATS HTS MAUI (826-15, fares, vs 5) daas apunay kee aapay raakhee bhai bhanjan oopar kartay maan. ||1]|
He Himself saves and protects His slaves, who believe in their Creator, the Destroyer of fear. ||1]|
set fuse fret soret ere vs af are af Il (826-16, fuses, He 5)
bha-ee mitraa-ee mitee buraa-ee darusat doot har kaadhay chhaan.
I have found friendship, and hatred has been eradicated; the Lord has rooted out the enemies and villains.
HY AIA MSS Usd HSA Me Ta TST SMS NINE (826-17, fase, vs 5) sookh sahj aanand ghanayray naanak jeevai har gunah vakhaan. ||2||26||112]|
Nanak has been blessed with celestial peace and poise and total bliss; chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, he lives. ||2||26||112]|
Pass HIS U Il (826-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
UTIAIH ys SS fKUTS Il (826-18, faery, ve 5) paarbarahm parabh bha-ay kirpaal. The Supreme Lord God has become Merciful.
OSH Hale Hed Afsaed Afu Afy ATG se foo NIU TIS it (826-18, faares, v2 5) kaaraj Sagal savaaray satgur jap jap saaDhoo bha-ay nihaal. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The True Guru has arranged all my affairs; chanting and meditating with the Holy Saints, I have become happy. ||1]||Pause| |
vidas ater yfs nus cut Aas SS FST Il (826-19, frees, ve 5) angeekaar kee-aa parabh apnai dokhee saglay bha-ay ravaal. God has made me His own, and all my enemies have been reduced to dust.
dfs ofe aa Ae nud Cafe ste wfe mrs urs Il (826-19, fees, He 5)
kanth laa-ay raakhay jan apnay uDhar lee-ay laa-ay apnai paal. ||1]|
He hugs us close in His embrace, and protects His humble servants; attaching us to the hem of His robe, he saves us. ||1||
UST tIo
Adt Fonts fife wis wre fSea X Ha TS aS Il (827-1, foes, ue 5) sahee salaamat mil ghar aa-ay nindak kay mukh ho-ay kaal. Safe and sound, we have returned home, while the slanderer's face is blackened.
a vot XT Afsag us qe yAte ys se fogs QUAN! (827-2, faares, HE 5) kaho naanak mayraa satgur pooraa gur parsaad parabh bha-ay nihaal. ||2||27]|113]| Says Nanak, my True Guru is Perfect; by the Grace of God and Guru, I am so happy. [12] [27] ]113]|
farses HIG U Il (827-3)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
H wed fA uifs gat I JS Il (827-3, forse, H2 5) moo laalan si-o pareet banee. rahaa-o. I have fallen in love with my Beloved Lord. ||Pause] |
Sct 3 J! Sat 3 se Mit HG fits Tat UA (827-3, fares, 4: 5)
toree na tootai chhoree na chhootai aisee maaDho khinch tanee. ||1]| Cutting it, it does not break, and releasing it, it does not let go. Such is the string the Lord has tied me with. ||1]|
fear sfs Ho Hts SAS 3 3 ate fas ys mrust III (827-4, frores, He 5)
dinas rain man maahi basat hai too kar kirpaa parabh apnee. ||2||
Day and night, He dwells within my mind; please bless me with Your Mercy, O my God. ||2]|
afs afs w@ fiom Hes a nie aa AT at aS ot Sil (827-4, farses, He 5)
bal bal jaa-o si-aam sundar ka-o akath kathaa jaa kee baat sunee. ||3]||
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to my beauteous Lord; I have heard his Unspoken Speech and Story. ||3]|
He Soa VAS A ads J Hfs weg fur SAT nUSt ISIACHIWSIl (827-5, frees, He 5)
jan naanak daasan daas kahee-at hai mohi karahu kirpaa thaakur apunee.
[14] [28] ]114]|
Servant Nanak is said to be the slave of His slaves; O my Lord and Master, please bless me with Your Mercy. ||4||28]|114]|
faTSG HIT U Il (827-6)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & vse Alu AE AaHS Il (827-6, fares, us 5) har kay charan jap jaa‘-o kurbaan. I meditate on the Lord's Feet; I am a sacrifice to Them.
Tg AT uUsqIN ushAY 3 at fase ufs Ho fore ail TIS Il (827-6, fares, He 5) gur mayraa paarbarahm parmaysur taa kaa hirdai Dhar man Dhi-aan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord; I enshrine Him within my heart, and meditate on Him within my mind. ||1||Pause||
finite frites frafs Ae|eTst AT aT aot Aas ATS Il (827-7, fares, v3 5)
simar simar simar sukh-daata jaa kaa kee-aa sagal jahaan.
Meditate, meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Giver of peace, who created the whole Universe.
TAS JeT SA STINSS ATS Vda UST HS IAI (827-8, faares, He 5) rasnaa ravhu ayk naaraa-in saachee dargeh paavhu maan. ||1||
With your tongue, savor the One Lord, and you shall be honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
AQ Ha uss at ag fsa ot ufenr Sg feure Il (827-8, frees, v2 5) saaDhoo sang paraapat jaa ka-o tin hee paa-i-aa ayhu niDhaan. He alone obtains this treasure, who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Tee Te atese fos anmit afe fagur area UA BS MQNQ€CNAWII (827-9, faSs, He 5) gaava-o gun keertan nit su-aamee kar kirpaa naanak deejai daan. ||2]|29]|115]|
O Lord and Master, mercifully bless Nanak with this gift, that he may ever sing the Glorious Praises of Your Kirtan. ||2||29||115] |
PASS HIS U Il (827-10)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
ofy we Afsad at AGS Il (827-10, fuses, He 5) raakh lee-ay satgur kee saran. I have been saved, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
AA ag Oot wa nists usquH Ad SIS Sd UI TIS Il (827-10, feeres, uz 5)
jai jai kaar ho-aa jag antar paarbarahm mayro taaran taran. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am cheered and applauded throughout the world; my Supreme Lord God carries me across. ||1||Pause]|
fied Yds HUES AAS AHat UAS SIE Il (827-11, faw~ew, ve 5)
bisamvbhar pooran sukh-daata sagal samagree pokhan bharan.
The Perfect Lord fills the Universe; He is the Giver of peace; He cherishes and fulfills the whole Universe.
we waste Aes fadste af sf vet afs & BIS NA (827-12, fares, He 5)
thaan thanantar sarab nirantar bal bal jaa‘-ee har kay charan. ||1]|
He is completely filling all places and interspaces; I am a devoted sacrifice to the Lord's Feet. ||1]|
Abt Fats eA Ae AyrHt Asa fafa SH ATE AES Il (827-12, faares, He 5)
jee-a jugat vas mayray su-aamee sarab siDh tum kaaran karan.
The ways of all beings are in Your Power, O my Lord and Master. All supernatural spiritual powers are Yours; You are the Creator, the Cause of causes.
mite qarfe yg duet uifenr ofg fAHIS BISA Sdt SPE MUBONVWE! (827-13, frarew, He 5)
aad jugaad parabh rakh-daa aa-i-aa har simrat naanak nahee daran. ||2||30]|116] | In the beginning, and throughout the ages, God is our Savior and Protector; remembering the Lord in meditation, O Nanak, fear is eliminated. ||2||30]|116]|
Ta fase Hos u wUe Wet (827-15) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 8 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Eighth House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (827-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H odt us Ag fxs ST Il (827-16, frees, He 5) mai naahee parabh sabh kichh tayraa. I am nothing, God; everything is Yours.
Shu fase Cu Heda ae aes fats Amit He UU TIS il (827-16, fares, 3 5)
eeghai nirgun ooghai sargun kayl karat bich su-aamee mayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In this world, You are the absolute, formless Lord; in the world hereafter, You are the related Lord of form. You play it both ways, O my Lord and Master. ||1]|Pause]|
odd fs orfy srofs efs mrus us HS A AGG SAT Il (827-17, frees, ve 5) nagar meh aap baahar fun aapan parabh mayray ko sagal basayraa. You exist within the city, and beyond it as well; O my God, You are everywhere.
mre dt THe mia dt afer ad aT SAT AT AT Sa AU (827-17, faeres, He 5)
aapay hee raajan aapay hee raa-i-aa kah kah thaakur kah kah chayraa. ||1||
You Yourself are the King, and You Yourself are the subject. In one place, You are the Lord and Master, and in another place, You are the slave. ||1||
a ag ere a fAG sede AI AT UNG So 3d ST Il (827-18, faores, He 5)
kaa ka-o duraa-o kaa si-o balbanchaa jah jah paykha-o tah tah nayraa.
From whom should I hide? Whom should I try to deceive? Wherever I look, I see Him near at hand.
AY Hats ag sfeS aaa fife Aa Fe oot mS Ta NQAUAUIAVII (827-18, fawres, He 5)
saaDh moorat gur bhayti-o naanak mil saagar boond nahee an hayraa. ||2||1||117]| I have met with Guru Nanak, the Embodiment of the Holy Saints. When the drop of water merges into the ocean, it cannot be distinguished as separate again. []2]]2]]117]]
faTSS HIS U Il (827-19)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
UST cWe
3H AHIA AIS ATS Il (828-1, frases, v2 5) tum" samrathaa kaaran karan. You are the all-powerful Cause of causes.
wae ala dfse as AS fo wrraat AES Vas IA TIE Il (828-1, faores, He 5) dhaakan dhaak gobid gur mayray mohi apraaDhee saran charan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please cover my faults, Lord of the Universe, O my Guru; I am a sinner - I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
At ale ASH We ules OCs od aE Uo HATS II (828-2, frees, He 5) jo jo keeno so tum" jaani-o paykhi-o tha-ur naahee kachh dheeth mukran. Whatever we do, You see and know; there is no way anyone can stubbornly deny this.
as ussTy AfsS us 3nd afe mer 3d BH TIS INU! (828-2, frares, He 5)
bad partaap suni-o parabh tum"ro kot aghaa tayro naam haran. ||1||
Your glorious radiance is great! So I have heard, O God. Millions of sins are destroyed by Your Name. ||1]|
THs AVG Ae Ae sHo SHe fase ufss Suga Il (928-3, frores, we 5)
hamro sahaa-o sadaa sad bhoolan tum"ro birad patit uDhran.
It is my nature to make mistakes, forever and ever; it is Your Natural Way to save sinners.
age 4 fasues four fafa Heo ue Soa dfs SAAS NQANVNAICI (828-3, frees, He 5)
karunaa mai kirpaal kirpaa niDh jeevan pad naanak har darsan. ||2||2||118]| You are the embodiment of kindness, and the treasure of compassion, O Merciful Lord; through the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, Nanak has found the state of redemption in life. ||2||2]]118] |
PASS HIS U Il (828-4)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Mt farsut Hfs ATT Il (828-4, fuses, He 5) aisee kirpaa mohi karahu. Bless me with such mercy, Lord,
H3d VIS THs Ha So waH sls Ufs usT Ul TIS Il (828-5, fares, ws 5) santeh charan hamaaro maathaa nain daras tan Dhoor parahu. ||1]|| rahaa-o. that my forehead may touch the feet of the Saints, and my eyes may behold the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, and my body may fall at the dust of their feet. ||1]|Pause] |
qd a Aa Hd did aA fe ont Ho Afal Tag Il (828-5, fares, He 5)
gur ko sabad mayrai hee-arai baasai har naamaa man sang Dharahu.
May the Word of the Guru's Shabad abide within my heart, and the Lord's Name be enshrined within my mind.
SHAG Uv fsetad SAT Aas SIH SH ATT IAUl (828-6, fawres, v2 5)
taskar panch nivaarahu thaakur saglo bharmaa hom jarahu. ||1||
Drive out the five thieves, O my Lord and Master, and let my doubts all burn like incense. ||1]|
A 3H Add Het 35 HS seq Ulam Ufs cag Il (828-7, faares, He 5) jo tum" karahu so-ee bhal maanai bhaavan dubiDhaa door tarahu. Whatever You do, I accept as good; I have driven out the sense of duality.
Soa & US ZH St BS ASAfa B Hfs Sugg NIAUSUAIEN (828-7, few, He 5)
naanak kay parabh tum hee daatay satsang lay mohi uDhrahu. ||2]||3||119]|
You are Nanak's God, the Great Giver; in the Congregation of the Saints, emancipate me. |[2][3]]119]|
fas HIS U Il (828-8)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Mt cfm AS fA Har I (s28-8, faores, He 5) aisee deekhi-aa jan si-o mangaa. I ask for such advice from Your humble servants,
Sud fomrg sud Jar Il (828-8, frees, we 5) tum"ro Dhi-aan tum"aaro rangaa. that I may meditate on You, and love You,
Hat AS SHS via AU TIS Il (828-9, feorew, He 5) tum"ree sayvaa tum"aaray angaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. and serve You, and become part and parcel of Your Being. ||1]||Pause| |
Wo at cae HeTdG Aa PAG Boo Hog AS a Aa Il (828-9, fares, v3 5) jan kee tahal sambhaakhan jan si-o oothan baithan jan kai sangaa. I serve His humble servants, and speak with them, and abide with them.
WS Us TA Mle Ha wait MAT UIs MSS Ssa UI (828-10, farses, we 5)
jan char raj mukh maathai laagee aasaa pooran anant tarangaa. ||1]||
I apply the dust of the feet of His humble servants to my face and forehead; my hopes, and the many waves of desire, are fulfilled. ||1]|
AS USAIN A at fosHe HfsH He a Bao Stee afe aiar Il (828-10, frees, ve 5)
jan paarbarahm jaa kee nirmal mahimaa jan kay charan tirath kot gangaa. Immaculate and pure are the praises of the humble servants of the Supreme Lord God; the feet of His humble servants are equal to millions of sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Wo ot ofs at HAG SSA ASH ASH A TS ASA MUUIOMN (828-11, frees, us 5) jan kee Dhoor kee-o majan naanak janam janam kay haray kalangaa. ||2||4||120|| Nanak bathes in the dust of the feet of His humble servants; the sinful resides of countless incarnations have been washed away. ||2||4||120||
farSs HIS U Il (828-12)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fa@ sve (38 Hfo yfsure il (928-12, few, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o mohi partipaal. If it pleases You, then cherish me.
UTSYIH USHA Afsad JH stax SH fust fasurs AI FITS Il (828-12, faarew, us 5) paarbarahm parmaysar satgur ham baarik tum" pitaa kirpaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Supreme Lord God, Transcendent Lord, O True Guru, I am Your child, and You are my Merciful Father. ||1]|Pause| |
Hfs fasae Te art set ugfs o AAS SHSt ws II (928-13, foes, He 5)
mohi nirgun gun naahee ko-ee pahuch na saaka-o tum"ree ghaal.
I am worthless; I have no virtues at all. I cannot understand Your actions.
suet afs ffs 3H ot wag Me fills AS SHe HS INU (828-14, frees, He 5) tumree gat mit tum hee jaanhu jee-o pind sabh tumro maal. ||1]| You alone know Your state and extent. My soul, body and property are all Yours. ||1]|
MSTA Use AMM nisses dt WoT TS Il (828-14, frees, v2 5)
antarjaamee purakh su-aamee anbolat hee jaanhu haal.
You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Primal Lord and Master; You know even what is unspoken.
36 HO Alse df gud aaa ys AIG aefa fers NINUNIVAI (828-15, frees, He 5) tan man seetal ho-ay hamaaro naanak parabh jee-o nadar nihaal. ||2||5||121||
My body and mind are cooled and soothed, O Nanak, by God's Glance of Grace. []2] [5] [1211]
Pass HIS U Il (828-16)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
IY ek YS MUS ATG Il (828-16, faorew, Hs 5) raakh sadaa parabh apnai saath. Keep me with You forever, O God.
3 THe UlSH HaHdS 3B fag Fle Aas vars AI TIS Il (828-16, frorew, we 5)
too hamro pareetam manmohan tujh bin jeevan sagal akaath. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are my Beloved, the Enticer of my mind; without You, my life is totally useless. ||1]|Pause] |
Ja 3 TC ags fio stafe us A HOTS A SE Il (828-17, frres, He 5)
rank tay raa-o karat khin bheetar parabh mayro anaath ko naath.
In an instant, You transform the beggar into a king; O my God, You are the Master of the masterless.
Hes male Hf Ae yrfu Cord afe nus SF TA TS NA (828-17, fares, ve 5)
jalat agan meh jan aap uDhaaray kar apunay day raakhay haath. ||1||
You save Your humble servants from the burning fire; You make them Your own, and with Your Hand, You protect them. ||1||
Hise AY uTeG Ho fxus aie fAHaS AH Aas Be Il (928-18, foes, ue 5)
seetal sukh paa-i-o man tariptai har simrat saram saglay laath.
I have found peace and cool tranquility, and my mind is satisfied; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, all struggles are ended.
fafa fours soa ofa Ae nied flmrou Aas niara || (828-19, frares, He 5) niDh niDhaan naanak har sayvaa avar si-aanap sagal akaath.
Service to the Lord, O Nanak, is the treasure of treasures; all other clever tricks are useless. ||2||6||122]|
var co¢
farses HIS U Il (829-1)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
mus Aza AG aa & fAATST Il (829-1, faares, He 5) apnay sayvak ka-o kabahu na bisaarahu. Never forget Your servant, O Lord.
Cfs wag Homi ys He usa Us afie sera a TIS il (929-1, fares, v2 5)
ur laagahu su-aamee parabh mayray poorab pareet gobind beechaarahu. ||1]| rahaa- O.
Hug me close in Your embrace, O God, my Lord and Master; consider my primal love for You, O Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause] |
ufss ureo us fase sud one ty foe HS Ure” II (829-2, frees, He 5)
patit paavan parabh birad tum"aaro hamray dokh ridai mat Dhaarahu.
It is Your Natural Way, God, to purify sinners; please do not keep my errors in Your Heart.
Hize urs ofa us AY SH dt ICH ues far afe ATaT IAI (829-3, frees, He 5)
jeevan paraan har Dhan sukh tum hee ha-umai patal kirpaa kar jaarahu. ||1||
You are my life, my breath of life, O Lord, my wealth and peace; be merciful to me, and burn away the curtain of egotism. ||1]|
nS fags His as Hea eu faat JIG AS I Il (829-3, frees, we 5) jal bihoon meen kat jeevan dooDh binaa rahan kat baaro. Without water, how can the fish survive? Without milk, how can the baby survive?
He soe fimrn vse anes at uff ean AMM AY ATS NQUDIIZII (829-4, frees, He 5) jan naanak pi-aas charan kamlan" kee paykh daras su-aamee sukh saaro. [2] [7] ]123]|
Servant Nanak thirsts for the Lord's Lotus Feet; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of his Lord and Master's Darshan, he finds the essence of peace. ||2||7||123]|
farses HIS U Il (829-5)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Wd UT AAS SfEni | (929-5, faares, ue 5) aagai paachhai kusal bha-i-aa. Here, and hereafter, there is happiness.
afs us ust As od uregath yfs oat Hfemr 19 TIS Il (829-5, frees, He 5)
gur poorai pooree sabh raakhee paarbarahm parabh keenee ma-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Perfect Guru has perfectly, totally saved me; the Supreme Lord God has been kind to me. ||1]|Pause| |
fe fe sfe sfoor afs uisy eu use Aare fife afer i (929-6, fares, H2 5)
man tan rav rahi-aa har pareetam dookh darad saglaa mit ga-i-aa.
The Lord, my Beloved, is pervading and permeating my mind and body; all my pains and sufferings are dispelled.
ANS AIH oe Te We US vHe Als Te ufenr Al (829-7, fawres, we 5)
saa“t sahj aanad gun gaa-ay doot dusat sabh ho-ay kha-i-aa. ||1]|
In celestial peace, tranquility and bliss, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; my enemies and adversaries have been totally destroyed. ||1]|
qo Mede ufs ae 3 atetes ate fas nua afe wfenr | (829-7, frees, He 5)
gun avgun parabh kachh na beechaari-o kar kirpaa apunaa kar la-i-aa.
God has not considered my merits and demerits; in His Mercy, He has made me His own.
3G FaTet orgs uifsort asa Gud ofa at afer NNTHISII (829-8, frees, He 5) atul badaa-ee achut abhinaasee naanak uchrai har kee ja-i-aa. ||2||8||124| | Unweighable is the greatness of the immovable and imperishable Lord; Nanak proclaims the victory of the Lord. ||2||8]|124]|
farSs HIS U Il (829-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
faa 3 sast 3d AA Il (829-9, fuses, He 5)
bin bhai bhagtee taran kaisay.
Without the Fear of God, and devotional worship, how can anyone cross over the world-ocean?
ad woqgy ufss Curse we AyMit wry saA AI TIE I (829-9, fares, He 5) karahu anoograhu patit uDhaaran raakh su-aamee aap bharosay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Be kind to me, O Saving Grace of sinners; preserve my faith in You, O my Lord and Master. ||1]|Pause| |
fing odt ures fess He Hes fafimr aS AMIS AA Il (829-10, fore, He 5)
simran nahee aavat firat mad maavat bikhi-aa raataa su-aan jaisay.
The mortal does not remember the Lord in meditation; he wanders around intoxicated by egotism; he is engrossed in corruption like a dog.
mi@u fares nifte HSS UT HSS FS MA IAI (829-11, fuares, He 5) a-oDh bihaavat aDhik mohaavat paap kamaavat buday aisay. ||1|| Utterly cheated, his life is slipping away; committing sins, he is sinking away. ||1]|
Aefe wa sHs use fasts AY Aals Tee AA Il (829-11, frees, Hs 5)
saran dukh bhanjan purakh niranjan saaDhoo sangat ravan jaisay.
I have come to Your Sanctuary, Destroyer of pain; O Primal Immaculate Lord, may I dwell upon You in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
QHE AGA SA MU USS Soa Ales Tan feA NQNKNIQUII (829-12, frees, HE 5)
kaysav kalays naas agh khandan naanak jeevat daras disay. ||2||9||125]|| O Lord of beautiful hair, Destroyer of pain, Eradicator of sins, Nanak lives, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2||9]|125]]|
Ta fase Hoe u wud wg ¢ (929-14) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 9 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Ninth House:
qe Afsars urfe il (829-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
muta Afs BE Il (329-15, fuses, He 5) aapeh mayl la-ay. He Himself merges us with Himself.
wa 3 Aofs sud ore 3a 3 Se Te NU TTC Il (829-15, frarew, v2 5) jab tay saran tumaaree aa-ay tab tay dokh ga-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. When I came to Your Sanctuary, my sins vanished. ||1]||Pause| |
3fa uifore ug fos farot AIT Ade Ue Il (929-15, frees, He 5)
taj abhimaan ar chint biraanee saaDhah saran pa-ay.
Renouncing egotistical pride and other anxieties, I have sought the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints.
afy afu om sud UISH So 3 Sa ve IAI (829-16, frees, He 5)
jap jap naam tum"aaro pareetam tan tay rog kha-ay. ||1]|
Chanting, meditating on Your Name, O my Beloved, disease is eradicated from my body. ||1]|
Hd Hag MATS vifemirat ga Ufs SE Il (g29-16, fawres, He 5) mahaa mugaDh ajaan agi-aanee raakhay Dhaar da-ay.
Even utterly foolish, ignorant and thoughtless persons have been saved by the Kind Lord.
TT aod TT UT Sle neq AS IT MAUUIIEM (829-17, frees, v2 5) kaho naanak gur pooraa bhayti-o aavan jaan rahay. ||2]|1||126]||
Says Nanak, I have met the Perfect Guru; my comings and goings have ended. [|2]]1][126]|
farSs HIS U Il (829-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Me SH Hat Il (929-18, faores, He 5) jeeva-o naam sunee. Hearing Your Name, I live.
AG HYAS se TdT us Ja Hat oA yst IA TIS Il (829-18, frarey, ve 5) ja-o suparsan bha-ay gur pooray tab mayree aas punee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
When the Perfect Guru became pleased with me, then my hopes were fulfilled. ||1]|Pause] |
uta wet ardt ufe ote HfsS mee gat Il (829-19, freres, H2 5) peer ga-ee baaDhee man Dheeraa mohi-o anad Dhunee. Pain is gone, and my mind is comforted; the music of bliss fascinates me.
CufaS we fas ys UISH de 3 ATE fast IAI (829-19, fares, H3 5)
upji-o chaa-o milan parabh pareetam rahan na jaa-ay khinee. ||1]||
The yearning to meet my Beloved God has welled up within me. I cannot live without Him, even for an instant. ||1]|
UST tZBo
misa sas uifsa AS 3d fAHSfa mifsx Hat Il (830-1, faares, He 5)
anik bhagat anik jan taaray simrahi anik munee.
You have saved so many devotees, so many humble servants; so many silent sages contemplate You.
nis fea foaas us utes us soa mifsx Tat QUAN (830-1, fraves, Hs 5) anDhulay tik nirDhan Dhan paa-i-o parabh naanak anik gunee. ||2]|2]|127]||
The support of the blind, the wealth of the poor; Nanak has found God, of endless virtues. ||2||2||127]|
Ta fases HIG U WI IZ USS (830-3) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 ghar 13 parh-taal Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Thirteenth House, Partaal:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (830-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hue Ste 3 wire TS IS ANT SAG mss ale Il (830-4, frases, uz 5)
mohan need na aavai haavai haar kajar bastar abhran keenay.
O Enticing Lord, I cannot sleep; I sigh. I am adorned with necklaces, gowns, ornaments and make-up.
stat Sstat Ssteat il (830-4, frees, He 5) udeenee udeenee udeenee. I am sad, sad and depressed.
as ufg mre St Al TIS Il (830-4, frees, He 5) kab ghar aavai ree. ||1]| rahaa-o. When will You come home? ||1||Pause] |
Hale Aas BIS ALA Uf Il (830-5, faares, He 5) saran suhaagan charan sees Dhar. I seek the Sanctuary of the happy soul-brides; I place my head upon their feet.
wee Hfs fered Il (830-5, faeres, H2 5) laalan mohi milaavhu. Unite me with my Beloved.
aa ufs mire dt Al (830-5, fares, He 5) kab ghar aavai ree. ||1|| When will He come to my home? ||1]||
Hod Addt fies ws ag nad nid fkeveg 3G wa dt wee U|T Il (830-5, frees, He 5) sunhu sahayree milan baat kaha-o sagro aha" mitaavhu ta-o ghar hee laalan paavhu. Listen, my companions: tell me how to meet Him. Eradicate all egotism, and then you shall find your Beloved Lord within the home of your heart.
38 TA HAG TS WT Il (830-6, frees, ve 5) tab ras mangal gun gaavhu. Then, in delight, you shall sing the songs of joy and praise.
mitoe Ju flmireg Il (830-7, frees, H 5) aanad roop Dhi-aavahu. Meditate on the Lord, the embodiment of bliss.
SoA Enid nifES il (830-7, fuerew, v2 5) naanak du-aarai aa-i-o. O Nanak, I came to the Lord's Door,
38H wee UTES gH II (830-7, fuares, He 5) ta-o mai laalan paa-i-o ree. ||2|| and then, I found my Beloved. ||2]|
Hoe gu fears il (830-7, faees, vs 5) mohan roop dikhaavai. The Enticing Lord has revealed His form to me,
ma Hf ate ATS Il (830-8, faeres, He 5) ab mohi need suhaavai. and now, sleep seems sweet to me.
Hg Hot far gTsrat Il (830-8, faares, He 5) sabh mayree tikhaa bujhaanee. My thirst is totally quenched,
ma H Adfa AHTST Il (830-8, fueres, He 5) ab mai sahj samaanee. and now, I am absorbed in celestial bliss.
Hiot fusts aarst il (830-8, frases, He 5) meethee pireh kahaanee. How sweet is the story of my Husband Lord.
HIG wag UTES st TS SA UAUICII (830-9, frerew, He 5) mohan laalan paa-i-o ree. rahaa-o doojaa. ||1]|128] | I have found my Beloved, Enticing Lord. ||Second Pause] |1]||128]|
fas HIS U Il (830-9)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Hot ord ate eons ures T Il (830-9, fares, v2 5) moree aha™ jaa-ay darsan paavat hay. My ego is gone; I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
aed aa dt AIST HST Il (830-10, fuares, He 5) raachahu naath hee sahaa-ee santnaa. I am absorbed in my Lord and Master, the help and support of the Saints.
ME BIS TdT Al FI Il (830-10, fawres, v2 5) ab charan gahay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Now, I hold tight to His Feet. ||1]]Pause| |
WITT HO MST 5 Se VSS Vaore Cals nile nade ans fA Il (830-10, frees, He 5) aahay man avar na bhaavai charnaavai charnaavai uljhi-o al makrand kamal ji-o.
My mind longs for Him, and does not love any other. I am totally absorbed, in love with His Lotus Feet, like the bumble bee attached to the honey of the lotus flower.
MS GA Sdt Bd Sa Tis Bed MAUI (830-11, fares, He 5) an ras nahee chaahai aykai har laahai. ||1]| I do not desire any other taste; I seek only the One Lord. ||1]|
mis 3 edit faa 3 Se Il (830-12, frees, 2 5)
an tay tootee-ai rikh tay chhootee-ai.
I have broken away from the others, and I have been released from the Messenger of Death.
Ho fe A webs Fifer ATT BBM Il (830-12, frees, we 5)
man har ras ghootee-ai sang saaDhoo ultee-ai.
O mind, drink in the subtle essence of the Lord; join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and turn away from the world.
MB Sd Sat F Il (830-12, fuses, He 5) an naahee naahee ray. There is no other, none other than the Lord.
Soa US BIS BIG FT MQUIUIEN (830-13, fares, He 5)
naanak pareet charan charan hay. ||2||2||129]| O Nanak, love the Feet, the Feet of the Lord. ||2]|2||129]|
Ta fase Hoe t€ Bue (830-14) raag bilaaval mehlaa 9 dupday Raag Bilaaval, Ninth Mehl, Du-Padas:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (830-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
eu Jast ofs SH UETS Il (830-15, faares, He 9) dukh hartaa har naam pachhaano. The Name of the Lord is the Dispeller of sorrow - realize this.
MAHS doa fag fangs HAS se Aha ATS NAN TI Il (830-15, fuses, He 9)
ajaamal ganikaa jih simrat mukat bha-ay jee-a jaano. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Remembering Him in meditation, even Ajaamal the robber and Ganikaa the prostitute were liberated; let your soul know this. ||1]||Pause| |
aa at 3A fet feag vfs wa dt TH sus Il (830-16, fares, we 9)
gaj kee taraas mitee chhinhoo meh jab hee raam bakhaano.
The elephant's fear was taken away in an instant, as soon as he chanted the Lord's Name.
onde Ads HOS Got Hfya sHo ufs BUSTS INA (830-16, fasres, He 9) naarad kahat sunat Dharoo-a baarik bhajan maahi laptaano. ||1|| Listening to Naarad's teachings, the child Dhroo was absorbed in deep meditation.
[11|
Wee wd foss ue utes Aas who Jas Il (830-17, frees, H2 9)
achal amar nirbhai pad paa-i-o jagat jaahi hairaano.
He obtained the immovable, eternal state of fearlessness, and all the world was amazed.
Sod AIS SS dea dia feafe sho SH HS MUA (830-17, faeres, 2 9)
naanak kahat bhagat rachhak har nikat taahi tum maano. ||2||1|| Says Nanak, the Lord is the Saving Grace and the Protector of His devotees; believe it - He is close to you. ||2||1||
faaree Hoe € Il (830-18) bilaaval mehlaa 9. Bilaaval, Ninth Mehl:
dfs & on fast ey UTS Il (830-18, fares, He 9) har kay naam binaa dukh paavai. Without the Name of the Lord, you shall only find pain.
sats fast HOA od ya Ag fey FE ASS AU TIE Il (830-18, frees, ve 9) bhagat binaa sahsaa nah chookai gur ih bhayd bataavai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Without devotional worship, doubt is not dispelled; the Guru has revealed this secret. ||1]|Pause] |
as sf sta ys ate oH Aafs odt mrs II (830-19, few, He 9)
kahaa bha-i-o tirath barat kee-ay raam saran nahee aavai.
Of what use are sacred shrines of pilgrimage, if one does not enter the Sanctuary of the Lord?
UST t3Bq na na foses fsa woe A us AA faATS IAI (831-1, frees, He 9)
jog jag nihfal tih maan-o jo parabh jas bisraavai. ||1]| Know that Yoga and sacrificial feasts are fruitless, if one forgets the Praises of God.
[1
He Hd 86 AS ude dfs AX TS We I (931-1, fears, ve 9)
maan moh dono ka-o parhar gobind kay gun gaavai.
One who lays aside both pride and attachment, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
ag soa fea fafa & yrat Hes Hats ATS NII (831-2, few, He 9) kaho naanak ih biDh ko paraanee jeevan mukat kahaavai. ||2||2||
Says Nanak, the mortal who does this is said to be ‘jivan mukta' - liberated while yet alive. ||2||2]|
faaree Hos € Il (831-2) bilaaval mehlaa 9. Bilaaval, Ninth Mehl:
WH SHG TH & OTT Il (831-2, fuares, He 9) jaa mai bhajan raam ko naahee. There is no meditation on the Lord within him.
fs0 3d FOX mareg afer GI Tug Ho HTS NA TIS Il (831-3, faarew, He 9) tinh nar janam akaarath kho-i-aa yeh raakho man maahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. That man wastes his life uselessly - keep this in mind. ||1]||Pause] |
Stee ad ys Sf TH ST HOM SA AT A II (831-3, fares, M3 9)
tirath karai barat fun raakhai nah manoo-aa bas jaa ko.
He bathes at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and adheres to fasts, but he has no control over his mind.
faves UaH af 3H Hod A AIS HO AS IAI (831-4, faores, H2 9) nihfal Dharam taahi tum maanhu saach kahat mai yaa ka-o. ||1]| Know that such religion is useless to him. I speak the Truth for his sake. ||1]|
AA US AG Hfs ates se ofa feo uTst Il (831-5, faares, He 9) jaisay paahan jal meh raakhi-o bhaydai naahi tih paanee. It's like a stone, kept immersed in water; still, the water does not penetrate it.
3A dt 3H ato usrag gals die FH Yrat IQII (931-5, frees, He 9) taisay hee tum taahi pachhaanahu bhagat heen jo paraanee. ||2| | So, understand it: that mortal being who lacks devotional worship is just like that.
21 |
aS H Hafs oH S USS TT Wd SE ASS Il (831-6, frares, He 9)
kal mai mukat naam tay paavat gur yeh bhayd bataavai.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, liberation comes from the Naam. The Guru has revealed this secret.
TI HSA AS BI Tao A YS A TS WS MSIUSIl (831-6, faaes, vs 9) kaho naanak so-ee nar garoo-aa jo parabh kay gun gaavai. ||3||3]| Says Nanak, he alone is a great man, who sings the Praises of God. ||3]|3]|
fares nincudint HIG A WT IO (831-8) bilaaval asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 10 Bilaaval, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Tenth House:
qe Afsas yrrfe il (831-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
foafe ZA ta AS ASt Il (831-9, fueres, He 1) nikat vasai daykhai sabh so-ee. He dwells close at hand, and sees all,
Tafa feser gs AST I (831-9, frees, we 1) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. but how rare is the Gurmukh who understands this.
fee 3 ufet safes 5 det Il (331-9, faares, nH: 1) vin bhai pa-i-ai bhagat na ho-ee. Without the Fear of God, there is no devotional worship.
Rafe gS wet AY Tet NAM (831-9, faeres, He 1) Sabad ratay sadaa sukh ho-ee. ||1]| Imbued with the Word of the Shabad, eternal peace is attained. ||1]|
MAT famitg USTIT SH Il (831-10, frares, He 1) aisaa gi-aan padaarath naam. Such is the spiritual wisdom, the treasure of the Naam;
aanfy uretA aff aff He All FITS Il (931-10, frares, He 1) gurmukh paavas ras ras maan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. obtaining it, the Gurmukhs enjoy the subtle essence of this nectar. ||1]|Pause]|
fami fama ae AS et Il (931-11, faores, He 1) gi-aan gi-aan kathai sabh ko-ee. Everyone talks about spiritual wisdom and spiritual knowledge.
afa afa ae ad vy det il (931-11, free, He 1 kath kath baad karay dukh ho-ee. Talking, talking, they argue, and suffer.
ofa age 3 Id 3 ASH Il (831-11, fares, He 1) kath kahnai tay rahai na ko-ee. No one can stop talking and discussing it.
faa gH oS Hats o Tet QI (831-11, frees, He 1) bin ras raatay mukat na ho-ee. ||2]| Without being imbued with the subtle essence, there is no liberation. ||2||
fomrg fomrg As aa 3 Tet Il (931-12, faeres, He 1) gi-aan Dhi-aan sabh gur tay ho-ee. Spiritual wisdom and meditation all come from the Guru.
Ardt JIS ATat fe Aet I (831-12, fuses, He 1) saachee rahat saachaa man so-ee. Through the lifestyle of Truth, the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
HOHY aaat J Us JIS 3 Det Il (831-12, fueres, H2 1) manmukh kathnee hai par rahat na ho-ee. The self-willed manmukh talks about it, but does not practice it.
eT 3S TE Aet SM (831-13, frorew, we 1) naavhu bhoolay thaa-o na ko-ee. ||3]| Forgetting the Name, he finds no place of rest. ||3]|
Ho Hfenr afas Ag Afs I (831-13, fueres, He 1) man maa-i-aa banDhi-o sar jaal. Maya has caught the mind in the trap of the whirlpool.
ufe ufe famrfu safe fra ots il (831-13, frees, He 1) ghat ghat bi-aap rahi-o bikh naal. Each and every heart is trapped by this bait of poison and sin.
a oma ASA of I (931-14, fasres, He 1) jo aa‘jai so deesai kaal. See that whoever has come, is subject to death.
oad Ata fee mts igi (831-14, frees, He 1) kaaraj seeDho ridai sam"aal. ||4]| Your affairs shall be adjusted, if you contemplate the Lord in your heart. ||4| |
A famrat fafs wafe foe wet i (831-15, fueres, He 1)
SO gi-aanee jin sabad liv laa-ee.
He alone is a spiritual teacher, who lovingly focuses his consciousness on the Word of the Shabad.
Houfa s@H ufs aevet Il (931-15, fares, He 1) manmukh ha-umai pat gavaa-ee.
The self-willed, egotistical manmukh loses his honor. mnt ads sats aavet I (831-15, fasres, He 1)
aapay kartai bhagat karaa-ee. The Creator Lord Himself inspires us to His devotional worship.
Tafa nim & Sfanet lull (831-16, fase, u2 1) gurmukh aapay day vadi-aa-ee. ||5|| He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness. ||5| |
df= niurdt fegHe Afs I (831-16, faeres, He 1) rain anDhaaree nirmal jot. The life-night is dark, while the Divine Light is immaculate.
om faa 3d qa AEP Il (831-16, fares, we 1) naam binaa jhoothay kuchal kachhot. Those who lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are false, filthy and untouchable.
ae uard sas Adfs Il (831-17, frees, He 1) bayd pukaarai bhagat sarot. The Vedas preach sermons of devotional worship.
Afs afs we Fe AS NEN (831-17, faeres, He 1 sun sun maanai vaykhai jot. ||6|| Listening, hearing and believing, one beholds the Divine Light. ||6]||
AAS ffs on fesnt i (931-17, fares, us 1) saastar simrit naam darirh-aam. The Shaastras and Simritees implant the Naam within.
genta AS SSH aI Il (831-18, frerew, He 1) gurmukh saa‘t ootam karaama”. The Gurmukh lives in peace and tranquility, doing deeds of sublime purity.
Houta Fat Ta AI Il (31-18, fees, we 1) manmukh jonee dookh sahaama”. The self-willed manmukh suffers the pains of reincarnation.
au se fea SH SAM IDI (831-18, fares, He 1) banDhan tootay ik naam vasaama”. ||7]| His bonds are broken, enshrining the Name of the One Lord. ||7]|
HS om Fat ufs uA Il (831-19, freres, v2 1) mannay naam sachee pat poojaa. Believing in the Naam, one obtains true honor and adoration.
for Sar ard & TAT Il (831-19, frerew, He 1) kis vaykhaa naahee ko doojaa. Who should I see? There is none other than the Lord.
ofa as@ ae ufo ALE II (931-19, faerew, He 1) daykh kaha-o bhaavai man so-ay. I see, and I say, that He alone is pleasing to my mind.
SOA Ad MST dt AE MCA (831-19, faeres, He 1) naanak kahai avar nahee ko-ay. ||8]|1]| Says Nanak, there is no other at all. ||8]|1]|
UST t3BQ
faaSs HIS Y Il (832-1) bilaaval mehlaa 1. Bilaaval, First Mehl:
Ho at afanit HSAT AP Il (832-1, fases, 42 1) man kaa kahi-aa mansaa karai. The human acts according to the wishes of the mind.
feg ne us uy Bud I (932-1, frases, He 1) ih man punn paap uchrai. This mind feeds on virtue and vice.
Hfeor ufe ws feufs 3 mrs I (832-2, fravew, He 1) maa-i-aa mad maatay taripat na aavai. Intoxicated with the wine of Maya, satisfaction never comes.
fgufs Hats yfs Ara Bre IAI (832-2, fore, He 1) taripat mukat man saachaa bhaavai. ||1] | Satisfaction and liberation come, only to one whose mind is pleasing to the True Lord.
[21
36 U6 ASS AZ Sy MSHA Il (832-2, fuses, He 1) tan Dhan kalat sabh daykh abhimaanaa. Gazing upon his body, wealth, wife and all his possessions, he is proud.
fag oe fae Aft o WaT IA TIE Il (932-3, fueres, He 1) bin naavai kichh sang na jaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. But without the Name of the Lord, nothing shall go along with him. ||1]||Pause] |
atefs dA sat yA Ho AT Il (832-3, faeres, 42 1) keecheh ras bhog khusee-aa man kayree. He enjoys tastes, pleasures and joys in his mind.
Ug Bat 3G SAH Vat Il (932-4, fares, ve 1) Dhan lokaa™ tan bhasmai dhayree. But his wealth will pass on to other people, and his body will be reduced to ashes.
WT UT I AF SH Il (832-4, faves, vs 1) khaakoo khaak ralai sabh fail. The entire expanse, like dust, shall mix with dust.
faa Hae adt BSs A Il (932-4, faores, nz 1) bin sabdai nahee utrai mail. ||2]| Without the Word of the Shabad, his filth is not removed. ||2]|
Hs Ta wo 3G ft AT Il (832-5, fawrew, v2 1) geet raag ghan taal se kooray. The various songs, tunes and rhythms are false.
fgg ae Cur faor EF Il (932-5, frees, we 1) tarihu gun upjai binsai dooray. Trapped by the three qualities, people come and go, far from the Lord.
ot ToHfs wae o ATE Il (832-5, fares, v2 1) doojee durmat darad na jaa-ay. In duality, the pain of their evil-mindedness does not leave them.
ge Tanfe wy Te WE Sil (932-5, foes, ws 1)
chhootai gurmukh daaroo gun gaa-ay. ||3]||
But the Gurmukh is emancipated by taking the medicine, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. |[3]|
Ost Cae fSeq aes Ha Il (832-6, faery, He 1)
Dhotee oojal tilak gal maalaa.
He may wear a clean loin-cloth, apply the ceremonial mark to his forehead, and wear a mala around his neck;
nists atu usta are ATH Il (832-6, frees, He 1) antar kroDh parheh naat saalaa. but if there is anger within him, he is merely reading his part, like an actor in a play.
om feats Hfenr we ub Il (832-7, fares, He 1) naam visaar maa-i-aa mad pee-aa. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he drinks in the wine of Maya.
fag ad sats oat AY dr Isil (932-7, frees, He 1) bin gur bhagat naahee sukh thee-aa. ||4]| Without devotional worship to the Guru, there is no peace. ||4]|
Had AMite gauss HAI I (832-7, frees, He 1) sookar su-aan garDhabh manjaaraa. The human is a pig, a dog, a donkey, a cat,
UH HOS St BSH Il (832-8, fares, He 1) pasoo malaychh neech chandalaa. a beast, a filthy, lowly wretch, an outcast,
Gd 3 Hg 2s fSq Af seve I (832-8, fares, He 1) gur tay muhu fayray tin” jon bhavaa-ee-ai. if he turns his face away from the Guru. He shall wander in reincarnation.
Safe sfomr mre Arent lull (832-8, fuses, He 1) banDhan baaDhi-aa aa-ee-ai jaa-ee-ai. | |5|| Bound in bondage, he comes and goes. ||5||
Td Ae 3 Bd UCTS Il (832-9, fears, 2 1)
gur sayvaa tay lahai padaarath. Serving the Guru, the treasure is found.
fase oH Het fxgsraa Il (832-9, frees, He 1) hirdai naam sadaa kirtaarath. With the Naam in the heart, one always prospers.
Wet CsaT us o TE Il (832-9, fares, vs 1) saachee dargeh poochh na ho-ay. And in the Court of the True Lord, you shall not called to account.
HS JaH AS efe AE Ell (832-10, frees, He 1) maanay hukam seejhai dar so-ay. ||6||
One who obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command, is approved at the Lord's Door. [16] |
Afsag fxs 3 fon aS WE II (832-10, fueres, He 1) satgur milai ta tis ka-o jaanai.
Meeting the True Guru, one knows the Lord. Td IAET JAH USTE Il (832-10, fuses, He 1)
rahai rajaa-ee hukam pachhaanai. Understanding the Hukam of His Command, one acts according to His Will.
Jan ues Ad Uf SH Il (832-10, frees, He 1) hukam pachhaan sachai dar vaas. Understanding the Hukam of His Command, he dwells in the Court of the True Lord.
ares fears Aafe Se SA IDI (832-11, faares, He 1) kaal bikaal sabad bha-ay naas. ||7]|| Through the Shabad, death and birth are ended. ||7]||
dd ists We As fSA aT Il (832-11, frees, He 1) rahai ateet jaanai sabh tis kaa. He remains detached, knowing that everything belongs to God.
3o HO mau J feg fA a Il (832-11, fares, He 1) tan man arpai hai ih jis kaa. He dedicates his body and mind unto the One who owns them.
a Gg mre of Go AME II (832-12, fares, He 1) naa oh aavai naa oh jaa-ay. He does not come, and he does not go.
Soa ATS Als ANTS CHUM (832-12, fuses, He 1)
naanak saachay saach samaa-ay. ||8]|2|| O Nanak, absorbed in Truth, he merges in the True Lord. ||8||2||
faaee HIS 3 neue UT IO (832-13) bilaaval mehlaa 3 asatpadee ghar 10 Bilaaval, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Tenth House:
qe Afsara yATfe il (832-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aa agor uft ga fare il (832-14, frees, ve 3) jag ka-oo-aa mukh chunch gi-aan. The world is like a crow; with its beak, it croaks spiritual wisdom.
nists BF TS vifSHre il (832-14, frees, vs 3) antar lobh jhooth abhimaan. But deep within there is greed, falsehood and pride.
fag oe ug soa foes Ill (832-14, foes, He 3) bin naavai paaj lahag nidaan. ||1|| Without the Name of the Lord, your thin outer covering shall wear off, you fool. ||1]|
Afsas Afe on ZA Hfs HF Il (932-15, faores, He 3) satgur Sayv naam vasai man cheet. Serving the True Guru, the Naam shall dwell in your conscious mind.
Gg se ala oy sare fag are Ja 3S uSHS Al TTS I (832-15, fares, ws 3)
gur bhaytay har naam chaytaavai bin naavai hor jhooth pareet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meeting with the Guru, the Name of the Lord comes to mind. Without the Name, other loves are false. ||1]||Pause] |
afe atom AT ars AHTST Il (832-16, frees, He 3) gur kahi-aa saa kaar kamaavahu. So do that work, which the Guru tells you to do.
Hag dite AdH ue wired i (832-16, foes, us 3) sabad cheeneh sahj ghar aavhu. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, you shall come to the home of celestial bliss.
APS ate earet urSg QI (832-16, farses, He 3) Saachai naa-ay vadaa-ee paavhu. ||2|| Through the True Name, you shall obtain glorious greatness. ||2| |
uit & YS SA TSS Il (832-17, frees, ve 3) aap na boojhai lok bujhaavai. One who does not understand his own self, but still tries to instruct others,
Ho a witt nig AHS Il (832-17, fawes, He 3) man kaa anDhaa anDh kamaavai. is mentally blind, and acts in blindness.
UJI WI HIG SCT AA US ISI (832-17, frees, He 3)
dar ghar mahal tha-ur kaisay paavai. ||3]||
How can he ever find a home and a place of rest, in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence? ||3]|
dfs HE Aha visa I (832-18, frees, He 3) har jee-o sayvee-ai antarjaamee. Serve the Dear Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts;
we we nists fan oft Afs AHTAT II (832-18, fuses, He 3) ghat ghat antar jis kee jot samaanee. deep within each and every heart, His Light is shining forth.
fan ate fom 3S ugantt gil (832-18, frees, He 3) tis naal ki-aa chalai pehnaamee. ||4|| How can anyone hide anything from Him? ||4]|
Ust t3Bs
AST STH ATS Aafe AS Il (833-1, fase, v2 3) saachaa naam saachai sabad jaanai. The True Name is known through the True Word of the Shabad.
mime ning fH Tox uifSHS Il (933-1, frovew, 2 3) aapai aap milai chookai abhimaanai. The Lord Himself meets that one who eradicates egotistical pride.
THe SH AST AST SUS |NUIl (833-1, foes, He 3) gurmukh naam sadaa sadaa vakhaanai. ||5|| The Gurmukh chants the Naam, forever and ever. ||5||
Afsate Afent gat eIHfS AT Il (833-2, frees, Hs 3) satgur sayvi-ai doojee durmat jaa-ee. Serving the True Guru, duality and evil-mindedness are taken away.
mae atte urut HFS Uret Il (833-2, fawres, He 3) a-ugan kaat paapaa mat khaa-ee. Guilty mistakes are erased, and the sinful intellect is cleansed.
ave atfenr Ast Afs ANTE NEI (833-2, fares, He 3) kanchan kaa-i-aa jotee jot samaa-ee. ||6|| One's body sparkles like gold, and one's light merges into the Light. ||6]|
Afsafe fife est |fsnret il (933-3, frees, He 3) satgur mili-ai vadee vadi-aa-ee. Meeting with the True Guru, one is blessed with glorious greatness.
eu are fase an SAret Il (933-3, faores, He 3) dukh kaatai hirdai naam vasaa-ee. Pain is taken away, and the Naam comes to dwell within the heart.
OTH TS Ae AY Uret IDI (833-4, freres, He 3) naam ratay sadaa sukh paa-ee. ||7|| Imbued with the Naam, one finds eternal peace. ||7| |
TaHfs Hout ATat ATS Il (833-4, fares, He 3) gurmat maani-aa karnee saar. Obeying the Gur's instructions, one's actions are purified.
Tents Hfsnr He BMT Il (833-4, fares, v2 3) gurmat maani-aa mokh du-aar. Obeying the Guru's Instructions, one finds the state of salvation.
Soa TIHfS HS usNTs ATT NCIUAUISI (833-5, fasres, He 3) naanak gurmat maani-aa parvaarai saaDhaar. ||8]|1]|3]|
O Nanak, those who follow the Guru's Teachings are saved, along with their families. [18] {11131
fares HIS 8 mAcUdT we IA (833-6) bilaaval mehlaa 4 asatpadee-aa ghar 11 Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Eleventh House:
qe Afsas yrrfe Il (833-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nm ning ufe J AS mafes ofs dA as Teer Il (833-7, foes, He 4)
aapai aap khaa-ay ha-o maytai an-din har ras geet gava-ee-aa.
One who eliminates his self-centeredness, and eradicates his ego, night and day sings the songs of the Lord's Love.
Tsnfy uses ave afenr fass@ vat Afs f@etor 149i (833-7, faores, ue 4)
gurmukh parchai kanchan kaa-i-aa nirbha-o jotee jot mila-ee-aa. ||1]|
The Gurmukh is inspired, his body is golden, and his light merges into the Light of the Fearless Lord. ||1||
H dfs ofs om wiarg THEM II (933-8, faores, He 4) mai har har naam aDhaar rama-ee-aa. I take the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fas use afs 5 AAS fas ae TaHfe of afs ws user I TIS Il (833-8, frares, He 4) khin pal reh na saka-o bin naavai gurmukh har har paath parha-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I cannot live, for a moment, even for an instant, without the Name of the Lord; the Gurmukh reads the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]||Pause||
fa fas eA eord 3d wat nifofofh sAag Us Ua Bae Il (833-9, frees, He 4) ayk girahu das du-aar hai jaa kay ahinis taskar panch chor laga-ee-aa.
In the one house of the body, there are ten gates; night and day, the five thieves break in.
ug mee AS fofs 3 Wefs HOHE niTs vats o Uehor III (833-10, fueres, He 4)
Dharam arath sabh hir lay jaaveh manmukh anDhulay khabar na pa-ee-aa. | |2| |
They steal the entire wealth of one's Dharmic faith, but the blind, self-willed manmukh does not know it. ||[2||
ave ad ad Hela sfoor wa fami fs foe went Il (933-10, frares, He 4)
kanchan kot baho maanak bhari-aa jaagay gi-aan tat liv la-ee-aa.
The fortress of the body is overflowing with gold and jewels; when it is awakened by spiritual wisdom, one enshrines love for the essence of reality.
SAAS 3g orfs Bars Ts a ate uals sfo uetor Sil (933-11, frees, v3 4) taskar hayroo aa-ay lukaanay gur kai sabad pakarh banDh pa-ee-aa. ||3]| The thieves and robbers hide out in the body; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are arrested and locked up. ||3]|
dfs of on Us Sfoe dee Hae ag ute Swe Il (833-12, frees, He 4)
har har naam pot bohithaa khayvat sabad gur paar langh-ee-aa.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the boat, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the boatman, to carry us across.
AH Worst Off o ure oT a SHAT VT BAST gil (833-12, foes, v2 4)
jam jaagaatee nayrh na aavai naa ko taskar chor laga-ee-aa. | |4||
The Messenger of Death, the tax collector, does not even come close, and no thieves or robbers can plunder you. ||4||
dfs we We Ae feg TSt H fs AA ATS IZ 3 BMT Il (833-13, feerew, He 4)
har gun gaavai sadaa din raatee mai har jas kahtay ant na lahee-aa.
I continuously sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, day and night; singing the Lord's Praises, I cannot find His limits.
aenfa Hour feag wufs ore freG dus stare anehor iui (933-14, fares, 3 4) gurmukh manoo-aa ikat ghar aavai mila-o gopaal neesaan baja-ee-aa. ||5||
The mind of the Gurmukh returns to its own home; it meets the Lord of the Universe, to the beat of the celestial drum. ||5]|
dot efy ean Ho feus Azo Feat qe Age Ase Il (933-14, fares, ue 4)
nainee daykh daras man tariptai sarvan banee gur sabad suna-ee-aa.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan with my eyes, my mind is satisfied; with my ears, I listen to the Guru's Bani, and the Word of His Shabad.
Afs Afs wisn 22 3 SS ofA ofA ot Ges Teer Ell (833-15, foes, He 4)
sun sun aatam dayv hai bheenay ras ras raam gopaal rava-ee-aa. ||6||
Listening, listening, my soul is softened, delighted by His subtle essence, chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||6]|
3 ae wher dfs feed scorn ae 3 Tanfe Bde II (933-16, frees, He 4)
tarai gun maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapay turee-aa gun hai gurmukh lahee-aa.
In the grip of the three qualities, they are engrossed in love and attachment to Maya; only as Gurmukh do they find the absolute quality, absorption in bliss.
ea fenfe ns AH afe We Sedt res AG YIN UATE IDI (833-16, frorew, Hs 4) ayk darisat sabh sam kar jaanai nadree aavai sabh barahm pasra-ee-aa. ||7]| With a single, impartial eye, look upon all alike, and see God pervading all. ||7||
oH OH od Afs Fast Tanta wm ney Sayer Il (833-17, fase, H2 4)
raam naam hai jot sabaa-ee gurmukh aapay alakh lakha-ee-aa. The Light of the Lord's Name permeates all; the Gurmukh knows the unknowable.
Soa te efenre se 3 sats af afe ath AHS NCIISI (833-18, frares, He 4)
naanak deen da-i-aal bha-ay hai bhagat bhaa-ay har naam sama-ee-aa. ||8||1||4]| O Nanak, the Lord has become merciful to the meek; through loving adoration, he merges in the Lord's Name. ||8]|1]||4| |
faaTSH HIS g Il (833-19) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofa on Ase Ae fwred afe dee SA Aaa aoe II (933-19, fueres, He 4)
har har naam seetal jal Dhi-aavahu har chandan vaas suganDh ganDh-ee-aa. Meditate on the cool water of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. Perfume yourself with the fragrant scent of the Lord, the sandalwood tree.
Uat t3e ffs AsHafs usH ue ufeer x fsss ue Afar afe gd NA (834-1, frees, He 4)
mil satsangat param pad paa-i-aa mai hirad palaas sang har buhee-aa. ||1]|| Joining the Society of the Saints, I have obtained the supreme status. I am just a castor-oil tree, made fragrant by their association. ||1]|
afy Aaiava AaetA AAS Il (834-1, fares, H2 4) jap jagannaath jagdees gus-ee-aa. Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Master of the world, the Lord of creation.
Hofe ud Aet AS Cad fas yfsere Corfs AHS NU TIE Il (934-2, fares, He 4) Saran paray say-ee jan ubray ji-o par-hilaad uDhaar sama-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those humble beings who seek the Lord's Sanctuary are saved, like Prahlaad; they are emancipated and merge with the Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
3g niotsT Hf Veg SSH dea foale AS JUG TEM Il (834-2, faores, us 4) bhaar athaarah meh chandan ootam chandan nikat sabh chandan hu-ee-aa. Of all plants, the sandalwood tree is the most sublime. Everything near the sandalwood tree becomes fragrant like sandalwood.
Was as G3 Aa ge ufos wifsre feats ofa Teor QI (834-3, fares, He 4)
saakat koorhay oobh suk hoo-ay man abhimaan vichhurh door ga-ee-aa. ||2||
The stubborn, false faithless cynics are dried up; their egotistical pride separates them far from the Lord. ||2]|
dfs afs fufs aga wm we As fafa ofs afe wrfu godine I (934-4, fusres, He 4)
har gat mit kartaa aapay jaanai sabh biDh har har aap bana-ee-aa.
Only the Creator Lord Himself knows the state and condition of everyone; the Lord Himself makes all the arrangements.
fan Afsag 32 A ave Je A Ufe fofimr A fie o feeor SI (834-4, faores, He 4)
jis satgur bhaytay so kanchan hovai jo Dhur likhi-aa so mitai na mita-ee-aa. ||3]| One who meets the True Guru is transformed into gold. Whatever is pre-ordained, is not erased by erasing. ||3]|
336 uese TaHfs us Aa gals Favs WHE II (934-5, foes, He 4)
ratan padaarath gurmat paavai saagar bhagat bhandaar khul"'-ee-aa.
The treasure of jewels is found in the ocean of the Guru's Teachings. The treasure of devotional worship is opened to me.
Gd vset fea Aaa Curt 4 afs Te as feufs o ser Igil (834-6, frees, He 4)
gur charnee ik sarDhaa upjee mai har gun kahtay taripat na bha-ee-aa. ||4||
Focused on the Guru's Feet, faith wells up within me; chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I hunger for more. ||4||
usH saa fos fos ofa fomre 4 of Te ATS Seat adr I (834-7, fees, v2 4) param bairaag nit nit har Dhi-aa-ay mai har gun kahtay bhaavnee kahee-aa.
I am totally detached, continually, continuously meditating on the Lord; chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I express my love for Him.
ag ag firs fas ue adba afe ug 3 ure ud Use Ul (834-7, fares, He 4)
baar baar khin khin pal kahee-ai har paar na paavai parai para-ee-aa. ||5||
Time and time again, each and every moment and instant, I express it. I cannot find the Lord's limits; He is the farthest of the far. ||5||
AAS ad use uatdty UH Add ue AGH fase I (934-8, frarew, ve 4)
saasat bayd puraan pukaareh Dharam karahu khat karam darirha-ee-aa.
The Shaastras, the Vedas and the Puraanas advise righteous actions, and the performance of the six religious rituals.
Hou units sofh feas os wale ae ofa gsebnr lel (834-9, frees, 3 4) manmukh pakhand bharam vigootay lobh lahar naav bhaar buda-ee-aa. ||6] |
The hypocritical, self-willed manmukhs are ruined by doubt; in the waves of greed, their boat is heavily loaded, and it sinks. ||6]|
oH Aug 3H als ureg fAfyfs AAZ OH feser I (934-9, frares, He 4)
naam japahu naamay gat paavhu simrit saastar naam darirh-ee-aa.
So chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and through the Naam, find emancipation. The Simritees and Shaastras recommend the Naam.
JH wfe 3 feos de Tonfe uss USH Us Ue IDI (834-10, frees, He 4) ha-umai jaa-ay ta nirmal hovai gurmukh parchai param pad pa-ee-aa. ||7|| Eradicating egotism, one becomes pure. The Gurmukh is inspired, and obtains the supreme status. ||7]||
feg Aa edo JU Ag So fas wef A AIH AHEM Il (834-11, faares, He 4)
ih jag varan roop sabh tayraa jit laaveh say karam kama-ee-aa.
This world, with its colors and forms, is all Yours, O Lord; as You attach us, so do we do our deeds.
Soa HS ene safe fas ae fSs oho voror IcQNUI (834-11, foes, He 4)
naanak jant vajaa-ay vaajeh jit bhaavai tit raahi chala-ee-aa. ||8||2||5]|
O Nanak, we are the instruments upon which He plays; as He wills, so is the path we take. ||8]|2||5]|
faTSs HIS 8 Il (834-12) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
Tents man wired fomrfeur @ afs safe afsae vfs usueior Il (834-12, frees, He 4) gurmukh agam agochar Dhi-aa-i-aa ha-o bal bal satgur sat purkha-ee-aa.
The Gurmukh meditates on the Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the True Guru, the True Primal Being.
oH on He uUfs eae Afsag usta ofe ath AHEM INA (834-13, frees, He 4)
raam naam mayrai paraan vasaa-ay satgur paras har naam sama-ee-aa. ||1||
He has brought the Lord's Name to dwell upon my breath of life; meeting with the True Guru, I am absorbed into the Lord's Name. ||1||
Ho at 2a dfs oH feaeinr il (834-14, foes, He 4) jan kee tayk har naam tika-ee-aa. The Name of the Lord is the only Support of His humble servants.
Afsad at Us war wet ag fasu Ss ofg eg BMT NA TTS Il (934-14, faorea, ne 4) satgur kee Dhar laagaa jaavaa gur kirpaa tay har dar lahee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I shall live under the protection of the True Guru. By Guru's Grace, I shall attain the Court of the Lord. ||1]|Pause||
feg Adley aeH at asst aanfe ufa nfa 33 ae I (834-15, frares, He 4)
ih sareer karam kee Dhartee gurmukh math math tat kadha-ee-aa.
This body is the field of karma; the Gurmukhs plow and work it, and harvest the essence.
we Aes OU ysrthor sis ae ues Sz neo 12M (834-16, frees, ne 4)
laal javayhar naam pargaasi-aa bhaa“dai bhaa-o pavai tit a-ee-aa. ||2]|
The priceless jewel of the Naam becomes manifest, and it pours into their vessels of love. |[2||
aaAfs oA oA dfe adm A Ae TH sas fon Ser I (834-16, faares, H: 4)
daasan daas daas ho-ay rahee-ai jo jan raam bhagat nij bha-ee-aa.
Become the slave of the slave of the slave, of that humble being who has become the devotee of the Lord.
Ho afa wrefy us ae yrat Te USAT A nia aaeor ISI (834-17, fares, He 4) man buDh arap Dhara-o gur aagai gur parsaadee mai akath katha-ee-aa. ||3]|
I dedicate my mind and intellect, and place them in offering before my Guru; by Guru's Grace, I speak the Unspoken. ||3]||
Hou Hfeur Hfo feumt feg Hoe feAe Aes fsuder I (934-18, fares, Hs 4) manmukh maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapay ih man tarisnaa jalat tikha-ee-aa.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in attachment to Maya; their minds are thirsty, burning with desire.
Tans on nifts AS ufenr nafs gst ae Aafe gsehor igil (934-18, frees, He 4) gurmat naam amrit jal paa-i-aa agan bujhee gur sabad bujha-ee-aa. ||4|| Following the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, and the fire has been put out. The Word of the Guru's Shabad has put it out. ||4]]|
feg Ho ard Afsae ora nose Hae Ufs Ja SAE Il (834-19, fawrew, ws 4)
ih man naachai satgur aagai anhad sabad Dhun toor vaja-ee-aa.
This mind dances before the True Guru. The unstruck sound current of the Shabad resounds, vibrating the celestial melody.
Uat tBu ofs ofs Grats as feo wat aft aft vse ofa Te ysetor Uli (935-1, fraorey, He 4)
har har ustat karai din raatee rakh rakh charan har taal poora-ee-aa. ||5|| I praise the Lord, day and night, moving my feet to the beat of the drum. ||5]|
dfs & df ast Ho we ah oe afk Hae Jet Il (935-2, frees, He 4)
har kai rang rataa man gaavai ras rasaal ras sabad rava-ee-aa.
Imbued with the Lord's Love, my mind sings His Praise, joyfully chanting the Shabad, the source of nectar and bliss.
fon ufs oe ont vifs fears fafs uve fae dt AY odor NEI (935-2, frees, He 4)
nij ghar Dhaar chu-ai at nirmal jin pee-aa tin hee sukh lahee-aa. ||6]| The stream of immaculate purity flows through the home of the self within; one who drinks it in, finds peace. ||6| |
Houle AH ad nifsHrat fAs waa we us SATE II (935-3, frees, we 4)
manhath karam karai abhimaanee ji-o baalak baaloo ghar usra-ee-aa.
The stubborn-minded, egotistical, proud-minded person performs rituals, but these are like sand castles built by children.
Wile Bdfa AH Ava at fuse ufo fsa fFa eta utr INDI (935-4, fares, He 4) aavai lahar samund saagar kee khin meh bhinn bhinn dheh pa-ee-aa. ||7]| When the waves of the ocean come in, they crumble and dissolve in an instant. ||7]||
dfs Ag Aad dfs J om fed AG dD AT Aw VBS I (935-4, frees, He 4)
har sar saagar har hai aapay ih jag hai sabh khayl khayla-ee-aa.
The Lord is the pool, and the Lord Himself is the ocean; this world is all a play which He has staged.
fAG Ae sda AS Aes ANSfs Bea HM orfu THe ICISIEN (935-5, feares, He 4)
ji-o jal tarang jal jaleh samaaveh naanak aapay aap rama-ee-aa. ||8||3||6]| As the waves of water merge into the water again, O Nanak, so does He merge into Himself. ||8]|3]|6]|
farSs HIS 8 Il (835-6) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
Afsag usd fs Het uret aa at Hae 3fe SAH feseor II (835-6, frees, He 4) satgur parchai man mundraa paa-ee gur kaa sabad tan bhasam darirh-ee-aa.
My mind wears the ear-rings of the True Guru's acquaintance; I apply the ashes of the Word of the Guru's Shabad to my body.
wna fils s€ AG Afa ABH HIE SE fife aetor A (835-7, frovew, Hi 4)
amar pind bha-ay saaDhoo sang janam maran do-oo mit ga-ee-aa. || 1] |
By body has become immortal, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Both birth and death have come to an end for me. ||1]|
Hd Ho ATGHafs ffs adit i (835-7, fase, He 4) mayray man saaDhsangat mil rahee-aa. O my mind, remain united with the Saadh Sangat.
fgur ag Hones HU H fas fas ATG BaS UNE NA TIS Il (835-8, freee, vs 4) kirpaa karahu maDhsoodan maaDha-o mai khin khin saaDhoo charan pakha-ee-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Be merciful to me, O Lord; each and every instant, let me wash the Feet of the Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
3H faery sfeor ae eat fea fag Hour fea & feaxetnr Il (935-9, frees, He 4)
tajai girsat bha-i-aa ban vaasee ik khin manoo-aa tikai na tika-ee-aa.
Forsaking family life, he wanders in the forest, but his mind does not remain at rest, even for an instant.
wes fe se wife wre ofa ofs AG Aafe USS III (835-9, fore, He 4)
Dhaavat Dhaa-ay taday ghar aavai har har saaDhoo saran pava-ee-aa. ||2||
The wandering mind returns home, only when it seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Holy people. ||2||
ther ys efs Afooret umn nin His ags Ase I (835-10, frees, v3 4)
Dhee-aa poot chhod sani-aasee aasaa aas man bahut kara-ee-aa.
The Sannyaasi renounces his daughters and sons, but his mind still conjures up all sorts of hopes and desires.
WAT MITA Ad Sd IS Ts a Hale fern AY Sd Wall (835-11, freee, vs 4)
aasaa aas karai nahee boojhai gur kai sabad niraas sukh lahee-aa. ||3]|
With these hopes and desires, he still does not understand, that only through the Word of the Guru's Shabad does one become free of desires, and find peace. ||3]|
Cunt saa fectag dur Ho va fen vfs ale aeq ager II (835-11, fares, He 4) upjee tarak digambar ho-aa man dah dis chal chal gavan kara-ee-aa.
When detachment from the world wells up within, he become a naked hermit, but still, his mind roams, wanders and rambles in the ten directions.
Yyseo ad FS ddl fFAe ffs Af AG efenr wg BMT sil (935-12, frees, Hs 4) parbhavan karai boojhai nahee tarisnaa mil sang saaDh da-i-aa ghar lahee-aa. ||4]| He wanders around, but his desires are not satisfied; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he finds the house of kindness and compassion. ||4||
mA fro frafs sgsd ufo Hats fafa fafa sea Sener I (935-13, frees, v2 4) aasan siDh sikheh bahutayray man maageh riDh siDh chaytak chaytka-ee-aa. The Siddhas learn many Yogis postures, but their minds still yearn for riches, miraculous powers and energy.
fgufs sy His ANS 3 ure fife AG fyufs ofs ath fafa weber iui (935-14, fares, vs 4)
taripat santokh man saa‘t na aavai mil saaDhoo taripat har naam siDh pa-ee-aa. ||5]| Satisfaction, contentment and tranquility do not come to their minds; but meeting the Holy Saints, they are satisfied, and through the Name of the Lord, spiritual perfection is attained. ||5||
vise Hen Asn Ssgn Als sao gu Aba AS Cuetor I (935-14, frorew, vs 4)
andaj jayraj saytaj ut-bhuj sabh varan roop jee-a jant upa-ee-aa.
Life is born from the egg, from the womb, from sweat and from the earth; God created the beings and creatures of all colors and forms.
WY Hale ud A Gad ust FHS AE SH Usw Ue MEM (835-15, feores, ve 4) saaDhoo saran parai so ubrai khatree baraahman sood vais chandaal chand-ee-aa. [16] |
One who seeks the Sanctuary of the Holy is saved, whether he is a Kh'shaatriya, a Brahmin, a Soodra, a Vaishya or the most untouchable of the untouchables. | |6| |
OM AUG adie fesue wCats sfeen shmrg sHer II (835-16, frov<w, He 4) naamaa jaiday-o kambeer tarilochan a-ujaat ravidaas chami-aar chama-ee-aa. Naam Dayv, Jai Dayv, Kabeer, Trilochan and Ravi Daas the low-caste leather-worker,
A i fee AG AS Hats ug Ua Ae Ae fifeor of wetor DI (935-16, fares, 3 4) jo jo milai saaDhoo jan sangat Dhan Dhannaa jat sain mili-aa har da-ee-aa. ||7]|| blessed Dhanna and Sain; all those who joined the humble Saadh Sangat, met the Merciful Lord. ||7]|
Ha Aor ot ofs Un sat sats eee visitas ager Il (835-17, frees, He 4)
sant janaa kee har paij rakhaa-ee bhagat vachhal angeekaar kara-ee-aa.
The Lord protects the honor of His humble servants; He is the Lover of His devotees - He makes them His own.
SOA Ade Ud Adales Tle oe fag ofs Tes CISD (835-18, frees, H3 4)
naanak saran paray jagjeevan har har kirpaa Dhaar rakha-ee-aa. ||8]|4||7]| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Life of the world, who has showered His Mercy upon him, and saved him. ||8]|||4]|7]|
faaSs HIS g Il (835-19)
bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
nists funn Bat us act Af= aa s86 His Ste ware II (835-19, frees, Hs 4) antar pi-aas uthee parabh kayree sun gur bachan man teer laga-ee-aa.
The thirst for God has welled up deep within me; hearing the Word of the Guru's Teachings, my mind is pierced by His arrow.
Us tBE
Ho at fase Ho dt we nieg fa we a ute user IAI (836-1, fueres, He 4)
man kee birthaa man hee jaanai avar ke jaanai ko peer para-ee-aa. ||1]||
The pain of my mind is known only to my own mind; who can know the pain of another? ||1]|
aH afe Hafs Hfs He Ber | (836-1, feares, He 4) raam gur mohan mohi man la-ee-aa. The Lord, the Guru, the Enticer, has enticed my mind.
JG uras fras set aa ea Ie Se ues Sf usr NU TIS Il (836-2, feares, He 4)
ha-o aakal bikal bha-ee gur daykhay ha-o lot pot ho-ay pa-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am stunned and amazed, gazing upon my Guru; I have entered the realm of wonder and bliss. ||1]|Pause| |
J@ focus fea nfs @n ferisg H ys tus a aos His ver II (836-2, frees, He 4) ha-o nirkhat fira-o sabh days disantar mai parabh daykhan ko bahut man cha-ee-aa. I wander around, exploring all lands and foreign countries; within my mind, I have such a great longing to see my God.
He 36 ae 28 aa ord fafs ofe ys wea Ue feud lI (836-3, fares, He 4) man tan kaat day-o gur aagai jin har parabh maarag panth dikha-ee-aa. ||2]|
I sacrifice my mind and body to the Guru, who has shown me the Way, the Path to my Lord God. ||2||
act urfs rer fe us as fee nists nfs sfe Hts ware I (836-4, frees, He 4)
ko-ee aan sadaysaa day-ay parabh kayraa rid antar man tan meeth laga-ee-aa.
If only someone would bring me news of God; He seems so sweet to my heart, mind and body.
HAS afe 2G veer 3fs a afs us HS Afs fredior Si (836-5, foes, He 4)
mastak kaat day-o charnaa tal jo har parabh maylay mayl mila-ee-aa. ||3]|
I would cut off my head and place it under the feet of that one who leads me to meet and unite with my Lord God. ||3]|
3 Ue Aut gH ug usd Te ane afe afe ys Bd I (936-5, frees, ue 4)
chal chal sakhee ham parabh parboDheh gun kaaman kar har parabh lahee-aa.
Let us go, O my companions, and understand our God; with the spell of virtue, let us obtain our Lord God.
sms ZS Cor t oH Ady 3 Hale ys A UES UEMT IIBII (836-6, frees, He 4) bhagat vachhal u-aa ko naam kahee-at hai saran parabhoo tis paachhai pa-ee-aa. [41 |
He is called the Lover of His devotees; let us follow in the footsteps of those who seek God's Sanctuary. ||4||
fi Atars ad ys yA fs cua aa fame awe Il (936-7, fares, He 4)
khimaa seegaar karay parabh khusee-aa man deepak gur gi-aan bala-ee-aa.
If the soul-bride adorns herself with compassion and forgiveness, God is pleased, and her mind is illumined with the lamp of the Guru's wisdom.
ofa off Sa ad ys Ha on fH meat ME afe afe usr Mull (936-8, few, He 4)
ras ras bhog karay parabh mayraa ham tis aagai jee-o kat kat pa-ee-aa. ||5]|
With happiness and ecstasy, my God enjoys her; I offer each and every bit of my soul to Him. |[5]|
ofs fs Tg as F afoor HE HSteT Ss TIS TISe MM Il (936-8, frees, ws 4)
har har haar kanth hai bani-aa man moteechoor vad gahan gehna-ee-aa.
I have made the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, my necklace; my mind tinged with devotion is the intricate ornament of crowning glory.
fe ofa Ham An feet us efs 5 Aa as fs ser HEI (836-9, fares, He 4)
har har sarDhaa sayj vichhaa-ee parabh chhod na sakai bahut man bha-ee-aa. ||6]| I have spread out my bed of faith in the Lord, Har, Har. I cannot abandon Him - my mind is filled with such a great love for Him. ||6] |
ad us weg neg fas ain AS ate Alrg dae dace Il (836-10, frarew, He 4) kahai parabh avar avar kichh keejai sabh baad seegaar fokat fokta-ee-aa.
If God says one thing, and the soul-bride does something else, then all her decorations are useless and false.
as Htarg free & set us BIS Haas ga HfH Ue IDI (836-10, frevew, M2 4) kee-o seegaar milan kai taa-ee parabh lee-o suhaagan thook mukh pa-ee-aa. ||7|| She may adorn herself to meet her Husband Lord, but still, only the virtuous soul- bride meets God, and the other's face is spat upon. ||7]||
TH Bat J Ma TA for TH ass 33 SA Ue I (936-11, frees, Hs 4)
ham chayree too agam gusaa-ee ki-aa ham karah tayrai vas pa-ee-aa.
I am Your hand-maiden, O Inaccessible Lord of the Universe; what can I do by myself? I am under Your power.
efent te agg af SeT saa Ts TdT Ass AHSMT NCUUICI (836-12, frees, He 4)
da-i-aa deen karahu rakh layvhu naanak har gur saran sama-ee-aa. ||8||5||8]| Be merciful, Lord, to the meek, and save them; Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord, and the Guru. ||8]|5]|8]|
fas HIS 8 Il (836-13) bilaaval mehlaa 4. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
Hufs 3fs un oan oad a fas fue Fao nfs sTZ Corr II (936-13, frees, He 4) mai man tan paraym agam thaakur kaa khin khin sarDhaa man bahut utha-ee-aa. My mind and body are filled with love for my Inaccessible Lord and Master. Each and every instant, I am filled with immense faith and devotion.
Gs ey Aa Ho ust fs olga fyS fyS de ufs uetor INA (836-14, faeres, He 4) gur daykhay sarDhaa man pooree ji-o chaatrik pari-o pari-o boond mukh pa-ee-aa.
HII Gazing upon the Guru, my mind's faith is fulfilled, like the song-bird, which cries and cries, until the rain-drop falls into its mouth. ||1]|
fe flees Fat afe aa ASST I (836-14, faores, He 4) mil mil sakhee har kathaa suna-ee-aa. Join with me, join with me, O my companions, and teach me the Sermon of the Lord.
Afsag efeor ad ys AS H fsa ora fie afe afe udtor Na TIS Il (836-15, frees, v2
4)
satgur da-i-aa karay parabh maylay mai tis aagai sir kat kat pa-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru has mercifully united me with God. Cutting off my head, and chopping it into pieces, I offer it to Him. ||1]|Pause] |
oft oft ufs sfe fea dea 4 us Te fae ote o UST II (836-16, fro<w, He 4) rom rom man tan ik baydan mai parabh daykhay bin need na pa-ee-aa. Each and every hair on my head, and my mind and body, suffer the pains of separation; without seeing my God, I cannot sleep.
aea ofea ef gard H fase ufe sfs Un ute waeor |QI1 (836-16, fares, He 4) baidak naatik daykh bhulaanay mai hirdai man tan paraym peer laga-ee-aa. ||2|| The doctors and healers look at me, and are perplexed. Within my heart, mind and body, I feel the pain of divine love. ||2| |
JG fue us afs o Aa fas utsn fa fas ons ont ufe ae 1 (936-17, frees, He 4) ha-o khin pal reh na saka-o bin pareetam ji-o bin amlai amlee mar ga-ee-aa.
I cannot live for a moment, for even an instant, without my Beloved, like the opium addict who cannot live without opium.
fro ag filmrn af ys act fsa meg o ae faa afe & Ber ISI (936-18, frees, 8 4) jin ka-o pi-aas ho-ay parabh kayree tin” avar na bhaavai bin har ko du-ee-aa. ||3]| Those who thirst for God, do not love any other. Without the Lord, there is no other at all. |[3]|
aet ute nits Ha ys free 0G fSH feeg af afe wih Ter I (836-19, frores, He 4) ko-ee aan aan mayraa parabhoo milaavai ha-o tis vitahu bal bal ghum ga-ee-aa.
If only someone would come and unite me with God; I am devoted, dedicated, a sacrifice to him.
Moa HOH a fess AS HS A ALS Als Afsad Adfe USS Sil (836-19, frees, He 4) anayk janam kay vichhurhay jan maylay jaa sat sat satgur saran pava-ee-aa. ||4|| After being separated from the Lord for countless incarnations, I am re-united with Him, entering the Sanctuary of the True, True, True Guru. ||4]|
Us cB
AW 8a Sa US Sag HIG B US HOHY SIHeT | (837-1, feerew, ve 4)
sayj ayk ayko parabh thaakur mahal na paavai manmukh bharma-ee-aa.
There is one bed for the soul-bride, and the same bed for God, her Lord and Master. The self-willed manmukh does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; she wanders around, in limbo.
Gg Tg ass Aafe A ore ys orfe fs fas dhs o usr ull (37-2, fares, He 4)
gur gur karat saran jay aavai parabh aa-ay milai khin dheel na pa-ee-aa. ||5]| Uttering, "Guru, Guru", she seeks His Sanctuary; so God comes to meet her, without a moment's delay. ||5||
ate afs fafemrers eure His unis aH auS Seer | (837-3, fase, H2 4)
kar kar kiri-aachaar vaDhaa-ay man pakhand karam kapat lobha-ee-aa.
One may perform many rituals, but the mind is filled with hypocrisy, evil deeds and greed.
anor a ufs det Hofer fust sie fomr any Aeetor Ell (837-3, fares, He 4)
baysu-aa kai ghar baytaa janmi-aa pitaa taahi ki-aa naam sada-ee-aa. ||6||
When a son is born in the house of a prostitute, who can tell the name of his father? [16] |
usa Hoty sats afs ore afs afe ats afs ofs sats Aner Il (837-4, fares, He 4) poorab janam bhagat kar aa-ay gur har har har har bhagat jama-ee-aa.
Because of devotional worship in my past incarnations, I have been born into this life. The Guru has inspired me to worship the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har.
sats sats ads de uteor a fe ofa ofa dfs StH AHS IDI (837-5, fares, H8 4) bhagat bhagat kartay har paa-i-aa jaa har har har har naam sama-ee-aa. || 7] | Worshipping, worshipping Him with devotion, I found the Lord, and then I merged into the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||7]|
uf onfs orfs Hfset ubret nm) ulfs uifes nifor weer I (837-6, foes, He 4)
parabh aan aan mahindee peesaa-ee aapay ghol ghol ang la-ee-aa.
God Himself came and ground the henna leaves into powder, and applied it to my body.
fa a oafe fagur odt ag uate soe ahs BS NCUENQANAUIENEN (837-6, faares, He 4)
jin ka-o thaakur kirpaa Dhaaree baah pakar naanak kadh la-ee-aa. ||8]|6]|2|]1]]6]|9]| Our Lord and Master showers His Mercy upon us, and grasps hold of our arms; O Nanak, He lifts us up and saves us. ||8||6]|9]|2]|1]|6]/9]|
Ta fase HIS u mAcUet We I2 (837-8) raag bilaaval mehlaa 5 asatpadee ghar 12 Raag Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Twelfth House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (837-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Cunt ATS 6 aAdt HS ys at Cunt ATS 3 At Il (937-9, fares, He 5) upmaa jaat na kahee mayray parabh kee upmaa jaat na kahee. I cannot express the Praises of my God; I cannot express His Praises.
3th ute Aas adt Al TIS Il (837-9, fawres, ve 5)
taj aan saran gahee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have abandoned all others, seeking His Sanctuary. ||1||Pause]|
YS BIS AHS HU Il (837-9, faares, He 5) parabh charan kamal apaar. God's Lotus Feet are Infinite.
JG WE Ae sss Il (937-10, foes, 2 5) ha-o jaa-o sad balihaar. I am forever a sacrifice to Them.
Hfs ulfs arait 3s II (837-10, frees, He 5) man pareet laagee taahi. My mind is in love with Them.
sta ure asts & vfs IAI (837-10, fuses, He 5) taj aan kateh na jaahi. ||1]| If I were to abandon Them, there is nowhere else I could go. ||1]|
Uf BH FAS AIS Il (837-11, fuses, He 5) har naam rasnaa kahan. I chant the Lord's Name with my tongue.
HS UY AGHS TIS Il (837-11, frases, Hs 5) mal paap kalmal dahan. The filth of my sins and evil mistakes is burnt off.
ofs are HS Corfe il (937-11, fares, He 5) charh naav sant uDhaar. Climbing aboard the Boat of the Saints, I am emancipated.
3 3d Aad uts iil (937-11, frees, v2 5) bhai taray saagar paar. ||2|| I have been carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
Hfs sfa UN Ud II (837-12, frees, H8 5) man dor paraym pareet. My mind is tied to the Lord with the string of love and devotion.
fea HS fogne SHS Il (837-12, frees, He 5) ih sant nirmal reet. This is the Immaculate Way of the Saints.
sft we uy fears il (837-12, fares, He 5) taj ga-ay paap bikaar. They forsake sin and corruption.
ofa fxs ys fSedars BI (837-12, frares, Hs 5) har milay parabh nirankaar. ||3]| They meet the Formless Lord God. ||3]||
ys udba fare Il (937-13, frees, He 5) parabh paykhee-ai bismaad. Gazing upon God, I am wonderstruck.
aft mee UTS ATE Il (837-13, fasey, He 5) chakh anad pooran saad. I taste the Perfect Flavor of Bliss.
oo samt fs BS 1 (937-13, fares, Hs 5) nah dolee-ai it oot. I do not waver or wander here or there.
ys aA ofa ofa BS sil (837-13, faerew, He 5) parabh basay har har cheet. ||4|| The Lord God, Har, Har, dwells within my consciousness. ||4||
fsq ata saa fosA il fos fAHfs Ys TSSA Il (937-14, frre, He 5) tin" naahi narak nivaas. nit simar parabh guntaas. Those who constantly remember God, the treasure of virtue, will never go to hell.
3 FH 6 Uufs 3o I AfS Hd MisIS FS MUI (837-14, fueres, v2 5)
tay jam na paykheh nain. sun mohay anhat bain. ||5]|
Those who listen, fascinated, to the Unstruck Sound-Current of the Word, will never have to see the Messenger of Death with their eyes. ||5||
ofa ASE AT TUS Il (837-15, fuses, v2 5) har saran soor gupaal. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Heroic Lord of the World.
Ys 3as <A afer Il (g37-15, frares, He 5) parabh bhagat vas da-i-aal. The Merciful Lord God is under the power of His devotees.
ofa feat wats & Sz Il (837-15, fuses, He 5) har nigam laheh na bhayv. The Vedas do not know the Mystery of the Lord.
fos aats ufs AS AZ Mell (837-16, fares, He 5) nit karahi mun jan sayv. ||6]| The silent sages constantly serve Him. ||6] |
ey tle vse fees Il (837-16, frees, v2 5) dukh deen darad nivaar. He is the Destroyer of the pains and sorrows of the poor.
A at Hot faust As Il (837-16, fuses, He 5) jaa kee mahaa bikh-rhee kaar. It is so very difficult to serve Him.
ot at ffs o WS AfE II (837-17, foes, He 5) taa kee mit na jaanai ko-ay. No one knows His limits.
afs afe Hdtofs Afe IDI (837-17, faares, He 5) jal thal mahee-al so-ay. ||7]|| He is pervading the water, the land and the sky. ||7]|
ats Feat BY Hs Il (837-17, fawres, us 5) kar bandnaa lakh baar. Hundreds of thousands of times, I humbly bow to Him.
af ufsS ys FIAT Il (837-17, frwres, ue 5) thak pari-o parabh darbaar. I have grown weary, and I have collapsed at God's Door.
ys add AY Ufe Il (837-18, frees, He 5) parabh karahu saaDhoo Dhoor. O God, make me the dust of the feet of the Holy.
SSX HOA ufs UCI (837-18, frees, 42 5)
naanak mansaa poor. ||8]|1]| Please fulfill this, Nanak's wish. ||8]|1]|
fasSs HIS U Il (837-18)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
YS ASH Hes feet Il (g37-19, frarey, He 5) parabh janam maran nivaar. God, please release me from birth and death.
owfe ufs& eurfs il (837-19, frares, v2 5) haar pari-o du-aar. I have grown weary, and collapsed at Your door.
Ty BIS AY Aa Il (837-19, frases, ve 5) geh charan saaDhoo sang. I grasp Your Feet, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ho fine ofa afs Ja Il (837-19, frase, He 5) man misat har har rang. The Love of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet to my mind.
Ust cst ats efenr Bg afs ote Il (838-1, fees, v2 5)
kar da-i-aa layho larh laa-ay. Be Merciful, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.
Steal STH famrf— iil (838-1, fares, He 5) naankaa naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]| Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
dar are efenie AS AMM dla ara efenrs I (938-1, foes, v2 5)
deenaa naath da-i-aal mayray su-aamee deenaa naath da-i-aal.
O Merciful Master of the meek, You are my Lord and Master, O Merciful Master of the meek.
WIC AS ISTH NA FI Il (938-2, fares, ue 5) jaacha-o sant ravaal. ||1]| rahaa-o. I yearn for the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1]]Pause]|
HAT faftor au il (938-2, frreree, 3 5) sansaar bikhi-aa koop. The world is a pit of poison,
3H nifamirs HTS WU Il (838-2, fares, Hs 5) tam agi-aan mohat ghoop. filled with the utter darkness of ignorance and emotional attachment.
ad 3A YS Ft B_ Il (838-3, frases, vs 5) geh bhujaa parabh jee layho. Please take my hand, and save me, Dear God.
Ts SH MUST ST Il (938-3, fawes, Hs 5) har naam apunaa dayh. Please bless me with Your Name, Lord.
ys 33 faat aot a Il (938-3, frarew, He 5) parabh tujh binaa nahee thaa-o. Without You, God, I have no place at all.
Sa’ Sls Bf AWS iQ (938-3, fuerew, v2 5) naankaa bal bal jaa-o. ||2|| Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||2||
@ts Hfa at 7 Il (938-4, foes, He 5) lobh mohi baaDhee dayh. The human body is in the grip of greed and attachment.
fag SHo Jes UT Il (838-4, faeres, H2 5) bin bhajan hovat khayh. Without meditating and vibrating upon the Lord, it is reduced to ashes.
AHES HI" sfEnra Il (838-4, frees, 12 5) jamdoot mahaa bha-i-aan. The Messenger of Death is dreadful and horrible.
fas Tus aaHfs AS Il (838-4, frases, He 5)
chit gupat karmeh jaan.
The recording scribes of the conscious and the unconscious, Chitr and Gupt, know all actions and karma.
feo dfs Af Hote I (938-5, fares, He 5) din rain saakh sunaa-ay. Day and night, they bear witness.
Sloat Jf AGoNe IlSil (838-5, fuses, He 5)
naankaa har sarnaa-ay. ||3]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||3]|
3 SHal Hata Il (838-5, frees, He 5) bhai bhanjnaa muraar. O Lord, Destroyer of fear and egotism,
ate efenr ufss Burfe il (838-5, fees, He 5) kar da-i-aa patit uDhaar. be merciful, and save the sinners.
Hd Tu asd 3 ATs Il (938-6, fuses, He 5) mayray dokh ganay na jaahi. My sins cannot even be counted.
ofa faar asta AHS Il (938-6, fares, H2 5) har binaa kateh samaahi. Without the Lord, who can hide them?
afta Be faset Sra Il (838-6, fueres, H2 5) geh ot chitvee naath. I thought of Your Support, and seized it, O my Lord and Master.
Sat & TY IE IISil (838-7, fuses, v2 5) naankaa day rakh haath. ||4|| Please, give Nanak Your hand and save him, Lord! ||4]|
dfs Te fed aus il (838-7, fase, v2 5) har gun niDhay gopaal. The Lord, the treasure of virtue, the Lord of the world,
Hea we yfsure il (838-7, fares, ve 5) sarab ghat partipaal. cherishes and and sustains every heart.
Hfs ulfs ean fimrA Il (838-7, fares, He 5) man pareet darsan pi-aas. My mind is thirsty for Your Love, and the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
GS UIs HA Il (938-8, frwrew, He 5) gobind pooran aas. O Lord of the Universe, please fulfill my hopes.
fea fon JIS o ATE Il (938-8, faores, He 5) ik nimakh rahan na jaa-ay. I cannot survive, even for an instant.
es afar aoa uT= IUll (838-8, fae, He 5)
vad bhaag naanak paa-ay. ||5] | By great good fortune, Nanak has found the Lord. ||5]]|
ys 33 fear adt a Il (838-8, frees, v8 5) parabh tujh binaa nahee hor. Without You, God, there is no other at all.
nfs ulfs Te vas Il (838-9, frares, ue 5) man pareet chand chakor. My mind loves You, as the partridge loves the moon,
fig Hie Aw fAE JS Il (838-9, faeres, He 5) ji-o meen jal si-o hayt. as the fish loves the water,
mis aHe f¥q 3 3S Il (938-9, frees, H2 5) al kamal bhinn na bhayt. as the bee and the lotus cannot be separated.
fAS voSt HSA MIA II (838-9, faares, He 5) ji-o chakvee sooraj aas. As the chakvi bird longs for the sun,
SSA VIO fumrA IlEll (838-10, fuses, He 5)
naanak charan pi-aas. ||6|| so does Nanak thirst for the Lord's feet. ||6]|
fas safe SIs UTS Il (838-10, fuses, He 5) ji-o tarun bharat paraan. As the young bride places the hopes of her life in her husband,
fa@ Sst ae VT Il (838-10, fuses, He 5) ji-o lobhee-ai Dhan daan. as the greedy person looks upon the gift of wealth,
fa@ ga Hele AA Il (838-11, fraree, m3 5) ji-o dooDh jaleh sanjog. as milk is joined to water,
fa@ Ho uftmrea Sa Il (838-11, frees, He 5) ji-o mahaa khuDhi-aarath bhog. as food is to the very hungry man,
fAS Hs usts TST Il (838-11, fares, v2 5) ji-o maat pooteh hayt. and as the mother loves her son,
Ufa fAHfs ssa SS IDI (838-11, fares, H2 5) har simar naanak nayt. ||7]| so does Nanak constantly remember the Lord in meditation. ||7| |
faG chy use usT Il (938-12, fares, He 5) ji-o deep patan patang. As the moth falls into the lamp,
fa@ vg fags fora il (838-12, frees, He 5) ji-o chor hirat nisang. as the thief steals without hesitation,
Haefs AH FT Il (838-12, foes, v2 5) maiglahi kaamai banDh. as the elephant is trapped by its sexual urges,
fa qAs fauet da Il (838-12, free, He 5) ji-o garsat bikh-ee DhanDh. as the sinner is caught in his sins,
fAS wore fare o ATE Il (838-13, fares, H2 5) ji-o joo-aar bisan na jaa-ay. as the gambler's addiction does not leave him,
dfs aoa fed He STE IIc (838-13, fraves, He 5) har naanak ih man laa-ay. ||8]| so is this mind of Nanak's attached to the Lord. ||8]|
AIA BE BT Il (838-13, fares, uz 5) kurank naadai nayhu. As the deer loves the sound of the bell,
otgzq WIS HT Il (838-14, frwes, v2 5) chaatrik chaahat mayhu. and as the song-bird longs for the rain,
Ho Alea ASHfar Il (838-14, fasres, He 5) jan jeevnaa satsang. the Lord's humble servant lives in the Society of the Saints,
diss SHort dfat il (938-14, frees, He 5) gobid bhajnaa rang. lovingly meditating and vibrating upon the Lord of the Universe.
dHOT SUS BM Il (838-14, fares, He 5) rasnaa bakhaanai naam. My tongue chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
BOA PIAS VS IICil (838-14, faores, we 5) naanak darsan daan. ||9|| Please bless Nanak with the gift of the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||9]|
ao arfe Afs fete efe I (838-15, fares, v2 5) gun gaa-ay sun likh day-ay. One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and hears them, and writes them,
H Aga & df fe Il (938-15, fueres, He 5) so sarab fal har lay-ay. receives all fruits and rewards from the Lord.
XS AYT ATS Burg Il (938-15, faorey, He 5) kul samooh karat uDhaar. He saves all his ancestors and generations,
HATS Csafh urfa il (338-16, faares, v2 5) sansaar utras paar. and crosses over the world-ocean.
dfs wae Sfoe so il (838-16, frares, H2 5) har charan bohith taahi. The Lord's Feet are the boat to carry him across.
firfs Arorfer AA arfo II (938-16, freres, He 5) mil saaDhsang jas gaahi. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he sings the Praises of the Lord.
dfs Un ge Hae Il (838-16, frees, He 5) har paij rakhai muraar. The Lord protects his honor.
dfs soa Hale Svs WOM (838-17, fases, He 5) har naanak saran du-aar. ||10||2]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's door. ||10]|2]|
fares Hoe 9 fast wa 0 AS (838-18) bilaaval mehlaa 1 thitee ghar 10 jat Bilaaval, First Mehl, T'hitee ~ The Lunar Days, Tenth House, To The Drum-Beat Jat:
qe fsa YATE Il (838-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aH Saarg fear il (838-19, farses, He 1) aykam aykankaar niraalaa. The First Day: The One Universal Creator is unique,
WHE MASt ATS o ATS Il (838-19, foes, He 1) amar ajonee jaat na jaalaa. immortal, unborn, beyond social class or involvement.
MEH nase TUS Shim Il (838-19, frees, us 1) agam agochar roop na raykh-i-aa. He is inaccessible and unfathomable, with no form or feature.
das dns ute ufe Sfimr@ il (838-19, faeres, He 1) khojat khojat ghat ghat daykhi-aa. Searching, searching, I have seen Him in each and every heart.
yar cat A tfy fers fon a afe ATet II (839-1, frores, He 1)
jo daykh dikhaavai tis ka-o bal jaa-ee. I am a Sacrifice to one who sees, and inspires others to see Him.
as usdATS UTH Us UTET IAI (839-1, fawes, He 1)
gur parsaad param pad paa-ee. ||1|| By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. ||1]|
for wu ATU faa AETeTA II (839-2, frees, He 1) ki-aa jap jaapa-o bin jagdeesai. Whose Name should I chant, and meditate on, except the Lord of the Universe?
Gd a Aafe HIG we AA Ul FS Il (839-2, frees, He 1)
gur kai sabad mahal ghar deesai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is revealed within the home of one's own heart. ||1]|Pause| |
SH StS Ba USTS Il (839-2, fares, ve 1) doojai bhaa-ay lagay pachhutaanay. The Second Day: Those who are in love with another, come to regret and repent.
FH Uf AT nitSe WE Il (839-3, faares, He 1) jam dar baaDhay aavan jaanay. The are tied up at Death's door, and continue coming and going.
fom 3 urefs famr & as i (839-3, fuses, He 1)
ki-aa lai aavahi ki-aa lay jaahi.
What have they brought, and what will they take with them when they go? fafs AHare ft dot urfs Il (839-3, faeres, He 1)
sir jamkaal se chotaa khaahi. The Messenger of Death looms over their heads, and they endure his beating.
fag aa Hae 3 seta ate II (839-4, fares, v3 1) bin gur sabad na chhootas ko-ay. Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, no one finds release.
undfs ate Hats o SE MI (839-4, free, He 1) pakhand keen"ai mukat na ho-ay. ||2|| Practicing hypocrisy, no one finds liberation. ||2||
mm A ah ag As Il (839-4, fueres, 42 1) aapay sach kee-aa kar jorh. The True Lord Himself created the universe, joining the elements together.
nisa efs Afs feet I (839-5, fueres, He 1) andaj forh jorh vichhorh. Breaking the cosmic egg, He united, and separated.
Uefa morn ate SHE AG ae Il (839-5, frees, He 1) Dharat akaas kee-ay baisan ka-o thaa-o. He made the earth and the sky into places to live.
afs fees ate 38 ar@ I) (839-5, fares, He 1) raat dinant kee-ay bha-o bhaa-o. He created day and night, fear and love.
fafs ate afs Sues Il (839-5, fares, He 1) jin kee-ay kar vaykhanhaaraa. The One who created the Creation, also watches over it.
Meg Oo et fase Ss 3 (839-6, fares, H3 1) avar na doojaa sirjanhaaraa. ||3]| There is no other Creator Lord. ||3]|
fgstor gout fang HAT Il (839-6, fares, He 1) taritee-aa barahmaa bisan mahaysaa. The Third Day: He created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva,
eet Sz Bure SHA Il (939-6, fares, He 1) dayvee dayv upaa-ay vaysaa. the gods, goddesses and various manifestations.
Ast Wt Tes 3 vr| Il (839-7, fares, He 1) jotee jaatee ganat na aavai. The lights and forms cannot be counted.
fafs Ant A athafS ure i (839-7, fuares, v2 1) jin saajee so keemat paavai. The One who fashioned them, knows their value.
ants ute sfour saufs il (839-7, frees, 8 1) keemat paa-ay rahi-aa bharpoor. He evaluates them, and totally pervades them.
fan 3s fan nmr Uf gil (839-8, frees, Hs 1) kis nayrhai kis aakhaa door. ||4| | Who is close, and who is far away? ||4] |
s@fa Cure ard FET Il (839-8, freres, ue 1) cha-uth upaa-ay chaaray baydaa. The Fourth Day: He created the four Vedas,
urat ord arat SUT Il (839-8, frarey, H3 1) khaanee chaaray banee bhaydaa. the four sources of creation, and distinct forms of speech.
MAE TA ue Sifs Bure Il (939-8, frerew, He 1) asat dasaa khat teen upaa-ay. He created the eighteen Puraanas, the six Shaastras and the three qualities.
Aas fra orf gee Il (939-9, frees, v2 1) so boojhai jis aap bujhaa-ay. He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand.
aifs AHS VER STAT Il (839-9, faores, He 1) teen samaavai cha-uthai vaasaa. One who overcomes the three qualities, dwells in the fourth state.
YySets SSA JH 3 A SAT |UIl (839-9, faerew, He 1) paranvat naanak ham taa kay daasaa. ||5|| Prays Nanak, I am his slave. ||5]|
out us S35 FT Il (839-10, frees, we 1) panchmee panch bhoot baytaalaa. The Fifth Day: The five elements are demons.
nify nidiad use fearer il (839-10, frees, He 1) aap agochar purakh niraalaa. The Lord Himself is unfathomable and detached.
feta aft sa Ha fimra Il (39-10, froreg, He 1) ik bharam bhookhay moh pi-aasay. Some are gripped by doubt, hunger, emotional attachment and desire.
fefa sa ofa Aafe fZUSsTA Il (839-10, fares, He 1) ik ras chaakh sabad tariptaasay. Some taste the sublime essence of the Shabad, and are satisfied.
feta dfar as fefa nfs ofs i (839-11, frores, He 1) ik rang raatay ik mar Dhoor. Some are imbued with the Lord's Love, while some die, and are reduced to dust.
fefa efs wfs Ans Of gefs Well (939-11, frees, He 1)
ik dar ghar saachai daykh hadoor. ||6] |
Some attain the Court and the Mansion of the True Lord, and behold Him, ever- present. ||6||
3d aS ot ufs aS Il (839-11, fuores, He 1) jhoothay ka-o naahee pat naa-o. The false one has no honor or fame;
TAT F AS ast aE Il (839-12, fuses, 2 1) kabahu na soochaa kaalaa kaa-o. like the black crow, he never becomes pure.
fifafs Udit dfame afe 11 (939-12, fares, He 1) pinjar pankhee banDhi-aa ko-ay.
He is like the bird, imprisoned in a cage; edt SdH Hats 6 SE II (839-12, frarea, He 1)
chhayree™ bharmai mukat na ho-ay. he paces back and forth behind the bars, but he is not released.
3G ge WT UAH BSE Il (839-13, frorew, He 1) ta-o chhootai jaa khasam chhadaa-ay. He alone is emancipated, whom the Lord and Master emancipates.
Dans AS sels fase DI (839-13, fares, vs 1) gurmat maylay bhagat drirh-aa-ay. ||7]|| He follows the Guru's Teachings, and enshrines devotional worship. || 7] |
WAT dg PIAS YS ATH Il (839-13, fares, He 1) khastee khat darsan parabh saajay. The Sixth Day: God organized the six systems of Yoga.
Mode Hae fear SH Il (839-14, fasres, v2 1) anhad sabad niraalaa vaajay. The unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates of itself.
A Us aS ST Has FHS Il (839-14, fraoves, He 1) jay parabh bhaavai taa mahal bulaavai. If God wills it so, then one is summoned to the Mansion of His Presence.
~~ <5
Rae se 3C ufs ure Il (939-14, foes, v2 1) sabday bhayday ta-o pat paavai. One who is pierced through by the Shabad, obtains honor.
ats ats 2A wufa Afes Aefd Il (839-14, fase, He 1) kar kar vays khapeh jal jaaveh. Those who wear religious robes burn, and are ruined.
Ard Ard Atfs AHTSfg ICI (839-15, foes, He 1) saachai saachay saach samaaveh. ||8|| Through Truth, the truthful ones merge into the True Lord. ||8]|
Rusnt AS Hsu Ate I (839-15, frees, He 1) saptamee sat santokh sareer. The Seventh Day: When the body is imbued with Truth and contentment,
ATS AHS 3d fegHs alfa Il (839-15, frees, He 1) saat samund bharay nirmal neer. the seven seas within are filled with the Immaculate Water.
HHO AG Ag fee <terfs i (839-16, fares, He 1) majan seel sach ridai veechaar. Bathing in good conduct, and contemplating the True Lord within the heart,
qd a Aafe ure vfs ute Il (839-16, faeres, v2 1) gur kai sabad paavai sabh paar. one obtains the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and carries everyone across.
Hfe Ara fy APES STE II (939-16, fares, He 1) man saachaa mukh saacha-o bhaa-ay. With the True Lord in the mind, and the True Lord lovingly on one's lips,
Ag one oat & UPS CI (839-17, fares, He 1) sach neesaanai thaak na paa-ay. ||9|| one is blessed with the banner of Truth, and meets with no obstructions. ||9]|
mAeHt md fafa sfo Aro il (839-17, fares, He 1) astamee asat siDh buDh saaDhai. The Eighth Day: The eight miraculous powers come when one subdues his own mind,
Ae fosaes aafh nat Il (939-17, frees, He 1) sach nihkayval karam araaDhai. and contemplates the True Lord through pure actions.
u@ze urat matet fare Il (839-18, fase, He 1) pa-un paanee agnee bisraa-o. Forget the three qualities of wind, water and fire,
sot fodae ATS a Il (939-18, faares, He 1) tahee niranjan saacho naa-o. and concentrate on the pure True Name.
fsH ufs Hour sfour foe BE Il (839-18, fares, He 1) tis meh manoo-aa rahi-aa liv laa-ay. That human who remains lovingly focused on the Lord,
ySets SSA AH 3 UTE ION (839-19, froes, ue 1) paranvat naanak kaal na khaa-ay. ||10]| prays Nanak, shall not be consumed by death. ||10]|
a oCHt o¢ aa ae UST I whe whe oe HIT FHSTT Il (839-19, frees, He 1)
naa-O na-umee navay naath nav khanda. ghat ghat naath mahaa balvandaa. The Ninth Day: The Name is the supreme almighty Master of the nine masters of Yoga, the nine realms of the earth, and each and every heart.
UST tO
miret ust fea Hal ATS Il (840-1, fawrew, He 1) aa-ee pootaa ih jag saaraa. This whole world is the child of Maya.
Ys uireH nife Tues Il (840-1, faeres, ue 1) parabh aadays aad rakhvaaraa. I bow in submission to God, my Protector from the very beginning of time.
wife qaret J St Ta Il (840-1, fueres, v2 1)
aad jugaadee hai bhee hog.
He was in the beginning, He has been throughout the ages, He is now, and He shall always be.
Gg wudug ATE AA MAI (840-2, frees, ve 1) oh aprampar karnai jog. ||11]| He is unlimited, and capable of doing everything. ||11]|
SAT SH US FEASTS Il (840-2, fuses, He 1) dasmee naam daan isnaan. The Tenth Day: Meditate on the Naam, give to charity, and purify yourself.
Males HAS Het Te famine il (940-2, fuses, v2 1) an-din majan sachaa gun gi-aan. Night and day, bathe in spiritual wisdom and the Glorious Virtues of the True Lord.
Afs HS 3 Ba FH SE Sa Il (840-3, fees, ve 1) sach mail na laagai bharam bha-o bhaagai. Truth cannot be polluted; doubt and fear run away from it.
faoH & Seta ars Sa Il (840-3, fares, v3 1) bilam na tootas kaachai taagai. The flimsy thread breaks in an instant.
fag sar Ha SS AST Il (840-3, faores, 2 1) ji-o taagaa jag ayvai jaanhu. Know that the world is just like this thread.
mAfag ots Ate da HST IAI (840-3, frees, He 1) asthir cheet saach rang maanhu. ||12]|
Your consciousness shall become steady and stable, enjoying the Love of the True Lord. ||12]|
Parent fea feet SAS Il (840-4, faares, ue 1) aykaadasee ik ridai vasaavai. The Eleventh Day: Enshrine the One Lord within your heart.
foAT HHS HT Var] Il (840-4, fueres, He 1) hinsaa mamtaa moh chukhaavai. Eradicate cruelty, egotism and emotional attachment.
SB urs FT MISH BMS Il (840-4, frees, ne 1) fal paavai barat aatam cheenai. Earn the fruitful rewards, by observing the fast of knowing your own self.
unéfs afs 33 Sot HS Il (840-5, faores, He 1) pakhand raach tat nahee beenai. One who is engrossed in hypocrisy, does not see the true essence.
fegHe forars fadxee Il (840-5, faares, He 1) nirmal niraahaar nihkayval. The Lord is immaculate, self-sustaining and unattached.
He ATS ST Ba HB II (840-5, fees, we 1) soochai saachay naa laagai mal. ||13]| The Pure, True Lord cannot be polluted. ||13]|
Ad Fu sg Sa Sar Il (840-6, frase, v2 1) jah daykh-a-u tah ayko aykaa. Wherever I look, I see the One Lord there.
~
ofa Hh Cure Sa Sar Il (840-6, fuerew, He 1) hor jee-a upaa-ay vayko vaykaa. He created the other beings, of many and various kinds.
SGIS aS Se ATE Il (840-6, fuares, He 1) falohaar kee-ay fal jaa-ay. Eating only fruits, one loses the fruits of life.
GA AA we Are Tete Il (940-6, fares, v2 1) ras kas khaa-ay saad gavaa-ay. Eating only delicacies of various sorts, one loses the true taste.
Ts wats sue Bue|te il (840-7, frores, we 1) koorhai laalach laptai laptaa-ay. In fraud and greed, people are engrossed and entangled.
Be Tate AP AHS IAVil (840-7, frorew, He 1) chhootai gurmukh saach kamaa-ay. ||14]| The Gurmukh is emancipated, practicing Truth. ||14] |
worefA HET HS MBS Il (840-7, faores, He 1) du-aadas mudraa man a-uDhootaa. The Twelfth Day: One whose mind is not attached to the twelve signs,
mifsfota aArata ats o AST Il (840-8, fawres, v2 1) ahinis jaageh kabeh na sootaa. remains awake day and night, and never sleeps.
was Ata gd fee ote Il (s40-8, frees, He 1) jaagat jaag rahai liv laa-ay. He remains awake and aware, lovingly centered on the Lord.
dd ude fsH ae 5 ue Il (840-8, fares, 2 1) gur parchai tis kaal na khaa-ay. With faith in the Guru, he is not consumed by death.
mts se HTS FaTet Il (840-9, fares, ne 1) ateet bha-ay maaray bairaa-ee. Those who become detached, and conquer the five enemies
ysets SHA 3d fHeS Bet WII (840-9, fares, ne 1) paranvat naanak tah liv laa-ee. ||15]| - prays Nanak, they are lovingly absorbed in the Lord. ||15]||
enient efsor ag afs ATS Il (840-9, faares, He 1) du-aadasee da-i-aa daan kar jaanai. The Twelfth Day: Know, and practice, compassion and charity.
wots as stafs mre Il (840-10, faeres, v2 1) baahar jaato bheetar aanai. Bring your out-going mind back home.
ast was Id fedaH Il (840-10, faares, He 1) bartee barat rahai nihkaam. Observe the fast of remaining free of desire.
MT TY AU Hf SH II (840-10, frees, He 1) ajpaa jaap japai mukh naam. Chant the unchanted Chant of the Naam with your mouth.
sts gee ufo Sat ATE Il (840-10, fuses, He 1) teen bhavan meh ayko jaanai. Know that the One Lord is contained in the three worlds.
Afs Afe HAH ATS UES IMEI (840-11, fares, He 1) sabh such sanjam saach pachhaanai. ||16] | Purity and self-discipline are all contained in knowing the Truth. ||16]|
SofA Sded ANS Aas Il (840-11, faeres, v2 1) tayras tarvar samud kanaarai. The Thirteenth Day: He is like a tree on the sea-shore.
nifts ue firafs fee TS I (840-11, fares, 43 1) amrit mool sikhar liv taarai. But his roots can become immortal, if his mind is attuned to the Lord's Love.
3d Sts Hs 3 FS ALE Il (840-12, fares, He 1) dar dar marai na boodai ko-ay. Then, he will not die of fear or anxiety, and he will never drown.
fosg afs He ufs af& II (840-12, faoreg, He 1) nidar bood marai pat kho-ay. Without the Fear of God, he drowns and dies, and loses his honor.
3d Hf we we Hf Sg AE Il (840-12, fueres, He 1) dar meh ghar ghar meh dar jaanai. With the Fear of God in his heart, and his heart in the Fear of God, he knows God.
sufs foen Ag Hf STE IDI (940-13, frees, He 1) takhat nivaas sach man bhaanai. ||17] | He sits on the throne, and becomes pleasing to the Mind of the True Lord. ||17]|
sein ua aefs ofs ue Il (840-13, frees, He 1) cha-udas cha-uthay thaaveh leh paavai. The Fourteenth Day: One who enters into the fourth state,
THA SHA AS AS ANTS Il (840-13, fawres, He 1) raajas taamas sat kaal samaavai. overcomes time, and the three qualities of raajas, taamas and satva.
AAMis & wife Ae AHS Il (840-14, fares, He 1) sasee-ar kai ghar soor samaavai. Then the sun enters into the house of the moon,
Aa Hals at ahifs urs i (840-14, faeres, v2 1) jog jugat kee keemat paavai. and one knows the value of the technology of Yoga.
sein seq UTS ANTE Il Us qoHs sfonr fos BES NACI (840-14, frav<w, He 1) cha-udas bhavan paataal samaa-ay. khand barahmand rahi-aa liv laa-ay. ||18] | He remains lovingly focused on God, who is permeating the fourteen worlds, the nether regions of the underworld, the galaxies and solar systems. ||18]|
mHefhort de Tus deta il (940-15, frores, He 1) amaavasi-aa chand gupat gainaar. Amaavas - The Night of the New Moon: The moon is hidden in the sky.
asg fomrat rae ates il (840-15, frase, He 1) boojhhu gi-aanee sabad beechaar. O wise one, understand and contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
AA sats vfs for Bet il (s40-16, fares, 2 1) sasee-ar gagan jot tihu lo-ee. The moon in the sky illuminates the three worlds.
ats afs 24 agar HET Il (840-16, fawres, He 1) kar kar vaykhai kartaa so-ee. Creating the creation, the Creator beholds it.
ag 3 on A fSn ot orf I (840-16, fares, He 1) gur tay deesai so tis hee maahi. One who sees, through the Guru, merges into Him.
HoH 3% wreta AT AEN (840-17, faeres, He 1) manmukh bhoolay aavahi jaahi. ||19]| The self-willed manmukhs are deluded, coming and going in reincarnation. ||19]|
wg vg afy fag ats AOS II (840-17, frees, He 1)
ghar dar thaap thir thaan suhaavai.
One who establishes his home within his own heart, obtains the most beautiful, permanent place.
wy UETe AT Afsag ure Il (840-17, fueres, He 1) aap pachhaanai jaa satgur paavai. One comes to understand his own self, when he finds the True Guru.
Ad maT so faath fear Il (840-18, fawres, He 1)
jah aasaa tah binas binaasaa. Wherever there is hope, there is destruction and desolation.
ge yug wfaor HOAT Il (840-18, frees, HE 1) footai khapar dubiDhaa mansaa. The bowl of duality and selfishness breaks.
HHS AT 3 Id Cera | USSlS BEA IN BA VA OWA (840-18, frees, ne 1) mamtaa jaal tay rahai udaasaa. paranvat naanak ham taa kay daasaa. ||20]||1|| Prays Nanak, I am the slave of that one, who remains detached amidst the traps of attachment. ||20||1]|
UST ts
fares HIG 3 I AS We IO (841-1) bilaaval mehlaa 3 vaar sat ghar 10 Bilaaval, Third Mehl, The Seven Days, Tenth House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (841-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
utfes ats orfe use J At Il (841-2, frees, He 3) aadit vaar aad purakh hai so-ee. Sunday: He, the Lord, is the Primal Being.
MM} FIs eT F HET Il (841-2, faores, 2 3) aapay vartai avar na ko-ee. He Himself is the Pervading Lord; there is no other at all.
6fs ufs Ha sfour udet II (941-2, fueres, He 3) ot pot jag rahi-aa paro-ee. Through and through, He is woven into the fabric of the world.
WM} AIST AT A Et Il (841-2, fares, 2 3) aapay kartaa karai so ho-ee. Whatever the Creator Himself does, that alone happens.
of gS Ae AY Jet Il (841-3, fuares, He 3) naam ratay sadaa sukh ho-ee. Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one is forever in peace.
Tafa feser gs TET UI (841-3, frarew, Hs 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. ||1]| But how rare is the one, who, as Gurmukh, understands this. ||1]||
fase Hust AUG TSSA Il (841-3, frees, He 3) hirdai japnee japa-o guntaasaa. Within my heart, I chant the Chant of the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
dfs want vided wrudus AMM wo ufa ofa fomres af eaAfs SA NU TIS I (841-4, fawree, He 3)
har agam agochar aprampar su-aamee jan pag lag Dhi-aava-o ho-ay daasan daasaa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Lord, my Lord and Master, is inaccessible, unfathomable and unlimited. Grasping the feet of the Lord's humble servants, I meditate on Him, and become the slave of His slaves. ||1|]Pause| |
Aves vfs sf ANTE Il (841-5, faares, He 3) somvaar sach rahi-aa samaa-ay. Monday: The True Lord is permeating and pervading.
fH at SHS at o ATE I (841-5, foes, He 3) tis kee keemat kahee na jaa-ay. His value cannot be described.
nity orf ad Afs fee OTe I (941-5, fares, 43 3) aakh aakh rahay sabh liv laa-ay. Talking and speaking about Him, all keep themselves lovingly focused on Him.
fan de fSA us ule Il (841-6, frees, He 3) jis dayvai tis palai paa-ay. Devotion falls into the laps of those whom He so blesses.
Ma Midas Ber o ATE Il (841-6, fares, He 3) agam agochar lakhi-aa na jaa-ay. He is inaccessible and unfathomable; He cannot be seen.
ad a Hate ofa sft ANTE IQI (841-6, foes, He 3)
gur kai sabad har rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2] |
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is seen to be permeating and pervading everywhere. ||2]|
Hates wfeor Ho Burfenr | (841-7, frees, He 3) mangal maa-i-aa moh upaa-i-aa. Tuesday: The Lord created love and attachment to Maya.
wm fafs fafs da efor | (841-7, fasres, v2 3) aapay sir sir DhanDhai laa-i-aa. He Himself has enjoined each and every being to their tasks.
uf gsre Het gS I (841-7, foes, ve 3) aap bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai. He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand.
Gs a Aafe VI we AS Il (s41-8, fovew, v2 3) gur kai sabad dar ghar soojhai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one understands his heart and home.
UH sails ad fee ote Il (841-8, feos, ue 3) paraym bhagat karay liv laa-ay. He worships the Lord in loving devotion.
ICH HHS Aafe AETE SII (841-8, frees, He 3) ha-umai mamtaa sabad jalaa-ay. ||3]| His egotism and self-conceit are burnt away by the Shabad. ||3]|
gues nm afa Ae Il (841-9, fawres, v3 3) buDhvaar aapay buDh saar. Wednesday: He Himself bestows sublime understanding.
aaHfy adat Aa Sarg Il (941-9, frares, He 3) gurmukh karnee sabad veechaar. The Gurmukh does good deeds, and contemplates the Word of the Shabad.
ot gS He feaHe df Il (841-9, faares, He 3)
naam ratay man nirmal ho-ay.
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind become pure and immaculate.
dfs TE We TBH HS aE Il (841-9, feos, v2 3) har gun gaavai ha-umai mal kho-ay. He sings the Glorious Glorious Praises of the Lord, and washes off the filth of egotism.
ofa Ad Ae AST ues Il (841-10, fuses, v2 3) dar sachai sad sobhaa paa-ay. In the Court of the True Lord, he obtains lasting glory.
otH IS Td Aste ATS ISil (841-10, frees, vs 3) naam ratay gur sabad suhaa-ay. ||4]| Imbued with the Naam, he is embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||
Od SH ue Ts ents il (841-10, frees, ve 3) laahaa naam paa-ay gur du-aar. The profit of the Naam is obtained through the Door of the Guru.
a
mM} Ve VEST Il (841-11, fuses, 2 3) aapay dayvai dayvanhaar. The Great Giver Himself gives it.
A te fA a afs We II (841-11, fares, He 3) jo dayvai tis ka-o bal jaa-ee-ai. I am a Sacrifice to the One who gives it.
Te USAT ny aves I (841-11, freres, He 3) gur parsaadee aap gavaa-ee-ai. By Guru's Grace, self-conceit is eradicated.
SSA SH TUT Sa ute Il (841-12, fares, v2 3) naanak naam rakhahu ur Dhaar. O Nanak, enshrine the Naam within your heart.
SzsTG AG AAT UII (841-12, frees, He 3) dayvanhaaray ka-o jaikaar. ||5|| I celebrate the victory of the Lord, the Great Giver. ||5]|
dteets ate sath SHES Il (841-12, fares, He 3) veervaar veer bharam bhulaa-ay. Thursday: The fifty-two warriors were deluded by doubt.
YS F3 Als SA we il (g41-12, fares, v2 3) parayt bhoot sabh doojai laa-ay. All the goblins and demons are attached to duality.
mify Cure af Se Sar il (841-13, fuerew, He 3) aap upaa-ay kar vaykhai vaykaa. God Himself created them, and sees each one distinct.
HI" ATS Sat SAT Il (841-13, fasres, ve 3) sabhnaa kartay tayree taykaa. O Creator Lord, You are the Support of all.
Aba As Sot Agaret Il (841-13, fares, He 3) jee-a jant tayree sarnaa-ee. The beings and creatures are under Your protection.
A f@ fan Sfo firoret él (941-13, faeres, v2 3) so milai jis laihi milaa-ee. ||6]| He alone meets You, whom You Yourself meet. ||6]|
Hats ys shoo AHTet I (841-14, fares, us 3) sukarvaar parabh rahi-aa samaa-ee. Friday: God is permeating and pervading everywhere.
nifty Cue AS aMHfs uret I (841-14, faores, He 3) aap upaa-ay sabh keemat paa-ee. He Himself created all, and appraises the value of all.
qenfy de A ad Hes Il (841-15, fears, He 3) gurmukh hovai so karai beechaar. One who become Gurmukh, contemplates the Lord.
Ae HAH adat J ATS Il (841-15, frees, He 3) sach sanjam karnee hai kaar. He practices truth and self-restraint.
Zos 3H fesryfs un i fag Fs AF HS FT SA MDI (841-15, fares, 3 3)
varat naym nitaaparat poojaa. bin boojhay sabh bhaa-o hai doojaa. ||7]||
Without genuine understanding, all fasts, religious rituals and daily worship services lead only to the love of duality. ||7]||
sfosdets ABE AAS Stes Il (841-16, faerea, ve 3) chhanichharvaar sa-un saasat beechaar. Saturday: Contemplating good omens and the Shaastras,
ICH Ha SIH AAT Il (841-16, fares, He 3) ha-umai mayraa bharmai sansaar. in egotism and self-conceit, the world wanders in delusion.
HOH nit eA STE Il (841-16, fares, v3 3) manmukh anDhaa doojai bhaa-ay. The blind, self-willed manmukh in engrossed in the love of duality.
aH Ufa aor get ute | (841-17, fares, 2 3) jam dar baaDhaa chotaa khaa-ay. Bound and gagged at death's door, he is beaten and punished.
Td UsATet AST AY UTES Il (841-17, fares, He 3) gur parsaadee sadaa sukh paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, one finds lasting peace.
He adet Ate fos BES NCI (941-17, fasres, 2 3) sach karnee saach liv laa-ay. ||8]| He practices Truth, and lovingly focuses on the Truth. ||8] |
Afsag Aets A PSSM Il (841-18, frees, vs 3) satgur sayveh say vadbhaagee. Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.
ICH ufs Afs foe oral Il (841-18, frees, He 3) ha-umai maar sach liv laagee. Conquering their ego, they embrace love for the True Lord.
SA o
3d da TS Hola AST Il (841-18, frees, 2 3) tayrai rang raatay sahj subhaa-ay. They are automatically imbued with Your Love, O Lord.
UST tg2
3 Auerst Sfo fheste ii (942-1, frorew, ve 3) too sukh-daata laihi milaa-ay. You are the Giver of peace; You merge them into Yourself.
SoA 3 TA art AE il (842-1, fares, we 3) aykas tay doojaa naahee ko-ay. Everything comes from the One and only Lord; there is no other at all.
TaHfs gs ASt TE ut (942-1, frvew, v2 3) gurmukh boojhai sojhee ho-ay. ||9]| The Gurmukh realizes this, and understands. ||9||
ues fast 3 AS Fes Il (842-1, froves, ne 3) pandreh thitee” tai sat vaar. The fifteen lunar days, the seven days of the week,
Ht GSt nitSfd Ss ST Il (842-2, fuses, vs 3) maahaa rutee aavahi vaar vaar. the months, seasons, days and nights, come over and over again;
feon df= fee AAT II (842-2, foes, He 3) dinas rain tivai sansaar. so the world goes on.
MTS IGE AM ATS Il (842-2, free, v2 3) aavaa ga-on kee-aa kartaar. Coming and going were created by the Creator Lord.
fesse ATS dont ae oe Il (842-3, fuses, He 3) nihchal saach rahi-aa kal Dhaar. The True Lord remains steady and stable, by His almighty power.
aoa Tate gs a AAT Sots NINA (842-3, fawres, we 3) naanak gurmukh boojhai ko sabad veechaar. ||10||1||
O Nanak, how rare is that Gurmukh who understands, and contemplates the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||10]|1]|
faaSs HIS 3 Il (842-3) bilaaval mehlaa 3. Bilaaval, Third Mehl:
mife usy wnt figAfe ATA Il (842-4, frees, He 3) aad purakh aapay sarisat saajay. The Primal Lord Himself formed the Universe.
aba a3 Hfenr vfs uA Il (842-4, faares, He 3) jee-a jant maa-i-aa mohi paajay. The beings and creatures are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya.
en ate usufs ora Il (342-4, frees, ve 3)
doojai bhaa-ay parpanch laagay.
In the love of duality, they are attached to the illusory material world. mets Wels Hots MIST Il (842-5, faaree, He 3)
aavahi jaaveh mareh abhaagay. The unfortunate ones die, and continue to come and go.
Afsafe sfent ASt ute I (942-5, foes, He 3) satgur bhayti-ai sojhee paa-ay. Meeting with the True Guru, understanding is obtained.
usug ya Afs AHS WAI (842-5, frwrew, He 3) parpanch chookai sach samaa-ay. ||1|| Then, the illusion of the material world is shattered, and one merges in Truth. ||1]|
W a HASta fefimr Sy I (942-5, fares, He 3) jaa kai mastak likhi-aa laykh. One who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead
a a Hf efor ys Sa NU TIC Il (842-6, fravew, ne 3) taa kai man vasi-aa parabh ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o. - the One God abides within his mind. ||1||Pause]|
fqrfe Gurfe mm Ag SH II (842-6, frees, He 3) sarisat upaa-ay aapay sabh vaykhai. He created the Universe, and He Himself beholds all.
afe o Ae Sg Be Il (842-7, faares, He 3) ko-ay na maytai tayrai laykhai. No one can erase Your record, Lord.
fho Afoa A at ad ATS Il (842-7, faares, v2 3) siDh saaDhik jay ko kahai kahaa-ay. If someone calls himself a Siddha or a seeker,
SIH FH nS AS Il (842-7, fares, v3 3) bharmay bhoolaa aavai jaa-ay. he is deluded by doubt, and will continue coming and going.
Afsaqg AS A AS FS Il (842-7, foes, we 3) satgur sayvai so jan boojhai. That humble being alone understands, who serves the True Guru.
ISH HS S VT AS MMi (842-8, frorew, vs 3) ha-umai maaray taa dar soojhai. ||2|| Conquering his ego, he finds the Lord's Door. ||2||
San SAS AT IMM Il (842-8, fares, He 3) aykas tay sabh doojaa hoo-aa. From the One Lord, all others were formed.
Sa TIS MST S Ai I (942-8, fares, v2 3) ayko vartai avar na bee-aa. The One Lord is pervading everywhere; there is no other at all.
GH SH Sa AS Il (842-8, foes, He 3) doojay tay jay ayko jaanai. Renouncing duality, one comes to know the One Lord.
ad a Aafe ofa uefa SATS Il (842-9, fares, He 3) gur kai sabad har dar neesaanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one knows the Lord's Door, and His Banner.
Afsag Se 3 Sa US Il (942-9, fares, ve 3) satgur bhaytay taa ayko paa-ay. Meeting the True Guru, one finds the One Lord.
fess BAT ofa TITS Sli (842-9, frorew, He 3) vichahu doojaa thaak rahaa-ay. ||3]| Duality is subdued within. ||3]|
fan a Atos aver df= Il (842-10, faares, He 3) jis daa saahib daadhaa ho-ay. One who belongs to the All-powerful Lord and Master
fan 3 uf o AA afe Il (842-10, faares, He 3) tis no maar na saakai ko-ay. - no one can destroy him.
Afos ot Aza Td AsSTet Il (842-10, fares, He 3) saahib kee sayvak rahai sarnaa-ee. The Lord's servant remains under His protection;
mm SaA Sf Sfsniret Il (842-10, fuses, He 3) aapay bakhsay day vadi-aa-ee. The Lord Himself forgives him, and blesses him with glorious greatness.
fA 3 Cute ardt a= I (842-11, faorey, ve 3) tis tay oopar naahee ko-ay. There is none higher than Him.
ae 3d 3g fan a af Isil (942-11, faares, He 3) ka-un darai dar kis kaa ho-ay. ||4|| Why should he be afraid? What should he ever fear? ||4||
TaHst AS SA Ate Il (842-11, faores, He 3) gurmatee saat vaSai Sareer. Through the Guru's Teachings, peace and tranquility abide within the body.
Hae dife feta wat 3 ute li (942-12, frares, ve 3) sabad cheeneh fir lagai na peer. Remember the Word of the Shabad, and you shall never suffer pain.
wie & ATE aT ey UTES Il (842-12, fueres, He 3) aavai na jaa-ay naa dukh paa-ay. You shall not have to come or go, or suffer in sorrow.
OH IS Ata AHS Il (342-12, frsves, He 3) naamay raatay sahj samaa-ay. Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall merge in celestial peace.
sree TaHfe Sh Tels il (942-13, faarew, vs 3) naanak gurmukh vaykhai hadoor. O Nanak, the Gurmukh beholds Him ever-present, close at hand.
AT ys Ae stor saute ull (942-13, feares, ve 3) mayraa parabh sad rahi-aa bharpoor. ||5|| My God is always fully pervading everywhere. ||5||
fefa Rea feta sath SHES Il (942-13, frees, He 3) ik sayvak ik bharam bhulaa-ay. Some are selfless servants, while others wander, deluded by doubt.
my ad ofa nity AIS Il (942-14, fares, v2 3) aapay karay har aap karaa-ay. The Lord Himself does, and causes everything to be done.
Sa TIS neg B AE Il (842-14, fueres, He 3) ayko vartai avar na ko-ay. The One Lord is all-pervading; there is no other at all.
Hie SH ott A EAT SE Il (942-14, faores, 2 3) man ros keejai jay doojaa ho-ay. The mortal might complain, if there were any other.
Afsagd AS Adat ATS Il (842-14, fawres, ve 3) satgur sayvay karnee saaree. Serve the True Guru; this is the most excellent action.
ofa Ard ATS Stordt Ell (842-15, faares, ue 3) dar saachai saachay veechaaree. ||6| | In the Court of the True Lord, you shall be judged true. ||6]|
fast aa Afs Aafe ATS Il (942-15, faores, He 3) thitee vaar sabh sabad suhaa-ay.
All the lunar days, and the days of the week are beautiful, when one contemplates the Shabad.
Afsagd AS 3 Sw UTES Il (842-15, fares, He 3) satgur sayvay taa fal paa-ay. If one serves the True Guru, he obtains the fruits of his rewards.
fast aa vfs nirefs ats Il (342-16, fares, He 3)
thitee vaar sabh aavahi jaahi. The omens and days all come and go.
ad Aa fedse Ae Afs AHO Il (842-16, fares, He 3)
gur sabad nihchal sadaa sach samaahi.
But the Word of the Guru's Shabad is eternal and unchanging. Through it, one merges in the True Lord.
fast aa 3 wT Afs TS Il (842-16, fasres, He 3) thitee vaar taa jaa sach raatay. The days are auspicious, when one is imbued with Truth.
fag oe Afs sonfa as IDI (842-17, foes, He 3) bin naavai sabh bharmeh kaachay. ||7]| Without the Name, all the false ones wander deluded. ||7]||
HoH Hote Hf faarst Ate Il (842-17, frees, He 3) manmukh mareh mar bigtee jaahi. The self-willed manmukhs die, and dead, they fall into the most evil state.
2a 3 Vala eA Bata Il (942-17, frores, ve 3) ayk na cheeteh doojai lobhaahi. They do not remember the One Lord; they are deluded by duality.
mes fifst uifamirs niurg | (842-18, freres, He 3) achayt pindee agi-aan anDhaar. The human body is unconscious, ignorant and blind.
fag Fae fa ure urg il (842-18, fueres, He 3) bin sabdai ki-o paa-ay paar. Without the Word of the Shabad, how can anyone cross over?
mf Cure Guresdg Il (842-18, fares, v3 3) aap Uupaa-ay upaavanhaar. The Creator Himself creates.
nmt ase Te Seg Ici (842-19, frees, ve 3) aapay keeton gur veechaar. ||8]| He Himself contemplates the Guru's Word. ||8]|
Ws sy Ast SuOrs Il (842-19, fasres, ue 3) bahutay bhaykh karahi bhaykh-Dhaaree. The religious fanatics wear all sorts of religious robes.
afe afe santa aret Are Il (842-19, fuses, He 3) bhav bhav bharmeh kaachee saaree. They roll around and wander around, like the false dice on the board.
Me AY o vita SE Il (842-19, froves, He 3) aithai sukh na aagai ho-ay. They find no peace, here or hereafter.
Usk tes
HOHY HE nual HOH BfE II (843-1, frees, He 3) manmukh mu-ay apnaa janam kho-ay. The self-willed manmukhs waste away their lives, and die.
Afsagd AS SH FATES Il (843-1, faorea, ne 3) satgur sayvay bharam chukaa-ay. Serving the True Guru, doubt is driven away.
we dt niefa AG HIG us Cl (943-1, frees, He 3)
ghar hee andar sach mahal paa-ay. ||9]|
Deep within the home of the heart, one finds the Mansion of the True Lord's Presence. ||9||
MM Us aS A TLE Il (843-2, frre, we 3) aapay pooraa karay so ho-ay. Whatever the Perfect Lord does, that alone happens.
fa fast ea eA Se Il (943-2, fares, vs 3) ayhi thitee vaar doojaa do-ay. Concern with these omens and days leads only to duality.
Afsaqd IST nig TAT Il (943-2, farses, He 3) satgur baajhahu anDh gubaar. Without the True Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
fast aa Aefs Ha TSS Il (843-3, frases, He 3) thitee vaar sayveh mugaDh gavaar. Only idiots and fools worry about these omens and days.
aoa Tate gs ASt ute il (843-3, frorew, ve 3) naanak gurmukh boojhai sojhee paa-ay. O Nanak, the Gurmukh obtains understanding and realization;
feas oth Ae stent ANTE NAOMI (843-3, fares, He 3) ikat naam sadaa rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||10]||2|| he remains forever merged in the Name of the One Lord. ||10]|2]|
faares HIS A BT BUST (943-5) bilaaval mehlaa 1 chhant dakh-nee Bilaaval, First Mehl, Chhant, Dakhnee:
qe Afsara yATfe il (843-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hu aeesior afefs ret IH II (943-6, forse wast, He 1) munDh navaylrhee-aa go-il aa-ee raam. The young, innocent soul-bride has come to the pasture lands of the world.
Heat atta udt ofa fee Bet IH Il (943-6, faerews wast, He 1) matukee daar Dharee har liv laa-ee raam. Laying aside her pitcher of worldly concern, she lovingly attunes herself to her Lord.
foe ofe afs fag oct afefs nofa Rafe Atardiui Il (943-6, feos weet, He 1)
liv laa-ay har si-o rahee go-il sahj sabad seegaaree-aa.
She remains lovingly absorbed in the pasture of the Lord, automatically embellished with the Word of the Shabad.
ad nfs ae ufs afe fasst feo fe fimrdinr i (843-7, faorew weet, He 1)
kar jorh gur peh kar binantee milhu saach pi-aaree-aa.
With her palms pressed together, she prays to the Guru, to unite her with her True Beloved Lord.
us af sarst efy uisn an atu foster I (843-8, faores weet, He 1)
Dhan bhaa-ay bhagtee daykh pareetam kaam kroDh nivaari-aa.
Seeing His bride's loving devotion, the Beloved Lord eradicates unfulfilled sexual desire and unresolved anger.
Sot HU aes Hefe efy fug Arata All (943-8, frees waet, He 1)
naanak munDh navayl sundar daykh pir saaDhaari-aa. ||1]||
O Nanak, the young, innocent bride is so beautiful; seeing her Husband Lord, she is comforted. ||1]|
Afs seoste Aafe set IH Il (843-9, fueres wut, He 1) sach navaylrhee-ay joban baalee raam. Truthfully, O young soul-bride, your youth keeps you innocent.
me o WE adt MUS Ad aS IH Il (843-9, feorews ust, us 1) aa-O na jaa-o kahee apnay sah naalee raam. Do not come and go anywhere; stay with your Husband Lord.
od MUS Af SA H sas dfs at SSS Il (943-9, frees wut, ue 1)
naah apnay sang daasee mai bhagat har kee bhaav-ay.
I will stay with my Husband Lord; I am His hand-maiden. Devotional worship to the Lord is pleasing to me.
warfa afa nee adhy Hof us TS WSS Il (843-10, frarews wuet, ve 1)
agaaDh boDh akath kathee-ai sahj parabh gun gaav-ay.
I know the unknowable, and speak the unspoken; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Celestial Lord God.
TH OH SAS dA ge Ate fins Il (943-10, fuses ust, He 1) raam naam rasaal rasee-aa ravai saach pi-aaree-aa. She who chants and savors the taste of the Lord's Name is loved by the True Lord.
dfs Aa ert ae at otsar Sardi IQ (843-11, fase euet, ve 1)
gur sabad dee-aa daan kee-aa naankaa veechaaree-aa. ||2||
The Guru grants her the gift of the Shabad; O Nanak, she contemplates and reflects upon it. ||2||
Aloe Hfomrst fue Af ASt TH Il (943-11, fares eet, we 1) sareeDhar mohi-arhee pir sang sootee raam. She who is fascinated by the Supreme Lord, sleeps with her Husband Lord.
qs a oe vs AfS Hast TH Il (843-12, frees uct, we 1) gur kai bhaa-ay chalo saach sangootee raam. She walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, attuned to the Lord.
ue As Hast ofs Afar ASt Afor Met Adsbor I (843-12, fers euet, we 1)
Dhan saach sangootee har sang sootee sang sakhee sahaylee-aa.
The soul-bride is attuned to the Truth, and sleeps with the Lord, along with her companions and sister soul-brides.
fea fe fea nfs on efhor Afsag TH HS Il (8943-13, feorey weet, He 1)
ik bhaa-ay ik man naam vasi-aa satguroo ham maylee-aa.
Loving the One Lord, with one-pointed mind, the Naam dwells within; I am united with the True Guru.
feo df= wet o um fend Af AA fodHe II (843-13, fares wut, He 1)
din rain gharhee na chasaa visrai Saas saas niranjano.
Day and night, with each and every breath, I do not forget the Immaculate Lord, for a moment, even for an instant.
Rafe Afs nerfs tua seat SE SHS ISI (843-14, feoes Tet, He 1) sabad jot jagaa-ay deepak naankaa bha-o bhanjno. ||3]|| So light the lamp of the Shabad, O Nanak, and burn away your fear. ||3||
nfs nafeste fazee AS IN I (943-15, forse weet, He 1) jot sabaa-irhee-ay taribhavan saaray raam. O soul-bride, the Lord's Light pervades all the three worlds.
whe ufe sf sfomr nee nturg IH Il (843-15, fares wast, H2 1) ghat ghat rav rahi-aa alakh apaaray raam. He is pervading each and every heart, the Invisible and Infinite Lord.
Wee MUS nurs ATE nity Hifs floret | (943-15, feos weet, He 1)
alakh apaar apaar saachaa aap maar milaa-ee-ai.
He is Invisible and Infinite, Infinite and True; subduing his self-conceit, one meets Him.
ICH HHS BS Wed Ale HS vars Il (843-16, fares wet, He VD
ha-umai mamtaa lobh jaalahu sabad mail chukhaa-ee-ai.
So burn away your egotistical pride, attachment and greed, with the Word of the Shabad; wash away your filth.
ofa fe wane adt awe afe saeatfenr Il (343-16, fasres euet, v2 1)
dar jaa-ay darsan karee bhaanai taar taaranhaari-aa.
When you go to the Lord's Door, you shall receive the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; by His Will, the Savior will carry you across and save you.
ofa on nifys of feust aoa Ca ofan sill (343-17, fravew Tut, He 1)
har naam amrit chaakh tariptee naankaa ur Dhaari-aa. ||4||1]|
Tasting the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name, the soul-bride is satisfied; O Nanak, she enshrines Him in her heart. ||4||1]|
farses HIS 4 Il (843-18) bilaaval mehlaa 1. Bilaaval, First Mehl:
H nfs we wat afs fearAt TH Il (843-18, fueres, He 1) mai man chaa-o ghanaa saach vigaasee raam. My mind is filled with such a great joy; I have blossomed forth in Truth.
Hat Un fus ufs oifsert ar i (843-18, free, ve 1) mohee paraym piray parabh abhinaasee raam. I am enticed by the love of my Husband Lord, the Eternal, Imperishable Lord God.
wifeas dfs og aad fSA at] A dh Il (843-19, fares, He 1) avigato har naath naathah tisai bhaavai so thee-ai. The Lord is everlasting, the Master of masters. Whatever He wills, happens.
faaurs Het efenig erst Aor niefs J Fit i (843-19, freres, we 1)
kirpaal sadaa da-i-aal daataa jee-aa andar too’ jee-ai.
O Great Giver, You are always kind and compassionate. You infuse life into all living beings.
Ua tse H nied famrg 3 fomreg ust afs on nists eft 3d Il (944-1, frees, we 1)
mai avar gi-aan na Dhi-aan poojaa har naam antar vas rahay. I have no other spiritual wisdom, meditation or worship; the Name of the Lord alone dwells deep within me.
BY 3e6t JS 6 Ha Boa’ AY ald Fd NA (944-1, fuses, ne 1)
bhaykh bhavnee hath na jaanaa naankaa sach geh rahay. ||1||
I know nothing about religious robes, pilgrimages or stubborn fanaticism; O Nanak, I hold tight to the Truth. ||1]|
fsost df= sat fear ATS TH Il (844-2, frares, He 1) bhinrhee rain bhalee dinas suhaa-ay raam. The night is beautiful, drenched with dew, and the day is delightful,
for uta Asst fusH Aare IN Il (844-2, faares, He 1) nij ghar soot-rhee-ay piram jagaa-ay raam. when her Husband Lord wakes the sleeping soul-bride, in the home of the self.
oe f= o€ US Hale Wat mye fus ser Il (844-3, faores, He 1)
nav haan nav Dhan sabad jaagee aapnay pir bhaanee-aa.
The young bride has awakened to the Word of the Shabad; she is pleasing to her Husband Lord.
sft AZ AUS ATS VAT Tat Saree | (844-3, fvew, we 1) taj koorh kapat subhaa-o doojaa chaakree lokaanee-aa. So renounce falsehood, fraud, love of duality and working for people.
H Oy df at og AS A ASE StAfSEnt Il (844-4, fares, He 1 mai naam har kaa haar kanthay saach sabad neesaani-aa. The Name of the Lord is my necklace, and I am anointed with the True Shabad.
ad rifs soa ATG He oefe afs sO Shem II (944-4, forse, He 1)
kar jorh naanak saach maagai nadar kar tuDh bhaani-aa. ||2||
With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for the gift of the True Name; please, bless me with Your Grace, through the pleasure of Your Will. ||2]|
Wd ASosle 8B Taaret TH Il (944-5, foes, ne 1) jaag salonrhee-ay bolai gurbaanee raam. Awake, O bride of splendored eyes, and chant the Word of the Guru's Bani.
fate Afs Hfemrst nies aITet IM Il (844-5, faores, He 1) jin sun mani-arhee akath kahaanee raam. Listen, and place your faith in the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
Wee aTet ue fasaet &t feser TaHfs Tse | (844-6, fares, vs 1)
akath kahaanee pad nirbaanee ko virlaa gurmukh boojh-ay.
The Unspoken Speech, the state of Nirvaanaa - how rare is the Gurmukh who understands this.
6g Aafe AHS nry ae fede ASt ABE Il (844-6, faorew, we 1)
oh sabad samaa-ay aap gavaa-ay taribhavan sojhee soojh-ay.
Merging in the Word of the Shabad, self-conceit is eradicated, and the three worlds are revealed to her understanding.
dd nists wrudufs wat Are Hf Te AfeMr Il (844-7, frees, He 1) rahai ateet aprampar raataa saach man gun saari-aa.
Remaining detached, with infinity infusing, the true mind cherishes the virtues of the Lord.
6g ufs sfomr Aga oct aso Ca afar SII (944-7, faares, He 1)
oh poor rahi-aa sarab thaa-ee naankaa ur Dhaari-aa. ||3]||
He is fully pervading and permeating all places; Nanak has enshrined Him within his heart. ||3]|
Hote soteste sats AST IH Il (844-8, faores, He 1)
mahal bulaa-irhee-ay bhagat sanayhee raam.
The Lord is calling you to the Mansion of His Presence; O soul-bride, He is the Lover of His devotees.
asHfs Hfs JoAt ALStA Sot IM Il (844-8, fares, He 1)
gurmat man rahsee seejhas dayhee raam.
Following the Guru's Teachings, your mind shall be delighted, and your body shall be fulfilled.
He Hfe HS Aafe AS 3 Ba BE uses Il (844-9, frases, ne 1)
man maar reejhai sabad seejhai tarai lok naath pachhaan-ay.
Conquer and subdue your mind, and love the Word of the Shabad; reform yourself, and realize the Lord of the three worlds.
He Sif sfs o wfe as ot yrmuar fug Wee Il (944-9, frees, He 1)
man deeg dol na jaa-ay kat hee aapnaa pir jaan-ay.
Her mind shall not waver or wander anywhere else, when she comes to know her Husband Lord.
Ho omarg 3a J MAY Aa H StS Solo SIG Il (844-10, frees, ws 1)
mai aaDhaar tayraa too khasam mayraa mai taan takee-aa tayra-o.
You are my only Support, You are my Lord and Master. You are my strength and anchor.
Ate Ae Ae ated Ts Hale Sag feasS isi (844-10, freres, v2 1)
saach soochaa sadaa naanak gur sabad jhagar nibayra-o. ||4||2||
She is forever truthful and pure, O Nanak; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, conflicts are resolved. ||4]|2| |
es faaee HIS 8 HAG (844-12) chhant bilaaval mehlaa 4 mangal Chhant, Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl, Mangal ~ The Song Of Joy:
qe Afsara yATfE Il (844-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aa ofs ys AR orfeor ne Afe AHS IH II (944-13, fares, He 4) mayraa har parabh sayjai aa-i-aa man sukh samaanaa raam. My Lord God has come to my bed, and my mind is merged with the Lord.
afs 38 ofs ys ufenr df gebor Har IM I (944-13, fares, He 4) gur tuthai har parabh paa-i-aa rang ralee-aa maanaa raam. As it pleases the Guru, I have found the Lord God, and I revel and delight in His Love.
saan Aavaret afe MASA HST ITH Il (844-14, fares, He 4)
vadbhaagee-aa sohaaganee har mastak maanaa raam.
Very fortunate are those happy soul-brides, who have the jewel of the Naam upon their foreheads.
ofe ys ofa Aa J Sa HS SET TH NA (844-14, fearew, He 4)
har parabh har sohaag hai naanak man bhaanaa raam. ||1|| The Lord, the Lord God, is Nanak's Husband Lord, pleasing to his mind. ||1]|
fourfenr ofa wre 3 ofa ys ofa mm aM I (844-15, frovew, He 4)
nimaaniaa har maan hai har parabh har aapai raam.
The Lord is the honor of the dishonored. The Lord, the Lord God is Himself by Himself.
qanfa wiry aefeur fos afe afe AM TH I (844-15, faeres, He 4) gurmukh aap gavaa-i-aa nit har har jaapai raam. The Gurmukh eradicates self-conceit, and constantly chants the Name of the Lord.
Ad ofs ys are A ad afe df afs TU IM I (944-16, feeres, He 4)
mayray har parabh bhaavai so karai har rang har raapai raam.
My Lord God does whatever He pleases; the Lord imbues mortal beings with the color of His Love.
Ae Soa Hole frerfemr afe aff ofe grt aH III (844-16, fees, He 4)
jan naanak sahj milaa-i-aa har ras har Dharaapai raam. ||2||
Servant Nanak is easily merged into the Celestial Lord. He is satisfied with the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||
HSH Hoty dfs usb af Tee Sa IM Il (844-17, faores, He 4)
maanas janam har paa-ee-ai har raavan vayraa raam.
The Lord is found only through this human incarnation. This is the time to contemplate the Lord.
aan fxs Hoel da ofS wear IM Il (944-17, feos, He 4) gurmukh mil sohaaganee rang ho-ay ghanayraa raam. As Gurmukhs, the happy soul-brides meet Him, and their love for Him is abundant.
fae Hen Hoth 3 ufemr faq aa Hea IM II (944-18, fares, ve 4) jin maanas janam na paa-i-aa tin" bhaag mandayraa raam. Those who have not attained human incarnation, are cursed by evil destiny.
dfs ae afs ais ay us Soa AG SI TH ISI (844-18, frares, ne 4) har har har har raakh parabh naanak jan tayraa raam. |[3]| O Lord, God, Har, Har, Har, Har, save Nanak; he is Your humble servant. ||3]||
afs ofa ys wan feafenr He 36 Sfat Star TH Il (844-19, fares, He 4)
gur har parabh agam drirh-aa-i-aa man tan rang bheenaa raam.
The Guru has implanted within me the Name of the Inaccessible Lord God; my mind and body are drenched with the Lord's Love.
Ua cgu
sats zee ofa an 3 TaHfe afs Stat IM I (845-1, fuores, ue 4) bhagat vachhal har naam hai gurmukh har leenaa raam. The Name of the Lord is the Lover of His devotees; the Gurmukhs attain the Lord.
fag dfs oH 6 Flee fA Ae fee Hat IM I (845-1, fares, He 4) bin har naam na jeevday ji-o jal bin meenaa raam. Without the Name of the Lord, they cannot even live, like the fish without water.
He@ ASH dle ufeur area yfs alet TH NSIUISI (845-2, fravew, He 4)
safal janam har paa-i-aa naanak parabh keenaa raam. ||4||1||3]| Finding the Lord, my life has become fruitful; O Nanak, the Lord God has fulfilled me. [14] 111131]
fesse HIG 8 ABA Ill (845-2)
bilaaval mehlaa 4 salok. Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl, Shalok:
ofs ys Ane Ofs wg His SA FIST Il (945-3, fore, He 4)
har parabh sajan lorh lahu man vasai vadbhaag.
Seek out the Lord God, your only true Friend. He shall dwell in your mind, by great good fortune.
afs us Safer sea ois fee Sa UI (845-3, frorew, oe 4) gur poorai vaykhaali-aa naanak har liv laag. ||1]| The True Guru shall reveal Him to you; O Nanak, lovingly focus yourself on the Lord.
[2
2S Il (845-3) chhant. Chhant:
na ofs ys wets wre GBH fey sat TH II (845-4, frees, He 4)
mayraa har parabh raavan aa-ee-aa ha-umai bikh jhaagay raam.
The soul-bride has come to ravish and enjoy her Lord God, after eradicating the poison of egotism.
gents wiry feeteur ote ofe fee wet TH Il (945-4, fase, He 4)
gurmat aap mitaa-i-aa har har liv laagay raam.
Following the Guru's Teachings, she has eliminated her self-conceit; she is lovingly attuned to her Lord, Har, Har.
nists SHS uderfawr aa famrat Aa IM Il (945-5, faares, He 4)
antar kamal pargaasi-aa gur gi-aanee jaagay raam.
Her heart-lotus deep within has blossomed forth, and through the Guru, spiritual wisdom has been awakened within her.
We Soa fs ys ule us SST TH MAUI (845-5, fares, ve 4)
jan naanak har parabh paa-i-aa poorai vadbhaagay raam. ||1]|| Servant Nanak has found the Lord God, by perfect, great good fortune. ||1]|
dfs yg dfs ufs stfeur afe ath earet IH Il (845-6, fares, ne 4)
har parabh har man bhaa-i-aa har naam vaDhaa-ee raam. The Lord, the Lord God, is pleasing to her mind; the Lord's Name resounds within her.
afs us ug ufenr ate ate fee wet TH Il (845-6, fares, 3 4)
gur poorai parabh paa-i-aa har har liv laa-ee raam.
Through the Perfect Guru, God is obtained; she is lovingly focused on the Lord, Har, Har.
mfr nits afenr Afs usafenmet aH Il (845-7, fares, He 4) agi-aan anDhayraa kati-aa jot pargati-aa-ee raam. The darkness of ignorance is dispelled, and the Divine Light radiantly shines forth.
He aoa SH mug FT ofa oTH ANEST IM NNQII (845-7, faores, He 4) jan naanak naam aDhaar hai har naam samaa-ee raam. ||2]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is Nanak's only Support; he merges into the Lord's Name. |[2||
us ofa ufs fimrd aetor at af us aret IH II (845-8, frees, He 4)
Dhan har parabh pi-aarai raavee-aa jaa‘ har parabh bhaa-ee raam.
The soul-bride is ravished and enjoyed by her Beloved Lord God, when the Lord God is pleased with her.
mat UH aA faAS faa HATET TH II (845-8, frwres, He 4) akhee paraym kasaa-ee-aa ji-o bilak masaa-ee raam. My eyes are drawn to His Love, like the cat to the mouse.
afs us ofs Afr ofe oft wmuret IH Il (845-9, frees, v3 4)
gur poorai har mayli-aa har ras aaghaa-ee raam.
The Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord; I am satisfied by the subtle essence of the Lord.
Ho ood oH feathor safe ofa fee Bet IH Ill (845-9, faorea, He 4)
jan naanak naam vigsi-aa har har liv laa-ee raam. ||3]|
Servant Nanak blossoms forth in the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he is lovingly attuned to the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
oH Ysa Hare frerfenr ate faxsur ordt IH II (845-10, frees, 8 4)
ham moorakh mugaDh milaa-i-aa har kirpaa Dhaaree raam.
I am a fool and an idiot, but the Lord showered me with His Mercy, and united me with Himself.
ue U6 ag AEH o fafs IGH HST IH Il (845-10, faarew, 8 4) Dhan Dhan guroo saabaas hai jin ha-umai maaree raam. Blessed, blessed is the most wonderful Guru, who has conquered egotism.
fag esac esara 3 afs ofa Ga ost TH Il (845-11, frares, ne 4)
jin" vadbhaagee-aa vadbhaag hai har har ur Dhaaree raam.
Very fortunate, of blessed destiny are those, who enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, in their hearts.
AS soa SH Hots 3 oH sfsadt TH USUI (845-12, fasrew, He 4)
jan naanak naam salaahi too naamay balihaaree raam. ||4||2||4] | O servant Nanak, praise the Naam, and be a sacrifice to the Naam. ||4||2||4| |
fame HIG UBT (845-13)
bilaaval mehlaa 5 chhant Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsara YATE Il (845-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hares AA Seer ys must arent aH I (845-14, frases, He 5) mangal saaj bha-i-aa parabh apnaa gaa-i-aa raam. The time of rejoicing has come; I sing of my Lord God.
mfsaAt eo Afeur His Cutter wfenr aH Il (845-14, faores, He 5) abhinaasee var suni-aa man upji-aa chaa-i-aa raam. I have heard of my Imperishable Husband Lord, and happiness fills my mind.
nfs ylfs wat es sat oe fresh uss Us Il (845-15, faarew, 2 5)
man pareet laagai vadai bhaagai kab milee-ai pooran patay.
My mind is in love with Him; when shall I realize my great good fortune, and meet with my Perfect Husband?
Hon ANSha afse urehy Fg Ade vfs HS Il (945-15, faores, He 5)
sehjay samaa-ee-ai govind paa-ee-ai dayh sakhee-ay mohi matay.
If only I could meet the Lord of the Universe, and be automatically absorbed into Him; tell me how, O my companions!
fea dfs ordt as AS ys asa Hast uf Il (845-16, frees, v2 5) din rain thaadhee kara-o sayvaa parabh kavan jugtee paa-i-aa. Day and night, I stand and serve my God; how can I attain Him?
foods aoa agg faa 3g dfs ofs went Il (845-16, faeres, 4 5) binvant naanak karahu kirpaa laihu mohi larh laa-i-aa. ||1] | Prays Nanak, have mercy on me, and attach me to the hem of Your robe, O Lord.
[21
stent AHTGS" Tf Iso FEAT TH Il (945-17, fawres, v2 5) bha-i-aa samaahrhaa har ratan visaahaa raam. Joy has come! I have purchased the jewel of the Lord.
ant dfs sor dfs Aso UTI TH Il (845-17, faores, He 5) khojee khoj laDhaa har santan paahaa raam. Searching, the seeker has found the Lord with the Saints.
fu Hz fumrg efenr os aafa mee sted Il (845-18, fares, 42 5)
milay sant pi-aaray da-i-aa Dhaaray katheh akath beechaaro.
I have met the Beloved Saints, and they have blessed me with their kindness; I contemplate the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
fea fafs fea ufs fourfe aomit of& ulfs fimrd II (845-18, frees, v2 5)
ik chit ik man Dhi-aa-ay su-aamee laa-ay pareet pi-aaro.
With my consciousness centered, and my mind one-pointed, I meditate on my Lord and Master, with love and affection.
ad rife ys ufo afe fasst fue afe AA BT II (845-19, foes, He 5)
kar jorh parabh peh kar binantee milai har jas laahaa.
With my palms pressed together, I pray unto God, to bless me with the profit of the Lord's Praise.
faadts Soa SH SI AT YS MAH MAT III (845-19, free, Hs 5) binvant naanak daas tayraa mayraa parabh agam athaahaa. ||2| | Prays Nanak, I am Your slave. My God is inaccessible and unfathomable. ||2]|
UST tee
AS nies alent uss Aa TH Il (846-1, frees, v2 5)
saahaa atal gani-aa pooran sanjogo raam.
The date for my wedding is set, and cannot be changed; my union with the Lord is perfect.
Had AH sfenr afenr fertat IH Il (846-1, frees, v3 5) sukhah samooh bha-i-aa ga-i-aa vijogo raam. I am totally at peace, and my separation from Him has ended.
fife AS ore ys fre ge organ Arent I (846-2, frorew, He 5)
mil sant aa-ay parabh Dhi-aa-ay banay achraj jaanjee-aa”.
The Saints meet and come together, and meditate on God; they form a wondrous wedding party.
fifs feag ce Aofa ee nfs uifs Curt Heer I (846-2, frarew, ve 5)
mil ikatar ho-ay sahj dho-ay man pareet upjee maanjee-aa.
Gathering together, they arrive with poise and grace, and love fills the minds of the bride's family.
ffs xfs aSt Gfs ust afe an Afs GA Sar I (946-3, fares, He 5)
mil jot jotee ot potee har naam sabh ras bhogo.
Her light blends with His Light, through and through, and everyone enjoys the Nectar of the Lord's Name.
faadfs aoa AS Afs ASt Us ATE AGE Aa III (846-3, frees, ne 5)
binvant naanak sabh sant maylee parabh karan kaaran jogo. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, the Saints have totally united me with God, the All-powerful Cause of causes. ||3]||
326 HUSa' Usts AS IH Il (846-4, faares, He 5) bhavan suhaavrhaa Dharat sabhaagee raam. Beautiful is my home, and beauteous is the earth.
yg ufs orfenist ad vdet Bait IN I (846-4, frases, ue 5) parabh ghar aa-i-arhaa gur charnee laagee raam. God has entered the home of my heart; I touch the Guru's feet.
Td VIe Sait Aofa Ava Aare feet US Il (946-5, fuses, ue 5) gur charan laagee sahj jaagee sagal ichhaa punnee-aa. Grasping the Guru's feet, I awake in peace and poise. All my desires are fulfilled.
Hat orn ust AS Ust afs fee as fesfonr il (846-5, faores, wu: 5)
mayree aas pooree sant Dhooree har milay kant vichhunni-aa.
My hopes are fulfilled, through the dust of the feet of the Saints. After such a long separation, I have met my Husband Lord.
mee nates Zafs SH wid HPS Ho at fSnrait I (846-6, fueres, He 5)
aanand an-din vajeh vaajay aha” mat man kee ti-aagee.
Night and day, the sounds of ecstasy resound and resonate; I have forsaken my stubborn-minded intellect.
faaefs aoa Hafs Homi AsAfar fee wait Sil (846-6, frees, H8 5)
binvant naanak saran su-aamee satsang liv laagee. ||4||1||
Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of my Lord and Master; in the Society of the Saints, I am lovingly attuned to Him. ||4]]|1]|
farses HIS U Il (846-7)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
Sa HoUdESt Shs AT THI IM Il (846-7, faeres, He 5) bhaag sulakh-naa har kant hamaaraa raam. By blessed destiny, I have found my Husband Lord.
mode atst fA ufs esas TH Il (346-8, fravey, He 5) anhad baajitraa tis Dhun darbaaraa raam. The unstruck sound current vibrates and resounds in the Court of the Lord.
mee mMofes eafs aH fear sf= Grra Il (46-8, fuarew, He 5)
aanand an-din vajeh vaajay dinas rain omaahaa.
Night and day, the sounds of ecstasy resound and resonate; day and night, I am enraptured.
3d da Aa 3 ey fam ASH HIS B SW Il (946-8, frorew, we 5)
tah rog sog na dookh bi-aapai janam maran na taahaa.
Disease, sorrow and suffering do not afflict anyone there; there is no birth or death there.
fafa fafa no aH nifys sats sd FSS I (946-9, fraves, us 5)
riDh siDh suDhaa ras amrit bhagat bharay bhandaaraa.
There are treasures overflowing there - wealth, miraculous powers, ambrosial nectar and devotional worship.
faadis aoa afeots Ser uTSATH YTS MOST IAI (846-10, faorew, Hs 5) binvant naanak balihaar vanjaa paarbarahm paraan aDhaaraa. ||1] |
Prays Nanak, I am a sacrifice, devoted to the Supreme Lord God, the Support of the breath of life. ||1]|
Afs Adba Ad@Std fife Hae ST TH Il (846-10, fares, He 5)
sun sakhee-a sahaylrheeho mil mangal gaavah raam.
Listen, O my companions, and sister soul-brides, let's join together and sing the songs of joy.
Hfs 3f6 UH ad fH Ys AG Teg TH Il (846-11, fares, we 5) man tan paraym karay tis parabh ka-o raavah raam. Loving our God with mind and body, let's ravish and enjoy Him.
afs un awed fA area fea fany usa 3 fSnraiint I (846-11, foes, v8 5)
kar paraym raavah tisai bhaavah ik nimakh palak na ti-aagee-ai.
Lovingly enjoying Him, we become pleasing to Him; let's not reject Him, for a moment, even for an instant.
afd ate Seba SI SEM Bao JA HS Urs Il (946-12, frarew, He 5)
geh kanth laa-ee-ai nah lajaa-ee-ai charan raj man paagee-ai.
Let's hug Him close in our embrace, and not feel shy; let's bathe our minds in the dust of His feet.
Hs SAGs UTE HIT MiSs AST B WT Il (846-12, fares, we 5)
bhagat thag-uree paa-ay mohah anat kathoo na Dhaavah.
With the intoxicating drug of devotional worship, let's entice Him, and not wander anywhere else.
fasefs aoa fife Aft AAS MINS UsSt UST IQ (846-13, fares, He 5)
binvant naanak mil sang saajan amar padvee paavah. ||2| | Prays Nanak, meeting with our True Friend, we attain the immortal status. ||2]|
faAHo fan set uf Te nifsovAt INH Il (946-13, fares, H2 5) bisman bisam bha-ee paykh gun abhinaasee raam. I am wonder-struck and amazed, gazing upon the Glories of my Imperishable Lord.
ag as se adt afe AH at SA IH Il (846-14, frees, He 5) kar geh bhujaa gahee kat jam kee faasee raam. He took my hand, and held my arm, and cut away the noose of Death.
afs sa Stat ofr atet niafs Ces Aafeur I (846-14, fares, He 5)
geh bhujaa leen"ee daas keen"ee ankur udot janaa-i-aa.
Holding me by the arm, He made me His slave; the branch has sprouted in abundance.
Hoe Hd faars ard feen faane uirfenr II (846-15, frees, He 5) malan moh bikaar naathay divas nirmal aa-i-aa. Pollution, attachment and corruption have run away; the immaculate day has dawned.
ferfe dt Hfe fimrdt Hat GaHfs STH II (846-16, foes, He 5)
darisat Dnaaree man pi-aaree mahaa durmat naasee.
Casting His Glance of Grace, the Lord loves me with His Mind; my immense evil- mindedness is dispelled.
faadts aoa set foone us fs mifsart Sil (846-16, frares, Hs 5)
binvant naanak bha-ee nirmal parabh milay abhinaasee. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, I have become immaculate and pure; I have met the Imperishable Lord God. ||3]|
Han fasts fees AG OT AG TnI IH Il (846-17, faorew, v2 5) sooraj kiran milay jal kaa jal hoo-aa raam. The rays of light merge with the sun, and water merges with water.
Hat Ais Tet Huse shot IH I (846-17, faares, 3 5) jotee jot ralee sampooran thee-aa raam. One's light blends with the Light, and one becomes totally perfect.
gon vA gH Heh Sa Sa TuTSMA Il (846-17, fares, ne 5) barahm deesai barahm sunee-ai ayk ayk vakhaanee-ai. I see God, hear God, and speak of the One and only God.
WISH UATE AdeTa ys far odt Web | (846-18, faves, He 5)
aatam pasaaraa karanhaaraa parabh binaa nahee jaanee-ai.
The soul is the Creator of the expanse of creation. Without God, I know no other at all.
mfu aes orfu gas orf args SM Il (846-18, faerea, He 5) aap kartaa aap bhugtaa aap kaaran kee-aa. He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer. He created the Creation.
faadfs soa Aet wets faat ofs TA Ub SII (846-19, frares, Hs 5)
binvant naanak say-ee jaaneh jin"ee har ras pee-aa. ||4]|2]|
Prays Nanak, they alone know this, who drink in the subtle essence of the Lord. [141121]
UST ceo
fame HIG UT (847-1)
bilaaval mehlaa 5 chhant Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
qe Afsars yArfe il (847-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ret or Ret efA or wet ot furs ar Hae Wes Il (847-2, farses, He 5)
sakhee aa-o sakhee vas aa-o sakhee asee pir kaa mangal gaavah.
Come, O my sisters, come, O my companions, and let us remain under the Lord's control. Let's sing the Songs of Bliss of our Husband Lord.
3fa HG Het sft He Ad HS mye UTSH SteT Il (847-2, faeres, v2 5)
taj maan sakhee taj maan sakhee mat aapnay pareetam bhaavah.
Renounce your pride, O my companions, renounce your egotistical pride, O my sisters, so that you may become pleasing to your Beloved.
sft He Ho faorg gar Afe Fa fSdAS I (847-3, fares, 3 5)
taj maan moh bikaar doojaa sayv ayk niranjano.
Renounce pride, emotional attachment, corruption and duality, and serve the One Immaculate Lord.
Gd BIE Ade cleus ISH Aas vss fesse I (847-3, fers, uz 5)
lag charan saran da-i-aal pareetam sagal durat bikhandno.
Hold tight to the Sanctuary of the Feet of the Merciful Lord, your Beloved, the Destroyer of all sins.
df an ont sfx Cent safe fact o ore Il (947-4, fares, He 5)
ho-ay daas daasee taj udaasee bahurh biDhee na Dhaavaa.
Be the slave of His slaves, forsake sorrow and sadness, and do not bother with other devices.
So Ufenil ade farsur sth Has ar|T AI (847-4, faarew, He 5) naanak pa-i-ampai karahu kirpaa taam mangal gaavaa. ||1||
Prays Nanak, O Lord, please bless me with Your Mercy, that I may sing Your songs of bliss. ||1]|
nifys fina at ong H nigs Jat Il (947-5, frsres, He 5) amrit pari-a kaa naam mai anDhulay tohnee. The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of my Beloved, is like a cane to a blind man.
6a rd aT udaTs Hefa Hat Il (847-5, frees, He 5) oh johai baho parkaar sundar mohnee. Maya seduces in so many ways, like a beautiful enticing woman.
Hust no afefs dats mifsa are feurse | (847-6, fares, ue 5)
mohnee mahaa bachitar chanchal anik bhaav dikhaava-ay.
This enticer is so incredibly beautiful and clever; she entices with countless suggestive gestures.
df= do Hat Hafs wa SH BE 5 MISE Il (847-6, faares, He 5)
ho-ay dheeth meethee maneh laagai naam lain na aav-ay.
Maya is stubborn and persistent; she seems so sweet to the mind, and then he does not chant the Naam.
fas safe Sts sas UAT aS uTS ATS I (847-7, fares, vs 5)
garih baneh teerai barat poojaa baat ghaatai johnee.
At home, in the forest, on the banks of sacred rivers, fasting, worshipping, on the roads and on the shore, she is spying.
Som ufenitt efsor ass H BH nigs Sdat IQ (947-7, faees, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai da-i-aa Dhaarahu mai naam anDhulay tohnee. ||2||
Prays Nanak, please bless me with Your Kindness, Lord; I am blind, and Your Name is my cane. ||2||
Hfo wrova finn ova fa@ wag f3@ sag II (947-8, frores, v8 5)
mohi anaath pari-a naath ji-o jaanhu ti-o rakhahu.
I am helpless and masterless; You, O my Beloved, are my Lord and Master. As it pleases You, so do You protect me.
vsaet ufo ats dtsve afo weg Il (847-8, frees, He 5) chaturaa-ee mohi naahi reejhaava-o kahi mukhahu. I have no wisdom or cleverness; what face should I put on to please You?
od vate Aufe AAS ast Hfs fosafs To odt Il (847-9, fuares, He 5) nah chatur sughar sujaan baytee mohi nirgun gun nahee. I am not clever, skillful or wise; I am worthless, without any virtue at all.
od JU UU F GS HA WT HS ST TY Tat Il (847-9, fawres, uz 5)
nah roop Dhoop na nain bankay jah bhaavai tah rakh tuhee.
I have no beauty or pleasing smell, no beautiful eyes. As it pleases You, please preserve me, O Lord.
A A Afeniufs Ade A ae ageufs afs fats weg II (847-10, fares, He 5) jai jai ja-i-ampeh sagal jaa ka-o karunaapat gat kin lakhahu. His victory is celebrated by all; how can I know the state of the Lord of Mercy?
So ufeni AZ Aea fa wog f3@ Hfo sug ISI (847-10, foes, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai sayv sayvak ji-o jaanhu ti-o mohi rakhahu. |[3]|
Prays Nanak, I am the servant of Your servants; as it pleases You, please preserve me. |[3]|
Hfo Hest SH ote 33 faa fa AS I (947-11, frees, He 5) mohi machhulee tum neer tujh bin ki-o sarai. I am the fish, and You are the water; without You, what can I do?
Hfs ofga 3H Fe Ruse yft us ii (947-11, fees, 2 5) mohi chaatrik tum" boond taripta-o mukh parai.
I am the rainbird, and You are the rain-drop; when it falls into my mouth, I am satisfied.
yfa ud ad fimmn Het Hh Shar yrous I (847-12, ferew, v8 5)
mukh parai harai pi-aas mayree jee-a hee-aa paranpatay.
When it falls into my mouth, my thirst is quenched; You are the Lord of my soul, my heart, my breath of life.
ose os wate As nfs fe oH SE TS Il (847-12, fares, He 5)
laadilay laad ladaa-ay sabh meh mil hamaaree ho-ay gatay.
Touch me, and caress me, O Lord, You are in all; let me meet You, so that I may be emancipated.
dfs fase? fire vias faG orn vaet fea vd Il (847-13, fuares, He 5)
cheet chitva-o mit anDhaaray ji-o aas chakvee din charai.
In my consciousness I remember You, and the darkness is dispelled, like the chakvi duck, which longs to see the dawn.
ood ufenitt finn Afar Hat Hest ste o SA ISil (847-13, frees, He 5)
naanak pa-i-ampai pari-a sang maylee machhulee neer na veesrai. ||4]|
Prays Nanak, O my Beloved, please unite me with Yourself; the fish never forgets the water. ||4||
afs dfs ors ava us nrfenr furs Hat II (947-14, fueres, He 5) Dhan Dhan hamaaray bhaag ghar aa-i-aa pir mayraa. Blessed, blessed is my destiny; my Husband Lord has come into my home.
Hd 8a VMS Aas Fo IA Il (847-15, fase, ve 5) sohay bank du-aar saglaa ban haraa. The gate of my mansion is so beautiful, and all my gardens are so green and alive.
Jd Jd Aum AUT anit wow Has IA wet Il (947-15, frees, He 5)
har haraa su-aamee sukhah gaamee anad mangal ras ghanaa.
My peace-giving Lord and Master has rejuvenated me, and blessed me with great joy, bliss and love.
O25 O36 ST WS ACH JAS Ad FE" Il (847-15, fawrew, Hs 5)
naval navtan naahu baalaa kavan rasnaa gun bhanaa.
My Young Husband Lord is eternally young, and His body is forever youthful; what tongue can I use to chant His Glorious Praises?
Het AA Act Sf Hat Aas ATA BU Ta Il (847-16, fuares, He 5)
mayree sayj sohee daykh mohee sagal sahsaa dukh haraa.
My bed is beautiful; gazing upon Him, I am fascinated, and all my doubts and pains are dispelled.
aed ufenitt Het yr ust HS Amit mrruT NUNVUISIl (847-16, frees, He 5) naanak pa-i-ampai mayree aas pooree milay su-aamee apramparaa. ||5||1||3]| Prays Nanak, my hopes are fulfilled; my Lord and Master is unlimited. ||5||1]|3]|
faOSe HIS UST HAG (847-18) bilaaval mehlaa 5 chhant mangal Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Mangal ~ The Song Of Joy:
qe Afsara yATfe il (847-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS Il (847-18)
salok. Shalok:
Hed AS efeors ys Aaa Ae fof ut II (947-18, fraves, Hs 5) sundar saa“t da-i-aal parabh sarab sukhaa niDh pee-o.
God is beautiful, tranquil and merciful; He is the treasure of absolute peace, my Husband Lord.
Ua cst
HY Arad ys Sfemt aoa Aut ds feg AE NA (948-1, frees, He 5) sukh saagar parabh bhayti-ai naanak sukhee hot ih jee-o. ||1]| Meeting with God, the Ocean of Peace, O Nanak, this soul becomes happy. ||1] |
#3 Il (848-1) chhant. Chhant:
AY Arad ys urdht AS TS Sat IH Il (848-2, frees, ue 5)
sukh saagar parabh paa-ee-ai jab hovai bhaago raam. One finds God, the Ocean of Peace, when destiny is activated.
Hofe He zevehn afe vast Beat IN Il (848-2, frase, He 5) maanan maan vanjaa-ee-ai har charnee laago raam. Abandoning the distinctions of honor and dishonor, grasp the Feet of the Lord.
efs fimrou wadt vanfs aft fanrdt at Il (848-2, frees, He 5) chhod si-aanap chaaturee durmat buDh ti-aago raam. Renounce cleverness and trickery, and forsake your evil-minded intellect.
Soa UG Haast aH af fag dE AIT IN IAI (848-3, faares, He 5)
naanak pa-o sarnaa-ee raam raa-ay thir ho-ay suhaago raam. ||1||
O Nanak, seek the Sanctuary of the Sovereign Lord, Your King, and your marriage will be permanent and stable. ||1]|
A us 3fa as acim fan fae ufe wretat IH II (848-4, frees, He 5)
so parabh taj kat laagee-ai jis bin mar jaa-ee-ai raam.
Why forsake God, and attach yourself to another? Without the Lord, you cannot even live.
OHA S we uifsmitg Ht Pano fase IM Il (848-4, faores, He 5) laaj na aavai agi-aan matee durjan birmaa-ee-ai raam. The ignorant fool does not feel any shame; the evil man wanders around deluded.
ufss ure us faurfa ad ag as SaaS TH Il (848-5, frees, ne 5)
patit paavan parabh ti-aag karay kaho kat thehraa-ee-ai raam.
God is the Purifier of sinners; if he forsakes God, tell me, where he can find a place of rest?
Soa Sas aE af cere at Alea ue ure IMT NII (848-5, fares, He 5) naanak bhagat bhaa-o kar da-i-aal kee jeevan pad paa-ee-ai raam. ||2||
O Nanak, by loving devotional worship of the Merciful Lord, he attains the state of eternal life. ||2||
At cures & Cuate fs aete vowafs TAT IH Il (948-6, frees, ne 5)
saree gopaal na uchrahi bal ga-ee-ay duhchaaran rasnaa raam.
May that vicious tongue that does not chant the Name of the Great Lord of the World, be burnt.
Ug sds FeG 5d ASdt Aer ara TAST IH Il (848-7, faares, ws 5)
parabh bhagat vachhal nah sayvhee kaa-i-aa kaak garsanaa raam.
One who does not serve God, the Lover of His devotees, shall have his body eaten by crows.
gf Hot ga o Wadt afe Hat AAS TH Il (848-7, fares, He 5)
bharam mohee dookh na jaanhee kot jonee basnaa raam.
Enticed by doubt, he does not understand the pain it brings; he wanders through millions of incarnations.
aed fag ofa neg fa war fan|t faH SAH ITH ISI (948-8, frees, He 5)
naanak bin har avar je chaahnaa bistaa kiram bhasmaa raam. ||3]|
O Nanak, if you desire anything other than the Lord, you shall be consumed, like a maggot in manure. ||3]|
oe fasg saes Ha dfe fie Saale TH Il (848-8, faores, ne 5) laa-ay birahu bhagvant sangay ho-ay mil bairaagan raam. Embrace love for the Lord God, and in detachment, unite with Him.
dee die Aaa dA UGH fay fanrafe aH II (848-9, foes, He 5)
chandan cheer suganDh rasaa ha-umai bikh ti-aagan raam.
Give up your sandalwood oil, expensive clothes, perfumes, tasty flavors and the poison of egotism.
as Bs ag sami afs AS AWals TH Il (848-10, frees, 3 5) eet oot nah dolee-ai har sayvaa jaagan raam. Do not waver this way or that, but remain wakeful in the service of the Lord.
Sod fafs ug urfenr nimy|r AT nies ATS TH ISIAH (848-10, fares, He 5)
naanak jin parabh paa-i-aa aapnaa saa atal suhaagan raam. ||4]|1]|4]| O Nanak, she who has obtained her God, is a happy soul-bride forever. ||4||1]|4||
farses HIS U Il (848-11)
bilaaval mehlaa 5. Bilaaval, Fifth Mehl:
fs dng eared ffs ATT Aat IH Il (848-11, fares, we 5)
har khojahu vadbhaageeho mil saaDhoo sangay raam.
Seek the Lord, O fortunate ones, and join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Go dfee Ae aetofs ursgagn A Fa TH I (848-11, faves, ne 5)
gun govid sad gaa-ee-ah paarbarahm kai rangay raam.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe forever, imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God.
A ug Ae ot Reba urea |e Hat IH Il (848-12, frees, ne 5) so parabh sad hee sayvee-ai paa-ee-ah fal mangay raam. Serving God forever, you shall obtain the fruitful rewards you desire.
soa Us HdStast Afu nes Soa TH MAU (848-12, frrew, ue 5)
naanak parabh sarnaagatee jap anat tarangay raam. ||1]||
O Nanak, seek the Sanctuary of God; meditate on the Lord, and ride the many waves of the mind. ||1]|
fea fae ys 3 dnd fats Ag fas cat IH Il (48-13, frees, Hs 5) ik til parabhoo na veesrai jin sabh kichh deenaa raam. I shall not forget God, even for an instant; He has blessed me with everything.
zssat Hora TaHfy fug star TH Il (848-14, frarea, ve 5) vadbhaagee maylaavarhaa gurmukh pir cheen"aa raam. By great good fortune, I have met Him; as Gurmukh, I contemplate my Husband Lord.
wd uate 3H 3S atten ate muar Slat IH Il (848-14, frees, v2 5)
baah pakarh tam tay kaadhi-aa kar apunaa leenaa raam.
Holding me by the arm, He has lifted me up and pulled me out of the darkness, and made me His own.
oH AUS Soa Mle ASS HS Alot IH III (948-15, frares, He 5)
naam japat naanak jeevai seetal man seenaa raam. ||2||
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Nanak lives; his mind and heart are cooled and soothed. ||2||
foor ae 33 af HAG ys nissan IH Il (848-15, foes, He 5) ki-aa gun tayray kahi saka-o parabh antarjaamee raam. What virtues of Yours can I speak, O God, O Searcher of hearts?
finifa frnfs oafee se ugar In II (848-16, fueres, He 5)
simar simar naaraa-inai bha-ay paargaraamee raam.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, I have crossed over to the other shore.
Ts Wes afee a As fee uA IM Il (848-16, fuares, He 5) gun gaavat govind kay sabh ichh pujaamee raam. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, all my desires are fulfilled.
aaa Sud Af Jd As oT Amt IH ISI (848-17, faeres, He 5) naanak uDhray jap haray sabhhoo kaa su-aamee raam. ||3]|| Nanak is saved, meditating on the Lord, the Lord and Master of all. ||3]|
on fsfons nud TH Hal A SfES sta INH Il (848-17, frees, He 5) ras bhini-arhay apunay raam sangay say lo-in neekay raam. Sublime are those eyes, which are drenched with the Love of the Lord.
ys Uys fear voor fife AAS At &X IH I (848-18, foes, He 5) parabh paykhat ichhaa punnee-aa mil saajan jee kay raam. Gazing upon God, my desires are fulfilled; I have met the Lord, the Friend of my soul.
nifys oA ofa ufemr fafimr oA dt IH Il (848-18, froree, He 5)
amrit ras har paa-i-aa bikhi-aa ras feekay raam.
I have obtained the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Love, and now the taste of corruption is insipid and tasteless to me.
Soa AS AOfs AMfeur Ast Afs Ha TH NSIQNUIEN (848-19, frees, He 5) naanak jal jaleh samaa-i-aa jotee jot meekay raam. ||4||2||5||9]]|
O Nanak, as water mingles with water, my light has merged into the Light. 41121151191]
Ua cert
fares at SI HIG (849-1)
bilaaval kee vaar mehlaa 4 Vaar Of Bilaaval, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars urfe II (849-1) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa H8 8 Il (849-2)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs 3H dfs ys arfenr ats ore famres Ta Il (849-2, foes, ue 4) har utam har parabh gaavi-aa kar naad bilaaval raag. I sing of the sublime Lord, the Lord God, in the melody of Raag Bilaaval.
Cuen ag Afe Hfoor ofs HASfa UT Sra Il (849-2, faares, He 4)
updays guroo sun mani-aa Dhur mastak pooraa bhaag.
Hearing the Guru's Teachings, I obey them; this is the pre-ordained destiny written upon my forehead.
AS feor dfs ae Gud ofa ofa ofa Sfa foe wa Il (349-3, frees, He 4)
sabh dinas rain gun uchrai har har har ur liv laag.
All day and night, I chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har; within my heart, I am lovingly attuned to Him.
AS 36 HO drown dfenr no fufsor ofan ara Il (849-3, fueres, H2 4)
sabh tan man hari-aa ho-i-aa man khirhi-aa hari-aa baag.
My body and mind are totally rejuvenated, and the garden of my mind has blossomed forth in lush abundance.
mfr nits fife afeer as aes fame ara Il (949-4, freres, He 4)
agi-aan anDhayraa mit ga-i-aa gur chaanan gi-aan charaag.
The darkness of ignorance has been dispelled, with the light of the lamp of the Guru's wisdom. Servant Nanak lives by beholding the Lord.
HO sod He efy ofa fea fan wat Hft war All (949-5, faares, He 4) jan naanak jeevai daykh har ik nimakh gharhee mukh laag. ||1|| Let me behold Your face, for a moment, even an instant! ||1]|
Hse 3 Il (849-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
faoree sa dt atin wa yf de a Il (849-5, frees, He 3)
bilaaval tab hee keejee-ai jab mukh hovai naam.
Be happy and sing in Bilaaval, when the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is in your mouth.
Ta are Aafe Ave AT oa Hala firme Il (949-6, frase, He 3)
raag naad sabad sohnay jaa laagai sahj Dhi-aan.
The melody and music, and the Word of the Shabad are beautiful, when one focuses his meditation on the celestial Lord.
Ta oe fs ofa ASH St vag ust HE Il (849-6, fares, He 3)
raag naad chhod har sayvee-ai taa dargeh paa-ee-ai maan.
So leave behind the melody and music, and serve the Lord; then, you shall obtain honor in the Court of the Lord.
aed TaHfe Fan starsat ga fs mifsrs iil (849-7, frorew, we 3) naanak gurmukh barahm beechaaree-ai chookai man abhimaan. ||2]|| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, contemplate God, and rid your mind of egotistical pride. ||2||
uQst II (849-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 ofa ys vrfu man 3 Afs 3g Curfenr I (349-8, frees, ve 3) too har parabh aap agamm hai sabh tuDh upaa-i-aa. O Lord God, You Yourself are inaccessible; You formed everything.
3 umy orf Zsa AS Aas Hater Il (49-8, fawres, v2 3) too aapay aap varatdaa sabh jagat sabaa-i-aa. You Yourself are totally permeating and pervading the entire universe.
30 wm ast ort wm ae afer Il (849-8, frees, ne 3)
tuDh aapay taarhee laa-ee-ai aapay gun gaa-i-aa.
You Yourself are absorbed in the state of deep meditation; You Yourself sing Your Glorious Praises.
dfs fureg sasg fear afs nifs we safenr II (849-9, fares, He 3) har Dhi-aavahu bhagtahu dinas raat ant la-ay chhadaa-i-aa. Meditate on the Lord, O devotees, day and night; He shall deliver you in the end.
fate Afeor fate AY ufeer ofe of AHEM IAI (849-10, faores, He 3) jin sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa har naam samaa-i-aa. ||1]|| Those who serve the Lord, find peace; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord.
[11
H8a H8 3 Il (849-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
en afe fares 3 Jeet Houta afte o ute Il (849-10, faores, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay bilaaval na hova-ee manmukh thaa-ay na paa-ay.
In the love of duality, the happiness of Bilaaval does not come; the self-willed manmukh finds no place of rest.
unifs safs o deet ursqan 3 urfemr ate II (949-11, frees, ne 3)
pakhand bhagat na hova-ee paarbarahm na paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
Through hypocrisy, devotional worship does not come, and the Supreme Lord God is not found.
Hodfs aon antes af 3 aet ute Il (949-11, fuses, He 3) manhath karam kamaavnay thaa-ay na ko-ee paa-ay.
By stubborn-mindedly performing religious rituals, no one obtains the approval of the Lord.
Soa TaHfe wry sterdha fees wimg Tete i (849-12, fasres, ve 3) naanak gurmukh aap beechaaree-ai vichahu aap gavaa-ay. O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands himself, and eradicates self-conceit from within.
nm onfy ursqan 3 ursgqon efi vfs wife 11 (849-12, fares, v8 3)
aapay aap paarbarahm hai paarbarahm vasi-aa man aa-ay.
He Himself is the Supreme Lord God; the Supreme Lord God comes to dwell in his mind.
HHE Hoel afenr Ast Afs fefE AI (849-13, foes, He 3) jaman marnaa kati-aa jotee jot milaa-ay. ||1]|| Birth and death are erased, and his light blends with the Light. ||1]|
He & Il (849-13)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fore afag 3H fimrfad San fre fess ofe I (849-14, frees, He 3) bilaaval karihu tum" pi-aariho aykas si-o liv laa-ay. Be happy in Bilaaval, O my beloveds, and embrace love for the One Lord.
HOH HIS VY ACM AY Jd ANTE Il (949-14, fuses, He 3)
janam maran dukh katee-ai sachay rahai samaa-ay.
The pains of birth and death shall be eradicated, and you shall remain absorbed in the True Lord.
Ret faores mide dA vats Afsag SE Il (949-15, fares, H2 3)
sadaa bilaaval anand hai jay chaleh satgur bhaa-ay.
You shall be blissful forever in Bilaaval, if you walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
HsHast afs we afs Het afs A TS ATE I (849-15, fawres, ve 3)
satsangtee bahi bhaa-o kar sadaa har kay gun gaa-ay.
Sitting in the Saints' Congregation, sing with love the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
Soa A Ho Ave fa aenfe vfs fot ii (49-16, faeres, He 3) naanak say jan sohnay je gurmukh mayl milaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, beautiful are those humble beings, who, as Gurmukh, are united in the Lord's Union. ||2]|
UST II (849-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hao dior fefs ofs orfu A sarst at firs afar Il (849-16, faares, He 3) sabhnaa jee-aa vich har aap so bhagtaa kaa mit har. The Lord Himself is within all beings. The Lord is the friend of His devotees.
Ag act ofa & afh sas a mise ute Il (849-17, faeres, He 3) sabh ko-ee har kai vas bhagtaa kai anand ghar. Everyone is under the Lord's control; in the home of the devotees there is bliss.
dfs saat a Hot AsEs AG fons AS Sa Ufa Il (849-17, faores, He 3)
har bhagtaa kaa maylee sarbat sa-o nisul jan tang Dhar.
The Lord is the friend and companion of His devotees; all His humble servants stretch out and sleep in peace.
dfs Ags ad UAH A sas He fofs af Il (849-18, faores, He 3) har sabhnaa kaa hai khasam so bhagat jan chit kar. The Lord is the Lord and Master of all; O humble devotee, remember Him.
30 wufs afe 5 Aa AS sty sft us SfF I2QH (949-18, faeres, He 3) tuDh aparh ko-ay na sakai sabh jhakh jhakh pavai jharh. ||2]| No one can equal You, Lord. Those who try, struggle and die in frustration. ||2| |
USst tuo
HBa H28 3 Il (850-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
gon faefo 3 qrone A vals Afsas STE Il (850-1, frares, Hs 3)
barahm bindeh tay barahmanaa jay chaleh satgur bhaa-ay.
He alone knows God, and he alone is a Brahmin, who walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
fro a fase ofe ZA UGH da Tete Ii (850-1, frees, He 3) jin kai hirdai har vasai ha-umai rog gavaa-ay. One whose heart is filled with the Lord, is freed of egotism and disease.
Ge veto we Agate Ast AfS firefE I (850-2, frees, He 3) gun raveh gun sangar-hahi jotee jot milaa-ay. He chants the Lord's Praises, gathers virtue, and his light merges into the Light.
fen wa ufo fees qrone qoH feefs fas ote Il (850-2, fares, Hs 3)
is jug meh virlay baraahman barahm bindeh chit laa-ay. How rare are those Brahmins who, in this age, come to know God, by lovingly focusing their consciousness on Him.
Sod faa aS sels ad dfs Aa A at ad fos STE AN (950-3, frarew, He 3) naanak jin" ka-o nadar karay har sachaa say naam rahay liv laa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, those who are blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace, remain lovingly attuned to the Name of the True Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (850-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsag at Ae o atsor Aafe o wa SE Il (850-4, frees, He 3)
satgur kee sayv na keetee-aa sabad na lago bhaa-o.
One who does not serve the True Guru, and who does not love the Word of the Shabad,
ICH da ane nfs etay aT Ayre Il (950-4, frees, He 3) ha-umai rog kamaavanaa at deeragh baho su-aa-o. earns the very painful disease of egotism; he is so very selfish.
Hodle AGH anes fefs fefa Hat ute I (950-5, frares, He 3) manhath karam kamaavnay fir fir jonee paa-ay. Acting stubborn-mindedly, he is reincarnated over and over again.
Tanfe ASH AES J fan S omy we free i (850-5, fees, He 3) gurmukh janam safal hai jis no aapay la-ay milaa-ay. The birth of the Gurmukh is fruitful and auspicious. The Lord unites him with Himself.
Oa Sed Sele AT Sk OH UG US UTE III (950-6, frees, He 3)
naanak nadree nadar karay taa naam Dhan palai paa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, when the Merciful Lord grants His Mercy, one obtains the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
ust II (850-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS efsnreior afe on fefe afs qantas foment i (850-6, frees, He 3) sabh vadi-aa-ee-aa har naam vich har gurmukh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. All glorious greatness is in the Name of the Lord; as Gurmukh, meditate on the Lord.
fa 2As Haba Arvet ure A of fas wet I (850-7, frees, He 3)
je vasat mangee-ai saa-ee paa-ee-ai jay naam chit laa-ee-ai.
One obtains all that he asks for, if he keeps his consciousness focused on the Lord. Ton ae riba at ate Afsag uta 3 Aga AY Ure Il (950-8, fore, H2 3)
guhaj gal jee-a kee keechai satguroo paas taa sarab sukh paa-ee-di. If he tells the secrets of his soul to the True Guru, then he finds absolute peace.
Gg us ofs Quen cfs As gu als web Il (850-8, frees, He 3) gur pooraa har updays day-ay sabh bhukh leh jaa-ee-ai. When the Perfect Guru bestows the Lord's Teachings, then all hunger departs.
fan ysta de foto A afs TE aeht Sil (950-9, frees, v2 3)
jis poorab hovai likhi-aa so har gun gaa-ee-ai. ||3]|
One who is blessed with such pre-ordained destiny, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
HBa HH 3 Il (850-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag 3 wet & odt AS ufs Afs fire II (850-9, frees, He 3)
satgur tay khaalee ko nahee mayrai parabh may! milaa-ay.
No one goes away empty-handed from the True Guru; He unites me in Union with my God.
Afsaqd a PIAS HES I AT a fee ST Sw we Il (850-10, faoes, v2 3)
satgur kaa darsan safal hai jayhaa ko ichhay tayhaa fal paa-ay.
Fruitful is the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru; through it, one obtains whatever fruitful rewards he desires.
qd o Age nifys 3 AS feAe sy TSS Il (850-10, frees, ne 3)
gur kaa sabad amrit hai sabh tarisnaa bhukh gavaa-ay. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is Ambrosial Nectar. It banishes all hunger and thirst.
dfs am ut Hsu dur Ag Sfrmr ufe mre I (850-11, faores, He 3)
har ras pee santokh ho-aa sach vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Drinking in the sublime essence of the Lord brings contentment; the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
Ae foorfe ye ue ufenr nisge Aa FAS Il (850-11, faores, He 3)
sach Dhi-aa-ay amraa pad paa-i-aa anhad sabad vajaa-ay.
Meditating on the True Lord, the status of immortality is obtained; the Unstruck Word of the Shabad vibrates and resounds.
Ae vd fefh unfour aa & AofA ASS Il (850-12, frees, He 3)
sacho dah dis pasri-aa gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
The True Lord is pervading in the ten directions; through the Guru, this is intuitively known.
sod fro niefs AY dA Ho eufs 3 fan F sure IAI (850-13, fuses, He 3)
naanak jin andar sach hai say jan chhapeh na kisai day chhapaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, those humble beings who have the Truth deep within, are never hidden, even if others try to hide them. ||1]|
He 3 Il (850-13)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ad Aet 3 ofa urha wT a sete aafe Il (950-13, fuera, ne 3)
gur sayvaa tay har paa-ee-ai jaa ka-o nadar karay-i.
Serving the Guru, one finds the Lord, when the Lord blesses him with His Glance of Grace.
HOA 3 tes Fe At sats fAA Ste Il (950-14, fares, He 3)
maanas tay dayvtay bha-ay sachee bhagat jis day-ay.
Human beings become angels, when the Lord blesses them with true devotional worship.
JH ufs frefemig aa a Aafe ASfe I (850-14, frees, He 3)
ha-umai maar milaa-i-an gur kai sabad suchay-ay. Conquering egotism, they are blended with the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are purified.
Soa AA fife gd oH Sane SE NM (850-15, faeres, He 3)
naanak sehjay mil rahay naam vadi-aa-ee day-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, they remain merged with the Lord; they are blessed with the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||2]|
UugSt II (850-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ad Afsas fefs are of zat efsuret afe age wrt saret Il (950-15, fares, He 3) gur satgur vich naavai kee vadee vadi-aa-ee har kartai aap vaDhaa-ee.
Within the Guru, the True Guru, is the glorious greatness of the Name. The Creator Lord Himself has magnified it.
Rea fire vfs ef afr Hef Gar niefa fase sret il (850-16, faores, ve 3)
sayvak sikh sabh vaykh vaykh jeevni" on"aa andar hirdai bhaa-ee.
All His servants and Sikhs live by gazing, gazing upon it. It is pleasing to their hearts deep within.
feea ene eauret fy 3 Hale Gar usfenr sor o AUT II (850-17, frees, He 3) nindak dusat vadi-aa-ee vaykh na sakan on"aa paraa-i-aa bhalaa na sukhaa-ee. The slanderers and evil-doers cannot see this glorious greatness; they do not appreciate the goodness of others.
for de for dt at su ndt aT AS AAG afs met I (950-17, foes, He 3) ki-aa hovai kis hee kee jhakh maaree jaa sachay si-o ban aa-ee. What can be achieved by anyone babbling? The Guru is in love with the True Lord.
fa ae ads ave A fos fos us Aeet AS Bf sfx HS Saret igil (s50-18, frees, He 3) je gal kartay bhaavai saa nit nit charhai savaa-ee sabh jhakh jhakh marai lokaa-ee. Nall
That which is pleasing to the Creator Lord, increases day by day, while all the people babble uselessly. ||4||
HBa H8 3 Il (850-19)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fga a vir eA ste at F Hfa Hier fez WES Il (850-19, fares, Hs 3)
Dharig ayh aasaa doojay bhaav kee jo mohi maa-i-aa chit laa-ay.
Cursed are the hopes in the love of duality; they tie the consciousness to love and attachment to Maya.
dfs AY uate fsurtamr ant ferrfa ey UTS Il (850-19, faeres, He 3)
har sukh pal"ar ti-aagi-aa naam visaar dukh paa-ay.
One who forsakes the peace of the Lord in exchange for straw, and forgets the Naam, suffers in pain.
UST cuy
HOH vifamrat nine Aofh nafs fefs mre WE Il (951-1, faeres, He 3)
manmukh agi-aanee anDhulay janam mareh fir aavai jaa-ay.
The ignorant self-willed manmukhs are blind. They are born, only to die again, and continue coming and going.
aan fafa 3 deat nifs afenr ues Il (951-2, fares, 2 3) kaaraj siDh na hovnee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ay. Their affairs are not resolved, and in the end, they depart, regretting and repenting.
fan agH de faq Afsag fxs A ofe afe ont fomre II (951-2, frees, He 3)
jis karam hovai tis satgur milai so har har naam Dhi-aa-ay.
One who is blessed with the Lord's Grace, meets the True Guru; he alone meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ot dS AS Ae AY uTfels AS aoa f3q af AES IAI (951-3, faeres, He 3)
naam ratay jan sadaa sukh paa-ini" jan naanak tin bal jaa-ay. ||1]|
Imbued with the Naam, the humble servants of the Lord find a lasting peace; servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||1]|
He 3 Il (851-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
MITAT HOA Afat Huet fafs Afr HATE Il (851-3, frees, H2 3) aasaa mansaa jag mohnee jin mohi-aa sansaar. Hope and desire entice the world; they entice the whole universe.
AS a WH a ote fefe 3 AST AS MMe Il (951-4, frares, He 3) sabh ko jam kay cheeray vich hai jaytaa sabh aakaar. Everyone, and all that has been created, is under the domination of Death.
Jont dt aH wae A Cad fA SUA AGS Il (951-4, frees, He 3)
hukmee hee jam lagdaa so ubrai jis bakhsai kartaar.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, Death seizes the mortal; he alone is saved, whom the Creator Lord forgives.
Soa TS USA ST HO Zi 3d A SS MATT Il (951-5, foes, ue 3) naanak gur parsaadee ayhu man taa’ tarai jaa chhodai aha™kaar. O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, this mortal swims across, if he abandons his ego.
MTA HOA Hd fooA fe ae Aaet Sees QI (951-5, fase, He 3) aasaa mansaa maaray niraas ho-ay gur sabdee veechaar. ||2| |
Conquer hope and desire, and remain unattached; contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2]|
uGst Il (851-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fra vein wars ufo fsa ofa Art Il (851-6, fuses, He 3) jithai jaa-ee-ai jagat meh tithai har saa-ee. Wherever I go in this world, I see the Lord there.
Wal AS wm zaser dfs Ae fenret il (951-7, faeres, v2 3)
agai sabh aapay varatdaa har sachaa ni-aa-ee.
In the world hereafter as well, the Lord, the True Judge Himself, is pervading and permeating everywhere.
ators x Ho fecahats ng sats efsnret i (951-7, feores, ve 3)
koorhi-aaraa kay muh fitkee-ah sach bhagat vadi-aa-ee.
The faces of the false are cursed, while the true devotees are blessed with glorious greatness.
AY Afos Ae foo Jd fife fee Sve Il (851-7, fares, Hs 3)
sach saahib sachaa ni-aa-o hai sir nindak chhaa-ee.
True is the Lord and Master, and true is His justice. The heads of the slanderers are covered with ashes.
Ho Soa A watfoor TaHfy AY UTet HUI! (851-8, fares, He 3) jan naanak sach araaDhi-aa gurmukh sukh paa-ee. ||5|| Servant Nanak worships the True Lord in adoration; as Gurmukh, he finds peace. ||5||
HBa H8 3 Il (851-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ud ata Asay urehy A afs ys SUA ASE Il (851-9, faarew, ve 3) poorai bhaag satgur paa-ee-ai jay har parabh bakhas karay-i. By perfect destiny, one finds the True Guru, if the Lord God grants forgiveness.
Guret ffs Gr J aS uarufs FE it (851-9, fares, ve 3) Opaavaa Sir opaa-o hai naa-o paraapat ho-ay. Of all efforts, the best effort is to attain the Lord's Name.
nied Hise Aifs d fase Het AY OE Il (851-10, fees, nH 3) andar seetal saa‘t hai hirdai sadaa sukh ho-ay. It brings a cooling, soothing tranquility deep within the heart, and eternal peace.
nifys uret Uget soa of= efanret dE NA (s51-10, frees, He 3)
amrit khaanaa pain"naa naanak naa-ay vadi-aa-ee ho-ay. ||1]|
Then, one eats and wears the Ambrosial Nectar; O Nanak, through the Name, comes glorious greatness. ||1||
He 3 Il (851-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
= Ho dd at fry Afe ufets aat fears il (851-11, frees, He 3) ay man gur kee sikh sun paa-ihi gunee niDhaan. O mind, listening to the Guru's Teachings, you shall obtain the treasure of virtue.
Huet 39 nfs SA ICH Ate wife Il (851-11, frees, He 3) sukh-daata tayrai man vasai ha-umai jaa-ay abhimaan. The Giver of peace shall dwell in your mind; you shall be rid of egotism and pride.
soa oedt ueha nifigs get fears iQH (851-12, frees, He 3)
naanak nadree paa-ee-ai amrit gunee niDhaan. ||2]|
O Nanak, by His Grace, one is blessed with the Ambrosial Nectar of the treasure of virtue. ||2]|
Uugat Il (851-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fise ufsAS AS TH UTS Cues fraes ais fase Afs dfs & AES Il (951-12, fares, ue 3) jitnay paatisaah saah raajay khaan umraav sikdaar heh titnay sabh har kay kee-ay. The kings, emperors, rulers, lords, nobles and chiefs, are all created by the Lord.
fi fae ofs ave A Gf adie Afs afe & wiaese I (851-13, fares, v2 3)
jo kichh har Karaavai so o-ay karahi sabh har kay arthee-ay.
Whatever the Lord causes them to do, they do; they are all beggars, dependent on the Lord.
A ur ofa Age at ug Afsad & ef 3 fSfs vfs cao ord wet vs fkafe Gs afs Afsas Wal ATS AHS AC AS | (951-14, foes, v2 3)
so aisaa har sabhnaa kaa parabh satgur kai val hai tin sabh varan chaaray khaanee sabh sarisat golay kar satgur agai kaar kamaavan ka-o dee-ay.
Such is God, the Lord of all; He is on the True Guru's side. All castes and social classes, the four sources of creation, and the whole universe are slaves of the True Guru; God makes them work for Him.
Ufs A at wt efsuret tug ofs Hag false fees ofenr sat SAHS Us Afs ue ace Il (851-15, fawres, He 3)
har sayvay kee aisee vadi-aa-ee daykhhu har santahu jin vichahu kaa-i-aa nagree dusman doot sabh maar kadhee-ay.
See the glorious greatness of serving the Lord, O Saints of the Lord; He has conquered and driven all the enemies and evil-doers out of the body-village.
dfs ofe fasures dur sas Aor Cufs afe nruat faa afs fe orf afr Se Ell (851-16, fawree, He 3)
har har kirpaal ho-aa bhagat janaa upar har aapnee kirpaa kar har aap rakh lee-ay. [16] |
The Lord, Har, Har, is Merciful to His humble devotees; granting His Grace, the Lord Himself protects and preserves them. ||6||
HBa H8 3 Il (851-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
wets AUS AST Su DT HOHY fomitS & Bel Il (851-17, fase, 2 3)
andar kapat sadaa dukh hai manmukh Dhi-aan na laagai.
Fraud and hypocrisy within bring constant pain; the self-willed manmukh does not practice meditation.
eu fefe ag areal BY SIS TU MMT Il (851-18, frees, He 3)
dukh vich kaar kamaavnee dukh vartai dukh aagai.
Suffering in pain, he does his deeds; he is immersed in pain, and he shall suffer in pain hereafter.
aot Afsag scht st Afs of foe ord Il (851-18, foes, He 3)
karmee satgur bhaytee-ai taa sach naam liv laagai.
By his karma, he meets the True Guru, and then, he is lovingly attuned to the True Name.
Soa Hon AY df nivag FH SC Sa NA (851-19, frrew, He 3) naanak sehjay sukh ho-ay andrahu bharam bha-o bhaagai. ||1]|| O Nanak, he is naturally at peace; doubt and fear run away and leave him. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (851-19) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
aenty Ae fs da 3 afs a a yfs afer I (851-19, faores, He 3)
gurmukh sadaa har rang hai har kaa naa-o man bhaa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh is in love with the Lord forever. The Name of the Lord is pleasing to his mind.
Ust tur
Tanta Sus Fast OH AUS AY ufeur | (852-1, fares, v2 3)
gurmukh vaykhan bolnaa naam japat sukh paa-i-aa.
The Gurmukh beholds and speaks the Naam, the Name of the Lord; chanting the Naam, he finds peace.
soa Tate famig arf fare mifamrs nitty gorfeur iH (852-1, frees, Hs 3) naanak gurmukh gi-aan pargaasi-aa timar agi-aan anDhayr chukaa-i-aa. ||2||
O Nanak, the spiritual wisdom of the Gurmukh shines forth; the black darkness of ignorance is dispelled. ||2||
He 8 Il (852-2)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY HS Hota TTS Il (852-2, fares, He 3) manmukh mailay mareh gavaar. The filthy, foolish, self-willed manmukhs die.
asHty fasne dfs whim Sa ofs i (952-3, frees, v2 3)
gurmukh nirmal har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
The Gurmukhs are immaculate and pure; they keep the Lord enshrined within their hearts.
Bos BOA HST HS TS Il (852-3, fares, ve 3) bhanat naanak sunhu jan bhaa-ee. Prays Nanak, listen, O Siblings of Destiny!
Afsag Afeg IGH HS ATT I (952-3, fore, He 3) satgur sayvihu ha-umai mal jaa-ee. Serve the True Guru, and the filth of your ego shall be gone.
niefs HAT ey fenmd fife dar fos He Il (852-4, faeres, He 3)
andar sansaa dookh vi-aapay sir DhanDhaa nit maar.
Deep within, the pain of skepticism afflicts them; their heads are constantly assaulted by worldly entanglements.
en of AS cag 3 Wats Hen Ha fim II (852-4, frores, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay sootay kabahu na jaageh maa-i-aa moh pi-aar.
Asleep in the love of duality, they never wake up; they are attached to the love of Maya.
oH 6 Vals Ade 6 Seat fe HOHY a Fes Il (852-5, fuarew, v2 3)
naam na cheeteh sabad na vichaareh ih manmukh kaa beechaar.
They do not remember the Name, and they do not contemplate the Word of the Shabad; this is the view of the self-willed manmukhs.
dfs oH 3 Seon fase ASH aTetenr aoa AH Hts A WMT ISI (852-5, farses, He 3) har naam na bhaa-i-aa birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa naanak jam maar karay khu-aar.
I3]| They do not love the Lord's Name, and they lose their life uselessly. O Nanak, the Messenger of Death attacks them, and humiliates them. ||3]|
ugat Il (852-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan 6 ofa safs AY Suns A AS ATT Il (852-6, forse, He 3) jis no har bhagat sach bakhsee-an so sachaa saahu. He alone is a true king, whom the Lord blesses with true devotion.
SA at HIS Sa Awe das dle o Sa 5 SAT Il (852-7, fuses, He 3)
tis kee muhtaajee lok kadh-daa horat hat na vath na vaysaahu.
People pledge their allegiance to him; no other store stocks this merchandise, nor deals in this trade.
ds Ao A AoHY de A Ufa TH BS SHY SA UT Il (952-7, fares, He 3)
bhagat janaa ka-o sanmukh hovai so har raas la-ay vaimukh bhas paahu.
That humble devotee who turns his face towards the Guru and becomes sunmukh, receives the Lord's wealth; the faithless baymukh, who turns his face away from the Guru, gathers only ashes.
dfs & aH a aud ole sas aio AH erst fSar SiS 6 ATT Il (952-8, frees, He 3)
har kay naam kay vaapaaree har bhagat heh jam jaagaatee tinaa nayrh na jaahu. The Lord's devotees are dealers in the Name of the Lord. The Messenger of Death, the tax-collector, does not even approach them.
Ho Sofa dfs SH UG Bent Ae SugST IDI (852-9, fuses, He 3)
jan naanak har naam Dhan ladi-aa sadaa vayparvaahu. ||7]||
Servant Nanak has loaded the wealth of the Name of the Lord, who is forever independent and care-free. ||7||
HBa H8 3 Il (852-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fen aa xfs sast ofe ue ufenr dg AS AAS SafH gerfeur II (852-9, frees, He 3) is jug meh bhagtee har Dhan khati-aa hor sabh jagat bharam bhulaa-i-aa.
In this age, the devotee earns the wealth of the Lord; all the rest of the world wanders deluded in doubt.
ad udAet oH His efor nisfes an famrfeur It (852-10, freee, He 3)
gur parsaadee naam man vasi-aa an-din naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
By Guru's Grace, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell in his mind; night and day, he meditates on the Naam.
fafimr ofa Gera J IGH Aafe AerfeMr Il (852-11, faeres, v2 3)
bikhi-aa maahi udaas hai ha-umai sabad jalaa-i-aa.
In the midst of corruption, he remains detached; through the Word of the Shabad, he burns away his ego.
of sfor ae Bus Ue Aedt Hfenr I (952-11, frees, He 3)
aap tari-aa kul uDhray Dhan janaydee maa-i-aa.
He crosses over, and saves his relatives as well; blessed is the mother who gave birth to him.
He’ Add AY Hfo efor Ad fAC fee afenr Il (952-12, fares, He 3) sadaa sahj sukh man vasi-aa sachay si-o liv laa-i-aa. Peace and poise fill his mind forever, and he embraces love for the True Lord.
gut fang Hoe 3 Te 38 ICH Hg Serfemrr Il (852-12, frees, ne 3)
barahmaa bisan mahaaday-o tarai gun bhulay ha-umai moh vaDhaa-i-aa. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva wander in the three qualities, while their egotism and desire increase.
ufss ufs ufs Hat 38 eA ate fez wfenr Il (852-13, frees, He 3)
pandit parh parh monee bhulay doojai bhaa-ay chit laa-i-aa.
The Pandits, the religious scholars and the silent sages read and debate in confusion; their consciousness is centered on the love of duality.
nat Han Afoumt 38 fee ag 3s 5 ufenr I (952-14, feos, nH: 3)
jogee jangam sani-aasee bhulay vin gur tat na paa-i-aa.
The Yogis, wandering pilgrims and Sanyaasees are deluded; without the Guru, they do not find the essence of reality.
HoH ete Ae fh 38 fsot face HOH aefemr | (852-14, faeres, ue 3)
manmukh dukhee-ay sadaa bharam bhulay tin"ee birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa.
The miserable self-willed manmukhs are forever deluded by doubt; they waste away their lives uselessly.
Sot OTH TS ASt Ae AH fA ory sufA frerfenr Wl (852-15, frees, He 3)
naanak naam ratay say-ee jan samDhay je aapay bakhas milaa-i-aa. ||1]||
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are balanced and poised; forgiving them, the Lord blends them with Himself. ||1]|
He 3 Il (852-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Soa A Aerdhat faa fA AS fee SE Il (952-15, faores, He 3) naanak so salaahee-ai jis vas sabh kichh ho-ay. O Nanak, praise Him, who has control over everything.
fsnfa Adeg uretd fsa faa neg o afe II (952-16, foes, H8 3) tiseh sarayvhu paraaneeho tis bin avar na ko-ay. Remember Him, O mortals - without Him, there is no other at all.
aante nists nfs SA wet AT AY SE NQM (952-16, foes, He 3) gurmukh antar man vasai sadaa sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||2|| He dwells deep within those who are Gurmukh; forever and ever, they are at peace.
21 |
UgST Il (852-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
frat aanfa safe on ug 3 ufes A Peete Aa Hf II (952-17, fares, He 3)
jinee gurmukh har naam Dhan na khati-o say dayvaalee-ay jug maahi.
Those who do not become Gurmukh and earn the wealth of the Lord's Name, are bankrupt in this age.
6fe Hae fests AS Aas Hfo aet nfs ga 3 f8a AG utes Il (852-18, frees, He 3) o-ay mangday fireh sabh jagat meh ko-ee muhi thuk na tin ka-o paahi. They wander around begging all over the world, but no one even spits in their faces.
uset adiet acts mruat usstfs defe Aare St niu serfs Il (952-18, fueres, He 3) paraa-ee bakheelee karahi aapnee parteet khovan sagvaa bhee aap lakhaahi. They gossip about others, and lose their credit, and expose themselves as well.
fan Ue aefs vast adfo A ue vast Ufa o ure Gfe are faa aia Il (852-19, fares, He 3)
jis Dhan kaaran chuglee karahi so Dhan chuglee hath na aavai o-ay bhaavai tithai jaahi.
That wealth, for which they slander others, does not come into their hands, no matter where they go.
Ua tus
qenfy Aza ofe ofs ug fe fsa anise 3 o Naf da & On fenste afs us ats ICI (853-1, fares, He 3)
gurmukh sayvak bhaa-ay har Dhan milai tithhu karamheen lai na sakahi hor thai days disantar har Dhan naahi. ||8] |
Through loving service, the Gurmukhs receive the wealth of the Naam, but the unfortunate ones cannot receive it. This wealth is not found anywhere else, in this country or in any other. ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (853-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aenfa AAT uf 3 Jeet fos feag ATE I (853-2, fares, 3 3)
gurmukh sansaa mool na hova-ee chintaa vichahu jaa-ay.
The Gurmukh does not have an iota of skepticism or doubt; worries depart from within him.
A fag of A Aon of age fas o ATE II (853-3, frorew, H2 3) jo kichh ho-ay so sehjay ho-ay kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. Whatever he does, he does with grace and poise. Nothing else can be said about him.
sod fae at orfimr rfl Ae fa ofenig US ue Nil (953-3, faeres, He 3)
naanak tin kaa aakhi-aa aap sunay je la-i-an pannai paa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, the Lord Himself hears the speech of those whom He makes His own. ||1]|
He 3 Il (853-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ae Hfs HOA Hats Anal nists fesHs os il (953-4, frsves, He 3)
kaal maar mansaa maneh samaanee antar nirmal naa-o.
He conquers death, and subdues the desires of his mind; the Immaculate Name abides deep within him.
wofes Wat ae o Ae Aon vifys fim ii (953-5, frees, ve 3)
an-din jaagai kaday na sovai sehjay amrit pi-aa-o.
Night and day, he remains awake and aware; he never sleeps, and he intuitively drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
Hor 88 vifys wet niafes afs ae We il (953-5, frrsres, He 3)
meethaa bolay amrit banee an-din har gun gaa-o.
His speech is sweet, and his words are nectar; night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fon ufs SAT Het Ade Boa fo fifemr AY us III (853-6, fares, He 3)
nij ghar vaasaa sadaa sohday naanak tin mili-aa sukh paa-o. ||2]|
He dwells in the home of his own self, and appears beautiful forever; meeting him, Nanak finds peace. ||2]|
ust II (853-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs ug Wo Aes A afte ofs us of uA Serer II (853-6, frees, He 3) har Dhan ratan javayharee so gur har Dhan har paashu dayvaa-i-aa.
The wealth of the Lord is a jewel, a gem; the Guru has caused the Lord to grant that wealth of the Lord.
A far fag fefh ore a act fag vfs we nia det fag tee Sg afe ue dfs als fan ate o ate gatfenr Il (3953-7, frases, He 3)
jay kisai kihu dis aavai taa ko-ee kihu mang la-ay akai ko-ee kihu dayvaa-ay ayhu har Dhan jor keetai kisai naal na jaa-ay vandaa-i-aa.
If someone sees something, he may ask for it; or, Someone may cause it to be given to him. But no one can take a share of this wealth of the Lord by force.
fan 3 Afsad ofe ofs Ham we fen ofa us at 23 ofa re fan 3 as of fof wfeor Il (853-8, fawree, He 3)
jis no satgur naal har sarDhaa laa-ay tis har Dhan kee vand hath aavai jis no kartai Dhur likh paa-i-aa.
He alone obtains a share of the wealth of the Lord, who is blessed by the Creator with faith and devotion to the True Guru, according to his pre-ordained destiny.
fen ofs as ot aet Adta ot fan at us ant fan a Ale a6 do ot A a ofa Us at adiot ad fA at yg cfs vg as fefe are aafemr Il (953-9, frees, He 3)
is har Dhan kaa ko-ee sareek naahee kisai kaa khat naahee kisai kai seev bannai rol naahee jay ko har Dhan kee bakheelee karay tis kaa muhu har chahu kundaa vich kaalaa karaa-i-aa.
No one is a share-holder in this wealth of the Lord, and no one owns any of it. It has no boundaries or borders to be disputed. If anyone speaks ill of the wealth of the Lord, his face will be blackened in the four directions.
dfs & fes ote fan rg adiet o vedt feo fe fos fas vs Aetfemr It (853-10, frores, H8 3) har kay ditay naal kisai jor bakheelee na chal-ee dihu dihu nit nit charhai savaa-i-aa.
H9I| No one's power or slander can prevail against the gifts of the Lord; day by day they continually, continuously increase. ||9]|
HBa H8 3 Il (853-11)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Ads ASE af & wmuat fagur ofs | (953-11, fares, He 3) jagat jalandaa rakh lai aapnee kirpaa Dhaar. The world is going up in flames - shower it with Your Mercy, and save it!
fas word Gud fess Ba Barfe Il (953-11, fares, He 3) jit du-aarai ubrai titai laihu ubaar. Save it, and deliver it, by whatever method it takes.
Afsafes AY eufeor AS AaE stets il (853-12, fase, ve 3)
satgur sukh vaykhaali-aa sachaa sabad beechaar.
The True Guru has shown the way to peace, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
SOA MST Oo ASSt dle fae TaAST ST IU (953-12, faores, He 3) naanak avar na sujh-ee har bin bakhsanhaar. ||1]| Nanak knows no other than the Lord, the Forgiving Lord. ||1||
Hs 3 Il (853-13) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ISH Hfeor HaNt EA Bat ATE Il (953-13, frarew, v3 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa mohnee doojai lagai jaa-ay. Through egotism, fascination with Maya has trapped them in duality.
at fea urdt 3 ud ot fea afe feae Il (953-13, fuses, He 3)
naa ih maaree na marai naa ih hat vikaa-ay. It cannot be killed, it does not die, and it cannot be sold in a store.
ad a Rafe usr st feo fees ATE I (853-14, foes, He 3)
gur kai sabad parjaalee-ai taa ih vichahu jaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is burnt away, and then it departs from within.
36 HO de Cao on ZA fe mrfe II (953-14, fueres, He 3)
tan man hovai ujlaa naam vasai man aa-ay.
The body and mind become pure, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell within the mind.
Sod Hfent ar Huge Hae J ToHfe ufeor we Iii (853-15, fueres, He 3) naanak maa-i-aa kaa maaran sabad hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, the Shabad is the killer of Maya; the Gurmukh obtains it. ||2||
UgST Il (853-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
satgur kee vadi-aa-ee satgur ditee Dharahu hukam bujh neesaan. The glorious greatness of the True Guru was bestowed by the True Guru; He understood this as the Insignia, the Mark of the Primal Lord's Will.
ust aatet vreret Hat nag fue fs fer ofsGe Agat at wifsHre Il (953-16, fueres, He 3)
putee bhaatee-ee jaavaa-ee sakee agahu pichhahu tol dithaa laahi-on sabhnaa kaa abhimaan.
He tested His sons, nephews, sons-in-law and relatives, and subdued the egotistical pride of them all.
fra a 24 fsa Ha Afsag ofa aufAGA AS ATS Il (953-17, frees, v3 3)
jithai ko vaykhai tithai mayraa satguroo har bakhsi-os sabh jahaan.
Wherever anyone looks, my True Guru is there; the Lord blessed Him with the whole world.
fa Afsas 3 fife Ha A vets uefs fhs fa Suu de A fed afar] WS Il (853-18, frase, Hs 3)
je satgur no mil mannay so halat palat sijhai je vaimukh hovai so firai bharisat thaan. One who meets with, and believes in the True Guru, is embellished here and hereafter. Whoever turns his back on the Guru and becomes baymukh, shall wander in cursed and evil places.
Ua tug
Ho Boa a Sf dot Hat Amit fs AME UTY AAS Il (954-1, faoes, He 3)
jan naanak kai val ho-aa mayraa su-aamee har sajan purakh sujaan.
My Lord and Master is on the side of servant Nanak. The All-powerful and All-knowing Lord God is my Best Friend.
u@et fafs efa a vfs orfe ue Afsas at ust ofaGe Aso fomtg HOT INS IMO (854- 1, faares, H3 3)
pa-udee bhit daykh kai sabh aa-ay pa-ay satgur kee pairee laahi-on sabhnaa ki-ahu manhu gumaan. ||10||
Seeing the food being distributed, everyone came and fell at the feet of the True Guru, who cleansed the minds of all of their egotistical pride. ||10]|
HX H2 Y Il (854-2)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
aet ad a we a ure ufsats Il (954-2, foes, v2 1) ko-ee vaahay ko lunai ko paa-ay khalihaan.
One plants the seed, another harvests the crop, and still another beats the grain from the chaff.
ood Seo Auet aet ute fees wil (954-3, frees, He 1) naanak ayv na jaap-ee ko-ee khaa-ay nidaan. ||1]| O Nanak, it is not Known, who will ultimately eat the grain. ||1||
He 4% Il (854-3)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fam ufo efror sfanr AE II (954-3, frees, He 1) jis man vasi-aa tari-aa So-ay. He alone is carried across, within whose mind the Lord abides.
SSA A SS A AS MQM (854-4, fuses, ue 1) naanak jo bhaavai so ho-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, that alone happens, which is pleasing to His Will. ||2]|
u@at Il (354-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ursgath efenrts Ararg Sstfamit | (954-4, frees, He 1) paarbarahm da-i-aal saagar taari-aa. The Merciful Supreme Lord God has carried me across the world-ocean.
afs us fhosets sou 38 far II (854-4, frre, oe 1) gur poorai miharvaan bharam bha-o maari-aa. The compassionate perfect Guru has eradicated my doubts and fears.
aH ay frases vs Als Tfanr II (854-5, fares, 3 1)
kaam kroDh bikraal doot sabh haari-aa.
Unsatisfied sexual desire and unresolved anger, the horrible demons, have been totally destroyed.
nifys ou fears afs Sfa afar Il (954-5, foes, He 1) amrit naam niDhaan kanth ur Dhaari-aa. I have enshrined the treasure of the Ambrosial Naam within my throat and heart.
Soa AY Afel ASH HIS AStfawr AI (854-6, freres, He 1)
naanak saaDhoo sang janam maran savaari-aa. ||11||
O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, my birth and death have been adorned and redeemed. ||11]||
HBa HH 3 Il (854-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
frat on ferfeur aS age adie Il (954-6, fers, 3 3) jin"ee naam visaari-aa koorhay kahan kahaNni". Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are said to be false.
us da fear wg Hofe IBH niefs Fife I (954-7, frees, He 3) panch chor tinaa ghar muhni" ha-umai andar sa‘ni". The five thieves plunder their homes, and egotism breaks in.
HAS HS FaHst fe GA o Hele Il (954-7, frees, He 3)
saakat muthay durmatee har ras na jaana‘ni”.
The faithless cynics are defrauded by their own evil-mindedness; they do not know the sublime essence of the Lord.
frat nifts sath sefeur fay fr@ gefs gdéfe Il (954-8, fares, Hs 3)
jin"ee amrit bharam lutaa-i-aa bikh si-o racheh racha“ni".
Those who lose the Ambrosial Nectar through doubt, remain engrossed and entangled in corruption.
eHe’ Ast fussst Ae fAG ee ase Il (854-8, faves, He 3) dustaa saytee pirharhee jan si-o vaad kara“ni". They make friends with the wicked, and argue with the humble servants of the Lord.
Sa AAS oda fo AH ad TU Adley Il (854-9, fares, He 3)
naanak saakat narak meh jam baDhay dukh sahani".
O Nanak, the faithless cynics are bound and gagged by the Messenger of Death, and suffer agony in hell.
ufemt faafs aed fre aufa fse gdfe WAM (854-9, frees, He 3)
pa-i-ai kirat kKamaavday jiv raakhahi tivai raha™ni"™. ||1]|
They act according to the karma of the actions they committed before; as the Lord keeps them, so do they live. ||1]|
He 3 Il (854-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
frat Afsag Afeor sve fests fSH Il (854-10, frorew, He 3) jin"ee satgur sayvi-aa taan nitaanay tis. Those who serve the True Guru, are transformed from powerless into powerful.
Wh forofa wet nfs ZA AH Afs o Aa FSA II (854-10, frees, He 3)
Saas giraas Sadaa man vasai jam johi na sakai tis.
With every breath and morsel of food, the Lord abides in their minds forever, and the Messenger of Death cannot even see them.
fase ofa af ant aA acer Aefa FSH II (954-11, frees, He 3) hirdai har har naam ras kavlaa sayvak tis. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, fills their hearts, and Maya is their servant.
dfs aA at aA afe uan ues FSH II (854-11, frees, He 3) har daasaa kaa daas ho-ay param padaarath tis. One who becomes the slave of the Lord's slaves, obtains the greatest treasure.
ood fe 3fs fan us ZA UG AE aaee (3H Il (854-12, frees, He 3)
naanak man tan jis parabh vasai ha-o sad kurbaanai tis.
O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to that one, within whose mind and body God dwells.
fa a@ yofa foftmr oA AS Aor fAS FSA NI (854-12, frerew, v3 3) jin" ka-o poorab likhi-aa ras sant janaa si-o tis. ||2]| One who has such pre-ordained destiny, he alone is in love with the humble Saints.
[21] UugaT Il (854-13)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
nH a8 us Afsag A UsHAfS AfeMr I (854-13, fares, He 3) jo bolay pooraa satguroo so parmaysar suni-aa. Whatever the Perfect True Guru says, the Transcendent Lord hears.
Het zefsur wars nfs wie wie fa afer | (954-13, frees, He 3)
so-ee varti-aa jagat meh ghat ghat mukh bhani-aa.
It pervades and permeates the whole world, and it is on the mouth of each and every being.
ads esnreior was og AS TSM I (954-14, fares, He 3) bahut vadi-aa-ee-aa saahibai nah jaahee ganee-aa. So numerous are the great glories of the Lord, they cannot even be counted.
Ay Hdd wood Afsag uta wet TT Hetr Il (854-14, fuses, He 3) sach sahj anad satguroo paas sachee gur manee-aa. Truth, poise and bliss rest in the True Guru; the Guru bestows the jewel of Truth.
Soa AS Aes uTSgoH Ad fA@ sfsnr 921 (854-15, fares, He 3) naanak sant savaaray paarbarahm sachay ji-o bani-aa. ||12]|
O Nanak, the Supreme Lord God embellishes the Saints, who become like the True Lord. ||12]|
HBa H8 3 Il (854-15)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
mual nig & ustedt ofe ys AST Bhs I (954-16, fawres, He 3) apnaa aap na pachhaan-ee har parabh jaataa door. He does not understand himself; he believes the Lord God to be far away.
qs at Ae ferat fa ue sd Tafa il (854-16, frees, ve 3) gur kee sayvaa visree ki-o man rahai hajoor. He forgets to serve the Guru; how can his mind remain in the Lord's Presence?
Houta ASH detent ss wets afs Il (954-16, fares, 42 3) manmukh janam gavaa-i-aa jhoothai laalach koor. The self-willed manmukh wastes away his life in worthless greed and falsehood.
area sua frerfenig Ad Hafe defe All (854-17, frerew, M2 3)
naanak bakhas milaa-i-an sachai sabad hadoor. ||1] |
O Nanak, the Lord forgives, and blends them with Himself; through the True Word of the Shabad, He is ever-present. ||1]|
He 3 Il (854-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ofs ys Ae Afoer aanfa on aifSe i (954-17, frees, 8 3)
har parabh sachaa sohilaa gurmukh naam govind.
True is the Praise of the Lord God; the Gurmukh chants the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
mMofes SH Heder dfe Afumr yfs mses Il (854-18, frees, He 3) an-din naam salaahnaa har japi-aa man aanand.
Praising the Naam night and day, and meditating on the Lord, the mind becomes blissful.
essa Ths ue IG USHTSE Il (854-19, frees, Hs 3)
vadbhaagee har paa-i-aa pooran parmaanand.
By great good fortune, I have found the Lord, the perfect embodiment of supreme bliss.
Ho soa oH Hotton sofs 6 Hfs Sfe Sq NII (954-19, fueres, He 3) jan naanak naam sahaali-aa bahurh na man tan bhang. ||2|| Servant Nanak praises the Naam; his mind and body shall never again be shattered.
21 |
Ue cuu
ust Il (855-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aet feea de Afsag or feta Aafs TT ws I (855-1, fares, v3 3) ko-ee nindak hovai satguroo kaa fir saran gur aavai. If someone slanders the True Guru, and then comes seeking the Guru's Protection,
fue dog Afsag sufk we ASHals ate gare Il (955-1, fuares, He 3) pichhlay gunah satgur bakhas la-ay satsangat naal ralaavai.
the True Guru forgives him for his past sins, and unites him with the Saints’ Congregation.
fA@ rife so aah afer efaur or Ae ate ue fetes Fendt AeAdt fres ufeg weg ofS ATS Il (855-2, fasres, He 3)
ji-o meehi vuthai galee-aa naali-aa tobhi-aa kaa jal jaa-ay pavai vich sursaree sursaree milat pavitar paavan ho-ay jaavai.
When the rain falls, the water in the streams, rivers and ponds flows into the Ganges; flowing into the Ganges, it is made sacred and pure.
fo efsnret vfsas foes fete fas fifemt foro su Gad afe Aifs se mre II (855-3, fawree, He 3)
ayh vadi-aa-ee satgur nirvair vich jit mili-ai tisnaa bhukh utrai har saa“t tarh aavai. Such is the glorious greatness of the True Guru, who has no vengeance; meeting with Him, thirst and hunger are quenched, and instantly, one attains celestial peace.
aed fg ueay tug He ofe Ae AD or fA Alsag 6 HS A ASS STS NIZA AT I (855-4, faares, H3 3)
naanak ih achraj daykhhu mayray har sachay saah kaa je satguroo no mannai so sabhnaa" bhaavai. ||13]|1]| suDh.
O Nanak, behold this wonder of the Lord, my True King! Everyone is pleased with one who obeys and believes in the True Guru. ||13]|1]| Sudh] |
faaree sat Sas at Il (855-6) bilaaval banee bhagtaa kee. Bilaaval, The Word Of The Devotees.
wats AIS at (955-6) kabeer jee-o kee Of Kabeer Jee:
96 Afs on asst Use Ta YATE II (955-6, frees, sas acta Ht)
ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified By Guru's Grace:
mA feg AAG Uae JIG 3 aC ueld F Il (855-7, fares, sas adits Fh aiso ih sansaar paykhnaa rahan na ko-oo pa-eehai ray. This world is a drama; no one can remain here.
AO AO sa ve SH ose que fests F UU TIS Il (855-7, frerew, sas aeits Ft) sooDhay sooDhay rayg chalhu tum natar kuDhkaa diva-eehai ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Walk the straight path; otherwise, you will be pushed around. ||1||Pause| |
Ms FS SIs Selo AST FH B Ald F Il (855-8, fares, sas aria Fh)
baaray boodhay tarunay bha-ee-aa sabhhoo jam lai ja-eehai ray.
The children, the young and the old, O Siblings of Destiny, will be taken away by the Messenger of Death.
HOH aus HA ate Hig fawdbor wets F UI (955-8, frorew, sas aes Ht) maanas bapuraa moosaa keeno meech bila-ee-aa kha-eehai ray. ||1]| The Lord has made the poor man a mouse, and the cat of Death is eating him up.
[21
Uses nig feaas Het 3 at aE o ATA g Il (855-9, fuorew, sas alta Hh) Dhanvantaa ar nirDhan man-ee taa kee kachhoo na kaanee ray. It gives no special consideration to either the rich or the poor.
OH UH AH afd HS MA ATS BSS F IQIl (955-9, fueres, sas aes th) raajaa parjaa sam kar maarai aiso kaal badaanee ray. ||2|| The king and his subjects are equally killed; such is the power of Death. ||2]|
dfs & Aza A ofa ae fq at ae foot F Il (855-10, frees, sas ats Fh
har kay sayvak jo har bhaa-ay tin” kee kathaa niraaree ray.
Those who are pleasing to the Lord are the servants of the Lord; their story is unique and singular.
uefa 3 Ad 6 AAT HIS USAIN Aarat F USI (855-10, faeres, sas sets Fh) aavahi na jaahi na kabhoo martay paarbarahm sangaaree ray. ||3||
They do not come and go, and they never die; they remain with the Supreme Lord God. ||3]|
uz aes ofent wfenr fed sag Aha wt F Il (855-11, frees, sas ate Fh) putar kaltar lachhimee maa-i-aa ihai tajahu jee-a jaanee ray. Know this in your soul, that by renouncing your children, spouse, wealth and property
ads ade Hod 3 Aad fies wfserst F NSU (955-12, frees, sas adie rh) kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu milihai saarigpaanee ray. ||4]|1]|
- says Kabeer, listen, O Saints - you shall be united with the Lord of the Universe. [4] 111
fABSS Il (855-12) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
fafenr 6 usG ae odt ASE Il (855-10, fuses, sas adits Ah bidi-aa na para-o baad nahee jaan-o. I do not read books of knowledge, and I do not understand the debates.
dfs To AAS HOS SCTS IA (855-13, feos, sas ate Ft) har gun kathat sunat ba-uraano. ||1|| I have gone insane, chanting and hearing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
HS Ma HA aa AS uA Anat H aa Il (855-13, frees, sas ate Ff) mayray baabaa mai ba-uraa sabh khalak sai-aanee mai ba-uraa. O my father, I have gone insane; the whole world is sane, and I am insane.
H faafeS faa ufs mrBa nai TIC il (955-14, frees, sas adie FH) mai bigri-o bigrai mat a-uraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am spoiled; let no one else be spoiled like me. ||1||Pause] |
mfu o aa on ate sar Il (955-14, fares, sas adie Ff)
aap na ba-uraa raam kee-o ba-uraa. I have not made myself go insane - the Lord made me go insane.
Afsag we ae gy HT 2M (955-14, feos, sas adits FH) satgur jaar ga-i-o bharam moraa. ||2|| The True Guru has burnt away my doubt. ||2||
H faard nruat Hfs wet i (955-15, frares, sas asta at) mai bigray apnee mat kho-ee. I am spoiled; I have lost my intellect.
AS sath eS HfS AST Sil (855-15, fore, sas ats Ht) mayray bharam bhoola-o mat ko-ee. ||3]| Let no one go astray in doubt like me. ||3]|
AH a@a A mmy & User Il (855-15, fares, sas adie Ah so ba-uraa jo aap na pachhaanai. He alone is insane, who does not understand himself.
MTY UES J SA AS III (955-16, feos, sas adie Ah aap pachhaanai ta aykai jaanai. ||4|| When he understands himself, then he knows the One Lord. ||4]|
mafd 6 HST A AAT G HIST Il (855-16, fuses, sas ate Ah abeh na maataa so kabahu na maataa. One who is not intoxicated with the Lord now, shall never be intoxicated.
afs adts IH Sfor IST UNI (855-16, fueres, sas adie zt)
kahi kabeer raamai rang raataa. ||5||2|| Says Kabeer, I am imbued with the Lord's Love. ||5||2||
PASSES Il (855-17) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
fag sft ae ds wreht ufs uretba Aer il (855-17, freee, sas ats wh garihu taj ban khand jaa-ee-ai chun khaa-ee-ai kandaa. Abandoning his household, he may go to the forest, and live by eating roots;
wing faors 5 Sset unit He HET IAI (855-17, faores, sas adits Ah ajahu bikaar na chhod-ee paapee man mandaa. ||1]| but even so, his sinful, evil mind does not renounce corruption. ||1] |
fag ge8 aA sa sens fafa srdt I (955-18, frees, sas adits Fh) ki-o chhoota-o kaisay tara-o bhavjal niDh bhaaree. How can anyone be saved? How can anyone cross over the terrifying world-ocean?
ay ay HI Moa AS Aals SHAT INA JIS Il (955-18, frerey, sas oats Ft) raakh raakh mayray beethulaa jan saran tum"aaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Save me, save me, O my Lord! Your humble servant seeks Your Sanctuary. ||1]|Pause| |
fae fae of aAat sea oo ATT II (855-19, feares, sas adte At) bikhai bikhai kee baasnaa tajee-a nah jaa-ee. I cannot escape my desire for sin and corruption.
mfsa A365 afa ardbn fefs fefs su]|ret i1QI (855-19, faares, sas adte Ah
anik jatan kar raakhee-ai fir fir laptaa-ee. ||2]| I make all sorts of efforts to hold back from this desire, but it clings to me, again and again. ||2||
uar tue ad dies Aae afenr fas aor & star il (856-1, frees, sas adie Ah
jaraa jeevan joban ga-i-aa kichh kee-aa na neekaa. Youth and old age - my entire life has passed, but I haven't done any good.
feg rime fashoad aGst ofa var Sil (956-1, frees, sas adie Ff) ih jee-araa nirmolko ka-udee lag meekaa. ||3]| This priceless soul has been treated as if if were worth no more than a shell. ||3]|
ag ads HS HOE 3 AE femmit il (856-2, frees, sas aete Fh) kaho kabeer mayray maaDhvaa too sarab bi-aapee. Says Kabeer, O my Lord, You are contained in all.
3H AHAfe odt efenre dfs AHAfs unit ISI (856-2, frees, sas adte Th
tum samsar naahee da-i-aal mohi samsar paapee. ||4]|3]|| There is none as merciful as You are, and none as sinful as I am. ||4||3]|
fAB'SS Il (856-3) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
fos Cfo act arate urd Stes Ae afeEG II (856-3, frees, sas asta FH)
nit uth koree gaagar aanai leepat jee-o ga-i-o.
Every day, he rises early, and brings a fresh clay pot; he passes his life embellishing and glazing it.
To Ws aE 5 AS oie ate aA BuleS Al (856-4, frees, sas adits Fh)
taanaa baanaa kachhoo na soojhai har har ras lapti-o. ||1]| He does not think at all of worldly weaving; he is absorbed in the subtle essence of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
TS AH ACS IH Ala Il (856-4, frees, sas asta ef) hamaaray kul ka-unay raam kahi-o. Who in our family has ever chanted the Name of the Lord?
ma ot Her wet fous sa 3 AY 5 SES A IHS I (856-5, frorew, sas aes Fh)
jab kee maalaa la-ee nipootay tab tay sukh na bha-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Ever since this worthless son of mine began chanting with his mala, we have had no peace at all! ||1]|Pause| |
Hod frost Hod feast mun Sa sfeS | (956-5, frees, sas ate ah) sunhu jithaanee sunhu diraanee achraj ayk bha-i-o. Listen, O my sisters-in-law, a wondrous thing has happened!
WS AS fefs nate de feg user fas o HES NI (856-6, frees, sas ata Fh) saat soot in mudee‘ay kho-ay ih mudee-aa ki-o na mu-i-o. ||2]| This boy has ruined our weaving business. Why didn't he simply die? ||2]|
Aaa Aa at Sa dfs Aymit A afe ant efEE II (856-6, frees, sas adie FH)
sarab sukhaa kaa ayk har su-aamee so gur naam da-i-o.
O mother, the One Lord, the Lord and Master, is the source of all peace. The Guru has blessed me with His Name.
AS ysere at un fafe adt gasrun on feefas 3 (856-7, freee, sas ats Hh sant parahlaad kee paij jin raakhee harnaakhas nakh bidri-o. ||3|| He preserved the honor of Prahlaad, and destroyed Harnaakhash with his nails. ||3]|
wg a de fuss ot dst aa ad Age OEE II (956-7, fueres, sas adits Ff) ghar kay dayv pitar kee chhodee gur ko sabad la-i-o.
I have renounced the gods and ancestors of my house, for the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ads dts Aas uy uso H3d & Cufss iisiisil 956-2, frees, sas ate zh) kahat kabeer sagal paap khandan santeh lai uDhaari-o. ||4||4||
Says Kabeer, God is the Destroyer of all sins; He is the Saving Grace of His Saints. [41141 |
fABSS Il (856-9) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
ag ata AHS Sdt TH Il (956-9, frores, sas oats Ht) ko-oo har samaan nahee raajaa. There is no king equal to the Lord.
& gufs xs feen wig & 3d aes festa IU TTS Il (856-9, frees, sas acta Fh) ay bhoopat sabh divas chaar kay jhoothay karat divaajaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
All these lords of the world last for only a few days, putting on their false displays. ||1]|Pause| |
3d Ho dfe Afe as 38 Sis seo Us SH Il (856-10, fueres, sas adits TH) tayro jan ho-ay so-ay kat dolai teen bhavan par chhaajaa. How can Your humble servant waver? You spread Your shadow over the three worlds.
vg uns Aa ot He AS Sfs AA B HVAT IAI (856-10, frees, sas adie Ah
haath pasaar sakai ko jan ka-o bol sakai na andaajaa. ||1||
Who can raise his hand against Your humble servant? No one can describe the Lord's expanse. ||1||
Ss oss HS HS HT TH MSIE AAT Il (856-11, frees, sas aete Fh)
chayt achayt moorh man mayray baajay anhad baajaa.
Remember Him, O my thoughtless and foolish mind, and the unstruck melody of the sound current will resonate and resound.
afs adts AAT gH gat Y yfowre SSA QUI (856-11, frees, sas aete Ht) kahi kabeer sansaa bharam chooko Dharoo par-hilaad nivaajaa. ||2||5]]|
Says Kabeer, my skepticism and doubt have been dispelled; the Lord has exalted me, as He did Dhroo and Prahlaad. ||2||5]|
fHBSS Il (856-12) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
ote SI JH S feat Il (856-12, freres, gars aceite Hh) raakh layho ham tay bigree. Save me! I have disobeyed You.
Hi@ UsH AU Sas 6 Slat JE nifsHts Se ust NU! TIS Il (856-12, feses, sas adits FH) seel Dharam jap bhagat na keenee ha-o abhimaan taydh pagree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have not practiced humility, righteousness or devotional worship; I am proud and egotistical, and I have taken a crooked path. ||1||Pause]|
mud wf Ast feo ofeur feo fufamr act aerdt Il (856-13, fueres, sas adte th)
amar jaan sanchee ih kaa-i-aa ih mithi-aa kaachee gagree.
Believing this body to be immortal, I pampered it, but it is a fragile and perishable vessel.
frafs foes Ata on ate feats farrfa nreg wart II (856-14, feos, sas adie Hh jineh nivaaj saaj ham kee-ay tiseh bisaar avar lagree. ||1]||
Forgetting the Lord who formed, fashioned and embellished me, I have become attached to another. ||1]|
Hfae sfs ATG adt adi nafs us Suet ust Il (956-14, foes, sas adits Ah
sanDhik tohi saaDh nahee kahee-a-o saran paray tumree pagree. I am Your thief; I cannot be called holy. I have fallen at Your feet, seeking Your Sanctuary.
ats adte feo frost HSmig HS wes AH at wast NIE (8956-15, fares, sas ate Ah
kahi kabeer ih bintee sunee-ahu mat ghaalhu jam kee khabree. ||2||6|| Says Kabeer, please listen to this prayer of mine, O Lord; please do not send me sommons of the Messenger of Death. ||2]|6] |
fABSS Il (856-16)
bilaaval.
Bilaaval:
PINS SS Taal Il (956-16, feeres, sas adte wh
darmaaday thaadhay darbaar. I stand humbly at Your Court.
33 fag nafs ad & Hat wane cin fs fees A TTS Il (856-16, frees, sas aes FH) tujh bin surat karai ko mayree darsan deejai kholi” kivaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Who else can take care of me, other than You? Please open Your door, and grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1]||Pause] |
3H U6 ual Bers fsurait AZoq HSM AAA SHS Il (856-17, feerey, sas ats FH)
tum Dhan Dhanee udaar ti-aagee saravnan" sunee-at Sujas tum"aar.
You are the richest of the rich, generous and unattached. With my ears, I listen to Your Praises.
Hae ofs da AS tue 3H dt 3 As fEAST NI (956-17, feores, sas ate Ft) maaga-o kaahi rank sabh daykh-a-u tum" hee tay mayro nistaar. ||1||
From whom should I beg? I see that all are beggars. My salvation comes only from You. |[1]|
nee ont fou wet fso a faur set FT ong I (956-18, fears, sas adie th) jaiday-o naamaa bip sudaamaa tin ka-o kirpaa bha-ee hai apaar.
You blessed Jai Dayv, Naam Dayv and Sudaamaa the Brahmin with Your infinite mercy.
afs add 3H Aye BS ofs ueTsa SSB MST MMIII (856-18, feores, sas ate Hh)
kahi kabeer tum samrath daatay chaar padaarath dayt na baar. ||2||7]| Says Kabeer, You are the All-powerful Lord, the Great Giver; in an instant, You bestow the four great blessings. ||2||7]|
fABSS Il (856-19)
bilaaval.
Bilaaval:
sat Her fiter mirardt il (956-19, frovee, sas afte Hf)
dandaa mundraa khinthaa aaDhaaree. He has a walking stick, ear-rings, a patched coat and a begging bowl.
gH a afe ae Suara UI (956-19, fesse, sas acta Ht) bharam kai bhaa-ay bhavai bhaykh-Dhaaree. ||1]|| Wearing the robes of a beggar, he wanders around, deluded by doubt. ||1]|
Uart cud
MAS UtS Ble afd Ae Il (857-1, faery, sas aete Fh) aasan pavan door kar bavray. Abandon your Yogic postures and breath control exercises, O madman.
efs aue fos ofe sa aed NU TTS Il (957-1, faeres, sas adits 7)
chhod kapat nit har bhaj bavray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Renounce fraud and deception, and meditate continuously on the Lord, O madman. ||1]|Pause] |
faa 3 Wels A seq Sait | (857-2, frees, sas alta Fh) jih too jaacheh so taribhavan bhogee. That which you beg for, has been enjoyed in the three worlds.
afs adte aA Afar Fait QUI (857-2, frases, sas ats Ah
kahi kabeer kaysou jag jogee. ||2||8]| Says Kabeer, the Lord is the only Yogi in the world. ||2||8] |
fABSS Il (857-2) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
fefe ufenr AaretA TATST SHS vse fAATS Il (957-3, faeres, sas aes Ft) ayni" maa-i-aa jagdees gusaa-ee tum"ray charan bisaaray. This Maya has made me forget Your feet, O Lord of the World, Master of the Universe.
fass ulfs o Gun He AG He aT ass SoS NA TIC Il (857-3, frees, sas ante Fh kichant pareet na upjai jan ka-o jan kahaa karahi baychaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Not even a bit of love wells up in Your humble servant; what can Your poor servant do? ||1]|Pause||
faa 30 for ue fon feo wfeor foo foo Hf afa gat i (957-4, fees, sas ate Ah Dharig tan Dharig Dhan Dharig ih maa-i-aa Dharig Dharig mat buDh fannee. Cursed is the body, cursed is the wealth, and cursed is this Maya; cursed, cursed is the clever intellect and understanding.
fen wfeor a fes afs aug at my gdat IA (957-5, fares, sas ate Fh
is maa-i-aa ka-o darirh kar raakho baa’Dhay aap bachannee. ||1]|
Restrain and hold back this Maya; overcome it, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|
foot ast foo Set set unis Fo THAT Il (957-5, frees, sas aets FH)
ki-aa khaytee ki-aa layvaa day-ee parpanch jhooth gumaanaa.
What good is farming, and what good is trading? Worldly entanglements and pride are false.
af ats 3 ifs fags urfeur arg foerat IQUCI (857-6, frees, sas aets Ft) kahi kabeer tay ant bigootay aa-i-aa kaal nidaanaa. ||2||9||
Says Kabeer, in the end, they are ruined; ultimately, Death will come for them. 21/911
fABSS Il (857-6) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
Adld Ades SHIT iTS AHS GU Il (857-6, feorey, sas alte Ft) sareer Sarovar bheetray aachhai kamal anoop. Within the pool of the body, there is an incomparably beautiful lotus flower.
USH AIS UTASH AT at TUS FU NA (857-7, fees, sas oats HH) param jot purkhotamo jaa kai raykh na roop. ||1]| Within it, is the Supreme Light, the Supreme Soul, who has no feature or form. ||1]|
J HO did 3A FH 3Hg Adeleo TH UNA TIE Il (857-7, foes, sas ate Ah ray man har bhaj bharam tajahu jagjeevan raam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my mind, vibrate, meditate on the Lord, and forsake your doubt. The Lord is the Life of the World. ||1]|Pause] |
WSS Ag 3 Cnet od GA AS Il (957-8, frees, sas aets Ht) aavat kachhoo na dees-ee nah deesai jaat. Nothing is seen coming into the world, and nothing is seen leaving it.
wd Gun fon sdt AA ufsea UTS QI (857-8, frees, sas ade th jah upjai binsai tahee jaisay purivan paat. ||2|| Where the body is born, there it dies, like the leaves of the water-lily. ||2]|
fufemr afs wfenr sat AY AoA Stef il (957-9, feos, sas ate Ft)
mithi-aa kar maa-i-aa tajee sukh sahj beechaar. Maya is false and transitory; forsaking it, one obtains peaceful, celestial contemplation.
afs adie Aa agg He HfS Hehe ISIION (857-9, frees, sas adie Ah
kahi kabeer sayvaa karahu man manjh muraar. ||3||10]| Says Kabeer, serve Him within your mind; He is the Enemy of ego, the Destroyer of demons. ||3||10||
faerSs Il (857-10) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
HOH HIS a SH afeur aifse fee aralt Il (857-10, freee, sas ate fh
janam maran kaa bharam ga-i-aa gobid liv laagee. The illusion of birth and death is gone; I lovingly focus on the Lord of the Universe.
dies Afs mrfonr ae Ardt wait WU TIS Il (857-11, frees, sas aete Ah
jeevat sunn samaani-aa gur saakhee jaagee. ||1|| rahaa-o. In my life, I am absorbed in deep silent meditation; the Guru's Teachings have awakened me. ||1||Pause| |
oat 3 ofS Gur ofs art At II (857-11, fares, sas adie Fh) kaasee tay Dhun oopjai Dhun kaasee jaa-ee. The sound made from bronze, that sound goes into the bronze again.
At ect ufsst ofs aot AMET AI (857-11, faeres, sas aes Fh)
kaasee footee panditaa Dhun kahaa™ samaa-ee. ||1||
But when the bronze is broken, O Pandit, O religious scholar, where does the sound go then? ||1]|
fgaet Afo A Ufmr we J we eit Il (957-12, frees, sas afte Fh)
tarikutee sanDh mai paykhi-aa ghat hoo ghat jaagee.
I gaze upon the world, the confluence of the three qualities; God is awake and aware in each and every heart.
Mt sfa AME we ufo fsorait 2H (957-12, frees, sas adte rh
aisee buDh samaacharee ghat maahi ti-aagee. ||2|| Such is the understanding revealed to me; within my heart, I have become a detached renunciate. ||2||
my mtu 3 Aout SH SH AHA Il (857-13, frees, sas adie Ft) aap aap tay jaani-aa tayj tay] samaanaa. I have come to know my own self, and my light has merged in the Light.
ad ade wie wfoor dfse HS HST ISIAA (857-13, frees, sas ade Ah
kaho kabeer ab jaani-aa gobid man maanaa. ||3||11]| Says Kabeer, now I know the Lord of the Universe, and my mind is satisfied. ||3||11]|
faa'SS Il (857-14) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
3do SHS Wa fee sAfo A HS fas 38 SE Il (857-14, frees, sas adits HH)
charan kamal jaa kai ridai baseh so jan ki-o dolai dayv.
When Your Lotus Feet dwell within one's heart, why should that person waver, O Divine Lord?
HS AS AY o@ fafa a a AofA Hota AA AS SS I TIC Il (857-14, frees, sas adits FH) maanou sabh sukh na-o niDh taa kai sahj sahj jas bolai dayv. rahaa-o.
I know that all comforts, and the nine treasures, come to one who intuitively, naturally, chants the Praise of the Divine Lord. ||Pause| |
3a feo nfs AG AS nfo Ue afes aifs Fa US Be Il (857-15, fueres, sas adits FH) tab ih mat ja-o sabh meh paykhai kutil gaa“th jab kholai dayv.
Such wisdom comes, only when one sees the Lord in all, and unties the knot of hypocrisy.
ad ag for 3 nied & SIA HS 38 VT MUI (857-16, frees, sas adits Fh)
baara™ baar maa-i-aa tay atkai lai narjaa man tolai dayv. ||1||
Time and time again, he must hold himself back from Maya; let him take the scale of the Lord, and weigh his mind. ||1]|
ag 6g ate sdt wy ure afer 3TH 9 3S BE Il (857-16, frees, sas adie Ff) jah uho jaa-ay tahee sukh paavai maa-i-aa taas na jholai dayv. Then wherever he goes, he will find peace, and Maya will not shake him.
afs adte Aa He wfoer oH US ate S FS UIA (857-17, fees, sas adits Ah
kahi kabeer mayraa man maani-aa raam pareet kee-o lai dayv. ||2||12]| Says Kabeer, my mind believes in the Lord; I am absorbed in the Love of the Divine Lord. ||2||12]|
fares sat Sas SHES At at (857-19)
bilaaval banee bhagat naamdayv jee kee
Bilaaval, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsars yrrfe I (857-19)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: Hee HOH H AC Ag ator Il (857-19, fares, sas anes FH)
safal janam mo ka-o gur keenaa. The Guru has made my life fruitful.
Ue cut
eu fierfe Ay vista stat I (858-1, fase, sas onze FH) dukh bisaar sukh antar leenaa. ||1]| My pain is forgotten, and I have found peace deep within myself. ||1]|
fomra nine H aS afe ctor il (858-1, fees, sas ones th gi-aan anjan mo ka-o gur deenaa. The Guru has blessed me with the ointment of spiritual wisdom.
TH OH fas AleS Ho Tat NA TIC Il (858-1, feores, sas see Hh) raam naam bin jeevan man heenaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Lord's Name, life is mindless. ||1]|Pause] |
oMete frnge ate Wot Il (858-2, frees, sas anes Hh) naamday-ay simran kar jaanaa™. Meditating in remembrance, Naam Dayv has come to know the Lord.
FHanles FAG AIG ANAT QUA (858-2, frees, sas oHee A) jagjeevan si-o jee-o samaanaa”. ||2]|1]| His soul is blended with the Lord, the Life of the World. ||2||1]|
faares arat sfeerA Sas at (858-3) bilaaval banee ravidaas bhagat kee Bilaaval, The Word Of Devotee Ravi Daas:
qe Afsara yATfe il (858-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afge ofa AS & JA MAT SAT THT I (958-4, fueres, sas ae Th) daarid daykh sabh ko hasai aisee dasaa hamaaree. Seeing my poverty, everyone laughed. Such was my condition.
We eA fafa ag 38 AS fut SHH NU (958-4, feores, sas afer Ah
asat dasaa siDh kar talai sabh kirpaa tumaaree. ||1]| Now, I hold the eighteen miraculous spiritual powers in the palm of my hand; everything is by Your Grace. ||1]|
3 Woes H fag adt se UBS TH Il (858-4, fares, sas seen Fh) too jaanat mai kichh nahee bhav khandan raam. You know, and I am nothing, O Lord, Destroyer of fear.
AIG Aba AsataIst YS UTS AH WAU TIS Il (958-5, frees, sas seen Fh)
Sagal jee-a sarnaagatee parabh pooran kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. All beings seek Your Sanctuary, O God, Fulfiller, Resolver of our affairs. ||1]|Pause| |
A Sct Adoas fS5 ot ST Il (858-5, feos, sas ofeen Ah jo tayree sarnaagataa tin naahee bhaar. Whoever enters Your Sanctuary, is relieved of his burden of sin.
Gz dle SH 3 3d MMH AAT III (858-6, frees, saz ofeen A) ooch neech tum tay taray aalaj sansaar. ||2|| You have saved the high and the low from the shameless world. ||2]|
afs sfeen nia aa ag ae ada Il (858-6, frares, sas oer ah kahi ravidaas akath kathaa baho kaa-ay kareejai. Says Ravi Daas, what more can be said about the Unspoken Speech?
AAT 3 SAT Sot foot Cunt SA SUI (858-7, frees, sas sfeern Ht)
jaisaa too taisaa tuhee ki-aa upmaa deejai. ||3]||1]|
Whatever You are, You are, O Lord; how can anything compare with Your Praises? 31121]
fHBSS Il (858-7) bilaaval. Bilaaval:
fad a ATG SAS SE Il (958-7, frees, gas sfeen th) jih kul saaDh baisnou ho-ay. That family, into which a holy person is born,
ado nade da odt ctag fs aA ashy afar AE Nan Toe Il (858-8, frees, sas see Ht)
baran abran rank nahee eesur bimal baas jaanee-ai jag so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
whether of high or low social class, whether rich or poor, shall have its pure fragrance spread all over the world. ||1||Pause| |
WuHS SA Ae wg YSt SH USTs HOS HO ALS Il (858-8, fares, sas fee HH)
barahman bais sood ar kha-ytaree dom chandaar malaychh man so-ay. Whether he is a Brahmin, a Vaishya, a Soodra, or a Kh'shaatriya; whether he is a poet, an outcaste, or a filthy-minded person,
dfs uals sdes ano 3 ory ate ae aw SE UI (958-9, frees, sas ofeera th)
ho-ay puneet bhagvant bhajan tay aap taar taaray kul do-ay. ||1]||
he becomes pure, by meditating on the Lord God. He saves himself, and the families of both his parents. ||1]|
Ufs Har dfs A oe Ufs uals ada AS BLE II (958-9, frees, sas steer th)
Dhan so gaa-o Dhan so thaa-o Dhan puneet kutamb sabh lo-ay.
Blessed is that village, and blessed is the place of his birth; blessed is his pure family, throughout all the worlds.
fate ler AS JA OSH MTS DA df JA Hale STS fay SE QI (958-10, fueres, sas sfeeTA aft)
jin pee-aa saar ras tajay aan ras ho-ay ras magan daaray bikh kho-ay. ||2||
One who drinks in the sublime essence abandons other tastes; intoxicated with this divine essence, he discards sin and corruption. ||2||
ufss AS sguls aa sas aerate nie 3 aE I (958-11, frees, sas ofeen Ht)
pandit soor chhatarpat raajaa bhagat baraabar a-or na ko-ay.
Among the religious scholars, warriors and kings, there is no other equal to the Lord's devotee.
AA UdSs US dd AS AMy safe afeeA AON Afar SE SII (858-11, frares, sas afeeA Ht) jaisay purain paat rahai jal sameep bhan ravidaas janmay jag o-ay. ||3]||2]|
As the leaves of the water lily float free in the water, says Ravi Daas, so is their life in the world. ||3]|2]|
Wat AGS at dar fawres (858-13) banee saDhnay kee raag bilaaval The Word Of Sadhana, Raag Bilaaval:
qe Afsare YATE Il (858-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fqu afour & aad fea afer Suurdt il (958-14, frores, sas Aras Ft) nrip kanniaa kay kaarnai ik bha-i-aa bhaykh-Dhaaree. For a king's daughter, a man disguised himself as Vishnu.
Hse AMset et ot UA ATS NU (858-14, faeres, sas AUST Ah
kaamaarathee su-aarthee vaa kee paij savaaree. ||1]|| He did it for sexual exploitation, and for selfish motives, but the Lord protected his honor. ||1]|
3 Io AT AAS Ts AC adSH 5 OA ll (858-14, fases, Sas AUST At)
tav gun kahaa jagat guraa ja-o karam na naasai.
What is Your value, O Guru of the world, if You will not erase the karma of my past actions?
fu Age as we AE Hea PA AU TIS Il (958-15, feores, sas Aras FH)
singh saran kat jaa-ee-ai ja-o ja“buk garaasai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why seek safety from a lion, if one is to be eaten by a jackal? ||1]|Pause] |
Sa Fe AG AIS WITT TY UTS Il (958-15, free, sas Aras Ft)
a Se
ayk boond jal kaarnay chaatrik dukh paavai. For the sake of a single rain-drop, the rainbird suffers in pain.
ure ae Arad fess efo orf © mire QI (858-16, frores, sas AUS Ft) paraan ga-ay saagar milai fun kaam na aavai. ||2]| When its breath of life is gone, even an ocean is of no use to it. ||2]|
urs Fae fag odt aA fear]? I (858-16, fares, sas Fram Ff) paraan jo thaakay thir nahee kaisay birmaava-o. Now, my life has grown weary, and I shall not last much longer; how can I be patient?
fs He oGar fHs ag ats BESS SI (858-17, fares, sas FUT Ft) bood moo-ay na-ukaa milai kaho kaahi chadhaava-o. ||3]| If I drown and die, and then a boat comes along, tell me, how shall I climb aboard?
[I3I|
H od ae IC Sdt fas uefa o Ha Il (958-17, feos, sas AUS th) mai naahee kachh ha-o nahee kichh aahi na moraa. I am nothing, I have nothing, and nothing belongs to me.
w@ne oH af STI AUST AS ST ISI (858-18, frees, sas AIS Ff) a-osar lajaa raakh layho saDhnaa jan toraa. ||4]|1]| Now, protect my honor; Sadhana is Your humble servant. ||4||1||
Uuar cur qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nieve Has orst AS TT YATE I (859-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Td ds veue HIS 8 we Il (859-3) raag gond cha-upday mehlaa 4 ghar 1. Raag Gond, Chau-Padas, Fourth Mehl, First House:
A ufe fats orm safe afe Gufs at Ha fFS MISA niSa SH uret Il (859-4, ats, v2 4) jay man chit aas rakheh har oopar taa man chinday anayk anayk fal paa-ee.
If, in his conscious mind, he places his hopes in the Lord, then he shall obtain the fruits of all the many desires of his mind.
ofa we Ag fae FH Af ees us urfer faR ao fea fom 5 TeTet II (859-4, as, He 4)
har jaanai sabh kichh jo jee-ay vartai parabh ghaali-aa kisai kaa ik til na gavaa-ee. The Lord knows everything which happens to the soul. Not even an iota of one's effort goes to waste.
dfs fSn at orn ata Ho He A AS Hfo AMM sfomr ANTET NA (859-5, Hs, He 4)
har tis kee aas keejai man mayray jo sabh meh su-aamee rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1]|| Place your hopes in the Lord, O my mind; the Lord and Master is pervading and permeating all. ||1||
Hd Ho MTA ate AerelA TATET Il (859-6, a's, He 4) mayray man aasaa kar jagdees gusaa-ee. O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe.
A fag of orn nied org at att AT feges uA AS fast FET NU TIS Il (859-6, ats, 3 4) jo bin har aas avar kaahoo kee keejai saa nihfal aas sabh birthee jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-
0. That hope which is placed in any other than the Lord - that hope is fruitless, and totally useless. ||1]||Pause| |
a dA wfeor Ho ade Ag HS fSA at TA ofa AON Tee Il (859-7, as, He 4)
jo deesai maa-i-aa moh kutamb sabh mat tis kee aas lag janam gavaa-ee.
That which you can see, Maya, and all attachment to family - don't place your hopes in them, or your life will be wasted and lost.
fea a fae ofa odt as aafe fefo sus fea a efor ag & SAT II (859-8, as, He 4) in" kai kichh haath nahee kahaa karahi ihi bapurhay in" kaa vaahi-aa kachh na vasaa- ee.
Nothing is in their hands; what can these poor creatures do? By their actions, nothing can be done.
He Ho oA ats ofs UlsH mud at A 33 3d 3a acy AS Save II! (959-9, as, v2 4) mayray man aas kar har pareetam apunay kee jo tujh taarai tayraa kutamb sabh chhadaa-ee. ||2||
O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord, your Beloved, who shall carry you across, and save your whole family as well. ||2| |
A fag orn nies asfs usthst Hs F Wels 3d fas af mre I (859-10, ds, 2 4)
jay kichh aas avar karahi parmitree mat too” jaaneh tayrai kitai kamm aa-ee.
If you place your hopes in any other, in any friend other than the Lord, then you shall come to know that it is of no use at all.
fea nim usthst oS ei o fits fs 3S faotA AS ATT II (859-11, ds, He 4)
ih aas parmitree bhaa-o doojaa hai khin meh jhooth binas sabh jaa-ee.
This hope placed in other friends comes from the love of duality. In an instant, it is gone; it is totally false.
Ad Ho weer af ofe ulsn AS ot A Sa urfemr Ag ae uret SI (859-11, ats, He 4) mayray man aasaa kar har pareetam saachay kee jo tayraa ghaali-aa sabh thaa-ay paa-ee. ||3]|
O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord, your True Beloved, who shall approve and reward you for all your efforts. ||3]|
WAT HOM! AS Set HS AMMt AA S ora aeefs SA A MTA ATE Il (959-12, a's, He 4) aasaa mansaa sabh tayree mayray su-aamee jaisee too aas karaaveh taisee ko aas karaa-ee.
Hope and desire are all Yours, O my Lord and Master. As You inspire hope, so are the hopes held.
Uat téo fos fart a ofa oct He AoMit wet He Afsafe gs gst II (860-1, as, Hs 4)
kichh kisee kai hath naahee mayray su-aamee aisee mayrai satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. Nothing is in the hands of anyone, O my Lord and Master; such is the understanding the True Guru has given me to understand.
Ao otoe at oA Ss ATets ois ean fe ala eanfs fyuset SNA (860-2, as, He 4)
jan naanak kee aas too jaaneh har darsan daykh har darsan tariptaa-ee. ||4||1]|
You alone know the hope of servant Nanak, O Lord; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, he is satisfied. ||4||1]|
as HIS 8 Il (860-3)
gond menhlaa 4. Gond, Fourth Mehl:
mrt ofa Aeha fos foment a fas ufo faafes vfs ad faarAr Il (960-3, as, He 4) aisaa har sayvee-ai nit Dhi-aa-ee-ai jo khin meh kilvikh sabh karay binaasaa.
Serve such a Lord, and ever meditate on Him, who in an instant erases all sins and mistakes.
A dfs fsurfa nied ot umm ath at of fages AS urs TSTAT Il (860-4, as, He 4)
jay har ti-aag avar kee aas keejai taa har nihfal sabh ghaal gavaasaa.
If someone forsakes the Lord and places his hopes in another, then all his service to the Lord is rendered fruitless.
Hd Ho dfs Afeg Hues" AM fam Afet AS se BIA AU! (860-4, as, He 4)
mayray man har sayvihu sukh-daata su-aamee jis sayvi-ai sabh bhukh lahaasaa. ||1]|| O my mind, serve the Lord, the Giver of peace; serving Him, all your hunger shall depart. ||1]|
AS Hs ae Gufs aH SISA I (860-5, ds, we 4) mayray man har oopar keejai bharvaasaa. O my mind, place your faith in the Lord.
Ag West so ofs Ha AoMt ofs wrust UA Ta AS SAT IA TIC Il (60-6, as, H2 4) jah jaa-ee-ai tah naal mayraa su-aamee har apnee paij rakhai jan daasaa. ||1|| rahaa- O. Wherever I go, my Lord and Master is there with me. The Lord saves the honor of His humble servants and slaves. ||1]||Pause| |
A must fase agg wieza ufs st neat must fase aT ATS ASAT Il (860-6, a's, v2 4) jay apnee birthaa kahhu avraa peh taa aagai apnee birthaa baho bahut kadhaasaa. If you tell your sorrows to another, then he, in return, will tell you of his greater SOrrows.
nust fase aay afs nud Hom ufs A SHS TU ING ACTA Il (860-7, Hs, He 4) apnee birthaa kahhu har apunay su-aamee peh jo tum"ray dookh tatkaal kataasaa. So tell your sorrows to the Lord, your Lord and Master, who shall instantly dispel your pain.
Aur ug efs must fase wea ufo adit nea ufs afs Ho SA HSA III (860-8, as, H8 4)
So aisaa parabh chhod apnee birthaa avraa peh kahee-ai avraa peh kahi man laaj maraasaa. ||2]|
Forsaking such a Lord God, if you tell your sorrows to another, then you shall die of shame. ||2||
A AA a ace fies oet ctafs Ho Ae 3 Als mS Aone far II (860-9, as, He 4)
jo sansaarai kay kutamb mitar bhaa-ee deeseh man mayray tay sabh apnai su-aa-ay milaasaa.
The relatives, friends and siblings of the world that you see, O my mind, all meet with you for their own purposes.
fas fefs Go a Hore af 3 ure faz fefe 33 AF SAAT II (860-10, as, He 4)
jit din un" kaa su-aa-o ho-ay na aavai tit din nayrhai ko na dhukaasaa.
And that day, when their self-interests are not served, on that day, they shall not come near you.
Ho Ae nus fe Afe feg ast A sO Cuad ef AUTAT ISI (860-11, a3, He 4) man mayray apnaa har sayv din raatee jo tuDh upkarai dookh sukhaasaa. ||3]| O my mind, serve your Lord, day and night; He shall help you in good times and bad.
[I3]|
fn at sae fa ata Ho He A vist marta af o AATAT II (860-11, Hs, He 4)
tis kaa bharvaasaa ki-o keejai man mayray jo antee a-osar rakh na sakaasaa.
Why place your faith in anyone, O my mind, who cannot come to your rescue at the last instant?
ofg Hu HS ae Cuen B rug 8 nifs ese faa af ulfS fast Il (860-12, Hs, Hs 4) har jap mant gur updays lai jaapahu tin" ant chhadaa-ay jin" har pareet chitaasaa. Chant the Lord's Mantra, take the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on Him. In the end, the Lord saves those who love Him in their consciousness.
Wo SSA voles OH Aug Us Aad fey See A AMT SISTA III (860-13, Hs, He 4) jan naanak an-din naam japahu har santahu ih chhootan kaa saachaa bharvaasaa.
[41121]
Servant Nanak speaks: night and day, chant the Lord's Name, O Saints; this is the
only true hope for emancipation. ||4]|2]|
as HIS 8 Il (860-14)
gond menhlaa 4. Gond, Fourth Mehl:
dfs fines Fe df mise AY uists AMS AISG He Mra Il (860-14, Hs, He 4)
har simrat sadaa ho-ay anand sukh antar saa“t seetal man apnaa.
Remembering the Lord in meditation, you shall find bliss and peace forever deep within, and your mind will become tranquil and cool.
AA Hats Ag ag ASS Ts AMA Sa ofa ATE AS Sus Al (860-15, as, Hs 4)
jaisay sakat soor baho jaltaa gur sas daykhay leh jaa-ay sabh tapnaa. ||1]||
It is like the harsh sun of Maya, with its burning heat; seeing the moon, the Guru, its heat totally vanishes. |]|1]|
Hd Ho motes faurfe on safe Aur Il (860-15, as, He 4) mayray man an-din Dhi-aa-ay naam har japnaa. O my mind, night and day, meditate, and chant the Lord's Name.
AS AI 35 TH AS oe A vi ys Afe Ae T ws UU TIS Il (860-16, as, Hs 4) jahaa kahaa tujh raakhai sabh thaa-ee so aisaa parabh sayv sadaa too apnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Here and hereafter, He shall protect you, everywhere; serve such a God forever. ||1]|Pause| |
vw ufo vfs fours A dfs afl He AS TeHfe Ufa Bag Tis Tor Il (s60-17, as, v2 4)
jaa meh sabh niDhaan so har jap man mayray gurmukh khoj lahhu har ratnaa. Meditate on the Lord, who contains all treasures, O my mind; as Gurmukh, search for the jewel, the Lord.
fre ofe fourfeur fae ofs ufeor Hat AnMit fsa & vee HOT Tle SAS IlQIl (860-17, as, H8 4)
jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa tin har paa-i-aa mayraa su-aamee tin kay charan malahu har dasnaa. ||2||
Those who meditate on the Lord, find the Lord, my Lord and Master; I wash the feet of those slaves of the Lord. ||2]|
Hag uste TH 3A ueg Gy Osu Hy SES as asa Il (800-18, as, Hs 4)
sabad pachhaan raam ras paavhu oh ootam sant bha-i-o bad badnaa.
One who realizes the Word of the Shabad, obtains the sublime essence of the Lord; such a Saint is lofty and sublime, the greatest of the great.
fan Ao ot efsuret afs orf caret Gg we 3 fan at weet fea fam fee fama SII (860-19, aS, He 4)
tis jan kee vadi-aa-ee har aap vaDhaa-ee oh ghatai na kisai kee ghataa-ee ik til til tilnaa. ||3]|
The Lord Himself magnifies the glory of that humble servant. No one can lessen or decrease that glory, not even a bit. ||3]|
UST téq
fan 3 AY uefa Ho He A Ae fore fos ag AIST Il (861-1, Fs, He 4)
jis tay sukh paavahi man mayray so sadaa Dhi-aa-ay nit kar jurnaa.
He shall give you peace, O my mind; meditate forever, every day on Him, with your palms pressed together.
Ho soa ag dfs we fea cin fos safs foe aot Hfo Bao SII (s61-2, as, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har daan ik deejai nit baseh ridai haree mohi charnaa. ||4]|3]| Please bless servant Nanak with this one gift, O Lord, that Your feet may dwell within my heart forever. ||4]|3]|
as HIS 8 Il (861-3)
gond mehlaa 4. Gond, Fourth Mehl:
fase AT UfsATS Cuore fhaes vBudt Afs fifeor so aE EAT ATE Il (861-3, a3, He 4) jitnay saah paatisaah umraav sikdaar cha-uDhree sabh mithi-aa jhooth bhaa-o doojaa jaan.
All the kings, emperors, nobles, lords and chiefs are false and transitory, engrossed in duality - know this well.
dfe mfsart Het fas fosee fSH HI Ho SH UPSTS IAI (861-4, as, He 4)
har abhinaasee sadaa thir nihchal tis mayray man bhaj parvaan. ||1]|
The eternal Lord is permanent and unchanging; meditate on Him, O my mind, and you shall be approved. ||1||
Hd HO OH Jat 3H Aet SaS Il (961-4, as, v8 4)
mayray man naam haree bhaj sadaa deebaan.
O my mind, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord's Name, which shall be your defender forever.
A dfd HIG ue Td gual fSA ASS neg ard fAA BT STS NA TIS Il (861-5, as, He 4) jo har mahal paavai gur bachnee tis jayvad avar naahee kisai daa taan. ||1|| rahaa-o. One who obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings - no one else's power is as great as his. ||1||Pause] |
fisd Uses aBes fkauds tinfs Ho He Afs faofH wis fA da AHS ATS Il (861-6, as, He 4)
jitnay Dhanvant kulvant milakhvant deeseh man mayray sabh binas jaahi ji-o rang kasumbh kachaan.
All the wealthy, high class property owners which you see, O my mind, shall vanish, like the fading color of the safflower.
dfs Afs fadae Ae Afe Ho Ae fag dle eearg usta J HE ll (61-7, as, vs 4)
har sat niranjan sadaa sayv man mayray jit har dargeh paavahi too maan. ||2||
Serve the True, Immaculate Lord forever, O my mind, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2]|
QaHS ust Ae sn ote Fas ote uTAH ofe A fe foMTS AUTISM (861-7, as, Hs 4) baraahman khatree sood vais chaar varan chaar aasram heh jo har Dhi-aavai so parDhaan.
There are four castes: Brahmin, Kh'shaatriya, Soodra and Vaishya, and there are four stages of life. One who meditates on the Lord, is the most distinguished and renowned.
fa@ veo foafe eA foes aus fS@ ASHafs fife ufss users III (861-8, as, H2 4)
ji-o chandan nikat vasai hirad bapurhaa ti-o satsangat mil patit parvaan. ||3]|
The poor castor oil plant, growing near the sandalwood tree, becomes fragrant; in the same way, the sinner, associating with the Saints, becomes acceptable and approved.
[I3]|
6g As 3 Ca AS 3 Ae WT a fase Sf saISs Il (861-9, as, Hs 4) oh sabh tay oochaa sabh tay soochaa jaa kai hirdai vasi-aa bhagvaan. He, within whose heart the Lord abides, is the highest of all, and the purest of all.
He ood fSA a vas uN A Ufa He Sle ATS ASAE ISIS (861-10, as, He 4)
jan naanak tis kay charan pakhaalai jo har jan neech jaat sayvkaan. ||4||4||
Servant Nanak washes the feet of thM at humble servant of the Lord; he may be from a low class family, but he is now the Lord's servant. ||4||4] |
aS HIS 8 Il (861-11)
gond mehlaa 4. Gond, Fourth Mehl:
dfs visa Ass eos AT of age 3a a ATE Il (861-11, Fs, 42 4)
har antarjaamee sabh-tai vartai jayhaa har karaa-ay tayhaa ko kara-ee-ai.
The Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is all-pervading. As the Lord causes them to act, so do they act.
Air of Afe Ae Ho AS A ZUS AS s she BEM AUN (861-11, ss, we 4) SO aisaa har sayv sadaa man mayray jo tuDhno sabh doo rakh la-ee-ai. ||1]| So serve forever such a Lord, O my mind, who will protect you from everything. ||1]|
He He dfs afu afs fos use II (861-12, as, He 4) mayray man har jap har nit parha-ee-ai. O my mind, meditate on the Lord, and read about the Lord every day.
fs faa & wife Hes o Aa STH Ho ates ase NA TIS Il (861-12, Hs, ne 4) har bin ko maar jeevaal na saakai taa mayray man kaa-it karha-ee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Other than the Lord, no one can kill you or save you; so why do you worry, O my mind? ||1]||Pause| |
dfs uadg aot As aes fete nmr nmuet AfS Tee II (861-13, Fs, He 4) har parpanch kee-aa sabh kartai vich aapay aapnee jot Dhara-ee-ai. The Creator created the entire universe, and infused His Light into it.
ofs Fa 3S ala Sa gore ats us als Sa feast iM! (8ei-14, as, we 4)
har ayko bolai har ayk bulaa-ay gur poorai har ayk dikha-ee-ai. ||2||
The One Lord speaks, and the One Lord causes all to speak. The Perfect Guru has revealed the One Lord. |[2||
dfs nists ae sofa oe ag fH ug Ho famr SaEM Il (861-15, as, He 4)
har antar naalay baahar naalay kaho tis paashu man ki-aa chora-ee-ai.
The Lord is with you, inside and out; tell me, O mind, how can You hide anything from Him?
fovaue Rat att ofe adt Si HS Ho Aaa AY UehH ISI (g61-15, as, v2 4) nihakpat sayvaa keejai har kayree taa‘ mayray man sarab sukh pa-ee-ai. | |3]| Serve the Lord open-heartedly, and then, O my mind, you shall find total peace. ||3]|
fan & ef Ag fag AAS © st A HS Ho Ae fet I (so1-16, as, ws 4)
jis dai vas sabh kichh so sabh doo vadaa so mayray man sadaa Dhi-a-ee-ai. Everything is under His control; He is the greatest of all. O my mind, meditate forever on Him.
Wo Soa A fe ae 3 3d ale Ae fomrfe J 50 we Sse IIUII (861-17, as, Hs 4) jan naanak so har naal hai tayrai har sadaa Dhi-aa-ay too tuDh la-ay chhada-ee-ai. [4115]
O Servant Nanak, that Lord is always with you. Meditate forever on your Lord, and He shall emancipate you. ||4]|5]|
as HIS 8 Il (861-18)
gond mehlaa 4. Gond, Fourth Mehl:
dfg BIAS AB Ha Ho sg Sus fA fRurdy fag ote IAI (861-18, as, He 4)
har darsan ka-o mayraa man baho taptai ji-o tarikhaava™t bin neer. ||1]|
My mind yearns so deeply for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, like the thirsty man without water. ||1]|
Ad fs UH wat ofa Ste Il (so1-18, Hs, us 4) mayrai man paraym lago har teer. My mind is pierced through by the arrow of the Lord's Love.
Tut Sea oe ys WS NT HO visa at ute AU TIS Il (g61-19, as, ne 4) hamree baydan har parabh jaanai mayray man antar kee peer. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord God knows my anguish, and the pain deep within my mind. ||1]]Pause| |
Ad fe Us at set ws Hove A ovet AAT ate QI (861-19, Hs, He 4) mayray har pareetam kee ko-ee baat sunaavai so bhaa-ee so mayraa beer. ||2||
Whoever tells me the Stories of my Beloved Lord is my Sibling of Destiny, and my friend. ||2||
Uat té2 fis foe Aet Te ag HS us a S Alsag at His Ute ISI (g62-1, as, Hs 4)
mil mil sakhee gun kaho mayray parabh kay lay satgur kee mat Dheer. ||3]| Come, and join together, O my companions; let's sing the Glorious Praises of my God, and follow the comforting advice of the True Guru.. ||3]|
Ho Soa at fs TA uAteg Jie wants ATS Ast ISIE (g62-2, Hs, 42 4)
jan naanak kee har aas pujaavahu har darsan saa“t sareer. ||4]|6]| Please fulfill the hopes of servant Nanak, O Lord; his body finds peace and tranquility in the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||4]|6]|
Bat Il (862-2)
chhakaa 1|| First set of six. ||
Td Ts HI u veue we Y (862-3) raag gond mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Gond, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsas ure II (862-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS Ads" AS JAS NA FIC Il (862-4, as, ue 5) sabh kartaa sabh bhugtaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Creator of all, He is the Enjoyer of all. ||1]|Pause]|
Hos Ads UNS ATS Il (862-4, as, v2 5) sunto kartaa paykhat kartaa. The Creator listens, and the Creator sees.
mifene wast fens AIST Il (862-4, Hs, us 5) adristo kartaa daristo kartaa. The Creator is unseen, and the Creator is seen.
Gufs AIS UuTHES ATS Il (862-5, Hs, v2 5) opat kartaa parla-o kartaa. The Creator forms, and the Creator destroys.
fimrys agst mifsus AIST WAU (862-5, as, He 5) bi-aapat kartaa alipato kartaa. ||1]| The Creator touches, and the Creator is detached. ||1||
YAS ATS FSS ATT Il (862-5, Hs, we 5) bakto kartaa boojhat kartaa. The Creator is the One who speaks, and the Creator is the One who understands.
MSS ATS AS St ATS Ill (862-6, as, He 5) aavat kartaa jaat bhee kartaa. The Creator comes, and the Creator also goes.
fSdIs ATS" ATAS ATS Il (862-6, as, vz 5)
nirgun kartaa sargun kartaa.
The Creator is absolute and without qualities; the Creator is related, with the most excellent qualities.
Ts YAS SSX AHPEACT MUA (862-6, a's, He 5) gur parsaad naanak samdristaa. ||2||1|| By Guru's Grace, Nanak looks upon all the same. ||2]|1||
as HIS U Il (862-7)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
stas His afua at famret 5 Cals ato aHstEs 11 (862-7, ats, wu: 5)
faaki-o meen kapik kee ni-aa-ee too urajh rahi-o kasumbhaa-ilay.
You are caught, like the fish and the monkey; you are entangled in the transitory world.
ud wets AA Ba & 36 Cuefs ofs Te WES Al (962-7, as, He 5)
pag Dhaareh saas laykhai lai ta-o uDhrahi har gun gaa-ilay. ||1||
Your foot-steps and your breaths are numbered; only by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord will you be saved. ||1]|
HO AHS efs nietEs I (862-8, as, 42 5) man samajh chhod aavaa-ilay. O mind, reform yourself, and forsake your aimless wandering.
nus do AG oGs 5 UWefs aS ug a ATES INA TIE Il (g62-8, Hs, nz 5)
apnay rahan ka-o tha-ur na paavahi kaa-ay par kai jaa-ilay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You have found no place of rest for yourself; so why do you try to teach others? ||1]|Pause] |
fa Hae fect off Ufss 3 afar ufss acatEs Il (802-9, as, us 5) ji-o maigal indree ras parayri-o too laag pari-o kutambaa-ilay. Like the elephant, driven by sexual desire, you are attached to your family.
fa@ udt frag df fefs fed fag Hafs ofe afe femrfEs 21 (62-10, as, H2 5)
ji-o pankhee ikatar ho-ay fir bichhurai thir sangat har har Dhi-aa-ilay. ||2]|
People are like birds that come together, and fly apart again; you shall become stable and steady, only when you meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, in the Company of the Holy. ||2]|
nA Hig sHo Ate faofhe GI HS Ha BItEs I (862-11, ds, we 5)
jaisay meen rasan saad binsi-o oh moothou moorh lobhaa-ilay.
Like the fish, which perishes because of its desire to taste, the fool is ruined by his greed.
3 dor us oth Sct & sels ug AaSTeS MSI (862-11, ats, Hs 5)
too ho-aa panch vaas vairee kai chhooteh par sarnaa-ilay. ||3]|
You have fallen under the power of the five thieves; escape is only possible in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||3]|
dg faurs die eu sho Afs Sue Ab HSAES II (802-12, Hs, 48 5)
hohu kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan sabh tum"ray jee-a jantaa-ilay.
Be Merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the meek; all beings and creatures belong to You.
ure Ug Het VIA Ua fH Bod VA CATES III (862-12, as, He 5)
paava-o daan sadaa daras paykhaa mil naanak daas dasaa-ilay. | |4]||2| |
May I obtain the gift of always seeing the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; meeting with You, Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. ||4]|2]|
Td Ts HI u vue we 2 (g62-14) raag gond mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 2 Raag Gond, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:
qe Afsars ure II (862-14) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aba yrs ote fate ATT I (862-15, as, 48 5) jee-a paraan kee-ay jin saaj. He fashioned the soul and the breath of life,
Het ufo Afs set foerfat i (862-15, as, 42 5) maatee meh jot rakhee nivaaj. and infused His Light into the dust;
ads0 AG AS fas SH SATE Il (862-15, Hs, v2 5) bartan ka-o sabh kichh bhojan bhogaa-ay. He exalted you and gave you everything to use, and food to eat and enjoy
A ys sft HS AS ATE AI (862-16, as, Hs 5) so parabh taj moorhay kat jaa-ay. ||1|| - how can you forsake that God, you fool! Where else will you go? ||1]|
UTIAIH at BAC AS Il (862-16, as, us 5) paarbarahm kee laaga-o sayv. Commit yourself to the service of the Transcendent Lord.
ad 3 AS fedne FS Ul TICS Il (962-16, H's, v2 5) gur tay sujhai niranjan dayv. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Guru, one understands the Immaculate, Divine Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
fafe ate gat nifea ugars Il (862-17, Fs, v2 5) jin kee-ay rang anik parkaar.
He created plays and dramas of all sorts; Gufs use faHy HET Il (862-17, as, H 5) opat parla-o nimakh majhaar.
He creates and destroys in an instant;
vw at afs fufS adt o Afe I (862-17, as, v2 5) jaa kee gat mit kahee na jaa-ay. His state and condition cannot be described.
A yg Ho Ad Het forfe iI (962-18, as, v2 5) so parabh man mayray sadaa Dhi-aa-ay. ||2]| Meditate forever on that God, O my mind. ||2||
wife 3 AS fess Tot Il (862-18, Hs, He 5) aa-ay na jaavai nihchal Dhanee. The unchanging Lord does not come or go.
Bis To" 3 A ASA Tot Il (862-18, as, Hs 5) bay-ant gunaa taa kay kaytak ganee. His Glorious Virtues are infinite; how many of them can I count?
UST tés
GS OH AH aA Sd SBP Il (863-1, Fs, v2 5) laal naam jaa kai bharay bhandaar. His treasure is overflowing with the rubies of the Name.
Ade wet SS nimarg |ISIil (863-1, Hs, 43 5)
sagal ghataa dayvai aaDhaar. ||3]|| He gives Support to all hearts. ||3]|
AS use AT a DT OTE Il (863-1, Fs, He 5) sat purakh jaa ko hai naa-o. The Name is the True Primal Being;
frets afe ony for AA aE Il (863-1, as, He 5) miteh kot agh nimakh jas gaa-o. millions of sins are washed away in an instant, singing His Praises.
we Aue saso a HIS Il (863-2, as, v2 5) baal sakhaa-ee bhagtan ko meet. The Lord God is your best friend, your playmate from earliest childhood.
UTS MOTs SSA fs BS ISuASil (g63-2, as, ws 5) paraan aDhaar naanak hit cheet. ||4||1]|3]|
He is the Support of the breath of life; O Nanak, He is love, He is consciousness. 41211311
as HIS U Il (863-3)
gond mehlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
oH Afa ate faBas Il (863-3, Hs, He 5) naam sang keeno bi-uhaar. I trade in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
OH dt EA HS AT MOTE Il (863-3, Hs, He 5) naamo hee is man kaa aDhaar. The Naam is the Support of the mind.
oH dt fats atat Be I (863-3, as, nu: 5) naamo hee chit keenee ot. My consciousness takes to the Shelter of the Naam.
oy Aus fiefs uns afe I (863-4, as, He 5) naam japat miteh paap kot. ||1|| Chanting the Naam, millions of sins are erased. ||1||
oth tet ofa Sat SNH Il (863-4, Hs, He 5) raas dee-ee har ayko naam. The Lord has blessed me with the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
Ho @ fens ad Af fore ail TIS I (863-4, a's, v2 5)
man kaa isat gur sang Dhi-aan. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The wish of my mind is to meditate on the Naam, in association with the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
OH IHS Aba at TH Il (863-5, as, He 5) naam hamaaray jee-a kee raas. The Naam is the wealth of my soul.
OH Halt AS AS AS Il (863-5, as, v2 5) naamo sangee jat kat jaat. Wherever I go, the Naam is with me.
oH dt xfs war ter il (963-5, as, He 5) naamo hee man laagaa meethaa. The Naam is sweet to my mind.
nfs af As ufo oH Stor III (863-6, as, He 5) jal thal sabh meh naamo deethaa. ||2|| In the water, on the land, and everywhere, I see the Naam. ||2||
OH dT HY BAS Il (863-6, as, He 5) naamay dargeh mukh ujlay. Through the Naam, one's face becomes radiant in the Court of the Lord.
OH Ade As SU Il (863-6, as, vs 5) naamay saglay kul uDhray. Through the Naam, all one's generations are saved.
Ot THE ASA AIM Il (863-6, as, Hs 5) naam hamaaray kaaraj seeDh. Through the Naam, my affairs are resolved.
on Afar feg Hour afta Wil (363-7, as, Hs 5) naam sang ih manoo-aa geeDh. ||3]| My mind is accustomed to the Naam. ||3]||
oH dt JH fegsS Ze Il (863-7, as, He 5) naamay hee ham nirbha-o bha-ay. Through the Naam, I have become fearless.
OH MTSS ASO Fd Il (863-7, as, us 5) naamay aavan jaavan rahay. Through the Naam, my comings and goings have ceased.
Gfs us AS TESTA Il (863-8, as, Hs 5) gur poorai maylay guntaas. The Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
AI soa Ale Aol FSSA NINII (863-8, as, He 5) kaho naanak sukh sahj nivaas. ||4||2||4|| Says Nanak, I dwell in celestial peace. ||4||2||4||
as HIS U Il (863-8)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
fours aG A SS HT Il (863-9, as, He 5) nimaanay ka-o jo dayto maan. He grants honor to the dishonored,
AIS FH AG ATS UG Il (863-9, as, ve 5) sagal bhookhay ka-o kartaa daan. and gives gifts to all the hungry;
Is Us Hfsy IASI Il (863-9, Hs, ue 5) garabh ghor meh raakhanhaar. he protects those in the terrible womb.
fsH SAT AC Ae’ SHAG IIAll (863-9, as, He 5) tis thaakur ka-o sadaa namaskaar. ||1] | So humbly bow forever to that Lord and Master. ||1]|
MA Ys Ho Ho forte i (863-10, as, Hs 5) aiso parabh man maahi Dhi-aa-ay. Meditate on such a God in your mind.
ufe meufe AS asts AITE NA TIS Il (863-10, ds, He 5)
ghat avghat jat kateh sahaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He shall be your help and support everywhere, in good times and bad. ||1||Pause| |
da TE A a Sa ANTS Il (863-11, as, v2 5) rank raa-o jaa kai ayk samaan. The beggar and the king are all the same to Him.
ate TAS AGS UTS Il (863-11, Hy, He 5) keet hasat sagal pooraan. He sustains and fulfills both the ant and the elephant.
HE ufs 5 HASLS Us Il (863-11, ds, ws 5) bee-o poochh na maslat Dharai. He does not consult or seek anyone's advice.
A fae ad A nmufs ad IQI (863-11, as, v2 5) jo kichh karai so aapeh karai. ||2|| Whatever He does, He does Himself. ||2||
W at nis 3 ASA Ate Il (863-12, as, He 5) jaa kaa ant na jaanas ko-ay. No one knows His limit.
nmt vif fadre ATE Il (863-12, as, He 5) aapay aap niranjan so-ay. He Himself is the Immaculate Lord.
mify mars vif fadarg Il (863-12, as, He 5) aap akaar aap nirankaar. He Himself is formed, and He Himself is formless.
we we wife AS We ITU, |ISIl (863-13, as, He 5) ghat ghat ghat sabh ghat aaDhaar. ||3]| In the heart, in each and every heart, He is the Support of all hearts. ||3] |
aM df SIs FS BS Il (863-13, HS, H2 5)
naam rang bhagat bha-ay laal.
Through the Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the devotees become His Beloveds.
AA Ads AS Aet fSIs Il (863-13, a's, He 5) jas kartay sant sadaa nihaal. Singing the Praises of the Creator, the Saints are forever in bliss.
OH Shar AS TI mUMe | (863-14, as, 18 5) naam rang jan rahay aghaa-ay. Through the Love of the Naam, the Lord's humble servants remain satisfied.
ood fsa Ho Bat uf! IsiBiUll (963-14, a's, He 5) naanak tin jan laagai paa-ay. ||4||3]|5|| Nanak falls at the feet of those humble servants of the Lord. ||4]|3]|5]|
aS HIS U Il (863-14)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Ww ot Afar feg Ho fesHS Il (863-15, a's, v2 5) jaa kai sang ih man nirmal. Associating with them, this mind becomes immaculate and pure.
Ww a Afa ofa ofa finee Il (863-15, as, He 5) jaa kai sang har har simran. Associating with them, one meditates in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har.
wo Afar faofie dfs oA Il (863-15, as, He 5) jaa kai sang kilbikh hohi naas. Associating with them, all the sins are erased.
W ot Afar foe UsaA IAI (863-15, Hs, He 5) jaa kai sang ridai pargaas. ||1]|| Associating with them, the heart is illumined. ||1]|
A A306 dfs & A HIS Il (863-16, as, H2 5) say santan har kay mayray meet. Those Saints of the Lord are my friends.
ATG OH Tet AT a SIS NA TIC Il (863-16, Hs, 2 5) kayval naam gaa-ee-ai jaa kai neet. ||1|| rahaa-o. It is their custom to sing only the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
vw a fs afa afs Hfs SA Il (863-17, as, 48 5) jaa kai mantar har har man vasai. By their mantra, the Lord, Har, Har, dwells in the mind.
wa Quefh say SE OF Il (863-17, as, He 5) jaa kai updays bharam bha-o nasai. By their teachings, doubt and fear are dispelled.
Wa atefs fesHe ATE Il (863-17, ds, Hz 5) jaa kai keerat nirmal saar. By their kirtan, they become immaculate and sublime.
W at So se AAT III (863-18, Hs, He 5) jaa kee rayn baa‘chhai sansaar. ||2]| The world longs for the dust of their feet. ||2||
afe ufss at a Afat Bure Il (863-18, a3, 2 5) kot patit jaa kai sang uDhaar. Millions of sinners are saved by associating with them.
Sa fadarg AT a OH MUTE Il (803-18, as, He 5) ayk nirankaar jaa kai naam aDhaar. They have the Support of the Name of the One Formless Lord.
Hae Amit ar ATS SE Il (863-19, as, He 5) sarab jee-aa™ kaa jaanai bhay-o. He knows the secrets of all beings;
faut fours fodre FB Sil (963-19, as, He 5) kirpaa niDhaan niranjan day-o. ||3]| He is the treasure of mercy, the divine immaculate Lord. ||3]|
UTIAIH Aa SS fXUTH il (863-19, as, us 5) paarbarahm jab bha-ay kirpaal. When the Supreme Lord God becomes merciful,
3a 3S TI AT Sens Il (863-19, Hs, He 5) tab bhaytay gur saaDh da-i-aal. then one meets the Merciful Holy Guru.
UST tés
feo df= sea oH fomre II (864-1, as, He 5) din rain naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay. Day and night, Nanak meditates on the Naam.
AY Ada MiSs Tid SS ISISIEll (864-1, a3, He 5) sookh sahj aanand har naa-ay. ||4||4]|6]| Through the Lord's Name, he is blessed with peace, poise and bliss. ||4||4]|6||
HS HIS U Il (864-1) gond mehlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
ad at Hats Ho ufa fame I (864-2, ds, 42 5) gur kee moorat man meh Dhi-aan. Meditate on the image of the Guru within your mind;
Ta & Aafe HZ HO HTS Il (864-2, as, v2 5) gur kai sabad mantar man maan. let your mind accept the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and His Mantra.
Gd a vse fae & ars Il (964-2, ats, ve 5) gur kay charan ridai lai Dhaara-o. Enshrine the Guru's feet within your heart.
TI UTFIH Ae’ SHAASS |All (864-3, ats, ne 5) gur paarbarahm sadaa namaskaara-o. ||1|| Bow in humility forever before the Guru, the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
HS & Saf 3S AAS Il (s64-3, a's, v2 5) mat ko bharam bhulai sansaar. Let no one wander in doubt in the world.
ad fag afe o sath uta nan soe Il (864-3, as, He 5) gur bin ko-ay na utras paar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Guru, no one can cross over. ||1||Pause| |
38 a8 ats Hata ufenr i (864-4, as, H 5) bhoolay ka-o gur maarag paa-i-aa. The Guru shows the Path to those who have wandered off.
med fsurfa ats sat fener I (864-4, as, us 5)
avar ti-aag har bhagtee laa-i-aa.
He leads them to renounce others, and attaches them to devotional worship of the Lord.
HOH Hao at STA fHeTet Il (864-4, as, 2 5)
janam maran kee taraas mitaa-ee. He obliterates the fear of birth and death.
TS UT at MIT Sse |i (864-5, ay, v2 5) gur pooray kee bay-ant vadaa-ee. ||2|| The glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru is endless. ||2||
as yAte Cau ane faare Il (864-5, as, nH 5) gur parsaad ooraDh kamal bigaas. By Guru's Grace, the inverted heart-lotus blossoms forth,
nivers His sf yar il (364-5, ds, He 5) anDhkaar meh bha-i-aa pargaas. and the Light shines forth in the darkness.
fafs oer A aa 3 wWfonr Il (864-6, a's, H2 5) jin kee-aa so gur tay jaani-aa. Through the Guru, know the One who created you.
ad fasur 3 Ha He HSM SII (864-6, as, v8 5) gur kirpaa tay mugaDh man maanic-aa. ||3]| By the Guru's Mercy, the foolish mind comes to believe. ||3]|
TT AGS’ TT ATS AT Il (864-6, as, 2 5) gur kartaa gur karnai jog. The Guru is the Creator; the Guru has the power to do everything.
Ge USHA J St IT Il (864-7, as, He 5) gur parmaysar hai bhee hog. The Guru is the Transcendent Lord; He is, and always shall be.
ag aad ufs fed Aaret Il (864-7, as, ue 5) kaho naanak parabh ihai janaa-ee. Says Nanak, God has inspired me to know this.
faa ad Hats o ure set ISINUIDI (864-7, as, He 5) bin gur mukat na paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee. ||4||5]|7]| Without the Guru, liberation is not obtained, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4]|5]|7]|
as HIS U Il (864-8)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
TT TI Ts ahs Hs HT Il (864-8, ds, we 5) guroo guroo gur kar man mor. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind.
Og fas H ast FT Il (64-8, ds, uz 5) guroo binaa mai naahee hor. I have no other than the Guru.
ad at 2a sag fea TS Il (964-9, ats, 3 5) gur kee tayk rahhu din raat. I lean upon the Support of the Guru, day and night.
vw at afe & HS BTS IAI (864-9, as, He 5) jaa kee ko-ay na maytai daat. ||1]| No one can decrease His bounty. ||1]||
TI USHA Sa AS Il (864-9, Hs, He 5) gur parmaysar ayko jaan. Know that the Guru and the Transcendent Lord are One.
A fA oS A UsSTS NU TIS Il (864-9, as, 2 5) jo tis bhaavai so parvaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever pleases Him is acceptable and approved. ||1||Pause] |
Ts Vast AW ATH Ba Il (864-10, Hs, ve 5) gur charnee jaa kaa man laagai. One whose mind is attached to the Guru's feet
SY UIT FH St A Sa Il (864-10, as, 2 5) dookh darad bharam taa kaa bhaagai. - his pains, sufferings and doubts run away.
TT At AST UTS HTS Il (864-10, a's, He 5) gur kee sayvaa paa-ay maan. Serving the Guru, honor is obtained.
ad Cufs HET AIAG ll (864-11, ds, ve 5) gur oopar sadaa kurbaan. ||2| | I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru. ||2]|
Td HT SIA Ufy feos Il (s64-11, as, vs 5) gur kaa darsan daykh nihaal. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I am exalted.
TT A ASA at UTS WS Il (864-11, sy, 2 5) gur kay sayvak kee pooran ghaal. The work of the Guru's servant is perfect.
dd a Aza a vy & famed I (964-12, as, 2 5) gur kay sayvak ka-o dukh na bi-aapai. Pain does not afflict the Guru's servant.
ad a Aza vs fete AU NWSI (864-12, as, He 5) gur kaa sayvak dah dis jaapai. ||3]| The Guru's servant is famous in the ten directions. ||3]|
ds at HfgH" AAG B ATE Il (864-12, as, 3 5) gur kee mahimaa kathan na jaa-ay. The Guru's glory cannot be described.
UTSTIH WT Snr ANTE | (864-13, as, Ws 5) paarbarahm gur rahi-aa samaa-ay. The Guru remains absorbed in the Supreme Lord God.
TIT HSA AT UT SMa Il (864-13, as, we 5) kaho naanak jaa kay pooray bhaag. Says Nanak, one who is blessed with perfect destiny
Ts Vat Sk AHS Ba NUENCH (864-13, as, vs 5)
gur charnee taa kaa man laag. ||4||6]|8]| - his mind is attached to the Guru's feet. ||4]|6]|8] |
as HIS U Il (864-14)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Og Hest uA Te aE il (964-14, as, us 5) gur mayree poojaa gur gobind. I worship and adore my Guru; the Guru is the Lord of the Universe.
TI AT USI WT SASS Il (864-14, as, ue 5) gur mayraa paarbarahm gur bhagvant. My Guru is the Supreme Lord God; the Guru is the Lord God.
Ts Aa SE ney nis Il (364-14, as, v3 5) gur mayraa day-o alakh abhay-o. My Guru is divine, invisible and mysterious.
Ada UA BIS TT AS Al (864-15, ay, w2 5) sarab pooj charan gur say-o. ||1|| I serve at the Guru's feet, which are worshipped by all. ||1]|
ad fag neg adt A aS Il (864-15, as, He 5) gur bin avar naahee mai thaa-o. Without the Guru, I have no other place at all.
Motes AUS TT TI SS NU! TIS Il (864-15, ay, we 5) an-din japa-o guroo gur naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Night and day, I chant the Name of Guru, Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
ag As famre ag fee fore il (864-16, as, He 5)
gur mayraa gi-aan gur ridai Dhi-aan.
The Guru is my spiritual wisdom, the Guru is the meditation within my heart. TST AUB UTY FISTS Il (864-16, a's, He 5)
gur gopaal purakh bhagvaan. The Guru is the Lord of the World, the Primal Being, the Lord God.
ad at Hafs go ag Fife Il (964-17, as, He 5) gur kee saran raha-o kar jor. With my palms pressed together, I remain in the Guru's Sanctuary.
Og fast A sat FT iQ (864-17, as, us 5) guroo binaa mai naahee hor. ||2]| Without the Guru, I have no other at all. ||2]|
ag Sfog ad se urs il (864-17, as, ne 5) gur bohith taaray bhav paar. The Guru is the boat to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
ad AS AH 3 Seats Il (964-18, as, ue 5) gur sayvaa jam tay chhutkaar. Serving the Guru, one is released from the Messenger of Death.
nigerd His Ta HZ SAI I (864-18, as, He 5) anDhkaar meh gur mantar ujaaraa. In the darkness, the Guru's Mantra shines forth.
Td a Afar Aas fSASTa iSll (s64-18, as, v2 5) gur kai sang sagal nistaaraa. ||3]|| With the Guru, all are saved. ||3]|
TT UT uct Fara Il (864-19, as, us 5) gur pooraa paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee. The Perfect Guru is found, by great good fortune.
TT at AS SY F Bail Il (864-19, a3, w2 5) gur kee sayvaa dookh na laagee. Serving the Guru, pain does not afflict anyone.
yA oS
Td A AE 6 He Ale Il (364-19, as, 8 5) gur kaa sabad na maytai ko-ay. No one can erase the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
TT Soa BSA Tis AfE SDI (g64-19, as, He 5) gur naanak naanak har so-ay. ||4||7||9]| Nanak is the Guru; Nanak is the Lord Himself. ||4]|7]||9]|
User téu
Hs HIS U Il (865-1) gond mehlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
oH TH Afar afs faBas I (865-1, as, He 5) raam raam sang kar bi-uhaar. Deal and trade only with the Lord, Raam, Raam.
TH TH SH YTS MU" Il (865-1, as, He 5) raam raam raam paraan aDhaar. The Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, is the Support of the breath of life.
TH TH TH atasq ATE Il (865-2, as, ue 5) raam raam raam keertan gaa-ay. Sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
IHS TH AS SfoS ANTE All (865-2, a's, He 5) ramat raam sabh rahi-o samaa-ay. ||1|| The Lord is ever-present, all-pervading. ||1]||
Ha Hort ffs se TH Il (865-2, ats, 12 5) sant janaa mil bolhu raam. Joining the humble Saints, chant the Lord's Name.
AS 3 fogHe UIs AH NA TIE Il (865-3, as, 42 5) sabh tay nirmal pooran kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is the most immaculate and perfect occupation of all. ||1]]|Pause] |
TH TH UG Afs F3"e Il (865-3, ds, Hz 5) raam raam Dhan sanch bhandaar. Gather the treasure, the wealth of the Lord, Raam, Raam.
IH TH IH afd MITTS Il (865-3, Fs, He 5) raam raam raam kar aahaar. Let your sustenance be the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
TH TH Stats odt ATE Il (965-4, as, He 5) raam raam veesar nahee jaa-ay. Never forget the Lord, Raam, Raam.
ate fasur afs thor gate iQ (965-4, as, He 5) kar kirpaa gur dee-aa bataa-ay. ||2]| In His Mercy, the Guru has revealed this to me. ||2||
OH TH TH Ae AOE Il (865-4, as, He 5) raam raam raam sadaa sahaa-ay. The Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, is always our help and support.
TH TH TH fs BLE Il (865-5, as, He 5) raam raam raam liv laa-ay. Embrace love for the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
TH TH Aly fegHs Se Il (865-5, Fs, He 5) raam raam jap nirmal bha-ay. Through the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, I have become immaculate.
HOH HOH & foaafas TE ill (865-5, Hs, v8 5) janam janam kay kilbikh ga-ay. ||3]| The sins of countless incarnations have been taken away. ||3]|
SHS TH HOH HIS fHeTs Il (865-6, Hs, He 5) ramat raam janam maran nivaarai. Uttering the Lord's Name, birth and death are finished.
Guss TH 8 Ufa Bars Il (865-6, Hs, He 5) uchrat raam bhai paar utaarai. Repeating the Lord's Name, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
AS 3 BU TH USA Il (865-6, a3, H2 5) sabh tay ooch raam pargaas. The Luminous Lord is the highest of all.
fofA ag Af SSA VA INITIO! (865-7, Fs, H2 5)
nis baasur jap naanak daas. ||4||8]|10]| Night and day, servant Nanak meditates on Him. ||4]|8]|10||
as HIS U Il (865-7)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Boa a@ uAfh atat Stags Il (865-7, as, He 5) un ka-o khasam keenee thaakhaaray. My Lord and Master has held back the five demons.
aA Ha 3 ue fers Il (965-7, as, He 5) daas sang tay maar bidaaray. He conquered them, and scared them away from the Lord's slave.
dae SAS aT HIG B ufEnt | (865-8, Hs, He 5) gobind bhagat kaa mahal na paa-i-aa. They cannot find the mansion of the Lord's devotee.
oH Hort fife Hare arfenr Wail (g65-3, Fs, v8 5) raam janaa mil mangal gaa-i-aa. ||1]| Joining together, the Lord's humble servants sing the songs of joy. ||1]|
Rares fAfe & us frees I (865-9, as, 42 5) Sagal sarisat kay panch sikdaar. The five demons are the rulers of the whole world,
TH SIS A UST ST IAI TIC Il (865-9, ds, nz 5) raam bhagat kay paaneehaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. but they are just water-carriers for the Lord's devotee. ||1]||Pause] |
AIS UA 3 BS BG Il (865-9, Fs, H2 5) jagat paas tay laytay daan. They collect taxes from the world,
disse sas AG asf ABA Il (865-10, Hs, v2 5) gobind bhagat ka-o karahi salaam. but they bow in subservience to God's devotees.
Ble Sa AAS ufs des I (865-10, Hs, He 5) loot layhi saakat pat khoveh. They plunder and dishonor the faithless cynics,
Ag Aor ual Hf Hf Gefs QI (s65-10, Hs, 2 5) saaDh janaa pag mal mal Dhoveh. ||2|| but they massage and wash the feet of the Holy. ||2]|
us us we fea He Il (865-11, as, 8 5) panch poot janay ik maa-ay. The One Mother gave birth to the five sons,
@33an Ye ats aS fenrf=e Il (865-11, as, 42 5) ut-bhuj khayl kar jagat vi-aa-ay. and began the play of the created world.
sifs gat a Fifa af FA Il (865-11, a3, He 5) teen gunaa kai sang rach rasay. With the three qualities joined together, they celebrate.
feo ag efs Gufs Ae FA ISI (865-12, as, Hs 5) in ka-o chhod oopar jan basay. ||3]| Renouncing these three qualities, the Lord's humble servants rise above them. ||3]|
ate fasur Ae Ble Sate Il (365-12, a's, v2 5) kar kirpaa jan lee-ay chhadaa-ay. In His Mercy, He saves His humble servants.
fan a A fats sa Jets il (365-12, as, vs 5) jis kay say tin rakhay hataa-ay. They belong to Him, and so He saves them by driving out the five.
AT soa Sats Ys ATE Il (865-13, a's, ue 5) kaho naanak bhagat parabh saar. Says Nanak, devotion to God is noble and sublime.
fag saat AS of urs SIENA (865-13, Hs, He 5) bin bhagtee sabh ho-ay khu-aar. ||4]|9]]11]| Without devotion, all just waste away uselessly. ||4]|9]|11]|
as HIS U Il (865-13)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
ates XGA fee dfs ote Il (965-13, as, He 5) kal kalays mitay har naa-ay. Suffering and troubles are eradicated by the Lord's Name.
eu faorn AY ats aE Il (s65-14, as, 2 5) dukh binsay sukh keeno thaa-o. Pain is dispelled, and peace takes its place.
atu afu nifgs oa mre Il (965-14, as, He 5) jap jap amrit naam aghaa-ay. Meditating, chanting the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied.
AS YAS Aas SH UTE MAUI (865-14, at's, He 5) sant parsaad sagal fal paa-ay. ||1]| By the Grace of the Saints, I have received all fruitful rewards. ||1]|
TH AUS AS UTT Us Il (865-15, a3, He 5) raam japat jan paar paray. Meditating on the Lord, His humble servant is carried across,
HOH HOH & UY TF MAU TIS Il (865-15, ds, He 5) janam janam kay paap haray. ||1|| rahaa-o. and the sins of countless incarnations are taken away. ||1||Pause] |
ad a vse fae Cfs ws Il (965-15, Hs, He 5) gur kay charan ridai ur Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Guru's feet within my heart,
Male Aad 3 SSI Urs Il (865-16, Hs, Hz 5) agan saagar tay utray paaray. and crossed over the ocean of fire.
HOH Hee AS feet Buriat i (965-16, as, nH 5)
janam maran sabh mitee upaaDh. All the painful diseases of birth and death have been eradicated.
ys fAG orait Hota ANTE NII (865-16, as, He 5) parabh si-o laagee sahj samaaDh. ||2| | I am attached to God in celestial Samaadhi. ||2||
We goats Sa AMM I (865-17, as, ue 5) thaan thanantar ayko su-aamee. In all places and interspaces, the One, our Lord and Master is contained.
Aas wet at nissan Il (865-17, as, He 5) sagal ghataa kaa antarjaamee. He is the Inner-knower of all hearts.
ate fasur AT a Hfs ef I (965-17, as, He 5) kar kirpaa jaa ka-o mat day-ay. One whom the Lord blesses with understanding,
MTS UIT YS aT aS SE Sli (865-18, as, we 5) aath pahar parabh kaa naa-o lay-ay. ||3]| chants the Name of God, twenty-four hours a day. ||3]|
wa nists SA us rfl il (g65-18, as, 4 5) jaa kai antar vasai parabh aap. Deep within, God Himself abides;
a a fase df Yar Il (865-18, as, He 5) taa kai hirdai ho-ay pargaas. within his heart, the Divine Light shines forth.
sats afe afs atase adit I (865-19, as, 2 5) bhagat bhaa-ay har keertan karee-ai. With loving devotion, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
Af ursqan sta fens WSIouIil (865-19, as, He 5) jap paarbarahm naanak nistaree-ai. ||4]|10]|12]| Meditate on the Supreme Lord God, O Nanak, and you shall be saved. ||4||10||12||
as HIS U Il (865-19)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Yat céE
Td X BIS AHS SHAAN Il (366-1, Hs, 42 5) gur kay charan kamal namaskaar. Bow in humility to the lotus feet of the Guru.
an au feR 3a 3 HG II (866-1, Hs, He 5) kaam kroDh is tan tay maar. Eliminate sexual desire and anger from this body.
df= sdba Aare at Stat Il (866-1, a's, v2 5) ho-ay rahee-ai sagal kee reenaa. Be the dust of all,
we whe gHeor AS Hfs BST IA (866-2, as, He 5)
ghat ghat rama-ee-aa sabh meh cheenaa. ||1]|| and see the Lord in each and every heart, in all. ||1]|
feo fafa arg atures af#z I (g06-2, as, 2 5) in biDh ramhu gopaal gobind. In this way, dwell upon the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe.
36 0S ys a us at fe NA TIC Il (866-2, as, He 5) tan Dhan parabh kaa parabh kee jind. ||1|| rahaa-o. My body and wealth belong to God; my soul belongs to God. ||1]|Pause| |
MS Udd Tid X TE WES Il (966-3, as, vs 5) aath pahar har kay gun gaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
riba ure & fed Avr I (866-3, as, Hs 5) jee-a paraan ko ihai su-aa-o. This is the purpose of human life.
sf mfsus AS Us Afar Il (866-3, as, Hs 5) taj abhimaan jaan parabh sang. Renounce your egotistical pride, and know that God is with you.
AG UAE dfs fe He Sar MQM (866-4, as, Hs 5) saaDh parsaad har si-o man rang. ||2]| By the Grace of the Holy, let your mind be imbued with the Lord's Love. ||2]|
fate 3 ator fSA aS AG Il (866-4, ds, Hs 5) jin too’ kee-aa tis ka-o jaan. Know the One who created you,
WITdl FIAT UTS HIG Il (866-4, Hs, He 5)
aagai dargeh paavai maan. and in the world hereafter you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
Ho 36 fosne dfe fers Il (866-5, as, H2 5) man tan nirmal ho-ay nihaal. Your mind and body will be immaculate and blissful;
dHoT SH AUS GUS IlSil (g66-5, Hs, 2 5) rasnaa naam japat gopaal. ||3|| chant the Name of the Lord of the Universe with your tongue. ||3]|
ate fasut HS ete efeEniar Il (g66-5, as, v8 5) kar kirpaa mayray deen da-i-aalaa. Grant Your Kind Mercy, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek.
AY at HE Hat ISTH Il (866-6, a's, He 5) saaDhoo kee man mangai ravaalaa. My mind begs for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
dg tens FI us BS Il (866-6, Hs, He 5) hohu da-i-aal dayh parabh daan. Be merciful, and bless me with this gift,
ood Afy HS YS SH IBIIUIIII (866-6, as, He 5) naanak jap jeevai parabh naam. ||4||11]|13]| that Nanak may live, chanting God's Name. ||4]]11]|13]|
as HIS U Il (866-7)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
gu atu AS TUS Il (866-7, as, Hz 5) Dhoop deep sayvaa gopaal. My incense and lamps are my service to the Lord.
wMfodk IS FeH ATS Il (866-7, as, v3 5) anik baar bandan kartaar. Time and time again, I humbly bow to the Creator.
ys at Aafe adt As fsurfar il (s66-7, Hs, He 5) parabh kee saran gahee sabh ti-aag. I have renounced everything, and grasped the Sanctuary of God.
TI AYAS se SS Sa |All (866-8, as, us 5) gur suparsan bha-ay vad bhaag. ||1]| By great good fortune, the Guru has become pleased and satisfied with me. ||1]]|
nS ude aah afHe Il (s66-8, as, He 5) aath pahar gaa-ee-ai gobind. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing of the Lord of the Universe.
36 0S ys a us at fae A TIC Il (866-8, as, He 5) tan Dhan parabh kaa parabh kee jind. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My body and wealth belong to God; my soul belongs to God. ||1]|Pause| |
Ufs TE FHS FS TST Il (806-9, as, vs 5) har gun ramat bha-ay aanand. Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I am in bliss.
UTIYIH UTS TWAS Il (866-9, as, Hz 5) paarbarahm pooran bakhsand. The Supreme Lord God is the Perfect Forgiver.
ate faxsut AS AST BE Il (866-9, d's, uz 5) kar kirpaa jan sayvaa laa-ay. Granting His Mercy, He has linked His humble servants to His service.
HOH Hd uy Af] fs Il (g66-10, as, v8 5) janam maran dukh mayt milaa-ay. ||2|| He has rid me of the pains of birth and death, and merged me with Himself. ||2||
aan aan feg 33 fami Il (866-10, as, 42 5)
karam Dharam ih tat gi-aan. This is the essence of karma, righteous conduct and spiritual wisdom,
AH fa wuba dfs SH Il (g66-10, as, He 5) saaDhsang japee-ai har naam. to chant the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Wad 3fs sfva ys BIS Il (866-11, Hs, us 5) saagar tar bohith parabh charan. God's Feet are the boat to cross over the world-ocean.
nissHHt YS AGE ATE ISI (866-11, ds, we 5) antarjaamee parabh kaaran karan. ||3]| God, the Inner-knower, is the Cause of causes. ||3]|
afte ote nat fsur ots il (s66-11, as, v8 5) raakh lee-ay apnee kirpaa Dhaar. Showering His Mercy, He Himself has saved me.
Us Es sat faKIS Il (866-12, as, He 5) panch doot bhaagay bikraal. The five hideous demons have run away.
WM FOH 6 AAT TT Il (866-12, ds, we 5) joo-ai janam na kabhoo haar. Do not lose your life in the gamble.
SSA AT nigh Ahat TISHT USUAVIAIl (866-12, Fs, He 5)
naanak kaa ang kee-aa kartaar. ||4||12||14] | The Creator Lord has taken Nanak's side. ||4]|12]]14]|
as HIS U Il (866-13)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
ate fasur AY noe ASE Il (866-13, as, He 5) kar kirpaa sukh anad karay-i. In His Mercy, He has blessed me with peace and bliss.
wea sty Be TIefeS i (806-13, ds, uz 5) baalak raakh lee-ay gurdayv. The Divine Guru has saved His child.
ys forsues vfemis afe Il (866-13, a3, 48 5) parabh kirpaal da-i-aal gobind. God is kind and compassionate; He is the Lord of the Universe.
aba HS AAS safAe Al (g66-14, as, He 5) jee-a jant saglay bakhsind. ||1]|
He forgives all beings and creatures. ||1]| sot Aafe ys ce cfenis Il (866-14, as, 48 5)
tayree saran parabh deen da-i-aal. I seek Your Sanctuary, O God, O Merciful to the meek.
UTaqaH Afy Het fess WA TI'S i (866-15, ds, Hs 5) paarbarahm jap sadaa nihaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Supreme Lord God, I am forever in ecstasy. ||1||Pause| |
ys viens EAT at ara Il (866-15, a3, 48 5) parabh da-i-aal doosar ko-ee naahee. There is no other like the Merciful Lord God.
we we nists Ads ANTS Il (866-15, Ts, He 5) ghat ghat antar sarab samaahee. He is contained deep within each and every heart.
WUS BA AT IGS UBS ASTd Il (866-16, HS, v2 5) apnay daas kaa halat palat savaarai. He embellishes His slave, here and hereafter.
ufsz wee ys fase SHS III (866-16, Hs, Hs 5)
patit paavan parabh birad tum"aarai. ||2|| It is Your nature, God, to purify sinners. ||2]|
m@ua afe fife afte i (866-16, a3, He 5) a-ukhaDh kot simar gobind. Meditation on the Lord of the Universe is the medicine to cure millions of illnesses.
33 HZ SAbH SASS Il (866-17, as, v2 5) tant mant bhajee-ai bhagvant. My Tantra and Mantra is to meditate, to vibrate upon the Lord God.
da Aa fixe ys fore it (966-17, as, v8 5) rog sog mitay parabh Dhi-aa-ay. Illnesses and pains are dispelled, meditating on God.
HS TST UTS SH UTS ISI (866-17, 3, H2 5) man baa'chhat pooran fal paa-ay. ||3]| The fruits of the mind's desires are fulfilled. ||3]|
ATS ATS AHIA Semis Il (366-18, as, He 5) karan kaaran samrath da-i-aar. He is the Cause of causes, the All-powerful Merciful Lord.
Hea feare HI sters Il (866-18, Hs, v2 5) sarab niDhaan mahaa beechaar. Contemplating Him is the greatest of all treasures.
Soa aufA Be yfs mrfu ii (866-18, ds, ne 5) naanak bakhas lee-ay parabh aap. God Himself has forgiven Nanak;
Het Het Sa ofa AY NSNASIAUII (66-19, as, 42 5)
sadaa sadaa ayko har jaap. ||4]|13]|15]| forever and ever, he chants the Name of the One Lord. ||4]|13]]15]|
as HIS U Il (866-19)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ots SH Aug He HTS Il (866-19, as, He 5) har har naam japahu mayray meet. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my friend.
UST téo
foones df sure BS Il (867-1, as, v8 5) nirmal ho-ay tum"aaraa cheet. Your consciousness shall become immaculate and pure.
Ho 36 at AS fe aete Il (867-1, as, v2 5) man tan kee sabh mitai balaa-ay. All the misfortunes of your mind and body shall be taken away,
Sy MTS Aa ATS AI (867-1, a3, He 5) dookh anDhayraa saglaa jaa-ay. ||1|| and all your pain and darkness will be dispelled. ||1]|
dfs TE Wes Sd AAT Il (867-2, as, v2 5) har gun gaavat taree-ai sansaar. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, cross over the world-ocean.
SS Sat usha use yrs NA TIS Il (867-2, Hs, v2 5) vad bhaagee paa-ee-ai purakh apaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. By great good fortune, one attains the Infinite Lord, the Primal Being. ||1]|Pause] |
HHO ad atese dus i SAH a ufo a AA ANAS Il (867-2, Hs, v2 5)
jo jan karai keertan gopaal. tis ka-o pohi na sakai jamkaal.
The Messenger of Death cannot even touch that humble being, who sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
Aa ufo orfenr A uses I ToHfe MRIs MAH UETES III (867-3, Hs, He 5) jag meh aa-i-aa so parvaan. gurmukh apnaa khasam pachhaan. ||2]|| The Gurmukh realizes his Lord and Master; his coming into this world is approved.
21 |
ofa we are AS YATE Il (867-4, Hs, He 5) har gun gaavai sant parsaad. He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, by the Grace of the Saints;
am au fiefs Bone Il (867-4, Hs, He 5) kaam kroDh miteh unmaad. his sexual desire, anger and madness are eradicated.
Het dats WE SHES Il (867-4, Hs, v2 5) sadaa hajoor jaan bhagvant. He knows the Lord God to be ever-present.
ud TT a YTS HT USI (867-5, as, wu 5) pooray gur kaa pooran mant. ||3]| This is the Perfect Teaching of the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
dfs ua wfe ate Fas Il (867-5, a's, He 5) har Dhan khaat kee-ay bhandaar. He earns the treasure of the Lord's wealth.
fife Afsas Afs aA ASS Il (867-5, as, v8 5) mil satgur sabh kaaj savaar. Meeting with the True Guru, all his affairs are resolved.
dfs & SH Sa Afal Aa I (867-5, as, Hz 5) har kay naam rang sang jaagaa. He is awake and aware in the Love of the Lord's Name;
Ts TISt SSA HS Bal" ISUASIAE! (867-6, as, v3 5)
har charnee naanak man laagaa. ||4||14]|16]| O Nanak, his mind is attached to the Lord's Feet. ||4||14]|16]|
as HIS U Il (867-6)
gond mehlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
se Aad Sfoa afs BIS Il (867-6, Hs, He 5) bhav saagar bohith har charan. The Lord's Feet are the boat to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
finds oH oct fefs Hee Il (867-7, as, He 5)
simrat naam naahee fir maran.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he does not die again.
Ufs TE FHS Bt AH UE Il (867-7, Hs, v2 5)
har gun ramat naahee jam panth.
Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, he does not have to walk on the Path of Death.
Ho deg us e3sT He MAI (867-7, ay, He 5) mahaa beechaar panch dootah manth. ||1|| Contemplating the Supreme Lord, the five demons are conquered. ||1||
38 AgEet UTS SE Il (967-8, a3, He 5) ta-o sarnaa-ee pooran naath. I have entered Your Sanctuary, O Perfect Lord and Master.
Hs nud a ctafs ga Al TIC Il (867-8, Hs, v2 5) jant apnay ka-o deejeh haath. ||1]| rahaa-o. Please give Your hand to Your creatures. ||1]||Pause] |
fAfyfs AAS Ae UTE Il (867-8, as, w3 5) simrit saastar bayd puraan. The Simritees, Shaastras, Vedas and Puraanas
USAIN at ata Semis i (867-9, ds, ne 5) paarbarahm kaa karahi vakhi-aan. expound upon the Supreme Lord God.
Haat ASt SAS THETA Il (867-9, as, He 5) jogee jatee baisno raamdaas. The Yogis, celibates, Vaishnavs and followers of Ram Das
ffs ordt gan mifaarA II (867-9, ds, 43 5) mit naahee barahm abinaas. ||2]| cannot find the limits of the Eternal Lord God. ||2]|
age UBT Aata fre SS Il (867-10, as, v2 5) karan palaah karahi siv dayv. Shiva and the gods lament and moan,
fe odt Feta ni MSS Il (867-10, a3, H2 5) til nahee boojheh alakh abhayv. but they do not understand even a tiny bit of the unseen and unknown Lord.
YH sofs fA mm fe I (867-10, ds, He 5) paraym bhagat jis aapay day-ay. One whom the Lord Himself blesses with loving devotional worship,
Aa Hf fess Aet afe SI (867-11, as, He 5) jag meh virlay kay-ee kay-ay. ||3]|
is very rare in this world. |[3]|
Hfa fasae ae fasg ofa il (g67-11, as, 2 5)
mohi nirgun gun kichhahoo naahi. I am worthless, with absolutely no virtue at all;
Rea fours Sot ferdt Hts i (867-11, as, He 5) sarab niDhaan tayree daristee maahi. all treasures are in Your Glance of Grace.
Sod te AS Sot AS Ill (867-12, as, w2 5) naanak deen jaachai tayree sayv. Nanak, the meek, desires only to serve You.
afs fac dA AIST USUI (867-12, as, v2 5) kar kirpaa deejai gurdayv. ||4]|15||17]| Please be merciful, and grant him this blessing, O Divine Guru. ||4]]15]|17]]|
as HIS U Il (867-13)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Hs a Sor gets fees il (867-13, a's, He 5) sant kaa lee-aa Dharat bidaara-o. One who is cursed by the Saints, is thrown down on the ground.
Hs ot feva marr 3 ag Il (867-13, as, He 5) sant kaa nindak akaas tay taara-o. The slanderer of the Saints is thrown down from the skies.
Hs a gu mus Abt ats Il (867-13, as, He 5) sant ka-o raakha-o apnay jee-a naal. I hold the Saints close to my soul.
Hs Care@ satis ahs Wail (867-14, as, He 5) sant uDhaara-o tat-khin taal. ||1]| The Saints are saved instantaneously. ||1||
Het As fa oS TH Il (867-14, Fs, He 5) so-ee sant je bhaavai raam. He alone is a Saint, who is pleasing to the Lord.
Ha afte & Sa AH NU TIS Il (867-14, as, v2 5) sant gobind kai aykai kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Saints, and God, have only one job to do. ||1]||Pause| |
Hs & Gufs efe ys TE Il (867-15, as, He 5) sant kai oopar day-ay parabh haath. God gives His hand to shelter the Saints.
Ha a& Afar aA fea TFS Il (867-15, as, He 5) sant kai sang basai din raat. He dwells with His Saints, day and night.
Ata ATA Aso Ufsurfe i (867-15, as, He 5) Saas Saas santeh partipaal. With each and every breath, He cherishes His Saints.
As ot set TH S Shs QM (g67-16, Hs, 2 5) sant kaa dokhee raaj tay taal. ||2|| He takes the power away from the enemies of the Saints. ||2] |
Ha at feet aad o fF Il (867-16, a's, v2 5) sant kee nindaa karahu na ko-ay. Let no one slander the Saints.
A fe fan at use dfe Il (867-16, as, He 5) jo nindai tis kaa patan ho-ay. Whoever slanders them, will be destroyed.
fan ag ae fHanods Il (867-17, as, He 5)
jis ka-o raakhai sirjanhaar. One who is protected by the Creator Lord,
BY HTSG Aas AAT ISll (867-17, Hs, Hz 5) jhakh maara-o sagal sansaar. ||3]| cannot be harmed, no matter how much the whole world may try. ||3]||
ys nud at stent fAATA II (867-17, as, 42 5) parabh apnay kaa bha-i-aa bisaas. I place my faith in my God.
aH€ fiz Ag fA at THA II (867-18, as, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tis kee raas. My soul and body all belong to Him.
aoa as Burt usstfs il (867-18, as, Hs 5) naanak ka-o upjee parteet. This is the faith which inspires Nanak:
HOHY TS TINY AE AS USIIENATI (867-18, Fs, Hz 5) manmukh haar gurmukh sad jeet. ||4||16||18]| the self-willed manmukhs will fail, while the Gurmukhs will always win. ||4||16]|18] |
as HIS U Il (867-19)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
oH fedne ats satee Il (867-19, Fs, v2 5) naam niranjan neer naraa-in. The Name of the Immaculate Lord is the Ambrosial Water.
ono fAHas uy faofes Al TIS i (867-19, as, Hz 5) rasnaa simrat paap bilaa-in. ||1]| rahaa-o. Chanting it with the tongue, sins are washed away. ||1||Pause| |
Yat cét Sates AS Hfo feet Il (868-1, as, He 5)
naaraa-in sabh maahi nivaas. The Lord abides in everyone.
Sates wife whe ugarA il (868-1, ds, He 5)
naaraa-in ghat ghat pargaas. The Lord illumines each and every heart.
SIS ATS Sala B AN Il (868-1, Hs, Hs 5) naaraa-in kahtay narak na jaahi. Chanting the Lord's Name, one does not fall into hell.
odes Afs Aas SH uTfT IAM (868-2, as, He 5) naaraa-in sayv sagal fal paahi. ||1]| Serving the Lord, all fruitful rewards are obtained. ||1]|
STINLSS HS HT MUTT Il (868-2, as, He 5) naaraa-in man maahi aDhaar. Within my mind is the Support of the Lord.
atafee sfye AAS Il (868-2, as, ue 5) naaraa-in bohith sansaar. The Lord is the boat to cross over the world-ocean.
Sates AIS AH ota UBS Il (868-3, Fs, v2 5) naaraa-in kahat jam bhaag palaa-in. Chant the Lord's Name, and the Messenger of Death will run away.
Safes TZ IS SHES III (g68-3, Fs, He 5) naaraa-in dant bhaanay daa-in. ||2]| The Lord breaks the teeth of Maya, the witch. ||2||
oates Ae Ae eae Il (s68-4, as, 12 5) naaraa-in sad sad bakhsind.
The Lord is forever and ever the Forgiver. TIES SS AY MST Il (868-4, ay, He 5)
naaraa-in keenay sookh anand. The Lord blesses us with peace and bliss.
safes yas ats uss Il (868-4, as, ue 5) naaraa-in pargat keeno partaap. The Lord has revealed His glory.
safes AS & HET ary ISI (ge8-4, as, He 5) naaraa-in sant ko maa-ee baap. ||3]| The Lord is the mother and father of His Saint. ||3]|
oases ATUHfa SITES I (868-5, H's, He 5) naaraa-in saaDhsang naraa-in. The Lord, the Lord, is in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ag ag safes ates Il (868-5, Hs, H2 5) baara™ baar naraa-in gaa-in. Time and time again, I sing the Lord's Praises.
SAS nidiad ad fife wet Il (s68-5, as, v2 5) basat agochar gur mil lahee. Meeting with the Guru, I have attained the incomprehensible object.
Safes Ge saad BWA Tet ISUIDINACI (868-6, Hs, 12 5)
naaraa-in ot naanak daas gahee. ||4]|17||19]| Slave Nanak has grasped the Support of the Lord. ||4]|17]|19]|
as HIS U Il (868-6)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
WT a@ Te MIST Il (868-6, F3, He 5) jaa ka-o raakhai raakhanhaar. One who is protected by the Protector Lord
fA a nig ad faders Ul TI I (868-7, a's, v2 5) tis kaa ang karay nirankaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. - the Formless Lord is on his side. ||1||Pause] |
HS aes Hfs vials o Hd Il (868-7, as, He 5) maat garabh meh agan na johai. In the mother's womb, the fire does not touch him.
aH AT BF HT B Ud Il (868-7, Hs, v2 5) kaam kroDh lobh moh na pohai. Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment do not affect him.
AaHfa AU fadarg il (s68-8, as, He 5) saaDhsang japai nirankaar. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he meditates on the Formless Lord.
fsea aX His Bat ST INU (g08-s, Hs, He 5) nindak kai muhi laagai chhaar. ||1]| Dust is thrown into the faces of the slanderers. ||1]|
TH AeU WH A HST Il (g08-8, as, v2 5) raam kavach daas kaa sannahu. The Lord's protective spell is the armor of His slave.
eS ene fSA UTS tT Il (868-9, ds, He 5) doot dusat tis pohat naahi. The wicked, evil demons cannot even touch him.
A A Wee Ad A ATE Il (868-9, a's, v2 5) jo jo garab karay so jaa-ay. Whoever indulges in egotistical pride, shall waste away to ruin.
ada A at YS AGES iil (g68-9, ds, ue 5) gareeb daas kee parabh sarnaa-ay. ||2]| God is the Sanctuary of His humble slave. ||2]|
a A Ate ufemr afs ate Il (s68-10, as, He 5) jo jo saran pa-i-aa har raa-ay. Whoever enters the Sanctuary of the Sovereign Lord
AoA ofimr nue afs wf Il (868-10, as, He 5) so daas rakhi-aa apnai kanth laa-ay. - He saves that slave, hugging him close in His embrace.
A A AIS AI MIA Il (868-10, Hs, v2 5) jay ko bahut karay aha‘kaar. Whoever takes great pride in himself,
6g fas ufo gest UTE SG USI (868-11, Hs, H2 5) oh khin meh rultaa khaakoo naal. ||3]| in an instant, shall be like dust mixing with dust. ||3]|
d St AMS JSST Il (868-11, Hs, 2 5) hai bhee saachaa hovanhaar. The True Lord is, and shall always be.
Het Het WEST sfsas Il (868-11, as, He 5) sadaa sadaa jaa-ee™ balihaar. Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him.
mue oA ae fasut of Il (868-12, as, He 5) apnay daas rakhay kirpaa Dhaar. Granting His Mercy, He saves His slaves.
SSA A UF UTS MUTT NIACHOM (868-12, as, He 5)
naanak kay parabh paraan aDhaar. ||4]||18||20|| God is the Support of Nanak's breath of life. ||4]|18]|20]|
as HIS U Il (868-12)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
MISH KAT HIT NIGU Il YUTSHT UTIAIH a Jy il sae Il (868-13, a3, He 5)
achraj kathaa mahaa anoop. paraatamaa paarbarahm kaa roop. rahaa-o. Wondrous and beautiful is the description of the beauty of the Supreme Soul, the Supreme Lord God. ||Pause] |
a feg ger ot feg ae Il (868-13, a3, He 5) naa ih boodhaa naa ih baalaa. He is not old; He is not young.
o fea ea odt AH ATH Il (808-13, a3, He 5) naa is dookh nahee jam jaalaa. He is not in pain; He is not caught in Death's noose.
o feg fon o feo wfe Il (868-14, a3, He 5) naa ih binsai naa ih jaa-ay. He does not die; He does not go away.
mife Faret stom AHTE IAI (868-14, as, He 5)
aad jugaadee rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||1||
In the beginning, and throughout the ages, He is permeating everywhere. ||1|| a fA Bre odt fA ATS Il (g68-15, as, He 5)
naa is usan nahee is seet. He is not hot; He is not cold.
o' feR SANS oT fEA HTS Il (868-15, as, He 5) naa is dusman naa is meet. He has no enemy; He has no friend.
o fem day odt fEA Aa Il (868-15, Hs, v2 5) naa is harakh nahee is sog. He is not happy; He is not sad.
AS fae fen a fed AGS AA MQM! (868-16, Hs, He 5) sabh kichh is kaa ih karnai jog. ||2] | Everything belongs to Him; He can do anything. ||2||
a fA au adt feR wet II (g68-16, as, Hz 5) naa is baap nahee is maa-i-aa. He has no father; He has no mother.
feg wrdug dat wirfenr | (868-16, Hs, He 5) in aprampar hotaa aa-i-aa. He is beyond the beyond, and has always been so.
ury us at fEA BU S Bal Il (868-17, Hs, 2 5) paap punn kaa is layp na laagai. He is not affected by virtue or vice.
we ue nists Ae dt AT ISI (s68-17, Hs, v2 5) ghat ghat antar sad hee jaagai. ||3]| Deep within each and every heart, He is always awake and aware. ||3]||
sie ae fea nafs Curfenr Il (868-17, as, 43 5) teen gunaa ik sakat upaa-i-aa. From the three qualities, the one mechanism of Maya was produced.
Hot Htfenr st ot Jd atfenr Il (g68-18, as, 42 5) mahaa maa-i-aa taa kee hai chhaa-i-aa. The great Maya is only His shadow.
MES Mes vise vfenis Il (68-18, as, H2 5) achhal achhayd abhayd da-i-aal. He is undeceivable, impenetrable, unfathomable and merciful.
ate ufenis Aer forgurs Il (s68-18, ats, He 5) deen da-i-aal sadaa kirpaal. He is merciful to the meek, forever compassionate.
a at afs fufs ag 3 ue I (808-19, a3, H2 5) taa kee gat mit kachhoo na paa-ay. His state and limits cannot ever be known.
Sea SA ale ale ATS NSNICNQAI (868-19, as, He 5)
naanak taa kai bal bal jaa-ay. ||4]]19]|21]| Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||4]|19]|21]|
Yat cer
as HIS U Il (869-1)
gond menhlaa 5. Gond, Fifth Mehl:
Hao a& afead AWE Il (869-1, Fs, v2 5) santan kai balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the Saints.
H36 & Afal TH TS WE I (809-1, Fs, 2 5) santan kai sang raam gun gaa-o. Associating with the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ha uA faoteu vfs Te Il (869-1, as, ue 5) sant parsaad kilvikh sabh ga-ay. By the Grace of the Saints, all the sins are taken away.
Ha Aafe Ssarait US WAU (869-2, Hs, He 5) sant saran vadbhaagee pa-ay. ||1|| By great good fortune, one finds the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||1]|
oH Hus ae feu o femme Il (869-2, as, nH 5) raam japat kachh bighan na vi-aapai. Meditating on the Lord, no obstacles will block your way.
qe ure mua ys AM NU TIC Il (s69-2, as, He 5) gur parsaad apunaa parabh jaapai. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, meditate on God. ||1]|Pause| |
ursqan Aa df efemrs il (869-3, as, us 5) paarbarahm jab ho-ay da-i-aal. When the Supreme Lord God becomes merciful,
AY AS at AT FSH Il (869-3, H's, ws 5) saaDhoo jan kee karai ravaal. he makes me the dust of the feet of the Holy.
an au feA 3a 3 WE II (s69-3, ats, H2 5) kaam kroDh is tan tay jaa-ay. Sexual desire and anger leave his body,
TH I36 ZA Hfe MMe IM (s69-4, as, He 5) raam ratan vasai man aa-ay. ||2|| and the Lord, the jewel, comes to dwell in his mind. ||2||
He HOH St aT UDSTE Il (869-4, as, He 5) safal janam taa™ kaa parvaan. Fruitful and approved is the life of one
urgqoH feafe afe ATE Il (869-4, as, ws 5) paarbarahm nikat kar jaan. who knows the Supreme Lord God to be close.
afe safs ys atests adi Il (809-5, as, Hs 5)
bhaa-ay bhagat parabh keertan laagai.
One who is committed to loving devotional worship of God, and the Kirtan of His Praises,
HOH HOH at Afeor Ard III (869-5, Hs, v2 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaagai. ||3]| awakens from the sleep of countless incarnations. ||3]|
BIO AHS AS Al miMU"_ Il (869-5, as, Hs 5) charan kamal jan kaa aaDhaar. The Lord's Lotus Feet are the Support of His humble servant.
He dfee Ie AY EWP Il (69-6, as, v2 5) gun govind ra-u™ sach vaapaar. To chant the Praises of the Lord of the Universe is the true trade.
OA Hat at HOA Ufs Il (809-6, a3, 12 5) daas janaa kee mansaa poor. Please fulfill the hopes of Your humble slave.
BSR AY US AS Ts USIQONUNENITI (869-6, as, we 5)
naanak sukh paavai jan Dhoor. ||4||20||22||6||28]| Nanak finds peace in the dust of the feet of the humble. ||4]|20]|22||6||28] |
TH Ts MAcuco HIS U We 2 (g69-8) raag gond asatpadee-aa mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Raag Gond, Ashtapadees, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas ure II (869-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ats SHAS UT WIC Il (869-9, sy, H2 5) kar namaskaar pooray gurdayv. Humbly bow to the Perfect Divine Guru.
HeG Hols Aes A at AS Il (969-9, as, H2 5) safal moorat safal jaa kee sayv. Fruitful is His image, and fruitful is service to Him.
misonHt usy feast Il (g69-9, az, v2 5) antarjaamee purakh biDhaataa. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Architect of Destiny.
WITS UTE BH Sal SS WAU (869-9, as, He 5) aath pahar naam rang raataa. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, he remains imbued with the love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
Ge ais TT Tus Il (g69-10, ds, we 5) gur gobind guroo gopaal. The Guru is the Lord of the Universe, the Guru is the Lord of the World.
MUS BA AS MUST Al FIG Il (g69-10, as, v8 5) apnay daas ka-o raakhanhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Saving Grace of His slaves. ||1]|Pause] |
ufsATs ATS CHIE ushwreS Il (g69-11, as, v2 5) paatisaah saah umraa-o patee-aa-ay. He satisfies the kings, emperors and nobles.
SH]! nidardt wfs use il (g69-11, as, He 5) dusat aha‘kaaree maar pachaa-ay. He destroys the egotistical villains.
feea a Hf ats Fa I (809-11, as, He 5) nindak kai mukh keeno rog. He puts illness into the mouths of the slanderers.
A A OS Ad AF SA MQM (s69-11, as, v2 5) jai jai kaar karai sabh log. ||2]| All the people celebrate His victory. ||2||
Hae & ofS HIT MIST Il (869-12, as, He 5) santan kai man mahaa anand. Supreme bliss fills the minds of the Saints.
Hs wufs Tee saes Il (869-12, a's, ve 5) sant jaapeh gurday-o bhagvant. The Saints meditate on the Divine Guru, the Lord God.
Halfs & HY SAS Se Il (869-12, as, vs 5) sangat kay mukh oojal bha-ay. The faces of His companions become radiant and bright.
Hae ae fSeax I TS Ill (869-13, as, He 5) sagal thaan nindak kay ga-ay. ||3]|| The slanderers lose all places of rest. ||3]|
ATA ATA AS Ae AG Il (369-13, as, v3 5) Saas Saas jan sadaa Salaahay. With each and every breath, the Lord's humble slaves praise Him.
UTIYIH WT UTS Il (869-13, ds, ne 5) paarbarahm gur bayparvaahay. The Supreme Lord God and the Guru are care-free.
Hae 3 fe at at Hats Il (869-13, as, He 5) Sagal bhai mitay jaa kee saran. All fears are eradicated, in His Sanctuary.
foea ufs ure Afs cafe igil (s69-14, as, He 5) nindak maar paa-ay sabh Dharan. ||4|| Smashing all the slanderers, the Lord knocks them to the ground. ||4]|
Ho at fear ad & ate il (869-14, as, we 5) jan kee nindaa karai na ko-ay. Let no one slander the Lord's humble servants.
A ad A edb fe Il (809-14, as, He 5) jo karai so dukhee-aa ho-ay. Whoever does so, will be miserable.
MTS Udd AS Sa fries I (869-15, as, 2 5) aath pahar jan ayk Dhi-aa-ay. Twenty-four hours a day, the Lord's humble servant meditates on Him alone.
mor st ot Sate o WS IU (869-15, as, He 5) jamoo-aa taa kai nikat na jaa-ay. ||5]| The Messenger of Death does not even approach him. ||5]|
He fede fSea nidardt Il (869-15, as, He 5) jan nirvair nindak aha‘kaaree. The Lord's humble servant has no vengeance. The slanderer is egotistical.
Ho 36 Hala Sea Sart Il (969-16, as, v3 5) jan bhal maaneh nindak vaykaaree. The Lord's humble servant wishes well, while the slanderer dwells on evil.
ae o fate Afsag fimrfenr 1 (69-16, a3, H8 5) gur kai sikh satguroo Dhi-aa-i-aa. The Sikh of the Guru meditates on the True Guru.
Ho Gud foun sofa ufenr él (869-16, as, v2 5) jan ubray nindak narak paa-i-aa. ||6] | The Lord's humble servants are saved, while the slanderer is cast into hell. ||6]|
Afe AHS Ae Hts fumPs il (869-17, as, v2 5) sun Saajan mayray meet pi-aaray. Listen, O my beloved friends and companions:
Afs ado zest ahs Erg Il (869-17, as, He 5) sat bachan varteh har du-aaray. these words shall be true in the Court of the Lord.
EN EN EN EN P nA Ad A SAT Ue Il (869-17, ds, 43 5) jaisaa karay so taisaa paa-ay.
As you plant, so shall you harvest.
misHet at AS APU ATE IDI (869-18, as, He 5) abhimaanee kee jarh sarpar jaa-ay. ||7]| The proud, egotistical person will surely be uprooted. ||7]||
Slaten Afsad Us Set Il (69-18, as, He 5) neeDhri-aa satgur Dhar tayree. O True Guru, You are the Support of the unsupported.
ate fasur aay AS At Il (g69-18, as, v2 5) kar kirpaa raakho jan kayree. Be merciful, and save Your humble servant.
aT saa f3H aa afsardt Il (869-19, as, He 5) kaho naanak tis gur balihaaree. Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru;
aw a fanofe Ua Ae|TdH ICHAUIQE! (869-19, Hs, 43 5)
jaa kai simran paij savaaree. ||8||1||29]| remembering Him in meditation, my honor has been saved. ||8||1||29]|
UST tIO
Ta As sat Sas at Il (870-1)
raag gond banee bhagtaa kee. Raag Gond, The Word Of The Devotees.
oats At we A (870-1) kabeer jee ghar 1 Kabeer Jee, First House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (870-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hz fxs fae Aobat adit i (870-2, as, sas adie Hf) sant milai kichh sunee-ai kahee-ai. When you meet a Saint, talk to him and listen.
firs ons nAfe afe adh Wall (870-2, as, sas asta Hf) milai asant masat kar rahee-ai. ||1]| Meeting with an unsaintly person, just remain silent. ||1]|
arar soar far adm Il (g70-2, as, sas adie Hh) baabaa bolnaa ki-aa kahee-ai. O father, if I speak, what words should I utter?
AA OH OH ofe TH NU TIS Il (870-3, as, sas ate Ff) jaisay raam naam rav rahee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Speak such words, by which you may remain absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Hao fAG a8 Guard I (870-3, as, sas acts Ah santan si-o bolay upkaaree. Speaking with the Saints, one becomes generous.
Hoe fA FS Sex HTS INA (870-3, as, sas ate FH) moorakh si-o bolay jhakh maaree. ||2]| To speak with a fool is to babble uselessly. ||2| |
aos dos sets fears il (870-4, as, sas adie Hf) bolat bolat badheh bikaaraa. By speaking and only speaking, corruption only increases.
fag 38 fomr asta atest SII (870-4, as, sas adits Th bin bolay ki-aa karahi beechaaraa. ||3]| If I do not speak, what can the poor wretch do? |[3]|
XI THT Fat WS I Il (870-4, at's, sas aets Hh) kaho kabeer chhoochhaa ghat bolai. Says Kabeer, the empty pitcher makes noise,
Stour dfe A Aa 5 3B ISI (870-5, as, sas ade Th bhari-aa ho-ay so kabahu na dolai. ||4]|1]| but that which is full makes no sound. ||4]]1]|
as Il (870-5) gond. Gond:
OT He 3g ATH S nS Il (870-5, a3, sas oats Ht) naroo marai nar kaam na aavai. When a man dies, he is of no use to anyone.
UH Hd GA AA ASS UWAUl (870-5, Hs, sas seats FH) pasoo marai das kaaj savaarai. ||1]| But when an animal dies, it is used in ten ways. ||1||
MUS AH at afs H fom ASE Il (870-6, Hs, sas ate Ah apnay karam kee gat mai ki-aa jaan-o. What do I know, about the state of my karma?
H foor wae sar F UU TIS Il (870-6, as, sas adits FH) mai ki-aa jaan-o baabaa ray. ||1]|| rahaa-o. What do I know, O Baba? ||1||Pause] |
~ ASN
TS AS HA BAST Ay ZH Il (870-6, ds, sas aete Fh) haad jalay jaisay lakree kaa toolaa. His bones burn, like a bundle of logs;
x, AN
AA AS AA WA AT YS MQM (870-7, Hs, sas aete Fh) kays jalay jaisay ghaas kaa poolaa. ||2|| his hair burns like a bale of hay. ||2||
ad ads sa dt Sg Wea Il (870-7, as, sas ade th kaho kabeer tab hee nar jaagai. Says Kabeer, the man wakes up,
WH OT Ss HS Hfs Sa WBA (870-7, ds, sas aeta Fh) jam kaa dand moond meh laagai. ||3]||2| | only when the Messenger of Death hits him over the head with his club. ||3]|2]|
as Il (870-8)
gond. Gond:
math dae use ae J ug fefH mae JITES Il (870-8, Hs, sas adits Hh
aakaas gagan paataal gagan hai chahu dis gagan rahaa-ilay.
The Celestial Lord is in the Akaashic ethers of the skies, the Celestial Lord is in the nether regions of the underworld; in the four directions, the Celestial Lord is pervading.
MSE HE AS USES we fAoA TaS 3 ATES IAI (870-8, ats, sas aeite Fh)
aanad mool sadaa purkhotam ghat binsai gagan na jaa-ilay. ||1]||
The Supreme Lord God is forever the source of bliss. When the vessel of the body perishes, the Celestial Lord does not perish. ||1]|
Hfo Saar sfEE 11 (970-9, a's, sas adie wh) mohi bairaag bha-i-o. I have become sad,
feg At orfe as afeG nan TIS il (870-9, Hs, sas adits Fh) ih jee-o aa-ay kahaa ga-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. wondering where the soul comes from, and where it goes. ||1]||Pause] |
us 33 fife axfenr atat 33 aa 3 ate F Il (870-10, a's, a3 aes Hf)
panch tat mil kaa-i-aa keen"ee tat kahaa tay keen ray.
The body is formed from the union of the five tatvas; but where were the five tatvas created?
adH 80 3H AIG aus J asf fate AIG Se F NII (870-10, 3, sas aes Ah karam baDh tum jee-o kahat hou karmeh kin jee-o deen ray. ||2|| You say that the soul is tied to its karma, but who gave karma to the body? ||2]|
dfs nfs 36 3 36 Hfe ofa 3 Hea fadsfe AfE F II (870-11, ds, sas ate Th)
har meh tan hai tan meh har hai sarab nirantar so-ay ray.
The body is contained in the Lord, and the Lord is contained in the body. He is permeating within all.
afs adte TH oH 3 e3@ Aon de A OSE F NSIS (870-12, as, sas ate Hh kahi kabeer raam naam na chhoda-o sehjay ho-ay so ho-ay ray. ||3][3]|
Says Kabeer, I shall not renounce the Lord's Name. I shall accept whatever happens. 31131]
Td ds wat adie Me at wa 2 (870-13) raag gond banee kabeer jee-o kee ghar 2 Raag Gond, The Word Of Kabeer Jee, Second House:
qe Afsara YATE il (870-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
gm sifa fer ats ata il (870-14, as, sas adits ah) bhujaa baa“Dh bhilaa kar daari-o. They tied my arms, bundled me up, and threw me before an elephant.
oASt af Hs ufs Hts il (870-14, as, gars alte Ft) hastee karop moond meh maari-o. The elephant driver struck him on the head, and infuriated him.
JAfs afa & SAT Hrs II (870-14, a's, sas ade Th hasat bhaag kai cheesaa maarai. But the elephant ran away, trumpeting,
feur vats & IE afsas AI (870-15, as, sas seta Fh) i-aa moorat kai ha-o balihaarai. ||1]| "I am a Sacrifice to this image of the Lord."||1]|
wits AS SAT SHI AT Il (870-15, as, sas adits rh aahi mayray thaakur tumraa jor. O my Lord and Master, You are my strength.
at afad Ast So UU TIS Il (870-15, a's, gas adie rh) kaajee bakibo hastee tor. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Qazi shouted at the driver to drive the elephant on. ||1||Pause]|
J HSS SEB TIE ate Il (870-16, as, sas aes Ft) ray mahaavat tujh daara-o kaat. He yelled out, "O driver, I shall cut you into pieces.
fernts saeg weg ATE Il (870-16, as, sas ate iseh turaavahu ghaalhu saat. Hit him, and drive him on!"
JAS 3 3d Ud films Il (870-16, as, sas adits Th hasat na torai Dharai Dhi-aan. But the elephant did not move; instead, he began to meditate.
a a fae FA SSS III (870-17, as, sas aete Ah
vaa kai ridai basai bhagvaan. ||2|| The Lord God abides within his mind. ||2||
for nrg AS J atari (870-17, as, sas ate Fh) ki-aa apraaDh sant hai keen"aa. What sin has this Saint committed,
aifa ue ava a ear Il (870-17, as, sas adits Ff) baa™Dh pot kunchar ka-o deen"aa. that you have made him into a bundle and thrown him before the elephant?
avs Us B B SHAY Il (870-18, a3, sas acta wf) kunchar pot lai lai namaskaarai. Lifting up the bundle, the elephant bows down before it.
Bt Sat at niforg wil (970-18, as, sas alta Fh) boojhee nahee kaajee anDhi-aarai. ||3]|| The Qazi could not understand it; he was blind. ||3]|
ste ag user afe star Il (870-18, as, sas adie Hh
teen baar patee-aa bhar leenaa. Three times, he tried to do it.
UST tDq
HS FSe MAT 3S UStat Il (871-1, ats, sas alta Fh) man kathor ajhoo na pateenaa. Even then, his hardened mind was not satisfied.
afs ade ane affe i (871-1, as, sas ate Ff) kahi kabeer hamraa gobind. Says Kabeer, such is my Lord and Master.
seq ue Hfo Ho at fe NSNAUISI (71-1, as, sas ate FH) cha-uthay pad meh jan kee jind. ||4||1||4|| The soul of His humble servant dwells in the fourth state. ||4]]1]|4]|
as Il (871-2)
gond. Gond:
a fed Hon a fed 8 Il (871-2, as, sas acts naa ih maanas naa ih day-o. It is not human, and it is not a god.
a feg Ast age AG Il (871-2, as, sas adie Ah naa ih jatee kahaavai say-o. It is not called celibate, or a worshipper of Shiva.
a feg Fait a megs I (871-2, a's, sas oats Hh) naa ih jogee naa avDhootaa. It is not a Yogi, and it is not a hermit.
o fea wife 5 arg UST NU (871-3, a3, sas aete Fh naa is maa-ay na kaahoo pootaa. ||1]|| It is not a mother, or anyone's son. ||1]|
feur Hea nfs ae aAret Il (871-3, as, sas adits Th) i-aa mandar meh koun basaa-ee. Then what is it, which dwells in this temple of the body?
TT nis 3s as uret Ul TIS il (871-3, as, sas aes HH) taa kaa ant na ko-oo paa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. No one can find its limits. ||1]]Pause] |
ot feg fast at Gert i (871-4, as, sas adits Fh) naa ih girhee naa odaasee. It is not a house-holder, and it is not a renouncer of the world.
o fea oH 8 Ste Hart Il (971-4, as, sas adits Ft) naa ih raaj na bheekh mangaasee. It is not a king, and it is not a beggar.
a fen fis 5 say TSH Il 871-4, Hs, sas ats Hh) naa is pind na raktoo raatee. It has no body, no drop of blood.
ao feg qaHe oF feg wt IQ (871-5, as, sas ats Hh naa ih barahman naa ih khaatee. ||2]| It is not a Brahmin, and it is not a Kh'shaatriya. ||2||
o feg sur age AY Il (871-5, as, sas aeite Ht) naa ih tapaa kahaavai saykh. It is not called a man of austere self-discipline, or a Shaykh.
or feg He & Has SU Il (871-5, as, sag adits Th naa ih jeevai na martaa daykh. It does not live, and it is not seen to die.
feR Hes aG A AG Fs I (871-5, ds, sas aes HH) is martay ka-o jay ko-oo rovai. If someone cries over its death,
Ss SA 4
a de Het ufs dS USI (871-6, as, sas adits A)
jo rovai so-ee pat khovai. ||3]|| that person loses his honor. ||3]|
aa urfe H sad ufeur | (871-6, as, sas adits sf) gur parsaad mai dagro paa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, I have found the Path.
files HIG UC fhesfenr I (71-6, a3, sas ats HH) jeevan maran do-oo mitvaa-i-aa. Birth and death have both been erased.
ag ade feg oH at ni II (871-7, as, sas adie Hh kaho kabeer ih raam kee as. Says Kabeer, this is formed of the same essence as the Lord.
AA ae us fee o HA ISIQNUIl (871-7, as, sas adits Th)
jas kaagad par mitai na mans. ||4||2||5|| It is like the ink on the paper which cannot be erased. ||4]|2||5||
as Il (871-8)
gond. Gond:
Ze Tat fouct ute il 971-3, #3, sas ats Ft) tootay taagay nikhutee paan. The threads are broken, and the starch has run out.
word Cuts fesoreta are Il (871-8, a3, sas aete Zt) du-aar oopar jhilkaavahi kaan. Bare reeds glisten at the front door.
qe fad se SS Il (871-8, ds, saz aete kooch bichaaray foo-ay faal. The poor brushes are scattered in pieces.
for Hstur fafa vfes are Ill (871-8, as, sas ada Ah i-aa mundee-aa sir chadhibo kaal. ||1|| Death has entered this shaven head. ||1]|
feg Hstor Aas we yet Il (871-9, as, sas ate Ah in mundee-aa saglo darab kho-ee. This shaven-headed mendicant has wasted all his wealth.
WES WS BA Ad Jet AU! TIS Il (871-9, as, sas aeta rh
aavat jaat naak sar ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. All this coming and going has irritated him. ||1]|Pause]|
sot ats ot est ase | (871-10, as, sas ate Ff) turee naar kee chhodee baataa. He has given up all talk of his weaving equipment.
TH OH ST ATH FST Il (871-10, ds, sas oats Fh) raam naam vaa kaa man raataa. His mind is attuned to the Lord's Name.
Blaat ofsas 4a ots Il (871-10, #3, sas ade A) larikee larikan khaibo naahi. His daughters and sons have nothing to eat,
Hater mafes ont afs 2H (871-11, as, sas ate Hf) mundee-aa an-din Dhaapay jaahi. ||2]| while the shaven-headed mendicants night and day eat their fill. ||2| |
fea vfe vefe fea off we Il (971-11, as, sas adie Hh ik du-ay mandar ik du-ay baat. One or two are in the house, and one or two more are on the way.
JH AG ATag Bo AS We Il (871-11, Hs, sas ate Ah ham ka-o saathar un ka-o khaat. We sleep on the floor, while they sleep in the beds.
HS uslA aHe afa Ut Il (871-12, as, sas ats FH) mood palos kamar baDh pothee. They rub their bare heads, and carry prayer-books in their waist-bands.
JH ag wag Bo aS set SI (871-12, as, sas adie wh ham ka-o chaaban un ka-o rotee. ||3]| We get dry grains, while they get loaves of bread. ||3]|
shor shor Je Sa Il (871-12, as, sas wets FH) mundee-aa mundee-aa hoo-ay ayk. He will become one of these shaven-headed mendicants.
& Hstor gas ot Sa Il (871-12, as, sas aes Ht) ay mundee-aa boodat kee tayk. They are the support of the drowning.
Afs nigest Set suife ii (971-13, as, sas asta rh sun anDhlee lo-ee baypeer. Listen, O blind and unguided Loi:
feq Hse afa Aafs wate ISIBIEN (871-13, as, sas ate FH)
in" mundee-an bhaj saran kabeer. ||4]|3]|6]| Kabeer has taken shelter with these shaven-headed mendicants. ||4]|3]|6||
as il (871-14) gond. Gond:
WAH Hd 3B ats o dz Il (871-14, as, sas ade th khasam marai ta-o naar na rovai. When her husband dies, the woman does not cry.
CA gueat md TS Il (871-14, Fs, sas ast Ah us rakhvaaraa a-uro hovai. Someone else becomes her protector.
guard at of= fan Il (971-14, as, sas adie th rakhvaaray kaa ho-ay binaas. When this protector dies,
wid SIA Sto sar fHHA Al (871-14, as, sas asta HH) aagai narak eehaa bhog bilaas. ||1]||
he falls into the world of hell hereafter, for the sexual pleasures he enjoyed in this world. ||1]|
Sa Ads Aas furs i (871-15, as, sas ate FH) ayk suhaagan jagat pi-aaree. The world loves only the one bride, Maya.
Hae Aba HS at oat AU TIC il 971-15, Hs, sas ate FH) saglay jee-a jant kee naaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. She is the wife of all beings and creatures. ||1]||Pause] |
Hoate afe Ad TS Il (871-16, Hs, sas ate Ah sohaagan gal sohai haar. With her necklace around her neck, this bride looks beautiful.
Ha a@ fae fan AAT Il (871-16, H3, sas adie Ah sant ka-o bikh bigsai sansaar. She is poison to the Saint, but the world is delighted with her.
afa Atarg ad uftmrdt il (871-16, a3, sas ate Ah kar seegaar bahai pakhi-aaree. Adorning herself, she sits like a prostitute.
Ha at fooat fed feast 21 (971-17, #3, sas ate Fh) sant kee thithkee firai bichaaree. ||2]| Cursed by the Saints, she wanders around like a wretch. ||2||
Hs ofa Ga ue ug Il (971-17, Hs, sas adits wh) sant bhaag oh paachhai parai. She runs around, chasing after the Saints.
Te USAT HIT 3d Il (871-17, as, sas ate th gur parsaadee maarahu dardi. She is afraid of being beaten by those blessed with the Guru's Grace.
Aas ot Ga fis uafefs i (871-17, as, sas ade Ah saakat kee oh pind paraa-in. She is the body, the breath of life, of the faithless cynics.
oH a@ fenfe ud sf sfefe Wail (s71-18, as, sas ats A) ham ka-o darisat parai tarakh daa-in. ||3]| She appears to me like a blood-thirsty witch. ||3]|
oH fA a ag Wout SE Il (871-18, Fs, sas ate Hh) ham tis kaa baho jaani-aa bhay-o. I know her secrets well
ma Je fgurs fHS Uses Il (e71-18, Hs, sas ats FH) jab hoo-ay kirpaal milay gurday-o. - in His Mercy, the Divine Guru met me.
a ade wa wots udt Il (971-19, as, sas ate Ah kaho kabeer ab baahar paree. Says Kabeer, now I have thrown her out.
HATS & vive Bt SUSU (s71-19, Hs, sas aete A)
sansaarai kai anchal laree. ||4||4]|7]| She clings to the skirt of the world. ||4||4||7]|
UST tI2Q
as Il (872-1)
gond. Gond:
fafa Fat aT at J ofa Il (872-1, as, sas ate Hf) garihi sobhaa jaa kai ray naahi. When someone's household has no glory,
wires udhat ut Ate Il (872-1, as, sas aes Ft) aavat pahee-aa khooDhay jaahi. the guests who come there depart still hungry.
a a nists odt ASe Il (872-1, as, sas adie rh) vaa kai antar nahee santokh. Deep within, there is no contentment.
fag Haale wat SY AU (872-1, as, sas ate Ah bin sohaagan laagai dokh. ||1]| Without his bride, the wealth of Maya, he suffers in pain. ||1]|
U6 Adafe Ho uets i su sine 3B MS NU THE Il (972-2, as, sas adits wh
Dhan sohaagan mahaa paveet. tapay tapeesar dolai cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
So praise this bride, which can shake the consciousness of even the most dedicated ascetics and sages. ||1]||Pause| |
Aaate fasus at ust i (872-3, as, sas acts Fh sohaagan kirpan kee pootee. This bride is the daughter of a wretched miser.
Rea sta was fAS AST Il (972-3, a3, sas acta Hh sayvak taj jagat si-o sootee. Abandoning the Lord's servant, she sleeps with the world.
AY & oret Tats Il (872-3, a's, sas alte Ft) saaDhoo kai thaadhee darbaar. Standing at the door of the holy man,
Rafe 3sdt 4 aS farsa Qi (972-3, as, sas ate Ah saran tayree mo ka-o nistaar. ||2|| she says, "I have come to your sanctuary; now save me!"||2||
Haas d mifs Hest Il (972-4, Hs, sas aes Ah sohaagan hai at sundree. This bride is so beautiful.
Ud SLI ZA SHIA Il (872-4, Hs, sas adits wh pag nayvar chhanak chhanharee. The bells on her ankles make soft music.
AG BI YS SS BI Adi ll (872-4, a's, sas aes Fh) ja-o lag paraan ta-oo lag sangay. As long as there is the breath of life in the man, she remains attached to him.
ofa 3 vat afar fs Sa Sil (872-5, as, sas acts Ah naahi ta chalee bayg uth nangay. ||3]|| But when it is no more, she quickly gets up and departs, bare-footed. ||3]|
vate seo 3 Shor I (872-5, a's, sas acta wh) sohaagan bhavan tarai lee-aa. This bride has conquered the three worlds.
A M6 UTS Stsa GA AMM Il (872-5, Hs, sas adits Hh) das ath puraan tirath ras kee-aa. The eighteen Puraanas and the sacred shrines of pilgrimage love her as well.
qoH fae HIAP 8T Il (872-6, as, sas adie Ht) barahmaa bisan mahaysar bayDhay. She pierced the hearts of Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu.
as guls TH F ST III (872-6, as, sas alte Fh) baday bhoopat raajay hai chhayDhay. ||4|| She destroyed the great emperors and kings of the world. ||4]|
Hote Gaeta o urfa il (872-6, as, sas adits th sohaagan urvaar na paar. This bride has no restraint or limits.
uty age a Afar faaets il (972-7, as, sas adits Hh paa'ch naarad kai sang biDhvaar. She is in collusion with the five thieving passions.
uig are & fed SS Il (872-7, as, saz ete Fh paa'ch naarad kay mitvay footay. When the clay pot of these five passions bursts,
AT eats Ts fag SS NUNUNCH (872-7, Hs, sas ate FH) kaho kabeer gur kirpaa chhootay. ||5||5||8]| then, says Kabeer, by Guru's Mercy, one is released. ||5||5||8]|
as Il (872-8) gond. Gond:
AA Hed Hf FGIT OT Sd Il (872-8, Hs, sas ate Ah jaisay mandar meh balhar naa thaahrai. As the house will not stand when the supporting beams are removed from within it,
on fast an ute Ess Il (872-8, as, sas adits Ah naam binaa kaisay paar utrai. just so, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can anyone be carried across?
as fear ne at flare Il (872-8, as, saz adie Ah kumbh binaa jal naa teekaavai. Without the pitcher, the water is not contained;
Ag fag MA ues AS IAI (872-9, a3, sas ots Ht) saaDhoo bin aisay abgat jaavai. ||1]| just so, without the Holy Saint, the mortal departs in misery. ||1]|
ws fSA HTH 5 BS Il (872-9, as, sas ate Ff) jaara-o tisai jo raam na chaytai. One who does not remember the Lord - let him burn;
3S HO SHS Jd Hfs BS NU TTS Il (872-9, Hs, sas aes AH tan man ramat rahai meh khaytai. ||1|| rahaa-o. his body and mind have remained absorbed in this field of the world. ||1]|Pause| |
AA Jedd fas fat adt Fehr Il (872-10, as, sas aes Ah jaisay halhar binaa jimee nahee bo-ee-ai. Without a farmer, the land is not planted;
HS fear ar Het use Il (872-10, a3, sas ata Fh) soot binaa kaisay manee paroee-dai. without a thread, how can the beads be strung?
ust fas foo aife sazreht I (872-11, ats, sas alta Fh) ghundee bin ki-aa ganth charh"aa-ee-ai. Without a loop, how can the knot be tied?
Ay fag 3A nears Wehr NI (872-11, a3, sas ats HH) saaDhoo bin taisay abgat jaa-ee-ai. ||2| | Just so, without the Holy Saint, the mortal departs in misery. ||2]|
AA HS fust fag ae o Tet Il (972-11, Fs, sas adits Ah jaisay maat pitaa bin baal na ho-ee. Without a mother or father there is no child;
fia faor AA aud Tet Il (872-12, Hs, sas asta FH) bimb binaa kaisay kapray Dho-ee. just so, without water, how can the clothes be washed?
uid fot AA MASTS Il (872-12, as, sas adie Ah ghor binaa kaisay asvaar. Without a horse, how can there be a rider?
AY fag ardt esers WSN (872-12, as, sas adits Zh) saaDhoo bin naahee darvaar. ||3]|| Without the Holy Saint, one cannot reach the Court of the Lord. ||3]||
AA aA fag odt StH Sct Il (872-13, Hs, sas adits HH) jaisay baajay bin nahee leejai fayree. Just as without music, there is no dancing,
YAH eoate Sti MBI Il (872-13, as, sas adits Hh khasam duhaagan taj a-uhayree. the bride rejected by her husband is dishonored.
ad adits Sa afs AIST Il (872-13, a's, sas ade rh kahai kabeer aykai kar karnaa. Says Kabeer, do this one thing:
aanty af safe odt Has NIECE (872-14, as, sas ate Fh)
gurmukh ho-ay bahur nahee marnaa. ||4||6]|9]| become Gurmukh, and you shall never die again. ||4]]6||9||
as Il (872-14) gond. Gond:
eo AE F Ho AS A! Il (872-14, a's, sas aats HH) kootan so-ay jo man ka-o kootai. He alone is a pimp, who pounds down his mind.
Ho Fe 3B AH S Sse Il (872-14, ats, sas sets A) man kootai ta-o jam tay chhootai. Pounding down his mind, he escapes from the Messenger of Death.
afe afe He AASSt Be Il (872-15, Hs, sas aes Ah kut kut man kasvatee laavai. Pounding and beating his mind, he puts it to the test;
A eS Hats FT US NUL (872-15, a3, sas ats Ht) so kootan mukat baho paavai. ||1]| such a pimp attains total liberation. ||1]|
TO fA ATT AAS Il (872-15, a3, sas ots Ht) kootan kisai kahhu sansaar. Who is called a pimp in this world?
HIS Bo X Hf seers Ul TIS il (872-16, as, sas adits rh Sagal bolan kay maahi beechaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. In all speech, one must carefully consider. ||1]|Pause| |
oe AfE A Ho fAG Bre Il (872-16, as, sas adie Th naachan so-ay jo man si-o naachai. He alone is a dancer, who dances with his mind.
Bfs 5 usb UTE ATS Il (872-16, a's, sas ate Ft) jhooth na patee-ai parchai saachai. The Lord is not satisfied with falsehood; He is pleased only with Truth.
fEH HS Mra UT SH Il (872-17, ats, sas sets FH) is man aagay poorai taal. So play the beat of the drum in the mind.
fEH SIS A HS TUS] III (872-17, Hs, sas aete FH) is naachan kay man rakhvaal. ||2|| The Lord is the Protector of the dancer with such a mind. ||2||
aad A A SH AG Il (872-17, 3, sas adie Ah bajaaree so jo bajaarahi soDhai. She alone is a street-dancer, who cleanses her body-street,
ug usisd AG uss Il (972-18, a3, sas ast Ah paa"ch paleeteh ka-o parboDhai. and educates the five passions.
og atfea at sats ues Il (872-18, Hs, sas ade Ah na-o naa-ik kee bhagat pachhaanai. She who embraces devotional worship for the Lord
A aad JH Tg HS ISI (872-18, as, sas ate Ah so baajaaree ham gur maanay. ||3]| - I accept such a street-dancer as my Guru. ||3]|
snag Afe fa sts 3 a Il (872-18, a3, sag ade A) taskar so-ay je taat na karadi. He alone is a thief, who is above envy,
feet & asfs on Bud Il (972-19, as, sas adits Hh indree kai jatan naam uchrai. and who uses his sense organs to chant the Lord's Name.
AT AGT JH MA BS Il (872-19, Hs, sas ate 7H) kaho kabeer ham aisay lakhan. Says Kabeer, these are the qualities of the one
U6 Tes ifs gu fess siOIoll (872-19, ds, sas alta A) Dhan gurdayv at roop bichkhan. ||4||7||10|| I know as my Blessed Divine Guru, who is the most beautiful and wise. ||4]|7]|10]|
UST tos
as il (873-1)
gond. Gond:
US WWS Us Ases Il (873-1, Hs, sas asta wh) Dhan gupaal Dhan gurdayv. Blessed is the Lord of the World. Blessed is the Divine Guru.
US uote Fa AEH FIAT Il (873-1, d's, sas atta Fh) Dhan anaad bhookhay kaval tehkayv. Blessed is that grain, by which the heart-lotus of the hungry blossoms forth.
ue Gf Hs fro MAT ATST II (873-2, as, sas adits Th Dhan o-ay sant jin aisee jaanee. Blessed are those Saints, who know this.
fs0 a@ firfea afgarrst Wall (873-2, as, sas ate Ah tin ka-o milibo saringpaanee. ||1|| Meeting with them, one meets the Lord, the Sustainer of the World. ||1]|
uife used 3 of mare Il (873-2, Hs, sas ate Ah aad purakh tay ho-ay anaad. This grain comes from the Primal Lord God.
mbt on nis & Ae NAN TIS Il (873-3, Hs, sas aete FH) japee-ai naam ann kai saad. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, only when he tastes this grain. ||1]|Pause] |
mba on mba nig il (973-3, a's, gas adie rh japee-ai naam japee-ai ann. Meditate on the Naam, and meditate on this grain.
nis A Hfa Stat So Il (873-3, Hs, sas adits ZH) ambhai kai sang neekaa vann. Mixed with water, its taste becomes sublime.
MO Bdfd A od deta Il (873-4, as, sas adie Ah annai baahar jo nar hoveh. One who abstains from this grain,
Sis seo ufo rust defs Qi (873-4, ats, sas adie Fh)
teen bhavan meh apnee khoveh. ||2|| loses his honor in the three worlds. ||2]|
eats nig aafa unas Il (873-4, as, sag adie Ah chhodeh ann karahi pakhand. One who discards this grain, is practicing hypocrisy.
o Avate ot Gfo ds Il (873-4, ds, sas adie Th) naa sohaagan naa ohi rand. She is neither a happy soul-bride, nor a widow.
Aa ufo Aas EUITSH I (973-5, as, sas aes rh) jag meh baktay dooDhaaDhaaree. Those who claim in this world that they live on milk alone,
aust wets efear Ast ISI (873-5, as, sas aete FH) guptee khaaveh vatikaa saaree. ||3]| secretly eat whole loads of food. ||3]|
mie faot 3 df HATS Il (873-5, a3, sas ast Ah annai binaa na ho-ay sukaal. Without this grain, time does not pass in peace.
afm nifs 3 fies Turse Il (873-6, as, gas ate rh taji-ai ann na milai gupaal. Forsaking this grain, one does not meet the Lord of the World.
ad ads IH MA Afonr Il (873-6, a3, sas ate Ah kaho kabeer ham aisay jaani-aa. Says Kabeer, this I know:
Us mote sad He Hom ISICIAUI (873-6, as, sas aete Ht) Dhan anaad thaakur man maani-aa. ||4]|8]|11]|
blessed is that grain, which brings faith in the Lord and Master to the mind. [14] 18] [221]
TH TS Tet SHEE Ht at wa 9 (873-8) raag gond banee naamday-o jee kee ghar 1 Raag Gond, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:
qe Afsas yATfe il (873-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAA Aas Il (873-9, Hs, sas oHee zh) asumayDh jagnay. The ritual sacrifice of horses,
Jor UTY BWS Il (873-9, a's, sas SHV FH) tulaa purakh daanay. giving one's weight in gold to charities,
yrar FEASTS Al (873-9, a's, sas See Ah paraag isnaanay. ||1]|| and ceremonial cleansing baths -||1]|
38 6 unfa ofa atefs St Il (873-9, as, sas ane= Hh) ta-o na pujeh har keerat naamaa. These are not equal to singing the Praises of the Lord's Name.
mus THs 3H FT HS MBA IA TIS Il (873-9, as, sas oHeS AH apunay raameh bhaj ray man aalsee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meditate on your Lord, you lazy man! ||1||Pause| |
afent fits SIS Il (873-10, Hs, sas SHR Fh) ga-i-aa pind bhartaa. Offering sweet rice at Gaya,
SOTA wif FAST Il (873-10, as, sas oe banaaras as bastaa. living on the river banks at Benares,
Hfy Fe FST UST NMI (873-10, Hs, sas onee A mukh bayd chatur parh-taa. ||2|| reciting the four Vedas by heart;||2||
Hale UeH wifes Il (873-11, as, sas onee sagal Dharam achhitaa. Completing all religious rituals,
ae fomres feet fezs it (973-11, as, sas see Hh) gur gi-aan indree darirh-taa. restraining sexual passion by the spiritual wisdom given by the Guru,
Ye AIH AIS FIT IBM (873-11, Hs, sas SHE FH)
khat karam sahit rahtaa. ||3]| and performing the six rituals;||3]|
fae Hafs Aare Il (873-12, Hs, sas ones A sivaa sakat sambaada’. Expounding on Shiva and Shakti
Ho efs efs Aa Se Il (873-12, as, sas oS A) man chhod chhod sagal bhayda”. - O man, renounce and abandon all these things.
fife frnife afss 1 (973-12, as, sas ones HH) simar simar gobinda’. Meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe.
SH OH SafA se FAT ISA (873-12, as, sas ones Ah
bhaj naamaa taras bhav sinDha™. ||4]|1]| Meditate, O Naam Dayv, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||1]|
as Il (873-13) gond. Gond:
x ASN
ote 3H AA fears Il (873-13, a's, sas ones Ah) naad bharamay jaisay mirgaa-ay. The deer is lured by the sound of the hunter's bell;
Ure SH ST ot fomirg & WES IU (973-13, as, sas SHS Fh paraan tajay vaa ko Dhi-aan na jaa-ay. ||1]| it loses its life, but it cannot stop thinking about it. ||1]|
MA TH MA TSS Il (873-13, as, sas oS Th) aisay raamaa aisay hayra-o. In the same way, I look upon my Lord.
aH efs fos nies 3 Sa Al TIE Il (873-14, Hs, sas ane Th raam chhod chit anat na fayra-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I will not abandon my Lord, and turn my thoughts to another. ||1]|Pause| |
fA Hor IS UAHA I (873-14, as, sas see Ft) ji-o meenaa hayrai pasoo-aaraa. As the fisherman looks upon the fish,
Hot aes fod ASS IQ (873-14, Hs, sas SNE Th) sonaa gadh-tay hirai sunaaraa. ||2| | and the goldsmith looks upon the gold he fashions; | |2| |
fa@ fauet Id ug ard Il (873-15, a's, sas SHS Ah ji-o bikh-ee hayrai par naaree. As the man driven by sex looks upon another man's wife,
aQat srgz fod Anict ISI (873-15, Hs, sas SHS FH) ka-udaa daarat hirai ju-aaree. ||3]|| and the gambler looks upon the throwing of the dice -||3]|
Ad Ad SUS SI 3d TH Il (873-15, as, sas Se FH) jah jah daykh-a-u tah tah raamaa. In the same way, wherever Naam Dayv looks, he sees the Lord.
ufs & ude fos fame SH IQ (873-16, HS, sas SNS FH)
har kay charan nit Dhi-aavai naamaa. ||4||2|| Naam Dayv meditates continuously on the Feet of the Lord. ||4||2]|
as Il (873-16) gond. Gond:
Hag safe 3 or of B Il (973-16, as, sas see FH) mo ka-o taar lay raamaa taar lay. Carry me across, O Lord, carry me across.
H one AO Sfead o ASS ay dos aes Se NU FE Il (873-17, as, sas one Th
mai ajaan jan taribay na jaan-o baap beethulaa baah day. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am ignorant, and I do not know how to swim. O my Beloved Father, please give me Your arm. ||1]|Pause| |
od 3 Ae df ws fone kt Afsag afa freeret II (873-17, as, sas ane TH)
nar tay sur ho-ay jaat nimakh mai satgur buDh sikhlaa-ee.
I have been transformed from a mortal being into an angel, in an instant; the True Guru has taught me this.
od 3 Gufs naa aG ASE A ream A uret AN (873-18, as, sas oe Ah nar tay upaj surag ka-o jeeti-o so avkhaDh mai paa-ee. ||1|| Born of human flesh, I have conquered the heavens; such is the medicine I was given.
[2
AS A Uni sae 2a 3a feared xfs Il (873-19, as, sas one Ht) jahaa jahaa Dhoo-a naarad taykay naik tikaavahu mohi. Please place me where You placed Dhroo and Naarad, O my Master.
33 on nifzafa sos He Bud on at for HAS So QUI (873-19, Fs, sas SHE FH) tayray naam avilamb bahut jan uDhray naamay kee nij mat ayh. ||2|[3]|
With the Support of Your Name, so many have been saved; this is Naam Dayv's understanding. ||2||3]|
UST CIB
as Il (874-1) gond. Gond:
Hfa wast Starast | (874-1, as, sas ones At mohi laagtee taalaabaylee. I am restless and unhappy.
wed faa ate wast Al (874-1, as, sas onee Ah bachhray bin gaa-ay akaylee. ||1]| Without her calf, the cow is lonely. ||1]|
uso fag He SE Il (874-1, as, sas ones Ah paanee-aa bin meen talfai. Without water, the fish writhes in pain.
MA IH ont fas aud oT A TIS Il (874-2, as, sas oe Ah aisay raam naamaa bin baapuro naamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. So is poor Naam Dayv without the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
AA OMe Oo Mer STS Il (874-2, ats, sas oe Fh) jaisay gaa-ay kaa baachhaa chhootlaa. Like the cow's calf, which, when let loose,
BS FUT HUG WSBT MQ (874-3, d's, sas ones FM) than chokh-taa maakhan ghootlaa. ||2|| sucks at her udders and drinks her milk -||2||
SHES Sates ufenit I (874-3, as, sas see Hh) naamday-o naaraa-in paa-i-aa. So has Naam Dayv found the Lord.
Ts FSS niwy Baten Sil (874-3, Hs, sas see Ah gur bhaytat alakh lakhaa-i-aa. ||3]| Meeting the Guru, I have seen the Unseen Lord. ||3]|
AA fad Is us ot I (874-4, Fs, sas oR Ah jaisay bikhai hayt par naaree. As the man driven by sex wants another man's wife,
MA OA US Hast gil (874-4, as, sas see Hh) aisay naamay pareet muraaree. ||4|| so does Naam Dayv love the Lord. ||4||
AA Sus fegHs UM Il (874-4, Hs, sas SHS FH) jaisay taaptay nirmal ghaamaa. As the earth burns in the dazzling sunlight,
3A OTH ont fas syd SH NUN (874-4, as, sas ones Ah taisay raam naamaa bin baapuro naamaa. ||5||4|| so does poor Naam Dayv burn without the Lord's Name. ||5||4]|
Td Ts Tat oHES ME at wa 2 (74-6) raag gond banee naamday-o jee-o kee ghar 2 Raag Gond, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (874-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs dfs ass fee Afs SIH Il (874-7, Fs, sas ones Fh) har har karat mitay sabh bharmaa. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all doubts are dispelled.
fs & SH S SSH US Il (874-7, Hs, sas one Fh) har ko naam lai ootam Dharmaa. Chanting the Name of the Lord is the highest religion.
os ots aes WTS AG Tat Il (874-7, Fs, sas one A
har har karat jaat kul haree.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, erases social classes and ancestral pedigrees.
A dfa nigd at wat Ul (874-8, as, sas ane FH) so har anDhulay kee laakree. ||1]| The Lord is the walking stick of the blind. ||1]|
Ide SHAS Ise SH Il (874-8, as, sas see FH) har-ay namastay har-ay namah. I bow to the Lord, I humbly bow to the Lord.
dfs dfs xas Odt SY ANT IA FIC Il (874-8, ds, sas ones Hh)
har har karat nahee dukh jamah. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, you will not be tormented by the Messenger of Death. ||1||Pause| |
Us TIGA Is UTS Il (874-9, as, sas see FH) har harnaakhas haray paraan. The Lord took the life of Harnaakhash,
WMAHS at Faofs ae Il (874-9, as, sas aes Ah ajaimal kee-o baikuntheh thaan. and gave Ajaamal a place in heaven.
Hot uses afoot Sat Il (874-9, as, sas anes Fh soo-aa parhaavat ganikaa taree. Teaching a parrot to speak the Lord's Name, Ganika the prostitute was saved.
A fe dog at USS MQM (874-10, as, sas oH Fh) so har nainhu kee pootree. ||2|| That Lord is the light of my eyes. ||2||
dfs ois ass Usa SdH Il (874-10, Hs, sas one Hh har har karat pootnaa taree. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Pootna was saved,
We wTSsSt AUStT Tat Il (874-10, as, sas onee FH) baal ghaatnee kaptahi bharee. even though she was a deceitful child-killer.
finge tue AS Cust | (974-11, as, sas oR FH) simran daropad sut uDhree. Contemplating the Lord, Dropadi was saved.
ISH Ast fre forsdt wail (874-11, a3, sas suze FA ga-ootam satee silaa nistaree. ||3]| Gautam's wife, turned to stone, was saved. ||3]|
aAt an Hae fafs abo i (874-11, as, sas ane Fh) kaysee kans mathan jin kee-aa. The Lord, who killed Kaysee and Kans,
Aba ae aret AB hor I (974-12, as, sas ones FH) jee-a daan kaalee ka-o dee-aa. gave the gift of life to Kali.
Use OH MA Tet Il (874-12, Hs, sas ones Fh paranvai naamaa aiso haree. Prays Naam Dayv, such is my Lord;
WH AUS F net edt NSIAUIUI (874-12, Fs, sas oS Fh jaas japat bhai apdaa taree. ||4]|1]|5|| meditating on Him, fear and suffering are dispelled. ||4]|1]|5]|
as Il (874-13) gond. Gond:
39G 33 ASH We Il (874-13, ds, sas ane Fh bhairo bhoot seetlaa Dhaavai. One who chases after the god Bhairau, evil spirits and the goddess of smallpox,
ud ade Cg ag Css NU (874-13, as, sas ane khar baahan uho chhaar udaavai. ||1|| is riding on a donkey, kicking up the dust. ||1||
IG 38 Sa Her BIE Il (874-13, as, sas an Ah ha-o ta-o ayk rama-ee-aa laiha-o. I take only the Name of the One Lord.
nis te aewrefe SIS Ul TIC Il (974-14, Hs, sas oe FH) aan dayv badlaavan daiha-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have given away all other gods in exchange for Him. ||1||Pause] |
fre fre ages FH og fomre II (874-14, 3, sas aN TH) Siv siv kartay jo nar Dhi-aavai. That man who chants "Shiva, Shiva", and meditates on him,
HIE VS SST CHAS Nl (874-14, H's, sas one Fh) barad chadhay da-uroo dhamkaavai. ||2|| is riding on a bull, shaking a tambourine. ||2| |
Ho Het St UAT TT Il (874-15, ds, sas see A) mahaa maa-ee kee poojaa karai. One who worships the Great Goddess Maya
od A ofa df mead ISI (974-15, Hs, sas one FH) nar sai naar ho-ay a-utarai. ||3]| will be reincarnated as a woman, and not a man. ||3]|
3 adhas ot orfe seat i (974-15, as, sas ones Hh) too kahee-at hee aad bhavaanee. You are called the Primal Goddess.
Hats at adit ao surat iSil (874-16, as, sas oHeS AH
mukat kee baree-aa kahaa chhapaanee. ||4|| At the time of liberation, where will you hide then? ||4| |
Dans TH SH ag HSM Il (874-16, as, sas oe AH gurmat raam naam gahu meetaa. Follow the Guru's Teachings, and hold tight to the Lord's Name, O friend.
yee ort FES ad aS NUNQNEN (874-17, a's, sas HRS FH) paranvai naamaa i-o kahai geetaa. ||5||2||6|| Thus prays Naam Dayv, and so says the Gita as well. ||5||2]]6]|
fase Hs Il (874-17) bilaaval gond. Bilaaval Gond:
ME OH Hos efor usa F AHS F 1 TTS I (974-17, fares dis, sas se Fh) aaj naamay beethal daykhi-aa moorakh ko samjhaa-oo ray. rahaa-o. Today, Naam Dayv saw the Lord, and so I will instruct the ignorant. ||Pause| |
uid SHot fest BA at ay ust aH Il (974-18, fees Hs, sas ones Hh paa“day tumree gaa-itaree loDhay kaa khayt khaatee thee. O Pandit, O religious scholar, your Gayatri was grazing in the fields.
& afe Sat cadt sdt Bias Bias wWSt St AU (874-18, feores Fs, sas one Ah) lai kar thaygaa tagree toree laa%gat laa‘ gat jaatee thee. ||1|| Taking a stick, the farmer broke its leg, and now it walks with a limp. ||1]|
uls SHI HIS UBS soe Bisnt nres Shor a Il (974-19, fares ds, sas one Fh paa“day tumraa mahaaday-o Dha-ulay balad charhi-aa aavat daykhi-aa thaa. O Pandit, I saw your great god Shiva, riding along on a white bull.
Het & we yret Ua ST aT BSal Hfant | II (874-19, fuses as, sas anee Ah
modee kay ghar khaanaa paakaa vaa kaa larhkaa maari-aa thaa. ||2|| In the merchant's house, a banquet was prepared for him - he killed the merchant's son. ||2]|
Ua cou
us SHI THE A at ores Sf a Il (875-1, faeres as, gas one Th) paa“day tumraa raamchand so bhee aavat daykhi-aa thaa. O Pandit, I saw your Raam Chand coming too
Teo Ast Head det we at Afe Tevet at SI (875-1, frees Hs, sas one Ah
raavan saytee sarbar ho-ee ghar kee jo-ay gavaa-ee thee. ||3]| ; he lost his wife, fighting a war against Raawan. ||3]||
foe nigr SI AST Il (875-2, froreg ss, sas see FH) hindoo an‘aa turkoo kaanaa. The Hindu is sightless; the Muslim has only one eye.
eat 3 famrot flmiet Il (875-2, fares a's, sas one Fh) duhaa"™ tay gi-aanee si-aanaa. The spiritual teacher is wiser than both of them.
foe UA PIT HABHES HAS I (975-3, faery as, sas ones A) hindoo poojai dayhuraa musalmaan maseet. The Hindu worships at the temple, the Muslim at the mosque.
on ASt Afent AT PIT o HAS ISISIDI (875-3, frees Ts, sas one TH) naamay so-ee sayvi-aa jah dayhuraa na maseet. ||4]|3]|7]|
Naam Dayv serves that Lord, who is not limited to either the temple or the mosque. [4113] 171]
Td ds wat seen AG at we 2 (975-4) raag gond banee ravidaas jee-o kee ghar 2 Raag Gond, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee, Second House:
qe Afsars Arte il (875-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HAT HAT AUT AAT Il (875-5, a's, sas sheen fh mukand mukand japahu sansaar. Meditate on the Lord Mukanday, the Liberator, O people of the world.
fag Hae 36 dfe mBog Il (975-5, Hs, sas shee Th) bin mukand tan ho-ay a-uhaar. Without Mukanday, the body shall be reduced to ashes.
Het Hae Hats a VST Il (975-5, as, sas seen Ah so-ee mukand mukat kaa daataa. Mukanday is the Giver of liberation.
Het Hote Ina fus HST WAL (875-5, as, sas afer Fh so-ee mukand hamraa pit maataa. ||1|| Mukanday is my father and mother. ||1]|
AS HAS HIS HAT Il (875-6, a's, sas seen Hh jeevat mukanday marat mukanday. Meditate on Mukanday in life, and meditate on Mukanday in death.
3 A Aza AG Het Se UU! TIC Il (975-6, Hs, sas seeH Fh) taa kay sayvak ka-o sadaa ananday. ||1|| rahaa-o. His servant is blissful forever. ||1]||Pause||
HAE HAT IHS UTS Il (875-7, as, sas sheen HM) mukand mukand hamaaray paraana’, The Lord, Mukanday, is my breath of life.
afu Hate HASfa SAS Il (875-7, 3, sas seeA Ff) jap mukand mastak neesaana”. Meditating on Mukanday, one's forehead will bear the Lord's insignia of approval.
AZ Hae Ad Aaa Il (875-7, Hs, sas seen 7) sayv mukand karai bairaagee. The renunciate serves Mukanday.
Het Hae Tass US Hat iil (975-7, as, sas sheen Ah so-ee mukand durbal Dhan laaDhee. ||2|| Mukanday is the wealth of the poor and forlorn. ||2||
aq HAE Ad Suarg il (975-8, a's, sas steer rh) ayk mukand karai upkaar. When the One Liberator does me a favor,
JHS AI Ad AAT Il (875-8, as, sas seen Ah hamraa kahaa karai sansaar. then what can the world do to me?
Het ats ge warts il (875-8, ds, sas seen A) maytee jaat hoo-ay darbaar. Erasing my social status, I have entered His Court.
Sot Hae Ha Aa Ste SI (875-9, as, sas sfeerA Th) tuhee mukand jog jug taar. ||3]| You, Mukanday, are potent throughout the four ages. ||3]|
CufAS forma Jur uTIA Il (875-9, as, sas seen FH) upji-o gi-aan hoo-aa pargaas. Spiritual wisdom has welled up, and I have been enlightened.
ate fasur ate ate SA Il (875-9, as, sas seen a) kar kirpaa leenay keet daas. In His Mercy, the Lord has made this worm His slave.
ag seen wre FFAS Yat il (875-10, as, sas seen Fh) kaho ravidaas ab tarisnaa chookee. Says Ravi Daas, now my thirst is quenched;
mf HAS AS 3g at IAM (875-10, a3, sas seen FH) jap mukand sayvaa taahoo kee. ||4||1|| I meditate on Mukanday the Liberator, and I serve Him. ||4]|1]|
as Il (875-10) gond. Gond:
A Gg nionfe Stee are Il (875-11, as, sas ofeen ah) jay oh athsath tirath n"aavai. Someone may bathe at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage,
A Sg woren fre uATS Il (975-11, a3, sas ofeern Ht) jay oh du-aadas silaa poojaavai. and worship the twelve Shiva-lingam stones,
A Gg qu Ser SSS Il (875-11, as, sas sfeen Fh) jay oh koop tataa dayvaavai. and dig wells and pools,
ad fee AS fase AS NA (975-11, Fs, sas see A) karai nind sabh birthaa jaavai. ||1|| but if he indulges in slander, then all of this is useless. ||1]|
AQ a {Sea AA Sd Il (875-12, as, sas sfeera th) saaDh kaa nindak kaisay tarai. How can the slanderer of the Holy Saints be saved?
Hud Wad sda St us WAU TIS Il (875-12, as, sas seen A) Sarpar jaanhu narak hee parai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Know for certain, that he shall go to hell. ||1]|Pause] |
A Gg quo ad aways | (975-13, as, sas afeen FH) jay oh garahan karai kulkhayt. Someone may bathe at Kuruk-shaytra during a solar eclipse,
mau ofa Atars ANFS Il (875-13, as, sas sfeerA th arpai naar seegaar samayt. and give his decorated wife in offering,
Faret fifigfs Asst AS Il (975-13, as, sas sfeen Fh saglee simrit sarvanee sunai. and listen to all the Simritees,
Ad Se ASS St TS lll (875-14, as, sas seers wh karai nind kavnai nahee gunai. ||2|| but if he indulges in slander, these are of no account. ||2]||
A Gg nifea YATE aes I (875-14, Hs, sas seen FH) jay oh anik parsaad karaavai. Someone may give countless feasts,
oft we Ast Hsfu urs I (875-14, as, sas afeen Ft) bhoom daan sobhaa mandap paavai. and donate land, and build splendid buildings;
nual fants frstor APS I (875-15, as, sas seer Ah apnaa bigaar biraa“naa saa™dhai. he may neglect his own affairs to work for others,
ad fee ag Hot TS SI (875-15, as, sas seen Ah karai nind baho jonee haa“dhai. ||3]| but if he indulges in slander, he shall wander in countless incarnations. ||3]|
{Set ATT ATI AAS Il (875-15, as, sas sheen nindaa kahaa karahu sansaaraa. Why do you indulge in slander, O people of the world?
feea ar ugafe uTIa Il (875-15, a's, sas afer Hh nindak kaa pargat paahaaraa. The emptiness of the slanderer is soon exposed.
fsea Afo fo dtefoor i (875-16, a3, sas afeera 7) nindak soDh saaDh beechaari-aa. I have thought, and determined the fate of the slanderer.
ag seen unit safe frorfoor Ss iINAUDNQISEl AZ ll (875-16, Hs, sas sheeA Ah
kaho ravidaas paapee narak siDhaari-aa. ||4||2||11]|7]|2||49]| jorh. Says Ravi Daas, he is a sinner; he shall go to hell. ||4]|2||11]|7||2||49]|| Total] |
Uat coe THAG HIS Y UT 1 TUE (876-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday Raamkalee, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe ATS on aes usy fesse faseg nieve Hats mist AS TT YATE I (876-2) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
act uss HoAfads aSt US UT Il (876-4, THAT, He 1) ko-ee parh-taa sehsaakirtaa ko-ee parhai puraanaa. Some read the Sanskrit scriptures, and some read the Puraanas.
aet ay AU must oral FSA fomrar Il (876-4, sHat, He 1)
ko-ee naam japai japmaalee laagai tisai Dhi-aanaa.
Some meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and chant it on their malas, focusing on it in meditation.
me ot aa ot fas o AST SI Sat SH UST MAU (876-4, THA, Hs 1) ab hee kab hee kichhoo na jaanaa tayraa ayko naam pachhaanaa. ||1]| I know nothing, now or ever; I recognize only Your One Name, Lord. ||1]|
6 Hat Jd Het ACS TS Il (876-5, Tat, uz 1) na jaanaa haray mayree kavan gatay. I do not know, Lord, what my condition shall be.
oH He vifemra Hats ys Sct ate fasur gag Ast BA Us NAN TI Il (876-5, THA, H8 1)
ham moorakh agi-aan saran parabh tayree kar kirpaa raakho mayree laaj patay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am foolish and ignorant; I seek Your Sanctuary, God. Please, save my honor and my self-respect. ||1]|Pause] |
aay tar Sfs vas 3 cag Ate ufeMrs Il (876-6, sat, H: 1)
kabhoo jee-arhaa oobh charhat hai kabhoo jaa-ay pa-i-aalay.
Sometimes, the soul soars high in the heavens, and sometimes it falls to the depths of the nether regions.
Bat Hast fag & JIS I WS AT SS Il (876-7, Tat, we 1) lobhee jee-arhaa thir na rahat hai chaaray kundaa bhaalay. ||2|| The greedy soul does not remain stable; it searches in the four directions. ||2]|
Hoe feu vise ufo wre diese ATAfs Het II (976-7, Hat, He 1) maran likhaa-ay mandal meh aa-ay jeevan saajeh maa-ee. With death pre-ordained, the soul comes into the world, gathering the riches of life.
Sfx vs TH tug AoMt ofa ssst niet SI (876-8, Hast, He 1)
ayk chalay ham daykhah su-aamee bhaahi balantee aa-ee. ||3]||
I see that some have already gone, O my Lord and Master; the burning fire is coming closer! ||3]|
3 fort ar rts & fart ar avet or fart avy o Het II (876-8, THES, He 1) na kisee kaa meet na kisee kaa bhaa-ee naa kisai baap na maa-ee. No one has any friend, and no one has any brother; no one has any father or mother.
ysels aoa AS tela nis TE Met SIU (876-9, THT, HE 1)
paranvat naanak jay too dayveh antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||4||1]|
Prays Nanak, if You bless me with Your Name, it shall be my help and support in the end. |/4]|11|
THA HIB Y Il (876-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Hea Afs Sat unfa dt Il (876-10, Hast, He 1) sarab jot tayree pasar rahee. Your Light is prevailing everywhere.
Ad Ad Sa ST Sadat MAUI (876-10, Tat, Hs 1) jah jah daykhaa tah narharee. ||1|| Wherever I look, there I see the Lord. ||1]|
Ales soe fests Amt Il (876-11, mat, He 1) jeevan talab nivaar su-aamee. Please rid me of the desire to live, O my Lord and Master.
vig afu ufeer He arfsur fa afs Sse ufs AuMit wan TIS il (876-11, mast, Hs 1) anDh koop maa-i-aa man gaadi-aa ki-o kar utara-o paar su-aamee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
My mind is entangled in the deep dark pit of Maya. How can I cross over, O Lord and Master? ||1]||Pause| |
Ad State we sists affor wots aT ST Il (876-12, Tat, He 1) jah bheetar ghat bheetar basi-aa baahar kaahay naahee. He dwells deep within, inside the heart; how can He not be outside as well?
fae at wg ad fos afog Het fFs HO HST MII (876-12, THA, He 1) tin kee saar karay nit saahib sadaa chint man maahee. ||2|| Our Lord and Master always takes care of us, and keeps us in His thoughts. ||2]||
~ NS
mm SS nM wa Il (876-13, THe, He 1) aapay nayrhai aapay door. He Himself is near at hand, and He is far away.
mint Aaa ston saute Il (876-13, Hast, He 1) aapay sarab rahi-aa bharpoor. He Himself is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.
Asad fus nite wfe il (976-13, mast, He 1) satgur milai anDhayraa jaa-ay. Meeting the True Guru, the darkness is dispelled.
UST ctIO
Ag ta 3g stot ANTE III (877-1, THA, He 1) jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||3]|| Wherever I look, there I see Him pervading. ||3]|
nists HOA sofa ufeur Sat raf areat i (877-1, wae, v2 1) antar sahsaa baahar maa-i-aa nainee laagas banee. There is doubt within me, and Maya is outside; it hits me in the eyes like an arrow.
ysefs Sag MAS aA ussTufsar Yyrat MSI (877-2, THAT, Hs 1) paranvat naanak daasan daasaa partaapehgaa paraanee. ||4||2|| Prays Nanak, the slave of the Lord's slaves: such a mortal suffers terribly. ||4||2] |
THA HIS % Il (877-2)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
fas ufs eafs aeg va ad ea safe wg ASG Bd Il (877-2, THA, #2 1)
jit dar vaseh kavan dar kahee-ai daraa bheetar dar kavan lahai.
Where is that door, where You live, O Lord? What is that door called? Among all doors, who can find that door?
fan vd oofs feat Gort A eg set orf] aT Al (877-3, THES, He 1)
jis dar kaaran firaa udaasee so dar ko-ee aa-ay kahai. ||1]|
For the sake of that door, I wander around sadly, detached from the world; if only someone would come and tell me about that door. ||1]|
fas fafa Aras Sd Il (877-4, ena, He 1) kin biDh saagar taree-ai. How can I cross over the world-ocean?
Htefsur og He NU TIS Ul (877-4, Tat, He 1) jeevti-aa nah maree-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. While I am living, I cannot be dead. ||1]||Pause] |
eu wen dg Teeter nr vida ef— u| AS Il (877-4, THAT, He 1) dukh darvaajaa rohu rakhvaalaa aasaa andaysaa du-ay pat jarhay. Pain is the door, and anger is the guard; hope and anxiety are the two shutters.
Hier Ae uwet urat we afar AS a nrAfs use Id QI (877-5, THAT, He 1) maa-i-aa jal khaa-ee paanee ghar baaDhi-aa sat kai aasan purakh rahai. ||2||
Maya is the water in the moat; in the middle of this moat, he has built his home. The Primal Lord sits in the Seat of Truth. ||2||
fxs on nis 3 afer 3H Afs ardt meg Js Il (877-6, 7a, v2 1)
kintay naamaa ant na jaani-aa tum sar naahee avar haray.
You have so many Names, Lord, I do not know their limit. There is no other equal to You.
Cu adt ava Ho ufo Jae My ATS nef AT SII (877-6, THast, He 1)
oochaa nahee kahnaa man meh rahnaa aapay jaanai aap karay. ||3]||
Do not speak out loud - remain in your mind. The Lord Himself knows, and He Himself acts. ||3]|
wa mA nea se dt faG afa Sa ad il (877-7, Tat, v2 1) jab aasaa andaysaa tab hee ki-o kar ayk kahai. As long as there is hope, there is anxiety; so how can anyone speak of the One Lord?
nat stats ad fast 3B aaa Sa fs Mil (877-7, sat, nH 1) aasaa bheetar rahai niraasaa ta-o naanak ayk milai. ||4||
In the midst of hope, remain untouched by hope; then, O Nanak, you shall meet the One Lord. ||4]|
feo fafa Aras Sd i (877-8, oat, w: 1) in biDh saagar taree-ai. In this way, you shall cross over the world-ocean.
Htefsur fe@ Hdha 14 FHS FAT USI (877-8, THA, Hs 1) jeevti-aa i-o maree-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||3]| This is the way to remain dead while yet alive. ||1||Second Pause||3]|
THAGt HIS % Il (877-9) raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Refs Aa Art Hot fist GH Sa AES Il (877-9, THs, He 1)
surat sabad saakhee mayree sinyee baajai lok sunay.
Awareness of the Shabad and the Teachings is my horn; the people hear the sound of its vibrations.
us Sot Hae & Set Str | us Al (877-9, THA, He 1)
pat jholee mangan kai taa-ee bheekhi-aa naam parhay. ||1||
Honor is my begging-bowl, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the charity I receive. ||1||
Bat HIN Aa ll (877-10, THast, v2 1) baabaa gorakh jaagai. O Baba, Gorakh is the Lord of the Universe; He is always awake and aware.
diay A fats af Gout ass aa Sa NU TIS Il (877-10, saat, v2 1) gorakh so jin go-ay uthaalee kartay baar na laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone is Gorakh, who sustains the earth; He created it in an instant. ||1]]Pause||
urat ure uefe af oa ge Hed Hf MS il (877-11, arrest, we 1)
paanee paraan pavan banDh raakhay chand sooraj mukh dee-ay.
Binding together water and air, He infused the breath of life into the body, and made the lamps of the sun and the moon.
Hae Flee AG asst cat S3 TE EAP Qi (877-11, Tas, v2 1 maran jeevan ka-o Dhartee deenee aytay gun visray. ||2] | To die and to live, He gave us the earth, but we have forgotten these blessings. ||2]|
fro rrfoa wig Heit Ham Ute UTA aTST Il (877-12, THF, He 1)
siDh saaDhik ar jogee jangam peer puras bahutayray.
There are so many Siddhas, seekers, Yogis, wandering pilgrims, spiritual teachers and good people.
A fSo fuer 3 ates wma ST HG AZ AT IBM (877-12, Tat, Hz 1) jay tin milaa ta kKeerat aakhaa taa man sayv karay. ||3]| If I meet them, I chant the Lord's Praises, and then, my mind serves Him. ||3]|
NH SS Fd flys Aa urst HHS FI Il (877-13, Tuas, vs 1)
kaagad loon rahai gharit sangay paanee kamal rahai.
Paper and salt, protected by ghee, remain untouched by water, as the lotus remains unaffected in water.
MA sas fHofs AS aoa f35 AH fom ad SII (877-13, THA, He 1)
aisay bhagat mileh jan naanak tin jam ki-aa karai. ||4]||4||
Those who meet with such devotees, O servant Nanak - what can death do to them? [141141]
THA HIS % Il (877-14)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Afs ufser SSX FS Il (877-14, Tae, ue 1) sun maachhindaraa naanak bolai. Listen, Machhindra, to what Nanak says.
znafs us ad od 3B Il (877-15, THaSt, He 1) vasgat panch karay nah dolai. One who subdues the five passions does not waver.
MAT Hats Fat AE UTS i (877-15, THast, v2 1) aisee jugat jog ka-o paalay. One who practices Yoga in such a way,
wif 3d Aas AG 3S NAL (877-15, Tae, Hs aap tarai saglay kul taaray. ||1]|| saves himself, and saves all his generations. ||1]|
Angus wirt HPs urs il (877-15, THast, He 1) so a-uDhoot aisee mat paavai. He alone is a hermit, who attains such understanding.
wifofafa Afs AHTfa ANTS NU TIS I (877-16, THA, He 1) ahinis sunn samaaDh samaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Day and night, he remains absorbed in deepest Samaadhi. ||1]|Pause| |
fatter afe safs s 3s Il (977-16, sat, He 1) bhikhi-aa bhaa-ay bhagat bhai chalai. He begs for loving devotion to the Lord, and lives in the Fear of God.
de A fgufs Aste ms I (877-17, mast, Hs 1) hovai so taripat santokh amulai. He is satisfied, with the priceless gift of contentment.
fours ofu df wre urs il (877-17, Tae, Hs 1) Dhi-aan roop ho-ay aasan paavai. Becoming the embodiment of meditation, he attains the true Yogic posture.
Afs oft sat fos BS MQM (877-17, THA, He 1) sach naam taarhee chit laavai. ||2]| He focuses his consciousness in the deep trance of the True Name. ||2||
SSR FS nifiys great il (877-18, mast, us 1) naanak bolai amrit banee. Nanak chants the Ambrosial Bani.
Afe wfeer my StAret il (877-18, THast, 2 1) sun maachhindaraa a-oDhoo neesaanee. Listen, O Machhindra: this is the insignia of the true hermit.
MAT Hf {SIA SHES Il (877-18, THat, He 1) aasaa maahi niraas valaa-ay. One who, in the midst of hope, remains untouched by hope,
fess Sa ATS UES IBll (877-18, Tat, Hz 1) nihcha-o naanak kartay paa-ay. ||3]| shall truly find the Creator Lord. ||3]|
YySets SSA MAH ASE Il (877-19, Tet, us 1) paranvat naanak agam sunaa-ay. Prays Nanak, I share the mysterious secrets of God.
Td 3B at Afa fers | (977-19, oat, v2 gur chaylay kee sanDh milaa-ay. The Guru and His disciple are joined together!
ciftmr erg SHG UAE Il (877-19, Hee, He 1) deekhi-aa daaroo bhojan khaa-ay. One who eats this food, this medicine of the Teachings,
at Cot
fant Zane at ASt ute SUI (978-1, THAT, He 1) chhi-a darsan kee sojhee paa-ay. ||4]|5]| has the wisdom of the six Shaastras. ||4]|5]|
THA HIB Y Il (878-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
JH 303 Sat uu act FT USS Bat HS WET Il (878-1, Haast, we 1D)
ham dolat bayrhee paap bharee hai pavan lagai mat jaa-ee.
My boat is wobbly and unsteady; it is filled with sins. The wind is rising - what if it tips over?
Hone fra see a nie fogs efs efsnret iil (373-2, east, He 1)
sanmukh siDh bhaytan ka-o aa-ay nihcha-o deh vadi-aa-ee. ||1||
As sunmukh, I have turned to the Guru; O my Perfect Master; please be sure to bless me with Your glorious greatness. ||1]||
ad ate Saeafar Il (878-2, mat, He 1) gur taar taaranhaari-aa. O Guru, my Saving Grace, please carry me across the world-ocean.
af sats use mifeort 38 33 a8 afeofoor ai TIE i (978-3, sHaMt, v2 1)
deh bhagat pooran avinaasee ha-o tujh ka-o balihaari-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Bless me with devotion to the perfect, imperishable Lord God; I am a sacrifice to You. ||1]|Pause] |
fro rrfoe Halt ore Ham Sa fro frost fomrfenr | (978-3, mast, He
siDh saaDhik jogee ar jangam ayk siDh jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa.
He alone is a Siddha, a seeker, a Yogi, a wandering pilgrim, who meditates on the One Perfect Lord.
ugAs us fass 3 Ayumi org fas aS orfemr QI (878-4, east, He 1)
parsat pair sijhat tay su-aamee akhar jin ka-o aa-i-aa. ||2||
Touching the feet of the Lord Master, they are emancipated; they come to receive the Word of the Teachings. ||2]|
AU 3U AAH ASH B AST BH Aut US Sa Il (878-5, Hast, ws 1)
jap tap sanjam karam na jaanaa naam japee parabh tayraa.
I know nothing of charity, meditation, self-discipline or religious rituals; I only chant Your Name, God.
Td USHA ssa SfeG AS Aafe fads SEI (978-5, THA, He 1)
gur parmaysar naanak bhayti-o saachai sabad nibayraa. ||3]|6]||
Nanak has met the Guru, the Transcendent Lord God; through the True Word of His Shabad, he is set free. ||3]|6]|
THAGt HIS % Il (878-6) raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Hest Aafs gore SS Il (878-6, aH, He 1) surtee surat ralaa-ee-ai ayt. Focus your consciousness in deep absorption on the Lord.
36 ats seo Sula AZ Il (878-6, THA, He 1) tan kar tulhaa langheh jayt. Make your body a raft, to cross over.
nists ata fA FS TY Il (878-7, Tet, He 1) antar bhaahi tisai too rakh. Deep within is the fire of desire; keep it in check.
wifofofh tet 3S wae AU (878-7, THAT, He 1) ahinis deevaa balai athak. ||1]| Day and night, that lamp shall burn unceasingly. ||1]|
MAT ater Stfs Sate i (878-7, Hast, v2 1) aisaa deevaa neer taraa-ay. Float such a lamp upon the water;
fas de As Ast ute Na TIE Il (978-7, Hast, He 1) jit deevai sabh sojhee paa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. this lamp will bring total understanding. ||1||Pause| |
Jet fet AST SE I (878-8, Hat, He 1) hachhee mitee sojhee ho-ay. This understanding is good clay;
ST at aot He ALE Il (978-8, sHaet, He 1) taa kaa kee-aa maanai so-ay. a lamp made of such clay is acceptable to the Lord.
Adal 3 als VaT SS Il (973-8, Tat, v2 1) karnee tay kar chakahu dhaal. So shape this lamp on the wheel of good actions.
ma Ga foadt arts i211 (978-9, mat, He 1) aithai othai nibhee naal. ||2]| In this world and in the next, this lamp shall be with you. ||2||
mm sefa ad AT ALE Il (878-9, Hast, He 1) aapay nadar karay jaa so-ay. When He Himself grants His Grace,
Tanta fear gS ate i (978-9, oHast, 3 1) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ay. then, as Gurmukh, one may understand Him.
faz ufe ete fasee oF II (978-9, erat, nH 1) tit ghat deevaa nihchal ho-ay. Within the heart, this lamp is permanently lit.
urat Hd & EStfemt ATE II (878-10, aH, He 1) paanee marai na bujhaa-i-aa jaa-ay. It is not extinguished by water or wind.
MAT dter otfs safe Sil (878-10, gat, He 1)
aisaa deevaa neer taraa-ay. ||3]| Such a lamp will carry you across the water. ||3]|
38 BE a eat HE Il (878-10, mat, He 1 dolai vaa-o na vadaa ho-ay. Wind does not shake it, or put it out.
wu fa fiurafs Sfe i (978-11, erat, He 1) jaapai ji-o singhaasan lo-ay. Its light reveals the Divine Throne.
ust FONE AE fx SA Il (878-11, Tat, we khatree baraahman sood ke vais. The Kh'shaatriyas, Brahmins, Soodras and Vaishyas
feats o urciut at ADA Il (878-11, east, He 1) nirat na paa-ee-aa ganee saha"s. cannot find its value, even by thousands of calculations.
MAT Stet as APE Il (978-12, an1aat, He 1) aisaa deevaa baalay ko-ay. If any of them lights such a lamp,
soa A udats dE Sidi (978-12, THAT, He 1) naanak so paarangat ho-ay. ||4||7]|| O Nanak, he is emancipated. ||4]|7||
THA HIB Y Il (878-12)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
3u6 faze Hoe Sa IE I (978-12, east, He 1) tuDhno nivan manan tayraa naa-o. To place one's faith in Your Name, Lord, is true worship.
Ag 3c SHE a ae Il (878-13, mast, ne 1) saach bhayt baisan ka-o thaa-o. With an offering of Truth, one obtains a place to sit.
AS Assy de mgeH Il (878-13, mat, He 1) sat santokh hovai ardaas. If a prayer is offered with truth and contentment,
a Afe Afe sos UTA NA (878-13, THE, He 1) taa sun sad bahaalay paas. ||1]| the Lord will hear it, and call him in to sit by Him. ||1]|
sod fase afe 3 dF Il (878-14, meet, He naanak birthaa ko-ay na ho-ay. O Nanak, no one returns empty-handed;
MAT Baars ATS APE NAN TIS I (878-14, Haat, He 1) aisee dargeh saachaa so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. such is the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
urufs ust aH UATE Il (878-14, THe, He 1) paraapat potaa karam pasaa-o. The treasure I seek is the gift of Your Grace.
3 tefs Has Ao TE I (978-15, THA, 42 1) too dayveh mangat jan chaa-o. Please bless this humble beggar - this is what I seek.
as o@ ue fas vrfe Il (878-15, sat, He 1) bhaadai bhaa-o pavai tit aa-ay. Please, pour Your Love into the cup of my heart.
fs 3 dat ahifs ute i (978-15, sat, He 1) Dhur tai chhodee keemat paa-ay. ||2||
This is Your pre-determined value. ||2||
fate fae aur A fore AP Il (878-16, Hast, He 1)
jin kichh kee-aa so kichh karai. The One who created everything, does everything.
must atHfs wm as Il (878-16, HAST, He 1) apnee keemat aapay Dharai. He Himself appraises His own value.
aenfy usae dur ofa THE Il (978-16, mat, He 1) gurmukh pargat ho-aa har raa-ay. The Sovereign Lord King becomes manifest to the Gurmukh.
oT a nite at at ATE SI (878-17, oat, He 1) naa ko aavai naa ko jaa-ay. ||3]| He does not come, and He does not go. |[3]|
Ba foes ad Has AS HIS HS @ USM I (978-17, Tat, He 1) lok Dhikaar kahai mangat jan maagat maan na paa-i-aa. People curse at the beggar; by begging, he does not receive honor.
Ad oot aor va aot grat S at age aor SIC (878-18, Tat, He 1)
sah kee-aa galaa dar kee-aa baataa tai taa kahan kahaa-i-aa. ||4||8]| O Lord, You inspire me to speak Your Words, and tell the Story of Your Court. ||4]|8]|
THA HIB Y Il (878-18)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Wad His ge Fe nfs Ag ace FS fafa wre Il (878-18, meet, we 1) saagar meh boond boond meh saagar kavan bujhai biDh jaanai.
The drop is in the ocean, and the ocean is in the drop. Who understands, and knows this?
Gsen vos onfu afe dS wm Sz uSre Il (878-19, eat, He 1) ut-bhuj chalat aap kar cheenai aapay tat pachhaanai. ||1||
He Himself creates the wondrous play of the world. He Himself contemplates it, and understands its true essence. ||1||
Ua cor
mT fame shard et | (979-1, sat, He 1) aisaa gi-aan beechaarai ko-ee. How rare are those who contemplate this spiritual wisdom.
fan 3 Hats usH afs det an TIC Il (979-1, sae, v2 1) tis tay mukat param gat ho-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Through this, the supreme state of liberation is attained. ||1]|Pause]|
feo ufo df= df= ufo feabag Gra Ats fafa AST I (879-1, mat, He 1) din meh rain rain meh dinee-ar usan seet biDh so-ee. The night is in the day, and the day is in the night. The same is true of hot and cold.
a ot afs ffs weg o we aa faa AHS B Te QI (879-2, sna, He 1) taa kee gat mit avar na jaanai gur bin samajh na ho-ee. ||2|| No one else knows His state and extent; without the Guru, this is not understood.
21 |
usa ufo ate ofs ufs use gSg FIH famrat il (879-3, Hast, He 1)
purakh meh naar naar meh purkhaa boojhhu barahm gi-aanee.
The female is in the male, and the male is in the female. Understand this, O God- realized being!
ufe xfs fame fers ufo afer aaufa mea aot ISI (879-3, aHast, He 1)
Dhun meh Dhi-aan Dhi-aan meh jaani-aa gurmukh akath kahaanee. ||3] |
The meditation is in the music, and knowledge is in meditation. Become Gurmukh, and speak the Unspoken Speech. ||3]|
Ho Hfe AfS APS Hfs Hour Us FHS TT set Il (879-4, mat, ws
man meh jot jot meh manoo-aa panch milay gur bhaa-ee.
The Light is in the mind, and the mind is in the Light. The Guru brings the five senses together, like brothers.
Sad f35 a Ae alsa fao fa Aafe foe wet siti (379-5, aaat, nH 1)
naanak tin kai sad balihaaree jin ayk sabad liv laa-ee. ||4||9|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who enshrine love for the One Word of the Shabad. ||4]|9] |
THA HIS Y Il (879-5)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
w ofa ufs farsur ordt Il (879-5, goat, 48 1) jaa har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree. When the Lord God showered His Mercy,
3 ICH fees Ht Il (879-6, THT, He 1) taa ha-umai vichahu maaree. egotism was eradicated from within me.
A Rafa on floret i A ae weet atest Wail (879-6, sat, He 1)
SO sayvak raam pi-aaree. jo gur sabdee beechaaree. ||1||
That humble servant who contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad, is very dear to the Lord. ||1]|
A ofa wg ofa ys aS II (879-7, araet, Hs 1) so har jan har parabh bhaavai. That humble servant of the Lord is pleasing to his Lord God;
mifofofhA sats ad feo Tat on efs fa a TE WS NU TIC Il (879-7, ast, He 1) ahinis bhagat karay din raatee laaj chhod har kay gun gaavai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
day and night, he performs devotional worship, day and night. Disregarding his own honor, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
Ufs SH nSeTe wT Il (879-8, oat, He 1) Dhun vaajay anhad ghoraa. The unstruck melody of the sound current resonates and resounds;
Ho Hfoor ofe ofA Ha Il (879-8, THT, He 1) man maani-aa har ras moraa. my mind is appeased by the subtle essence of the Lord.
Gs Us AY AEM I (879-8, Tas, He 1) gur poorai sach samaa-i-aa. Through the Perfect Guru, I am absorbed in Truth.
ag wife usy of urfemr Wil (879-9, aaah, He 1) gur aad purakh har paa-i-aa. ||2|| Through the Guru, I have found the Lord, the Primal Being. ||2||
Afs are Fe Tsarat Il (879-9, THast, v2 1) sabh naad bayd gurbaanee. Gurbani is the sound current of the Naad, the Vedas, everything.
HO IST Afsarurat Il (879-9, aHast, He 1) man raataa saarigpaanee. My mind is attuned to the Lord of the Universe.
3d Shea FIs SU AS Il (879-10, Tae, v2 1) tah tirath varat tap saaray. He is my sacred shrine of pilgrimage, fasting and austere self-discipline.
ad fufemr ofs feAsTs ISI (879-10, sat, He 1) gur mili-aa har nistaaray. ||3]|| The Lord saves, and carries across, those who meet with the Guru. ||3]|
Ad nity afenit SB sal Il (879-10, wHaet, He 1) jah aap ga-i-aa bha-o bhaagaa. One whose self-conceit is gone, sees his fears run away.
Ts VISNt ALA BA Il (879-11, Hast, uz 1) gur charnee sayvak laagaa. That servant grasps the Guru's feet.
afe Afsats san garfemr I (879-11, sat, He 1) gur satgur bharam chukaa-i-aa. The Guru, the True Guru, has expelled my doubts.
aT saa Aafe fhafenr isiIoll (879-11, sat, Hs 1)
kaho naanak sabad milaa-i-aa. ||4||10|| Says Nanak, I have merged into the Word of the Shabad. ||4||10] |
THA HIB Y Il (879-12)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
BES SHO HAS SH Il (879-12, THs, He 1) chhaadan bhojan maagat bhaagai. He runs around, begging for clothes and food.
uftmr eAS AS TY MMT Il (879-12, THAT, He 1) khuDhi-aa dusat jalai dukh aagai. He burns with hunger and corruption, and will suffer in the world hereafter.
THs St Stat eanfs ufs set | (979-13, saat, He 1)
gurmat nahee leenee durmat pat kho-ee.
He does not follow the Guru's Teachings; through his evil-mindedness, he loses his honor.
aenfs safs ure AG SET AU (879-13, Trae, He 1) gurmat bhagat paavai jan ko-ee. ||1]| Only through the Guru's Teachings will such a person become devoted. ||1]|
nat Hats AeA ws SA Il (879-13, mat, He 1D jogee jugat sahj ghar vaasai. The way of the Yogi is to dwell in the celestial home of bliss.
ea fenfe ea afe tfimr stir of mafe fRusA Wan TIS il (979-14, at, He 1) ayk darisat ayko kar daykhi-aa bheekhi-aa bhaa-ay sabad tariptaasai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He looks impartially, equally upon all. He receives the charity of the Lord's Love, and the Word of the Shabad, and so he is satisfied. || 1] |Pause] |
Us 8B Tso FI UH Il (979-15, mat, He 1) panch bail gadee-aa dayh Dhaaree. The five bulls, the senses, pull the wagon of the body around.
oH aot foad ufS Art Il (879-15, east, He 1) raam kalaa nibhai pat saaree. By the Lord's power, one's honor is preserved.
Us set ws fits sts Il (879-15, Hast, He 1) Dhar tootee gaado sir bhaar. But when the axle breaks, the wagon falls and crashes.
wad faafs rdt Hs she iH (879-16, mast, He 1) lakree bikhar jaree manjh bhaar. ||2|| It falls apart, like a pile of logs. ||2||
ad a Aa stots Fait il (879-16, east, He 1) gur kaa sabad veechaar jogee. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, Yogi.
eu AY AH adel Har faGait i (879-16, raat, He dukh sukh sam karnaa sog bi-ogee. Look upon pain and pleasure as one and the same, sorrow and separation.
3afs SH Td Hale Sard il (379-17, wast, He 1) bhugat naam gur sabad beechaaree.
Let your food be contemplative meditation upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
wAfag aa AU fadardt Sil (979-17, mat, He 1) asthir kanDh japai nirankaaree. ||3]| Your wall shall be permanent, by meditating on the Formless Lord. ||3]|
HOH Hdie™ HIS F SET Il (879-17, THe, He 1) sahj jagotaa banDhan tay chhootaa. Wear the loin-cloth of poise, and be free of entanglements.
XH AU YI Aaet BET Il (879-18, Tae, vz 1) kaam kroDh gur sabdee lootaa. The Guru's Word shall release you from sexual desire and anger.
HO fs Het afs TI ATS" Il (879-18, THe, He 1) man meh mundraa har gur sarnaa. In your mind, let your ear-rings be the Sanctuary of the Guru, the Lord.
Soa TH Sails AS Sar USUAAUI (879-18, THA, He 1)
naanak raam bhagat jan tarnaa. ||4||11]| O Nanak, worshipping the Lord in deep devotion, the humble are carried across. [14] [12]
ust cto qe Afsars yATfe Il (80-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THA HIG 3 We Il (880-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 3 ghar 1. Raamkalee, Third Mehl, First House:
Asafa AT Ad AF ae Il (ss0-1, Tat, He 3) satjug sach kahai sabh ko-ee. In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, everyone spoke the Truth.
ufs ufs safs routs Tet i (gs0-1, mat, He 3)
ghar ghar bhagat gurmukh ho-ee.
In each and every home, devotional worship was performed by the people, according to the Guru's Teachings.
Asafa us Us I ae Il (980-2, east, He 3) satjug Dharam pair hai chaar. In that Golden Age, Dharma had four feet.
anf gs x stots Ail (80-2, mast, ws 3) gurmukh boojhai ko beechaar. ||1|| How rare are those people who, as Gurmukh, contemplate this and understand. ||1]|
Aa od of efsuret Tet Il (830-2, oat, v2 3) jug chaaray naam vadi-aa-ee ho-ee. In all four ages, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is glory and greatness.
fa of od A Hats de ad fag SH 5 ur} Set A TIS Il (gs0-3, Tat, He 3)
je naam laagai so mukat hovai gur bin naam na paavai ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who holds tight to the Naam is liberated; without the Guru, no one obtains the Naam. ||1||Pause] |
33 fea ae atet Ufs I (880-3, arat, He 3) taraytai ik kal kKeenee door. In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yuga, one leg was removed.
unis zofsur afs arate efe il (880-4, Hat, Hs 3) pakhand varti-aa har jaanan door. Hypocrisy became prevalent, and people thought that the Lord was far away.
TaHfs gs ASt Tet I (ss0-4, rast, Hs 3) gurmukh boojhai sojhee ho-ee. The Gurmukhs still understood and realized;
wists SH ZA AY Tet NI (ss0-4, sat, He 3) antar naam vasai sukh ho-ee. ||2|| the Naam abided deep within them, and they were at peace. ||2]||
enmufe en efaar ofS I (80-5, oHast, Hs 3) du-aapur doojai dubiDhaa ho-ay. In the Brass Age of Dwaapur Yuga, duality and double-mindedness arose.
Saf gars ATefa Sf Il (gs0-5, aHat, He 3) bharam bhulaanay jaaneh do-ay. Deluded by doubt, they knew duality.
eumufs daft eff us gee Il (s30-5, eat, 2 3) du-aapur Dharam du-ay pair rakhaa-ay. In this Brass Age, Dharma was left with only two feet.
Toufa de 5 oH fess i311 (ss0-6, wat, ne 3) gurmukh hovai ta naam drirh-aa-ay. ||3]|| Those who became Gurmukh implanted the Naam deep within. ||3]|
aorta UH aor fEX TIES Il (g30-6, Tat, He 3) kaljug Dharam kalaa ik rahaa-ay. In the Iron Age of Kali Yuga, Dharma was left with only one power.
fea ufs 3S wfenr HT TOS Il (gs0-6, mat, He 3) ik pair chalai maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-ay. It walks on just one foot; love and emotional attachment to Maya have increased.
Hear Hg uifs Tags i (ss0-7, meat, He 3) maa-i-aa moh at gubaar. Love and emotional attachment to Maya bring total darkness.
Asad se of Garg igil (ss0-7, saat, v2 3) satgur bhaytai naam uDhaar. ||4||
If someone meets the True Guru, he is saved, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|
AS Aa ufo ATS Sat HET Il (s80-7, THaat, 2 3) sabh jug meh saachaa ayko so-ee. Throughout the ages, there is only the One True Lord.
AS Hfo AG SAT Sot AT Il (g80-8, Tash, v2 3) sabh meh sach doojaa nahee ko-ee. Among all, is the True Lord; there is no other at all.
At atefs AT AY Jet I (80-8, east, He 3) saachee keerat sach sukh ho-ee. Praising the True Lord, true peace is attained.
TaHfs SH Tas AEt ull gso-8, wast, He 3) gurmukh naam vakhaanai ko-ee. ||5|| How rare are those, who as Gurmukh, chant the Naam. ||5]|
AS Wa His oH SSH Tet Il (gs80-9, saat, He 3) sabh jug meh naam ootam ho-ee. Throughout all the ages, the Naam is the ultimate, the most sublime.
Tanta feser gs FEet Il (s80-9, mat, ws 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. How rare are those, who as Gurmukh, understand this.
dfs om famre gars AS Het Il (830-9, aac, He 3) har naam Dhi-aa-ay bhagat jan so-ee. One who meditates on the Lord's Name is a humble devotee.
Soa Afar Afar oH efsnret Tet WENA (880-10, Hast, He 3) naanak jug jug naam vadi-aa-ee ho-ee. ||6||1|| O Nanak, in each and every age, the Naam is glory and greatness. ||6||1]|
THA HIS 8 WI A (880-11) raamkalee mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (880-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A 2s aa Jefe esaat J ofa vfs any fore Il (880-12, mat, He 4)
jay vad bhaag hoveh vadbhaagee taa har har naam Dhi-aavai.
If someone is very fortunate, and is blessed with great high destiny, then he meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
oH AUS BH AY UTS Ufo SH aH ANTS IAM (880-12, THAT, He 4) naam japat naamay sukh paavai har naamay naam samaavai. ||1] | Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he finds peace, and merges in the Naam.
[11
gente sats agg Ae yrat | (880-13, areet, us 4) gurmukh bhagat karahu sad paraanee. O mortal, as Gurmukh, worship the Lord in devotion forever.
fose yarn 32 fos ort Tans af ofa af Aret A TIS Il (80-13, THe, He 4) hirdai pargaas hovai liv laagai gurmat har har naam samaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your heart shall be illumined; through the Guru's Teachings, lovingly attune yourself to the Lord. You shall merge in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
Ta Is ALIS Het AT Aas SIUT shor Il (880-14, sHast, v2 4)
heeraa ratan javayhar maanak baho saagar bharpoor kee-aa. The Great Giver is filled with diamonds, emeralds, rubies and pearls;
fan es aa de es HASta fats Tanfs afe afe Sor NMI (880-14, Tat, He 4)
jis vad bhaag hovai vad mastak tin gurmat kadh kadh lee-aa. ||2]|
one who has good fortune and great destiny inscribed upon his forehead, digs them out, by following the Guru's Teachings. ||2||
336 Wedd BS Ts ow ate ate sat feusfEnt il (ss0-15, east, ve 4)
ratan javayhar laal har naamaa gur kaadh talee dikhlaa-i-aa.
The Lord's Name is the jewel, the emerald, the ruby; digging it out, the Guru has placed it in your palm.
sadte Houfa adt sor fee GS wry surfer ISI (ss0-16, mat, He 4)
bhaagheen manmukh nahee lee-aa tarin olai laakh chhapaa-i-aa. ||3]|
The unfortunate, self-willed manmukh does not obtain it; this priceless jewel remains hidden behind a curtain of straw. ||3]|
HASta sa de ufs foftmr st Asa AST GES Il (gs0-16, THA, v2 4)
mastak bhaag hovai Dhur likhi-aa taa satgur sayvaa laa-ay.
If such pre-ordained destiny is written upon one's forehead, then the True Guru enjoins him to serve Him.
SOA ISH Hed US US US TaHfs aha wes USA (880-17, Tat, He 4)
naanak ratan javayhar paavai Dhan Dhan gurmat har paa-ay. ||4]|1]|
O Nanak, then he obtains the jewel, the gem; blessed, blessed is that one who follows the Guru's Teachings, and finds the Lord. ||4]|1]|
THASt HIS 8 Il (880-18)
raamkalee mehlaa 4. Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl:
oH Hot ffs sfeor nse afe stat war HoTe Il (ss0-18, sHat, He 4)
raam janaa mil bha-i-aa anandaa har neekee kathaa sunaa-ay.
Meeting with the humble servants of the Lord, I am in ecstasy; they preach the sublime sermon of the Lord.
zoHfs AS Tet AS state AsHafs ffs sfo ute Hall (ss0-18, east, He 4)
durmat mail ga-ee sabh neekal satsangat mil buDh paa-ay. ||1]|
The filth of evil-mindedness is totally washed away; joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, one is blessed with understanding. ||1||
UST cee
TH Ao TsHfs TH Foe Il (gsi-1, mat, v2 4)
raam jan gurmat raam bolaa-ay.
O humble servant of the Lord, follow the Guru's Teachings, and chant the Name of the Lord.
A He ad A aS IH AUS AOS NU TICS Il (gsi-1, Tat, He 4)
jo jo sunai kahai so muktaa raam japat sohaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whoever hears and speaks it is liberated; chanting the Lord's Name, one is embellished with beauty. ||1||Pause]|
A es oa defo ufa waste afs aH Ao S]Nve Il (s81-2, east, ne 4)
jay vad bhaag hoveh mukh mastak har raam janaa bhaytaa-ay.
If someone has supremely high destiny written on his forehead, the Lord leads him to meet the humble servants of the Lord.
TdHS HS eg afe fas Ag wee ey os ATE QI (881-3, mat, He 4)
darsan sant dayh kar kirpaa sabh daalad dukh leh jaa-ay. ||2| |
Be merciful, and grant me the Blessed Vision of the Saints' Darshan, which shall rid me of all poverty and pain. ||2]|
dfs & Sa TH AS Bla Sade & AME I (81-3, erat, n2 4) har kay log raam jan neekay bhaagheen na sukhaa-ay. The Lord's people are good and sublime; the unfortunate ones do not like them at all.
fA fas oH cats AS Gs og Sea SA Bae ISI (g81-4, at, we 4)
ji-o ji-o raam kaheh jan oochay nar nindak dans lagaa-ay. ||3]|
The more the Lord's exalted servants speak of Him, the more the slanderers attack and sting them. ||3]|
fon fon aa feea fas AS dt gS fs & Aa AUPE I (s81-4, araat, He 4) Dharig Dharig nar nindak jin jan nahee bhaa-ay har kay sakhaa sakhaa-ay. Cursed, cursed are the slanderers who do not like the humble, the friends and companions of the Lord.
A dfs & oa Hy HY WS faa aa at UA o STE ISI (881-5, Tat, He 4)
say har kay chor vaimukh mukh kaalay jin gur kee paij na bhaa-ay. ||4||
Those who do not like the honor and glory of the Guru are faithless, black-faced thieves, who have turned their backs on the Lord. ||4||
efenr efeur afs aug safe ate gH ete Sat AGS Il (ssi-6, erat, He 4)
da-i-aa da-i-aa kar raakho har jee-o ham deen tayree sarnaa-ay.
Have mercy, have mercy, please save me, Dear Lord. I am meek and humble - I seek Your protection.
JH wea 3H fust ys AT AS SSA SUA fee Ulli (ssi-6, Tat, He 4) ham baarik tum pitaa parabh mayray jan naanak bakhas milaa-ay. ||5||2| |
I am Your child, and You are my father, God. Please forgive servant Nanak and merge him with Yourself. ||5]|2||
THASt HIS 8 Il (881-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 4. Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl:
fs & Aa ATT AS ste fse Cufs TE Sse Il (81-7, Tat, Hs 4)
har kay sakhaa saaDh jan neekay tin oopar haath vataavai.
The friends of the Lord, the humble, Holy Saints are sublime; the Lord spreads out His protecting hands above them.
aoufy Aa At us ave afe farsur urfu fires All (ssi-3, Hat, He 4)
gurmukh saaDh say-ee parabh bhaa-ay kar kirpaa aap milaavai. ||1]|
The Gurmukhs are the Holy Saints, pleasing to God; in His mercy, He blends them with Himself. ||1| |
aH H A Ufa He AfS nfs SS Il (gsi-8, THAT, He 4) raam mo ka-o har jan mayl man bhaavai. O Lord, my mind longs to meet with the humble servants of the Lord.
mifH@ mfx af ga od vio fife AS Ao He US AU TIE I (ssi-9, mast, Hs 4)
ami-o ami-o har ras hai meethaa mil sant janaa mukh paavai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The sweet, subtle essence of the Lord is immortalizing ambrosia. Meeting the Saints, I drink it in. ||1]|Pause] |
fs & BI TH AS SSH ffs SoH vest urs il (gsi-9, anaat, we 4)
har kay log raam jan ootam mil ootam padvee paavai.
The Lord's people are the most lofty and exalted. Meeting with them, the most exalted status is obtained.
JH des Oat SH UH at HT SaT YA ATS QI! (gsi-10, wat, He 4)
ham hovat chayree daas daasan kee mayraa thaakur khusee karaavai. ||2| |
I am the slave of the slave of the Lord's slaves; my Lord and Master is pleased with me. |[2||
Rea qo Aefs A eset fee nfs sfe utfS were il (ssi-u1, sat, us 4)
sayvak jan sayveh say vadbhaagee rid man tan pareet lagaavai.
The humble servant serves; one who enshrines love for the Lord in his heart, mind and body is very fortunate.
fag Uist asta ag ast ag afs AF SB ures Sl (ssi-u1, Tae, ws 4) bin pareetee karahi baho baataa koorh bol koorho fal paavai. ||3]| One who talks too much without love, speaks falsely, and obtains only false rewards.
31 Hag os four wales ws ofa AS ual S ur] Il (gs1-12, east, He 4)
mo ka-o Dhaar kirpaa jagjeevan daatay har sant pagee lay paavai. Take pity on me, O Lord of the World, O Great Giver; let me fall at the feet of the Saints.
u@ aee afe afe fra mu fas aoa AS ofs mr] ISIS (ssi1-12, mast, He 4) ha-o kaata-o kaat baadh sir raakha-o jit naanak sant charh aavai. ||4||3]|
I would cut off my head, and cut it into pieces, O Nanak, and set it down for the Saints to walk upon. ||4]|3]|
THaASt HIS 8 Il (g81-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 4. Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl:
As aa Jefe es Ae AS frofenr fea 3 wet | (ssi-13, sat, He 4)
jay vad bhaag hoveh vad mayray jan mildi-aa™ dhil na laa-ee-ai.
If I am blessed with supreme high destiny, I will meet the humble servants of the Lord, without delay.
uf Ho nifys ae Aa ola aera fa sree Al (ssi-14, mat, He 4)
har jan amrit kunt sar neekay vadbhaagee tit naavaa-ee-ai. ||1||
The Lord's humble servants are pools of ambrosial nectar; by great good fortune, one bathes in them. ||1]|
TH H AG Ufa He ad BEM Il (ssi-15, THast, He 4) raam mo ka-o har jan kaarai laa-ee-ai. O Lord, let me work for the humble servants of the Lord.
og urat uat ulAg AS yrat uat Hie Hf of Hie web A TIS Il (ssi-15, Tae, Hs 4) ha-o paanee pakhaa peesa-o sant aagai pag mal mal Dhoor mukh laa-ee-ai. || 1] | rahaa-o.
I carry water, wave the fan and grind the corn for them; I massage and wash their feet. I apply the dust of their feet to my forehead. ||1]|Pause| |
fs Ae Bs Bs Fs BS A Asa fs feet I (ss1-16, gaat, vs 4)
har jan vaday vaday vad oochay jo satgur mayl milaa-ee-ai.
The Lord's humble servants are great, very great, the greatest and most exalted; they lead us to meet the True Guru.
Haag Aes nied 3 aet fife Asa use fomrey QI (ssi-16, aHat, He 4)
satgur jayvad avar na ko-ee mil satgur purakh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||2||
No one else is as great as the True Guru; meeting the True Guru, I meditate on the Lord, the Primal Being. ||2]|
Haag Aafe ud foo ufeor Ae sag GA Tae I (881-17, THT, He 4)
satgur saran paray tin paa-i-aa mayray thaakur laaj rakhaa-ee-ai.
Those who seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru find the Lord. My Lord and Master saves their honor.
fefa nue Aorfe urfe gafs ae rat fAG sae Porfa ware Sil (ssi-18, east, 2 4) ik apnai Su-aa-ay aa-ay baheh gur aagai ji-o bagul samaaDh lagaa-ee-ai. | |3]| Some come for their own purposes, and sit before the Guru; they pretend to be in Samaadhi, like storks with their eyes closed. ||3]|
TIS aa ste at Halts we ada fry uf went i (ssi-is, mat, ws 4)
bagulaa kaag neech kee sangat jaa-ay karang bikhoo mukh laa-ee-ai. Associating with the wretched and the lowly, like the stork and the crow, is like feeding on a carcass of poison.
oad Afs Afs ys Hats fife Hats TA ahr sisi (ssi-19, mat, He 4)
naanak mayl mayl parabh sangat mil sangat hans karaa-ee-ai. ||4||4]]|
Nanak: O God, unite me with the Sangat, the Congregation. United with the Sangat, I will become a swan. ||4]|4]]|
UST cc2
THASt HIS 8 Il (882-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 4. Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl:
Hadad efor agg dfs Hag As UisH ure ofa when I (982-1, Tat, He 4)
satgur da-i-aa karahu har maylhu mayray pareetam paraan har raa-i-aa.
O True Guru, please be kind, and unite me with the Lord. My Sovereign Lord is the Beloved of my breath of life.
dH oct df wag as veet fafs ofs ys Ha UE feerfemr NA (es2-2, mat, He 4) ham chayree ho-ay lagah gur charnee jin har parabh maarag panth dikhaa-i-aa. ||1]||
I am a Slave; I fall at the Guru's feet. He has shown me the Path, the Way to my Lord God. ||1]|
oH H dfs dfs aH fs afer Il (882-2, east, He 4) raam mai har har naam man bhaa-i-aa. The Name of my Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
H uf fas neg 3 aet Sat Ha fust west afe merfeor an TIS I (882-3, ena, He 4) mai har bin avar na ko-ee baylee mayraa pitaa maataa har sakhaa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. I have no friend except the Lord; the Lord is my father, my mother, my companion. ||1]|Pause] |
Hd fea fas ure 3 dafo fag utsn fas ta Hafo Het Hem | (gs2-3, areet, Hs 4) mayray ik khin paraan na raheh bin pareetam bin daykhay mareh mayree maa-i-aa. My breath of life will not survive for an instant, without my Beloved; unless I see Him, I will die, O my mother!
U6 U6 Ss Ta Td Adel wre ale as fife vane ufenr Ill (982-4, sat, uz 4)
Dhan Dhan vad bhaag gur sarnee aa-ay har gur mil darsan paa-i-aa. ||2| |
Blessed, blessed is my great, high destiny, that I have come to the Guru's Sanctuary. Meeting with the Guru, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||2]|
H neg 3 aet AS gs His ale AY AUS AefEMT II (882-5, THA, Hs 4)
mai avar na ko-ee soojhai boojhai man har jap japa-o japaa-i-aa.
I do not know or understand any other within my mind; I meditate and chant the Lord's Chant.
oHdle feats A dae fso wih uff oa FeteEnr ISI (g82-6, Trt, He 4) naamheen fireh say naktay tin ghas ghas nak vaDhaa-i-aa. ||3]| Those who lack the Naam, wander in shame; their noses are chopped off, bit by bit.
[I3I|
H a@ wares Heiss & Aum fee nists an sArfeur II (882-6, mast, He 4)
mo ka-o jagjeevan jeevaal lai su-aamee rid antar naam vasaa-i-aa.
O Life of the World, rejuvenate me! O my Lord and Master, enshrine Your Name deep within my heart.
aod TT Ts oT us fife afsaes oy fonrfenr isu (ss2-7, meet, we 4)
naanak guroo guroo hai pooraa mil satgur naam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4]|5]|
O Nanak, perfect is the Guru, the Guru. Meeting the True Guru, I meditate on the Naam. ||4[|5]|
THASt HIB 8 Il (882-8)
raamkalee mehlaa 4. Raamkalee, Fourth Mehl:
Asad ws est es use Jd fas fife afs Sa ws I (882-8, eat, He 4)
satgur daataa vadaa vad purakh hai jit mili-ai har ur Dhaaray.
The True Guru, the Great Giver, is the Great, Primal Being; meeting Him, the Lord is enshrined within the heart.
Fit ae afe us chor ofe nif~s SH AHS IU (882-8, THT, Hs 4)
jee-a daan gur poorai dee-aa har amrit naam samaaray. ||1]| The Perfect Guru has granted me the life of the soul; I meditate in remembrance on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord. ||1]|
aH afe afs afs oH afe ares II (882-9, oat, He 4) raam gur har har naam kanth Dhaaray. O Lord, the Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart.
aanfy aa et Hfs svet US US SS Ha THT AI FIG Il (882-9, arraet, ws 4)
gurmukh kathaa sunee man bhaa-ee Dhan Dhan vad bhaag hamaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. As Gurmukh, I have heard His sermon, which pleases my mind; blessed, blessed is my great destiny. ||1||Pause| |
afe afe 3am fomrefa at at nis 3 urefa urs II (882-10, east, He 4)
kot kot taytees Dhi-aavahi taa kaa ant na paavahi paaray.
Millions, three hundred thirty millions of gods meditate on Him, but they cannot find His end or limitation.
fase an amnat Hrafa fafa wrafs ore UATE QI (882-11, THAT, He 4)
hirdai kaam kaamnee maageh riDh maageh haath pasaaray. ||2||
With sexual urges in their hearts, they beg for beautiful women; stretching out their hands, they beg for riches. ||2||
dfs FA AfU AY esr ese aaHfy su Sfa wes Il (882-11, Ha, H2 4)
har jas jap jap vadaa vadayraa gurmukh rakha-o ur Dhaaray.
One who chants the Praises of the Lord is the greatest of the great; the Gurmukh keeps the Lord clasped to his heart.
A es aa defo a min afs sne utes Cars Si (882-12, enact, He 4)
jay vad bhaag hoveh taa japee-ai har bha-ojal paar utaaray. ||3]|
If one is blessed with high destiny, he meditates on the Lord, who carries him across the terrifying world-ocean. ||3]|
dfs Ae foate foafe af aa 3 ofs Te afe AS OS Il (882-13, THA, HE 4)
har jan nikat nikat har jan hai har raakhai kanth jan Dhaaray.
The Lord is close to His humble servant, and His humble servant is close to the Lord; He keeps His humble servant clasped to His Heart.
soe fust wat 3 ofs ys on afea ofa yfsurd ISNENICI (882-13, THAT, He 4) naanak pitaa maataa hai har parabh ham baarik har partipaaray. ||4||6||18]|
O Nanak, the Lord God is our father and mother. I am His child; the Lord cherishes me. ||4]/6]]18]|
TH THA HIG U We A (882-15) raag raamkalee mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (882-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fast agg te a aS Ae TS neds 5 Hered Aet Il (882-16, mat, He 5)
kirpaa karahu deen kay daatay mayraa gun avgan na beechaarahu ko-ee.
Have mercy on me, O Generous Giver, Lord of the meek; please do not consider my merits and demerits.
Het at for ot AMM HEA at afs Sat NAM (82-16, east, He 5) maatee kaa ki-aa Dhopai su-aamee maanas kee gat ayhee. ||1]|| How can dust be washed? O my Lord and Master, such is the state of mankind. ||1||
Hd Ho Afsag Afe wy Tet Il (gs2-17, at, v2 5) mayray man satgur sayv sukh ho-ee. O my mind, serve the True Guru, and be at peace.
A feeg Aet ee ureg feta gy o fend et na TIS i (982-17, sash, ws 5)
jo ichhahu so-ee fal paavhu fir dookh na vi-aapai ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whatever you desire, you shall receive that reward, and you shall not be afflicted by pain any longer. ||1]||Pause] |
ard as Ata foe nists AfS ANTE II (g82-18, aHeMtF, He 5) kaachay bhaaday saaj nivaajay antar jot samaa-ee. He creates and adorns the earthen vessels; He infuses His Light within them.
AAT fous fofimr ofs ass gH SHt feats ret | (882-18, mat, He 5) jaisaa likhat likhi-aa Dhur kartai ham taisee kirat kamaa-ee. ||2]| As is the destiny pre-ordained by the Creator, so are the deeds we do. ||2||
Ho 36 Stu aot AS mar Sd nie ATST Il (882-19, THAT, He 5)
man tan thaap kee-aa sabh apnaa ayho aavan jaanaa.
He believes the mind and body are all his own; this is the cause of his coming and going.
fafs dior A fefs o mre Hfo nig Bu|T|St ISI (882-19, THES, He 5)
jin dee-aa so chit na aavai mohi anDh laptaanaa. ||3] |
He does not think of the One who gave him these; he is blind, entangled in emotional attachment. ||3||
Us ccs
fafs aor Aet us AS ofa aT HIG wus I (883-1, THA, He 5)
jin kee-aa so-ee parabh jaanai har kaa mahal apaaraa.
One who knows that God created him, reaches the Incomparable Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
sas Act Ss AX TE WS" FSA SH SHAT IIIA (883-1, Hast, He 5) bhagat karee har kay gun gaavaa naanak daas tumaaraa. ||4]|1]| Worshipping the Lord, I sing His Glorious Praises. Nanak is Your slave. ||4]]|1]|
THA HIB U Il (883-2)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ugg veer af Gufs nreg wir AS oH” Il (983-2, mat, Hs 5) pavahu charnaa tal oopar aavhu aisee sayv kamaavahu. Place yourself beneath all men's feet, and you will be uplifted; serve Him in this way.
wun 3 Cufs As Hed 3G edd AY UST IA (883-3, THAT, He 5) aapas tay oopar sabh jaanhu ta-o dargeh sukh paavhu. ||1]|| Know that all are above you, and you shall find peace in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
Hag “At aag aget il As ufeg og te ufez fag dog Tanfy wet ua Jo Il (883-3, THAT, He 5)
santahu aisee kathahu kahaanee. sur pavitar nar dayv pavitaraa khin bolhu gurmukh banee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Saints, speak that speech which purifies the gods and sanctifies the divine beings. As Gurmukh, chant the Word of His Bani, even for an instant. ||1]|Pause] |
usug efs Aon ules Ag So" ATT & Aet Il (883-4, rast, Hs 5)
parpanch chhod sahj ghar baishu jhoothaa kahhu na ko-ee.
Renounce your fraudulent plans, and dwell in the celestial palace; do not call anyone else false.
Afsas fog ae fofa ured feo fafa sz faset 12 (983-5, mast, He 5)
satgur milhu navai niDh paavhu in biDh tat bilo-ee. ||2]|
Meeting with the True Guru, you shall receive the nine treasures; in this way, you shall find the essence of reality. ||2| |
SdH yaST Tony fee Sed nisH Bog Set Il (983-6, at, us 5)
bharam chukaavahu gurmukh liv laavhu aatam cheenahu bhaa-ee.
Eradicate doubt, and as Gurmukh, enshrine love for the Lord; understand your own soul, O Siblings of Destiny.
foafe af Weg Ae ug IH fan fAG agg gaet SII (883-6, mraat, He 5) nikat kar jaanhu sadaa parabh haajar kis si-o karahu buraa-ee. ||3] |
Know that God is near at hand, and ever-present. How could you try to hurt anyone else? |[3]|
Afsafe fixfemt Hea HAST HoH fs AoMt | (es3-7, sat, He 5)
satgur mili-ai maarag muktaa sehjay milay su-aamee.
Meeting with the True Guru, your path shall be clear, and you shall easily meet your Lord and Master.
Ue U6 A He fAat ate fo dfs ufemr He Soa AE ATA NII (883-7, aHast, He 5) Dhan Dhan say jan jinee kal meh har paa-i-aa jan naanak sad kurbaanee. ||4||2|| Blessed, blessed are those humble beings, who, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, find the Lord. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||4]|2]|
THASt HIS U Il (883-8)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
WSS TS S WSS TUT od feet Ho saat Il (883-8, oat, ws 5)
aavat harakh na jaavat dookhaa nah bi-aapai man rognee. Coming does not please me, and going does not bring me pain, and so my mind is not afflicted by disease.
He noe TT us ufent 3B Sst Aare faSarat Wall (883-9, meet, 3 5)
sadaa anand gur pooraa paa-i-aa ta-o utree sagal bi-oganee. ||1]||
I am in bliss forever, for I have found the Perfect Guru; my separation from the Lord is totally ended. ||1||
fea fafa 3 He Faret Il (883-10, Hat, He 5) ih biDh hai man jognee. This is how I have joined my mind to the Lord.
Hg Aa da Sa 3 fanru se ats af afs GA Sarat AU TIE Il (883-10, THe, nH 5) moh sog rog log na bi-aapai tah har har har ras bhognee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Attachment, sorrow, disease and public opinion do not affect me, and so, I enjoy the subtle essence of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||1]||Pause] |
Hea ufes fires ufegt ufemres ufez misaret i (983-11, mat, 48 5)
Surag pavitaraa mirat pavitaraa pa-i-aal pavitar aloganee.
I am pure in the heavenly realm, pure on this earth, and pure in the nether regions of the underworld. I remain apart from the people of the world.
wtfemrardt Ae AY Se AS aS UY ais Tat QM (ss3-11, sae, ne 5) aagi-aakaaree sadaa sukh bhunchai jat kat paykha-o har gunee. ||2| | Obedient to the Lord, I enjoy peace forever; wherever I look, I see the Lord of glorious virtues. ||2||
6d fae Hast AS odt uss" 3d Mags odt Heat Il (983-12, 71a, ns 5)
nah siv saktee jal nahee pavnaa tah akaar nahee maydnee.
There is no Shiva or Shakti, no energy or matter, no water or wind, no world of form there,
Afsag Aa at so foe AT nifeas SS ma Tot SII (883-12, Tat, He 5)
satgur jog kaa tahaa nivaasaa jah avigat naath agam Dhanee. ||3]| where the True Guru, the Yogi, dwells, where the Imperishable Lord God, the Unapproachable Master abides. ||3]||
36 HO Ue a US AS dig a fg a TE IE fam Tat Il (883-13, east, ve 5)
tan man har kaa Dhan sabh har kaa har kay gun ha-o ki-aa ganee.
Body and mind belong to the Lord; all wealth belongs to the Lord; what glorious virtues of the Lord can I describe?
AT sod JH SH fe vet F nis nig fisaet ISS (383-14, mat, He 5)
kaho naanak ham tum gur kho-ee hai ambhai ambh miloganee. ||4]|3]|
Says Nanak, the Guru has destroyed my sense of 'mine and yours’. Like water with water, I am blended with God. ||4||3]|
THAGt HIS U Il (883-15)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
3 Ue das ad foadt wfue fia 3 AS Il (883-15, THA, Hs 5)
tarai gun rahat rahai niraaree saaDhik siDh na jaanai.
It is beyond the three qualities; it remains untouched. The seekers and Siddhas do not know it.
TSH dost vis HuTS ASAT & AAS MAUL (883-15, THAT, He 5)
ratan koth-rhee amrit sampooran satgur kai khajaanai. ||1]||
There is a chamber filled with jewels, overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar, in the Guru's Treasury. ||1||
Mod fas ATE B AT Il (883-16, Tat, He 5) achraj kichh kahan na jaa-ee. This thing is wonderful and amazing! It cannot be described.
BAS Mags SET NAV TITS Il (883-16, Tat, He 5) basat agochar bhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It is an unfathomable object, O Siblings of Destiny! ||1]||Pause] |
HS od as ade rar fom a AT ASTS Il (883-16, Tat, He 5) mol naahee kachh karnai jogaa ki-aa ko kahai sunaavai. Its value cannot be estimated at all; what can anyone say about it?
aes ade aC ASt ot A Ue fSA afe mS IQM (883-17, Hat, He 5) kathan kahan ka-o sojhee naahee jo paykhai tis ban aavai. ||2| |
By speaking and describing it, it cannot be understood; only one who sees it realizes it. |[2]|
Het We agea atst fom Fara Il (883-18, THaat, He 5) so-ee jaanai karnaihaaraa keetaa ki-aa baychaaraa. Only the Creator Lord knows it; what can any poor creature do?
nimuet afs fufs omy wre afe wm UT SIT ISI (883-18, THA, Hs 5)
aapnee gat mit aapay jaanai har aapay poor bhandaaraa. ||3]||
Only He Himself knows His own state and extent. The Lord Himself is the treasure overflowing. ||3]|
mA oA nifigs His aftmr faufs ad nmuret i (883-19, oHat, He 5) aisaa ras amrit man chaakhi-aa taripat rahay aaghaa-ee. Tasting such Ambrosial Nectar, the mind remains satisfied and satiated.
aT aoa Hot ora udt Afsag at AsSret ISISI (883-19, THAT, He 5) kaho naanak mayree aasaa pooree satgur kee sarnaa-ee. ||4||4]| Says Nanak, my hopes are fulfilled; I have found the Guru's Sanctuary. ||4]|4] |
UST cry
THaASt HIS U Il (g84-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
vidas abhor yfs mus St Aas AN Il (984-1, saat, ue 5) angeekaar kee-aa parabh apnai bairee saglay saaDhay. God has made me His own, and vanquished all my enemies.
fates Sat 3 fea Aa fen S Fst S TT NA (s34-2, Trees, wz 5) jin bairee hai ih jag looti-aa tay bairee lai baaDhay. ||1]| Those enemies who have plundered this world, have all been placed in bondage. ||1]|
Afsag USHA HI Il (834-2, sat, He 5) satgur parmaysar mayraa. The True Guru is my Transcendent Lord.
wifsax IH Sa IA Heal oS Aut SoS Sa UNA TIC Il (834-2, era, ne 5)
anik raaj bhog ras maanee naa-o japee bharvaasaa tayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I enjoy countless pleasures of power and tasty delights, chanting Your Name, and placing my faith in You. ||1]||Pause||
ds 6 oreta vat ast fa Gufs seers Il (884-3, arash, He 5) cheet na aavas doojee baataa sir oopar rakhvaaraa. I do not think of any other at all. The Lord is my protector, above my head.
aqudey ds J Amit fea SH A yragrsy IQ (884-4, 7a, ne 5)
bayparvaahu rahat hai su-aamee ik naam kai aaDhaaraa. ||2||
I am carefree and independent, when I have the Support of Your Name, O my Lord and Master. ||2||
use ofe fies Haeet Ba B aret ast Il (884-4, HAST, HE 5)
pooran ho-ay mili-o sukh-daa-ee oon na kaa-ee baataa.
I have become perfect, meeting with the Giver of peace, and now, I lack nothing at all.
33 AY USH ue UfeMr ets 3 AST AST ISI (884-5, THAT, Hs 5)
tat saar param pad paa-i-aa chhod na kathoo jaataa. ||3]|
I have obtained the essence of excellence, the supreme status; I shall not forsake it to go anywhere else. ||3||
AHS SARS AAT TT AMS MSY MUTT Il (884-5, THM, He 5) baran na saaka-o jaisaa too hai saachay alakh apaaraa. I cannot describe how You are, O True Lord, unseen, infinite,
WSS METI SG AMM Soak WAH THT ISIUI (884-6, THEM, He 5)
atul athaah adol su-aamee naanak khasam hamaaraa. ||4]|5||
immeasurable, unfathomable and unmoving Lord. O Nanak, He is my Lord and Master. ||4||5]|
THASt HIS U Il (884-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
3 wa Zs nifsse sot 3 hs Ast ust I (834-7, enrast, v2 5) too daanaa too abichal toohee too jaat mayree paatee. You are wise; You are eternal and unchanging. You are my social class and honor.
3 MSS Te Sola Fa St TH AAT SST MAUI (884-7, THe, He 5) too adol kaday doleh naahee taa ham kaisee taatee. ||1]| You are unmoving - You never move at all. How can I be worried? ||1||
aA RA SD
Ba Sa SA TAT Il (884-8, sat, we 5) aykai aykai ayk toohee. You alone are the One and only Lord;
Sa Sa ZF TMM I (sa4-8, maa, ws 5)
aykai aykai too raa-i-aa.
You alone are the king.
38 fagur 3 AY ufemr I TITS Il (884-8, Hat, He 5)
ta-o kirpaa tay sukh paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Your Grace, I have found peace. ||1]||Pause] |
3 Wag JH JA SHS SH fs HEA WS Il (884-9, Tra, we 5) too saagar ham hans tumaaray tum meh maanak laalaa. You are the ocean, and I am Your swan; the pearls and rubies are in You.
3H 22g fq Aa HSI JH Sud AST ETH lM (834-9, mat, He 5) tum dayvhu til sank na maanhu ham bhunchah sadaa nihaalaa. ||2|| You give, and You do not hesitate for an instant; I receive, forever enraptured. ||2||
JH afea 3H fust SHS SH Hfe Seg Ute Il (884-10, raat, He 5) ham baarik tum pitaa hamaaray tum mukh dayvhu kheeraa. I am Your child, and You are my father; You place the milk in my mouth.
JH WSs Als BS SSSI SH AE Tat Ads Ill (s84-10, eas, us 5)
ham khaylah sabh laad ladaaveh tum sad gunee gaheeraa. ||3]|
I play with You, and You caress me in every way. You are forever the ocean of excellence. ||3||
3H uss Us Jd HUTS TH St Afar mee I (984-11, THA, He 5) tum pooran poor rahay sampooran ham bhee sang aghaa-ay. You are perfect, perfectly all-pervading; I am fulfilled with You as well.
fos fos fros ffs afoot sea ATE & AE ISIE! (884-11, THT, He 5)
milat milat milat mil rahi-aa naanak kahan na jaa-ay. ||4||6]|
I am merged, merged, merged and remain merged; O Nanak, I cannot describe it! [14] 16] |
THASt HIB U Il (884-12)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ad afg 37% udeH Sod HA Snfa Tara Il (g84-10, mma, He 5)
kar kar taal pakhaavaj nainhu maathai vajeh rabaabaa.
Make your hands the cymbals, your eyes the tambourines, and your forehead the guitar you play.
adod HO wad an faget afe nirarar Il (884-13, ania, He 5)
karnahu maDh baasuree baajai jihvaa Dhun aagaajaa.
Let the sweet flute music resound in your ears, and with your tongue, vibrate this song.
foots ad afs Honr ard nis wwe AMAT II (884-13, aH, Hs 5)
nirat karay kar manoo-aa naachai aanay ghooghar saajaa. ||1||
Move your mind like the rhythmic hand-motions; do the dance, and shake your ankle bracelets. ||1]|
oH & foafsardt i (884-14, aaa, 13 5) raam ko nirtikaaree. This is the rhythmic dance of the Lord.
ue Uses efeurer AST ATA Afr A TIS I (984-14, mat, He 5) paykhai paykhanhaar da-i-aalaa jaytaa saaj seegaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Merciful Audience, the Lord, sees all your make-up and decorations. ||1||Pause||
nines Hast uate Aaret Gufe sare Tene Il (984-15, Tet, we 5) aakhaar mandlee Dharan sabaa-ee oopar gagan chando-aa. The whole earth is the stage, with the canopy of the sky overhead.
uzo fedo aes fea Aw 3 Gufs nT Il (884-15, eat, He 5) pavan vicholaa karat ikaylaa jal tay opat ho-aa. The wind is the director; people are born of water.
us 33 afs usa ator fags fireret Tur IQ (884-16, Tat, He 5) panch tat kar putraa keenaa kirat milaavaa ho-aa. ||2| | From the five elements, the puppet was created with its actions. ||2]|
de Hen fe Ad ura ug ae sists TA Il (984-16, mat, Hs 5)
chand sooraj du-ay jaray charaagaa chahu kunt bheetar raakhay.
The sun and the moon are the two lamps which shine, with the four corners of the world placed between them.
2A us uv Halts’ Sa Stafe AE Il (884-17, mat, He 5)
das paata-o panch sangeetaa aykai bheetar saathay.
The ten senses are the dancing girls, and the five passions are the chorus; they sit together within the one body.
fso fea of we feurefa nag foadt amt SII (884-17, met, He 5) bhinn bhinn ho-ay bhaav dikhaaveh sabhahu niraaree bhaakhay. ||3]|| They all put on their own shows, and speak in different languages. ||3]|
ufs ufe feos de fea ast ufe ufe ert Fa Il (g84-18, Haat, He 5)
ghar ghar nirat hovai din raatee ghat ghat vaajai tooraa.
In each and every home there is dancing, day and night; in each and every home, the bugles blow.
Sfx aueta Sfa sees fete urfe wife dfe ga il (se4-19, Treat, He 5)
ayk nachaaveh ayk bhavaaveh ik aa-ay jaa-ay ho-ay Dhooraa.
Some are made to dance, and some are whirled around; some come and some go, and some are reduced to dust.
AI SSAA dole 3 HS AA TI FS UT MII (884-19, Treat, we 5)
kaho naanak so bahur na naachai jis gur bhaytai pooraa. ||4||7||
Says Nanak, one who meets with the True Guru, does not have to dance the dance of reincarnation again. ||4]|7]|
Ua cru
THA HIS U Il (885-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Gniats Sa ufs Sat Sak Ta MH Il (gs5-1, mat, we 5) o-ankaar ayk Dhun aykai aykai raag alaapai. He sings the song of the One Universal Creator; he sings the tune of the One Lord.
Sart SAt Sa feure Sa afonr fam il (9s5-1, mast, He 5)
aykaa daysee ayk dikhaavai ayko rahi-aa bi-aapai.
He lives in the land of the One Lord, shows the way to the One Lord, and remains attuned to the One Lord.
Sar Aafs Sar Ht AS Sa TSI 3 AVY MAUI (985-2, saat, 2 5)
aykaa surat aykaa hee sayvaa ayko gur tay jaapai. ||1]||
He centers his consciousness on the One Lord, and serves only the One Lord, who is known through the Guru. ||1]|
3S 3G J atgsomr Il (885-2, THA, He 5) bhalo bhalo ray keeratnee-aa. Blessed and good is such a kirtanee, who sings such Praises.
TH SH TH TS IE Il (885-3, Tat, He 5) raam ramaa raamaa gun gaa-o. He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
efs wfenr & Uo Ars ai gas I (985-3, oat, He 5) chhod maa-i-aa kay DhanDh su-aa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and renounces the entanglements and pursuits of Maya. ||1]|Pause| |
us afag ad Hsu AS Aa B BS Il (885-3, saat, ne 5)
panch baajitar karay santokhaa saat suraa lai chaalai.
He makes the five virtues, like contentment, his musical instruments, and plays the seven notes of the love of the Lord.
a We se sf set ur o ater ws Il (985-4, aaa, nH: 5)
baajaa maan taan taj taanaa paa-o na beegaa ghaalai.
The notes he plays are the renunciation of pride and power; his feet keep the beat on the straight path.
oot eg 5 de ag dt Sa Age sf us NM (gs5-4, mat, He 5)
fayree fayr na hovai kab hee ayk sabad banDh paalai. ||2]|
He does not enter the cycle of reincarnation ever again; he keeps the One Word of the Shabad tied to the hem of his robe. ||2||
det adIT ATE TET Il (885-5, THaat, He 5) naardee narhar jaan hadooray. To play like Naarad, is to know that the Lord is ever-present.
ulus usa fSnrfar FEA Il (885-5, Tet, H2 5) ghoongar kharhak ti-aag visooray. The tinkling of the ankle bells is the shedding of sorrows and worries.
Hon moe feure are il (985-5, mat, v2 5) sahj anand dikhaavai bhaavai. The dramatic gestures of acting are celestial bliss.
fg fsafsarct aft & mrs Sil (g85-6, eat, He 5) ayhu nirtikaaree janam na aavai. ||3]| Such a dancer is not reincarnated again. ||3]||
Aa nus sag ae Il afe Hfa Sg atase We Il (885-6, THaSt, v2 5)
jay ko apnay thaakur bhaavai. kot maDh ayhu keertan gaavai.
If anyone, out of millions of people, becomes pleasing to his Lord and Master, he sings the Lord's Praises in this way.
AUHafs at ASE Sa Il (885-7, THat, v2 5) saaDhsangat kee jaava-o tayk. I have taken the Support of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
aT saa (3H alse SA ISIC (885-7, Tat, Hs 5) kaho naanak tis keertan ayk. ||4||8]| Says Nanak, the Kirtan of the One Lord's Praises are sung there. ||4||8]|
THA HIB U Il (885-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
aet 8S TH TH aet wee il (985-8, saat, 2 5) ko-ee bolai raam raam ko-ee khudaa-ay. Some call Him, 'Raam, Raam', and some call Him, 'Khudaa-i'.
aet AS aAetor det mrefs Ul (985-8, THs, He 5) ko-ee sayvai gus-ee-aa ko-ee alaahi. ||1|| Some serve Him as 'Gusain’, others as ‘Allaah’. ||1]|
ATE ATE APH Il (885-8, aHast, Hz 5) kaaran karan kareem. He is the Cause of causes, the Generous Lord.
fxsur ofs SdH NA TIS Il (885-9, ara, He 5)
kirpaa Dhaar raheem. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He showers His Grace and Mercy upon us. ||1]||Pause| | aet are stefa aet gn ATE II (885-9, mast, He 5)
ko-ee naavai tirath ko-ee haj jaa-ay. Some bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and some make the pilgrimage to Mecca. |
aet aT UAT aet fg foehS I (gs5-9, mast, Hs 5) ko-ee karai poojaa ko-ee sir nivaa-ay. ||2| | Some perform devotional worship services, and some bow their heads in prayer. ||2| |
act us ae cet ASe Il (885-10, east, 2 5) ko-ee parhai bayd ko-ee katayb. Some read the Vedas, and some the Koran.
aet Ge ste set AUS ISI (g85-10, mat, He 5) ko-ee odhai neel ko-ee supayd. ||3]| Some wear blue robes, and some wear white. ||3]|
et AT FIT TE AT FFE Ml (885-10, grass, v3 5) ko-ee kahai turak ko-ee kahai hindoo. Some call themselves Muslim, and some call themselves Hindu.
aet we fsAs aet Aafate iil (895-11, Hat, Hs 5) ko-ee baachhai bhisat ko-ee surgindoo. ||4|| Some yearn for paradise, and others long for heaven. ||4]|
aT saad fats JAH Usrst Il (885-11, THaat, He 5) kaho naanak jin hukam pachhaataa. Says Nanak, one who realizes the Hukam of God's Will,
ys Atfoa ot fats Se AST NUNN (885-11, THAT, Hs 5) parabh saahib kaa tin bhayd jaataa. ||5||9]| knows the secrets of his Lord and Master. ||5||9||
THASt HIB U Il (885-12)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
uze Hfo ues ANfEMMr Il (885-12, THAT, He 5) pavnai meh pavan samaa-i-aa. The wind merges into the wind.
ast ufo Afs afs wfeur | (885-12, mat, Hs 5) jotee meh jot ral jaa-i-aa. The light blends into the light.
Het Het Tet Sa Il (885-13, Tat, we 5) maatee maatee ho-ee ayk. The dust becomes one with the dust.
TzHTS At ATS SH NA (885-13, THA, He 5) rovanhaaray kee kavan tayk. ||1]| What support is there for the one who is lamenting? ||1]|
ASS Hu FT ASS HMM Il (885-13, Hat, He 5) ka-un moo-aa ray ka-un moo-aa. Who has died? O, who has died?
goH fomrat fife agg dies feg 36 vag sfeor na TIC il (385-14, mast, v2 5) barahm gi-aanee mil karahu beechaaraa ih ta-o chalat bha-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O God-realized beings, meet together and consider this. What a wondrous thing has happened! ||1]||Pause| |
maret fas wats o uret Il (885-14, Hat, He 5) aglee kichh khabar na paa-ee. No one knows what happens after death.
dzau” fs Cfs fraret il (885-15, anaat, v3 5) rovanhaar bhe ooth siDhaa-ee. The one who is lamenting will also arise and depart.
SdH HT AX FT FT I (885-15, mast, He 5) bharam moh kay baa“Dhay banDh. Mortal beings are bound by the bonds of doubt and attachment.
Hue sfenr sure nig iI (985-15, wat, He 5) supan bha-i-aa bhakhlaa-ay anDh. ||2|| When life becomes a dream, the blind man babbles and grieves in vain. ||2||
feg 38 sug stent agate Il (885-15, ana, He 5) ih ta-o rachan rachi-aa kartaar. The Creator Lord created this creation.
MSS Wes JatH wrrts Il (885-16, aHast, He 5) aavat jaavat hukam apaar. It comes and goes, subject to the Will of the Infinite Lord.
Sd I WMT B HTS AT Il (885-16, Tat, ws 5) nah ko moo-aa na marnai jog. No one dies; no one is capable of dying.
od faon uifsart Ja Sil (g35-16, THast, He 5) nah binsai abhinaasee hog. ||3]|| The soul does not perish; it is imperishable. ||3]|
a feg wed A fg ofa il (885-17, maa, v2 5) jo ih jaanhu so ih naahi. That which is known, does not exist.
Weeds A als AG Il (985-17, eas, Hs 5) jaananhaaray ka-o bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the one who knows this.
aT saa ats SoH Gatfent I (985-17, Tat, 2 5) kaho naanak gur bharam chukaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, the Guru has dispelled my doubt.
oT aet Hd O mite AEM IIIOMl (885-18, Hat, He 5) naa ko-ee marai na aavai jaa-i-aa. ||4||10]| No one dies; no one comes or goes. ||4||10]|
THASt HIB U Il (885-18)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
afu afe dures re Il (985-18, THA, He 5) jap gobind gopaal laal. Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Beloved Lord of the World.
oH OH fants 3 Atefs feta o wet HoT aH UNA TIS Il (885-19, THrast, H 5)
raam naam simar too jeeveh fir na khaa-ee mahaa kaal. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord's Name, you shall live, and the Great Death Shall not consume you ever again. ||1]|Pause| |
afe wax afk afk sft urfeEG i (ss5-19, araet, 48 5) kot janam bharam bharam bharam aa-i-o. Through millions of incarnations, you have come, wandering, wandering, wandering.
UST cteé
as ata AGHA UTES All (g86-1, Hast, He 5) badai bhaag saaDhsang paa-i-o. ||1|| By the highest destiny, you found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
fag as us oat Surg Il (g86-1, Hast, H: 5) bin gur pooray naahee uDhaar. Without the Perfect Guru, no one is saved.
Wa FST nT ST Fes MUA (ss6-1, Tat, v2 5)
baabaa naanak aakhai ayhu beechaar. ||2||11]| This is what Baba Nanak says, after deep reflection. ||2||11]|
TA THAS HIG U WT 2 (886-3) raag raamkalee mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Raag Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas ure II (886-3)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: aig uarats at 5 Hate Il (886-4, THAT, He 5)
chaar pukaareh naa too maaneh.
The four Vedas proclaim it, but you don't believe them.
ue at Sar ars Surafs Il (g36-4, anrast, He 5)
khat bhee aykaa baat vakhaaneh. The six Shaastras also say one thing.
2A mAct fife Sa afar il (886-4, sat, He 5) das astee mil ayko kahi-aa. The eighteen Puraanas all speak of the One God.
wT Ht Hat Se 3 Bf Al (g86-4, sat, He 5) taa bhee jogee bhayd na lahi-aa. ||1]| Even so, Yogi, you do not understand this mystery. ||1]]|
fast wigu SH Il (886-5, Tee, He 5) kinkuree anoop vaajai. The celestial harp plays the incomparable melody,
Hai HsNTs FT UU TIE il (gs6-5, Tat, v2 5) jogee-aa matvaaro ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. but in your intoxication, you do not hear it, O Yogi. ||1||Pause] |
YS efit AS at UST Il (886-5, Tat, Hs 5) parathmay vasi-aa sat kaa khayrhaa. In the first age, the Golden Age, the village of truth was inhabited.
fgste ufo fag sfenr Tsar II (886-6, mast, He 5) taritee-ay meh kichh bha-i-aa dutayrhaa. In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yuga, things began to decline.
esior mrad wrafa marfenr | (8g6-6, aHat, He 5)
dutee-aa arDho araDh samaa-i-aa. In the Brass Age of Dwaapur Yuga, half of it was gone.
Sa cont at Sa fearfeur IQ (8386-6, east, vs 5) ayk rahi-aa taa ayk dikhaa-i-aa. ||2|| Now, only one leg of Truth remains, and the One Lord is revealed. ||2||
Sa APS UPS Hale Il (886-7, Tat, He 5) aykai soot paro-ay manee-ay. The beads are strung upon the one thread.
aot fats fats fats fate sete i (ss6-7, sat, v2 5)
gaathee bhin bhin bhin bhin tanee-ay.
By means of many, various, diverse knots, they are tied, and kept separate on the string.
fegst Her ag fafa ate Il (gs6-7, anrast, He 5) firtee maalaa baho biDh bhaa-ay. The beads of the mala are lovingly chanted upon in many ways.
fifeor AS 3 wet af ISI (886-8, gHast, He 5) khinchi-aa soot ta aa-ee thaa-ay. ||3]| When the thread is pulled out, the beads come together in one place. ||3]|
vg ufo Sa He J ar Il (ss6-8, oH, He 5) chahu meh aykai mat hai kee-aa. Throughout the four ages, the One Lord made the body His temple.
30 faus ae nifea fasetint Il (ss6-8, east, v8 5) tah bikh-rhay thaan anik khirhkee-aa. It is a treacherous place, with several windows.
aHSs YAS eurs nef | (gs6-9, sat, He 5) khojat khojat du-aaray aa-i-aa. Searching and searching, one comes to the Lord's door.
J Soa Halt HIG we ufer sil (886-9, aaa, ne 5) taa naanak jogee mahal ghar paa-i-aa. ||4]| Then, O Nanak, the Yogi attains a home in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4]|
fEG feast mrau SH Il (886-9, Tat, He 5) i-o kinkuree aanoop vaajai. Thus, the celestial harp plays the incomparable melody;
Afe Hatt & His Hot Sa AU FHS SAT UAUAI (886-10, Trae, Hs 5) sun jogee kai man meethee laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||1]|12|| hearing it, the Yogi's mind finds it sweet. ||1||Second Pause] |1||12] |
THASt HIB U Il (886-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
sar afs & wet fast il (86-11, anraat, He 5) taagaa kar kai laa-ee thiglee. The body is a patch-work of threads.
BS sat Hut F MAST Il (s86-11, THe, He 5) la-o naarhee soo-aa hai astee. The muscles are stitched together with the needles of the bones.
nig at ats Sat Ufani Il (g86-11, eat, He 5) ambhai kaa kar dandaa Dhari-aa. The Lord has erected a pillar of water.
foor 5 Hatt aeats ufsMor Ul (s86-12, THEM, He 5) ki-aa too jogee garbeh pari-aa. ||1]|| O Yogi, why are you so proud? ||1]|
afu ara fea Foret Il (s36-12, aa, v2 5) jap naath din rainaa-ee. Meditate on your Lord Master, day and night.
Sot fife & feast nail TIS I (986-12, east, He 5) tayree khinthaa do dihaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The patched coat of the body shall last for only a few days. ||1]|Pause]|
Tot fags ofS For Seat Il (g86-13, Tae, He 5) gahree bibhoot laa-ay baithaa taarhee. Smearing ashes on your body, you sit in a deep meditative trance.
Hat Sat Het ast i (986-13, east, we 5) mayree tayree mundraa Dhaaree. You wear the ear-rings of 'mine and yours’.
Hats gar fyufs & urs il (886-13, Tat, He 5) maageh tookaa taripat na paavai. You beg for bread, but you are not satisfied.
og efs Wels SA O MTS III (886-13, THAT, He 5) naath chhod jaacheh laaj na aavai. ||2|| Abandoning your Lord Master, you beg from others; you should feel ashamed. ||2| |
3S fas Fait »TAE ST Il (886-14, Haat, He 5) chal chit jogee aasan tayraa. Your consciousness is restless, Yogi, as you sit in your Yogic postures.
fiat oH fas GevAT II (ss6-14, mat, He 5) sinyee vaajai nit udaasayraa. You blow your horn, but still feel sad.
Ts Hows at 3 ITF ut Il (886-14, Trash, ws 5) gur gorakh kee tai boojh na paa-ee. You do not understand Gorakh, your guru.
fefs fefa Haft mre ATET ISI (886-15, oHIat, He 5) fir fir jogee aavai jaa-ee. ||3]| Again and again, Yogi, you come and go. ||3]||
fAH S dur ore furs il (g86-15, saat, 2 5) jis no ho-aa naath kirpaalaa. He, unto whom the Master shows Mercy
JIT DHS TT TUS Il (886-15, THat, ue 5) rahraas hamaaree gur gopaalaa. - unto Him, the Guru, the Lord of the World, I offer my prayer.
on fitar SH SAS Il (886-16, THA, He 5) naamai khinthaa naamai bastar. One who has the Name as his patched coat, and the Name as his robe,
HS SSA Halt dur wiAfag isi (ss6-16, sat, He 5) jan naanak jogee ho-aa asthir. ||4|| O servant Nanak, such a Yogi is steady and stable. ||4]|
fe@ nfm arg feo daret I (s86-16, mast, He 5) i-o japi-aa naath din rainaa-ee. One who meditates on the Master in this way, night and day,
ofs ufenr ag HAST NU TIS SAT MUNI (886-17, THs, Hz 5) hun paa-i-aa gur gosaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||2||13]| finds the Guru, the Lord of the World, in this life. ||1]|Second Pause] |2||13]|
THA HIS U Il (886-17)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
AIS ATSH ASH Il (g86-17, wHaet, we 5) karan karaavan so-ee. He is the Creator, the Cause of causes;
MTS 3 AA ASH Il (886-18, aHast, He 5) aan na deesai ko-ee. I do not see any other at all.
StaT HS AWS AAS Il (g36-18, sat, He 5) thaakur mayraa sugharh sujaanaa. My Lord and Master is wise and all-knowing.
aanfe fifeoor Fat HST MAUI (886-18, TH, He 5) gurmukh mili-aa rang maanaa. ||1|| Meeting with the Gurmukh, I enjoy His Love. ||1]|
MAF ofa TA Hite II (ss6-19, ara, He 5) aiso ray har ras meethaa. Such is the sweet, subtle essence of the Lord.
aante fxs fess stor ail TITS Il (gs6-19, sat, v2 5) gurmukh kinai virlai deethaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, taste it. ||1]|Pause] |
fans afs nifigs afe SH I (s86-19, THe, He 5) nirmal jot amrit har naam. The Light of the Ambrosial Name of the Lord is immaculate and pure.
UST ccd
ules nina SE fSETAH Il (887-1, THaSt, He 5) peevat amar bha-ay nihkaam. Drinking it in, one becomes immortal and free of desire.
36 HO Ase male feet Il (887-1, east, He 5) tan man seetal agan nivaaree. The body and mind are cooled and soothed, and the fire is extinguished.
MoE TU Yae AAT IM (887-1, Tet, Hs 5) anad roop pargatay sansaaree. ||2|| Such a being is the embodiment of bliss, famous throughout the world. ||2]|
four fe AT AS fxs SI Il (887-2, THat, He 5) ki-aa dayva-o jaa sabh kichh tayraa. What can I offer You, Lord? Everything belongs to You.
He afeots WE By Fa Il (887-2, Hast, He 5) sad balihaar jaa-o lakh bayraa. I am forever a sacrifice to You, hundreds of thousands of times.
36 Ho AG fis & Afr II (887-2, saat, He 5) tan man jee-o pind day saaji-aa. You blessed me, and fashioned my body, mind and soul.
asd fasu 3 ate foetrmr Sil (887-3, set, He 5)
gur kirpaa tay neech nivaaji-aa. ||3]| By Guru's Grace, this lowly being was exalted. ||3]||
afs fxerst Hof gerfemr Il (887-3, aHat, He 5)
khol kivaaraa mahal bulaa-i-aa.
Opening the door, You summoned me to the Mansion of Your Presence. AAT AT SAT feuerfemr Il (887-3, THA, He 5)
jaisaa saa taisaa dikhlaa-i-aa. As You are, so You have revealed Yourself to me.
AJ BA AF Use FeT Il (887-4, THA, Hs 5) kaho naanak sabh parh-daa tootaa. Says Nanak, the screen is totally torn away;
IS 3ST 3H Hfs FS USIBUIWI (887-4, THA, Hs 5) ha-o tayraa too mai man voothaa. ||4||3||14]| I am Yours, and You are enshrined within my mind. ||4||3||14] |
THAGt HIB U Il (887-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Aza BtEG nryst AS il (887-5, THast, He 5) sayvak laa-i-o apunee sayv. He has linked His servant to His service.
mitts ou BG uf Fe I (887-5, ona, He 5)
amrit naam dee-o mukh dayv.
The Divine Guru has poured the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, into his mouth.
Haat fest urfy foerst i (s87-5, aHat, v3 5) saglee chintaa aap nivaaree. He has subdued all his anxiety.
fan Td aG IG Ae afoarst UI (987-5, ea, U8 5) tis gur ka-o ha-o sad balihaaree. ||1]| I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru. ||1]|
OH SHS US ASH Il (887-6, Hast, He 5) kaaj hamaaray pooray satgur. The True Guru has perfectly resolved my affairs.
WA Mode JI ASTT AU TIC Il (887-6, Tat, v2 5) baajay anhad tooray satgur. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru vibrates the unstruck melody of the sound current. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfout at at afeg asta il (887-7, aaat, He 5) mahimaa jaa kee gahir gambheer. His Glory is profound and unfathomable.
afe feos fe fam tte I (887-7, mat, v2 5) ho-ay nihaal day-ay jis Dheer. One whom He blesses with patience becomes blissful.
Wa Fe aS TE Il (887-7, Hast, ue 5) jaa kay banDhan kaatay raa-ay. One whose bonds are shattered by the Sovereign Lord
H Sd Sofa & Hot UTS MQM (887-7, THe, He 5) so nar bahur na jonee paa-ay. ||2]| is not cast into the womb of reincarnation again. ||2||
w a nists yates mime il (887-8, aHaat, He 5) jaa kai antar pargati-o aap. One who is illuminated by the Lord's radiance within,
J AS ast TY AST Il (887-8, Tat, He 5) taa ka-o naahee dookh santaap. is not touched by pain and sorrow.
we 336 faq us ufenr il (987-8, sat, He 5) laal ratan tis paalai pari-aa. He holds in his robe the gems and jewels.
Hae aca Go AS B Sherr il (887-9, Tat, He 5) sagal kutamb oh jan lai tari-aa. ||3]| That humble being is saved, along with all his generations. ||3]||
o fas SdH o Sfaor TAT Il (887-9, aaa, HE 5) naa kichh bharam na dubiDhaa doojaa. He has no doubt, double-mindedness or duality at all.
Sa Sq fSSAS UAT Il (887-9, THAT, He 5) ayko ayk niranjan poojaa. He worships and adores the One Immaculate Lord alone.
As as fu orf efenrs Il (887-10, oat, 2 5) jat kat daykh-a-u aap da-i-aal. Wherever I look, I see the Merciful Lord.
AT aod ys fHS FAS ISiusiWil (887-10, Tae, us 5) kaho naanak parabh milay rasaal. ||4]|4]|15]| Says Nanak, I have found God, the source of nectar. ||4]|4]|15]|
THA HIS U Il (887-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
36 3 seat must urdt il (887-11, Hat, Hz 5) tan tay chhutkee apnee Dhaaree. My self-conceit has been eliminated from my body.
ys at ofan salt fmt i (s87-11, mest, nH 5) parabh kee aagi-aa lagee pi-aaree. The Will of God is dear to me.
a fas ad A fe He Hor Il (887-11, mat, He 5) jo kichh karai so man mayrai meethaa. Whatever He does, seems sweet to my mind.
ax feg nivan Bog Stet IAI (887-12, THA, He 5) taa ih achraj nainhu deethaa. ||1|| And then, these eyes behold the wondrous Lord. ||1||
ma Hf wet F Het Tet sete il (887-12, mnraet, He 5) ab mohi jaanee ray mayree ga-ee balaa-ay. Now, I have become wise and my demons are gone.
afs aet fare fost HHS afe us St AHSTE WA TIS Ml (887-12, srast, vs 5) bujh ga-ee tarisan nivaaree mamtaa gur poorai lee-o samjhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. My thirst is quenched, and my attachment is dispelled. The Perfect Guru has instructed me. ||1||Pause] |
ate fasur afaS afs Agar il (887-13, oat, He 5) kar kirpaa raakhi-o gur sarnaa. In His Mercy, the Guru has kept me under His protection.
dfs uasve ste & FIs" Il (887-14, Tat, He 5) gur pakraa-ay har kay charnaa. The Guru has attached me to the Lord's Feet.
aA faHe AT HS SITS Il (887-14, Tas, He 5) bees bisu-ay jaa man thehraanay. When the mind is totally held in check,
TT USAIN Sa St AS lil (987-14, mast, ne 5) gur paarbarahm aykai hee jaanay. ||2|| one sees the Guru and the Supreme Lord God as one and the same. ||2||
aH ote dH SA aA SA Il (887-14, east, He 5) jo jo keeno ham tis kay daas. Whoever You have created, I am his slave.
Us AS & Aas fesA Il (887-15, Tat, He 5) parabh mayray ko sagal nivaas. My God dwells in all.
a a Bz Sot ATT Il (887-15, THat, ws 5) naa ko doot nahee bairaa-ee. I have no enemies, no adversaries.
ae ffs wes Sa set Si (887-15, Hast, He 5) gal mil chaalay aykai bhaa-ee. ||3]| I walk arm in arm, like brothers, with all. ||3]|
wv a@ afs ofs He Aa I (987-16, Tat, He 5) jaa ka-o gur har dee-ay sookhaa. One whom the Guru, the Lord, blesses with peace,
a a@ agfs 6 wats Tar Il (887-16, ast, He 5) taa ka-o bahur na laageh dookhaa. does not suffer in pain any longer.
nmy nify Aga yfsurs il (87-16, Irae, Hs 5) aapay aap sarab partipaal. He Himself cherishes all.
Soa TSS sar Hus iSiUIell (987-17, Tat, v2 5)
naanak raata-o rang gopaal. ||4||5||16]]| Nanak is imbued with the love of the Lord of the World. ||4]|5||16]|
THA HIB U Il (887-17)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
HY 3 usst Stat Afss Il (887-17, aaet, 2 5) mukh tay parh-taa teekaa sahit. You read the scriptures, and the commentaries,
fase TH odt UTS TIS Il (887-18, Tat, He 5) hirdai raam nahee pooran rahat. but the Perfect Lord does not dwell in your heart.
Buen ad af Ga fess | (987-18, Hast, He 5) updays karay kar lok darirh-aavai. You preach to others to have faith,
ntuor afar mirfly o AHS IU (887-18, THAT, He 5) apnaa kahi-aa aap na kamaavai. ||1]|| but you do not practice what you preach. ||1]||
ufss az ates ufss i (887-19, mast, v2 5) pandit bayd beechaar pandit. O Pandit, O religious scholar, contemplate the Vedas.
Ho at ay foets ufss Nail TIC il (887-19, TH, He 5) man kaa kroDh nivaar pandit. ||1]| rahaa-o. Eradicate anger from your mind, O Pandit. ||1]||Pause] |
mirat IHG ATs farsTy Il (887-19, Tat, He 5) aagai raakhi-o saal giraam. You place your stone god before yourself,
Ua eet
He ote ea fer faATH II (sss-1, THe, He 5) man keeno dah dis bisraam. but your mind wanders in the ten directions.
fsaq sae uret urfé Il (gs8-1, Hat, He 5) tilak charaavai paa-ee paa-ay. You apply a ceremonial tilak mark to its forehead, and fall at its feet.
BA UIST MT AHAE Ql (sss-1, Haat, v2 5) lok pachaaraa anDh kamaa-ay. ||2]| You try to appease the people, and act blindly. ||2||
YS AH nig MTHS Ost Il (988-2, saat, ve 5) khat karmaa ar aasan Dhotee. You perform the six religious rituals, and sit wearing your loin-cloth.
sate fafs us fos uet i (sss-2, mat, Hs 5) bhaagath garihi parhai nit pothee. In the homes of the wealthy, you read the prayer book.
Her So Hat fags il (sss-2, erat, 2 5) maalaa fayrai mangai bibhoot. You chant on your mala, and beg for money.
fes fafa afe 5 sf HIS I13I (sss-3, mat, He 5) ih biDh ko-ay na tari-o meet. ||3]| No one has ever been saved in this way, friend. ||3] |
A ufss qd Age AH TE Il (sss-3, mat, He 5)
so pandit gur sabad kamaa-ay.
He alone is a Pandit, who lives the Word of the Guru's Shabad. 3 ae at GA Csdt HE Il (ss8-3, nae, ne 5)
tarai gun kee os utree maa-ay. Maya, of the three qualities, leaves him.
UsTI FT YTS Tis ate Il (g88-3, gua, H 5) chatur bayd pooran har naa-ay. The four Vedas are completely contained within the Lord's Name.
Sod fsn at Haat ute USNENION (sss-4, aH, He 5)
naanak tis kee sarnee paa-ay. ||4||6||17]|| Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||4||6||17]|
THAGt HIB U Il (888-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
afe furs adt virefa Sfs Il (988-4, mat, He 5) kot bighan nahee aavahi nayr. Millions of troubles do not come near him;
wife nfs J at at fs Il (sss-5, erat, 2 5) anik maa-i-aa hai taa kee chayr. the many manifestations of Maya are his hand-maidens;
mfok UTE St a USI Il (888-5, Hat, He 5) anik paap taa kay paaneehaar. countless sins are his water-carriers;
Ww as Hfeur set ATS NA (888-5, THaSt, He 5) jaa ka-o ma-i-aa bha-ee kartaar. ||1]| he is blessed with the Grace of the Creator Lord. ||1]|
fants Aoet df= sae II (88-6, THA, He 5) jisahi sahaa-ee ho-ay bhagvaan. One who has the Lord God as his help and support
wifsa Hse Cut a ASA NA TIC Il (sss-6, aaa, He 5) anik jatan u-aa kai sara‘jaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. - all his efforts are fulfilled. ||1]|Pause| |
ads Ia ast AVS Il (s88-6, Tat, v2 5) kartaa raakhai keetaa ka-un. He is protected by the Creator Lord; what harm can anyone do to him?
atdt HS Ager SSS Il (888-7, THat, ue 5) keeree jeeto saglaa bhavan. Even an ant can conquer the whole world.
ans ufoHt st at ABA Fags Il (g88-7, THat, He 5) bay-ant mahimaa taa kee kaytak baran. His glory is endless; how can I describe it?
afe afs wey St a VIS IQ (ss8-7, THA, He 5) bal bal jaa-ee-ai taa kay charan. ||2| | I am a Sacrifice, a devoted sacrifice, to His feet. ||2]|
fae ct ator vy su famre Il (sss-8, saat, He 5) tin hee kee-aa jap tap Dhi-aan. He alone performs worship, austerities and meditation;
moa yard at ffs ae Il (gss-8, THe, us 5) anik parkaar kee-aa tin daan. he alone is a giver to various charities;
sas Het afe nfs users Il (sss-8, aast, He 5) bhagat so-ee kal meh parvaan. he alone is approved in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga,
wT as oats et He III (888-9, THaat, He 5) jaa ka-o thaakur dee-aa maan. ||3]| whom the Lord Master blesses with honor. ||3]|
AoAfal ffs SE YSrA Il (sss-9, sre, we 5) saaDhsang mil bha-ay pargaas. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am enlightened.
Hon WY wi fSSTA Il (888-9, THAT, He 5) sahj sookh aas nivaas. I have found celestial peace, and my hopes are fulfilled.
ud Asafa thor faATA II (888-10, THT, 42 5) poorai satgur dee-aa bisaas. The Perfect True Guru has blessed me with faith.
SOA TE VAS SA ISIDUACIH (888-10, art, He 5)
naanak ho-ay daasan daas. ||4||7||18]| Nanak is the slave of His slaves. ||4]|7||18]|
THASt HIB U Il (888-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
CH 5 tin AT ST Il (888-10, Hast, 2 5) dos na deejai kaahoo log. Don't blame others, O people;
AH OHS ASt Sa Il (sss-11, Hat, v2 5) jo kamaavan so-ee bhog. as you plant, so shall you harvest.
WTS AIH nM Tt FT Il (sss-11, mast, He 5) aapan karam aapay hee banDh. By your actions, you have bound yourself.
Meo ASS Het GT IAI (sss-11, THAT, He 5) aavan jaavan maa-i-aa DhanDh. ||1|| You come and go, entangled in Maya. ||1]||
MAT AST HS Wot Il (888-12, THAT, He 5) aisee jaanee sant janee. Such is the understanding of the Saintly people.
uderA sfeor us TT gest WAU TIS il (988-12, Tat, Hi: 5) pargaas bha-i-aa pooray gur bachnee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. You shall be enlightened, through the Word of the Perfect Guru. ||1]]|Pause]|
36 U6 aes fifamr fares i (ss8-12, erat, He 5) tan Dhan kalat mithi-aa bisthaar. Body, wealth, spouse and ostentatious displays are false.
JST ASI WHOIS Il (888-13, Haat, 2 5) haivar gaivar chaalanhaar. Horses and elephants will pass away.
TH IT IU Als FT Il (888-13, Tat, we 5) raaj rang roop sabh koor. Power, pleasures and beauty are all false.
om fear ofe AAT OT NI (gs8-13, THT, He 5) naam binaa ho-ay jaasee Dhoor. ||2|| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, everything is reduced to dust. ||2]|
Soh 3B ate nidardt Il (88-13, mast, Hs 5) bharam bhoolay baad aha‘kaaree. The egotistical people are deluded by useless doubt.
Afar ardt F Aas UAT Il (sss-14, mast, Hs 5) sang naahee ray sagal pasaaree. Of all this expanse, nothing shall go along with you.
Ha Jou ufs ta faaurat il (sss-14, saat, v2 5) sog harakh meh dayh birDhaanee. Through pleasure and pain, the body is growing old.
Was fee dt ags fast ISI (888-14, aHaat, He 5)
saakat iv hee karat bihaanee. ||3]| Doing these things, the faithless cynics are passing their lives. ||3]|
ofa a on nifqs af uefa i (sss-15, aHeat, Hs 5) har kaa naam amrit kal maahi. The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Sg foarst Arg urfa i (888-15, eHast, He 5) ayhu niDhaanaa saaDhoo paahi. This treasure is obtained from the Holy.
asa TT afew fA JS" Il (sas-15, Hast, 3 5) naanak gur govid jis toothaa. O Nanak, whoever pleases the Guru,
we whe gHeor fae dt ster ISNCHAE! (888-16, aHaSt, He 5)
ghat ghat rama-ee-aa tin hee deethaa. ||4]|8]|19]| the Lord of the Universe, beholds the Lord in each and every heart. ||4]|8]|19]|
THASt HIB U Il (888-16)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Us Aa SI UTS SE Il (888-16, THA, Hs 5)
panch sabad tah pooran naad.
The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, echo the perfect sound current of the Naad.
Mode AH wsdA PAHS Il (888-17, THT, He 5) anhad baajay achraj bismaad. The wondrous, amazing unstruck melody vibrates.
AG Adfd HS Tis Sa Il (g8s-17, Tat, v2 5) kayl karahi sant har log. The Saintly people play there with the Lord.
USAIN YSIS Sara UA (888-17, Tees, we 5) paarbarahm pooran nirjog. ||1]| They remain totally detached, absorbed in the Supreme Lord God. ||1||
HY dA MiTSe Feo Il (888-18, THAT, He 5) sookh sahj aanand bhavan. It is the realm of celestial peace and bliss.
Forfa afA ae wefo 3g da Aa Sdt HSH HIS IU TIE Il (gss-18, mat, He 5) saaDhsang bais gun gaavahi tah rog sog nahee janam maran. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sits and sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. There is no disease or sorrow there, no birth or death. ||1||Pause] |
Ca frnats SEG SH Il (888-19, THA, He 5) oohaa simrahi kayval naam. There, they meditate only on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fase urefs Gg faATH II (888-19, THT, He 5) birlay paavahi oh bisraam. How rare are those who find this place of rest.
3Ho aE algse MIU Il (gs8-19, aHAt, He 5) bhojan bhaa-o keertan aaDhaar. The love of God is their food, and the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is their support.
vat cece
fSdIG MTA SANT IQIl (889-1, sat, He 5) nihchal aasan baysumaar. ||2]| They obtain a permanent seat in the infinite. ||2]|
fafa o 38 AST & Ure Il (989-1, saat, v3 5) dig na dolai kathoo na Dhaavai. No one falls there, or wavers, or goes anywhere.
aa unte & feg Hoe US Il (889-1, oat, He 5) gur parsaad ko ih mahal paavai. By Guru's Grace, some find this mansion.
3H S Ha © Hem A Il (889-2, an1aat, He 5) bharam bhai moh na maa-i-aa jaal. They are not touched by doubt, fear, attachment or the traps of Maya.
Ho AH ys frsus ISI (839-2, sHat, He 5) sunn samaaDh parabhoo kirpaal. ||3]| They enter the deepest state of Samaadhi, through the kind mercy of God. ||3]|
3 aT MT B UTS Il (889-2, mat, ve 5) taa kaa ant na paaraavaar. He has no end or limitation.
MY TUS MM UTA Il (889-3, 71a, v2 5) aapay gupat aapay paasaar. He Himself is unmanifest, and He Himself is manifest.
w a nists ofs afs Are Il (gs9-3, aaa, He 5) jaa kai antar har har su-aad. One who enjoys the taste of the Lord, Har, Har, deep within himself,
AIS & Wet aoa PAAHTES NICENQOM (889-3, THAT, H3 5)
kahan na jaa-ee naanak bismaad. ||4||9||20]|| O Nanak, his wondrous state cannot be described. ||4||9||20||
THASt HIB U Il (889-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
323 Af ursqan feats wrfenr i (sso-4, arash, Hs 5)
bhaytat sang paarbarahm chit aa-i-aa.
Meeting with the Sangat, the Congregation, the Supreme Lord God has come into my consciousness.
Hafs aga Hsu ufo urfemr Il (ss9-4, ara, He 5) sangat karat santokh man paa-i-aa. In the Sangat, my mind has found contentment.
H3d Uds Ha AS uSsT Il (g89-5, Tat, ve 5) santeh charan maathaa mayro pa-ut. I touch my forehead to the feet of the Saints.
mfox BS HST STVT IAI (889-5, Tat, He 5) anik baar santeh dand-ut. ||1]| Countless times, I humbly bow to the Saints. ||1]|
feg Ho Hae & Sfeadt Il (89-5, erat, He 5) ih man santan kai balihaaree. This mind is a sacrifice to the Saints;
wT at Ge adt AY ufenr ae fast ost Ul TIT Il (889-6, Hat, H2 5)
jaa kee ot gahee sukh paa-i-aa raakhay kirpaa Dhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o. holding tight to their support, I have found peace, and in their mercy, they have protected me. ||1]||Pause] |
Had ude ofe afe after Il (889-6, mast, v2 5) santeh charan Dho-ay Dho-ay peevaa. I wash the feet of the Saints, and drink in that water.
Had van ufey ufet Ate I (g39-6, anraat, He 5) santeh daras paykh paykh jeevaa. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Saints’ Darshan, I live.
Hag at He fs MIA Il (889-7, arraat, He 5) santeh kee mayrai man aas. My mind rests its hopes in the Saints.
HS JH fSesHe TH II (g89-7, THT, He 5) sant hamaaree nirmal raas. ||2|| The Saints are my immaculate wealth. ||2||
HS JHat afm User Il (g89-7, THat, He 5) sant hamaaraa raakhi-aa parh-daa. The Saints have covered my faults.
AS yAte His TAT 3 ATE Il (889-8, THM, He 5) sant parsaad mohi kabhoo na karh-daa. By the Grace of the Saints, I am no longer tormented.
H3d Hat thor fagurs il (ss9-8, sat, v2 5) santeh sang dee-aa kirpaal. The Merciful Lord has blessed me with the Saints' Congregation.
Hs Aoet se afer] IlSil (389-8, mat, v2 5) sant sahaa-ee bha-ay da-i-aal. ||3]| The Compassionate Saints have become my help and support. ||3] |
Hats Hfs af usarA Il (s89-9, anHaet, He 5) surat mat buDh pargaas. My consciousness, intellect and wisdom have been enlightened.
MIs WSs MUTT WSS Il (889-9, Tat, He 5) gahir gambheer apaar guntaas. The Lord is profound, unfathomable, infinite, the treasure of virtue.
Fa HS Aare yfsurs il (ss9-9, mast, He 5) jee-a jant saglay partipaal. He cherishes all beings and creatures.
Soa Hsd afy fears NUAONAI (889-10, aHast, we 5)
naanak santeh daykh nihaal. ||4]|10]|21]| Nanak is enraptured, seeing the Saints. ||4]|10]|21]|
THA HIB U Il (889-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
33 ofa o fas TH HG Il (gs9-10, mat, He 5) tayrai kaaj na garihu raaj maal. Your home, power and wealth will be of no use to you.
3d ata o fad AAS Il (889-10, east, He 5) tayrai kaaj na bikhai janjaal. Your corrupt worldly entanglements will be of no use to you.
fene HIS WE AS SS Il (889-11, gH, 2 5) isat meet jaan sabh chhalai. Know that all your dear friends are fake.
dfs ofs on Afar SI VS UI (gs9-11, Hat, v2 5) har har naam sang tayrai chalai. ||1|| Only the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, will go along with you. ||1]|
oH OH Te ae & Hist ofe fires Sct SH IT Il (889-11, Tat, He 5)
raam naam gun gaa-ay lay meetaa har simrat tayree laaj rahai.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, O friend; remembering the Lord in meditation, your honor shall be saved.
dfs fes AH AES 3 AT NU! TIS Il (g89-12, saat, v2 5) har simrat jam kachh na kahai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Remembering the Lord in meditation, the Messenger of Death will not touch you. ||1]|Pause] |
fag ofa Aas fesse AM Il (889-12, saat, He 5) bin har sagal niraarath kaam. Without the Lord, all pursuits are useless.
Afar gut HrSt BH Il (889-13, THast, He 5) su-inaa rupaa maatee daam. Gold, silver and wealth are just dust.
ad & Age AY HS AAT Il (889-13, THAT, He 5) gur kaa sabad jaap man sukhaa. Chanting the Word of the Guru's Shabad, your mind shall be at peace.
Sto Ca Sd SAS HAT II (889-13, THAT, He 5) eehaa oohaa tayro oojal mukhaa. ||2|| Here and hereafter, your face shall be radiant and bright. ||2]|
ats afs Aa ZS TST Il (889-14, Hast, us 5) kar kar thaakay vaday vadayray. Even the greatest of the great worked and worked until they were exhausted.
faa dt ate on ufemr us il (839-14, oHaet, He 5) kin hee na kee-ay kaaj maa-i-aa pooray. None of them ever accomplished the tasks of Maya.
dfs ofs om AU AE ATE II (gs9-14, mnt, He 5) har har naam japai jan ko-ay. Any humble being who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
3 at nrAT use TE MSI (989-15, THER, He 5) taa kee aasaa pooran ho-ay. ||3]| will have all his hopes fulfilled. ||3] |
dfs aso A SH MOTE Ill (889-15, mat, He 5) har bhagtan ko naam aDhaar. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the anchor and support of the Lord's devotees.
Hat AIS" HOH MRT Il (989-15, THe, He 5) santee jeetaa janam apaar. The Saints are victorious in this priceless human life.
dfs HZ Ad ASt UTSTES Il (889-16, Tra, He 5) har sant karay so-ee parvaan. Whatever the Lord's Saint does, is approved and accepted.
SOA UH BA ATAES ISUIAUIQW2II (889-16, Tat, He 5) naanak daas taa kai kurbaan. ||4]|11]|22|| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to him. ||4]|11]|22]|
THA HIB U Il (889-16)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fifo veg Sfo ey Sa Il (ss9-17, THe, nH 5) sincheh darab deh dukh log. You gather wealth by exploiting people.
33 ofA & nies Aa Il (889-17, THA, He 5) tayrai kaaj na avraa jog. It is of no use to you; it was meant for others.
afa udarg dfe zasfa nit Il (839-17, east, He 5) kar aha‘kaar ho-ay varteh anDh. You practice egotism, and act like a blind man.
WH ot Heat J Mra ST UAL (889-17, THe, He 5) jam kee jayvrhee too aagai banDh. ||1]| In the world hereafter, you shall be tied to the leash of the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
ats fesrat 31S HS I (889-18, THAT, He 5) chhaad vidaanee taat moorhay. Give up your envy of others, you fool!
Sto aHat IS HS Il (989-18, Hat, He 5) eehaa basnaa raat moorhay. You only live here for a night, you fool!
Hear & HS 3 fs THAT Il (ss9-18, THA, He 5) maa-i-aa kay maatay tai uth chalnaa. You are intoxicated with Maya, but you must soon arise and depart.
afe sto 3 Afar AUST A TIS ll (889-19, Tra, He 5) raach rahi-o too sang supnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are totally involved in the dream. ||1||Pause] |
ae faener sf nit il (839-19, mat, He 5) baal bivasthaa baarik anDh. In his childhood, the child is blind.
afs Fale war VaaT Il (gs9-19, aa, He 5) bhar joban laagaa durganDh. In the fullness of youth, he is involved in foul-smelling sins.
uar cto fgshu fasrer fs HAE I (390-1, Tra, He 5)
taritee-a bivasthaa sinchay maa-ay. In the third stage of life, he gathers the wealth of Maya.
fasfa sfiur efs sie usste 121 (390-1, at, He 5) biraDh bha-i-aa chhod chali-o pachhutaa-ay. ||2| | And when he grows old, he must leave all this; he departs regretting and repenting.
21 |
fadares uret BHT ST Il (990-1, Tras, ue 5)
chirankaal paa-ee darulabh dayh. After a very long time, one obtains this precious human body, so difficult to obtain.
om faget det aT il (890-2, saat, Hs 5) naam bihoonee ho-ee khayh. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, it is reduced to dust.
UA Uds HAT S FA Il (890-2, arrast, wi 5) pasoo parayt mugaDh tay buree. Worse than a beast, a demon or an idiot,
farts 3 38 fats So first Wail (890-2, aneet, He 5) tiseh na boojhai jin ayh siree. ||3]| is that one who does not understand who created him. ||3]|
Afs agate adfee dus il (890-3, mast, He 5) sun kartaar govind gopaal. Listen, O Creator Lord, Lord of the Universe, Lord of the World,
ae efenias Het faxguns il (990-3, aHaet, He 5) deen da-i-aal sadaa kirpaal. Merciful to the meek, forever compassionate
suf exveg seats FT Il (990-3, sat, He 5) tumeh chhadaavahu chhutkahi banDh. - If You emancipate the human, then his bonds are broken.
aufh fires SOA Ad NIT NIIVNQSI (g90-4, Hat, He 5)
bakhas milaavhu naanak jag anDh. ||4||12]|23]| O Nanak, the people of world are blind; please, Lord, forgive them, and unite them with Yourself. ||4]]12||23]|
THASt HIB U Il (890-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
afa Ana sovet arfe Il (s90-4, mat, v2 5) kar sanjog banaa-ee kaachh. Joining the elements together, the robe of the body is fashioned.
faq Afar sfaS femrar afe il (s90-5, mast, He 5) tis sang rahi-o i-aanaa raach. The ignorant fool is engrossed in it.
ufsurg fos Arfa AMT II (890-5, THA, He 5) partipaarai nit saar Samaarai. He cherishes it, and constantly takes care of it.
nis ot as StS fitars Al (890-5, gH, He 5) ant kee baar ooth siDhaarai. ||1]| But at the very last moment, he must arise and depart. ||1]|
on fast As So udrat Il (890-6, Tat, He 5) naam binaa sabh jhooth paraanee. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, everything is false, O mortal.
difze sro fag nied Af as 3 Afs wfenr HS UsTAt AU TIS Il (890-6, grat, Hs 5) govid bhajan bin avar sang raatay tay sabh maa-i-aa mooth paraanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Those who do not vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, but instead are imbued with other things, - all those mortals are plundered by Maya. ||1]||Pause| |
ste af 3 Gsafh HG Il (890-7, aaa, nH 5) tirath naa-ay na utras mail. Bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, filth is not washed off.
ASH UdH Afs IBH SH Il (890-7, Tat, He 5) karam Dharam sabh ha-umai fail. Religious rituals are all just egotistical displays.
Ba Usd ats odt de Il (90-7, snrast, He 5) lok pachaarai gat nahee ho-ay. By pleasing and appeasing people, no one is saved.
on fage sorts fF 2H (90-8, aneet, He 5) naam bihoonay chalsahi ro-ay. ||2|| Without the Naam, they shall depart weeping. ||2] |
fag ofa oH & SefH USS Il (990-8, Tnaat, He 5) bin har naam na tootas patal. Without the Lord's Name, the screen is not torn away.
AO AAS fAfyfs Aare | (890-8, mast, He 5) soDhay saastar simrit sagal. I have studied all the Shaastras and Simritees.
A oH AU fan vrf AUS II (890-8, Hat, He 5) SO Naam japai jis aap japaa-ay. He alone chants the Naam, whom the Lord Himself inspires to chant.
AaG Sor A Aha ATS SII (890-9, east, He 5) sagal falaa say sookh samaa-ay. ||3]| He obtains all fruits and rewards, and merges in peace. ||3] |
TuSIS TUT mf Il (g90-9, sat, He 5) raakhanhaaray raakho aap. O Savior Lord, please save me!
Aas AM ys SHS TE Il (890-9, sna, He 5) sagal sukhaa parabh tumrai haath. All peace and comforts are in Your Hand, God.
fas wets f33 werd AMM Il (90-10, saat, He 5) jit laaveh tit laagah su-aamee. Whatever you attach me to, to that I am attached, O my Lord and Master.
Soa Atos nisdAHt ISiIllQVll (s90-10, 7Hast, He 5)
naanak saahib antarjaamee. ||4]|13]|24]| O Nanak, the Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||4]|13]|24] |
THaASt HIS U Il (890-11)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
A fae ad Het AY AAT II (890-11, Ha, He 5) jo kichh karai so-ee sukh jaanaa. Whatever He does makes me happy.
HO MANS ATGHfar uUsbarsr Il (g90-11, east, He 5) man asmajh saaDhsang patee-aanaa. The ignorant mind is encouraged, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
BBO 3 Yat SaTfEnt I (890-11, ara, Hs 5) dolan tay chookaa thehraa-i-aa. Now, it does not waver at all; it has become stable and steady.
Afs ufo & AfSs AHEM WAU (890-12, Hest, He 5) sat maahi lay sat samaa-i-aa. ||1]| Receiving Truth, it is merged in the True Lord. ||1||
ey afenr Ag sa AEM Il (890-12, Treat, we 5) dookh ga-i-aa sabh rog ga-i-aa. Pain is gone, and all illness is gone.
us oat urfamr He Hf Hot HoT Use aT Aa Shem NA TI Il (890-12, an1aet, He 5) parabh kee aagi-aa man meh maanee mahaa purakh kaa sang bha-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have accepted the Will of God in my mind, associating with the Great Person, the Guru. ||1]||Pause| |
Hae ufez Ada fSIHS Il (890-13, Treat, He 5) Sagal pavitar sarab nirmalaa. All is pure; all is immaculate.
A Zgsve ASt Ss Il (890-13, THast, v2 5) jo vartaa-ay so-ee bhalaa. Whatever exists is good.
Ag ae Het Hats ae Il (s90-14, sHaeHt, He 5) jah raakhai so-ee mukat thaan. Wherever He keeps me, that is the place of liberation for me.
A AUS ASt SH NII (890-14, mat, He 5) jo japaa-ay so-ee naam. ||2|| Whatever He makes me chant, is His Name. ||2]|
MoAlS stee AT AT ua Ufa Il (g90-14, aaa, He 5)
athsath tirath jah saaDh pag Dhareh. That is the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where the Holy place their feet,
3d Fao AT OH Bvafa Il (890-15, aaa, Ht 5) tah baikunth jah naam uchrahi. and that is heaven, where the Naam is chanted.
Ads MSe WA VIAS UTEM Il (890-15, Tat, v2 5) sarab anand jab darsan paa-ee-ai. All bliss comes, when one obtains the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
on ae fos fos of arent 31 (990-15, rast, He 5) raam gunaa nit nit har gaa-ee-ai. ||3]| I sing continuously, continually, the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3] |
mma ufe ufe sfonm famrfur il (890-16, arast, He 5) aapay ghat ghat rahi-aa bi-aap. The Lord Himself is pervading in each and every heart.
efente ude Use UTSU Il (890-16, THaSt, He 5) da-i-aal purakh pargat partaap. The glory of the Merciful Lord is radiant and manifest.
TUS UBS FH BS VI Il (390-16, Haat, He 5) kapat khulaanay bharam naathay dooray. The shutters are opened, and doubts have run away.
THX AS TAT FS UT USUASNQUI (890-17, Tnrawt, He 5) naanak ka-o gur bhaytay pooray. ||4||14||25]| Nanak has met with the Perfect Guru. ||4]|14]|25]|
THA HIS U Il (890-17)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
afe ary sry faAM II (890-17, sat, He 5) kot jaap taap bisraam. Millions of meditations and austerities rest in him,
fafa afa fafa Aa famire Il (g90-18, sat, H8 5) riDh buDh siDh sur gi-aan. along with wealth, wisdom, miraculous spiritual powers and angelic spiritual insight.
mfsa JU Ia Sa FA ll (890-18, Tat, we 5) anik roop rang bhog rasai. He enjoys the various shows and forms, pleasures and delicacies;
aanfa an fora foe SA Al (890-18, eH, He 5) gurmukh naam nimakh ridai vasai. ||1]| | the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells within the heart of the Gurmukh. ||1]|
Tfs X SH at Sanit Il (g90-19, srraat, 2 5) har kay naam kee vadi-aa-ee. Such is the glorious greatness of the Name of the Lord.
ais ATE O ATT IA TIS Il (890-19, srt, He 5) keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Its value cannot be described. ||1]||Pause| |
Heated Utsr HFS ys Il (890-19, eat, H2 5) soorbeer Dheeraj mat pooraa. He alone is brave, patient and perfectly wise;
yar ety Hon Anta ufs afss aster Il (991-1, mast, He 5)
sahj samaaDh Dhun gahir gambheeraa. he is intuitively in Samaadhi, profound and unfathomable.
HET HAS ST UT OTH Il (991-1, Hat, He 5) sadaa mukat taa kay pooray kaam. He is liberated forever and all his affairs are perfectly resolved;
wd fae ZA afe SMH IQ (g91-1, saat, He 5) jaa kai ridai vasai har naam. ||2| | the Lord's Name abides within his heart. ||2]|
AGS AY MTSE Mga Il (891-2, Trees, we 5) Sagal sookh aanand arog. He is totally peaceful, blissful and healthy;
HHSSAt UTS fSsear Il (g91-2, Tet, Hs 5) Samadrasee pooran nirjog. he looks upon all impartially, and is perfectly detached.
wife o ATE 38 AT SS Il (891-2, snact, He 5) aa-ay na jaa-ay dolai kat naahee. He does not come and go, and he never wavers;
AW & OH SA HS HT ISI (891-2, Ta, He 5) jaa kai naam basai man maahee. ||3] | the Naam abides in his mind. ||3||
de efenre due dfee i (391-3, erat, He 5) deen da-i-aal gopaal govind. God is Merciful to the meek; He is the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe.
aanfy wut Css fee | (991-3, erat, He 5) gurmukh japee-ai utrai chind. The Gurmukh meditates on Him, and his worries are gone.
Sea AS fs Short SH Il (g91-3, anrast, ve 5) naanak ka-o gur dee-aa naam. The Guru has blessed Nanak with the Naam;
H36 Ot IG AS AT AH ISIUIWUNEM (891-4, sna, v2 5) santan kee tahal sant kaa kaam. ||4||15]|26]|| he serves the Saints, and works for the Saints. ||4]]15]|26]|
THASt HIS U Il (891-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ain Hz afe atesa aS Il (91-4, snraet, v2 5) beej mantar har keertan gaa-o. Sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and the Beej Mantra, the Seed Mantra.
nite frst faare ar il (891-5, anraet, He 5) aagai milee nithaavay thaa-o. Even the homeless find a home in the world hereafter.
TT UT At BISt BA Il (891-5, Tat, 42 5) gur pooray kee charnee laag. Fall at the feet of the Perfect Guru;
HOH HOH aT Afeor Ava IA (891-5, Tat, He 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaag. ||1]| you have slept for so many incarnations - wake up! ||1]||
ofa of ATU AUS Il (991-6, aHaet, He 5) har har jaap japlaa. Chant the Chant of the Lord's Name, Har, Har.
ad fasur 3 fase SH sue ufa user 4 TI Il (g91-6, mat, He 5)
gur kirpaa tay hirdai vaasai bha-ojal paar parlaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, it shall be enshrined within your heart, and you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause| |
om feu famrfe He miSe Il (891-6, aHast, He 5) naam niDhaan Dhi-aa-ay man atal. Meditate on the eternal treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mind,
x get wfeur x UST Il (991-7, sHaRe, He 5) taa chhooteh maa-i-aa kay patal. and then, the screen of Maya shall be torn away.
Ts a Age nifys TA ut ii (891-7, ona, He 5) gur kaa sabad amrit ras pee-o. Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Guru's Shabad,
a 3a dfe feane Me N21 (891-7, eat, He 5) taa tayraa ho-ay nirmal jee-o. ||2]| and then your soul shall be rendered immaculate and pure. ||2| |
Hus Aus Afo steer | (991-8, Hast, HW 5) soDhat soDhat soDh beechaaraa.
Searching, searching, searching, I have realized fag dfs sats adt Sears Il (991-8, snast, He 5)
bin har bhagat nahee chhutkaaraa. that without devotional worship of the Lord, no one is saved.
A ofs sHo AT & Afar il (g91-8, oH, He 5) so har bhajan saaDh kai sang. So vibrate, and meditate on that Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy;
HG 36 TU da a Sa Sli (g91-9, Tae, He 5) man tan raapai har kai rang. |[3]| your mind and body shall be imbued with love for the Lord. ||3]|
efs fimreu ag vaaet Il (891-9, Hast, He 5) chhod si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee. Renounce all your cleverness and trickery.
Ho fas ofa ae ATE o arTet Il (891-9, oat, He 5) man bin har naavai jaa-ay na kaa-ee. O mind, without the Lord's Name, there is no place of rest.
efeor odt afze TASH I (891-10, erat, He 5) da-i-aa Dhaaree govid gosaa-ee. The Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the World, has taken pity on me.
dfa ofa aaa 2a feast ISNIENQIIN (891-10, sHaeHT, He 5)
har har naanak tayk tikaa-ee. ||4]|16||27]|| Nanak seeks the protection and support of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||16]|27] |
THA HIB U Il (891-11)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Ha a Afal TH Sa A Il (991-11, Teast, nH 5) sant kai sang raam rang kayl. In the Saints' Congregation, play joyfully with the Lord,
witat AH fA SE BAG Il (g91-11, Tat, He 5) aagai jam si-o ho-ay na mayl. and you will not have to meet the Messenger of Death hereafter.
mogfa ar sfenr faarA I (g91-11, Hat, He 5) aha’-buDh kaa bha-i-aa binaas. Your egotistical intellect shall be dispelled,
ToHfs det AaSt SA IAI (891-12, THAT, He 5) durmat ho-ee saglee naas. ||1|| and your evil-mindedness will be totally taken away. ||1||
TH OH TE ate ufss il (891-12, aHat, v2 5) raam naam gun gaa-ay pandit. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, O Pandit.
aH ais nidag 5 WH AAG Ast wfs ats ufss NAN TIS I (891-12, erat, He 5) karam kaad aha™kaar na kaajai kusal saytee ghar jaahi pandit. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Religious rituals and egotism are of no use at all. You shall go home with happiness, O Pandit. ||1||Pause] |
ofa ax AA fafa Sor ws Il (991-13, Hat, He 5) har kaa jas niDh lee-aa laabh. I have earned the profit, the wealth of the Lord's praise.
YIS FS HSTA AST Il (891-13, Tat, Hs 5) pooran bha-ay manorath saabh. All my hopes have been fulfilled.
ey ao’ AY we fo MMe Il (g91-14, aHet, He 5) dukh naathaa sukh ghar meh aa-i-aa. Pain has left me, and peace has come to my home.
AS yAtE ane faarrfenr iI (891-14, sat, He 5) sant parsaad kamal bigsaa-i-aa. | |2| | By the Grace of the Saints, my heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||2| |
OH 336 fate ufent ere Il (891-14, set, He 5) naam ratan jin paa-i-aa daan. One who is blessed with the gift of the jewel of the Name,
fSH Ao JE Aas fours Il (991-15, wast, He 5) tis jan ho-ay sagal niDhaan. obtains all treasures.
Hay nitfenr yfe ust ute il (91-15, anreett, He 5) santokh aa-i-aa man pooraa paa-ay. His mind becomes content, finding the Perfect Lord.
feta fefe Hare ard ATE ISI (991-15, ea, U8 5) fir fir maagan kaahay jaa-ay. ||3]| Why should he ever go begging again? ||3]|
dfs at Xa ASS uf|s Il (891-16, wast, He 5) har kee kathaa sunat pavit. Hearing the Lord's sermon, he becomes pure and holy.
frget gas uret afs HfS Il (891-16, anaat, He 5) jihvaa bakat paa-ee gat mat. Chanting it with his tongue, he finds the way to salvation.
A users fan foe eAret Il (891-16, mast, He 5) SO parvaan jis ridai vasaa-ee. He alone is approved, who enshrines the Lord within his heart.
TX SAS SSH set USNWUQCH (991-17, THAT, 42 5)
naanak tay jan ootam bhaa-ee. ||4||17||28]| Nanak: such a humble being is exalted, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4]|17]|28]|
THaASt HIS U Il (891-17)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ad ats uadt & wiret THE I (991-17, east, v8 5) gahu kar pakree na aa-ee haath. No matter how hard you try to grab it, it does not come into your hands.
Us adt wat odt Af II (s91-18, aret, He 5) pareet karee chaalee nahee saath. No matter how much you may love it, it does not go along with you.
aT saa AC fsorfar Set Il (g91-18, saat, He 5) kaho naanak ja-o ti-aag da-ee. Says Nanak, when you abandon it,
sa 8g vaat mrfe uet iil (91-18, sat, He 5)
tab oh charnee aa-ay pa-ee. ||1|| then it comes and falls at your feet. ||1]|
Afs Had faa ster Il (g91-19, mast, v2 5) sun santahu nirmal beechaar. Listen, O Saints: this is the pure philosophy.
oH OH fag as odt wet TT UT ses Borg AU TIC Il (s91-19, erat, 42 5)
raam naam bin gat nahee kaa-ee gur pooraa bhaytat uDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Lord's Name, there is no salvation. Meeting with the Perfect Guru, one is saved. ||1]||Pause| |
Ua cra
wa BA aG aet SS WG Il (892-1, saat, H: 5) jab us ka-o ko-ee dayvai maan. When someone tries to appease her,
3a nmun Gufs TH THE Il (892-1, Tne, we 5) tab aapas oopar rakhai gumaan. then she takes pride in herself.
wa GA aG aet Hfs usT II (892-1, Hat, He 5) jab us ka-o ko-ee man parharai. But when someone puts her out of his thoughts,
sa Go Aefe AS AT II (g92-2, eras, He 5) tab oh sayvak sayvaa karai. ||2]| then she serves him like a slave. ||2]|
Hf Sas nifSs oar] il (992-2, oract, ne 5) mukh bayraavai ant thagaavai. She seems to please, but in the end, she deceives.
feas o@s Go adt 5 Me Il (892-2, at, He 5) ikat tha-ur oh kahee na samaavai. She does not remain in any one place.
Cfs HI ATS FINS Il (892-3, Treat, ue 5) un mohay bahutay barahmand. She has bewitched a great many worlds.
TH Hot aot YS YT Ill (892-3, rast, He 5) raam janee keenee khand khand. ||3]| The Lord's humble servants cut her apart into pieces. ||3]|
Ha A SY Td Il (992-3, Trash, Hs 5) jo maagai so bhookhaa rahai. Whoever begs from her remains hungry.
fen Aft TS A AE 3 BI Il (892-3, Treat, we 5) is sang raachai so kachhoo na lahai. Whoever is infatuated with her obtains nothing.
fenfo fsurfat AsHafs ad Il (92-4, enrast, He 5) iseh ti-aag satsangat karai. But one who renounces her, and joins the Society of the Saints,
VTGM Soa GI SF NIACHEN (892-4, sma, v2 5) vadbhaagee naanak oh tarai. ||4||18]|29]| by great good fortune, O Nanak, is saved. ||4||18]|29]|
THAGt HIB U Il (892-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
MSH IH Ads His Ue Il (892-5, THs, Hs 5) aatam raam sarab meh paykh. See the Lord, the Universal Soul, in all.
uae ufe sfomr ys Sa Il (892-5, oHat, He 5) pooran poor rahi-aa parabh ayk. The One God is perfect, and all-pervading.
336 WHS foe ufo WS Il (892-5, THT, He 5) ratan amol riday meh jaan. Know that the priceless jewel is within your own heart.
muat FAS J orf USTs Al (892-6, TrHaat, He 5) apnee vasat too aap pachhaan. ||1|| Realize that your essence is within your own self. ||1]|
ul nifs AB usAE Il (892-6, Hast, Hs 5) pee amrit santan parsaad. Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, by the Grace of the Saints.
zs aa defo 3B urn faa fave foor AS AMIS A TIC Il (992-6, ana, He 5) vaday bhaag hoveh ta-o paa-ee-ai bin jihvaa ki-aa jaanai su-aad. ||1]| rahaa-o.
One who is blessed with high destiny, obtains it. Without a tongue, how can one know the taste? ||1||Pause] |
WS ZA FE AS AT ST Il (892-7, Tat, 2 5) ath das bayd sunay kah doraa. How can a deaf person listen to the eighteen Puraanas and the Vedas?
afe yarn & few nittar il (892-7, aac, He 5) kot pargaas na disai anDhayraa. The blind man cannot see even a million lights.
UA USS UTA fet Te Il (892-8, THAT, He 5) pasoo pareet ghaas sang rachai. The beast loves grass, and remains attached to it.
fan odt ase A fas fafa gS 21 (g92-8, sat, He 5) jis nahee bujhaavai so kit biDh bujhai. ||2|| One who has not been taught - how can he understand? ||2||
Weeds stot yg ATS Il (892-8, sneat, Hs 5) jaananhaar rahi-aa parabh jaan. God, the Knower, knows all.
6fs ufs sase Harts Il (s92-9, sre, v2 5) ot pot bhagtan sangaan. He is with His devotees, through and through.
faa fae mrs ys arefs il (92-9, aneat, 3 5) bigas bigas apunaa parabh gaavahi. Those who sing God's Praises with joy and delight,
Sod fsa AH Sfs 6 wTe|fs ISIAENBOI (892-9, aHaSt, He 5)
naanak tin jam nayrh na aavahi. ||3||19]|30|| O Nanak - the Messenger of Death does not even approach them. ||3]|19]|30] |
THaASt HIS U Il (892-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ate aH ats ufes il (892-10, mast, He 5) deeno naam kee-o pavit. Blessing me with His Name, He has purified and sanctified me.
ofa ug ath faan fea fas Il (892-10, rat, He 5) har Dhan raas niraas ih bit. The Lord's wealth is my capital. False hope has left me; this is my wealth.
act afa ofs AST we Il (92-11, mast, 2 5) kaatee banDh har sayvaa laa-ay. Breaking my bonds, the Lord has linked me to His service.
dfs ss sas TH TF WES IA (892-11, east, vs 5) har har bhagat raam gun gaa-ay. ||1]| I am a devotee of the Lord, Har, Har; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
WH WSIS SH Il (892-11, aHast, H2 5) baajay anhad baajaa. The unstruck sound current vibrates and resounds.
dAfa sAfa Te Wefs dfs A wus Taefe festa AU TIC il (892-12, 7a, ne 5) rasak rasak gun gaavahi har jan apnai gurdayv nivaajaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord's humble servants sing His Glorious Praises with love and delight; they are honored by the Divine Guru. ||1||Pause] |
urfe afoS usar SH Il (892-12, rast, 48 5) aa-ay bani-o poorbalaa bhaag. My pre-ordained destiny has been activated;
HOH HOH aT Afeor ATE Il (892-13, THs, He 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaag. I have awakened from the sleep of countless incarnations.
aet farts AT & Afat Il (892-13, aHat, H2 5) ga-ee gilaan saaDh kai sang. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, my aversion is gone.
HG 36 TS Ua a Sa NM (992-13, sna, He 5) man tan raato har kai rang. ||2|| My mind and body are imbued with love for the Lord. ||2]|
IY ISITE VfEnis I (892-14, THaat, vs 5) raakhay raakhanhaar da-i-aal. The Merciful Savior Lord has saved me.
oT fxs AS oT fas wre Il (992-14, Hast, v8 5) naa kichh sayvaa naa kichh ghaal. I have no service or work to my credit.
afd fasur ufs atat efenr il (892-14, mest, 8 5) kar kirpaa parabh keenee da-i-aa. In His Mercy, God has taken pity on me;
gas eu nfo orfe ofemr il (992-14, east, He 5) boodat dukh meh kaadh la-i-aa. ||3]| He lifted me up and pulled me out, when I was suffering in pain. ||3]|
Afe Af= CufA Ho Hfs BE I (992-15, east, He 5) sun sun upji-o man meh chaa-o. Listening, listening to His Praises, joy has welled up within my mind.
MS Udd Tis X TE AE Il (992-15, Hat, He 5) aath pahar har kay gun gaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ves WES UH als Ut Il (892-16, saat, He 5) gaavat gaavat param gat paa-ee. Singing, singing His Praises, I have obtained the supreme status.
Ts YAMS SH fs BET UUQOUSAUI (892-16, Tat, us 5)
gur parsaad naanak liv laa-ee. ||4]|20||31|| By Guru's Grace, Nanak is lovingly focused on the Lord. ||4||20]|31]|
THaASt HIB U Il (892-16)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
agat aes fanrdt Io Il (892-17, THA, He 5) ka-udee badlai ti-aagai ratan. In exchange for a shell, he gives up a jewel.
efs whe 3g a ABS Il (892-17, THe, we 5) chhod jaa-ay taahoo kaa jatan. He tries to get what he must give up.
AH Ad A det aS Il (892-17, anrast, H: 5) so sanchai jo hochhee baat. He collects those things which are worthless.
Hfeor Afar Se AS NAL (892-17, THES, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi-aa taydha-o jaat. ||1]|| Enticed by Maya, he takes the crooked path. ||1]|
WTA J BHA Sra Il (g92-18, Haat, He 5) abhaagay tai laaj naahee. You unfortunate man - have you no shame?
HY Aad Use USHA oie 3 BfSG Ho HST NAN TIS Il (992-18, grat, He 5) sukh saagar pooran parmaysar har na chayti-o man maahee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You do not remember in your mind the ocean of peace, the perfect Transcendent Lord God. ||1||Pause] |
nifys aa fatto HtSt I (s92-19, anraatt, He 5) amrit ka-uraa bikhi-aa meethee. Nectar seems bitter to you, and poison is sweet.
Has at fafa Sag Stet Il (992-19, erat, He 5) saakat kee biDh nainhu deethee. Such is your condition, you faithless cynic, which I have seen with my own eyes.
afs aufe mdorts dtsra il (992-19, sHast, 12 5) koorh kapat aha"kaar reejhaanaa. You are fond of falsehood, fraud and egotism.
Ua ces
OH Hos Ae fisnt SATAT MQM (893-1, THA, He 5)
naam sunat jan bichhoo-a dasaanaa. ||2||
If you hear the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you feel like you have been stung by a scorpion. ||2| |
Hfeur orate AE Tt ST Il (893-1, THast, 42 5) maa-i-aa kaaran sad hee jhoorai. You continually yearn for Maya,
fs ufa aafs 3 Grafs ad Il (893-1, mat, He 5) man mukh kabeh na ustat karai. and you never chant the Lord's Praises with your mouth.
fags fadarg BSTg Il (893-2, saat, nH 5) nirbha-o nirankaar daataar. The Lord is fearless and formless; He is the Great Giver.
fan fk uifs 5 ad TSg ISI (893-2, raat, He 5) tis Si-o pareet na karai gavaar. ||3]|| But you do not love Him, you fool! ||3]|
Ag ATS fafs AS ATT Il (893-2, set, He 5) sabh saahaa sir saachaa saahu. God, the True King, is above the heads of all kings.
SHISHA UT UTSATT Il (893-3, THAT, H2 5) vaymuhtaaj pooraa paatisaahu. He is the independent, perfect Lord King.
Hg Hae wufeS gH fara i (893-3, neat, 42 5) moh magan lapti-o bharam girah. People are intoxicated by emotional attachment, entangled in doubt and family life.
Sea sd Sct fgg uSn2wUiS2kl_ (893-3, gaat, H3 5)
naanak taree-ai tayree mihar. ||4||21]|32]| Nanak: they are saved only by Your Mercy, Lord. ||4||21]|32]|
THASt HIS U Il (893-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
dfs fear wu afa ar Il (393-4, mat, He 5) rain dinas japa-o har naa-o. Night and day, I chant the Lord's Name.
Wid PITT USS ar Il (893-4, aH, ne 5) aagai dargeh paava-o thaa-o. Hereafter, I shall obtain a seat in the Court of the Lord.
Het Se B det Aa Il (893-4, oH, v2 5) Sadaa anand na hovee sog. I am in bliss forever; I have no sorrow.
aag 3 fmm IBH Fa WAU (893-5, THast, Hs 5) kabhoo na bi-aapai ha-umai rog. ||1]| The disease of ego never afflicts me. ||1]|
dng H3g ofs yan famrst il (993-5, mat, v8 5) khojahu santahu har barahm gi-aanee. O Saints of the Lord, seek out those who know God.
fanHe fann se fanntet us afs uefa ofa finite usrat all FITS Il (993-5, THe, 5)
bisman bisam bha-ay bismaadaa param gat paavahi har simar paraanee. ||1|| rahaa- oO. You shall be wonderstruck with wonder at the wonderful Lord; meditate in remembrance on the Lord, O mortal, and obtain the supreme status. ||1]||Pause] |
ae ffs Sug Aare sterfs il (s93-6, oat, nH 5) gan min daykhhu sagal beechaar. Calculating, measuring, and thinking in every way,
oH faat ad Aa & Ste Il (993-7, sHaSt, v2 5) naam binaa ko sakai na taar. see that without the Naam, no one can be carried across.
Rae Gure o wets Afar il (393-7, anraat, He 5) Sagal upaav na chaaleh sang. Of all your efforts, none will go along with you.
Sense 3st ys a Sfar Ql (893-7, ava, us 5) bhavjal taree-ai parabh kai rang. ||2]| You can cross over the terrifying world-ocean only through the love of God. ||2]|
oot af 3 Bad HS Il (993-8, mat, He 5) dayhee Dho-ay na utrai mail. By merely washing the body, one's filth is not removed.
ICH fammt efsar SH Il (893-8, mat, He 5) ha-umai bi-aapai dubiDhaa fail. Afflicted by egotism, duality only increases.
dfs ofs niGug A AS wt II (993-8, enact, He 5) har har a-ukhaDh jo jan khaa-ay. That humble being who takes the medicine of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har
a at da Aare fife we SI (s93-8, mat, He 5) taa kaa rog sagal mit jaa-ay. ||3]|| - all his diseases are eradicated. ||3]||
afd fagut ursqaH afer il (893-9, arat, He 5)
kar kirpaa paarbarahm da-i-aal. Take pity on me, O merciful, Supreme Lord God;
Ho 3 aad 3 fang Tus Il (393-9, raat, He 5) man tay kabahu na bisar gopaal. let me never forget the Lord of the World from my mind.
33 TA at de Ofe I (893-9, anaett, He 5) tayray daas kee hovaa Dhoor. Let me be the dust of the feet of Your slaves;
aoe at ys AGO ufs ISilIINBll (893-10, Haat, He 5)
naanak kee parabh sarDhaa poor. ||4]|22]||33]| O God, please fulfill Nanak's hope. ||4||22]|33]|
THASt HIS U Il (893-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
3d Aafe UT TISS I (893-10, enraat, v2 5) tayree saran pooray gurdayv. You are my Protection, O perfect Divine Guru.
30 fag gat ardt ae I (993-11, arrest, Hs 5) tuDh bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. There is no other than You.
3 AHIE YIS UIZIH Il (893-11, THaSt, Hs 5) too samrath pooran paarbarahm. You are all-powerful, O perfect Supreme Lord God.
A fare yar fA ASH WAL (893-11, THe, He 5) so Dhi-aa-ay pooraa jis karam. ||1]| He alone meditates on You, whose karma is perfect. ||1]||
3dE WISE YS 3d FC I (993-12, raat, ue 5) taran taaran parabh tayro naa-o. You Name, God, is the boat to carry us across.
Sar Hate Td Hs HS 30 fas sa at SS Ul TIS Il (893-12, maa, ws 5)
aykaa saran gahee man mayrai tuDh bin doojaa naahee thaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind has grasped Your protection alone. Other than You, I have no place of rest at all. ||1]]Pause| |
afuy afu Ate Sa aS Il (893-12, seat, He 5)
jap jap jeevaa tayraa naa-o. Chanting, meditating on Your Name, I live,
Wd PITT USS SE Il (893-13, THe, ue 5) aagai dargeh paava-o thaa-o. and hereafter, I will obtain a seat in the Court of the Lord.
ey nda Ho 3 AME Il (893-13, oat, He 5) dookh anDhayraa man tay jaa-ay. Pain and darkness are gone from my mind;
zonfs faorn ae ofe SPE NI (393-13, aH, He 5) durmat binsai raachai har naa-ay. ||2|| my evil-mindedness is dispelled, and I am absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||2]|
3do AHS fAS await ytfS i (893-14, meet, us 5) charan kamal si-o laagee pareet. I have enshrined love for the Lord's lotus feet.
Gs ud at fase SHS i (893-14, erat, He 5) gur pooray kee nirmal reet. The lifestyle of the Perfect Guru is immaculate and pure.
3 sar faas@ nfs SA Il (893-14, oat, He 5) bha-o bhaagaa nirbha-o man basai. My fear has run away, and the fearless Lord dwells within my mind.
nifqs SU dHat fez AU BI (893-15, meat, He 5) amrit naam rasnaa nit japai. ||3]| My tongue continually chants the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
ate HOH A ATS |TT Il (893-15, THast, Hz 5) kot janam kay kaatay faahay. The nooses of millions of incarnations are cut away.
ute we AS UG Bed Il (893-15, Hast, vs 5) paa-i-aa laabh sachaa Dhan laahay. I have obtained the profit of the true wealth.
Sfe 5 mie mS FST Il (893-16, THA, He 5) tot na aavai akhut bhandaar. This treasure is inexhaustible; it will never run out.
Soa SIS Hols dfs Erg ISilIsiS3Veill (393-16, THast, He 5)
naanak bhagat soheh har du-aar. ||4||23]|34|| O Nanak, the devotees look beautiful in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|23]|34||
THA HIS U Il (893-16)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
TSO ALIS BH Il (893-17, THat, Hs 5) ratan javayhar naam. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a jewel, a ruby.
AS Hsu fame il (93-17, mat, Hs 5) sat santokh gi-aan. It brings Truth, contentment and spiritual wisdom.
AY Ade Cent a ust | Ts SAS TSH TS UI (893-17, Tat, ws 5) sookh sahj da-i-aa kaa potaa. har bhagtaa havaalai hotaa. ||1]|| The Lord entrusts the treasures of peace, intuition and kindness to His devotees. ||1]|
Hd TH A FST Il (893-18, THA, v2 5) mayray raam ko bhandaar. This is the treasure of my Lord.
us udfe ag Sf 3 ore nig odt fs uses IU TIC Il (893-18, aH, He 5) khaat kharach kachh tot na aavai ant nahee har paaraavaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Consuming and expending it, it is never used up. The Lord has no end or limitation. ||1]|Pause] |
ates fashwa ata il (893-19, ast, He 5)
keertan nirmolak heeraa.
The Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is a priceless diamond. MSS Tat Tdta Il (893-19, THast, He 5)
aanand gunee gaheeraa. It is the ocean of bliss and virtue.
mode areat Uet Il (893-19, Tne, He 5) anhad banee poonjee. In the Word of the Guru's Bani is the wealth of the unstruck sound current.
Hao ofa art Set iM (s93-19, grat, He 5) santan hath raakhee koonjee. ||2|| The Saints hold the key to it in their hands. ||2||
Ua ctg
Ho ANG Tet Sd MITAG Il (994-1, ast, He 5) sunn samaaDh gufaa tah aasan. They sit there, in the cave of deep Samaadhi;
ATG YIN UTS ST IAG Il (994-1, THA, He 5) kayval barahm pooran tah baasan. the unique, perfect Lord God dwells there.
sas Afar ys aAfe ATS Il (994-1, rset, He 5)
bhagat sang parabh gosat karat. God holds conversations with His devotees.
3d JIU B A 3 HOH B Hes ISI (894-2, THAT, He 5)
tah harakh na sog na janam na marat. ||3]| There is no pleasure or pain, no birth or death there. ||3]||
ate fasur fan orfy feerfemr II (394-2, aret, He 5) kar kirpaa jis aap divaa-i-aa. One whom the Lord Himself blesses with His Mercy,
AGH fa fats ofs ae urfemr | (894-2, erat, v2 5)
saaDhsang tin har Dhan paa-i-aa. obtains the Lord's wealth in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Sfents use Soe MITETA I (894-3, THast, He 5) da-i-aal purakh naanak ardaas. Nanak prays to the merciful Primal Lord;
ofa Hat zasfe ofa Ast TH IIgi2QenSUll (394-3, Hast, He 5)
har mayree vartan har mayree raas. ||4||24]|35]| the Lord is my merchandise, and the Lord is my capital. ||4]|24]|35]|
THaASt HIS U Il (894-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
HfoH" o AST Fe Il (994-4, arrast, He 5) mahimaa na jaaneh bayd. The Vedas do not know His greatness.
Aon odt ASfs Sz Il (894-4, nat, He 5) barahmay nahee jaaneh bhayd. Brahma does not know His mystery.
MESS & Wald Mis Il (894-4, ones, He 5) avtaar na jaaneh ant. Incarnated beings do not know His limit.
USHA USYIH SMT IAI (894-5, THast, us 5) parmaysar paarbarahm bay-ant. ||1]| The Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God, is infinite. ||1]|
must afs wif ATS Il (s94-5, Tat, He 5) apnee gat aap jaanai. Only He Himself knows His own state.
Afs Afs neg Sas NU TIC Il (894-5, Trast, He 5) sun sun avar vakhaanai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Others speak of Him only by hearsay. ||1]||Pause] |
Has Sdt ofa Sz il (894-6, mat, v2 5) sankraa nahee jaaneh bhayv. Shiva does not know His mystery.
WAS IS SS Il (894-6, gHaat, v2 5) khojat haaray dayv. The gods gave grown weary of searching for Him.
Sait odt WS HIM Il (894-6, Tat, He 5) dayvee-aa nahee jaanai maram. The goddesses do not know His mystery.
AS Gufs wise UrTsZIH MI (994-6, Tash, He 5) sabh oopar alakh paarbarahm. ||2|| Above all is the unseen, Supreme Lord God. ||2]|
MUS dal ATS A Il (894-7, Tat, ve 5) apnai rang kartaa kayl. The Creator Lord plays His own plays.
mify feed nm HG Il (894-7, mast, He 5) aap bichhorai aapay mayl. He Himself separates, and He Himself unites.
feta san fet sarst BE Il (994-7, erat, v8 5) ik bharmay ik bhagtee laa-ay. Some wander around, while others are linked to His devotional worship.
muet abot orf ASS ISI (894-8, ena, He 5) apnaa kee-aa aap janaa-ay. ||3]|| By His actions, He makes Himself known. ||3]|
H36 at Afs Arét APT Il (g04-8, east, He 5)
santan kee sun saachee saakhee. Listen to the true story of the Saints.
A gafo A wufs nmi il (994-8, aaa, H2 5) so boleh jo paykheh aakhee. They speak only of what they see with their eyes.
odt Su fSH ufs o urfiy Il (994-8, enact, He 5) nahee layp tis punn na paap. He is not involved with virtue or vice.
sot a UF mMy nif WSNQUIISEI (894-9, Treat, He 5)
naanak kaa parabh aapay aap. ||4]|25]|36]|| Nanak's God is Himself all-in-all. ||4]|25]|36]|
THASt HIB U Il (894-9)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
foes aH 3 AG AS II (894-9, anrast, He 5) kichhahoo kaaj na kee-o jaan. I have not tried to do anything through knowledge.
Hats fs ardt fos formrfs il (g94-10, arat, v2 5) surat mat naahee kichh gi-aan. I have no knowledge, intelligence or spiritual wisdom.
Amy STy Ales Sdt TAH Il (894-10, sat, He 5) jaap taap seel nahee Dharam. I have not practiced chanting, deep meditation, humility or righteousness.
fag 8 WSS AAT AGH IA (894-10, THAT, He 5) kichhoo na jaan-o kaisaa karam. ||1|| I know nothing of such good karma. ||1]|
Sad YISH YS HT Il (894-11, Treat, 3 5) thaakur pareetam parabh mayray. O my Beloved God, my Lord and Master,
35 fag BT neg 3 aet FHI YaT YS SF NU TTS I (894-11, Trash, v3 5) tujh bin doojaa avar na ko-ee bhoolah chookah parabh tayray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
there is none other than You. Even though I wander and make mistakes, I am still Yours, God. ||1||Pause]|
fafa 3 afa 3 fafa yarn I (994-12, meet, He 5)
riDh na buDh na siDh pargaas.
I have no wealth, no intelligence, no miraculous spiritual powers; I am not enlightened.
fae faorfo & are nfo aH II (894-12, rast, He 5) bikhai bi-caaDh kay gaav meh baas. I dwell in the village of corruption and sickness.
aed HI YS SA Il (894-12, Trax, ne 5) karanhaar mayray parabh ayk. O my One Creator Lord God,
OH 3d At HS Hfd Sz MQM (894-12, en1aaH, ni 5) naam tayray kee man meh tayk. ||2|| Your Name is the support of my mind. ||2]|
Hfe afe Ate@ ufo fea fan Il (894-13, ona, Hs 5) sun sun jeeva-o man ih bisraam. Hearing, hearing Your Name, I live; this is my mind's consolation.
uy USS UST 3g 3MH Il (894-13, onaat, ne 5) paap khandan parabh tayro naam. Your Name, God, is the Destroyer of sins.
J Maes Abt a Use Il (894-13, THM, He 5) too agnat jee-a kaa daataa. You, O Limitless Lord, are the Giver of the soul.
farts Aeets fats 3 AST NSM (894-14, eat, H2 5) jisahi janaaveh tin too jaataa. ||3]| He alone knows You, unto whom You reveal Yourself. ||3]|
A Gun for Sct rr Il (994-14, erat, nH 5) jo upaa-i-o tis tayree aas. Whoever has been created, rests his hopes in You.
Aas Maas YS TESA Il (894-15, Task, vs 5) Sagal araaDheh parabh guntaas. All worship and adore You, God, O treasure of excellence.
Soa VA Sd AAS Il (894-15, THA, v2 5) naanak daas tayrai kurbaan. Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to You.
anis Afog Ha fogs ISNQENBIIN (894-15, Tat, He 5) bay-ant saahib mayraa miharvaan. ||4||26]||37]|| My merciful Lord and Master is infinite. ||4]|26]|37] |
THASt HIS U Il (894-16)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ITUSITS SEs Il (894-16, THaet, He 5) raakhanhaar da-i-aal. The Savior Lord is merciful.
afe se us ferns fim il (894-16, mat, He 5) kot bhav khanday nimakh khi-aal. Millions of incarnations are eradicated in an instant, contemplating the Lord.
Hares warats AS Il (894-17, wast, He 5) Sagal araaDheh jant. All beings worship and adore Him.
frasba ys aa fiefs HS WAN (894-17, ena, He 5) milee-ai parabh gur mil mant. ||1]| Receiving the Guru's Mantra, one meets God. ||1]|
bas & VST HS YZ Il (894-17, orate 5) jee-an ko daataa mayraa parabh. My God is the Giver of souls.
use USHAS HM uf|e ufe Ist HI YT NU! TIS Il (894-17, Tras, ve 5) pooran parmaysur su-aamee ghat ghat raataa mayraa parabh. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Transcendent Lord Master, my God, imbues each and every heart. ||1]|Pause] |
st at Tat Ho GE Il (894-18, saat, He 5) taa kee gahee man ot. My mind has grasped His Support.
dae 3 det se Il (994-18, mast, He 5) banDhan tay ho-ee chhot. My bonds have been shattered.
fase Af USHTSE Il (894-19, oHat, He 5) hirdai jap parmaanand. Within my heart, I meditate on the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss.
Ho Hf SS MST Il (894-19, Tat, Hz 5) man maahi bha-ay anand. ||2]| My mind is filled with ecstasy. ||2| |
BWTE BIE Ts AGES Ill (894-19, Hast, uz 5) taaran taran har saran. The Lord's Sanctuary is the boat to carry us across.
Alea JU Ts BIS Il (894-19, THAT, He 5) jeevan roop har charan. The Lord's Feet are the embodiment of life itself.
Ua ctu
AZo & YTS MU Il (895-1, Test, we 5) santan kay paraan aDhaar. They are the Support of the breath of life of the Saints.
Bs 3 Su wg ISI (895-1, Hast, v2 5)
oochay tay ooch apaar. ||3]|| God is infinite, the highest of the high. ||3]|
A nfs wg fas ofa fide i (895-1, eat, He 5) so mat saar jit har simreejai. That mind is excellent and sublime, which meditates in remembrance on the Lord.
afa fasur fan wm ct Il (s95-2, mat, He 5) kar kirpaa jis aapay deejai. In His Mercy, the Lord Himself bestows it.
HY Ada MiSs Tha a Il (895-2, anaatt, H2 5) sookh sahj aanand har naa-o. Peace, intuitive poise and bliss are found in the Lord's Name.
Sa Alum aa ffs SS iSiIUScil (895-2, wast, vs 5) naanak japi-aa gur mil naa-o. ||4]|27]|38] | Meeting with the Guru, Nanak chants the Name. ||4]|27||38]|
THA HIB U Il (895-3)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Hae famireu ets il (995-3, Haat, He 5) Sagal si-aanap chhaad. Abandon all your clever tricks.
ats AS ALA ATH Il (895-3, Hast, He 5) kar sayvaa sayvak saaj. Become His servant, and serve Him.
must nity Aare fHet= il (895-3, anraat, He 5) apnaa aap sagal mitaa-ay. Totally erase your self-conceit.
Ho feet AEt Se UTE NAN (895-4, anaMt, He 5) man chinday say-ee fal paa-ay. ||1]| You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1]|
dg AUS nus ad fAE Il (895-4, ara, He 5) hohu saavDhaan apunay gur si-o. Be awake and aware with your Guru.
WAT HOM! UdS Je Uefa Aare fours as fA ud TIS il (995-4, ora, Hs 5)
aasaa mansaa pooran hovai paavahi sagal niDhaan gur si-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your hopes and desires shall be fulfilled, and you shall obtain all treasures from the Guru. ||1||Pause| |
SA Sat AS AE Il (995-5, Treat, Hs 5) doojaa nahee jaanai ko-ay. Let no one think that God and Guru are separate.
Asad fadae Afe Il (895-5, aaa, He 5) satgur niranjan so-ay. The True Guru is the Immaculate Lord.
HOY OT aft TUS ATS Il (895-6, THAst, He 5) maanukh kaa kar roop na jaan. Do not believe that He is a mere human being;
frat fEHTS HA MQM (895-6, Tat, v8 5) milee nimaanay maan. ||2|| He gives honor to the dishonored. ||2]|
ad at ofa 2a feats il (395-6, mast, He 5) gur kee har tayk tikaa-ay. Hold tight to the Support of the Guru, the Lord.
MZI MAT AS Bt Il (895-6, THaet, He 5) avar aasaa sabh laahi. Give up all other hopes.
Ts & SH Ha fours il (895-7, THast, He 5) har kaa naam maag niDhaan. Ask for the treasure of the Name of the Lord,
3 PIT UStT HS III (895-7, saat, He 5) taa dargeh paavahi maan. ||3]|| and then you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
ad a sag Afy HS Il (895-7, mat, He 5) gur kaa bachan jap mant. Chant the Mantra of the Guru's Word.
fT gals AS 3s Il (895-8, aHaat, He 5) ayhaa bhagat saar tat. This is the essence of true devotional worship.
Afsad se efenrs Il (995-8, Hast, v8 5) satgur bha-ay da-i-aal. When the True Guru becomes merciful,
SSA BWA fogs IIQCIStll (895-8, Tat, He 5)
naanak daas nihaal. ||4]|28]|39] | slave Nanak is enraptured. ||4||28]|39]|
THASt HIS U Il (895-9) raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
sa 4
de Het 3 HS Il (895-9, snaat, He 5) hovai so-ee bhal maan. Whatever happens, accept that as good.
mus! St mfsHre Il (895-9, Hast, He 5) aapnaa taj abhimaan. Leave your egotistical pride behind.
feo dfs Het as a Il (895-9, mat, He 5) din rain sadaa gun gaa-o. Day and night, continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Use Sat AorS All (895-10, sHaat, 42 5) pooran ayhee su-aa-o. ||1|| This is the perfect purpose of human life. ||1]|
me afd AS ofa Afy Il (895-10, east, He 5) aanand kar sant har jap. Meditate on the Lord, O Saints, and be in bliss.
ats fimrou ag vaaet ag ot fu HS feaHe 1d TIS Il (895-10, meat, He 5) chhaad si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee gur kaa jap mant nirmal. ||1]| rahaa-o. Renounce your cleverness and all your tricks. Chant the Immaculate Chant of the Guru's Mantra. ||1||Pause]|
Pa at ats MTA SiShe Il (895-11, Tat, He 5) ayk kee kar aas bheetar. Place the hopes of your mind in the One Lord.
fogHe afu on ofa ate Il (g95-11, east, He 5) nirmal jap naam har har. Chant the Immaculate Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ts X BIS SHAT Il (895-11, Tat, vz 5) gur kay charan namaskaar. Bow down to the Guru's Feet,
sense Ssats wuts iQ (995-12, east, v2 5) bhavjal utreh paar. ||2| | and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2| |
PZT VST Il (895-12, an1ast, Hs 5)
dayvanhaar daataar. The Lord God is the Great Giver.
MZ O UTITETT Il (895-12, Hat, H2 5) ant Na PaardaaVvaedr. He has no end or limitation.
aw a ufg Aaa fours Il (895-12, aHat, He 5) jaa kai ghar sarab niDhaan. All treasures are in His home.
TUSITS fSeTS NI (895-13, aHaet, He 5) raakhanhaar nidaan. ||3]| He will be your Saving Grace in the end. ||3]|
aoa ue Sg fSars il (895-13, aHast, He 5) naanak paa-i-aa ayhu niDhaan. Nanak has obtained this treasure,
Id Tha fSTHS SH Il (895-13, THA, Hs 5) haray har nirmal naam. the immaculate Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
a wu f3A ot afs de Il (895-13, mmrast, He 5) jo japai tis kee gat ho-ay. Whoever chants it, is emancipated.
SOd ATH ustufs TE NSiIeisoll (395-14, wast, us 5)
naanak karam paraapat ho-ay. ||4||29]||40]| It is obtained only by His Grace. ||4||29||40||
THA HIS U Il (895-14)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Pos Ud AS Il (895-14, aHaat, ue 5) dulabh dayh savaar. Make this invaluable human life fruitful.
At & Pda Te Il (995-15, aHast, Hz 5) jaahi na dargeh haar. You shall not be destroyed when you go to the Lord's Court.
Jofs uafs 30 df= efsnret I (995-15, mast, He 5) halat palat tuDh ho-ay vadi-aa-ee. In this world and the next, you shall obtain honor and glory.
MS at For BE Ssvet IAI (895-15, Tawt, ue 5) ant kee baylaa la-ay chhadaa-ee. ||1]| At the very last moment, He will save you. ||1||
TH A TS WE Il (895-16, oa, us 5) raam kay gun gaa-o. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Jes uss dfs te AIS nrsan usy foMre nai Toe Il (995-16, mat, v2 5)
halat palat hohi dovai suhaylay achraj purakh Dhi-aa-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
In both this world and the next, you shall be embellished with beauty, meditating on the wondrous Primal Lord God. ||1||Pause]|
Gos Fos als WY Il (895-16, Tat, Hs 5) oothat baithat har jaap. While standing up and sitting down, meditate on the Lord,
faoR Aas ASY Il (895-17, THasH, He 5) binsai sagal santaap. and all your troubles shall depart.
act Afs defo HIS Wl (895-17, enrast, 2 5) bairee sabh hoveh meet. All your enemies will become friends.
feqHe Sa de] BMS MMi (995-17, ast, He 5) nirmal tayraa hovai cheet. ||2|| Your consciousness shall be immaculate and pure. ||2]|
AS 3 OSH feg ATH Il (895-17, ara, HE 5) sabh tay ootam ih karam. This is the most exalted deed.
Aal® IH Hf AAS TSH Il (895-18, Tat, He 5) sagal Dharam meh saraysat Dharam. Of all faiths, this is the most sublime and excellent faith.
dfs finafe Sa of= Garg Il (995-18, mat, He 5) har simran tayraa ho-ay uDhaar. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall be saved.
HOH HOH at Sss STs SII (895-18, aHat, He 5) janam janam kaa utrai bhaar. ||3]| You shall be rid of the burden of countless incarnations. ||3]|
UIs Sat TS MTA Il (895-19, Tat, we 5) pooran tayree hovai aas. Your hopes shall be fulfilled,
AH at achat Sat SA Il (895-19, anaat, He 5) jam kee katee-ai tayree faas. and the noose of the Messenger of Death will be cut away.
ae a Buen wate Il (995-19, en1aet, He 5) gur kaa updays suneejai. So listen to the Guru's Teachings.
Soa Af Adfa AMA ISISONUI! (895-19, THAT, He 5)
naanak sukh sahj sameejai. ||4]|30]|41] | O Nanak, you shall be absorbed in celestial peace. ||4||30||41] |
Yat cre
THASt HIS U Il (896-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fA at fSA at afe HE Il (896-1, sree, He 5) jis kee tis kee kar maan. Honor the One, to whom everything belongs.
MUS BI AHS Il (896-1, THaet, He 5) aapan laahi gumaan. Leave your egotistical pride behind.
fan ot 3 fA oT Ag ate Il (896-2, mat, Hs 5)
jis kaa too tis kaa sabh ko-ay. You belong to Him; everyone belongs to Him.
fsnfs mrofa wet AE SE NAM (896-2, ara, He 5) tiseh araaDh sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1]| Worship and adore Him, and you shall be at peace forever. ||1]|
ard af guia faard Il (896-2, arast, Hs 5) kaahay bharam bharmeh bigaanay. Why do you wander in doubt, you fool?
on fas fas ath o ore HoT Aa afs aTy UETS IU! TIS Il (896-3, Tat, He 5) naam binaa kichh kaam na aavai mayraa mayraa kar bahut pachhutaanay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, nothing is of any use at all. Crying out, ‘Mine, mine’, a great many have departed, regretfully repenting. ||1]|Pause] |
A A ad Het wie Se Il (996-3, aaa, He 5) jo jo karai so-ee maan layho. Whatever the Lord has done, accept that as good.
fag HS afs defa UT Il (396-4, east, He 5) bin maanay ral hoveh khayh. Without accepting, you shall mingle with dust.
fSA ot grat Bra HST Il (896-4, east, H2 5) tis kaa bhaanaa laagai meethaa. His Will seems sweet to me.
as yAte fess His FST MII (896-4, east, v2 5) gur parsaad virlay man voothaa. ||2| | By Guru's Grace, He comes to dwell in the mind. ||2||
TudSTT Midtag wry il (996-5, anraat, He 5) vayparvaahu agochar aap. He Himself is carefree and independent, imperceptible.
MTS UdT HO 3 ASG ATU Il (896-5, THES, He 5) aath pahar man taa ka-o jaap. Twenty-four hours a day, O mind, meditate on Him.
fra fats wire forts eur il (896-5, aHaat, He 5) jis chit aa-ay binsahi dukhaa. When He comes into the consciousness, pain is dispelled.
Jos uBls SI CAG HAT ISI (896-5, Hat, He 5) halat palat tayraa oojal mukhaa. ||3]| Here and hereafter, your face shall be radiant and bright. ||3]|
aso ao Bud qa aAMe Il (996-6, anaat, He 5) ka-un ka-un uDhray gun gaa-ay. Who, and how many have been saved, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord?
THE © AEST AH B UTE Il (896-6, east, He 5) ganan na jaa-ee keem na paa-ay. They cannot be counted or evaluated.
FSS BI AUHfa 3d Il (896-6, THast, Hz 5) boodat loh saaDhsang tarai. Even the sinking iron is saved, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
aed fanfs usufs ad iSiSUiS2Il (896-7, anrast, 42 5)
naanak jisahi paraapat karai. ||4]|31]|42|| O Nanak, as His Grace is received. ||4||31]|42] |
THA HIB U Il (896-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Hfs af sas Il (896-7, THat, Hz 5) man maahi jaap bhagvant. In your mind, meditate on the Lord God.
afs us feg HS HE il (s96-8, mat, Hs 5) gur poorai ih deeno mant. This is the Teaching given by the Perfect Guru.
fle Hares J IA Il (896-8, THA, He 5) mitay sagal bhai taraas. All fears and terrors are taken away,
YIS Tet MA IAL (896-8, THA, Hs 5) pooran ho-ee aas. ||1]|| and your hopes shall be fulfilled. ||1]|
HES AST AIST Il (896-8, THe, He 5) safal sayvaa gurdayvaa. Service to the Divine Guru is fruitful and rewarding.
ants fs AE 3 Wel APS AG nis MISS IA FI Il (896-9, saat, He 5) keemat kichh kahan na jaa-ee saachay sach alakh abhayvaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. His value cannot be described; the True Lord is unseen and mysterious. ||1||Pause| |
AIS ATSS nM Il (896-9, sHast, He 5) karan karaavan aap. He Himself is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
fan a@ Ae Ho Wy II fSA at AS afte ats Il (896-10, oat, v2 5)
tis ka-o sadaa man jaap. tis kee sayvaa kar neet. Meditate on Him forever, O my mind, and continually serve Him.
Ad Ada AY uefa HTS MQM (896-10, enast, v8 5) sach sahj sukh paavahi meet. ||2|| You shall be blessed with truth, intuition and peace, O my friend. ||2| |
Atog Ha nfs Sra Il (396-10, Hast, He 5) saahib mayraa at bhaaraa. My Lord and Master is so very great.
fas ufo atu Sarusara Il (896-11, east, He 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.
fan faa neg o et Il (896-11, aaa, He 5) tis bin avar na ko-ee. There is no other than Him.
AS aT sa ASt ISI (g96-11, saat, He 5) jan kaa raakhaa so-ee. ||3]| He is the Saving Grace of His humble servant. ||3]|
afe fasur meth wath Il (996-11, aH, He 5) kar kirpaa ardaas suneejai. Please take pity on me, and hear my prayer,
wus Aza AG ZIAG UH Il (896-12, mast, He 5) apnay sayvak ka-o darsan deejai. that Your servant may behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Sea AUT AY AY Il (896-12, THT, He 5) naanak jaapee jap jaap. Nanak chants the Chant of the Lord,
AS 3 Bu AW a UTSTY MSNS2USSI (896-12, THAT, He 5) sabh tay ooch jaa kaa partaap. ||4]|32]|43]| whose glory and radiance are the highest of all. ||4]|32]|43]|
THAGt HIS U Il (896-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fagear SISTA BA Il (896-13, Tae, v3 5) birthaa bharvaasaa lok. Reliance on mortal man is useless.
SAT ys Sdt Sa Il (896-13, Trae, w2 5) thaakur parabh tayree tayk. O God, my Lord and Master, You are my only Support.
MET Sct AS MTA Il (896-13, THAT, He 5) avar chhootee sabh aas. I have discarded all other hopes.
Miss SAT FS TESA MAU (896-14, Hast, He 5) achint thaakur bhaytay guntaas. ||1]|| I have met with my carefree Lord and Master, the treasure of virtue. ||1]|
Sa oH ftmrf— Ha He Il (896-14, THA, He 5) ayko naam Dhi-aa-ay man mayray. Meditate on the Name of the Lord alone, O my mind.
aay so de us oie af ae Te aE Ho AS NU TTS Il (896-14, grass, v3 5)
kaaraj tayraa hovai pooraa har har har gun gaa-ay man mayray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Your affairs shall be perfectly resolved; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, O my mind. ||1]]Pause| |
SH dt ATS ATS Ill (896-15, Tas, vs 5) tum hee kaaran karan. You are the Doer, the Cause of causes.
BIS AHS fs AS Il (896-15, wHast, Hz 5) charan kamal har saran. Your lotus feet, Lord, are my Sanctuary.
ufe af afs Sdt fomrfeur it (996-16, anrast, 43 5) man tan har ohee Dhi-aa-i-aa. I meditate on the Lord in my mind and body.
mee Tia gu feufenr III (996-16, Tat, 48 5) aanand har roop dikhaa-i-aa. ||2|| The blissful Lord has revealed His form to me. ||2||
fan dt at Be Ate I (896-16, nae, He 5) tis hee kee ot sadeev. I seek His eternal support;
Wa ats J ATS Il (896-17, THe, He 5) jaa kay keenay hai jeev. He is the Creator of all beings.
fines af ass fours Il (896-17, sat, He 5) simrat har karat niDhaan. Remembering the Lord in meditation, the treasure is obtained.
TUSITS fSSTS NBII (896-17, aH, He 5) raakhanhaar nidaan. ||3]| At the very last instant, He shall be your Savior. ||3]|
Hea at JE TAHA Il (896-17, Tast, v3 5) sarab kee rayn hoveejai. Be the dust of all men's feet.
ning firetfe fiesta Il (896-18, eet, He 5) aap mitaa-ay mileejai. Eradicate self-conceit, and merge in the Lord.
motes famretat ant Il (896-18, mast, He 5) an-din Dhi-aa-ee-ai naam. Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hee Sod fed aH IiSsigell (996-18, mat, H2 5)
safal naanak ih kaam. ||4||33]|44]| O Nanak, this is the most rewarding activity. ||4||33||44||
THAGt HIB U Il (896-19)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
AIS AIS ATH Il (896-19, east, He 5) kaaran karan kareem. He is the Doer, the Cause of causes, the bountiful Lord.
Hea yfsures TH Il (896-19, mraait, we 5) sarab partipaal raheem. The merciful Lord cherishes all.
MST MSY MUTT Il (896-19, THAT, He 5) alah alakh apaar. The Lord is unseen and infinite.
ufe wee ST FANT IAI (896-19, Tat, He 5) khud khudaa-ay vad baysumaar. ||1]|| God is great and endless. ||1]|
vat cto
& oH SASS TAT Il (897-1, THT, He 5) o” namo bhagvant gusaa-ee. I humbly pray to invoke the Universal Lord God, the Lord of the World.
wea ate stent Aga Set AU! TIS Il (897-1, THaet, He 5) khaalak rav rahi-aa sarab thaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Creator Lord is all-pervading, everywhere. ||1]||Pause| |
Ado'S HaHAtes HT Il (897-2, THat, He 5) jagannaath jagjeevan maaDho. He is the Lord of the Universe, the Life of the World.
38 sHo foe ufo nist Il (897-2, mat, He 5) bha-o bhanjan rid maahi araaDho. Within your heart, worship and adore the Destroyer of fear.
fadtan dius dfs il (997-2, east, He 5) rikheekays gopaal govind. The Master Rishi of the senses, Lord of the World, Lord of the Universe.
YIS AGAT HAT Il (897-2, Tnrawt, we 5) pooran sarbatar mukand. ||2|| He is perfect, ever-present everywhere, the Liberator. ||2||
fradets HBe Zot Sa Il (897-3, sHat, v2 5) miharvaan ma-ulaa toohee ayk. You are the One and only merciful Master,
utd Uatag AY I (897-3, THAT, He 5) peer paikaa™bar saykh. spiritual teacher, prophet, religious teacher.
fear a HBA AT J Il (897-3, gHaat, ue 5) dilaa kaa maalak karay haak. Master of hearts, Dispenser of justice,
AIS ASH FS US ISI (897-3, THast, He 5) kuraan katayb tay paak. ||3]| more sacred than the Koran and the Bible. ||3]|
STINLS BITS SEMIS Il (897-4, saat, v3 5) naaraa-in narhar da-i-aal. The Lord is powerful and merciful.
THS SH We We nTUTT Il (897-4, THAT, Hs 5) ramat raam ghat ghat aaDhaar. The all-pervading Lord is the support of each and every heart.
WHET FAS AS OTE Il (897-4, sHaat, ue 5) baasudayv basat sabh thaa-ay. The luminous Lord dwells everywhere.
Ble fas wat & ATE gil (897-5, mast, He 5) leelaa kichh lakhee na jaa-ay. ||4|| His play cannot be known. ||4]|
fag vfemr afa agaTs Il (897-5, THAT, He 5) mihar da-i-aa kar karnaihaar. Be kind and compassionate to me, O Creator Lord.
sats deat Ufo franeds Il (897-5, wHaGHt, He 5) bhagat bandagee deh sirjanhaar. Bless me with devotion and meditation, O Lord Creator.
AT asa Afs 4S SIH Il (897-6, THA, He 5) kaho naanak gur kho-ay bharam. Says Nanak, the Guru has rid me of doubt.
Sa MGT USAIN NUNSSUBUI (897-6, THM, He 5)
ayko alhu paarbarahm. ||5||34||45]|
The Muslim God Allah and the Hindu God Paarbrahm are one and the same. [151134] 145] |
THA HIB U Il (897-6)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
afe ASH & faSA uy Il (897-7, aHaat, 42 5) kot janam kay binsay paap. The sins of millions of incarnations are eradicated.
dfs dfs Aus Bt ASU Il (897-7, THe, He 5) har har japat naahee santaap. Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, pain will not afflict you.
Td X BIS AH Hs SA Ill (897-7, THast, ue 5) gur kay charan kamal man vasay. When the Lord's lotus feet are enshrined in the mind,
Ha" faars 36 3 Als SA AI (897-7, THAT, He 5) mahaa bikaar tan tay sabh nasay. ||1|| all terrible evils are taken away from the body. ||1]|
dues & AA aE yrat il (997-8, mat, Hs 5) gopaal ko jas gaa-o paraanee. Sing the Praise of the Lord of the World, O mortal being.
MEE TE Ast YS uss ASt APs AHTSt AU TIE Il (897-8, Tra, we 5)
akath kathaa saachee parabh pooran jotee jot samaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Unspoken Speech of the True Lord God is perfect. Dwelling upon it, one's light merges into the Light. ||1||Pause]|
JAS Su AS Sat Il (897-9, Tat, He 5) tarisnaa bhookh sabh naasee. Hunger and thirst are totally quenched;
Aa yAfe Afr mifsart i (397-9, arast, Hs 5) sant parsaad japi-aa abhinaasee. by the Grace of the Saints, meditate on the immortal Lord.
dfs fear us AS Anat Il (997-9, Hast, He 5) rain dinas parabh sayv kamaanee. Night and day, serve God.
ofa fee at Fa Strat III (897-10, east, He 5) har milnai kee ayh neesaanee. ||2|| This is the sign that one has met with the Lord. ||2]|
fle Hares JS ys efenrs II (897-10, rat, Hs 5) mitay janjaal ho-ay parabh da-i-aal. Worldly entanglements are ended, when God becomes merciful.
Td a SIA efy fags Il (897-10, wat, He 5) gur kaa darsan daykh nihaal. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I am enraptured.
Us Ysaer aS ats wrfeur i (997-11, erat, H 5) paraa poorbalaa karam ban aa-i-aa. My perfect pre-destined karma has been activated.
dfs & Te fos TAS afEnr Il (897-11, Tat, v2 5) har kay gun nit rasnaa gaa-i-aa. ||3|| With my tongue, I continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
dfs & AS AST UPSTES Il (897-11, THat, nz 5) har kay sant sadaa parvaan. The Saints of the Lord are accepted and approved forever.
HZ HOt HASta SATS Il (897-12, THat, Hz 5) sant janaa mastak neesaan. The foreheads of the Saintly people are marked with the Lord's insignia.
aA at de ue F AE Il (897-12, oH, nH 5) daas kee rayn paa-ay jay ko-ay. One who is blessed with the dust of the feet of the Lord's slave,
sod fsA at usH afs dE IgiBUgEll (897-12, erat, He 5) naanak tis kee param gat ho-ay. ||4]|35||46] | O Nanak, obtains the supreme status. ||4]|35]|46| |
THASt HIB U Il (897-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ZInS AG Weba aTATS Il (897-13, snat, He 5) darsan ka-o jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. Let yourself be a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
3do AHS fase ufa fame i (897-13, mast, He 5) charan kamal hirdai Dhar Dhi-aan. Focus your heart's meditation on the Lord's lotus feet.
ufs Hae ot HASfe STE I (997-14, THAT, H: 5) Dhoor santan kee mastak laa-ay. Apply the dust of the feet of the Saints to your forehead,
HOH HOH At IHS HS ATE IA (897-14, aH, He 5) janam janam kee durmat mal jaa-ay. ||1]| and the filthy evil-mindedness of countless incarnations will be washed off. ||1]|
fan ses fie nifsnte Il (897-14, aHaat, He 5) jis bhaytat mitai abhimaan. Meeting Him, egotistical pride is eradicated,
UIYIH AG seat vrs ate fas yas SASS NU TI I (897-15, Treat, we 5) paarbarahm sabh nadree aavai kar kirpaa pooran bhagvaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
and you will come to see the Supreme Lord God in all. The Perfect Lord God has showered His Mercy. ||1]|Pause| |
aed at atefs wba af a il (997-15, east, He 5)
gur kee keerat japee-ai har naa-o. This is the Guru's Praise, to chant the Name of the Lord.
ad at sats Ae Te AS Il (897-16, Hast, H2 5) gur kee bhagat sadaa gun gaa-o. This is devotion to the Guru, to sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ad at Hats foate ats WS Il (897-16, aa, He 5) gur kee surat nikat kar jaan. This is contemplation upon the Guru, to know that the Lord is close at hand.
ad & Age AS Als HS MM (897-17, Tash, v3 5)
gur kaa sabad sat kar maan. ||2] | Accept the Word of the Guru's Shabad as Truth. ||2||
Gd Fat AMAT AY TA Il (897-17, THast, He 5)
gur bachnee samsar sukh dookh.
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, look upon pleasure and pain as one and the same.
ae & fammy fra se Il (897-17, THA, Hs 5) kaday na bi-aapai tarisnaa bhookh. Hunger and thirst shall never afflict you.
Hf Hsu Aafe ae IH Il (897-17, THAT, He 5) man santokh sabad gur raajay. The mind becomes content and satisfied through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
afu affe use Afs aH III (897-18, THA, He 5) jap gobind parh-day sabh kaajay. ||3]| Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and He will cover all your faults. ||3]|
TT USHA TT fee Il (897-18, erat, He 5) gur parmaysar gur govind. The Guru is the Supreme Lord God; the Guru is the Lord of the Universe.
ag ost efenms gafhe Il (s97-18, meet, He 5) gur daataa da-i-aal bakhsind. The Guru is the Great Giver, merciful and forgiving.
TT BISt A AT HS Bel Il (897-19, Tas, vs 5) gur charnee jaa kaa man laagaa. One whose mind is attached to the Guru's feet,
BSR WA (SA YIS TM USIBENSII (897-19, THEM, He 5)
naanak daas tis pooran bhaagaa. ||4||36]||47]|| O slave Nanak, is blessed with perfect destiny. ||4]|36||47]|
Ua cette
THASt HIS U Il (898-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fan saan fasafs seo Il (898-1, sat, He 5) kis bharvaasai bichrahi bhavan. What supports you in this world?
He YHaT SI Halt AEo Il (898-1, THAT, He 5) moorh mugaDh tayraa sangee kavan. You ignorant fool, who is your companion?
oH Hat fsa afs odt wats Il (398-1, saat, v2 5) raam sangee tis gat nahee jaaneh. The Lord is your only companion; no one knows His condition.
ug aed A Hts afe Hrafs All (898-2, arraet, He 5) panch batvaaray say meet kar maaneh. ||1|| You look upon the five thieves as your friends. ||1]|
A we Afe fas Guefs Hts Il (s98-2, ena, He 5) so ghar sayv jit uDhrahi meet. Serve that home, which will save you, my friend.
Ge afee sts feg ast wana afs He at ulfs ai Jae il (s98-2, ona, 8 5) gun govind ravee-ah din raatee saaDhsang kar man kee pareet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, day and night; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, love Him in your mind. ||1||Pause] |
HOH faos uidarfa nrg She I (898-3, anraat, He 5) janam bihaano aha‘kaar ar vaad. This human life is passing away in egotism and conflict.
fgufs o mire faftmr arfe i (s98-4, mast, He 5) taripat na aavai bikhi-aa saad. You are not satisfied; such is the flavor of sin.
SIHS SIHS HI Cy utfent II (898-4, THAT, He 5) bharmat bharmat mahaa dukh paa-i-aa. Wandering and roaming around, you suffer terrible pain.
Sot 8 Wet wag HEMT NIM (898-4, eat, He 5) taree na jaa-ee dutar maa-i-aa. ||2|| You cannot cross over the impassable sea of Maya. ||2| |
ath & nile A ATs AH] Il (898-5, Hat, He 5) kaam na aavai so kaar kamaavai. You do the deeds which do not help you at all.
nity sift mmr dt ure i (g98-5, anaat, He 5) aap beej aapay hee khaavai. As you plant, so shall you harvest.
TUS AG TAS Sat ale il (898-5, saat, 3 5) raakhan ka-o doosar nahee ko-ay. There is none other than the Lord to save you.
38 fonsd AG forsur df ISI (s98-6, mat, He 5) ta-o nistarai ja-o kirpaa ho-ay. ||3]| You will be saved, only if God grants His Grace. ||3]|
ufsz uals ys 3d BH Il (98-6, at, He 5) patit puneet parabh tayro naam. Your Name, God, is the Purifier of sinners.
MUS BA A alH BS Il (898-6, THA, He 5) apnay daas ka-o keejai daan. Please bless Your slave with that gift.
afd fasur ys afs afte Hat I (898-7, anraat, 3 5) kar kirpaa parabh gat kar mayree. Please grant Your Grace, God, and emancipate me.
Rafe adt SSX US Sat USISOISCH (s98-7, Test, He 5)
saran gahee naanak parabh tayree. ||4||37||48]| Nanak has grasped Your Sanctuary, God. ||4||37||48]|
THA HIB U Il (898-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fea Ba AY ufer II (s98-8, aH, He 5) ih lokay sukh paa-i-aa. I have found peace in this world.
dt SSS TSH Tent Il (898-8, aHaat, He 5) nahee bhaytat Dharam raa-i-aa. I will not have to appear before the Righteous Judge of Dharma to give my account.
dfs edad ASST Il (898-8, east, He 5) har dargeh sobhaavant. I will be respected in the Court of the Lord,
efe aafs adt SAS IAI (898-8, aHat, He 5) fun garabh naahee basant. ||1]| and I will not have to enter the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||1||
Wat AS at fret i (s98-9, araatt, He 5) jaanee sant kee mitraa-ee. Now, I know the value of friendship with the Saints.
ate fasur aa afs ont yate Heifer feet na TIS il (g98-9, ance, we 5)
kar kirpaa deeno har naamaa poorab sanjog milaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In His Mercy, the Lord has blessed me with His Name. My pre-ordained destiny has been fulfilled. ||1]|Pause] |
Gd a vate fas Bar il (898-10, aa, 2 5) gur kai charan chit laagaa. My consciousness is attached to the Guru's feet.
Ufs ufe Aral AST Il (98-10, east, He 5) Dhan Dhan sanjog sabhaagaa. Blessed, blessed is this fortunate time of union.
AS ot Ufs wait HS HA Il (898-10, Hat, He 5) sant kee Dhoor laagee mayrai maathay. I have applied the dust of the Saints' feet to my forehead,
~
fxofed Se Aas AT BS lil (898-10, sat, Hz 5) kilvikh dukh saglay mayray laathay. ||2|| and all my sins and pains have been eradicated. ||2||
AT at A SIG AHA Il (898-11, Tat, He 5) saaDh kee sach tahal kamaanee. Performing true service to the Holy,
3a Je HS AT ust Il (898-11, east, He 5) tab ho-ay man suDh paraanee. the mortal's mind is purified.
HO OT HSS SIA StS" Il (898-11, saat, He 5) jan kaa safal daras deethaa. I have seen the fruitful vision of the Lord's humble slave.
oH ys ar ufe ufe Zar Sil (898-12, THA, He 5) naam parabhoo kaa ghat ghat voothaa. ||3]|| God's Name dwells within each and every heart. ||3]|
fers Afs als ABA Il (898-12, Tat, He 5) mitaanay sabh kal kalays. All my troubles and sufferings have been taken away;
fan 3 Gur fSA ufos USPSA II (898-12, THaT, He 5) jis tay upjay tis meh parvays. I have merged into the One, from whom I originated.
yae nitgu afee il (898-13, Treat, He 5) pargatay aanoop govind. The Lord of the Universe, incomparably beautiful, has become merciful.
Ys UT SSA MUHHS ISIBCIEN (g98-13, THM, Hs 5) parabh pooray naanak bakhsind. ||4||38]||49]| O Nanak, God is perfect and forgiving. ||4||38]|49] |
THASt HIS U Il (898-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
I AC WI AGES Il (898-13, eHast, v2 5) ga-oo ka-o chaaray saardool. The tiger leads the cow to the pasture,
ASSt AT BY IMT HB Il (898-14, THA, 2 5) ka-udee kaa lakh hoo-aa mool. the shell is worth thousands of dollars,
wast AF TASt yfsurs Il (s98-14, Trast, ue 5) bakree ka-o hastee partipaalay. and the elephant nurses the goat,
must yg sete fsa IAI (898-14, Trt, Hs 5) apnaa parabh nadar nihaalay. ||1]| when God bestows His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
faut fours ufsH ys HE Il (898-15, meet, Hs 5) kirpaa niDhaan pareetam parabh mayray. You are the treasure of mercy, O my Beloved Lord God.
wate 3 AAS FI To Sg NU TIS Il (998-15, aaa, ns 5) baran na saaka-o baho gun tayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I cannot even describe Your many Glorious Virtues. ||1]|Pause| |
ans HA oO ute faaret II (898-15, Haat, He 5) deesat maas na khaa-ay bilaa-ee. The cat sees the meat, but does not eat it,
Ho ante sat Afe uret Il (g98-16, saat, He 5) mahaa kasaab chhuree sat paa-ee. and the great butcher throws away his knife;
TISTS YZ fT FS" Il (898-16, rast, us 5) karanhaar parabh hirdai voothaa. the Creator Lord God abides in the heart;
Sat HSS! A AS FST MM (898-16, THast, we 5) faathee machhulee kaa jaalaa tootaa. ||2|| the net holding the fish breaks apart. ||2]|
Hot WHS Td VHS Il (898-17, THAT, H 5) sookay kaasat haray chalool. The dry wood blossoms forth in greenery and red flowers;
Ce ais SB AHS nigu Il (998-17, Tras, vs 5) oochai thal foolay kamal anoop. in the high desert, the beautiful lotus flower blooms.
male foest Afsad SS il (898-17, Hat, v2 5) agan nivaaree satgur dayv. The Divine True Guru puts out the fire.
Aza nust SES AS ISll (898-18, Tat, v2 5) sayvak apnee laa-i-o sayv. ||3]|| He links His servant to His service. ||3]|
mixdsuet at AT Burg Il (g98-18, Hast, He 5) akirat-ghanaa kaa karay uDhaar. He saves even the ungrateful;
us Aa dF Het efenrg | (398-18, at, Hs 5) parabh mayraa hai sadaa da-i-aar. my God is forever merciful.
HS Hol aT Het Have Il (g98-19, oat, He 5) sant janaa kaa sadaa sahaa-ee. He is forever the helper and support of the humble Saints.
TIO THS SSA ATS ISUSENUOMl (g98-19, Tat, He 5)
charan kamal naanak sarnaa-ee. ||4]|39]|50] | Nanak has found the Sanctuary of His lotus feet. ||4]|39]|50]|
THASt HIB U Il (898-19)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
dar cre
us fru at ufs ntfs il (99-1, saat, we 5) panch singh raakhay parabh maar. God killed the five tigers.
oA fafumrst wet feetfa il (899-1, aHaet, He 5) das bigi-aarhee la-ee nivaar. He has driven out the ten wolves.
Sie uress at got uls i (899-1, arrat, H2 5) teen aavrat kee chookee ghayr. The three whirl-pools have stopped spinning.
WUAfa FX F ST UI (899-1, Treat, ws 5) saaDhsang chookay bhai fayr. ||1]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the fear of reincarnation is gone. ||1]|
fants fifa tet aifse i (s99-2, mia, v2 5) simar simar jeevaa govind. Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe, I live.
ate fasur wfaS en mua Het Het Are gufAS NU FIC Il (g99-2, srast, He 5) kar kirpaa raakhi-o daas apnaa sadaa sadaa saachaa bakhsind. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In His Mercy, He protects His slave; the True Lord is forever and ever the forgiver. ||1]|Pause| |
ans ae fge uy ANT Il (899-3, Hatt, He 5) daajh ga-ay tarin paap sumayr. The mountain of sin is burnt down, like straw,
mfy afu oH UA Ys Us Il (899-3, mat, Hs 5) jap jap naam poojay parabh pair. by chanting and meditating on the Name, and worshipping God's feet.
moe gu yates AS ate Il (899-3, mast, H2 5) anad roop pargati-o sabh thaan. God, the embodiment of bliss, becomes manifest everywhere.
UH safe rat Aa HS MI (899-4, mat, He 5) paraym bhagat joree sukh maan. ||2|| Linked to His loving devotional worship, I enjoy peace. ||2| |
Aad sfeS sed YA Il (899-4, saat, He 5)
Saagar tari-o baachhar khoj.
I have crossed over the world-ocean, as if it were no bigger than a calf's footprint on the ground.
we o uteG og efe SH Il (899-4, aHaat, He 5) khayd na paa-i-o nah fun roj. I shall never again have to endure suffering or grief.
fia Aes wea wrfs Il (g99-5, mast, He 5) sinDh samaa-i-o ghatukay maahi. The ocean is contained in the pitcher.
adeds a fas nivsA ats Sil (999-5, mat, Hs 5) karanhaar ka-o kichh achraj naahi. ||3]| This is not such an amazing thing for the Creator to do. ||3]|
Ag sc@ 38 Ate ufeurs I (999-5, mast, 2 5) ja-o chhoota-o ta-o jaa-ay pa-i-aal. When I am separated from Him, then I am consigned to the nether regions.
Ag ates 3 sets fess Il (399-6, anraat, He 5) ja-o kaadhi-o ta-o nadar nihaal. When He lifts me up and pulls me out, then I am enraptured by His Glance of Grace.
ury ua dnd Sf af Il (899-6, mat, He 5) paap punn hamrai vas naahi. Vice and virtue are not under my control.
TAA IAA SOR WE Ah iSiSOuUail (399-6, wat, He 5)
rasak rasak naanak gun gaahi. ||4||40]|51]| With love and affection, Nanak sings His Glorious Praises. ||4]|40||51] |
THA HIB U Il (899-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
ot 39 SI OT He Sha Il (399-7, aH, He 5) naa tan tayraa naa man tohi. Neither your body nor your mind belong to you.
Hfeor Hfo faorfimr dfs i (g99-7, erat, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi bi-aapi-aa Dhohi. Attached to Maya, you are entangled in fraud.
Fen ad Wad fAS fH I (899-8, erat, He 5) kudam karai gaadar ji-o chhayl. You play like a baby lamb.
mpgs TS AS BX US AU (999-8, THs, we 5) achint jaal kaal chakaro payl. ||1]| But suddenly, Death will catch you in its noose. ||1]|
Us BIS AHS APSE Har Il (899-8, east, vs 5) har charan kamal sarnaa-ay manaa. Seek the Sanctuary of the Lord's lotus feet, O my mind.
oH oH Afu Af Aoet dente uefa ATT Tar A TI Il (g99-9, ena, v2 5)
raam naam jap sang sahaa-ee gurmukh paavahi saach Dhanaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Chant the Name of the Lord, which will be your help and support. As Gurmukh, you shall obtain the true wealth. ||1||Pause]|
CS HH & TEST UT Il (899-9, saat, Hs 5) oonay kaaj na hovat pooray. Your unfinished worldly affairs will never be resolved.
at afa ufe Ae dt Fs Il (899-10, Tat, He 5)
kaam kroDh mad sad hee jhooray.
You shall always regret your sexual desire, anger and pride. ad faars Hind & Stet II (899-10, enrast, He 5)
karai bikaar jee-aray kai taa-ee. You act in corruption in order to survive,
TSS Ala o SAM AT iI (899-10, Trak, He 5)
gaafal sang na tasoo-aa jaa-ee. ||2|| but not even an iota will go along with you, you ignorant fool! ||2]|
Uds Gd mifsa 26 AS Il (899-11, eHast, H2 5) Dharat Dhoh anik chhal jaanai. You practice deception, and you know many tricks;
aGst aGst a ua fife |S Il (899-11, aHat, H2 5) ka-udee ka-udee ka-o khaak sir chhaanai. for the sake of mere shells, you throw dust upon your head.
fate chor fA Ss TS Hs Il (899-11, aneett, He 5) jin dee-aa tisai na chaytai mool. You never even think of the One who gave you life.
fufemr BF 3 S3s AS Bll (99-12, Trae, we 5) mithi-aa lobh na utrai sool. ||3]| The pain of false greed never leaves you. ||3]|
UTIAIH AA SS Tenis I (899-12, Trask, us 5) paarbarahm jab bha-ay da-i-aal. When the Supreme Lord God becomes merciful,
feg Ho dur ATT JST Il (899-12, Trae, He 5) in man ho-aa saaDh ravaal. this mind becomes the dust of the feet of the Holy.
JAS SHS Bs BS STE Il (899-12, saat, nu: 5) hasat kamal larh leeno laa-ay. With His lotus hands, He has attached us to the hem of His robe.
Soa ATs As AHS NSISUUIl (899-13, Tat, He 5)
naanak saachai saach samaa-ay. ||4||41]||52|| Nanak merges in the Truest of the True. ||4||41]|52]|
THASt HIS U Il (899-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
TH TH at AdSTe Il (899-13, oat, He 5) raajaa raam kee sarnaa-ay. I seek the Sanctuary of the Sovereign Lord.
foss@ se afte ae wes wonfa eu WE NA TIE Il (899-14, era, nH 5) nirbha-o bha-ay gobind gun gaavat saaDhsang dukh jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have become fearless, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, my pains have been taken away. ||1]|Pause] |
WT A TH SA HO Ha Il (899-14, eat, He 5) jaa kai raam basai man maahee. That person, within whose mind the Lord abides,
H Ho Usd Uys ard Il (999-15, mat, He 5) so jan dutar paykhat naahee. does not see the impassible world-ocean.
Ha ATH ASS MUS Il (899-15, sat, He 5) saglay kaaj savaaray apnay. All one's affairs are resolved,
dfs Ts SH FAS fos AUS IIA (899-15, THe, He 5) har har naam rasan nit japnay. ||1]| by chanting continually the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
fAA & HASfa TE TT Us | A MA MEAT ATT AP Il (399-16, Hat, He 5) jis kai mastak haath gur Dharai. so daas adaysaa kaahay karai. Why should His slave feel any anxiety? The Guru places His hand upon my forehead.
HOH HIE at Yat APE Il (g99-16, mnrast, He 5) janam maran kee chookee kaan. The fear of birth and death is dispelled;
ud TT Gufs TIMES il (899-17, Trees, we 5) poorai gur oopar kurbaan. ||2|| I am a sacrifice to the Perfect Guru. ||2||
ad UTHA Ste feds Il (899-17, east, 8 5) gur parmaysar bhayt nihaal. I am enraptured, meeting with the Guru, the Transcendent Lord.
A zane ue fam of efenrs Il (899-17, erat, He 5)
so darsan paa-ay jis ho-ay da-i-aal.
He alone obtains the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, who is blessed by His Mercy.
ursqun far farsur ad Il (899-18, oat, He 5) paarbarahm jis kirpaa karai. One who is blessed by the Grace of the Supreme Lord God,
AWUOHfa A ISAS Sd MMI (99-18, erat, He 5)
saaDhsang so bhavijal tarai. ||3]|
crosses over the terrifying world-ocean in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. |[3]|
nifys uteg Ara fimirs Il (399-18, aot, He 5) amrit peevhu saaDh pi-aaray. Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, O Beloved Holy people.
He SAG ATS TIA Il (899-18, THA, He 5) mukh oojal saachai darbaaray. Your face shall be radiant and bright in the Court of the Lord.
Moe ATT StH Aas faars il (899-19, arrest, Hs 5) anad karahu taj sagal bikaar. Celebrate and be blissful, and abandon all corruption.
aoa die Af Ssag uts ISISQNUBIl (899-19, ea, He 5)
naanak har jap utarahu paar. ||4||42||53]| O Nanak, meditate on the Lord and cross over. ||4]||42||53]|
UST Koo
THA HIS U Il (900-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Stas 3 FAST Sa Il (900-1, mat, He 5) ee‘Dhan tay baisantar bhaagai. The fire runs away from the fuel.
Het aS AG Ba feR fSnras Il (900-1, mat, He 5) maatee ka-o jal dah dis ti-aagai. The water runs away from the dust in all directions.
Gufs TIS 3s MSTA Il (900-1, THast, Hz 5) oopar charan talai aakaas. The feet are above, and the sky is beneath.
we fo fita at usar All (900-2, east, He 5) ghat meh sinDh kee-o pargaas. ||1|| The ocean appears in the cup. ||1||
mA AYE dfs A wrfy i (900-2, anraet, He 5) aisaa samrath har jee-o aap. Such is our all-powerful dear Lord.
four 3 fard rh sase & nite usd He ST aS AY NA TIC Il (900-2, ara, He 5) nimakh na bisrai jee-a bhagtan kai aath pahar man taa ka-o jaap. ||1|| rahaa-o. His devotees do not forget Him, even for an instant. Twenty-four hours a day, O mind, meditate on Him. ||1||Pause| |
YBH HIG UTE VT Il (900-3, Treat, we 5) parathmay maakhan paachhai dooDh. First comes the butter, and then the milk.
H@ ats AAS AT Il (900-3, saat, Hs 5) mailoo keeno saabun sooDh. The dirt cleans the soap.
3 3 fess saat fed II (900-4, mast, He 5) bhai tay nirbha-o dartaa firai. The fearless are afraid of fear.
Tet A mredet fas 2M (00-4, aa, He 5) ho‘dee ka-o anho“dee hirai. ||2]| The living are killed by the dead. ||2]|
oot Tus faedt SA It (900-4, enaet, He 5)
dayhee gupat bidayhee deesai.
The visible body is hidden, and the etheric body is seen. Has Ata ATS Aa Il (900-4, sna, 2 5)
saglay saaj karat jagdeesai. The Lord of the world does all these things.
SUTSIS MSSaET SAH Il (900-5, aaa, He 5) thaganhaar an-thagdaa thaagai. The one who is cheated, is not cheated by the cheat.
fag wus fefs fefs Bfs wat SBI (900-5, aHat, He 5) bin vakhar fir fir uth laagai. ||3]| With no merchandise, the trader trades again and again. ||3]|
Hs Ast fife agg aftimire Il (900-5, mast, He 5) sant sabhaa mil karahu bakhi-aan. So join the Society of the Saints, and chant the Lord's Name.
fAfYfS ATAS HE USE Il (900-6, THast, we 5) simrit saasat bayd puraan. So say the Simritees, Shaastras, Vedas and Puraanas.
qoH aterg ahers ate I (900-6, anrat, ue 5) barahm beechaar beechaaray ko-ay. Rare are those who contemplate and meditate on God.
SSa St at UGH Os TE ISISSNUSIl (900-6, Tat, 13 5)
naanak taa kee param gat ho-ay. ||4]|43]|54] | O Nanak, they attain the supreme status. ||4]|43]|54||
THA HIB U Il (900-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
a fSq aS A Shor i (00-7, mat, 2 5) jo tis bhaavai so thee-aa. Whatever pleases Him happens.
Het Het ofg at Ageret ys fag art vite aot 14 TIS Il (900-7, mast, ne 5) Sadaa sadaa har kee sarnaa-ee parabh bin naahee aan bee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Forever and ever, I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord.There is none other than God. ||1]|Pause] |
us aeg oftnt aA feo xfs fas o Afar Shor | (900-8, ana, He 5) put kalatar lakhimee deesai in meh kichhoo na sang lee-aa. You look upon your children, spouse and wealth; none of these will go along with you.
fae oaSdt uf gaa Hfenr vee fourfar afeur ail (900-9, sraat, He 5)
bikhai thag-uree khaa-ay bhulaanaa maa-i-aa mandar ti-aag ga-i-aa. ||1]||
Eating the poisonous potion, you have gone astray. You will have to go, and leave Maya and your mansions. ||1]|
foe afe ate agg feast aes vfs nfs fasts ufemr 1 (00-9, mat, H8 5)
nindaa kar kar bahut vigootaa garabh jon meh kirat pa-i-aa.
Slandering others, you are totally ruined; because of your past actions, you shall be consigned to the womb of reincarnation.
yaa He este adt AHEfS FAS Ho sfeEmr 112K (900-10, sat, 3 5)
purab kamaanay chhodeh naahee jamdoot garaasi-o mahaa bha-i-aa. ||2]|
Your past actions will not just go away; the most horrible Messenger of Death shall seize you. ||2||
a8 3S ate nied fFAS 3 ys ATs Ten I (900-11, Hast, v3 5)
bolai jhooth kamaavai avraa tarisan na boojhai bahut ha-i-aa. You tell lies, and do not practice what you preach. Your desires are not satisfied - what a shame.
mG sa Cufor AS eats ta fot Ho ufenr SI (00-11, Hat, Hs 5)
asaaDh rog upji-aa sant dookhan dayh binaasee mahaa kha-i-aa. ||3]|
You have contracted an incurable disease; slandering the Saints, your body is wasting away; you are utterly ruined. ||3]||
frofs fae fae dt AA nm ate AS afer It (900-12, erat, He 5) jineh nivaajay tin hee saajay aapay keenay sant ja-i-aa. He embellishes those whom He has fashioned. He Himself gave life to the Saints.
soe BA afs ote ae ate faa ursgqgH Her IgisslUUll (900-13, THM, He 5) naanak daas kanth laa-ay raakhay kar kirpaa paarbarahm ma-i-aa. ||4]|44]|55]| O Nanak, He hugs His slaves close in His Embrace. Please grant Your Grace, O Supreme Lord God, and be kind to me as well. ||4]|44]|55] |
THASt HIS U Il (900-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
MAT UT TIES ATE Il (900-14, Toast, ws 5) aisaa pooraa gurday-o sahaa-ee. Such is the Perfect Divine Guru, my help and support.
wv at fhHae fase o ATET IAI TIS I (900-14, sraat, He 5) jaa kaa simran birthaa na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditation on Him is not wasted. ||1]||Pause] |
IAS UUs aE fsa Il (900-14, mast, He 5) darsan paykhat ho-ay nihaal. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I am enraptured.
W ot Ofs ae AH AH Il (900-15, Tae, He 5) jaa kee Dhoor kaatai jam jaal. The dust of His feet snaps the noose of Death.
~~
TIO AHS FA HT HS & Ill (900-15, Tas, vz 5) charan kamal basay mayray man kay. His lotus feet dwell within my mind,
OSH Hed AS 3d A MAU (900-15, anaxst, He 5) kaaraj savaaray saglay tan kay. ||1]| and so all the affairs of my body are arranged and resolved. ||1]|
W ao HASfx TH IEG Il (900-16, Tas, He 5) jaa kai mastak raakhai haath. One upon whom He places His Hand, is protected.
Us AS MSS A SE Il (900-16, snaet, He 5) parabh mayro anaath ko naath. My God is the Master of the masterless.
ufss Burge faut fears Il (900-16, set, He 5) patit uDhaaran kirpaa niDhaan. He is the Savior of sinners, the treasure of mercy.
Het Het AS ATA 12M! (900-16, saat, v2 5) Sadaa sadaa jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. ||2]| Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||2]|
fosHe Hz 2fe fa BS Il (900-17, sat, He 5) nirmal mant day-ay jis daan. One whom He blesses with His Immaculate Mantra,
Safa fears fear nifsre Il (900-17, east, He 5) tajeh bikaar binsai abhimaan. renounces corruption; his egotistical pride is dispelled.
Sa fomreiat Aa & Afar il (900-17, eet, He 5) ayk Dhi-aa-ee-ai saaDh kai sang. Meditate on the One Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
uy fasTH oH & fat SBI (00-18, mat, He 5) paap binaasay naam kai rang. ||3]|| Sins are erased, through the love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. |[3]|
TT USHA Aas fSSA Il (900-18, aHast, Hz 5) gur parmaysur sagal nivaas. The Guru, the Transcendent Lord, dwells among all.
wife wie afe afomit TESA Il (900-18, Hat, He 5) ghat ghat rav rahi-aa guntaas. The treasure of virtue pervades and permeates each and every heart.
Cdn tf os YS MMA II (900-19, mat, H3 5) daras deh Dhaara-o parabh aas. Please grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan;
fas sod fase AY mae IISISUIUEN (900-19, THAT, He 5)
nit naanak chitvai sach ardaas. ||4||45||56]|| O God, I place my hopes in You. Nanak continually offers this true prayer. [14] 145] [56]
Yar OX
TA THAS HIG U We 2 eUe (901-1) raag raamkalee mehlaa 5 ghar 2 dupday Raag Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsas ure I (901-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
eI TH A TS Ms Il (901-2, saat, us 5) gaavhu raam kay gun geet. Sing the songs of Praise of the Lord.
OM AUS UdH AY ure niet aCe fee HE HIS NAN TIE Il (901-2, mrt, v2 5)
naam japat param sukh paa-ee-ai aavaa ga-on mitai mayray meet. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, total peace is obtained; coming and going is ended, my friend. ||1]|Pause] |
TE Wes ISS UTA Il (901-3, saat, v2 5) gun gaavat hovat pargaas. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, one is enlightened,
JIS AHS ufo dE fSSA NA (01-3, Trast, He 5) charan kamal meh ho-ay nivaas. ||1]| and comes to dwell in His lotus feet. ||1]|
Hanafs Hfs df= Burg tl (901-3, sat, He 5) santsangat meh ho-ay uDhaar. In the Society of the Saints, one is saved.
sad sens Ssafh ufs NIANUUII (901-4, mast, He 5)
naanak bhavjal utras paar. ||2||1]|57|| O Nanak, he crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|1||57||
THaASt HIS U Il (901-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
TT UT AT TAT Us il (01-4, saat, He 5) gur pooraa mayraa gur pooraa. My Guru is perfect, my Guru is perfect.
TH OH Alu HET AIS AAS AA FT AT AU TIS il (901-4, Tne, v2 5) raam naam jap sadaa suhaylay sagal binaasay rog kooraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Chanting the Lord's Name, I am always at peace; all my illness and fraud is dispelled. ||1]|Pause] |
Sq maa” Ara ALE Il (901-5, Tat, He 5) ayk aaraaDhahu saachaa so-ay. Worship and adore that One Lord alone.
wW ot Hafe AeT AY SPE NA (901-5, THES, He 5) jaa kee saran sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1]| In His Sanctuary, eternal peace is obtained. ||1]||
ate HISt SH at Bait FH il Ooi-6, erat, v2 5) need suhaylee naam kee laagee bhookh. One who feels hunger for the Naam sleeps in peace.
dfs fangs faor AS TA MI (Go1-6, erat, H: 5) har simrat binsay sabh dookh. ||2]| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, all pains are dispelled. ||2||
Hofa mdse ATT AS sret Il (901-7, mast, He 5) sahj anand karahu mayray bhaa-ee. Enjoy celestial bliss, O my Siblings of Destiny.
afs us As fs feet SN (901-7, Tae, He 5) gur poorai sabh chint mitaa-ee. ||3]| The Perfect Guru has eradicated all anxiety. ||3] |
mS UTS YS aT AY AMY Il (901-7, THe, Hs 5) aath pahar parabh kaa jap jaap. Twenty-four hours a day, chant God's Chant.
Soa Dut gut niTfy WSUQNUCH (01-8, aeet, 13 5)
naanak raakhaa ho-aa aap. ||4||2||58]| O Nanak, He Himself shall save you. ||4||2||58] |
TA THASt HIS UF3S WI 2 (901-9) raag raamkalee mehlaa 5 parh-taal ghar 3 Raag Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
qe Afsara yATfe II (901-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Sdodd SHHATS Il (901-10, aaat, 43 5) narnarah namaskaara”. I humbly bow to the Lord, the Supreme Being.
HSS FSS FAT Ido Sa SaaS MAU! TIC il (901-10, ast, v2 5)
jalan thalan basuDh gagan ayk ayka"kaara™. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The One, the One and Only Creator Lord permeates the water, the land, the earth and the sky. ||1]|Pause| |
JSS UTS US UST ATS Il (901-10, THast, He 5) haran Dharan pun punah karan. Over and over again, the Creator Lord destroys, sustains and creates.
od farsa fadas NA (901-11, eat, He 5) nah girah nira‘haara”™. ||1|| He has no home; He needs no nourishment. || 1] |
dst dts aH dts Sa He oR Il (o1-11, Tat, He 5)
gambheer Dheer naam heer ooch mooch apaara”.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is deep and profound, strong, poised, lofty, exalted and infinite.
AIS AG TE MHS sor sors NIANWUUCEM Go1-11, THAT, He 5)
karan kayl gun amol naanak balihaara™. ||2||1]|59]| He stages His plays; His Virtues are priceless. Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||2||1]|59]|
THaASt HIS U Il (901-12)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
gu da Aaa sa fsorfa vs when ss afoa otHat WAU TIS il (901-12, Trae, we 5) roop rang suganDh bhog ti-aag chalay maa-i-aa chhalay kanik kaaminee. ||1]| rahaa- O. You must abandon your beauty, pleasures, fragrances and enjoyments; beguiled by gold and sexual desire, you must still leave Maya behind. ||1||Pause] |
Sarg vag niga use uly Sher Ho AUS Il (901-13, Tat, He 5)
bhandaar darab arab kharab paykh leelaa man saDhaarai.
You gaze upon billions and trillions of treasures and riches, which delight and comfort your mind,
Od Atal Hat WAll (901-13, Test, He 5) nah sang gaamnee. ||1]| but these will not go along with you. ||1]|
AS aegz 3s His Cals ufee sath Hfse fea fou snot Il (901-14, oat, v2 5)
sut kaltar bharaat meet urajh pari-o bharam mohi-o ih birakh chhaamnee. Entangled with children, spouse, siblings and friends, you are enticed and fooled; these pass like the shadow of a tree.
TIO AHS AGS SOA AY AS Tat MNQUEOM (901-14, wnat, vs 5)
charan kamal saran naanak sukh sant bhaavnee. ||2]||2||60]|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of His lotus feet; He has found peace in the faith of the Saints. ||2||2]|60] |
qe Afsars yATfe II (901-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TA THAS HIe € fSue Il (901-17) raag raamkalee mehlaa 9 tipday. Raag Raamkalee, Ninth Mehl, Ti-Padas:
J Ho Ge BIJ Ifa SH Il (901-17, Hae, H2 9) ray man ot layho har naamaa. O mind, take the sheltering support of the Lord's Name.
wv ad finafe vans on uefa ug fagaer Ul TIE Il (901-17, Tat, 2 9)
jaa kai simran durmat naasai paavahi pad nirbaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remembering Him in meditation, evil-mindedness is dispelled, and the state of Nirvaanaa is obtained. ||1]||Pause] |
asset fag AS AG AST A fs A Ts We Il (901-18, aaa, nu: 9) badbhaagee tih jan ka-o jaanhu jo har kay gun gaavai. Know that one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord is very fortunate.
HOH HOH a uy ufe a |fe Safe fares NA (01-18, Hast, He 9) janam janam kay paap kho-ay kai fun baikunth siDhaavai. ||1]| | The sins of countless incarnations are washed off, and he attains the heavenly realm.
[11
Uat Co2 MAHS AG nis ave His ovatfeo Afa niet II (902-1, mast, He 9)
ajaamal ka-o ant kaal meh naaraa-in suDh aa-ee. At the very last moment, Ajaamal became aware of the Lord;
a afs ag Aang wes A afs fee nfo uret 12M (902-1, eniaat, He 9) jaa‘ gat ka-o jogeesur baachhat so gat chhin meh paa-ee. ||2|| that state which even the supreme Yogis desire - he attained that state in an instant.
[21] ots Te otde ae fafenr can aa ala star Il (902-2, rat, He 9)
naahin gun naahin kachh bidi-aa Dharam ka-un gaj keenaa. The elephant had no virtue and no knowledge; what religious rituals has he performed?
Sod fags IH at tug nis we fsa Sar SIAM (902-3, THAT, He 9) naanak birad raam kaa daykhhu abhai daan tih deenaa. ||3||1]| O Nanak, behold the way of the Lord, who bestowed the gift of fearlessness. ||3]||1]|
Hast HIS € Il (902-3)
raamkalee mehlaa 9. Raamkalee, Ninth Mehl:
AG ao Halls we ata Il (902-3, Hat, He 9) saaDho ka-un jugat ab keejai. Holy people: what way should I now adopt,
Ww 3 vos nae faa oH sas Ho SH NU TIS Il (902-4, wnat, He 9)
jaa tay durmat sagal binaasai raam bhagat man bheejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
by which all evil-mindedness may be dispelled, and the mind may vibrate in devotional worship to the Lord? ||1||Pause| |
Ho when xfs Cafe safes J gs 3a aE famrar il (902-4, mat, we 9) man maa-i-aa meh urajh rahi-o hai boojhai nah kachh gi-aanaa. My mind is entangled in Maya; it knows nothing at all of spiritual wisdom.
aCe an Aa A ot fe ure ue fSaarar IU (902-5, nat, He 9)
ka-un naam jag jaa kai simrai paavai pad nirbaanaa. ||1]||
What is that Name, by which the world, contemplating it, might attain the state of Nirvaanaa? ||1||
se vfs faus AS Ho sa feo FS gsTet II (902-6, raat, He 9) bha-ay da-i-aal kirpaal sant jan tab ih baat bataa-ee. When the Saints became kind and compassionate, they told me this.
Aaa aH HS fag ate fas ys atefs aret i211 (902-6, area, 42 9) sarab Dharam maano tih kee-ay jih parabh keerat gaa-ee. ||2||
Understand, that whoever sings the Kirtan of God's Praises, has performed all religious rituals. ||2||
oH oH od fafa aAs Hfo fone Sa fs wes Il (902-7, araaH, He 9) raam naam nar nis baasur meh nimakh ayk ur Dhaarai. One who enshrines the Lord's Name in his heart night and day - even for an instant
AH a 3H fe soa fsa nS ASH ASS III (02-7, mat, Hs 9) jam ko taraas mitai naanak tih apuno janam savaarai. ||3||2|| - has his fear of Death eradicated. O Nanak, his life is approved and fulfilled. ||3]|2||
THaSt HIS € Il (902-8)
raamkalee mehlaa 9. Raamkalee, Ninth Mehl:
yrat aratfes Afa Sfo i (902-8, aneat, us 9) paraanee naaraa-in suDh layhi. O mortal, focus your thoughts on the Lord.
feo faq m@u we fofh was fg ws 3 FT NU TIS Il (902-8, mae, He 9)
chhin chhin a-oDh ghatai nis baasur baritha jaat hai dayh. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Moment by moment, your life is running out; night and day, your body is passing away in vain. ||1]|Pause] |
sou fafimrs fa@ fe aug nifamirst Il (902-9, east, He 9) tarnaapo bikhi-an si-o kho-i-o baalpan agi-aanaa. You have wasted your youth in corrupt pleasures, and your childhood in ignorance.
fasta sfeG nig oot AHS aa aHfS Basra IAI (902-10, Tat, He 9)
biraDh bha-i-o ajhoo nahee samjhai ka-un kumat urjhaanaa. ||1]|
You have grown old, and even now, you do not understand, the evil-mindedness in which you are entangled. ||1]|
HOH HOH UG fas oafe AS fas faRafEs i (902-10, erat, v2 9) maanas janam dee-o jih thaakur so tai ki-o bisraa-i-o. Why have you forgotten your Lord and Master, who blessed you with this human life?
Has 33 3d A a fins fone o 3 a WES NQI (902-11, mat, Hz 9)
mukat hot nar jaa kai simrai nimakh na taa ka-o gaa-i-o. ||2]|
Remembering Him in meditation, one is liberated. And yet, you do not sing His Praises, even for an instant. ||2]|
Hier t HE AT ATT F Afar 3s AT AT Il (902-11, Treat, we 9) maa-i-aa ko mad kahaa karat hai sang na kaahoo jaa-ee. Why are you intoxicated with Maya? It will not go along with you.
soa ads ofs feanie afe F nifs ATS NSUSICAUI (902-12, THAT, H2 9)
naanak kahat chayt chintaaman ho-ay hai ant sahaa-ee. ||3]||3||81]|
Says Nanak, think of Him, remember Him in your mind. He is the Fulfiller of desires, who will be your help and support in the end. ||3][3||81||
THAS HIG AW MAcUeMT (902-14) raamkalee mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa Raamkalee, First Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsara yATfe I (902-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het de vata A ad Het feshrg Sus Id Il (902-15, raat, He so-ee chand charheh say taaray so-ee dinee-ar tapat rahai. The same moon rises, and the same stars; the same sun shines in the sky.
AW ugst A ue sad Ha Ht YS ae] AA IAI (902-15, Tat, He 1)
saa Dhartee so pa-un jhulaaray jug jee-a khaylay thaav kaisay. ||1||
The earth is the same, and the same wind blows. The age in which we dwell affects living beings, but not these places. ||1]|
Hes soe fests il (902-16, aa, v8 1) jeevan talab nivaar. Give up your attachment to life.
de udear aate fase afe wus Stefe 1a TTS Il (902-16, mast, He 1)
hovai parvaanaa karahi Dhinyaanaa kal lakhan veechaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who act like tyrants are accepted and approved - recognize that this is the sign of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1]|Pause] |
fas eff 3 orfenr ret Stee uA & Aor Il (902-16, snraat, He 1)
kitai days na aa-i-aa sunee-ai tirath paas na baithaa.
Kali Yuga has not been heard to have come to any country, or to be sitting at any sacred shrine.
UST WS Ad 3d aS HIG Safa @ For Nl (902-17, maa, v2 1)
daataa daan karay tah naahee mahal usaar na baithaa. ||2||
It is not where the generous person gives to charities, nor seated in the mansion he has built. ||2||
A a AS ad A ain su ute su Tet Il (902-18, aaa, He 1)
jay ko sat karay so chheejai tap ghar tap na ho-ee.
If someone practices Truth, he is frustrated; prosperity does not come to the home of the sincere.
Aa a we yearet afe a BUS Set 3M (902-18, mat, He jay ko naa-o la-ay badnaavee kal kay lakhan ay-ee. ||3]| If someone chants the Lord's Name, he is scorned. These are the signs of Kali Yuga.
131] fra froenct fants ynrdt sag AT SIS I (902-19, Tras, Hz 1)
jis sikdaaree tiseh khu-aaree chaakar kayhay darnaa. Whoever is in charge, is humiliated. Why should the servant be afraid,
w fhoed us Hetdt St WaT Jag HIST NBII (902-19, erat, He 1) jaa sikdaarai pavai janjeeree taa chaakar hathahu marnaa. ||4| | when the master is put in chains? He dies at the hands of his servant. ||4||
Ua cos
ning dat ates wire Il (903-1, aHast, He 1) aakh gunaa kal aa-ee-ai. Chant the Praises of the Lord; Kali Yuga has come.
fag na as four suren A ae Ufa 3 ure NU TIE I (903-1, Tae, He
tihu jug kayraa rahi-aa tapaavas jay gun deh ta paa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The justice of the previous three ages is gone. One obtains virtue, only if the Lord bestows it. ||1]|Pause] |
ats amet Aa feast ait fara dur i (03-2, erat, v2 1)
kal kalvaalee saraa nibayrhee kaajee krisanaa ho-aa.
In this turbulent age of Kali Yuga, Muslim law decides the cases, and the blue-robed Qazi is the judge.
Wat YH" Fe nMadds adel ates Bfanr ull (903-2, mraat, us 1)
banee barahmaa bayd atharban karnee keerat lahi-aa. ||5||
The Guru's Bani has taken the place of Brahma's Veda, and the singing of the Lord's Praises are good deeds. ||5||
ufs fee ur AS fee ArH AS fee ad ASS Il (903-3, mast, Hs 1)
pat vin poojaa sat vin sanjam jat vin kaahay janay-oo.
Worship without faith; self-discipline without truthfulness; the ritual of the sacred thread without chastity - what good are these?
Sed ted fea vas Av fee Aa 5 Tet NEN (903-3, eae, He 1)
naavhu Dhovahu tilak charhaavahu such vin soch na ho-ee. ||6] |
You may bathe and wash, and apply a ritualistic tilak mark to your forehead, but without inner purity, there is no understanding. ||6| |
ats UTE ASH ATES Il (903-4, aaa, us 1) kal parvaan katayb kuraan. In Kali Yuga, the Koran and the Bible have become famous.
ut Ufss TI UTE Il (903-4, oat, He 1) pothee pandit rahay puraan. The Pandit's scriptures and the Puraanas are not respected.
BSA SS sfEnit TINE Il (903-4, Tat, nz 1) naanak naa-o bha-i-aa rehmaan. O Nanak, the Lord's Name now is Rehmaan, the Merciful.
ae AIS J Sa ATS MDI (903-5, Tae, we 1) kar kartaa too ayko jaan. ||7|| Know that there is only One Creator of the creation. ||7||
area oH fHs sfenret Fe Gufs aay sat Il (903-5, anaat, we 1)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee aydoo upar karam nahee.
Nanak has obtained the glorious greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. There is no action higher than this.
a ufs de Hafs weba fefs Gant fHs Sat NCUA (903-5, mat, He 1)
jay ghar hodai mangan jaa-ee-ai fir olaamaa milai tahee. ||8]|1]|
If someone goes out to beg for what is already in his own home, then he should be chastised. ||8]|1]|
THA HIS Y Il (903-6)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Ag ussufs Hat sorefa Il (903-6, sat, He 1) jag parboDheh marhee baDhaaveh. You preach to the world, and set up your house.
mHe fsurfa ard AG urSfd Il (903-7, sHat, He 1) aasan ti-aag kaahay sach paavahi. Abandoning your Yogic postures, how will you find the True Lord?
HHS Hg aTHfs fasardt il (903-7, mat, He 1) mamtaa moh kaaman hitkaaree. You are attached to possessiveness and the love of sexual pleasure.
a mgust a AAT IA (903-7, THAT, He 1) naa a-uDhootee naa sansaaree. ||1|| You are not a renunciate, nor a man of the world. ||1||
nat aff gag efsor Sy STH Il (903-8, aH, He 1) jogee bais rahhu dubiDhaa dukh bhaagai. Yogi, remain seated, and the pain of duality will run away from you.
ufs ufs HIS BH Ba NA TIS Il (903-8, THA, He 1)
ghar ghar maagat laaj na laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. You beg from door to door, and you don't feel ashamed. ||1]||Pause] |
Tets ats o Blots my Il (903-9, aHast, v2 1) gaavahi geet na cheeneh aap. You sing the songs, but you do not understand your own self.
fa sat feed ussTy Il (903-9, enraat, He 1) ki-o laagee nivrai partaap. How will the burning pain within be relieved?
ad a Aafe gd Ho STE I (903-9, saat, He 1)
gur kai sabad rachai man bhaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, let your mind be absorbed in the Lord's Love,
fatter Aon Sterdt ate iI (903-9, east, v3 1) bhikhi-aa sahj veechaaree khaa-ay. ||2|| and you will intuitively experience the charity of contemplation. ||2]|
SAH vate aafa UTS Il (903-10, mast, He 1) bhasam charhaa-ay karahi pakhand. You apply ashes to your body, while acting in hypocrisy.
Hfeur Hfs Aofs AH ST Il (903-10, mat, He 1) maa-i-aa mohi saheh jam dand. Attached to Maya, you will be beaten by Death's heavy club.
ge wug sti 3 SME Il (903-10, anaet, He 1) footai khaapar bheekh na bhaa-ay. Your begging bowl is broken; it will not hold the charity of the Lord's Love.
safe afar wre wf Sil (903-11, sat, He 1) banDhan baaDhi-aa aavai jaa-ay. ||3]| Bound in bondage, you come and go. ||3]||
fiz 3 wafs Ast agefs I (903-11, mast, He 1) bind na raakhahi jatee kahaaveh. You do not control your seed and semen, and yet you claim to practice abstinence.
Het Has 3 Garefs Il (903-11, mast, we 1) maa-ee maagat tarai lobhaaveh. You beg from Maya, lured by the three qualities.
fosefenr odt Afs Barer Il (903-12, erat, He 1) nirda-i-aa nahee jot ujaalaa. You have no compassion; the Lord's Light does not shine in you.
FSS FS ATT HAH Ill (903-12, gHast, ue 1) boodat booday sarab janjaalaa. ||4|| You are drowned, drowned in worldly entanglements. ||4]|
ay asta fiat ag Tem Il (903-12, Hest, He 1) bhaykh karahi khinthaa baho thatoo-aa. You wear religious robes, and your patched coat assumes many disguises.
BS YS YS BT SenM Il (903-13, Tras, He 1) jhootho khayl khaylai baho natoo-aa. You play all sorts of false tricks, like a juggler.
nists wats fest god AS Il (903-13, THAT, He 1) antar agan chintaa baho jaaray. The fire of anxiety burns brightly within you.
fee aon an Bsafk us ull (903-13, oat, He 1) vin karmaa kaisay utras paaray. ||5|| Without the karma of good actions, how can you cross over? ||5]|
Her sea aaret ats il (903-14, gaat, He 1) mundraa fatak banaa-ee kaan. You make ear-rings of glass to wear in your ears.
Hats odt fafenr fafemrts i (903-14, mast, He 1) mukat nahee bidi-aa bigi-aan. But liberation does not come from learning without understanding.
fase fet afe Sear i (903-14, mast, us 1) jihvaa indree saad lobhaanaa. You are lured by the tastes of the tongue and sex organs.
UH Be Sat fe Sta Ell (903-15, THAT, He 1) pasoo bha-ay nahee mitai neesaanaa. ||6|| You have become a beast; this sign cannot be erased. ||6]||
fefafa sar fafafa Far i (903-15, sna, He 1)
taribaDh logaa taribaDh jogaa.
The people of the world are entangled in the three modes; the Yogis are entangled in the three modes.
Hae Sars Fath Aa | (903-15, THast, Hs 1) sabad veechaarai chookas sogaa. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, sorrows are dispelled.
Cae ATG A aE SE Il (903-15, mat, Hs 1) oojal saach so sabad ho-ay. Through the Shabad, one becomes radiant, pure and truthful.
nat Wats hers ATE NDI (903-16, THT, He 1) jogee jugat veechaaray so-ay. ||7]| One who contemplates the true lifestyle is a Yogi. ||7]|
35 ufs 38 fafa 3 ATE AT Il (903-16, Tat, Hs 1) tujh peh na-o niDh too karnai jog. The nine treasures are with You, Lord; You are potent, the Cause of causes.
afu Gant ad A IT Il (903-16, Tae, He 1) thaap uthaapay karay so hog. You establish and disestablish; whatever You do, happens.
HS AS AW AY AMS Il (903-17, east, ne 1) jat sat sanjam sach sucheet. One who practices celibacy, chastity, self-control, truth and pure consciousness
oa Hat fesse HIST NCH (903-17, THM, He 1) naanak jogee taribhavan meet. ||8]|2|| - O Nanak, that Yogi is the friend of the three worlds. ||8]|2| |
THAT HIB Y Il (903-17)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
We HE dt HO Asai Il (903-18, wast, He 1) khat mat dayhee man bairaagee. Above the six chakras of the body dwells the detached mind.
Hofs Hae ufs nists wait Il (903-18, mast, He 1)
surat sabad Dhun antar jaagee.
Awareness of the vibration of the Word of the Shabad has been awakened deep within.
SH MOTE Hat He SST Il (903-18, THast, He 1)
vaajai anhad mayraa man leenaa.
The unstruck melody of the sound current resonates and resounds within; my mind is attuned to it.
ad adat Ate ot uster All (903-19, Haat, He 1) gur bachnee sach naam pateenaa. ||1|| Through the Guru's Teachings, my faith is confirmed in the True Name. ||1]|
urat OH Safs AY Urea I (903-19, mat, He 1)
paraanee raam bhagat sukh paa-ee-dai.
O mortal, through devotion to the Lord, peace is obtained.
aenty ofa afs Hie oat ofa afe at AHEM NA TIS I (903-19, Haat, He 1) gurmukh har har meethaa laagai har har naam samaa-ee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Lord, Har, Har, seems sweet to the Gurmukh, who merges in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
Us Kos
When Hg faeafa ANTE Il (904-1, erat, He 1) maa-i-aa moh bivaraj samaa-ay. Eradicating attachment to Maya, one merges into the Lord.
Afsag se Afs fiers | (904-1, erat, He 1) satgur bhaytai mayl milaa-ay. Meeting with the True Guru, we unite in His Union.
oH 330 faahwa dtat il (904-2, sat, He 1) naam ratan nirmolak heeraa. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a priceless jewel, a diamond.
f33 TS AT HS Ths Ql (904-2, ania, Hs 1) tit raataa mayraa man Dheeraa. ||2|| Attuned to it, the mind is comforted and encouraged. ||2| |
IGH HHS STO Ba Il (904-2, Tat, He 1) ha-umai mamtaa rog na laagai. The diseases of egotism and possessiveness do not afflict
TH Safs AH a SS SH Il (904-2, saat, He 1) raam bhagat jam kaa bha-o bhaagai. one who worships the Lord. Fear of the Messenger of Death runs away.
AH Hes o Ba Hfs I (04-3, mat, He 1) jam jandaar na laagai mohi. The Messenger of Death, the enemy of the soul, does not touch me at all.
foaHe oH fee ofe Afs ISI (904-3, aHast, He 1) nirmal naam ridai har sohi. ||3]| The Immaculate Name of the Lord illuminates my heart. ||3]|
Rae stots se fadarct i) (904-3, mast, Hz 1)
sabad beechaar bha-ay nirankaaree.
Contemplating the Shabad, we become Nirankaari - we come to belong to the Formless Lord God.
DsHfs Wat FINS UTI Il (904-4, anaat, He 1) gurmat jaagay durmat parhaaree. Awakening to the Guru's Teachings, evil-mindedness is taken away.
mates Ata Td fee Bet il (904-4, anrast, He 1) an-din jaag rahay liv laa-ee. Remaining awake and aware night and day, lovingly focused on the Lord,
Htzo nafs afs nists uret igil (004-4, east, He 1)
jeevan mukat gat antar paa-ee. ||4]|
one becomes Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive. He finds this state deep within himself. ||4 |
misus Tet ufo gots fess Il (904-5, aaet, He 1) alipat gufaa meh raheh niraaray. In the secluded cave, I remain unattached.
SHad Us Aafe Awd Il (904-5, mat, He 1) taskar panch sabad sanghaaray. With the Word of the Shabad, I have killed the five thieves.
Ud Ud ATE B HS SHES Il (904-5, Hast, v2 1) par ghar jaa-ay na man dolaa-ay. My mind does not waver or go to the home of any other.
Hon fedsfa ga@ ANTES |Ull (904-6, ania, He 1) sahj nirantar raha-o samaa-ay. ||5|| I remain intuitively absorbed deep within. ||5||
Toute Afar II MTS Il (904-6, Hast, He 1) gurmukh jaag rahay a-uDhootaa. As Gurmukh, I remain awake and aware, unattached.
He Fait FS UST Il (904-6, Task, He 1) sad bairaagee tat parotaa. Forever detached, I am woven into the essence of reality.
Wd AS Hfs mrs ATE Il (904-7, ora, Hs 1) jag sootaa mar aavai jaa-ay. The world is asleep; it dies, and comes and goes in reincarnation.
fag ad Age 3 ASt Ute MEN (904-7, oat, He 1) bin gur sabad na sojhee paa-ay. ||6|| Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it does not understand. ||6]|
Mode Ade en fes Tt Il (904-7, mat, He 1) anhad sabad vajai din raatee. The unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates day and night.
mizas at afs aaHfy AST II (904-8, mat, He 1) avigat kee gat gurmukh jaatee. The Gurmukh knows the state of the eternal, unchanging Lord God.
38 Wot A Aafe ust Il (904-8, mat, He 1)
ta-o jaanee jaa sabad pachhaanee. When someone realizes the Shabad, then he truly knows.
Sa afe sfonr fagarat ID Il (904-8, mat, He 1) ayko rav rahi-aa nirbaanee. ||7]| The One Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere in Nirvaanaa. ||7||
Ho Aaa AafA HS TST Il (904-9, saat, He 1) sunn samaaDh sahj man raataa. My mind is intuitively absorbed in the state of deepest Samaadhi;
3fa IG Bat Sat AST I (904-9, erat, 2 1) taj ha-o lobhaa ayko jaataa. renouncing egotism and greed, I have come to know the One Lord.
Ts VB MUS HO HSM Il (904-9, aHast, He 1) gur chaylay apnaa man maani-aa. When the disciple's mind accepts the Guru,
aaa AT Hfe AHTfon ICSI (904-10, THAT, He 1) naanak doojaa mayt samaani-aa. ||8]|3]| O Nanak, duality is eradicated, and he merges in the Lord. ||8]||3]|
THA HIB Y Il (904-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
A Feats 6 Ads sts Il (904-10, saat, He 1) saahaa ganeh na karahi beechaar. You calculate the auspicious days, but you do not understand
ATS Gufs Saas Il (904-10, meet, we 1) Saahay oopar aykankaar. that the One Creator Lord is above these auspicious days.
fan ae fixe et fafa WE I (04-11, sneer, He 1) jis gur milai so-ee biDh jaanai. He alone knows the way, who meets the Guru.
aenfs df 3 JaH UES AU (904-11, meet, Hs
gurmat ho-ay ta hukam pachhaanai. ||1]||
When one follows the Guru's Teachings, then he realizes the Hukam of God's Command. ||1||
BO 3 af us AY AIA Il (904-11, ora, Hs 1) jhooth na bol paaday sach kahee-ai. Do not tell lies, O Pandit; O religious scholar, speak the Truth.
ICH wfe Aafe we BA Al TIC Il (904-12, erat, He 1)
ha-umai jaa-ay sabad ghar lahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When egotism is eradicated through the Word of the Shabad, then one finds His home. ||1||Pause] |
ae dfs Aaa ast atat il (904-12, mast, He 1) gan gan jotak kaa‘dee keenee. Calculating and counting, the astrologer draws the horoscope.
Us Hat] 3S 5 Tet Il (904-12, eat, ne 1) parhai sunaavai tat na cheenee. He studies it and announces it, but he does not understand reality.
ABA Gufs Ts AAT SIT Il (904-13, maa, we 1) sabhsai oopar gur sabad beechaar. Understand, that the Word of the Guru's Shabad is above all.
dd AGot FEC 3 AaSt ST Iii (904-13, rast, He 1) hor kathnee bada-o na saglee chhaar. ||2|| Do not speak of anything else; it is all just ashes. ||2] |
orate defo uAfs A Il (904-14, meet, we 1) naaveh Dhoveh poojeh sailaa. You bathe, wash, and worship stones.
fag ofs TS AS HST Il (904-14, mast, He 1) bin har raatay mailo mailaa. But without being imbued with the Lord, you are the filthiest of the filthy.
aaa foets fires ys Arafat (904-14, mat, He 1) garab nivaar milai parabh saarath. Subduing your pride, you shall receive the supreme wealth of God.
Hats ure Afu afte fasstafe SI (904-14, ora, He 1) mukat paraan jap har kirtaarath. ||3]| The mortal is liberated and emancipated, meditating on the Lord. ||3]|
ad Seo Fe Herd Il (904-15, oat, we 1) vaachai vaad na bayd beechaardi. You study the arguments, but do not contemplate the Vedas.
mify sa fxS fuse svg Il (904-15, mat, He 1 aap dubai ki-o pitraa taarai. You drown yourself - how will you save your ancestors?
ufe wife qoH de He AfE II (904-15, anraet, He 1) ghat ghat barahm cheenai jan ko-ay. How rare is that person who realizes that God is in each and every heart.
Afsag fxs 3 ASt TE ISI (904-16, erat, He 1) satgur milai ta sojhee ho-ay. ||4|| When one meets the True Guru, then he understands. ||4||
TEs Teh ATA Sy Ab Il (904-16, aa, ve 1) ganat ganee-ai sahsaa dukh jee-ai. Making his calculations, cynicism and suffering afflict his soul.
ad at Aafs ue AY At | (904-16, mat, He gur kee saran pavai sukh thee-ai. Seeking the Sanctuary of the Guru, peace is found.
ats wusa Hate JH witfeEnt Il (904-17, mast, He 1) kar apraaDh saran ham aa-i-aa. I sinned and made mistakes, but now I seek Your Sanctuary.
ad ofa se usta AHEM Ul (904-17, ana, He 1) gur har bhaytay purab kamaa-i-aa. ||5|| The Guru led me to meet the Lord, according to my past actions. ||5||
Gd Hate 3 wreha gan & urehat i (904-18, oat, vs 1) gur Saran na aa-ee-ai barahm na paa-ee-ai. If one does not enter the Guru's Sanctuary, God cannot be found.
sath garcia waft Hfe wren Il (904-18, oat, He 1) bharam bhulaa-ee-ai janam mar aa-ee-ai. Deluded by doubt, one is born, only to die, and come back again.
aH efs sa He fears Il (904-18, erat, He 1) jam dar baaDha-o marai bikaar. Dying in corruption, he is bound and gagged at Death's door.
o fae SH B ASE MST NEll (904-19, anraat, He 1) naa ridai naam na sabad achaar. ||6]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is not in his heart, and he does not act according to the Shabad. ||6] |
fefa urd ufss fins aorefs il (904-19, mnraet, He 1) ik paaDhay pandit misar kahaaveh. Some call themselves Pandits, religious scholars and spiritual teachers.
efam FS HIG 3 ues Il (904-19, rat, He 1) dubiDhaa raatay mahal na paavahi. Tinged with double-mindedness, they do not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Ua cou
fA TS USAT SH MOT Il (905-1, THaet, He 1) jis gur parsaadee naam aDhaar. One who takes the Support of the Naam, by Guru's Grace,
afe HO at AS MMU IDI (905-1, THs, He 1) kot maDhay ko jan aapaar. ||7]|| is a rare person, one among millions, incomparable. ||7||
Pq Fs SH" AY Sa Il (905-1, aa, He 1) ayk buraa bhalaa sach aykai. One is bad, and another good, but the One True Lord is contained in all.
as famrat Aas at Sax Il (905-2, Tnraat, we 1) boojh gi-aanee satgur kee taykai. Understand this, O spiritual teacher, through the support of the True Guru:
Tanta feast Sa Asn | (905-2, sHast, v2 1) gurmukh virlee ayko jaani-aa. rare indeed is that Gurmukh, who realizes the One Lord.
mee Wat Hfe AHEM ICI (905-2, mat, He 1) aavan jaanaa mayt samaani-aa. ||8]|| His comings and goings cease, and he merges in the Lord. ||8]|
fro & fase Sears I (905-3, saat, He 1) jin kai hirdai aykankaar. Those who have the One Universal Creator Lord within their hearts,
Had Tat ATS HST ll (905-3, anast, uz 1) sarab gunee saachaa beechaar. possess all virtues; they contemplate the True Lord.
Td A STE ATH AHS Il (905-3, THast, v2 1) gur kai bhaanai karam kamaavai. One who acts in harmony with the Guru's Will,
Soa ATS Ate AH] WENSI (905-4, THAT, He 1) naanak saachay saach samaavai. ||9||4] | O Nanak, is absorbed in the Truest of the True. ||9]|4||
THAGt HIS % Il (905-4) raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
Jo feag afe arfeor eth I (905-4, mast, He 1) hath nigarahu kar kaa-i-aa chheejai. Practicing restraint by Hatha Yoga, the body wears away.
IZ BUS afe HS dt SHA Il (905-4, enact, He 1) varat tapan kar man nahee bheejai. The mind is not softened by fasting or austerities.
TH BH Als MST F UA IAI (905-5, THAT, He 1) raam naam Sar avar na poojai. ||1]| Nothing else is equal to worship of the Lord's Name. ||1]]|
ag Afe Hat dfs Ae Ad ate Il (905-5, mat, He 1 gur sayv manaa har jan sang keejai. Serve the Guru, O mind, and associate with the humble servants of the Lord.
AH Hed hfs adt Aa Heufe sfh o Aa dfs a aA UA NA TIS Il (905-6, Traat, He 1) jam jandaar johi nahee saakai sarpan das na sakai har kaa ras peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The tyrannical Messenger of Death cannot touch you, and the serpent of Maya cannot sting you, when you drink in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Ze US Tait Ha StH Il (905-6, eat, He 1) vaad parhai raagee jag bheejai. The world reads the arguments, and is softened only by music.
3 we faftor afk Heth II (905-7, ania, He 1)
tarai gun bikhi-aa janam mareejai.
In the three modes and corruption, they are born and die. TH OH fas TY ASA MQM (905-7, THs, He 1)
raam naam bin dookh saheejai. ||2|| Without the Lord's Name, they endure suffering and pain. ||2||
wath uee fiurng sth Il (905-7, mast, He 1) chaarhas pavan singhaasan bheejai. The Yogi draws the breath upwards, and opens the Tenth Gate.
foGut AGH Ye ATH ASA Il (905-8, snIaat, He 1) ni-ulee karam khat karam kareejai. He practices inner cleansing and the six rituals of purification.
oH OH fag foe ATA SIA III (905-8, THA, He 1) raam naam bin birthaa saas leejai. ||3]| But without the Lord's Name, the breath he draws is useless. ||3]|
nists us vrais fre cto dt Il (905-8, sat, He 1)
antar panch agan ki-o Dheeraj Dheejai.
The fire of the five passions burns within him; how can he be calm? nists og faG ATE BIA I (905-9, eet, He 1
antar chor ki-o saad laheejai. The thief is within him; how can he taste the taste?
aenty df afeor as Str Iii (905-9, mat, He 1) gurmukh ho-ay kaa-i-aa garh leejai. ||4|| One who becomes Gurmukh conquers the body-fortress. ||4||
nists HS Stee SoH Il (905-9, ona, He 1) antar mail tirath bharmeejai. With filth within, he wanders around at places of pilgrimage.
Ho Sdt AT foo Ae aA Il (905-10, mat, Hs 1) man nahee soochaa ki-aa soch kareejai. His mind is not pure, so what is the use of performing ritual cleansings?
fas ufsor tH at a@ SH MUI (905-10, erat, He 1) kirat pa-i-aa dos kaa ka-o deejai. ||5|| He carries the karma of his own past actions; who else can he blame? ||5||
nig 3 ufo edt ey Ut Il (905-10, mat, He 1) ann na khaahi dayhee dukh deejai. He does not eat food; he tortures his body.
fags aa famre feufs odt ahr It (05-11, araet, He bin gur gi-aan taripat nahee theejai. Without the Guru's wisdom, he is not satisfied.
Houfa ASH ASfH HaTA NEN (905-11, mat, He D manmukh janmai janam mareejai. ||6|| The self-willed manmukh is born only to die, and be born again. ||6||
Afsas ufs Hats AS attr Il (905-12, Trae, He 1) satgur poochh sangat jan keejai. Go, and ask the True Guru, and associate with the Lord's humble servants.
HO dfs de odt Hoty Ha Il (905-12, aHaSt, He 1) man har raachai nahee janam mareejai. Your mind shall merge into the Lord, and you shall not be reincarnated to die again.
oH OH faa for aaH ath IDI (905-12, east, He 1) raam naam bin ki-aa karam keejai. ||7| | Without the Lord's Name, what can anyone do? ||7||
Ges Gea uA Tate II (905-13, THT, Hs 1) oo‘dar doo“dar paas Dhareejai. Silence the mouse scurrying around within you.
Ug at Ret IH TeIA Il (905-13, TH, He 1) Dhur kee sayvaa raam raveejai. Serve the Primal Lord, by chanting the Lord's Name.
saa on fs fasur ys ah WCIUI (905-13, THES, He 1) naanak naam milai kirpaa parabh keejai. ||8]|5|| O Nanak, God blesses us with His Name, when He grants His Grace. ||8]|5]|
THA HIB Y Il (905-14)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
nists Caan nied o ET II (905-14, east, He 1) antar ut-bhuj avar na ko-ee. The created Universe emanated from within You; there is no other at all.
A adh A ys 3S det il (905-14, mma, He 1) jo kahee-ai so parabh tay ho-ee. Whatever is said to be, is from You, O God.
Had Wastes AfsE AT AST I (05-14, eat, He 1) jugah jugantar saahib sach so-ee. He is the True Lord and Master, throughout the ages.
Gsufs uses nies 5 Aet WA (905-15, THA, He 1) utpat parla-o avar na ko-ee. ||1]| Creation and destruction do not come from anyone else. ||1]|
MAT HI Sag Afss std il (905-15, THA, He 1) aisaa mayraa thaakur gahir gambheer. Such is my Lord and Master, profound and unfathomable.
fafs afumr fso dt ay ufeor ofs & ath 3 oat AH Ste NU TITS Il (905-16, erat, Hz 1) jin japi-aa tin hee sukh paa-i-aa har kai naam na lagai jam teer. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Whoever meditates on Him, finds peace. The arrow of the Messenger of Death does not strike one who has the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
oH ISO Stat SSH Il (905-16, sHast, He 1) naam ratan heeraa nirmol. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a priceless jewel, a diamond.
ATS ATfos MH MSS Il (905-17, Haat, He 1) saachaa saahib amar atol. The True Lord Master is immortal and immeasurable.
foe" Het ATI IS Il (905-17, geet, we 1) jihvaa soochee saachaa bol. That tongue which chants the True Name is pure.
ulfs efs ATS STS IB Ql (905-17, Tas, He 1)
ghar dar saachaa naahee rol. ||2]| The True Lord is in the home of the self; there is no doubt about it. ||2]|
fefa as ufa Safa sats MAS Il (905-18, THast, He 1) ik ban meh baiseh doogar asthaan. Some sit in the forests, and some make their home in the mountains.
on farrfa uate nifsHre Il (905-18, mat, He 1) naam bisaar pacheh abhimaan. Forgetting the Naam, they rot away in egotistical pride.
om faar fom famire flmirg Il (905-18, aHaet, He 1) naam binaa ki-aa gi-aan Dhi-aan. Without the Naam, what is the use of spiritual wisdom and meditation?
aay urets Faas HS ISI (905-19, aHast, Hs 1)
gurmukh paavahi dargahi maan. ||3]| The Gurmukhs are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
JO MAT AI odt urs Il (905-19, anaat, He 1) hath aha‘kaar karai nahee paavai. Acting stubbornly in egotism, one does not find the Lord.
US Us B BA ASS Il (905-19, THA, He 1) paath parhai lay lok sunaavai. Studying the scriptures, reading them to other people,
Ua tko€ Stefa sanfh famrfa o ATS I (906-1, arrest, we 1)
tirath bharmas bi-aaDh na jaavai. and wandering around at places of pilgrimage, the disease is not taken away.
oH fat AA AY UTS ISI (06-1, THAT, He 1) naam binaa kaisay sukh paavai. ||4]| Without the Naam, how can one find peace? ||4]|
Hs6 ad fits fat 5 TIT I (906-1, Hat, He 1) jatan karai bind kivai na rahaa-ee. No matter how much he tries, he cannot control his semen and seed.
Hout 3B SIr UTE Il (906-2, THast, Hs 1) manoo-aa dolai narkay paa-ee. His mind wavers, and he falls into hell.
aH ufs sd Bd ANTE II (906-2, erat, He 1) jam pur baaDho lahai sajaa-ee. Bound and gagged in the City of Death, he is tortured.
fas oe MG Afs af AST Ul (906-2, mnie, He 1) bin naavai jee-o jal bal jaa-ee. ||5|| Without the Name, his soul cries out in agony. ||5||
fra Atos as Hfs Se Il (906-3, at, He 1) siDh saaDhik kaytay mun dayvaa. The many Siddhas and seekers, silent sages and demi-gods
afe foafs 3 fyustefs Se Il (906-3, mraet, Hs 1) hath nigrahi na tariptaaveh bhayvaa. cannot satisfy themselves by practicing restraint through Hatha Yoga.
Hae gets adufs 7a AS Il (906-3, saat, He 1) sabad veechaar gaheh gur sayvaa. One who contemplates the Word of the Shabad, and serves the Guru
Hts sf fegHe nifsHe niger Ell (906-4, mast, H8 1) man tan nirmal abhimaan abhayvaa. ||6|| - his mind and body become immaculate, and his egotistical pride is obliterated. ||6||
oath fs urs AY a Il (906-4, mma, He 1 karam milai paavai sach naa-o. Blessed with Your Grace, I obtain the True Name.
3H Ade als JIG ASE Il (906-4, mast, He 1) tum sarnaagat raha-o subhaa-o. I remain in Your Sanctuary, in loving devotion.
3H 3 GufaS sast aE il (906-5, enact, v2 1) tum tay upji-o bhagtee bhaa-o. Love for Your devotional worship has welled up within me.
au Wu aanfe af aS IDI (906-5, eat, He 1) jap jaapa-o gurmukh har naa-o. ||7]| As Gurmukh, I chant and meditate on the Lord's Name. ||7]||
ICH Teg ATE Ho SS Il (906-5, THA, He 1) ha-umai garab jaa-ay man bheenai. When one is rid of egotism and pride, his mind is drenched in the Lord's Love.
3fs 3 ureth undfs ats Il (06-6, mat, Hs 1) jhooth na paavas pakhand keenai. Practicing fraud and hypocrisy, he does not find God.
fae Td Aas Sdt We AT Il (906-6, THaat, He 1) bin gur sabad nahee ghar baar. Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he cannot find the Lord's Door.
SSA THY 33 AMT ICINEIl (06-6, wast, ue 1) naanak gurmukh tat beechaar. ||8||6]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh contemplates the essence of reality. ||8]|6] |
THA HIS Y Il (906-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
fA@ urfenr fa vets ad fAS HOH FE HaE SfEnr Il (906-7, eat, He 1) ji-o aa-i-aa ti-o jaaveh ba-uray ji-o janmay ti-o maran bha-i-aa. As you come, so will you leave, you fool; as you were born, so will you die.
faG oA Sa ate Sat ey ort on ferris sents ufemr all (906-8, erat, He 1)
ji-o ras bhog kee-ay taytaa dukh laagai naam visaar bhavjal pa-i-aa. ||1]|
As you enjoy pleasures, so will you suffer pain. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you will fall into the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]||
36 U6 Vus Teta Tear I (906-8, raat, Hz 1) tan Dhan daykhat garab ga-i-aa. Gazing upon your body and wealth, you are so proud.
aed aHst fA ds eofets at on ferrets sath afer na TIS Il (906-9, sna, He 1) kanik kaamnee si-o hayt vaDhaa-ihi kee naam visaareh bharam ga-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your love for gold and sexual pleasures increases; why have you forgotten the Naam, and why do you wander in doubt? ||1||Pause] |
AS AS AWAY Ale o ohm us filme nfs aA] sfenr It (906-10, raat, He 1)
jat sat sanjam seel na raakhi-aa parayt pinjar meh kaasat bha-i-aa.
You do not practice truth, abstinence, self-discipline or humility; the ghost within your skeleton has turned to dry wood.
Ud we feHa's 3 HAH ATGHs fae afte AfeMr IQ (906-10, mat, He 1)
punn daan isnaan na sanjam saaDhsangat bin baad ja-i-aa. ||2]|
You have not practiced charity, donations, cleansing baths or austerities. Without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, your life has gone in vain. ||2]|
wots od on farfss nes Wes HOH afEMr Il (906-11, eat, He 1)
laalach laagai naam bisaari-o aavat jaavat janam ga-i-aa.
Attached to greed, you have forgotten the Naam. Coming and going, your life has been ruined.
vw aH of an afte Hd Hafs odt Hie are afeuT ZI (906-12, rae, He 1
jaa jam Dhaa-ay kays geh maarai surat nahee mukh kaal ga-i-aa. ||3]|
When the Messenger of Death grabs you by your hair, you will be punished. You are unconscious, and have fallen into Death's mouth. ||3]|
wifofath feet ais usret food ay 3 Aaa efemr Il (906-12, mat, He 1)
ahinis nindaa taat paraa-ee hirdai naam na sarab da-i-aa.
Day and night, you jealously slander others; in your heart, you have neither the Naam, nor compassion for all.
fag ad Aa 6 afs ufs wets TH OM fae sefa afeMr ISI (906-13, east, He 1)
bin gur sabad na gat pat paavahi raam naam bin narak ga-i-aa. ||4||
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you will not find salvation or honor. Without the Lord's Name, you shall go to hell. ||4||
fas ufs SA aafs sent fag Ha uy fe aes afer ii (06-14, mast, we 1)
khin meh vays karahi natoo-aa ji-o moh paap meh galat ga-i-aa.
In an instant, you change into various costumes, like a juggler; you are entangled in emotional attachment and sin.
fez Os whtor ofa unt Ho feor a Hae sfemr ull (06-14, mat, He D
it ut maa-i-aa daykh pasaaree moh maa-i-aa kai magan bha-i-aa. ||5]|
You gaze here and there upon the expanse of Maya; you are intoxicated with attachment to Maya. ||5]|
acts faors fears wdd Hols Hae faa sath ufenr I (906-15, mast, Hs 1)
karahi bikaar vithaar ghanayray surat sabad bin bharam pa-i-aa.
You act in corruption, and put on ostentatious shows, but without awareness of the Shabad, you have fallen into confusion.
ICH da Ho ey Sa TeHfs Seg Ja afar Ell (906-16, Hast, He 1)
ha-umai rog mahaa dukh laagaa gurmat layvhu rog ga-i-aa. ||6||
You suffer great pain from the disease of egotism. Following the Guru's Teachings, you shall be rid of this disease. ||6| |
AY Hufs a@ wres 24 was nfs ifsHe sfemr I (06-16, eat, He 1) sukh sampat ka-o aavat daykhai saakat man abhimaan bha-i-aa. Seeing peace and wealth come to him, the faithless cynic become proud in his mind.
fan o feg 36 U6 A fefs Se nists AOA TY UfeMr IDI (906-17, THA, Hs 1)
jis kaa ih tan Dhan so fir layvai antar sahsaa dookh pa-i-aa. ||7]|
But He who owns this body and wealth, takes them back again, and then the mortal feels anxiety and pain deep within. ||7]|
nifs ats fae Af o oS A dA AS fsAfo HfeMr II (906-18, erat, He 1) ant kaal kichh saath na chaalai jo deesai sabh tiseh ma-i-aa. At the very last instant, nothing goes along with you; all is visible only by His Mercy.
uife usy wudug A us dfs on fae & ute ufer Ici (906-18, THe, He 1)
aad purakh aprampar so parabh har naam ridai lai paar pa-i-aa. ||8]|
God is our Primal and Infinite Lord; enshrining the Lord's Name in the heart, one crosses over. ||8]|
He a@ defe fants Aerts S Aras mina ufenr Il (906-19, mast, Hs 1)
moo-ay ka-o roveh kiseh sunaaveh bhai saagar asraal pa-i-aa.
You weep for the dead, but who hears you weeping? The dead have fallen to the serpent in the terrifying world-ocean.
afy ada wenn fas veg Was Aas uate ufemr KM (906-19, mat, He 1)
daykh kutamb maa-i-aa garih mandar saakat janjaal paraal pa-i-aa. ||9|| Gazing upon his family, wealth, household and mansions, the faithless cynic is entangled in worthless worldly affairs. ||9]|
Ua coo
Ww ore at fafa use ws fd gore ofeur I (907-1, mat, He
jaa aa-ay taa tineh pathaa-ay chaalay tinai bulaa-ay la-i-aa.
He comes when the Lord sends him; when the Lord calls him back, he goes. a fag age’ A afs sfoor aunsad sufh ofenr 9011 (07-2, Hast, He 1)
jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa bakhsanhaarai bakhas la-i-aa. ||10|| Whatever he does, the Lord is doing. The Forgiving Lord forgives him. ||10] |
fafs Sg ome oH orfte fee at Aafs da sfemr I (907-2, mast, nH: 1) jin ayhu chaakhi-aa raam rasaa-in tin kee sangat khoj bha-i-aa. I seek to be with those who have tasted this sublime essence of the Lord.
fafa fifa aft fomrg ag 3 urfeor vats uevse Aefe ufemr 9A (907-3, Trast, 42 1) riDh siDh buDh gi-aan guroo tay paa-i-aa mukat padaarath saran pa-i-aa. ||11]| Wealth, miraculous spiritual powers, wisdom and spiritual knowledge, are obtained from the Guru. The treasure of liberation is obtained in His Sanctuary. ||11]|
eu AY qonfa AH afe wet Jou Aa 3 fasas sfenr Il (907-4, east, He 1) dukh sukh gurmukh sam kar jaanaa harakh sog tay birkat bha-i-aa.
The Gurmukh looks upon pain and pleasure as one and the same; he remains untouched by joy and sorrow.
my Hf aaHfa of ure aaa Aol AME Bent NIQNDI (907-4, THT, H8 1) aap maar gurmukh har paa-ay naanak sahj samaa-ay la-i-aa. ||12||7]| Conquering his self-conceit, the Gurmukh finds the Lord; O Nanak, he intuitively merges into the Lord. ||12||7]|
THaSt wuSt HIST Y Il (907-5)
raamkalee dakh-nee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, Dakhanee, First Mehl:
AS AZ AnH Ae fesfenr Ave Aafe ofA ster Al (907-5, saat waet, ve 1)
jat sat sanjam saach drirh-aa-i-aa saach sabad ras leenaa. ||1]|| Abstinence, chastity, self-control and truthfulness have been implanted within me; I am imbued with the sublime essence of the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
Ha Tg efenre Ae sfar Stat il (907-6, wast wat, nz 1) mayraa gur da-i-aal sadaa rang leenaa. My Merciful Guru remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love.
mfofofh ad Sa foe oat ATS Sf usta A TI i (907-7, THast Beet, He 1D)
ahinis rahai ayk liv laagee saachay daykh pateenaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Day and night, He remains lovingly focused on the One Lord; gazing upon the True Lord, He is pleased. ||1||Pause| |
vod aaa ufs fenfe AAAfs nous Aafe gaiter QI (907-7, raat wut, He 1)
rahai gagan pur darisat samaisar anhat sabad rangeenaa. ||2||
He abides in the Tenth Gate, and looks equally upon all; He is imbued with the unstruck sound current of the Shabad. ||2]|
AS fa aute steufs ote fave dfar arte 3 (907-8, east weet, He 1)
sat banDh kupeen bharipur leenaa jinvaa rang raseenaa. ||3]|
Wearing the loin-cloth of chastity, He remains absorbed in the all-pervading Lord; His tongue enjoys the taste of God's Love. ||3]|
fies aa ATS fafs so ae fags stots usta I18il (907-8, meat wUSt, He 1)
milai gur saachay jin rach raachay kirat veechaar pateenaa. ||4||
The One who created the creation has met the True Guru; contemplating the Guru's lifestyle, He is pleased. ||4| |
ea ufos Aga Asa ufo Sar Sa Afsate efe feet ull (907-9, arast weet, He 1) ayk meh sarab sarab meh aykaa ayh satgur daykh dikhaa-ee. ||5|| All are in the One, and the One is in all. This is what the True Guru has shown me.
[5] |
fafs ate us Hse yYNis A ys BYE B Wet HEN (907-10, mast waet, He 1) jin kee-ay khand mandal barahmandaa so parabh lakhan na jaa-ee. ||6||
He who created the worlds, solar systems and galaxies - that God cannot be known. [16] |
dua 3 dua userfior fase Afs feuret 1911 (907-10, sreet east, He 1)
deepak tay deepak pargaasi-aa taribhavan jot dikhaa-ee. ||7| |
From the lamp of God, the lamp within is lit; the Divine Light illuminates the three worlds. ||7||
He sufs Ae Host 86 fasse Sat Set CH (907-11, sHast weet, He 1
sachai takhat sach mahlee baithay nirbha-o taarhee laa-ee. ||8]||
The Guru sits on the true throne in the true mansion; He is attuned, absorbed in the Fearless Lord. ||8]|
Hf afsor Sarat rat wile whe feast set ti (07-1, mat weet, He 1)
mohi ga-i-aa bairaagee jogee ghat ghat kinguree vaa-ee. ||9] |
The Guru, the detached Yogi, has enticed the hearts of all; He plays His harp in each and every heart. ||9]|
aoa AoE ys at Se Asad AG AYTET NAONTI (907-12, THast wuet, He 1)
naanak saran parabhoo kee chhootay satgur sach sakhaa-ee. ||10]|8]||
O Nanak, in God's Sanctuary, one is emancipated; the True Guru becomes our true help and support. ||10]|8] |
THAT HIB Y Il (907-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 1. Raamkalee, First Mehl:
mals JAS Hat we stent gals Tease AG UT NA (907-13, THe, He 1)
a-uhath hasat marhee ghar chhaa-i-aa Dharan gagan kal Dhaaree. ||1]||
He has made His home in the monastery of the heart; He has infused His power into the earth and the sky. ||1]|
aonfy ast Aafe Borst AST Ul TIS Il (907-13, sHat, He
gurmukh kaytee sabad uDhaaree santahu. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Shabad, the Gurmukhs have saved so very many, O Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
HHS fs IH Ae fesef= APS SHS QI (907-14, THat, He 1)
mamtaa maar ha-umai sokhai taribhavan jot tumaaree. ||2| |
He conquers attachment, and eradicates egotism, and sees Your Divine Light pervading the three worlds, Lord. ||2]|
Hon Hfe HS Hfs ae Afsasg Aafe sted 3 (907-14, mat, He 1)
mansaa maar manai meh raakhai satgur sabad veechaaree. ||3]|
He conquers desire, and enshrines the Lord within his mind; he contemplates the Word of the True Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
fiat Feafs movofe aH ufe wie Hf SHH SII (907-15, Ta, He 1D
sinyee surat anaahad vaajai ghat ghat jot tumaaree. ||4||
The horn of consciousness vibrates the unstruck sound current; Your Light illuminates each and every heart, Lord. ||4||
usugs 8e Sdt He ahmr gon mats usar MU (907-16, rat, He 1) parpanch bayn tahee man raakhi-aa barahm agan parjaaree. ||5|| He plays the flute of the universe in his mind, and lights the fire of God. ||5]|
us 33 fife mifofafa crue foo Afs ont Ell (907-16, sat, He 1)
panch tat mil ahinis deepak nirmal jot apaaree. ||6||
Bringing together the five elements, day and night, the Lord's lamp shines with the Immaculate Light of the Infinite. ||6]|
dfe AfA oa fea 36 feast aH Aa feast IDI (907-17, mae, He
rav sas la-ukay ih tan kinguree vaajai sabad niraaree. ||7| |
The right and left nostrils, the sun and the moon channels, are the strings of the body-harp; they vibrate the wondrous melody of the Shabad. ||7||
fre dart Hf ore iO nied nig MrUTst ICI (907-17, Tree, He 1)
Siv nagree meh aasan a-oDhoo alakh agamm apaaree. ||8]||
The true hermit obtains a seat in the City of God, the invisible, inaccessible, infinite. [18] |
afent oadt fea Ho oat Us SAfs Sterct CI (907-18, mat, He 1)
kaa-i-aa nagree ih man raajaa panch vaseh veechaaree. ||9||
The mind is the king of the city of the body; the five sources of knowledge dwell within it. ||9]|
Rafe ge nrafs ufs aH nee AT TSaTaH MIOll (907-19, THast, He 1)
sabad ravai aasan ghar raajaa adal karay gunkaaree. ||10]|| Seated in his home, this king chants the Shabad; he administers justice and virtue. ||10]|
ae fares ad ats sud Hes Hor He HST NAA (907-19, THEM, He 1)
kaal bikaal kahay kahi bapuray jeevat moo-aa man maaree. ||11||
What can poor death or birth say to him? Conquering his mind, he remains dead while yet alive. ||11]|
Ua cot
gout fang HoH fea Hats nme ast art NAM (908-1, Tat, He 1)
barahmaa bisan mahays ik moorat aapay kartaa kaaree. ||12| |
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are manifestations of the One God. He Himself is the Doer of deeds. ||12]|
afer Aff 3d se AT MTSH Sz eters 1931 (908-1, mat, He 1)
kaa-i-aa soDh tarai bhav saagar aatam tat veechaaree. ||13]|
One who purifies his body, crosses over the terrifying world-ocean; he contemplates the essence of his own soul. ||13]|
ad Az 3 Ae AY ufeor nists Age dent Tears i9ll (908-2, mae, He 1)
gur sayvaa tay sadaa sukh paa-i-aa antar sabad ravi-aa gunkaaree. ||14] |
Serving the Guru, he finds everlasting peace; deep within, the Shabad permeates him, coloring him with virtue. ||14]]|
nny fs we Tees ICH feat Hest UAUII (908-3, THEA, He 1) aapay mayl la-ay gundaataa ha-umai tarisnaa maaree. ||15|| The Giver of virtue unites with Himself, one who conquers egotism and desire. ||15]|
3 ae Ae wea sas ST gals feast IEll (908-3, arraet, He 1)
tarai gun maytay cha-uthai vartai ayhaa bhagat niraaree. ||16]|
Eradicating the three qualities, dwell in the fourth state. This is the unparalleled devotional worship. ||16] |
qenfy Aa Aafe wisn we fase Sa Hast V1 (9038-4, sat, He 1)
gurmukh jog sabad aatam cheenai hirdai ayk muraaree. ||17]|
This is the Yoga of the Gurmukh: Through the Shabad, he understands his own soul, and he enshrines within his heart the One Lord. ||17]|
Hout wAfag Aa Ist Sat aTNat ATS MACH (908-4, THast, He 1)
manoo-aa asthir sabday raataa ayhaa karnee saaree. ||18] |
Imbued with the Shabad, his mind becomes steady and stable; this is the most excellent action. ||18]|
ae reo unig meg gente rate sterdt dell (08-5, mast, Hs 1)
bayd baad na pakhand a-oDhoo gurmukh sabad beechaaree. ||19]|
This true hermit does not enter into religious debates or hypocrisy; the Gurmukh contemplates the Shabad. ||19]|
TsHfe Aa aS muy AS AS Aafe est iQoll (908-5, meet, wz 1)
gurmukh jog kamaavai a-oDhoo jat sat sabad veechaaree. ||20||
The Gurmukh practices Yoga - he is the true hermit; he practices abstinence and truth, and contemplates the Shabad. ||20]|
Hafe He HO HS MB Aa Fats Sea UI (908-6, Tat, we 1) sabad marai man maaray a-oDhoo jog jugat veechaaree. ||21]|
One who dies in the Shabad and conquers his mind is the true hermit; he understands the Way of Yoga. ||21]||
Hfeor HI SSH T uieg Hale 3d AS Sra M2Ql (908-7, Hast, w2 1)
maa-i-aa moh bhavjal hai avDhoo sabad tarai kul taaree. ||22] |
Attachment to Maya is the terrifying world-ocean; through the Shabad, the true hermit saves himself, and his ancestors as well. ||22| |
Rafe Ad Fa US MSO set sats Stes QS (os-7, Hat, Hs 1)
sabad soor jug chaaray a-oDhoo banee bhagat veechaaree. ||23]|
Contemplating the Shabad, you shall be a hero throughout the four ages, O hermit; contemplate the Word of the Guru's Bani in devotion. ||23]|
fg He Hier Hfoor m@y fear Aafe Sterat Ql (908-8, THast, Hs 1)
ayhu man maa-i-aa mohi-aa a-oDhoo niksai sabad veechaaree. ||24| |
This mind is enticed by Maya, O hermit; contemplating the Shabad, you shall find release. ||24]|
mma aun Afs fee soa Hale SHAT QUIEN (908-8, Tat, He 1) aapay bakhsay mayl milaa-ay naanak saran tumaaree. ||25||9||
He Himself forgives, and unites in His Union; Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, Lord. [125] 191]
THaSt HIS 3 niu (908-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa Raamkalee, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsara YATE Il (908-10) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ASH chor Har aot ule Aatt fier afe 3 efemr it 08-11, mat, us 3) sarmai dee-aa mundraa kannee paa-ay jogee khinthaa kar too da-i-aa. Make humility your ear-rings, Yogi, and compassion your patched coat.
wee We fasts ofe Fat 3 Sie see fate ofenr Ail (908-11, mat, He 3)
aavan jaan bibhoot laa-ay jogee taa teen bhavan jin la-i-aa. ||1||
Let coming and going be the ashes you apply to your body, Yogi, and then you shall conquer the three worlds. ||1||
Met fast srf= aft i (908-12, mast, He 3) aisee kinguree vajaa-ay jogee. Play that harp, Yogi,
fas fotadt nese aH ofa fa@ ad foe ote Nal TIC Il (908-12, east, He 3)
jit kinguree anhad vaajai har si-o rahai liv laa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
which vibrates the unstruck sound current, and remain lovingly absorbed in the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
AS H3y us afe sat Aalt nifys ony gafs uret Il (908-13, anraet, He 3)
sat santokh pat kar jholee jogee amrit naam bhugat paa-ee.
Make truth and contentment your plate and pouch, Yogi; take the Ambrosial Naam as your food.
furs oa afs Sa Hat fist wafs SATS II (908-13, THAT, He 3)
Dhi-aan kaa kar dandaa jogee sinyee surat vajaa-ee. ||2||
Make meditation your walking stick, Yogi, and make higher consciousness the horn you blow. ||2||
Ho fes afe orafs SH Halt at Sct awu|ST AT I (908-14, raat, He 3)
man darirh kar aasan bais jogee taa tayree kalpanaa jaa-ee.
Make your stable mind the Yogic posture you sit in, Yogi, and then you shall be rid of your tormenting desires.
afenr sadt nfs Hats vats rat St STH US UTST NI (908-15, THAT, He 3)
kaa-i-aa nagree meh mangan charheh jogee taa naam palai paa-ee. ||3]|
Go begging in the village of the body, Yogi, and then, you shall obtain the Naam in your lap. ||3]|
fez fotadt fomrg 3 ord ait a AT US UTE I (908-15, ana, He 3)
it kinguree Dhi-aan na laagai jogee naa sach palai paa-ay.
This harp does not center you in meditation, Yogi, nor does it bring the True Name into your lap.
fez fotadt nifs 3 ure Fait mifsre 5 fees ATE ISI (08-16, mat, He 3) it kinguree saa‘t na aavai jogee abhimaan na vichahu jaa-ay. ||4]| This harp does not bring you peace, Yogi, nor eliminate egotism from within you. ||4]|
38 a fe us ofe Halt feg Adte afe Sat Il (908-16, mast, He 3)
bha-o bhaa-o du-ay pat laa-ay jogee ih sareer kar dandee.
Make the Fear of God, and the Love of God, the two gourds of your lute, Yogi, and make this body its neck.
qanfy defs at Sst an feo fafa fear dst ull (908-17, seat, He 3) gurmukh hoveh taa tantee vaajai in biDh tarisnaa khandee. ||5|| Become Gurmukh, and then vibrate the strings; in this way, your desires shall depart.
[5] |
Jan FS A Halt adba San fA fos we Il (08-18, mat, He 3)
hukam bujhai so jogee kahee-ai aykas si-o chit laa-ay.
One who understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command is called a Yogi; he links his consciousness to the One Lord.
Hom 3 fesns de ra qats fee ue Well (os-18, sat, Hs 3)
sahsaa tootai nirmal hovai jog jugat iv paa-ay. ||6]|
His cynicism is dispelled, and he becomes immaculately pure; this is how he finds the Way of Yoga. ||6]|
Sedt urea AS fae fon sia ASt fas ate II (038-19, mat, He 3)
nadree aavdaa sabh kichh binsai har saytee chit laa-ay.
Everything that comes into view shall be destroyed; focus your consciousness on the Lord.
Afsag ofs Sct aeat oat a feo ASt ufE DN (908-19, meat, He 3) satgur naal tayree bhaavnee laagai taa ih sojhee paa-ay. ||7|| Enshrine love for the True Guru, and then you shall obtain this understanding. ||7]||
Yar vor
&d Hd o de nat fa aca efs ussees asta Il (909-1, sat, He 3) ayhu jog na hovai jogee je kutamb chhod parbhavan karahi. This is not Yoga, O Yogi, to abandon your family and wander around.
fas Adte ufo fs ofs on as usAet ner ais ys Bald III (909-2, raat, Hs 3)
garih sareer meh har har naam gur parsaadee apnaa har parabh laheh. ||8]||
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is within the household of the body. By Guru's Grace, you shall find your Lord God. ||8]|
feg nas fret a user Hot fe ufo ga est feAor afer II (909-2, enact, He 3) ih jagat mitee kaa putlaa jogee is meh rog vadaa tarisnaa maa-i-aa. This world is a puppet of clay, Yogi; the terrible disease, the desire for Maya is in it.
Wa AS6 84 ad Halt dao ATE Tetfeor ICN (09-3, erat, He 3)
anayk jatan bhaykh karay jogee rog na jaa-ay gavaa-i-aa. ||9] |
Making all sorts of efforts, and wearing religious robes, Yogi, this disease cannot be cured. ||9]|
dfs a ay mug o Halt fAA S Hf SAS Il (909-4, ena, H2 3) har kaa naam a-ukhaDh hai jogee jis no man vasaa-ay. The Name of the Lord is the medicine, Yogi; the Lord enshrines it in the mind.
Tsnfe Tz Het Fs Aa Fats A US MAO! (909-4, ana, we 3) gurmukh hovai so-ee boojhai jog jugat so paa-ay. ||10|| One who becomes Gurmukh understands this; he alone finds the Way of Yoga. ||10]|
nat a Hea fem J Aait fA o sels ad A UTS Il (09-5, Haat, He 3)
jogai kaa maarag bikham hai jogee jis no nadar karay so paa-ay.
The Path of Yoga is very difficult, Yogi; he alone finds it, whom God blesses with His Grace.
nists wots Sa Fe fag SIN aS VWI (909-5, saat, He 3) antar baahar ayko vaykhai vichahu bharam chukaa-ay. ||11]|
Inside and outside, he sees the One Lord; he eliminates doubt from within himself. []11]|
fee srret faadt aa Fatt AT feast SATE Il (909-6, mnrast, He 3) vin vajaa-ee kinguree vaajai jogee saa kinguree vajaa-ay. So play the harp which vibrates without being played, Yogi.
ad aaa Hafs Jefe Fait AS Tafa ANTE NAVNAUIION (909-6, THAT, He 3) kahai naanak mukat hoveh jogee saachay raheh samaa-ay. ||12||1]||10]]|
Says Nanak, thus you shall be liberated, Yogi, and remain merged in the True Lord. []12][1]]10]|
THaASt HIS 3 Il (909-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 3. Raamkalee, Third Mehl:
sats una Tenfy ast Afsate sf asst Wall (909-7, arrast, He 3)
bhagat khajaanaa gurmukh jaataa satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||1]|
The treasure of devotional worship is revealed to the Gurmukh; the True Guru has inspired me to understand this understanding. ||1||
Hag aonfa af efamret na ga i (09-8, erat, ne 3) santahu gurmukh day-ay vadi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Saints, the Gurmukh is blessed with glorious greatness. ||1]||Pause] |
Afs dg Ae AoA AY Cun an au fess wet III (909-8, erat, He 3)
sach rahhu sadaa sahj sukh upjai kaam kroDh vichahu jaa-ee. ||2]|
Dwelling always in Truth, celestial peace wells up; sexual desire and anger are eliminated from within. ||2||
nity éfs on fos walt HHS" Aafe ABST BI (909-9, ara, He 3)
aap chhod naam liv laagee mamtaa sabad jalaa-ee. ||3]|
Eradicating self-conceit, remain lovingly focused on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Word of the Shabad, burn away possessiveness. ||3]|
fan 3 Gun fsn 3 faor nis oF AaTet ISI (09-9, eat, He 3)
jis tay upjai tis tay binsai antay naam sakhaa-ee. ||4||
By Him we are created, and by Him we are destroyed; in the end, the Naam will be our only help and support. ||4]|
Hel date efs og tug guar fats Favet Wu (909-10, anrast, He 3) sadaa hajoor door nah daykhhu rachnaa jin rachaa-ee. ||5|| He is ever-present; don't think that He is far away. He created the creation. ||5| |
Hel Hae de we nists Ae fae foe wet NEI (909-10, east, He 3)
sachaa sabad ravai ghat antar sachay si-o liv laa-ee. ||6||
Deep within your heart, chant the True Word of the Shabad; remain lovingly absorbed in the True Lord. ||6]||
AsHats xfs ay fasted es afar urfemr aret DI (09-11, araet, He 3) satsangat meh naam nirmolak vadai bhaag paa-i-aa jaa-ee. ||7| |
The Priceless Naam is in the Society of the Saints; by great good fortune, it is obtained. ||7||
3d o god Afsag Aeg Ho Tug fea set ICI (909-12, east, He 3)
bharam na bhoolahu satgur sayvhu man raakho ik thaa-ee. ||8]||
Do not be deluded by doubt; serve the True Guru, and keep your mind steady in one place. ||8]|
fag we As got feaet fase AON aeTeT IKI (909-12, Hast, Hs 3)
bin naavai sabh bhoolee firdee birthaa janam gavaa-ee. ||9]|
Without the Name, everyone wanders around in confusion; they waste away their lives in vain. ||9]|
nat Fats Tevet Je unifs Aa o ust AON! (909-13, saat, He 3)
jogee jugat gavaa-ee handhai pakhand jog na paa-ee. ||10||
Yogi, you have lost the Way; you wander around confused. Through hypocrisy, Yoga is not attained. ||10||
fre sadt ufo urafs SA ae Aaet Aa UST AAI (909-13, sa, He 3)
siv nagree meh aasan baisai gur sabdee jog paa-ee. ||11]||
Sitting in Yogic postures in the City of God, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall find Yoga. ||11]|
sg at nafe foes an SA Hfe niet 9211 (909-14, Hast, He 3)
Dhaatur baajee sabad nivaaray naam vasai man aa-ee. ||12|| Restrain your restless wanderings through the Shabad, and the Naam will come to dwell in your mind. ||12]|
&g Adlg Hded 3 Hag fenoe ad fos wet 1931 (909-14, saat, He 3) ayhu sareer sarvar hai santahu isnaan karay liv laa-ee. ||13]| This body is a pool, O Saints; bathe in it, and enshrine love for the Lord. ||13]|
of fenars acts A He fone Hae HS Tevet AVll (909-15, sat, He 3)
naam isnaan karahi say jan nirmal sabday mail gavaa-ee. ||14||
Those who cleanse themselves through the Naam, are the most immaculate people; through the Shabad, they wash off their filth. ||14]|
3 Te ws on Bate oct fas ae faofh WET QUI (909-16, THT, He 3)
tarai gun achayt naam cheeteh naahee bin naavai binas jaa-ee. ||15]|
Trapped by the three qualities, the unconscious person does not think of the Naam; without the Name, he wastes away. ||15]||
qu fang Hen 3 Hols fale sath gHet VEN (909-16, Trt, H2 3)
barahmaa bisan mahays tarai moorat tarigun bharam bhulaa-ee. ||16]||
The three forms of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are trapped in the three qualities, lost in confusion. ||16]|
qs usAet fyaet se BSE ule fee Bet A Il (909-17, Trae, He 3)
gur parsaadee tarikutee chhootai cha-uthai pad liv laa-ee. ||17]|
By Guru's Grace, this triad is eradicated, and one is lovingly absorbed in the fourth state. ||17]||
lfss usta ufs we sures far gs o Uret ATI (909-18, sat, He 3)
pandit parheh parh vaad vakaaneh tinnaa boojh na paa-ee. ||18] |
The Pandits, the religious scholars, read, study and discuss the arguments; they do not understand. ||18]|
fator Hs sofh gore Buen aats fan set NACI (909-18, sHast, He 3)
bikhi-aa maatay bharam bhulaa-ay updays kaheh kis bhaa-ee. ||19]|
Engrossed in corruption, they wander in confusion; who can they possibly instruct, O Siblings of Destiny? ||19]]|
sas Ao ot SSH set afer afar got AHTET NON (909-19, east, He 3)
bhagat janaa kee ootam banee jug jug rahee samaa-ee. ||20||
The Bani, the Word of the humble devotee is the most sublime and exalted; it prevails throughout the ages. ||20]|
wel wa A afs ue Age Afs AHTET MUI (909-19, aH, He 3) banee laagai so gat paa-ay sabday sach samaa-ee. ||21]||
One who is committed to this Bani is emancipated, and through the Shabad, merges in Truth. ||21]|
Yar £90
afer oadt Age dA oH de fafa ust 122K (910-1, snraet, v3 3)
kaa-i-aa nagree sabday khojay naam nava" niDh paa-ee. ||22||
One who searches the village of the body, through the Shabad, obtains the nine treasures of the Naam. ||22]|
Hon Hd HO Adfa AHTe! fae JAat CHsfs aaet QSIl (910-1, as, v2 3)
mansaa maar man sahj samaanaa bin rasnaa ustat karaa-ee. ||23]||
Conquering desire, the mind is absorbed in intuitive ease, and then one chants the Lord's Praises without speaking. ||23]|
Slee ofa od farret fos uifenfe waret i291 (910-2, erat, He 3)
lo-in daykh rahay bismaadee chit adisat lagaa-ee. ||24]|
Let your eyes gaze upon the Wondrous Lord; let your consciousness be attached to the Unseen Lord. ||24||
wifene Ae dd foro wat AS forest QUI (910-3, rast, He 3)
adisat sadaa rahai niraalam jotee jot milaa-ee. ||25]||
The Unseen Lord is forever absolute and immaculate; one's light merges into the Light. ||25]|
UG ag Wad Ae nrue fas AS Ts Tse NEN (910-3, sHat, He 3)
ha-o gur saalaahee sadaa aapnaa jin saachee boojh bujhaa-ee. ||26||
I praise my Guru forever, who has inspired me to understand this true understanding. ||26]|
Sod SA ad Host aeg als ufS uret NDNA (910-4, THe, He 3)
naanak ayk kahai baynantee naavhu gat pat paa-ee. ||27||2||11]|| Nanak offers this one prayer: through the Name, may I find salvation and honor. [127] [2]]121|
THaASt HIS 3 Il (910-5)
raamkalee mehlaa 3. Raamkalee, Third Mehl:
Ofs at UH CHS I AST ATS AT H AT AU (910-5, Trae, ns 3)
har kee poojaa dulambh hai santahu kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ee. ||1||
It is so hard to obtain that devotional worship of the Lord, O Saints. It cannot be described at all. ||1]|
ASd TaHfe yar uret il (910-5, oat, we 3)
santahu gurmukh pooraa paa-ee. O Saints, as Gurmukh, find the Perfect Lord,
OH UA TIT UU TIS I (910-6, Treas, ws 3)
naamo pooj karaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. and worship the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
ofs fag Ag fas Her Asg foamr 3B yA Tare MQM (910-6, Tra, He 3)
har bin sabh kichh mailaa santahu ki-aa ha-o pooj charhaa-ee. ||2||
Without the Lord, everything is filthy, O Saints; what offering should I place before Him? ||2| |
fs APS SS AT UAT TS Stat HS SATE MSI (910-7, Trt, we 3) har saachay bhaavai saa poojaa hovai bhaanaa man vasaa-ee. ||3]|| Whatever pleases the True Lord is devotional worship; His Will abides in the mind.
[I3I|
UH ad AY BA A3gT HoOHfy ate & uret sil (10-7, THast, Hs 3)
poojaa karai sabh lok santahu manmukh thaa-ay na paa-ee. ||4]|
Everyone worships Him, O Saints, but the self-willed manmukh is not accepted or approved. ||4]|
Hafe Ho HO fosHs Hag Sa uA ate uret Ul (910-8, mat, He 3)
sabad marai man nirmal santahu ayh poojaa thaa-ay paa-ee. ||5||
If someone dies in the Word of the Shabad, his mind become immaculate, O Saints; such worship is accepted and approved. ||5||
ufes USO A HO ATS Sa Hale fee wet iléll (910-8, mast, ve 3) pavit paavan say jan saachay ayk sabad liv laa-ee. ||6|| Sanctified and pure are those true beings, who enshrine love for the Shabad. ||6| |
fag ae dd UA 3 det Sa Fat Saret DI (910-9, anaat, v2 3) bin naavai hor pooj na hovee bharam bhulee lokaa-ee. ||7| |
There is no worship of the Lord, other than the Name; the world wanders, deluded by doubt. ||7]||
Tanfe nmy use HST TH oft fos wet ici (910-9, east, He 3)
gurmukh aap pachhaanai santahu raam naam liv laa-ee. ||8]|
The Gurmukh understands his own self, O Saints; he lolvingly centers his mind on the Lord's Name. ||8]|
mnt fosHe uA ase Ts Ast ate uret ICM (910-10, eat, He 3)
aapay nirmal pooj karaa-ay gur sabdee thaa-ay paa-ee. ||9||
The Immaculate Lord Himself inspires worship of Him; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is accepted and approved. ||9||
um aate ug fafa odt wets gH ote HS Bet ION (910-10, Trae, He 3)
poojaa karahi par biDh nahee jaaneh doojai bhaa-ay mal laa-ee. ||10||
Those who worship Him, but do not know the Way, are polluted with the love of duality. ||10]|
TsHfe TS A UA WE star HfS SATET AAU (910-11, THe, Hs 3)
gurmukh hovai so poojaa jaanai bhaanaa man vasaa-ee. ||11]|
One who becomes Gurmukh, knows what worship is; the Lord's Will abides within his mind. ||11]|
we 3 Afs AY US AST MIS OH Aa IQ (10-12, Ta, He 3)
bhaanay tay sabh sukh paavai santahu antay naam sakhaa-ee. ||12||
One who accepts the Lord's Will obtains total peace, O Saints; in the end, the Naam will be our help and support. ||12||
wus nity 3 ustefs Had afs ate sfsuret Sil (910-12, grat, H3 3) apnaa aap na pachhaaneh santahu koorh karahi vadi-aa-ee. ||13]| One who does not understand his own self, O Saints, falsely flatters himself. ||13]|
uns ate AH Sdt SS B AAT ufs Tevet 19811 (910-13, erat, He 3)
pakhand keenai jam nahee chhodai lai jaasee pat gavaa-ee. ||14||
The Messenger of Death does not give up on those who practices hypocrisy; they are dragged away in disgrace. ||14||
fre nists Age wimg uetafe afs fufs feo ct ust NU (910-13, aHat, He 3)
jin antar sabad aap pachhaaneh gat mit tin hee paa-ee. ||15]||
Those who have the Shabad deep within, understand themselves; they find the way of salvation. ||15]|
So HOM Ho AHTE Bare Ast AfS fHeret AEM (910-14, Trae, He 3)
ayhu manoo-aa sunn samaaDh lagaavai jotee jot milaa-ee. ||16] |
Their minds enter into the deepest state of Samaadhi, and their light is absorbed into the Light. ||16] |
Afs afs aenfa on eeurafa ASAafs Horet N91 (910-15, THA, He 3)
sun sun gurmukh naam vakaaneh satsangat maylaa-ee. ||17]||
The Gurmukhs listen constantly to the Naam, and chant it in the True Congregation. []17]|
Tenfe ae wry dere ofs ATS AST uTet NACI (10-15, THAT, He 3) gurmukh gaavai aap gavaavai dar saachai sobhaa paa-ee. ||18]||
The Gurmukhs sing the Lord's Praises, and erase self-conceit; they obtain true honor in the Court of the Lord. ||18]|
Ao sal Ay sue Afe ath fee wet IKI (910-16, erat, H2 3)
saachee banee sach vakhaanai sach naam liv laa-ee. ||19] | True are their words; they speak only the Truth; they lovingly focus on the True Name. ||19]|
3 sno ifs uy fadne Ha ys nifs Aaret Ol (910-16, Tat, He 3)
bhai bhanjan at paap nikhanjan mayraa parabh ant sakhaa-ee. ||20] |
My God is the Destroyer of fear, the Destroyer of sin; in the end, He is our only help and support. ||20||
AS fae vm orf eas aot att SfSnret QASIM (910-17, THAT, He 3)
sabh kichh aapay aap vartai naanak naam vadi-aa-ee. ||21]||3]|12|| He Himself pervades and permeates everything; O Nanak, glorious greatness is obtained through the Naam. ||21||3||12||
THaASt HIS 3 Il (910-18)
raamkalee mehlaa 3. Raamkalee, Third Mehl:
JH Ave ade nifs niferst fife Hae HS Csr 9 (10-18, at, He 3)
ham kuchal kucheel at abhimaanee mil sabday mail utaaree. ||1]||
I am filthy and polluted, proud and egotistical; receiving the Word of the Shabad, my filth is taken away. ||1||
Hag auf of fansrdt il (910-19, mat, He 3) santahu gurmukh naam nistaaree. O Saints, the Gurmukhs are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ret on efhor we nists aes urfu Ae|rct il TIS Il (10-19, saat, He 3)
sachaa naam vasi-aa ghat antar kartai aap savaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Name abides deep within their hearts. The Creator Himself embellishes them. ||1]|Pause| |
Uuar £99 urd udA fefs usa de fe AG vrvret fag ost NN C1-1, Tat, He 3)
paaras parsay fir paaras ho-ay har jee-o apnee kirpaa Dhaaree. ||2|| Touching the philosopher's stone, they themselves become the philosopher's stone; the Dear Lord Himself blesses them with His Mercy. ||2]|
fefa su cafe feats mifsurat fae at at Tet SI Cu-1, Tret, we 3)
ik bhaykh karahi fireh abhimaanee tin joo-ai baajee haaree. ||3] |
Some wear religious robes, and wander around in pride; they lose their life in the gamble. ||3||
fefa nates sats acts feo ast an aH fe wet sil (11-2, mas, He 3)
ik an-din bhagat karahi din raatee raam naam ur Dhaaree. ||4]|
Some worship the Lord in devotion, night and day; day and night, they keep the Lord's Name enshrined in their hearts. ||4]|
Woes TS AIA HS AIA TBH HST UI (11-3, sat, He 3)
an-din raatay sehjay maatay sehjay ha-umai maaree. ||5||
Those who are imbued with Him night and day, are spontaneously intoxicated with Him; they intuitively conquer their ego. ||5]|
3 fas safs 5 det as ot Ss ate sats ASH NEN (911-3, east, H 3)
bhai bin bhagat na ho-ee kab hee bhai bhaa-ay bhagat savaaree. ||6||
Without the Fear of God, devotional worship is never performed; through the Love and the Fear of God, devotional worship is embellished. | |6] |
Hear Hg Aafe Herfenr famrfs sfs sted Oi (1-4, anast, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaa-i-aa gi-aan tat beechaaree. ||7]||
The Shabad burns away emotional attachment to Maya, and then one contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom. ||7]|
nm wify age agsat wm suff gardt util (11-4, arast, v2 3)
aapay aap karaa-ay kartaa aapay bakhas bhandaaree. ||8]| The Creator Himself inspires us to act; He Himself blesses us with His treasure. ||8]|
fSA for gat at nis 3 ufeor o@ arer Aafe Sterct CI (911-5, raat, He 3)
tis ki-aa gunaa kaa ant na paa-i-aa ha-o gaavaa sabad veechaaree. ||9]|
The limits of His virtues cannot be found; I sing His Praises and contemplate the Word of the Shabad. ||9]|
dfs ME Aut afe AE Ad feaT miu foes IOI! (11-6, ara, He 3)
har jee-o japee har jee-o saalaahee vichahu aap nivaaree. ||10||
I chant the Lord's Name, and praise my Dear Lord; egotism is eradicated from within me. |[10]|
oy ued dd 3 fer mrs AS SSH NAA (11-6, THA, He 3)
naam padaarath gur tay paa-i-aa akhut sachay bhandaaree. ||11]||
The treasure of the Naam is obtained from the Guru; the treasures of the True Lord are inexhaustible. ||11]|
wufsnt saIst S wm Zor niet fasur afs awe Urs 9M (911-7, THA, He 3)
apni-aa bhagtaa no aapay tuthaa apnee kirpaa kar kal Dhaaree. ||12||
He Himself is pleased with His devotees; by His Grace, He infuses His strength within them. ||12] |
f36 ATS OH St Het sy Bet Wels Hale Saat iASll (911-7, saat, ue 3)
tin saachay naam kee sadaa bhukh laagee gaavan sabad veechaaree. ||13]|
They always feel hunger for the True Name; they sing and contemplate the Shabad. ||13]|
mG fiz ng fae d fA at nme fn Sterst 98 (911-8, oat, He 3)
jee-o pind sabh kichh hai tis kaa aakhan bikham beechaaree. ||14||
Soul, body and everything are His; it is so difficult to speak of, and contemplate Him. [|14]|
Rafe od Aet Ao feHsd sene utes Sarat U9Ull (11-9, srat, He 3)
sabad lagay say-ee jan nistaray bha-ojal paar utaaree. ||15]||
Those humble beings who are attached to the Shabad are saved; they cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||15] |
fag dfs Ars a fs Burs FS a Sarat IIEM (11-9, gaat, we 3)
bin har saachay ko paar na paavai boojhai ko veechaaree. ||16||
Without the True Lord, no one can cross over; how rare are those who contemplate and understand this. ||16]|
a Ufa foftimr Fret urfeor fife ofs Aafe Heat AD II (11-10, THT, He 3)
jo Dhur likhi-aa so-ee paa-i-aa mil har sabad savaaree. ||17]|
We obtain only that which is pre-ordained; receiving the Lord's Shabad, we are embellished. ||17]|
afin ave Hae ast Are are fimrdt nati (1-10, saat, He 3)
kaa-i-aa kanchan sabday raatee saachai naa-ay pi-aaree. ||18]|
Imbued with the Shabad, the body becomes golden, and loves only the True Name. ||18]|
ofenr nifyfs sot sous ureint Hate Sars ue (1-11, Tae, v2 3) kaa-i-aa amrit rahee bharpooray paa-ee-ai sabad veechaaree. ||19||
The body is then filled to overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar, obtained by contemplating the Shabad. ||19]|
nf Us nfs wet uete dfs gfe HE MIAH MOM (911-12, Tat, He 3) jo parabh khojeh say-ee paavahi hor foot moo-ay aha“kaaree. ||20|| Those who seek God, find Him; others burst and die from their own egotism. ||20] |
aet faonfs Aza Refs ae & OS filmit 1291 (1-12, erst, He 3)
baadee binsahi sayvak sayveh gur kai hayt pi-aaree. ||21||
The debaters waste away, while the servants serve, with love and affection for the Guru. ||21||
A rat 33 fomre stes JEN feAar weet 112211 (11-13, raat, He 3)
SO jogee tat gi-aan beechaaray ha-umai tarisnaa maaree. ||22||
He alone is a Yogi, who contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom, and conquers egotism and thirsty desire. ||22]|
Afsag ost fs uerst faR 3 fur SHH QSZil (11-13, Hast, He 3) satgur daataa tinai pachhaataa jis no kirpaa tumaaree. ||23]|
The True Guru, the Great Giver, is revealed to those upon whom You bestow Your Grace, O Lord. ||23]|
Afsag 3 Refs wfenr ord sfa He uidardt NQSil (1-14, gas, Hs 3)
satgur na sayveh maa-i-aa laagay doob moo-ay aha™kaaree. ||24]|
Those who do not serve the True Guru, and who are attached to Maya, are drowned; they die in their own egotism. ||24||
fraud viefs wm foe Ae ote ate fish ot Hast QUI (911-15, aHaaH, He 3) jichar andar saas tichar sayvaa keechai jaa-ay milee-ai raam muraaree. ||25] |
As long as there is breath within you, so long you should serve the Lord; then, you will go and meet the Lord. ||25]|
wofes Aas dd feg ast mrs finn uffs fimrst QE (11-15, mat, ue 3)
an-din jaagat rahai din raatee apnay pari-a pareet pi-aaree. ||26]||
Night and day, she remains awake and aware, day and night; she is the darling bride of her Beloved Husband Lord. ||26]|
3o HO Vest Ste wrest nus ag feed afer iQDI1 (911-16, anrast, Hs 3) tan man vaaree vaar ghumaa-ee apnay gur vitahu balihaaree. ||27]|| I offer my body and mind in sacrifice to my Guru; I am a sacrifice to Him. ||27]|
Hfeor Hg faofa wfear Cad Aafe Sed ci (911-17, east, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh binas jaa-igaa ubray sabad veechaaree. ||28]|
Attachment to Maya will end and go away; only by contemplating the Shabad will you be saved. ||28]|
wimfy ware ASt ATH TT a Ate Spas Ici (1-17, east, He 3) aap jagaa-ay Say-ee jaagay gur kai sabad veechaaree. ||29]|
They are awake and aware, whom the Lord Himself awakens; so contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||29]|
oon Het ye ft on o Vale sas Ate Stes WSONSNIIl (1-18, east, He 3)
naanak say-ee moo-ay je naam na cheeteh bhagat jeevay veechaaree. ||30||4||13]| O Nanak, those who do not remember the Naam are dead. The devotees live in contemplative meditation. ||30||4||13]|
THaASt HIS 3 Il (911-19)
raamkalee mehlaa 3. Raamkalee, Third Mehl:
OH une ae 3 ufenr feufs gs nmwuret Al (911-19, THe, He 3)
naam khajaanaa gur tay paa-i-aa taripat rahay aaghaa-ee. ||1]|
Receiving the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, from the Guru, I remain satisfied and fulfilled. ||1]|
Hag aenfa vats afs uret it (1-19, mat, He 3) santahu gurmukh mukat gat paa-ee. O Saints, the Gurmukhs attain the state of liberation.
Yat EIQ Sa oH shor we nists us at sfsmret dil TIS Il (912-1, Traast, we 3)
ayk naam vasi-aa ghat antar pooray kee vadi-aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The One Name abides deep within my heart; such is the glorious greatness of the Perfect Lord. ||1||Pause| |
MY Ags wMy gars" Ser faAg AASt iQ (912-1, mast, vs 3)
aapay kartaa aapay bhugtaa daydaa rijak sabaa-ee. ||2]|
He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer. He Himself gives sustenance to all. ||2||
ni fae age A ate sfoor nied o AdeSt Aet IBI (912-2, eH, He 3) jo kichh karnaa so kar rahi-aa avar na karnaa jaa-ee. ||3]| Whatever He wants to do, He is doing; no one else can do anything. ||3]|
nny ATA fqAfe Cure ffs fafe do art ei (912-2, erat, ne 3)
aapay Saajay sarisat upaa-ay sir sir DhanDhai laa-ee. ||4||
He Himself fashions and creates the creation; He links each and every person to their task. ||4]|
farts Adeg 3 AY ueg Afsate vfs fhoret iui (912-3, sas, He 3) tiseh sarayvhu taa sukh paavhu satgur mayl milaa-ee. ||5|| If you serve Him, then you will find peace; the True Guru will unite you in His Union.
[5] |
ntuar ning nif Bure nie o BeSt AST NEM (912-4, mat, He 3) aapnaa aap aap upaa-ay alakh na lakh-naa jaa-ee. ||6]| The Lord Himself creates Himself; the Unseen Lord cannot be seen. ||6]|
nm uifs Hes nm fSH 3 fSe B SHE IDI (912-4, eH, He 3) aapay maar jeevaalay aapay tis no til na tamaa-ee. ||7]|| He Himself kills, and brings back to life; He does not have even an iota of greed. ||7]||
fefe os fefa Has aS wm sats aaret Ici (912-5, anaet, He 3)
ik daatay ik mangtay keetay aapay bhagat karaa-ee. ||8]||
Some are made givers, and some are made beggars; He Himself inspires us to devotional worship. ||8] |
A waa frat Sa AST AS Td ANTS NCI (912-5, THA, He 3) say vadbhaagee jinee ayko jaataa sachay rahay samaa-ee. ||9||
Those who know the One Lord are very fortunate; they remain absorbed in the True Lord. ||9]|
wify Agu frre ume atHfs age o ATE ION (912-6, THAT, He 3) aap saroop si-aanaa aapay keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||10]|
He Himself is beautiful, He Himself is wise and clever; His worth cannot be expressed. ||10]|
mm} wy AY ue nists mm) sof Taret AAU (912-6, THA, He 3)
aapay dukh sukh paa-ay antar aapay bharam bhulaa-ee. ||11]|
He Himself infuses pain and pleasure; He Himself makes them wander around in doubt. ||11||
zat ust qenfy ast foadt nia fed Savst 9 (912-7, sn1aat, He 3) vadaa daataa gurmukh jaataa niguree anDh firai lokaa-ee. ||12]||
The Great Giver is revealed to the Gurmukh; without the Guru, the world wanders in darkness. ||12||
frat otto fer Are orfenr Afsafa gs gETet ASI (912-7, Tash, v2 3) jinee chaakhi-aa tinaa saad aa-i-aa satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||13]| Those who taste, enjoy the flavor; the True Guru imparts this understanding. ||13]|
feast oes nity gare fea aaHfy ef asret 198i (912-8, saat, He 3)
iknaa naavhu aap bhulaa-ay iknaa gurmukh day-ay bujhaa-ee. ||14] |
Some, the Lord causes to forget and lose the Name; others become Gurmukh, and are granted this understanding. ||14||
Re Ae Atos HSd fA et eat Sfsnret aul (912-9, sat, He 3) sadaa sadaa saalaahihu santahu tis dee vadee vadi-aa-ee. ||15]|| Forever and ever, praise the Lord, O Saints; how glorious is His greatness! ||15] |
fan faa nied 3 aet ont afe Suren Bes Fare IME! (912-9, Tat, He 3) tis bin avar na ko-ee raajaa kar tapaavas banat banaa-ee. ||16]|| There is no other King except Him; He administers justice, as He has made it. ||16]|
fourG fsA ad Ae Ate fess JAH HOST NADI (912-10, mat, He 3) ni-aa-o tisai kaa hai sad saachaa virlay hukam manaa-ee. ||17]|| His justice is always True; how rare are those who accept His Command. ||17]|
fsn 3 urat Het fomreg fafs aenfs ses geTeT NACI (912-11, THM, He 3)
tis no paraanee sadaa Dhi-aavahu jin gurmukh banat banaa-ee. ||18]|
O mortal, meditate forever on the Lord, who has made the Gurmukh in His making. ||18]|
Afsag 3¢ A AS ALS fan fose a SAT IQEN (912-11, Tat, He 3)
satgur bhaytai so jan seejhai jis hirdai naam vasaa-ee. ||19]|
That humble being who meets with the True Guru is fulfilled; the Naam abides in his heart. ||19]|
Ret wif Het F ATet eat Aafe Ase OM (912-12, aH, He 3)
sachaa aap sadaa hai saachaa banee sabad sunaa-ee. ||20]| The True Lord is Himself forever True; He announces His Bani, the Word of His Shabad. ||20]|
soa Afe Sfy stor feAHte Hat ys dent Aa set NIUUINASI (912-12, THT, Hs 3) naanak sun vaykh rahi-aa vismaad mayraa parabh ravi-aa sarab thaa-ee.
[121] [5]]14]|
Nanak is wonderstruck, hearing and seeing His Lord; my God is all-pervading, everywhere. ||21]||5||14]|
THaSt HIS Uu mMAcUdMIT (912-14)
raamkalee mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsaa ure Il (912-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fxadt aor ustests UATS Il (912-15, aHaet, He 5) kinhee kee-aa parvirat pasaaraa. Some make a big show of their worldly influence.
faodt otter yar frarat il (912-15, east, He 5) kinhee kee-aa poojaa bisthaaraa. Some make a big show of devotional worship.
faodt foes sfeniant ATH II (912-15, anraat, He 5)
kinhee nival bhu-i-angam saaDhay.
Some practice inner cleansing teahniques, and control the breath through Kundalini Yoga.
Hfo ete ofa afs mira All (912-16, mat, He 5) mohi deen har har aaraaDhay. ||1]| I am meek; I worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
3a samt fimirg i (12-16, aah, v2 5) tayraa bharosaa pi-aaray. I place my faith in You alone, O Beloved Lord.
MTS & AO! SAT UA TIS Il (912-16, sat, Hs 5) aan na jaanaa vaysaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I do not know any other way. ||1]|Pause| |
faodt fags sfa ze dfs urfemr It (912-16, anraat, ne 5) kinhee garihu taj van khand paa-i-aa. Some abandon their homes, and live in the forests.
faodt Hfs mBus Aefemr i 12-17, mat, H8 5) kinhee mon a-uDhoot sadaa-i-aa. Some put themselves on silence, and call themselves hermits.
aet aos msfs sat i 012-17, mat, v2 5) ko-ee kahta-o annan bhag-utee. Some claim that they are devotees of the One Lord alone.
Hfs ate af afs Ge SST 2 (912-18, srraat, 2 5)
mohi deen har har ot leetee. ||2|| I am meek; I seek the shelter and support of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2]|
fxodt afm IB Stee SH Il (912-18, wat, H2 5) kinhee kahi-aa ha-o tirath vaasee. Some say that they live at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
at nig sta sfeor Bet i 912-18, mat, v2 5) ko-ee ann taj bha-i-aa udaasee. Some refuse food and become Udaasis, shaven-headed renunciates.
fxodt 326 AS Vast Afni Il (912-19, saat, Hs 5) kinhee bhavan sabh Dhartee kari-aa. Some have wandered all across the earth.
Hfs ate afs afe efs ufemr sit (912-19, sraat, 12 5)
mohi deen har har dar pari-aa. ||3]| I am meek; I have fallen at the door of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
fasdt afour 4 aafs efsnret II (912-19, aac, He 5) kinhee kahi-aa mai kuleh vadi-aa-ee. Some say that they belong to great and noble families.
Ua £93 fxodt atom ad ag Set I (913-1, saat, He 5)
kinhee kahi-aa baah baho bhaa-ee. Some say that they have the arms of their many brothers to protect them.
act ad H USfa UATE Il (913-1, THA, He 5) ko-ee kahai mai dhaneh pasaaraa. Some say that they have great expanses of wealth.
Hfo fe afe afs wars igi (913-1, Tat, He 5) mohi deen har har aaDhaaraa. ||4] | I am meek; I have the support of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|
faodt yurs feats xaret i (913-2, erat, He 5) kinhee ghooghar nirat karaa-ee. Some dance, wearing ankle bells.
fad SIS OH Her uret I (913-2, Hast, He 5) kinhoo varat naym maalaa paa-ee. Some fast and take vows, and wear malas.
faadt fsea aut dee ofenr i (13-2, saat, ve 5) kinhee tilak gopee chandan laa-i-aa. Some apply ceremonial tilak marks to their foreheads.
Hfo ae afe af af foerfeor ull (013-3, oat, He 5) mohi deen har har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||5|| I am meek; I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||5]|
fxodt fra ag Sea BE Il (913-3, Tat, He 5) kinhee siDh baho chaytak laa-ay. Some work spells using the miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas.
fxodt su aT WS ASS Il (913-4, east, He 5) kinhee bhaykh baho thaat banaa-ay. Some wear various religious robes and establish their authority.
faodt 33 HS FT VST Il (913-4, oat, He 5) kinhee tant mant baho khayvaa. Some perform Tantric spells, and chant various mantras.
Hf ate ofa af afe AST NEN (913-4, Hast, 4 5) mohi deen har har har sayvaa. ||6]| I am meek; I serve the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||6||
aet vag aoe] ufss il (913-5, oat, v2 5) ko-ee chatur kahaavai pandit. One calls himself a wise Pandit, a religious scholar.
a uz aan Afos fr Hiss 1 (13-5, at, He 5) ko khat karam sahit si-o mandit. One performs the six rituals to appease Shiva.
aet A vires Haat Il (913-5, THat, v2 5) ko-ee karai aachaar sukarnee. One maintains the rituals of pure lifestyle, and does good deeds.
Hfa ate ofs ofs afs Agat WDM (913-5, THT, He 5) mohi deen har har har sarnee. ||7]|| I am meek; I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||7]|
Ags ATH USH Aa AT Il (913-6, Tat, ve 5) saglay karam Dharam jug soDhay. I have studied the religions and rituals of all the ages.
fag are feg Ho o UST II (913-6, mat, He 5) bin naavai ih man na parboDhay. Without the Name, this mind is not awakened.
ad aoa AG AUGHa usr Il (913-6, wHat, H8 5) kaho naanak ja-o saaDhsang paa-i-aa. Says Nanak, when I found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
ast fsAo Hot Alserfeor CUA (913-7, THT, He 5) boojhee tarisnaa mahaa seetlaa-i-aa. ||8]|1]| my thirsty desires were satisfied, and I was totally cooled and soothed. ||8]||1]|
THASt HIS U Il (913-7)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
fe urat 3 fats 3 wfanr i (913-7, eneat, v2 5) is paanee tay jin too ghari-aa. He created you out of this water.
Het at & SIT Afar I (913-8, Ta, us 5)
maatee kaa lay dayhuraa kari-aa. From clay, He fashioned your body.
Gafs afs & Hafs udtfimr I (013-8, mat, He 5) ukat jot lai surat pareekhi-aa. He blessed you with the light of reason and clear consciousness.
Hs aes ufe fats 3 Thm NA (13-8, eHat, He 5) maat garabh meh jin too raakhi-aa. ||1|| In your mother's womb, He preserved you. ||1]||
TUSI YT AHS AST Il (913-9, Tat, He 5) raakhanhaar sam"aar janaa. Contemplate your Savior Lord.
Ha® efs ates HoT NAN TITS Il (913-9, sn1aat, He 5) saglay chhod beechaar manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Give up all others thoughts, O mind. ||1]||Pause| |
fafe Ste 30 au HIST Il (913-9, erat, v8 5) jin dee-ay tuDh baap mehtaaree. He gave you your mother and father;
fate de srs us Tet Il (913-10, erat, 8 5) jin dee-ay bharaat put haaree. he gave you your charming children and siblings;
fafe ee su safest nig HIST II (913-10, saat, H2 5) jin dee-ay tuDh banitaa ar meetaa. he gave you your spouse and friends;
fan sag a af SI SST MM (913-10, saat, He 5) tis thaakur ka-o rakh layho cheetaa. ||2|| enshrine that Lord and Master in your consciousness. ||2]|
fafs dor So usa Mite II (913-11, Hat, He 5) jin dee-aa tuDh pavan amolaa. He gave you the invaluable air;
fats dior 3g ate footer il (913-11, mat, He 5) jin dee-aa tuDh neer nirmola. He gave you the priceless water;
fafs thor 30 usa FHT Il (913-11, THast, He 5) jin dee-aa tuDh paavak balnaa. He gave you burning fire;
fSH SAT at JT HS APS ISI (913-12, east, ns 5)
tis thaakur kee rahu man sarnaa. ||3]| let your mind remain in the Sanctuary of that Lord and Master. ||3]|
este nifys fafs sro Be I (913-12, mast, ue 5) chhateeh amrit jin bhojan dee-ay. He gave you the thirty-six varieties of tasty foods;
nists ae ddgeo AC aS | (913-13, Tat, nH 5) antar thaan thehraavan ka-o kee-ay. He gave you a place within to hold them;
aA US gests Far il (913-13, saat, ue 5) basuDhaa dee-o bartan balnaa. He gave you the earth, and things to use;
fan oad a fats sy BIS ISI (913-13, THA, He 5) tis thaakur kay chit rakh charnaa. ||4|| enshrine in your consciousness the feet of that Lord and Master. ||4]|
us AC 33 HSS AC ATS Il (913-14, Trash, uz 5) paykhan ka-o naytar sunan ka-o karnaa. He gave you eyes to see, and ears to hear;
JAS AH'SO AAS JHA Il (913-14, THASt, He 5) hasat kamaavan baasan rasnaa. He gave you hands to work with, and a nose and a tongue;
3d vse aS fig ate AS Il (913-14, an1ast, He 5) charan chalan ka-o sir kKeeno mayraa. He gave you feet to walk upon, and the crowning glory of your head;
Ho A SAT & UAT UT UI (913-15, grat, Hs 5) man tis thaakur kay poojahu pairaa. ||5|| O mind, worship the Feet of that Lord and Master. ||5]|
mufez ufez fafs 3 afm i (913-15, meet, He 5) apvitar pavitar jin too kari-aa. He transformed you from impure to pure;
Hae rife Hfa 3 fats fame i (913-15, oust, 2 5) Sagal jon meh too sir Dhari-aa.
He installed you above the heads of all creatures; ma 3 ALS oS Sot ATS Il (913-16, Tat, Hs 5)
ab too seejh bhaavai nahee seejhai. now, you may fulfill your destiny or not;
aH Hed HS Ys fomrett ill (913-16, erat, us 5) kaaraj savrai man parabh Dhi-aa-eejai. ||6|| Your affairs shall be resolved, O mind, meditating on God. ||6]|
ato Sa Sa Sat il (913-16, Tne, He 5) eehaa oohaa aykai ohee. Here and there, only the One God exists.
As as sdb sz 3a Sct Il (913-17, east, v3 5) jat kat daykhee-ai tat tat tohee. Wherever I look, there You are.
fsH Aes Hfe nT@A AP Il (913-17, THAT, He 5)
tis sayvat man aalas karai. My mind is reluctant to serve Him;
fan fenfont fea fort o Ad IDI (913-17, oH, He 5) jis visri-ai ik nimakh na sarai. ||7]|| forgetting Him, I cannot survive, even for an instant. ||7]||
JH nusat fesaahird Il (913-18, set, He 5) ham apraaDhee nirgunee-aaray. I am a sinner, without any virtue at all.
OT fxs AS OATHS Il (913-18, Tat, ve 5) naa kichh sayvaa naa karmaaray. I do not serve You, or do any good deeds.
ag Sfog esarat firfemr il (913-18, aa, 2 5) gur bohith vadbhaagee mili-aa. By great good fortune, I have found the boat - the Guru.
SOA VA Afar urTag sfanr ICQI (913-19, anaet, v3 5)
naanak daas sang paathar tari-aa. ||8]||2|| Slave Nanak has crossed over, with Him. ||8][2||
THA HIS U Il (913-19)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
arg fore FH FA FU Il (913-19, THawt, 2 5) kaahoo bihaavai rang ras roop. Some pass their lives enjoying pleasures and beauty.
Yat £98
arg faore He ary YS I (914-1, Hast, 4: 5) kaahoo bihaavai maa-ay baap poot. Some pass their lives with their mothers, fathers and children.
arg fare om flees SUS Il (914-1, Tat, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai raaj milakh vaapaaraa. Some pass their lives in power, estates and trade.
Ha faore afs ont mara AU (014-1, Trae, He 5) sant bihaavai har naam aDhaaraa. ||1] | The Saints pass their lives with the support of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
ada" ATT got Il (914-2, wast, He 5) rachnaa saach banee. The world is the creation of the True Lord.
AS at Sa Tot Al TIS Il (914-2, arava, uz 5) sabh kaa ayk Dhanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone is the Master of all. ||1]|Pause| |
arg fore Fe mig ate i (914-2, Tra, we 5) kaahoo bihaavai bayd ar baad. Some pass their lives in arguments and debates about scriptures.
arg faa THAT AME Il (914-2, Tat, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai rasnaa saad. Some pass their lives tasting flavors.
arg faore wufe Fifa stat Il (914-3, Treat, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai lapat sang naaree. Some pass their lives attached to women.
HS Jd ASH GH HSA MM (914-3, sna, v2 5) sant rachay kayval naam muraaree. ||2|| The Saints are absorbed only in the Name of the Lord. ||2||
arg faores FSS WMT II (914-3, Tat, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai khaylat joo-aa. Some pass their lives gambling.
arg fare met Tn Il (914-4, Treat, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai amlee hoo-aa. Some pass their lives getting drunk.
arg fare ud Baa YTS Il (914-4, THaVt, we 5) kaahoo bihaavai par darab choraa-ay. Some pass their lives stealing the property of others.
dfs Ae feos OH fore BI (914-4, aH, He 5) har jan bihaavai naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]| The humble servants of the Lord pass their lives meditating on the Naam. ||3]|
arg faore Hat SU UAT II (914-5, Tne, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai jog tap poojaa. Some pass their lives in Yoga, strict meditation, worship and adoration.
AT FH Aa SIMA Il (914-5, Traxst, we 5) kaahoo rog sog bharmeejaa. Some, in sickness, sorrow and doubt.
arg ues Ud ATS favs Il (914-5, anraat, v2 5) kaahoo pavan Dhaar jaat bihaa-ay. Some pass their lives practicing control of the breath.
Ha faoe atesg We isi (14-5, Hat, He 5) sant bihaavai keertan gaa-ay. ||4|| The Saints pass their lives singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||4]|
arg faa fea sfs BBS Il (914-6, Tat, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai din rain chaalat. Some pass their lives walking day and night.
arg faare A fs HBT I (914-6, Treat, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai so pirh maalat. Some pass their lives on the fields of battle.
ag fares FS USES Il (914-6, Trash, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai baal parhaavat. Some pass their lives teaching children.
Ha faoe ofe AA We]s Ul (14-7, Hat, He 5) sant bihaavai har jas gaavat. ||5|| The Saints pass their lives singing the Lord's Praise. ||5]|
ag fare oe atfea fess Il (914-7, mast, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai nat naatik nirtay. Some pass their lives as actors, acting and dancing.
arg faore Hhorfes fess i (914-7, mat, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai jee-aa-ih hirtay. Some pass their lives taking the lives of others.
ag fare TH Hfs SIS Il (914-8, Tat, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai raaj meh dartay. Some pass their lives ruling by intimidation.
Ha faoe ofa AA AS MEN (14-8, IaH, He 5) sant bihaavai har jas kartay. ||6|| The Saints pass their lives chanting the Lord's Praises. ||6||
arg fare HST HATS Il (914-8, Trae, He 5) kaahoo bihaavai mataa masoorat. Some pass their lives counseling and giving advice.
arg faore Aet ASPs Il (914-9, mat, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai sayvaa jaroorat. Some pass their lives forced to serve others.
ag fare AUS AST II (914-9, arrest, Hs 5) kaahoo bihaavai soDhat jeevat. Some pass their lives exploring life's mysteries.
Ha fare ofe oA utes IDI (914-9, anraet, nH 5) sant bihaavai har ras peevat. ||7]| The Saints pass their lives drinking in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||7||
fas a ofenr fsa dt Barat Il (914-10, anaat, He 5) jit ko laa-i-aa tit hee lagaanaa. As the Lord attaches us, so we are attached.
ot A HE dt & firs I (914-10, Tne, we 5) naa ko moorh nahee ko si-aanaa. No one is foolish, and no one is wise.
afa fasu fan te a i aoa at at afe afe WE ICSI (14-10, mat, He 5)
kar kirpaa jis dayvai naa-o. naanak taa kai bal bal jaa-o. ||8||3]|
Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those who are blessed by His Grace to receive His Name. ||8||3]|
THaASt HIS U Il (914-11)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
arer matte Id Ths FS Il (914-11, Treat, He 5) daavaa agan rahay har boot. Even in a forest fire, some trees remain green.
HS WIT HAS J ST Il (914-11, Tas, we 5) maat garabh sankat tay chhoot. The infant is released from the pain of the mother's womb.
wT a on fanes 36 ATE II (914-12, snaat, He 5) jaa kaa naam simrat bha-o jaa-ay. Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, fear is dispelled.
3A AS Ho ge ofa THE WA (914-12, sna, He 5) taisay sant janaa raakhai har raa-ay. ||1]| Just so, the Sovereign Lord protects and saves the Saints. ||1]|
MA USI S SEs Il (914-12, THat, He 5) aisay raakhanhaar da-i-aal. Such is the Merciful Lord, my Protector.
AS aS cus SH ufsure Al TIC | (914-13, Hast, He 5) jat kat daykh-a-u tum partipaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Wherever I look, I see You cherishing and nurturing. ||1||Pause| |
ae utes fa four fees i (914-13, erat, He 5) jal peevat ji-o tikhaa mitant. As thirst is quenched by drinking water;
ue faar fafa wires FS I (914-13, oreett, 42 5) Dhan bigsai garihi aavat kant. as the bride blossoms forth when her husband comes home;
Bat A US UTS MU Il (914-14, oat, ve 5) lobhee kaa Dhan paraan aDhaar. as wealth is the support of the greedy person
f3@ safe Ao ofs fs om fimrg NI (914-14, mat, He 5) ti-o har jan har har naam pi-aar. ||2]| - just so, the humble servant of the Lord loves the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2]||
foxsrTat fa@ amet TeSTET II (914-14, Hast, He 5) kirsaanee ji-o raakhai rakhvaalaa. As the farmer protects his fields;
HS fust efenr fA@ aer il (914-15, enraat, v8 5) maat pitaa da-i-aa ji-o baalaa. as the mother and father show compassion to their child;
Utsy efy ufsy fife ate i 14-15, arrest, ns 5) pareetam daykh pareetam mil jaa-ay. as the lover merges on seeing the beloved;
fs@ afs He ae afe OTE SI (914-15, aH, He 5) ti-o har jan raakhai kanth laa-ay. ||3]| just so does the Lord hug His humble servant close in His Embrace. ||3]||
faG vias wes df mS Il (914-16, ara, nH 5) ji-o anDhulay paykhat ho-ay anand. As the blind man is in ecstasy, when he can see again;
GTM AAS We AT ST Il (914-16, Tuas, v2 5) goongaa bakat gaavai baho chhand. and the mute, when he is able to speak and sing songs;
fifa uses uss ute Il (914-16, oat, He 5) pingul parbat partay paar. and the cripple, being able to climb over the mountain
dfs & ath Aare Barfs igi (914-17, mat, He 5) har kai naam sagal uDhaar. ||4|| - just so, the Name of the Lord saves all. ||4||
fA@ urea Afat AIS & OA Il (914-17, Tras, He 5) ji-o paavak sang seet ko naas. As cold is dispelled by fire,
WA Utes ASAfa fasrA Il (914-17, at, He 5) aisay paraachhat satsang binaas. sins are driven out in the Society of the Saints.
fa@ Arafs anus BAe TT I (914-18, saat, 3 5) ji-o saabun kaapar oojal hot. As cloth is cleaned by soap,
OH AUS AT FH SE AZ UU (914-18, oat, He 5) naam japat sabh bharam bha-o khot. ||5]| just so, by chanting the Naam, all doubts and fears are dispelled. ||5| |
fAS vast HoH ot MITA II (914-18, enrast, He 5)
ji-o chakvee sooraj kee aas. As the chakvi bird longs for the sun,
fa@ ofza xe at fimrA Il (914-19, oat, H2 5) ji-o chaatrik boond kee pi-aas. as the rainbird thirsts for the rain drop,
fA ATR SE ATS AHS Il (914-19, Hast, Hz 5) ji-o kurank naad karan samaanay. as the deer's ears are attuned to the sound of the bell,
f38 afe on df Ae Hols AUS INEIl (914-19, sree, He 5) ti-o har naam har jan maneh sukhaanay. ||6|| the Lord's Name is pleasing to the mind of the Lord's humble servant. ||6]|
uar tqu Suet fut 3 raft YffS i (15-1, meet, w3 5)
tumree kirpaa tay laagee pareet. By Your Grace, we love You.
Sfenis FS ST nie BHT i (915-1, aneat, vs 5) da-i-aal bha-ay taa aa-ay cheet. When You show Mercy, then You come into our minds.
eter ort fafe ursears Il (915-2, aast, H2 5) da-i-aa Dhaaree tin Dhaaranhaar. When the Support of the earth granted His Grace,
aus 3 det Sears IDI (915-2, ona, ve 5) banDhan tay ho-ee chhutkaar. ||7|| then I was released from my bonds. ||7]|
Afs ae 2a SS MBlE I (915-2, Haat, v2 5) sabh thaan daykhay nain alo-ay. I have seen all places with my eyes wide open.
fH fas AT neg o Ate Il (915-2, Treat, He 5) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ay. There is no other than Him.
GH F FS TI USAT Il (915-3, Tne, we 5) bharam bhai chhootay gur parsaad. Doubt and fear are dispelled, by Guru's Grace.
Sea UlUS AF AAHTS ICIBI (915-3, THaSH, He 5) naanak paykhi-o sabh bismaad. ||8]|4]| Nanak sees the wondrous Lord everywhere. ||8]||4||
THA HIS U Il (915-4)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Aba #3 Als Udinifs ys Aas SHS USS WAU (915-4, Trae, He 5) jee-a jant sabh paykhee-ah parabh sagal tumaaree Dhaarnaa. ||1|| All beings and creatures that are seen, God, depend on Your Support. ||1]|
feg no dfs & of Carga a TIE Il (915-4, ona, v2 5) ih man har kai naam uDhaarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. This mind is saved through the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
fas ufo af Gard aeafs Afs ATS A ASST MII (915-5, Tmax, ue 5)
khin meh thaap uthaapay kudrat sabh kartay kay kaarnaa. ||2||
In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes, by His Creative Power. All is the Creation of the Creator. ||2]|
aH ty BF 3S fee AY Afar feersar Sil (915-5, Tat, Hs 5)
kaam kroDh lobh jhooth nindaa saaDhoo sang bidaarnaa. ||3]||
Sexual desire, anger, greed, falsehood and slander are banished in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. |[3]|
OH AUS HO fasHe Je AY Af Tersar Sil (15-6, THs, Hz 5)
naam japat man nirmal hovai sookhay sookh gudaarnaa. ||4||
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind becomes immaculate, and life is passed in absolute peace. ||4| |
3a Aafe Ft ore yet fH Sto Sa a TIS MUI (915-7, THA, He 5) bhagat saran jo aavai paraanee tis eehaa oohaa na haarnaa. ||5||
That mortal who enters the Sanctuary of the devotees, does not lose out, here or hereafter. ||5]|
AY gy fe Ho at fase SH St nial ATST IE (915-7, Tre, He 5) sookh dookh is man kee birthaa tum hee aagai saarnaa. ||6]| Pleasure and pain, and the condition of this mind, I place before You, Lord. ||6]|
3 BST Asa Ahr ar mug Shot UTS IDI (915-8, sat, He 5)
too daataa sabhnaa jee-aa kaa aapan kee-aa paalnaa. ||7]|| You are the Giver of all beings; You cherish what You have made. ||7]||
uifsa as afe AS Gufs saa TS MIS TMU (915-8, Tat, Hs 5) anik baar kot jan oopar naanak vanjai vaarnaa. ||8]||5|| So many millions of times, Nanak is a sacrifice to Your humble servants. ||8]|5| |
THaSt HIS U mMAcUeT (915-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5 asatpadee Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadee:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (915-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
edo ses uu Afs ate ofa AG ef froret IA (915-11, eas, U8 5)
darsan bhaytat paap sabh naaseh har si-o day-ay milaa-ee. ||1]|
Receiving the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all sins are erased, and He unites me with the Lord. ||1]|
Ha Ts USHA AMETEeT I (915-11, Tat, 2 5) mayraa gur parmaysar sukh-daa-ee. My Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the Giver of peace.
USAIN a oH fears nis cf Aaret ud TIS i (915-12, ara, us 5)
paarbarahm kaa naam drirh-aa-ay antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He implants the Naam, the Name of the Supreme Lord God within us; in the end, He is our help and support. ||1]|Pause| |
AIS SY a so sa AS Ole Hf Bet WM (15-12, Tact, Hs 5)
sagal dookh kaa dayraa bhannaa sant Dhoor mukh laa-ee. ||2]|
The source of all pain within is destroyed; I apply the dust of the feet of the Saints to my forehead. ||2]|
ufss udts ate faa stsfe nifamrg nity Jeet 31 (15-13, wat, He 5) patit puneet kee-ay khin bheetar agi-aan anDhayr vanjaa-ee. ||3]|| In an instant, He purifies the sinners, and dispels the darkness of ignorance. ||3]|
ATE ATE ANGE AMM soa (3A AdSet ISil (915-13, sat, He 5) karan kaaran samrath su-aamee naanak tis sarnaa-ee. ||4| | The Lord is all-powerful, the Cause of causes. Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||4]|
gu9 Sf vse ane fess Sa Rafe fos wet ull (915-14, mat, He 5) banDhan torh charan kamal drirh-aa-ay ayk sabad liv laa-ee. ||5| |
Shattering the bonds, the Guru implants the Lord's lotus feet within, and lovingly attunes us to the One Word of the Shabad. ||5]|
nig gu fatter 3 ates wre Aafe afs wiret Ell (915-15, enraet, 42 5)
anDh koop bikhi-aa tay kaadhi-o saach sabad ban aa-ee. ||6||
He has lifted me up, and pulled me out of the deep, dark pit of sin; I am attuned to the True Shabad. ||6] |
HOH HIE A AIA Yor ss AST F UT MDI (915-15, Trash, He 5) janam maran kaa sahsaa chookaa baahurh katahu na Dhaa-ee. ||7|| The fear of birth and death is taken away; I shall never wander again. ||7]||
on oAtefe feg He ast nifys ut feuset CI (915-16, THe, Hs 5)
naam rasaa-in ih man raataa amrit pee tariptaa-ee. ||8]|
This mind is imbued with the sublime elixir of the Naam; drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, it is satisfied. ||8]|
HaAfa ffs ates arfemr faasse sfrmr wet CI (15-16, ast, He 5)
satsang mil keertan gaa-i-aa nihchal vasi-aa jaa-ee. ||9]|
Joining the Society of the Saints, I sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; I dwell in the eternal, unchanging place. ||9||
ud afe udt His eat afe fag vrs & set AON (915-17, TIM, He 5)
poorai gur pooree mat deenee har bin aan na bhaa-ee. ||10]|
The Perfect Guru has given me the perfect teachings; there is nothing except the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny. ||10]|
on fours ufemr esarat Baa Sala S AEST NAA (915-18, eHaAeH, He 5)
naam niDhaan paa-i-aa vadbhaagee naanak narak na jaa-ee. ||11||
I have obtained the treasure of the Naam, by great good fortune; O Nanak, I shall not fall into hell. ||11]|
wre froreu Cats o Het us TAT AH II (15-18, THe, He 5) ghaal si-aanap ukat na mayree poorai guroo kamaa-ee. ||12]|
Clever tricks have not worked for me; I shall act according to the Instructions of the Perfect Guru. ||12]|
AU su HAH Afs 3 Het ym} ad ave ISI (915-19, THAT, He 5)
jap tap sanjam such hai so-ee aapay karay karaa-ee. ||13]|
He is chanting, intense meditation, austere self-discipline and purification. He Himself acts, and causes us to act. ||13]|
uz amg Ho fatter ufo afs AS ofe Saret 98K (915-19, soa, He 5)
putar kaltar mahaa bikhi-aa meh gur saachai laa-ay taraa-ee. ||14]|
In the midst of children and spouse, and utter corruption, the True Guru has carried me across. ||14]|
uar K9E mus Abr 3 orf Ayes orf Be ws wet ql (16-1, meet, Hs 5)
apnay jee-a tai aap sam"aalay aap lee-ay larh laa-ee. ||15]| You Yourself take care of Your beings; You Yourself attach them to the hem of Your robe. ||15||
And UdH a eat afar sene us uSet MAEM (916-2, sat, He 5) saach Dharam kaa bayrhaa baa™Dhi-aa bhavjal paar pavaa-ee. ||16]|
I have built the boat of true Dharmic faith, to cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||16]|
SANS ans Amt area afe afs AST NVI (916-2, east, He 5) baysumaar bay-ant su-aamee naanak bal bal jaa-ee. ||17]|
The Lord Master is unlimited and endless; Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. []171]
mors Hos ost AIS ae nigargs Thuret ACI (916-3, THe, He 5)
akaal moorat ajoonee sambha-o kal anDhkaar deepaa-ee. ||18]|
Being of Immortal Manifestation, He is not born; He is self-existent; He is the Light in the darkness of Kali Yuga. ||18]|
nisarHt Abie ar erst us fFufs mwret Ae (916-3, sat, 2 5)
antarjaamee jee-an kaa daataa daykhat taripat aghaa-ee. ||19]||
He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Giver of souls; gazing upon Him, I am satisfied and fulfilled. ||19]|
aad fadio forse vs nfs afs afonr ANTS IIQOI (916-4, mat, He 5)
aykankaar niranjan nirbha-o sabh jal thal rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||20||
He is the One Universal Creator Lord, immaculate and fearless; He is permeating and pervading all the water and the land. ||20||
sats we sast ag car ale saa AS HET QUIEN (916-5, THAT, He 5) bhagat daan bhagtaa ka-o deenaa har naanak jaachai maa-ee. ||21||1||6]]|
He blesses His devotees with the Gift of devotional worship; Nanak longs for the Lord, O my mother. ||21||1]|6]|
THASt HIS U Il (916-5)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl,
HS Il (916-6)
salok. Shalok:
frag Fae fimrfed HOH Hae at Sa Il (916-6, THAT, He 5)
sikhahu sabad pi-aariho janam maran kee tayk.
Study the Word of the Shabad, O beloveds. It is your anchoring support in life and in death.
HY CaS Ae At ataa fAHTS SA WAI (916-6, Tash, He 5)
mukh oojal sadaa sukhee naanak simrat ayk. ||1]|
Your face shall be radiant, and you will be at peace forever, O Nanak, meditating in remembrance on the One Lord. ||1]|
HO 36 TS" oH fimrd afe Un safs f= wet AZT WA (916-7, THe, Hs 5)
man tan raataa raam pi-aaray har paraym bhagat ban aa-ee santahu. ||1||
My mind and body are imbued with my Beloved Lord; I have been blessed with loving devotion to the Lord, O Saints. ||1]|
Afsafe wu feast AST il (916-7, mat, He 5) satgur khayp nibaahee santahu. The True Guru has approved my cargo, O Saints.
dfs oH wa aA a cor Harel {AS Cad AST UU TIS ll (16-8, Tnrat, He 5)
har naam laahaa daas ka-o dee-aa saglee tarisan ulaahee santahu. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He has blessed His slave with the profit of the Lord's Name; all my thirst is quenched, O Saints. ||1]]Pause| |
ans dns oe fea ufenr af ahifs age 5 AST AST IQ (916-8, east, He 5)
khojat khojat laal ik paa-i-aa har keemat kahan na jaa-ee santahu. ||2||
Searching and searching, I have found the One Lord, the jewel; I cannot express His value, O Saints. ||2||
3d AHS fA wat fiero AS vat AHS AZT ISI (916-9, Tra, He 5) charan kamal si-o laago Dhi-aanaa saachai daras samaa-ee santahu. ||3]|
I focus my meditation on His Lotus Feet; I am absorbed in the True Vision of His Darshan, O Saints. ||3]|
Ve Wes wes ge fore ofa fhnes fFufS nwret ASg isil 16-10, Tash, Hs 5)
gun gaavat gaavat bha-ay nihaalaa har simrat taripat aghaa-ee santahu. ||4]| Singing, singing His Glorious Praises, I am enraptured; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, I am satisfied and fulfilled, O Saints. ||4]|
MISH IH deur AS nists as wre AST WET AST Mull (916-10, aH, He 5)
aatam raam ravi-aa sabh antar kat aavai kat jaa-ee santahu. ||5||
The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is permeating within all; what comes, and what goes, O Saints? ||5||
wife qaret J St TAt AS Aor ar Hues AST NEM (916-11, Tat, He 5)
aad jugaadee hai bhee hosee sabh jee-aa kaa sukh-daa-ee santahu. ||6| |
At the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, He is, and He shall always be; He is the Giver of peace to all beings, O Saints. ||6]|
unfy ants viz oct uréta ufs sfour AS Set AST DI (916-12, mat, 43 5) aap bay-ant ant nahee paa-ee-ai poor rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee santahu. ||7]|| He Himself is endless; His end cannot be found. He is totally pervading and permeating everywhere, O Saints. ||7]||
HS AHO HS Ase AS dfs aoa ay Hat HST AST NCI (916-12, eH, He 5) meet saajan maal joban sut har naanak baap mayree maa-ee santahu. ||8||2||7|| Nanak: the Lord is my friend, companion, wealth, youth, son, father and mother, O Saints. ||8]|2]|7]|
THA HIS U Il (916-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Ho ad ath aH oH fesrdt Il (916-13, anaat, He 5) man bach karam raam naam chitaaree. In thought, word and deed, I contemplate the Lord's Name.
wHe ufs Hot ofS frst qoute asa uts Cars Al FITS Mt (916-14, Treat, 2 5) ghooman ghayr mahaa at bikh-rhee gurmukh naanak paar utaaree. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The horrible world-ocean is very treacherous; O Nanak, the Gurmukh is carried across. ||1]|Pause] |
nists Feat ots at of AfU HES se FASTA WAU (916-14, Tra, He 5) antar sookhaa baahar sookhaa har jap malan bha-ay dustaaree. ||1||
Inwardly, peace, and outwardly, peace; meditating on the Lord, evil tendencies are crushed. ||1]]|
fA 3 od fsofa foes ys AG vrvret fagur ordt iQ (916-15, mmraet, H2 5)
jis tay laagay tineh nivaaray parabh jee-o apnee kirpaa Dhaaree. ||2]|
He has rid me of what was clinging to me; my Dear Lord God has blessed me with His Grace. ||2||
Gud HS ud ofa Haat ufs fHoA HO nad SII (16-16, Tat, He 5) uDhray sant paray har sarnee pach binsay mahaa aha‘kaaree. ||3]| The Saints are saved, in His Sanctuary; the very egotistical people rot away and die.
[I3I|
AY Halts fed ee ufeur fea tem SH nM III (916-16, THAT, He 5)
saaDhoo sangat ih fal paa-i-aa ik kayval naam aDhaaree. ||4||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained this fruit, the Support of the One Name alone. ||4||
3 aet Ae 8 aet det AS yaet APS SHH Null (916-17, Trae, Hs 5) na ko-ee soor na ko-ee heenaa sabh pargatee jot tum"aaree. ||5|| No one is strong, and no one is weak; all are manifestations of Your Light, Lord. ||5]|
3H ANGE nae miaisd sfeur Sa Hat iWEll (916-18, mat, Hs 5) tum" samrath akath agochar ravi-aa ayk muraaree. ||6]| You are the all-powerful, indescribable, unfathomable, all-pervading Lord. ||6||
ainfs aBe ad 3dt ads Us niZ o UTaESTeH IDI (916-18, snHaet, He 5) keemat ka-un karay tayree kartay parabh ant na paaraavaaree. ||7|| Who can estimate Your value, O Creator Lord? God has no end or limitation. ||7]|
SH Ug soa Sfsniret Sfoor AS Hot JSTa NCUSICHQAMN (16-19, mast, He 5)
naam daan naanak vadi-aa-ee tayri-aa sant janaa raynaaree. ||8]|3||8||22|| Please bless Nanak with the glorious greatness of the gift of the Naam, and the dust of the feet of Your Saints. ||8]|3]|8||22]|
Us £99
THAS! HIS 3 MSZ 917-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 3 anand Raamkalee, Third Mehl, Anand ~ The Song Of Bliss:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (917-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mde stent Het He Asa H ufent I (917-2, Tat, He 3) anand bha-i-aa mayree maa-ay satguroo mai paa-i-aa. I am in ecstasy, O my mother, for I have found my True Guru.
Afsag 3 wfenr AoA Ast His Sabor Saree I (917-2, an1ast, Hs 3)
satgur ta paa-i-aa sahj saytee man vajee-aa vaaDhaa-ee-aa.
I have found the True Guru, with intuitive ease, and my mind vibrates with the music of bliss.
Td Iso udes Ud AaS Wee niet I (917-3, aHast, He 3) raag ratan parvaar paree-aa sabad gaavan aa-ee-aa.
The jewelled melodies and their related celestial harmonies have come to sing the Word of the Shabad.
Rae 3 Weg dt as ufe frat errfenr i (917-3, aac, v2 3) sabdo ta gaavhu haree kayraa man jinee vasaa-i-aa. The Lord dwells within the minds of those who sing the Shabad.
TI TSA SE Tor Afsagy A ufSur WAU (917-4, Tae, we 3) kahai naanak anand ho-aa satguroo mai paa-i-aa. ||1|| Says Nanak, I am in ecstasy, for I have found my True Guru. ||1]|
& Ho Afr J Ae Ig Ths SS Il (917-4, Hat, v2 3) ay man mayri-aa too sadaa rahu har naalay. O my mind, remain always with the Lord.
fs af ag 3 Hs Ae eu Als feATsS™ Il (917-5, THast, 3 3) har naal rahu too man mayray dookh sabh visaarnaa. Remain always with the Lord, O my mind, and all sufferings will be forgotten.
Males GI ad Sa aren Als Hetsar Il (917-5, THe, He 3) angeekaar oh karay tayraa kaaraj sabh savaarnaa. He will accept You as His own, and all your affairs will be perfectly arranged.
Aso dest AH AMM A fa Hog fers I (917-6, mast, He 3)
sabhnaa galaa samrath su-aamee so ki-o manhu visaaray.
Our Lord and Master is all-powerful to do all things, so why forget Him from your mind?
ad Bea Ho AS AST IT fs JS Mil (917-6, wat, v2 3) kahai naanak man mayray sadaa rahu har naalay. ||2|| Says Nanak, O my mind, remain always with the Lord. ||2]|
AMS Afoa fom ardt wis Sg il (917-7, aac, ne 3) saachay saahibaa ki-aa naahee ghar tayrai. O my True Lord and Master, what is there which is not in Your celestial home?
ufs 3 33 AS fae d fan Ufo AUSSI 917-7, THE, He 3) ghar ta tayrai sabh kichh hai jis deh so paav-ay. Everything is in Your home; they receive, unto whom You give.
He fhefs Hod Sot OH His SAE Il (917-7, THe, He 3) sadaa sifat salaah tayree naam man vasaava-ay. Constantly singing Your Praises and Glories, Your Name is enshrined in the mind.
oy fae & Hfe efhor SA Aa WSs Il (917-8, aHaat, He 3)
naam jin kai man vasi-aa vaajay sabad ghanayray.
The divine melody of the Shabad vibrates for those, within whose minds the Naam abides.
ad aoa AY Atos foor art wfs Sg Sil (917-8, aH, He 3) kahai naanak sachay saahib ki-aa naahee ghar tayrai. ||3]|| Says Nanak, O my True Lord and Master, what is there which is not in Your home?
[I3I|
ATT OH AS MUTT Il (917-9, THast, He 3) saachaa naam mayraa aaDhaaro. The True Name is my only support.
Ag oH nog Hat fate gut Afs erst Il (917-9, east, He 3) saach naam aDhaar mayraa jin bhukhaa sabh gavaa-ee-aa. The True Name is my only support; it satisfies all hunger.
ate As AY HfS wrfe efhor fafs feer Afs uATehor Il (917-10, east, v8 3) kar saa‘t sukh man aa-ay vasi-aa jin ichhaa sabh pujaa-ee-aa. It has brought peace and tranquility to my mind; it has fulfilled all my desires.
Re gases ast ag feeg fan tor Ste sfsmreior il (917-10, mast, v2 3) sadaa kurbaan keetaa guroo vitahu jis dee-aa ayhi vadi-aa-ee-aa. I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who possesses such glorious greatness.
ad ea Hed H3g ASfe cag fimrg i 917-11, eat, ve 3) kahai naanak sunhu santahu sabad Dharahu pi-aaro. Says Nanak, listen, O Saints; enshrine love for the Shabad.
ATT STH HS was ISI (917-11, THAT, He 3) Saachaa naam mayraa aaDhaaro. ||4]| The True Name is my only support. ||4||
aH uv nae fs wife Asta I (917-12, east, He 3) vaajay panch sabad tit ghar sabhaagai. The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, vibrate in that blessed house.
ufs Had Hee aH aor fas wis adbor it (917-12, aH, v2 3) ghar sabhaagai sabad vaajay kalaa jit ghar Dhaaree-aa. In that blessed house, the Shabad vibrates; He infuses His almighty power into it.
Us vs 30 th ats are ag far II (917-12, grat, He 3) panch doot tuDh vas keetay kaal kantak maari-aa. Through You, we subdue the five demons of desire, and slay Death, the torturer.
fs aaft ufeor su fro ag fh oth ofs & wa I (917-13, mat, He 3) Dhur karam paa-i-aa tuDh jin ka-o se naam har kai laagay. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny are attached to the Lord's Name.
ad aoa Sd AY oor fez ule nage SH MUI (917-13, THaT, He 3)
kahai naanak tah sukh ho-aa tit ghar anhad vaajay. ||5]|
Says Nanak, they are at peace, and the unstruck sound current vibrates within their homes. ||5||
Anat fee fae ta fenrat i (17-14, Hat, He 3) saachee livai bin dayh nimaanee. Without the true love of devotion, the body is without honor.
ao fourat foe arsg famr ad Sardior Il (917-14, erat, He 3) dayh nimaanee livai baajhahu ki-aa karay vaychaaree-aa. The body is dishonored without devotional love; what can the poor wretches do?
30 3s ANGE afe ant faut afs aeerdor i (917-15, Hat, He 3) tuDh baajh samrath ko-ay naahee kirpaa kar banvaaree-aa. No one except You is all-powerful; please bestow Your Mercy, O Lord of all nature.
2A o@ dg a ant Aafe ofa Aes Il (917-15, THT, He 3)
ays na-o hor thaa-o naahee sabad laag savaaree-aa.
There is no place of rest, other than the Name; attached to the Shabad, we are embellished with beauty.
ad aad fee asg fam ad Surdor Ell (917-16, sat, 2 3) kahai naanak livai baajhahu ki-aa karay vaychaaree-aa. ||6]| Says Nanak, without devotional love, what can the poor wretches do? ||6||
WSS MTSE AZ A Ad MTSE TT 3 Alene Il (917-16, Tat, we 3) aanand aanand sabh ko kahai aanand guroo tay jaani-aa. Bliss, bliss - everyone talks of bliss; bliss is known only through the Guru.
wot wre Het aa 3 feu ad fimrfenr i 017-17, mast, He 3)
jaani-aa aanand sadaa gur tay kirpaa karay pi-aari-aa.
Eternal bliss in known only through the Guru, when the Beloved Lord grants His Grace.
ate fasur faafea ae fame nine Afenr i (917-17, mast, He 3)
kar kirpaa kilvikh katay gi-aan anjan saari-aa.
Granting His Grace, He cuts away our sins; He blesses us with the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom.
nivad fas at Hg Sa fSe a Hae Ae ASfanr | (917-18, mat, He 3) andrahu jin kaa moh tutaa tin kaa sabad sachai savaari-aa.
Those who eradicate attachment from within themselves, are adorned with the Shabad, the Word of the True Lord.
ad sod ST mee J olSe ad 3 ASEM DI 17-18, east, He 3)
kahai naanak ayhu anand hai aanand gur tay jaani-aa. ||7]|| Says Nanak, this alone is bliss - bliss which is known through the Guru. ||7| |
yar £4t
war fia 3 etfs At AS US Il (18-1, THES, He 3) baabaa jis too deh so-ee jan paavai. O Baba, he alone receives it, unto whom You give it.
ure 3A He Ufa fan 6 ofa fomr acts Sofenr Il (918-1, mat, 2 3)
paavai ta so jan deh jis no hor ki-aa karahi vaychaari-aa.
He alone receives it, unto whom You give it; what can the other poor wretched beings do?
fefa soft 38 feats us fefh fefa oft ofa Hetoor Il (918-2, mast, He 3)
ik bharam bhoolay fireh dah dis ik naam laag savaari-aa.
Some are deluded by doubt, wandering in the ten directions; some are adorned with attachment to the Naam.
ad UdATSt Ho Stent feaHe frat stat SSE I (918-3, Tat, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee man bha-i-aa nirmal jinaa bhaanaa bhaav-ay.
By Guru's Grace, the mind becomes immaculate and pure, for those who follow God's Will.
ad aed fam efo fimrs Aet AS USS ICI (918-3, erat, He 3) kahai naanak jis deh pi-aaray so-ee jan paav-ay. ||8]|| Says Nanak, he alone receives it, unto whom You give it, O Beloved Lord. ||8]|
weg AS fimrfed wee at aad ATat Il (918-4, mast, He 3) aavhu sant pi-aariho akath kee karah kahaanee. Come, Beloved Saints, let us speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
Add ATeat nas act fas enis ure | (918-4, east, ne 3) karah kahaanee akath kayree kit du-aarai paa-ee-ai.
How can we speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord? Through which door will we find Him?
3O Ho Ue AS ASfu ae a gat Hfamt ure Il (918-5, aah, He 3)
tan man Dhan sabh sa-up gur ka-o hukam mani-ai paa-ee-ai.
Surrender body, mind, wealth, and everything to the Guru; obey the Order of His Will, and you will find Him.
Jon Hfog TT AT Weg Aut set Il (918-5, svat, ws 3) hukam mannihu guroo kayraa gaavhu sachee banee. Obey the Hukam of the Guru's Command, and sing the True Word of His Bani.
ad SA AST H3d afag mag aTat INCI (918-6, east, ne 3)
kahai naanak sunhu santahu kathihu akath kahaanee. ||9]| Says Nanak, listen, O Saints, and speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord. ||9]]|
= Ho due vaoet fas & ufenr Il (18-6, eat, He 3) ay man chanchlaa chaturaa-ee kinai na paa-i-aa. O fickle mind, through cleverness, no one has found the Lord.
ssTet & ufeur fas J Ale Hs Afsr i (is-7, rat, us 3) chaturaa-ee na paa-i-aa kinai too sun man mayri-aa. Through cleverness, no one has found Him; listen, O my mind.
fo ufenr Huet fafe fs sof gorfeor | 18-7, mat, Hs 3) ayh maa-i-aa mohnee jin ayt bharam bhulaa-i-aa. This Maya is so fascinating; because of it, people wander in doubt.
Hfeor 3 Huat f36 ast fafe saat uretor | (18-8, mat, He 3) maa-i-aa ta mohnee tinai keetee jin thag-ulee paa-ee-aa. This fascinating Maya was created by the One who has administered this potion.
asae ots fsn fees fafs Ha Het afer I (918-8, mat, He 3) kurbaan keetaa tisai vitahu jin moh meethaa laa-i-aa. I am a Sacrifice to the One who has made emotional attachment sweet.
Ad BSA HO Vas vsaet fas o ufemr 90 l! (18-9, Treat, He 3) kahai naanak man chanchal chaturaa-ee kinai na paa-i-aa. ||10|| Says Nanak, O fickle mind, no one has found Him through cleverness. ||10]|
& Ho fumrfaor J HET AT AHN Il (918-9, erat, He 3) ay man pi-aari-aa too sadaa sach samaalay. O beloved mind, contemplate the True Lord forever.
fo acy J fa Suet VS | 3g FS Il (918-10, Tnaet, we 3) ayhu kutamb too je daykh-daa chalai naahee tayrai naalay. This family which you see shall not go along with you.
Afa 33 3s ard fH ofs fas fos wert Il (918-10, erat, He 3) saath tayrai chalai naahee tis naal ki-o chit laa-ee-ai. They shall not go along with you, so why do you focus your attention on them?
WAT AH HS 6 ate fas uifs uss Il (18-11, eet, we 3) aisaa kamm moolay na keechai jit ant pachhotaa-ee-ai. Don't do anything that you will regret in the end.
sa NA N
Afsag o Quen fe 5 IS STI GS Il (918-11, THAT, He 3) satguroo kaa updays sun too hovai tayrai naalay. Listen to the Teachings of the True Guru - these shall go along with you.
TI SSA HS fms J AS AG AHS |NAWII (918-12, Traet, we 3) kahai naanak man pi-aaray too sadaa sach samaalay. ||11|| Says Nanak, O beloved mind, contemplate the True Lord forever. ||11]|
WOH Mia Sa nis o ufEnt Il (918-12, wast, He 3) agam agocharaa tayraa ant na paa-i-aa. O inaccessible and unfathomable Lord, Your limits cannot be found.
nis o utfenr fas Sar niryEr ny J AST Il (918-13, Tae, He 3) anto na paa-i-aa kinai tayraa aapnaa aap too jaanhay. No one has found Your limits; only You Yourself know.
Hat az Afs ae Sa fowr & orfy TaTSES I (918-13, Treat, He 3) jee-a jant sabh khayl tayraa ki-aa ko aakh vakhaana-ay. All living beings and creatures are Your play; how can anyone describe You?
nmdfs 3 safe Ag 3d fafs Aas Curfenr i ois-14, sat, Hs 3) aakhahi ta vaykheh sabh toohai jin jagat upaa-i-aa. You speak, and You gaze upon all; You created the Universe.
TI THA FAT MH F 3ST wig 3 usr AI (918-14, THast, vs 3) kahai naanak too sadaa agamm hai tayraa ant na paa-i-aa. ||12]| Says Nanak, You are forever inaccessible; Your limits cannot be found. ||12]|
Afs o¢ nfs Ae vifys dae A nifts ae 3 ufemr I (918-15, rat, He 3)
sur nar mun jan amrit khojday so amrit gur tay paa-i-aa.
The angelic beings and the silent sages search for the Ambrosial Nectar; this Amrit is obtained from the Guru.
utfeor nifigs afe fur atet Ae Hfs sAfemr I (918-15, mast, He 3)
paa-i-aa amrit gur kirpaa keenee sachaa man vasaa-i-aa.
This Amrit is obtained, when the Guru grants His Grace; He enshrines the True Lord within the mind.
dba a3 Afs so Cure fefe efy usaf mrfemr | 18-16, eat, v2 3)
jee-a jant sabh tuDh upaa-ay ik vaykh parsan aa-i-aa.
All living beings and creatures were created by You; only some come to see the Guru, and seek His blessing.
BI BF MIN YR' Alsag sor Sten I (918-17, THast, v3 3) lab lobh aha‘kaar chookaa satguroo bhalaa bhaa-i-aa. Their greed, avarice and egotism are dispelled, and the True Guru seems sweet.
ad sod fan 3 orfy sor fate nifys ag 3 ufemr 193811 (918-17, THe, He 3) kahai naanak jis no aap tuthaa tin amrit gur tay paa-i-aa. ||13]|
Says Nanak, those with whom the Lord is pleased, obtain the Amrit, through the Guru. [|13]|
sas at aes feast Il (918-18, set, He 3) bhagtaa kee chaal niraalee. The lifestyle of the devotees is unique and distinct.
oer feet sass Act fran Hrafar BHT Il (918-18, Hat, He 3) chaalaa niraalee bhagtaah kayree bikham maarag chalnaa. The devotees’ lifestyle is unique and distinct; they follow the most difficult path.
wr BF nidarg sta fA agTs ast FHer Il (918-18, ast, vs 3) lab lobh aha‘kaar taj tarisnaa bahut naahee bolnaa. They renounce greed, avarice, egotism and desire; they do not talk too much.
dfonrg faut eeg foot Ss nrafar ATST I (918-19, THE, He 3) khanni-ahu tikhee vaalahu nikee ayt maarag jaanaa. The path they take is sharper than a two-edged sword, and finer than a hair.
yar Kat ad usAret frat wu shaver ofs SAS AHTSt Il (919-1, Hat, He 3)
gur parsaadee jinee aap taji-aa har vaasnaa samaanee. By Guru's Grace, they shed their selfishness and conceit; their hopes are merged in the Lord.
Ad FSA VS SIS Ha AA forest 9Vll (919-1, saat, nz 3)
kahai naanak chaal bhagtaa jugahu jug niraalee. ||14| |
Says Nanak, the lifestyle of the devotees, in each and every age, is unique and distinct. ||14]|
fa@ 3 vorfets fe vou AoMit dg for WET TE 3g Il (919-2, Trae, v2 3)
ji-o too chalaa-ihi tiv chalah su-aamee hor ki-aa jaanaa gun tayray.
As You make me walk, so do I walk, O my Lord and Master; what else do I know of Your Glorious Virtues?
fre 3 vorfefs fe sea frat Hrefar uTST I (919-2, Tat, He 3) jiv too chalaa-ihi tivai chalah jinaa maarag paavhay. As You cause them to walk, they walk - You have placed them on the Path.
ate fasu fae ofy ofefs fA ofe ofs ret fomred Il (919-3, mat, He 3)
kar kirpaa jin naam laa-ihi se har har sadaa Dhi-aavhay.
In Your Mercy, You attach them to the Naam; they meditate forever on the Lord, Har, Har.
fan 6 ag Hetfefs niruet fx agents AY UT]ST I (919-3, araat, He 3)
jis no kathaa sunaa-ihi aapnee se gurdu-aarai sukh paavhay.
Those whom You cause to listen to Your sermon, find peace in the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate.
ad asa AY Atos fag are fSS vored NWI (919-4, THT, He 3) kahai naanak sachay saahib ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaavahay. ||15]|
Says Nanak, O my True Lord and Master, you make us walk according to Your Will. []15]|
Sg Afset ASE AIST Il (919-5, raat, He 3) ayhu sohilaa sabad suhaavaa. This song of praise is the Shabad, the most beautiful Word of God.
Hee Ade Aer Aloe Afsagy AeteEnr Il (919-5, saat, Hs 3) sabdo suhaavaa sadaa sohilaa satguroo sunaa-i-aa. This beauteous Shabad is the everlasting song of praise, spoken by the True Guru.
&g fo & vfs efior fro cag fefimr urfeur I (19-5, east, He 3) ayhu tin kai man vasi-aa jin Dharahu likhi-aa aa-i-aa. This is enshrined in the minds of those who are so pre-destined by the Lord.
fefa feafo wad aafs ae aet fas o urfemr II (919-6, aaa, He 3) ik fireh ghanayray karahi galaa galee kinai na paa-i-aa. Some wander around, babbling on and on, but none obtain Him by babbling.
TI SSA Ase Afos Afsags Aetenr Vell (19-7, Tas, ws 3) kahai naanak sabad sohilaa satguroo sunaa-i-aa. ||16] |
Says Nanak, the Shabad, this song of praise, has been spoken by the True Guru. ||16]|
ufes de A nor frat ofa fomrfeur | (19-7, mast, He 3) pavit ho-ay say janaa jinee har Dhi-aa-i-aa. Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord become pure.
dfs famrfeor ufes ce aanfa frat fomrfenr i 19-8, erat, He 3) har Dhi-aa-i-aa pavit ho-ay gurmukh jinee Dhi-aa-i-aa. Meditating on the Lord, they become pure; as Gurmukh, they meditate on Him.
ufes nest fust ads Afos fA@ ufes Hafs Aaeior II (919-8, erat, He 3)
pavit maataa pitaa kutamb sahit si-o pavit sangat sabaa-ee-aa.
They are pure, along with their mothers, fathers, family and friends; all their companions are pure as well.
ade ufes Hee ufes A ufes frat Hf sArfeur II (919-9, ena, He 3)
kahday pavit sunday pavit say pavit jinee man vasaa-i-aa.
Pure are those who speak, and pure are those who listen; those who enshrine it within their minds are pure.
ad soa A ufes frat aenfy afte afe fomrfemr 9911 (919-9, mat, He 3)
kahai naanak say pavit jinee gurmukh har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||17]|
Says Nanak, pure and holy are those who, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||17]|
aot AoW 6 Gur fee Aan AVA o AME Il (919-10, ana, H2 3)
karmee sahj na oopjai vin sahjai sahsaa na jaa-ay.
By religious rituals, intuitive poise is not found; without intuitive poise, skepticism does not depart.
od Wf AoA fas AAfh TI ATH ANE I (919-10, erat, He 3)
nah jaa-ay sahsaa kitai sanjam rahay karam kamaa-ay.
Skepticism does not depart by contrived actions; everybody is tired of performing these rituals.
HOA WMG Hote J fas Aafh GST AES I (19-11, erat, He 3) sahsai jee-o maleen hai kit sanjam Dhotaa jaa-ay. The soul is polluted by skepticism; how can it be cleansed?
Ho deg Aafe wag dfs fre gag fos OTE II (919-11, Heat, He 3)
man Dhovahu sabad laagahu har si-o rahhu chit laa-ay.
Wash your mind by attaching it to the Shabad, and keep your consciousness focused on the Lord.
ad sod Td UGA AoA Gun feg AoA fe|S ATE NACH (919-12, THE, He 3) kahai naanak gur parsaadee sahj upjai ih sahsaa iv jaa-ay. ||18]|
Says Nanak, by Guru's Grace, intuitive poise is produced, and this skepticism is dispelled. ||18]|
Hing HS saaT feaHs Il (919-13, Hat, He 3) jee-ahu mailay baahrahu nirmal. Inwardly polluted, and outwardly pure.
MTT fess nig 5 HS Psst ASH At Than | (919-13, Treat, He 3) baahrahu nirmal jee-ahu ta mailay tinee janam joo-ai haari-aa. Those who are outwardly pure and yet polluted within, lose their lives in the gamble.
fo fsAat eat da Gar HIS Hod ferfaur i (919-14, saat, v2 3)
ayh tisnaa vadaa rog lagaa maran manhu visaari-aa.
They contract this terrible disease of desire, and in their minds, they forget about dying.
zu fs aH OsnH A Hate at feats faG aafemr i (919-14, mast, He 3)
vaydaa meh naam utam so suneh naahee fireh ji-o baytaali-aa.
In the Vedas, the ultimate objective is the Naam, the Name of the Lord; but they do not hear this, and they wander around like demons.
ad Sse fs AY shor gs war at AoW At Thar AEM (919-15, THA, Hs 3) kahai naanak jin sach taji-aa koorhay laagay tinee janam joo-ai haari-aa. ||19||
Says Nanak, those who forsake Truth and cling to falsehood, lose their lives in the gamble. ||19]|
Hig fSEaHs addT feds Il (919-15, aHast, He 3) jee-ahu nirmal baahrahu nirmal. Inwardly pure, and outwardly pure.
Wd 3 Sens Amg fosHe Afsad 3 Adat Anat Il (919-16, saat, He 3)
baahrahu ta nirmal jee-ahu nirmal satgur tay karnee kamaanee.
Those who are outwardly pure and also pure within, through the Guru, perform good deeds.
as at AfS uge ast HOA Afs AHTet Il (919-16, Tat, He 3) koorh kee so-ay pahuchai naahee mansaa sach samaanee. Not even an iota of falsehood touches them; their hopes are absorbed in the Truth.
HOH I30 fAat ufent 3B A PEAS Il (919-17, Tat, He 3) janam ratan jinee khati-aa bhalay say vanjaaray. Those who earn the jewel of this human life, are the most excellent of merchants.
ad aad fas Ha fone Het dofs TT SS MOM (919-17, saat, v2 3) kahai naanak jin man nirmal sadaa raheh gur naalay. ||20|| Says Nanak, those whose minds are pure, abide with the Guru forever. ||20]|
Ao fy ae ASt ASHY Jz Il (919-18, mma, Hs 3) jay ko sikh guroo saytee sanmukh hovai. If a Sikh turns to the Guru with sincere faith, as sunmukh
de 3 Aony fry act Hig Jd TT SS Il (919-18, rast, He 3)
hovai ta sanmukh sikh ko-ee jee-ahu rahai gur naalay.
- if a Sikh turns to the Guru with sincere faith, as sunmukh, his soul abides with the Guru.
Gd a Bde fase fore visa nrSH ANS Il (919-19, THA, He 3)
gur kay charan hirdai Dhi-aa-ay antar aatmai samaalay.
Within his heart, he meditates on the lotus feet of the Guru; deep within his soul, he contemplates Him.
nity efs Het Id ude Td fag nied 5 WE AS Il (19-19, saat, He 3)
aap chhad sadaa rahai parnai gur bin avar na jaanai ko-ay.
Renouncing selfishness and conceit, he remains always on the side of the Guru; he does not know anyone except the Guru.
UST K2o
ad sod Hed Had A fhe ASHY JE QAI (920-1, east, He 3)
kahai naanak sunhu santahu so sikh sanmukh ho-ay. ||21]|
Says Nanak, listen, O Saints: such a Sikh turns toward the Guru with sincere faith, and becomes sunmukh. ||21]|
Aa qd 3 tH de faa Afsag nafs & US Il (920-1, at, He 3)
jay ko gur tay vaimukh hovai bin satgur mukat na paavai.
One who turns away from the Guru, and becomes baymukh - without the True Guru, he shall not find liberation.
ure Hafs 5 dd & act ued fasolor WE Il (920-2, mat, He 3) paavai mukat na hor thai ko-ee puchhahu bibaykee-aa jaa-ay. He shall not find liberation anywhere else either; go and ask the wise ones about this.
MS Tat SoH ore fee AfsaT Hats o US Il (920-2, grat, Hs 3)
anayk joonee bharam aavai vin satgur mukat na paa-ay.
He shall wander through countless incarnations; without the True Guru, he shall not find liberation.
fefs nafs ue ofa saat Afsag HAE AES Il (920-3, mast, He 3)
fir mukat paa-ay laag charnee satguroo sabad sunaa-ay.
But liberation is attained, when one is attached to the feet of the True Guru, chanting the Word of the Shabad.
ad aed sets tug fee Afsag Hats o UTES N22Il (920-4, east, He 3) kahai naanak veechaar daykhhu vin satgur mukat na paa-ay. ||22]|
Says Nanak, contemplate this and see, that without the True Guru, there is no liberation. ||22||
uted fra Afsag & fried reg AST Bret I (920-4, oHast, Hs 3) aavhu sikh satguroo kay pi-aariho gaavhu sachee banee. Come, O beloved Sikhs of the True Guru, and sing the True Word of His Bani.
wet 3 weg Tg adt water fafs set i (920-5, saat, 42 3) banee ta gaavhu guroo kayree baanee-aa sir banee. Sing the Guru's Bani, the supreme Word of Words.
fro a@ sefs ag de fase fear ANTAt II (920-5, anast, He 3)
jin ka-o nadar karam hovai hirdai tinaa samaanee.
Those who are blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace - their hearts are imbued with this Bani.
uleg nifys Ae sag ofa dfa afug Afsarur|t II (920-6, snraet, 8 3)
peevhu amrit sadaa rahhu har rang japihu saarigpaanee.
Drink in this Ambrosial Nectar, and remain in the Lord's Love forever; meditate on the Lord, the Sustainer of the world.
Ad SSX AST Weg ST Ast seat MlQsil (920-6, wast, He 3) kahai naanak sadaa gaavhu ayh sachee banee. ||23]| Says Nanak, sing this True Bani forever. ||23] |
Afsag faa da aet J set il (920-7, Tact, 3) satguroo binaa hor kachee hai banee. Without the True Guru, other songs are false.
Fal 3 ast Aas ws Ja aat set il (920-7, Tat, v2 3) banee ta kachee satguroo baajhahu hor kachee banee. The songs are false without the True Guru; all other songs are false.
ade AD Hee Ad At mrfy surat Il (920-8, sat, He 3)
kahday kachay sunday kachay kachee™ aakh vakhaanee.
The speakers are false, and the listeners are false; those who speak and recite are false.
ofs ofs fas asta sAat afoot aE B Fret Il (920-8, THAT, H 3)
har har nit karahi rasnaa kahi-aa kachhoo na jaanee.
They may continually chant, 'Har, Har’ with their tongues, but they do not know what they are saying.
fas fro a fof ofenr wfenr sefs ue geet Il (920-9, east, He 3) chit jin kaa hir la-i-aa maa-i-aa bolan pa-ay ravaanee. Their consciousness is lured by Maya; they are just reciting mechanically.
AI SSA ASAT TST Ja Adt set NQSil (920-9, gaat, v2 3) kahai naanak satguroo baajhahu hor kachee banee. ||24|| Says Nanak, without the True Guru, other songs are false. ||24| |
ad a Aa 39 J dtd fas AST Il (920-10, east, ne 3) gur kaa sabad ratann hai heeray jit jarhaa-o. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is a jewel, studded with diamonds.
Hae 336 fas Hoe war Sg Int ANTS I (920-10, raat, He 3) sabad ratan jit man laagaa ayhu ho-aa samaa-o. The mind which is attached to this jewel, merges into the Shabad.
Rae Ast Ho firfeor AS afer ar i (920-11, meet, He 3) sabad saytee man mili-aa sachai laa-i-aa bhaa-o. One whose mind is attuned to the Shabad, enshrines love for the True Lord.
nmy dt sae om fan 3 ef ase il (920-11, saat, v2 3)
aapay heeraa ratan aapay jis no day-ay bujhaa-ay.
He Himself is the diamond, and He Himself is the jewel; one who is blessed, understands its value.
Ad BSA AGE ISO FT da fas ASS lull (920-12, mast, v2 3) kahai naanak sabad ratan hai heeraa jit jarhaa-o. ||25]|| Says Nanak, the Shabad is a jewel, studded with diamonds. ||25]||
fre nafs urfy Garfe & ATS yMY JAH FISTS | (920-12, Tat, He 3)
siv sakat aap upaa-ay kai kartaa aapay hukam vartaa-ay.
He Himself created Shiva and Shakti, mind and matter; the Creator subjects them to His Command.
Jay ease vrfu fa Toute far gas I (920-13, mast, He 3)
hukam vartaa-ay aap vaykhai gurmukh kisai bujhaa-ay.
Enforcing His Order, He Himself sees all. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, come to know Him.
33 due de Has Age fs SAS Il (920-13, aHaat, He 3)
torhay banDhan hovai mukat sabad man vasaa-ay.
They break their bonds, and attain liberation; they enshrine the Shabad within their minds.
aenfe fan 6 orf ad A de San fhe fos we I (920-14, oat, He 3) gurmukh jis no aap karay so hovai aykas si-o liv laa-ay.
Those whom the Lord Himself makes Gurmukh, lovingly focus their consciousness on the One Lord.
ad aed ify AIS MM} JAH FSS NEM (920-14, east, ne 3)
kahai naanak aap kartaa aapay hukam bujhaa-ay. ||26]|
Says Nanak, He Himself is the Creator; He Himself reveals the Hukam of His Command. ||26] |
fafifs AAy us uy dterse 3S ATS B AST Il (920-15, Treat, He 3)
simrit saastar punn paap beechaarday tatai saar na jaanee.
The Simritees and the Shaastras discriminate between good and evil, but they do not know the true essence of reality.
33 AS 5 Wel TTI TST FS AT Wet Il (920-15, Tat, we 3)
tatai saar na jaanee guroo baajhahu tatai saar na jaanee.
They do not know the true essence of reality without the Guru; they do not know the true essence of reality.
fect wet AAs afk aS aAfsur sf feorst 11 20-16, mast, He 3)
tihee gunee sansaar bharam sutaa suti-aa rain vihaanee.
The world is asleep in the three modes and doubt; it passes the night of its life Sleeping.
as fas 3 A He Fat fro uf uf efhmr dats nifiqs set II (920-16, mast, He 3)
gur kirpaa tay say jan jaagay jinaa har man vasi-aa boleh amrit banee.
Those humble beings remain awake and aware, within whose minds, by Guru's Grace, the Lord abides; they chant the Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani.
ad sod A 3g ue fan 6 notes ofa foe oat was df= feaet QDI (920-17, sat, H: 3)
kahai naanak so tat paa-ay jis no an-din har liv laagai jaagat rain vihaanee. ||27] | Says Nanak, they alone obtain the essence of reality, who night and day remain lovingly absorbed in the Lord; they pass the night of their life awake and aware. [|27]|
Hat & Gea ufo ufsurs ad A fa@ Hag fers Il (920-18, sraat, ne 3) maataa kay udar meh partipaal karay so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai. He nourished us in the mother's womb; why forget Him from the mind?
Hod fa@ ferrdha Ses ost fa mais ufo wrorg ugeUT]e Il (920-18, THAT, He 3) manhu ki-o visaaree-ai ayvad daataa je agan meh aahaar pahuchaava-ay.
Why forget from the mind such a Great Giver, who gave us sustenance in the fire of the womb?
6A 3 fag ufs 3 Hat fan 5E nmuat fer Bee Il (20-19, wast, He 3) os no kihu pohi na sakee jis na-o aapnee liv laav-ay. Nothing can harm one, whom the Lord inspires to embrace His Love.
Yat £29
niuat fee nm oe aayf Het ANTS I (921-1, east, He 3)
aapnee liv aapay laa-ay gurmukh sadaa samaalee-ai.
He Himself is the love, and He Himself is the embrace; the Gurmukh contemplates Him forever.
ad Bed Ses VST A fa Hag fers Ici (921-1, east, ve 3) kahai naanak ayvad daataa so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai. ||28] | Says Nanak, why forget such a Great Giver from the mind? ||28] |
Amt mate Bea ufo Sat softs Hfeur I (921-2, erat, He 3) jaisee agan udar meh taisee baahar maa-i-aa. As is the fire within the womb, so is Maya outside.
Hear nafs AS fea At ATs Ae Tefen | (921-2, erat, He 3) maa-i-aa agan sabh iko jayhee kartai khayl rachaa-i-aa. The fire of Maya is one and the same; the Creator has staged this play.
wv faq svat a fir usetfa ser atfemr | (921-3, aHast, He 3) jaa tis bhaanaa taa jammi-aa parvaar bhalaa bhaa-i-aa. According to His Will, the child is born, and the family is very pleased.
fee Exot walt fZAa Hear yng FastfEnr | (921-3, Tat, He 3)
liv chhurhkee lagee tarisnaa maa-i-aa amar vartaa-i-aa.
Love for the Lord wears off, and the child becomes attached to desires; the script of Maya runs its course.
eu Hier fag ofs fend Hg Cun eS ea wfenr I (921-4, mast, Hs 3)
ayh maa-i-aa jit har visrai moh upjai bhaa-o doojaa laa-i-aa.
This is Maya, by which the Lord is forgotten; emotional attachment and love of duality well up.
Ad SS Td uA fro foe oreit fsat fed wfeor urf—or Ici (921-5, wast, ne 3) kahai naanak gur parsaadee jinaa liv laagee tinee vichay maa-i-aa paa-i-aa. ||29]|| Says Nanak, by Guru's Grace, those who enshrine love for the Lord find Him, in the midst of Maya. ||29]|
dfs urfy mea od Hf o urfeer ate i 921-5, rast, He 3) har aap amulak hai mul na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Lord Himself is priceless; His worth cannot be estimated.
His 3 ufenr afe far fees ad Sa fete i (921-6, mat, He 3) mul na paa-i-aa jaa-ay kisai vitahu rahay lok villaa-ay. His worth cannot be estimated, even though people have grown weary of trying.
mrt Afsad A fHS fSA 3 fag ACubA fees mre ATE II (921-6, mat, 2 3)
aisaa satgur jay milai tis no sir sa-upee-ai vichahu aap jaa-ay.
If you meet such a True Guru, offer your head to Him; your selfishness and conceit will be eradicated from within.
fan a iG fan ffs ao ofa SA ufo wrfe I (921-7, act, H2 3)
jis daa jee-o tis mil rahai har vasai man aa-ay.
Your soul belongs to Him; remain united with Him, and the Lord will come to dwell in your mind.
dfs urfy mea od ova fsar ax Boat faa dfs us uTe IZON (921-8, eH, He 3) har aap amulak hai bhaag tinaa kay naankaa jin har palai paa-ay. ||30||
The Lord Himself is priceless; very fortunate are those, O Nanak, who attain to the Lord. ||30||
ofa TA AS HS SEAT Il (921-8, THs, Hs 3) har raas mayree man vanjaaraa. The Lord is my capital; my mind is the merchant.
dfs ofA AS He Zena Afsagd 3 TA Aret Il (921-9, anHaat, He 3)
har raas mayree man vanjaaraa satgur tay raas jaanee.
The Lord is my capital, and my mind is the merchant; through the True Guru, I know my capital.
dfs ofs fos Afug Ag oe ufeg feast I (921-9, mat, He 3)
har har nit japihu jee-ahu laahaa khatihu dihaarhee.
Meditate continually on the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul, and you shall collect your profits daily.
Sg U6 fsa fufeur fae dfs mms grat Il (921-10, mat, He 3)
ayhu Dhan tinaa mili-aa jin har aapay bhaanaa.
This wealth is obtained by those who are pleasing to the Lord's Will.
ad aed dfs TH Hat Ho Sort SEAS NSU (21-10, Haat, He 3)
kahai naanak har raas mayree man ho-aa vanjaaraa. ||31||
Says Nanak, the Lord is my capital, and my mind is the merchant. ||31]|
Sana 3 us oth The sdt Sct fara o ATE It 21-11, enraat, 2 3)
ay rasnaa too an ras raach rahee tayree pi-aas na jaa-ay.
O my tongue, you are engrossed in other tastes, but your thirsty desire is not quenched.
fiomn o wfe des fas frag afs oA us 3 UTE II (921-11, sna, He 3)
pi-aas na jaa-ay horat kitai jichar har ras palai na paa-ay.
Your thirst shall not be quenched by any means, until you attain the subtle essence of the Lord.
ofe oA uf us ub ofs oA safe o feRor wot wrfe II (921-12, erat, He 3)
har ras paa-ay palai pee-ai har ras bahurh na tarisnaa laagai aa-ay.
If you do obtain the subtle essence of the Lord, and drink in this essence of the Lord, you shall not be troubled by desire again.
&g ofa gn anit ue Afsag fe far orfe i (921-12, erect, v2 3)
ayhu har ras karmee paa-ee-ai satgur milai jis aa-ay.
This subtle essence of the Lord is obtained by good karma, when one comes to meet with the True Guru.
ad aed dfs ne dA Als Stns wT fs SA fs ore 132i (921-13, mat, He 3) kahai naanak hor an ras sabh veesray jaa har vasai man aa-ay. ||32||
Says Nanak, all other tastes and essences are forgotten, when the Lord comes to dwell within the mind. ||32]|
& Aetet Hfonr afe SH ufo Ais at St gs aT He wefeMr I 21-14, Treat, He 3) ay sareeraa mayri-aa har tum meh jot rakhee taa too jag meh aa-i-aa. O my body, the Lord infused His Light into you, and then you came into the world.
ofs Afs ait sg fete a 5 Aa fs nefemr It (21-14, erst, 3 3) har jot rakhee tuDh vich taa too jag meh aa-i-aa. The Lord infused His Light into you, and then you came into the world.
dfs wimg Hat wird fust fafe AIG Gute Aas featfemr | (921-15, mat, He 3)
har aapay maataa aapay pitaa jin jee-o upaa-ay jagat dikhaa-i-aa.
The Lord Himself is your mother, and He Himself is your father; He created the created beings, and revealed the world to them.
qd usAet gfsor st vas dum ves edt wrfenr | (921-16, erat, He 3) gur parsaadee bujhi-aa taa chalat ho-aa chalat nadree aa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, some understand, and then it's a show; it seems like just a show.
ad wee fqafe x ue stoor ais anit ot gs Far ufo wrfeMr Wasi (921-16, THE, He 3) kahai naanak sarisat kaa mool rachi-aa jot raakhee taa too jag meh aa-i-aa. ||33]|| Says Nanak, He laid the foundation of the Universe, and infused His Light, and then you came into the world. ||33]|
Hfs wC sfeur ys nia AfEnt | (921-17, mat, us 3) man chaa-o bha-i-aa parabh aagam suni-aa. My mind has become joyful, hearing of God's coming.
ofa Hares ar@ At fas Hes afer il (921-18, eat, He 3)
har mangal gaa-o sakhee garihu mandar bani-aa.
Sing the songs of joy to welcome the Lord, O my companions; my household has become the Lord's Mansion.
ofs ar Hae fos Ade Aa sy o fenrue i (921-18, seat, v3 3)
har gaa-o mangal nit sakhee-ay sog dookh na vi-aapa-ay.
Sing continually the songs of joy to welcome the Lord, O my companions, and sorrow and suffering will not afflict you.
Td BIS wa fee Asa mruear fug AUS Il (921-19, Tat, He 3)
gur charan laagay din sabhaagay aapnaa pir jaap-ay.
Blessed is that day, when I am attached to the Guru's feet and meditate on my Husband Lord.
Wods wat ad Aafe wel ofe on dfs IA Sa Il (921-19, erat, 2 3)
anhat banee gur sabad jaanee har naam har ras bhogo.
I have come to know the unstruck sound current and the Word of the Guru's Shabad; I enjoy the sublime essence of the Lord, the Lord's Name.
UST K2Q2
ad aod ys uify fife age arse Aa BSI (922-1, sre, He 3)
kahai naanak parabh aap mili-aa karan kaaran jogo. ||34]| Says Nanak, God Himself has met me; He is the Doer, the Cause of causes. ||34||
© Ade Afour fea Aa fo ofS a famr so aeH afeMr It (922-1, Hat, He 3) ay Sareeraa mayri-aa is jag meh aa-ay kai ki-aa tuDh karam kamaa-i-aa. O my body, why have you come into this world? What actions have you committed?
fa aH aHtfeor so Adte ATS Aa Ufo mrfenr | (922-2, east, He 3) ke karam kamaa-i-aa tuDh sareeraa jaa too jag meh aa-i-aa. And what actions have you committed, O my body, since you came into this world?
fafs ofa 3a" suo ofeur A ofa nfs 3 eAfeMT I (922-2, erat, He 3) jin har tayraa rachan rachi-aa so har man na vasaa-i-aa. The Lord who formed your form - you have not enshrined that Lord in your mind.
qs usAet ots vfs efor ust foto urfemr i (922-3, mat, He 3)
gur parsaadee har man vasi-aa poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa.
By Guru's Grace, the Lord abides within the mind, and one's pre-ordained destiny is fulfilled.
ad aed Sy Ade use dvr fats afsasg fae fos wfenr sul (922-4, mat, v2 3) kahai naanak ayhu sareer parvaan ho-aa jin satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa. ||35]|
Says Nanak, this body is adorned and honored, when one's consciousness is focused on the True Guru. ||35]|
& ogg Afad ofa SH ufo AfS Ut afe fas neg o Sug Set I (922-4, ania, He 3) ay naytarahu mayriho har tum meh jot Dharee har bin avar na daykhhu ko-ee.
O my eyes, the Lord has infused His Light into you; do not look upon any other than the Lord.
dfs fas neg & tug aet aedt afe faofemr i (922-5, mat, He 3) har bin avar na daykhhu ko-ee nadree har nihaali-aa. Do not look upon any other than the Lord; the Lord alone is worthy of beholding.
eu fem AAS SH tue Sg of a gu a ofa gy Seat urfEMr Ih (922-6, at, H: 3)
ayhu vis sansaar tum daykh-day ayhu har kaa roop hai har roop nadree aa-i-aa.
This whole world which you see is the image of the Lord; only the image of the Lord is seen.
ae usAet afsor at ser afe fea 3 afe fas neg 3 At I 022-7, meet, Hi 3)
gur parsaadee bujhi-aa jaa vaykhaa har ik hai har bin avar na ko-ee.
By Guru's Grace, I understand, and I see only the One Lord; there is no one except the Lord.
ad seg fs 33 vin A Afsafe fife fea ferfe det isi (922-7, araet, us 3) kahai naanak ayhi naytar anDh say satgur mili-ai dib darisat ho-ee. ||36||
Says Nanak, these eyes were blind; but meeting the True Guru, they became all- seeing. ||36||
& Ageg Afsd AS ASS SB USES Il (922-8, mast, Hs 3) ay sarvanhu mayriho saachai sunnai no pathaa-ay. O my ears, you were created only to hear the Truth.
Hd Hoe 6 Use Adifa we Aeg Als set Il (922-8, east, He 3)
saachai sunnai no pathaa-ay sareer laa-ay sunhu sat banee.
To hear the Truth, you were created and attached to the body; listen to the True Bani.
fas Hat Ho 36 dfoor dur gAor ofA AAret Il (922-9, erat, He 3)
jit sunee man tan hari-aa ho-aa rasnaa ras samaanee.
Hearing it, the mind and body are rejuvenated, and the tongue is absorbed in Ambrosial Nectar.
Ag neu fesvat 3 at afs act & WES Il (922-9, mre, v2 3) sach alakh vidaanee taa kee gat kahee na jaa-ay. The True Lord is unseen and wondrous; His state cannot be described.
ad soa nifys ony Aeg ufeg Jeg AW ASS B USE MBI (922-10, an1awt, He 3)
kahai naanak amrit naam sunhu pavitar hovhu saachai sunnai no pathaa-ay. ||37|| Says Nanak, listen to the Ambrosial Naam and become holy; you were created only to hear the Truth. ||37]||
dfs HE ge viefs of & ae use Srfemr It 922-11, aes, nH: 3)
har jee-o gufaa andar rakh kai vaajaa pavan vajaa-i-aa.
The Lord placed the soul to the cave of the body, and blew the breath of life into the musical instrument of the body.
erfeur aa us o8 Enid usde ale GAS Tus safer Il (922-11, anaat, He 3) Vajaa-i-aa vaajaa pa-un na-o du-aaray pargat kee-ay dasvaa gupat rakhaa-i-aa.
He blew the breath of life into the musical instrument of the body, and revealed the nine doors; but He kept the Tenth Door hidden.
deen ofe seat feast eA eng fearfeur i) (922-12, mat, He 3)
gurdu-aarai laa-ay bhaavnee iknaa dasvaa du-aar dikhaa-i-aa.
Through the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate, some are blessed with loving faith, and the Tenth Door is revealed to them.
3d mda gu ae o€ fafa fan & nis o Wet UfeMr II (922-13, Tnrast, He 3)
tah anayk roop naa-o nav niDh tis daa ant na jaa-ee paa-i-aa.
There are many images of the Lord, and the nine treasures of the Naam; His limits cannot be found.
ad aed dfs fimrd He ger niefs oft a ea ues sefemr ati (922-13, meet, He 3) kahai naanak har pi-aarai jee-o gufaa andar rakh kai vaajaa pavan vajaa-i-aa. ||38]| Says Nanak, the Lord placed the soul to the cave of the body, and blew the breath of life into the musical instrument of the body. ||38]|
Sg Ae Afser ATS wis Weg Il (922-14, saat, He 3) ayhu saachaa sohilaa saachai ghar gaavhu. Sing this true song of praise in the true home of your soul.
Weg 3 Afser ufs AS fae Het AG famed Il (922-15, aH, He 3) gaavhu ta sohilaa ghar saachai jithai sadaa sach Dhi-aavhay. Sing the song of praise in your true home; meditate there on the True Lord forever.
Ae fowrefo wt sg aefs aenfe frat gsr]ed Il (922-15, east, He 3)
sacho Dhi-aavahi jaa tuDh bhaaveh gurmukh jinaa bujhaavhay.
They alone meditate on You, O True Lord, who are pleasing to Your Will; as Gurmukh, they understand.
fég AY Ass aT UAH JD fA SYA A AS UST Il (922-16, raat, He 3) ih sach sabhnaa kaa khasam hai jis bakhsay so jan paavhay. This Truth is the Lord and Master of all; whoever is blessed, obtains it.
Ad asa AY Afser AY ufs Wed Stil (922-16, mast, He 3) kahai naanak sach sohilaa sachai ghar gaavhay. ||39]|| Says Nanak, sing the true song of praise in the true home of your soul. ||39]|
MSE AST STMT ANS HOTS YT Il (922-17, Haat, we 3) anad sunhu vadbhaageeho sagal manorath pooray. Listen to the song of bliss, O most fortunate ones; all your longings shall be fulfilled.
uTdqaH ys ufemr Ss Aare feAs I (922-17, erat, He 3) paarbarahm parabh paa-i-aa utray sagal visooray. I have obtained the Supreme Lord God, and all sorrows have been forgotten.
eu da Hsu Sse Hat At set il (922-18, mat, Hs 3) dookh rog santaap utray sunee sachee banee. Pain, illness and suffering have departed, listening to the True Bani.
HS AHO Se AGA Us Ta SF AAT Il (922-18, oat, He 3) sant Saajan bha-ay sarsay pooray gur tay jaanee. The Saints and their friends are in ecstasy, knowing the Perfect Guru.
Hes uals ass ules Afsag stor sauT Il (922-18, oH, He 3)
suntay puneet kahtay pavit satgur rahi-aa bharpooray.
Pure are the listeners, and pure are the speakers; the True Guru is all-pervading and permeating.
fasdts SH TT VIS Ha TH viSIe ZF MONA (922-19, Tras, we 3)
binvant naanak gur charan laagay vaajay anhad tooray. ||40||1]|
Prays Nanak, touching the Guru's Feet, the unstruck sound current of the celestial bugles vibrates and resounds. ||40||1]|
yar CQZ THAG! AE (923-1)
raamkalee sadu Raamkalee, Sadd ~ The Call Of Death:
qe Afsars urrfe II (923-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afa ost Af safs zee fg of FIG I (023-2, maat, war Hes)
jag daataa so-ay bhagat vachhal tihu lo-ay jee-o.
He is the Great Giver of the Universe, the Lover of His devotees, throughout the three worlds.
dd Aafe AHSS nied 3 We afe ME Il (923-2, ast, wer Hes) gur sabad samaav-ay avar na jaanai ko-ay jee-o. One who is merged in the Word of the Guru's Shabad does not know any other.
Wed 3 Wefs Aafe Td a Sa aH fared Il 623-2, saat, wa Hes)
avro na jaaneh sabad gur kai ayk naam Dhi-aavhay.
Dwelling upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he does not know any other; he meditates on the One Name of the Lord.
UsATE SS TI vige UH ute urST Il (923-3, Tat, war Hea)
parsaad naanak guroo angad param padvee paavhay.
By the Grace of Guru Nanak and Guru Angad, Guru Amar Das obtained the supreme status.
mitfent Jars Voseta' Ifs TH oth AHMET I (923-4, aHast, aa Hes) aa-i-aa hakaaraa chalanvaaraa har raam naam samaa-i-aa. And when the call came for Him to depart, He merged in the Name of the Lord.
Afa Mg nee use Sag sats 3 ofs ufeMr 4 (923-4, eHast, wear Hes) jag amar atal atol thaakur bhagat tay har paa-i-aa. ||1||
Through devotional worship in this world, the imperishable, immovable, immeasurable Lord is found. ||1]|
dfs wat ga Sfeor ag we ofa ys uta AIG II (923-5, mast, er Hes)
har bhaanaa gur bhaa-i-aa gur jaavai har parabh paas jee-o.
The Guru gladly accepted the Lord's Will, and so the Guru easily reached the Lord God's Presence.
Afsag ad ofa ufs saat Ast UA sag reef AIG I (023-5, snes, wer Hes) satgur karay har peh bayntee mayree paij rakhahu ardaas jee-o. The True Guru prays to the Lord, "Please, save my honor. This is my prayer".
Un dug dfs Ad Adt af Sg on feds Il (923-6, wast, war Hes)
paij raakho har janah kayree har dayh naam niranjano.
Please save the honor of Your humble servant, O Lord; please bless him with Your Immaculate Name.
nifs softer of ast AMES aS fSdAS Il (923-6, meet, war Hes)
ant chaldi-aa ho-ay baylee jamdoot kaal nikhanjano. At this time of final departure, it is our only help and support; it destroys death, and the Messenger of Death.
Afsag at dost uret af yfs wet orseth AIS I (923-7, oHast, wear Hes) satguroo kee bayntee paa-ee har parabh sunee ardaas jee-o. The Lord God heard the prayer of the True Guru, and granted His request.
dfs ofs faa Afsag frorfeor ug ue ad ATatA AIG NN (923-8, mat, war Hes) har Dhaar kirpaa satgur milaa-i-aa Dhan Dhan kahai saabaas jee-o. ||2]|
The Lord showered His Mercy, and blended the True Guru with Himself; He said, "Blessed! Blessed! Wonderful!"| | 2] |
He fra Hed us sete AS aie svat ov H uth AIG II (923-8, east, wer Hes)
mayray sikh sunhu put bhaa-eeho mayrai har bhaanaa aa-o mai paas jee-o.
Listen O my Sikhs, my children and Siblings of Destiny; it is my Lord's Will that I must now go to Him.
df vat ae Seon Ha as ug ad Aa AIG II (923-9, niet, war He) har bhaanaa gur bhaa-i-aa mayraa har parabh karay saabaas jee-o. The Guru gladly accepted the Lord's Will, and my Lord God applauded Him.
saz Afsag use Aet faa ofs ys svat Sree II (923-9, oHast, oer Hes)
bhagat satgur purakh so-ee jis har parabh bhaanaa bhaav-ay.
One who is pleased with the Lord God's Will is a devotee, the True Guru, the Primal Lord.
MSs node eafs eA dfs orfu af Hwee Il (923-10, mat, ear Hes)
aanand anhad vajeh vaajay har aap gal maylaava-ay.
The unstruck sound current of bliss resounds and vibrates; the Lord hugs him close in His embrace.
SA us avet ugerg Ha nfs Sug afe foartA AE Il (923-11, sat, wer Hes) tusee put bhaa-ee parvaar mayraa man vaykhhu kar nirjaas jee-o. O my children, siblings and family, look carefully in your minds, and see.
ufs fafimr users fed ont ag wafe afs ys uth AIG 3H 023-11, mast, er Fes) Dhur likhi-aa parvaanaa firai naahee gur jaa-ay har parabh paas jee-o. ||3]|
The pre-ordained death warrant cannot be avoided; the Guru is going to be with the Lord God. ||3]|
Afsafe ae mre afs ugerg Hetfenr | (923-12, mast, wat Hes)
satgur bhaanai aapnai bahi parvaar sadaa-i-aa.
The True Guru, in His Own Sweet Will, sat up and summoned His family. HSH fue vet dent AH ute 3 Stee I (923-12, mast, ar Hes)
mat mai pichhai ko-ee rovsee so mai mool na bhaa-i-aa.
Let no one weep for me after I am gone. That would not please me at all. fiz us fis faa fan fies ot UA aTSe I 623-13, ores, wer Hes)
mit paijhai mit bigsai jis mit kee paij bhaav-ay. When a friend receives a robe of honor, then his friends are pleased with his honor.
St atefs tug ys set ofe Asa UsTSe Il (923-13, Tae, eer Hes)
tusee veechaar daykhhu put bhaa-ee har satguroo painaava-ay.
Consider this and see, O my children and siblings; the Lord has given the True Guru the robe of supreme honor.
Afsag ussty de afs aq nrfu feorfenr i (923-14, meet, eer Hes)
satguroo partakh hodai bahi raaj aap tikaa-i-aa.
The True Guru Himself sat up, and appointed the successor to the Throne of Raja Yoga, the Yoga of Meditation and Success.
Afs fre dou us set THETA Ut urfSr gil (923-15, Hast, wa Hes) sabh sikh banDhap put bhaa-ee raamdaas pairee paa-i-aa. ||4]|
All the Sikhs, relatives, children and siblings have fallen at the Feet of Guru Ram Das. [141]
wis Afsag Sfeor 4 fue atese afeng fasare IG II (923-15, meet, war Hes) antay satgur boli-aa mai pichhai keertan kari-ahu nirbaan jee-o.
Finally, the True Guru said, "When I am gone, sing Kirtan in Praise of the Lord, in Nirvaanaa."
aA dure ufss vfenrg ofa af ae usts use AIG Il (923-16, saat, wr Hes)
kayso gopaal pandit sadi-ahu har har kathaa parheh puraan jee-o.
Call in the long-haired scholarly Saints of the Lord, to read the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs ae usha fs an Heba Sars ofs da Td SSE Il (923-16, Haast, wa Hes)
har kathaa parhee-ai har naam sunee-ai baybaan har rang gur bhaav-ay.
Read the sermon of the Lord, and listen to the Lord's Name; the Guru is pleased with love for the Lord.
fis usts fafour der ee ofa vfs uree i (923-17, mast, wer Hes)
pind patal kiri-aa deevaa ful har sar paav-ay.
Do not bother with offering rice-balls on leaves, lighting lamps, and other rituals like floating the body out on the Ganges; instead, let my remains be given up to the Lord's Pool.
dfs afer Afsag sfeor afs fifemr use AAS AG II (923-18, east, wer Hes)
har bhaa-i-aa satgur boli-aa har mili-aa purakh sujaan jee-o.
The Lord was pleased as the True Guru spoke; he was blended then with the all- knowing Primal Lord God.
THEA Aet fsea cor ag Age AY otATE MIG Null (623-18, maat, war Hes) raamdaas sodhee tilak dee-aa gur sabad sach neesaan jee-o. ||5]|
The Guru then blessed the Sodhi Ram Das with the ceremonial tilak mark, the insignia of the True Word of the Shabad. ||5]|
yar 28 Afsag usy fa afer aefrer rife wet safe FIG 1 (924-1, ast, war Hes)
satgur purakh je boli-aa gursikhaa man la-ee rajaa-ay jee-o. And as the True Guru, the Primal Lord spoke, and the Gursikhs obeyed His Will.
Hodt us Aone dfeer men ost ute AG I (924-2, nest, wer Hes)
mohree put sanmukh ho-i-aa raamdaasai pairee paa-ay jee-o.
His son Mohri turned sunmukh, and become obedient to Him; he bowed, and touched Ram Das' feet.
Ag ud Udt Afsag act fra ag wiry aftr i 624-2, mat, arr Hes)
sabh pavai pairee satguroo kayree jithai guroo aap rakhi-aa.
Then, everyone bowed and touched the feet of Ram Das, into whom the Guru infused His essence.
aet afe aitet foe oct fete afsag vite foefenr 1 (924-3, oat, ar Hes)
ko-ee kar bakheelee nivai naahee fir satguroo aan nivaa-i-aa.
And any that did not bow then because of envy - later, the True Guru brought them around to bow in humility.
dfs Tats vat Stet Sfanret ute fettimr Sy sate AS i (924-3, erat, eer Hes)
har gureh bhaanaa dee-ee vadi-aa-ee Dhur likhi-aa laykh rajaa-ay jee-o.
It pleased the Guru, the Lord, to bestow glorious greatness upon Him; such was the pre-ordained destiny of the Lord's Will.
ad Hd Hed H3d AS Aas Ut ute AE NENA (924-4, mast, wer Hes) kahai sundar sunhu santahu sabh jagat pairee paa-ay jee-o. ||6||1]| Says Sundar, listen, O Saints: all the world fell at His feet. ||6]|1]|
THAGt HIG UBT (924-6)
raamkalee mehlaa 5 chhant Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
QB Afsas YATE II (924-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AHost Ha AHost foafe usfimist Ha ATHOST Il (924-6, Tat, He 5) Saajanrhaa mayraa saajanrhaa nikat khalo-i-arhaa mayraa saajanrhaa. Friend, my Friend - standing so near to me is my Friend!
Woiat dfs AShrst Se ni@fenrst ats ASIST I (924-7, THe, He 5) jaanee-arhaa har jaanee-arhaa nain alo-i-arhaa har jaanee-arhaa. Beloved, the Lord my Beloved - with my eyes, I have seen the Lord, my Beloved!
de n@fenr ufe ule Afeur ofS vifigs flor gar I (24-8, arash, MH: 5)
nain alo-i-aa ghat ghat so-i-aa at amrit pari-a goorhaa.
With my eyes I have seen Him, sleeping upon the bed within each and every heart; my Beloved is the sweetest ambrosial nectar.
ote deer ofa & AAS AMIS B ATE HAT Il (924-8, Tat, He 5) naal hovandaa leh na sakandaa su-aa-o na jaanai moorhaa. He is with all, but he cannot be found; the fool does not know His taste.
Hfeor Hfe Hst det ast foes 3 ATet SIH TST I (24-9, ona, He 5)
maa-i-aa mad maataa hochhee baataa milan na jaa-ee bharam Dharhaa.
Intoxicated with the wine of Maya, the mortal babbles on about trivial affairs; giving in to the illusion, he cannot meet the Lord.
aI Sa Ts fag ad AS os AMG As a feats war A (924-9, Tract, Hs 5) kaho naanak gur bin naahee soojhai har saajan sabh kai nikat kharhaa. ||1]| Says Nanak, without the Guru, he cannot understand the Lord, the Friend who is standing near everyone. ||1]|
SS
afte AS afer yrs nore HS atfFEr il (924-10, ore, ue 5)
gobindaa mayray gobindaa paraan aDhaaraa mayray gobindaa. God, my God - the Support of the breath of life is my God.
fxsursr He farsuresr Be sre HS fagurTsr il (924-11, east, 2 5) kirpaalaa mayray kirpaalaa daan daataaraa mayray kirpaalaa. Merciful Lord, my Merciful Lord - the Giver of gifts is my Merciful Lord.
VS VST nus wre ue ue nists Hafan | (924-11, mast, He 5)
daan daataaraa apar apaaraa ghat ghat antar sohni-aa.
The Giver of gifts is infinite and unlimited; deep within each and every heart, He is so beautiful!
fea art odt Fae und Aho HSS Hofenr Il (924-12, erat, He 5)
ik daasee Dhaaree sabal pasaaree jee-a jant lai mohni-aa.
He created Maya, His slave, so powerfully pervasive - she has enticed all beings and creatures.
fA S Id A AY sve Ts a Hae sera Il (924-12, erat, we 5) jis no raakhai so sach bhaakhai gur kaa sabad beechaaraa.
One whom the Lord saves, chants the True Name, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
aT soa Hus ag ster fSH dt aS us fips QI (924-13, arate 5) kaho naanak jo parabh ka-o bhaanaa tis hee ka-o parabh pi-aaraa. ||2|| Says Nanak, one who is pleasing to God - God is very dear to him. ||2]|
HE US HE AT US AT HME Il (924-13, ansatz 5) maano parabh maano mayray parabh kaa maano. I take pride, I take pride in God; I take pride in my God.
We US We AyMt AUS AAS Il (924-14, Hast, He 5) jaano parabh jaano su-aamee sugharh sujaano. Wise, God is wise; my Lord and Master is all-wise, and all-knowing.
AUS AAS Ae usUa nifys ofe at SH Il (924-14, Hat, Hs 5)
sugharh sujaanaa sad parDhaanaa amrit har kaa naamaa.
All-wise and all-knowing, and forever supreme; the Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar.
ofa mure rfsarré fae & Sta HEAT Il (924-15, aH, He 5)
chaakh aghaanay saarigpaanay jin kai bhaag mathaanaa.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny recorded upon their foreheads, taste it, and are satisfied with the Lord of the Universe.
fae dt ufemr faafa fomrfenr Aare FSA at He II (924-15, enrast, He 5) tin hee paa-i-aa tineh Dhi-aa-i-aa sagal tisai kaa maano. They meditate on Him, and find Him; they place all their pride in Him.
ag aed fag sufs foenit ng fSA eters 1131 (24-16, act, v2 5) kaho naanak thir takhat nivaasee sach tisai deebaano. ||3]|| Says Nanak, He is seated on His eternal throne; True is His royal court. ||3]|
Harr ofs Hares HS YS A HbA Harr i (924-16, Hat, He 5) manglaa har manglaa mayray parabh kai sunee-ai manglaa. The song of joy, the Lord's song of joy; listen to the song of joy of my God.
Afsest ys Afsea nioge gat Afsest il (924-17, mat, He 5)
sohilrhaa parabh sohilrhaa anhad Dhunee-ai sohilrhaa.
The wedding song, God's wedding song; the unstruck sound current of His wedding song resounds.
Mode BH Ase man fos fos faAfs Saret |i (924-17, en1ast, us 5)
anhad vaajay sabad agaajay nit nit jisahi vaDhaa-ee.
The unstruck sound current vibrates, and the Word of the Shabad resounds; there is continuous, continual rejoicing.
A us famrebt vg fae uret ue 3 ore Fret I (924-18, ora, He 5) so parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabh kichh paa-ee-ai marai na aavai jaa-ee. Meditating on that God, everything is obtained; He does not die, or come or go.
got fimmrr use wir arent fees fasarsba i (924-18, meat, Hs 5)
chookee pi-aasaa pooran aasaa gurmukh mil nirgunee-ai.
Thirst is quenched, and hopes are fulfilled; the Gurmukh meets with the absolute, unmanifest Lord.
ag soa ufs ys He & fos fos Hae Asha SIA (924-19, mnrat, He 5) kaho naanak ghar parabh mayray kai nit nit mangal sunee-ai. ||4||1||
Says Nanak, in the Home of my God, the songs of joy are continuously, continually heard. ||4||1]|
Ua K2Qu
THA HIS U Il (925-1)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofe famrfe nat fas 3 fendi il (925-1, araat, ve 5) har har Dhi-aa-ay manaa khin na visaaree-ai. Meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, O mind; don't forget Him, even for an instant.
TH TH OH SH afe Ba ash Il (925-2, aaa, He 5) raam raamaa raam ramaa kanth ur Dhaaree-ai. Enshrine the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, Raam, within your heart and throat.
Gs os ofa afe use uss UTSATH fads II (925-2, saat, Hs 5)
ur Dhaar har har purakh pooran paarbarahm niranjano.
Enshrine within your heart the Primal Lord, Har, Har, the all-pervading, supreme, immaculate Lord God.
3 Ufs aIs Uy TIS" GAT TY FS YTS Il (925-3, Treat, we 5)
bhai door kartaa paap hartaa dusah dukh bhav khandno.
He sends fear far away; He is the Destroyer of sin; He eradicates the unbearable pains of the terrifying world-ocean.
Haein SA Gus HG Te dfs SAerdyt | (925-3, raat, He 5)
jagdees ees gopaal maaDho gun govind veechaaree-ai.
Contemplate the Lord of the World, the Cherisher of the World, the Lord, the Virtuous Lord of the Universe.
fasets aoa fife Afar AG fear sf= fears Wall (925-4, meet, we 5)
binvant naanak mil sang saaDhoo dinas rain chitaaree-ai. ||1]| | Prays Nanak, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, remember the Lord, day and night. ||1]|
BIO AHS MU HO AT MTA Il (925-4, THaSt, He 5) charan kamal aaDhaar jan kaa aasraa. His lotus feet are the support and anchor of His humble servants.
HS foe SoS SY MST US Il (925-5, Tat, He 5)
maal milakh bhandaar naam anant Dharaa.
He takes the Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord, as his wealth, property and treasure.
oH oddd fours fas a IA Sa Sa Safear | (925-5, oat, ve 5) naam narhar niDhaan jin kai ras bhog ayk naraa-inaa. Those who have the treasure of the Lord's Name, enjoy the taste of the One Lord.
TA JU da Mes sow ATA ATH fourfear il (925-5, Tat, He 5)
ras roop rang anant beethal saas saas Dhi-aa-inaa.
They meditate on the Infinite Lord with each and every breath, as their pleasure, joy and beauty.
foafed IIS" STH USITITST OH AH At STA Ja Il (925-6, mast, He 5)
kilvikh harnaa naam punehcharnaa naam jam kee taraas haraa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Destroyer of sins, the only deed of redemption. The Naam drives out the fear of the Messenger of Death.
fasdfs aoa aH AS at VIS AHS MITAST IIQI (925-7, aHast, 4 5)
binvant naanak raas jan kee charan kamlah aasraa. ||2| | Prays Nanak, the support of His lotus feet is the capital of His humble servant. ||2||
TE Anis Homi 3d afe 3B Ae I (925-7, ana, ne 5) gun bay-ant su-aamee tayray ko-ay na jaan-ee. Your Glorious Virtues are endless, O my Lord and Master; no one knows them all.
efy vos eens Affe sas SaSeET I (925-8, Trae, 2 5)
daykh chalat da-i-aal sun bhagat vakhaana-ee.
Seeing and hearing of Your wondrous plays, O Merciful Lord, Your devotees narrate them.
dba a3 Afs 33 fourefs usaufs UsAAS Il (925-8, mat, He 5)
jee-a jant sabh tujh Dhi-aavahi purakhpat parmaysraa.
All beings and creatures meditate on You, O Primal Transcendent Lord, Master of men.
Hea Afea Sq VST Aget H AaSIAT Il (925-9, mast, He 5)
sarab jaachik ayk daataa karunaa mai jagdeesraa.
All beings are beggars; You are the One Giver, O Lord of the Universe, Embodiment of mercy.
AY AS AAS Aet fAAfa ys At Hrset I (925-9, saat, Hs 5) saaDhoo sant sujaan so-ee jisahi parabh jee maana-ee. He alone is holy, a Saint, a truly wise person, who is accepted by the Dear Lord.
faadfs aoa aad fasu Afe ssfs ueset ISI (925-10, aH, He 5) binvant naanak karahu kirpaa so-ay tujheh pachhaana-ee. ||3]| Prays Nanak, they alone realize You, unto whom You show Mercy. ||3]|
Hfo fosae nara Adat wrfenr | (925-10, erat, He 5) mohi nirgun anaath sarnee aa-i-aa. I am unworthy and without any master; I seek Your Sanctuary, Lord.
afe af% afe ase fate am festfenr | (925-11, raat, us 5)
bal bal bal gurdayv jin naam drirh-aa-i-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Divine Guru, who has implanted the Naam within me.
afs ony tor ane shor Age feer Usb I (925-11, aHat, v2 5) gur naam dee-aa kusal thee-aa sarab ichhaa punnee-aa.
The Guru blessed me with the Naam; happiness came, and all my desires were fulfilled.
Awe asst vfs niet fs fast feefour i (925-12, arract, He 5)
jalnay bujhaa-ee saat aa-ee milay chiree vichhunni-aa.
The fire of desire has been quenched, and peace and tranquility have come; after such a long separation, I have met my Lord again.
MTSE Ide AJA AS HI Hae Te Wher i (925-12, saat, v2 5)
aanand harakh sahj saachay mahaa mangal gun gaa-i-aa.
I have found ecstasy, pleasure and true intuitive poise, singing the great glories, the song of bliss of the Lord.
fasdts aoa oH YS a Te us 3 UfeMr sii (925-13, Tet, Hs 5) binvant naanak naam parabh kaa gur pooray tay paa-i-aa. ||4||2| | Prays Nanak, I have obtained the Name of God from the Perfect Guru. ||4]|2]|
THAGt HIS U Il (925-13)
raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
Je Se Aad niowe fas Cfo went Ase & Il (925-14, mat, He 5)
run jhuno sabad anaahad nit uth gaa-ee-ai santan kai.
Rise early each morning, and with the Saints, sing the melodious harmony, the unstruck sound current of the Shabad.
faofeu Afs cu faone ofa an mba ae H30 & Il (925-14, oat, He 5) kilvikh sabh dokh binaasan har naam japee-ai gur mantan kai.
All sins and sufferings are erased, chanting the Lord's Name, under Guru's Instructions.
dfs on Stn fe ute sf= feor mraciint i) (25-15, mat, v2 5)
har naam leejai ami-o peejai rain dinas araaDhee-ai.
Dwell upon the Lord's Name, and drink in the Nectar; day and night, worship and adore Him.
Ha Be nda fafonr afar vse AHS ATA Il (925-15, aH, He 5)
jog daan anayk kiri-aa lag charan kamlah saaDhee-ai.
The merits of Yoga, charity and religious rituals are obtained by grasping His lotus feet.
3G gals cfenrs HIS TY ATs UTI Il (925-16, Tat, Hs 5) bhaa-o bhagat da-i-aal mohan dookh saglay parharai. Loving devotion to the merciful, enticing Lord takes away all pain.
faodfs aoa 3d Ana fomrfe AyMit ogg IAI (925-16, THT, He 5)
binvant naanak tarai saagar Dhi-aa-ay su-aamee narharai. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, cross over the world-ocean, meditating on the Lord, your Lord and Master. ||1]|
He Arad afte frse sas Wefs TE SF TH Il (925-17, Tae, 2 5)
sukh saagar gobind simran bhagat gaavahi gun tayray raam.
Meditation on the Lord of the Universe is an ocean of peace; Your devotees sing Your Glorious Praises, Lord.
Moe HIS TI VINt Sa US AY WSs IH Il (925-18, sHast, we 5) anad mangal gur charnee laagay paa-ay sookh ghanayray raam. Ecstasy, bliss and great happiness are obtained by grasping hold of the Guru's feet.
AY fours fifemr za ofour fgur ate yfs afar i (925-18, east, He 5)
sukh niDhaan mili-aa dookh hari-aa kirpaa kar parabh raakhi-aa.
Meeting with the treasure of peace, their pains are taken away; granting His Grace, God protects them.
dfs vse Sa FH 3C aa ahs SH THAT Shem | (925-19, THAT, He 5)
har charan laagaa bharam bha-o bhaagaa har naam rasnaa bhaakhi-aa.
Those who grasp the Lord's feet - their fears and doubts run away, and they chant the Name of the Lord.
ofa &a fase us 8a ae afe Sa ferct wrfemr I (925-19, anaatt, v2 5)
har ayk chitvai parabh ayk gaavai har ayk daristee aa-i-aa.
He thinks of the One Lord, and he sings of the One God; he gazes upon the One Lord alone.
Yat C2E fasts asa yfs act four us Afsarg ute 2H (926-1, THe, He 5)
binvant naanak parabh karee kirpaa pooraa satgur paa-i-aa. ||2|| Prays Nanak, God has granted His Grace, and I have found the Perfect True Guru.
[21 | ffs achat ys ATG Aor fife afe atase HS INH I (926-2, mre, He 5)
mil rahee-ai parabh saaDh janaa mil har keertan sunee-ai raam. Meet with the holy, humble servants of God; meeting with the Lord, listen to the Kirtan of His Praises.
cfenrs ys wHeE HO nig o ure Taba TH I (926-2, mat, ws 5) da-i-aal parabhoo daamodar maaDho ant na paa-ee-ai gunee-ai raam. God is the Merciful Master, the Lord of wealth; there is no end to His Virtues.
efenrs wu dd Aafs ast Aare du fess I (926-3, a1aet, He 5)
da-i-aal dukh har saran daataa sagal dokh nivaarno.
The Merciful Lord is the Dispeller of pain, the Giver of Sanctuary, the Eradicator of all evil.
Ho Aa fears fous wus SH Burge Il (926-3, mat, v2 5)
moh sog vikaar bikh-rhay japat naam uDhaarano.
Emotional attachment, sorrow, corruption and pain - chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one is saved from these.
As ba 33 yg He afe forsut AS Je Stee Il (926-4, mnrast, He 5)
sabh jee-a tayray parabhoo mayray kar kirpaa sabh rayn theevaa.
All beings are Yours, O my God; bless me with Your Mercy, that I may become the dust under the feet of all men.
faadfs aoa ys Hfeor att on Sor Afu Het BI (926-4, mmr, He 5) binvant naanak parabh ma-i-aa keejai naam tayraa jap jeevaa. ||3|| Prays Nanak, O God, be kind to me, that I may chant Your Name, and live. ||3]|
ofy we ufs sas Aa mat Goat BS TH Il (926-5, Tat, us 5)
raakh lee-ay parabh bhagat janaa apnee charnee laa-ay raam. God saves His humble devotees, attaching them to His feet.
mis udd must ys fanss Sa 5H fore aH I (926-6, Tra, He 5)
aath pahar apnaa parabh simreh ayko naam Dhi-aa-ay raam.
Twenty-four hours a day, they meditate in remembrance on their God; they meditae on the One Name.
fomrfe A yg 3d SSHG FI wSS AST II (926-6, aa, ue 5)
Dhi-aa-ay so parabh taray bhavjal rahay aavan jaanaa.
Meditating on that God, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and their comings and goings cease.
Het AY afenie atasg ys wal Hor svar | (926-7, ana, ws 5)
sadaa sukh kali-aan keertan parabh lagaa meethaa bhaanaa.
They enjoy eternal peace and pleasure, singing the Kirtan of God's Praises; His Will seems so sweet to them.
Ag fee vat orm ust fue Afsard ufsur Il (926-7, Hast, He 5) sabh ichh punnee aas pooree milay satgur poori-aa. All my desires are fulfilled, meeting with the Perfect True Guru.
faodts aoa yfs orfu HS fefs ardt gu feRfomr Isiail (926-8, meet, H2 5)
binvant naanak parabh aap maylay fir naahee dookh visoori-aa. ||4]|3]|
Prays Nanak, God has blended me with Himself; I shall never suffer pain or sorrow again. ||4]|3]|
THAGt HIG U BT Il (926-8)
raamkalee mehlaa 5 chhant. Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Chhant.
HS Il (926-9) salok. Shalok:
TIO AHS APSaSt Moe HAG TE IH Il (926-9, erat, nz 5) charan kamal sarnaagatee anad mangal gun gaam. In the Sanctuary of His lotus feet, I sing His Glorious Praises in ecstasy and bliss.
soa ys wired faufs faerse IH IAI (926-9, THA, He 5) naanak parabh aaraaDhee-ai bipat nivaaran raam. ||1]| O Nanak, worship God in adoration, the Eradicator of misfortune. ||1]|
ZZ Il (926-10) chhant. Chhant:
us faufs faese fan fag vie 3 afe FIG II (926-10, anraat, 2 5) parabh bipat nivaarno tis bin avar na ko-ay jee-o. God is the Eradicator of misfortune; there is none other than Him.
Ret Het dfs frndha vfs afe udtoiie AfE AIG II (926-10, erat, He 5)
sadaa sadaa har simree-ai jal thal mahee-al so-ay jee-o.
Forever and ever, remember the Lord in meditation; He is permeating the water, the land and the sky.
rife afs Hots ufs afar fea far Hog o SAG Il (926-11, Tet, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al poor rahi-aa ik nimakh manhu na veesrdi.
He is permeating and pervading the water, the land and the sky; do not forget Him from your mind, even for an instant.
Td VIS Bd fea Asa AGH Te Hae Il (926-12, eae, nH: 5)
gur charan laagay din sabhaagay sarab gun jagdeesrai.
Blessed was that day, when I grasped the Guru's feet; all virtues rest in the Lord of the Universe.
afa Az Aza feor dat fa ae A SE AIG I (926-12, sniaat, He 5) kar sayv sayvak dinas rainee tis bhaavai so ho-ay jee-o. So serve Him day and night, O servant; whatever pleases Him, happens.
afe wf aod AY aS usA Hfe sfs Of AIG NAM (926-13, erat, He 5) bal jaa-ay naanak sukhah daatay pargaas man tan ho-ay jee-o. ||1]| Nanak is a sacrifice to the Giver of peace; his mind and body are enlightened. ||1]|
HS Il (926-13)
salok. Shalok:
dfs fines Ho 36 Aut faort esior Ae I (926-13, mnie, He 5)
har simrat man tan sukhee binsee dutee-aa soch.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the mind and body find peace; the thought of duality is dispelled.
SoA SA AUG at diese HAS HT MAUI (926-14, sat, nw 5)
naanak tayk gopaal kee govind sankat moch. ||1||
Nanak takes the support of the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe, the Destroyer of troubles. ||1]|
ZS Il (926-14) chhant. Chhant:
3 Hae ae arates vfenre AME Il (926-14, meet, He 5) bhai sankat kaatay naaraa-in da-i-aal jee-o. The Merciful Lord has eradicated my fears and troubles.
ofg Te ose we ys cio ova yfsure AG Il (926-15, araat, ne 5)
har gun aanand gaa-ay parabh deenaa naath partipaal jee-o.
In ecstasy, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; God is the Cherisher, the Master of the meek.
ufsurs ngs use Sa feats fae da war Il (926-15, oat, He 5)
partipaal achut purakh ayko tiseh si-o rang laagaa.
The Cherishing Lord is imperishable, the One and only Primal Lord; I am imbued with His Love.
AT JIS HASA Als Blo Ae niales ATA Il (926-16, on1aat, us 5)
kar charan mastak mayl leenay sadaa an-din jaagaa.
When I placed my hands and forehead upon His Feet, He blended me with Himself; I became awake and aware forever, night and day.
me fils fas ae fSn a 39 HaS US HS AE II (926-16, Tat, He 5)
jee-o pind garihu thaan tis kaa tan joban Dhan maal jee-o.
My soul, body, household and home belong to Him, along with my body, youth, wealth and property.
He Het afe ate arog Aga Amr yfsurs AIG QI (926-17, Trae, Hs 5) sad sadaa bal jaa-ay naanak sarab jee-aa partipaal jee-o. ||2]| Forever and ever, Nanak is a sacrifice to Him, who cherishes and nurtures all beings.
21 |
HS Il (926-18)
salok. Shalok:
dna Gud dfs ud Te dies smn | (626-18, mat, v2 5)
rasnaa uchrai har haray gun govind vakhi-aan.
My tongue chants the Name of the Lord, and chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Sod Uast 2a Sa UHH Te fSevs All (926-18, THA, He 5)
naanak pakrhee tayk ayk parmaysar rakhai nidaan. ||1||
Nanak has grasped the sheltering support of the One Transcendent Lord, who shall save him in the end. ||1]|
ZZ Il (926-19) chhant. Chhant:
A Amit ys sua nists at&t wa AME Il (926-19, oat, He 5) SO sSu-aamee parabh rakhko anchal taa kai laag jee-o. He is God, our Lord and Master, our Saving Grace. Grab hold of the hem of His robe.
3a AY Afa efenre te Ho at HfS Sura AI Il (926-19, mnerett, He 5)
bhaj saaDhoo sang da-i-aal dayv man kee mat ti-aag jee-o.
Vibrate, and meditate on the Merciful Divine Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; renounce your intellectual mind.
Uat C29 fea Ge ath HG tH oA fea UsStaP II (927-1, THe, Ht: 5)
ik ot keejai jee-o deejai aas ik DharneeDharai. Seek the Support of the One Lord, and surrender your soul to Him; place your hopes only in the Sustainer of the World.
o~N Oo x
HUH dfs oH da AAS Ans AS 3d ll (927-1, saat, v2 5)
saaDhsangay har naam rangay sansaar saagar sabh tarai.
Those who are imbued with the Lord's Name, in the Saadh Sangat, cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
HOH Hoe feos ge feta o wrat Va AG Il (927-2, mat, Hs 5)
janam maran bikaar chhootay fir na laagai daag jee-o.
The corrupting sins of birth and death are eradicated, and no stain ever sticks to them again.
afe ate asa use use fag A ot Aaa AIG SI (927-2, arash, Hs 5) bal jaa-ay naanak purakh pooran thir jaa kaa sohaag jee-o. ||3]| Nanak is a sacrifice to the Perfect Primal Lord; His marriage is eternal. ||3]|
Hq Il (927-3) salok. Shalok:
UdH Mae Mig AH HY Hats USTIE BE Il (927-3, THA, He 5)
Dharam arath ar kaam mokh mukat padaarath naath.
Righteous faith, wealth, sexual success and salvation; the Lord bestows these four blessings.
Aas Hose ular area fester Ha WAU (927-4, sHaRe, Hs 5)
Sagal manorath poori-aa naanak likhi-aa maath. ||1]|
One who has such pre-ordained destiny upon his forehead, O Nanak, has all his desires fulfilled. ||1]|
#3 Il (927-4) chhant. Chhant:
Hae fee Hat UStor fufeor fadre af AIG I (927-4, erat, He 5) Sagal ichh mayree punnee-aa mili-aa niranjan raa-ay jee-o. All my desires are fulfilled, meeting with my Immaculate, Sovereign Lord.
now sfeur esaraitd fafs yae ys orf AIG I 927-5, mac, He 5)
anad bha-i-aa vadbhaageeho garihi pargatay parabh aa-ay jee-o.
I am in ecstasy, O very fortunate ones; the Dear Lord has become manifest in my own home.
fafa ars mire usta ane st oft Gun fom ater il (927-5, nat, v3 5)
garihi laal aa-ay purab kamaa-ay taa kee upmaa ki-aa ganaa.
My Beloved has come to my home, because of my past actions; how can I count His Glories?
ais UIs AY AIA VS ACS TAS! TE FST Il (927-6, Tras, ue 5)
bay-ant pooran sukh sahj daataa kavan rasnaa gun bhanaa.
The Lord, the Giver of peace and intuition, is infinite and perfect; with what tongue can I describe His Glorious Virtues?
nm fro afs afe we faq foo odt wf AE II (27-6, mast, He 5)
aapay milaa-ay geh kanth laa-ay tis binaa nahee jaa-ay jee-o.
He hugs me close in His embrace, and merges me into Himself; there is no place of rest other than Him.
af wmf soa Ae ads AS Hs soot ATE AIG ISISI (927-7, HT, He 5)
bal jaa-ay naanak sadaa kartay sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ay jee-o. ||4||4||
Nanak is forever a sacrifice to the Creator, who is contained in, and permeating all. [41141
TH THA HIS U Il (927-8)
raag raamkalee mehlaa 5. Raag Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
JE S3oat WS At afs Sa fomre|g Il (927-8, mat, He 5) ran jhunjhnarhaa gaa-o sakhee har ayk Dhi-aavahu. Sing the melodious harmonies, O my companions, and meditate on the One Lord.
Afsag SH Afe Aut nfs fefentat ew ureT Il (927-9, aHaat, He 5)
satgur tum sayv sakhee man chindi-arhaa fal paavhu.
Serve your True Guru, O my companions, and you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires.
THAS! HIS u gat ABA (927-10)
raamkalee mehlaa 5 rutee salok Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl, Ruti ~ The Seasons. Shalok:
qe Afsars uArfe I (927-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ats deo ys USAIN Fes AGT Ofe Il (927-11, aHast, Hs 5) kar bandan parabh paarbarahm baachha-o saaDhah Dhoor. Bow to the Supreme Lord God, and seek the dust of the feet of the Holy.
wy foets afs ofs sAS aaa ys saute NAN (927-11, Tract, He 5)
aap nivaar har har bhaja-o naanak parabh bharpoor. ||1] |
Cast out your self-conceit, and vibrate, meditate, on the Lord, Har, Har. O Nanak, God is all-pervading. ||1||
faofeu ates S$ Ide AY Aad Tha TE Il (927-12, meat, He 5)
kilvikh kaatan bhai haran sukh saagar har raa-ay.
He is the Eradicator of sins, the Destroyer of fear, the Ocean of peace, the Sovereign Lord King.
dis efeore eu SHS SSA StS forfe QIN (927-12, aH, H2 5) deen da-i-aal dukh bhanjno naanak neet Dhi-aa-ay. ||2| | Merciful to the meek, the Destroyer of pain: O Nanak, always meditate on Him. ||2]|
ZZ Il (927-13) chhant. Chhant:
AA Weg esaditd afs faa saes A Il (927-13, eras, He 5)
jas gaavhu vadbhaageeho kar kirpaa bhagvant jee-o.
Sing His Praises, O very fortunate ones, and the Dear Lord God shall bless you with His Mercy.
Ist WT HIS ust TE Suss As Ss AE il (927-13, Trash, ws 5)
rutee maah moorat gharhee gun uchrat sobhaavant jee-o.
Blessed and auspicious is that season, that month, that moment, that hour, when you chant the Lord's Glorious Praises.
ae dsfa a3 Ufs 3 He frat fea nfs fomrfeur II 927-14, eet, H2 5)
gun rang raatay Dhan tay jan jinee ik man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Blessed are those humble beings, who are imbued with love for His Praises, and who meditate single-mindedly on Him.
Hes Hou sfeur fso ot fret A ys urfemr I (927-14, ona, v8 5) safal janam bha-i-aa tin kaa jinee so parabh paa-i-aa. Their lives become fruitful, and they find that Lord God.
Us Be 6 3fe fafeor ofs Age une Js AIG I (927-15, mast, He 5)
punn daan na tul kiri-aa har sarab paapaa hant jee-o.
Donations to charities and religious rituals are not equal to meditation on the Lord, who destroys all sins.
faodfs aoa fanfs ate HOH HeE TS AIG WA (927-15, Hat, He 5)
binvant naanak simar jeevaa janam maran rahant jee-o. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, meditating in remembrance on Him, I live; birth and death are finished for me. ||1]]|
Ha Il (927-16)
salok. Shalok:
CEH MEM nididd VIO AHS SHAAS Il (927-16, THaAt, He 5)
udam agam agocharo charan kamal namaskaar.
Strive for the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord, and bow in humility to His lotus feet.
aot AT 30 SSA BSA BH MUTT INA (927-17, THat, He 5)
kathnee saa tuDh bhaavsee naanak naam aDhaar. ||1||
O Nanak, that sermon alone is pleasing to You, Lord, which inspires us to take the Support of the Name. ||1]|
H3 Aefe AHS UsT Hemet ffs mSs Il (927-17, sat, v2 5)
sant saran Saajan parahu su-aamee simar anant.
Seek the Sanctuary of the Saints, O friends; meditate in remembrance on your infinite Lord and Master.
Ha 3 olor shor seat Af saTeT Il (927-18, Trae, He 5) sookay tay hari-aa thee-aa naanak jap bhagvant. ||2]|
The dried branch shall blossom forth in its greenery again, O Nanak, meditating on the Lord God. ||2]|
#3 Il (927-18) chhant. Chhant:
dfs AGA SHS WS BS SAG AY HA ATG Il (927-18, eras, He 5)
rut saras basant maah chayt vaisaakh sukh maas jee-o.
The season of spring is delightful; the months of Chayt and Baisaakhi are the most pleasant months.
dfs ME og fifemr Heft Ho So ATA AIG Il (927-19, ast, He 5)
har jee-o naahu mili-aa ma-oli-aa man tan saas jee-o.
I have obtained the Dear Lord as my Husband, and my mind, body and breath have blossomed forth.
ufs ag fogue mow Ade Bde AHS YSfeonr Il (927-19, Tat, He 5)
ghar naahu nihchal anad sakhee-ay charan kamal parfuli-aa.
The eternal, unchanging Lord has come into my home as my Husband, O my companions; dwelling upon His lotus feet, I blossom forth in bliss.
UST KQe
Hed AWS AAS AST Te adfee wnsfemr |) (928-1, east, He 5) sundar sugharh sujaan baytaa gun govind amuli-aa. The Lord of the Universe is beautiful, proficient, wise and all-knowing;
zaota ufeor vy aefenr set use oA ATS II (928-1, erat, H2 5)
vadbhaag paa-i-aa dukh gavaa-i-aa bha-ee pooran aas jee-o.
His Virtues are priceless. By great good fortune, I have found Him; my pain is dispelled, and my hopes are fulfilled.
fasdis soa Hafe Sat fet AH at 37H AIG MQM (928-2, mae, Hs 5) binvant naanak saran tayree mitee jam kee taraas jee-o. ||2|| Prays Nanak, I have entered Your Sanctuary, Lord, and my fear of death is eradicated.
21 |
H8a Il (928-2)
salok. Shalok:
Wonats fas sft vet aast ATH MSs Il (928-3, Tat, He 5)
saaDhsangat bin bharam mu-ee kartee karam anayk.
Without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one dies wandering around in confusion, performing all sorts of rituals.
AHS sus sdb soa asHfs Sy Il (928-3, saat, ne 5)
komal banDhan baaDhee-aa naanak karmeh laykh. ||1]|
O Nanak, all are bound by the attractive bonds of Maya, and the karmic record of past actions. ||1]|
A ate A fer fees st vrfur i (928-3, aac, H 5)
jo bhaanay say mayli-aa vichhorhay bhee aap.
Those who are pleasing to God are united with Him; He separates others from Himself.
Soa YS AdStast AT AT SF UTSTY MII (928-4, avast, us 5) naanak parabh sarnaagatee jaa kaa vad partaap. ||2|| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God; His greatness is glorious! ||2| |
ZZ Il (928-4) chhant. Chhant:
arm af3 fs aust AS mrs ur ATE I (928-4, anaet, ne 5)
gareekham rut at gaakh-rhee jayth akhaarhai ghaam jee-o.
In the summer season, in the months of Jayt'h and Asaarh, the heat is terrible, intense and severe.
Un fads zoel fenfe o adt an AIG I (28-5, mac, H8 5)
paraym bichhohu duhaaganee darisat na karee raam jee-o.
The discarded bride is separated from His Love, and the Lord does not even look at her.
od fenfe wre nas TS HoT arafa HST II (928-5, anraet, Hs 5)
nah darisat aavai marat haavai mahaa gaarab muthee-aa.
She does not see her Lord, and she dies with an aching sigh; she is defrauded and plundered by her great pride.
WS MS Hest sseat] Afar wen gsr Il (928-6, aa, ve 5) jal baajh machhulee tarhfarhaavai sang maa-i-aa ruthee-aa.
She flails around, like a fish out of water; attached to Maya, she is alienated from the Lord.
afa uy dot & sts det Sf AHS AH AIG II (928-7, erat, He 5)
kar paap jonee bhai bheet ho-ee day-ay saasan jaam jee-o.
She sins, and so she is fearful of reincarnation; the Messenger of Death will surely punish her.
fasdts asa Ge Sct Ty UTS aH AIG ISI (928-7, Tra, He 5) binvant naanak ot tayree raakh pooran kaam jee-o. ||3]||
Prays Nanak, take me under Your sheltering support, Lord, and protect me; You are the Fulfiller of desire. ||3]|
H8a Il (928-8)
salok. Shalok:
Fam ovat Afar utsn fea fae soe o ATE II (928-8, east, He 5)
sarDhaa laagee sang pareetamai ik til rahan na jaa-ay.
With loving faith, I am attached to my Beloved; I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant.
Ho 36 Nists sfe ad Soa Adit ASTE A (928-8, sat, He 5) man tan antar rav rahay naanak sahj subhaa-ay. ||1]| He is permeating and pervading my mind and body, O Nanak, with intuitive ease.
[21
ag ats Sst AHAols ASH ASH & HIS Il (928-9, enraat, vs 5)
kar geh leenee saajni" janam janam kay meet.
My Friend has taken me by the hand; He has been my best friend, lifetime after lifetime.
ddod aA ats wet SSA YS fos PHS Qi (928-9, sna, ws 5)
charnah daasee kar la-ee naanak parabh hit cheet. ||2|| He has made me the slave of His feet; O Nanak, my consciousness is filled with love for God. ||2]|
ZZ Il (928-10) chhant. Chhant:
dfs san HIG ASS Ses nse FIG I (928-10, saat, He 5) rut baras suhaylee-aa saavan bhaadvay aanand jee-o. The rainy season is beautiful; the months of Saawan and Bhaadon bring bliss.
we Gafe 26 Ae Be Ufo Hade AIG II (928-10, mat, Hs 5)
ghan unav vuthay jal thal poori-aa makrand jee-o.
The clouds are low, and heavy with rain; the waters and the lands are filled with honey.
ys ufs sfour Aga oret afs om og fafa fas 3g I (928-11, eH, He 5)
parabh poor rahi-aa sarab thaa-ee har naam nav niDh garih bharay.
God is all-pervading everywhere; the nine treasures of the Lord's Name fill the homes of all hearts.
frufs Femi unison aes ANT Afs 3g Il (928-11, Tact, He 5)
simar Su-aamee antarjaamee kul samoohaa sabh taray.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord and Master, the Searcher of hearts, all one's ancestry is saved.
fina dfat wat og fee oat faus AE suf]e AIG I (928-12, ara, He 5)
pari-a rang jaagay nah chhidar laagay kirpaal sad bakhsind jee-o.
No blemish sticks to that being who remains awake and aware in the Love of the Lord; the Merciful Lord is forever forgiving.
faodfs aoa ofs as ufenr net nfs sree AIG Ist (928-13, mat, He 5)
binvant naanak har kant paa-i-aa sadaa man bhaavand jee-o. ||4||
Prays Nanak, I have found my Husband Lord, who is forever pleasing to my mind. [141]
H8a Il (928-13)
salok. Shalok:
nin fumrat 4 feaS ae Ua dures il (28-13, mat, He 5) aas pi-aasee mai fira-o kab paykha-o gopaal. Thirsty with desire, I wander around; when will I behold the Lord of the World?
d act AHS AS AS Soa US ABST ST IA (928-14, at, ve 5) hai ko-ee saajan sant jan naanak parabh maylanhaar. ||1|| Is there any humble Saint, any friend, O Nanak, who can lead me to meet with God?
[111 fag feos ATS 3 Cun fe use dE 3 ATE I (928-14, mnaett, we 5)
bin milbay saat na oopjai til pal rahan na jaa-ay. Without meeting Him, I have no peace or tranquility; I cannot survive for a moment, even for an instant.
Ufs AUT AdStaIst SSA MITA UATE NII (928-15, aHat, He 5)
har saaDhah sarnaagatee naanak aas pujaa-ay. ||2]| Entering the Sanctuary of the Lord's Holy Saints, O Nanak, my desires are fulfilled.
21 |
ZZ Il (928-15) chhant. Chhant:
ofS Ade nisad nA asa ate fimrr FIG II (928-15, Tat, Hs 5) rut sarad adambaro asoo katkay har pi-aas jee-o.
In the cool, autumn season, in the months of Assu and Katik, I am thirsty for the Lord.
uHst wane fess aa feaba TESTA AIG II (928-16, erat, He 5)
khojantee darsan firat kab milee-ai guntaas jee-o.
Searching for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I wander around wondering, when will I meet my Lord, the treasure of virtue?
fag a3 fimrd oo AY ATS Te oe fT gat Il (928-16, Hast, He 5)
bin kant pi-aaray nah sookh saaray haar kanyan Dharig banaa.
Without my Beloved Husband Lord, I find no peace, and all my necklaces and bracelets become cursed.
Hefs aafs vafs ast AA fae AA Zar Il (928-17, mast, He 5) sundar sujaan chatur baytee saas bin jaisay tanaa. So beautiful, so wise, so clever and knowing; still, without the breath, it is just a body.
as @s va fer nsas xfs fas at us firma AIG I (028-17, oat, He 5) eet ut dah dis alokan man milan kee parabh pi-aas jee-o. I look here and there, in the ten directions; my mind is so thirsty to meet God!
faadts soa whe fas Hog YS TSS AG ull (928-18, mat, He 5)
binvant naanak Dhaar kirpaa maylhu parabh guntaas jee-o. ||5]|
Prays Nanak, shower Your Mercy upon me; unite me with Yourself, O God, O treasure of virtue. ||5||
H8a Il (928-19)
salok. Shalok:
Hole ast Hise se Hfs sto Curt AS Il (928-19, east, He 5)
jalan bujhee seetal bha-ay man tan upjee saa"t.
The fire of desire is cooled and quenched; my mind and body are filled with peace and tranquility.
wax ys Uda fs ester faort SHS WA (928-19, erat, He 5) naanak parabh pooran milay dutee-aa binsee bharaa"t. ||1|| O Nanak, I have met my Perfect God; the illusion of duality is dispelled. ||1]|
Yar coe
A use wif ofs JH SHS ardt Efe Il (929-1, enraat, He 5) saaDh pathaa-ay aap har ham tum tay naahee door. The Lord Himself sent His Holy Saints, to tell us that He is not far away.
aad gH S fife Te THE TH Fouls Il (929-1, THs, 2 5) naanak bharam bhai mit ga-ay raman raam bharpoor. ||2|| O Nanak, doubt and fear are dispelled, chanting the Name of the all-pervading Lord.
21 |
#Z Il (929-2) chhant. Chhant:
fs firinrs Hise ofs yas Hue Ufa FIG II (929-2, onraat, He 5) rut sisee-ar seetal har pargatay manghar pohi jee-o. In the cold season of Maghar and Poh, the Lord reveals Himself.
note st eon ufeor faon wfeor Go AE II (929-3, anaet, 2 5)
jalan bujhee daras paa-i-aa binsay maa-i-aa Dharoh jee-o.
My burning desires were quenched, when I obtained the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; the fraudulent illusion of Maya is gone.
Afs am ud fife sad ais use Ala Afeur il (929-3, erat, He 5)
sabh kaam pooray mil hajooray har charan sayvak sayvi-aa.
All my desires have been fulfilled, meeting the Lord face-to-face; I am His servant, I serve at His feet.
wg 39 Here Afs GA Te WE vise nisfenr Il (929-4, mnt, He 5)
haar dor seegaar sabh ras gun gaa-o alakh abhayvi-aa.
My necklaces, hair-ties, all decorations and adornments, are in singing the Glorious Praises of the unseen, mysterious Lord.
a@ safs afée sites AH 3 Ae Afo MI II (929-4, mma, He 5)
bhaa-o bhagat govind baaNchhat jam na saakai johi jee-o.
I long for loving devotion to the Lord of the Universe, and so the Messenger of Death cannot even see me.
fasdfs aoa ufs orfu Het sao UH fads AIG NEN (929-5, anrat, Hs 5)
binvant naanak parabh aap maylee tah na paraym bichhoh jee-o. ||6||
Prays Nanak, God has united me with Himself; I shall never suffer separation from my Beloved again. ||6||
H8a Il (929-5)
salok. Shalok:
dfs ug ufenr Aoaet SHS SS BMS Il (929-5, aaah, ne 5)
har Dhan paa-i-aa sohaaganee dolat naahee cheet.
The happy soul bride has found the wealth of the Lord; her consciousness does not waver.
AS Ariat soar fafa yae ys Hts WA (929-6, oes, ve 5)
sant sanjogee naankaa garihi pargatay parabh meet. ||1]|
Joining together with the Saints, O Nanak, God, my Friend, has revealed Himself in my home. ||1]|
oe fase nie as finn utsy Afar aa Il (929-6, anract, Hs 5)
naad binod anand kod pari-a pareetam sang banay. With her Beloved Husband Lord, she enjoys millions of melodies, pleasures and joys.
Ho Wes Se utter Ife SS SH FS IlQil (929-7, aHast, He 5) man baachhat fal paa-i-aa har naanak naam bhanay. ||2|| The fruits of the mind's desires are obtained, O Nanak, chanting the Lord's Name.
21 |
#3 Il (929-7) chhant. Chhant:
fonas ofs xfs sect ny cae Tees AE II (929-7, mast, He 5)
himkar rut man bhaavtee maagh fagan gunvant jee-o.
The snowy winter season, the months of Maagh and Phagun, are pleasing and ennobling to the mind.
Rot Adat ar vars fofs wre ofa xs AI Il (929-8, mma, He 5)
sakhee sahaylee gaa-o manglo garihi aa-ay har kant jee-o.
O my friends and companions, sing the songs of joy; my Husband Lord has come into my home.
fafa ores mre fs fomre AA Hefs Adba 1 (929-9, areat, He 5)
garihi laal aa-ay man Dhi-aa-ay sayj sundar sohee-aa.
My Beloved has come into my home; I meditate on Him in my mind. The bed of my heart is beautifully adorned.
ve fge fasee se afer afr zane Har II (929-9, anrast, Hs 5)
van tarin taribhavan bha-ay hari-aa daykh darsan mohee-aa.
The woods, the meadows and the three worlds have blossomed forth in their greenery; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I am fascinated.
fs promi fee vot ufs afimr fears He AG I (929-10, erret, He 5)
milay su-aamee ichh punnee man japi-aa nirmal mant jee-o.
I have met my Lord and Master, and my desires are fulfilled; my mind chants His Immaculate Mantra.
faadis aoa fos aay sor ofs fs Alas AS AE WI (929-10, mat, Hs 5) binvant naanak nit karahu ralee-aa har milay sareeDhar kant jee-o. ||7||
Prays Nanak, I celebrate continuously; I have met my Husband Lord, the Lord of excellence. ||7||
H8a Il (929-11)
salok. Shalok:
HS Aoet Aba & SSAG BWSSTST Il (929-11, mast, He 5)
sant sahaa-ee jee-a kay bhavjal taaranhaar.
The Saints are the helpers, the support of the soul; they carry us cross the terrifying world-ocean.
AS 3 Os Aehfa Goa oH flmrg IAI (929-11, THe, He 5) sabh tay oochay jaanee-ahi naanak naam pi-aar. ||1||
Know that they are the highest of all; O Nanak, they love the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
faa Moor Ret SI A AS A Ste II (929-12, oH, He 5) jin jaani-aa say-ee taray say sooray say beer. Those who know Him, cross over; they are the brave heroes, the heroic warriors.
sod fae sfease dfs afl Css Ste M21 (929-12, erat, He 5)
naanak tin balihaarnai har jap utray teer. ||2||
Nanak is a sacrifice to those who meditate on the Lord, and cross over to the other shore. ||2||
ZZ Il (929-13) chhant. Chhant:
ude fartas AS Sud fifenr Aare ASA ATS I (929-13, erat, He 5) charan biraajit sabh oopray miti-aa sagal kalays jee-o. His feet are exalted above all. They eradicate all suffering.
MSE Wee BY Jd Ta salsa At ue AIG I (929-14, sna, He 5) aavan jaavan dukh haray har bhagat kee-aa parvays jee-o. They destroy the pains of coming and going. They bring loving devotion to the Lord.
ofs dfa aS Aofa HS fm 3 Ho 3 SAE Il (929-14, eae, He 5)
har rang raatay sahj maatay til na man tay beesrai.
Imbued with the Lord's Love, one is intoxicated with intuitive peace and poise, and does not forget the Lord from his mind, even for an instant.
3fa uy Adal ud VIst AGA Te AaetAg | (929-15, raat, He 5)
taj aap sarnee paray charnee sarab gun jagdeesrai.
Shedding my self-conceit, I have entered the Sanctuary of His Feet; all virtues rest in the Lord of the Universe.
dfee ae fafa Atgar Aymt orfe a urea AE I (929-15, erat, He 5)
govind gun niDh sareerang su-aamee aad ka-o aadays jee-o.
I bow in humility to the Lord of the Universe, the treasure of virtue, the Lord of excellence, our Primal Lord and Master.
faadfs aoa Hfeor ores Ha Hal fea SH FIG NCINIUENCH (929-16, TIT, He 5) binvant naanak ma-i-aa Dhaarahu jug jugo ik vays jee-o. ||8||1]|6]|8]|
Prays Nanak, shower me with Your Mercy, Lord; throughout the ages, You take the same form. ||8||1]|6]|8]|
THASt HIS 4 Bual Eniars (929-17) raamkalee mehlaa 1 dakh-nee o-ankaar Raamkalee, First Mehl, Dakhanee, Ongkaar:
qe Afsara YATE Il (929-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Guiofs gout Ssufs il (929-18, mast euet, us 1) o-ankaar barahmaa utpat. From Ongkaar, the One Universal Creator God, Brahma was created.
Eniarg oor fafe fafs i (929-18, meet wut, He 1) o-ankaar kee-aa jin chit. He kept Ongkaar in his consciousness.
Gniats Aw Aa Fe Il (929-18, saat wet, He 1) o-ankaar sail jug bha-ay. From Ongkaar, the mountains and the ages were created.
Gniotts Fe fegHe il (929-18, saat west, He 1) o-ankaar bayd nirma-ay. Ongkaar created the Vedas.
uat CBO Gniafs Aafe Gud Il (930-1, mat wuAt, He 1)
o-ankaar sabad uDhray. Ongkaar saves the world through the Shabad.
Gniafs TaHfe SF Il (930-1, mat TuMt, He 1) o-ankaar gurmukh taray. Ongkaar saves the Gurmukhs.
GOH nd HST SS Il (930-1, sat wae, He 1) onam akhar sunhu beechaar. Listen to the Message of the Universal, Imperishable Creator Lord.
ou mg fyss=E ATT AU (930-1, Tat Suet, He 1) onam akhar taribhavan saar. ||1]]| The Universal, Imperishable Creator Lord is the essence of the three worlds. ||1]|
Afs us for feud AAT Il (930-2, mast waet, He 1) sun paaday ki-aa likhahu janjaalaa. Listen, O Pandit, O religious scholar, why are you writing about worldly debates?
fou oH oH Tenfe dure il TIE Il (930-2, mraast wut, He 1) likh raam naam gurmukh gopaalaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. As Gurmukh, write only the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||1]|Pause] |
AA AS Ad Ada Curfenr ste seo fea Ast II (930-3, east weet, He 1
Sasai sabh jag sahj upaa-i-aa teen bhavan ik jotee.
Sassa: He created the entire universe with ease; His One Light pervades the three worlds.
aenfy eas usufs de vfs & yea HT Il (930-3, aHast weet, He 1) gurmukh vasat paraapat hovai chun lai maanak motee. Become Gurmukh, and obtain the real thing; gather the gems and pearls.
AHS AS ule ufs gs nifs fadsfe Ara Il (930-4, mnreat weet, He 1)
samjhai soojhai parh parh boojhai ant nirantar saachaa.
If one understands, realizes and comprehends what he reads and studies, in the end he shall realize that the True Lord dwells deep within his nucleus.
Tenfy Sey ATG AHS fag ATS AG ATS |2QIl (930-4, Haat wut, He 1)
gurmukh daykhai saach samaalay bin saachay jag kaachaa. ||2] |
The Gurmukh sees and contemplates the True Lord; without the True Lord, the world is false. ||2]|
ad UsH Ud UeH ufs Teardt Ho Uta Il (930-5, saat wut, He 1)
DhaDhai Dharam Dharay Dharmaa pur gunkaaree man Dheeraa.
Dhadha: Those who enshrine Dharmic faith and dwell in the City of Dharma are worthy; their minds are steadfast and stable.
uo ofes us Hfe HASfa aI SS HST Il (930-5, THast wut, 1)
DhaDhai Dhool parhai mukh mastak kanchan bha-ay manooraa.
Dhadha: If the dust of their feet touches one's face and forehead, he is transformed from iron into gold.
ug Uselog urfy mist She af A Us II (930-6, aHaat wut, Hs 1)
Dhan DharneeDhar aap ajonee tol bol sach pooraa.
Blessed is the Support of the Earth; He Himself is not born; His measure and speech are perfect and True.
RIS ot HS AIT We A WE TI AT MSI! (930-6, Taet wuct, we 1) kartay kee mit kartaa jaanai kai jaanai gur sooraa. ||3]|| Only the Creator Himself knows His own extent; He alone knows the Brave Guru. ||3]|
faorg aefeor vat stfenr areata ae fry ufeur i (930-7, erast wut, He 1)
nyi-aan gavaa-i-aa doojaa bhaa-i-aa garab galay bikh khaa-i-aa.
In love with duality, spiritual wisdom is lost; the mortal rots away in pride, and eats poison.
Gd 3A ats we dt ge Heb alas asta Tetfenr Il (930-7, wast wedt, He 1)
gur ras geet baad nahee bhaavai sunee-ai gahir gambheer gavaa-i-aa.
He thinks that the sublime essence of the Guru's song is useless, and he does not like to hear it. He loses the profound, unfathomable Lord.
afs Ag afoor ifs ofoor xfs 3fs APS Aerfemr I (930-8, aust wast, He 1)
gur sach kahi-aa amrit lahi-aa man tan saach sukhaa-i-aa.
Through the Guru's Words of Truth, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained, and the mind and body find joy in the True Lord.
nm Taf wm FS nmd nifigs Uborfeur tei (30-9, mat wast, He 1)
aapay gurmukh aapay dayvai aapay amrit pee-aa-i-aa. ||4||
He Himself is the Gurmukh, and He Himself bestows the Ambrosial Nectar; He Himself leads us to drink it in. ||4]|
Sa Sa ad AS act IGH asa femmy il (930-9, aHast weet, He 1)
ayko ayk kahai sabh ko-ee ha-umai garab vi-aapai.
Everyone says that God is the One and only, but they are engrossed in egotism and pride.
nists wots Sa ues EC we Hoe fren II (930-10, mat Tut, He 1)
antar baahar ayk pachhaanai i-o ghar mahal sinjaapai.
Realize that the One God is inside and outside; understand this, that the Mansion of His Presence is within the home of your heart.
yg ds de uf 3 Weg Sa fAfe Aaet Il (930-10, mast ust, we 1)
parabh nayrhai har door na jaanhu ayko sarisat sabaa-ee.
God is near at hand; do not think that God is far away. The One Lord permeates the entire universe.
SANT Meg Sot SA SSA Sa ANE MUll (930-11, Trast Tet, we 1)
aykankaar avar nahee doojaa naanak ayk samaa-ee. ||5] |
There in One Universal Creator Lord; there is no other at all. O Nanak, merge into the One Lord. ||5]|
fen ass a fa afs wuG nrefes sfeS o Fret I (930-11, oraat weet, He 1) is kartay ka-o ki-o geh raakha-o afri-o tuli-o na jaa-ee. How can you keep the Creator under your control? He cannot be seized or measured.
ufenrt & ees yreat Bfo oaSdt uret il (930-12, erat wut, v2 1)
maa-i-aa kay dayvaanay paraanee jhooth thag-uree paa-ee.
Maya has made the mortal insane; she has administered the poisonous drug of falsehood.
ofa afs Hosts feqs fea sa fefs ussret Il (930-12, anreet weet, He 1)
lab lobh muhtaaj vigootay ib tab fir pachhutaa-ee. Addicted to greed and avarice, the mortal is ruined, and then later, he regrets and repents.
ea Ade J afs fiifs we ores Are Tae NEM (930-13, Tat Tet, He 1)
ayk sarayvai taa gat mit paavai aavan jaan rahaa-ee. ||6] |
So serve the One Lord, and attain the state of Salvation; your comings and goings Shall cease. ||6]|
eq neg Jo feq TU Il (930-13, THast uct, Hs 1) ayk achaar rang ik roop. The One Lord is in all actions, colors and forms.
ue urat mratat MATU Il (930-14, Hast wut, He 1) pa-un paanee agnee asroop. He manifests in many shapes through wind, water and fire.
Sa seg se fg SF Il (930-14, raat wet, He 1) ayko bhavar bhavai tihu lo-ay. The One Soul wanders through the three worlds.
Sa FS AS ufs TE il (930-14, mnreat wast, we 1) ayko boojhai soojhai pat ho-ay. One who understands and comprehends the One Lord is honored.
fami fmirg & AHAfEs Jd Il (930-15, Hat TUAt, He 1) gi-aan Dhi-aan lay samsar rahai. One who gathers in spiritual wisdom and meditation, dwells in the state of balance.
Tanta Sa feaar & GI Il (930-15, maa wut, He 1) gurmukh ayk virlaa ko lahai. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, attain the One Lord.
fan 3 Uf fasur 3 AY Ue Il (930-15, saat TUMt, He 1) jis no day-ay kirpaa tay sukh paa-ay. They alone find peace, whom the Lord blesses with His Grace.
TT Turg nif AES IDI (930-16, Traest wut, we 1) guroo du-aarai aakh sunaa-ay. ||7]| In the Gurdwara, the Guru's Door, they speak and hear of the Lord. ||7]||
oH aH ATS SAS Il (930-16, Tat eust, He 1) ooram Dhooram jot ujaalaa. His Light illuminates the ocean and the earth.
sifs see Hfo Te aus Il (930-16, anraxat euSt, He 1) teen bhavan meh gur gopaalaa. Throughout the three worlds, is the Guru, the Lord of the World.
Cafenr mmgy fears il (930-17, Tnreet wut, He 1) oogvi-aa asroop dikhaavai. The Lord reveals His various forms;
afa fasur mud wis ne il (930-17, mat weet, He 1) kar kirpaa apunai ghar aavai. granting His Grace, He enters the home of the heart.
Cafe saw Stsa UT Il (930-17, anaat wut, Hs 1) oonav barsai neejhar Dhaaraa. The clouds hang low, and the rain is pouring down.
3H Aafe ASIST Il (930-18, THaet wet, He 1) ootam sabad savaaranhaaraa. The Lord embellishes and exalts with the Sublime Word of the Shabad.
fen Sa at we SE Il (930-18, sHast wUdt, He 1) is aykay kaa jaanai bhay-o. One who knows the mystery of the One God,
my ast ny SE cI (930-18, aHast wut, He 1) aapay kartaa aapay day-o. ||8]|| is Himself the Creator, Himself the Divine Lord. ||8]|
Cae AY MAT AUS Il (930-18, nat wut, Hs 1)
ugvai soor asur sanghaarai. When the sun rises, the demons are slain;
Cus efy Hate ses Il (930-19, meet eust, He 1) oocha-o daykh sabad beechaarai. the mortal looks upwards, and contemplates the Shabad.
Gufs orfe nifs fsa SE 1 (930-19, mast euat, Hs 1) oopar aad ant tihu lo-ay. The Lord is beyond the beginning and the end, beyond the three worlds.
nm ad XA AS ALE Il (930-19, raat ut, we 1) aapay karai kathai sunai so-ay. He Himself acts, speaks and listens.
Yar £39
6g feast He Se SE Il (931-1, meat weet, He 1) oh biDhaataa man tan day-ay. He is the Architect of Destiny; He blesses us with mind and body.
6g faorst nfs yf ALE II (931-1, meat weet, He 1) oh biDhaataa man mukh so-ay. That Architect of Destiny is in my mind and mouth.
Us Hates vies 3 AE Il (931-1, Hast weet, Hs 1) parabh jagjeevan avar na ko-ay. God is the Life of the world; there is no other at all.
Soa of gS ufs dE ICI (931-2, meet TUSt, He 1) naanak naam ratay pat ho-ay. ||9]| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one is honored. ||9||
THo TH de fosarfa il (931-2, Hast wast, He 1) raajan raam ravai hitkaar. One who lovingly chants the Name of the Sovereign Lord King,
TE His BS HOM HAS Il (931-2, gaat eet, ws 1) ran meh loojhai manoo-aa maar. fights the battle and conquers his own mind;
ofs fests ad df FST Il (931-2, saat wuMt, He 1) raat dinant rahai rang raataa. day and night, he remains imbued with the Lord's Love.
Sie Seo Aa BS AST Il (931-3, THast wuMt, ue 1) teen bhavan jug chaaray jaataa. He is famous throughout the three worlds and the four ages.
fafs ast A OfSA ot Ao I (931-3, reat Tut, He 1) jin jaataa so tis hee jayhaa. One who knows the Lord, becomes like Him.
mfs fogHtes AISfA Sa Il (931-3, Hast Tut, He 1) at nirmaa-il seejhas dayhaa. He becomes absolutely immaculate, and his body is sanctified.
JoAt IH foe fee ae i) (931-4, meat wuSt, He 1) rahsee raam ridai ik bhaa-ay. His heart is happy, in love with the One Lord.
nists Fae Ate fee oe AOI (931-4, wHast waet, He 1) antar sabad saach liv laa-ay. ||10]||
He lovingly centers his attention deep within upon the True Word of the Shabad. ||10]|
dH 6 an nifys uA dE odt AAS Il (931-4, maet wet, He 1)
ros na keejai amrit peejai rahan nahee sansaaray.
Don't be angry - drink in the Ambrosial Nectar; you shall not remain in this world forever.
oH of ga odt goat wrfe ate Aa US Il (931-5, saat wut, He YD
raajay raa-ay rank nahee rahnaa aa-ay jaa-ay jug chaaray.
The ruling kings and the paupers shall not remain; they come and go, throughout the four ages.
WE AWE 3 Id 5 aSt fan ufo a faSst II (931-5, sHaat wat, He VD
rahan kahan tay rahai na ko-ee kis peh kara-o binantee.
Everyone says that they will remain, but none of them remain; unto whom should I offer my prayer?
faq Wee TH OM fodug ag ee ufs Hat NAVI (931-6, Hat Saat, He 1)
ayk sabad raam naam niroDhar gur dayvai pat matee. ||11]|
The One Shabad, the Name of the Lord, will never fail you; the Guru grants honor and understanding. ||11]|
OH Hast Hfs Tet wus ules Tat il (931-6, Trast wut, vs 1) laaj marantee mar ga-ee ghooghat khol chalee. My shyness and hesitation have died and gone, and I walk with my face unveiled.
AA fesot wedt fra 3 Ha Zot I (931-7, wHaet wut, He 1)
Saas divaanee baavree sir tay sank talee.
The confusion and doubt from my crazy, insane mother-in-law has been removed from over my head.
Ufh goret gat fAG Ho ufo aE MISE Il (931-7, Taet wast, He 1) paraym bulaa-ee ralee si-o man meh sabad anand.
My Beloved has summoned me with joyful caresses; my mind is filled with the bliss of the Shabad.
one gst wet set aanfa set fofse 92K (931-8, aHaet wut, He 1) laal ratee laalee bha-ee gurmukh bha-ee nichind. ||12|| Imbued with the Love of my Beloved, I have become Gurmukh, and carefree. ||12]|
Bd SH I3O Af ATT Il (931-8, Tat wut, Hs 1) laahaa naam ratan jap saar. Chant the jewel of the Naam, and earn the profit of the Lord.
BI BF FIT MIA Il (931-9, meat wast, v2 1) lab lobh buraa aha™kaar. Greed, avarice, evil and egotism;
wat Tat SfEsags il (931-9, Haat wet, He 1) laarhee chaarhee laa-itbaar. Slander, inuendo and gossip;
HOHY HITT HAT TST Il (931-9, THast wut, He 1) manmukh anDhaa mugaDh gavaar. the self-willed manmukh is blind, foolish and ignorant.
Od aate ntfent Afar il (931-9, sHast wut, v8 1) laahay kaaran aa-i-aa jag. For the sake of earning the profit of the Lord, the mortal comes into the world.
ofe Has afenr SarfS ofa i (931-10, wrest eet, He 1) ho-ay majoor ga-i-aa thagaa-ay thag. But he becomes a mere slave laborer, and is mugged by the mugger, Maya.
we oy Unt SAT ll (931-10, sHast vuet, Hs 1) laahaa naam poonjee vaysaahu. One who earns the profit of the Naam, with the capital of faith,
Soa Adt ufs AS UPSATT NASI (931-10, THaet Tut, He 1)
naanak sachee pat sachaa paatisaahu. ||13]| O Nanak, is truly honored by the True Supreme King. ||13]|
wife feast Aa AH UE Il (931-11, meet euet, He 1) aa-ay vigootaa jag jam panth. The world is ruined on the path of Death.
niet & ASE A AHA Il (931-11, THast waet, He 1) aa-ee na maytan ko samrath. No one has the power to erase Maya's influence.
nifa Ae Ste ute df i (931-11, east wet, He 1) aath sail neech ghar ho-ay. If wealth visits the home of the lowliest clown,
wife ef fae fan Sfe Il (931-12, aast weet, He 1 aath daykh nivai jis do-ay. seeing that wealth, all pay their respects to him.
wife df= at Hara frat il (931-12, sHast weet, He 1) aath ho-ay taa mugaDh si-aanaa. Even an idiot is thought of as clever, if he is rich.
sats fager Aa ASTaT Il (931-12, THaMt euMt, He 1) bhagat bihoonaa jag ba-uraanaa. Without devotional worship, the world is insane.
AS Hfs zas Sat ALE Il (931-13, oHast euat, He 1) sabh meh vartai ayko so-ay. The One Lord is contained among all.
fan 3 fasu ad fan usae de 198i (931-13, sHast weet, He 1) jis no kirpaa karay tis pargat ho-ay. ||14]| He reveals Himself, unto those whom He blesses with His Grace. ||14]|
afar afar atu net fages Il (931-13, mat wut, He 1) jug jug thaap sadaa nirvair. Throughout the ages, the Lord is eternally established; He has no vengeance.
Hoty Hofs odt Gor Oe i (31-14, mat weet, He 1) janam maran nahee DhanDhaa Dhair. He is not subject to birth and death; He is not entangled in worldly affairs.
a tA A my orf i (931-14, oraat weet, ve 1) jo deesai so aapay aap. Whatever is seen, is the Lord Himself.
mifu Cure wmy we af il (931-14, mat wut, Hs 1) aap Uupaa-ay aapay ghat thaap. Creating Himself, He establishes Himself in the heart.
mify nigisd UA Bet Il (931-15, raat wast, v2 1) aap agochar DhanDhai lo-ee. He Himself is unfathomable; He links people to their affairs.
na Hafs AaHtes At Il (931-15, wast wat, He 1) jog jugat jagjeevan so-ee. He is the Way of Yoga, the Life of the World.
afe wires AY AY Jet I (931-15, raat Tut, He 1) kar aachaar sach sukh ho-ee. Living a righteous lifestyle, true peace is found.
om fegar Hats fore Tet NWI (931-15, THe wut, He 1) naam vihoonaa mukat kiv ho-ee. ||15]|| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can anyone find liberation? ||15] |
fee ore FdO Aste Il (931-16, THast wast, He 1) vin naavai vayroDh sareer. Without the Name, even one's own body is an enemy.
fas o feats aefs Ho ule Il (931-16, mat wut, He 1) ki-o na mileh kaateh man peer. Why not meet the Lord, and take away the pain of your mind?
Ze Fer wir] FTE Il (931-16, Treat wast, we 1) vaat vataa-00 aavai jaa-ay. The traveller comes and goes along the highway.
fom & nifenr foo us uf= i) (031-17, mat Tut, He 1) ki-aa lay aa-i-aa ki-aa palai paa-ay. What did he bring when he came, and what will he take away when he goes?
fee are Sat AS ae Il (931-17, Haat wut, He 1) vin naavai totaa sabh thaa-ay. Without the Name, one loses everywhere.
oro fires at efe gee i (931-17, Hast weet, He 1) laahaa milai jaa day-ay bujhaa-ay. The profit is earned, when the Lord grants understanding.
ZEH Murg SEH Sus Il (931-18, mast ust, we 1) vanaj Vvaapaar vanjai vaapaaree. In merchandise and trade, the merchant is trading.
fee ore aAt ufs Act NEN (931-18, oat Tut, He 1) vin naavai kaisee pat saaree. ||16]|| Without the Name, how can one find honor and nobility? ||16] |
ae Sted fomrat AfE i (931-18, sHaet zuat, He 1) gun veechaaray gi-aanee so-ay. One who contemplates the Lord's Virtues is spiritually wise.
we ufo famre usufs fe i (931-19, mat Tut, He 1) gun meh gi-aan paraapat ho-ay.
Through His Virtues, one receives spiritual wisdom. Tees feger HAs Il (931-19, aHaet wuet, He 1) gundaataa virlaa sansaar.
How rare in this world, is the Giver of virtue.
Ardt aget aa Stata il (931-19, mat wast, Hs 1) saachee karnee gur veechaar. The True way of life comes through contemplation of the Guru.
WAH nididd StHfS odt ufE I (931-19, raat Tut, He 1) agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ay. The Lord is inaccessible and unfathomable. His worth cannot be estimated.
Ua 32
at fisha at we fete | (932-1, oat wut, He 1) taa milee-ai jaa la-ay milaa-ay. They alone meet Him, whom the Lord causes to meet.
Teest TE ATS StS Il (932-1, THaest wut, nz 1) gunvantee gun saaray neet. The virtuous soul bride continually contemplates His Virtues.
Soa Tents fresh HIS 19D Il (932-1, sHast wat, He 1) naanak gurmat milee-ai meet. ||17]| O Nanak, following the Guru's Teachings, one meets the Lord, the true friend. ||17]|
an ag afenr aS as Il (932-2, mHaat weet, He 1) kaam kroDh kaa-i-aa ka-o gaalai. Unfulfilled sexual desire and unresolved anger waste the body away,
fA@ ave Asa BS I (932-2, saat wut, ve 1) ji-o kanchan sohaagaa dhaalai. as gold is dissolved by borax.
afA anect Ad ASS Il (932-2, araat weet, He 1) kas kasvatee sahai so taa-o. The gold is touched to the touchstone, and tested by fire;
Sets Aa Sat AVS Il (932-3, wast weet, He 1) nadar saraaf vannee sachrhaa-o. when its pure color shows through, it is pleasing to the eye of the assayer.
ATS UA MI AH AAT Il (932-3, Hast ust, we 1) jagat pasoo aha’ kaal kasaa-ee. The world is a beast, and arrogent Death is the butcher.
afs ads adet afs uret Il (932-3, oaat weet, He 1) kar kartai karnee kar paa-ee. The created beings of the Creator receive the karma of their actions.
fafs atst fats ahafS uret i (932-4, oat suet, He 1) jin keetee tin keemat paa-ee. He who created the world, knows its worth.
dd fomr adh fxs ATE 3B AST NACI (932-4, Treat TUT, He 1) hor ki-aa kahee-ai kichh kahan na jaa-ee. ||18]|| What else can be said? There is nothing at all to say. ||18]|
das AS vifiggs Ub i 032-4, onaat wast, He 1) khojat khojat amrit pee-aa. Searching, searching, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
for adt He Asatte er i (932-5, wast wut, us 1) khimaa gahee man satgur dee-aa. I have adopted the way of tolerance, and given my mind to the True Guru.
Ua Yat nie AF APE I (932-5, Tat Tut, He 1) kharaa kharaa aakhai sabh ko-ay. Everyone calls himself true and genuine.
UT ISS Ha BS AE il (032-5, mat weet, He 1) kharaa ratan jug chaaray ho-ay. He alone is true, who obtains the jewel throughout the four ages.
ug Ubis He odt AfeMr Il (932-6, meet wut, HE 1) khaat pee-ant moo-ay nahee jaani-aa. Eating and drinking, one dies, but still does not know.
fas ufo He AT AE ustfen Il (932-6, THast euet, He 1) khin meh moo-ay jaa sabad pachhaani-aa. He dies in an instant, when he realizes the Word of the Shabad.
mAfag sts Hafe He HEMT I (932-6, aHast wut, He 1) asthir cheet maran man maani-aa. His consciousness becomes permanently stable, and his mind accepts death.
ad facut 3 oH ustoni IACI (932-7, mast uM, He 1) gur kirpaa tay naam pachhaani-aa. ||19]| By Guru's Grace, he realizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||19]|
TIS Wsts Waosts SH Il (932-7, Hast wut, He 1) gagan gambheer gagnantar vaas. The Profound Lord dwells in the sky of the mind, the Tenth Gate;
TE We AY Ade fSeA il (32-7, mast weet, He 1) gun gaavai sukh sahj nivaas. singing His Glorious Praises, one dwells in intuitive poise and peace.
afeor o mire uirf= o ATE I (32-8, eet Tut, He 1) ga-i-aa na aavai aa-ay na jaa-ay. He does not go to come, or come to go.
ae usrtfe ad fee ote i (932-8, meat wut, He 1) gur parsaad rahai liv laa-ay. By Guru's Grace, he remains lovingly focused on the Lord.
TAS MAH MSE niet Il (932-8, THast wuet, He 1) gagan agamm anaath ajonee. The Lord of the mind-sky is inaccessible, independent and beyond birth.
wAfag sts ANTE Aart I (932-9, saat Tut, He 1) asthir cheet samaaDh sagonee. The most worthy Samaadhi is to keep the consciousness stable, focused on Him.
ofa on afs fefs uefa & Fat Il (32-9, erat wut, He 1) har naam chayt fir paveh na joonee. Remembering the Lord's Name, one is not subject to reincarnation.
Tans AY Ta OH fagat ilQoll (932-9, mnaat wut, we 1) gurmat saar hor naam bihoonee. ||20]||
The Guru's Teachings are the most Excellent; all other ways lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||20]||
we ed fefs aat AIST Il (932-10, maet uMt, He 1) ghar dar fir thaakee bahutayray. Wandering to countless doorsteps and homes, I have grown weary.
ats mA nis odt AT Il (932-10, saat wut, He 1 jaat asa‘kh ant nahee mayray. My incarnations are countless, without limit.
a3 HS fust AS Ur I (932-10, araet wat, He 1) kaytay maat pitaa sut Dhee-aa. I have had so many mothers and fathers, sons and daughters.
AS TI VS Slo Jur Il (932-11, THast vuet, ve 1) kaytay gur chaylay fun hoo-aa. I have had so many gurus and disciples.
ae TI SHAS S IMT Il (932-11, THast wut, ve 1) kaachay gur tay mukat na hoo-aa. Through a false guru, liberation is not found.
ast ots SI Sa ANTS Il (932-11, saat wat, uz 1) kaytee naar var ayk samaal. There are so many brides of the One Husband Lord - consider this.
THe HE Ales YS OTS Il (932-11, mast euet, we 1) gurmukh maran jeevan parabh naal. The Gurmukh dies, and lives with God.
ao fer gfe ue ufo urfemr I (932-12, oat wut, He 1) dah dis dhoodh gharai meh paa-i-aa. Searching in the ten directions, I found Him within my own home.
HS sfeor Afsag fhefenr 291 (32-12, sHaet euat, He 1) mayl bha-i-aa satguroo milaa-i-aa. ||21]|| I have met Him; the True Guru has led me to meet Him. ||21]|
aenfy ae aanfe FB | (932-13, mast wut, v2 1) gurmukh gaavai gurmukh bolai. The Gurmukh sings, and the Gurmukh speaks.
Tenty sf SHS 3S Il (932-13, wast waet, ve 1)
gurmukh tol tolaavai tolai.
The Gurmukh evaluates the value of the Lord, and inspires others to evaluate Him as well.
aante ore ate fara il (932-13, meat euet, He 1) gurmukh aavai jaa-ay nisang. The Gurmukh comes and goes without fear.
uddfa HS AOE ASA Il (932-13, THast waet, He 1) parhar mail jalaa-ay kalank. His filth is taken away, and his stains are burnt off.
aaHfe are Fe sas il (932-14, meat wast, uz 1) gurmukh naad bayd beechaar. The Gurmukh contemplates the sound current of the Naad for his Vedas.
TaHfe HAS BA MTT Il (932-14, wHaat wut, us 1) gurmukh majan chaj achaar. The Gurmukh's cleansing bath is the performance of good deeds.
Tonfa Age nifigs J ATT i 032-14, oat weet, vs 1) gurmukh sabad amrit hai saar. For the Gurmukh, the Shabad is the most excellent Ambrosial Nectar.
SOA TSH UTS UTF MQIl (932-15, Tat wut, He 1) naanak gurmukh paavai paar. ||22|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh crosses over. ||22]|
JIG WS 3 FIet OFF i (932-15, aHaet weet, ne 1) chanchal cheet na rah-ee thaa-ay. The fickle consciousness does not remain stable.
oot faa nigat w= il (932-15, rast wut, Hs 1) choree mirag angooree khaa-ay. The deer secretly nibbles at the green sprouts.
JdIo SHS Bs OS BS Il (932-16, maat wet, He 1) charan kamal ur Dhaaray cheet. One who enshrines the Lord's lotus feet in his heart and consciousness
fag Flee 336 fas ats Il (032-16, mast wuet, He 1) chir jeevan chaytan nit neet. lives long, always remembering the Lord.
fess dt aA Ag afe I (032-16, maat BUA, He 1) chintat hee deesai sabh ko-ay. Everyone has worries and cares.
dats Sa sot AY SE I (032-16, mast weet, He 1) cheeteh ayk tahee sukh ho-ay. He alone finds peace, who thinks of the One Lord.
fefs ZA ad ofa ofe Il (932-17, mast weet, He 1) chit vasai raachai har naa-ay. When the Lord dwells in the consciousness, and one is absorbed in the Lord's Name,
Hats sfeor ufs fAG wie ATE 12QZI (932-17, Hat Suet, He 1) mukat bha-i-aa pat si-o ghar jaa-ay. ||23]| one is liberated, and returns home with honor. ||23]|
ain to us fea aife i 032-17, saat weet, He 1) chheejai dayh khulai ik gandh. The body falls apart, when one knot is untied.
ent fas tug afar dfs i (932-18, mraet wet, He 1) chhay-aa nit daykhhu jag handh. Behold, the world is on the decline; it will be totally destroyed.
UU ste A AH af ATE Il (932-18, oat TUSt, He 1) Dhoop chhaav jay sam kar jaanai. Only one who looks alike upon sunshine and shade
gue afe Hats wfs mre il (932-18, Hast waet, He 1) banDhan kaat mukat ghar aanai. has his bonds shattered; he is liberated and returns home.
atfeur get Aas FHT Il (932-19, wast wuet, ve 1) chhaa-i-aa chhoochhee jagat bhulaanaa. Maya is empty and petty; she has defrauded the world.
fofimr faxss UF UTS Il (932-19, Tat SUM, He 1) likhi-aa kirat Dhuray parvaanaa. Such destiny is pre-ordained by past actions.
gin Fag AgHr ffs ae il (932-19, oat ust, we 1) chheejai joban jaroo-aa sir kaal. Youth is wasting away; old age and death hover above the head.
Uar 33 fen ta set frase gil (933-1, aHast wast, He 1)
kaa-i-aa chheejai bha-ee sibaal. ||24|| The body falls apart, like algae upon the water. ||24| |
mY orfy ys fg SE i (933-1, mast wut, Hs 1) jaapai aap parabhoo tihu lo-ay. God Himself appears throughout the three worlds.
afar fa ast weg 3 afF Il (933-1, saat waet, He 1) jug jug daataa avar na ko-ay. Throughout the ages, He is the Great Giver; there is no other at all.
fa@ are f38 omafa ae Il (933-2, eHaat weMt, He 1) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakhahi raakh. As it pleases You, You protect and preserve us.
AA We te ufs ANE Il (933-2, sHast TUMt, He 1) jas jaacha-o dayvai pat saakh. I ask for the Lord's Praises, which bless me with honor and credit.
Was Ata TI SO SST || (933-2, mast wat, ue 1) jaagat jaag rahaa tuDh bhaavaa. Remaining awake and aware, I am pleasing to You, O Lord.
W 3 Hols St IS AHS Il (933-3, Treat euet, He 1) jaa too mayleh taa tujhai samaavaa. When You unite me with Yourself, then I am merged in You.
A A Od AUG AaeHA Il (933-3, THast TUAt, He 1) jai jai kaar japa-o jagdees. I chant Your Victorious Praises, O Life of the World.
aanfs frsha sta featr Qui 033-3, saat wut, He 1) gurmat milee-ai bees ikees. ||25]|| Accepting the Guru's Teachings, one is sure to merge in the One Lord. ||25]||
Sfa sue for war fA SE I (033-3, aHast wuAt, He 1) jhakh bolan ki-aa jag si-o vaad. Why do you speak such nonsense, and argue with the world?
Bfa He SH UTHTE Il (933-4, Tnraat wuet, He 1) jhoor marai daykhai parmaad. You shall die repenting, when you see your own insanity.
HOH HE dt Ales MITAT Il (933-4, Hast wut, He 1) janam moo-ay nahee jeevan aasaa. He is born, only to die, but he does not wish to live.
mife 3B se MTA (SIA Il (933-4, aHaat wut, He 1) aa-ay chalay bha-ay aas niraasaa. He comes hopeful, and then goes, without hope.
sta sfo sf wet af Ate Il (933-5, mraat wut, He 1) jhur jhur jhakh maatee ral jaa-ay. Regretting, repenting and grieving, he is dust mixing with dust.
ae o vil dfs TE TE Il (33-5, aHast wuet, He 1) kaal na chaa‘pai har gun gaa-ay. Death does not chew up one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
uret a fofa afe & STE Il (933-5, anraxet wut, He 1) paa-ee nav niDh har kai naa-ay. The nine treasures are obtained through the Name of the Lord;
~ SA
my te AdfA ASTS MQEI (933-6, Tat weet, He 1) aapay dayvai sahj subhaa-ay. ||26|| the Lord bestows intuitive peace and poise. ||26] |
fens FS nm} FF Il (933-6, Taest wast, He 1) nji-aano bolai aapay boojhai. He speaks spiritual wisdom, and He Himself understands it.
MT AHS MTU AS Il (933-6, THast wut, He 1) aapay samjhai aapay soojhai. He Himself knows it, and He Himself comprehends it.
ae a afar nif AHS Il (933-6, THast wast, He 1) gur kaa kahi-aa ank samaavai. One who takes the Words of the Guru into his very fiber,
fSSHE AS ATS BS Il (933-7, THaet wuet, we 1) nirmal soochay saacho bhaavai. is immaculate and holy, and is pleasing to the True Lord.
Ge Aas Isat Sdt SS Il (033-7, saat weet, He 1) gur saagar ratnee nahee tot. In the ocean of the Guru, there is no shortage of pearls.
BS USS ATT MAS Il (933-7, THaast wast, v2 1) laal padaarath saach akhot. The treasure of jewels is truly inexhaustible.
afta afm AT ars AHTST Il (933-8, Tat wut, He 1) gur kahi-aa saa kaar kamaavahu. Do those deeds which the Guru has ordained.
Ts At Adat AT Weg Il (933-8, wast uNt, ve 1) gur kee karnee kaahay Dhaavahu. Why are you chasing after the Guru's actions?
Sa THis Afs AST MQ (933-8, Tat wuet, He 1) naanak gurmat saach samaavahu. ||27|| O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, merge in the True Lord. ||27]|
Se Sg fa sala Aat Il (933-9, srast wut, He 1) tootai nayhu ke boleh sahee. Love is broken, when one speaks in defiance.
Se MT ea fen Tat Il (933-9, saat weet, He 1) tootai baah duhoo dis gahee. The arm is broken, when it is pulled from both sides.
gfe udifs met as af& il (933-9, saat wut, He 1) toot pareet ga-ee bur bol. Love breaks, when the speech goes sour.
vonfs usafe ast Sf 1 (933-9, mat weet, He 1) durmat parhar chhaadee dhol. The Husband Lord abandons and leaves behind the evil-minded bride.
ee ate us Sets I (933-10, reat wuet, we 1) tootai ganth parhai veechaar. The broken knot is tied again, through contemplation and meditation.
ad Agel wis ase ATs Il (933-10, mast uM, He 1) gur sabdee ghar kaaraj saar. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one's affairs are resolved in one's own home.
BI AT S nite SNe Il (933-10, aHast wet, He 1) laahaa saach na aavai totaa. One who earns the profit of the True Name, will not lose it again;
fase Sag UISH H|t NQCH (933-11, Treat waet, He 1) taribhavan thaakur pareetam motaa. ||28]| the Lord and Master of the three worlds is your best friend. ||28]|
Sag Hot gag ote il (933-11, THast wut, we 1) thaakahu manoo-aa raakho thaa-ay. Control your mind, and keep it in its place.
Soa Het nigafs uSSTE Il (933-11, Tat wuMt, He 1) thahak mu-ee avgun pachhutaa-ay. The world is destroyed by conflict, regretting its sinful mistakes.
Sag Sa AaeSt ates il (933-12, wast wut, vs 1) thaakur ayk sabaa-ee naar. There is one Husband Lord, and all are His brides.
ags 2H ad afsnrts il (933-12, wraat wut, v2 1) bahutay vays karay koorhi-aar. The false bride wears many costumes.
ug ufs AST ofa TIT I (933-12, Tat Tuet, Hs 1) par ghar jaatee thaak rahaa-ee. He stops her from going into the homes of others;
Hats Foret Stax & UTSt Il (933-12, Tat TuNt, He 1) mahal bulaa-ee thaak na paa-ee. He summons her to the Mansion of His Presence, and no obstacles block her path.
Rafe Heat AS fimirst i (933-13, mast wat, ue 1) sabad savaaree saach pi-aaree. She is embellished with the Word of the Shabad, and is loved by the True Lord.
Wet Hots safe ost ICI (933-13, THaSt Tut, He 1) saa-ee sohagan thaakur Dhaaree. ||29]|| She is the happy soul bride, who takes the Support of her Lord and Master. ||29]|
30s SOs 0 At ae ste Alers Il 033-13, aHast weat, He 1) dolat dolat hay sakhee faatay cheer seegaar. Wandering and roaming around, O my companion, your beautiful robes are torn.
stgufe 3fe AY odt fae 3a feast SS Il (933-14, mraat wuet, He 1) daahpan tan sukh nahee bin dar binathee daar. In jealousy, the body is not at peace; without the Fear of God, multitudes are ruined.
sofu Het wis nrué stot afs AATE II (933-14, oHeSt Zest, He 1)
darap mu-ee ghar aapnai deethee kant sujaan.
One who remains dead within her own home, through the Fear of God, is looked upon with favor by her all-knowing Husband Lord.
3g Thmr afs nrue foss@ oy sete Il (933-15, oat Tut, He 1) dar raakhi-aa gur aapnai nirbha-o naam vakhaan. She maintains fear of her Guru, and chants the Name of the Fearless Lord.
sate aA fsa wet Aa tar odt Efe Il (933-15, east wut, He 1)
doogar vaas tikhaa ghanee jab daykhaa nahee door.
Living on the mountain, I suffer such great thirst; when I see Him, I know that He is not far away.
four foerst Fae vfs nifys uot saufs 1 033-16, oHast eect, Hs 1)
tikhaa nivaaree sabad man amrit pee-aa bharpoor.
My thirst is quenched, and I have accepted the Word of the Shabad. I drink my fill of the Ambrosial Nectar.
efo efs ord Ag aet A aS 3 SE II (033-16, ast weet, He 1 deh deh aakhai sabh ko-ee jai bhaavai tai day-ay. Everyone says, "Give! Give!" As He pleases, He gives.
TT word tert fear fees APE Boll (933-17, Hast wut, Hs 1) guroo du-aarai dayvsee tikhaa nivaarai so-ay. ||30|| Through the Gurdwara, the Guru's Door, He gives, and quenches the thirst. ||30||
Seas Bes IG fedt vfe eo uets aot il (933-17, rast weet, we 1)
dhandholat dhoodhat ha-o firee dheh dheh pavan karaar. Searching and seeking, I fell down and collapsed upon the bank of the river of life.
ad UIs Us us IBS fean ure il (933-18, mat Tut, He 1) bhaaray dhahtay dheh pa-ay ha-ulay niksay paar. Those who are heavy with sin sink down, but those who are light swim across.
WH Mine ofa fxs foo aX TB afs WE Il (933-18, raat wut, He 1) amar ajaachee har milay tin kai ha-o bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who meet the immortal and immeasurable Lord.
fae at of mrysha Aals vfs fer i (933-19, oat euet, we 1)
tin kee Dhoorh aghulee-ai sangat mayl milaa-o.
The dust of their feet brings emancipation; in their company, we are united in the Lord's Union.
Ho tor ate wimue ufo feaHe are il (933-19, aHast waet, He 1) man dee-aa gur aapnai paa-i-aa nirmal naa-o. I gave my mind to my Guru, and received the Immaculate Name.
yar 38 fafs om dior faq Aer fan afsod WE Il (934-1, saat weet, He 1)
jin naam dee-aa tis sayvsaa tis balihaarai jaa-o. I serve the One who gave me the Naam; I am a sacrifice to Him.
a Grd A aunt fon fio nied 3 afF Il (934-1, oat weet, He 1 jo usaaray so dhaahsee tis bin avar na ko-ay. He who builds, also demolishes; there is no other than Him.
qs usAet fSq Ayer st sis ey o TE WSU (934-2, mrrat wuet, we 1) gur parsaadee tis samm'"laa taa tan dookh na ho-ay. ||31|| By Guru's Grace, I contemplate Him, and then my body does not suffer in pain. ||31] |
Sana faq adt a at Int 3 Ia Il (934-2, mat weet, we 1)
naa ko mayraa kis gahee naa ko ho-aa na hog.
No one is mine - whose gown should I grasp and hold? No one ever was, and no one Shall ever be mine.
wefs ats fear faa fem ga il (934-3, oat wuet, He 1) aavan jaan viguchee-ai dubiDhaa vi-aapai rog. Coming and going, one is ruined, afflicted with the disease of dual-mindedness.
on fegé urent amg at fardfs il (934-3, srraet wut, He 1) naam vihoonay aadmee kalar kanDh girant. Those beings who lack the Naam, the Name of the Lord, collapse like pillars of salt.
fee are fas edn we orate ifs 1 (934-3, raat weet, 3 1) vin naavai ki-o chhootee-ai jaa-ay rasaatal ant. Without the Name, how can they find release? They fall into hell in the end.
Tes Tse wad mates ATS AE i (934-4, gHast weet, ne 1) ganat ganaavai akhree agnat saachaa so-ay. Using a limited number of words, we describe the unlimited True Lord.
mifamrat Hisdte 3 ad fae famie & aE Il 034-4, mat wast, He 1) agi-aanee matiheen hai gur bin gi-aan na ho-ay. The ignorant lack understanding. Without the Guru, there is no spiritual wisdom.
3et S3 sara at aH Sot ferifer ii (34-5, mrreet ust, He 1)
tootee tant rabaab kee vaajai nahee vijog.
The separated soul is like the broken string of a guitar, which does not vibrate its sound.
fegfaor AS ys atea afs Ara NBII (934-5, Treat wuet, we 1) vichhurhi-aa maylai parabhoo naanak kar sanjog. ||32]| God unites the separated souls with Himself, awakening their destiny. ||32]|
sdeg afenr Ufa He saefs Ut Us I (934-6, aHaet weet, He 1)
tarvar kaa-i-aa pankh man tarvar pankhee panch.
The body is the tree, and the mind is the bird; the birds in the tree are the five senses.
33 vata fife San faq a8 SH 8 FT Il (934-6, east weet, He 1)
tat chugeh mil ayksay tin ka-o faas na ranch.
They peck at the essence of reality, and merge with the One Lord. They are never trapped at all.
Gsfo 3 sae Sas Safe sa wet Il (934-7, mat wut, ve 1) udeh ta baygul baygulay takeh chog ghanee. But the others fly away in a hurry, when they see the food.
uu 32 adt ust meats sts gat i (934-7, east weet, ne 1)
pankh tutay faahee parhee avgun bheerh banee.
Their feathers are clipped, and they are caught in the noose; through their mistakes, they are caught in disaster.
fag ATS fas scot ate qe ath Hat Il (934-8, meet wuet, we 1)
bin saachay ki-o chhootee-ai har gun karam manee.
Without the True Lord, how can anyone find release? The jewel of the Lord's Glorious Praises comes by the karma of good actions.
uify save scat Sar orf Tat il (34-8, grat wuct, we 1)
aap chhadaa-ay chhootee-ai vadaa aap Dhanee.
When He Himself releases them, only then are they released. He Himself is the Great Master.
Ts usAret scr forsur orfy StS il (934-8, gaat wuct, we 1) gur parsaadee chhootee-ai kirpaa aap karay-i. By Guru's Grace, they are released, when He Himself grants His Grace.
nue ofa zsrdion A are 3 OE 133i (34-9, raat But, He 1)
apnai haath vadaa-ee-aa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||33]|
Glorious greatness rests in His Hands. He blesses those with whom He is pleased. 133]
Be Fs aU rhs are feger ofS il 34-9, onrerat ust, we 1) thar thar kampai jee-arhaa thaan vihoonaa ho-ay. The soul trembles and shakes, when it loses its mooring and support.
afs wis Ay Sa 3 aH 8 ele af Il (934-10, erat wut, He 1)
thaan maan sach ayk hai kaaj na feetai ko-ay.
Only the support of the True Lord brings honor and glory. Through it, one's works are never in vain.
fag oatee fag ag fag Are stag Il (934-10, mrraat weet, He 1)
thir naaraa-in thir guroo thir saachaa beechaar.
The Lord is eternal and forever stable; the Guru is stable, and contemplation upon the True Lord is stable.
Afs od ovag og F fours wirarg I (934-11, THaMt Tuet, He 1)
sur nar naathah naath too niDhaaraa aaDhaar.
O Lord and Master of angels, men and Yogic masters, You are the support of the unsupported.
Ava 8 Fost F VS VSG Il 934-11, THast Twat, ve 1) sarbay thaan thanantaree too daataa daataar. In all places and interspaces, You are the Giver, the Great Giver.
Ad Sa 3a SA FMF USS Il (934-11, rast wet, we 1) jah daykhaa tah ayk too ant na paaraavaar. Wherever I look, there I see You, Lord; You have no end or limitation.
ae aeste afe sfoor ag Hat Sterfs i (934-12, erat weet, ne 1)
thaan thanantar rav rahi-aa gur sabdee veechaar.
You are pervading and permeating the places and interspaces; reflecting upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad, You are found.
MeHfamr wg VeAt TST MAH MUTT WSSIl (934-12, ast wuMt, He 1)
anmangi-aa daan dayvsee vadaa agam apaar. ||34||
You give gifts even when they are not asked for; You are great, inaccessible and infinite. ||34] |
cfeur ag tense 3 ate afs SUSI? Il (934-13, saat eet, He 1) da-i-aa daan da-i-aal too kar kar daykhanhaar.
O Merciful Lord, You are the embodiment of mercy; creating the Creation, You behold it.
efor asfs us vfs dfo fas ufo fa Crrfa il (934-13, sraet waet, He 1)
da-i-aa karahi parabh may! laihi khin meh dhaahi usaar.
Please shower Your Mercy upon me, O God, and unite me with Yourself. In an instant, You destroy and rebuild.
wer 5 dar gat war a ffs Be i (934-14, meat wut, we 1) daanaa too beenaa tuhee daanaa kai sir daan. You are all-wise and all-seeing; You are the Greatest Giver of all givers.
BSE SHS LU woe TaHfe famrg fomre isull (934-14, saat wut, nz
daalad bhanjan dukh dalan gurmukh gi-aan Dhi-aan. ||35]|
He is the Eradicator of poverty, and the Destroyer of pain; the Gurmukh realizes spiritual wisdom and meditation. ||35]||
ufs afent afs sdb as vfs BS TST Il (934-15, raat wut, we 1)
Dhan ga-i-ai bahi jhooree-ai Dhan meh cheet gavaar. Losing his wealth, he cries out in anguish; the fool's consciousness is engrossed in wealth.
ug feast AY Hfeor fesHe on fumrfa i (934-15, east wut, He 1)
Dhan virlee sach sanchi-aa nirmal naam pi-aar.
How rare are those who gather the wealth of Truth, and love the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ue dfenr st ave Ufo A Teta Sf Sa Il (934-16, oat wat, He 1)
Dhan ga-i-aa taa jaan deh jay raacheh rang ayk.
If by losing your wealth, you may become absorbed in the Love of the One Lord, then just let it go.
Ho dn fra AGuba St AGS at Sax Il (934-16, sniaat wut, He 1)
man deejai sir sa-upee-ai bhee kartay kee tayk.
Dedicate your mind, and surrender your head; seek only the Support of the Creator Lord.
um wes sfo qe Ho Hf ASE MSs Il (934-17, THast weet, He 1) DhanDhaa Dhaavat reh ga-ay man meh sabad anand.
Worldly affairs and wanderings cease, when the mind is filled with the bliss of the Shabad.
PINs 3 AHS Se SS Ts fee Il (934-17, saat weet, ve 1) durjan tay saajan bha-ay bhaytay gur govind. Even one's enemies become friends, meeting with the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
a0 89 feast gest ans aot ule ate i (934-18, saat euet, He 1)
ban ban firtee dhoodh-tee basat rahee ghar baar.
Wandering from forest to forest searching, you will find that those things are within the home of your own heart.
Afsate Hat fife sdt ASH Hee By fasts SEI (934-18, mast wuMt, He 1 satgur maylee mil rahee janam maran dukh nivaar. ||36||
United by the True Guru, you shall remain united, and the pains of birth and death will be ended. ||36||
aa! Has B Seat fee Te AH ufs WAT Il (934-19, anraat weet, vs 1)
naanaa karat na chhootee-ai vin gun jam pur jaahi. Through various rituals, one does not find release. Without virtue, one is sent to the City of Death.
o faq fg 3 Gg do meats fefs ues il (934-19, araat weet, He 1)
naa tis ayhu na oh hai avgun fir pachhutaahi.
One will not have this world or the next; committing sinful mistakes, one comes to regret and repent in the end.
yar su or fam fomre 3 fomre 3 o& fam can fomre Il (935-1, aHast weet, He 1
naa tis gi-aan na Dhi-aan hai naa tis Dharam Dhi-aan. He has neither spiritual wisdom or meditation; neither Dharmic faith mor meditation.
fee oe foas@ aa famr Arat mifsHre I (935-1, THaSt Tut, He 1)
vin naavai nirbha-o kahaa ki-aa jaanaa abhimaan.
Without the Name, how can one be fearless? How can he understand egotistical pride?
ata got fas must Iva St BT UTP Il (935-2, oraat wut, He 1) thaak rahee kiv aprhaa haath nahee naa paar. I am so tired - how can I get there? This ocean has no bottom or end.
oO AHO A dae fan ufs act yas Il (935-2, mat weet, He 1) naa saajan say rangulay kis peh karee pukaar. I have no loving companions, whom I can ask for help.
soa fyS fyS A adt HS HBS Il (935-3, mmraat wut, ue 1) naanak pari-o pari-o jay karee maylay maylanhaar. O Nanak, crying out, "Beloved, Beloved", we are united with the Uniter.
fafs feest A HeAt as & Sf onefs 1311 (935-3, mat Tut, He 1) jin vichhorhee so maylsee gur kai hayt apaar. ||37]|| He who separated me, unites me again; my love for the Guru is infinite. ||37] |
uTy gat unit x fumirat il (935-4, arast wet, v8 1) paap buraa paapee ka-o pi-aaraa. Sin is bad, but it is dear to the sinner.
uf Se UN UATE Il (935-4, aHaet wut, He 1) paap laday paapay paasaaraa. He loads himself with sin, and expands his world through sin.
Uddfa UTY UTE nTY Il (935-4, THAT TUet, He 1) parhar paap pachhaanai aap. Sin is far away from one who understands himself.
o fsq Aa fea ASU I (35-5, Haat Tut, He 1) naa tis sog vijog santaap. He is not afflicted by sorrow or separation.
Oda uss fas ad fa FS WHATS Il (935-5, Haat weet, He 1) narak parha“ta-o ki-o rahai ki-o banchai jamkaal. How can one avoid falling into hell? How can he cheat the Messenger of Death?
fag nrze Wat SAG 3S Fa F AH Il (935-5, Taat wet, we 1) ki-o aavan jaanaa veesrai jhooth buraa khai kaal. How can coming and going be forgotten? Falsehood is bad, and death is cruel.
Ho Het Sfanr st Haver ue I (935-6, oat wut, He 1) man janjaalee vayrhi-aa bhee janjaalaa maahi. The mind is enveloped by entanglements, and into entanglements it falls.
fee are fas sca ut usta uefa ati! (935-6, meet wut, we 1) vin naavai ki-o chhootee-ai paapay pacheh pachaahi. ||38]| Without the Name, how can anyone be saved? They rot away in sin. ||38]|
fete fefs edt SA AGH Il (935-7, Treat east, He 1) fir fir faahee faasai ka-oo-aa. Again and again, the crow falls into the trap.
fefs usstar mre fom Int Il (935-7, Tat Tuet, He 1) fir pachhutaanaa ab ki-aa hoo-aa. Then he regrets it, but what can he do now?
SH IA FH Sot IS Il (935-7, THast wat, we 1) faathaa chog chugai nahee boojhai. Even though he is trapped, he pecks at the food; he does not understand.
Asay fH 3 wirdt AS il (935-8, oat euat, we 1) satgur milai ta aakhee soojhai. If he meets the True Guru, then he sees with his eyes.
fA Hest Sat AH ATS I (935-8, Tat wut, Hs 1) ji-o machhulee faathee jam jaal. Like a fish, he is caught in the noose of death.
fee TT WS Hals B TFS Il (935-8, Tat Tet, He 1) vin gur daatay mukat na bhaal. Do not seek liberation from anyone else, except the Guru, the Great Giver.
fefa fefs mre fefs fefa wife II (935-8, onaat weet, He 1) fir fir aavai fir fir jaa-ay. Over and over again, he comes; over and over again, he goes.
fea dfa ao ad fe] ote I (935-9, mat weet, He 1) ik rang rachai rahai liv laa-ay. Be absorbed in love for the One Lord, and remain lovingly focused on Him.
fee ge fefs oA 5 uf= Natl (935-9, nat weet, Hs 1) iv chhootai fir faas na paa-ay. ||39]| In this way you shall be saved, and you shall not fall into the trap again. ||39]|
ate ate af at ate se Safe i (935-10, mast west, v2 1) beeraa beeraa kar rahee beer bha-ay bairaa-ay. She calls out, "Brother, O brother - stay, O brother!" But he becomes a stranger.
ats ve uf wmue afse frsfo vfs we I (935-10, saat weet, He 1D)
beer chalay ghar aapnai bahin bireh jal jaa-ay.
Her brother departs for his own home, and his sister burns with the pain of separation.
wae a ufs Seat sat as Sfs il (935-10, wast wadt, He 1)
baabul kai ghar baytrhee baalee baalai nayhi.
In this world, her father's home, the daughter, the innocent soul bride, loves her Young Husband Lord.
A Sats zg anet Afsag Refs Sf i (935-11, meat wuMt, He 1) jay lorheh var kaamnee satgur sayveh tayhi. If you long for your Husband Lord, O soul bride, then serve the True Guru with love.
fass famrst gse@ Afsag Ate fHefe I (935-11, oat east, we birlo gi-aanee boojh-na-o satgur saach milay-ay. How rare are the spiritually wise, who meet the True Guru, and truly understand.
oad ofa easter A are 3 Sf Il (935-12, oat wedt, He 1)
thaakur haath vadaa-ee-aa jai bhaavai tai day-ay.
All glorious greatness rests in the Lord and Master's Hands. He grants them, when He is pleased.
wal fase dtorart A aX Toute dE I 35-12, saat weet, He 1)
banee birla-o beechaarsee jay ko gurmukh ho-ay.
How rare are those who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Bani; they become Gurmukh.
feo wat no use ot for wis er df gol! (935-13, aHast wudt, He 1)
in banee mahaa purakh kee nij ghar vaasaa ho-ay. ||40]||
This is the Bani of the Supreme Being; through it, one dwells within the home of his inner being. ||40||
fs safe want wis wis sn ots Crd CAS BT I (935-13, sHaSt TUdt, He 1)
bhan bhan gharhee-ai gharh gharh bhajai dhaahi usaarai usray dhaahai.
Shattering and breaking apart, He creates and re-creates; creating, He shatters again. He builds up what He has demolished, and demolishes what He has built.
Ag af Aa St sf Us ANGE Fug|NTT Il (935-14, raat weet, He 1)
sar bhar sokhai bhee bhar pokhai samrath vayparvaahai.
He dries up the pools which are full, and fills the dried tanks again. He is all-powerful and independent.
soft gars se feed fee svar fam ure Il (935-14, onraat wut, He 1) bharam bhulaanay bha-ay divaanay vin bhaagaa ki-aa paa-ee-ai. Deluded by doubt, they have gone insane; without destiny, what do they obtain?
qonfy famrg sot ufs uast fre fits foo vrei 935-15, oat weet, Hs 1) gurmukh gi-aan doree parabh pakrhee jin khinchai tin jaa-ee-ai. The Gurmukhs know that God holds the string; wherever He pulls it, they must go.
dfs ge afe ne ofa aS safe o UesTEH II (935-16, Tat Tut, He 1)
har gun gaa-ay sadaa rang raatay bahurh na pachhotaa-ee-ai.
Those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, are forever imbued with His Love; they never again feel regret.
33 sels Tenfy ate st fer whe SAT Usha Il (935-16, Haat wut, Hs 1)
bhabhai bhaaleh gurmukh boojheh taa nij ghar vaasaa paa-ee-ai.
Bhabha: If someone seeks, and then becomes Gurmukh, then he comes to dwell in the home of his own heart.
33 3@ne Wea feast on fear dh Il (935-17, oat Tut, He 1)
bhabhai bha-ojal maarag vikh-rhaa aas niraasaa taree-ai.
Bhabha: The way of the terrifying world-ocean is treacherous. Remain free of hope, in the midst of hope, and you shall cross over.
Ts usASt wnt we refsur fee Hdhat weal (935-17, wast weet, ve 1)
gur parsaadee aapo cheen"ai jeevti-aa iv maree-ai. ||41]|
By Guru's Grace, one comes to understand himself; in this way, he remains dead while yet alive. ||41]|
Heer afeor afe we afemr fart o Arf II (935-18, raat wet, He 1)
maa-i-aa maa-i-aa kar mu-ay maa-i-aa kisai na saath.
Crying out for the wealth and riches of Maya, they die; but Maya does not go along with them.
JH 3S fs SHE Whenr sat orf il (935-18, Haat wut, Hs 1) hans chalai uth dumno maa-i-aa bhoolee aath. The soul-swan arises and departs, sad and depressed, leaving its wealth behind.
Ho Bor AH Afoor vege vata are il (935-19, anaat wut, Hs 1)
man jhoothaa jam johi-aa avgun chaleh naal.
The false mind is hunted by the Messenger of Death; it carries its faults along when it goes.
Ho Hf He Bue Hd A TES deta STS Il (35-19, mast wast, He 1) man meh man ulto marai jay gun hoveh naal. The mind turns inward, and merges with mind, when it is with virtue.
Ua cBE
Het Hat afe we fee ars Bu ats I (936-1, mat Beet, He 1) mayree mayree kar mu-ay vin naavai dukh bhaal. Crying out, "Mine, mine!", they have died, but without the Name, they find only pain.
as Hed Hoe aT fa sat chars i (036-1, wast wet, nz 1) garh mandar mehlaa kahaa ji-o baajee deebaan. So where are their forts, mansions, palaces and courts? They are like a short story.
TA AS BH (eS FO" MSS ATS Il (936-2, THast wet, v2 1) naanak sachay naam vin jhoothaa aavan jaan. O Nanak, without the True Name, the false just come and go.
MM FIT AGU F mM WS AAS |GIl (936-2, saat wut, vs 1) aapay chatur saroop hai aapay jaan sujaan. ||42]| He Himself is clever and so very beautiful; He Himself is wise and all-knowing. ||42||
A otefs A ats efs orfe Te uests I (036-3, Haat weet, He 1) jo aavahi say jaahi fun aa-ay ga-ay pachhutaahi. Those who come, must go in the end; they come and go, regretting and repenting.
wy wants Heat we o ea Bars i (036-3, raat weet, He 1) lakh cha-oraaseeh maydnee ghatai na vaDhai utaahi. They will pass through 8.4 millions species; this number does not decrease or rise.
A Wo Gad faa ofa afemr Il (936-3, erat wuMt, He 1) say jan ubray jin har bhaa-i-aa. They alone are saved, who love the Lord.
Gor yor feast Her il (936-4, mre wut, we 1) DhanDhaa mu-aa vigootee maa-i-aa. Their worldly entanglements are ended, and Maya is conquered.
A dA A went fan ag HIS ade Il (936-4, reat wut, He 1) jo deesai so chaalsee kis ka-o meet karay-o. Whoever is seen, shall depart; who should I make my friend?
MG AHUG nmuet 3g HO MIT SE il (036-5, Haat weet, He 1) jee-0 Sampa-o aapnaa tan man aagai day-o. I dedicate my soul, and place my body and mind in offering before Him.
wAfag as FZ Tet fA ot at H GE Il 36-5, sHast east, we 1) asthir kartaa too Dhanee tis hee kee mai ot. You are eternally stable, O Creator, Lord and Master; I lean on Your Support.
Te at wdt J yet Rafe gt Hfs J] igsil (936-5, saat waet, He 1
gun kee maaree ha-o mu-ee sabad ratee man chot. ||43]|
Conquered by virtue, egotism is killed; imbued with the Word of the Shabad, the mind rejects the world. ||43]|
Ta Te oa dd JT 5 SH sald Il (936-6, Tat weet, He 1) raanaa raa-o na ko rahai rang na tung fakeer. Neither the kings nor the nobles will remain; neither the rich nor the poor will remain.
aot nmi niryat af& o dt ate Il 036-6, mat weet, He 1) vaaree aapo aapnee ko-ay na banDhai Dheer. When one's turn comes, no one can stay here.
TT IT STE AT SIT MAT Il (936-7, THaet eet, He 1) raahu buraa bheehaavalaa sar doogar asgaah. The path is difficult and treacherous; the pools and mountains are impassable.
H 3fs meade sfa net fee ae fa wis ArT Il (936-7, meet wUSt, He 1)
mai tan avgan jhur mu-ee vin gun ki-o ghar jaah.
My body is filled with faults; I am dying of grief. Without virtue, how can I enter my home?
Ter qe & ys fxs fas fsq fee fumrts i (936-8, aneet wast, He 1) gunee-aa gun lay parabh milay ki-o tin mila-o pi-aar. The virtuous take virtue, and meet God; how can I meet them with love?
fso dt wat et sat afu afu fee nafs | (936-3, erat weet, He 1) tin hee jaisee thee rahaa™ jap jap ridai muraar. If ony I could be like them, chanting and meditating within my heart on the Lord.
Meat FAUT I TS St SAT STS Il (936-9, gaat weet, vs 1) avgunee bharpoor hai gun bhee vaseh naal. He is overflowing with faults and demerits, but virtue dwells within him as well.
fee Asad Te 6 Wusl favd Aafe 3 ad Aes Sell (936-9, eat wuMt, He 1)
vin satgur gun na jaapnee jichar sabad na karay beechaar. ||44|| Without the True Guru, he does not see God's Virtues; he does not chant the Glorious Virtues of God. ||44] |
SAAMI we AHS wire Sag fue ii (936-10, wat suet, Hz 1)
laskaree-aa ghar sammlay aa-ay vajahu likhaa-ay.
God's soldiers take care of their homes; their pay is pre-ordained, before they come into the world.
arg antefs fafs cat wor us ue I (936-10, anaet zust, He 1)
kaar kamaaveh sir Dhanee laahaa palai paa-ay. They serve their Supreme Lord and Master, and obtain the profit.
a SF sfnreinn f3 Hog ferrfa i (36-11, mraat weet, He 1) lab lobh buri-aa-ee-aa chhoday manhu visaar. They renounce greed, avarice and evil, and forget them from their minds.
as edt ufsAT at ae B mr]S The I (936-11, Hast Uat, He 1)
garh dohee paatisaah kee kaday na aavai haar.
In the fortress of the body, they announce the victory of their Supreme King; they are never ever vanquished.
Tag ad wAH aT ACT Osa SE Il (036-12, aHast wuet, He 1)
chaakar kahee-ai khasam kaa sa-uhay utar day-ay.
One who calls himself a servant of his Lord and Master, and yet speaks defiantly to Him,
erg dee niuat sufs o Safe ALE Il (936-12, Haat wut, He 1) vajahu gavaa-ay aapnaa takhat na baiseh say-ay. shall forfeit his pay, and not be seated upon the throne.
UlsH ofa efsurdior A are 3 SE II (936-13, eat weet, He 1)
pareetam hath vadi-aa-ee-aa jai bhaavai tai day-ay.
Glorious greatness rests in the hands of my Beloved; He gives, according to the Pleasure of His Will.
nify ad for wmdibat neg 3 afe adfe iigull (936-13, mHaat weet, He 1) aap karay kis aakhee-ai avar na ko-ay karay-i. ||45]|
He Himself does everything; who else should we address? No one else does anything. [145]
AG AS &t Sdt ad StS UTE Il (936-14, Hast ust, we beeja-o soojhai ko nahee bahai duleechaa paa-ay. I cannot conceive of any other, who could be seated upon the royal cushions.
dda feeds SdT BT AVE AMS OTE Il (936-14, THaet wut, He 1) narak nivaaran narah nar saacha-o saachai naa-ay. The Supreme Man of men eradicates hell; He is True, and True is His Name.
ze fee ges fete sot Ho ufo aa sterg I (936-14, east weet, He 1)
van tarin dhoodhat fir rahee man meh kara-o beechaar.
I wandered around searching for Him in the forests and meadows; I contemplate Him within my mind.
BS IZ AT Heal Afsagd fa Fsg | (936-15, Tat wut, ne 1)
laal ratan baho maankee satgur haath bhandaar.
The treasures of myriads of pearls, jewels and emeralds are in the hands of the True Guru.
su de ys fre fea nfs Fa STE il (936-15, rast wut, He 1) ootam hovaa parabh milai ik man aykai bhaa-ay. Meeting with God, I am exalted and elevated; I love the One Lord single-mindedly.
ooa UISH ofh fs wo B useTte | (936-16, mawt wast, He 1) naanak pareetam ras milay laahaa lai parthaa-ay. O Nanak, one who lovingly meets with his Beloved, earns profit in the world hereafter.
saat ats fate det fate fats nites Il (936-16, wast wuet, He 1) rachnaa raach jin rachee jin siri-aa aakaar. He who created and formed the creation, made your form as well.
aenty aniz fomreint nis 3 ursrerg ISéll (936-17, THast waet, He 1) gurmukh bay-ant Dhi-aa-ee-ai ant na paaraavaar. ||46|| As Gurmukh, meditate on the Infinite Lord, who has no end or limitation. ||46]|
WSs Ia" Ths ME At i (936-17, met weet, we 1) rhaarhai roorhaa har jee-o so-ee. Rharha: The Dear Lord is beautiful;
fan faa Ia nigg 3 At Il 036-18, Haat wut, He 1) tis bin raajaa avar na ko-ee. There is no other king, except Him.
aS Ws SH Hed dfs SA Ho HT Il (936-18, THAT wat, He 1) rhaarhai gaarurh tum sunhu har vasai man maahi. Rharha: Listen to the spell, and the Lord will come to dwell in your mind.
ad usAet ofs uh ns a sath gos Il (936-18, meat wUSt, He 1) gur parsaadee har paa-ee-ai mat ko bharam bhulaahi. By Guru's Grace, one finds the Lord; do not be deluded by doubt.
AAG ATS fan ofe oe HH II (936-19, reat TUT, He 1) so saahu saachaa jis har Dhan raas. He alone is the true banker, who has the capital of the wealth of the Lord.
qoute us fA Arathi (936-19, sHaet zuet, He 1) gurmukh pooraa tis saabaas. The Gurmukh is perfect - applaud him!
gat rat ofs ufeor ae eet stots Il (936-19, east wut, He 1)
roorhee banee har paa-i-aa gur sabdee beechaar.
Through the beautiful Word of the Guru's Bani, the Lord is obtained; contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
yar 39 my afenr ey afent ofs zg urfeor aa igo il (937-1, saat euet, Hs 1)
aap ga-i-aa dukh kati-aa har var paa-i-aa naar. ||47]| Self-conceit is eliminated, and pain is eradicated; the soul bride obtains her Husband Lord. ||47]|
Afear gut Adhat us aver fy erg Il (937-2, erat eUSt, He 1)
Su-inaa rupaa sanchee-ai Dhan kaachaa bikh chhaar.
He hoards gold and silver, but this wealth is false and poisonous, nothing more than ashes.
Ag wee Afs ag vfs df ynrg Il (937-2, saat wuat, He 1) saahu sadaa-ay sanch Dhan dubiDhaa ho-ay khu-aar. He calls himself a banker, gathering wealth, but he is ruined by his dual-mindedness.
Afsordt Ae Afeor ATE OH MAG Il (37-2, mHaat wut, He 1) sachi-aaree sach sanchi-aa saacha-o naam amol. The truthful ones gather Truth; the True Name is priceless.
ofs fomrfes Gas ufs Ast A 8S Il (937-3, saat wut, vs 1)
har nirmaa-il oojlo pat saachee sach bol.
The Lord is immaculate and pure; through Him, their honor is true, and their speech is true.
AAG HIS HATE J J Adeg J IA Il (937-3, rast wet, we 1)
Saajan meet sujaan too too sarvar too hans.
You are my friend and companion, all-knowing Lord; You are the lake, and You are the swan.
AMG oad His ZA IC afsodt FSA I (937-4, maat BUA, He 1) saacha-o thaakur man vasai ha-o balihaaree tis. I am a Sacrifice to that being, whose mind is filled with the True Lord and Master.
Hfeor HHS Huet fafe atSt A ATE Il (037-4, sHast waet, He 1) maa-i-aa mamtaa mohnee jin keetee so jaan. Know the One who created love and attachment to Maya, the Enticer.
faftor nifys Sa I gS UTY AAS MISTI (937-5, THaMt Tuet, Hs 1)
bikhi-aa amrit ayk hai boojhai purakh sujaan. ||48]|
One who realizes the all-knowing Primal Lord, looks alike upon poison and nectar. ||48]|
fin fege ufu me yates we mA Il (937-5, Hast TuAt, He 1) khimaa vihoonay khap ga-ay khoohan lakh asa“kh. Without patience and forgiveness, countless hundreds of thousands have perished.
des 8 oe faS cat ufu ufy we fare i (937-6, meat weet, ne 1)
ganat na aavai ki-o ganee khap khap mu-ay bisankh.
Their numbers cannot be counted; how could I count them? Bothered and bewildered, uncounted numbers have died.
UAH UsTE nua ys aT S UTS Il (937-6, oat east, we 1) khasam pachhaanai aapnaa khoolai banDh na paa-ay. One who realizes his Lord and Master is set free, and not bound by chains.
Rafe Het us 3 fin Ae AY SAE Il (937-6, mast euet, He 1)
sabad mahlee kharaa too khimaa sach sukh bhaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Shabad, enter the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; you shall be blessed with patience, forgiveness, truth and peace.
Yay ust ug foMrg 3 nme eAfe ASH II (937-7, mast euet, He 1) kharach kharaa Dhan Dhi-aan too aapay vaseh sareer.
Partake of the true wealth of meditation, and the Lord Himself shall abide within your body.
fs safe ufe aU Ae Te vise Hfs dts Il (037-7, sHast waet, He 1)
man tan mukh jaapai sadaa gun antar man Dheer.
With mind, body and mouth, chant His Glorious Virtues forever; courage and composure shall enter deep within your mind.
Jen uu wren dt ea fears II (937-3, mast wut, He 1)
ha-umai khapai khapaa-isee beeja-o vath vikaar.
Through egotism, one is distracted and ruined; other than the Lord, all things are corrupt.
a3 @urfe fefe ufimig aS no mrs stil (937-8, Haat TuMt, He 1)
jant upaa-ay vich paa-i-an kartaa alag apaar. ||49]||
Forming His creatures, He placed Himself within them; the Creator is unattached and infinite. ||49] |
fqn] 38 6 We AfE II (937-9, ast weet, He 1) saristay bhay-o na jaanai ko-ay. No one knows the mystery of the Creator of the World.
fqre ad A fsau@ Sf II (937-9, sneat wuet, He 1)
saristaa karai so nihcha-o ho-ay. Whatever the Creator of the World does, is certain to occur.
Hu a@ Stag foment i 037-9, rast wast, He 1) sampai ka-o eesar Dhi-aa-ee-ai. For wealth, some meditate on the Lord.
Hu usta fee at ureint | (937-10, meat wut, He 1) sampai purab likhay kee paa-ee-ai. By pre-ordained destiny, wealth is obtained.
Hu ates Wags FT Il (937-10, saat wut, He 1) sampai kaaran chaakar chor. For the sake of wealth, some become servants or thieves.
Hu Ate SVS IT Il (937-10, THast wast, He 1)
sampai saath na chaalai hor.
Wealth does not go along with them when they die; it passes into the hands of others.
fag ATS odt SaaT HS Il (937-11, wast wuMt, He 1) bin saachay nahee dargeh maan. Without Truth, honor is not obtained in the Court of the Lord.
ofa oA ute ee foes nuoll (937-11, mast zuet, H 1) har ras peevai chhutai nidaan. ||50|| Drinking in the subtle essence of the Lord, one is emancipated in the end. ||50]|
dds das FT Met OE ast ITS Il (937-11, ast Tea, we 1) hayrat hayrat hay sakhee ho-ay rahee hairaan. Seeing and perceiving, O my companions, I am wonder-struck and amazed.
JG 0G aast H Het Aafe ge] nfs fare I (937-12, east wut, He 1)
ha-o ha-o kartee mai mu-ee sabad ravai man gi-aan.
My egotism, which proclaimed itself in possessiveness and self-conceit, is dead. My mind chants the Word of the Shabad, and attains spiritual wisdom.
Jd 30 dao we afe gat ters Il (937-12, meat Tut, He 1)
haar dor kankan ghanay kar thaakee seegaar.
I am so tired of wearing all these necklaces, hair-ties and bracelets, and decorating myself.
fife ufsH AY utfemr Aare ater af Tg Il (937-13, Tat euet, us 1)
mil pareetam sukh paa-i-aa sagal gunaa gal haar.
Meeting with my Beloved, I have found peace; now, I wear the necklace of total virtue.
soa TaHfy ut afs fAS ulfs fimrg il (937-13, mraet weet, He 1) naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai har si-o pareet pi-aar. O Nanak, the Gurmukh attains the Lord, with love and affection.
dfs fae fate AY ufenr cug ufe state Il (937-14, mast weet, He 1)
har bin kin sukh paa-i-aa daykhhu man beechaar.
Without the Lord, who has found peace? Reflect upon this in your mind, and see. dfs use of ase ofa fA sug fimrg Il (937-14, mat weet, He 1)
har parh-naa har bujh-naa har si-o rakhahu pi-aar. Read about the Lord, understand the Lord, and enshrine love for the Lord.
ofa mba ofa fame afe at on vias Ua (937-15, THT wUSt, He 1)
har japee-ai har Dhi-aa-ee-ai har kaa naam aDhaar. ||51]|
Chant the Lord's Name, and meditate on the Lord; hold tight to the Support of the Name of the Lord. ||51]|
By 3 feet 3 ret Fi fefmr aese II (937-15, mat wast, He 1) laykh na mit-ee hay sakhee jo likhi-aa kartaar. The inscription inscribed by the Creator Lord cannot be erased, O my companions.
mma ade fafs aor afe fagur uat of il (937-16, saat wast, Hs 1) aapay kaaran jin kee-aa kar kirpaa pag Dhaar. He who created the universe, in His Mercy, installs His Feet within us.
ads ofa efsurcior asg as stats il (937-16, mast zeet, He 1)
kartay hath vadi-aa-ee-aa boojhhu gur beechaar.
Glorious greatness rests in the Hands of the Creator; reflect upon the Guru, and understand this.
foftimr efs o net fas act FE vfs i) 037-17, aast weet, He 1 likhi-aa fayr na sakee-ai ji-o bhaavee ti-o saar. This inscription cannot be challenged. As it pleases You, You care for me.
Sed Sct AY Ufeor aoa Ase Sete I (937-17, Haat wut, us 1) nadar tayree sukh paa-i-aa naanak sabad veechaar. By Your Glance of Grace, I have found peace; O Nanak, reflect upon the Shabad.
HoH 3% ufs He Cad as stots il (937-18, mast weet, we 1)
manmukh bhoolay pach mu-ay ubray gur beechaar.
The self-willed manmukhs are confused; they rot away and die. Only by reflecting upon the Guru can they be saved.
fa usy dete 6 oreet SA a four afe ator ATE II (937-18, mast TUM, He 1)
je purakh nadar na aavee tis kaa ki-aa kar kahi-aa jaa-ay. What can anyone say, about that Primal Lord, who cannot be seen?
afeodt ag rue fafs fase fest feerfe u2i (37-19, saat wuet, He 1) balihaaree gur aapnay jin hirdai ditaa dikhaa-ay. ||52] | I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who has revealed Him to me, within my own heart. ||52]|
uror ufsmr nmiba fafeor fed Hofa wate 11 (037-19, mast wut, He 1)
paaDhaa parhi-aa aakhee-ai bidi-aa bichrai sahj subhaa-ay.
That Pandit, that religious scholar, is said to be well-educated, if he contemplates knowledge with intuitive ease.
Ua eBt
fafeor Ad 33 Bd TH OH fos OTE I 638-1, eHaat west, He 1)
bidi-aa soDhai tat lahai raam naam liv laa-ay.
Considering his knowledge, he finds the essence of reality, and lovingly focuses his attention on the Name of the Lord.
Hou fafenr fae fra ue fy uf i (938-1, oat weet, He 1) manmukh bidi-aa bikardaa bikh khatay bikh khaa-ay. The self-willed manmukh sells his knowledge; he earns poison, and eats poison.
Hod Hae 6 voet AS Fs od ATE USI (38-2, THast TUet, He 1)
moorakh sabad na cheen-ee soojh boojh nah kaa-ay. ||53]|
The fool does not think of the Word of the Shabad. He has no understanding, no comprehension. ||53]|
ung danfa wmihat arefaur vfs efe | (938-2, oat weet, He 1) paaDhaa gurmukh aakhee-ai chaatrhi-aa mat day-ay. That Pandit is called Gurmukh, who imparts understanding to his students.
SH AHS SH Adldd BI Aa xfs SE Il (938-3, mat wat, He 1)
naam samaalahu naam sangrahu laahaa jag meh lay-ay.
Contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord; gather in the Naam, and earn the true profit in this world.
Ret uct Ag Hie usb ASE A ATS Il (938-3, oat wut, He 1) sachee patee sach man parhee-ai sabad so saar. With the true notebook of the true mind, study the most sublime Word of the Shabad.
Sod A ufsur A ufss dio fan OH OH ae TE USI (38-4, Hast TUet, He 1) naanak so parhi-aa so pandit beenaa jis raam naam gal haar. ||54||1]|
O Nanak, he alone is learned, and he alone is a wise Pandit, who wears the necklace of the Lord's Name. ||54||1]|
THA HI 9 fra dAfe (938-5) raamkalee mehlaa 1 siDh gosat Raamkalee, First Mehl, Sidh Gosht ~ Conversations With The Siddhas:
qe Afsars yArfe il (938-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fho Ast afe wrAfs 8S AS Ast Aas Il (938-6, anaat, He 1)
siDh sabhaa kar aasan baithay sant sabhaa jaikaaro.
The Siddhas formed an assembly; sitting in their Yogic postures, they shouted, "Salute this gathering of Saints."
fSH vid Toot IHS ATS Mrs wRuTs Il (938-6, Hat, He 1) tis aagai rahraas hamaaree saachaa apar apaaro. I offer my salutation to the One who is true, infinite and incomparably beautiful.
HASa ofe udt fH ni So HO nit SE il (038-7, saat, v2 1) mastak kaat Dharee tis aagai tan man aagai day-o. I cut off my head, and offer it to Him; I dedicate my body and mind to Him.
Sod As fue AG Usha AoA ate AA BE INA (938-7, TIT, He 1
naanak sant milai sach paa-ee-ai sahj bhaa-ay jas lay-o. ||1||
O Nanak, meeting with the Saints, Truth is obtained, and one is spontaneously blessed with distinction. ||1]|
four sein Afs Het SE Il (938-8, gHast, He 1) ki-aa bhavee-ai sach soochaa ho-ay. What is the use of wandering around? Purity comes only through Truth.
Ay Hae fio nafs 3 af Na TIE Il (938-8, east, He 1) saach sabad bin mukat na ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the True Word of the Shabad, no one finds liberation. ||1]|Pause]|
aS SH for oS srs aa Haga AGS AMS Il (938-8, saat, ve 1) kavan tumay ki-aa naa-o tumaaraa ka-un maarag ka-un su-aa-o. "Who are you? What is your name? What is your way? What is your goal?
AY ae ngetH dt IG AS Hor afs ATE Il (938-9, mat, He 1) saach kaha-o ardaas hamaaree ha-o sant janaa bal jaa-o. We pray that you will answer us truthfully; we are a sacrifice to the humble Saints.
AT SAT AT dt Is AT neg AT ATT Il (938-9, ona, He 1)
kah baishu kah rahee-ai baalay kah aavhu kah jaaho.
Where is your seat? Where do you live, boy? Where did you come from, and where are you going?
Soa 88 Als Saat far sHra TT |i (938-10, mast, He 1)
naanak bolai sun bairaagee ki-aa tumaaraa raaho. ||2]|
Tell us, Nanak - the detached Siddhas wait to hear your reply. What is your path?"||2| |
ufe ufe afi fadsts adit wats Afsag se II (938-10, east, He 1)
ghat ghat bais nirantar rahee-ai chaaleh satgur bhaa-ay.
He dwells deep within the nucleus of each and every heart. This is my seat and my home. I walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
Hon mre gath frore sea Hel SAS Il (938-11, THs, v8 1)
sehjay aa-ay hukam siDhaa-ay naanak sadaa rajaa-ay.
I came from the Celestial Lord God; I go wherever He orders me to go. I am Nanak, forever under the Command of His Will.
wtafs safes fas oats mitt aenfs ure | (038-12, sat, He 1)
aasan baisan thir naaraa-in aisee gurmat paa-ay.
I sit in the posture of the eternal, imperishable Lord. These are the Teachings I have received from the Guru.
TsHfe Fs wry use AG Afs AHS ISI (938-12, Haat, He 1)
gurmukh boojhai aap pachhaanai sachay sach samaa-ay. ||3]||
As Gurmukh, I have come to understand and realize myself; I merge in the Truest of the True. ||3]|
zoo ATI ess ada faS afe ureht urd i (938-13, oat, v2 1) dunee-aa saagar dutar kahee-ai ki-o kar paa-ee-ai paaro. "The world-ocean is treacherous and impassable; how can one cross over?
TIUS 35 SY HSA TT Au sad Il (938-13, svat, ws 1) charpat bolai a-oDhoo naanak dayh sachaa beechaaro. Charpat the Yogi says, O Nanak, think it over, and give us your true reply."
nm mre ym} AHS fSH foo Cs SHH Il (938-14, aH, He 1) aapay aakhai aapay samjhai tis ki-aa utar deejai. What answer can I give to someone, who claims to understand himself?
AY Add 3H usa se famr sre cA gil (38-14, Hat, He 1) saach kahhu tum paargaraamee tujh ki-aa baisan deejai. ||4|| I speak the Truth; if you have already crossed over, how can I argue with you? ||4||
AA AS ufo ane fore Hoaet 6 ATES I (938-15, Tat, He 1
jaisay jal meh kamal niraalam murgaa-ee nai saanay.
The lotus flower floats untouched upon the surface of the water, and the duck swims through the stream;
Hofs wate se Aa Sd BSA OH SUS Il (938-15, Tat, He 1)
surat sabad bhav saagar taree-ai naanak naam vakhaanay.
with one's consciousness focused on the Word of the Shabad, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. O Nanak, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
dota feaifs ea nfs efor noe ofa fea Il (938-16, wHast, He 1)
raheh ikaa“t ayko man vasi-aa aasaa maahi niraaso.
One who lives alone, as a hermit, enshrining the One Lord in his mind, remaining unaffected by hope in the midst of hope,
MoH wide fy fears areq St aT STA NUM (938-16, HAST, He 1)
agam agochar daykh dikhaa-ay naanak taa kaa daaso. ||5||
sees and inspires others to see the inaccessible, unfathomable Lord. Nanak is his Slave. ||5||
Afe Fumit weet THe uss ATG Stes I (938-17, Trast, we 1) sun su-aamee ardaas hamaaree poochha-o saach beechaaro. "Listen, Lord, to our prayer. We seek your true opinion.
dH 3 on Cag cn fae ue ae erg I (938-17, raat, v2 1) ros na keejai utar deejai ki-o paa-ee-ai gur du-aaro. Don't be angry with us - please tell us: How can we find the Guru's Door?"
feg Ho vOse Ae ules SA SSA OH MMOS Il (938-18, THAT, He 1)
ih man chalta-o sach ghar baisai naanak naam aDhaaro.
This fickle mind sits in its true home, O Nanak, through the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
nm Afs froe agar oat rte fumrd ell (938-18, mat, He 1D aapay mayl milaa-ay kartaa laagai saach pi-aaro. ||6|| The Creator Himself unites us in Union, and inspires us to love the Truth. ||6]|
oet aet safe ford gfe fasts Sfemira i 38-19, mast, 4 1) haatee baatee raheh niraalay rookh birakh udi-aanay. "Away from stores and highways, we live in the woods, among plants and trees.
AE HB ofaTS we Sy ss fares il (938-19, saat, we 1)
kand mool ahaaro khaa-ee-ai a-oDhoo bolai gi-aanay.
For food, we take fruits and roots. This is the spiritual wisdom spoken by the renunciates.
yar tat stefa sett AY ee ure HG B Sal at I (939-1, saat, He 1)
tirath naa-ee-ai sukh fal paa-ee-ai mail na laagai kaa-ee. We bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and obtain the fruits of peace; not even an iota of filth sticks to us.
died ys Bode #8 Aa Pats fata Aret WOU (39-1, mat, we gorakh poot lohaareepaa bolai jog jugat biDh saa-ee. ||7]|| Luhaareepaa, the disciple of Gorakh says, this is the Way of Yoga."||7| |
vet act ste o ure ug ule fas o SHret I (039-2, ena, ne 1)
haatee baatee need na aavai par ghar chit na dolaa-ee. In the stores and on the road, do not sleep; do not let your consciousness covet anyone else's home.
fag ae HE Sa 3 feaet area FYB AT Il (939-3, saat, He 1) bin naavai man tayk na tik-ee naanak bhookh na jaa-ee. Without the Name, the mind has no firm support; O Nanak, this hunger never departs.
TE ucS WS TS feerfenr ATA AY Mug Il (939-3, Tat, ws 1)
haat patan ghar guroo dikhaa-i-aa sehjay sach vaapaaro.
The Guru has revealed the stores and the city within the home of my own heart, where I intuitively carry on the true trade.
dfss fot nes nod GTSa SB Stes NCI (939-4, rast, He 1) khandit nidraa alap ahaara’ naanak tat beechaaro. ||8]| Sleep little, and eat little; O Nanak, this is the essence of wisdom. ||8]|
TIAG Bu aay Aare Her Sat fifa i) (939-4, anaet, He 1)
darsan bhaykh karahu jogindaraa mundraa jholee khinthaa.
"Wear the robes of the sect of Yogis who follow Gorakh; put on the ear-rings, begging wallet and patched coat.
add nists Sa AdeT ue VIS fea ET II (939-5, mat, He 1)
baarah antar ayk sarayvhu khat darsan ik panthaa.
Among the twelve schools of Yoga, ours is the highest; among the six schools of philosophy, ours is the best path.
feo fafa ne AHSTeIMt Use gfe de a ure Il (939-5, Haat, He 1)
in biDh man samjaa-ee-ai purkhaa baahurh chot na khaa-ee-ai.
This is the way to instruct the mind, so you will never suffer beatings again." aod 88 TeHfy gs Aa Fats fee ueat cii (939-6, aet, ws 1)
naanak bolai gurmukh boojhai jog jugat iv paa-ee-ai. ||9|| Nanak speaks: the Gurmukh understands; this is the way that Yoga is attained. ||9||
nists Fag fodsts Het IGH HHS Efe at II (939-6, raat, Hs 1)
antar sabad nirantar mudraa ha-umai mamtaa door karee.
Let constant absorption in the Word of the Shabad deep within be your ear-rings; eradicate egotism and attachment.
any ag nidarg foes ad & Aafe A AHS Ut Il (939-7, aH, He 1)
kaam kroDh aha‘kaar nivaarai gur kai sabad so samajh paree.
Discard sexual desire, anger and egotism, and through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, attain true understanding.
fier Sat sfoufs sfomt aaa std Sa Tat Il (939-7, eras, He 1)
khinthaa jholee bharipur rahi-aa naanak taarai ayk haree.
For your patched coat and begging bowl, see the Lord God pervading and permeating everywhere; O Nanak, the One Lord will carry you across.
Wet Atos At ot Use Tg at AST ust IOMl (939-8, THAT, He 1) saachaa saahib saachee naa-ee parkhai gur kee baat kharee. ||10] |
True is our Lord and Master, and True is His Name. Analyze it, and you shall find the Word of the Guru to be True. ||10]|
Sug wug us g Sut il (39-8, mat, He 1)
oo’Dha-o khapar panch bhoo topee.
Let your mind turn away in detachment from the world, and let this be your begging bowl. Let the lessons of the five elements be your cap.
aifent ASHE HS ATM Il (939-9, THe, He 1) kaa’-i-aa karhaasan man jaagotee. Let the body be your meditation mat, and the mind your loin cloth.
AS HSy HAH FT BTS Il (39-9, sna, He 1) sat santokh sanjam hai naal. Let truth, contentment and self-discipline be your companions.
SSA TSH SH AHN AAU (939-9, aHat, He 1) naanak gurmukh naam samaal. ||11]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh dwells on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||11]]|
ae A TUS ALG A HAT Il (939-10, Tat, He 1) kavan so guptaa kavan so muktaa. "Who is hidden? Who is liberated?
aze A nists wots Aas Il (939-10, anaat, He 1) kavan so antar baahar jugtaa. Who is united, inwardly and outwardly?
ASO A nits RSQ A ATE Il (939-10, anaat, He 1) kavan so aavai kavan so jaa-ay. Who comes, and who goes?
ade A fgsefe fam ANTE 9211 (939-11, THAT, He 1) kavan so taribhavan rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||12|| Who is permeating and pervading the three worlds?"||12||
wie wie gust aaHfe HAST Il (939-11, sHaet, He 1) ghat ghat guptaa gurmukh muktaa. He is hidden within each and every heart. The Gurmukh is liberated.
nists sofa Aafe A AAS I (939-11, wHat, He 1) antar baahar sabad so jugtaa. Through the Word of the Shabad, one is united, inwardly and outwardly.
HoHfe faor wire AE I (939-12, oHat, He 1) manmukh binsai aavai jaa-ay. The self-willed manmukh perishes, and comes and goes.
Soa TSH Afs ANTE IVI (939-12, THast, He 1) naanak gurmukh saach samaa-ay. ||13]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh merges in Truth. ||13]|
fag af aor Aaufs ya II (939-12, Haat, He 1) ki-o kar baaDhaa sarpan khaaDhaa. "How is one placed in bondage, and consumed by the serpent of Maya?
fa afs dfeur fa@ afs war Il (939-13, mast, He 1) ki-o kar kho-i-aa ki-o kar laaDhaa. How does one lose, and how does one gain?
fa@ afe fasHe fx@ afe nifitmarrar il (039-13, mast, He 1)
ki-o kar nirmal ki-o kar anDhi-aaraa.
How does one become immaculate and pure? How is the darkness of ignorance removed?
feg 33 ses ATT THT IAW (939-13, aes, He 1) ih tat beechaarai so guroo hamaaraa. ||14]| One who understands this essence of reality is our Guru."||14]|
ents sar Aaufs war Il (939-14, mat, He 1) durmat baaDhaa sarpan khaaDhaa. Man is bound by evil-mindedness, and consumed by Maya, the serpent.
Houfa dfeor aanfir war Il (939-14, aHast, He 1) manmukh kho-i-aa gurmukh laaDhaa. The self-willed manmukh loses, and the Gurmukh gains.
Afsag fixe nitrat ate i (39-15, eat, He 1) satgur milai anDhayraa jaa-ay. Meeting the True Guru, darkness is dispelled.
Soa ICH Afe ANTE NWI (939-15, THAT, He 1) naanak ha-umai mayt samaa-ay. ||15]|| O Nanak, eradicating egotism, one merges in the Lord. ||15]|
Ho fodate ttt Fa Il (939-15, mast, He 1) sunn nirantar deejai banDh. Focused deep within, in perfect absorption,
83 5 JA us 3 AT Il (939-15, Haat, He 1) udai na hansaa parhai na kanDh. the soul-swan does not fly away, and the body-wall does not collapse.
Hon Wet Us We AST Il (939-16, aHast, He 1) sahj gufaa ghar jaanai saachaa. Then, one knows that his true home is in the cave of intuitive poise.
SOA A BS ATT IME (939-16, THast, He 1) naanak saachay bhaavai saachaa. ||16]|| O Nanak, the True Lord loves those who are truthful. ||16]]|
fon arate fas fA Sart i (939-16, snraet, He 1) kis kKaaran garihu taji-o udaasee. "Why have you left your house and become a wandering Udaasee?
fan arate feg su feeHt Il (939-17, erat, He 1) kis kaaran ih bhaykh nivaasee. Why have you adopted these religious robes?
fx PUI A 3H ZEA Il (939-17, Tat, uz 1) kis vakhar kay tum vanjaaray. What merchandise do you trade?
fa@ afe Aa Sureg urs IVI (939-17, Hast, He 1) ki-o kar saath langhaavahu paaray. ||17]|| How will you carry others across with you?"||17| |
Tenfy As se erat il (939-18, sat, He 1) gurmukh khojat bha-ay udaasee. I became a wandering Udaasee, searching for the Gurmukhs.
IAS & 3Tet Su SSH Il (939-18, oat, He 1) darsan kai taa-ee bhaykh nivaasee. I have adopted these robes seeking the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
ATS Sud A JH Fan's Il (939-18, THast, He 1) saach vakhar kay ham vanjaaray. I trade in the merchandise of Truth.
Sea TSHfe SSAA urs IACI (939-19, sat, He 1) naanak gurmukh utras paaray. ||18]| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, I carry others across. ||18]|
fas fafa use HoH ZetfEmr II (939-19, anaet, He 1) kit biDh purkhaa janam vataa-i-aa. "How have you changed the course of your life?
ad a 33 feg He went Il (939-19, mast, He 1) kaahay ka-o tujh ih man laa-i-aa. With what have you linked your mind?
Ua *Kgo
fos fafa nrAT HOAT UTET I (940-1, ana, He 1) kit biDh aasaa mansaa khaa-ee. How have you subdued your hopes and desires?
fas fafa afs fodsfs ust il (40-1, mat, He 1 kit biDh jot nirantar paa-ee. How have you found the Light deep within your nucleus?
fag dat fa ureint Arg Il (940-1, mat, He 1) bin dantaa ki-o khaa-ee-ai saar. Without teeth, how can you eat iron?
SSA ATS ATT SIT NACI (940-2, Hast, v2 1) naanak saachaa karahu beechaar. ||19]| Give us your true opinion, Nanak."||19]|
Afsag & HoH Wee fketfemr Il (940-2, aaa, He 1) satgur kai janmay gavan mitaa-i-aa. Born into the House of the True Guru, my wandering in reincarnation ended.
Mods IS fed He Bent I (940-2, mat, Hz 1) anhat raatay ih man laa-i-aa. My mind is attached and attuned to the unstruck sound current.
HOA! MAT Hate ABret Il (940-3, aHaat, He 1) mansaa aasaa sabad jalaa-ee. Through the Word of the Shabad, my hopes and desires have been burnt away.
gente afs fadsfa uret il (940-3, saat, He 1 gurmukh jot nirantar paa-ee. As Gurmukh, I found the Light deep within the nucleus of my self.
3 TE AS we Arg Il (940-3, araet, ne 1) tarai gun maytay khaa-ee-ai saar. Eradicating the three qualities, one eats iron.
SSA BS SIETT MQOMl (940-4, snrast, He 1) naanak taaray taaranhaar. ||20] | O Nanak, the Emancipator emancipates. ||20||
nite xB aeq seg ashi Ho AT Wa SA Il (940-4, saat, He 1) aad ka-o kavan beechaar kathee-alay sunn kahaa ghar vaaso.
"What can you tell us about the beginning? In what home did the absolute dwell then?
fomirs at Het kee Ads ule wfe aes fSeA Il (940-5, seat, He 1) gi-aan kee mudraa kavan kathee-alay ghat ghat kavan nivaaso. What are the ear-rings of spiritual wisdom? Who dwells in each and every heart?
aes at Star fas nots fat fogs@ wife vreht il (940-5, anaes, He 1) kaal kaa theegaa ki-o jalaa-ee-alay ki-o nirbha-o ghar jaa-ee-ai. How can one avoid the attack of death? How can one enter the home of fearlessness?
Hon Hsu a wine we faG se Fare Il (040-6, sna, v2 1)
sahj santokh kaa aasan jaanai ki-o chhayday bairaa-ee-ai.
How can one know the posture of intuition and contentment, and overcome one's adversaries?"
ad a Aafe gen fay nd ST fon whe JS SH Il (940-6, aaa, He 1)
gur kai sabad ha-umai bikh maarai taa nij ghar hovai vaaso.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, egotism and corruption are conquered, and then one comes to dwell in the home of the self within.
fafs afe afer fan nafe use Sea St aT VTA QUI (940-7, THA, He 1)
jin rach rachi-aa tis sabad pachhaanai naanak taa kaa daaso. ||21]||
One who realizes the Shabad of the One who created the creation - Nanak is his Slave. ||21]|
as 3 ure ag feg we ag feg gd ANT II (940-7, erat, He 1) kahaa tay aavai kahaa ih jaavai kahaa ih rahai samaa-ee. "Where did we come from? Where are we going? Where will we be absorbed?
2H Hae a Ff meee fan as fSe 3 SHreT II (940-8, erat, 2 1) ays sabad ka-o jo arthaavai tis gur til na tamaa-ee. One who reveals the meaning of this Shabad is the Guru, who has no greed at all.
fag 33 nifzas ure qonfa oat fimid i (940-9, mnract, He 1)
ki-o tatai avigatai paavai gurmukh lagai pi-aaro.
How can one find the essence of the unmanifest reality? How does one become Gurmukh, and enshrine love for the Lord?
nM AIST MMI AIS" AT Soa sas Il (940-9, raat, He 1)
aapay surtaa aapay kartaa kaho naanak beechaaro.
He Himself is consciousness, He Himself is the Creator; share with us, Nanak, your wisdom."
JAH me JAH We JOH Jd AH Il (940-10, erat, He 1)
hukmay aavai hukmay jaavai hukmay rahai samaa-ee.
By His Command we come, and by His Command we go; by His Command, we merge in absorption.
ud Ts 3 AY anes als ffs Hae UTet Il (940-10, Tat, Hs 1)
pooray gur tay saach kamaavai gat mit sabday paa-ee. ||22]|
Through the Perfect Guru, live the Truth; through the Word of the Shabad, the state of dignity is attained. ||22]|
oife ag fame shee adhd Ha fodsfs aH Shr | (940-11, sat, ve 1)
aad ka-o bismaad beechaar kathee-alay sunn nirantar vaas lee-aa.
We can only express a sense of wonder about the beginning. The absolute abided endlessly deep within Himself then.
MAGUS HS Ad famrg dtadhus ufe wife Arat Aga AMM Il (940-11, mast, He 1) akalpat mudraa gur gi-aan beechaaree-alay ghat ghat saachaa sarab jee-aa. Consider freedom from desire to be the ear-rings of the Guru's spiritual wisdom. The True Lord, the Soul of all, dwells within each and every heart.
ae svt uifzats Arey 3s fadHo AafA BI Il (940-12, east, He 1)
gur bachnee avigat samaa-ee-ai tat niranjan sahj lahai.
Through the Guru's Word, one merges in the absolute, and intuitively receives the immaculate essence.
Bsa Vit aT s Asal AS fry A UPA BI Il (940-13, anreatt, oe 1) naanak doojee kaar na karnee sayvai sikh so khoj lahai. O Nanak, that Sikh who seeks and finds the Way does not serve any other.
gan famre gat ues tha wats Ag AE Het I (940-13, mat, He 1
hukam bismaad hukam pachhaanai jee-a jugat sach jaanai so-ee.
Wonderful and amazing is His Command; He alone realizes His Command and knows the true way of life of His creatures.
ny Hfe fare de nists ATG Halt adba ASt NSM (940-14, erat, He 1)
aap mayt niraalam hovai antar saach jogee kahee-ai so-ee. ||23]|
One who eradicates his self-conceit becomes free of desire; he alone is a Yogi, who enshrines the True Lord deep within. ||23]|
wifeas faofes Cun fosae 3 Haare sor i (940-14, east, ne 1)
avigato nirmaa-il upjay nirgun tay sargun thee-aa.
From His state of absolute existence, He assumed the immaculate form; from formless, He assumed the supreme form.
Afsaqg ude UsH ue uTehy ATS Hate ANTE Shor Il (940-15, aa, He 1)
satgur parchai param pad paa-ee-ai saachai sabad samaa-ay lee-aa.
By pleasing the True Guru, the supreme status is obtained, and one is absorbed in the True Word of the Shabad.
ea AG Ay Sar We ICH EA ela Ae Il (940-16, raat, we 1)
aykay ka-o sach aykaa jaanai ha-umai doojaa door kee-aa.
He knows the True Lord as the One and only; he sends his egotism and duality far away.
A rot dd Wee use nists ane Yar shor Il (940-16, mast, He 1)
SO jogee gur sabad pachhaanai antar kamal pargaas thee-aa.
He alone is a Yogi, who realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the lotus of the heart blossoms forth within.
Meg Hd 3 Ag fas AS uists We Hee efenr | (940-17, mast, He 1)
jeevat marai taa sabh kichh soojhai antar jaanai sarab da-i-aa.
If one remains dead while yet alive, then he understands everything; he knows the Lord deep within himself, who is kind and compassionate to all.
Soa St aS fs zaret ny ues Age AMM M21 (940-17, sat, He 1) naanak taa ka-o milai vadaa-ee aap pachhaanai sarab jee-aa. ||24|| O Nanak, he is blessed with glorious greatness; he realizes himself in all beings. ||24||
Ard Cur Ate AHS Ars AS Sa HSMM Il (940-18, aaa, He 1)
saachou upjai saach samaavai saachay soochay ayk ma-i-aa.
We emerge from Truth, and merge into Truth again. The pure being merges into the One True Lord.
3d nets oes 3 UTefe BA HTS AGS sfEnr Il (940-18, Haat, He 1) jhoothay aavahi thavar na paavahi doojai aavaa ga-on bha-i-aa. The false come, and find no place of rest; in duality, they come and go.
wer age fee ag Aaet my use gufh afeur I (40-19, anaet, He 1)
aavaa ga-on mitai gur sabdee aapay parkhai bakhas la-i-aa.
This coming and going in reincarnation is ended through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Lord Himself analyzes and grants His forgiveness.
Sar see eH fermi oy sales Safer i (940-19, mat, us 1) aykaa baydan doojai bi-aapee naam rasaa-in veesri-aa. One who suffers from the disease of duality, forgets the Naam, the source of nectar.
Yat £84
Ags faq ofl gee ae & Aale A Has SfeMr I (941-1, meet, we 1)
so boojhai jis aap bujhaa-ay gur kai sabad so mukat bha-i-aa.
He alone understands, whom the Lord inspires to understand. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one is liberated.
BSA SS SISTST ISH SA UTTMt Quill (941-2, Tnaat, we 1) naanak taaray taaranhaaraa ha-umai doojaa parhari-aa. ||25] |
O Nanak, the Emancipator emancipates one who drives out egotism and duality. [|25]|
Houta 3B AH at OE I (941-2, rast, Hs 1) manmukh bhoolai jam kee kaan. The self-willed manmukhs are deluded, under the shadow of death.
ud Ug Hd TS TTS Il (941-2, mat, ve 1) par ghar johai haanay haan. They look into the homes of others, and lose.
HoHfe sof se Sars i (941-3, oat, v2 1) manmukh bharam bhavai baybaan. The manmukhs are confused by doubt, wandering in the wilderness.
eHrafar HA HAZ HALE Il (941-3, THe, He 1)
vaymaarag moosai mantar masaan.
Having lost their way, they are plundered; they chant their mantras at cremation grounds.
Hae 6 wl Be AHS I (941-3, east, He 1) sabad na cheenai lavai kubaan. They do not think of the Shabad; instead, they utter obscenities.
Soa ATS IS AY ATE NEM (941-4, Hat, He 1) naanak saach ratay sukh jaan. ||26|| O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Truth know peace. ||26]|
aanfe AS at eS urTS | (941-4, meat, He 1) gurmukh saachay kaa bha-o paavai. The Gurmukh lives in the Fear of God, the True Lord.
Tanfy wat ways wars |) (941-4, mat, Hs gurmukh banee agharh gharhaavai. Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, the Gurmukh refines the unrefined.
aanty fess ofa Te WS Il (941-5, oat, v2 1) gurmukh nirmal har gun gaavai. The Gurmukh sings the immaculate, Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Tafa ufez USH UT UTS Il (941-5, THAT, He 1) gurmukh pavitar param pad paavai. The Gurmukh attains the supreme, sanctified status.
aante df sft afs famre i 041-5, mat, ne 1) gurmukh rom rom har Dhi-aavai. The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord with every hair of his body.
Soa TIHfe As AHS MQM (941-6, THAT, He 1)
naanak gurmukh saach samaavai. ||27]|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh merges in Truth. ||27]|
Tenfy usd Fe seat | (941-6, saat, we 1) gurmukh parchai bayd beechaaree. The Gurmukh is pleasing to the True Guru; this is contemplation on the Vedas.
aTenfy usd sdht Sea Il (941-6, onraat, v2 1) gurmukh parchai taree-ai taaree. Pleasing the True Guru, the Gurmukh is carried across.
aenfy usd A Aafe famrat il (941-7, sat, He 1) gurmukh parchai so sabad gi-aanee. Pleasing the True Guru, the Gurmukh receives the spiritual wisdom of the Shabad.
aenfy usd visa fafa wet | (941-7, east, He 1) gurmukh parchai antar biDh jaanee. Pleasing the True Guru, the Gurmukh comes to know the path within.
Tanta ure wiese wns | (941-7, aaa, He 1) gurmukh paa-ee-ai alakh apaar. The Gurmukh attains the unseen and infinite Lord.
SSA THY Hats EMT HACI (941-8, sat, He 1) naanak gurmukh mukat du-aar. ||28] | O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the door of liberation. ||28]|
aenfy mae axe state il (941-8, erat, v2 1) gurmukh akath kathai beechaar. The Gurmukh speaks the unspoken wisdom.
aan faad Ausefs il (941-8, east, He 1) gurmukh nibhai saparvaar. In the midst of his family, the Gurmukh lives a spiritual life.
aanty wm nists fumrfs i 4-9, mat, Hs gurmukh japee-ai antar pi-aar. The Gurmukh lovingly meditates deep within.
qanfy uh Rafe orate il (941-9, sat, He 1) gurmukh paa-ee-ai sabad achaar. The Gurmukh obtains the Shabad, and righteous conduct.
Rafe sfe we waret Il (941-9, anaat, He 1) sabad bhayd jaanai jaanaa-ee. He knows the mystery of the Shabad, and inspires others to know it.
Soa ICH As AHTET QCM (941-10, THAT, He 1) naanak ha-umai jaal samaa-ee. ||29]|| O Nanak, burning away his ego, he merges in the Lord. ||29]|
Tanfy cast ATS ATT Il (941-10, oat, He 1) gurmukh Dhartee saachai saajee. The True Lord fashioned the earth for the sake of the Gurmukhs.
fan ufa Gufs wufs A at Il (941-10, ora, He 1) tis meh opat khapat so baajee. There, he set in motion the play of creation and destruction.
qd a Rafe gu ga ote Il (941-11, erat, He 1)
gur kai sabad rapai rang laa-ay.
One who is filled with the Word of the Guru's Shabad enshrines love for the Lord. Afs 33@ ufs fAG wie ATE I (941-11, sas, He
saach rata-o pat si-o ghar jaa-ay. Attuned to the Truth, he goes to his home with honor.
Ary Hae fae ufs adt ure] Il (941-11, east, He 1) saach sabad bin pat nahee paavai. Without the True Word of the Shabad, no one receives honor.
Soa fag ore fas wfs ANTS BOM (941-12, Hat, He 1) naanak bin naavai ki-o saach samaavai. ||30|| O Nanak, without the Name, how can one be absorbed in Truth? ||30]||
aanfa mime frat Afs gut | (941-12, erat, He 1) gurmukh asat siDhee sabh buDhee. The Gurmukh obtains the eight miraculous spiritual powers, and all wisdom.
Tents sens sd Av AUT I (941-12, at, He gurmukh bhavjal taree-ai sach suDhee. The Gurmukh crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, and obtains true understanding.
dente Ag wun fafa WE Il (041-13, east, He 1) gurmukh sar apsar biDh jaanai. The Gurmukh knows the ways of truth and untruth.
aanfy ustests safeafs uere il (941-13, mast, He 1) gurmukh parvirat narvirat pachhaanai. The Gurmukh knows worldliness and renunciation.
anf arg ufg BSrs Il (941-14, at, He 1) gurmukh taaray paar utaaray. The Gurmukh crosses over, and carries others across as well.
Soa Tafa Aafe fSASS SAU (941-14, Hat, He 1) naanak gurmukh sabad nistaaray. ||31]|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is emancipated through the Shabad. ||31]|
oH TS ICH ATE II (941-14, mat, He 1) naamay raatay ha-umai jaa-ay. Attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, egotism is dispelled.
oty g3 Afs gd AME Il (941-15, anaet, He 1)
naam ratay sach rahay samaa-ay. Attuned to the Naam, they remain absorbed in the True Lord.
oth gS Aa Fats ses I (941-15, mat, He naam ratay jog jugat beechaar. Attuned to the Naam, they contemplate the Way of Yoga.
oth gS uefa HY BMT” Il (941-15, Haat, He 1 naam ratay paavahi mokh du-aar. Attuned to the Naam, they find the door of liberation.
of 33 fase Ast SE II (941-15, oreat, He 1) naam ratay taribhavan sojhee ho-ay. Attuned to the Naam, they understand the three worlds.
Soa STH IS AST AY SE NS2il (941-16, mat, He 1) naanak naam ratay sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||32|| O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, eternal peace is found. ||32| |
of a3 fra ante df& i (941-16, enact, He 1) naam ratay siDh gosat ho-ay. Attuned to the Naam, they attain Sidh Gosht - conversation with the Siddhas.
of gS Ae su SE I 41-17, mat, He 1) naam ratay sadaa tap ho-ay. Attuned to the Naam, they practice intense meditation forever.
otH JS Ay Adel ATS Il (941-17, sat, Hz 1) naam ratay sach karnee saar. Attuned to the Naam, they live the true and excellent lifestyle.
ot IS Te famre ses il (941-17, wast, ue 1) naam ratay gun gi-aan beechaar. Attuned to the Naam, they contemplate the Lord's virtues and spiritual wisdom.
fag oS 38 AS Sarg Il (941-17, mat, He 1) bin naavai bolai sabh vaykaar. Without the Name, all that is spoken is useless.
sod oH ws fsa aS Aas BSI (941-18, THA, He 1) naanak naam ratay tin ka-o jaikaar. ||33]|| O Nanak, attuned to the Naam, their victory is celebrated. ||33]|
ud Ts 3 oH ufeur ATS Il (941-18, Hast, He 1) pooray gur tay naam paa-i-aa jaa-ay. Through the Perfect Guru, one obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
na Fats Afs Jd ANTE Il (941-19, onreet, He 1) jog jugat sach rahai samaa-ay. The Way of Yoga is to remain absorbed in Truth.
Wad Hfo Hat sane Afsnrat fent whe il (941-19, erat, He 1) baarah meh jogee bharmaa-ay sani-aasee chhi-a chaar. The Yogis wander in the twelve schools of Yoga; the Sannyaasis in six and four.
ad a Rafe A ufe Ate AUS HY BM” Il (941-19, ae, He 1)
gur kai sabad jo mar jeevai so paa-ay mokh du-aar.
One who remains dead while yet alive, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, finds the door of liberation.
UST *y2
fag Fae Afs eH wat tug fee stata i (942-1, mast, ue 1)
bin sabdai sabh doojai laagay daykhhu ridai beechaar.
Without the Shabad, all are attached to duality. Contemplate this in your heart, and see.
Soa Zs A Zoo frat Ag sor Ss og Sell (942-1, mast, He 1)
naanak vaday say vadbhaagee jinee sach rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||34||
O Nanak, blessed and very fortunate are those who keep the True Lord enshrined in their hearts. ||34||
Tenfy ae wd fee OE il 042-2, erat, v2 1) gurmukh ratan lahai liv laa-ay. The Gurmukh obtains the jewel, lovingly focused on the Lord.
Tenfy use Jaq ASE Il (942-2, enraat, v2 1) gurmukh parkhai ratan subhaa-ay. The Gurmukh intuitively recognizes the value of this jewel.
Tafa Arat ars SHE | (942-3, arrest, He 1) gurmukh saachee kaar kamaa-ay. The Gurmukh practices Truth in action.
Tafa AMS Ho Ustrf=e Il (942-3, anrast, He 1) gurmukh saachay man patee-aa-ay. The mind of the Gurmukh is pleased with the True Lord.
Tanfe nese wae fSq sre Il (942-3, oat, He 1) gurmukh alakh lakhaa-ay tis bhaavai. The Gurmukh sees the unseen, when it pleases the Lord.
Sod WSHfy FS WS WBUIl (942-4, THA, He 1) naanak gurmukh chot na khaavai. ||35] | O Nanak, the Gurmukh does not have to endure punishment. ||35]||
aaHfe an ee fEAarS Il (942-4, anraat, He 1) gurmukh naam daan isnaan. The Gurmukh is blessed with the Name, charity and purification.
aanty oat Hata fore il (942-4, aH, He 1) gurmukh laagai sahj Dhi-aan. The Gurmukh centers his meditation on the celestial Lord.
TaHfy urs VITT HS Il (942-5, Tat, v2 1) gurmukh paavai dargeh maan. The Gurmukh obtains honor in the Court of the Lord.
anf 3B SHS UIT Il (942-5, mat, He 1) gurmukh bha-o bhanjan parDhaan. The Gurmukh obtains the Supreme Lord, the Destroyer of fear.
aaHfy Asat AST ITE Il (942-5, aHat, ue 1) gurmukh karnee kaar karaa-ay. The Gurmukh does good deeds, an inspires others to do so.
Sea THY Afs fore SEN (942-6, rast, v2 1) naanak gurmukh mayl milaa-ay. ||36| | O Nanak, the Gurmukh unites in the Lord's Union. ||36||
qoute AAS fAfyfs Fe i (942-6, mraat, He 1) gurmukh saastar simrit bayd. The Gurmukh understands the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Vedas.
aanfa ure ufe wie Se il (942-6, mast, v2 1) gurmukh paavai ghat ghat bhayd. The Gurmukh knows the secrets of each and every heart.
qanfa Sa feda Te] Il (942-7, ona, He 1) gurmukh vair viroDh gavaavai. The Gurmukh eliminates hate and envy.
Tanta Aaet aes fev] i (942-7, onraat, He 1) gurmukh saglee ganat mitaavai. The Gurmukh erases all accounting.
Tonfs TH OH fat TST Il (942-7, Hast, He 1) gurmukh raam naam rang raataa. The Gurmukh is imbued with love for the Lord's Name.
SSA TSH MAH USTST NBII (942-8, Hat, He 1) naanak gurmukh khasam pachhaataa. ||37]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes his Lord and Master. ||37| |
fae ad San wires ATE I (942-8, enraat, He 1) bin gur bharmai aavai jaa-ay. Without the Guru, one wanders, coming and going in reincarnation.
fag ad wre 6 uset aE Il (942-8, arast, He 1) bin gur ghaal na pav-ee thaa-ay. Without the Guru, one's work is useless.
fag Te Honor mifs STE Il (942-9, ora, Hs 1) bin gur manoo-aa at dolaa-ay. Without the Guru, the mind is totally unsteady.
fas as fgufs odt fag uf 1 (942-9, mat, ue 1) bin gur taripat nahee bikh khaa-ay. Without the Guru, one is unsatisfied, and eats poison.
fae aa faring 3A Hfe Se] I (942-9, oat, v2 1) bin gur bisee-ar dasai mar vaat. Without the Guru, one is stung by the poisonous snake of Maya, and dies.
Soa Td fas we wre iScil (942-10, mat, He 1) naanak gur bin ghaatay ghaat. ||38]|| O Nanak without the Guru, all is lost. ||38]|
fan ad fxs fon ufs Bars II (942-10, erat, He 1) jis gur milai tis paar utaarai. One who meets the Guru is carried across.
wae He afe fests Il (942-10, enact, He 1) avgan maytai gun nistaarai. His sins are erased, and he is emancipated through virtue.
Hats Ho" AY ad Ase sets il (942-11, mast, us 1) mukat mahaa sukh gur sabad beechaar.
The supreme peace of liberation is attained, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Dante ae o irs os i (942-11, Haat, He 1) gurmukh kaday na aavai haar. The Gurmukh is never defeated.
36 deat fed HS FEATS Il (942-11, east, He 1) tan hatrhee ih man vanjaaraa. In the store of the body, this mind is the merchant;
Sa AJA AM Sure [Stil (942-12, Hast, He 1)
naanak sehjay sach vaapaaraa. ||39|| O Nanak, it deals intuitively in Truth. ||39]|
aenty aifag AS fas i (942-12, erat, nH 1) gurmukh baa‘Dhi-o sayt biDhaatai. The Gurmukh is the bridge, built by the Architect of Destiny.
Ba Get SI ASU Il (942-12, Teast, we 1) lankaa lootee dait santaapai. The demons of passion which plundered Sri Lanka - the body - have been conquered.
oHdfe HfaS mts TSS i (942-13, wHat, v2 1) raamchand maari-o ah raavan. Ram Chand - the mind - has slaughtered Raawan - pride;
3e asus Tonfe usetes Il (942-13, oat, He 1) bhayd babheekhan gurmukh parchaa-in. the Gurmukh understands the secret revealed by Babheekhan.
asHty Atets ue SS Il (942-13, Haat, He 1) gurmukh saa-ir paahan taaray. The Gurmukh carries even stones across the ocean.
aenty afe Sam Burd gol (942-14, saat, He 1) gurmukh kot taytees uDhaaray. ||40]| The Gurmukh saves millions of people. ||40]|
TSH Fa wTSE ATE Il (942-14, Tat, vs 1) gurmukh chookai aavan jaan. The comings and goings in reincarnation are ended for the Gurmukh.
TH VIaTT UTS HE Il (942-14, THA, He 1) gurmukh dargeh paavai maan. The Gurmukh is honored in the Court of the Lord.
Tents AS us USS I (942-14, mat, ve 1) gurmukh khotay kharay pachhaan. The Gurmukh distinguishes the true from the false.
aanfy wat Aafa fore il (942-15, sat, He 1) gurmukh laagai sahj Dhi-aan. The Gurmukh focuses his meditation on the celestial Lord.
aanfy esa frefs AME II (942-15, mast, He 1) gurmukh dargeh sifat samaa-ay. In the Court of the Lord, the Gurmukh is absorbed in His Praises.
Soa ToHfe Fa o uf= sai (942-15, mat, He 1)
naanak gurmukh banDh na paa-ay. ||41|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is not bound by bonds. ||41]|
aanfa an fedaa ure Il (942-16, mat, He 1) gurmukh naam niranjan paa-ay. The Gurmukh obtains the Name of the Immaculate Lord.
Tanfy IH Aafe ABE Il (942-16, mat, He 1 gurmukh ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. Through the Shabad, the Gurmukh burns away his ego.
Tate AS A TE WES Il (942-16, wast, He 1) gurmukh saachay kay gun gaa-ay. The Gurmukh sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
aaHfe ATS Id ANE | (942-17, Haat, He 1) gurmukh saachai rahai samaa-ay. The Gurmukh remains absorbed in the True Lord.
aanfa vfs oth ufs SSH afe il 42-17, anaet, Hz 1) gurmukh saach naam pat ootam ho-ay. Through the True Name, the Gurmukh is honored and exalted.
Soa TIHfe Aas see at ASt SE i192 (942-17, rast, He 1) naanak gurmukh sagal bhavan kee sojhee ho-ay. ||42|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands all the worlds. ||42||
ATE HS ACE HES SH Il (942-18, maa, He 1) kavan mool kavan mat vaylaa. "What is the root, the source of all? What teachings hold for these times?
3T AE TT fAA a FT GH Il (942-18, araat, v2 1) tayraa kavan guroo jis kaa too chaylaa. Who is your guru? Whose disciple are you?
ACE AAG JIT Sg Il (942-19, Haat, v2 1) kavan kathaa lay rahhu niraalay. What is that speech, by which you remain unattached?
3H Sod HET SH WS Il (942-19, raat, He 1) bolai naanak sunhu tum baalay. Listen to what we say, O Nanak, you little boy.
SA ag at efe ate Il (942-19, anaat, He 1) ays kathaa kaa day-ay beechaar. Give us your opinion on what we have said.
Sane Aafe SuwresTg iSSll (942-19, aaa, He 1) bhavjal sabad langhaavanhaar. ||43]| How can the Shabad carry us across the terrifying world-ocean?"||43] |
Ua kgs
ude mds Afsagd Hfs SH Il (943-1, THaat, He 1) pavan arambh satgur mat vaylaa. From the air came the beginning. This is the age of the True Guru's Teachings.
Hae dg Asfs als For i (943-1, sua, He 1)
sabad guroo surat Dhun chaylaa.
The Shabad is the Guru, upon whom I lovingly focus my consciousness; I am the chaylaa, the disciple.
Maa at B JIS fears Il (943-1, mast, ve 1) akath kathaa lay raha-o niraalaa. Speaking the Unspoken Speech, I remain unattached.
SOR Ata Afar Ts GUTS il (943-2, mast, He 1) naanak jug jug gur gopaalaa. O Nanak, throughout the ages, the Lord of the World is my Guru.
a Ade fas aa Stara | (943-2, snaat, ue 1) ayk sabad jit kathaa veechaaree. I contemplate the sermon of the Shabad, the Word of the One God.
aanfy en niafs feed sei (943-2, east, He 1) gurmukh ha-umai agan nivaaree. ||44|| The Gurmukh puts out the fire of egotism. ||44]|
He & US fas ureha Arg il (43-3, mat, ve 1) main kay dant ki-o khaa-ee-ai saar. "With teeth of wax, how can one chew iron?
fis dee WE A APE nT Il (943-3, anrast, Hs 1) jit garab jaa-ay so kavan aahaar. What is that food, which takes away pride?
foe at we Hed nafs fuss Il (943-4, mast, He 1) hivai kaa ghar mandar agan piraahan. How can one live in the palace, the home of snow, wearing robes of fire?
AS TS fT Id MIS Il (943-4, Tat, He 1) kavan gufaa jit rahai avaahan. Where is that cave, within which one may remain unshaken?
fez Qs fan aG wfs mS Il (943-4, nat, He it ut kis ka-o jaan samaavai. Who should we know to be pervading here and there?
ae famig Ho Hofs ANTS IISUll (43-5, THAT, He 1) kavan Dhi-aan man maneh samaavai. ||45]| What is that meditation, which leads the mind to be absorbed in itself?"||45] |
JG IG HH feag FS Il (943-5, erat, He 1) ha-o ha-o mai mai vichahu khovai. Eradicating egotism and individualism from within,
SS SS SAX
on He Sa Je Il (943-5, THaSt, He 1) doojaa maytai ayko hovai. and erasing duality, the mortal becomes one with God.
Ad ATS HOHY AST Il (943-6, THast, He 1) jag karrhaa manmukh gaavaar. The world is difficult for the foolish, self-willed manmukh;
Rae anreby urea ATT ll (943-6, oat, He 1) sabad kamaa-ee-ai khaa-ee-ai saar. practicing the Shabad, one chews iron.
nists wots Sat WS Il (943-6, wHast, He 1) antar baahar ayko jaanai. Know the One Lord, inside and out.
Soa Mats Hd AfsaT A SS MEI (943-6, THast, He 1) naanak agan marai satgur kai bhaanai. ||46]| O Nanak, the fire is quenched, through the Pleasure of the True Guru's Will. ||46]|
Ae 3 TST ae feerd il (943-7, erat, 2 1) sach bhai raataa garab nivaarai. Imbued with the True Fear of God, pride is taken away;
Sa AST ASS ters Il (943-7, sHaat, v2 1) ayko jaataa sabad veechaarai. realize that He is One, and contemplate the Shabad.
Had ZA Ay nists dor | (943-7, mat, He sabad vasai sach antar hee-aa. With the True Shabad abiding deep within the heart,
36 Ho Ase da dai i (943-8, east, ne 1) tan man seetal rang rangee-aa. the body and mind are cooled and soothed, and colored with the Lord's Love.
any au fay wrafs fers il (043-8, mat, He 1) kaam kroDh bikh agan nivaaray. The fire of sexual desire, anger and corruption is quenched.
SSA SE Seta fimirs SII (943-8, Tass, He 1) naanak nadree nadar pi-aaray. ||47]|| O Nanak, the Beloved bestows His Glance of Grace. ||47] |
ae Hfy de foe we atfeur Il (943-9, mat, He 1) kavan mukh chand hivai ghar chhaa-i-aa. "The moon of the mind is cool and dark; how is it enlightened?
aes Hf AeA SU Suen | (943-9, Tat, Hs 1) kavan mukh sooraj tapai tapaa-i-aa. How does the sun blaze so brilliantly?
ae Hfa are Aus fez Fs Il (943-9, erst, He 1) kavan mukh kaal johat nit rahai. How can the constant watchful gaze of Death be turned away?
ae af aonfa ufs ad i (043-10, eet, He 1) kavan buDh gurmukh pat rahai. By what understanding is the honor of the Gurmukh preserved?
ASS AT A AS Aus Il (943-10, mat, He 1) kavan joDh jo kaal sanghaarai. Who is the warrior, who conquers Death?
3 weal soa stars Stil (943-10, saat, x2 1) bolai banee naanak beechaarai. ||48] | Give us your thoughtful reply, O Nanak."||48] |
Rag amas AfA Afs yrs | (943-11, Hae, He 1) sabad bhaakhat sas jot apaaraa. Giving voice to the Shabad, the moon of the mind is illuminated with infinity.
AMA fs Ae =A fe nifamrar i (43-11, east, He 1) sas ghar soor vasai mitai anDhi-aaraa. When the sun dwells in the house of the moon, the darkness is dispelled.
AY @Y AH afd SH MOST Il (943-11, aHaat, He 1)
sukh dukh sam kar naam aDhaaraa.
Pleasure and pain are just the same, when one takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
mma ute BsrseT a Il (943-12, aHast, v8 1) aapay paar utaaranhaaraa. He Himself saves, and carries us across.
Gd ude Ho Afs ANTE I (943-12, saat, He 1) gur parchai man saach samaa-ay. With faith in the Guru, the mind merges in Truth,
ySsts SHA AH S UTS Stil (943-12, maa, we 1) paranvat naanak kaal na khaa-ay. ||49|| and then, prays Nanak, one is not consumed by Death. ||49]|
oH 33 AS ot fafs AT I (943-13, Hast, He 1)
naam tat sabh hee sir jaapai.
The essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is known to be the most exalted and excellent of all.
fag oS By ATH ASM Il (943-13, ona, He 1) bin naavai dukh kaal santaapai. Without the Name, one is afflicted by pain and death.
33 35 fe He HS I 043-13, oat, He 1) tato tat milai man maanai. When one's essence merges into the essence, the mind is satisfied and fulfilled.
em ate fears ute mir II (943-14, arast, He 1D) doojaa jaa-ay ikat ghar aanai. Duality is gone, and one enters into the home of the One Lord.
FH USS Tae WdH Il (943-14, THA, ve 1) bolai pavnaa gagan garjai. The breath blows across the sky of the Tenth Gate and vibrates.
Sod fesse fuss AIA IUOll (943-14, east, He 1) naanak nihchal milan sahjai. ||50] | O Nanak, the mortal then intuitively meets the eternal, unchanging Lord. ||50]||
nists HS wots HS fesse HS HAS Il (943-15, THA, He 1)
antar suna™ baahar suna™ taribhavan sunn masu‘na”.
The absolute Lord is deep within; the absolute Lord is outside us as well. The absolute Lord totally fills the three worlds.
Bea Hd A Sd WES STAG uy 5 US Il (943-15, aHaat, He 1) cha-uthay sunnai jo nar jaanai taa ka-o paap na pu‘na”. One who knows the Lord in the fourth state, is not subject to virtue or vice.
ufe ufe Ho at Ae 3 1 orf use fade FE Il (943-16, ona, He 1) ghat ghat sunn kaa jaanai bhay-o. aad purakh niranjan day-o.
One who knows the mystery of God the Absolute, who pervades each and every heart, knows the Primal Being, the Immaculate Divine Lord.
A HO OH fadHe FST Il (943-16, mat, He 1) jo jan naam niranjan raataa. That humble being who is imbued with the Immaculate Naam,
Soa ASt use faarst ual (943-16, aH, He 1) naanak so-ee purakh biDhaataa. ||51|| O Nanak, is himself the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||51]|
Hd HO Ad AS et Il (943-17, aeat, He 1) sunno sunn kahai sabh ko-ee. "Everyone speaks of the Absolute Lord, the unmanifest void.
WSds HS AT S Tet Il (943-17, Hast, He 1) anhat sunn kahaa tay ho-ee. How can one find this absolute void?
Mods Hfs IS A AA Il (943-17, wHat, He 1) anhat sunn ratay say kaisay. Who are they, who are attuned to this absolute void?"
fan 3 Cun fSA dt AA I 643-18, Hast, He 1) jis tay upjay tis hee jaisay. They are like the Lord, from whom they originated.
6fe waft o Hats © refs Aa Il (943-18, anaat, He 1)
o-ay janam na mareh na aavahi jaahi. They are not born, they do not die; they do not come and go.
SOA TSH HS AHS tT UII (943-18, wHast, He 1) naanak gurmukh man samjhaahi. ||52|| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs instruct their minds. ||52||
3G Ad AST TAS UT Il (943-19, Tne, HE 1)
na-o sar subhar dasvai pooray.
By practicing control over the nine gates, one attains perfect control over the Tenth Gate.
BI WSIS Ho Sefs FT Il (943-19, THast, He 1) tah anhat sunn vajaavah tooray. There, the unstruck sound current of the absolute Lord vibrates and resounds.
Ard oe Sf TAT I (943-19, oat, He 1) saachai raachay daykh hajooray. Behold the True Lord ever-present, and merge with Him.
ufe wie Arg stot sIUT Il (943-19, erat, He 1) ghat ghat saach rahi-aa bharpooray. The True Lord is pervading and permeating each and every heart.
Ua gg
aust seat usa df Il (944-1, ona, ne 1) guptee banee pargat ho-ay. The hidden Bani of the Word is revealed.
Soa Udi BE AG AS USI (944-1, eat, He 1) naanak parakh la-ay sach so-ay. ||53]|| O Nanak, the True Lord is revealed and known. ||53]|
Hon ae fish Ae JS il (944-1, ona, we 1) sahj bhaa-ay milee-ai sukh hovai. Meeting with the Lord through intuition and love, peace is found.
TaHfe ATH Ste S AS il (944-2, ora, nz 1) gurmukh jaagai need na sovai. The Gurmukh remains awake and aware; he does not fall sleep.
Ho Age mudufe ard il (944-2, oat, He 1) sunn sabad aprampar Dhaarai. He enshrines the unlimited, absolute Shabad deep within.
ads Has Hale feAss il (944-2, mat, ue 1) kahtay mukat sabad nistaarai. Chanting the Shabad, he is liberated, and saves others as well.
ad at etme A Afs JS Il (944-3, ast, He 1) gur kee deekhi-aa say sach raatay. Those who practice the Guru's Teachings are attuned to the Truth.
Som miry aee fhe odt STS USI (944-3, Trraat, He 1)
naanak aap gavaa-ay milan nahee bharaatay. ||54]|
O Nanak, those who eradicate their self-conceit meet with the Lord; they do not remain separated by doubt. ||54] |
aafa vere A fas off Il 044-3, oat, He 1) kubuDh chavaavai so kit thaa-ay. "Where is that place, where evil thoughts are destroyed?
fag 33 5 FS set ae I (944-4, anraat, we 1) ki-o tat na boojhai chotaa khaa-ay. The mortal does not understand the essence of reality; why must he suffer in pain?"
aH efe aa afe o ae Il (944-4, ona, He 1) jam dar baaDhay ko-ay na raakhai. No one can save one who is tied up at Death's door.
faa Hae ot ufS APE I (44-4, ast, He 1) bin sabdai naahee pat saakhai. Without the Shabad, no one has any credit or honor.
fag afs xs urs ur” Il (944-5, Tract, Hs 1) ki-o kar boojhai paavai paar. "How can one obtain understanding and cross over?"
SOA HOF & FS TST NUUIl (944-5, anraat, He 1) naanak manmukh na bujhai gavaar. ||55|| O Nanak, the foolish self-willed manmukh does not understand. ||55]|
aafa fre aa Age stefs i (944-5, mat, ne 1) kubuDh mitai gur sabad beechaar. Evil thoughts are erased, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afsag SS HY VMs Il (944-6, aa, He 1) satgur bhaytai mokh du-aar. Meeting with the True Guru, the door of liberation is found.
33 0 US Hon Ale ATE II (944-6, mma, He 1)
tat na cheenai manmukh jal jaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh does not understand the essence of reality, and is burnt to ashes.
vans feefs dat we Il (944-6, arash, He 1) durmat vichhurh chotaa khaa-ay. His evil-mindedness separates him from the Lord, and he suffers.
HS JAH AS Te famrs il (944-7, saat, we 1)
maanai hukam sabhay gun gi-aan.
Accepting the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he is blessed with all virtues and spiritual wisdom.
SOA UIT UTS HTS NUEM (944-7, oat, He 1)
naanak dargeh paavai maan. ||56|| O Nanak, he is honored in the Court of the Lord. ||56]|
ATS Tus UG us dle il (944-7, saat, He 1) saach vakhar Dhan palai ho-ay. One who possesses the merchandise, the wealth of the True Name,
nif sd ad St APE i (944-7, arrest, we 1) aap tarai taaray bhee so-ay. crosses over, and carries others across with him as well.
Hota 3st gs uls aE Il (944-8, mast, Hs 1) sahj rataa boojhai pat ho-ay. One who intuitively understands, and is attuned to the Lord, is honored.
at ot atts ad 3 OE Il (944-8, anast, we 1) taa kee keemat karai na ko-ay. No one can estimate his worth.
Ag fa 3g stot ANTE Il (944-8, anrast, He 1) jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ay. Wherever I look, I see the Lord permeating and pervading.
soa uty ud AY STE UDI (944-9, anaat, He 1) naanak paar parai sach bhaa-ay. ||57|| O Nanak, through the Love of the True Lord, one crosses over. ||57| |
H Aad a ag aq adhd fas sdb Sew AAS Il (944-9, ona, He 1)
so sabad kaa kahaa vaas kathee-alay jit taree-ai bhavjal sansaaro.
"Where is the Shabad said to dwell? What will carry us across the terrifying world- ocean?
3 AS nia set adn fsa ag aeq MOS II (944-10, mnraat, Hs 1)
tarai sat angul vaa-ee kahee-ai tis kaho kavan aDhaaro.
The breath, when exhaled, extends out ten finger lengths; what is the support of the breath?
sa NA
38 3S mnAfag de fas afe nisy Bae | (944-10, ona, v2 1)
bolai khaylai asthir hovai ki-o kar alakh lakhaa-ay.
Speaking and playing, how can one be stable and steady? How can the unseen be seen?"
Afs Aomit Ay Soa USS MUS HS AHS Il (944-11, Tat, ve 1) sun Su-aamee sach naanak paranvai apnay man samjhaa-ay. Listen, O master; Nanak prays truly. Instruct your own mind.
qanfy nae vfs fee oat afs sedt nfs fresre Il (944-11, enract, He 1)
gurmukh sabday sach liv laagai kar nadree mayl milaa-ay.
The Gurmukh is lovingly attuned to the True Shabad. Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He unites us in His Union.
mint Bret wT SST UT She AHS UCI (944-12, Tre, He 1) aapay daanaa aapay beenaa poorai bhaag samaa-ay. ||58|| He Himself is all-knowing and all-seeing. By perfect destiny, we merge in Him. ||58]|
H Aad a fadsfa aR med AT te 30 Het Il (944-12, ae, He
so sabad ka-o nirantar vaas alkha™ jah daykhaa tah so-ee.
That Shabad dwells deep within the nucleus of all beings. God is invisible; wherever I look, there I see Him.
USS AT SH HS fSetAT nia AS Ud At Il (944-13, Hast, He 1)
pavan kaa vaasaa sunn nivaasaa akal kalaa Dhar so-ee.
The air is the dwelling place of the absolute Lord. He has no qualities; He has all qualities.
dels Ad Ade we Hfs ZA fess SIN TSS Il (944-13, mast, He 1)
nadar karay sabad ghat meh vasai vichahu bharam gavaa-ay.
When He bestows His Glance of Grace, the Shabad comes to abide within the heart, and doubt is eradicated from within.
36 HO foane fans seal oH ifs SAS II (944-14, mnrast, He 1)
tan man nirmal nirmal banee naamo man vasaa-ay.
The body and mind become immaculate, through the Immaculate Word of His Bani. Let His Name be enshrined in your mind.
Hafe ag serrag sd fs SS Sa WE Il (944-14, Trash, Hs 1)
sabad guroo bhavsaagar taree-ai it ut ayko jaanai.
The Shabad is the Guru, to carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. Know the One Lord alone, here and hereafter.
fade 2do Sdt afeor went area ASE UST NUCH (944-15, THAT, He 1) chihan varan nahee chhaa-i-aa maa-i-aa naanak sabad pachhaanai. ||59]| He has no form or color, shadow or illusion; O Nanak, realize the Shabad. ||59]||
3 AS vige Tet niSg AS AM MITTS Il (944-16, eet, He 1)
tarai sat angul vaa-ee a-oDhoo sunn sach aahaaro.
O reclusive hermit, the True, Absolute Lord is the support of the exhaled breath, which extends out ten finger lengths.
Tenfy #8 sa fads TS ney wns | 44-16, sat, v2 1)
gurmukh bolai tat birolai cheenai alakh apaaro.
The Gurmukh speaks and churns the essence of reality, and realizes the unseen, infinite Lord.
3 Ve He Aa AS T fe Fa mda Il (944-17, Tat, we 1)
tarai gun maytai sabad vasaa-ay taa man chookai ahankaaro.
Eradicating the three qualities, he enshrines the Shabad within, and then, his mind is rid of egotism.
nists sofa Sa We st ofa at wa fumrd Il (944-17, oat, we 1) antar baahar ayko jaanai taa har naam lagai pi-aaro. Inside and out, he knows the One Lord alone; he is in love with the Name of the Lord.
HaHa fear fiiger gS FT mm nis WATE Il (944-18, Tat, He 1)
sukhmanaa irhaa pingulaa boojhai jaa aapay alakh lakhaa-ay.
He understands the Sushmana, Ida and Pingala, when the unseen Lord reveals Himself.
ood fag 3 Cufs Are Afsas Hate AHS NEON (944-18, THAT, He 1)
naanak tihu tay oopar saachaa satgur sabad samaa-ay. ||60||
O Nanak, the True Lord is above these three energy channels. Through the Word, the Shabad of the True Guru, one merges with Him. ||60]|
Ho a HG usg AMS USGS AT FA wet Il (944-19, ora, vs 1) man kaa jee-o pavan kathee-alay pavan kahaa ras khaa-ee. "The air is said to be the soul of the mind. But what does the air feed on?
fomirs ot HET tea mB faa at eG AHF I (944-19, Hat, He 1)
gi-aan kee mudraa kavan a-oDhoo siDh kee kavan kamaa-ee.
What is the way of the spiritual teacher, and the reclusive hermit? What is the occupation of the Siddha?"
Ua gu
fag Fae 3A 3 ure my IH fimrA o AST I (945-1, eet, we 1)
bin sabdai ras na aavai a-oDhoo ha-umai pi-aas na jaa-ee.
Without the Shabad, the essence does not come, O hermit, and the thirst of egotism does not depart.
Rafe 33 vifts oA ufeor AS Td nrwret Il (945-1, Treat, He 1)
sabad ratay amrit ras paa-i-aa saachay rahay aghaa-ee.
Imbued with the Shabad, one finds the ambrosial essence, and remains fulfilled with the True Name.
aze aft fra wnfag adh fas safe feusA it (945-2, anraet, He 1)
kavan buDh jit asthir rahee-ai kit bhojan tariptaasai.
"What is that wisdom, by which one remains steady and stable? What food brings satisfaction?"
ood EU AY AH afd AU Afsae 3 aH S TA MEU (945-2, rae, He 1)
naanak dukh sukh sam kar jaapai satgur tay kaal na garaasai. ||61]||
O Nanak, when one looks upon pain and pleasure alike, through the True Guru, then he is not consumed by Death. ||61||
dfa & ast ofA St HST I (945-3, THaat, He 1) rang na raataa ras nahee maataa. If one is not imbued with the Lord's Love, nor intoxicated with His subtle essence,
fae ad Aad Als af SST Il (945-3, mma, He 1)
bin gur sabdai jal bal taataa.
without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is frustrated, and consumed by his own inner fire.
fiz o ahmr Age 3 attr I (945-4, mast, He 1) bind na raakhi-aa sabad na bhaakhi-aa. He does not preserve his semen and seed, and does not chant the Shabad.
uze 6 Aton Ag & Mafanet (945-4, raat, He 1) pavan na saaDhi-aa sach na araaDhi-aa. He does not control his breath; he does not worship and adore the True Lord.
WAG Aa B AH Afs Fd Il (945-4, saat, He 1) akath kathaa lay sam kar rahai. But one who speaks the Unspoken Speech, and remains balanced,
3B Soa MISH IH AC BI NEI (045-5, Tat, He 1) ta-o naanak aatam raam ka-o lahai. ||62|| O Nanak, attains the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||62| |
TT USAT Fa IST Il (945-5, Tat, He 1) gur parsaadee rangay raataa. By Guru's Grace, one is attuned to the Lord's Love.
nif Ubot APS HST II (945-5, aa, He 1) amrit pee-aa saachay maataa. Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, he is intoxicated with the Truth.
as stot nate feerst il (945-6, aast, He 1) gur veechaaree agan nivaaree. Contemplating the Guru, the fire within is put out.
miu ut& »irsH AY UT II (945-6, oat, He 1) api-o pee-o aatam sukh Dhaaree. Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, the soul settles in peace.
Ae maton asHfy 3g Stat Il (945-6, raat, He 1) sach araaDhi-aa gurmukh tar taaree. Worshipping the True Lord in adoration, the Gurmukh crosses over the river of life.
Boa FS a Sars WES (945-7, THast, vs 1) naanak boojhai ko veechaaree. ||63]| O Nanak, after deep contemplation, this is understood. ||63] |
feg Ho Hae aT exis a sA fed uSar Il (945-7, saat, He 1) ih man maigal kahaa basee-alay kahaa basai ih pavnaa. "Where does this mind-elephant live? Where does the breath reside?
XI FA A AGE niSy St AG Ya HS A Seat Il (945-8, Tat, we 1) kahaa basai so sabad a-oDhoo taa ka-o chookai man kaa bhavnaa. Where should the Shabad reside, so that the wanderings of the mind may cease?"
dels ad ST Alsag HS T fon wuts ar fg He WS Il (945-8, aaa, He 1)
nadar karay taa satgur maylay taa nij ghar vaasaa ih man paa-ay.
When the Lord blesses one with His Glance of Grace, he leads him to the True Guru. Then, this mind dwells in its own home within.
nm nrg ufe st feos de wes sofa TIS Il (945-9, east, ne 1)
aapai aap khaa-ay taa nirmal hovai Dhaavat varaj rahaa-ay.
When the individual consumes his egotism, he becomes immaculate, and his wandering mind is restrained.
fas He use wsy we fa@ AMA wha Ae ANTS II (045-9, mat, He 1)
ki-o mool pachhaanai aatam jaanai ki-o sas ghar soor samaavai.
"How can the root, the source of all be realized? How can the soul know itself? How can the sun enter into the house of the moon?"
dante IGH fess de SE soa AofH ANTS NEI (945-10, mat, He 1)
gurmukh ha-umai vichahu khovai ta-o naanak sahj samaavai. ||64| |
The Gurmukh eliminates egotism from within; then, O Nanak, the sun naturally enters into the home of the moon. ||64| |
feg Ho fares fase exis Tanfs He ues FT I (945-11, meet, we
ih man nihchal hirdai vasee-alay gurmukh mool pachhaan rahai.
When the mind becomes steady and stable, it abides in the heart, and then the Gurmukh realizes the root, the source of all.
ofs uee uf wrafs SA qenfe das SS GI Il (945-11, Tat, He 1)
naabh pavan ghar aasan baisai gurmukh khojat tat lahai.
The breath is seated in the home of the navel; the Gurmukh searches, and finds the essence of reality.
A Age fodats for wf wre fasee Afs A Rafe od Il (945-12, one, He 1)
so sabad nirantar nij ghar aachhai taribhavan jot so sabad lahai.
This Shabad permeates the nucleus of the self, deep within, in its own home; the Light of this Shabad pervades the three worlds.
we TY sU ATS at AS dt fyustA Fd Ml (945-12, anaat, v2 1)
khaavai dookh bhookh saachay kee saachay hee tariptaas rahai.
Hunger for the True Lord shall consume your pain, and through the True Lord, you shall be satisfied.
Mode Seal Tent vAvet fags & niga] Il (945-13, ona, He 1)
anhad banee gurmukh jaanee birlo ko arthaavai.
The Gurmukh knows the unstruck sound current of the Bani; how rare are those who understand.
aod wird Ay ASTe Afs TU Sa Aa J AS WUT (945-13, Tat, He 1)
naanak aakhai sach subhaakhai sach rapai rang kabhoo na jaavai. ||65||
Says Nanak, one who speaks the Truth is dyed in the color of Truth, which will never fade away. ||65]|
wv feg fase 2a 5 dat 3B He AS FIST Il (945-14, ae, He YD) jaa ih hirdaa dayh na hotee ta-o man kaithai rahtaa. "When this heart and body did not exist, where did the mind reside?
ots AHS MAES 3 IS 3 USS ASO ule ATS I (945-15, Tat, He 1)
naabh kamal asthambh na hoto taa pavan kavan ghar sahtaa.
When there was no support of the navel lotus, then in which home did the breath reside?
TY 5 IS 3u 3S HS T Hale aT fe Bet Il (945-15, THast, ws 1) roop na hoto raykh na kaa-ee taa sabad kahaa liv laa-ee.
When there was no form or shape, then how could anyone lovingly focus on the Shabad?
gas fits ot Hat 3 ost ffs athifs act uret It (945-16, rast, He 1)
rakat bind kee marhee na hotee mit keemat nahee paa-ee.
When there was no dungeon formed from egg and sperm, who could measure the Lord's value and extent?
Zo SY MAY o At fas afs ATUfA ATT Il (945-16, THAT, He 1) varan bhaykh asroop na jaapee ki-o kar jaapas saachaa. When color, dress and form could not be seen, how could the True Lord be known?"
Soa oH gs saat fea sa AS ATS EEN (945-17, Tat, He 1)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee ib tab saacho saachaa. ||66| |
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are detached. Then and now, they see the Truest of the True. ||66]|
fase 2a 3 dst Bu 3E He Afs Fd Fava il 45-17, saat, m2 1)
hirdaa dayh na hotee a-oDhoo ta-o man sunn rahai bairaagee.
When the heart and the body did not exist, O hermit, then the mind resided in the absolute, detached Lord.
ofs ane mAaS 3 ds ST fon wife sHSe USE MST Il (945-18, Tat, He 1)
naabh kamal asthambh na hoto taa nij ghar basta-o pavan anraagee.
When there was no support of the lotus of the navel, the breath remained in its own home, attuned to the Lord's Love.
gy 3 Shor ats o Ist 3 maeife JSS Aa A ATE Il (945-19, att, Hs 1)
roop na raykh-i-aa jaat na hotee ta-o akuleen rahta-o sabad so saar.
When there was no form or shape or social class, then the Shabad, in its essence, resided in the unmanifest Lord.
ao dae wa sats o I3C fasee AS wm fadarg Il (945-19, anraet, He 1)
ga-un gagan jab tabeh na hota-o taribhavan jot aapay nirankaar.
When the world and the sky did not even exist, the Light of the Formless Lord filled the three worlds.
UST cvE
ZI SY MATY H Sa Sa Aa fesrat il (946-1, svat, 2 1)
varan bhaykh asroop so ayko ayko sabad vidaanee.
Color, dress and form were contained in the One Lord; the Shabad was contained in the One, Wondrous Lord.
Arg faa Ae at SS SSA MAS TIA EDI (946-1, Tat, He 1) saach binaa soochaa ko naahee naanak akath kahaanee. ||67||
Without the True Name, no one can become pure; O Nanak, this is the Unspoken Speech. ||67]||
fas fas fafa na Gun user fas fos oft feof AST I (046-2, mma, He D kit kit biDh jag upjai purkhaa kit kit dukh binas jaa-ee. "How, in what way, was the world formed, O man? And what disaster will end it?"
JGH fefs na Gun user ath feRfodt ey uret Il (46-3, mniaat, He 1) ha-umai vich jag upjai purkhaa naam visri-ai dukh paa-ee. In egotism, the world was formed, O man; forgetting the Naam, it suffers and dies.
aenfy de A famrg sz sted JOH Aafe AEE I (946-3, at, He 1
gurmukh hovai so gi-aan tat beechaarai ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay.
One who becomes Gurmukh contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom; through the Shabad, he burns away his egotism.
36 HO fosHe fans seat ATS Id AHS Il (046-4, Haat, He 1)
tan man nirmal nirmal banee saachai rahai samaa-ay.
His body and mind become immaculate, through the Immaculate Bani of the Word. He remains absorbed in Truth.
oH of gd Saat AT ofmer Sfs ars il (046-4, enact, ne 1)
naamay naam rahai bairaagee saach rakhi-aa ur Dhaaray.
Through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he remains detached; he enshrines the True Name in his heart.
Sod fas ae Ha ae B de tug fee sters écil (946-5, mast, He 1) naanak bin naavai jog kaday na hovai daykhhu ridai beechaaray. ||68| |
O Nanak, without the Name, Yoga is never attained; reflect upon this in your heart, and see. ||68]|
aenfy ATG Aa sted aE i (946-6, mat, He 1) gurmukh saach sabad beechaarai ko-ay. The Gurmukh is one who reflects upon the True Word of the Shabad.
aenfy AY set usa dE Il (946-6, erat, He 1) gurmukh sach banee pargat ho-ay. The True Bani is revealed to the Gurmukh.
TsHfe He ste fear gs aE i (946-6, Tract, Hs 1)
gurmukh man bheejai virlaa boojhai ko-ay.
The mind of the Gurmukh is drenched with the Lord's Love, but how rare are those who understand this.
aante for wha eat fe Il (946-7, niet, He 1) gurmukh nij ghar vaasaa ho-ay. The Gurmukh dwells in the home of the self, deep within.
aan Aait wats ues il (946-7, east, He 1) gurmukh jogee jugat pachhaanai. The Gurmukh realizes the Way of Yoga.
TaHfy Soa Sa AES NEC (946-7, Tat, He 1) gurmukh naanak ayko jaanai. ||69|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh knows the One Lord alone. ||69]|
fag Afsagd AS Aa o Tet Il (946-8, mma, He 1) bin satgur sayvay jog na ho-ee. Without serving the True Guru, Yoga is not attained;
fag Afsasd Se Hafs 3 Aet Il (946-8, mat, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay mukat na ko-ee. without meeting the True Guru, no one is liberated.
fag Afsas 32 oH Ufenr & ATE II (946-8, enact, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay naam paa-i-aa na jaa-ay. Without meeting the True Guru, the Naam cannot be found.
fag Afsagd 3S HoT Sa UTE Il (946-9, enact, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay mahaa dukh paa-ay. Without meeting the True Guru, one suffers in terrible pain.
fag Afsas se Ho aaa Tats Il (946-9, srHast, v2 1) bin satgur bhaytay mahaa garab gubaar. Without meeting the True Guru, there is only the deep darkness of egotistical pride.
Sa fio TI HoT ASH Ite DON (946-10, mast, He 1) naanak bin gur mu-aa janam haar. ||70||
O Nanak, without the True Guru, one dies, having lost the opportunity of this life. ||70]|
aanfe He Atst ICH ws I (946-10, ores, He 1) gurmukh man jeetaa ha-umai maar. The Gurmukh conquers his mind by subduing his ego.
ante Ars afm Ba ofa Il (946-10, saat, He 1) gurmukh saach rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. The Gurmukh enshrines Truth in his heart.
gant Aa Als AHoTS fe feerfs I (946-11, mat, He 1)
gurmukh jag jeetaa jamkaal maar bidaar.
The Gurmukh conquers the world; he knocks down the Messenger of Death, and kills it.
TaHfe esas 3 nits Ths il (946-11, ast, He 1) gurmukh dargeh na aavai haar. The Gurmukh does not lose in the Court of the Lord.
aonte vfs fore A ATS I (946-11, mat, He 1) gurmukh mayl milaa-ay so jaanai. The Gurmukh is united in God's Union; he alone knows.
Soa TIHfe Ashe uss WOU (946-12, THast, He 1)
naanak gurmukh sabad pachhaanai. ||71]|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Word of the Shabad. ||71]|
Hee o fora afe 3 Gu fag ae Aa 3S Tet Il (46-12, anaat, He 1)
sabdai kaa nibayrhaa sun too a-oDhoo bin naavai jog na ho-ee.
This is the essence of the Shabad - listen, you hermits and Yogis. Without the Name, there is no Yoga.
oH WS nafes HS aH S AY Jet I (046-13, oat, He 1)
naamay raatay an-din maatay naamai tay sukh ho-ee.
Those who are attuned to the Name, remain intoxicated night and day; through the Name, they find peace.
oH dt 3 Ag Uda de OH AST uret I (946-13, eat, He 1)
naamai hee tay sabh pargat hovai naamay sojhee paa-ee.
Through the Name, everything is revealed; through the Name, understanding is obtained.
faa ore Su afte agsd AS orf unret II (946-14, eet, He D
bin naavai bhaykh karahi bahutayray sachai aap khu-aa-ee.
Without the Name, people wear all sorts of religious robes; the True Lord Himself has confused them.
Asad 3 oH ueht By Aa Pals I Tet Il (946-14, Toast, Hs 1)
satgur tay naam paa-ee-ai a-oDhoo jog jugat taa ho-ee.
The Name is obtained only from the True Guru, O hermit, and then, the Way of Yoga is found.
afe dteg nfs tug sea fas ae Hats o Tet DQM (946-15, TH, He 1)
kar beechaar man daykhhu naanak bin naavai mukat na ho-ee. ||72||
Reflect upon this in your mind, and see; O Nanak, without the Name, there is no liberation. ||72||
Sct afs ffs so Arete foro & nity SuTS I (946-16, Hast, He 1) tayree gat mit toohai jaaneh ki-aa ko aakh vakhaanai. You alone know Your state and extent, Lord; What can anyone say about it?
3 omy Tus my usa’? nm Afs Fa HE Il (946-16, THe, Hs 1)
too aapay guptaa aapay pargat aapay sabh rang maanai.
You Yourself are hidden, and You Yourself are revealed. You Yourself enjoy all pleasures.
Afoe fio 7s ag 8B dns feats SaHE Il (946-17, Trask, vz 1)
saaDhik siDh guroo baho chaylay khojat fireh furmaanai.
The seekers, the Siddhas, the many gurus and disciples wander around searching for You, according to Your Will.
Hafa an ue feo fafimr 3a wane AG aTAS | (946-17, oat, He 1)
maageh naam paa-ay ih bhikhi-aa tayray darsan ka-o kurbaanai.
They beg for Your Name, and You bless them with this charity. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
nifsort ufs ae sofeor gouty ASt det i (946-18, wnat, He 1) abhinaasee parabh khayl rachaa-i-aa gurmukh sojhee ho-ee. The eternal imperishable Lord God has staged this play; the Gurmukh understands it.
Soa Als Fa MM Pas VAT vleg F AST WOBUAUI (946-19, Trae, we 1)
naanak sabh jug aapay vartai doojaa avar na ko-ee. ||73||1]| O Nanak, He extends Himself throughout the ages; there is no other than Him. [173] 121]
uar tgo 9B Afsars ure II (947-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THaat at Sg HIS 3 Il (947-2)
raamkalee kee vaar mehlaa 3. Vaar Of Raamkalee, Third Mehl,
ng Se ysaret at gat il (947-2) joDhai veerai poorbaanee kee Dhunee. To Be Sung To The Tune Of ‘Jodha And Veera Poorbaanee’:
H@a H8 3 Il (947-2) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Afsag AoA a as dD fAN S BS TE I (047-2, mae, v2 3) satgur sahjai daa khayt hai jis no laa-ay bhaa-o. The True Guru is the field of intuitive wisdom. One who is inspired to love Him,
oe da a Cae on gd ANTE I 047-3, oat, He 3)
naa-o beejay naa-o ugvai naamay rahai samaa-ay.
plants the seed of the Name there. The Name sprouts up, and he remains absorbed in the Name.
ICH Sd ata dD Ao afenr feat= il (947-3, east, He 3)
ha-umai ayho beej hai sahsaa ga-i-aa vilaa-ay.
But this egotism is the seed of skepticism; it has been uprooted. o fae dt o Cae A aun A ute Il (947-4, anast, He 3)
naa kichh beejay na ugvai jo bakhsay so khaa-ay. It is not planted there, and it does not sprout; whatever God grants us, we eat.
nis Ast nig dfour aafs 3 feaftmr ATE Il (947-4, mnrast, He 3) ambhai saytee ambh rali-aa bahurh na niksi-aa jaa-ay. When water mixes with water, it cannot be separated again.
Sod Tet vas J Sug Bar wife i (947-5, mat, ve 3) naanak gurmukh chalat hai vaykhhu lokaa aa-ay. O Nanak, the Gurmukh is wonderful; come, poeple, and see!
Ba fa 24 gust fan 3 ASt ata i (47-5, mat, 2 3) lok ke vaykhai bapurhaa jis no sojhee naahi. But what can the poor people see? They do not understand.
fan fue A Se fan efor Ho Ha NU (947-5, THAT, He 3) jis vaykhaalay so vaykhai jis vasi-aa man maahi. ||1]| He alone sees, whom the Lord causes to see; the Lord comes to dwell in his mind.
[11
He 3 Il (947-6)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY BY at as Tey a ey Ue I (947-6, mat, He 3)
manmukh dukh kaa khayt hai dukh beejay dukh khaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh is the field of sorrow and suffering. He plains sorrow, and eats sorrow.
eu fefe HH of He JEN aas fate I (047-6, eae, He 3) dukh vich jammai dukh marai ha-umai karat vihaa-ay. In sorrow he is born, and in sorrow he dies. Acting in egotism, his life passes away.
MES WE 8 ABET nia nig AHTE Il (947-7, sna, He 3)
aavan jaan na sujh-ee anDhaa anDh kamaa-ay.
He does not understand the coming and going of reincarnation; the blind man acts in blindness.
A dd fA o weet fes a Bute Il (947-7, east, He 3) jo dayvai tisai na jaan-ee ditay ka-o laptaa-ay. He does not know the One who gives, but he is attached to what is given.
aad uste foftmr aHear neg & ATS ATE MQM (947-8, Tat, He 3) naanak poorab likhi-aa kamaavanaa avar na karnaa jaa-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, he acts according to his pre-ordained destiny. He cannot do anything else.
21 |
He 3 Il (947-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Afsafe fufet Het AY fA S ym HS ALE Il (947-8, ar1ast, He 3)
satgur mili-ai sadaa sukh jis no aapay maylay so-ay.
Meeting the True Guru, everlasting peace is obtained. He Himself leads us to meet Him.
Aa Sg fada 3d visa fagHe Sf I (947-9, mat, He 3) sukhai ayhu bibayk hai antar nirmal ho-ay. This is the true meaning of peace, that one becomes immaculate within oneself.
nifamres a su aha famre uarufs fe II (947-9, anreat, He 3) agi-aan kaa bharam katee-ai gi-aan paraapat ho-ay. The doubt of ignorance is eradicated, and spiritual wisdom is obtained.
Sod Sa Sedt otfeor AT Sat so ALE BI (947-10, Haat, He 3) naanak ayko nadree aa-i-aa jah daykhaa tah so-ay. ||3]| Nanak comes to gaze upon the One Lord alone; wherever he looks, there He is. ||3]|
uGat Il (947-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ae sug softer snes aS Aiet I (947-10, aaa, He 3) sachai takhat rachaa-i-aa baisan ka-o jaa-ee. The True Lord created His throne, upon which He sits.
AS fas omy uorfu do ae Aafe weet I (947-11, Hat, He 3) sabh kichh aapay aap hai gur sabad sunaa-ee. He Himself is everything; this is what the Word of the Guru's Shabad says.
mma aes AMG ats HIG Aart Il (947-11, saat, He 3)
aapay kudrat saajee-an kar mahal saraa-ee.
Through His almighty creative power, He created and fashioned the mansions and hotels.
de Hen ule woe ust yes Tevet Il (947-12, mat, us 3) chand sooraj du-ay chaannay pooree banat banaa-ee. He made the two lamps, the sun and the moon; He formed the perfect form.
nm Sy AS orfy aa Aafe fomret 9 (047-12, eHast, He 3) aapay vaykhai sunay aap gur sabad Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]|| He Himself sees, and He Himself hears; meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
[2
aT Bg AY USAT J AST set AU TIS Il (947-13, Treat, He 3) vaahu vaahu sachay paatisaah too sachee naa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Waaho! Waaho! Hail, hail, O True King! True is Your Name. ||1|]|Pause| |
HSE Il (947-13)
salok. Shalok:
adie ufset afe & urfeor my utafe ubrfe i 047-13, mast, asta) kabeer mahidee kar kai ghaali-aa aap peesaa-ay peesaa-ay. Kabeer, I have ground myself into henna paste.
3 Ad FS 6 Ue aag o wet UTS A (947-14, Tat, aes) tai sah baat na puchhee-aa kabhoo na laa-ee paa-ay. ||1]|| O my Husband Lord, You took no notice of me; You never applied me to Your feet.
[11
He 8 Il (947-14)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
sod Hfvet afs a sft A AG Sefs ASE I (947-14, aH, He 3)
naanak mahidee kar kai rakhi-aa so saho nadar karay-i.
O Nanak, my Husband Lord keeps me like henna paste; He blesses me with His Glance of Grace.
mm ula mm wa wm dt afe were i (947-15, erat, He 3) aapay peesai aapay ghasai aapay hee laa-ay la-ay-ay. He Himself grinds me, and He Himself rubs me; He Himself applies me to His feet.
feg fuer fumrer uAH at A ave 3 SE QI (947-15, Haat, He 3) ih piram pi-aalaa khasam kaa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||2|| This is the cup of love of my Lord and Master; He gives it as He chooses. ||2]||
uGat Il (947-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
zat fqrfe Gurding AS gate wre ae A II (947-16, mnrat, He 3)
vaykee sarisat upaa-ee-an sabh hukam aavai jaa-ay samaahee.
You created the world with its variety; by the Hukam of Your Command, it comes, goes, and merges again in You.
min Sfx fearret SAT at SST Il (947-17, Test, He 3) aapay vaykh vigsadaa doojaa ko naahee. You Yourself see, and blossom forth; there is no one else at all.
fa are (38 sy 5 ae Aafe Fs Il (947-17, THs, Hs 3)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakh too gur sabad bujhaahee.
As it pleases You, You keep me. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I understand You.
Hao 3a Fg J fag are fSS Vord | (947-17, Haat, 2 3) sabhnaa tayraa jor hai ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaahee. You are the strength of all. As it pleases You, You lead us on.
30 Aes H ots & fan orf FETE QI (047-18, east, He 3) tuDh jayvad mai naahi ko kis aakh sunaa-ee. ||2|| There is no other as great as You; unto whom should I speak and talk? ||2] |
H@q H8 3 Ill (947-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
sofh goret AS Aa fedt ast Jet Shs II (947-18, enrat, He 3) bharam bhulaa-ee sabh jag firee faavee ho-ee bhaal. Deluded by doubt, I wandered over the whole world. Searching, I became frustrated.
yar tet A Ag Ais 3 teet famr 3S FSH ofS Il (948-1, erat, He 3)
so saho saat na dayv-ee ki-aa chalai tis naal. My Husband Lord has not blessed me with peace and tranquility; what will work with Him?
ae usAet ofs fomreha nists adit Ba ofs i (048-1, mat, He 3) gur parsaadee har Dhi-aa-ee-ai antar rakhee-ai ur Dhaar. By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Lord; I enshrine Him deep within my heart.
soa us Sfonr Ag ufeor at fagur atst agate All (948-2, mast, He 3)
naanak ghar baithi-aa saho paa-i-aa jaa kirpaa keetee kartaar. ||1]|
O Nanak, seated in his her own home, she finds her Husband Lord, when the Creator Lord grants His Grace. ||1]||
He 3 Il (948-3)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
um oes fes afenr df= eet AE II (948-3, araat, He 3) DhanDhaa Dhaavat din ga-i-aa rain gavaa-ee so-ay. Chasing after worldly affairs, the day is wasted, and the night passes in sleep.
as Safe fay ufeor Hout afer sf i (048-3, mat, Hs 3) koorh bol bikh khaa-i-aa manmukh chali-aa ro-ay. Speaking lies, one eats poison; the self-willed manmukh departs, crying out in pain.
fas Gufe AH S35 3 En ote us af II (948-4, anratt, we 3)
sirai upar jam dand hai doojai bhaa-ay pat kho-ay.
The Mesenger of Death holds his club over the mortal's head; in the love of duality, he loses his honor.
dfs ou ae 3 3G fefs mres ret SE I (048-4, mat, He 3)
har naam kaday na chayti-o fir aavan jaanaa ho-ay.
He never even thinks of the Name of the Lord; over and over again, he comes and goes in reincarnation.
ad usAet dfs Hie ZA AH SS 5 Sa Ale Il (948-5, saat, He 3)
gur parsaadee har man vasai jam dand na laagai ko-ay.
But if, by Guru's Grace, the Lord's Name comes to dwell in his mind, then the Messenger of Death will not strike him down with his club.
saad Hon fife ad aot usafs GE NI (48-5, aH, He 3) naanak sehjay mil rahai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||2|| Then, O Nanak, he merges intuitively into the Lord, receiving His Grace. ||2||
Uugat I (948-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fefa nruet frest afenig = Afsara HSt I (948-6, anraat, He 3)
ik aapnee siftee laa-i-an day satgur matee.
Some are linked to His Praises, when the Lord blesses them with the Guru's Teachings.
feast 6 a aufaGe umfag afs AST I (948-6, anit, He 3) iknaa no naa-o bakhsi-on asthir har satee. Some are blessed with the Name of the eternal, unchanging True Lord.
u@s urat Sad Jaf asfa sat Il (948-7, oat, v2 3) pa-un paanee baisantaro hukam karahi bhagtee. Water, air and fire, by His Will, worship Him.
Sa 8 3S naar yst AST ASS Il (948-7, Trae, ws 3) aynaa no bha-o aglaa pooree banat bantee. They are held in the Fear of God; He has formed the perfect form.
Ag fea gan ease Hfomt AY uTet ISI (948-7, mast, He 3) sabh iko hukam varatdaa mani-ai sukh paa-ee. ||3]|
The Hukam, the Command of the One Lord is all-pervasive; accepting it, peace is found. ||3]|
HS Il (948-8) Salok. Shalok:
aes SACS TH at Bor feat 3 AfE Il 48-8, anast, alte) kabeer kasa-utee raam kee jhoothaa tikai na ko-ay. Kabeer, such is the touchstone of the Lord; the false cannot even touch it.
TH AAG? A Ad A HeHteT SE NA (948-8, aH, adits) raam kasa-utee so sahai jo marjeevaa ho-ay. ||1]| He alone passes this test of the Lord, who remains dead while yet alive. ||1]|
He 3 Il (948-9)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fa afs fea He nrdha fa afe frase df II (948-9, enact, nH 3) ki-o kar ih man maaree-ai ki-o kar mirtak ho-ay. How can this mind be conquered? How can it be killed?
afoor Age o HSE IBH BS oO ATE II (948-10, ana, He 3) kahi-aa sabad na maan-ee ha-umai chhadai na ko-ay. If one does not accept the Word of the Shabad, egotism does not depart.
qd usAS IEH se Alea HAS A GE Il (948-10, anaxat, He 3)
gur parsaadee ha-umai chhutai jeevan mukat so ho-ay.
By Guru's Grace, egotism is eradicated, and then, one is Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive.
Sod fan & sun fSH fs fon fous 3 ore AfE III (948-10, oat, He 3)
naanak jis no bakhsay tis milai tis bighan na laagai ko-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, one whom the Lord forgives is united with Him, and then no obstacles block his way. ||2]|
He 3 Il (948-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hes HS AS a ad Ales Hats fas dE i (48-11, naa, 2 3)
jeevat marnaa sabh ko kahai jeevan mukat ki-o ho-ay.
Everyone can say that they are dead while yet alive; how can they be liberated while yet alive?
3 OHA A ad Uy SS Hele Il (948-12, Trash, 2 3)
bhai kaa sanjam jay karay daaroo bhaa-o laa-ay-ay.
If someone restrains himself through the Fear of God, and takes the medicine of the Love of God,
Wofes TE We AY Aon fay sense of Safe Il (948-12, enract, He 3)
an-din gun gaavai sukh sehjay bikh bhavjal naam taray-ay.
night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. In celestial peace and poise, he crosses over the poisonous, terrifying world-ocean, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Soa TeHfe uh AT aS sefs ASE Sil (48-13, mast, He 3) naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai jaa ka-o nadar karay-i. ||3|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the Lord; he is blessed with His Glance of Grace. ||3]|
uGat Il (948-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aH TE TESS J TE FIST Il (948-13, THast, vs 3) doojaa bhaa-o rachaa-i-on tarai gun vartaaraa. God created the love of duality, and the three modes which pervade the universe.
gon" fang HUA Burfemig Jaf anrefs ara il (948-14, THast, ue 3) barahmaa bisan mahays upaa-i-an hukam kamaavan kaaraa. He created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, who act according to His Will.
Ufss use Asat a gEfs sears il (48-14, anaat, we 3)
pandit parh-day jotkee naa boojheh beechaaraa.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the astrologers study their books, but they do not understand contemplation.
AS fae 3a 4G dD Ae fAaHETS Il (948-15, ena, He 3) sabh kichh tayraa khayl hai sach sirjanhaaraa. Everything is Your play, O True Creator Lord.
fan sve fan sufh dfs vfs Aafe ATT ISI (948-15, THA, He 3)
jis bhaavai tis bakhas laihi sach sabad samaa-ee. | |4||
As it pleases You, You bless us with forgiveness, and merge us in the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||
H8a H8 3 Il (948-16)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HO OT FS FS AHS Il (948-16, THast, Hs 3) man kaa jhoothaa jhooth kamaavai. The man of false mind practices falsehood.
Hear S fed sur ASS Il (948-16, THaAt, He 3) maa-i-aa no firai tapaa sadaavai. He runs after Maya, and yet pretends to be a man of disciplined meditation.
SoH ger Als Stee Ad Il (948-16, aaa, we 3) bharmay bhoolaa sabh tirath gahai. Deluded by doubt, he visits all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
6g su aA UGH als BI Il (948-17, THs, He 3) oh tapaa kaisay param gat lahai. How can such a man of disciplined meditation attain the supreme status?
Te USAT A AT AHS Il (948-17, saat, He 3) gur parsaadee ko sach kamaavai. By Guru's Grace, one lives the Truth.
Soa A SUT HUST US NA (948-17, Haat, He 3) naanak so tapaa mokhantar paavai. ||1|| O Nanak, such a man of disciplined meditation attains liberation. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (948-18) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
A sur fa feg su we Il (948-18, oat, He 3) so tapaa je ih tap ghaalay. He alone is a man of disciplined meditation, who practices this self-discipline.
Afsag 3 fis ASE ANS Il (048-18, THat, He 3) satgur no milai sabad samaalay. Meeting with the True Guru, he contemplates the Word of the Shabad.
Afsad at Ae feg Su ussES Il (948-18, Tat, He 3) satgur kee sayvaa ih tap parvaan. Serving the True Guru - this is the only acceptable disciplined meditation.
Soa A SUT Vda UTS HTS IQ! (948-19, oraat, nz 3) naanak so tapaa dargahi paavai maan. ||2|| O Nanak, such a man of disciplined meditation is honored in the Court of the Lord.
121]
ust Il (948-19)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
afs feon Gufemig AAS at Zasfe il (948-19, anat, v2 3)
raat dinas upaa-i-an sansaar kee vartan. He created the night and the day, for the activities of the world.
Yar cer
TsHst ule wear nitSg fasAfs Il (949-1, meat, He 3) gurmatee ghat chaannaa aanayr binaasan. Following the Guru's Teachings, one's heart is illumined, and the darkness is dispelled.
IaH dt As AHS deur As se FRE II (949-1, mnraat, He 3)
hukmay hee sabh saajee-an ravi-aa sabh van tarin.
By the Hukam of His Command, He creates everything; He pervades and permeates all the woods and meadows.
AS fas omy orf d gente Aer ofa sf= I (949-2, mat, He 3) sabh kichh aapay aap hai gurmukh sadaa har bhan. He Himself is everything; the Gurmukh constantly chants the Lord's Name.
Rae dt Ast uet Ad wef gsret Mull (949-2, erat, He 3)
sabday hee sojhee pa-ee sachai aap bujhaa-ee. ||5]|
Through the Shabad, understanding comes; the True Lord Himself inspires us to understand. ||5]|
H8a H8 3 Il (949-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
misoras ef a undinfs fae & fas ufo SIH Il (949-3, aniaat, He 3) abhi-aagat ayhi na aakhee-an jin kay chit meh bharam. He is not called a renunciate, whose consciousness is filled with doubt.
fs @ fes aoat 3d AT OH Il (949-3, erat, He 3) tis dai ditai naankaa tayho jayhaa Dharam. Donations to him bring proportionate rewards.
mis fadag UH UE ST aT gar TE Il (949-4, ona, Hs 3) abhai niranjan param pad taa kaa bhookhaa ho-ay. He hungers for the supreme status of the Fearless, Immaculate Lord;
fSA a SHG Soa fear uve AfE IAI (949-4, enIaat, He 3) tis kaa bhojan naankaa virlaa paa-ay ko-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, how rare are those who offer him this food. ||1]|
He 3 Il (949-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
wifsoras fs 5 mitts fa ug ute sxe adfs I (949-5, mat, He 3) abhi-aagat ayhi na aakhee-an je par ghar bhojan karayn. They are not called renunciates, who take food in the homes of others.
Bed wafs nus gas Sf ade Il (949-5, anaat, He 3) udrai kaaran aapnay bahlay bhaykh karayn. For the sake of their bellies, they wear various religious robes.
misoras Het soot fa msn ABs ads Il (949-6, anaat, He 3) abhi-aagat say-ee naankaa je aatam ga-on karayn. They alone are renunciates, O Nanak, who enter into their own souls.
ate sufe Ad mua for ules JIS ASS Ql (949-6, ana, 2 3) bhaal lahan saho aapnaa nij ghar rahan karayn. ||2]|
They seek and find their Husband Lord; they dwell within the home of their own inner self. ||2||
ust Il (949-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wag Usts feefania fefs ra mmATE II (949-7, erat, He 3) ambar Dharat vichhorhi-an vich sachaa asraa-o. They sky and the earth are separate, but the True Lord supports them from within.
wg Ud AS AY d faa fefe Het BE Il (949-7, enraat, H:2 3) ghar dar sabho sach hai jis vich sachaa naa-o. True are all those homes and gates, within which the True Name is enshrined.
AZ AS Jan ese" TaHfy Afs ANTE Il (949-8, enHaet, He 3)
sabh sachaa hukam varatdaa gurmukh sach samaa-o.
The Hukam of the True Lord's Command is effective everywhere. The Gurmukh merges in the True Lord.
Ae nifty saz Ae ats AS ad fen Il (949-8, anaat, He 3) sachaa aap takhat sachaa bahi sachaa karay ni-aa-o. He Himself is True, and True is His throne. Seated upon it, He administers true justice.
AS Ad Ay ase Tania niwy Baret Ell (949-9, raat, He 3) sabh sacho sach varatdaa gurmukh alakh lakhaa-ee. ||6] |
The Truest of the True is all-pervading everywhere; the Gurmukh sees the unseen. [16] |
HSa H3 3 Ill (949-9) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
sates Hf mds FT Tat nS ATES Il (949-9, Treat, Hs 3) rainaa-ir maahi anant hai koorhee aavai jaa-ay. In the world-ocean, the Infinite Lord abides. The false come and go in reincarnation.
aS VS TUS FIST BI ANTE Il (949-10, east, ne 3) bhaanai chalai aapnai bahutee lahai sajaa-ay. One who walks according to his own will, suffers terrible punishment.
dated nfs AS fxs J aot Us ute Il (949-10, erat, He 3)
rainaa-ir meh sabh kichh hai karmee palai paa-ay.
All things are in the world-ocean, but they are obtained only by the karma of good actions.
soa o€ fafa uit AUS FSA SATE A (949-11, aH, He 3) naanak na-o niDh paa-ee-ai jay chalai tisai rajaa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, he alone obtains the nine treasures, who walks in the Will of the Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (949-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hon Afsag 3 Afes fefs JGH vot faoA II (949-11, aHaet, He 3) sehjay satgur na sayvi-o vich ha-umai janam binaas. One who intuitively serves the True Guru, loses his life in egotism.
dHat ofa dA 3 UG aHS o SEE usarA Il (949-12, sat, He 3)
rasnaa har ras na chakhi-o kamal na ho-i-o pargaas.
His tongue does not taste the sublime essence of the Lord, and his heart-lotus does not blossom forth.
fag ut Hone Hor atfenr vfs fearA II (949-12, arast, He 3)
bikh khaaDhee manmukh mu-aa maa-i-aa mohi vinaas.
The self-willed manmukh eats poison and dies; he is ruined by love and attachment to Maya.
fean dfs a am fee fog ates fog SA II (949-13, mat, v8 3) ikas har kay naam vin Dharig jeevan Dharig vaas. Without the Name of the One Lord, his life is cursed, and his home is cursed as well.
W um sefe ad us Ae a de SAS SA Il (949-13, arraat, Hs 3)
jaa aapay nadar karay parabh sachaa taa hovai daasan daas.
When God Himself bestows His Glance of Grace, then one becomes the slave of His Slaves.
wT nates Ae ad Asay at cafes o SS WA Il (949-14, Hast, Hs 3) taa an-din sayvaa karay satguroo kee kabeh na chhodai paas. And then, night and day, he serves the True Guru, and never leaves His side.
fa ne ufo ane mifsus ees f3@ fed farsa GSH II (949-14, arast, He 3)
ji-o jal meh kamal alipato vartai ti-o vichay girah udaas.
As the lotus flower floats unaffected in the water, so does he remain detached in his own household.
Ho Sod ad aden Ag a fae are fe oie TESA IM (949-15, mat, He 3) jan naanak karay karaa-i-aa sabh ko ji-o bhaavai tiv har guntaas. ||2||
O servant Nanak, the Lord acts, and inspires everyone to act, according to the Pleasure of His Will. He is the treasure of virtue. ||2]|
UST I (949-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
est AG TAT AT nM} Tes alat Il (949-16, Tne, vz 3)
chhateeh jug gubaar saa aapay ganat keenee. For thirty-six ages, there was utter darkness. Then, the Lord revealed Himself.
nm figafe AS AAS vif HES eat Il (949-16, grat, Hs 3) aapay sarisat sabh saajee-an aap mat deenee. He Himself created the entire universe. He Himself blessed it with understanding.
fafyfs AAS fig ung Us Tes aetat Il (949-17, sre, Hs 3)
simrit Saasat Saaji-an paap punn ganat ganeenee.
He created the Simritees and the Shaastras; He calculates the accounts of virtue and vice.
fan ase A gsr Ae ASfe usta Il (949-17, sna, He 3)
jis bujhaa-ay so bujhsee sachai sabad pateenee.
He alone understands, whom the Lord inspires to understand and to be pleased with the True Word of the Shabad.
Ag ning wrfy zaset wm gUtA PHOT IDI (949-18, anHat, He 3) sabh aapay aap varatdaa aapay bakhas milaa-ee. ||7]|| He Himself is all-pervading; He Himself forgives, and unites with Himself. ||7] |
HBa H8 3 Il (949-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
feg 39 AS 33 9 oS faa 3 8 SE II (49-18, enaet, He 3) ih tan sabho rat hai rat bin tann na ho-ay. This body is all blood; without blood, the body cannot exist.
a Afo gS umué fs fs Ss IZ 3 TE Il (949-19, sm1aat, He 3)
jo seh ratay aapnai tin tan lobh rat na ho-ay.
Those who are attuned to their Lord - their bodies are not filled with the blood of greed.
3 ufent so ute dfe os as fees WHE II (049-19, erat, He 3)
bhai pa-i-ai tan kheen ho-ay lobh rat vichahu jaa-ay.
In the Fear of God, the body becomes thin, and the blood of greed passes out of the body.
Uuar cuo fag Sxafs ws wo dfs 8 afe a 3 eas He T]STE I (950-1, east, He 3)
ji-o baisantar Dhaat suDh ho-ay ti-o har kaa bha-o durmat mail gavaa-ay. As fire purifies metal, so does the Fear of the Lord eradicate the filth of evil- mindedness.
Sod 3 Ho Ade A IS Uae Sa StS Al (950-2, mae, ve 3) naanak tay jan sohnay jo ratay har rang laa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, beautiful are those humble beings, who are imbued with the Lord's Love.
[21 |
He 3 Il (950-2)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
THaASt IH Hfs SfAor 3 afer Alera il (950-2, aHast, He 3) raamkalee raam man vasi-aa taa bani-aa seegaar. In Raamkalee, I have enshrined the Lord in my mind; thus I have been embellished.
ad a Rafe ane faafior at ACfimr safs Fag i (950-3, mat, He 3)
gur kai sabad kamal bigsi-aa taa sa-upi-aa bhagat bhandaar.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, my heart-lotus has blossomed forth; the Lord blessed me with the treasure of devotional worship.
SoH afenr St arfamt gor uifamaTs vias Il (950-3, THast, He 3) bharam ga-i-aa taa jaagi-aa chookaa agi-aan anDhaar. My doubt was dispelled, and I woke up; the darkness of ignorance was dispelled.
SAS gy vis wrarer fA ofs aries fing II (950-4, aneat, He 3) tis no roop at aglaa jis har naal pi-aar. She who is in love with her Lord, is the most infinitely beautiful.
Het ge fug mmuat Harvest af il (950-4, aHast, 2 3) Sadaa ravai pir aapnaa sobhaavantee naar. Such a beautiful, happy soul-bride enjoys her Husband Lord forever.
Houfy Aters 6 ATe6t WAS HOH AS Th Il (950-5, aniaat, He 3)
manmukh seegaar na jaannee jaasan janam sabh haar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know how to decorate themselves; wasting their whole lives, they depart.
faa ofa saat Atere aafo fos AHfs SE unr II (950-5, erat, He 3)
bin har bhagtee seegaar karahi nit jameh ho-ay khu-aar.
Those who decorate themselves without devotional worship to the Lord, are continually reincarnated to suffer.
AAS fefs As 3 ufeot mat fA ad A ATE AIS Il (950-6, Tat, ne 3)
saisaarai vich sobh na paa-inee agai je karay so jaanai kartaar.
They do not obtain respect in this world; the Creator Lord alone knows what will happen to them in the world hereafter.
Sod Au Sa J vd fete FI AAT Il (950-6, erat, He 3) naanak sachaa ayk hai duhu vich hai sansaar. O Nanak, the True Lord is the One and only; duality exists only in the world.
da He orfu wfenig A aafe fa orf age AIST II (950-7, eHast, He 3)
changai mandai aap laa-i-an so karan je aap karaa-ay kartaar. ||2| |
He Himself enjoins them to good and bad; they do only that which the Creator Lord causes them to do. ||2||
He 3 Il (950-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fag Afsas Ae ATS & oreet ert ast ATE II (50-8, east, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay saat na aavee doojee naahee jaa-ay.
Without serving the True Guru, tranquility is not obtained. It cannot be found anywhere else.
A asa SUM fee ann ufeor o Ae Il (950-8, erst, He 3)
jay bahutayraa lochee-ai vin karmaa paa-i-aa na jaa-ay.
No matter how much one may long for it, without the karma of good actions, it cannot be found.
nists 8g fearg 3 EA Ste uMrte Il (950-9, ana, we 3)
antar lobh vikaar hai doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay.
Those whose inner beings are filled with greed and corruption, are ruined through the love of duality.
fs Hue HdE 3 Vaet GEH fefe ey ue I (950-9, anrat, Hs 3)
tin jaman maran na chuk-ee ha-umai vich dukh paa-ay.
The cycle of birth and death is not ended, and filled with egotism, they suffer in pain. frat Afsad fag fos wfeur A ust set of II (950-10, mast, He 3)
jinee satgur si-o chit laa-i-aa so khaalee ko-ee naahi. Those who focus their consciousness on the True Guru, do not remain unfulfilled.
fSo FH ot sea 3 Jeet o Gf eu ATT Il (950-10, saat, He 3) tin jam kee talab na hova-ee naa o-ay dukh sahaahi. They are not summoned by the Messenger of Death, and they do not suffer in pain.
Sod Tent Gad Ae Aafe ANT ISI (950-11, THEA, He 3) naanak gurmukh ubray sachai sabad samaahi. ||3]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is saved, merging in the True Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
ugat Il (950-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
umfy nifsus Het od dfe da Afs oefs Il (950-11, erat, He 3) aap alipat sadaa rahai hor DhanDhai sabh Dhaaveh. He Himself remains unattached forever; all others run after worldly affairs.
uimfy fase uae 3 dfs mrefs wrefa Il (950-12, mat, He 3)
aap nihchal achal hai hor aavahi jaaveh.
He Himself is eternal, unchanging and unmoving; the others continue coming and going in reincarnation.
Ret Het dfs fomrehat genta wy uefa i (950-12, erat, v2 3) Sadaa sadaa har Dhi-aa-ee-ai gurmukh sukh paavahi. Meditating on the Lord forever and ever, the Gurmukh finds peace.
fon ufe ear urehat vfs fiefs AHrefs I (50-13, east, He 3) nij ghar vaasaa paa-ee-ai Sach sifat samaaveh. He dwells in the home of his own inner being, absorbed in the Praise of the True Lord.
Ae afed asts J aa wate gst NCI (950-13, mat, He 3)
sachaa gahir gambheer hai gur sabad bujhaa-ee. ||8||
The True Lord is profound and unfathomable; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is understood. ||8]|
HBa H8 3 Il (950-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Aa oy fourfe 3 As FIs Ag Il (950-14, THast, vs 3) sachaa naam Dhi-aa-ay too sabho vartai sach. Meditate on the True Name; the True Lord is all-pervading.
Soa JOH HS A SG UE Ag Il (950-14, aaah, He 3) naanak hukmai jo bujhai so fal paa-ay sach.
O Nanak, one who realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, obtains the fruit of Truth.
at Fest AIS" fed TAH 3 FS AG Il (950-15, maa, ws 3)
kathnee badnee kartaa firai hukam na boojhai sach.
One who merely mouths the words, does not understand the Hukam of the True Lord's Command.
Sod dfs at svat HS A sas dle fee Hd ag foaw NA (950-15, THA, He 3)
naanak har kaa bhaanaa mannay so bhagat ho-ay vin mannay kach nikach. ||1]|
O Nanak, one who accepts the Will of the Lord is His devotee. Without accepting it, he is the falsest of the false. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (950-16) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
HOHY Sfs 3 ATSdt Gor niefa an aT vida Il (950-16, east, He 3)
manmukh bol na jaannee onaa andar kaam kroDh aha"kaar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know what they are saying. They are filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.
Gf a@ am o west Go nists Se fears Il (950-16, THAT, He 3)
o-ay thaa-o kuthaa-o na jaannee un antar lobh vikaar.
They do not understand right places and wrong places; they are filled with greed and corruption.
6fe nrue Aurfe orf afo ae asta Gor HS AH ATT Il (950-17, THF, He 3)
O-ay aapnai su-aa-ay aa-ay bahi galaa karahi onaa maaray jam jandaar.
They come, and sit and talk for their own purposes. The Messenger of Death strikes them down.
Mal Tae Se Hfamt ute ynrg atets afsnrs i (950-18, mae, 2 3)
agai dargeh laykhai mangi-ai maar khu-aar keecheh koorhi-aar.
Hereafter, they are called to account in the Court of the Lord; the false ones are struck down and humiliated.
fd aS at HE fas Cas aet aeg feg SAeg il (950-18, mast, v3 3)
ayh koorhai kee mal ki-o utrai ko-ee kadhahu ih veechaar.
How can this filth of falsehood be washed off? Can anyone think about this, and find the way?
Afsag fxs at on feare nfs fosfeu aes Il (950-19, east, x2 3)
satgur milai taa naam dirhaa-ay sabh kilvikh katanhaar.
If one meets with the True Guru, He implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord within; all his sins are destroyed.
oH AU aH nred fsH We A add Afs SHAG Il (950-19, THA, He 3)
naam japay naamo aaraaDhay tis jan ka-o karahu sabh namaskaar.
Let all bow in humility to that humble being who chants the Naam, and worships the Naam in adoration.
uar uy HE ast oth Sardinig Af aH dur Afenrs I (951-1, Tat, Hs 3)
mal koorhee naam utaaree-an jap naam ho-aa sachiaar. The Naam washes off the filth of falsehood; chanting the Naam, one becomes truthful.
Ho ood fan & efs vos dfs A Ate SeeTs MQM (951-1, met, He 3) jan naanak jis day ayhi chalat heh so jeeva-o dayvanhaar. ||2| | O servant Nanak, wondrous are the plays of the Lord, the Giver of life. ||2]|
uQst II (951-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
30 Aes ws ofs fan rf FETE II (951-2, Tat, He 3)
tuDh jayvad daataa naahi kis aakh sunaa-ee-ai.
You are the Great Giver; no other is as great as You. Unto whom should I speak and talk?
ae usAet ufe frag eH web II (951-3, aHat, He 3) gur parsaadee paa-ay jithahu ha-umai jaa-ee-ai. By Guru's Grace, I find You; You eradicate egotism from within.
dA OA Aret agar Het Sfsnret i 051-3, mat, v2 3) ras kas saadaa baahraa sachee vadi-aa-ee-ai. You are beyond sweet and salty flavors; True is Your glorious greatness.
fan 6 sun fan efe orfu we fore I 51-4, mniaet, He 3) jis no bakhsay tis day-ay aap la-ay milaa-ee-ai. You bless those whom You forgive, and unite them with Yourself.
we nists nifgs safe aenfe far fimret ei (951-4, mest, He 3) ghat antar amrit rakhi-on gurmukh kisai pi-aa-ee. ||9] | You have placed the Ambrosial Nectar deep within the heart; the Gurmukh drinks it in.
[9I|
HBa H8 3 Il (951-5)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
wash aah us AUS Ads Il (951-5, THe, He 3) baabaanee-aa kahaanee-aa put saput karayn. The stories of one's ancestors make the children good children.
fa Afsas ae fs Sfs ASt AGH Aas Il (951-5, mat, He 3) je satgur bhaavai so man lain say-ee karam karayn. They accept what is pleasing to the Will of the True Guru, and act accordingly.
af ueg fafyfs AAs fimrA Aa ode ave AS fhAfe ats Il (951-6, Tat, ue 3) jaa-ay puchhahu simrit saasat bi-aas suk naarad bachan sabh sarisat karayn.
Go and consult the Simritees, the Shaastras, the writings of Vyaas, Suk Dayv, Naarad, and all those who preach to the world.
He we Afe Sa Ae’ A AHTSSs Il (51-6, saat, He 3)
sachai laa-ay sach lagay sadaa sach samaalayn.
Those, whom the True Lord attaches, are attached to the Truth; they contemplate the True Name forever.
Soa MS A Uses SE fA AAS AB Saf MAUI (951-7, THast, ue 3) naanak aa-ay say parvaan bha-ay je saglay kul taarayn. ||1]| O Nanak, their coming into the world is approved; they redeem all their ancestors.
[21
Hs 3 Il (951-7)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Og frat at niger fra st uid aH aafe Il (951-7, Trat, He 3) guroo jinaa kaa anDhulaa sikh bhee anDhay karam karayn. The disciples whose teacher is blind, act blindly as well.
Gfe se vats nue fs 3S 5S FSlS Il (951-8, Trash, vs 3) o-ay bhaanai chalan aapnai nit jhootho jhooth bolayn. They walk according to their own wills, and continually speak falsehood and lies.
IZ FAS aed us fee Het aaa Il (951-8, gHat, He 3) koorh kusat kamaavday par nindaa sadaa karayn. They practice falsehood and deception, and endlessly slander others.
6fe orfu sa us fSear AIS aw Safe Il (951-9, east, 2 3) O-ay aap dubay par nindkaa saglay kul dobayn. Slandering others, they drown themselves, and drown all their generations as well.
aoe fas Gf we fez oa Cfe aus famr adfe IQ (951-9, mast, He 3)
naanak jit o-ay laa-ay tit lagay u-ay bapurhay ki-aa karayn. ||2||
O Nanak, whatever the Lord links them to, to that they are linked; what can the poor creatures do? ||2||
ust Il (951-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS ded nivfs gee Ast faAfe AS atSt Il (951-10, erat, He 3) sabh nadree andar rakh-daa jaytee sisat sabh keetee. He keeps all under His Gaze; He created the entire Universe.
fefa afs ants wfenig Hone feast il (951-11, erat, H 3)
ik koorh kusat laa-i-an manmukh vigootee.
He has linked some to falsehood and deception; these self-willed manmukhs are plundered.
aToHfa Aer fomretn niefa afe ust i (51-11, oat, ve 3) gurmukh sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai andar har pareetee. The Gurmukhs meditate on the Lord forever; their inner beings are filled with love.
faa ag us ua 3d fq ets frist I (951-12, mast, v8 3) jin ka-o potai punn hai tin" vaat sipeetee. Those who have the treasure of virtue, chant the Praises of the Lord.
Sot oH fren wg fhefs AHaTet IQON (951-12, enraat, He 3) naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sach sifat sanaa-ee. ||10]| O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, and the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||10]|
HB H3 9 Il (951-13) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Ast uy ate AS aH Il (951-13, THast, He 1)
satee paap kar sat kamaahi.
Men of charity gather wealth by committing sins, and then give it away in donations to charity.
ad ftir ufs tee ATT Il (951-13, THe, He 1) gur deekhi-aa ghar dayvan jaahi. Their spiritual teachers go to their homes to instruct them.
fensdt usa ufemt a8 i 951-13, mat, He 1) istaree purkhai khati-ai bhaa-o. The woman loves the man only for his wealth;
ae meg are AE Il (951-14, aH, He 1) bhaavai aava-o bhaavai jaa-o. they come and go as they please.
HAS 82 5 HS Af Il (951-14, Hast, He 1) saasat bayd na maanai ko-ay. No one obeys the Shaastras or the Vedas.
mime nT UAT TPE Il (951-14, THe, He 1) aapo aapai poojaa ho-ay. Everyone worships himself.
oat df= a ad fanrfe i (951-14, mast, He 1) kaajee ho-ay kai bahai ni-aa-ay. Becoming judges, they sit and administer justice.
Sd SHat ad YETe Il (951-15, Tae, He 1) fayray tasbee karay khudaa-ay. They chant on their malas, and call upon God.
Tet BA Ja TSE Il (951-15, Tat, He 1) vadhee lai kai hak gavaa-ay. They accept bribes, and block justice.
A oa ue ot ufs ASS Il (951-15, oat, He 1) jay ko puchhai taa parh sunaa-ay. If someone asks them, they read quotations from their books.
3a Hz ate foe Mis Il (51-15, Hest, He 1) turak mantar kan ridai samaahi. The Muslim scriptures are in their ears and in their hearts.
Ba HT Sfa wat uta i (951-16, mat, He lok muhaaveh chaarhee khaahi. They plunder the people, and engage in gossip and flattery.
wear & a Ae SE I (951-16, mae, He cha-ukaa day kai suchaa ho-ay. They anoint their kitchens to try to become pure.
mr foe Sug aE i (951-16, THA, 3 1) aisaa hindoo vaykhhu ko-ay. Behold, such is the Hindu.
nant farsdt wet FATT Il (951-16, Hast, He 1) jogee girhee jataa bibhoot. The Yogi, with matted hair and ashes on his body, has become a householder.
Mat Ute FefT UT Il (951-17, THe, He 1) aagai paachhai roveh poot. The children weep in front of him and behind him.
na 3 ufeer qafs aeret Il (951-17, east, He 1) jog na paa-i-aa jugat gavaa-ee. He does not attain Yoga - he has lost his way.
fas arafe fafa set uret il (951-17, erat, He 1 kit kaaran sir chhaa-ee paa-ee.
Why does he apply ashes to his forehead? SOA AS A ST UPSTES Il (951-18, Tat, uz 1)
naanak kal kaa ayhu parvaan. O Nanak, this is the sign of the Dark Age of Kali Yuga;
MY MEE MIM ATS IAI (951-18, THT, He 1) aapay aakhan aapay jaan. ||1|| everyone says that he himself knows. ||1]|
He 4% Il (951-18) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
foe & uf foe mS Il (951-18, THT, He 1) hindoo kai ghar hindoo aavai. The Hindu comes to the house of a Hindu.
HS FOS uls ales urs il (951-19, mae, Hs 1) soot janay-oo parh gal paavai. He puts the sacred thread around his neck and reads the scriptures.
AS ute ad afamret i (951-19, neat, 4 1) soot paa-ay karay buri-aa-ee. He puts on the thread, but does evil deeds.
ast ost afe o uret Il (951-19, anraat, He 1) naataa Dhotaa thaa-ay na paa-ee. His cleansings and washings will not be approved.
HAGHS Ad Senet i (951-19, mat, He 1) musalmaan karay vadi-aa-ee. The Muslim glorifies his own faith.
Uar Cu2 fee aa utd & ate & ure Il (952-1, mast, He 1)
vin gur peerai ko thaa-ay na paa-ee. Without the Guru or a spiritual teacher, no one is accepted.
ag ents Ga at ATE I (952-1, mat, He 1 raahu dasaa-ay othai ko jaa-ay. They may be shown the way, but only a few go there.
adel asd fsrfs & ute il (952-1, sae, He 1) karnee baajhahu bhisat na paa-ay. Without the karma of good actions, heaven is not attained.
nat & wife wats SATS I (052-2, Haat, He 1) jogee kai ghar jugat dasaa-ee. The Way of Yoga is demonstrated in the Yogi's monastery.
faz arafe afs Her uret Il (952-2, mnie, He 1) tit kaaran kan mundraa paa-ee. They wear ear-rings to show the way.
Her urfe fed AAAS I (952-2, seat, He 1) mundraa paa-ay firai sansaar. Wearing ear-rings, they wander around the world.
fra fort franeog i) (052-3, mat, He 1) jithai kithai sirjanhaar. The Creator Lord is everywhere.
AS Abr SS ser Il (952-3, meat, we 1) jaytay jee-a taytay vaataa-oo. There are as many travellers as there are beings.
Stat wret Fes 5 aE i (952-3, arraat, v2 1)
cheeree aa-ee dhil na kaa-oo. When one's death warrant is issued, there is no delay.
Se We A wfe free Il (952-3, east, He 1) aythai jaanai so jaa-ay sinjaanai. One who knows the Lord here, realizes Him there as well.
TT SAT (FE HABHE Il (952-4, raat, Hs 1) hor fakarh hindoo musalmaanai. Others, whether Hindu or Muslim, are just babbling.
Haat at uf Sut SE Il (952-4, mast, He 1) sabhnaa kaa dar laykhaa ho-ay. Everyone's account is read in the Court of the Lord;
adat Msg 3d 5 Ale Il (952-4, raat, He 1) karnee baajhahu tarai na ko-ay. without the karma of good actions, no one crosses over.
Ae Ag eure ate Il (952-4, aaa, He 1) sacho sach vakhaanai ko-ay. One who speaks the True Name of the True Lord,
Soa Mal US B AES ill (952-5, Tat, He 1) naanak agai puchh na ho-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, is not called to account hereafter. ||2||
uGat Il (952-5)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
dfs a veg wmdiba afin ae Ts Il (952-5, at, He 1)
har kaa mandar aakhee-ai kaa-i-aa kot garh. The fortress of the body is called the Mansion of the Lord.
wets oe Head TaHfe dfs SH Us Il (952-6, Tat, He 1) andar laal javayharee gurmukh har naam parh. The rubies and gems are found within it; the Gurmukh chants the Name of the Lord.
dfs a veg Adte vifs Ave ofs af on fes I (952-6, mat, nH 1)
har kaa mandar sareer at sohnaa har har naam dirh.
The body, the Mansion of the Lord, is very beautiful, when the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is implanted deep within.
HoH vif unrfenrs ufeor He fos aS Il (952-7, oat, He 1)
manmukh aap khu-aa-i-an maa-i-aa moh nit karh.
The self-willed manmukhs ruin themselves; they boil continuously in attachment to Maya.
Aso Ase Sa Tus star fener AT AU (952-7, THe, Hs 1) sabhnaa saahib ayk hai poorai bhaag paa-i-aa jaa-ee. ||11]| The One Lord is the Master of all. He is found only by perfect destiny. ||11]|
HEX H3 % Il (952-8)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ot Afs eden a Afs Aer a Afs uret HS feats II (952-8, mast, He 1)
naa sat dukhee-aa naa sat sukhee-aa naa sat paanee jant fireh.
There is no Truth in suffering, there is no Truth in comfort. There is no Truth in wandering like animals through the water.
a Afs Hs Heret ant a vfs ufsor en feats I (952-8, meet, He 1)
naa sat moond mudaa-ee kaysee naa sat parhi-aa days fireh.
There is no Truth in shaving one's head; there is no Truth is studying the scriptures or wandering in foreign lands.
o Afs got faedt ued wry servefs ey Agfa Il (952-9, mast, Hs 1) naa sat rukhee birkhee pathar aap tachhaaveh dukh saheh. There is no Truth in trees, plants or stones, in mutilating oneself or suffering in pain.
o Afs JASt sa Hae of Afs aret wg vats Il (952-10, east, He 1) naa sat hastee baDhay sangal naa sat gaa-ee ghaahu chareh. There is no Truth in binding elephants in chains; there is no Truth in grazing cows.
fan ofa fafa 22 A et fan 3 Ufe fon orfe FHS I (952-10, mat, ne 1)
jis hath siDh dayvai jay so-ee jis no day-ay tis aa-ay milai.
He alone grants it, whose hands hold spritual perfection; he alone receives it, unto whom it is given.
soa st aG fs zoret fan we stsfe Age Fe Il (952-11, mae, He VD naanak taa ka-o milai vadaa-ee jis ghat bheetar sabad ravai.
O Nanak, he alone is blessed with glorious greatness, whose heart is filled with the Word of the Shabad.
Afs we Hd 0G Asa viefs faAfs unret fsR ABE aT Il (952-11, raat, He 1)
sabh ghat mayray ha-o sabhnaa andar jisahi khu-aa-ee tis ka-un kahai.
God says, all hearts are mine, and I am in all hearts. Who can explain this to one who is confused?
fants fears west fanfo sere ABE Il (952-12, east, He 1) jisahi dikhaalaa vaatrhee tiseh bhulaavai ka-un. Who can confuse that being, unto whom I have shown the Way?
fants soret uo fafs farfs fears ABS NU (952-12, meat, He 1)
jisahi bhulaa-ee panDh sir tiseh dikhaavai ka-un. ||1]|
And who can show the Path to that being whom I have confused since the beginning of time? ||1]|
He % Il (952-13)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
A faradt Ft feos ae il (952-13, seat, He 1) so girhee jo nigarahu karai. He alone is a householder, who restrains his passions
AU su AA Stim ae Il (952-13, east, He 1) jap tap sanjam bheekhi-aa karai. and begs for meditation, austerity and self-discipline.
US BS At aA Adtd Il (952-14, wast, nz 1) punn daan kaa karay sareer. He gives donations to charity with his body;
A faradt afar at Ste i (52-14, oat, v2 1) so girhee gangaa kaa neer. such a householder is as pure as the water of the Ganges.
a8 etry ARS AGU Il (952-14, ast, He 1) bolai eesar sat saroop. Says Eeshar, the Lord is the embodiment of Truth.
USH SB fs THF TY Ml (952-14, THA, He 1) param tant meh raykh na roop. ||2| | The supreme essence of reality has no shape or form. ||2||
He 4% Il (952-15)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
A m@ust Ff Te my Il (952-15, THe, He 1) so a-uDhootee jo Dhoopai aap. He alone is a detached hermit, who burns away his self-conceit.
fafimr SHO Ad AST I (952-15, Tat, He 1) bhikhi-aa bhojan karai santaap. He begs for suffering as his food.
m@uve uce Hf Stftmr ad Il (952-15, aHast, He 1) a-uhath patan meh bheekhi-aa karai. In the city of the heart, he begs for charity.
A nigust fre ufs gs il (952-16, mat, ws 1) so a-uDhootee siv pur charhai. Such a renunciate ascends to the City of God.
88 day AS AGY Il (952-16, meet, ws 1) bolai gorakh sat saroop. Says Gorakh, God is the embodiment of Truth;
UdH SB fs TY SF TY MSI (952-16, Hast, we 1) param tant meh raykh na roop. |[3]| the supreme essence of reality has no shape or form. ||3]|
He % Il (952-17) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
A Gent fa urs Berm i (052-17, mat, v2 1) SO udaasee je paalay udaas. He alone is an Udasi, a shaven-headed renunciate, who embraces renunciation.
maa Bau ad fade SA Il (952-17, THA, He 1) araDh uraDh karay niranjan vaas. He sees the Immaculate Lord dwelling in both the upper and lower regions.
de AoA at ure aifs il (952-17, aHast, He 1) chand sooraj kee paa-ay gandh. He balances the sun and the moon energies.
fan Cert a us 3 AT I (952-18, mat, He 1) tis udaasee kaa parhai na kanDh. The body-wall of such an Udasi does not collapse.
a8 aut Ge APS ASU Il (952-18, THs, He 1) bolai gopee chand sat saroop. Says Gopi Chand, God is the embodiment of Truth;
USH SB fs THB TY MS (952-18, THs, He 1) param tant meh raykh na roop. ||4|| the supreme essence of reality has no shape or form. ||4]|
He 4% Il (952-19) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
A urdst fa arfemr ued Il (952-19, mast, He 1) so paakhandee je kaa-i-aa pakhaalay. He alone is a Paakhandi, who cleanses his body of filth.
afenr oft nafs FIN UPA Il (952-19, THAT, Hs 1) kaa-i-aa kee agan barahm parjaalay. The fire of his body illuminates God within.
Hue fide o tet Saar il (952-19, aah, H2 1) supnai bind na day-ee jharnaa. He does not waste his energy in wet dreams.
Ua cus
fs uNist AST B HIST Il (953-1, THT, He 1) tis paakhandee jaraa na marnaa. Such a Paakhandi does not grow old or die.
HS VIUS AS AGY Il (953-1, THast, He 1) bolai charpat sat saroop. Says Charpat, God is the embodiment of Truth;
USH SB fs THF TY MUM 53-1, Tat, He param tant meh raykh na roop. ||5|| the supreme essence of reality has no shape or form. ||5]|
He 4% Il (953-2) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
A Saat fr Cae qIH Il (953-2, mast, He 1) so bairaagee je ultay barahm. He alone is a Bairaagi, who turns himself toward God.
Tae Hse fs SU GH Il (953-2, erat, ne 1) gagan mandal meh ropai thamm. In the Tenth Gate, the sky of the mind, he erects his pillar.
mfafafa nists ad forts | (953-2, enact, v3 1) ahinis antar rahai Dhi-aan. Night and day, he remains in deep inner meditation.
3 Fait AS ANTS Il (953-3, THAT, He 1) tay bairaagee sat samaan. Such a Bairaagi is just like the True Lord.
a8 sate ARS AGU Il (953-3, THT, He 1) bolai bharthar sat saroop. Says Bhart'har, God is the embodiment of Truth;
USH 33 Hfs SYS TY MEM (953-3, Tae, He 1) param tant meh raykh na roop. ||6|| the supreme essence of reality has no shape or form. ||6]|
He % Il (953-3) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
faG Hd Het fa He wats | (953-3, saat, He 1) ki-o marai mandaa ki-o jeevai jugat. How is evil eradicated? How can the true way of life be found?
ae uate fom ue sats il (953-4, mast, He 1) kann parhaa-ay ki-aa khaajai bhugat. What is the use of piercing the ears, or begging for food?
mAfs oAfs Sa BE il (953-4, oat, ne 1) aasat naasat ayko naa-o. Throughout existence and non-existence, there is only the Name of the One Lord.
age A nrg fas ad four Il (953-4, anrast, He 1) ka-un so akhar jit rahai hi-aa-o. What is that Word, which holds the heart in its place?
UU ste A AH Ale Ad Il (953-5, Tuas, Hs 1) Dhoop chhaav jay sam kar sahai. When you look alike upon sunshine and shade,
TT SSK MM TT A AT Il (953-5, Tat, v2 1) taa naanak aakhai gur ko kahai. says Nanak, then the Guru will speak to you.
fam Fass FIshT UT Il (953-5, THast, He 1) chhi-a vartaaray varteh poot. The students follow the six systems.
oT AAS ot MISTS Il (953-6, THA, He 1) naa sansaaree naa a-uDhoot. They are neither worldly people, nor detached renunciates.
fsdarfs # Jd ANTE Il (953-6, aorast, we 1) nirankaar jo rahai samaa-ay. One who remains absorbed in the Formless Lord
ard stftmr vats ate Wi (953-6, wat, He 1) kaahay bheekhi-aa mangan jaa-ay. ||7|| - why should he go out begging? ||7]||
UugatT Il (953-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs Hee Het wmiba frag dfs AST I (953-7, Tat, He 1) har mandar so-ee aakhee-ai jithahu har jaataa. That alone is said to be the Lord's temple, where the Lord is known.
HOH @d dd asat Ufent AF MTSH TH USS Il (953-7, THA, He 1)
maanas dayh gur bachnee paa-i-aa sabh aatam raam pachhaataa.
In the human body, the Guru's Word is found, when one understands that the Lord, the Supreme Soul, is in all.
wats His 3 drt we wfs frost i (953-8, meet, He 1)
baahar mool na khojee-ai ghar maahi biDhaataa.
Don't look for Him outside your self. The Creator, the Architect of Destiny, is within the home of your own heart.
HOHY dfs Hes at ATS @ ATEot fst ASH ASST Il (953-8, THA, He 1)
manmukh har mandar kee saar na jaannee tinee janam gavaataa.
The self-willed manmukh does not appreciate the value of the Lord's temple; they waste away and lose their lives.
AS ufo fea Zaser as Aaeet ue AST III (953-9, Tat, He 1)
sabh meh ik varatdaa gur sabdee paa-i-aa jaa-ee. ||12|| The One Lord is pervading in all; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He can be found. ||12]|
HBa HH 3 Il (953-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hay IS A AE HIT A ATS Il (953-9, Tra, ws 3) moorakh hovai so sunai moorakh kaa kahnaa. Only a fool listens to the words of the fool.
Hoe ot for Bue F fot Yaa a ATE Il (953-10, THe, He 3) moorakh kay ki-aa lakhan hai ki-aa moorakh kaa karnaa. What are the signs of the fool? What does the fool do?
Hay Gg fA Hag F MPAs HIST Il (953-10, Tat, He 3) moorakh oh je mugaDh hai aha“kaaray marnaa. A fool is stupid; he dies of egotism.
Sy ane Het ey eu dt xfs goat il (953-11, saat, He 3) ayt kamaanai sadaa dukh dukh hee meh rahnaa. His actions always bring him pain; he lives in pain.
mits fume ue yf fag HAH ATS Il (953-11, TnaMt, we 3) at pi-aaraa pavai khoohi kihu sanjam karnaa. If someone's beloved friend falls into the pit, what can be used to pull him out?
qanfy dfe A ad tere GA mfsus Ta Il 53-11, THA, He 3) gurmukh ho-ay so karay veechaar os alipato rahnaa. One who becomes Gurmukh contemplates the Lord, and remains detached.
dfs om WU orfu Bud GA fue sae St Saat I (53-12, erat, nH: 3)
har naam japai aap uDhrai os pichhai dubday bhee tarnaa.
Chanting the Lord's Name, he saves himself, and he carries across those who are drowning as well.
Sod H fSsH oe A ad HOME A AST NA (953-12, ara, He 3)
naanak jo tis bhaavai so karay jo day-ay so sahnaa. ||1||
O Nanak, he acts in accordance with the Will of God; he endures whatever he is given. |[1]|
He 4% Il (953-13) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Soa MIT FJ HoT HEH fa AT I (953-13, THAT, He 1) naanak aakhai ray manaa sunee-ai sikh sahee. Says Nanak, listen, O mind, to the True Teachings.
But Ig HaHa For afe St il (953-13, mast, He 1) laykhaa rab mangaysee-aa baithaa kadh vahee. Opening His ledger, God will call you to account.
ser uBAlS nition arat frat Tat il (953-14, saat, He 1) talbaa pa-usan aakee-aa baakee jinaa rahee. Those rebels who have unpaid accounts shall be called out.
MATES SAS SH ofS set i (953-14, mat, ve 1) ajraa-eel faraystaa hosee aa-ay ta-ee. Azraa-eel, the Angel of Death, shall be appointed to punish them.
MISE Ae G ABET Stat Tet Sat il (953-15, Haat, He 1)
aavan jaan na sujh-ee bheerhee galee fahee.
They will find no way to escape coming and going in reincarnation; they are trapped in the narrow path.
as foue aso Safa Afs Td QM 53-15, THAT, He 1) koorh nikhutay naankaa orhak sach rahee. ||2|| Falsehood will come to an end, O Nanak, and Truth will prevail in the end. ||2]|
UST Il (953-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs a Ag Ads J ofe afe afer AS MM II 53-16, erat, He 1)
har kaa sabh sareer hai har rav rahi-aa sabh aapai.
The body and everything belongs to the Lord; the Lord Himself is all-pervading. dfs at ahifs 5 ue fas ATE B AU Il (953-16, mat, He 1)
har kee keemat na pavai kichh kahan na jaapai.
The Lord's value cannot be estimated; nothing can be said about it.
ae USAT ATS ofs sarst TU il 953-17, sat, He 1)
gur parsaadee salaahee-ai har bhagtee raapai. By Guru's Grace, one praises the Lord, imbued with feelings of devotion.
AS HO 36 drown dfeur wars TEU I (953-17, THs, He 1) sabh man tan hari-aa ho-i-aa aha‘kaar gavaapai. The mind and body are totally rejuvenated, and egotism is eradicated.
AS fas ofa a ae od ToHfe far gsret 19811 (953-18, mat, He D sabh kichh har kaa khayl hai gurmukh kisai bujhaa-ee. ||13]| Everything is the play of the Lord. The Gurmukh understands this. ||13]|
HBA Hs % Il (953-18) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
HOA BS & fe Sonfenr | (953-18, east, He 1) saha'sar daan day indar ro-aa-i-aa. Branded with a thousand marks of disgrace, Indra cried in shame.
UA TH de whe wrfenr Il (953-19, mat, He 1) paras raam rovai ghar aa-i-aa. Paras Raam returned home crying.
mn A de Sth af= |) (53-19, mat, v2 1)
ajai so rovai bheekhi-aa khaa-ay.
Ajai cried and wept, when he was made to eat the manure he had given, pretending it was Charity.
MA ead fs AATE II (953-19, onIat, He 1) aisee dargeh milai sajaa-ay. Such is the punishment received in the Court of the Lord.
de oH foarer sfemr Il (953-19, aHest, He 1) rovai raam nikaalaa bha-i-aa. Rama wept when he was sent into exile,
yar tug Hist sune fesfs afeur it (954-1, saat, ue 1)
seetaa lakhman vichhurh ga-i-aa. and separated from Sita and Lakhshman.
de tung Sa Tete il fats Als wet Se SHE I (954-1, Treat, we 1)
rovai dehsir lank gavaa-ay. jin seetaa aadee da-uroo vaa-ay.
The ten-headed Raawan, who stole away Sita with the beat of his tambourine, wept when he lost Sri Lanka.
Jefe ulse e HAT II fe x AuMt gas Teta Il (954-2, raat, we 1)
roveh paa“dav bha-ay majoor. jin kai su-aamee rahat hadoor.
The Paandavas once lived in the Presence of the Lord; they were made slaves, and wept.
de Hone ufe afeur | (954-2, mat, He 1) rovai janmayjaa khu-ay ga-i-aa. Janmayjaa wept, that he had lost his way.
Sat arate unit sfenr il (954-3, aaa, He 1) aykee kaaran paapee bha-i-aa.
One mistake, and he became a sinner.
defo Ae HATES utes Il (954-3, mat, He 1) roveh saykh masaa-ik peer.
The Shaykhs, Pirs and spiritual teachers weep; nifs ats HS Bea SS ll (954-3, THast, v2 1)
ant kaal mat laagai bheerh. at the very last instant, they suffer in agony.
defo TH AS USTE Il (954-3, ana, He 1)
roveh raajay kann parhaa-ay. The kings weep - their ears are cut;
wie uta Haifa sth Ate i (954-4, aneet, He 1) ghar ghar maageh bheekhi-aa jaa-ay. they go begging from house to house. defo fasus Hefs ag ATE I (954-4, meat, He
roveh kirpan sa‘cheh Dhan jaa-ay. The miser weeps; he has to leave behind the wealth he has gathered.
ufss defo famirg Tete il (954-4, enact, He 1) pandit roveh gi-aan gavaa-ay. The Pandit, the religious scholar, weeps when his learning is gone.
wet de ay FST Il (954-5, ona, He 1) baalee rovai naahi bhataar. The young woman weeps because she has no husband.
Soa Tb AF AAMT ll (954-5, sat, He 1) naanak dukhee-aa sabh sansaar. O Nanak, the whole world is suffering.
Hd a Aet fats Ate il (954-5, mast, He 1) mannay naa-o so-ee jin jaa-ay. He alone is victorious, who believes in the Lord's Name.
MGdt AGH & BA SLE AU (954-6, Haat, He a-uree karam na laykhai laa-ay. ||1]| No other action is of any account. ||1]||
He 2 Il (954-6) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
my su AS fas Hfont wrefa ara Afs ae Il (954-6, anaat, He 2)
jap tap sabh kichh mani-ai avar kaaraa sabh baad.
Meditation, austerity and everything come through belief in the Lord's Name. All other actions are useless.
Soa Hon Hob ssh ae usaf] iQ (954-6, Hast, He 2) naanak mani-aa mannee-ai bujhee-ai gur parsaad. ||2|| O Nanak, believe in the One who is worth believing in. By Guru's Grace, he is realized.
21 |
ust Il (954-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afenr dA ufs He aes feta ufemr II (954-7, mast, He 2) kaa-i-aa hans Dhur mayl kartai likh paa-i-aa. The union of the body and the soul-swan was pre-ordained by the Creator Lord.
Ag Hfg dug ese" TsHfy yaretfenr | (954-8, anast, He 2) sabh meh gupat varatdaa gurmukh paragtaa-i-aa. He is hidden, and yet pervading all. He is revealed to the Gurmukh.
ae we qe Gud qe ws AN fer I (954-8, enact, He 2)
gun gaavai gun uchrai gun maahi samaa-i-aa.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and chanting His Praises, one merges in His Glories.
Ret set AY od Ae Af frefemr | (954-8, rast, He 2) sachee banee sach hai sach mayl milaa-i-aa. True is the True Word of the Guru's Bani. One unites in Union with the True Lord.
AS foe mt vrf d omy Sfe Sfmt 9g (954-9, aHat, v2 2) sabh kichh aapay aap hai aapay day-ay vadi-aa-ee. ||14|| He Himself is everything; He Himself grants glorious greatness. ||14]|
HBA HH 2 Il (954-9)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
sod nia dfs & Iso" use ATE Il (954-10, rat, He 2) naanak anDhaa ho-ay kai ratnaa parkhan jaa-ay. O Nanak, the blind man may go to appraise the jewels,
Iso" ATS B ATSet wr] ny warfE AI (954-10, oat, He 2) ratnaa saar na jaan-ee aavai aap lakhaa-ay. ||1]| but he will not know their value; he will return home after exposing his ignorance.
[2
H8 2 Il (954-11) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Tsar adt Tat Jast VSt orfe it 954-11, rast, He 2) ratnaa kayree guthlee ratnee kholee aa-ay. The Jeweller has come, and opened up the bag of jewels.
zug 3 Zenfenr wat adt ANTE Il (954-11, are, He 2) vakhar tai vanjaari-aa duhaa rahee samaa-ay. The merchandise and the merchant are merged together.
fio TS Us Foal Hrea Tents AE i (54-11, mat, He 2) jin gun palai naankaa maanak vanjahi say-ay. They alone purchase the gem, O Nanak, who have virtue in their purse.
Iso ATS B Sot wid safe SE i (954-12, anaxet, ve 2) ratnaa saar na jaannee anDhay vateh lo-ay. ||2| |
Those who do not appreciate the value of the jewels, wander like blind men in the world. ||2||
uGat Il (954-12)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
OG Vden Kor az I eA]S TUS THA I (54-12, maa, v2 2)
na-o darvaajay kaa-i-aa kot hai dasvai gupat rakheejai. The fortress of the body has nine gates; the tenth gate is kept hidden.
and Aue & ysal Td Aafe wat Il (954-13, mat, v2 2)
bajar kapaat na khulnee gur sabad khuleejai.
The rigid door is not open; only through the Word of the Guru's Shabad can it be opened.
Wode BH Uf eAe Td Aafe ASIA Il (54-13, THAT, He 2)
anhad vaajay Dhun vajday gur sabad suneejai.
The unstruck sound current resounds and vibrates there. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is heard.
faz we vise weet afe sats fete I (954-14, areat, He 2)
tit ghat antar chaannaa kar bhagat mileejai. Deep within the nucleus of the heart, the Divine Light shines forth. Through devotional worship, one meets the Lord.
Ag fg Sa ease fats wm sae Taret WAU (954-14, ara, He 2) sabh meh ayk varatdaa jin aapay rachan rachaa-ee. ||15]|| The One Lord is pervading and permeating all. He Himself created the creation. ||15]|
HBA HE 2 Il (954-15)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
wid & ofa afin vio df A ATE II (954-15, Hat, He 2) anDhay kai raahi dasi-ai anDhaa ho-ay so jaa-ay. He is truly blind, who follows the way shown by the blind man.
df= Arma soot A fa Ssfs ufé il (954-16, ast, v2 2) ho-ay sujaakhaa naankaa so ki-o ujharh paa-ay. O Nanak, why should the one who can see, get lost?
nia &fs o unite faa yfe Sfee ofe Il (954-16, mast, He 2) anDhay ayhi na aakhee-an jin mukh lo-in naahi. Do not call them blind, who have no eyes in their face.
mit Aet soak MAND We ATT IA (954-16, Hast, He 2) anDhay say-ee naankaa khasmahu ghuthay jaahi. ||1]| They alone are blind, O Nanak, who wander away from their Lord and Master. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (954-17) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Afofs niar Ft athor ad AATaT OE Il (954-17, an1ast, He 2) saahib anDhaa jo kee-aa karay sujaakhaa ho-ay. One whom the Lord has made blind - the Lord can make him see again.
Ad We 3d Zgs AAG nia afe I (954-17, maa, He 2) jayhaa jaanai tayho vartai jay sa-o aakhai ko-ay. He acts only as he knows, although he may be spoken to a hundred times.
fad AH OZAS 6 Wuet nm eas AWTS II (954-18, aH, He 2) jithai so vasat na jaap-ee aapay varta-o jaan. Where the real thing is not seen, self-conceit prevails there - know this well.
Soa Ida fa SE Aa 5 SAS USTs Iii (954-18, THAT, He 2) naanak gaahak ki-o la-ay sakai na vasat pachhaan. ||2]| O Nanak, how can the purshaser purchase the real thing, if he cannot recognize it?
21 |
He 2 Il (954-19)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
A fa wir wmiba fa gong nia dfF Il (954-19, erat, He 2) so ki-o anDhaa aakhee-ai je hukmahu anDhaa ho-ay. How can someone be called blind, if he was made blind by the Lord's Command?
Soa JAH & asset nigr adit AfE Sil (954-19, mat, He 2) naanak hukam na bujh-ee anDhaa kahee-ai so-ay. ||3]|
O Nanak, one who does not understand the Hukam of the Lord's Command should be called blind. ||3]|
Uae cuuy
uGat Il (955-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afenr niefs ag az d Afs fense SAT Il (955-1, eae, He 2)
kaa-i-aa andar garh kot hai sabh disantar daysaa.
Deep within the body is the fortress of the Lord, and all lands and countries. my stat Seig AS HiT UTSAT Il (955-1, THAT, He 2)
aapay taarhee laa-ee-an sabh meh parvaysaa. He Himself sits in primal, profound Samaadhi; He Himself is all-pervading.
nmy fate Abas virfy gus TAAT Il (955-2, mnraat, us 2) aapay Sarisat saajee-an aap gupat rakhaysaa. He Himself created the Universe, and He Himself remains hidden within it.
ad At 3 Wau Ag UPaeleA Il (955-2, aHaat, He 2) gur sayvaa tay jaani-aa sach pargatee-aysaa. Serving the Guru, the Lord is known, and the Truth is revealed.
HS fae Ad Ae J afe ASt UTet NEN (955-3, enIat, He 2) sabh kichh sacho sach hai gur sojhee paa-ee. ||16|| He is True, the Truest of the True; the Guru has imparted this understanding. ||16]|
Ha H2 Y Il (955-3)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Wee of mos fea aH au efe YS Il (955-3, eae, He 1)
saavan raat ahaarh dihu kaam kroDh du-ay khayt.
Night is the summer season, and day is the winter season; sexual desire and anger are the two fields planted.
wer Sz vda Me Test gga IS Il (955-4, anaat, ne 1)
lab vatar darog bee-o haalee raahak hayt.
Greed prepares the soil, and the seed of falsehood is planted; attachment and love are the farmer and hired hand.
J ates fears He gant wes Ute II (955-4, rae, He 1)
hal beechaar vikaar man hukmee khatay khaa-ay.
Contemplation is the plow, and corruption is the harvest; this is what one earns and eats, according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
Soa BH Hfamt MBs Weer ATE Al (955-5, THast, we 1) naanak laykhai mangi-ai a-ut janaydaa jaa-ay. ||1]|| O Nanak, when one is called to give his account, he will be barren and infertile. ||1]|
He 4% Il (955-5) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
38 safe ufeg uat AS HSy BBE Il (955-5, ont, He 1)
bha-o bhu-ay pavit paanee sat santokh balayd.
Make the Fear of God the farm, purity the water, truth and contentment the cows and bulls,
JS Tout Tat fas Sa Fy SUS AAT I (955-6, anraet, He 1)
hal halaymee haalee chit chaytaa vatar vakhat sanjog.
humility the plow, consciousness the plowman, remembrance the preparation of the soil, and union with the Lord the planting time.
oe dtd auHin sum voor Aa Vda Il (955-6, Haat, He 1)
naa-o beej bakhsees bohal dunee-aa sagal darog.
Let the Lord's Name be the seed, and His Forgiving Grace the harvest. Do this, and the whole world will seem false.
Soa Sed AGH de wWefa Aas feria iQ 055-7, mat, He 1) naanak nadree karam ho-ay jaaveh sagal vijog. ||2||
O Nanak, if He bestows His Merciful Glance of Grace, then all your separation will be ended. ||2||
ust Il (955-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Houta Hg Tag I eA StS FB il 955-7, mast, we 1)
manmukh moh gubaar hai doojai bhaa-ay bolai.
The self-willed manmukh is trapped in the darkness of emotional attachment; in the love of duality he speaks.
en afe Ae ey od fas aty feds Il (955-8, mast, we 1)
doojai bhaa-ay sadaa dukh hai nit neer virolai. The love of duality brings pain forever; he churns the water endlessly.
aenty oy fours uff 35 SS | (955-8, Tat, He 1)
gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai math tat kadholai.
The Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he churns, and obtains the essence of reality.
wists usarA wife wear dfs BO SS Il (955-8, mat, He 1)
antar pargaas ghat chaannaa har laDhaa tolai.
The Divine Light illuminates his heart deep within; he seeks the Lord, and obtains Him.
mma sath gotee fas ATE & AEST IVI (955-9, aa, He 1)
aapay bharam bhulaa-idaa kichh kahan na jaa-ee. ||17] | He Himself deludes in doubt; no one can comment on this. ||17]|
HBa HH 2 Il (955-9)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
sod fest xfs agg fest fSA dt Ife i (955-10, eat, ne 2) naanak chintaa mat karahu chintaa tis hee hay-ay. O Nanak, don't be anxious; the Lord will take care of you.
We ufs Hs Curfemrs fae fe Set SHE I (955-10, erat, He 2) jal meh jant upaa-i-an tinaa bhe rojee day-ay. He created the creatures in water, and He gives them their nourishment.
Ga Je 5 weet a a fan adfe Il (955-10, saat, He 2) othai hat na chal-ee naa ko kiras karay-i. There are no stores open there, and no one farms there.
AGT" His 3 Tet BT A BEB UE Il (955-11, Trae, we 2) Sa-udaa mool na hova-ee naa ko la-ay na day-ay. No business is ever transacted there, and no one buys or sells.
Abo at mitarg Abt urar Sg ASE Il (955-11, Hat, He 2) jee-aa kaa aahaar jee-a khaanaa ayhu karay-i. Animals eat other animals; this is what the Lord has given them as food.
feta Cure Afea faar fas ATS ASE Il (955-12, Hast, He 2) vich upaa-ay Saa-iraa tinaa bhe saar karay-i. He created them in the oceans, and He provides for them as well.
Sod fest Hs aaT fos fSA ct HE ai (955-12, sat, vs 2) naanak chintaa mat karahu chintaa tis hee hay-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, don't be anxious; the Lord will take care of you. ||1||
He 4% Il (955-13) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
sod feg AG Heat Steg fSAat aE Il (955-13, Treat, us 1) naanak ih jee-o machhulee jheevar tarisnaa kaal. O Nanak, this soul is the fish, and death is the hungry fisherman.
Hour nig o Bset us vifFs AS Il (955-13, Haat, ws 1) manoo-aa anDh na chayt-ee parhai achintaa jaal. The blind man does not even think of this. And suddenly, the net is cast.
sod fos mes do fest gor ATE I (955-14, raat, He 1) naanak chit achayt hai chintaa baDhaa jaa-ay. O Nanak, his consciousness is unconscious, and he departs, bound by anxiety.
Setd Ad A MTuat ST My BE fate ili (955-14, sat, Hs 1) nadar karay jay aapnee taa aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||2|| But if the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then He unites the soul with Himself.
[21] UgST Il (955-15)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
A 6 Ard Ae Het frat ote oA Utst Il (955-15, aaa, He 1) Say jan saachay sadaa sadaa jinee har ras peetaa. They are true, forever true, who drink in the sublime essence of the Lord.
aenfy Ae Hfs ZA Ae ABST AIST Il (955-15, Tat, He 1) gurmukh sachaa man vasai sach sa-udaa keetaa. The True Lord abides in the mind of the Gurmukh; He strikes the true bargain.
AS fae wa dt fa dF esata SST Il (955-16, Hat, He 1) sabh kichh ghar hee maahi hai vadbhaagee leetaa. Everything is in the home of the self within; only the very fortunate obtain it.
nists fare ufs wet dfs Te ats Ih (955-16, Toast, ue 1)
antar tarisnaa mar ga-ee har gun gaaveetaa.
The hunger within is conquered and overcome, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
mma vfs fHorfenig vind SfE TSE} NACI (955-16, Tat, He 1) aapay mayl milaa-i-an aapay day-ay bujhaa-ee. ||18]| He Himself unites in His Union; He Himself blesses them with understanding. ||18]|
HEX H2 % Il (955-17)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
afs fitetfeur afs gatfenr I 055-17, oat, He 1) vayl pinjaa-i-aa kat gunaa-i-aa. The cotton is ginned, woven and spun;
afe afe afs dfs varfemr | (955-17, oat, He 1) kat kut kar khumb charhaa-i-aa. the cloth is laid out, washed and bleached white.
BI SS Vat US Aet War Ale il (955-18, gHaet, we 1) lohaa vadhay darjee paarhay soo-ee Dhaagaa seevai. The tailor cuts it with his scissors, and sews it with his thread.
fe@ ufs uct frest Akt aaa Hes AS II (955-18, ena, He 1)
i-o pat paatee siftee seepai naanak jeevat jeevai.
Thus, the torn and tattered honor is sewn up again, through the Lord's Praise, O Nanak, and one lives the true life.
of yer aug ure Het War aS I (955-19, Haat, oe 1) ho-ay puraanaa kaparh paatai soo-ee Dhaagaa gandhai. Becoming worn, the cloth is torn; with needle and thread it is sewn up again.
Hg uy fag vs ost wat HIS fs JS il (955-19, eae, He 1)
maahu pakh kihu chalai naahee gharhee muhat kichh handhai.
It will not last for a month, or even a week. It barely lasts for an hour, or even a moment.
Uar cue
Ag udat de dt Ast ae & US Il (956-1, THA, He 1) sach puraanaa hovai naahee seetaa kaday na paatai. But the Truth does not grow old; and when it is stitched, it is never torn again.
soa Avs Ad AM fseg ART AT NA (956-1, sae, He 1
naanak saahib sacho sachaa tichar jaapee jaapai. ||1]||
O Nanak, the Lord and Master is the Truest of the True. While we meditate on Him, we see Him. |[1||
He 4% Il (956-2) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ad at ast AY AS ATS Il (956-2, seat, He 1) sach kee kaatee sach sabh saar. The knife is Truth, and its steel is totally True.
wr fA at mg murs Il (956-2, aHaet, He 1) ghaarhat tis kee apar apaar. Its workmanship is incomparably beautiful.
Hae AS TaTSt STE Il (956-2, anast, He 1) sabday saan rakhaa-ee laa-ay. It is sharpened on the grindstone of the Shabad.
ae at Gat fete marfe i 956-3, erat, v2 1) gun kee thaykai vich samaa-ay. It is placed in the scabbard of virtue.
SA BT Aor de AY Il (956-3, Tat, He 1) tis daa kuthaa hovai saykh. If the Shaykh is killed with that,
BI og feaer Sy Il (956-3, THast, Hs 1) lohoo lab nikthaa vaykh. then the blood of greed will spill out.
df= THs Bal Ther ATE Il (956-3, Tat, He 1) ho-ay halaal lagai hak jaa-ay. One who is slaughtered in this ritualistic way, will be attached to the Lord.
Soa ufe ctetfa mrfe iQ (956-4, aat, He 1)
naanak dar deedaar samaa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, at the Lord's door, he is absorbed into His Blessed Vision. ||2||
He 4% Il (956-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
anfs Kees FAS FA AT MATT Il (956-4, Tat, He 1) kamar kataaraa ba‘kurhaa bankay kaa asvaar. A beautiful dagger hangs by your waist, and you ride such a beautiful horse.
Tse 3 ath Soa HS ffs wis srg SI (956-4, Hat, He 1) garab na keejai naankaa mat sir aavai bhaar. ||3]| But don't be too proud; O Nanak, you may fall head first to the ground. ||3]|
ust II (956-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A AsHafs Aafe fxs A Teufe Vs Il (956-5, Tat, He 1)
so satsangat sabad milai jo gurmukh chalai.
They alone walk as Gurmukh, who receive the Shabad in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
Ae foorfefe A Ad fro of uses Ue Us Il (956-5, sat, He 1)
sach Dhi-aa-in say sachay jin har kharach Dhan palai.
Meditating on the True Lord, they become truthful; they carry in their robes the supplies of the Lord's wealth.
sas Aufe TE Wee Tas n7ss Il (56-6, Haat, He 1)
bhagat sohan gun gaavday gurmat achlai.
The devotees look beautiful, singing the Praises of the Lord; following the Guru's Teachings, they become stable and unchanging.
g30 Steg nfs efhor ag a Aafe FS Il (956-6, Tat, He 1)
ratan beechaar man vasi-aa gur kai sabad bhalai.
They enshrine the jewel of contemplation within their minds, and the most sublime Word of the Guru's Shabad.
mmd Afs farfeer nmr ef sfsniret Atl (956-7, Tat, He 1) aapay mayl milaa-idaa aapay day-ay vadi-aa-ee. ||19]|| He Himself unites in His Union; He Himself grants glorious greatness. ||19]|
HBa H8 3 Il (956-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
nit nets AS a afe foo aE Il (956-8, aHast, He 3) aasaa andar sabh ko ko-ay niraasaa ho-ay. Everyone is filled with hope; hardly anyone is free of hope.
soa A fs Atfemr Afser werfeor APE IAI (956-8, ana, He 3) naanak jo mar jeevi-aa sahilaa aa-i-aa so-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, blessed is the birth of one, who remains dead while yet alive. ||1]|
He 3 Il (956-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
o fxs ort ofa 3 AG foot SE I (956-9, ona, He 3) naa kichh aasaa hath hai kay-o niraasaa ho-ay. Nothing is in the hands of hope. How can one become free of hope?
fomr ad So aust At Soe AE QM (956-9, eat, He 3) ki-aa karay ayh bapurhee jaa" bholaa-ay so-ay. ||2|| What can this poor being do? The Lord Himself creates confusion. ||2]|
ust II (956-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fgg Fie HATS AS 3H fag Il (956-10, arast, Hs 3) Dharig jeevan sansaar sachay naam bin. Cursed is the life in this world, without the True Name.
yg ast usrg fesse SI WS Il (956-10, Treat, us 3) parabh daataa daataar nihchal ayhu Dhan. God is the Great Giver of givers. His wealth is permanent and unchanging.
AfA AA wera fears AE AS Il (956-10, aH, He 3) Saas Saas aaraaDhay nirmal so-ay jan. That humble being is immaculate, who worships the Lord with each and every breath.
MII Me TAS SA FS Il (956-11, THe, He 3)
antarjaamee agam rasnaa ayk bhan.
With your tongue, vibrate the One Inaccessible Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
oe soo Aas Sa Bf AST NOM (956-11, THAT, He 3)
rav rahi-aa sarbat naanak bal jaa-ee. ||20|| He is all-pervading everywhere. Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. ||20]|
HBA Hs Il (956-12)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Hded JA ud dt He WAH SS Sr|T II (956-12, Haat, He 1)
sarvar hans Dhuray hee maylaa khasmai ayvai bhaanaa.
The union between the lake of the True Guru, and the swan of the soul, was pre- ordained from the very beginning, by the Pleasure of the Lord's Will.
Heed vets det Hat A SAT at Urar I (956-12, oat, He 1) sarvar andar heeraa motee so hansaa kaa khaanaa. The diamonds are in this lake; they are the food of the swans.
aI aad o det Adele A Ie wis frat tt (956-13, raat, ve 1) bagulaa kaag na rah-ee sarvar jay hovai at si-aanaa. The cranes and the ravens may be very wise, but they do not remain in this lake.
Gar fara o ufe& Ga Gar gs war il (956-13, sae, He 1) onaa rijak na pa-i-o othai on"aa horo khaanaa. They do not find their food there; their food is different.
Afs SHE Ae ue FS AST HAT Il (956-14, Taw, He 1) sach kamaanai sacho paa-ee-ai koorhai koorhaa maanaa. Practicing Truth, the True Lord is found. False is the pride of the false.
sod fae a Afsag fifeor fro os Uo useTaT IA (56-14, orHat, He 1)
naanak tin kou satgur mili-aa jinaa Dhuray paiyaa parvaanaa. ||1]||
O Nanak, they alone meet the True Guru, who are so pre-destined by the Lord's Command. ||1||
He % Il (956-15) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Wfog Aa Cro A a fats ase i (956-15, eat, He 1) saahib mayraa ujlaa jay ko chit karay-i. My Lord and Master is immaculate, as are those who think of Him.
Sod ASt Aba Ae Het AH STE Il (956-15, at, He 1 naanak so-ee sayvee-ai sadaa sadaa jo day-ay. O Nanak, serve Him, who gives to you forever and ever.
Soa Het Adba fas Afet vu ATE I 56-16, eat, He 1) naanak so-ee sayvee-ai jit sayvi-ai dukh jaa-ay. O Nanak, serve Him; by serving Him, sorrow is dispelled.
weae <efs qe defo Hfs AY ZA nrfe QI (956-16, THAT, He 1)
avgun vanjan gun raveh man sukh vasai aa-ay. ||2||
Faults and demerits vanish, and virtues take their place; peace comes to dwell in the mind. ||2]|
Uugat Il (956-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
my orf ease orf sat wes Il (956-17, THast, He 1)
aapay aap varatdaa aap taarhee laa-ee-an. He Himself is all-pervading; He Himself is absorbed in the profound state of Samaadhi.
my dt Guene aaHfe ushareinig Il (956-17, mat, He 1) aapay hee updaysdaa gurmukh patee-aa-ee-an. He Himself instructs; the Gurmukh is satisfied and fulfilled.
fefa nrg Gsfs urfimig feta saat wfenisg Il (956-18, sHaat, He 1) ik aapay ujharh paa-i-an ik bhagtee laa-i-an.
Some, He causes to wander in the wilderness, while others are committed to His devotional worship.
fan orf ase A SSAt nmr ofe wrenig Il (956-18, mat, He 1)
jis aap bujhaa-ay so bujhsee aapay naa-ay laa-ee-an.
He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand; He Himself attaches mortals to His Name.
Soa OH fomreha Aet sfsnret QUI AT Il (956-19, Hat, He 1)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sachee vadi-aa-ee. ||21||1|| suDh. O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, true greatness is obtained. [|21] [1] | Sudh]|
Ua cud
THaSt at Sg HIS U (957-1)
raamkalee kee vaar mehlaa 5 Vaar Of Raamkalee, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas urrfe I (957-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa HU Il (957-2)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
AAT Afsag Hate’ SA dt HA ste Il (957-2, mnt, He 5) jaisaa satgur suneedaa taiso hee mai deeth. As I have heard of the True Guru, so I have seen Him.
fesfaor HS ys ofa edad a SAIS Il (957-2, mast, He 5) vichhurhi-aa maylay parabhoo har dargeh kaa baseeth. He re-unites the separated ones with God; He is the Mediator at the Court of the Lord.
ofs on Hy feafeet ae IH FT I (957-3, Hat, H: 5) har naamo mantar darirhaa-idaa katay ha-umai rog. He implants the Mantra of the Lord's Name, and eradicates the illness of egotism.
soa Afsag foot frerfeor frat od ufeor Aaa WAI (957-3, THEStT, He 5) naanak satgur tinaa milaa-i-aa jinaa Dhuray pa-i-aa sanjog. ||1]| O Nanak, he alone meets the True Guru, who has such union pre-ordained. ||1]|
He U Il (957-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fea Ane Afs AHS fea Sct Afs SHE I 57-4, eHaaH, He 5)
ik sajan sabh sajnaa ik vairee sabh vaad.
If the One Lord is my Friend, then all are my friends. If the One Lord is my enemy, then all fight with me.
afs us turfeur fee ae AS fe il (957-4, mat, Hs 5) gur poorai daykhaali-aa vin naavai sabh baad. The Perfect Guru has shown me that, without the Name, everything is useless.
WAS TINS Soot AH Ba SA ATS Il (957-5, Tae, we 5)
saakat durjan bharmi-aa jo lagay doojai saad.
The faithless cynics and the evil people wander in reincarnation; they are attached to other tastes.
Ae oofa ofa ys sfsur ag Afsag & usAfe NQI (957-5, oat, He 5) jan naanak har parabh bujhi-aa gur satgur kai parsaad. ||2]| Servant Nanak has realized the Lord God, by the Grace of the Guru, the True Guru.
[21]
Uugat Il (957-6)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
Besa ae nt ot afent | (957-6, mast, He 5)
thatanhaarai thaat aapay hee thati-aa. The Creator Lord created the Creation.
mint ust Arg nim St ufent | 57-6, sHast, He 5)
aapay pooraa saahu aapay hee khati-aa. He Himself is the perfect Banker; He Himself earns His profit.
mm afs uA wm Jat Sfentt Il (957-6, anast, He 5)
aapay Kar paasaar aapay rang rati-aa. He Himself made the expansive Universe; He Himself is imbued with joy.
Fests aH o ute mee qanfeni i (957-7, mat, w3 5) kudrat keem na paa-ay alakh barahmati-aa. The value of God's almighty creative power cannot be estimated.
Wa METS Anis ud usfeni il (957-7, ast, He 5) agam athaah bay-ant parai parti-aa. He is inaccessible, unfathomable, endless, the farthest of the far.
mma es ufsATg orfy eatefent il (957-8, sat, He 5) aapay vad paatisaahu aap vajeerti-aa. He Himself is the greatest Emperor; He Himself is His own Prime Minister.
afe 6 we oth aes Hfenr il (057-8, mat, He 5) ko-ay na jaanai keem kayvad mati-aa. No one knows His worth, or the greatness of His resting place.
Ae Atos wify genta usatemt all (957-8, aHast, He 5)
sachaa saahib aap gurmukh pargati-aa. ||1]|| He Himself is our True Lord and Master. He reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||1]|
H@a Hs U Il (957-9) salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Afs Ane UtsH Afr H Afsag te feats II (957-9, snat, 2 5) sun sajan pareetam mayri-aa mai satgur dayh dikhaal. Listen, O my beloved friend: please show me the True Guru.
o@ faq tat Ho mma fas fore gat AAS II (957-9, ana, He 5) ha-o tis dayvaa man aapnaa nit hirdai rakhaa samaal. I dedicate my mind to Him; I keep Him continually enshrined within my heart.
fean Afsaa soe fog ates AAS I (957-10, art, Hs 5) ikas satgur baahraa Dharig jeevan sansaar. Without the One and Only True Guru, life in this world is cursed.
He aed Afsag fear frerteGe faa Ae dt eas of IA (957-10, mnraet, He 5) jan naanak satgur tinaa milaa-i-on jin sad hee vartai naal. ||1]| O servant Nanak, they alone meet the True Guru, with whom He constantly abides.
[21
He U Il (957-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Ad nists Se foe at fa urer ys Sfo i (957-11, sre, ue 5) mayrai antar lochaa milan kee ki-o paavaa parabh tohi. Deep within me is the longing to meet You; how can I find You, God?
aot wnt Ane Sfs wg AS Ulsy fs I (957-12, mat, v8 5) ko-ee aisaa sajan lorh lahu jo maylay pareetam mohi. I will search for someone, some friend, who will unite me with my Beloved.
afs ys Heotenr ws Sar Ss ALS Il (957-12, Trash, Hs 5) gur poorai maylaa-i-aa jat daykhaa tat so-ay. The Perfect Guru has united me with Him; wherever I look, there He is.
He ood A us Afeur fSH Aes leg 3 ALE MQM (957-13, mast, He 5) jan naanak so parabh sayvi-aa tis jayvad avar na ko-ay. ||2|| Servant Nanak serves that God; there is no other as great as He is. ||2]|
ugat Il (957-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
desu wag fos yf Aas I (957-13, aH, He 5)
dayvanhaar daataar kit mukh salaahee-ai.
He is the Great Giver, the Generous Lord; with what mouth can I praise Him? fan oe fxour ofa fore ANTS I (957-14, mat, He 5)
jis rakhai kirpaa Dhaar rijak samaahee-ai. In His Mercy, He protects, preserves and sustains us.
afe o fan dt ef Ago fea ag I (957-14, rat, He 5) ko-ay na kis hee vas sabhnaa ik Dhar. No one is under anyone else's control; He is the One Support of all.
Us Sea efor SF at wif aT Il (957-15, THaat, He 5) paalay baalak vaag day kai aap kar. He cherishes all as His children, and reaches out with His hand.
aoe mise fase fos o AEM Il (957-15, TMM, He 5) kardaa anad binod kichhoo na jaanee-dai. He stages His joyous plays, which no one understands at all.
Hea os AHeE UC fSA ATES Il (957-15, TH, He 5) sarab Dhaar samrath ha-o tis kurbaanee-ai. The all-powerful Lord gives His Support to all; Iam a sacrifice to Him.
aeha ofs fess ares afamr il (957-16, aH, He 5) gaa-ee-ai raat dinant gaavan jogi-aa. Night and day, sing the Praises of the One who is worthy of being praised.
A ae at uct ute fast afe aA Sfamr Ni (957-16, aH, He 5) jo gur kee pairee paahi tinee har ras bhogi-aa. ||2|| Those who fall at the Guru's Feet, enjoy the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2]|
HBa HU Il (957-17)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Stag Hawt atsinig AS Ta ASH of I (957-17, THA, v2 5)
bheerhahu moklaa-ee keetee-an sabh rakhay kutambi naal.
He has widened the narrow path for me, and preserved my integrity, along with that of my family.
aan uify netfanig A us Het Aarts il (957-17, seat, He 5) kaaraj aap savaari-an so parabh sadaa sabhaal. He Himself has arranged and resolved my affairs. I dwell upon that God forever.
ug Hs fust af ofeer ws a UTS Il (957-18, oat, He 5)
parabh maat pitaa kanth laa-idaa lahurhay baalak paal.
God is my mother and father; He hugs me close in His embrace, and cherishes me, like His tiny baby.
efenres ge AS rhea Ay afe soa Sefs fers IAI (957-18, THe, He 5)
da-i-aal ho-ay sabh jee-a jantar har naanak nadar nihaal. ||1]|
All beings and creatures have become kind and compassionate to me. O Nanak, the Lord has blessed me with His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
Uae cut
He U Il (958-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fee 30 dg fa Hae ffs eat a Se Il (958-1, met, He 5) vin tuDh hor je mangnaa sir dukhaa kai dukh. To ask for any other than You, Lord, is the most miserable of miseries.
efo an Hsdion Cad He at Su Il (958-1, mat, He 5)
deh naam santokhee-aa utrai man kee bhukh.
Please bless me with Your Name, and make me content; may the hunger of my mind be satisfied.
afe ze fe sfaur atfaur aoa fom Hoe N21 (958-2, Hat, He 5)
gur van tin hari-aa keeti-aa naanak ki-aa manukh. ||2]|
The Guru has made the woods and meadows green again. O Nanak, is it any wonder that He blesses human beings as well? ||2||
u@at Il (958-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A MAT BST HST © SIA Il (958-2, Haat, He 5) SO aisaa daataar manhu na veesrai. Such is that Great Giver; may I never forget Him from my mind.
wet o HIS BAT fSH fie oA Il (958-3, Haat, He 5) gharhee na muhat chasaa tis bin naa sarai. I cannot survive without Him, for an instant, for a moment, for a second.
nists aots Afar famr & ofa AT Il (958-3, THaST, He 5) antar baahar sang ki-aa ko luk karai. Inwardly and outwardly, He is with us; how can we hide anything from Him?
fan ufs se rfl A seHw 3d Il (058-4, mat, He 5) jis pat rakhai aap so bhavjal tarai. One whose honor He Himself has preserved, crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
sas famret sur fan farsur ag Il (958-4, east, He 5)
bhagat gi-aanee tapaa jis kirpaa karai.
He alone is a devotee, a spiritual teacher, and a disciplined pratictioner of meditation, whom the Lord has so blessed.
A Ya usage fAA S 8S Ue Il (958-4, mnaatt, wes 5)
SO pooraa parDhaan jis no bal Dharai.
He alone is perfect and renowned as supreme, whom the Lord has blessed with His power.
fants Aee orf Het oT AS Il (958-5, THA, He 5) jisahi jaraa-ay aap so-ee ajar jarai. He alone endures the unendurable, whom the Lord inspires to endure it.
fsn ct fifeor Ag HZ as His Us NSN (958-5, aneet, He 5) tis hee mili-aa sach mantar gur man Dharai. ||3]| And he alone meets the True Lord, within whose mind the Guru's Mantra is implanted.
[I3I|
HBA Hs U Il (958-6)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Uo Aa Ada wees AS fsu AWE I (958-6, raat, He 5) Dhan so raag surangrhay aalaapat sabh tikh jaa-ay. Blessed are those beautiful Ragas which, when chanted, quench all thirst.
U9 AAs Aves A Tenia Aue aE Il (958-6, east, He 5) Dhan so jant suhaavrhay jo gurmukh japday naa-o. Blessed are those beautiful people who, as Gurmukh, chant the Name of the Lord.
frat fea ufo fea merftor fae ne afeaod ATE I (958-7, mat, He 5) jinee ik man ik araaDhi-aa tin sad balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who single-mindedly worship and adore the One Lord.
fae at ofs oH wee aeHt us ue Il (958-7, snast, v3 5) tin kee Dhoorh ham baachh-day karmee palai paa-ay. I yearn for the dust of their feet; by His Grace, it is obtained.
A os ofa afee a a fso sfead WE II (958-8, maa, He 5) jo ratay rang govid kai ha-o tin balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who are imbued with love for the Lord of the Universe.
mira fagar Aba at afs AAS HOI ITE Il (958-8, aHaat, He 5)
aakhaa birthaa jee-a kee har sajan maylhu raa-ay.
I tell them the state of my soul, and pray that I may be united with the Sovereign Lord King, my Friend.
afs us Herfenr AoH He Ty ATE Il (958-9, Treat, He 5)
gur poorai maylaa-i-aa janam maran dukh jaa-ay.
The Perfect Guru has united me with Him, and the pains of birth and death have departed.
AS oot UfeMit mia JU Mas 3 ATT AME IA (958-9, Tat, HE 5)
jan naanak paa-i-aa agam roop anat na kaahoo jaa-ay. ||1]|
Servant Nanak has found the inaccessible, infinitely beautiful Lord, and he will not go anywhere else. ||1]|
He U Il (958-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
US A SH ust Ug UG HSS US APG Il (958-10, aast, vs 5)
Dhan so vaylaa gharhee Dhan Dhan moorat pal saar.
Blessed is that time, blessed is that hour, blessed is that second, excellent is that instant;
Uo FH feor Anas fas fser qe FIAT Il (958-10, erat, He 5)
Dhan so dinas sanjogrhaa jit dithaa gur darsaar.
blessed is that day, and that opportunity, when I gazed upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
Ho other fear udhor ats user ora mrurg Il (958-11, mest, He 5) man kee-aa ichhaa pooree-aa har paa-i-aa agam apaar. The mind's desires are fulfilled, when the inaccessible, unfathomable Lord is obtained.
ICH 3a" Hust fea AT BH MME Il (958-11, THA, He 5)
ha-umai tutaa mohrhaa ik sach naam aaDhaar.
Egotism and emotional attachment are eradicated, and one leans only on the Support of the True Name.
HO sod wa As ofa Gufs Aa AAT MQM (958-12, mat, He 5)
jan naanak lagaa sayv har uDhri-aa sagal sansaar. ||2| |
O servant Nanak, one who is committed to the Lord's service - the whole world is saved along with him. ||2]|
UugaT Il (958-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
frefs Howe sats fees fesinig Il (958-12, mast, He 5) sifat salaahan bhagat virlay ditee-an. How rare are those who are blessed to praise the Lord, in devotional worship.
Agu faA sad fefs us o SS Il (958-13, oH, v2 5)
Sa-upay jis bhandaar fir puchh na leetee-an.
Those who are blessed with the Lord's treasures are not called to give their account again.
fAA & Gar da A dfa afsmr Il (958-13, erat, He 5) jis no lagaa rang say rang rati-aa. Those who are imbued with His Love are absorbed in ecstasy.
Gar feat on wore fear Bo sfsur Il (958-14, oHaat, He 5) onaa iko naam aDhaar ikaa un bhati-aa. They take the Support of the One Name; the One Name is their only food.
Gar fue wa So Sat | (958-14, eHaat, He 5) onaa pichhai jag bhunchai bhog-ee. For their sake, the world eats and enjoys.
Gar fimra ga Gora Haret I 58-14, Haat, He 5) Onaa pi-aaraa rab onaahaa jog-ee. Their Beloved Lord belongs to them alone.
faa fifeor ag orfe fats ys aAtfemt i (58-15, ast, 12 5) jis mili-aa gur aa-ay tin parabh jaani-aa. The Guru comes and meets them; they alone know God.
JG afeodt faq fa wAN atfenr igi (658-15, aHat, He 5) ha-o balihaaree tin je khasmai bhaani-aa. ||4| I am a Sacrifice to those who are pleasing to their Lord and Master. ||4] |
HBa H8 U Il (958-16)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
dfs fear afe 4 ent afe fear ofs H Sa Il (958-16, erat, He 5) har iksai naal mai dostee har iksai naal mai rang. My friendship is with the One Lord alone; I am in love with the One Lord alone.
dfs fea Hat ANE Jha fan ats H AT I (58-16, mat, He 5) har iko mayraa sajno har iksai naal mai sang. The Lord is my only friend; my companionship is with the One Lord alone.
dfs fear af 4 GAS HT HoT Ad B ST Il (958-17, Tat, He 5) har iksai naal mai gostay muhu mailaa karai na bhang. My conversation is with the One Lord alone; He never frowns, or turns His face away.
we fager rh at ae 6 HS ST Il (958-17, THe, He 5) jaanai birthaa jee-a kee kaday na morhai rang. He alone knows the state of my soul; He never ignores my love.
dfs feat Hat HASSt SHE WSS AHA Il (958-18, mat, v2 5) har iko mayraa maslatee bhannan gharhan samrath. He is my only counselor, all-powerful to destroy and create.
dfs fea Ha wag 3 fafs efor Aa TE Il (958-18, mat, He 5)
har iko mayraa daataar hai sir daati-aa jag hath.
The Lord is my only Giver. He places His hand upon the heads of the generous in the world.
dfs fear ath 2a 3 a fafs Ago" ANE I (58-19, act, He 5)
har iksai dee mai tayk hai jo sir sabhnaa samrath.
I take the Support of the One Lord alone; He is all-powerful, over the heads of all. Afsafe Hs frerfemr nAsfa uf & TE Il (958-19, aa, He 5)
satgur sant milaa-i-aa mastak Dhar kai hath.
The Saint, the True Guru, has united me with the Lord. He placed His hand on my forehead.
yar tur za Ateg ag fhofeor fafs afar Aare Aas Il (959-1, Hast, He 5)
vadaa saahib guroo milaa-i-aa jin taari-aa sagal jagat. The Guru led me to meet the greatest Lord and Master; He saved the whole world.
Ho other fear usher urfenr ofe Arta Il (959-1, THE, He 5) man kee-aa ichhaa pooree-aa paa-i-aa Dhur sanjog. The desires of the mind are fulfilled; I have attained my pre-destined Union with God.
Sod Ufo A oH Ae dt Sa Sa NA (959-2, snrast, He 5) naanak paa-i-aa sach naam sad hee bhogay bhog. ||1|| Nanak has obtained the True Name; He enjoys the enjoyments forever. ||1]|
He U Il (959-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HOHe adt SASt Hfeor at AST Il (959-2, oH, v2 5) manmukhaa kayree dostee maa-i-aa kaa san-banDh. Friendship with the self-willed manmukhs is an alliance with Maya.
zufenr dt afa afe ae o ufefe sa Il (959-3, mat, He 5) vaykh-di-aa hee bhaj jaan kaday na paa-in banDh. As we watch, they run away; they never stand firm.
favs uote urea fsug sufe ate Il (959-3, anraat, ne 5) jichar painan khaavn"ay tichar rakhan gandh. As long as they get food and clothing, they stick around.
fas fefs fae o Jeet fea fefs safe ata il (959-4, anaet, v8 5) jit din kichh na hova-ee tit din bolan ganDh. But on that day when they receive nothing, then they start to curse.
aba at ATS 3B ATeot HOHE wifamrat nig Il (959-4, mat, He 5)
jee-a kee saar na jaannee manmukh agi-aanee anDh.
The self-willed manmukhs are ignorant and blind; they do not know the secrets of the soul.
Is Ie vHet feats uss ST Il (959-5, raat, 3 5) koorhaa gandh na chal-ee chikarh pathar banDh. The false bond does not last; it is like stones joined with mud.
nid nity o Heal cas fuefs dO I (959-5, aHaat, Hs 5)
anDhay aap na jaannee fakarh pitan DhanDh.
The blind do not understand themselves; they are engrossed in false worldly entanglements.
36 Hf suctemr IS IS aes fHTT II (959-6, aa, Hi: 5) jhoothai mohi laptaa-i-aa ha-o ha-o karat bihanDh. Entangled in false attachments, they pass their lives in egotism and self-conceit.
fgur ad faa uruat ufs ust aH ASE II (959-6, Hast, Hi: 5)
kirpaa karay jis aapnee Dhur pooraa karam karay-i.
But that being, whom the Lord has blessed with His Mercy from the very beginning, does perfect deeds, and accumulates good karma.
Ho Soa A AS Cad FH Afsag Aas us III (959-7, Tat, He 5)
jan naanak say jan ubray jo satgur saran paray. ||2||
O servant Nanak, those humble beings alone are saved, who enter the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||2||
uQat II (959-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A gS ders ASt AG Ter Il (959-7, aaa, He 5) jo ratay deedaar say-ee sach haak. Those who are imbued with the Lord's Vision, speak the Truth.
frat AST UAH fa we fear ue Il (959-7, ania, He 5) jinee jaataa khasam ki-o labhai tinaa khaak. How can I obtain the dust of those who realize their Lord and Master?
HO Hor ears de Afat us Il (959-8, saat, He 5) man mailaa vaykaar hovai sang paak. The mind, stained by corruption, becomes pure by associating with them.
fe Ae HIG Us SIH SA Il (959-8, Haat, He 5) disai sachaa mahal khulai bharam taak. One sees the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, when the door of doubt is opened.
fants fears Hoe fan & fxs Ore II (959-9, erat, He 5)
jisahi dikhaalay mahal tis na milai Dhaak.
That one, unto whom the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is revealed, is never pushed or shoved.
Ho 36 dle fous fea sefa se II (959-9, meat, He 5)
man tan ho-ay nihaal bindak nadar jhaak.
My mind and body are enraptured, when the Lord blesses me, even for an instant, with His Glance of Grace.
o@ fofa an fours aa & Aafe wa Il (959-9, aHat, H2 5) na-o niDh naam niDhaan gur kai sabad laag.
The nine treasures, and the treasure of the Naam are obtained by commitment to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fSA fies HS we HASfea AA Sa UII (959-10, aH, He 5)
tisai milai sant khaak mastak jisai bhaag. ||5]|
He alone is blessed with the dust of the feet of the Saints, upon whose forehead such pre-ordained desiny is inscribed. ||5||
HBa H8 U Il (959-10)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Jsent F AY SS Hae A IG aT Surges Il (959-11, anaes, we 5) harnaakhee koo sach vain sunaa-ee jo ta-o karay uDhaaran. O deer-eyed bride, I speak the Truth, which shall save you.
Hed 300 SH Hed seit fug Sa Ho AUSSI (959-11, Haat, He 5)
sundar bachan tum sunhu chhabeelee pir taidaa man saaDhaaran.
Listen to these beautiful words, O beauteous bride; your Beloved Lord is your mind's only support.
wane Ast og Jotes afk fe H arge Il (959-12, mnrast, He 5) durjan saytee nayhu rachaa-i-o das vikhaa mai kaaran. You have fallen in love with an evil person; tell me - show me why!
Cat wat sat aat ardt far fegat i (959-12, matt, Hs 5) oonee naahee jhoonee naahee naahee kisai vihoonee. I lack nothing, and I am not sad or depressed; I have no deficiency at all.
fug 25 sate afs aetes voufs aath feget i (959-13, mraat, we 5)
pir chhail chhabeelaa chhad gavaa-i-o durmat karam vihoonee.
I abandoned and lost my fascinating and beautiful Husband Lord; in this evil- mindedness, I have lost my good fortune.
ot I sat a IG Vat oH Brat SAT Il (959-13, naa, He 5)
naa ha-o bhulee naa ha-o chukee naa mai naahee dosaa.
I am not mistaken, and I am not confused; I have no egotism, and commit no offense.
fag 3S wet fz IS Balt 3 Afe AG AAT II (959-14, anrast, M3 5) jit ha-o laa-ee tit ha-o lagee too sun sach sandaysaa. As You have linked me, so I am linked; listen to my true message.
Wet Hoafs ATet avafs A fufs forsur UTdt I (959-14, arat, He 5)
Saa-ee sohagan saa-ee bhaagan jai pir kirpaa Dhaaree.
She alone is the blessed soul-bride, and she alone is fortunate, upon whom the Husband Lord has showered His Mercy.
fufs ae fsn a Afs Teves aes ASt Ole Aes I (959-15, saat, Hs 5)
pir a-ugan tis kay sabh gavaa-ay gal saytee laa-ay savaaree.
Her Husband Lord takes away all her faults and mistakes; hugging her close in His embrace, He embellishes her.
add us ad fadst afe Soa ni] Se Il (959-15, Tat, He 5) karamheen Dhan karai binantee kad naanak aavai vaaree. The unfortunate soul-bride makes this prayer: O Nanak, when will my turn come?
Afs Haas Hats sor fea te TAS HASH IA (59-16, Hat, He 5)
sabh suhaagan maaneh ralee-aa ik dayvhu raat muraaree. ||1]|
All the blessed soul-brides celebrate and make merry; bless me as well with a night of bliss, O Lord. ||1]|
He U Il (959-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HI HS J SHS Tia HOA UIST Il (959-17, Tas, us 5) kaahay man too doltaa har mansaa pooranhaar. Why do you waver, O my mind? The Lord is the Fulfiller of hopes and desires.
Afsag usy fomrfe 3 vfs wa ferrseag Il (959-17, mast, v2 5) satgur purakh Dhi-aa-ay too sabh dukh visaaranhaar. Meditate on the True Guru, the Primal Being; He is the Destroyer of all pains.
dfs ont mata Ho Afs faofes ats fears Il (959-18, sat, H 5)
har naamaa aaraaDh man sabh kilvikh jaahi vikaar.
Worship and adore the Lord's Name, O my mind; all sins and corruption shall be washed away.
fe a@ usta faftimr fae ga war faders il (959-18, Haat, He 5)
jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin rang lagaa nirankaar.
Those who are blessed with such pre-ordained destiny, are in love with the Formless Lord.
Got efsur wrfeor Ayrest ug AfeMr oH nus Il (959-19, Hat, He 5) onee chhadi-aa maa-i-aa su-aavarhaa Dhan sanchi-aa naam apaar. They abandon the tastes of Maya, and gather in the infinite wealth of the Naam.
Wd udd feas fos Hof JOH wus Il (59-19, mat, He 5)
athay pahar iktai livai mannayn hukam apaar.
Twenty-four hours a day, they are lovingly absorbed in the One Lord; they surrender and accept the Will of the Infinite Lord.
User cEo
HO aod Hat we fea tg van fe fimrg 12 (960-1, east, He 5)
jan naanak mangai daan ik dayh daras man pi-aar. ||2||
Servant Nanak begs for this one gift: please bless me, Lord, with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; my mind is in love with You. ||2||
ust Il (960-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan 3 refs fefs fA S FET AY I (960-1, Tat, He 5) jis too aavahi chit tis no sadaa sukh. One who is conscious of You finds everlasting peace.
fan 3 orefa fefs fsa AH ofa Te Il (960-2, mast, He 5) jis too aavahi chit tis jam naahi dukh. One who is conscious of You does not suffer at the hands of the Messenger of Death.
faa 3 orefs fefs fsa fo arfamr i (960-2, erat, 42 5) jis too aavahi chit tis ke kaarhi-aa. One who is conscious of You is not anxious.
fan a ads fey Afs OH AetfaMr Il (960-3, Ie, He 5) jis daa kartaa mitar sabh kaaj savaari-aa. One who has the Creator as his Friend - all his affairs are resolved.
fan 3 refs fats A usSS AG Il (960-3, Treat, we 5) jis too aavahi chit so parvaan jan. One who is conscious of You is renowned and respected.
fan 3 orefa fefs agst fSH Ue II (960-3, mast, He 5) jis too aavahi chit bahutaa tis Dhan. One who is conscious of You becomes very wealthy.
faa 3 vrefe fats A es usefanr Il (960-4, grast, He 5) jis too aavahi chit so vad parvaari-aa. One who is conscious of You has a great family.
fan 3 orefa fats fats ae Surfamr El (960-4, erat, H 5) jis too aavahi chit tin kul uDhaari-aa. ||6] | One who is conscious of You saves his ancestors. ||6]|
HBa H8 U Il (960-5)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
nivag niat aay vist Fat TST IS Il (960-5, Hawt, 2 5) andrahu annaa baahrahu annaa koorhee koorhee gaavai. Blind inwardly, and blind outwardly, he sings falsely, falsely.
oot Ue va gave wife 6 aT We Il (960-5, met, He 5) dayhee Dhovai chakar banaa-ay maa-i-aa no baho Dhaavai. He washes his body, and draws ritual marks on it, and totally runs after wealth.
nets HS 3 Gad JH feta fefa wire AS I (960-6, enIaat, He 5)
andar mail na utrai ha-umai fir fir aavai jaavai.
But the filth of his egotism is not removed from within, and over and over again, he comes and goes in reincarnation.
ote feurfimr afk Hafimr Hug fs af aTS Il (960-6, mat, He 5)
nee"d vi-aapi-aa kaam santaapi-aa mukhahu har har kahaavai.
Engulfed in sleep, and tormented by frustrated sexual desire, he chants the Lord's Name with his mouth.
SHS OH AGH JC HAST Sd ae fort Sw urs Il (960-7, met, 2 5)
baisno naam karam ha-o jugtaa tuh kutay ki-aa fal paavai.
He is called a Vaishnav, but he is bound to deeds of egotism; by threshing only husks, what rewards can be obtained?
unm fefs For sa o Beet fas Hor Het S 3ST Be Il (960-7, Tat, He 5)
hansaa vich baithaa bag na ban-ee nit baithaa machhee no taar laavai.
Sitting among the swans, the crane does not become one of them; sitting there, he keeps staring at the fish.
Ww dn AS deg afe tufs a gar of As AS 5 NIMS Il (960-8, Tat, He 5)
jaa hans sabhaa veechaar kar daykhan taa bagaa naal jorh kaday na aavai.
And when the gathering of swans looks and sees, they realize that they can never form an alliance with the crane.
oA Stat HSt Vast Fa 3S" SHE ATS Il (960-9, Tat, He 5) hansaa heeraa motee chugnaa bag dadaa bhaalan jaavai. The swans peck at the diamonds and pearls, while the crane chases after frogs.
Csfonr surat ga HS TS HE BAS | (960-9, raat, He 5) udri-aa vaychaaraa bagulaa mat hovai manj lakhaavai. The poor crane flies away, so that his secret will not be exposed.
fas a ofenr fas dt oar fan oH fed a af SS SS Il (960-10, rast, He 5)
jit ko laa-i-aa tit hee laagaa kis dos dichai jaa har ayvai bhaavai.
Whatever the Lord attaches one to, to that he is attached. Who is to blame, when the Lord wills it so?
Afsag Ades Isat says fA yrUfS A Ure Il (960-10, mat, 48 5)
satgur sarvar ratnee bharpooray jis paraapat so paavai.
The True Guru is the lake, overflowing with pearls. One who meets the True Guru obtains them.
fu SH Hdefs feas Je Afsas A JAHS Il (960-11, THs, nH 5) sikh hans sarvar ikthay ho-ay satgur kai hukmaavai. The Sikh-swans gather at the lake, according to the Will of the True Guru.
TSH URTTE Hed Adele says we uate sd She F nrs Il (960-11, THAT, He 5) ratan padaarath maanak sarvar bharpooray khaa-ay kharach rahay tot na aavai. The lake is filled with the wealth of these jewels and pearls; they are spent and consumed, but they never run out.
~
Heed JA ofa 3 Tet AIS SS TS Il (960-12, Trash, v3 5) sarvar hans door na ho-ee kartay ayvai bhaavai. The swan never leaves the lake; such is the Pleasure of the Creator's Will.
Wo o'oa fan & HASte sa ofe fefior A fra ae ufs mre Il (960-12, rat, Hs 5)
jan naanak jis dai mastak bhaag Dhur likhi-aa so sikh guroo peh aavai.
O servant Nanak, one who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead - that Sikh comes to the Guru.
unfy sf aga Afs ard Ast figAfe 3S AU (960-13, Tat, He 5) aap tari-aa kutamb sabh taaray sabhaa sarisat chhadaavai. ||1||
He saves himself, and saves all his generations as well; he emancipates the whole world. |[1]|
H8 U Il (960-14) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
uUfss nmr gost wd Aas Ho FAST Il (960-14, mat, He 5)
pandit aakaa-ay bahutee raahee korarh moth jinayhaa.
He is called a Pandit, a religious scholar, and yet he wanders along many pathways. He is as hard as uncooked beans.
wef Ho fos softy feurflmr fon|fA andt Fa" Il (960-14, mat, He 5)
andar moh nit bharam vi-aapi-aa tistas naahee dayhaa.
He is filled with attachment, and constantly engrossed in doubt; his body cannot hold still.
Fat ore gat ATS wher at fos AT Il (60-15, THs, H2 5) koorhee aavai koorhee jaavai maa-i-aa kee nit johaa. False is his coming, and false is his going; he is continually on the lookout for Maya.
Ag ad St ed wre nists aga IT | (960-15, Haat, He 5) sach kahai taa chhoho aavai antar bahutaa rohaa.
If someone speaks the truth, then he is aggravated; he is totally filled with anger.
feurfinr gents aafa anast ufs ara fA HIT II (960-16, Tet, He 5)
vi-aapi-aa durmat kubuDh kumoorhaa man laagaa tis mohaa.
The evil fool is engrossed in evil-mindedness and false intellectualizations; his mind is attached to emotional attachment.
Odt Ast od afe urfeur ATG fs fea AT Il (60-16, aHast, He 5) thagai saytee thag ral aa-i-aa saath bhe iko jayhaa. The deceiver abides with the five deceivers; it is a gathering of like minds.
Afsag Ades Sect feud ae si Gufs vrfenr Sa I (960-17, mast, v2 5)
satgur saraaf nadree vichdo kadhai taa‘ ugharh aa-i-aa lohaa.
And when the Jeweller, the True Guru, appraises him, then he is exposed as mere iron.
asd aet gore sorte fest Gufsor user nia orfe usT Il (960-18, mat, v2 5) bahutayree thaa-ee ralaa-ay ralaa-ay ditaa ugh-rhi-aa parh-daa agai aa-ay khalohaa. Mixed and mingled with others, he was passed off as genuine in many places; but now, the veil has been lifted, and he stands naked before all.
Afsae at A Avet ure fefs HaTT AIG TT Il (960-18, mat, ws 5)
satgur kee jay sarnee aavai fir manoorahu kanchan hohaa.
One who comes to the Sanctuary of the True Guru, shall be transformed from iron into gold.
Afsag foseg uz Ay ANS MTSE aS AI AT ST Il (960-19, anraat, ne 5)
satgur nirvair putar satar samaanay a-ugan katay karay suDh dayhaa.
The True Guru has no anger or vengeance; He looks upon son and enemy alike. Removing faults and mistakes, He purifies the human body.
sod fan ufe HASte dé foftmr fon Afsae ats AST Il (960-19, aH, He 5) naanak jis Dhur mastak hovai likhi-aa tis satgur naal sanayhaa.
O Nanak, one who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead, is in love with the True Guru.
Uar Ceq nifys aet Afsas us at fa fours de fSq fee SAT I (961-1, rat, we 5)
amrit banee satgur pooray kee jis kirpaal hovai tis ridai vasayhaa. The Word of the Perfect True Guru's Bani is Ambrosial Nectar; it dwells in the heart of one who is blessed by the Guru's Mercy.
mize Fret fSR at act HET AST AY TTT MQM (961-2, ona, He 5) aavan jaanaa tis kaa katee-ai sadaa sadaa sukh hohaa. ||2|| His coming and going in reincarnation is ended; forever and ever, he is at peace. ||2||
u@at Il (961-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A 30 Sal HS A SO gset Il (961-2, aaa, nH: 5) jo tuDh bhaanaa jant so tuDh bujh-ee. He alone understands You, Lord, with whom You are pleased.
Af 30 Sal He A tea fAset I (61-3, Ia, He 5) jo tuDh bhaanaa jant so dargeh sijh-ee. He alone is approved in the Court of the Lord, with whom You are pleased.
fan 6 Sct sets JEN fH Tet II (61-3, met, He 5) jis no tayree nadar ha-umai tis ga-ee. Egotism is eradicated, when You bestow Your Grace.
fA 3 3 ASAE ASHS FSA yet I (961-4, Tact, 48 5) jis no too santusat kalmal tis kha-ee. Sins are erased, when You are thoroughly pleased.
fan & Aum efs fags A set Il (961-4, erat, He 5) jis kai su-aamee val nirbha-o so bha-ee. One who has the Lord Master on his side, becomes fearless.
fA 6 3 fasurs Ae A femret I (961-4, anraat, He 5) jis no too kirpaal sachaa so thi-a-ee. One who is blessed with Your Mercy, becomes truthful.
fan 3 Sct Hfeor 6 UT nfaeet Il (961-5, mae, He 5) jis no tayree ma-i-aa na pohai agna-ee. One who is blessed with Your Kindness, is not touched by fire.
fA 6 Het efenre fafe ag 3 HfS wet MDI (961-5, mat, He 5) tis no sadaa da-i-aal jin gur tay mat la-ee. ||7]|| You are forever Merciful to those who are receptive to the Guru's Teachings. ||7]|
HBa H8 U Il (961-6)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
afa fasur farsures nm auft & il (961-6, sat, He 5) kar kirpaa kirpaal aapay bakhas lai. Please grant Your Grace, O Merciful Lord; please forgive me.
Het Het Aut Sat any Afsas ute U I (61-6, nat, He 5) sadaa sadaa japee tayraa naam satgur paa-ay pai. Forever and ever, I chant Your Name; I fall at the feet of the True Guru.
Ho 36 nists SA ea aA AE Il (961-7, mat, Hs 5) man tan antar vas dookhaa naas ho-ay. Please, dwell within my mind and body, and end my sufferings.
ga af rf ay fend 3@ 5 af& I (61-7, mat, He 5) hath day-ay aap rakh vi-aapai bha-o na ko-ay. Please give me Your hand, and save me, that fear may not afflict me.
ae we feg dfs &3 afk ote It (961-7, mast, He 5) gun gaavaa din rain aytai kamm laa-ay. May I sing Your Glorious Praises day and night; please commit me to this task.
Ha Ho & Afal ICH da ATE Il (61-8, erat, He 5) sant janaa kai sang ha-umai rog jaa-ay. Associating with the humble Saints, the disease of egotism is eradicated.
Raa fadsfa uAH Sa afe sfomr il (961-8, mat, v2 5) sarab nirantar khasam ayko rav rahi-aa. The One Lord and Master is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.
ad USA AY AS AY Blot Il (961-9, mat, He 5) gur parsaadee sach sacho sach lahi-aa. By Guru's Grace, I have truly found the Truest of the True.
efent agg efenres nuet frefs &g Il (61-9, anaat, He 5) da-i-aa karahu da-i-aal apnee sifat dayh. Please bless me with Your Kindness, O Kind Lord, and bless me with Your Praises.
Tang efy fos area uifs ST NAM (961-9, Test, He 5)
darsan daykh nihaal naanak pareet ayh. ||1]|
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I am in ecstasy; this is what Nanak loves. ||1||
He U Il (961-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Sa AU He ufs fear at AgSTte Il (961-10, east, Ht 5)
ayko japee-ai manai maahi ikas kee sarnaa-ay.
Meditate on the One Lord within your mind, and enter the Sanctuary of the One Lord alone.
fear fr ate fusost gat ardt Ae I (961-10, erat, 12 5) ikas si-o kar pirharhee doojee naahee jaa-ay. Be in love with the One Lord; there is no other at all.
feat ast Haiha AS fee us UTE I (961-11, aH, He 5) iko daataa mangee-ai sabh kichh palai paa-ay. Beg from the One Lord, the Great Giver, and you will be blessed with everything.
nfs sf AfA forefa us feat fea fomrfe i (961-11, erat, us 5)
man tan saas giraas parabh iko ik Dhi-aa-ay.
In your mind and body, with each breath and morsel of food, meditate on the One and only Lord God.
nifys ou fours Ag Taunt urfeor we I (961-12, ona, He 5) amrit naam niDhaan sach gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Gurmukh obtains the true treasure, the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
saat 3 AS Ho fae ufo For we | (961-12, oat, He 5)
vadbhaagee tay sant jan jin man vuthaa aa-ay.
Very fortunate are those humble Saints, within whose minds the Lord has come to abide.
rites af Hobs afe afoot ga aet ST Il (961-13, THT, He 5)
jal thal mahee-al rav rahi-aa doojaa ko-ee naahi.
He is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky; there is no other at all.
on fonret on Bua Stag YAN FATE NI (961-13, eat, He 5)
naam Dhi-aa-ee naam uchraa naanak khasam rajaa-ay. ||2||
Meditating on the Naam, and chanting the Naam, Nanak abides in the Will of his Lord and Master. ||2||
ust Il (961-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fAA 3 3 Tue He (SA AE Il (961-14, Tat, He 5) jis no too rakhvaalaa maaray tis ka-un. One who has You as his Saving Grace - who can kill him?
fA 6 3 Tae frst FS SF Il (961-14, Trae, we 5) jis no too rakhvaalaa jitaa tinai bhain. One who has You as his Saving Grace conquers the three worlds.
fan 6 3a nig FSA HY BAS Il (961-15, at, He 5) jis no tayraa ang tis mukh ujlaa. One who has You on his side - his face is radiant and bright.
fAA 3 3a vig A fooHet F fSeaHEr Il (961-15, aH, Hs 5) jis no tayraa ang so nirmalee hoo" nirmalaa. One who has You on his side, is the purest of the Pure.
fan & Sct sets o Sar ys Il (961-15, Hat, v2 5) jis no tayree nadar na laykhaa puchhee-ai. One who is blessed with Your Grace is not called to give his account.
fan & sot unt fate a fafa Sahat 1 (961-16, areas, v2 5) jis no tayree khusee tin na-o niDh bhunchee-ai. One with whom You are pleased, obtains the nine treasures.
fAA 3 3 us ae PSH famr Hosea II (961-16, Tra, He 5) jis no too parabh val tis ki-aa muhchhandgee. One who has You on his side, God - unto whom is he subservient?
fan 6 3dt fog A Sct Sfealt Wei (61-17, eae, He 5) jis no tayree mihar so tayree bandigee. ||8]|| One who is blessed with Your Kind Mercy is dedicated to Your worship. ||8]|
HOAX HIST U Il (961-17)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
og faurs Homi AS Ast Afar feos 11 (961-17, east, He 5)
hohu kirpaal su-aamee mayray jantaa™ sang vihaavay.
Be Merciful, O my Lord and Master, that I may pass my life in the Society of the Saints.
3ug 38 fF ath af Hae f3a ae 5 Valo TS IA (961-18, Tat, He 5)
tuDhhu bhulay se jam jam marday tin kaday na chukan haavay. ||1]|
Those who forget You are born only to die and be reincarnated again; their sufferings will never end. |[1]|
He U Il (961-18)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Afsag fAHeg ume ufe neufe we wre | (961-18, oat, He 5)
satgur simrahu aapnaa ghat avghat ghat ghaat.
Meditate in remembrance within your heart on the True Guru, whether you are on the most difficult path, on the mountain or by the river bank.
dfs ofs om mifsor afe & FO S| 12M (61-19, mat, He 5) har har naam japanti-aa ko-ay na banDhai vaat. ||2|| Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, no one shall block your way. ||2||
UugaT Il (961-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Yat céQ
fsa 3 ANeG fra afe ata Il (962-1, anreet, He 5) tithai too samrath jithai ko-ay naahi. Where You are, Almighty Lord, there is no one else.
6a Sct gu miarat Ges vfs Il (962-1, anaat, ne 5) othai tayree rakh agnee udar maahi. There, in the fire of the mother's womb, You protected us.
Ale & AH & US ote 3a als AMT Il (962-1, sat, Hs 5) sun kai jam kay doot naa-ay tayrai chhad jaahi. Hearing Your Name, the Messenger of Death runs away.
3@n@ fran mAag ae Ast us ute il (962-2, set, He 5)
bha-ojal bikham asgaahu gur sabdee paar paahi.
The terrifying, treacherous, impassible world-ocean is crossed over, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
faa ag wait flmrr nifgs Afe wts II (962-2, orast, He 5) jin ka-o lagee pi-aas amrit say-ay khaahi. Those who feel thirst for You, take in Your Ambrosial Nectar.
afe nfs fd us ae afee aia il (962-3, erat, He 5)
kal meh ayho punn gun govind gaahi.
This is the only act of goodness in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
ASA 3 fsurs ANS AE AT I (962-3, ana, He 5) sabhsai no kirpaal sam"aalay saahi saahi. He is Merciful to all; He sustains us with each and every breath.
fase af o wfe fa ure sa urfa tN (62-3, mat, He 5) birthaa ko-ay na jaa-ay je aavai tuDh aahi. ||9|| Those who come to You with love and faith are never turned away empty-handed.
[9I|
HBa HU Il (962-4)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
am fsa 5 asfegd uaqIH OH ST MTU II (962-4, THAT, He 5)
doojaa tis na bujhaa-iho paarbarahm naam dayh aaDhaar.
Those whom You bless with the Support of Your Name, O Supreme Lord God, do not know any other.
Wa Midids ATs ANSE A VSS Il (962-5, mast, He 5) agam agochar saahibo samrath sach daataar. Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord and Master, All-powerful True Great Giver:
3 fsaee fades AY AS SO PINT Il (962-5, gaat, ns 5)
too nihchal nirvair sach sachaa tuDh darbaar.
You are eternal and unchanging, without vengeance and True; True is the Darbaar of Your Court.
aHfs ave & AEM nis & uTSeT” Il (962-5, mat, He 5) keemat kahan na jaa-ee-ai ant na paaraavaar. Your worth cannot be described; You have no end or limitation.
us efs dg fa Hae ve fatter oA eg II (962-6, mat, He 5) parabh chhod hor je mangnaa sabh bikhi-aa ras chhaar. To forsake God, and ask for something else, is all corruption and ashes.
A Ade AY ASD A fAe AS faSoe I (962-6, erat, He 5) say sukhee-ay sach saah say jin sachaa bi-uhaar. They alone find peace, and they are the true kings, whose dealings are true.
frat watt UifS ys SH AGA AY AT Il (962-7, ona, ws 5) jinaa lagee pareet parabh naam sahj sukh saar. Those who are in love with God's Name, intuitively enjoy the essence of peace.
Soa fea nied HS FST NA (962-7, oHHaSt, He 5) naanak ik aaraaDhay santan raynaar. ||1|| Nanak worships and adores the One Lord; he seeks the dust of the Saints. ||1] |
He U Il (962-8)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
woe AY fay fos fe oa atese ate i (962-8, oaet, v2 5) anad sookh bisraam nit har kaa keertan gaa-ay. Singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, bliss, peace and rest are obtained.
med fimreu ats ef aoa Buaghh ate ii (962-8, aHast, v8 5) avar si-aanap chhaad deh naanak uDhras naa-ay. ||2|| Forsake other clever tricks, O Nanak; only through the Name will you be saved. ||2]|
uGSt II (962-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
a 3 mets af agg fuareé il (962-9, saat, 42 5) naa too aavahi vas bahut ghinaavanay. No one can bring You under control, by despising the world.
o 3 otefo fA Fz USS Il (962-9, THAT, He 5) naa too aavahi vas bayd parhaavanay. No one can bring You under control, by studying the Vedas.
ag neta eft Stata set i (962-10, mat, we 5) naa too aavahi vas tirath naa-ee-ai. No one can bring You under control, by bathing at the holy places.
ag neta sft cast Ure Il (962-10, mat, H8 5) naa too aavahi vas Dhartee Dhaa-ee-ai. No one can bring You under control, by wandering all over the world.
a 3 oteta eth fas frmred il (962-10, areet, He 5) naa too aavahi vas kitai si-aanpai. No one can bring You under control, by any clever tricks.
a 3 orety Sh agst Ue S Il (962-11, Tat, v2 5) naa too aavahi vas bahutaa daan day. No one can bring You under control, by giving huge donations to charities.
AS a 3d Sf MEM MITT Il (962-11, Tat, He 5) sabh ko tayrai vas agam agocharaa. Everyone is under Your power, O inaccessible, unfathomable Lord.
3 sIT a SAH SAT TS FT MAO (962-11, Hast, we 5)
too bhagtaa kai vas bhagtaa taan tayraa. ||10]||
You are under the control of Your devotees; You are the strength of Your devotees. ||10]|
HBa HU Il (962-12)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
nmr te wmf aratesS Il (962-12, rast, He 5) aapay vaid aap naaraa-in. The Lord Himself is the true physician.
Sfo fe Aba at ey otee I (62-12, mat, He 5) ayhi vaid jee-a kaa dukh laa-in. These physicians of the world only burden the soul with pain.
Td a Age nits GA UTES Il (962-13, anraat, He 5) gur kaa sabad amrit ras khaa-in. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is Ambrosial Nectar; it is so delicious to eat.
aod faa Hie =A fA & Afs sa fHeTeE NAM (962-13, Tet, He 5) naanak jis man vasai tis kay sabh dookh mitaa-in. ||1]|| O Nanak, one whose mind is filled with this Nectar - all his pains are dispelled. ||1]|
H8 U Il (962-14) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Jah Gee JOH Fd Il (962-14, aaa, v2 5)
hukam uchhlai hukmay rahai.
By the Hukam of Lord's Command, they move about; by the Lord's Command, they remain still.
Jan ey AY AN afe Ad Il (962-14, mat, He 5) hukmay dukh sukh sam kar sahai. By His Hukam, they endure pain and pleasure alike.
Jan aH AU fea THs I (962-14, mma, He 5) hukmay naam japai din raat. By His Hukam, they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night.
Soa fAA S de] Vs Il (962-14, mat, He 5) naanak jis no hovai daat. O Nanak, he alone does so, who is blessed.
Jat Hs JAH ct FS Il (962-15, araat, He 5)
hukam marai hukmay hee jeevai.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, they die; by the Hukam of His Command, they live.
JAH Sra" aT GS I (962-15, Tat, ne 5) hukmay naan"aa vadaa theevai. By His Hukam, they become tiny, and huge.
JAH Ad Ide MTSE Il (962-15, mat, v2 5) hukmay sog harakh aanand. By His Hukam, they receive pain, happiness and bliss.
Jan AU feds TH Il (962-16, THA, He 5) hukmay japai niroDhar gurmant. By His Hukam, they chant the Guru's Mantra, which always works.
JOH MISE WE TIES Il (962-16, Tat, v3 5) hukmay aavan jaan rahaa-ay. By His Hukam, coming and going in reincarnation cease,
SSA A AS Fast BES Ql (962-16, aHast, He 5) naanak jaa ka-o bhagtee laa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, when He links them to His devotional worship. ||2||
UgST Il (962-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
J¢ fsH wel aga fA Sa AZerT Il (962-17, mast, He 5)
ha-o tis dhaadhee kurbaan je tayraa sayvdaar. I am a Sacrifice to that musician who is Your servant, O Lord.
UG fan wet sfeos fa we TE Es Il (962-17, Tat, He 5) ha-o tis dhaadhee balihaar je gaavai gun apaar. I am a Sacrifice to that musician who sings the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
A oret ue Uo fan 83 fadarg Il (962-17, sat, He 5) so dhaadhee Dhan Dhan jis lorhay nirankaar. Blessed, blessed is that musician, for whom the Formless Lord Himself longs.
A aret aval fan AST EMTs Sg Il (962-18, sat, He 5) so dhaadhee bhaagath jis sachaa du-aar baar. Very fortunate is that musician who comes to the gate of the Court of the True Lord.
6g wet su fimrfe awe fea sera Il (962-18, at, He 5) oh dhaadhee tuDh Dhi-aa-ay kalaanay din rainaar. That musician meditates on You, Lord, and praises You day and night.
Hat nfs ou 6 mire ae THE Il (962-19, mast, He 5) mangai amrit naam na aavai kaday haar. He begs for the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, and will never be defeated.
GUS SHO AY Jdet fs! Wes Il (962-19, ania, He 5) kaparh bhojan sach rahdaa livai Dhaar. His clothes and his food are true, and he enshrines love for the Lord within.
A wet gees fan 3 us fimrg 199ll (962-19, saat, He 5) so dhaadhee gunvant jis no parabh pi-aar. ||11]|| Praiseworthy is that musician who loves God. ||11||
Yar ces
HBa HU Il (963-1)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
nifys set me oA nifys afs at are il (963-1, anraatt, ne 5)
amrit banee ami-o ras amrit har kaa naa-o.
The Bani of the Guru's Word is Ambrosial Nectar; its taste is sweet. The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar.
fs safe fase fife afs ne usd TE WE Il (963-2, saat, v2 5)
man tan hirdai simar har aath pahar gun gaa-o.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord in your mind, body and heart; twenty-four hours a day, sing His Glorious Praises.
Guen Hed 3H Tefhag AS fed ATS II (963-2, erat, He 5) updays sunhu tum gursikhahu sachaa ihai su-aa-o. Listen to these Teachings, O Sikhs of the Guru. This is the true purpose of life.
HOH Ueda HES de ne fs wfEg aS Il (963-3, en1aat, He 5) janam padaarath safal ho-ay man meh laa-ihu bhaa-o. This priceless human life will be made fruitful; embrace love for the Lord in your mind.
HY Hon woe wer ys Aufsur wy ATE I (963-3, THM, He 5)
sookh sahj aanad ghanaa parabh japti-aa dukh jaa-ay.
Celestial peace and absolute bliss come when one meditates on God - suffering is dispelled.
aoa SH AUS AY Cun esas uTsht a Ul (963-4, Tera, we 5)
naanak naam japat sukh oopjai dargeh paa-ee-ai thaa-o. ||1]||
O Nanak, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, peace wells up, and one obtains a place in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
He U Il (963-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
area oH fomrdint ag ya HPS SE Il (963-4, arash, v3 5)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai gur pooraa mat day-ay.
O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is the Teaching imparted by the Perfect Guru.
ae WU SU AA ave dt afe SF Il (963-5, mast, He 5)
bhaanai jap tap sanjamo bhaanai hee kadh lay-ay.
In the Lord's Will, they practice meditation, austerity and self-discipline; in the Lord's Will, they are released.
ae Hfe seven ate GUA ASE Il (963-5, Tat, He 5)
bhaanai jon bhavaa-ee-ai bhaanai bakhas karay-i.
In the Lord's Will, they are made to wander in reincarnation; in the Lord's Will, they are forgiven.
aS VU AY Sait SS ATH AGE Il (963-5, Tae, He 5)
bhaanai dukh sukh bhogee-ai bhaanai karam karay-i.
In the Lord's Will, pain and pleasure are experienced; in the Lord's Will, actions are performed.
ae fict afa & ove Afs aefe II (63-6, mast, He 5)
bhaanai mitee saaj kai bhaanai jot Dharay-ay.
In the Lord's Will, clay is fashioned into form; in the Lord's Will, His Light is infused into it.
ae sa samfeat ate Hats Age Il (963-6, Hast, H: 5)
bhaanai bhog bhogaa-idaa bhaanai maneh karay-i.
In the Lord's Will, enjoyments are enjoyed; in the Lord's Will, these enjoyments are denied.
ae dola Hofa mBsrs ave afs udfe Il (963-7, mast, He 5)
bhaanai narak surag a-utaaray bhaanai Dharan paray-ay.
In the Lord's Will, they are incarnated in heaven and hell; in the Lord's Will, they fall to the ground.
ae dt fan saat we soa fees FJ IQ (963-7, east, He 5)
bhaanai hee jis bhagtee laa-ay naanak virlay hay. ||2||
In the Lord's Will, they are committed to His devotional worship and Praise; O Nanak, how rare are these! ||2]|
uGat II (963-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
efauret Ad oH at IG Ate Af=e AE Il (963-8, anHast, He 5) vadi-aa-ee sachay naam kee ha-o jeevaa sun sunay. Hearing, hearing of the glorious greatness of the True Name, I live.
un uss ifemrs Burs fe Ye Il (963-8, THAT, He 5) pasoo parayt agi-aan uDhaaray ik khanay. Even ignorant beasts and goblins can be saved, in an instant.
feon dfs 3a a Ae AS ANAM I (63-9, ara, He 5) dinas rain tayraa naa-o sadaa sad jaapee-ai. Day and night, chant the Name, forever and ever.
fara gu feaaes af 33 gnibt Il (963-9, mast, ne 5)
tarisnaa bhukh vikraal naa-ay tayrai Dharaapee-ai. The most horrible thirst and hunger is satisfied through Your Name, O Lord.
da Aa ey <e fan a nfs <A Il (03-9, mat, He 5) rog sog dukh vanjai jis naa-o man vasai. Disease, sorrow and pain run away, when the Name dwells within the mind.
fsrfs usufs we A TT Aaet FA Il (963-10, mat, He 5) tiseh paraapat laal jo gur sabdee rasai. He alone attains his Beloved, who loves the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
us YIHS Inis Curgeatanr Il (963-10, THast, Hs 5) khand barahmand bay-ant uDhaaranhaari-aa. The worlds and solar systems are saved by the Infinite Lord.
iN
Sot Ast 30 Ae Ae fumrfenr 1921 (63-11, aH, He 5) tayree sobhaa tuDh sachay mayray pi-aari-aa. ||12]| Your glory is Yours alone, O my Beloved True Lord. ||12||
HBa H2 U Il (963-11)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
fig floret aoa Ath afs aeteor sft aS FST I (963-11, Hast, He 5)
mitar pi-aaraa naanak jee mai chhad gavaa-i-aa rang kasumbhai bhulee.
I abandoned and lost my Beloved Friend, O Nanak; I was fooled by the transitory color of the safflower, which fades away.
38 Ane at H ah 3 uGet Je su faa nS o Bet NA (963-12, eH, He 5)
ta-o sajan kee mai keem na pa-udee ha-o tuDh bin adh na lahdee. ||1]|
I did not know Your value, O my Friend; without You, I am not worth even half a shell. ||1]|
Hé U Il (963-13) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
AA featefe aoa AIG AAS Set AS UG ue BI I (963-13, grat, Hs 5)
Sas viraa-in naanak jee-o sasuraa vaadee jaytho pa-o pa-o loohai.
My mother-in-law is my enemy, O Nanak; my father-in-law is argumentative and my brother-in-law burns me at every step.
US SA USE FIG AH AAS Fd Il (963-13, Tmt, we 5) habhay bhas punayday vatan jaa mai sajan toohai. ||2|| They can all just play in the dust, when You are my Friend, O Lord. ||2]|
uGat Il (963-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fan 3 eo fats fA wae fesse II (963-14, ma, Hs 5) jis too vuthaa chit tis darad nivaarno. You relieve the pains of those, within whose consciousness You dwell, O Lord.
fan 3 eo fats fA ae S TSE I (963-14, Tat, we 5) jis too vuthaa chit tis kaday na haarno. Those, within whose consciousness You dwell, never lose.
fan fifeor ya TT A ASUS SIS Il (963-15, Tat, H8 5) jis mili-aa pooraa guroo so sarpar taarno. One who meets the Perfect Guru will surely be saved.
fan 6 we Afs fA A ANS Il (963-15, sat, He 5) jis no laa-ay sach tis sach sam"aalano. One who is attached to Truth, contemplates Truth.
fan urfenr ofa fears A ofa aes I (963-15, THA, He 5) jis aa-i-aa hath niDhaan so rahi-aa bhaalno. One, into whose hands the treasure comes, stops searching.
fan 6 fea Sa sas A WSES Il (963-16, TnIat, He 5) jis no iko rang bhagat so jaanno. He alone is known as a devotee, who loves the One Lord.
6g Asa at Je faadt BSE I (963-16, Tat, He 5) oh sabhnaa kee rayn birhee chaarno. He is the dust under the feet of all; he is the lover of the Lord's feet.
Afs 33 oH fests AT ST AGES NII (963-17, THA, He 5) sabh tayray choj vidaan sabh tayraa kaarno. ||13]| Everything is Your wonderful play; the whole creation is Yours. ||13] |
HBa H8 U Il (963-17)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Grafs fee aoa At H us zeret efaur aa fas fonrait i) (963-17, mat, He 5)
ustat nindaa naanak jee mai habh vanjaa-ee chhorhi-aa habh kijh ti-aagee.
I have totally discarded praise and slander, O Nanak; I have forsaken and abandoned everything.
US AA Aas (SS SB us SS ait AU (963-18, saat, us 5)
habhay saak koorhaavay dithay ta-o palai taidai laagee. ||1||
I have seen that all relationships are false, and so I have grasped hold of the hem of Your robe, Lord. ||1||
Hé U Il (963-18) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
feset feat soa HIG IG at det sos ferred Uo Il (963-19, ana, Hs 5)
firdee firdee naanak jee-o ha-o faavee thee-ee bahut disaavar panDhaa.
I wandered and wandered and went crazy, O Nanak, in countless foreign lands and pathways.
a 0 Af Aeret ASt a a fife AAS H BA IM (963-19, mast, He 5) taa ha-o sukh sukhaalee sutee jaa gur mil sajan mai laDhaa. ||2]| But then, I slept in peace and comfort, when I met the Guru, and found my Friend.
21 |
uot CEs ust Il (964-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS ey Asy At Sag THM Il (964-1, aaah, ne 5) sabhay dukh santaap jaa‘ tuDhhu bhulee-ai. When I forget You, I endure all pains and afflictions.
A otefs wy Cure st adt & wehA I (964-1, mat, He 5) jay keechan lakh upaav taa‘ kahee na ghulee-ai. Making thousands of efforts, they are still not eliminated.
fan 6 fend a@ A feaue arent il (964-2, mast, He 5) jis no visrai naa-o so nirDhan kaa‘dhee-ai. One who forgets the Name, is known as a poor person.
fan 6 fend a A Hat Jesh | (964-2, raat, He 5) jis no visrai naa-o so jonee haa‘dhee-ai. One who forgets the Name, wanders in reincarnation.
fan UAH o ue fos fH AH Ss = Il (964-2, east, He 5)
jis khasam na aavai chit tis jam dand day.
One who does not remember his Lord and Master, is punished by the Messenger of Death.
fAA UAH 6 viet fats dat A Te Il (964-3, mma, v2 5) jis khasam na aavee chit rogee say ganay. One who does not remember his Lord and Master, is judged to be a sick person.
fA UAH 3 viet fafs A ud midardinr | (964-3, mast, He 5) jis khasam na aavee chit so kharo aha‘kaaree-aa. One who does not remember his Lord and Master, is egotistical and proud.
Het woer afar fafs oS ferrdior 99 (064-4, mat, v2 5) so-ee duhaylaa jag jin naa-o visaaree-aa. ||14|| One who forgets the Name is miserable in this world. ||14] |
HOA H3 U Il (964-4)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
33t defA H ate o for 3 BHA HAs StS Il (964-4, THAT, He 5) taidee bandas mai ko-ay na dithaa too naanak man bhaanaa. I have not seen any other like You. You alone are pleasing to Nanak's mind.
uifs wHret fon fies fees A ffs XT uSr|er AI (964-5, ora, He 5)
ghol ghumaa-ee tis mitar vicholay jai mil kant pachhaanaa. ||1]|
I am a dedicated, devoted sacrifice to that friend, that mediator, who leads me to recognize my Husband Lord. ||1]|
He U Il (964-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ure Hoe At 38 fofe Awe AIA HIST Vast Il (964-6, ena, H3 5)
paav suhaavay jaa" ta-o Dhir julday sees suhaavaa charnee.
Beautiful are those feet which walk towards You; beautiful is that head which falls at Your Feet.
HY ASST AT Se AA eS HE ufeor SE Aget QI (964-6, mast, He 5)
mukh suhaavaa jaa™ ta-o jas gaavai jee-o pa-i-aa ta-o sarnee. ||2||
Beautiful is that mouth which sings Your Praises; beautiful is that soul which seeks Your Sanctuary. ||2||
uGat Il (964-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
firs oct ASAfa Hae aor | (964-7, meet, He 5) mil naaree satsang mangal gaavee-aa. Meeting the Lord's brides, in the True Congregation, I sing the songs of joy.
we at dur surg agfs o OS Il (964-7, aaa, He 5) ghar kaa ho-aa banDhaan bahurh na Dhaavee-aa. The home of my heart is now held steady, and I shall not go out wandering again.
fasot voHfs vas Ae garner Il (964-8, anraatt, we 5) binthee durmat durat so-ay koorhaavee-aa. Evil-mindedness has been dispelled, along with sin and my bad reputation.
Hisefs usa foe washer | (964-8, enact, He 5) seelvant parDhaan ridai sachaavee-aa. I am well-known as being calm and good-natured; my heart is filled with Truth.
nists sofa fea fea dtsréor i (64-8, aract, Hz 5) antar baahar ik ik reetaavee-aa. Inwardly and outwardly, the One and only Lord is my way.
Hfe ean at flmimA vas BAST I (964-9, aHaMt, H3 5) man darsan kee pi-aas charan daasaavee-aa. My mind is thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. I am a slave at His feet.
Hat gat Atarg wat At ator I (964-9, oat, He 5) sobhaa banee seegaar khasam jaa" raavee-aa. I am glorified and embellished, when my Lord and Master enjoys me.
firstor urfe AAfa At fSA aso NAUII (964-10, erat, He 5) milee-aa aa-ay sanjog jaa” tis bhaavee-aa. ||15]| I meet Him through my blessed destiny, when it is pleasing to His Will. ||15]|
HBa HU Il (964-10)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Us TE 33 Fa AG Hg He H fosaE F fort FS Il (964-10, raat, Hs 5)
habh gun taiday naanak jee-o mai koo thee-ay mai nirgun tay ki-aa hovai.
All virtues are Yours, Dear Lord; You bestow them upon us. I am unworthy - what can I achieve, O Nanak?
38 Aes wag 8 at Wea AST AMS A (964-11, TH, He 5) ta-o jayvad daataar na ko-ee jaachak sadaa jaachovai. ||1]|| There is no other Giver as great as You. I am a beggar; I beg from You forever. ||1||
He U Il (964-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ad feiest Sz use afs Ante AG asfenr II 964-11, meet, 3 5)
dayh chhijand-rhee oon majhoonaa gur sajan jee-o Dharaa-i-aa.
My body was wasting away, and I was depressed. The Guru, my Friend, has encouraged and consoled me.
Js AY Ades AS fast Aa ASEM Ii (964-12, erat, Hs 5) habhay sukh suhaylrhaa sutaa jitaa jag sabaa-i-aa. ||2|| I sleep in total peace and comfort; I have conquered the whole world. ||2]|
uGat Il (964-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
wa ST Ia AS 30 Sus Il (964-13, saat, He 5) vadaa tayraa darbaar sachaa tuDh takhat. The Darbaar of Your Court is glorious and great. Your holy throne is True.
fats AT ufsATY fogs JVI SF Il (964-13, onrast, ue 5)
sir saahaa paatisaahu nihchal cha-ur chhat.
You are the Emperor over the heads of kings. Your canopy and chauree (fly-brush) are permanent and unchanging.
A oe uTsqoH Aet Ag four i 964-13, mast, He 5) jo bhaavai paarbarahm so-ee sach ni-aa-o. That alone is true justice, which is pleasing to the Will of the Supreme Lord God.
A ae ursqan fours fs aE il (964-14, anaat, v2 5) jay bhaavai paarbarahm nithaavay milai thaa-o.
Even the homeless receive a home, when it is pleasing to the Will of the Supreme Lord God.
A atet agate vet set As Il (964-14, Treat, He 5) jo keen"ee kartaar saa-ee bhalee gal. Whatever the Creator Lord does, is a good thing.
fat UsTSt YAH A Pda" HS Il (964-15, raat, He 5) jin"ee pachhaataa khasam say dargaah mal. Those who recognize their Lord and Master, are seated in the Court of the Lord.
Hot Sa SoH fas o SdH I (964-15, aaa, He 5) sahee tayraa furmaan kinai na fayree-ai. True is Your Command; no one can challenge it.
AGE ATE ASM avafs Soh NEN (964-15, Tat, He 5) kaaran karan kareem kudrat tayree-ai. ||16]| O Merciful Lord, Cause of causes, Your creative power is all-powerful. ||16]|
HBA He U Il (964-16)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Afe qevat Ha 3g HO Hes aN AUSSt Beat Il (964-16, mat, v2 5)
so-ay sunand-rhee mayraa tan man ma-ulaa naam japand-rhee laalee.
Hearing of You, my body and mind have blossomed forth; chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am flushed with life.
ufa FSest AT nies Set Ts ane efe fast All (964-16, raat, He 5)
panDh juland-rhee mayraa andar thandhaa gur darsan daykh nihaalee. ||1]| Walking on the Path, I have found cool tranquility deep within; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I am enraptured. ||1]|
Hé U Il (964-17) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
JS HST H HSK BWA Il (964-17, THAT, He 5) hath manjhaahoo mai maanak laDhaa. I have found the jewel within my heart.
nfs 3 fur H & Afsate fest i (964-17, sast, Hi 5) mul na ghiDhaa mai koo satgur ditaa. I was not charged for it; the True Guru gave it to me.
Sz seret Shor fast i (964-18, anrast, Hs 5) dhoondh vanjaa-ee thee-aa thitaa. My search has ended, and I have become stable.
HOH USTIG SSA FAS MQIl (964-18, anrast, He 5) janam padaarath naanak jitaa. ||2|| O Nanak, I have conquered this priceless human life. ||2]|
ust II (964-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fAA & HASfa AGH SE A AST Sa Il (964-18, at, He 5)
jis kai mastak karam ho-ay so sayvaa laagaa.
One who has such good karma inscribed upon his forehead, is committed to the Lord's service.
fan ad ffs ane yarfior A niafes Arar Il (964-19, mma, Hs 5)
jis gur mil Kamal pargaasi-aa so an-din jaagaa.
One whose heart lotus blossoms forth upon meeting the Guru, remains awake and aware, night and day.
BI JI Bsesie AF FH SS Sa Il (964-19, anraatt, ne 5) lagaa rang charnaarbind sabh bharam bha-o bhaagaa. All doubt and fear run away from one who is in love with the Lord's lotus feet.
Yar vey
MISH fASt ATHSt MIMS UTA | (965-1, Tat, He 5)
aatam jitaa gurmatee aaganjat paagaa.
He conquers his soul, following the Guru's Teachings, and attains the Imperishable Lord.
farts foorfeor ursqan A af fo Star Il (965-1, aaett, 48 5)
jisahi Dhi-aa-i-aa paarbarahm so kal meh taagaa.
He alone keeps up in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, who meditates on the Supreme Lord God.
AQ Halls fasHer nioAfs HASTE Il (965-2, THe, He 5)
saaDhoo sangat nirmalaa athsath majnaagaa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he is immaculate, as if he has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
fan ys fife mmeet A Use AST Il (965-2, Hast, He 5) jis parabh mili-aa aapnaa so purakh sabhaagaa. He alone is a man of good fortune, who has met with God.
ood fan sfeose faq Ses ST IVI (965-3, Tat, He 5) naanak tis balihaarnai jis ayvad bhaagaa. ||17]|| Nanak is a sacrifice to such a one, whose destiny is so great! ||17] |
HBa He U Il (965-3)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
at fug nivfe st ae avofa il (965-3, aHat, H8 5) jaa’ pir andar taa’ Dhan baahar. When the Husband Lord is within the heart, then Maya, the bride, goes outside.
at fug gots 3t ae Hote Il (965-4, eat, HH 5) jaa’ pir baahar taa’ Dhan maahar. When one's Husband Lord is outside of oneself, then Maya, the bride, is supreme.
fag oe ag eg feaafa Il (965-4, mat, Hi 5) bin naavai baho fayr firaahar. Without the Name, one wanders all around.
Afsafe Afar fearfemr arate il (965-4, mast, He 5) satgur sang dikhaa-i-aa jaahar. The True Guru shows us that the Lord is with us.
HO aoa Ad Afs AMT IA (965-5, THT, He 5) jan naanak sachay sach samaahar. ||1]| Servant Nanak merges in the Truest of the True. ||1]|
He U Il (965-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
nitad Afs age fed nirag fea o SPE I (965-5, nat, He 5) aahar sabh kardaa firai aahar ik na ho-ay. Making all sorts of efforts, they wander around; but they do not make even one effort.
aed fas orate Aa Bud feaa gs Af QI (965-6, meet, we 5) naanak jit aahar jag uDhrai virlaa boojhai ko-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, how rare are those who understand the effort which saves the world. ||2| |
ugat Il (965-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sat J FS MUTT SI HISA Il (965-6, Tat, H2 5) vadee hoo vadaa apaar tayraa martabaa. The greatest of the great, infinite is Your dignity.
SAT UST MSA S AUS AISA Il (965-7, Test, ue 5) rang parang anayk na jaapni" kartabaa. Your colors and hues are so numerous; no one can know Your actions.
Hho nets Ate AS fos ASST I (965-7, mast, He 5) jee-aa andar jee-o sabh kichh jaanlaa. You are the Soul within all souls; You alone know everything.
AS fag 39 sf Sa we SH Il (965-7, anaet, He 5) sabh kichh tayrai vas tayraa ghar bhalaa. Everything is under Your control; Your home is beautiful.
3d wf nrée earet 30 wife Il (965-8, erat, He 5) tayrai ghar aanand vaDhaa-ee tuDh ghar. Your home is filled with bliss, which resonates and resounds throughout Your home.
HE HIS 3H Muar nrfu Ate Il (965-8, ana, He 5) maan mahtaa tayj aapnaa aap jar. Your honor, majesty and glory are Yours alone.
Ava AS sIUT fer AS AST Il (965-9, Treat, we 5) sarab kalaa bharpoor disai jat kataa. You are overflowing with all powers; wherever we look, there You are.
Soa VAS VA SU nid faSeST NACH (965-9, aH, He 5) naanak daasan daas tuDh aagai binvataa. ||18]|| Nanak, the slave of Your slaves, prays to You alone. ||18]|
HBa H8 U Il (965-9)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ess was Aafs fefs suse it (965-10, mast, He 5) chhat-rhay baajaar sohan vich vapaaree-ai. Your streets are covered with canopies; under them, the traders look beautiful.
zug fax mug area US A Tat MAUI (65-10, sat, He 5) vakhar hik apaar naanak khatay so Dhanee. ||1]| O Nanak, he alone is truly a banker, who buys the infinite commodity. ||1]|
HIG U Il (965-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
TAS THT & Sot TH fan I x ST il (965-10, sat, ats) kabeeraa hamraa ko nahee ham kis hoo kay naahi. Kabeer, no one is mine, and I belong to no one.
fats feg sao satfeur fsA dt ate mts 2K (965-11, mat, ats) jin ih rachan rachaa-i-aa tis hee maahi samaahi. ||2| | I am absorbed in the One, who created this creation. ||2]|
Uugat Il (965-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hefae fasy naeat ofa Hes nifgst I (965-12, an1aet, He 5) Safli-o birakh suhaavrhaa har safal amritaa. The Lord is the most beautiful fruit tree, bearing fruits of Ambrosial Nectar.
He Be Ba fs a fa Fe fiyst i (965-12, ores, 2 5) man lochai un" milan ka-o ki-o vanjai ghitaa. My mind longs to meet Him; how can I ever find Him?
zor fagat aaa By man wifAS Il (965-12, Hat, He 5) varnaa chihnaa baahraa oh agam ajitaa. He has no color or form; He is inaccessible and unconquerable.
Gg fume Fa a ft HS fas I (965-13, mnraat, He 5) oh pi-aaraa jee-a kaa jo khol"ai bhitaa. I love Him with all my soul; He opens the door for me.
At adt sASor H OefAg fest Il (965-13, erat, He 5) sayvaa karee tusaarhee-aa mai dasihu mitaa. I shall serve you forever, if you tell me of my Friend.
asaat Tet age aH ales frst i (965-14, ona, ve 5) kurbaanee vanjaa vaarnai balay bal kitaa. I am a Sacrifice, a dedicated, devoted sacrifice to Him.
eAfe AS fimrfour eg ofe fast Il (965-14, mast, He 5) dasan sant pi-aari-aa sunhu laa-ay chitaa. The Beloved Saints tell us, to listen with our consciousness.
fan ffir aoa on fH ao vifts Asafa fest Atl (965-15, mast, He 5)
jis likhi-aa naanak daas tis naa-o amrit satgur ditaa. ||19]|
One who has such pre-ordained destiny, O slave Nanak, is blessed with the Ambrosial Name by the True Guru. ||19]|
HOAX HIST U Il (965-15)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
adie cast AG at sro aAfs as i (965-15, mat, He 5)
kabeer Dhartee saaDh kee taskar baiseh gaahi.
Kabeer, the earth belongs to the Holy, but the thieves have come and now sit among them.
gest ata & fanruet 8a a ag ots NA (965-16, meet, He 5) Dhartee bhaar na bi-aapa-ee un ka-o laahoo laahi. ||1|| The earth does not feel their weight; even they profit. ||1]|
HIG U Il (965-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Tad WSS ASS Sy AG HIS STE I (965-17, THast, ue 5) kabeer chaaval kaarnay tukh ka-o muhlee laa-ay. Kabeer, for the sake of the rice, the husks are beaten and threshed.
Hfat aHat SAS Sa YS TAH TLS il (965-17, Trees, we 5)
sang kusangee baistay tab poochhay Dharam raa-ay. ||2||
When one sits in the company of evil people, then he will be called to account by the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||2| |
UugST Il (965-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mma dt es ugera nity fearsini i (965-18, saat, nH 5) aapay hee vad parvaar aap ikaatee-aa. He Himself has the greatest family; He Himself is all alone.
nual ats orfu my dt ASM I (965-18, aHast, He 5) aapnee keemat aap aapay hee jaatee-aa. He alone knows His own worth.
AS foe nm orfu orf Cuifenr it (965-18, mat, v2 5) sabh kichh aapay aap aap upanni-aa. He Himself, by Himself, created everything.
nmyart atst wif nrfuy edfemir il (965-19, anraat, He 5) aapnaa keetaa aap aap varanni-aa. Only He Himself can describe His own creation.
US A 3ST ae fra J FST Il (965-19, mash, ws 5) Dhan so tayraa thaan jithai too vuthaa. Blessed is Your place, where You dwell, Lord.
uot tee
U6 A 3d sas frat AY SF fSor Il (966-1, Tra, He 5) Dhan so tayray bhagat jin"ee sach too” dithaa. Blessed are Your devotees, who see You, O True Lord.
fan 6 Sot efeor Aad ALE ST I (966-1, eras, He 5) jis no tayree da-i-aa salaahay so-ay tuDh. He alone praises You, who is blessed by Your Grace.
fAA Td se BSA feos ASt AT MQOll (966-1, Tat, He 5) jis gur bhaytay naanak nirmal so-ee suDh. ||20]| One who meets the Guru, O Nanak, is immaculate and sanctified. ||20]||
HBa H8 U Il (966-2)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
oder afk dareat HfS fer aa il (966-2, aract, 43 5) fareedaa bhoom rangaavalee manjh visoolaa baag. Fareed, this world is beautiful, but there is a thorny garden within it.
A og ulfe foetimr fSar nis o Ber AU (966-2, THe, He 5) jo nar peer nivaaji-aa tin"aa anch na laag. ||1|| Those who are blessed by their spiritual teacher are not even scratched. ||1||
He U Il (966-3)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
edie Gua Aoest Aft A<ost ST Il (966-3, enraat, He 5) fareedaa umar suhaavarhee sang suvannrhee dayh. Fareed, blessed is the life, with such a beautiful body.
fee vet ureinifs frat fimirs ST MQM (966-3, Trae, Hs 5) virlay kay-ee paa-ee-ani" jin"aa pi-aaray nayh. ||2]| How rare are those who are found to love their Beloved Lord. ||2||
uGst II (966-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
au su HAY efeor usy fam @fo A UTES Il (966-4, mH, He 5)
jap tap sanjam da-i-aa Dharam jis deh so paa-ay.
He alone obtains meditation, austerities, self-discipline, compassion and Dharmic faith, whom the Lord so blesses.
fan astfefs wats orf A any fame | (G66-4, mat, He 5) jis bujhaa-ihi agan aap so naam Dhi-aa-ay. He alone meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, whose fire the Lord puts out.
nisarHt ora use fea ferfe feure i (966-5, oat, He 5)
antarjaamee agam purakh ik darisat dikhaa-ay.
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Inaccessible Primal Lord, inspires us to look upon all with an impartial eye.
Wonafs & oA us fAC Sa Be I (966-5, anraat, He 5)
saaDhsangat kai aasrai parabh si-o rang laa-ay.
With the support of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one falls in love with God.
m@ae afe Hy Gre afa of SIS Il (966-6, mast, He 5)
a-ugan kat mukh ujlaa har naam taraa-ay.
One's faults are eradicated, and one's face becomes radiant and bright; through the Lord's Name, one crosses over.
HOH Hee 3G alee fefs Afs o US I (966-6, ana, He 5) janam maran bha-o kati-on fir jon na paa-ay. The fear of birth and death is removed, and he is not reincarnated again.
nig gu 3 ofenig os urfu Saves Il (966-7, Trak, He 5)
anDh koop tay kaadhi-an larh aap farhaa-ay. God lifts him up and pulls him out of the deep, dark pit, and attaches him to the hem of His robe.
aoa sutA fherfemte ge als BES Mal (966-7, wast, Hs 5) naanak bakhas milaa-i-an rakhay gal laa-ay. ||21]| O Nanak, God forgives him, and holds him close in His embrace. ||21]|
HBa H2 U Il (966-8)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Hoats fra yee et ast Sar Tals Il (966-8, Tas, Hs 5) muhabat jis khudaa-ay dee rataa rang chalool. One who loves God is imbued with the deep crimson color of His love.
oad fess uretats fA AS ah o HP IAI (966-8, aH, He 5)
naanak virlay paa-ee-ah tis jan keem na mool. ||1]|
O Nanak, such a person is rarely found; the value of such a humble person can never be estimated. ||1]|
He U Il (966-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
nies fea vfs afe aofe st Ae fSSft II (966-9, anxat, He 5)
andar viDhaa sach naa-ay baahar bhee sach dithom.
The True Name has pierced the nucleus of my self deep within. Outside, I see the True Lord as well.
ooe sfeor us afe efs fafs fesef= Sfx QU (966-9, east, He 5)
naanak ravi-aa habh thaa-ay van tarin taribhavan rom. ||2||
O Nanak, He is pervading and permeating all places, the forests and the meadows, the three worlds, and every hair. ||2||
UST I (966-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nny ats Jae wt dt afsnr Il (966-10, aa, He 5) aapay keeto rachan aapay hee rati-aa. He Himself created the Universe; He Himself imbues it.
nmy dfe fea wm ag sfsmr | (966-10, mat, He 5) aapay ho-i-o ik aapay baho bhati-aa. He Himself is One, and He Himself has numerous forms.
mm} Agar HFS wm Era Il (966-11, Tat, He 5) aapay sabhnaa manjh aapay baahraa. He Himself is within all, and He Himself is beyond them.
wing Aefo Ufs wit dt ATIT Il (966-11, THAT, H 5) aapay jaaneh door aapay hee jaahraa. He Himself is known to be far away, and He Himself is right here.
nm defo TUS wMy usa I (966-11, anraat, He 5) aapay hoveh gupat aapay pargatee-dai. He Himself is hidden, and He Himself is revealed.
atnfs far o ute sdt act il (966-12, mast, He 5) keemat kisai na paa-ay tayree thatee-ai. No one can estimate the value of Your Creation, Lord.
Mas Ass MAT Ug vides F Il (966-12, Trae, ws 5) gahir gambheer athaahu apaar agnat too”. You are deep and profound, unfathomable, infinite and invaluable.
aed eas fea fea fea F NANI AT Il (966-13, Trae, Hs 5) naanak vartai ik iko ik too’. |]22||1||2|| suDh. O Nanak, the One Lord is all-pervading. You are the One and only. ||22||1||2|| Sudh]|
THA at ea ate awefs sex AS SfH nM (966-14)
raamkalee kee vaar raa-ay balvand tathaa satai doom aakhee Vaar Of Raamkalee, Uttered By Satta And Balwand The Drummer:
qe Afsas ure II (966-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oe aga aed ad fas sq de Ales | (06-15, maat, saefs 3 AS) naa-o kartaa kaadar karay ki-o bol hovai jokheevadai. One who chants the Name of the Almighty Creator - how can his words be judged?
2 aa vfs se Ba] FT UdalS BS Uses Il (966-15, THA, sedis 3 AS)
day gunaa sat bhain bharaav hai paarangat daan parheevadai.
His divine virtues are the true sisters and brothers; through them, the gift of supreme status is obtained.
Sota TH voter AG de Asal Ste Il (966-16, onraat, sats 3 AS) naanak raaj chalaa-i-aa sach kot sataanee neev dai.
Nanak established the kingdom; He built the true fortress on the strongest foundations.
ade ufsGe a3 fafs af frest nifqs utee I (966-16, mast, sadfs 3 AST)
lahnay Dhari-on chhat sir kar siftee amrit peevdai.
He installed the royal canopy over Lehna's head; chanting the Lord's Praises, He drank in the Ambrosial Nectar.
Hfs ad orsH Be Ut usta Afs usefe Fhe S Il (966-17, ast, sedfs 3 AS) mat gur aatam dayv dee kharhag jor puraaku-ay jee-a dai. The Guru implanted the almighty sword of the Teachings to illuminate his soul.
dfs 38 sooth atet areata nents dee Il (966-17, mast, sedfs 3 AS) gur chaylay rahraas kee-ee naanak salaamat theevdai. The Guru bowed down to His disciple, while Nanak was still alive.
Afo fear fesH AIS IU (966-18, oH, sedfs 3 AS) seh tikaa ditos jeevdai. ||1|| The King, while still alive, applied the ceremonial mark to his forehead. ||1]|
Bde Ht saci soar St ust Il (966-18, onrast, awefs 3 FS lahnay dee fayraa-ee-ai naankaa dohee khatee-ai. Nanak proclaimed Lehna's succession - he earned it.
nfs Ga wats wfe vfs fer efe usd | (966-18, mast, sedfs 3 AS) jot ohaa jugat saa-ay seh kaa-i-aa fayr paltee-ai. They shared the One Light and the same way; the King just changed His body.
38 A es fadnat Hie sus 8a" TT Teh Il (966-19, east, saefs 3 AS)
jhulai so chhat niranjanee mal takhat baithaa gur hatee-ai.
The immaculate canopy waves over Him, and He sits on the throne in the Guru's shop.
ate fa as sorfenr fies Fa neat TEM Il (966-19, meet, wwefs 3 AS)
karahi je gur furmaa-i-aa sil jog aloonee chatee-ai. He does as the Guru commands; He tasted the tasteless stone of Yoga.
Yat ceo
Sag VS Ad wale aie sfe o wrest we Il (967-1, raat, saefs 3 AS)
langar chalai gur sabad har tot na aavee khatee-ai.
The Langar - the Kitchen of the Guru's Shabad has been opened, and its supplies never run short.
ude fefs ann ot ume uoet afe cad I (967-2, snact, sedis 3 AS kharchay dit khasamm dee aap khahdee khair dabtee-ai. Whatever His Master gave, He spent; He distributed it all to be eaten.
de frefs wAH Ut Og MaHY ATA FEM I (967-2, wrath, wads 3 AS)
hovai sifat khasamm dee noor arsahu kursahu jhatee-ai.
The Praises of the Master were sung, and the Divine Light descended from the heavens to the earth.
30 fs6 AS UTSATS HS HOH HOH Ut AM Il (967-3, Hast, swefs 3 AS) tuDh dithay sachay paatisaah mal janam janam dee katee-ai. Gazing upon You, O True King, the filth of countless past lives is washed away.
Ag fa afs sorfenr fag Fe sag Teh Il (967-3, oract, wadfs 3 AS)
sach je gur furmaa-i-aa ki-o aydoo bolhu hatee-ai.
The Guru gave the True Command; why should we hesitate to proclaim this?
ust a8e o ute afs utes ae Hah I (067-4, maet, wats 3 AS)
putree ka-ul na paali-o kar peerahu kan" murtee-ai.
His sons did not obey His Word; they turned their backs on Him as Guru.
fefs ue rat feafs sf avg Curfefs scint Il (967-4, rast, sadfs 3 AST)
dil khotai aakee firni" baneh bhaar uchaa-ini" chhatee-ai.
These evil-hearted ones became rebellious; they carry loads of sin on their backs. fafs uindt Het ad fafe atst f3S adh II (967-5, mast, sedis 3 AS)
jin aakhee so-ee karay jin keetee tinai thatee-ai. Whatever the Guru said, Lehna did, and so he was installed on the throne.
ae od fats Gech iQ (967-5, oHast, aadfs 3 AST) ka-un haaray kin uvtee-ai. ||2] | Who has lost, and who has won? ||2||
fafs otst A Haat a ATS fred AST I (967-5, meat, saefs 3 AS) jin keetee so mannnaa ko saal jivaahay saalee. He who did the work, is accepted as Guru; so which is better - the thistle or the rice?
UeH afe J PSsat B TST AI VHS Il (967-6, wast, wees 3 AST) Dharam raa-ay hai dayvtaa lai galaa karay dalaalee. The Righteous Judge of Dharma considered the arguments and made the decision.
Afsaqg ore AS ad AT aS J] BITS Il (067-6, maat, saefs 3 AT) satgur aakhai sachaa karay saa baat hovai darhaalee. Whatever the True Guru says, the True Lord does; it comes to pass instantaneously.
Gd via ot sdt fedt AY ass sfo gas Il (967-7, ast, wads 3 AST) gur angad dee dohee firee sach kartai banDh bahaalee. Guru Angad was proclaimed, and the True Creator confirmed it.
Sod afar use afte nfs saz Fat A STA Il (967-7, Hast, swdfs 3 AS)
naanak kaa-i-aa palat kar mal takhat baithaa sai daalee.
Nanak merely changed his body; He still sits on the throne, with hundreds of branches reaching out.
ag Ae Cyfs ust HAAS SE Harst | (967-8, aah, saefs 3 AS dar sayvay umat kharhee maskalai ho-ay jangaalee. Standing at His door, His followers serve Him; by this service, their rust is scraped off.
ofs eden MAH @ ate AS Aat Seat Il (967-8, Hast, seefs 3 AS)
dar darvays khasamm dai naa-ay sachai banee laalee.
He is the Dervish - the Saint, at the door of His Lord and Master; He loves the True Name, and the Bani of the Guru's Word.
aees utet 3a Ho fan sgSt Se ust Il (967-9, mast, sadfs 3 AS)
balvand kheevee nayk jan jis bahutee chhaa-o patraalee.
Balwand says that Khivi, the Guru's wife, is a noble woman, who gives soothing, leafy shade to all.
Sate eats 2s oA nifys alfa fumrst il (967-9, rast, sadfs 3 AS)
langar da-ulat vandee-ai ras amrit kheer ghi-aalee.
She distributes the bounty of the Guru's Langar; the kheer - the rice pudding and ghee, is like sweet ambrosia.
Taha & He CAS HOH BE uses Il (967-10, mast, swefs 3 FS
gursikhaa kay mukh ujlay manmukh thee-ay paraalee.
The faces of the Guru's Sikhs are radiant and bright; the self-willed manmukhs are pale, like straw.
US TIS YAH ate At urs Het WS Il (967-10, wHast, awefs 3 AS) pa-ay kabool khasamm naal jaa‘ ghaal mardee ghaalee. The Master gave His approval, when Angad exerted Himself heroically.
HST tet AG Af fafs df= Borst 13 (967-11, oat, sadfs 3 AS) maataa kheevee saho so-ay jin go-ay uthaalee. ||3]|| Such is the Husband of mother Khivi; He sustains the world. ||3]|
oe aia zoe efonret wire fer fae i 967-11, oat, sadfs 3 AS
hori’-o gang vahaa-ee-ai duni-aa-ee aakhai ke ki-on.
It is as if the Guru made the Ganges flow in the opposite direction, and the world wonders: what has he done?
soa Safe Aaota Guact te fefsfaSe i (967-12, ast, seefs 3 AS naanak eesar jagnaath uchhadee vain viriki-on. Nanak, the Lord, the Lord of the World, spoke the words out loud.
Hue! uses ate fs wa Fate fastase il (967-12, Hast, saéfs 3 AS") maaDhaanaa parbat kar naitar baasak sabad rirhki-on.
Making the mountain his churning stick, and the snake-king his churning string, He has churned the Word of the Shabad.
sees 330 ferfenig afe ure ae feafaGs Il (967-13, saat, waéfs 3 AS) cha-odah ratan nikaali-an kar aavaa ga-on chilki-on. From it, He extracted the fourteen jewels, and illuminated the world.
avs uifs sursinia fafs nies fus fosfaBe it (967-14, mat, waefs 3 AS) kudrat ah vaykhaali-an jin aivad pid thinki-on. He revealed such creative power, and touched such greatness.
eve ufeég eg fats oinris fanrs fefaba il 67-14, mast, sedis 3 AS)
lahnay Dhari-on chhatar sir asmaan ki-aarhaa chhiki-on.
He raised the royal canopy to wave over the head of Lehna, and raised His glory to the skies.
nfs Anat Afs ofa my nm ASt fufaGe il (967-15, east, sachs 3 AS jot samaanee jot maahi aap aapai saytee miki-on. His Light merged into the Light, and He blended Him into Himself.
frat ust uify a AS Cufs Sug fA fae i 967-15, mast, wadfs 3 AS) sikhaa™ putraa’ ghokh kai sabh umat vaykhhu je ki-on. Guru Nanak tested His Sikhs and His sons, and everyone saw what happened.
at AGA St oe fefaGs Sil (967-16, ast, seefs 3 AS) jaa‘ suDhos taa™ lahnaa tiki-on. ||4]| When Lehna alone was found to be pure, then He was set on the throne. ||4||
efs arfeur gannfe Afsata wsg Il (967-16, Hast, sees 3 AS) fayr vasaa-i-aa faru-aan satgur khaadoor. Then, the True Guru, the son of Pheru, came to dwell at Khadoor.
WY Su HAH of% SU IT HE TT Il (967-17, Trae, wets 3 AS)
jap tap sanjam naal tuDh hor much garoor.
Meditation, austerities and self-discipline rest with You, while the others are filled with excessive pride.
wg feard Hert fAS uret Fe Il (967-17, mast, awefs 3 AST) lab vinaahay maansaa ji-o paanee boor. Greed ruins mankind, like the green algae in the water.
gut BIT TT at TIS BT Il (967-17, Tras, asefs 3 AS) var"i-ai dargeh guroo kee kudratee noor. In the Guru's Court, the Divine Light shines in its creative power.
fas Ae 6 Bset SF GT Og Il (967-18, Tae, wets 3 AT) jit so haath na labh-ee too’ oh tharoor. You are the cooling peace, whose depth cannot be found.
3@ fafa an foarg 3 3u fefs sau II (967-18, mat, Tees 3 AST) na-o niDh naam niDhaan hai tuDh vich bharpoor.
You are overflowing with the nine treasures, and the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ser Sot FAT A SE YT Il (967-19, Meet, sae 3 AS") nindaa tayree jo karay so vanjai choor. Whoever slanders You will be totally ruined and destroyed.
ds feA HS Ba 30 AS ET Il (967-19, Haat, wets 3 AST) nayrhai disai maat lok tuDh sujhai door. People of the world can see only what is near at hand, but You can see far beyond.
efs erfeur gannte Afsafs wsg Null (967-19, oHast, sees 3 AS) fayr vasaa-i-aa faru-aan satgur khaadoor. ||5]|| Then the True Guru, the son of Pheru, came to dwell at Khadoor. ||5]|
Uar tet
A feat A Svat Het chars Il (68-1, meat, sweets 3 AS) so tikaa so baihnaa so-ee deebaan. The same mark on the forehead, the same throne, and the same Royal Court.
fury ere Afeot UST USSTS Il (968-1, Tees, swefs 3 AS) piyoo daaday jayvihaa potaa parvaan. Just like the father and grandfather, the son is approved.
fafs wAa 33 wfsur afs odt ae 11 fafs me fedfemr afe He HOES Il (968-2, enact, gedfs 3 AS)
jin baasak naytrai ghati-aa kar nayhee taan. jin samund viroli-aa kar mayr maDhaan. He took the thousand-headed serpent as his churning string, and with the force of devotional love, he churned the ocean of the world with his churning stick, the Sumayr mountain.
seus 336 foorfemig aise WSS Il (968-2, mHaat, waefs 3 AS) cha-odah ratan nikaali-an keeton chaanaan. He extracted the fourteen jewels, and brought forth the Divine Light.
ust ats AIH BAS atG use Il (968-3, saat, sachs 3 AST) ghorhaa keeto sahj daa jat kee-o palaan. He made intuition his horse, and chastity his saddle.
Uey vateS AS oT AA Je AS Il (968-3, oat, saefs 3 AS) Dhanakh charhaa-i-o sat daa jas handaa baan. He placed the arrow of the Lord's Praise in the bow of Truth.
ate fefs g niarg AT ufsur g STE Il (968-4, maat, wees 3 AST)
kal vich Dhoo anDhaar saa charhi-aa rai bhaan.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, there was only pitch darkness. Then, He rose like the sun to illuminate the darkness.
Had a3 ANTES AST SSS Il (968-4, mast, wads 3 AS) satahu khayt jamaa-i-o satahu chhaavaan. He farms the field of Truth, and spreads out the canopy of Truth.
fos sHet sdb fiuG Het ure | (968-4, oat, sadfs 3 AS) nit raso-ee tayree-ai ghi-o maidaa khaan. Your kitchen always has ghee and flour to eat.
wd ast ASIGA He Hfo HAE UdSTS Il (968-5, Tat, sadfs 3 AS)
chaaray kundaa™ sujhee-os man meh sabad parvaan.
You understand the four corners of the universe; in your mind, the Word of the Shabad is approved and supreme.
mat ae foatas ats sefa otATS Il (968-5, THast, saefs 3 AS)
aavaa ga-on nivaari-o kar nadar neesaan.
You eliminate the comings and goings of reincarnation, and bestow the insignia of Your Glance of Grace.
m@sfeor ni@savg 3 A use APE Il (968-6, THast, seefs 3 AS a-utri-aa a-utaar lai so purakh sujaan. You are the Avataar, the Incarnation of the all-knowing Primal Lord.
sufs a o suet uses ATE Il (968-6, THA, saefs 3 AS)
jhakharh vaa-o na dol-ee parbat mayraan.
You are not pushed or shaken by the storm and the wind; you are like the Sumayr Mountain.
We fase Aba at Wet J WE Il (908-7, Tat, reefs 3 AST) jaanai birthaa jee-a kee jaanee hoo jaan. You know the inner state of the soul; You are the Knower of knowers.
foro Arad AS UTSATS ATS AWE AAS Il (968-7, THast, wwefs 3 AS") ki-aa saalaahee sachay paatisaah jaa‘ too sugharh sujaan. How can I praise You, O True Supreme King, when You are so wise and all-knowing?
ae fa Afsad SSH A AS BE Il (968-7, oat, sedfs 3 AS)
daan je satgur bhaavsee so satay daan.
Those blessings granted by the Pleasure of the True Guru - please bless Satta with those gifts.
aod Jet sg fife Cufs ae I (68-2, THast, awefs 3 AS) naanak handaa chhatar sir umat hairaan. Seeing Nanak's canopy waving over Your head, everyone was astonished.
A fear A Svat Het chars Il (968-8, mast, saefs 3 AS) so tikaa so baihnaa so-ee deebaan. The same mark on the forehead, the same throne, and the same Royal Court.
fu ere Afeat UT UTSTES MEI (968-9, Hast, wees 3 AS) piyoo daaday jayvihaa potraa parvaan. ||6|| Just like the father and grandfather, the son is approved. ||6]|
U9 de aHeA ad fats fafeor fas Aetfemr Il (968-9, east, aadfs 3 AS) Dhan Dhan raamdaas gur jin siri-aa tinai savaari-aa. Blessed, blessed is Guru Raam Daas; He who created You, has also exalted You.
udt det aes orfu franeas ufent | (968-9, oHat, aadfs 3 AS) pooree ho-ee karaamaat aap sirjanhaarai Dhaari-aa. Perfect is Your miracle; the Creator Lord Himself has installed You on the throne.
fret ofS Hast ursgan afs oHAatfanr | (968-10, suet, sats 3 AS)
sikhee atai sangtee paarbarahm kar namaskaari-aa.
The Sikhs and all the Congregation recognize You as the Supreme Lord God, and bow down to You.
MEH MEY 3B 3 ST nso ursetfent Il (968-10, meet, wwefs 3 AS) atal athaahu atol too tayraa ant na paaraavaari-aa. You are unchanging, unfathomable and immeasurable; You have no end or limitation.
faat 3 Afeor s@ afs A so ute Cofamr Il (908-11, oHast, sets 3 AST) jin"ee too” sayvi-aa bhaa-o kar say tuDh paar utaari-aa. Those who serve You with love - You carry them across.
Ba SF aH au Hg Hf ae SO AUsStfaMT Il (968-11, east, sadfs 3 AS)
lab lobh kaam kroDh moh maar kadhay tuDh saparvaari-aa.
Greed, envy, sexual desire, anger and emotional attachment - You have beaten them and driven them out.
U9 A Sd We dA So Unf Il (968-12, oHast, sadfs 3 AS Dhan so tayraa thaan hai sach tayraa paiskaari-aa. Blessed is Your place, and True is Your magnificent glory.
aod J BIS Sd TT wing J Aotanr I (968-12, Taet, wets 3 AS") naanak too lahnaa toohai gur amar too veechaari-aa. You are Nanak, You are Angad, and You are Amar Daas; so do I recognize You.
ag for 3t He Afar IDI (968-13, THast, swefs 3 AS) gur dithaa taa’ man saaDhaari-aa. ||7]| When I saw the Guru, then my mind was comforted and consoled. ||7||
Od Wd VI Hat Uses ym In | (968-13, maat, saefs 3 AS) chaaray jaagay chahu jugee panchaa-in aapay ho-aa. The four Gurus enlightened the four ages; the Lord Himself assumed the fifth form.
mnie nny Ate wm dt afk usm i (968-14, mast, sedis 3 AST) aapeen"ai aap saaji-on aapay hee thami" khalo-aa. He created Himself, and He Himself is the supporting pillar.
nmr uct aH orfu urfu fereaat Iu | (968-14, wnat, saefs 3 AST) aapay patee kalam aap aap likhanhaaraa ho-aa. He Himself is the paper, He Himself is the pen, and He Himself is the writer.
AS Gufs ure Feat wm dt ae faamr Il (968-15, onraat, saefs 3 AS) sabh umat aavan jaavnee aapay hee navaa niro-aa. All His followers come and go; He alone is fresh and new.
sufs For nse Te Afsas a fas Tene il (968-15, Tat, waefs 3 AS") takhat baithaa arjan guroo satgur kaa khivai chando-aa. Guru Arjun sits on the throne; the royal canopy waves over the True Guru.
Gueed 3 nTadeg UT vat Amis But I (968-16, mast, waeets 3 AST) ugavnahu tai aathavnahu chahu chakee kee-an lo-aa. From east to west, He illuminates the four directions.
frat ag 3 Aes Hone ufsor Hor I (968-16, Hast, wads 3 AS) jin"ee guroo na sayvi-o manmukhaa pa-i-aa mo-aa. Those self-willed manmukhs who do not serve the Guru die in shame.
val Bat TINTS AS A AM tT Il (968-17, THast, wets 3 AS) doonee cha-unee karaamaat sachay kaa sachaa dho-aa. Your miracles increase two-fold, even four-fold; this is the True Lord's true blessing.
Wd Wd VI Fat Uses ym Iu WCU (968-17, oat, saefs 3 AS
chaaray jaagay chahu jugee panchaa-in aapay ho-aa. ||8||1||
The four Gurus enlightened the four ages; the Lord Himself assumed the fifth form. [8] {11 |
THAS Bat Sas at Il (968-19)
raamkalee banee bhagtaa kee. Raamkalee, The Word Of The Devotees.
ats AIG (968-19) kabeer jee-o Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars YATE II (968-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aur asate safe HOS Td a Ad TZ ale J Il (968-19, mast, sas adie Hh) kaa-i-aa kalaalan laahan mayla-o gur kaa sabad gurh keen ray.
Make your body the vat, and mix in the yeast. Let the Word of the Guru's Shabad be the molasses.
Yat cer
fgna aM au He HSAG afte ae aA ete F IA (969-1, HEA, sas ate Fh tarisnaa kaam kroDh mad matsar kaat kaat kas deen ray. ||1]|| Cut up desire, sexuality, anger, pride and envy, and let them be the fermenting bark.
[11
aet J 3 AS Aon AY nists wae AU Su RE VHst TF Il (909-1, at, gas ade Hh) ko-ee hai ray sant sahj sukh antar jaa ka-o jap tap day-o dalaalee ray.
Is there any Saint, with intuitive peace and poise deep within, unto whom I might offer my meditation and austerities as payment?
ea de ofe 3g HO VEE A He Se awSt F NU! TTS Il (969-2, wast, sas adits Fh
ayk boond bhar tan man dayva-o jo mad day-ay kalaalee ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I dedicate my body and mind to whoever gives me even a drop of this wine from such a vat. ||1]|Pause| |
32S VSI TA Stat alat qo male sf ATA F Il (909-3, Tat, sas ate Fh) bhavan chatur das bhaathee keen"ee barahm agan tan jaaree ray.
I have made the fourteen worlds the furnace, and I have burnt my body with the fire of God.
He Hea AoA Ufs wait HUN UST SH F MQM (969-3, Tnast, sas ants Fh
mudraa madak sahj Dhun laagee sukhman pochanhaaree ray. ||2||
My mudra - my hand-gesture, is the pipe; tuning into the celestial sound current within, the Shushmanaa - the central spinal channel, is my cooling pad. ||2||
Stee sas 3n Afe Han af AfA ads SE F Il (969-4, sat, sas adits Hf)
tirath barat naym such sanjam rav sas gahnai day-o ray.
Pilgrimages, fasting, vows, purifications, self-discipline, austerities and breath control through the sun and moon channels - all these I pledge.
Hafs fimrs wo 3m vifys Sg Ho TA UG FT BI (969-5, oat, sas acts fh
Surat pi-aal suDhaa ras amrit ayhu mahaa ras pay-o ray. ||3]|
My focused consciousness is the cup, and the Ambrosial Nectar is the pure juice. I drink in the supreme, sublime essence of this juice. ||3]|
fess us om nits fase feo SA HOM TS F Il (969-5, THast, sas sets Ht)
nijhar Dhaar chu-ai at nirmal ih ras manoo-aa raato ray.
The pure stream constantly trickles forth, and my mind is intoxicated by this sublime essence.
afd wats Aas He ge fed Ho TA ATS F BIA (969-6, Hat, sas ats Hh)
kahi kabeer saglay mad chhoochhay ihai mahaa ras saacho ray. ||4]|1]|
Says Kabeer, all other wines are trivial and tasteless; this is the only true, sublime essence. ||4]|1]|
ag ats fomrg fmrg ats Hom 3B sot HS UST II (969-6, THaMt, sas aEte FH)
gurh kar gi-aan Dhi-aan kar mahoo-aa bha-o bhaathee man Dhaaraa.
Make spiritual wisdom the molasses, meditation the flowers, and the Fear of God the fire enshrined in your mind.
HUno odt AoA AHTat ute utesarat Al (969-7, wHast, sas adits Th)
sukhman naaree sahj samaanee peevai peevanhaaraa. ||1||
The Shushmanaa, the central spinal channel, is intuitively balanced, and the drinker drinks in this wine. ||1]|
MST HI HG HSS Il (969-7, THaAt, sas aete Fh) a-oDhoo mayraa man matvaaraa. O hermit Yogi, my mind is intoxicated.
Gone ve Hes JA Witmer fyseo sfeor Cfrmrat 14 TIS Il (969-8, ast, sas alts Ft) unmad chadhaa madan ras chaakhi-aa taribhavan bha-i-aa uji-aaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o. When that wine rises up, one tastes the sublime essence of this juice, and sees across the three worlds. ||1]|Pause| |
efe us afe srret aret ul@ HoT GA Set II (969-8, Haat, sas adits Ah
du-ay pur jor rasaa-ee bhaathee pee-o mahaa ras bhaaree.
Joining the two channels of the breath, I have lit the furnace, and I drink in the supreme, sublime essence.
ay ay ufe ate ASS ele Tet HATS MQM (969-9, Tat, sas adits Ht) kaam kroDh du-ay kee-ay jalaytaa chhoot ga-ee sansaaree. ||2]|
I have burnt both sexual desire and anger, and I have been emancipated from the world. ||2||
uae YEA fame aa afta Afsaa 3 Afo uret || (969-10, wast, sas adits Fh
pargat pargaas gi-aan gur gammit satgur tay suDh paa-ee.
The light of spiritual wisdom enlightens me; meeting with the Guru, the True Guru, I have obtained this understanding.
aA ody SH He HST Bula o oa AT SII (969-10, THASt, saz aete FH) daas kabeer taas mad maataa uchak na kabhoo jaa-ee. ||3]||2|| Slave Kabeer is intoxicated with that wine, which never wears off. ||3]||2]||
3 Hd Ag uses AM Ge ad H Sat I (969-11, mast, sas adits Hf) too” mayro mayr parbat su-aamee ot gahee mai tayree. You are my Sumayr Mountain, O my Lord and Master; I have grasped Your Support.
ot SH 38d 3 UH fas ofa Sot afs Act NU (969-11, rast, sas adits Hh naa tum dolahu naa ham girtay rakh leenee har mayree. ||1]| You do not shake, and I do not fall. You have preserved my honor. ||1||
Ma 3a Aa Aa Sat Tat Il (969-12, mast, sas adits AH ab tab jab kab tuhee tuhee. Now and then, here and there, You, only You.
JH 3m usAte Aut Ae dt NA TIS Il (969-12, mast, sas ate A ham tu-a parsaad sukhee sad hee. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Your Grace, I am forever in peace. ||1]|Pause] |
3d 3dA Haas aA HS Zo at Sufs gsret Il (969-13, east, sas ate Ff)
toray bharosay maghar basi-o mayray tan kee tapat bujhaa-ee.
Relying upon You, I can live even in the cursed place of Magahar; You have put out the fire of my body.
ufu® @aHe Holds UTES sf AH FA MrTEetT NII (969-13, wat, sas ate Ff)
pahilay darsan maghar paa-i-o fun kaasee basay aa-ee. ||2]|
First, I obtained the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan in Magahar; then, I came to dwell at Benares. ||2||
AAT Hdd SHt aH IH Sa ae At Il (969-14, oat, sas adie Ah jaisaa maghar taisee kaasee ham aykai kar jaanee. As is Magahar, so is Benares; I see them as one and the same.
dH fosus fas feg ag ufeur Hes sfe THAT ISI (969-14, THast, sas aete FH)
ham nirDhan ji-o ih Dhan paa-i-aa martay foot gumaanee. ||3]|
I am poor, but I have obtained this wealth of the Lord; the proud are bursting with pride, and die. ||3]|
ad THS ystu fA AE a AES AE sat Il (969-15, meet, sas aets Ht) karai gumaan chubheh tis soolaa ko kaadhan ka-o naahee. One who takes pride in himself is stuck with thorns; no one can pull them out.
wn Hos ae faos fears aoa vig ust II8Il (909-15, mat, sas adits Th) ajai so chobh ka-o bilal bilaatay narkay ghor pachaahee. ||4| | Here, he cries bitterly, and hereafter, he burns in the most hideous hell. ||4]|
REG BIE for Hag frase AIS SS TE Il (969-16, mrast, sas alta Fh) kavan narak ki-aa surag bichaaraa santan do-oo raaday. What is hell, and what is heaven? The Saints reject them both.
oH ag at ofs & ASS MUS TT UATE MUI (969-16, THast, sas aets Fh ham kaahoo kee kaan na kadh-tay apnay gur parsaaday. ||5|| I have no obligation to either of them, by the Grace of my Guru. ||5] |
mwa 3@ ate ve fhurafs fee 3 Afsaat il (969-17, sHast, sas adte A)
ab ta-o jaa-ay chadhay singhaasan milay hai saringpaanee.
Now, I have mounted to the throne of the Lord; I have met the Lord, the Sustainer of the World.
oH adie fa se J afe & AA USTs NENSI (969-18, east, sas adie Ft) raam kabeeraa ayk bha-ay hai ko-ay na sakai pachhaanee. ||6||3]| The Lord and Kabeer have become one. No one can tell them apart. ||6||3]|
Ast HOG Tst sms fea acerdt Ht Il (969-18, mast, sas ats HH)
santaa maan-o dootaa daana-o ih kutvaaree mayree.
I honor and obey the Saints, and punish the wicked; this is my duty as God's police officer.
feen dfs 3d ue usAe an ved af Sat A (969-19, sat, sas adits 7) divas rain tayray paa-o palosa-o kays chavar kar fayree. ||1]||
Day and night, I wash Your feet, Lord; I wave my hair as the chauree, to brush away the flies. ||1]|
TH FAT SF Taats i (969-19, rast, saz aes zh) ham kookar tayray darbaar. I am a dog at Your Court, Lord.
sata wig seq urs NAN TIS I (969-19, oHast, sas adte A) bha-ukahi aagai badan pasaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. I open my snout and bark before it. ||1]]Pause] |
Us ko
Uda HOH JH SHS Aza wa 3E fifenr 3 AST II (970-1, eHaet, sas aets Fh poorab janam ham tum"ray sayvak ab ta-o miti-aa na jaa-ee. In my past life, I was Your servant; now, I cannot leave You.
3d word ufs Aan at HE HS Varet 112i 70-1, Haat, sas ade th
tayray du-aarai Dhun sahj kee maathai mayray dagaa-ee. ||2||
The celestial sound current resounds at Your Door. Your insignia is stamped upon my forehead. ||2]|
wa dfo A ao fe Aste fas war star AT I (970-2, aast, sas aes Ft)
daagay hohi so ran meh joojheh bin daagay bhag jaa-ee.
Those who are branded with Your brand fight bravely in battle; those without Your brand run away.
Ay df= A sats uss Tha BE ys Uret ISI (970-2, Tat, sas sets Ft)
saaDhoo ho-ay so bhagat pachhaanai har la-ay khajaanai paa-ee. ||3]|
One who becomes a Holy person, appreciates the value of devotional worship to the Lord. The Lord places him in His treasury. ||3]|
aod Hfs aodt usn ast dtefe il (970-3, east, sas adte Hf)
kothray meh kothree param kothee beechaar.
In the fortress is the chamber; by contemplative meditation it becomes the supreme chamber.
ats diet ans adte AG Seg SAS AN Ill (970-3, saat, sas ade Ah
gur deenee basat kabeer ka-o layvhu basat sam"aar. | |4]|
The Guru has blessed Kabeer with the commodity, saying, "Take this commodity; cherish it and keep it secure."| |4| |
adifs det AAS a@ stot fan HASfe Sa I (970-4, THast, sas adte FH)
kabeer dee-ee sansaar ka-o leenee jis mastak bhaag.
Kabeer gives it to the world, but he alone receives it, upon whose forehead such destiny is recorded.
nifys oa fafs ufeor fag a or Aaa WUIIBI (970-5, Tat, sas ote FH) amrit ras jin paa-i-aa thir taa kaa sohaag. ||5||4|| Permanent is the marriage, of one who receives this ambrosial essence. ||5||4]|
fag He Se afest faa A fa youne fang ad II (970-5, mast, sas adits Ff)
jin mukh bayd gaa-itaree niksai so ki-o barahman bisar karai.
O Brahmin, how can you forget the One, from whose mouth the Vedas and the Gayitri prayer issured forth?
wa ule nas AS oa A fa ufss ofa a ad NA (970-6, meat, sas adits Th) jaa kai paa-ay jagat sabh laagai so ki-o pandit har na kahai. ||1||
The whole world falls at His feet; why don't you chant the Name of that Lord, O Pandit? ||1]|
x NN
ad He IHS Tis S Adld Il (970-6, mae, sas ata Ah
kaahay mayray baam"an har na kaheh. Why, O my Brahmin, do you not chant the Lord's Name?
TH 3 safe us ena safe All TIC Il (970-7, east, sas adits FH) raam na boleh paaday dojak bhareh. ||1|| rahaa-o. If you don't chant the Lord's Name, O Pandit, you will only suffer in hell. ||1]|Pause] |
ulus Su ate ufs sq JS aH af Ceg gata Il (970-7, mast, sas adits Ht)
aapan ooch neech ghar bhojan hathay karam kar udar bhareh.
You think that you are high, but you take food from the houses of the lowly; you fill up your belly by forcibly practicing your rituals.
UGTA onTEA ofe af Hats as dua & afu uate 2 (970-8, meet, saz ats Hh) cha-udas amaavas rach rach maa‘geh kar deepak lai Koop pareh. ||2||
On the fourteenth day, and the night of the new moon, you go out begging; even though you hold the lamp in your hands, still, you fall into the pit. ||2]| |
3 qos A ona qed nfs Sfo aradt AA a Bafa Il (970-8, meet, sas oats Ht) too” barahman mai kaaseek julhaa muhi tohi baraabaree kaisay kai baneh. You are a Brahmin, and I am only a weaver from Benares. How can I compare to you?
THe TH OH afs Gad Fe SIA us Sha Hots NSNUI (970-9, Hast, sas aE Ht)
hamray raam naam kahi ubray bayd bharosay paa“day doob mareh. ||3]|5|| Chanting the Lord's Name, I have been saved; relying on the Vedas, O Brahmin, you Shall drown and die. ||3]|5||
3de_g SA SS ST AT YOU uy JA Sd | (970-10, eat, sas afte HH)
tarvar ayk anant daar saakhaa puhap patar ras bharee-aa.
There is a single tree, with countless branches and twigs; its flowers and leaves are filled with its juice.
feo nifys ot ast 3 3 fSfe afs us adh AU (970-10, sat, sas ate Fh)
ih amrit kee baarhee hai ray tin har poorai karee-aa. ||1]| This world is a garden of Ambrosial Nectar. The Perfect Lord created it. ||1]|
Wot wat I TH TH at Aast Il (970-11, aHast, sas ade aH)
jaanee jaanee ray raajaa raam kee kahaanee. I have come to know the story of my Sovereign Lord.
wists Afs on user aaHfe fase AAT NU TIC ll (970-11, Hast, sas aete Th antar jot raam pargaasaa gurmukh birlai jaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
How rare is that Gurmukh who knows, and whose inner being is illumined by the Lord's Light. ||1]]Pause| |
32g SA UTU GA stor gag B Sa Ufa Il 970-12, mast, sas asta
bhavar ayk puhap ras beeDhaa baarah lay ur Dhari-aa.
The bumble bee, addicted to the nectar of the twelve-petalled flowers, enshrines it in the heart.
Hdd HO ueg safer wrarmA eg efamr QI (970-12, sHast, saz adie Ah
sorah maDhay pavan jhakori-aa aakaasay far fari-aa. ||2||
He holds his breath suspended in the sixteen-petalled sky of the Akaashic Ethers, and beats his wings in esctasy. ||2||
Hon fe fea fase Cuftmr cast Aosg Aftmr i) (070-13, mast, sas adie Ah
sahj sunn ik birvaa upji-aa Dhartee jalhar sokhi-aa.
In the profound void of intuitive Samaadhi, the one tree rises up; it soaks up the water of desire from the ground.
ats adits J8 3 at Hea fats feg fase Shmr SEN (970-14, mast, sas aete FH) kahi kabeer ha-o taa kaa sayvak jin ih birvaa daykhi-aa. ||3]|6|| Says Kabeer, I am the servant of those who have seen this celestial tree. ||3]|6] |
Her dfs efeur afs sat ug at aag ates F Il (970-14, mast, sas oes Fh mundraa mon da-i-aa kar jholee patar kaa karahu beechaar ray.
Make silence your ear-rings, and compassion your wallet; let meditation be your begging bowl.
fter feg sq Abu wruat an ag nrarg FINA (970-15, oat, sas ate Hf) khinthaa ih tan see-a-o apnaa naam kara-o aaDhaar ray. ||1|| Sew this body as your patched coat, and take the Lord's Name as your support. ||1]|
WAT A AHST Aait | (970-15, wast, sas adits FH) aisaa jog kamaavahu jogee. Practice such Yoga, O Yogi.
Au su AnH dente sat ail TIS Il (970-16, east, sas ats FH) jap tap sanjam gurmukh bhogee. ||1|| rahaa-o. As Gurmukh, enjoy meditation, austerities and self-discipline. ||1]|Pause] |
afa fags see nryat frat Aafs feet || (970-16, oat, sas odts Ft) buDh bibhoot chadhaava-o apunee singee surat milaa-ee. Apply the ashes of wisdom to your body; let your horn be your focused consciousness.
afs saa fea fs sadt Ho at feotadt sere? N2QH1 (970-17, east, sas ate Ff)
kar bairaag fira-o tan nagree man kee kinguree bajaa-ee. ||2||
Become detached, and wander through the city of your body; play the harp of your mind. ||2]|
Us 33 8 fase mug ad feaGH SST II (970-17, Hast, sas adts Hf)
panch tat lai hirdai raakho rahai niraalam taarhee.
Enshrine the five tatvas - the five elements, within your heart; let your deep meditative trance be undisturbed.
ads ads Hod 3 Asg aH efemr afs set SIDI (970-18, mast, sas ate FH) kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu Dharam da-i-aa kar baarhee. ||3]|7]|
Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: make righteousness and compassion your garden. HSII7II
azo aa fhan Aa sists HOt aso Sw ufEMr Il (970-19, Hast, sas adits A)
kavan kaaj sirjay jag bheetar janam kavan fal paa-i-aa. For what purpose were you created and brought into the world? What rewards have you received in this life?
3¢ fofa sg0 sta0 fesnie fea fouy 3 feg He wfenr IAI (970-19, saat, sas asta Th)
bhav niDh taran taaran chintaaman ik nimakh na ih man laa-i-aa. ||1]| God is the boat to carry you across the terrifying world-ocean; He is the Fulfiller of the mind's desires. You have not centered your mind on Him, even for an instant. ||1]|
User £99
disse TH MA mat I (971-1, mast, sas ate Fh) gobind ham aisay apraaDhee. O Lord of the Universe, I am such a sinner!
fafs ufs Ht@ fils a dior fan at we safe act Arata goS Il (971-1, Hast, sas aes Ht)
jin parabh jee-o pind thaa dee-aa tis kee bhaa-o bhagat nahee saaDhee. ||1|| rahaa- O. God gave me body and soul, but I have not practiced loving devotional worship to Him. ||1||Pause| |
Ud US Ud 36 Us St Ser Us MRE o Fe Il (971-2, THast, sas aes Ft)
par Dhan par tan par tee nindaa par apbaad na chhootai.
Others' wealth, others' bodies, others' wives, others' slander and others’ fights - I have not given them up.
wer eG IS 3 ofs Sle fed USAT 3 Fe! Il (971-3, sass, sas aes FH)
aavaa gavan hot hai fun fun ih parsang na tootai. ||2||
For the sake of these, coming and going in reincarnation happens over and over again, and this story never ends. ||2||
fag ufs aa ds ofs Hao fea fare 3 ate H Sa Il (971-3, mast, sas adie Hh)
jih ghar kathaa hot har santan ik nimakh na keen"o mai fayraa.
That house, in which the Saints speak of the Lord - I have not visited it, even for an instant.
BUS BI US Hes [So Afar AE AAT Sl (71-4, THast, sas seta Fh) lampat chor doot matvaaray tin sang sadaa basayraa. ||3]|| Drunkards, thieves, and evil-doers - I constantly dwell with them. ||3]|
aH au Hfear He HSAG & AU H HTS Il (971-4, meet, sas adits Ff)
kaam kroDh maa-i-aa mad matsar ay sampai mo maahee.
Sexual desire, anger, the wine of Maya, and envy - these are what I collect within myself.
efor usH nig ad at AS S HuSsts od sil (971-5, mast, sas adits Fh)
da-i-aa Dharam ar gur kee sayvaa ay supnantar naahee. ||4||
Compassion, righteousness, and service to the Guru - these do not visit me, even in my dreams. ||4]|
de vfenre faurs eHed safs gem 3 TSH I 971-5, mat, sas ade Th
deen da-i-aal kirpaal damodar bhagat bachhal bhai haaree.
He is merciful to the meek, compassionate and benevolent, the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear.
as ade ste Ao aug ofe AS AGS SHS UIT 71-6, Hast, sas ats Fh) kahat kabeer bheer jan raakho har sayvaa kara-o tum"aaree. ||5||8||
Says Kabeer, please protect Your humble servant from disaster; O Lord, I serve only You. |{5]|8]|
fag fansfs df nafs eure | 071-7, mat, sas adits Ah jih simran ho-ay mukat du-aar. Remembering Him in meditation, the door of liberation is found.
wf Safe adt AAS Il (971-7, mast, sas adie Ah jaahi baikunth nahee sansaar. You shall go to heaven, and not return to this earth.
fesse o ute arrefs 3a Il (971-7, Tat, sas aes Ht) nirbha-o kai ghar bajaaveh toor. In the home of the Fearless Lord, the celestial trumpets resound.
Mode FAs HET FIUT AU (71-8, THASt, sas aete FH)
anhad bajeh sadaa bharpoor. ||1]| The unstruck sound current will vibrate and resonate forever. ||1]||
mrt fines afa Ho wfs I (971-8, aHeet, sas adits Hf) aisaa simran kar man maahi. Practice such meditative remembrance in your mind.
fag faunas nafs as ots dl TTS Il (971-8, wast, sas adits FH) bin simran mukat kat naahi. ||1]| rahaa-o. Without this meditative remembrance, liberation will never be found. ||1]||Pause] |
fr frnafs ost SSars Il (971-9, oHast, sas ate A jih simran naahee nankaar. Remembering Him in meditation, you will meet with no obstruction.
Hafs ad 63d FT 3g Il (971-9, Haat, sas adits Th mukat karai utrai baho bhaar. You will be liberated, and the great load will be taken away.
HAAS ate fase ufo il (971-9, mHaat, sas ate Ah namaskaar kar hirdai maahi. Bow in humility within your heart,
fefs fefs Sa neg ots IQ (971-10, wast, sas ade Ft) fir fir tayraa aavan naahi. ||2|| and you will not have to be reincarnated over and over again. ||2| |
fad frafs xafs 3 AB il (971-10, mHaat, sas ats FH) jih simran karahi too kayl. Remember Him in meditation, celebrate and be happy.
ctua sifa ufes fas 3m Il (971-10, mat, sas asta Ah deepak baa“Dh Dhari-o bin tayl. God has placed His lamp deep within you, which burns without any oil.
A dua una AAS I 971-1, Hae, sas adie Ah so deepak amrak sansaar. That lamp makes the world immortal;
am au fay aid nfs ail 71-11, meet, sas asta Hf) kaam kroDh bikh kaadheelay maar. ||3]| it conquers and drives out the poisons of sexual desire and anger. ||3]|
fag frets Sct afs ce Il 71-1, mast, sas aste Ah jih simran tayree gat ho-ay. Remembering Him in meditation, you shall obtain salvation.
A fine gy af udfé | o71-12, mast, sas adits Hh so simran rakh kanth paro-ay. Wear that meditative remembrance as your necklace.
A figs afte odt wu Cafe il 71-12, act, sas asts Ah so simran kar nahee raakh utaar. Practice that meditative remembrance, and never let it go.
ad usAret sata uts sil 971-12, mast, sas ate Hh)
gur parsaadee utreh paar. ||4]| By Guru's Grace, you shall cross over. ||4| |
fra frets ont sfo ate il 071-13, Hast, sas ate Hh) jih simran naahee tuhi kaan. Remembering Him in meditation, you shall not be obligated to others.
Hefs Hef ude Sts Il (971-13, Hast, sas aete Th) mandar soveh patambar taan. You shall sleep in your mansion, in blankets of silk.
An Aaret faa AIG i (971-13, sas, sas adits Ah sayj sukhaalee bigsai jee-o. Your soul shall blossom forth in happiness, on this comfortable bed.
A finae 3 nates ul ui 071-13, meet, sas ats Hh) so simran too an-din pee-o. ||5|| So drink in this meditative remembrance, night and day. ||5||
fra frets Sot ate sorte | 071-14, mast, sas adits Ah jih simran tayree jaa-ay balaa-ay. Remembering Him in meditation, your troubles will depart.
fag fansfs 33 Ud 3 HAE I (971-14, mast, sas adits Ah jih simran tujh pohai na maa-ay. Remembering Him in meditation, Maya will not bother you.
ffs fanfe afe afe nfs arent i (971-14, arast, sas adie Fh)
simar simar har har man gaa-ee-ai. Meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, and sing His Praises in your mind.
feg fange Afsag 3 ure Ell (971-15, east, sas adits Zh)
ih simran satgur tay paa-ee-ai. ||6||
This meditative remembrance is obtained from the True Guru. ||6]| He Ae fAHfe fee TS Il (971-15, wast, sas ate Ft)
Sadaa sadaa simar din raat. Forever and ever, remember Him, day and night,
Gos dos AMA farrth Il (971-16, mast, sas ats Ft) oothat baithat saas giraas. while standing up and sitting down, with every breath and morsel of food.
wa Afe faHde JA ST Il (971-16, Haat, sas adits th jaag so-ay simran ras bhog. While awake and asleep, enjoy the essence of this meditative remembrance.
dfs fares ureébat AAS DI (71-16, Hast, sas ate Ff) har simran paa-ee-ai sanjog. || 7] | The Lord's meditative remembrance is obtained by good destiny. ||7]|
fag fansts adt SB Ss Il (971-17, Haat, sas adits Hh jih simran naahee tujh bhaar. Remembering Him in meditation, you shall not be loaded down.
A fangs TH OH nO I (971-17, Hast, sas ate Fh) so simran raam naam aDhaar. Make this meditative remembrance of the Lord's Name your Support.
afta ate AT ar odt nfs Il (971-17, mast, sas adits Fh) kahi kabeer jaa kaa nahee ant. Says Kabeer, He has no limits;
fSA & nord S53 HT CUCM 71-17, mat, sas ate Ah tis kay aagay tant na mant. ||8]|9]| no tantras or mantras can be used against Him. ||8]|9||
THAS We 2 ral aeld At At 971-19)
raamkalee ghar 2 banee kabeer jee kee Raamkalee, Second House, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsas ure II (971-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dates sae ufemr | (971-19, mast, sas ate at) banDhach banDhan paa-i-aa. Maya, the Trapper, has sprung her trap.
Has afe wae gefeor | 71-19, mat, sas adits th) muktai gur anal bujhaa-i-aa. The Guru, the Liberated One, has put out the fire.
UST *oQ
aa ou fry feg Ho Star Il (972-1, mast, sas adie at)
jab nakh sikh ih man cheen"aa. When I came to understand this mind, from the tips of my toes to the crown of my head,
3a nists HAS ater UI (972-1, THast, sas ate eh) tab antar majan keen"aa. ||1|| then I took my cleansing bath, deep within my self. ||1]|
uzoufs Bante IIe Ys Il (972-1, THast, sas asta FH) pavanpat unman rahan kharaa. The mind, the master of the breath, abides in the state of supreme bliss.
Oot foes B ASH AT UU TIC il (972-2, wast, sas adits Fh) nahee mirat na janam jaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. There is no death, no re-birth, and no aging for me now. ||1||Pause] |
Gact & nafs ATS | (972-2, THast, sas adits Ff) ultee lay sakat sahaara’. Turning away from materialism, I have found intuitive support.
UAIS elo HBS Il (972-2, mnrast, sas adie Fh)
paiseelay gagan majhaara’, I have entered into the sky of the mind, and opened the Tenth Gate.
HOAs VAX TnI Il (972-3, wast, sas aes Hh bayDhee-alay chakar bhuangaa. The chakras of the coiled Kundalini energy have been opened,
sens THE fEHar iI (972-3, Hast, sas ate Fh) bhaytee-alay raa-ay nisangaa. ||2|| and I have met my Sovereign Lord King without fear. ||2||
ToS HT HfEMrAr Il (972-3, Hast, sas ats Ft) chookee-alay moh ma-i-aasaa. My attachment to Maya has been eradicated;
ATA ate Ae fara il (972-4, ona, sas oedts Ht) sas keeno soor giraasaa. the moon energy has devoured the sun energy.
wa asa sfoufs stat Il (972-4, mast, sas adits zh) jab kumbhak bharipur leenaa. When I was focused and merged into the all-pervading Lord,
3d TH MSde ster SI (072-4, mast, sas adie zh) tah baajay anhad beenaa. ||3]| then the unstruck sound current began to vibrate. ||3]|
was of Hae Hatten | (972-4, mast, sas ate Fh) baktai bak sabad sunaa-i-aa. The Speaker has spoken, and proclaimed the Word of the Shabad.
Hos Afe dfs sarfemr il (972-5, wast, sas adie tt) suntai sun man basaa-i-aa. The hearer has heard, and enshrined it in the mind.
afs aga Bsafh urd i) (972-5, wHaet, sas adits FH) kar kartaa utras paara’, Chanting to the Creator, one crosses over.
Ad ata ATT NWSUAUAOM (972-5, Hat, sas adits rh kahai kabeeraa saara™. ||4]|1]|10]| Says Kabeer, this is the essence. ||4||1]|10]|
Je Hee vfs As Ag Il (972-6, meet, saz ats Hh) chand sooraj du-ay jot saroop. The moon and the sun are both the embodiment of light.
Hat nists FIN MSU IAI (972-6, Tet, sas ots Ht) jotee antar barahm anoop. ||1]| Within their light, is God, the incomparable. ||1||
ag F famrst gan ates Il (972-6, mast, sas ate Ft) kar ray gi-aanee barahm beechaar. O spiritual teacher, contemplate God.
nat wists ofemr uA AU TIC Il (972-6, mast, sas aete Ah jotee antar Dhari-aa pasaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. In this light is contained the expanse of the created universe. ||1]|Pause] |
ote efy dts aa oreH | (972-7, THast, sas adits FH) heeraa daykh heeray kara-o aadays. Gazing upon the diamond, I humbly salute this diamond.
Ad ade fadas MSY NAUANVUL (972-7, THA, sas ade Ah kahai kabeer niranjan alaykh. ||2||2|]11]| Says Kabeer, the Immaculate Lord is indescribable. ||2||2||11]|
ear JA gers AIS HANS IG FT set Il (972-8, mast, sas adits Hh)
dunee-aa husee-aar baydaar jaagat musee-at ha-o ray bhaa-ee.
People of the world, remain awake and aware. Even though you are awake, you are being robbed, O Siblings of Destiny.
foo gHhorg ugg Sus AH S Wet NU JIS Il (972-8, THast, sas aets Fh
nigam husee-aar pahroo-aa daykhat jam lay jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
While the Vedas stand guard watching, the Messenger of Death carries you away. ||1]|Pause] |
Sta sfe6 nig nig sfeG Sta aor urat sis i (972-9, mast, sas adie ah)
neemb bha-i-o aa‘b aa‘b bha-i-o neembaa kaylaa paakaa jhaar.
He thinks that the bitter nimm fruit is a mango, and the mango is a bitter nimm. He imagines the ripe banana on the thorny bush.
THES SH Aas UST HIN HTT TST UA (972-10, THast, sas ats Ht)
naalee-ayr fal saybar paakaa moorakh mugaDh gavaar. ||1||
He thinks that the ripe coconut hangs on the barren simmal tree; what a stupid, idiotic fool he is! ||1]|
dfs sf&6 uiz 33 nfs faufee ans afes o AST I (972-10, oHaat, sas ate Hf) har bha-i-o khaa“d rayt meh bikhri-o hastee™ chuni-o na jaa-ee. The Lord is like sugar, spilled onto the sand; the elephant cannot pick it up.
afs ote ae wt uifs afr dtet af gfe wet 1239211 (972-11, Hast, sas ate FH)
kahi kameer kul jaat paa™t taj cheetee ho-ay chun khaa-ee. ||2||3]|12]| Says Kabeer, give up your ancestry, social status and honor; be like the tiny ant - pick up and eat the sugar. ||2||3||12]|
Wat SHES AE at Hast wa Y (972-12) banee naamday-o jee-o kee raamkalee ghar 1 The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, Raamkalee, First House:
qe Afsars urrfe II (972-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MATS ATE AAS Tst wa HO sIHAS Il (972-13, Tat, sas sues Fh) aaneelay kaagad kaateelay goodee aakaas maDhay bharmee-alay. The boy takes paper, cuts it and makes a kite, and flies it in the sky.
us Aa fAG as asGur dts A Sct Tes AU (972-13, Meet, sas ones Fh) panch janaa si-o baat bata-oo-aa cheet so doree raakhee-alay. ||1]| Talking with his friends, he still Keeps his attention on the kite string. ||1]|
HO TH SH FUMS Il (972-14, Hast, sas see Hh) man raam naamaa bayDhee-alay. My mind has been pierced by the Name of the Lord,
AA afea aor fas Hishs IU! TIS I (972-14, Tat, sas anes Ah jaisay kanik kalaa chit maa‘dee-alay. ||1]| rahaa-o. like the goldsmith, whose attention is held by his work. ||1]||Pause| |
MTS AT TITAS Coa TH Anis Use Il (972-14, mat, sas oe FH) aaneelay kumbh bharaa-eelay oodak raaj ku-aar purandree-ay. The young girl in the city takes a pitcher, and fills it with water.
JAS fase steve aest 3 ts A ales Ms IQ (972-15, Hast, sas R= FH)
hasat binod beechaar kartee hai cheet so gaagar raakhee-alay. ||2||
She laughs, and plays, and talks with her friends, but she keeps her attention focused on the pitcher of water. ||2]|
Heg Sq whrs A A a AS VISS SSH Il (972-16, Tat, sas see FH) mandar ayk du-aar das jaa kay ga-oo charaavan chhaadee-alay. The cow is let loose, out of the mansion of the ten gates, to graze in the field.
Ug GA UT TG VSS WT A FST TUS SII (972-16, Tees, sas nee Ft) paa'ch kos par ga-oo charaavat cheet so bachhraa raakhee-alay. ||3]| It grazes up to five miles away, but keeps its attention focused on its calf. ||3]|
AIS SHES Hod fasue Tea uss uss | 0972-17, saat, sas onee FH) kahat naamday-o sunhu tilochan baalak paalan pa-udhee-alay. Says Naam Dayyv, listen, O Trilochan: the child is laid down in the cradle.
nists wots an fagdt sts A afsa seihas sil (972-17, meet, sas oH Hh) antar baahar kaaj birooDhee cheet so baarik raakhee-alay. ||4||1]|
Its mother is at work, inside and outside, but she holds her child in her thoughts. [41121]
ae us AAS oSst als afas o Wear Il (972-18, Tat, sas one Hh)
bayd puraan saastar aanantaa geet kabit na gaav-ogo.
There are countless Vedas, Puraanas and Shaastras; I do not sing their songs and hymns.
Us cB
mds 436 fadars ufo wioge 8S SASS Al (973-1, mast, sas ones Ah
akhand mandal nirankaar meh anhad bayn bajaav-ogo. ||1]|
In the imperishable realm of the Formless Lord, I play the flute of the unstruck sound current. ||1||
aaa nfs wea il (973-1, mHast, sas oH Th) bairaagee raameh gaav-ogo. Becoming detached, I sing the Lord's Praises.
Rafe nists niavofe ast ora a ufs Wea NA TIS Il (973-1, Hast, sas one FH) sabad ateet anaahad raataa aakul kai ghar jaa-ugo. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Imbued with the unattached, unstruck Word of the Shabad, I shall go to the home of the Lord, who has no ancestors. ||1||Pause] |
fea fiiaer nia mune us fa goa | (973-2, mat, sas ane Ah
irhaa pingulaa a-or sukhmanaa pa-unai banDh rahaa-ugo.
Then, I shall no longer control the breath through the energy channels of the Ida, Pingala and Shushmanaa.
Je Aad ule AH ate Tus gon AS fife Wat QU (973-3, Tat, sas se Fh
chand sooraj du-ay sam kar raakha-o barahm jot mil jaa-ugo. ||2||
I look upon both the moon and the sun as the same, and I shall merge in the Light of God. ||2]|
Stee efy 3 Ae Hfs UAE Abt HS o ASTSCaT I 973-3, eae, sas one FH)
tirath daykh na jal meh paisa-o jee-a jant na sataav-ogo.
I do not go to see sacred shrines of pilgrimage, or bathe in their waters; I do not bother any beings or creatures.
MOIS Stee Tg fers we dt sists aSat Sil (973-4, mast, sas see Ft)
athsath tirath guroo dikhaa-ay ghat hee bheetar na“aa-ogo. ||3]|
The Guru has shown me the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage within my own heart, where I now take my cleansing bath. ||3]|
Ud Het He at Het 3S 3B o ATSCG Il 073-4, Hast, sas oe Fh) panch sahaa-ee jan kee sobhaa bhalo bhalo na kahaav-ogo. I do not pay attention to anyone praising me, or calling me good and nice.
on ad fas afe fk aS Ho Ao AST III (973-5, Hat, sas SHS Ah naamaa kahai chit har si-o raataa sunn samaaDh samaa-ugo. ||4]|2]|
Says Naam Dayv, my consciousness is imbued with the Lord; I am absorbed in the profound state of Samaadhi. ||4]|2||
Hf o dst au 5 dst AGH 8 Ist aft | 073-6, Tat, sas anes Ah maa-ay na hotee baap na hotaa karam na hotee kaa-i-aa. When there was no mother and no father, no karma and no human body,
JH odt JS 3H Od IS ASG AT SF oper AI (973-6, THast, sas one FH) ham nahee hotay tum nahee hotay kavan kahaa” tay aa-i-aa. ||1|| when I was not and you were not, then who came from where? ||1]|
on afe 3 fan dt aa Il (973-7, mast, sas see FH) raam ko-ay na kis hee kayraa. O Lord, no one belongs to anyone else.
AA Sdefe Ufe SAT NA TIC i (973-7, Hast, sas oH TH) jaisay tarvar pankh basayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. We are like birds perched on a tree. ||1||Pause] |
Jeo IS AT 3 dst ust ueg fherfenr I (973-7, mast, sas aN Fh) chand na hotaa soor na hotaa paanee pavan milaa-i-aa. When there was no moon and no sun, then water and air were blended together.
WAS 3 ds Fe 3 IS AGH AT S yrfenr III. 973-8, sas, sas one= FM) saasat na hotaa bayd na hotaa karam kahaa’" tay aa-i-aa. ||2]| When there were no Shaastras and no Vedas, then where did karma come from? ||2||
Yes FIT SoH usr TT usATet ufeMr i 973-8, sHaat, sas see Fh)
khaychar bhoochar tulsee maalaa gur parsaadee paa-i-aa.
Control of the breath and positioning of the tongue, focusing at the third eye and wearing malas of tulsi beads, are all obtained through Guru's Grace.
OW use UGH 3g 9 Asad df werfeor ISISI (073-9, Haat, sas SHS FH)
naamaa paranvai param tat hai satgur ho-ay lakhaa-i-aa. ||3]||3]||
Naam Dayv prays, this is the supreme essence of reality; the True Guru has inspired this realization. ||3||3]|
THAS WF 2 Il (973-10) raamkalee ghar 2. Raamkalee, Second House:
Worst su ad Cafe stea Hd nafs ed ofeor awy ath Il (973-10, saat, sas anes FH) banaarsee tap karai ulat tirath marai agan dahai kaa-i-aa kalap keejai.
Someone may practice austerities at Benares, or die upside-down at a sacred shrine ofpilgrimage, or burn his body in fire, or rejuvenate his body to life almost forever;
MANU AT att Ast Tse VS Tin TH oH Als 3B 5 UA UA (973-10, Tat, sas SNE Ht)
asumayDh jag keejai sonaa garabh daan deejai raam naam sar ta-oo na poojai. ||1|| he may perform the horse-sacrifice ceremony, or give donations of gold covered over, but none of these is equal to the worship of the Lord's Name. ||1]|
efs efs 3 unist Ho Aue 5 ate Il (973-11, oHaat, sas oes chhod chhod ray paakhandee man kapat na keejai. O hypocrite, renounce and abandon your hypocrisy; do not practice deception.
dfs a ay fos fests sta al TIC Il (973-12, Hast, sas one Th) har kaa naam nit niteh leejai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Constantly, continually, chant the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
Gar AS deets Web ais AG aera grea ast AGA AG Ve ae Il (973-12, Tract, Sas SHEE At)
gangaa ja-o godaavar jaa-ee-ai kumbh ja-o kaydaar n"aa-ee-ai gomtee sahas ga-00 daan keejai.
Someone may go to the Ganges or the Godaavari, or to the Kumbha festival, or bathe at Kaydaar Naat'h, or make donations of thousands of cows at Gomti;
afe Ag stea ad 39 AG fees as TH oH Ale 3B 5 YA II (973-13, Hast, sas He af)
kot ja-o tirath karai tan ja-o hivaalay gaarai raam naam sar ta-oo na poojai. ||2||
he may make millions of pilgrimages to sacred shrines, or freeze his body in the Himalayas; still, none of these is equal to the worship of the Lord's Name. ||2] |
MA BS TA we fron at sf ae vin we fos fasts att Il (973-14, mast, sas ones at)
as daan gaj daan sihjaa naaree bhoom daan aiso daan nit niteh keejai.
Someone may give away horses and elephants, or women on their beds, or land; he may give such gifts over and over again.
WISH AG foorfes att nu aerate aeg SA TH oH Afs SBS UA II (973-14, TH, Bas SHEE At)
aatam ja-o nirmaa-il kKeejai aap baraabar kanchan deejai raam naam sar ta-oo na poojai. ||3]|
He may purify his soul, and give away in charity his body weight in gold; none of these is equal to the worship of the Lord's Name. ||3]|
Hofs 3 att JH AHfs o cia GH fooHs fosare ue difs StH II (973-15, snaet, sas RS ah
maneh na keejai ros jameh na deejai dos nirmal nirbaan pad cheeneh leejai.
Do not harbor anger in your mind, or blame the Messenger of Death; instead, realize the immaculate state of Nirvaanaa.
Ange of Se TH Ha TH UE use OH 3g GA Nifys UIA IISIBII (973-16, sat, sas OHeE Fh)
jasrath raa-ay nand raajaa mayraa raam chand paranvai naamaa tat ras amrit peejai. [41141]
My Sovereign Lord King is Raam Chandra, the Son of the King Dasrat'h; prays Naam Dayv, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||4]|4]|
THaSt sat sfeerA At at (973-18)
raamkalee banee ravidaas jee kee Raamkalee, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsara yATfe il (973-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
usb Taba SH AS Haba nase a o VaA Il (973-19, mHast, sas oeeA Ah
parhee-ai gunee-ai naam sabh sunee-ai anbha-o bhaa-o na darsai.
They read and reflect upon all the Names of God; they listen, but they do not see the Lord, the embodiment of love and intuition.
Ba ave fuss df an AG usnfs o UGA IA (973-19, sHast, sas sfeeA Th lohaa kanchan hiran ho-ay kaisay ja-o paarseh na parsai. ||1|| How can iron be transformed into gold, unless it touches the Philosopher's Stone?
[21
UST £98
Ue AA TS o Se Il (974-1, Tract, saz sfeen HH) dayv sansai gaa"th na chhootai. O Divine Lord, the knot of skepticism cannot be untied.
oH a0 Wheat He HsAS fea use fils Be ud TIS ll (974-1, wast, sas seen Fh) kaam kroDh maa-i-aa mad matsar in panchahu mil lootay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Sexual desire, anger, Maya, intoxication and jealousy - these five have combined to plunder the world. ||1||Pause] |
JH 83 af aie JH Ufss oH Hatt Afra | 074-2, sat, sas afer Ff)
ham bad kab kuleen ham pandit ham jogee sani-aasee.
I am a great poet, of noble heritage; I am a Pandit, a religious scholar, a Yogi and a Sannyaasi;
fomrat rat As oH es feo aft oats o STAT QI (974-2, sHast, sas afer FH) gi-aanee gunee soor ham daatay ih buDh kabeh na naasee. ||2|| I am a Spiritual teacher, a warrior and a giver - such thinking never ends. ||2||
OT Sean As sdt AMSA sfH us AA BCT Il 974-3, Tact, sas see Fh) kaho ravidaas sabhai nahee samjhas bhool paray jaisay ba-uray. Says Ravi Daas, no one understands; they all run around, deluded like madmen.
Hfs wrorg ony oats Hee UTS Uo He IIA (974-3, mast, sas afeera ah mohi aDhaar naam naaraa-in jeevan paraan Dhan moray. ||3]||1||
The Lord's Name is my only Support; He is my life, my breath of life, my wealth. 31111
THA set Fat HE at (974-5) raamkalee banee baynee jee-o kee Raamkalee, The Word Of Baynee Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe il (974-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fear fits mia rune Sie sAfa fea oet i 074-6, mast, saz Bat Ah
irhaa pingulaa a-or sukhmanaa teen baseh ik thaa-ee.
The energy channels of the Ida, Pingala and Shushmanaa: these three dwell in one place.
dat Han 30 fuea He HAS ad fsaret Al (974-6, Hast, sas Bet FH)
baynee sangam tah piraag man majan karay tithaa-ee. ||1||
This is the true place of confluence of the three sacred rivers: this is where my mind takes its cleansing bath. ||1||
Had 30 fadHo TH FT Il 074-7, mast, sas Bet Fh) santahu tahaa niranjan raam hai. O Saints, the Immaculate Lord dwells there;
Oe ath we fase afe i) 074-7, mast, sas Fat HH) gur gam cheenai birlaa ko-ay. how rare are those who go to the Guru, and understand this.
sot fadre sHetor af a TITS I (974-7, sat, sas Fat tahaa™ niranjan rama-ee-aa ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The all-pervading immaculate Lord is there. ||1]||Pause| |
Sz AES fom Starat Il 974-8, saat, sas Feat Fh) dayv sathaanai ki-aa neesaanee. What is the insignia of the Divine Lord's dwelling?
3d WH Aas made arat Il (974-8, oat, sas at Hh tah baajay sabad anaahad banee. The unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates there.
3d JE 3 ASH US 3 Ut Il (974-9, TnaEt, sas Bet Hh) tah chand na sooraj pa-un na paanee. There is no moon or sun, no air or water there.
And wait aH ATAt QM (974-9, mast, sas Bet FH) saakhee jaagee gurmukh jaanee. ||2|| The Gurmukh becomes aware, and knows the Teachings. ||2||
Cun fomre voufs eh Il (974-9, snrast, saz Bat Hf) upjai gi-aan durmat chheejai. Spiritual wisdom wells up, and evil-mindedness departs;
nif aff aadste StH Il (974-10, oat, sas Bet Fh
amrit ras gagnantar bheejai.
the nucleus of the mind sky is drenched with Ambrosial Nectar. SF ae A ATS SE Il (974-10, mast, sas Bat Ah
ays kalaa jo jaanai bhay-o. One who knows the secret of this device,
32 JA UGH Tse Sil (974-10, wast, sas Ft wh bhaytai taas param gurday-o. ||3]| meets the Supreme Divine Guru. ||3]|
AH Suis nia Mura UH UT at wet Il (974-11, Hast, sas et FH)
dasam du-aaraa agam apaaraa param purakh kee ghaatee. The Tenth Gate is the home of the inaccessible, infinite Supreme Lord.
Cufs we ve ufs wre ors sists ast Ii C74-11, mast, saz Ft A oopar haat haat par aalaa aalay bheetar thaatee. ||4|| Above the store is a niche, and within this niche is the commodity. ||4]|
Was Jd H AW 3 Ae Il 74-12, mast, saz at Hf) jaagat rahai so kabahu na sovai. One who remains awake, never sleeps.
sts fsa Antfa uses Il (974-12, wHact, sas Fat AH teen tilok samaaDh palovai. The three qualities and the three worlds vanish, in the state of Samaadhi.
ait Hz S fase gd i (974-12, weet, saz FAt Fh) beej mantar lai hirdai rahai. He takes the Beej Mantra, the Seed Mantra, and keeps it in his heart.
Hoor Gate Ha His ad Ul (974-13, Tat, sas St HH) manoo-aa ulat sunn meh gahai. ||5| |
Turning his mind away from the world, he focuses on the cosmic void of the absolute Lord. ||5||
Was Id BF MSba srs I (974-13, THast, sas Fat Ah jaagat rahai na alee-aa bhaakhai. He remains awake, and he does not lie.
us@ feet aff afs ae i 974-13, mast, sas Bet sh paacha-o indree bas kar raakhai. He keeps the five sensory organs under his control.
ad at Ardt ame SHS il (974-14, onraat, sas Fat FH) gur kee saakhee raakhai cheet. He cherishes in his consciousness the Guru's Teachings.
HO 36 mau fans udlfs El (974-14, enast, saz Bet Ff) man tan arpai krisan pareet. ||6]|| He dedicates his mind and body to the Lord's Love. ||6||
AT UBS ATE Serd Il (974-14, mast, sas Bat Hh kar palav saakhaa beechaaray. He considers his hands to be the leaves and branches of the tree.
MUST HOH S HA TS ll (974-15, aet, sas Bet Hh) apnaa janam na joo-ai haaray. He does not lose his life in the gamble.
MAT Set A FT HB il 974-15, Tat, sas Bet HH) asur nadee kaa banDhai mool. He plugs up the source of the river of evil tendencies.
ufgH Sfs Bars AG Il (974-15, Tree, sas Bet Hh) pachhim fayr charhaavai soor. Turning away from the west, he makes the sun rise in the east.
Wad Ad A fess 3d Il (974-15, east, sas At Th ajar jarai so nijhar jharai. He bears the unbearable, and the drops trickle down within;
Adora fAG aAfe ad NDI (974-16, saat, sas FA Th) jagannaath si-o gosat karai. ||7]|| then, he speaks with the Lord of the world. ||7]||
s@ue dte Afs enre Il (974-16, mat, sas Fat Ah cha-umukh deevaa jot du-aar. The four-sided lamp illuminates the Tenth Gate.
Us nos HS frsorfs il (974-16, east, saz Fat Fh paloo anat mool bichkaar. The Primal Lord is at the center of the countless leaves.
Aga ASB mM Fd Il (974-17, mast, sas Feat wh sarab kalaa lay aapay rahai. He Himself abides there with all His powers.
HO HSa ISaT Hfs Ts Mil (974-17, wast, sas Fat Ah man maanak ratnaa meh guhai. ||8]| He weaves the jewels into the pearl of the mind. ||8]|
HASfx UEH BITS Hat Il (974-17, Hast, sas Bet HA) mastak padam du-aalai manee. The lotus is at the forehead, and the jewels surround it.
ufs fadae fysee vet I (974-18, mast, sas et Fh maahi niranjan taribhavan Dhanee. Within it is the Immaculate Lord, the Master of the three worlds.
us Aad foarte aH Il 0974-18, mat, gas Fat Hh) panch sabad nirmaa-il baajay. The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, resound and vibrate their in their purity.
BSA VET AY Wo AH Il (974-18, THast, sas Fat Hh) dhulkay chavar sankh ghan gaajay. The chauris - the fly brushes wave, and the conch shells blare like thunder.
ofs His tag aenfe famre il 074-19, erat, sas Bet th dal mal daatahu gurmukh gi-aan. The Gurmukh tramples the demons underfoot with his spiritual wisdom.
Bat AS ST OH NCNU (974-19, Hast, sas Bat AH baynee jaachai tayraa naam. ||9||1]| Baynee longs for Your Name, Lord. ||9]|1]|
Uae cou
TAH SE SITES HIG 8 (975-1) raag nat naaraa-in mehlaa 4 Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fourth Mehl:
qe ATS on aes usy fos fares uiors Has mst AS TT YATE 1975-2) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Hd Ho Afu nifofefA SH Ie Il (975-4, se arafes, He 4) mayray man jap ahinis naam haray. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, day and night.
afe afe tu ag até AS udefe uA Os NAN TIC Il (975-4, ae ararfes, He 4)
kot kot dokh baho keenay sabh parhar paas Dharay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Millions and millions of sins and mistakes, committed through countless lifetimes, shall all be put aside and sent away. ||1||Pause]|
dfs dfs oH Auf yraafs Aza STE Us Il (975-5, ae safes, He 4)
har har naam jaapeh aaraaDheh sayvak bhaa-ay kharay. Those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and worship Him in adoration, and serve Him with love, are genuine.
faofaa du ae As slats faG urat HS Ts NU! (75-5, ae aartes, He 4) kilbikh dokh ga-ay sabh neekar ji-o paanee mail haray. ||1|| All their sins are erased, just as water washes off the dirt. ||1]|
fas fas og ootfee arefs nf Safe og Sad Il (975-6, ae orates, He 4)
khin khin nar naaraa-in gaavahi mukh boleh nar narharay.
That being, who sings the Lord's Praises each and every instant, chants with his mouth the Name of the Lord.
us eu mina sare fe fea fag ue Ble AF MQM (975-6, sz safes, He 4)
panch dokh asaaDh nagar meh ik khin pal door karay. ||2| |
In a moment, in an instant, the Lord rids him of the five incurable diseases of the body-village. ||2]|
zasaat dig oH fourefs ais & SIS Ig Il (975-7, 5c aeates, 2 4)
vadbhaagee har naam Dhi-aavahi har kay bhagat haray.
Very fortunate are those who meditate on the Lord's Name; they alone are the Lord's devotees.
fae at Hats dfs ys Aree HHS HAT feASs III (975-7, 5¢ aerfes, Hs 4)
tin kee sangat deh parabh jaacha-o mai moorh mugaDh nistaray. ||3]|
I beg for the Sangat, the Congregation; O God, please bless me with them. I am a fool, and an idiot - please save me! ||3]|
faur faut ofa Aariea sft Seo Hale ud Il (975-8, se safes, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa Dhaar jagjeevan rakh layvhu saran paray.
Shower me with Your Mercy and Grace, O Life of the World; save me, I seek Your Sanctuary.
SOA HO SHA AdoeSt slg TUT BA Td ISA (975-9, ae safes, He 4) naanak jan tumree sarnaa-ee har raakho laaj haray. ||4]|1]|
Servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary; O Lord, please preserve my honor! [41121]
Oc HIG 8 Il (975-9)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
oH afl AS TH of TS Il (975-9, az, He 4) raam jap jan raamai naam ralay. Meditating on the Lord, His humble servants are blended with the Lord's Name.
oH OH AUS Te seat dfs ost Tis faus Al FI i (975-10, sz, ne 4)
raam naam japi-o gur bachnee har Dhaaree har kiraplay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Lord's Name, following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord showers His Mercy upon them. ||1]||Pause] |
dfs of want widied Homi we aAfu ffs Aes ABS Il (975-10, az, He 4)
har har agam agochar su-aamee jan jap mil salal sallay.
Our Lord and Master, Har, Har, is inaccessible and unfathomable. Meditating on Him, His humble servant merges with Him, like water with water.
dfs & AS fife on on ufeor on Ae & af FSS NU (975-11, 32, He 4)
har kay sant mil raam ras paa-i-aa ham jan kai bal ballay. ||1]]|
Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I have obtained the sublime essence of the Lord. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to His humble servants. ||1]|
usasn ofa an Afs fe vfs wweS Fu VHS Il (975-12, 52, He 4)
purkhotam har naam jan gaa-i-o sabh daalad dukh dallay.
The Lord's humble servant sings the Praises of the Name of the Supreme, Primal Soul, and all poverty and pain are destroyed.
fefs Sat cu nara us og afe ate firs uss MI (75-12, 3, He 4)
vich dayhee dokh asaaDh panch Dhaatoo har kee-ay khin parlay. ||2]|
Within the body are the five evil and uncontrollable passions. The Lord destroys them in an instant. ||2]|
dfs & AS Hfs ulfs waret fae Fa Af AHS II (975-13, se, He 4) har kay sant man pareet lagaa-ee ji-o daykhai sas kamlay. The Lord's Saint loves the Lord in his mind, like the lotus flower gazing at the moon.
Bad we ws ufogd den Hf faa HI HIS ISI (975-13, se, He 4)
unvai ghan ghan ghanihar garjai man bigsai mor murlay. ||3]||
The clouds hang low, the clouds tremble with thunder, and the mind dances joyfully like the peacock. ||3]|
Jud Wot Be TH wet Hn Atefa Ufa ofe fs Il (975-14, ae, He 4)
hamrai su-aamee loch ham laa-ee ham jeeveh daykh har milay.
My Lord and Master has placed this yearning within me; I live by seeing and meeting my Lord.
HO SSA Tid MHS Tie Se Tis HSI MSE FS ISI (975-15, sz, He 4)
jan naanak har amal har laa-ay har maylhu anad bhalay. ||4||2|| Servant Nanak is addicted to the intoxication of the Lord; meeting with the Lord, he finds sublime bliss. ||4]|2||
Oe HIS 8 Il (975-15)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho Afu afe dfs oH AA Il (975-15, se, He 4) mayray man jap har har naam sakhay. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, your only Friend.
yar toe ae usAet af on fourfes mn Afsag vas Us UI TI Il (976-1, sz, He 4)
gur parsaadee har naam Dhi-aa-i-o ham satgur charan pakhay. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Name of the Lord; I wash the Feet of the True Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
OSH Adaa AaetAT TH unit Aafs Te Il (976-2, sz, Hs 4)
ootam jagannaath jagdeesur ham paapee saran rakhay.
The Exalted Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, keeps a sinner like me in His Sanctuary
3H Ss use tte By Sno Ta AT aM HF IAI (976-2, 3g, He 4)
tum vad purakh deen dukh bhanjan har dee-o naam mukhay. ||1||
You are the Greatest Being, Lord, Destroyer of the pains of the meek; You have placed Your Name in my mouth, Lord. ||1]]|
fs To Su ste TH We Fs Afsas Afar AA Il (976-3, a2, Hs 4)
har gun ooch neech ham gaa-ay gur satgur sang sakhay.
I am lowly, but I sing the Lofty Praises of the Lord, meeting with the Guru, the True Guru, my Friend.
fa@ dea Afa aA fou fas ae Jee A FAG III! (976-3, sz, Hz 4)
ji-o chandan sang basai nimm birkhaa gun chandan kay baskhay. ||2||
Like the bitter nimm tree, growing near the sandalwood tree, I am permeated with the fragrance of sandalwood. ||2| |
JH niga fafimr fd & ao aa ara feet il (076-4, az, He 4) hamray avgan bikhi-aa bikhai kay baho baar baar nimkhay. My faults and sins of corruption are countless; over and over again, I commit them.
wedfonrs uTag ad dfs ad Afat ASa ISI (976-5, 3z, He 4)
avgani-aaray paathar bhaaray har taaray sang jankhay. ||3||
I am unworthy, I am a heavy stone sinking down; but the Lord has carried me across, in association with His humble servants. ||3]||
fie a8 3H ofs Tug AMM AS fo x uy fae Il (976-5, se, He 4) jin ka-o tum har raakho su-aamee sabh tin kay paap karikhay. Those whom You save, Lord - all their sins are destroyed.
Ho aod & tenes ys Amit 3H BA! Std Idee ISISI (976-6, oz, He 4)
jan naanak kay da-i-aal parabh su-aamee tum dusat taaray harnakhay. ||4||3]|
O Merciful God, Lord and Master of servant Nanak, You have carried across even evil villains like Harnaakhash. ||4||3]]|
Oc HIS 8 Il (976-7)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho Afu of dfs TH FH Il (976-7, 3g, He 4) mayray man jap har har raam rangay. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with love.
dfs ofa faur act matafs af fomrfes AS ufar wer All TIS Il (976-7, sz, He 4)
har har kirpaa karee jagdeesur har Dhi-aa-i-o jan pag lagay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
When the Lord of the Universe, Har, Har, granted His Grace, then I fell at the feet of the humble, and I meditate on the Lord. ||1]|Pause||
HOH HOH A IB YA JH Ma mE YS Ado! Il (976-8, 32, ve 4)
janam janam kay bhool chook ham ab aa-ay parabh sarangay.
Mistaken and confused for so many past lives, I have now come and entered the Sanctuary of God.
3H Aderats ufsurea Aymt JH Tug SST Ura MAU (976-8, az, He 4)
tum sarnaagat partipaalak su-aamee ham raakho vad paapgay. ||1||
O my Lord and Master, You are the Cherisher of those who come to Your Sanctuary. I am such a great sinner - please save me! ||1]|
suet Hats ofs a a 3 Bufss ys ate ufSs ued Il (976-9, sz, Hs 4) tumree sangat har ko ko na uDhaari-o parabh kee-ay patit pavgay. Associating with You, Lord, who would not be saved? Only God sanctifies the sinners.
Go wes ghr eretes yfs met Un ASA III (976-10, sz, He 4)
gun gaavat chheepaa dustaari-o parabh raakhee paij jangay. ||2||
Naam Dayv, the calico printer, was driven out by the evil villains, as he sang Your Glorious Praises; O God, You protected the honor of Your humble servant. ||2]|
A SHd To wets Homi ve afs afs afs fod Il (976-10, az, He 4)
jo tumray gun gaavahi su-aamee ha-o bal bal bal tingay.
Those who sing Your Glorious Praises, O my Lord and Master - I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them.
326 320 uleg Als ate Aa Ufs Udt He Ua ISI (976-11, 3, He 4)
bhavan bhavan pavitar sabh kee-ay jah Dhoor paree jan pagay. ||3]|
Those houses and homes are sanctified, upon which the dust of the feet of the humble settles. ||3]|
SHI WS ys afd 6 ald JH SH VS FZ UT FMI Il (976-12, dz, ws 4)
tumray gun parabh kahi na sakahi ham tum vad vad purakh vadgay.
I cannot describe Your Glorious Virtues, God; You are the greatest of the great, O Great Primal Lord God.
Ho aod a efenr ys Ugg JH ASd SH AS Udi III (976-12, az, Hs 4)
jan naanak ka-o da-i-aa parabh Dhaarahu ham sayvah tum jan pagay. ||4||4]|
Please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, God; I serve at the feet of Yor humble servants. ||4]||4||
Oe HIS 8 Il (976-13)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho Afu dfs dia oH HS Il (976-13, az, H8 4)
mayray man jap har har naam manay. O my mind, believe in and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
maote fasur ufs ost His aaHfs OH aS NU! TIE Il (976-13, 32, Hs 4)
jagannaath kirpaa parabh Dhaaree mat gurmat naam banay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God, the Master of the Universe, has showered His Mercy upon me, and through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect has been molded by the Naam. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs AS ofs AA as afs TES Sueth TT Ts AS Il (976-14, sz, He 4)
har jan har jas har har gaa-i-o updays guroo gur sunay.
The Lord's humble servant sings the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, listening to the Guru's Teachings.
foofad una oH dfs ae fre YS farts BS IU (976-15, 32, Hs 4) kilbikh paap naam har kaatay jiv khayt kirsaan lunay. ||1]| The Lord's Name cuts down all sins, like the farmer cutting down his crops. ||1]|
SHot Gut 3H dt ys AST TH ala B Aals ale TW Il (976-15, sz, us 4)
tumree upmaa tum hee parabh jaanhu ham kahi na sakahi har gunay.
You alone know Your Praises, God; I cannot even describe Your Glorious Virtues, Lord.
AA 3H 3A Us SH ot TS WSs YS MUS Ill (976-16, sz, He 4) jaisay tum taisay parabh tum hee gun jaanhu parabh apunay. ||2|| You are what You are, God; You alone know Your Glorious Virtues, God. ||2| |
Hier aA da sg 80 ofe Aue us UH I (976-17, 3z, He 4)
maa-i-aa faas banDh baho banDhay har japi-o khul khulnay.
The mortals are bound by the many bonds of Maya's noose. Meditating on the Lord, the knot is untied,
fAG Ae aug sent aus af SSE Hy Has SI (76-17, 3z, He 4)
ji-o jal kunchar tadoo-ai baa‘Dhi-o har chayti-o mokh mukhnay. ||3]]|
like the elephant, which was caught in the water by the crococile; it remembered the Lord, and chanted the Lord's Name, and was released. ||3]||
Homi usgan usHAg SH YAY Aa Has Il (976-18, sz, He 4)
Su-aamee paarbarahm parmaysar tum khojahu jug jugnay.
O my Lord and Master, Supreme Lord God, Transcendent Lord, throughout the ages, mortals search for You.
suet ag uret odt urs He BSA A YS FO III (976-18, 3z, Hs 4) tumree thaah paa-ee nahee paavai jan naanak kay parabh vadnay. ||4||5]| Your extent cannot be estimated or known, O Great God of servant Nanak. ||4||5]|
Oe HIS 8 Il (976-19)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho afe atefs fs yse Il (976-19, 3z, ue 4)
mayray man kal keerat har parvanay.
O my mind, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is worthy and commendable.
ofa ofg eerie efenr ys ot ofa Afsaa ofe AUS IU TIS Il (976-19, 32, He 4) har har da-i-aal da-i-aa parabh Dhaaree lag satgur har japnay. ||1|| rahaa-o. When the Merciful Lord God shows kindness and compassion, then one falls at the feet of the True Guru, and meditates on the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ua e990 dfs SH FS Ma mae AM Afs fowrefs afs Tze Il (977-1, 52, Hz 4)
har tum vad agam agochar su-aamee sabh Dhi-aavahi har rurh-nay. O my Lord and Master, You are great, inaccessible and unfathomable; all meditate on You, O Beautiful Lord.
faa a sud es aeu 3 3 Tanfe ofa fse AI (977-2, 32, He 4)
jin ka-o tum"ray vad kataakh hai tay gurmukh har simarnay. ||1]|
Those whom You view with Your Great Eye of Grace, meditate on You, Lord, and become Gurmukh. ||1]|
feg ualg ator ys Amit Ag AaHleS AAS Il (977-3, 3, us 4)
ih parpanch kee-aa parabh su-aamee sabh jagjeevan jugnay.
The expanse of this creation is Your work, O God, my Lord and Master, Life of the entire universe, united with all.
faG HOS Hos Cofs ag sudt fife ASS ASS ANE Ill (977-3, ae, ue 4) ji-o sallai salal utheh baho lahree mil sallai salal samnay. ||2|| Countless waves rise up from the water, and then they merge into the water again.
21 |
A us der A OSH ot Weg DH od Heat ofa TIE Il (977-4, sz, He 4) jo parabh kee-aa so tum hee jaanhu ham nah jaanee har gahnay. You alone, God, know whatever You do. O Lord, I do not know.
oH afea aG foe Gusts weg JH aT Ys FANE ISI (977-4, 5, He 4)
ham baarik ka-o rid ustat Dnaarahu ham karah parabhoo simarnay. ||3]|
I am Your child; please enshrine Your Praises within my heart, God, so that I may remember You in meditation. ||3]|
3H WS fafa of He Aded HAS AS SHE Il (977-5, 3g, H2 4)
tum jal niDh har maan sarovar jo sayvai sabh falnay.
You are the treasure of water, O Lord, the Maansarovar Lake. Whoever serves You receives all fruitful rewards.
Ho ood dfs dfs ofa ofa sie afe teg afa faues isilell (977-6, oz, ue 4)
jan naanak har har har har baaNchhai har dayvhu kar kirapnay. ||4||6||
Servant Nanak longs for the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har; bless him, Lord, with Your Mercy. ||4||6]|
Se States HIG 8 USS™ (977-7)
nat naaraa-in mehlaa 4 parh-taal Nat Naaraayan, Fourth Mehl, Partaal:
96 Afsas yrrfe il (977-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hd HO AZ ASG Tis ws Il (977-8, se arafes, us 4) mayray man sayv safal har ghaal. O my mind, serve the Lord, and receive the fruits of your rewards.
B UIT Ud IS FS" Il (977-8, se arates, He 4) lay gur pag rayn ravaal. Receive the dust of the Guru's feet.
Afs efse Sir eu BS Il 077-8, se sates, He 4) sabh dalid bhanj dukh daal. All poverty will be eliminated, and your pains will disappear.
dfs ¢ Fd Sets fers NA TIC Il (977-8, se wares, He 4)
har ho ho ho nadar nihaal. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Lord shall bless you with His Glance of Grace, and you shall be enraptured. ||1]|Pause] |
ofe @ fag afs urfu netes ofs ga da HIS Mis ws wr Ths WS ll 977-9, se oartes, H8 4)
har kaa garihu har aap savaari-o har rang rang mahal bay-ant laal laal har laal.
The Lord Himself embellishes His household. The Lord's Mansion of Love is studded with countless jewels, the jewels of the Beloved Lord.
ofa nruat fgur act urfu fafa orfeS on afe at ae atet 3 sHtat on ofa 2a set foros feos foares fears IAI (977-10, se srarfes, He 4)
har aapnee kirpaa karee aap garihi aa-i-o ham har kee gur kee-ee hai baseethee ham har daykhay bha-ee nihaal nihaal nihaal nihaal. ||1]|
The Lord Himself has granted His Grace, and He has come into my home.The Guru is my advocate before the Lord. Gazing upon the Lord, I have become blissful, blissful, blissful. |]1]|
dfs ures at wate afe uret nfs afe nrad orée ge afe nres HS AS WS dfs we il (977-11, Be BTIES, Hs 4)
har aavtay kee khabar gur paa-ee man tan aando aanand bha-ay har aavtay sunay mayray laal har laal.
From the Guru, I received news of the Lord's arrival. My mind and body became ecstatic and blissful, hearing of the arrival of the Lord, my Beloved Love, my Lord.
Ho soa dle ofa He se THs TS fogs fg WINAUIDI (977-12, se arafes, He 4)
jan naanak har har milay bha-ay galtaan haal nihaal nihaal. ||2||1]|7]| Servant Nanak has met with the Lord, Har, Har; he is intoxicated, enraptured, enraptured. ||2]|1]|7]||
Oe HIS 8 Il (977-13)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Ho fie AsHafs As<st Il (977-13, 52, H 4) man mil santsangat subhvantee. O mind, join the Society of the Saints, and become noble and exalted.
Afs nee xat HUST Il (977-13, 32, H 4) sun akath kathaa sukhvantee. Listen to the Unspoken Speech of the peace-giving Lord.
As faofea uy BIST Il (977-14, a, He 4) sabh kilvikh paap lahantee. All sins will be washed away.
dfs i do fous fodst na Tr it (977-14, az, He 4) har ho ho ho likhat likhantee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meet with the Lord, according to your pre-ordained destiny. ||1||Pause| |
dfs atefs aora fete @su nfs gents ae sHSt I 077-14, az, He 4)
har keerat kaljug vich ootam mat gurmat kathaa bhajantee.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is lofty and exalted. Following the Guru's Teachings, the intellect dwells on the sermon of the Lord.
fate vfs Wet Hot d fats afe fon Ae a IG agaSSt IAI (977-15, 3z, He 4) jin jan sunee manee hai jin jan tis jan kai ha-o kurbaanantee. ||1]|| I am a Sacrifice to that person who listens and believes. ||1] |
fs nae oe at fafs cA ohm SH Ho AS su BIST Il (977-16, sz, v2 4)
har akath kathaa kaa jin ras chaakhi-aa tis jan sabh bhookh lahantee.
One who tastes the sublime essence of the Unspoken Speech of the Lord - all his hunger is satisfied.
soa Ho dfs ae aAfs feus afu ofa fe af FSS WIANQUCH (977-17, Bz, He 4)
naanak jan har kathaa sun tariptai jap har har har hovantee. ||2||2||8]| Servant Nanak listens to the sermon of the Lord, and is satisfied; chanting the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har, he has become like the Lord. ||2||2||8]|
O62 HIS 8 Il (977-17)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
act urfs Aare ofs at afg a Il (977-18, ae, He 4) ko-ee aan sunaavai har kee har gaal. If only someone would come and tell me the Lord's sermon.
fan a 38 fs af ae Il (977-18, 32, H8 4) tis ka-o ha-o bal bal baal. I would be a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to him.
H ufa Ao J 3G FS Il (977-18, 3g, v2 4) so har jan hai bhal bhaal. That humble servant of the Lord is the best of the best.
yar tot dfs oF oF APS feos NAN TIC Il (978-1, sz, v2 4)
har ho ho ho mayl nihaal. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meeting with the Lord, you be enraptured. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs x wed ad Afs sstes afs we feuet afe we Il (978-1, sz, v8 4)
har kaa maarag gur sant bataa-i-o gur chaal dikhaa-ee har chaal.
The Guru, the Saint, has shown me the Lord's Path. The Guru has shown me the way to walk on the Lord's Path.
nists Aue vated AS TefAag fasau]e aneg die at ofs we fos feos foas 1151 (978-2, 32, H3 4)
antar kapat chukaavahu mayray gursikhahu nihakpat kamaavahu har kee har ghaal nihaal nihaal nihaal. ||1]|
Cast out deception from within yourself, O my Gursikhs, and without deception, serve the Lord. You shall be enraptured, enraptured, enraptured. ||1||
3 a0 & fra As ae ufs ae faa afe ys Wises Ha ots Il (978-3, 32, He 4)
tay gur kay sikh mayray har parabh bhaa-ay jinaa har parabh jaani-o mayraa naal. Those Sikhs of the Guru, who realize that my Lord God is with them, are pleasing to my Lord God.
Ao ated ag His ofe ufs dat afs ef faate sets fos fas fooes far NSIC (978-4, od, H3 4)
jan naanak ka-o mat har parabh deenee har daykh nikat hadoor nihaal nihaal nihaal nihaal. ||2]|3||9]|
The Lord God has blessed servant Nanak with understanding; seeing his Lord hear at hand, his is enraptured, enraptured, enraptured, enraptured. ||2||3]|9]|
TI se SHES HIS U (978-6) raag nat naaraa-in mehlaa 5 Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (978-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
IH IS foo ATET foot STS Il (978-7, ae safes, He 5) raam ha-o ki-aa jaanaa ki-aa bhaavai. O Lord, how can I know what pleases You?
Hfs flmiA age PIAS NU TIS Il (978-7, 5c sates, Hs 5) man pi-aas bahut darsaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Within my mind is such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1]|Pause] |
Aet famrat Het Ae Sa fA Cufs Fw vrs Il (78-7, se safes, He 5)
so-ee gi-aanee so-ee jan tayraa jis oopar ruch aavai.
He alone is a spiritual teacher, and he alone is Your humble servant, to whom You have given Your approval.
faut aad faa use fas A Het HET 3g flrs IAI (978-8, ae aarfes, He 5)
kirpaa karahu jis purakh biDhaatay so sadaa sadaa tuDh Dhi-aavai. ||1]||
He alone meditates on You forever and ever, O Primal Lord, O Architect of Destiny, unto whom You grant Your Grace. ||1]|
as Hal Aa famirs fomrat asa Tat dsr] Il (978-9, ae states, He 5) kavan jog kavan gi-aan Dhi-aanaa kavan gunee reejhaavai.
What sort of Yoga, what spiritual wisdom and meditation, and what virtues please You?
Aet AO Aet for sas faa Sule Fa we iil (978-9, se safes, Hs 5)
so-ee jan so-ee nij bhagtaa jis oopar rang laavai. ||2| |
He alone is a humble servant, and he alone is God's own devotee, with whom You are in love. |[2||
Aref nfs Aret aft fimrou fas fany 3 ug fares Il (978-10, se avates, He 5)
Saa-ee mat saa-ee buDh si-aanap jit nimakh na parabh bisraavai.
That alone is intelligence, that alone is wisdom and cleverness, which inspires one to never forget God, even for an instant.
Hanfa ofa Ss wy utes als qe Ae dt WS Sil (978-10, ae ares, Hs 5)
satsang lag ayhu sukh paa-i-o har gun sad hee gaavai. ||3]|
Joining the Society of the Saints, I have found this peace, singing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
efaS niga Ho Hae gu fas ora odt ferers Il (978-11, 3c arerfes, HE 5)
daykhi-o achraj mahaa mangal roop kichh aan nahee distaavai.
I have seen the Wondrous Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss, and now, I see nothing else at all.
a aoa Hae afte ofss sg aes rife aT mS SIA (978-12, se aates, He 5) kaho naanak morchaa gur laahi-o tah garabh jon kah aavai. ||4||1||
Says Nanak, the Guru has rubbed sway the rust; now how could I ever enter the womb of reincarnation again? ||4]|1]|
Se SSIES HIG U BUS (978-13) nat naaraa-in mehlaa 5 dupday Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:
qe Afsara YATE Il (978-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Cass Hag o AE Il 78-14, ae oates, He 5) ulaahano mai kaahoo na dee-o. I don't blame anyone else.
Ho Hts sad AE 9 TIC il (78-14, se safes, nz 5) man meeth tuhaaro kee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever You do is sweet to my mind. ||1]|Pause| |
nifamr Hfs ais AY ufeor afs afs an sod AIG II (978-14, ae orarfes, He 5)
aagi-aa maan jaan sukh paa-i-aa sun sun naam tuhaaro jee-o.
Understanding and obeying Your Order, I have found peace; hearing, listening to Your Name, I live.
aot Sa of gu dt gn ot feg as 3 HZ fest Wa 78-15, se ovates, v2 5)
eehaa™ oohaa har tum hee tum hee ih gur tay mantar darirh-ee-o. ||1||
Here and hereafter, O Lord, You, only You. The Guru has implanted this Mantra within me. ||1]|
wa 3 Wf uret So PST Sa AAG YN AS AE Il (978-15, se safes, He 5) jab tay jaan paa-ee ayh baataa tab kusal khaym sabh thee-o. Since I came to realize this, I have been blessed with total peace and pleasure.
HUA Soa UdITAS vie ad F gS QUAI (978-16, sz arvafEs, 3 5)
saaDhsang naanak pargaasi-o aan naahee ray bee-o. ||2||1||2|| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, this has been revealed to Nanak, and now, there is no other for him at all. ||2||1||2]|
O¢ HIG U Il (978-17)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
Ww ag set SH ts Il (978-17, se, He 5) jaa ka-o bha-ee tumaaree Dheer. Whoever has You for support,
AH at 37H fret Ae urfemr foot IH ute all FI Il (978-17, 5z, Hs 5)
jam kee taraas mitee sukh paa-i-aa niksee ha-umai peer. ||1|| rahaa-o.
has the fear of death removed; peace is found, and the disease of egotism is taken away. ||1]|Pause| |
sufs asst nifts aot feus fas afae ute i (978-18, 32, He 5)
tapat bujhaanee amrit baanee tariptai ji-o baarik kheer.
The fire within is quenched, and one is satisfied through the Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani, as the baby is satisfied by milk.
HS fust AHO AS AS AS Aaet sts All (978-18, sz, He 5)
maat pitaa saajan sant mayray sant sahaa-ee beer. ||1]||
The Saints are my mother, father and friends. The Saints are my help and support, and my brothers. ||1||
Yar tor
us 3H SHS fies sree Hts aa ate I (979-1, az, v2 5)
khulay bharam bheet milay gopaalaa heerai bayDhay heer.
The doors of doubt are thrown open, and I have met the Lord of the World; God's diamond has pierced the diamond of my mind.
faAH Se SSA AA WSS SAT Tat Ads MQW (979-1, az, vs 5)
bisam bha-ay naanak jas gaavat thaakur gunee gaheer. ||2||2]||3]|
Nanak blossoms forth in ecstasy, singing the Lord's Praises; my Lord and Master is the ocean of virtue. ||2||2||3]|
Oc HIG U Il (979-2)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
must AS mute orf BarfsG i 979-2, sz, ue 5) apnaa jan aapeh aap uDhaari-o. He Himself saves His humble servant.
nS Ud Ho a Aft aA Ho 3 ata fais wail Fa i (979-2, wz, 2 5)
aath pahar jan kai sang basi-o man tay naahi bisaari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Twenty-four hours a day, He dwells with His humble servant; He never forgets him from His Mind. ||1]||Pause]|
ado fade ardt fas ufus oA at ae o fats Il 979-3, az, v2 5)
baran chihan naahee kichh paykhi-o daas kaa kul na bichaari-o.
The Lord does not look at his color or form; He does not consider the ancestry of His Slave.
ate fagut on dfs HG nafs Hate ASfsG IAI (979-4, az, He 5)
kar kirpaa naam har dee-o sahj subhaa-ay savaari-o. ||1]|
Granting His Grace, the Lord blesses him with His Name, and embellishes him with intuitive ease. ||1]|
Ho fea nafs a Aa fA 3 ufs Cafes i (979-4, az, uz 5) mahaa bikham agan kaa saagar tis tay paar utaari-o. The ocean of fire is treacherous and difficult, but he is carried across.
ufa Ufa aaa fears usd usd SfeofeS NNSISI (079-5, sz, He 5)
paykh paykh naanak bigsaano punah punah balihaari-o. ||2||3||4] |
Seeing, seeing Him, Nanak blossoms forth, over and over again, a sacrifice to Him. 2113] 141]
Oc HIG U Il (979-6)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofa Ha Hf BH AfIG I (979-6, az, Hz 5) har har man meh naam kahi-o. One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within his mind
afe ura frefs fas stafs ot or eu 3 safe ail TIS Il (979-6, az, ve 5) kot apraaDh miteh khin bheetar taa kaa dukh na rahi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. - millions of sins are erased in an instant, and pain is relieved. ||1]|Pause| |
das das see Sra AG Afe was il 79-7, az, ue 5)
khojat khojat bha-i-o bairaagee saaDhoo sang lahi-o.
Seeking and searching, I have become detached; I have found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Hae fsurfa fa fee orit ofa afs wae ates nail (979-7, az, H3 5)
Sagal ti-aag ayk liv laagee har har charan gahi-o. ||1|| Renouncing everything, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord. I grab hold of the feet of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
ads HAS Hos fonsd A A Aefe ufSS il (979-8, az, nu 5)
kahat mukat suntay nistaaray jo jo saran pa-i-o.
Whoever chants His Name is liberated; whoever listens to it is saved, as is anyone who seeks His Sanctuary.
frufs frufs Aum us var ag sea noe SHES USUI (979-8, 5z, He 5)
simar simar su-aamee parabh apunaa kaho naanak anad bha-i-o. ||2||4||5]]| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God the Lord and Master, says Nanak, I am in ecstasy! ||2]|4]|5||
O¢ HIG U Il (979-9)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
TIO GHG Afar Bait Sat il (979-9, az, ue 5) charan kamal sang laagee doree. I am in love with Your Lotus Feet.
HY Arad afs usH afs Hat NA TIS Il (979-10, 3g, ne 5) sukh saagar kar param gat moree. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O Lord, ocean of peace, please bless me with the supreme status. ||1]|Pause] |
niger aofes Ao mud a ne sa Un at at i (979-10, az, He 5)
anchlaa gahaa-i-o jan apunay ka-o man beeDho paraym kee khoree.
He has inspired His humble servant to grasp the hem of His robe; his mind is pierced through with the intoxication of divine love.
AA Wes safs on Cufas wfeur at Ast Sat A (979-11, az, He 5) jas gaavat bhagat ras upji-o maa-i-aa kee jaalee toree. ||1]| Singing His Praises, love wells up within the devotee, and the trap of Maya is broken.
[21
use ufe ad fas fafa ure 3 Ua Tat I (979-11, 3z, He 5)
pooran poor rahay kirpaa niDh aan na paykha-o horee.
The Lord, the ocean of mercy, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere; I do not see any other at all.
aoa Ais SE aA nus Us s wag Set WQNUIEN (979-12, 32, Hs 5) naanak mayl lee-o daas apunaa pareet na kabhoo thoree. ||2||5||6]| He has united slave Nanak with Himself; His Love never diminishes. ||2]||5||6]|
O¢ HIG U Il (979-12)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
Hd Ho AU Alu ofa STateeS Il (979-13, az, v3 5) mayray man jap jap har naaraa-in. O my mind, chant, and meditate on the Lord.
aay 6 fansg Ho HS 3 ro UTd TS TE AU TIE i 979-13, 3z, ue 5)
kabhoo na bisrahu man mayray tay aath pahar gun gaa-in. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I shall never forget Him from my mind; twenty-four hours a day, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]|Pause| |
AY ufs ag fos une AS fof uy Teves Il (979-14, 3, He 5)
saaDhoo Dhoor kara-o nit majan sabh kilbikh paap gavaa-in.
I take my daily cleansing bath in the dust of the feet of the Holy, and I am rid of all my sins.
use ufs sd fasur fafa wife ufe fenfe AHTES NAM (979-14, 3, He 5) pooran poor rahay kirpaa niDh ghat ghat disat samaa-in. ||1]|
The Lord, the ocean of mercy, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere; He is seen to be contained in each and every heart. ||1]|
my su afe we ua ofa fee 3f% 5 BEE Il (979-15, 3, Hs 5)
jaap taap kot lakh poojaa har simran tul na laa-in.
Hundreds of thousands and millions of meditations, austerities and worships are not equal to remembering the Lord in meditation.
efe ag His soa BS Hid 3d MAS GA CATES IIENDI (979-15, 52, He 5)
du-ay kar jorh naanak daan maa™gai tayray daasan daas dasaa-in. ||2||6||7]|
With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing, that he may become the slave of the slaves of Your slaves. ||2||6]|7]|
O¢ HIG U Il (979-16)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
He ATaA BH feure Il (979-16, 3, He 5) mayrai sarbas naam niDhaan. The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is everything for me.
ate fasur Arg Afar fHfes afsafs ets ee a TIS il 979-17, 3z, us 5)
kar kirpaa saaDhoo sang mili-o satgur deeno daan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Granting His Grace, He has led me to join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; the True Guru has granted this gift. ||1]]Pause] |
AYeTS GU SHoss WS atasq uso fami il (979-17, a, Hs 5)
sukh-daata dukh bhanjanhaaraa gaa-o keertan pooran gi-aan.
Sing the Kirtan, the Praises of the Lord, the Giver of peace, the Destroyer of pain; He shall bless you with perfect spiritual wisdom.
aH ty Ss us ds ale faotHe us nifare All (979-18, az, 8 5) kaam kroDh lobh khand khand keen"ay binsi-o moorh abhimaan. ||1]|
Sexual desire, anger and greed shall be shattered and destroyed, and your foolish ego will be dispelled. ||1]|
foor ae 33 urfa suret us visa AE Il (979-18, se, He 5)
ki-aa gun tayray aakh vakhaanaa parabh antarjaamee jaan.
What Glorious Virtues of Yours should I chant? O God, You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
TIO AHS Adis AY AIS SOAK AE ATA MUDICI (979-19, sz, He 5) charan kamal saran sukh saagar naanak sad kurbaan. ||2||7||8]||
I seek the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet, O Lord, ocean of peace; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||7||8]|
UST eco
O¢ HIG U Il (80-1)
nat mehlaa 5. Nat, Fifth Mehl:
o@ afs afe we ae dus al Ta il (980-1, az, we 5) ha-o vaar vaar jaa-o gur gopaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Guru, the Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||
Hfa faa SH uss BS car ara efenrs Al (980-1, az, Hs 5) mohi nirgun tum pooran daatay deenaa naath da-i-aal. ||1]| I am unworthy; You are the Perfect Giver. You are the Merciful Master of the meek.
[11
Gos Fos Aes Was Abt YTS WS HS Il (980-2, az, He 5)
oothat baithat sovat jaagat jee-a paraan Dhan maal. ||2||
While standing up and sitting down, while sleeping and awake, You are my soul, my breath of life, my wealth and property. ||2]|
zane fmm aga nfs HS Soa TEA fogs ISIC! (980-2, sz, He 5)
darsan pi-aas bahut man mayrai naanak daras nihaal. ||3]|8]|9||
Within my mind there is such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. Nanak is enraptured with Your Glance of Grace. ||3]|8]|9]|
O¢ USS HIG U (980-4)
nat parh-taal mehlaa 5 Nat Partaal, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (9380-4) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aS I HT AHS HIS Il (980-5, sz uss, Hs 5) ko-oo hai mayro saajan meet. Is there any friend or companion of mine,
dfs SH ASS SS Il (980-5, se uss, 42 5) har naam sunaavai neet. who will constantly share the Lord's Name with me?
faon vy faudifs I (80-5, 52 uss, He 5) binsai dukh bipreet. Will he rid me of my pains and evil tendencies?
AS ngus HS 36 BS NA FI Il (980-5, se uss, He 5) sabh arpa-o man tan cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o. I would surrender my mind, body, consciousness and everything. ||1||Pause] |
act feaer nus ats Il (980-6, se uss, He 5) ko-ee virlaa aapan keet. How rare is that one whom the Lord makes His own,
Hfat JIS AHS HS Als Il (980-6, se uss, He 5) sang charan kamal man seet. and whose mind is sewn into the Lord's Lotus Feet.
ate faxsur dfs AA UTS IAI (980-6, ae USI, He 5) kar kirpaa har jas deet. ||1]| Granting His Grace, the Lord blesses him with His Praise. ||1]|
dfs Sf ASH UTS AIS Il (980-7, se uss, He 5) har bhaj janam padaarath jeet. Vibrating, meditating on the Lord, he is victorious in this precious human life,
afe ufss dfs usts Il (930-7, se uss, He 5) kot patit hohi puneet. and millions of sinners are sanctified.
BOA VA Ss BH AST IQNAUIAONAEN (980-7, se UTI, He 5)
naanak daas bal bal keet. ||2]|1]|10||19]| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||2||1]|10]|19]|
Se MASUeMIT HIG 8 (980-9) nat asatpadee-aa mehlaa 4 Nat Ashtapadees, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure I (980-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oH He Hfs Bf SH NITE Il (980-10, 3z, He 4) raam mayray man tan naam aDhaaray. O Lord, Your Name is the support of my mind and body.
fas us fo 3 AAG fag ASH TTHS OW ANTS NU TIC Il (980-10, az, He 4)
khin pal reh na saka-o bin sayvaa mai gurmat naam sam"aaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot survive for a moment, even for an instant, without serving You. Following the Guru's Teachings, I dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs ofs ofe ofe afe xfs foureg 4 afs afs on filmi II (980-11, ae, He 4)
har har har har har man Dhi-aavahu mai har har naam pi-aaray.
Within my mind, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so dear to me.
ae vfmrs se us oad Td a Aafe ASS IAI (980-11, 5z, He 4)
deen da-i-aal bha-ay parabh thaakur gur kai sabad savaaray. ||1||
When God, my Lord and Master, became merciful to me the meek one, I was exalted by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
HOASS AHS HT HT SAT MATH MMUTS Il (980-12, 3z, He 4)
maDhsoodan jagjeevan maaDho mayray thaakur agam apaaray.
Almighty Lord, Slayer of demons, Life of the World, my Lord and Master, inaccessible and infinite:
fea fas@ aast ase Ts yrs HAY VIS UAT Il (980-12, sz, we 4) ik bin-o bayntee kara-o gur aagai mai saaDhoo charan pakhaaray. ||2|| I offer this one prayer to the Guru, to bless me, that I may wash the feet of the Holy.
21 |
HUA 33 33 0 us ae ys Sa us fea? Il (980-13, sz, He 4)
sahas naytar naytar hai parabh ka-o parabh ayko purakh niraaray.
The thousands of eyes are the eyes of God; the One God, the Primal Being, remains unattached.
HOA Hats Sa ysS stag YS Sa TIHfS 3s SM (980-14, az, us 4)
sahas moorat ayko parabh thaakur parabh ayko gurmat taaray. ||3]|
The One God, our Lord and Master, has thousands of forms; God alone, through the Guru's Teachings, saves us. ||3]|
aanfs aH eHeg ufenr ofa afs oH Bfa ars Il (80-14, az, He 4)
gurmat naam damodar paa-i-aa har har naam ur Dhaaray.
Following the Guru's Teachings, I have been blessed with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I have enshrined within my heart the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofs afs xe sat mits Htet fAS sar sea ANTS III (980-15, 32, He 4)
har har kathaa banee at meethee ji-o goongaa gatak sam"aaray. ||4||
The sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is so very sweet; like the mute, I taste its sweetness, but I cannot describe it at all. ||4]|
THe Are va ate en nfs da Ss f¥ars i (980-15, oz, vs 4) rasnaa saad chakhai bhaa-ay doojai at feekay lobh bikaaray. The tongue savors the bland, insipid taste of the love of duality, greed and corruption.
A deufa Are vufo TH OH AS nS SA Ae feATS MUI (980-16, az, He 4)
jo gurmukh saad chakheh raam naamaa sabh an ras saad bisaaray. ||5||
The Gurmukh tastes the flavor of the Lord's Name, and all other tastes and flavors are forgotten. ||5||
TsHfs TH OH US Ufemr As Aafsor uy feers Il (980-17, se, H8 4)
gurmat raam naam Dhan paa-i-aa sun kehti-aa paap nivaaray.
Following the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Name; hearing it, and chanting it, sins are eradicated.
UeH ofe AH fs 5 ore HE Sad a Ho fimrd Ell (980-17, az, He 4)
Dharam raa-ay jam nayrh na aavai mayray thaakur kay jan pi-aaray. ||6| |
The Messenger of Death and the Righteous Judge of Dharma do not even approach the beloved servant of my Lord and Master. ||6]|
ATA ATA ATA 3 ASH OTSHPS OH ANTS Il (980-18, 5, He 4) Saas saas saas hai jaytay mai gurmat naam sam"aaray. With as many breaths as I have, I chant the Naam, under Guru's Instructions.
AA OAT fe on fag A feoer ATA fears DI (980-19, az, He 4)
SaaS Saas jaa-ay naamai bin so birthaa saas bikaaray. ||7||
Each and every breath which escapes me without the Naam - that breath is useless and corrupt. ||7||
four four afs ae ys Addl H a afte Ae Afs fimrs II (980-19, sz, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kar deen parabh sarnee mo ka-o har jan may! pi-aaray.
Please grant Your Grace; I am meek; I seek Your Sanctuary, God. Unite me with Your beloved, humble servants.
UST Leq
Sod VAS WH AIS FT IN BH a ufogs ICHUAU (81-1, 3g, He 4) naanak daasan daas kahat hai ham daasan kay panihaaray. ||8]|1|| Nanak, the slave of Your slaves, says, I am the water-carrier of Your slaves. ||8]|1]|
Oc HIS 8 Il (981-1)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
TH JH uTad fesaamrs Il (981-2, s, He 4) raam ham paathar nirgunee-aaray. O Lord, I am an unworthy stone.
fgur fgur afs ag fhe oH urge Hate TT SSI AU TIS Il (si-2, 3, ve 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kar guroo milaa-ay ham paahan sabad gur taaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Merciful Lord, in His Mercy, has led me to meet the Guru; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, this stone is carried across. ||1]||Pause| |
Afsag ou feared ifs vitor Hoag HBAS II (981-3, 5, He 4)
satgur naam drirh-aa-ay at meethaa mailaagar malgaaray.
The True Guru has implanted within me the exceedingly sweet Naam, the Name of the Lord; it is like the most fragrant sandalwood.
oH Aofs ext J zs feta af HAS HAA TUS UU (81-3, az, He 4)
naamai surat vajee hai dah dis har muskee musak ganDhaaray. ||1]||
Through the Name, my awareness extends in the ten directions; the fragrance of the fragrant Lord permeates the air. ||1]|
Sct fosae aa ae J Hat afs sta avo ANTS Il (981-4, az, He 4)
tayree nirgun kathaa kathaa hai meethee gur neekay bachan samaaray.
Your unlimited sermon is the most sweet sermon; I contemplate the most Sublime Word of the Guru.
Tes Wes Ws To We Ts Wes ate EAs iQ (981-4, az, He 4)
gaavat gaavat har gun gaa-ay gun gaavat gur nistaaray. ||2||
Singing, singing, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; singing His Glorious Praises, the Guru saves me. ||2||
faa Te TT ANeEHt SA fHeht Ha SSS I (81-5, sz, we 4)
bibayk guroo guroo samadrasee tis milee-ai sank utaaray.
The Guru is wise and clear; the Guru looks upon all alike. Meeting with Him, doubt and skepticism are removed.
Afsazg fife usH ue ufémr 38 Afsas & afsas ISI Csi-6, 52, He 4)
satgur mili-ai param pad paa-i-aa ha-o satgur kai balihaaray. ||3]|
Meeting with the True Guru, I have obtained the supreme status. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. |[3]|
uns unis afe afs san Be unis afar sfanid I Csi-6, a, He 4)
pakhand pakhand kar kar bharmay lobh pakhand jag buri-aaray.
Practicing hypocrisy and deception, people wander around in confusion. Greed and hypocrisy are evils in this world.
Jofs uafs wueet defs AHaTS wart fafs ws Igil (981-7, sz, He 4)
halat palat dukh-daa-ee hoveh jamkaal kharhaa sir maaray. ||4| |
In this world and the next, they are miserable; the Messenger of Death hovers over their heads, and strikes them down. ||4]|
Cae fear ore we ANS fay wfeor & fares I (981-7, 32, He 4)
ugvai dinas aal jaal sam"aalai bikh maa-i-aa kay bisthaaray.
At the break of day, they take care of their affairs, and the poisonous entanglements of Maya.
niet dfs sfeur nudsd fay Aus st eu ATS MUI (981-8, az, He 4)
aa-ee rain bha-i-aa supnantar bikh supnai bhee dukh saaray. ||5]|
When night falls, they enter the land of dreams, and even in dreams, they take care of their corruptions and pains. ||5]|
RSI YS 8 AZ Aen As As A WHS Il (981-9, az, we 4) kalar khayt lai koorh jamaa-i-aa sabh koorhai kay khalvaaray. Taking a barren field, they plant falsehood; they shall harvest only falsehood.
HAS od Als SU SUS Cle SS AH Hers MEM (981-9, 32, He 4)
saakat nar sabh bhookh bhukhaanay dar thaadhay jam jandaaray. ||6||
The materialistic people shall all remain hungry; the brutal Messenger of Death stands waiting at their door. ||6||
HOHY aan visor fou ardt Gad Hae Sted Il (981-10, sz, nH 4)
manmukh karaj charhi-aa bikh bhaaree utrai sabad veechaaray.
The self-willed manmukh has accumulated a tremendous load of debt in sin; only by contemplating the Word of the Shabad, can this debt be paid off.
fA3d AdH AdH a Hale afs Aza ula war Ss WI (981-10, sz, He 4)
jitnay karaj karaj kay mangee-ay kar sayvak pag lag vaaray. ||7]||
As much debt and as many creditors as there are, the Lord makes them into servants, who fall at his feet. ||7]|
naara Afs Hy Cure ofa dtot AS sas Il (981-11, 32, Hs 4)
jagannaath sabh jantar upaa-ay nak kheenee sabh nathhaaray.
All the beings which the Lord of the Universe created - He puts the rings through their noses, and leads them all along.
ooa us fd foe sebn fae are aH firs ICH (81-12, 32, He 4)
naanak parabh khinchai tiv chalee-ai ji-o bhaavai raam pi-aaray. ||8]|2||
O Nanak, as God drives us on, so do we follow; it is all the Will of the Beloved Lord. [18] [2] |
Oc HIS 8 Il (981-12)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
oH fe nifts Afs ares Il (981-12, a2, He 4) raam har amrit sar naavaaray. The Lord has bathed me in the pool of Ambrosial Nectar.
Afsafe famrg HAS Jd ola fife awHe uy Gas AU TIS Il (981-13, 3z, He 4)
satgur gi-aan majan hai neeko mil kalmal paap utaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The spiritual wisdom of the True Guru is the most excellent cleansing bath; bathing in it, all the filthy sins are washed away. ||1]||Pause] |
Hats a To ads uifuoret ufs Aor aoa Burs i (981-13, sz, Hs 4)
sangat kaa gun bahut aDhikaa-ee parh soo-aa ganak uDhaaray.
The virtues of the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, are so very great. Even the prostitute was saved, by teaching the parrot to speak the Lord's Name.
UH SUdH Be afant aG & Safe fos 9 Cs1-14, oz, H2 4)
paras napras bha-ay kubijaa ka-o lai baikunth siDhaaray. ||1||
Krishna was pleased, and so he touched the hunch-back Kubija, and she was transported to the heavens. ||1]|
mH Uifs uz ufs atet afs aafee Fars Il (981-15, sz, ue 4)
ajaamal pareet putar parat keenee kar naaraa-in bolaaray. Ajaamal loved his son Naaraayan, and called out his name.
He sag a His af! seat Haag He fers NN (981-15, oz, He 4)
mayray thaakur kai man bhaa-ay bhaavnee jamkankar maar bidaaray. ||2] |
His loving devotion pleased my Lord and Master, who struck down and drove off the Messengers of Death. ||2||
Hoy aa afa Sa Hos WES AS Mere Il (981-16, 3z, He 4)
maanukh kathai kath lok sunaavai jo bolai so na beechaaray.
The mortal speaks and by speaking, makes the people listen; but he does not reflect upon what he himself says.
FsHats fixe 3 feast ore afs oH oft forsrd ISI (981-16, 52, He 4)
satsangat milai ta dirh-taa aavai har raam naam nistaaray. ||3]|
But when he joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, he is confirmed in his faith, and he is saved by the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
wa oa Ae fis J Aas sa ofa fas o ANTS Il (981-17, 3g, He 4)
jab lag jee-o pind hai saabat tab lag kichh na samaaray.
As long as his soul and body are healthy and strong, he does not remember the Lord at all.
Wa we Hefe orf warat ate aU oe ufsss gil (981-18, 32, He 4)
jab ghar mandar aag lagaanee kadh koop kadhai panihaaray. ||4||
But when his home and mansion catch fire, then, he wants to dig the well to draw water. ||4||
Has fA He He o adn fate ate afs an faATS Il (981-18, sz, He 4)
Saakat si-o man mayl na karee-ahu jin har har naam bisaaray.
O mind, do not join with the faithless cynic, who has forgotten the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Was ave frsur fa sHbt Sha AAS us UTS UII (981-19, 3z, He 4) saakat bachan bichhoo-aa ji-o dasee-ai taj saakat parai paraaray. ||5||
The word of the faithless cynic stings like a scorpion; leave the faithless cynic far, far behind. ||5]||
Uar CcQ ofa ofa ufs ag yifs saret ofor ATG Aft ASS Il (982-1, 32, 8 4)
lag lag pareet baho pareet lagaa-ee lag saaDhoo sang savaaray. Fall in love, fall deeply in love with the Lord; clinging to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you will be exalted and embellished.
qd & ado Als Afs ala WS HS Stag agy fimrsd ill (982-1, az, us 4) gur kay bachan sat sat kar maanay mayray thaakur bahut pi-aaray. ||6] |
Those who accept the Word of the Guru as True, totally True, are very dear to my Lord and Master. ||6||
usta Fofh usgs one af afe af oth fimrd i (982-2, az, H2 4)
poorab janam parchoon kamaa-ay har har har naam pi-aaray.
Because of actions committed in past lives, one comes to love the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
ae urte nifys sa ufenr on are SH Stes IDI (982-3, az, He 4)
gur parsaad amrit ras paa-i-aa ras gaavai ras veechaaray. ||7||
By Guru's Grace, you shall obtain the ambrosial essence; sing of this essence, and reflect upon this essence. ||7]||
A. NA x
ofs afs gu sa Afs 3d HT WHS BS TH Il (982-3, az, we 4)
har har roop rang sabh tayray mayray laalan laal gulaaray.
O Lord, Har, Har, all forms and colors are Yours; O my Beloved, my deep crimson ruby.
AA da efs A de famr soa HS fees ICSI (82-4, 52, He 4) jaisaa rang deh so hovai ki-aa naanak jant vichaaray. ||8]|3] |
Only that color which You impart, Lord, exists; O Nanak, what can the poor wretched being do? ||8]|3]|
6c HIG 8 Il (982-4)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
TH Td Hale YS TAS Il (982-4, ae, He 4)
raam gur saran parabhoo rakhvaaray. In the Sanctuary of the Guru, the Lord God saves and protects us,
fAG aug sent uals vores ate Gug afe ferss Ul TIS I (982-5, 3z, ws 4) ji-o kunchar tadoo-ai pakar chalaa-i-o kar oopar kadh nistaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. as He protected the elephant, when the crocodile seized it and pulled it into the water; He lifted him up and pulled him out. ||1]|Pause] |
ys a Asa dos uifs ota nfs Aaa ate ats Ud Il (982-6, a2, He 4) parabh kay sayvak bahut at neekay man sarDhaa kar har Dhaaray. God's servants are sublime and exalted; they enshrine faith for Him in their minds.
ne ufs Aso sats ufs aS Ho at UA ATS IAI (982-6, 32, He 4)
mayray parabh sarDhaa bhagat man bhaavai jan kee paij savaaray. ||1]||
Faith and devotion are pleasing to my God's Mind; He saves the honor of His humble servants. ||1]|
ofa ofs Asa AS ort AZ SH YIN UAT Il (982-7, sz, us 4)
har har sayvak sayvaa laagai sabh daykhai barahm pasaaray.
The servant of the Lord, Har, Har, is committed to His service; He sees God pervading the entire expanse of the universe.
ea usy fea oedt nie As Sar sels fears NII (982-7, se, He 4) ayk purakh ik nadree aavai sabh aykaa nadar nihaaray. ||2| | He sees the One and only Primal Lord God, who blesses all with His Glance of Grace.
21 |
dfs ug Stag sent As set AG Vat Aas AHS Il (982-8, 32, He 4)
har parabh thaakur ravi-aa sabh thaa-ee sabh chayree jagat samaaray.
God, our Lord and Master, is permeating and pervading all places; He takes care of the whole world as His slave.
mify efenre efeur ag te fefes uvag afd ard ISI (982-8, az, He 4) aap da-i-aal da-i-aa daan dayvai vich paathar keeray kaaray. ||3]| The Merciful Lord Himself mercifully gives His gifts, even to worms in stones. ||3]|
nists eH ATs HAS ofh ger fear FAAS I (982-9, sz, Hs 4)
antar vaas bahut muskaa-ee bharam bhoolaa mirag sinyhaaray.
Within the deer is the heavy fragrance of musk, but he is confused and deluded, and he shakes his horns looking for it.
a9 46 ele efe fete wat af us wis feAss igi (82-10, az, Hs 4)
ban ban dhoodh dhoodh fir thaakee gur poorai ghar nistaaray. ||4]|
Wandering, rambling and roaming through the forests and woods, I exhausted myself, and then in my own home, the Perfect Guru saved me. ||4]|
Fat TT TT FI Tat fete wat nifys AS il (982-10, sz, we 4)
banee guroo guroo hai banee vich banee amrit saaray.
The Word, the Bani is Guru, and Guru is the Bani. Within the Bani, the Ambrosial Nectar is contained.
TT Fal ad Aa AG HS usste Te fSASS Uli (982-11, 3z, Hs 4)
gur banee kahai sayvak jan maanai partakh guroo nistaaray. ||5| |
If His humble servant believes, and acts according to the Words of the Guru's Bani, then the Guru, in person, emancipates him. ||5||
AS od YdH Yon 9 unfer ufe Sifter were I (982-12, 3g, He 4) sabh hai barahm barahm hai pasri-aa man beeji-aa khaavaaray. All is God, and God is the whole expanse; man eats what he has planted.
fA@ Ao VeaA eftmr fyAegtt mus wg Sat AS Ell (982-12, 5z, He 4)
ji-o jan chandar-haa"s dukhi-aa DharistbuDhee apunaa ghar lookee jaaray. ||6]| When Dhrishtabudhi tormented the humble devotee Chandrahaans, he only set his own house on fire. ||6]|
us aG He nists fee SY us Ho a ATA fears Il (982-13, 32, He 4)
parabh ka-o jan antar rid lochai parabh jan kay saas nihaaray.
God's humble servant longs for Him within his heart; God watches over each breath of His humble servant.
four four afs safs feare ae ule wa feAss IDI (982-13, 5, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kar bhagat drirh-aa-ay jan peechhai jag nistaaray. ||7]||
Mercifully, mercifully, He implants devotion within his humble servant; for his sake, God saves the whole world. ||7||
nus nif uf yg oag ys nm fAfe Herd Il (982-14, sz, He 4)
aapan aap aap parabh thaakur parabh aapay sarisat savaaray.
God, our Lord and Master, is Himself by Himself; God Himself embellishes the universe.
He soa mm orf Ag Zas ate fur wrfy feAsTs CII (982-15, 5, He 4)
jan naanak aapay aap sabh vartai kar kirpaa aap nistaaray. ||8||4||
O servant Nanak, He Himself is all-pervading; in His Mercy, He Himself emancipates all. ||8]|4]|
Of HIS 8 Il (982-15)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
oH ate fxsur SI Bars il (982-16, az, u3 4) raam kar kirpaa layho ubaaray. Grant Your Grace, Lord, and save me,
fa@ uate gust eA]|t oret ofa afs ora foes A TIC Il (982-16, 32, He 4)
ji-o pakar daropatee dustaa™ aanee har har laaj nivaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
as You saved Dropadi from shame when she was seized and brought before the court by the evil villians. ||1]]Pause| |
ats fasu wafsa Ae Sd fea HAIG ee fumrd Il (982-17, se, He 4)
kar kirpaa jaachik jan tayray ik maaga-o daan pi-aaray.
Bless me with Your Grace - I am just a humble beggar of Yours; I beg for a single blessing, O my Beloved.
Afsas at fos Asm walt H a ofs ag Afs ASS NA (982-17, 32, He 4)
satgur kee nit sarDhaa laagee mo ka-o har gur mayl savaaray. || 1] |
I long constantly for the True Guru. Lead me to meet the Guru, O Lord, that I may be exalted and embellished. ||1]|
HAS AGH urat fas Haba fas urat 3H sare Il (982-18, sz, v2 4)
saakat karam paanee ji-o mathee-ai nit paanee jhol jhulaaray.
The actions of the faithless cynic are like the churning of water; he churns, constantly churning only water.
ffs AsHafs usH ue ufeor afe HS A TEAS III (982-18, 3g, He 4)
mil satsangat param pad paa-i-aa kadh maakhan kay gatkaaray. ||2||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the supreme status is obtained; the butter is produced, and eaten with delight. ||2]|
fos fos afenr HAS aur fas ufs His SI ASS Il (982-19, 32, Hs 4)
nit nit kaa-i-aa majan kee-aa nit mal mal dayh savaaray.
He may constantly and continually wash his body; he may constantly rub, clean and polish his body.
Ua ccs
Hd Afsag a fs gue 6 TS AS eae VG Alas ISI (983-1, oz, He 4)
mayray satgur kay man bachan na bhaa-ay sabh fokat chaar seegaaray. ||3]|
But if the Word of my True Guru is not pleasing to his mind, then all his preparations and beautiful decorations are useless. ||3]|
Het Hata 3H Aut AVSt HS StaT A WS ATS Il (983-1, dz, ve 4)
matak matak chal sakhee sahaylee mayray thaakur kay gun saaray.
Walk playfully and carefree, O my friends and companions; cherish the Glorious Virtues of my Lord and Master.
Toufy As AS ys set H AfSaAT visY Bas Ill (983-2, 32, us 4)
gurmukh sayvaa mayray parabh bhaa-ee mai satgur alakh lakhaaray. ||4]|
To serve, as Gurmukh, is pleasing to my God. Through the True Guru, the unknown is known. ||4||
od Udy UTY AS SS AS Sa UTY HIS Il (983-3, ae, He 4) naaree purakh purakh sabh naaree sabh ayko purakh muraaray. Women and men, all the men and women, all came from the One Primal Lord God.
HS Aor at 3@ Hfe avet ffs ofa we ofa feAss Ul (983-3, 5g, He 4)
sant janaa kee rayn man bhaa-ee mil har jan har nistaaray. ||5||
My mind loves the dust of the feet of the humble; the Lord emancipates those who meet with the Lord's humble servants. ||5| |
TH aH sad AS fefaur fee nists fs AS ss Il (983-4, 5z, He 4)
garaam garaam nagar sabh firi-aa rid antar har jan bhaaray. From village to village, throughout all the cities I wandered; and then, inspired by the Lord's humble servants, I found Him deep within the nucleus of my heart.
Ram Hem Cure frre H aS afe as afe fansrs lel (983-4, az, He 4)
sarDhaa sarDhaa upaa-ay milaa-ay mo ka-o har gur gur nistaaray. ||6]|
Faith and longing have welled up within me, and I have been blended with the Lord; the Guru, the Guru, has saved me. ||6]|
ues AS Ag slot afer Afsafs HAE Ses I (983-5, se, He 4)
pavan soot sabh neekaa kari-aa satgur sabad veechaaray.
The thread of my breath has been made totally sublime and pure; I contemplate the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru.
for wfs afe nifts oA ulvr fae So" Aas fers IDI (83-6, 32, He 4)
nij ghar jaa-ay amrit ras pee-aa bin nainaa jagat nihaaray. ||7]||
I came back to the home of my own inner self; drinking in the ambrosial essence, I see the world, without my eyes. ||7]|
38 qo Sn safe odt WAG SH Hed IN fos ald Il (983-6, az, He 4)
ta-o gun ees baran nahee saaka-o tum mandar ham nik keeray.
I cannot describe Your Glorious Virtues, Lord; You are the temple, and I am just a tiny worm.
Sod fxur adT TT HST HTH AUS HO Aid ICIUI (983-7, sz, He 4)
naanak kirpaa karahu gur maylhu mai raam japat man Dheeray. ||8]|5||
Bless Nanak with Your Mercy, and unite him with the Guru; meditating on my Lord, my mind is comforted and consoled. ||8]|5||
Oc HIG 8 Il (983-8)
nat mehlaa 4. Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Hd HO SH SAT MGI “UTS Il (983-8, se, He 4) mayray man bhaj thaakur agam apaaray. O my mind, vibrate, meditate on the inaccessible and infinite Lord and Master.
JH unt ag fasdemre ate fasu afs fests Ail TIS Il (983-8, se, Hs 4)
ham paapee baho nirgunee-aaray kar kirpaa gur nistaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am such a great sinner; I am so unworthy. And yet the Guru, in His Mercy, has saved me. ||1]|Pause| |
Ag usd ATM Ho ure fea foS as aa fimrd I (983-9, 3, He 4)
saaDhoo purakh saaDh jan paa-ay ik bin-o kara-o gur pi-aaray.
I have found the Holy Person, the Holy and humble servant of the Lord; I offer a prayer to Him, my Beloved Guru.
TH OH UG Unt teg As fsAaT gu fSeTsT IAM (983-10, 32, He 4)
raam naam Dhan poojee dayvhu sabh tisnaa bhookh nivaaray. ||1]||
Please, bless me with the wealth, the capital of the Lord's Name, and take away all my hunger and thirst. ||1]|
ud usa fxg fea aus Hie fea fet uafe Aus Il (983-10, 2, He 4)
pachai patang marig bharing kunchar meen ik indree pakar saghaaray.
The moth, the deer, the bumble bee, the elephant and the fish are ruined, each by the one passion that controls them.
Us 3 AAG J Vat Te Afsag uy fees iM! (983-1, a, us 4)
panch bhoot sabal hai dayhee gur satgur paap nivaaray. ||2]|
The five powerful demons are in the body; the Guru, the True Guru turns out these sins. ||2||
AAg Se Afo Afo 2a ufs ose aes UATS Il (983-12, se, He 4)
saastar bayd soDh soDh daykhay mun naarad bachan pukaaray.
I searched and searched through the Shaastras and the Vedas; Naarad the silent sage proclaimed these words as well.
TH OH usd afs weg AsHals afte feAss ISI (983-12, oz, He 4)
raam naam parhahu gat paavhu satsangat gur nistaaray. ||3]|
Chanting the Lord's Name, salvation is attained; the Guru saves those in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||3||
Yisn us wait ys act fre Hae AHS food Il (983-13, se, He 4) pareetam pareet lagee parabh kayree jiv sooraj kamal nihaaray. In love with the Beloved Lord God, one looks at Him as the lotus looks at the sun.
He ANG He ag ae He Bae we wWod'd Ill (983-14, az, He 4) mayr sumayr mor baho naachai jab unvai ghan ghanhaaray. ||4|| The peacock dances on the mountain, when the clouds hang low and heavy. ||4||
Aas a@ nifys ag fivg As 3S Ss faHars Ii (983-14, az, ve 4)
saakat ka-o amrit baho sinchahu sabh daal fool bisukaaray.
The faithless cyinc may be totally drenched with ambrosial nectar, but even so, all his branches and flowers are filled with venom.
fa@ fag foefo mas og Ast efs afs ae fay wes Mull (983-15, oz, He 4)
ji-o ji-o niveh saakat nar saytee chhayrh chhayrh kadhai bikh khaaray. ||5||
The more one bows down in humility before the faithless cyinc, the more he provokes, and stabs, and spits out his poison. ||5||
Hae As Aa fife sdb qe sofa usBuard Il (983-16, sz, v2 4)
santan sant saaDh mil rahee-ai gun boleh par-upkaaray.
Remain with the Holy man, the Saint of the Saints, who chants the Lord's Praises for the benefit of all.
Hs As fs Ho faa fas ne fife ane Aes MEN (983-16, oz, H2 4)
santai sant milai man bigsai ji-o jal mil kamal savaaray. ||6]|
Meeting the Saint of Saints, the mind blossoms forth, like the lotus, exalted by obtaining the water. ||6||
Bs Bld AS Ans Joa J Jalas Asafa fears il (983-17, se, He 4) lobh lahar sabh su-aan halak hai halki-o sabheh bigaaray. The waves of greed are like mad dogs with rabies. Their madness ruins everything.
He oad a chats uate det afs famrg usa & HTS MDI (83-17, az, He 4)
mayray thaakur kai deebaan khabar ho-ee gur gi-aan kharhag lai maaray. ||7]||
When the news reached the Court of my Lord and Master, the Guru took up the sword of spiritual wisdom, and killed them. ||7]||
oy my ay us He H aug fag Ws Il (983-18, sz, He 4) raakh raakh raakh parabh mayray mai raakho kirpaa Dhaaray. Save me, save me, save me, O my God; shower me with Your Mercy, and save me!
Soa H Ud Med 3 aE H Afsag ag fens ICE! (983-19, oz, He 4) naanak mai Dhar avar na kaa-ee mai satgur gur nistaaray. ||8||6|| O Nanak, I have no other support; the Guru, the True Guru, has saved me. ||8]|6||
sat 4 Il (983-19)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six Hymns] |
Ua kcgy
Ta Ht ASA HIS 8 (984-1) raag maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4 Raag Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
qe ATS on aes uy fesse fares nieve Hats niet AS TT YATE I (984-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
mfoad AS0 afe sd dfs viz ardt urfemr I (984-4, wat aBsr, He 4) anik jatan kar rahay har ant naahee paa-i-aa. Countless have tried, but none have found the Lord's limit.
of am nam werfa sfo wren afs ys ahem a TIS i 84-4, west aay, He 4)
har agam agam agaaDh boDh aadays har parabh raa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable; I humbly bow to the Lord God, my King. ||1||Pause| |
any au 83 Hg fas saes saafent | (984-5, wat aa, v2 4)
kaam kroDh lobh moh nit jhagratay jhagraa-i-aa.
Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment bring continual conflict and strife.
JH wy ay de 3d da Aafe ae ys wrfenr UI (984-5, wet Tes, He 4)
ham raakh raakh deen tayray har saran har parabh aa-i-aa. ||1]|
Save me, save me, I am your humble creature, O Lord; I have come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord God. ||1]|
Hdaast ys ues dfs safs zee Stent | (984-6, wat aa, vs 4)
sarnaagatee parabh paaltay har bhagat vachhal naa-i-aa.
You protect and preserve those who take to Your Sanctuary, God; You are called the Lover of Your devotees.
ufoere Ae Jeary uater afes ofe SE safenr II (984-6, wet a@ar, ue 4)
par-hilaad jan harnaakh pakri-aa har raakh lee-o taraa-i-aa. ||2||
Prahlaad, Your humble servant, was caught by Harnaakhash; but You saved Him and carried him across, Lord. ||2||
dfs MS J Ho HIG USE AS Sa SAG THEM Il (984-7, wat Ser, ve 4)
har chayt ray man mahal paavan sabh dookh bhanjan raa-i-aa.
Remember the Lord, O mind, and rise up to the Mansion of His Presence; the Sovereign Lord is the Destroyer of pain.
38 HOH Hdd fosts oad de AsHSt ys ufsHr ISI (984-8, wet aes, He 4) bha-o janam maran nivaar thaakur har gurmatee parabh paa-i-aa. ||3]|
Our Lord and Master takes away the fear of birth and death; following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord God is found. ||3]|
dfs ufss urea oH Ayumi 3G sas sHe afenr | (984-8, wat ast, He 4)
har patit paavan naam su-aamee bha-o bhagat bhanjan gaa-i-aa.
The Name of the Lord, our Lord and Master, is the Purifier of sinners; I sing of the Lord, the Destroyer of the fears of His devotees.
ofa wg ats Cfa ofeS He aaa OTH AHTEMT ISI (984-9, wet Bsr, He 4)
har haar har ur Dhaari-o jan naanak naam samaa-i-aa. ||4||1]| One who wears the necklace of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in his heart, O servant Nanak, merges in the Naam. ||4|[1]|
Hat TSS HIG 8 Il (984-10)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4. Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
Afu HS TH SH AYSTST Il (984-10, uret ast, Hs 4) jap man raam naam sukh-daata. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Giver of peace.
AsHats fife ofs Are uefeor asHfa FH UES NA TIC Il (984-10, wet ast, ue 4) satsangat mil har saad aa-i-aa gurmukh barahm pachhaataa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and enjoys the sublime taste of the Lord, as Gurmukh, comes to realize God. ||1]|Pause| |
Zsa Ts vanS ufeur ate fife afs us AST II (984-11, wet TBs, He 4)
vadbhaagee gur darsan paa-i-aa gur mili-ai har parabh jaataa.
By great good fortune, one obtains the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; meeting with the Guru, the Lord God is known.
eonfs He aet AS slate of nifiqfs of Afs |Sé UA (984-12, wat TBs, He 4) durmat mail ga-ee sabh neekar har amrit har sar naataa. ||1]||
The filth of evil-mindedness is totally washed away, bathing in the Lord's ambrosial pool of nectar. ||1]|
U6 U6 AY frat ate ys ufenr faq uss oie at ast Il (984-12, wat aes, He 4)
Dhan Dhan saaDh jin"ee har parabh paa-i-aa tin" poochha-o har kee baataa. Blessed, blessed are the Holy, who have found their Lord God; I ask them to tell me the stories of the Lord.
ue oa fos ase Fedor fs HoT aah feast QI (984-13, wet as, He 4)
paa-ay laga-o nit kara-o judree-aa har maylhu karam biDhaataa. ||2||
I fall at their feet, and always pray to them, to mercifully unite me with my Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||2] |
fore fod ufeor ag AY Td asat HG So IST Il (984-14, wet as, we 4)
lilaat likhay paa-i-aa gur saaDhoo gur bachnee man tan raataa.
Through the destiny written on my forehead, I have found the Holy Guru; my mind and body are imbued with the Guru's Word.
dfs ys vie fxs AY ufeur AS fomfer uTT TSS SI (984-14, wet Tes, He 4) har parabh aa-ay milay sukh paa-i-aa sabh kilvikh paap gavaataa. ||3]| The Lord God has come to meet me; I have found peace, and I am rid of all the sins.
[131] oH sAte|S faq Tents ufeor fq at SSH AST I (984-15, wet TGs, He 4)
raam rasaa-in jin" gurmat paa-i-aa tin" kee ootam baataa. Those who follow the Guru's Teachings find the Lord, the source of nectar; their words are sublime and exalted.
fae at ua urint esata He Soa Vato UTS III (984-16, wet TCs, He 4)
tin kee pank paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee jan naanak charan paraataa. ||4]|2||
By great good fortune, one is blessed with the dust of their feet; servant Nanak falls at their feet. ||4]|2]|
Ua ecu
Hat TS HIG 8 Il (985-1)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4. Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
Afs fro vfoe yfs wat Hfs seat ofa fame i (985-1, wat a@ar, He 4)
sabh siDh saaDhik mun janaa man bhaavnee har Dhi-aa-i-o.
All the Siddhas, seekers and silent sages, with their minds full of love, meditate on the Lord.
nuUdUud USAIN AMM afe vis TT StS ual TIS il (985-1, wet aes, ws 4) aprampro paarbarahm su-aamee har alakh guroo lakhaa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Supreme Lord God, my Lord and Master, is limitless; the Guru has inspired me to know the unknowable Lord. ||1||Pause] |
TH ote Hfan aan ale odt Sf safe THEE Il (985-2, wet aSar, He 4) ham neech maDhim karam kee-ay nahee chayti-o har raa-i-o. I am low, and I commit evil actions; I have not remembered my Sovereign Lord.
dfs urfe Hfas Afsag fag da Hats aetES ual (85-3, wet aes, we 4)
har aan mayli-o satguroo khin banDh mukat karaa-i-o. ||1||
The Lord has led me to meet the True Guru; in an instant, He liberated me from bondage. ||1]||
ufs HASa Ufs ottmer asHst afs fee ote | (985-3, wet a@ar, ue 4)
parabh mastakay Dhur leekhi-aa gurmatee har liv laa-i-o.
Such is the destiny God wrote on my forehead; following the Guru's Teachings, I enshrine love for the Lord.
Us Age vasa Ifaor sie fifeS Hares afES ii (985-4, wet aGar, v2 4)
panch sabad dargeh baaji-aa har mili-o mangal gaa-i-o. ||2||
The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, vibrate and resound in the Court of the Lord; meeting the Lord, I sing the songs of joy. ||2||
ufsa ureg oH odds Husain odt sfEE i (985-4, wet aGar, He 4)
patit paavan naam narhar mand-bhaagee-aa™ nahee bhaa-i-o.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Purifier of sinners; the unfortunate wretches do not like this.
3 wes not wets fae Se vals TetES sil (985-5, wet agar, He 4) tay garabh jonee gaalee-ah ji-o lon jaleh galaa-i-o. ||3]|| They rot away in the womb of reincarnation; they fall apart like salt in water. ||3]|
fs dfs ofs ys Ma Sad TI BIS HO WH SAEE I (985-5, wast aBsr, ve 4)
mat deh har parabh agam thaakur gur charan man mai laa-i-o.
Please bless me with such understanding, O Inaccessible Lord God, my Lord and Master, that my mind may remain attached to the Guru's feet.
dfs TH oH FIC ad Ae Bea OTH PES ISIS (985-6, wet as, He 4)
har raam naamai raha-o laago jan naanak naam samaa-i-o. ||4]|3] | Servant Nanak remains attached to the Name of the Lord; he is merged in the Naam. [141131]
Hest TSS HIS 8 Il (985-7)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4. Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
HT Ho TH OTH SA Bar Il (985-7, wat aCar, He 4) mayraa man raam naam ras laagaa. My mind is addicted to the juice of the Lord's Name.
HS yaa sfeur ag ufenr ats afus gH s@ star NU TIS Il (985-7, wet aa, ue 4) kamal pargaas bha-i-aa gur paa-i-aa har japi-o bharam bha-o bhaagaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My heart-lotus has blossomed forth, and I have found the Guru. Meditating on the Lord, my doubts and fears have run away. ||1||Pause| |
3 off safs oa As dhs He AES Tans War Il (85-8, wat aa, He 4)
bhai bhaa-ay bhagat laago mayraa hee-araa man so-i-o gurmat jaagaa.
In the Fear of God, my heart is committed in loving devotion to Him; following the Guru's Teachings, my sleeping mind has awakened.
faofay ute se AS niet ofa Ca OfeS Ssara IAI (985-9, wat aBsr, He 4) kilbikh kheen bha-ay saa‘t aa-ee har ur Dhaari-o vadbhaagaa. ||1||
All my sins have been erased, and I have found peace and tranquility; I have enshrined the Lord within my heart, by great good fortune. ||1]]|
HOHY da aHS Fagor fAG AAH ata fea Tar Il (985-9, wat aBar, He 4)
manmukh rang kasumbh hai kachoo-aa ji-o kusam chaar din chaagaa.
The self-willed manmukh is like the false color of the safflower, which fades away; its color lasts for only a few days.
fas ufo faofa wf ussd S33 cen THE at Ba MQM (985-10, wat aGzr, He 4) khin meh binas jaa-ay partaapai dand Dharam raa-ay kaa laagaa. ||2||
He perishes in an instant; he is tormented, and punished by the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||2||
AsHats Uifs AG wits gat fAS Ja HAS AT Sar il (985-11, wat Sar, ws 4) satsangat pareet saaDh at goorhee ji-o rang majeeth baho laagaa.
The Lord's Love, found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is absolutely permanent, and colorfast.
afer aug dtd sg ed dfs da 5 Gd AS ISI (9385-11, wet aes, He 4)
kaa-i-aa kaapar cheer baho faaray har rang na lahai sabhaagaa. ||3]|
The cloth of the body may be torn to shreds, but still, this beautiful color of the Lord's Love does not fade away. ||3]|
ofs wfyS da fee aa As af sft Tees Tar | (985-12, wet aes, ws 4)
har chaar"i-o rang milai gur sobhaa har rang chaloolai raa‘gaa.
Meeting with the Blessed Guru, one is dyed in the color of the Lord's Love, imbued with this deep crimson color.
Ho aod fs5 aA VIS ua A fs Vaot AS Sa ISiSil (985-12, wat ase, He 4) jan naanak tin kay charan pakhaarai jo har charnee jan laagaa. ||4||4||
Servant Nanak washes the feet of that humble being, who is attached to the feet of the Lord. ||4||4]|
Hat TGS HIS 8 Il (985-13)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4. Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
Hd HO 3H Ue Te SH TUS Il (985-13, wat aSar, ve 4)
mayray man bhaj har har naam gupaalaa.
O my mind, meditate, vibrate upon the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the World, Har, Har.
Ha He 36 Bo sfeor oH oF Hfs Tes TH TST NU TIS I (985-14, wet as, v2 4)
mayraa man tan leen bha-i-aa raam naamai mat gurmat raam rasaalaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. My mind and body are merged in the Lord's Name, and through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect is imbued with the Lord, the source of nectar. ||1||Pause||
aanfs an fomrein ats afe nfs aruba ofe peer I (985-15, ust aBar, He 4)
gurmat naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai har har man japee-ai har japmaalaa.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. Chant, and meditate, on the beads of the mala of the Lord.
faa a HASfe otfimr afe fife afs gener WA (985-15, Het aBar, He 4)
jin" kai mastak leekhi-aa har mili-aa har banmaalaa. ||1||
Those who have such destiny inscribed upon their foreheads, meet with the Lord, adorned with garlands of flowers. ||1]|
fq ofs on fimrfenr fq ga ASA AH I (985-16, wet aes, we 4) jin" har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tin" chookay sarab janjaalaa. Those who meditate on the Name of the Lord - all their entanglements are ended.
fq FH fs 6 yreet afe aed ats Tas |I2QIl (985-16, wet as, He 4)
tin" jam nayrh na aavee gur raakhay har rakhvaalaa. ||2]|
The Messenger of Death does not even approach them; the Guru, the Savior Lord, saves them. ||2||
oH ated fas o Aeg ots HS fust yfsurer i (985-17, wat aes, He 4) ham baarik kichhoo na jaanhoo har maat pitaa partipaalaa. I am a child; I know nothing at all. The Lord cherishes me, as my mother and father.
ag Went nafs fos Hos afs TS ee efenrsr Bil (985-17, wet ast, He 4)
kar maa-i-aa agan nit mayltay gur raakhay deen da-i-aalaa. ||3]|
I continually put my hands into the fire of Maya, but the Guru saves me; He is merciful to the meek. ||3]|
ag HS fesHe dfeor vs faofsu of afA Ae Il (985-18, wet aGsr, He 4)
baho mailay nirmal ho-i-aa sabh kilbikh har jas jaalaa.
I was filthy, but I have become immaculate. Singing the Lord's Praises, all sins have been burnt to ashes.
Hfe wise sfeor ag ufenr AS aoe Hate fags isiUll (985-19, west ast, H8 4)
man anad bha-i-aa gur paa-i-aa jan naanak sabad nihaalaa. ||4||5||
My mind is in esctasy, having found the Guru; servant Nanak is enraptured through the Word of the Shabad. ||4]|5]|
Hat TGS HIG 8 Il (985-19)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 4. Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:
Yat cre
Hd HO dfs 3H AS faofae ae Il (986-1, wet aBar, He 4)
mayray man har bhaj sabh kilbikh kaat. O my mind, meditate, vibrate on the Lord, and all sins will be eradicated.
ofs afs Ga wfes afe ud He AA ot TST FS AU TTS Il (986-1, wat aGar, we 4) har har ur Dhaari-o gur poorai mayraa sees keejai gur vaat. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Guru has enshried the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart; I place my head on the Guru's Path. ||1||Pause]|
Ad ofs ys at H Ps Hae fSH He PEC ale HE Il (986-2, wet aes, He 4)
mayray har parabh kee mai baat sunaavai tis man dayva-o kat kaat.
Whoever tells me the stories of my Lord God, I would cut my mind into slices, and dedicate it to him.
dfs AMG Hes afs us as sels fears ale T| A (986-2, wet Tez, He 4)
har saajan mayli-o gur poorai gur bachan bikaano hat haat. ||1]|
The Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord, my Friend; I have sold myself at each and every store for the Guru's Word. ||1||
Had Ufa ee aT ahr Aste St nig arf] il (986-3, wat aa, ue 4) makar paraag daan baho kee-aa sareer dee-o aDh kaat. One may give donations in charity at Prayaag, and cut the body in two at Benares,
faa ofa on & nafs 5 ue ag ave UIA ale A] IQIl (936-3, wat as, He 4)
bin har naam ko mukat na paavai baho kanchan deejai kat kaat. ||2]|
but without the Lord's Name, no one attains liberation, even though one may give away huge amounts of gold. ||2||
dfs atefs Tans AA ES Hfs Gus auS Aue| Il (986-4, wat aCar, He 4)
har keerat gurmat jas gaa-i-o man ughray kapat kapaat.
When one follows the Guru's Teachings, and sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, the doors of the mind, held shut by deception, are thrown open again.
fgact dfs sau BE Tar GH Tt Heat HS ISI (86-5, wat TBs, He 4)
tarikutee for bharam bha-o bhaagaa laj bhaanee matukee maat. | |3] |
The three qualities are shattered, doubt and fear run away, and the clay pot of public opinion is broken. |[3]|
aorta ag us fa ufeur fas ufs Haste fet frre i (936-5, wat ast, He 4)
kaljug gur pooraa tin paa-i-aa jin Dhur mastak likhay lilaat.
They alone find the Perfect Guru in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is inscribed.
Wo Soa 3A nifys ult AS wet gu fFaTS ISIE (936-6, wet Tez, we 4) jan naanak ras amrit pee-aa sabh laathee bhookh tikhaat. ||4]|6||
Servant Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar; all his hunger and thirst are quenched. [14] 16]
sat 4% Il (986-6) chhakaa 1. Set of Six Hymns 1]|
Hest TSS HIS U (986-7) maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5 Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (986-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
J HO 2de Js AY ATS Il (986-8, west Tar, He 5) ray man tahal har sukh saar. O mind, true peace comes from serving the Lord.
Mes coe sour fos ad AH fAfs Hrs AU TIES il (986-8, wat az, we 5)
avar tahlaa jhoothee-aa nit karai jam sir maar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Other services are false, and as punishment for them, the Messenger of Death bashes in one's head. ||1||Pause] |
frat HASta Stim 3 fHs Has Il (86-9, wet agar, He 5)
jinaa mastak leekhi-aa tay milay sangaar.
They alone join the Sangat, the Congregation, upon whose forehead such destiny is inscribed.
HATS 3CHe Sfoor afs AS UT MRIS IU (936-9, Het TBs, Hs 5) sansaar bha-ojal taari-aa har sant purakh apaar. ||1]|
They are carried across the terrifying world-ocean by the Saints of the Infinite, Primal Lord God. ||1]|
fos vee Aeg AU a sfx Bs Ho fears Il (986-10, wat az, He 5)
nit charan sayvhu saaDh kay taj lobh moh bikaar.
Serve forever at the feet of the Holy; renounce greed, emotional attachment and corruption.
AS 3Ag ort wnat sy ITA fea faders II (986-10, wet Tez, He 5)
sabh tajahu doojee aasrhee rakh aas ik nirankaar. ||2| | Abandon all other hopes, and rest your hopes in the One Formless Lord. ||2]|
fefa soft 38 Aas fag as nia niars Il (986-11, wat Tar, Hs 5)
ik bharam bhoolay saaktaa bin gur anDh anDhaar.
Some are faithless cynics, deluded by doubt; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
ufs deo" A dfeor a B ASST ST ISI (86-11, wat aBsr, He 5) Dhur hovnaa so ho-i-aa ko na maytanhaar. ||3]| Whatever is pre-ordained, comes to pass; no one can erase it. ||3]|
MH TU difae at nifsa oH nur Il (986-12, HT@t AGS, He 5)
agam roop gobind kaa anik naam apaar.
The beauty of the Lord of the Universe is profound and unfathomable; the Names of the Infinite Lord are immunerable.
US U9 3 Ho StHat faa ofa ont Cfas We IIA (936-12, Heat ACs, He 5)
Dhan Dhan tay jan naankaa jin har naamaa ur Dhaar. ||4]|1]| Blessed, blessed are those humble beings, O Nanak, who enshrine the Lord's Name in their hearts. ||4]|1]|
Hat TSS HIS U Il (986-13)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
TH BH AS SHAY Il (986-13, wat aSar, He 5) raam naam ka-o namaskaar. I humbly bow to the Name of the Lord.
WH AUS des Burg 19 FIC Il (986-13, 1st as, He 5) jaas japat hovat uDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting it, one is saved. ||1]||Pause| |
aw a fants fuefs do i (986-14, nat a@sr, v3 5) jaa kai simran miteh DhanDh. Meditating on Him in remembrance, conflicts are ended.
W & fruate gets Fa I (9386-14, wet a@z, we 5) jaa kai simran chhooteh banDh. Meditating on Him, one's bonds are untied.
W & fAHats Hoe VST Il (986-14, wat Tex, ws 5) jaa kai simran moorakh chatur. Meditating on Him, the fool becomes wise.
Ww a fiefs awed Cua Il (86-14, west ast, He 5) jaa kai simran kulah uDhar. ||1]| Meditating on Him, one's ancestors are saved. ||1||
w a finrafs 3B Bu Tg Il (986-15, wat az, v2 5) jaa kai simran bha-o dukh harai. Meditating on Him, fear and pain are taken away.
aw a fiefs mrret 2d Il (986-15, wat ast, H: 5) jaa kai simran apdaa tarai. Meditating on Him, misfortune is avoided.
w a fasts Hes UNE Il (936-15, Hast aTBaT, He 5) jaa kai simran muchat paap. Meditating on Him, sins are erased.
aw a fanefe adt Hane IQH (986-16, wet aGsr, He 5) jaa kai simran nahee santaap. ||2]| Meditating on Him, agony is ended. ||2]|
a a finrefe foe faarn Il (986-16, wet aGsr, He 5) jaa kai simran rid bigaas. Meditating on Him, the heart blossoms forth.
w a faHafe acer oH Il (86-16, wet aes, He 5) jaa kai simran kaviaa daas. Meditating on Him, Maya becomes one's slave.
aw a finetfe fafa fours Il (986-17, wat a@sr, He 5) jaa kai simran niDh niDhaan. Meditating on Him, one is blessed with the treasures of wealth.
aw a fanefs 3d foes SII (936-17, wet aGsr, He 5) jaa kai simran taray nidaan. ||3]| Meditating on Him, one crosses over in the end. ||3]||
ufs3 USq SH Tet Il (936-17, wat aSar, He 5) patit paavan naam haree. The Name of the Lord is the Purifier of sinners.
afe sas Burg at Il (936-17, wat as, He 5) kot bhagat uDhaar karee. It saves millions of devotees.
Ufs VA VA US AGS Il (986-18, wet az, ve 5) har daas daasaa deen saran. I am meek; I seek the Sanctuary of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
SSA HET HS VIS II (986-18, wat ast, vs 5)
naanak maathaa sant charan. ||4||2]| Nanak lays his forehead on the feet of the Saints. ||4]|2]|
Hat TSS HIS U Il (986-18)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
MA Hovet fs OH Il (986-19, wet ast, v2 5) aiso sahaa-ee har ko naam. This is the sort of helper the Name of the Lord is.
AUGHAS SH UTS aH AU TIS Il (986-19, wet war, Hs 5)
saaDhsangat bhaj pooran kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one's affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1]]|Pause| |
AN A
33s AG AA Fat fHOsT Il (936-19, wet aSz, He 5) boodat ka-o jaisay bayrhee milat. It is like a boat to a drowning man.
Yar €CD
ass that fos fos Il (987-1, wet aes, He 5) boojhat deepak milat tilat. It is like oil to the lamp whose flame is dying out.
HOS Marat fHos Std Il (987-1, wat as, He 5) jalat agnee milat neer. It is like water poured on the burning fire.
AA afea Hafs dts All (987-1, wet as, He 5) jaisay baarik mukheh kheer. ||1]]| It is like milk poured into the baby's mouth. ||1]|
AA Je Hfs AMT gS Il (987-1, wat aS, ve 5) jaisay ran meh sakhaa bharaat. As one's brother becomes a helper on the field of battle;
AA SY SAS HS Il (987-2, wat aes, 3 5) jaisay bhookhay bhojan maat. as one's hunger is satisfied by food;
AA fasufs aA Aw il (987-2, wet a@zr, v2 5) jaisay kirkhahi baras maygh. as the cloudburst saves the crops;
AA USS Aefe AW III (987-2, Het TBs, He 5) jaisay paalan saran say"gh. ||2|| as one is protected in the tiger's lair;||2||
aga Hf adt Adu JA Il (987-3, wet aes, He 5)
garurh mukh nahee sarap taraas.
As with the magic spell of Garuda the eagle upon one's lips, one does not fear the snake;
Hor fisifs odt ute faerr il (987-3, wat ar, 43 5) soo-aa pinjar nahee khaa-ay bilaas. as the cat cannot eat the parrot in its cage;
AA mis fase uf il (987-3, wet aGsr, He 5) jaiso aa‘do hirday maahi. as the bird cherishes her eggs in her heart;
AA BS Vat Pats Sil (987-3, wat a@sr, He 5) jaiso daano chakee daraahi. ||3]| as the grains are spared, by sticking to the central post of the mill;||3]|
a3 Gur Fa act i (937-4, wat aBar, ne 5) bahut opmaa thor kahee. Your Glory is so great; I can describe only a tiny bit of it.
Ue MaIH “aH wfarfa Sat il (987-4, ust aBsr, Hz 5) har agam agam agaaDh tuhee. O Lord, You are inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable.
Gu He FT oRIS Il (987-4, wat aes, He 5) ooch moochou baho apaar. You are lofty and high, utterly great and infinite.
fAHTS BSA Sg AT ISU (987-5, west TBs, He 5) simrat naanak taray saar. ||4]|3]| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, O Nanak, one is carried across. ||4||3]|
Hat TSS HIS U Il (987-5)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
fedt Dd Aes WH Il (987-5, Het TEST, He 5) ihee hamaarai safal kaaj. Please let my works be rewarding and fruitful.
MUS BA AS SI fests IA FIC Il (987-5, wat aSsr, He 5) apunay daas ka-o layho nivaaj. ||1]| rahaa-o. Please cherish and exalt Your slave. ||1]||Pause| |
Jdo H3d Ha Hg Il (987-6, wat ast, He 5) charan santeh maath mor. I lay my forehead on the feet of the Saints,
dfe tan UUs fof Fg Il (987-6, wat agar, He 5) nain daras paykha-o nis bhor. and with my eyes, I gaze upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, day and night.
JAS JH AS FIs Il (987-6, wat ast, ue 5) hasat hamray sant tahal. With my hands, I work for the Saints.
UTS HO US AS FIG MAUI (987-7, wat aGar, ue 5) paraan man Dhan sant bahal. ||1]| I dedicate my breath of life, my mind and wealth to the Saints. ||1]|
H3Afa HS Ho at UtfS i (987-7, wat ae, Hs 5) satsang mayray man kee pareet. My mind loves the Society of the Saints.
HZ a aAts AS SHS I (987-7, wat aes, He 5) sant gun baseh mayrai cheet. The Virtues of the Saints abide within my consciousness.
Hs witfamr Hota He I (987-8, wet ast, He 5) sant aagi-aa maneh meeth. The Will of the Saints is sweet to my mind.
Hat ane faa AS SIS II (987-8, wet az, He 5) mayraa kamal bigsai sant deeth. ||2]| Seeing the Saints, my heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||2]|
Hanfa Hat dfs fS|erA Il (987-8, wet aa, He 5) satsang mayraa ho-ay nivaas. I dwell in the Society of the Saints.
Hae at dfs ags fimrA Il (987-8, wet aa, He 5) santan kee mohi bahut pi-aas. I have such a great thirst for the Saints.
HS 8S Ae Hala HS Il (987-9, wet az, He 5) sant bachan mayray maneh mant. The Words of the Saints are the Mantras of my mind.
As une As fee FS Wil (87-9, wet aSsr, ne 5) sant parsaad mayray bikhai hant. ||3]| By the Grace of the Saints, my corruption is taken away. ||3]|
Hats Fats Sa fSare Il (987-9, wet a@zr, vs 5) mukat jugat ayhaa niDhaan. This way of liberation is my treasure.
ys efenimes Hfs Peg BS Il (987-10, wet as, ne 5) parabh da-i-aal mohi dayvhu daan. O Merciful God, please bless me with this gift.
Soa AS Ys cen ofs il (987-10, wet aGar, us 5) naanak ka-o parabh da-i-aa Dhaar. O God, shower Your Mercy upon Nanak.
a, et
Jd6 Hae a He foe HEfe NII (987-10, wet Ags, He 5)
charan santan kay mayray riday majhaar. ||4||4]| I have enshrined the feet of the Saints within my heart. ||4]|4]|
Hat TSS HIS U Il (987-11)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
AS & Halt ardt eta il (987-11, wet aez, ws 5) sabh kai sangee naahee door. He is with all; He is not far away.
TIS ATSH THT THs Al TIS il (987-11, wat aSzr, v2 5) karan karaavan haajraa hajoor. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Cause of causes, ever-present here and now. ||1]||Pause| |
Hos AG ATA OH Il (987-12, wet aBsr, He 5) Sunat jee-o jaas naam. Hearing His Name, one comes to life.
ou faor AY at faAn il (987-12, wat aa, ve 5) dukh binsay sukh kee-o bisraam. Pain is dispelled; peace and tranquility come to dwell within.
Hare fafa afs ofa gg il (987-12, west as, He 5) sagal niDh har har haray. The Lord, Har, Har, is all treasure.
ufo AS St at AS AT UA (987-13, wet aSsr, He 5) mun jan taa kee sayv karay. ||1]| The silent sages serve Him. ||1||
aw a ufs Aas AMS Il (987-13, wet ast, He 5) jaa kai ghar saglay samaahi. Everything is contained in His home.
fan 3 fase afe ofa i (987-13, wet ast, He 5) jis tay birthaa ko-ay naahi. No one is turned away empty-handed.
ba AZ as ufsus il (987-13, wet a@sr, us 5) jee-a jantar karay partipaal. He cherishes all beings and creatures.
Het Ae AST fxg iil (987-14, wat a@ar, ny 5) Sadaa sadaa sayvhu kirpaal. ||2|| Forever and ever, serve the Merciful Lord. ||2||
Het Gen AT a eats Il (987-14, wet aGar, H2 5) sadaa Dharam jaa kai deebaan. Righteous justice is dispensed in His Court forever.
SHISH Sot fas ATE il (987-14, wet aBsr, He 5) baymuhtaaj nahee kichh kaan. He is carefree, and owes allegiance to no one.
AS fxs Adar niu mrfy Il (9387-15, wet aBar, He 5) sabh kichh karnaa aapan aap. He Himself, by Himself, does everything.
THO AT 3 TAS ATHY SI (937-15, wet aSZ, He 5) ray man mayray too taa ka-o jaap. ||3]| O my mind, meditate on Him. |[3]|
AUHats XB IG afsars Il (987-15, wat az, He 5) saaDhsangat ka-o ha-o balihaar. I am a Sacrifice to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
wy fife de Garg Il (987-16, wet aGsr, H2 5) jaas mil hovai uDhaar. Joining them, I am saved.
OH Afal Ho Sats TS Il (987-16, wet as, He 5) naam sang man taneh raat. My mind and body are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
sot aS ufs adt ats usiull (987-16, wat aes, we 5)
naanak ka-o parabh karee daat. ||4||5|| God has blessed Nanak with this gift. ||4]|5]|
Hat TSS HIG U FUE (987-17) maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5 dupday Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:
qe Afsare YATE Il (987-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Uf ANTE at ATS Il (987-18, wt as, He 5) har samrath kee sarnaa. I seek the Sanctuary of the all-powerful Lord.
Me fis ug fh Hat ys Sa AIS AIS NU! TIE Il (987-18, wet aSsr, us 5) jee-o pind Dhan raas mayree parabh ayk kaaran karnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My soul, body, wealth and capital belong to the One God, the Cause of causes. ||1]|Pause] |
fants faufs wet AY usb Ales a HB Il (987-19, wrat aCar, Hs 5)
simar simar sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai jeevnai kaa mool.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, I have found everlasting peace. He is the source of life.
ofe sfoor Avas Set HAH MAES UU (987-19, wet aes, ws 5) rav rahi-aa sarbat thaa-ee sookhmo asthool. ||1]|| He is all-pervading, permeating all places; He is in subtle essence and manifest form.
[21
tar ece ne W® faars sta Afs ots aor fofs we il (Oss-1, wet aSsr, us 5)
aal jaal bikaar taj sabh har gunaa nit gaa-o. Abandon all your entanglements and corruption; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
ad Als Soa VS Hid ST mua aS MQUAUEI (988-1, wat azar, He 5)
kar jorh naanak daan maa‘gai dayh apnaa naa-o. ||2||1||6]|
With palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing; please bless me with Your Name. ||2]|1||6]|
Hat TSS HIS U Il (988-2)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
Ys AHIE SS MUTT Il (988-2, wat aSzr, He 5) parabh samrath dayv apaar. God is all-powerful, divine and infinite.
ae We vies 3d fas viz ot urs AN TIE I (988-2, wat aEsr, v2 5) ka-un jaanai chalit tayray kichh ant naahee paar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Who knows Your wondrous plays? You have no end or limitation. ||1]|Pause] |
fea fuafs afu Garret wis sfo aTSTS Il (988-3, wat az, ve 5) ik khineh thaap uthaapadaa gharh bhann karnaihaar. In an instant, You establish and disestablish; You create and destroy, O Creator Lord.
As ale Curgnar ug Ug Uf BSTs UI (988-3, wet Tes, He 5) jayt keen upaarjanaa parabh daan day-ay daataar. ||1]| As many beings as You created, God, so many You bless with Your blessings. ||1]|
dfs Hate wes aA Sot ys Cy ma HAS Il (988-4, wat TSz, He 5) har saran aa-i-o daas tayraa parabh ooch agam muraar. I have come to Your Sanctuary, Lord; I am Your slave, O Inaccessible Lord God.
ate J 3Cn@ feu 3 AG Soa Ae aS s NIN (oss-4, wet Sar, He 5)
kadh layho bha-ojal bikham tay jan naanak sad balihaar. ||2||2||7]||
Lift me up and pull me out of the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean; servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2]|2]|7]|
Hat TSS HIG U Il (988-5)
maalee ga-urhaa mehlaa 5. Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:
Hfs sf aff gd dures Il (988-5, wet aes, He 5) man tan bas rahay gopaal. The Lord of the World abides in my mind and body.
ae aug safs Zoo Ae AST furs Al TTS I (88-6, wat aSzr, vs 5)
deen baa‘Dhav bhagat vachhal sadaa sadaa kirpaal. ||1]| rahaa-o. Friend of the meek, Lover of His devotees, forever and ever merciful. ||1]||Pause| |
unfe nis ufo so ys frat ardt afe I (oss-6, wat a@z, we 5)
aad antay maDh toohai parabh binaa naahee ko-ay.
In the beginning, in the end and in the middle, You alone exist, God; there is none other than You.
ufe afer Aas Asm Sa AMT ALE UA (88-7, wrat TCs, Hs 5) poor rahi-aa sagal mandal ayk su-aamee so-ay. ||1||
He is totally permeating and pervading all worlds; He is the One and only Lord and Master. ||1]]|
asta dfs AA 63 UdAS JAlo dls TS WS I (988-7, wet a=, vs 5)
karan har jas naytar darsan rasan har gun gaa-o.
With my ears I hear God's Praises, and with my eyes I behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; with my tongue I sing the Lord's Glorious Praises.
feats AWE Ae Skog ST wUSNT SE [NBICWENIVI (988-8, wet ACs, v3 5)
balihaar jaa-ay sadaa naanak dayh apnaa naa-o. ||2||3||8]|6||14|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You; please, bless me with Your Name. [12] 13] 18] 16] [141]
Hal ast gat SIS SHES At at (s8-9) maalee ga-urhaa banee bhagat naamdayv jee kee Maalee Gauraa, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsas ure II (988-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fs dfs © TH 8B IH Il (988-10, wat aa, sas ones HH Dhan Dhan o raam bayn baajai. Blessed, blessed is that flute which the Lord plays.
HOd HOS Ufs Mods AA NA TIC Il (988-10, wet aGar, sas ane Th) maDhur maDhur Dhun anhat gaajai. ||1]| rahaa-o. The sweet, sweet unstruck sound current sings forth. ||1]||Pause] |
fs ufe Hur dest Il (988-10, wat a@sr, sas anes Ah Dhan Dhan mayghaa romaavalee. Blessed, blessed is the wool of the sheep;
fe ufs fare Se atest ai coss-11, wat aa, sas ones FH) Dhan Dhan krisan odhai kaa™blee. || 1]| blessed, blessed is the blanket worn by Krishna. ||1]|
ufs ufs 3 HST Seat Il (88-11, wet aGar, sas anes Ft) Dhan Dhan too maataa dayvkee. Blessed, blessed are you, O mother Dayvakee;
fro fas THE aeorust IQ (88-11, wet as, sas oHee Ah
jih garih rama-ee-aa kavalaapatee. ||2]| into your home the Lord was born. ||2||
uf ufs aa us faeraar |i (988-12, wet aGar, sas see FH) Dhan Dhan ban khand bindraabanaa. Blessed, blessed are the forests of Brindaaban;
Ad YS At orafeor Sil (Oss-12, wat aGar, sas one A)
jah khaylai saree naaraa-inaa. ||3]| the Supreme Lord plays there. ||3]|
a SAS TUS Va Il (988-12, wat aa, sas ones Hh bayn bajaavai goDhan charadi. He plays the flute, and herds the cows;
OH aT ATH mee Ad SIA (88-13, wet aga, sas oS Ah naamay kaa su-aamee aanad karai. ||4]|1]| Naam Dayv's Lord and Master plays happily. ||4||1]|
Ae wy Hug J Ug aA ASS sowtS nai TIS il (oss-13, wat aes, sas one HH) mayro baap maaDha-o too Dhan kaysou saa“vlee-o beethulaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my Father, Lord of wealth, blessed are You, long-haired, dark-skinned, my darling. ||1]|Pause] |
ad Us VA FAS 3 oS TA TAS A yrs Cordas I (988-14, wat aSar, sas one Fh
kar Dharay chakar baikunth tay aa-ay gaj hastee kay paraan uDhaaree-alay.
You hold the steel chakra in Your hand; You came down from Heaven, and saved the life of the elephant.
TaAAS at Ast Tust nas 3 Cashas Al (988-14, wat ae, sas ones Ah duhsaasan kee sabhaa daropatee ambar layt ubaaree-alay. ||1]||
In the court of Duhsaasan, You saved the honor of Dropati, when her clothes were being removed. ||1]|
dsH ote niofenr st uss ABA BSS I (988-15, wet aa, sas see wh gotam naar ahli-aa taaree paavan kaytak taaree-alay.
You saved Ahliyaa, the wife of Gautam; how many have You purified and carried across?
MAT MOH wits SHES SE Adaafs wrehxs MQM (988-15, wat aGst, sas one Th) aisaa aDham ajaat naamday-o ta-o sarnaagat aa-ee-alay. ||2||2|| Such a lowly outcaste as Naam Dayv has come seeking Your Sanctuary. ||2||2||
AS we TH FS IM FS Il (988-16, wat aa, sas ones wh) sabhai ghat raam bolai raamaa bolai. Within all hearts, the Lord speaks, the Lord speaks.
~
on fast & FS F NVI TICS I Co88-16, wat aes, sas see wh) raam binaa ko bolai ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Who else speaks, other than the Lord? ||1]||Pause| |
ae Het ang det gH FT aT aa ST Il (988-17, wat aa, sas one FH)
aykal maatee kunjar cheetee bhaajan hai’ baho naanaa ray.
Out of the same clay, the elephant, the ant, and the many sorts of species are formed.
MAGSd HaH ate usa whe whe TH ANAT TS NU (988-17, wet ABs, sas SH Fh)
asthaavar jangam keet patangam ghat ghat raam samaanaa ray. ||1|| In stationary life forms, moving beings, worms, moths and within each and every heart, the Lord is contained. ||1]||
ae fest gy most mes SHI AS MATT Il (988-18, wat a@ar, sas one Fh) aykal chintaa raakh anantaa a-or tajahu sabh aasaa ray. Remember the One, Infinite Lord; abandon all other hopes.
yse ont ge faganr & SAT & SAT IQ (988-19, wat aa, sas ones Fh paranvai naamaa bha-ay nihkaamaa ko thaakur ko daasaa ray. ||2]|3]|
Naam Dayv prays, I have become dispassionate and detached; who is the Lord and Master, and who is the slave? ||2]|3]|
Yar cere
THT HT HIS 4 Ug 1 BUS (989-1) raag maaroo mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday Raag Maaroo, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe ATS on aes usy fos faves urs Has mast AS aT YATE I (989-2) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
HSE Il (989-4) salok. Shalok:
WHo 38 Bao at ae ga Ae Ole Il (989-4, wg, He Saajan tayray charan kee ho-ay rahaa sad Dhoor. O my Friend, I shall forever remain the dust of Your feet.
aod Aste sors UU Aer Tafa All (989-4, weg, we 1) naanak saran tuhaaree-aa paykha-o sadaa hajoor. ||1|| Nanak seeks Your protection, and beholds You ever-present, here and now. ||1]|
Had Il (989-5)
sabad. Shabad:
fusg TSt Hest SH YAH at Sf Il (989-5, wg, He 1)
pichhahu raatee sad-rhaa naam khasam kaa layhi.
Those who receive the call in the last hours of the night, chant the Name of their Lord and Master.
an eg Aated feAfe ga uts il (989-5, wg, ws 1) khaymay chhatar saraa-ichay disan rath peerhay. Tents, canopies, pavilions and carriages are prepared and made ready for them.
frat sat any fourfeur faq a8 Afe fH WA (89-5, wg, He 1) jinee tayraa naam Dhi-aa-i-aa tin ka-o sad milay. ||1]|| You send out the call, Lord, to those who meditate on Your Name. ||1]|
Ta H AGHMS Trg Il (989-6, wg, we 1) baabaa mai karamheen koorhi-aar. Father, I am unfortunate, a fraud.
oH o ufent sa nie sath ger HE AT UA TIS Il (989-6, weg, He naam na paa-i-aa tayraa anDhaa bharam bhoolaa man mayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have not found Your Name; my mind is blind and deluded by doubt. ||1]|Pause| |
He ats wu uses usta fer wife i (89-7, wg, v2 1)
saad keetay dukh parfurhay poorab likhay maa-ay.
I have enjoyed the tastes, and now my pains have come to fruition; such is my pre- ordained destiny, O my mother.
AY SS eu mars Ta of feats I 89-7, wg, we 1) sukh thorhay dukh aglay dookhay dookh vihaa-ay. ||2]| Now my joys are few, and my pains are many. In utter agony, I pass my life. ||2||
feefaur ar foor Ses firfeor a for AB Il (989-8, wg, He 1)
vichhurhi-aa kaa ki-aa veechhurhai mili-aa kaa ki-aa mayl.
What separation could be worse than separation from the Lord? For those who are united with Him, what other union can there be?
Afos A Aad fats afs Shimer de SI (989-8, wg, Hs 1) saahib so salaahee-ai jin kar daykhi-aa khayl. ||3]| Praise the Lord and Master, who, having created this play, beholds it. ||3]|
Anat Hoes fefs sfs ats Sar |i (989-9, wg, ue 1) sanjogee maylaavarhaa in tan keetay bhog. By good destiny, this union comes about; this body enjoys its pleasures.
ferat fife fees soa st HAA ISA (89-9, mg, He 1D
vijogee mil vichhurhay naanak bhee sanjog. ||4||1]|
Those who have lost their destiny, suffer separation from this union. O Nanak, they may still be united once again! ||4||1]|
HTg HIG 4 Il (989-10) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
ffs Hrs fust fits oorfemr I (89-10, wg, Hs 1)
mil maat pitaa pind kamaa-i-aa. The union of the mother and father brings the body into being.
fafs aas By ferfemr 1 (89-10, wg, He 1) tin kartai laykh likhaa-i-aa. The Creator inscribes upon it the inscription of its destiny.
fou ots afs efsnret i (89-11, og, He 1) likh daat jot vadi-aa-ee. According to this inscription, gifts, light and glorious greatness are received.
ffs urfemr Aafs aevet AI (989-11, wg, Hs 1D mil maa-i-aa surat gavaa-ee. ||1]|| Joining with Maya, the spiritual consciousness is lost. ||1]|
Hod Ho AT ATALT HST Il (989-11, Hg, He 1) moorakh man kaahay karseh maanaa. O foolish mind, why are you so proud?
fs THe" WAH SST UU! TIS Il (989-12, wg, us 1) uth chalnaa khasmai bhaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall have to arise and depart when it pleases your Lord and Master. ||1]||Pause| |
3ff ATE AOA AY Tet Il (989-12, wg, He 1) taj saad sahj sukh ho-ee. Abandon the tastes of the world, and find intuitive peace.
We BSE Id B AT Il (989-12, wg, we 1) ghar chhadnay rahai na ko-ee. All must abandon their worldly homes; no one remains here forever.
fas ut fas ufe veh II (989-13, wg, He 1D kichh khaajai kichh Dhar jaa-ee-ai. Eat some, and save the rest,
A aofs vob wire 1211 (989-13, wg, He 1) jay baahurh dunee-aa aa-ee-ai. ||2|| if you are destined to return to the world again. ||2||
An afenit us Jere Il (989-13, wg, Hs 1) Saj kaa-i-aa pat hadhaa-ay. He adorns his body and ress in silk robes.
SoHtefA ATs VHS Il (989-14, wg, ve 1) furmaa-is bahut chalaa-ay. He issues all sorts of commands.
afs AA HUTS AS il (989-14, wg, He 1) kar sayj sukhaalee sovai. Preparing his comfortable bed, he sleeps.
vat uget ard FS USI (989-14, wg, Hs 1)
hathee pa-udee kaahay rovai. ||3]||
When he falls into the hands of the Messenger of Death, what good does it do to cry out? ||3]|
we wHeetat STet I (989-14, wg, Hs 1) ghar ghummanvaanee bhaa-ee. Household affairs are whirlpools of entanglements, O Siblings of Destiny.
Yar eto
uTYy UT SIE B ASH Il (990-1, wg, Hs 1) paap pathar taran na jaa-ee. Sin is a stone which does not float.
38 aa HIG BaTS Il (990-1, og, Hs 1) bha-o bayrhaa jee-o charhaa-oo. So let the Fear of God be the boat to carry your soul across.
TT GSA SS AT ISI (990-1, wg, Hs 1) kaho naanak dayvai kaahoo. ||4]|2]| Says Nanak, rare are those who are blessed with this Boat. ||4]|2]|
HTT HIG A WT 4 Il (990-2) maaroo mehlaa 1 ghar 1. Maaroo, First Mehl, First House:
adel ade Ho HAsal gat sor ole BY US Il (990-2, wg, we 1)
karnee kaagad man masvaanee buraa bhalaa du-ay laykh pa-ay.
Actions are the paper, and the mind is the ink; good and bad are both recorded upon it.
fa@ faG fas vere 88 san 38 Te ost nF TF NA (990-2, og, He 1)
ji-o ji-o kirat chalaa-ay ti-o chalee-ai ta-o gun naahee ant haray. ||1||
As their past actions drive them, so are mortals driven. There is no end to Your Glorious Virtues, Lord. ||1||
fas 33th at odt aefanr Il (990-3, wg, H8 1) chit chaytas kee nahee baavri-aa. Why do you not keep Him in your consciousness, you mad man?
dfs fands 33 TE afer nail TIS il (990-3, wg, we 1) har bisrat tayray gun gali-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Forgetting the Lord, your own virtues shall rot away. ||1]|Pause| |
Wet sf We feg Jur ASt west edt SS i (990-4, og, we Y
jaalee rain jaal din hoo-aa jaytee gharhee faahee taytee.
The night is a net, and the day is a net; there are as many traps as there are moments.
afm off sa gato fos safes seth HS AES Tat iil (990-4, wg, we
ras ras chog chugeh nit faaseh chhootas moorhay kavan gunee. ||2]|
With relish and delight, you continually bite at the bait; you are trapped, you fool - how will you ever escape? ||2||
afin nirge Ho fefs So us nafs fsa afar gat I (990-5, og, He 1) kaa-i-aa aaran man vich lohaa panch agan tit laag rahee. The body is a furnace, and the mind is the iron within it; the five fires are heating it.
afes uu us SA Gufs He afer Hat FFs set SI (990-6, wg, He 1)
ko-ilay paap parhay tis oopar man jali-aa san"ee chint bha-ee. ||3]|
Sin is the charcoal placed upon it, which burns the mind; the tongs are anxiety and worry. ||3]|
sfeur Hog ave fefs de A TT HS FST Ii (990-6, wg, He 1) bha-i-aa manoor kanchan fir hovai jay gur milai tinayhaa. What was turned to slag is again transformed into gold, if one meets with the Guru.
ea on nifys Gy 22 36 aoa feA|fA ST Iii (990-7, wg, He 1)
ayk naam amrit oh dayvai ta-o naanak taristas dayhaa. ||4]|3]|
He blesses the mortal with the Ambrosial Name of the One Lord, and then, O Nanak, the body is held steady. ||4||3]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (990-8) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
fans nets aAfA fesHe AS UeHS ATH F Il (990-8, wg, He 1) bimal majhaar basas nirmal jal padman jaaval ray. In the pure, immaculate waters, both the lotus and the slimy scum are found.
uenfs Wes HS SA Hafs Afar Su Sdt F Al (990-8, wg, us 1)
padman jaaval jal ras sangat sang dokh nahee ray. ||1]||
The lotus flower is with the scum and the water, but it remains untouched by any pollution. ||1]|
wed 5 aats o AIA g Il (990-9, wg, He 1) daadar too kabeh na jaanas ray. You frog, you will never understand.
suff fra sath foo AS nifys o wufA F NA TIE Il (990-9, wg, He 1)
bhakhas sibaal basas nirmal jal amrit na lakhas ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. You eat the dirt, while you dwell in the immaculate waters. You know nothing of the ambrosial nectar there. ||1||Pause]|
aH AS fos 3 SAS MSG AT Va TS F Il (990-10, wg, ve 1)
bas jal nit na vasat alee-al mayr chachaa gun ray.
You dwell continually in the water; the bumble bee does not dwell there, but it is intoxicated with its fragrance from afar.
Je AHS Tad feeAtA vias arate F iil (990-10, wg, we 1) chand kumudanee Dhoorahu nivsas anbha-o kaaran ray. ||2| | Intuitively sensing the moon in the distance, the lotus bows its head. ||2]|
nifys ds ef ug HatA J as TST FT Il (990-11, og, we 1)
amrit khand dooDh maDh sanchas too ban chaatur ray.
The realms of nectar are irrigated with milk and honey; you think you are clever to live in the water.
nus nity 3 tag 3 estn furs uifs fas F WS (90-12, wg, we Y apnaa aap too kabahu na chhodas pisan pareet ji-o ray. ||3]| You can never escape your own inner tendencies, like the love of the flea for blood.
[I3I|
Ufss Hfat zAfs Ao HIE MITE ATA AS Il (990-12, wg, He 1)
pandit sang vaseh jan moorakh aagam saas sunay.
The fool may live with the Pandit, the religious scholar, and listen to the Vedas and the Shaastras.
Mus nity 3 tag 3 estA Awe ule fas F sil (990-13, wg, Hs 1) apnaa aap too kabahu na chhodas su-aan poochh jji-o ray. ||4||
You can never escape your own inner tendencies, like the crooked tail of the dog. [141]
fefa unist oft o araty fea ofa afs saet F il (990-13, wg, He 1)
ik paakhandee naam na raacheh ik har har charnee ray.
Some are hypocrites; they do not merge with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Some are absorbed in the Feet of the Lord, Har, Har.
usta foto ureth sod rat oH ATU FT NUNIT (90-14, Hg, He 1)
poorab likhi-aa paavas naanak rasnaa naam jap ray. ||5||4||
The mortals obtain what they are predestined to receive; O Nanak, with your tongue, chant the Naam. ||5||4]|
HTS HIG 1 Il (990-15) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl,
HS Il (990-15)
salok. Shalok:
ufsz usls mre dfs ofa saat He Ba Il (990-15, wg, He 1) patit puneet asa‘kh hohi har charnee man laag. Countless sinners are sanctified, attaching their minds to the Feet of the Lord.
MOIS Sta SH US SSA fAA HASlA Sa NAM (990-15, wg, Hs 1)
athsath tirath naam parabh naanak jis mastak bhaag. ||1] |
The merits of the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage are found in God's Name, O Nanak, when such destiny is inscribed upon one's forehead. ||1]|
Had Il (990-16)
sabad. Shabad:
Ret Hat areata ast il (990-16, wg, He 1) sakhee sahaylee garab gahaylee. O friends and companions, so puffed up with pride,
Hfe Ag at fea as AIS IAM (990-16, wg, He 1) sun sah kee ik baat suhaylee. ||1]| listen to this one joyous story of your Husband Lord. ||1]|
AH dee AT fa wma Het Il (990-17, wg, He 1) jo mai baydan saa kis aakhaa maa-ee. Who can I tell about my pain, O my mother?
ofa fag FIG o Td AA er Het NA TI'S Ml (990-17, wg, Hs 1)
har bin jee-o na rahai kaisay raakhaa maa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Lord, my soul cannot survive; how can I comfort it, O my mother? ||1]|Pause] |
JG toate udt Feet | (990-17, wg, He 1) ha-o dohaagan kharee ranjaanee. I am a dejected, discarded bride, totally miserable.
Tien A AS US UsSTt QM (990-18, wg, He 1) ga-i-aa so joban Dhan pachhutaanee. ||2|| I have lost my youth; I regret and repent. ||2]|
3 wor mfog ffs As II (990-18, wg, He 1) too daanaa saahib sir mayraa. You are my wise Lord and Master, above my head.
farHfs adt AG Fer ST USI (990-18, wg, He 1) khijmat karee jan bandaa tayraa. ||3]| I serve You as Your humble slave. ||3]||
sefs area visa Sat i (990-19, wg, us 1) bhanat naanak andaysaa ayhee. Nanak humbly prays, this is my only concern:
fag tsHe aA se ASTt usiull (90-19, wg, Hs 1) bin darsan kaisay rava-o sanayhee. ||4||5|| without the Blessed Vision of my Beloved, how can I enjoy Him? ||4]|5||
Yar vxtq
HT HIG 4 Il (991-1) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
HS udtet wre der Ha ar Asa Il (991-1, wg, He 1) mul khareedee laalaa golaa mayraa naa-o sabhaagaa. I am Your slave, Your bonded servant, and so I am called fortunate.
ad at asat ote fara fag ofenr fsz Ber All (991-1, wg, wes 1
gur kee bachnee haat bikaanaa jit laa-i-aa tit laagaa. ||1||
I sold myself at Your store in exchange for the Guru's Word; whatever You link me to, to that I am linked. ||1]|
3o OS fant gst Il (991-2, wg, He 1)
tayray laalay ki-aa chaturaa-ee. What cleverness can Your servant try with You?
Aga aT JAH & Ade AT UU FITS il (991-2, wg, we 1) saahib kaa hukam na karnaa jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. O my Lord and Master, I cannot carry out the Hukam of Your Command. ||1||Pause| |
Ht wrest fu wer Ha IG ares at AEM It (991-3, wg, He 1) maa laalee pi-o laalaa mayraa ha-o laalay kaa jaa-i-aa. My mother is Your slave, and my father is Your slave; I am the child of Your slaves.
wat od oer ae safs as Sat afer I (991-3, wg, He 1)
laalee naachai laalaa gaavai bhagat kara-o tayree raa-i-aa. ||2||
My slave mother dances, and my slave father sings; I practice devotional worship to You, O my Sovereign Lord. ||2]||
ulmifa 3 urat nrat Het urs 3 ulAS ATS I (991-4, og, Hs
pee-ah ta paanee aanee meeraa khaahi ta peesan jaa-o.
If You wish to drink, then I shall get water for You; if You wish to eat, I shall grind the corn for You.
ud edt Us HBS" AUS gat Sar ar SI (991-4, wg, we 1) pakhaa fayree pair malovaa japat rahaa tayraa naa-o. ||3]| I wave the fan over You, and wash Your feet, and continue to chant Your Name. ||3]|
BE Tat og wer sufats so sfsmret i (91-5, wg, ve 1)
loon haraamee naanak laalaa bakhsihi tuDh vadi-aa-ee.
I have been untrue to myself, but Nanak is Your slave; please forgive him, by Your glorious greatness.
mite qarfe efenmufs ast sy fee Hats 3 uret ISIE (991-5, wg, He 1)
aad jugaad da-i-aapat daataa tuDh vin mukat na paa-ee. ||4]|6] |
Since the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, You have been the merciful and generous Lord. Without You, liberation cannot be attained. ||4||6]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (991-6) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
TE i FSIS A AT FSS Il (991-6, wg, Hz 1) ko-ee aakhai bhootnaa ko kahai baytaalaa. Some call him a ghost; some say that he is a demon.
aet ning nirent area Sar AI (991-7, wg, HB 1) ko-ee aakhai aadmee naanak vaychaaraa. ||1] | Some call him a mere mortal; O, poor Nanak! ||1||
Stent fester ATT aT STSq AST AT Il (991-7, wg, He 1) bha-i-aa divaanaa saah kaa naanak ba-uraanaa. Crazy Nanak has gone insane, after his Lord, the King.
JG dfs fas neg & AST UU TIE Il (991-8, wg, us ha-o har bin avar na jaanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I know of none other than the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
3 daar webt ATs Seat OE Il (991-8, wg, He 1) ta-o dayvaanaa jaanee-ai jaa bhai dayvaanaa ho-ay. He alone is known to be insane, when he goes insane with the Fear of God.
Sat Aa AIT SA nisg F WE AS lM (991-8, og, He 1) aykee saahib baahraa doojaa avar na jaanai ko-ay. ||2]| He recognizes none other than the One Lord and Master. ||2| |
3@ fara webt AT Sar arg SHE II (991-9, wg, He 1) ta-o dayvaanaa jaanee-ai jaa aykaa kaar kamaa-ay. He alone is known to be insane, if he works for the One Lord.
JAH USS YAH oT vat nies fimreu ate SI (991-9, wg, He 1) hukam pachhaanai khasam kaa doojee avar si-aanap kaa-ay. ||3] |
Recognizing the Hukam, the Command of his Lord and Master, what other cleverness is there? ||3]|
3 tear reba a rfos og fimrg il (991-10, wg, He 1) ta-o dayvaanaa jaanee-ai jaa saahib Dharay pi-aar. He alone is known to be insane, when he falls in love with his Lord and Master.
He We nity a neg 36" AAT IBID (91-11, wg, He 1) mandaa jaanai aap ka-o avar bhalaa sansaar. ||4||7]|| He sees himself as bad, and all the rest of the world as good. ||4||7]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (991-11) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
feg ug Ava sfoor saufs Il (991-11, 4g, He 1) in Dhan sarab rahi-aa bharpoor. This wealth is all-pervading, permeating all.
HoH fests fa wrefa Efe WAM (991-12, og, He 1) manmukh fireh se jaaneh door. ||1]| The self-willed manmukh wanders around, thinking that it is far away. ||1]|
Hug Zug on fee INS Il (991-12, og, He 1) so Dhan vakhar naam ridai hamaarai. That commodity, the wealth of the Naam, is within my heart.
fan 3 tfa fA SASS UU TIS i 91-12, wg, we 1) jis too deh tisai nistaarai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Whoever You bless with it, is emancipated. ||1]||Pause| |
6 feg ug HS 3 SAA B ATE I 991-13, wg, He 1) na ih Dhan jalai na taskar lai jaa-ay. This wealth does not burn; it cannot be stolen by a thief.
3 feg ug 38 3 fen Us aS FHS ARTE NII 91-13, wg, He 1)
na ih Dhan doobai na is Dhan ka-o milai sajaa-ay. ||2| | This wealth does not drown, and its owner is never punished. ||2||
fem us at tug Sfanret i (991-14, wg, He 1) is Dhan kee daykhhu vadi-aa-ee. Gaze upon the glorious greatness of this wealth,
Hon HS motes wet ISI (991-14, wg, He 1) sehjay maatay an-din jaa-ee. ||3]| and your nights and days will pass, imbued with celestial peace. ||3]||
fea aS nigu Hog od Bet Il (991-14, wg, He 1) ik baat anoop sunhu nar bhaa-ee. Listen to this incomparably beautiful story, O my brothers, O Siblings of Destiny.
fen ua faa aug fads uan afs uret isi (991-15, wg, He 1D is Dhan bin kahhu kinai param gat paa-ee. ||4|| Tell me, without this wealth, who has ever obtained the supreme status? ||4]|
als FS via at AA ASS Il (991-15, wg, we 1) bhanat naanak akath kee kathaa sunaa-ay. Nanak humbly prays, I proclaim the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
Afsag fixe 3 fey ag wes UIT (991-16, we, Hs 1) satgur milai ta ih Dhan paa-ay. ||5||8]| If one meets the True Guru, then this wealth is obtained. ||5]||8]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (991-16) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ha Ag Aff & AH Ag Uf & gals afe HIS A ASAT ale Il (991-16, wg, He 1)
soor sar sos lai som sar pokh lai jugat kar marat so san-banDh keejai.
Heat up the sun energy of the right nostril, and cool down the moon energy of the left nostril; practicing this breath-control, bring them into perfect balance.
He at sus fae nafs ne aba CS ag dH og AO SA NA (991-17, og, He 1)
meen kee chapal si-o jugat man raakhee-ai udai nah hans nah kanDh chheejai. ||1]| In this way, the fickle fish of the mind will be held steady; the swan-soul shall not fly away, and the body-wall will not crumble. ||1||
us afes Saf FH Il (o1-18, wy, 42 1) moorhay kaa-ichay bharam bhulaa. You fool, why are you deluded by doubt?
od door usHSe Haat uA TIS il (991-18, wg, we 1) nah cheeni-aa parmaanand bairaagee. ||1|| rahaa-o. You do not remember the detached Lord of supreme bliss. ||1||Pause||
wind ag we & yn ag ute 8 ots sia afs 3B mfUG ut It (991-18, wg, He 1) ajar gahu jaar lai amar gahu maar lai bharaat taj chhod ta-o api-o peejai.
Seize and burn the unbearable; seize and kill the imperishable; leave behind your doubts, and then, you shall drink in the Nectar.
He at sus fA Hafs Ho abt CS og TA Bd AO AIA II (991-19, rg, He 1)
meen kee chapal si-o jugat man raakhee-ai udai nah hans nah kanDh chheejai. ||2]| In this way, the fickle fish of the mind will be held steady; the swan-soul shall not fly away, and the body-wall shall not crumble. ||2]|
Yat cto
sefs Sq AS Je A Ufa HS Ho uEs FAG nifys UA II (992-1, wg, Hs 1)
bhanat naanak jano ravai jay har mano man pavan si-o amrit peejai.
Nanak humbly prays, if the Lord's humble servant dwells upon Him, in his mind of minds, with his every breath, then he drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
He at sus fae vals He aby CS og JA Bd AO AIA SICH (992-2, we, He 1)
meen kee chapal si-o jugat man raakhee-ai udai nah hans nah kanDh chheejai. [31191
In this way, the fickle fish of the mind will be held steady; the swan-soul shall not fly away, and the body-wall shall not crumble. ||3]||9]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (992-3) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Hfeor net o He HoT AG BIdt H HZ Il (992-3, wg, ne 1)
maa-i-aa mu-ee na man mu-aa sar lahree mai mat.
Maya is not conquered, and the mind is not subdued; the waves of desire in the world-ocean are intoxicating wine.
Sfse ve fafa sfs fea Arar zug fas il (992-3, wg, He 1) bohith jal sir tar tikai saachaa vakhar jit. The boat crosses over the water, carrying the true merchandise.
Hed HS Hfs He HEAT Afs o Bal AZ Il (992-4, wg, uz 1) maanak man meh man maarsee sach na laagai kat. The jewel within the mind subdues the mind; attached to the Truth, it is not broken.
om sufs fea gat 3 Uefes FT NA (992-4, wg, He 1)
raajaa takhat tikai gunee bhai panchaa-in rat. ||1]|
The king is seated upon the throne, imbued with the Fear of God and the five qualities. ||1]|
rer Ae Ato Efe 6 Se Il (992-5, wg, He 1) baabaa saachaa saahib door na daykh. O Baba, do not see your True Lord and Master as being far away.
Hea vfs Aadizor fafe fafe Ara Sy uA TIC It (992-5, wg, ne 1)
sarab jot jagjeevanaa sir sir saachaa laykh. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He is the Light of all, the Life of the world; The True Lord writes His Inscription on each and every head. ||1||Pause]|
gout fare faut wat Hag fee su surct Il (992-6, wg, ne 1)
barahmaa bisan rikhee munee sankar ind tapai bhaykhaaree.
Brahma and Vishnu, the Rishis and the silent sages, Shiva and Indra, penitents and beggars
HS JaH Ad efs AS nrat Hata mera I (992-6, wg, He 1)
maanai hukam sohai dar saachai aakee mareh afaaree.
- whoever obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command, looks beautiful in the Court of the True Lord, while the stubborn rebels die.
HOH AU Ast Afeorat afs us Sarat il (992-7, wg, He 1)
jangam joDh jatee sani-aasee gur poorai veechaaree.
The wandering beggars, warriors, celibates and Sannyaasee hermits - through the Perfect Guru, consider this:
fag Ag eB aug 6 urefA AST Adal Aref MQ (992-7, wg, ue 1)
bin sayvaa fal kabahu na paavas sayvaa karnee saaree. ||2||
without selfless service, no one ever receives the fruits of their rewards. Serving the Lord is the most excellent action. ||2| |
foufenr ug foafoor ag feufeor J HE Il (992-8, og, He 1)
niDhni-aa Dhan niguri-aa gur nimaaniaa too maan.
You are the wealth of the poor, the Guru of the guru-less, the honor of the dishonored.
ngs Wed Te uatsur fesfenr 3 IES il (992-8, wg, Hs 1)
anDhulai maanak gur pakrhi-aa nitaani-aa too taan.
I am blind; I have grasped hold of the jewel, the Guru. You are the strength of the weak.
oH Aur odt Wenn TSH AY UES Il (992-9, wg, Hs 1)
hom japaa nahee jaani-aa gurmatee saach pachhaan.
He is not known through burnt offerings and ritual chanting; the True Lord is known through the Guru's Teachings.
om fas ardt ef Set Far wrSE AE MSI (992-9, wg, He 1)
naam binaa naahee dar dho-ee jhoothaa aavan jaan. ||3]||
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one finds shelter in the Court of the Lord; the false come and go in reincarnation. ||3]|
Ast oH Aardbat AS S feufs dE ii (992-10, wg, we 1) saachaa naam salaahee-ai saachay tay taripat ho-ay. So praise the True Name, and through the True Name, you will find satisfaction.
famits asfs Ho HbH safe o Her aE I (992-10, wg, He 1)
gi-aan ratan man maajee-ai bahurh na mailaa ho-ay.
When the mind is cleaned with the jewel of spiritual wisdom, it does not become dirty again.
ma od Asa Hfs eA sa wa fue 3 SE II (992-11, wg, He 1) jab lag saahib man vasai tab lag bighan na ho-ay. As long as the Lord and Master dwells in the mind, no obstacles are encountered.
soe fag & sci ufe sfe Arar AE ISIAON (992-11, #3, He 1D naanak sir day chhutee-ai man tan saachaa so-ay. ||4||10]|
O Nanak, giving one's head, one is emancipated, and the mind and body become true. | 4] |10]|
Hg HIG 4% Il (992-12) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
nat nafs on foarfes a a Hw 3 Tt Il (992-12, wg, us 1)
jogee jugat naam nirmaa-il taa kai mail na raatee.
The Yogi who is joined to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is pure; he is not stained by even a particle of dirt.
UISH SE Ae AY Hdl AGH Hes ats AST UA (992-13, wg, He
pareetam naath sadaa sach sangay janam maran gat beetee. ||1]||
The True Lord, his Beloved, is always with him; the rounds of birth and death are ended for him. ||1]|
aA} Sa AT OH AA ASH Il (992-13, we, He 1) gusaa-ee tayraa kahaa naam kaisay jaatee. O Lord of the Universe, what is Your Name, and what is it like?
W 38 stats Holes yerets use as fosst NU IIS Il (992-14, wg, He 1)
jaa ta-o bheetar mahal bulaaveh poochha-o baat nirantee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
If You summon me into the Mansion of Your Presence, I will ask You, how I can become one with You. ||1||Pause] |
Wave AIH fomra fenarat ate qe uA ust il (92-14, wg, He 1)
barahman barahm gi-aan isnaanee har gun poojay paatee.
He alone is a Brahmin, who takes his cleansing bath in the spiritual wisdom of God, and whose leaf-offerings in worship are the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Sa on 8a ootes fesse Sar Ast MQM (992-15, wg, He 1) ayko naam ayk naaraa-in taribhavan aykaa jotee. ||2|| The One Name, the One Lord, and His One Light pervade the three worlds. ||2| |
fase" sat feg we sar 3m@ oy mine II (992-15, wg, He 1)
jihvaa dandee ih ghat chhaabaa tola-o naam ajaachee.
My tongue is the balance of the scale, and this heart of mine is the pan of the scale; I weigh the immeasurable Naam.
ea we Ag Asa fafs zens fea SSH ISI (992-16, og, He 1)
ayko haat saahu sabhnaa sir vanjaaray ik bhaatee. ||3]|
There is one store, and one banker above all; the merchants deal in the one commodity. ||3]|
ee fia Afsag foas A as fra Sa foe wait nig ad fesast Il (992-17, wg, He 1)
dovai siray satguroo nibayrhay so boojhai jis ayk liv laagee jee-ahu rahai nibhraatee. The True Guru saves us at both ends; he alone understands, who is lovingly focused on the One Lord; his inner being remains free of doubt.
Had ZAE SdH yates Het Hea feg Tt sil (992-17, wg, ws 1)
sabad vasaa-ay bharam chukaa-ay sadaa sayvak din raatee. ||4] |
The Word of the Shabad abides within, and doubt is ended, for those who constantly serve, day and night. ||4]|
Gufs mae aa ule aay St oT mre AT uls SAT Il (992-18, wg, He 1) oopar gagan gagan par gorakh taa kaa agam guroo pun vaasee. Above is the sky of the mind, and beyond this sky is the Lord, the Protector of the
World; the Inaccessible Lord God; the Guru abides there as well.
Gs aot wate ufs sa arog sfeor Set Ua (992-19, wg, He 1)
gur bachnee baahar ghar ayko naanak bha-i-aa udaasee. ||5||11]|
According to the Word of the Guru's Teachings, what is outside is the same as what is inside the home of the self. Nanak has become a detached renunciate. ||5||11]|
Yar exts
TH HT HIG WT U (993-1) raag maaroo mehlaa 1 ghar 5 Raag Maaroo, First Mehl, Fifth House:
qe Afsaa urrfe II (993-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
wifafofa Aral ote o AS I (993-2, wg, He 1) ahinis jaagai need na sovai. Day and night, he remains awake and aware; he never sleeps or dreams.
A we fan fee FS ll (993-2, wg, ve 1) SO jaanai jis vaydan hovai. He alone knows this, who feels the pain of separation from God.
UH & ae Ga 36 Sisfs Se fa WE act FIG UA (993-2, og, He 1)
paraym kay kaan lagay tan bheetar vaid ke jaanai kaaree jee-o. ||1]|
My body is pierced through with the arrow of love. How can any physician know the cure? ||1]|
fan 6 AS frest we | Toute fess far ges 11 (993-3, weg, He 1)
jis no saachaa siftee laa-ay. gurmukh virlay kisai bujhaa-ay.
Rare is that one, who as Gurmukh, understands, and whom the True Lord links to His Praise.
vifs ot Ara Het we fa nifys ar erst AIG 9 TIS Il (993-3, wg, us 1)
amrit kee saar so-ee jaanai je amrit kaa vaapaaree jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He alone appreciates the value of the Ambsosial Nectar, who deals in this Ambrosia. ||1]|Pause] |
fug ASt Us YH Fae Il (993-4, wg, ws 1) pir saytee Dhan paraym rachaa-ay. The soul-bride is in love with her Husband Lord;
Gd a Aafe ser fas we | (993-4, wg, us 1) gur kai sabad tathaa chit laa-ay. the focuses her consciousness on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Hon Ast us udt Adet fens fsur foerdt AG iQ (93-5, wg, Hs 1)
sahj saytee Dhan kharee suhaylee tarisnaa tikhaa nivaaree jee-o. ||2]|
The soul-bride is joyously embellished with intuitive ease; her hunger and thirst are taken away. ||2]|
HUA 33 SIH VATS Il (993-5, wy, us 1) sahsaa torhay bharam chukaa-ay. Tear down skepticism and dispel your doubt;
Hon fest vey Barve Il (993-6, wg, Hs 1) sehjay siftee Dnhanakh charhaa-ay. with your intuition, draw the bow of the Praise of the Lord.
Gd & Aafe Hd Ho He Hele Harardt AIG SI (993-6, wg, He 1)
gur kai sabad marai man maaray sundar jogaaDhaaree jee-o. ||3]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, conquer and subdue your mind; take the support of Yoga - Union with the beautiful Lord. ||3]|
ICH Afoor Hog feATS II (993-6, wg, He 1D ha-umai jali-aa manhu visaaray. Burnt by egotism, one forgets the Lord from his mind.
aH ufs Afo Usa ATS Il (993-7, weg, we 1) jam pur vajeh kharhag karaaray. In the City of Death, he is attacked with massive swords.
wa & atom on & feet 3 Ag Abws seat AIS sil (993-7, og, we D
ab kai kahi-ai naam na mil-ee too saho jee-arhay bhaaree jee-o. ||4||
Then, even if he asks for it, he will not receive the Lord's Name; O soul, you shall suffer terrible punishment. ||4| |
Hfent HHSt uefa fiat i (993-8, wg, He 1) maa-i-aa mamtaa paveh khi-aalee. You are distracted by thoughts of Maya and worldly attachment.
AH ufs sTAfse AH AST Il (993-8, wg, He 1) jam pur faashigaa jam jaalee. In the City of Death, you will be caught by the noose of the Messenger of Death.
ds & 400 Sf 6 Wafs TAN AS US AIG MUI (993-8, og, He 1)
hayt kay banDhan torh na saakeh taa jam karay khu-aaree jee-o. ||5]|
You cannot break free from the bondage of loving attachment, and so the Messenger of Death will torture you. ||5]|
ot I AIST STH abo I (993-9, wg, we 1) naa ha-o kartaa naa mai kee-aa. I have done nothing; I am doing nothing now.
nifys ou Afsafe shor |i (993-9, wg, He 1) amrit naam satgur dee-aa. The True Guru has blessed me with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
fan 3 fa SA for Ta aoa Hale SHS AS WENA (993-10, wg, He 1)
jis too deh tisai ki-aa chaaraa naanak saran tumaaree jee-o. ||6]|1]|12]|
What other efforts can anyone make, when You bestow Your blessing? Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||6||1]|12||
Hg HIG 3 WI A (993-11) maaroo mehlaa 3 ghar 1 Maaroo, Third Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas urrfe II (993-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ad Srrafs so SA AMM wa Safa SI AST Il (993-12, wg, He 3)
jah baisaaleh tah baisaa su-aamee jah bhayjeh tah jaavaa.
Wherever You seat me, there I sit, O my Lord and Master; wherever You send me, there I go.
AS oat Hfs Sa aa AS ufes ofa are AI (993-12, wg, Hs 3) sabh nagree meh ayko raajaa sabhay pavit heh thaavaa. ||1|| In the entire village, there is only One King; all places are sacred. ||1]||
wat af SAT AG ae il (993-13, Hg, He 3) baabaa deh vasaa sach gaavaa. O Baba, while I dwell in this body, let me sing Your True Praises,
W 3 Aon Adfd AHS WU TIS Il (993-13, wg, He 3) jaa tay sehjay sahj samaavaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. that I may intuitively merge with You. ||1]]Pause| |
as sor fag nium 3 Aout Set Aare fears i (993-13, wg, He 3) buraa bhalaa kichh aapas tay jaani-aa ay-ee sagal vikaaraa. He thinks that good and bad deeds come from himself; this is the source of all evil.
feg gourfeur wAN at dor eas fe HATS III (993-14, wg, He 3) ih furmaa-i-aa khasam kaa ho-aa vartai ih sansaaraa. ||2|| Whatever happens in this world is only by the Order of our Lord and Master. ||2| |
feet os nae ads t fet far 3 Tet 1 (993-15, wg, v8 3) indree Dhaat sabal kahee-at hai indree kis tay ho-ee. Sexual desires are so strong and compelling; where has this sexual desire come from?
MT HS Ad Als ATS MAT FS AST ISI (993-15, wg, ue 3) aapay khayl karai sabh kartaa aisaa boojhai ko-ee. ||3]|| The Creator Himself stages all the plays; how rare are those who realize this. ||3]|
Od usAet Sa foe oreit efaar se fat Il (993-16, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee ayk liv laagee dubiDhaa taday binaasee. By Guru's Grace, one is lovingly focused on the One Lord, and then, duality is ended.
a fsa ser A Afs afe wfomr aret AH at STH ISI (993-16, wg, He 3)
jo tis bhaanaa so sat kar maani-aa kaatee jam kee faasee. ||4]|
Whatever is in harmony with His Will, he accepts as True; the noose of Death is loosened from around his neck. ||4]|
Sats FSA SM Ha ASS" AT Tar Hfs wifSHrar il (993-17, wg, we 3)
bhanat naanak laykhaa maagai kavnaa jaa chookaa man abhimaanaa.
Prays Nanak, who can call him to account, when the egotistical pride of his mind has been silenced?
SA SH UGH Tf Aus J ue AS at AST UIA (993-17, wg, He 3)
taas taas Dharam raa-ay japat hai pa-ay sachay kee sarnaa. ||5||1||
Even the Righteous Judge of Dharma is intimidated and afraid of him; he has entered the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||5|[1]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (993-18)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Wise Aral ot dint for wife erat aE Il (993-18, wg, Hs 3)
aavan jaanaa naa thee-ai nij ghar vaasaa ho-ay.
Coming and going in reincarnation no longer exist, when one dwells in the home of the self within.
Ag uAat sufi mm) ATS APE AI (993-18, og, Hs 3) sach khajaanaa bakhsi-aa aapay jaanai so-ay. ||1|| He bestowed the Blessing of His treasure of truth; only He Himself knows. ||1]|
UST kts & Ho oe MS Bs 3 Hog ShA fears Il (994-1, wg, Hs 3)
ay man har jee-o chayt too manhu taj vikaar. O my mind, remember the Dear Lord, and abandon the corruption of your mind.
qe a Fate fomrfe 3 vfs wat fimrg na TIS il (994-1, wg, ws 3)
gur kai sabad Dhi-aa-ay too sach lagee pi-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad; focus lovingly on the Truth. ||1]|Pause]|
me oreg sfemr fefs ge far o ute il (994-2, wg, we 3)
aithai naavhu bhuli-aa fir hath kithaa-oo na paa-ay.
One who forgets the Name in this world, shall not find any place of rest anywhere else.
nat Afs seveinife fare uefa AHAE NN (994-2, wg, He 3) jonee sabh bhavaa-ee-an bistaa maahi samaa-ay. ||2|| He shall wander in all sorts of reincarnations, and rot away in manure. ||2||
waa Tg wfeor ysts fesfmr ute i 94-3, wg, v2 3)
vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa poorab likhi-aa maa-ay.
By great good fortune, I have found the Guru, according to my pre-ordained destiny, O my mother.
wofes Aut softs ats Aut woe fate Sil (994-3, wg, Hs 3) an-din sachee bhagat kar sachaa la-ay milaa-ay. ||3]| Night and day, I practice true devotional worship; I am united with the True Lord.
[31 nm figAfe AS AMG wm seta ase Il (994-4, wg, Hs 3)
aapay sarisat sabh saajee-an aapay nadar karay-i. He Himself fashioned the entire universe; He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
aed oth efsmrehor A are 3 SfE Wii (994-4, wg, He 3)
naanak naam vadi-aa-ee-aa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||4]|2]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is glorious and great; as He pleases, He bestows His Blessings. ||4]|2]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (994-5)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
fuss Tou sant Ate ora J Hrafor ute I (994-5, wg, He 3) pichhlay gunah bakhsaa-ay jee-o ab too maarag paa-ay. Please forgive my past mistakes, O my Dear Lord; now, please place me on the Path.
dfs at saat oar ga feag miry TSE WAU (994-6, wg, He 3) har kee charnee laag rahaa vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||1|| I remain attached to the Lord's Feet, and eradicate self-conceit from within. ||1]|
He Ho TsHfy oH ate forte i (994-6, wg, ne 3) mayray man gurmukh naam har Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Name of the Lord.
He fe vaet ofa so fea nfs a ote ai TIS il (994-7, wg, vs 3)
sadaa har charnee laag rahaa ik man aykai bhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Remain attached forever to the Lord's Feet, single-mindedly, with love for the One Lord. ||1|]Pause| |
oH ats 6 ufs 9d aT ag 3B HES Il (994-7, wg, ve 3) naa mai jaat na pat hai naa mai thayhu na thaa-o. I have no social status or honor; I have no place or home.
Rafe sf gH afeur afe ou cht AHSTE IQ (994-8, wg, He 3)
sabad bhayd bharam kati-aa gur naam dee-aa samjhaa-ay. ||2||
Pierced through by the Word of the Shabad, my doubts have been cut away. The Guru has inspired me to understand the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
fey He wed age fed orafs war ATE II (994-8, wg, He 3) ih man laalach kardaa firai laalach laagaa jaa-ay. This mind wanders around, driven by greed, totally attached to greed.
ua afs feorfimr aH ufe der fe WS (994-9, wg, Hs 3) DhanDhai koorh vi-aapi-aa jam pur chotaa khaa-ay. ||3]| He is engrossed in false pursuits; he shall endure beatings in the City of Death. ||3]|
area Ag fas wml orf T BAT ardt Ale Il (994-9, wg, Hs 3) naanak sabh kichh aapay aap hai doojaa naahee ko-ay. O Nanak, God Himself Himself is all-in-all. There is no other at all.
sats uot sufAGe Tene AY SE SIS (994-10, wg, He 3)
bhagat khajaanaa bakhsi-on gurmukhaa sukh ho-ay. ||4]|3]|
He bestows the treasure of devotional worship, and the Gurmukhs abide in peace. [4113] |
Hg HIG 3 Il (994-10)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Afs 33 A Sf wg A fees Arrfa i (994-10, wg, He 3) sach ratay say tol lahu say virlay sansaar. Seek and find those who are imbued with Truth; they are so rare in this world.
fs6 fufeor Hu Caer afr aH Hate NU (994-11, Hg, He 3)
tin mili-aa mukh ujlaa jap naam muraar. ||1||
Meeting with them, one's face becomes radiant and bright, chanting the Name of the Lord. ||1||
aa Arat Afoe fee AHA I (994-11, wg, Hs 3) baabaa saachaa saahib ridai samaal. O Baba, contemplate and cherish the True Lord and Master within your heart.
Afsag wut ufs ty Ss Zug Sh UV! TIS I (994-12, og, ne 3)
satgur apnaa puchh daykh layho vakhar bhaal. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Seek out and see, and ask your True Guru, and obtain the true commodity. ||1]|Pause] |
fea Aa AS Aeet ufe ofr fr]r GE I (994-12, wg, He 3) ik sachaa sabh sayvdee Dhur bhaag milaavaa ho-ay. All serve the One True Lord; through pre-ordained destiny, they meet Him.
qonfy fue A 3 feesfs uefa Ag APE 2H (94-13, wg, He 3)
gurmukh milay say na vichhurheh paavahi sach so-ay. ||2]|
The Gurmukhs merge with Him, and will not be separated from Him again; they attain the True Lord. |[2||
fefa saat ATS & West HOHE Saf gate Il (994-13, wg, He 3)
ik bhagtee saar na jaannee manmukh bharam bhulaa-ay.
Some do not appreciate the value of devotional worship; the self-willed manmukhs are deluded by doubt.
Sor fefe urfu zaser age fas 3 ATE NSM (994-14, og, He 3)
onaa vich aap varatdaa karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. ||3]| They are fillled with self-conceit; they cannot accomplish anything. ||3]|
fan ofe ag 3 soet us ate mrageth I (994-14, wg, He 3) jis naal jor na chal-ee khalay keechai ardaas. Stand and offer your prayer, to the One who cannot be moved by force.
ood TeHfy on vfs ZA st Afs ad APIA ISIS (994-15, wg, He 3)
naanak gurmukh naam man vasai taa sun karay saabaas. ||4||4]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides within the mind of the Gurmukh; hearing his prayer, the Lord applauds him. ||4||4||
Hg HIS 3 Il (994-16)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Hg 3 Ase as HOTT AIG FE I (994-16, og, ws 3)
maaroo tay seetal karay manoorahu kanchan ho-ay.
He transforms the burning desert into a cool oasis; he transmutes rusted iron into gold.
AAS ATodhat fsa Aes neg o AE NA (994-16, wg, He 3) SO saachaa salaahee-ai tis jayvad avar na ko-ay. ||1]| So praise the True Lord; there is none other as great as He is. ||1]|
He Ho Motes ftmrfe afs ar i (994-17, wg, us 3) mayray man an-din Dhi-aa-ay har naa-o. O my mind, night and day, meditate on the Lord's Name.
Asad & sale neta 3 niafes TE TS Al TIE il (994-17, og, we 3) satgur kai bachan araaDh too an-din gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Teachings, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1||Pause] |
Toufa a webs a Afsag Sf gsfe i 94-18, wg, ve 3)
gurmukh ayko jaanee-ai jaa satgur day-ay bujhaa-ay.
As Gurmukh, one comes to know the One Lord, when the True Guru instructs him. A Afsag Werdha fre So ASt UTE II (994-18, wg, we 3)
so satgur salaahee-ai jidoo ayh sojhee paa-ay. ||2|| Praise the True Guru, who imparts this understanding. ||2]|
Afsag efs en wat far aafe viet ATE Il (994-19, og, 8 3)
satgur chhod doojai lagay ki-aa karan agai jaa-ay.
Those who forsake the True Guru, and attach themselves to duality - what will they do when they go to the world hereafter?
aM ufs sa urdhafs sgst fxs AAE SI (994-19, wg, He 3)
jam pur baDhay maaree-ah bahutee milai sajaa-ay. ||3]|
Bound and gagged in the City of Death, they will be beaten. They will be punished severely. ||3]|
Yar ety
na ug suseg 3 a fSH fe 3 SHE I (995-1, wg, 18 3) mayraa parabh vayparvaahu hai naa tis til na tamaa-ay. My God is independent and self-sufficient; he does not have even an iota of greed.
Sod fH Aderet sft uG vm auf fhe isuull (95-1, wg, Hs 3)
naanak tis sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-o aapay bakhas milaa-ay. ||4||5||
O Nanak, run to His Sanctuary; granting His forgiveness, He merges us into Himself. [4115] |
HTS HIG! 8 We 2 (995-3) maaroo mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Maaroo, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (995-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AfuS oH Aa Hoa Ts vat ofa ofa Aafs us Il (995-4, wg, He 4)
japi-o naam suk janak gur bachnee har har saran paray.
Suk-deva and Janak meditated on the Naam; following the Guru's Teachings, they sought the Sanctuary of the Lord, Har, Har.
aoe Sha HEH fifoS sast afte Sg i (995-4, wg, He 4)
daalad bhanj sudaamay mili-o bhagtee bhaa-ay taray.
God met Sudama and removed his poverty; through loving devotional worship, he crossed over.
sats gee dfs aH fasse auf faut as IAI (995-5, wg, He 4)
bhagat vachhal har naam kirtaarath gurmukh kirpaa karay. ||1]|
God is the Lover of His devotees; the Lord's Name is fufilling; God showers His Mercy on the Gurmukhs. ||1]|
Hd HO OH AUS BU Ill (995-5, wg, we 4) mayray man naam japat uDhray. O my mind, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you will be saved.
y yfowre freg wat as Toute of So NA THE il (95-5, og, us 4)
Dharoo par-hilaad bidar daasee sut gurmukh naam taray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Dhroo, Prahlaad and Bidar the slave-girl's son, became Gurmukh, and through the Naam, crossed over. ||1||Pause] |
ASAfa SH YUTS uUTIg sds Ao’ Gud Il (995-6, wg, us 4)
kaljug naam parDhaan padaarath bhagat janaa uDhray.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Naam is the supreme wealth; it saves the humble devotees.
om AUG adits fesue Afs Su TS VHS Il (995-7, wg, ne 4)
naamaa jaiday-o kabeer tarilochan sabh dokh ga-ay chamray.
All the faults of Naam Dayv, Jai Dayv, Kabeer, Trilochan and Ravi Daas the leather- worker were covered.
gone ath od A Gud Afs fosfas urs SF QI (995-7, wg, Hs 4)
gurmukh naam lagay say uDhray sabh kilbikh paap taray. ||2]|
Those who become Gurmukh, and remain attached to the Naam, are saved; all their sins are washed off. ||2| |
A i oH AU mua Afs fsa & Su uss Il (995-8, wg, He 4) jo jo naam japai apraaDhee sabh tin kay dokh parharay. Whoever chants the Naam, all his sins and mistakes are taken away.
Shor ses wie Gufs uf 88 arafes agg I (995-8, wg, He 4) baysu-aa ravat ajaamal uDhaari-o mukh bolai naaraa-in narharay. Ajaamal, who had sex with prostitites, was saved, by chanting the Name of the Lord.
on nus CqnAfs afs wet Sfs das Hats a ISI (995-9, wg, He 4)
naam japat ugarsain gat paa-ee torh banDhan mukat karay. ||3]|
Chanting the Naam, Ugar Sain obtained salvation; his bonds were broken, and he was liberated. ||3]|
As ag orf mogq”y amr ofe niaitarg aT Il (995-9, wg, He 4)
=— AS
jan ka-o aap anoograhu kee-aa har angeekaar karay. God Himself takes pity on His humble servants, and makes them His own.
Aza Un ge Ae afse Aafs ud Sus I (995-10, wg, He 4)
sayvak paij rakhai mayraa govid saran paray uDhray.
My Lord of the Universe saves the honor of His servants; those who seek His Sanctuary are saved.
Ho soa die fasur ost Ca uss SH Ts SIA (995-10, wg, He 4)
jan naanak har kirpaa Dhaaree ur Dhari-o naam haray. ||4]|1||
The Lord has showered servant Nanak with His Mercy; he has enshrined the Lord's Name within his heart. ||4]|1]|
HTg HIG 8 Il (995-11) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
fro Arto Afus fee ret Afoe ufs Afumr II (995-11, wg, He 4)
siDh samaaDh japi-o liv laa-ee saaDhik mun japi-aa.
The Siddhas in Samaadhi meditate on Him; they are lovingly focused on Him. The seekers and the silent sages meditate on Him as well.
Ast Ast ASsut fomrfemr ufe fFerfee afer I (995-12, wg, He 4)
jatee satee santokhee Dhi-aa-i-aa mukh indraadik ravi-aa.
The celibates, the true and contented beings meditate on Him; Indra and the other gods chant His Name with their mouths.
Rafe ud Afus 3 ave aTaHfe ure ufemr ail (995-12, wg, He 4)
saran paray japi-o tay bhaa-ay gurmukh paar pa-i-aa. ||1|| Those who seek His Sanctuary meditate on Him; they become Gurmukh and swim across. ||1||
He Ho OH AUS Shor Il (995-13, wg, Hs 4) mayray man naam japat tari-aa. O my mind, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and cross over.
Ua Ae Tota seers TaHfe ute ufeor ai TIS il (995-13, wg, us 4)
Dhannaa jat baalmeek batvaaraa gurmukh paar pa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Dhanna the farmer, and Balmik the highway robber, became Gurmukh, and crossed over. ||1]|Pause] |
Afs og awe diuea wfus feats sud ofe arfemr i (995-14, wg, He 4)
sur nar gan ganDharbay japi-o rikh bapurai har gaa-i-aa.
Angels, men, heavenly heralds and celestial singers meditate on Him; even the humble Rishis sing of the Lord.
Rafe yon eat wfuG ufe afe afe on afi i (995-14, wg, v8 4)
sankar barahmai dayvee japi-o mukh har har naam japi-aa.
Shiva, Brahma and the goddess Lakhshmi, meditate, and chant with their mouths the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs afs ath faat He stat 3 gente ua ufemir QI (995-15, wg, He 4)
har har naam jinaa man bheenaa tay gurmukh paar pa-i-aa. ||2]|
Those whose minds are drenched with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, as Gurmukh, cross over. ||2]||
afe afe Sain fmrfe6 afe rufsur viz o urfer II (995-16, wg, He 4)
kot kot taytees Dhi-aa-i-o har japti-aa ant na paa-i-aa.
Millions and millions, three hundred thirty million gods meditate on Him; there is no end to those who meditate on the Lord.
ae uae fafyfs ofe afimr ufe ufss afe arfemr i (995-16, wg, He 4)
bayd puraan simrit har japi-aa mukh pandit har gaa-i-aa.
The Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees meditate on the Lord; the Pandits, the religious scholars, sing the Lord's Praises as well.
OH DAS faa Hfe sfhor 3 aeHfy ute ufemr Si (95-17, wg, us 4)
naam rasaal jinaa man vasi-aa tay gurmukh paar pa-i-aa. ||3]||
Those whose minds are filled with the Naam, the source of nectar - as Gurmukh, they cross over. ||3]|
Woes sda on fae Afr A aes 3 afa Afomr II (995-18, wg, He 4) anat tarangee naam jin japi-aa mai ganat na kar saki-aa. Those who chant the Naam in endless waves - I cannot even count their number.
difee feu ad fe ue Fafa ys ufs atfemr I (995-18, og, He 4)
gobid kirpaa karay thaa-ay paa-ay jo har parabh man bhaa-i-aa.
The Lord of the Universe bestows His Mercy, and those who are pleasing to the Mind of the Lord God, find their place.
afta ots faur ofs on feates AS Soa SH BlEMM III (995-19, wg, He 4)
gur Dhaar kirpaa har naam darirh-aa-i-o jan naanak naam la-i-aa. ||4||2||
The Guru, granting His Grace, implants the Lord's Name within; servant Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||2||
Yat ute
HT HIG 8 WI 3 (996-1) maaroo mehlaa 4 ghar 3 Maaroo, Fourth Mehl, Third House:
96 Afsars yATfe II (996-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa afs om foarg & ants afe ufS uf II (996-2, wg, He 4)
har har naam niDhaan lai gurmat har pat paa-ay.
Take the treasure of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. Follow the Guru's Teachings, and the Lord shall bless you with honor.
vars uals ats soe of nis BE SSE Il (996-2, wg, us 4) halat palat naal chaldaa har antay la-ay chhadaa-ay. Here and hereafter, the Lord goes with you; in the end, He shall deliver you.
fra nieuwe ae sistor fsa ofa afs nafs aafe wall (996-3, wg, ne 4) jithai avghat galee-aa bheerhee-aa tithai har har mukat karaa-ay. ||1|| Where the path is difficult and the street is narrow, there the Lord shall liberate you.
[11] Ad Afsae A afs ofs on feste i (996-3, weg, ue 4)
mayray satiguraa mai har har naam drirh-aa-ay. O my True Guru, implant within me the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Aa ws fust ws sou H of fae neg o HE NAN TIC I 996-4, wg, He 4)
mayraa maat pitaa sut banDhpo mai har bin avar na maa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is my mother, father, child and relative; I have none other than the Lord, O my mother. ||1]|Pause| |
H ofa faadt ofa on 3 aet urfs fire aef& I (996-4, og, He 4)
mai har birhee har naam hai ko-ee aan milaavai maa-ay.
I feel the pains of love and yearning for the Lord, and the Name of the Lord. If only someone would come and unite me with Him, O my mother.
fSH ora H Hest Ha UisH Ufe fhefe 1 (996-5, wg, us 4) tis aagai mai jod-rhee mayraa pareetam day-ay milaa-ay. I bow in humble devotion to one who inspires me to meet with my Beloved.
Afsag usy efenres ug ats AS fee o ue QI (996-5, wg, He 4) satgur purakh da-i-aal parabh har maylay dhil na paa-ay. ||2|| The almighty and merciful True Guru unites me with the Lord God instantaneously.
[21] fae afs ofs on 3 S36 A sardia Hf ATE II (996-6, wg, HI 4)
jin har har naam na chayti-o say bhaagheen mar jaa-ay. Those who do not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are most unfortunate, and are slaughtered.
Gfe fefa fefa afs serchufa ufa Hufo mre AE II (996-7, og, Hs 4)
o-ay fir fir jon bhavaa-ee-ah mar jameh aavai jaa-ay.
They wander in reincarnation, again and again; they die, and are re-born, and continue coming and going.
Gf aH efs ao ndnifs ofe waar fe FATE BI (996-7, wg, He 4)
o-ay jam dar baDhay maaree-ah har dargeh milai sajaa-ay. ||3]|| Bound and gagged at Death's Door, they are cruelly beaten, and punished in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
3 Us TH Avaast HAS Hf Sa ala THE Il (996-8, wg, Hs 4)
too parabh ham sarnaagatee mo ka-o mayl laihu har raa-ay.
O God, I seek Your Sanctuary; O my Sovereign Lord King, please unite me with Yourself.
dfs ofe four waHleat ad Afsad at AGSETe Il (996-8, wg, us 4)
har Dhaar kirpaa jagjeevanaa gur satgur kee sarnaa-ay.
O Lord, Life of the World, please shower me with Your Mercy; grant me the Sanctuary of the Guru, the True Guru.
ofa AG urfu efemrs df He Sea The Hote SIAN (996-9, wg, He 4)
har jee-o aap da-i-aal ho-ay jan naanak har maylaa-ay. ||4]|1]|3]|
The Dear Lord, becoming merciful, has blended servant Nanak with Himself. 401211311
HTg HIG 8 Il (996-10) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
ug Unt oy cAfeer at VA Tie TG TAA II (996-10, wg, Hs 4)
ha-o poonjee naam dasaa-idaa ko dasay har Dhan raas.
I inquire about the commodity of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Is there anyone who can show me the wealth, the capital of the Lord?
u@ fan fees us daha HAS fe ys uA Il (996-10, wg, He 4)
ha-o tis vitahu khan khannee-ai mai maylay har parabh paas.
I cut myself into pieces, and make myself a sacrifice to that one who leads me to meet my Lord God.
H nists Un fudu a fa Ane fess florfit al (96-11, wg, He 4)
mai antar paraym piramm kaa ki-o sajan milai milaas. ||1]|
I am filled with the Love of my Beloved; how can I meet my Friend, and merge with Him? ||1]|
He fimrfamr first 4 afs ofa on US TAA II (996-11, wg, He 4)
man pi-aari-aa mitraa mai har har naam Dhan raas. O my beloved friend, my mind, I take the wealth, the capital of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afs us on fesfenr ofe uta ofs Aref na TIS ll (996-12, wg, Hs 4)
gur poorai naam drirh-aa-i-aa har Dheerak har saabaas. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Naam within me; the Lord is my support - I celebrate the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
ofa ofs »rfu fone ag HBA ofs ag TH II (996-12, wg, He 4)
har har aap milaa-ay gur mai dasay har Dhan raas.
O my Guru, please unite me with the Lord, Har, Har; show me the wealth, the capital of the Lord.
fag ad UH 6 sel AS Sug His fegAtA Il (996-13, wg, He 4) bin gur paraym na labh-ee jan vaykhhu man nirjaas. Without the Guru, love does not well up; see this, and know it in your mind.
dfs aa fefs »my sftimr afs HS ae ATatA I2QI (996-14, wg, Hs 4)
har gur vich aap rakhi-aa har maylay gur saabaas. ||2||
The Lord has installed Himself within the Guru; so praise the Guru, who unites us with the Lord. ||2]|
Aad sats gard ofa ud Afsae UTA Il (996-14, wg, He 4)
saagar bhagat bhandaar har pooray satgur paas.
The ocean, the treasure of devotional worship of the Lord, rests with the Perfect True Guru.
Afsag so fs efe yfy went afe usarfit it (996-15, wg, 8 4)
satgur tuthaa khol day-ay mukh gurmukh har pargaas.
When it pleases the True Guru, He opens the treasure, and and the Gurmukhs are illuminated by the Lord's Light.
Houfe svat fegfenr fea Hehor adit uri Sil (996-15, wg, He 4) manmukh bhaag vihooni-aa tikh mu-ee-aa kanDhee paas. ||3]|| The unfortunate self-willed manmukhs die of thirst, on the very bank of the river. ||3]|
Ts ws wag J Ie wae we Ts wi Il (996-16, wg, He 4)
gur daataa daataar hai ha-o maaga-o daan gur paas. The Guru is the Great Giver; I beg for this gift from the Guru,
fodt fegar Afs ys A Hfs 3fs saat MIA II (996-16, wg, He 4)
chiree vichhunnaa mayl parabh mai man tan vadrhee aas.
that He may unite me with God, from whom I was separated for so long! This is the great hope of my mind and body.
Gd we Afs Fost Ho Soa at mage tA ISIINBIl (996-17, wg, He 4)
gur bhaavai sun bayntee jan naanak kee ardaas. ||4]|2||4]| If it pleases You, O my Guru, please listen to my prayer; this is servant Nanak's prayer. ||4||2]|4]|
HTg HIG 8 Il (996-17) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
fe ofs am nets ys aanfs afe fae ANret I (996-17, wg, He 4)
har har kathaa sunaa-ay parabh gurmat har ridai samaanee.
O Lord God, please preach Your sermon to me. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is merged into my heart.
afu ofs dfs aa esaraiion afs @SH ue feaaret Il (996-18, wg, H8 4)
jap har har kathaa vadbhaagee-aa har utam pad nirbaanee.
Meditate on the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, O very fortunate ones; the Lord shall bless you with the most sublime status of Nirvaanaa.
Ua cto Tor His ussts tafe us oth AHTet WAU (997-1, +g, He 4)
gurmukhaa man parteet hai gur poorai naam samaanee. ||1]| The minds of the Gurmukhs are filled with faith; through the Perfect Guru, they merge in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Ho ASH ofa afs aa Hfs great | (997-1, wg, ue 4) man mayray mai har har kathaa man bhaanee. O my mind, the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
dfs os am fos Ae afe aaHfe mae aTrat AU TIS Il (997-2, wg, we 4)
har har kathaa nit sadaa kar gurmukh akath kahaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Continually and forever, speak the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har; as Gurmukh, speak the Unspoken Speech. ||1||Pause] |
Hue 30 Ufa defer fab unt nee aaret I (997-2, og, He 4)
mai man tan khoj dhandholi-aa ki-o paa-ee-ai akath kahaanee.
I have searched through and through my mind and body; how can I attain this Unspoken Speech?
As aot fife ufenr afe wie ae His Set Il (997-3, wg, He 4)
sant janaa mil paa-i-aa sun akath kathaa man bhaanee.
Meeting with the humble Saints, I have found it; listening to the Unspoken Speech, my mind is pleased.
He fs sfs oy waorg fs HAS usy AASt NII (997-3, wg, He 4)
mayrai man tan naam aDhaar har mai maylay purakh sujaanee. ||2| |
The Lord's Name is the Support of my mind and body; I am united with the all- Knowing Primal Lord God. ||2]|
qa use use foe ys fife wast wafs Aret Il (997-4, wg, He 4)
gur purkhai purakh milaa-ay parabh mil surtee surat samaanee.
The Guru, the Primal Being, has united me with the Primal Lord God. My consciousness has merged into the supreme consciousness.
saat ag Afeor ots ufenr Aus AAA Il (997-5, wg, Hs 4)
vadbhaagee gur sayvi-aa har paa-i-aa sugharh sujaanee.
By great good fortune, I serve the Guru, and I have found my Lord, all-wise and all- knowing.
Hou ava fegfenr fae eet sfe fearet Wil (997-5, wg, He 4)
manmukh bhaag vihooni-aa tin dukhee rain vihaanee. ||3]||
The self-willed manmukhs are very unfortunate; they pass their life-night in misery and pain. |[3]|
oH Whee te us Sfour ufy cA ifs get II (997-6, wg, He 4)
ham jaachik deen parabh tayri-aa mukh deejai amrit banee.
I am just a meek beggar at Your Door, God; please, place the Ambrosial Word of Your Bani in my mouth.
Afsag Aa fz ys ofa HoT Aus AAT II (997-6, og, He 4) satgur mayraa mitar parabh har maylhu sugharh sujaanee. The True Guru is my friend; He unites me with my all-wise, all-knowing Lord God.
Ho Sa Adetast ate fagur oth Anat siSiUll (997-7, wg, Hs 4)
jan naanak sarnaagatee kar kirpaa naam samaanee. ||4]|3]|5]| Servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary; grant Your Grace, and merge me into Your Name. ||4][3]|5]|
HTg HIG 8 Il (997-8) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
dfs HE war Savane esarait ofa ufs ary il (997-8, wg, He 4)
har bhaa-o lagaa bairaagee-aa vadbhaagee har man raakh.
Detached from the world, I am in love with the Lord; by great good fortune, I have enshrined the Lord within my mind.
fife Hats Heo Curt ae Aaet ofs TA ITY II (997-8, wg, He 4)
mil sangat sarDhaa oopjai gur sabdee har ras chaakh.
Joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, faith has welled up within me; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I taste the sublime essence of the Lord.
AZ Ho 30 dour deur qesret of TE FY WAU (997-9, wg, He 4)
sabh man tan hari-aa ho-i-aa gurbaanee har gun bhaakh. ||1]|
My mind and body have totally blossomed forth; through the Word of the Guru's Bani, I chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
Ho fimrfonr fst ofa afe oH FA BY II (997-9, wg, He 4)
man pi-aari-aa mitraa har har naam ras chaakh.
O my beloved mind, my friend, taste the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
afs us of wfenr gets uefs ufs ay 1 TIS I (997-10, wg, v3 4)
gur poorai har paa-i-aa halat palat pat raakh. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Through the Perfect Guru, I have found the Lord, who saves my honor, here and hereafter. ||1]|Pause| |
ofa afs om fone afe atefs aout ae II (997-11, wg, He 4)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai har keerat gurmukh chaakh.
Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; as Gurmukh, taste the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
36 Uest ofa sith fefs Hafs afs ys are II (997-11, wg, He 4)
tan Dhartee har beejee-ai vich sangat har parabh raakh.
Plant the seed of the Lord in the body-farm. The Lord God is enshrined within the Sangat, the Holy Congregation.
nifs af ofs on 3 afs us of TA UY MI (997-12, wg, Hs 4)
amrit har har naam hai gur poorai har ras chaakh. ||2||
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. Through the Perfect Guru, taste the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||
HoH fsHar safe gd His wat eT FEA ag Bre Il (997-12, wg, He 4)
manmukh tarisnaa bhar rahay man aasaa dah dis baho laakh.
The self-willed manmukhs are filled with hunger and thirst; their minds run around in the ten directions, hoping for great wealth.
fag ae fon riee fefe faret Hone TY II (997-13, wg, He 4) bin naavai Dharig jeevday vich bistaa manmukh raakh. Without the Name of the Lord, their life is cursed; the manmukhs are stuck in manure.
6fe urefa fa serttufs sg Hot Fad sry SI (997-13, wg, He 4)
o-ay aavahi jaahi bhavaa-ee-ah baho jonee durganDh bhaakh. ||3]||
They come and go, and are consigned to wander through uncounted incarnations, eating stinking rot. ||3]|
ata ato Adeast offs cfeur ofe ys ay I (997-14, wg, ne 4)
taraahi taraahi sarnaagatee har da-i-aa Dhaar parabh raakh.
Begging, imploring, I seek Your Sanctuary; Lord, shower me with Your Mercy, and save me, God.
Hanafs Hoy ate afs on fxs ufS AME II (997-15, wg, He 4)
santsangat maylaap kar har naam milai pat saakh. Lead me to join the Society of the Saints, and bless me with the honor and glory of the Lord's Name.
dfs fs SH US Ute AS SOA ATHS SY ISISIEI (997-15, wg, He 4)
har har naam Dhan paa-i-aa jan naanak gurmat bhaakh. ||4]|4]]6]|| I have obtained the wealth of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; servant Nanak chants the Lord's Name, through the Guru's Teachings. ||4||4||6]|
Hg HIG 8 Wg U (997-17)
maaroo mehlaa 4 ghar 5 Maaroo, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House:
qe Afsara yATfE Il (997-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fe afs sats so FSH Il (997-18, wg, He 4) har har bhagat bharay bhandaaraa. Devotional worship to the Lord, Har, Har, is an overflowing treasure.
TaHfY IH Ad (SASS | (997-18, wg, He 4) gurmukh raam karay nistaaraa. The Gurmukh is emancipated by the Lord.
fan 6 feu ad Aa Homi A ofs & TE WS AG NA (997-18, wg, He 4) jis no kirpaa karay mayraa su-aamee so har kay gun gaavai jee-o. ||1]|
One who is blessed by the Mercy of my Lord and Master sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
ofa ats faur ag seeat | (997-19, wg, He 4) har har kirpaa karay banvaalee. O Lord, Har, Har, take pity on me,
ofa fase Het Het AHTSt Il (997-19, wg, He 4) har hirdai sadaa sadaa samaalee. that within my heart, I may dwell upon You, Lord, forever and ever.
ofa ofs om Aug He Fbrs Afu ofe afs on eave HIG NAN TIS I (997-19, wg, ue 4) har har naam japahu mayray jee-arhay jap har har naam chhadaavai jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, you shall be emancipated. ||1]||Pause| |
ua ttc
AY Arad vfs af oS il (98-1, wg, Hs 4) sukh saagar amrit har naa-o. The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the ocean of peace.
Has Ae AS dfs FoI UATE I (998-2, wg, He 4) mangat jan jaachai har dayh pasaa-o. The beggar begs for it; O Lord, please bless him, in Your kindness.
ofa Afs Afs Ae ofa AfS ofa AfS HS Hfs BTS FIG NM (998-2, wg, He 4) har sat sat sadaa har sat har sat mayrai man bhaavai jee-o. ||2|| True, True is the Lord; the Lord is forever True; the True Lord is pleasing to my mind.
21 |
oe fee Aefa wrufsst il (98-3, wg, Hs 4) navay chhidar sarveh apvitraa. The nine holes pour out filth.
afs ofa on ufeg vfs fast i (998-3, wg, He 4) bol har naam pavitar sabh kitaa. Chanting the Lord's Name, they are all purified and sanctified.
A ofa AUS de Aa AM afe fines He ofa we FIG SII (998-3, >g, He 4) jay har suparsan hovai mayraa su-aamee har simrat mal leh jaavai jee-o. ||3] | When my Lord and Master is totally pleased, He leads the mortal to meditate in remembrance on the Lord, and then his filth is taken away. ||3]|
Hfeor Hg faa F ard Il (998-4, wg, He 4) maa-i-aa moh bikham hai bhaaree. Attachment to Maya is terribly treacherous.
fa@ sdba vag AAS I (998-4, wg, He 4) ki-o taree-ai dutar sansaaree. How can one cross over the difficult world-ocean?
Afsag sfog ef ys ve afu afe afe uf SurS HE igil (998-4, wg, ne 4)
satgur bohith day-ay parabh saachaa jap har har paar langhaavai jee-o. ||4||
The True Lord bestows the boat of the True Guru; meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, one is carried across. ||4||
3 Haag So A Ae Il (998-5, wg, us 4) too sarbatar tayraa sabh ko-ee. You are everywhere; all are Yours.
HS aes et ys Tet Il (998-5, wg, ws 4) jo too karahi so-ee parabh ho-ee. Whatever You do, God, that alone comes to pass.
We Soa Te we Soa oe are ale ofS urs HI NUNAIDI (98-6, wg, He 4)
jan naanak gun gaavai baychaaraa har bhaavai har thaa-ay paavai jee-o. ||5]|1]|7|| Poor servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord; as it pleases the Lord, He bestows His approval. ||5||1||7]|
HTg HIG 8 Il (998-7) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
dfs fs SH AUT HS Hg Il (998-7, wg, we 4) har har naam japahu man mayray. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind.
Afs faafea are ofa 33 Il (998-7, wg, He 4) sabh kilvikh kaatai har tayray. The Lord shall eradicate all your sins.
dfs us aug ofa us Avg ofa vafenr of Aaret AIG NA (998-7, wg, Hs 4)
har Dhan raakho har Dhan sanchahu har chaldi-aa naal sakhaa-ee jee-o. ||1]| Treasure the Lord's wealth, and gather in the Lord's wealth; when you depart in the end, the Lord shall go along with you as your only friend and companion. ||1]|
far 3S fur ag A fim II (998-8, og, He 4) jis no kirpaa karay so Dhi-aavai. He alone meditates on the Lord, unto whom He grants His Grace.
fos ofa wu wma afu afe AY UTS II (998-8, og, He 4) nit har jap jaapai jap har sukh paavai. He continually chants the Lord's Chant; meditating on the Lord, one finds peace.
qe usAet ofs oa ore afu ofe afs ute Suet HE ua TIC it (98-9, wg, ne 4) gur parsaadee har ras aavai jap har har paar langhaa-ee jee-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the sublime essence of the Lord is obtained. Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, one is carried across. ||1]|Pause| |
feas@ fadarg AfS BH II (998-10, xg, He 4) nirbha-o nirankaar sat naam. The fearless, formless Lord - the Name is Truth.
Aa His HAE SSH AH Il (998-10, wg, He 4) jag meh saraysat ootam kaam. To chant it is the most sublime and exalted activity in this world.
THHS ES AHAG Od HG alg Hea fs 3 AST A MIN (98-10, wg, He 4) dusman doot jamkaal thayh maara-o har sayvak nayrh na jaa-ee jee-o. ||2|| Doing so, the Messenger of Death, the evil enemy, is killed. Death does not even approach the Lord's servant. ||2| |
fan Gufs of at He HfSmr I (998-11, wg, He 4) jis upar har kaa man maani-aa. One whose mind is satisfied with the Lord
A Aeg Ug Ha vg aS Whom Il (998-11, wg, He 4) so sayvak chahu jug chahu kunt jaani-aa. - that servant is known throughout the four ages, in all four directions.
A CA a ga ad aet unt fsH AHA wet AIG BI (98-12, wg, He 4) jay us kaa buraa kahai ko-ee paapee tis jamkankar khaa-ee jee-o. ||3]| If some sinner speaks evil of him, the Messenger of Death chews him up. ||3]|
AS Hig Sa fede ATS Il (998-12, wg, He 4) sabh meh ayk niranjan kartaa. The One Pure Creator Lord is in all.
Afs af afe SH mus FHI Il (998-13, wg, ue 4) sabh kar kar vaykhai apnay chaltaa. He stages all His wondrous plays, and watches them.
fan ofs oa fen ae He fan aes orf saret AIG Iii (998-13, wg, He 4)
jis har raakhai tis ka-un maarai jis kartaa aap chhadaa-ee jee-o. ||4||
Who can kill that person, whom the Lord has saved? The Creator Lord Himself delivers him. ||4] |
IG nites SH Bet ATS Il (998-14, wg, ws 4) ha-o an-din naam la-ee kartaaray. I chant the Name of the Creator Lord, night and day.
fats Aa sas AS (SASS Il (998-14, wg, we 4) jin sayvak bhagat sabhay nistaaray. He saves all His servants and devotees.
TH M6 Ug fz Als UST Ao Soa BH Savet A NUNIT (998-14, wg, He 4)
das ath chaar vayd sabh poochhahu jan naanak naam chhadaa-ee jee-o. ||5]|2||8]| Consult the eighteen Puraanas and the four Vedas; O servant Nanak, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, will deliver you. ||5]|2||8]|
Hg HIG U Ug 2 (998-16) maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe II (998-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sou vets mary ous fre Gufs wate Aaa Il (998-17, wg, Hs 5)
darpai Dharat akaas nakh-yataraa sir oopar amar karaaraa.
The earth, the Akaashic ethers and the stars abide in the Fear of God. The almighty Order of the Lord is over the heads of all.
use uat SHsg sau sau fs frat NA (98-17, rg, HE 5)
pa-un paanee baisantar darpai darpai indar bichaaraa. ||1] |
Wind, water and fire abide in the Fear of God; poor Indra abides in the Fear of God as well. ||1]|
ear fegs@ ars Hot Il (998-18, wg, us 5) aykaa nirbha-o baat sunee. I have heard one thing, that the One Lord alone is fearless.
A Ader A Ae Ade A ae fife af wat nal TIC It (998-18, wg, He 5)
so sukhee-aa so sadaa suhaylaa jo gur mil gaa-ay gunee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He alone is at peace, and he alone is embellished forever, who meets with the Guru, and sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
woud mg tet saute fko Afoe ste Hfenr II (98-19, wg, Hs 5)
dayhDhaar ar dayvaa darpahi siDh saaDhik dar mu-i-aa.
The embodied and the divine beings abide in the Fear of God. The Siddhas and seekers die in the Fear of God.
wu s@ante ufs nfs Hon fefa fefa Fat Hfeor II (998-19, wg, He 5)
lakh cha-oraaseeh mar mar janmay fir fir jonee jo-i-aa. ||2||
The 8.4 millions species of beings die, and die again, and are born over and over again. They are consigned to reincarnation. ||2||
Ua tte
THA ASA SHA sdufy as Ju Surfer it (999-1, wg, ue 5)
raajas saatak taamas darpahi kaytay roop upaa-i-aa.
Those who embody the energies of sattva-white light, raajas-red passion, and taamas-black darkness, abide in the Fear of God, along with the many created forms.
ao audt feo aber sau nfs sau Gan Ther BI (999-1, wg, He 5)
chhal bapuree ih ka-ulaa darpai at darpai Dharam raa-i-aa. ||3]||
This miserable deceiver Maya abides in the Fear of God; the Righteous Judge of Dharma is utterly afraid of Him as well. ||3]|
Has Anat sofa fimmit fag sa AIST Il (999-2, wg, ue 5)
Sagal samagree dareh bi-aapee bin dar karnaihaaraa.
The entire expanse of the Universe is in the Fear of God; only the Creator Lord is without this Fear.
AI Sst FIIs A Halt SIS ATfs SIA SUA (999-2, wg, ue 5)
kaho naanak bhagtan kaa sangee bhagat soheh darbaaraa. ||4||1|| Says Nanak, God is the companion of His devotees; His devotees look beautiful in the Court of the Lord. ||4[|1]|
HTT HIG U Il (999-3)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
uts aad & wiovg g afaa ofa fies unis mets II (999-3, ng, He 5)
paa™ch barakh ko anaath Dharoo baarik har simrat amar ataaray.
The five year old orphan boy Dhroo, by meditating in remembrance on the Lord, became stationary and permanent.
ug dfs owes afaS anata fa fers Ail (999-4, wg, He 5)
putar hayt naaraa-in kahi-o jamkankar maar bidaaray. ||1]|
For the sake of his son, Ajaamal called out, "O Lord, Naaraayan", who struck down and killed the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
He SAT AS naas Burg | (999-4, wg, we 5) mayray thaakur kaytay agnat uDhaaray. My Lord and Master has saved many, countless beings.
Hfa de osu fs fesae ufeS wafs sors ail TIS il (99-5, wg, 18 5)
mohi deen alap mat nirgun pari-o saran du-aaray. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am meek, with little or no understanding, and unworthy; I seek protection at the Lord's Door. ||1||Pause] |
wong Hud ste afua sd fires Il (999-5, wg, Hs 5) baalmeek supchaaro tari-o baDhik taray bichaaray. Baalmeek the outcaste was saved, and the poor hunter was saved as well.
ea foxy Ho uta mafos anufs ufs S3srg iQ (999-6, wg, ue 5)
ayk nimakh man maahi araaDhi-o gajpat paar utaaray. ||2||
The elephant remembered the Lord in his mind for an instant, and so was carried across. ||2||
atat sfmr sas ufsere gaarun suf fares 1 (999-6, wg, He 5) keenee rakhi-aa bhagat parhilaadai harnaakhas nakheh bidaaray. He saved His devotee Prahlaad, and tore Harnaakhash with his nails.
faeg wt AS sfeS usta Aas Aw BAS Sil (999-7, wg, ue 5) bidar daasee sut bha-i-o puneetaa saglay kul ujaaray. ||3]| Bidar, the son of a slave-girl, was purified, and all his generations were redeemed.
[I3I|
ae usa ase@ mus fixfemr Ha Haters Il (999-7, wg, He 5)
kavan paraaDh bataava-o apunay mithi-aa moh magnaaray.
What sins of mine should I speak of? I am intoxicated with false emotional attachment.
uifeG AM soa Ge ofa at SA FAT UATS III (999-8, wg, He 5)
aa-i-O Saam naanak ot har kee leejai bhujaa pasaaray. ||4||2| | Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord; please, reach out and take me into Your embrace. ||4||2||
HTT HIG U Il (999-9)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
fes ofes gfx ag at uifsa ASS afs WE II (999-9, wg, He 5)
vit navit bharmi-o baho bhaatee anik jatan kar Dhaa-ay.
For the sake of riches, I wandered around in so many ways; I rushed around, making all sorts of efforts.
At AH ate JB ICH 3 3 BS MATE INA (999-9, og, He 5) jo jo karam kee-ay ha-o ha-umai tay tay bha-ay ajaa-ay. ||1]|| The deeds I did in egotism and pride, have all been done in vain. ||1||
Med fee AT AH F BE Il (999-10, wg, He 5) avar din kaahoo kaaj na laa-ay. Other days are of no use to me;
A fes 4 a@ din us He wr fee ofs AA WES AI TIE Il (999-10, rg, He 5)
so din mo ka-o deejai parabh jee-o jaa din har jas gaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
please bless me with those days, O Dear God, on which I may sing the Lord's Praises. ||1]|Pause] |
uz aes fas efy uns fer dt ufo SasTS Il (999-11, wg, H8 5) putar kaltar garih daykh pasaaraa is hee meh urjhaa-ay. Gazing upon children, spouse, household and possessions, one is entangled in these.
Hien He ofy se Cans ote dfs aad 6 WES IQ (999-11, wg, ue 5) maa-i-aa mad chaakh bha-ay udmaatay har har kabahu na gaa-ay. ||2|| Tasting the wine of Maya, one is intoxicated, and never sings of the Lord, Har, Har.
21 |
feg fafa det ag usars fag HG odt UTS II (999-12, wg, He 5) ih biDh khojee baho parkaaraa bin santan nahee paa-ay. In this way, I have examined lots of methods, but without the Saints, it is not found.
3H Ws SS YS AYE HIS AC VS wES III (999-13, wg, ue 5)
tum daataar vaday parabh samrath maagan ka-o daan aa-ay. ||3]||
You are the Great Giver, the great and almighty God; I have come to beg a gift from You. |[3]|
fsurfaS Aare HS HIST BA IS AGSTE Il (999-13, wg, us 5)
ti-aagi-o saglaa maan mahtaa daas rayn sarnaa-ay.
Abandoning all pride and self-importance, I have sought the Sanctuary of the dust of the feet of the Lord's slave.
ag aad dfa fife se Sa Ho MISE AY UTES IIGISI (999-14, wg, He 5)
kaho naanak har mil bha-ay aykai mahaa anand sukh paa-ay. ||4|[3]|
Says Nanak, meeting with the Lord, I have become one with Him; I have found supreme bliss and peace. ||4]|3]|
HTT HIG U Il (999-14)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
aes ae ulfaS J ot AES SAT MATS Il (999-14, wg, us 5) kavan thaan Dheeri-o hai naamaa kavan basat aha"kaaraa. In what place is the Name established? Where does egotism dwell?
azo fads Afs Gufs efoG Hu 3 Afs afe ara Al (999-15, wg, Hs 5) kavan chihan sun oopar chhohi-o mukh tay sun kar gaaraa. ||1|| What injury have you suffered, listening to abuse from someone else's mouth? ||1]|
Hog 3 5 aASg AT SF mmMEG I (999-16, wg, we 5) sunhu ray too ka-un kahaa tay aa-i-o. Listen: who are you, and where did you come from?
Sst 6 Woe asta Hels vas vats o UTES A TIE Il (999-16, wg, He 5)
aytee na jaan-o kayteek mudat chaltay khabar na paa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You don't even know how long you will stay here; you have no hint of when you shall leave. ||1||Pause| |
Ado Ale udo wig ureat aAur ft fasars ll (999-17, wg, He 5)
sahan seel pavan ar paanee basuDhaa khimaa nibhraatay.
Wind and water have patience and tolerance; the earth has compassion and forgiveness, no doubt.
us 33 fife sfe6 Arar fea Hfs eG GIS NM (999-17, wg, ue 5)
panch tat mil bha-i-o sanjogaa in meh kavan duraatay. ||2]|
The union of the five tattvas - the five elements - has brought you into being. Which of these is evil? ||2]|
fafs afs afeor usta fears ars TBH uret I (999-18, 7g, He 5)
jin rach rachi-aa purakh biDhaatai naalay ha-umai paa-ee.
The Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, formed your form; He also burdened you with egotism.
HOH Hee CA tt ae 3 F Go mre Are ISI (999-18, wg, Hs 5) janam maran us hee ka-o hai ray ohaa aavai jaa-ee. ||3]| He alone is born and dies; He alone comes and goes. ||3]|
ade fade ant fag guar fifanr Aare UATT II (999-19, wg, He 5)
baran chihan naahee kichh rachnaa mithi-aa sagal pasaaraa.
Nothing of the color and the form of the creation shall remain; the entire expanse is transitory.
sefs aoa Fe ae Css Sa Sa SaaS IIS (999-19, wg, He 5)
bhanat naanak jab khay! ujhaarai tab aykai aykankaaraa. ||4||4]|
Prays Nanak, when He brings His play to its close, then only the One, the One Lord remains. ||4||4||
Yat FOOO
HTT HIG U Il (1000-1)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
HS HI nig BS fears HG ds o wis i co00-1, wg, ue 5)
maan moh ar lobh vikaaraa bee-o cheet na ghaali-o.
Pride, emotional attachment, greed and corruption are gone; I have not placed anything else, other than the Lord, within my consciousness.
OH 336 Te Ufa sen ote sug & THT All (1000-2, wg, ws 5)
naam ratan gunaa har banjay laad vakhar lai chaali-o. ||1]||
I have purchased the jewel of the Naam and the Glorious Praises of the Lord; loading this merchandise, I have set out on my journey. ||1]|
Aza at Gata foadt yifS 1 (000-2, wg, He 5) sayvak kee orhak nibhee pareet. The love which the Lord's servant feels for the Lord lasts forever.
Hes Ato Aes nus vos THE sHS uA TIS il 000-2, wg, ue 5)
jeevat saahib sayvi-o apnaa chaltay raakhi-o cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In my life, I served my Lord and Master, and as I depart, I keep Him enshrined in my consciousness. ||1]|Pause| |
AAT ofan atat safe fSA 3 HY odt HfsS II co00-3, wg, ne 5) jaisee aagi-aa keenee thaakur tis tay mukh nahee mori-o. I have not turned my face away from my Lord and Master's Command.
Hdd »ioe sfus fas st3fs Cfs Curg as estas 2M (000-4, wg, Hs 5)
sahj anand rakhi-o garih bheetar uth u-aahoo ka-o da-ori-o. ||2| |
He fills my household with celestial peace and bliss; if He asks me to leave, I leave at once. ||2]||
nifamrt His ga Ret afs Hat Aart Tau oot ASE Il (1000-4, wg, Hz 5)
aagi-aa meh bhookh so-ee kar sookhaa sog harakh nahee jaani-o.
When I am under the Lord's Command, I find even hunger pleasurable; I know no difference between sorrow and joy.
A gan sfe6 wfog a A a B HSE ISI (1000-5, wg, He 5) jo jo hukam bha-i-o saahib kaa so maathai lay maani-o. ||3]| Whatever the Command of my Lord and Master is, I bow my forehead and accept it.
[I3]|
ses fours SaT AA AG ASI JSS UBS Il (1000-6, wg, ws 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal thaakur sayvak ka-o savray halat palaataa.
The Lord and Master has become merciful to His servant; He has embellished both this world and the next.
Ue Aza Hes Gy urfemr fafs Soa WAH UES IBIUII (1000-6, Hg, He 5)
Dhan sayvak safal oh aa-i-aa jin naanak khasam pachhaataa. ||4||5] |
Blessed is that servant, and fruitful is his birth; O Nanak, he realizes his Lord and Master. ||4||5]|
HTT HIG U Il (1000-7)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
ufemr acy fou set stag atese fs afs aet il (1000-7, wg, He 5)
khuli-aa karam kirpaa bha-ee thaakur keertan har har gaa-ee.
Good karma has dawned for me - my Lord and Master has become merciful. I sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
AY aor ure faa fife aret rarest oret Ail (1000-8, xg, He 5)
saram thaakaa paa-ay bisraamaa mit ga-ee saglee Dhaa-ee. ||1]||
My struggle is ended; I have found peace and tranquility. All my wanderings have ceased. ||1]||
ma Hfs ates vest uret i 000-8, wg, He 5) ab mohi jeevan padvee paa-ee. Now, I have obtained the state of eternal life.
os ures nfs usy fast He at Aa|STet AUN TI Il (1000-8, wg, He 5)
cheet aa-i-o man purakh biDhaataa santan kee sarnaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, has come into my conscious mind; I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
aM au BF Hg feed foes Hares Fae Il (1000-9, wg, ne 5)
kaam kroDh lobh moh nivaaray nivray sagal bairaa-ee.
Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment are eradicated; all my enemies are eliminated.
He dale THe I SHE ashe F SSS Taret IMI (1000-10, wg, He 5) sad hajoor haajar hai naajar kateh na bha-i-o dooraa-ee. ||2|| He is always ever-present, here and now, watching over me; He is never far away.
21 |
HY Alse Aaa AS ust TS AS Age Il (1000-10, +g, He 5)
sukh seetal sarDhaa sabh pooree ho-ay sant sahaa-ee.
In peace and cool tranquility, my faith has been totally fulfilled; the Saints are my Helpers and Support.
ures ufss ate fas stsfe HfoHt wag 3 AT ISI (1000-11, wg, H8 5)
paavan patit kee-ay khin bheetar mahimaa kathan na jaa-ee. ||3]| He has purified the sinners in an instant; I cannot express His Glorious Praises. ||3]|
foas@ se nae 3 ue afse sae Geret Il (1000-11, wg, ne 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay sagal bhai kho-ay gobid charan otaa-ee.
I have become fearless; all fear has departed. The feet of the Lord of the Universe are my only Shelter.
oSa AA We oad a Sfs fear fs wet ISiEell “000-12, wg, He 5)
naanak jas gaavai thaakur kaa rain dinas liv laa-ee. ||4||6||
Nanak sings the Praises of his Lord and Master; night and day, he is lovingly focused on Him. ||4]|6] |
HTT HIG U Il (1000-12)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
A ANde Aaa Te otfeg fsA as agg 6 WefA ST Il (1000-13, mg, He 5) jo samrath sarab gun naa-ik tis ka-o kabahu na gaavas ray. He is all-powerful, the Master of all virtues, but you never sing of Him!
efs we fas sisfs s aG Gur a@ fefs fefs orefit J NAN (000-13, wg, H8 5) chhod jaa-ay khin bheetar taa ka-o u-aa ka-o fir fir Dhaavas ray. ||1]| You shall have to leave all this in an instant, but again and again, you chase after it.
[21
mud ys AS fas o AHTSA F II (1000-14, wg, He 5) apunay parabh ka-o ki-o na samaaras ray. Why do you not contemplate your God?
Sct Afa da afh sfeor faa fA Abas wefh J ua FI it (000-14, wg, ne 5)
bairee sang rang ras rachi-aa tis si-o jee-araa jaaras ray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are entangled in association with your enemies, and the enjoyment of pleasures; your soul is burning up with them! ||1||Pause] |
wa ofh Afomt AH eS 3 at Aafe o uTSfA ST II (1000-15, mg, He 5)
jaa kai naam suni-ai jam chhodai taa kee saran na paavas ray.
Hearing His Name, the Messenger of Death will release you, and yet, you do not enter His Sanctuary!
ante af fins aud ag st at Ge fearetA F MQM (000-15, wg, H8 5) kaadh day-ay si-aal bapuray ka-o taa kee ot tikaavas ray. ||2|| Turn out this wretched jackal, and seek the Shelter of that God. ||2]|
fan oT AH HOS se Sd ST HE dao wel FT II (1000-16, og, He 5)
jis kaa jaas sunat bhav taree-ai taa si-o rang na laavas ray.
Praising Him, you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and yet, you have not fallen in love with Him!
aot as neu Aus at sofs safe wearefA J SII (1000-17, wg, Hs 5)
thoree baat alap supnay kee bahur bahur atkaavas ray. ||3]|
This meager, short-lived dream, this thing - you are engrossed in it, over and over again. ||3]|
safe unre faur fafa ora AsAfer ufs uret Il (1000-17, wg, Hs 5)
bha-i-o parsaad kirpaa niDh thaakur satsang pat paa-ee.
When our Lord and Master, the ocean of mercy, grants His Grace, one finds honor in the Society of the Saints.
TI SHA FTE FH Se AS YS Fe ATT SIDI (1000-18, wg, ws 5)
kaho naanak tarai gun bharam chhootaa ja-o parabh bha-ay sahaa-ee. ||4]|7]|| Says Nanak, I am rid of the illusion of the three-phased Maya, when God becomes my help and support. ||4]|7]||
HTT HIG U Il (1000-19)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
nizarnt As fafa wes fsR 3 ao vats il (1000-19, wg, Hs 5)
antarjaamee sabh biDh jaanai tis tay kahaa dulaari-o.
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows everything; what can anyone hide from Him?
JAS ure sd fis sista mas Afar S ASS Wall 000-19, wg, He 5) hasat paav jharay khin bheetar agan sang lai jaari-o. ||1|| Your hands and feet will fall off in an instant, when you are burnt in the fire. ||1]|
UST Yoo
HS 3 Ho 3 oH faAteG I coo1-1, og, He 5) moorhay tai man tay raam bisaari-o. You fool, you have forgotten the Lord from your mind!
ee ule acts ganda was oo fetes na TIS il Coo1-1, wg, we 5)
loon khaa-ay karahi haraamkhoree paykhat nain bidaari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You eat His salt, and then you are untrue to Him; before your very eyes, you shall be torn apart. ||1]||Pause| |
mAT ta Cus 30 sists cas 3 arg eta I (1001-2, og, we 5) asaaDh rog upji-o tan bheetar tarat na kaahoo taari-o. The incurable disease has arisen in your body; it cannot be removed or overcome.
ys fanaa no ey ute feg soa 33 stetaS NINTH (1001-2, wg, He 5)
parabh bisrat mahaa dukh paa-i-o ih naanak tat beechaari-o. ||2||8] |
Forgetting God, one endures utter agony; this is the essence of reality which Nanak has realized. ||2||8||
HTT HIG U Il (1001-3)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
JdIO AHS YS TY SHS il (1001-3, wg, ws 5)
charan kamal parabh raakhay cheet. I have enshrined the lotus feet of God within my consciousness.
dfs TE Wed Sst Sts Il (1001-3, wg, ws 5) har gun gaavah neetaa neet. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, continually, continuously.
fH fag BAT neg 3 A Il 001-4, og, we 5) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-oo. There is none other than Him at all.
wife Hf nifs I AS Wall Coo1-4, wg, Hs 5) aad maDh ant hai so-oo. ||1]| He alone exists, in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end. ||1]|
Azo at Ge nm orf wai TIS il Goo1-4, wg, wz 5) santan kee ot aapay aap. ||1|| rahaa-o. He Himself is the Shelter of the Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
EN xX Oo wW of SA I Ads AAP Il (1001-5, wg, 8 5) jaa kai vas hai sagal sansaar. The entire universe is under His control.
nim wif nif faders il Co01-5, wg, He 5) aapay aap aap nirankaar. He Himself, the Formless Lord, is Himself by Himself.
sed afaG Ara AE II Cio01-5, wg, Hs 5) naanak gahi-o saachaa so-ay. Nanak holds tight to that True Lord.
AY ufenr fefs ey s TE NQUNCN Coo1-6, wg, Hs 5) sukh paa-i-aa fir dookh na ho-ay. ||2||9]| He has found peace, and shall never suffer pain again. ||2||9]|
HTS HIG U Ug 3 (1001-7) maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsas ure Il (001-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
UTS Hues Aha AMES SH ad fafa uifamiree i cioo1-8, wg, v2 5)
paraan sukh-daata jee-a sukh-daata tum kaahay bisaari-o agi-aanath.
He is the Giver of peace to the breath of life, the Giver of life to the soul; how can you forget Him, you ignorant person?
da He why Je 3H eT VSS HOH MASE IAI (1001-8, +g, He 5)
hochhaa mad chaakh ho-ay tum baavar dulabh janam akaarath. ||1]|
You taste the weak, insipid wine, and you have gone insane. You have uselessly wasted this precious human life. ||1]|
3 3a Mt oats fearee Il (1001-9, wg, He 5) ray nar aisee karahi i-aanath. O man, such is the foolishness you practice.
sf Asaae gf 3 sm Hfs wufes wat Afar AST UU TIS Il Cioo1-9, wg, m2 5)
taj sarangDhar bharam too bhoolaa mohi lapti-o daasee sang saanath. ||1|| rahaa-o. Renouncing the Lord, the Support of the earth, you wander, deluded by doubt; you are engrossed in emotional attachment, associating with Maya, the slave-girl. ||1]|Pause] |
ugelug fauna ate ae Asta IG IG ads fase Il (1001-10, wg, HW 5)
DharneeDhar ti-aag neech kul sayveh ha-o ha-o karat bihaavath.
Abandoning the Lord, the Support of the earth, you serve her of lowly ancestry, and you pass you life acting egotistically.
ae AGH aaa vifamrst HoHfe vig ATS MMW (001-11, wg, ne 5)
fokat karam karahi agi-aanee manmukh anDh kahaavath. ||2]|
You do useless deeds, you ignorant person; this is why you are called a blind, self- willed manmukh. ||2||
Afs os" wats afe afer a fers A fsa ASE Il (001-1, wg, He 5)
sat hotaa asat kar maani-aa jo binsat so nihchal jaanath.
That which is true, you believe to be untrue; what is transitory, you believe to be permanent.
ud at aS nust afs uadt MA ge SHS |S (1001-12, wg, ws 5) par kee ka-o apnee kar pakree aisay bhool bhulaanath. ||3]| You grasp as your own, what belongs to others; in such delusions you are deluded.
[I3I|
ust FINE Ae SA AS Sa OTH Fase Il (1001-12, wg, ws 5)
khatree baraahman sood vais sabh aykai naam taraanath.
The Kh'shaatriyas, Brahmins, Soodras and Vaishyas all cross over, through the Name of the One Lord.
Tg Soa Cuen as 3 FAS A ura usa ISIANAON (001-13, wg, He 5) gur naanak updays kahat hai jo sunai so paar paraanath. ||4]|1]|10||
Guru Nanak speaks the Teachings; whoever listens to them is carried across. [14] [1] [20] |
HTT HIG U Il (1001-14)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Tus ass Afar A ys SIaTSS HEUTE Il (1001-14, wg, ne 5) gupat kartaa sang so parabh dehkaava-ay manukhaa-ay. You may act in secrecy, but God is still with you; you can only deceive other people.
farrfa afs M@ fad safe sus dy afe we ail coo1-14, wg, He 5)
bisaar har jee-o bikhai bhogeh tapat thamm gal laa-ay. || 1] |
Forgetting your Dear Lord, you enjoy corrupt pleasures, and so you shall have to embrace red-hot pillars. ||1]|
J od afte ug fafa ATE I (001-15, wg, He 5) ray nar kaa-ay par garihi jaa-ay. O man, why do you go out to the households of others?
TIS Ass ath Teas SH odt AfSS Gan THE ai JIE il coo1-15, wg, ne 5)
kuchal kathor kaam garDhabh tum nahee suni-o Dharam raa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. You filthy, heartless, lustful donkey! Haven't you heard of the Righteous Judge of Dharma? ||1]||Pause| |
fears urag aafa aa fsa uz firefe ii (iooi-16, wg, ue 5)
bikaar paathar galeh baaDhay nind pot siraa-ay.
The stone of corruption is tied around your neck, and the load of slander is on your head.
Hd" Ag AME Swat ute o uss’ ATE III (1001-16, wg, Hs 5) mahaa saagar samud langhnaa paar na parnaa jaa-ay. ||2|| You must cross over the vast open ocean, but you cannot cross over to the other side.
21 |
of afa afs xfs faorfuG 33 ae feate i coo1-17, wg, ue 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mohi bi-aapi-o naytar rakhay firaa-ay.
You are engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment; you have turned your eyes away from the Truth.
Hin Soreo 3 aag fhoet Ho EST HAE SI (1001-17, wg, HE 5) sees uthaavan na kabhoo mil-ee mahaa dutar maa-ay. ||3]||
You cannot even raise your head above the water of the vast, impassable sea of Maya. ||3]|
Hg Hast AAT HAST AIH fomirat mifsurfs i coo1-18, wg, He 5)
soor muktaa sasee muktaa barahm gi-aanee alipaa-ay.
The sun is liberated, and the moon is liberated; the God-realized being is pure and untouched.
Hass AA SAsd uifsus Ae feaHote isi coo1-is, wg, 48 5) subhaavat jaisay baisantar alipat sadaa niramlaa-ay. ||4| | His inner nature is like that of fire, untouched and forever immaculate. ||4| |
fan aeH ufeor faq ofoor user fafs aa ufo Hfenr Aste I cool-19, wg, Hs 5)
jis karam khuli-aa tis lahi-aa parh-daa jin gur peh mani-aa subhaa-ay.
When good karma dawns, the wall of doubt is torn down. He lovingly accepts the Guru's Will.
UaT IOO2
dfs 43 wreug on dat Aa atod Hae Afs o ue UM (1002-1, og, HE 5)
gur mantar avkhaDh naam deenaa jan naanak sankat jon na paa-ay. ||5||2|| One who is blessed with the medicine of the GurMantra, the Name of the Lord, O servant Nanak, does not suffer the agonies of reincarnation. ||5||2]|
3 od fea fafa uf uate i (1002-1, wg, He 5) ray nar in biDh paar paraa-ay. O man, in this way, you shall cross over to the other side.
fourfe afe Fig af fresa forte sa SS TIS SAT NINA (1002-2, ag, He 5) Dhi-aa-ay har jee-o ho-ay mirtak ti-aag doojaa bhaa-o. rahaa-o doojaa. ||2||11]| Meditate on your Dear Lord, and be dead to the world; renounce your love of duality. ||Second Pause||2||11]|
HTT HIG U Il (1002-3)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
wots geo 3 sfe ud afe wa dt fo feufenr a i (1002-3, wg, He 5)
baahar dhoodhan tay chhoot paray gur ghar hee maahi dikhaa-i-aa thaa.
I have quit searching outside; the Guru has shown me that God is within the home of my own heart.
nese nie Ju ys Umer de He efs 6 asg wer a NA (1002-3, wg, He 5) anbha-o achraj roop parabh paykhi-aa mayraa man chhod na kathoo jaa-i-aa thaa.
H1II I have seen God, fearless, of wondrous beauty; my mind shall never leave Him to go anywhere else. ||1]|
Hea utes go ufeS ofa yar urfemr a Il (1002-4, wg, He 5) maanak paa-i-o ray paa-i-o har pooraa paa-i-aa thaa. I have found the jewel; I have found the Perfect Lord.
Hfs une 3 ufenr vet afe fas ag feefenr a nail FI il (1002-5, wg, we 5) mol amol na paa-i-aa jaa-ee kar kirpaa guroo divaa-i-aa thaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. The invaluable value cannot be obtained; in His Mercy, the Guru bestows it. ||1]|Pause] |
mifeAe uitag urTaqoy ffs AG nee aerfeEnr ar Il (1002-5, wg, He 5)
adisat agochar paarbarahm mil saaDhoo akath kathaa-i-aa thaa.
The Supreme Lord God is imperceptible and unfathomable; meeting the Holy Saint, I speak the Unspoken Speech.
Wiode Hae TAH warts eS sg nis ou gorfenr | III (1002-6, wg, Hs 5)
anhad sabad dasam du-aar vaji-o tah amrit naam chu-aa-i-aa thaa. ||2||
The unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates and resounds in the Tenth Gate; the Ambrosial Naam trickles down there. ||2||
fe ardt nfs fyAat gst or] save AHEM a Il (1002-7, wg, Hs 5)
tot naahee man tarisnaa boojhee akhut bhandaar samaa-i-aa thaa.
I lack nothing; the thirsty desires of my mind are satisfied. The inexhaustible treasure has entered into my being.
VIE VIE BIE Ts AS ny wis gH ufeor | BI (1002-7, wg, ve 5)
charan charan charan gur sayvay agharh gharhi-o ras paa-i-aa thaa. ||3]||
I serve the feet, the feet, the feet of the Guru, and manage the unmanageable. I have found the juice, the sublime essence. ||3]|
Hon “et Ade Ae" AIH HG YotfSnr Sr il (1002-8, wg, us 5) sehjay aavaa sehjay jaavaa sehjay man khaylaa-i-aa thaa. Intuitively I come, and intuively I go; my mind intuitively plays.
aT soa SdH afe dfeor safe Host Hoe usr a NIZNII (1002-9, Hg, He 5)
kaho naanak bharam gur kho-i-aa taa har mahlee mahal paa-i-aa thaa. ||4||3]|12|| Says Nanak, when the Guru drives out doubt, then the soul-bride enters the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4]|3]|12]|
HTT HIG U Il (1002-9)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
farnfo Ata foster fsrfs fA ge ats il (1002-10, wg, ue 5) jisahi saaj nivaaji-aa tiseh si-o ruch naahi. You feel no love for the One who created and embellished you.
mis Tat nis get SHS FB SAT MAU (1002-10, wg, Hs 5) aan rootee aan bo-ee-ai fal na foolai taahi. ||1]| The seed, planted out season, does not germinate; it does not produce flower or fruit.
[21
3 HO Ss MAS JE Il (1002-11, wg, ue 5) ray man vatar beejan naa-o. O mind, this is the time to plant the seed of the Name.
afe ast of Hour 38 ANS AMS A TIS i (1002-11, wg, Hs 5)
bo-ay khaytee laa-ay manoo-aa bhalo sama-o su-aa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Focus your mind, and cultivate this crop; at the proper time, make this your purpose. ||1]|Pause| |
afe wos SoH Ho ot Afsag AeNt ATE I (1002-11, wg, He 5)
kho-ay khahrhaa bharam man kaa satgur sarnee jaa-ay.
Eradicate the stubbornness and doubt of your mind, and go to the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
aay fan a@ usg fofimr Aet ars SHAE II (1002-12, wg, Hs 5) karam jis ka-o Dharahu likhi-aa so-ee kaar kamaa-ay. ||2| | He alone does such deeds, who has such pre-ordained karma. ||2||
a oar dfs fr@ ures uct ate i (1002-12, wg, He 5) bhaa-o laagaa gobid si-o ghaal paa-ee thaa-ay. He falls in love with the Lord of the Universe, and his efforts are approved.
afs Ae dfhor foufe o ag ATE SI (1002-13, wg, He 5) khayt mayrai jammi-aa nikhut na kabhoo jaa-ay. ||3]| My crop has germinated, and it shall never be used up. ||3]|
ufeur me uese Sfs o AST ATE Il (1002-13, wg, Hs 5) paa-i-aa amol padaaratho chhod na kathoo jaa-ay. I have obtained the priceless wealth, which shall never leave me or go anywhere else.
ag aoa AY ufenr feufs gd mruMf— sisi (1002-14, wg, He 5) kaho naanak sukh paa-i-aa taripat rahay aaghaa-ay. ||4||4||13]| Says Nanak, I have found peace; I am satisfied and fulfilled. ||4]|4]|13]]|
HTT HIG U Il (1002-15)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Se nist SIH a Hols SES usaA Il (1002-15, wg, we 5) footo aa‘daa bharam kaa maneh bha-i-o pargaas. The egg of doubt has burst; my mind has been enlightened.
aret sat ua 3 afe atet sfe wera NAN (1002-15, wg, He 5) kaatee bayree pagah tay gur keenee band khalaas. ||1]| The Guru has shattered the shackles on my feet, and has set me free. ||1]|
mee WE ThoS Il (1002-16, wg, us 5) aavan jaan rahi-o. My coming and going in reincarnation is ended.
sus aso afs afeor afs Aise oH SE a TIS il (1002-16, wg, ue 5)
tapat karhaahaa bujh ga-i-aa gur seetal naam dee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The boiling cauldron has cooled down; the Guru has blessed me with the cooling, soothing Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Wa 3 AY Ha sfeur 38 efs ae feats i (1002-17, wg, we 5)
jab tay saaDhoo sang bha-i-aa ta-o chhod ga-ay nighaar.
Since I joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, those who were eyeing me have left.
fan at nea fn 3 eet 3B aT as ATSST NMI (1002-17, wg, ne 5)
jis kee atak tis tay chhutee ta-o kahaa karai kotvaar. ||2||
The one who tied me up, has released me; what can the Watchman of Death do to me now? ||2]|
TA SI ATH A TE fSTAIHT Il (1002-18, 7g, we 5) chookaa bhaaraa karam kaa ho-ay nihkarmaa. The load of my karma has been removed, and I am now free of karma.
Wad 3 ae vs af ats TaN BI (1002-18, wg, He 5)
Saagar tay kandhai charhay gur keenay Dharmaa. ||3] |
I have crossed the world-ocean, and reached the other shore; the Guru has blessed me with this Dharma. ||3]|
Ay Wo Ay da AG Are sete It (1002-18, wg, He 5) sach thaan sach baithkaa sach su-aa-o banaa-i-aa. True is my place, and True is my seat; I have made Truth my life's purpose.
Ag unt Ag zud aoa ule ure SUI (1002-19, wg, He 5)
sach poonjee sach vakhro naanak ghar paa-i-aa. ||4||5||14]|
True is my capital, and True is the merchandise, which Nanak has placed into the home of the heart. ||4]|5]|14]|
HTT HIG U Il (1002-19)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
uat 90038
ae us HY S USS AHS A HST Il (1003-1, Wg, He 5) bayd pukaarai mukh tay pandat kaamaaman kaa maathaa. The Pandit, the religious scholar, proclaims the Vedas, but he is slow to act on them.
Hat dfs sar feast fast asus Wr I (1003-1, wg, ue 5) monee ho-ay baithaa ikaa‘tee hirdai kalpan gaathaa. Another person on silence sits alone, but his heart is tied in knots of desire.
dfs Cet fas sfx sfeG sea ait Bor AI (1003-1, wg, He 5)
ho-ay udaasee garihu taj chali-o chhutkai naahee naathaa. ||1]||
Another becomes an Udaasi, a renunciate; he abandons his home and walks out on his family, but his wandering impulses do not leave him. ||1]|
riba at & ufs ars AIT I (1003-2, wg, ue 5) jee-a kee kai peh baat kahaa. Who can I tell about the state of my soul?
ufy Has HAG ys AS MA AT BI NU! TIC i (1003-2, wg, He 5)
aap mukat mo ka-o parabh maylay aiso kahaa lahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Where can I find such a person who is liberated, and who can unite me with my God? ||1]|Pause] |
SuMt afe & Sot Aa Hor wa FEA UAT II (1003-3, wg, He 5)
tapsee kar kai dayhee saaDhee manoo-aa dah dis Dhaanaa.
Someone may practice intensive meditation, and discipline his body, but his mind still runs around in ten directions.
quneta yoHeH ator fase sfeor THAT Il (1003-3, wg, Hs 5) barahmchaar barahmchaj keenaa hirdai bha-i-aa gumaanaa. The celibate practices celibacy, but his heart is filled with pride.
Hfoumlt dfs & stefa safe Gr nfs axa fears i211 003-4, wg, Hs 5)
Sani-aasee ho-ay kai tirath bharmi-o us meh kroDh bigaanaa. ||2||
The Sannyaasi wanders around at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, but his mindless anger is still within him. ||2| |
ulus ata se THETA Shs SX Gurer i (1003-5, wg, 2 5) ghoongar baaDh bha-ay raamdaasaa rotee-an kay opaavaa. The temple dancers tie bells around their ankles to earn their living.
dS OH AH YY ala ada su feurer il (1003-5, wg, us 5)
barat naym karam khat keenay baahar bhaykh dikhaavaa.
Others go on fasts, take vows, perform the six rituals and wear religious robes for show.
ats ote Hfe sar mond His odt dfs fs wet SI (1003-5, wg, ws 5)
geet naad mukh raag alaapay man nahee har har gaavaa. ||3]|| Some sing songs and melodies and hymns, but their minds do not sing of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
Jay Aa BF HT das ofa feans safe &X AS II (1003-6, wg, He 5)
harakh sog lobh moh rahat heh nirmal har kay santaa.
The Lord's Saints are immaculately pure; they are beyond pleasure and pain, beyond greed and attachment.
fee ot ofS ure He He AT efenr aT saTSTT Il (1003-7, wg, He 5) tin kee Dhoorh paa-ay man mayraa jaa da-i-aa karay bhagvantaa. My mind obtains the dust of their feet, when the Lord God shows mercy.
OWT SSA Te UT ffemr st Ssdt Ho at fest gil (1003-7, wg, ws 5) kaho naanak gur pooraa mili-aa taa utree man kee chintaa. ||4||
Says Nanak, I met the Perfect Guru, and then the anxiety of my mind was removed. [141]
Ae nisaat afs afenr i) 003-8, wg, we 5) mayraa antarjaamee har raa-i-aa. My Sovereign Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Ag fag We He Abr a Utsy fants ae soxafeor na TTS TAT UENWI (1003-8, wg, Hs 5)
sabh kichh jaanai mayray jee-a kaa pareetam bisar ga-ay bakbaa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||6||15]|
The Beloved of my soul knows everything; all trivial talk is forgotten. ||1]|Second Pause] |6||15]|
HTT HIG U Il (1003-9)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
afe oa Aaa & aa fan fase SH SH Il (1003-9, wg, Hs 5)
kot laakh sarab ko raajaa jis hirdai naam tumaaraa.
One who has Your Name in his heart is the king of all the hundreds of thousands and millions of beings.
Tag on 3 tr ve Afsafe A fs HaHa aera WAN (1003-10, wg, He 5)
jaa ka-o naam na dee-aa mayrai satgur say mar janmeh gaavaaraa. ||1]|
Those, whom my True Guru has not blessed with Your Name, are poor idiots, who die and are reborn. ||1]|
He Afsaad ot ufS ge Il (1003-10, wg, He 5) mayray satgur hee pat raakh. My True Guru protects and preserves my honor.
os ores sa dt ufs yest farss set wa NU TIS ll 003-11, wg, 3 5)
cheet aavahi tab hee pat pooree bisrat ralee-ai khaak. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When You come to mind, Lord, then I obtain perfect honor. Forgetting You, I roll in the dust. ||1]]Pause| |
gu da yor Ho sae 3 3 fee fears i 1003-11, wg, 3 5) roop rang khusee-aa man bhogan tay tay chhidar vikaaraa. The mind's pleasures of love and beauty bring just as many blames and sins.
ofa or oH fours afemret Aa Hod fe ATS II (1003-12, Hg, He 5) har kaa naam niDhaan kali-aanaa sookh sahj ih saaraa. ||2]| The Name of the Lord is the treasure of Emancipation; it is absolute peace and poise.
121] Her ga fade furs ufo faG area at arfemr I (1003-13, og, Hs 5)
maa-i-aa rang birang khinai meh ji-o baadar kee chhaa-i-aa. The pleasures of Maya fade away in an instant, like the shade of a passing cloud.
Awe se gs sha ws fae ae fife afs afe afenr ai (1003-13, wg, nH 5)
say laal bha-ay goorhai rang raatay jin gur mil har har gaa-i-aa. ||3||
They alone are dyed in the deep crimson of the Lord's Love, who meet the Guru, and sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
Ca HE MUTT AMM Mia TIT I (1003-14, wg, He 5)
ooch mooch apaar su-aamee agam darbaaraa.
My Lord and Master is lofty and exalted, grand and infinite. The Darbaar of His Court is inaccessible.
oH efsuret Ast SSa YAH fimirasr IIDIIEN (1003-14, Hg, He 5)
naamo vadi-aa-ee sobhaa naanak khasam pi-aaraa. ||4]|7||16|| Through the Naam, glorious greatness and respect are obtained; O Nanak, my Lord and Master is my Beloved. ||4]|7||16||
Hg HIG UU 8 (1003-16)
maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
96 Afsas ure II (1003-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Guiofs Ssurst i 1003-17, wg, He 5) o-ankaar utpaatee. The One Universal Creator Lord created the creation.
ater feo AS TST Il (1003-17, wg, v3 5) kee-aa dinas sabh raatee. He made all the days and the nights.
ze fee fesee uret Il (1003-17, wg, wu 5) van tarin taribhavan paanee. The forests, meadows, three worlds, water,
Ofg Fe Bs urat |l (1003-17, wg, Hs 5) chaar bayd chaaray khaanee. the four Vedas, the four sources of creation,
as thy Afs Gur Il (1003-18, wg, ue 5) khand deep sabh lo-aa. the countries, the continents and all the worlds,
Sa aes 3 Afs IM AI (1003-18, wg, us 5) ayk kavaavai tay sabh ho-aa. ||1]| have all come from the One Word of the Lord. ||1]|
TISTS FST F Il (1003-18, wg, we 5) karnaihaaraa boojhhu ray. Hey - understand the Creator Lord.
Afsag fs 3 AS FT UU TIS tl 1003-18, wg, we 5) satgur milai ta soojhai ray. ||1|| rahaa-o. If you meet the True Guru, then you'll understand. ||1]|Pause]|
3 Te ahr uArS |i (1003-19, wg, He 5)
tarai gun kee-aa pasaaraa.
He formed the expanse of the entire universe from the three gunas, the three qualities.
Oda AI MESA Il (1003-19, Hg, He 5) narak surag avtaaraa. People are incarnated in heaven and in hell.
ICH wis ATET I (1003-19, wg, He 5) ha-umai aavai jaa-ee. In egotism, they come and go.
He feaxs & ure aet I (1003-19, ng, He 5) man tikan na paavai raa-ee. The mind cannot hold still, even for an instant.
Uat IOO8
WS TI TAT Il (1004-1, wg, ne 5) baajh guroo gubaaraa. Without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
ffs Afsas fers 12 (1004-1, wg, He 5) mil satgur nistaaraa. ||2|| Meeting with the True Guru, one is emancipated. ||2||
JG IG AGH AHS Il (1004-1, wg, He 5) ha-o ha-o karam kamaanay. All the deeds done in egotism,
3 3 80 THES Il (1004-1, wg, we 5) tay tay banDh galaanay. are just chains around the neck.
At Hat art Il (1004-2, wg, ws 5) mayree mayree Dhaaree. Harboring self-conceit and self-interest
Ga ufs Sar il (1004-2, wg, ue 5) ohaa pair lohaaree. is just like placing chains around one's ankles.
A ae fife Sq use i (1004-2, wg, us 5) so gur mil ayk pachhaanai. He alone meets with the Guru, and realizes the One Lord,
fan JS ST HATES ISI (1004-2, 7g, ne 5)
jis hovai bhaag mathaanai. ||3]| who has such destiny written on his forehead. ||3] |
A fifemr fa ofa ufs arfemr i 004-3, wg, us 5) so mili-aa je har man bhaa-i-aa. He alone meets the Lord, who is pleasing to His Mind.
Age fa ys serfenr I (1004-3, wg, He 5) so bhoolaa je parabhoo bhulaa-i-aa. He alone is deluded, who is deluded by God.
od mug Hay fararat i (1004-3, wg, He 5) nah aaphu moorakh gi-aanee. No one, by himself, is ignorant or wise.
fa aoe A OOH surat Il (1004-4, wg, us 5) je karaavai so naam vakhaanee. He alone chants the Naam, whom the Lord inspires to do so.
3ST niZ S UTI Il (1004-4, 7g, He 5) tayraa ant na paaraavaaraa. You have no end or limitation.
AS SSA AE ASIST USUUAI (1004-4, wg, 3 5)
jan naanak sad balihaaraa. ||4]|1]|17]| Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||4||1]|17]|
HTT HIG U Il (1004-5)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Hast Hfs He 3 Tash i 1004-5, wg, ue 5) mohnee mohi lee-ay tarai gunee-aa. Maya, the enticer, has enticed the world of the three gunas, the three qualities.
Sts fenmit sot str | 004-5, wg, Hs 5) lobh vi-aapee jhoothee dunee-aa. The false world is engrossed in greed.
Hat Ast afe & Ast vis at ara Aas B soe WAU (1004-5, wg, He 5)
mayree mayree kar kai sanchee ant kee baar sagal lay chhalee-aa. ||1|| Crying out, "Mine, mine!" they collect possessions, but in the end, they are all deceived. ||1||
foas@ fadarg efemisiinr it (1004-6, wg, Hs 5) nirbha-o nirankaar da-i-alee-aa. The Lord is fearless, formless and merciful.
ba AS Aare yfsusmr ai TIS il 004-6, wg, we 5) jee-a jant saglay partipalee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Cherisher of all beings and creatures. ||1]||Pause] |
Sa AH afs ast asd Il (1004-7, wg, ue 5) aykai saram kar gaadee gadhai. Some collect wealth, and bury it in the ground.
Sats AUS BH S BSd Il (1004-7, wg, Hs 5) aykeh supnai daam na chhadhai. Some cannot abandon wealth, even in their dreams.
awa ante adt fafs dat a at Afar 3 Safes ssh IQ (1004-7, wg, us 5)
raaj kamaa-ay karee jin thailee taa kai sang na chanchal chalee-aa. ||2]|
The king exercises his power, and fills his money-bags, but this fickle companion will not go along with him. ||2]|
eats yre fils 3 fumrst il 1004-8, wg, ne 5) aykeh paraan pind tay pi-aaree. Some love this wealth even more than their body and breath of life.
Sa Adt Shr ay Has Il (1004-8, wg, He 5) ayk sanchee taj baap mehtaaree. Some collect it, forsaking their fathers and mothers.
AS HS gs 3 Tot 3 a foafe o Tet usr ZI (1004-9, wg, He 5) sut meet bharaat tay guhjee taa kai nikat na ho-ee khalee-aa. ||3]| Some hide it from their children, friends and siblings, but it will not remain with them.
[131] of mBus FS ole se Il (1004-9, og, Hs 5)
ho-ay a-uDhoot baithay laa-ay taaree. Some become hermits, and sit in meditative trances.
Hat Ast Ufss sherds I (1004-9, wg, He 5) jogee jatee pandit beechaaree. Some are Yogis, celibates, religious scholars and thinkers.
fafa Hat HATAt we His SAS fs fSar & wait usr |sil (1004-10, wg, we 5)
garihi marhee masaanee ban meh bastay ooth tinaa kai laagee palee-aa. ||4||
Some dwell in homes, graveyards, cremation grounds and forests; but Maya still clings to them there. ||4||
are dus Sats ATs Il (1004-10, wg, He 5) kaatay banDhan thaakur jaa kay. When the Lord and Master releases one from his bonds,
ofa afs on afAG Aba St & Wt (1004-11, wg, He 5) har har naam basi-o jee-a taa kai. the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, comes to dwell in his soul.
WOH se AS HAS als uret area Sele fersmr WUNINATH (1004-11, wg, He 5)
saaDhsang bha-ay jan muktay gat paa-ee naanak nadar nihlee-aa. ||5]|2||18]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, His humble servants are liberated; O Nanak, they are redeemed and enraptured by the Lord's Glance of Grace. ||5]|2]|18]|
HTT HIG U Il (1004-12)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
frag &a fadae AG il (1004-12, wg, 3 5) simrahu ayk niranjan so-oo. Meditate in remembrance on the One Immaculate Lord.
Ww 3 fase WS 3 A Il (1004-12, og, Hs 5)
jaa tay birthaa jaat na ko-oo.
No one is turned away from Him empty-handed. HS aes Ufo fats yfsufamr it (1004-13, wg, H8 5)
maat garabh meh jin partipaari-aa. He cherished and preserved you in your mother's womb;
Me fis & Ata Aetfamr I (1004-13, wg, He 5) jee-o pind day saaj savaari-aa. He blessed you with body and soul, and embellished you.
Ret forse fire firs mfr i (1004-13, wg, ne 5) so-ee biDhaataa khin khin japee-ai. Each and every instant, meditate on that Creator Lord.
fan fines nea Afs welt I (1004-14, wg, He 5)
jis simrat avgun sabh dhakee-ai.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, all faults and mistakes are covered. BIE GHG Sa nists wag il (1004-14, wg, ue 5)
charan kamal ur antar Dhaarahu. Enshrine the Lord's lotus feet deep within the nucleus of your self.
fafimr aa 3 AIG Borag Il 004-14, wg, He 5) bikhi-aa ban tay jee-o uDhaarahu. Save your soul from the waters of corruption.
age ued frets faserer Il (1004-15, wg, H3 5) karan palaah miteh billaataa. Your cries and shrieks shall be ended;
fu afee say 38 Ser Il (1004-15, 7g, He 5) jap govid bharam bha-o faataa. meditating on the Lord of the Universe, your doubts and fears shall be dispelled.
Arora feaer x UTS Il (1004-15, wg, He 5) saaDhsang virlaa ko paa-ay. Rare is that being, who finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
SSA 3 ates ales WES WAM (1004-16, wg, ne 5) naanak taa kai bal bal jaa-ay. ||1|| Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||1]|
TH OH His She MTUTE Il (1004-16, Hg, Hs 5) raam naam man tan aaDhaaraa. The Lord's Name is the support of my mind and body.
A fd fan a forse A TIS i (1004-16, wg, Hs 5) jo simrai tis kaa nistaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whoever meditates on Him is emancipated. ||1||Pause| |
fufemr eas AfS afs Hat I (1004-17, wg, H8 5) mithi-aa vasat sat kar maanee. He believes that the false thing is true.
fos ofeS AS Hs mifararat I (1004-17, og, He 5) hit laa-i-o sath moorh agi-aanee. The ignorant fool falls in love with it.
OH AT BF HE HST Il (1004-17, wg, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh mad maataa. He is intoxicated with the wine of sexual desire, anger and greed;
ASS FES ASH ASST Il (1004-18, wg, ne 5) ka-udee badlai janam gavaataa. he loses this human life in exchance for a mere shell.
muort fs usfemt IST I (1004-18, wg, He 5) apnaa chhod paraa-i-ai raataa. He abandons his own, and loves that of others.
Hfent He He 3S Afat AST Il (1004-18, wg, He 5) maa-i-aa mad man tan sang jaataa. His mind and body are permeated with the intoxication of Maya.
FFAS 3 FS ATT ASS Il (1004-19, wg, we 5) tarisan na boojhai karat kalolaa. His thirsty desires are not quenched, although he indulges in pleasures.
Gat orn fifeort Afs Ser I (1004-19, +g, He 5) oonee aas mithi-aa sabh bolaa. His hopes are not fulfilled, and all his words are false.
nites fear AS fear Il (1004-19, wg, H3 5) aavat ikaylaa jaat ikaylaa. He comes alone, and he goes alone.
uat IOOU
TH SH Afat 3S Als AH Il (1005-1, wg, we 5) ham tum sang jhoothay sabh bolaa. False is all his talk of me and you.
ufe saat orfu gateS i 005-1, wg, He 5) paa-ay thag-uree aap bhulaa-i-o. The Lord Himself administers the poisonous potion, to mislead and delude.
saa fags 3 Ate feeteS iI (1005-1, wg, He 5) naanak kirat na jaa-ay mitaa-i-o. ||2|| O Nanak, the the karma of past actions cannot be erased. ||2| |
un Udt FF wigs YS I 1005-2, wg, ws 5) pas pankhee bhoot ar paraytaa. Beasts, birds, demons and ghosts
ag fafa dat fess mds I (1005-2, wg, He 5) baho biDh jonee firat anaytaa. - in these many ways, the false wander in reincarnation.
Ad WS 3ST TIS 3B US Il (1005-2, 7g, He 5) jah jaano tah rahan na paavai. Wherever they go, they cannot remain there.
we fags @fs Sfo fefs ures II (1005-2, wg, Hs 5) thaan bihoon uth uth fir Dhaavai. They have no place of rest; they rise up again and again and run around.
Hf6 3f6 aaa ags faAEre | (1005-3, wg, He 5) man tan baasnaa bahut bisthaaraa. Their minds and bodies are filled with immense, expansive desires.
MINS HS FIT Il (1005-3, wg, Hz 5) aha‘mayv mootho baychaaraa. The poor wretches are cheated by egotism.
mifoa tu nig FIs AATET | (1005-3, wg, He 5) anik dokh ar bahut sajaa-ee. They are filled with countless sins, and are severely punished.
oT ot ais age & AST Il (1005-4, wg, He 5) taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee. The extent of this cannot be estimated.
ys fangs aoa Hf urfenr | (1005-4, wg, 43 5) parabh bisrat narak meh paa-i-aa. Forgetting God, they fall into hell.
3d HS 3 80S HS B AEM I 1005-4, og, we 5) tah maat na banDh na meet na jaa-i-aa. There are no mothers there, no siblings, no friends and no spouses.
fan ag os farues Amit i (1005-5, wg, He 5) jis ka-o hot kirpaal su-aamee. Those humble beings, unto whom the Lord and Master becomes Merciful,
A We aoa urgent iS (1005-5, wg, ue 5) so jan naanak paargaraamee. ||3]|| O Nanak, cross over. ||3]|
SHS ZH YS Adal mfEnr i (1005-5, wg, He 5) bharmat bharmat parabh sarnee aa-i-aa. Rambling and roaming, wandering around, I came to seek the Sanctuary of God.
clo ova wats fus yfenr | (1005-6, wg, H2 5) deenaa naath jagat pit maa-i-aa. He is the Master of the meek, the father and mother of the world.
ys tenis gu ude faerse Il (1005-6, wg, H2 5)
parabh da-i-aal dukh darad bidaaran.
The Merciful Lord God is the Destroyer of sorrow and suffering. fan ave fSA dt fesse I (1005-7, wg, He 5)
jis bhaavai tis hee nistaaran. He emancipates whoever He pleases.
nig US AIT Il (1005-7, wg, He 5) anDh koop tay kaadhanhaaraa. He lifts them up and pulls him out of the deep dark pit.
Un safs des fers il 1005-7, wg, us 5) paraym bhagat hovat nistaaraa. Emancipation comes through loving devotional worship.
AT Ju Must Sq Ufa Il (1005-7, Hg, He 5) saaDh roop apnaa tan Dhaari-aa. The Holy Saint is the very embodiment of the Lord's form.
Hot mate S orf Sarfanr il (1005-8, wg, 48 5) mahaa agan tay aap ubaari-aa. He Himself saves us from the great fire.
wu 3u AAH fe 3 fas oat i (1005-8, wg, us 5) jap tap sanjam is tay kichh naahee. By myself, I cannot practice meditation, austerities, penance and self-discipline.
nite nifs Ys nietH wiardt il (1005-8, ug, He 5) aad ant parabh agam agaahee. In the beginning and in the end, God is inaccessible and unfathomable.
OH Sfo Hat SA Sa Il (1005-9, wg, Hs 5) naam deh maagai daas tayraa. Please bless me with Your Name, Lord; Your slave begs only for this.
ofs Mes UE SSA YF HT ISIUSIUAEM (1005-9, wg, 8 5)
har jeevan pad naanak parabh mayraa. ||4]|3||19]| O Nanak, my Lord God is the Giver of the true state of life. ||4]|3]|19]|
HTT HIG U Il (1005-10)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
aS A sdaeg Ga Hs ete fasuret All (1005-10, wg, 48 5)
kat ka-o dahkaavahu logaa mohan deen kirpaa-ee. ||1]|
Why do you try to deceive others, O people of the world? The Fascinating Lord is Merciful to the meek. ||1]|
mrt aris uret I (1005-10, Hg, Hs 5) aisee jaan paa-ee. This is what I have come to know.
Aefe Ae Ts ast as nef Sse AU TIS Il (1005-10, wg, ws 5)
Saran sooro gur daataa raakhai aap vadaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The brave and heroic Guru, the Generous Giver, gives Sanctuary and preserves our honor. ||1||Pause| |
Sas" aT nitfomrardt Het Het AMEE MQM (1005-11, wg, Hs 5)
bhagtaa kaa aagi-aakaaree sadaa sadaa sukh-daa-ee. ||2|| He submits to the Will of His devotees; He is forever and ever the Giver of peace.
21 |
nus ag fagur adding fea an fimiret 31 (1005-12, wg, 2 5) apnay ka-o kirpaa karee-ahu ik naam Dhi-aa-ee. ||3]| Please bless me with Your Mercy, that I may meditate on Your Name alone. ||3]|
oo He oH Hal Eso SIN Yaret Igisi2oll (1005-12, wg, He 5)
naanak deen naam maagai dutee-aa bharam chukaa-ee. | |4||4||20]|
Nanak, the meek and humble, begs for the Naam, the Name of the Lord; it eradicates duality and doubt. ||4]|4||20||
HTT HIG U Il (1005-13)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Ha Stag uifS Sra Il (1005-13, wg, He 5) mayraa thaakur at bhaaraa. My Lord and Master is utterly powerful.
Hfs Wea AIS WAU (1005-13, wg, He 5) mohi sayvak baychaaraa. ||1]|| I am just His poor servant. ||1]|
HIG Be Ha UlSH Ho YTS Il (1005-13, wg, ue 5) mohan laal mayraa pareetam man paraanaa. My Enticing Beloved is very dear to my mind and my breath of life.
Hag eg Bar ual TIS Il (1005-14, wg, Hs 5) mo ka-o dayh daanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He blesses me with His gift. |]1]]Pause] |
sN oS
Fa A Sa Wet | (1005-14, wg, us 5) saglay mai daykhay jo-ee. I have seen and tested all.
SAG neg F AST MM (1005-14, wg, vs 5) beeja-o avar na ko-ee. ||2]| There is none other than Him. ||2]|
Fibs yfsurfs AHS I (1005-15, ug, He 5) jee-an partipaal samaahai. He sustains and nurtures all beings.
od At MrT MSI (1005-15, wg, He 5) hai hosee aahay. ||3]| He was, and shall always be. ||3]|
efemr vfs att Fer I (1005-15, wg, He 5) da-i-aa mohi keejai dayvaa. Please bless me with Your Mercy, O Divine Lord,
SSA Ba AS WSU (1005-15, wg, we 5)
naanak laago sayvaa. ||4||5||21]| and link Nanak to Your service. ||4||5||21]|
HTT HIG U Il (1005-16)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
ufss Gargs sae afes afes ae af ATED I (1005-16, wg, He 5)
patit uDhaaran taaran bal bal balay bal jaa-ee-ai.
The Redeemer of sinners, who carries us across; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him.
mA ast Se AS fs fe ge ofa former Wall 1005-16, wg, Hs 5)
aisaa ko-ee bhaytai sant jit har haray har Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1] |
If only I could meet with such a Saint, who would inspire me to meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||1]|
Hag af o Wes adhas GH SHS Il (1005-17, 7g, ne 5) mo ka-o ko-ay na jaanat kahee-at daas tumaaraa. No one knows me; I am called Your slave.
Sat |e nigra AU TI Il (1005-17, wg, us 5) ayhaa ot aaDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is my support and sustenance. ||1||Pause| |
Hea ude ufsurse fea fasS ear it (1005-18, wg, ws 5) sarab Dhaaran partipaaran ik bin-o deenaa. You support and cherish all; Iam meek and humble - this is my only prayer.
SHot fafa SH dt AST SH AG IH His IM (005-18, wg, us 5) tumree biDh tum hee jaanhu tum jal ham meenaa. ||2]| You alone know Your Way; You are the water, and I am the fish. ||2] |
yao fandtas Homi orfa mrfeS ure i 005-19, wg, Hs 5) pooran bistheeran su-aamee aahi aa-i-o paachhai. O Perfect and Expansive Lord and Master, I follow You in love.
AIS J HSS UTS YS SH Tt MS WI (1005-19, wg, we 5) saglo bhoo mandal khandal parabh tum hee aachhai. ||3]|| O God, You are pervading all the worlds, solar systems and galaxies. ||3]||
Uat IooE
nies mfes Fer HIS wise MUST Il (1006-1, Hg, Hs 5)
atal akhi-o dayvaa mohan alakh apaaraa.
You are eternal and unchanging, imperishable, invisible and infinite, O divine fascinating Lord.
aS Uee AS Ad GSA IS VAST NUENIAI (1006-1, wg, He 5)
daan paava-o santaa sang naanak rayn daasaaraa. ||4]|6]|22]|
Please bless Nanak with the gift of the Society of the Saints, and the dust of the feet of Your slaves. ||4]|6]|22]|
HTT HIG U Il (1006-2)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
fsufs nme AST | (1006-2, wg, He 5) taripat aaghaa-ay santaa. The Saints are fulfilled and satisfied;
GI WS fAS HST I 1006-2, wg, ve 5) gur jaanay jin manntaa. they know the Guru's Mantra and the Teachings.
XT at fas AIG 3 AT Il 1006-2, wg, ws 5) taa kee kichh kahan na jaa-ee. They cannot even be described;
WAS oH asret WA (1006-3, wg, Hs 5) jaa ka-o naam badaa-ee. ||1]| they are blessed with the glorious greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
BS MAB BB Il (1006-3, wg, He 5) laal amolaa laalo. My Beloved is a priceless jewel.
MAT MSS STA UU TIS Il (1006-3, wg, He 5) agah atolaa naamo. ||1|| rahaa-o. His Name is unattainable and immeasurable. ||1]||Pause| |
nifeas fA wfemr HS I (006-4, wg, He 5) avigat si-o maani-aa maano. One whose mind is satisfied believing in the imperishable Lord God,
Tafa 33 farsi (1006-4, wg, Hs 5) gurmukh tat gi-aano. becomes Gurmukh and attains the essence of spiritual wisdom.
ues Aas fms il 1006-4, wg, us 5) paykhat sagal Dhi-aano. He sees all in his meditation.
sfaS Hs 3 mifsrs i211 (1006-4, wg, 48 5) taji-o man tay abhimaano. ||2| | He banishes egotistical pride from his mind. ||2]|
fSIdS f3s a STAT | (1006-5, wg, He 5) nihchal tin kaa thaanaa. Permanent is the place of those
I 3 HIG USAT Il (1006-5, wg, He 5) gur tay mahal pachhaanaa. who, through the Guru, realize the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
motes ad ful Ara Il 006-5, wg, He 5) an-din gur mil jaagay. Meeting the Guru, they remain awake and aware night and day;
fs at AST Brat WS (1006-6, wg, He 5) har kee sayvaa laagay. ||3]| they are committed to the Lord's service. ||3]|
use fyufs mere I (1006-6, wg, He 5) pooran taripat aghaa-ay. They are perfectly fulfilled and satisfied,
Hon AH ASS Il (1006-6, wg, H2 5) sahj samaaDh subhaa-ay. intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi.
ofs Sarg ofa wrfEnr I (1006-6, wg, He 5) har bhandaar haath aa-i-aa. The Lord's treasure comes into their hands;
Tot TT SF UfEMT WSU ONISMl (1006-7, wg, wz 5) naanak gur tay paa-i-aa. ||4||7||23]| O Nanak, through the Guru, they attain it. ||4]|7]|23]|
HTS HIG U wg € TUS (1006-8) maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 6 dupday Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsars YATE Il (1006-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fs Rares frmreu fife Ara famrfar aS I (1006-9, wg, He 5)
chhod sagal si-aanpaa mil saaDh ti-aag gumaan.
Abandon all your clever tricks; meet with the Holy, and renounce your egotistical pride.
wed Ag foe fifeor grat TH IH SUS MAU (1006-9, wg, He 5) avar sabh kichh mithi-aa rasnaa raam raam vakhaan. ||1|| Everything else is false; with your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam.
[2
Hd Ho AIG AfE fs SH Il (1006-10, wg, us 5) mayray man karan sun har naam. O my mind, with your ears, listen to the Name of the Lord.
fkefo nny 33 HOH HON A ASQ Hus AH AU TIC I (1006-10, wg, Hs 5)
miteh agh tayray janam janam kay kavan bapuro jaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The sins of your many past lifetimes shall be washed away; then, what can the wretched Messenger of Death do to you? ||1||Pause] |
eu de 3 3G fame fee Ae PAH II (006-11, og, He 5) dookh deen na bha-o bi-aapai milai sukh bisraam. Pain, poverty and fear shall not afflict you, and you shall find peace and pleasure.
aa uAte soa aes die SHO Sz famre iNAUIIil (1006-11, 7g, He 5) gur parsaad naanak bakhaanai har bhajan tat gi-aan. ||2||1||24||
By Guru's Grace, Nanak speaks; meditation on the Lord is the essence of spiritual wisdom. ||2||1]|24] |
HTT HIG U Il (1006-12)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
frat on ferrfamr A TS SA AT I (1006-12, wg, ue 5)
jinee naam visaari-aa say hot daykhay khayh.
Those who have forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord - I have seen them reduced to dust.
ug fy far afast Ses S ST AU (1006-12, wg, H 5) putar mitar bilaas banitaa toottay ay nayh. ||1]| The love of children and friends, and the pleasures of married life are torn apart. ||1]|
Hd Ho oH fos fos ST Il (1006-13, wg, w2 5) mayray man naam nit nit layh. O my mind, continually, continuously chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
AGS SdH mats Aa AY Hfs Sto ST UU TIS Ml (1006-13, wg, H2 5)
jalat naahee agan saagar sookh man tan dayh. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall not burn in the ocean of fire, and your mind and body shall be blessed with peace. ||1]|Pause| |
fasa sfeor AA PASAT USS FSS HT Il (1006-14, wg, we 5)
birakh chhaa-i-aa jaisay binsat pavan jhoolat mayh.
Like the shade of a tree, these things shall pass away, like the clouds blown away by the wind.
of safs fes firs AO Sa 3d OHH mT]ST ST NQUQWQUI (1006-14, wg, He 5)
har bhagat darirh mil saaDh naanak tayrai kaam aavat ayh. ||2||2||25]|
Meeting with the Holy, devotional worship to the Lord is implanted within; O Nanak, only this shall work for you. ||2||2||25]]|
HTT HIG U Il (1006-15)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Yay UIs AUT VS Afar SAS StS Il (1006-15, wg, Hs 5)
purakh pooran sukhah daataa sang basto neet. The perfect, primal Lord is the Giver of peace; He is always with you.
Hd 3 ore 3 wfe fear ferus BHa 6 ATS IAI (1006-16, Hg, 8 5)
marai na aavai na jaa-ay binsai bi-aapat usan na seet. ||1]||
He does not die, and he does not come or go in reincarnation. He does not perish, and He is not affected by heat or cold. ||1]|
Hd Ho oH fAG afe UTS I (006-16, wg, H8 5) mayray man naam si-o kar pareet. O my mind, be in love with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Sts Ho ufo ofa ats fears Sa fasHs SHS uA FIC il (1006-17, wg, v2 5)
chayt man meh har har niDhaanaa ayh nirmal reet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Within the mind, think of the Lord, Har, Har, the treasure. This is the purest way of life. ||1]|Pause] |
furs efenies atures diffe A AU fs Aft i 006-17, weg, ue 5)
kirpaal da-i-aal gopaal gobid jo japai tis seeDh.
Whoever meditates on the merciful compassionate Lord, the Lord of the Universe, is successful.
25 BSG VSI Hed Ho oS f3H Afar sf WIANSNEN (1006-18, wg, He 5)
naval navtan chatur sundar man naanak tis sang beeDh. ||2||3||26|| He is always new, fresh and young, clever and beautiful; Nanak's mind is pierced through with His Love. ||2||3]||26] |
HTT HIG U Il (1006-19)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
JOS HAS Aes Was Ts HZ foe fests i 1006-19, wg, we 5)
chalat baisat sovat jaagat gur mantar ridai chitaar.
While walking and sitting, sleeping and waking, contemplate within your heart the GurMantra.
ade Ade Sy Ala AY se AAI Ssata wuts All (1006-19, wg, He 5)
charan saran bhaj sang saaDhoo bhav saagar utreh paar. ||1|| Run to the Lord's lotus feet, and join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and reach the other side. ||1]|
Uuat IOOD
Ad Ho oH fase ofa | (1007-1, ug, He 5) mayray man naam hirdai Dhaar. O my mind, enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart.
ate utfs Ho 36 ore afe fAG nied Aare ferrfa NA TIS Il 007-1, wg, us 5) kar pareet man tan laa-ay har si-o avar sagal visaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Love the Lord, and commit your mind and body to Him; forget everything else. ||1]|Pause| |
AG HS 35 US YS A F TUS wry feet il (1007-2, wg, ue 5) jee-o man tan paraan parabh kay too aapan aap nivaar. Soul, mind, body and breath of life belong to God; eliminate your self-conceit.
dfee sq Als Aras Us Sa TAT 3 TVG MNO (1007-3, wg, Hs 5)
govid bhaj sabh su-aarath pooray naanak kabahu na haar. ||2||4||27]||
Meditate, vibrate on the Lord of the Universe, and all your desires shall be fulfilled; O Nanak, you shall never be defeated. ||2]|4||27] |
HTT HIG U Il (1007-3)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
ta wiry front sry ge ATG StS i (1007-3, wg, 42 5)
taj aap binsee taap rayn saaDhoo thee-o.
Renounce your self-conceit, and the fever shall depart; become the dust of the feet of the Holy.
fsrfo usufs an sa afte four fan SAS A (1007-4, wg, us 5) tiseh paraapat naam tayraa kar kirpaa jis dee-o. ||1|| He alone receives Your Name, Lord, whom You bless with Your Mercy. ||1]|
Ae Ho 3H wifes ut@ i (1007-4, wg, us 5) mayray man naam amrit pee-o. O my mind, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
nite Are farfs dé ong wa Fa AE Wal TIE Il (1007-5, wg, ne 5) aan saad bisaar hochhay amar jug jug jee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Abandon other bland, insipid tastes; become immortal, and live throughout the ages. ||1]|Pause] |
on fea sn dat ot OTH arait BE il 1007-5, wg, we 5)
naam ik ras rang naamaa naam laagee lee-o.
Savor the essence of the One and only Naam; love the Naam, focus and attune yourself to the Naam.
Hg AHS Ae gay dfs Sa Soa StS MQNUNQCH (4007-6, wg, He 5) meet saajan sakhaa banDhap har ayk naanak kee-o. ||2||5||28]| Nanak has made the One Lord his only friend, companion and relative. ||2||5||28]|
HTT HIG U Il (1007-7)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
yfsurfs ust Cefa ae wales Fs BAS Il (1007-7, wg, us 5)
partipaal maataa udar raakhai lagan dayt na sayk.
He nourishes and preserves mortals in the womb of the mother, so that the fiery heat does not hurt them.
Ret Aum Stor at gs aft fase wil (1007-7, wg, we 5) SO-ee Su-aamee eehaa raakhai boojh buDh bibayk. ||1]| That Lord and Master protects us here. Understand this in your mind. ||1]||
Hd HO OH at ats Sa Il (1007-8, wg, He 5) mayray man naam kee kar tayk. O my mind, take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fsafo as fafs 3 oer ys age aE SA AU TIT Il (1007-8, wg, He 5)
tiseh boojh jin too kee-aa parabh karan kaaran ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o. Understand the One who created you; the One God is the Cause of causes. ||1]|Pause| |
af3 Ho ufs sfa froreu fs Aes Se Il (1007-9, wg, ue 5)
chayt man meh taj si-aanap chhod saglay bhaykh.
Remember the One Lord in your mind, renounce your clever tricks, and give up all your religious robes.
frufs fs afs Het atGa Sd AST MISS MUENIEN (1007-9, wg, Hs 5)
simar har har sadaa naanak taray ka-ee anayk. ||2||6||29]| Meditating in remembrance forever on the Lord, Har, Har, O Nanak, countless beings have been saved. ||2||6||29]|
HTT HIG U Il (1007-10)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
ufs3 Uso OH AT A MoTa A IF BE Il (1007-10, wg, 8 5) patit paavan naam jaa ko anaath ko hai naath. His Name is the Purifier of sinners; He is the Master of the masterless.
Ho 3@Hn@ Ho Sad A at fefeG Hrs NA (1007-10, +g, He 5)
mahaa bha-ojal maahi tulho jaa ko likhi-o maath. ||1]|
In the vast and terrifying world-ocean, he is the raft for those who have such destiny inscribed on their foreheads. || 1] |
ga on fag we ATE Il (1007-11, +g, He 5)
doobay naam bin ghan saath.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, huge numbers of companions have drowned.
age age fafa 5 ure 2 afs TS TS NU TIC It 1007-11, wg, 8 5)
karan kaaran chit na aavai day kar raakhai haath. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Even if someone does not remember the Lord, the Cause of causes, still, the Lord reaches out with His hand, and saves him. ||1]||Pause] |
WuHas Te Sage ole on vifys ure il (1007-12, wg, we 5)
saaDhsangat gun uchaaran har naam amrit paath.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and take the Path of the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
ag feu nafs na aAfs oa HS WS NQNDNBOMN (1007-12, wg, Hs 5) karahu kirpaa muraar maaDha-o sun naanak jeevai gaath. ||2||7||30||
Shower me with Your Mercy, O Lord; listening to Your sermon, Nanak lives. [12] 17] [30] |
Hg nigel HIST U WT D (1007-14)
maaroo anjulee mehlaa 5 ghar 7 Maaroo, Anjulee ~ With Hands Cupped In Prayer, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsara yATfe il (1007-14) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ana feria gag dt Ive i (1007-15, wg, we 5) sanjog vijog Dharahu hee hoo-aa. Union and separation are ordained by the Primal Lord God.
us ug afs user ahr | (1007-15, wg, He 5) panch Dhaat kar putlaa kee-aa. The puppet is made from the five elements.
Ad & gontfens at ect fete ae orfe ufsor wait (007-15, wg, He 5) saahai kai furmaa-i-arhai jee dayhee vich jee-o aa-ay pa-i-aa. ||1]| By the Command of the Dear Lord King, the soul came and entered into the body.
[21 |
fra wife se sz Il (1007-16, wg, ue 5) jithai agan bhakhai bharhhaaray. In that place, where the fire rages like an oven,
Sag He HIT TAT I (1007-16, wg, He 5) ooraDh mukh mahaa gubaaray. in that darkness where the body lies face down
Afa ata AHS Het Ga Ath safe wer 2K (1007-16, wg, He 5)
SaaS SaaS Samaalay so-ee othai khasam chhadaa-ay la-i-aa. ||2||
- there, one remembers his Lord and Master with each and every breath, and then he is rescued. ||2]|
fesg aaa feats mrfemr iI (1007-17, wg, 48 5) vichahu garbhai nikal aa-i-aa. Then, one comes out from within the womb,
WAH fertta gat fos wafer i 1007-17, wg, u3 5) khasam visaar dunee chit laa-i-aa. and forgetting his Lord and Master, he attaches his consciousness to the world.
wire fe seveba Hot se o fasdt afe sfemr 3 (1007-18, wg, He 5)
aavai jaa-ay bhavaa-ee-ai jonee rahan na kithee thaa-ay bha-i-aa. ||3]| He comes and goes, and wanders in reincarnation; he cannot remain anywhere. ||3] |
frases sft afenig mmt it (1007-18, ag, H8 5) miharvaan rakh la-i-an aapay. The Merciful Lord Himself emancipates.
fia #3 Afs fA A AN I (1007-19, wg, He 5) jee-a jant sabh tis kay thaapay. He created and established all beings and creatures.
Aon uese fafs afer soa orfeor A users fem BASU (1007-19, we, Hs 5) janam padaarath jin chali-aa naanak aa-i-aa so parvaan thi-aa. ||4||1]|31]|
Those who depart after having been victorious in this priceless human life - O Nanak, their coming into the world is approved. ||4||1||31]|
Uat AOOtK
HTT HIG U Il (1008-1)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
fe 6 eel SE TET Sa ATS TH FT AU (1008-1, rg, He 5)
vaido na vaa-ee bhaino na bhaa-ee ayko sahaa-ee raam hay. ||1||
The One Lord alone is our help and support; neither physician nor friend, nor sister nor brother can be this. ||1]|
ots fan dS urut ne OS A fied usUTS F III (1008-2, wg, He 5)
keetaa jiso hovai paapaa” malo Dhovai so simrahu parDhaan hay. ||2|| His actions alone come to pass; He washes off the filth of sins. Meditate in remembrance on that Supreme Lord. ||2||
ufe we SH Ada fost wAfag AT at ATE FT USI (008-2, wg, ws 5) ghat ghatay vaasee sarab nivaasee asthir jaa kaa thaan hay. ||3]| He abides in each and every heart, and dwells in all; His seat and place are eternal.
[SII
Me B We Hal AHS UTS AT AT OTH T IISIl (1008-3, wy, He 5) aavai na jaavai Sangay samaavai pooran jaa kaa kaam hay. ||4]| He does not come or go, and He is always with us. His actions are perfect. ||4||
SAS AAT AT JUST A Il (1008-3, Hg, Hs 5) bhagat janaa kaa raakhanhaaraa. He is the Savior and the Protector of His devotees.
As dtefa Afy yrs wrars Il (1008-4, wg, He 5) sant jeeveh jap paraan aDhaaraa. The Saints live by meditating on God, the support of the breath of life.
ATS ATS AHGE AMM soa fA Aas J NUMNQNSIIM (1008-4, wg, He 5) karan kaaran samrath su-aamee naanak tis kurbaan hay. ||5]|2||32]|
The Almighty Lord and Master is the Cause of causes; Nanak is a sacrifice to Him. [15112] [321]
qe Afsara YATE II (1008-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HTS HIS € Il (1008-5) maaroo mehlaa 9. Maaroo, Ninth Mehl:
dfs & OTH Het AYE Il (1008-5, wg, He 9) har ko naam sadaa sukh-daa-ee. The Name of the Lord is forever the Giver of peace.
vw ag frnfs uae CufsS afsor g afs wet wail TIS it (1008-5, wg, He 9)
jaa ka-o simar ajaamal uDhaari-o ganikaa hoo gat paa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Meditating in remembrance on it, Ajaamal was saved, and Ganika the prostitute was emancipated. ||1]|Pause| |
Usst as TH Ast His aH oH Af met I (1008-6, wg, Hs 9) panchaalee ka-o raaj sabhaa meh raam naam suDh aa-ee. Dropadi the princess of Panchaala remembered the Lord's Name in the royal court.
3 a wy aes age H must UA Feet WAU (1008-6, wg, 3 9)
taa ko dookh hari-o karunaa mai apnee paij badhaa-ee. ||1]|
The Lord, the embodiment of mercy, removed her suffering; thus His own glory was increased. ||1]||
fad oo FA fae fafa fe a a sf Aaret | (1008-7, wg, ne 9)
jih nar jas kirpaa niDh gaa-i-o taa ka-o bha-i-o sahaa-ee.
That man, who sings the Praise of the Lord, the treasure of mercy, has the help and support of the Lord.
AW soa H fedt sch at orf Agaret QUAI (1008-8, wg, He 9)
kaho naanak mai ihee bharosai gahee aan sarnaa-ee. ||2||1]| Says Nanak, I have come to rely on this. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2]|1]|
HTg HIS € Il (1008-8)
maaroo mehlaa 9. Maaroo, Ninth Mehl:
mae H xo TI Tt Het | co0s-s, wg, ue 9) ab mai kahaa kara-o ree maa-ee. What should I do now, O mother?
Fares Fou fafimrs fa@ dfeur frnfeS ofa aqret ai TI il (1008-9, wg, ve 9) sagal janam bikhi-an si-o kho-i-aa simri-o naahi kan"aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have wasted my whole life in sin and corruption; I never remembered the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
aes SA Aa ad Hf Hat fsa Afa AS faAaet Il c1008-9, wg, 8 9) kaal faas jab gar meh maylee tih suDh sabh bisraa-ee. When Death places the noose around my neck, then I lose all my senses.
oH on fag w Hae Hfs & we IS ATT WAU (1008-10, wg, Hs 9)
raam naam bin yaa sankat meh ko ab hot sahaa-ee. ||1||
Now, in this disaster, other than the Name of the Lord, who will be my help and support? || 1] |
A Hufs must afa net fea ufo set usret | (1008-10, wg, He 9) jo sampat apnee kar maanee chhin meh bha-ee paraa-ee. That wealth, which he believes to be his own, in an instant, belongs to another.
AI FSA WI Av sat nfs as AA AAT S TMT MUI (1008-11, wg, ws 9) kaho naanak yeh soch rahee man har jas kabhoo na gaa-ee. ||2||2||
Says Nanak, this still really bothers my mind - I never sang the Praises of the Lord. 2112] |
HG HIS € Il (1008-12)
maaroo mehlaa 9. Maaroo, Ninth Mehl:
Het HHO & HTS © fSnrfarS | cioos-12, wg, Hs 9) maa-ee mai man ko maan na ti-aagi-o. O my mother, I have not renounced the pride of my mind.
Heart a Hfe Aon frates aH safe odt ofaS nai TIS il (1008-12, wg, uz 9) maa-i-aa kay mad janam siraa-i-o raam bhajan nahee laagi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have wasted my life intoxicated with Maya; I have not focused myself in meditation on the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
TH & 33 uleG fra Gufs sa Aes 3 AEE Il 1008-13, wg, He 9) jam ko dand pari-o sir oopar tab sovat tai jaagi-o. When Death's club falls on my head, then I will be wakened from my sleep.
I IS wa a UTS Ses Sts Sars |All (1008-13, +g, we 9) kahaa hot ab kai pachhutaa-ay chhootat naahin bhaagi-o. ||1]| But what good will it do to repent at that time? I cannot escape by running away.
[11
fes fea Curt we ufo Aa Ta BIG masta il (1008-14, wg, Hs 9) ih chintaa upjee ghat meh jab gur charnan anuraagi-o. When this anxiety arises in the heart, then, one comes to love the Guru's feet.
HES HOH Sod 3a Io AS ys AA Hfo UTS WUBI (1008-15, wg, He 9)
sufal janam naanak tab hoo-aa ja-o parabh jas meh paagi-o. ||2||3]|
My life becomes fruitful, O Nanak, only when I am absorbed in the Praises of God. H2113]|
Hg mMACuteT HIG A WT A (1008-16)
maaroo asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Maaroo, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsara yATfe II (1008-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ae UTS AG HS Td HOt MSar Il (1008-17, wg, ws 1)
bayd puraan kathay sunay haaray munee anaykaa.
Reciting and listening to the Vedas and the Puraanas, countless wise men have grown weary.
Monts Steve ag wat gf Ba SUT Il (1008-17, wg, He 1)
athsath tirath baho ghanaa bharam thaakay bhaykhaa.
So many in their various religious robes have grown weary, wandering to the sixty- eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Ard fos fesHs Hfs HS Sar Al (1008-17, wg, He 1)
saacho saahib nirmalo man maanai aykaa. ||1||
The True Lord and Master is immaculate and pure. The mind is satisfied only by the One Lord. ||1]|
J MATS MH FAS WHET aH Il (1008-18, wg, we 1) too ajraavar amar too sabh chaalanhaaree. You are eternal; You do not grow old. All others pass away.
on sates afe & use ey Svat NU TIS ll (008-18, wg, He 1)
naam rasaa-in bhaa-ay lai parhar dukh bhaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who lovingly focuses on the Naam, the source of nectar - his pains are taken away. ||1]|Pause| |
UaT qoot ofa ust ofs ashy rant ath Sars i (1009-1, wg, ne 1)
har parhee-ai har bujhee-ai gurmatee naam uDhaaraa. Study the Lord's Name, and understand the Lord's Name; follow the Guru's Teachings, and through the Naam, you shall be saved.
afs us ust Hf 3 us Hate sere Il (1009-1, wg, He 1)
gur poorai pooree mat hai poorai sabad beechaaraa.
Perfect are the Teachings of the Perfect Guru; contemplate the Perfect Word of the Shabad.
Worle Stee dfs on 3 faafed aezars III (1009-2, wg, 4 1)
athsath tirath har naam hai kilvikh kaatanhaaraa. ||2||
The Lord's Name is the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and the Eradicator of sins. ||2||
n@ fas? we Ha 33 BS nig mifamrar Il (1009-2, rg, ne 1)
jal bilovai jal mathai tat lorhai anDh agi-aanaa.
The blind ignorant mortal stirs the water and churns the water, wishing to obtain butter.
ToHSt efo Haba nifigs urea any fearsr il (1009-3, wg, He 1)
gurmatee daDh mathee-ai amrit paa-ee-ai naam niDhaanaa.
Following the Guru's Teachings, one churns the cream, and the treasure of the Ambrosial Naam is obtained.
HOH 33H Weot uA Hf AHS ISI (1009-3, Hg, He 1)
manmukh tat na jaannee pasoo maahi samaanaa. ||3] |
The self-willed manmukh is a beast; he does not know the essence of reality that is contained within himself. ||3]|
ICH Aa Hot Hg fs HA Ss Fs Il (1009-4, wg, He 1)
ha-umai mayraa maree mar mar jammai vaaro vaar.
Dying in egotism and self-conceit, one dies, and dies again, only to be reincarnated over and over again.
Gs a Aa A He fete Hs 3 THt ST Il (1009-4, og, He 1) gur kai sabday jay marai fir marai na doojee vaar. But when he dies in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, then he does not die, ever again.
TaHSt warize Hfs SA Afs ae Borgegs isl (1009-5, wg, He 1)
gurmatee jagjeevan man vasai sabh kul uDhaaranhaar. ||4] |
When he follows the Guru's Teachings, and enshrines the Lord, the Life of the World, within his mind, he redeems all his generations. ||4]|
Het Sug OU F Ae SUT | (1009-5, wg, He 1) sachaa vakhar naam hai sachaa vaapaaraa. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the true object, the true commodity.
wo an AAS J Asst Stars Il (1009-6, wg, Hs 1)
laahaa naam sansaar hai gurmatee veechaaraa.
The Naam is the only true profit in this world. Follow the Guru's Teachings, and contemplate it.
en ate arg aHteat fos Set AAS MUI (1009-6, wg, He 1) doojai bhaa-ay kaar kamaavnee nit totaa saisaaraa. ||5|| To work in the love of duality, brings constant loss in this world. ||5]|
Ant Hats ae AU AY We Se || AU SHO HC AY AY SH MOTT Il (1009-7, we, He 1) saachee sangat thaan sach sachay ghar baaraa. sachaa bhojan bhaa-o sach sach naam aDhaaraa.
True is one's association, true is one's place, and true is one's hearth and home, when one has the support of the Naam.
Aot wet Asher wer wae Sere Ell (1009-7, wg, He 1)
sachee banee santokhi-aa sachaa sabad veechaaraa. ||6||
Contemplating the True Word of the Guru's Bani, and the True Word of the Shabad, one becomes content. ||6]|
dA sae ufsAibor wu AY AUrar | (1009-8, wg, Hs 1) ras bhogan paatisaahee-aa dukh sukh sanghaaraa. Enjoying princely pleasures, one shall be destroyed in pain and pleasure.
Het a@ caeha af mare Sra Il (1009-8, wg, ne 1) motaa naa-o Dharaa-ee-ai gal a-ugan bhaaraa. Adopting a name of greatness, one strings heavy sins around his neck.
HEA US B TSet JF VS ATS MDI (1009-9, wg, He 1) maanas daat na hova-ee too daataa saaraa. ||7|| Mankind cannot give gifts; You alone are the Giver of everything. ||7]||
MEH uss J et uifeas wears il (1009-9, wg, He 1) agam agochar too Dhanee avigat apaaraa. You are inaccessible and unfathomable; O Lord, You are imperishable and infinite.
Gd Agel es Het HAS FST Il (1009-10, wg, us 1)
gur sabdee dar jo-ee-ai muktay bhandaaraa.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, seeking at the Lord's Door, one finds the treasure of liberation.
THA AS & FRET APT SUTS NCHA (1009-10, wg, ws 1) naanak mayl na chook-ee saachay vaapaaraa. ||8]|1|| O Nanak, this union is not broken, if one deals in the merchandise of Truth. ||8]|1]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1009-11) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
fg sfoer orfemr chor AHe Hts I Co09-11, wg, He 1) bikh bohithaa laadi-aa dee-aa samund manjhaar. The boat is loaded with sin and corruption, and launched into the sea.
aut feta 3 mreet ar Saerg & UTE Il (1009-11, wg, He 1) kanDhee dis na aavee naa urvaar na paar. The shore cannot be seen on this side, nor on the shore beyond.
Jot Tfa & ASS AS AMT MATS IAll (1009-12, wg, ws 1) vanjhee haath na khayvtoo jal saagar asraal. ||1]| There are no oars, nor any boatmen, to cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
Wat Ag STAT HIT AMG | (1009-12, wg, He 1) baabaa jag faathaa mahaa jaal. O Baba, the world is caught in the great noose.
Od usAet Cad AS SH AHS AU TIS Il (1009-12, wg, He 1) gur parsaadee ubray sachaa naam samaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, they are saved, contemplating the True Name. ||1]||Pause] |
Afsag 3 sfoe Fate SuresTg Il (1009-13, wg, ws 1) satguroo hai bohithaa sabad langhaavanhaar. The True Guru is the boat; the Word of the Shabad will carry them across.
fsa uss o USA BAG BT MATT Il (1009-13, wg, He 1) tithai pavan na paavko naa jal naa aakaar. There is neither wind nor fire, neither water nor form there.
fsa Ae Afs ofe SeHH BIST MQM (1009-14, wg, Hs 1)
tithai sachaa sach naa-ay bhavjal taaranhaar. ||2]|
The True Name of the True Lord is there; it carries them across the terrifying world- ocean. ||2||
Tanfy Su A us ue Ad fA fee OE ii (1009-14, wg, He 1)
gurmukh langhay say paar pa-ay sachay si-o liv laa-ay.
The Gurmukhs reach the shore beyond, lovingly focusing on the True Lord. wiret aGe foefaor Hat fs ff i 009-15, wg, Hs 1)
aavaa ga-on nivaari-aa jotee jot milaa-ay. Their comings and goings are ended, and their light merges into the Light.
TIS Aa Cur Ad Id AHS SI (1009-15, wg, we 1)
gurmatee sahj oopjai sachay rahai samaa-ay. ||3]|
Following the Guru's Teachings, intuitive peace wells up within them, and they remain merged in the True Lord. ||3]|
Fy fusret ure fay nists nfs SA II (1009-16, wg, He 1)
sap pirhaa-ee paa-ee-ai bikh antar man ros.
The snake may be locked in a basket, but it is still poisonous, and the anger within its mind remains.
yota fetter ure for S ett SA Il (1009-16, wg, He 1D poorab likhi-aa paa-ee-ai kis no deejai dos. One obtains what is pre-ordained; why does he blame others?
Tafa wes A AS HS SC ASH ISI (1009-17, wg, Hs 1)
gurmukh gaararh jay sunay mannay naa-o santos. ||4||
If one, as Gurmukh, hears and believes in the Name, the charm against poison, his mind becomes content. ||4||
Hass SoSH St AS Save il 1009-17, wg, ve 1)
maagarmachh fahaa-ee-ai kundee jaal vataa-ay. The crocodile is caught by the hook and line;
vanfs arar anit fafa fafa uesfe i (1009-17, wg, ue 1) durmat faathaa faa-ee-ai fir fir pachhotaa-ay. caught in the trap of evil-mindedness, he regrets and repents, again and again.
HHE HIE 3 ABEet faass o Afenr we ull (1009-18, wg, Hs 1)
jaman maran na sujh-ee kirat na mayti-aa jaa-ay. ||5]]|
He does not understand birth and death; the inscription of one's past actions cannot be erased. ||5]|
J@H fay ufe nay Curftor Age SA fire AE II 1009-18, og, He 1)
ha-umai bikh paa-ay jagat upaa-i-aa sabad vasai bikh jaa-ay.
Injecting the poison of egotism, the world was created; with the Shabad enshrined within, the poison is eliminated.
Aa vfs 3 Hat vfs ad fess ote II (1009-19, wg, He 1) jaraa johi na sak-ee sach rahai liv laa-ay. Old age cannot torment one who remains lovingly absorbed in the True Lord.
Hize Has A omdiba fan feed JOH we WEN (1009-19, wg, He 1)
jeevan mukat so aakhee-ai jis vichahu ha-umai jaa-ay. ||6]|
He alone is called Jivan-Mikta, liberated while yet alive, from within whom egotism is eradicated. ||6] |
UST IOVO
ud Wes Ag atom a gs Sag il (010-1, wg, we 1)
DhanDhai Dhaavat jag baaDhi-aa naa boojhai veechaar.
The world is chasing after worldly affairs; caught and bound, it does not understand contemplative meditation.
Hue Hee ferfaor HOHY HAT TST Il (1010-1, wg, He 1) jaman maran visaari-aa manmukh mugaDh gavaar. The foolish, ignorant, self-willed manmukh has forgotten birth and death.
ats we A Gad Aet Age gets WI (010-2, wg, we 1) gur raakhay say ubray sachaa sabad veechaar. ||7]||
Those whom the Guru has protected are saved, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad. ||7]||
Hue fiinfs YH & FS FHETY Il (1010-2, wg, we 1) soohat pinjar paraym kai bolai bolanhaar. In the cage of divine love, the parrot, speaks.
Ag ua ifs ubt CS 3 Sar Sa Il (1010-3, vg, He 1) sach chugai amrit pee-ai udai ta aykaa vaar. It pecks at the Truth, and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar; it flies away, only once.
ate fixfemt um usTeht ag area HY EMIT WCW (1010-3, wg, Hs 1)
gur mili-ai knasam pachhaanee-ai kaho naanak mokh du-aar. ||8]|2||
Meeting with the Guru, one recognizes his Lord and Master; says Nanak, he finds the gate of liberation. ||8]|2]| |
HTT HIG 4 Il (1010-4) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Rafe ud ST fs He svat fan ufs we Il (1010-4, wg, Hs 1)
sabad marai taa maar mar bhaago kis peh jaa-o.
One who dies in the Word of the Shabad conquers death; otherwise, where can you run?
fan a sf 3 sai nifigs at OE Il (010-4, wg, He 1) jis kai dar bhai bhaagee-ai amrit taa ko naa-o. Through the Fear of God, fear runs away; His Name is Ambrosial Nectar.
Hats sufs Sa ZF sas ast aS WA co10-5, wg, ws 1) maareh raakhahi ayk too beeja-o naahee thaa-o. ||1]| You alone kill and protect; except for You, there is no place at all. ||1]|
aah ade ae yfsdte il cio10-5, wg, us 1) baabaa mai kucheel kaacha-o matiheen. O Baba, I am filthy, shallow and totally without understanding.
on fas a ag adt afs us ust HS ate NU TIS Il coi0-6, wg, we Y
naam binaa ko kachh nahee gur poorai pooree mat keen. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, no one is anything; the Perfect Guru has made my intellect perfect. ||1||Pause| |
Medle HSd Te odt fag ae fae wis WE i co10-6, wg, ws 1 avgan subhar gun nahee bin gun ki-o ghar jaa-o. I am full of faults, and I have no virtue at all. Without virtues, how can I go home?
Hota Aafe AY Gur fas sar as ats Il (io10-7, wg, we 1)
sahj sabad sukh oopjai bin bhaagaa Dhan naahi.
Through the Word of the Shabad, intuitive peace wells up; without good destiny, the wealth is not obtained.
fs & oH 3 Hie SA A ad we ATT MQM 1010-7, wg, He
jin kai naam na man vasai say baaDhay dookh sahaahi. ||2||
Those whose minds are not filled with the Naam are bound and gagged, and suffer in pain. ||2]|
frat on ferfeor A fas mre Arf I (io10-8, wg, Hs 1) jinee naam visaari-aa say kit aa-ay sansaar. Those who have forgotten the Naam - why have they even come into the world?
nid Ua AY odt WS Be Sg Il (1010-8, wg, He 1)
aagai paachhai sukh nahee gaaday laaday chhaar.
Here and hereafter, they do not find any peace; they have loaded their carts with ashes.
fegfaor Her odt gy we AH Bors ISI (1010-9, wg, Hs 1)
vichhurhi-aa maylaa nahee dookh ghano jam du-aar. ||3]|
Those who are separated, do not meet with the Lord; they suffer in terrible pain at Death's Door. ||3]|
mat for Frat ofa H SS J ANSE I (1010-9, wg, we 1)
agai ki-aa jaanaa naahi mai bhoolay too samjhaa-ay.
I do not know what will happen in the world hereafter; I am so confused - please teach me, Lord!
38 He HVA fA a Has ute Il (1010-10, wg, He 1) bhoolay maarag jo dasay tis kai laaga-o paa-ay. I am confused; I would fall at the feet of one who shows me the Way.
ae fag wat a odt ahs aE & ATE IIgil (1010-10, +g, He 1)
gur bin daataa ko nahee keemat kahan na jaa-ay. ||4]| Without the Guru, there is no giver at all; His value cannot be described. ||4||
AAG ear ot aes fear ATG uSTES By Il co10-1, wg, ue 1) Saajan daykhaa taa gal milaa saach pathaa-i-o laykh. If I see my friend, then I will embrace Him; I have sent Him the letter of Truth.
yfa fore ae wast aenfe md Fy il co10-11, wg, we 1) mukh Dhimaanai Dhan kharhee gurmukh aakhee daykh. His soul-bride stands waiting expectantly; as Gurmukh, I see Him with my eyes.
30 se 3 nS Safe Seat ath fA NUN Co10-12, wg, Hs 1)
tuDh bhaavai too man vaseh nadree karam visaykh. ||5||
By the Pleasure of Your Will, You abide in my mind, and bless me with Your Glance of Grace. ||5||
gu fimrr A se foor fA Hae fe i co10-12, wg, we D
bhookh pi-aaso jay bhavai ki-aa tis maaga-o day-ay.
One who is wandering hungry and thirsty - what can he give, and what can anyone ask from him?
HA AS at odt fs sis uss SfS ii co10-13, wg, we beeja-o soojhai ko nahee man tan pooran day-ay. I cannot conceive of any other, who can bless my mind and body with perfection.
fate ater fate efor urfu zaret Sf nen co10-13, wg, Hs 1) jin kee-aa tin daykhi-aa aap vadaa-ee day-ay. ||6]| The One who created me takes care of me; He Himself blesses me with glory. ||6]]|
SHS STA SEIS PHA BS MIGU Il (1010-13, wg, we 1)
nagree naa-ik navtano baalak leel anoop.
In the body-village is my Lord and Master, whose body is ever-new, Innocent and child-like, incomparably playful.
afd 3 usYy 3 UNE AS V3I AgY Il (1010-14, wg, He 1) naar na purakh na pankh-noo saacha-o chatur saroop. He is neither a woman, nor a man, nor a bird; the True Lord is so wise and beautiful.
A SA ee A at J tug J Ty MDI 1010-14, wg, we jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai too deepak too Dhoop. ||7]|| Whatever pleases Him, happens; You are the lamp, and You are the incense. ||7]||
as AE wa AS ge AE 3fe Faq Il (1010-15, wg, He 1)
geet saad chaakhay sunay baad saad tan rog.
He hears the songs and tastes the flavors, but these flavors are useless and insipid, and bring only disease to the body.
Ag He AGG Ve Se AT fEraT Il 1010-15, wg, we 1)
sach bhaavai saacha-o chavai chhootai sog vijog.
One who loves the Truth and speaks the Truth, escapes from the sorrow of separation.
Soa OH S Sad A SA SS A TT NCSI (1010-16, +g, He 1) naanak naam na veesrai jo tis bhaavai so hog. ||8]|3]|| Nanak does not forget the Naam; whatever happens is by the Lord's Will. ||8]|3]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1010-16) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Wet arg anreat dfs wee ate i (1010-16, wg, He 1) saachee kaar kamaavnee hor laalach baad. Practice Truth - other greed and attachments are useless.
feg Ho ATS Hor faget Afe Arfe il (1010-17, wg, He 1) ih man saachai mohi-aa jihvaa sach saad. The True Lord has fascinated this mind, and my tongue enjoys the taste of Truth.
fag ae a on Odt dfs vata fae fe NAN Co10-17, wg, He D bin naavai ko ras nahee hor chaleh bikh laad. ||1]| Without the Name, there is no juice; the others depart, loaded with poison. ||1||
MAT Ber HS wes a Afs WAH HTS Il (1010-18, wg, He 1) aisaa laalaa mayray laal ko sun khasam hamaaray. I am such a slave of Yours, O my Beloved Lord and Master.
fA@ garets f@ vor Ay wes fimrs dl TIS Il Co10-18, wg, we 1) ji-o furmaaveh ti-o chalaa sach laal pi-aaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. I walk in harmony with Your Command, O my True, Sweet Beloved. ||1]||Pause| |
motes we wast as fafe rite i co10-19, wg, ve 1) an-din laalay chaakree golay sir meeraa. Night and day, the slave works for his overlord.
Td Adal HS Sonor Aafe He Us Il (1010-19, wg, He 1)
gur bachnee man vaychi-aa sabad man Dheeraa.
I have sold my mind for the Word of the Guru's Shabad; my mind is comforted and consoled by the Shabad.
UST YOAA
Os ys AA F are HS UTS MM Coit, wg, He 1)
gur pooray saabaas hai kaatai man peeraa. ||2||
The Perfect Guru is honored and celebrated; He has taken away the pains of my mind. ||2]|
wer der ust & for aa efsnreht it coii-1, wg, us 1)
laalaa golaa Dhanee ko ki-aa kaha-o vadi-aa-ee-ai.
I am the servant and slave of my Master; what glorious greatness of His can I describe?
SS TA UT Val AY aS AHEM I (1011-2, wg, we 1) bhaanai bakhsay pooraa Dhanee sach kaar kamaa-ee-di. The Perfect Master, by the Pleasure of His Will, forgives, and then one practices Truth.
feefanr a@ vfs we ae a@ af Weht 3 co1-2, wg, He vichhurhi-aa ka-o mayl la-ay gur ka-o bal jaa-ee-ai. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to my Guru, who re-unites the separated ones. ||3]|
BS Ho Hfs udt qa at Hfs stat i cous, wg, ve 1)
laalay golay mat kharee gur kee mat neekee.
The intellect of His servant and slave is noble and true; it is made so by the Guru's intellect.
Ardt Adfs Aateat HOH HfS Sett I cio1-3, wg, He 1)
saachee surat suhaavanee manmukh mat feekee.
The intuition of those who are true is beautiful; the intellect of the self-willed manmukh is insipid.
HO 36 3ST 3 Ug Ag Utea Us at NSN Co1-3, wg, He 1)
man tan tayraa too parabhoo sach Dheerak Dhur kee. ||4]|
My mind and body belong to You, God; from the very beginning, Truth has been my only support. ||4||
And Snes Coast Ag SHO Stir I (io1-4, wg, He 1) saachai baisan uth-naa sach bhojan bhaakhi-aa. In Truth I sit and stand; I eat and speak the Truth.
fafa As fes Ae ATaT oA whim I Gou-4, wg, He 1)
chit sachai vito sachaa saachaa ras chaakhi-aa.
With Truth in my consciousness, I gather the wealth of Truth, and drink in the sublime essence of Truth.
And wife APS ga ae sels Asher Hull co1-s, we, Hs 1)
saachai ghar saachai rakhay gur bachan subhaakhi-aa. ||5]||
In the home of Truth, the True Lord protects me; I speak the Words of the Guru's Teachings with love. ||5||
HoH a nro we ea Garrat il cous, we, us 1) manmukh ka-o aalas ghano faathay ojaarhee. The self-willed manmukh is very lazy; he is trapped in the wilderness.
oer gat fos saat ofa sa fearst ii cou-6, wg, Hs 1)
faathaa chugai nit chogrhee lag banDh vigaarhee.
He is drawn to the bait, and continually pecking at it, he is trapped; his link to the Lord is ruined.
Ge usASt Has dfs AS for set El co1-6, wg, He 1D gur parsaadee mukat ho-ay saachay nij taarhee. ||6]| By Guru's Grace, one is liberated, absorbed in the primal trance of Truth. ||6]|
nods oer aftor ys dfs furs i coti-6, wg, ue 1)
anhat laalaa bayDhi-aa parabh hayt pi-aaree.
His slave remains continually pierced through with love and affection for God.
fag ATS AIG Als awe sd Sard i cou-7, wg, He 1) bin saachay jee-o jal bala-o jhoothay vaykaaree. Without the True Lord, the soul of the false, corrupt person is burnt to ashes.
afe arg Afs ester Ardt Sg Sra WON Cou-7, wg, He 1) baad kaaraa sabh chhodee-aa saachee tar taaree. ||7|| Abandoning all evil actions, he crosses over in the boat of Truth. ||7]||
frat an fertanr faqt Ba 6 OTE Il Coll-s, wg, ue 1) jinee naam visaari-aa tinaa tha-ur na thaa-o. Those who have forgotten the Naam have no home, no place of rest.
wre ored fsorfanr urfemr ofs are il (iot-s, wg, He 1) laalai laalach ti-aagi-aa paa-i-aa har naa-o. The Lord's slave renounces greed and attachment, and obtains the Lord's Name.
3 aunts 3 fe Ss soa fs WE UTUI Co1-9, wg, He 1D too bakhsahi taa mayl laihi naanak bal jaa-o. ||8]|4|| If You forgive him, Lord, then He is united with You; Nanak is a sacrifice. ||8]|4]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1011-9) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
we Wee sur qe a F Aol AST I Cio1i-9, wg, He 1)
laalai gaarab chhodi-aa gur kai bhai sahj subhaa-ee.
The Lord's slave renounces his egotistical pride, through the Guru's Fear, intuitively and easily.
ws MAY UEtfent eat sfsnret i cou-10, wg, He 1) laalai knasam pachhaani-aa vadee vadi-aa-ee. The slave realizes his Lord and Master; glorious is his greatness!
uA fixfort Ae urfeor ahifs age o ATT IAI Ciotl-10, wg, He 1) khasam mili-ai sukh paa-i-aa keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||1|| Meeting with his Lord and Master, he finds peace; His value cannot be desribed. ||1]|
Grr Ger MAH aT UAH Sfmt i Cou-11, wg, He 1) laalaa golaa khasam kaa khasmai vadi-aa-ee. I am the slave and servant of my Lord and Master; all glory is to my Master.
ad usAet Cad ofa at Agavet NA FIT it co1-11, wg, we 1) gur parsaadee ubray har kee sarnaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, I am saved, in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
we 8 fafs ars 3 ofs wath sone il cou-12, wg, He 1) laalay no sir kaar hai Dhur khasam furmaa-ee.
The slave has been given the most excellent task, by the Primal Command of the Master.
wes TAH ustfsnr Het gd TAT Il (1011-12, vg, ne 1) laalai hukam pachhaani-aa sadaa rahai rajaa-ee. The slave realizes the Hukam of His Command, and submits to His Will forever.
nmy Hite auf oe eat efsnret 2H (io1-13, wg, we 1) aapay meeraa bakhas la-ay vadee vadi-aa-ee. ||2| | The Lord King Himself grants forgiveness; how glorious is His greatness! ||2||
uf Ae AS AY I as Aafe ysret | co1-13, we, ws 1) aap sachaa sabh sach hai gur sabad bujhaa-ee.
He Himself is True, and everything is True; this is revealed through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Sct Ae A as fan S Sfo J wet Il cou-14, weg, ws 1) tayree sayvaa so karay jis no laihi too laa-ee. He alone serves You, whom You have enjoined to do so.
fag Ae fas o urfenr eA sath yet WBN Cou-14, wg, He D bin sayvaa kinai na paa-i-aa doojai bharam khu-aa-ee. ||3]| Without serving Him, no one finds Him; in duality and doubt, they are ruined. ||3]|
A fa@ nog ferrdhn fos 22 vs Aetfemr i co1-15, we, us 1)
so ki-o manhu visaaree-ai nit dayvai charhai savaa-i-aa.
How could we forget Him from our minds? The gifts which he bestows increase day by day.
me fis ns fA a wg fs6 fefe user i cou-15, wg, He 1) jee-o pind sabh tis daa saahu tinai vich paa-i-aa. Soul and body, all belong to Him; He infused the breath into us.
Ww fgu ag a Aéba Afe Afs AHfeMr sil CoL-16, wg, He 1) jaa kirpaa karay taa sayvee-ai sayv sach samaa-i-aa. ||4|| If he shows His Mercy, then we serve Him; serving Him, we merge in Truth. ||4||
wer A Hes ue nfe feag wry Tee Il (01-16, wg, He 1D
laalaa so jeevat marai mar vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
He alone is the Lord's slave, who remains dead while yet alive, and eradicates egotism from within.
gue geta vats afe fyAe mats FSS | co1-17, wg, Hs 1) banDhan tooteh mukat ho-ay tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ay. His bonds are broken, the fire of his desire is quenched, and he is liberated.
AS ufs on fears 3 TeHfe & ws WUll Co1-17, wg, He 1)
sabh meh naam niDhaan hai gurmukh ko paa-ay. ||5||
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within all, but how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, obtain it. ||5]|
we fefs ae fags odt war nigafEnrg | coi-18, wg, He 1) laalay vich gun kichh nahee laalaa avgani-aar. Within the Lord's slave, there is no virtue at all; the Lord's slave is totally unworthy.
30 Aes UST a St FJ TMAST Il (1011-18, og, we tuDh jayvad daataa ko nahee too bakhsanhaar. There is no Giver as great as You, Lord; You alone are the Forgiver.
3a JAH Ber xs Sd agat AT WE (io1-19, wg, us 1) tayraa hukam laalaa mannay ayh karnee saar. ||6]|| Your slave obeys the Hukam of Your Command; this is the most excellent action. ||6]|
Gg Wag nifys Ag A fee A Sw wes I io1-19, wg, ne 1)
gur saagar amrit sar jo ichhay so fal paa-ay.
The Guru is the pool of nectar in the world-ocean; whatever one desires, that fruit is obtained.
oy ueeg wing 3 fase fs SAS Il cio1i-19, wg, Hs 1) naam padaarath amar hai hirdai man vasaa-ay. The treasure of the Naam brings immortality; enshrine it in your heart and mind.
Yast YO92
Gd AS Ae AY od fAA S JAH HOS IDI (1012-1, wg, Hs 1)
gur sayvaa sadaa sukh hai jis no hukam manaa-ay. ||7||
Serving the Guru, eternal peace is obtained, by those whom the Lord inspires to obey the Hukam of His Command. ||7]||
Afear gut AS os oO Het of AT II (1012-1, og, He 1) su-inaa rupaa sabh Dhaat hai maatee ral jaa-ee. Gold and silver, and all metals, mix with dust in the end
fag ae ans 3 veel Afsafs gs Tsret I 012-2, wg, He
bin naavai naal na chal-ee satgur boojh bujhaa-ee.
Without the Name, nothing goes along with you; the True Guru has imparted this understanding.
sed oth a3 A fSaHs ATS To AHTST CHUN (1012-2, »g, He 1)
naanak naam ratay say nirmalay saachai rahay samaa-ee. ||8]||5||
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are immaculate and pure; they remain merged in the Truth. ||8||5||
HTT HIG 4 Il (1012-3) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
gan sfeor sgat adt ufe aS BS il (1012-3, wg, us 1) hukam bha-i-aa rahnaa nahee Dhur faatay cheerai. The Order is issued, and he cannot remain; the permit to stay has been torn up.
fg He meats afar Ag tg ASS Il (1012-3, +g, He 1) ayhu man avgan baaDhi-aa saho dayh sareerai. This mind is tied to its faults; it suffers terrible pain in its body.
ud afe surreinifs Afs ToT Sats WAU (1012-4, org, we poorai gur bakhsaa-ee-ah sabh gunah fakeerai. ||1|| The Perfect Guru forgives all the mistakes of the beggar at His Door. ||1]|
fa@ sdb Cfo goat gs Hae shers Il (1012-4, wg, ne 1)
ki-o rahee-ai uth chalnaa bujh sabad beechaaraa.
How can he stay here? He must get up and depart. Contemplate the Word of the Shabad, and understand this.
fan 3 Aefe A HS ofs Jou ors UU TTS Ml (1012-5, wg, we 1)
jis too mayleh so milai Dhur hukam apaaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He alone is united, whom You, O Lord, unite. Such is the Primal Command of the Infinite Lord. ||1||Pause| |
fA@ 3 wuts 8 sa A Mf AWS I 012-5, wg, we ji-o too raakhahi ti-o rahaa jo deh so khaa-o. As You keep me, I remain; whatever You give me, I eat.
fas 3 verefe fC vor yf nifigs aS Il (012-6, og, He 1) ji-o too chalaaveh ti-o chalaa mukh amrit naa-o. As You lead me, I follow, with the Ambrosial Name in my mouth.
He oad ofa saureior Hats nfs BE QI (1012-6, wg, us 1)
mayray thaakur hath vadi-aa-ee-aa mayleh man chaa-o. ||2]|
All glorious greatness rests in the hands of my Lord and Master; my mind yearns to unite with You. |[2||
atst far Aredia afs fe et Wt 012-7, wg, ve 1)
keetaa ki-aa salaahee-ai kar daykhai so-ee. Why should anyone praise any other created being? That Lord acts and sees.
fafs ater A fs SAH msg & AET I (1012-7, wg, we 1) jin kee-aa so man vasai mai avar na ko-ee. The One who created me, abides within my mind; there is no other at all.
A Are" ATedba Act ufs Tet wil (1012-8, we, us 1) so saachaa salaahee-ai saachee pat ho-ee. ||3]| So praise that True Lord, and you shall be blessed with true honor. ||3]|
ufss ufs o ugeel 3g nS AAT I (1012-8, wg, Hs 1)
pandit parh na pahucha-ee baho aal janjaalaa.
The Pandit, the religious scholar, reads, but does not reach the Lord; he is totally entangled in worldly affairs.
uy US efe Aa ufo AHATET II (1012-9, wg, He 1)
paap punn du-ay sangmay khuDhi-aa jamkaalaa.
He keeps the company of both virtue and vice, tormented by hunger and the Messenger of Death.
fees 38 SAS UT TASS VI (1012-9, wg, 2 1) vichhorhaa bha-o veesrai pooraa rakhvaalaa. ||4|| One who is protected by the Perfect Lord, forgets separation and fear. ||4||
fie ot BH ufs ue A Us set Il (1012-9, wg, we 1) jin kee laykhai pat pavai say pooray bhaa-ee. They alone are perfect, O Siblings of Destiny, whose honor is certified.
ud udt HIS o At Sfsnret il (1012-10, wg, 48 1) pooray pooree mat hai sachee vadi-aa-ee. Perfect is the intellect of the Perfect Lord. True is His glorious greatness.
ae Sfe 5 ureet BS afar uret ull (1012-10, wg, ve 1) dayday tot na aavee lai lai thak paa-ee. ||5|| His gifts never run short, although those who receive may grow weary of receiving.
[5] |
ug AHS Seana fea Heber urs Il (1012-10, wg, He 1) khaar samudar dhandholee-ai ik manee-aa paavai. Searching the salty sea, one finds the pearl.
ef feo of nosat ret FSR wre II (1012-11, »g, He 1) du-ay din chaar suhaavanaa maatee tis khaavai. It looks beautiful for a few days, but in the end, it is eaten away by dust.
ag Wag Afs Ae F Sfe B ors WEN (1012-11, wg, He 1)
gur saagar sat sayvee-ai day tot na aavai. ||6||
If one serves the Guru, the ocean of Truth, the gifts one receives never run short. [161]
AS ys sels A CAS AS HS Set I 1012-12, og, ws 1) mayray parabh bhaavan say oojlay sabh mail bhareejai. They alone are pure, who are pleasing to my God; all others are soiled with filth.
Her Cae st aha ursr Afar StH i 012-12, wg, vs 1) mailaa oojal taa thee-ai paaras sang bheejai. The filthy become pure, when they meet with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone.
Sat AS ore ot fats ahafs att WOW (012-13, wg, He 1) vannee saachay laal kee kin keemat keejai. ||7]| Who can estimate the value of the color of the true jewel? ||7]|
su wa 5 aset Stefa odt BS I (1012-13, wg, He 1)
bhaykhee haath na labh-ee tirath nahee daanay.
Wearing religious robes, the Lord is not obtained, nor is He obtained by giving donations at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
yus@ ae ustsor vot fee HS Il (1012-13, wg, M8 1) poochha-o bayd parhanti-aa moothee vin maanay. Go and ask the readers of the Vedas; without faith, the world is cheated.
aot HHS AAS UST Tg farrs wcll (o12-14, wg, He D naanak keemat so karay pooraa gur gi-aanay. ||8]|6] |
O Nanak, he alone values the jewel, who is blessed with the spiritual wisdom of the Perfect Guru. ||8]|6] |
HTT HIG 4 Il (1012-14)
maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
HOY Bole we sh feqs via a wa Fs | (1012-15, wg, ws 1)
manmukh lahar ghar taj vigoochai avraa kay ghar hayrai.
The self-willed manmukh, in a fit of passion, abandons his home, and is ruined; then, he spies on the homes of others.
fas UaH Tee ASAT 5 Se VSHS WHS WS I (1012-15, wg, we
garih Dharam gavaa-ay satgur na bhaytai durmat ghooman ghayrai.
He neglects his household duties, and does not meet with the True Guru; he is caught in the whirlpool of evil-mindedness.
ferisg 32 ure ufs war fanart fe Sag Il (1012-16, wg, He 1)
disantar bhavai paath parh thaakaa tarisnaa ho-ay vaDhayrai.
Wandering in foreign lands and reading scriptures, he grows weary, and his thirsty desires only increase.
ard fist nag o dé Beg sd AA ST NA (1012-16, wg, He D kaachee pindee sabad na cheenai udar bharai jaisay dhorai. ||1]||
His perishable body does not remember the Word of the Shabad; like a beast, he fills his belly. |[{1]|
ae mrt Tes Je Afomrat il (1012-17, wg, ve 1) baabaa aisee ravat ravai sani-aasee. O Baba, this is the way of life of the Sannyaasi, the renunciate.
qd a Rafe Sa fee wat 33 oth as fRuset ua THC i 012-17, wg, us
gur kai sabad ayk liv laagee tayrai naam ratay tariptaasee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is to enshrine love for the One Lord. Imbued with Your Name, Lord, he remains satisfied and fulfilled. ||1]|Pause] |
west ae sq vateur SAX su Sars il (1012-18, wg, we 1) gholee gayroo rang charhaa-i-aa vastar bhaykh bhaykhaaree. He dyes his robes with saffron dye, and wearing these robes, he goes out begging.
aus ata aaret fitar sat ufemrardt il (1012-18, wg, He 1) kaaparh faar banaa-ee khinthaa jholee maa-i-aaDhaaree. Tearing his robes, he makes a patched coat, and puts the money in his wallet.
wife whe Hat Aa used Hfs nit ufsS at I (1012-19, wg, He 1)
ghar ghar maagai jag parboDhai man anDhai pat haaree.
From house to house he goes begging, and tries to teach the world; but his mind is blind, and so he loses his honor.
SoH Saat Hae MS MA TH TSH QM (012-19, wg, we Y
bharam bhulaanaa sabad na cheenai joo-ai baajee haaree. ||2||
He is deluded by doubt, and does not remember the Word of the Shabad. He loses his life in the gamble. ||2||
Yat 9093
nists mate 3 as fag gs wats ute SU it (1013-1, wg, He 1) antar agan na gur bin boojhai baahar poo-ar taapai. Without the Guru, the fire within is not quenched; and outside, the fire still burns.
ad Az fae sats o dat fa@ afe dtofh mre tt (1013-1, wg, He
gur sayvaa bin bhagat na hovee ki-o kar cheenas aapai.
Without serving the Guru, there is no devotional worship. How can anyone, by himself, know the Lord?
foe afe afs sea foet nists wiry AMY II (1013-2, wg, He 1) nindaa kar kar narak nivaasee antar aatam jaapai. Slandering others, one lives in hell; within him is hazy darkness.
WOnIS Stee saty feats fas He TY ut Sil (1013-2, wg, Hs 1)
athsath tirath bharam vigoocheh ki-o mal Dhopai paapai. | |3] |
Wandering to the eixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, he is ruined. How can the filth of sin be washed away? ||3]|
wat wae fags varet wfenr a Ha AT Il (1013-3, wg, He 1)
chhaanee khaak bibhoot charhaa-ee maa-i-aa kaa mag johai.
He sifts through the dust, and applies ashes to his body, but he is searching for the path of Maya's wealth.
iN
nists wofs fa 5 WE ATG Ad 3 sd Il (1013-3, wg, ve 1)
antar baahar ayk na jaanai saach kahay tay chhohai.
Inwardly and outwardly, he does not know the One Lord; if someone tells him the Truth, he grows angry.
us us Hf 3S 88 faa at HPS Gs It (1013-4, wg, we 1) paath parhai mukh jhootho bolai niguray kee mat ohai. He reads the scriptures, but tells lies; such is the intellect of one who has no guru.
oH 3 Aust fae AY ue fae ore fa AD igi (1013-4, wg, He 1)
naam na jap-ee ki-o sukh paavai bin naavai ki-o sohai. ||4||
Without chanting the Naam, how can he find peace? Without the Name, how can he look good? ||4||
Hs Hote wert fra act fs sd wifsHrar il (1013-5, wg, we 1)
moond mudaa-ay jataa sikh baaDhee mon rahai abhimaanaa.
Some shave their heads, some keep their hair in matted tangles; some keep it in braids, while some keep silent, filled with egotistical pride.
Hour 38 vo fen we fag TS wrsn famrar i (1013-5, wg, me 1)
manoo-aa dolai dah dis Dhaavai bin rat aatam gi-aanaa.
Their minds waver and wander in ten directions, without loving devotion and enlightenment of the soul.
nifys dfs Ho fg ute wefemr ar Ferar | (1013-6, wg, He 1)
amrit chhod mahaa bikh peevai maa-i-aa kaa dayvaanaa.
They abandon the Ambrosial Nectar, and drink the deadly poison, driven mad by Maya.
fass 3 feet Tau 3 3S unMr Hfe AHMET INUIT (1013-7, wg, M8 1)
kirat na mit-ee hukam na boojhai pasoo-aa maahi samaanaa. ||5]|
Past actions cannot be erased; without understanding the Hukam of the Lord's Command, they become beasts. ||5||
ve aise ausior nfs feAS Surt sat i 013-7, wg, we 1) haath kamandal kaaprhee-aa man tarisnaa upjee bhaaree. With bowl in hand, wearing his patched coat, great desires well up in his mind.
fenst sta ats oth feurfimr fas afenr ug ardt i (1013-8, wg, we 1)
istaree taj kar kaam vi-aapi-aa chit laa-i-aa par naaree.
Abandoning his own wife, he is engrossed in sexual desire; his thoughts are on the wives of others.
fru ad afs Hae 3 dts Bus F Pas Il 1013-8, wg, ne 1)
sikh karay kar sabad na cheenai lampat hai baajaaree.
He teaches and preaches, but does not contemplate the Shabad; he is bought and sold on the street.
nists fay aofe fosast 3 AH AS Unrest EN (1013-9, wg, He 1)
antar bikh baahar nibhraatee taa jam karay khu-aaree. ||6]|
With poison within, he pretends to be free of doubt; he is ruined and humiliated by the Messenger of Death. ||6]|
A Afoornt A Afsas AS fees wry Tee I (1013-9, wg, He 1)
SO Sani-aasee jo satgur sayvai vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
He alone is a Sannyaasi, who serves the True Guru, and removes his self-conceit from within.
Bea sHo at oA @ aset nifss fs A urs It (1013-10, wg, we 1) chhaadan bhojan kee aas na kar-ee achint milai so paa-ay. He does not ask for clothes or food; without asking, he accepts whatever he receives.
wa 6 88 finr ug Aad SHA OTH ABS Il (1013-10, wg, Hs 1)
bakai na bolai khimaa Dhan sangrahai taamas naam jalaa-ay.
He does not speak empty words; he gathers in the wealth of tolerance, and burns away his anger with the Naam.
ue foradt Hfouret Hat fa afs geet fos we DI 013-11, wg, He 1D
Dhan girhee sani-aasee jogee je har charnee chit laa-ay. ||7||
Blessed is such a householder, Sannyaasi and Yogi, who focuses his consciousness on the Lord's feet. ||7]|
wh fear ad Hfoorat San fre foe we Il (1013-11, wg, He
aas niraas rahai sani-aasee aykas si-o liv laa-ay.
Amidst hope, the Sannyaasi remains unmoved by hope; he remains lovingly focused on the One Lord.
ofa aA ute 3 AS wre for ufs Stat we I (1013-12, wg, He 1)
har ras peevai taa saat aavai nij ghar taarhee laa-ay.
He drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord, and so finds peace and tranquility; in the home of his own being, he remains absorbed in the deep trance of meditation.
Hour 3 38 TeHfe ys Wes zofA ITS I (1013-13, wg, vs 1)
manoo-aa na dolai gurmukh boojhai Dhaavat varaj rahaa-ay.
His mind does not waver; as Gurmukh, he understands. He restrains it from wandering out.
fad Adley TIHSt BA SH USTI_ US CH (1013-13, wg, He 1)
garihu sareer gurmatee khojay naam padaarath paa-ay. ||8] |
Following the Guru's Teachings, he searches the home of his body, and obtains the wealth of the Naam. ||8]|
qoH fae HI AdHe OTH gs Sterdt Ii (1013-14, wg, ne 1)
barahmaa bisan mahays saraysat naam ratay veechaaree.
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are exalted, imbued with contemplative meditation on the Naam.
urat aret aare usat Hat AS SHS It (1013-14, wg, ve 1)
khaanee banee gagan pataalee jantaa jot tumaaree.
The sources of creation, speech, the heavens and the underworld, all beings and creatures, are infused with Your Light.
Afs AY Hats oH Ufs wat AG OH Es Ut I (1013-14, wg, we 1
sabh sukh mukat naam Dhun banee sach naam ur Dhaaree.
All comforts and liberation are found in the Naam, and the vibrations of the Guru's Bani; I have enshrined the True Name within my heart.
on for adt sefA aoa ATS Sg FT SSH MCN N (1013-15, wg, we 1)
naam binaa nahee chhootas naanak saachee tar too taaree. ||9]|7]|
Without the Naam, no one is saved; O Nanak, with the Truth, cross over to the other side. ||9]|7]|
HT HIG 1 Il (1013-16) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
ns fust Haft Cure sas fitz fife ffs as i 1013-16, wg, He 1)
maat pitaa sanjog upaa-ay rakat bind mil pind karay.
Through the union of mother and father, the fetus is formed. The egg and sperm join together to make the body.
nists aes Bafa fos oat A ys ATS STS AT NA (1013-16, +g, He 1)
antar garabh uraDh liv laagee so parabh saaray daat karay. ||1]|
Upside-down within the womb, it lovingly dwells on the Lord; God provides for it, and gives it nourishment there. ||1]|
HATS SENS fa 3g il (1013-17, wg, He 1) sansaar bhavjal ki-o tarai. How can he cross over the terrifying world-ocean?
qonfa on fodre uh nrefaS arg nrerg Sd UU TIS Ml 1013-17, og, ve 1) gurmukh naam niranjan paa-ee-ai afri-o bhaar afaar tarai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukh obtains the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; the unbearable load of sins is removed. ||1]|Pause] |
3 ae fenfa ae mredt 4 aCe for aa Ts Il (1013-18, wg, He 1) tay gun visar ga-ay apraaDhee mai ba-uraa ki-aa kara-o haray. I have forgotten Your Virtues, Lord; I am insane - what can I do now?
3 ws efenre As fate uifofetA ofS Mts AT WM (1013-19, wg, He 1)
too daataa da-i-aal sabhai sir ahinis daat samaar karay. ||2||
You are the Merciful Giver, above the heads of all. Day and night, You give gifts, and take care of all. ||2||
ofa uesa & afar aofimr fre Hast wife SA Us I (1013-19, wg, He 1)
chaar padaarath lai jag janmi-aa siv saktee ghar vaas Dharay.
One is born to achieve the four great objectives of life. The spirit has taken up its home in the material world.
UST 90%
wat sa went ng Ad Hats ueTsE Hfs ws WSN (014-1, wg, He 1D
laagee bhookh maa-i-aa mag johai mukat padaarath mohi kharay. ||3]|
Driven by hunger, it sees the path of Maya's riches; this emotional attachment takes away the treasure of liberation. ||3]|
TIE UBS AS St ure fs SS Fes Tha us il (1014-1, wg, we
karan palaav karay nahee paavai it ut dhoodhat thaak paray.
Weeping and wailing, he does not receive them; he searches here and there, and grows weary.
oth afi nderts femmt az aca fr@ yifs as en (014-2, wg, we 1)
kaam kroDh aha‘kaar vi-aapay koorh kutamb si-o pareet karay. ||4||
Engrossed in sexual desire, anger and egotism, he falls in love with his false relatives. [141]
ure sat Afs afs 28 ufofe fears ares we Il (1014-3, og, He 1)
khaavai bhogai sun sun daykhai pahir dikhaavai kaal gharay.
He eats and enjoys, listens and watches, and dresses up to show off in this house of death.
fag ae Ase 3 ny use fae ofa BH B AG Ss MUI (1014-3, wg, He 1)
bin gur sabad na aap pachhaanai bin har naam na kaal taray. ||5||
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he does not undersand himself. Without the Lord's Name, death cannot be avoided. ||5||
AS Hy IGH afs ss Hat Ast aes eS us i 014-4, og, we
jaytaa moh ha-umai kar bhoolay mayree mayree kartay chheen kharay.
The more attachment and egotism delude and confuse him, the more he cries out, "Mine, mine!", and the more he loses out.
36 U6 faorn AGA Aa fefs ugar] yf ofs us WEN C014-4, wg, Hs 1)
tan Dhan binsai sahsai sahsaa fir pachhutaavai mukh Dhoor paray. ||6] |
His body and wealth pass away, and he is torn by skepticism and cynicism; in the end, he regrets and repents, when the dust falls on his face. ||6]|
fasta sfeur Fag 36 fufimr ag ao fast Sag Ste SI Il 1014-5, wg, Hs 1)
biraDh bha-i-aa joban tan khisi-aa kaf kanth birooDho nainhu neer dharay.
He grows old, his body and youth waste away, and his throat is plugged with mucous; water flows from his eyes.
BIE TI AT AUS SA AAS IH B fet JS MDI (1014-6, wg, us 1)
charan rahay kar kampan laagay saakat raam na ridai haray. ||7| |
He feet fail him, and his hands shake and tremble; the faithless cynic does not enshrine the Lord in his heart. ||7]||
Hats wet ast I uss far o se THE ws I (1014-6, wg, we
Surat ga-ee kaalee hoo Dha-ulay kisai na bhaavai rakhi-o gharay.
His intellect fails him, his black hair turns white, and no one wants to keep him in their home.
fangs on win du oreo AH Hf ANTS Safe Ys CH (1014-7, wg, He 1)
bisrat naam aisay dokh laageh jam maar samaaray narak kharay. ||8|| Forgetting the Naam, these are the stigmas which stick to him; the Messenger of Death beats him, and drags him to hell. ||8]|
Usa ASH & BY 3 feet Fath Hs a aA SA TS I (1014-8, og, He poorab janam ko laykh na mit-ee janam marai kaa ka-o dos Dharay.
The record of one's past actions cannot be erased; who else is to blame for one's birth and death?
fas ag wfe Hee dg Hoa fig Ta Wee AON A ICI (1014-8, wg, He 1D
bin gur baad jeevan hor marnaa bin gur sabdai janam jaray. ||9]|
Without the Guru, life and death are pointless; without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, life just burns away. ||9]|
ut Units Se IA Sale eae AGH fears aT I (1014-9, wg, ve 1)
khusee khu-aar bha-ay ras bhogan fokat karam vikaar karay.
The pleasures enjoyed in happiness bring ruin; acting in corruption is useless indulgence.
on farts ats ue dfes fats can of a SF UT WAM (1014-9, wg, He 1)
naam bisaar lobh mool kho-i-o sir Dharam raa-ay kaa dand paray. ||10]|
Forgetting the Naam, and caught by greed, he betrays his own source; the club of the Righteous Judge of Dharma will strike him over the head. ||10]|
Tony TH OH Te Wels W aS ate ys sefe AP I (1014-10, wg, ne 1)
gurmukh raam naam gun gaavahi jaa ka-o har parabh nadar karay.
The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name; the Lord God blesses them with His Glance of Grace.
3 fase use wrdus us 3 Aa His ae Ae TF NIV Co14-11, og, He DY
tay nirmal purakh aprampar pooray tay jag meh gur govind haray. ||11]||
Those beings are pure, perfect unlimited and infinite; in this world, they are the embodiment of the Guru, the Lord of the Universe. ||11] |
ofa fAnag Ta 389 AHTaT Aafs als AS HS as Il (1014-11, wg, us
har simrahu gur bachan samaarahu sangat har jan bhaa-o karay.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord; meditate and contemplate the Guru's Word, and love to associate with the humble servants of the Lord.
ufg He TT use Enid soa fSo Ho at FS TF NUCH (1014-12, wg, He 1D
har jan gur parDhaan du-aarai naanak tin jan kee rayn haray. ||12||8]|
The Lord's humble servants are the embodiment of the Guru; they are supreme and respected in the Court of the Lord. Nanak seeks the dust of the feet of those humble servants of the Lord. ||12]|8]]|
qe Afsars yAfe I (1014-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hg ast HIS A WT 2 Il (1014-15) maaroo kaafee mehlaa 1 ghar 2. Maaroo, Kaafee, First Mehl, Second House:
mreQ ZeS sHat fast fee as it (1014-15, we adh, ve 1) aava-O vanja-o dummnee kitee mitar karay-o. The double-minded person comes and goes, and has numerous friends.
Aue et 3 wd set fas ass wai (1014-15, wg at, ve 1) saa Dhan dho-ee na lahai vaadhee ki-o Dheeray-o. ||1]|
The soul-bride is separated from her Lord, and she has no place of rest; how can she be comforted? ||1]|
AS He Is nuss furs arf i (1014-16, wg aret, He 1) maidaa man rataa aapnarhay pir naal. My mind is attuned to the Love of my Husband Lord.
IG uifs unret usb atest fox sct sefa foots wai ToS il 1014-16, wg art, 48 1) ha-o ghol ghumaa-ee khannee-ai keetee hik bhoree nadar nihaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am devoted, dedicated, a sacrifice to the Lord; if only He would bless me with His Glance of Grace, even for an instant! ||1]|Pause] |
udhus soaet Ages f@ AE Wt 1014-17, we wet, us 1)
pay-ee-arhai dohaaganee saahurrhai ki-o jaa-o.
I am a rejected bride, abandoned in my parents' home; how can I go to my in-laws now?
H ates m@ae vost fas fue sfe HeS Qu (1014-17, wg ore, we
mai gal a-ugan muth-rhee bin pir jhoor maraa-o. ||2|| I wear my faults around my neck; without my Husband Lord, I am grieving, and wasting away to death. ||2||
ushas fug Aye Ages wife SH I (014-18, we art, He 1)
pay-ee-arhai pir sammlaa saahurrhai ghar vaas.
But if, in my parents' home, I remember my Husband Lord, then I will come to dwell in the home of my in-laws yet.
Af Aéfa Aocret fug fer TESA ISI (1014-18, we at, Hs 1)
sukh savanDh sohaaganee pir paa-i-aa guntaas. ||3]||
The happy soul-brides sleep in peace; they find their Husband Lord, the treasure of virtue. ||3]|
Be fevest ue at aus nifar sete it 014-19, we art, ue 1) layf nihaalee pat kee kaaparh ang banaa-ay. Their blankets and mattresses are made of silk, and so are the clothes on their bodies.
fug Hat Soaret fsa sut df= feat igi (1014-19, wg aet, He 1) pir mutee dohaaganee tin dukhee rain vihaa-ay. ||4|| The Lord rejects the impure soul-brides. Their life-night passes in misery. ||4||
Us AWW fast su@ Ass fast SA AG Il (1015-1, wg aret, He 1)
kitee chakha-o saadrhay kitee vays karay-o. I have tasted many flavors, and worn many robes,
fus fag Fag wfe afeony eet seat SIS NU Co1s-1, wy wet, Hs 1)
pir bin joban baad ga-i-am vaadhee jhooraydee jhooray-o. ||5||
but without my Husband Lord, my youth is slipping away uselessly; I am separated from Him, and I cry out in pain. ||5]|
Ae Het Heat Heb as Stef Il (1015-2, wg aret, ne 1) sachay sandaa sad-rhaa sunee-ai gur veechaar. I have heard the True Lord's message, contemplating the Guru.
Ad Ae dda" oedt oefa fimrfa wei ao1s-2, wg wet, ue 1) sachay sachaa baihnaa nadree nadar pi-aar. ||6|| True is the home of the True Lord; by His Gracious Grace, I love Him. ||6||
famrat nine AY at SU SuST Il (1015-3, wg art, we 1)
gi-aanee anjan sach kaa daykhai daykhanhaar.
The spiritual teacher applies the ointment of Truth to his eyes, and sees God, the Seer.
Tsnfe gs Weba IBH aeg fests Di co1s-3, wg at, we 1) gurmukh boojhai jaanee-ai ha-umai garab nivaar. ||7|| The Gurmukh comes to know and understand; ego and pride are subdued. ||7||
38 sels 38 Ader y Adtor faster I (1015-3, wg act, He 1)
ta-o bhaavan ta-o jayhee-aa moo jayhee-aa kitee-aah.
O Lord, You are pleased with those who are like Yourself; there are many more like me.
soe od 6 Hes fo Ae BST CNA 015-4, we art, Hs 1) naanak naahu na veechhurhai tin sachai rat-rhee-aah. ||8]]1]|9||
O Nanak, the Husband does not separate from those who are imbued with Truth. [8] 11191]
HTT HIG 4 Il (1015-5) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
o Sat sane ot A AAS Il (1015-5, wg, He 1) naa bhainaa bharjaa-ee-aa naa say sasurhee-aah. Neither the sisters, nor the sisters-in-law, nor the mothers-in-law, shall remain.
Au A 6 Scel TI AS ATMIT WAU (1015-5, wg, He 1)
sachaa saak na tut-ee gur maylay sahee-aas. ||1]|
The true relationship with the Lord cannot be broken; it was established by the Lord, O sister soul-brides. ||1||
afeodt as ntue Ae Safed AE Il (1015-6, wg, He 1)
balihaaree gur aapnay sad balihaarai jaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.
ad fag ea safe aat afe fug Afeu fesu fore nai TIE it (1015-6, wg, Hs 1)
gur bin aytaa bhav thakee gur pir maylim ditam milaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Wandering so far without the Guru, I grew weary; now, the Guru has united me in Union with my Husband Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
Sat Stat HA Sg ASTSS ST Il (1015-7, wg, He 1) fufee naanee maasee-aa dayr jaythaanrhee-aah. Aunts, uncles, grandparents and sisters-in-law
wets Jets ot Jae UT SI UTMAT III 1015-7, wg, Hs 1)
aavan vanjan naa rahan poor bharay pahee-aah. ||2||
- they all come and go; they cannot remain. They are like boatloads of passengers embarking. ||2||
HH S HTShor ates a SHE I 1015-8, wg, He 1) maamay tai maamaanee-aa bhaa-ir baap na maa-o. Uncles, aunts, and cousins of all sorts, cannot remain.
AG 3 fso sob sts wet adr Sil (1015-8, wg, us saath laday tin naathee-aa bheerh ghanee daree-aa-o. ||3]| The caravans are full, and great crowds of them are loading up at the riverbank. ||3]|
WUC da Jared Fat DS FT I (1015-9, wg, ve 1) saacha-o rang rangaavio sakhee hamaaro kant. O sister-friends, my Husband Lord is dyed in the color of Truth.
Afs feds at dha A Ag dfor FSZ SI (1015-9, wg, we 1) sach vichhorhaa naa thee-ai so saho rang ravant. ||4| |
She who lovingly remembers her True Husband Lord is not separated from Him again. [141]
AS gst vam fas Ae fAG Sg Il (1015-10, wg, 48 1) sabhay rutee changee-aa jit sachay si-o nayhu. All the seasons are good, in which the soul-bride falls in love with the True Lord.
Aug ag uetfenr afy Ast fafa ST WUI (015-10, wg, He 1) saa Dhan kant pachhaani-aa sukh sutee nis dayhu. ||5]| That soul-bride, who knows her Husband Lord, sleeps in peace, night and day. ||5]||
usfe ga usat Jeg gfx fete i co1s-11, wg, we patan kookay paat-nee vanjahu Dharuk vilaarh. At the ferry, the ferryman announces, "O travellers, hurry up and cross over."
ufs udes fae 4 Afsae Sfofa of WEN (015-11, wg, Hs 1D paar pavand-rhay dith mai satgur bohith chaarh. ||6]|| I have seen them crossing over there, on the boat of the True Guru. ||6] |
fast ofenr fata afe are fate std FI |S Il (1015-11, wg, He 1)
hiknee ladi-aa hik lad ga-ay hik bhaaray bhar naal.
Some are getting on board, and some have already set out; some are weighed down with their loads.
faat Ag zefror A AS YS as WI (1015-12, wg, us 1) jinee sach vananji-aa say sachay parabh naal. ||7|| Those who deal in Truth, remain with their True Lord God. ||7||
oO dH vat wring gato fer afe il (1015-12, wg, He 1) naa ham changay aakhee-aah buraa na disai ko-ay. I am not called good, and I see none who are bad.
SSa IGH Hdba AT Ada APE NCIQNION (1015-13, wg, He 1) naanak ha-umai maaree-ai sachay jayhrhaa so-ay. ||8]||2||10]|
O Nanak, one who conquers and subdues his ego, becomes just like the True Lord. [18] [2] [210] |
HTS HIG 4 Il (1015-14) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
ot Wet Hay FT aet a Arar frat i (1015-14, og, we naa jaanaa moorakh hai ko-ee naa jaanaa si-aanaa. I do not believe that anyone is foolish; I do not believe that anyone is clever.
Ret Afos & dat ast niafes SH SUS WA (1015-14, wg, Hs 1)
sadaa saahib kai rangay raataa an-din naam vakhaanaa. ||1||
Imbued forever with the Love of my Lord and Master, I chant His Name, night and day. ||1]|
TT HI TSS af AS ll (1015-15, wg, we 1) baabaa moorakh haa naavai bal jaa-o. O Baba, I am so foolish, but I am a sacrifice to the Name.
3 aT TTS Mar 3g oT SHS AU FHS I 015-15, wg, we Y
too kartaa too daanaa beenaa tayrai naam taraa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are the Creator, You are wise and all-seeing. Through Your Name, we are carried across. ||1||Pause]|
Hay frora Sa o Sa AS Sf JS I (1015-16, wg, Hs 1) moorakh si-aanaa ayk hai ayk jot du-ay naa-o. The same person is foolish and wise; the same light within has two names.
yee ffs yaa o fA HS ata SS UN (1015-16, wy, we 1) moorkhaa sir moorakh hai je mannay naahee naa-o. ||2|| The most foolish of the foolish are those who do not believe in the Name. ||2]|
Td word ae uc fas Afsag us o ute It 1015-17, wg, He
gur du-aarai naa-o paa-ee-ai bin satgur palai na paa-ay.
Through the Guru's Gate, the Gurdwara, the Name is obtained. Without the True Guru, it is not received.
Afsad & ave Hfs SA st mifofatA ad fs ofe Si (1015-17, wg, Hs 1)
satgur kai bhaanai man vasai taa ahinis rahai liv laa-ay. ||3]|
Through the Pleasure of the True Guru's Will, the Name comes to dwell in the mind, and then, night and day, one remains lovingly absorbed in the Lord. ||3]|
TH Ja Te Hs HAG FS HS Il 1015-18, wg, we raaja’ ranga™ roopa’ maala™ joban tay joo-aaree. In power, pleasures, beauty, wealth and youth, one gambles his life away.
got sa uA dats sBufs Sar Are Iigil (1015-18, wg, He 1)
hukmee baaDhay paasai khayleh cha-uparh aykaa saaree. ||4| |
Bound by the Hukam of God's Command, the dice are thrown; he is just a piece in the game of chess. ||4] |
afa 33g fiore sath gore a ufss usta arerct il (1015-19, wg, He 1)
jag chatur si-aanaa bharam bhulaanaa naa-o pandit parheh gaavaaree.
The world is clever and wise, but it is deluded by doubt, and forgets the Name; the Pandit, the religious scholar, studies the scriptures, but he is still a fool.
og ferrsts te AHofe fay 3H Sars ull 015-19, wg, He 1)
naa-o visaareh bayd samaaleh bikh bhoolay laykhaaree. ||5||
Forgetting the Name, he dwells upon the Vedas; he writes, but he is confused by his poisonous corruption. ||5]|
Yat 9oWE
aed vst Saed AS Har ufsats ans Ss Il (1016-1, wg, Hs 1)
kalar khaytee tarvar kanthay baagaa pahirahi kajal jharai.
He is like the crop planted in the salty soil, or the tree growing on the river bank, or the white clothes sprinkled with dirt.
Ss AAR 4
fg HAG fA at aot A UA A Tete AP NEN (016-1, >, He 1) ayhu sansaar tisai kee kothee jo paisai so garab jarai. ||6||
This world is the house of desire; whoever enters it, is burnt down by egotistical pride. [16] |
vats TH aT APS eg nists A AAT I (1016-2, wg, He 1)
ra-yat raajay kahaa sabaa-ay duhu antar so jaasee.
Where are all the kings and their subjects? Those who are immersed in duality are destroyed.
AIS SSA Td Ad at uSSt TaAt nioy feeAt WOUSNAAUI (1016-2, wg, He 1)
kahat naanak gur sachay kee pa-orhee rahsee alakh nivaasee. ||7||3||11]| Says Nanak, these are the steps of the ladder, of the Teachings of the True Guru; only the Unseen Lord shall remain. ||7]|3]]11]|
Hg HIG 3 wg Uu MAcUet (1016-4)
maaroo mehlaa 3 ghar 5 asatpadee Maaroo, Third Mehl, Fifth House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsas ure II (1016-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
far S UN Hfs SAS I (1016-5, wg, Hs 3) jis no paraym man vasaa-ay. One whose mind is filled with the Lord's Love,
Ard Aafe Hof ASS Il (1016-5, wg, Hs 3) saachai sabad sahj subhaa-ay. is intuitively exalted by the True Word of the Shabad.
fa suo At we neg fa we arct AIG Al C1o16-5, ag, He 3) ayhaa vaydan so-ee jaanai avar ke jaanai kaaree jee-o. ||1|| He alone knows the pain of this love; what does anyone else know about its cure?
[11
nm AB wiTfy fase I (1016-6, wg, He 3) aapay maylay aap milaa-ay. He Himself unites in His Union.
nimuyar fimirg nm} Be Il (1016-6, wg, He 3) aapnaa pi-aar aapay laa-ay. He Himself inspires us with His Love.
Un at Ara Het we faA 3 sete SHH AE Wal TIE I Cioi6-6, wg, ne 3)
paraym kee saar so-ee jaanai jis no nadar tumaaree jee-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He alone appreciates the value of Your Love, upon whom You shower Your Grace, O Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
fea fenfe Ad SSH FAS Il (1016-7, wg, us 3) dib darisat jaagai bharam chukaa-ay. One whose spiritual vision is awakened - his doubt is driven out.
Td USAT UGH UE UTES Il (1016-7, Hg, He 3) gur parsaad param pad paa-ay. By Guru's Grace, he obtains the supreme status.
A fat fea nafs ues aa a Aafe dterct AIG MQH Cio16-8, og, He 3) so jogee ih jugat pachhaanai gur kai sabad beechaaree jee-o. ||2||
He alone is a Yogi, who understands this way, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2]|
Anat as firs Her FS Il Cioi6-8, wg, Hs 3) sanjogee Dhan pir maylaa hovai. By good destiny, the soul-bride is united with her Husband Lord.
qonfs fess vaHfs FI (1016-9, wg, 48 3) gurmat vichahu durmat khovai. Following the Guru's Teachings, she eradicates her evil-mindedness from within.
da fA@ fos sshor wre mus AZ fimrct FIG 31 cio16-9, wg, ne 3)
rang si-o nit ralee-aa maanai apnay kant pi-aaree jee-o. ||3]|
With love, she continually enjoys pleasure with Him; she becomes the beloved of her Husband Lord. ||3]||
Afsag wsg fe o aet Il co16-10, wg, He 3) satgur baajhahu vaid na ko-ee. Other than the True Guru, there is no physician.
nny nif fedHe Het i (1016-10, wg, Hs 3) aapay aap niranjan so-ee. He Himself is the Immaculate Lord.
Afsag fife Hd Het FS fare Stes HIE igi co16-10, wg, ne 3)
satgur mili-ai marai mandaa hovai gi-aan beechaaree jee-o. ||4||
Meeting with the True Guru, evil is conquered, and spiritual wisdom is contemplated. [141]
fg Ade AS fAA S BS I (1016-11, wg, He 3) ayhu sabad saar jis no laa-ay. One who is committed to this most sublime Shabad
aaHfy fA SH AES Il (1016-11, wg, He 3) gurmukh tarisnaa bhukh gavaa-ay. becomes Gurmukh, and is rid of thirst and hunger.
nitus Stor fas 3 ureint ate frou aes oret AS WUll o16-12, wg, Hs 3)
aapan lee-aa kichhoo na paa-ee-ai kar kirpaa kal Dhaaree jee-o. ||5||
By one's own efforts, nothing can be accomplished; the Lord, in His Mercy, bestows power. ||5||
man foo Afsag fearfenr i (o16-12, wg, 1 3) agam nigam satguroo dikhaa-i-aa. The True Guru has revealed the essence of the Shaastras and the Vedas.
afe fasur mrs wife wife I (1016-13, og, 48 3) kar kirpaa apnai ghar aa-i-aa. In His Mercy, He has come into the home of my self.
nine ufo fedto WS fas ag sefs Surat AIG WEN Co16-13, wg, He 3)
anjan maahi niranjan jaataa jin ka-o nadar tumaaree jee-o. ||6| |
In the midst of Maya, the Immaculate Lord is known, by those upon whom You bestow Your Grace. ||6||
Tafa JS A SZ US I (1016-14, wg, ne 3) gurmukh hovai so tat paa-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh, obtains the essence of reality;
ninyar nity fea Tee Il (1016-14, wg, ws 3) aapnaa aap vichahu gavaa-ay. he eradictes his self-conceit from within.
Afsag wsg Ag UO ane Sug nfs Storct AIG WON Co16-14, wg, He 3)
satgur baajhahu sabh DhanDh kamaavai vaykhhu man veechaaree jee-o. ||7|| Without the True Guru, all are entangled in worldly affairs; consider this in your mind, and see. ||7||
fefa gf 3% feats nidardt i (1016-15, »g, He 3) ik bharam bhoolay fireh aha‘kaaree. Some are deluded by doubt; they strut around egotistically.
feos aaufa TH HTS I (016-15, wg, He 3) iknaa gurmukh ha-umai maaree. Some, as Gurmukh, subdue their egotism.
Ae Aafe gs saat dfs soft ss wert AE cH 1016-16, wg, He 3)
sachai sabad ratay bairaagee hor bharam bhulay gaavaaree jee-o. ||8] |
Attuned to the True Word of the Shabad, they remain detached from the world. The other ignorant fools wander, confused and deluded by doubt. ||8] |
aaHty fast oH 3 uTfemi | (1016-16, Tg, He 3)
gurmukh jinee naam na paa-i-aa.
Those who have not become Gurmukh, and who have not found the Naam, the Name of the Lord
HoHfe fase ASH aetfenr Il 1016-17, wg, He 3) manmukh birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. - those self-willed manmukhs waste their lives uselessly.
wat fee are & Ast ot IS Te starst AS uti co16-17, og, ws 3)
agai vin naavai ko baylee naahee boojhai gur beechaaree jee-o. ||9||
In the world hereafter, nothing except the Name will be of any assistance; this is understood by contemplating the Guru. ||9||
wis SH Ae AYSTST II (1016-18, wg, He 3) amrit naam sadaa sukh-daata. The Ambrosial Naam is the Giver of peace forever.
Ofs us Fa TS AST Il (1016-18, og, ws 3) gur poorai jug chaaray jaataa. Throughout the four ages, it is known through the Perfect Guru.
fan 3 defo et ue Hoa Sz atest AME WIONAI Cio16-18, wg, Hs 3) jis too dayveh so-ee paa-ay naanak tat beechaaree jee-o. ||10||1]|
He alone receives it, unto whom You bestow it; this is the essence of reality which Nanak has realized. ||10]|1]|
Yat YOAD
Hg Hoe u wg 3 nMAcut (1017-1)
maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 3 asatpadee-aa Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Third House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1017-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
BY VTA FHS FHS CSS HOH Me UTES Al (1017-2, wg, ws 5)
lakh cha-oraaseeh bharamtay bharamtay dulabh janam ab paa-i-o. ||1|| Wandering and roaming through 8.4 million incarnations, you have now been given this human life, so difficult to obtain. ||1]|
ous 3 de oh Buetes Il (1017-2, weg, He 5) ray moorhay too hochhai ras laptaa-i-o. You fool! You are attached and clinging to such trivial pleasures!
nifys Af srs 3 3d faftmr fAe CasteE nan ga i (1017-2, wg, He 5)
amrit sang basat hai tayrai bikhi-aa si-o urjhaa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Ambrosial Nectar abides with you, but you are engrossed in sin and corruption. ||1]|Pause| |
336 Aedd yore yes gag ote sores iQ (1017-3, wg, ue 5) ratan javayhar banjan aa-i-o kaalar laad chalaa-i-o. ||2|| You have come to trade in gems and jewels, but you have loaded only barren soil.
21 |
fag we Hfs 30 ade" SAo' A we HS & ores ZI (1017-4, ws, He 5) jih ghar meh tuDh rahnaa basnaa so ghar cheet na aa-i-o. ||3]| That home within which you live - you have not kept that home in your thoughts.
[31] nee mds ure Auevet fea foxy odt 33 EE sii (1017-4, wg, ne 5)
atal akhand paraan sukh-daa-ee ik nimakh nahee tujh gaa-i-o. ||4|| He is immovable, indestructible, the Giver of peace to the soul; and yet you do not sing His Praises, even for an instant. ||4]|
Ag Wer A we ferfas fea fone adt He wfES wuil (1017-5, wg, ne 5)
jahaa jaanaa so thaan visaar-i-o ik nimakh nahee man laa-i-o. ||5]|
You have forgotten that place where you must go; you have not attached your mind to the Lord, even for an instant. ||5]|
uz aes fas ofa Anat fen dt ufo CastES wel (1017-6, wg, we 5)
putar kaltar garih daykh samagree is hee meh urjhaa-i-o. ||6]|
Gazing upon your children, spouse, household and paraphernalia, you are entangled in them. ||6] |
fas a ofeg fas dt oar 3A ae ANTES IDI (1017-6, wg, ne 5) jit ko laa-i-o tit hee laagaa taisay karam kamaa-i-o. ||7]|| As God links the mortals, so are they linked, and so are the deeds they do. ||7]||
Ag sf faurs at ORG ufear AS Soa YH foMrfES weal 1017-7, wg, Hs 5) ja-o bha-i-o kirpaal taa saaDhsang paa-i-aa jan naanak barahm Dhi-aa-i-o. ||8]|1|| When He becomes Merciful, then the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is found; servant Nanak meditates on God. ||8]|1]|
HTT HIG U Il (1017-8)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
ate nog ote ste sfe AT Ag Il (1017-8, wg, 43 5)
kar anoograhu raakh leeno bha-i-o saaDhoo sang.
Granting His Grace, He has protected me; I have found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fs OH VA Hat Burs fuAS TS" FT WAU (1017-8, wg, ws 5) har naam ras rasnaa uchaaray misat goorhaa rang. ||1]|| My tongue lovingly chants the Lord's Name; this love is so sweet and intense! ||1||
AS HS TX MAAS Il (1017-9, wg, ue 5) mayray maan ko asthaan. He is the place of rest for my mind,
Hts AAS AT say vissAMt ATS WAU TIS il (1017-9, wg, He 5)
meet saajan sakhaa banDhap antarjaamee jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
my friend, companion, associate and relative; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||1||Pause| |
AAS ATag fafs Gute Aafe ys at adt il (1017-10, wg, He 5) sansaar Saagar jin upaa-i-o saran parabh kee gahee. He created the world-ocean; I seek the Sanctuary of that God.
Gs yA ys niga AHaag fas F Ad iM (1017-10, wg, ve 5)
gur parsaadee parabh araaDhay jamkankar kichh na kahee. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, I worship and adore God; the Messenger of Death can't say anything to me. ||2||
He Hats eurfs a a AS feet Fag I (1017-11, wg, ve 5)
mokh mukat du-aar jaa kai sant ridaa bhandaar.
Emancipation and liberation are at His Door; He is the treasure in the hearts of the Saints.
Aba qals AAS AMM AeT WeSI_T MBI (1017-11, wg, ue 5)
jee-a jugat sujaan su-aamee sadaa raakhanhaar. ||3]||
The all-knowing Lord and Master shows us the true way of life; He is our Savior and Protector forever. ||3]|
guy Tae AGA fronts fA aA Ho HT II (1017-12, wg, He 5) dookh darad kalays binsahi jis basai man maahi. Pain, suffering and troubles are eradicated, when the Lord abides in the mind.
fas sag miners fous fay 5 UT SAT ISI (1017-12, wg, He 5)
mirat narak asthaan bikh-rhay bikh na pohai taahi. ||4]|
Death, hell and the most horrible dwelling of sin and corruption cannot even touch such a person. ||4||
fafa fafa og fafa at & nifigar users I (1017-13, wg, He 5)
riDh siDh nav niDh jaa kai amritaa parvaah.
Wealth, miraculous spiritual powers and the nine treasures come from the Lord, as do the streams of Ambrosial Nectar.
wife nis ufo ude Bs Mia MaT MUI (1017-13, wg, He 5)
aad antay maDh pooran ooch agam agaah. ||5||
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, He is perfect, lofty, unapproachable and unfathomable. ||5||
fro rfoe = His AS ae asta Bag ii (1017-13, wg, He 5) siDh saaDhik dayv mun jan bayd karahi uchaar. The Siddhas, seekers, angelic beings, silent sages, and the Vedas speak of Him.
faufs Amit wy Hota Safe odt Mis ursrerg WEN (1017-14, wg, He 5)
simar su-aamee sukh sahj bhu‘cheh nahee ant paaraavaar. ||6||
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord and Master, celestial peace is enjoyed; He has no end or limitation. ||6]|
wifsa ures frefo fas fs foe af saree tI (1017-15, wg, Hs 5)
anik paraachhat miteh khin meh ridai jap bhagvaan.
Countless sins are erased in an instant, meditating on the Benevolent Lord within the heart.
urear 3 Hot urea afe ae FEASTS IDI (1017-15, Hg, He 5)
paavnaa tay mahaa paavan kot daan isnaan. ||7] |
Such a person becomes the purest of the pure, and is blessed with the merits of millions of donations to charity and cleansing baths. ||7]|
36 ufo Afo use ASEH Hse at TAA II (1017-16, wg, He 5)
bal buDh suDh paraan sarbas santnaa kee raas.
God is power, intellect, understanding, the breath of life, wealth, and everything for the Saints.
fang odt ford Ho 3 aoa at mgetA WCQ (1017-16, wg, 8 5)
bisar naahee nimakh man tay naanak kee ardaas. ||8]||2||
May I never forget Him from my mind, even for an instant - this is Nanak's prayer. [18] [21]
HTT HIG U Il (1017-17)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
AAs Stefe ofe sfeG ufs 3 ats FA Il (1017-17, wg, He 5) sastar teekhan kaat daari-o man na keeno ros. The sharp tool cuts down the tree, but it does not feel anger in its mind.
ad Gur a & Hates foe 5 HS SA NA (1017-17, og, He 5) kaaj u-aa ko lay savaari-o til na deeno dos. ||1]| It serves the purpose of the cutter, and does not blame him at all. ||1]]|
Ho Hd TH FE fos StS I (1017-18, wg, w2 5) man mayray raam ra-o nit neet. O my mind, continually, continuously, meditate on the Lord.
cfenre te faurs afte vfs Hse at HHS wa TIC Wt 017-18, wg, Hs 5)
da-i-aal dayv kirpaal gobind sun santnaa kee reet. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord of the Universe is merciful, divine and compassionate. Listen - this is the way of the Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
Ua IA ade 36 Carfa afAS AH o afaG Aatfe I Cois-1, wg, He 5)
charan talai ugaahi baisi-o saram na rahi-o sareer. He plants his feet in the boat, and then sits down in it; the fatigue of his body is relieved.
Ho Arad od feumd fuofs Cafes Ss 2H co1s-1, wg, ve 5)
mahaa saagar nah vi-aapai khineh utri-o teer. ||2] |
The great ocean does not even affect him; in an instant, he arrives on the other shore. ||2||
Jes MalS AUT Bus fSA Aat Sat YifS i ciois-2, wg, we 5) chandan agar kapoor laypan tis sangay nahee pareet. Sandalwood, aloe, and camphor-paste - the earth does not love them.
fare Ha ufe fSe fs nfs 3 Hot frustfS nai cois-2, wg, Hs 5)
bistaa mootar khod til til man na manee bipreet. ||3]|
But it doesn't mind, if someone digs it up bit by bit, and applies manure and urine to it. |[3]]
Gz ate faors Higs Heads AS AY ST Il (1018-3, wg, we 5)
ooch neech bikaar sukarit sa‘igan sabh sukh chhatar.
High and low, bad and good - the comforting canopy of the sky stretches evenly over all.
fey AZ 3 As AS Aga Abt AS Ill (1018-3, wg, He 5) mitar satar na kachhoo jaanai sarab jee-a samat. ||4|| It knows nothing of friend and enemy; all beings are alike to it. ||4]|
afs yara yds yates niuare faorA Il (io1s-4, wg, He 5) kar pargaas parchand pargati-o anDhkaar binaas. Blazing with its dazzling light, the sun rises, and dispels the darkness.
ufez mufess fase oat His 3 sfeG fru] ull (io1s-4, wg, Hs 5) pavitar apvitreh kiran laagay man na bha-i-o bikhaad. ||5]| Touching both the pure and the impure, it harbors no hatred to any. ||5||
Als He Aaa wie Aga ETS AHTS Il (1018-5, wg, He 5) seet mand suganDh chali-o sarab thaan samaan. The cool and fragrant wind gently blows upon all places alike.
Ag A fae so otaS f3e o Ha HS IE (1018-5, Hg, He 5) jahaa saa kichh tahaa laagi-o til na sankaa maan. ||6]| Wherever anything is, it touches it there, and does not hesitate a bit. ||6]|
Aafe ware 7 foafe wre At at ar ae I ciois-6, wg, He 5) subhaa-ay abhaa-ay jo nikat aavai seet taa kaa jaa-ay. Good or bad, whoever comes close to the fire - his cold is taken away.
WY Ud A AS B WE Ae Aaa ASE IDI (io1s-6, wg, He 5) aap par kaa kachh na jaanai sadaa sahj subhaa-ay. ||7]|| It knows nothing of its own or others’; it is constant in the same quality. ||7]|
Ude Hae Hora feg ne df TS BG Il (1018-7, wg, ue 5)
charan saran sanaath ih man rang raatay laal.
Whoever seeks the Sancuary of the feet of the Sublime Lord - his mind is attuned to the Love of the Beloved.
due ae fos re waa se ys forgus ICSI Cols-s, wg, Hs 5)
gopaal gun nit gaa-o naanak bha-ay parabh kirpaal. ||8]|3]|
Constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World, O Nanak, God becomes merciful to us. ||8]|3]|
Hg Hos Uwe 8 MACUEMT (1018-9) maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 4 asatpadee-aa Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1018-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
wea weg mats us Ate nists sear IA (018-10, wg, He 5)
chaadnaa chaadan aagan parabh jee-o antar chaadnaa. ||1||
Moonlight, moonlight - in the courtyard of the mind, let the moonlight of God shine down. ||1]|
made Maas Stat dfs Ts SH MTS III (1018-10, wg, ws 5) aaraaDhnaa araaDhan neekaa har har naam araaDhanaa. ||2| | Meditation, meditation - sublime is meditation on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
[21] fanraa faurae star an au BF fSuraar Zi! cois-11, wg, He 5)
ti-aaganaa ti-aagan neekaa kaam kroDh lobh ti-aaganaa. ||3]|| Renunciation, renunciation - noble is the renunciation of sexual desire, anger and greed. |[3]|
Hao HIG Slat Ss AA UAT 3 HAS" ISI (1018-11, wg, we 5) maagnaa maagan neekaa har jas gur tay maagnaa. ||4|| Begging, begging - it is noble to beg for the Lord's Praise from the Guru. ||4| |
Waar AaG stat dfs atesa Hf ATES UII (1018-12, wg, He 5)
jaagnaa jaagan neekaa har keertan meh jaagnaa. ||5|| Vigils, vigils - sublime is the vigil spent singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||5]|
BIS BAS Stat TT Bet HS Baa" Ell (101s-12, wg, ne 5) laagnaa laagan neekaa gur charnee man laagnaa. ||6| |
Attachment, attachment - sublime is the attachment of the mind to the Guru's Feet. [16] |
fea fafa fanfs usus wa HASfE Sas MDI ois-13, wg, He 5)
ih biDh tiseh paraapatay jaa kai mastak bhaagnaa. ||7]||
He alone is blessed with this way of life, upon whose forehead such destiny is recorded. ||7||
ag soa fsa Ag fae slat FH YS at AGO aS CUA (018-13, wg, He 5) kaho naanak tis sabh kichh neekaa jo parabh kee sarnaaganaa. ||8||1||41|
Says Nanak, everything is sublime and noble, for one who enters the Sanctuary of God. ||8]]1]14]|
HTT HIG U Il (1018-14)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
wg At 3 oS ad ate AA Aes ASSST UU! TTS I (ois-14, wg, we 5)
aa-o jee too aa-o hamaarai har jas sarvan sunaavanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please come, O please come into the home of my heart, that I may hear with my ears the Lord's Praises. ||1]||Pause] |
30 wes Ha He 36 dfour ofs AA SH Afal WSS NA (1018-15, wg, He 5)
tuDh aavat mayraa man tan hari-aa har jas tum sang gaavnaa. ||1||
With your coming, my soul and body are rejuvenated, and I sing with you the Lord's Praises. ||1]|
As fgur 3 fase SA er are fretear QM (1018-15, wg, He 5)
sant kirpaa tay hirdai vaasai doojaa bhaa-o mitaavanaa. ||2||
By the Grace of the Saint, the Lord dwells within the heart, and the love of duality is eradicated. ||2||
sas tent 3 gia usarA SHS EY SAAT III (1018-16, wg, Hs 5)
bhagat da-i-aa tay buDh pargaasai durmat dookh tajaavanaa. ||3]|
By the kindness of the devotee, the intellect is enlightened, and pain and evil- mindedness are eradicated. ||3]|
dno 32s JZ ustlst usafu aes o USOT III (1018-17, wg, He 5)
darsan bhaytat hot puneetaa punrap garabh na paavnaa. ||4]|
Beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, one is sanctified, and is no longer consigned to the womb of reincarnation. ||4| |
o@ fofa fafa fafa uret FH ZH Hfs Sear UII (io1s-17, Hg, He 5)
na-o niDh riDh siDh paa-ee jo tumrai man bhaavnaa. ||5||
The nine treasures, wealth and miraculous spiritual powers are obtained, by one who is pleasing to Your mind. ||5||
Hg faa H oS o act nied o AS ASST MEM (1018-18, wg, 42 5) sant binaa mai thaa-o na ko-ee avar na soojhai jaavnaa. ||6] |
Without the Saint, I have no place of rest at all; I cannot think of any other place to go. ||6]|
Hfs fasae a@ af o ae AS Afat ANTSOr IDI (1018-18, 47g, He 5)
mohi nirgun ka-o ko-ay na raakhai santaa sang samaavanaa. ||7||
I am unworthy; no one gives me sanctuary. But in the Society of the Saints, I merge in God. ||7]|
ag sod dfg ves feurfeor He HO of ofs Tear NCIQUNUI (018-19, wg, Hs 5) kaho naanak gur chalat dikhaa-i-aa man maDhay har har raavnaa. ||8]||2||5||
Says Nanak, the Guru has revealed this miracle; within my mind, I enjoy the Lord, Har, Har. |]8]|2||5]|
yar 9oat
HTS HIS U Il (1019-1)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Higa" Aes Alea Afe ate Af Afu AS Hear NA TIS I (1019-1, wg, Hs 5)
jeevnaa safal jeevan sun har jap jap sad jeevnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Fruitful is the life, the life of one who hears about the Lord, and chants and meditates on Him; he lives forever. ||1]|Pause] |
uleor fas Ho nrure oy nifys oA Utear IAI (1019-1, 47g, He 5)
peevnaa jit man aaghaavai naam amrit ras peevnaa. ||1]||
The real drink is that which satisfies the mind; this drink is the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam. ||1]]|
weal fs su 6 ora Aste Ae fustear MQM (1019-2, wg, 3 5)
khaavnaa jit bhookh na laagai santokh sadaa taripteevnaa. ||2||
The real food is that which will never leave you hungry again; it will leave you contented and satisfied forever. ||2||
Usa ve ufs unas fefa oat adt dear ISI (1019-3, wg, He 5)
painnaa rakh pat parmaysur fir naagay nahee theevnaa. ||3]|
The real clothes are those which protect your honor before the Transcendent Lord, and do not leave you naked ever again. ||3]||
Salo" HS HO dfs oA HsAafs fs sear gil (1019-3, wg, us 5)
bhognaa man maDhay har ras santsangat meh leevnaa. ||4||
The real enjoyment within the mind is to be absorbed in the sublime essence of the Lord, in the Society of the Saints. ||4]|
fag seat fas Feat orat He ofe sarst Afor Alea WUll (1019-4, wg, He 5) bin taagay bin soo-ee aanee man har bhagtee sang seevnaa. ||5|| Sew devotional worship to the Lord into the mind, without any needle or thread. ||5||
Hifsur ofa aA ufo as f3H agfs 3 aa mSdtea MEN (1019-4, wg, He 5)
maati-aa har ras meh raatay tis bahurh na kabhoo a-ukheevanaa. ||6||
Imbued and intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord, this experience will never wear off again. ||6]|
fifeS fsa Aaa fours ufs faurts fan cheat DI (019-5, wg, us 5) mili-o tis sarab niDhaanaa parabh kirpaal jis deevnaa. ||7]|| One is blessed with all treasures, when God, in His Mercy, gives them. ||7]||
AY Sa ASS at Ae vas AS Ofe ules ICUSIEN (1019-6, wg, He 5) sukh naanak santan kee sayvaa charan sant Dho-ay peevnaa. ||8]|3]||6||
O Nanak, service to the Saints beings peace; I drink in the wash water of the feet of the Saints. ||8||3||6]|
Hg HIS U Wg t uiqwsyA (1019-7) maaroo mehlaa 5 ghar 8 anjulee-aa Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Eighth House, Anjulees ~ With Hands Cupped In Prayer:
qe Afsas ure II (019-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fan fafs sos fA fof fest 1 coi9-s, wg, He 5) jis garihi bahut tisai garihi chintaa. The household which is filled with abundance - that household suffers anxiety.
fan fofs eat A fed SHS Wt cio19-8, wg, He 5) jis garihi thoree so firai bharmantaa. One whose household has little, wanders around searching for more.
ey faene 3 Af Hast Het Ade ses WAIN (019-8, wg, 48 5) duhoo bivasthaa tay jo muktaa so-ee suhaylaa bhaalee-ai. ||1|| He alone is happy and at peace, who is liberated from both conditions. ||1]|
fas aH Hf Sax GSA TIO Il (1019-9, 7g, He 5) garih raaj meh narak udaas karoDhaa. Householders and kings fall into hell, along with renunciates and angry men,
ag fafa de we Afs Aor Il (1019-9, wg, Hs 5) baho biDh bayd paath sabh soDhaa. and all those who study and recite the Vedas in so many ways.
Sot Hf A Td Mifeust fA AS ot UTS wrest MQM (o19-9, wg, He 5) dayhee meh jo rahai alipataa tis jan kee pooran ghaalee-ai. ||2| | Perfect is the work of that humble servant, who remains unattached while in the body.
21 |
Was Ast say feqTs ii (1019-10, wg, He 5) jaagat sootaa bharam vigootaa. The mortal sleeps, even while he is awake; he is being plundered by doubt.
fag ae Hats 3 debt HIST II (1019-10, wg, He 5) bin gur mukat na ho-ee-ai meetaa. Without the Guru, liberation is not obtained, friend.
Worfa sefs Je due Sa Sa farsa wil (1019-11, wg, He 5)
saaDhsang tuteh ha-o banDhan ayko ayk nihaalee-ai. ||3] |
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the bonds of egotism are released, and one comes to behold the One and only Lord. ||3]||
OSH Ad 3 FO od Ad F (Ser ll 1019-11, wg, ve 5) karam karai ta banDhaa nah karai ta nindaa. Doing deeds, one is placed in bondage; but if he does not act, he is slandered.
Ha Hale He feorfinar feet i oi9-12, wg, He 5) moh magan man vi-aapi-aa chindaa. Intoxicated with emotional attachment, the mind is afflicted with anxiety.
aa unfe AY ey AN We wie wie any farshe ISI! (1019-12, »g, He 5)
gur parsaad sukh dukh sam jaanai ghat ghat raam hi-aalee-ai. ||4||
One who looks alike upon pleasure and pain, by Guru's Grace, sees the Lord in each and every heart. ||4]|
HATS Hfs AOA femme it (1019-13, wg, He 5) sansaarai meh sahsaa bi-aapai. Within the world, one is afflicted by skepticism;
MAE AA mass St ANT | (1019-13, wg, Hz 5) akath kathaa agochar nahee jaapai. he does not know the imperceptible Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
fants gre Het gs Gy waa salt usher Null (1019-13, wg, Hs 5)
jisahi bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai oh baalak vaagee paalee-ai. ||5||
He alone understands, whom the Lord inspires to understand. The Lord cherishes him as His child. ||5||
fs ad 38 se ST I (1019-14, wg, Hs 5) chhod bahai ta-o chhootai naahee. He may try to abandon Maya, but he is not released.
AG He SE 3G Ho HST II (1019-14, og, He 5) ja-o sanchai ta-o bha-o man maahee. If he collects things, then his mind is afraid of losing them.
fern ot ufs far ot ufs oe fSR AG Beg Seas WEN (019-14, wg, 8 5)
is hee meh jis kee pat raakhai tis saaDhoo cha-ur dhaalee-ai. ||6||
I wave the fly-brush over that holy person, whose honor is protected in the midst of Maya. ||6||
A AS fA ot af HIS I (1019-15, wg, He 5) jo sooraa tis hee ho-ay marnaa. He alone is a warrior hero, who remains dead to the world.
A svat fan Hot fear il co19-15, wg, Hs 5) jo bhaagai tis jonee firnaa. One who runs away will wander in reincarnation.
Af zosve ASt gm HS Sf Jan BaHfS AeA DI (1019-16, wg, He 5)
jo vartaa-ay so-ee bhal maanai bujh hukmai durmat jaalee-ai. ||7]|
Whatever happens, accept that as good. Realize the Hukam of His Command, and your evil-mindedness will be burnt away. ||7]|
fas fas orets fs3z fSs Barat Il 019-16, wg, ws 5) jit jit laaveh tit tit lagnaa. Whatever He links us to, to that we are linked.
afs afs SY nus AVST Il (1019-17, wg, He 5) kar kar vaykhai apnay jachnaa. He acts, and does, and watches over His Creation.
Boa X YSIS ANTS J Uf J TH AMSA UCD (1019-17, wg, 8 5)
naanak kay pooran sukh-daatay too deh ta naam samaalee-ai. ||8]|1]|7||
You are the Giver of peace, the Perfect Lord of Nanak; as You grant Your blessings, I dwell upon Your Name. ||8]|1]|7]|
HTT HIG U Il (1019-18)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
fase dfs fs #3 feaS i co19-18, wg, He 5) birkhai hayth sabh jant ikthay. Beneath the tree, all beings have gathered.
fefa 33 fefa safe fxd I Ci019-18, wg, Hs 5) ik tatay ik bolan mithay. Some are hot-headed, and some speak very sweetly.
wns Cas afer Cfs us fa fag mBa feorstor Wail cio19-18, wg, He 5)
asat udot bha-i-aa uth chalay ji-o ji-o a-oDh vihaanee-aa. ||1||
Sunset has come, and they rise up and depart; their days have run their course and expired. ||1||
UTY AGUS ATUT HO Ill (1019-19, wg, we 5) paap karaydarh sarpar muthay. Those who committed sins are sure to be ruined.
mavens Ss Sz AS Il (1019-19, wg, us 5) ajraa-eel farhay farh kuthay. Azraa-eel, the Angel of Death, seizes and tortures them.
Yat FO2O
Sfx ure franeas Bar Hat esha | (1020-1, wg, 2 5)
dojak paa-ay sirjanhaarai laykhaa mangai baanee-aa. ||2] |
They are consigned to hell by the Creator Lord, and the Accountant calls them to give their account. ||2||
Afar o vet sehr Far i 1020-1, wg, ue 5) sang na ko-ee bha-ee-aa baybaa. No brothers or sisters can go with them.
HS WAS US efs SAT Il (1020-1, wg, Hs 5) maal joban Dhan chhod vanjaysaa. Leaving behind their property, youth and wealth, they march off.
ade ASH 3 AS aes fq uls fae ureter 3 (1020-2, wg, us 5)
karan kareem na jaato kartaa til peerhay ji-o ghaanee-aa. ||3]|
They do not know the kind and compassionate Lord; they shall be crushed like sesame seeds in the oil-press. ||3]|
uff uff Set SAS uset i (1020-2, wg, us 5) khus khus laidaa vasat paraa-ee. You happily, cheerfully steal the possessions of others,
za Ae 3d of weet II (1020-3, wg, He 5) vaykhai sunay tayrai naal khudaa-ee. but the Lord God is with you, watching and listening.
color ofa ufeur urs nists merest aes & ATE Sil (1020-3, wg, He 5)
dunee-aa lab pa-i-aa khaat andar aglee gal na jaanee-aa. ||4||
Through worldly greed, you have fallen into the pit; you know nothing of the future. [141]
Afy aft He He fefe AH I (1020-4, xg, He 5)
jam jam marai marai fir jammai.
You shall be born and born again, and die and die again, only to be reincarnated again.
aos Anfe ufsor Sf SH Il (1020-4, wg, He 5) bahut sajaa-ay pa-i-aa days lammai. You shall suffer terrible punishment, on your way to the land beyond.
fafs ats fSA o Fret nior ot gy AD UaTeber Hull (1020-4, wg, He 5)
jin keetaa tisai na jaanee anDhaa taa dukh sahai paraanee-aa. ||5||
The mortal does not know the One who created him; he is blind, and so he shall suffer. ||5||
UGX ASy FH HST Il (1020-5, wg, ws 5) khaalak thaavhu bhulaa muthaa. Forgetting the Creator Lord, he is ruined.
Tout YB Fat IS JST Il (1020-5, wg, ws 5) dunee-aa khayl buraa ruth tuthaa. The drama of the world is bad; it brings sadness and then happiness.
freg Hast AS 3 ffs es nue sree ill (1020-6, +g, He 5)
sidak sabooree sant na mili-o vatai aapan bhaanee-aa. ||6]|
One who does not meet the Saint does not have faith or contentment; he wanders just as he pleases. ||6||
Hoar vs ad Afs wm i feta ae fefax wats femme il (1020-6, wg, He 5)
ma-ulaa khayl karay sabh aapay. ik kadhay ik lahar vi-aapay.
The Lord Himself stages all this drama. Some, he lifts up, and some he throws into the waves.
fA@ ove £38 f3@ sufe fats fafs fags fearetor DN 020-7, wg, Hs 5)
ji-o nachaa-ay ti-o ti-o nachan sir sir kirat vihaanee-aa. ||7] |
As He makes them dance, so do they dance. Everyone lives their lives according to their past actions. ||7]||
fag ad 3° MAY forrest It (1020-8, ag, He 5)
mihar karay taa khasam Dhi-aa-ee. When the Lord and Master grants His Grace, then we meditate on Him.
Ast Hats sofa o uret il (1020-8, wg, He 5) santaa sangat narak na paa-ee. In the Society of the Saints, one is not consigned to hell.
Ms SH Be soa AC Te ats fas Suresh WCUUCHIUQOM (4020-8, wg, He 5) amrit naam daan naanak ka-o gun geetaa nit vakhaanee-aa. ||8]|2]|8]|12||20|| Please bless Nanak with the gift of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord; he continually sings the songs of Your Glories. ||8]|2||8||12]|20] |
HT ABI HIB Y (1020-10) maaroo solhay mehlaa 1 Maaroo, Solahas, First Mehl:
qe Afsara yATfE II (1020-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
As! Ag Aet neg & et Il (1020-11, wg, He 1) saachaa sach so-ee avar na ko-ee. The True Lord is True; there is no other at all.
fafs frart fsa ct ef det i (1020-11, wg, He 1) jin sirjee tin hee fun go-ee. He who created, shall in the end destroy.
fa sre f38 aug soe 3H fAE famr Hat T NA (1020-11, wg, Hs 1) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho rahnaa tum si-o ki-aa mukraa-ee hay. ||1|| As it pleases You, so You keep me, and so I remain; what excuse could I offer to You?
[21
mify Sure nirfly ware i (1020-12, arg, He 1) aap upaa-ay aap khapaa-ay. You Yourself create, and You Yourself destroy.
win} fife fafe do we ii (1020-12, wg, He 1) aapay sir sir DhanDhai laa-ay. You yourself link each and every person to their tasks.
nny Stadt Tear wm yrafar wet FJ Qi (1020-12, wg, we 1)
aapay veechaaree gunkaaree aapay maarag laa-ee hay. ||2|| You contemplate Yourself, You Yourself make us worthy; You Yourself place us on the Path. ||2||
nmy arar nmy ats il (1020-13, wg, He 1) aapay daanaa aapay beenaa. You Yourself are all-wise, You Yourself are all-knowing.
mmy nity Gurfe uster il (1020-13, wg, He 1) aapay aap upaa-ay pateenaa. You Yourself created the Universe, and You are pleased.
nm u@e urat SH3g umd Afs first J USI 020-14, wg, He 1) aapay pa-un paanee baisantar aapay mayl milaa-ee hay. ||3|| You Yourself are the air, water and fire; You Yourself unite in Union. |[3]|
mind ALA AS Us US Il (1020-14, wg, He 1) aapay Sas sooraa pooro pooraa. You Yourself are the moon, the sun, the most perfect of the perfect.
ming forortes fomrts TT AS I (1020-14, wg, He 1) aapay gi-aan Dhi-aan gur sooraa. You Yourself are spiritual wisdom, meditation, and the Guru, the Warrior Hero.
ae WS AH Afs o AA ATS fAC fee wet FT Sil (1020-15, we, He 1)
kaal jaal jam johi na saakai saachay si-o liv laa-ee hay. ||4||
The Messenger of Death, and his noose of death, cannot touch one, who is lovingly focused on You, O True Lord. ||4] |
mmy use mint ot Srdt | (1020-15, wg, ue 1) aapay purakh aapay hee naaree. You Yourself are the male, and You Yourself are the female.
mm UTAT MM ATT Il (1020-16, Hg, He 1)
aapay paasaa aapay saaree. You Yourself are the chess-board, and You Yourself are the chessman.
wnt fus act wa Ys omy ahafS uret FT WUll 1020-16, wg, ve 1)
aapay pirh baaDhee jag khaylai aapay keemat paa-ee hay. ||5]|
You Yourself staged the drama in the arena of the world, and You Yourself evaluate the players. ||5||
MN} SFI SH SB SIS Il (1020-16, wg, wz 1) aapay bhavar ful fal tarvar. You Yourself are the bumble bee, the flower, the fruit and the tree.
MM AS FS Arg AdSg Il (1020-17, wg, ve 1) aapay jal thal saagar sarvar. You Yourself are the water, the desert, the ocean and the pool.
Mn HE WE Adelag ST Ju oS BaSt Wet T MEN (1020-17, wg, He 1)
aapay machh kachh karneekar tayraa roop na lakh-naa jaa-ee hay. ||6]|
You Yourself are the great fish, the tortoise, the Cause of causes; Your form cannot be known. ||6||
nny fesr wm} dt get i 020-18, wg, Hs 1) aapay dinas aapay hee rainee. You Yourself are the day, and You Yourself are the night.
wif usta aa ot Fet it 020-18, wg, us 1) aap pateejai gur kee bainee. You Yourself are pleased by the Word of the Guru's Bani.
nite arte niatote notes ufe whe AE dATEt FT DI (1020-18, wg, He 1)
aad jugaad anaahad an-din ghat ghat sabad rajaa-ee hay. ||7||
From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, the unstruck sound current resounds, night and day; in each and every heart, the Word of the Shabad, echoes Your Will. ||7]|
MM TSH MSY MHS Il (1020-19, wg, Hs 1) aapay ratan anoop amolo. You Yourself are the jewel, incomparably beautiful and priceless.
mim UTA YS SB Il (1020-19, wg, Hs 1) aapay parkhay pooraa tolo. You Yourself are the Assessor, the Perfect Weigher.
UST YO2YA
wnt far dt afa wart nm & B sret FT CH co21-1, wg, we 1)
aapay kis hee kas bakhsay aapay day lai bhaa-ee hay. ||8]| You Yourself test and forgive. You Yourself give and take, O Siblings of Destiny. ||8]|
mm Used wy APSre? Il (1021-1, 4g, He 1) aapay Dhanakh aapay sarbaanaa. He Himself is the bow, and He Himself is the archer.
mindy Aus Agy fret il (1021-1, wg, He 1) aapay sugharh saroop si-aanaa. He Himself is all-wise, beautiful and all-knowing.
AIS FAS" ASST Het nm) ges garet F UC (1021-2, wg, ve 1) kahtaa baktaa suntaa so-ee aapay banat banaa-ee hay. ||9]|| He is the speaker, the orator and the listener. He Himself made what is made. ||9] |
ue ag urat fus AST II (1021-2, wg, He 1) pa-un guroo paanee pit jaataa. Air is the Guru, and water is known to be the father.
eg Arai cast HST I (1021-2, wg, He 1) udar sanjogee Dhartee maataa. The womb of the great mother earth gives birth to all.
dfs feon efe wet afer va YS Bare F AON! (1021-3, wg, He 1)
rain dinas du-ay daa-ee daa-i-aa jag khaylai khaylaa-ee hay. ||10] |
Night and day are the two nurses, male and female; the world plays in this play. ||10]|
nm Hest MY ANB Il (1021-3, wg, Hs 1) aapay machhulee aapay jaalaa. You Yourself are the fish, and You Yourself are the net.
mney AG wiry TASS | (1021-4, wg, we 1) aapay ga-oo aapay rakhvaalaa. You Yourself are the cows, and You yourself are their keeper.
Aaa Aber afar afs surat AAT ufs sonret F WAU 1021-4, wg, Hs 1)
sarab jee-aa jag jot tumaaree jaisee parabh furmaa-ee hay. ||11]|| Your Light fills all the beings of the world; they walk according to Your Command, O God. ||11]|
Win Fait mmy Sait it co21-4, wg, ve 1) aapay jogee aapay bhogee. You Yourself are the Yogi, and You Yourself are the enjoyer.
my sAbat UsH Astait il (1021-5, wg, Hs 1) aapay rasee-aa param sanjogee. You Yourself are the reveller; You form the supreme Union.
ning zarat fadarct fesse sat wet FJ WAI 021-5, wg, He 1)
aapay vaybaanee nirankaaree nirbha-o taarhee laa-ee hay. ||12||
You Yourself are speechless, formless and fearless, absorbed in the primal ecstasy of deep meditation. ||12]|
urat arat 38fo AHTet Il (021-6, wg, Hs 1) khaanee banee tujheh samaanee. The sources of creation and speech are contained within You, Lord.
A CA AS nee wet Il (1021-6, wg, He 1) jo deesai sabh aavan jaanee. All that is seen, is coming and going.
Ret ATS AS Sud Afsafs ss gsTEt FT WIA! (1021-6, wg, He 1)
say-ee saah sachay vaapaaree satgur boojh bujhaa-ee hay. ||13]|
They are the true bankers and traders, whom the True Guru has inspired to understand. ||13]|
Hae ys Asa UT Il (1021-7, wg, He 1) sabad bujhaa-ay satgur pooraa. The Word of the Shabad is understood through the Perfect True Guru.
Ada AS ATS SIUT Il (1021-7, wg, He 1) sarab kalaa saachay bharpooraa. The True Lord is overflowing with all powers.
wefss fugeyg Ae gs ot fH fH a THe TF NAVIN (1021-7, weg, He 1)
afri-o vayparvaahu sadaa too naa tis til na tamaa-ee hay. ||14]|
You are beyond our grasp, and forever independent. You do not have even an iota of greed. ||14||
are fears Sf SSS Il (1021-8, wg, us 1) kaal bikaal bha-ay dayvaanay. Birth and death are meaningless, for those
Hae AVA 3A wists HS I (1021-8, we, Hs 1) sabad sahj ras antar maanay. who enjoy the sublime celestial essence of the Shabad within their minds.
nm Hats fgufs zest sats ofe His avet J QUI Co2i-s, wg, He 1)
aapay mukat taripat vardaataa bhagat bhaa-ay man bhaa-ee hay. ||15]||
He Himself is the Giver of liberation, satisfaction and blessings, to those devotees who love Him in their minds. ||15]||
mify fSasH Wa AH faMarar il (1021-9, wg, He 1) aap niraalam gur gam gi-aanaa. He Himself is immaculate; by contact with the Guru, spiritual wisdom is obtained.
A aA 33 Hfe ANAT II (1021-9, Wg, He 1) jo deesai tujh maahi samaanaa. Whatever is seen, shall merge into You.
soe ote fatter ofa ad H Sth oH saTet TF UAE (1021-10, wg, He 1D
naanak neech bhikhi-aa dar jaachai mai deejai naam vadaa-ee hay. ||16]||1]| Nanak, the lowly, begs for charity at Your Door; please, bless him with the glorious greatness of Your Name. ||16]|1]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1021-10) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
nnd Usst UBS MAA Il (1021-11, wg, He 1) aapay Dhartee Dha-ul akaasa”. He Himself is the earth, the mythical bull which supports it and the Akaashic ethers.
WM AS TE USAA Il (1021-11, wg, ws 1) aapay saachay gun pargaasa”. The True Lord Himself reveals His Glorious Virtues.
Ast Ast ASset wm mmd arg aHret FT UA (021-11, wg, He 1) jatee satee santokhee aapay aapay kaar kamaa-ee hay. ||1]|| He Himself is celibate, chaste and contented; He Himself is the Doer of deeds. ||1]|
fan ade A afe afs SB ii (1021-12, wg, ue 1) jis karnaa so kar kar vaykhai. He who created the creation, beholds what He has created.
~
afe o AS APT Be Il (1021-12, wg, He 1) ko-ay na maytai saachay laykhai. No one can erase the Inscription of the True Lord.
nm ad ATS nny nmy & Sfanret F iil (1021-12, wg, ws
aapay karay karaa-ay aapay aapay day vadi-aa-ee hay. ||2||
He Himself is the Doer, the Cause of causes; He Himself is the One who bestows glorious greatness. ||2||
us da due fag arefs i 021-13, wg, Hs 1) panch chor chanchal chit chaaleh. The five thieves cause the fickle consciousness to waver.
ud wa Hafs we adt safe Il (1021-13, wg, He 1) par ghar joheh ghar nahee bhaaleh. It looks into the homes of others, but does not search its own home.
afin sag ed ufs tat fag Fae ufs Wet FT USI (021-13, wg, He D
kaa-i-aa nagar dhahai dheh dhayree bin sabdai pat jaa-ee hay. ||3]|
The body-village crumbles into dust; without the Word of the Shabad, one's honor is lost. ||3]|
Gs 3 gs (SSS AS Il (1021-14, weg, we 1) gur tay boojhai taribhavan soojhai. One who realizes the Lord through the Guru, comprehends the three worlds.
Hot Hf He FAS BST ll cio21-14, og, He 1) mansaa maar manai si-o loojhai. He subdues his desires, and struggles with his mind.
Af 30 Refs A su dt Ad fogs we Aeet FT I Co21-14, »g, He 1)
jo tuDh sayveh say tuDh hee jayhay nirbha-o baal sakhaa-ee hay. ||4||
Those who serve You, become just like You; O Fearless Lord, You are their best friend from infancy. ||4| |
MM Add He ufSmirar i (1021-15, wg, He 1)
aapay surag machh pa-i-aalaa.
You Yourself are the heavenly realms, this world and the nether regions of the underworld.
mint fs Agut are Il (021-15, wg, He 1) aapay jot saroopee baalaa. You Yourself are the embodiment of light, forever young.
Ac faxe faa Agut gu a sf aret J Ul (021-16, wg, He 1) jataa bikat bikraal saroopee roop na raykh-i-aa kaa-ee hay. ||5|| With matted hair, and a horrible, dreadful form, still, You have no form or feature.
[5] |
ae asst SE AST Il (1021-16, wg, He 1) bayd kataybee bhayd na jaataa. The Vedas and the Bible do not know the mystery of God.
o f3H HS fust AS FST I (1021-16, wg, He 1) naa tis maat pitaa sut bharaataa. He has no mother, father, child or brother.
Aa AS Cue AHS nse o BY|St AT T MEM (1021-17, wg, He 1)
saglay sail upaa-ay samaa-ay alakh na lakh-naa jaa-ee hay. ||6||
He created all the mountains, and levels them again; the Unseen Lord cannot be seen. [16] |
ate ats aot HtS WSs Il (1021-17, wg, ws 1) kar kar thaakee meet ghanayray. I have grown weary of making so many friends.
afe 5 ae meaqe AS I (021-18, wg, He 1) ko-ay na kaatai avgun mayray. No one can rid me of my sins and mistakes.
Afs og org Atos Aso fafs ae fs SC ret F DI (021-18, og, He 1D
Sur nar naath saahib sabhnaa sir bhaa-ay milai bha-o jaa-ee hay. ||7]||
God is the Supreme Lord and Master of all the angels and mortal beings; blessed with His Love, their fear is dispelled. ||7]|
3S Ya Hota urSts Il (1021-19, wg, He 1) bhoolay chookay maarag paavahi. He puts back on the Path those who have wandered and strayed.
nity gore Jd ANSTSfT Il (1021-19, wg, He 1) aap bhulaa-ay toohai samjhaavahi. You Yourself make them stray, and You teach them again.
fag ae H neg o UA oreg afs ffs wet Fo CH C1021-19, wg, He 1)
bin naavai mai avar na deesai naavhu gat mit paa-ee hay. ||8]|
I cannot see anything except the Name. Through the Name comes salvation and merit. ||8]|
Yast FO22
Ha AHS AH ASS Il (1022-1, wg, ws 1) gangaa jamunaa kayl kaydaaraa. The Ganges, the Jamunaa where Krishna played, Kaydar Naat'h,
aA ast ust Guia I (1022-1, wg, He 1) kaasee kaa‘tee puree du-aaraa. Benares, Kanchivaram, Puri, Dwaarkaa,
dar Aag Set Ha wionfs nifa AHTET T UCM (1022-1, wg, He 1)
gangaa saagar baynee sangam athsath ank samaa-ee hay. ||9||
Ganga Saagar where the Ganges empties into the ocean, Trivaynee where the three rivers come together, and the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, are all merged in the Lord's Being. ||9]|
nm fio Afoe Ser i 022-2, wg, ue 1) aapay siDh saaDhik veechaaree. He Himself is the Siddha, the seeker, in meditative contemplation.
nny IAG US arat il (1022-2, wg, ue 1) aapay raajan panchaa kaaree. He Himself is the King and the Council.
sufs ad wrest us wm san Se SE ATT AON! (1022-3, wg, He 1)
takhat bahai adlee parabh aapay bharam bhayd bha-o jaa-ee hay. ||10]||
God Himself, the wise Judge, sits on the throne; He takes away doubt, duality and fear. ||10]|
mm aa MM HO Il (1022-3, ug, He 1) aapay kaajee aapay mulaa. He Himself is the Qazi; He Himself is the Mullah.
mify mgS 3 AIT FS Il (1022-3, wg, v2 1) aap abhul na kabhoo bhulaa. He Himself is infallible; He never makes mistakes.
nny fos efenmafs erst or fan & Faret FT uaa (1022-4, wg, Hs 1) aapay mihar da-i-aapat daataa naa kisai ko bairaa-ee hay. ||11]| He Himself is the Giver of Grace, compassion and honor; He is no one's enemy. ||11]|
faa aA fSR & sfsniet i (1022-4, wg, ne 1) jis bakhsay tis day vadi-aa-ee. Whoever He forgives, He blesses with glorious greatness.
ASA ast fq 6 SHE Il (1022-5, wg, Hs 1) sabhsai daataa til na tamaa-ee. He is the Giver of all; He does not have even an iota of greed.
saufs us ofr fosetee Tus yas AS SST T NAM (1022-5, wg, He 1)
bharpur Dhaar rahi-aa nihkayval gupat pargat sabh thaa-ee hay. ||12||
The Immaculate Lord is all pervading, permeating everywhere, both hidden and manifest. ||12]|
foro Arerdt mia murs | (1022-6, wg, He 1) ki-aa saalaahee agam apaarai. How can I praise the inaccessible, infinite Lord?
Ard frsHeos HIS I (1022-6, wg, He 1) saachay sirjanhaar muraarai. The True Creator Lord is the Enemy of ego.
fan S oefs ad SH AS Afs fs Horet FT ISI (1022-6, rg, He 1)
jis no nadar karay tis maylay mayl milai maylaa-ee hay. ||13]|
He unites those whom He blesses with His Grace; uniting them in His Union, they are united. ||13]|
gout fare HOA BMS I (1022-7, we, Hs 1) barahmaa bisan mahays du-aarai. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva stand at His Door;
Gs Refs nied mrs Il (1022-7, wg, He 1) oobhay sayveh alakh apaarai. they serve the unseen, infinite Lord.
dg ast ofs ch fawact 4 aes 5 wre aret J 981 (1022-7, 7g, He 1)
hor kaytee dar deesai billaadee mai ganat na aavai kaa-ee hay. ||14||
Millions of others can be seen crying at His door; I cannot even estimate their numbers. ||14||
Ardt atefs Ardt aret il (1022-8, wg, ws 1) saachee keerat saachee banee. True is the Kirtan of His Praise, and True is the Word of His Bani.
dd 3 SA Fe uTet Il (1022-8, wg, ve 1) hor na deesai bayd puraanee. I can see no other in the Vedas and the Puraanas.
Unt Wg AS Te We H Us Jas aret F UWI (1022-9, og, we 1)
poonjee saach sachay gun gaavaa mai Dhar hor na kaa-ee hay. ||15]||
Truth is my capital; I sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. I have no other support at all. ||15]|
Aad Aa ATs FT St SAT il (1022-9, org, ws 1) jug jug saachaa hai bhee hosee. In each and every age, the True Lord is, and shall always be.
ASE B HoT ACS 3 HAT Il (1022-9, wg, He 1)
ka-un na moo-aa ka-un na marsee. Who has not died? Who shall not die?
oo oly ad Fost fe tug fas wet F AEN (1022-10, wg, He 1) naanak neech kahai baynantee dar daykhhu liv laa-ee hay. ||16]|2| |
Nanak the lowly offers this prayer; see Him within your own self, and lovingly focus on the Lord. ||16]|2]|
HTT HIS 4 Il (1022-10) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Set SIMS nist FSt Ml (1022-11, wg, Hs 1) doojee durmat annee bolee. In duality and evil-mindedness, the soul-bride is blind and deaf.
aH aa at axdt FH il (1022-11, wg, we 1) kaam kroDh kee kachee cholee. She wears the dress of sexual desire and anger.
ufg J Hon 3 We dufe fag fus ste o uret T NA (1022-11, wg, He 1)
ghar var sahj na jaanai chhohar bin pir need na paa-ee hay. ||1]|
Her Husband Lord is within the home of her own heart, but she does not know Him; without her Husband Lord, she cannot go to sleep. ||1||
nists mats AS SzaST M (1022-12, wg, He 1) antar agan jalai bhatkaaray. The great fire of desire blazes within her.
HOHY SA AS BST I (1022-12, wg, ue 1) manmukh takay kundaa chaaray. The self-willed manmukh looks around in the four directions.
fag Afsaa Az fa AY ue ATS ofa Saet FT NM (1022-12, og, He 1)
bin satgur sayvay ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai saachay haath vadaa-ee hay. ||2||
Without serving the True Guru, how can she find peace? Glorious greatness rests in the hands of the True Lord. ||2||
aH ay nidarg foes i 1022-13, wg, He 1) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar nivaaray. Eradicating sexual desire, anger and egotism,
SAad Ug Aafe AVS | (1022-13, wg, ws 1) taskar panch sabad sanghaaray. she destroys the five thieves through the Word of the Shabad.
famis usa & Ho fA SS Hor Hola AHET T ISI (1022-13, wg, He D
gi-aan kharhag lai man si-o loojhai mansaa maneh samaa-ee hay. ||3]|
Taking up the sword of spiritual wisdom, she struggles with her mind, and hope and desire are smoothed over in her mind. ||3]|
H at das fust fae are it (1022-14, wg, He
maa kee rakat pitaa bid Dhaaraa. From the union of the mother's egg and the father's sperm,
nafs Asfs afs murat il (1022-14, wg, He 1) moorat soorat kar aapaaraa. the form of infinite beauty has been created.
nfs ots Ast AS Sat J AIST AS Set FT Vil (1022-15, wg, we 1)
jot daat jaytee sabh tayree too kartaa sabh thaa-ee hay. ||4||
The blessings of light all come from You; You are the Creator Lord, pervading everywhere. ||4||
35 ot dhe AHS HIS Il (1022-15, wg, He 1) tujh hee kee-aa jaman marnaa. You have created birth and death.
Od 3 ANS ust fant sar Il (1022-16, wg, ws gur tay samajh parhee ki-aa darnaa. Why should anyone fear, if they come to understand through the Guru?
3 tonne efeor afe cufo gy ese Adtsg Wet TF WU (1022-16, wg, He 1)
too da-i-aal da-i-aa kar daykheh dukh darad sareerahu jaa-ee hay. ||5||
When You, O Merciful Lord, look with Your kindness, then pain and suffering leave the body. |[5]|
for wife aff ad s@ urfemr i 1022-17, wg, He 1) nij ghar bais rahay bha-o khaa-i-aa. One who sits in the home of his own self, eats his own fears.
Wes Ia ofa TafEnM i (1022-17, wg, He 1) Dhaavat raakhay thaak rahaa-i-aa. He quiets and holds his wandering mind still.
OHS faarA Jd Ad Ass MISH IH Aaret FT Ell (1022-17, wg, ws 1)
kamal bigaas haray sar subhar aatam raam sakhaa-ee hay. ||6]|
His heart-lotus blossoms forth in the overflowing green pool, and the Lord of his soul becomes his companion and helper. ||6||
Hee fourfe Hse ufo mre I 4022-18, wg, He 1) maran likhaa-ay mandal meh aa-ay. With their death already ordained, mortals come into this world.
fag soho seat usaES I (1022-18, wg, Hs 1) ki-o rahee-ai chalnaa parthaa-ay. How can they remain here? They have to go to the world beyond.
Ae og Ae wine ufs A Ag fee eset F DI (1022-18, wg, He 1)
sachaa amar sachay amraa pur so sach milai vadaa-ee hay. ||7||
True is the Lord's Command; the true ones dwell in the eternal city. The True Lord blesses them with glorious greatness. ||7||
nity Gurfeur wars Aare | 1022-19, wg, He 1) aap upaa-i-aa jagat sabaa-i-aa.
He Himself created the whole world.
fafs fafeur fafs da arfemr I (1022-19, wg, 48 1)
jin siri-aa tin DnanDhai laa-i-aa. The One who made it, assigns the tasks to it.
Yst 9O2ZB
Ae Gufs wed 3 UA ATS atHfS uret FT UTI (1023-1, og, He 1) sachai oopar avar na deesai saachay keemat paa-ee hay. ||8|| I cannot see any other above the True Lord. The True Lord does the appraisal. ||8]|
me aifewat fee as I (1023-1, wg, He 1) aithai go-ilrhaa din chaaray. In this green pasture, the mortal stays only a few days.
YB SHA Yas Il (1023-2, wg, we 1) khayl tamaasaa DhunDhookaaray. He plays and frolics in utter darkness.
at afe ae ante fae fofh pus suoret J KCI (1023-2, wg, He 1D
baajee khayl ga-ay baajeegar ji-o nis supnai bhakhlaa-ee hay. ||9||
The jugglers have staged their show, and left, like people mumbling in a dream. ||9]| 85 ag sufs fret sfanret it (1023-2, wg, Hs 1)
tin ka-o takhat milee vadi-aa-ee. They alone are blessed with glorious greatness at the Lord's throne,
foss@ His efhor fee wret il (1023-3, wg, He 1) nirbha-o man vasi-aa liv laa-ee. who enshrine the fearless Lord in their minds, and lovingly center themselves on Him.
ust qoHast usrat udtet fasee Tat set FT AON (1023-3, wg, Hs 1)
khandee barahmandee paataalee puree-ee taribhavan taarhee laa-ee hay. ||10|| In the galaxies and solar systems, nether regions, celestial realms and the three worlds, the Lord is in the primal void of deep absorption. ||10]|
Ardt Saldt SUT ABST Il (1023-4, wg, we 1) saachee nagree takhat sachaavaa. True is the village, and true is the throne,
aoufa Arg fs AY UST II (1023-4, wg, Hs 1) gurmukh saach milai sukh paavaa. of those Gurmukhs who meet with the True Lord, and find peace.
AS ATS sufs eset IGN Tes Teet FT AAU (1023-4, wg, He 1)
saachay saachai takhat vadaa-ee ha-umai ganat gavaa-ee hay. ||11]|
In Truth, seated upon the true throne, they are blessed with glorious greatness; their egotism is eradicated, along with the calculation of their account. ||11]|
TES Tet ATA AH | (1023-5, wg, He 1) ganat ganee-ai sahsaa jee-ai. Calculating its account, the soul becomes anxious.
fas AY urs Et SM I (1023-5, wg, Hs 1) ki-o sukh paavai doo-ai tee-ai. How can one find peace, through duality and the three gunas - the three qualities?
foone ea fadHe TS Ts us 3 ufs uret FT NII (1023-6, wg, He 1)
nirmal ayk niranjan daataa gur pooray tay pat paa-ee hay. ||12||
The One Lord is immaculate and formless, the Great Giver; through the Perfect Guru, honor is obtained. ||12]|
afar afar feast araufs ATS II 1023-6, wg, ue 1) jug jug virlee gurmukh jaataa. In each and every age, very rare are those who, as Gurmukh, realize the Lord.
Ara gfe samt He IST Il (1023-6, wg, He 1) saachaa rav rahi-aa man raataa. Their minds are imbued with the True, all-pervading Lord.
fan at Ge adt Ay ufemr ufs safe He o aret FT NASI (1023-7, we, He 1)
tis kee ot gahee sukh paa-i-aa man tan mail na kaa-ee hay. ||13]|
Seeking His Shelter, they find peace, and their minds and bodies are not stained with filth. ||13]|
ats arfefe Ars TST I (1023-7, wg, He 1) jeebh rasaa-in saachai raatee. Their tongues are imbued with the True Lord, the source of nectar;
ofs ys Hat 38S FISH Il (1023-8, wg, ws 1) har parabh sangee bha-o na bharaatee. abiding with the Lord God, they have no fear or doubt.
Age AS IA Taset Ast AS fret J 99H (1023-8, wg, Hs 1)
sarvan sarot rajay gurbaanee jotee jot milaa-ee hay. ||14||
Hearing the Word of the Guru's Bani, their ears are satisfied, and their light merges into the Light. ||14]]|
ofa afi us ad u@ ager il (1023-9, wg, He 1) rakh rakh pair Dharay pa-o Dharnaa. Carefully, carefully, I place my feet upon the ground.
AS aS Cus Sat Ager | (1023-9, wg, ne 1) jat kat daykh-a-u tayree sarnaa. Wherever I go, I behold Your Sanctuary.
ey AY tf 30 His Sela 35 ot AG ate mret T NWI (1023-9, og, He
dukh sukh deh toohai man bhaaveh tujh hee si-o ban aa-ee hay. ||15]| Whether You grant me pain or pleasure, You are pleasing to my mind. I am in harmony with You. ||15]|
nis artes & Ft |rat Il (1023-10, wg, Hs 1) ant kaal ko baylee naahee. No one is anyone's companion or helper at the very last moment;
TaHfe AS 3g ATH Il (1023-10, wg, us 1) gurmukh jaataa tuDh saalaahee. as Gurmukh, I realize You and praise You.
ood oth a3 Saat for wis saat wet J NVENSI (1023-10, wg, Hs 1)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee nij ghar taarhee laa-ee hay. ||16||3]|| O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, I am detached; in the home of my own self deep within, Iam absorbed in the primal void of deep meditation. ||16]|3]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1023-11) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
nitfe Farrel wus murs Il (1023-11, wg, Hs 1)
aad jugaadee apar apaaray. From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, You are infinite and incomparable.
nitfe fede WAH THTS Il (1023-12, wg, He 1) aad niranjan khasam hamaaray. You are my primal, immaculate Lord and Master.
We Aa wats aed AS Tat wet FT AU (1023-12, wg, He 1)
saachay jog jugat veechaaree saachay taarhee laa-ee hay. ||1]||
I contemplate the Way of Yoga, the Way of Union with the True Lord. I am truly absorbed in the primal void of deep meditation. ||1]|
Astor Fa TAS | (1023-12, wg, we 1) kayt-rhi-aa jug DhunDhookaarai. For so many ages, there was only pitch darkness;
wat oret franegs I (1023-13, wg, Hs 1) taarhee laa-ee sirjanhaarai. the Creator Lord was absorbed in the primal void.
Ag oH Adt efsnret vd sufs eave F WH (1023-13, wg, He 1)
sach naam sachee vadi-aa-ee saachai takhat vadaa-ee hay. ||2]|
There was the True Name, the glorious greatness of the Truth, and the glory of His true throne. ||2||
Asafa AS ASY ASS Il (1023-13, wg, He 1) satjug sat santokh sareeraa. In the Golden Age of Truth, Truth and contentment filled the bodies.
Afs Afs gas afsa aster I (1023-14, wg, He 1) sat sat vartai gahir gambheeraa. Truth was pervasive, Truth, deep, profound and unfathomable.
Ae Afog Ag use AS Jat voret J USI (1023-14, we, Hs 1)
sachaa saahib sach parkhai saachai hukam chalaa-ee hay. ||3]|
The True Lord appraises the mortals on the Touchstone of Truth, and issues His True Command. ||3]||
AS Asdt ARBaT Us Il (1023-15, wg, we 1) sat santokhee satgur pooraa. The Perfect True Guru is true and contented.
Gs HT ABE HS A AT Il (1023-15, wg, we 1) gur kaa sabad manay so sooraa. He alone is a spiritual hero, who believes in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
At waa AY fas HS JOH TAT T Il (1023-15, wg, Hs 1)
saachee dargeh saach nivaasaa maanai hukam rajaa-ee hay. ||4| |
He alone obtains a true seat in the True Court of the Lord, who surrenders to the Command of the Commander. ||4]|
Asafa AY Ad AT at Il (1023-16, wg, ve 1) satjug saach kahai sabh ko-ee. In the Golden Age of Truth, everyone spoke the Truth.
Afs eas ATS Het I (1023-16, wg, we 1) sach vartai saachaa so-ee. Truth was pervasive - the Lord was Truth.
Hfs uf ATS SoH BC SAS TeHfe ATG AMET FT UI (1023-16, wg, Hs 1D
man mukh saach bharam bha-o bhanjan gurmukh saach sakhaa-ee hay. ||5||
With Truth in their minds and mouths, mortals were rid of doubt and fear. Truth was the friend of the Gurmukhs. ||5]|
33 UH ae fea gat i (1023-17, wg, He D taraytai Dharam kalaa ik chookee. In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yoga, one power of Dharma was lost.
Sie see fea efaor Fat Il (1023-17, wg, He 1) teen charan ik dubiDhaa sookee. Three feet remained; through duality, one was cut off.
Toufa de A ATG Save Honfe ud meet FT El (1023-17, wg, He 1)
gurmukh hovai so saach vakhaanai manmukh pachai avaa-ee hay. ||6] |
Those who were Gurmukh spoke the Truth, while the self-willed manmukhs wasted away in vain. ||6]|
HoHfe ae @ Baa ALS Il (1023-18, wg, He 1) manmukh kaday na dargeh seejhai. The manmukh never succeeds in the Court of the Lord.
fag Fae fa nisg HS II (1023-18, wg, He 1) bin sabdai ki-o antar reejhai. Without the Word of the Shabad, how can one be pleased within?
ag ofefs awa wets ASt gs o aet T MDI (1023-19, wg, He 1)
baaDhay aavahi baaDhay jaaveh sojhee boojh na kaa-ee hay. ||7| |
In bondage they come, and in bondage they go; they understand and comprehend nothing. ||7]||
afer enmufe mit det i 1023-19, wg, He 1)
da-i-aa du-aapur aDhee ho-ee. In the Brass Age of Dwaapur Yuga, compassion was cut in half.
Usk 9028 aonfa fear HS set i 1024-1, wg, ues 1)
gurmukh virlaa cheenai ko-ee. Only a few, as Gurmukh, remembered the Lord.
ofe ua UsH Ud Udelus asHfy ATG fSaret F NCI (1024-1, wg, we 1)
du-ay pag Dharam Dharay DharneeDhar gurmukh saach tithaa-ee hay. ||8]| Dharmic faith, which upholds and supports the earth, had only two feet; Truth was revealed to the Gurmukhs. ||8||
TH UGH Achy UTaES Il (1024-1, wg, He 1) raajay Dharam karahi parthaa-ay. The kings acted righteously only out of self-interest.
MITAT SO BTS ASE Il (1024-2, wg, ve 1) aasaa banDhay daan karaa-ay. Tied to hopes of reward, they gave to charities.
oH on fag Hafs 3 det aa AIH aH T NCI (1024-2, wg, He 1)
raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee thaakay karam kamaa-ee hay. ||9||
Without the Lord's Name, liberation did not come, although they grew weary of performing rituals. ||9]|
OSH UGH ats Hats Hardt i 1024-3, wg, ve 1) karam Dharam kar mukat mangaa-ee. Practicing religious rituals, they sought liberation,
Hafs uerse Aafe Hardt il 1024-3, wg, we 1) mukat padaarath sabad salaahee. but the treasure of liberation comes only by praising the Shabad.
fag ag Ase Hats o det uslg afe saret J AON (1024-3, wg, Hs 1)
bin gur sabdai mukat na ho-ee parpanch kar bharmaa-ee hay. ||10]|| Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, liberation is not obtained; practicing hypocrisy, they wander around confused. ||10]|
Mfr Hust sat AE I (1024-4, wg, Hs 1) maa-i-aa mamtaa chhodee na jaa-ee. Love and attachment to Maya cannot be abandoned.
A Se AG as GH Il (1024-4, nrg, 2 1) say chhootay sach kaar kamaa-ee. They alone find release, who practice deeds of Truth.
mfeA sats ds stadt oad fA afe niet FT NAAN (1024-4, wg, He 1)
ahinis bhagat ratay veechaaree thaakur si-o ban aa-ee hay. ||11]|
Day and night, the devotees remain imbued with contemplative meditation; they become just like their Lord and Master. ||11]|
fefa wu su afs ats Stee arefs il (1024-5, wg, He 1)
ik jap tap kar kar tirath naaveh. Some chant and practice intensive meditation, and take cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
fa@ su are fae sorefa II (1024-5, 7g, He 1) ji-o tuDh bhaavai tivai chalaaveh. They walk as You will them to walk.
fe foafs nruste o sin fae ofe ae fate ufS uret 3 92M (1024-6, og, He 1)
hath nigrahi apteej na bheejai bin har gur kin pat paa-ee hay. ||12||
By stubborn rituals of self-suppression, the Lord is not pleased. No one has ever obtained honor, without the Lord, without the Guru. ||12]|
ast ae Hts fea ae sat i (1024-7, wg, He 1) kalee kaal meh ik kal raakhee. In the Iron Age, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, only one power remains.
fas aa ud fas 3 ard il (1024-7, og, we 1) bin gur pooray kinai na bhaakhee. Without the Perfect Guru, no one has even described it.
Houta ag eas eas fag Afsas SoH B ET T AI (1024-7, og, He D
manmukh koorh vartai vartaaraa bin satgur bharam na jaa-ee hay. ||13]|
The self-willed manmukhs have staged the show of falsehood. Without the True Guru, doubt does not depart. ||13]|
Afsag Fuaerg fATe™ Il (1024-8, wg, He 1) satgur vayparvaahu sirandaa. The True Guru is the Creator Lord, independent and carefree.
OAH ats & Set Fe Il (1024-8, wg, ne 1) naa jam kaan na chhandaa bandaa. He does not fear death, and He is not dependent on mortal men.
A fsa Ae A feo o fsA are ASST FT NAVI (1024-8, wg, He 1)
jo tis sayvay so abhinaasee naa tis kaal santaa-ee hay. ||14||
Whoever serves Him becomes immortal and imperishable, and will not be tortured by death. ||14||
ad Hfs miry shim AIST ll (1024-9, wg, He 1) gur meh aap rakhi-aa kartaaray. The Creator Lord has enshrined Himself within the Guru.
aonfa afe wife Burs il (1024-9, wg, He 1) gurmukh kot asa‘kh uDhaaray. The Gurmukh saves countless millions.
Hea Hor wares BS fase Hw 3 aret FT WAU (1024-10, wg, He 1)
sarab jee-aa jagjeevan daataa nirbha-o mail na kaa-ee hay. ||15]|
The Life of the World is the Great Giver of all beings. The Fearless Lord has no filth at all. |]15]|
Age AST TT FST Il (1024-10, wg, ue 1) saglay jaacheh gur bhandaaree. Everyone begs from the Guru, God's Treasurer.
nif fede nied wrurdst i (1024-11, wg, Hs 1) aap niranjan alakh apaaree. He Himself is the immaculate, unknowable, infinite Lord.
ood AY ad ys Ae HS ATE set T NAENSI (1024-11, og, He 1)
naanak saach kahai parabh jaachai mai deejai saach rajaa-ee hay. ||16||4||
Nanak speaks the Truth; he begs from God. Please bless me with the Truth, by Your Will. |]16]|4]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1024-12) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ars HS Hate fare i 1024-12, wg, we 1) saachai maylay sabad milaa-ay. The True Lord unites with those who are united with the Word of the Shabad.
wW {3H Stat Hof AWTS Il (1024-12, ng, 8 1) jaa tis bhaanaa sahj samaa-ay. When it pleases Him, we intuitively merge with Him.
fgsee afs udt usHAfS weg o SAT SST T UUM (1024-12, wg, He 1)
taribhavan jot Dharee parmaysar avar na doojaa bhaa-ee hay. ||1]|
The Light of the Transcendent Lord pervades the three worlds; there is no other at all, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1]|
fA & Bod fA at AS Il (1024-13, wg, ws 1)
jis kay chaakar tis kee sayvaa. I am His servant; I serve Him.
Rafe ust wise wiser il (1024-13, wg, He 1) sabad pateejai alakh abhayvaa. He is unknowable and mysterious; He is pleased by the Shabad.
SIS A Teas asst aufA Be sfanret F il (1024-14, wg, ue 1)
bhagtaa kaa gunkaaree kartaa bakhas la-ay vadi-aa-ee hay. ||2| |
The Creator is the Benefactor of His devotees. He forgives them - such is His greatness. ||2||
SS
ae Sfe 5 mires APS Il (1024-14, wg, He 1) dayday tot na aavai saachay. The True Lord gives and gives; His blessings never run short.
& B Hats ue aes i (1024-14, wg, ws 1) lai lai mukar pa-uday kaachay. The false ones receive, and then deny having received.
He 3 yste Ate 3 dtsfe eH Sat goret FT UI (1024-15, wg, He 1D
mool na boojheh saach na reejheh doojai bharam bhulaa-ee hay. ||3||
They do not understand their origins, they are not pleased with the Truth, and so they wander in duality and doubt. ||3]|
Toute ata ad fee ast il (1024-15, wg, He 1) gurmukh jaag rahay din raatee. The Gurmukhs remain awake and aware, day and night.
Ard at fee ASHS ATS I (1024-15, wg, He 1) saachay kee liv gurmat jaatee. Following the Guru's Teachings, they know the Love of the True Lord.
Hou Afe ga A Se TeHfe AAT set F il (1024-16, wg, we
manmukh so-ay rahay say lootay gurmukh saabat bhaa-ee hay. ||4]|
The self-willed manmukhs remain asleep, and are plundered. The Gurmukhs remain safe and sound, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4||
TS MTS TS APS Il (1024-16, wg, we 1) koorhay aavai koorhay jaavai. The false come, and the false go;
TS TSt AT AHS Il (1024-17, wg, Hs 1) koorhay raatee koorh kamaavai. imbued with falsehood, they practice only falsehood.
Rafe fs A veo Ud Tenfe Aafs AHret TF Wu 024-17, wg, He 1)
sabad milay say dargeh paiDhay gurmukh surat samaa-ee hay. ||5]|
Those who are imbued with the Shabad are robed in honor in the Court of the Lord; the Gurmukhs focus their consciousness on Him. ||5||
Ofs Hot Sait sarerst Wt (1024-17, wg, 4 1) koorh muthee thagee thagvaarhee. The false are cheated, and robbed by the robbers.
fA sat Gats SASt (1024-18, wg, He 1) ji-o vaarhee ojaarh ujaarhee. The garden is laid waste, like the rough wilderness.
on fas fag afe 3 oat ofa fanfont ey uret FT El (1024-18, wg, He 1)
naam binaa kichh saad na laagai har bisri-ai dukh paa-ee hay. ||6||
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, nothing tastes sweet; forgetting the Lord, they suffer in sorrow. ||6]|
SH Ave fs mmr i (1024-19, we, us 1) bhojan saach milai aaghaa-ee. Receiving the food of Truth, one is satisfied.
oH I3q Avot Sfamret it (1024-19, wg, us naam ratan saachee vadi-aa-ee. True is the glorious greatness of the jewel of the Name.
HS omy use Het Ast AfS fraret J WDM 024-19, wg, Hs 1)
cheenai aap pachhaanai so-ee jotee jot milaa-ee hay. ||7]||
One who understands his own self, realizes the Lord. His light merges into the Light. II7II
Yat 9o2Y
Seg Fat PST wS Il 1025-1, wg, He 1) naavhu bhulee chotaa khaa-ay. Wandering from the Name, he endures beatings.
ags frmreu SdH 3 WE Il 1025-1, wg, we 1) bahut si-aanap bharam na jaa-ay. Even great cleverness does not dispel doubt.
ufg ufs He nds 6 Usfe minata stig Beret FT UCI (1025-1, wg, He 1)
pach pach mu-ay achayt na cheeteh ajgar bhaar ladaa-ee hay. ||8]|
The unconscious fool does not remain conscious of the Lord; he putrifies and rots away to death, carrying his heavy load of sin. ||8]|
fag ae fagufs set ardt i (1025-2, wg, Hs 1) bin baad biroDheh ko-ee naahee. No one is free of conflict and strife.
A turfeg fSq Aerdt i 1025-2, we, Hs 1) mai daykhaalihu tis saalaahee. Show me anyone who is, and I will praise him.
He 36 natu fies Hates afs fAG ses gervet FT UCI (1025-3, wg, He 1)
man tan arap milai jagjeevan har si-o banat banaa-ee hay. ||9| |
Dedicating mind and body to God, one meets the Lord, the Life of the World, and becomes just like Him. ||9]]|
ys at afs ffs af& o ure Il (1025-3, wg, He 1) parabh kee gat mit ko-ay na paavai. No one knows the state and extent of God.
A a gat aoe saret urs I (1025-4, wg, He 1) jay ko vadaa kahaa-ay vadaa-ee khaavai. Whoever calls himself great, will be eaten by his greatness.
AS Atos sfe 3 ast Aart fafa Guret FJ AON (1025-4, wg, He 1) saachay saahib tot na daatee saglee tineh upaa-ee hay. ||10|| There is no lack of gifts of our True Lord and Master. He created all. ||10]|
zat Sfanret Fuss I (1025-4, wg, He 1) vadee vadi-aa-ee vayparvaahay. Great is the glorious greatness of the independent Lord.
mify Gure arg AHS Il (1025-5, wg, Hs 1) aap upaa-ay daan samaahay. He Himself created, and gives sustanance to all.
umfy fers vfs odt est fifeor waft gATEt TNA (1025-5, og, He 1)
aap da-i-aal door nahee daataa mili-aa sahj rajaa-ee hay. ||11]|
The Merciful Lord is not far away; the Great Giver spontaneously unites with Himself, by His Will. ||11]]|
fefea Fait fefer sfar femmd i (1025-6, wg, He 1) ik sogee ik rog vi-aapay. Some are sad, and some are afflicted with disease.
A fas ad A my nme Il (1025-6, wg, Hs 1) jo kichh karay so aapay aapay. Whatever God does, He does by Himself.
sats TC ae at ufs udt nisdfe Hate wart J WII (1025-6, wg, He 1) bhagat bhaa-o gur kee mat pooree anhad sabad lakhaa-ee hay. ||12||
Through loving devotion, and the Perfect Teachings of the Guru, the unstruck sound current of the Shabad is realized. ||12]|
fefax sat su sets SSS I (1025-7, wg, v2 1) ik naagay bhookhay bhaveh bhavaa-ay. Some wander and roam around, hungry and naked.
fefa go afs Hofs & otHfs ure it (1025-7, wg, us ik hath kar mareh na keemat paa-ay. Some act in stubbornness and die, but do not know the value of God.
Os nifears ot AS 5 We FS Aa THT T UII (1025-8, wg, we 1)
gat avigat kee saar na jaanai boojhai sabad kamaa-ee hay. ||13]|
They do not know the difference between good and bad; this is understood only through the practice of the Word of the Shabad. ||13]|
fefa stefa orefa nig o refs Il (1025-8, wg, He 1) ik tirath naaveh ann na khaaveh. Some bathe at sacred shrines and refuse to eat.
fefa nate Farets So wurT|fs Il (1025-9, wg, Hs 1) ik agan jalaaveh dayh khapaaveh. Some torment their bodies in burning fire.
oH on fag Hats 3 det fas fafa ufe Suret F 9911 (1025-9, wg, He 1D
raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee kit biDh paar langhaa-ee hay. ||14]|
Without the Lord's Name, liberation is not obtained; how can anyone cross over? [|14]|
aeons esta Osfs wet It (1025-10, we, Hs 1) gurmat chhodeh ujharh jaa-ee. Abandoning the Guru's Teachings, some wander in the wilderness.
HoHfe IH o AY meet Il (1025-10, wg, He 1) manmukh raam na japai avaa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs are destitute; they do not meditate on the Lord.
ufs ufs gata az onreta afs are FITSt T UWI (1025-10, wg, He 1)
pach pach booDheh koorh kamaaveh koorh kaal bairaa-ee hay. ||15]||
They are ruined, destroyed and drowned from practicing falsehood; death is the enemy of the false. ||15]|
JON wis JRA AS I (1025-11, wg, He 1)
hukmay aavai hukmay jaavai.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, they come, and by the Hukam of His Command, they go.
8S Ja A AVS AWTS Il (1025-11, og, Hs 1) boojhai hukam so saach samaavai. One who realizes His Hukam, merges in the True Lord.
ood Ae fe uf are aonfe arg anret FT UNAENUI (1025-12, wg, He 1)
naanak saach milai man bhaavai gurmukh kaar kamaa-ee hay. ||16]||5||
O Nanak, he merges in the True Lord, and his mind is pleased with the Lord. The Gurmukhs do His work. ||16]||5]|
HTT HIS 4 Il (1025-12) maaroo menhlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
nm} agar use fearst |i (1025-12, wg, He 1) aapay kartaa purakh biDhaataa. He Himself is the Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
fats my orfy Surf uerst il (1025-13, wg, Hs 1 jin aapay aap upaa-ay pachhaataa. He evaluates those whom He Himself has created.
nd Afsag umd Aza mms fqAfe Guret J uA (1025-13, wg, He 1)
aapay satgur aapay sayvak aapay sarisat upaa-ee hay. ||1]|
He Himself is the True Guru, and He Himself is the servant; He Himself created the Universe. ||1]|
mim SS SS TS Il (1025-14, weg, we 1) aapay nayrhai naahee dooray. He is near at hand, not far away.
gate Toute A AS UT II (1025-14, wg, HE 1) boojheh gurmukh say jan pooray. The Gurmukhs understand Him; perfect are those humble beings.
fae at Hats mifsfeta oo aa Aafs Sa FsTet FT NM (1025-14, wg, ue 1)
tin kee sangat ahinis laahaa gur sangat ayh vadaa-ee hay. ||2||
Associating with them night and day is profitable. This is the glorious greatness of associating with the Guru. ||2||
Afa Aft AS 3B YS 3g Il (1025-15, wg, uz jug jug sant bhalay parabh tayray. Throughout the ages, Your Saints are holy and sublime, O God.
dfs TE Wels FAS FAT Il (1025-15, wg, we 1) har gun gaavahi rasan rasayray. They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, savoring it with their tongues.
Grafs asf ussfs ey woe fas ost fos uset FT USI (1025-15, wg, He 1)
ustat karahi parhar dukh daalad jin naahee chint paraa-ee hay. ||3]|
They chant His Praises, and their pain and poverty are taken away; they are not afraid of anyone else. ||3]|
Gf was safe o AS Stats I (1025-16, wg, HE 1) o-ay jaagat raheh na sootay deeseh. They remain awake and aware, and do not appear to sleep.
Hafs a 3rd ATG USTAfT I (1025-16, wg, He 1) sangat kul taaray saach pareeseh. They serve up Truth, and so save their companions and relatives.
asus He odt 3 fess fe safa sas fos wet F si (1025-17, weg, He 1)
kalimal mail naahee tay nirmal o-ay raheh bhagat liv laa-ee hay. ||4||
They are not stained with the filth of sins; they are immaculate and pure, and remain absorbed in loving devotional worship. ||4]|
asg ofa AS Afsas set Il (1025-17, wg, v2 1) boojhhu har jan satgur banee. O humble servants of the Lord, understand the Word of the Guru's Bani.
fg Agee AAD ST User Il (1025-18, wg, He 1) ayhu joban saas hai dayh puraanee. This youth, breath and body shall pass away.
ming ants ufs reba uret afe mu af fee fomret J ull 1025-18, wg, Hs 1)
aaj kaal mar jaa-ee-ai paraanee har jap jap ridai Dhi-aa-ee hay. ||5||
O mortal, you shall die today or tomorrow; chant, and meditate on the Lord within your heart. ||5]|
23g WSt AF AAS Il (1025-19, wg, Hs 1) chhodahu paraanee koorh kabaarhaa. O mortal, abandon falsehood and your worthless ways.
IZ HS AS SSIS Il (1025-19, wg, He 1) koorh maaray kaal uchhaahaarhaa. Death viciously kills the false beings.
Was afs usts xfs IGH va Hata us UTET T NEN (1025-19, wg, Hs 1)
saakat koorh pacheh man ha-umai duhu maarag pachai pachaa-ee hay. ||6||
The faithless cynic is ruined through falsehood and his egotistical mind.On the path of duality, he rots away and decomposes. ||6] |
UST AOE efsg foe afs uaet i (1026-1, +g, ne 1)
chhodihu nindaa taat paraa-ee. Abandon slander and envy of others.
ufz ufs ests ATS & ret I (1026-1, wg, Hs 1D parh parh dajheh saat na aa-ee. Reading and studying, they burn, and do not find tranquility.
fife ASHafs oH Ae MSH IH AMET T IDI (1026-1, wg, Hs 1)
mil satsangat naam salaahahu aatam raam sakhaa-ee hay. ||7||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The Lord, the Supreme Soul, shall be your helper and companion. ||7]||
23g aH ay sfamret Il (1026-2, wg, He 1) chhodahu kaam kroDh buri-aa-ee. Abandon sexual desire, anger and wickedness.
IH Ug e3g Sueret il (1026-2, we, us 1) ha-umai DhanDh chhodahu lamptaa-ee. Abandon your involvement in egotistical affairs and conflicts.
Afsad Hafs usg + Caag ER sdht sen@ ge T CI (1026-3, wg, He 1)
satgur saran parahu taa ubrahu i-o taree-ai bhavjal bhaa-ee hay. ||8] |
If you seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru, then you shall be saved. In this way you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean, O Siblings of Destiny. ||8]|
mira fares set mratfs far Ser i 1026-3, wg, Hs 1) aagai bimal nadee agan bikh jhaylaa. In the hereafter, you shall have to cross over the fiery river of poisonous flames.
fsa neg 3 aet He feaer i (1026-4, wg, He 1) tithai avar na ko-ee jee-o ikaylaa. No one else will be there; your soul shall be all alone.
33 3a Male Ara & Bad ula ests HOH Set FT UCI (1026-4, wg, we 1)
bharh bharh agan saagar day lahree parh dajheh manmukh taa-ee hay. ||9||
The ocean of fire spits out waves of searing flames; the self-willed manmukhs fall into it, and are roasted there. ||9||
aa ufs Hats BS SSS Il (1026-5, wg, ne 1) gur peh mukat daan day bhaanai. Liberation comes from the Guru; He grants this blessing by the Pleasure of His Will.
fafs urfemr Fret fafa AS 1 (1026-5, wg, He 1) jin paa-i-aa so-ee biDh jaanai. He alone knows the way, who obtains it.
faa ufeur faq ues set AY Afsagd AS Het FT AON (1026-5, wg, He 1)
jin paa-i-aa tin poochhahu bhaa-ee sukh satgur sayv kamaa-ee hay. ||10] |
So ask one who has obtained it, O Siblings of Destiny. Serve the True Guru, and find peace. ||10||
ad fag Cats Hafs Sara i (1026-6, wg, He 1) gur bin urajh mareh baykaaraa. Without the Guru, he dies entangled in sin and corruption.
aH fAfs Hs AI WATT II (1026-6, wg, He 1) jam sir maaray karay khu-aaraa. The Messenger of Death smashes his head and humiliates him.
ra Hats adt od feea gata fee uset TF AI (1026-7, wg, HE 1)
baaDhay mukat naahee nar nindak doobeh nind paraa-ee hay. ||11]|
The slanderous person is not freed of his bonds; he is drowned, slandering others. []11]|
8g AY usted niefs il (1026-7, wg, He 1) bolhu saach pachhaanhu andar. So speak the Truth, and realize the Lord deep within.
fe ardt eug afe Sefs il (1026-8, wg, He 1) door naahee daykhhu kar nandar. He is not far away; look, and see Him.
furs ardt auf 3g srct fe sene ute Suret F 92H (1026-8, wg, us 1)
bighan naahee gurmukh tar taaree i-o bhavjal paar langhaa-ee hay. ||12]|
No obstacles shall block your way; become Gurmukh, and cross over to the other side. This is the way to cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||12| |
Tat niefs on fest il (1026-9, wg, He 1) dayhee andar naam nivaasee. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the body.
WN} aes FT nifserAt i 1026-9, wg, He 1) aapay kartaa hai abhinaasee. The Creator Lord is eternal and imperishable.
o me He o Hfenr vet afs 2a Aafe gH T ISI (1026-9, vg, He 1)
naa jee-o marai na maari-aa jaa-ee kar daykhai sabad rajaa-ee hay. ||13]|
The soul does not die, and it cannot be killed; God creates and watches over all. Through the Word of the Shabad, His Will is manifest. ||13]|
6g feaHe 3 act niftmrs 1 (1026-10, wg, Hs 1) oh nirmal hai naahee anDhi-aaraa. He is immaculate, and has no darkness.
Gg omit sufs ad Afar I (1026-10, wg, Hs 1) oh aapay takhat bahai sachi-aaraa. The True Lord Himself sits upon His throne.
Was gs sfa seetuifs nfs Aonfs wret At T AVI (1026-11, wg, Hs 1)
saakat koorhay banDh bhavaa-ee-ah mar janmeh aa-ee jaa-ee hay. ||14]|
The faithless cynics are bound and gagged, and forced to wander in reincarnation. They die, and are reborn, and continue coming and going. ||14| |
dd a Aa Afsaa fumrg | 1026-11, wg, He 1) gur kay sayvak satgur pi-aaray. The Guru's servants are the Beloveds of the True Guru.
6fe safs sufs A ASE Ses Il (1026-12, rg, He 1) o-ay baiseh takhat so sabad veechaaray. Contemplating the Shabad, they sit upon His throne.
33 sole visas wets ASAafs ATT SsTSt F UAW (1026-12, wg, He 1)
tat laheh antargat jaaneh satsangat saach vadaa-ee hay. ||15]|
They realize the essence of reality, and know the state of their inner being. This is the true glorious greatness of those who join the Sat Sangat. ||15||
wify so Ag fuss SS i 1026-13, wg, He 1) aap tarai jan pitraa taaray. He Himself saves His humble servant, and saves his ancestors as well.
Hafs vats A ufs Bsrs il (1026-13, wg, Hs 1) sangat mukat so paar utaaray. His companions are liberated; He carries them across.
ood fSA at oer ater fafs aenfe afs fos wet F NEEM (1026-13, wg, He 1) naanak tis kaa laalaa golaa jin gurmukh har liv laa-ee hay. ||16]||6||
Nanak is the servant and slave of that Gurmukh who lovingly focuses his consciousness on the Lord. ||16||6]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1026-14) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
AS AA SIS TNS Il (1026-14, wg, ve 1) kaytay jug vartay gubaarai. For many ages, only darkness prevailed;
Tat wet wus wrurs i (1026-14, wg, Hs 1) taarhee laa-ee apar apaarai. the infinite, endless Lord was absorbed in the primal void.
uyatts ferey For a sfe Uy UATE FT WAU (1026-15, wg, Hs 1) DhunDhookaar niraalam baithaa naa tad DhanDh pasaaraa hay. ||1|| He sat alone and unaffected in absolute darkness; the world of conflict did not exist.
[21
Aa este fs FITS Il 1026-15, wg, ve 1) jug chhateeh tinai vartaa-ay. Thirty-six ages passed like this.
fa@ fsa ara fsS Boe It (1026-16, we, He 1) ji-o tis bhaanaa tivai chalaa-ay. He causes all to happen by the Pleasure of His Will.
farts Adta 3 SA aet wmy mrs murat FT QM (1026-16, wg, He 1) tiseh sareek na deesai ko-ee aapay apar apaaraa hay. ||2| | No rival of His can be seen. He Himself is infinite and endless. ||2| |
TUS IST Aa Vs Il (1026-16, wg, He 1) guptay boojhhu jug chatu-aaray. God is hidden throughout the four ages - understand this well.
ufe wfe eas Bea HBTS Il (1026-17, wg, HB 1)
ghat ghat vartai udar majhaaray. He pervades each and every heart, and is contained within the belly.
WT Ta Sat Sat Fas aet FS Te Atos TF WSN (1026-17, wg, we 1)
jug jug aykaa aykee vartai ko-ee boojhai gur veechaaraa hay. ||3]||
The One and Only Lord prevails throughout the ages. How rare are those who contemplate the Guru, and understand this. ||3]|
fiz gas fife fils Adbor i (1026-18, wg, Hs 1) bind rakat mil pind saree-aa. From the union of the sperm and the egg, the body was formed.
use uTet marat ffs Fb 1 (1026-18, wg, He 1) pa-un paanee agnee mil jee-aa. From the union of air, water and fire, the living being is made.
wnt dH Ad Ja Host da afer HT UATE T Ill (1026-18, wg, He 1)
aapay choj karay rang mahlee hor maa-i-aa moh pasaaraa hay. ||4]|
He Himself plays joyfully in the mansion of the body; all the rest is just attachment to Maya's expanse. ||4| |
was 36 Hfs Sau fimrat il (1026-19, wg, Hs 1) garabh kundal meh uraDh Dhi-aanee. Within the mother's womb, upside-down, the mortal meditated on God.
WY ATS nisaAMt Il (1026-19, wg, He 1) aapay jaanai antarjaamee. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows everything.
ATA ATA Ae OH AHS “ists Bes HETET T UII (1026-19, wg, He 1) Saas Saas sach naam samaalay antar udar majhaaraa hay. ||5||
With each and every breath, he contemplated the True Name, deep within himself, within the womb. ||5||
ust YO2D ofa uesa & Afar mrfeor i (1027-1, wg, He 1)
chaar padaarath lai jag aa-i-aa. He came into the world to obtain the four great blessings.
fre Fast wits ear urfemr | 1027-1, wg, Hs 1D siv saktee ghar vaasaa paa-i-aa. He came to dwell in the home of the Shiva and Shakti, energy and matter.
ea fers a fus wed nigds on ferret Tiel (1027-2, rg, ne 1)
ayk visaaray taa pirh haaray anDhulai naam visaaraa hay. ||6]|
But he forgot the One Lord, and he has lost the game. The blind person forgets the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6||
TSI HS Gar at wr i 1027-2, wg, us 1) baalak marai baalak kee leelaa. The child dies in his childish games.
afs afs sefa aes daiter il (1027-3, wg, ue 1) kahi kahi roveh baal rangeelaa. They cry and mourn, saying that he was such a playful child.
fAA ot AT A fe ot Shor ger SzSoa F MDI 1027-3, og, He 1)
jis kaa saa so tin hee lee-aa bhoolaa rovanhaaraa hay. ||7]||
The Lord who owns him has taken him back. Those who weep and mourn are mistaken. ||7||
afa rafts ufe arta fer att i (1027-3, wg, ue 1) bhar joban mar jaahi ke keejai. What can they do, if he dies in his youth?
Aa Hat afs TSA il (1027-4, wg, ve 1) mayraa mayraa kar roveejai. They cry out, "His is mine, he is mine!"
Hfeor arate afe feats fog Fee AAS T ITI 027-4, wg, Hs 1)
maa-i-aa kaaran ro-ay vigoocheh Dharig jeevan sansaaraa hay. ||8]|
They cry for the sake of Maya, and are ruined; their lives in this world are cursed. [18] |
aet J Sis USS wir I (1027-5, wg, He 1) kaalee hoo fun Dha-ulay aa-ay. Their black hair eventually turns grey.
fee are ae afeor Tee Il (1027-5, wg, He 1) vin naavai gath ga-i-aa gavaa-ay. Without the Name, they lose their wealth, and then leave.
eons uiger faoth faa ue sfe yorst F CI (1027-5, wg, He 1)
durmat anDhulaa binas binaasai moothay ro-ay pookaaraa hay. ||9||
They are evil-minded and blind - they are totally ruined; they are plundered, and cry out in pain. ||9]|
wiry eats o FS aet I (1027-6, wg, He 1) aap veechaar na rovai ko-ee. One who understands himself, does not cry.
Afsag fixes 3 ASt Tet I (1027-6, wg, ue satgur milai ta sojhee ho-ee. When he meets the True Guru, then he understands.
fag ae ane aure 3 Yate Hate fs feAsa FT NAO (1027-6, wg, He D
bin gur bajar kapaat na khooleh sabad milai nistaaraa hay. ||10||
Without the Guru, the heavy, hard doors are not opened. Obtaining the Word of the Shabad, one is emancipated. ||10]|
faafa sfeur sq eth Sat I (1027-7, wg, He 1) biraDh bha-i-aa tan chheejai dayhee. The body grows old, and is beaten out of shape.
TH 6 Auet vifs AST I (1027-7, wg, us 1) raam na jap-ee ant sanayhee. But he does not meditate on the Lord, His only friend, even at the end.
on farts 38 ufo wes VaaT FS ya T NVI (1027-8, og, He 1)
naam visaar chalai muhi kaalai dargeh jhooth khu-aaraa hay. ||11]|
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he departs with his face blackened. The false are humiliated in the Court of the Lord. ||11||
on ferfs 38 afsrd il (1027-8, wg, oH 1) naam visaar chalai koorhi-aaro. Forgetting the Naam, the false ones depart.
wires ars us fafa ers il (1027-9, wg, He 1) aavat jaat parhai sir chhaaro. Coming and going, dust falls on their heads.
Ages ufs aA 3s ue utbas ffs Hat FT 92M (1027-9, we, Hs 1)
saahurrhai ghar vaas na paa-ay pay-ee-arhai sir maaraa hay. ||12||
The soul-bride finds no home in her in-laws' home, the world hereafter; she suffers in agony in this world of her parents' home. ||12||
uA US Tot asta Il (1027-10, wg, we 1) khaajai paijhai ralee kareejai. She eats, dresses and plays joyfully,
fag nis sarst afe Hetr II (1027-10, wg, He 1) bin abh bhagtee baad mareejai. but without loving devotional worship of the Lord, she dies uselessly.
Ad Mung at ATS Oo AS AH HS foo Brat FT AI (1027-10, wg, He 1)
Sar apsar kee saar na jaanai jam maaray ki-aa chaaraa hay. ||13]|
One who does not distinguish between good and evil, is beaten by the Messenger of Death; how can anyone escape this? ||13]|
usfeast safeafs use I (1027-11, wg, Hs 1) parvirtee narvirat pachhaanai. One who realizes what he has to possess, and what he has to abandon,
Ga & Af Aafe we AS Il (1027-11, wg, He 1)
gur kai sang sabad ghar jaanai.
associating with the Guru, comes to know the Word of the Shabad, within the home of his own self.
for ot Her orf 3 ae Afs yar Afra FT NASI (1027-11, wg, He 1)
kis hee mandaa aakh na chalai sach kharaa sachi-aaraa hay. ||14||
Do not call anyone else bad; follow this way of life. Those who are true are judged to be genuine by the True Lord. ||14]|
Are fast efs fis o et il (1027-12, wg, ue 1)
saach binaa dar sijhai na ko-ee. Without Truth, no one succeeds in the Court of the Lord.
Ae Aafe Us ufs Tet i 1027-12, wg, He 1)
saach sabad paijhai pat ho-ee. Through the True Shabad, one is robed in honor.
nm suff we faq sve IBN aes foea FT QUI (1027-13, wg, He 1)
aapay bakhas la-ay tis bhaavai ha-umai garab nivaaraa hay. ||15]|
He forgives those with whom He is pleased; they silence their egotism and pride. []15]|
qa fxsur 3 JAH USES Il (1027-13, wg, He 1) gur kirpaa tay hukam pachhaanai. One who realizes the Hukam of God's Command, by the Grace of the Guru,
Aad Hasse at fafa AS Ul (1027-13, we, Hs 1) jugah jugantar kee biDh jaanai. comes to know the lifestyle of the ages.
Sot OH AUT SI SS AY Sd BrdST a FT NIVENAUDM (1027-14, wg, He 1)
naanak naam japahu tar taaree sach taaray taaranhaaraa hay. ||16||1||7||
O Nanak, chant the Naam, and cross over to the other side. The True Lord will carry you across. ||16]||1]|7]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1027-15) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
ofa AT ots ordt A AEF I (1027-15, we, Hs 1) har saa meet naahee mai ko-ee. I have no other friend like the Lord.
fafs 36 Ho thor wafs ANT I 1027-15, »g, He 1) jin tan man dee-aa surat samo-ee. He gave me body and mind, and infused consciousness into my being.
Aaa rier yfsuts As A nists ear ster FT AU (1027-15, we, Hs 1) sarab jee-aa partipaal samaalay so antar daanaa beenaa hay. ||1|| He cherishes and cares for all beings; He is deep within, the wise, all-knowing Lord.
[21|
WI ASST TH IA fimrs | (1027-16, wg, ve 1) gur sarvar ham hans pi-aaray. The Guru is the sacred pool, and I am His beloved swan.
Aad Hig J3s BB AT ATS Il (1027-16, wg, ws 1) sSaagar meh ratan laal baho saaray. In the ocean, there are so many jewels and rubies.
Hat wea dhe ofs AA SS HE 36 Sar T MQM 1027-17, weg, us 1)
motee maanak heeraa har jas gaavat man tan bheenaa hay. ||2||
The Lord's Praises are pearls, gems and diamonds. Singing His Praises, my mind and body are drenched with His Love. ||2||
of Mia niarg nrerfa fee il (1027-17, wg, He 1) har agam agaahu agaaDh niraalaa. The Lord is inaccessible, inscrutable, unfathomable and unattached.
ofa nis B urehat Tes TUS | (1027-18, we, us 1)
har ant na paa-ee-ai gur gopaalaa. The Lord's limits cannot be found; the Guru is the Lord of the World.
Afsad Hfs ae SeeTS Afs GE Sar Blo F WI (1027-18, wg, ue 1)
satgur mat taaray taaranhaaraa mayl la-ay rang leenaa hay. ||3]|
Through the Teachings of the True Guru, the Lord carries us across to the other side. He unites in His Union those who are colored by His Love. ||3]|
Afsags asg Hats fasdt il (1027-19, wg, He 1) satgur baajhahu mukat kinayhee. Without the True Guru, how can anyone be liberated?
6g urfe Faret TH AST Il (1027-19, wg, Hs 1)
oh aad jugaadee raam sanayhee.
He has been the Friend of the Lord, from the very beginning of time, and all throughout the ages.
Tddd Hats ad ate fagur uA mieaS atar FT gil (1027-19, wg, us 1)
dargeh mukat karay kar kirpaa bakhsay avgun keenaa hay. ||4]| By His Grace, He grants liberation in His Court; He forgives them for their sins. ||4]|
Yat 9O2C
Afsag BS Hats ATES I (1028-1, wg, ue 1) satgur daataa mukat karaa-ay. The True Guru, the Giver, grants liberation;
Afs da wee nifts TA US I (1028-1, wg, He 1) sabh rog gavaa-ay amrit ras paa-ay. all diseases are eradicated, and one is blessed with the Ambrosial Nectar.
AY warts andt ag oad faa mafe gst og Alor dT ull (1028-2, wg, He 1D
jam jaagaat naahee kar laagai jis agan bujhee thar seenaa hay. ||5]|
Death, the tax collector, does not impose any tax on one whose inner fire has been put out, whose heart is cool and tranquil. ||5]|
ofan JA Uifs ag Ut Il (1028-2, »g, He 1) kaa-i-aa hans pareet baho Dhaaree. The body has developed a great love for the soul-swan.
6g Hat use Ga Hefs art Il (1028-3, »g, He 1) oh jogee purakh oh sundar naaree. He is a Yogi, and she is a beautiful woman.
wifofofa sat ca faset Cfe yas HS 3 ater T NEI (1028-3, wg, Hs 1)
ahinis bhogai choj binodee uth chaltai mataa na keenaa hay. ||6||
Day and night, he enjoys her with delight, and then he arises and departs without consulting her. ||6||
fqrfe Gufé gd ys SA II (1028-4, wg, He 1) sarisat upaa-ay rahay parabh chhaajai. Creating the Universe, God remains diffused throughout it.
ue urat SH3g IH Il (1028-4, wg, He 1) pa-un paanee baisantar gaajai. In the wind, water and fire, He vibrates and resounds.
Hour 38 ws Hats fife A ure A fas ator FT DM (1028-4, og, we
manoo-aa dolai doot sangat mil so paa-ay jo kichh keenaa hay. ||7]|
The mind wavers, keeping company with evil passions; one obtains the rewards of his own actions. ||7]|
on ferfa tu ze Ad i 028-5, we, Hs 1) naam visaar dokh dukh sahee-ai. Forgetting the Naam, one suffers the misery of his evil ways.
gon afer seat fa sdb | (1028-5, wg, He hukam bha-i-aa chalnaa ki-o rahee-ai. When the order to depart is issued, how can he remain here?
aaa gu vfs Gs we fA AS Ss safe Hla T UTI (1028-5, wg, Hs 1) narak koop meh gotay khaavai ji-o jal tay baahar meenaa hay. ||8]|| He falls into the pit of hell, and suffers like a fish out of water. ||8]|
SeaHT sda HAZ SIEM Il (1028-6, wg, we 1) cha-oraaseeh narak saakat bhogaa-ee-ai. The faithless cynic has to endure 8.4 million hellish incarnations.
AM ats SA usb I (1028-6, wg, He 1) jaisaa keechai taiso paa-ee-ai. As he acts, so does he suffer.
Afsag wsg vats 3 det fasts sor qfh dar FT eH (1028-7, wg, He 1)
satgur baajhahu mukat na ho-ee kirat baaDhaa garas deenaa hay. ||9||
Without the True Guru, there is no liberation. Bound and gagged by his own actions, he is helpless. ||9]|
43 os Tet ifs stat i 028-7, wg, us 1) khanday Dhaar galee at bheerhee. This path is very narrow, like the sharp edge of a sword.
Bur in fss fa utst ii 028-8, wg, us 1) laykhaa leejai til ji-o peerhee. When his account is read, he shall be crushed like the sesame seed in the mill.
Hg fust az AS Fat ardt fas ais GA Hafs o altar FT AON! (1028-8, wg, He 1) maat pitaa kaltar sut baylee naahee bin har ras mukat na keenaa hay. ||10]| Mother, father, spouse and child - none is anyone's friend in the end. Without the Lord's Love, no one is liberated. ||10||
HS AY AS Aat HTT Il (1028-9, wg, He 1) meet sakhay kaytay jag maahee. You may have many friends and companions in the world,
fag ae USHAS aet arc Il (1028-9, wg, He 1) bin gur parmaysar ko-ee naahee. but without the Guru, the Transcendent Lord Incarnate, there is no one at all.
ad at Ast Hats usfefs notes atasg ator T WAU (1028-9, wg, He 1)
gur kee sayvaa mukat paraa-in an-din keertan keenaa hay. ||11]|
Service to the Guru is the way to liberation. Night and day, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||11]|
ag efs AS AG Weg Il (1028-10, wg, He 1) koorh chhod saachay ka-o Dhaavahu. Abandon falsehood, and pursue the Truth,
A feeg Het se urST Il (1028-10, wg, Hs 1) jo ichhahu so-ee fal paavhu. and you shall obtain the fruits of your desires.
Ae zug & eur fess ora AGer ata T 921 (1028-10, wg, He 1)
saach vakhar kay vaapaaree virlay lai laahaa sa-udaa keenaa hay. ||12| |
Very few are those who trade in the merchandise of Truth. Those who deal in it, obtain the true profit. ||12]|
ofa ofs OM Sug B VBI Il (1028-11, wg, ws 1) har har naam vakhar lai chalhu. Depart with the merchandise of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
TdAG UST Adlt HIS” Il (1028-11, wg, ne 1)
darsan paavhu sahj mahlahu.
and you shall intuitively obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, in the Mansion of His Presence.
qenfa ufa safe Ae us feS AHESHt Bar FT Ill (1028-12, og, we
gurmukh khoj laheh jan pooray i-o samadrasee cheenaa hay. ||13]|
The Gurmukhs search for Him and find Him; they are the perfect humble beings. In this way, they see Him, who looks upon all alike. ||13]|
ys avis aanfs & urefa i (1028-12, wg, 48 1) parabh bay-ant gurmat ko paavahi. God is endless; following the Guru's Teachings, some find Him.
qd & Aafe Hoe a ANSTSfo I (1028-13, wg, He 1) gur kai sabad man ka-o samjhaavahi. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they instruct their minds.
Afsag at wet afs Afs af Hog fe ursH TH Star T 9eil (1028-13, og, He 1) satgur kee banee sat sat kar maanhu i-o aatam raamai leenaa hay. ||14]|
Accept as True, Perfectly True, the Word of the True Guru's Bani. In this way, you shall merge in the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||14||
de ASE ASA Sg Il (1028-14, wg, ws 1) naarad saarad sayvak tayray. Naarad and Saraswati are Your servants.
fgsefe AZa F5gT FT Il (1028-14, wg, we 1) taribhavan sayvak vadahu vadayray. Your servants are the greatest of the great, throughout the three worlds.
Ag 3c aeatls 3 fafs fife ws Ag 3d HSE ator TF NWI (1028-14, wg, Hs 1)
sabh tayree kudrat too sir sir daataa sabh tayro kaaran keenaa hay. ||15]|
Your creative power permeates all; You are the Great Giver of all. You created the whole creation. ||15] |
fefa ufo Refs BIE FES | (1028-15, wg, He 1) ik dar sayveh darad vanjaa-ay. Some serve at Your Door, and their sufferings are dispelled.
Gf wsag ud Asa STS I (1028-15, wg, we 1)
o-ay dargeh paiDhay satguroo chhadaa-ay.
They are robed with honor in the Court of the Lord, and emancipated by the True Guru.
JH du Afsafs 33 fos due vof= o Sat FT IMEI (1028-16, wg, He 1)
ha-umai banDhan satgur torhay chit chanchal chalan na deenaa hay. ||16||
The True Guru breaks the bonds of egotism, and restrains the fickle consciousness. ||16]|
Afsas fheg dteg fafa Aret i co28-17, wg, ue 1 satgur milhu cheenahu biDh saa-ee. Meet the True Guru, and search for the way,
f3 Ys Weg TEs 3S et Il (1028-17, wg, ws jit parabh paavhu ganat na kaa-ee. by which you may find God, and not have to answer for your account.
JH Hf AdT Ts AS Ho aoa fa sf Star T WAUUCH (1028-17, wy, Hs 1) ha-umai maar karahu gur sayvaa jan naanak har rang bheenaa hay. ||17||2||8]|
Subdue your egotism, and serve the Guru; O servant Nanak, you shall be drenched with the Lord's Love. ||17||2||8]|
HTT HIS 4 Il (1028-18) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
MAT AUIS JH JH Il (1028-18, Hg, He 1) asur saghaaran raam hamaaraa. My Lord is the Destroyer of demons.
ufe wife sHehort aH finite Il (1028-18, wg, He 1) ghat ghat rama-ee-aa raam pi-aaraa. My Beloved Lord is pervading each and every heart.
aS ney 3 adba Hs TaHfy fey Ses FT AU (1028-19, wg, we 1)
naalay alakh na lakhee-ai moolay gurmukh likh veechaaraa hay. ||1] |
The unseen Lord is always with us, but He is not seen at all. The Gurmukh contemplates the record. ||1||
aoufy AG Hate Surat I (1028-19, wg, He 1) gurmukh saaDhoo saran tumaaree. The Holy Gurmukh seeks Your Sanctuary.
ust qoIt afd fasur ufs us Carat i (029-1, wg, He 1)
kar kirpaa parabh paar utaaree. God grants His Grace, and carries him across to the other side.
mate uret Aad ifs aos ag Afsag uts Sarat J Wl (1029-1, wg, uz 1)
agan paanee saagar at gahraa gur satgur paar utaaraa hay. ||2||
The ocean is very deep, filled with fiery water; the Guru, the True Guru, carries us across to the other side. ||2]|
HOHY nigs ASt ordt il (1029-2, we, Hs 1) manmukh anDhulay sojhee naahee. The blind, self-willed manmukh does not understand.
wets Ata Hots Hf ATE I (1029-2, wg, He 1) aavahi jaahi mareh mar jaahee. He comes and goes in reincarnation, dying, and dying again.
yata foftor Sy 3 fucet aH efs nig yma FT USBI (1029-2, wg, He 1)
poorab likhi-aa laykh na mit-ee jam dar anDh khu-aaraa hay. ||3]||
The primal inscription of destiny cannot be erased. The spiritually blind suffer terribly at Death's door. ||3]|
fefa urefs arefs ufs SA & uT|fs II (1029-3, wg, He 1) ik aavahi jaaveh ghar vaas na paavahi. Some come and go, and do not find a home in their own heart.
fags & ad ury aHrefa Il (1029-3, wg, 8 1) kirat kay baaDhay paap kamaaveh. Bound by their past actions, they commit sins.
nigs Ast Is  ael SF YT vidas T sil (1029-4, wg, we 1)
anDhulay sojhee boojh na kaa-ee lobh buraa aha‘kaaraa hay. ||4!|
The blind ones have no understanding, no wisdom; they are trapped and ruined by greed and egotism. ||4]|
furs fag fomr fsR ue Alara il (1029-4, wg, He 1) pir bin ki-aa tis Dhan seegaaraa. Without her Husband Lord, what good are the soul-bride's decorations?
ug fus ast wAH feATaT Il (1029-5, wg, He 1) par pir raatee khasam visaaraa. She has forgotten her Lord and Master, and is infatuated with another's husband.
fA@ Sar us wy &t adit SE dae arg fara T ull (1029-5, wg, we 1)
ji-o baysu-aa poot baap ko kahee-ai ti-o fokat kaar vikaaraa hay. ||5| |
Just as no one knows who is the father of the prostitute's son, such are the worthless, useless deeds that are done. ||5||
ys firs ufo sa WSs Il (1029-6, wg, He 1) parayt pinjar meh dookh ghanayray. The ghost, in the body-cage, suffers all sorts of afflictions.
Sata usta mifaMmits WITT Il (1029-6, wg, He 1) narak pacheh agi-aan anDhayray. Those who are blind to spiritual wisdom, putrefy in hell.
Ue ofe at sat an fafs ofa a any ferret J Ell (1029-6, vg, He 1)
Dharam raa-ay kee baakee leejai jin har kaa naam visaaraa hay. ||6||
The Righteous Judge of Dharma collects the balance due on the account, of those who forget the Name of the Lord. ||6] |
Hag Su wrafe fey Sve it (1029-7, wg, we 1) sooraj tapai agan bikh jhaalaa. The scorching sun blazes with flames of poison.
MUS UA HOHY ASH Il (1029-7, wg, He 1) apat pasoo manmukh baytaalaa. The self-willed manmukh is dishonored, a beast, a demon.
WAT HOM FS Aneta say Fa Fania FT DI (1029-8, wg, we 1)
aasaa mansaa koorh kamaaveh rog buraa buri-aaraa hay. ||7||
Trapped by hope and desire, he practices falsehood, and is afflicted by the terrible disease of corruption. ||7]|
HASta 3Tg aed fafs STI I (1029-8, wg, He 1) mastak bhaar kalar sir bhaaraa. He carries the heavy load of sins on his forehead and head.
fa@ af sen SufA urs |i (1029-8, wg, He 1) ki-o kar bhavjal langhas paaraa. How can he cross the terrifying world-ocean?
Afsag sfoe urfe garet ant of fansrat J IH (1029-9, wg, Hs 1)
satgur bohith aad jugaadee raam naam nistaaraa hay. ||8]|
From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, the True Guru has been the boat; through the Lord's Name, He carries us across. ||8]|
UZ Aes Afar TS furs i (1029-9, wg, we 1) putar kaltar jag hayt pi-aaraa. The love of one's children and spouse is so sweet in this world.
Heer Hy UAfEer UTATET II (1029-10, Hg, He 1)
maa-i-aa moh pasri-aa paasaaraa. The expansive expanse of the Universe is attachment to Maya.
AH a ad Afsate 33 aenfe 33 ster FT EN (1029-10, wg, He 1)
jam kay faahay satgur torhay gurmukh tat beechaaraa hay. ||9| |
The True Guru snaps the noose of Death, for that Gurmukh who contemplates the essence of reality. ||9]|
afs Hot BS aT Tat I (1029-11, wg, Hs 1) koorh muthee chaalai baho raahee. Cheated by falsehood, the self-willed manmukh walks along many paths;
HoH as ufs ufs srdt il (1029-11, »g, He 1) manmukh daajhai parh parh bhaahee. he may be highly educated, but he burns in the fire.
nif{s OU TT Ss Vat SH AUT AY ATS TF IAM (1029-11, wg, He 1)
amrit naam guroo vad daanaa naam japahu sukh saaraa hay. ||10||
The Guru is the Great Giver of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. Chanting the Naam, sublime peace is obtained. ||10||
Afsag 3a" Ag fexe | (1029-12, wg, ne 1) satgur tuthaa sach drirh-aa-ay. The True Guru, in His Mercy, implants Truth within.
Afg wy He Hrefar UTS I (1029-12, wg, He 1) sabh dukh maytay maarag paa-ay. All suffering is eradicated, and one is placed on the Path.
ast ufe 5 aset HS fra Afsag TuSTS FT WAU (1029-12, wg, He 1) kandaa paa-ay na gad-ee moolay jis satgur raakhanhaaraa hay. ||11]|
Not even a thorn ever pierces the foot of one who has the True Guru as his Protector. []11]|
YT FT IS 3G Sle Il (1029-13, wg, we khayhoo khayh ralai tan chheejai. Dust mixes with dust, when the body wastes away.
HOHY UAT AS S Ste Il (1029-13, wg, ne 1) manmukh paathar sail na bheejai. The self-willed manmukh is like a stone slab, which is impervious to water.
ATE US'S AD ATS dla Hala wissra FT WIM (4029-14, wg, we 1) karan palaav karay bahutayray narak surag avtaaraa hay. ||12|| He cries out and weeps and wails; he is reincarnated into heaven and then hell. ||12]|
Hfenr fg sfemian oS Il (1029-14, wg, Hs 1) maa-i-aa bikh bhu-i-angam naalay. They live with the poisonous snake of Maya.
fefe efaar we agS AS Il (1029-14, wg, ues in dubiDhaa ghar bahutay gaalay. This duality has ruined so many homes.
Afsag wsg ulfs 5 Cun safs 33 ushers F ISI (1029-15, wg, He 1)
satgur baajhahu pareet na upjai bhagat ratay patee-aaraa hay. ||13]|
Without the True Guru, love does not well up. Imbued with devotional worship, the soul is satisfied. ||13]]|
Aas Hfent a@ ag Urets | (1029-15, wg, He 1) saakat maa-i-aa ka-o baho Dhaaveh. The faithless cynics chase after Maya.
oH feta aot AY UTYfT II (1029-16, Wg, He 1) naam visaar kahaa sukh paavahi. Forgetting the Naam, how can they find peace?
fag ae nists uufs wrefs ardt ufa Sara FT AVI (1029-16, wg, Hs 1)
tarihu gun antar khapeh khapaaveh naahee paar utaaraa hay. ||14||
In the three qualities, they are destroyed; they cannot cross over to the other side. [|14]|
Gas Had Adhnifs afsors il (1029-17, wg, we 1) kookar sookar kahee-ahi koorhi-aaraa. The false are called pigs and dogs.
sia Hats SB 3B SE Ta I (1029-17, wg, He 1) bha-uk mareh bha-o bha-o bha-o haaraa. They bark themselves to death; they bark and bark and howl in fear.
fe sto 36 az onTefs ESHIS Baa TI FT NWI (1029-18, wg, He 1)
man tan jhoothay koorh kamaaveh durmat dargeh haaraa hay. ||15]||
False in mind and body, they practice falsehood; through their evil-mindedness, they lose out in the Court of the Lord. ||15]|
Afsag fees 3 HOM Sa Il (1029-18, wg, He satgur milai ta manoo-aa taykai. Meeting the True Guru, the mind is stabilized.
TH BH @ Aafs Use Il (1029-19, wg, He 1) raam naam day saran paraykai. One who seeks His Sanctuary is blessed with the Lord's Name.
ofg US 3H Mw 2S ois AA caer filma F AEN (1029-19, wg, He 1)
har Dhan naam amolak dayvai har jas dargeh pi-aaraa hay. ||16||
They are given the priceless wealth of the Lord's Name; singing His Praises, they are His beloveds in His court. ||16] |
Ust FO3O
TH BH AT ATS Il (1030-1, wg, He 1) raam naam saaDhoo sarnaa-ee. In the Sanctuary of the Holy, chant the Lord's Name.
Afsad seat afs fufs uret i (1030-1, wg, He 1) satgur bachnee gat mit paa-ee. Through the True Guru's Teachings, one comes to know His state and extent.
Soa Te Af ats He HS Tig HS HOSTS FT NAWIUSIUCH (1030-1, wg, He 1)
naanak har jap har man mayray har maylay maylanhaaraa hay. ||17||3]|9]|
Nanak: chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind; the Lord, the Uniter, shall unite you with Himself. ||17]|3]|9]|
HTS HIG 4 Il (1030-2) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
ufg IJ J Ho Hare fens Il 1030-2, wg, ue 1) ghar rahu ray man mugaDh i-aanay. Remain in your own home, O my foolish and ignorant mind.
oH Aug vissats fms Il (1030-2, wg, He 1) raam japahu antargat Dhi-aanay. Meditate on the Lord - concentrate deep within your being and meditate on Him.
wed efs sag mudufe f&@ weg Hats wore FT NA (1030-3, wg, Hs 1)
laalach chhod rachahu aprampar i-o paavhu mukat du-aaraa hay. ||1||
Renounce your greed, and merge with the infinite Lord. In this way, you shall find the door of liberation. ||1]|
fan fanfont my tafe at II (1030-3, wg, He 1) jis bisri-ai jam johan laagai. If you forget Him, the Messenger of Death will catch sight of you.
Afs AY fos ear |fs wrat I (1030-4, wg, Hs 1) sabh sukh jaahi dukhaa fun aagai. All peace will be gone, and you will suffer in pain in the world hereafter.
oH OTH Afu asHfy Ais Sg USH 3 Sea F IQ (1030-4, wg, ws 1)
raam naam jap gurmukh jee-arhay ayhu param tat veechaaraa hay. ||2]|
Chant the Name of the Lord as Gurmukh, O my soul; this is the supreme essence of contemplation. ||2||
dfs afs SH AUT FA Hor Il (1030-5, wg, He 1) har har naam japahu ras meethaa. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the sweetest essence.
aanfy ofs aA nists Ste i (1030-5, xg, He 1) gurmukh har ras antar deethaa. As Gurmukh, see the essence of the Lord deep within.
nifsfafA oH dog df TS Sa AU SU ARH AST MBI (1030-5, wg, He 1)
ahinis raam rahhu rang raatay ayhu jap tap sanjam saaraa hay. ||3]|
Day and night, remain imbued with the Lord's Love. This is the essence of all chanting, deep meditation and self-discipline. ||3] |
TH OH Td Fdot FB Il (1030-6, wg, ue 1) raam naam gur bachnee bolhu. Speak the Guru's Word, and the Name of the Lord.
Hs AS fs fey FA ZHI Il (1030-6, wg, He 1) sant sabhaa meh ih ras tolahu. In the Society of the Saints, search for this essence.
TaHfs ofA sg we mus safe 3 Ass HSS TF WII (1030-7, we, Hs 1)
gurmat khoj lahhu ghar apnaa bahurh na garabh majhaaraa hay. ||4||
Follow the Guru's Teachings - seek and find the home of your own self, and you shall never be consigned to the womb of reincarnation again. ||4| |
Ag stefa ateg dfs TE Weg Il (1030-7, wg, ue 1) sach tirath naavhu har gun gaavhu. Bathe at the sacred shrine of Truth, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
33 dwag afe foe weg Il (1030-8, wg, He 1) tat veechaarahu har liv laavhu. Reflect upon the essence of reality, and lovingly focus your consciousness on the Lord.
nis ats mH Hf o Aa Ufs Seg TH fimra FT ull (1030-8, wg, He 1D
ant kaal jam johi na saakai har bolhu raam pi-aaraa hay. ||5||
At the very last moment, the Messenger of Death will not be able to touch you, if you chant the Name of the Beloved Lord. ||5||
Afsdg Udy BSI FS VAT | (1030-8, wg, ne 1) satgur purakh daataa vad daanaa. The True Guru, the Primal Being, the Great Giver, is all-knowing.
fan uists Ana A OAafe AHT|ST II (1030-9, 47g, He 1) jis antar saach so sabad samaanaa. Whoever has Truth within himself, merges in the Word of the Shabad.
fan ag Afsag vfs foe fH Yor AH SF Bra T MEM (1030-9, wg, Hs 1)
jis ka-o satgur mayl milaa-ay tis chookaa jam bhai bhaaraa hay. ||6]|
One whom the True Guru unites in Union, is rid of the overpowering fear of death. [16] |
us 33 fife afenr atat il (1030-10, wg, 42 1) panch tat mil kaa-i-aa keenee. The body is formed from the union of the five elements.
fan ufs aH 33g B sot Il (1030-10, wg, xe 1) tis meh raam ratan lai cheenee. Know that the Lord's jewel is within it.
MSH IH IH D oTSH Ufa uh Rafe Sea F IDI (1030-10, wg, Hs 1)
aatam raam raam hai aatam har paa-ee-ai sabad veechaaraa hay. ||7]||
The soul is the Lord, and the Lord is the soul; contemplating the Shabad, the Lord is found. ||7]|
AS Hf gag Ae Set I (1030-11, wg, He 1) sat santokh rahhu jan bhaa-ee. Abide in truth and contentment, O humble Siblings of Destiny.
fH aog Afsad Ad|eret Il 030-11, wg, He 1) khimaa gahhu satgur sarnaa-ee. Hold tight to compassion and the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
misy die ursn deg ae Aals feg fensra FT ICH (1030-12, wg, 48 1)
aatam cheen paraatam cheenahu gur sangat ih nistaaraa hay. ||8||
Know your soul, and know the Supreme Soul; associating with the Guru, you shall be emancipated. ||8]||
HAS Fs GUS Hfy Sar Il (1030-12, wg, we 1) saakat koorh kapat meh taykaa. The faithless cynics are stuck in falsehood and deceit.
nifofoth fee aafs wiser il (1030-13, wg, Hs 1) ahinis nindaa karahi anaykaa. Day and night, they slander many others.
fag fines urefs efs refs qs Hat Soa HET T CN (1030-13, wg, He 1)
bin simran aavahi fun jaaveh garabh jonee narak majhaaraa hay. ||9]|
Without meditative remembrance, they come and then go, and are cast into the hellish womb of reincarnation. ||9]|
WAS AH at ats F YF Il (1030-14, wg, ne 1) saakat jam kee kaan na chookdi. The faithless cynic is not rid of his fear of death.
WH OT SSO AAT Hot Il (1030-14, wg, He 1) jam kaa dand na kabhoo mookdi. The Messenger of Death's club is never taken away.
wat aaH af at ata fafe wtefeG arg mrerat J AON! (1030-14, wg, He 1)
baakee Dharam raa-ay kee leejai sir afri-o bhaar afaaraa hay. ||10] |
He has to answer to the Righteous Judge of Dharma for the account of his actions; the egotistical being carries the unbearable load. ||10||
fas ae Was AIT & Shar I (1030-15, wg, He 1) bin gur saakat kahhu ko tari-aa. Tell me: without the Guru, what faithless cynic has been saved?
JH ass sents ufsmr Il (1030-15, wg, He 1) ha-umai kartaa bhavjal pari-aa. Acting egotistically, he falls into the terrifying world-ocean.
fag ag ug 5 ure aet ofa mus ure Borat F AAI (1030-15, 7g, He 1)
bin gur paar na paavai ko-ee har japee-ai paar utaaraa hay. ||11||
Without the Guru, no one is saved; meditating on the Lord, they are carried across to the other side. ||11]|
Gs at af o AS At I (1030-16, wg, He 1) gur kee daat na maytai ko-ee. No one can erase the Guru's blessings.
fan SUA fSH STS Aet Il (1030-16, wg, He 1) jis bakhsay tis taaray so-ee. The Lord carries across those whom He forgives.
HOH Hee By Sfs 5 ure His A YS ws Murs FT N92I1 (1030-17, wg, He 1)
janam maran dukh nayrh na aavai man so parabh apar apaaraa hay. ||12||
The pains of birth and death do not even approach those whose minds are filled with God, the infinite and endless. ||12]|
TT 3 IS MST WS Il (1030-17, wg, He 1) gur tay bhoolay aavhu jaavhu. Those who forget the Guru come and go in reincarnation.
Hoth Hag Sis UTE AHS Il (1030-18, wg, Hs 1) janam marahu fun paap kamaavahu. They are born, only to die again, and continue committing sins.
WAS HF USS 3 VSlo TY Ha 3S TH Yara T All (1030-18, wg, Hs 1)
saakat moorh achayt na cheeteh dukh laagai taa raam pukaaraa hay. ||13]|
The unconscious, foolish, faithless cynic does not remember the Lord; but when he is stricken with pain, then he cries out for the Lord. ||13]|
HY FY UT ASH A ATS Il (1030-19, wg, He 1) sukh dukh purab janam kay kee-ay. Pleasure and pain are the consequences of the actions of past lives.
A we fafs es Fe it (1030-19, wg, we 1) SO jaanai jin daatai dee-ay. The Giver, who blesses us with these - He alone knows.
fan ag eH efs 3 yet Ag murat aot aarat T NAVI (1030-19, wg, Hz 1)
kis ka-o dos deh too paraanee saho apnaa kee-aa karaaraa hay. ||14]|
So who can you blame, O mortal being? The hardships you suffer are from your own actions. ||14]|
Ust YO3Y%
ICH HHS ser wife | (1031-1, wg, He 1) ha-umai mamtaa kardaa aa-i-aa. Practicing egotism and possessiveness, you have come into the world.
WITAT HOA ofa Sefer | (1031-1, wg, He 1) aasaa mansaa banDh chalaa-i-aa. Hope and desire bind you and lead you on.
Het Het aes four & 3s fay we ara fears FT UWI (1031-2, wg, ws
mayree mayree karat ki-aa lay chaalay bikh laaday chhaar bikaaraa hay. ||15]|| Indulging in egotism and self-conceit, what will you be able to carry with you, except the load of ashes from poison and corruption? ||15] |
ufs at sats adgT AS Set Il (1031-2, wg, Hs har kee bhagat karahu jan bhaa-ee. Worship the Lord in devotion, O humble Siblings of Destiny.
Mag AGT HS Hof AHret Il 1031-3, wg, us 1) akath kathahu man maneh samaa-ee. Speak the Unspoken Speech, and the mind will merge back into the Mind.
fs vas ofa sug ufs mus BY are aeST a T IE! (1031-3, Wg, He 1)
uth chaltaa thaak rakhahu ghar apunai dukh kaatay kaatanhaaraa hay. ||16]|| Restrain your restless mind within its own home, and the Lord, the Destroyer, shall destroy your pain. ||16] |
of Ts us at Ge usst il (1031-4, wg, we 1) har gur pooray kee ot paraatee. I seek the support of the Perfect Guru, the Lord.
aanty ofa foe auf Ast il (1031-4, wg, ne 1) gurmukh har liv gurmukh jaatee. The Gurmukh loves the Lord; the Gurmukh realizes the Lord.
aaa TH oth His Ssu ole aA uts Sara FT NA USIION (1031-4, wg, He 1)
naanak raam naam mat ootam har bakhsay paar utaaraa hay. ||17||4||10]|
O Nanak, through the Lord's Name, the intellect is exalted; granting His forgiveness, the Lord carries him across to the other side. ||17||4]|10]]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1031-5) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Hofe ud Tdes SHA Ml (1031-5, wg, He 1) Saran paray gurdayv tumaaree. O Divine Guru, I have entered Your Sanctuary.
3 ANGE cere Has Il (1031-6, wg, we 1) too samrath da-i-aal muraaree. You are the Almighty Lord, the Merciful Lord.
33 dH 5 We aet 5 uT yoy feast T AI (1031-6, wg, we tayray choj na jaanai ko-ee too pooraa purakh biDhaataa hay. ||1|| No one knows Your wondrous plays; You are the perfect Architect of Destiny. ||1]|
3 urfe gare aaa yfsurer il (1031-6, wg, He 1) too aad jugaad karahi partipaalaa.
From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, You cherish and sustain Your beings.
ufe wie gu migu efenrer i (1031-7, wg, He 1) ghat ghat roop anoop da-i-aalaa. You are in each and every heart, O Merciful Lord of incomparable beauty.
fa su ae fae serefa AS 3d Shor CONST FT III (1031-7, wg, He 1) ji-o tuDh bhaavai tivai chalaaveh sabh tayro kee-aa kamaataa hay. ||2|| As You will, You cause all to walk; everyone acts according to Your Command. ||2]|
nist fs set artes Il (1031-8, wg, Hs 1) antar jot bhalee jagjeevan. Deep within the nucleus of all, is the Light of the Life of the World.
Afs we gat of oH Utes II (1031-8, wg, He 1) sabh ghat bhogai har ras peevan. The Lord enjoys the hearts of all, and drinks in their essence.
~ SA ~ SA
nny BS nn} #2 fag Set was fus esr F 3 031-8, wg, Hs 1)
aapay layvai aapay dayvai tihu lo-ee jagat pit daataa hay. ||3]||
He Himself gives, and He himself takes; He is the generous father of the beings of the three worlds. ||3]|
Aas Gufs ae gorfeni | (1031-9, wg, He 1) jagat upaa-ay khayl rachaa-i-aa. Creating the world, He has set His play into motion.
use ural marat AG urfemr | (1031-9, wg, He 1)
pavnai paanee agnee jee-o paa-i-aa.
He placed the soul in the body of air, water and fire.
oot sadt o8 VISA A PAST TUT FIST Ill (1031-10, we, ws 1)
dayhee nagree na-o darvaajay so dasvaa gupat rahaataa hay. ||4]| The body-village has nine gates; the Tenth Gate remains hidden. ||4||
Ot Set mast MATS Il (1031-10, wg, Hs 1) chaar nadee agnee asraalaa. There are four horrible rivers of fire.
aet qaufs 78 Fate fearer i 1031-10, wg, He 1)
ko-ee gurmukh boojhai sabad niraalaa.
How rare is that Gurmukh who understands this, and through the Word of the Shabad, remains unattached.
Was voHis sate wets afs ae ofe foe St FT NUM (1031-11, wg, He 1)
saakat durmat doobeh daajheh gur raakhay har liv raataa hay. ||5]|
The faithless cynics are drowned and burnt through their evil-mindedness. The Guru saves those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||5]|
mu SA ete fyeHt marae | (1031-11, wg, He 1) ap tayj vaa-ay parithmee aakaasaa. Water, fire, air, earth and ether
fo Hfs us 33 wis SAT I (1031-12, wg, Hs 1) tin meh panch tat ghar vaasaa. - in that house of the five elements, they dwell.
Afsas Aafe safe df ast sft wfenr IBA grat T WEN (031-12, wg, Hs 1)
satgur sabad raheh rang raataa taj maa-i-aa ha-umai bharaataa hay. ||6]||
Those who remain imbued with the Word of the True Guru's Shabad, renounce Maya, egotism and doubt. ||6] |
feg Ho Sth Aafe usty Il (1031-13, wg, He 1) ih man bheejai sabad pateejai. This mind is drenched with the Shabad, and satisfied.
fag ove for 2a feat i (1031-13, wg, He 1) bin naavai ki-aa tayk tikeejai. Without the Name, what support can anyone have?
nists og Hd ug Hes fefs Wats sz o AST T WDM (1031-13, wg, Hs 1)
antar chor muhai ghar mandar in saakat doot na jaataa hay. ||7]||
The temple of the body is being plundered by the thieves within, but this faithless cynic does not even recognize these demons. ||7]||
SUI TS FS FtTS Il (1031-14, weg, we dundar doot bhoot bheehaalay. They are argumentative demons, terrifying goblins.
fitsafs aafo 3s i (1031-14, wg, Hs 1) khinchotaan karahi baytaalay. These demons stir up conflict and strife.
Rae Hafs fag ore are ufs det wes AST NICH (1031-15, wg, He 1D
sabad surat bin aavai jaavai pat kho-ee aavat jaataa hay. ||8]|
Without awareness of the Shabad, one comes and goes in reincarnation; he loses his honor in this coming and going. ||8] |
TT ASI 3G SAH Vt I (1031-15, og, we koorh kalar tan bhasmai dhayree. The body of the false person is just a pile of barren dirt.
fag oe aHt ufs Sat I (1031-15, wg, He 1) bin naavai kaisee pat tayree. Without the Name, what honor can you have?
ad Hats ardt Hal ws AHAats ats uss FT IC (1031-16, wg, He 1)
baaDhay mukat naahee jug chaaray jamkankar kaal paraataa hay. ||9||
Bound and gagged throughout the four ages, there is no liberation; the Messenger of Death keeps such a person under his gaze. ||9]||
AH ef aa foto AATET II (1031-16, Hg, He 1) jam dar baaDhay mileh sajaa-ee. At Death's door, he is tied up and punished;
SH vrusdt af odt aret it (1031-17, wg, He 1) tis apraaDhee gat nahee kaa-ee. such a sinner does not obtain salvation.
ade use ad fase fae ast He uss TF AON (1031-17, wg, He 1) karan palaav karay billaavai ji-o kundee meen paraataa hay. ||10]| He cries out in pain, like the fish pierced by the hook. ||10]|
Wag sat us fear i) cosi-is, wg, Hs 1) saakat faasee parhai ikaylaa. The faithless cynic is caught in the noose all alone.
AH Sth abo nig eI Il (1031-18, wg, He 1) jam vas kee-aa anDh duhaylaa. The miserable spiritually blind person is caught in the power of Death.
oH oH fas Hats 3 AS nrg aries ule AST T NAA 1031-18, wg, Hs 1)
raam naam bin mukat na soojhai aaj kaal pach jaataa hay. ||11]||
Without the Lord's Name, liberation is not known. He shall waste away, today or tomorrow. ||11]|
Afsag ws 3 st set | (1031-19, we, ue 1) satgur baajh na baylee ko-ee. Other than the True Guru, no one is your friend.
me Ga mar ys At il (1031-19, wg, He 1) aithai othai raakhaa parabh so-ee. Here and hereafter, God is the Savior.
TH on de ats far fe Aes AES fers F AI (1031-19, »g, He 1)
raam naam dayvai kar kirpaa i-o sallai salal milaataa hay. ||12] |
He grants His Grace, and bestows the Lord's Name. He merges with Him, like water with water. ||12||
Yat 9O32
38 fa TI ASS Il (1032-1, wg, He 1) bhoolay sikh guroo samjhaa-ay. The Guru instructs His wandering Sikhs;
Osis Are Hrafar UTS I (1032-1, wg, He 1) ujharh jaaday maarag paa-ay. if they go astray, He sets them on the right path.
fsH aa Afe ne feo ast eu SAS Afa ANS FT WISI (1032-1, wg, Hs 1D
tis gur sayv sadaa din raatee dukh bhanjan sang sakhaataa hay. ||13]|
So serve the Guru, forever, day and night; He is the Destroyer of pain - He is with you as your companion. ||13]|
Td at sats asta fom yrat i (1032-2, wg, He 1) gur kee bhagat karahi ki-aa paraanee. O mortal being, what devotional worship have you performed to the Guru?
gan féfe Hof o Fret II 1032-2, wg, He 1) barahmai in-dar mahays na jaanee. Even Brahma, Indra and Shiva do not know it.
Afsag nieuw aod fas adh faa sun fSrfo uerst J AVI (1032-3, wg, He 1D satgur alakh kahhu ki-o lakhee-ai jis bakhsay tiseh pachhaataa hay. ||14]| Tell me, how can the unknowable True Guru be known? He alone attains this realization, whom the Lord forgives. ||14||
nists YH usufs FaAS Il (1032-4, wg, He 1) antar paraym paraapat darsan. One who has love within, obtains the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
adeaat fA uifs A USAG Il 1032-4, wg, ue 1) gurbaanee si-o pareet so parsan. One who enshrines love for the Word of the Guru's Bani, meets with Him.
wifofoth fosne afs raret whe dua aeyfe Ast FT QUI (1032-4, mg, He 1D
ahinis nirmal jot sabaa-ee ghat deepak gurmukh jaataa hay. ||15]|
Day and night, the Gurmukh sees the immaculate Divine Light everywhere; this lamp illuminates his heart. ||15]|
SHo fare Hot SA Hter II (1032-5, wg, He 1) bhojan gi-aan mahaa ras meethaa. The food of spiritual wisdom is the supremely sweet essence.
fats afin fSfs eaAS Stor il (1032-5, wg, He 1) jin chaakhi-aa tin darsan deethaa. Whoever tastes it, sees the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
wane efy fs Sait Ho HOA fe AHTST T HAE (1032-6, WE, He 1)
darsan daykh milay bairaagee man mansaa maar samaataa hay. ||16]|| Beholding His Darshan, the unattached one meets the Lord; subduing the mind's desires, he merges into the Lord. ||16]|
Afsag Agfa A usUTST Il (1032-6, wg, ue 1) satgur sayveh say parDhaanaa. Those who serve the True Guru are supreme and famous.
So we we nists YIN UAT Il (1032-7, wg, He 1) tin ghat ghat antar barahm pachhaanaa. Deep within each and every heart, they recognize God.
oe dfs AA dfs He at Hats dn faa Afsag dfs ys AST T NA UNUNAA (1032-7, mg, H8 1)
naanak har jas har jan kee sangat deejai jin satgur har parabh jaataa hay. [47] [5] 1121]
Please bless Nanak with the Lord's Praises, and the Sangat, the Congregation of the Lord's humble servants; through the True Guru, they know their Lord God. []47][5]]121]
HTS HIG 4 Il (1032-8) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ard Atfoa fAsAETTS Il (1032-8, wg, He 1) saachay saahib sirjanhaaray. The True Lord is the Creator of the Universe.
fats Ug Bx Us Ss il (1032-8, wg, ws jin Dhar chakar Dharay veechaaray. He established and contemplates the worldly sphere.
nny asst afe afs Sh APT SugsT FT WAU (1032-9, wg, He 1) aapay kartaa kar kar vaykhai saachaa vayparvaahaa hay. ||1]| He Himself created the creation, and beholds it; He is True and independent. ||1]|
Vat Fat AS Sure It (1032-9, wg, ue 1) vaykee vaykee jant upaa-ay. He created the beings of different kinds.
ofe uat ef Ta THES Il (1032-9, wg, ue 1) du-ay pandee du-ay raah chalaa-ay. The two travellers have set out in two directions.
qs usd fee vats 3 det AG SH Af BT T MI! (1032-10, wg, He D gur pooray vin mukat na ho-ee sach naam jap laahaa hay. ||2|| Without the Perfect Guru, no one is liberated. Chanting the True Name, one profits.
[21 |
usta HoHY ug fafa odt AAT II (1032-10, wg, Hs 1) parheh manmukh par biDh nahee jaanaa. The self-willed manmukhs read and study, but they do not know the way.
oH 8 ysts SHH SHS Il (1032-11, wg, Hs 1)
naam na boojheh bharam bhulaanaa.
They do not understand the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they wander, deluded by doubt.
Ba set ef Card vans a afe aa F Sil (1032-11, wg, He 1)
lai kai vadhee dayn ugaahee durmat kaa gal faahaa hay. ||3]|
They take bribes, and give false testimony; the noose of evil-mindedness is around their necks. ||3]|
fAfyfs AAS usfs YaST Il 1032-12, wg, Hs 1 simrit saastar parheh puraanaa. They read the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Puraanas;
se sutefy JTS AST Il (1032-12, wg, wz 1) vaad vakaaneh tat na jaanaa. they argue and debate, but do not know the essence of reality.
fee TI us 35 5 UM AG AS AY TI ST SI (1032-12, og, we 1)
vin gur pooray tat na paa-ee-ai sach soochay sach raahaa hay. ||4||
Without the Perfect Guru, the essence of reality is not obtained. The true and pure beings walk the Path of Truth. ||4]|
AS Arerd Afs Af= wires | (1032-13, wg, He 1) sabh saalaahay sun sun aakhai. All praise God and listen, and listen and speak.
MN] BST AG UIA Il (1032-13, wg, He 1) aapay daanaa sach paraakhai. He Himself is wise, and He Himself judges the Truth.
fo aS oefs ad us must aeHfy AE ABI J UI (1032-13, wg, He 1) jin ka-o nadar karay parabh apnee gurmukh sabad salaahaa hay. ||5]||
Those whom God blesses with His Glance of Grace become Gurmukh, and praise the Word of the Shabad. ||5||
Afs af= mre ast seat | (1032-14, wg, He 1) sun sun aakhai kaytee banee. Many listen and listen, and speak the Guru's Bani.
Afs adh & viz o ATS II (1032-14, wg, He 1D sun kahee-ai ko ant na jaanee. Listening and speaking, no one knows His limits.
WT a@ nisy Sue nm niaa ae afa svat FT WEN (4032-15, wg, us 1)
jaa ka-o alakh lakhaa-ay aapay akath kathaa buDh taahaa hay. ||6||
He alone is wise, unto whom the unseen Lord reveals Himself; he speaks the Unspoken Speech. ||6]|
HOH AS Safs SUS Il (1032-15, wg, He 1) janmay ka-o vaajeh vaaDhaa-ay. At birth, the congratulations pour in;
Afses vifamrst are il (1032-15, wg, He 1) sohilrhay agi-aanee gaa-ay. the ignorant sing songs of joy.
A Hon fq Haug Hee fass ufemr fafs Ara T WDM (1032-16, wg, He 1)
jo janmai tis sarpar marnaa kirat pa-i-aa sir saahaa hay. ||7]| Whoever is born, is sure to die, according to the destiny of past deeds inscribed upon his head by the Sovereign Lord King. ||7]||
Ana fera vs ufs ate i (1032-16, wg, ue 1) sanjog vijog mayrai parabh kee-ay. Union and separation were created by my God.
fAfe Gurfe war Ae AS Il (1032-17, wg, He 1) sarisat upaa-ay dukhaa sukh dee-ay. Creating the Universe, He gave it pain and pleasure.
ou AY dt 3 se fers aaHfy Ale Ao T ITI (1032-17, wg, He 1)
dukh sukh hee tay bha-ay niraalay gurmukh seel sanaahaa hay. ||8] |
The Gurmukhs remain unaffected by pain and pleasure; they wear the armor of humility. ||8]|
Slat ATS SUT Il (1032-18, wg, we 1) neekay saachay kay vaapaaree. The noble people are traders in Truth.
Ag Ae S ag Sorc Il (1032-18, wg, we 1) sach sa-udaa lai gur veechaaree. They purchase the true merchandise, contemplating the Guru.
Ae zug fan ug us Aafe Ad Gero FT ell (1032-18, wg, He 1)
sachaa vakhar jis Dhan palai sabad sachai omaahaa hay. ||9||
One who has the wealth of the true commodity in his lap, is blessed with the rapture of the True Shabad. ||9]|
ardt ABST Ser mrs i (1032-19, wg, He 1) kaachee sa-udee totaa aavai. The false dealings lead only to loss.
Tafa Zen AT YT BS Il (1032-19, wg, He 1) gurmukh vanaj karay parabh bhaavai. The trades of the Gurmukh are pleasing to God.
Unt Wag Tf AeHAS Yor AH AT STITT AON (1032-19, wg, He 1)
poonjee saabat raas salaamat chookaa jam kaa faahaa hay. ||10]|
His stock is safe, and his capital is safe and sound. The noose of Death is cut away from around his neck. ||10]|
Yat 9o33
AZ & FS MUS SE Il (1033-1, wg, He 1) sabh ko bolai aapan bhaanai. Everyone speaks as they please.
HOHY BA Sf BAS ll (1033-1, wg, Hs 1) manmukh doojai bol na jaanai. The self-willed manmukh, in duality, does not know how to speak.
nigd at Hf nicest sat orf afeer ey svar FT UAV (1033-1, we, He 1)
anDhulay kee mat anDhlee bolee aa-ay ga-i-aa dukh taahaa hay. ||11]||
The blind person has a blind and deaf intellect; coming and going in reincarnation, he suffers in pain. ||11]|
eu Hfs HOH wy Mfg HIST Il (1033-2, wg, He 1) dukh meh janmai dukh meh marnaa. In pain he is born, and in pain he dies.
ey 3 fhe fag aa at Age il (1033-2, wg, we 1) dookh na mitai bin gur kee sarnaa. His pain is not relieved, without seeking the Sanctuary of the Guru.
eat Cunt eat fron foor & nrfenr far & Ara FT WAI 1033-3, og, He 1)
dookhee upjai dookhee binsai ki-aa lai aa-i-aa ki-aa lai jaahaa hay. ||12| |
In pain he is created, and in pain he perishes. What has he brought with himself? And what will he take away? ||12||
Het adel Td at fAgars Il (1033-3, wg, He 1) sachee karnee gur kee sirkaaraa. True are the actions of those who are under the Guru's influence.
MISS AS Sdt AH UT I (1033-4, wg, Hs 1
aavan jaan nahee jam Dhaaraa.
They do not come and go in reincarnation, and they are not subject to the laws of Death.
ae efs 33 He UTS His Ara Gra FT NASI (1033-4, og, He 1) daal chhod tat mool paraataa man saachaa omaahaa hay. ||13]|
Whoever abandons the branches, and clings to the true root, enjoys true ecstasy within his mind. ||13]|
ofa & Bat Sdt AH HTS Il (1033-5, wg, He 1) har kay log nahee jam maarai. Death cannot strike down the people of the Lord.
or ey tufy uf aad Il (1033-5, wg, He 1) naa dukh daykheh panth karaarai. They do not see pain on the most difficult path.
TH OH We nists UAT MT o FAT ATI T MAI (1033-5, wg, HE 1)
raam naam ghat antar poojaa avar na doojaa kaahaa hay. ||14||
Deep within the nucleus of their hearts, they worship and adore the Lord's Name; there is nothing else at all for them. ||14]|
Gz 3 aes fiefs AAET II (1033-6, wg, He 1) orh na kathnai sifat sajaa-ee. There is no end to the Lord's sermon and Praise.
fa@ 30 stefa gots TAHT II (1033-6, wg, He 1) ji-o tuDh bhaaveh raheh rajaa-ee. As it pleases You, I remain under Your Will.
edd ud ws AVS Jath AS UfSATI FT UAUIl (1033-6, Hg, He 1)
dargeh paiDhay jaan suhaylay hukam sachay paatisaahaa hay. ||15]||
I am embellished with robes of honor in the Court of the Lord, by the Order of the True King. ||15]|
foo aha Te wafs wss il 1033-7, wg, we 1) ki-aa kahee-ai gun katheh ghanayray. How can I chant Your uncounted glories?
nig o UTets ZS "I Il (1033-7, wg, ve 1) ant na paavahi vaday vadayray. Even the greatest of the great do not know Your limits.
area AY fH ufs oag J fAfe AO ufsATT T NAENEN II (1033-8, wg, He 1) naanak saach milai pat raakho too sir saahaa paatisaahaa hay. ||16]|6]|12|| Please bless Nanak with the Truth, and preserve his honor; You are the supreme emperor above the heads of kings. ||16||6]|12]|
HTT HIG A TAT Il (1033-8) maaroo mehlaa 1 dakh-nee. Maaroo, First Mehl, Dakhanee:
fen Sag Sad Ts nists il (1033-9, we wast, ue 1) kaa-i-aa nagar nagar garh andar. Deep within the body-village is the fortress.
Ara? SAT ufs Tats Il (1033-9, wy wast, ve 1) Saachaa vaasaa pur gagnandar. The dwelling of the True Lord is within the city of the Tenth Gate.
mAfag ae Ae fesHtfes nny wimg Gurfeer All (1033-9, wg wast, we 1) asthir thaan sadaa nirmaa-il aapay aap upaa-idaa. ||1]| This place is permanent and forever immaculate. He Himself created it. ||1]|
nets AS SA TSS Il (1033-10, wg wut, ue 1) andar kot chhajay hatnaalay. Within the fortress are balconies and bazaars.
~~ »*
MN} BS SAS AN Il (1033-10, wg waet, ve 1) aapay layvai vasat samaalay. He Himself takes care of His merchandise.
and cure Aa Afs WE Te Aaet dof Ser Ii (1033-10, wg wut, we 1)
bajar kapaat jarhay jarh jaanai gur sabdee kholaa-idaa. ||2| |
The hard and heavy doors of the Tenth Gate are closed and locked. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are thrown open. ||2]|
Sisfs ae wer we wet I (1033-11, wg wut, He 1) bheetar kot gufaa ghar jaa-ee. Within the fortress is the cave, the home of the self.
oS we ay Jat FAST I (1033-11, wg ust, He 1) na-o ghar thaapay hukam rajaa-ee. He established the nine gates of this house, by His Command and His Will.
THe UY MOY nud mM ney wafer SI (1033-11, we wuet, ve 1)
dasvai purakh alaykh apaaree aapay alakh lakhaa-idaa. ||3]||
In the Tenth Gate, the Primal Lord, the unknowable and infinite dwells; the unseen Lord reveals Himself. ||3]|
uge ural miarat fea STAT II (1033-12, wg Tuet, Hs 1) pa-un paanee agnee ik vaasaa. Within the body of air, water and fire, the One Lord dwells.
MY aS YB SHAT | (1033-12, ug waet, ve 1) aapay keeto khayl tamaasaa. He Himself stages His wondrous dramas and plays.
weet als feed fasur 3 um ae fofa urfeer eit 1033-13, wg weet, He 1)
baldee jal nivrai kirpaa tay aapay jal niDh paa-idaa. ||4| |
By His Grace, water puts out the burning fire; He Himself stores it up in the watery ocean. ||4||
uafs Gurfe adt GaH ATH Il (1033-13, wg eet, ws 1) Dharat upaa-ay Dharee Dharam saalaa. Creating the earth, He established it as the home of Dharma.
Csufs uses vrfu fear il (1033-14, wg wast, ws 1) utpat parla-o aap niraalaa. Creating and destroying, He remains unattached.
use 8S dhor AS aret ae fife eafeer null 1033-14, wg weet, He 1)
pavnai khayl kee-aa sabh thaa-ee kalaa khinch dhaahaa-idaa. ||5||
He stages the play of the breath everywhere. Withdrawing His power, He lets the beings crumble. ||5||
aT Mos Hole STH il (1033-14, wg ust, ve 1) bhaar athaarah maalan tayree. Your gardener is the vast vegetation of nature.
aCg BS use B Sct Il (1033-15, we wet, ue 1) cha-ur dhulai pavnai lai fayree. The wind blowing around is the chauree, the fly-brush, waving over You.
de Hed ufe dua ae AfA we Ag AEE EN (1033-15, wg Euet, He 1)
chand sooraj du-ay deepak raakhay sas ghar soor samaa-idaa. ||6||
The Lord placed the two lamps, the sun and the moon; the sun merges in the house of the moon. ||6] |
udt us ste adt arefs I (1033-16, wg euet, us 1) pankhee panch udar nahee Dhaaveh. The five birds do not fly wild.
Hefas fasy nifigs ee urefa il (1033-16, wg euet, He 1) safli-o birakh amrit fal paavahi. The tree of life is fruitful, bearing the fruit of Ambrosial Nectar.
aToufy Aafa ge Te ae afs aA Sa Varfeer DI (1033-16, we weet, Hs 1)
gurmukh sahj ravai gun gaavai har ras chog chugaa-idaa. ||7]||
The Gurmukh intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord; he eats the food of the Lord's sublime essence. ||7||
feafifs fsaa Fes 3S Il 1033-17, we east, ue 1) jhilmil jhilkai chand na taaraa. The dazzling light glitters, although neither the moon nor the stars are shining;
Hon fost o fate stare i 1033-17, wg euet, He 1) sooraj kiran na bijul ghainaaraa. neither the sun's rays nor the lightning flashes across the sky.
not xaG fase dt aet ufs afar fs arfeer ci (1033-18, wg euet, we 1)
akthee katha-o chihan nahee ko-ee poor rahi-aa man bhaa-idaa. ||8]||
I describe the indescribable state, which has no sign, where the all-pervading Lord is still pleasing to the mind. ||8]|
undt faafe afs Sfrmrar i (1033-18, wg weet, He 1) pasree kiran jot uji-aalaa. The rays of Divine Light have spread out their brilliant radiance.
afs afs 2a urfu efemiar it (1033-19, wg weet, He 1)
kar kar daykhai aap da-i-aalaa. Having created the creation, the Merciful Lord Himself gazes upon it.
WoJe Jz searg He ufe fass@ a wife sfe|er EN 1033-19, wg wet, He 1)
anhad run jhunkaar sadaa Dhun nirbha-o kai ghar vaa-idaa. ||9| |
The sweet, melodious, unstruck sound current vibrates continuously in the home of the fearless Lord. ||9]|
Yast O38
WOJE BH FH 38 SH Il (1034-1, we wet, He 1) anhad vaajai bharam bha-o bhaajai. When the unstruck sound current resounds, doubt and fear run away.
Fars famrfiy afr ys erat il (1034-1, wg wut, we 1) Sagal bi-aap rahi-aa parabh chhaajai. God is all-pervading, giving shade to all.
AS 3at 3 Tents west Ufe Ad TE weer AON (1034-1, wg wuet, we 1)
sabh tayree too gurmukh jaataa dar sohai gun gaa-idaa. ||10]|
All belong to You; to the Gurmukhs, You are known. Singing Your Praises, they look beautiful in Your Court. ||10] |
uife fede foone Aet | 1034-2, we wuet, He 1) aad niranjan nirmal so-ee. He is the Primal Lord, immaculate and pure.
MST S AST SAT AT I (1034-2, weg eat, we 1) avar na jaanaa doojaa ko-ee. I know of no other at all.
Saag ZA fs sve ICH Tas Tefeer AA (1034-3, wg weet, He 1)
aykankaar vasai man bhaavai ha-umai garab gavaa-idaa. ||11]|
The One Universal Creator Lord dwells within, and is pleasing to the mind of those who banishe egotism and pride. ||11]|
nifs ub Afsafs dor i 034-3, wg waet, ue 1) amrit pee-aa satgur dee-aa. I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, given by the True Guru.
MET 3 Are Ent Sha Il (1034-3, wg wuet, He 1) avar na jaanaa doo-aa tee-aa. I do not know any other second or third.
Sa Sa A mug udug uate ws ufe|T NII (1034-4, wg TaMt, He 1)
ayko ayk so apar parampar parakh khajaanai paa-idaa. ||12]|
He is the One, Unique, Infinite and Endless Lord; He evaluates all beings and places some in His treasury. ||12]|
famrrg fours Ag afod asta i 1034-4, wg eaet, ve 1) gi-aan Dhi-aan sach gahir gambheeraa. Spiritual wisdom and meditation on the True Lord are deep and profound.
afe 5 We Sa stat il 1034-5, wg wut, we 1) ko-ay na jaanai tayraa cheeraa. No one knows Your expanse.
Ast 3 3st 30 AS oath FHS A urfeer 93 (1034-5, wg weet, He 1) jaytee hai taytee tuDh jaachai karam milai so paa-idaa. ||13]| All that are, beg from You; You are attained only by Your Grace. ||13]|
ASH USN AY Ifa SHS Il (1034-5, wg weet, us 1) karam Dharam sach haath tumaarai. You hold karma and Dharma in Your hands, O True Lord.
BUTS MYS FSS Il (1034-6, wy wast, ue 1) vayparvaah akhut bhandaarai. O Independent Lord, Your treasures are inexhaustible.
3 teors face Ae ys wm Afe ferfeer 198 I (1034-6, wg euet, He 1) too da-i-aal kirpaal sadaa parabh aapay mayl milaa-idaa. ||14]| You are forever kind and compassionate, God. You unite in Your Union. ||14] |
miny afer feure wmy il (1034-7, wg east, He 1) aapay daykh dikhaavai aapay. You Yourself see, and cause Yourself to be seen.
nmy arfy Gant nmr il (1034-7, wg wast, Hs 1) aapay thaap uthaapay aapay. You Yourself establish, and You Yourself disestablish.
nny afs fees agar omit unfa Ftefe]er quil 1034-7, wg east, He 1) aapay jorh vichhorhay kartaa aapay maar jeevaa-idaa. ||15]| The Creator Himself unites and separates; He Himself kills and rejuvenates. ||15]|
Ast I 33 gg wiefs ii c034-8, wg weet, ve 1) jaytee hai taytee tuDh andar. As much as there is, is contained within You.
aufo orf aff far Hefei 034-8, wg euet, ve 1) daykheh aap bais bij mandar. You gaze upon Your creation, sitting within Your royal palace.
Soa AY ad 8dst ale vanfs AY user NIENANISI (1034-8, ug Suet, He 1) naanak saach kahai baynantee har darsan sukh paa-idaa. ||16||1||13]|
Nanak offers this true prayer; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, I have found peace. ||16]|1]|13]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1034-9) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
TdAG UST A SO Bret Il (1034-9, wg, He 1) darsan paavaa jay tuDh bhaavaa. If I am pleasing to You, Lord, then I obtain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
ofe gafs ATS TE AST Il (1034-9, wg, ws 1)
bhaa-ay bhagat saachay gun gaavaa. In loving devotional worship, O True Lord, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
Oo HE J Helo ATS MM TAG FATES IAI (1034-10, wg, He 1)
tuDh bhaanay too bhaaveh kartay aapay rasan rasaa-idaa. ||1]|
By Your Will, O Creator Lord, You have become pleasing to me, and so sweet to my tongue. ||1]|
Hate SIS YS PIAS Il (1034-10, wg, Hs 1) sohan bhagat parabhoo darbaaray. The devotees look beautiful in the Darbaar, the Court of God.
Hag se Ths BA SHS Il (1034-11, wg, we 1) mukat bha-ay har daas tumaaray. Your slaves, Lord, are liberated.
ny dete 33 df aS niofes on fork] 20 (1034-11, wg, He 1D
aap gavaa-ay tayrai rang raatay an-din naam Dhi-aa-idaa. ||2||
Eradicating self-conceit, they are attuned to Your Love; night and day, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
SA Yon Set SST I (1034-11, wg, we 1) eesar barahmaa dayvee dayvaa. Shiva, Brahma, gods and goddesses,
fee su fs Sat AS ih 1034-12, wg, we 1) indar tapay mun tayree sayvaa. Indra, ascetics and silent sages serve You.
Ast ASt a3 soe viz 3 aet uf—e|r BI (1034-12, wg, He 1)
jatee satee kaytay banvaasee ant na ko-ee paa-idaa. ||3]||
Celibates, givers of charity and the many forest-dwellers have not found the Lord's limits. ||3]|
fee Ware afe 5 AE Il (1034-13, wg, He 1) vin jaanaa-ay ko-ay na jaanai. No one knows You, unless You let them know You.
A fas ad A mus SS Il (1034-13, wg, He 1) jo kichh karay so aapan bhaanai. Whatever is done, is by Your Will.
we aanty Hha Cure are ATG Bee I (1034-13, wg, He 1D
lakh cha-oraaseeh jee-a upaa-ay bhaanai saah lavaa-idaa. ||4||
You created the 8.4 million species of beings; by Your Will, they draw their breath. [141]
A fsa ae A feos Fe Il (1034-14, weg, us 1) jo tis bhaavai so nihcha-o hovai. Whatever is pleasing to Your Will, undoubtedly comes to pass.
HOHY niTy Tare FS il (1034-14, wg, He 1) manmukh aap ganaa-ay rovai. The self-willed manmukh shows off, and comes to grief.
Sed 5 Ga 6 ure one we ey ufee|r ull 4034-14, wg, He 1)
naavhu bhulaa tha-ur na paa-ay aa-ay jaa-ay dukh paa-idaa. ||5]|
Forgetting the Name, he finds no place of rest; coming and going in reincarnation, he suffers in pain. ||5]|
fooHe ofeur BAe TAT Il (1034-15, wg, He 1D nirmal kaa-i-aa oojal hansaa. Pure is the body, and immaculate is the swan-soul;
fsH feta on fedAe IAT II (1034-15, wg, Hs 1) tis vich naam niranjan ansaa. within it is the immaculate essence of the Naam.
rae vy vifys afs ule wuts gu o ufser nell (1034-16, wg, He 1)
saglay dookh amrit kar peevai baahurh dookh na paa-idaa. ||6] |
Such a being drinks in all his pains like Ambrosial Nectar; he never suffers sorrow again. ||6||
ag Weg TY usufs Fe Il (1034-16, wg, oe 1) baho saadahu dookh paraapat hovai. For his excessive indulgences, he receives only pain;
sag da A ifs feds i 1034-16, wg, He 1) bhogahu rog so ant vigovai. from his enjoyments, he contracts diseases, and in the end, he wastes away.
Jag Ag 3 feet wag fee sre soHfSEr DI (1034-17, wg, Hs 1)
harkhahu sog na mit-ee kabhoo vin bhaanay bharmaa-idaa. ||7]|
His pleasure can never erase his pain; without accepting the Lord's Will, he wanders lost and confused. ||7||
fame feget se Aaret Il (1034-17, 2g, He 1D gi-aan vihoonee bhavai sabaa-ee. Without spiritual wisdom, they all just wander around.
Ara’ gfe ston fee wret il (1034-18, wg, 8 1)
saachaa rav rahi-aa liv laa-ee. The True Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere, lovingly engaged.
fows@ Fae Tg Ag AS Ast APS freee CH (1034-18, wg, Hs 1)
nirbha-o sabad guroo sach jaataa jotee jot milaa-idaa. ||8]|
The Fearless Lord is known through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru; one's light merges into the Light. ||8]|
WES MSG MSH AIT Il (1034-19, we, us 1) atal adol ato] muraaray. He is the eternal, unchanging, immeasurable Lord.
fas uf ofa Sfs BATS Il (1034-19, wg, Hs 1) khin meh dhaahi fayr usaaray. In an instant, He destroys, ang then reconstructs.
gu o sfimr ffs adt ahifs Aafe sfe ustorfee|r iti (1034-19, wg, He 1) roop na raykh-i-aa mit nahee keemat sabad bhayd patee-aa-idaa. ||9|| He has no form or shape, no limit or value. Pierced by the Shabad, one is satisfied.
[9I|
Yat 9oBU
TH DHS & OTA fms Il (1035-1, wg, Hs 1) ham daasan kay daas pi-aaray. I am the slave of Your slaves, O my Beloved.
Afoe ATS 3B Sears | (1035-1, wg, He 1) saaDhik saach bhalay veechaaray. The seekers of Truth and goodness contemplate You.
Hd a@ wet fafs wat om Ae fearfeer AON (1035-1, we, He 1) mannay naa-o so-ee jin jaasee aapay saach darirhaa-idaa. ||10]| Whoever believes in the Name, wins; He Himself implants Truth within. ||10]|
UB ATG AS AfsMrS Il (1035-2, wg, He 1) palai saach sachay sachi-aaraa. The Truest of the True has the Truth is His lap.
Ard ove Hae fiparar it (1035-2, wg, we 1) saachay bhaavai sabad pi-aaraa. The True Lord is pleased with those who love the Shabad.
fgsefe AG ae ofs anit Ars dt ustorfe|r AA (1035-3, wg, He 1)
taribhavan saach kalaa Dhar thaapee saachay hee patee-aa-idaa. ||11]|
Exerting His power, the Lord has established Truth throughout the three worlds; with Truth He is pleased. ||11]|
Sa" FST Ta AG AEet | (1035-3, wg, Hes 1) vadaa vadaa aakhai sabh ko-ee. Everyone calls Him the greatest of the great.
aa faa Ast fas o Tet Il (1035-3, wg, He 1) gur bin sojhee kinai na ho-ee. Without the Guru, no one understands Him.
Af fee A APS ove o Stefs wy uke N92 (1035-4, wg, He 1)
saach milai so saachay bhaa-ay naa veechhurh dukh paa-idaa. ||12]|
The True Lord is pleased with those who merge in Truth; they are not separated again, and they do not suffer. ||12| |
Uag feed ardt FS Il (1035-4, wg, He 1) Dharahu vichhunay Dhaahee runnay. Separated from the Primal Lord, they loudly weep and wail.
fa Hfs AOHfs HIVES US Il (1035-5, wg, He 1) mar mar janmeh muhlat punnay. They die and die, only to be reborn, when their time has passed.
fan sun fsa & efsuret Afs 3 udsfeer 193i (1035-5, we, Hs 1)
jis bakhsay tis day vadi-aa-ee mayl na pachhotaa-idaa. ||13]|
He blesses those whom He forgives with glorious greatness; united with Him, they do not regret or repent. ||13 |
nM ATS MM FAS Il (1035-5, wg, He 1) aapay kartaa aapay bhugtaa. | He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer.
nmy fZust nMy HAST Il (1035-6, wg, Hs 1) aapay tariptaa aapay muktaa. He Himself is satisfied, and He Himself is liberated.
nm) Hats eg NASA HHS" He vorfeer ISI (1035-6, ws, He 1)
aapay mukat daan mukteesar mamtaa moh chukaa-idaa. ||14| |
The Lord of liberation Himself grants liberation; He eradicates possessiveness and attachment. ||14]|
aat & fafa ee Shera I (1035-7, wg, Hs 1) daanaa kai sir daan veechaaraa. I consider Your gifts to be the most wonderful gifts.
ATE AWE AHI MUTT Il (1035-7, Hg, He 1) karan kaaran samrath apaaraa. You are the Cause of causes, Almighty Infinite Lord.
afs afs 28 ats wruat aget arg aarfeer WAU (1035-7, wg, HB 1)
kar kar vaykhai keetaa apnaa karnee kaar karaa-idaa. ||15]|| Creating the creation, You gaze upon what You have created; You cause all to do their deeds. ||15]|
A ae wef AS Stefs Il (1035-8, wg, He 1) say gun gaavahi saachay bhaaveh. They alone sing Your Glorious Praises, who are pleasing to You, O True Lord.
33 3 Gunfo 35 aa AHrefd Il (1035-8, 2g, He 1) tujh tay upjahi tujh maahi samaaveh. They issue forth from You, and merge again into You.
Soa AY ad Sot fife APS AY ufe|Er VENA (1035-9, wg, He 1D naanak saach kahai baynantee mil saachay sukh paa-idaa. ||16]||2||14||
Nanak offers this true prayer; meeting with the True Lord, peace is obtained. || 16]|2]]14]|
HTS HIG 4 Il (1035-9) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Magee SAE UAT Il (1035-9, wg, He 1) arbad narbad DhunDhookaaraa. For endless eons, there was only utter darkness.
Use 3 Was JAH MUS | (1035-10, wg, He 1) Dharan na gagnaa hukam apaaraa. There was no earth or sky; there was only the infinite Command of His Hukam.
a feg sf 3 de 3 Ade Ao ANTO Bares NAM (1035-10, wg, Hs 1) naa din rain na chand na sooraj sunn samaaDh lagaa-idaa. ||1|| There was no day or night, no moon or sun; God sat in primal, profound Samaadhi.
[21
ural 3 aret UBS B urat Il (1035-11, wg, He 1) khaanee na banee pa-un na paanee. There were no sources of creation or powers of speech, no air or water.
Gufs wufs 6 vise Fret Il (1035-11, wg, He 1) opat khapat na aavan jaanee. There was no creation or destruction, no coming or going.
YS USS AUS Sdt Aras Set 3 Sty SaveET IAW (1035-11, wg, ue 1)
khand pataal sapat nahee saagar nadee na neer vahaa-idaa. ||2|| There were no continents, nether regions, seven seas, rivers or flowing water. ||2||
ot sft Add He UfEnirar Il (1035-12, wg, Hs 1) naa tad surag machh pa-i-aalaa. There were no heavenly realms, earth or nether regions of the underworld.
ana fang odt & Aer I (1035-12, wg, Hs 1) dojak bhisat nahee khai kaalaa. There was no heaven or hell, no death or time.
Oda Add Sdt HHS Host oT a oe o AEST SI (1035-12, wg, He 1) narak surag nahee jaman marnaa naa ko aa-ay na jaa-idaa. ||3]| There was no hell or heaven, no birth or death, no coming or going in reincarnation.
[I3I|
gun! fang HIA B At Il (1035-13, wg, He 1)
barahmaa bisan mahays na ko-ee. There was no Brahma, Vishnu or Shiva.
weg 6 UA Sa Aet I 1035-13, wg, Hs 1) avar na deesai ayko so-ee. No one was seen, except the One Lord.
ofa usy odt ats o HOM of at BY AY UTEET ISI (1035-14, wg, He 1)
naar purakh nahee jaat na janmaa naa ko dukh sukh paa-idaa. ||4| |
There was no female or male, no social class or caste of birth; no one experienced pain or pleasure. ||4| |
o sfe Ast ASt ASsTAt Il (1035-14, wg, He 1)
naa tad jatee satee banvaasee. There were no people of celibacy or charity; no one lived in the forests.
o 3fe fra Ata AYSTAT Il (1035-15, wg, He 1) naa tad siDh saaDhik sukhvaasee. There were no Siddhas or seekers, no one living in peace.
Hat Ha Sy B act ot at aE aafeer WUll (1035-15, we, He 1)
jogee jangam bhaykh na ko-ee naa ko naath kahaa-idaa. ||5||
There were no Yogis, no wandering pilgrims, no religious robes; no one called himself the master. ||5]|
WU SU AAH ST YS UA Il (1035-15, wg, He D
jap tap sanjam naa barat poojaa. There was no chanting or meditation, no self-discipline, fasting or worship.
ott nity SUS TA Il (1035-16, wg, He 1) naa ko aakh vakhaanai doojaa. No one spoke or talked in duality.
nny nif Gurfe fear wm) athafs urfeer el (1035-16, wg, He 1) aapay aap upaa-ay vigsai aapay keemat paa-idaa. ||6||
He created Himself, and rejoiced; He evaluates Himself. ||6| | Oo Afs AHH SOA HT Il (1035-16, Hg, He 1)
naa such sanjam tulsee maalaa. There was no purification, no self-restraint, no malas of basil seeds.
Tut age o AS PH I (1035-17, wg, we 1) gopee kaan na ga-oo go-aalaa. There were no Gopis, no Krishna, no cows or cowherds.
33 43 unig o aet o a Sm Sefer DI (1035-17, wg, He 1) tant mant pakhand na ko-ee naa ko vans vajaa-idaa. ||7]|| There were no tantras, no mantras and no hypocrisy; no one played the flute. ||7||
OATH UGH Sdt Hemi HAT I (1035-18, Hg, HE 1) karam Dharam nahee maa-i-aa maakhee. There was no karma, no Dharma, no buzzing fly of Maya.
fs HOH Sot SA vmdk i (1035-18, wg, He 1) jaat janam nahee deesai aakhee. Social class and birth were not seen with any eyes.
HHS AS aS St Ha ot at far fore ci 1035-18, wg, He 1)
mamtaa jaal kaal nahee maathai naa ko kisai Dhi-aa-idaa. ||8]||
There was no noose of attachment, no death inscribed upon the forehead; no one meditated on anything. ||8]|
fee fae odt He 3 AAS II 1035-19, wg, Hs 1) nind bind nahee jee-o na jindo. There was no slander, no seed, no soul and no life.
or sfe diay or Hse Il (1035-19, ug, He 1) naa tad gorakh naa maachhindo. There was no Gorakh and no Maachhindra.
o sfe fame fmrg as Gufs o a aes Tafeer ell (1035-19, wg, He 1)
naa tad gi-aan Dhi-aan kul opat naa ko ganat ganaa-idaa. ||9||
There was no spiritual wisdom or meditation, no ancestry or creation, no reckoning of accounts. ||9||
at IOBE
ZIG SU St YIHE Ut Il (1036-1, wg, He 1) varan bhaykh nahee barahman khatree. There were no castes or social classes, no religious robes, no Brahmin or Kh'shaatriya.
2B io tad a aest it (1036-1, wg, Hs 1) day-o na dayhuraa ga-oo gaa-itaree. There were no demi-gods or temples, no cows or Gaayatri prayer.
dH Aa Sot Stes SSS FT A UAT SEI WIM (1036-2, wg, we 1)
hom jag nahee tirath naavan naa ko poojaa laa-idaa. ||10]|
There were no burnt offerings, no ceremonial feasts, no cleansing rituals at sacred shrines of pilgrimage; no one worshipped in adoration. ||10]|
Ot HO SB a At I (1036-2, wg, He 1) naa ko mulaa naa ko kaajee. There was no Mullah, there was no Qazi.
oa AY HATER Tet Il (1036-3, wg, He 1) naa ko saykh masaa-ik haajee. There was no Shaykh, or pilgrims to Mecca.
sets Teo TBH Pol of a ATE HOES AAI (1036-3, wg, Hs 1)
ra-ee-at raa-o na ha-umai dunee-aa naa ko kahan kahaa-idaa. ||11]||
There was no king or subjects, and no worldly egotism; no one spoke of himself. ||11]|
aC 3 sast a fs AAT Il (1036-4, wg, 8 1) bhaa-o na bhagtee naa siv saktee. There was no love or devotion, no Shiva or Shakti - no energy or matter.
AMS Hts fe adt gost | 1036-4, wg, He 1) Saajan meet bind nahee raktee. There were no friends or companions, no semen or blood.
Wn) AMY MM sens AS ST SHIT WAI (1036-4, wg, we 1)
aapay saahu aapay vanjaaraa saachay ayho bhaa-idaa. ||12||
He Himself is the banker, and He Himself is the merchant. Such is the Pleasure of the Will of the True Lord. ||12]|
ae asa 8 fas AMAS II (1036-5, wg, Hs 1) bayd katayb na simrit saasat. There were no Vedas, Korans or Bibles, no Simritees or Shaastras.
US UTS Ce odt MTAS Il (1036-5, wg, He 1)
paath puraan udai nahee aasat. There was no recitation of the Puraanas, no sunrise or sunset.
as east wif nigiag mm ney warfeer All (1036-5, wg, Hs 1)
kahtaa baktaa aap agochar aapay alakh lakhaa-idaa. ||13]|
The Unfathomable Lord Himself was the speaker and the preacher; the unseen Lord Himself saw everything. ||13]|
wW f3H stat 3 aS Curfenr Il (1036-6, wg, ue 1) jaa tis bhaanaa taa jagat upaa-i-aa. When He so willed, He created the world.
WS AS mss JofEnt i (1036-6, wg, He 1) baajh kalaa aadaan rahaa-i-aa. Without any supporting power, He sustained the universe.
gout fare Hon Cure orfemr Hg earfeer IVI (1036-7, we, He 1)
barahmaa bisan mahays upaa-ay maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-idaa. ||14| |
He created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva; He fostered enticement and attachment to Maya. ||14||
fea a@ afs Fae Hetfenr Il (1036-7, wg, He 1) virlay ka-o gur sabad sunaa-i-aa. How rare is that person who listens to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
afs afs fe gan Aafemr Il (1036-8, wg, He 1) kar kar daykhai hukam sabaa-i-aa. He created the creation, and watches over it; the Hukam of His Command is over all.
Ys YIHS USS nigSsT TUST udaret mrfSer Ul (1036-8, wg, He 1)
khand barahmand paataal arambhay guptahu pargatee aa-idaa. ||15]||
He formed the planets, solar systems and nether regions, and brought what was hidden to manifestation. ||15]]|
J aT nis o WE At Il (1036-9, wg, we 1) taa kaa ant na jaanai ko-ee. No one knows His limits.
Us TI 3 ASt Tet I (1036-9, wg, Hs 1) pooray gur tay sojhee ho-ee. This understanding comes from the Perfect Guru.
Soa Ate gS faRnret faRH se Te afEer AES (1036-9, wg, Hs 1D
naanak saach ratay bismaadee bisam bha-ay gun gaa-idaa. ||16]|3]|15]| O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Truth are wonderstruck; singing His Glorious Praises, they are filled with wonder. ||16]|3]|15]|
HTS HIG 4 Il (1036-10) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
nmy nity Gurfe fear il 1036-10, wg, He 1) aapay aap upaa-ay niraalaa. He Himself created the creation, remaining unattached.
Arat arg atG efenirar il (1036-10, wg, He 1)
saachaa thaan kee-o da-i-aalaa. The Merciful Lord has established His True Home.
ue urat maret ar dag afer ae garfeer Al (1036-11, wg, He 1) pa-un paanee agnee kaa banDhan kaa-i-aa kot rachaa-idaa. ||1|| Binding together air, water and fire, He created the fortress of the body. ||1]|
o@ wa ant aTySTs Il (1036-11, wg, He 1) na-o ghar thaapay thaapanhaaradi. The Creator established the nine gates.
SHS SAT nis MUTE Il (1036-11, Hg, HE 1) dasvai vaasaa alakh apaarai. In the Tenth Gate, is the dwelling of the infinite, unseen Lord.
AMfeg Aus 3d af foonfs aout He o wher QM (1036-12, wg, He 1D
Saa-ir Sapat bharay jal nirmal gurmukh mail na laa-idaa. ||2||
The seven seas are overflowing with the Ambrosial Water; the Gurmukhs are not stained with filth. ||2] |
ofe AfA dhe Afs Aaret | (1036-12, wg, Hs 1) rav sas deepak jot sabaa-ee. The lamps of the sun and the moon fill all with light.
nny afe Se efsuret it (1036-13, wg, Hs 1) aapay kar vaykhai vadi-aa-ee. Creating them, He beholds His own glorious greatness.
nfs AgU Ae ANTS AS AST user SM (1036-13, wg, He 1)
jot saroop sadaa sukh-daata sachay sobhaa paa-idaa. ||3]||
The Giver of peace is forever the embodiment of Light; from the True Lord, glory is obtained. ||3]|
Hs HiT We USE STUTS | (1036-13, Hg, He 1)
garh meh haat patan vaapaaraa. Within the fortress are the stores and markets; the business is transacted there.
Ud StH 3B FEAT Il (1036-14, wg, He 1) poorai tol tolai vanjaaraa. The Supreme Merchant weighs with the perfect weights.
nn} 33@ fend BS my ahafS urfee|r ei (1036-14, wg, He 1) aapay ratan visaahay layvai aapay keemat paa-idaa. ||4|| He Himself buys the jewel, and He Himself appraises its value. ||4||
afs uret ureears | (1036-15, wg, He 1) keemat paa-ee paavanhaardi. The Appraiser appraises its value.
TUTST US FST Il (1036-15, 4°Y, He 1) vayparvaah pooray bhandaarai. The Independent Lord is overflowing with His treasures.
Aaa aor B umd ofr aanfy fan gsfeer ull (1036-15, wg, He 1)
sarab kalaa lay aapay rahi-aa gurmukh kisai bujhaa-idaa. ||5||
He holds all powers, He is all-pervading; how few are those who, as Gurmukh, understand this. ||5||
sels I YT TI F™S Il (1036-16, wg, Hs 1) nadar karay pooraa gur bhaytai. When He bestows His Glance of Grace, one meets the Perfect Guru.
AH He” SHS SS Il (1036-16, wg, He 1) jam jandaar na maarai faytai. The tyrannical Messenger of Death cannot strike him then.
fa@ Ae nists ane faarAt wm feat fomrfeer él (1036-16, wg, He 1)
ji-o jal antar kamal bigaasee aapay bigas Dhi-aa-idaa. ||6||
He blossoms forth like the lotus flower in the water; he blossoms forth in joyful meditation. ||6||
mn eae nifys Wer | IIS ASIST BS MUTT I (1036-17, wg, He 1)
aapay varkhai amrit Dhaaraa. ratan javayhar laal apaaraa.
He Himself rains down the Ambrosial Stream of jewels, diamonds, and rubies of priceless value.
Afsag fees 3 ua urea UH uerse user DI (1036-17, wg, He 1D
satgur milai ta pooraa paa-ee-ai paraym padaarath paa-idaa. ||7]||
When they meet the True Guru, then they find the Perfect Lord; they obtain the treasure of Love. ||7||
UH URTIG BI MAS Il (1036-18, wg, we 1) paraym padaarath lahai amolo. Whoever receives the priceless treasure of Love
ae oto weft ust 3B Il (1036-18, +g, He 1) kab hee na ghaatas pooraa tolo. - his weight never decreases; he has perfect weight.
Ae oa enrdt de Ad AGS user Wel (1036-19, wg, He 1) sachay kaa vaapaaree hovai sacho sa-udaa paa-idaa. ||8]|| The trader of Truth becomes true, and obtains the merchandise. ||8]||
Het AGer fear & ure Il (1036-19, wg, He 1) sachaa Sa-udaa virlaa ko paa-ay. How rare are those who obtain the true merchandise.
ya Afsag fue free | 1036-19, wg, m2 1) pooraa satgur milai milaa-ay. Meeting the Perfect True Guru, one meets with the Lord.
Yat 9O3D
qonfa df A IaH uss HS JAH ANAESTH (1037-1, we, He 1)
gurmukh ho-ay so hukam pachhaanai maanai hukam samaa-idaa. ||9||
One who becomes Gurmukh realizes the Hukam of His command; surrendering to His Command, one merges in the Lord. ||9]|
Jan nitfeer gat AHEM | (1037-1, wg, He 1) hukmay aa-i-aa hukam samaa-i-aa. By His Command we come, and by His command we merge into Him again.
Jan BA Aas Ceurfer | (1037-2, wg, He hukmay deesai jagat upaa-i-aa. By His Command, the world was formed.
IaH Add He ufenrar Jan aor gafeer AON (1037-2, wg, ue 1)
hukmay surag machh pa-i-aalaa hukmay kalaa rahaa-idaa. ||10] |
By His Command, the heavens, this world and the nether regions were created; by His Command, His Power supports them. ||10] |
Jan vest ue fAfs ss I (1037-3, wg, He 1)
hukmay Dhartee Dha-ul sir bhaara’.
The Hukam of His Command is the mythical bull which supports the burden of the earth on its head.
Jan ue uret aard il (1037-3, wg, ue 1) hukmay pa-un paanee gainaara”. By His Hukam, air, water and fire came into being.
Jan fre Hast wis SAT JAH Ys Yaf—er AAU (1037-3, wg, He 1)
hukmay siv saktee ghar vaasaa hukmay khayl khaylaa-idaa. ||11]||
By His Hukam, one dwells in the house of matter and energy - Shiva and Shakti. By His Hukam, He plays His plays. ||11]|
TAH MTSE MAA | (1037-4, Hg, He 1) hukmay aadaanay aagaasee. By the Hukam of His command, the sky is spread above.
JAH AG BS fase TAT Il (1037-4, wg, ws
hukmay jal thal taribhavan vaasee.
By His Hukam, His creatures dwell in the water, on the land and throughout the three worlds.
Jon ATA fara He So JAH Ufy feerfeer 192K 037-4, wg, He 1
hukmay saas giraas sadaa fun hukmay daykh dikhaa-idaa. ||12]|
By His Hukam, we draw our breath and receive our food; by His Hukam, He watches over us, and inspires us to see. ||12]|
IaH Cure TA usta Il (1037-5, wg, us 1 hukam upaa-ay das a-utaaraa. By His Hukam, He created His ten incarnations,
Vz VSS MASS MUTT Il (1037-5, wg, ws 1) dayv daanav agnat apaaraa. and the uncounted and infinite gods and devils.
HS JaH A vad Us Ate feos AfE|r Ill (1037-6, wg, He 1)
maanai hukam so dargeh paijhai saach milaa-ay samaa-idaa. ||13]|
Whoever obeys the Hukam of His Command, is robed with honor in the Court of the Lord; united with the Truth, He merges in the Lord. ||13]|
JAH Aa SST ALT Il (1037-6, wg, ws 1) hukmay jug chhateeh gudaaray. By the Hukam of His Command, the thirty-six ages passed.
gan fro vfs Sears | (1037-6, wg, He 1) hukmay siDh saaDhik veechaaray. By His Hukam, the Siddhas and seekers contemplate Him.
uf ag oat AS AT ot SYA Hats aafeer AVil (1037-7, wg, us 1
aap naath nathee™ sabh jaa kee bakhsay mukat karaa-idaa. ||14]|
The Lord Himself has brought all under His control. Whoever He forgives, is liberated. [|14]|
afenr ae as Hfs A Il SA USA SH SISTA Il (1037-7, wg, we 1)
kaa-i-aa kot garhai meh raajaa. nayb khavaas bhalaa darvaajaa.
In the strong fortress of the body with its beautiful doors, is the king, with his special assistants and ministers.
fifeor Be ot whe er ofs ufu usstfeer Ui (1037-8, Wg, He 1)
mithi-aa lobh naahee ghar vaasaa lab paap pachhutaa-idaa. ||15]|
Those gripped by falsehood and greed do not dwell in the celestial home; engrossed in greed and sin, they come to regret and repent. ||15]]|
AS Hy Sard Hfo art Il (1037-9, wg, He 1) sat santokh nagar meh kaaree. Truth and contentment govern this body-village.
AS AZ AWM Aafe Has Il (1037-9, wg, He 1) jat sat sanjam saran muraaree. Chastity, truth and self-control are in the Sanctuary of the Lord.
oo Hota fes nates aa Aaet ufS ufeer IESE! (1037-9, wg, He 1)
naanak sahj milai jagjeevan gur sabdee pat paa-idaa. ||16||4]|16] |
O Nanak, one intuitively meets the Lord, the Life of the World; the Word of the Guru's Shabad brings honor. ||16]||4||16]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1037-10) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ho oer mudufs oat il (1037-10, wg, He 1) sunn kalaa aprampar Dhaaree. In the Primal Void, the Infinite Lord assumed His Power.
nity feaeu nud mrurdt il (1037-10, wg, He 1) aap niraalam apar apaaree. He Himself is unattached, infinite and incomparable.
nm avafs afs afs 2a Hog He Curfk]Sr ual 1037-11, wg, He
aapay kudrat kar kar daykhai sunnahu sunn upaa-idaa. ||1] |
He Himself exercised His Creative Power, and He gazes upon His creation; from the Primal Void, He formed the Void. ||1]|
u@e urat HS 3 APA Il (1037-11, og, He 1) pa-un paanee sunnai tay saajay. From this Primal Void, He fashioned air and water.
frfe Surfs arfeur as TH Il (1037-11, wg, He 1) sarisat upaa-ay kaa-i-aa garh raajay. He created the universe, and the king in the fortress of the body.
wate urat Me Afs SHS HS aor goer QM (1037-12, wg, He 1D agan paanee jee-o jot tumaaree sunnay kalaa rahaa-idaa. ||2|| Your Light pervades fire, water and souls; Your Power rests in the Primal Void. ||2]|
Hog Yon fans Hon Bure it (1037-12, wg, us 1) sunnahu barahmaa bisan mahays upaa-ay. From this Primal Void, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva issued forth.
Hd FIs Aa AVS Il (1037-13, wg, we 1) sunnay vartay jug sabaa-ay. This Primal Void is pervasive throughout all the ages.
feR ue ders A AS ua fA fheba sou Yorfeer 3 (1037-13, wg, Hs 1)
is pad veechaaray so jan pooraa tis milee-ai bharam chukaa-idaa. ||3] |
That humble being who contemplates this state is perfect; meeting with him, doubt is dispelled. ||3]|
Hog Aus AdSa SNe Il (1037-14, wg, He 1) sunnahu sapat sarovar thaapay. From this Primal Void, the seven seas were established.
fate ATA Stars MM | (1037-14, wg, He 1) jin saajay veechaaray aapay. The One who created them, Himself contemplates them.
fs3 AS Afs Hour gent are fefs wats rife 3 ufe|er el (1037-14, wg, Hs 1)
tit sat sar manoo-aa gurmukh naavai fir baahurh jon na paa-idaa. ||4| |
That human being who becomes Gurmukh, who bathes in the pool of Truth, is not cast into the womb of reincarnation again. ||4]|
Hdd VE AVA MAST Il (1037-15, wg, Hs 1) sunnahu chand sooraj gainaaray. From this Primal Void, came the moon, the sun and the earth.
fan at Afs fesse ATS Il (1037-15, wg, 4 1) tis kee jot taribhavan saaray. His Light pervades all the three worlds.
Ho view oud fereu HS stst afe|r ull (1037-16, wg, He 1)
sunnay alakh apaar niraalam sunnay taarhee laa-idaa. ||5] |
The Lord of this Primal Void is unseen, infinite and immaculate; He is absorbed in the Primal Trance of Deep Meditation. ||5||
Hog uals mam Bure Il (1037-16, wg, He 1) sunnahu Dharat akaas upaa-ay. From this Primal Void, the earth and the Akaashic Ethers were created.
fag SH Ie AG AG US Il (1037-16, wg, ue 1) bin thammaa raakhay sach kal paa-ay. He supports them without any visible support, by exercising His True Power.
fgsee Ata Huet Hfenr orfy Cure uurfser we (1037-17, wg, 48 1)
taribhavan saaj maykhulee maa-i-aa aap upaa-ay khapaa-idaa. ||6||
He fashioned the three worlds, and the rope of Maya; He Himself creates and destroys. ||6||
Hog wet Hog set Il (1037-17, wg, He 1) sunnahu khaanee sunnahu banee. From this Primal Void, came the four sources of creation, and the power of speech.
Hog Curt Afs AHTAt II (1037-18, wg, Hs 1) sunnahu upjee sunn samaanee. They were created from the Void, and they will merge into the Void.
@san ves ar fife ass fare Rafe Serfeer I (1037-18, wg, He 1D
ut-bhuj chalat kee-aa sir kartai bismaad sabad daykhaa-idaa. ||7]||
The Supreme Creator created the play of Nature; through the Word of His Shabad, He stages His Wondrous Show. ||7]||
Hog ots feor efe ate il 4037-19, wg, Hs 1) sunnahu raat dinas du-ay kee-ay. From this Primal Void, He made both night and day;
Gufs wufs Aa wa AS Il 4037-19, wg, Hs 1) opat khapat sukhaa dukh dee-ay. creation and destruction, pleasure and pain.
AY ey dt 3 wing nists aanfu fon we ufee|r ci (1037-19, wg, He 1)
sukh dukh hee tay amar ateetaa gurmukh nij ghar paa-idaa. ||8]|
The Gurmukh is immortal, untouched by pleasure and pain. He obtains the home of his own inner being. ||8]|
Yat 9o3t
AM de fod AAT MATS Il (1038-1, wg, He 1) saam vayd rig jujar atharban. The Saam Veda, the Rig Veda, the Jujar Veda and the At'harva Veda
gon Hf wfemr 3 3 TE ll (1038-1, wg, ve 1)
barahmay mukh maa-i-aa hai tarai gun.
form the mouth of Brahma; they speak of the three gunas, the three qualities of Maya.
a at ahs afo 5 Aa & £3 8S fA Sorfeer eH 038-1, we, Hes 1 taa kee keemat kahi na sakai ko ti-o bolay ji-o bolaa-idaa. ||9]| None of them can describe His worth. We speak as He inspires us to speak. ||9| |
Hog Aus urs Bure Il (1038-2, wg, He 1) sunnahu sapat paataal upaa-ay. From the Primal Void, He created the seven nether regions.
Hog see ae fHeS WES Il (1038-2, wg, ve 1) sunnahu bhavan rakhay liv laa-ay. From the Primal Void, He established this world to lovingly dwell upon Him.
nm age abo nrudufs Ag So shor aHfEe|r AON (1038-3, wg, He 1)
aapay kaaran kee-aa aprampar sabh tayro kee-aa kamaa-idaa. ||10||
The Infinite Lord Himself created the creation. Everyone acts as You make them act, Lord. ||10]|
dn 3H AS aS Sat ster | (1038-3, wg, He 1) raj tam sat kal tayree chhaa-i-aa. Your Power is diffused through the three gunas: raajas, taamas and satva.
HOH HIE TBH SY urfemr Ih (1038-4, wg, He 1) janam maran ha-umai dukh paa-i-aa. Through egotism, they suffer the pains of birth and death.
fan 6 feu ad ofa anf afs sea vats aafeer Iai (1038-4, wg, He 1)
jis no kirpaa karay har gurmukh gun cha-uthai mukat karaa-idaa. ||11]|
Those blessed by His Grace become Gurmukh; they attain the fourth state, and are liberated. ||11]|
Hog Gun GA wears Il (1038-5, wg, He 1) sunnahu upjay das avtaaraa. From the Primal Void, the ten incarnations welled up.
fAfe Surf afer uTATE Il (1038-5, wg, Hs 1) Sarisat upaa-ay kee-aa paasaaraa. Creating the Universe, He made the expanse.
@z Woe Te aus AA Als foo aH AHAEET IVI (1038-5, wg, He 1)
dayv daanav gan ganDharab saajay sabh likhi-aa karam kamaa-idaa. ||12] | He fashioned the demi-gods and demons, the heavenly heralds and celestial musicians; everyone acts according to their past karma. ||12||
Tafa AHS da 3 Tet i 1038-6, we, Hs 1) gurmukh samjhai rog na ho-ee. The Gurmukh understands, and does not suffer the disease.
fes ag at ust we AG set I (1038-6, wg, Hs 1) ih gur kee pa-orhee jaanai jan ko-ee. How rare are those who understand this ladder of the Guru.
Aad Haste Hats usfee A Mats sfeor ufs uf¥|er 193i (1038-7, wg, He 1)
jugah jugantar mukat paraa-in so mukat bha-i-aa pat paa-idaa. ||13]|
Throughout the ages, they are dedicated to liberation, and so they become liberated; thus they are honored. ||13]|
UT SZ AST USAMA Il (1038-7, wg, He 1) panch tat sunnahu pargaasaa. From the Primal Void, the five elements became manifest.
Zo Healt aH wifsnmAr i (1038-8, wg, He 1) dayh sanjogee karam abhi-aasaa. They joined to form the body, which engages in actions.
aa sor efe Hse ate uy Us shrfe|r ISI (1038-8, wg, He 1) buraa bhalaa du-ay mastak leekhay paap punn beejaa-idaa. ||14|| Both bad and good are written on the forehead, the seeds of vice and virtue. ||14| |
sn Afsag use fess Il (1038-9, wg, He 1) ootam satgur purakh niraalay. The True Guru, the Primal Being, is sublime and detached.
Rafe gS dfs ofA HSS Il (1038-9, wg, He 1)
sabad ratay har ras matvaalay.
Attuned to the Word of the Shabad, He is intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord.
fefa ofa fafa fares ag 3 urea us afar fresfeer qui (1038-9, wg, m2 1)
riDh buDh siDh gi-aan guroo tay paa-ee-ai poorai bhaag milaa-idaa. ||15]||
Riches, intellect, miraculous spiritual powers and spiritual wisdom are obtained from the Guru; through perfect destiny, they are received. ||15]|
fen Ho Hen AB ST WSs Il (1038-10, wg, He 1) is man maa-i-aa ka-o nayhu ghanayraa. This mind is so in love with Maya.
aet sg farrst aay fees il (1038-10, wg, Hs 1) ko-ee boojhhu gi-aanee karahu nibayraa. Only a few are spiritually wise enough to understand and know this.
WAT HOH! UGH AVA 3g Sst AZ AHASE NIE (1038-11, wg, we 1) aasaa mansaa ha-umai sahsaa nar lobhee koorh kamaa-idaa. ||16|| In hope and desire, egotism and skepticism, the greedy man acts falsely. ||16||
Afsag 3 ure Sera | (1038-11, wg, we 1) satgur tay paa-ay veechaaraa. From the True Guru, contemplative meditation is obtained.
Ho AMG AS We AS Il (1038-11, 4g, He 1)
sunn samaaDh sachay ghar baaraa.
And then, one dwells with the True Lord in His celestial home, the Primal State of Absorption in Deepest Samaadhi.
oe fess ae Hae ufs AY TH at AEST NIDNUNADI (1038-12, wg, He 1) naanak nirmal naad sabad Dhun sach raamai naam samaa-idaa. ||17||5||17]||
O Nanak, the immaculate sound current of the Naad, and the Music of the Shabad resound; one merges into the True Name of the Lord. ||17||5||17]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1038-13) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ag car 30 Ste elena i (1038-13, wg, 48 1) jah daykhaa tah deen da-i-aalaa. Wherever I look, I see the Lord, merciful to the meek.
uife 3 ATeT yg forsurEr il (1038-13, Hg, He 1) aa-ay na jaa-ee parabh kirpaalaa. God is compassionate; He does not come or go in reincarnation.
Hor niefs wats AHet afoG feren ahem all c038-13, 4g, He 1) jee-aa andar jugat samaa-ee rahi-o niraalam raa-i-aa. ||1]| He pervades all beings in His mysterious way; the Sovereign Lord remains detached.
[21] Ad fsa ot afeor fam ay o HEM II 038-14, wg, He 1)
jag tis kee chhaa-i-aa jis baap na maa-i-aa. The world is a reflection of Him; He has no father or mother.
o fH sz 5 Sage Ofer II (1038-14, wg, He 1) naa tis bhain na bharaa-o kamaa-i-aa. He has not acquired any sister or brother.
o fsA Gufs uufs ae WSt 6g winaeg HS Stem NI (1038-15, wg, He 1)
naa tis opat khapat kul jaatee oh ajraavar man bhaa-i-aa. ||2]|
There is no creation or destruction for Him; He has no ancestry or social status. The Ageless Lord is pleasing to my mind. ||2| |
3 mors usY adt ffs aver i (1038-15, wg, Hs 1)
too akaal purakh naahee sir kaalaa. You are the Deathless Primal Being. Death does not hover over Your head.
3 UTY mse vlan fears Il (1038-16, wg, Hs 1) too purakh alaykh agamm niraalaa. You are the unseen inaccessible and detached Primal Lord.
AS Hsfy Aafe ofS Aise Aon ate fee afeur 13 (1038-16, wg, Hs 1)
sat santokh sabad at seetal sahj bhaa-ay liv laa-i-aa. ||3]| You are true and content; the Word of Your Shabad is cool and soothing. Through it, we are lovingly, intuitively attuned to You. |[3]|
3 vaste aa whe SAT I (1038-17, wg, He 1) tarai vartaa-ay cha-uthai ghar vaasaa. The three qualities are pervasive; the Lord dwells in His home, the fourth state.
ares frares afte fea BAT Il (1038-17, wg, Hs 1 kaal bikaal kee-ay ik garasaa. He has made death and birth into a bite of food.
fase ifs Aga Hales afe moge Aafe feurfemr tei 1038-17, wg, He 1)
nirmal jot sarab jagjeevan gur anhad sabad dikhaa-i-aa. ||4| |
The immaculate Light is the Life of the whole world. The Guru reveals the unstruck melody of the Shabad. ||4||
@3H Aa AS 3S ata fimrs II (1038-18, wg, He 1) ootam jan sant bhalay har pi-aaray. Sublime and good are those humble Saints, the Beloveds of the Lord.
dfs JA HS UT SSrs Il (1038-19, wg, He 1)
har ras maatay paar utaaray.
They are intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord, and are carried across to the other side.
Soa Je AS AS Halls ole Ts USAT ure ull (1038-19, wg, He 1)
naanak rayn sant jan sangat har gur parsaadee paa-i-aa. ||5||
Nanak is the dust of the Society of the Saints; by Guru's Grace, he finds the Lord. HSI
3 visor Abr Afs Sd Il (1038-19, wg, 48 1) too antarjaamee jee-a sabh tayray. You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. All beings belong to You.
at qo3t
J VS IN Aa 3g Il (1039-1, wg, we 1) too daataa ham sayvak tayray. You are the Great Giver; I am Your slave.
nifys on feu afs an afs famre ase cherfer Ell (1039-1, wg, He 1D
amrit naam kirpaa kar deejai gur gi-aan ratan deepaa-i-aa. ||6]|
Please be merciful and bless me with Your Ambrosial Naam, and the jewel, the lamp of the Guru's spiritual wisdom. ||6]|
us 33 ffs feg 3q ahr it (1039-2, wg, He 1) panch tat mil ih tan kee-aa. From the union of the five elements, this body was made.
MISH TH UTE AY ah Il (1039-2, wg, ws 1) aatam raam paa-ay sukh thee-aa. Finding the Lord, the Supreme Soul, peace is established.
oo asses vifys ee war ate aH 339 His UfeEMr IDI (1039-2, wg, HE 1)
karam kartoot amrit fal laagaa har naam ratan man paa-i-aa. ||7| |
The good karma of past actions brings fruitful rewards, and man is blessed with the jewel of the Lord's Name. ||7||
o fq ga fumrrm He Hf II (1039-3, Hg, He 1) naa tis bhookh pi-aas man maani-aa. His mind does not feel any hunger or thirst.
Aaa fodae ufe wife afer il (1039-3, wg, He 1) sarab niranjan ghat ghat jaani-aa. He knows the Immaculate Lord to be everywhere, in each and every heart.
vifys of rst dee Saat Tens fe Farfeur ici (1039-4, wg, He 1)
amrit ras raataa kayval bairaagee gurmat bhaa-ay subhaa-i-aa. ||8]||
Imbued with the Lord's Ambrosial essence, he becomes a pure, detached renunciate; he is lovingly absorbed in the Guru's Teachings. ||8]|
niftMrsn adH ad feg Ist Il (1039-4, wg, He 1) aDhi-aatam karam karay din raatee. Whoever does the deeds of the soul, day and night,
foane xfs fedsfa Ast i 039-5, wg, He 1) nirmal jot nirantar jaatee. sees the immaculate Divine Light deep within.
Hae dA IHS SA Aa! Fe TAS Sefer CI (1039-5, wg, ws
sabad rasaal rasan ras rasnaa bayn rasaal vajaa-i-aa. ||9||
Enraptured with the delightful essence of the Shabad, the source of nectar, my tongue plays the sweet music of the flute. ||9]|
SS IAG SHS At Il (1039-6, wg, we 1) bayn rasaal vajaavai so-ee. He alone plays the sweet music of this flute,
Ww at fysee Ast Tet I 1039-6, wg, He 1) jaa kee taribhavan sojhee ho-ee. who knows the three worlds.
aod asd feo fafa asHfs afs oH oy foe ofenr 90 (1039-6, wg, He 1)
naanak boojhhu ih biDh gurmat har raam naam liv laa-i-aa. ||10||
O Nanak, know this, through the Guru's Teachings, and lovingly focus yourself on the Lord's Name. ||10]|
MA He fess AAS II (1039-7, wg, He 1) aisay jan virlay sansaaray. Rare are those beings in this world,
ad Hae seats gots fears il (1039-7, wg, He 1) gur sabad vichaareh raheh niraaray. who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and remain detached.
uinfy safe Hats ae safe fo ASS HOH Afar yrfEmr NAA (1039-8, wg, He 1)
aap tareh sangat kul taareh tin safal janam jag aa-i-aa. ||11]|
They save themselves, and save all their associates and ancestors; fruitful is their birth and coming into this world. ||11]|
wg Ug Neg WE At Il (1039-8, wg, ne 1) ghar dar mandar jaanai so-ee. He alone knows the home of his own heart, and the door to the temple,
fA Us TI 3 ASt Tet I (1039-9, wg, we jis pooray gur tay sojhee ho-ee. who obtains perfect understanding from the Guru.
oafent as HIG HIG YS ATS Ay ATS Sug Joe 192M (1039-9, wg, ve 1)
kaa-i-aa garh mahal mahlee parabh saachaa sach saachaa takhat rachaa-i-aa. ||12]| In the body-fortress is the palace; God is the True Master of this Palace. The True Lord established His True Throne there. ||12]|
33d CA Te de afe ANH I (1039-10, wg, He 1) chatur das haat deevay du-ay saakhee. The fourteen realms and the two lamps are the witnesses.
Rea us ordt fy seit il (1039-10, wg, Hs 1) sayvak panch naahee bikh chaakhee. The Lord's servants, the self-elect, do not taste the poison of corruption.
nists SAS uigu fastsa ate fifemt afs ag urfemr 193i 039-10, wg, 2 1)
antar vasat anoop nirmolak gur mili-ai har Dhan paa-i-aa. ||13]]|
Deep within, is the priceless, incomparable commodity; meeting with the Guru, the wealth of the Lord is obtained. ||13]|
sufs ad Sus at wfear Il (1039-11, wg, He 1)
takhat bahai takh-tai kee laa-ik. He alone sits on the throne, who is worthy of the throne.
Us AHS TaHis utes i 1039-11, wg, He 1)
panch samaa-ay gurmat paa-ik.
Following the Guru's Teachings, he subdues the five demons, and becomes the Lord's foot soldier.
wife Faret 3 st SA AGA SoH Barfemr NAVIl (1039-12, wg, He 1)
aad jugaadee hai bhee hosee sahsaa bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||14]|
He has existed from the very beginning of time and throughout the ages; He exists here and now, and will always exist. Meditating on Him, skepticism and doubt are dispelled. ||14]|
sufs Fo de fes TSt Il 1039-12, wg, He 1) takhat salaam hovai din raatee. The Lord of the Throne is greeted and worshipped day and night.
feg Ag gaTet ATH fos AST I (1039-12, wg, He 1) ih saach vadaa-ee gurmat liv jaatee. This true glorious greatness comes to those who love the Guru's Teachings.
Soa TH AUG 3g 3rd ofa nifs Maret ure NAUNANATH (4039-13, WE, HB 1)
naanak raam japahu tar taaree har ant sakhaa-ee paa-i-aa. ||15]|1]|18]| O Nanak, meditate on the Lord, and swim across the river; they find the Lord, their best friend, in the end. ||15]]1]|18]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1039-14) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
dfs US Avg J AS Set Il (1039-14, wg, us 1) har Dhan sanchahu ray jan bhaa-ee. Gather in the wealth of the Lord, O humble Siblings of Destiny.
Afsad Afe Jog AdSTet I (1039-14, wg, He 1) satgur sayv rahhu sarnaa-ee. Serve the True Guru, and remain in His Sanctuary.
3Hag 3g 6 od 3 a ufs Cun Rafe Aarfemr AI (1039-14, wg, Hs 1)
taskar chor na laagai taa ka-o Dhun upjai sabad jagaa-i-aa. ||1]|
This wealth cannot be stolen; the celestial melody of the Shabad wells up and keeps us awake and aware. ||1]|
3 Saag fSTSH TAT Il (1039-15, wg, He 1) too aykankaar niraalam raajaa. You are the One Universal Creator, the Immaculate King.
3 urfu Aetafs AG A AH Il (1039-15, wg, He 1) too aap savaareh jan kay kaajaa. You Yourself arrange and resolve the affairs of Your humble servant.
WHE Se nuTg wea ofa mAfas ate FofEur QI (1039-16, wg, He 1)
amar adol apaar amolak har asthir thaan suhaa-i-aa. ||2]|
You are immortal, immovable, infinite and priceless; O Lord, Your place is beautiful and eternal. ||2||
Sdt oatdt SSH Arar Il (1039-16, wg, He 1) dayhee nagree ootam thaanaa. In the body-village, the most sublime place,
Ug BA SAT USM Il (1039-17, wg, Hs 1) panch lok vaseh parDhaanaa. the supremely noble people dwell.
Gufs Scorg forsy Ha AHfE Barfenr Sil (1039-17, wg, Hs 1)
oopar aykankaar niraalam sunn samaaDh lagaa-i-aa. ||3]|
Above them is the Immaculate Lord, the One Universal Creator; they are lovingly absorbed in the profound, primal state of Samaadhi. ||3]|
Sot Sadt SF VISA Il (1039-17, wg, He 1) dayhee nagree na-o darvaajay. There are nine gates to the body-village;
fafa fafa ageas AF II (1039-18, wg, He 1) sir sir kKarnaihaarai saajay. the Creator Lord fashioned them for each and every person.
eHe use nists fore nmd ney wurfemr igil (1039-18, Hg, He 1)
dasvai purakh ateet niraalaa aapay alakh lakhaa-i-aa. ||4]|
Within the Tenth Gate, dwells the Primal Lord, detached and unequalled. The unknowable reveals Himself. ||4| |
Use Mey AT Theta ll (1039-19, wg, He 1) purakh alaykh sachay deevaanaa. The Primal Lord cannot be held to account; True is His Celestial Court.
IaH Boe Ay SlATAT Il (1039-19, wg, Hs 1) hukam chalaa-ay sach neesaanaa. The Hukam of His Command is in effect; True is His Insignia.
woe Ufa SIT we nua dfs wisn IH oy uTfemr Ul (1039-19, Hg, He 1D
naanak khoj lahhu ghar apnaa har aatam raam naam paa-i-aa. ||5] |
O Nanak, search and examine your own home, and you shall find the Supreme Soul, and the Name of the Lord. ||5]|
Ust FORO
Aaa fedHa Use AAS Il (1040-1, »7g, He 1) sarab niranjan purakh sujaanaa. The Primal Lord is everywhere, immaculate and all-knowing.
MES AT We fame AHS Il (1040-1, wg, He 1) adal karay gur gi-aan samaanaa. He administers justice, and is absorbed in the spiritual wisdom of the Guru.
aM au 8 aqeefs Hed ICH SF vorfemr MEI (1040-2, wg, He 1D
kaam kroDh lai gardan maaray ha-umai lobh chukaa-i-aa. ||6]||
He seizes sexual desire and anger by their necks, and kills them; He eradicates egotism and greed. ||6]|
Ae afe eA fedarar il (1040-2, wg, we 1) sachai thaan vasai nirankaaraa. In the True Place, the Formless Lord abides.
wif usTé Hae SSS Il (1040-2, wg, Hs 1) aap pachhaanai sabad veechaaraa. Whoever understands his own self, contemplates the Word of the Shabad.
Ae Hole foes fodste ores we gaorfemr IDI (1040-3, wg, He 1)
sachai mahal nivaas nirantar aavan jaan chukaa-i-aa. ||7]||
He comes to abide deep within the True Mansion of His Presence, and his comings and goings are ended. ||7||
OHS VB 6 UES Bares Il (1040-3, wg, He 1) naa man chalai na pa-un udaavai. His mind does not waver, and he is not buffeted by the winds of desire.
Halt HAE mMoeTE SS Il (1040-4, wg, He 1) jogee sabad anaahad vaavai. Such a Yogi vibrates the unstruck sound current of the Shabad.
us Hae seorg faaen ufs wma ae Ratfemr ICH (1040-4, wg, He 1)
panch sabad jhunkaar niraalam parabh aapay vaa-ay sunaa-i-aa. ||8]|
God Himself plays the pure music of the Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds to hear. ||8]|
3@ Saar Haft ANTST II (1040-4, wg, He 1) bha-o bairaagaa sahj samaataa. In the Fear of God, in detachment, one intuitively merges into the Lord.
ICH fSmrat mreafe Isr Il (1040-5, wg, He 1) ha-umai ti-aagee anhad raataa. Renouncing egotism, he is imbued with the unstruck sound current.
nine Ate fade we Hee fade afenr Wel (1040-5, wg, Hs 1)
anjan saar niranjan jaanai sarab niranjan raa-i-aa. ||9||
With the ointment of enlightenment, the Immaculate Lord is known; the Immaculate Lord King is pervading everywhere. ||9]|
eu 3 sno Ys uifsoret Il (1040-6, we, Hs 1)
dukh bhai bhanjan parabh abhinaasee. God is eternal and imperishable; He is the Destroyer of pain and fear.
Ja AS aret AH SAT Il (1040-6, wg, He 1) rog katay kaatee jam faasee. He cures the disease, and cuts away the noose of death.
ooa dfs us A Se sxe afe fifo ofe ys urfemr AON (1040-6, wg, He 1)
naanak har parabh so bha-o bhanjan gur mili-ai har parabh paa-i-aa. ||10] |
O Nanak, the Lord God is the Destroyer of fear; meeting the Guru, the Lord God is found. ||10]|
aS ASG feds AS Il (1040-7, wg, He 1) kaalai kaval niranjan jaanai. One who knows the Immaculate Lord chews up death.
US AGH A ASE USS Il (1040-7, wg, we 1) boojhai karam so sabad pachhaanai. One who understands karma, realizes the Word of the Shabad.
nm we orf ues AS fA oO dH Fate AA (1040-7, mg, He 1) aapay jaanai aap pachhaanai sabh tis kaa choj sabaa-i-aa. ||11]|| He Himself knows, and He Himself realizes. This whole world is all His play. ||11]|
nm ATY MM SEATS Il (1040-8, wg, Hs 1) aapay saahu aapay vanjaaraa. He Himself is the Banker, and He Himself is the Merchant.
nmy uUTY UTUSTS Il (1040-8, wg, He 1) aapay parkhay parkhanhaaraa. The Appraiser Himself appraises.
nny aff aAeet we nmy atts urfemi 92K (1040-9, wg, He 1)
aapay kas kasvatee laa-ay aapay keemat paa-i-aa. ||12|| He Himself tests upon His Touchstone, and He Himself estimates the value. ||12]|
nifty efenrfs cfenr yfs ardt i (1040-9, wg, He 1) aap da-i-aal da-i-aa parabh Dhaaree. God Himself, the Merciful Lord, grants His Grace.
ufe ufe sfe sft aoerdt Il (1040-10, wg, Hs
ghat ghat rav rahi-aa banvaaree. The Gardener pervades and permeates each and every heart.
uy mss =A fovaes ae use usy feerfemr 119311 (1040-10, wg, He 1D
purakh ateet vasai nihkayval gur purkhai purakh milaa-i-aa. ||13]|
The pure, primal, detached Lord abides within all. The Guru, the Lord Incarnate, leads us to meet the Lord God. ||13]|
Ys Bor Mor APA ASS ll (1040-11, wg, we 1)
parabh daanaa beenaa garab gavaa-ay. God is wise and all-knowing; He purges men of their pride.
ea He Sa fers il (1040-11, wg, Hs 1) doojaa maytai ayk dikhaa-ay. Eradicating duality, the One Lord reveals Himself.
wim fs fereu ot nae fadae afemr 199i 040-11, wg, Hs 1)
aasaa maahi niraalam jonee akul niranjan gaa-i-aa. ||14||
Such a being remains unattached amidst hope, singing the Praise of the Immaculate Lord, who has no ancestry. ||14||
J@H Afe Aafe AY Tet I (1040-12, wg, Hs 1) ha-umai mayt sabad sukh ho-ee. Eradicating egotism, he obtains the peace of the Shabad.
nity Stars farnrst Aet I (1040-12, wg, Hs 1) aap veechaaray gi-aanee so-ee. He alone is spiritually wise, who contemplates his own self.
soa ded AA dfs Te ow ASHals AY Swe uf AUNQUE! (1040-12, wg, Hs 1)
naanak har jas har gun laahaa satsangat sach fal paa-i-aa. ||15||2||19]| O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the true profit is obtained; in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the fruit of Truth is obtained. ||15||2||19]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1040-13) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
Ag ag AD wife Tost il (1040-13, wg, He 1) sach kahhu sachai ghar rahnaa. Speak the Truth, and remain in the home of Truth.
Mes HIT SSHS Ad SIS Il (1040-14, wg, we 1) jeevat marahu bhavijal jag tarnaa. Remain dead while yet alive, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
ag sfeg ag sat sad no afe Afu ute Surfer a (1040-14, wg, He 1)
gur bohith gur bayrhee tulhaa man har jap paar langhaa-i-aa. ||1||
The Guru is the boat, the ship, the raft; meditating on the Lord in your mind, you shall be carried across to the other side. ||1]|
ICH HHS BS fASTAG Il (1040-15, wg, ne 1) ha-umai mamtaa lobh binaasan. Eliminating egotism, possessiveness and greed,
OG Ud HAS CAS MITA Il (1040-15, wg, He 1) na-o dar muktay dasvai aasan. one is liberated from the nine gates, and obtains a place in the Tenth Gate.
Gufs ug ud urdug fas mm nig Gerfemr IH 040-15, wg, He 1) oopar parai parai aprampar jin aapay aap upaa-i-aa. ||2]| Lofty and high, the farthest of the far and infinite, He created Himself. ||2]|
qos Beg ofa fee SAM Il (1040-16, wg, He 1)
gurmat layvhu har liv taree-ai. Receiving the Guru's Teachings, and lovingly attuned to the Lord, one crosses over.
mos afe AH 3 fam sa I (1040-16, wg, He 1) akal gaa-ay jam tay ki-aa daree-ai. Singing the Praises of the absolute Lord, why should anyone be afraid of death?
AS AS fu 33 35 3H Tt vied 6 estor fen 3h 040-17, wg, ne 1)
jat jat daykh-a-u tat tat tum hee avar na dutee-aa gaa-i-aa. ||3]|| Wherever I look, I see only You; I do not sing of any other at all. ||3]|
Ag ofa on Ay J Ase Il (1040-17, og, ne 1) sach har naam sach hai sarnaa. True is the Lord's Name, and True is His Sanctuary.
Ay aa Age fas afar Saar Il (1040-17, wg, us 1) sach gur sabad jitai lag tarnaa. True is the Word of the Guru's Shabad, grasping it, one is carries across.
neg wa TY nudug sfe aefs o Hot whew sil (1040-18, we, He 1)
akath kathai daykhai aprampar fun garabh na jonee jaa-i-aa. ||4]|
Speaking the Unspoken, one sees the Infinite Lord, and then, he does not have to enter the womb of reincarnation again. ||4]|
Ae fag AS ASy 3 US Il (1040-18, +g, He 1) sach bin sat santokh na paavai. Without the Truth, no one finds sincerity or contentment.
fag ae Hats o mre AS II (1040-19, >g, He 1) bin gur mukat na aavai jaavai. Without the Guru, no one is liberated; coming and going in reincarnation continue.
He HZ os oy safes aT aaa UT ute Uli (1040-19, wg, He 1)
mool mantar har naam rasaa-in kaho naanak pooraa paa-i-aa. ||5||
Chanting the Mool Mantra, and the Name of the Lord, the source of nectar, says Nanak, I have found the Perfect Lord. ||5]|
UST IO8A
Av fag seq Ate o Stour I (1041-1, wg, ne 1) sach bin bhavjal jaa-ay na tari-aa. Without the Truth, the terrifying world-ocean cannot be crossed.
fg AME weg Ho fay sfar it 041-1, wg, He 1) ayhu samund athaahu mahaa bikh bhari-aa. This ocean is vast and unfathomable; it is overflowing with the worst poison.
dd nists THiS & Sule fe fosss a wife urfeor wel co4i-1, wg, ws Y
rahai ateet gurmat lay oopar har nirbha-o kai ghar paa-i-aa. | |6| |
One who receives the Guru's Teachings, and remains aloof and detached, obtains a place in the home of the Fearless Lord. ||6| |
sot Aa fos at TTI Il (1041-2, wg, He 1) jhoothee jag hit kee chaturaa-ee. False is the cleverness of loving attachment to the world.
faoH & wat wis ATT I (1041-2, wg, He 1) bilam na laagai aavai jaa-ee. In no time at all, it comes and goes.
on fers sofa mfaret Cur frofa uerfemr ON (041-3, wg, Hes 1)
naam visaar chaleh abhimaanee upjai binas khapaa-i-aa. ||7]|
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the proud egotistical people depart; in creation and destruction they are wasted away. ||7]|
Cunfo fasrfs sas Fo i (1041-3, wg, ws 1) upjahi binsahi banDhan banDhay. In creation and destruction, they are bound in bondage.
ICH ufeur & af SA i (1041-4, wg, ue 1) ha-umai maa-i-aa kay gal fanDhay. The noose of egotism and Maya is around their necks.
fan oH oH ordt Hf aeHfs A AN ufe Sfo vorfenr HCH 041-4, we, Hs 1)
jis raam naam naahee mat gurmat so jam pur banDh chalaa-i-aa. ||8] |
Whoever does not accept the Guru's Teachings, and does not dwell upon the Lord's Name, is bound and bagged, and dragged into the City of Death. ||8] |
aa fag Hu Hats fa ure i (041-5, og, He 1) gur bin mokh mukat ki-o paa-ee-ai. Without the Guru, how can anyone be emancipated or liberated?
fag ae oH oH fas ferret i 041-5, wg, Hs 1) bin gur raam naam ki-o Dhi-aa-ee-ai. Without the Guru, how can anyone meditate on the Lord's Name?
THis SI 30g 3S UST Hats se AY fen ell (1041-5, wg, ue 1)
gurmat layho tarahu bhav dutar mukat bha-ay sukh paa-i-aa. ||9]|
Accepting the Guru's Teachings, cross over the arduous, terrifying world-ocean; you shall be emancipated, and find peace. ||9]|
qaHfs fants deaue WSs Il (1041-6, wg, 48 1) gurmat krisan govarDhan Dhaaray. Through the Guru's Teachings, Krishna lifted up the mountain of Govardhan.
Tents Afefs uTE ST Il (1041-6, wg, Hs 1) gurmat saa-ir paahan taaray. Through the Guru's Teachings, Rama floated stones across the ocean.
TaHfs BI usH ue ueha soa afs san varfemr AON (1041-7, ws, He 1)
gurmat layho param pad paa-ee-ai naanak gur bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||10]| Accepting the Guru's Teachings, the supreme status is obtained; O Nanak, the Guru eradicates doubt. ||10]|
DHS SJ 3dg AY Set Il (1041-7, wg, we 1) gurmat layho tarahu sach taaree. Accepting the Guru's Teachings, cross over to the other side through Truth.
WTSH dog fee Hardt Il co4i-s, wg, He 1) aatam cheenahu ridai muraaree. O soul, remember the Lord within your heart.
AH a ad wets ofe afu mas fedre ufemr 19a (041-8, wg, 48 1D
jam kay faahay kaateh har jap akul niranjan paa-i-aa. ||11]|
The noose of death is cut away, meditating on the Lord; you shall obtain the Immaculate Lord, who has no ancestry. ||11]|
TaHfs Us AS TAs Set I (1041-9, wg, wz 1) gurmat panch sakhay gur bhaa-ee. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Holy become one's friends and Siblings of Destiny.
aants wrate foets ATE II (1041-9, wg, Hs 1 gurmat agan nivaar samaa-ee. Through the Guru's Teachings, the inner fire is subdued and extinguished.
Hfs uft om Aug Aaries fee nists nese serfenr 9211 (1041-9, wg, Hs 1)
man mukh naam japahu jagjeevan rid antar alakh lakhaa-i-aa. ||12]|
Chant the Naam with your mind and mouth; know the unknowable Lord, the Life of the World, deep within the nucleus of your heart. ||12]|
TsHfe gs Fave usty il (1041-10, wg, we 1) gurmukh boojhai sabad pateejai. The Gurmukh understands, and is pleased with the Word of the Shabad.
Crafts fee far at ay Il (1041-10, wg, He 1) ustat nindaa kis kee keejai. Who does he praise or slander?
diog viru Aug AaetAg ofa Aaa Hie Sher NASI Co4i-11, we, Hs 1D
cheenahu aap japahu jagdeesar har jagannaath man bhaa-i-aa. ||13]|
Know yourself, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe; let your mind be pleased with the Lord, the Master of the Universe. ||13]|
A qoHfs dfs A ASG I Go4i-11, wg, He 1) jo barahmand khand so jaanhu. Know the One who pervades all the realms of the universe.
Toute weg Hate UsveT Il (1041-12, wg, He 1) gurmukh boojhhu sabad pachhaanhu. As Gurmukh, understand and realize the Shabad.
ufe ufe sat Saeda ad nists Aafeur nasil (1041-12, wg, He 1)
ghat ghat bhogay bhoganhaaraa rahai ateet sabaa-i-aa. ||14| |
The Enjoyer enjoys each and every heart, and yet He remains detached from all. ||14]|
GTsHfs aI fs AA AT Il (1041-12, wg, we 1) gurmat bolhu har jas soochaa. Through the Guru's Teachings, chant the Pure Praises of the Lord.
TIS wirdt Sug Sar i (1041-13, wg, we 1) gurmat aakhee daykhhu oochaa. Through the Guru's Teachings, behold the lofty Lord with your eyes.
Real oH He fa wel aoa ofa df Jarfeur NqUNSION (1041-13, wg, He 1) sarvanee naam sunai har banee naanak har rang rangaa-i-aa. ||15]|3||20|| Whoever listens to the Lord's Name, and the Word of His Bani, O Nanak, is imbued with the color of the Lord's Love. ||15]|3||20]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1041-14) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
OH ay usd us fer i (1041-14, we, Hs 1) kaam kroDh parhar par nindaa. Leave behind sexual desire, anger and the slander of others.
we OF Str dg fafser it 041-14, we, us 1) lab lobh taj hohu nichindaa. Renounce greed and possessiveness, and become carefree.
3H a Hare Sfs foaer fa nists ofe aa urfemr ait (1041-15, wg, He 1) bharam kaa sangal torh niraalaa har antar har ras paa-i-aa. ||1]| Renounce greed and possessiveness, and become carefree.
fof enfs fr@ wf Serfes SH i (1041-15, we, ws 1) nis daaman ji-o chamak chandaa-in daykhai. As one sees the flash of lightning in the night,
wifofofa afs fadafs Ue Il 041-16, wg, He 1) ahinis jot nirantar paykhai. see the Divine Light deep within your nucleus, day and night.
mee TU nigu Agu ate ys SufeMr IM (1041-16, wg, 4s aanand roop anoop saroopaa gur poorai daykhaa-i-aa. ||2| | The Lord, the embodiment of bliss, incomparably beautiful, reveals the Perfect Guru.
[21 |
Afsad fag mmd ys 37g Il (1041-17, wg, ws satgur milhu aapay parabh taaray. So meet with the True Guru, and God Himself will save you.
AA us Ae Clue ass ll C1041-17, wg, we 1) sas ghar soor deepak gainaaray. He placed the lamps of the sun and the moon in the home of the sky.
ofa uifere Jog foe oat Ag fesefe you Aafenr Si (1041-17, wg, He 1) daykh adisat rahhu liv laagee sabh taribhavan barahm sabaa-i-aa. ||3]| He placed the lamps of the sun and the moon in the home of the sky.
wifys oA ure fyAat 3B AS Il (1041-18, wg, He 1) amrit ras paa-ay tarisnaa bha-o jaa-ay. Obtaining the sublime ambrosial essence, desire and fear are dispelled.
nose Us UTS ITY TSS Il (1041-18, wg, He 1) anbha-o pad paavai aap gavaa-ay. Obtaining the sublime ambrosial essence, desire and fear are dispelled.
Cut ueet Gs Gat fooHs Fag oer il (1041-19, wg, He 1)
oochee padvee oocho oochaa nirmal sabad kamaa-i-aa. ||4]|
The lofty and exalted state, the highest of the high is obtained, practicing the immaculate Word of the Shabad. ||4||
mifeAe maTT OU MUTE Il (1041-19, wg, He 1)
adrist agochar naam apaaraa.
The lofty and exalted state, the highest of the high is obtained, practicing the immaculate Word of the Shabad. ||4]|
ust IOS2 mits dA Htot oH fumirar Il (1042-1, wg, He 1)
at ras meethaa naam pi-aaraa. The sublime essence of the Beloved Naam is utterly sweet.
soa a@ afar afar ofs aA dts ofe wu nig 3 urfemr ull (1042-1, >, He 1) naanak ka-o jug jug har jas deejai har japee-ai ant na paa-i-aa. ||5]| The sublime essence of the Beloved Naam is utterly sweet.
nists on usufs Ste il (1042-2, wg, He 1) antar naam paraapat heeraa. With the Naam deep within the nucleus of the self, the jewel is obtained.
dfs AUS HG HS 3 Utes I (1042-2, wg, He 1) har japtay man man tay Dheeraa. With the Naam deep within the nucleus of the self, the jewel is obtained.
eue we 3@ sno uit aos Hath 3 Afemr WEN (1042-2, wg, He 1)
dughat ghat bha-o bhanjan paa-ee-ai baahurh janam na jaa-i-aa. ||6||
On that most difficult path, the Destroyer of fear is found, and one does not have to enter the womb of reincarnation again. ||6]|
sats of3 aa Aafe Sdar Il (1042-3, wg, He 1)
bhagat hayt gur sabad tarangaa. On that most difficult path, the Destroyer of fear is found, and one does not have to enter the womb of reincarnation again. ||6||
dfs AA OH UST Hal Il (1042-3, wg, He 1) har jas naam padaarath mangaa. I beg for the treasure of the Naam, and the Lord's Praise.
ofa are aa Afs fore afe ard Hay Aafemr WDM (1042-4, wg, He 1) har bhaavai gur may! milaa-ay har taaray jagat sabaa-i-aa. ||7|| I beg for the treasure of the Naam, and the Lord's Praise.
fats au AfuG Afsae Hs SF & Il (1042-4, wg, He 1) jin jap japi-o satgur mat vaa kay. One who chants the Lord's Chant, attains the Wisdom of the True Guru.
HAAS AH ASA Us Sk A Il (1042-5, wg, us 1) jamkankar kaal sayvak pag taa kay. One who chants the Lord's Chant, attains the Wisdom of the True Guru.
@3n Hats afs ffs Osu wa s@n@ ute Safer II (1042-5, wg, He 1D
ootam sangat gat mit ootam jag bha-ojal paar taraa-i-aa. ||8]||
In the noble congregation of the Sangat, one's state and way of life become noble as well, and one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||8]|
fey sen@ Has Aafe ae Soh I (1042-6, wg, He 1) ih bhavjal jagat sabad gur taree-ai. Through the Shabad, one crosses over this terrifying world-ocean.
nize at efaar nists AA I (1042-6, wg, He 1) antar kee dubiDhaa antar jaree-ai. Through the Shabad, one crosses over this terrifying world-ocean.
Us We 3 AH aC ne Taos Gey vate ICI (1042-6, wg, He 1D
panch baan lay jam ka-o maarai gagnantar Dhanakh charhaa-i-aa. ||9] |
Taking up the five arrows of virtue, Death is killed, drawing the Bow of the Tenth Gate in the Mind's Sky. ||9]|
Was ofg Age Hots fas ure Il (1042-7, wg, He 1)
saakat nar sabad surat ki-o paa-ee-ai. How can the faithless cynics attain enlightened awareness of the Shabad?
Rae Aofs fag wire wre it (1042-7, we, us 1) sabad surat bin aa-ee-ai jaa-ee-ai. How can the faithless cynics attain enlightened awareness of the Shabad?
aed TeHfy vats uates ofs us stfar fefenr ION (1042-8, wg, Hs 1)
naanak gurmukh mukat paraa-in har poorai bhaag milaa-i-aa. ||10||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh obtains the support of liberation; by perfect destiny, he meets the Lord. ||10]|
foas@ Afsag J Tae Il (1042-8, wg, He 1) nirbha-o satgur hai rakhvaalaa. The Fearless True Guru is our Savior and Protector.
sats usufs Ts AUS | (1042-9, wg, ve 1) bhagat paraapat gur gopaalaa. Devotional worship is obtained through the Guru, the Lord of the world.
ufs mde mode aH as Hate fadae ufemr Waal (1042-9, wg, Hs 1)
Dhun anand anaahad vaajai gur sabad niranjan paa-i-aa. ||11]||
The blissful music of the unstruck sound current vibrates and resounds; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Immaculate Lord is obtained. ||11]|
fsas@ A fafa ardt Sar il (1042-10, wg, ve 1) nirbha-o so sir naahee laykhaa. He alone is fearless, who has no destiny written on His head.
wif mse aeafs J Sar i (1042-10, wg, ve 1) aap alaykh kudrat hai daykhaa. God Himself is unseen; He reveals Himself through His wondrous creative power.
uify mists uinst Hs soa TeHfS A urfemr 9211 (1042-10, wg, He 1D)
aap ateet ajonee sambha-o naanak gurmat so paa-i-aa. ||12| |
He Himself is unattached, unborn and self-existent. O Nanak, through the Guru's Teachings, He is found. ||12]|
nisg at afs Afsag AWE I (1042-11, we, He 1) antar kee gat satgur jaanai. The True Guru knows the state of one's inner being.
A fess@ aa Aafe ueré i (1042-11, wg, us 1) so nirbha-o gur sabad pachhaanai. He alone is fearless, who realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nisg efy fadsts gs uiss 6 HE sotEMr ISI (1042-12, wg, He 1)
antar daykh nirantar boojhai anat na man dolaa-i-aa. ||13]|
He looks within his own inner being, and realizes the Lord within all; his mind does not waver at all. ||13]|
fsas@ A nie nists sfhr i (1042-12, wg, Hs 1) nirbha-o so abh antar vasi-aa. He alone is fearless, within whose being the Lord abides.
nifofota oth fedre sfAmr it (1042-13, wg, us 1) ahinis naam niranjan rasi-aa. Day and night, he is delighted with the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oe dfs AA Hats uch ofs AoA Aofa feerfemr Ne (1042-13, »g, He 1)
naanak har jas sangat paa-ee-ai har sehjay sahj milaa-i-aa. ||14||
O Nanak, in the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, the Lord's Praise is obtained, and one easily, intuitively meets the Lord. ||14]|
nists wafs A Ys ATE Il (1042-14, wg, He 1) antar baahar so parabh jaanai. One who knows God, within the self and beyond,
Jo nifsugs ses wis mrs I (1042-14, wg, Hs 1) rahai alipat chaltay ghar aanai. remains detached, and brings his wandering mind back to its home.
Gufs urfe Asa fsa Set AY Soa nis TA UeMr NAUINIUI (1042-14, wg, Hs 1) oopar aad sarab tihu lo-ee sach naanak amrit ras paa-i-aa. ||15||4]|21]|
The True Primal Lord is over all the three worlds; O Nanak, His Ambrosial Nectar is obtained. ||15]|4]|21]|
HTT HIG 4 Il (1042-15) maaroo mehlaa 1. Maaroo, First Mehl:
TEAS AISTS MUTI | (1042-15, wg, we 1) kudrat karnaihaar apaaraa. The Creator Lord is infinite; His creative power is wondrous.
ats at ardt fag aa Il (1042-16, wg, Hs 1) keetay kaa naahee kihu chaaraa. Created beings have no power over Him.
Aba Gurfe fora @ um fafs fafs gan verfenr WAI (1042-16, wg, He 1)
jee-a upaa-ay rijak day aapay sir sir hukam chalaa-i-aa. ||1]|
He formed the living beings, and He Himself sustains them; the Hukam of His Command controls each and every one. ||1]|
JOH vote sor sIUT Il (1042-16, wg, He 1) hukam chalaa-ay rahi-aa bharpooray. The all-pervading Lord orchestrates all through His Hukam.
fan 3s fan nimat Ts I (1042-17, wg, He 1) kis nayrhai kis aakhaa™ dooray. Who is near, and who is far away?
qus yae dfs ufe wie tug as sa Aafemr IQ (1042-17, wg, He 1)
gupat pargat har ghat ghat daykhhu vartai taak sabaa-i-aa. ||2]|
Behold the Lord, both hidden and manifest, in each and every heart; the unique Lord is permeating all. ||2||
fA AS HS Ass AHS Il (1042-18, wg, Hs 1) jis ka-o maylay surat samaa-ay. One whom the Lord unites with Himself, merges in conscious awareness.
ad Aaet dfs oH fore ii 1042-18, wg, ue 1) gur sabdee har naam Dhi-aa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, meditate on the Lord's Name.
mee JU nigu mas Te fifemt say Went SI (1042-18, wg, Hs 1)
aanad roop anoop agochar gur mili-ai bharam jaa-i-aa. ||3||
God is the embodiment of bliss, incomparably beautiful and unfathomable; meeting with the Guru, doubt is dispelled. ||3] |
Hd 36 Ud 3 3H fimairar It (1042-19, wg, us 1) man tan Dhan tay naam pi-aaraa. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is more dear to me than my mind, body and wealth.
nifS Aurel BSS Il (1042-19, wg, He 1) ant sakhaa-ee chalanvaaraa. In the end, when I must depart, it shall be my only help and support.
Ua 908s Hd und Sdt Afar set fag ale aa fats wy urfer sil (1043-1, wg, He 1D
moh pasaar nahee sang baylee bin har gur kin sukh paa-i-aa. ||4]| In this world of love and attachment, no one is anyone else's friend or companion; without the Lord, without the Guru, who has ever found peace? ||4| |
fA AS sets AT TT UT Il (1043-1, wg, He 1) jis ka-o nadar karay gur pooraa. He, unto whom the Perfect Guru grants His Grace,
Rafe fare aaHfs As Il (1043-2, wg, He 1)
sabad milaa-ay gurmat sooraa.
is merged in the Word of the Shabad, through the Teachings of the brave, heroic Guru.
TX TI t Vda Ade” fats gor Hata ue ult (1043-2, wg, He 1) naanak gur kay charan sarayvhu jin bhoolaa maarag paa-i-aa. ||5]|
O Nanak, dwell upon, and serve at the Guru's feet; He places those who wander back on the Path. ||5||
Hz Hot ofa ue AA fina I (1043-3, nrg, He 1) sant janaa™ har Dhan jas pi-aaraa. The wealth of the Lord's Praise is very dear to the humble Saints.
Tans ufent SH SHS Il (1043-3, wg, He 1) gurmat paa-i-aa naam tumaaraa. Through the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained Your Name, Lord.
wa Az ad Ufs ofs & ofs esa AA fer NEN (1043-3, wg, He 1)
jaachik sayv karay dar har kai har dargeh jas gaa-i-aa. ||6]|
The beggar serves at the Lord's door, and in the Court of the Lord, sings His Praises. [16] |
Afsag fxs 3 nafs swe | (1043-4, wg, He 1D satgur milai ta mahal bulaa-ay. When one meets the True Guru, he is called into the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Ad edad afs ufs ure il (1043-4, wg, we 1)
saachee dargeh gat pat paa-ay. In the True Court, he is blessed with salvation and honor.
Was o@s ant ofs Hed HOH He EY Ue HDI (1043-4, wg, He 1)
saakat tha-ur naahee har mandar janam marai dukh paa-i-aa. ||7||
The faithless cynic has no place of rest in the Lord's palace; he suffers the pains of birth and death. ||7]|
Reg Afsad AHS mara | (1043-5, wg, He 1) sayvhu satgur samund athaahaa. So serve the True Guru, the unfathomable ocean,
UST SH ISO UG BI Il (1043-5, wg, He 1) paavhu naam ratan Dhan laahaa. and you shall obtain the profit, the wealth, the jewel of the Naam.
fafter He fe vifys Afs oeg ae Ae Ase uf II (1043-6, wg, He 1)
bikhi-aa mal jaa-ay amrit sar naavhu gur sar santokh paa-i-aa. ||8]|
The filth of corruption is washed away, by bathing in the pool of Ambrosial Nectar. In the Guru's pool, contentment is obtained. ||8]||
Afsag AZg Hao AtA Il (1043-6, we, Hs 1) satgur sayvhu sank na keejai. So serve the Guru without hesitation.
witat utfo fea goby Il (1043-7, ug, He 1) aasaa maahi niraas raheejai. And in the midst of hope, remain unmoved by hope.
AA ey faa Reg fete wots sa 3s wfenr eI (1043-7, wg, He 1)
sansaa dookh binaasan sayvhu fir baahurh rog na laa-i-aa. ||9]|
Serve the Eradicator of cynicism and suffering, and you shall never again be afflicted by the disease. ||9||
Ars are fSH eShore I (1043-8, wg, ve 1) saachay bhaavai tis vadee-aa-ay. One who is pleasing to the True Lord is blessed with glorious greatness.
ASS A UA (SA AHSTE Il (1043-8, wg, He 1) ka-un so doojaa tis samjhaa-ay. Who else can teach him anything?
fs Ta Hats Sa FIs SSA Ts Ta SEM AOI (1043-8, wg, Hs
har gur moorat aykaa vartai naanak har gur bhaa-i-aa. ||10]|
The Lord and the Guru are pervading in one form. O Nanak, the Lord loves the Guru. ||10]|
THI UASA SF UTS Il (1043-9, wg, ue 1) vaacheh pustak vayd puraanaa”. Some read scriptures, the Vedas and the Puraanas.
fea afa Hafs Harvefs Arar i (1043-9, wg, He 1) ik bahi suneh sunaaveh kaanaa’. Some sit and listen, and read to others.
Winds GUE ag fas us fas afsas sa 0 urfer AA (1043-9, wg, He 1)
ajgar kapat kahhu ki-o khul®ai bin satgur tat na paa-i-aa. ||11||
Tell me, how can the heavy, rigid doors be opened? Without the True Guru, the essence of reality is not realized. ||11]|
ate fasts warefs SAH Il (1043-10, wg, 48 1) karahi bibhoot lagaaveh bhasmai. Some collect dust, and smear their bodies with ashes;
nists a Tas A ICH Il (1043-10, wg, He 1) antar kroDh chandaal so ha-umai. but deep within them are the outcasts of anger and egotism.
uns ad Aa 3 uréht fae Afsag new o urfer 19211 (1043-11, »g, He 1)
pakhand keenay jog na paa-ee-ai bin satgur alakh na paa-i-aa. ||12||
Practicing hypocrisy, Yoga is not obtained; without the True Guru, the unseen Lord is not found. ||12]|
steve eds BH aaa Sfenrar i 1043-11, wg, ue 1)
tirath varat naym karahi udi-aanaa.
Some make vows to visit sacred shrines of pilgrimage, keep fasts and live in the forest.
AS AS ARH aata fara it (1043-12, wg, He 1) jat sat sanjam katheh gi-aanaa. Some practice chastity, charity and self-discipline, and speak of spiritual wisdom.
oH on fag fa@ ay urcba faa Afsag san 3 A feMr ISI (1043-12, wg, He 1)
raam naam bin ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai bin satgur bharam na jaa-i-aa. ||13]||
But without the Lord's Name, how can anyone find peace? Without the True Guru, doubt is not dispelled. ||13]|
feat aay sfenian rst I (1043-13, wg, He 1)
ni-ulee karam bhu-i-angam bhaathee.
Inner cleansing techniques, channeling the energy to raise the Kundalini to the Tenth Gate,
JIA AIA UTA Ho Trot Il (1043-13, wg, we 1) raychak kumbhak poorak man haathee. inhaling, exhaling and holding the breath by the force of the mind -
urds uaH ulfs odt ofa AG aa wee HO SA UfeMr ISI (1043-14, Hg, He 1) pakhand Dharam pareet nahee har sa-o gur sabad mahaa ras paa-i-aa. ||14||
by empty hypocritical practices, Dharmic love for the Lord is not produced. Only through the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the sublime, supreme essence obtained. [|14]|
aeats tft Id HS HSMM Il (1043-14, wg, He 1) kudrat daykh rahay man maani-aa. Seeing the Lord's creative power, my mind remains satisfied.
ad Aaet AZ FIN UStoni il 1043-15, wg, ve 1) gur sabdee sabh barahm pachhaani-aa. Through the Guru's Shabad, I have realized that all is God.
SO MISH TH Hatter ae Afsdad visy wafer WAUNUNQ2I (4043-15, wg, He 1) naanak aatam raam sabaa-i-aa gur satgur alakh lakhaa-i-aa. ||15]|5||22||
O Nanak, the Lord, the Supreme Soul, is in all. The Guru, the True Guru, has inspired me to see the unseen Lord. ||15||5||22||
Hg AGI HIS 3 (1043-17)
maaroo solhay mehlaa 3 Maaroo, Solhay, Third Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1043-17) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
gant Aon fiqAfe Guret i (1043-18, wg, 8 3) hukmee sehjay sarisat upaa-ee. By the Hukam of His Command, He effortlessly created the Universe.
afs afs 28 nruet efsuret it (1043-18, wg, Hs 3) kar kar vaykhai apnee vadi-aa-ee. Creating the creation, He gazes upon His own greatness.
nm Ad ATS vy JAH Son AHS FT UU (1043-18, wg, 8 3) aapay karay karaa-ay aapay hukmay rahi-aa samaa-ee hay. ||1]|| He Himself acts, and inspires all to act; in His Will, He pervades and permeates all.
[21
Heer Hg AAS WIT I (1043-19, wg, ve 3) maa-i-aa moh jagat gubaaraa. The world is in the darkness of love and attachment to Maya.
TaHfs FS FX AI I (1043-19, og, ws 3) gurmukh boojhai ko veechaaraa. How rare is that Gurmukh who contemplates, and understands.
nny sefe ad A ure nm Afs fesret FT MI (1043-19, wg, Hs 3)
aapay nadar karay so paa-ay aapay mayl milaa-ee hay. ||2||
He alone attains the Lord, unto whom He grants His Grace. He Himself unites in His Union. ||2||
UST IOs
~~ SN
nmy HS eS ssniret i (1044-1, wg, ue 3) aapay maylay day vadi-aa-ee. Uniting with Himself, He bestows glorious greatness.
Ts UPA SHAS uret it (1044-1, wg, ws 3) gur parsaadee keemat paa-ee. By Guru's Grace, one comes to know the Lord's worth.
Houta avs fed fasaret er ote ynret FT BM (1044-1, wg, He 3)
manmukh bahut firai billaadee doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee hay. ||3]|
The self-willed manmukh wanders everywhere, weeping and wailing; he is utterly ruined by the love of duality. ||3]]|
ICH Hfemr fed uret i (1044-2, wg, Hs 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa vichay paa-ee. Egotism was instilled into the illusion of Maya.
HOH FB ufs Tevet Il (1044-2, nrg, He 3) manmukh bhoolay pat gavaa-ee. The self-willed manmukh is deluded, and loses his honor.
qonfa 32 A afe ad Ars afar AHret TZ ISI (1044-3, wg, He 3) gurmukh hovai so naa-ay raachai saachai rahi-aa samaa-ee hay. ||4||
But one who becomes Gurmukh is absorbed in the Name; he remains immersed in the True Lord. ||4]|
ad 3 fame oH I3q UfeEnr I (1044-3, wg, He 3)
gur tay gi-aan naam ratan paa-i-aa.
Spiritual wisdom is obtained from the Guru, along with the jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Hot Hifg Ho Hfo AHEM Il (1044-4, wg, He 3) mansaa maar man maahi samaa-i-aa. Desires are subdued, and one remains immersed in the mind.
nm ae ad Als ATs wy VE gsret FT WU (1044-4, wg, ws 3) aapay khayl karay sabh kartaa aapay day-ay bujhaa-ee hay. ||5|| The Creator Himself stages all His plays; He Himself bestows understanding. ||5||
Afsag AS wiry ASS Il (1044-5, wg, ws 3) satgur Sayvay aap gavaa-ay. One who serves the True Guru eradicates self-conceit.
fife UtSsH Aafe AY UTE I (1044-5, wg, He 3) mil pareetam sabad sukh paa-ay. Meeting with his Beloved, he finds peace through the Word of the Shabad.
nists fimrg sast ast AofA HS Safe wiret FT WEN (1044-5, wg, He 3)
antar pi-aar bhagtee raataa sahj matay ban aa-ee hay. ||6]|
Deep within his inner being, he is imbued with loving devotion; intuitively, he becomes one with the Lord. ||6]|
wy fogs TI FS AST Il (1044-6, weg, He 3) dookh nivaaran gur tay jaataa. The Destroyer of pain is known through the Guru.
nity fife Aerdteg BST Il (1044-6, wg, He 3) aap mili-aa jagjeevan daataa. The Great Giver, the Life of the world, Himself has met me.
fA 3 we Aet gs 3 san Adtsg WET T DM (1044-6, wg, Hs 3)
jis no laa-ay so-ee boojhai bha-o bharam sareerahu jaa-ee hay. ||7| |
He alone understands, whom the Lord joins with Himself. Fear and doubt are taken away from his body. ||7]||
mmy aaufr mm SS i (1044-7, wg, ne 3) aapay gurmukh aapay dayvai. He Himself is the Gurmukh, and He Himself bestows His blessings.
Ae Aafe Afsag AS i (1044-7, wg, ve 3)
sachai sabad satgur sayvai. Through the True Word of the Shabad, serve the True Guru.
aa FH fsx xfs 3 Ae ATS fe afs mret FT UH (1044-7, og, He 3) jaraa jam tis johi na saakai saachay si-o ban aa-ee hay. ||8]| Old age and death cannot even touch one who is in harmony with the True Lord. ||8]|
fSHor miarfs A HATS I (1044-8, ug, He 3)
tarisnaa agan jalai sansaaraa. The world is burning up in the fire of desire.
nfs afew aga fears i (1044-8, wg, He 3) jal jal khapai bahut vikaaraa. It burns and burns, and is destroyed in all its corruption.
HOHY OCT 5 US aa Asad FS FSS FT UC (1044-9, wg, we 3)
manmukh tha-ur na paa-ay kabhoo satgur boojh bujhaa-ee hay. ||9||
The self-willed manmukh finds no place of rest anywhere. The True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||9]|
Afsag Adele A essa Il (1044-9, wg, ws 3) satgur sayvan say vadbhaagee. Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.
Ars oth Aer fee salt Il (1044-10, wg, He 3) saachai naam sadaa liv laagee. They remain lovingly focused on the True Name forever.
nists on sfenr fouaes feAat Aafe gset FT WAM (1044-10, wg, Hs 3)
antar naam ravi-aa nihkayval tarisnaa sabad bujhaa-ee hay. ||10]|
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, permeates the nucleus of their inner being; through the Shabad, their desires are quenched. ||10||
Ae" Hae At J get Il (1044-10, wg, ue 3)
sachaa sabad sachee hai banee. True is the Word of the Shabad, and True is the Bani of His Word.
aonfa fea fas ueret it (1044-11, wg, He 3) gurmukh virlai kinai pachhaanee. How rare is that Gurmukh who realizes this.
Ae Aafe gS Aaa ores We gat F NAA (1044-11, og, ne 3)
sachay sabad ratay bairaagee aavan jaan rahaa-ee hay. ||11]||
Those who are imbued with the True Shabad are detached. Their comings and goings in reincarnation are ended. ||11]|
AE FS AHAB Vare Il (1044-12, wg, us 3) sabad bujhai so mail chukaa-ay. One who realizes the Shabad is cleansed of impurities.
SdH oH SA HPS mE I (1044-12, wg, He 3) nirmal naam vasai man aa-ay. The Immaculate Naam abides within his mind.
Afsag nue Ae dt Aefs JEN feag AST T NII (1044-12, wg, He 3) satgur apnaa sad hee sayveh ha-umai vichahu jaa-ee hay. ||12|| He serves his True Guru forever, and egotism is eradicated from within. ||12] |
GT 3 FS 3B TT AS Il (1044-13, og, vs 3)
gur tay boojhai taa dar soojhai.
If one comes to understand, through the Guru, then he comes to know the Lord's Door.
om feget afe af BF Il (1044-13, wg, Hs 3) naam vihoonaa kath kath loojhai. But without the Naam, one babbles and argues in vain.
Aisas Ae at sfuret fens su Tevet FT WAM (1044-13, wg, He 3) satgur sayvay kee vadi-aa-ee tarisnaa bhookh gavaa-ee hay. ||13]| The glory of serving the True Guru is that it eradicates hunger and thirst. ||13]|
mime nity fH ST SS I (1044-14, og, Hs 3) aapay aap milai taa boojhai. When the Lord unites them with Himself, then they come to understand.
fare feger fas 5 AS Il (1044-14, og, He 3)
gi-aan vihoonaa kichhoo na soojhai. Without spiritual wisdom, they understand nothing at all.
Ge at ots Het He nists wet Aafe SAT T ASI (1044-15, wg, He 3)
gur kee daat sadaa man antar banee sabad vajaa-ee hay. ||14|| One whose mind is filled with the Guru's gift forever - his inner being resounds with the Shabad, and the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||14| |
A ufe fesfimr A aH aHfemr I (1044-15, wg, He 3) jo Dhur likhi-aa so karam kamaa-i-aa. He acts according to his pre-ordained destiny.
afe a He ufs sarfemr I (1044-16, wg, He 3) ko-ay na maytai Dhur furmaa-i-aa. No one can erase the Command of the Primal Lord.
AsHats ufo fs5 ct er fae a@ ofa fefs uret TF NAW (1044-16, wg, He 3) satsangat meh tin hee vaasaa jin ka-o Dhur likh paa-ee hay. ||15]|
They alone dwell in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, who have such pre- ordained destiny. ||15]|
must ets aS A UTS I (1044-17, wg, He 3) apnee nadar karay so paa-ay. He alone finds the Lord, unto whom He grants His Grace.
Ae Aafe sat fag we i (1044-17, wg, ue 3) sachai sabad taarhee chit laa-ay. He links his consciousness to the deep meditative state of the True Shabad.
SSA VA Ad Fost sth any efs uret FT AEWA (1044-17, wg, ne 3) naanak daas kahai baynantee bheekhi-aa naam dar paa-ee hay. ||16]||1||
Nanak, Your slave, offers this humble prayer; I stand at Your Door, begging for Your Name. ||16]|1]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1044-18)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Sa Sa FIs AT ASt Il (1044-18, wg, us 3) ayko ayk vartai sabh so-ee. The One and only Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere.
Tafa feser gs TET Il (1044-18, wg, Hs 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. How rare is that person, who as Gurmukh, understands this.
ea ofe afer vs nists fan fas nies & aet T NA (1044-19, vg, He 3)
ayko rav rahi-aa sabh antar tis bin avar na ko-ee hay. ||1]|
The One Lord is permeating and pervading, deep within the nucleus of all. Without Him, there is no other at all. ||1]|
Bd VoTAtT Abt Bure il 1044-19, wg, ne 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh jee-a upaa-ay. He created the 8.4 millions species of beings.
uat qogU format fomrat uirfly AES Il (1045-1, wg, H3 3)
gi-aanee Dhi-aanee aakh sunaa-ay. The spiritual teachers and meditators proclaim this.
Aso fena ANTS nmd atHfs da o Tet T WM (1045-1, wg, ne 3) sabhnaa rijak samaahay aapay keemat hor na ho-ee hay. ||2]| He Himself nourishes all; no one else can estimate His value. ||2| |
Hfeor Hg nig niUrE Il (1045-2, Hg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh anDh anDhaaraa. Love and attachment to Maya are utter darkness.
ICH Hat UAfaMe UTATST II (1045-2, ug, He 3) ha-umai mayraa pasri-aa paasaaraa. Egotism and possessiveness have spread throughout the expanse of the universe.
notes Hos Jd feg ast aa fag AS © Tet FT WBN (1045-2, wg, He 3)
an-din jalat rahai din raatee gur bin saa“t na ho-ee hay. ||3]|
Night and day, they burn, day and night; without the Guru, there is no peace or tranquility. ||3]|
mint Ffs fees mt il (1045-3, wg, ue 3) aapay jorh vichhorhay aapay. He Himself unites, and He Himself separates.
nme arfy Bart nmr |i (1045-3, wg, He 3) aapay thaap uthaapay aapay. He Himself establishes, and He Himself disestablishes.
Ae" JaH Ae uaa dafe Jan 3 det J sil 1045-3, wg, ne 3)
sachaa hukam sachaa paasaaraa horan hukam na ho-ee hay. ||4| |
True is the Hukam of His Command, and True is the expanse of His universe. No one else can issue any Command. ||4||
nny ofe we A Bra I (1045-4, wg, He 3) aapay laa-ay la-ay so laagai. He alone is attached to the Lord, whom the Lord attaches to Himself.
Ts USATS AH aT SE SAH I (1045-4, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee jam kaa bha-o bhaagai. By Guru's Grace, the fear of death runs away.
nists Aa Het AYuETSt TeHfe gs get F WU (1045-5, wg, Hs 3)
antar sabad sadaa sukh-daata gurmukh boojhai ko-ee hay. ||5||
The Shabad, the Giver of peace, dwells forever deep within the nucleus of the self. One who is Gurmukh understands. ||5]|
~~
nmy AB AfH fare it (1045-5, wg, 8 3) aapay maylay mayl milaa-ay. God Himself unites those united in His Union.
usta fosfimr A Azar SAE Il 1045-5, wg, Hs 3) purab likhi-aa so maytnaa na jaa-ay. Whatever is pre-ordained by destiny, cannot be erased.
wofes safs ad feo ast aonfs AS Tet FT WEN (1045-6, wg, He 3)
an-din bhagat karay din raatee gurmukh sayvaa ho-ee hay. ||6||
Night and day, His devotees worship Him, day and night; one who becomes Gurmukh serves Him. ||6]|
Afsag Afe Wet AY ATST Il (1045-6, wg, He 3) satgur sayv sadaa sukh jaataa. Serving the True Guru, lasting peace is experienced.
nmy nite fife Ass" AT VST I (1045-7, wg, He 3) aapay aa-ay mili-aa sabhnaa kaa daataa. He Himself, the Giver of all, has come and met me.
J@H fs feAa mats foedt Hae dis AY Tet T WDM (1045-7, wg, He 3)
ha-umai maar tarisnaa agan nivaaree sabad cheen sukh ho-ee hay. ||7]||
Subduing egotism, the fire of thirst has been extinguished; contemplating the Word of the Shabad, peace is found. ||7| |
afent ay HT 3s FS Il (1045-8, wg, Hs 3) kaa-i-aa kutamb moh na boojhai. One who is attached to his body and family, does not understand.
TaHfe Ts J nmdt AS il 1045-8, wg, ws 3) gurmukh hovai ta aakhee soojhai. But one who becomes Gurmukh, sees the Lord with his eyes.
notes oH ve feg ast fife utsn AY det T cH 045-8, wg, He 3)
an-din naam ravai din raatee mil pareetam sukh ho-ee hay. ||8]|
Night and day, he chants the Naam, day and night; meeting with his Beloved, he finds peace. ||8||
HOHE UZ EA FT Ba Il (1045-9, wg, ws 3) manmukh Dhaat doojai hai laagaa. The self-willed manmukh wanders distracted, attached to duality.
HOHS ot & HE wrsrar Il (1045-9, wg, He 3) janmat kee na moo-o aabhaagaa. That unfortunate wretch - why didn't he just die as soon as he was born?
nites Ws fase Hon aefeur fag ae Hats o Tet T WEN (1045-10, wg, He 3)
aavat jaat birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa bin gur mukat na ho-ee hay. ||9]|
Coming and going, he wastes away his life in vain. Without the Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||9]|
afin aAO IH He Bret i 1045-10, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa kusuDh ha-umai mal laa-ee. That body which is stained with the filth of egotism is false and impure.
A AG Gefs 3 Hw B AT Il (1045-11, wg, He 3) jay sa-o Dhoveh taa mail na jaa-ee. It may be washed a hundred times, but its filth is still not removed.
Hafe cu 3 det de feta Hat yfs 3 Tet F AON! (1045-11, wg, Hz 3)
sabad Dhopai taa hachhee hovai fir mailee mool na ho-ee hay. ||10]|
But if it is washed with the Word of the Shabad, then it is truly cleansed, and it shall never be soiled again. ||10]|
Us es ofenr Aurats il (1045-12, wg, Hs 3) panch doot kaa-i-aa sanghaareh. The five demons destroy the body.
Hf ufe HHfs AaE 3 Sterafs i (1045-12, wg, ue 3) mar mar jameh sabad na vichaareh. He dies and dies again, only to be reincarnated; he does not contemplate the Shabad.
nists ufeor Ho aaa fa Hus Afo o det FT WAU (1045-12, wg, He 3)
antar maa-i-aa moh gubaaraa ji-o supnai suDh na ho-ee hay. ||11]||
The darkness of emotional attachment to Maya is within his inner being; as if in a dream, he does not understand. ||11]|
fefa ust urfa Aafe J wa | (1045-13, wg, He 3) ik panchaa maar sabad hai laagay. Some conquer the five demons, by being attached to the Shabad.
Afsag uirfe fer esa | (1045-13, wg, He 3) satgur aa-ay mili-aa vadbhaagay. They are blessed and very fortunate; the True Guru comes to meet them.
nists Avg defs df aS ofA ANTS ASt T WAM (1045-14, wg, we 3)
antar saach raveh rang raatay sahj samaavai so-ee hay. ||12||
Within the nucleus of their inner being, they dwell upon the Truth; attuned to the Lord's Love, they intuitively merge in Him. ||12]|
Ts at BH AT J AU Il (1045-14, og, we 3) gur kee chaal guroo tay jaapai. The Guru's Way is known through the Guru.
ua Reg Aafe fret il (1045-14, wg, Hs 3) pooraa sayvak sabad sinjaapai. His perfect servant attains realization through the Shabad.
Ae’ Hae de we nists GAat JA UY AG Aet FT NII (1045-15, wg, He 3)
sadaa sabad ravai ghat antar rasnaa ras chaakhai sach so-ee hay. ||13]|
Deep within his heart, he dwells forever upon the Shabad; he tastes the sublime essence of the True Lord with his tongue. ||13]]|
ICH Hrd Aafe fees Il (1045-15, ug, He 3) ha-umai maaray sabad nivaaray. Egotism is conquered and subdued by the Shabad.
ofs a any oe Bfs as Il (1045-16, wg, He 3) har kaa naam rakhai ur Dhaaray. I have enshrined the Name of the Lord within my heart.
fan fag 8 dg 5 We AOA dE A det T NII (1045-16, wg, He 3)
aykas bin ha-o hor na jaanaa sehjay ho-ay so ho-ee hay. ||14]|
Other than the One Lord, I know nothing at all. Whatever will be, will automatically be. ||14]|
fag Afsara Aon fas adt urfemr I 1045-17, wg, He 3) bin satgur sahj kinai nahee paa-i-aa. Without the True Guru, no one obtains intuitive wisdom.
aenfa gS Afs AHEM It (1045-17, wg, Hs 3) gurmukh boojhai sach samaa-i-aa. The Gurmukh understands, and is immersed in the True Lord.
Ae Afe nafe AY TS ICH Hae Bet FT NWI (1045-17, wg, He 3)
sachaa sayv sabad sach raatay ha-umai sabday kho-ee hay. ||15]|
He serves the True Lord, and is attuned to the True Shabad. The Shabad banishes egotism. ||15]|
nmy Jeerst Herd i (1045-18, wg, Hs 3)
aapay gundaataa beechaaree. He Himself is the Giver of virtue, the Contemplative Lord.
aanfy eefo uot Ardt il 045-18, wg, He 3) gurmukh dayveh pakee saaree. The Gurmukh is given the winning dice.
ood oth AMefs ATS ATS 3 ufs det FT AEM (1045-18, wg, Hs 3)
naanak naam samaaveh saachai saachay tay pat ho-ee hay. ||16||2||
O Nanak, immersed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one becomes true; from the True Lord, honor is obtained. ||16]|2| |
Hg HIG 3 Il (1045-19)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Hames AT SAX SST Il (1045-19, wg, ve 3) jagjeevan saachaa ayko daataa. One One True Lord is the Life of the World, the Great Giver.
Td Ae" S Aafe USTST Il (1045-19, wg, ve 3) gur sayvaa tay sabad pachhaataa. Serving the Guru, through the Word of the Shabad, He is realized.
st AOE
Sa wing Sar ufsardt wa wa fafs ave gavet F UA (1046-1, wg, He 3)
ayko amar aykaa patisaahee jug jug sir kaar banaa-ee hay. ||1||
There is only One Command, and there is only One Supreme King. In each and every age, He links each to their tasks. ||1]|
A ne foone fafs wry usrst il (1046-1, wg, He 3) So jan nirmal jin aap pachhaataa. That humble being is immaculate, who knows his own self.
mma nite fife AYeTST I (1046-2, wg, He 3) aapay aa-ay mili-aa sukh-daata. The Lord, the Giver of peace, Himself comes and meets him.
dhe Aafe gst ae are vfs AS ufS uret F MW (4046-2, 7g, He 3)
rasnaa sabad ratee gun gaavai dar saachai pat paa-ee hay. ||2||
His tongue is imbued with the Shabad, and he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord; he is honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||2||
aoHfa af fxs sfamret i 046-3, wg, ve 3) gurmukh naam milai vadi-aa-ee. The Gurmukh is blessed with the glorious greatness of the Naam.
HoHfe Sete ufs aeret il (1046-3, wg, He 3) manmukh nindak pat gavaa-ee. The self-willed manmukh, the slanderer, loses his honor.
oft 33 usH JA Sat for wis set wet F NBII (1046-3, wg, He 3)
naam ratay param hans bairaagee nij ghar taarhee laa-ee hay. ||3]|
Attuned to the Naam, the supreme soul-swans remain detached; in the home of the self, they remain absorbed in deep meditative trance. ||3]|
Hafe He At AS UT Il (1046-4, wg, He 3) sabad marai so-ee jan pooraa. That humble being who dies in the Shabad is perfect.
Afsag orf HES AT Il (1046-4, wg, He 3) satgur aakh sunaa-ay sooraa. The brave, heroic True Guru chants and proclaims this.
afimr niefs nifts Ag Ara He ule af ASret T SI (1046-5, wg, He 3)
kaa-i-aa andar amrit sar saachaa man peevai bhaa-ay subhaa-ee hay. ||4||
Deep within the body is the true pool of Ambrosial Nectar; the mind drinks it in with loving devotion. ||4]|
ufs ufss mise AHSTES Il (1046-5, wg, He 3) parh pandit avraa samjhaa-ay. The Pandit, the religious scholar, reads and instructs others,
We ASS at wats o UTS Il (1046-5, wg, we 3)
ghar jaltay kee khabar na paa-ay. but he does not realize that his own home is on fire.
fag Afsaa Az on 3 ureha ufs aa AS B met F WU (1046-6, 7g, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay naam na paa-ee-ai parh thaakay saa‘t na aa-ee hay. ||5]|
Without serving the True Guru, the Naam is not obtained. You can read until you are exhausted, but you shall not find peace and tranquility. ||5]|
fefa SAH safe feats suUrdt I (1046-6, wg, He 3) ik bhasam lagaa-ay fireh bhaykh-Dhaaree. Some smear their bodies with ashes, and wander around in religious disguises.
fag Fae ICH fate ure II 1046-7, 1g, He 3) bin sabdai ha-umai kin maaree. Without the Word of the Shabad, who has ever subdued egotism?
motes ASS duly feg ast sath sf SaHTST T MEN (1046-7, wg, Hs 3)
an-din jalat raheh din raatee bharam bhaykh bharmaa-ee hay. ||6] |
Night and day, they continue burning, day and night; they are deluded and confused by their doubt and religious costumes. ||6]||
fefa fas aga uf Ae BEAT Il (1046-8, wg, He 3) ik garih kutamb meh sadaa udaasee. Some, in the midst of their household and family, remain always unattached.
Rafe He fe ot foerat i (1046-8, wg, He 3) sabad mu-ay har naam nivaasee. They die in the Shabad, and dwell in the Lord's Name.
wofes Het gots df ws 3 afte sats fas wet F WON (1046-9, wg, He 3) an-din sadaa raheh rang raatay bhai bhaa-ay bhagat chit laa-ee hay. ||7]|| Night and day, they remain forever attuned to His Love; they focus their consciousness on loving devotion and the Fear of God. ||7]|
HoHY fee ate afs feast il (1046-9, wg, Hs 3) manmukh nindaa kar kar vigutaa. The self-willed manmukh indulges in slander, and is ruined.
nists 3 38a fAA AST Il (1046-10, wg, He 3) antar lobh bha-ukai jis kutaa. The dog of greed barks within him.
ANAS fsH ae 3 eS nifs afeur vest F ICI (1046-10, wg, 8 3)
jamkaal tis kaday na chhodai ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-ee hay. ||8]|
The Messenger of Death never leaves him, and in the end, he leaves, regretting and repenting. ||8||
Ae Aafe wet ufs det i (1046-10, wg, ve 3) sachai sabad sachee pat ho-ee. Through the True Word of the Shabad, true honor is obtained.
fag are Hats o ure aet I (1046-11, wg, He 3) bin naavai mukat na paavai ko-ee. Without the Name, no one attains liberation.
fag Afsas & a 5 ue ufs mA ses Servet TF CN (1046-11, wg, He 3)
bin satgur ko naa-o na paa-ay parabh aisee banat banaa-ee hay. ||9]|
Without the True Guru, no one finds the Name. Such is the making which God has made. ||9||
fefa faa Ade sags <terdt i 1046-12, wg, we 3) ik siDh saaDhik bahut veechaaree. Some are Siddhas and seekers, and great contemplators.
fefa mifsfeta oth a3 fadarst il (1046-12, wg, ue 3) ik ahinis naam ratay nirankaaree. Some remain imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord, day and night.
fan 6 orfy fore A as sats ste 3G Aret T ION (1046-12, og, He 3)
jis no aap milaa-ay so boojhai bhagat bhaa-ay bha-o jaa-ee hay. ||10]|
He alone understands, whom the Lord unites with Himself; through loving devotional worship, fear is dispelled. ||10] |
fenarg we Aste odt gEhs Il (1046-13, +g, He 3)
isnaan daan karahi nahee boojheh.
Some take cleansing baths and give donations to charities, but they do not understand.
fefa Hour uta He FAS Bsts il (1046-13, wg, we 3) ik manoo-aa maar manai si-o loojheh. Some struggle with their minds, and conquer and subdue their minds.
And Aafe gs fea dat vrs Aafe fesret J UIA (1046-14, ag, He 3)
saachai sabad ratay ik rangee saachai sabad milaa-ee hay. ||11]||
Some are imbued with love for the True Word of the Shabad; they merge with the True Shabad. ||11]|
nny fan & Sfanret it 1046-14, wg, ws 3) aapay sirjay day vadi-aa-ee. He Himself creates and bestows glorious greatness.
nny are efe fret il (1046-15, wg, ue 3) aapay bhaanai day-ay milaa-ee. By the Pleasure of His Will, He bestows union.
nny sefa ad Hfs efimr Ae ufs fe sanret FJ 92M (1046-15, wg, He 3)
aapay nadar karay man vasi-aa mayrai parabh i-o furmaa-ee hay. ||12]|
Bestowing His Grace, He comes to dwell in the mind; such is the Command ordained by my God. ||12]|
Afsag Agfa A AS Are Il (1046-16, wg, us 3) satgur sayveh say jan saachay. Those humble beings who serve the True Guru are true.
HOHY Afe o ATSts ATS Il (1046-16, wg, Hs 3) manmukh sayv na jaanan kaachay. The false, self-willed manmukhs do not know how to serve the Guru.
nm ast afs afs 2h fA@ ae (SE wet F 93M (1046-16, wg, He 3)
aapay kartaa kar kar vaykhai ji-o bhaavai ti-o laa-ee hay. ||13]|
The Creator Himself creates the creation and watches over it; he attaches all according to the Pleasure of His Will. ||13]|
Afar afar APT SAX VST | (1046-17, wg, ue 3) jug jug saachaa ayko daataa. In each and every age, the True Lord is the one and only Giver.
us Sa TI ARE USS Il (1046-17, wg, He 3) poorai bhaag gur sabad pachhaataa. Through perfect destiny, one realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Rafe fue A fees odt aedt Aafa frost J Il (1046-18, wg, He 3)
sabad milay say vichhurhay naahee nadree sahj milaa-ee hay. ||14]|
Those who are immersed in the Shabad are not separated again. By His Grace, they are intuitively immersed in the Lord. ||14||
IH fer Ae afenr i (1046-18, wg, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa mail kamaa-i-aa. Acting in egotism, they are stained with the filth of Maya.
Hfe His AHfs SAT SEM Il (1046-19, wg, Hs 3) mar mar jameh doojaa bhaa-i-aa. They die and die again, only to be reborn in the love of duality.
fag Afsaa Az Hats o det nfs tug fee wet FT Ul (1046-19, 7g, ne 3)
bin satgur sayvay mukat na ho-ee man daykhhu liv laa-ee hay. ||15]|
Without serving the True Guru, no one finds liberation. O mind, tune into this, and see. ||15]|
A faq are Het aarti (1047-1, xg, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee. He does whatever He pleases.
Yat FORD
nitug duit ar fos TAT Il (1047-1, wg, He 3) aaphu ho-aa naa kichh hosee. No one has done, or can do anything by himself.
saa on fue efsuret ef Ard ufS uret T NEN (1047-1, wg, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee dar saachai pat paa-ee hay. ||16]|3]|
O Nanak, through the Name, one is blessed with glorious greatness, and obtains honor in the Court of the True Lord. ||16]|3]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1047-2)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
A urfenr A Ag & AAT II (1047-2, wg, He 3) jo aa-i-aa so sabh ko jaasee. All who come shall have to depart.
en ote aa AH STAT Il (1047-2, wg, He 3)
doojai bhaa-ay baaDhaa jam faasee. In the love of duality, they are caught by the noose of the Messenger of Death.
Afsafe aad A AS Cad ATS AS AHTET T AU (1047-3, wg, Hs 3)
satgur raakhay say jan ubray saachay saach samaa-ee hay. ||1]|
Those humble beings who are protected by the True Guru, are saved. They merge into the Truest of the True. ||1]|
nny asst afe afe Sh i 1047-3, wg, 8 3) aapay kartaa kar kar vaykhai. The Creator Himself creates the creation, and watches over it.
fan 6 oefs ad ASt Ae BA Il 1047-3, wg, us 3) jis no nadar karay so-ee jan laykhai. Thay alone are acceptable, upon whom He bestows His Glance of Grace.
aanfs famrg fsa Ag fas AS vifemrst nig aHret T WM (1047-4, wg, Hs 3)
gurmukh gi-aan tis sabh kichh soojhai agi-aanee anDh kamaa-ee hay. ||2| |
The Gurmukh attains spiritual wisdom, and understands everything. The ignorant ones act blindly. ||2||
HOHY AIA 8S B ures I (1047-4, wg, v2 3) manmukh sahsaa boojh na paa-ee. The self-willed manmukh is cynical; he doesn't understand.
nfs vfs AA HOH aTeTet I (1047-5, wg, He 3) mar mar jammai janam gavaa-ee. He dies and dies again, only to be reborn, and loses his life uselessly again.
aonfy oth 33 AY ufeor AoA As ANTEt T USI (047-5, wg, He 3)
gurmukh naam ratay sukh paa-i-aa sehjay saach samaa-ee hay. ||3]|
The Gurmukh is imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he find peace, and is intuitively immersed in the True Lord. |[3]|
UO Wes HO Sfent HOT Il (1047-6, wg, He 3) DhanDhai Dhaavat man bha-i-aa manooraa. Chasing after worldly affairs, the mind has become corroded and rusty.
fefa de AIG SS TI UT I (1047-6, og, we 3) fir hovai kanchan bhaytai gur pooraa. But meeting with the Perfect Guru, it is transmuted into gold once again.
ning auth Se AY ue ud Hate fleet F sil (1047-6, wg, He 3)
aapay bakhas la-ay sukh paa-ay poorai sabad milaa-ee hay. ||4||
When the Lord Himself grants forgiveness, then peace is obtained; through the Perfect Word of the Shabad, one is united with Him. ||4| |
zonfs sot act afeuris it (1047-7, wg, He 3) durmat jhoothee buree buri-aar. The false and evil-minded are the most wicked of the wicked.
m@atenrdt mBatenrts il (1047-7, wg, Hs 3) a-ugani-aaree a-ugani-aar. They are the most unworthy of the unworthy.
oot fs der nfs 8B eons oH oS uret FT UII (1047-8, wg, He 3) kachee mat feekaa mukh bolai durmat naam na paa-ee hay. ||5]|
With false intellect, and insipid words of mouth, evil-minded, they do not obtain the Naam. ||5]|
miGafeurdt X35 BS Il (1047-8, wg, ue 3) a-ugani-aaree kant na bhaavai. The unworthy soul-bride is not pleasing to her Husband Lord.
Ho ot St AS AHS Il (1047-8, og, we 3) man kee joothee jooth kamaavai. False-minded, her actions are false.
fus a Ag 3 We Hof fag TT gs o uret FT MEM (1047-9, og, we 3)
pir kaa saa-o na jaanai moorakh bin gur boojh na paa-ee hay. ||6||
The foolish person does not know the excellence of her Husband Lord. Without the Guru, she does not understand at all. ||6]|
eonfs act de AHS I (1047-9, wg, He 3) durmat khotee khot kamaavai. The evil-minded, wicked soul-bride practices wickedness.
Htarg ad firs AH & STS Il (1047-10, wg, Hs 3) seegaar karay pir khasam na bhaavai. She decorates herself, but her Husband Lord is not pleased.
dest Ae fug we Afsafa nfs first F WN 1047-10, wg, He 3)
gunvantee sadaa pir raavai satgur mayl milaa-ee hay. ||7]|
The virtuous soul-bride enjoys and ravishes her Husband Lord forever; the True Guru unites her in His Union. ||7]||
nM JAH AI AF SH Il (1047-10, wg, ue 3) aapay hukam karay sabh vaykhai. God Himself issues the Hukam of His Command, and beholds all.
feos suff we ufs BA i 1047-11, wg, us 3) iknaa bakhas la-ay Dhur laykhai. Some are forgiven, according to their pre-ordained destiny.
mofeg oth gs AG uUfenr nm Afs fHoret J CH 047-11, wg, He 3)
an-din naam ratay sach paa-i-aa aapay mayl milaa-ee hay. ||8]||
Night and day, they are imbued with the Naam, and they find the True Lord. He Himself unites them in His Union. ||8] |
IGH WS He ofA wet Il (1047-12, wg, He 3)
ha-umai Dhaat moh ras laa-ee.
Egotism attaches them to the juice of emotional attachment, and makes them run around.
dante fee Ad Aofa AHTet I 1047-12, wg, He 3) gurmukh liv saachee sahj samaa-ee. The Gurmukh is intuitively immersed in the True Love of the Lord.
~~
nm He um afe fe fag Afsas gs o uret FT UCN (1047-12, og, He 3) aapay maylai aapay kar vaykhai bin satgur boojh na paa-ee hay. ||9|| He Himself unites, He Himself acts, and beholds. Without the True Guru, understanding is not obtained. ||9]|
fefa Fae tots AE’ AS ATH Il (1047-13, wg, He 3)
ik sabad veechaar sadaa jan jaagay.
Some contemplate the Word of the Shabad; these humble beings remain always awake and aware.
fefa uefa Hfo Afe gd isa I (1047-13, wg, He 3) ik maa-i-aa mohi so-ay rahay abhaagay. Some are attached to the love of Maya; these unfortunate ones remain asleep.
mn aT ATE uM Ig ager fags 3 AET TF AON (1047-14, wg, He 3) aapay karay karaa-ay aapay hor karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ee hay. ||10|| He Himself acts, and inspires all to act; no one else can do anything. ||10]|
ae Hf ad Hate fees i (1047-14, wg, ws 3) kaal maar gur sabad nivaaray. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, death is conquered and killed.
ofg a aH TY ST WS Il (1047-15, wg, He 3) har kaa naam rakhai ur Dhaaray. Keep the Name of the Lord enshrined within your heart.
Afsaa Ae 3 AY urfenr af & of ANETTA (1047-15, wg, He 3)
satgur sayvaa tay sukh paa-i-aa har kai naam samaa-ee hay. ||11]|
Serving the True Guru, peace is obtained, and one merges in the Name of the Lord. ||11]|
en ote fed Sarat il (1047-16, wg, 2 3) doojai bhaa-ay firai dayvaanee. In the love of duality, the world wanders around insane.
Heer Hfs ea urfs AHTSt I (1047-16, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi dukh maahi samaanee. Immersed in love and attachment to Maya, it suffers in pain.
aos 3u ad og ue fag Afsag AY o UST TD INI (1047-16, wg, H8 3)
bahutay bhaykh karai nah paa-ay bin satgur sukh na paa-ee hay. ||12]|
Wearing all sorts of religious robes, He is not obtained. Without the True Guru, peace is not found. ||12]|
for S adit ar nirfly aS (1047-17, wg, ue 3) kis no kahee-ai jaa aap karaa-ay. Who is to blame, when He Himself does everything?
fas are fas afe sere It 1047-17, +g, v8 3) jit bhaavai tit raahi chalaa-ay. As He wills, so is the path we take.
nm frageg Hues fAG are fSS voret F NASI (1047-17, og, He 3) aapay miharvaan sukh-daata ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-ee hay. ||13]| He Himself is the Merciful Giver of peace; as He wills, so do we follow. ||13]|
nM ATS MMT FAS Il (1047-18, wg, us 3) aapay kartaa aapay bhugtaa. He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer.
mind AAW MM AaSe Il (1047-18, Hg, He 3) aapay Sanjam aapay jugtaa. He Himself is detached, and He Himself is attached.
nny fosHe fhoges HOHeS fA a IaH 3 Afenr AST T NAVI (1047-18, Hg, He 3) aapay nirmal miharvaan maDhusoodan jis daa hukam na mayti-aa jaa-ee hay. ||14]|
He Himself is immaculate, compassionate, the lover of nectar; the Hukam of His Command cannot be erased. ||14||
A zsorait frat Sat ATS I (1047-19, wg, He 3) say vadbhaagee jinee ayko jaataa. Those who know the One Lord are very fortunate.
ua qost ufe ufe sth sfour AarteG SST Il (1048-1, wg, 8 3)
ghat ghat vas rahi-aa jagjeevan daataa. He dwells in each and every heart, the Great Giver, the Life of the world.
fea & qug usae 3 wmy aenfe gy 3 wet FT NU (1048-1, og, He 3)
ik thai gupat pargat hai aapay gurmukh bharam bha-o jaa-ee hay. ||15]|
At the same time, He is both hidden and revealed. For the Gurmukh, doubt and fear are dispelled. ||15||
aonfa afs AG Sa AST II (1048-2, og, ne 3) gurmukh har jee-o ayko jaataa. The Gurmukh knows the One, the Dear Lord.
nists oH Aafe usrSt Il (1048-2, wg, Hs 3)
antar naam sabad pachhaataa.
Deep within the nucleus of his inner being, is the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he realizes the Word of the Shabad.
fan 3 dfs Ret AS US Soa oth Sarat FT VENI (1048-2, wg, Hs 3) jis too deh so-ee jan paa-ay naanak naam vadaa-ee hay. ||16||4||
He alone receives it, unto whom You give it. O Nanak, the Naam is glorious greatness. ||16]|41|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1048-3)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Ag Werdt afsa aste il 1048-3, wg, ue 3) sach saalaahee gahir gambheerai. I praise the true, profound and unfathomable Lord.
Ag Aa o fSA ot a MHS I (1048-3, ag, v8 3) sabh jag hai tis hee kai cheeradi. All the world is in His power.
Aig we sae Ae feg TSt wml AY feet T WAU (1048-4, wg, Hs 3) sabh ghat bhogvai sadaa din raatee aapay sookh nivaasee hay. ||1]| He enjoys all hearts forever, day and night; He Himself dwells in peace. ||1]|
Ret Atay At aret Il (1048-4, wg, ws 3) sachaa saahib sachee naa-ee. True is the Lord and Master, and True is His Name.
Ts usATSt Hfs SAT i 048-5, wg, we 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I enshrine Him in my mind.
wnt urfe efhor we nists set AH at STAT T QI (1048-5, og, He 3)
aapay aa-ay vasi-aa ghat antar tootee jam kee faasee hay. ||2||
He Himself has come to dwell deep within the nucleus of my heart; the noose of death has been snapped. ||2]|
for Aet 3 for Avert il (1048-5, ug, He 3) kis sayvee tai kis saalaahee. Whom should I serve, and whom should I praise?
Afsag Aet Aafe Arar i 1048-6, wg, He 3) satgur sayvee sabad saalaahee. I serve the True Guru, and praise the Word of the Shabad.
Ae Fate wet His SSH nists AHS YSAt FT SI (1048-6, wg, we 3)
sachai sabad sadaa mat ootam antar kamal pargaasee hay. ||3]||
Through the True Shabad, the intellect is exalted and ennobled forever, and the lotus deep within blossoms forth. ||3]|
ot aa Aare fers il (1048-7, wg, ws 3) dayhee kaachee kaagad mikdaaraa. The body is frail and perishable, like paper.
He us foA SIT 5 Ha AT Il (1048-7, wg, v2 3) boond pavai binsai dhahat na laagai baaraa. When the drop of water falls upon it, it crumbles and dissolves instantaneously.
ave afeor qeyfa 3S fra vists on feet T sil (1048-7, wg, He 3)
kanchan kaa-i-aa gurmukh boojhai jis antar naam nivaasee hay. ||4||
But the body of the Gurmukh, who understands, is like gold; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells deep within. ||4||
Ae yar Aas at AAT Il (1048-8, wg, He 3) sachaa cha-ukaa surat kee kaaraa. Pure is that kitchen, which is enclosed by spiritual awareness.
dfs SH SHS AG MUTT II (1048-8, wg, He 3) har naam bhojan sach aaDhaaraa. The Lord's Name is my food, and Truth is my support.
ret fyufs ufez 3 urea fag ufe afs on fost F ull (1048-9, og, He 3)
sadaa taripat pavitar hai paavan jit ghat har naam nivaasee hay. ||5]|
Forever satisfied, sanctified and pure is that person, within whose heart the Lord's Name abides. ||5||
JG f3o afsodt FATS Bal Il (1048-9, wg, He 3) ha-o tin balihaaree jo saachai laagay. I am a Sacrifice to those who are attached to the Truth.
dfs TE Pets mofeg Ara Il (1048-10, wg, He 3)
har gun gaavahi an-din jaagay.
They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and remain awake and aware night and day.
Ara’ AY Ae fo nists sAot afte a TH TF iWEll (1048-10, wg, nH 3) saachaa sookh sadaa tin antar rasnaa har ras raasee hay. ||6] |
True peace fills them forever, and their tongues savor the sublime essence of the Lord. ||6||
Td SH FS MST & UAT Il (1048-10, wg, He 3) har naam chaytaa avar na poojaa. I remember the Lord's Name, and no other at all.
Sa Ast MST TAT Il (1048-11, 7g, He 3) ayko sayvee avar na doojaa. I serve the One Lord, and no other at all.
ud afe Ag Ag ferfeor Ae ath foeAt FT WN (1048-11, wg, Hs 3) poorai gur sabh sach dikhaa-i-aa sachai naam nivaasee hay. ||7|| The Perfect Guru has revealed the whole Truth to me; I dwell in the True Name. ||7||
af afr nat fete fefs wrfemr i (1048-12, wg, He 3) bharam bharam jonee fir fir aa-i-aa. Wandering, wandering in reincarnation, again and again, he comes into the world.
wify ger AT MAfH sorter Il (1048-12, Hg, He 3) aap bhoolaa jaa khasam bhulaa-i-aa. He is deluded and confused, when the Lord and Master confuses him.
dfs MC fhe st Tene gs BS Fae ust T UTI (1048-12, og, He 3)
har jee-o milai taa gurmukh boojhai cheenai sabad abhinaasee hay. ||8]|
He meets with the Dear Lord, when, as Gurmukh, he understands; he remembers the Shabad, the Word of the immortal, eternal Lord God. ||8] |
oth af so oH mrad i 1048-13, og, Hs 3) kaam kroDh bharay ham apraaDhee. I am a sinner, overflowing with sexual desire and anger.
for Hy B AI a IH TE o AS ACH I (1048-13, 7g, ne 3) ki-aa muhu lai bolah naa ham gun na sayvaa saaDhee. With what mouth should I speak? I have no virtue, and I have rendered no service.
sae urag Af Bg SH oma ATE OM nifsoAt T EM (048-14, og, He 3)
dubday paathar mayl laihu tum aapay saach naam abhinaasee hay. ||9||
I am a sinking stone; please, Lord, unite me with Yourself. Your Name is eternal and imperishable. ||9||
o wet Ad 6 ATS AA I (1048-14, wg, Hs 3) naa ko-ee karay na karnai jogaa. No one does anything; no one is able to do anything.
nny asta aaefa A ofear il (1048-15, wg, He 3) aapay karahi karaaveh so ho-igaa. That alone happens, which the Lord Himself does, and causes to be done.
nn sufA Sf Ay ure Ae dt ath fest J WOM! (1048-15, wg, He 3) aapay bakhas laihi sukh paa-ay sad hee naam nivaasee hay. ||10]|
Those whom He Himself forgives, find peace; they dwell forever in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||10]|
feg 39 Usst Fae Sif wrurar Il (1048-16, wg, 2 3)
ih tan Dhartee sabad beej apaaraa. This body is the earth, and the infinite Shabad is the seed.
dfs AS ASt FSH SUT Il (1048-16, wg, ws 3) har saachay saytee vanaj vaapaaraa. Deal and trade with the True Name alone.
Ag U6 aftr sfe 5 ure nists om fest J AA 1048-16, wg, He 3) sach Dhan jammi-aa tot na aavai antar naam nivaasee hay. ||11]|
The True wealth increases; it is never exhausted, when the Naam dwells deep within. []11]]
dfs ME neafsurs S TE aA Il (1048-17, wg, He 3) har jee-o avgani-aaray no gun keejai. O Dear Lord, please bless me, the worthless sinner, with virtue.
min} auf Bfa on Shr I (1048-17, wg, Hs 3) aapay bakhas laihi naam deejai. Forgive me, and bless me with Your Name.
aonfa d2 A ufs ue frag oft fast F 19211 (1048-18, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so pat paa-ay ikat naam nivaasee hay. ||12||
One who becomes Gurmukh, is honored; he dwells in the Name of the One Lord alone. ||12]|
vista dfs ug AHS & det Il (1048-18, wg, He 3) antar har Dhan samajh na ho-ee. The wealth of the Lord is deep within one's inner being, but he does not realize it.
TT USA FS FST Il (1048-18, wg, Hz 3) gur parsaadee boojhai ko-ee. By Guru's Grace, one comes to understand.
qTonfa de A ag ue Ae dt oth fost F 9S (1048-19, wg, v8 3) gurmukh hovai so Dhan paa-ay sad hee naam nivaasee hay. ||13]|
One who becomes Gurmukh is blessed with this wealth; he lives forever in the Naam. [|13]|
6% WE say gHret Il 1048-19, wg, ne 3) anal vaa-o bharam bhulaa-ee. Fire and wind lead him into delusions of doubt.
ust qost Hor Hfs Afo o aret Il (1049-1, 1g, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi suDh na kaa-ee. In love and attachment to Maya, he has no understanding at all.
Hou nid fas o AS Tans oH Yat FT VV (1049-1, wg, He 3)
manmukh anDhay kichhoo na soojhai gurmat naam pargaasee hay. ||14||
The blind, self-willed manmukh sees nothing; through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam is gloriously revealed. ||14] |
HOH ICH HfEnt AS Il (1049-2, wg, Hs 3) manmukh ha-umai maa-i-aa sootay. The manmukhs are asleep in egotism and Maya.
muet wg & AH nifs feats il (1049-2, wg, Hs 3) apnaa ghar na samaaleh ant vigootay. They do not watch over their own homes, and are ruined in the end.
ud fee asfa ag fest we va ofy feet FT aU (1049-2, og, He 3) par nindaa karahi baho chintaa jaalai dukhay dukh nivaasee hay. ||15]||
They slander others, and burn in great anxiety; they dwell in pain and suffering. []15]|
WN] ATS ATS TIE Il (1049-3, wg, we 3) aapay kartai kaar karaa-ee. The Creator Himself has created the creation.
nm aaHfe Sf geet I (1049-3, wg, ws 3) aapay gurmukh day-ay bujhaa-ee. He blesses the Gurmukh with understanding.
SOA OTH TS HO fSdHS STH OTH fSeTAt FT UAENUI (049-3, wg, He 3)
naanak naam ratay man nirmal naamay naam nivaasee hay. ||16]|5||
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam - their minds become immaculate; they dwell in the Naam, and only the Naam. ||16]|5]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1049-4)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Sa Ast Aer firg ATT Il (1049-4, wg, He 3) ayko sayvee sadaa thir saachaa. I serve the One Lord, who is eternal, stable and True.
SH OW AF A A Il (1049-5, wg, we 3) doojai laagaa sabh jag kaachaa. Attached to duality, the whole world is false.
TIHSt Ae AG Aerdt AS ot fe usta FT AU (1049-5, ng, ne 3)
gurmatee sadaa sach saalaahee saachay hee saach pateejai hay. ||1]| Following the Guru's Teachings, I praise the True Lord forever, pleased with the Truest of the True. ||1]|
33 TE FISH SAO AST Il (1049-5, 7g, ne 3) tayray gun bahutay mai ayk na jaataa. Your Glorious Virtues are so many, Lord; I do not know even one.
nmy ofe SE AaHleg ST Il (1049-6, wg, He 3) aapay laa-ay la-ay jagjeevan daataa. The Life of the world, the Great Giver, attaches us to himself.
nm sun & efsnret aenfs feg Ho Sta FT MM (1049-6, wg, He 3)
aapay bakhsay day vadi-aa-ee gurmat ih man bheejai hay. ||2]|
He Himself forgives, and bestows glorious greatness. Following the Guru's Teachings, this mind is delighted. ||2]|
Hfent wate Aafe feerdt i (1049-7, xg, Hs 3) maa-i-aa lahar sabad nivaaree. The Word of the Shabad has subdued the waves of Maya.
feg Ho fasHe IBH Hr II (1049-7, wg, He 3) ih man nirmal ha-umai maaree. Egotism has been conquered, and this mind has become immaculate.
Hon De we sf TS TAS TH FSH TF BI (1049-7, wg, ne 3)
sehjay gun gaavai rang raataa rasnaa raam raveejai hay. ||3]|
I intuitively sing His Glorious Praises, imbued with the Lord's Love. My tongue chants and savors the Lord's Name. |[3]|
Hat Ast ass fearat i (1049-8, wg, He 3) mayree mayree karat vihaanee. Crying out, "Mine, mine!" he spends his life.
Houta 3 as fed fenr|t il (1049-8, og, He 3) manmukh na boojhai firai i-aanee. The self-willed manmukh does not understand; he wanders around in ignorance.
ANAS wat HIS fors niofes ura gta F igil (1049-8, og, ne 3)
jamkaal gharhee muhat nihaalay an-din aarjaa chheejai hay. ||4]|
The Messenger of Death watches over him every moment, every instant; night and day, his life is wasting away. ||4]|
nists BF Ad Sat FF Il (1049-9, ag, we 3) antar lobh karai nahee boojhai. He practices greed within, and does not understand.
fia Gufs AHS 3 AS Il (1049-9, wg, 2 3) sir Oopar jamkaal na soojhai. He does not see the Messenger of Death hovering over his head.
Me AHS! A nial utfenr nisarfes for at T Ul 049-10, wg, Hs 3)
aithai kamaanaa So agai aa-i-aa antkaal ki-aa keejai hay. ||5]|
Whatever one does in this world, will come to face him in the hereafter; what can he do at that very last moment? ||5]||
A Afs oat fae Act APE I (1049-10, wg, v8 3)
jo sach laagay tin saachee so-ay. Those who are attached to the Truth are true.
eH oat Houta gE il (1049-11, wg, He 3) doojai laagay manmukh ro-ay. The self-willed manmukhs, attached to duality, weep and wail.
eo fafoor ar uA dT om wm) ge vfs Str T WEN (1049-11, wg, He 3) duhaa siri-aa kaa khasam hai aapay aapay gun meh bheejai hay. ||6|| He is the Lord and Master of both worlds; He Himself delights in virtue. ||6]|
Gd & Aafe Ae’ AS Ad ll (1049-11, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad sadaa jan sohai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, His humble servant is exalted forever.
on oAtfefs feg He HO Il (1049-12, wg, Hs 3) naam rasaa-in ih man mohai. This mind is enticed by the Naam, the source of nectar.
Heer Ho AS UST 3s oa TaHSt Tis of SH FT WON (1049-12, og, ne 3) maa-i-aa moh mail patang na laagai gurmatee har naam bheejai hay. ||7|| It is not stained at all by the dirt of attachment to Maya; through the Guru's Teachings, it is pleased and saturated with the Lord's Name. ||7||
Asa fefs eas fea Aet Il (1049-13, wg, v8 3) sabhnaa vich vartai ik so-ee. The One Lord is contained within all.
Ts usATSt uses Tet Il (1049-13, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee pargat ho-ee. By Guru's Grace, He is revealed.
JH ufs Ae AY Ufeor of Are ifs Uta T ICH (1049-13, wg, He 3)
ha-umai maar sadaa sukh paa-i-aa naa-ay saachai amrit peejai hay. ||8] |
One who subdues his ego, finds lasting peace; he drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name. ||8]||
foots wa feetgeTs Il (1049-14, wg, He 3) kilbikh dookh nivaaranhaaraa. God is the Destroyer of sin and pain.
aanfy Afeor Aafe Sarat il (1049-14, wg, He 3)
gurmukh sayvi-aa sabad veechaaraa. The Gurmukh serves Him, and contemplates the Word of the Shabad.
AS fae um orfu eas aenfa Sq Ho SIA TF NCH (1049-15, wg, H8 3)
sabh kichh aapay aap vartai gurmukh tan man bheejai hay. ||9||
He Himself is pervading everything. The Gurmukh's body and mind are saturated and pleased. ||9||
Hfenr mals AB AAS Il (1049-15, ug, He 3) maa-i-aa agan jalai sansaaray. The world is burning in the fire of Maya.
aanfa foes Aafe Sears Il (1049-16, wg, He 3) gurmukh nivaarai sabad veechaaray. The Gurmukh extinguishes this fire, by contemplating the Shabad.
vista AfS Ae AY Ufeor aaHSt SH SH FT NAM (1049-16, wg, He 3)
antar saa“t sadaa sukh paa-i-aa gurmatee naam leejai hay. ||10]|
Deep within are peace and tranquility, and lasting peace is obtained. Following the Guru's Teachings, one is blessed with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||10]|
fe fernfe 83 aH a 3G urefa Il (1049-16, wg, Hs 3) indar indaraasan baithay jam kaa bha-o paavahi. Even Indra, seated upon his throne, is caught in the fear of death.
AH 3 SS Fd AIH ANeg Il (1049-17, wg, He 3) jam na chhodai baho karam kamaaveh. The Messenger of Death will not spare them, even though they try all sorts of things.
Afsag 3¢ 3 Hats udm afe ofa Aa UlA TF NAA (1049-17, wg, He 3)
satgur bhaytai taa mukat paa-ee-ai har har rasnaa peejai hay. ||11]|
When one meets with the True Guru, one is liberated, drinking in and savoring the sublime essence of the Lord, Har, Har. ||11]|
Houfe nists safs 3 det i (1049-18, wg, ue 3) manmukh antar bhagat na ho-ee. There is no devotion within the self-willed manmukh.
aonfa safs Aifs AY Tet I (1049-18, xg, He 3) gurmukh bhagat saa™t sukh ho-ee. Through devotional worship, the Gurmukh obtains peace and tranquility.
ufez urea FET od sat THs nisg Sh FT Ail (1049-19, wg, He 3)
pavitar paavan sadaa hai banee gurmat antar bheejai hay. ||12||
Forever pure and sanctified is the Word of the Guru's Bani; following the Guru's Teachings, one's inner being is drenched in it. ||12]|
gon faAS HIA Sted il (1049-19, wg, He 3) barahmaa bisan mahays veechaaree. I have considered Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
3 ae saa Hats feat il (1049-19, wg, we 3)
tarai gun baDhak mukat niraaree.
They are bound by the three qualities - the three gunas; they are far away from liberation.
Yat FOUO
aonfy famrg Sa 3 St niofes oH seta FT III (1050-1, +g, He 3)
gurmukh gi-aan ayko hai jaataa an-din naam raveejai hay. ||13]|
The Gurmukh knows the spiritual wisdom of the One Lord. Night and day, he chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||13]|
ge uate ote aH 3 gsts Il (1050-1, wg, Hs 3) bayd parheh har naam na boojheh. He may read the Vedas, but he does not realize the Lord's Name.
Hfeur orate ufs uf osfs il (1050-2, wg, H8 3) maa-i-aa kaaran parh parh loojheh. For the sake of Maya, he reads and recites and argues.
nists He mifamrst nim fas afs vag sdtA FT AVI (1050-2, wg, He 3)
antar mail agi-aanee anDhaa ki-o kar dutar tareejai hay. ||14]|
The ignorant and blind person is filled with filth within. How can he cross over the impassable world-ocean? ||14] |
ae are Afs nity sures il (1050-3, wg, we 3) bayd baad sabh aakh vakaaneh. He voices all the controversies of the Vedas,
3 isd Sit o Age usTefa Il (1050-3, wg, He 3) na antar bheejai na sabad pachhaaneh.
but his inner being is not saturated or satisfied, and he does not realize the Word of the Shabad.
ue uy Ag Safe fearior qoute nifys Ut FT UII 050-3, wg, He 3)
punn paap sabh bayd drirh-aa-i-aa gurmukh amrit peejai hay. ||15]|
The Vedas tell all about virtue and vice, but only the Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||15]|
min} ArET Sat At | (1050-4, ug, ue 3) aapay saachaa ayko so-ee. The One True Lord is all by Himself.
fH fag gH nig & AEST II (1050-4, og, He 3) tis bin doojaa avar na ko-ee. There is no one else except Him.
soa of IS HO A AD AY Jen TF NQENE! (1050-5, wg, He 3) naanak naam ratay man saachaa sacho sach raveejai hay. ||16||6] |
O Nanak, true is the mind of one who is attuned to the Naam; he speaks Truth, and nothing but Truth. ||16]|6]|
Hg HIS 3 Il (1050-5)
maaroo menhlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Ae Ae sus safenr | (1050-5, wg, Hs 3) sachai sachaa takhat rachaa-i-aa. The True Lord has established the Throne of Truth.
for wife efimr fsa He 3 HAE II 1050-6, wg, He 3)
nij ghar vasi-aa tithai moh na maa-i-aa.
He dwells in His own home deep within the self, where there is no emotional attachment to Maya.
Re ot Ag efor we nists qaufa aget AS T UA (1050-6, wg, H8 3)
sad hee saach vasi-aa ghat antar gurmukh karnee saaree hay. ||1||
The True Lord dwells deep within the nucleus of the Gurmukh's heart forever; his actions are excellent. ||1]|
Ae Ae Ay Sura Il (1050-7, wg, He 3) sachaa sa-udaa sach vaapaaraa. True is his merchandise, and true is his trade.
& fa SIH B SAT UAT Il (1050-7, og, He 3) na tithai bharam na doojaa pasaaraa. There is no doubt within him, and no expanse of duality.
Ae Ug ufent ae sfe 5 wre gS I Aas T iM (1050-7, wg, us 3)
sachaa Dhan khati-aa kaday tot na aavai boojhai ko veechaaree hay. ||2| |
He has earned the true wealth, which is never exhausted. How few are those who contemplate this, and understand. ||2||
Ae we A AS Bra Il (1050-8, wg, ue 3) sachai laa-ay say jan laagay. They alone are attached to the True Name, whom the Lord Himself attaches.
nists Hae HAS SSS | (1050-8, wg, He 3)
antar sabad mastak vadbhaagay.
The Word of the Shabad is deep within the nucleus of the self; good fortune is recorded upon their foreheads.
Ae Aafe Het Te wets Aafe gs SAasdt F BI (1050-8, wg, Hs 3)
sachai sabad sadaa gun gaavahi sabad ratay veechaaree hay. ||3]|
Through the True Word of the Shabad, they sing the True Praises of the Lord; they are attuned to contemplative meditation on the Shabad. ||3]|
Ae Ae" Ay Arad il (1050-9, wg, 8 3) sacho sachaa sach saalaahee. I praise the True Lord, the Truest of the True.
Sa Sa TAT FA Il (1050-9, wg, we 3) ayko vaykhaa doojaa naahee. I see the One Lord, and no other.
Tas Ss Sst ust famrfs safe TBH Hat F sil 1050-10, wg, we 3)
gurmat oocho oochee pa-orhee gi-aan ratan ha-umai maaree hay. ||4||
The Guru's Teachings are the ladder to reach the highest of the high. the jewel of spiritual wisdom conquers egotism. ||4||
Hfenr Hg Hate Aerfenr | (1050-10, xg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaa-i-aa. Emotional attachment to Maya is burnt away by the Word of the Shabad.
Ag Hfo efron ar sg stfemr i (1050-11, wg, He 3) sach man vasi-aa jaa tuDh bhaa-i-aa. The True One comes to dwell in the mind, when it pleases You, O Lord.
Ae ot As At aget ICH fer foerdst F wull 1050-11, wg, ve 3) sachay kee sabh sachee karnee ha-umai tikhaa nivaaree hay. ||5|| True are all the actions of the truthful; the thirst of egotism is subdued. ||5]|
Hfeor Hg AS wy altar il “050-11, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabh aapay keenaa. All by Himself, God created emotional attachment to Maya.
aanfa fess forse dt star il (1050-12, wg, 8 3) gurmukh virlai kin hee cheenaa. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, realize the Lord.
TaHfy Je A AY AHS ATS aget ATS T Ell (1050-12, wg, ne 3) gurmukh hovai so sach kamaavai saachee karnee saaree hay. ||6]| One who becomes Gurmukh practices Truth; true and excellent are his actions. ||6||
arg anet HAT Ys set Il (1050-13, wg, He 3) kaar kamaa-ee jo mayray parabh bhaa-ee. He does those deeds which are pleasing to my God;
ICH feo Aafe eset I 050-13, wg, He 3) ha-umai tarisnaa sabad bujhaa-ee. through the Shabad, he burns away egotism and the thirst of desire.
TaHfs Ae dt uisg Aise ICH wfa foest FT DN (1050-13, wg, He 3)
gurmat sad hee antar seetal ha-umai maar nivaaree hay. ||7| |
Following the Guru's Teachings, he remains forever cool and calm deep within; he conquers and subdues his ego. ||7]|
Afs wat fo AS fae SS II (1050-14, wg, He 3) sach lagay tin sabh kichh bhaavai. Those who are attached to the Truth are pleased with everything.
Ae Age Afs AS I (1050-14, wg, He 3)
sachai sabday sach suhaavai. They are embellished with the True Word of the Shabad.
me ATS A ef AS Sedt sefe Heat F UCI (1050-14, wg, He 3)
aithai saachay say dar saachay nadree nadar savaaree hay. ||8||
Those who are true in this world, are true in the Court of the Lord. The Merciful Lord adorns them with His Mercy. ||8]|
fag ATS A BEM I (1050-15, wg, Hs 3) bin saachay jo doojai laa-i-aa. Those who are attached to duality, and not the Truth,
Heer Ho eu Aarfet | (1050-15, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh dukh sabaa-i-aa. are trapped in emotional attachment to Maya; they totally suffer in pain.
fas ae ey AY A ondt afeor He BY ard T IM (1050-16, wg, He 3)
bin gur dukh sukh jaapai naahee maa-i-aa moh dukh bhaaree hay. ||9||
Without the Guru, they do not understand pain and pleasure; attached to Maya, they suffer in terrible pain. ||9]|
Ara’ ae frat ufe stfemit i (1050-16, wg, He 3) saachaa sabad jinaa man bhaa-i-aa. Those whose minds are pleased with the True Word of the Shabad
usta fof fat xrfeur i cos0-16, rg, He 3) poorab likhi-aa tinee kamaa-i-aa. act according to pre-ordained destiny.
Ae Refs Ag fomrefa Afs 33 Sterdt J AON (1050-17, wg, He 3)
sacho sayveh sach Dhi-aavahi sach ratay veechaaree hay. ||10]||
They serve the True Lord, and meditate on the True Lord; they are imbued with contemplative meditation on the True Lord. ||10]||
Os at As HtSt Bait il 1050-17, wg, ws 3) gur kee sayvaa meethee laagee. Service to the Guru seems sweet to them.
motes HY AIA AHHH Il (1050-18, Hg, He 3) an-din sookh sahj samaaDhee. Night and day, they are intuitively immersed in celestial peace.
ofa ofa aafsur He fess dur as at Az first FT 9a (1050-18, wg, 8 3)
har har karti-aa man nirmal ho-aa gur kee sayv pi-aaree hay. ||11||
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, their minds become immaculate; they love to serve the Guru. ||11]|
A Ho Ade Afsafs A Be Il 1050-19, wg, us 3) say jan sukhee-ay satgur sachay laa-ay. Those humble beings are at peace, whom the True Guru attaches to the Truth.
nmy ste witty fee II (1050-19, wg, He 3) aapay bhaanay aap milaa-ay. He Himself, in His Will, merges them into Himself.
Afsafa wa A AS Cad da wfeor HT UMTS FT 92M (1050-19, wg, Hs 3)
satgur raakhay say jan ubray hor maa-i-aa moh khu-aaree hay. ||12| |
Those humble beings, whom the True Guru protects, are saved. The rest are ruined through emotional attachment to Maya. ||12]|
Yast Fouy
TaHfy Ara Aafs USS" Il (1051-1, wg, us 3)
gurmukh saachaa sabad pachhaataa. The Gurmukh realizes the True Word of the Shabad.
o fSH Ae oF (SA HIST II (1051-1, Hg, He 3) naa tis kutamb naa tis maataa. He has no family, and he has no mother.
ea ea sfenr As nists Agar Aber ar mrad FT WAI (1051-1, wg, He 3)
ayko ayk ravi-aa sabh antar sabhnaa jee-aa kaa aaDhaaree hay. ||13]||
The One and Only Lord is pervading and permeating deep within the nucleus of all. He is the Support of all beings. ||13]|
ISH He SAT sem I (1051-2, wg, He 3) ha-umai mayraa doojaa bhaa-i-aa. Egotism, possessiveness, and the love of duality
fas 3 38 Ufa uAfH fof ufemr I (1051-2, wg, He 3)
kichh na chalai Dhur khasam likh paa-i-aa.
- none of these shall go along with you; such is the pre-ordained will of our Lord and Master.
Gs AS 3 AY anette ATS TY feest FT NAVI! (1051-3, wg, Hs 3) gur saachay tay saach kamaaveh saachai dookh nivaaree hay. ||14||
Through the True Guru, practice Truth, and the True Lord shall take away your pains. [|14]|
wW 3 to AST AY UTS Il (1051-3, wg, He 3) jaa too deh sadaa sukh paa-ay. If You so bless me, then I shall find lasting peace.
Ard Hae AMY AHS Il (1051-4, wg, He 3) saachai sabday saach kamaa-ay. Through the True Word of the Shabad, I live the Truth.
Weg AS HS 3 AS sas sd FaTSH FT UWI (1051-4, wg, He 3)
andar saachaa man tan saachaa bhagat bharay bhandaaree hay. ||15]||
The True Lord is within me, and my mind and body have become True. I am blessed with the overflowing treasure of devotional worship. ||15]|
SAR
nm SY Jat VHS Il (1051-4, wg, He 3) aapay vaykhai hukam chalaa-ay. He Himself watches, and issues His Command.
nue grat nitty TIES Il (1051-5, wg, us 3) apnaa bhaanaa aap karaa-ay. He Himself inspires us to obey His Will.
soa of IS Saat HS 36 TAat atH ASH TF UAENDI (1051-5, wg, He 3)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee man tan rasnaa naam savaaree hay. ||16||7]||
O Nanak, only those who are attuned to the Naam are detached; their minds, bodies and tongues are embellished with the Naam. ||16]]|7]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1051-6)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
ning ning Burfe Brae il (1051-6, wg, He 3) aapay aap upaa-ay upannaa. He Himself created Himself, and came into being.
AS Hfg eas SA UTES Il (1051-6, wg, He 3) sabh meh vartai ayk parchhannaa. The One Lord is pervading in all, remaining hidden.
ASo' A'S Ad Aanleo fate war wiry usrst J WAI (1051-6, wg, Hs 3) sabhnaa saar karay jagjeevan jin apnaa aap pachhaataa hay. ||1||
The Lord, the Life of the world, takes care of all. Whoever knows his own self, realizes God. ||1]|
fafe yout faRG HIA Bure il 1051-7, wg, us 3) jin barahmaa bisan mahays upaa-ay. He who created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva,
fafe fafa dd wd we I (1051-7, wg, ue 3) sir sir DhanDhai aapay laa-ay. links each and every being to its tasks.
fan ave faR nrt AS fafs aenf Sa AST T MQM (1051-8, wg, Hs 3)
jis bhaavai tis aapay maylay jin gurmukh ayko jaataa hay. ||2||
He merges into Himself, whoever is pleasing to His Will. The Gurmukh knows the One Lord. ||2]|
x {o) met TSE J AAS Il (1051-8, wg, ws 3) aavaa ga-on hai sansaaraa. The world is coming and going in reincarnation.
Hfeor Hg ag fas fers i (1051-9, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh baho chitai bikaaraa. Attached to Maya, it dwells on its many sins.
fag Aa Aad Ae dt fafs ag at Age UEeTST T MBI (1051-9, wg, He 3)
thir saachaa saalaahee sad hee jin gur kaa sabad pachhaataa hay. ||3]||
One who realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad, praises forever the eternal, unchanging True Lord. ||3]|
feta ufe wat Sot AY urfemr It cosi-10, wg, He 3) ik mool lagay onee sukh paa-i-aa. Some are attached to the root - they find peace.
wat wa fsst ASH aetfEnr i (1051-10, wg, He 3) daalee laagay tinee janam gavaa-i-aa. But those who are attached to the branches, waste their lives away uselessly.
nifys 2s fso AS as wa A Safe vifys ast FT gil (1051-10, wg, He 3)
amrit fal tin jan ka-o laagay jo boleh amrit baataa hay. ||4]|
Those humble beings, who chant the Name of the Ambrosial Lord, produce the ambrosial fruit. ||4] |
TH TE oat foo FHT FH Il (1051-11, wg, us 3) ham gun naahee ki-aa bolah bol. I have no virtues; what words should I speak?
3 Asa tule Safe 3B I (1051-11, wg, He 3) too sabhnaa daykheh toleh tol. You see all, and weigh them on Your scale.
fa sre f38 maf soe Tonfe Sa AST T Ul (1051-12, wg, He 3)
ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakhahi rahnaa gurmukh ayko jaataa hay. ||5||
By Your will, You preserve me, and so do I remain. The Gurmukh knows the One Lord. ||5||
W 30 stat ST At ATS WE Il (1051-12, wg, He 3) jaa tuDh bhaanaa taa sachee kaarai laa-ay. According to Your Will, You link me to my true tasks.
weae sfs ae ufo ANTES II (1051-13, wg, He 3) avgan chhod gun maahi samaa-ay. Renouncing vice, I am immersed in virtue.
Ge vfs 8a fosne wa ag a Rafe uss T MEM (1051-13, wg, 8 3)
gun meh ayko nirmal saachaa gur kai sabad pachhaataa hay. ||6||
The One Immaculate True Lord abides in virtue; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is realized. ||6||
Ag tur sg Sa ASt il (1051-14, wg, ue 3) jah daykhaa tah ayko so-ee. Wherever I look, there I see Him.
get Tans Hae Fet Il (1051-14, wg, we 3) doojee durmat sabday kho-ee. Duality and evil-mindedness are destroyed through the Shabad.
fan ufs us Sa ANTS nuS df AS TSt T MDI (1051-14, wg, 8 3)
aykas meh parabh ayk samaanaa apnai rang sad raataa hay. ||7||
The One Lord God is immersed in His Oneness. He is attuned forever to His own delight. ||7]|
ofan aH I THB Il (1051-15, wg, Hs 3) kaa-i-aa kamal hai kumlaanaa. The body-lotus is withering away,
HOHY aE 3 gS fear|ar i 1051-15, wg, He 3) manmukh sabad na bujhai i-aanaa. but the ignorant, self-willed manmukh does not understand the Shabad.
Te usASt ofeor aA ue AaHeo VST T MCI (1051-15, wg, He 3)
gur parsaadee kaa-i-aa khojay paa-ay jagjeevan daataa hay. ||8]|
By Guru's Grace, he searches his body, and finds the Great Giver, the Life of the world. ||8||
ae at & uy fees I (1051-16, wg, He 3)
kot gahee kay paap nivaaray. The Lord frees up the body-fortress, which was seized by sins,
Ret ofa HG ge Sa aes Il (1051-16, wg, He 3) sadaa har jee-o raakhai ur Dhaaray. when one keeps the Dear Lord enshrined forever in the heart.
A fee Het oe ue fa@ da yes TST T CH (051-16, wg, He 3)
jo ichhay so-ee fal paa-ay ji-o rang majeethai raataa hay. ||9]|
The fruits of his desires are obtained, and he is dyed in the permanent color of the Lord's Love. ||9]|
HoHY fomirg aa Tet Il (1051-17, wg, He 3) manmukh gi-aan kathay na ho-ee. The self-willed manmukh speaks of spiritual wisdom, but does not understand.
fefs fefa »re oa 3 Aet Il (1051-17, wg, He 3) fir fir aavai tha-ur na ko-ee. Again and again, he comes into the world, but he finds no place of rest.
qonfa famrg wet Ad afer afer SAX AST T WOM (1051-18, wg, He 3)
gurmukh gi-aan sadaa saalaahay jug jug ayko jaataa hay. ||10]|
The Gurmukh is spiritually wise, and praises the Lord forever. Throughout each and every age, the Gurmukh knows the One Lord. ||10]|
HOHY ad Ad Als TY AAS Il (1051-18, wg, He 3) manmukh kaar karay sabh dukh sabaa-ay. All the deeds which the manmukh does bring pain - nothing but pain.
nists Hae ardt fa@ efe ATE I (1051-19, wg, He 3) antar sabad naahee ki-o dar jaa-ay. The Word of the Shabad is not within him; how can he go to the Court of the Lord?
qonfa Age ZA fs ATS AE AS AYES T NAA (1051-19, +g, He 3)
gurmukh sabad vasai man saachaa sad sayvay sukh-daata hay. ||11||
The True Shabad dwells deep within the mind of the Gurmukh; he serves the Giver of peace forever. ||11]|
Yat WOU
Ad eur Fs AsAt aet i (1052-1, wg, we 3) jah daykhaa too sabhnee thaa-ee. Wherever I look, I see You, everywhere.
ud Ofs AS ASt Uret I (1052-1, wg, He 3) poorai gur sabh sojhee paa-ee. Through the Perfect Guru, all this is known.
oH om fomreba Het Ae feg Ho SA TST T II (1052-1, wg, He 3) naamo naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sadaa sad ih man naamay raataa hay. ||12|| I meditate forever and ever on the Naam; this mind is imbued with the Naam. ||12]|
oH gst ufeg Ate Il (1052-2, wg, Hs 3) naamay raataa pavit sareeraa. Imbued with the Naam, the body is sanctified.
fag are sfa He fae Ste I (1052-2, og, He 3) bin naavai doob mu-ay bin neeraa. Without the Naam, they are drowned and die without water.
uefa Aefs oH odt ests feast Tete AaE UETST T WISI (1052-2, wg, He 3)
aavahi jaaveh naam nahee boojheh iknaa gurmukh sabad pachhaataa hay. ||13]| They come and go, but do not understand the Naam. Some, as Gurmukh, realize the Word of the Shabad. ||13]|
ud Asafa gs Tse Il (1052-3, wg, He 3) poorai satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. The Perfect True Guru has imparted this understanding.
fee are Hats fas o ure? Il (1052-3, Hg, He 3) vin naavai mukat kinai na paa-ee. Without the Name, no one attains liberation.
on oth fies efsuret Rafe ad dfat gst T IVI (1052-4, wg, He 3)
naamay naam milai vadi-aa-ee sahj rahai rang raataa hay. ||14||
Through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one is blessed with glorious greatness; he remains intuitively attuned to the Lord's Love. ||14| |
afenr sag wd Ufa Sat il (1052-4, wg, ue 3) kaa-i-aa nagar dhahai dheh dhayree. The body-village crumbles and collapses into a pile of dust.
fag Hae Ya oot Sat il (1052-5, wg, Hs 3) bin sabdai chookai nahee fayree. Without the Shabad, the cycle of reincarnation is not brought to an end.
Ag Fos Ate AHS fafs Toute Sat AST T NU! (1052-5, Hg, He 3)
saach salaahay saach samaavai jin gurmukh ayko jaataa hay. ||15]|
One who knows the One Lord, through the True Guru, praises the True Lord, and remains immersed in the True Lord. ||15]||
fan 6 oefs ad A Ue || ATS" Wee SA HS MIS I (1052-6, wg, He 3)
jis no nadar karay so paa-ay. saachaa sabad vasai man aa-ay.
The True Word of the Shabad comes to dwell in the mind, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace.
aaa of 33 fadardt efs AS ATT USTST T NQENCH (1052-6, Hg, He 3) naanak naam ratay nirankaaree dar saachai saach pachhaataa hay. ||16||8]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord, realize the True Lord in His True Court. ||16||8]|
Hg Awd 2 Il (1052-7) maaroo solhay 3. Maaroo, Solhay, Third Mehl:
nm ATS" AZ fA AST Il (1052-7, wg, v2 3) aapay kartaa sabh jis karnaa. O Creator, it is You Yourself who does all.
ba #3 Afs Sat AsST Il (1052-7, wg, ue 3) jee-a jant sabh tayree sarnaa. All beings and creatures are under Your Protection.
nm Tus gas AS uists ad a Aafe usrst FT WAI (1052-8, wg, He 3)
aapay gupat vartai sabh antar gur kai sabad pachhaataa hay. ||1]||
You are hidden, and yet permeating within all; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, You are realized. ||1]|
ofs & safs SF FSI I (1052-8, wg, He 3) har kay bhagat bharay bhandaaraa. Devotion to the Lord is a treasure overflowing.
nm aan Aafe Sera il (1052-8, wg, He 3) aapay bakhsay sabad veechaaraa. He Himself blesses us with contemplative meditation on the Shabad.
Af 30 ae Aet agnfs AS fAE He TST MQM (1052-9, wg, ne 3) jo tuDh bhaavai so-ee karseh sachay si-o man raataa hay. ||2|| You do whatever You please; my mind is attuned to the True Lord. ||2]|
nny Stat TIS WA I 1052-9, wg, ve 3) aapay heeraa ratan amolo. You Yourself are the priceless diamond and jewel.
WN Sed 3B 3B Il (1052-9, wg, we 3) aapay nadree tolay tolo. In Your Mercy, You weigh with Your scale.
fi #3 Als Hefe surat ate fasur orf usrst FT WI (1052-10, wg, He 3)
jee-a jant sabh saran tumaaree kar kirpaa aap pachhaataa hay. ||3]| All beings and creatures are under Your protection. One who is blessed by Your Grace realizes his own self. ||3]|
fan 6 oefs de ufe Sat it (1052-10, wg, we 3) jis no nadar hovai Dhur tayree. One who receives Your Mercy, O Primal Lord,
x on A SN Hd 3 HH Yo Sot Il (1052-11, wg, He 3) marai na jammai chookai fayree. does not die, and is not reborn; he is released from the cycle of reincarnation.
AS we we feg wat afar afr Sa AST T WSN (1052-11, wg, Hs 3)
saachay gun gaavai din raatee jug jug ayko jaataa hay. ||4]|
He sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, day and night, and, throughout the ages, he knows the One Lord. ||4| |
Hfenr fs As Aas Curfeor | (1052-11, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi sabh jagat upaa-i-aa. Emotional attachment to Maya wells up throughout the whole world,
gon faAe te Aafenr il (1052-12, wg, ws 3) barahmaa bisan dayv sabaa-i-aa. from Brahma, Vishnu and all the demi-gods.
A 30 ae A Ooty oat famre Hest uSTst T UI (1052-12, wg, He 3)
jo tuDh bhaanay say naam laagay gi-aan matee pachhaataa hay. ||5||
Those who are pleasing to Your Will, are attached to the Naam; through spiritual wisdom and understanding, You are recognized. ||5||
ung Ua SIS AAT | (1052-13, wg, we 3) paap punn vartai sansaaraa. The world is engrossed in vice and virtue.
Jay A AF SY FT ST I (1052-13, wg, He 3) harakh sog sabh dukh hai bhaaraa. Happiness and misery are totally loaded with pain.
aoufy 2 A AY ure fafs aenfe ow uerst TEN (1052-13, +g, He 3) gurmukh hovai so sukh paa-ay jin gurmukh naam pachhaataa hay. ||6|| One who becomes Gurmukh finds peace; such a Gurmukh recognizes the Naam. ||6||
fass 5 tet HeSTS Il (1052-14, wg, ue 3) kirat na ko-ee maytanhaaraa. No one can erase the record of one's actions.
TI A ASS HY SMHS Il (1052-14, wg, He 3) gur kai sabday mokh du-aaraa. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one finds the door of salvation.
yota foto A ee ufenr fafs wiry uefa usrst TDI (1052-14, wg, Hs 3)
poorab likhi-aa so fal paa-i-aa jin aap maar pachhaataa hay. ||7]||
One who conquers self-conceit and recognizes the Lord, obtains the fruits of his pre- destined rewards. ||7||
wfenr xfs afs fae fas o Brat | (1052-15, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi har si-o chit na laagai. Emotionally attached to Maya, one's consciousness is not attached to the Lord.
SH STS Wet CY MMA Il (1052-15, wg, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay ghanaa dukh aagai. In the love of duality, he will suffer terrible agony in the world hereafter.
HOH SoH FH suas nis arf USS FT ICH (1052-16, wg, us 3)
manmukh bharam bhulay bhaykh-Dhaaree ant kaal pachhutaataa hay. ||8]| The hypocritical, self-willed manmukhs are deluded by doubt; at the very last moment, they regret and repent. ||8]|
ofa & we dfs TE WES I (1052-16, wg, ue 3) har kai bhaanai har gun gaa-ay. In accordance with the Lord's Will, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Afs fowfau are Eu ABE Il (1052-17, wg, He 3) sabh kilbikh kaatay dookh sabaa-ay. He is rid of all sins, and all suffering.
ofa fone foans J wet afs ASt He TST T CN (4052-17, wg, He 3)
har nirmal nirmal hai banee har saytee man raataa hay. ||9||
The Lord is immaculate, and immaculate is the Word of His Bani. My mind is imbued with the Lord. ||9]|
fan 6 oefe ad A ae fefa ue it (1052-18, wg, ue 3)
jis no nadar karay so gun niDh paa-ay.
One who is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace, obtains the Lord, the treasure of virtue.
ICH Ha arf TIES | (1052-18, wg, ue 3) ha-umai mayraa thaak rahaa-ay. Egotism and possessiveness are brought to an end.
TE nede a Sa ost Taf feaat Ast FT WOM (1052-18, wg, He 3)
gun avgan kaa ayko daataa gurmukh virlee jaataa hay. ||10||
The One Lord is the only Giver of virtue and vice, merits and demerits; how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, understand this. ||10]|
Hat ys fedHs wits wnat Il (1052-19, wg, He 3) mayraa parabh nirmal at apaaraa. My God is immaculate, and utterly infinite.
Wy AS aa Aafe Sars | (1052-19, wg, ue 3) aapay maylai gur sabad veechaaraa. God unites with Himself, through contemplation of the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Yat qous
nny aur Ag fese He 3q ATS IST T NAA (1053-1, wg, He 3)
aapay bakhsay sach drirh-aa-ay man tan saachai raataa hay. ||11|| He Himself forgives, and implants the Truth. The mind and body are then attuned to the True Lord. ||11]|
He 30 Her fefe Af mrs Il (1053-1, wg, He 3) man tan mailaa vich jot apaaraa. Within the polluted mind and body is the Light of the Infinite Lord.
THs gs ahs Sars il (1053-2, wg, ue 3) gurmat boojhai kar veechaaraa. One who understands the Guru's Teachings, contemplates this.
I@H Hfs Het HO fess sAo Afe AuSTST FT NAMI (1053-2, wg, He 3)
ha-umai maar sadaa man nirmal rasnaa sayv sukh-daata hay. ||12] |
Conquering egotism, the mind becomes immaculate forever; with his tongue, he serves the Lord, the Giver of peace. ||12]|
aa fener niefs ag Te SAS I (1053-2, wg, He 3) garh kaa-i-aa andar baho hat baajaaraa. In the fortress of the body there are many shops and bazaars;
fan fefs on 3 mifS mre il 1053-3, 47g, He 3) tis vich naam hai at apaaraa. within them is the Naam, the Name of the utterly infinite Lord.
ad & Aafe Ae vfs Ad ICH wfs UES FT NII (1053-3, Hg, He 3)
gur kai sabad sadaa dar sohai ha-umai maar pachhaataa hay. ||13]|
In His Court, one is embellished forever with the Word of the Guru's Shabad; he conquers egotism and realizes the Lord. ||13]|
TSO MAGA MAH MUS Il (1053-4, w7g, He 3) ratan amolak agam apaaraa. The jewel is priceless, inaccessible and infinite.
Hs ATE AT SI Il (1053-4, wg, He 3) keemat kavan karay vaychaaraa. How can the poor wretch estimate its worth?
Gd a Age 3f% Swe nists Aafe vest T Ill 1053-4, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabday tol tolaa-ay antar sabad pachhaataa hay. ||14||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is weighed, and so the Shabad is realized deep within. ||14||
fafiyfs Ay ags fare i fener Hy UAE UTATET II (1053-5, Hg, He 3)
simrit saastar bahut bisthaaraa. maa-i-aa moh pasri-aa paasaaraa.
The great volumes of the Simritees and the Shaastras only extend the extension of attachment to Maya.
Hau usta Hae 6 yste Tenfe fess AST T WWI (1053-6, wg, Hs 3)
moorakh parheh sabad na boojheh gurmukh virlai jaataa hay. ||15]||
The fools read them, but do not understand the Word of the Shabad. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, understand. ||15]|
MY ATS AT ATES Il (1053-6, wg, us 3) aapay kartaa karay karaa-ay. The Creator Himself acts, and causes all to act.
Ret set Ag fesre il (1053-7, wg, He 3) sachee banee sach drirh-aa-ay. Through the True Word of His Bani, Truth is implanted deep within.
ood oH fe efsuret afar afar Sat AST T NENEN (1053-7, wg, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee jug jug ayko jaataa hay. ||16||9]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, one is blessed with glorious greatness, and throughout the ages, the One Lord is known. ||16]||9]|
Hg HIS 3 Il (1053-8)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
A Ag Afeg fAaneg es I (1053-8, wg, He 3) so sach sayvihu sirjanhaaraa. Serve the True Creator Lord.
Hae Ty feegsIs Il (1053-8, Hg, He 3) sabday dookh nivaaranhaaraa. The Word of the Shabad is the Destroyer of pain.
Wa mass ats odt uret mmd mam mrarar FT AU (1053-8, wg, He 3)
agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee aapay agam athaahaa hay. ||1|| He is inaccessible and unfathomable; He cannot be evaluated. He Himself is inaccessible and immeasurable. ||1]||
nm AE Ag FISTS Il (1053-9, wg, us 3) aapay sachaa sach vartaa-ay. The True Lord Himself makes Truth pervasive.
fafa Ae APS MMy we I (1053-9, ug, He 3) ik jan saachai aapay laa-ay. He attaches some humble beings to the Truth.
And Refs ATG aHefs oH Afs ANTE T MM (1053-9, wg, He 3)
saacho sayveh saach kamaaveh naamay sach samaahaa hay. ||2]|
They serve the True Lord and practice Truth; through the Name, they are absorbed in the True Lord. |[2||
uf saat HS wrfy fers | (1053-10, wg, He 3) Dhur bhagtaa maylay aap milaa-ay. The Primal Lord unites His devotees in His Union.
Het sarst wm Be Il (1053-10, wg, ws 3) sachee bhagtee aapay laa-ay. He attaches them to true devotional worship.
At wat Het de ae fER ASH a wT FT BI (1053-11, wg, He 3)
saachee banee sadaa gun gaavai is janmai kaa laahaa hay. ||3]||
One who sings forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord, through the True Word of His Bani, earns the profit of this life. ||3]|
aaHfy gen aafa ug wiry usrats Il (1053-11, wg, He 3) gurmukh vanaj karahi par aap pachhaaneh. The Gurmukh trades, and understands his own self.
San fag & neg 3 Aafa Il (1053-12, wg, He 3) aykas bin ko avar na jaaneh. He knows no other than the One Lord.
Ae Ag Ae zane Unt SH feAra T iil (1053-12, wg, Hs 3) sachaa saahu sachay vanjaaray poonjee naam visaahaa hay. ||4]|
True is the banker, and True are His traders, who buy the merchandise of the Naam. [141]
nmy Ara figAfe Cure i (1053-12, ug, Hs 3) aapay Saajay sarisat upaa-ay. He Himself fashions and creates the Universe.
fed AG Ad Aa Ase Il (1053-13, wg, ve 3) virlay ka-o gur sabad bujhaa-ay. He inspires a few to realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afsag Aefs A AS ATS aS AH AT Sto T MUI (1053-13, wg, He 3)
satgur sayveh say jan saachay kaatay jam kaa faahaa hay. ||5]|
Those humble beings who serve the True Guru are true. He snaps the noose of death from around their necks. ||5]|
88 Ws Aes ATH Il (1053-14, wg, He 3) bhannai gharhay savaaray saajay. He destroys, creates, embellishes and fashions all beings,
Hfeor vfs SA AT UTA Il (1053-14, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi doojai jant paajay. and attaches them to duality, attachment and Maya.
HoH feats Ae nig onrefs AH at Aga as Sra T MEM (1053-14, wg, He 3)
manmukh fireh sadaa anDh kamaaveh jam kaa jayvrhaa gal faahaa hay. ||6]|
The self-willed manmukhs wander around forever, acting blindly. Death has strung his noose around their necks. ||6||
MM SMA WAT AST BS Il (1053-15, wg, He 3) aapay bakhsay gur sayvaa laa-ay. He Himself forgives, and enjoins us to serve the Guru.
TIHSt oH Hfs SAS Il (1053-15, wg, Hs 3) gurmatee naam man vasaa-ay. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam comes to dwell within the mind.
wofes on famre Ara fea vat fo SH we T MDI (1053-15, wg, He 3)
an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay saachaa is jag meh naamo laahaa hay. ||7||
Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the True Lord, and earn the profit of the Naam in this world. ||7]|
nim AE Het aret Il (1053-16, wg, ws 3) aapay sachaa sachee naa-ee. He Himself is True, and True is His Name.
Tonfa fe vfs SAT Il (1053-16, wg, He 3) gurmukh dayvai man vasaa-ee. The Gurmukh bestows it, and enshrines it within the mind.
fe His efter A Ae Aafe fe fAfe gor ara T NTI (1053-17, wg, He 3)
jin man vasi-aa say jan soheh tin sir chookaa kaahaa hay. ||8]|
Noble and exalted are those, within whose mind the Lord abides. Their heads are free of strife. ||8]|
Ma nidiag AHS adt uret I (1053-17, wg, Hs 3) agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee. He is inaccessible and unfathomable; His value cannot be appraised.
Ts usASt Hfs SAT i 053-18, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee man vasaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, He dwells within the mind.
Ae Aafe Werdt qeest Sur afs o Hat Sr FT UCM (1053-18, wg, He 3)
sadaa sabad saalaahee gundaataa laykhaa ko-ay na mangai taahaa hay. ||9]|
No one calls that person to account, who praises the Word of the Shabad, the Giver of virtue. ||9]|
gon fang ge fSA at AS Il (1053-18, wg, 42 3) barahmaa bisan rudar tis kee sayvaa. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva serve Him.
Miz o UTStT Mee MSS Il (1053-19, ug, He 3) ant na paavahi alakh abhayvaa. Even they cannot find the limits of the unseen, unknowable Lord.
faa ag oes acta J nruat Tonfe mee wera TF AON (1053-19, wg, He 3)
jin ka-o nadar karahi too apnee gurmukh alakh lakhaahaa hay. ||10]|
Those who are blessed by Your Glance of Grace, become Gurmukh, and comprehend the incomprehensible. ||10]|
ust IOus ud Afsatfe ASt uret Il (1054-1, wg, He 3)
poorai satgur sojhee paa-ee. The Perfect True Guru has imparted this understanding.
Sa oH fs SAE Il (1054-1, wg, He 3) ayko naam man vasaa-ee. I have enshrined the Naam, the One Name, within my mind.
on Aut 3 on fomret nos ue TE AT T NAA (1054-1, wg, He 3)
naam japee tai naam Dhi-aa-ee mahal paa-ay gun gaahaa hay. ||11]||
I chant the Naam, and meditate on the Naam. Singing His Glorious Praises, I enter the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||11||
Rea Aefa vfs JaH murs il (1054-2, wg, He 3) sayvak sayveh man hukam apaaraa. The servant serves, and obeys the Command of the Infinite Lord.
HOHY JAH B Aefs ATS Il (1054-2, wg, we 3) manmukh hukam na jaaneh saaraa. The self-willed manmukhs do not know the value of the Lord's Command.
~ ON
JAH HS JAH Sanret Jan Suga FT WAI (1054-3, wg, He 3)
hukmay mannay hukmay vadi-aa-ee hukmay vayparvaahaa hay. ||12||
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, one is exalted; by His Hukam, one is glorified; by His Hukam, one becomes carefree. ||12]|
TI USATST JAH USE Il (1054-3, wg, Hs 3) gur parsaadee hukam pachhaanai. By Guru's Grace, one recognizes the Lord's Hukam.
wes oa feas wis mire Il (1054-3, wg, He 3) Dhaavat raakhai ikat ghar aanai. The wandering mind is restrained, and brought back to the home of the One Lord.
OH TS Ae Sait oH Ise Hfs SIT NII (1054-4, wg, He 3)
naamay raataa sadaa bairaagee naam ratan man taahaa hay. ||13]|
Imbued with the Naam, one remains forever detached; the jewel of the Naam rests within the mind. |]13]|
xb 4
AS Aa ufo eas Sat AST It (1054-4, wg, ue 3) sabh jag meh vartai ayko so-ee. The One Lord is pervasive throughout all the world.
Ts usATSt use| Tet Il (1054-5, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee pargat ho-ee. By Guru's Grace, He is revealed.
Hag Aodts A AS fesHe for whe SAT STITT NASI (1054-5, Hg, He 3)
Sabad salaaheh say jan nirmal nij ghar vaasaa taahaa hay. ||14| |
Those humble beings who praise the Shabad are immaculate; they dwell within the home of their own inner self. ||14]|
Het Sas Sot AgSret Il (1054-5, wg, ws 3) sadaa bhagat tayree sarnaa-ee. The devotees abide forever in Your Sanctuary, Lord.
Man nidiad AHS St uret | 1054-6, wg, He 3)
agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee. You are inaccessible and unfathomable; Your value cannot be estimated.
fAS su sets EB 3 mats qoute on fora FT NAUI (1054-6, wg, He 3) ji-o tuDh bhaaveh ti-o too raakhahi gurmukh naam Dhi-aahaa hay. ||15]| As it pleases Your Will, You keep us; the Gurmukh meditates on the Naam. ||15]|
Het Het SI TS AST Il (1054-7, wg, ws 3) sadaa sadaa tayray gun gaavaa. Forever and ever, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
Ae Afsa 3d HfS SST Il (1054-7, wg, He 3) sachay saahib tayrai man bhaavaa. O my True Lord and Master, may I become pleasing to Your Mind.
Soa AY ad Fost AG Peg Af ANTI T NAENAUIION (1054-7, wg, He 3)
naanak saach kahai baynantee sach dayvhu sach samaahaa hay. ||16||1||10]|
Nanak offers this true prayer: O Lord, please bless me with Truth, that I may merge in the Truth. ||16]]1]]10]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1054-8)
maaroo menhlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Afsag Aefe A essa Il 1054-8, wg, ws 3) satgur sayvan say vadbhaagee. Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.
motes Ate at fees Breit I (1054-9, ug, He 3) an-din saach naam liv laagee. Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the True Name.
Ret quest sfenr we nists Aafe AS Gara FT WAU (1054-9, wg, Hs 3)
sadaa sukh-daata ravi-aa ghat antar sabad sachai omaahaa hay. ||1]|
The Lord, the Giver of peace, abides forever deep within their hearts; they delight in the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
Sets AT ST TT FHS Il (1054-10, wg, He 3) nadar karay taa guroo milaa-ay. When the Lord grants His Grace, one meets with the Guru.
ofe a aH Hfs SAE Il (1054-10, wg, He 3) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. The Name of the Lord is enshrined within the mind.
of Hf6 Sfror Ae AYES Hae HS GHTIT T NM (1054-10, wg, we 3)
har man vasi-aa sadaa sukh-daata sabday man omaahaa hay. ||2||
The Lord, the Giver of peace, abides forever within the mind; the mind is delighted with the Word of the Shabad. ||2] |
faut ad st Afs fHere Il (1054-11, wg, H8 3) kirpaa karay taa mayl milaa-ay. When the Lord bestows His Mercy, He unites in His Union.
ICH HHS" Aafe ABS il (1054-11, wg, ue 3) ha-umai mamtaa sabad jalaa-ay. Egotism and attachment are burned away by the Shabad.
Het Has od fea gait ordt far afs ara F WI (1054-11, wg, He 3)
sadaa mukat rahai ik rangee naahee kisai naal kaahaa hay. ||3]||
In the Love of the One Lord, one remains liberated forever; he is not in conflict with anyone. ||3]|
fag Afsara AS ule niara i (1054-12, wg, ne 3) bin satgur sayvay ghor anDhaaraa. Without serving the True Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness.
fag Fae af @ ure urs Il (1054-12, ug, He 3) bin sabdai ko-ay na paavai paaraa. Without the Shabad, no one crosses over to the other side.
A Aafe FS Ho Saat AAG ASS BIT TD sil (1054-12, wg, He 3) jo sabad raatay mahaa bairaagee so sach sabday laahaa hay. ||4||
Those who are imbued with the Shabad, are very detached. They earn the profit of the True Word of the Shabad. ||4]|
ey AY aes Ufe fof urfemr I (1054-13, og, He 3) dukh sukh kartai Dhur likh paa-i-aa. Pain and pleasure are pre-ordained by the Creator.
car 3G orf, zastfemr ih (1054-13, mg, H 3) doojaa bhaa-o aap vartaa-i-aa. He Himself has caused the love of duality to be pervasive.
qonfy 32 A mifsus eas HOHE a foo SAT T UI (1054-14, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so alipato vartai manmukh kaa ki-aa vaysaahaa hay. ||5||
One who becomes Gurmukh remains detached; how can anyone trust the self-willed manmukh? ||5]|
A HOHY ASE © UsTefes Il (1054-14, wg, He 3) say manmukh jo sabad na pachhaaneh. Those who do not recognize the Shabad are manmukhs.
GI as at AS B Wefa Il (1054-15, wg, ue 3) gur kay bhai kee saar na jaaneh. They do not know the essence of the Fear of the Guru.
3 fag fa foss@ wg urdha ay ate wear ArT ST WEN (1054-15, 47g, He 3)
bhai bin ki-o nirbha-o sach paa-ee-ai jam kaadh la-aygaa saahaa hay. ||6|| Without this Fear, how can anyone find the Fearless True Lord? The Messenger of Death will pull the breath out. ||6]|
metas AH Hat @ ATT II (1054-16, wg, He 3) afri-o jam maari-aa na jaa-ee. The invulnerable Messenger of Death cannot be killed.
TI a AAS Sfs B wire I (1054-16, wg, Hs 3) gur kai sabday nayrh na aa-ee. The Word of the Guru's Shabad prevents him from approaching.
Hae Ae 3 PIT Sa HS HS Tia ME Fuses FT MDI (1054-16, wg, we 3)
sabad sunay taa Dhoorahu bhaagai mat maaray har jee-o vayparvaahaa hay. ||7]|| When he hears the Word of the Shabad, he runs far away. He is afraid that the self- sufficient Dear Lord will kill him. ||7]|
ofa HG at 3 AS frgars I (1054-17, wg, Hs 3) har jee-o kee hai sabh sirkaaraa. The Dear Lord is the Ruler above all.
Sg AH foo ag fears Il 1054-17, wg, He 3) ayhu jam ki-aa karay vichaaraa. What can this wretched Messenger of Death do?
Toot se Jan ANS YAH aE ATT T NCH (1054-18, wg, He 3)
hukmee bandaa hukam kamaavai hukmay kadh-daa saahaa hay. ||8]||
As slave to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the mortal acts according to His Hukam. According to His Hukam, he is deprived of his breath. ||8]|
Toute AS athe wfarar il (1054-18, wg, He 3) gurmukh saachai kee-aa akaaraa. The Gurmukh realizes that the True Lord created the creation.
dante uAfsmr AF UATE |] (1054-19, wg, Hs 3) gurmukh pasri-aa sabh paasaaraa. The Gurmukh knows that the Lord has expanded the entire expanse.
TsHfy de A AY ys Aafe AG AY SIT ICM (1054-19, wg, Hs 3)
gurmukh hovai so sach boojhai sabad sachai sukh taahaa hay. ||9]||
One who becomes Gurmukh, understands the True Lord. Through the True Word of the Shabad, he finds peace. ||9]|
aaHfe Ast aafH faarst |i 054-19, wg, He 3)
gurmukh jaataa karam biDhaataa. The Gurmukh knows that the Lord is the Architect of karma.
ua qouu
Ad Ud WAS Aafe usrst Il 1055-1, wg, us 3) jug chaaray gur sabad pachhaataa. Throughout the four ages, he recognizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ToHfy ud o AON Tene gente Aafe AHTaT T AON (1055-1, wg, He 3) gurmukh marai na janmai gurmukh gurmukh sabad samaahaa hay. ||10]||
The Gurmukh does not die, the Gurmukh is not reborn; the Gurmukh is immersed in the Shabad. ||10]|
gouty ath Aafe Arerd I (1055-2, wg, He 3) gurmukh naam sabad saalaahay. The Gurmukh praises the Naam, and the Shabad.
WMH Migs SUSI Il (1055-2, wg, we 3) agam agochar vayparvaahay. God is inaccessible, unfathomable and self-sufficient.
ea oth aa ots Gard Age aH EAI T NAA (1055-2, mg, He 3)
ayk naam jug chaar uDhaaray sabday naam visaahaa hay. ||11]||
The Naam, the Name of the One Lord, saves and redeems throughout the four ages. Through the Shabad, one trades in the Naam. ||11]|
dante AS Aet AY UTE Il (1055-3, wg, He 3) gurmukh saa‘t sadaa sukh paa-ay. The Gurmukh obtains eternal peace and tranqulity.
qonfa fase on SAS Il (1055-3, wg, He 3) gurmukh hirdai naam vasaa-ay. The Gurmukh enshrines the Naam within his heart.
Taf Te A oY gs aS IHS Sra TF NA (1055-4, org, ws 3)
gurmukh hovai so naam boojhai kaatay durmat faahaa hay. ||12]|
One who becomes Gurmukh recognizes the Naam, and the noose of evil-mindedness is snapped. ||12||
aoufa Gun vfs ANTS II (1055-4, wg, He 3) gurmukh upjai saach samaavai. The Gurmukh wells up from, and then merges back into Truth.
ot Hie HH B Wat US Il (1055-4, wg, He 3) naa mar jammai na joonee paavai. He does not die and take birth, and is not consigned to reincarnation.
qonfy Ae safe df ws niafeg BS wa FT w9Sll (1055-5, wg, He 3)
gurmukh sadaa raheh rang raatay an-din laiday laahaa hay. ||13]|
The Gurmukh remains forever imbued with the color of the Lord's Love. Night and day, he earns a profit. ||13]|
Tafa sas Aafs seas | 1055-5, wg, He 3) gurmukh bhagat soheh darbaaray. The Gurmukhs, the devotees, are exalted and beautified in the Court of the Lord.
Ret set Aafe ASS I (1055-6, wg, He 3) sachee banee sabad savaaray. They are embellished with the True Word of His Bani, and the Word of the Shabad.
wofes Te we feg ast Aon ASt whe AIT T NASI! (1055-6, wg, He 3)
an-din gun gaavai din raatee sahj saytee ghar jaahaa hay. ||14||
Night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, day and night, and they intuitively go to their own home. ||14]|
Afsdg Us HAE ASS Il (1055-7, wg, He 3) satgur pooraa sabad sunaa-ay. The Perfect True Guru proclaims the Shabad;
moe salts ad” fee Be il (1055-7, wg, us 3) an-din bhagat karahu liv laa-ay. night and day, remain lovingly attuned to devotional worship.
dfs Te Wefy Ae cSt fess fasHs Te ufSara F UqUil (1055-7, wg, He 3)
har gun gaavahi sad hee nirmal nirmal gun paatisaahaa hay. ||15]|
One who sings forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord, becomes immaculate; Immaculate are the Glorious Praises of the Sovereign Lord . ||15]|
TE A Vs AS At Il (1055-8, wg, us 3) gun kaa daataa sachaa so-ee. The True Lord is the Giver of virtue.
Tafa feser g5 et Il (1055-8, wg, we 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, understand this.
SSA HO OH Aod faaA A OM Buses FT NANQUAAI (1055-8, Hg, He 3)
naanak jan naam salaahay bigsai so naam bayparvaahaa hay. ||16||2||11]|
Servant Nanak praises the Naam; he blossoms forth in the ecstasy of the Name of the self-sufficient Lord. ||16]|2||11]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1055-9)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
dfs AG Afeg mam mma I (1055-9, wg, He 3)
har jee-o sayvihu agam apaaraa. Serve the Dear Lord, the inaccessible and infinite.
far a nig 3 urea urgrerar il (1055-10, wg, He 3)
tis daa ant na paa-ee-ai paaraavaaraa. He has no end or limitation.
aa uarte sfeor we nists fez whe Hfs mara J A (1055-10, Hg, 18 3)
gur parsaad ravi-aa ghat antar tit ghat mat agaahaa hay. ||1]|
By Guru's Grace, one who dwells upon the Lord deep within his heart - his heart is filled with infinite wisdom. ||1]|
Ag Hfo eas Sa AST il (1055-11, wg, ue 3) sabh meh vartai ayko so-ee. The One Lord is pervading and permeating amidst all.
Gs usASt usa|e Tet il (1055-11, wg, ve 3) gur parsaadee pargat ho-ee. By Guru's Grace, He is revealed.
Asa yufsues ad Adeles Ter fone AAI T WAM (1055-11, wg, He 3) sabhnaa partipaal karay jagjeevan daydaa rijak sambaahaa hay. ||2|| The Life of the world nurtures and cherishes all, giving sustenance to all. ||2]|
ud Afsate afs gsfenr it (1055-12, wg, 43 3) poorai satgur boojh bujhaa-i-aa. The Perfect True Guru has imparted this understanding.
IaH dt Ag Aas Curfemr It (1055-12, wg, v8 3) hukmay hee sabh jagat upaa-i-aa. By the Hukam of His Command, He created the entire Universe.
Jou Hd Ret wy ue gan fafs Ar fsa T SI (1055-12, wg, He 3)
hukam mannay so-ee sukh paa-ay hukam sir saahaa paatisaahaa hay. ||3] | Whoever submits to His Command, finds peace; His Command is above the heads of kings and emperors. ||3||
Ae’ Afsdg AGE MUS I (1055-13, wg, He 3)
sachaa satgur sabad apaaraa. True is the True Guru. Infinite is the Word of His Shabad.
fan 2 nafe feAsd HATS I (1055-13, wg, Hs 3) tis dai sabad nistarai sansaaraa. Through His Shabad, the world is saved.
wn asst afe afs Sh Ser ATA fararar FT USI (1055-14, wg, Hs 3)
aapay kartaa kar kar vaykhai daydaa saas giraahaa hay. ||4||
The Creator Himself created the creation; He gazes upon it, and blesses it with breath and nourishment. ||4||
afe no farfs ese I 1055-14, wg, He 3) kot maDhay kiseh bujhaa-ay. Out of millions, only a few understand.
Gd a Aafe gs aT WES Il (1055-14, wg, ue 3) gur kai sabad ratay rang laa-ay. Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are colored in His Love.
dfs Weds Het AYES Sfg ANA sats ABT T MUI (1055-15, wg, He 3)
har saalaahahi sadaa sukh-daata har bakhsay bhagat salaahaa hay. ||5]||
They praise the Lord, the Giver of peace forever; the Lord forgives His devotees, and blesses them with His Praise. ||5||
Afsag Agfs A AS Are Il (1055-15, wg, us 3) satgur sayveh say jan saachay. Those humble beings who serve the True Guru are true.
A ufa aufs arate ars Il (1055-16, ug, He 3) jo mar jameh kaachan kaachay. The falsest of the false die, only to be reborn.
Wa nidieg Suse safs FSG nraTTT FT MEM (1055-16, wg, He 3)
agam agochar vayparvaahaa bhagat vachhal athaahaa hay. ||6||
The inaccessible, unfathomable, self-sufficient, incomprehensible Lord is the Lover of His devotees. ||6||
Afsag us Ary fesve Il (1055-17, wg, He 3) satgur pooraa saach drirh-aa-ay. The Perfect True Guru implants Truth within.
Ae Aafe Ae AS WES ll (1055-17, wg, us 3) sachai sabad sadaa gun gaa-ay. Through the True Word of the Shabad, they sing His Glorious Praises forever.
dees eas AS ists fafe fafe fren ATI T WOM (1055-17, wg, He 3)
gundaataa vartai sabh antar sir sir likh-daa saahaa hay. ||7]||
The Giver of virtue is pervading deep within the nucleus of all beings; He inscribes the time of destiny upon each and every person's head. ||7]|
Het vets aaHfa AN Il (1055-18, wg, Hs 3) sadaa hadoor gurmukh jaapai. The Gurmukh knows that God is always ever-present.
~~ &
Hae AS AAS QM Il (1055-18, wg, Hs 3) sabday sayvai so jan Dharaapai. That humble being who serves the Shabad, is comforted and fulfilled.
wofes Refs Adt wet Aafe AS Gara FCI (1055-18, og, Hs 3)
an-din sayveh sachee banee sabad sachai omaahaa hay. ||8||
Night and day, he serves the True Word of the Guru's Bani; he delights in the True Word of the Shabad. ||8] |
nifamrat niar ag ASH Ese i (1055-19, wg, we 3) agi-aanee anDhaa baho karam drirh-aa-ay. The ignorant and blind cling to all sorts of rituals.
Hodfe aan fefs wat us | 4055-19, wg, He 3) manhath karam fir jonee paa-ay. They stubborn-mindedly perform these rituals, and are consigned to reincarnation.
ust Ioug fatter orafs oa Se anata vans a saT FT WC (1056-1, wg, He 3)
bikhi-aa kaaran lab lobh kamaaveh durmat kaa doraahaa hay. ||9|| For the sake of poison, they act in greed and possessiveness, and evil-minded duality.
[9I|
ums Afsag sats fear i (1056-1, wg, He 3) pooraa satgur bhagat drirh-aa-ay. The Perfect True Guru implants devotional worship within.
aa a Aafe ofs oth fas we Il (1056-2, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabad har naam chit laa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he lovingly centers his consciousness on the Lord's Name.
nfs 3fs ofe sfeor we nists ufs ste safs Aera F AON (1056-2, wg, He 3)
man tan har ravi-aa ghat antar man bheenai bhagat salaahaa hay. ||10||
The Lord pervades his mind, body and heart; deep within, his mind is drenched with devotional worship and praise of the Lord. ||10]|
Aa ys ATG MAT AUS Il (1056-3, ug, we 3) mayraa parabh saachaa asur sanghaaran. My True Lord God is the Destroyer of demons.
aa & Aafe sats fens gE Il (1056-3, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad bhagat nistaaran. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, His devotees are saved.
Ad yg ATS Ae dt Ava ffs Ara ufSATIT FT NAA (1056-3, Hg, He 3)
mayraa parabh saachaa sad hee saachaa sir saahaa paatisaahaa hay. ||11]| My True Lord God is forever True. He is the Emperor over the heads of kings. ||11]|
x. AA
A gas Ad 3d Hf6 SS Il (1056-4, wg, Hs 3) say bhagat sachay tayrai man bhaa-ay. True are those devotees, who are pleasing to Your Mind.
of dtase ast ag Aafe ATES Il (1056-4, wg, He 3)
dar keertan karahi gur sabad suhaa-ay.
They sing the Kirtan of His Praises at His Door; they are embellished and exalted by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Arot sat nofes aefa fogs at SH SATS T AI (1056-5, wg, He 3)
saachee banee an-din gaavahi nirDhan kaa naam vaysaahaa hay. ||12]||
Night and day, they sing the True Word of His Bani. The Naam is the wealth of the poor. ||12]|
faa win Afs fedafa art il (1056-5, wg, ue 3) jin aapay mayl vichhorheh naahee. Those whom You unite, Lord, are never separated again.
Gs a Aafe Aer Aart il (1056-6, wg, we 3) gur kai sabad sadaa saalaahee. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they praise You forever.
Aso fafs 3 Sa wifes Hae SH ABT FT III (1056-6, wg, Hs 3)
sabhnaa sir too ayko saahib sabday naam salaahaa hay. ||13]||
You are the One Lord and Master over all. Through the Shabad, the Naam is praised. [|13]|
fag Fae 30S aet o Fret Il (1056-6, wg, He 3) bin sabdai tuDhuno ko-ee na jaanee. Without the Shabad, no one knows You.
30 nm at nica aarat Il (1056-7, wg, Hs 3) tuDh aapay kathee akath kahaanee. You Yourself speak the Unspoken Speech.
nim Ade Ae dg ast Us ou Afu Aaa FT AVI (1056-7, Wg, He 3)
aapay sabad sadaa gur daataa har naam jap sambaahaa hay. ||14] |
You Yourself are the Shabad forever, the Guru, the Great Giver; chanting the Lord's Name, You bestow Your treasure. ||14| |
3 umy Aas fHaAeTT Il (1056-8, wg, H8 3) too aapay kartaa sirjanhaaraa. You Yourself are the Creator of the Universe.
3a fafimr afe o HeeTT Il (1056-8, wg, He 3) tayraa likhi-aa ko-ay na maytanhaaraa. No one can erase what You have written.
Toute ou tefs J uM} AGA TES F SIT MAUI (1056-8, wg, He 3)
gurmukh naam dayveh too aapay sahsaa ganat na taahaa hay. ||15||
You Yourself bless the Gurmukh with the Naam, who is no longer skeptical, and is not held to account. ||15]|
~*~
Sas AS Sd CISTS Il (1056-9, wg, ve 3) bhagat sachay tayrai darvaaray. Your true devotees stand at the Door of Your Court.
Rad Rafe af fimrg il (1056-9, wg, ws 3) sabday sayvan bhaa-ay pi-aaray. They serve the Shabad with love and affection.
oot STH IS Aaa SH AeA AT FT UAENSUAI (1056-10, wg, He 3)
naanak naam ratay bairaagee naamay kaaraj sohaa hay. ||16||3||12]|
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam remain detached; through the Naam, their affairs are resolved. ||16||3]|12]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1056-10)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Ad ufs Ans fea Ye sofenr i 1056-10, wg, Hs 3) mayrai parabh saachai ik khayl rachaa-i-aa. My True Lord God has staged a play.
afe 3 far ot Aa Surfer | 1056-11, xg, 48 3) ko-ay na kis hee jayhaa upaa-i-aa. He has created no one like anyone else.
nm gaa ad efy fear vfs oA Sot HITT NA (1056-11, +g, He 3)
aapay farak karay vaykh vigsai sabh ras dayhee maahaa hay. ||1]|
He made them different, and he gazes upon them with pleasure; he placed all the flavors in the body. ||1]|
an ue 3 rfl Se Il (1056-12, wg, He 3) vaajai pa-un tai aap vajaa-ay. You Yourself vibrate the beat of the breath.
fre Fast edt Hfs ure Il (1056-12, wg, ws 3) siv saktee dayhee meh paa-ay. Shiva and Shakti, energy and matter - You have placed them into the body.
Gs usASt Cuct Je famra se ARE SIT QI (1056-12, 7g, ne 3)
gur parsaadee ultee hovai gi-aan ratan sabad taahaa hay. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, one turns away from the world, and attains the jewel of spiritual wisdom, and the Word of the Shabad. ||2]|
MTT THE MM Shor | (1056-13, wg, ue 3) anDhayraa chaanan aapay kee-aa. He Himself created darkness and light.
Sa FIs nis_ B Fh | (1056-13, wg, ue 3) ayko vartai avar na bee-aa. He alone is pervasive; there is no other at all.
Ts USA wiry use GHG fear sfa sro FT SI (1056-14, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee aap pachhaanai kamal bigsai buDh taahaa hay. ||3]|| One who realizes his own self - by Guru's Grace, the lotus of his mind blossoms forth.
[I3]|
must ade afs wmd ATE Il (1056-14, wg, He 3) apnee gahan gat aapay jaanai. Only He Himself knows His depth and extent.
dg 8a Afe afs wrfiy Sars I (1056-14, wg, ve 3) hor lok sun sun aakh vakhaanai. Other people can only listen and hear what is spoken and said.
famret de A ASH gs Ara refs AEST FT sil (1056-15, wg, He 3)
gi-aanee hovai so gurmukh boojhai saachee sifat salaahaa hay. ||4]|
One who is spiritually wise, understands himself as Gurmukh; he praises the True Lord. ||4||
Tot niefs SAT MUS Il (1056-16, wg, He 3) dayhee andar vasat apaaraa. Deep within the body is the priceless object.
WM TUS YBTSEITT Il (1056-16, Hg, 48 3) aapay kapat khulaavanhaaraa. He Himself opens the doors.
aoufy Aon vifgs ule faRar orafs gsr FT ull 056-16, wg, Hs 3)
gurmukh sehjay amrit peevai tarisnaa agan bujhaahaa hay. ||5]||
The Gurmukh intuitively drings in the Ambrosial Nectar, and the fire of desire is quenched. ||5]|
Afs dA eat nists ure il (1056-17, wg, He 3) sabh ras dayhee andar paa-ay. He placed all the flavors within the body.
fed AG Ag ASE ASS | (1056-17, wg, us 3) virlay ka-o gur sabad bujhaa-ay. How rare are those who understand, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nigg UA Aa AES safes ard ArT T MEM (1056-17, 47g, He 3)
andar khojay sabad saalaahay baahar kaahay jaahaa hay. ||6||
So search within yourself, and praise the Shabad. Why run around outside your self? [16] |
fee oad Are fan o nrfemr I (1056-18, wg, He 3) vin chaakhay saad kisai na aa-i-aa. Without tasting, no one enjoys the flavor.
qa & Rafe nifys uborfenr | (1056-18, wg, 48 3) gur kai sabad amrit pee-aa-i-aa. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
nifys ut une ue de ag a Aafe GA SIT IDI (1056-19, wg, Hs 3)
amrit pee amraa pad ho-ay gur kai sabad ras taahaa hay. ||7]||
The Ambrosial Nectar is drunk, and the immoral status is obtained, when one obtains the sublime essence of the Guru's Shabad. ||7] |
nity usTé A Afs TE WS Il (1056-19, wg, He 3) aap pachhaanai so sabh gun jaanai. One who realizes himself, knows all virtues.
Yat qoUuD
Gd & Rafe ofa SH AE Il (1057-1, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad har naam vakhaanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he chants the Name of the Lord.
wofes aft gat feg ast wfemr Ho vara T WC (1057-1, wg, He 3)
an-din naam rataa din raatee maa-i-aa moh chukaahaa hay. ||8]|
Night and day, he remains imbued with the Naam, day and night; he is rid of emotional attachment to Maya. ||8]||
dd As 3 AS fas urs | (1057-2, wg, ues 3) gur sayvaa tay sabh kichh paa-ay. Serving the Guru, all things are obtained;
ICH As nmy TSS Il (1057-2, wg, ve 3) ha-umai mayraa aap gavaa-ay. egotism, possessiveness and self-conceit are taken away.
mnt fxur ad AMES TI aA Ase ATT TD WM (1057-2, wg, Hs 3)
aapay kirpaa karay sukh-daata gur kai sabday sohaa hay. ||9||
The Lord, the Giver of peace Himself grants His Grace; He exalts and adorns with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||9]|
Ts a Aa vifys I seat il 1057-3, wg, ue 3) gur kaa sabad amrit hai banee. The Guru's Shabad is the Ambrosial Bani.
motes ats at STH Surat | (1057-3, wg, He 3) an-din har kaa naam vakhaanee. Night and day, chant the Name of the Lord.
fe ofs Ae ZA we nists A we fegHe StI T AOI (1057-3, wg, He 3) har har sachaa vasai ghat antar so ghat nirmal taahaa hay. ||10]| That heart becomes immaculate, which is filled with the True Lord, Har, Har. ||10]|
Hea Agta Aafe Awad il (1057-4, wg, ws 3) sayvak sayveh sabad salaaheh. His servants serve, and praise His Shabad.
Ae ofa ws fs we awets il (1057-4, wg, 42 3) sadaa rang raatay har gun gaavahi. Imbued forever with the color of His Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
nm aun Aafe fhe usnes eA fs Sta FT WAU (1057-5, Hg, He 3)
aapay bakhsay sabad milaa-ay parmal vaas man taahaa hay. ||11]|
He Himself forgives, and unites them with the Shabad; the fragrance of sandalwood permeates their minds. ||11]|
Fad WikG XA ANH Il (1057-5, wg, us 3) sabday akath kathay saalaahay. Through the Shabad, they speak the Unspoken, and praise the Lord.
He ys AMS SUTeT Il (1057-6, wg, He 3) mayray parabh saachay vayparvaahay. My True Lord God is self-sufficient.
nny Tees Aafe fhe Age a IA STITT NAMI (1057-6, wg, He 3)
aapay gundaataa sabad milaa-ay sabdai kaa ras taahaa hay. ||12||
The Giver of virtue Himself unites them with the Shabad; they enjoy the sublime essence of the Shabad. ||12]|
HOHY FH SST F UTES Il (1057-6, wg, Hz 3) manmukh bhoolaa tha-ur na paa-ay. The confused, self-willed manmukhs find no place of rest.
A ofa fof A IH ANE Il (1057-7, Wg, He 3) jo Dhur likhi-aa so karam kamaa-ay. They do those deeds which they are pre-destined to do.
fatter a3 fafimr dn nfs AEH BY StI T AI (1057-7, wg, He 3)
bikhi-aa raatay bikhi-aa khojai mar janmai dukh taahaa hay. ||13]|
Imbued with poison, they search out poison, and suffer the pains of death and rebirth. [|13]|
nmy nify mirfly Ares Il (1057-8, wg, Hs 3)
aapay aap aap Saalaahay. He Himself praises Himself.
33 TE ys J3 Tt Hrd Il (1057-8, wg, ue 3) tayray gun parabh tujh hee maahay. Your Glorious Virtues are within You alone, God.
3 urfu Ae Sot aet Ret wm ney wrest FT NASI (1057-8, Hg, H8 3)
too aap sachaa tayree banee sachee aapay alakh athaahaa hay. ||14||
You Yourself are True, and True is the Word of Your Bani. You Yourself are invisible and unknowable. ||14||
fag ae ws afe & we Il (1057-9, wg, Hs 3) bin gur daatay ko-ay na paa-ay. Without the Guru, the Giver, no one finds the Lord,
we Act A AH AHS I (1057-9, wg, ue 3) lakh kotee jay karam kamaa-ay. though one may make hundreds of thousands and millions of attempts.
ad fase 3 we nists efior wae Ay AI T WWII (1057-9, Hg, He 3)
gur kirpaa tay ghat antar vasi-aa sabday sach saalaahaa hay. ||15]||
By Guru's Grace, He dwells deep within the heart; through the Shabad, praise the True Lord. ||15]|
A Ao fee ufs orfu fee i (1057-10, wg, wu 3) say jan milay Dhur aap milaa-ay. They alone meet Him, whom the Lord unites with Himself.
Ardt aet Aafe AIS | (1057-10, xg, Hs 3) saachee banee sabad suhaa-ay. They are adorned and exalted with the True Word of His Bani, and the Shabad.
woe HO Te We fos AS Te Weg Tet ANT T NAENSNISI (1057-11, wg, He 3) naanak jan gun gaavai nit saachay gun gaavah gunee samaahaa hay. ||16||4|/|13]| Servant Nanak continually sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; singing His Glories, he is immersed in the Glorious Lord of Virtue. ||16]|4]|13]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1057-11)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
fogue Sa Het Ag Aet il (1057-12, wg, ue 3) nihchal ayk sadaa sach so-ee. The One Lord is eternal and unchanging, forever True.
Us TT FS ASt Fe I (1057-12, wg, He 3) pooray gur tay sojhee ho-ee. Through the Perfect Guru, this understanding is obtained.
ofa aff 36 Ae fomrfefs aaHfs Ale Hara T WAU (1057-12, wg, He 3)
har ras bheenay sadaa Dhi-aa-in gurmat seel sannaahaa hay. ||1]| Those who are drenched with the sublime essence of the Lord, meditate forever on Him; following the Guru's Teachings, they obtain the armor of humility. ||1]|
viata Sa Het AfsMrs il (1057-13, wg, He 3) andar rang sadaa sachi-aaraa. Deep within, they love the True Lord forever.
aa & Rafe ofa ath fimirar i (1057-13, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad har naam pi-aaraa. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they love the Lord's Name.
0@ fafa om efhmr we nists efor afer ar ara F 2H (1057-13, +g, He 3)
na-o niDh naam vasi-aa ghat antar chhodi-aa maa-i-aa kaa laahaa hay. ||2||
The Naam, the embodiment of the nine treasures, abides within their hearts; they renounce the profit of Maya. ||2]|
sebofs ae eaHfs Set i (1057-14, wg, ue 3) ra-ee-at raajay durmat do-ee. Both the king and his subjects are involved in evil-mindedness and duality.
fag Afsara AS Sa 3 Tet i 4057-14, wg, ne 3) bin satgur sayvay ayk na ho-ee. Without serving the True Guru, they do not become one with the Lord.
ea fourfefs net Ay ufefs fegee aa fFara FT USI (1057-15, wg, He 3)
ayk Dhi-aa-in sadaa sukh paa-in nihchal raaj tinaahaa hay. ||3]|
Those who meditate on the One Lord find eternal peace. Their power is eternal and unfailing. ||3]|
MTSS Fret TH B AEST I (1057-15, wg, Hs 3) aavan jaanaa rakhai na ko-ee. No one can save them from coming and going.
ANE He FA 3 Tet Il (1057-16, wg, He 3) jaman maran tisai tay ho-ee. Birth and death come from Him.
aonfa Ara Het fomreg afs wats fSA 3 urs FT il 4057-16, wg, He 3)
gurmukh saachaa sadaa Dhi-aavahu gat mukat tisai tay paahaa hay. ||4||
The Gurmukh meditates forever on the True Lord. Emancipation and liberation are obtained from Him. ||4] |
Ag AH Asas Vs Il (1057-17, wg, Hs 3) sach sanjam satguroo du-aarai. Truth and self-control are found through the Door of the True Guru.
JH au Aafe fess Il (1057-17, wg, Hs 3) ha-umai kroDh sabad nivaarai. Egotism and anger are silenced through the Shabad.
Afsag Afe Ae AY ure Ale ASy AS SIT UI (1057-17, wg, He 3) satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai seel santokh sabh taahaa hay. ||5]|
Serving the True Guru, lasting peace is found; humility and contentment all come from Him. ||5]||
IH He Bur AAS II (1057-18, 47g, He 3) ha-umai moh upjai sansaaraa. Out of egotism and attachment, the Universe welled up.
AS Aa faor om ferret il (1057-18, 47g, He 3) sabh jag binsai naam visaaraa. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all the world perishes.
fag Afsaa AS on 6 ureha OU AS Afar wa TF MEM (1057-18, wg, He 3)
bin satgur sayvay naam na paa-ee-ai naam sachaa jag laahaa hay. ||6]|
Without serving the True Guru, the Naam is not obtained. The Naam is the True profit in this world. ||6||
Ae’ wig Hate AafeEni | (1057-19, wg, He 3) sachaa amar sabad suhaa-i-aa. True is His Will, beauteous and pleasing through the Word of the Shabad.
ue ae fifes erat erfemr i (1057-19, wg, He 3) panch sabad mil vaajaa vaa-i-aa. The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, vibrate and resonate.
Yat Goutc
Ae ara Afs of der fo Fae ASH ATT MDI (1058-1, wg, He 3)
sadaa kaaraj sach naam suhaylaa bin sabdai kaaraj kayhaa hay. ||7]||
Through the True Name, one's actions are forever embellished. Without the Shabad, what can anyone do? ||7]||
firs fa TA firs Hf FS Ml (1058-1, wg, He 3) khin meh hasai khin meh rovai. One instant, he laughs, and the next instant, he cries.
Set TIHAS HSH B IS Il (1058-2, wg, m2 3) doojee durmat kaaraj na hovai. Because of duality and evil-mindedness, his affairs are not resolved.
Ana feta ass fats ue fags o 3S Bors T ICH (1058-2, wg, He 3)
sanjog vijog kartai likh paa-ay kirat na chalai chalaahaa hay. ||8]||
Union and separation are pre-ordained by the Creator. Actions already committed cannot be taken back. ||8] |
Heo Hats Td As AHS | (1058-3, wg, He 3)
jeevan mukat gur sabad kamaa-ay.
One who lives the Word of the Guru's Shabad becomes Jivan Mukta - liberated while yet alive.
ofa fa AE dt gd ANTES Il 1058-3, wg, Hs 3) har si-o sad hee rahai samaa-ay. He remains forever immersed in the Lord.
aa fxsur 3 fed efanret WBN Fao SIT I (1058-3, »g, ne 3)
gur kirpaa tay milai vadi-aa-ee ha-umai rog na taahaa hay. ||9||
By Guru's Grace, one is blessed with glorious greatness; he is not afflicted by the disease of egotism. ||9]|
oA aA ure fig SUES Il (1058-4, wg, we 3) ras kas khaa-ay pind vaDhaa-ay. Eating tasty delicacies, he fattens up his body
Bu Ad Td AGE o AWE Il (1058-4, wg, He 3) bhaykh karai gur sabad na kamaa-ay. and wears religious robes, but he does not live to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nists da Ho ve ard fare ufs ANTI T AON (1058-4, Hg, He 3)
antar rog mahaa dukh bhaaree bistaa maahi samaahaa hay. ||10]||
Deep with the nucleus of his being is the great disease; he suffers terrible pain, and eventually sinks into the manure. ||10]|
ae uate ufs ae surefs il 058-5, wg, 8 3) bayd parheh parh baad vakaaneh. He reads and studies the Vedas, and argues about them;
we Hfo You fH Aafe 3 usrats Il (1058-5, wg, He 3) ghat meh barahm tis sabad na pachhaaneh. God is within his own heart, but he does not recognize the Word of the Shabad.
qonfy 32 A sg fase gAo ais GA TTT AAU (1058-6, wg, H8 3)
gurmukh hovai so tat bilovai rasnaa har ras taahaa hay. ||11||
One who becomes Gurmukh churns the essence of reality; his tongue savors the sublime essence of the Lord. ||11]|
ufs eq g3fe aofe arefs i 1058-6, wg, He 3) ghar vath chhodeh baahar Dhaaveh. Those who forsake the object within their own hearts, wander outside.
HOHY nit ATE @ uTSfs Il (1058-7, wg, He 3) manmukh anDhay saad na paavahi. The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not taste the flavor of God.
MS TA TSt TAS Stat FS Tis TA Hf F TI TF WAI (1058-7, wg, He 3)
an ras raatee rasnaa feekee bolay har ras mool na taahaa hay. ||12] |
Imbued with the taste of another, their tongues speak tasteless, insipid words. They never taste the sublime essence of the Lord. ||12]|
HoH Vdt SIH FS Il (1058-8, wg, He 3) manmukh dayhee bharam bhataaro. The self-willed manmukh has doubt as his spouse.
eanfs ud fos df ung I (1058-8, wg, He 3) durmat marai nit ho-ay khu-aaro. He dies of evil-mindedness, and suffers forever.
ath afr He eA wfenr AUS AY So STITT NII (1058-8, wg, He 3)
kaam kroDh man doojai laa-i-aa supnai sukh na taahaa hay. ||13]|
His mind is attached to sexual desire, anger and duality, and he does not find peace, even in dreams. ||13]|
AIS VI AGE FIT Il (1058-9, wg, ue 3) kanchan dayhee sabad bhataaro. The body becomes golden, with the Word of the Shabad as its spouse.
wofes sa sat ofa fr@ furs i (1058-9, wg, He 3) an-din bhog bhogay har si-o pi-aaro. Night and day, enjoy the enjoyments, and be in love with the Lord.
Hoe niefs ae Hoe ure star gfS ANTI T NAVI (1058-10, wg, He 3)
mehlaa andar gair mahal paa-ay bhaanaa bujh samaahaa hay. ||14||
Deep within the mansion of the self, one finds the Lord, who transcends this mansion. Realizing His Will, we merge in Him. ||14]|
~~
my BS FEST Il (1058-10, wg, ue 3) aapay dayvai dayvanhaaraa. The Great Giver Himself gives.
fSH nirat Sot far ar Bra I (1058-10, wg, Hs 3) tis aagai nahee kisai kaa chaaraa. No one has any power to stand against Him.
nm aun Aafe fhore fSA a Age maT T NAW (058-11, wg, Hs 3)
aapay bakhsay sabad milaa-ay tis daa sabad athaahaa hay. ||15]||
He Himself forgives, and unites us with the Shabad; The Word of His Shabad is unfathomable. ||15]]|
Me fis As do fSA AT I 1058-11, wg, He 3) jee-o pind sabh hai tis kayraa. Body and soul, all belong to Him.
Het Afos Stag AT Il (1058-12, wg, us 3) sachaa saahib thaakur mayraa. The True Lord is my only Lord and Master.
Soa Teaet dfs ufenr ats Au Af ANTI TF INAENUNIEH (1058-12, Hg, He 3)
naanak gurbaanee har paa-i-aa har jap jaap samaahaa hay. ||16||5||14] | O Nanak, through the Word of the Guru's Bani, I have found the Lord. Chanting the Lord's Chant, I merge in Him. ||16||5||14]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1058-13)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
TaHfy are ae sag Il (1058-13, wg, ve 3) gurmukh naad bayd beechaar. The Gurmukh contemplates the sound current of the Naad instead of the Vedas.
aaHty famirg fomre nimarg il 058-13, wg, He 3) gurmukh gi-aan Dhi-aan aapaar. The Gurmukh attains infinite spiritual wisdom and meditation.
Tsnfe ve as ys ste ToHfe yar user Al (1058-13, wg, we 3) gurmukh kaar karay parabh bhaavai gurmukh pooraa paa-idaa. ||1]|| The Gurmukh acts in harmony with God's Will; the Gurmukh finds perfection. ||1]|
Tafa Hour Cafe uss i (1058-14, wg, we 3) gurmukh manoo-aa ulat paraavai. The mind of the Gurmukh turns away from the world.
Tafa wat ore SAS I (1058-14, wg, ve 3) gurmukh banee naad vajaavai. The Gurmukh vibrates the Naad, the sound current of the Guru's Bani.
aonfy vfs a3 Saat fon wie ear urfeer Qi (1058-15, wg, He 3)
gurmukh sach ratay bairaagee nij ghar vaasaa paa-idaa. ||2||
The Gurmukh, attuned to the Truth, remains detached, and dwells in the home of the self deep within. ||2]|
Ts at Anat nifys Seat 1 1058-15, wg, He 3) gur kee saakhee amrit bhaakhee. I speak the Ambrosial Teachings of the Guru.
Ae Aad AG AST Il (1058-15, wg, He 3) sachai sabday sach subhaakhee. I lovingly chant the Truth, through the True Word of the Shabad.
Ae Afs df ws He Aa AS Afs AMEE SI (1058-16, wg, He 3)
sadaa sach rang raataa man mayraa sachay sach samaa-idaa. ||3] |
My mind remains forever imbued with the Love of the True Lord. I am immersed in the Truest of the True. |[3]|
qoHfa He fess AS Afe BS Il (1058-16, wg, He 3) gurmukh man nirmal sat sar naavai. Immaculate and pure is the mind of the Gurmukh, who bathes in the Pool of Truth.
AS o Brat Afs AHS Il (1058-17, wg, He 3) mail na laagai sach samaavai. No filth attaches to him; he merges in the True Lord.
Ae Ay one Ae dt wet safs feat er ei (1058-17, we, He 3) sacho sach kamaavai sad hee sachee bhagat darirhaa-idaa. ||4|| He truly practices Truth forever; true devotion is implanted within him. ||4| |
Tafa Ag sat aoufey AG Set i (1058-18, wg, He 3) gurmukh sach bainee gurmukh sach nainee. True is the speech of the Gurmukh; true are the eyes of the Gurmukh.
Tafa AT AHS Aaat Il (1058-18, wg, He 3) gurmukh sach kamaavai karnee. The Gurmukh practices and lives the Truth.
He dt Ag ad feg wat neg Ag aafeer ull (1058-18, wg, He 3) sad hee sach kahai din raatee avraa sach kahaa-idaa. ||5|| He speaks the Truth forever, day and night, and inspires others to speak the Truth.
HSI] Toute Hat SSH set Il (1058-19, wg, we 3)
gurmukh sachee ootam banee. True and exalted is the speech of the Gurmukh.
Tafa AS AT Turet I (1058-19, wg, He 3) gurmukh sacho sach vakhaanee. The Gurmukh speaks Truth, only Truth.
donfy we Agfo Ae Ae Tenfy Age Aefeer WEN (1058-19, wg, He 3)
gurmukh sad sayveh sacho sachaa gurmukh sabad sunaa-idaa. ||6]||
The Gurmukh serves the Truest of the True forever; the Gurmukh proclaims the Word of the Shabad. ||6] |
at qour
Toufa JS A AST US It (1059-1, wg, H8 3) gurmukh hovai so sojhee paa-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh understands.
ICH Hfemr SIN TASES Il (1059-1, wg, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa bharam gavaa-ay. He rids himself of egotism, Maya and doubt.
qs at ust Ss Sut fe Ae afe Te weer WI 1059-2, wg, Hs 3)
gur kee pa-orhee ootam oochee dar sachai har gun gaa-idaa. ||7| |
He ascends the sublime, exalted ladder of the Guru, and he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord at His True Door. ||7]|
aanfy AY HAAN ATNt APT Il (1059-2, wg, Hs 3) gurmukh sach sanjam karnee saar. The Gurmukh practices true self-control, and acts in excellence.
ToHfa ure He BME I (1059-2, 7g, ne 3) gurmukh paa-ay mokh du-aar. The Gurmukh obtains the gate of salvation.
ofe sats Ae df ast my sete ANAESTH (1059-3, wg, Hs 3)
bhaa-ay bhagat sadaa rang raataa aap gavaa-ay samaa-idaa. ||8]||
Through loving devotion, he remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love; eradicating self-conceit, he merges in the Lord. ||8]|
Taufa JS He ofA AES Il (1059-3, nrg, ne 3) gurmukh hovai man khoj sunaa-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh examines his own mind, and instructs others.
Ae of Aer fee we Il 1059-4, wg, Hs 3)
sachai naam Sadaa liv laa-ay. He is lovingly attuned to the True Name forever.
A fsa oe Het aaAt A AS Hie afe|er CN (1059-4, wg, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so-ee karsee jo sachay man bhaa-idaa. ||9]|| They act in harmony with the Mind of the True Lord. ||9] |
W fA ate Afsag fare I (1059-4, wg, Hs 3) jaa tis bhaavai satguroo milaa-ay. As it pleases His Will, He unites us with the True Guru.
Ww faq ae 3 ifs SATS Il 1059-5, wg, Hs 3) jaa tis bhaavai taa man vasaa-ay. As it pleases His Will, He comes to dwell within the mind.
nitue ave Hert dfar wat ave vfs sArfeEer ION (1059-5, wg, He 3)
aapnai bhaanai sadaa rang raataa bhaanai man vasaa-idaa. ||10||
As it pleases His Will, He imbues us with His Love; as it pleases His Will, He comes to dwell in the mind. ||10]|
Hodfe AGH AT A et Il (1059-6, wg, us 3) manhath karam karay so chheejai. Those who act stubborn-mindedly are destroyed.
SIs 34 aT Sdt SHA I (1059-6, wg, ue 3) bahutay bhaykh karay nahee bheejai. Wearing all sorts of religious robes, they do not please the Lord.
fafimr a3 gy anrefa ge ofa Mfee|r IA (1059-6, wg, Hs 3) bikhi-aa raatay dukh kamaaveh dukhay dukh samaa-idaa. ||11]| Tinged by corruption, they earn only pain; they are immersed in pain. ||11||
ToHfa JS A AY AHS Il (1059-7, wg, He 3) gurmukh hovai so sukh kamaa-ay. One who becomes Gurmukh earns peace.
HdE Fie at ASt urs | 1059-7, wg, He 3) maran jeevan kee sojhee paa-ay. He comes to understand death and birth.
Hde Hee FAN afs WE AAT ys seer NII (4059-7, wg, He 3) maran jeevan jo sam kar jaanai so mayray parabh bhaa-idaa. ||12] | One who looks alike upon death and birth, is pleasing to my God. ||12||
aanfy Hots A dfs uss Il (1059-8, wg, He 3) gurmukh mareh so heh parvaan. The Gurmukh, while remaining dead, is respected and approved.
MSE Aral HAE USES Il (1059-8, Hg, He 3) aavan jaanaa sabad pachhaan. He realizes that coming and going are according to God's Will.
He 3 AH BT BY Ue HO dt Hols AHMET WISI (1059-9, wg, He 3) marai na jammai naa dukh paa-ay man hee maneh samaa-idaa. ||13]|
He does not die, he is not reborn, and he does not suffer in pain; his mind merges in the Mind of God. ||13]|
A essa fast Afsag urfemr | 059-9, wg, He 3)
say vadbhaagee jinee satgur paa-i-aa. Very fortunate are those who find the True Guru.
ICH fess Ho varfeur II (1059-10, wg, He 3) ha-umai vichahu moh chukaa-i-aa. They eradicate egotism and attachment from within.
He fase fefa He 3 ord Uf AS AST uf—eT NASI (1059-10, wg, He 3)
man nirmal fir mail na laagai dar sachai sobhaa paa-idaa. ||14| |
Their minds are immaculate, and they are never again stained with filth. They are honored at the Door of the True Court. ||14]|
MM AT ATS WIM I (1059-10, wg, He 3) aapay karay karaa-ay aapay. He Himself acts, and inspires all to act.
SAR
nme Sy afy Sars i 1059-11, wg, 8 3) aapay vaykhai thaap uthaapay. He Himself watches over all; He establishes and disestablishes.
Tafa As Ae ys ave AG Afs BS urf—Ser WAU (1059-11, wg, Hs 3)
gurmukh sayvaa mayray parabh bhaavai sach sun laykhai paa-idaa. ||15]|
The service of the Gurmukh is pleasing to my God; one who listens to the Truth is approved. ||15]|
Tafa AT AT AHS Il (1059-12, wg, He 3) gurmukh sacho sach kamaavai. The Gurmukh practices Truth, and only Truth.
ToHfy fess AS 3 BS Il (1059-12, wg, Hs 3) gurmukh nirmal mail na laavai. The Gurmukh is immaculate; no filth attaches to him.
Soa OH IS Sard oH oft AHTEET INVENT (1059-12, wg, Hs 3)
naanak naam ratay veechaaree naamay naam samaa-idaa. ||16]|1]|15]| O Nanak, those who contemplate the Naam are imbued with it. They merge in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||16]|1]|]15]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1059-13)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
nm figAfe gafh As ATHt Il (1059-13, wg, He 3) aapay sarisat hukam sabh saajee. He Himself fashioned the Universe, through the Hukam of His Command.
nmy arf Barfy foes il (1059-13, wg, ws 3) aapay thaap uthaap nivaajee. He Himself establishes and disestablishes, and embellishes with grace.
nmy fonr@ ad Ag Ara’ Are AMY fHofeer AI (1059-14, wg, He 3) aapay ni-aa-o karay sabh saachaa saachay saach milaa-idaa. ||1]||
The True Lord Himself administers all justice; through Truth, we merge in the True Lord. ||1]|
afenr ae FT nara il (1059-14, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa kot hai aakaaraa. The body takes the form of a fortress.
Hfenr Hy Unf UTATET II (1059-15, Hg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh pasri-aa paasaaraa. Emotional attachment to Maya has expanded throughout its expanse.
fag Hae SAH at Sat Yo Ao THtSeEr 2M (1059-15, wg, we 3)
bin sabdai bhasmai kee dhayree khayhoo khayh ralaa-idaa. ||2| |
Without the Word of the Shabad, the body is reduced to a pile of ashes; in the end, dust mingles with dust. ||2| |
fen ase TS MUS Il (1059-15, ug, He 3) kaa-i-aa kanchan kot apaaraa. The body is the infinite fortress of gold;
fan fetes sfenr Aas yiurat Il (1059-16, wg, Hs 3)
jis vich ravi-aa sabad apaaraa. it is permeated by the Infinite Word of the Shabad.
Tonfa we Ae ae ATS fife Utsn AY ufeer SI (1059-16, wg, He 3)
gurmukh gaavai sadaa gun saachay mil pareetam sukh paa-idaa. ||3]||
The Gurmukh sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord forever; meeting his Beloved, he finds peace. ||3]|
ofan afs Heg dfs wif ASS II (1059-17, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa har mandar har aap savaaray. The body is the temple of the Lord; the Lord Himself embellishes it.
fan fefe ofa HE SA Has II (1059-17, wg, Hs 3) tis vich har jee-o vasai muraaray. The Dear Lord dwells within it.
qd a Rafe genfo eurct sect nef frarfeer ei 1059-17, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabad vanjan vaapaaree nadree aap milaa-idaa. ||4|| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the merchants trade, and in His Grace, the Lord merges them with Himself. ||4] |
AAS fa ady fees Il (1059-18, og, Hs 3) so soochaa je karoDh nivaaray. He alone is pure, who eradicates anger.
Hee FS wTY ASS Il (1059-18, wg, Hs 3) sabday boojhai aap savaaray. He realizes the Shabad, and reforms himself.
nn as TIE aes wry His SAT EEr UI (1059-19, wg, us 3) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa aapay man vasaa-idaa. ||5] | The Creator Himself acts, and inspires all to act; He Himself abides in the mind. ||5]|
fesse sats 3 feat i 059-19, wg, Hs 3) nirmal bhagat hai niraalee. Pure and unique is devotional worship.
He 36 Uefa Rafe Stet i (1059-19, wg, He 3) man tan Dhoveh sabad veechaaree. The mind and body are washed clean, contemplating the Shabad.
Yat IOEO
wofes He od df ast afe fasur safs aafeer Ell (1060-1, wg, He 3)
an-din sadaa rahai rang raataa kar kirpaa bhagat karaa-idaa. ||6||
One who remains forever imbued with His Love, night and day - in His Mercy, the Lord inspires him to perform devotional worship service. ||6]|
fem Ho Hes His HOM UTS Il (1060-1, +g, He 3)
is man mandar meh manoo-aa Dhaavai. In this temple of the mind, the mind wanders around.
Ay uate fsorfar wor By UTS II (1060-2, wg, He 3) sukh palar ti-aag mahaa dukh paavai. Discarding joy like straw, it suffers in terrible pain.
fag Afsaa 32 oa 5 US mm Ye aafESr MDI (1060-2, wg, ne 3)
bin satgur bhaytay tha-ur na paavai aapay khayl karaa-idaa. ||7||
Without meeting the True Guru, it finds no place of rest; He Himself has staged this play. ||71|
wif mrudug mf tardt il (1060-3, xg, He 3)
aap aprampar aap veechaaree. He Himself is infinite; He contemplates Himself.
nm HB Adel ASH ll (1060-3, wg, He 3) aapay maylay karnee saaree. He Himself bestows Union through actions of excellence.
for & arg ad Sarat nm gua fherfeer Weil 060-3, wg, He 3) ki-aa ko kaar karay vaychaaraa aapay bakhas milaa-idaa. ||8]||
What can the poor creatures do? Granting forgiveness, He unites them with Himself. [18] |
mn AfsagT HB UT Il (1060-4, wg, He 3) aapay satgur maylay pooraa. The Perfect Lord Himself unites them with the True Guru.
He Aafe HOAs AS Il (1060-4, wg, we 3)
sachai sabad mahaabal sooraa. Through the True Word of the Shabad, he makes them brave spiritual heroes.
nny HS & sfanret Ad fAC fas ofeer ti (060-4, wg, us 3)
aapay maylay day vadi-aa-ee sachay si-o chit laa-idaa. ||9||
Uniting them with Himself, He bestows glorious greatness; He inspires them to focus their consciousness on the True Lord. ||9||
we ot niefa Ara At Il (1060-5, wg, He 3) ghar hee andar saachaa so-ee. The True Lord is deep within the heart.
Tafa feser gS AST I (1060-5, og, ws 3) gurmukh virlaa boojhai ko-ee. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, realize this.
oH fours sfror we nists grat oH fomrfeer 901! (1060-6, Hg, He 3)
naam niDhaan vasi-aa ghat antar rasnaa naam Dhi-aa-idaa. ||10]|
The treasure of the Naam abides deep within their hearts; they meditate on the Naam with their tongues. ||10]|
ferisg 3@ nisg adt SH Il (1060-6, wg, He 3) disantar bhavai antar nahee bhaalay. He wanders through foreign lands, but does not look within himself.
Hfenr Hfs gor AHS Il (1060-7, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi baDhaa jamkaalay. Attached to Maya, he is bound and gagged by the Messenger of Death.
TH ot SH aa 3 Se EH Ste SoHE AAU (1060-7, wg, He 3)
jam kee faasee kabhoo na tootai doojai bhaa-ay bharmaa-idaa. ||11]|
The noose of death around his neck will never be untied; in the love of duality, he wanders in reincarnation. ||11]|
AU Su ARH dg Aet are Il (1060-8, 7g, He 3) jap tap sanjam hor ko-ee naahee. There is no real chanting, meditation, penance or self-control,
Aa Sd Wd A AE B AH Il (1060-8, wg, He 3) jab lag gur kaa sabad na kamaahee. as long as one does not live to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
aa & Aafe fifeor wg ufeer AS Afs PfeET 92I1 (1060-8, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabad mili-aa sach paa-i-aa sachay sach samaa-idaa. ||12]||
Accepting the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one obtains Truth; through Truth, one merges in the True Lord. ||12]|
OH AY AAS HATS Il (1060-9, wg, Hs 3) kaam karoDh sabal sansaaraa. Sexual desire and anger are very powerful in the world.
Ud AGH aHefd AF TY AT UAT Il (1060-9, wg, He 3) baho karam kamaaveh sabh dukh kaa pasaaraa. They lead to all sorts of actions, but these only add to all the pain.
Afsag Refs A AY uefa AS Aafe ferfeer 19311 (1060-10, wg, He 3)
satgur sayveh say sukh paavahi sachai sabad milaa-idaa. ||13]|
Those who serve the True Guru find peace; they are united with the True Shabad. [|13]|
u@e urat 3 SAS Il (1060-10, wg, Hs 3) pa-un paanee hai baisantar. Air, water and fire make up the body.
Hor Hy gas AS vista Il (1060-11, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh vartai sabh antar. Emotional attachment to Maya rules deep within all.
fafs at3 at fSA usrefo aefemr Ho garfeer 19811 (1060-11, wg, He 3)
jin keetay jaa tisai pachhaaneh maa-i-aa moh chukaa-idaa. ||14||
When one realizes the One who created him, emotional attachment to Maya is dispelled. ||14]|
fefax urfemr Hifo arafa femme i 060-12, wg, 48 3) ik maa-i-aa mohi garab vi-aapay. Some are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya and pride.
ICH dE gI FI mM II (1060-12, wg, Hs 3) ha-umai ho-ay rahay hai aapay. They are self-conceited and egotistical.
ANAS at wafs o uret nifs afeor ugafe]er Wail (1060-12, wg, He 3)
jamkaalai kee khabar na paa-ee ant ga-i-aa pachhutaa-idaa. ||15]|| They never think about the Messenger of Death; in the end, they leave, regretting and repenting. ||15]|
fafs Gure A fafr ATE II 060-13, og, Hs 3) jin upaa-ay so biDh jaanai. He alone knows the Way, who created it.
Tafa FS ASE USS Il (1060-13, wg, 8 3) gurmukh dayvai sabad pachhaanai. The Gurmukh, who is blessed with the Shabad, realizes Him.
Soa VA Ad FSst Afs oth fas atest NIE! (1060-13, wg, He 3)
naanak daas kahai baynantee sach naam chit laa-idaa. ||16]||2||16]| Slave Nanak offers ths prayer; O Lord, let my consciousness be attached to the True Name. ||16]|2||16]]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1060-14)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
mite Fate efenmufs VST Il (1060-14, wg, ws 3)
aad jugaad da-i-aapat daataa.
From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, the Merciful Lord has been the Great Giver.
UT TT a Aafe UES Il (1060-15, wg, He 3) pooray gur kai sabad pachhaataa. Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, He is realized.
306 Af A ssfo Arete 3 my Afs freee Wal (1060-15, wg, He 3) tuDhuno sayveh say tujheh samaaveh too aapay mayl milaa-idaa. ||1]]| Those who serve You are immersed in You. You unite them in Union with Yourself.
[21] Ma nidisg AHS adt uret Il (1060-16, wg, He 3)
agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee. You are inaccessible and unfathomable; Your limits cannot be found.
Aba HS Sat AsSTet Il (1060-16, wg, He 3) jee-a jant tayree sarnaa-ee. All beings and creatures seek Your Sanctuary.
fa@ su are fe varefa 3 nm Hrafar UET QI (1060-16, wg, Hs 3) ji-o tuDh bhaavai tivai chalaaveh too aapay maarag paa-idaa. ||2|| As is pleases Your Will, You guide us along; You Yourself place us on the Path. ||2]|
o St Aa" GAT At Il (1060-17, wg, He 3) hai bhee saachaa hosee so-ee. The True Lord is, and shall always be.
my AT MET o At Il (1060-17, wg, He 3) aapay Saajay avar na ko-ee. He Himself creates - there is no other at all.
Aga" AS Ad AYeTSt nny fea UTefEET ISI (1060-17, wg, He 3) sabhnaa saar karay sukh-daata aapay rijak pahuchaa-idaa. ||3]| The Giver of peace takes care of all; He Himself sustains them. ||3]|
WAH MdTT MSY MUTE II (1060-18, Hg, He 3) agam agochar alakh apaaraa. You are inaccessible, unfathomable, invisible and infinite;
afe 5 WE SI USS Il (1060-18, wg, He 3) ko-ay na jaanai tayraa parvaaraa. no one knows Your extent.
nimyat nity usteto nim aaHst orfu gsfeer sil (1060-19, wg, He 3) aapnaa aap pachhaaneh aapay gurmatee aap bujhaa-idaa. ||4|| You Yourself realize Yourself. Through the Guru's Teachings, You reveal Yourself. ||4||
uss ude Sut wirarat | fsa fefs Is JAH AIST Il (1060-19, wg, He 3)
paataal puree-aa lo-a aakaaraa. tis vich vartai hukam karaaraa.
Your Almighty Command prevails throughout the nether worlds, realms and worlds of form.
UST AEA
JAH ATA JAH Bd Jan Hf feorfeer ull io6i-1, wg, Hs 3)
hukmay saajay hukmay dhaahay hukmay mayl milaa-idaa. ||5||
By the Hukam of Your Command, You create, and by Your Command, You destroy. By Your Command, You unite in Union. ||5||
JAH FS A YAH AST Il (1061-2, wg, vs 3) hukmai boojhai so hukam salaahay. One who realizes Your Command, praises Your Command.
Ma nigiss SUSI Il (1061-2, wg, He 3) agam agochar vayparvaahay. You are Inaccessible, Unfathomable and Self-Sufficient.
Hot Hf ef A de 3 wm wale gateer Well (1061-2, wg, ws 3)
jayhee mat deh so hovai too aapay sabad bujhaa-idaa. ||6]|
As is the understanding You give, so do I become. You Yourself reveal the Shabad. [16] |
motes mdr feret AS Il (1061-3, wg, Hs 3) an-din aarjaa chhijdee jaa-ay. Night and day, the days of our lives wear away.
dfs feon efe Amdt mre Il (1061-3, wg, ne 3) rain dinas du-ay saakhee aa-ay. Night and day both bear witness to this loss.
HouY nig 3 3s ua fra Gufs ae gorfeer DI (1061-3, og, He 3) manmukh anDh na chaytai moorhaa sir oopar kaal roo-aa-idaa. ||7||
The blind, foolish, self-willed manmukh is not aware of this; death is hovering over his head. ||7||
HO 36 AlSS Tg Yoel Bear Il (1061-4, wg, us 3) man tan seetal gur charnee laagaa. The mind and body are cooled and soothed, holding tight to the Guru's Feet.
nists sou afer SB sar il (1061-4, wg, He 3) antar bharam ga-i-aa bha-o bhaagaa. Doubt is eliminated from within, and fear runs away.
He’ noe AY Te Weta Ay set Safer CI (1061-5, wg, Hs 3)
sadaa anand sachay gun gaavahi sach banee bolaa-idaa. ||8]||
One is in bliss forever, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, and speaking the True Word of His Bani. ||8] |
fafe 3 AST aH feast I (1061-5, wg, He 3) jin too jaataa karam biDhaataa. One who knows You as the Architect of Karma,
ud otal Ts Aas USS Il (1061-5, wg, Hs 3) poorai bhaag gur sabad pachhaataa.
has the good fortune of perfect destiny, and recognizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
afs ufs Ag Aa AY Het JH ufa ferfeer EN Co6i-6, wg, He 3)
jat pat sach sachaa sach so-ee ha-umai maar milaa-idaa. ||9||
The Lord, the Truest of the True, is his social class and honor. Conquering his ego, he is united with the Lord. ||9]|
HG FST TH SVS Bar Il (1061-6, wy, ws 3) man kathor doojai bhaa-ay laagaa. The stubborn and insensitive mind is attached to the love of duality.
SIH FH fEs niSsaI I (1061-7, wg, Hs 3) bharmay bhoolaa firai abhaagaa. Deluded by doubt, the unfortunate wander around in confusion.
aH de ST Afsag AS AoA dt AY wfe|r AON (1061-7, +g, He 3)
karam hovai taa satgur sayvay sehjay hee sukh paa-idaa. ||10||
But if they are blessed by God's Grace, they serve the True Guru, and easily obtain peace. ||10||
od BeaTAtT wify Sure il (061-7, wg, us 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh aap upaa-ay. He Himself created the 8.4 million species of beings.
HOA Aol Ad sats fEsrS | (1061-8, wg, ws 3) maanas janam gur bhagat drirh-aa-ay. Only in this human life, is devotional worship to the Guru implanted within.
fag sarst fare fefs er farer fete fefa urf&er 94 Co6i-8, wg, He 3)
bin bhagtee bistaa vich vaasaa bistaa vich fir paa-idaa. ||11]| Without devotion, one lives in manure; he falls into manure again and again. ||11]|
aH de ag sats fess i co61-9, wg, He 3) karam hovai gur bhagat drirh-aa-ay. If one is blessed with His Grace, devotional worship to the Guru is implanted within.
fee agH fas urfenr AS Il (061-9, wg, He 3) vin karmaa ki-o paa-i-aa jaa-ay. Without God's Grace, how can anyone find Him?
Wn ad ae aTs fa are fSe verfEer 19211 (1061-9, wg, He 3) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-idaa. ||12|| The Creator Himself acts, and inspires all to act; as He wills, he leads us on. ||12]|
fAfifs AAS MTZ o ATS Il (1061-10, wg, He 3) simrit Saasat ant na jaanai. The Simritees and the Shaastras do not know His limits.
Hay niu SZ BUSES Il (1061-10, wg, 2 3) moorakh anDhaa tat na pachhaanai. The blind fool does not recognize the essence of reality.
nm ad ATS aTst nny sath gorfser AS (1061-11, wg, He 3)
aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa aapay bharam bhulaa-idaa. ||13]||
The Creator Himself acts, and inspires all to act; He Himself deludes with doubt. [|13]|
A fag vy nerf ase Il (1061-11, wg, us 3) sabh kichh aapay aap karaa-ay. He Himself causes everything to be done.
win} fafa fafa dao we ii (061-12, wg, ue 3) aapay sir sir DhanDhai laa-ay. He Himself joins each and every person to his tasks.
nm afy Gard Se aaufe orf gerfker 198i Co61-12, wg, He 3)
aapay thaap uthaapay vaykhai gurmukh aap bujhaa-idaa. ||14||
He Himself establishes and disestablishes, and watches over all; He reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||14]|
Ret Afee afss asta i (1061-12, wg, He 3) sachaa saahib gahir gambheeraa. The True Lord and Master is profoundly deep and unfathomable.
Het ABrdt St He Ute i (1061-13, wg, He 3) sadaa salaahee taa man Dheeraa. Praising Him forever, the mind is comforted and consoled.
Wan nidieg ahs odt uct aanfs vfs srfe]er quill (1061-13, wg, He 3)
agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee gurmukh man vasaa-idaa. ||15]|| He is inaccessible and unfathomable; His value cannot be estimated. He dwells in the mind of the Gurmukh. ||15]]|
uifu fea Ta UA Bet | co61-14, wg, ve 3) aap niraalam hor DhanDhai lo-ee. He Himself is detached; all others are entangled in their affairs.
TT USA FS FET Il (1061-14, weg, Hz 3) gur parsaadee boojhai ko-ee. By Guru's Grace, one comes to understand Him.
ost SH ZA We nists TaHst Afs freee NIENSIIDN (1061-14, wg, He 3)
naanak naam vasai ghat antar gurmatee mayl milaa-idaa. ||16]|3]|17]|
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell deep within the heart; through the Guru's Teachings, one is united in His Union. ||16||3]|17]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1061-15)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
Aa esto aS TAs Il 1061-15, wg, He 3) jug chhateeh kee-o gubaaraa. For thirty-six ages, utter darkness prevailed.
3 um Arata fraAeTT Il (1061-15, wg, He 3) too aapay jaaneh sirjanhaaraa. Only You Yourself know this, O Creator Lord.
oo four a ao fx nrfa ere J nm} aHPS urf—|r Al co6i-16, wg, He 3)
hor ki-aa ko kahai ke aakh vakhaanai too aapay keemat paa-idaa. ||1]|
What can anyone else say? What can anyone explain? Only You Yourself can estimate Your worth. ||1]|
Guiofs AS fqAfe Curet il (1061-16, wg, 42 3) o-ankaar sabh sarisat upaa-ee. The One Universal Creator created the entire Universe.
AZ YS SHA Sat Senet It (1061-17, wg, ne 3) sabh khayl tamaasaa tayree vadi-aa-ee. All the plays and dramas are to Your glory and greatness.
nny za ad Afs APat nm sfe war|Er I (1061-17, wg, He 3) aapay vayk karay sabh saachaa aapay bhann gharhaa-idaa. ||2]| The True Lord Himself makes all distinctions; He Himself breaks and builds. ||2]|
ates fea ast uret il (1061-18, wg, ws 3) baajeegar ik baajee paa-ee. The Juggler has staged His juggling show.
ud TIS Seat met Il (1061-18, wg, ne 3) pooray gur tay nadree aa-ee. Through the Perfect Guru, one comes to behold it.
He nifsugs gd ae weet AS fAe fas wfeer Si (01-18, wg, Hs 3)
sadaa alipat rahai gur sabdee saachay si-o chit laa-idaa. ||3]||
One who remains forever detached in the Word of the Guru's Shabad - his consciousness is attuned to the True Lord. ||3]|
Bald IH Ofs wirars | (1061-19, wg, He 3) baajeh baajay Dhun aakaaraa. The musical instruments of the body vibrate and resound.
nifty Se SSSI Il (1061-19, wg, ws 3) aap vajaa-ay vajaavanhaaraa. The Player Himself plays them.
ufe ufe ue =o fea daft fife uzé AS sAfEeEr SI (061-19, wg, He 3)
ghat ghat pa-un vahai ik rangee mil pavnai sabh vajaa-idaa. | |4||
The breath flows equally through the hearts of each and every being. Receiving the breath, all the instruments sing. ||4]|
Ust AOE
as ad A fess Fz Il (1062-1, 7g, ne 3) kartaa karay so nihcha-o hovai. Whatever the Creator does, surely comes to pass.
Gd A Ase IGH FS Il (1062-1, wg, Hs 3) gur kai sabday ha-umai khovai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, egotism is consumed.
qe ust far & sfsnret ont ony fmf er iui 1062-2, wg, He 3)
gur parsaadee kisai day vadi-aa-ee naamo naam Dhi-aa-idaa. | |5| |
By Guru's Grace, some are blessed with glorious greatness; they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||5||
TI AS AST TT BT Jr Il (1062-2, wg, ne 3) gur sayvay jayvad hor laahaa naahee. There is no other profit as great as service to the Guru.
oH Hfs SA SH Arar I (1062-2, wg, He 3) naam man vasai naamo saalaahee. The Naam abides within my mind, and I praise the Naam.
OH OH Ae’ AMSTST OH wer user Ell (1062-3, wg, He 3) naamo naam sadaa sukh-daata naamo laahaa paa-idaa. ||6] | The Naam is forever the Giver of peace. Through the Naam, we earn the profit. | |6] |
fag aS AS EY AAT Il (1062-3, wg, He 3) bin naavai sabh dukh sansaaraa. Without the Name, all the world suffers in misery.
ad AGH aHtets sata fears il (1062-4, wg, us 3) baho karam kamaaveh vaDheh vikaaraa. The more actions one does, the more the corruption increases.
on 3 Refs fae wy ure fe ore ey uTfeET NDI (1062-4, wg, He 3)
naam na sayveh ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai bin naavai dukh paa-idaa. ||7]|
Without serving the Naam, how can anyone find peace? Without the Naam, one suffers in pain. ||7]|
wif ad 3 rf aare Il (1062-5, wg, He 3) aap karay tai aap karaa-ay. He Himself acts, and inspires all to act.
Ts uTATSt far FSS | (1062-5, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee kisai bujhaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, He reveals Himself to a few.
aonfy defo A due Safe wast & whe user ci (1062-5, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hoveh say banDhan torheh muktee kai ghar paa-idaa. ||8] |
One who becomes Gurmukh breaks his bonds, and attains the home of liberation. [18] |
TES TE A AS AAS Il (1062-6, wg, we 3) ganat ganai so jalai sansaaraa. One who calculates his accounts, burns in the world.
Hom Hf 3 ya fears | (1062-6, wg, He 3) sahsaa mool na chukai vikaaraa. His skepticism and corruption are never dispelled.
Toufy de W TEs yove AS Afs AH EET EN (1062-6, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so ganat chukaa-ay sachay sach samaa-idaa. ||9]|
One who becomes Gurmukh abandons his calculations; through Truth, we merge in the True Lord. ||9]|
A Ag ef 3 ure set Il (1062-7, wg, Hs 3) jay sach day-ay ta paa-ay ko-ee. If God grants Truth, then we may attain it.
Ts usATSt uga|e Tet Il (1062-7, wg, ve 3) gur parsaadee pargat ho-ee. By Guru's Grace, it is revealed.
Ag OH Ad df wa as fas 3 AY uTeET AOI (1062-8, wg, He 3)
sach naam saalaahay rang raataa gur kirpaa tay sukh paa-idaa. ||10]||
One who praises the True Name, and remains imbued with the Lord's Love, by Guru's Grace, finds peace. ||10]|
AU SU AHH oH fimra Il (1062-8, wg, He 3)
jap tap sanjam naam pi-aaraa.
The Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord, is chanting, meditation, penance and self- control.
forte ATS AEST Il (1062-9, wg, ws 3) kilvikh kaatay kaatanhaaraa. God, the Destroyer, destroys sins.
ofa & aft 36 HO Ase dur AoA Aafa AHEE|r AAI (1062-9, Hg, He 3)
har kai naam tan man seetal ho-aa sehjay sahj samaa-idaa. ||11]|
Through the Name of the Lord, the body and mind are cooled and soothed, and one is intuitively, easily absorbed into the Celestial Lord. ||11]]|
nists SF Hfs AS Hw Be Il (1062-10, wg, ve 3) antar lobh man mailai mal laa-ay. With greed within them, their minds are filthy, and they spread filth around.
AS AGH AT EY UE Il (1062-10, wg, ue 3) mailay karam karay dukh paa-ay. They do filthy deeds, and suffer in pain.
aS ag ad eure ag afs gy ufser 9211 (1062-10, wg, He 3)
koorho koorh karay vaapaaraa koorh bol dukh paa-idaa. ||12||
They deal in falsehood, and nothing but falsehood; telling lies, they suffer in pain. []12]|
feos aat & vfs SAE Il (1062-11, wg, Hs 3)
nirmal banee ko man vasaa-ay.
Rare is that person who enshrines the Immaculate Bani of the Guru's Word within his mind.
Od UAT ATA ATS Il (1062-11, wg, 8 3) gur parsaadee sahsaa jaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, his skepticism is removed.
Td a we VS feo TSt on BS AY UES NASI (1062-11, wg, He 3)
gur kai bhaanai chalai din raatee naam chayt sukh paa-idaa. ||13]|
He walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, day and night; remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he finds peace. ||13]|
wif fier Ae Het i (1062-12, wg, Hs 3) aap sirandaa sachaa so-ee. The True Lord Himself is the Creator.
wif Gurfe wure Het | (1062-12, wg, Hs 3) aap upaa-ay khapaa-ay so-ee. He Himself creates and destroys.
qonfy 2 A Ae Aad fife APS AY ufe|Er AVIl (1062-12, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so sadaa salaahay mil saachay sukh paa-idaa. ||14||
One who becomes Gurmukh, praises the Lord forever. Meeting the True Lord, he finds peace. ||14||
Wda AIS ad fet ef S Tet il (1062-13, wg, ue 3) anayk jatan karay indree vas na ho-ee. Making countless efforts, sexual desire is not overcome.
ath adfa 7S AS aEet | 1062-13, wg, Hs 3) kaam karoDh jalai sabh ko-ee. Everyone is burning in the fires of sexuality and anger.
Afsag Az Ho SfA wre Ho HS Hofa AMEE UAW (1062-14, Hy, He 3)
satgur Sayvay man vas aavai man maaray maneh samaa-idaa. ||15]||
Serving the True Guru, one brings his mind under control; conquering his mind, he merges in the Mind of God. ||15]|
Aa 3a" 30 MMy ahr It (1062-14, wg, us 3) mayraa tayraa tuDh aapay kee-aa. You Yourself created the sense of 'mine' and ‘yours.’
Afs 33 A3 33 Afs Fer I (1062-15, wg, Hs 3) sabh tayray jant tayray sabh jee-aa. All creatures are Yours; You created all beings.
aoa OTH AHS Het J TaHst Hfe SASEr UAEUSIUACH (1062-15, wy, Hs 3) naanak naam samaal sadaa too gurmatee man vasaa-idaa. ||16||4||18]|
O Nanak, contemplate the Naam forever; through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord abides in the mind. ||16||4]|18]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1062-16)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
dfs AME VST nia MIATIT Il (1062-16, wg, He 3) har jee-o daataa agam athaahaa. The Dear Lord is the Giver, inaccessible and unfathomable.
6A fe 3 SHE FugST Il (1062-16, wg, He 3) os til na tamaa-ay vayparvaahaa. He does not have even an iota of greed; He is self-sufficient.
fsH 6 nufs o Aa aet mmd Afs frerfeer Wall (1062-17, wg, He 3) tis no aparh na sakai ko-ee aapay may! milaa-idaa. ||1]| No one can reach up to Him; He Himself unites in His Union. ||1]]|
A fas ad A fscs@ det i 062-17, wg, ne 3) jo kichh karai so nihcha-o ho-ee. Whatever He does, surely comes to pass.
fan fag ast neg 3 At Il (1062-17, wg, 8 3) tis bin daataa avar na ko-ee. There is no other Giver, except for Him.
fA 6 OH BS Ad A ure Ta Aaet Harfee|r IMI (1062-18, wg, ue 3)
jis no naam daan karay so paa-ay gur sabdee maylaa-idaa. ||2]|
Whoever the Lord blesses with His gift, obtains it. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He unites him with Himself. ||2]|
JSUT SSE SI TCHS Il (1062-18, wg, ws 3) cha-odah bhavan tayray hatnaalay. The fourteen worlds are Your markets.
Afsata fears nists Ss il (1062-19, wg, He 3) satgur dikhaa-ay antar naalay. The True Guru reveals them, along with one's inner being.
oe a eurdt de qa Aaet & user SI (1062-19, wg, Hs 3)
naavai kaa vaapaaree hovai gur sabdee ko paa-idaa. ||3]|| One who deals in the Name, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, obtains it. ||3]|
UST IOE3
Afsafa Afent AGA Me Il (1063-1, wg, He 3) satgur sayvi-ai sahj anandaa. Serving the True Guru, one obtains intuitive bliss.
fase urfe gar aifser il (1063-1, wg, He 3) hirdai aa-ay vuthaa govindaa. The Lord of the Universe comes to dwell within the heart.
Hon sats ad feg ast wm sats aafeer sil (1063-1, wg, ws 3)
sehjay bhagat karay din raatee aapay bhagat karaa-idaa. ||4||
He intuitively practices devotional worship day and night; God Himself practices devotional worship. ||4||
Afsas 3 fees fsat gy urfemr | (1063-2, wg, He 3) satgur tay vichhurhay tinee dukh paa-i-aa. Those who are separated from the True Guru, suffer in misery.
mofeg Hdbifs gu Hatem i 1063-2, wg, ws 3) an-din maaree-ah dukh sabaa-i-aa. Night and day, they are punished, and they suffer in total agony.
He aS HIG 3 ures ou dt fefy gu ufeer ull c063-3, wg, us 3)
mathay kaalay mahal na paavahi dukh hee vich dukh paa-idaa. ||5]| Their faces are blackened, and they do not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. They suffer in sorrow and agony. ||5||
Afsag Aefs A essai Il (1063-3, wg, He 3) satgur sayveh say vadbhaagee. Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.
Hon atte Adt fee sraft | (1063-4, wg, ws 3) sahj bhaa-ay sachee liv laagee. They intuitively enshrine love for the True Lord.
Ae Ag anefa Ae dt Ad Afs ferfeer El (063-4, wg, ue 3) sacho sach kamaaveh sad hee sachai mayl milaa-idaa. ||6]|| They practice Truth, forever Truth; they are united in Union with the True Lord. ||6||
fa S Ae ef A UTS Il (1063-4, wg, He 3) jis no sachaa day-ay so paa-ay. He alone obtains the Truth, unto whom the True Lord gives it.
nists APG SIH FaES Il (1063-5, wg, Hs 3) antar saach bharam chukaa-ay. His inner being is filled with Truth, and his doubt is dispelled.
Ag Ad a omit est fang 22 A AG use| DI (1063-5, Hg, He 3)
sach sachai kaa aapay daataa jis dayvai so sach paa-idaa. ||7]||
The True Lord Himself is the Giver of Truth; he alone obtains the Truth, unto whom He gives it. ||7]|
WN] ATS Aga at At Il (1063-6, wg, He 3) aapay kartaa sabhnaa kaa so-ee. He Himself is the Creator of all.
fAA 6 orf gee gS AT I (1063-6, wg, we 3) jis no aap bujhaa-ay boojhai ko-ee. Only one whom He instructs, understands Him.
nm aan & sfanret nm Af fherfeer cil (1063-6, wg, Hs 3)
aapay bakhsay day vadi-aa-ee aapay mayl milaa-idaa. ||8] |
He Himself forgives, and grants glorious greatness. He himself unites in His Union. [18] |
ICH aafenr HOH aetfemr II (1063-7, Hg, He 3) ha-umai kardi-aa janam gavaa-i-aa. Acting egotistically, one loses his life.
Mat HIS YX HSMM Il (1063-7, wg, Hs 3) aagai moh na chookai maa-i-aa. Even in the world hereafter, emotioal attachment to Maya does not leave him.
Wal AHS Bat Be fas fs wrat utarH|er ei 1063-7, wg, ne 3)
agai jamkaal laykhaa layvai ji-o til ghaanee peerhaa-idaa. ||9] |
In the world hereafter, the Messenger of Death calls him to account, and crushes him like sesame seeds in the oil-press. ||9||
ud Sat TI AS Tet Il (1063-8, wg, He 3) poorai bhaag gur sayvaa ho-ee. By perfect destiny, one serves the Guru.
oefs as 3ST AS ae Il (1063-8, wg, Hs 3) nadar karay taa sayvay ko-ee. If God grants His Grace, then one serves.
AHaS fH Sf o mre Hofs AS AY UfEET AON (1063-8, Hg, He 3)
jamkaal tis nayrh na aavai mahal sachai sukh paa-idaa. ||10||
The Messenger of Death cannot even approach him, and in the Mansion of the True Lord's Presence, he finds peace. ||10]||
fs AY ufeor HO SES Il (1063-9, wg, He 3) tin sukh paa-i-aa jo tuDh bhaa-ay. They alone find peace, who are pleasing to Your Will.
ud Sa TS AST BES Il (1063-9, wg, us 3) poorai bhaag gur sayvaa laa-ay. By perfect destiny, they are attached to the Guru's service.
33 ofa 3 AS efsnret fam tefa A urfee|r 9AM (1063-10, +g, He 3)
tayrai hath hai sabh vadi-aa-ee jis dayveh so paa-idaa. ||11]|
All glorious greatness rests in Your Hands; he alone obtains it, unto whom You give it. ||11]|
nits USI AT J US Il (1063-10, wg, we 3) andar pargaas guroo tay paa-ay. Through the Guru, one's inner being is enlightened and illumined.
oH ueTag HfS SAS Il (1063-10, wg, He 3) naam padaarath man vasaa-ay. The wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell in the mind.
fomrs dao Ae ufe wos nifamirs nitty Teer AI (1063-11, 47g, He 3)
gi-aan ratan sadaa ghat chaanan agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-idaa. ||12]|
The jewel of spiritual wisdom ever illumines the heart, and the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled. ||12| |
mifamrat nit SH Ba Il (1063-12, wg, we 3) agi-aanee anDhay doojai laagay. The blind and ignorant are attached to duality.
fag uret ofa He msrat Il (1063-12, +g, He 3) bin paanee dub moo-ay abhaagay. The unfortunates are drowned without water, and die.
Jofeur wg ug sels 3 wire AH Uf aor ey ufeeEr ISI (1063-12, Hg, He 3)
chaldi-aa ghar dar nadar na aavai jam dar baaDhaa dukh paa-idaa. ||13]|
When they depart from the world, they do not find the Lord's door and home; bound and gagged at Death's door, they suffer in pain. ||13]|
fag Afsaa Az Hats o Tet Il 1063-13, wg, He 3) bin satgur sayvay mukat na ho-ee. Without serving the True Guru, no one finds liberation.
farret forrat ysT AST I (1063-13, wg, m2 3) gi-aanee Dhi-aanee poochhahu ko-ee. Go ask any spiritual teacher or meditator.
Afsag Az fsa fxs efsuret fe Ae Ae ufe|Er dell (1063-14, wg, He 3)
satgur sayvay tis milai vadi-aa-ee dar sachai sobhaa paa-idaa. ||14||
Whoever serves the True Guru is blessed with glorious greatness, and honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||14]|
Afsag 6 Az fsa vrfu fesre Ih (1063-14, og, 8 3) satgur no sayvay tis aap milaa-ay. One who serves the True Guru, the Lord merges into Himself.
HHS atte Afs fee BES I (1063-15, wg, us 3) mamtaa kaat sach liv laa-ay. Cutting away attachment, one lovingly focuses on the True Lord.
Ae’ Ag genfs surat oH wor urfe|r UI (1063-15, wg, He 3) sadaa sach vanjahi vaapaaree naamo laahaa paa-idaa. ||15]|| The merchants deal forever in Truth; they earn the profit of the Naam. ||15]|
nM AI ATS ATS? Il (1063-15, wg, ws 3) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa. The Creator Himself acts, and inspires all to act.
Rafe Hd Het He HAST Il (1063-16, wg, He 3) sabad marai so-ee jan muktaa. He alone is liberated, who dies in the Word of the Shabad.
SSR OTH SA HS Nists oH OH fomrfeer IIENUIAE! (1063-16, Hg, He 3) naanak naam vasai man antar naamo naam Dhi-aa-idaa. ||16]|5||19]|
O Nanak, the Naam dwells deep within the mind; meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||16]|5]|19]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1063-17)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
A 30 age A ate ufemr Il (1063-17, wg, He 3) jo tuDh karnaa so kar paa-i-aa. Whatever You do, is done.
ae fefa a feaer nifemr It (1063-17, og, He 3) bhaanay vich ko virlaa aa-i-aa. How rare are those who walk in harmony with the Lord's Will.
sat 48 A AY ure are fefs AY user AI (1063-18, wg, Hs 3) bhaanaa mannay so sukh paa-ay bhaanay vich sukh paa-idaa. ||1]| One who surrenders to the Lord's Will finds peace; he finds peace in the Lord's Will.
[21
Tafa Sa grat srs Il (1063-18, wg, He 3) gurmukh tayraa bhaanaa bhaavai. Your Will is pleasing to the Gurmukh.
Hon dt AY AY AHS Il (1063-18, wg, He 3) sehjay hee sukh sach kamaavai. Practicing Truth, he intuitively finds peace.
we 3 Gd Fst wruear grat wry HaEE|r NIM (1063-19, wg, He 3)
bhaanay no lochai bahutayree aapnaa bhaanaa aap manaa-idaa. ||2||
Many long to walk in harmony with the Lord's Will; He Himself inspires us to surrender to His Will. ||2||
3a gat HS A HS 30 we II (1063-19, wg, He 3) tayraa bhaanaa mannay so milai tuDh aa-ay. One who surrenders to Your Will, meets with You, Lord.
ust IOE8
fan Stat are A OSSfo AMS I (1064-1, wg, He 3) jis bhaanaa bhaavai so tujheh samaa-ay. One who is pleased with Your Will is immersed in You.
ae fefs est efanret svar fants aafeer Sil (1064-1, wg, He 3)
bhaanay vich vadee vadi-aa-ee bhaanaa kiseh karaa-idaa. ||3]| Glorious greatness rests in God's Will; rare are those who accept it. ||3]|
W fA ae T TT fae It (1064-2, wg, Hs 3) jaa tis bhaavai taa guroo milaa-ay. When it pleases His Will, He leads us to meet the Guru.
THY SH USTIT UTE | (1064-2, wg, He 3) gurmukh naam padaarath paa-ay. The Gurmukh finds the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
3u nme are AS fknfe Curet fan 3 arar Ofe fen afer sil (1064-2, wg, He 3)
tuDh aapnai bhaanai sabh sarisat upaa-ee jis no bhaanaa deh tis bhaa-idaa. ||4]|
By Your Will, You created the whole Universe; those whom You bless with Your favor are pleased with Your Will. ||4]|
HOHY MT AT PSI Il (1064-3, wg, He 3) manmukh anDh karay chaturaa-ee. The blind, self-willed manmukhs practice cleverness.
Sat OHS ATS SY uret il (1064-3, wg, ue 3) bhaanaa na mannay bahut dukh paa-ee. They do not surrender to the Lord's Will, and suffer terrible pain.
SoH FH nis WE UT HIG B aT UPSET MUI (1064-4, wg, we 3)
bharmay bhoolaa aavai jaa-ay ghar mahal na kabhoo paa-idaa. ||5]||
Deluded by doubt, they come and go in reincarnation; they never find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||5||
Afsag HS & Sfsnret i (1064-4, wg, ve 3) satgur maylay day vadi-aa-ee. The True Guru brings Union, and grants glorious greatness.
Afsad at As ufs saHret Il 064-4, wg, ne 3) satgur kee sayvaa Dhur furmaa-ee. The Primal Lord ordained service to the True Guru.
Afsad AS St oH ure oH Tt AY uTfee|r HEN (1064-5, nrg, He 3)
satgur sayvay taa naam paa-ay naamay hee sukh paa-idaa. ||6||
Serving the True Guru, the Naam is obtained. Through the Naam, one finds peace. [16] |
AS oreg Cun areg ate Il (1064-5, vg, ne 3) sabh naavhu upjai naavhu chheejai. Everything wells up from the Naam, and through the Naam, perishes.
aa fxsur 3 Ho 3g SH Il (1064-6, wg, 8 3) gur kirpaa tay man tan bheejai. By Guru's Grace, the mind and body are pleased with the Naam.
dHot on fomre aff sth aA dt 3 am urfeer DI (1064-6, wg, Hs 3)
rasnaa naam Dhi-aa-ay ras bheejai ras hee tay ras paa-idaa. ||7]||
Meditating on the Naam, the tongue is drenched with the Lord's sublime essence. Through this essence, the Essence is obtained. ||7||
HIG niefs How a UTS Il (1064-6, wg, He 3)
mahlai andar mahal ko paa-ay.
Rare are those who find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence within the mansion of their own body.
aa & Aafe Afs fas we il (1064-7, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabad sach chit laa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they lovingly focus their consciousness on the True Lord.
fan 6 Ay efe Het Ay ue AS Afe fefeer CI (1064-7, wg, Hs 3)
jis no sach day-ay so-ee sach paa-ay sachay sach milaa-idaa. ||8]||
Whoever the Lord blesses with Truth obtains Truth; he merges in Truth, and only Truth. ||8]|
omy fer Hfe sf ee usm Il (1064-8, wg, Hs 3) naam visaar man tan dukh paa-i-aa. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind and body suffer in pain.
Heer Hg AS da afer | (1064-8, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabh rog kamaa-i-aa. Attached to the love of Maya, he earns nothing but disease.
fag ae Ho 30 0 AAT Baa SAT ufeeEr WEN (1064-8, wg, He 3)
bin naavai man tan hai kustee narkay vaasaa paa-idaa. ||9]|
Without the Name, his mind and body are afflicted with leprosy, and he obtains his home in hell. ||9]|
Oot gS f35 fSdHs SI Il (1064-9, wg, He 3) naam ratay tin nirmal dayhaa. Those who are imbued with the Naam - their bodies are immaculate and pure.
SdH TA Ae AY ST Il (1064-9, wg, He 3) nirmal hansaa sadaa sukh nayhaa. Their soul-swan is immaculate, and in the Lord's Love, they find eternal peace.
oH Aoetg Ae AY ufeor for wifes erAT user NAOMI (1064-10, wg, He 3)
naam salaahi sadaa sukh paa-i-aa nij ghar vaasaa paa-idaa. ||10]||
Praising the Naam, they find eternal peace, and dwell in the home of their own inner being. ||10]|
AS & SSH AT SUS Il (1064-10, wg, ne 3) sabh ko vanaj karay vaapaaraa. Everyone deals and trades.
fee are AG Sev AAS Il (1064-11, wg, He 3) vin naavai sabh totaa sansaaraa. Without the Name, all the world loses.
oat witfinrt ora ATT fee are wy ufe|Er IAI (1064-11, Hg, He 3) naago aa-i-aa naago jaasee vin naavai dukh paa-idaa. ||11|| Naked they come, and naked they go; without the Name, they suffer in pain. ||11]|
far S on Sf A ure Il (1064-11, wg, Hs 3) jis no naam day-ay so paa-ay. He alone obtains the Naam, unto whom the Lord gives it.
aa & Rafe ofa vfs SAS Il (1064-12, wg, ue 3) gur kai sabad har man vasaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
ae fxsur 3 on efi we nists ont on fomrf er 19211 (1064-12, wg, He 3) gur kirpaa tay naam vasi-aa ghat antar naamo naam Dhi-aa-idaa. ||12]|
By Guru's Grace, the Naam dwells deep within the heart, and one meditates upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||12]|
Ss SA A
oe 6 Be ASt AS met Il (1064-13, wg, ne 3)
naavai no lochai jaytee sabh aa-ee. Everyone who comes into the world, longs for the Name.
oe fsar fire ufa usta aHret Il (1064-13, wg, Hs 3)
naa-o tinaa milai Dhur purab kamaa-ee.
They alone are blessed with the Name, whose past actions were so ordained by the Primal Lord.
frat a ufear A eserat ag & Rafe frerfeer 193i (1064-13, wg, He 3)
jinee naa-o paa-i-aa say vadbhaagee gur kai sabad milaa-idaa. ||13]|
Those who obtain the Name are very fortunate. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are united with God. ||13]|
fen ae ifs wrest i (1064-14, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa kot at apaaraa. Utterly incomparable is the fortress of the body.
fsH fefs afs ys ad Sera I (1064-14, wg, Hs 3) tis vich bahi parabh karay veechaaraa. Within it, God sits in contemplation.
Ae four@ Ad eure foose SAT ue ASI (1064-15, Hg, He 3)
sachaa ni-aa-o sacho vaapaaraa nihchal vaasaa paa-idaa. ||14||
He administers true justice, and trades in Truth; through Him, one finds the eternal, unchanging dwelling. ||14]|
MI We AX BS Hofer I (1064-15, wg, He 3) antar ghar bankay thaan suhaa-i-aa. Deep within the inner self are glorious homes and beautiful places.
aonfy fess fas are urfemr i (1064-16, wg, He 3) gurmukh virlai kinai thaan paa-i-aa. But rare is that person who, as Gurmukh, finds these places.
fez rfa fod Ad AS ofa AST vfs SAfeEr WAU (1064-16, wg, Hs 3)
it saath nibhai saalaahay sachay har sachaa man vasaa-idaa. ||15]||
If one stays in these places, and praises the True Lord, the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind. |]15]|
Ae aes fea ges geret | (1064-17, wg, Hs 3) mayrai kartai ik banat banaa-ee. My Creator Lord has formed this formation.
fen edt fefs As Se uret Il (1064-17, wg, us 3) is dayhee vich sabh vath paa-ee. He has placed everything within this body.
soa on ents df aS TaHfe & oH ufk|r NIENENQON (1064-17, wg, He 3) naanak naam vanjahi rang raatay gurmukh ko naam paa-idaa. ||16||6]|20] |
O Nanak, those who deal in the Naam are imbued with His Love. The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||16]|6||20] |
Hg HIG 3 Il (1064-18)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
afin dag AeE SIs Il (1064-18, wg, Hs 3) kaa-i-aa kanchan sabad veechaaraa. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, the body becomes golden.
fsa ofa eA fA & nig B ursrerat Il (1064-19, wg, He 3) tithai har vasai jis daa ant na paaraavaaraa. The Lord abides there; He has no end or limitation.
mofes ots Afeg Adt wat afe AIG Hate fHerfeer NA (1064-19, wg, He 3)
an-din har sayvihu sachee banee har jee-o sabad milaa-idaa. ||1]|
Night and day, serve the Lord, and chant the True Word of the Guru's Bani. Through the Shabad, meet the Dear Lord. ||1]|
ust OEY ofa sats fae afeas WE Il (1065-1, 1g, H8 3)
har cheeteh tin balihaarai jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who remember the Lord.
aa & Aafe fsa Af fer i (1065-1, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad tin mayl milaa-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I unite in Union with the Lord.
fae ot ufs oet ufa HASfa ASHafs afo TE afer IM (1065-2, wg, He 3)
tin kee Dhoor laa-ee mukh mastak satsangat bahi gun gaa-idaa. ||2]|
I touch the dust of their feet to my face and forehead; sitting in the Society of the Saints, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||2||
dfs a TE PS A Ths YS SST Il (1065-2, wg, us 3) har kay gun gaavaa jay har parabh bhaavaa. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, as I am pleasing to the Lord God.
nists ofa on Aafe AIST Il (1065-3, wg, He 3)
antar har naam sabad suhaavaa.
With the Lord's Name deep within my inner being, I am adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
Taaet vg ast Feb ATS of AMEE|T SI (1065-3, wg, He 3)
gurbaanee chahu kundee sunee-ai saachai naam samaa-idaa. ||3]|
The Word of the Guru's Bani is heard throughout the four corners of the world; through it, we merge in the True Name. ||3]||
A Ag AS fA nisg TS Il Ta a Aafe afe seta foo Il (1065-3, wg, ne 3)
so jan saachaa je antar bhaalay. gur kai sabad har nadar nihaalay.
That humble being, who searches within himself, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, sees the Lord with his eyes.
fomrs ning ue ae Aaet oedt oefa fherfeer gil (1065-4, wg, He 3)
gi-aan anjan paa-ay gur sabdee nadree nadar milaa-idaa. ||4||
Through the Guru's Shabad, he applies the ointment of spiritual wisdom to his eyes; the Gracious Lord, in His Grace, unites him with Himself. ||4] |
zs ofa feg Acts ufemr i (1065-5, wg, He 3) vadai bhaag ih sareer paa-i-aa. By great good fortune, I obtained this body;
HSA Aol Hate fas wfenr il 1065-5, wg, ws 3) maanas janam sabad chit laa-i-aa. in this human life, I have focused my consciousness on the Word of the Shabad.
fag Fae AS nin wide qeufey fanfs ssfeer ull (1065-5, wg, He 3)
bin sabdai sabh anDh anDhayraa gurmukh kiseh bujhaa-idaa. ||5||
Without the Shabad, everything is enveloped in utter darkness; only the Gurmukh understands. ||5||
fefa faz nie ASH TES Il (1065-6, wg, ws 3) ik kit aa-ay janam gavaa-ay. Some merely waste away their lives - why have they even come into the world?
HOHY Bal TH SS Il (1065-6, wg, Hs 3) manmukh laagay doojai bhaa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs are attached to the love of duality.
fa ae fefs ofa 3 ore uf fafiot ugafeer ell (1065-7, wg, He 3)
ayh vaylaa fir haath na aavai pag khisi-ai pachhutaa-idaa. ||6]|
This opportunity shall not into their hands again; their foot slips, and they come to regret and repent. ||6||
Wd & Hate ufez AT Il (1065-7, wg, v8 3) gur kai sabad pavitar sareeraa. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the body is sanctified.
fan fefs ZA Ag qet ate Il (1065-8, wg, ne 3) tis vich vasai sach gunee gaheeraa. The True Lord, the ocean of virtue, dwells within it.
Ae Ay 2y AS eet Ag Afe vfs sAfEEr NDI (1065-8, wg, He 3)
sacho sach vaykhai sabh thaa-ee sach sun man vasaa-idaa. ||7]|
One who sees the Truest of the True everywhere, hears the Truth, and enshrines it within his mind. ||7||
ICH aes as Aafe fess Il (1065-8, wg, He 3) ha-umai ganat gur sabad nivaaray. Egotism and mental calculations are relieved through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ofa MG fore seg Ba Us I (1065-9, 7g, He 3) har jee-o hirdai rakhahu ur Dhaaray. Keep the Dear Lord close, and enshrine Him in your heart.
qa & Aafe Aer werd ffs AS AY urfeer ICI (1065-9, Tg, He 3)
gur kai sabad sadaa saalaahay mil saachay sukh paa-idaa. ||8]||
One who praises the Lord forever, through the Guru's Shabad, meets with the True Lord, and finds peace. ||8| |
A 3S fam urfu Sse I (1065-10, wg, 48 3) so chaytay jis aap chaytaa-ay. He alone remembers the Lord, whom the Lord inspires to remember.
Ga & Rafe SA fs wire I (1065-10, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad vasai man aa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He comes to dwell in the mind.
‘AR
mindy SH wm gS wie ny AHMET CM (1065-10, wg, He 3) aapay vaykhai aapay boojhai aapai aap samaa-idaa. ||9|| He Himself sees, and He Himself understands; He merges all into Himself. ||9] |
fafs Ho fefs sa uret Het ATE Il (1065-11, og, He 3)
jin man vich vath paa-ee so-ee jaanai. He alone knows, who has placed the object within his mind.
TI A AGS wTY USES Il (1065-11, wg, He 3) gur kai sabday aap pachhaanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he comes to understand himself.
nity use Het Ae fasHe wel Fae Hafeer Aol (1065-11, wg, He 3) aap pachhaanai so-ee jan nirmal banee sabad sunaa-idaa. ||10]||
That humble being who understands himself is immaculate. He proclaims the Guru's Bani, and the Word of the Shabad. ||10]|
fa afenr ufes o ASE Il (1065-12, wg, He 3) ayh kaa-i-aa pavit hai sareer. This body is sanctified and purified;
Gs Aaet FS Tat Tag Il (1065-12, wg, ne 3) gur sabdee chaytai gunee gaheer. through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it contemplates the Lord, the ocean of virtue.
wofes Te we df rat ae afo get AEST AAU (1065-13, wg, He 3)
an-din gun gaavai rang raataa gun kahi gunee samaa-idaa. ||11]||
One who chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord night and day, and remains attuned to His Love, chants His Glorious Virtues, immersed in the Glorious Lord. ||11]|
Sg Adlg AS HS F HEM I (1065-13, wg, Hs 3) ayhu sareer sabh mool hai maa-i-aa. This body is the source of all Maya;
en ote sath gorfenr Il (1065-14, wg, Hs 3) doojai bhaa-ay bharam bhulaa-i-aa. in love with duality, it is deluded by doubt.
dfg 3 33 AS ey ue fag af 33 ey UfeET NII (1065-14, og, He 3)
har na chaytai sadaa dukh paa-ay bin har chaytay dukh paa-idaa. ||12||
It does not remember the Lord, and suffers in eternal pain. Without remembering the Lord, it suffers in pain. ||12]|
fa Afsag AS A UPSTE Il (1065-15, wg, He 3) je satgur sayvay so parvaan. One who serves the True Guru is approved and respected.
afer JH foone efs AS ATE Il (1065-15, wg, Hs 3)
kaa-i-aa hans nirmal dar sachai jaan.
His body and soul-swan are immaculate and pure; in the Court of the Lord, he is known to be true.
ofa A ofa ifs ere Ad af Te WEE NII (1065-15, wg, He 3)
har sayvay har man vasaa-ay sohai har gun gaa-idaa. ||13]||
He serves the Lord, and enshrines the Lord in his mind; he is exalted, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||13]|
fag war ag Afeor o ATE II (1065-16, wg, He 3) bin bhaagaa gur sayvi-aa na jaa-ay. Without good destiny, no one can serve the True Guru.
HOH 3% HE fawstE ii (1065-16, +g, He 3) manmukh bhoolay mu-ay billaa-ay. The self-willed manmukhs are deluded, and die weeping and wailing.
faa a@ sefe de aa act ofe HE mrt firerfeer NA8I 065-17, wg, He 3)
jin ka-o nadar hovai gur kayree har jee-o aap milaa-idaa. ||14||
Those who are blessed by the Guru's Glance of Grace - the Dear Lord unites them with Himself. ||14]|
fen az ut TESS Il (1065-17, ug, He 3) kaa-i-aa kot pakay hatnaalay. In the body fortress, are the solidly-constructed markets.
Tafa SS SAT AHS Il (1065-18, wg, us 3) gurmukh layvai vasat samaalay. The Gurmukh purchases the object, and takes care of it.
ofa or ony fourfe feg ast Can ust ufe|er ql (1065-18, +g, H8 3)
har kaa naam Dhi-aa-ay din raatee ootam padvee paa-idaa. ||15]|
Meditating on the Name of the Lord, day and night, he attains the sublime, exalted status. ||15]|
MN} AST J AYSTST Il (1065-18, Tg, He 3) aapay sachaa hai sukh-daata. The True Lord Himself is the Giver of peace.
UT TT & Aafe UES Il (1065-19, wg, He 3) pooray gur kai sabad pachhaataa. Through the Shabad of the Perfect Guru, He is realized.
Bsa BH ASS AS us star x user UIEWD NU (1065-19, wg, Hs 3) naanak naam salaahay saachaa poorai bhaag ko paa-idaa. ||16||7||21]||
Nanak praises the Naam, the True Name of the Lord; through perfect destiny, He is found. ||16||7||21]|
ust IEE
HTS HIS F Il (1066-1)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
fadarta nrarg Gurfemr i 066-1, ug, He 3) nirankaar aakaar upaa-i-aa. The Formless Lord created the universe of form.
Hfeor Hg gat gerfemr | (1066-1, wg, He 3) maa-i-aa moh hukam banaa-i-aa. By the Hukam of His Command, He created attachment to Maya.
nny ue ad Afs asst Afe Ara fs SATEEN (1066-2, wg, He 3)
aapay khayl karay sabh kartaa sun saachaa man vasaa-idaa. ||1] |
The Creator Himself stages all the plays; hearing of the True Lord, enshrine Him in your mind. ||1]|
Hfenr Het 3 ae usAls AAfEnT I (1066-2, mg, He 3) maa-i-aa maa-ee tarai gun parsoot jamaa-i-aa. Maya, the mother, gave birth to the three gunas, the three qualities,
ad 82 FIN S SaHfEmr I (1066-3, wg, ue 3) chaaray bayd barahmay no furmaa-i-aa. and proclaimed the four Vedas to Brahma.
@q ug ag fast afe fem aa Hfs ASt Uf —|Er QM (1066-3, wg, Hs 3) var"ay maah vaar thitee kar is jag meh sojhee paa-idaa. ||2]| Creating the years, months, days and dates, He infused intelligence into the world.
21 |
Od Ae 3 Adal AST Il (1066-3, wg, Hs 3) gur sayvaa tay karnee saar. Service to the Guru is the most excellent action.
TH OTH ag Sf UE Il (1066-4, wg, He 3) raam naam raakho ur Dhaar. Enshrine the Lord's Name within your heart.
Taveat zest Aa nists fea wat 3 afs oy uf—Er SI (1066-4, wg, Hs 3)
gurbaanee vartee jag antar is banee tay har naam paa-idaa. ||3]|
The Word of the Guru's Bani prevails throughout the world; through this Bani, the Lord's Name is obtained. ||3]|
Ze us mofes Se AHS Il (1066-5, wg, He 3) vayd parhai an-din vaad samaalay. He reads the Vedas, but he starts arguments night and day.
OH 3 3S FU AHAS Il (1066-5, wg, Hs 3)
naam na chaytai baDhaa jamkaalay.
He does not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord; he is bound and gagged by the Messenger of Death.
en afe Ae ey ue 3 Te sath FStET Ill (1066-5, wg, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay sadaa dukh paa-ay tarai gun bharam bhulaa-idaa. ||4]|
In the love of duality, he suffers in pain forever; he is deluded by doubt, and confused by the three gunas. ||4||
dante San fre fos Be Il 1066-6, wg, ws 3) gurmukh aykas si-o liv laa-ay. The Gurmukh is in love with the One Lord alone;
fsfafa HOA HOfo AHTE Il (1066-6, wg, He 3) taribaDh mansaa maneh samaa-ay. he submerges in his mind the three-phased desire.
And Aafe Het od Hast Hem Hg yorfEer ull (1066-6, wg, He 3)
saachai sabad sadaa hai muktaa maa-i-aa moh chukaa-idaa. ||5||
Through the True Word of the Shabad, he is liberated forever; he renounces emotional attachment to Maya. ||5||
A ofa 7S A ofs TS Il (1066-7, wg, He 3) jo Dhur raatay say hun raatay. Those who are so pre-ordained to be imbued, are imbued with love for the Lord.
Td UAT ATH HS Il (1066-7, wg, M8 3) gur parsaadee sehjay maatay. By Guru's Grace, they are intuitively intoxicated.
Afsag Afe Ae us urfemr mt mmy frerfee|r WE (1066-8, wg, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa parabh paa-i-aa aapai aap milaa-idaa. ||6] |
Serving the True Guru forever, they find God; He Himself unites them with Himself. [16] |
Hfeor Hfs sath @ ure II (1066-8, +g, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi bharam na paa-ay.
In attachment to Maya and doubt, the Lord is not found. SH STS BI TY US Il (1066-9, wg, we 3)
doojai bhaa-ay lagaa dukh paa-ay. Attached to the love of duality, one suffers in pain.
Ad da feo as de feq we fasH 5 SEE IDI (1066-9, og, He 3) soohaa rang din thorhay hovai is jaaday bilam na laa-idaa. ||7|| The crimson color lasts for only a few days; all too soon, it fades away. ||7]|
fg He s ofS Fas Il (1066-9, wg, Hs 3) ayhu man bhai bhaa-ay rangaa-ay. So color this mind in the Fear and the Love of God.
fez dfa APs ufo AHS II (1066-10, wg, Hs 3) it rang saachay maahi samaa-ay. Dyed in this color, one merges in the True Lord.
ud ofa & feg Ja ue TIHSt Fa GatSEr cI (1066-10, wg, 2 3)
poorai bhaag ko ih rang paa-ay gurmatee rang charhaa-idaa. ||8]||
By perfect destiny, some may obtain this color. Through the Guru's Teachings, this color is applied. ||8]|
HOHY FIs Ad PSHE Il (1066-11, wg, Hs 3) manmukh bahut karay abhimaan. The self-willed manmukhs take great pride in themselves.
TIT Fa StS UTS HM Il (1066-11, wg, Hs 3) dargeh kab hee na paavai maan. In the Court of the Lord, they are never honored.
SH Oa ASH aetfenr fag gs sy wiser ICI (066-11, wg, Hs 3) doojai laagay janam gavaa-i-aa bin boojhay dukh paa-idaa. ||9|| Attached to duality, they waste their lives; without understanding, they suffer in pain.
H9I|
Ae ufs niefs wry worfeur ih (1066-12, wg, He 3) mayrai parabh andar aap lukaa-i-aa.
My God has hidden Himself deep within the self. aa uaAet ofa fe firerfemr i (1066-12, wg, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee har milai milaa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, one is united in the Lord's Union.
Ae" ys AS Surat OH MAG UEET AOI! (1066-12, HE, Hs 3)
sachaa parabh sachaa vaapaaraa naam amolak paa-idaa. ||10] |
God is True, and True is His trade, through which the priceless Naam is obtained. ||10]|
fen orfimr at atafs fas o uret Il 1066-13, wg, 8 3) is kaa-i-aa kee keemat kinai na paa-ee. No one has found this body's value.
Ad orate fea wes sect | (1066-13, og, Hs 3) mayrai thaakur ih banat banaa-ee. My Lord and Master has worked His handiwork.
Toufa 32 A orfear AO nrufs wiry fri er AA (1066-14, wg, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so kaa-i-aa soDhai aapeh aap milaa-idaa. ||11]||
One who becomes Gurmukh purifies his body, and then the Lord unites him with Himself. ||11]|
ofenr fefs Ser arfemr fafa wre il (1066-14, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa vich totaa kaa-i-aa vich laahaa. Within the body, one loses, and within the body, one wins.
Tafa aA SuTSI I (1066-15, wg, He 3) gurmukh khojay vayparvaahaa. The Gurmukh seeks the self-sustaining Lord.
aonfy gefa Ae AY uve Aon Adla fearfeer 921 (1066-15, wg, He 3)
gurmukh vanaj sadaa sukh paa-ay sehjay sahj milaa-idaa. ||12||
The Gurmukh trades, and finds peace forever; he intuitively merges in the Celestial Lord. ||12]|
He" HIG AY SST Il (1066-16, wg, Hz 3) sachaa mahal sachay bhandaaraa. True is the Lord's Mansion, and True is His treasure.
~
mY BS SSSTS Il (1066-16, wg, we 3) aapay dayvai dayvanhaaraa. The Great Giver Himself gives.
Tote Wed Ades Hfs HS atHfs ufseEr 19311 066-16, wg, He 3)
gurmukh saalaahay sukh-daatay man maylay keemat paa-idaa. ||13]|
The Gurmukh praises the Giver of peace; his mind is united with the Lord, and he comes to know His worth. ||13]|
afeur fete ers atHfs odt uret i (1066-17, wg, 8 3) kaa-i-aa vich vasat keemat nahee paa-ee. Within the body is the object; its value cannot be estimated.
Tanta wmd & sfsniret i (1066-17, wg, He 3) gurmukh aapay day vadi-aa-ee. He Himself grants glorious greatness to the Gurmukh.
fan o Je Het ea we Tenfy tf 3 uesfeer 9eil (1066-18, wg, He 3)
jis daa hat so-ee vath jaanai gurmukh day-ay na pachhotaa-idaa. ||14||
He alone knows this object, to whom this store belongs; the Gurmukh is blessed with it, and does not come to regret. ||14]|
dfs AMC AS fs Sloot AHTET II (1066-18, wg, He 3) har jee-o sabh meh rahi-aa samaa-ee. The Dear Lord is pervading and permeating all.
Ts UATS urfEn AST I (1066-19, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee paa-i-aa jaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, He is found.
nm Afs fhore nm Aad Hof AHTEET IAI (066-19, Wg, Hs 3)
aapay mayl milaa-ay aapay sabday sahj samaa-idaa. ||15]||
He Himself unites in His Union; through the Word of the Shabad, one intuitively merges with Him. ||15]|
ust IOED
nm Aa Aafe fare i 1067-1, wg, He 3)
aapay sachaa sabad milaa-ay. The True Lord Himself unites us in the Word of His Shabad.
Hae fegg SIH FAS Il (1067-1, wg, ve 3) sabday vichahu bharam chukaa-ay. Within the Shabad, doubt is driven out.
ood oth fixe efsuret ont dt Ay ufe|er IAENCHQIM (1067-1, wg, Hs 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee naamay hee sukh paa-idaa. ||16||8]|22|| O Nanak, He blesses us with His Naam, and throgh the Naam, peace is found. | |16]]8][22]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1067-2)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
MEH Migs SUSI Il (1067-2, wg, ue 3) agam agochar vayparvaahay. He is inaccessible, unfathomable and self-sustaining.
nmy faders nie METS Il (1067-2, wg, Hs 3)
aapay miharvaan agam athaahay. He Himself is merciful, inaccessible and unlimited.
wufs af 5 Ae fA Ss Te Aaet Herfemr All (1067-3, wg, He 3) aparh ko-ay na sakai tis no gur sabdee maylaa-i-aa. ||1]|| No one can reach up to Him; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is met. ||1]|
306 Aefs A Zo seta I (1067-3, wg, He 3) tuDhuno sayveh jo tuDh bhaaveh. He alone serves You, who pleases You.
Gd a Age Afs Anes I (1067-3, wg, Hs 3) gur kai sabday sach samaaveh. Through the Guru's Shabad, he merges in the True Lord.
mofeg Te defy feg ast sAat aie TA SEM IM (1067-4, wg, He 3)
an-din gun raveh din raatee rasnaa har ras bhaa-i-aa. ||2]|
Night and day, he chants the Lord's Praises, day and night; his tongue savors and delights in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2]|
Rafe Hots A HE Aetafs | (1067-4, wg, Hs 3) sabad mareh say maran savaareh. Those who die in the Shabad - their death is exalted and glorified.
ofa & we fase Sa orate Il (1067-5, wg, He 3) har kay gun hirdai ur Dhaareh. They enshrine the Lord's Glories in their hearts.
HOH AES dio vset wat eA sa yarfeur Si (1067-5, wg, He 3)
janam safal har charnee laagay doojaa bhaa-o chukaa-i-aa. ||3]|
Holding tight to the Guru's feet, their lives becomes prosperous, and they are rid of the love of duality. ||3]|
dfs ME HS wirfy fee i (1067-6, wg, He 3) har jee-o maylay aap milaa-ay. The Dear Lord unites them in Union with Himself.
TI A AGS wy TSS Il (1067-6, wg, ue 3) gur kai sabday aap gavaa-ay. Through the Guru's Shabad, self-conceit is dispelled.
motes Ae ots saat TS feR Aa xfs oro ufeMr sil (1067-6, wg, He 3)
an-din sadaa har bhagtee raatay is jag meh laahaa paa-i-aa. ||4||
Those who remain attuned to devotional worship to the Lord, night and day, earn the profit in this world. ||4]|
33 TE AT HAE B WET Il (1067-7, wg, v8 3) tayray gun kahaa mai kahan na jaa-ee. What Glorious Virtues of Yours should I describe? I cannot describe them.
mig o ura atHfS Sot uTet Il (1067-7, wg, He 3) ant na paaraa keemat nahee paa-ee. You have no end or limitation. Your value cannot be estimated.
nm} efent ad AYdeTSt Te Hfo Tat AHEM WUll (1067-7, wg, He 3)
aapay da-i-aa karay sukh-daata gun meh gunee samaa-i-aa. ||5||
When the Giver of peace Himself bestows His Mercy, the virtuous are absorbed in virtue. ||5||
fea wa Hfs He Dd UATE II (1067-8, Hg, He 3) is jag meh moh hai paasaaraa. In this world, emotional attachment is spread all over.
HOY mfaparst nig nara | (1067-8, Hg, Hs 3) manmukh agi-aanee anDh anDhaaraa. The ignorant, self-willed manmukh is immersed in utter darkness.
ud Wey Hon aetfenr fas ae ey urfemr ell (1067-9, wg, He 3)
DhanDhai Dhaavat janam gavaa-i-aa bin naavai dukh paa-i-aa. | |6||
Chasing after worldly affairs, he wastes away his life in vain; without the Name, he suffers in pain. ||6]|
AGH Je ST AfSaT US Il (1067-9, wg, us 3) karam hovai taa satgur paa-ay. If God grants His Grace, then one finds the True Guru.
ICH HS Aafe ABS Il (1067-10, wg, He 3) ha-umai mail sabad jalaa-ay. Through the Shabad, the filth of egotism is burned away.
Hd fesHs fomrg 339 woe uifamrg nits aefeur WII (1067-10, wg, He 3) man nirmal gi-aan ratan chaanan agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-i-aa. ||7| | The mind becomes immaculate, and the jewel of spiritual wisdom brings enlightenment; the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled. ||7| |
3d OH Hida AHS Sat uret It (1067-11, wg, Hs 3)
tayray naam anayk keemat nahee paa-ee. Your Names are countless; Your value cannot be estimated.
Ag oH dfs fase SAS Il (1067-11, +g, ne 3) sach naam har hirdai vasaa-ee. I enshrine the Lord's True Name within my heart.
ants ase ag ys Sot 3 wm Aofe AafeMr CI (1067-11, +g, He 3) keemat ka-un karay parabh tayree too aapay sahj samaa-i-aa. ||8]|| Who can estimate Your value, God? You are immersed and absorbed in Yourself. ||8]|
SH MAGA MH MRUTST I (1067-12, Hg, He 3) naam amolak agam apaaraa. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is priceless, inaccessible and infinite.
oO at Init SHETST Il (1067-12, wg, ue 3) naa ko ho-aa tolanhaaraa. No one can weigh it.
WN 38 3fs soe as Hat Afs Sorfeor WEN (1067-13, wg, 8 3)
aapay tolay tol tolaa-ay gur sabdee may! tolaa-i-aa. ||9||
You Yourself weigh, and estimate all; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, You unite, when the weight is perfect. ||9] |
Hea Aes ada maeth il (1067-13, wg, He 3) sayvak sayveh karahi ardaas. Your servant serves, and offers this prayer.
3 ume Afes sorsfo UTA I (1067-13, wg, He 3) too aapay mayl bahaaleh paas. Please, let me sit near You, and unite me with Yourself.
Aso Aor a Fuerst us oath forte AON! (1067-14, wg, He 3) sabhnaa jee-aa kaa sukh-daata poorai karam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||10|| You are the Giver of peace to all beings; by perfect karma, we meditate on You. ||10]|
AS AS HAN fA Ag AHS Il (1067-14, og, He 3) jat sat sanjam je sach kamaavai. Chastity, truth and self-control come by practicing and living the Truth.
feg Ho fosne fa afs ae WS It (1067-15, wg, He 3) ih man nirmal je har gun gaavai. This mind becomes immaculate and pure, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fer fay ufo nifgs uaufs d2@ ofa HE HS Shr NAA (1067-15, wg, He 3)
is bikh meh amrit paraapat hovai har jee-o mayray bhaa-i-aa. ||11]||
In this world of poison, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained, if it pleases my Dear Lord. []11]|
fAA 3 gee ASt FF Il (1067-16, wg, Hs 3) jis no bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai. He alone understands, whom God inspires to understand.
Us TE We MTT AS Il (1067-16, gy, He 3) har gun gaavai andar soojhai. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, one's inner being is awakened.
J@H As ofa gre AoA dt AG urea 921 (1067-16, Hg, He 3)
ha-umai mayraa thaak rahaa-ay sehjay hee sach paa-i-aa. ||12||
Egotism and possessiveness are silenced and subdued, and one intuitively finds the True Lord. ||12||
fag aa da fed wddt i (1067-17, wg, ue 3) bin karmaa hor firai ghanayree. Without good karma, countless others wander around.
nfs Hfs AH Va S Sa I (1067-17, wg, Hs 3)
mar mar jammai chukai na fayree.
They die, and die again, only to be reborn; they cannot escape the cycle of reincarnation.
fay or ost fay OHS AY BS aag ure ASI (1067-17, wg, He 3) bikh kaa raataa bikh kamaavai sukh na kabhoo paa-i-aa. ||13]|
Imbued with poison, they practice poison and corruption, and they never find peace. [|13]|
AIS SY AT SUOTA Il (1067-18, wg, us 3) bahutay bhaykh karay bhaykh-Dhaaree. Many disguise themselves with religious robes.
fag Fae JGH fads 3 Ht II (1067-18, Hg, He 3) bin sabdai ha-umai kinai na maaree. Without the Shabad, no one has conquered egotism.
Hes ue ST Hats ue AS of= Mrfeur A811 (1067-19, Hg, He 3)
jeevat marai taa mukat paa-ay sachai naa-ay samaa-i-aa. ||14| | One who remains dead while yet alive is liberated, and merges in the True Name. | |141|
mifamie fear fe Safa ABE il (1067-19, wg, He 3) agi-aan tarisnaa is taneh jalaa-ay. Spiritual ignorance and desire burn this human body.
Yat WOEC
fSA dt gs fA Te Ae AHS Il (1068-1, wg, Hs 3) tis dee boojhai je gur sabad kamaa-ay. He alone puts out this fire, who practices and lives the Guru's Shabad.
36 HO Alse au foes ICH Hfe Mar femr UII (1068-1, wg, He 3)
— Qj —
tan man seetal kroDh nivaaray ha-umai maar samaa-i-aa. ||15]|| His body and mind are cooled and soothed, and his anger is silenced; conquering egotism, he merges in the Lord. ||15]||
Ret Atay Aet Sfsnret il 068-1, wg, He 3) sachaa saahib sachee vadi-aa-ee. True is the Lord and Master, and True is His glorious greatness.
aa usAet fess uret il (1068-2, wg, us 3) gur parsaadee virlai paa-ee. By Guru's Grace, a rare few attain this.
sss SA Ad Fst OH oft AHfEMM NAENAIQSI (1068-2, wg, He 3) naanak ayk kahai baynantee naamay naam samaa-i-aa. ||16||1||23]|
Nanak offers this one prayer: through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, may I merge in the Lord. ||16]|1]|23]]|
Hg HIG 3 Il (1068-3)
maaroo mehlaa 3. Maaroo, Third Mehl:
oedt saat Bg fre | ci06s-3, wg, ve 3) nadree bhagtaa laihu milaa-ay. By Your Grace, please unite with Your devotees.
Sas Aaa Ae fee BES il 1068-3, wg, Hs 3) bhagat salaahan sadaa liv laa-ay. Your devotees ever praise You, lovingly focusing on You.
38 Aveet Gucfs ags nm Afs fherfemr all Go6s-4, wg, He 3)
ta-o sarnaa-ee ubrahi kartay aapay mayl milaa-i-aa. ||1]|
In Your Sanctuary, they are saved, O Creator Lord; You unite them in Union with Yourself. ||1]|
ud Hale safs AaeT Il (068-4, og, He 3) poorai sabad bhagat suhaa-ee. Sublime and exalted is devotion to the Perfect Word of the Shabad.
nists AY 3d Hs STeT II Co6s-4, wg, He 3) antar sukh tayrai man bhaa-ee. Peace prevails within; they are pleasing to Your Mind.
HO 36 Adt sast wa Ad FAG fos afenr 21 (068-5, wg, Hs 3)
man tan sachee bhagtee raataa sachay si-o chit laa-i-aa. ||2]||
One whose mind and body are imbued with true devotion, focuses his consciousness on the True Lord. ||2]|
UGH fefs HE AS APs Il (1068-5, wg, ve 3) ha-umai vich sad jalai sareeraa. In egotism, the body is forever burning.
TI TS SS TT UT Il (1068-6, wg, Hs 3) karam hovai bhaytay gur pooraa. When God grants His Grace, one meets the Perfect Guru.
nists nifamre Aafe ase Afsae 3 AY ufeMr ISI (1068-6, wg, H8 3)
antar agi-aan sabad bujhaa-ay satgur tay sukh paa-i-aa. ||3]|
The Shabad dispels the spiritual ignorance within, and through the True Guru, one finds peace. ||3]||
HOHY nur nig AHS Il (1068-7, wg, Hs 3) manmukh anDhaa anDh kamaa-ay. The blind, self-willed manmukh acts blindly.
ag Has WSt SIS Il (1068-7, wg, ue 3) baho sankat jonee bharmaa-ay. He is in terrible trouble, and wanders in reincarnation.
AH Ot eat ae 6 aS MS aT TY Ue Igil (1068-7, wg, He 3) jam kaa jayvrhaa kaday na kaatai antay baho dukh paa-i-aa. ||4|| He can never snap the noose of Death, and in the end, he suffers in horrible pain.
[41 |
mee Frat Aafe fees Il (1068-8, wg, ws 3) aavan jaanaa sabad nivaaray. Through the Shabad, one's comings and goings in reincarnation are ended.
Ag oH ge Ba ars Il (1068-8, rg, ne 3) sach naam rakhai ur Dhaaray. He keeps the True Name enshrined within his heart.
qd & Aafe Hd He HS ICH AE Pfeor Hull (1068-8, wg, He 3)
gur kai sabad marai man maaray ha-umai jaa-ay samaa-i-aa. ||5||
He dies in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and conquers his mind; stilling his egotism, he merges in the Lord. ||5||
wires AS UTA featet i 068-9, xg, He 3) aavan jaanai paraj vigo-ee. Coming and going, the people of the world are wasting away.
fag Afsas fag af& o det II c106s-9, wg, ne 3) bin satgur thir ko-ay na ho-ee. Without the True Guru, no one finds permanence and stability.
nists afs Aafe AY efron Ast Afs flerfemr EI (1068-9, wg, He 3)
antar jot sabad sukh vasi-aa jotee jot milaa-i-aa. ||6]|
The Shabad shines its Light deep within the self, and one dwells in peace; one's light merges into the Light. ||6]|
us es fasefa feara Il (1068-10, +g, H 3) panch doot chitvahi vikaaraa. The five demons think of evil and corruption.
Her HI at SI UATE Il (1068-10, 4g, He 3) maa-i-aa moh kaa ayhu pasaaraa. The expanse is the manifestation of emotional attachment to Maya.
Afsag Ae ST Has de Us es SA orfenr DI co6s-11, og, 8 3)
satgur sayvay taa mukat hovai panch doot vas aa-i-aa. ||7]|
Serving the True Guru, one is liberated, and the five demons are put under his control. ||7||
MS TT I AT TIS Il (1068-11, wg, Hs 3) baajh guroo hai moh gubaaraa. Without the Guru, there is only the darkness of attachment.
fefs fefa 58 srg Sra Il (1068-11, wg, v8 3) fir fir dubai vaaro vaaraa. Over and over, time and time again, they are drowned.
Afsad 3¢ Ag fesve Ag OTH HfS Stem NICH (1068-12, wg, He 3)
satgur bhaytay sach drirh-aa-ay sach naam man bhaa-i-aa. ||8] |
Meeting the True Guru, Truth is implanted within, and the True Name becomes pleasing to the mind. ||8]||
Ad! STI ATS CdIetd Il (1068-12, Hg, H8 3) saachaa dar saachaa darvaaraa. True is His Door, and True is His Court, His Royal Darbaar.
Ae Aefo Fate fume it (1068-13, wg, 8 3) sachay sayveh sabad pi-aaraa. The true ones serve Him, through the Beloved Word of the Shabad.
Aut uf6 AY Te Wet Ad He AHEM CN (1068-13, wg, He 3) sachee Dhun sachay gun gaavaa sachay maahi samaa-i-aa. ||9||
Singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, in the true melody, I am immersed and absorbed in Truth. ||9]|
wed nef t we UTS I (1068-13, wg, Hs 3) gharai andar ko ghar paa-ay. Deep within the home of the self, one finds the home of the Lord.
Gd A Ase AOfA ASS Il (1068-14, wg, He 3) gur kai sabday sahj subhaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one easily, intuitively finds it.
Ga Aa fera o fend non Hof Mrfeur I9ON (1068-14, wg, He 3)
othai sog vijog na vi-aapai sehjay sahj samaa-i-aa. ||10]|
There, one is not afflicted with sorrow or separation; merge into the Celestial Lord with intuitive ease. ||10]|
SH StS TACT a SAT Il (1068-15, wg, 3 3) doojai bhaa-ay dustaa kaa vaasaa. The evil people live in the love of duality.
3@e feats ag Ha fimrr Il (1068-15, wg, Hs 3) bha-uday fireh baho moh pi-aasaa. They wander around, totally attached and thirsty.
gnats safe Ae ey uefa ee BY afer AAI (1068-15, Hg, He 3)
kusangat baheh sadaa dukh paavahi dukho dukh kamaa-i-aa. ||11]|
They sit in evil gatherings, and suffer in pain forever; they earn pain, nothing but pain. ||11]|
Afsag wsg Hats 3 Tet | (1068-16, wg, Hs 3) satgur baajhahu sangat na ho-ee. Without the True Guru, there is no Sangat, no Congregation.
fag Fae urg o ure aet Il (1068-16, wg, ve 3) bin sabday paar na paa-ay ko-ee. Without the Shabad, no one can cross over to the other side.
Hon ae veto feg oat aat AfS fresfemr 119211 (1068-16, wg, He 3)
sehjay gun raveh din raatee jotee jot milaa-i-aa. ||12]|
One who intuitively chants God's Glorious Praises day and night - his light merges into the Light. ||12]|
ofan fasy udt fefa SAT Il (1068-17, wg, 48 3) kaa-i-aa birakh pankhee vich vaasaa. The body is the tree; the bird of the soul dwells within it.
nifys gato aa Aafe fee il (1068-17, wg, Hs 3) amrit chugeh gur sabad nivaasaa. It drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar, resting in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Cats o HS 6 oreta o At for whe SAT uTfeMt ISI (1068-18, Hg, He 3)
udeh na moolay na aavahi na jaahee nij ghar vaasaa paa-i-aa. ||13]|
It never flies away, and it does not come or go; it dwells within the home of its own self. ||13]|
ofenr Rufs Hae Sterafs il (1068-18, wg, He 3) kaa-i-aa soDheh sabad vichaareh. Purify the body, and contemplate the Shabad.
Ha oa@at san feerafs it (1068-19, og, ne 3) moh thag-uree bharam nivaareh. Remove the poisonous drug of emotional attachment, and eradicate doubt.
nmy fxur ad AYeTst nm Afs feerfenr 19811 (068-19, wg, He 3)
aapay kirpaa karay sukh-daata aapay mayl milaa-i-aa. ||14]|
The Giver of peace Himself bestows His Mercy, and unites us in Union with Himself. [|14]|
at 9oEt
He dt 3s Ue 3 WT Il (1069-1, wg, 3 3) sad hee nayrhai door na jaanhu. He is always near at hand; He is never far away.
aa & Aafe orifa used Il (1069-1, wg, He 3) gur kai sabad najeek pachhaanhu. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, realize that He is very near.
faa one faxafs userA usae af Surfer Ul (1069-1, wg, He 3)
bigsai kamal kiran pargaasai pargat kar daykhaa-i-aa. ||15||
Your heart-lotus shall blossom forth, and the ray of God's Divine Light shall illuminate your heart; He shall be revealed to You. ||15]|
WN] ATS AS At Il (1069-2, wg, us 3) aapay kartaa sachaa so-ee. The True Lord is Himself the Creator.
mn uf ates meg & MET I (1069-2, wg, He 3) aapay maar jeevaalay avar na ko-ee. He Himself kills, and gives life; there is no other at all.
saa on fe efsuret ory gets Ay urea AEN QNQEIl (1069-3, wg, He 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee aap gavaa-ay sukh paa-i-aa. ||16||2||24||
O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, glorious greatness is obtained. Eradicating self-conceit, peace is found. ||16]|2]|24]|
HT AGI HIG S (1069-4) maaroo solhay mehlaa 4 Maaroo, Solahas, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrfe II (1069-4) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het nitfly ASTISTTS Il (1069-5, wg, us 4) sachaa aap savaaranhaaraa. The Lord Lord Himself is the One who exalts and embellishes.
Med o HASTA stat ara Il (1069-5, wg, He 4) avar na soojhas beejee kaaraa. Do not consider any other work.
qoHfy Ay ZA we nists Aon Afs AMET FT UA (1069-5, wg, He 4) gurmukh sach vasai ghat antar sehjay sach samaa-ee hay. ||1]|
The True Lord abides deep within the heart of the Gurmukh, who intuitively merges in the True Lord. ||1]|
ASS" Ay SA HS He Il (1069-6, wg, He 4) sabhnaa sach vasai man maahee. The True Lord dwells within the minds of all.
Ts UAC Ada ANT I (1069-6, wg, He 4) gur parsaadee sahj samaahee. By Guru's Grace, they are intuitively absorbed in Him.
VJ Ag ads Ae AY wfeor ag veat fos Bet FT ui (1069-6, wg, ue 4)
gur gur karat sadaa sukh paa-i-aa gur charnee chit laa-ee hay. ||2| |
Calling out, "Guru, Guru", I have found eternal peace; my consciousness is focused on the Guru's feet. ||2| |
Afsag 3 famrg Afsag FT UAT Il (1069-7, og, He 4) satgur hai gi-aan satgur hai poojaa. The True Guru is spiritual wisdom; the True Guru is worship and adoration.
Afsag Aet nies S FAT Il (1069-7, wg, He 4) satgur sayvee avar na doojaa. I serve the True Guru, and no other.
Afsad 3 OH 336 US Ufenr Asad at AST set J USI (1069-8, wg, He 4)
satgur tay naam ratan Dhan paa-i-aa satgur kee sayvaa bhaa-ee hay. |[3]|
From the True Guru, I have obtained the wealth, the jewel of the Naam. Service to the True Guru is pleasing to me. ||3]|
fag Afsae A SA Ba I (1069-8, wg, we 4) bin satgur jo doojai laagay. Without the True Guru, those who are attached to duality
mets ats Sf Hats Misra Il (1069-9, wg, Hs 4) aavahi jaahi bharam mareh abhaagay. come and go, and wander in reincarnation; these unfortunate ones die.
ood fae at fefs afs de fa aenfe sofa Aeeet JF SI (1069-9, wg, He 4)
naanak tin kee fir gat hovai je gurmukh raheh sarnaa-ee hay. ||4]|
O Nanak, even after they are emancipated, those who become Gurmukh remain in the Guru's Sanctuary. ||4||
qoute ulfs wet 3 Aret i (1069-10, wg, 8 4) gurmukh pareet sadaa hai saachee. The love of the Gurmukh is forever true.
Afsagd 3 Ha STH MATT II (1069-10, wg, He 4) satgur tay maaga-o naam ajaachee. I beg for the invaluable Naam, the Name of the Lord, from the Guru.
dg tenes fau afs ofa He af Seg aT Asset F MUI (1069-10, wg, He 4)
hohu da-i-aal kirpaa kar har jee-o rakh layvhu gur sarnaa-ee hay. ||5]|
O Dear Lord, please be kind, and grant Your Grace; please keep me in the Guru's Sanctuary. ||5||
ifs oA Afsag gorfenr i 069-11, wg, He 4) amrit ras satguroo chu-aa-i-aa. The True Guru trickles the Ambrosial Nectar into my mouth.
ene enifg yates df= urfemr I (io69-11, wg, 48 4) dasvai du-aar pargat ho-ay aa-i-aa. My Tenth Gate has been opened and revealed.
3d Mode Aad enfe ofS wat AGH Adi AMET T MEI (1069-12, wg, Hs 4)
tah anhad sabad vajeh Dhun banee sehjay sahj samaa-ee hay. | |6| |
The unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates and resounds there, with the melody of the Guru's Bani; one is easily, intuitively absorbed in the Lord. ||6]|
faa ag ass ufe fests uret II (1069-12, og, He 4) jin ka-o kartai Dhur likh paa-ee. Those who are so pre-ordained by the Creator,
mofeg TT TT ATS feaet il (1069-13, wg, ue 4) an-din gur gur karat vihaa-ee. pass their nights and days calling on the Guru.
fag Afsas & AIS odt as saat fas wet FT DN (1069-13, wg, He 4)
bin satgur ko seejhai naahee gur charnee chit laa-ee hay. ||7]||
Without the True Guru, no one understands; focus your consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||7||
fan ave faq mt SfF I 069-14, wg, Hs 4) jis bhaavai tis aapay day-ay. The Lord Himself blesses those with whom He is pleased.
TaHfy aH uersa SE il 1069-14, wg, we 4) gurmukh naam padaarath lay-ay. The Gurmukh receives the wealth of the Naam.
wn} faut ad oH 8S atoa of ANTET T ICI (1069-14, wg, He 4)
aapay kirpaa karay naam dayvai naanak naam samaa-ee hay. ||8] |
When the Lord grants His Grace, He bestows the Naam; Nanak is immersed and absorbed in the Naam. ||8]|
fama Jaq Hfe usa]| Semi II (1069-15, wg, He 4) gi-aan ratan man pargat bha-i-aa. The jewel of spiritual wisdom is revealed within the mind.
OH USSG Ade BEM | (1069-15, wg, He 4) naam padaarath sehjay la-i-aa. The wealth of the Naam is easily, intuitively received.
So gauret ag 3 uret Afsag aS Ae af% AST T CH 069-16, wg, He 4)
ayh vadi-aa-ee gur tay paa-ee satgur ka-o sad bal jaa-ee hay. ||9]|
This glorious greatness is obtained from the Guru; I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||9||
yateur Ag fofh fifemr niftmrs il (1069-16, wg, 48 4) pargati-aa soor nis miti-aa anDhi-aaraa. With the rising of the sun, the darkness of the night is dispelled.
mifamite fufen aa gate wrurar il (1069-17, wg, Hs 4) agi-aan miti-aa gur ratan apaaraa. Spiritual ignorance is eradicated, by the priceless jewel of the Guru.
Afsag fomrg sae ifs act oof fs AY UST FT AON (1069-17, Hg, He 4)
satgur gi-aan ratan at bhaaree karam milai sukh paa-ee hay. ||10]|
The True Guru is the fantastically valuable jewel of spiritual wisdom; blessed by God's Mercy, peace is found. ||10]|
aonf on yaret 3 APE II (1069-18, wg, He 4) gurmukh naam pargatee hai so-ay. The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, and his good reputation increases.
ag Hfa feos get BE Il (1069-18, wg, He 4) chahu jug nirmal hachhaa lo-ay. In all four ages he is considered to be pure and good.
oH oth gs AY Ufeor oth afar fos Bet FT UAW (069-18, Hg, He 4)
naamay naam ratay sukh paa-i-aa naam rahi-aa liv laa-ee hay. ||11]|
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he finds peace. He remains lovingly focused on the Naam. ||11]|
aToufa ay usrufs FS i (1069-19, wg, He 4) gurmukh naam paraapat hovai. The Gurmukh receives the Naam.
Hon Wel HUA AS Il (1069-19, wg, ue 4) sehjay jaagai sehjay sovai. In intuitive peace he wakes, and in intuitive peace he sleeps.
Yat YODO
aonfa of marfe wre oro ony fimret FT 92M (1070-1, wg, He 4)
gurmukh naam samaa-ay samaavai naanak naam Dhi-aa-ee hay. ||12]|
The Gurmukh is immersed and absorbed in the Naam; Nanak meditates on the Naam. []12]|
saat Hf nifigs 3 aet il (1070-1, wg, He 4) bhagtaa mukh amrit hai banee. The Ambrosial Nectar of the Guru's Bani is in the mouth of the devotees.
aaHfy afe oH witty Surat i 1070-2, wg, v8 4) gurmukh har naam aakh vakhaanee. The Gurmukhs chant and repeat the Lord's Name.
ofa ufs aga Ae He faa ofa saat HE wet F ISI (1070-2, wg, He 4)
har har karat sadaa man bigsai har charnee man laa-ee hay. ||13]||
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, their minds forever blossom forth; they focus their minds on the Lord's Feet. ||13]|
TH Hae vifamra famirg fos sat Il (1070-3, wg, He 4) ham moorakh agi-aan gi-aan kichh naahee. I am foolish and ignorant; I have no wisdom at all.
Afsad 3 AHS ust HS Hat Il (1070-3, wg, Hs 4) satgur tay samajh parhee man maahee. From the True Guru, I have obtained understanding in my mind.
dg tenes faur afs ofa He Afsag at Aer wet F 9811 (1070-3, wg, He 4)
hohu da-i-aal kirpaa kar har jee-o satgur kee sayvaa laa-ee hay. ||14||
O Dear Lord, please be kind to me, and grant Your Grace; let me be committed to serving the True Guru. ||14]|
fate Afsag wast fSfe Sa USTs Il (1070-4, wg, ue 4) jin satgur jaataa tin ayk pachhaataa. Those who know the True Guru realize the One Lord.
Hea of sfonm AYSTST Il (1070-4, wg, Hs 4) sarbay rav rahi-aa sukh-daata. The Giver of peace is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.
mTsH die udH ue ufent Ae Aafs AHTET TD UNAUII (1070-5, wg, Hs 4)
aatam cheen param pad paa-i-aa sayvaa surat samaa-ee hay. ||15]|| Understanding my own soul, I have obtained the Supreme Status; my awareness is immersed in selfless service. ||15]||
fo a orfe fret efsniret i (1070-5, wg, He 4) jin ka-o aad milee vadi-aa-ee. Those who are blessed with glorious greatness by the Primal Lord God
Afsag Hie sfhor fs wet i (1070-6, wg, He 4) satgur man vasi-aa liv laa-ee. are lovingly focused on the True Guru, who dwells within their minds.
nity fife wales UST Soa nifar AMET T NENA (070-6, ww, He 4)
aap mili-aa jagjeevan daataa naanak ank samaa-ee hay. ||16]||1||
The Giver of life to the world Himself meets them; O Nanak, they are absorbed in His Being. ||16||1]|
HTg HIG 8 Il (1070-7) maaroo mehlaa 4. Maaroo, Fourth Mehl:
ofa Mant wiatag Het nifserat i (1070-7, wg, Hs 4) har agam agochar sadaa abhinaasee. The Lord is inaccessible and unfathomable; He is eternal and imperishable.
Hea ofe sfonm we SH il (1070-7, wg, He 4) sarbay rav rahi-aa ghat vaasee. He dwells in the heart, and is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.
fan fag neg o aet ost afe fsnfa Adeg yet TUNA (1070-8, wg, He 4) tis bin avar na ko-ee daataa har tiseh sarayvhu paraanee hay. ||1] | There is no other Giver except Him; worship the Lord, O mortals. ||1]|
Ww a@ ae ofs mesos I a a af o AAA HET II (1070-8, wg, Hs 4) jaa ka-o raakhai har raakhanhaaraa. taa ka-o ko-ay na saakas maaraa. No one can kill anyone who is saved by the Savior Lord.
A MAT ofe Ag Asg 7 at SSH aat F MQM 1070-9, wg, Hs 4) So aisaa har sayvhu santahu jaa kee ootam banee hay. ||2| | So serve such a Lord, O Saints, whose Bani is exalted and sublime. ||2||
WT AU fos forerS sat il (1070-9, wg, He 4) jaa jaapai kichh kithaa-oo naahee. When it seems that a place is empty and void,
3 aga ssufs AHA Il (1070-10, wg, He 4) taa kartaa bharpoor samaahee. there, the Creator Lord is permeating and pervading.
Ha 3 sfe ofenr ase ate faureg on feset F SII (1070-10, og, Hs 4)
sookay tay fun hari-aa keeton har Dhi-aavahu choj vidaanee hay. ||3]|
He causes the dried-up branch to blossom forth in greenery again; so meditate on the Lord - wondrous are His ways! ||3]|
A ror at See AS Il (1070-11, wg, He 4) jo jee-aa kee vaydan jaanai. The One who knows the anguish of all beings
fan rfoa & IG aT I (1070-11, wg, He 4) tis saahib kai ha-o kurbaanai. - unto that Lord and Master, I am a sacrifice.
fSH ora Ao afs Sst FH Asa AUT at erat F USI (1070-11, wg, He 4) tis aagai jan kar baynantee jo sarab sukhaa kaa daanee hay. ||4|| Offer your prayers to the One who is the Giver of all peace and joy. ||4||
A ribet at ATS & ATE Il (1070-12, wg, He 4) jo jee-ai kee saar na jaanai. But one who does not know the state of the soul
fsH fr@ fae 5 adit mine | (1070-12, wg, He 4) tis si-o kichh na kahee-ai ajaanai. - do not say anything to such an ignorant person.
Hau AE oa SS use fe mia ue fesaet T Wu (1070-12, wg, Hs 4) moorakh si-o nah loojh paraanee har japee-ai pad nirbaanee hay. ||5]|| Do not argue with fools, O mortals. Meditate on the Lord, in the state of Nirvaanaa.
[5] |
a ate fas fest I ATT Il (1070-13, wg, ve 4) naa kar chint chintaa hai kartay. Don't worry - let the Creator take care of it.
ofa &2 afs af Ha" ASS | 1070-13, wg, Hs 4) har dayvai jal thal jantaa sabh-tai. The Lord gives to all creatures in the water and on the land.
wifes we efe ys Ho fete urag ate uarat FT WEN (1070-14, wg, He 4) achint daan day-ay parabh mayraa vich paathar keet pakhaanee hay. ||6||
My God bestows His blessings without being asked, even to worms in soil and stones. [16] |
o afd wir HIS AS Bret Il (1070-14, wg, He 4) naa kar aas meet sut bhaa-ee. Do not place your hopes in friends, children and siblings.
a afa nin far As faGarg at usret Il (1070-15, ug, He 4) naa kar aas kisai saah bi-uhaar kee paraa-ee. Do not place your hopes in kings or the business of others.
fag ofa are & at ordt afe mba Ararat FT MDI (1070-15, wg, He 4)
bin har naavai ko baylee naahee har japee-ai saarangpaanee hay. ||7| |
Without the Lord's Name, no one will be your helper; so meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the world. ||7||
moles SH AUG Fett Il (1070-16, wg, He 4) an-din naam japahu banvaaree. Night and day, chant the Naam.
AS MTA HOAT Us Bat Il (1070-16, wg, Hs 4) sabh aasaa mansaa poorai thaaree. All your hopes and desires shall be fulfilled.
Hd SSa OH HUT Se Ud9 Af Hon fe feat FJ ICH (1070-16, wg, He 4)
jan naanak naam japahu bhav khandan sukh sehjay rain vihaanee hay. ||8]|
O servant Nanak, chant the Naam, the Name of the Destroyer of fear, and your life- night shall pass in intuitive peace and poise. ||8]||
fate af Afenr ffs AY urfemr II (1070-17, wg, He 4) jin har sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa. Those who serve the Lord find peace.
Hon ot ofa ath Aner i (1070-17, wg, 48 4) sehjay hee har naam samaa-i-aa. They are intuitively absorbed in the Lord's Name.
nf Aafe ud Sn at ufs oe ate yeg Fe yaet FT ICI (1070-18, wg, m2 4)
jo saran parai tis kee pat raakhai jaa-ay poochhahu vayd puraanee hay. ||9]|
The Lord preserves the honor of those who seek His Sanctuary; go and consult the Vedas and the Puraanas. ||9||
fan dfs Ret we Het Ae Wal Il (1070-18, wg, He 4) jis har sayvaa laa-ay so-ee jan laagai. That humble being is attached to the Lord's service, whom the Lord so attaches.
Gd a Aafe SIH SE Sa I (1070-19, wg, He 4) gur kai sabad bharam bha-o bhaagai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, doubt and fear are dispelled.
fed fas Het ad Cort fA ane ad fefs ust F AON (1070-19, wg, He 4) vichay garih sadaa rahai udaasee ji-o kamal rahai vich paanee hay. ||10]|| In his own home, he remains unattached, like the lotus flower in the water. ||10]|
UST YODA
fefa TH Ae ae o US II (1071-1, wg, He 4) vich ha-umai sayvaa thaa-ay na paa-ay. One who serves in egotism is not accepted or approved.
Aofy ud fefs wre AS I 071-1, wg, He 4) janam marai fir aavai jaa-ay. Such a person is born, only to die again, and come and go in reincarnation.
Aesu us wet AS A ofa AS Hfe stat FT AAU (1071-1, og, He 4) so tap pooraa saa-ee sayvaa jo har mayray man bhaanee hay. ||11]|
Perfect is that penance and that service, which is pleasing to the Mind of my Lord. ||11]|
JG fom Te Sz virat AMMA It (071-2, wg, He 4) ha-o ki-aa gun tayray aakhaa su-aamee. What Glorious Virtues of Yours should I chant, O my Lord and Master?
3 Aga Abort ot nisarmt i co71-2, wg, 3 4) too sarab jee-aa kaa antarjaamee. You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all souls.
IG Hae we 33 ufs ass ais mafes SH Turet FT NII 1071-3, wg, Hs 4)
ha-o maaga-o daan tujhai peh kartay har an-din naam vakhaanee hay. ||12]||
I beg for blessings from You, O Creator Lord; I repeat Your Name night and day. []12]|
far dt He mars FHS ST Il (1071-3, wg, ue 4) kis hee jor aha‘kaar bolan kaa. Some speak in egotistical power.
for ot Ha thas urfemr ar it (1071-4, wg, He 4) kis hee jor deebaan maa-i-aa kaa. Some have the power of authority and Maya.
H fe fag 2a Us nies & ae FS ASS TY H fenret FT II (ao71-4, og, He 4)
mai har bin tayk Dhar avar na kaa-ee too kartay raakh mai nimaanee hay. ||13]|
I have no other Support at all, except the Lord. O Creator Lord, please save me, meek and dishonored. ||13]|
foHré He adfs SO SS Il (1071-5, wg, He 4) nimaanay maan karahi tuDh bhaavai. You bless the meek and dishonored with honor, as it pleases You, O Lord.
da ast sf sft mre AS I Co71-5, wg, He 4) hor kaytee jhakh jhakh aavai jaavai. Many others argue in conflict, coming and going in reincarnation.
fro oa uy adts 5 Aum fso ot Cufs ae sg ret T NASI (071-5, wg, He 4)
jin kaa pakh karahi too su-aamee tin kee oopar gal tuDh aanee hay. ||14||
Those people, whose side You take, O Lord and Master, are elevated and successful. ||14]|
ofs ots oH frat Aer fomrfenr ii cozi-6, wg, 8 4) har har naam jinee sadaa Dhi-aa-i-aa. Those who meditate forever on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
fsot ag usAfe ugh ug uTfeMT II 071-6, wg, 8 4) tinee gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa. by Guru's Grace, obtain the supreme status.
fafs afs Afr fSfs wy urfemr fag Aer ussTat J UAUII (1071-7, wg, He 4)
jin har sayvi-aa tin sukh paa-i-aa bin sayvaa pachhotaanee hay. ||15||
Those who serve the Lord find peace; without serving Him, they regret and repent. []15]|
3 As ufo asfe os Aas I (1071-8, wg, Hs 4) too sabh meh varteh har jagannaath. You are pervading all, O Lord of the world.
A ofa wu faa ae HASfE TE I (1071-8, wg, Hs 4) so har japai jis gur mastak haath. He alone meditates on the Lord, upon whose forehead the Guru places His hand.
dfs at Hafe ufeor afs anit AS Sa VA TATA FT NEN Cio71-8, wg, He 4)
har kee saran pa-i-aa har jaapee jan naanak daas dasaanee hay. ||16||2||
Entering the Sanctuary of the Lord, I meditate on the Lord; servant Nanak is the slave of His slaves. ||16]|2]|
Hg ABI HIB U 1071-10) maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1071-10) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oo Cure uct fafe ager i (071-11, wg, He 5) kalaa upaa-ay Dharee jin Dharnaa. He infused His power into the earth.
Tag Jatt JAH FIST I (1071-11, wg, He 5) gagan rahaa-i-aa hukmay charnaa. He suspends the heavens upon the feet of His Command.
mats Gurfe tos xfs adt A ys ae set T UA (1071-11, wg, He 5)
agan upaa-ay eeDhan meh baaDhee so parabh raakhai bhaa-ee hay. ||1]||
He created fire and locked it into wood. That God protects all, O Siblings of Destiny. H11I
ba AS aS fara Aas i (1071-12, wg, ue 5) jee-a jant ka-o rijak sambaahay. He gives nourishment to all beings and creatures.
ATE ATE ANGE MUTT II (1071-12, H™Y, H3 5)
karan kaaran samrath aapaahay. He Himself is the all-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes.
fas ufs af Garusoe Het Sat AoTet FT QM co71-12, wg, ue 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa so-ee tayraa sahaa-ee hay. ||2|| In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; He is your help and support. ||2||
HS aes Ufo fate yfsurfemr il (071-13, wg, Hs 5) maat garabh meh jin partipaali-aa. He cherished you in your mother's womb.
Af ata ofe Afar Arf | (1071-13, wg, 48 5) Saas garaas ho-ay sang samaali-aa. With every breath and morsel of food, He is with you, and takes care of you.
Ret Het wuba A Ulsu eat fan efsnret FWSM co71-14, wg, He 5)
sadaa sadaa japee-ai so pareetam vadee jis vadi-aa-ee hay. ||3]| Forever and ever, meditate on that Beloved; Great is His glorious greatness! ||3]|
HOSS u's ad fs as Il (1071-14, wg, we 5) sultaan khaan karay khin keeray. The sultans and nobles are reduced to dust in an instant.
ada feet ad YS Hts Il (1071-15, wg, 48 5) gareeb nivaaj karay parabh meeray. God cherishes the poor, and makes them into rulers.
dea feeds Asa AOE fas AHS adt & AST T ISI (1071-15, wg, He 5)
garab nivaaran sarab saDhaaran kichh keemat kahee na jaa-ee hay. ||4]| He is the Destroyer of egotistical pride, the Support of all. His value cannot be estimated. ||4] |
A ufsest A USSST Il (1071-16, wg, He 5) SO pativantaa so Dhanvantaa. He alone is honorable, and he alone is wealthy,
fan Hfs efor afs saest I (1071-16, wg, He 5) jis man vasi-aa har bhagvantaa. within whose mind the Lord God abides.
Hs fust AS dou set fafs fea fqAfe Guret F nui coz1-16, wg, ue 5) maat pitaa sut banDhap bhaa-ee jin ih sarisat upaa-ee hay. ||5|| He alone is my mother, father, child, relative and sibling, who created this Universe.
[5]
ys mre Adel SV Sdt ATS Il (1071-17, wg, us 5) parabh aa-ay sarnaa bha-o nahee karnaa. I have come to God's Sanctuary, and so I fear nothing.
Aunts fess J SaESr Il (1071-17, wg, ue 5) saaDhsangat nihcha-o hai tarnaa. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am sure to be saved.
HO ad AGH wT ads (3H od ae AATST T MEM (1071-17, wg, Hs 5) man bach karam araaDhay kartaa tis naahee kaday sajaa-ee hay. ||6||
One who adores the Creator in thought, word and deed, shall never be punished. [161]
ae foure Ho 36 Hfs Stent Il cio71-18, wg, we 5) gun niDhaan man tan meh ravi-aa. One whose mind and body are permeated with the Lord, the treasure of virtue,
HOH Hee at fs o Sfenr Ih co71-18, wg, He 5) janam maran kee jon na bhavi-aa. does not wander in birth, death and reincarnation.
wu faon ater afe so at fyufs gd mruret J DI (1071-19, wg, He 5) dookh binaas kee-aa sukh dayraa jaa taripat rahay aaghaa-ee hay. ||7]|| Pain vanishes and peace prevails, when one is satisfied and fulfilled. ||7] |
Mts grat Het AMMA It 071-19, wg, He 5) meet hamaaraa so-ee su-aamee. My Lord and Master is my best friend.
UST AOD2 Ws Boste Misa I 1072-1, wg, He 5)
thaan thanantar antarjaamee. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is in all places and interspaces.
frufe frufs use usnas fest aes feet F ICI (1072-1, rg, He 5)
simar simar pooran parmaysur chintaa ganat mitaa-ee hay. ||8|| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Perfect Transcendent Lord, I am rid of all anxieties and calculations. ||8]|
ofa a om afe we aT Il (1072-2, wg, He 5) har kaa naam kot lakh baahaa. One who has the Name of the Lord has hundreds of thousands and millions of arms.
dfs AA atese Afal ue SI Il (1072-2, wg, He 5) har jas keertan sang Dhan taahaa. The wealth of the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is with him.
fomire usa ats fasur dat es ug afs oret FCM (1072-2, wg, He 5)
gi-aan kharhag kar kirpaa deenaa doot maaray kar Dhaa-ee hay. ||9]|
In His Mercy, God has blessed me with the sword of spiritual wisdom; I have attacked and killed the demons. ||9||
dfs a WY AUG AY AUS Il (1072-3, wg, Hs 5) har kaa jaap japahu jap japnay. Chant the Chant of the Lord, the Chant of Chants.
ats neg ZAG whe wus Il 072-3, wg, He 5) jeet aavhu vashu ghar apnay. Be a winner of the game of life and come to abide in your true home.
Bd VET sda 6 Sug IAla JAfa TS Wet J AO 1072-3, wg, wz 5)
lakh cha-oraaseeh narak na daykhhu rasak rasak gun gaa-ee hay. ||10]|
You shall not see the 8.4 million types of hell; sing His Glorious Praises and remain saturated with loving devotion||10] |
us qons Curgeaar I (1072-4, wg, us 5) khand barahmand uDhaaranhaaraa. He is the Savior of worlds and galaxies.
CU MET Mat MUTT Il (1072-4, wg, He 5) ooch athaah agamm apaaraa. He is lofty, unfathomable, inaccessible and infinite.
fan 3 feu ad ug must A Ae fsafs fomret N99 (1072-5, wg, He 5) jis no kirpaa karay parabh apnee so jan tiseh Dhi-aa-ee hay. ||11]| That humble being, unto whom God grants His Grace, meditates on Him. ||11]|
gue sfs we ufs 4S il 1072-5, wg, ue 5) banDhan torh lee-ay parabh molay. God has broken my bonds, and claimed me as His own.
af fasur ats wea FB Il (1072-6, wg, us 5)
kar kirpaa keenay ghar golay. In His Mercy, He has made me the slave of His home.
mode Jz Searg Aun ule Art as AHS FT WAI (1072-6, wg, He 5)
anhad run jhunkaar sahj Dhun saachee kaar kamaa-ee hay. ||12| |
The unstruck celestial sound current resounds and vibrates, when one performs acts of true service. ||12||
Hfs ussts at ys Sct il 1072-7, wg, us 5) man parteet banee parabh tayree. O God, I have enshrined faith in You within my mind.
feof at TBH HfS At II 1072-7, wg, He 5) binas ga-ee ha-umai mat mayree. My egotistical intellect has been driven out.
vidtorg ater yfs mus Aa ufo AS AIST T NASI (1072-7, wg, He 5) angeekaar kee-aa parabh apnai jag meh sobh suhaa-ee hay. ||13]| God has made me His own, and now I have a glorious reputation in this world. ||13]|
A A OY AUT AaetA Il (1072-8, wg, He 5) jai jai kaar japahu jagdeesai. Proclaim His Glorious Victory, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
ates af aret ys mus SHA I (1072-8, wg, ne 5) bal bal jaa-ee parabh apunay eesai. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to my Lord God.
fH fag oA neg o SA Sor Aas Aaet FT NAVIN (1072-8, wg, Hs 5) tis bin doojaa avar na deesai aykaa jagat sabaa-ee hay. ||14|| I do not see any other except Him. The One Lord pervades the whole world. ||14]|
Afs Afs As Ys AST Il (1072-9, wg, H8 5) sat sat sat parabh jaataa. True, True, True is God.
Td USAT AEt HS TSM Il (1072-9, wg, He 5) gur parsaad sadaa man raataa. By Guru's Grace, my mind is attuned to Him forever.
fants fants Feta AS Sa Saxorfs AHTET T UWI (1072-10, +g, He 5)
simar simar jeeveh jan tayray aykankaar samaa-ee hay. ||15]||
Your humble servants live by meditating, meditating in remembrance on You, merging in You, O One Universal Creator. ||15]|
Sas AST at UtSH fimirsr Il (1072-10, wg, H8 5) bhagat janaa kaa pareetam pi-aaraa. The Dear Lord is the Beloved of His humble devotees.
AS Curse WAH THE Il (1072-11, 47g, He 5) sabhai uDhaaran khasam hamaaraa. My Lord and Master is the Savior of all.
fanfs on ust AS fear He Soa UA TaTet T NENA (1072-11, wg, He 5)
simar naam punnee sabh ichhaa jan naanak paij rakhaa-ee hay. ||16]||1]| Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all desires are fulfilled. He has saved the honor of servant Nanak. ||16]|1]|
HT AGI HIS U (1072-12)
maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
96 Afsas yArfe il (1072-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hatt Fait atfa wueret | (1072-13, wg, He 5) Sangee jogee naar laptaanee. The body-bride is attached to the Yogi, the husband-soul.
Cats aot Fa FA Hat II (1072-13, wg, He 5) urajh rahee rang ras maanee. She is involved with him, enjoying pleasure and delights.
fass Hrat se feast ass sar fara F WAU (1072-13, wg, He 5)
kirat sanjogee bha-ay iktaraa kartay bhog bilaasaa hay. ||1]||
As a consequence of past actions, they have come together, enjoying pleasurable play. ||1]|
A fug ad AUS 33 HS Il (1072-14, wg, He 5) jo pir karai so Dhan tat maanai. Whatever the husband does, the bride willingly accepts.
fug uefa Fterfa se Aars il (1072-14, wg, ne 5) pir dhaneh seegaar rakhai sangaanai. The husband adorns his bride, and keeps her with himself.
fife Gaz zafs feg wat fyS & uafo fear TF QI (1072-14, wg, He 5) mil ayktar vaseh din raatee pari-o day dhaneh dilaasaa hay. ||2] | Joining together, they live in harmony day and night; the husband comforts his wife.
21 |
ue Hat fy@ ag fafa oe i (1072-15, ug, He 5) Dhan maagai pari-o baho biDh Dhaavai. When the bride asks, the husband runs around in all sorts of ways.
A ure A onrfs fees il (1072-15, wg, Hs 5) jo paavai so aan dikhaavai. Whatever he finds, he brings to show his bride.
2a FAS aS ugte 3 Aa Us Fast su filma T SI (1072-16, wg, He 5) ayk vasat ka-o pahuch na saakai Dhan rahtee bhookh pi-aasaa hay. ||3]| But there is one thing he cannot reach, and so his bride remains hungry and thirsty.
[I3]|
ua ad fasS SS aT AT II (1072-16, wg, He 5) Dhan karai bin-o do-oo kar jorai. With her palms pressed together, the bride offers her prayer,
fipn usefa o ATG SAG wha HS I (1072-16, wg, Hs 5) pari-a pardays na jaahu vashu ghar mordi. "O my beloved, do not leave me and go to foreign lands; please stay here with me.
mT deg aeg fas sists fas Css gu imma T leit (1072-17, og, He 5) aisaa banaj karahu garih bheetar jit utrai bhookh pi-aasaa hay. ||4|| Do such business within our home, that my hunger and thirst may be relieved."| |4| |
Hal® ATH OSH Hal ATO Il (1072-18, wg, we 5) saglay karam Dharam jug saaDhaa. All sorts of religious rituals are performed in this age,
fag ofa dA AY f3q odt Ba Il 4072-18, wg, us 5) bin har ras sukh til nahee laaDhaa. but without the sublime essence of the Lord, not an iota of peace is found.
set faur area ASHa SE us fus mse Sar FT Ul (1072-18, Wg, He 5) bha-ee kirpaa naanak satsangay ta-o Dhan pir anand ulaasaa hay. ||5]| When the Lord becomes Merciful, O Nanak, then in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the bride and the husband enjoy ecstasy and bliss. ||5||
ust 9OD3 U6 vidt fug sue flier il (1073-1, wg, He 5)
Dhan anDhee pir chapal si-aanaa. The body-bride is blind, and the groom is clever and wise.
UT FZ A FIG TIS Il (1073-1, wg, we 5) panch tat kaa rachan rachaanaa. The creation was created of the five elements.
fan sug aS 3H ore og A utes Afsas UAT T HEN (1073-1, wg, He 5)
jis vakhar ka-o tum aa-ay hahu so paa-i-o satgur paasaa hay. ||6]||
That merchandise, for which you have come into the world, is received only from the True Guru. ||6] |
US XI J SAH 3S Il (1073-2, wg, we 5) Dhan kahai too vas mai naalay. The body-bride says, "Please live with me,
fit AYSTAT ares TUB Il (1073-2, wg, w8 5) pari-a sukhvaasee baal gupaalay. O my beloved, peaceful, young lord.
33 fao 3 fas dt 5 BY sue Ufo SfS BAA T NDI (1073-3, wg, He 5)
tujhai binaa ha-o kit hee na laykhai vachan deh chhod na jaasaa hay. ||7|| Without you, I am of no account. Please give me your word, that you will not leave me". ||7]|
fufs afar 38 Jat Fer ii 1073-3, wg, Hs 5) pir kahi-aa ha-o hukmee bandaa. The soul-husband says, "I am the slave of my Commander.
6g ad orag fra ofs & BET Il (1073-4, wg, He 5) oh bhaaro thaakur jis kaan na chhandaa. He is my Great Lord and Master, who is fearless and independent.
frog ae fSeg 3H Af soe A Ae 3 Cs fro T ITI (1073-4, wg, Hs 5) jichar raakhai tichar tum sang rahnaa jaa saday ta ooth siDhaasaa hay. ||8]||
As long as He wills, I will remain with you. When He summons me, I shall arise and depart."||8] |
Ag fin FIG AT Us ATS Il (1073-5, wg, ws 5) ja-o pari-a bachan kahay Dhan saachay. The husband speaks words of Truth to the bride,
US AE 3 AHS Vals aS Il (1073-5, wg, us 5) Dhan kachhoo na samjhai chanchal kaachay. but the bride is restless and inexperienced, and she does not understand anything.
gofs safe fue dt Aa wat Go ws AS afs TAT IKI (1073-5, wg, He 5)
bahur bahur pir hee sang maagai oh baat jaanai kar haasaa hay. ||9||
Again and again, she begs her husband to stay; she thinks that he is just joking when he answers her. ||9] |
mire} witfanat furs gerfenit | (1073-6, ug, He 5) aa-ee aagi-aa pirahu bulaa-i-aa. The Order comes, and the husband-soul is called.
Oo Us Ust 6 HST uatfeEni Il (1073-6, wg, He 5) naa Dhan puchhee na mataa pakaa-i-aa. He does not consult with his bride, and does not ask her opinion.
Cfe fhofes sefs wet tu aaa firs HIATT AOI (1073-7, wg, HE 5)
ooth siDhaa-i-o chhootar maatee daykh naanak mithan mohaasaa hay. ||10|| He gets up and marches off, and the discarded body-bride mingles with dust. O Nanak, behold the illusion of emotional attachment and hope. ||10]|
J HO Gat Af= HS AT Il (1073-7, wg, He 5) ray man lobhee sun man mayray. O greedy mind - listen, O my mind!
Afsag Afe fea afs Aes Il (1073-8, wg, Hs 5) satgur sayv din raat sadayray. Serve the True Guru day and night forever.
fas Afsas ufs He Aas ford af AH STAT T AAI (1073-8, wy, He 5)
bin satgur pach moo-ay saakat niguray gal jam faasaa hay. ||11]|
Without the True Guru, the faithless cynics rot away and die. The noose of Death is around the necks of those who have no guru. ||11]|
Houfe wire Houfle AS II (1073-9, 7g, He 5) manmukh aavai manmukh jaavai. The self-willed manmukh comes, and the self-willed manmukh goes.
Houfy fefe fef Ser ws | (1073-9, wg, He 5) manmukh fir fir chotaa khaavai. The manmukh suffers beatings again and again.
fase oda A Houfe sat aanfe Su o HAT T NAMI (1073-9, wg, He 5)
jitnay narak say manmukh bhogai gurmukh layp na maasaa hay. ||12||
The manmukh endures as many hells as there are; the Gurmukh is not even touched by them. ||12]|
aonfa Afe fa ofs Ate srfemr I (1073-10, wg, He 5) gurmukh so-ay je har jee-o bhaa-i-aa. He alone is Gurmukh, who is pleasing to the Dear Lord.
fsa a@e free fa ufs ufserfemr II (1073-10, wg, 8 5) tis ka-un mitaavai je parabh pehraa-i-aa. Who can destroy anyone who is robed in honor by the Lord?
Het mde ad nist fan frar@ ufeor ates war FT WISI 4073-11, wg, He 5) sadaa anand karay aanandee jis sirpaa-o pa-i-aa gal khaasaa hay. ||13]| The blissful one is forever in bliss; he is dressed in robes of honor. ||13] |
IG afoot AfsaTsT UT I (1073-12, wg, HE 5) ha-o balihaaree satgur pooray. I am a sacrifice to the Perfect True Guru.
Hote & VS AIS A AP Il (1073-12, wg, v2 5) saran kay daatay bachan kay sooray. He is the Giver of Sanctuary, the Heroic Warrior who keeps His Word.
mA us fiufeor Fees feats o as dt AAT ST NASI (1073-12, wg, He 5)
aisaa parabh mili-aa sukh-daata vichhurh na kat hee jaasaa hay. ||14||
Such is the Lord God, the Giver of peace, whom I have met; He shall never leave me or go anywhere else. ||14| |
ae fours fag ott & uret il (1073-13, wg, 2 5) gun niDhaan kichh keem na paa-ee. He is the treasure of virtue; His value cannot be estimated.
ufe ufe ufs sfuS As ort I (1073-13, wg, He 5) ghat ghat poor rahi-o sabh thaa-ee. He is perfectly permeating each and every heart, prevailing everywhere.
woe Hofs ae BU Sho UE 8S 39 ASAT NWUINAUI (1073-13, wg, He 5)
naanak saran deen dukh bhanjan ha-o rayn tayray jo daasaa hay. ||15]|1]|2||
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Destroyer of the pains of the poor; I am the dust of the feet of Your slaves. ||15||1]|2]|
HG AGI HIB U (1073-15) maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yArfe il (1073-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ad MSE MSet AT Il (1073-16, wg, Hs 5) karai anand anandee mayraa. My Blissful Lord is forever in bliss.
ufe wie uae fre frets foes i 073-16, 4g, H8 5) ghat ghat pooran sir sireh nibayraa. He fills each and every heart, and judges each and everyone.
fafa Art & Ae AoE neg ard A SAT T WAU (1073-16, wg, 8 5) sir Saahaa kai sachaa saahib avar naahee ko doojaa hay. ||1||
The True Lord and Master is above the heads of all kings; there is none other than Him. ||1]|
TIUSS MISS SEs | (1073-17, wg, He 5) harakhvant aanant da-i-aalaa. He is joyful, blissful and merciful.
yate sfuS ys Aga SAS Il (1073-17, wg, u3 5) pargat rahi-o parabh sarab ujaalaa. God's Light is manifest everywhere.
gu ad afe Sa feat mmr dt rf uA TQM (1073-17, og, He 5)
roop karay kar vaykhai vigsai aapay hee aap poojaa hay. ||2||
He creates forms, and gazing upon them, He enjoys them; He Himself worships Himself. ||2] |
nm Feats AT Hara il (1073-18, wg, ws 5) aapay kudrat karay veechaaraa. He contemplates His own creative power.
nm ot AG AT UATE Il (1073-18, Hg, Hs 5) aapay hee sach karay pasaaraa. The True Lord Himself creates the expanse of the Universe.
nm ae free feo ast omy afs Afs StF SI 1073-18, wg, He 5) aapay khayl khilaavai din raatee aapay sun sun bheejaa hay. ||3]| He Himself stages the play, day and night; He Himself listens, and hearing, rejoices.
[I3I|
Arg’ Sey Aet uUTSATS Il (1073-19, wg, Hs 5)
saachaa takhat sachee paatisaahee. True is His throne, and True is His kingdom.
Ag unter Are Ardt il (1073-19, wg, ws 5) sach khajeenaa saachaa saahee. True is the treasure of the True Banker.
Ust 9OD8
nm AY UfsG Ag AMS Ae Afs Postar T USI (074-1, wg, He 5)
aapay sach Dhaari-o sabh saachaa sachay sach varteejaa hay. ||4||
He Himself is True, and true is all that He has established. True is the prevailing Order of the True Lord. ||4||
Ay SUH Ad AT Il (1074-1, wg, ws 5) sach tapaavas sachay kayraa. True is the justice of the True Lord.
Arg BG Het YS Sa Il (1074-1, wg, ws 5) saachaa thaan sadaa parabh tayraa. Your place is forever True, O God.
Aut desfs Adt wat Ag Atoa AY aA T UI (1074-2, wg, He 5)
sachee kudrat sachee banee sach saahib sukh keejaa hay. ||5]|
True is Your Creative Power, and True is the Word of Your Bani. True is the peace which You give, O my Lord and Master. ||5||
Sa nif SF ST TA Il (1074-2, wg, we 5) ayko aap toohai vad raajaa. You alone are the greatest king.
TAH AS X US AH Il (1074-3, wg, He 5) hukam sachay kai pooray kaajaa. By the Hukam of Your Command, O True Lord, our affairs are fulfilled.
nists rote Ag fas AS wd dt orf ust T WEN 1074-3, wg, He 5)
antar baahar sabh kichh jaanai aapay hee aap pateejaa hay. ||6||
Inwardly and outwardly, You know everything; You Yourself are pleased with Yourself. [16] |
3 FS Tt J FT Saft Il (1074-3, wg, ve 5) too vad rasee-aa too vad bhogee. You are the great party-goer, You are the great enjoyer.
3 fears 3d Tt Hatt I (1074-4, og, He 5) too nirbaan toohai hee jogee. You are detached in Nirvaanaa, You are the Yogi.
Ava AY Aon wuts 33 mie Sot fect FT WOM 074-4, wg, Hs 5) sarab sookh sahj ghar tayrai ami-o tayree daristeejaa hay. ||7|| All celestial comforts are in Your home; Your Glance of Grace rains Nectar. ||7||
sat ats 33 3 FS it 1074-5, wg, us 5) tayree daat tujhai tay hovai. You alone give Your gifts.
afs ae ASA AS BM I (1074-5, wg, ue 5) deh daan sabhsai jant loai. You grant Your gifts unto all the beings of the world.
fe 3 mre ys Sars fgufs ga muita FT UCI (1074-5, og, He 5) tot na aavai poor bhandaarai taripat rahay aagheejaa hay. ||8||
Your treasures are overflowing, and are never exhausted; through them, we remain satisfied and fulfilled. ||8]|
mata fra Afoa aeeAt Il (1074-6, wg, us 5) jaacheh siDh saaDhik banvaasee. The Siddhas, seekers and forest-dwellers beg from You.
Wats ASt ASt AYSTAT Il (1074-6, wg, H2 5) jaacheh jatee satee sukhvaasee. The celibates and abstainers, and those who abide in peace beg from You.
fea wag nae 3 Wha ef ae frac FCI (1074-6, wg, He 5)
ik daataar sagal hai jaachik deh daan saristeejaa hay. ||9]||
You alone are the Great Giver; all are beggars of You. You bless all the world with Your gifts. ||9||
eats sats wig Fa murs il (1074-7, wg, ve 5) karahi bhagat ar rang apaaraa. Your devotees worship You with infinite love.
fas ufo af SarusIa Il (1074-7, wg, Hs 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa. In an instant, You establish and disestablish.
ad 35 Sis AoMit gan Hfs sasta FT WOM (1074-7, wg, He 5)
bhaaro tol bay-ant su-aamee hukam man bhagteejaa hay. ||10]|
Your weight is so heavy, O my infinite Lord and Master. Your devotees surrender to the Hukam of Your Command. ||10]|
fan fo ean Het SO ATE Il (1074-8, ng, He 5) jis deh daras so-ee tuDh jaanai. They alone know You, whom You bless with Your Glance of Grace.
Gg aa a Aafe Het Sa HTS Il (1074-8, ng, He 5) oh gur kai sabad sadaa rang maanai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they enjoy Your Love forever.
Tso Agu frora wet A ufs So Seta FT UAL (1074-9, og, He 5) chatur saroop si-aanaa so-ee jo man tayrai bhaaveejaa hay. ||11]| They alone are clever, handsome and wise, who are pleasing to Your Mind. ||11]|
fan dis nrefs A SuserT Il (1074-9, wg, He 5) jis cheet aavahi so vayparvaahaa. One who keeps You in his consciousness, becomes carefree and independent.
fan dtfs nrefa A OATS" AI Il (1074-10, wg, He 5) jis cheet aavahi so saachaa saahaa. One who keeps You in his consciousness, is the true king.
fan dis urefs fs 3B aa nieg as fag ata T WAI (1074-10, wg, Hs 5)
jis cheet aavahi tis bha-o kayhaa avar kahaa kichh keejaa hay. ||12||
One who keeps You in his consciousness - what does he have to fear? And what else does he need to do? ||12||
fgAat Fst wSI SST I (1074-11, wg, He 5) tarisnaa boojhee antar thandhaa. Thirst and desire are quenched, and one's inner being is cooled and soothed.
Os us B St HS I (1074-11, wg, Hs 5) gur poorai lai tootaa gandhaa. The True Guru has mended the broken one.
Hafs Ase foe nists avait mie sf sf utr FT 938i 1074-11, wg, He 5)
surat sabad rid antar jaagee ami-o jhol jhol peejaa hay. ||13]|
Awareness of the Word of the Shabad has awakened within my heart. Shaking it and vibrating it, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||13]|
He Std AE AE St AS Il (1074-12, wg, He 5) marai naahee sad sad hee jeevai. I shall not die; I shall live forever and ever.
wg Sfeor mifsart ate i 1074-12, nrg, He 5) amar bha-i-aa abhinaasee theevai. I have become immortal; I am eternal and imperishable.
ao ature oa we afe efe ahor santa FT u9Vil (1074-12, wg, He 5) naa ko aavai naa ko jaavai gur door kee-aa bharmeejaa hay. ||14]| I do not come, and I do not go. The Guru has driven out my doubts. ||14||
ud Ts at ust set Il (1074-13, wg, He 5)
pooray gur kee pooree banee. Perfect is the Word of the Perfect Guru.
Ud Bar us Hts ANTE Il (1074-13, wg, He 5) poorai laagaa pooray maahi samaanee. One who is attached to the Perfect Lord, is immersed in the Perfect Lord.
va Hefeur fos fos gar we odt Soh FT WWII (1074-14, og, Hs 5) charhai savaa-i-aa nit nit rangaa ghatai naahee toleejaa hay. ||15]|| His love increases day by day, and when it is weighed, it does not decrease. ||15]|
WIT ATS AT aafEr Il (1074-14, wg, us 5) baarhaa kanchan suDh karaa-i-aa. When the gold is made one hundred percent pure,
oefa Have Sat AaatfeEr Il (1074-15, wg, He 5) nadar saraaf vannee sachrhaa-i-aa. its color is true to the jeweller's eye.
uate uré ufenr Hardt fefa ordt sretar T NAEN (1074-15, wg, Hs 5)
parakh khajaanai paa-i-aa saraafee fir naahee taa-eejaa hay. ||16]|
Assaying it, it is placed in the treasury by God the Jeweller, and it is not melted down again. ||16]|
MiSs SH SHI AMM I (1074-16, wg, He 5) amrit naam tumaaraa su-aamee. Your Naam is Ambrosial Nectar, O my Lord and Master.
66a VTA Aet asst Il (1074-16, HTT, He 5) naanak daas sadaa kurbaanee. Nanak, Your slave, is forever a sacrifice to You.
AsAfa Hot AY ufemr ef wane feg He Sta T NADUAISH (1074-16, wg, Hs 5)
satsang mahaa sukh paa-i-aa daykh darsan ih man bheejaa hay. ||17]||1||3]|
In the Society of the Saints, I have found great peace; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, this mind is pleased and satisfied. ||17]||1]|3]|
HY HIG U AB (1074-18) maaroo mehlaa 5 solhay Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Solhas:
qe Afsars yArfe il (1074-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TT HUG WT dfeer i 1074-19, wg, ve 5) gur gopaal gur govindaa. The Guru is the Lord of the World, the Guru is the Master of the Universe.
Te chen Het gafHEST I (1074-19, wg, He 5) gur da-i-aal sadaa bakhsindaa. The Guru is merciful, and always forgiving.
ag was fAhyfs we amr ag ufey mimeat F NA (1074-19, wg, He 5)
gur saasat simrit khat karmaa gur pavitar asthaanaa hay. ||1||
The Guru is the Shaastras, the Simritees and the six rituals. The Guru is the Holy Shrine. |[1]|
usr qoDu ag fines Afs foofer omAfs il 4075-1, wg, us 5)
gur simrat sabh kilvikh naaseh. Meditating in remembrance on the Guru, all the sins are erased.
ag frnss AH Afa o SAT I (1075-1, wg, Hs 5) gur simrat jam sang na faaseh. Meditating in remembrance on the Guru, one is not strangled by the noose of Death.
ag finss He fasne Je TT HS mre F II! 4075-1, we, us 5)
gur simrat man nirmal hovai gur kaatay apmaanaa hay. ||2||
Meditating in remembrance on the Guru, the mind becomes immaculate; the Guru eliminates egotistical pride. ||2]|
TI A ASA Sala F AE Il (1075-2, wg, ve 5) gur kaa sayvak narak na jaa-ay. The Guru's servant is not consigned to hell.
Td aT AS UTSATH fms | (1075-2, wg, ue 5) gur kaa sayvak paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ay. The Guru's servant meditates on the Supreme Lord God.
Td a AeA WUAT ue ag ager fos Abe sar T WS (1075-3, wg, ue 5)
gur kaa sayvak saaDhsang paa-ay gur kardaa nit jee-a daanaa hay. ||3]|
The Guru's servant joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; the Guru ever gives the life of the soul. ||3]|
Gd ward dfs atese Heh | (1075-3, wg, us 5) gur du-aarai har keertan sunee-ai. At the Gurdwara, the Guru's Gate, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
Afsag 3fe fs aA fe seh I (1075-4, wg, He 5) satgur bhayt har jas mukh bhanee-ai. Meeting with the True Guru, one chants the Lord's Praises.
afe aan fue Afsag ofs coors FS Ha T Igil (1075-4, wg, He 5)
kal kalays mitaa-ay satgur har dargeh dayvai maanaa”™ hay. ||4]|
The True Guru eradicates sorrow and suffering, and bestows honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4]|
MEH nidtss Te fewer i (1075-5, wg, Hs 5) agam agochar guroo dikhaa-i-aa. The Guru has revealed the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord.
gor Hata Afsafs ufemr i (075-5, wg, 8 5) bhoolaa maarag satgur paa-i-aa. The True Guru returns to the Path, those who have wandered away.
Gd Hea aS faug 3 sast of us feafenr famrat F ull 1075-5, wg, He 5)
gur sayvak ka-o bighan na bhagtee har poor darirh-aa-i-aa gi-aanaa™ hay. ||5]|
No obstacles stand in the way of devotion to the Lord, for one who serves the Guru. The Guru implants perfect spiritual wisdom. ||5]|
ats fener Asat otet Il (1075-6, wg, Hs 5) gur daristaa-i-aa sabhnee thaa’-ee. The Guru has revealed the Lord everywhere.
rifes af uf afar atATet Il (1075-6, wg, Hz 5) jal thal poor rahi-aa gosaa-ee. The Lord of the Universe is permeating and pervading the water and the land.
Gu 8a AS Sa at His oar Hota fowrar FT WEI (1075-7, wg, He 5)
ooch oon sabh ayk samaanaa™ man laagaa sahj Dhi-aanaa hay. ||6]|
The high and the low are all the same to Him. Focus your mind's meditation intuitively on Him. ||6||
afa fifemt As feAS gsret I (1075-7, wg, He 5) gur mili-ai sabh tarisan bujhaa-ee. Meeting with the Guru, all thirst is quenched.
afa fifemt oo Ad HET II (1075-8, ug, He 5) gur mili-ai nah johai maa-ee. Meeting with the Guru, one is not watched by Maya.
Ag sy tor afe us oy nits ut ust T WDM (1075-8, wg, H8 5)
sat santokh dee-aa gur poorai naam amrit pee paanaa™ hay. ||7||
The Perfect Guru bestows truth and contentment; I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||7]|
Od at wat AS Hf AHTAt Il (1075-9, wg, He 5) gur kee banee sabh maahi samaanee. The Word of the Guru's Bani is contained in all.
wif Hat 3 ify saret i 1075-9, wg, He 5) aap sunee tai aap vakhaanee. He Himself hears it, and He Himself repeats it.
fate fafs mut set vfs fons fso ufenr fesse arat Ft (1075-9, wg, He 5) jin jin japee tay-ee sabh nistaray tin paa-i-aa nihchal thaanaa” hay. ||8|| Those who meditate on it, are all emancipated; they attain the eternal and unchanging home. ||8]|
Afsag at nfour Afsarg AS Il (1075-10, wg, Hs 5) satgur kee mahimaa satgur jaanai. The Glory of the True Guru is known only to the True Guru.
A fas ad A nmue SS Il (1075-10, wg, Hs 5) jo kichh karay so aapan bhaanai. Whatever He does, is according to the Pleasure of His Will.
AY ufe ATE AS 3d Hod AS ATaat FT UCUUSI (1075-11, wg, 8 5)
saaDhoo Dhoor jaacheh jan tayray naanak sad kurbaanaa™ hay. ||9||1||4]|
Your humble servants beg for the dust of the feet of the Holy; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||9]|1]|4]|
HY AGI HIB U (1075-12) maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1075-12) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nitfe fodHe us fedarat il (1075-13, ug, He 5) aad niranjan parabh nirankaaraa. The Primal, Immaculate Lord God is formless.
Ag Hf eas wrfy fearar i (1075-13, Tg, Hs 5) sabh meh vartai aap niraaraa. The Detached Lord is Himself prevailing in all.
zoo mts faug odt cet AS gan f_Afe Gourfeer ail (1075-13, wg, He 5)
varan jaat chihan nahee ko-ee sabh hukmay sarisat upaa-idaa. ||1] |
He has no race or social class, no identifying mark. By the Hukam of His Will, He created the entire universe. ||1]|
we s@arte fs Aaret Il (1075-14, wg, He 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh jon sabaa-ee. Out of all the 8.4 million species of beings,
HEA AG ufs cet efsnret it 1075-14, wg, v3 5) maanas ka-o parabh dee-ee vadi-aa-ee. God blessed mankind with glory.
feR ugst 3 A og ga A oorfe ae ey feet Qi (1075-15, wg, Hs 5)
is pa-orhee tay jo nar chookai so aa-ay jaa-ay dukh paa-idaa. ||2| |
That human who misses this chance, shall suffer the pains of coming and going in reincarnation. ||2| |
ats d@ fsa famr adh it (1075-15, wg, He 5) keetaa hovai tis ki-aa kahee-ai. What should I say, to one who has been created.
ToHfa SH USTs BIA Il 1075-15, wg, Hs 5) gurmukh naam padaarath lahee-ai. The Gurmukh receives the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fan orf gore Het 38 A gs fAAfs geteer WSN (1075-16, wg, He 5)
jis aap bhulaa-ay so-ee bhoolai so boojhai jisahi bujhaa-idaa. ||3||
He alone is confused, whom the Lord Himself confuses. He alone understands, whom the Lord inspires to understand. ||3]||
Tau Aa a Sarg feg aha it (1075-16, wg, ne 5) harakh sog kaa nagar ih kee-aa. This body has been made the village of joy and sorrow.
A Cad FH Afsag AaSbhor | (1075-17, wg, Hs 5) say ubray jo satgur sarnee-aa. They alone are emancipated, who seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
fan gat 3 a0 fora A qoute Ast ufeer ell (1075-17, we, Hs 5)
tarihaa gunaa tay rahai niraaraa so gurmukh sobhaa paa-idaa. ||4||
One who remains untouched by the three qualities, the three gunas - such a Gurmukh is blessed with glory. ||4]|
mifsa AGH Me ass i FH Ata A Fag UT | 1075-18, wg, ue 5) anik karam kee-ay bahutayray. jo keejai so banDhan pairay. You can do anything, but whatever you do, only serves to tie your feet.
TIT ae sta odt HA AS SI HS TStEer WUll (1075-18, wg, we 5)
kurutaa beej beejay nahee jammai sabh laahaa mool gavaa-idaa. ||5||
The seed which is planted out of season does not sprout, and all one's capital and profits are lost. ||5||
ASAT Hig AIsq UTUTST Il (1075-19, wg, He 5)
kaljug meh keertan parDhaanaa.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are most sublime and exalted.
aoufa subs ate forar i 1075-19, wg, Hs 5) gurmukh japee-ai laa-ay Dhi-aanaa. Become Gurmukh, chant and focus your meditation.
Uat IoDE
wif 3d AAS AG 3d fe vag ufs fAG wfES EN (1076-1, wg, He 5)
aap tarai saglay kul taaray har dargeh pat si-o jaa-idaa. ||6||
You shall save yourself, and save all your generations as well. You shall go to the Court of the Lord with honor. ||6]|
us use chu Afs Snr | (1076-1, wg, ue 5) khand pataal deep sabh lo-aa. All the continents, nether worlds, islands and worlds
Afs ae efA orf ufs ath i (1076-1, wg, He 5) sabh kaalai vas aap parabh kee-aa. - God Himself has made them all subject to death.
fosse Sa urfu uifsost A feces A fsafa fomrfeer ON (1076-2, we, Hs 5)
nihchal ayk aap abhinaasee so nihchal jo tiseh Dhi-aa-idaa. ||7]|
The One Imperishable Lord Himself is unmoving and unchanging. Meditating on Him, one becomes unchanging. ||7]|
ofa a Aza A afs AT Il (1076-3, wg, ue 5) har kaa sayvak so har jayhaa. The Lord's servant becomes like the Lord.
Se 6 Weg HEA ST Il (1076-3, wg, ws 5) bhayd na jaanhu maanas dayhaa. Do not think that, because of his human body, he is different.
fa ae sda Cofs ag ast fefs Has AOS AMES ICI (1076-3, wg, He 5)
ji-o jal tarang utheh baho bhaatee fir sallai salal samaa-idaa. ||8]|
The waves of the water rise up in various ways, and then the water merges again in water. ||8]|
fea mfsa Hat BS EMIS I (1076-4, wg, Hs 5) ik jaachik mangai daan du-aarai. A beggar begs for charity at His Door.
W ys are St fargur ag il (1076-4, wg, Hs 5) jaa parabh bhaavai taa kirpaa Dhaarai. When God pleases, He takes pity on him.
2g van fas ue fRusn afe atestfe He soafeer WEN (1076-5, wg, He 5)
dayh daras jit man tariptaasai har keertan man thehraa-idaa. ||9||
Please bless me with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, to satisfy my mind, O Lord. Through the Kirtan of Your Praises, my mind is held steady. ||9]|
gs Sag fas SAB mrs Il (1076-5, wg, 3 5) roorho thaakur kitai vas na aavai. The Beauteous Lord and Master is not controlled in any way.
ofa A fae as fa ofa far Hat aS 11 (1076-6, wg, He 5) har so kichh karay je har ki-aa santaa bhaavai. The Lord does that which pleases the Saints of the Lord.
dist Safe Ret aafefs vfs Sg o aet ufseEr AON! (1076-6, wg, He 5) keetaa lorhan so-ee karaa-in dar fayr na ko-ee paa-idaa. ||10]| He does whatever they wish to be done; nothing blocks their way at His Door. ||10]|
fra m@we orfe sos od yret Il (1076-7, wg, H8 5) jithai a-ughat aa-ay banat hai paraanee. Wherever the mortal is confronted with difficulty,
fsa ofa fore Arfsaruret i 4076-7, wg, Hs 5) tithai har Dhi-aa-ee-ai saaringpaanee. there he should meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
fre uz ey 3 Bet aet fsa afe orf safer AAU (1076-8, og, He 5)
jithai putar kalatar na baylee ko-ee tithai har aap chhadaa-idaa. ||11]||
Where there are no children, spouse or friends, there the Lord Himself comes to the rescue. ||11||
<a" ANTE MH METI Il (1076-8, wg, Hs 5) vadaa saahib agam athaahaa. The Great Lord and Master is inaccessible and unfathomable.
fag frsbt ys Susesrs Il (1076-9, ug, He 5) ki-o milee-ai parabh vayparvaahaa. How can anyone meet with God, the self-suficient One?
ofe fra fra nrafa ure A fefs Harfs evar urf&er 19211 (1076-9, wg, He 5)
kaat silak jis maarag paa-ay so vich sangat vaasaa paa-idaa. ||12||
Those who have had the noose cut away from around their necks, whom God has set back upon the Path, obtain a place in the Sangat, the Congregation. ||12]|
JAH FS A ASA AIM I (1076-10, wg, 3 5) hukam boojhai so sayvak kahee-ai. One who realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command is said to be His servant.
ga sor Ufe AMAfs Ad Il (1076-10, wg, He 5) buraa bhalaa du-ay samsar sahee-ai. He endures both bad and good equally.
UGH Ae 3 Sa gS A TeHfY Hata ANTES NII (1076-10, mg, He 5)
ha-umai jaa-ay ta ayko boojhai so gurmukh sahj samaa-idaa. ||13]|
When egotism is silenced, then one comes to know the One Lord. Such a Gurmukh intuitively merges in the Lord. ||13]|
Uf AX SIS AST AUSTAT Il (1076-11, wg, ws 5) har kay bhagat sadaa sukhvaasee. The devotees of the Lord dwell forever in peace.
we Hate nists Sarat il (1076-11, wg, ue 5)
baal subhaa-ay ateet udaasee. With a child-like, innocent nature, they remain detached, turning away from the world.
mifsa da acts ag ast fae fust us wsfee 19811 (1076-12, wg, He 5)
anik rang karahi baho bhaatee ji-o pitaa poot laadaa-idaa. ||14||
They enjoy various pleasures in many ways; God caresses them, like a father caressing his son. ||14]|
Ma nidiag AHS adt uret I (1076-12, wg, He 5)
agam agochar keemat nahee paa-ee. He is inaccessible and unfathomable; His value cannot be estimated.
oT fireshat ar we firesret i 1076-13, og, Hs 5) taa milee-ai jaa la-ay milaa-ee. We meet Him, only when He causes us to meet.
dante yae sfeur f35 Ae aS fae ufs HAS Sy feurfeer UU (1076-13, Hg, He 5) gurmukh pargat bha-i-aa tin jan ka-o jin Dhur mastak laykh likhaa-idaa. ||15] |
The Lord is revealed to those humble Gurmukhs, who have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||15]|
3 MN ATS ATE ATS II (1076-14, H™T, Hs 5) too aapay kartaa kaaran karnaa. You Yourself are the Creator Lord, the Cause of causes.
fAfe Surfs udt AS UST Il (1076-14, wg, H2 5) sarisat upaa-ay Dharee sabh Dharnaa. You created the Universe, and You support the whole earth.
He woe Aafs ufeor afs end ofe aS oA safer UAE (1076-14, Hg, He 5)
jan naanak saran pa-i-aa har du-aarai har bhaavai laaj rakhaa-idaa. ||16||1]|5]]| Servant Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of Your Door, O Lord; if it is Your Will, please preserve his honor. ||16]|1]|5||
HG AGI HIB U (1076-16)
maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas yArfE I (1076-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
WGA A Sa Zo Il (1076-17, wg, ue 5) jo deesai so ayko toohai. Whatever is seen is You, O One Lord.
wat Sat Hefs AEA II 1076-17, wg, He 5) banee tayree sarvan sunee-ai. What the ears hear is the Word of Your Bani.
Sat nied 3 ATU aret Aa SHS UTS WAU (1076-17, wg, HE 5)
doojee avar na jaapas kaa-ee sagal tumaaree Dhaarnaa. ||1|| There is nothing else to be seen at all. You give support to all. ||1]|
nify fasts mruer afar il (1076-18, Hg, 8 5) aap chitaaray apnaa kee-aa. You Yourself are conscious of Your Creation.
nme nify mirfy ys eho i (1076-18, wg, 8 5)
aapay aap aap parabh thee-aa. You Yourself established Yourself, O God.
nmfy Gufs afsq unrat wm wife wife ATES MQIl (1076-18, Hg, He 5)
aap upaa-ay rachi-on pasaaraa aapay ghat ghat saarnaa. ||2]|
Creating Yourself, You formed the expanse of the Universe; You Yourself cherish and sustain each and every heart. ||2||
fefa Guré es waerdt Il (1076-19, wg, He 5) ik upaa-ay vad darvaaree. You created some to hold great and royal courts.
fefa Gerat fefa wea ardt i (1076-19, wg, w3 5) ik udaasee ik ghar baaree. Some turn away from the world in renunciation, and some maintain their households.
Yat 9oDD
fefa gu fefa fyufs were ASA Sa urge SI (1077-1, wg, He 5) ik bhookhay ik taripat aghaa-ay sabhsai tayraa paarnaa. ||3]|| Some are hungry and some are satisfied and satiated, but all lean on Your Support.
[I3I|
wmy Afs Afs AS APS Il (1077-1, wg, He 5)
aapay sat sat sat saachaa. The True Lord Himself is True, True, True.
6fs ufs sase Afar ae il (1077-1, wg, Hs 5) ot pot bhagtan sang raachaa. He is woven into the essence of His devotees, through and through.
mm} Tus wy J usdS wUu|Srt wiry UATTST |S (1077-2, Hg, He 5)
aapay gupat aapay hai pargat apnaa aap pasaarnaa. ||4||
He Himself is hidden, and He Himself is revealed. He Himself spreads Himself out. [141]
Het Het He TFSI Il (1077-2, wg, ve 5) sadaa sadaa sad hovanhaaraa. Forever, forever and ever, He shall always exist.
Car nant MaTY MUTT Il (1077-3, Hg, He 5) oochaa agam athaahu apaaraa. He is lofty, inaccessible, unfathomable and infinite.
Ge ag 3d ats Se Efe vas AM a ager MUI (1077-3, mg, HE 5) oonay bharay bharay bhar oonay ayhi chalat su-aamee kay kaarnaa. ||5||
He fills the empty, and empties out the filled; such are the plays and dramas of my Lord and Master. ||5||
Hf Arardt AS ATI Il (1077-3, wg, Hs 5) mukh saalaahee sachay saahaa. With my mouth, I praise my True Lord King.
Set UM MAH METI | (1077-4, ug, He 5) nainee paykhaa agam athaahaa. With my eyes, I behold the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord.
adel Afe Afe He 36 dfoor HS Atos AaIe Surgar Well (1077-4, wg, He 5)
karnee sun sun man tan hari-aa mayray saahib sagal uDhaaranaa. ||6] |
Listening, listening with my ears, my mind and body are rejuvenated; my Lord and Master saves all. ||6]|
af ats sufa ats wruer il (1077-5, wg, H3 5) kar kar vaykheh keetaa apnaa. He created the creation, and gazes upon what He has created.
fiba #3 Het F AUST I 1077-5, wg, He 5) jee-a jant so-ee hai japnaa. All beings and creatures meditate on Him.
nuat geafs nm we sedt sefa foaeser IDI (1077-5, wg, He 5) apnee kudrat aapay jaanai nadree nadar nihaalanaa. ||7|| He Himself knows His creative power; He blesses with His Glance of Grace. ||7]|
AS AS Ag SAfs ys WA Il (1077-6, wg, He 5) sant sabhaa jah baiseh parabh paasay. Where the Saints gather together and sit, God dwells close at hand.
MSE Has Ts BSI SHA Il (1077-6, wg, ue 5) anand mangal har chalat tamaasay. They abide in bliss and joy, beholding the Lord's wondrous play.
Te Wels nisde ufs seat 3d Soa WA festa|ar ICI (4077-6, wg, He 5)
gun gaavahi anhad Dhun banee tah naanak daas chitaaranaa. ||8]||
They sing the Glories of the Lord, and the unstruck sound current of His Bani; O Nanak, His slaves remain conscious of Him. ||8]|
MSS Ae! AF VOSS SHS Il (1077-7, wg, He 5) aavan jaanaa sabh chalat tumaaraa. Coming and going is all Your wondrous play.
afs afs fa Ye wns | (1077-7, wg, ue 5) kar kar daykhai khayl apaaraa. Creating the Creation, You gaze upon Your infinite play.
mify Cure Guresatat niuear ait urear littl (1077-8, wg, He 5)
aap Upaa-ay upaavanhaaraa apnaa kee-aa paalnaa. ||9]| Creating the Creation, You Yourself cherish and nurture it. ||9]|
Afs afs ate APE Ser Il 1077-8, wg, 8 5) sun sun jeevaa so-ay tumaaree. Listening, listening to Your Glory, I live.
Ret Het AST afar Il (1077-9, wg, us 5) sadaa sadaa jaa-ee balihaaree. Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to You.
efe ag afs fine? fea ast HS AMM ora MRUTS|ST AON! (1077-9, Hg, He 5)
du-ay kar jorh simra-o din raatee mayray su-aamee agam apaaranaa. ||10]|
With my palms pressed together, I meditate in remembrance on You, day and night, O my inaccessible, infinite Lord and Master. ||10]|
3g fag en faq Aerdt Il (1077-10, wg, He 5) tuDh bin doojay kis saalaahee. Other than You, who else should I praise?
Sa Sa Aut HS HM Il (1077-10, wg, He 5) ayko ayk japee man maahee. I meditate on the One and Only Lord within my mind.
Jon ofS Ao se fooer fea sas at wrsEr AAU (1077-10, wg, He 5)
hukam boojh jan bha-ay nihaalaa ih bhagtaa kee ghaalnaa. ||11]|
Realizing the Hukam of Your Will, Your humble servants are enraptured; this is the achievement of Your devotees. ||11]|
aa Guefa auba xfs Are i (1077-11, +g, He 5) gur updays japee-ai man saachaa. Following the Guru's Teachings, I meditate on the True Lord within my mind.
aa QuefA an dfar ar il (1077-11, wg, Hs 5) gur updays raam rang raachaa. Following the Guru's Teachings, I am immersed in the Lord's Love.
aa Guefh sefs vfs sue feg SoH HT USA HAST II (1077-11, Hg, He 5)
gur updays tuteh sabh banDhan ih bharam moh parjaalanaa. ||12| |
Following the Guru's Teachings, all bonds are broken, and this doubt and emotional attachment are burnt away. ||12||
Ag we Het AY ar Il (1077-12, wg, He 5) jah raakhai so-ee sukh thaanaa. Wherever He keeps me, is my place of rest.
Hon df et 3% HAT Il (1077-12, wg, He 5) sehjay ho-ay so-ee bhal maanaa. Whatever naturally happens, I accept that as good.
fear as odt & Sct AT Sa I SHAT NII 1077-13, wg, He 5) binsay bair naahee ko bairee sabh ayko hai bhaalnaa. ||13]| Hatred is gone - I have no hatred at all; I see the One Lord in all. ||13]|
3d ga faan viftrs I (1077-13, wg, H 5) dar chookay binsay anDhi-aaray. Fear has been removed, and darkness has been dispelled.
yae se ys use fears Il (1077-14, wg, He 5) pargat bha-ay parabh purakh niraaray. The all-powerful, primal, detached Lord God has been revealed.
nity efs ue Ageret fan ar AT SA wrear ISI (1077-14, Hg, He 5) aap chhod pa-ay sarnaa-ee jis kaa saa tis ghaalnaa. ||14|| Forsaking self-conceit, I have entered His Sanctuary, and I work for Him. ||14]|
MAT ot SSarait mire it (1077-14, wg, He 5) aisaa ko vadbhaagee aa-i-aa. Rare are those few, very blessed people, who come into the world,
mite ude fats WAY fororfenr I (1077-15, wg, 8 5) aath pahar jin khasam Dhi-aa-i-aa. and meditate on their Lord and Master, twenty-four hours a day.
fsH Ho & Afar 3d AS act A users AUIS WAUII (1077-15, Hg, He 5) tis jan kai sang tarai sabh ko-ee so parvaar saDhaaranaa. ||15]||
Associating with such humble people, all are saved, and their families are saved as well. ||15]|
fea aunt YAH S UTS Il (1077-16, Hg, 48 5) in bakhsees khasam tay paavaa. This is the blessing which I have received from my Lord and Master.
mS ude ae fs fomrer it (1077-16, wg, He 5) aath pahar kar jorh Dhi-aavaa. Twenty-four hours a day, with my palms pressed together, I meditate on Him.
on Aut oft Haft ANTS" OH Boa FHS Bogart AEN UE (1077-16, Hg, He 5)
naam japee naam sahj samaavaa naam naanak milai uchaaranaa. ||16||1]|6]|
I chant the Naam, and through the Naam, I intuitively merge into the Lord; O Nanak, may I be blessed with the Naam, and ever repeat it. ||16||1||6]|
HTT HIG U Il (1077-17)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Hats ef o IS ASI I (1077-17, wg, He 5) soorat daykh na bhool gavaaraa. Do not be fooled by appearances, you fool.
fas Hava" SS UATS Il (1077-18, wg, He 5) mithan mohaaraa jhooth pasaaraa. This is a false attachment to the expanse of an illusion.
na Hf act se o ue fogue Sa orafe|sr AU (1077-18, wg, He 5) jag meh ko-ee rahan na paa-ay nihchal ayk naaraa-inaa. ||1|| No one can remain in this world; only the One Lord is permanent and unchanging.
[2
Ts us at uS Agere Il (1077-19, wg, ve 5) gur pooray kee pa-o sarnaa-ee. Seek the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru.
Hg Aa As san fevet il (1077-19, wg, v2 5) moh sog sabh bharam mitaa-ee. He shall eradicate all emotional attachment, sorrow and doubt.
Sa HZ fers mBug Ag oy foe afeer iM (1077-19, wg, v2 5)
ayko mantar drirh-aa-ay a-ukhaDh sach naam rid gaa-inaa. ||2| |
He shall administer the medicine, the Mantra of the One Name. Sing the True Name within your heart. ||2] |
Yat 9odt
fan oH AG SaAfs sg SS Il (1078-1, wg, He 5) jis naamai ka-o tarseh baho dayvaa. So many gods yearn for the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ads Sas A at Ade AST il (1078-1, wg, ve 5) sagal bhagat jaa kee karday sayvaa. All the devotees serve Him.
noe arg dig eu SAO A Ts us 3 usar Sil (1078-1, wg, Hs 5)
anaathaa naath deen dukh bhanjan so gur pooray tay paa-inaa. ||3]|
He is the Master of the masterless, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor. His Name is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
dg worst ate & AS Il (1078-2, wg, 48 5) hor du-aaraa ko-ay na soojhai. I cannot conceive of any other door.
fgsee we 3 fas & FS Il (1078-2, wg, Hs 5) taribhavan Dhaavai taa kichhoo na boojhai. One who wanders through the three worlds, understands nothing.
Afsag Ag Sag oH fan feg ase fSA 3 ufeS Ie (1078-3, wg, He 5)
satgur saahu bhandaar naam jis ih ratan tisai tay paa-inaa. ||4]|
The True Guru is the banker, with the treasure of the Naam. This jewel is obtained from Him. ||4]|
mW at ofs ad YSIS Il (1078-3, wg, He 5) jaa kee Dhoor karay puneetaa. The dust of His feet purifies.
Afg ad te 3 uefa HIST Il (1078-3, wg, H8 5) sur nar dayv na paavahi meetaa. Even the angelic beings and gods cannot obtain it, O friend.
Afs usu Afsag ushAg fan ses ute usfe|r ull (1078-4, wg, He 5)
sat purakh satgur parmaysar jis bhaytat paar paraa-inaa. ||5] |
The True Guru is the True Primal Being, the Transcendent Lord God; meeting with Him, one is carried across to the other side. ||5||
ursarg Bafa He fimrs it 1078-4, wg, He 5) paarjaat lorheh man pi-aaray. O my beloved mind, if you wish for the 'tree of life’;
aHug Adt Faas Il (1078-5, wg, ue 5) kaamDhayn sohee darbaaray. if you wish for Kaamadhayna, the wish-fulfilling cow to adorn your court;
fgufs A3y AS TT us oH ante sAeSr Ell (1078-5, wg, Hs 5)
taripat santokh sayvaa gur pooray naam kamaa-ay rasaa-inaa. ||6||
if you wish to be satisfied and contented, then serve the Perfect Guru, and practice the Naam, the source of nectar. ||6]||
Gs & Hate Hats Us WS Ml (1078-5, wg, He 5) gur kai sabad mareh panch Dhaatoo. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the five thieves of desire are conquered.
3 USAIN deta fesHer F Il (1078-6, wg, Hs 5) bhai paarbarahm hoveh nirmalaa too. In the Fear of the Supreme Lord God, you shall become immaculate and pure.
USA Wa Se TT UT St ura usta fewfear WOM 1078-6, wg, Hs 5)
paaras jab bhaytai gur pooraa taa paaras paras dikhaa-inaa. ||7]||
When one meets the Perfect Guru, the Philosopher's Stone, His touch reveals the Lord, the Philosopher's Stone. ||7]||
at FAS SS GS Beak | 1078-7, wg, ue 5) ka-ee baikunth naahee lavai laagay. Myriads of heavens do not equal the Lord's Name.
Hafs aust st famirat fsnirat il 1078-7, wg, us 5) mukat bapurhee bhee gi-aanee ti-aagay. The spiritually wise forsake mere liberation.
Saag Afsas 3 ub 3G afs af ae warts ci (1078-7, wg, He 5)
aykankaar satgur tay paa-ee-ai ha-o bal bal gur darsaa-inaa. ||8||
The One Universal Creator Lord is found through the True Guru. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||8] |
Gd at As o WS AEet I 1078-8, wg, ue 5) gur kee sayv na jaanai ko-ee. No one knows how to serve the Guru.
TI USAIN mage At | (1078-8, wg, us 5) gur paarbarahm agochar so-ee. The Guru is the unfathomable, Supreme Lord God.
fan 6 ofe we A Aza fan esa HefeSr CI (1078-9, wg, He 5)
jis no laa-ay la-ay so sayvak jis vadbhaag mathaa-inaa. ||9||
He alone is the Guru's servant, whom the Guru Himself links to His service, and upon whose forehead such blessed destiny is inscribed. ||9]|
Od At HfgH" Fe o ArSfg Il (1078-9, wg, ws 5) gur kee mahimaa bayd na jaaneh. Even the Vedas do not know the Guru's Glory.
3e HS Afe Afe surefa Il (1078-10, wg, Hs 5) tuchh maat sun sun vakaaneh. They narrate only a tiny bit of what is heard.
UTsqoH nudud Afsad far frnes He Atsefe|sr AON! (1078-10, wg, He 5) paarbarahm aprampar satgur jis simrat man seetlaa-inaa. ||10]||
The True Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Incomparable One; meditating in remembrance on Him, the mind is cooled and soothed. ||10]||
Ww at Af Wat He AI II 1078-11, wg, He 5) jaa kee so-ay sunee man jeevai. Hearing of Him, the mind comes to life.
fae SA st Ser ats Il (1078-11, wg, ue 5) ridai vasai taa thandhaa theevai. When He dwells within the heart, one becomes peaceful and cool.
Gg Hug were st Ast ure fSH AH & Ufa o ufeSr AA (1078-11, wg, He 5)
gur mukhahu alaa-ay taa sobhaa paa-ay tis jam kai panth na paa-inaa. ||11]| Chanting the Guru's Name with the mouth, one obtains glory, and does not have to walk on the Path of Death. ||11]|
Azo at Aaeret ufsor il (1078-12, wg, He 5) santan kee sarnaa-ee parhi-aa. I have entered the Sanctuary of the Saints,
AMG yrs Ug wit Ufamr tl (1078-12, wg, Hs 5) jee-o paraan Dhan aagai Dhari-aa. and placed before them my soul, my breath of life and wealth.
Az Hots 6 Arat avet SH aag elenr fagHfeEar 92 (1078-12, wg, He 5) sayvaa Surat na jaanaa kaa-ee tum karahu da-i-aa kirmaa-inaa. ||12|| I know nothing about service and awareness; please take pity upon this worm. ||12||
fosae a Aft SI THES Il (1078-13, wg, us 5) nirgun ka-o sang layho ralaa-ay. I am unworthy; please merge me into Yourself.
af fasur Hf fas BE Il (1078-13, wg, ue 5) kar kirpaa mohi tahlai laa-ay. Please bless me with Your Grace, and link me to Your service.
ut 2a ulnG As ord vee of AY uUfe|Sr ISI (1078-14, Wg, He 5)
pakhaa fayra-o peesa-o sant aagai charan Dho-ay sukh paa-inaa. ||13]|
I wave the fan, and grind the corn for the Saints; washing their feet, I find peace. [|13]|
agg our oft sfh mrfenr i (1078-14, wg, He 5) bahut du-aaray bharam bharam aa-i-aa. After wandering around at so many doors, I have come to Yours, O Lord.
SHot fgur 3 SH AgetfEnr | (1078-15, wg, He 5) tumree kirpaa tay tum sarnaa-i-aa. By Your Grace, I have entered Your Sanctuary.
He" Het HSd Af Tag SI SH Ve Serfear IV 1078-15, wg, He 5)
Sadaa sadaa santeh sang raakho ayhu naam daan dayvaa-inaa. ||14||
Forever and ever, keep me in the Company of the Saints; please bless me with this Gift of Your Name. ||14||
se fours TAEt AT Il 1078-16, wg, Hs 5) bha-ay kirpaal gusaa-ee mayray. My World-Lord has become merciful,
Tan Ufeor AfsaIs UT Il (1078-16, Hg, H2 5) darsan paa-i-aa satgur pooray. and I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Perfect True Guru.
AY Ade Aer MSS BSA VA SATE|S WAND! (1078-16, HTg, H8 5)
sookh sahj sadaa aanandaa naanak daas dasaa-inaa. ||15||2||7]|| I have found eternal peace, poise and bliss; Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. 25] /2|171|
Hg AGI HIG U (1078-18)
maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solahas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas yrrfe I (1078-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fans Uast nig wTaTAT II (1078-19, wg, He 5)
simrai Dhartee ar aakaasaa. The earth and the Akaashic ethers meditate in remembrance.
fruafs Fe ASA TESA Il (1078-19, wg, He 5) simrahi chand sooraj guntaasaa. The moon and the sun meditate in remembrance on You, O treasure of virtue.
u@ze urat SH30 fiefs fs Fares Cursror Il (1078-19, Hg, He 5)
pa-un paanee baisantar simrahi simrai sagal upaarjanaa. ||1|| Air, water and fire meditate in remembrance. All creation meditates in remembrance.
[11
ust IoDK fanafa as che Afs Bur i (1079-1, wg, us 5)
simrahi khand deep sabh lo-aa. All the continents, islands and worlds meditate in remembrance.
fayefa uses uso AE Ar Il (1079-1, wg, He 5) simrahi paataal puree-aa sach so-aa. The nether worlds and spheres meditate in remembrance on that True Lord.
ffuHots urat fayate arat fate Aas Ts AST MQM 079-2, wg, Hs 5)
simrahi khaanee simrahi banee simrahi saglay har janaa. ||2|| The sources of creation and speech meditate in remembrance; all the Lord's humble servants meditate in remembrance. ||2||
fats yaH fare HIAT Il (1079-2, wg, He 5) simrahi barahmay bisan mahaysaa. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva meditate in remembrance.
fanafs tes afs SSH I (1079-3, wg, 2 5) simrahi dayvtay korh tayteesaa. The three hundred thirty million gods meditate in remembrance.
fanafs afy t3 Afs fanefs wares 3 Wet AA ST ISI (1079-3, wg, Hs 5)
simrahi jakh-y dait sabh simrahi agnat na jaa-ee jas ganaa. ||3]|
The titans and demons all meditate in remembrance; Your Praises are uncountable - they cannot be counted. ||3]|
fryoafo un udt Afs FST Il (1079-4, wg, He 5) simrahi pas pankhee sabh bhootaa. All the beasts, birds and demons meditate in remembrance.
fAnsts aa uTas MUST I (1079-4, wg, He 5) simrahi ban parbat a-uDhootaa. The forests, mountains and hermits meditate in remembrance.
ost wet Ad AS fAHets ofe dont ATH AS HoT ISI (1079-4, wg, He 5)
lataa balee saakh sabh simrahi rav rahi-aa su-aamee sabh manaa. ||4||
All the vines and branches meditate in remembrance; O my Lord and Master, You are permeating and pervading all minds. ||4]|
frHafa 3% AM Afs AST Il (1079-5, wg, He 5) simrahi thool sookham sabh jantaa. All beings, both subtle and gross, meditate in remembrance.
fants fio rrfoe afs HST I (1079-5, wg, He 5) simrahi siDh saaDhik har manntaa. The Siddhas and seekers meditate in remembrance on the Lord's Mantra.
aus ya] fAHafs ys He Aas SSH AT YS UST MUI (1079-6, wg, He 5)
gupat pargat simrahi parabh mayray sagal bhavan kaa parabh Dhanaa. ||5||
Both the visible and the invisible meditate in remembrance on my God; God is the Master of all worlds. ||5]|
frHats SF Std MIMATHT Il (1079-6, wg, HB 5) simrahi nar naaree aasramaa. Men and women, throughout the four stages of life, meditate in remembrance on You.
fanafs fs afs Afs eaar Il (1079-6, wg, He 5) simrahi jaat jot sabh varnaa. All social classes and souls of all races meditate in remembrance on You.
fanefs wet va Afs 83 firefa Sat nig fear Well 079-7, wg, He 5)
simrahi gunee chatur sabh baytay simrahi rainee ar dinaa. ||6||
All the virtuous, clever and wise people meditate in remembrance; night and day meditate in remembrance. ||6] |
fAnats wat Hos ues fore Il (1079-7, wg, He 5) simrahi gharhee moorat pal nimkhaa. Hours, minutes and seconds meditate in remembrance.
fae are nies Afs HET I (1079-8, Wg, Hs 5) simrai kaal akaal such sochaa. Death and life, and thoughts of purification, meditate in remembrance.
fants ABS AAS Aner niey o wdba fea frat DI (1079-8, ng, He 5)
simrahi sa-un saastar sanjogaa alakh na lakhee-ai ik khinaa. ||7]||
The Shaastras, with their lucky signs and joinings, meditate in remembrance; the invisible cannot be seen, even for an instant. ||7]|
AIO ATO Hot Il (4079-9, HTT, H8 5) karan karaavanhaar su-aamee. The Lord and Master is the Doer, the Cause of causes.
Aas Wet X nisaAMHT Il (1079-9, wg, He 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts.
afs fasur far sast oeg HOH ues A fAer ICI (1079-9, wg, He 5)
kar kirpaa jis bhagtee laavhu janam padaarath so jinaa. ||8]||
That person, whom You bless with Your Grace, and link to Your devotional service, wins this invaluable human life. ||8]|
W a His FS" YF MUS" Il (1079-10, wg, Hs 5) jaa kai man voothaa parabh apnaa. He, within whose mind God dwells,
Us ASH TI A AY AUS Il (1079-10, wg, wz 5) poorai karam gur kaa jap japnaa. has perfect karma, and chants the Chant of the Guru.
Aaa fadats A ug AS agfs o Hat Saf TST WEN (1079-11, wg, He 5)
sarab nirantar so parabh jaataa bahurh na jonee bharam runaa. ||9| |
One who realizes God pervading deep within all, does not wander crying in reincarnation again. ||9||
Gs oe Hae SA vfs A a il TY SIS FH I A Sa I (1079-11, wg, us 5) gur kaa sabad vasai man jaa kai. dookh darad bharam taa kaa bhaagai.
Pain, sorrow and doubt run away from that one, within whose mind the Word of the Guru's Shabad abides.
HY AoA MSS SH IA Mode Aet AIA Tar IAOMl (1079-12, wg, 8 5)
sookh sahj aanand naam ras anhad banee sahj Dhunaa. ||10]|
Intuitive peace, poise and bliss come from the sublime essence of the Naam; the unstruck sound current of the Guru's Bani intuitively vibrates and resounds. ||10]|
A uses" fafs ys forfemr i 079-13, wg, ue 5) so Dhanvantaa jin parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa. He alone is wealthy, who meditates on God.
A ufsdest fafs Arona urfemr 1 (1079-13, wg, He 5) SO pativantaa jin saaDhsang paa-i-aa. He alone is honorable, who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
USAT A a His Zot A YS ATH at fs" AAU (1079-13, wg, we 5)
paarbarahm jaa kai man voothaa so poor karammaa naa chhinaa. ||11]|
That person, within whose mind the Supreme Lord God abides, has perfect karma, and becomes famous. ||11]|
nfs afs Hotes Amit et 1 079-14, wg, He 5) jal thal mahee-al su-aamee so-ee. The Lord and Master is pervading the water, land and sky.
MET AIH SAT AST Il (1079-14, wg, He 5) avar na kahee-ai doojaa ko-ee. There is no other said to be so.
as fame ninfs ofeS gu Rarer mieg 3 SA Sa fast 92 (1079-15, wg, He 5)
gur gi-aan anjan kaati-o bharam saglaa avar na deesai ayk binaa. ||12||
The ointment of the Guru's spiritual wisdom has eradicated all doubts; except the One Lord, I do not see any other at all. ||12]|
Bs 3 Sor wags Il (1079-15, wg, He 5)
oochay tay oochaa darbaaraa. The Lord's Court is the highest of the high.
ATE & At nis B Urs Il (1079-16, wg, ue 5) kahan na jaa-ee ant na paaraa. His limit and extent cannot be described.
afed aste wears AMMt nie o Aret foo flat ISI (1079-16, wg, He 5)
gahir gambheer athaah su-aamee atul na jaa-ee ki-aa minaa. ||13]|
The Lord and Master is profoundly deep, unfathomable and unweighable; how can He be measured? ||13]|
3 AIS ST AG ahr It (1079-16, wg, v2 5) too kartaa tayraa sabh kee-aa. You are the Creator; all is created by You.
33 faq neg o aet shar it (1079-17, wg, ne 5) tujh bin avar na ko-ee bee-aa. Without You, there is no other at all.
unfe Hf nifs ys 3d Aas UATS JH Zar All (1079-17, wg, He 5)
aad maDh ant parabh toohai sagal pasaaraa tum tanaa. ||14||
You alone, God, are in the beginning, the middle and the end. You are the root of the entire expanse. ||14||
mHes f3H feafe s mrs Il (1079-18, og, He 5) jamdoot tis nikat na aavai. The Messenger of Death does not even approach that person
AaHfa dfs atssS AS Il (1079-18, wg, He 5)
saaDhsang har keertan gaavai.
who sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
AIS HSsa ST aA UTS A ASSNt YS A AA AST UWI (1079-18, wg, Hs 5) sagal manorath taa kay pooran jo sarvanee parabh kaa jas sunaa. ||15]|| All desires are fulfilled, for one who listens with his ears to the Praises of God. ||15]]|
3A OAS st ST I ATS AoE aos asta Il (1079-19, wg, He 5)
too sabhnaa kaa sabh ko tayraa. saachay saahib gahir gambheeraa.
You belong to all, and all belong to You, O my true, deep and profound Lord and Master.
Yat FOLO
TI HSA ASt AS SSH A sels AMM SH Hat UAENAUITH (080-1, wg, Hs 5) kaho naanak say-ee jan ootam jo bhaaveh su-aamee tum manaa. ||16]|1]|8]|
Says Nanak, those humble beings are exalted, who are pleasing to Your Mind, O my Lord and Master. ||16||1]||8]|
HTT HIG U Il (1080-1)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
Ys HHI Ada AY eS! Il (1080-1, Hg, Hs 5) parabh samrath sarab sukh daanaa. God is the almighty Giver of all peace and joy.
fans on dg firgaear I (1080-2, wg, 8 5) simra-oO naam hohu miharvaanaa. Be merciful to me, that I may meditate in remembrance on Your Name.
dfs war tha HS Sud AS se Aa AU (1080-2, wg, Hs 5)
har daataa jee-a jant bhaykhaaree jan baa‘chhai jaachangnaa. ||1||
The Lord is the Great Giver; all beings and creatures are beggars; His humble servants yearn to beg from Him. ||1]|
HAG Ao Ufs UsH ats urSS I (1080-3, wg, He 5)
maaga-o jan Dhoor param gat paava-o.
I beg for the dust of the feet of the humble, that I may be blessed with the supreme status,
HOH HOH at Hw fers i (1080-3, wg, He 5) janam janam kee mail mitaava-o. and the filth of countless lifetimes may be erased.
clay da fiefs of m@ufa ofa feaufs at Hara QI (080-3, wg, He 5)
deeragh rog miteh har a-ukhaDh har nirmal raapai mangnaa. ||2| |
The chronic diseases are cured by the medicine of the Lord's Name; I beg to be imbued with the Immaculate Lord. ||2]||
Adel HES faHs AA AMM Il c0s0-4, wg, ue 5) sarvanee suna-o bimal jas su-aamee. With my ears, I listen to the Pure Praises of my Lord and Master.
ear Ge sv fay anit il ios0-4, wg, we 5) aykaa ot taja-o bikh kaamee. With the Support of the One Lord, I have abandoned corruption, sexuality and desire.
fofe fofe ufe oa@ aA 33 afe Afas odt Hats ISI (10g0-5, wg, He 5) niv niv paa-ay laga-o daas tayray kar sukarit naahee sangnaa. ||3]|| I humbly bow and fall at the feet of Your slaves; I do not hesitate to do good deeds.
[SII
THo TE We ofa Fg il 10g0-5, wg, us 5) rasnaa gun gaavai har tayray. O Lord, with my tongue I sing Your Glorious Praises.
fefs SHS nieTe AT Il (1080-6, wg, w3 5) miteh kamaatay avgun mayray. The sins which I have committed are erased.
frnfe fants Aomit He Ale Us gs Shr Saat sil (1os0-6, wg, we 5)
simar simar Su-aamee man jeevai panch doot taj tangnaa. ||4||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my Lord and Master, my mind lives; I am rid of the five oppressive demons. ||4||
3do aHS fu sfafa gdm It (1080-7, wg, ue 5) charan kamal jap bohith charee-ai. Meditating on Your lotus feet, I have come aboard Your boat.
AsAfa fife Aras Sd i os0-7, wg, ue 5) satsang mil saagar taree-ai. Joining the Society of the Saints, I cross over the world-ocean.
wee dee dfs ANS fosat wats Afs 3 Saar WUll (1080-7, wg, He 5)
archaa bandan har samat nivaasee baahurh jon na nangnaa. ||5||
My flower-offering and worship is to realize that the Lord is dwelling alike in all; I shall not be reincarnated naked again. ||5||
DA THO & afs SI TUS Il (1080-8, wg, ve 5) daas daasan ko kar layho gopaalaa. Please make me the slave of Your slaves, O Lord of the world.
four fears ate fener il ci0so-8, wg, we 5) kirpaa niDhaan deen da-i-aalaa. You are the treasure of Grace, merciful to the meek.
Aa Fovet uss USHAS fee ae B Tet FATS WEI (1080-9, wg, Hs 5)
sakhaa sahaa-ee pooran parmaysur mil kaday na hovee bhangnaa. ||6| |
Meet with your companion and helper, the Perfect Transcendent Lord God; you shall never be separated from Him again. ||6]||
He 36 mafu udt afs mia I (1080-9, wg, He 5) man tan arap Dharee har aagai. I dedicate my mind and body, and place them in offering before the Lord.
HOH ASH a Afenr Ard Il (1080-10, wg, He 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaagai. Asleep for countless lifetimes, I have awakened.
fan or AT Het yfsursa ofS surat IBA Isat WI (1080-10, wg, He 5)
jis kaa saa so-ee partipaalak hat ti-aagee ha-umai hantnaa. ||7]||
He, to whom I belong, is my cherisher and nurturer. I have killed and discarded my murderous self-conceit. ||7]|
rife ofS uss Misa I cogo-11, wg, 2 5) jal thal pooran antarjaamee. The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is pervading the water and the land.
ufe ufe sfent wise Avimt il (i0s0-11, wg, He 5) ghat ghat ravi-aa achhal su-aamee. The undeceivable Lord and Master is permeating each and every heart.
33H sis det afs us Sa sfeor AasaS ITI (1080-11, wg, He 5)
bharam bheet kho-ee gur poorai ayk ravi-aa sarbangnaa. ||8||
The Perfect Guru has demolished the wall of doubt, and now I see the One Lord pervading everywhere. ||8]|
AS as UN ys AY Are Il (1080-12, wg, us 5) jat kat paykha-o parabh sukh saagar. Wherever I look, there I see God, the ocean of peace.
ofa Sfe ara BS TTS Il (1080-12, wg, ve 5) har tot bhandaar naahee ratnaagar. The Lord's treasure is never exhausted; He is the storehouse of jewels.
mad mars fos fufs odt urea A as fAA fsiarsr WI (1080-13, +g, He 5)
agah agaah kichh mit nahee paa-ee-ai so boojhai jis kirpangnaa. ||9]|
He cannot be seized; He is inaccessible, and His limits cannot be found. He is realized when the Lord bestows His Grace. ||9]|
SSt ASG HS 3S SST Il (1080-13, wg, Hs 5) chhaatee seetal man tan thandhaa. My heart is cooled, and my mind and body are calmed and soothed.
HOH Hae at fest SS I (1080-14, wg, us 5) janam maran kee mitvee danjhaa. The craving for birth and death is quenched.
ag afs ofe se ufs nud wif ofs ferzarer doll (1080-14, wg, Hs 5)
kar geh kaadh lee-ay parabh apunai ami-o Dhaar daristangnaa. ||10]|
Grasping hold of my hand, He has lifted me up and out; He has blessed me with His Ambrosial Glance of Grace. ||10] |
Sa Sa sfenr AS set Il (1080-15, wg, us 5) ayko ayk ravi-aa sabh thaa-ee. The One and Only Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.
fH fas TAT Ket Bra Il (1080-15, wg, He 5) tis bin doojaa ko-ee naahee. There is none other than Him at all.
uife ufo nifs yg sfenr fSAS gst Saas AAI (1080-15, wg, Hs 5)
aad maDh ant parabh ravi-aa tarisan bujhee bharmangnaa. ||11]||
God permeates the beginning, the middle and the end; He has subdued my desires and doubts. ||11]|
TI USAR Ts AfFE | (1080-16, we, us 5) gur parmaysar gur gobind. The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, the Guru is the Lord of the Universe.
TI AIS" WT AE AYAS Il (1080-16, wg, we 5) gur kartaa gur sad bakhsand. The Guru is the Creator, the Guru is forever forgiving.
qe wu wf wus ee ufenr fame chug AS Agar iAil (1080-16, wg, He 5)
gur jap jaap japat fal paa-i-aa gi-aan deepak sant sangnaa. ||12||
Meditating, chanting the Guru's Chant, I have obtained the fruits and rewards; in the Company of the Saints, I have been blessed with the lamp of spiritual wisdom. ||12]|
A ue A Ag fae AMmt Il c1080-17, +g, He 5) jo paykhaa so sabh kichh su-aamee. Whatever I see, is my Lord and Master God.
A Hos! A ys at arat Il (1080-17, wg, ne 5)
jo sunnaa so parabh kee baanee. Whatever I hear, is the Bani of God's Word.
A até A gnfo ates Aaf= AIT HST Jar ISI (1080-18, wg, He 5)
jo keeno so tumeh karaa-i-o saran sahaa-ee santeh tanaa. ||13]|
Whatever I do, You make me do; You are the Sanctuary, the help and support of the Saints, Your children. ||13]|
Wsa AS SHfs wig | (1080-18, wg, Hs 5) jaachak jaachai tumeh araaDhai. The beggar begs, and worships You in adoration.
ufss USS UTS YS A Il (1080-19, wg, Hs 5) patit paavan pooran parabh saaDhai. You are the Purifier of the sinners, O Perfectly Holy Lord God.
Sa we Asa AY Te fafa ure Hae feafetsar 9811 C1o80-19, wg, He 5)
ayko daan sarab sukh gun niDh aan mangan nihkinchnaa. ||14]|
Please bless me with this one gift, O treasure of all bliss and virtue; I do not ask for anything else. ||14] |
UST AOL
afenr uy Ys ATSIT | (1081-1, 47g, H2 5) kaa-i-aa paatar parabh karnaihaaraa. God is the Creator of the body-vessel.
wait wat AS Aas Il (iosi-1, wg, we 5) lagee laag sant sangaaraa. In the Society of the Saints, the dye is produced.
foane Afe sat afs aret He of HATS Farar WAU Cosi-1, wg, He 5)
nirmal so-ay banee har banee man naam majeethai rangnaa. ||15]|
Through the Word of the Lord's Bani, one's reputation becomes immaculate, and the mind is colored by the dye of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||15]|
ABI TS AYTS Slew Il (1081-2, wg, we 5) solah kalaa sampooran fali-aa. The sixteen powers, absolute perfection and fruitful rewards are obtained,
nos oer dfe sag afsmr i cosi-2, wg, ue 5) anat kalaa ho-ay thaakur charhi-aa. when the Lord and Master of infinite power is revealed.
nod fase ofs oft AY coe nifys oA ofs Sear NAENQUNEN Ciosi-2, wg, He 5) anad binod har naam sukh naanak amrit ras har bhunchanaa. ||16||2||9]|
The Lord's Name is Nanak's bliss, play and peace; he drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord. ||16]|2]|9]|
Hg AGT HIG U 1081-4)
maaroo solhay mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Solhas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsaa urfe il (081-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 Aga IG Aeq AST Il (1081-5, wg, He 5) too saahib ha-o sayvak keetaa. You are my Lord and Master; You have made me Your servant.
Me fis AS Sa SST I (iosi-5, wg, He 5) jee-o pind sabh tayraa deetaa. My soul and body are all gifts from You.
TIS ATS AF 3d 3d FT ara fas MAS WAU (1081-5, wg, Hs 5) karan karaavan sabh toohai toohai hai naahee kichh asaarhaa. ||1]|| You are the Creator, the Cause of causes; nothing belongs to me. ||1]|
Suis use St Hat Ha mS Il (1081-6, wg, He 5) tumeh pathaa-ay taa jag meh aa-ay. When You sent me, I came into the world.
ft 30 Sa! A AGH AHS Il (1081-6, wg, He 5) jo tuDh bhaanaa say karam kamaa-ay. Whatever is pleasing to Your Will, I do.
33 3 wats fag 5 Ion T St aa fas AS INI cosi-6, wg, ws 5) tujh tay baahar kichhoo na ho-aa taa bhee naahee kichh kaarhaa. ||2|| Without You, nothing is done, so I am not anxious at all. ||2| |
Ox TAH SHI AEM Il (1081-7, wg, He 5) oohaa hukam tumaaraa sunee-ai. In the world hereafter, the Hukam of Your Command is heard.
ete fs aA Sa gem | 1081-7, wg, Hs 5) eehaa har jas tayraa bhanee-ai. In this world, I chant Your Praises, Lord.
nny BY mse um SH fAG art fas svar USI Ciosi-7, wg, He 5) aapay laykh alaykhai aapay tum si-o naahee kichh jhaarhaa. ||3]| You Yourself write the account, and You Yourself erase it; no one can argue with You.
SII 3 fust vfs aise arg I (1o8i-8, wg, H8 5)
too pitaa sabh baarik thaaray. You are our father; we are all Your children.
fA@ darefs (3G YwETST Il cosi-g, wg, ws 5) ji-o khaylaaveh ti-o khaylanhaaray. We play as You cause us to play.
@ss Hed AZ 3H dt ator Vs |S A Suse Vil ciosi-9, wg, ws 5) ujharh maarag sabh tum hee keenaa chalai naahee ko vaypaarhaa. ||4||
The wilderness and the path are all made by You. No one can take the wrong path. [141]
fefa Safe oe fas uista i cosi-9, wg, ue 5) ik baisaa-ay rakhay garih antar. Some remain seated within their homes.
fefa uere 2H ferste Il (osi-10, wg, He 5) ik pathaa-ay days disantar. Some wander across the country and through foreign lands.
fea dt a wy fea dt a oar fea nfs adit far gar ull cosi-10, wg, 3 5) ik hee ka-o ghaas ik hee ka-o raajaa in meh kahee-ai ki-aa koorhaa. ||5]| Some are grass-cutters, and some are kings. Who among these can be called false?
[5] |
as A HaASt ALS A SAAT Il (1081-11, wg, He 5) kavan so muktee kavan so narkaa. Who is liberated, and who will land in hell?
azo AAS Ao A SAS Il (1081-11, wg, ne 5) kavan saisaaree kavan so bhagtaa. Who is worldly, and who is a devotee?
Ato H Wal ASG A Je’ ASS HW AIS ASH AS EM (1081-11, wg, us 5) kavan so daanaa kavan so hochhaa kavan so surtaa kavan jarhaa. ||6|| Who is wise, and who is shallow? Who is aware, and who is ignorant? ||6] |
JAH Hast JAH SAAT I (1081-12, wg, He 5)
hukmay muktee hukmay narkaa.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, one is liberated, and by His Hukam, one falls into hell.
gath AAS JAH Sas Il (1osi-12, wg, ve 5) hukam saisaaree hukmay bhagtaa. By His Hukam, one is worldly, and by His Hukam, one is a devotee.
TAH Tet JAH VWSt TA BS msg TAT MDI (1osi-12, wg, ws 5)
hukmay hochhaa hukmay daanaa doojaa naahee avar Dharhaa. ||7||
By His Hukam, one is shallow, and by His Hukam, one is wise. There is no other side except His. ||7]|
Arag ater ifs SH Sta Il (1081-13, wg, ue 5) Saagar keenaa at tum bhaaraa. You made the ocean vast and huge.
fefa us sATSfe afs HOHY area | (1081-13, wg, He 5) ik kharhay rasaatal kar manmukh gaavaaraa. You made some into foolish self-willed manmukhs, and dragged them into hell.
feast ufg Surefs wm Afsarg fas at A SST ICH Cosi-14, wg, Hs 5) iknaa paar langhaaveh aapay satgur jin kaa sach bayrhaa. ||8]| Some are carried across, in the ship of Truth of the True Guru. ||8]|
a@saq are feg gafh uatfenr Il (1081-14, wg, He 5) ka-utak kaal ih hukam pathaa-i-aa. You issue Your Command for this amazing thing, death.
ba #3 Gurfe Ayer | (iosi-15, wg, He 5) jee-a jant opaa-ay samaa-i-aa. You create all beings and creatures, and absorb them back into Yourself.
au fear Afs da He Jaq ator fea wirarar EI (1081-15, wg, He 5) vaykhai vigsai sabh rang maanay rachan keenaa ik aakhaarhaa. ||9|| You gaze in delight upon the one arena of the world, and enjoy all the pleasures. ||9]|
zat AoE Zt ST Il (1081-16, wg, He 5) vadaa saahib vadee naa-ee. Great is the Lord and Master, and Great is His Name.
Ss wag sat fan AT Il (1081-16, wg, Hs 5) vad daataar vadee jis jaa-ee. He is the Great Giver; Great is His place.
Wa nidias Anis vised ordt fas maser IAOll (1081-16, wg, He 5)
agam agochar bay-ant atolaa hai naahee kichh aahaarhaa. ||10||
He is inaccessible and unfathomable, infinite and unweighable. He cannot be measureed. ||10||
SHS af & AE SA Il (1081-17, wg, Hs 5) keemat ko-ay na jaanai doojaa. No one else knows His value.
mina nitty fost UAT I (1081-17, Hg, 8 5) aapay aap niranjan poojaa. Only You Yourself, O Immaculate Lord, are equal to Yourself.
nif A farmrat orfu fomrat orf Aseat ofS ara AAU (1081-17, wg, He 5)
aap so gi-aanee aap Dhi-aanee aap satvantaa at gaarhaa. ||11]|| You Yourself are the spiritual teacher, You Yourself are the One who meditates. You Yourself are the great and immense Being of Truth. ||11]]|
astaur fes qugs aofenr i (iosi-1s, wg, He 5) kayt-rhi-aa din gupat kahaa-i-aa. For so many days, You remained invisible.
astsur fee Afs AHEM II (osi-18, wg, He 5) kayt-rhi-aa din sunn samaa-i-aa. For so many days, You were absorbed in silent absorption.
astaur fea Ugara nm} AIST UTAEST AI (1081-19, wy, He 5)
kayt-rhi-aa din DnhunDhookaaraa aapay kartaa pargatrhaa. ||12||
For so many days, there was only pitch darkness, and then the Creator revealed Himself. ||12]|
nm AaSt AAS AT Eni | (10si-19, wg, ws 5) aapay saktee sabal kahaa-i-aa. You Yourself are called the God of Supreme Power.
Yat YOLI
mnt AS Mg Been ih (1082-1, wg, we 5) aapay sooraa amar chalaa-i-aa. You Yourself are the hero, exerting Your regal power.
ning fre zaseinig nists nm ASS Sg TS WISI (1082-1, wg, He 5) aapay siv vartaa-ee-an antar aapay seetal thaar garhaa. ||13]| You Yourself spread peace within; You are cool and icy calm. ||13]|
fanfs foes aaHfa ATA II (1082-2, xg, He 5) jisahi nivaajay gurmukh saajay. One whom You bless and make Gurmukh
OU SA fH wlode SA Il (1082-2, wg, He 5) naam vasai tis anhad vaajay. - the Naam abides within him, and the unstruck sound current vibrates for him.
fsn dt ny fSH dt oaaet fsnfs o mre AH SST IAI (1082-2, 7g, He 5)
tis hee sukh tis hee thakuraa-ee tiseh na aavai jam nayrhaa. ||14]|
He is peaceful, and he is the master of all; the Messenger of Death does not even approach him. ||14]|
Hts aa adt & AT Il (1082-3, wg, He 5)
keemat kaagad kahee na jaa-ee. His value cannot be described on paper.
AT SSA Mis TATEt | (1082-3, wg, us 5) kaho naanak bay-ant gusaa-ee. Says Nanak, the Lord of the world is infinite.
uife nfo nifs ys Aet ofa fA & SAS UI (1082-3, wg, Hs 5)
aad maDh ant parabh so-ee haath tisai kai naybayrhaa. ||15]|
In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, God exists. Judgement is in His Hands alone. ||15]]|
fsrfa Acta ardt FJ tet | 1082-4, wg, ue 5) tiseh sareek naahee ray ko-ee. No one is equal to Him.
fan dt 33 FAS Tet I (1082-4, wg, He 5) kis hee butai jabaab na ho-ee. No one can stand up against Him by any means.
set a ug nmi nm af afe Sa SA MST NIENAUIAO! (1082-5, wg, Hs 5)
naanak kaa parabh aapay aapay kar kar vaykhai choj kharhaa. ||16||1]|10]| Nanak's God is Himself all-in-all. He creates and stages and watches His wondrous plays. ||16]]1]|10]|
HTT HIG U Il (1082-5)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
MES USYIH USHAS visa Il (1082-6, wg, He 5)
achut paarbarahm parmaysur antarjaamee.
The Supreme Lord God is imperishable, the Transcendent Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
HOHES SHES AMM Il (1082-6, wg, Hz 5) maDhusoodan daamodar su-aamee. He is the Slayer of demons, our Supreme Lord and Master.
fader deaas dt Hast HOTE fe Far Al (1082-6, wg, He 5)
rikheekays govarDhan Dhaaree murlee manohar har rangaa. ||1||
The Supreme Rishi, the Master of the sensory organs, the uplifter of mountains, the joyful Lord playing His enticing flute. ||1]|
Hos HUGS fAA HST Il (1082-7, wy, He 5) mohan maaDhav krisan muraaray. The Enticer of Hearts, the Lord of wealth, Krishna, the Enemy of ego.
Ageia ole AIG wT Aus | (1082-7, wg, He 5) jagdeesur har jee-o asur sanghaaray. The Lord of the Universe, the Dear Lord, the Destroyer of demons.
Aantes vifsorrt Sas we we SA I Aa QI (1082-7, wg, Hs 5)
jagjeevan abhinaasee thaakur ghat ghat vaasee hai sangaa. ||2| | The Life of the World, our eternal and ever-stable Lord and Master dwells within each and every heart, and is always with us. ||2| |
usetud Str sath aratEs Il (1082-8, wg, He 5) DharneeDhar ees narsingh naaraa-in. The Support of the Earth, the man-lion, the Supreme Lord God.
oat nigh fyefy aafee | (082-8, wg, He 5) daarhaa agray paritham Dharaa-in. The Protector who tears apart demons with His teeth, the Upholder of the earth.
Te TY at Jy ATs AS dt ASt FT Yar SI (1082-9, wg, ws 5)
baavan roop kee-aa tuDh kartay sabh hee saytee hai changa. ||3]||
O Creator, You assumed the form of the pygmy to humble the demons; You are the Lord God of all. ||3]|
At ous fa gy o ster Il (1082-9, wg, He 5) saree raamchand jis roop na raykh-i-aa. You are the Great Raam Chand, who has no form or feature.
Towel VaurE Tata wigfimw it (1082-10, wg, 42 5)
banvaalee chakarpaan daras anoopi-aa.
Adorned with flowers, holding the chakra in Your hand, Your form is incomparably beautiful.
HOA 33 Hols 3 Aon fq ws AS FI Ha sil (1082-10, wg, Hs 5)
sahas naytar moorat hai sahsaa ik daataa sabh hai mangaa. ||4||
You have thousands of eyes, and thousands of forms. You alone are the Giver, and all are beggars of You. ||4]|
SUS FSS MSTAT STS Il (1082-11, wg, He 5) bhagat vachhal anaathah naathay. You are the Lover of Your devotees, the Master of the masterless.
aut ore Aas J ATE il (1082-11, wg, ue 5) gopee naath sagal hai saathay. The Lord and Master of the milk-maids, You are the companion of all.
THe fadnos ws sale 6 WAS Te via WUll (1082-11, wg, He 5)
baasudayv niranjan daatay baran na saaka-o gun angaa. ||5||
O Lord, Immacuate Great Giver, I cannot describe even an iota of Your Glorious Virtues. ||5||
Hae Hod Sut sates il (1082-12, wg, ue 5) mukand manohar lakhmee naaraa-in. Liberator, Enticing Lord, Lord of Lakshmi, Supreme Lord God.
dust om foes Barge il (1082-12, wg, Hs 5) daropatee lajaa nivaar uDhaaran. Savior of Dropadi's honor.
THIAS Tas KIS wise faset feaHar iE (1082-12, wg, vs 5) kamlaakant karahi kantoohal anad binodee nihsangaa. ||6]|| Lord of Maya, miracle-worker, absorbed in delightful play, unattached. ||6] |
mH TIAS ust ASS Il (1082-13, wg, He 5)
amogh darsan aajoonee sambha-o.
The Blessed Vision of His Darshan is fruitful and rewarding; He is not born, He is self- existent.
mas Hots fA xe ardt YS i (1082-13, wg, He 5) akaal moorat jis kaday naahee kha-o. His form is undying; it is never destroyed.
nifsort nifsas uidtes AS fee 35 dt T Bar WII (1082-14, wg, He 5) abhinaasee abigat agochar sabh kichh tujh hee hai lagaa. ||7]| O imperishable, eternal, unfathomable Lord, everything is attached to You. ||7]||
Alda Fas X SA | (1082-14, wg, ne 5) sareerang baikunth kay vaasee. The Lover of greatness, who dwells in heaven.
HE AS ASH orfom@ MSSIAT Il (1082-15, wg, He 5) machh kachh kooram aagi-aa a-utraasee. By the Pleasure of His Will, He took incarnation as the great fish and the tortoise.
ane ves acts fors ats Safa A dear ci 082-15, wg, ue 5)
kaysav chalat karahi niraalay keetaa lorheh so ho-igaa. ||8] |
The Lord of beauteous hair, the Worker of miraculous deeds, whatever He wishes, comes to pass. ||8]||
foradt faseg AntfeEmr I (1082-16, wg, He 5) niraahaaree nirvair samaa-i-aa. He is beyond need of any sustenance, free of hate and all-pervading.
wfg Ys vsdge AafEnr | (1082-16, wg, He 5) Dhaar khayl chaturbhuj kahaa-i-aa. He has staged His play; He is called the four-armed Lord.
WEG Hed Ju wereld FS ASS AS Aga ICI (1082-16, wg, ws 5)
Saaval sundar roop banaaveh bayn sunat sabh mohaigaa. ||9]|
He assumed the beautiful form of the blue-skinned Krishna; hearing His flute, all are fascinated and enticed. ||9]|
WOH fase THB SS Il (1082-17, wg, we 5) banmaalaa bibhookhan kamal nain. He is adorned with garlands of flowers, with lotus eyes.
Hed ATG HAS FS Il (1082-17, wg, ue 5) sundar kundal mukat bain. His ear-rings, crown and flute are so beautiful.
HY 3a get d ost Ho AT ASH AON (1082-17, Hg, He 5) sankh chakar gadaa hai Dhaaree mahaa saarthee satsangaa. ||10]||
He carries the conch, the chakra and the war club; He is the Great Charioteer, who stays with His Saints. ||10]||
uls ulsag fase Tat II (1082-18, wg, He 5) peet peetambar taribhavan Dhanee. The Lord of yellow robes, the Master of the three worlds.
Aaag dures uf get i (1082-18, wg, He 5) jagannaath gopaal mukh bhanee. The Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the world; with my mouth, I chant His Name.
AMfgaad saree Mow H Wes B wis ATaa AAU (1082-18, wg, He 5) saaringDhar bhagvaan beethulaa mai ganat na aavai sarbangaa. ||11]||
The Archer who draws the bow, the Beloved Lord God; I cannot count all His limbs. []11]]
feuces fosates adit Il (1082-19, wg, He 5) nihkantak nihkayval kahee-ai. He is said to be free of anguish, and absolutely immaculate.
Uon Aes af I usb i 082-19, wg, us 5) Dhananjai jal thal hai mahee-ai. The Lord of prosperity, pervading the water, the land and the sky.
Yat 9OC3
fas Ga ufeeres Atus mAfas ae faR Fo isa 92M (1083-1, Wg, Hs 5) mirat lok pa-i-aal sameepat asthir thaan jis hai abhgaa. ||12]|
He is near this world and the nether regions of the underworld; His Place is permanent, ever-stable and imperishable. ||12||
ufs3 ureo BY FS SHAG Ill (1083-1, wg, He 5) patit paavan dukh bhai bhanjan. The Purifier of sinners, the Destroyer of pain and fear.
nidars foess J TS YTS Il (1083-2, wg, He 5) aha‘kaar nivaaran hai bhav khandan. The Eliminator of egotism, the Eradicator of coming and going.
saat Sfus we feu az o fas dtd fear 193i (1083-2, wg, Hs 5)
bhagtee tokhit deen kirpaalaa gunay na kit hee hai bhigaa. ||13]|
He is pleased with devotional worship, and merciful to the meek; He cannot be appeased by any other qualities. ||13]|
fSdaTY MEG MS I (1083-3, wg, He 5) nirankaar achhal adolo. The Formless Lord is undeceivable and unchanging.
nfs Agut Ag Aa HBS Il (1083-3, wg, we 5) jot saroopee sabh jag ma-ulo. He is the Embodiment of Light; through Him, the whole world blossoms forth.
A fk@ fra urfu fore orug af& 5 urear 119811 (1083-3, 47g, He 5)
so milai jis aap milaa-ay aaphu ko-ay na paavaigaa. ||14||
He alone unites with Him, whom He unites with Himself. No one can attain the Lord by himself. ||14] |
miny arut mmd arar il (1083-4, wg, He 5) aapay gopee aapay kaanaa. He Himself is the milk-maid, and He Himself is Krishna.
mm TG TIS AST Il (1083-4, wg, He 5) aapay ga-oo charaavai baanaa. He Himself grazes the cows in the forest.
umf Gurefs urfu uurefs su Su odt fea fe Far quill 1083-4, wg, He 5)
aap upaaveh aap khapaaveh tuDh layp nahee ik til rangaa. ||15]|
You Yourself create, and You Yourself destroy. Not even a particle of filth attaches to You. ||15]|
Sa AT TS APS FATS Il (1083-5, wg, ne 5) ayk jeeh gun kavan bakhaanai. Which of Your Glorious Virtues can I chant with my one tongue?
HOA sat AY wT B AS Il (1083-5, wg, Hs 5) sahas fanee saykh ant na jaanai. Even the thousand-headed serpent does not know Your limit.
230 BH HU fes wat fea as oct us afo Har IIE! (1083-6, 7g, He 5)
navtan naam japai din raatee ik gun naahee parabh kahi sangaa. ||16]|
One may chant new names for You day and night, but even so, O God, no one can describe even one of Your Glorious Virtues. ||16]|
Ge adt was fus AgefeEmr II (1083-6, wg, He 5)
ot gahee jagat pit sarnaa-i-aa.
I have grasped the Support, and entered the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Father of the world.
3 sfenrad AHES TSe FT HEMT II (1083-7, wg, Hs 5) bhai bha-i-aanak jamdoot dutar hai maa-i-aa. The Messenger of Death is terrifying and horrendous, and sea of Maya is impassable.
dg faurs feet afs aug AG Hse & Afer Har ADI (1083-7, wg, He 5)
hohu kirpaal ichhaa kar raakho saaDh santan kai sang sangaa. ||17||
Please be merciful, Lord, and save me, if it is Your Will; please lead me to join with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||17]|
fenfents 3 Hares firedar il 083-8, wg, 48 5) daristimaan hai sagal mithaynaa. All that is seen is an illusion.
fea nrar@ ere diffe AS Far il (1083-3, wg, Hs 5) ik maaga-o daan gobid sant raynaa. I beg for this one gift, for the dust of the feet of the Saints, O Lord of the Universe.
HASfa ofe usH ug ues fan yrufs A USAT IACI (1083-8, Wg, He 5)
mastak laa-ay param pad paava-o jis paraapat so paavaigaa. ||18]|
Applying it to my forehead, I obtain the supreme status; he alone obtains it, unto whom You give it. ||18]|
fro aS four adt AYETS II (1083-9, wg, He 5) jin ka-o kirpaa karee sukh-daatay. Those, unto whom the Lord, the Giver of peace, grants His Mercy,
fae AY Bae S fee uss Il (1083-9, wg, uz 5) tin saaDhoo charan lai ridai paraatay. grasp the feet of the Holy, and weave them into their hearts.
Hae 3H fours fsa ufeor nigge Age Hfs Star AEM (1083-10, wg, He 5)
sagal naam niDhaan tin paa-i-aa anhad sabad man vaajangaa. ||19]|| They obtain all the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the unstruck sound current of the Shabad vibrates and resounds within their minds. ||19]|
fXTSH STH AG 3d fa | (1083-10, wg, He 5) kirtam naam kathay tayray jihbaa. With my tongue I chant the Names given to You.
AfS OTH Sa UT UTAH Il (1083-11, +g, He 5) sat naam tayraa paraa poorbalaa. 'Sat Naam’ is Your perfect, primal Name.
AT SSA SIS us Adael Sy PaA nfs Fa Ba Moll (1083-1, wg, Hs 5)
kaho naanak bhagat pa-ay sarnaa-ee dayh daras man rang lagaa. ||20]||
Says Nanak, Your devotees have entered Your Sanctuary. Please bestow the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; their minds are filled with love for You. ||20] |
Sat afs ffs 3d refs I 1083-12, og, we 5) tayree gat mit toohai jaaneh. You alone know Your state and extent.
3 omy aafs 3 wf erate il (1083-12, og, 48 5) too aapay katheh tai aap vakaaneh. You Yourself speak, and You Yourself describe it.
SSA BA VHS at adhag dfs HS SA TY Aa WIUIUAAI (1083-12, wg, He 5) naanak daas daasan ko karee-ahu har bhaavai daasaa raakh sangaa. ||21||2||11|| Please make Nanak the slave of Your slaves, O Lord; as it pleases Your Will, please keep him with Your slaves. ||21||2||11]|
HTT HIG U Il (1083-13)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
MSI MH YeTet FF Il (1083-13, wg, He 5) alah agam khudaa-ee banday. O slave of the inaccessible Lord God Allah,
efs fms eobor & Uo I (1083-14, wg, Hs 5) chhod khi-aal dunee-aa kay DhanDhay. forsake thoughts of worldly entanglements.
ofe U wa sole HATeg fed TILA AIH TI MAUI (1083-14, og, we 5)
ho-ay pai khaak fakeer musaafar ih darvays kabool daraa. ||1]|
Become the dust of the feet of the humble fakeers, and consider yourself a traveller on this journey. O saintly dervish, you shall be approved in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
Ag foe Wale HAST Il (1083-14, wg, He 5) sach nivaaj yakeen muslaa. Let Truth be your prayer, and faith your prayer-mat.
Hon Hite fests MITA Il (1083-15, wg, He 5) mansaa maar nivaarihu aasaa. Subdue your desires, and overcome your hopes.
2d HANS HO HVBral AGH YeTSt UT YT III (1083-15, wg, He 5)
dayh maseet man ma-ulaanaa kalam khudaa-ee paak kharaa. ||2]|
Let your body be the mosque, and your mind the priest. Let true purity be God's Word for you. ||2]|
Aa Adbats % AHST Il (1083-16, wg, we 5) Saraa saree-at lay kammaavahu. Let your practice be to live the spiritual life.
sdiafs saa fa Sureg Il (1083-16, wg, He 5) tareekat tarak khoj tolaavahu. Let your spiritual cleansing be to renounce the world and seek God.
Hels HO Hag wae fhag dolafs fas fefs o Ha SII (1083-16, Hg, He 5)
maarfat man maarahu abdaalaa milhu hakeekat jit fir na maraa. ||3]|
Let control of the mind be your spiritual wisdom, O holy man; meeting with God, you Shall never die again. ||3]|
ave asa fee ufo aH I (1083-17, wg, Hs 5) kuraan katayb dil maahi kamaahee. Practice within your heart the teachings of the Koran and the Bible;
TA UGIS Tg Fe Tat Il 1083-17, wg, we 5) das a-uraat rakhahu bad raahee. restrain the ten sensory organs from straying into evil.
Ug Hoe frefa & aug fs Aadt aIw UT Sil (1083-18, wg, He 5)
panch marad sidak lay baaDhhu khair sabooree kabool paraa. ||4||
Tie up the five demons of desire with faith, charity and contentment, and you shall be acceptable. ||4||
Hot figs SATU yar Il (1083-18, xg, He 5) makaa mihar rojaa pai khaakaa. Let compassion be your Mecca, and the dust of the feet of the holy your fast.
fang ule Sen AHS vista II (1083-19, wg, He 5) bhisat peer lafaj kamaa-ay andaajaa. Let Paradise be your practice of the Prophet's Word.
JT Od HAS yee Feat nw vio TAS WUIl (1083-19, wg, Hs 5)
hoor noor musak khudaa-i-aa bandagee alah aalaa hujraa. ||5||
God is the beauty, the light and the fragrance. Meditation on Allah is the secluded meditation chamber. ||5||
Yat YOY
Ag ante Het aati (1084-1, wg, ue 5) sach kamaavai so-ee kaajee. He alone is a Qazi, who practices the Truth.
A fee AG Het Tet I C0s4-1, wg, He 5) jo dil soDhai so-ee haajee. He alone is a Haji, a pilgrim to Mecca, who purifies his heart.
A Ho Heo foes A waen faA frefs Ter NEN (1084-1, wg, m8 5)
so mulaa mala-oon nivaarai so darvays jis sifat Dharaa. ||6]|
He alone is a Mullah, who banishes evil; he alone is a saintly dervish, who takes the Support of the Lord's Praise. ||6| |
AS wus AS af gar | waa ofe fee nfs HBr I (1084-2, wg, He 5) sabhay vakhat sabhay kar vaylaa. khaalak yaad dilai meh ma-ulaa. Always, at every moment, remember God, the Creator within your heart.
sAat fe add GA HdeS Hols Ate safe gar WDM (1084-2, wg, ue 5)
tasbee yaad karahu das mardan sunat seel banDhaan baraa. ||7| |
Let your meditation beads be the subjugation of the ten senses. Let good conduct and self-restraint be your circumcision. ||7]|
fees ufo Weg As fesse Il 1084-3, wg, us 5) dil meh jaanhu sabh filhaalaa. You must know in your heart that everything is temporary.
flrmarat Paras TH HATH Il (1084-3, wg, He 5) khilkhaanaa biraadar hamoo janjaalaa. Family, household and siblings are all entanglements.
Hig Hoa Cue softer Sa Ham yarfe Tar cI (1084-4, wg, He 5)
meer malak umray faanaa-i-aa ayk mukaam khudaa-ay daraa. ||8]|
Kings, rulers and nobles are mortal and transitory; only God's Gate is the permanent place. ||8]|
wets fiefs gat Arad Il 1084-4, wg, v2 5) aval sifat doojee saabooree. First, is the Lord's Praise; second, contentment;
St JeHt sea Bast ii c0s4-s, wg, ue 5) teejai halaymee cha-uthai khairee. third, humility, and fourth, giving to charities.
Une un feas nord Sfo uff gus 3g wRguT ICH (1084-5, wg, He 5)
punjvai panjay ikat mukaamai ayhi panj vakhat tayray aparparaa. ||9]||
Fifth is to hold one's desires in restraint. These are the five most sublime daily prayers. ||9||
Raat AS AIT HCet|r il 1084-6, wg, ws 5) saglee jaan karahu ma-udeefaa. Let your daily worship be the knowledge that God is everywhere.
Fe MHS Sfs KIT Ta AA Il (1084-6, wg, Hs 5) bad amal chhod karahu hath koojaa. Let renunciation of evil actions be the water-jug you carry.
vere eq afs Gey aot FI TIUTETT UT MAOMl (1084-6, wg, He 5)
khudaa-ay ayk bujh dayvhu baa‘gaa™ burgoo barkhurdaar kharaa. ||10]|
Let realization of the One Lord God be your call to prayer; be a good child of God - let this be your trumpet. ||10]|
JX JSG FATT UST Il (1084-7, wg, 8 5) hak halaal bakhorahu khaanaa. Let what is earned righteously be your blessed food.
fees edior@ deg Herr | (1084-7, wg, He 5) dil daree-aa-o Dhovahu mailaanaa. Wash away pollution with the river of your heart.
ulg use fanst Aet wee & SA Sa AAU (1084-7, wg, Hs 5)
peer pachhaanai bhistee so-ee ajraa-eel na doj tharaa. ||11]||
One who realizes the Prophet attains heaven. Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death, does not cast him into hell. ||11]|
fen fagend niGgs Wala Il (1084-8, wg, Hs 5) kaa-i-aa kirdaar a-urat yakeenaa. Let good deeds be your body, and faith your bride.
Ja SHA HS Tatst i (1084-8, wg, Hs 5) rang tamaasay maan hakeenaa. Play and enjoy the Lord's love and delight.
oud ug ats gets seta Aras Hats ASS fA NII (1084-9, wg, HE 5)
naapaak paak kar hadoor hadeesaa saabat soorat dastaar siraa. ||12||
Purify what is impure, and let the Lord's Presence be your religious tradition. Let your total awareness be the turban on your head. ||12||
HASHES HH fefs FS i (1084-9, wg, us 5) musalmaan mom dil hovai. To be Muslim is to be kind-hearted,
nisd at He few 3 GS Il (1084-10, wg, He 5) antar kee mal dil tay Dhovai. and wash away pollution from within the heart.
zor dao mre 33 fae aAH ue fu@ ua Tat ISI (1084-10, wg, He 5)
dunee-aa rang na aavai nayrhai ji-o kusam paat ghi-o paak haraa. ||13]|
He does not even approach worldly pleasures; he is pure, like flowers, silk, ghee and the deer-skin. ||13]|
Ww a@ fag fos fog]rsr II (1084-11, wg, He 5) jaa ka-o mihar mihar miharvaanaa. One who is blessed with the mercy and compassion of the Merciful Lord,
Het HIE HIT HIST I (1084-11, wg, He 5) so-ee marad marad mardaanaa. is the manliest man among men.
Ret Ay HAfea oat A de fA SAfs Sa NII Cos4-11, wg, He 5)
so-ee saykh masaa-ik haajee so bandaa jis najar naraa. ||14] |
He alone is a Shaykh, a preacher, a Haji, and he alone is God's slave, who is blessed with God's Grace. ||14] |
FUSS ASI ATE ATH Il (1084-12, wg, we 5) kudrat kaadar karan kareemaa. The Creator Lord has Creative Power; the Merciful Lord has Mercy.
frefs Hoafs urara THT Il (1084-12, wg, H8 5) sifat muhabat athaah raheemaa. The Praises and the Love of the Merciful Lord are unfathomable.
Ja JaH Ag uetfeor fs soa fe MOA Sa NQUIBIIM (1084-13, wg, Hs 5)
hak hukam sach khudaa-i-aa bujh naanak band khalaas taraa. ||15||3]|12||
Realize the True Hukam, the Command of the Lord, O Nanak; you shall be released from bondage, and carried across. ||15]|3]|12]|
HTT HIG U Il (1084-13)
maaroo mehlaa 5. Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
urdqan AS Gu faae i (1084-14, wg, He 5) paarbarahm sabh ooch biraajay. The Abode of the Supreme Lord God is above all.
mmy arfy Bard ATA Il (1084-14, Hg, Hs 5) aapay thaap uthaapay saajay. He Himself establishes, establishes and creates.
us at nafs aos AY ue fas 3B a fen) as ar IAI (1084-14, Hg, He 5) parabh kee saran gahat sukh paa-ee-ai kichh bha-o na vi-aapai baal kaa. ||1]|
Holding tight to the Sanctuary of God, peace is found, and one is not afflicted by the fear of Maya. ||1||
aes mate ufo faofs Cafani i Gos4-15, wg, He 5) garabh agan meh jineh ubaari-aa. He saved you from the fire of the womb,
vas fasH ufo st Aurfar il (1084-15, wg, us 5) rakat kiram meh nahee sanghaari-aa. and did not destroy you, when you were an egg in your mother's ovary.
nut frag & yfsurfeort Sy Aas Wet Ak HBA III (1084-16, wg, Hs 5)
apnaa simran day partipaali-aa oh sagal ghataa kaa maalkaa. ||2||
Blessing you with meditative remembrance upon Himself, He nurtured you and cherished you; He is the Master of all hearts. ||2||
JIE AHS Adaret nif it (1084-16, wg, us 5) charan kamal sarnaa-ee aa-i-aa. I have come to the Sanctuary of His lotus feet.
AaHfa 3 ofs AA arfemr | (1084-17, wg, Hs 5) saaDhsang hai har jas gaa-i-aa. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing the Praises of the Lord.
HOH Hee Als vy foes afu ate ofa 3B adt aS aT SN (1084-17, wg, He 5)
janam maran sabh dookh nivaaray jap har har bha-o nahee kaal kaa. ||3]|
I have erased all the pains of birth and death; meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, I have no fear of death. ||3]|
AHSE MAG Mass SST I (1084-18, wg, us 5) samrath akath agochar dayvaa. God is all-powerful, indescribable, unfathomable and divine.
fba #3 Afs St at AST il 084-18, wg, He 5)
jee-a jant sabh taa kee sayvaa. All beings and creatures serve Him.
Nise AIA ASH C3sH FT UTATS UTA III (1084-18, wg, He 5)
andaj jayraj saytaj ut-bhuj baho parkaaree paalkaa. ||4]|
In so many ways, He cherishes those born from eggs, from the womb, from sweat and from the earth. ||4| |
farfs uaufs dfs feurer il (1084-19, ug, ue 5) tiseh paraapat ho-ay niDhaanaa. He alone obtains this wealth,
TH OTH FA ists HTS Il (1084-19, Hg, He 5) raam naam ras antar maanaa. who savors and enjoys, deep within his mind, the Name of the Lord.
ag ate wes vig qu 3 fess aet Aer UII (1084-19, wg, Hs 5)
kar geh leenay anDh koop tay virlay kay-ee saalkaa. ||5||
Grasping hold of his arm, God lifts him up and pulls him out of the deep, dark pit. Such a devotee of the Lord is very rare. ||5||
ust AocU wife nif ufo ys Aet | o8s-1, ug, He 5)
aad ant maDh parabh so-ee. God exists in the beginning, in the middle and in the end.
WN] ATS AT A Tet il (1085-1, wg, ue 5) aapay kartaa karay so ho-ee. Whatever the Creator Lord Himself does, comes to pass.
3H 3@ fifeur Hona 3 wfee o tet wTSAT HEI (1085-1, Wg, Hs 5)
bharam bha-o miti-aa saaDhsang tay daalid na ko-ee ghaalkaa. ||6]|
Doubt and fear are erased, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and then one is not afflicted by deadly pain. ||6] |
OSH wat TS Turse i (1085-2, wg, we 5) ootam banee gaa-o gopaalaa. I sing the most Sublime Bani, the Word of the Lord of the Universe.
AOHats at Hag FS Il (1085-2, wg, He 5) saaDhsangat kee mangahu ravaalaa. I beg for the dust of the feet of the Saadh Sangat.
mAs Afe farAs TEbA AGH Aas AAT MDI (1085-3, wg, He 5) baasan mayt nibaasan ho-ee-ai kalmal saglay jaalkaa. ||7|| Eradicating desire, I have become free of desire; I have burnt away all my sins. ||7]|
Ast at fea dfs feast ii coss-3, wg, ve 5) santaa kee ih reet niraalee. This is the unique way of the Saints;
UTSAIH ats Tufs Sst Il (10ss-4, wg, ws 5) paarbarahm kar daykheh naalee. they behold the Supreme Lord God with them.
Afa Ata reas ofa ofe fae fas att mira HICH (085-4, wg, He 5)
Saas Saas aaraaDhan har har ki-o simrat keejai aalkaa. ||8| |
With each and every breath, they worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har. How could anyone be too lazy to meditate on Him? ||8] |
Ag Sut 3g nisaAMt i (1085-5, wg, we 5) jah daykhaa tah antarjaamee. Wherever I look, there I see the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
fou 3 feAag ys AS AMM Il cogs-5, wg, ue 5) nimakh na visrahu parabh mayray su-aamee. I never forget God, my Lord and Master, even for an instant.
frufs fants rtefo So oer afs Ale UTS AGA NCI (1085-5, Hg, He 5)
simar simar jeeveh tayray daasaa ban jal pooran thaalkaa. ||9] |
Your slaves live by meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord; You are permeating the woods, the water and the land. ||9]|
sat BE 5 3 AW Sad Il (1085-6, wg, 2 5) tatee vaa-o na taa ka-o laagai. Even the hot wind does not touch one
fres 3H Miafes ATH I (1085-6, wg, He 5) simrat naam an-din jaagai. who remains awake in meditative remembrance, night and day.
woe fase ad ofa finae fsa wfenr Afar 5 SwaT NAOM (1085-7, Hg, He 5)
anad binod karay har simran tis maa-i-aa sang na taalkaa. ||10]||
He delights and enjoys meditative remembrance on the Lord; he has no attachment to Maya. ||10]|
da Aat ea FSA ara Il (1085-7, wg, Hz 5) rog sog dookh tis naahee. Disease, sorrow and pain do not affect him;
AUAfa dfs atssq At Il (1085-8, wg, He 5)
saaDhsang har keertan gaahee.
he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
nituar a ffs ys UulsH Afe FSst war AAI (1085-8, Hg, Hs 5) aapnaa naam deh parabh pareetam sun baynantee khaalkaa. ||11]||
Please bless me with Your Name, O my Beloved Lord God; please listen to my prayer, O Creator. ||11]|
OH 36 Sa SF flimsy I (1085-8, wg, us 5) naam ratan tayraa hai pi-aaray. Your Name is a jewel, O my Beloved Lord.
dfar TS SF VA MNT II (1085-9, wg, He 5) rang ratay tayrai daas apaaray. Your slaves are imbued with Your Infinite Love.
33 df a3 30 Aa feas AEt THAT 921 (1085-9, wg, He 5)
tayrai rang ratay tuDh jayhay virlay kay-ee bhaalkaa. ||12]|
Those who are imbued with Your Love, become like You; it is so rare that they are found. ||12||
fae at ofS Hat He AS Il (1085-10, wg, Hz 5) tin kee Dhoorh maa‘gai man mayraa. My mind longs for the dust of the feet of those
faa fenats ardt ag Far i (1085-10, wg, H2 5) jin visrahi naahee kaahoo bayraa. who never forget the Lord.
feo & Afar us ue ut Het Halt ofs Brsar |ASIl (1085-10, wg, He 5)
tin kai sang param pad paa-ee sadaa sangee har naalkaa. ||13]|
Associating with them, I obtain the supreme status; the Lord, my Companion, is always with me. ||13]|
Ae Hts floret At I (1085-11, wg, He 5) Saajan meet pi-aaraa so-ee. He alone is my beloved friend and companion,
Sa fears eanfs vet it (085-11, wg, us 5) ayk drirh-aa-ay durmat kho-ee. who implants the Name of the One Lord within, and eradicates evil-mindedness.
aH au ndarg sae fan Ao aS Buen fama 19811 (1085-12, Hg, He 5)
kaam kroDh aha‘kaar tajaa-ay tis jan ka-o updays nirmaalkaa. ||14]| Immaculate are the teachings of that humble servant of the Lord, who casts out sexual desire, anger and egotism. ||14||
au fee ardt det Ha I 1085-12, wg, Hs 5) tuDh vin naahee ko-ee mayraa. Other than You, O Lord, no one is mine.
afs uae ys & US Il (1085-13, wg, He 5) gur pakrhaa-ay parabh kay pairaa. The Guru has led me to grasp the feet of God.
JS afeodt Afsas us fate disor SoH Marsa WII (1085-13, Hg, Hs 5)
ha-o balihaaree satgur pooray jin khandi-aa bharam anaalkaa. ||15]||
I am a Sacrifice to the Perfect True Guru, who has destroyed the illusion of duality. [|15]|
Afa Ata yg fare ard i (085-14, wg, Hs 5) Saas Saas parabh bisrai naahee. With each and every breath, I never forget God.
mS ude The dhs AS foriret i (1085-14, wg, He 5) aath pahar har har ka-o Dhi-aa-ee. Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
o SA
oad AS 3d sha TS J ANT FIG IAEINSIUASI (1085-14, wg, He 5) naanak sant tayrai rang raatay too samrath vadaalkaa. ||16]|4]|13]|
O Nanak, the Saints are imbued with Your Love; You are the great and all-powerful Lord. ||16]|4[|13]|
HTS HIG U (1085-16) maaroo mehlaa 5 Maaroo, Fifth Mehl:
96 Afsara YATE II (1085-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3do aH fase fos art il (1085-17, wg, He 5) charan kamal hirdai nit Dhaaree. I enshrine the Lord's lotus feet continually within my heart.
ag us fag fas SHAATS I (1085-17, Wg, He 5) gur pooraa khin khin namaskaaree. Each and every moment, I humbly bow to the Perfect Guru.
36 HO mafy udt AS md Hat Hfs OU ATSSr WAN (1085-17, wg, He 5)
tan man arap Dharee sabh aagai jag meh naam suhaavanaa. ||1||
I dedicate my body, mind and everything, and place it in offering before the Lord. His Name is the most beautiful in this world. ||1]|
Hoag fa Hog fers il (1085-18, wg, He 5) so thaakur ki-o manhu visaaray. Why forget the Lord and Master from your mind?
mG fits & Ata ASS I (1085-18, wg, Hs 5) jee-o pind day saaj savaaray. He blessed you with body and soul, creating and embellishing you.
AYA oat AHS ATS AtSt MST UTSS|T |! (1085-18, wg, Hs 5)
Saas garaas Samaalay kartaa keetaa apnaa paavnaa. ||2|| With every breath and morsel of food, the Creator takes care of His beings, who receive according to what they have done. ||2||
Ww 3 fase &B srt il (1085-19, wg, Hs 5) jaa tay birthaa ko-oo naahee. No one returns empty-handed from Him;
WITS UIT Ths TY HS HTT Il (1085-19, wg, He 5) aath pahar har rakh man maahee. twenty-four hours a day, keep the Lord in your mind.
ust OLE
WoAfa 3H wigs Amt Vad AST UTS|T NBII (1086-1, wg, He 5)
saaDhsang bhaj achut su-aamee dargeh sobhaa paavnaa. ||3]||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate and vibrate upon your imperishable Lord and Master, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. |[3]|
ofg uersa mire TAT fafa i (1086-1, wg, w3 5) chaar padaarath asat dasaa siDh. The four great blessings, and the eighteen miraculous spiritual powers,
oH feure Hd AY 3@ fof I cos6-1, wg, He 5)
naam niDhaan sahj sukh na-o niDh.
are found in the treasure of the Naam, which brings celestial peace and poise, and the nine treasures.
Hee afenre A Ho Hf wate fufe ATG Amit Tear Sil (1086-2, wg, He 5)
sarab kali-aan jay man meh chaaheh mil saaDhoo su-aamee raavnaa. ||4]|
If you yearn in your mind for all joys, then join the Saadh Sangat, and dwell upon your Lord and Master. ||4]|
WAS fAf_fs He Turat il (1086-3, wg, ve 5) saasat simrit bayd vakhaanee. The Shaastras, the Simritees and the Vedas proclaim
HOH UeTsE Aly udret Il 1086-3, wg, ws 5) janam padaarath jeet paraanee. that the mortal must be victorious in this priceless human life.
am au fee usadhat ofa gHar StS ASST UI (1086-3, 47g, He 5)
kaam kroDh nindaa parharee-ai har rasnaa naanak gaavnaa. ||5||
Forsaking sexual desire, anger and slander, sing of the Lord with your tongue, O Nanak. ||5]|
fan gud Sfior ae sdt AST II (1086-4, wg, He 5) jis roop na raykh-i-aa kul nahee jaatee. He has no form or shape, no ancestry or social class.
uae ute stom feg ast Il 086-4, Hg, H 5) pooran poor rahi-aa din raatee. The Perfect Lord is perfectly pervading day and night.
A i WU Het eset agfs o Fat USS EN (1086-4, wg, He 5)
jo jo japai so-ee vadbhaagee bahurh na jonee paavnaa. ||6] |
Whoever meditates on Him is very fortunate; he is not consigned to reincarnation again. ||6||
fan 6 fad use fsarst il c1086-5, wg, Hs 5) jis no bisrai purakh biDhaataa. One who forgets the Primal Lord, the Architect of karma,
Aes fed ad fos 3ST Il 1086-5, wg, He 5) jaltaa firai rahai nit taataa. wanders around burning, and remains tormented.
mifxasue a se o act saa vis Hfg uTSST IDI (1086-6, Hg, He 5) akirat-ghanai ka-o rakhai na ko-ee narak ghor meh paavnaa. ||7||
No one can save such an ungrateful person; he is thrown into the most horrible hell. [711
MG ure 36 UG fafo Afar Il Cog6-6, wg, He 5)
jee-o paraan tan Dhan jin saaji-aa.
He blessed you with your soul, the breath of life, your body and wealth; HS aes Hho ates feet Il (1086-7, wg, Hs 5)
maat garabh meh raakh nivaaji-aa. He preserved and nurtured you in your mother's womb.
fA fag uifs ats nie ast arg fA S Beat ICI (1086-7, wg, 48 5) tis si-o pareet chhaad an raataa kaahoo sirai na laavnaa. ||8||
Forsaking His Love, you are imbued with another; you shall never achieve your goals like this. ||8]|
Uf niga ATH AT Il (1086-8, wg, He 5) Dhaar anoograhu su-aamee mayray. Please shower me with Your Merciful Grace, O my Lord and Master.
ufe wfe ZAfs ASS X ST Ill (1086-8, wg, Hs 5) ghat ghat vaseh sabhan kai nayray. You dwell in each and every heart, and are near everyone.
of THs cent Sd fra Aefeta FSA Ware|ar ICI (1086-8, wg, He 5) haath hamaarai kachhoo-ai naahee jis janaa-ihi tisai janaavanaa. ||9|| Nothing is in my hands; he alone knows, whom You inspire to know. ||9||
vw ot HASte uf fesfe urfemr II (1086-9, wg, He 5) jaa kai mastak Dhur likh paa-i-aa. One who has such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon his forehead,
far dt use & fen) uefemr I (1086-9, ug, He 5) tis hee purakh na vi-aapai maa-i-aa. that person is not afflicted by Maya.
SSA WH Ae AIS TAT BE B BSST IFO (1086-10, wg, Hz 5) naanak daas sadaa sarnaa-ee doosar lavai na laavnaa. ||10]| Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary forever; there is no other equal to You. ||10]|
uifamnt wa Aa As ats Il (1086-10, wg, H2 5) aagi-aa dookh sookh sabh keenay. In His Will, He made all pain and pleasure.
nifys on fasd dt HS il cos6-11, wg, ue 5) amrit naam birlai hee cheenay. How rare are those who remember the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord.
wT at ats age 3 Wet AS AS Gat AHT]SST AAU (1086-11, Hg, HB 5)
taa kee keemat kahan na jaa-ee jat kat ohee samaavnaa. ||11]| His value cannot be described. He is prevailing everywhere. ||11]|
Ret gars Het SF VST Il (1086-12, wg, ve 5) so-ee bhagat so-ee vad daataa. He is the devotee; He is the Great Giver.
Het use use faarsr il (1086-12, wg, we 5) so-ee pooran purakh biDhaataa. He is the Perfect Primal Lord, the Architect of karma.
aes Hoet Het Sat A Sd Hs SST NIM (1086-12, wg, He 5) baal sahaa-ee so-ee tayraa jo tayrai man bhaavnaa. ||12| | He is your help and support, since infancy; He fulfills your mind's desires. ||12] |
feos wa AY fof ure I (1086-13, wg, 42 5) mirat dookh sookh likh paa-ay. Death, pain and pleasure are ordained by the Lord.
sq adt sufs wefs & were i (1086-13, wg, He 5) til nahee baDheh ghateh na ghataa-ay. They do not increase or decrease by anyone's efforts.
Ret of fa ass are afs & wiry SersUSr |All (1086-13, wg, He 5)
so-ee ho-ay je kartay bhaavai kahi kai aap vanjaavanaa. ||13]||
That alone happens, which is pleasing to the Creator; speaking of himself, the mortal ruins himself. ||13]|
nig au 3 At aS Il (1086-14, wg, He 5) anDh koop tay say-ee kaadhay. He lifts us up and pulls us out of the deep dark pit;
HOH AGH A Te TMS Il (1086-14, wg, ve 5) janam janam kay tootay gaa‘dhay. He unites with Himself, those who were separated for so many incarnations.
faour ofe se afs nud fife Arg afie fomreer 19Veil Co86-15, +g, He 5)
kirpaa Dhaar rakhay kar apunay mil saaDhoo gobind Dhi-aavanaa. ||14]|
Showering them with His Mercy, He protects them with His own hands. Meeting with the Holy Saints, they meditate on the Lord of the Universe. ||14| |
ot MHS ave 3 ASH II (1086-15, wg, He 5) tayree keemat kahan na jaa-ee. Your worth cannot be described.
medA JU est Samet Il (1086-16, wg, He 5) achraj roop vadee vadi-aa-ee. Wondrous is Your form, and Your glorious greatness.
sats BS Hat AS 3a area af af ASST NAUNAUANIAUNISUVNINEI (1086-16, wg, H8 5)
bhagat daan mangai jan tayraa naanak bal bal jaavnaa.
[J15] [1] [14] [22] [24] [2] |14]|62]|
Your humble servant begs for the gift of devotional worship. Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||15]|1]|14]|22||24||2||14]|62] |
Hg BT HIG 3 (1086-18)
maaroo vaar mehlaa 3 Vaar Of Maaroo, Third Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1086-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBA Hs 4 Ill (1086-18) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
fee moa Te Sdn 3 TE Aa AE I (1086-19, wg, He 1) vin gaahak gun vaychee-ai ta-o gun sahgho jaa-ay. If virtue is sold when there is no buyer, then it is sold very cheap.
Te eT Wa A fs 3B TE wea fearf— i os6-19, wg, ne 1)
gun kaa gaahak jay milai ta-o gun laakh vikaa-ay. But if one meets a buyer of virtue, then virtue sells for hundreds of thousands.
ust 9ouD qe 3 ae fife ue A Afsag fa AE I (1087-1, og, He 1)
gun tay gun mil paa-ee-ai jay satgur maahi samaa-ay. Meeting with a virtuous person, virtue is obtained, and one is immersed in the True Guru.
Hfs one o uch zefa 3 ota ofe Il (1087-1, wg, Hs 1) mol amol na paa-ee-ai vanaj na leejai haat. Priceless virtues are not obtained for any price; they cannot be purchased in a store.
Soa UT 3H TI aa F J] wee WAU (1087-2, wg, vs 1) naanak pooraa tol hai kabahu na hovai ghaat. ||1]]| O Nanak, their weight is full and perfect; it never decreases at all. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (1087-2) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
on fege sannfe oreta ATefa StS Il (1087-2, wg, He 4)
naam vihoonay bharmaseh aavahi jaaveh neet.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they wander around, continually coming and going in reincarnation.
fefa ata feta dfemr fefa Ade afs yifS i c0s7-3, wg, ue 4) ik baa’Dhay ik dheeli-aa ik sukhee-ay har pareet. Some are in bondage, and some are set free; some are happy in the Love of the Lord.
ood Ae vfs & AG adet Ag SHS MQM (1087-3, wg, He 4)
naanak sachaa man lai sach karnee sach reet. ||2||
O Nanak, believe in the True Lord, and practice Truth, through the lifestyle of Truth. [21]
ust Il (1087-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ad 3 fame ufenr nfs usa AIS Il 1087-4, wg, we 4) gur tay gi-aan paa-i-aa at kharhag karaaraa. From the Guru, I have obtained the supremely powerful sword of spiritual wisdom.
SH SH Ag Afent HY BF MIA Il (1087-4, wg, we 4) doojaa bharam garh kati-aa moh lobh aha™kaaraa. I have cut down the fortress of duality and doubt, attachment, greed and egotism.
dfs at oH His stron ad Aafe sera il (10s7-5, wg, He 4)
har kaa naam man vasi-aa gur sabad veechaaraa.
The Name of the Lord abides within my mind; I contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ae AAtH Hfs SSH ate war fina il (1087-5, wg, He 4)
sach sanjam mat ootmaa har lagaa pi-aaraa.
Through Truth, self-discipline and sublime understanding, the Lord has become very dear to me.
Ag Ae Ay ease" Ay fAaHSTS A (1087-5, wg, He 4) sabh sacho sach varatdaa sach sirjanhaaraa. ||1|| Truly, truly, the True Creator Lord is all-pervading. ||1]|
HS H8 3 Il (1087-6)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
aes mar fefs wet sret Hae ad fing Il (1087-6, wg, He 3)
kaydaaraa raagaa vich jaanee-ai bhaa-ee sabday karay pi-aar.
Among the ragas, Kaydaaraa Raga is known as good, O Siblings of Destiny, if through it, one comes to love the Word of the Shabad,
ABHats fae feed sd AS od fimrg Il (1087-7, wg, He 3) satsangat si-o mildo rahai sachay Dharay pi-aar. and if one remains in the Soceity of the Saints, and enshrines love for the True Lord.
fedg HG AS niruet qatar ag Surg Il (1087-7, wg, ue 3)
vichahu mal katay aapnee kulaa kaa karay uDhaar.
Such a person washes away the pollution from within, and saves his generations as well.
Ga at oth Aad nieae ae feats ii 087-8, wg, ue 3) gunaa kee raas sangrahai avgan kadhai vidaar. He gathes in the capital of virtue, and destroys and drives out unvirtuous sins.
aren fifeur A rebt ae 3s Ss wTuSt En 3 Us firs AI 1087-8, ag, He 3)
naanak mili-aa so jaanee-ai guroo na chhodai aapnaa doojai na Dharay pi-aar. ||1|| O Nanak, he alone is known as united, who does not forsake his Guru, and who does not love duality. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1087-9)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Arag eu safe na 3 39 Sa ST I (1087-9, wg, He 4)
Saagar daykh-a-u dar mara-o bhai tayrai dar naahi.
Gazing upon the world-ocean, I am afraid of death; but if I live in the Fear of You, God, then I am not afraid.
qd & Rafe Hsu oreo fear a= iM (1087-9, wg, He 4)
gur kai sabad santokhee-aa naanak bigsaa naa-ay. ||2||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am content; O Nanak, I blossom forth in the Name. ||2]|
He 8 Il (087-10)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
afs afod TeRe wag Badt SfE i (1087-10, wg, He 4) charh bohithai chaalsa-o saagar lahree day-ay. I get on board the boat and set out, but the ocean is churning with waves.
oa o Ae Sfoe A Ag Utea Sf I (1087-10, wg, 8 4) thaak na sachai bohithai jay gur Dheerak day-ay. The boat of Truth encounters no obstruction, if the Guru gives encouragement.
faz uefa wf Cardio ag fe AreUTS II (1087-11, wg, He 4) tit dar jaa-ay utaaree-aa gur disai saavDhaan. He takes us across to the door on the other side, as the Guru keeps watch.
oot Seat urehy Tad FS HG MSI (1087-11, wg, ve 4)
naanak nadree paa-ee-ai dargeh chalai maan. ||3]| O Nanak, if I am blessed with His Grace, I shall go to His Court with honor. ||3]|
ust Il (1087-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fovdea aH Sho 3 TIHfY AG AH II (1087-12, wg, He 4) nihkantak raaj bhunch too gurmukh sach kamaa-ee. Enjoy your kingdom of bliss; as Gurmukh, practice Truth.
Ae sufs aor four afa Asha vfs fret i (1087-12, wg, ue 4)
sachai takhat baithaa ni-aa-o kar satsangat may! milaa-ee.
Sitting upon the throne of Truth, the Lord administers justice; He unites us in Union with the Society of the Saints.
Ae Cuer ofe aTuar of fA afe met i 1087-13, wg, Hs 4) sachaa updays har jaapnaa har si-o ban aa-ee. Meditating on the Lord, through the True Teachings, we become just like the Lord.
me Aes Hfs SA nifs df AUTet II (1087-13, wg, He 4)
aithai sukh-daata man vasai ant ho-ay sakhaa-ee.
If the Lord, the Giver of peace, abides in the mind, in this world, then in the end, He becomes our help and support.
of fag uts Curt afs ASt uret IN (1087-14, wg, Hs 4) har si-o pareet oopjee gur sojhee paa-ee. ||2]| Love for the Lord wells up, when the Guru imparts understanding. ||2]|
ABA Hs 4% Il (1087-14) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Bot got H fest wag ad 3 ale Il (1087-14, og, we D bhoolee bhoolee mai firee paaDhar kahai na ko-ay. Confused and deluded, I wander around, but no one shows me the way.
usd ATS frmorfenr gy are Hat aE il (1087-15, wg, 48 1) poochhahu jaa-ay si-aani-aa dukh kaatai mayraa ko-ay. I go and ask the clever people, if there is there anyone who can rid me of my pain.
Afsag Aa Hfs SA AHS Cs dt ote i (1087-15, wg, He satgur saachaa man vasai saajan ut hee thaa-ay. If the True Guru abides within my mind, then I see the Lord, my best friend, there.
sed He fyusihy frest APS SAE UA (1087-16, wg, HB 1)
naanak man tariptaasee-ai siftee saachai naa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, my mind is satisfied and fulfilled, contemplating the Praises of the True Name. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (1087-16)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
nm adget arg ify nm ad TATE Il (1087-16, wg, Hs 3) aapay karnee kaar aap aapay karay rajaa-ay. He Himself is the Doer, and He is the deed; He Himself issues the Command.
nim for ot auf we wimd arg HAE | (1087-17, wg, Hs 3) aapay kis hee bakhas la-ay aapay kaar kamaa-ay. He Himself forgives some, and He Himself does the deed.
SSt Woe Td fHs ou fay Ast ote Qi (1087-17, wg, ve 3)
naanak chaanan gur milay dukh bikh jaalee naa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, receiving the Divine Light from the Guru, suffering and corruption are burnt away, through the Name. ||2]|
ust Il (1087-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufenr sfa 3 3G J HOHA HST Il (1087-18, Hg, He 3) maa-i-aa vaykh na bhul too manmukh moorkhaa. Don't be fooled by gazing at the riches of Maya, you foolish self-willed manmukh.
wore ats 5 VHEt AF FS CIT BAT Il (1087-18, wg, He 3) chaldi-aa naal na chal-ee sabh jhooth darab lakhaa. It shall not go along with you when you must depart; all the wealth you see is false.
mifamrat vig 3 aset fra Gufs AH Usa ASA Il (1087-19, wg, Hs 3)
agi-aanee anDh na boojh-ee sir oopar jam kharhag kalkhaa.
The blind and ignorant do not understand, that the sword of death is hanging over their heads.
ad usAet Cad fae dfs TA Tat Il (1087-19, wg, He 3) gur parsaadee ubray jin har ras chakhaa. By Guru's Grace, those who drink in the sublime essence of the Lord are saved.
Yat Goce
uimfy age ad vif mm afg Ta WS (1ogs-1, wg, Hs 3)
aap karaa-ay karay aap aapay har rakhaa. ||3]||
He Himself is the Doer, and He Himself is the Cause; the Lord Himself is our Saving Grace. ||3]||
HSa H3 3 Ill (1088-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
faot ag odt Sfeur & at ordt fe M1 Cioss-1, wg, He 3) jinaa gur nahee bhayti-aa bhai kee naahee bind. Those who do not meet with the Guru, who have no Fear of God at all,
WSS WEE VY wat ae o Fa FFE Il (108-2, wg, we 3)
aavan jaavan dukh ghanaa kaday na chookai chind.
continue coming and going in reincarnation, and suffer terrible pain; their anxiety is never relieved.
aus fre ues wat Hos wears | coss-2, wg, He 3)
kaaparh jivai pachhorhee-ai gharhee muhat gharhee-aal.
They are beaten like clothes being washed on the rocks, and struck every hour like chimes.
soa Ae on fas fag 5 Va AAD AU (1088-3, wg, He 3)
naanak sachay naam bin sirahu na chukai janjaal. ||1||
O Nanak, without the True Name, these entanglements are not removed from hanging over one's head. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (08s-3) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fgsee get AAS IBH gat Fats I coss-s, og, He 3)
taribhavan dhoodhee sajnaa ha-umai buree jagat.
I have searched throughout the three worlds, O my friend; egotism is bad for the world.
Oo 3g dbus Ay Be Sa Ad Ag III (1088-4, wg, He 3)
naa jhur hee-arhay sach cha-o naanak sacho sach. ||2||
Don't worry, O my soul; speak the Truth, O Nanak, the Truth, and only the Truth. [21]
ust Il (088-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aanfy nmr aufaGe ofs oth ANTE Il (1088-4, wg, He 3)
gurmukh aapay bakhsi-on har naam samaanay.
The Lord Himself forgives the Gurmukhs; they are absorbed and immersed in the Lord's Name.
nnd sast fee aa Aafe StATS Il (1088-5, wg, He 3)
aapay bhagtee laa-i-on gur sabad neesaanay.
He Himself links them to devotional worship; they bear the Insignia of the Guru's Shabad.
HOY Het Ave Ad Ufa WS Il (1088-5, wg, He 3)
sanmukh sadaa sohnay sachai dar jaanay.
Those who turn towards the Guru, as sunmukh, are beautiful. They are famous in the Court of the True Lord.
mea Ga vats o fe TH use Il (1088-6, wg, He 3) aithai othai mukat hai jin raam pachhaanay. In this world, and in the world hereafter, they are liberated; they realize the Lord.
Ud Us A HS fro afe Afenr f35 IB AaHeS Ill (10ss-6, wg, He 3) Dhan Dhan say jan jin har sayvi-aa tin ha-o kurbaanay. ||4||
Blessed, blessed are those humble beings who serve the Lord. I am a sacrifice to them. ||4]|
HBA Hs 4% Il (1088-7) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
HIG Fst Hseat AS HoT AAT Il (1088-7, wg, ue 1)
mahal kuchjee marvarhee kaalee manhu kasuDh.
The rude, ill-mannered bride is encased in the body-tomb; she is blackened, and her mind is impure.
A ae defo so fug ge Soa STE HT AU 1oss-7, wg, He 1)
jay gun hovan taa pir ravai naanak avgun munDh. ||1]|
She can enjoy her Husband Lord, only if she is virtuous. O Nanak, the soul-bride is unworthy, and without virtue. ||1]|
He 4% Il (1088-8) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Arg Ale Ag AaMt AT ust users Il (10ss-8, wg, He 1) saach seel sach sanjmee saa pooree parvaar. She has good conduct, true self-discipline, and a perfect family.
oad mfufafa ret sat furs & dfs fumrfs ni coss-s, wg, He 1) naanak ahinis sadaa bhalee pir kai hayt pi-aar. ||2|| O Nanak, day and night, she is always good; she loves her Beloved Husband Lord.
[21] UugStT Il (1088-9)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
nimyat nity ustfent oH foure urfemi i cioss-9, wg, He 1)
aapnaa aap pachhaani-aa naam niDhaan paa-i-aa.
One who realizes his own self, is blessed with the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fas afs & niruet aa Aafe frerfemr i coss-10, wg, He 1) kirpaa kar kai aapnee gur sabad milaa-i-aa. Granting His Mercy, the Guru merges him in the Word of His Shabad.
ad at aet font of dA Uborfenr | (iogs-10, wg, He 1)
gur kee banee nirmalee har ras pee-aa-i-aa.
The Word of the Guru's Bani is immaculate and pure; through it, one drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord.
dfs 3A frat ofhtmr nig dA ofa softer i Woss-1, wg, Hs 1)
har ras jinee chaakhi-aa an ras thaak rahaa-i-aa. Those who taste the sublime essence of the Lord, forsake other flavors.
ofs 3H ut Ae fgufs se fete fRAa su Teter ull ioss-11, wg, He 1)
har ras pee sadaa taripat bha-ay fir tarisnaa bhukh gavaa-i-aa. ||5]|
Drinking in the sublime essence of the Lord, they remain satisfied forever; their hunger and thirst are quenched. ||5||
HS H8 3 Il (1088-12)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fus yAte us aete us Sfa oH Alara Il (i0ss-12, wg, we 3)
pir khusee-ay Dhan raavee-ay Dhan ur naam seegaar.
Her Husband Lord is pleased, and He enjoys His bride; the soul-bride adorns her heart with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Sot US iat ust Aarsst ofa Al (088-12, wg, He 3)
naanak Dhan aagai kharhee sobhaavantee naar. ||1|| O Nanak, that bride who stands before Him, is the most noble and respected woman.
[1
He % Il (1088-13) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AAS uth as at AT vai wag | coss-13, wg, us 1)
sasurai pay-ee-ai kant kee kant agamm athaahu.
In her father-in-law's home hereafter, and in her parents' home in this world, she belongs to her Husband Lord. Her Husband is inaccessible and unfathomable.
woe Us Avaet A svefy FugST NQIl (1088-13, wg, He 1) naanak Dhan sohaaganee jo bhaaveh vayparvaah. ||2||
O Nanak, she is the happy soul-bride, who is pleasing to her carefree, independent Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (1088-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
sufs oa A oad fa sus ofea det i coss-14, wg, He 1) takhat raajaa so bahai je takh-tai laa-ik ho-ee. That king sits upon the throne, who is worthy of that throne.
fot Ag ustfent Ag IH AT Il oss-14, wg, ws jinee sach pachhaani-aa sach raajay say-ee. Those who realize the True Lord, they alone are the true kings.
afo gufs aH 3 mmdiinfe eA ote ey Tet Il c0gs-15, wg, Hs 1) ayhi bhoopat raajay na aakhee-ahi doojai bhaa-ay dukh ho-ee. These mere earthly rulers are not called kings; in the love of duality, they suffer.
ats famr Arardint fan are fron o Tet i coss-15, wg, Hs 1)
keetaa ki-aa salaahee-ai jis jaaday bilam na ho-ee.
Why should someone praise someone else who is also created? They depart in no time at all.
faves Ae tao Tene gs A fSaee Tet ill (oss-i6, wg, Hs 1)
nihchal sachaa ayk hai gurmukh boojhai so nihchal ho-ee. ||6] |
The One True Lord is eternal and imperishable. One who, as Gurmukh, understands becomes eternal as well. ||6||
HS H2 3 Ill (1088-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Asa ot fug ea 3 furs fas uret arfa Il cioss-17, og, 8 3) sabhnaa kaa pir ayk hai pir bin khaalee naahi. The One Lord is the Husband of all. No one is without the Husband Lord.
ood A Aoet fa Afsas ufo Arts A (1088-17, wg, He 3) naanak say sohaaganee je satgur maahi samaahi. ||1]| | O Nanak, they are the pure soul-brides, who merge in the True Guru. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1088-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ho & nifoe sda fae efs wfsa sch i coss-is, wg, He 3)
man kay aDhik tarang ki-o dar saahib chhutee-ai.
The mind is churning with so many waves of desire. How can one be emancipated in the Court of the Lord?
A Te Ae sa Ts shar mers & Il (1088-18, wg, Hz 3)
jay raachai sach rang goorhai rang apaar kai.
Be absorbed in the Lord's True Love, and imbued with the deep color of the Lord's Infinite Love.
soa Ts usAet scha A fas wat AfS iI (oss-19, wg, He 3) naanak gur parsaadee chhutee-ai jay chit lagai sach. ||2]|
O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, one is emancipated, if the consciousness is attached to the True Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (1088-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe a oH we F fa ahafS ath i (1088-19, wg, He 3) har kaa naam amol hai ki-o keemat keejai. The Name of the Lord is priceless. How can its value be estimated?
ust yout wnt figafe AS Ag wmt east Il (1089-1, wg, He 3)
aapay sarisat sabh saajee-an aapay varteejai. He Himself created the entire universe, and He Himself is pervading it.
Tafa Ae Fedha AG axhfs shy I (1089-1, wg, He 3) gurmukh sadaa salaahee-ai sach keemat keejai. The Gurmukhs praise the Lord forever, and through the Truth, they assess Him.
qd Aaet ans feerfimr fee ofe sa Ub II (1089-2, 7g, He 3)
gur sabdee kamal bigaasi-aa iv har ras peejai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and in this way, one drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord.
nite Arar otfont Afy Hof AST WII (1089-2, wg, Hs 3) aavan jaanaa thaaki-aa sukh sahj saveejai. ||7]| Coming and going in reincarnation ceases, and one sleeps in peace and poise. ||7||
HBA Hs 4 Il (1089-3) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
OT HS ST UUS ot Sale ST AT Il (1089-3, wg, we 1) naa mailaa naa DhunDhliaa naa bhagvaa naa kach. Neither dirty, nor dull, nor saffron, nor any color that fades.
TSA WS BS I AT IS AG IA (1089-3, wg, ve 1)
naanak laalo laal hai sachai rataa sach. ||1||
O Nanak, crimson - deep crimson is the color of one who is imbued with the True Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (089-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hofa zenufs eo SB seg SAS fF I ios9-4, wg, vs 3)
sahj vanaspat ful fal bhavar vasai bhai khand.
The bumble bee intuitively and fearlessly dwells among the vegetation, flowers and fruits.
Soa Sdeg SA I Sa SB fSsaT IM! (1089-4, wg, vs 3) naanak tarvar ayk hai ayko ful bhirang. ||2|| O Nanak, there is only one tree, one flower, and one bumble bee. ||2]|
ust Il (1089-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WHS Osta Ho fAG A AS USAT II (1089-5, og, He 3)
jo jan loojheh manai si-o say sooray parDhaanaa.
Those humble beings who struggle with their minds are brave and distinguished heroes.
dfs Ast Aer ffs god fast wimy usar il (1089-5, wg, He 3) har saytee sadaa mil rahay jinee aap pachhaanaa. Those who realize their own selves, remain forever united with the Lord.
famrrobor ar feg HIS J HS HT ANAT II (1089-6, Hg, He 3) gi-aanee-aa kaa ih mahat hai man maahi samaanaa. This is the glory of the spiritual teachers, that they remain absorbed in their mind.
dfs AE ot HIG ufeur AG of= fire I (1089-6, ug, He 3)
har jee-o kaa mahal paa-i-aa sach laa-ay Dhi-aanaa.
They attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, and focus their meditation on the True Lord.
fie ad udAret He Alfsor Aa fsefa fasta ICI (089-7, wg, He 3) jin gur parsaadee man jeeti-aa jag tineh jitaanaa. ||8]| Those who conquer their own minds, by Guru's Grace, conquer the world. ||8]|
H@a H8 3 Il (1039-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fat de vfs se ufs wife stim SS i 089-7, wg, us 3) jogee hovaa jag bhavaa ghar ghar bheekhi-aa lay-o. If I were to become a Yogi, and wander around the world, begging from door to door,
Tadd Su Hain fan far Csr SE i ci0s9-s, wg, us 3) dargeh laykhaa mangee-ai kis kis utar day-o. then, when I am summoned to the Court of the Lord, what answer could I give?
fofter ou Hsu Hat Het Ag Fd ofH Il (1089-8, ug, He 3)
bhikhi-aa naam santokh marhee sadaa sach hai naal.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the charity I beg for; contentment is my temple. The True Lord is always with me.
sdt wa 3 ado AS act AHATS Il (1089-9, wg, He 3)
bhaykhee haath na laDhee-aa sabh baDhee jamkaal.
Nothing is obtained by wearing religious robes; all will be seized by the Messenger of Death.
THX Ts SSbot AV SH AH Al (1089-9, wg, He 3) naanak galaa jhoothee-aa sachaa naam samaal. ||1] | O Nanak, talk is false; contemplate the True Name. ||1||
He 3 Il (1089-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fas uefa Sur Hatt A eg Afeg 3 AfE Il (1089-10, wg, He 3) jit dar laykhaa mangee-ai so dar sayvihu na ko-ay. Through that door, you will be called to account; do not serve at that door.
mA Afsag Ofs og fan Aes neg o AfE II 1089-10, wg, He 3) aisaa satgur lorh lahu jis jayvad avar na ko-ay. Seek and find such a True Guru, who has no equal in His greatness.
fSH Aaeret Scha Sear Hat o AE il cios9-11, wg, we 3) tis sarnaa-ee chhootee-ai laykhaa mangai na ko-ay. In His Sanctuary, one is released, and no one calls him to account.
Ag fese vg fez Ae Gg Aa SfE Il cos9-11, wg, He 3)
sach drirh-aa-ay sach darirh sachaa oh sabad day-ay.
Truth is implanted within Him, and He implants Truth within others. He bestows the blessing of the True Shabad.
fose fan @ AY J 3g HO St AUT SE I (1089-12, wg, Hs 3) hirdai jis dai sach hai tan man bhee sachaa ho-ay. One who has Truth within his heart - his body and mind are also true.
ood Ad Jath Hfomt Adt efsnret SHE I (1089-12, wg, He 3)
naanak sachai hukam mani-ai sachee vadi-aa-ee day-ay.
O Nanak, if one submits to the Hukam, the Command of the True Lord God, he is blessed with true glory and greatness.
Ae Hfs AHH fA S Sefs ASE WII (1089-13, wg, ue 3)
sachay maahi samaavasee jis no nadar karay-i. ||2||
He is immersed and merged in the True Lord, who blesses him with His Glance of Grace. ||2||
UugST Il (1089-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ad &fo 3 mints nidorfs Hefs ey uTSfs Il (1089-13, wg, Hs 3) sooray ayhi na aakhee-ahi aha‘kaar mareh dukh paavahi. They are not called heroes, who die of egotism, suffering in pain.
nit ny 3 usTest Er ule Aref Il (1089-14, wg, He 3) anDhay aap na pachhaannee doojai pach jaaveh. The blind ones do not realize their own selves; in the love of duality, they rot.
mits ada fA@ ose nia fue gy urefs Il (1089-14, wg, Hs 3) at karoDh si-o loojh-day agai pichhai dukh paavahi. They struggle with great anger; here and hereafter, they suffer in pain.
fs ME vag 6 sect Se ata Hevefs Il (1089-15, wg, Hs 3) har jee-o aha“kaar na bhaav-ee vayd kook sunaaveh. The Dear Lord is not pleased by egotism; the Vedas proclaim this clearly.
nidats He A feast we ufs Aout fete mrefs ti 089-15, wg, He 3)
aha‘kaar mu-ay say vigtee ga-ay mar janmeh fir aavahi. ||9]|
Those who die of egotism, shall not find salvation. They die, and are reborn in reincarnation. ||9||
HSE H8 3 Il (1089-16)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
TAS de o Saar SI aS UT Ill (1089-16, wg, me 3) kaaga-o ho-ay na oojlaa lohay naav na paar. The crow does not become white, and an iron boat does not float across.
fusn uerse His B US ASSETS Il (1089-16, wg, us 3)
piram padaarath man lai Dhan savaaranhaar.
One who puts his faith in the treasure of his Beloved Lord is blessed; he exalts and embellishes others as well.
TaH use Caer ffs aA]! Sa uts i 1089-17, wg, wu 3)
hukam pachhaanai oojlaa sir kaasat lohaa paar.
One who realizes the Hukam of God's Command - his face is radiant and bright; he floats across, like iron upon wood.
fgHo 23 3 SA SSA ATet AT WAI (1089-17, wg, ve 3)
tarisnaa chhodai bhai vasai naanak karnee saar. ||1]||
Forsake thirst and desire, and abide in the Fear of God; O Nanak, these are the most excellent actions. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (1089-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hg HIE HATE Hs o Aas TEs Il (1089-18, wg, we 3)
maaroo maaran jo ga-ay maar na sakahi gavaar.
The ignorant people who go to the desert to conquer their minds, are not able to conquer them.
ood A feg Hb as Aaet Stef i (1089-18, wg, Hs 3)
naanak jay ih maaree-ai gur sabdee veechaar.
O Nanak, if this mind is to be conquered, one must contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
~
fg He Hfemor ar Hd A Be AS Ale Il (1089-19, wg, He 3) ayhu man maari-aa naa marai jay lochai sabh ko-ay. This mind is not conquered by conquering it, even though everyone longs to do so.
Soa HO dt a Ho HA A AfsagT SS APE MMI (1089-19, wg, He 3) naanak man hee ka-o man maarsee jay satgur bhaytai so-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, the mind itself conquers the mind, if one meets with the True Guru. ||2]]|
at IotO
ugat Il (1090-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ae sae" GuriGe fete Hats fire SAT II (1090-1, wg, He 3)
dovai tarfaa opaa-ee-on vich sakat siv vaasaa.
He created both sides; Shiva dwells within Shakti (the soul dwells within the material universe).
Fast fas 3 utes fefe waft fasrAr it (1090-1, xg, He 3)
saktee kinai na paa-i-o fir janam binaasaa.
Through the material universe of Shakti, no one has ever found the Lord; they continue to be born and die in reincarnation.
af Afemt Af urea afl ATA farerAT I (1090-2, 7g, He 3)
gur sayvi-ai Saat paa-ee-ai jap Saas giraasaa.
Serving the Guru, peace is found, meditating on the Lord with every breath and morsel of food.
fAfyfs AAS Afo Sy SSH ala VAT I (1090-2, wg, Hs 3)
simrit saasat soDh daykh ootam har daasaa.
Searching and looking through the Simritees and the Shaastras, I have found that the most sublime person is the slave of the Lord.
oad 3H fear a fag odt om afs AAT AOI (1090-3, wg, Hs 3)
naanak naam binaa ko thir nahee naamay bal jaasaa. ||10] |
O Nanak, without the Naam, nothing is permanent and stable; I am a sacrifice to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||10]|
HSE H8 3 Il (1090-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
de ufsz Asat Fe ust yf ats I (1090-3, wg, ne 3)
hovaa pandit jotkee vayd parhaa mukh chaar.
I might become a Pandit, a religious scholar, or an astrologer, and recite the four Vedas with my mouth;
oe Us HO unbr mu oft Sere Il (1090-4, wg, Hs 3)
nav khand maDhay poojee-aa apnai chaj veechaar.
I might be worshipped throughout the nine regions of the earth for my wisdom and thought;
HS Ae mg afs we wa fae o afe II (1090-4, wg, He 3) mat sachaa akhar bhul jaa-ay cha-ukai bhitai na ko-ay. let me not forget the Word of Truth, that no one can touch my sacred cooking square.
BS USA asa Ae Sat ALE UA (1090-5, wg, He 3) jhoothay cha-ukay naankaa sachaa ayko so-ay. ||1]|| Such cooking squares are false, O Nanak; only the One Lord is True. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (090-5) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
umfy Cure ag urfy mmr aefs asfe Il (1090-5, wg, ws 3) aap Upaa-ay karay aap aapay nadar karay-i. He Himself creates and He Himself acts; He bestows His Glance of Grace.
nny & efsureion ag soa Hat APE II (1090-6, wg, He 3) aapay day vadi-aa-ee-aa kaho naanak sachaa so-ay. ||2|| He Himself grants glorious greatness; says Nanak, He is the True Lord. ||2]|
UugST Il (1090-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ACT HS SA I IF ATA B AS Il (1090-6, wg, we 3) kantak kaal ayk hai hor kantak na soojhai. Only death is painful; I cannot conceive of anything else as painful.
uetas Fat His ZIser unit AS BS i 1090-7, wg, we 3) afri-o jag meh varatdaa paapee si-o loojhai. It is unstoppable; it stalks and pervades the world, and fights with the sinners.
Gs Aaet ofs seha ate Af afe gS il 1090-7, og, we 3)
gur sabdee har bhaydee-ai har jap har boojhai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one is immersed in the Lord. Meditating on the Lord, one comes to realize the Lord.
A dfa Hearet sea A Ho AB AS Il (1090-7, og, we 3)
so har sarnaa-ee chhutee-ai jo man si-o joojhai.
He alone is emancipated in the Sanctuary of the Lord, who struggles with his own mind.
nfs dterfs ofs wu ad ofa waar ATS AAI (1090-8, 27g, H8 3)
man veechaar har jap karay har dargeh seejhai. ||11]||
One who contemplates and meditates on the Lord in his mind, succeeds in the Court of the Lord. ||11]|
HBA Hs 4 Ill (1090-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Toth set ATES TIaT AY ATS Il (1090-9, wg, we 1) hukam rajaa-ee saakh-tee dargeh sach kabool. Submit to the Will of the Lord Commander; in His Court, only Truth is accepted.
Afog Sa Hart Tabor Vf F FH Il (1090-9, weg, ws 1)
saahib laykhaa mangsee dunee-aa daykh na bhool.
Your Lord and Master shall call you to account; do not go astray on beholding the world.
fees vaerat A ad eaert fees aA II (1090-10, wg, He 1)
dil darvaanee jo karay darvaysee dil raas.
One who keeps watch over his heart, and keeps his heart pure, is a dervish, a saintly devotee.
fena Hoafs arear But ATS UTA IAI (1090-10, wg, He 1) isak muhabat naankaa laykhaa kartay paas. ||1]| Love and affection, O Nanak, are in the accounts placed before the Creator. ||1]|
He % Il (1090-10) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
neag fe Hass ASUS AATE Il (1090-11, wg, He 1) alga-o jo-ay maDhookarha-o sarangpaan sabaa-ay. One who is unattached like the bumble bee, sees the Lord of the world everywhere.
ote dtr Sftmr area afe wate WH (090-11, wg, He 1)
heerai heeraa bayDhi-aa naanak kanth subhaa-ay. ||2| |
The diamond of his mind is pierced through with the Diamond of the Lord's Name; O Nanak, his neck is embellished with it. ||2]|
ust Il (1090-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HoH are fenmurer Hfo nefer arat Il (1090-12, wg, He 1)
manmukh kaal vi-aapdaa mohi maa-i-aa laagay.
The self-willed manmukhs are afflicted by death; they cling to Maya in emotional attachment.
fas ufo Hf USTSAt Ste SH Sta I (1090-12, wg, He 1)
khin meh maar pachhaarhsee bhaa-ay doojai thaagay.
In an instant, they are thrown to the ground and killed; in the love of duality, they are deluded.
fefs gar ofa & wrset AH AT SF ea Il (1090-12, wg, ve 1)
fir vaylaa hath na aavee jam kaa dand laagay.
This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; they are beaten by the Messenger of Death with his stick.
f8o AH 33 6 Bael A fa fee AW I (1090-13, wg, Hs 1)
tin jam dand na lag-ee jo har liv jaagay.
But Death's stick does not even strike those who remain awake and aware in the Love of the Lord.
Ag 3d 30 eareat AT 30 HT WAM (1090-13, wg, He 1) sabh tayree tuDh chhadaavanee sabh tuDhai laagay. ||12|| All are Yours, and cling to You; only You can save them. ||12||
HBA Hs 4% Il (1090-14) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Ava rife miarent sy wed orf i (1090-14, wg, He 1) sarbay jo-ay agachhmee dookh ghanayro aath. See the imperishable Lord everywhere; attachment to wealth brings only great pain.
Sy Beh Ag Suess og o UHt Ae Al (1090-14, wg, He 1)
kaalar laadas sar laaghana-o laabh na poonjee saath. ||1||
Loaded with dust, you have to cross over the world-ocean; you are not carrying the profit and capital of the Name with you. ||1]|
He &% Il (1090-15)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Urt ASS oH FT uwYySs VIF wR, Il (1090-15, wg, Hs 1) poonjee saacha-o naam too akhuta-o darab apaar. My capital is Your True Name, O Lord; this wealth is inexhaustible and infinite.
saa sug fSsHse Us AT SUT_ iQ! (1090-15, wg, ve 1) naanak vakhar nirmalo Dhan saahu vaapaar. ||2]| O Nanak, this merchandise is immaculate; blessed is the banker who trades in it. ||2]|
He &% Il (1090-16)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
yaa Us furfe & HEB Sag HAE I (1090-16, wg, Hs 1) poorab pareet piraan lai mota-o thaakur maan. Know and enjoy the primal, eternal Love of the Great Lord and Master.
He SS AH HSA SHA ABE STH ISI (1090-16, wg, He 1)
maathai oobhai jam maarsee naanak maylan naam. |[3]|
Blessed with the Naam, O Nanak, you shall strike down the Messenger of Death, and push his face to the ground. ||3]|
ust Il (1090-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nig fis HetaGe fefs og fofa SH II (1090-17, wg, Hs 1D
aapay pind savaari-on vich nav niDh naam.
He Himself has embellished the body, and placed the nine treasures of the Naam within it.
fefa nm gsafh gernfenig f85 fesse AH II (1090-17, wg, He 1)
ik aapay bharam bhulaa-i-an tin nihfal kaam. He confuses some in doubt; fruitless are their actions.
feast asufa afsmr afs yirsH IH II (1090-18, wg, He 1) iknee gurmukh bujhi-aa har aatam raam. Some, as Gurmukh, realize their Lord, the Supreme Soul.
feast fe & vifsmr afe SSH ANH I (1090-18, wg, He 1) iknee sun kai mani-aa har ootam kaam. Some listen to the Lord, and obey Him; sublime and exalted are their actions.
nists ofa da Gufor arfenr afs TE SH NASI (1090-19, wg, He 1)
antar har rang upji-aa gaa-i-aa har gun naam. ||13]|
Love for the Lord wells up deep within, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name. ||13]|
HBA Hs 4 Ill (1090-19) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Yat ov
soste 3 ufs SA Ja UTE HS Il (1091-1, wg, ue 1)
bhogtan bhai man vasai haykai paaDhar heed.
The Fear of God abides in the mind of the innocent; this is the straight path to the One Lord.
wifs srgufs eu we SS aS SAT WAU (1091-1, wg, we 1) at daahpan dukh ghano teenay thaav bhareed. ||1]| Jealousy and envy bring terrible pain, and one is cursed throughout the three worlds.
[21
He % Il (1091-1)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Hee Sfe fa ane we ost AE II (091-1, wg, Hs 1) maa‘dal bayd se baajno ghano Dharhee-ai jo-ay. The drum of the Vedas vibrates, bringing dispute and divisiveness.
Bsa BH AHS J MAS nig o AS NI (091-2, wg, vs 1) naanak naam samaal too beeja-o avar na ko-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, contemplate the Naam, the Name of the Lord; there is none except Him.
21 |
He % Il (1091-2)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Arad wat weary fats gears SebH | (1091-2, wg, ve 1)
Saagar gunee athaahu kin haathaalaa daykhee-ai.
The world-ocean of the three qualities is unfathomably deep; how can its bottom be seen?
eax gugeg Afsag fes 3 uf Us II (1091-3, og, He 1) vadaa vayparvaahu satgur milai ta paar pavaa. If I meet with the great, self-sufficient True Guru, then I am carried across.
HB 3fg TY FEY Il (1091-3, wg, us 1) majh bhar dukh badukh. This ocean is filled up with pain and suffering.
Sad Ad 3H fag fan o wet Fe ISI (1091-4, wg, Hs 1) naanak sachay naam bin kisai na lathee bhukh. ||3]| O Nanak, without the True Name, no one's hunger is appeased. ||3] |
uGst II (1091-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
frat nies afer ag Aafe AIS I Co91-4, we, He 1)
jinee andar bhaali-aa gur sabad suhaavai.
Those who search their inner beings, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, are exalted and adorned.
A feefs A urfee ofa ony fimre Il (io91-s, wg, ue 1) jo ichhan so paa-iday har naam Dhi-aavai. They obtain what they wish for, meditating on the Lord's Name.
fan 3 feu ad fsH ag fxs A ofs TE We I c1091-5, weg, ws 1)
jis no kirpaa karay tis gur milai so har gun gaavai.
One who is blessed by God's Grace, meets with the Guru; he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
usH ofe fs or fig 3 AH Hf S US I (1091-6, wg, He 1)
Dharam raa-ay tin kaa mit hai jam mag na paavai.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma is his friend; he does not have to walk on the Path of Death.
ofa ony fomrefs fear ofS ofa af AHS IAI (1091-6, wg, He 1)
har naam Dhi-aavahi dinas raat har naam samaavai. ||14||
He meditates on the Lord's Name, day and night; he is absorbed and immersed in the Lord's Name. ||14||
H@a Hs 4 Il (1091-7) salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Heh Sa eure wafar fiefs ufeurfs i co91-7, we, us
sunee-ai ayk vakhaanee-ai surag mirat pa-i-aal.
Listen to and speak the Name of the One Lord, who permeates the heavens, this world and the nether regions of the underworld.
Jou 6 Aet Afenr Ff fatter A arf II (io91-7, wg, He 1D
hukam na jaa-ee mayti-aa jo likhi-aa so naal.
The Hukam of His Command cannot be erased; whatever He has written, shall go with the mortal.
AVE Hot aE HGH AES ue AGE ATE I cio91-s, wg, we 1) ka-un moo-aa ka-un maarsee ka-un aavai ka-un jaa-ay. Who has died, and who kills? Who comes and who goes?
ACE TIA atEat fan at Hats AHTE IAI (1091-8, wg, Hes
ka-un rahsee naankaa kis kee surat samaa-ay. ||1]|| Who is enraptured, O Nanak, and whose consciousness merges in the Lord? ||1]|
He 4% Il (1091-9) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
IG Hor A for us ed edb i (1091-9, wg, He 1) ha-o mu-aa mai maari-aa pa-un vahai daree-aa-o. In egotism, he dies; possessiveness kills him, and the breath flows out like a river.
fSAat Fat Seat AT HG TST |MVE Il (1091-9, wg, we 1) tarisnaa thakee naankaa jaa man rataa naa-ay. Desire is exhausted, O Nanak, only when the mind is imbued with the Name.
Sfee 33 feat axat wats PE 1 (1091-10, wg, He 1)
lo-in ratay lo-inee kannee surat samaa-ay.
His eyes are imbued with the eyes of the Lord, and his ears ring with celestial consciousness.
as orfefe yout Ist WS BETS Il (1091-10, wg, He 1)
jeebh rasaa-in choonrhee ratee laal lavaa-ay.
His tongue drinks in the sweet nectar, dyed crimson by chanting the Name of the Beloved Lord.
nizg HAfE safer ahfs adt 3 ATE 2H Co91-11, wg, Hes 1) andar musak jhakoli-aa keemat kahee na jaa-ay. ||2|| His inner being is drenched with the Lord's fragrance; his worth cannot be described.
[21] ust Il (1091-11)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
fea qa yfs on foarg 3 ont arf BS Il Co91-11, wg, He 1)
is jug meh naam niDhaan hai naamo naal chalai.
In this age, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the treasure. Only the Naam goes along in the end.
fy nue ae 3 faucet ute uafs@ us i cio91-12, wg, ue 1)
ayhu akhut kaday na nikhuta-ee khaa-ay kharchi-o palai.
It is inexhaustible; it is never empty, no matter how much one may eat, consume or spend.
ofa ae fs 5 urset AHATT ANAS Il (1091-12, wg, He 1) har jan nayrh na aavee jamkankar jamkalai. The Messenger of Death does not even approach the humble servant of the Lord.
AAT Ae zentfanr fe afs ue Us Il (1091-13, wg, we 1)
say saah sachay vanjaari-aa jin har Dhan palai.
They alone are the true bankers and traders, who have the wealth of the Lord in their laps.
ofa fasur 3 afs ure ar orfy afe wes QUI (091-13, wg, HB 1)
har kirpaa tay har paa-ee-ai jaa aap har ghalai. ||15]|
By the Lord's Mercy, one finds the Lord, only when the Lord Himself sends for him. [|15]|
HSE H8 3 Il (1091-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HOH Sud ATS o ASdt fay feasts fay Aqufs fe fae aafs firs it (1091-14, wg, He 3)
manmukh vaapaarai saar na jaannee bikh vihaajheh bikh sangar-hahi bikh si-o Dhareh pi-aar.
The self-willed manmukh does not appreciate the excellence of trading in Truth. He deals in poison, collects poison, and is in love with poison.
Wd ufss Hees HoT HSH ATT Il (1091-15, wg, He 3)
baahrahu pandit sadaa-iday manhu moorakh gaavaar.
Outwardly, they call themselves Pandits, religious scholars, but in their minds they are foolish and ignorant.
dfs fA fas 5 ofeat set cafe fimrg il (091-15, wg, ue 3) har si-o chit na laa-inee vaadee Dharan pi-aar. They do not focus their consciousness on the Lord; they love to engage in arguments.
zat ah aale archer ag af asta nirag il (1091-16, wg, Hs 3) vaadaa kee-aa karan kahaanee-aa koorh bol karahi aahaar. They speak to cause arguments, and earn their living by telling lies.
Aa Hfs aH on fe feaner dg HS AS wary Il (1091-16, wg, He 3)
jag meh raam naam har nirmalaa hor mailaa sabh aakaar.
In this world, only the Lord's Name is immaculate and pure. All other objects of creation are polluted.
SSA OH J Vs0t dE HS Hata Tes IAI (1091-17, wg, ne 3)
naanak naam na chaytnee ho-ay mailay mareh gavaar. ||1||
O Nanak, those who do not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are polluted; they die in ignorance. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1091-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ey war fag Afet gan HS Be ATE II 1091-17, +g, He 3)
dukh lagaa bin sayvi-ai hukam mannay dukh jaa-ay.
Without serving the Lord, he suffers in pain; accepting the Hukam of God's Command, pain is gone.
mM} erst Aa et nmy Sfe ARE II (091-18, wg, He 3)
aapay daataa sukhai daa aapay day-ay sajaa-ay.
He Himself is the Giver of peace; He Himself awards punishment.
ood Se Weby AS fas FSA safe QI (1091-18, wg, He 3)
naanak ayvai jaanee-ai sabh kichh tisai rajaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, know this well; all that happens is according to His Will. ||2|| ust I (1091-19)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
ofa on fae wars 3 faaus faa ae feufs art II (1091-19, 7g, v8 3)
har naam binaa jagat hai nirDhan bin naavai taripat naahee. Without the Lord's Name, the world is poor. Without the Name, no one is satisfied.
en so gotent IBH TY UT Il (091-19, wg, He 3) doojai bharam bhulaa-i-aa ha-umai dukh paahee. He is deluded by duality and doubt. In egotism, he suffers in pain.
Yat ok
fag aot fas 5 usta A aTZ So I 1092-1, wg, we 3)
bin karmaa kichhoo na paa-ee-ai jay bahut lochaahee.
Without good karma, he does not obtain anything, no matter how much he may wish for it.
wire afe HH He Te Hate S|rd Il (1092-1, wg, ve 3)
aavai jaa-ay jammai marai gur sabad chhutaahee.
Coming and going in reincarnation, and birth and death are ended, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nity ad for nirdint gH t SST AEM (1092-2, wg, He 3) aap karai kis aakhee-ai doojaa ko naahee. ||16|| He Himself acts, so unto whom should we complain? There is no other at all. ||16]|
HS H2 3 Ill (1092-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fen wa xfs Ast us ufenr faa Afsag fifemr ys urfE I (1092-2, wg, He 3)
is jag meh santee Dhan khati-aa jinaa satgur mili-aa parabh aa-ay.
In this world, the Saints earn the wealth; they come to meet God through the True Guru.
Afsafe Ag ferfeur feR us at atHfs adt & ATE II (1092-3, wg, He 3)
satgur sach drirh-aa-i-aa is Dhan kee keemat kahee na jaa-ay.
The True Guru implants the Truth within; the value of this wealth cannot be described.
fez ofs urfimt gu oedt Ay efhor vfs wrfe II 092-4, wg, He 3) it Dhan paa-i-ai bhukh lathee sukh vasi-aa man aa-ay. Obtaining this wealth, hunger is relieved, and peace comes to dwell in the mind.
fiat a@ ufe ffm faat urfemr mite i (1092-4, wg, He 3) jin"aa ka-o Dhur likhi-aa tinee paa-i-aa aa-ay. Only those who have such pre-ordained destiny, come to receive this.
HoH Aas fesae 3 fer & fawate it (1092-5, wg, 8 3) manmukh jagat nirDhan hai maa-i-aa no billaa-ay. The world of the self-willed manmukh is poor, crying out for Maya.
wofes feget Het gd Tuo Ae ATE Il (1092-5, wg, He 3) an-din firdaa sadaa rahai bhukh na kaday jaa-ay. Night and day, it wanders continually, and its hunger is never relieved.
Aifs 3 ae ureet og AY SA HPS wrfe I (1092-5, xg, He 3) saa“t na kaday aavee nah sukh vasai man aa-ay. It never finds calm tranquility, and peace never comes to dwell in its mind.
Re fos fasger gd HOA ae 3 AME Il (1092-6, wg, He 3) sadaa chint chitvadaa rahai sahsaa kaday na jaa-ay. It is always plagued by anxiety, and its cynicism never departs.
ood fee Afsas ufs set Afsae 3 fe ST Hae GHTE I (1092-6, wg, 8 3)
naanak vin satgur mat bhavee satgur no milai taa sabad kamaa-ay.
O Nanak, without the True Guru, the intellect is perverted; if one meets the True Guru, then one practices the Word of the Shabad.
Ret Het AY Hfg ad AS Hs AME A (1092-7, wg, Hs 3) Sadaa sadaa sukh meh rahai sachay maahi samaa-ay. ||1]| Forever and ever, he dwells in peace, and merges in the True Lord. ||1]|
He 3 Il (092-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fafs Guret Heat et ATS aSfE I (1092-8, wg, He 3) jin upaa-ee maydnee so-ee saar karay-i. The One who created the world, takes care of it.
ea fnsg sfeag fan faa neg 3 afe II (1092-8, og, we 3)
ayko simrahu bhaa-irahu tis bin avar na ko-ay.
Meditate in remembrance on the One Lord, O Siblings of Destiny; there is none other than Him.
uret Hae dfemretor fas urd Aer feufs sfE it (1092-9, wg, us 3)
khaanaa sabad chang-aa-ee-aa jit khaaDhai sadaa taripat ho-ay.
So eat the food of the Shabad and goodness; eating it, you shall remain satisfied forever.
Use frefs note 3 Ae Het GI Saer Hor ae o SPE Il (1092-9, wg, Hs 3)
painan sifat sanaa-ay hai sadaa sadaa oh oojlaa mailaa kaday na ho-ay.
Dress yourself in the Praise of the Lord. Forever and ever, it is radiant and bright; it is never polluted.
Hon Ay ue ufenr dat ae & SPE Il (1092-10, 7g, ne 3) sehjay sach Dhan khati-aa thorhaa kaday na ho-ay. I have intuitively earned the true wealth, which never decreases.
ddt 6 Age Alerg 3 fay eT ET AY SE I (1092-10, wg, He 3) dayhee no sabad seegaar hai jit sadaa sadaa sukh ho-ay. The body is adorned with the Shabad, and is at peace forever and ever.
ood TeHfy ssi fan 3 orfu fears APE QI (092-11, wg, He 3) naanak gurmukh bujhee-ai jis no aap vikhaalay so-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Lord, who reveals Himself. ||2||
ust Il (1092-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nists Hu Su AAA ad Ast A II (1092-11, +g, He 3)
antar jap tap sanjamo gur sabdee jaapai.
Deep within the self are meditation and austere self-discipline, when one realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ofa af on four eH mifamrg ae I (1092-12, wg, He 3) har har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai ha-umai agi-aan gavaapai. Meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, egotism and ignorance are eliminated.
nieg nifyfs sous 3 oft Are AM II (1092-12, og, He 3) andar amrit bharpoor hai chaakhi-aa saad jaapai. One's inner being is overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar; tasting it, the flavor is known.
faa whmr A fsas@ se A ofa aft gry i (1092-13, og, Hs 3)
jin chaakhi-aa say nirbha-o bha-ay say har ras Dharaapai.
Those who taste it become fearless; they are satisfied with the sublime essence of the Lord.
ofa fasur ofe ubirfimr fafa ares 3 femmt 99 II 092-13, og, Hs 3)
har kirpaa Dhaar pee-aa-i-aa fir kaal na vi-aapai. ||17]|
Those who drink it in, by the Grace of the Lord, are never again afflicted by death. []17]|
HS H8 3 Ill (1092-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
BF niger at FS aost Te o fears af i 1092-14, wg, us 3) lok avganaa kee ban"ai ganth-rhee gun na vihaajhai ko-ay. People tie up bundles of demerits; no one deals in virtue.
TE XT WIA Sa feawr vet HE i (1092-15, wg, vs 3) gun kaa gaahak naankaa virlaa ko-ee ho-ay. Rare is that person, O Nanak, who purchases virtue.
Gs usAet ae uretafs fan 3 sefs aSfE wall (1092-15, wg, Hs 3)
gur parsaadee gun paa-ee-ani" jis no nadar karay-i. ||1]|
By Guru's Grace, one is blessed with virtue, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace. ||1||
He 3 Il (1092-16)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
awe Meade AHS ofa fa orfu ats aaste | (1092-16, wg, He 3) gun avgun samaan heh je aap keetay kartaar. Merits and demerits are the same; they are both created by the Creator.
ood Jath vfemt AY uh ae Aaet Sterfs i211 (1092-16, wg, He 3)
naanak hukam mani-ai sukh paa-ee-ai gur sabdee veechaar. ||2| |
O Nanak, one who obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command, finds peace, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2| |
ust Il (1092-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nets IAT Sus I umd ad fonr@ it (1092-17, wg, us 3) andar raajaa takhat hai aapay karay ni-aa-o. The King sits on the throne within the self; He Himself administers justice.
Gd Wael vg weet niefs Hos MASE Il (1092-17, wg, He 3)
gur sabdee dar jaanee-ai andar mahal asraa-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord's Court is known; within the self is the Sanctuary, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
ud usta us uTehafs dfent ardt aE i (1092-18, wg, Hs 3)
kharay parakh khajaanai paa-ee-an khoti-aa naahee thaa-o.
The coins are assayed, and the genuine coins are placed in His treasury, while the counterfeit ones find no place.
Ag Ae Ay gage Ae Ay fone i (1092-18, wg, He 3) sabh sacho sach varatdaa sadaa sach ni-aa-o. The Truest of the True is all-pervading; His justice is forever True.
nifys ot oA orfenr fs Sfrmi oS NACH (1092-19, wg, He 3)
amrit kaa ras aa-i-aa man vasi-aa naa-o. ||18]|
One comes to enjoy the Ambrosial essence, when the Name is enshrined in the mind. ||18]|
HEX H2 % Il (1092-19)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
US H at St ad J deta TS ats il (1092-19, wg, we
ha-o mai karee taa™ too naahee too hoveh ha-o naahi.
When one acts in egotism, then You are not there, Lord. Wherever You are, there is no ego.
at 9ots
asg fomrat ase Sa nice TET He HM Il (1093-1, wg, He 1) boojhhu gi-aanee boojh-naa ayh akath kathaa man maahi. O spiritual teachers, understand this: the Unspoken Speech is in the mind.
fag ae 33 5 US ney ZA AS HM II (1093-1, »g, He 1)
bin gur tat na paa-ee-ai alakh vasai sabh maahi.
Without the Guru, the essence of reality is not found; the Invisible Lord dwells everywhere.
Afsag fixe 3 web At Age SA HO HME II (1093-2, og, He 1)
satgur milai ta jaanee-ai jaa‘ sabad vasai man maabhi.
One meets the True Guru, and then the Lord is known, when the Word of the Shabad comes to dwell in the mind.
nny afer gH 3B afenr ASH Hes BA AMS Il (1093-2, wg, He 1)
aap ga-i-aa bharam bha-o ga-i-aa janam maran dukh jaahi.
When self-conceit departs, doubt and fear also depart, and the pain of birth and death is removed.
Tans vesy waeha SSH HfS SHAT il (1093-3, wg, we
gurmat alakh lakhaa-ee-ai ootam mat taraahi.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the Unseen Lord is seen; the intellect is exalted, and One is carried across.
ood Ad JA ay Aug fysee fA MFT AI (1093-3, wg, He 1)
naanak soha™ hansaa jap jaapahu taribhavan tisai samaahi. ||1]|
O Nanak, chant the chant of 'Sohang hansaa' - 'He is me, and I am Him.' The three worlds are absorbed in Him. ||1||
He 8 Il (093-4)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ho Hed fafo usftimr aa Aaet Starts i 1093-4, wg, ws 3) man maanak jin parkhi-aa gur sabdee veechaar. Some assay their mind-jewel, and contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
A a6 fess webifs aoaa feta AAS I (1093-5, wg, He 3)
say jan virlay jaanee-ahi kaljug vich sansaar.
Only a few of those humble beings are known in this world, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
nm & niry ffs sfoor TBH efor oefa II (1093-5, wg, He 3)
aapai no aap mil rahi-aa ha-umai dubiDhaa maar.
One's self remains blended with the Lord's Self, when egotism and duality are conquered.
soa OTH TS BSI Sd SCAG faun AAT III (1093-6, wg, He 3)
naanak naam ratay dutar taray bha-ojal bikham sansaar. ||2||
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam cross over the difficult, treacherous and terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
UugatT Il (1093-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
HOHY nigT & SHSt HS MTHS Il (1093-6, wg, Hs 3)
manmukh andar na bhaalnee muthay ahamtay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not search within their own selves; they are deluded by their egotistical pride.
awd ast sfe aa niefs fsx FS Il (1093-7, wg, ue 3)
chaaray kundaa” bhav thakay andar tikh tatay.
Wandering in the four directions, they grow weary, tormented by burning desire within.
fifqfs AAS 3 Host HoHY fears II (1093-7, wg, He 3)
simrit saasat na soDhnee manmukh vigutay.
They do not study the Simritees and the Shaastras; the manmukhs waste away and are lost.
fag as fads 5 ute ofa any ofa AS Il (1093-7, wg, He 3) bin gur kinai na paa-i-o har naam har satay. Without the Guru, no one finds the Naam, the Name of the True Lord.
33 fomrg gtafour ate Afu afe aS NACI (1093-8, wg, He 3)
tat gi-aan veechaari-aa har jap har gatay. ||19]|
One who contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom and meditates on the Lord is saved. ||19]|
HBA Hs 2 Il (1093-8)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
mn ATS ad uirfy mmd wire aA I (1093-9, wg, He 2) aapay jaanai karay aap aapay aanai raas. He Himself knows, He Himself acts, and He Himself does it right.
FSA oid coat ufsfe ats mgefA All (1093-9, wg, He 2) tisai agai naankaa khali-ay keechai ardaas. ||1]| So stand before Him, O Nanak, and offer your prayers. ||1||
He 4% Il (1093-9) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fafs ater ffs Sfimr mmt wre AfE I (1093-9, wg, He 1) jin kee-aa tin daykhi-aa aapay jaanai so-ay. He who created the creation, watches over it; He Himself knows.
for 3 adit area at wife eas AF AfE QI (1093-10, wg, we 1)
kis no kahee-ai naankaa jaa ghar vartai sabh ko-ay. ||2| |
Unto whom should I speak, O Nanak, when everything is contained within the home of the heart? ||2]]|
UST Il (1093-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS aa ferfs feat firs afa ii 1093-11, rg, He 1) sabhay thok visaar iko mit kar. Forget everything, and be friends with the One Lord alone.
He 30 df feos unr ed af It (1093-11, wg, He 1) man tan ho-ay nihaal paapaa dahai har. Your mind and body shall be enraptured, and the Lord shall burn away your sins.
wise Frat gat Hoty @ As Hfs II (1093-11, og, He 1)
aavan jaanaa chukai janam na jaahi mar.
Your comings and goings in reincarnation shall cease; you shall not be reborn and die again.
Ag oH urorg Afar 3 Afo Afs il (1093-12, xg, He 1)
sach naam aaDhaar sog na mohi jar.
The True Name shall be your Support, and you shall not burn in sorrow and attachment.
soa oH fous HS Ha AfA Ute iOll (1093-12, wg, He 1)
naanak naam niDhaan man meh sanj Dhar. ||20||
O Nanak, gather in the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your mind. ||20]|
HBa He U Il (1093-13)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
Heer Hog o Sr Hiat SH SH I (1093-13, wg, Hs 5) maa-i-aa manhu na veesrai maa‘gai dammaa damm. You do not forget Maya from your mind; you beg for it with each and every breath.
A yg fats 5 urect saa dt ATH IA (1093-13, wg, He 5) So parabh chit na aavee naanak nahee karamm. ||1]| You do not even think of that God; O Nanak, it is not in your karma. ||1]|
He U Il (1093-14)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hfeor Ata 3 seet fori wuerefs nit Il (1093-14, wg, Hs 5)
maa-i-aa saath na chal-ee ki-aa laptaavahi anDh.
Maya and its wealth shall not go along with you, so why do you cling to it - are you blind?
qs a vse fourfe 3 s]efs wfeur so 2M (1093-14, wg, He 5) gur kay charan Dhi-aa-ay too tooteh maa-i-aa banDh. ||2]| Meditate on the Guru's Feet, and the bonds of Maya shall be cut away from you. ||2||
UugST Il (1093-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ae Jou HoreGe sre AY urfeMr Il (1093-15, Wg, He 5)
bhaanai hukam manaa-i-on bhaanai sukh paa-i-aa.
By the Pleasure of His Will, the Lord inspires us to obey the Hukam of His Command; by the Pleasure of His Will, we find peace.
ae Afsag AfsGe ae Ag femrfenr It 1093-15, wg, He 5)
bhaanai satgur mayli-on bhaanai sach Dhi-aa-i-aa.
By the Pleasure of His Will, He leads us to meet the True Guru; by the Pleasure of His Will, we meditate on the Truth.
we Aes da ots odt Ay orf Harfemr Ih (1093-16, 7g, He 5)
bhaanay jayvad hor daat naahee sach aakh sunaa-i-aa.
There is no other gift as great as the Pleasure of His Will; this Truth is spoken and proclaimed.
fra ag usta fotimr fsa Ag aH I (1093-16, 4g, 42 5) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin sach kamaa-i-aa. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, practice and live the Truth.
Sod fH Adarast fafs Aas Curfenr 12a 093-17, wg, ue 5) naanak tis sarnaagatee jin jagat upaa-i-aa. ||21]| Nanak has entered His Sanctuary; He created the world. ||21||
HBa H8 3 Il (1093-17)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
faa a niefs fomire oct & at orct fife I 093-17, wg, He 3)
jin ka-o andar gi-aan nahee bhai kee naahee bind.
Those who do not have spiritual wisdom within, do not have even an iota of the Fear of God.
oa Hfear ar far ugar fa rf ns ae All (1093-18, wg, He 3) naanak mu-i-aa kaa ki-aa maarnaa je aap maaray govind. ||1]||
O Nanak, why kill those who are already dead? The Lord of the Universe Himself has killed them. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1093-18)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ho at ust seat Aut J AY ATG Il (1093-19, wg, He 3) man kee patree vaachnee sukhee hoo sukh saar. To read the horoscope of the mind, is the most sublime joyful peace.
AQ OHS so" nmiba ft eS FIN Ass Il 1093-19, wg, m2 3) so baraahman bhalaa aakhee-ai je boojhai barahm beechaar. He alone is called a good Brahmin, who understands God in contemplative meditation.
dfs Ard ofa us aa & Rafe Stes I (1093-19, wg, He 3)
har saalaahay har parhai gur kai sabad veechaar.
He praises the Lord, and reads of the Lord, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
at 9oxKs
uifeor Gg uses 3 ft ae aT as Burg il (1094-1, og, ne 3)
aa-i-aa oh parvaan hai je kul kaa karay uDhaar.
Celebrated and approved is the coming into the world of such a person, who saves all his generations as well.
mat Wf 3 udht asst HAE I AT Il (1094-1, wg, He 3)
agai jaat na puchhee-ai karnee sabad hai saar.
Hereafter, no one is questioned about social status; excellent and sublime is the practice of the Word of the Shabad.
dg 8s use’ ay aneat fatto ats fimrg il (1094-2, og, we 3) hor koorh parh-naa koorh kamaavanaa bikhi-aa naal pi-aar. Other study is false, and other actions are false; such people are in love with poison.
niet AY o Jeet HOHE AON WAT” Il (1094-2, wg, He 3)
andar sukh na hova-ee manmukh janam khu-aar.
They do not find any peace within themselves; the self-willed manmukhs waste away their lives.
ood oth a3 A Cad aa & 3fS mnrfa MN (1094-3, wg, He 3)
naanak naam ratay say ubray gur kai hayt apaar. ||2||
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are saved; they have infinite love for the Guru. ||2||
ugat Il (1094-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nrg ats afs Suet mM AF AV il (1094-3, wg, ws 3) aapay kar kar vaykh-daa aapay sabh sachaa. He Himself creates the creation, and gazes upon it; He Himself is totally True.
HUGH 3 YS YAH a At Bg AT Il (1094-4, org, ws 3)
jo hukam na boojhai khasam kaa so-ee nar kachaa.
One who does not understand the Hukam, the Command of his Lord and Master, is false.
fas ae fas ofeer gant ofa AST II (1094-4, wg, Hs 3) jit bhaavai tit laa-idaa gurmukh har sachaa. By the Pleasure of His Will, the True Lord joins the Gurmukh to Himself.
Aso a Afog Sa FT Te Ast FUT I (1094-5, wg, Hs 3)
sabhnaa kaa saahib ayk hai gur sabdee rachaa.
He is the One Lord and Master of all; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are blended with Him.
aoufa wet Heda Afs fSR SF AS II (1094-5, wg, He 3) gurmukh sadaa salaahee-ai sabh tis day jachaa. The Gurmukhs praise Him forever; all are beggars of Him.
faG soa urfu oafeer fee dt Sa QQ AT Il (1094-5, wg, He 3)
ji-o naanak aap nachaa-idaa tiv hee ko nachaa. ||22||1|| suDh. O Nanak, as He Himself makes us dance, we dance. ||22||1]| Sudh]|
Hg ST HIG U SAE HSU (1094-7) maaroo vaar mehlaa 5 dakh-nay mehlaa 5 Vaar Of Maaroo, Fifth Mehl, Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsara yATfE il (1094-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 UG Ane Hisor set fia SSTe Il (1094-8, wg, Hs 5) too cha-o sajan maidi-aa day-ee sis utaar. If You tell me to, O my Friend, I will cut off my head and give it to You.
de HfsiA Sane afe unt Sterg WA (1094-8, wg, He 5) nain mahinjay tarasday kad pasee deedaar. ||1]|| My eyes long for You; when will I see Your Vision? ||1]|
Hé U Il (094-8) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
dtd Hfdet 3E ate fier Sa avs SU Il (1094-8, wg, He 5) neehu mahinjaa ta-oo naal bi-aa nayh koorhaavay daykh. I am in love with You; I have seen that other love is false.
aus sa saves frag fudt o Sy MQM (1094-9, wg, ne 5) kaparh bhog daraavanay jichar piree na daykh. ||2|| Even clothes and food are frightening to me, as long as I do not see my Beloved. ||2]|
Hé U Il (094-9) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Cat Fe ass IS uAt SS eters I (1094-10, wg, we 5) uthee jhaaloo kant-rhay ha-o pasee ta-o deedaar. I rise early, O my Husband Lord, to behold Your Vision.
AHS Id SHG A fae uA ofs GA BT Ill (1094-10, wg, 2 5)
kaajal haar tamol ras bin pasay habh ras chhaar. ||3]|
Eye make-up, garlands of flowers, and the flavor of betel leaf, are all nothing but dust, without seeing You. ||3]|
UST Il (1094-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae AtvE AY AY AS Os I (1094-11, wg, He 5) too sachaa saahib sach sach sabh Dhaari-aa. You are True, O my True Lord and Master; You uphold all that is true.
qonfy ats we fafa Aerfamr it (1094-11, wg, Hs 5) gurmukh keeto thaat siraj sansaari-aa. You created the world, making a place for the Gurmukhs.
ofa wrfamr Je Se uy Us Stefan it (1094-11, wg, ue 5)
har aagi-aa ho-ay bayd paap punn veechaari-aa.
By the Will of the Lord, the Vedas came into being; they discriminate between sin and virtue.
gon fang Hun 3 Te fanerfanr i (1094-12, wg, Hs 5) barahmaa bisan mahays tarai gun bisthaari-aa. You created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, and the expanse of the three qualities.
oe Us fyent ata ofs ga Aten i (1094-12, wg, He 5) nav khand parithmee saaj har rang savaari-aa. Creating the world of the nine regions, O Lord, You have embellished it with beauty.
zat HS Cure nists awe afar | (1094-13, wg, He 5) vaykee jant upaa-ay antar kal Dhaari-aa. Creating the beings of various kinds, You infused Your power into them.
30 nig o we afe Ag fRaneofanr II (1094-13, wg, He 5) tayraa ant na jaanai ko-ay sach sirjanhaari-aa. No one knows Your limit, O True Creator Lord.
3 wets As fafa orf qoute forsttamr nail (1094-13, wg, He 5) too jaaneh sabh biDh aap gurmukh nistaari-aa. ||1]|| You Yourself know all ways and means; You Yourself save the Gurmukhs. ||1] |
SYS H3 U Il (1094-14)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
A 3 fy wnrss foo oct a Sefe Ml 1094-14, wg, He 5) jay too mitar asaadrhaa hik bhoree naa vaychhorh. If You are my friend, then don't separate Yourself from me, even for an instant.
mM ufder 38 Afr afe unt Ast Sfs WAN (1094-15, wg, He 5) jee-o mahinjaa ta-o mohi-aa kad pasee jaanee tohi. ||1|| My soul is fascinated and enticed by You; when will I see You, O my Love? ||1]|
He U Il (1094-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
INS J AS Sat fees nfs AT i (1094-15, wg, ws 5) durjan too jal bhaahrhee vichhorhay mar jaahi. Burn in the fire, you evil person; O separation, be dead.
ase 3 AG AnSt HS as Ty Bats MQM (1094-16, wg, Hs 5) kantaa too sa-o sayjrhee maidaa habho dukh ulaahi. ||2|| O my Husband Lord, please sleep upon my bed, that all my sufferings may be gone.
21 |
He U Il (1094-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
INS EAT HE FT Feat IGH FT Il (1094-16, wg, ws 5)
durjan doojaa bhaa-o hai vaychhorhaa ha-umai rog.
The evil person is engrossed in the love of duality; through the disease of egotism, he suffers separation.
Ane Ae ufsag fan ffs ats Sa Si (1094-17, wg, 8 5) Sajan sachaa paatisaahu jis mil keechai bhog. ||3]| The True Lord King is my friend; meeting with Him, I am so happy. ||3]|
ust Il (1094-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 moa tens ants Sat aS ad AE Il (1094-17, wg, v8 5) too agam da-i-aal bay-ant tayree keemat kahai ka-un. You are inaccessible, merciful and infinite; who can estimate Your worth?
30 fhefmr Ag AAG 3 ofeq Hae SVE Il (1094-18, wg, He 5) tuDh sirji-aa sabh sansaar too naa-ik sagal bha-un. You created the entire universe; You are the Master of all the worlds.
Sct avefs afe o WE AT SaT Aa IVE Il (1094-19, wg, He 5) tayree kudrat ko-ay na jaanai mayray thaakur sagal ra-un. No one knows Your creative power, O my all-pervading Lord and Master.
3y nuts af 3 Aa 3 nifsort Aa Sage Il (1094-19, wg, He 5) tuDh aparh ko-ay na sakai too abhinaasee jag uDhran. No one can equal You; You are imperishable and eternal, the Savior of the world.
ust you
BO OU Ws Aa JF ATS Aas UGS Il (1095-1, wg, we 5) tuDh thaapay chaaray jug too kartaa sagal Dharan. You established the four ages; You are the Creator of all worlds.
3U nee War ahr Sy Bu o Bal FFE Il (1095-1, wg, He 5)
tuDh aavan jaanaa kee-aa tuDh layp na lagai tarin.
You created the comings and goings of reincarnation; not even a particle of filth sticks to You.
fan defo orfu efemrs fan orefa Afsare BIE Il (1095-2, wg, He 5) jis hoveh aap da-i-aal tis laaveh satgur charan. As you are merciful, You attach us to the Feet of the True Guru.
3 dag Curie 3 osdt nifsant fAfe ATE MM (1095-2, wg, 43 5)
too horat upaa-ay na labhhee abhinaasee sarisat karan. ||2]|
You cannot be found by any other efforts; You are the eternal, imperishable Creator of the Universe. ||2]|
Sue H8 U Il (1095-3)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
A 3 esta vine Us cats Hae AE i (1095-3, og, He 5) jay too vateh any-nay habh Dharat suhaavee ho-ay. If You come into my courtyard, all the earth becomes beautiful.
fran &3 aodt Hat SS o us AE WA (1095-3, wg, He 5) hikas kantai baahree maidee vaat na puchhai ko-ay. ||1]|| Other than the One Lord, my Husband, no one else cares for me. ||1]|
H8 U Il (095-4) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Js 2B ASS AY FST nies Hf Il (1095-4, wg, ws 5)
habhay tol suhaavanay saho baithaa anyan mal.
All my adornments become beautiful, when You, O Lord, sit in my courtyard and make it Yours.
udt o 2@ fagaar A wife mire af MI (1095-4, wg, He 5) pahee na vanjai birtharhaa jo ghar aavai chal. ||2]| Then no traveller who comes to my home shall leave empty-handed. ||2| |
He U Il (1095-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Ad feeret &3 X aot Tg Alar” Il (1095-5, wg, 8 5)
sayj vichhaa-ee kant koo kee-aa habh seegaar.
I have spread out my bed for You, O my Husband Lord, and applied all my decorations.
fest HfS o AHeet A af ufsar Tg NBII (095-5, wg, He 5) itee manjh na samaava-ee jay gal pahiraa haar. ||3]| But even this is not pleasing to me, to wear a garland around my neck. |[3]|
UugST Il (1095-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 WSqaH USHA Hfs 3 niTedt Il (1095-6, wg, He 5) too paarbarahm parmaysar jon na aavhee. O Supreme Lord God, O Transcendent Lord, You do not take birth.
3 goot Aafo fqafe Ata AHTSdt I (1095-6, Hg, He 5)
too hukmee saajeh sarisat saaj samaavahee.
By the Hukam of Your Command, You formed the Universe; forming it, You merge into it.
so gu o wet oftmr fas sso fomredt it (1095-7, wg, He 5) tayraa roop na jaa-ee lakhi-aa ki-o tujheh Dhi-aavahee. Your Form cannot be known; how can one meditate on You?
3 Ag ufo zaste wrfu qeafs Suredt i (1095-7, wg, H2 5)
too sabh meh varteh aap kudrat daykhaavahee. You are pervading and permeating all; You Yourself reveal Your creative potency.
3a safs 33 garg Sfe & mired Il (1095-8, wg, He 5) tayree bhagat bharay bhandaar tot na aavhee. Your treasures of devotional worship are overflowing; they never decrease.
Sfo Jas AeId BS AH 3S ued Il (1095-8, wg, ws 5) ayhi ratan javayhar laal kKeem na paavhee. These gems, jewels and diamonds - their value cannot be estimated.
fan defo orfu efemrs fon Afsas Aet rect Il (1095-8, wg, ne 5) jis hoveh aap da-i-aal tis satgur sayvaa laavhee. As You Yourself become merciful, Lord, You link us to the service of the True Guru.
fsH ae o ore Sfe Ft ofa Te Wed WI (1095-9, wg, He 5) tis kaday na aavai tot jo har gun gaavhee. ||3]|| One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, never suffers any deficiency. ||3]|
Sue H8 U Il (1095-10)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
WH UAT Jo H fust Hfon atte I (1095-10, og, He 5) jaa moo pasee hath mai piree mahijai naal. When I look within my being, I find that my Beloved is with me.
Js su Carfomn aad deta feats IA (1095-10, wg, Hs 5) habhay dukh ulaahi-am naanak nadar nihaal. ||1]| All pains are relieved, O Nanak, when He bestows His Glance of Grace. ||1]|
He U Il (1095-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
oN 5
Sot Far sa VE BH Als VY war il (1095-11, wg, us 5)
naanak baithaa bhakhay vaa-o lammay sayveh dar kharhaa.
Nanak sits, waiting for news of the Lord, and stands at the Lord's Door; serving Him for so long.
fudté 3 we nfo re Wet AE He MST QI (1095-11, +g, He 5) piree-ay too jaan mahijaa saa-o jo-ee saa-ee muhu kharhaa. ||2|| O my Beloved, only You know my objective; I stand, waiting to see the Lord's face.
21 |
He U Il (1095-12)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
foor artes ge us Sf o AT ATF Il (1095-12, wg, 2 5)
ki-aa galaa-i-o bhoochh par vayl na johay kant too.
What should I say to you, you fool? Don't look at the vines of others - be a true husband.
soa soe Het ats fufaur gg AAT fAS SI (1095-12, wg, He 5) naanak fulaa sandee vaarh khirhi-aa habh sansaar ji-o. ||3] | O Nanak, the entire world is blooming, like a garden of flowers. ||3]|
UST Il (1095-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Aug AWE AGU 3 AS Hfs FIST Il (1095-13, wg, He 5) sugharh sujaan saroop too sabh meh vartantaa. You are Wise, all-knowing and beautiful; You are pervading and permeating all.
3 MM SAT Aa MM YAS Il (1095-13, wg, Hz 5)
too aapay thaakur sayvko aapay poojantaa.
You Yourself are the Lord and Master, and the servant; You worship and adore Yourself.
aor atar nirfly J mM ASST Il (1095-14, wg, we 5) daanaa beenaa aap too aapay satvantaa. You are all-wise and all-seeing; You Yourself are true and pure.
Ast ASt ys fesner AS ofe SALT Il (1095-14, wg, ue 5) jatee satee parabh nirmalaa mayray har bhagvantaa. The Immaculate Lord, my Lord God, is celibate and True.
AS YIN uA uAES my BBS I (1095-14, 7g, ue 5) sabh barahm pasaar pasaari-o aapay khaylantaa. God spreads out the expanse of the entire universe, and He Himself plays in it.
feg ore gee sure afs dH SYST I (1095-15, wg, He 5)
ih aavaa gavan rachaa-i-o kar choj daykhantaa.
He created this coming and going of reincarnation; creating the wondrous play, He gazes upon it.
fen wofs nafs 5 wedt fan defo ae HS I 4095-15, wg, He 5)
tis baahurh garabh na paavhee jis dayveh gur manntaa.
One who is blessed with the Guru's Teachings, is not consigned to the womb of reincarnation, ever again.
fa@ orfu serets f3@ soe fae ef S AS ISI (1095-16, wg, He 5)
ji-o aap chalaaveh ti-o chalday kichh vas na jantaa. ||4||
All walk as He makes them walk; nothing is under the control of the created beings. [141]
Bue H8 U Il (1095-16)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
ade ade efeur sf wat Hass Il (1095-17, wg, He 5) kuree-ay kuree-ay vaidi-aa tal gaarhaa mehrayr. You are walking along the river-bank, but the land is giving way beneath you.
au feefs died ath fire Ug ail (095-17, wg, ue 5) vaykhay chhitarh theevdo jaam khisando payr. ||1|| Watch out! Your foot might slip, and you'll fall in and die. ||1]|
He U Il (1095-18)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
AY We ay Ses J nmy nm} AS! Il (1095-18, wg, we 5) sach jaanai kach vaidi-o too aaghoo aaghay salvay. You believe what is false and temporary to be true, and so you run on and on.
aoa nTsAat Hf Se far els uate fAS AHS 20 co9s-18, wg, Hs 5) naanak aatasrhee manjh nainoo bi-aa dhal paban ji-o jummi-o. ||2]| O Nanak, like butter in the fire, it shall melt away; it shall fade away like the water-lily.
21 |
Hs U Il (1095-19) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
sx San + Aa
3I SI ISS AEe MHA Il (1095-19, Hg, H8 5) bhoray bhoray roohrhay sayvayday aalak. O my foolish and silly soul, why are you too lazy to serve?
Hes uet faretor fete as urs ofS USI (1095-19, wg, Hs 5) mudat pa-ee chiraanee-aa fir kadoo aavai rut. ||3]| Such a long time has passed. When will this opportunity come again? ||3]|
at AoE
uCat II (1096-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Bo gu 3 Sftmr ats J FIot AIT Il (1096-1, wg, He 5) tuDh roop na raykh-i-aa jaat too varnaa baahraa. You have no form or shape, no social class or race.
S HSH Wels Ufs J ZIshs ATT Il (1096-1, wg, He 5) ay maanas jaaneh door too varteh jaahraa. These humans believe that You are far away; but You are quite obviously apparent.
3 Als we sate orf 3g Su B HIT Il (1096-2, wg, we 5) too sabh ghat bhogeh aap tuDh layp na laahraa. You enjoy Yourself in every heart, and no filth sticks to You.
3 UsY mdet mds AS APS AWTS Il (1096-2, wg, Hs 5) too purakh anandee anant sabh jot samaaharaa. You are the blissful and infinite Primal Lord God; Your Light is all-pervading.
3 Ag te ufo te fas SoIT Il (1096-3, rg, He 5)
too sabh dayvaa meh dayv biDhaatay narharaa.
Among all divine beings, You are the most divine, O Creator-architect, Rejuvenator of all.
foot wired frost fea 3 mifsarrt mrrauat i (1096-3, wg, 42 5)
ki-aa aaraaDhay jihvaa ik too abhinaasee aparparaa.
How can my single tongue worship and adore You? You are the eternal, imperishable, infinite Lord God.
fan Hats Afsag urfu fsA a Afs AG IT I (1096-3, wg, He 5) jis mayleh satgur aap tis kay sabh kul taraa. One whom You Yourself unite with the True Guru - all his generations are saved.
Aga Als age Az ae SSA AG ST MUI (1096-4, wg, we 5) sayvak sabh karday sayv dar naanak jan tayraa. ||5|| All Your servants serve You; Nanak is a humble servant at Your Door. ||5||
SYS H3 U Il (1096-5)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
ddsaa fafe sfenr ares afeSg ata il (1096-5, wg, He 5) gehdrharhaa tarin chhaa-i-aa gaafal jali-ohu bhaahi. He builds a hut of straw, and the fool lights a fire in it.
frat sat Heads fee CAs] uate IAI (1096-5, wg, He 5)
jinaa bhaag mathaaharhai tin ustaad panaahi. ||1]|
Only those who have such pre-ordained destiny on their foreheads, find Shelter with the Master. ||1]|
Hs U Il (096-6) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
aad ulor uar Apa four wife HSAE Il (1096-6, wg, He 5) naanak peethaa pakaa saaji-aa Dhari-aa aan ma-ujood. O Nanak, he grinds the corn, cooks it and places it before himself.
MST AIT wus IS SS TIT MMI (1096-6, wg, ws 5) baajhahu satgur aapnay baithaa jhaak darood. ||2|| But without his True Guru, he sits and waits for his food to be blessed. ||2| |
Hé U Il 096-7) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Soa SAS uarehar urehar ars fT il (1096-7, nrg, ve 5) naanak bhusree-aa pakaa-ee-aa paa-ee-aa thaalai maahi. O Nanak, the loaves of bread are baked and placed on the plate.
frat ag Hofeor ofa ofa wet ufo Sil (096-7, wg, He 5) jinee guroo manaa-i-aa raj raj say-ee khaahi. ||3]| Those who obey their Guru, eat and are totally satisfied. ||3]|
UST Il (1096-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
30 Ha vfs Ue sofemr fefs IBH ureter I (1096-8, wg, He 5) tuDh jag meh khayl rachaa-i-aa vich ha-umai paa-ee-aa. You have staged this play in the world, and infused egotism into all beings.
ea deg uv de afs fos aafa sfamreor It (1096-8, wg, He 5) ayk mandar panch chor heh nit karahi buri-aa-ee-aa. In the one temple of the body are the five thieves, who continually misbehave.
2A odt fea uay afs eA Afe Saver | (1096-9, wg, He 5)
das naaree ik purakh kar dasay saad lobhaa-ee-aa.
The ten brides, the sensory organs were created, and the one husband, the self; the ten are engrossed in flavors and tastes.
ffs wfenr Haat Hobo fos feafa sane I 1096-9, wg, He 5) ayn maa-i-aa mohnee mohee-aa nit fireh bharmaa-ee-aa. This Maya fascinates and entices them; they wander continually in doubt.
vor de atsté fire Hafs ease I (1096-10, wg, He 5) haathaa dovai keetee-o siv sakat vartaa-ee-aa. You created both sides, spirit and matter, Shiva and Shakti.
fre niet Hast ofr S23 afe sree Il (1096-10, wg, He 5) Siv agai saktee haari-aa ayvai har bhaa-ee-aa. Matter loses out to spirit; this is pleasing to the Lord.
fefa feag dt sa sftimr Ff ASAfa froretor i (1096-11, wg, Hs 5)
ik vichahu hee tuDh rakhi-aa jo satsang milaa-ee-aa.
You enshrined spirit within, which leads to merger with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
n@ fesg fis Cotes Ae wfs ANTS EN 096-11, Hg, He 5)
jal vichahu bimb uthaali-o jal maahi samaa-ee-aa. ||6] |
Within the bubble, You formed the bubble, which shall once again merge into the water. ||6||
Sue Hs U Il (1096-12) dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
wrara X shy fuer Sfa S HIST Il (1096-12, wg, He 5) aagaahaa koo taraagh pichhaa fayr na muhadrhaa. Look ahead; don't turn your face backwards.
ood fafs feea aa sofa 5 det AOHST INA (1096-13, wg, He 5)
naanak sijh ivayhaa vaar bahurh na hovee janamrhaa. ||1]| O Nanak, be successful this time, and you shall not be reincarnated again. ||1]|
He U Il (1096-13)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Ade Hat web gs adt a fez Il (1096-13, wg, ne 5) sajan maidaa chaa-ee-aa habh kahee daa mit. My joyful friend is called the friend of all.
Us Wale nruar adt 6 oT FIT iM (1096-14, wg, we 5) habhay jaanan aapnaa kahee na thaahay chit. ||2|| All think of Him as their own; He never breaks anyone's heart. ||2||
He U Il (1096-14)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
TIS" BAY BS Ha dt use| fer i (1096-14, wg, us 5) gujh-rhaa laDham laal mathai hee pargat thi-aa. The hidden jewel has been found; it has appeared on my forehead.
Ret Aas" arg fra fuse aaa At J sfonr W3il (1096-15, wg, Hs 5) so-ee suhaavaa thaan jithai piree-ay naanak jee too vuthi-aa. ||3]|| Beautiful and exalted is that place, O Nanak, where You dwell, O my Dear Lord. ||3]|
UST Il (1096-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
W SHS She F 3 fot HIE Il (1096-15, wg, 43 5) jaa too mayrai val hai taa ki-aa muhchhandaa. When You are on my side, Lord, what do I need to worry about?
3u Ag fae HS ACfimr A Sa Fe Il (1096-16, wg, He 5) tuDh sabh kichh maino sa-upi-aa jaa tayraa bandaa. You entrusted everything to me, when I became Your slave.
out sfe o mrset ue uafs der I (1096-16, wg, He 5)
lakhmee tot na aavee khaa-ay kharach rahandaa. My wealth is inexhaustible, no matter how much I spend and consume.
wy VBaTHtT Heal AS AS AGE™ Il (1096-17, wg, ne 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh maydnee sabh sayv karandaa. The 8.4 million species of beings all work to serve me.
fg ect fig vfs atfsur og Hats Her i (1096-17, wg, Hs 5) ayh vairee mitar sabh keeti-aa nah mangeh mandaa. All these enemies have become my friends, and no one wishes me ill.
Su afe o uset wr ofa suAer I (1096-17, wg, Hs 5) laykhaa ko-ay na puchh-ee jaa har bhakhsandaa. No one calls me to account, since God is my forgiver.
wide sfeur AY utfemr fife ae aifser i 096-18, wg, He 5)
anand bha-i-aa sukh paa-i-aa mil gur govindaa.
I have become blissful, and I have found peace, meeting with the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
AS OH Aeon AT SO STSET IDI (1096-18, wg, He 5) sabhay kaaj savaari-ai jaa tuDh bhaavandaa. ||7|| All my affairs have been resolved, since You are pleased with me. ||7||
Sue H3 U Il (1096-19)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
Bue TF HASTA HY fara 3S aat il 1096-19, wg, ve 5) daykhan koo mustaak mukh kijayhaa ta-o Dhanee. I am so eager to see You, O Lord; what does Your face look like?
feser fas wis a fsou 3 HS Ofumr IAN (1096-19, wg, He 5)
firdaa kitai haal jaa ditham taa man Dharaapi-aa. ||1]|
I wandered around in such a miserable state, but when I saw You, my mind was comforted and consoled. ||1]|
at 9oKD
H8 U Il (097-1) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
cdot use we SIH AS F Vet Il (1097-1, wg, we 5) dukhee-aa darad ghanay vaydan jaanay too Dhanee. The miserable endure so much suffering and pain; You alone know their pain, Lord.
Wet oy se fudt fade at ASAT QI (1097-1, wg, He 5) jaanaa lakh bhavay piree dikhando taa jeevsaa. ||2||
I may know hundreds of thousands of remedies, but I shall live only if I see my Husband Lord. ||2]|
He U Il (1097-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
woet ate asta cafe ede A fsfenr It 1097-2, wg, us 5) dhahdee jaa-ay karaar vahan vahanday mai dithi-aa. I have seen the river-bank washed away by the raging waters of the river.
Ret gd mnt frat Afsagd sfemr Sil (1097-2, wg, He 5)
say-ee rahay amaan jinaa satgur bhayti-aa. ||3]| They alone remain intact, who meet with the True Guru. ||3]|
ust Il (1097-3)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
fan Ho Sct gu 3 fs ey o femme I (1097-3, wg, He 5)
jis jan tayree bhukh hai tis dukh na vi-aapai.
No pain afflicts that humble being who hungers for You, Lord. fafe vfs aeufe sfsor A og ast AT I (1097-3, wg, He 5)
jin jan gurmukh bujhi-aa so chahu kundee jaapai. That humble Gurmukh who understands, is celebrated in the four directions.
fi og GH at Haat ud fsR aafs unt Il (1097-4, og, He 5) jo nar us kee sarnee parai tis kambeh paapai. Sins run away from that man, who seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord.
HOH ASH ot HE S3s TT gst SU I (1097-4, wg, ws 5)
janam janam kee mal utrai gur Dhoorhee naapai.
The filth of countless incarnations is washed away, bathing in the dust of the Guru's feet.
fafs ofa svat Hfsmr fSH Aa o ASU Il (1097-5, wg, He 5) jin har bhaanaa mani-aa tis sog na santaapai. Whoever submits to the Lord's Will does not suffer in sorrow.
ofs Me 3 Asa a fee 3 Afs Aefa MM II (1097-5, wg, Hs 5) har jee-o too sabhnaa kaa mit hai sabh jaaneh aapai. O Dear Lord, You are the friend of all; all believe that You are theirs.
MAL AST AS at Aes Ths UTS Il (1097-6, wg, ue 5)
aisee sobhaa janai kee jayvad har partaapai.
The glory of the Lord's humble servant is as great as the Glorious Radiance of the Lord.
AS nists AS zastfenr afs AS 3 AN ITI (1097-6, wg, He 5)
sabh antar jan vartaa-i-aa har jan tay jaapai. ||8]|
Among all, His humble servant is pre-eminent; through His humble servant, the Lord is known. ||8] |
Sue H8 U Il (1097-7) dakh-nay mehlaa 5.
Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
fast fue o@ aet AH fue st afenra It (1097-7, wg, He 5) jinaa pichhai ha-o ga-ee say mai pichhai bhee ravi-aas. Those whom I followed, now follow me.
faat at H wmrat fear Hfaet mA AIL (1097-7, Hg, He 5)
jinaa kee mai aasrhee tinaa mahijee aas. ||1|| Those in whom I placed my hopes, now place their hopes in me. ||1]||
Hé U Il (097-8) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
foret forest Isat SCet sfe sfe umf 11 1097-8, wg, ue 5) gilee gilee rodrhee bha-udee bhav bhav aa-ay. The fly flies around, and comes to the wet lump of molasses.
sa
A YS A atanr Cad sta HEE IQ (1097-8, wg, He 5)
jo baithay say faathi-aa ubray bhaag mathaa-ay. ||2]|
Whoever sits on it, is caught; they alone are saved, who have good destiny on their foreheads. ||2| |
He U Il (1097-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fsor vs Hatta uret af @ AEM I (1097-9, wg, He 5) dithaa habh majhaahi khaalee ko-ay na jaanee-ai. I see Him within all. No one is without Him.
3 mt ava nerfs fast Hat AAS Then SI (1097-9, wg, He 5)
tai sakhee bhaag mathaahi jinee mayraa sajan raavi-aa. ||3]|
Good destiny is inscribed on the forehead of that companion, who who enjoys the Lord, my Friend. ||3]||
UugSt Il (1097-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
JG at fs ae weer A ofs ys SS Il (1097-10, wg, ue 5) ha-o dhaadhee dar gun gaavdaa jay har parabh bhaavai. I am a minstrel at His Door, singing His Glorious Praises, to please to my Lord God.
yg He fas aedt Ta mrs ATS Il (1097-10, wg, He 5) parabh mayraa thir thaavree hor aavai jaavai. My God is permanent and stable; others continue coming and going.
Afar ae ardor fas gu ofa Are Il (1097-11, wg, 8 5) SO mMangaa daan gosaa-ee-aa jit bhukh leh jaavai. I beg for that gift from the Lord of the World, which will satisfy my hunger.
ys HG teg wane wiuer fag ret fRusrs I (1097-11, wg, He 5)
parabh jee-o dayvhu darsan aapnaa jit dhaadhee tariptaavai.
O Dear Lord God, please bless Your minstrel with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, that I might be satisfied and fulfilled.
maetA Hat wots ufs eet aS nafs gees Il (1097-12, wg, He 5)
ardaas sunee daataar parabh dhaadhee ka-o mahal bulaavai.
God, the Great Giver, hears the prayer, and summons the minstrel to the Mansion of His Presence.
ys tufeor ey guy aet eet a Hare fats o mrs Il (1097-12, wg, He 5)
parabh daykh-di-aa dukh bhukh ga-ee dhaadhee ka-o mangan chit na aavai.
Gazing upon God, the minstrel is rid of pain and hunger; he does not think to ask for anything else.
AS feet ydior ofa ys & UTS Il (1097-13, og, 48 5) sabhay ichhaa pooree-aa lag parabh kai paavai. All desires are fulfilled, touching the feet of God.
JG fosae wet sufkGe ufs usaf Fars EN (1097-13, wg, He 5) ha-o nirgun dhaadhee bakhsi-on parabh purakh vaidaavai. ||9|| I am His humble, unworthy minstrel; the Primal Lord God has forgiven me. ||9]|
SYS Hs U Il (1097-14)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
W ge T Ug JF HS AZ SB WS Il (1097-14, wg, us 5)
jaa chhutay taa khaak too sunjee kant na jaanhee.
When the soul leaves, you shall become dust, O vacant body; why do you not realize your Husband Lord?
wane ASt 3g 3 a ale ala Fa HrSat WAM (1097-14, wg, Hs 5) durjan saytee nayhu too kai gun har rang maanhee. ||1]| You are in love with evil people; by what virtues will you enjoy the Lord's Love? ||1]|
He U Il (1097-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ood fan fag wat 3 Hee fed Ad o FHS Il (1097-15, wg, He 5)
naanak jis bin gharhee na jeevnaa visray sarai na bind.
O Nanak, without Him, you cannot survive, even for an instant; you cannot afford to forget Him, even for a moment.
fH frG faS Hs sHbn frAfs TH FFF NN (1097-15, wg, we 5) tis si-o ki-o man roosee-ai jisahi hamaaree chind. ||2|| Why are you alienated from Him, O my mind? He takes care of you. ||2||
He U Il (1097-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
oS df wagon & HS 3 MS TBS I (1097-16, wg, ve 5)
ratay rang paarbarahm kai man tan at gulaal.
Those who are imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God, their minds and bodies are colored deep crimson.
aed fee are nitefenr frst dg femrs ail (1097-17, wg, Hs 5) naanak vin naavai aaloodi-aa jitee hor khi-aal. ||3]| O Nanak, without the Name, other thoughts are polluted and corrupt. ||3]|
Uusat Il (1097-17)
pavrhee. Pauree:
ofa HE a gy AT fy FT foo A arSr Il (1097-17, wg, H8 5) har jee-o jaa too mayraa mitar hai taa ki-aa mai kaarhaa. O Dear Lord, when You are my friend, what sorrow can afflict me?
frat daft Aa ofemr A 30 Hfe fest Il (1097-18, wg, He 5) jinee thagee jag thagi-aa say tuDh maar nivaarhaa. You have beaten off and destroyed the cheats that cheat the world.
afs s@ae ufe surfer fast urersr Il (1097-18, wg, He 5)
gur bha-ojal paar langhaa-i-aa jitaa paavaarhaa.
The Guru has carried me across the terrifying world-ocean, and I have won the battle. TIHSt Afs TA SST SST MMTST I (1097-19, wg, He 5)
gurmatee sabh ras bhogdaa vadaa aakhaarhaa. Through the Guru's Teachings, I enjoy all the pleasures in the great world-arena.
Afs fédior ef afe fest@ ASS3t ATST Il (1097-19, wg, He 5) sabh indree-aa vas kar ditee-o satvantaa saarhaa. The True Lord has brought all my senses and organs under my control.
uar qott fas ons fas wardior og fifarsr it (1098-1, xg, He 5)
jit laa-ee-an titai lagdee-aa nah khinjotaarhaa. Wherever I join them, there they are joined; they do not struggle against me.
A feet A ee ufeer afe niefs ear i (1098-1, wg, He 5) jo ichhee so fal paa-idaa gur andar vaarhaa. I obtain the fruits of my desires; the Guru has directed me within.
I Sa Jo" sea oe SAE Sat IAOMl (1098-1, wg, He 5)
gur naanak tuthaa bhaa-irahu har vasdaa nayrhaa. ||10||
When Guru Nanak is pleased, O Siblings of Destiny, the Lord is seen to be dwelling near at hand. ||10]|
SYS H3 U Il (1098-2)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
vw Hf uefa fofs 3 3 Is AY BIE Il (1098-2, wg, Hs 5) jaa moo" aavahi chit too taa habhay sukh lahaa-o. When You come into my consciousness, then I obtain all peace and comfort.
Soa HS ot HfS gareor fust sfar |S Ail 098-3, wg, ne 5) naanak man hee manjh rangvaalaa piree tahijaa naa-o. ||1]| Nanak: with Your Name within my mind, O my Husband Lord, I am filled with delight.
[21
Hé U Il (098-3) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
aus sa fears & IS St Ss Il (1098-3, wg, ue 5) kaparh bhog vikaar ay habhay hee chhaar. Enjoyment of clothes and corrupt pleasures - all these are nothing more than dust.
wa Sse She 8 A IS Ces IM (1098-4, we, us 5) khaak lorhaydaa tann khay jo ratay deedaar. ||2]| I long for the dust of the feet of those who are imbued with the Lord's Vision. ||2]|
Hé U Il (098-4) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
for sats fmm uA ate dbus fox niorg Il “098-4, wg, us 5) ki-aa takeh bi-aa paas kar hee-arhay hik aDhaar. Why do you look in other directions? O my heart, take the Support of the Lord alone.
a Hae at se fag ost AY BS" ISI (1098-5, wg, He 5) thee-o santan kee rayn jit labhee sukh daataar. ||3]|| Become the dust of the feet of the Saints, and find the Lord, the Giver of peace. ||3]|
UST Il (1098-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fee aor ofa AIG 3 ureini fag AfSae HOM 3S Ba I (1098-5, wg, 8 5)
vin karmaa har jee-o na paa-ee-ai bin satgur manoo-aa na lagai.
Without good karma, the Dear Lord is not found; without the True Guru, the mind is not joined to Him.
UsH Ute afte vies feg unit yf & Sat | 098-6, wg, 8 5)
Dharam Dheeraa kal andray ih paapee mool na tagai.
Only the Dharma remains stable in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; these sinners will not last at all.
nifo ag ad A mifs ag ue fea wet HIS © Bar Il (1098-6, wg, He 5)
ah kar karay so ah kar paa-ay ik gharhee muhat na lagai.
Whatever one does with this hand, he obtains with the other hand, without a moment's delay.
ad Aa HW Afoor fee Hafs nidarg o Sat Il (1098-7, wg, He 5)
chaaray jug mai soDhi-aa vin sangat aha“kaar na bhagai.
I have examined the four ages, and without the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, egotism does not depart.
UGH His 3 Eeet feE AY ASH Il (1098-7, wg, we 5) ha-umai mool na chhut-ee vin saaDhoo satsangai. Egotism is never eradicated without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
fag ag 5 weet frag afoa fAG Ho Sat Il (1098-8, vg, He 5) tichar thaah na paav-ee jichar saahib si-o man bhangai. As long as one's mind is torn away from his Lord and Master, he finds no place of rest.
fafs vfs aaufa Afeor fen wie dare misdt I (1098-8, wg, He 5)
jin jan gurmukh sayvi-aa tis ghar deebaan abhgai.
That humble being, who, as Gurmukh, serves the Lord, has the Support of the Imperishable Lord in the home of his heart.
ofa faut 3 AY ufemr ae Afsae vast BA NAA (1098-9, wg, He 5)
har kirpaa tay sukh paa-i-aa gur satgur charnee lagai. ||11]||
By the Lord's Grace, peace is obtained, and one is attached to the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||11]|
SYS H3 U Il (1098-9)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
Sate vs wfe A rte vive fife i 098-10, wg, ue 5) lorheedo habh jaa-ay so meeraa meerann sir. I have searched everywhere for the King over the heads of kings.
Jo Herg A uat wes yf mete Ail (1098-10, wg, Hs 5) hath manjhaahoo so Dhanee cha-udo mukh alaa-ay. ||1|| That Master is within my heart; I chant His Name with my mouth. |]|1]|
He U Il (1098-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ufsa Hfs ug fSar cet wets il 1098-10, wg, we 5) maanikoo mohi maa-o dinnaa Dhanee apaahi. O my mother, the Master has blessed me with the jewel.
for Hfsat Seat HUT A MetE MQM (1098-11, wg, He 5) hi-aa-o mahijaa thandh-rhaa mukhahu sach alaa-ay. ||2|| My heart is cooled and soothed, chanting the True Name with my mouth. ||2||
He U Il (098-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
H Gore AA Se fut feerear il (098-11, +g, He 5)
moo thee-aa-oo sayj nainaa piree vichhaavnaa.
I have become the bed for my Beloved Husband Lord; my eyes have become the sheets.
~
A Se fox aa 3 AY AH T MTT MSI (1098-12, wg, Hz 5) jay daykhai hik vaar taa sukh keemaa hoo baahray. ||3]| If You look at me, even for an instant, then I obtain peace beyond all price. ||3]|
ugat Il (1098-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Hg Be ofa fee a@ fas cane urs Il (1098-12, wg, ne 5) man lochai har milan ka-o ki-o darsan paa-ee-aa. My mind longs to meet the Lord; how can I obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan?
A oe fess wfoe A fie goreor i 098-13, wg, us 5)
mai lakh virh-tay saahibaa jay bind bolaa-ee-aa.
I obtain hundreds of thousands, if my Lord and Master speaks to me, even for an instant.
Had as ger 30 Aes 3B AST Il (1098-13, wg, He 5) mai chaaray kundaa bhaalee-aa tuDh jayvad na saa-ee-aa. I have searched in four directions; there is no other as great as You, Lord.
H efig wea Aso fas ys fhesreter i 098-14, wg, v3 5) mai dasihu maarag santaho ki-o parabhoo milaa-ee-aa. Show me the Path, O Saints. How can I meet God?
He mafug JBH sag fes Ufa Aereor II (1098-14, wg, He 5) man arpihu ha-umai tajahu it panth julaa-ee-aa. I dedicate my mind to Him, and renounce my ego. This is the Path which I shall take.
fos Afeg Afog mer ASAfar feet Il (1098-15, ug, Hs 5)
nit sayvihu saahib aapnaa satsang milaa-ee-aa.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I serve my Lord and Master continually.
AS wit ude ad Hote gee I (1098-15, wg, He 5)
sabhay aasaa pooree-aa gur mahal bulaa-ee-aa.
All my hopes are fulfilled; the Guru has ushered me into the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
30 Ags dg 3 Ase AS fey TAS 92M (1098-16, wg, 8 5)
tuDh jayvad hor na sujh-ee mayray mitar gosaa-ee-aa. ||12||
I cannot conceive of any other as great as You, O my Friend, O Lord of the World. [|12]|
SYS H3 U Il (1098-16)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
H Ghorg sus fudt ufset urfsAra il (1098-16, wg, 2 5) moo thee-aa-oo takhat piree mahinjay paatisaah. I have become the throne for my Beloved Lord King.
ure fre af ase fae faerrr]ed Al (1098-17, wg, He 5) paav milaavay kol kaval jivai bigsaavdo. ||1]| If You place Your foot on me, I blossom forth like the lotus flower. ||1]|
He U Il (1098-17)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fudtor Hest guy wreE St fea Il (1098-17, wg, He 5) piree-aa sand-rhee bhukh moo laavan thee vithraa. If my Beloved becomes hungry, I will become food, and place myself before Him.
We foret feu get uls | gS MQM (1098-18, wg, He 5)
jaan mithaa-ee ikh bay-ee peerhay naa hutai. ||2| |
I may be crushed, again and again, but like sugarcane, I do not stop yielding sweet juice. ||2]|
He U Il (1098-18)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
om dty nafs we aya Sarat Il (1098-18, wg, ue 5) thagaa neehu matrorh jaan ganDharbaa nagree. Break off your love with the cheaters; realize that it is a mirage.
AY weg sfe fen uae we We ISI (1098-19, +g, M3 5)
sukh ghataa-oo doo-ay is panDhaanoo ghar ghanay. ||3]||
Your pleasure lasts for only two moments; this traveller wanders through countless homes. ||3||
ust Il (1098-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
RS FS SI uehH UF nse mise Il (1098-19, wg, ue 5) akal kalaa nah paa-ee-ai parabh alakh alaykha’. God is not found by intellectual devices; He is unknowable and unseen.
yar qoute’
ue PIAS FHS feats oa fresh SF Ih (1099-1, wg, ue 5)
khat darsan bharamtay fireh nah milee-ai bhaykha”.
The followers of the six orders wander and roam around wearing religious robes, but they do not meet God.
gas oats defeat A fas 6 Be Il (1099-1, wg, us 5) varat karahi chandraa-inaa say kitai na laykha”. They keep the lunar fasts, but they are of no account.
ae ust Huss 33 ATS 3 UE I (1099-1, wg, us 5)
bayd parheh sampoornaa tat saar na paykha”.
Those who read the Vedas in their entirety, still do not see the sublime essence of reality.
fsuq aefa fenarg afe nists wee Il (1099-2, wg, He 5)
tilak kadheh isnaan kar antar kaalaykha”.
They apply ceremonial marks to their foreheads, and take cleansing baths, but they are blackened within.
aut ys 3 wel fee At fre II (1099-2, wg, H 5) bhaykhee parabhoo na labh-ee vin sachee sikha”. They wear religious robes, but without the True Teachings, God is not found.
ger Hefa A ue faa ufs HASfa BE Il (1099-3, wg, we 5)
bhoolaa maarag so pavai jis Dhur mastak laykha”.
One who had strayed, finds the Path again, if such pre-ordained destiny is written on his forehead.
fafs HoH Aefaur nmuer fats ag writ St W9Sll (1099-3, wg, ne 5)
tin janam savaari-aa aapnaa jin gur akhee daykha”. ||13]| One who sees the Guru with his eyes, embellishes and exalts his human life. ||13] |
SYS H3 U Il (1099-4)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
A fseg ats a ses o Ft I (1099-4, og, ws 5) so nivaahoo gad jo chalaa-oo na thee-ai. Focus on that which will not pass away.
aS Tae SS AHS AG Tet AU 1099-4, wg, ws 5) kaar koorhaavee chhad sammal sach Dhanee. ||1]| Abandon your false actions, and meditate on the True Master. ||1]|
H8 U Il (099-5) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Us AHal Afs fAS Ae wes FHT I (1099-5, wg, we 5) habh samaanee jot ji-o jal ghataa-oo chandarmaa. God's Light is permeating all, like the moon reflected in the water.
udde Shor uirfy Stoat HASla fefimr 2H (1099-5, wg, 48 5)
pargat thee-aa aap naanak mastak likhi-aa. ||2]|
He Himself is revealed, O Nanak, to one who has such destiny inscribed upon his forehead. ||2]|
He U Il (1099-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HY Ade BH VE nS UTT TE AE Il 1099-6, wg, us 5)
mukh suhaavay naam cha-o aath pahar gun gaa-o.
One's face becomes beautiful, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and singing His Glorious Praises, twenty-four hours a day.
soa esas Haifa feet fears a Sil (1099-6, wg, we 5)
naanak dargeh manee-ah milee nithaavay thaa-o. ||3]||
O Nanak, in the Court of the Lord, you shall be accepted; even the homeless find a home there. ||3]|
ust Il (1099-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
add sfy 5 uci ys nisanmit i (1099-7, wg, He 5) baahar bhaykh na paa-ee-ai parabh antarjaamee. By wearing religious robes outwardly, God, the Inner-knower is not found.
fear fe HIG aadt AS fed feat II (1099-7, og, 8 5) ikas har jee-o baahree sabh firai nikaamee. Without the One Dear Lord, all wander around aimlessly.
He os" aca fe fos aafa feat it 1099-8, wg, He 5)
man rataa kutamb si-o nit garab firaamee.
Their minds are imbued with attachment to family, and so they continually wander around, puffed up with pride.
festa aHat Aart Hf for areata anit il (1099-8, wg, H8 5) fireh gumaanee jag meh ki-aa garbeh daamee. The arrogant wander around the world; why are they so proud of their wealth?
vsotent os 6 soet fuse ate faentt i c1099-9, wg, ne 5) chaldi-aa naal na chal-ee khin jaa-ay bilaamee. Their wealth shall not go with them when they depart; in an instant, it is gone.
fasse feafa HATS fe ofe At Janit i (1099-9, wg, Hs 5) bicharday fireh sansaar meh har jee hukaamee. They wander around in the world, according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
adH wer ag ufenr ate fife AMM it (1099-10, wg, Hs 5)
karam khulaa gur paa-i-aa har mili-aa su-aamee.
When one's karma is activated, one finds the Guru, and through Him, the Lord and Master is found.
A Ho dfs a Rect ofa fsA at anit 198i! (1099-10, wg, Hs 5) jo jan har kaa sayvko har tis kee kaamee. ||14]| That humble being, who serves the Lord, has his affairs resolved by the Lord. ||14]|
Sue H3 U Il (1099-11)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
Hug mere Js HIS used AE I (1099-11, wg, Hs 5) mukhahu alaa-ay habh maran pachhaanado ko-ay. All speak with their mouths, but rare are those one who realize death.
Soa faar ura frat wetter fox FAG WAM (1099-11, wg, Hs 5) naanak tinaa khaak jinaa yakeenaa hik si-o. ||1]| Nanak is the dust of the feet of those who have faith in the One Lord. ||1]|
He U Il (1099-12)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
We He HfS uss & TAS Il (1099-12, wg, 8 5) jaan vasando manjh pachhaanoo ko haykrho. Know that He dwells within all; rare are those who realize this.
3 3f6 use ony aaa A Ag Sfemr NM (1099-12, wg, v2 5) tai tan parh-daa naahi naanak jai gur bhayti-aa. ||2|| There is no obscuring veil on the body of that one, O Nanak, who meets the Guru.
21 |
He U Il (1099-13)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Host area nig urs GSE ULSAT II (1099-13, wg, He 5) mat-rhee kaa“dhak aah paav Dhovando peevsaa. I drink in the water which has washed the feet of those who share the Teachings.
H 3fe Un wears une & Ae at SI (1099-13, wg, He 5) moo tan paraym athaah pasan koo sachaa Dhanee. ||3]|| My body is filled with infinite love to see my True Master. ||3]]|
ust Il (1099-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fesse amy ferttonr artes HTfEnit Tar Il (1099-14, wg, Hs 5) nirbha-o naam visaari-aa naal maa-i-aa rachaa. Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Fearless Lord, he becomes attached to Maya.
wire afe sercha ag ASt See Il (1099-14, wg, Hs 5) aavai jaa-ay bhavaa-ee-ai baho jonee nachaa. He comes and goes, and wanders, dancing in countless incarnations.
weg ad 3 funfa wf Fs AS AT Il (1099-14, wg, ue 5) bachan karay tai khisak jaa-ay bolay sabh kachaa. He gives his word, but then backs out. All that he says is false.
nivad Sa afsurg Fast AS Ws Il (1099-15, wg, Hz 5) andrahu thothaa koorhi-aar koorhee sabh khachaa. The false person is hollow within; he is totally engrossed in falsehood.
ZI Ad fSIT BTS FS WI Il (1099-15, wg, Hz 5)
vair karay nirvair naal jhoothay laalchaa.
He tries to take vengeance upon the Lord, who bears no vengeance; such a person is trapped by falsehood and greed.
Har Ad ufsata Sfa ufs XIE Il (1099-16, wg, He 5) maari-aa sachai paatisaah vaykh Dhur karamchaa. The True King, the Primal Lord God, kills him when He sees what he has done.
AHESt F Shoot va dt Hfs ws Il (1099-16, wg, we 5) jamdootee hai hayri-aa dukh hee meh pachaa. The Messenger of Death sees him, and he rots away in pain.
oot SUSA UGH a BSA fs AB NWI (1099-16, wg, Hs 5)
ho-aa tapaavas Dharam kaa naanak dar sachaa. ||15]| Even-handed justice is administered, O Nanak, in the Court of the True Lord. ||15]|
Sue H3 U Il (1099-17)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
ugaTs ys OTH Af ad a ude fore i (1099-17, og, ue 5)
parbhaatay parabh naam jap gur kay charan Dhi-aa-ay.
In the early hours of the morning, chant the Name of God, and meditate on the Feet of the Guru.
HOH HIE HS Csd AY A TE ACE UA (1099-18, wg, ne 5)
janam maran mal utrai sachay kay gun gaa-ay. ||1||
The filth of birth and death is erased, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. [21]
He U Il (1099-18)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ed niurdt nig Het BH fegebar Il (1099-18, wg, He 5) dayh anDhaaree anDh sunjee naam vihoonee-aa. The body is dark, blind and empty, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
SSA HES HOH A wife Zor Ay Tat II (1099-19, wg, Hs 5) naanak safal jannam jai ghat vuthaa sach Dhanee. ||2]| O Nanak, fruitful is the birth of one, within whose heart the True Master dwells. ||2]|
He U Il (1099-19)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Slee Set fSo filmrn 5 gs YH wet Il (1099-19, wg, He 5) lo-in lo-ee dith pi-aas na bujhai moo ghanee. With my eyes, I have seen the Light; my great thirst for Him is not quenched.
Uast IAOO Sed A nus fimifs frat fare wt fst WS 100-1, wg, us 5)
naanak say akh-rhee-aa bi-ann jinee disando maa piree. ||3]| O Nanak, these are not the eyes which can see my Beloved Husband Lord. ||3]||
ust Il (1100-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fate afs asHfa Afeor fats Afs AY uTet I 100-1, wg, Hs 5)
jin jan gurmukh sayvi-aa tin sabh sukh paa-ee.
That humble being, who, as Gurmukh, serves the Lord, obtains all peace and pleasure.
6g urfu sf aca fAG AS AAS Saet i (1100-2, wg, us 5)
oh aap tari-aa kutamb si-o sabh jagat taraa-ee.
He Himself is saved, along with his family, and all the world is saved as well. 6fs ofa ont ug Afr As four gsret I (100-2, wg, Hs 5)
on har naamaa Dhan sanchi-aa sabh tikhaa bujhaa-ee. He collects the wealth of the Lord's Name, and all his thirst is quenched.
Gis gS GET Tal & nists fee wet il (1100-3, wg, He 5) on chhaday laalach dunee kay antar liv laa-ee. He renounces worldly greed, and his inner being is lovingly attuned to the Lord.
GA Ae Het wife mse od dfs Aart Have Il (1100-3, wg, ne 5)
os sadaa sadaa ghar anand hai har sakhaa sahaa-ee.
Forever and ever, the home of his heart is filled with bliss; the Lord is his companion, help and support.
Gfs Sct fig AH atfsur As ofes Aeret I (1100-4, wg, He 5) on vairee mitar sam keeti-aa sabh naal subhaa-ee. He looks alike upon enemy and friend, and wishes well to all.
oor Gat oe Aa Hfo ae fare Auret Il (1100-4, wg, Hs 5) ho-aa ohee al jag meh gur gi-aan japaa-ee. He alone is fulfilled in this world, who meditates on the spiritual wisdom of the Guru.
yata foto ufenr ofe fAS af mre AE (100-5, wg, 42 5) poorab likhi-aa paa-i-aa har si-o ban aa-ee. ||16|| He obtains what is pre-ordained for him, according to the Lord. ||16||
Sue H3 U Il (1100-5)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
Ag Ade! arb aS Tat AE I 1100-5, wg, 2 5) sach suhaavaa kaadhee-ai koorhai koorhee so-ay. The true person is said to be beautiful; false is the reputation of the false.
oad fess webs fas AG Us dE NA 1100-6, wg, He 5) naanak virlay jaanee-ahi jin sach palai ho-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, rare are those who have Truth in their laps. ||1]|
He U Il (1100-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HAE HY MIGU MS UIT fSaTGAT Il (1100-6, wg, He 5)
sajan mukh anoop athay pahar nihaalsaa.
The face of my friend, the Lord, is incomparably beautiful; I would watch Him, twenty-four hours a day.
Haat A Ag fse 3 Hus GE HShH III (1100-7, wg, He 5) sut-rhee so saho dith tai supnay ha-o khannee-ai. | |2| | In sleep, I saw my Husband Lord; I am a sacrifice to that dream. ||2| |
He U Il (1100-7)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Ane Ay uate uf wesree Ga Il (1100-7, wg, ve 5) sajan sach parakh mukh alaavan thothraa. O my friend, realize the True Lord. Just to talk about Him is useless.
He neg ofy gag ef 3 A fudt Nal (1100-8, wg, He 5) man majhaahoo lakh tuDhhu door na so piree. ||3]| See Him within your mind; your Beloved is not far away. ||3]|
ust Il (1100-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Uets wrarA USS I Ue Ag fast Il (100-8, wg, 3 5)
Dharat aakaas paataal hai chand soor binaasee.
The earth, the Akaashic ethers of the sky, the nether regions of the underworld, the moon and the sun shall pass away.
afer AS Custe ure Btfo SI AAT Il (1100-9, wg, He 5)
baadisaah saah umraav khaan dhaahi dayray jaasee.
Emperors, bankers, rulers and leaders shall depart, and their homes shall be demolished.
da 3a ada HAS AS Ba fA II (1100-9, og, He 5)
rang tung gareeb masat sabh lok siDhaasee.
The poor and the rich, the humble and the intoxicated, all these people shall pass away.
oat Au HATE AS SiS AAT II (1100-10, wg, He 5) kaajee saykh masaa-ikaa sabhay uth jaasee. The Qazis, Shaykhs and preachers shall all arise and depart.
ute ares mBate a fag o TIAA II (1100-10, +g, He 5)
peer paikaabar a-ulee-ay ko thir na rahaasee.
The spiritual teachers, prophets and disciples - none of these shall remain permanently.
da aa foen ase fee 33 AS AAT II (1100-10, wg, He 5)
rojaa baag nivaaj katayb vin bujhay sabh jaasee.
Fasts, calls to prayer and sacred scriptures - without understanding, all these shall vanish.
we sare Hest AS mrs AMAT II (1100-11, og, Hs 5)
lakh cha-oraaseeh maydnee sabh aavai jaasee.
The 8.4 million species of beings of the earth shall all continue coming and going in reincarnation.
fosse Ag wee Sa yee der mifssAt ADI (1100-11, Wg, He 5)
nihchal sach khudaa-ay ayk khudaa-ay bandaa abhinaasee. ||17]|
The One True Lord God is eternal and unchanging. The Lord's slave is also eternal. []17]|
SYS H3 U Il (1100-12)
dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
fsat us des foo as 3 AfE II (1100-12, wg, He 5) dithee habh dhandhol hikas baajh na ko-ay. I have seen and examined all; without the One Lord, there is none at all.
mr AAS 3 Hf Ba HS 3q HS Set SE WA 1100-12, og, v8 5)
aa-o sajan too mukh lag mayraa tan man thandhaa ho-ay. ||1||
Come, and show me Your face, O my friend, so that my body and mind may be cooled and soothed. ||1]|
He U Il (1100-13)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
MTAR MTAT aIa YH HS St MITA II (1100-13, Hg, He 5) aasak aasaa baahraa moo man vadee aas. The lover is without hope, but within my mind, there is great hope.
wir form fox 3 IS af af afe Terr II (1100-13, Wg, H8 5)
aas niraasaa hik too ha-o bal bal bal ga-ee-aas. ||2||
In the midst of hope, only You, O Lord, remain free of hope; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||2||
He U Il (1100-14)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
feds He su fee f3S nfaGfe II (100-14, wg, ne 5)
vichhorhaa sunay dukh vin dithay mari-od.
Even if I just hear of separation from You, I am in pain; without seeing You, O Lord, I die.
as fimrd nue faadt o dtefe Sil 100-14, wg, ne 5) baajh pi-aaray aapnay birhee naa Dheerod. ||3]|| Without her Beloved, the separated lover takes no comfort. ||3]|
ust I (1100-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3e Stee te Safer Aer” HAS AAT Il (1100-15, wg, we 5)
tat tirath dayv dayvaali-aa kaydaar mathuraa kaasee.
River-banks, sacred shrines, idols, temples, and places of pilgrimage like Kaydarnaat'h, Mat'huraa and Benares,
afe Sahn tes Ae fest AT II (1100-15, og, ne 5) kot tayteesaa dayvtay san indrai jaasee. the three hundred thirty million gods, along with Indra, shall all pass away.
fafyfs AAS ae hs us TIA AHA Il (1100-16, wg, H8 5)
simrit saastar bayd chaar khat daras samaasee.
The Simritees, Shaastras, the four Vedas and the six systems of philosophy shall vanish.
uet ufss ats afes aes st AAT II (1100-16, wg, He 5) pothee pandit geet kavit kavtay bhee jaasee. Prayer books, Pandits, religious scholars, songs, poems and poets shall also depart.
Aat Ast Afemrrior vfs ars St il 1100-17, wg, He 5)
jatee satee sanni-aasee-aa sabh kaalai vaasee.
Those who are celibate, truthful and charitiable, and the Sannyaasee hermits are all subject to death.
uf aait featae AA AE ATT II (1100-17, wg, Hs 5)
mun jogee digambraa jamai san jaasee.
The silent sages, the Yogis and the nudists, along with the Messengers of Death, shall pass away.
a oA A feena vs faafh faort it 1100-18, wg, us 5) jo deesai so vinsanaa sabh binas binaasee. Whatever is seen shall perish; all will dissolve and disappear.
fag usgquy usnAd Aza fag TAT NACH (1100-18, wg, He 5)
thir paarbarahm parmaysaro sayvak thir hosee. ||18]|
Only the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, is permanent. His servant becomes permanent as well. ||18]|
HBA SYS H8 U Il (1100-18)
salok dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Shalok Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
A Sd 3d Sa FY BY B gfe | (1100-19, wg, us 5)
sai nangay nah nang bhukhay lakh na bhukhi-aa.
Hundreds of times naked does not make the person naked; tens of thousands of hungers do not make him hungry;
3a afs 5 3u aoa fudt finite ae ferfe ail (100-19, wg, 8 5)
dukhay korh na dukh naanak piree pikhando subh disat. ||1]|
millions of pains do not cause him pain. O Nanak, the Husband Lord blesses him with his Glance of Grace. ||1]|
UAT AIO4
He U Il (1101-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
HY AHO sa Sth Aart & Tet Ml (1101-1, +g, He 5) sukh samoohaa bhog bhoom sabaa-ee ko Dhanee. Even if one were to enjoy all pleasures, and be master of the entire earth,
aed os ta frase aH fegfEnr I (01-1, +g, Hs 5) naanak habho rog mirtak naam vihooni-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, all of that is just a disease. Without the Naam, he is dead. ||2]|
He U Il (1101-2)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fon & 3 nfo users st foe afs Il (1101-2, wg, Hs 5)
hikas koo™ too aahi pachhaanoo bhee hik kar.
Yearn for the One Lord, and make Him your friend.
oot wTASt forts wou usaet oHtee SI (1101-2, wg, He 5)
naanak aasrhee nibaahi maanukh parthaa-ee lajeevdo. ||3]||
O Nanak, He alone fulfills your hopes; you should feel embarrassed, visiting other places. ||3]|
ust Il (1101-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fosae Sa cafes ofa mam marae Il (101-3, wg, He 5) nihchal ayk naaraa-ino har agam agaaDhaa. The One and only Lord is eternal, imperishable, inaccessible and incomprehensible.
fosue oH fours 3 fan fANas ofe war I (1101-3, wg, Hs 5)
nihchal naam niDhaan hai jis simrat har laaDhaa.
The treasure of the Naam is eternal and imperishable. Meditating in remembrance on Him, the Lord is attained.
fous atese awe afte aenfe arene I (1101-4, 7g, v2 5)
nihchal keertan gun gobind gurmukh gaavaaDhaa.
The Kirtan of His Praises is eternal and imperishable; the Gurmukh sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Ag uen 3u fesse fee dfs mre Il 01-4, og, v2 5)
sach Dharam tap nihchalo din rain araaDhaa.
Truth, righteousness, Dharma and intense meditation are eternal and imperishable. Day and night, worship the Lord in adoration.
efor cay su fesse frm oath furor i (01-5, ag, 8 5)
da-i-aa Dharam tap nihchalo jis karam likhaaDhaa.
Compassion, righteousness, Dharma and intense meditation are eternal and imperishable; they alone obtain these, who have such pre-ordained destiny.
fesse HASfa Sy faftmr A ee S SUT Il (101-5, wg, He 5)
nihchal mastak laykh likhi-aa so talai na talaaDhaa.
The inscription inscribed upon one's forehead is eternal and imperishable; it cannot be avoided by avoidance.
fesse Hats AU AS ado fess As AM Il 1101-6, wg, Hs 5)
nihchal sangat saaDh jan bachan nihchal gur saaDhaa.
The Congregation, the Company of the Holy, and the word of the humble, are eternal and imperishable. The Holy Guru is eternal and imperishable.
fra aS usta foftimr fsa Het ET wiTITaT AEN (1101-6, wg, He 5)
jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin sadaa sadaa aaraaDhaa. ||19]||
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny worship and adore the Lord, forever and ever. ||19]|
HOA SYS H8 U Il (1101-7)
salok dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
A sae orf A sae fag 8 il (01-7, wg, us 5) jo dubando aap so taraa-ay kin" khay. One who himself has drowned - how can he carry anyone else across?
sees st af aoa furs fag afr Wall cio1-7, wg, He 5)
taaraydarho bhee taar naanak pir si-o rati-aa. ||1]|
One who is imbued with the Love of the Husband Lord - O Nanak, he himself is saved, and he saves others as well. ||1]|
He U Il (1101-8)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fra afe adfs o@ Hee Hr fust I cio1-8, wg, Hs 5) jithai ko-ay kathann naa-o sunando maa piree. Wherever someone speaks and hears the Name of my Beloved Lord,
4 aoe sta aoa fust urs ofeS SAA QI (101-8, wg, He 5) moo” julaa-oo™ tath naanak piree pasando hari-o thee-os. ||2|| that is where I go, O Nanak, to see Him, and blossom forth in bliss. ||2| |
He U Il (1101-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hat Hat foo aafs UT ABZ AST Il (1101-9, wg, He 5)
mayree mayree ki-aa karahi putar kaltar sanayh.
You are in love with your children and your wife; why do you keep calling them your own?
aaa oH feger foxshret SI USI (1101-9, wg, He 5)
naanak naam vihoonee-aa nimunee-aadee dayh. ||3]|
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the human body has no foundation. ||3]|
UST Il (1101-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sot SUS TT PIAS TT BsNt HAT Il 1101-10, wg, ue 5)
nainee daykh-a-u gur darsano gur charnee mathaa.
With my eyes, I gaze upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; I touch my forehead to the Guru's feet.
Ut Hrafar ra eet ut Sat Tar I (1101-10, wg, ve 5) pairee maarag gur chaldaa pakhaa fayree hathaa. With my feet I walk on the Guru's Path; with my hands, I wave the fan over Him.
nore Hots fee fourfeer fea sfs ME i cio1-11, wg, we 5)
akaal moorat ridai Dhi-aa-idaa din rain japanthaa.
I meditate on Akaal Moorat, the undying form, within my heart; day and night, I meditate on Him.
A sfsor wae oerfes sae TT ANSE Il (1101-11, wg, us 5)
mai chhadi-aa sagal apaa-ino bharvaasai gur samrathaa.
I have renounced all possessiveness, and have placed my faith in the all-powerful Guru.
afe suffor any fears AS FY BA Il (1101-12, wg, He 5) gur bakhsi-aa naam niDhaan sabho dukh lathaa. The Guru has blessed me with the treasure of the Naam; I am rid of all sufferings.
Sag SUT THT US OH MAE I (101-12, wg, He 5) bhogahu bhunchahu bhaa-eeho palai naam agthaa. Eat and enjoy the Naam, the Name of the indescribable Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
OH Ue feos fex He Ady TT AA Il (1101-13, wg, uz 5)
naam daan isnaan dirh sadaa karahu gur kathaa.
Confirm your faith in the Naam, charity and self-purification; chant the Guru's sermon forever.
Hdd sfeor yg ufeur AH at 3B GET MOM (1101-13, wg, He 5)
sahj bha-i-aa parabh paa-i-aa jam kaa bha-o lathaa. ||20||
Blessed with intuitive poise, I have found God; I am rid of the fear of the Messenger of Death. ||20]|
HOA SYS H8 U Il (1101-14)
salok dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
marsha fudmifs uth ar fSuber i c101-14, wg, ue 5)
lagrhee-aa piree-ann paykhandee-aa naa tipee-aa.
I am centered and focused on my Beloved, but I am not satisfied, even by seeing Him.
us HBT A Uet faur s fSS aE WAM cio1-14, wg, 2 5) habh majhaahoo so Dhanee bi-aa na ditho ko-ay. ||1]| The Lord and Master is within all; I do not see any other. ||1||
He U Il (1101-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
aes AST S AAS Uther i (101-15, wg, 3 5) kathrhee-aa santaah tay sukhaa-oo panDhee-aa. The sayings of the Saints are the paths of peace.
Sod User Fars frat sa HATS |W (1101-15, wg, us 5) naanak laDh-rhee-aa tinnaah jinaa bhaag mathaaharhai. ||2|| O Nanak, they alone obtain them, upon whose foreheads such destiny is written. ||2]|
He U Il (1101-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Sala Ae wer sf at SH ACT Il (1101-16, wg, 8 5)
doongar jalaa thalaa bhoom banaa fal kandraa.
He is totally permeating the mountains, oceans, deserts, lands, forests, orchards, caves,
UTS MITATA UTS JF WET Il (1101-16, Hg, He 5) paataalaa aakaas pooran habh ghataa. the nether regions of the underworld, the Akaashic ethers of the skies, and all hearts.
area Ufa AG fees AS Ussher SN (1101-17, wg, 48 5) naanak paykh jee-o ikat soot parotee-aa. ||3]| Nanak sees that they are all strung on the same thread. ||3]|
ust Il (1101-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs At ust ofs At fust ofs AE yfsusa It (1101-17, +g, H8 5)
har jee maataa har jee pitaa har jee-o partipaalak.
The Dear Lord is my mother, the Dear Lord is my father; the Dear Lord cherishes and nurtures me.
dfs At Ast ATS AT TH Ts FX MS Il (1101-18, wg, ue 5) har jee mayree saar karay ham har kay baalak. The Dear Lord takes care of me; I am the child of the Lord.
Hon Auta faeorfeer dt ATT nH Il (1101-18, wg, He 5) sehjay sahj khilaa-idaa nahee kardaa aalak. Slowly and steadily, He feeds me; He never fails.
niGae at 6 fesse ae ASt fea Il 101-19, wg, He 5) a-ugan ko na chitaardaa gal saytee laa-ik. He does not remind me of my faults; He hugs me close in His embrace.
ufo Hat Het Seer ofa fust Mees | (101-19, wg, He 5) muhi mangaa™ so-ee dayvdaa har pitaa sukh-daa-ik. Whatever I ask for, He give me; the Lord is my peace-giving father.
usr 9902 fomrg oth aH ug ACfuUsS feR AGS wea Il (1102-1, wg, He 5)
gi-aan raas naam Dhan sa-opi-on is sa-uday laa-ik. He has blessed me with the capital, the wealth of spiritual wisdom; He has made me worthy of this merchandise.
ASt ad of% soto Age AY uUTfes Il (1102-1, wg, Hs 5) Saajhee gur naal bahaali-aa sarab sukh paa-ik. He has made me a partner with the Guru; I have obtained all peace and comforts.
H ood ae 6 fees af fust Ago cer ofa QAI (1102-2, rg, He 5)
mai naalahu kaday na vichhurhai har pitaa sabhnaa galaa laa-ik. ||21]|
He is with me, and shall never separate from me; the Lord, my father, is potent to do everything. ||21] |
HOA Sue HZ U Il (1102-2) salok dakh-nay mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dakhanay, Fifth Mehl:
aod aufsor fre sf efe AAS AS ufoM@ il (1102-3, wg, He 5) naanak kachrhi-aa si-o torh dhoodh sajan sant paki-aa. O Nanak, break away from the false, and seek out the Saints, your true friends.
Gfe ide fees Gf ufeor 3 act Sf Wail 1102-3, wg, He 5)
o-ay jeevanday vichhurheh o-ay mu-i-aa na jaahee chhorh. ||1]|
The false shall leave you, even while you are still alive; but the Saints shall not forsake you, even when you are dead. ||1]|
He U Il (1102-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
soa faqeha sHafs wats wer mits ares it (1102-4, wg, Hs 5) naanak bijulee-aa chamkann ghurni" ghataa at kaalee-aa. O Nanak, the lightning flashes, and thunder echoes in the dark black clouds.
wane Hu viurg stoa Halt fst Ader QI (1102-4, wg, we 5) barsan maygh apaar naanak sangam piree suhandee-aa. ||2]|
The downpour from the clouds is heavy; O Nanak, the soul-brides are exalted and embellished with their Beloved. ||2]|
Hé U Il (1102-5) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
AS 8G Sts 3d ASS UTES SHIGE Il (1102-5, wg, v2 5) jal thal neer bharay seetal pavan jhulaarday. The ponds and the lands are overflowing with water, and the cold wind is blowing.
Aasbo Afes ots wes Axe I 1102-5, wg, He 5) sayjrhee-aa so-inn heeray laal jarhandee-aa. Her bed is adorned with gold, diamonds and rubies;
Ase aus sa soa fudt feget 3S SM (1102-6, wg, we 5)
subhar kaparh bhog naanak piree vihoonee tatee-aa. ||3]|
she is blessed with beautiful gowns and delicacies, O Nanak, but without her Beloved, she burns in agony. ||3]|
ugat Il (1102-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AGE AIS A aor Het I ASST Il (1102-6, wg, uz 5) kaaran kartai jo kee-aa so-ee hai karnaa. He does the dees which the Creator causes him to do.
AAG Oefs yretor uefa Ufs BIST Il (1102-7, wg, He 5)
jay sa-o Dhaaveh paraanee-aa paavahi Dhur lahnaa.
Even if you run in hundreds of directions, O mortal, you shall still receive what you are pre-destined to receive.
fag aor fog 3 oset A fests AS UTE I (1102-7, wg, He 5)
bin karmaa kichhoo na labh-ee jay fireh sabh Dharnaa.
Without good karma, you shall obtain nothing, even if you wander across the whole world.
as ffs 38 afee or 3 3a Efe AIST Il (1102-8, wg, H: 5)
gur mil bha-o govind kaa bhai dar door karnaa.
Meeting with the Guru, you shall know the Fear of God, and other fears shall be taken away.
3 3 ag Cun aie dns fegar il (1102-8, og, Hs 5)
bhai tay bairaag oopjai har khojat firnaa.
Through the Fear of God, the attitude of detachment wells up, and one sets out in search of the Lord.
uns dns Aon Cufsmr fefe waft © NaS II (1102-8, wg, He 5)
khojat khojat sahj upji-aa fir janam na marnaa.
Searching and searching, intuitive wisdom wells up, and then, one is not born to die again.
fourfe ane fourfeur urfenr ATT Agar Il (1102-9, wg, 8 5) hi-aa-ay kamaa-ay Dhi-aa-i-aa paa-i-aa saaDh sarnaa. Practicing meditation within my heart, I have found the Sanctuary of the Holy.
Sfse soa 2@ ag fan dfs vee fSRH SBHe SeeST QM (1102-10, wg, Hs 5)
bohith naanak day-o gur jis har charhaa-ay tis bha-ojal tarnaa. ||22||
Whoever the Lord places on the boat of Guru Nanak, is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||22||
HBa H8 U Il (1102-10)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Dakhanay Fifth Mehl:
ufoer Hos aEte Ftee oft Sis wT I (1102-10, wg, He 5) pahilaa maran kabool jeevan kee chhad aas. First, accept death, and give up any hope of life.
dg Asa at dear SE or mrs uA A (1102-11, wg, He 5) hohu sabhnaa kee raynukaa ta-o aa-o hamaarai paas. ||1|| Become the dust of the feet of all, and then, you may come to me. ||1||
He U Il (1102-11)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Hor Fier Uy ates Hfs Ais i (1102-11, wg, He 5) mu-aa jeevandaa paykh jeevanday mar jaan. See, that only one who has died, truly lives; one who is alive, consider him dead.
fat Hoats fea fA 3 HEA UTUTS II (1102-12, wg, He 5) jin"aa muhabat ik si-o tay maanas parDhaan. ||2|| Those who are in love with the One Lord, are the supreme people. ||2||
He U Il (1102-12)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
fan Hfs eA ursqan foafe o mire ute I (1102-12, wg, ne 5) jis man vasai paarbarahm nikat na aavai peer. Pain does not even approach that person, within whose mind God abides.
gu fsu fan o feumuet AH odt ure Ste NBII (1102-13, +g, He 5)
Hunger and thirst do not affect him, and the Messenger of Death does not approach him. ||3]|
ugat Il (1102-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
afs age o ASA AY ATS MSS I (1102-13, wg, He 5) keemat kahan na jaa-ee-ai sach saah adolai. Your worth cannot be estimated, O True, Unmoving Lord God.
fro Afoe forrot fomrstor ABE 30S 3B i (1102-14, we, us 5)
siDh saaDhik gi-aanee Dhi-aanee-aa ka-un tuDhuno tolai.
The Siddhas, seekers, spiritual teachers and meditators - who among them can measure You?
de use ANGE 3 Gufs AS uss Il (1102-14, wg, He 5) bhannan gharhan samrath hai opat sabh parlai. You are all-powerful, to form and break; You create and destroy all.
ade AE AHsE J ufe whe AS FH Il (1102-15, wg, us 5)
karan kaaran samrath hai ghat ghat sabh bolai.
You are all-powerful to act, and inspire all to act; You speak through each and every heart.
fara AHS ASA for HEA SB I (1102-15, wg, Hs 5) rijak samaahay sabhsai ki-aa maanas dolai. You give sustanance to all; why should mankind waver?
Mss WSs MAT J TE fara ws 11 (1102-16, wg, us 5) gahir gabheer athaahu too gun gi-aan amolai. You are deep, profound and unfathomable; Your virtuous spiritual wisdom is priceless.
Ret ay area ahor fs HES i (1102-16, we, us 5) so-ee kamm kamaavanaa kee-aa Dhur ma-ulai. They do the deeds which they are pre-ordained to do.
sug wofs fae odt SSA TE FS MSNA (1102-17, wg, ne 5) tuDhhu baahar kichh nahee naanak gun bolai. ||23]|1]||2|| Without You, there is nothing at all; Nanak chants Your Glorious Praises. ||23]|1]||2||
Ta ug wet adits A at (1102-18) raag maaroo banee kabeer jee-o kee Raag Maaroo, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe it (1102-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
usa ACS AHS SH Brea Il (1102-19, wg, sas ate FH) padee-aa kavan kumat tum laagay. O Pandit, O religious scholar, in what foul thoughts are you engaged?
YsId used AAG AG ITH o AUT MSH NU! TIS Ml (1102-19, wy, sas aets Fh) bood-hugay parvaar sakal si-o raam na japahu abhaagay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You shall be drowned, along with your family, if you do not meditate on the Lord, you unfortunate person. ||1]|Pause]|
ae UTS us at fant To ws VES AA ST Il (1102-19, wg, sas ate Ah
bayd puraan parhay kaa ki-aa gun khar chandan jas bhaaraa.
What is the use of reading the Vedas and the Puraanas? It is like loading a donkey with sandalwood.
ust A903
TH 3H at afs odt Wet aA sala urs NA (1103-1, wg, sas afte Fh)
raam naam kee gat nahee jaanee kaisay utras paaraa. ||1]| You do not know the exalted state of the Lord's Name; how will you ever cross over?
[11|
nba ag A OUSH afd aug nH ATT AS Set Il (1103-2, wg, sas ait Ft)
jee-a baDhahu so Dharam kar thaapahu aDhram kahhu kat bhaa-ee.
You kill living beings, and call it a righteous action. Tell me, brother, what would you call an unrighteous action?
nmun ag Hfsed afe aug at AG agg AAT IQ (1103-2, wg, sas ait Ft) aapas ka-o munivar kar thaapahu kaa ka-o kahhu kasaa-ee. ||2|| You call yourself the most excellent sage; then who would you call a butcher? ||2]|
Ho & nid orfu 3s asg ots asreg set Il (1103-3, wg, sas oats At)
man kay anDhay aap na boojhhu kaahi bujhaavahu bhaa-ee.
You are blind in your mind, and do not understand your own self; how can you make others understand, O brother?
Hien age fafenr dug Aon nifagar ATeT ISI (1103-3, wg, sas ade Ah maa-i-aa kaaran bidi-aa baychahu janam abirathaa jaa-ee. ||3]|| For the sake of Maya and money, you sell knowledge; your life is totally worthless.
[SII
age ave fmrg aus 3 Aa AG eT AT I (1103-4, wg, sas adits Ht) naarad bachan bi-aas kahat hai suk ka-o poochhahu jaa-ee. Naarad and Vyaasa say these things; go and ask Suk Dayv as well.
ate wats TH af seg ae 3 gs Set ISNA (1103-4, wg, sas adits Fh) kahi kabeer raamai ram chhootahu naahi ta booday bhaa-ee. ||4||1]]|
Says Kabeer, chanting the Lord's Name, you shall be saved; otherwise, you shall drown, brother. ||4]|1]|
aofs SA fae uh AG we Hog 3 Snfa fers II (1103-5, +g, sas ats Hh
baneh basay ki-o paa-ee-ai ja-o la-o manhu na tajeh bikaar.
Living in the forest, how will you find Him? Not until you remove corruption from your mind.
fad We Bo AALS ah S us AAT IA (1103-6, wg, sas ats A) jih ghar ban samsar kee-aa tay pooray sansaar. ||1]|| Those who look alike upon home and forest, are the most perfect people in the world.
[11
Arg AY urea IH Il (1103-6, 4g, sas ante fh) saar sukh paa-ee-ai raamaa. You shall find real peace in the Lord,
Sat Jeg MSH IH NU! TIC i (1103-6, wg, sas acta Hf) rang ravhu aatmai raam. ||1|| rahaa-o. if you lovingly dwell on the Lord within your being. ||1]|Pause] |
Hel SAH BUS Aha AT Tet Hfs AA Il (1103-7, wg, sas aes Hh)
jataa bhasam laypan kee-aa kahaa gufaa meh baas.
What is the use of wearing matted hair, smearing the body with ashes, and living in a cave?
He ats Aa Atfsor at 3 fatter 3 Sf Sea QI (1103-7, wg, sas ats Fh
man jeetay jag jeeti-aa jaa‘ tay bikhi-aa tay ho-ay udaas. ||2||
Conquering the mind, one conquers the world, and then remains detached from corruption. ||2]|
ning tf As det ca ade nfo fasTE II (1103-8, wg, sas aeite Hh)
anjan day-ay sabhai ko-ee tuk chaahan maahi bidaan.
They all apply make-up to their eyes; there is little difference between their objectives.
fami ning fas ufemr 3 afes ugeTg NBII (1103-8, wg, sas ate Fh)
gi-aan anjan jih paa-i-aa tay lo-in parvaan. ||3]|
But those eyes, to which the ointment of spiritual wisdom is applied, are approved and supreme. ||3]|
ata adie ura atfoor ats famirg chor ANSE I (1103-9, wg, sas ots Ft) kahi kabeer ab jaani-aa gur gi-aan dee-aa samjhaa-ay. Says Kabeer, now I know my Lord; the Guru has blessed me with spiritual wisdom.
nisdats ofa sfeur net Aa HS AST 3 ATE III (1103-9, wg, sas aes FH)
antargat har bhayti-aa ab mayraa man kathoo na jaa-ay. ||4]||2||
I have met the Lord, and I am emancipated within; now, my mind does not wander at all. |[4] [21]
fafa fafa wt a edt sa arg fAS fom are II (1103-10, +g, sas aete FH)
riDh siDh jaa ka-o furee tab kaahoo si-o ki-aa kaaj.
You have riches and miraculous spiritual powers; so what business do you have with anyone else?
33 add at afs famr aa A ses dt as BA AU (1103-10, wg, sas aes Fh
tayray kahnay kee gat ki-aa kaha-o mai bolat hee bad laaj. ||1]|
What should I say about the reality of your talk? I am embarrassed even to speak to you. ||1]|
oH fag ufenr It Il (1103-11, wg, sas oets Ah) raam jih paa-i-aa raam. One who has found the Lord,
3 sefo 5 as TST UU TIS It (1103-11, wg, sas aete HH) tay bhaveh na baarai baar. ||1|| rahaa-o. does not wander from door to door. ||1]||Pause] |
Bo Ag sda war feo vfs sass at MMA II (1103-12, wg, sas ats Ht) jhoothaa jag dahkai ghanaa din du-ay bartan kee aas. The false world wanders all around, in hopes of finding wealth to use for a few days.
oH Gea fag Ao Ulr fate safe 6 set fumiA QI (1103-12, wg, sas afte Ft) raam udak jih jan pee-aa tihi bahur na bha-ee pi-aas. ||2|| That humble being, who drinks in the Lord's water, never becomes thirsty again. ||2||
a ure faa afer ora 3 sfemr fear I (1103-13, wg, sas aete Fh) gur parsaad jih boojhi-aa aasaa tay bha-i-aa niraas. Whoever understands, by Guru's Grace, becomes free of hope in the midst of hope.
Ag Ay oedt urfeur AG uirsn sfeur Bary ISI (1103-13, wg, sas aes Ft) sabh sach nadree aa-i-aa ja-o aatam bha-i-aa udaas. ||3]|| One comes to see the Lord everywhere, when the soul becomes detached. ||3]||
TH OH IA Otto ots SH Te SMe Il (1103-14, wg, sas aete Ft)
raam naam ras chaakhi-aa har naamaa har taar.
I have tasted the sublime essence of the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name carries everyone across.
ag adits ave sfeor gy afeor Ane uta si (1103-14, we, sas ats sh
kaho kabeer kanchan bha-i-aa bharam ga-i-aa samudrai paar. ||4||3] |
Says Kabeer, I have become like gold; doubt is dispelled, and I have crossed over the world-ocean. ||4]|3]|
Cea AHS Aes at Aftor Set Soa AHNTSfaa I (1103-15, wg, sas afte Hf)
udak samund salal kee saakhi-aa nadee tarang samaavhigay.
Like drops of water in the water of the ocean, and like waves in the stream, I merge in the Lord.
Hote Ao fifeor AHESAt ues gu ae ArSfaar WAI (1103-15, wg, sas oats Hh) sunneh sunn mili-aa samadrasee pavan roop ho-ay jaavhigay. ||1||
Merging my being into the Absolute Being of God, I have become impartial and transparent, like the air. ||1||
adfs TH ad weft il (1103-16, wg, sas ate Ft) bahur ham kaahay aavhigay. Why should I come into the world again?
WeS Ae" Jan fA a gan afs ANre|fad NA TIC i (1103-16, we, sas afte FH) aavan jaanaa hukam tisai kaa hukmai bujh samaavhigay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Coming and going is by the Hukam of His Command; realizing His Hukam, I shall merge in Him. ||1]|Pause] |
Wa ga UT WS at TIS" MA SIH Foes Il (1103-17, wg, sas aets Ht)
jab chookai panch Dhaat kee rachnaa aisay bharam chukaavhigay.
When the body, formed of the five elements, perishes, then any such doubts shall end.
TdHS efs se AHEaAt Sa oH fomrefad NN (1103-18, wg, sas ete Ft)
darsan chhod bha-ay samadrasee ayko naam Dhi-aavhigay. ||2| |
Giving up the different schools of philosophy, I look upon all equally; I meditate only on the One Name. ||2||
fas oH oe fas dt od SA aH anSfad Il (1103-18, wg, sas ats Hf) jit ham laa-ay tit hee laagay taisay karam kamaavhigay. Whatever I am attached to, to that I am attached; such are the deeds I do.
ofa Ft faut ad AG must 3 as & Rafe ASfad NBII (1103-19, 1g, sas ats Fh
har jee kirpaa karay ja-o apnee tou gur kay sabad samaavhigay. ||3]||
When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, then I am merged in the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
Hes nag Hog Sfe Feg usafu HOH o Tet Il (1103-19, wg, sas adits Hf) jeevat marahu marahu fun jeevhu punrap janam na ho-ee. Die while yet alive, and by so dying, be alive; thus you shall not be reborn again.
Yast A9O8
ag oats Hoth AHS Ho dfoor fos Feet Sell (104-1, ws, sas ate x) kaho kabeer jo naam samaanay sunn rahi-aa liv so-ee. ||4||4||
Says Kabeer, whoever is absorbed in the Naam remains lovingly absorbed in the Primal, Absolute Lord. ||4||4]]|
AG 3H H aS Ufs aes IS 3B SH HAS asTS_ Il (1104-1, wg, sas aes Hf) ja-o tum" mo ka-o door karat ha-o ta-o tum mukat bataavhu. If You keep me far away from You, then tell me, what is liberation?
fa nea df sfoG Aas ufo ma AA SIH] WAI (1104-2, wg, sas adits sf) ayk anayk ho-ay rahi-o sagal meh ab kaisay bharmaavahu. ||1]| The One has many forms, and is contained within all; how can I be fooled now? ||1]||
oH H ag ofe aot & wet F I (1104-3, wg, sas acta FH) raam mo ka-o taar kahaa” lai ja-ee hai. O Lord, where will You take me, to save me?
Aug vats as eC ant afs ure Hfo uret FA TITS I (1104-3, wg, sas adit Hh) soDha-o mukat kahaa day-o kaisee kar parsaad mohi paa-ee hai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Tell me where, and what sort of liberation shall You give me? By Your Grace, I have already obtained it. ||1]|Pause] |
WIS SIG Fa BA Ad AS oA 3g 5 Whom | (1104-4, we, sas adits HH)
taaran taran tabai lag kahee-ai jab lag tat na jaani-aa.
People talk of salvation and being saved, as long as they do not understand the essence of reality.
mwa 3 fans se we dt xfs ats adte He Hfom QUI (1104-4, wg, sas ae Ft)
ab ta-o bimal bha-ay ghat hee meh kahi kabeer man maani-aa. ||2||5|| I have now become pure within my heart, says Kabeer, and my mind is pleased and appeased. ||2||5]|
fafs aa ae ate aes & efs afeor Aree UA (1104-5, wg, sas adits Hf) jin garh kot kee-ay kanchan kay chhod ga-i-aa so raavan. ||1||
Raawan made castles and fortresses of gold, but he had to abandon them when he left. ||1]|
ad alas J Hfe see Il (1104-6, wg, sas adits Fh kaahay keejat hai man bhaavan. Why do you act only to please your mind?
wa FH urfe an Ss uad 3d ofa & OH SSS AU TIE Il (1104-6, wg, sas ante Ah jab jam aa-ay kays tay pakrai tah har ko naam chhadaavan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When Death comes and grabs you by the hair, then only the Name of the Lord will save you. ||1||Pause] |
Os MAS WAH a ate feg ual surSs Il (1104-7, wg, sas ate fh)
kaal akaal khasam kaa keen"aa ih parpanch baDhaavan.
Death, and deathlessness are the creations of our Lord and Master; this show, this expanse, is only an entanglement.
afs ats 3 nis Has fag fase oH safes QUEM (1104-7, wg, sas acta Ht)
kahi kabeer tay antay muktay jin" hirdai raam rasaa-in. ||2||6||
Says Kabeer, those who have the sublime essence of the Lord in their hearts - in the end, they are liberated. ||2||6]|
oot wet HG us Hose safe Us faSATS Il (1104-8, wg, sas adte Hh)
dayhee gaavaa jee-o Dhar mahta-o baseh panch kirsaanaa.
The body is a village, and the soul is the owner and farmer; the five farm-hands live there.
Sane
nainoo naktoo sarvanoo raspat indree kahi-aa na maanaa. ||1|| The eyes, nose, ears, tongue and sensory organs of touch do not obey any order.
[11
ASO sAufs feet afour o HAT IAI (1104-8, wg, sas ait Ft)
wa wa 6 avg feo a il 1104-9, wg, sas ate Ah baabaa ab na basa-o ih gaa-o. O father, now I shall not live in this village.
wat wet or Ser nat ate” FZ SS UU TIS Il (1104-9, wg, sas aes Ht)
gharee gharee kaa laykhaa maagai kaa-ith chaytoo naa-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The accountants summoned Chitar and Gupat, the recording scribes of the conscious and the unconscious, to ask for an account of each and every moment. ||1]|Pause] |
Ue ofe wa Sur Hat sat fSeaHt srt il (1104-10, wg, sas acta st)
Dharam raa-ay jab laykhaa maagai baakee niksee bhaaree. When the Righteous Judge of Dharma calls for my account, there shall be a very heavy balance against me.
us farce afar re & afas AH ears ii (1104-10, we, sas ate Ff) panch kirsaanvaa bhaag ga-ay lai baaDhi-o jee-o darbaaree. ||2|| The five farm-hands shall then run away, and the bailiff shall arrest the soul. ||2||
ad ads Ao 3 Ase US ot aeg fess i c104-11, wg, sas aeite Ht) kahai kabeer sunhu ray santahu khayt hee karahu nibayraa. Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: settle your accounts in this farm.
wa at ad aufA det a agfe o sCnfs ST SIDI (1104-11, wg, sas ate Hh
ab kee baar bakhas banday ka-o bahur na bha-ojal fayraa. ||3]|7| |
O Lord, please forgive Your slave now, in this life, so that he may not have to return again to this terrifying world-ocean. ||3]|7]|
TH Hg wet ads AS at (1104-13) raag maaroo banee kabeer jee-o kee Raag Maaroo, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1104-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nose fas o Sfimm Farathrs i (1104-14, we, sas ants sh anbha-o kinai na daykhi-aa bairaagee-arhay. No one has seen the Fearless Lord, O renunciate.
fag 3 nios@ df ZeTS AU (1104-14, wg, sas aeite Hh) bin bhai anbha-o ho-ay vanaahambai. ||1|| Without the Fear of God, how can the Fearless Lord be obtained? ||1]|
Ag dete fe St 38 us Faas I (1104-14, wg, sas alta Fh)
saho hadoor daykhai taa‘ bha-o pavai bairaagee-arhay.
If one sees the Presence of his Husband Lord near at hand, then he feels the Fear of God, O renunciate.
JaH Fs 3 fess SE esa NII (1104-15, wg, sas ats Hh) hukmai boojhai ta nirbha-o ho-ay vanaahambai. ||2|| If he realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then he becomes fearless. ||2||
ofa ung o ateet Sarathas It (1104-15, we, sas ate wf) har pakhand na keej-ee bairaagee-arhay. Don't practice hypocrisy with the Lord, O renunciate!
undfs Jat Ag BX FSIS WI (1104-15, wy, sas aete Ht) pakhand rataa sabh lok vanaahambai. ||3]|| The whole world is filled with hypocrisy. ||3]|
fgno uA 6 eset Saas I (1104-16, wg, sas acta Ht) tarisnaa paas na chhod-ee bairaagee-arhay. Thirst and desire do not just go away, O renunciate.
HHS" Wher fis FETS Vil (1104-16, wg, sas acta Ht) mamtaa jaali-aa pind vanaahambai. ||4|| The body is burning in the fire of worldly love and attachment. ||4||
fear ais sq afer Saraihs i (1104-17, wg, sas ate Fh chintaa jaal tan jaali-aa bairaagee-arhay. Anxiety is burned, and the body is burned, O renunciate,
A He frase of Zarsa ull (1104-17, wg, sas ate Ft) jay man mirtak ho-ay vanaahambai. ||5|| only if one lets his mind become dead. ||5]|
Afsas fag Soa 3 Sect Saaihas | (1104-17, we, sas ate Hh) satgur bin bairaag na hova-ee bairaagee-arhay. Without the True Guru, there can be no renunciation,
XS SA
A Ge Ag af Zarda Ell (1104-18, wg, sas ats sh jay lochai sabh ko-ay vanaahambai. ||6|| even though all the people may wish for it. ||6||
aH de Afsag fs Saraihus | (1104-18, wg, sas aaits Fh karam hovai satgur milai bairaagee-arhay. When God grants His Grace, one meets the True Guru, O renunciate,
Hon ure Afe Sars IDI (1104-19, wg, sas afte Fh) sehjay paavai so-ay vanaahambai. ||7| | and automatically, intuitively finds that Lord. ||7]|
ag oats fea sost Faains 1 1104-19, wg, sas aete sh) kaho kabeer ik bayntee bairaagee-arhay. Says Kabeer, I offer this one prayer, O renunciate.
Hag s@ne ute Cafe Fess WCUUICI (1104-19, og, sas ate Fh mo ka-o bha-ojal paar utaar vanaahambai. ||8]||1||8]| Carry me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||8]|1]|8]|
at aQoU
THs ACS SHS mS Il (1105-1, ws, sas ete FH) raajan ka-un tumaarai aavai. O king, who will come to you?
MA ae fees t UE Go acta Hfs eS WAN TIC I 1105-1, wg, sas adits Fh aiso bhaa-o bidar ko daykhi-o oh gareeb mohi bhaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have seen such love from Bidur, that the poor man is pleasing to me. ||1]|Pause]|
JASt Sf SoH 3 sar At BaeTG o ASM II (1105-2, wg, sas aete FH)
hastee daykh bharam tay bhoolaa saree bhagvaan na jaani-aa.
Gazing upon your elephants, you have gone astray in doubt; you do not know the Great Lord God.
Sue ey fred &t us nifys afe A fone AI (1105-2, wg, sas adits Ht) tumro dooDh bidar ko paan"o amrit kar mai maani-aa. ||1]| I judge Bidur's water to be like ambrosial nectar, in comparison with your milk. ||1]|
dts marfs Arar Ho urfemr ae ares ofe feat Il (1105-3, og, sas adits Fh
kheer samaan saag mai paa-i-aa gun gaavat rain bihaanee.
I find his rough vegetables to be like rice pudding; the night of my life passes singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
He t Sag nis fasdt AS 3 aT at HAT NUK (1105-3, wg, sas ate Fh)
kabeer ko thaakur anad binodee jaat na kaahoo kee maanee. ||2||9|| Kabeer's Lord and Master is joyous and blissful; He does not care about anyone's social class. ||2||9|]|
HBa aete Il (1105-4)
salok kabeer. Shalok, Kabeer:
qa SH ofa ufss stars wr il 105-4, wg, sas ante sf) gagan damaamaa baaji-o pari-o neesaanai ghaa-o. The battle-drum beats in the sky of the mind; aim is taken, and the wound is inflicted.
Ug 7 HSS ASH Ha ASS A AS AU 1105-5, wg, sas ats HH) khayt jo maa“di-o soormaa ab joojhan ko daa-o. ||1|| The spiritual warriors enter the field of battle; now is the time to fight! ||1]|
He A ufasamt 7 Bd Ute & IT Il (1105-5, wg, sas ata Fh) sooraa so pahichaanee-ai jo larai deen kay hayt. He alone is known as a spiritual hero, who fights in defense of religion.
yan Us afe HS AAT F BS BF MU (1105-6, wy, sas aes Hf) purjaa purjaa kat marai kabhoo na chhaadai khayt. ||2||2|| He may be cut apart, piece by piece, but he never leaves the field of battle. ||2]|2||
ats a AGE Ta Hg wet SHES Ft at 1105-7) kabeer kaa sabad raag maaroo banee naamday-o jee kee Shabad Of Kabeer, Raag Maaroo, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsas urrfe i (1105-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ate Hats ae fafa fife & goo ys at Aefe ule I (105-8, wg, sas ones Ft)
chaar mukat chaarai siDh mil kai doolah parabh kee saran pari-o.
I have obtained the four kinds of liberation, and the four miraculous spiritual powers, in the Sanctuary of God, my Husband Lord.
vats sf au aa AieS AA atefs He Sz UfsS UA (1105-8, wg, sas ane Fh) mukat bha-i-o cha-uhoo-a™ jug jaani-o jas keerat maathai chhatar Dhari-o. ||1||
I am liberated, and famous throughout the four ages; the canopy of praise and fame waves over my head. ||1]|
TH TH AUS a a B Sha il (1105-9, wg, sas see Fh raajaa raam japat ko ko na tari-o. Meditating on the Sovereign Lord God, who has not been saved?
a Guefh AG at Hats sas sas Ta OH ule NA TIC I (1105-9, wg, sas oes FH) gur updays saaDh kee sangat bhagat bhagat taa ko naam pari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whoever follows the Guru's Teachings and joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is called the most devoted of the devotees. ||1]|Pause] |
Ay 3a Hes faa faafas fe ysru AH SfeG I (1105-10, wg, sas anes FH)
sankh chakar maalaa tilak biraajit daykh partaap jam dari-o.
He is adorned with the conch, the chakra, the mala and the ceremonial tilak mark on his forehead; gazing upon his radiant glory, the Messenger of Death is scared away.
fogs se 3H 8m TefASs HOH Hes Asvy fofsS QU (105-11, ws, sas nee Ah nirbha-o bha-ay raam bal garjit janam maran santaap hiri-o. ||2||
He becomes fearless, and the power of the Lord thunders through him; the pains of birth and death are taken away. ||2||
nigdia ag AG us ue wa sates nifoe afs it 05-11, wg, sas ane Hh)
ambreek ka-o dee-o abhai pad raaj bhabheekhan aDhik kari-o.
The Lord blessed Ambreek with fearless dignity, and elevated Bhabhikhan to become king.
3@ feta oafs cet HEH Oot new vig 3 ches WSN (1105-12, wg, sas one Fh) na-o niDh thaakur da-ee sudaamai Dharoo-a atal ajhoo na tari-o. ||3]| Sudama's Lord and Master blessed him with the nine treasures; he made Dhroo permanent and unmoving; as the north star, he still hasn't moved. ||3]|
sas as Wiss JaouH sath gu afe ea ofeS i (1105-13, wg, sas ose Fh) bhagat hayt maari-o harnaakhas narsingh roop ho-ay dayh Dhari-o.
For the sake of His devotee Prahlaad, God assumed the form of the man-lion, and killed Harnaakhash.
on ad sats aft ane vind af & Erg us USA (1105-13, wg, sas US Hh) naamaa kahai bhagat bas kaysav ajahoo”™ bal kay du-aar kharo. ||4||1||
Says Naam Dayv, the beautiful-haired Lord is in the power of His devotees; He is standing at Balraja's door, even now! ||4]||1]|
Hg ate AE I (105-14) maaroo kabeer jee-o. Maaroo, Kabeer Jee:
ae fares 3 feeds tte fares F i (1105-14, wg, sas aeite Ff) deen bisaari-o ray divaanay deen bisaari-o ray. You have forgotten your religion, O madman; you have forgotten your religion.
Ue sf unor fa AS HOY ASH FT THIS NU TIS ll 1105-15, wg, sas aeits FM)
payt bhari-o pasoo-aa ji-o so-i-o manukh janam hai haari-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You fill your belly, and sleep like an animal; you have wasted and lost this human life. ||1]|Pause] |
AUHGS aa Sat atat says Ga FS Il (1105-15, wg, sas ats HH)
saaDhsangat kabhoo nahee keenee rachi-o DhanDhai jhooth.
You never joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. You are engrossed in false pursuits.
Aura Had afen fre seas USS SfS WAU (1105-16, wg, sas ots Ht) Su-aan sookar baa-is jivai bhatkat chaali-o ooth. ||1]| You wander like a dog, a pig, a crow; soon, you shall have to get up and leave. ||1]|
nun a cay afs WS mBae AG Ga HS Il (1105-16, 1g, sas adits Fh aapas ka-o deeragh kar jaanai a-uran ka-o lag maat. You believe that you yourself are great, and that others are small.
HOA Set ATHST H SH SAA AST MI (1105-17, wg, sas aes sh
mansaa baachaa karmanaa mai daykhay dojak jaat. ||2|| Those who are false in thought, word and deed, I have seen them going to hell. ||2]|
amt aut asdt weitere Fant il (1105-18, wg, sas ate Fh kaamee kroDhee chaaturee baajeegar baykaam. The lustful, the angry, the clever, the deceitful and the lazy
Se" AIS ASH fAesS aa 3 fifsS TH 3M (1105-18, wg, sas ats HH) nindaa kartay janam siraano kabhoo na simri-o raam. ||3]|| waste their lives in slander, and never remember their Lord in meditation. ||3]|
ae eats FS Sot HTH HAT TST Il (1105-19, wg, sas aes Fh)
kahi kabeer chaytai nahee moorakh mugaDh gavaar.
Says Kabeer, the fools, the idiots and the brutes do not remember the Lord. oH on WSS odt aA CsafA ufs NSA (1105-19, we, sas ate FH)
raam naam jaani-o nahee kaisay utras paar. ||4||1|| They do not know the Lord's Name; how can they be carried across? ||4]||1]|
ust AOE TY HT Tat AS AME at 1106-1)
raag maaroo banee jaiday-o jee-o kee Raag Maaroo, The Word Of Jai Dayv Jee:
qe Afsars yArfe It (1106-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Je AS Sfeur are AS ufsor Ae AS aSAT ey ae Il (1106-2, wg, sas AVE Fh
chand sat bhaydi-aa naad sat poori-aa soor sat khorhsaa dat kee-aa.
The breath is drawn in through the left nostril; it is held in the central channel of the Sushmanaa, and exhaled through the right nostril, repeating the Lord's Name sixteen times.
mee 8% Sfaor nee ve afumr ors wiser sor mifu uber ail (1106-2, wg, sas ABS af)
abal bal torhi-aa achal chal thapi-aa agharh gharhi-aa tahaa api-o pee-aa. ||1]|
I am powerless; my power has been broken. My unstable mind has been stabliized, and my unadorned soul has been adorned. I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|
Ho otfe Te wife sufEnt | (1106-3, wg, sas Fee Ah man aad gun aad vakhaani-aa. Within my mind, I chant the Name of the Primal Lord God, the Source of virtue.
Sot cfs ferfe Aen A TIS il 1106-4, wg, sas ABE FH) tayree dubiDhaa darisat sammaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My vision, that You are I are separate, has melted away. ||1||Pause] |
wafa a@ wafanr Aafa a@ Heftur Aes a@ Fels Afs wefemr I (1106-4, ws, sas ARS aft)
araDh ka-o arDhi-aa saraDh ka-o sarDhi-aa salal ka-o salal sammaan aa-i-aa.
I worship the One who is worthy of being worshipped. I trust the One who is worthy of being trusted. Like water merging in water, I merge in the Lord.
gefs Aee Aes aC dfimr qon foswe fos ste ufemr NINA C106-5, ws, sas Ae Ah badat jaiday-o jaidayv ka-o rammi-aa barahm nirbaan liv leen paa-i-aa. ||2||1]|
Says Jai Dayv, I meditate and contemplate the Luminous, Triumphant Lord. I am lovingly absorbed in the Nirvaanaa of God. ||2||1]|
AT ll HTT I (1106-6) kabeer. maaroo. Kabeer, Maaroo:
oH fAHg usstaa HS Il (1106-6, wg, sas aes Ft) raam simar pachhutaahigaa man. Meditate in remembrance on the Lord, or else you will regret it in the end, O mind.
unt Hine Se ass 3 ora ots Cfo wiser na TIS il (1106-6, wg, sas acta Hh) paapee jee-araa lobh karat hai aaj kaal uth jaahigaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O sinful soul, you act in greed, but today or tomorrow, you will have to get up and leave. ||1|]Pause| |
Bed Bd ASH aston Hfent sgH garfaar i (1106-7, wg, sas eit Ft) laalach laagay janam gavaa-i-aa maa-i-aa bharam bhulaahigaa. Clinging to greed, you have wasted your life, deluded in the doubt of Maya.
U6 Has a Teg 3 an Aare fA ats wfoar 9 (1106-7, wg, sas ate sf) Dhan joban kaa garab na keejai kaagad ji-o gal jaahigaa. ||1]|| Do not take pride in your wealth and youth; you shall crumble apart like dry paper.
[411 AG AH urfe an afs uea So fea fae o SAfoE Il (1106-8, wg, sas ats Fh
ja-o jam aa-ay kays geh patkai taa din kichh na basaahigaa. When the Messenger of Death comes and grabs you by the hair, and knocks you down, on that day, you shall be powerless.
fanaa sng efeur odt atet 36 fe dar wfoar 21 (1106-8, wg, sas adie Hh)
simran bhajan da-i-aa nahee keenee ta-o mukh chotaa khaahigaa. ||2]|
You do not remember the Lord, or vibrate upon Him in meditation, and you do not practice compassion; you shall be beaten on your face. ||2||
UeH of wa Sat Hat foo HY B a Afar Il (1106-9, wg, sas aete Ft)
Dharam raa-ay jab laykhaa maagai ki-aa mukh lai kai jaahigaa.
When the Righteous Judge of Dharma calls for your account, what face will you show Him then?
ads ais HoT J Asg AGHalS ste AoE SIAN (1106-10, wg, sas adits Hh)
kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu saaDhsangat tar jaa‘higaa. ||3||1||
Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you Shall be saved. ||3||1]|
Ta Hg wet seen AG at ci06-11) raag maaroo banee ravidaas jee-o kee Raag Maaroo, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsars ure II (1106-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MAT ors 3S fas ABS AP Il (1106-12, wg, sas afer Hf) aisee laal tujh bin ka-un karai. O Love, who else but You could do such a thing?
ada foes arbor He Ha SZ As UU TIS i (1106-12, wg, sas sfeern Fh)
gareeb nivaaj gus-ee-aa mayraa maathai chhatar Dharai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Patron of the poor, Lord of the World, You have put the canopy of Your Grace over my head. ||1||Pause]|
Ww at efs was AG oat St ug Sat SP Il (1106-13, wg, sas sheen FH) jaa kee chhot jagat ka-o laagai taa par tuhee™ dharai. Only You can grant Mercy to that person whose touch pollutes the world.
ated Cu ag He aig ag 3 3 3d UU (1106-13, wg, sas afer Ft)
neechah ooch karai mayraa gobind kaahoo tay na darai. ||1]|
You exalt and elevate the lowly, O my Lord of the Universe; You are not afraid of anyone. ||1]|
Ones atts su AUST AS 3d Il (1106-14, wg, sas see FH) naamdayv kabeer tilochan saDhnaa sain tarai. Naam Dayv, Kabeer, Trilochan, Sadhana and Sain crossed over.
afs sfeem Hod 3 Asg dfs ME 3 AS AS UNA (1106-14, wg, sas afeerA Hh kahi ravidaas sunhu ray santahu har jee-o tay sabhai sarai. ||2||1]| Says Ravi Daas, listen, O Saints, through the Dear Lord, all is accomplished. ||2]|1]|
HTg Il (1106-15) maaroo. Maaroo:
AY Arad Afssg fesHfs ands sfA A a g Il (1106-15, ws, sas sfeer Ah)
sukh saagar suritar chintaaman kaamDhayn bas jaa kay ray.
The Lord is the ocean of peace; the miraculous tree of life, the jewel of miracles and the wish-fulfilling cow are all under His power.
ofa uese mAe Ho fafa og fof ag 3m SS WAU (1106-15, wg, sas afeeA Hf) chaar padaarath asat mahaa siDh nav niDh kar tal taa kai. ||1]|
The four great blessings, the eight great miraculous spiritual powers and the nine treasures are in the palm of His hand. ||1]|
dfs of ofs o AUfA SAAT Il (1106-16, wg, sas sfeem Fh)
har har har na japas rasnaa. Why don't you chant the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har?
Wed AS sts aS FIAT NU! TIS Il (1106-16, wg, sas seem Ht)
avar sabh chhaad bachan rachnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Abandon all other devices of words. ||1||Pause||
oor fimire use ae fafa v@sta vied Hrdt I (1106-17, wg, sas ofeem Fh)
naanaa khi-aan puraan bayd biDh cha-utees achhar maahee.
The many epics, the Puraanas and the Vedas are all composed out of the letters of the alphabet.
fiorn dats afoS usHse TH OH Ale Srdt QM (1106-17, wg, sas sees Fh)
bi-aas beechaar kahi-o parmaarath raam naam sar naahee. ||2||
After careful thought, Vyaasa spoke the supreme truth, that there is nothing equal to the Lord's Name. ||2| |
Hon Af @urfa gas afe as afar foe wait Il (106-18, wg, saz fee Fh
sahj samaaDh upaaDh rahat ho-ay baday bhaag liv laagee.
In intuitive Samaadhi, their troubles are eliminated; the very fortunate ones lovingly focus on the Lord.
afs afer Carn SH HAS ASH HIS F Tait UWSUQUWI (1106-19, wg, sas sfeeA Fh
kahi ravidaas udaas daas mat janam maran bhai bhaagee. ||3||2||15]| Says Ravi Daas, the Lord's slave remains detached from the world; the fear of birth and death runs away from his mind. ||3]|2]|15]|
Uat AAD
Just ST HIG A HIT HI (1107-1)
tukhaaree chhant mehlaa 1 baarah maahaa Tukhaari Chhant, First Mehl, Baarah Maahaa ~ The Twelve Months:
qe Afsars urrfe il (1107-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 Afe fags adur usta corfenr 1 fife fafs ma AH efs AZ SH Il (1107-3, seek, we 1) too sun kirat karammaa purab kamaa-i-aa. sir sir sukh sahammaa deh so too bhalaa. Listen: according to the karma of their past actions, each and every person experiences happiness or sorrow; whatever You give, Lord, is good.
dfs daar Sct famr afs Hat ofe fae wat o Ale I (1107-3, sect, He 1)
har rachnaa tayree ki-aa gat mayree har bin gharhee na jeevaa.
O Lord, the Created Universe is Yours; what is my condition? Without the Lord, I cannot survive, even for an instant.
finn as oat af o sat gente nifigs uber it 1107-4, sere, ne 1)
pari-a baajh duhaylee ko-ay na baylee gurmukh amrit peevaa”.
Without my Beloved, I am miserable; I have no friend at all. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
dat of ad fadardt us Hfs ASH AAS Il (1107-5, Ses, Hs 1)
rachnaa raach rahay nirankaaree parabh man karam sukarmaa.
The Formless Lord is contained in His Creation. To obey God is the best course of action.
aod Ug fears AT US J ALE MSH THT IAI (1107-5, Sect, He 1) naanak panth nihaalay saa Dhan too sun aatam raamaa. ||1]| O Nanak, the soul-bride is gazing upon Your Path; please listen, O Supreme Soul.
[21] aeater fy ss afore arebor 1 (1107-6, sarct, 48 1)
baabeehaa pari-o bolay kokil baanee-aa. The rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Beloved!", and the song-bird sings the Lord's Bani.
AT uo Afs JA BS nif AHTEMT II (1107-6, sect, He 1) saa Dhan sabh ras cholai ank samaanee-aa. The soul-bride enjoys all the pleasures, and merges in the Being of her Beloved.
ofa nifx Anat AT Us Sat AT oars BS I (1107-7, Hest, ue 1)
har ank samaanee jaa parabh bhaanee saa sohagan naaray.
She merges into the Being of her Beloved, when she becomes pleasing to God; she is the happy, blessed soul-bride.
oe ug atu Hoe wg Cus for ule SA HIS Il (1107-7, sect, He 1)
nav ghar thaap mahal ghar oocha-o nij ghar vaas muraaray.
Establishing the nine houses, and the Royal Mansion of the Tenth Gate above them, the Lord dwells in that home deep within the self.
AS 3a 3 He yisy fata was sar Te I 107-8, ses, Hs 1) sabh tayree too mayraa pareetam nis baasur rang raavai. All are Yours, You are my Beloved; night and day, I celebrate Your Love.
oad fy@ fue ae aete afer Aafe ATS MQM (1107-8, Sed, He 1)
naanak pari-o pari-o chavai babeehaa kokil sabad suhaavai. ||2||
O Nanak, the rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" The song-bird is embellished with the Word of the Shabad. ||2]|
3 Afe af oF f8S UISH MPU II (1107-9, Hers, He 1) too sun har ras bhinnay pareetam aapnay. Please listen, O my Beloved Lord - I am drenched with Your Love.
Hfs sfs des Jes Wat & tA Il (1107-9, sere, He 1)
man tan ravat ravannay gharhee na beesrai.
My mind and body are absorbed in dwelling on You; I cannot forget You, even for an instant.
fas wat farst JB afeost IG Atet TS WE I 1107-10, Herc, v2
ki-o gharhee bisaaree ha-o balihaaree ha-o jeevaa gun gaa-ay.
How could I forget You, even for an instant? I am a sacrifice to You; singing Your Glorious Praises, I live.
o act Ha 0G fan as ofa fas TE o WE Il (1107-10, Fert, He naa ko-ee mayraa ha-o kis kayraa har bin rahan na jaa-ay. No one is mine; unto whom do I belong? Without the Lord, I cannot survive.
Ge adt ofa wae fee se ules AST Il 107-11, gest, He 1)
ot gahee har charan nivaasay bha-ay pavitar sareeraa.
I have grasped the Support of the Lord's Feet; dwelling there, my body has become immaculate.
ood fenfe dew AY ure ae Ast He The SH (107-11, sere, He 1) naanak darisat deeragh sukh paavai gur sabdee man Dheeraa. ||3]|
O Nanak, I have obtained profound insight, and found peace; my mind is comforted by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3]|
aan vifys oes Fe AT Set Il (1107-12, sect, we barsai amrit Dhaar boond suhaavanee. The Ambrosial Nectar rains down on us! Its drops are so delightful!
AM fue Aft Hate ate fAG Yifs gat i (107-12, yest, we 1)
saajan milay sahj subhaa-ay har si-o pareet banee.
Meeting the Guru, the Best Friend, with intuitive ease, the mortal falls in love with the Lord.
dfs Heats wre FT ys sve Us Sot Te APS Ml (1107-13, sere, ws 1)
har mandar aavai jaa parabh bhaavai Dhan oobhee gun saaree.
The Lord comes into the temple of the body, when it pleases God's Will; the soul-bride rises up, and sings His Glorious Praises.
ufs ufs az ge Hoafs 3S fae afs ferrst il (1107-13, zert, He
ghar ghar kant ravai sohagan ha-o ki-o kant visaaree.
In each and every home, the Husband Lord ravishes and enjoys the happy soul- brides; so why has He forgotten me?
Cafe we ae gan Hee Hf 3fe UN AUS I (1107-14, sect, He 1)
unav ghan chhaa-ay baras subhaa-ay man tan paraym sukhaavai.
The sky is overcast with heavy, low-hanging clouds; the rain is delightful, and my Beloved's Love is pleasing to my mind and body.
Soa ZA ifs areat afe faour whe mre Sil (1107-15, serdt, He 1)
naanak varsai amrit banee kar kirpaa ghar aavai. ||4]|
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar of Gurbani rains down; the Lord, in His Grace, has come into the home of my heart. ||4||
JZ YAS 3H FSI ATSS Il (1107-15, sews, ne
chayt basant bhalaa bhavar suhaavrhay.
In the month of Chayt, the lovely spring has come, and the bumble bees hum with joy.
Uat AQot
ao 8 Hs ate x fug wife args Il ci08-1, sect, we
ban foolay manjh baar mai pir ghar baahurhai.
The forest is blossoming in front of my door; if only my Beloved would return to my home!
fug ufs odt ure ue faG ay ure faofs fada aq etA II 1108-1, pret, He 1
pir ghar nahee aavai Dhan ki-o sukh paavai bireh biroDh tan chheejai.
If her Husband Lord does not return home, how can the soul-bride find peace? Her body is wasting away with the sorrow of separation.
afas nifa net SS fa vu nifa Act I (1108-2, seret, He
kokil amb suhaavee bolai ki-o dukh ank saheejai.
The beautiful song-bird sings, perched on the mango tree; but how can I endure the pain in the depths of my being?
Beg FET SH TS fas het HT HS I (1108-2, erst, we 1)
bhavar bhavantaa foolee daalee ki-o jeevaa mar maa-ay.
The bumble bee is buzzing around the flowering branches; but how can I survive? I am dying, O my mother!
Soa Vis Ada AY US A dfs eg wis Gs US HUI (1108-3, See, He 1)
naanak chayt sahj sukh paavai jay har var ghar Dhan paa-ay. ||5]|
O Nanak, in Chayt, peace is easily obtained, if the soul-bride obtains the Lord as her Husband, within the home of her own heart. ||5| |
SAY SE Aa SA AP Il (1108-3, suet, wz 1) vaisaakh bhalaa saakhaa vays karay. Baisakhi is so pleasant; the branches blossom with new leaves.
Ue ey dfs eurfa wreg efenr ad Il (1108-4, werct, He Dhan daykhai har du-aar aavhu da-i-aa karay. The soul-bride yearns to see the Lord at her door. Come, O Lord, and take pity on me!
ufs ur filmrdg esa ad 30 fae we 5 HS I (1108-4, wert, He
ghar aa-o pi-aaray dutar taaray tuDh bin adh na molo.
Please come home, O my Beloved; carry me across the treacherous world-ocean. Without You, I am not worth even a shell.
anf ae ad 30 aret fy fears SS Il (1108-5, weet, nz 1)
keemat ka-un karay tuDh bhaavaa™ daykh dikhaavai dholo.
Who can estimate my worth, if I am pleasing to You? I see You, and inspire others to see You, O my Love.
fs 3 War nists Hat Tis A HIG UST Il (1108-5, swt, we 1)
door na jaanaa antar maanaa har kaa mahal pachhaanaa.
I know that You are not far away; I believe that You are deep within me, and I realize Your Presence.
ood SA us ure Aafs Aafe He HAT IE (1108-6, surdt, He 1)
naanak vaisaakhee™ parabh paavai surat sabad man maanaa. ||6]|
O Nanak, finding God in Baisakhi, the consciousness is filled with the Word of the Shabad, and the mind comes to believe. ||6||
Hy HS sor ulsy fa@ fares il (108-6, erst, Hs 1) maahu jayth bhalaa pareetam ki-o bisrai. The month of Jayt'h is so sublime. How could I forget my Beloved?
ae stufs Aa ava AT US faa ad Il (108-7, sect, He 1 thal taapeh sar bhaar saa Dhan bin-o karai. The earth burns like a furnace, and the soul-bride offers her prayer.
us fas adet ae Ae TE ATS YS SST Il (1108-7, Fert, we 1)
Dhan bin-o karaydee gun saaraydee gun saaree parabh bhaavaa.
The bride offers her prayer, and sings His Glorious Praises; singing His Praises, she becomes pleasing to God.
Ard Hotes dd Saat wee fo J mr|r Il (108-8, sere, He 1)
saachai mahal rahai bairaagee aavan deh ta aavaa.
The Unattached Lord dwells in His true mansion. If He allows me, then I will come to Him.
fourat fosrat ofe fas fa@ ure Fe Host II (1108-8, west, He 1)
nimaanee nitaanee har bin ki-o paavai sukh mahlee. The bride is dishonored and powerless; how will she find peace without her Lord?
Soa Als We f3H AAT aatH fHs TE afost WI (108-9, sere, He 1)
naanak jayth jaanai tis jaisee karam milai gun gahilee. ||7||
O Nanak, in Jayt'h, she who knows her Lord becomes just like Him; grasping virtue, she meets with the Merciful Lord. ||7]|
WATS SO ASA sats SU Ml (1108-9, serdt, me 1) aasaarh bhalaa sooraj gagan tapai. The month of Aasaarh is good; the sun blazes in the sky.
Test Sa AT AS nafs SF Il (1108-10, swt, Hs 1) Dhartee dookh sahai sokhai agan bhakhai. The earth suffers in pain, parched and roasted in the fire.
wate dH AY Hdbat Ga st A fees o TS Il (1108-10, pret, He 1)
agan ras sokhai maree-ai Dhokhai bhee so kirat na haaray.
The fire dries up the moisture, and she dies in agony. But even then, the sun does not grow tired.
ag fed atfimr us set ats we HAS FS II (1108-10, Hest, He 1)
rath firai chhaa-i-aa Dhan taakai teed lavai manjh baaray.
His chariot moves on, and the soul-bride seeks shade; the crickets are chirping in the forest.
nieae ofa vet vy nrc AY SA ATS ANTS Il (1108-11, west, He 1)
avgan baaDh chalee dukh aagai sukh tis saach samaalay.
She ties up her bundle of faults and demerits, and suffers in the world hereafter. But dwelling on the True Lord, she finds peace.
ood fan 6 feg He thor Hee Aes US OS ICI (1108-12, Here, He 1)
naanak jis no ih man dee-aa maran jeevan parabh naalay. ||8]| O Nanak, I have given this mind to Him; death and life rest with God. ||8] |
Hefs AGA HS" We SIAfT SS wre Il (1108-12, sus, He 1)
Saavan SarasS manaa ghan varseh rut aa-ay.
In Saawan, be happy, O my mind. The rainy season has come, and the clouds have burst into showers.
H nfs sfs Ag ave fue useth fore II 1108-13, seret, He 1) mai man tan saho bhaavai pir pardays siDhaa-ay. My mind and body are pleased by my Lord, but my Beloved has gone away.
fug wife adt ure Hdbat TS enfe suf SaES Il (1108-13, gure, He 1)
pir ghar nahee aavai maree-ai haavai daaman chamak daraa-ay.
My Beloved has not come home, and I am dying of the sorrow of separation. The lightning flashes, and I am scared.
Aa feast udt eat Hee sfeor ey HS Il (1108-14, sect, He 1) sayj ikaylee kharee duhaylee maran bha-i-aa dukh maa-ay. My bed is lonely, and I am suffering in agony. I am dying in pain, O my mother!
ofs fag ate gu ag art aug sis S ANTS Il (1108-14, sect, we 1)
har bin need bhookh kaho kaisee kaaparh tan na sukhaava-ay.
Tell me - without the Lord, how can I sleep, or feel hungry? My clothes give no comfort to my body.
Soa AT Ads ast fus & nif AHTSS CM (108-15, gerdt, He 1) naanak saa sohagan kantee pir kai ank samaav-ay. ||9||
O Nanak, she alone is a happy soul-bride, who merges in the Being of her Beloved Husband Lord. ||9||
se safh gat afs wafs ussrat Il (1108-15, seret, He 1) bhaada-o bharam bhulee bhar joban pachhutaanee. In Bhaadon, the young woman is confused by doubt; later, she regrets and repents.
He a alfa sd SdH FS Sa Hat Il (1108-16, sect, He 1)
jal thal neer bharay baras rutay rang maanee.
The lakes and fields are overflowing with water; the rainy season has come - the time to celebrate!
adn fofh ast fa Ay set wed He BES Il (1108-16, Herct, He
barsai nis kaalee ki-o sukh baalee daadar mor lavantay.
In the dark of night it rains; how can the young bride find peace? The frogs and peacocks send out their noisy calls.
fy fy@ ve asta ss sfimian feafa SAS II (1108-17, sect, He 1)
pari-o pari-o chavai babeehaa bolay bhu-i-angam fireh dasantay.
"Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" cries the rainbird, while the snakes slither around, biting.
Hed sa Afes sa As faa ofa fae Ay uTsht I (1108-17, erst, He 1)
machhar dang saa-ir bhar subhar bin har ki-o sukh paa-ee-ai.
The mosquitoes bite and sting, and the ponds are filled to overflowing; without the Lord, how can she find peace?
aod ule VSS TI ys AT ys 3a dt WENA ION! 1108-18, swe, Hs 1) naanak poochh chala-o gur apunay jah parabh tah hee jaa-ee-ai. ||10|| O Nanak, I will go and ask my Guru; wherever God is, there I will go. ||10]|
wate wig furs At ue sts Het i ci08-19, serst, He 1) asun aa-o piraa saa Dhan jhoor mu-ee. In Assu, come, my Beloved; the soul-bride is grieving to death.
So fest ys HS ert se wet i 108-19, sect, He 1)
taa milee-ai parabh maylay doojai bhaa-ay khu-ee.
She can only meet Him, when God leads her to meet Him; she is ruined by the love of duality.
fe feast a fug ust aad ara fA SS Il (1108-19, gers, He 1)
jhooth vigutee taa pir mutee kukah kaah se fulay.
If she is plundered by falsehood, then her Beloved forsakes her. Then, the white flowers of old age blossom in my hair.
ar ago
wat um fue ofs wet Uf OSs He 3S Il (1109-1, Herc, He 1)
aagai ghaam pichhai rut jaadaa daykh chalat man dolay.
Summer is now behind us, and the winter season is ahead. Gazing upon this play, my shaky mind wavers.
zo fefa Ana oct dimr]es AofA ua A fer Il (1109-1, gest, He 1)
dah dis saakh haree haree-aaval sahj pakai so meethaa.
In all ten directions, the branches are green and alive. That which ripens slowly, is sweet.
aoa Mate feos fumrd Afsard SS SATS IAAI (1109-2, seret, He 1)
naanak asun milhu pi-aaray satgur bha-ay baseethaa. ||11]|
O Nanak, in Assu, please meet me, my Beloved. The True Guru has become my Advocate and Friend. ||11]||
asta fass uffor # ys afer II (1109-2, ert, Hs 1) katak kirat pa-i-aa jo parabh bhaa-i-aa. In Katak, that alone comes to pass, which is pleasing to the Will of God.
dua Aofa 3 sf Aefemr It (1109-3, west, He 1) deepak sahj balai tat jalaa-i-aa. The lamp of intuition burns, lit by the essence of reality.
dua gH 38 us fug HS ue Grd Agel Il (1109-3, wert, He 1)
deepak ras taylo Dhan pir maylo Dhan omaahai sarsee.
Love is the oil in the lamp, which unites the soul-bride with her Lord. The bride is delighted, in ecstasy.
Wee Ht HS o ALS als Hest St HAT II (1109-4, sere, He 1)
avgan maaree marai na seejhai gun maaree taa marsee.
One who dies in faults and demerits - her death is not successful. But one who dies in glorious virtue, really truly dies.
oH safs & for wis 83 ving fSorSt wIAT II (1109-4, sere, Hs
naam bhagat day nij ghar baithay ajahu tinaarhee aasaa.
Those who are blessed with devotional worship of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, sit in the home of their own inner being. They place their hopes in You.
Sod fied AUS UI USI Sa wWSt YS HAT IAI (1109-5, Suet, He 1)
naanak milhu kapat dar kholahu ayk gharhee khat maasaa. ||12||
Nanak: please open the shutters of Your Door, O Lord, and meet me. A single moment is like six months to me. ||12||
Hur Hg ser afe Te nif AHTSS Il (1109-5, surst, ne 1)
manghar maahu bhalaa har gun ank samaav-ay.
The month of Maghar is good, for those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and merge in His Being.
Teest TE de H fug fesse SSS I (1109-6, sur, ve 1)
gunvantee gun ravai mai pir nihchal bhaav-ay.
The virtuous wife utters His Glorious Praises; my Beloved Husband Lord is Eternal and Unchanging.
faves vag Ane faust Yue nas ASfenr | (09-6, werct, ve nihchal chatur sujaan biDhaataa chanchal jagat sabaa-i-aa. The Primal Lord is Unmoving and Unchanging, Clever and Wise; all the world is fickle.
famrg fours ae nifa AHS ys aS St ofeMr I (1109-7, serct, He 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan gun ank samaanay parabh bhaanay taa bhaa-i-aa.
By virtue of spiritual wisdom and meditation, she merges in His Being; she is pleasing to God, and He is pleasing to her.
ats oe afes ae Afs TH of SY Sra Il (1109-7, Test, He 1)
geet naad kavit kavay sun raam naam dukh bhaagai.
I have heard the songs and the music, and the poems of the poets; but only the Name of the Lord takes away my pain.
Sea AT US od fumirdt nis sarst fug vrd 9Sil (1109-8, serdt, H 1)
naanak saa Dhan naah pi-aaree abh bhagtee pir aagai. ||13]| O Nanak, that soul-bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, who performs loving devotional worship before her Beloved. ||13]|
ufé surg us Ze fee TA AS Il (1109-8, gerd, we 1) pokh tukhaar parhai van tarin ras sokhai. In Poh, the snow falls, and the sap of the trees and the fields dries up.
mes at otdt Hf 3fs SAfT HA Il (1109-9, surst, He 1) aavat kee naahee man tan vaseh mukhay. Why have You not come? I keep You in my mind, body and mouth.
Hfs 3fe sfe sfour warize ae Aaet Sa Het | (1109-9, west, v2 1)
man tan rav rahi-aa jagjeevan gur sabdee rang maanee.
He is permeating and pervading my mind and body; He is the Life of the World. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I enjoy His Love.
3H AdH Asa Csen wie whe AfSs Anat II (1109-10, yest, He 1)
andaj jayraj saytaj ut-bhuj ghat ghat jot samaanee.
His Light fills all those born of eggs, born from the womb, born of sweat and born of the earth, each and every heart.
ZAG eg efenmufs ws afs we nfs ST I 1109-10, sere, He 1)
darsan dayh da-i-aapat daatay gat paava-o mat dayho.
Grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Lord of Mercy and Compassion. O Great Giver, grant me understanding, that I might find salvation.
ood dfa se afk srior ofa fAE utfSs AST NAVI (109-11, sere, He 1)
naanak rang ravai ras rasee-aa har si-o pareet sanayho. ||14]|
O Nanak, the Lord enjoys, savors and ravishes the bride who is in love with Him. ||14]|
Hfy usts set Stee nists afomr i c109-11, serst, ne maagh puneet bha-ee tirath antar jaani-aa. In Maagh, I become pure; I know that the sacred shrine of pilgrimage is within me.
AHS Adfa fxs ae afta nif wrfemr Il (1109-12, wert, He 1)
saajan sahj milay gun geh ank samaani-aa.
I have met my Friend with intuitive ease; I grasp His Glorious Virtues, and merge in His Being.
ulsH ae nia Af= us Ha JO sre Afs SST Il (1109-12, surdt, us 1)
pareetam gun ankay sun parabh bankay tuDh bhaavaa sar naavaa.
O my Beloved, Beauteous Lord God, please listen: I sing Your Glories, and merge in Your Being. If it is pleasing to Your Will, I bathe in the sacred pool within.
Ha AHS 3d aat AH AS AHS ANTS I US VS UAT USHAS Ala Afar Sat AST Il (1109- 13, SuTdt, He 1)
gang jamun tah baynee sangam saat samund samaavaa. punn daan poojaa parmaysur jug jug ayko jaataa.
The Ganges, Jamunaa, the sacred meeting place of the three rivers, the seven seas, charity, donations, adoration and worship all rest in the Transcendent Lord God; throughout the ages, I realize the One.
aoa Hy Hot TA Tle Af mMOAS Stes SST NWI (1109-14, suet, He 1)
naanak maagh mahaa ras har jap athsath tirath naataa. ||15]| O Nanak, in Maagh, the most sublime essence is meditation on the Lord; this is the cleansing bath of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||15]|
eoate His dart UH AstfeEmr | (1109-14, gers, ws 1) falgun man rahsee paraym subhaa-i-aa. In Phalgun, her mind is enraptured, pleased by the Love of her Beloved.
mates JIA Sten wimg geen Il (1109-15, sarst, He 1) an-din rahas bha-i-aa aap gavaa-i-aa. Night and day, she is enraptured, and her selfishness is gone.
Ho He voter a fsR atfenr af fagur wife mr i (109-15, surst, we 1)
man moh chukaa-i-aa jaa tis bhaa-i-aa kar kirpaa ghar aa-o.
Emotional attachment is eradicated from her mind, when it pleases Him; in His Mercy, He comes to my home.
Js 2H adt fus weg Hust BIS HE I (1109-16, sect, nz 1)
bahutay vays karee pir baajhahu mahlee lahaa na thaa-o.
I dress in various clothes, but without my Beloved, I shall not find a place in the Mansion of His Presence.
Jd 3d 9A ue ucad fufa Sat Afar I (1109-16, sect, He 1)
haar dor ras paat patambar pir lorhee seegaaree.
I have adorned myself with garlands of flowers, pearl necklaces, scented oils and silk robes.
Soe Afs wet afe wue wfs zo ufeor ard AEM (1109-17, sect, He 1)
naanak mayl la-ee gur apnai ghar var paa-i-aa naaree. ||16]|
O Nanak, the Guru has united me with Him. The soul-bride has found her Husband Lord, within the home of her own heart. ||16] |
¥ tA Hd gst fast se 3S Il wat HIS UG ATS ore Hola AHS iai09-17, sect, He 1
bay das maah rutee thitee vaar bhalay. gharhee moorat pal saachay aa-ay sahj milay. The twelve months, the seasons, the weeks, the days, the hours, the minutes and the seconds are all sublime, when the True Lord comes and meets her with natural ease.
ys fxs fimrd avsn AS asst AS fafa ATS II (1109-18, Hers, He 1)
parabh milay pi-aaray kaaraj saaray kartaa sabh biDh jaanai.
God, my Beloved, has met me, and my affairs are all resolved. The Creator Lord knows all ways and means.
fafs Atarct fons fumidt Ae sfeor Ja HS Il (1109-19, wert, nz
jin seegaaree tiseh pi-aaree mayl bha-i-aa rang maanai.
I am loved by the One who has embellished and exalted me; I have met Him, and I savor His Love.
ufs AW Host wT fufs wet ToHfe HAZE Sra II (1109-19, erst, He 1)
ghar sayj suhaavee jaa pir raavee gurmukh mastak bhaago.
The bed of my heart becomes beautiful, when my Husband Lord ravishes me. As Gurmukh, the destiny on my forehead has been awakened and activated.
Ua AAO
soe uifsfefa ae utsy ofs eg fag AT WADA Ci0-1, Sect, He
naanak ahinis raavai pareetam har var thir sohaago. ||17]||1]|
O Nanak, day and night, my Beloved enjoys me; with the Lord as my Husband, my Marriage is Eternal. ||17]||1]|
Surat HIS Y Il (1110-1)
tukhaaree mehlaa 1. Tukhaari, First Mehl:
ufuS usd = AGoste sfe niftmarst aM Ih cat0-2, sere, Hz 1) pahilai pahrai nain salonrhee-ay rain anDhi-aaree raam. In the first watch of the dark night, O bride of splendored eyes,
wag Ty HAS wr] Sst TH Il 1110-2, Here, wz vakhar raakh mu-ee-ay aavai vaaree raam. protect your riches; your turn is coming soon.
zat ue ACE Aas ASt AH IA YAS Il (1110-3, swt, ws 1)
vaaree aavai kavan jagaavai sootee jam ras choos-ay.
When your turn comes, who will wake you? While you sleep, your juice shall be sucked out by the Messenger of Death.
fe nindt fomr ufs Sot FT us We HAS Il (1110-3, sect, ws 1)
rain anDhayree ki-aa pat tayree chor parhai ghar moos-ay.
The night is so dark; what will become of your honor? The thieves will break into your home and rob you.
TuSTS na wurst Afs Fost HS i 0-4, were, nz 1) raakhanhaaraa agam apaaraa sun baynantee mayree-aa. O Saviour Lord, Inaccessible and Infinite, please hear my prayer.
aoa HIN ald 3 VS for AS se nidshor Al cau0-4, ses, Hs 1) naanak moorakh kabeh na chaytai ki-aa soojhai rain anDhayree-aa. ||1|| O Nanak, the fool never remembers Him; what can he see in the dark of night? ||1]|
am ugg steer Ag MsSt IH II (1110-5, gers, He 1) doojaa pahar bha-i-aa jaag achaytee raam. The second watch has begun; wake up, you unconscious being!
ug Te Hee uA AST IM Ih (1110-5, sere, He 1) vakhar raakh mu-ee-ay khaajai khaytee raam. Protect your riches, O mortal; your farm is being eaten.
aug ust fs ag Ist Was SIO Ha Il (1110-5, erect, He 1)
raakho khaytee har gur haytee jaagat chor na laagai.
Protect your crops, and love the Lord, the Guru. Stay awake and aware, and the thieves shall not rob you.
AH Hf 6 AST OT SY UST AH aT Bg BE ST Il (1110-6, sect, He 1)
jam mag na jaavhu naa dukh paavhu jam kaa dar bha-o bhaagai.
You shall not have to go on the path of Death, and you shall not suffer in pain; your fear and terror of death shall run away.
dfe AfA due aenfs eure ufe Are yfer forest i cii0-6, sere, He 1)
rav sas deepak gurmat du-aarai man saachaa mukh Dhi-aav-ay.
The lamps of the sun and the moon are lit by the Guru's Teachings, through His Door, meditating on the True Lord, in the mind and with the mouth.
Soa HIY win 6 US fas SA AY USS QM (110-7, Herc, we 1)
naanak moorakh ajahu na chaytai kiv doojai sukh paav-ay. ||2| | O Nanak, the fool still does not remember the Lord. How can he find peace in duality?
[21] Shr ugg sfeur ate fenmdt oH I ci10-8, set, ne 1D)
teejaa pahar bha-i-aa need vi-aapee raam. The third watch has begun, and sleep has set in.
Hfent AS oat ofe Ast IH Il c0-8, Fest, He 1) maa-i-aa sut daaraa dookh santaapee raam. The mortal suffers in pain, from attachment to Maya, children and spouse.
Whar AS oe Aas filme sa va fos SA I au0-3, sect, He 1)
maa-i-aa sut daaraa jagat pi-aaraa chog chugai nit faasai.
Maya, his children, his wife and the world are so dear to him; he bites the bait, and is caught.
on foure a AY Ue TIHAS AGS TA Il (10-9, wert, we
naam Dhi-aavai taa sukh paavai gurmat kaal na garaasai.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he shall find peace; following the Guru's Teachings, he shall not be seized by death.
HHE HIE AG Sd ES fee aS Hanh ii ci0-9, sect, we 1) jaman maran kaal nahee chhodai vin naavai santaapee. He cannot escape from birth, dying and death; without the Name, he suffers.
oad Sin fefafa sor afer vfs fenmit Sil ”i0-10, erst, Hs 1)
naanak teejai taribaDh lokaa maa-i-aa mohi vi-aapee. ||3]|
O Nanak, in the third watch of the three-phased Maya, the world is engrossed in attachment to Maya. ||3]|
sea ugg sfeor es fod IH Il (iu0-10, sere, He 1) cha-uthaa pahar bha-i-aa da-ut bihaagai raam. The fourth watch has begun, and the day is about to dawn.
fae we whos FH mofes A TH Il (0-11, set, He
tin ghar raakhi-arhaa jo an-din jaagai raam.
Those who remain awake and aware, night and day, preserve and protect their homes.
as ufs wat oth oat fsor sf= AaB I Cu0-11, Hest, ws 1)
gur poochh jaagay naam laagay tinaa rain suhaylee-aa.
The night is pleasant and peaceful, for those who remain awake; following the Guru's advice, they focus on the Naam.
dd Hae aHety AatH o mrets fSar dfs ys awh It (10-12, sect, ws
gur sabad kamaaveh janam na aavahi tinaa har parabh baylee-aa.
Those who practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad are not reincarnated again; the Lord God is their Best Friend.
ad afy vse Adlg AU Se ngs So SAH AA Il (1110-12, Here, ne 1)
kar ka‘p charan sareer kampai nain anDhulay tan bhasam say.
The hands shake, the feet and body totter, the vision goes dark, and the body turns to dust.
Sea edit wa wd fag OH Ue a Hfe ZA ISI (1110-13, suet, He 1)
naanak dukhee-aa jug chaaray bin naam har kay man vasay. ||4||
O Nanak, people are miserable throughout the four ages, if the Name of the Lord does not abide in the mind. ||4||
yet afe Bs fefinr nrfenr a I au0-14, ses, Hs 1) khoolee ganth utho likhi-aa aa-i-aa raam. The knot has been untied; rise up - the order has come!
JA aA AY oat Sfo voter IM I (1110-14, ret, He 1) ras kas sukh thaakay banDh chalaa-i-aa raam. Pleasures and comforts are gone; like a prisoner, you are driven on.
Sfa verfeur a us ofan a SA or Sh I 10-14, erst, Hs 1)
banDh chalaa-i-aa jaa parabh bhaa-i-aa naa deesai naa sunee-ai.
You shall be bound and gagged, when it pleases God; you will not see or hear it coming.
WTUS edt ASA nis uct UST Beh | (1110-15, gust, we 1) aapan vaaree sabhsai aavai pakee khaytee lunee-ai. Everyone will have their turn; the crop ripens, and then it is cut down.
Wet VA at Sa SA Fa sort AT Ahr I cas0-15, weet, ws
gharhee chasay kaa laykhaa leejai buraa bhalaa saho jee-aa.
The account is kept for every second, every instant; the soul suffers for the bad and the good.
Soa Afs od Hate fare fats ufs age ao WU (1110-16, Fert, us
naanak sur nar sabad milaa-ay tin parabh kaaran kee-aa. ||5||2| | O Nanak, the angelic beings are united with the Word of the Shabad; this is the way God made it. ||5||2] |
Surg HIB Y Il (1110-17)
tukhaaree mehlaa 1. Tukhaari, First Mehl:
sa ofsur Sut fa ses feafenr TH th (1110-17, zest, v2 1) taaraa charhi-aa lammaa ki-o nadar nihaali-aa raam. The meteor shoots across the sky. How can it be seen with the eyes?
Hea ud adH Afsata Hate feu IH I ci0-17, sect, Hs 1)
sayvak poor karammaa satgur sabad dikhaali-aa raam.
The True Guru reveals the Word of the Shabad to His servant who has such perfect karma.
ad Fate ferfemr Ag AHtemr nifofefA ef stefan it cii0-18, set, He 1)
gur sabad dikhaali-aa sach samaali-aa ahinis daykh beechaari-aa. The Guru reveals the Shabad; dwelling on the True Lord, day and night, he beholds and reflects on God.
Wes Uv dd we afer an ag fas afar tl ci0-19, sect, He
Dhaavat panch rahay ghar jaani-aa kaam kroDh bikh maari-aa.
The five restless desires are restrained, and he knows the home of his own heart. He conquers sexual desire, anger and corruption.
wists Afs set aa Ard MS IM AST I (at10-19, surst, He 1)
antar jot bha-ee gur saakhee cheenay raam karammaa.
His inner being is illuminated, by the Guru's Teachings; He beholds the Lord's play of karma.
UST AVAA
Soa ICH Wife uste Sat Visor St NU: cai-1, sere, we
naanak ha-umai maar pateenay taaraa charhi-aa lammaa. ||1|| O Nanak, killing his ego, he is satisfied; the meteor has shot across the sky. ||1]|
Toute afar Jd ott mifsHrst IH Ml caii-1, gest, He 1) gurmukh jaag rahay chookee abhimaanee raam. The Gurmukhs remain awake and aware; their egotistical pride is eradicated.
wofes 3d Sfeur Ate AHS TH I ait1-1, Hest, He 1) an-din bhor bha-i-aa saach samaanee raam. Night and day, it is dawn for them; they merge in the True Lord.
Ats Aol dente ufo stot TeHfe AAS ATS Il (1111-2, sere, us 1)
saach samaanee gurmukh man bhaanee gurmukh saabat jaagay.
The Gurmukhs are merged in the True Lord; they are pleasing to His Mind. The Gurmukhs are intact, safe and sound, awake and awake.
Ag on nifys afe dor afs saat fee wat il ci-2, sect, ve 1)
saach naam amrit gur dee-aa har charnee liv laagay.
The Guru blesses them with the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name; they are lovingly attuned to the Lord's Feet.
yaret afs AfS ufo AST HoHfa sath gerat I ci-3, wert, He 1)
pargatee jot jot meh jaataa manmukh bharam bhulaanee.
The Divine Light is revealed, and in that Light, they achieve realization; the self-willed manmukhs wander in doubt and confusion.
Soa ST Sear Ho Hier was Sf= fearat QW cai-4, west, He 1)
naanak bhor bha-i-aa man maani-aa jaagat rain vihaanee. ||2||
O Nanak, when the dawn breaks, their minds are satisfied; they pass their life-night awake and aware. ||2||
m@ae Afr Tat we aha IH I 11-4, suct, ue 1) a-ugan veesri-aa gunee ghar kee-aa raam. Forgetting faults and demerits, virtue and merit enter one's home.
Sa ate sfoor weg & shot TH I caui-5, west, we 1) ayko rav rahi-aa avar na bee-aa raam. The One Lord is permeating everywhere; there is no other at all.
afe sfour Het nied 3 aet Ho dt S Ho HW fomr I cai-5, wert, He YD rav rahi-aa so-ee avar na ko-ee man hee tay man maani-aa. He is All-pervading; there is no other. The mind comes to believe, from the mind.
fafs no ae fgsee we we afm A ys dente wfemr Il ci-6, sect, He 1D
jin jal thal taribhavan ghat ghat thaapi-aa so parabh gurmukh jaani-aa.
The One who established the water, the land, the three worlds, each and every heart - that God is known by the Gurmukh.
ave age AHse murs fefafa Afe AHTeT I Cui-6, serct, He 1)
karan kaaran samrath apaaraa taribaDh mayt samaa-ee.
The Infinite, All-powerful Lord is the Creator, the Cause of causes; erasing the three- phased Maya, we merge in Him.
SOA METS Ted AHS At Tents uret Si cai-7, pret, we naanak avgan gunah samaanay aisee gurmat paa-ee. ||3]|| O Nanak, then, demerits are dissolved by merits; such are the Guru's Teachings. ||3]|
WISE WE TI FR SH TH Il (1ii-7, sect, we 1) aavan jaan rahay chookaa bholaa raam. My coming and going in reincarnation have ended; doubt and hesitation are gone.
ICH He fHS ATST SH IH Il caiti-3, sews, He 1) ha-umai maar milay saachaa cholaa raam. Conquering my ego, I have met the True Lord, and now I wear the robe of Truth.
UGH afs vet usa]e Tet Fa Aa ASU Il cu-s, swe, ws 1) ha-umai gur kho-ee pargat ho-ee chookay sog santaapai. The Guru has rid me of egotism; my sorrow and suffering are dispelled.
nat niefs Afs Arat wry ues My I caiti-8, serst, He 1) jotee andar jot samaanee aap pachhaataa aapai. My might merges into the Light; I realize and understand my own self.
using ufs wafe ustet Arges fue svat Il caiti-9, wert, He 1)
pay-ee-arhai ghar sabad pateenee saahurrhai pir bhaanee.
In this world of my parents' home, I am satisfied with the Shabad; at my in-laws' home, in the world beyond, I shall be pleasing to my Husband Lord.
aon Afsate Hf frost gat ofe Sarat sisi cui-9, set, we 1)
naanak satgur mayl milaa-ee chookee kaan lokaanee. ||4||3]|
O Nanak, the True Guru has united me in His Union; my dependence on people has ended. ||4]|3]|
Surg HIS Y Il (1111-10)
tukhaaree mehlaa 1. Tukhaari, First Mehl:
sures gat afs afs ussret il caiti-10, set, He 1) bholaavarhai bhulee bhul bhul pachhotaanee. Deluded by doubt, misled and confused, the soul-bride later regrets and repents.
fufs efant Ast fue at ATS & Fret I Cattt-11, Hest, we pir chhodi-arhee sutee pir kee saar na jaanee. Abandoning her Husband Lord, she sleeps, and does not appreciate His Worth.
fufs 23st Ast nreafs ust fan ue feces FS Wt auu-u1, sect, He
pir chhodee sutee avgan mutee tis Dhan viDhan raatay.
Leaving her Husband Lord, she sleeps, and is plundered by her faults and demerits. The night is so painful for this bride.
at afa udarte feast IGN wait SS I ai-12, wert, we kaam kroDh aha‘kaar vigutee ha-umai lagee taatay. Sexual desire, anger and egotism destroy her. She burns in egotism.
sts dn visor carter SAH SAH Anat I cait1-12, gest, He 1)
udar hans chali-aa furmaa-i-aa bhasmai bhasam samaanee.
When the soul-swan flies away, by the Command of the Lord, her dust mingles with dust.
aed AY oH feget gfe sf ussrat WU cu-13, gerd, we 1)
naanak sachay naam vihoonee bhul bhul pachhotaanee. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the True Name, she is confused and deluded, and so she regrets and repents. ||1]|
Afs org fimrd fea aSst At UW ciu1-13, Hert, He sun naah pi-aaray ik baynantee mayree. Please listen, O my Beloved Husband Lord, to my one prayer.
3 fon uf efi 3G gf SAH Sat cii-14, sere, Hs 1) too nij ghar vasi-arhaa ha-o rul bhasmai dhayree. You dwell in the home of the self deep within, while I roll around like a dust-ball.
fag nud ord af 3 od fomr adh fomr ate I ci-14, wert, He 1) bin apnay naahai ko-ay na chaahai ki-aa kahee-ai ki-aa keejai. Without my Husband Lord, no one likes me at all; what can I say or do now?
wifys OW IAS TA IAS Ta weet SA Uby I Cuti-15, sere, ne 1)
amrit naam rasan ras rasnaa gur sabdee ras peejai.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the sweetest nectar of nectars. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with my tongue, I drink in this nectar.
fee ore a Afa & Aa or|S ATE ws Ul cai-15, sect, we 1)
vin naavai ko sang na saathee aavai jaa-ay ghanayree.
Without the Name, no one has any friend or companion; millions come and go in reincarnation.
Sod ST & ule webs At As fs Sat QU ca-16, sere, we naanak laahaa lai ghar jaa-ee-ai saachee sach mat tayree. ||2|| Nanak: the profit is earned and the soul returns home. True, true are Your Teachings.
21 |
AHS ef feerints ASSIS Set Ul cai-16, Herc, ve 1)
Saajan days vidaysee-arhay saanayhrhay daydee.
O Friend, You have travelled so far from Your homeland; I send my message of love to You.
Afs AS fSo AAS HU Se sae I (1-17, Test, He 1) Saar Samaalay tin sajnaa munDh nain bharaydee. I cherish and remember that Friend; the eyes of this soul-bride are filled with tears.
Hu Se gach Te AIet fa ys flor filmes it cuti-17, sect, ne 1)
munDh nain bharaydee gun saaraydee ki-o parabh milaa pi-aaray.
The eyes of the soul-bride are filled with tears; I dwell upon Your Glorious Virtues. How can I meet my Beloved Lord God?
Hea ug 3 Wee feast fa urn furs urs it cai-18, wert, ve
maarag panth na jaana-o vikh-rhaa ki-o paa-ee-ai pir paaray.
I do not know the treacherous path, the way to You. How can I find You and cross over, O my Husband Lord?
Afsagd Aaet fxs fedat So Ho MM IS I caii-18, were, He 1D)
satgur sabdee milai vichhunnee tan man aagai raakhai.
Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, the separated soul-bride meets with the Lord; I place my body and mind before You.
ood vifys fase Ho oA cfemr ffs USN SA UTE ISH (ui-19, pret, Hs 1)
naanak amrit birakh mahaa ras fali-aa mil pareetam ras chaakhai. ||3]]|
O Nanak, the ambrosial tree bears the most delicious fruits; meeting with my Beloved, I taste the sweet essence. ||3]|
Hote gorfeste fou 3 att it ci-19, geet, He 1) mahal bulaa-irhee-ay bilam na keejai. The Lord has called you to the Mansion of His Presence - do not delay!
UST AAA wofes Taste Aofa festa | c12-1, sect, we 1)
an-din rat-rhee-ay sahj mileejai. Night and day, imbued with His Love, you shall meet with Him with intuitive ease.
Afa nafs feota dH 3 ote aoe foefa ANAT I (112-1, sere, He 1)
sukh sahj mileejai ros na keejai garab nivaar samaanee.
In celestial peace and poise, you shall meet Him; do not harbor anger - subdue your proud self!
APS oot fxs froret nonfat wires ArSt Il 2-2, erst, ne 1)
saachai raatee milai milaa-ee manmukh aavan jaanee.
Imbued with Truth, I am united in His Union, while the self-willed manmukhs continue coming and going.
Wa oat Sa wwe AAT Heat |fs fears i (112-2, ses, ws 1) jab naachee tab ghooghat kaisaa matukee forh niraaree. When you dance, what veil covers you? Break the water pot, and be unattached.
Soa MM wry use TeHf sz sted sisi 1112-3, sere, we 1)
naanak aapai aap pachhaanai gurmukh tat beechaaree. | |4||4| |
O Nanak, realize your own self; as Gurmukh, contemplate the essence of reality. [41141 |
Surat HIS A Il (1112-3)
tukhaaree mehlaa 1. Tukhaari, First Mehl:
HI BS FHS JH BS JX HS Il 1112-4, Sect, nz DY mayray laal rangeelay ham laalan kay laalay. O my Dear Beloved, I am the slave of Your slaves.
dfs ney warfenr weg o SAT STS Il (1112-4, sere, we 1) gur alakh lakhaa-i-aa avar na doojaa bhaalay. The Guru has shown me the Invisible Lord, and now, I do not seek any other.
ats ney outfenr a fsa sfeur ar ufs fasur ore it (112-4, gest, ne 1)
gur alakh lakhaa-i-aa jaa tis bhaa-i-aa jaa parabh kirpaa Dhaaree.
The Guru showed me the Invisible Lord, when it pleased Him, and when God showered His Blessings.
Ades ws" usy feast AOfA fH Teer Il c112-5, serst, He Y
jagjeevan daataa purakh biDhaataa sahj milay banvaaree.
The Life of the World, the Great Giver, the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, the Lord of the woods - I have met Him with intuitive ease.
sete aate 3 sala sd Ag teg te CfenrT I 2-6, werd, we 1)
nadar karahi too taareh taree-ai sach dayvhu deen da-i-aalaa.
Bestow Your Glance of Grace and carry me across, to save me. Please bless me with the Truth, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.
yeets soa wAfS VA ST Ase Aber yfsurar wall (1112-6, suret, ws 1)
paranvat naanak daasan daasaa too sarab jee-aa partipaalaa. ||1]|| Prays Nanak, I am the slave of Your slaves. You are the Cherisher of all souls. ||1]|
steufs ots ad mifs furs i 112-7, sere, He 1) bharipur Dhaar rahay at pi-aaray.
My Dear Beloved is enshrined throughout the Universe. Rae ofe sor ae gf HIS I (1112-7, Hers, He 1)
sabday rav rahi-aa gur roop muraaray. The Shabad is pervading, through the Guru, the Embodiment of the Lord.
Gs gu nad fess os T aT nis o fer it 112-8, gers, ws 1)
gur roop muraaray taribhavan Dhaaray taa kaa ant na paa-i-aa.
The Guru, the Embodiment of the Lord, is enshrined throughout the three worlds; His limits cannot be found.
dat front HS Cure fos te vs AStfenr It 2-8, wrct, ve rangee jinsee jant upaa-ay nit dayvai charhai savaa-i-aa. He created the beings of various colors and kinds; His Blessings increase day by day.
mudug mm afu Gant faq ste A TS ll (12-9, sect, He 1)
aprampar aapay thaap uthaapay tis bhaavai so hovai.
The Infinite Lord Himself establishes and disestablishes; whatever pleases Him, happens.
Soa da dtd Sfaor ge a Ths uss MM (1112-9, sect, He
naanak heeraa heerai bayDhi-aa gun kai haar parovai. ||2| |
O Nanak, the diamond of the mind is pierced through by the diamond of spiritual wisdom. The garland of virtue is strung. ||2]|
Te Tels AHS HAS SH SATE Il (1112-10, surst, He 1)
gun guneh samaanay mastak naam neesaano.
The virtuous person merges in the Virtuous Lord; his forehead bears the insignia of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ag Ate AHEM gar wTSS ATE Il (1112-10, gerd, oe 1) sach saach samaa-i-aa chookaa aavan jaano. The true person merges in the True Lord; his comings and goings are over.
Ae Ate ues AMS ast Arg fee nfs STS I 1112-11, west, He 1D)
sach saach pachhaataa saachai raataa saach milai man bhaavai.
The true person realizes the True Lord, and is imbued with Truth. He meets the True Lord, and is pleasing to the Lord's Mind.
We Gufs neg o CA ATS Ae AHS I (1112-11, serdt, Hs 1)
saachay oopar avar na deesai saachay saach samaavai. No one else is seen to be above the True Lord; the true person merges in the True Lord.
Hofe Hfs Sor He Aa sae afs fogs it c12-12, pret, we
mohan mohi lee-aa man mayraa banDhan khol niraaray.
The Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind; releasing me from bondage, He has set me free.
Soa Ast Afs Anat at fifemr vfs fimrs 3i c112-12, serst, 48 1) naanak jotee jot samaanee jaa mili-aa at pi-aaray. ||3]| O Nanak, my light merged into the Light, when I met my most Darling Beloved. ||3] |
Ae we dfA Gd AT TT TS Il (1112-13, weet, we sach ghar khoj lahay saachaa gur thaano. By searching, the true home, the place of the True Guru is found.
Houfa og urea aanfes forrS I 1112-13, sere, He 1) manmukh nah paa-ee-ai gurmukh gi-aano. The Gurmukh obtains spiritual wisdom, while the self-willed manmukh does not.
oe Ad US A udeS Ae VST SS UST Il (1112-13, gust, we 1)
dayvai sach daano so parvaano sad daataa vad daanaa.
Whoever the Lord has blessed with the gift of Truth is accepted; the Supremely Wise Lord is forever the Great Giver.
WHE minSt wAfas ATU AST HIG fear|ar il 1112-14, sect, He 1)
amar ajonee asthir jaapai saachaa mahal chiraanaa.
He is known to be Immortal, Unborn and Permanent; the True Mansion of His Presence is everlasting.
afs Gunufs du 3 fen yaet AfS Hae I 12-14, sere, He 1)
dot uchaapat laykh na likee-ai pargatee jot muraaree.
The day-to-day account of deeds is not recorded for that person, who manifests the radiance of the Divine Light of the Lord.
Soa AT AMS Ie qenfy sit Sra Sul 112-15, sere, we 1) naanak saachaa saachai raachaa gurmukh taree-ai taaree. ||4||5||
O Nanak, the true person is absorbed in the True Lord; the Gurmukh crosses over to the other side. ||4]|5]|
Surg HIS A Il (1112-16)
tukhaaree mehlaa 1. Tukhaari, First Mehl:
= Ho Hfsor 3 ANS ores feorfeor IH II (1112-16, geet, He 1) ay man mayri-aa too samajh achayt i-aani-aa raam. O my ignorant, unconscious mind, reform yourself.
= HO Hfeor efs niece Tet A fet IH I (1112-16, swt, He 1 ay man mayri-aa chhad avgan gunee samaani-aa raam. O my mind, leave behind your faults and demerits, and be absorbed in virtue.
a Are Bare fags ane fesfaur adt Aw it (1112-17, sect, ue 1)
baho saad lubhaanay kirat kamaanay vichhurhi-aa nahee maylaa.
You are deluded by so many flavors and pleasures, and you act in such confusion. You are separated, and you will not meet your Lord.
fa@ esa sdbt aH sfe nda AH a Ue BOM Il 1112-17, sect, He 1)
ki-o dutar taree-ai jam dar maree-ai jam kaa panth duhaylaa.
How can the impassible world-ocean be crossed? The fear of the Messenger of Death is deadly. The path of Death is agonizingly painful.
Hfs TH odt AST ATS stat nreufe gut foot aT Il (1112-18, gers, ue 1)
man raam nahee jaataa saajh parbhataa avghat ruDhaa ki-aa karay.
The mortal does not know the Lord in the evening, or in the morning; trapped on the treacherous path, what will he do then?
gute afomr feos fafa se qanfs AS Sas WAU 12-18, Fest, Hs 1) banDhan baaDhi-aa in biDh chhootai gurmukh sayvai narharay. ||1|| Bound in bondage, he is released only by this method: as Gurmukh, serve the Lord.
[2
& Ho for J ets ore AAT TH Il 1112-19, sect, Hs 1) ay man mayri-aa too chhod aal janjaalaa raam. O my mind, abandon your household entanglements.
= Ho Afeor ofa Aes usy fore TH Il (1112-19, west, Hz 1)
ay man mayri-aa har sayvhu purakh niraalaa raam. O my mind, serve the Lord, the Primal, Detached Lord.
Uat AAAS
dfs finifs Saarg Anat AS Has fife Gurfemr i ai3-1, sere, He 1)
har simar aykankaar saachaa sabh jagat jinn upaa-i-aa.
Meditate in remembrance on the One Universal Creator; the True Lord created the entire Universe.
u@e ural nafs aa afe Ye Aas fearfenr | (1113-2, seret, He 1) pa-un paanee agan baaDhay gur khayl jagat dikhaa-i-aa. The Guru controls the air, water and fire; He has staged the drama of the world.
urate 3 date nm ofs oH AA AU SU I 1113-2, sect, we
aachaar too veechaar aapay har naam sanjam jap tapo.
Reflect on your own self, and so practice good conduct; chant the Name of the Lord as your self-discipline and meditation.
Rat AS fimrg uisy on fe a Ay AU IQH 113-3, Serst, Hs 1)
sakhaa sain pi-aar pareetam naam har kaa jap japo. ||2||
The Name of the Lord is your Companion, Friend and Dear Beloved; chant it, and meditate on it. ||2||
& Ho Hfor J fag gg Fe wedt TH Il (1113-3, swe, Hs 1) ay man mayri-aa too thir rahu chot na khaavhee raam. O my mind, remain steady and stable, and you will not have to endure beatings.
= Ho Afr ae wets Hof AHSdt TH Il (1113-4, surst, He 1)
ay man mayri-aa gun gaavahi sahj samaavahee raam.
O my mind, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you shall merge into Him with intuitive ease.
ge afe on safe sHimifs ag famre nine Arad Wl 1113-4, wert, He 1)
gun gaa-ay raam rasaa-ay rasee-ah gur gi-aan anjan saarhay.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, be happy. Apply the ointment of spiritual wisdom to your eyes.
3 3a thug Aafe wee Us Ts Awad il 113-5, sect, we
tarai lok deepak sabad chaanan panch doot sanghaarahay. The Word of the Shabad is the lamp which illuminates the three worlds; it slaughters the five demons.
3 ote fase safe usa afe fife aren ATS I (1113-5, weet, He
bhai kaat nirbha-o tareh dutar gur mili-ai kaaraj saar-ay.
Quieting your fears, become fearless, and you shall cross over the impassible world ocean. Meeting the Guru, your affairs shall be resolved.
gu da fimrg afe fag afs nef fasur oree SI (1113-6, sect, He 1)
roop rang pi-aar har si-o har aap kirpaa Dhaar-ay. ||3]|
You shall find the joy and the beauty of the Lord's Love and Affection; the Lord Himself shall shower you with His Grace. ||3]|
& He for J for & nrfeor foor & WHEAT TH I 13-6, sect, we
ay man mayri-aa too ki-aa lai aa-i-aa ki-aa lai jaa-isee raam.
O my mind, why did you come into the world? What will you take with you when you go?
= HO Hfeor 3 SecA A SIH VASAT TH I (1113-7, suet, He 1) ay man mayri-aa taa chhutsee jaa bharam chukaa-isee raam. O my mind, you shall be emancipated, when you eliminate your doubts.
ug Afs ofs dfs oH ug Te ASfe Se used Il (1113-8, gust, He 1)
Dhan sanch har har naam vakhar gur sabad bhaa-o pachhaanahay.
So gather the wealth and capital of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall realize its value.
He udofe Aafe fons HIG we AY AST Il (1113-8, geet, He 1)
mail parhar sabad nirmal mahal ghar sach jaanhay.
Filth shall be taken away, through the Immaculate Word of the Shabad; you shall know the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, your true home.
ufs on urefs wife frorefa sfe nifigs ut SA I (113-9, sect, Hs 1)
pat naam paavahi ghar siDhaaveh jhol amrit pee raso.
Through the Naam, you shall obtain honor, and come home. Eagerly drink in the Ambrosial Amrit.
dfs om fomret Aafe oA ureha esarfar aut fs AA II (1113-9, sere, He D
har naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sabad ras paa-ee-ai vadbhaag japee-ai har jaso. ||4||
Meditate on the Lord's Name, and you shall obtain the sublime essence of the Shabad; by great good fortune, chant the Praises of the Lord. ||4]|
= Ho Afr fas user Hefs fa vs TH I 1113-10, Hers, He 1) ay man mayri-aa bin pa-urhee-aa mandar ki-o charhai raam. O my mind, without a ladder, how will you climb up to the Temple of the Lord?
= Ho Afenr fag sat urfa o nigs TH I 1113-11, seret, He 1) ay man mayri-aa bin bayrhee paar na ambrhai raam. O my mind, without a boat, you shall not reach the other shore.
ufs AAS Mug UISH Td Aa Aas Surse it 1113-11, sect, ve 1)
paar Saajan apaar pareetam gur sabad surat langhaava-ay.
On that far shore is Your Beloved, Infinite Friend. Only your awareness of the Guru's Shabad will carry you across.
fufs AoHafs asfs séiur fefe o uesT]Se i (1113-12, sere, He 1)
mil saaDhsangat karahi ralee-aa fir na pachhotaava-ay.
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and you shall enjoy ecstasy; you Shall not regret or repent later on.
ats afeur ee efeurs vne ofs am Aafs ues I (1113-12, sere, nz 1)
kar da-i-aa daan da-i-aal saachaa har naam sangat paava-o. Be Merciful, O Merciful True Lord God: please give me the Blessing of the Lord's Name, and the Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
cog ufenit neg UlsH ae Rafe Ho ANSTSE UNE! (1113-13, sere, He 1)
naanak pa-i-ampai sunhu pareetam gur sabad man sanjhaava-o. ||5||6]|
Nanak prays: please hear me, O my Beloved; instruct my mind through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||5||6]|
surdt SS HIS 8 1113-15)
tukhaaree chhant mehlaa 4 Tukhaari Chhant, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe it (1113-15) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nists fudt fume fae fue fas Atebat mr il a3-16, sect, He 4)
antar piree pi-aar ki-o pir bin jeevee-ai raam.
My inner being is filled with love for my Beloved Husband Lord. How can I live without Him?
Wa Sd TIA o ae fae ifs uteha IH I (1113-16, sere, ne 4)
jab lag daras na ho-ay ki-o amrit peevee-ai raam.
As long as I do not have the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, how can I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar?
fa@ nifigs uteht ofa fag Aiett fon fas soo o FES I 113-17, art, He 4)
ki-o amrit peevee-ai har bin jeevee-ai tis bin rahan na jaa-ay.
How can I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar without the Lord? I cannot survive without Him.
motes fy fu ad fea ast fus fag filmi o AS II (113-17, serdt, He 4)
an-din pari-o pari-o karay din raatee pir bin pi-aas na jaa-ay.
Night and day, I cry out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!", day and night. Without my Husband Lord, my thirst is not quenched.
muat faut agg dfs fumrd ofs afs on Ae Afar I (1113-18, sere, Hs 4)
apnee kirpaa karahu har pi-aaray har har naam sad saari-aa.
Please, bless me with Your Grace, O my Beloved Lord, that I may dwell on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, forever.
aa & Aafe fifeor 4 uisy u@ Afsas fees Sfonr Nail c113-19, west, 18 4)
gur kai sabad mili-aa mai pareetam ha-o satgur vitahu vaari-aa. ||1]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have met my Beloved; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. |[1]|
wa cut fug filmes afs ae ofA Jet TH I (1113-19, Sere, Hs 4) jab daykhaa” pir pi-aaraa har gun ras ravaa raam. When I see my Beloved Husband Lord, I chant the Lord's Glorious Praises with love.
ua A998
ne nists df fearm fy fue Ag fas ver oy Wt 1114-1, sect, ne 4) mayrai antar ho-ay vigaas pari-o pari-o sach nit chavaa raam. My inner being blossoms forth; I continually utter, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!"
fyS ger fumrd Aafe fons fag ta feufs o mse i (1114-1, gerd, us 4)
pari-o chavaa pi-aaray sabad nistaaray bin daykhay taripat na aav-ay.
I speak of my Dear Beloved, and through the Shabad, I am saved. Unless I can see Him, I am not satisfied.
Rafe Aterg de fas anf of afe ay fomr|t It ca114-2, sere, ne 4)
sabad seegaar hovai nit kaaman har har naam Dhi-aav-ay.
That soul-bride who is ever adorned with the Shabad, meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
cfeor we Has Ho dA A ulsH tg fre I 114-3, pert, ne 4)
da-i-aa daan mangat jan deejai mai pareetam dayh milaa-ay.
Please bless this beggar, Your humble servant, with the Gift of Mercy; please unite me with my Beloved.
wofes Tg dure fomret oH Afsae fees WHS MQM (1114-3, sect, ne 4)
an-din gur gopaal Dhi-aa-ee ham satgur vitahu ghumaa-ay. ||2||
Night and day, I meditate on the Guru, the Lord of the World; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2]|
JH ured ad are fay sane sh TH I 1114-4, Herc, ne 4)
ham paathar gur naav bikh bhavjal taaree-ai raam.
I am a stone in the Boat of the Guru. Please carry me across the terrifying ocean of poison.
qs teg Hae Hate H He fers IH I 114-4, gerd, we 4)
gur dayvhu sabad subhaa-ay mai moorh nistaaree-ai raam.
O Guru, please, lovingly bless me with the Word of the Shabad. I am such a fool - please save me!
JH He Ha fos ffs dt uret J iat Ss fer I c4-5, sect, we 4)
ham moorh mugaDh kichh mit nahee paa-ee too agamm vad jaani-aa.
I am a fool and an idiot; I know nothing of Your extent. You are known as Inaccessible and Great.
3 urfu efeurg efenr ate Hato oH fesaat fourfenr i 14-5, sect, He 4)
too aap da-i-aal da-i-aa kar mayleh ham nirgunee nimaani-aa.
You Yourself are Merciful; please, mercifully bless me. I am unworthy and dishonored - please, unite me with Yourself!
Mda ASH uTY ats SIH Tle 3B Ageafs mre Il 1114-6, sere, Hs 4)
anayk janam paap kar bharmay hun ta-o sarnaagat aa-ay.
Through countless lifetimes, I wandered in sin; now, I have come seeking Your Sanctuary.
efent aad sf Seg ofa HG IH weg Afsag ures ISI 4114-7, sere, vs 4) da-i-aa karahu rakh layvhu har jee-o ham laagah satgur paa-ay. ||3]|| Take pity on me and save me, Dear Lord; I have grasped the Feet of the True Guru.
HI3I|
qd USA JH Bd ffs ave deur aH I 14-7, sect, ne 4) gur paaras ham loh mil kanchan ho-i-aa raam. The Guru is the Philosopher's Stone; by His touch, iron is transformed into gold.
Ast afs forfe afer ag Afoor aM Il 14-8, sere, He 4) jotee jot milaa-ay kaa-i-aa garh sohi-aa raam. My light merges into the Light, and my body-fortress is so beautiful.
afin as Afoor ad ufs Hfoor fa actA forrta feast i ci1i4-8, erst, ne 4)
kaa-i-aa garh sohi-aa mayrai parabh mohi-aa ki-o saas giraas visaaree-ai.
My body-fortress is so beautiful; I am fascinated by my God. How could I forget Him, for even a breath, or a morsel of food?
wifene uidieg uafsor ag Feet 38 Afsag & afeadht i (114-9, sect, ne 4)
adrist agochar pakrhi-aa gur sabdee ha-o satgur kai balihaaree-ai.
I have seized the Unseen and Unfathomable Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru.
Afsas vid HA S| FC A Afsas AS BS I (1114-10, Teret, He 4) satgur aagai sees bhayt day-o jay satgur saachay bhaavai. I place my head in offering before the True Guru, if it truly pleases the True Guru.
nny efear add us BS Strom nif ANTS NSN (1114-10, Test, He 4) aapay da-i-aa karahu parabh daatay naanak ank samaavai. ||4||1]| Take pity on me, O God, Great Giver, that Nanak may merge in Your Being. ||4]|1]|
SurTst HIS 8 I (1114-11)
tukhaaree mehlaa 4. Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofs mam wrarfa mrdug wrrguar i 114-11, suret, He 4)
har har agam agaaDh aprampar aparparaa. The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Infinite, the Farthest of the Far.
A 3H fomrefa naein 3 Fe 3G fe Se I 4-11, Reet, He 4)
jo tum Dhi-aavahi jagdees tay jan bha-o bikham taraa.
Those who meditate on You, O Lord of the Universe - those humble beings cross over the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean.
foun 38 f36 sfonr Ade fA dfs os on fomrfeor Ih 114-12, sect, He 4) bikham bha-o tin tari-aa suhaylaa jin har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
Those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, easily cross over the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean.
ad ofa Afsas FH ate vd fSo ofe fe orfu feerfenr I ai4-13, wert, He 4)
gur vaak satgur jo bhaa-ay chalay tin har har aap milaa-i-aa.
Those who lovingly walk in harmony with the Word of the Guru, the True Guru - the Lord, Har, Har, unites them with Himself.
ast afs ffs Hfs Moret afe faur afe asstos | 14-13, set, He 4)
jotee jot mil jot samaanee har kirpaa kar DnarneeDharaa.
The mortal's light meets the Light of God, and blends with that Divine Light when the Lord, the Support of the Earth, grants His Grace.
ofa ofs mam wiarfa mrrdug mrsuat WAU (1114-14, gers, Hs 4)
har har agam agaaDh aprampar aparparaa. ||1]|| The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Infinite, the Farthest of the Far.
[21 Su Homi nem wera 3 ufe ufe ufs afer ii (14-14, serst, Hi 4)
tum su-aamee agam athaah too ghat ghat poor rahi-aa. O my Lord and Master, You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable. You are totally pervading and permeating each and every heart.
3 nied nis nian as Afsad sels Shor i 114-15, sect, ws 4)
too alakh abhay-o agamm gur satgur bachan lahi-aa.
You are Unseen, Unknowable and Unfathomable; You are found through the Word of the Guru, the True Guru.
U9 Ug 3 Ho Use US fo ae AsHals ffs Te eS lt 1114-15, sur, we 4)
Dhan Dhan tay jan purakh pooray jin gur santsangat mil gun ravay.
Blessed, blessed are those humble, powerful and perfect people, who join the Guru's Sangat, the Society of the Saints, and chant His Glorious Praises.
faaa afa diets auf aa Aafe fue fue afe fos se i 1114-16, sere, He 4)
bibayk buDh beechaar gurmukh gur sabad khin khin har nit chavay.
With clear and precise understanding, the Gurmukhs contemplate the Guru's Shabad; each and every instant, they continually speak of the Lord.
Ww dof aenfy afs an safe a us aenfy afe afs afoor It 114-17, sect, ne 4)
jaa baheh gurmukh har naam boleh jaa kharhay gurmukh har har kahi-aa.
When the Gurmukh sits down, he chants the Lord's Name. When the Gurmukh stands up, he chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har.
3H Fomit want wera 3 ufe wie ufs shor Ni (14-18, sure, He 4)
tum su-aamee agam athaah too ghat ghat poor rahi-aa. ||2| |
O my Lord and Master, You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable. You are totally pervading and permeating each and every heart. ||2||
Hea Ao Als 3 users fae Afent aSHfS Jas Il (1114-18, surst, He 4)
sayvak jan sayveh tay parvaan jin sayvi-aa gurmat haray.
Those humble servants who serve are accepted. They serve the Lord, and follow the Guru's Teachings.
fae & afe vfs uru fag usate afe efe ae I ci4-19, sect, 3 4) tin kay kot sabh paap khin parhar har door karay. All their millions of sins are taken away in an instant; the Lord takes them far away.
fs & uy eu Afs fon fro nfs fefs fea wreftmr it ci4-19, sere, He 4)
tin kay paap dokh sabh binsay jin man chit ik araaDhi-aa.
All their sin and blame is washed away. They worship and adore the One Lord with their conscious minds.
var aaa 85 & HOH Helse Ag abhor aes fas ae svat AG srftMr | (1115-1, Ses, He 4)
tin kaa janam safli-o sabh kee-aa kartai jin gur bachnee sach bhaakhi-aa. The Creator makes fruitful the lives of all those who, through the Guru's Word, chant the True Name.
3 U9 Fo Ss usd ud A Tenis ofa AfU se fem 3S II (15-2, geet, Hs 4)
tay Dhan jan vad purakh pooray jo gurmat har jap bha-o bikham taray.
Blessed are those humble beings, those great and perfect people, who follow the Guru's Teachings and meditate on the Lord; they cross over the terrifying and treacherous world-ocean.
Hea Ho Hels 3 usete faa Afent asHfS Jag ISI (1115-2, set, 2 4)
sayvak jan sayveh tay parvaan jin sayvi-aa gurmat haray. ||3]||
Those humble servants who serve are accepted. They follow the Guru's Teachings, and serve the Lord. ||3]|
3 nisarmt afe urfu fa@ 3 vorefa flmrs a8 fs Bar I aus-3, sect, ws 4)
too antarjaamee har aap ji-o too chalaaveh pi-aaray ha-o tivai chalaa.
You Yourself, Lord, are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; as You make me walk, O my Beloved, so do I walk.
THe ofe fas afew 3 Hots ST aS orf fer i cis-3, sect, oe 4) hamrai haath kichh naahi jaa too mayleh taa ha-o aa-ay milaa. Nothing is in my hands; when You unite me, then I come to be united.
fra ag 3 ots Hofs Aum As fs5 a Sar set afer I (115-4, Hest, ue 4)
jin ka-o too har mayleh su-aamee sabh tin kaa laykhaa chhutak ga-i-aa.
Those whom You unite with Yourself, O my Lord and Master - all their accounts are settled.
fae ot aes 5 afer & ave A a Seat Ufa fs wfenr I a15-5, weet, He 4)
tin kee ganat na kari-ahu ko bhaa-ee jo gur bachnee har may| la-i-aa.
No one can go through the accounts of those, O Siblings of Destiny, who through the Word of the Guru's Teachings are united with the Lord.
aod tenes dur fs Gufs fae ae at svat Hfsmr sar I 115-5, surct, we 4)
naanak da-i-aal ho-aa tin oopar jin gur kaa bhaanaa mani-aa bhalaa. O Nanak, the Lord shows Mercy to those who accept the Guru's Will as good.
3 visor afe urfu fas 3 sorefa fimrg JG fs Vor SIN (115-6, Fwe, He 4) too antarjaamee har aap ji-o too chalaaveh pi-aaray ha-o tivai chalaa. ||4||2||
You Yourself, Lord, are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; as You make me walk, O my Beloved, so do I walk. ||4|[2||
SuTst HIS 8 Il (1115-7)
tukhaaree mehlaa 4. Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:
3 Harteg AaetA AS aes fAAfe aE I (1115-7, sect, He 4)
too jagjeevan jagdees sabh kartaa sarisat naath.
You are the Life of the World, the Lord of the Universe, our Lord and Master, the Creator of all the Universe.
fs0 3 fomrfenr Aa aH fre & Uf Sy HT Il 115-8, surst, ws 4)
tin too Dhi-aa-i-aa mayraa raam jin kai Dhur laykh maath.
They alone meditate on You, O my Lord, who have such destiny recorded on their foreheads.
fa ag ufs ate feitimr Aymit fse safe afs an mratfomr Ih ca5-8, serst, He 4)
jin ka-o Dhur har likhi-aa su-aamee tin har har naam araaDhi-aa.
Those who are so pre-destined by their Lord and Master, worship and adore the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fa6 a uu fea fonu Afs we fae ae svat dfs AMT I (1115-9, zest, He 4)
tin kay paap ik nimakh sabh laathay jin gur bachnee har jaapi-aa.
All sins are erased in an instant, for those who meditate on the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings.
U6 Ud 3 Fo fae os on Ahm fso 2a JB sfeor Aes Ih (1115-10, serst, v2 4)
Dhan Dhan tay jan jin har naam japi-aa tin daykhay ha-o bha-i-aa sanaath.
Blessed, blessed are those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Name. Seeing them, I am uplifted.
3 Horleg AaetA AS aS fAAfe STE NAM (1115-10, Fest, He 4)
too jagjeevan jagdees sabh kartaa sarisat naath. ||1]||
You are the Life of the World, the Lord of the Universe, our Lord and Master, the Creator of all the Universe. ||1||
3 Ale afe Hdl scufs AS Gufs Arg Get I (115-11, seret, He 4)
too jal thal mahee-al bharpoor sabh oopar saach Dhanee.
You are totally pervading the water, the land and the sky. O True Lord, You are the Master of all.
fae Afr ofe Hfs sis ofs Afu Af Has wet i 115-11, sere, v8 4)
jin japi-aa har man cheet har jap jap mukat ghanee.
Those who meditate on the Lord in their conscious minds - all those who chant and meditate on the Lord are liberated.
fro Ahor ofs 3 Has yet fo a Cre He ofs warts It 115-12, gest, He 4)
jin japi-aa har tay mukat paraanee tin kay oojal mukh har du-aar.
Those mortal beings who meditate on the Lord are liberated; their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord.
Gf vats uafs Ae se HIS Jie The Se sasats It 1115-13, sewst, He 4)
o-ay halat palat jan bha-ay suhaylay har raakh lee-ay rakhanhaar.
Those humble beings are exalted in this world and the next; the Savior Lord saves them.
dfs H3Hafs He HET set Tenfe of AS ASG gat | 1115-13, Teret, v2 4)
har santsangat jan sunhu bhaa-ee gurmukh har sayvaa safal banee.
Listen to the Lord's Name in the Society of the Saints, O humble Siblings of Destiny. The Gurmukh's service to the Lord is fruitful.
3 nfs afe udinis scufs AS Gufs Arg Tat NIN (115-14, sere, He 4)
too jal thal mahee-al bharpoor sabh oopar saach Dhanee. ||2||
You are totally pervading the water, the land and the sky. O True Lord, You are the Master of all. ||2]|
3 we wate os Sa ala Sa Sa Tent I 115-15, Hers, ws 4) too thaan thanantar har ayk har ayko ayk ravi-aa. You are the One Lord, the One and Only Lord, pervading all places and interspaces.
fe fgfe fgsefe As fqrfe fy af afe ant afenr it 115-15, serdt, ne 4)
van tarin taribhavan sabh sarisat mukh har har naam chavi-aa.
The forests and fields, the three worlds and the entire Universe, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Afs vets afe ofs on aes nine nates ote fomr|e I (1115-16, sere, He 4)
sabh chaveh har har naam kartay asa“kh agnat har Dhi-aav-ay.
All chant the Name of the Creator Lord, Har, Har; countless, uncountable beings meditate on the Lord.
Aug ug de AS AY A Ole YS AIS SSS Il (1115-16, Herc, us 4)
so Dhan Dhan har sant saaDhoo jo har parabh kartay bhaav-ay.
Blessed, blessed are those Saints and Holy People of the Lord, who are pleasing to the Creator Lord God.
H HeS Vane ey aas fan ofa foge on Ae slew It 115-17, weet, He 4)
so Safal darsan dayh kartay jis har hirdai naam sad chavi-aa.
O Creator, please bless me with the Fruitful Vision, the Darshan, of those who chant the Lord's Name in their hearts forever.
3 we wate fs Sa ala Sa Sa Sent WSN 1115-18, zest, ws 4) too thaan thanantar har ayk har ayko ayk ravi-aa. ||3]| You are the One Lord, the One and Only Lord, pervading all places and interspaces.
1311 3c sats gars wR fAR 3 tefs HS Home SA frets Wt cis-18, sect, Hs 4)
tayree bhagat bhandaar asa™kh jis too dayveh mayray su-aamee tis mileh. The treasures of devotional worship to You are countless; he alone is blessed with them, O my Lord and Master, whom You bless.
fan & HASfa ae we fsH fase ofa Te feats i (115-19, sect, He 4)
jis kai mastak gur haath tis hirdai har gun tikeh.
The Lord's Glorious Virtues abide within the heart of that person, whose forehead the Guru has touched.
dfs ae fase feats fon & fan nists 38 arest Tet Wh 115-19, sect, He 4)
har gun hirdai tikeh tis kai jis antar bha-o bhaavnee ho-ee.
The Glorious Virtues of the Lord dwell in the heart of that person, whose inner being is filled with the Fear of God, and His Love.
ust AVE
fag 3 fas o UN ufemr fas 3 uta 3 Bsfour aet II Cii6-1, Serst, He 4)
bin bhai kinai na paraym paa-i-aa bin bhai paar na utri-aa ko-ee.
Without the Fear of God, His Love is not obtained. Without the Fear of God, no one is carried across to the other side.
38 + UifS aoa fSAfs oa fAA 3 yruet fas aafs Il ai6-2, sect, we 4)
bha-o bhaa-o pareet naanak tiseh laagai jis too aapnee kirpaa karahi.
O Nanak, he alone is blessed with the Fear of God, and God's Love and Affection, whom You, Lord, bless with Your Mercy.
3c sats gas wR fAR 3 tefa HS Home fSA frofs sal 16-2, swst, ue 4) tayree bhagat bhandaar asa‘kh jis too dayveh mayray su-aamee tis mileh. ||4||3]| The treasures of devotional worship to You are countless; he alone is blessed with Them, O my Lord and Master, whom You bless. ||4]||3]|
Sus HIS Il (1116-3)
tukhaaree mehlaa 4. Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:
SSE UIT HST Td Afsad ean Stew Il ci1i6-3, sere, He 4)
naavan purab abheech gur satgur daras bha-i-aa.
To receive the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, is to truly bathe at the Abhaijit festival.
ToHfs HS oet mifamrg nits afer it c116-4, sect, v2 4) durmat mail haree agi-aan anDhayr ga-i-aa. The filth of evil-mindedness is washed off, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
qe van ufeor mifamrg aefeur nists AfS yar i ciu6-4, west, v8 4)
gur daras paa-i-aa agi-aan gavaa-i-aa antar jot pargaasee.
Blessed by the Guru's Darshan, spiritual ignorance is dispelled, and the Divine Light illuminates the inner being.
HOH Hoe cy fas ufo far ofa ufeor ys mifsorrt Il c116-5, gerct, ws 4)
janam maran dukh khin meh binsay har paa-i-aa parabh abhinaasee.
The pains of birth and death vanish in an instant, and the Eternal, Imperishable Lord God is found.
ofs wrfu ass use aor Afsag aeats arte afer i cii6-6, ses, ws 4)
har aap kartai purab kee-aa satguroo kulkhayt naavan ga-i-aa.
The Creator Lord God Himself created the festival, when the True Guru went to bathe at the festival in Kuruk-shaytra.
ose UTE nisly Ad Afsad eo SfEnr AI (16-6, Serct, we 4)
naavan purab abheech gur satgur daras bha-i-aa. ||1]|
To receive the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, is to truly bathe at the Abhaijit festival. ||1]|
Hota Ufa 3B aa Afsas Afar frat i 16-7, sect, ns 4) maarag panth chalay gur satgur sang sikhaa. The Sikhs travelled with the Guru, the True Guru, on the path, along the road.
mates sats gat faa fue fone fear i (1116-7, serst, He 4)
an-din bhagat banee khin khin nimakh vikhaa.
Night and day, devotional worship services were held, each and every instant, with each step.
dfs ofs safs sat us act Ag Ba Suf= orfer | ciu6-8, Hers, He 4)
har har bhagat banee parabh kayree sabh lok vaykhan aa-i-aa.
Devotional worship services to the Lord God were held, and all the people came to see the Guru.
faa tan Afsad ag ater fsa urfy ate Herfenr I citi6-8, gest, H2 4)
jin daras satgur guroo kee-aa tin aap har maylaa-i-aa.
Whoever was blessed with the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, the Lord united with Himself.
Stee Gey Afsag aor As Sa Suge visa Il (1116-9, ses, ws 4)
tirath udam satguroo kee-aa sabh lok uDhran arthaa.
The True Guru made the pilgrimage to the sacred shrines, for the sake of saving all the people.
Hota uf 38 ag Afsas Afar fra QH (i6-10, sect, He 4) maarag panth chalay gur satgur sang sikhaa. ||2|| The Sikhs travelled with the Guru, the True Guru, on the path, along the road. ||2||
yen ore awafs aa Afsag use dur il ci16-10, west, v8 4)
paratham aa-ay kulkhayt gur satgur purab ho-aa.
When the Guru, the True Guru, first arrived at Kuruk-shaytra, it was a very auspicious time.
uate set Hats wire 3 Br | ca16-11, gers, ue 4) khabar bha-ee sansaar aa-ay tarai lo-aa. The news spread throughout the world, and the beings of the three worlds came.
cufs ure sie Sa Afe od ufo Ae Als mrfeor I a6-11, serst, He 4) daykhan aa-ay teen lok sur nar mun jan sabh aa-i-aa. The angelic beings and silent sages from all the three worlds came to see Him.
fro usthor ag Afsag us fsa & footed oA aefenr i ciii6-11, ses, He 4)
jin parsi-aa gur satguroo pooraa tin kay kilvikh naas gavaa-i-aa.
Those who are touched by the Guru, the True Guru - all their sins and mistakes were erased and dispelled.
not feats Afsurtt ue wane afe ae daAfe sur Il 16-12, sect, He 4)
jogee digambar sani-aasee khat darsan kar ga-ay gosat dho-aa.
The Yogis, the nudists, the Sannyaasees and those of the six schools of philosophy spoke with Him, and then bowed and departed.
yen ore awefs ag Afsag use dvr Sil (116-13, Serst, He 4)
paratham aa-ay kulkhayt gur satgur purab ho-aa. ||3]||
When the Guru, the True Guru, first arrived at Kuruk-shaytra, it was a very auspicious time. ||3]|
esior AHS ae ate ofa afe AUS ar I (1116-13, sere, v8 4)
dutee-aa jamun ga-ay gur har har japan kee-aa.
Second, the Guru went to the river Jamunaa, where He chanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
wWarst fxs & Se aa fue Surfe dor it au6-14, sect, we 4)
jaagaatee milay day bhayt gur pichhai langhaa-ay dee-aa.
The tax collectors met the Guru and gave Him offerings; they did not impose the tax on His followers.
Ag get Afsag fue fats af afe ony fimrfemr it ci6-14, serct, Hs 4)
sabh chhutee satguroo pichhai jin har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
All the True Guru's followers were excused from the tax; they meditated on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ad sole wofa A ufa we foe AN werst OfF 3 urfer I a6-15, Feet, He 4)
gur bachan maarag jo panth chaalay tin jam jaagaatee nayrh na aa-i-aa.
The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who have walked on the path, and followed the Guru's Teachings.
AS Ig TI Aas ss Ts a ote went Als sla afenr il ci16-16, serst, ws 4) sabh guroo guroo jagat bolai gur kai naa-ay la-i-ai sabh chhutak ga-i-aa.
All the world said, "Guru! Guru! Guru!" Uttering the Guru's Name, they were all emancipated.
eset AHS ae ate de dfs AUS AMM ISI (1116-17, set, He 4)
dutee-aa jamun ga-ay gur har har japan kee-aa. ||4]|
Second, the Guru went to the river Jamunaa, where He chanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|
fasion ure ASA 3d ACSA vss sfEnr I (1116-17, ses, vz 4) taritee-aa aa-ay sursaree tah ka-utak chalat bha-i-aa. Third, He went to the Ganges, and a wonderful drama was played out there.
AS Hot tfa wane as AS fas ore 3 OH BfeMr I ci6-18, sere, He 4)
sabh mohee daykh darsan gur sant kinai aadh na daam la-i-aa.
All were fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Saintly Guru's Darshan; no tax at all was imposed upon anyone.
nig oH fae ufeor 5 dea Warsion Hos Wefs uet Il ci6-18, seret, He 4) aadh daam kichh pa-i-aa na bolak jaagaatee-aa mohan mundan pa-ee. No tax at all was collected, and the mouths of the tax collectors were sealed.
avet oH aad fomr fan uff nia AS afar Afsag fue et II cii6-19, sere, He 4) bhaa-ee ham karah ki-aa kis paas maa‘gah sabh bhaag satgur pichhai pa-ee.
They said, "O brothers, what should we do? Who should we ask? Everyone is running after the True Guru."
var 9999 Warsior Bure fimirsu afe <teg for sis doar vfs Cfo afeor i ai7-1, sere, we 4)
jaagaatee-aa upaav si-aanap kar veechaar dithaa bhann bolkaa sabh uth ga-i-aa. The tax collectors were smart; they thought about it, and saw. They broke their cash- boxes and left.
fasion ure ASA 3d ACSA Vas sfenr ull (117-2, set, ve 4) taritee-aa aa-ay sursaree tah ka-utak chalat bha-i-aa. ||5|| Third, He went to the Ganges, and a wonderful drama was played out there. ||5]|
ffs wre odd HO Aa ad Afsad Ge at i 1117-2, sews, vs 4)
mil aa-ay nagar mahaa janaa gur satgur ot gahee.
The important men of the city met together, and sought the Protection of the Guru, the True Guru.
ag Afsag ag afee ufe fafyfS ats At a17-3, erst, He 4)
gur satgur gur govid puchh simrit keetaa sahee.
The Guru, the True Guru, the Guru is the Lord of the Universe. Go ahead and consult the Simritees - they will confirm this.
fafifs AA Asst Act ats Afe ufoerfe Atoth afe ae afee fomrfeur i cau7-3, sect, H8 4)
simrit saastar sabhnee sahee keetaa suk par-hilaad sareeraam kar gur govid Dhi-aa-i- aa.
The Simritees and the Shaastras all confirm that Suk Dayv and Prahlaad meditated on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, and knew Him as the Supreme Lord.
oot sate afe us va zeerd foo a ae ag Tetfenr | 1117-4, sect, He 4)
dayhee nagar kot panch chor vatvaaray tin kaa thaa-o thayhu gavaa-i-aa.
The five thieves and the highway robbers dwell in the fortress of the body-village; the Guru has destroyed their home and place.
atese use fas us def ag sels sofa ofe sats wet It (1117-5, sere, He 4) keertan puraan nit punn hoveh gur bachan naanak har bhagat lahee.
The Puraanas continually praise the giving of charity, but devotional worship of the Lord is only obtained through the Word of Guru Nanak.
ffs ore Sard HI Ao ad Afsad Ge at WENSNIOll (1117-6, Fest, v2 4)
mil aa-ay nagar mahaa janaa gur satgur ot gahee. ||6||4||10]| The important men of the city met together, and sought the Protection of the Guru, the True Guru. ||6]|4]|10]|
Surdt 23 HIS UY 1117-7) tukhaaree chhant mehlaa 5 Tukhaari Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (117-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ulfes unmet orsor afs He Stat I (1117-8, suet, ne 5)
ghol ghumaa-ee laalnaa gur man deenaa.
O my Beloved, I am a sacrifice to You. Through the Guru, I have dedicated my mind to You.
Afe Hae SHS AT HS Stok Il (1117-8, erst, He 5) sun sabad tumaaraa mayraa man bheenaa. Hearing the Word of Your Shabad, my mind is enraptured.
feg Ho ste faG ne Hot war Sa HATS I (1117-8, Sew, He 5) in man bheenaa ji-o jal meenaa laagaa rang muraaraa. This mind is enraptured, like the fish in the water; it is lovingly attached to the Lord.
ais adt & Wet SaT Sa HIG MUS I (1117-9, surdt, Hz 5)
keemat kahee na jaa-ee thaakur tayraa mahal apaaraa.
Your Worth cannot be described, O my Lord and Master; Your Mansion is Incomparable and Unrivalled.
HAS Tet a ws Amt fas Hag fea tor il 1117-9, sere, us 5)
Sagal gunaa kay daatay su-aamee bin-o sunhu ik deenaa.
O Giver of all Virtue, O my Lord and Master, please hear the prayer of this humble person.
GJ UIA Oa Beal Abs ale af star All (1117-10, sews, He 5)
dayh daras naanak balihaaree jee-arhaa bal bal keenaa. ||1]|
Please bless Nanak with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||1]|
fed 36 HO 3a Afs TE 3g Il (1117-10, Herc, uz 5) ih tan man tayraa sabh gun tayray. This body and mind are Yours; all virtues are Yours.
doba Fer BIAS 3ST ll 1117-11, swt, ve 5) khannee-ai vanjaa darsan tayray. I am a Sacrifice, every little bit, to Your Darshan.
dno 3d Afe ys He fony fenfe uf Ate i 17-11, gest, ne 5)
darsan tayray sun parabh mayray nimakh darisat paykh jeevaa.
Please hear me, O my Lord God; I live only by seeing Your Vision, even if only for an instant.
nifys on Adta Sa frou aafs 3 uber i (1117-12, serct, ne 5)
amrit naam suneejai tayraa kirpaa karahi ta peevaa.
I have heard that Your Name is the most Ambrosial Nectar; please bless me with Your Mercy, that I may drink it in.
wa funrat fus a sret fa@ oiga FST i ca17-12, sere, we 5)
aas pi-aasee pir kai taa-ee ji-o chaatrik boo“dayray.
My hopes and desires rest in You, O my Husband Lord; like the rainbird, I long for the rain-drop.
ag soa Abarat afoot Gg VIA YS AT MQM (1117-13, ses, ue 5) kaho naanak jee-arhaa balihaaree dayh daras parabh mayray. ||2]|
Says Nanak, my soul is a sacrifice to You; please bless me with Your Darshan, O my Lord God. ||2]|
3 Are Atos AY MHS I (1117-13, gest, He 5) too saachaa saahib saahu amitaa. You are my True Lord and Master, O Infinite King.
3 Ufsy fumrs yro fos fest i 17-14, zeret, 2 5) too pareetam pi-aaraa paraan hit chitaa. You are my Dear Beloved, so dear to my life and consciousness.
UTS AYES" Tanta AST Aa dar ats mre i (1117-14, sears, ve 5)
paraan sukh-daata gurmukh jaataa sagal rang ban aa-ay.
You bring peace to my soul; You are known to the Gurmukh. All are blessed by Your Love.
Het AGH AHS YrSt AI J SHS I (1117-15, Ferd, we 5) so-ee karam kamaavai paraanee jayhaa too furmaa-ay. The mortal does only those deeds which You ordain, Lord.
vw a@ fxur act naretafe ffs Avanfar He fAST MN (1117-15, suet, He 5)
jaa ka-o kirpaa karee jagdeesur tin saaDhsang man jitaa.
One who is blessed by Your Grace, O Lord of the Universe, conquers his mind in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
aT aoa Abra afoot AM fils 3B fest Wan c117-16, zest, ne 5) kaho naanak jee-arhaa balihaaree jee-o pind ta-o ditaa. ||3]| Says Nanak, my soul is a sacrifice to You; You gave me my soul and body. ||3]|
fosae sty Short Aso At ASAT | (1117-16, surst, n2 5) nirgun raakh lee-aa santan kaa sadkaa. I am unworthy, but He has saved me, for the sake of the Saints.
Afsafe aia shor xfs unit user il (1117-17, sere, He 5) satgur dhaak lee-aa mohi paapee parh-daa. The True Guru has covered by faults; I am such a sinner.
Wadd YS IHS Aha YS AYES Il (1117-17, sere, wz 5) dhaakanhaaray parabhoo hamaaray jee-a paraan sukh-daatay. God has covered for me; He is the Giver of the soul, life and peace.
uifsorat uifsars Homit use use fears i cii7-18, gurst, 12 5)
abhinaasee abigat su-aamee pooran purakh biDhaatay.
My Lord and Master is Eternal and Unchanging, Ever-present; He is the Perfect Creator, the Architect of Destiny.
Cxsfs ade o AE SH ABS AT J aE A Il (1117-18, Herc, we 5) ustat kahan na jaa-ay tumaaree ka-un kahai too kad kaa. Your Praise cannot be described; who can say where You are?
Soa UH ST a afwadt fs an ofa fora SNA (1117-19, Seust, Hz 5)
naanak daas taa kai balihaaree milai naam har nimkaa. ||4]|1]|11]| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to the one who blesses him with the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||4]|1]|11]|
UST AAAC
aes HIG 8 We 4 (1118-1) kaydaaraa mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas urrfe i (i11s-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
He Ho TH OH fos aeha F I (is-3, Aers, v2 4) mayray man raam naam nit gaavee-ai ray. O my mind, sing continually the Name of the Lord.
MEH nse 3 At ofs ofr ae us fHs Sart F i TTS I ca1s-3, Aers, vs 4) agam agochar na jaa-ee har lakhi-aa gur pooraa milai lakhaavee-ai ray. rahaa-o.
The Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord cannot be seen; meeting with the Perfect Guru, He is seen. ||Pause| |
fan vm feo ad Hat AMM fsH Ae aS fs fee what FI cas-4, Hers, ne 4)
jis aapay kirpaa karay mayraa su-aamee tis jan ka-o har liv laavee-ai ray.
That person, upon whom my Lord and Master showers His Mercy - the Lord attunes that one to Himself.
AS a sats ad of adt ofs we A ae ust F NA (atis-4, ders, 2 4)
sabh ko bhagat karay har kayree har bhaavai so thaa-ay paavee-ai ray. ||1]| Everyone worships the Lord, but only that person who is pleasing to the Lord is accepted. ||1]]|
dfs ofa an onioa ofa ufs afs tS st ony fost Fh cais-5, ders, He 4)
har har naam amolak har peh har dayvai taa naam Dhi-aavee-ai ray.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is priceless. It rests with the Lord. If the Lord bestows it, then we meditate on the Naam.
fan 6 on Mf Ha AyMt fSR Sat AS sav F NMI itis-6, aes, He 4)
jis no naam day-ay mayraa su-aamee tis laykhaa sabh chhadaavee-ai ray. ||2||
That person, whom my Lord and Master blesses with His Name - his entire account is forgiven. ||2]|
dfs om wieafs A Us Ae admis fso HASfea ava ofs fete uso FT I cais-6, Xora, ne 4) har naam araaDheh say Dhan jan kahee-ahi tin mastak bhaag Dhur likh paavee-ai ray. Those humble beings who worship and adore the Lord's Name, are said to be blessed. Such is the good destiny written on their foreheads.
fo ea Ha HO fear fae as fife ws afs what F 3H aus-7, es, He 4)
tin daykhay mayraa man bigsai ji-o sut mil maat gal laavee-ai ray. ||3]|
Gazing upon them, my mind blossoms forth, like the mother who meets with her son and hugs him close. ||3]|
oH efea ofe fust us AT HAS eg HSt fas ofs US FT I atis-8, Few, He 4) ham baarik har pitaa parabh mayray mo ka-o dayh matee jit har paavee-ai ray.
I am a child, and You, O my Lord God, are my Father; please bless me with such understanding, that I may find the Lord.
fAG wea tf ae AY HS HE asa oie als SS F USUI Cus-9, ders, Hs 4)
ji-o bachhuraa daykh ga-oo sukh maanai ti-o naanak har gal laavee-ai ray. ||4||1]| Like the cow, which is happy upon seeing her calf, O Lord, please hug Nanak close in Your Embrace. ||4||1]|
aera HIG 8 WI A (1118-10)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas ure Il (118-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hd HO Ue oe To AT F Il (atis-11, Fer, He 4) mayray man har har gun kaho ray. O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
Afsag & vee of afe ung feo fafa ne afe ys wT FW TTS Ul (uis-u, Fes, ws 4) satguroo kay charan Dho-ay Dho-ay poojahu in biDh mayraa har parabh lahu ray.
rahaa-o.
Wash the Feet of the True Guru, and worship them. In this way, you shall find my Lord God. ||Pause||
aH ty SF Hy ifs faa oA fea Aals 3 J 3g F Il aus-12, ders, we 4)
kaam kroDh lobh moh abhimaan bikhai ras in sangat tay too rahu ray.
Sexual desire, anger, greed, attachment, egotism and corrupt pleasures - stay away from these.
fife AsHafs att ofs aafe vg fAS aafe ate dn sree TH oH ofS Tle TH OH TH GH F WAI (1118-12, Fea, He 4)
mil satsangat keejai har gosat saaDhoo si-o gosat har paraym rasaa-in raam naam rasaa-in har raam naam raam ramhu ray. ||1]|
Join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and speak with the Holy People about the Lord. The Love of the Lord is the healing remedy; the Name of the Lord is the healing remedy. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||1||
var aaa
visa o miss Te 3 fas fags fas wos feg ofs aay mrus Tg F Il ca9-1, Few, v3 4) antar kaa abhimaan jor too kichh kichh kichh jaantaa ih door karahu aapan gahu ray. So you think that the egotistical pride in power which you harbor deep within is everything. Let it go, and restrain your self-conceit.
Wo soa a ofs efenrs dg AM of Ass at ofe ats TS WINVWM Cau9-1, ees, v2 4)
jan naanak ka-o har da-i-aal hohu su-aamee har santan kee Dhoor kar haray.
H2]12 1121]
Please be kind to servant Nanak, O Lord, my Lord and Master; please make him the dust of the Feet of the Saints. ||2||1||2]|
aes HIG UWE 2 (1119-3) kaydaaraa mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (1119-3)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: Het ASHfar ATS MW (1119-4, Xara, He 5)
maa-ee satsang jaagee. O mother, I have awakened in the Society of the Saints.
finn ga te wust on fourst i gaS i (19-4, Fars, v8 5) pari-a rang daykhai japtee naam niDhaanee. rahaa-o. Seeing the Love of my Beloved, I chant His Name, the greatest treasure] |Pause] |
TINS fimrA Sys Ss Bait i (1119-4, eer, we 5) darsan pi-aas lochan taar laagee. I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. my eyes are focused on Him;
fanct fanrm fastat al (119-5, Xara, He 5)
bisree ti-aas bidaanee. ||1]| I have forgotten other thirsts. ||1]|
wa ag ute 3 Aon Huefea PIAS UNS HO Bu|rst Il (1119-5, Revs, vz 5)
ab gur paa-i-o hai sahj sukh-daa-ik darsan paykhat man laptaanee.
Now, I have found my Peace-giving Guru with ease; seeing His Darshan, my mind clings to Him.
afy anes son fs CufAS area finn nifigs aot NINA Cii19-6, ders, He 5)
daykh damodar rahas man upji-o naanak pari-a amrit baanee. ||2||1]|
Seeing my Lord, joy has welled up in my mind; O Nanak, the speech of my Beloved is so sweet! ||2||1||
aes HIG UWE 2 (1119-7) kaydaaraa mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsars YATE II (1119-7)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: ae fas Ae efenre i ci19-8, Xara, He 5)
deen bin-o sun da-i-aal.
Please listen to the prayers of the humble, O Merciful Lord.
Us oA Ste Sut Sa HS Maa OE Il (119-8, Aes, He 5) panch daas teen dokhee ayk man anaath naath. The five thieves and the three dispositions torment my mind.
ay F frase i TIS I (119-8, Revs, wz 5) raakh ho kirpaal. rahaa-o. O Merciful Lord, Master of the masterless, please save me from them. ||Pause] |
Misa ASS WS ATE Il (1119-9, Reva", nz 5) anik jatan gavan kara-o. I make all sorts of efforts and go on pilgrimages;
uz aan als fomre us i 1119-9, Fear, He 5) khat karam jugat Dhi-aan Dhara-o. I perform the six rituals, and meditate in the right way.
Cure nae afs tI aI od Jato faa NAM (1119-9, era, v2 5)
upaav sagal kar haari-o nah nah huteh bikraal. ||1]| I am so tired of making all these efforts, but the horrible demons still do not leave me.
[2
Hafs Feo ATST us Il (1119-10, ers, ve 5) saran bandan karunaa patay. I seek Your Sanctuary, and bow to You, O Compassionate Lord.
3 ude ofa ofa af Tg Il (1119-10, Hera, He 5) bhav haran har har har haray. You are the Destroyer of fear, O Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har.
Sa sot tte efenrs i cat9-11, kes, ve 5) ayk toohee deen da-i-aal. You alone are Merciful to the meek.
US TIS TSA MAG I (1119-11, Fers, He 5) parabh charan naanak aasro. Nanak takes the Support of God's Feet.
Gud FH HI Aree I (1119-11, ders, ve 5) uDhray bharam moh saagar. I have been rescued from the ocean of doubt,
Bla ASS UT USB WAWAUIM (4119-11, erat, ne 5) lag santnaa pag paal. ||2||1||2|| holding tight to the feet and the robes of the Saints. ||2||1]|2||
aes HIG UWB (1119-13)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsas yArfe it (1119-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hoot wifes area feare il (1119-14, evs, v2 5) sarnee aa-i-o naath niDhaan. I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Lord, O Supreme Treasure.
oH Uulfs walt Ho stats HIS aE ahs aS NU FIC Ml (119-14, Hera, ws 5)
naam pareet laagee man bheetar maagan ka-o har daan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is enshrined within my mind; I beg for the gift of Your Name. ||1]|Pause] |
Huet ude USHA ate fargur IT HT Il (1119-15, Aes, He 5)
sukh-daa-ee pooran parmaysur kar kirpaa raakho maan.
O Pefect Transcendent Lord, Giver of Peace, please grant Your Grace and save my honor.
eg Uifs Ag Af AuMit ofs Ta TAS FAS MAI (1119-15, deers, He 5)
dayh pareet saaDhoo sang su-aamee har gun rasan bakhaan. ||1]||
Please bless me with such love, O my Lord and Master, that in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I may chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord with my tongue.
1141] gure vfenrs afse ches fosne aa fami Il (1119-16, Sera, He 5)
gopaal da-i-aal gobid damodar nirmal kathaa gi-aan. O Lord of the World, Merciful Lord of the Universe, Your sermon and spiritual wisdom are immaculate and pure.
Sod AG da a dia Tag Vas AHS Afar forse iINVUSil (1119-16, ers, Hz 5)
naanak ka-o har kai rang raagahu charan kamal sang Dhi-aan. ||2||1]|3]| Please attune Nanak to Your Love, O Lord, and focus his meditation on Your Lotus Feet. ||2]|1]/3]|
AUT HIS U Il (1119-17)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & wane & fs WE Il (1119-17, Xersr, He 5) har kay darsan ko man chaa-o. My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
afa fasu AsHfa fore 3H Peg yrs oS I ToS I (9-18, Aare, ni 5)
kar kirpaa satsang milaavhu tum dayvhu apno naa-o. rahaa-o.
Please grant Your Grace, and unite me with the Society of the Saints; please bless me with Your Name. ||Pause| |
ase Ae AS use filmed ws Hot 3a nfs Jone II (it19-18, aera, He 5)
kara-o sayvaa sat purakh pi-aaray jat sunee-ai tat man rahsaa-o.
I serve my True Beloved Lord. Wherever I hear His Praise, there my mind is in ecstasy.
UST A92o
zat Sat Ae Het ASG nigy SF SS AU (1120-1, ders, ws 5) vaaree fayree sadaa ghumaa-ee kavan anoop tayro thaa-o. ||1]||
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever devoted to You. Your place is incomparably beautiful! ||1]|
Hea ufsurats Aare AHtals Aafenr Sat SS i (1120-1, xers, ve 5) sarab paratpaalahi sagal samaaleh sagli-aa tayree chhaa-o. You cherish and nurture all; You take care of all, and Your shade covers all.
soa a us use fears ufe wfe s3fo fer wAWAUSI (1120-2, Xers, ve 5)
naanak kay parabh purakh biDhaatay ghat ghat tujheh dikhaa-o. ||2]|2]||4||
You are the Primal Creator, the God of Nanak; I behold You in each and every heart. 21121141]
AUT HIG U Il (1120-3)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
fir off Uff furarst i (1120-3, aera, u8 5) pari-a kee pareet pi-aaree. I love the Love of my Beloved.
Hale He Hfs fase nm Sag STS SoSH I TIS I (1120-3, Hers, v2 5)
magan manai meh chitva-o aasaa nainhu taar tuhaaree. rahaa-o.
My mind is intoxicated with delight, and my consciousness is filled with hope; my eyes are drenched with Your Love. ||Pause| |
Gfe fea use Has us aA Gfe us wet frost Il (1120-4, err, He 5)
o-ay din pahar moorat pal kaisay o-ay pal gharee kihaaree.
Blessed is that day, that hour, minute and second when the heavy, rigid shutters are opened, and desire is quenched.
us que cue af fgAa Hes Ute TaATSt NAM (1120-4, ders, He 5) khoolay kapat Dhapat bujh tarisnaa jeeva-o paykh darsaaree. ||1]| Seeing the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live. ||1]|
aGe AH AS6 Bure fas As AS sterat I (1120-5, Aers, He 5)
ka-un so jatan upaa-o kinayhaa sayvaa ka-un beechaaree.
What is the method, what is the effort, and what is the service, which inspires me to contemplate You?
H9 MifsH's He fA aoa Had Afar Burst NANSUUI (1120-6, Revs, He 5)
maan abhimaan moh taj naanak santeh sang uDhaaree. ||2||3||5]|
Abandon your egotistical pride and attachment; O Nanak, you shall be saved in the Society of the Saints. |]2]|3]]5]|
Aas HIG U Il (1120-6)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ots dfs TS We Il (1120-6, Xers, us 5) har har har gun gaavhu. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
add fur curs aifse mre an Aured Il TITS Il (1120-7, ders, He 5)
karahu kirpaa gopaal gobiday apnaa naam japaavhu. rahaa-o.
Have Mercy on me, O Life of the World, O Lord of the Universe, that I may chant Your Name. ||Pause]|
orfe ae ys mre fae 3 WOAfa Ho BST Il (1120-7, Aes, He 5)
kaadh lee-ay parabh aan bikhai tay saaDhsang man laavhu.
Please lift me up, God, out of vice and corruption, and attach my mind to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
3H 3@ Hg afes aa seat mus ean feared IA (1120-8, Fes, ne 5)
bharam bha-o moh kati-o gur bachnee apnaa daras dikhaavhu. ||1||
Doubt, fear and attachment are eradicated from that person who follows the Guru's Teachings, and gazes on the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]|
AS at do df Ho As nidafa Sr|NT Il (1120-8, ders, He 5) sabh kee rayn ho-ay man mayraa aha’-buDh tajaavahu. Let my mind become the dust of all; may I abandon my egotistical intellect.
must sats efs efenrer esa SSA Ts UST QUIEN (1120-9, evs, ns 5)
apnee bhagat deh da-i-aalaa vadbhaagee naanak har paavhu. ||2||4||6]]| Please bless me with Your devotional worship, O Merciful Lord; by great good fortune, O Nanak, I have found the Lord. ||2||4]|6]|
Aas HIG U Il (1120-10)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs fae ASH MASS AS Il (1120-10, Fors, He 5) har bin janam akaarath jaat. Without the Lord, life is useless.
3fa due ote dfa aes firfeor ufses urs i TIT It (1120-10, ers, He 5)
taj gopaal aan rang raachat mithi-aa pahirat khaat. rahaa-o.
Those who forsake the Lord, and become engrossed in other pleasures - false and useless are the clothes they wear, and the food they eat. ||Pause||
Us Has AU AY sae Afa o fess HS Il (1120-11, ers, ne 5)
Dhan joban sampai sukh bhogvai sang na nibhat maat.
The pleasures of wealth, youth, property and comforts will not stay with you, O mother.
figa fare efe ofS aed en steer sar TS NA (120-11, er, we 5)
marig tarisnaa daykh rachi-o baavar darum chhaa-i-aa rang raat. ||1]||
Seeing the mirage, the madman is entangled in it; he is imbued with pleasures that pass away, like the shade of a tree. ||1]|
H® HT HI He HIS AH AT A UTS I (1120-12, aera, ve 5)
maan moh mahaa mad mohat kaam kroDh kai khaat.
Totally intoxicated with the wine of pride and attachment, he has fallen into the pit of sexual desire and anger.
ag dfs 3g SA Soa ae ys ME GE ATS QUIN (1120-12, Fevw, ve 5)
kar geh layho daas naanak ka-o parabh jee-o ho-ay sahaat. ||2||5||7]|
O Dear God, please be the Help and Support of servant Nanak; please take me by the hand, and uplift me. ||2]|5]|7]|
UTI HIG U Il (1120-13)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs fae aff o wefh ATE Il (1120-13, ers, He 5) har bin ko-ay na chaalas saath. Nothing goes along with the mortal, except for the Lord.
dar ara agetufs AMM mara & Sa Il TIE il (1120-14, Aera, He 5)
deenaa naath karunaapat su-aamee anaathaa kay naath. rahaa-o.
He is the Master of the meek, the Lord of Mercy, my Lord and Master, the Master of the masterless. ||Pause| |
HS Hufs fafimr gH saes od foags AH A UE Il (1120-14, Bers, ni 5)
sut Sampat bikhi-aa ras bhogvat nah nibhat jam kai paath.
Children, possessions and the enjoyment of corrupt pleasures do not go along with the mortal on the path of Death.
oy fours rr ae afte Sug AT A UTS NAN (1120-15, evs, He 5)
naam niDhaan gaa-o gun gobind uDhar saagar kay Khaat. ||1]|
Singing the Glorious Praises of the treasure of the Naam, and the Lord of the Universe, the mortal is carried across the deep ocean. ||1||
Hofe AGS nae nidivd ofa fies TY BET Il (1120-16, Hers, ne 5)
saran samrath akath agochar har simrat dukh laath.
In the Sanctuary of the All-powerful, Indescribable, Unfathomable Lord, meditate in remembrance on Him, and your pains shall vanish.
area te ufe Ae ates fs fers ofs Ha QUENT (1120-16, ers, v8 5)
naanak deen Dhoor jan baa“chhat milai likhat Dhur maath. ||2]|6]|8]| Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant; he shall obtain it only if such pre-ordained destiny is written on his forehead. ||2||6||8]|
AVS HIG U WT U (1120-18)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5 ghar 5 Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:
qe Afsara YATE It (1120-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fanas ofa He 3 Jat I (1120-19, ders, He 5) bisrat naahi man tay haree. I do not forget the Lord in my mind.
ma fea uifs Ho yas set mins fart Fat TI il (1120-19, Fever, ue 5) ab ih pareet mahaa parabal bha-ee aan bikhai jaree. rahaa-o. This love has now become very strong; it has burnt away other corruption. ||Pause] |
ge aw fsorfa ofa vite JIS o wet | (1120-19, aera, we 5)
boond kahaa ti-aag chaatrik meen rahat na gharee.
How can the rainbird forsake the rain-drop? The fish cannot survive without water, even for an instant.
Yat A929
Go due Garg gAor fe So ust Ul c1i21-1, ers, Hs 5)
gun gopaal uchaar rasnaa tayv ayh paree. ||1]|
My tongue chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World; this has become part of my very nature. ||1]|
Ho are ada fas afa Shae At It (1121-1, Hers, we 5) mahaa naad kurank mohi-o bayDh teekhan saree. The deer is fascinated by the sound of the bell, and so it is shot with the sharp arrow.
YS BIS HS FAS SOA AMS ata ast MIUAIENM (121-2, Aera, we 5)
parabh charan kamal rasaal naanak gaath baaDh Dharee. ||2]|1]||9|| God's Lotus Feet are the Source of Nectar; O Nanak, I am tied to them by a knot. 21111191]
ATI HIG U Il (1121-3)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
UtsH ans fee ufo Ys I ci2i1-3, Fes, He 5)
pareetam basat rid meh khor. My Beloved dwells in the cave of my heart.
aon Sis foets oasg afs Ss must Gs ual TIS I (1121-3, Fer, vz 5)
bharam bheet nivaar thaakur geh layho apnee or. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Shatter the wall of doubt, O my Lord and Master; please grab hold of me, and lift me up towards Yourself. ||1]|Pause] |
wifax aes HATS AT afs efeor wag Oe I (1121-4, ders, v2 5)
aDhik garat sansaar saagar kar da-i-aa chaarahu Dhor.
The world-ocean is so vast and deep; please be kind, lift me up and place me on the shore.
H3nfa dfs vas Sfoa Sues B HT NA (1121-4, Aera, 2 5) satsang har charan bohith uDhratay lai mor. ||1]| In the Society of the Saints, the Lord's Feet are the boat to carry us across. ||1]|
das ac ufo faofs wfes odt fat go ufo do it ci2i-s, #ers, 2 5)
garabh kunt meh jineh Dhaari-o nahee bikhai ban meh hor.
The One who placed you in the womb of your mother's belly - no one else shall save you in the wilderness of corruption.
Ufs AAS Ads AHP Saat MTS Sdt fSdT NQANVUAOM (1121-5, Here, v2 5)
har sakat saran samrath naanak aan nahee nihor. ||2||2||10|| The power of the Lord's Sanctuary is all-powerful; Nanak does not rely on any other. [12] |2]|210]|
AUT HIG U Il (1121-6)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
SHOT TH TH Bars Il (1121-6, aes, v2 5) rasnaa raam raam bakhaan. With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord.
qs due Cog fea dfs se AGHS TS Il TIE I 1121-6, ers, v1 5)
gun gopaal uchaar din rain bha-ay kalmal haan. rahaa-o.
Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, day and night, your sins shall be eradicated. | |Pause| |
fsurfa door Ade Hus ae fa ufs ATS Il (1121-7, Revs, He 5)
ti-aag chalnaa sagal sampat kaal sir par jaan.
You shall have to leave behind all your riches when you depart. Death is hanging over your head - know this well!
fas Ho VIS MAT SS AUT HT NAL (1121-7, ders, v8 5) mithan moh durant aasaa jhooth sarpar maan. ||1|| Transitory attachments and evil hopes are false. Surely you must believe this! ||1]|
ARS ys vias Hats fee reg forge i (121-8, ders, Hs 5)
sat purakh akaal moorat ridai Dnaarahu Dhi-aan.
Within your heart, focus your meditation on the True Primal Being, Akaal Moorat, the Undying Form.
on fours BS Sa SHS fET uss NIANBNAUI (1121-8, Hers, He 5)
naam niDhaan laabh naanak basat ih parvaan. ||2||3||11]|
Only this profitable merchandise, the treasure of the Naam, O Nanak, shall be accepted. ||2||3]|11]|
AUT HIG U Il (1121-9)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & BH A MUS Il 1121-9, Hers, ne 5) har kay naam ko aaDhaar. I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord.
afe xen 5 ae fmt AsAfa faGorg 1 oe I czi-9, ders, 2 5)
kal kalays na kachh bi-aapai satsang bi-uhaar. rahaa-o.
Suffering and conflict do not afflict me; I deal only with the Society of the Saints. | |Pause| |
afs noqg umfu ate og Guns aarg il ci21-10, Fes, v2 5)
kar anoograhu aap raakhi-o nah upajta-o baykaar.
Showering His Mercy on me, the Lord Himself has saved me, and no evil thoughts arise within me.
fan usufs dfe find fA eas 3d AAS UI (1121-11, ers, He 5)
jis paraapat ho-ay simrai tis dahat nah sansaar. ||1||
Whoever receives this Grace, contemplates Him in meditation; he is not burned by the fire of the world. ||1]|
AY Hae mse ote oe ys vse Mis ATT Wl ci2i-11, Ferw, we 5)
sukh mangal aanand har har parabh charan amrit saar.
Peace, joy and bliss come from the Lord, Har, Har. God's Feet are sublime and excellent.
Soa VA Adardst SI ASH" at ST MANNII (1121-12, Aerar, vs 5)
naanak daas sarnaagatee tayray santnaa kee chhaar. ||2||4||12]|| Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; he is the dust of the feet of Your Saints. H2]14) [2121]
AUT HIG U Il (1121-12)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
ofa & om fag fog AS Wt ci21-13, Few, He 5) har kay naam bin Dharig sarot. Without the Name of the Lord, one's ears are cursed.
fies gu farts dtefs fa as Ales FS TTS Ul 121-13, ders, ws 5) jeevan roop bisaar jeeveh tih kat jeevan hot. rahaa-o. Those who forget the Embodiment of Life - what is the point of their lives? ||Pause| |
ug uls nida fine AA SS ae MST I (1121-13, ders, He 5)
khaat peet anayk binjan jaisay bhaar baahak khot.
One who eats and drinks countless delicacies is no more than a donkey, a beast of burden.
nits Uda HoT AN ufeor AA fase AST AS UA (121-14, Fes, He 5)
aath pahar mahaa saram paa-i-aa jaisay birakh jantee jot. ||1]|
Twenty-four hours a day, he endures terrible suffering, like the bull, chained to the oil-press. ||1]|
3fa dus fa ure od A ag yordt FT Il (1121-14, ere, ne 5)
taj gopaal je aan laagay say baho parkaaree rot.
Forsaking the Life of the World, and attached to another, they weep and wail in so many ways.
ad pfs saa Be Ha dfs wus afe UdT NQNUNISN (1121-15, ers, He 5)
kar jor naanak daan maagai har rakha-o kanth parot. ||2||5||13]|
With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this gift; O Lord, please keep me strung around Your Neck. ||2||5||13]|
AUT HIS U Il (1121-16)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
Had Ofe & yfe Hat i 121-16, dere, we 5) santeh Dhoor lay mukh malee. I take the dust of the feet of the Saints and apply it to my face.
TS ngs Het yss 3a oy fmufa ast i TIS il (121-16, Fers, us 5)
gunaa achut sadaa pooran nah dokh bi-aapahi kalee. rahaa-o.
Hearing of the Imperishable, Eternally Perfect Lord, pain does not afflict me, even in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||Pause] |
Gd Tals aaH Ada Uda SS Oss Tat I (1121-17, dere, we 5)
gur bachan kaaraj sarab pooran eet oot na halee.
Through the Guru's Word, all affairs are resolved, and the mind is not tossed about here and there.
ys Sa nifsa Aves use fad wrafs o AST WAU (121-17, sere, we 5)
parabh ayk anik sarbat pooran bikhai agan na jalee. ||1]|
Whoever sees the One God to be pervading in all the many beings, does not burn in the fire of corruption. ||1]|
afd st Be BA nus Afs ASt Tat Il 1121-18, Aes, He 5) geh bhujaa leeno daas apno jot jotee ralee. The Lord grasps His slave by the arm, and his light merges into the Light.
Us Bdo Ade Mag wifes aoa ata Afar Bat WIAWENASI (1121-19, Xevs, Hs 5)
parabh charan saran anaath aa-i-o naanak har sang chalee. ||2||6]|14]| Nanak, the orphan, has come seeking the Sanctuary of God's Feet; O Lord, he walks with You. ||2]|6||14]]|
AUT HIG U Il (1121-19)
kaydaaraa mehlaa 5. Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
UST AA22
dfs & oH at Ho FS Il (1122-1, aera, v2 5) har kay naam kee man ruchai. My mind is filled with yearning for the Name of the Lord.
afe AHS nse uss ASS Sst FS i TIS Mt 1122-1, Aerw, ws 5)
kot saat anand pooran jalat chhaatee bujhai. rahaa-o. I am totally filled with tranquility and bliss; the burning desire within has been quenched. ||Pause| |
As Hofa sos yrst ufss Bad ws i (1122-1, ders, v8 5) sant maarag chalat paraanee patit uDhray muchai. Walking on the path of the Saints, millions of mortal sinners have been saved.
30 Ho at Sait HASta nifsa Steq AT NA (1122-2, ders, v2 5)
rayn jan kee lagee mastak anik tirath suchai. ||1]|
One who applies the dust of the feet of the humble to his forehead, is purified, as if he has bathed at countless sacred shrines. ||1]|
3do AHS fomre stsfe ufe wefs Amit AS i (1122-2, ders, 2 5)
charan kamal Dhi-aan bheetar ghat ghateh su-aamee sujhai.
Meditating on His Lotus Feet deep within, one realizes the Lord and Master in each and every heart.
Hofs fz wurg soa Safe AH Sdt BSF UQUDNWI (1122-3, Hers, Hz 5) Saran dayv apaar naanak bahur jam nahee lujhai. ||2||7||15]|
In the Sanctuary of the Divine, Infinite Lord, Nanak shall never again be tortured by the Messenger of Death. ||2||7]|15]|
aa £5 HIS U (1122-4)
kaydaaraa chhant mehlaa 5 Kaydaaraa Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsare YATE Il (1122-4)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: firs He UISH fumrfanr i TIE it (1122-5, Aera, 2 5)
mil mayray pareetam pi-aari-aa. rahaa-o.
Please meet me, O my Dear Beloved. ||Pause| |
ufe sfoor Aaay HA uae fast I (1122-5, ders, v3 5)
poor rahi-aa sarbatar mai so purakh biDhaataa. He is All-pervading amongst all, the Architect of Destiny.
Hed ys a ofa shot HSS Aft AST I (1122-5, Fersr, He 5) maarag parabh kaa har kee-aa santan sang jaataa. The Lord God has created His Path, which is known in the Society of the Saints.
H30 Afar wst usy faorst wife wie sefs feafemr il (1122-6, ders, He 5)
santan sang jaataa purakh biDhaataa ghat ghat nadar nihaali-aa.
The Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is known in the Society of the Saints; You are seen in each and every heart.
A Adot ne Hea AY Ue f3q Sdt FS urfemr Il (1122-6, Aers, ve 5)
jo sarnee aavai sarab sukh paavai til nahee bhannai ghaali-aa.
One who comes to His Sanctuary, finds absolute peace; not even a bit of his work goes unnoticed.
dfs ae fofa are AoA Have YH Hd" GA HST II (1122-7, Hers, He 5)
har gun niDh gaa-ay sahj subhaa-ay paraym mahaa ras maataa.
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue, is easily, naturally intoxicated with the supreme, sublime essence of divine love.
ood VA Sd AsEst 5 uss use fears WAU (1122-8, dere, we 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee too pooran purakh biDhaataa. ||1]|
Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; You are the Perfect Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1]|
dfs UH sas AS sfoor Ayre as ATS Il (1122-8, Aes, us 5)
har paraym bhagat jan bayDhi-aa say aan kat jaahee.
The Lord's humble servant is pierced through with loving devotion to Him; where else can he go?
Hig faa ot Ad Ae fae ufo urd II (1122-9, dere, He 5) meen bichhohaa naa sahai jal bin mar paahee. The fish cannot endure separation, and without water, it will die.
ofs fag faS adit gu fate Ada ofa Fe fimfmr i 1122-9, ders, ns 5)
har bin ki-o rahee-ai dookh kin sahee-ai chaatrik boond pi-aasi-aa.
Without the Lord, how can I survive? How can I endure the pain? I am like the rainbird, thirsty for the rain-drop.
aa fe fare vaet AY ue Hon fate yartror i (1122-10, dere, 2 5)
kab rain bihaavai chakvee sukh paavai sooraj kiran pargaasi-aa. "When will the night pass?," asks the chakvi bird. "I shall find peace only when the rays of the sun shine on me."
Ufa ath Ho war feon Aster mates ols Te Wet i (1122-10, Fea, He 5)
har daras man laagaa dinas sabhaagaa an-din har gun gaahee.
My mind is attached to the Blessed Vision of the Lord. Blessed are the nights and days, when I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
Sst UH ad Asst as ala fag yre fears WI 1122-11, Fera, ne 5)
naanak daas kahai baynantee kat har bin paraan tikaahee. ||2||
Slave Nanak utters this prayer; without the Lord, how can the breath of life continue to flow through me? ||2||
WA fast faG tadt as AST urs It 1122-12, aera, He 5) saas binaa ji-o dayhuree kat sobhaa paavai. Without the breath, how can the body obtain glory and fame?
won fagat ATG AG fag fears 3 mrs Il (1122-12, Fer, 3 5)
daras bihoonaa saaDh jan khin tikan na aavai.
Without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, the humble, holy person does not find peace, even for an instant.
ofa fae HW JS" SIA A ATS" VIG AHS HS Ser th (1122-10, Hers, ve 5)
har bin jo rahnaa narak so sahnaa charan kamal man bayDhi-aa.
Those who are without the Lord suffer in hell; my mind is pierced through with the Lord's Feet.
dfs aha saat ath foe wait asa o ate feaftor i (1122-13, dere, He 5)
har rasik bairaagee naam liv laagee katahu na jaa-ay nikhayDhi-aa.
The Lord is both sensual and unattached; lovingly attune yourself to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. No one can ever deny Him.
dfs fa afe feet AO fa soe" A AY nif @ HS I (1122-14, Aes, He 5)
har si-o jaa-ay milnaa saaDhsang rahnaa so sukh ank na maavai.
Go and meet with the Lord, and dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; no one can contain that peace within his being.
dg faurs aaa a AoMit ofa vaog Afar ANTS ISI (1122-14, Aare, 2 5) hohu kirpaal naanak kay su-aamee har charnah sang samaavai. ||3]|| Please be kind to me, O Lord and Master of Nanak, that I may merge in You. ||3]|
das dns us es ofs age OS I 1122-15, ers, 2 5)
khojat khojat parabh milay har karunaa Dhaaray.
Searching and searching, I have met with my Lord God, who has showered me with His Mercy.
fogae oly wiovg H Sdt Su sted Il (1122-16, ders, He 5) nirgun neech anaath mai nahee dokh beechaaray. I am unworthy, a lowly orphan, but He does not even consider my faults.
oot ty ses use AY ATS ures fase serfonr it (1122-16, ders, 8 5)
nahee dokh beechaaray pooran sukh saaray paavan birad bakhaani-aa.
He does not consider my faults; He has blessed me with Perfect Peace. It is said that it is His Way to purify us.
sats eee Als vive afar wie wie ys AHMSMM I (1122-17, ders, we 5)
bhagat vachhal sun anchlo gahi-aa ghat ghat poor samaani-aa.
Hearing that He is the Love of His devotees, I have grasped the hem of His robe. He is totally permeating each and every heart.
He Aad ufeor Aon HStfenr HOH HIS SY TS Il (1122-17, ders, He 5)
sukh saagro paa-i-aa sahj subhaa-i-aa janam maran dukh haaray.
I have found the Lord, the Ocean of Peace, with intuitive ease; the pains of birth and death are gone.
aT as BS Soa SH MUS TH OH Sfs Ta ISIN (1122-18, Fes, He 5)
kar geh leenay naanak daas apnay raam naam ur haaray. ||4||1||
Taking him by the hand, the Lord has saved Nanak, His slave; He has woven the garland of His Name into his heart. ||4]|1]]|
UST AA23B Ta Aes wat adte A at 1123-1)
raag kaydaaraa banee kabeer jee-o kee Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (1123-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Cnsfs fee eC faashts sag HS uifsHar I (1123-2, err, sas aie Fh ustat nindaa do-oo bibarjit tajahu maan abhimaanaa. Those who ignore both praise and slander, who reject egotistical pride and conceit,
BI AIS AH ats Wats 3 Hats SoS WAU (1123-2, Aer, sas sets Ft) lohaa kanchan sam kar jaaneh tay moorat bhagvaanaa. ||1| | who look alike upon iron and gold - they are the very image of the Lord God. ||1]|
3a He Sa org aet Il 1123-3, Aes, sas adits Ah tayraa jan ayk aaDh ko-ee. Hardly anyone is a humble servant of Yours, O Lord.
aH au a3 Hg fascfas ofe ue dS At NA TIS I (1123-3, Few, sas adits Hh kaam kroDh lobh moh bibarjit har pad cheen"ai so-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Ignoring sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment, such a person becomes aware of the Lord's Feet. ||1]||Pause| |
dH TE 3H We AS Te adn fos Sct AS fer I 0123-4, Aes, sas adits th
raj gun tam gun sat gun kahee-ai ih tayree sabh maa-i-aa.
Raajas, the quality of energy and activity; Taamas, the quality of darkness and inertia; and Satvas, the quality of purity and light, are all called the creations of Maya, Your illusion.
aa ue ag A og de f8q dt UaH Us Uso NQH 1123-4, Aes, sas aes HA) cha-uthay pad ka-o jo nar cheen"ai tin" hee param pad paa-i-aa. ||2|| That man who realizes the fourth state - he alone obtains the supreme state. ||2||
shea sas 3H Afe HAH Ae ad fETaTHT I (1123-5, Aes, sas ate FH)
tirath barat naym such sanjam sadaa rahai nihkaamaa.
Amidst pilgrimages, fasting, rituals, purification and self-discipline, he remains always without thought of reward.
sno wg Hfenr gH yor fesEs MISH IAT SII (1123-5, aes, sas ets Fh) tarisnaa ar maa-i-aa bharam chookaa chitvat aatam raamaa. ||3]|
Thirst and desire for Maya and doubt depart, remembering the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3]|
fro Hefs cue ugarfior nigarg So SAT Il (1123-6, Fes, sas adits Ft) jin mandar deepak pargaasi-aa anDhkaar tah naasaa. When the temple is illuminated by the lamp, its darkness is dispelled.
fogs ufs so gH oar ate ate AS SAT BIA (1123-7, dex, sas ats A) nirbha-o poor rahay bharam bhaagaa kahi kabeer jan daasaa. ||4]|1]|
The Fearless Lord is All-pervading. Doubt has run away, says Kabeer, the Lord's humble slave. ||4]|1]]|
fxodt sofaor atat star faodt eGa Furst Il (1123-7, aes, sas aete FH) kinhee banji-aa kaa’see taa“baa kinhee la-ug supaaree. Some deal in bronze and copper, some in cloves and betel nuts.
Hag sofsor on diffe ar nat du DHS NU (1123-8, Few, sas ate Fh
santahu banji-aa naam gobid kaa aisee khayp hamaaree. ||1]|
The Saints deal in the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. Such is my merchandise as well. ||1]|
ofa & oH a fant i 1123-8, Fes, sas adie Hh) har kay naam kay bi-aapaaree. I am a trader in the Name of the Lord.
ote ofe sfsur faoisa gfe wet AAS a TIS il (1123-9, Fer, sas alte Fh heeraa haath charhi-aa nirmolak chhoot ga-ee sansaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The priceless diamond has come into my hands. I have left the world behind. ||1]|Pause] |
And we 38 Au oa AS a faSTet I (1123-9, Aes, sas adits Ah
saachay laa-ay ta-o sach laagay saachay kay bi-uhaaree.
When the True Lord attached me, then I was attached to Truth. I am a trader of the True Lord.
At SAS A aS VHS uTe ATS SoSH WMI (1123-10, ew, sas aes FH) saachee basat kay bhaar chalaa-ay pahuchay jaa-ay bhandaaree. ||2]| I have loaded the commodity of Truth; It has reached the Lord, the Treasurer. ||2]|
wtufo Jao AetId Hoa wm FT uUTATSH Il (1123-10, Aes, sas ets Ah) aapeh ratan javaahar maanik aapai hai paasaaree. He Himself is the pearl, the jewel, the ruby; He Himself is the jeweller.
nm vd fer wm sore fogee J fammrdt 3il (1123-11, keer, sas adits Th aapai dah dis aap chalaavai nihchal hai bi-aapaaree. ||3]| He Himself spreads out in the ten directions. The Merchant is Eternal and Unchanging.
[I3]|
Ho afs ao Hels afe Us fare dfs sfe st I 1123-11, aes, gas atte Ff)
man kar bail surat kar paidaa gi-aan gon bhar daaree.
My mind is the bull, and meditation is the road; I have filled my packs with spiritual wisdom, and loaded them on the bull.
ads ads Hod 3 Asg foadt du THA ISN 1123-12, Few, sas ate Ah kahat kabeer sunhu ray santahu nibhee khayp hamaaree. ||4||2]| Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: my merchandise has reached its destination! ||4]|2| |
dt ames aets ve vfs Cad ueg fers? il (1123-13, aes, sas ats Hh)
ree kalvaar gavaar moodh mat ulto pavan firaava-o.
You barbaric brute, with your primitive intellect - reverse your breath and turn it inward.
HO Hae He As sot mifys OS gorse AU (1123-13, Few, sas aes Hh)
man matvaar mayr sar bhaathee amrit Dhaar chu-aava-o. ||1||
Let your mind be intoxicated with the stream of Ambrosial Nectar which trickles down from the furnace of the Tenth Gate. ||1]|
aod sébor an at wave I (1123-14, Aare, sas adits rh) bolhu bha-ee-aa raam kee duhaa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, call on the Lord.
uleg HS Ae fs vases Aon fimrm geet al TIS Ul 1123-14, Few, sas ast Ah peevhu sant sadaa mat durlabh sehjay pi-aas bujhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Saints, drink in this wine forever; it is so difficult to obtain, and it quenches your thirst so easily. ||1||Pause]|
3 fate we ate aS asfe afs oA ure ret II (1123-15, Few, sas adits Fh)
bhai bich bhaa-o bhaa-ay ko-oo boojheh har ras paavai bhaa-ee.
In the Fear of God, is the Love of God. Only those few who understand His Love obtain the sublime essence of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
a3 we nifys As dt yfs sve fSnfa Ubret Qn (1123-15, enn, sas afte FH)
jaytay ghat amrit sabh hee meh bhaavai tiseh pee-aa-ee. ||2||
As many hearts as there are - in all of them, is His Ambrosial Nectar; as He pleases, He causes them to drink it in. ||2]|
Sddt Sa OF VISH Wes sata Jove I (1123-16, Aes, sas adie Ah
nagree aykai na-o darvaajay Dhaavat baraj rahaa-ee.
There are nine gates to the one city of the body; restrain your mind from escaping through them.
fact se SAS eg ws TT HS der gee SI (1123-16, era, sas aes Fh)
tarikutee chhootai dasvaa dar khool"ai taa man kheevaa bhaa-ee. ||3]|
When the knot of the three qualities is untied, then the Tenth Gate opens up, and the mind is intoxicated, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3]]|
mig ue ufs su 3d OA ate aaa Stora I 1123-17, Few, sas alte Fh
abhai pad poor taap tah naasay kahi kabeer beechaaree.
When the mortal fully realizes the state of fearless dignity, then his sufferings vanish; so says Kabeer after careful deliberation.
Cue ves feo ne ufeur AA dS wrt ISIS (1123-17, Aew, sas adits Th ubat chalantay ih mad paa-i-aa jaisay kho“d khumaaree. ||4/|3]|
Turning away from the world, I have obtained this wine, and I am intoxicated with it. [41131]
am au fear & wld afs adt Sa wreat Il (1123-18, Fear, sas acta Ht)
kaam kroDh tarisnaa kay leenay gat nahee aykai jaanee.
You are engrossed with unsatisfied sexual desire and unresolved anger; you do not know the State of the One Lord.
Set nrg as 3 AS ofS He fas west NA (1123-18, ders, sas ata Fh) footee aakhai kachhoo na soojhai bood moo-ay bin paanee. ||1|| Your eyes are blinded, and you see nothing at all. You drown and die without water.
[21
UST A928
a. AN AN
UOs AS SS SS CST Il (1124-1, aera’, gas aaa Ah) chalat kat taydhay taydhay taydhay. Why do you walk in that crooked, zig-zag way?
wAfs 3oH fae a He vada dt ax as NU FHS Ml (1124-1, Sew, sas alta HH)
asat charam bistaa kay moonday durganDh hee kay baydhay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are nothing more than a bundle of bones, wrapped in skin, filled with manure; you give off such a rotten smell! ||1]|Pause] |
TH 3 AUT AES FH FS SH SHG SG UI Il (1124-2, aos, sas aete FH)
raam na japahu kavan bharam bhoolay tum tay kaal na dooray.
You do not meditate on the Lord. What doubts have confused and deluded you? Death is not far away from you!
mise 30 ats feg 3q Tag Is MEAS YT QM (1124-2, err, sas alte Fh)
anik jatan kar ih tan raakho rahai avasthaa pooray. ||2||
Making all sorts of efforts, you manage to preserve this body, but it shall only survive until its time is up. ||2]|
minus athe ae 5 TS four t aT uTt Il (1124-3, Few, sas alte Fh aapan kee-aa kachhoo na hovai ki-aa ko karai paraanee. By one's own efforts, nothing is done. What can the mere mortal accomplish?
w faq we Afsag 3S Sa SH Swat IBM (1124-4, Aes, sas adits Th jaa tis bhaavai satgur bhaytai ayko naam bakhaanee. ||3]||
When it pleases the Lord, the mortal meets the True Guru, and chants the Name of the One Lord. ||3]|
aot & wget ufs sAS SHES ST wifes I (1124-4, ders, sas acta Fh) baloo-aa kay gharoo-aa meh bastay fulvat dayh a-i-aanay. You live in a house of sand, but you still puff up your body - you ignorant fool!
ag ade fo oH 3 BIS8 gs ATs fimrs Iii (124-5, dew, sas ats FH) kaho kabeer jih raam na chayti-o booday bahut si-aanay. ||4||4||
Says Kabeer, those who do not remember the Lord may be very clever, but they still drown. ||4||4]|
Sut Ua SS TS Bat ts WS Il (1124-5, Fors, sas acta FH)
taydhee paag taydhay chalay laagay beeray khaan.
Your turban is crooked, and you walk crooked; and now you have started chewing betel leaves.
a8 gals fe aH 3 aemt AS aH es UI (1124-6, aes, sas ats Ht)
bhaa-o bhagat si-o kaaj na kachhoo-ai mayro kaam deevaan. ||1]|
You have no use at all for loving devotional worship; you say you have business in court. ||1||
on farfes 3 mifsrfe i (124-7, ae, sas acts Ff) raam bisaari-o hai abhimaan. In your egotistical pride, you have forgotten the Lord.
afea anHot Ho Hest Ufe UfY AT HS NAN TIS Wt 1124-7, Few, sas aes Ah kanik kaamnee mahaa sundree paykh paykh sach maan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon your gold, and your very beautiful wife, you believe that they are permanent. ||1||Pause| |
wed 36 fears no ne fes fafa mia feos ii 124-8, aes, saz acts zh)
laalach jhooth bikaar mahaa mad ih biDh a-oDh bihaan. You are engrossed in greed, falsehood, corruption and great arrogance. Your life is passing away.
af adte nis at Sa ure oat are foarte Quill (1124-8, devs, sas ate Ff)
kahi kabeer ant kee bayr aa-ay laago kaal nidaan. ||2||5|| Says Kabeer, at the very last moment, death will come and seize you, you fool! 2115] |
ats fea ntuat aGals 3% aATE Il (1124-9, Few, sas acts A)
chaar din apnee na-ubat chalay bajaa-ay. The mortal beats the drum for a few days, and then he must depart.
fezoa udion adétor nd Af o ae B ATE A ToS Il 1124-9, Aer, sas adie HH itnak khatee-aa gathee-aa matee-aa sang na kachh lai jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With so much wealth and cash and buried treasure, still, he cannot take anything with him. ||1]||Pause] |
feodt Sot fradt FS word wG Afar fe i (1124-10, aes, sas aes Ah
dihree baithee mihree rovai du-aarai la-o sang maa-ay.
Sitting on the threshhold, his wife weeps and wails; his mother accompanies him to the outer gate.
Hide ofa AS Ba acs fife dm fea WE NU 124-01, Few, sas adte FH)
marhat lag sabh log kutamb mil hans ikaylaa jaa-ay. ||1]||
All the people and relatives together go to the crematorium, but the swan-soul must go home all alone. ||1]|
@ As @ fas = ug wee safe 5 Se Me I 124-11, aes, sas ade vai sut vai bit vai pur paatan bahur na daykhai aa-ay. Those children, that wealth, that city and town - he shall not come to see them again.
aS ads TH at & fAneg ASH Mose ATE NQINEN (4124-12, Ae, sas aete FH) kahat kabeer raam kee na simrahu janam akaarath jaa-ay. ||2||6] |
Says Kabeer, why do you not meditate on the Lord? Your life is uselessly slipping away! ||2||6]|
Ta aes arat seen AS at 1124-13) raag kaydaaraa banee ravidaas jee-o kee Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsars ure i (1124-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ue AGH AG Anas J ofa gals foge ats i (124-14, aes, sas fea th)
khat karam kul sanjugat hai har bhagat hirdai naahi.
One who performs the six religious rituals and comes from a good family, but who does not have devotion to the Lord in his heart,
TIovsde o AG ste Hus 3f% ANTS WAU (1124-14, Fer, sas sfeerA Hh
charnaarbind na kathaa bhaavai supach tul samaan. ||1||
one who does not appreciate talk of the Lord's Lotus Feet, is just like an outcaste, a pariah. ||1]|
3 fas dfs 33 MSS Il (1124-15, Aen, sas afeen Hh)
ray chit chayt chayt achayt. Be conscious, be conscious, be conscious, O my unconscious mind.
aI o ToHlats Sy il 1124-15, Few, sas afer FH) kaahay na baalmeekahi daykh. Why do you not look at Baalmeek?
fan wt 3 fas uefs omfes on sats fare al TIS It (1124-15, Aevs, sas sheen Fh) kis jaat tay kih padeh amri-o raam bhagat bisaykh. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
From such a low social status, what a high status he obtained! Devotional worship to the Lord is sublime! ||1||Pause] |
Aue AZ MATS AS 3 AGA SS VS Il (1124-16, dew, sas seen Hh) Su-aan satar ajaat sabh tay krisan laavai hayt. The killer of dogs, the lowest of all, was lovingly embraced by Krishna.
Sa quT faor Aad Sie SA USA MMi (1124-16, Fes, sas seen Fh) log bapuraa ki-aa saraahai teen lok parvays. ||2|| See how the poor people praise him! His praise extends throughout the three worlds.
21 |
mH fig oss aud ae dfs a uth it (1124-17, dew, sas sheen Ah ajaamal pingulaa lubhat kunchar ga-ay har kai paas. Ajaamal, Pingulaa, Lodhia and the elephant went to the Lord.
mA gous farsd 3 fas 3 safe SSeA WANA (1124-17, Few, sas shee Fh)
aisay durmat nistaray too ki-o na tareh ravidaas. ||3||1]|
Even such evil-minded beings were emancipated. Why should you not also be saved, O Ravi Daas? ||3]||1]|
UST A92Qu
Ta SIG HIS 9 we 9 VUE (1125-1) raag bhairo mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe ATS on ass usy fos faseg uiors Hats mist AS aT YAMS I 1125-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
33 3 wats fag 3 TE i (1125-4, 33, Hs 1) tujh tay baahar kichhoo na ho-ay. Without You, nothing happens.
3 afs afs cuts arate ALS NAM (1125-4, 3a, Hs 1) too kar kar daykheh jaaneh so-ay. ||1]| You create the creatures, and gazing on them, you know them. ||1||
foot adit fas adt & ATE I (1125-4, S58, He 1) ki-aa kahee-ai kichh kahee na jaa-ay. What can I say? I cannot say anything.
A fae od AS Sot SATE NU TIS th 1125-5, aS, ve jo kichh ahai sabh tayree rajaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever exists, is by Your Will. ||Pause| |
A fae aget A Sd UTA I 1125-5, 358, He 1) jo kichh karnaa so tayrai paas. Whatever is to be done, rests with You.
fan vid ate wrgentt QI (1125-5, 3a8, He 1) kis aagai keechai ardaas. ||2|| Unto whom should I offer my prayer? ||2| |
MUS HSS! Sot Sat Il (1125-6, aS, He 1) aakhan sunnaa tayree banee. I speak and hear the Bani of Your Word.
3 um Arata Aga fesTet W3I (1125-6, 338, He 1) too aapay jaaneh sarab vidaanee. ||3]| You Yourself know all Your Wondrous Play. ||3] |
ad age we rfp i (1125-6, 3s, He 1) karay karaa-ay jaanai aap. You Yourself act, and inspire all to act; only You Yourself know.
soa ae afy Caf us (1125-7, Sa, He 1) naanak daykhai thaap uthaap. ||4||1|| Says Nanak, You, Lord, see, establish and disestablish. ||4]|1]|
qe Afsars yArfe it (1125-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH SIS HIS 4 Wea 2 I (1125-9) raag bhairo mehlaa 1 ghar 2. Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, Second House:
qd a Rafe 3d nfs as fFefea gore 3g I 1125-9, 358, 48 1)
gur kai sabad taray mun kaytay indraadik barahmaad taray.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, so many silent sages have been saved; Indra and Brahma have also been saved.
Hod Hows Sunt Ae aS Te USAT fs us WAM (1125-9, eG, He 1)
sanak sanandan tapsee jan kaytay gur parsaadee paar paray. ||1||
Sanak, Sanandan and many humble men of austerity, by Guru's Grace, have been carried across to the other side. ||1]||
gene fae Hae fa sd | 1125-10, Se, 42 1)
bhavjal bin sabdai ki-o taree-ai.
Without the Word of the Shabad, how can anyone cross over the terrifying world- ocean?
omy faa na df faurfimr efaar sfe safe nd 9 TIE th (1125-10, 38, v2 1) naam binaa jag rog bi-aapi-aa dubiDhaa dub dub maree-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is entangled in the disease of duality, and is drowned, drowned, and dies. ||1]||Pause] |
Tg eS Tg ney mse fesse Ast as at AS Il (1125-11, 3G, ve 1)
gur dayvaa gur alakh abhayvaa taribhavan sojhee gur kee sayvaa.
The Guru is Divine; the Guru is Inscrutable and Mysterious. Serving the Guru, the three worlds are known and understood.
nm afs adt afe as ufeur nee wiser QI (1125-12, 3a8, He 1)
aapay daat karee gur daatai paa-i-aa alakh abhayvaa. ||2||
The Guru, the Giver, has Himself given me the Gift; I have obtained the Inscrutable, Mysterious Lord. ||2||
HO TH HO HO 3 Hout HOA" Hold AHTET II (1125-12, Sa@, Hs 1)
man raajaa man man tay maani-aa mansaa maneh samaa-ee.
The mind is the king; the mind is appeased and satisfied through the mind itself, and desire is stilled in the mind.
HO Hat Ho faofA faGalt He AHS TS aet Sil 1125-13, ss8, ve 1)
man jogee man binas bi-ogee man samjhai gun gaa-ee. ||3]||
The mind is the Yogi, the mind wastes away in separation from the Lord; singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the mind is instructed and reformed. ||3]|
ad 3 Ho Wher Age Stofenr 3 fess AAS I (1125-14, 358, He 1)
gur tay man maari-aa sabad veechaari-aa tay virlay sansaaraa.
How very rare are those in this world who, through the Guru, subdue their minds, and contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
aoa Atos stuffs ote ATS Aafe FEASTS NSAI (1125-14, Fe, He 1)
naanak saahib bharipur leenaa saach sabad nistaaraa. ||4||1||2|| O Nanak, our Lord and Master is All-pervading; through the True Word of the Shabad, we are emancipated. ||4]|1||2||
SIS HIS Y I (1125-15) bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
oat fenfe odt 36 dio afe difsor fafa ars i 1125-15, 358, ve 1)
nainee darisat nahee tan heenaa jar jeeti-aa sir kaalo.
The eyes lose their sight, and the body withers away; old age overtakes the mortal, and death hangs over his head.
TU FT TIA Sot AT fas SF AH WS UI (1125-16, 38, we
roop rang rahas nahee saachaa ki-o chhodai jam jaalo. ||1]|| Beauty, loving attachment and the pleasures of life are not permanent. How can anyone escape from the noose of death? ||1]|
urat ofs afl ABH AES i (1125-16, Fa@, He 1) paraanee har jap janam ga-i-o. O mortal, meditate on the Lord - your life is passing away!
UST WAVE
Arg Hee fag aay o Sef fase Aon SES an FIC il 1126-1, Fa, we 1)
saach sabad bin kabahu na chhootas birthaa janam bha-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the True Word of the Shabad, you shall never be released, and your life shall be totally useless. ||1]|Pause| |
36 Hfs aH au IG HHS afes ute mifs arc tt (1126-1, 358, v2 1)
tan meh kaam kroDh ha-o mamtaa kathin peer at bhaaree.
Within the body are sexual desire, anger, egotism and attachment. This pain is so great, and so difficult to endure.
Toute TH AUG TA IHS fea fafa 3g J ISH MM (1126-2, Ss, v2 1)
gurmukh raam japahu ras rasnaa in biDh tar too taaree. ||2]|
As Gurmukh, chant the Lord's Name, and savor it with your tongue; in this way, you Shall cross over to the other side. ||2]|
FIs AIS nats set Tet Hae Hoe Sot sfswr i 1126-2, Fs, we bahray karan akal bha-ee hochhee sabad sahj nahee boojhi-aa.
Your ears are deaf, and your intellect is worthless, and still, you do not intuitively understand the Word of the Shabad.
WOH ueTsE HoHfe afeur fas ae vig 3 AfSHr Si 1126-3, 398, He 1)
janam padaarath manmukh haari-aa bin gur anDh na soojhi-aa. ||3]|
The self-willed manmukh wastes this priceless human life and loses it. Without the Guru, the blind person cannot see. ||3] |
ad GerR orn foot Hon fomrfs Sarat ii ci26-4, 338, v2 1
rahai udaas aas niraasaa sahj Dhi-aan bairaagee.
Whoever remains detached and free of desire in the midst of desire - and whoever, unattached, intuitively meditates on the Celestial Lord
yeets aoa Tenfe sefA oH oth fos Sait SNNSI (1126-4, Fa, v2 1)
paranvat naanak gurmukh chhootas raam naam liv laagee. ||4||2||3]| - prays Nanak, as Gurmukh, he is released. He is lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]]|]|2]|3]|
SIS HIS Y I (1126-5)
bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
Sat TS we as find Jo ST THO Il (1126-5, Sas, 4s
bhoo“dee chaal charan kar khisray tuchaa dayh kumlaanee.
His walk becomes weak and clumsy, his feet and hands shake, and the skin of his body is withered and wrinkled.
oat Ufa ade SE AIS HOHfY BH SO AST NA (1126-5, a8, HH 1) naytree DhunDh karan bha-ay bahray manmukh naam na jaanee. ||1||
His eyes are dim, his ears are deaf, and yet, the self-willed manmukh does not know the Naam. ||1]]|
mig for utfenr Afar mire Il (1126-6, 3a8, Hz 1) anDhulay ki-aa paa-i-aa jag aa-ay. O blind man, what have you obtained by coming into the world?
oy fee odt Te at AS TS HS TST] Ul TIS il (1126-6, Fs, we 1)
raam ridai nahee gur kee sayvaa chaalay mool gavaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is not in your heart, and you do not serve the Guru. After wasting your capital, you shall have to depart. ||1]|Pause| |
fave dfa adt ofs wat wa FS Sa Ser I 1126-7, Sa8, ne 1)
jihvaa rang nahee har raatee jab bolai tab feekay.
Your tongue is not imbued with the Love of the Lord; whatever you say is tasteless and insipid.
HS Hor ot fee fenruft un se ae Sfs o Ste MM (1126-7, 3s, He 1) sant janaa kee nindaa vi-aapas pasoo bha-ay kaday hohi na neekay. ||2]| You indulge in slander of the Saints; becoming a beast, you shall never be noble. ||2| |
nifys a oA feast ufenr Afsara vfs frre i 1126-8, S58, ve 1)
amrit kaa ras virlee paa-i-aa satgur may! milaa-ay.
Only a few obtain the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Amrit, united in Union with the True Guru.
Ae Bd Ase se odt mrfeor se BI AS AVES ISll (1126-9, Fa, He 1)
jab lag sabad bhayd nahee aa-i-aa tab lag kaal santaa-ay. ||3]|
As long as the mortal does not come to understand the mystery of the Shabad, the Word of God, he shall continue to be tormented by death. ||3]|
MS I TI Ug AAT 3 WaltA Sa Ty AfsMMrs Il (1126-9, 3s@, ws 1)
an ko dar ghar kabhoo na jaanas ayko dar sachi-aaraa.
Whoever finds the door of the One True Lord, does not know any other house or door.
ad usAtfe usH ue ufeor soa ad feast ISIS (1126-10, a8, Hs 1)
gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa naanak kahai vichaaraa. ||4||3]|4] | By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; so says poor Nanak. ||4||3]|4||
SI HIS Y I (1126-11)
bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
Haat dfs Aes ate ad feon Avie aefenr | (1126-11, 388, v2 1)
saglee rain sovat gal faahee dinas janjaal gavaa-i-aa.
He spends the entire night in sleep; the noose is tied around his neck. His day is wasted in worldly entanglements.
fs ue wat odt us wfonr fafs feg Aas Curfer na ci26-11, a8, He 1) khin pal gharhee nahee parabh jaani-aa jin ih jagat upaa-i-aa. ||1|| He does not know God, who created this world, for a moment, for even an instant.
[21
Ho S fa seth ey ard i (1126-12, 338, He 1) man ray ki-o chhootas dukh bhaaree. O mortal, how will you escape this terrible disaster?
foor & nreth four & Wefh TH Au Teast Al FIC Il 1126-12, Fa, ve 1)
ki-aa lay aavas ki-aa lay jaavas raam japahu gunkaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
What did you bring with you, and what will you take away? Meditate on the Lord, the Most Worthy and Generous Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
Sug aes HoHy HfS det nfs vid fAfs Gor i 126-13, 338, we
oo’Dha-o kaval manmukh mat hochhee man anDhai sir DhanDhaa. The heart-lotus of the self-willed manmukh is upside-down; his intellect is shallow; his mind is blind, and his head is entangled in worldly affairs.
ae fares net fafs 3d fas ove af Sar QM (1126-14, Sa8, He 1)
kaal bikaal sadaa sir tayrai bin naavai gal fanDhaa. ||2| |
Death and re-birth constantly hang over your head; without the Name, your neck shall be caught in the noose. ||2]|
Sadt TS Oz sfo nigs nae Aas odt SeT Il 1126-14, Fa, v8 1) dagree chaal naytar fun anDhulay sabad surat nahee bhaa-ee.
Your steps are unsteady, and your eyes are blind; you are not aware of the Word of the Shabad, O Sibling of Destiny.
WAZ 82 3 Te 3 fer nigee do are ail (1126-15, Sa@, v2 1)
saastar bayd tarai gun hai maa-i-aa anDhula-o DhanDh kamaa-ee. ||3]|
The Shaastras and the Vedas keep the mortal bound to the three modes of Maya, and so he performs his deeds blindly. ||3]|
wes He wg aT uStA ESHfS farra fegs I (1126-15, Fa, Hz 1)
kho-i-o mool laabh kah paavas durmat gi-aan vihoonay.
He loses his capital - how can he earn any profit? The evil-minded person has no spiritual wisdom at all.
Hae stets TH oA ohm soa ATE Use ISISNUll (1126-16, Ss8, 48 1)
sabad beechaar raam ras chaakhi-aa naanak saach pateenay. ||4]|4]|5|| Contemplating the Shabad, he drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; O Nanak, his faith is confirmed in the Truth. ||4]|]4]|5]|
SI HIS Y Il (1126-17) bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
ad a Afa sd fes ast on safe dia TST I (1126-17, 358, v2 1)
gur kai sang rahai din raatee raam rasan rang raataa.
He remains with the Guru, day and night, and his tongue savors the savory taste of the Lord's Love.
Wed 3 Wel Hae uerafA nists ATS UETST NA (1126-17, 3e8, He 1)
avar na jaanas sabad pachhaanas antar jaan pachhaataa. ||1]||
He does not know any other; he realizes the Word of the Shabad. He knows and realizes the Lord deep within his own being. ||1]|
H Ho MATH Hfe ST] Il (1126-18, 388, He 1) SO jan aisaa mai man bhaavai. Such a humble person is pleasing to my mind.
my ufs wrdufs gst ag at ars AHS NA TIS Il (1126-18, SaS, He 1) aap maar aprampar raataa gur kee kaar kamaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He conquers his self-conceit, and is imbued with the Infinite Lord. He serves the Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
wists ats use fodne urfe use nirer Il (1126-19, Sa, He D
antar baahar purakh niranjan aad purakh aadayso.
Deep within my being, and outside as well, is the Immaculate Lord God. I bow humbly before that Primal Lord God.
we ue nists Aaa fedsts afe sfoor Ay SA NI (1126-19, 3s8, Hz 1)
ghat ghat antar sarab nirantar rav rahi-aa sach vayso. ||2]|
Deep within each and every heart, and amidst all, the Embodiment of Truth is permeating and pervading. ||2||
ust 9929 Afs 33 AY nifys fros fifemr He o Tet I (1127-1, 358, He D
saach ratay sach amrit jihvaa mithi-aa mail na raa-ee. Those who are imbued with Truth - their tongues are tinged with Truth; they do not have even an iota of the filth of falsehood.
fosHe oH uifys oA ohm Rafe gs ufs uret SI (1127-2, 338, Hs 1D
nirmal naam amrit ras chaakhi-aa sabad ratay pat paa-ee. ||3]|
They taste the sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; imbued with the Shabad, they are blessed with honor. ||3]|
dat Tat ffs oo ueth aaufa oth eset i (1127-2, Sa8, ve 1)
gunee gunee mil laahaa paavas gurmukh naam vadaa-ee.
The virtuous meet with the virtuous, and earn the profit; as Gurmukh, they obtain the glorious greatness of the Naam.
Hae wu frets qs AS SA oH AMET NSINUNEN (1127-3, 3s, He 1)
saglay dookh miteh gur sayvaa naanak naam sakhaa-ee. ||4||5]|6]|
All sorrows are erased, by serving the Guru; O Nanak, the Naam is our only Friend and Companion. ||4]|5||6]|
SI HIS Y Il (1127-3)
bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
fase OH Ada US WS Ta USAT UTS | (1127-4, Fa, He 1)
hirdai naam sarab Dhan Dhaaran gur parsaadee paa-ee-dai.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the wealth and support of all; It is enshrined in the heart, by Guru's Grace.
WH Ueda 3 fasta Hon fiorfs fos wet Wall (1127-4, 3s8, v2 1
amar padaarath tay kirtaarath sahj Dhi-aan liv laa-ee-ai. ||1]|
One who gathers this imperishable wealth is fulfilled, and through intuitive meditation, is lovingly focused on the Lord. ||1||
Ho 3 OH sats fs Behn Il 1127-5, 3a8, v2 1) man ray raam bhagat chit laa-ee-ai. O mortal, focus your consciousness on devotional worship of the Lord.
qoute an any afu fose Aon ASt wfs A NA TITS Ut (1127-5, Fa8, nz 1)
gurmukh raam naam jap hirdai sahj saytee ghar jaa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, meditate on the Name of the Lord in your heart, and you shall return to your home with intuitive ease. ||1]|Pause| |
SdH 3e 3C aa 5 Sci OTST WS O WOT Il (1127-6, 338, He 1)
bharam bhayd bha-o kabahu na chhootas aavat jaat na jaanee.
Doubt, separation and fear are never eradicated, and the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation, as long as he does not know the Lord.
fag ofa on & Hats 3 uefa sfa He fas ust HQ (1127-6, 398, He
bin har naam ko mukat na paavas doob mu-ay bin paanee. ||2] | Without the Name of the Lord, no one is liberated; they drown and die without water.
21 |
um aes Raat ufs defk san 8 frefA Tera Il (1127-7, 358, v2 1) DhanDhaa karat saglee pat khovas bharam na mitas gavaaraa. Busy with his worldly affairs, all honor is lost; the ignorant one is not rid of his doubts.
fae ae Hae Hats adt ag dt igs Uo UATE NBII (1127-8, 358, He 1D
bin gur sabad mukat nahee kab hee anDhulay DhanDh pasaaraa. ||3]||
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mortal is never liberated; he remains blindly entangled in the expanse of worldly affairs. ||3] |
mae fadae fA He Wiour Ho dt Ss He Hur Il (1127-8, Fa, Hs 1)
akul niranjan si-o man maani-aa man hee tay man moo-aa.
My mind is pleased and appeased with the Immaculate Lord, who has no ancestry. Through the mind itself, the mind is subdued.
nists wate Sa Went SSA wiST F TT MSIE (1127-9, Fae, Hs 1)
antar baahar ayko jaani-aa naanak avar na doo-aa. ||4]|6||7||
Deep within my being, and outside as well, I know only the One Lord. O Nanak, there is no other at all. ||4]|6]|7]||
SI HIS Y Il (1127-10)
bhairo mehlaa 1. Bhairao, First Mehl:
Was dH Us su UA eT eet fos Sa AG Il (1127-10, Fa@, He
jagan hom punn tap poojaa dayh dukhee nit dookh sahai.
You may give feasts, make burnt offerings, donate to charity, perform austere penance and worship, and endure pain and suffering in the body.
oH oH fag nafs 3 welh Hats ofh aonfe BI NA (1127-10, 38, He 1)
raam naam bin mukat na paavas mukat naam gurmukh lahai. ||1]|
But without the Lord's Name, liberation is not obtained. As Gurmukh, obtain the Naam and liberation. ||1||
oH OH fae fase Afat HOH Il (1127-11, FsB, Hz 1 raam naam bin birthay jag janmaa. Without the Lord's Name, birth into the world is useless.
fry ure fry Sat 38 fag oe faves nfs gHoT NAN TIS Wt (1127-11, Fa, vs 1) bikh khaavai bikh bolee bolai bin naavai nihfal mar bharmanaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Name, the mortal eats poison and speaks poisonous words; he dies fruitlessly, and wanders in reincarnation. ||1]|Pause] |
URSA us forage sure Afr agn fears AT Il 1127-12, Sa8, Hz 1)
pustak paath bi-aakaran vakhaanai sanDhi-aa karam tikaal karai.
The mortal may read scriptures, study grammar and say his prayers three times a day.
fag ag Ase Hats ao yet oH oH fae Cafs HS NI (127-13, 338, He 1D
bin gur sabad mukat kahaa paraanee raam naam bin urajh marai. ||2]|
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, where is liberation, O mortal? Without the Lord's Name, the mortal is entangled and dies. ||2||
33 ose fine Ay Ost Stef Teg ifs SHS AT Il (1127-13, aC, Hz 1)
dand kamandal sikhaa soot Dhotee tirath gavan at bharman karai.
Walking sticks, begging bowls, hair tufts, sacred threads, loin cloths, pilgrimages to sacred shrines and wandering all around
aH oH fag Aifs 3 ore afu ofs ofs on A Ourfa ud ISI (1127-14, 358, He
raam naam bin saa“t na aavai jap har har naam so paar parai. ||3]|
- without the Lord's Name, peace and tranquility are not obtained. One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, crosses over to the other side. ||3]|
Ae’ Hae fe SAH Barret SAS efs 3fs cate Sher I (1127-15, Fa, He 1)
jataa mukat tan bhasam lagaa-ee bastar chhod tan nagan bha-i-aa.
The mortal's hair may be matted and tangled upon his head, and he may smear his body with ashes; he may take off his clothes and go naked.
oH on fag feufs 5 ure fags & sd Sy sfemr Neil (1127-15, 338, He 1)
raam naam bin taripat na aavai kirat kai baa‘Dhai bhaykh bha-i-aa. | |4|
But without the Lord's Name, he is not satisfied; he wears religious robes, but he is bound by the karma of the actions he committed in past lives. ||4]|
nS Hot As Ale af% Hdd AZ ay J Asa Mr I (1127-16, Fee, Hs 1)
jaytay jee-a jant jal thal mahee-al jatar katar too sarab jee-aa.
As many beings and creatures as there are in the water, on the land and in the sky - wherever they are, You are with them all, O Lord.
ad usAtfe ofy 3 AS aS ofa GA Oa SfH Ubor NUNDICH (1127-16, 338, He 1)
gur parsaad raakh lay jan ka-o har ras naanak jhol pee-aa. ||5||7]||8]| By Guru's Grace, please preserve Your humble servant; O Lord, Nanak stirs up this juice, and drinks it in. ||5||7||8]|
Td SI HIS 3 Vue we A (1127-18)
raag bhairo mehlaa 3 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Bhairao, Third Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1127-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ws at Ter & Ado AST I (1127-19, Sa8, He 3) jaat kaa garab na karee-ahu ko-ee. No one should be proud of his social class and status.
gon fie A grane Jet UA (1127-19, 358, v8 3) barahm binday so baraahman ho-ee. ||1]| He alone is a Brahmin, who knows God. ||1||
mts Oo ada 6 Als HIM ASI Il (1127-19, 3s, v2 3) jaat kaa garab na kar moorakh gavaaraa. Do not be proud of your social class and status, you ignorant fool!
Uar qqat fen asa 3 voto ads fears NAN TIS Il (1128-1, Sa8, v1 3)
is garab tay chaleh bahut vikaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. So much sin and corruption comes from this pride. ||1]|Pause] |
aed FIs MTS AS HET Il (1128-1, Se, v2 3) chaaray varan aakhai sabh ko-ee. Everyone says that there are four castes, four social classes.
gon fie 3 AS Gufs Tet NN (1128-1, 358, 18 3) barahm bind tay sabh opat ho-ee. ||2|| They all emanate from the drop of God's Seed. ||2| |
Het Sa Aas AAS Il (1128-2, 3a, ve 3) maatee ayk sagal sansaaraa. The entire universe is made of the same clay.
ag fafa st3 ws AHA ISI (1128-2, Fa, He 3) baho biDh bhaa“day gharhai kum"aaraa. ||3]| The Potter has shaped it into all sorts of vessels. ||3]|
us 33 fife Sot at nierat I (1128-2, Sa8, nz 3) panch tat mil dayhee kaa aakaaraa. The five elements join together, to make up the form of the human body.
ufe efa & ad stars Igil (1128-3, Sa, v2 3) ghat vaDh ko karai beechaaraa. ||4|| Who can say which is less, and which is more? ||4]|
ads sod feg HE aan do Tet I (1128-3, 3a, ne 3) kahat naanak ih jee-o karam banDh ho-ee. Says Nanak, this soul is bound by its actions.
faa Afsae se Hats o det UNAM (128-4, 388, He 3) bin satgur bhaytay mukat na ho-ee. ||5||1]| Without meeting the True Guru, it is not liberated. ||5||1||
SIC HIST 3 Il (1128-4)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
rat fast ufss Saarst i ci28-4, 358, Hs 3)
jogee garihee pandit bhaykh-Dhaaree.
The Yogis, the householders, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the beggars in religious robes
& AS MUS nidarat WAU (1128-4, Fa, we 3) ay sootay apnai aha‘kaaree. ||1]| - they are all asleep in egotism. ||1]|
Htfenr Hfe Hrst afomr AE It (1128-5, a8, He 3) maa-i-aa mad maataa rahi-aa so-ay. They are asleep, intoxicated with the wine of Maya.
WHS Id OHA AES UU! TIS il (1128-5, SW, ws 3) jaagat rahai na moosai ko-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only those who remain awake and aware are not robbed. ||1||Pause| |
A aa fan Afsag fee 1 1128-5, 3a8, ne 3) SO jaagai jis satgur milai. One who has met the True Guru, remains awake and aware.
us es Gy FAAS AF NII (1128-6, 398, ws 3) panch doot oh vasgat karai. ||2|| Such a person overpowers the five thieves. ||2]|
A Wd A Ss ates Il (1128-6, a8, v2 3) SO jaagai jo tat beechaarai. One who contemplates the essence of reality remains awake and aware.
wif Hd Mea ST HTS ISI (1128-6, Sa, v2 3) aap marai avraa nah maarai. ||3]|| He kills his self-conceit, and does not kill anyone else. ||3]|
S A Ss Nb EN
A Wd A Sax ATE Il (1128-7, Sa, He 3)
SO jaagai jo ayko jaanai.
One who knows the One Lord remains awake and aware.
usfasts 23 SZ USE Ill 1128-7, 3a, v2 3) parkirat chhodai tat pachhaanai. ||4|| He abandons the service of others, and realizes the essence of reality. ||4| |
ag zor fete wat afe i (1128-7, 398, ne 3) chahu varnaa vich jaagai ko-ay. Of the four castes, whoever remains awake and aware
WH OS 3 Se AE WUll 1128-8, Sa, 3 3) jamai kaalai tay chhootai so-ay. ||5|| is released from birth and death. ||5]|
AIS SOA AS Ara ALE I (1128-8, Sa, He 3) kahat naanak jan jaagai so-ay. Says Nanak, that humble being remains awake and aware,
famita nite AT at Sat SE WENN (1128-8, 39, 48 3) gi-aan anjan jaa kee naytree ho-ay. ||6||2]| who applies the ointment of spiritual wisdom to his eyes. ||6]|2||
3d HIS 3 Il (1128-9)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Ww aG ge net Agee Il (1128-9, 3a8, v2 3) jaa ka-o raakhai apnee sarnaa-ee. Whoever the Lord keeps in His Sanctuary,
ATS Bal ATS Sw uret MAUI (1128-9, Sa, 2 3) saachay laagai saachaa fal paa-ee. ||1]| is attached to the Truth, and receives the fruit of Truth. ||1]|
J Wo & fAG adT UATE II (1128-9, 3a, ne 3) ray jan kai si-o karahu pukaaraa. O mortal, unto whom will you complain?
Jan ut Jan fasTS NU! TICS Il (1128-10, Fs, v2 3)
hukmay ho-aa hukmay vartaaraa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Hukam of the Lord's Command is pervasive; by the Hukam of His Command, all things happen. ||1||Pause] |
Sg wag Sa OST Il (1128-10, 3a, ve 3) ayhu aakaar tayraa hai Dhaaraa. This Creation was established by You.
fue ufo faa ATS o Bat AST IQ (1128-10, 3sG, He 3)
khin meh binsai karat na laagai baaraa. ||2]| In an instant You destroy it, and You create it again without a moment's delay. ||2]|
afe yAre fea ae feurfemr it 128-11, 338, vs 3) kar parsaad ik khayl dikhaa-i-aa.
By His Grace, He has staged this Play.
ad fasut 3 ugh ue ufemr ISI (1128-11, 3a8, He 3)
gur kirpaa tay param pad paa-i-aa. ||3|| By the Guru's Merciful Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. ||3]|
HIS Soa He Mes ALE il (1128-12, Sa, He 3) kahat naanak maar jeevaalay so-ay. Says Nanak, He alone kills and revives.
MAT BST SoH 5 FGI AE SUSI (1128-12, Sa, Hz 3) aisaa boojhhu bharam na bhoolahu ko-ay. ||4||3]| Understand this well - do not be confused by doubt. ||4]|3]|
SIG HIS 3 Il (1128-12)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
H onfs Hot AZ AGS Il (1128-13, 3G, v2 3) mai kaaman mayraa kant kartaar. I am the bride; the Creator is my Husband Lord.
Ad age 3a at Aters uA (1128-13, Fa, He 3) jayhaa karaa-ay tayhaa karee seegaar. ||1|| As He inspires me, I adorn myself. ||1]|
at faq oe St ad Sa Il (1128-13, 3a, ne 3) jaa’ tis bhaavai taa‘ karay bhog. When it pleases Him, He enjoys me.
3 HO ATS Atos AT NAN TIC Il (1128-14, FsG, v2 3) tan man saachay saahib jog. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am joined, body and mind, to my True Lord and Master. ||1]||Pause| |
Grafs feet ad for det I 1128-14, 358, He 3) ustat nindaa karay ki-aa ko-ee. How can anyone praise or slander anyone else?
x4 4
at nm ego Sat ASt QI (1128-14, Sa, He 3) jaa‘ aapay vartai ayko so-ee. ||2|| The One Lord Himself is pervading and permeating all. ||2||
ad usAet fusH AATST Il (1128-15, Sa@, v2 3) gur parsaadee piram kasaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I am attracted by His Love.
freGalt efeore us Age SAet SI (1128-15, 3a8, Hz 3)
mila-ugee da-i-aal panch sabad vajaa-ee. ||3]||
I shall meet with my Merciful Lord, and vibrate the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds. ||3]|
sats aaa ad for afe i (1128-16, Sa8, He 3) bhanat naanak karay ki-aa ko-ay. Prays Nanak, what can anyone do?
fan 3 urfuy fore Ae ISIS (128-16, 3sE, He 3) jis no aap milaavai so-ay. ||4]|4|| He alone meets with the Lord, whom the Lord Himself meets. ||4]|4]|
SIG HIT 3 Il (1128-16)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
A nfs fa Ho at efor ye Il 1128-16, 358, v2 3) SO mun je man kee dubiDhaa maaray. He alone is a silent sage, who subdues his mind's duality.
cfam ufg qoH ated NA (1128-17, S38, He 3) dubiDhaa maar barahm beechaaray. ||1|| Subduing his duality, he contemplates God. ||1||
fen Ho a aet dag STet II (1128-17, 3a8, He 3)
is man ka-o ko-ee khojahu bhaa-ee.
Let each person examine his own mind, O Siblings of Destiny. Ho AS oH 3G fofa uret NA TS Il 1128-17, a8, v2 3)
man khojat naam na-o niDh paa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Examine your mind, and you shall obtain the nine treasures of the Naam. ||1]||Pause] |
He Hg afe aes Aas Curfemr ii (1128-18, Sa, vs 3) mool moh kar kartai jagat upaa-i-aa. The Creator created the world, upon the foundation of worldly love and attachment.
HHS Oe sath FarfEnr iM (1128-18, ss, Hs 3) mamtaa laa-ay bharam bholaa-i-aa. ||2|| Attaching it to possessiveness, He has led it into confusion with doubt. ||2| |
fem Ho 3 AS fils usar Il (1128-19, 3a@, He 3) is man tay sabh pind paraanaa. From this Mind come all bodies, and the breath of life.
Ho & tots gan af ANTST ISI (1128-19, 338, v2 3)
man kai veechaar hukam bujh samaanaa. ||3]||
By mental contemplation, the mortal realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and merges in Him. ||3]]|
Yar aqat
AGH de Te fas as I (1129-1, Fa, v2 3) karam hovai gur kirpaa karai. When the mortal has good karma, the Guru grants His Grace.
feg Ho Aa fEA Ho at Vfsar He ISI (1129-1, 358, He 3) ih man jaagai is man kee dubiDhaa marai. ||4]| Then this mind is awakened, and the duality of this mind is subdued. ||4||
Ho a ASE Het Saat il (1129-1, Fa, ne 3) man kaa subhaa-o sadaa bairaagee. It is the innate nature of the mind to remain forever detached.
AS Hfo SA MSS Momait ull (1129-2, 3a, v2 3) sabh meh vasai ateet anraagee. ||5|| The Detached, Dispassionate Lord dwells within all. ||5||
AIS HSA A ATES SC Il (1129-2, 358, v2 3) kahat naanak jo jaanai bhay-o. Says Nanak, one who understands this mystery,
oife use fodae 28 Wellull (1129-2, 3a@, 2 3) aad purakh niranjan day-o. ||6||5|| becomes the embodiment of the Primal, Immaculate, Divine Lord God. ||6]||5]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1129-3)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
TH BH Aas (SASS Il (1129-3, Sa, He 3) raam naam jagat nistaaraa. The world is saved through Name of the Lord.
see Ute SsrseT ST WAU (1129-3, Sa, v2 3) bhavjal paar utaaranhaaraa. ||1]|| It carries the mortal across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
Od udAet ahs SH AHS I (1129-4, Fa, ve 3) gur parsaadee har naam sam"aal. By Guru's Grace, dwell upon the Lord's Name.
He dt foad 3d af na ToS I (1129-4, Sa, ne 3) sad hee nibhai tayrai naal. ||1|| rahaa-o. It shall stand by you forever. ||1]||Pause] |
OH 6 Val HOY Wers Il (1129-4, Fa, ve 3) naam na cheeteh manmukh gaavaaraa. The foolish self-willed manmukhs do not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fag oe AA uUT|fe UT NQI (1129-5, 3a, He 3) bin naavai kaisay paavahi paaraa. ||2| | Without the Name, how will they cross over? ||2]|
mm Bts AT BST Il (1129-5, 3a, He 3) aapay daat karay daataar. The Lord, the Great Giver, Himself gives His Gifts.
SzsTG A AAT Sli (1129-5, Fa, He 3) dayvanhaaray ka-o jaikaar. ||3]| Celebrate and praise the Great Giver! ||3]||
dete ad Afsag fare it 1129-6, 338, 12 3) nadar karay satguroo milaa-ay. Granting His Grace, the Lord unites the mortals with the True Guru.
Sod fuse SH SATS ISIE (1129-6, Sa, He 3) naanak hirdai naam vasaa-ay. ||4||6]|| O Nanak, the Naam is enshrined within the heart. ||4]|6] |
3d HIT 3 Il (1129-6)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
on Gud Afs fAsS BM Il (1129-6, FG, v2 3) naamay uDhray sabh jitnay lo-a. All people are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
aanfe fat uarufs df Wall (1129-7, 3a8, He 3) gurmukh jinaa paraapat ho-ay. ||1]|| Those who become Gurmukh are blessed to receive It. ||1]|
ofa AIG wrret faut ASE Il (1129-7, SaC, He 3) har jee-o apnee kirpaa karay-i. When the Dear Lord showers His Mercy,
aaHfa an sfanret Sf 19d TIS Il 1129-7, SaG, ve 3) gurmukh naam vadi-aa-ee day-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. He blesses the Gurmukh with the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||1]|Pause] |
oH Oty faa Uffs fumirg i (1129-8, S38, He 3) raam naam jin pareet pi-aar. Those who love the Beloved Name of the Lord
mfu Gud Afs ae Cursed Ql (1129-8, Sa, He 3) aap uDhray sabh kul uDhaaranhaar. ||2]| save themselves, and save all their ancestors. ||2||
fae oe HOHY AH ufs Af II (1129-9, 3G, He 3) bin naavai manmukh jam pur jaahi. Without the Name, the self-willed manmukhs go to the City of Death.
m@a defo get ufs il (1129-9, 38, v2 3) a-ukhay hoveh chotaa khaahi. ||3]| They suffer in pain and endure beatings. ||3]|
MM ATS SS ALE I (1129-9, SaG, v2 3) aapay kartaa dayvai so-ay. When the Creator Himself gives,
Soa OH usufs dE ISDH (1129-10, Fae, Hz 3)
naanak naam paraapat ho-ay. ||4]|7]| O Nanak, then the mortals receive the Naam. ||4||7||
3d HIS 3 Il (1129-10)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
afge uifs Haafea Bars il (1129-10, 3a@, 2 3) govind pareet sankaadik uDhaaray. Love of the Lord of the Universe saved Sanak and his brother, the sons of Brahma.
TH BH Aafe Sars Al (1129-10, Se, 2 3) raam naam sabad beechaaray. ||1|| They contemplated the Word of the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
dfs ME murat fasur wg Il (1129-11, 3a8, v8 3) har jee-o apnee kirpaa Dhaar. O Dear Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy,
Dente oH wa fimrgs nail TIS Ut 1129-11, 3sG, v2 3) gurmukh naamay lagai pi-aar. ||1]| rahaa-o. that as Gurmukh, I may embrace love for Your Name. ||1]||Pause] |
nists ulfs sats Arat SE II (1129-12, eG, He 3) antar pareet bhagat saachee ho-ay. Whoever has true loving devotional worship deep within his being
ud af Aeret SE MQM (1129-12, Fs@, v2 3) poorai gur maylaavaa ho-ay. ||2| | meets the Lord, through the Perfect Guru. ||2||
fon ufa ZA Aofa Hate I (1129-12, 338, ne 3) nij ghar vasai sahj subhaa-ay. He naturally, intuitively dwells within the home of his own inner being.
aanfa om ZA Hf mmf Wil (1129-13, 3a8, v2 3) gurmukh naam vasai man aa-ay. ||3]| The Naam abides within the mind of the Gurmukh. |[3]|
~ AR A
mm SH TUET Il (1129-13, sa, He 3) aapay vaykhai vaykhanhaar. The Lord, the Seer, Himself sees.
Sea SH TUT Sa os NINTH (1129-13, SaB, He 3) naanak naam rakhahu ur Dhaar. ||4]|8] | O Nanak, enshrine the Naam within your heart. ||4]|8]|
SIC HIS 3 Il (1129-14)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
ASAT Hid TH SH SFI We Il (1129-14, Sa, ne 3) kaljug meh raam naam ur Dhaar. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, enshrine the Lord's Name within your heart.
fag ove HE ure ST MAI (1129-14, 3aG, He 3) bin naavai maathai paavai chhaar. ||1]| Without the Name, ashes will be blown in your face. ||1||
TH SH VHT F Svet I (1129-14, 3a, v2 3) raam naam dulabh hai bhaa-ee. The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain, O Siblings of Destiny.
ae usAtfe ZA nfs met A TITS Il (1129-15, SaS, He 3) gur parsaad vasai man aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, it comes to dwell in the mind. ||1]]Pause| |
TH OH Ao Stafs ALE Il (1129-15, 35, He 3) raam naam jan bhaaleh so-ay. That humble being who seeks the Lord's Name,
ud TI 3 yrs FE 2M 129-15, Fae, v2 3) pooray gur tay paraapat ho-ay. ||2]| receives it from the Perfect Guru. ||2| |
dfs a stat Hats A AS UPSTS Il (1129-16, 3a, He 3) har kaa bhaanaa maneh say jan parvaan. Those humble beings who accept the Will of the Lord, are approved and accepted.
dd a Aafe oH SAS Ill (1129-16, 3s@, v2 3)
gur kai sabad naam neesaan. ||3]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they bear the insignia of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
AH Agd A ae sfoor wfe Il (1129-16, 358, nH 3) so sayvhu jo kal rahi-aa Dhaar. So serve the One, whose power supports the Universe.
Soa TsHf oH flmrfs snc (1129-17, ss@, nz 3)
naanak gurmukh naam pi-aar. ||4||9]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh loves the Naam. ||4]|9||
SIG HIS 3 Il (1129-17)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
AGHA HiT AT ATH AH Il (1129-17, FaG, He 3) kaljug meh baho karam kamaahi. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, many rituals are performed.
a os 3 AaH ate uta All (1129-18, Sa@, vs 3)
naa rut na karam thaa-ay paahi. ||1|| But it is not the time for them, and so they are of no use. ||1]|
ASH Hfs ITH SH DT ATT Il (1129-18, 3G, v2 3) kaljug meh raam naam hai saar. In Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the most sublime.
aante Ara wat firs Al TIS Il 1129-18, 3s, v2 3) gurmukh saachaa lagai pi-aar. ||1]| rahaa-o. As Gurmukh, be lovingly attached to Truth. ||1]||Pause| |
3 HO Ufa wed ufo ufeMr I (1129-19, 3aG, He 3) tan man khoj gharai meh paa-i-aa. Searching my body and mind, I found Him within the home of my own heart.
aaHfe aH oth fas afer | 1 (1129-19, 3a@, v8 3) gurmukh raam naam chit laa-i-aa. ||2| | The Gurmukh centers his consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||2]|
Yat A930
fora nine Afsag 3 dfE tl (1130-1, 388, He 3) gi-aan anjan satgur tay ho-ay. The ointment of spiritual wisdom is obtained from the True Guru.
oH oH de afour fag SE NSN (1130-1, Fa, He 3) raam naam rav rahi-aa tihu lo-ay. ||3]| The Lord's Name is pervading the three worlds. ||3]|
afera ufo afs AIG Sa da afs 3 aret I (1130-1, 358, v2 3) kalijug meh har jee-o ayk hor rut na kaa-ee. In Kali Yuga, it is the time for the One Dear Lord; it is not the time for anything else.
Soa TaHfy fst TH SH BI ANTE ISAO (1130-2, FsG, He 3) naanak gurmukh hirdai raam naam layho jamaa-ee. ||4]|10]| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, let the Lord's Name grow within your heart. ||4||10]|
SIC HIS 3 Uwe 2 (1130-3) bhairo mehlaa 3 ghar 2 Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars ure il (1130-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
efsa Hou sfa fenmat fara wats mifteret I (1130-4, 338, 118 3)
dubiDhaa manmukh rog vi-aapay tarisnaa jaleh aDhikaa-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs are afflicted with the disease of duality; they are burnt by the intense fire of desire.
fa xfs HHfs SBa o uefa fase HOH TSTeT UNAM (1130-4, 3a@, nz 3)
mar mar jameh tha-ur na paavahi birthaa janam gavaa-ee. ||1]|
They die and die again, and are reborn; they find no place of rest. They waste their lives uselessly. ||1]|
He utsn ate fagur eg gsret i (1130-5, a8, ve 3) mayray pareetam kar kirpaa dayh bujhaa-ee. O my Beloved, grant Your Grace, and give me understanding.
ICH dat Has Gurfenr fag Age Sa o WET NUN TITS Il (1130-5, a8, He 3)
ha-umai rogee jagat upaa-i-aa bin sabdai rog na jaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The world was created in the disease of egotism; without the Word of the Shabad, the disease is not cured. ||1||Pause]|
fifyfs ny uate ufs as fag Fae Aafs o uTet II (1130-6, 3e@, nH 3)
simrit saastar parheh mun kaytay bin sabdai surat na paa-ee.
There are so many silent sages, who read the Simritees and the Shaastras; without the Shabad, they have no clear awareness.
3 ve AS star fen wast Aafs Tere IMI (1130-7, Fa, He 3)
tarai gun sabhay rog vi-aapay mamtaa surat gavaa-ee. ||2|| All those under the influence of the three qualities are afflicted with the disease; through possessiveness, they lose their awareness. ||2| |
fefa nm afe we ufs nm ag AS ufs we | (1130-7, 3a, v3 3) ik aapay kaadh la-ay parabh aapay gur sayvaa parabh laa-ay. O God, you save some, and you enjoin others to serve the Guru.
dfs a any fears user Ay efor fs orfe ai (30-8, 338, ne 3)
har kaa naam niDhaano paa-i-aa sukh vasi-aa man aa-ay. ||3]|
They obtain the treasure of the Name of the Lord; peace comes to abide within their minds. ||3]|
seat ueet aanfa easfo f36 fon whe ear urfemr I (1130-8, Sa8, v8 3)
cha-uthee padvee gurmukh varteh tin nij ghar vaasaa paa-i-aa.
The Gurmukhs dwell in the fourth state; they obtain a dwelling in the home of their own inner being.
ud Afsate far atet feag wiry aerfemr gil (1130-9, 338, 8 3)
poorai satgur kirpaa keenee vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa. ||4||
The Perfect True Guru shows His Mercy to them; they eradicate their self-conceit from within. ||4] |
ean at fife ara Sa ffs gout fang Je Surfer it (1130-10, Sa, re 3) aykas kee sir kaar ayk jin barahmaa bisan rudar upaa-i-aa. Everyone must serve the One Lord, who created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
Sod forse Ava Sa ar Go Hd B AEM MUNAIAAI (1130-10, Sa, He 3)
naanak nihchal saachaa ayko naa oh marai na jaa-i-aa. ||5||1]|11]| O Nanak, the One True Lord is permanent and stable. He does not die, and He is not born. ||5]J1]]11]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1130-11) bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
HoHfe vfsaor Het F Sait dat Aas AAS Il (1130-11, Sa, v2 3) manmukh dubiDhaa sadaa hai rogee rogee sagal sansaaraa.
The self-willed manmukh is afflicted with the disease of duality forever; the entire universe is diseased.
qenfa gets sa aeeta TT Aaet Asa wl 1130-12, Fs, we 3)
gurmukh boojheh rog gavaaveh gur sabdee veechaaraa. ||1]||
The Gurmukh understands, and is cured of the disease, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
dfs AH ASHafs Hote il (1130-12, Fa@, v2 3) har jee-o satsangat maylaa-ay. O Dear Lord, please let me join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ood fan 3 efe efsuret Foon of fos of an TIS Ut (130-12, 358, v2 3) naanak tis no day-ay vadi-aa-ee jo raam naam chit laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Nanak, the Lord blesses with glorious greatness, those who focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||1]||Pause| |
Hust ats Afs dfa fenmt fae AH at 3 ffs aver Il (1130-13, 388, H2 3)
mamtaa kaal sabh rog vi-aapay tin jam kee hai sir kaaraa.
Death takes all those who are afflicted with the disease of possessiveness. They are subject to the Messenger of Death.
aoufa uret ay dfs o ure fro afe aftmr Sfa ara QM (1130-14, 3a8, He 3) gurmukh paraanee jam nayrh na aavai jin har raakhi-aa ur Dhaaraa. ||2||
The Messenger of Death does not even approach that mortal who, as Gurmukh, enshrines the Lord within his heart. ||2||
fie ofa & oH 3 Tent WS" A Aa fs ad yrfEnr I (1130-14, Fe, 2 3)
jin har kaa naam na gurmukh jaataa say jag meh kaahay aa-i-aa.
One who does not know the Lord's Name, and who does not become Gurmukh - why did he even come into the world?
Td at Ast ae B Alot fase AON Teter Sil (1130-15, Fs, ve 3) gur kee sayvaa kaday na keenee birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa. ||3]|| He never serves the Guru; he wastes his life uselessly. ||3]|
TA AUS Cast ASTI AST BES Il (1130-16, Sa, w 3)
naanak say pooray vadbhaagee satgur sayvaa laa-ay. O Nanak, those whom the True Guru enjoins to His service, have perfect good fortune.
a feefs Aet ee uefa TeaSt AY UTES INNA (1130-16, 3s, He 3)
jo ichheh so-ee fal paavahi gurbaanee sukh paa-ay. ||4||2||12]|
They obtain the fruits of their desires, and find peace in the Word of the Guru's Bani. [14] [2] ]12]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1130-17)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
eu fefe HH efe He eu fefe arg OMe Il (1130-17, 388, ne 3) dukh vich jammai dukh marai dukh vich kaar kamaa-ay. In pain he is born, in pain he dies, and in pain he does his deeds.
ads Hot fefe ae 3 fas fan] urfa AME AI (1130-17, a8, v3 3)
garabh jonee vich kaday na niklai bistaa maahi samaa-ay. ||1|| He is never released from the womb of reincarnation; he rots away in manure. ||1]|
fon foot HoHfa ASH aeTfEnr | (1130-18, Sa, re 3) Dharig Dharig manmukh janam gavaa-i-aa. Cursed, cursed is the self-willed manmukh, who wastes his life away.
ud Id at Ae o oat ahs a oH B stent A TITS Il (1130-18, Sa, H2 3) pooray gur kee sayv na keenee har kaa naam na bhaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He does not serve the Perfect Guru; he does not love the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
ad a Age Afs da ace fAA 6 fa AE BE Il (1130-19, Sa, ne 3)
gur kaa sabad sabh rog gavaa-ay jis no har jee-o laa-ay.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad cures all diseases; he alone is attached to it, whom the Dear Lord attaches.
Yat AWA on of fxs efsnret fan 6 vfs Sve 12H 1131-1, 3a, He 3)
naamay naam milai vadi-aa-ee jis no man vasaa-ay. ||2]| Through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; he alone obtains it, whose mind is filled with the Lord. ||2]|
Afsag Se 3 SG US Ay Adel AY AT Il (1131-1, 308, He 3)
satgur bhaytai taa fal paa-ay sach karnee sukh saar.
Meeting the True Guru, the fruitful rewards are obtained. This true lifestyle beings sublime peace.
A Ho fesue A ofs oa afs am cafa fimirg ISI (1131-2, 308, He 3)
say jan nirmal jo har laagay har naamay Dhareh pi-aar. ||3]|
Those humble beings who are attached to the Lord are immaculate; they enshrine love for the Lord's Name. ||3]|
fae at se fs St uAsia oret faa Afsag ye fomrfenr It (131-2, sa, v2 3)
tin kee rayn milai taa’ mastak laa-ee jin satgur pooraa Dhi-aa-i-aa.
If I obtain the dust of their feet, I apply it to my forehead. They meditate on the Perfect True Guru.
aed fsa at FE us Star ureha fast 7H oth fas wfenr snSnIil (1131-3, 3s, we 3) naanak tin kee rayn poorai bhaag paa-ee-ai jinee raam naam chit laa-i-aa.
41 131]13]]
O Nanak, this dust is obtained only by perfect destiny. They focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||4]|3]|13]|
SIC HIST 3 Il (1131-4)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Rag dled A AS Ae faa & fose Avot AST I (1131-4, Fa, ne 3)
sabad beechaaray so jan saachaa jin kai hirdai saachaa so-ee.
That humble being who contemplates the Word of the Shabad is true; the True Lord is within his heart.
Wet sats asta feg TSt st sis sae Tet AU 1131-5, Sa, vs 3)
saachee bhagat karahi din raatee taa‘ tan dookh na ho-ee. ||1]|
If someone performs true devotional worship day and night, then his body will not feel pain. ||1]|
SIS SAS Ad AS ASH I (1131-5, Sa, 2 3) bhagat bhagat kahai sabh ko-ee. Everyone calls him, "Devotee, devotee."
fag Afsae AS sats 3 ureha us ora fH YS Het uA TIS i c131-5, Fa, ws 3)
bin satgur sayvay bhagat na paa-ee-ai poorai bhaag milai parabh so-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. But without serving the True Guru, devotional worship is not obtained. Only through perfect destiny does one meet God. ||1||Pause||
HOH HS aeete wg Hats oo wy fee Tet il (131-6, Fa, we 3)
manmukh mool gavaaveh laabh maageh laahaa laabh kidoo ho-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs lose their capital, and still, they demand profits. How can they earn any profit?
THaS Het od fre Gufs en ae ufs set QM (131-7, Fa, we 3)
jamkaal sadaa hai sir oopar doojai bhaa-ay pat kho-ee. ||2||
The Messenger of Death is always hovering above their heads. In the love of duality, they lose their honor. ||2]|
ade su sete feg TSt IGH Jao eT II 1131-7, S88, 2 3)
bahlay bhaykh bhaveh din raatee ha-umai rog na jaa-ee.
Trying on all sorts of religious robes, they wander around day and night, but the disease of their egotism is not cured.
ufs ufs ost are zurete fife ofeor Aofs eet SI (1131-8, Sa, He 3)
parh parh loojheh baad vakaaneh mil maa-i-aa surat gavaa-ee. ||3]||
Reading and studying, they argue and debate; attached to Maya, they lose their awareness. ||3]|
Afsag Refs usn afs uefs ath fxs Sfsnret th ci31-9, 358, ne 3)
satgur sayveh param gat paavahi naam milai vadi-aa-ee.
Those who serve the True Guru are blessed with the supreme status; through the Naam, they are blessed with glorious greatness.
Sod OH frat ufos efaor efs AS ufs uret Iisisiasil (1131-9, saG, He 3)
naanak naam jinaa man vasi-aa dar saachai pat paa-ee. ||4]|4]|14]| O Nanak, those whose minds are filled with the Naam, are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||4]|4]|14]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1131-10)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
HOH oT Sot Css TH seS wre It (1131-10, Fa@, we 3)
manmukh aasaa nahee utrai doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh cannot escape false hope. In the love of duality, he is ruined.
Geg 3 WE 6 sd aug FAS wale UTES WAU (1131-10, 398, v8 3) udar nai saan na bharee-ai kabhoo tarisnaa agan pachaa-ay. ||1|| His belly is like a river - it is never filled up. He is consumed by the fire of desire. ||1]|
Ae MSs TH SA TS Il (1131-11, 3a8, ve 3) Sadaa anand raam ras raatay. Eternally blissful are those who are imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord.
fost on far Hfs salt ofe afe nifys ut feuss nan soe I cisi-u1, 358, v8 3) hirdai naam dubiDhaa man bhaagee har har amrit pee tariptaatay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, fills their hearts, and duality runs away from their minds. Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied. ||1]|Pause] |
nim uraqaH figrfe fafs ant fafs fafe cod we i cisi-12, 338, us 3)
aapay paarbarahm sarisat jin saajee sir sir DnanDhai laa-ay.
The Supreme Lord God Himself created the Universe; He links each and every person to their tasks.
Hfenr Ho ater fafs wm wm SA BS I 1131-13, Fa, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh kee-aa jin aapay aapay doojai laa-ay. ||2||
He Himself created love and attachment to Maya; He Himself attaches the mortals to duality. ||2]|
fA 3 fag ad A eA de Afs So wets AS I (1131-13, 398, v2 3)
tis no kihu kahee-ai jay doojaa hovai sabh tuDhai maahi samaa-ay. If there were any other, then I would speak to him; all will be merged in You.
aenty frmre 33 ators Ast Afs fers BN ci3i-14, 388, v2 3)
gurmukh gi-aan tat beechaaraa jotee jot milaa-ay. ||3]||
The Gurmukh contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom; his light merges into the Light. ||3]|
A ug Ara Ae dt ATS AST AS ara Il (1131-14, Fa, ve 3) SO parabh saachaa sad hee saachaa saachaa sabh aakaaraa. God is True, Forever True, and all His Creation is True.
Soa Afsate Ast uret Afe of feAsra NSNUNAUI (1131-15, Fa8, He 3)
naanak satgur sojhee paa-ee sach naam nistaaraa. ||4||5]|15]| O Nanak, the True Guru has given me this understanding; the True Name brings emancipation. ||4]|5||15||
3d HIS 3 Il (1131-16) bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
afs ufs Us frat TH 6 uss" ASHfal USH JA atest Il 1131-16, 3a, ne 3)
kal meh parayt jin"ee raam na pachhaataa satjug param hans beechaaree.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, those who do not realize the Lord are goblins. In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, the supreme soul-swans contemplated the Lord.
enrufs 33 Hen zasts feas IBH Hr UA (1131-16, 38, v8 3)
du-aapur taraytai maanas varteh virlai ha-umai maaree. ||1]|
In the Silver Age of Dwaapur Yuga, and the Brass Age of Traytaa Yuga, mankind prevailed, but only a rare few subdued their egos. ||1]|
ates Hid TH oth Samet I (1131-17, 3a8, He 3)
kal meh raam naam vadi-aa-ee. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, glorious greatness is obtained through the Lord's Name.
afa af aanfa Sa ast fee oe nafs o ret NA TIS Ih (1131-17, Sa, He 3) jug jug gurmukh ayko jaataa vin naavai mukat na paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In each and every age, the Gurmukhs know the One Lord; without the Name, liberation is not attained. ||1]|Pause] |
fase oH wea Ho ATT Tents Hfs SATS I (131-18, Fa8, ne 3)
hirdai naam lakhai jan saachaa gurmukh man vasaa-ee.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is revealed in the heart of the True Lord's humble servant. It dwells in the mind of the Gurmukh.
mifu 3d AS Aw 3d fast TH of fos Bet IM cai31-19, 3a@, vz 3)
aap taray saglay kul taaray jinee raam naam liv laa-ee. ||2||
Those who are lovingly focused on the Lord's Name save themselves; they save all their ancestors as well. ||2| |
Aa ug J Te a ws nies Aafe AHS Il (1131-19, 9, 48 3)
mayraa parabh hai gun kaa daataa avgan sabad jalaa-ay.
My Lord God is the Giver of virtue. The Word of the Shabad burns away all faults and demerits.
UST 9932
fo ufo efhor A Ae Ad foge a SAS ISI (1132-1, Sa, He 3)
jin man vasi-aa say jan sohay hirdai naam vasaa-ay. ||3]|
Those whose minds are filled with the Naam are beautiful; they enshrine the Naam within their hearts. ||3||
wg Uy HIS Afsag ferfenr ga FAG sehr HE I (1132-1, Fa@, we 3)
ghar dar mahal satguroo dikhaa-i-aa rang si-o ralee-aa maanai.
The True Guru has revealed to me the Lord's Home and His Court, and the Mansion of His Presence. I joyfully enjoy His Love.
A fas Ad A Ie afd HS BOA SH SWE IIE! (1132-2, Fe, He 3) jo kichh kahai so bhalaa kar maanai naanak naam vakhaanai. ||4||6||16]| Whatever He says, I accept as good; Nanak chants the Naam. ||4]|6]|16]|
SIG HIS 3 Il (1132-3)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
HOT Hots ANE B ad Ast Stars I (1132-3, Fa, ne 3)
mansaa maneh samaa-ay lai gur sabdee veechaar.
The desires of the mind are absorbed in the mind, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Gs us 3 Ast ue feta ng F FF FMT UI (1132-3, 3d, ws 3)
gur pooray tay sojhee pavai fir marai na vaaro vaar. ||1]||
Understanding is obtained from the Perfect Guru, and then the mortal does not die over and over again. ||1]|
Ho HS TH OH MMU” Il (1132-4, aS, He 3) man mayray raam naam aaDhaar. My mind takes the Support of the Lord's Name.
ad usAte ugh ue ufenr AS fes uSeT ST IA TIS Il (1132-4, Fa, He 3)
gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa sabh ichh pujaavanhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; the Lord is the Fulfiller of all desires. ||1||Pause| |
Ag ufo a fe sfoor qe fag gs 3 UTS I (1132-5, 398, ws 3)
sabh meh ayko rav rahi-aa gur bin boojh na paa-ay.
The One Lord is permeating and pervading amongst all; without the Guru, this understanding is not obtained.
Toufa yse dur Ae fe ys wafes as Te ae iM 1132-5, 3a, ne 3)
gurmukh pargat ho-aa mayraa har parabh an-din har gun gaa-ay. ||2||
My Lord God has been revealed to me, and I have become Gurmukh. Night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2] |
Hues of Sa I dag & AY B uta Il 1132-6, Sa8, He 3) sukh-daata har ayk hai hor thai sukh na paahi. The One Lord is the Giver of peace; peace is not found anywhere else.
Afsag fast o Afr est A ifs ae uestfs Wil (1132-7, 3a, ne 3) satgur jinee na sayvi-aa daataa say ant ga-ay pachhutaahi. ||3]|| Those who do not serve the Giver, the True Guru, depart regretfully in the end. ||3]|
Afsag Afe Ae AY ufenr fefs suo wa OE II (1132-7, S58, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-i-aa fir dukh na laagai Dhaa-ay.
Serving the True Guru, lasting peace is obtained, and the mortal does not suffer in pain any longer.
Sea df sats usufs det Ast APS MITE NSNONADI (1132-8, SaG, we 3)
naanak har bhagat paraapat ho-ee jotee jot samaa-ay. ||4]|7]||17]|
Nanak has been blessed with devotional worship of the Lord; his light has merged into the Light. ||4]|7||17]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1132-8) bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
as dg Adz agarar Coy der uret Il (1132-9, 3a@, H3 3)
baajh guroo jagat ba-uraanaa bhoolaa chotaa khaa-ee.
Without the Guru, the world is insane; confused and deluded, it is beaten, and it suffers.
Hfa ufs AA AST ey ue vas af wats & uret AI (1132-9, 3aG, He 3) mar mar jammai sadaa dukh paa-ay dar kee khabar na paa-ee. ||1]|
It dies and dies again, and is reborn, always in pain, but it is unaware of the Lord's Gate. ||1]|
Hd HO Ae Jag Asad at AST Il (1132-10, Sa@, v3 3) mayray man sadaa rahhu satgur kee sarnaa. O my mind, remain always in the Protection of the True Guru's Sanctuary.
fose dfs on Hot Ae war Te ASS S|NHH SINT UU! TIC Il 1132-10, 3a, v1 3) hirdai har naam meethaa sad laagaa gur sabday bhavjal tarnaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Those people, to whose hearts the Lord's Name seems sweet, are carried across the terrifying world-ocean by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]||Pause| |
3u ad a03 fos 338 nists an au nidarg Il (1132-11, 308, He 3)
bhaykh karai bahut chit dolai antar kaam kroDh aha“kaar.
The mortal wears various religious robes, but his consciousness is unsteady; deep within, he is filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.
nists for gu ifs agst sGas fed Bs aT NM (1132-11, 3a, 3 3)
antar tisaa bhookh at bahutee bha-ukat firai dar baar. ||2|| Deep within is the great thirst and immense hunger; he wanders from door to door.
[21 ad a Rafe Hats feta Hefs foo a Hats eorfe i (1132-12, 398, nH 3)
gur kai sabad mareh fir jeeveh tin ka-o mukat du-aar. Those who die in the Word of the Guru's Shabad are reborn; they find the door of liberation.
wists Aifs Ae AY de] of Thm Ba ofs ISI (1132-13, 388, He 3)
antar saat sadaa sukh hovai har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||3]|
With constant peace and tranquility deep within, they enshrine the Lord within their hearts. ||3]|
fa@ fA ae fe vars ATS fas o AT IN (1132-13, 3s8, He 3) ji-o tis bhaavai tivai chalaavai karnaa kichhoo na jaa-ee. As it pleases Him, He inspires us to act. Nothing else can be done.
SOA ATHfe As AHS IH OTH Sfanet NSICUATH (1132-14, Fae, ve 3)
naanak gurmukh sabad sam"aalay raam naam vadi-aa-ee. ||4||8]|18]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh contemplates the Word of the Shabad, and is blessed with the glorious greatness of the Lord's Name. ||4]|8]|18]|
SIG HIS 3 Il (1132-15)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
GH Hfeor vfs unrfenr ey uS we UTE II 1132-15, 398, He 3) ha-umai maa-i-aa mohi khu-aa-i-aa dukh khatay dukh khaa-ay. Lost in egotism, Maya and attachment, the mortal earns pain, and eats pain.
nists SF Joa vy atdt faa fader SoHE NU (1132-15, a8, v2 3)
antar lobh halak dukh bhaaree bin bibayk bharmaa-ay. ||1] |
The great disease, the rabid disease of greed, is deep within him; he wanders around indiscriminately. ||1]|
Houfe fog Hes AAS | (1132-16, 3a, He 3) manmukh Dharig jeevan saisaar. The life of the self-willed manmukh in this world is cursed.
TH SH AUS Sd Sfsnr ate fas ae 3 ora fimrg 9 TIC Il 1132-16, 38, nz 3) raam naam supnai nahee chayti-aa har si-o kaday na laagai pi-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He does not remember the Lord's Name, even in his dreams. He is never in love with the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause| |
UAT ISH ad St IS IT AHS FS FE it (1132-17, Sa, v2 3)
pasoo-aa karam karai nahee boojhai koorh kamaavai koorho ho-ay.
He acts like a beast, and does not understand anything. Practicing falsehood, he becomes false.
Afsag fed 3 Guet 3e UfA Bd AG AE WM (1132-17, 3a, we 3)
satgur milai ta ultee hovai khoj lahai jan ko-ay. ||2| |
But when the mortal meets the True Guru, his way of looking at the world changes. How rare are those humble beings who seek and find the Lord. ||2]|
dfs ofs on foe Ae efhor urfeor aet fours i (1132-18, 388, ne 3)
har har naam ridai sad vasi-aa paa-i-aa gunee niDhaan.
That person, whose heart is forever filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, obtains the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
Td UsASt ust ufeor gor HS uifsHTE III (1132-19, 3sC, v2 3)
gur parsaadee pooraa paa-i-aa chookaa man abhimaan. ||3]||
By Guru's Grace, he finds the Perfect Lord; the egotistical pride of his mind is eradicated. ||3]|
MN ATS Ad ATS nM Hofer UTS Il (1132-19, Fs@, He 3) aapay kartaa karay karaa-ay aapay maarag paa-ay. The Creator Himself acts, and causes all to act. He Himself places us on the path.
Yat 1933
mma Tanta & sanret Sea OTH AMS ISNCNIE! (1133-1, Fa, He 3)
aapay gurmukh day vadi-aa-ee naanak naam samaa-ay. ||4]|9||19]|
He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness; O Nanak, he merges in the Naam. ||4]|9][19]|
3d HIS 3 Il (1133-1)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Het udior foug ofa dfs aura it 1133-1, 3G, He 3)
mayree patee-aa likhahu har govind gopaalaa.
Upon my writing tablet, I write the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the World.
SH StS Sa AH AH Il (1133-2, Sa, Hs 3) doojai bhaa-ay faathay jam jaalaa. In the love of duality, the mortals are caught in the noose of the Messenger of Death.
Afsag ad Hat yfsurer it 1133-2, 338, ne 3) satgur karay mayree partipaalaa. The True Guru nurtures and sustains me.
Of AYSTST HS BST UA (1133-2, Ss, He 3) har sukh-daata mayrai naalaa. ||1|| The Lord, the Giver of peace, is always with me. ||1]|
aa Guefh ufowre ofa Gus I (1133-3, 398, He 3) gur updays par-hilaad har uchrai. Following his Guru's instructions, Prahlaad chanted the Lord's Name;
WAS S WGA TH 3 AP UU! TI Il (1133-3, Sa, He 3) saasnaa tay baalak gam na karai. ||1|| rahaa-o. he was a child, but he was not afraid when his teacher yelled at him. ||1]|Pause] |
Hat Quen ufoere fimrds Il 1133-4, 338, 48 3) maataa updaysai par-hilaad pi-aaray. Prahlaad's mother gave her beloved son some advice:
Ux TH OH dag ME BI Cars I (1133-4, 358, Hs 3) putar raam naam chhodahu jee-o layho ubaaray. "My son, you must abandon the Lord's Name, and save your life!"
ufsare ad Hog Het HE I 1133-4, SaB, ne 3) par-hilaad kahai sunhu mayree maa-ay. Prahlaad said: "Listen, O my mother;
TH 3H 3 est ate Shor gSfe QM (1133-5, Fa, He 3) raam naam na chhodaa gur dee-aa bujhaa-ay. ||2|| I shall never give up the Lord's Name. My Guru has taught me this."| |2] |
Hat Haat Afs we yards Il (1133-5, 3G, He 3) sandaa markaa sabh jaa-ay pukaaray. Sandaa and Markaa, his teachers, went to his father the king, and complained:
yfoere oifu featur Afs wes fears Il (1133-6, 38, vs 3) par-hilaad aap vigrhi-aa sabh chaatrhay vigaarhay. "Prahlaad himself has gone astray, and he leads all the other pupils astray."
ene Ast Hfs HZ uarfer | 1133-6, 3a, He 3) dusat sabhaa meh mantar pakaa-i-aa. In the court of the wicked king, a plan was hatched.
ysere ar arar of& swarm Wil (1133-6, 3a, He 3)
parahlaad kaa raakhaa ho-ay raghuraa-i-aa. ||3]|| God is the Savior of Prahlaad. ||3]|
ofa usa ats ofenr wifs niorfs i (1133-7, 3a8, He 3) haath kharhag kar Dhaa-i-aa at aha‘kaar. With sword in hand, and with great egotistical pride, Prahlaad's father ran up to him.
dfs 3a as 35 we Cate il 1133-7, sa, He 3) har tayraa kahaa tujh la-ay ubaar. "Where is your Lord, who will save you?"
fas His sure gu feather dH Surfs ii (1133-8, 398, ws 3) khin meh bhai-aan roop niksi-aa tham" upaarh. In an instant, the Lord appeared in a dreadful form, and shattered the pillar.
Jeanuy out faetfour ysore Shor Carta igil (1133-8, ss, ws 3) harnaakhas nakhee bidaari-aa parahlaad lee-aa ubaar. ||4|| Harnaakhash was torn apart by His claws, and Prahlaad was saved. ||4||
HS Ho a ofa AG AGH ASS Il (1133-9, 3aG, He 3) sant janaa kay har jee-o kaaraj savaaray. The Dear Lord completes the tasks of the Saints.
yJere AS a feats aw Burs Il 1133-9, a8, ne 3) parahlaad jan kay ikeeh kul uDhaaray. He saved twenty-one generations of Prahlaad's descendents.
ae a Aafe ICH fry HS Il 1133-9, 358, v2 3) gur kai sabad ha-umai bikh maaray. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the poison of egotism is neutralized.
SSA TH OTH AS fenss MUNAONQOIN (1133-10, Fa, Hz 3)
naanak raam naam sant nistaaray. ||5||10||20|| O Nanak, through the Name of the Lord, the Saints are emancipated. ||5||10]|20] |
3d HIS 3 Il (1133-10)
bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
nm es ofe fes HS Wat aA ymy ge AeT II 1133-10, Sa, He 3) aapay dait laa-ay ditay sant janaa ka-o aapay raakhaa so-ee. The Lord Himself makes demons pursue the Saints, and He Himself saves them.
A Sct Ae Agaret fSo nfs eu o Tet WA (1133-11, Sa, v2 3)
jo tayree sadaa sarnaa-ee tin man dukh na ho-ee. ||1||
Those who remain forever in Your Sanctuary, O Lord - their minds are never touched by sorrow. ||1]|
afar fa sat at saeT orfenr Ih (1133-11, Sa@, He 3) jug jug bhagtaa kee rakh-daa aa-i-aa. In each and every age, the Lord saves the honor of His devotees.
es uz yee west sous fag o We Fae Afs fresfenr nan sae i 1133-12, 33€, H: 3)
dait putar parahlaad gaa-itaree tarpan kichhoo na jaanai sabday mayl milaa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Prahlaad, the demon's son, knew nothing of the Hindu morning prayer, the Gayatri, and nothing about ceremonial water-offerings to his ancestors; but through the Word of the Shabad, he was united in the Lord's Union. ||1]||Pause] |
wofes safs acts fea wat vfs Hae Bet I (1133-13, 3a, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahi din raatee dubiDhaa sabday kho-ee.
Night and day, he performed devotional worship service, day and night, and through the Shabad, his duality was eradicated.
He fesHe dA Afs aS Ae feo nfs Het QM 1133-13, Sa, He 3)
Sadaa nirmal hai jo sach raatay sach vasi-aa man so-ee. ||2||
Those who are imbued with Truth are immaculate and pure; the True Lord abides within their minds. ||2| |
Hed efao uate ue 6 ustete fase HOH seem I (1133-14, Se, H2 3)
moorakh dubiDhaa parheh mool na pachhaaneh birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa.
The fools in duality read, but they do not understand anything; they waste their lives uselessly.
Ha Ao ot feet asfo ere 23 feafemr ail 1133-15, 3e8, v2 3) sant janaa kee nindaa karahi dusat dait chirhaa-i-aa. ||3]| The wicked demon slandered the Saint, and stirred up trouble. ||3]|
ysere vfs o us ofa oH 6 es 3d 0 fan a safenr It 1133-15, Sa@, ne 3)
parahlaad dubiDhaa na parhai har naam na chhodai darai na kisai daa daraa-i-aa. Prahlaad did not read in duality, and he did not abandon the Lord's Name; he was not afraid of any fear.
Ha Ao at ofa ME men SS aS Sat orfEr gil (1133-16, Sa, He 3)
sant janaa kaa har jee-o raakhaa daitai kaal nayrhaa aa-i-aa. ||4]|
The Dear Lord became the Savior of the Saint, and the demonic Death could not even approach him. ||4| |
nTuet UA wm at sarst fe |fsmret i (1133-16, 3a, v2 3) aapnee paij aapay raakhai bhagtaa™ day-ay vadi-aa-ee. The Lord Himself saved his honor, and blessed his devotee with glorious greatness.
Sad Jaean out frefour nit vs at uate & uret NUNAUIAUl (1133-17, 3a, He 3) naanak harnaakhas nakhee bidaari-aa anDhai dar kee khabar na paa-ee. ||5||11]|21]| O Nanak, Harnaakhash was torn apart by the Lord with His claws; the blind demon knew nothing of the Lord's Court. ||5||11]|21]|
Td SIG HIS 8 VeuS we (1133-19)
raag bhairo mehlaa 4 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:
qe Afsara ure Il (1133-19) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs Ho AS ate fxs uf ofeS Il (1133-19, Sa@, He 4) har jan sant kar kirpaa pag laa-in. The Lord, in His Mercy, attaches mortals to the feet of the Saints.
ust 9938 ad Agel Ife 3H Adls ANTES IAI (1134-1, Sa8, v8 4)
gur sabdee har bhaj surat samaa-in. ||1]| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, vibrate and meditate on the Lord; let your awareness be absorbed in Him. ||1]|
Hd HO dfs SH OH BITES I (1134-1, FaB, 2 4) mayray man har bhaj naam naraa-in. O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord and the Name of the Lord.
dfs ofe four ag quest TaHfy sane dhe of Safes NA TIS Il 1134-1, Sa, He 4) har har kirpaa karay sukh-daata gurmukh bhavjal har naam taraa-in. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of Peace, grants His Grace; the Gurmukh crosses over the terrifying world-ocean through the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
Hafs Ava Afs afs afes i (1134-2, Se, He 4) sangat saaDh mayl har gaa-in. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing of the Lord.
TIHSt B TH FATSS Il (1134-3, Fa, 2 4) gurmatee lay raam rasaa-in. ||2]| Follow the Guru's Teachings, and you shall obtain the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||2||
as AY nifys fara Afs otES Il (1134-3, Fa, Hs 4) gur saaDhoo amrit gi-aan sar naa-in. Bathe in the pool of ambrosial nectar, the spiritual wisdom of the Holy Guru.
Afs faofee uu ge wetes iil (1134-3, sa@, ve 4) sabh kilvikh paap ga-ay gaavaa-in. ||3]| All sins will be eliminated and eradicated. ||3]|
3 uy ast figAfe gates i (1134-4, 338, H8 4) too aapay kartaa sarisat Dharaa-in. You Yourself are the Creator, the Support of the Universe.
HO sod Als ST OA SATES ISIA (1134-4, Sa, He 4) jan naanak mayl tayraa daas dasaa-in. ||4]||1]| Please unite servant Nanak with Yourself; he is the slave of Your slaves. ||4]|1]|
SIC HIS 8 Il (1134-5)
bhairo mehlaa 4. Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
Sfs af an A|ew AT wet Il (1134-5, Sa, Hz 4) bol har naam safal saa gharee. Fruitful is that moment when the Lord's Name is spoken.
as Guefh Afs ey UdTdT NA (1134-5, Sa, He 4) gur updays sabh dukh parharee. ||1|| Following the Guru's Teachings, all pains are taken away. ||1]|
Hd HO dfs SH OH Sd Il (1134-6, SaB, He 4) mayray man har bhaj naam narharee. O my mind, vibrate the Name of the Lord.
ate fas Hog Ig us AsHals Afar fig SV sat uA FITS il 1134-6, Sag, we 4)
kar kirpaa maylhu gur pooraa satsangat sang sinDh bha-o taree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O Lord, be merciful, and unite me with the Perfect Guru. Joining with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause]|
Hates fomrfe ufe ate fAHat i 1134-7, SeB, Hs 4) jagjeevan Dhi-aa-ay man har simree. Meditate on the Life of the World; remember the Lord in your mind.
ae aSsa SF uy UsTd QM (1134-7, Ss8, 2 4) kot kotantar tayray paap parharee. ||2]| Millions upon millions of your sins shall be taken away. ||2| |
AsAats AG Ofs yfe ust il (1134-7, 338, 2 4) satsangat saaDh Dhoor mukh paree. In the Sat Sangat, apply the dust of the feet of the holy to your face;
fenas at nionfo HIATT SII (1134-8, Se8, Hz 4) isnaan kee-o athsath sursaree. ||3]|| this is how to bathe in the sixty-eight sacred shrines, and the Ganges. ||3]|
JH Hae AS ata fxsur act i (1134-8, Se, 2 4) ham moorakh ka-o har kirpaa karee. I am a fool; the Lord has shown mercy to me.
Ho soa Sts sage Jat WSiNQM (1134-8, Fa@, He 4) jan naanak taari-o taaran haree. ||4]|2]| The Savior Lord has saved servant Nanak. ||4||2||
SIC HIS g Il (1134-9) bhairo mehlaa 4. Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
Hfazs adat ATS AUNT Il (1134-9, Sa@, v8 4) sukarit karnee saar japmaalee. To do good deeds is the best rosary.
fase dfs 3S SO Set NU (1134-9, SG, He 4) hirdai fayr chalai tuDh naalee. ||1]| Chant on the beads within your heart, and it shall go along with you. ||1]|
dfs ots SH AU Foes Il 1134-10, Fa, He 4) har har naam japahu banvaalee. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Lord of the forest.
ate fase Hog AsHats Sfe aet wfeor AH AST NA TIS il 1134-10, Fa, ws 4)
kar kirpaa maylhu satsangat toot ga-ee maa-i-aa jam jaalee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Have mercy on me, Lord, and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, so that I may be released from Maya's noose of death. ||1||Pause| |
aaHty Ae urtes fate wrest i (1134-11, Se8, v2 4)
gurmukh sayvaa ghaal jin ghaalee. Whoever, as Gurmukh, serves and works hard,
fA waht Age AMT caATSt NI (1134-11, 3e8, He 4) tis gharhee-ai sabad sachee taksaalee. ||2]| is molded and shaped in the true mint of the Shabad, the Word of God. ||2]|
dfs wan wiied afs wan feast il 1134-12, 338, 2 4) har agam agochar gur agam dikhaalee. The Guru has revealed to me the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord.
fefs afeor sag Ba dfs STS MSI (1134-12, SaB, He 4)
vich kaa-i-aa nagar laDhaa har bhaalee. ||3]| Searching within the body-village, I have found the Lord. ||3]|
JH ate ofa fusr yfsuret i 1134-12, S38, ue 4) ham baarik har pitaa partipaalee. I am just a child; the Lord is my Father, who nurtures and cherishes me.
HS SOA ST Sele forest sii (1134-13, FsC, nz 4)
jan naanak taarahu nadar nihaalee. ||4]|3]| Please save servant Nanak, Lord; bless him with Your Glance of Grace. ||4]|3]|
SI HIS 8 I (1134-13) bhairo mehlaa 4. Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
Aig we So J Asa HAT Il (1134-13, 3s, He 4) sabh ghat tayray too sabhnaa maahi. All hearts are Yours, Lord; You are in all.
33 3 wofs aet ata All (1134-14, Sa8, He 4) tujh tay baahar ko-ee naahi. ||1]| There is nothing at all except You. ||1]|
dfs AMSTST HT HO AY Il (1134-14, eB, He 4) har sukh-daata mayray man jaap. O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace.
I su Hod FAT as ys ay NU! TIS Ml (1134-14, 3G, we 4) ha-o tuDh saalaahee too mayraa har parabh baap. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I praise You, O Lord God, You are my Father. ||1]|Pause| |
Ad Ag tur 30 dfs ys APE It (1134-15, Sa, 2 4) jah jah daykhaa tah har parabh so-ay. Wherever I look, I see only the Lord God.
AS 39 SA VA nie” B AE MQM (1134-15, Fa, we 4) sabh tayrai vas doojaa avar na ko-ay. ||2|| All are under Your control; there is no other at all. ||2||
fan ag 3H ofa ohm sre I (1134-16, S58, He 4) jis ka-o tum har raakhi-aa bhaavai. O Lord, when it is Your Will to save someone,
fSA dt 33 ofS 5 AS ISI (1134-16, 358, He 4) tis kai nayrhai ko-ay na jaavai. ||3]| then nothing can threaten him. ||3]|
3 ale af Hdmi AS 3 saute Il (1134-16, 338, He 4)
too jal thal mahee-al sabh tai bharpoor.
You are totally pervading and permeating the waters, the lands, the skies and all places.
Ao otoe ote Af THe Jafs ISIS (1134-17, Fae, He 4)
jan naanak har jap haajraa hajoor. ||4||4|| Servant Nanak meditates on the Ever-present Lord. ||4]||4||
SIC HIG 8 WI 2 (1134-18) bhairo mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars ure Il (1134-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fs a AZ ofs at ofe Hats faR fose ofs oH HATS II (1134-19, 338, Hs 4)
har kaa sant har kee har moorat jis hirdai har naam muraar.
The Lord's Saint is the embodiment of the Lord; within his heart is the Name of the Lord.
HASfa sa de fan fofter A asHfs fose ofe ony ANTS IAI (1134-19, 3a, He 4) mastak bhaag hovai jis likhi-aa so gurmat hirdai har naam sam"aar. ||1]|
One who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, follows the Guru's Teachings, and contemplates the Name of the Lord within his heart. ||1]|
usar qq3u
HOneS AUbA Ss ots i 1135-1, Fs@, He 4) maDhusoodan japee-ai ur Dhaar. Enshrine Him in your heart, and meditate on the Lord.
edt sald SAAT UT OS Ts Aaet ofa ars HT UU TTS il 1135-1, Sd, we 4) dayhee nagar taskar panch Dhaatoo gur sabdee har kaadhay maar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The five plundering thieves are in the body-village; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord has beaten them and driven them out. ||1]|Pause] |
fio a of ASt He Hour fe area ate nef Ate I (1135-2, Se8, Hs 4)
jin kaa har saytee man maani-aa tin kaaraj har aap savaar.
Those whose minds are satisfied with the Lord - the Lord Himself resolves their affairs.
fs Yat HTH Bas at af visitarg ahr AesTs MMI 1135-3, Fs, we 4)
tin chookee muhtaajee lokan kee har angeekaar kee-aa kartaar. ||2||
Their subservience and their dependence on other people is ended; the Creator Lord is on their side. ||2]|
Hat HAS St fas ate A fas Te ofe was il 1135-3, Fa, Hs 4)
mataa masoorat taa™ kichh keejai jay kichh hovai har baahar.
If something were beyond the realm of the Lord's Power, only then would we have recourse to consult someone else.
ni fae ad Het 36 at ofs fmreg nafes on Hefe NSH (1135-4, 358, He 4) jo kichh karai so-ee bhal hosee har Dhi-aavahu an-din naam muraar. ||3]| Whatever the Lord does is good. Meditate on the Name of the Lord, night and day.
[I3I|
ofs Ft fas as A nm om Gy ufe 3 fan ad seta Il (1135-5, 3a@, we 4) har jo kichh karay so aapay aapay oh poochh na kisai karay beechaar. Whatever the Lord does, He does by Himself. He does not ask or consult anyone else.
soa A ys Aer foment fafs Afr vfsag fasur of enanull 1135-5, sa, He 4)
naanak so parabh sadaa Dhi-aa-ee-ai jin mayli-aa satgur kirpaa Dhaar. ||4]|1]|5|| O Nanak, meditate forever on God; granting His Grace, He unites us with the True Guru. |]4]]1]|5]|
SIG HIT 8 Il (1135-6) bhairo mehlaa 4. Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
3 AY ofs Hog Hom fae afm afs af Mrs I 1135-6, 33@, vs 4)
tay saaDhoo har maylhu su-aamee jin japi-aa gat ho-ay hamaaree.
O my Lord and Master, please unite me with the Holy people; meditating on You, I am saved.
fo at van ef Ho fear fue fue fae a 3G afar NAN 1135-7, 358, He 4)
tin kaa daras daykh man bigsai khin khin tin ka-o ha-o balihaaree. ||1||
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, my mind blossoms forth. Each and every moment, I am a sacrifice to them. ||1]|
dfs fase vf ay HTH II (1135-8, a8, He 4) har hirdai jap naam muraaree. Meditate within your heart on the Name of the Lord.
four faur af was fus Aymit mn eAfs oA ath ufsordt Al TIS Il 1135-8, FG, v2 4) kirpaa kirpaa kar jagat pit su-aamee ham daasan daas keejai panihaaree. ||1]|| rahaa- O. Show Mercy, Mercy to me, O Father of the World, O my Lord and Master; make me the water-carrier of the slave of Your slaves. ||1]|Pause| |
fae HfS G3u fae ufs Osu fre food efhor asec I 1135-9, 338, 3 4)
tin mat ootam tin pat ootam jin hirdai vasi-aa banvaaree.
Their intellect is sublime and exalted, and so is their honor; the Lord, the Lord of the forest, abides within their hearts.
fs at Ret ofe afs Amit fSo fires afs df Drs II 1135-9, 3a8, He 4)
tin kee sayvaa laa-ay har su-aamee tin simrat gat ho-ay hamaaree. ||2||
O my Lord and Master, please link me to the service of those who meditate in remembrance on You, and are saved. ||2||
fas wit fsa ATG 3 Ufeer 3 ofs waa are HSH I (1135-10, SaG, He 4) jin aisaa satgur saaDh na paa-i-aa tay har dargeh kaadhay maaree.
Those who do not find such a Holy True Guru are beaten, and driven out of the Court of the Lord.
3 3d feea As 5 urefs f85 oa aS franoa dH ISI (1135-11, Sa@, He 4)
tay nar nindak sobh na paavahi tin nak kaatay sirjanhaaree. ||3]||
These slanderous people have no honor or reputation; their noses are cut by the Creator Lord. ||3]|
dfs orf gare nm 88 fe orf fedne fadarg faaract Il 1135-11, 358, v2 4)
har aap bulaavai aapay bolai har aap niranjan nirankaar niraahaaree.
The Lord Himself speaks, and the Lord Himself inspires all to speak; He is Immaculate and Formless, and needs no sustenance.
ofs fra 3 Hots A 30 fHoAt AS soa for Sfa HS feast NSNINEl (135-12, Fs@, we 4) har jis too mayleh so tuDh milsee jan naanak ki-aa ayhi jant vichaaree. ||4]|2||6||
O Lord, he alone meets You, whom You cause to meet. Says servant Nanak, Iam a wretched creature. What can I do? ||4]|2]|6]|
SIG HIS 8 Il (1135-13)
bhairo mehlaa 4. Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
AsHats Aet ofa Sct fas ofe atefs dfs Aas Il 1135-13, Sa@, He 4)
satsangat saa-ee har tayree jit har keerat har sunnay.
That is Your True Congregation, Lord, where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are heard.
fe dfs oH Afr He star f8a JH Ad fos Fee UU (1135-14, 3s8, ws 4)
jin har naam suni-aa man bheenaa tin ham sarayveh nit charnay. ||1||
The minds of those who listen to the Lord's Name are drenched with bliss; I worship their feet continually. ||1]|
Aanles Ste foMrfs sage i (1135-14, FaB, v2 4) jagjeevan har Dhi-aa-ay tarnay. Meditating on the Lord, the Life of the World, the mortals cross over.
MOA MAY SH Tia 3a o AST fAGe fES THe WAU TIS i (1135-15, FaW, ne 4) anayk asa‘kh naam har tayray na jaahee jihvaa it gannay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Your Names are so many, they are countless, O Lord. This tongue of mine cannot even count them. ||1]|Pause| |
Tae dfs sag os wes & Tanfs ofa wus I (1135-15, eG, ve 4)
gursikh har bolhu har gaavhu lay gurmat har japnay.
O Gursikhs, chant the Lord's Name, and sing the Praises of the Lord. Take the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the Lord.
na Quen He Td AT A HS US Tis AY WE NI (1135-16, Sa8, v2 4)
jo updays sunay gur kayraa so jan paavai har sukh ghanay. ||2]|
Whoever listens to the Guru's Teachings - that humble being receives countless comforts and pleasures from the Lord. ||2||
Uo A A Uo A fust de A HST fafo Ao He Il (1135-17, 38, He 4)
Dhan so vans Dhan so pitaa Dhan so maataa jin jan janay.
Blessed is the ancestry, blessed is the father, and blessed is that mother who gave birth to this humble servant.
fae ATA faoth foorfeor As afte ofa A ATS esas Tis AS Fe ISI (1135-17, Fs@, He 4)
jin saas giraas Dhi-aa-i-aa mayraa har har say saachee dargeh har jan banay. ||3]|| Those who meditate on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and morsel of food - those humble servants of the Lord look beautiful in the True Court of the Lord. ||3]|
Uf dfs nan oH dfs 3a fete sast dfs Use Il (1135-18, FaB, v1 4)
har har agam naam har tayray vich bhagtaa har Dharnay.
O Lord, Har, Har, Your Names are profound and infinite; Your devotees cherish them deep within.
Soa Als Ufeur Hfs Tents afu ofe ats utes use NIBIDI (1135-19, Fa, He 4) naanak jan paa-i-aa mat gurmat jap har har paar pavnay. ||4||3]|7]|
Servant Nanak has obained the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings; meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, he crosses over to the other side. ||4]|3]|7]||
Ua q93E
SIC HIST U WE A (1136-1) bhairo mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars Are Il (1136-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Raet Sf uf afe anit i win|n aifs afge Aor At A (1136-2, Sa, He 5)
saglee theet paas daar raakhee. astam theet govind janmaa see. ||1]| Setting aside all other days, it is said that the Lord was born on the eighth lunar day. [1II
SIH 3G BI ATS ATITES Il (1136-2, Sa, 2 5) bharam bhoolay nar karat kachraa-in. Deluded and confused by doubt, the mortal practices falsehood.
HOH HIE 3 TIS FSIS AU! TIS Il (1136-3, FaS, Hz 5)
janam maran tay rahat naaraa-in. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord is beyond birth and death. ||1]|Pause] |
afe ute wefeS Fa i (1136-3, 3a8, v2 5) kar panjeer khavaa-i-o chor. You prepare sweet treats and feed them to your stone god.
6g Haft & Hd J AAS Sg MQM (1136-3, S08, we 5) oh janam na marai ray saakat dhor. ||2| | God is not born, and He does not die, you foolish, faithless cynic! ||2] |
Hae usa ef Sat Il (1136-4, Sa, vz 5) Sagal paraaDh deh loronee. You sing lullabyes to your stone god - this is the source of all your mistakes.
AH yy nee fas agfo sag Fat SI (1136-4, 3a8, He 5) so mukh jala-o jit kaheh thaakur jonee. ||3]|| Let that mouth be burnt, which says that our Lord and Master is subject to birth. ||3]|
Hath o Hd B Mie ] AME I (1136-5, Sa, v2 5) janam na marai na aavai na jaa-ay. He is not born, and He does not die; He does not come and go in reincarnation.
Soa a US SoG AHTE SIA (1136-5, Sa, 18 5)
naanak kaa parabh rahi-o samaa-ay. ||4||1]| The God of Nanak is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||4||1]|
SI HIST U Il (1136-5)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Gos Adbr 8os Aer I 1136-6, Fae, 3 5) oothat sukhee-aa baithat sukhee-aa. Standing up, I am at peace; sitting down, I am at peace.
38 adt oa AT MA TST INA 1136-6, 3a8, v2 5) bha-o nahee laagai jaa" aisay bujhee-aa. ||1]| I feel no fear, because this is what I understand. ||1||
aa Sa THs" AMMT I (1136-6, Fa@, v8 5) raakhaa ayk hamaaraa su-aamee. The One Lord, my Lord and Master, is my Protector.
Aas Wet at visa ail Tae il 1136-7, Sa, nz 5) sagal ghataa kaa antarjaamee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts. ||1]|Pause] |
Afe mifsar afar wifsar i 1136-7, 3sG, v2 5) so-ay achintaa jaag achintaa. I sleep without worry, and I awake without worry.
AS Ad Ys F PIST Ill (1136-7, Fa, ns 5)
jahaa kahaa™ parabh too” vartantaa. ||2]| You, O God, are pervading everywhere. ||2||
wig Afe effort wots AY ufent Il 1136-8, Sa8, v8 5) ghar sukh vasi-aa baahar sukh paa-i-aa. I dwell in peace in my home, and I am at peace outside.
ag aod Hfs HZ feafeor Wai 1136-8, S38, He 5) kaho naanak gur mantar drirh-aa-i-aa. ||3]||2| | Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted His Mantra within me. ||3]|2| |
SI HIT U Il (1136-9)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
ZdIS B ICG B HI SHES Il (1136-9, SaS, He 5) varat na raha-o na mah ramdaanaa. I do not keep fasts, nor do I observe the month of Ramadaan.
fSH ASt A Te feevar A 1136-9, Sa8, He 5) tis sayvee jo rakhai nidaanaa. ||1]|| I serve only the One, who will protect me in the end. ||1]|
Sa TAT mw HS Il (1136-9, Fa@, Hz 5) ayk gusaa-ee alhu mayraa. The One Lord, the Lord of the World, is my God Allah.
foe Jaq Tat Sa UU TIS Il (1136-10, Fa, 3 5) hindoo turak duhaa™ naybayraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He adminsters justice to both Hindus and Muslims. ||1]|Pause] |
TA HS WE S Sts UAT Il 1136-10, Fa@, we 5) haj kaabai jaa-o na tirath poojaa. I do not make pilgrimages to Mecca, nor do I worship at Hindu sacred shrines.
Sa At oeT F A IM (1136-10, Fa@, we 5) ayko sayvee avar na doojaa. ||2]| I serve the One Lord, and not any other. ||2||
uM ade o foe TATE Il (1136-11, S38, He 5) poojaa kara-o na nivaaj gujaara-o. I do not perform Hindu worship services, nor do I offer the Muslim prayers.
fa fadars & fae SHAATSE ISI (1136-11, 308, Hz 5) ayk nirankaar lay ridai namaskaara-o. ||3]| I have taken the One Formless Lord into my heart; I humbly worship Him there. ||3]|
OT TH foe S HABHTS Il (1136-11, Fae, 8 5) naa ham hindoo na musalmaan. I am not a Hindu, nor am I a Muslim.
Med TH a ffs uss Iii (1136-12, 3a8, v2 5) alah raam kay pind paraan. ||4|| My body and breath of life belong to Allah - to Raam - the God of both. ||4]|
ag wate feg aha saree il (1136-12, Sa@, Hz 5) kaho kabeer ih kee-aa vakhaanaa. Says Kabeer, this is what I say:
aa ute fife ufe aA UsTaT NUNS (1136-12, sa@, He 5) gur peer mil khud khasam pachhaanaa. ||5||3]|
meeting with the Guru, my Spiritual Teacher, I realize God, my Lord and Master. S113] |
SIC HIS U Il (1136-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
on firect Aon afa mist Il (1136-13, Se8, Hz 5) das mirgee sehjay banDh aanee. I easily tied up the deer - the ten sensory organs.
uta faa Sa fre at arat Ail 1136-13, Ss@, He 5)
paa‘ch mirag bayDhay siv kee baanee. ||1]| I shot five of the desires with the Word of the Lord's Bani. ||1]|
HaAfa & sis frag il (1136-14, 3a, vs 5) satsang lay charhi-o sikaar. I go out hunting with the Saints,
faa ues fag us gebors Al TIS Il (1136-14, FsB, v8 5) marig pakray bin ghor hathee-aar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and we capture the deer without horses or weapons. ||1]||Pause| |
nag fasts wofe wmfeS of Il 1136-14, 388, He 5) aakhayr birat baahar aa-i-o Dhaa-ay. My mind used to run around outside hunting.
wos utes we a aE QI (1136-15, Ss8, He 5) ahayraa paa-i-o ghar kai gaa’-ay. ||2]| But now, I have found the game within the home of my body-village. ||2| |
fat uad uf mre ate I (1136-15, Fa8, He 5) marig pakray ghar aanay haat. I caught the deer and brought them home.
ou gy B we ae ate Ill (1136-16, 3a@, He 5) chukh chukh lay ga-ay baa“dhay baat. ||3]| Dividing them up, I shared them, bit by bit. ||3]|
ST wid ate BS Il (1136-16, SsG, v2 5) ayhu ahayraa keeno daan. God has given this gift.
SoA A Ufg ASH SH III (1136-16, Fs, He 5) naanak kai ghar kayval naam. ||4||4| | Nanak's home is filled with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|4||
SI HIS U Il (1136-17)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
AAG Sfe Sfe weer Il (1136-17, 358, v2 5) jay sa-o loch loch khaavaa-i-aa. Even though he may be fed with hundreds of longings and yearnings,
Has Uf dfs ss o mrfenr All (1136-17, SaB, He 5)
saakat har har cheet na aa-i-aa. ||1]| still the faithless cynic does not remember the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
HZ Fat at BT HS Il (1136-17, 3a, He 5) sant janaa kee layho matay. Take in the teachings of the humble Saints.
AUHfa UST USH TS UU! FIC il 1136-18, Fs, v2 5) saaDhsang paavhu param gatay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall obtain the supreme status. ||1]|Pause] |
uTag A ag Ste UStemt Il (1136-18, Fa, He 5) paathar ka-o baho neer pavaa-i-aa. Stones may be kept under water for a long time.
oo Stat nfo Forte iI! (1136-18, S38, He 5) nah bheegai aDhik sookaa-i-aa. ||2|| Even so, they do not absorb the water; they remain hard and dry. ||2||
Yat 1932
We AAS Had Hotenr | 1137-1, 398, 3 5) khat saastar moorkhai sunaa-i-aa. The six Shaastras may be read to a fool,
AA vd fen ueg sofenr sil 1137-1, 388, He 5) jaisay dah dis pavan jhulaa-i-aa. ||3]|| but it is like the wind blowing in the ten directions. ||3]|
fag Ae UBS AA Ado ufenr Il (1137-2, FG, He 5) bin kan khalhaan jaisay gaahan paa-i-aa. It is like threshing a crop without any corn - nothing is gained.
fs@ Was 3 a 5 Baer gil (1137-2, 388, He 5) ti-o saakat tay ko na baraasaa-i-aa. ||4] | In the same way, no benefit comes from the faithless cynic. ||4]|
fas ct oor fas & ofenr I 1137-2, 358, H2 5) tit hee laagaa jit ko laa-i-aa. As the Lord attaches them, so are all attached.
ag sod ufs des water UNI (1137-3, Fae, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh banat banaa-i-aa. ||5||5|| Says Nanak, God has formed such a form. ||5|[5]|
SIC HIS U Il (1137-3) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
mG ure fafs sfeG Ate Il (1137-3, 338, He 5) jee-o paraan jin rachi-o sareer. He created the soul, the breath of life and the body.
frots Sure fSA aS ute All (1137-4, 3a, v2 5) jineh upaa-ay tis ka-o peer. ||1]| He created all beings, and knows their pains. ||1]|
Ge dfse Abt x AM I (1137-4, Fa, ne 5) gur gobind jee-a kai kaam. The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, is the Helper of the soul.
Jos UBS A at AS SH UA FITS Il (1137-4, Fa, vs 5)
halat palat jaa kee sad chhaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Here and herafter, He always provides shade. ||1||Pause||
yg wires feds SHS Il (1137-5, 3G, v3 5) parabh aaraaDhan nirmal reet. Worship and adoration of God is the pure way of life.
AaAfa fort faust wi (1137-5, ss8, He 5) saaDhsang binsee bipreet. ||2]| In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the love of duality vanishes. ||2]|
HIS SS US BI ura Il (1137-5, FaS, He 5) meet heet Dhan nah paarnaa. Friends, well-wishers and wealth will not support you.
Ufe ufs He oratfear SII (1137-6, Fa@, He 5) Dhan Dhan mayray naaraa-inaa. ||3]| Blessed, blessed is my Lord. ||3]|
Sg 8S nifys aret i 1137-6, 3a@, ue 5) naanak bolai amrit banee. Nanak utters the Ambrosial Bani of the Lord.
Sa faat ert adt At SIEM (1137-6, 338, He 5) ayk binaa doojaa nahee jaanee. ||4||6|| Except the One Lord, he does not know any other at all. ||4]|6] |
3d HIS U Il (1137-7)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Wd VA UTE BTITES Il 1137-7, SaC, Hz 5) aagai da-yu paachhai naaraa-in. The Lord is in front of me, and the Lord is behind me.
Hfa ata fs YH STATES WAU (1137-7, FaS, v2 5) maDh bhaag har paraym rasaa-in. ||1|| My Beloved Lord, the Source of Nectar, is in the middle as well. ||1||
Ys THs ATAS ABS Il (1137-8, 3a, Hs 5) parabhoo hamaarai saastar sa-un. God is my Shaastra and my favorable omen.
AY Aan nse foyT SVS NU TI Il (1137-8, Fa, ns 5) sookh sahj aanand garih bha-un. ||1|| rahaa-o. In His Home and Mansion, I find peace, poise and bliss. ||1]||Pause||
TAS SH AS Ale AS Il (1137-8, SaS, He 5)
rasnaa naam karan sun jeevay.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with my tongue, and hearing it with my ears, I live.
yg faufs finife une fag ate i2U 137-9, 338, He 5)
parabh simar simar amar thir theevay. ||2]|
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I have become eternal, permanent and stable. ||2]|
HOH HOH A Ta fSers il 1137-9, Fa, ve 5) janam janam kay dookh nivaaray. The pains of countless lifetimes have been erased.
Mode AAS SA PIAS ISI (1137-9, Fs@, v1 5)
anhad sabad vajay darbaaray. ||3]||
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, vibrates in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
afd fasur ufs ate fre i (1137-10, 3a, v8 5) kar kirpaa parabh lee-ay milaa-ay. Granting His Grace, God has blended me with Himself.
Sot YS AdStals MES SIDI (1137-10, Fd, v2 5) naanak parabh sarnaagat aa-ay. ||4||7|| Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God. ||4]||7]||
3d HIS U Il (1137-10)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
afe Hoda wiefs IE Il (1137-10, Sa@, v2 5) kot manorath aavahi haath. It brings millions of desires to fulfillment.
AH Ha A Halt Ure NAM (1137-11, SsS, He 5) jam maarag kai sangee paa"th. ||1|| On the Path of Death, It will go with you and help you. ||1||
Ha AS Td afse SH Il (1137-11, Se, He 5) gangaa jal gur gobind naam. The Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe, is the holy water of the Ganges.
A find fSn at afs dé utes safe 6 Fife SHH AU TIS It 1137-11, 38, 2 5)
jo simrai tis kee gat hovai peevat bahurh na jon bharmaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Whoever meditates on it, is saved; drinking it in, the mortal does not wander in reincarnation again. ||1]|Pause| |
uF ATY stu fears Il (1137-12, 3s8, 42 5) poojaa jaap taap isnaan. It is my worship, meditation, austerity and cleansing bath.
fAHgs BH SS fSIAH II (1137-12, S58, 2 5)
simrat naam bha-ay nihkaam. ||2| | Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, I have become free of desire. ||2| |
TH HS ASS CIA Il (1137-13, dC, 3 5)
raaj maal saadan darbaar. It is my domain and empire, wealth, mansion and court.
finigs oH UIs MIT ISI (1137-13, 33, H3 5)
simrat naam pooran aachaar. ||3]|| Meditating in remembrance on the Naam brings perfect conduct. ||3]|
Soa OA fSg abt stars i (1137-13, Se, vs 5) naanak daas ih kee-aa beechaar. Slave Nanak has deliberated, and has come to this conclusion:
fag dfs on fufaor AS Ss NSIT (1137-14, S38, v8 5)
bin har naam mithi-aa sabh chhaar. ||4||8]]| Without the Lord's Name, everything is false and worthless, like ashes. ||4||8]|
SIC HIST U Il (1137-14)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Buy 3 wal fe a HAS I (1137-14, 3a, He 5) layp na laago til kaa mool. The poison had absolutely no harmful effect.
CHS FHS Hur ae a AS WAU (1137-15, Fs@, He 5)
dusat baraahman moo-aa ho-ay kai sool. ||1]| But the wicked Brahmin died in pain. ||1]|
dfs AS TY uTsqafH mrfU il (1137-15, Ss, v2 5)
har jan raakhay paarbarahm aap.
The Supreme Lord God Himself has saved His humble servant. undt wat as usstfy NAM FITS Ml (1137-15, Ss, He 5)
paapee moo-aa gur partaap. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The sinner died through the Power of the Guru. ||1]|Pause] | muel wAH AfS wit fomrfenr | (1137-16, a8, He 5)
apnaa khasam jan aap Dhi-aa-i-aa. The humble servant of the Lord and Master meditates on Him.
femrat unit 6g vrfu ustfemr QI (1137-16, 3a@, 12 5) i-aanaa paapee oh aap pachaa-i-aa. ||2|| He Himself has destroyed the ignorant sinner. ||2||
ys HS fust nue BTA AT TASH I (1137-17, FTC, He 5) parabh maat pitaa apnay daas kaa rakhvaalaa. God is the Mother, the Father and the Protector of His slave.
eee at rer Stat Gar arer BI (1137-17, Sa, 8 5) nindak kaa maathaa eehaa™ oohaa kaalaa. ||3]| The face of the slanderer, here and hereafter, is blackened. ||3]|
Ho Soa at USHAG Hat META II (1137-18, Fae, 2 5) jan naanak kee parmaysar sunee ardaas. The Transcendent Lord has heard the prayer of servant Nanak.
Hee udt ufenr sfenr fea ISIN (1137-18, Se8, He 5) malaychh paapee pachi-aa bha-i-aa niraas. ||4||9]| The filthy sinner lost hope and died. ||4]|9]|
SI HIS U Il (1137-19)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Ue ue ye ye ye SF SH Il 1137-19, 39, vs 5) khoob khoob khoob khoob khoob tayro naam. Excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent is Your Name.
3O 3S 3S FO Tat MG NU ITC It (1137-19, Sa, v2 5) jhooth jhooth jhooth jhooth dunee gumaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. False, false, false, false is pride in the world. ||1||Pause| |
xs LON
San Sd Fe Steg MMU Il (1137-19, Sa@, ns 5) nagaj tayray banday deedaar apaar. The glorious vision of Your slaves, O Infinite Lord, is wonderful and beauteous.
Ua qq3at
om faa AS vot srs WAU (1138-1, Sa, He 5) naam binaa sabh dunee-aa chhaar. ||1|| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is just ashes. ||1]|
Md Sot ACas SI AEH ABT Ill (1138-1, Fs, ve 5) achraj tayree kudrat tayray kadam salaah. Your Creative Power is marvellous, and Your Lotus Feet are admirable.
date sat frefs AS UPSATT NI (1138-2, Sa8, He 5)
ganeev tayree sifat sachay paatisaah. ||2|| Your Praise is priceless, O True King. ||2||
Saft Us UST Wee Il (1138-2, se@, vs 5) neeDhri-aa Dhar panah khudaa-ay. God is the Support of the unsupported.
ada foea fea df= fomrfe ai «138-2, 338, 2 5)
gareeb nivaaj din rain Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]|
Meditate day and night on the Cherisher of the meek and humble. ||3] | aoa AS ute wAN fHISTS Il (1138-3, Sa@, He 5)
naanak ka-o khud khasam miharvaan. God has been merciful to Nanak.
Wed 3 fend few Abr use Isiqoll (1138-3, Sa, v2 5)
alhu na visrai dil jee-a paraan. ||4||10|| May I never forget God; He is my heart, my soul, my breath of life. ||4]]10]|
SIG HIST U Il (1138-4)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Ag uetse Taf BIT Il (1138-4, Sa@, v2 5) saach padaarath gurmukh lahhu. As Gurmukh, obtain the true wealth.
ys at stat Als ats Add Al (1138-4, Sa, we 5)
parabh kaa bhaanaa sat kar sahhu. ||1|| Accept the Will of God as True. ||1]]|
Ales Ales Ales FIT Il (1138-4, 3a@, v2 5) jeevat jeevat jeevat rahhu. Live, live, live forever.
oH sAtee fos Bfe uted Il (1138-5, 38, He 5) raam rasaa-in nit uth peevhu. Rise early each day, and drink in the Nectar of the Lord.
ofa of af ofs TAA ATT NA TIS Il (1138-5, FsC, Hz 5)
har har har har rasnaa kahhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause]|
atena xfs fea oth Burg il 1138-6, 3a, He 5) kalijug meh ik naam uDhaar. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the One Name alone shall save you.
SSX FS FIN Hag NINA (1138-6, FW, 8 5) naanak bolai barahm beechaar. ||2||11]| Nanak speaks the wisdom of God. ||2||11]|
SIC HIT U Il (1138-6) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Afsagd Afe ATs SH UES Il (1138-6, Fa, v1 5) satgur sayv sarab fal paa-ay. Serving the True Guru, all fruits and rewards are obtained.
HOH HOH at HS fevS All 1138-7, 3aC, v2 5) janam janam kee mail mitaa-ay. ||1|| The filth of so many lifetimes is washed away. ||1]]|
ufss uree us 3d OE I (1138-7, 308, v2 5) patit paavan parabh tayro naa-o. Your Name, God, is the Purifier of sinners.
usta aan fet TE TS Ul TIS il (1138-7, Fa, v2 5) poorab karam likhay gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Because of the karma of my past deeds, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
AY Afar FS Surg i 138-8, Fae, 3 5) saaDhoo sang hovai uDhaar. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am saved.
Hat ure YS A MTT Ill (1138-8, Fa, ve 5) sobhaa paavai parabh kai du-aar. ||2|| I am blessed with honor in God's Court. ||2]|
Hea aeons IIS YS AT Il (1138-8, 3a@, He 5) sarab kali-aan charan parabh sayvaa. Serving at God's Feet, all comforts are obtained.
ufs wefs Afs Afs og SS NSM (1138-9, Sse, v2 5) Dhoor baachheh sabh sur nar dayvaa. ||3]| All the angels and demi-gods long for the dust of the feet of such beings. ||3]|
aoa ust aH fears il (1138-9, FaC, v2 5) naanak paa-i-aa naam niDhaan. Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam.
dfs Afu Afu Gufemr Aas ATS ISIAH (1138-10, Fa, He 5) har jap jap uDhri-aa sagal jahaan. ||4]|12]| Chanting and meditating on the Lord, the whole world is saved. ||4]|12]|
SI HIS U Il (1138-10)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
mus BA AG afe Bare Il (1138-10, Se, He 5) apnay daas ka-o kanth lagaavai. God hugs His slave close in His Embrace.
feea a@ nafs ufo ure Wil (1138-11, 338, He 5) nindak ka-o agan meh paavai. ||1]| He throws the slanderer into the fire. ||1]|
unt 3 a rates Il (1138-11, Fa@, v2 5) paapee tay raakhay naaraa-in. The Lord saves His servants from the sinners.
undt at afs asg ardt unit ufo nrg SHAS AU TIS i (1138-11, FSB, He 5)
paapee kee gat kathoo naahee paapee pachi-aa aap kamaa-in. ||1]|| rahaa-o. No one can save the sinner. The sinner is destroyed by his own actions. ||1]|Pause| |
OA IH AG wait US i (1138-12, 38, ws 5) daas raam jee-o laagee pareet. The Lord's slave is in love with the Dear Lord.
fez at det faudtS in (1138-12, 3a8, v2 5) nindak kee ho-ee bipreet. ||2] | The slanderer loves something else. ||2||
ursqgatH uuer fase yatetfenr Il (1138-13, Se, v2 5) paarbarahm apnaa birad paragtaa-i-aa. The Supreme Lord God has revealed His Innate Nature.
aut nrrat ata urfemr 31 (1138-13, Se8, He 5) dokhee apnaa keetaa paa-i-aa. ||3]|| The evil-doer obtains the fruits of his own actions. ||3]|
mite & AST aon ANTS II (1138-13, SaB, He 5) aa-ay na jaa-ee rahi-aa samaa-ee. God does not come or go; He is All-pervading and permeating.
Soa BWA Tle at AdSvet ISIISI (1138-14, FaG, He 5)
naanak daas har kee sarnaa-ee. ||4||13]| Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||4]|13]|
Td SIS HIS u veue we 2 1138-15) raag bhairo mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 2 Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Chaupadas, Second House:
qe Afsas ure Il (1138-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hlog Hue wae Cures faders AYETST II (1138-16, Sa@, 8 5) sareeDhar mohan sagal upaavan nirankaar sukh-daata. The Fascinating Lord, the Creator of all, the Formless Lord, is the Giver of Peace.
mA us efs acts me Ae age fafimr SA HST IAI (1138-16, Fa, He 5)
aisaa parabh chhod karahi an sayvaa kavan bikhi-aa ras maataa. ||1]|
You have abandoned this Lord, and you serve another. Why are you intoxicated with the pleasures of corruption? ||1]|
3 Ho AS F fee SH Il 1138-17, 3a8, we 5) ray man mayray too govid bhaaj. O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
wed Cure AaG H Pe A fesdha fas faorsfh oH NA TIC It 1138-17, 358, v2 5)
avar upaav sagal mai daykhay jo chitvee-ai tit bigras kaaj. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have seen all other sorts of efforts; whatever you can think of, will only bring failure. ||1]|Pause| |
oad efs wt a frets Howe nic wifamrar Il (1138-18, 3a, He 5)
thaakur chhod daasee ka-o simrahi manmukh anDh agi-aanaa.
The blind, ignorant, self-willed manmukhs forsake their Lord and Master, and dwell on His slave Maya.
dfs at sats asts fe feeta fares UA ANAT QI (1138-18, Fae, 8 5) har kee bhagat karahi tin nindeh niguray pasoo samaanaa. ||2|| They slander those who worship their Lord; they are like beasts, without a Guru. ||2||
mG fils 3q US AS Us a AAS AIS AT Il (1138-19, Sa, Hs 5)
jee-o pind tan Dhan sabh parabh kaa saakat kahtay mayraa.
Soul, life, body and wealth all belong to God, but the faithless cynics claim that they own them.
usar qqat
widafa vaHfs 3 Hot fae ae senfs Sa SI 1139-1, Fa8, He 5)
aha‘-buDh durmat hai mailee bin gur bhavjal fayraa. ||3]|
They are proud and arrogant, evil-minded and filthy; without the Guru, they are reincarnated into the terrifying world-ocean. ||3]|
dH Aa AU Su Afs HAH ste Stefa act ufeor Ih (1139-1, Sa, v2 5)
hom jag jap tap sabh sanjam tat tirath nahee paa-i-aa.
Through burnt offerings, charitable feasts, ritualistic chants, penance, all sorts of austere self-discipline and pilgrimages to sacred shrines and rivers, they do not find God.
fufenr ny ue AgeTet TaHfy aoa AAS SofEMr ISNANASI (1139-2, Fae, He 5) miti-aa aap pa-ay sarnaa-ee gurmukh naanak jagat taraa-i-aa. ||4||1]|14]]| Self-conceit is only erased when one seeks the Lord's Sanctuary and becomes Gurmukh; O Nanak, he crosses over the world-ocean. ||4||1]|14]|
SI HIST U Il (1139-2)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
a6 Hf ufus fee Hfo utes fof uf GarAS | (1139-3, Se, we 5)
ban meh paykhi-o tarin meh paykhi-o garihi paykhi-o udaasaa-ay.
I have seen Him in the woods, and I have seen Him in the fields. I have seen Him in the household, and in renunciation.
surg Aeud ufys eas SH Stes IAI (1139-3, 3aG, v2 5)
dandDhaar jatDhaarai paykhi-o varat naym teerthaa-ay. ||1||
I have seen Him as a Yogi carrying His staff, as a Yogi with matted hair, fasting, making vows, and visiting sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1]||
HaAfa ufyG He He Il (1139-4, Sa, v2 5) satsang paykhi-o man maa-ay”. I have seen Him in the Society of the Saints, and within my own mind.
G3 ufemra Ava ufo use oH Hae TE WS AU TIS I (1139-4, Fa, ws 5)
oobh pa-i-aal sarab meh pooran ras mangal gun gaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the sky, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in everything, He is pervading and permeating. With love and joy, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]||Pause| |
Aa su AfoorA ufuS vfs Ham aTusTe | (1139-5, 3aG, v2 5)
jog bhaykh sanni-aasai paykhi-o jat jangam kaaprhaa-ay.
I have seen Him among the Yogis, the Sannyaasees, the celibates, the wandering hermits and the wearers of patched coats.
Sut sutas ufe ufo ufas oe afer fesse MQM (1139-5, a8, H8 5)
tapee tapeesur mun meh paykhi-o nat naatik nirtaa-ay. ||2||
I have seen Him among the men of severe self-discipline, the silent sages, the actors, dramas and dances. ||2||
vg fs uf we ufo US A AST fAAYSTS II 1139-6, Sa, v2 5)
chahu meh paykhi-o khat meh paykhi-o das astee simmritaa-ay.
I have seen Him in the four Vedas, I have seen Him in the six Shaastras, in the eighteen Puraanas and the Simritees as well.
AS firfs Sa Sa eurafs 38 fan 3 ae ETS NSM (1139-6, Fa, ne 5)
sabh mil ayko ayk vakhaaneh ta-o kis tay kaha-o duraa-ay. ||3]|
All together, they declare that there is only the One Lord. So tell me, from whom is He hidden? ||3]|
MAT MIT Fis AnMt og aH aH AS | 1139-7, Sa, ve 5)
agah agah bay-ant su-aamee nah keem keem keemaa-ay.
Unfathomable and Inaccessible, He is our Infinite Lord and Master; His Value is beyond valuation.
He aed fae a afs afs wen fro wile ugadinre sini (1139-8, Fe, He 5)
jan naanak tin kai bal bal jaa-ee-ai jih ghat pargatee-aa-ay. ||4||2||15]|
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those, within whose heart He is revealed. H41]2] [15] |
SI HIST U Il (1139-8) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
foafe 33 A gat fa ad Il 1139-9, a8, He 5) nikat bujhai so buraa ki-o karai. How can anyone do evil, if he realizes that the Lord is near?
fay He fas sas fed Il (1139-9, 358, He 5) bikh sanchai nit dartaa firai. One who gathers corruption, constantly feels fear.
d fsae ng se 0 ufemr Il (1139-9, 3a8, He 5) hai niktay ar bhayd na paa-i-aa. He is near, but this mystery is not understood.
faa Afsaa AS Hot wfeMr Wall 1139-10, Ss, He 5) bin satgur sabh mohee maa-i-aa. ||1]| Without the True Guru, all are enticed by Maya. ||1]||
NA NA &
ds OS AS A Ad Il (1139-10, Fa, v2 5) nayrhai nayrhai sabh ko kahai. Everyone says that He is near, near at hand.
aenfy se fegar & BI NU FIC Il (1139-10, Ss@, v2 5) gurmukh bhayd virlaa ko lahai. ||1]| rahaa-o. But rare is that person, who, as Gurmukh, understands this mystery. ||1]]Pause| |
feafe o fe ua fafa ate Wt (1139-11, 358, 42 5)
nikat na daykhai par garihi jaa-ay.
The mortal does not see the Lord near at hand; instead, he goes to the homes of others.
zag fod fifaor afe afe i (139-11, 338, 2 5) darab hirai mithi-aa kar khaa-ay. He steals their wealth and lives in falsehood.
uct oat ofs Afar o Afenr i (1139-11, S38, He 5)
pa-ee thag-uree har sang na jaani-aa.
Under the influence of the drug of illusion, he does not know that the Lord is with him.
MS TT oI sath Fotour QM (1139-12, 3a, ws 5) baajh guroo hai bharam bhulaani-aa. ||2]| Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||2]|
foafe & WS FS AZ Il 1139-12, Fa@, we 5) nikat na jaanai bolai koorh. Not understanding that the Lord is near, he tells lies.
Hfenr vfs HOt I HZ Il (1139-12, Fs@, we 5) maa-i-aa mohi moothaa hai moorh. In love and attachment to Maya, the fool is plundered.
nists ZAS fensts ATE II (1139-13, 338, He 5) antar vasat disantar jaa-ay. That which he seeks is within his own self, but he looks for it outside.
MS TT d sah Fore Si (1139-13, FaG, we 5) baajh guroo hai bharam bhulaa-ay. ||3]|| Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||3]|
fA HASta aaH ffm fswr| Il (1139-13, 3a, He 5) jis mastak karam likhi-aa lilaat. One whose good karma is recorded on his forehead
Afsag AS YB AUS Il (1139-14, Fa, ve 5) satgur sayvay khul"ay kapaat. serves the True Guru; thus the hard and heavy shutters of his mind are opened wide.
nists arate faae Af I (1139-14, 388, He 5) antar baahar niktay so-ay. Within his own being and beyond, he sees the Lord near at hand.
Ho sea wile & AS AE NSISIIE! (1139-14, FsG, He 5)
jan naanak aavai na jaavai ko-ay. ||4||3||16]| O servant Nanak, he does not come and go in reincarnation. ||4||3]|16]|
SI HIS U Il (1139-15) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
fan 3 oafs fSA ASS HS Il (1139-15, 3G, 8 5) jis too raakhahi tis ka-un maarai. Who can kill that person whom You protect, O Lord?
As 33 dt nists Aare AAS Il (1139-15, 308, He 5) sabh tujh hee antar sagal sansaarai. All beings, and the entire universe, is within You.
afe Gure fases J yrat Il (1139-16, 358, 48 5) kot upaav chitvat hai paraanee. The mortal thinks up millions of plans,
Ss 4A
A de fa ad oH fesret nl (1139-16, a8, He 5) so hovai je karai choj vidaanee. ||1|| but that alone happens, which the Lord of wondrous plays does. ||1||
aug aug fxgur ots il (1139-16, 3a, 12 5) raakho raakho kirpaa Dhaar. Save me, save me, O Lord; shower me with Your Mercy.
Sot Aafs 3d woes NA TIS Il (1139-16, Fa, v2 5) tayree saran tayrai darvaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. I seek Your Sanctuary, and Your Court. ||1]]Pause| |
fats Afeor fess@ AYETST II (1139-17, Sa@, v2 5)
jin sayvi-aa nirbha-o sukh-daata.
Whoever serves the Fearless Lord, the Giver of Peace, f3fe 38 ete other Sq UsTST Il (1139-17, Ss, He 5)
tin bha-o door kee-aa ayk paraataa.
is rid of all his fears; he knows the One Lord.
HZ aaa Aet Sfo ae it (1139-18, Sa, m2 5)
jo too karahi so-ee fun ho-ay. Whatever You do, that alone comes to pass in the end.
HS 3 IA SAT ALS Ml (1139-18, SW, ws 5) maarai na raakhai doojaa ko-ay. ||2|| There is no other who can kill or protect us. ||2||
foor 3 Aafe HEA ATE Il (1139-18, Fa, 2 5) ki-aa too socheh maanas baan. What do you think, with your human understanding?
Mad UTY HATS Il (1139-19, 358, He 5) antarjaamee purakh sujaan. The All-knowing Lord is the Searcher of Hearts.
Sa Sq Sa MMT Il (1139-19, 3a, ve 5) ayk tayk ayko aaDhaar. The One and only Lord is my Support and Protection.
AS fas We freed? ISI (1139-19, Sa, v2 5) sabh kichh jaanai sirjanhaar. ||3]| The Creator Lord knows everything. ||3]|
fan Sufs sefs AI ATS Il (1139-19, 3s, 42 5) jis oopar nadar karay kartaar. That person who is blessed by the Creator's Glance of Grace
UST A980
fan Ao & Afs aA Het Il (1140-1, 3a8, He 5) tis jan kay sabh kaaj savaar. - all his affairs are resolved.
fA or grat Sat AE I (1140-1, Sa, nH: 5) tis kaa raakhaa ayko so-ay. The One Lord is his Protector.
Ho sea nuts o Ata afe ISISNADI (1140-1, Fae, He 5)
jan naanak aparh na saakai ko-ay. ||4||4]|17]| O servant Nanak, no one can equal him. ||4]|4]|17]|
SIG HIS U Il (1140-2) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
38 asim A de aofe Il (1140-2, 388, v2 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay hovai baahar. We should feel sad, if God were beyond us.
38 asin F fers agate Il (1140-2, 398, v2 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay visrai narhar. We should feel sad, if we forget the Lord.
38 ast FEAT SS I (1140-3, Sa, we 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay doojaa bhaa-ay. We should feel sad, if we are in love with duality.
for asint at ofan AHS IIL (1140-3, Sa, He 5) ki-aa karhee-ai jaa‘ rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||1]| But why should we feel sad? The Lord is pervading everywhere. ||1]|
ufenr Hfs as afs ufemr |i (1140-3, 338, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi karhay karh pachi-aa. In love and attachment to Maya, the mortals are sad, and are consumed by sadness.
fag ae aft oft afk ufimr nan go@ it 1140-4, S38, v8 5)
bin naavai bharam bharam bharam khapi-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Name, they wander and wander and wander, and waste away. ||1]|Pause| |
38 ashy A A ATT I 1140-4, 3a, v3 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay doojaa kartaa. We should feel sad, if there were another Creator Lord.
38 asim A mfonnfe & NaS II (1140-4, 358, He 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay ani-aa-ay ko martaa.
We should feel sad, if someone dies by injustice. 38 asin F fas We adh Il (1140-5, a8, v2 5)
ta-o karhee-ai jay kichh jaanai naahee. We should feel sad, if something were not known to the Lord.
for asta At saufs ANTS QI (1140-5, 338, v8 5) ki-aa karhee-ai jaa’ bharpoor samaahee. ||2|| But why should we feel sad? The Lord is totally permeating everywhere. ||2||
38 asin A fae dfe fose i (140-5, 398, He 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay kichh ho-ay Dhinyaanai. We should feel sad, if God were a tyrant.
38 ash Fo af% Tee Il (1140-6, 398, He 5) ta-o karhee-ai jay bhool ranjaanay. We should feel sad, if He made us suffer by mistake.
afe afoor FH dfs As Ys 3 Il (1140-6, 358, 8 5) gur kahi-aa jo ho-ay sabh parabh tay. The Guru says that whatever happens is all by God's Will.
3a ast efs mifss oH AS ISI (1140-6, 388, HF 5) tab kaarhaa chhod achint ham sotay. ||3]| So I have abandoned sadness, and I now sleep without anxiety. ||3]|
Ys 3d SAT AS A ST Il (1140-7, 39, v3 5) parabh toohai thaakur sabh ko tayraa. O God, You alone are my Lord and Master; all belong to You.
fa@ are 38 aaa fader it (1140-7, 358, v2 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o karahi nibayraa. According to Your Will, You pass judgement.
esior ants fea stom ANTE I (1140-8, 3a@, v8 5)
dutee-aa naasat ik rahi-aa samaa-ay. There is no other at all; the One Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.
TUT UA Soa APSE NSIUNACI (1140-8, SaG, He 5) raakho paij naanak sarnaa-ay. ||4||5||18]| Please save Nanak's honor; I have come to Your Sanctuary. ||4]|5||18]|
SIG HIS U Il (1140-8) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
faa an an foafsardt il (1140-9, 3a8, v2 5) bin baajay kaiso nirtikaaree. Without music, how is one to dance?
oN AN
fag AS AA WeST eT Il (1140-9, Sa, vs 5) bin kanthai kaisay gaavanhaaree. Without a voice, how is one to sing?
ate faat aA aA Tara Il (1140-9, SaG, v2 5) jeel binaa kaisay bajai rabaab. Without strings, how is a guitar to be played?
on faa fase Afs AA NA (1140-9, Sa@, 2 5) naam binaa birthay sabh kaaj. ||1]| Without the Naam, all affairs are useless. ||1||
om fast add & Sfamt Il (1140-10, S58, v2 5) naam binaa kahhu ko tari-aa. Without the Naam - tell me: who has ever been saved?
fas Afsas an ute ufsr nail TIS tl (1140-10, Sa€, v2 5) bin satgur kaisay paar pari-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the True Guru, how can anyone cross over to the other side? ||1||Pause| |
faa faget OT X FAST I (1140-11, 3G, ve 5) bin jihvaa kahaa ko baktaa. Without a tongue, how can anyone speak?
fag Ao" AT A ASST Il (1140-11, Sa, ne 5) bin sarvanaa kahaa ko suntaa. Without ears, how can anyone hear?
fag 3" AT A UH Il (1140-11, Fs@, v8 5) bin naytaraa kahaa ko paykhai. Without eyes, how can anyone see?
oH faa og adt 5 BF MI (140-11, 3a8, v2 5) naam binaa nar kahee na laykhai. ||2|| Without the Naam, the mortal is of no account at all. ||2]|
fag fafeur ao aet ufss i (1140-12, 336, He 5) bin bidi-aa kahaa ko-ee pandit. Without learning, how can one be a Pandit - a religious scholar?
faa und AA aH HSS Il (1140-12, 398, v2 5) bin amrai kaisay raaj mandit. Without power, what is the glory of an empire?
fag FS AT HG STI Il (1140-12, Fa, ne 5) bin boojhay kahaa man thehraanaa. Without understanding, how can the mind become steady?
om faa AS Aa Sa ISI (1140-13, Se, v8 5) naam binaa sabh jag ba-uraanaa. ||3]| Without the Naam, the whole world is insane. ||3]|
fag Hoa AT Haat i (1140-13, Ss, ve 5) bin bairaag kahaa bairaagee. Without detachment, how can one be a detached hermit?
fas 3G fsorfa ax xB fSnrait ii 1140-13, Fa, v3 5) bin ha-o ti-aag kahaa ko-oo ti-aagee. Without renouncing egotism, how can anyone be a renunciate?
fag aff ue ao Hs VT Il (1140-14, 3a, He 5) bin bas panch kahaa man chooray. Without overcoming the five thieves, how can the mind be subdued?
on fiat Ae Ae dt Ss Sil (1140-14, Fa, 2 5) naam binaa sad sad hee jhooray. ||4|| Without the Naam, the mortal regrets and repents forever and ever. ||4||
fae aa cftmr an famre il 140-14, 3a8, nH 5)
bin gur deekhi-aa kaisay gi-aan.
Without the Guru's Teachings, how can anyone obtain spiritual wisdom? fas ua ag aA filme Il (1140-15, S58, He 5)
bin paykhay kaho kaiso Dhi-aan.
Without seeing - tell me: how can anyone visualize in meditation?
fas 3 agat Hea fears Il (1140-15, 3a8, He 5) bin bhai kathnee sarab bikaar. Without the Fear of God, all speech in useless.
AT FOX SI AT MIT NUNENAEM (1140-15, Fa, v2 5)
kaho naanak dar kaa beechaar. ||5||6||19]| Says Nanak, this is the wisdom of the Lord's Court. ||5]|6]|19]|
SIC HIS U Il (1140-16)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
ICH da HOY AG ear il (1140-16, Fa, v2 5) ha-umai rog maanukh ka-o deenaa. Mankind is afflicted with the disease of egotism.
aH dfat Hare ath Star il (1140-16, Sa, v2 5) kaam rog maigal bas leenaa. The disease of sexual desire overwhelms the elephant.
fenfe dfar ufs He usar i (1140-17, Fa, ne 5) darisat rog pach mu-ay patangaa. Because of the disease of vision, the moth is burnt to death.
ore ofa uf Te Ada NA (1140-17, Fa, ne 5) naad rog khap ga-ay kurangaa. ||1|| Because of the disease of the sound of the bell, the deer is lured to its death. ||1]|
aH CA AA Soft Il (1140-17, 398, He 5)
jo jo deesai so so rogee. Whoever I see is diseased.
da sfos Aa Afsag Fait NAN TIS Wt 1140-17, Fa, v2 5) rog rahit mayraa satgur jogee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only my True Guru, the True Yogi, is free of disease. ||1]|Pause| |
fase dfar Hite afimrs il (1140-18, 338, 8 5) jihvaa rog meen garsi-aano. Because of the disease of taste, the fish is caught.
WHS ofa sea fHoATS Il (1140-18, Sa8, He 5) baasan rog bhavar binsaano. Because of the disease of smell, the bumble bee is destroyed.
JS Ia A AAG AAS Il (1140-19, Fa, v2 5) hayt rog kaa sagal sansaaraa. The whole world is caught in the disease of attachment.
fefafa gar ufo aa faerat QU (1140-19, 358, 48 5) taribaDh rog meh baDhay bikaaraa. ||2]| In the disease of the three qualities, corruption is multiplied. ||2||
dat HIS" Sat AGH Il (1140-19, Sa, v2 5) rogay martaa rogay janmai. In disease the mortals die, and in disease they are born.
da fefa fefa Hat SIH Il (1140-19, SaG, v2 5)
rogay fir fir jonee bharmai. In disease they wander in reincarnation again and again.
var 1989
da 80 ISG Tat B US I (1141-1, Sa, 2 5) rog banDh rahan ratee na paavai. Entangled in disease, they cannot stay still, even for an instant.
faa Afsas da asfo o We ISI (1141-1, 358, He 5) bin satgur rog kateh na jaavai. ||3]| Without the True Guru, the disease is never cured. ||3]||
ursgaty faa attat afer i ci4i-2, 338, 2 5) paarbarahm jis keenee da-i-aa. When the Supreme Lord God grants His Mercy,
ag uats dag afe ofenr il 141-2, 3a, He 5) baah pakarh rogahu kadh la-i-aa. He grabs hold of the mortal's arm, and pulls him up and out of the disease.
Ze due AOA ufeMr i (41-2, 38, v2 5) tootay banDhan saaDhsang paa-i-aa. Reaching the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the mortal's bonds are broken.
ad sod af da fuer gio (41-2, sa, He 5) kaho naanak gur rog mitaa-i-aa. ||4]|7]||20|| Says Nanak, the Guru cures him of the disease. ||4||7||20] |
SI HIST U Il (1141-3)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
dts mire Si Hot MISE Il (1141-3, Sa@, v2 5) cheet aavai taa’ mahaa anand. When He comes to mind, then I am in supreme bliss.
dfs ore st vfs wu SA Il 1141-3, 38, He 5) cheet aavai taa™ sabh dukh bhanj. When He comes to mind, then all my pains are shattered.
SHS ore St Aa ust Il ci4i-4, Sa, 2 5) cheet aavai taa™ sarDhaa pooree. When He comes to mind, my hopes are fulfilled.
TS ore St aafs o Sat AU (1141-4, 398, v8 5) cheet aavai taa™ kabeh na jhooree. ||1]| When He comes to mind, I never feel sadness. ||1] |
nists on afte yate wrfe il ci4i-4, 338, 48 5) antar raam raa-ay pargatay aa-ay. Deep within my being, my Sovereign Lord King has revealed Himself to me.
afs us AS da ote ual TS i cisi-s, 398, ws 5) gur poorai dee-o rang laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Perfect Guru has inspired me to love Him. ||1]|Pause] |
dts wire St Age A TH Il (1141-5, 3aG, v2 5) cheet aavai taa™ sarab ko raajaa. When He comes to mind, I am the king of all.
SHS ors St UST AH Il (1141-5, Fae, 2 5) cheet aavai taa™ pooray kaajaa. When He comes to mind, all my affairs are completed.
Ss ore st Sar TH Il 1141-6, Fa, 2 5) cheet aavai taa™ rang gulaal. When He comes to mind, I am dyed in the deep crimson of His Love.
dts wire St Het PSI NM 141-6, SsS, He 5) cheet aavai taa™ sadaa nihaal. ||2|| When He comes to mind, I am ecstatic forever. ||2] |
dfs wire Si AS THSST Il (1141-6, Sa, Hz 5) cheet aavai taa’ sad Dhanvantaa. When He comes to mind, I am wealthy forever.
dfs wire sit Ae fesdsr il (1141-7, a8, v2 5) cheet aavai taa™ sad nibhrantaa. When He comes to mind, I am free of doubt forever.
dfs ure st Afs da we I (1141-7, 388, v2 5) cheet aavai taa™ sabh rang maanay. When He comes to mind, then I enjoy all pleasures.
SHS vrs St Yat HS WM 1141-7, 398, v8 5) cheet aavai taa™ chookee kaanay. ||3]| When He comes to mind, I am rid of fear. ||3]|
dfs nore 3t AoA we ufeor | cai4i-s, 3a8, He 5) cheet aavai taa™ sahj ghar paa-i-aa. When He comes to mind, I find the home of peace and poise.
dfs ore st Afs mrfeor Ih cai4i-s, Sa8, v2 5) cheet aavai taa” sunn samaa-i-aa. When He comes to mind, I am absorbed in the Primal Void of God.
dfs nre Ae atsse AST Il (1141-8, eG, ve 5) cheet aavai sad keertan kartaa. When He comes to mind, I continually sing the Kirtan of His Praises.
HO Hfomt stax SASS MSIUCHQVUI (1141-9, Se, He 5)
man maani-aa naanak bhagvantaa. ||4||8]|21]| Nanak's mind is pleased and satisfied with the Lord God. ||4]|8]|21]|
SIG HIST U Il (1141-9)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
ay JHS Ae VsHtet Il (1141-9, Sa, v2 5) baap hamaaraa sad charanjeevee. My Father is Eternal, forever alive.
amet THTS AS Tt Atet  c1141-10, Sa@, v2 5) bhaa-ee hamaaray sad hee jeevee. My brothers live forever as well.
HIS INS Het mifsarHt Il (1141-10, Fe@, v2 5) meet hamaaray sadaa abhinaasee. My friends are permanent and imperishable.
ace oHe fon ute SAT WAU (1141-10, 3a@, 148 5) kutamb hamaaraa nij ghar vaasee. ||1]| My family abides in the home of the self within. ||1]|
JH AY ue St ASfs ATS Il (1141-10, Sa@, v8 5) ham sukh paa-i-aa taa sabheh suhaylay. I have found peace, and so all are at peace.
afs us fusr Afar HS wal FHS i ci4i-11, 338, v8 5) gur poorai pitaa sang maylay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Perfect Guru has united me with my Father. ||1]]Pause]|
Hed Ag AS 3 Ss il c4i-11, 3a@, v2 5) mandar mayray sabh tay oochay. My mansions are the highest of all.
SA HS Mis nS Il (1141-11, Sa, nH 5) days mayray bay-ant apoochhay. My countries are infinite and uncountable.
TH IHS Ae Tt fogs Il (1141-12, 3a, He 5) raaj hamaaraa sad hee nihchal. My kingdom is eternally stable.
HS THT MYS MAI MM (1141-12, Fa, v2 5) maal hamaaraa akhoot abaychal. ||2| | My wealth is inexhaustible and permanent. ||2]|
Hat Hot AS wa iste Il (1141-12, a8, He 5) sobhaa mayree sabh jug antar. My glorious reputation resounds throughout the ages.
Wa JN ao Foe Il (1141-13, Fa, v2 5) baaj hamaaree thaan thanantar. My fame has spread in all places and interspaces.
otafs gnet wis wie det Wt 41-13, sa8, v2 5) keerat hamree ghar ghar ho-ee. My praises echo in each and every house.
sats sHdt Asat St WS 1141-13, a8, v3 5)
bhagat hamaaree sabhnee lo-ee. ||3]| My devotional worship is known to all people. ||3]|
fst THE YAS HTT I (1141-14, Sa, ws 5) pitaa hamaaray pargatay maajh. My Father has revealed Himself within me.
fust us of aftet APS I (1141-14, 3a, 2 5) pitaa poot ral keenee saa"jh. The Father and son have joined together in partnership.
aT saa AE fust usts Il (1141-14, 3a@, He 5) kaho naanak ja-o pitaa pateenay. Says Nanak, when my Father is pleased,
fust ys Sa Sa BS SEI (41-14, 398, ws 5) pitaa poot aykai rang leenay. ||4||9]|22]| then the Father and son are joined together in love, and become one. ||4||9||22||
SI HIST U Il (1141-15)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
foses use Afsag ys BS Il 1141-15, 3a, v2 5)
nirvair purakh satgur parabh daatay.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, is free of revenge and hate; He is God, the Great Giver.
JH Must SH AAAS Il (1141-15, Fa@, He 5) ham apraaDhee tum" bakhsaatay. I am a sinner; You are my Forgiver.
fan unit as fs o Set Il ca4i-16, 38, v2 5) jis paapee ka-o milai na dho-ee. That sinner, who finds no protection anywhere
Hafe mre si fegHe Tet WAM (1141-16, SaG, 42 5) saran aavai taa™ nirmal ho-ee. ||1]| - if he comes seeking Your Sanctuary, then he becomes immaculate and pure. ||1]||
AY ufeur Afsag Hate I (1141-16, 3s, 42 5) sukh paa-i-aa satguroo manaa-ay. Pleasing the True Guru, I have found peace.
As oe ure ag fore nan TIS i (1141-17, 3G, 2 5) sabh fal paa-ay guroo Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Guru, I have obtained all fruits and rewards. ||1||Pause] |
UTIYIH Afsaqg MSA Il (1141-17, Fa, He 5) paarbarahm satgur aadays. I humbly bow to the Supreme Lord God, the True Guru.
HO 36 3ST AS 3ST CA Il (1141-17, 3a@, v2 5) man tan tayraa sabh tayraa days. My mind and body are Yours; all the world is Yours.
Ja Use St Sect nrfenr I (1141-18, Sa, 42 5) chookaa parh-daa taa™ nadree aa-i-aa. When the veil of illusion is removed, then I come to see You.
WAH 3d Asst a TEM IM (41-18, Fa, we 5) khasam toohai sabhnaa kay raa-i-aa. ||2]| You are my Lord and Master; You are the King of all. ||2]|
SH set Aa AHS Thaw il (1141-18, S38, v2 5) tis bhaanaa sookay kaasat hari-aa. When it pleases Him, even dry wood becomes green.
fan xa 3t ae fafa Afemr il (1141-19, 338, 8 5) tis bhaanaa taa™ thal sir sari-aa. When it pleases Him, rivers flow across the desert sands.
fan vat St Afs SH US I (1141-19, Fa, 1s 5)
tis bhaanaa taa™ sabh fal paa-ay.
When it pleases Him, all fruits and rewards are obtained. fos net ofa Afsag ue SII (1141-19, a8, He 5)
chint ga-ee lag satgur paa-ay. ||3]| Grasping hold of the Guru's feet, my anxiety is dispelled. ||3]|
ust 9982
Tends fasae AG SS" Il (1142-1, Fa, ws 5) haraamkhor nirgun ka-o toothaa. I am unworthy and ungrateful, but He has been merciful to me.
HO 30 Alse nfo nifys For il (1142-1, Fa, ws 5)
man tan seetal man amrit voothaa.
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed; the Ambrosial Nectar rains down in my mind.
USAIH TI SS CfEnirsr Il (1142-2, Fa, ws 5) paarbarahm gur bha-ay da-i-aalaa. The Supreme Lord God, the Guru, has become kind and compassionate to me.
SSA BH Uf se fST BH ISIAONSI (1142-2, Sa, He 5)
naanak daas daykh bha-ay nihaalaa. ||4]|10||23]| Slave Nanak beholds the Lord, enraptured. ||4]|10]|23]|
SIS HIS U Il (1142-2)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Afsag Ha SHISHA Il (1142-3, Sa@, He 5) satgur mayraa baymuhtaaj. My True Guru is totally independent.
Afsad HS AS ATA Il (1142-3, 3a@, He 5) satgur mayray sachaa saaj. My True Guru is adorned with Truth.
Afsag Ha ASA AT SST I (1142-3, Se, He 5) satgur mayraa sabhas kaa daataa. My True Guru is the Giver of all.
Afsag Hat use faarst A (1142-3, 3a8, v8 5) satgur mayraa purakh biDhaataa. ||1|| My True Guru is the Primal Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1]|
Td AAT STS A VS Il (1142-4, SG, ve 5) gur jaisaa naahee ko dayv. There is no deity equal to the Guru.
fA HAS Sa A Ba AZ UA TIS i (1142-4, Fa, nz 5)
jis mastak bhaag so laagaa sayv. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whoever has good destiny inscribed on his forehead, applies himself to seva - selfless service. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsag Ha AaS yfsus i (1142-4, Sa, v2 5) satgur mayraa sarab paratipaalai. My True Guru is the Sustainer and Cherisher of all.
Afsag Hat fs ates i (1142-5, Fa, ne 5) satgur mayraa maar jeevaalai. My True Guru kills and revives.
Afsag Hs at efsnret i yas set F AsSt aret NIM (1142-5, Sa, ne 5) satgur mayray kee vadi-aa-ee. pargat bha-ee hai sabhnee thaa-ee. ||2|| The glorious greatness of my True Guru has become manifest everywhere. ||2]|
Afsag Hat BS fess Il 1142-6, 3a@, v2 5) satgur mayraa taan nitaan. My True Guru is the power of the powerless.
Afsag Hat ufs Stare il (1142-6, a8, v2 5)
satgur mayraa ghar deebaan. My True Guru is my home and court.
Afsag & JG Ae af wfenr I 1142-6, 358, v2 5) satgur kai ha-o sad bal jaa-i-aa. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.
yate Had fats ate feuerfenr Si (1142-7, 338, He 5)
pargat maarag jin kar dikhlaa-i-aa. ||3]| He has shown me the path. ||3]|
fafe ag Afeor fen 3 a ferry i (1142-7, 398, He 5) jin gur sayvi-aa tis bha-o na bi-aapai.
One who serves the Guru is not afflicted with fear. fafs aa Afeor fA eu o AST Il (1142-8, a8, ne 5)
jin gur sayvi-aa tis dukh na santaapai. One who serves the Guru does not suffer in pain.
ood Ad fAf_fs Fe i 1142-8, Fa, 2 5) naanak soDhay simrit bayd. Nanak has studied the Simritees and the Vedas.
USAIN TAT SSH SF NSUAUSIl (1142-8, Sa, ws 5)
paarbarahm gur naahee bhayd. ||4]|11||24|| There is no difference between the Supreme Lord God and the Guru. ||4]|11]|24]|
SIG HIS U Il (1142-9)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
oH BS HO Uda Sent Il (1142-9, SG, He 5) naam lait man pargat bha-i-aa. Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal is exalted and glorified.
oH BS uy 36 3 afew I (1142-9, 358, 2 5) naam lait paap tan tay ga-i-aa. Repeating the Naam, sin is banished from the body.
oH BS Aas usafeEnt Il (1142-10, 3a, Hz 5) naam lait sagal purbaa-i-aa. Repeating the Naam, all festivals are celebrated.
oH BS MOAfS HAO EMT IAM (1142-10, Fa, He 5) naam lait athsath majnaa-i-aa. ||1]|| Repeating the Naam, one is cleansed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines. ||1]|
Steg Jus dfs & NH Il (1142-10, 3a8, v2 5)
tirath hamraa har ko naam. My sacred shrine of pilgrimage is the Name of the Lord.
afs Guefimr 33 famre nau TIS i 1142-11, 3a@, v2 5) gur updaysi-aa tat gi-aan. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Guru has instructed me in the true essence of spiritual wisdom. ||1]|Pause]|
oH BS BY Us Usa I (1142-11, Fa, Hs 5) naam lait dukh door paraanaa. Repeating the Naam, the mortal's pains are taken away.
oH BS ifs Hs Aamo il 1142-11, 3s@, we 5) naam lait at moorh sugi-aanaa. Repeating the Naam, the most ignorant people become spiritual teachers.
oH BS udale Srbarar Il (1142-12, 308, He 5) naam lait pargat ujee-aaraa. Repeating the Naam, the Divine Light blazes forth.
OH BS SS AAT MQM (1142-12, 38, ve 5) naam lait chhutay janjaaraa. ||2|| Repeating the Naam, one's bonds are broken. ||2||
oH BS AH Sfs B MS Il (1142-12, 3a, He 5) naam lait jam nayrh na aavai. Repeating the Naam, the Messenger of Death does not draw near.
OH BS Vdd AY US Il (1142-13, Fa, v2 5) naam lait dargeh sukh paavai. Repeating the Naam, one finds peace in the Court of the Lord.
OY 83 Us ad AHA Il (1142-13, Sa@, He 5) naam lait parabh kahai saabaas. Repeating the Naam, God gives His Approval.
OH JH AS ITA ISI (1142-13, Sa@, v3 5) naam hamaaree saachee raas. ||3]|| The Naam is my true wealth. ||3]|
afs Quen afaS feg AT Il (1142-13, 3a@, He 5) gur updays kahi-o ih saar. The Guru has instructed me in these sublime teachings.
dfs ates Ho SH MOET Il (1142-14, Sa@, He 5) har keerat man naam aDhaar. The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises and the Naam are the Support of the mind.
SSA CUT SH USI Il (1142-14, Sa, ve 5) naanak uDhray naam punahchaar. Nanak is saved through the atonement of the Naam.
Mets AH BAT uss ISUIVUQUI (1142-14, SsG, v2 5)
avar karam lokah patee-aar. ||4]|12||25]| Other actions are just to please and appease the people. ||4||12||25]|
SI HIST U Il (1142-15) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
SHAS 3 AS BY AT Il (1142-15, SaS, ve 5) namaskaar taa ka-o lakh baar. I bow in humble worship, tens of thousands of times.
feg Ho da st a ate th (1142-15, 358, He 5) ih man deejai taa ka-o vaar. I offer this mind as a sacrifice.
finrafs at a flrefa Hane il (1142-16, 3a@, v2 5) simran taa kai miteh santaap. Meditating in remembrance on Him, sufferings are erased.
afe wide o fenmufs snr all (1142-16, 3a, v2 5) ho-ay anand na vi-aapahi taap. ||1]| Bliss wells up, and no disease is contracted. ||1]||
MA Stet fSdHs SH Il (1142-16, 3aG, He 5) aiso heeraa nirmal naam. Such is the diamond, the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
WH AUS UTS Afs AH NA TIS I (1142-17, Ss, 2 5) jaas japat pooran sabh kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting it, all works are perfectly completed. ||1||Pause] |
w at fenfe eu Sa Sd Il (1142-17, Fa@, ne 5) jaa kee darisat dukh dayraa dhahai. Beholding Him, the house of pain is demolished.
nifys on Atse fe ad Il (1142-17, 358, v8 5) amrit naam seetal man gahai. The mind seizes the cooling, soothing, Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
mfox SIS A A BIS UAT Il (1142-18, Ss, 42 5) anik bhagat jaa kay charan poojaaree. Millions of devotees worship His Feet.
AIS HOTS UISISH Ml (1142-18, SW, ws 5) Sagal manorath pooranhaaree. ||2]| He is the Fulfiller of all the mind's desires. ||2]|
fas ufs Se AST Stoo I (1142-18, Ss, He 5) khin meh oonay subhar bhari-aa. In an instant, He fills the empty to over-flowing.
fs ufo Het ats Thome i (1142-19, Sa, v2 5) khin meh sookay keenay hari-aa. In an instant, He transforms the dry into green.
fs nfs fears a BS are Il (1142-19, Fa, v2 5) khin meh nithaavay ka-o deeno thaan. In an instant, He gives the homeless a home.
fs nfs foure AB HS HS ISI (1142-19, Sa, He 5) khin meh nimaanay ka-o deeno maan. ||3]|| In an instant, He bestows honor on the dishonored. ||3]|
Ust 9983
Ag ufs Sa shower sIUT I (1143-1, Fa, 2 5) sabh meh ayk rahi-aa bharpooraa. The One Lord is totally pervading and permeating all.
Aaa fan AfsaT YT Il (1143-1, 3s8, we 5)
SO jaapai jis satgur pooraa. He alone meditates on the Lord, whose True Guru is Perfect.
dfs atese 3 a MTU Il (1143-2, 308, He 5) har keertan taa ko aaDhaar. Such a person has the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises for his Support.
ag aod fan orfy efemrs ISIASIEN (1143-2, Se@, He 5)
kaho naanak jis aap da-i-aar. ||4||13||26]| Says Nanak, the Lord Himself is merciful to him. ||4]|13]|26]|
SIC HIST U Il (1143-2) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Ho worafs wef Atardt i (1143-3, S58, ve 5) mohi duhaagan aap seegaaree. I was discarded and abandoned, but He has embellished me.
JU Sas OHH Aes i (1143-3, Fa, v2 5) roop rang day naam savaaree. He has blessed me with beauty and His Love; through His Name, I am exalted.
fiufeS wy nig Aas ASU Il 1143-3, Fa@, nz 5) miti-o dukh ar sagal santaap. All my pains and sorrows have been eradicated.
sn AS
ad JE AT HST ay A (1143-3, Se, ve 5) gur ho-ay mayray maa-ee baap. ||1]| The Guru has become my Mother and Father. ||1]|
Fat Add HS TAPS mise Il 1143-4, Fa, ve 5)
sakhee sahayree mayrai garsat anand. O my friends and companions, my household is in bliss.
afa fasur 32 vfs AT NA TIS i (1143-4, Fa, ne 5) kar kirpaa bhaytay mohi kant. ||1|| rahaa-o. Granting His Grace, my Husband Lord has met me. ||1||Pause] |
sufs ast Use AS MAT Il (1143-5, 3a, He 5) tapat bujhee pooran sabh aasaa. The fire of desire has been extinguished, and all my desires have been fulfilled.
fie nits Se UTaAT II (1143-5, S58, He 5) mitay anDhayr bha-ay pargaasaa. The darkness has been dispelled, and the Divine Light blazes forth.
Mode Aad widdA fans II (1143-5, 338, He 5)
anhad sabad achraj bismaad.
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, is wondrous and amazing!
qg Us Ud USAT HQ (1143-5, STV, Hs 5) gur pooraa pooraa parsaad. ||2|| Perfect is the Grace of the Perfect Guru. ||2||
Wag ye SS AUS Il (1143-6, Fa, v8 5) jaa ka-o pargat bha-ay gopaal. That person, unto whom the Lord reveals Himself
3 a TaAfe Ae fogs Il (1143-6, 3s, He 5) taa kai darsan sadaa nihaal. - by the Blessed Vision of his Darshan, I am forever enraptured.
Ads Tat ST a BTS fears I (1143-6, Fa, ne 5) sarab gunaa taa kai bahut niDhaan. He obtains all virtues and so many treasures.
wT ag Afsafs StS aa Si 1143-7, 3a8, v2 5) jaa ka-o satgur dee-o naam. ||3]| The True Guru blesses him with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
wT ag sfeG sag nruar il (1143-7, 3a@, H2 5) jaa ka-o bhayti-o thaakur apnaa. That person who meets with his Lord and Master
HO 36 Als Ufa dfs AUS Il (1143-7, 3a@, 2 5) man tan seetal har har japnaa. - his mind and body are cooled and soothed, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
AT sa A AS US SS Il (1143-8, Fa, ne 5) kaho naanak jo jan parabh bhaa-ay. Says Nanak, such a humble being is pleasing to God;
Tat 39 fagar & ue ISIN (1143-8, SeG, He 5)
taa kee rayn birlaa ko paa-ay. ||4||14||27] | only a rare few are blessed with the dust of his feet. ||4]]14||27]|
SI HIS U Il (1143-8) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
foses UY & TG TS I (1143-9, FaG, v2 5) chitvat paap na aalak aavai. The mortal does not hesitate to think about sin.
Ant sna fas ad AGH Il (1143-9, 398, v2 5) baysu-aa bhajat kichh nah sarmaavai. He is not ashamed to spend time with prostitutes.
Ard Fes HAST AP I (1143-9, Fae, 3 5) saaro dinas majooree karai. He works all day long,
dfs fires at tar saa fafa ud nail (1143-10, 3s@, He 5)
har simran kee vaylaa bajar sir parai. ||1|| but when it is time to remember the Lord, then a heavy stone falls on his head. ||1]|
Hfeur afar FS AAT I (1143-10, Sa, Hz 5) maa-i-aa lag bhoolo sansaar. Attached to Maya, the world is deluded and confused.
unfy sefeur gseresas ofe sfoor fase faBors nail TIC il (1143-10, 358, v2 5) aap bhulaa-i-aa bhulaavanhaarai raach rahi-aa birthaa bi-uhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Deluder Himself has deluded the mortal, and now he is engrossed in worthless worldly affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
Uys Hfenr ga faote it 143-11, 3a8, Hz 5) paykhat maa-i-aa rang bihaa-ay. Gazing on Maya's illusion, its pleasures pass away.
dsas ad ast Ja ote il 1143-11, 358, v2 5) garhbarh karai ka-udee rang laa-ay. He loves the shell, and ruins his life.
nig fagora SO He OS I (1143-12, 3a@, Hs 5) anDh bi-uhaar banDh man Dhaavai. Bound to blind worldly affairs, his mind wavers and wanders.
adedys & Aba Hfs mr] QM 1143-12, Sa, Hz 5) karnaihaar na jee-a meh aavai. ||2|| The Creator Lord does not come into his mind. ||2]|
ads ass fee Tt ey uteri 1143-12, Sa8, He 5) karat karat iv hee dukh paa-i-aa. Working and working like this, he only obtains pain,
YIS TS 3 ASH HEM | 1143-13, Fs@, we 5) pooran hot na kaaraj maa-i-aa. and his affairs of Maya are never completed.
ath afa fs He Star i 1143-13, 38, 2 5) kaam kroDh lobh man leenaa. His mind is saturated with sexual desire, anger and greed.
sate yor fAS Ae fas Har Si (1143-13, 388, H 5) tarhaf moo-aa ji-o jal bin meenaa. ||3]|| Wiggling like a fish out of water, he dies. ||3]|
fan a ama dfe ofa mrfur i (43-14, Sa8, nz 5) jis kay raakhay ho-ay har aap. One who has the Lord Himself as his Protector,
dfs ofs aH Ae AY AMY I (1143-14, Sa, nH 5) har har naam sadaa jap jaap. chants and meditates forever on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
AaAfa dfs x TS afer I 1143-14, FaG, ve 5)
saaDhsang har kay gun gaa-i-aa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
TSX AfsIT UT UfeHM NSUAUNQCH (1143-15, STS, H8 5)
naanak satgur pooraa paa-i-aa. ||4]|15]|28] | O Nanak, he has found the Perfect True Guru. ||4]|15]|28]|
SIC HIST U Il (1143-15)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
muat efenr ad A UTS Il (1143-15, 3aG, He 5) apnee da-i-aa karay so paa-ay. He alone obtains it, unto whom the Lord shows Mercy.
dfs a on Hfs SATE Il (1143-16, Sa@, He 5) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. He enshrines the Name of the Lord in his mind.
Ara Hae fost He HT Il (1143-16, Sa@, He 5)
saach sabad hirday man maahi. With the True Word of the Shabad in his heart and mind,
HOH HOH o& fofer AT AI (1143-16, Fa@, He 5) janam janam kay kilvikh jaahi. ||1]| the sins of countless incarnations vanish. ||1]|
TH OH Abe & wars Il (1143-17, 3a, He 5) raam naam jee-a ko aaDhaar. The Lord's Name is the Support of the soul.
ag usrte nud fos aret afe we AGS AAT WU TIS Il (1143-17, 3a, He 5)
gur parsaad japahu nit bhaa-ee taar la-ay saagar sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, chant the Name continually, O Siblings of Destiny; It shall carry you across the world-ocean. ||1]||Pause| |
fre a@ fetimr afs fg fears il 1143-18, 338, v2 5) jin ka-o likhi-aa har ayhu niDhaan. Those who have this treasure of the Lord's Name written in their destiny,
A WO tddd uUets HS Il (1143-18, Sa@, 2 5) say jan dargeh paavahi maan. those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord.
AY AoA MSS TS TS I (1143-18, Fo, we 5) sookh sahj aanand gun gaa-o. Singing His Glorious Praises with peace, poise and bliss,
nial firs foarte ar@ iQ (1143-19, Sa@, v2 5) aagai milai nithaavay thaa-o. ||2]| even the homeless obtain a home hereafter. ||2]|
Aad Haste fed 33 AT Il 1143-19, Sa@, He 5) jugah jugantar ih tat saar. Throughout the ages, this has been the essence of reality.
ofa fangs ATS stars il (1143-19, 3a, v2 5) har simran saachaa beechaar. Meditate in remembrance on the Lord, and contemplate the Truth.
UST 1988
fan ofs ofe BE A Ba I (1144-1, 398, ne 5) jis larh laa-ay la-ay so laagai. He alone is attached to the hem of the Lord's robe, whom the Lord Himself attaches.
HOH HOH aT Afeor ATH WI (1144-1, 358, He 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaagai. ||3]| Asleep for countless incarnations, he now awakens. ||3]|
3d Sas Sass A nrfy Il (1144-1, Sa, He 5)
tayray bhagat bhagtan kaa aap. Your devotees belong to You, and You belong to Your devotees.
must HfoHt wim Af Il (1144-2, Sa, He 5)
apnee mahimaa aapay jaap.
You Yourself inspire them to chant Your Praises. aba Ha Afs So oe Il (1144-2, Sa8, He 5)
jee-a jant sabh tayrai haath. All beings and creatures are in Your Hands.
Sot A US Ae Tt AM SIAN (1144-2, Fae, we 5)
naanak kay parabh sad hee saath. ||4]|16]|29]|| Nanak's God is always with him. ||4||16]|29]|
SI HIS U Il (1144-3) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
OH DHS Misa I (1144-3, Fa, ne 5) naam hamaarai antarjaamee. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Inner-knower of my heart.
OH DHS mS AMT Il (1144-3, SaG, He 5) naam hamaarai aavai kaamee. The Naam is so useful to me.
of sft sfeur afs oH Il (1144-3, S08, He 5) rom rom ravi-aa har naam. The Lord's Name permeates each and every hair of mine.
ASAT UT AS BMS MUI (1144-4, Ss, ws 5) satgur poorai keeno daan. ||1]| The Perfect True Guru has given me this gift. ||1]|
SX o
OH ISO HI Bs"d Il (1144-4, Sa, ve 5) naam ratan mayrai bhandaar. The Jewel of the Naam is my treasure.
WaT MAS RT HUTS UU TITS il (1144-4, Sa, nz 5) agam amolaa apar apaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. It is inaccessible, priceless, infinite and incomparable. ||1]||Pause] |
OH THs forse Tat Il (1144-5, 308, He 5) naam hamaarai nihchal Dhanee. The Naam is my unmoving, unchanging Lord and Master.
3H at HfgH" AS nfs gat Il (1144-5, SaS, Hs 5)
naam kee mahimaa sabh meh banee. The glory of the Naam spreads over the whole world.
OH DHS US AMT Il (1144-5, 398, ws 5) naam hamaarai pooraa saahu. The Naam is my perfect master of wealth.
OH DHS FUTSTT MQ (1144-6, aC, ve 5) naam hamaarai bayparvaahu. ||2]| The Naam is my independence. ||2||
SoH JH SHS STE Il (1144-6, 30G, ve 5) naam hamaarai bhojan bhaa-o. The Naam is my food and love.
SH THs Ho aT AMIE Il (1144-6, 358, He 5) naam hamaarai man kaa su-aa-o. The Naam is the objective of my mind.
On 8 fend AS YAS Il (1144-6, 358, 48 5) naam na visrai sant parsaad. By the Grace of the Saints, I never forget the Naam.
OH BS MSde us SE ISM (1144-7, 3a, ve 5) naam lait anhad pooray naad. ||3]| Repeating the Naam, the Unstruck Sound-current of the Naad resounds. ||3] |
ys fasur 3 amy a@ fafa uret i (1144-7, 338, He 5) parabh kirpaa tay naam na-o niDh paa-ee. By God's Grace, I have obtained the nine treasures of the Naam.
ad facut 3 oH FAB ate miret I (1144-7, Sa@, He 5) gur kirpaa tay naam si-o ban aa-ee. By Guru's Grace, I am tuned in to the Naam.
on 5
Uses ASt usas Il (1144-8, Ss@, He 5) Dhanvantay say-ee parDhaan. They alone are wealthy and supreme,
Soa A aA OH fears ISIIDNBON (1144-8, S58, He 5)
naanak jaa kai naam niDhaan. ||4]|17]|30]| O Nanak, who have the treasure of the Naam. ||4]|17]|30||
SI HIST U Il (1144-9)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
3 Ae fust sa HI HST II (1144-9, FaG, we 5) too mayraa pitaa toohai mayraa maataa. You are my Father, and You are my Mother.
3 Ae rho yrs AUSTST II (1144-9, 338, He 5) too mayray jee-a paraan sukh-daata. You are my Soul, my Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace.
3 HT sag IG VHA ST Il (1144-9, Sa, 42 5) too mayraa thaakur ha-o daas tayraa. You are my Lord and Master; I am Your slave.
33 fag nied odt & AA NA (1144-10, SG, v2 5) tujh bin avar nahee ko mayraa. ||1|| Without You, I have no one at all. ||1]|
ate fasur agg ys aAS I (1144-10, 338, ve 5) kar kirpaa karahu parabh daat. Please bless me with Your Mercy, God, and give me this gift,
Hot CHsts ag fea TH NAN FITS it (1144-10, FS, v2 5) tum"ree ustat kara-o din raat. ||1|| rahaa-o. that I may sing Your Praises, day and night. ||1||Pause]|
TH 3d HS J ASSIST Il (1144-11, Fa, ws 5) ham tayray jant too bajaavanhaaraa. I am Your musical instrument, and You are the Musician.
JH 3d faust ae Sfo Sara I (1144-11, SaB, v2 5) ham tayray bhikhaaree daan deh daataaraa. I am Your beggar; please bless me with Your charity, O Great Giver.
38 usmfe da GA HTS I (1144-11, 358, H2 5) ta-o parsaad rang ras maanay. By Your Grace, I enjoy love and pleasures.
we we nists SHfs ANTS QI (1144-12, 3a8, H2 5) ghat ghat antar tumeh samaanay. ||2|| You are deep within each and every heart. ||2||
Sut fur 3 mbt orE i 1144-12, S58, v8 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay japee-ai naa-o. By Your Grace, I chant the Name.
AUHfa SHS TE WS il (1144-12, Fa, nz 5) saaDhsang tumray gun gaa-o. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
Suot efeor 3 dfe eee fae Il (1144-13, Sa, He 5) tum"ree da-i-aa tay ho-ay darad binaas. In Your Mercy, You take away our pains.
SHot Hier 3 ane faarA ISI (1144-13, a8, v8 5) tumree ma-i-aa tay kamal bigaas. ||3]| By Your Mercy, the heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||3]|
JG afeats WE TIeS Il (1144-13, Fa, He 5) ha-o balihaar jaa-o gurdayv. I am a Sacrifice to the Divine Guru.
HES PIAS AT at fegHes AS Il (1144-14, Sa, vs 5)
safal darsan jaa kee nirmal sayv.
The Blessed Vision of His Darshan is fruitful and rewarding; His service is immaculate and pure.
cfeort add SAT ys AT I (1144-14, Sa, ve 5) da-i-aa karahu thaakur parabh mayray. Be Merciful to me, O my Lord God and Master,
TE We Soa fos SF USNACWSAUI (1144-14, Sa, He 5) gun gaavai naanak nit tayray. ||4||18]|31]| that Nanak may continually sing Your Glorious Praises. ||4]|18]|31]|
SIC HIST U Il (1144-15)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
AS 3 Gu a Baa” Il (1144-15, Fa, v2 5) sabh tay ooch jaa kaa darbaar. His Regal Court is the highest of all.
Het Het at a AIS Il 1144-15, 30G, v2 5) sadaa sadaa taa ka-o johaar. I humbly bow to Him, forever and ever.
Cs 3 Car A at aS Il (1144-16, 338, 2 5) oochay tay oochaa jaa kaa thaan. His place is the highest of the high.
afe mur frefa af oH NAM (1144-16, Sa8, He 5)
kot aghaa miteh har naam. ||1|| Millions of sins are erased by the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
fsH Adeet FET AY SE I (1144-16, 358, v2 5) tis sarnaa-ee sadaa sukh ho-ay. In His Sanctuary, we find eternal peace.
afe fasur a ag AS ALE NA TIS ih 1144-17, 398, v2 5) kar kirpaa jaa ka-o maylai so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He Mercifully unites us with Himself. ||1||Pause| |
W AX ASS BAS AT Il (1144-17, Fa, 2 5) jaa kay kartab lakhay na jaahi. His wondrous actions cannot even be described.
A OT SISTA AS US HM Il (1144-17, FaB, He 5)
jaa kaa bharvaasaa sabh ghat maahi. All hearts rest their faith and hope in Him.
yate sfeur ATG & Afar il (1144-18, 3a, we 5) pargat bha-i-aa saaDhoo kai sang. He is manifest in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
sas maats mofes sf i (1144-18, 3a@, H2 5) bhagat araaDheh an-din rang. ||2]| The devotees lovingly worship and adore Him night and day. ||2||
Ne)
ee sfe adt STS Il (1144-18, S58, v2 5) dayday tot nahee bhandaar. He gives, but His treasures are never exhausted.
fas ufo af Garusarg Il (1144-19, Sa@, v2 5) khin meh thaap uthaapanhaaraa. In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.
W at JAH o He AE Il (1144-19, 358, v2 5) jaa kaa hukam na maytai ko-ay. No one can erase the Hukam of His Command.
fafs ufsAro Aret AfE SII (1144-19, SaG, He 5) sir paatisaahaa saachaa so-ay. ||3]| The True Lord is above the heads of kings. ||3]|
fan oft Ge fSA at miAT Il (1144-19, 3a8, He 5) jis kee ot tisai kee aasaa. He is my Anchor and Support; I place my hopes in Him.
usar qagu
ey AY JHe (3A St UAT I (1145-1, 3a@, He 5) dukh sukh hamraa tis hee paasaa. I place my pain and pleasure before Him.
afy BS A AS a Use Il (1145-1, Sa, v2 5) raakh leeno sabh jan kaa parh-daa. He covers the faults of His humble servant.
aoa f3A at Casts age™ SNA (1145-1, Fa@, Hz 5)
naanak tis kee ustat kardaa. ||4]|19]|32]|| Nanak sings His Praises. ||4||19||32||
SI HIST U Il (1145-2) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
dzodd SH Tofu It 1145-2, 3a, He 5) rovanhaaree roj banaa-i-aa. The whiner whines every day.
Woo Fdse a Hogg fats wrfenr it 145-2, sa@, vs 5) balan bartan ka-o san-banDh chit aa-i-aa. His attachment to his household and entanglements cloud his mind.
af Sag ad A ate il (1145-3, 398, v3 5) boojh bairaag karay jay ko-ay. If someone becomes detached through understanding,
HOH He fefa Fas SE NAN 1145-3, S58, He 5) janam maran fir sog na ho-ay. ||1]| he will not have to suffer in birth and death again. ||1]|
fafimr ar As UO UAT Il (1145-3, Sa, He 5) bikhi-aa kaa sabh DhanDh pasaar. All of his conflicts are extensions of his corruption.
fee ate OH vos AUN TITS Il (1145-4, Sa, He 5) virlai Keeno naam aDhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. How rare is that person who takes the Naam as his Support. ||1]|Pause| |
fsfafa urfenr sot fart i ci4s-4, 338, v2 5) taribaDh maa-i-aa rahee bi-aap. The three-phased Maya infects all.
A BuevsS (SA Ta ASU Il (1145-4, 3d@, ws 5) jo laptaano tis dookh santaap. Whoever clings to it suffers pain and sorrow.
HY ardt fae am faire it 145-5, 3a, He 5) sukh naahee bin naam Dhi-aa-ay. There is no peace without meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
om fears sssat UTS WM (1145-5, Fa@, 2 5) naam niDhaan badbhaagee paa-ay. ||2|| By great good fortune, the treasure of the Naam is received. ||2||
Hiatt FAS A He SsrS i 145-5, 3a@, n2 5) savaa‘gee si-o jo man reejhaavai. One who loves the actor in his mind,
Ata Catan fefs uss~S il (1145-6, 39, He 5) savaag utaari-ai fir pachhutaavai. later regrets it when the actor takes off his costume.
Huy at ator AA TasoITS Il (1145-6, Sa, v2 5) maygh kee chhaa-i-aa jaisay bartanhaar. The shade from a cloud is transitory,
3A usdy Ho feare SII (1145-6, 38, He 5) taiso parpanch moh bikaar. ||3]| like the worldly paraphernalia of attachment and corruption. ||3]|
Sa SAS A ue afE I 1145-7, 308, v2 5) ayk vasat jay paavai ko-ay. If someone is blessed with the singular substance,
YIS AH SS aT TE i (1145-7, Sd, ws 5) pooran kaaj taahee kaa ho-ay. then all of his tasks are accomplished to perfection.
aa uAte fats urfemir oH Il 1145-7, 338, vs 5) gur parsaad jin paa-i-aa naam. One who obtains the Naam, by Guru's Grace
Soa uifEnt A USTs ISNQONSSI (1145-8, SaE, He 5)
naanak aa-i-aa so parvaan. ||4]|20]|33]| - O Nanak, his coming into the world is certified and approved. ||4||20]|33]|
SIC HIST U Il (1145-8) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Hs of feet Hat S!ar Il 1145-8, Ss, He 5) sant kee nindaa jonee bhavnaa. Slandering the Saints, the mortal wanders in reincarnation.
Hs of fSer dat xaat Il (1145-8, Sa, v2 5) sant kee nindaa rogee karnaa. Slandering the Saints, he is diseased.
As oft (Set Sa AIH Il (1145-9, Sa, H2 5) sant kee nindaa dookh sahaam. Slandering the Saints, he suffers in pain.
39 ts Sea AS AM IAI (1145-9, eG, He 5) daan dait nindak ka-o jaam. ||1|| The slanderer is punished by the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
H3Afal Xafs A AS i (1145-9, Fa, ne 5) satsang karahi jo baad. Those who argue and fight with the Saints
fae feua ardt fore ATS NA TIT il (1145-10, Fa@, v2 5) tin nindak naahee kichh saad. ||1]|| rahaa-o. - those slanderers find no happiness at all. ||1]||Pause] |
sas at feet ag SES Il (1145-10, Sa, Hz 5) bhagat kee nindaa kanDh chhaydaavai. Slandering the devotees, the wall of the mortal's body is shattered.
sas at Set aga SIS Il (1145-10, FG, we 5) bhagat kee nindaa narak bhunchaavai. Slandering the devotees, he suffers in hell.
sas at fear ras ufo TS Il 1145-11, S58, 42 5) bhagat kee nindaa garabh meh galai. Slandering the devotees, he rots in the womb.
sas at Sat TA FS SS MM (1145-11, FaG, v2 5) bhagat kee nindaa raaj tay talai. ||2|| Slandering the devotees, he loses his realm and power. ||2]|
fora at af aSy otf Il (1145-11, 338, n2 5) nindak kee gat kathoo naahi. The slanderer finds no salvation at all.
mify atta mime ot afa il 1145-12, 3a@, He 5) aap beej aapay hee khaahi. He eats only that which he himself has planted.
Jo WS WMT FS FI Il (1145-12, S98, ws 5) chor jaar joo-aar tay buraa. He is worse than a thief, a lecher, or a gambler.
wieder avg fSefa ffs gat SII (1145-12, 308, He 5) anhodaa bhaar nindak sir Dharaa. ||3]|| The slanderer places an unbearable burden upon his head. ||3]||
USAIN & Sas fSIST Il (1145-13, SaB, v2 5) paarbarahm kay bhagat nirvair. The devotees of the Supreme Lord God are beyond hate and vengeance.
A fsAsd FOUR Ue Il (1145-13, 338, 3 5) so nistarai jo poojai pair. Whoever worships their feet is emancipated.
mife uate Sex serfeur i (1145-13, 3a8, He 5)
aad purakh nindak bholaa-i-aa. The Primal Lord God has deluded and confused the slanderer.
aoa fags 3 WE fketfemr ISiIUiSsesil 1145-13, 3a, He 5) naanak kirat na jaa-ay mitaa-i-aa. ||4||21]|34]| O Nanak, the record of one's past actions cannot be erased. ||4]|21||34||
SI HIST U Il (1145-14)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
OH DHS FE MT BES Il (1145-14, Se, He 5) naam hamaarai bayd ar naad.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is for me the Vedas and the Sound-current of the Naad.
OH THs US OH Il (1145-14, Fae, He 5) naam hamaarai pooray kaaj. Through the Naam, my tasks are perfectly accomplished.
OH DHS UAT SS Il (1145-15, a@, we 5) naam hamaarai poojaa dayv. The Naam is my worship of deities.
OH DHS Ts at AS NA (1145-15, Fa, ne 5) naam hamaarai gur kee sayv. ||1]|| The Naam is my service to the Guru. ||1]|
afs us fefse afe oy il (1145-15, sa@, 3 5) gur poorai darirha-o har naam. The Perfect Guru has implanted the Naam within me.
AS 3 83H ae ois AH NAN TIS Il 1145-16, Sa, v2 5) sabh tay ootam har har kaam. ||1]| rahaa-o. The highest task of all is the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]]Pause]|
OH DH's HAS FEASTS Il (1145-16, 3G, He 5) naam hamaarai majan isnaan. The Naam is my cleansing bath and purification.
OH THTS UTS BMG Il (1145-16, 3s, we 5) naam hamaarai pooran daan. The Naam is my perfect donation of charity.
oH BS 3 AG uty I (1145-17, a8, v2 5) naam lait tay sagal paveet. Those who repeat the Naam are totally purified.
oH AUS Ae Set HTS MQM (1145-17, Fs, v8 5) naam japat mayray bhaa-ee meet. ||2]| Those who chant the Naam are my friends and Siblings of Destiny. ||2] |
OH DH's ACS AAT Ml (1145-17, S58, He 5) naam hamaarai sa-un sanjog. The Naam is my auspicious omen and good fortune.
OH dud fxufs ASA Il (1145-18, 3sB, He 5) naam hamaarai taripat subhog. The Naam is the sublime food which satisfies me.
Oo™H JMS Ags MIS Il (1145-18, Sa, He 5) naam hamaarai sagal aachaar. The Naam is my good conduct.
oH dud fosne fagas SII (1145-18, 358, He 5) naam hamaarai nirmal bi-uhaar. ||3]| The Naam is my immaculate occupation. ||3]|
wa ufs efor ug Sa Il 1145-18, 3a, v2 5) jaa kai man vasi-aa parabh ayk. All those humble beings whose minds are filled with the One God
Ha AST at Sts ofa Sq Il (1145-19, Sa@, He 5)
Sagal janaa kee har har tayk. have the Support of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hf fe aoa Ts TE WES Il 1145-19, Sa, 13 5) man tan naanak har gun gaa-o. O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with your mind and body.
WOHfa far SS SC iSl2nSBull (1145-19, Fa, He 5)
saaDhsang jis dayvai naa-o. ||4||22||35]||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord bestows His Name. [|4]|22]|35]|
Uat 998E
SIG HIST U Il (1146-1)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
fads AG SH SST ST Il (1146-1, Sa, v2 5) nirDhan ka-o tum dayvhu Dhanaa. You bless the poor with wealth, O Lord.
mfoa uTu Ato fSdHs HOT Il (1146-1, Fs@, He 5) anik paap jaahi nirmal manaa. Countless sins are taken away, and the mind becomes immaculate and pure.
AIS HSTa UIs AH Il (1146-2, Sd, ws 5) Sagal manorath pooran kaam. All the mind's desires are fulfilled, and one's tasks are perfectly accomplished.
BTS MUS AG SST SH INA (1146-2, Sa, ve 5) bhagat apunay ka-o dayvhu naam. ||1]| You bestow Your Name upon Your devotee. ||1||
Hee AST dures gfe il (1146-2, Sa, v2 5) safal sayvaa gopaal raa-ay. Service to the Lord, our Sovereign King, is fruitful and rewarding.
ade aATeaas AuMit sts fase afe o ATE Na ToS Il 1146-3, Sa, Hz 5)
karan karaavanhaar su-aamee taa tay birthaa ko-ay na jaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes; no one is turned away from His Door empty-handed. ||1]||Pause] |
dat & Us UST FT I (1146-3, a, vs 5) rogee kaa parabh khandahu rog. God eradicates the disease from the diseased person.
ete a fered Us Aa Il (1146-4, Se, v8 5) dukhee-ay kaa mitaavhu parabh sog. God takes away the sorrows of the suffering.
fore a8 3H fs Bored Il (1146-4, S58, v2 5) nithaavay ka-o tum" thaan baithaavahu. And those who have no place at all - You seat them upon the place.
SA MUS AS Sdst BST Ill (1146-4, Sa@, ns 5) daas apnay ka-o bhagtee laavhu. ||2| | You link Your slave to devotional worship. ||2| |
foHré a@ ys FS HG Il (1146-5, 398, vs 5) nimaanay ka-o parabh dayto maan. God bestows honor on the dishonored.
He Hag af vga Afamrg Il (1146-5, 398, 2 5) moorh mugaDh ho-ay chatur sugi-aan. He makes the foolish and ignorant become clever and wise.
Hae sfenre at 38 GA Il (1146-5, 358, He 5) sagal bha-i-aan kaa bha-o nasai. The fear of all fear disappears.
He nud a ofa Hfs SA BI (1146-5, 3aG, He 5) jan apnay kai har man basai. ||3]|| The Lord dwells within the mind of His humble servant. ||3]|
UTdqaH ys AY fears il (1146-6, Sa, He 5) paarbarahm parabh sookh niDhaan. The Supreme Lord God is the Treasure of Peace.
33 famrg afe nifgs oH I (1146-6, 358, Hs 5) tat gi-aan har amrit naam. The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the essence of reality.
ats fagut HS ZIG BES Il (1146-6, Ss, He 5) kar kirpaa sant tahlai laa-ay. Granting His Grace, He enjoins the mortals to serve the Saints.
Soa AY Afe AHS WSIVISEM (1146-7, Fa, Hs 5) naanak saaDhoo sang samaa-ay. ||4||23]|36||
O Nanak, such a person merges in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. [14] [23] [36]
SIC HIST U Il (1146-7)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Hs H3@ ufo ofe ufs SA Il (1146-7, 3a, v8 5) sant mandal meh har man vasai. In the Realm of the Saints, the Lord dwells in the mind.
Ha H3e Hfs SIS AS OA Il (1146-8, 3a@, nz 5) sant mandal meh durat sabh nasai. In the Realm of the Saints, all sins run away.
HS Hse ufs fesne SHS il (1146-8, 338, v2 5) sant mandal meh nirmal reet. In the Realm of the Saints, one's lifestyle is immaculate.
H3Afa dfs Sa udtfS wail (46-8, Sa, v2 5) satsang ho-ay ayk pareet. ||1]| In the Society of the Saints, one comes to love the One Lord. ||1||
HS H3G 3d aT a Il (1146-9, Sa@, vs 5) sant mandal tahaa kaa naa-o. That alone is called the Realm of the Saints,
USYIH ALG TE AS Al FI I (1146-9, Fae, v1 5) paarbarahm kayval gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. where only the Glorious Praises of the Supreme Lord God are sung. ||1||Pause] |
HZ H3G Hfs ASH HAS Fd Il (1146-9, Sa, He 5) sant mandal meh janam maran rahai. In the Realm of the Saints, birth and death are ended.
HS 436 ufo WH fas 3 AT Il (1146-10, Fa@, we 5) sant mandal meh jam kichhoo na kahai. In the Realm of the Saints, the Messenger of Death cannot touch the mortal.
HaAfa dfs fesHe arat il (1146-10, 3s8, v2 5) satsang ho-ay nirmal banee. In the Society of the Saints, one's speech becomes immaculate
HS H3@ Hid SH Sarat NII (1146-10, 3s, He 5) sant mandal meh naam vakhaanee. ||2|| In the realm of the saints, the Lord's Name is chanted. ||2]|
HS HIG ot fegae MAS Il (1146-11, 3a8, v2 5) sant mandal kaa nihchal aasan. The Realm of the Saints is the eternal, ever-stable place.
HS Hae Hfa uy fHaTAS Il (1146-11, 358, v2 5) sant mandal meh paap binaasan. In the Realm of the Saints, sins are destroyed.
HS Hse Hf fesHs AST Il (1146-11, Ss, v8 5) sant mandal meh nirmal kathaa. In the Realm of the Saints, the immaculate sermon is spoken.
H3Afa ICH Sy OAT ISI (1146-12, Fa, ne 5) satsang ha-umai dukh nasaa. ||3]|| In the Society of the Saints, the pain of egotism runs away. ||3]||
HS H3G a Sdt faa Il (1146-12, 3a@, nz 5) sant mandal kaa nahee binaas. The Realm of the Saints cannot be destroyed.
HS H36 nfs dfs TESA Il (1146-12, S58, ve 5) sant mandal meh har guntaas. In the Realm of the Saints, is the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
HZ H3G stad fa Il (1146-13, 358, He 5) sant mandal thaakur bisraam. The Realm of the Saints is the resting place of our Lord and Master.
soa Ss ufs SHS IIVNSBIN (1146-13, 3a, Hz 5)
naanak ot pot bhagvaan. ||4]|24||37]|| O Nanak, He is woven into the fabric of His devotees, through and through. [14] [24] |37]|
SI HIST U Il (1146-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
da ASS At ae wef ih 1146-14, 3e@, v2 5) rog kavan jaa™ raakhai aap. Why worry about disease, when the Lord Himself protects us?
fH He df 3 BY ATU Il (1146-14, 3a, ws 5) tis jan ho-ay na dookh santaap. That person whom the Lord protects, does not suffer pain and sorrow.
fa Gufs ys forsur ae I (1146-14, Sa, 2 5) jis oopar parabh kirpaa karai. That person, upon whom God showers His Mercy
fSH Gua 3 are usTs WAI (1146-14, 3a, Hs 5) tis oopar tay kaal parharai. ||1|| - Death hovering above him is turned away. ||1||
Het AYTet Ths Tfs SH Il (1146-15, FaC, Hz 5) sadaa sakhaa-ee har har naam. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is forever our Help and Support.
fan difs ure faq Ae AY de foate 5 mre STS AH NU TIS Mh (1146-15, Sa, He 5) jis cheet aavai tis sadaa sukh hovai nikat na aavai taa kai jaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When He comes to mind, the mortal finds lasting peace, and the Messenger of Death cannot even approach him. ||1||Pause] |
wa feg o A 3a faofs Gourfemr Il 1146-16, 358, 2 5) jab ih na so tab kineh upaa-i-aa. When this being did not exist, who created him then?
AEG HS S for yarerfenr it 1146-16, Fa, ve 5) kavan mool tay ki-aa paragtaa-i-aa. What has been produced from the source?
ntufs ufs wify Aters i (1146-17, Sa, v2 5) aapeh maar aap jeevaalai. He Himself kills, and He Himself rejuvenates.
nus Sas a AT yfsurs |! (1146-17, 3a, ne 5) apnay bhagat ka-o sadaa paratipaalai. ||2] | He cherishes His devotees forever. ||2||
AS fag Wed fSA & TS Il 1146-17, 388, v2 5) sabh kichh jaanhu tis kai haath. Know that everything is in His Hands.
Us AS MSS A SE Il (1146-18, Fa, ve 5) parabh mayro anaath ko naath. My God is the Master of the masterless.
eu sHG SAT BE Il (1146-18, 308, v2 5) dukh bhanjan taa kaa hai naa-o. His Name is the Destroyer of pain.
AY uefa f3A & TE WS ISll (1146-18, Fa, v2 5)
sukh paavahi tis kay gun gaa-o. ||3]|
Singing His Glorious Praises, you shall find peace. ||3]| Afs Aymit Hae mrseth Il (1146-19, 3a@, He 5)
sun Su-aamee santan ardaas. O my Lord and Master, please listen to the prayer of Your Saint.
AMG ure US SHS UA II (1146-19, 358, Hs 5) jee-o paraan Dhan tum"rai paas. I place my soul, my breath of life and wealth before You.
feg Aa 3a AS s3f0 foMre Il 1146-19, a8, 13 5) ih jag tayraa sabh tujheh Dhi-aa-ay. All this world is Yours; it meditates on You.
Yast A989
ate faxsur Staak AY UES NSUQUIIBTIH (1147-1, 3a8, He 5)
kar kirpaa naanak sukh paa-ay. ||4]|25]|38] | Please shower Nanak with Your Mercy and bless him with peace. ||4]|25]|38]|
SI HIST U Il (1147-1)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Sot 2a gat ate Hts Il (1147-1, 358, v2 5) tayree tayk rahaa kal maahi. With Your Support, I survive in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Sot 2a 39 TE AT I (1147-1, 3aB, v2 5) tayree tayk tayray gun gaahi. With Your Support, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
Sot Sa BUT AS I (1147-2, 3a, v2 5) tayree tayk na pohai kaal. With Your Support, death cannot even touch me.
Sot 2a faoR AAS WAU (1147-2, 388, He 5) tayree tayk binsai janjaal. ||1]| With Your Support, my entanglements vanish. ||1]|
ate wor Sat Sa Il (1147-2, Sa@, He 5) deen dunee-aa tayree tayk. In this world and the next, I have Your Support.
AS ufo stent AT SH WAU TIS Il (1147-3, FaS, Hz 5) sabh meh ravi-aa saahib ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o. The One Lord, our Lord and Master, is all-pervading. ||1||Pause] |
Sot 2a AGS mS I 1147-3, FaW, 2 5) tayree tayk kara-o aanand. With Your Support, I celebrate blissfully.
Sot 2a AUC TT HS I 1147-3, Sa, He 5) tayree tayk japa-o gur mant. With Your Support, I chant the Guru's Mantra.
Sot 2a sd SE Aa I (1147-3, 3a8, v2 5) tayree tayk taree-ai bha-o saagar. With Your Support, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
TUES UT AY ATA ill (1147-4, saG, vs 5) raakhanhaar pooraa sukh saagar. ||2| | The Perfect Lord, our Protector and Savior, is the Ocean of Peace. ||2||
Sot fa ardt SB APE I (1147-4, S58, He 5) tayree tayk naahee bha-o ko-ay. With Your Support, I have no fear.
misart Are Afe Il (1147-4, Se@, He 5) antarjaamee saachaa so-ay. The True Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Sot 2a 3a Hf BE Il 1147-5, Fa, v3 5) tayree tayk tayraa man taan. With Your Support, my mind is filled with Your Power.
Stat Sat J chars Si 4147-5, Fa, 2 5) eehaa™ oohaa™ too deebaan. ||3]| Here and there, You are my Court of Appeal. ||3]|
Sot 2a ST SISTA I (1147-5, Fs@, He 5) tayree tayk tayraa bharvaasaa. I take Your Support, and place my faith in You.
Hae fmrefs Us PESTA Il (1147-5, Fa, ve 5) sagal Dhi-aavahi parabh guntaasaa. All meditate on God, the Treasure of Virtue.
afu Afu moe adts Sod STAT I (1147-6, Sa, nH 5) jap jap anad karahi tayray daasaa. Chanting and meditating on You, Your slaves celebrate in bliss.
fruits Soa ATS TESA ISUQENBEN (1147-6, FsB, v2 5)
simar naanak saachay guntaasaa. ||4||26||39]|| Nanak meditates in remembrance on the True Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. [14]|26||39]|
3d HIST U Il (1147-7)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
yen gat uaret fSer i 1147-7, 398, ue 5) parathmay chhodee paraa-ee nindaa. First, I gave up slandering others.
Css aet As He ot fee i (1147-7, Sa, He 5) utar ga-ee sabh man kee chindaa. All the anxiety of my mind was dispelled.
8 HI AS ats Ste Ml (1147-7, 398, ws 5) lobh moh sabh keeno door. Greed and attachment were totally banished.
USH BAS ys Ufa TAfe WA (1147-8, 398, H8 5) param baisno parabh paykh hajoor. ||1]| I see God ever-present, close at hand; I have become a great devotee. ||1]||
MA fSureit feaer afe i 1147-8, a8, v2 5) aiso ti-aagee virlaa ko-ay. Such a renunciate is very rare.
dfs ofs om WU AS ALE NA TIS I (1147-8, Fa, v2 5) har har naam japai jan so-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Such a humble servant chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
midafa at efsur Aa Il (1147-9, 338, He 5) aha‘-buDh kaa chhodi-aa sang. I have forsaken my egotistical intellect.
an au at Qatar ga Il (1147-9, 358, He 5) kaam kroDh kaa utri-aa rang. The love of sexual desire and anger has vanished.
oH fomre afte ofa Tg il (1147-9, Sa8, He 5) naam Dhi-aa-ay har har haray. I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
AT Aa & Afar fSASs iQ (1147-10, SaG, v2 5) saaDh janaa kai sang nistaray. ||2|| In the Company of the Holy, Iam emancipated. ||2||
Sot Hts Te ANTS Il (1147-10, Sa, v2 5) bairee meet ho-ay sammaan. Enemy and friend are all the same to me.
Ada His UTS FAS" Il (1147-10, 3s, He 5) sarab meh pooran bhagvaan. The Perfect Lord God is permeating all.
ys at orfamr ufs AY urfemi | (1147-11, 338, He 5) parabh kee aagi-aa maan sukh paa-i-aa. Accepting the Will of God, I have found peace.
afs us ofs oy fester nai 147-11, 338, 8 5) gur poorai har naam drirh-aa-i-aa. ||3|| The Perfect Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me. ||3]|
afe fasur fan amet wif it 47-11, 338, v2 5) kar kirpaa jis raakhai aap. That person, whom the Lord, in His Mercy, saves
Het Sas AU OH ANE Il (1147-12, 38, He 5) so-ee bhagat japai naam jaap. - that devotee chants and meditates on the Naam.
Hf yaA AT Ss His Bet Il 1147-12, Fa, ve 5)
man pargaas gur tay mat la-ee.
That person, whose mind is illumined, and who obtains understanding through the Guru
AT Toa St at udt uet ISNQOUBOll (1147-12, Fa, ve 5)
kaho naanak taa kee pooree pa-ee. ||4||27||40|| - says Nanak, he is totally fulfilled. ||4]|27]||40] |
SIC HIST U Il (1147-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
AY odt aos Ufe we Il 1147-13, 3a8, v2 5) sukh naahee bahutai Dhan khaatay. There is no peace in earning lots of money.
AY adt ua feafs are il (1147-13, 3a@, He 5) sukh naahee paykhay nirat naatay. There is no peace in watching dances and plays.
HY adt ad SA AHS Il (1147-13, S58, v8 5) sukh naahee baho days kamaa-ay. There is no peace in conquering lots of countries.
Hea Aut ofs de Te WES AI (1147-14, Fa, ns 5) sarab sukhaa har har gun gaa-ay. ||1]| All peace comes from singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
HY AIH MTSE BIT Il (1147-14, Sa, Hs 5) sookh sahj aanand lahhu. You shall obtain peace, poise and bliss,
Wonafs uch esarait aenfy ofs ofs ou ATT WAU TITS Mt 1147-14, 39G, 2 5) saaDhsangat paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee gurmukh har har naam kahhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. when you find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune. As Gurmukh, utter the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
dae HS fust AS sfest il (1147-15, Sa8, He 5) banDhan maat pitaa sut banitaa. Mother, father, children and spouse - all place the mortal in bondage.
8Us AH UH IG AIST Il (1147-15, Sa@, ve 5) banDhan karam Dharam ha-o kartaa. Religious rituals and actions done in ego place the mortal in bondage.
aus aces Hfs SA Il (1147-16, 3aG, v2 5) banDhan kaatanhaar man vasai. If the Lord, the Shatterer of bonds, abides in the mind,
38 AY ure for whe aA QM (1147-16, 338, He 5) ta-o sukh paavai nij ghar basai. ||2| | then peace is obtained, dwelling in the home of the self deep within. ||2] |
Afs Wha ys CfGTST Il (1147-16, Ss, v8 5) sabh jaachik parabh dayvanhaar. Everyone is a beggar; God is the Great Giver.
we fours Mis wus | (1147-17, 3a@, v2 5) gun niDhaan bay-ant apaar. The Treasure of Virtue is the Infinite, Endless Lord.
fA S AGH AT YS UST Il (1147-17, Fa@, ue 5) jis no karam karay parabh apnaa. That person, unto whom God grants His Mercy
dfs ofa an f38 vfs AUST IBN (1147-17, 388, He 5) har har naam tinai jan japnaa. ||3]| - that humble being chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
Td MUS wid MgetA II (1147-18, 3aG, He 5) gur apnay aagai ardaas. I offer my prayer to my Guru.
ate fasut used TESA Il (1147-18, Sa@, He 5) kar kirpaa purakh guntaas. O Primal Lord God, Treasure of Virtue, please bless me with Your Grace.
AT SSA SHS ATS Il 1147-18, SaS, ns 5) kaho naanak tumree sarnaa-ee. Says Nanak, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
fag ave f38 sug TAS ISNQACINSIU (1147-19, FG, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakhahu gusaa-ee. ||4||28]|41]| If it pleases You, please protect me, O Lord of the World. ||4||28]|41]|
SI HIS U Il (1147-19)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
as fife fsurfaS ert aS i (1147-19, Sa, v2 5)
gur mil ti-aagi-o doojaa bhaa-o. Meeting with the Guru, I have forsaken the love of duality.
ust Vast aanfa Afus afs ar are i (1148-1, sa, ve 5)
gurmukh japi-o har kaa naa-o. As Gurmukh, I chant the Name of the Lord.
fandt fos of Sa ora il (1148-1, 358, He 5) bisree chint naam rang laagaa. My anxiety is gone, and I am in love with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
HOH HOH at Afeor Ara A (1148-1, Sa, ne 5) janam janam kaa so-i-aa jaagaa. ||1]| I was asleep for countless lifetimes, but I have now awakened. ||1||
ate fxsut must AST BES Il (1148-2, a8, He 5) kar kirpaa apnee sayvaa laa-ay. Granting His Grace, He has linked me to His service.
Ag Afet Aga AY UTS A TIS I (1148-2, FaC, ws 5) saaDhoo sang sarab sukh paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all pleasures are found. ||1]||Pause] |
da au aa wate feerd il (1148-2, S96, He 5) rog dokh gur sabad nivaaray. The Word of the Guru's Shabad has eradicated disease and evil.
oH mBug Ho Stsfs ATS Il (1148-3, Sa, He 5) naam a-ukhaDh man bheetar saaray. My mind has absorbed the medicine of the Naam.
ad 323 nfs sfemr mises Il (1148-3, a8, He 5) gur bhaytat man bha-i-aa anand. Meeting with the Guru, my mind is in bliss.
Hea fears SH SaHSs NM (1148-3, Ss, Hz 5) sarab niDhaan naam bhagvant. ||2]| All treasures are in the Name of the Lord God. ||2]|
HOH Hoe ot fet AH STA Il (1148-4, Sa, v8 5) janam maran kee mitee jam taraas. My fear of birth and death and the Messenger of Death has been dispelled.
AGS Su aHe faarA il (1148-4, Fae, ns 5) saaDhsangat oo“Dh kamal bigaas. In the Saadh Sangat, the inverted lotus of my heart has blossomed forth.
Te Wes fesse faAMH i (1148-4, 3a, v2 5) gun gaavat nihchal bisraam. Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I have found eternal, abiding peace.
UIs JS ATS AH Ill (1148-5, Fa, we 5) pooran ho-ay saglay kaam. ||3]|| All my tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||3]||
POs UT met UTS Il (1148-5, Fa, Hz 5) dulabh dayh aa-ee parvaan. This human body, so difficult to obtain, is approved by the Lord.
Hee det fu afe afs any i ci4s-5, 3a8, v2 5) safal ho-ee jap har har naam. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, it has become fruitful.
ag aad ufs fagur adt il (1148-6, se, v2 5) kaho naanak parabh kirpaa karee. Says Nanak, God has blessed me with His Mercy.
AMA fasta AU ahs Tat NSNQAENSII (1148-6, Fae, v2 5)
Saas giraas japa-o har haree. ||4||29]|42| | With every breath and morsel of food, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||29||42| |
SIC HIST U Il (1148-6)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
AS 3 Bor AT aT ar Il (1148-7, 38, 2 5) sabh tay oochaa jaa kaa naa-o. His Name is the Highest of all.
He Het 3ST A TE WS Il (1148-7, Sa, uz 5) sadaa sadaa taa kay gun gaa-o. Sing His Glorious Praises, forever and ever.
fan fAHss Aare ey ATE I 1148-7, 3a8, v8 5) jis simrat saglaa dukh jaa-ay. Meditating in remembrance on Him, all pain is dispelled.
Ada AY SAfe His we WAM (1148-7, Se, 2 5) sarab sookh vaseh man aa-ay. ||1]| All pleasures come to dwell in the mind. ||1]|
frufa Hor 3 Arar ALE Il (148-8, 338, v2 5) simar manaa too saachaa so-ay. O my mind, meditate in remembrance on the True Lord.
Jofs uafs suc afs df nan ga it 148-8, 358, v2 5) halat palat tumree gat ho-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. In this world and the next, you shall be saved. ||1]||Pause| |
usd fadHe fraHsdd Il (1148-9, 308, He 5) purakh niranjan sirjanhaar. The Immaculate Lord God is the Creator of all.
Aba AS FS niITS Il (1148-9, Sa8, nz 5) jee-a jant dayvai aahaar. He gives sustenance to all beings and creatures.
afte us fie SUASITS Il (1148-9, 3aG, v2 5) kot khatay khin bakhsanhaar. He forgives millions of sins and mistakes in an instant.
sats ate Aet fSASTS IQ (1148-9, Fe, v2 5) bhagat bhaa-ay sadaa nistaar. ||2|| Through loving devotional worship, one is emancipated forever. ||2| |
Aral US Ara Sfsmiret il 1148-10, Fa@, v2 5) saachaa Dhan saachee vadi-aa-ee. True wealth and true glorious greatness,
Gd ud 3 fesse vfs uret i (1148-10, 338, H2 5) gur pooray tay nihchal mat paa-ee. and eternal, unchanging wisdom, are obtained from the Perfect Guru.
ate fasur fA TSI Il (1148-10, Sa, He 5) kar kirpaa jis raakhanhaaraa. When the Protector, the Savior Lord, bestows His Mercy,
a at Aas fe nifomra Sil (1148-11, S38, 42 5) taa kaa sagal mitai anDhi-aaraa. ||3]|| all spiritual darkness is dispelled. ||3]|
ursgqan fr@ arat fms it ci4s-11, 338, 48 5) paarbarahm si-o laago Dhi-aan. I focus my meditation on the Supreme Lord God.
use ufs sf fagare Il (148-11, 338, v2 5) pooran poor rahi-o nirbaan. The Lord of Nirvaanaa is totally pervading and permeating all.
3H 3@ Afe fxs atures I (1148-12, 398, Hs 5) bharam bha-o mayt milay gopaal. Eradicating doubt and fear, I have met the Lord of the World.
SOA AC Td FS Tenis ISUBOUSSI (1148-12, Fa, He 5) naanak ka-o gur bha-ay da-i-aal. ||4||30||43]| The Guru has become merciful to Nanak. ||4]|30]|43] |
SIC HIST U Il (1148-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
fan frnes vfs of yarn Il 1148-13, 358, 18 5) jis simrat man ho-ay pargaas. Meditating in remembrance on Him, the mind is illumined.
fhefs ABA AY Hote fev I 1148-13, Sa@, v3 5) miteh kalays sukh sahj nivaas. Suffering is eradicated, and one comes to dwell in peace and poise.
fsrfs uaufs fan ys fe i (1148-13, Sa, v8 5) tiseh paraapat jis parabh day-ay. They alone receive it, unto whom God gives it.
ud Ts at urs AS MA (1148-14, Fa, 2 5) pooray gur kee paa-ay sayv. ||1|| They are blessed to serve the Perfect Guru. ||1]|
Aaa Ae ys Sa oS Il (1148-14, Sa@, ne 5) sarab sukhaa parabh tayro naa-o. All peace and comfort are in Your Name, God.
MS Udd HT HO TS UA! FIG I (1148-14, SaG, He 5) aath pahar mayray man gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]|Pause] |
A fee Het SB ue Il 1148-15, 308, v2 5) jo ichhai so-ee fal paa-ay. You shall receive the fruits of your desires,
dfs a on Hfs SATS Il (1148-15, Sa@, He 5) har kaa naam man vasaa-ay. when the Name of the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
MIZE AE Td Tha fame i (1148-15, Fe@, 72 5) aavan jaan rahay har Dhi-aa-ay. Meditating on the Lord, your comings and goings cease.
sats afe ys at fos OTE iQ (1148-16, sa, ve 5) bhagat bhaa-ay parabh kee liv laa-ay. ||2]| Through loving devotional worship, lovingly focus your attention on God. ||2||
faoR OH AU wars Il (1148-16, 3s, v2 5) binsay kaam kroDh aha‘kaar. Sexual desire, anger and egotism are dispelled.
Ze whenr Ha fire Il (1148-16, 398, 8 5) tootay maa-i-aa moh pi-aar. Love and attachment to Maya are broken.
us at 2a ad fee ofS Il (1148-17, 358, 18 5) parabh kee tayk rahai din raat. Lean on God's Support, day and night.
UTSYIH Ad fA ST USI (1148-17, 3a, He 5) paarbarahm karay jis daat. ||3]|| The Supreme Lord God has given this gift. ||3]|
AIO ATO ST Amt Il (1148-17, S38, He 5) karan karaavanhaar su-aamee. Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes.
Has wet X nisaaHt il (1148-18, 3a, v2 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts.
ate faxsur must Het ote il (1148-18, Sa, He 5) kar kirpaa apnee sayvaa laa-ay. Bless me with Your Grace, Lord, and link me to Your service.
SSA VA SoH APSTS ISiSUissil (1148-18, Fae, He 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ay. ||4||31]|44| | Slave Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||31||44||
SI HIS U Il (1148-19) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
GHA Hd A BH B Be Ill (1148-19, Fa, v2 5) laaj marai jo naam na layvai. One who does not repeat the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall die of shame.
on fags Aut fas AS il (148-19, 398, v8 5) naam bihoon sukhee ki-o sovai. Without the Name, how can he ever sleep in peace?
fs frag ats usn afs od Il (1148-19, 3a8, v2 5)
har simran chhaad param gat chaahai.
The mortal abandons meditative remembrance of the Lord, and then wishes for the state of supreme salvation;
usar qa8e
He fast Arar aS wT WAU (1149-1, FaG, we 5) mool binaa saakhaa kat aahai. ||1]| but without roots, how can there be any branches? ||1]||
Gd dfee AS He forfeit 1149-1, S58, v2 5) gur govind mayray man Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
HOH ASH at HS Gard dus ate afs Afar feof] wan TIS it 1149-2, Se, v2 5) janam janam kee mail utaarai banDhan kaat har sang milaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The filth of countless incarnations shall be washed away. Breaking your bonds, you Shall be united with the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
stefa of as afe AG il 1149-2, 358, He 5)
tirath naa-ay kahaa such sail.
How can a stone be purified by bathing at a sacred shrine of pilgrimage? Ho aG fenmd IBH HG Il 1149-3, 39@, 2 5)
man ka-o vi-aapai ha-umai mail. The filth of egotism clings to the mind.
afe AIH FS a HB Il (1149-3, Fa, ws 5) kot karam banDhan kaa mool. Millions of rituals and actions taken are the root of entanglements.
ofa & sHo fag fase Us Nil 1149-3, $s, v2 5)
har kay bhajan bin birthaa pool. ||2]|
Without meditating and vibrating on the Lord, the mortal gathers only worthless bundles of straw. ||2]|
fag we FS Sdt FY I (1149-4, 3a, ws 5) bin khaa-ay boojhai nahee bhookh. Without eating, hunger is not satisfied.
da me st Ssafa TH Il (1149-4, 3a, Hs 5) rog jaa-ay taa™ utreh dookh. When the disease is cured, then the pain goes away.
aH au oe Hfs faerfim i (149-4, a8, v2 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mohi bi-aapi-aa.
The mortal is engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment. fafs ufs ater A ys odt afin SII (1149-4, 3a8, He 5)
jin parabh keenaa so parabh nahee jaapi-aa. ||3]| He does not meditate on God, that God who created him. |[3]|
Ue U6 AG Ue ofa a I (1149-5, 3a, He 5) Dhan Dhan saaDh Dhan har naa-o. Blessed, blessed is the Holy Saint, and blessed is the Name of the Lord.
MTS Udd Ales TE AES i (1149-5, FaS, v2 5) aath pahar keertan gun gaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Kirtan, the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
U6 ofa sats Ue ATeTS Ill (1149-5, 35, He 5) Dhan har bhagat Dhan karnaihaar. Blessed is the devotee of the Lord, and blessed is the Creator Lord.
Hafe SSA YS UTY MUTT ISUSIUSUI (1149-6, Fae, we 5)
saran naanak parabh purakh apaar. ||4||32||45]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Primal, the Infinite. ||4]|32||45]|
SI HIS U Il (1149-6)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
TI AYAS Je 3 TS Il 1149-6, FaG, ve 5) gur suparsan ho-ay bha-o ga-ay. When the Guru was totally pleased, my fear was taken away.
3m fedHe Ho Hfa BE Il (1149-7, 3, He 5) naam niranjan man meh la-ay. I enshrine the Name of the Immaculate Lord within my mind.
ae eens Het frgurs il (1149-7, 3a8, He 5) deen da-i-aal sadaa kirpaal. He is Merciful to the meek, forever Compassionate.
faofa Te AAS AAS IAI (1149-7, 3aG, v2 5) binas ga-ay saglay janjaal. ||1|| All my entanglements are finished. ||1]|
AY AIH MTSE WS Il (1149-8, Sd, He 5) sookh sahj aanand ghanay. I have found peace, poise, and myriads of pleasures.
Worfa fre 3 so nifys afs afs TAS FS AU TIC I (1149-8, Fa, v8 5) saaDhsang mitay bhai bharmaa amrit har har rasan bhanay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, fear and doubt are dispelled. My tongue chants the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
TIO AHS fA wai TS Il (1149-9, Sa, v2 5) charan kamal si-o laago hayt. I have fallen in love with the Lord's Lotus Feet.
fs ufo faafA& Hat usZ Il (1149-9, 3a@, v2 5) khin meh binsi-o mahaa parayt. In an instant, the terrible demons are destroyed.
MTS UIT Tid Ifa AU ATU Il (1149-9, SaB, He 5) aath pahar har har jap jaap. Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
USI afer TT nef WIN (1149-10, Ss, He 5) raakhanhaar govid gur aap. ||2|| The Guru is Himself the Savior Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||2||
nus Aza a eT ufsurd Il 1149-10, 338, 8 5) apnay sayvak ka-o sadaa partipaarai. He Himself cherishes His servant forever.
SIS Aa’ a ATA fEars Il (1149-10, Sa, He 5) bhagat janaa kay saas nihaarai. He watches over every breath of His humble devotee.
HOA at AT ASA FS Il (1149-11, Fs, v1 5) maanas kee kaho kaytak baat. Tell me, what is the nature of human beings?
AH 3 Te tafe TS ISI (149-11, 358, He 5) jam tay raakhai day kar haath. |[3]| The Lord extends His Hand, and saves them from the Messenger of Death. ||3] |
foone Fat feaHe cH i (1149-11, S88, v2 5) nirmal sobhaa nirmal reet. Immaculate is the Glory, and Immaculate is the way of life,
UTaqaH uitfeur His SHS i (1149-12, 3a, us 5) paarbarahm aa-i-aa man cheet. of those who remember the Supreme Lord God in their minds.
afa fasur afs 6 Be Il (1149-12, 3e@, v2 5) kar kirpaa gur deeno daan. The Guru, in His Mercy, has granted this Gift.
Soa usm aH fours ISiSSiISEll (1149-12, Fa, He 5)
naanak paa-i-aa naam niDhaan. ||4||33||46]| Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||33]|46] |
SI HIS U Il (1149-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
ATE ATE AHIT TT AT Il (1149-13, Fa@, ve 5) karan kaaran samrath gur mayraa. My Guru is the All-powerful Lord, the Creator, the Cause of causes.
Aba ure AMSTST SST Il (1149-13, Sa, we 5) jee-a paraan sukh-daata nayraa. He is the Soul, the Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace, always near.
3 Sno Miso THE I 1149-14, SaG, v2 5) bhai bhanjan abhinaasee raa-ay. He is the Destroyer of fear, the Eternal, Unchanging, Sovereign Lord King.
zante Sfmt AS ey ATE NA (1149-14, 3a8, He 5) darsan daykhi-ai sabh dukh jaa-ay. ||1]| Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all fear is dispelled. ||1]|
AS aS UN Sat Agar i (1149-14, Sa, v2 5)
jat kat paykha-o tayree sarnaa. Wherever I look, is the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
afes afe avet Afsag BaNSt UA TIS il (1149-14, Sa@, nz 5)
bal bal jaa-ee satgur charnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Feet of the True Guru. ||1]||Pause] |
UTS AH FHS TIS Il (1149-15, SW, w 5) pooran kaam milay gurdayv. My tasks are perfectly accomplished, meeting the Divine Guru.
Afs euerst fSgHs AS Il (1149-15, Ss@, ue 5) sabh faldaataa nirmal sayv. He is the Giver of all rewards. Serving Him, I am immaculate.
AT Ts BS MUS SA Il (1149-16, Fa@, Hz 5) kar geh leenay apunay daas. He reaches out with His Hand to His slaves.
TH OH fee UG fEeTA MQM (1149-16, 3a@, v2 5)
raam naam rid dee-o nivaas. ||2|| The Name of the Lord abides in their hearts. ||2]|
Het wise Brat fxs Aa Il (1149-16, FsG, v2 5) sadaa anand naahee kichh sog. They are forever in bliss, and do not suffer at all.
ey Use od fam Fa Il (1149-17, 398, v2 5) dookh darad nah bi-aapai rog. No pain, sorrow or disease afflicts them.
Ag fag 3a J ATET GT Il (1149-17, Fa, vs 5) sabh kichh tayraa too karnaihaar. Everything is Yours, O Creator Lord.
UTSZIH Td Md MUTT MSI (1149-17, 3a8, He 5) paarbarahm gur agam apaar. ||3]| The Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Inaccessible and Infinite. ||3] |
fede ASt MIA Sat Il (1149-18, SaG, v2 5) nirmal sobhaa achraj banee. His Glorious Grandeur is immaculate, and the Bani of His Word is wonderful!
UTSAIH UTS Hf set Il (1149-18, Sa, ve 5) paarbarahm pooran man bhaanee. The Perfect Supreme Lord God is pleasing to my mind.
afs afe dts afenr Afe II (1149-18, 338, 42 5) jal thal mahee-al ravi-aa so-ay. He is permeating the waters, the lands and the skies.
waa AS fas ys 3 OE SNSsigil (1149-19, Fa, ve 5) naanak sabh kichh parabh tay ho-ay. ||4]|34]|47]| O Nanak, everything comes from God. ||4]|34||47]|
SI HIS U Il (1149-19)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
HO 30 TS IH Sat BaE Il (1149-19, Ss@, He 5) man tan raataa raam rang charnay. My mind and body are imbued with the Love of the Lord's Feet.
at AQUO
Ava HOTA YUIS ATE Il (1150-1, Fa, 3 5) sarab manorath pooran karnay. All the desires of my mind have been perfectly fulfilled.
WTS UIT Wes FIST Il (1150-1, Fa, nz 5) aath pahar gaavat bhagvant. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing of the Lord God.
Afsafe ae ys HZ WA (1150-1, Fa@, we 5) satgur deeno pooraa mant. ||1|| The True Guru has imparted this perfect wisdom. ||1]|
A zsarat fam of fumire it 1150-1, 338, v2 5) so vadbhaagee jis naam pi-aar. Very fortunate are those who love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fA & Af Sd AAS WU TIS I (1150-2, SaG, v2 5)
tis kai sang tarai sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Associating with them, we cross over the world-ocean. ||1]|Pause| |
Het famrat fa ford Sar i (1150-2, Sa, Hz 5) so-ee gi-aanee je simrai ayk. They are spiritual teachers, who meditate in remembrance on the One Lord.
A uoest fan afa fader it (1150-2, 338, v2 5) so Dhanvantaa jis buDh bibayk. Wealthy are those who have a discriminating intellect.
A a@est fa fad AyMmt i (150-3, 3a8, v2 5) so kulvantaa je simrai su-aamee. Noble are those who remember their Lord and Master in meditation.
A ufsdst fa my uerat iI (1150-3, 3e8, He 5) SO pativantaa je aap pachhaanee. ||2| | Honorable are those who understand their own selves. ||2| |
ad usAtE UsH UE UfEM II (1150-3, Sa@, He 5) gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status.
ae due fee sf forfeor i ais0-4, 358, v2 5) gun gopaal din rain Dhi-aa-i-aa. Day and night I meditate on the Glories of God.
Je AIS UTS WAT Il (1150-4, 3a, v2 5)
tootay banDhan pooran aasaa. My bonds are broken, and my hopes are fulfilled.
Ufs & vas foe wf fSeSTAT SI (1150-4, 3a, H2 5)
har kay charan rid maahi nivaasaa. ||3]| The Feet of the Lord now abide in my heart. ||3]|
AT THA AT A UTS ATH Il (1150-5, Sa, we 5) kaho naanak jaa kay pooran karmaa. Says Nanak, one whose karma is perfect
A Ae orfeur ys at Agar Il (1150-5, 3a, ve 5) SO jan aa-i-aa parabh kee sarnaa. - that humble being enters the Sanctuary of God.
nifty ufes ure Afs ats Il (1150-5, Fa@, 2 5) aap pavit paavan sabh keenay. He himself is pure, and he sanctifies all.
TH FATES FAST BS NIBUNSTI (1150-6, Fa, He 5)
raam rasaa-in rasnaa cheen"ay. ||4||35||48]| His tongue chants the Name of the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||4]|35||48]|
SI HIS U Il (1150-6)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
oH Bs fas fas o Bd Il (1150-6, 35, He 5) naam lait kichh bighan na laagai. Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no obstacles block the way.
OH ASS AH BIT SW Il (1150-7, 3a, v2 5) naam sunat jam Dhoorahu bhaagai. Listening to the Naam, the Messenger of Death runs far away.
oH BS AS CUT A Il (1150-7, Fa@, we 5) naam lait sabh dookhah naas. Repeating the Naam, all pains vanish.
OH AUS did Bae (SSA IAI (1150-7, 3aG, He 5) naam japat har charan nivaas. ||1]| Chanting the Naam, the Lord's Lotus Feet dwell within. ||1]|
fosfaus safs aq afs offs a il (1150-8, S38, v3 5)
nirbighan bhagat bhaj har har naa-o.
Meditating, vibrating the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is unobstructed devotional worship.
wala dAfa Ss xX TE WS AI TIS Il (1150-8, Fa@, nz 5) rasak rasak har kay gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with loving affection and energy. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs fines fae WU OAT Il (1150-9, 358, He 5)
har simrat kichh chaakh na johai.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the Eye of Death cannot see you. dfs fies fs FE 5 UT Il 1150-9, 358, v2 5)
har simrat dait day-o na pohai. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, demons and ghosts shall not touch you.
dfs fags HI HWS 3 A Il (1150-9, 358, He 5) har simrat moh maan na baDhai. Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, attachment and pride shall not bind you.
dfs fas aes fs & FO WM (1150-9, Sa, He 5)
har simrat garabh jon na ruDhai. ||2]|
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall not be consigned to the womb of reincarnation. ||2| |
Ufa fAHde at Aart FB Il (1150-10, Sa, He 5) har simran kee saglee baylaa. Any time is a good time to meditate in remembrance on the Lord.
ofa fade ag Hts fear il (1150-10, Sa@, v8 5)
har simran baho maahi ikaylaa.
Among the masses, only a few meditate in remembrance on the Lord. vfs warts WU Ae AE I 150-11, 388, He 5)
jaat ajaat japai jan ko-ay.
Social class or no social class, anyone may meditate on the Lord.
a wa fSA of afs df Wai ciso-11, a8, v8 5)
jo jaapai tis kee gat ho-ay. |[3]|
Whoever meditates on Him is emancipated. ||3]|
dfs ot on mba ATGAfar I (1150-11, Sa, v2 5)
har kaa naam japee-ai saaDhsang. Chant the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ts X SH A UIs IT Il (1150-11, Fa, ns 5) har kay naam kaa pooran rang. Perfect is the Love of the Lord's Name.
Soa AS Ys forgur orfs i (1150-12, Ss@, we 5) naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa Dhaar. O God, shower Your Mercy on Nanak,
AtA ATA dfs ed fests ISNBENS€l (1150-12, Fs@, nH 5)
Saas saas har dayh chitaar. ||4]|36]|49]| that he may think of you with each and every breath. ||4||36||49]|
SI HIS U Il (1150-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
MY AAS MM FE I (1150-13, Fa@, He 5) aapay saasat aapay bayd. He Himself is the Shaastras, and He Himself is the Vedas.
nm ufe ufe AS Fe Il (1150-13, 3s, v2 5) aapay ghat ghat jaanai bhayd. He knows the secrets of each and every heart.
nfs AU A ot AS SF Il (1150-13, Fv, we 5) jot saroop jaa kee sabh vath. He is the Embodiment of Light; all beings belong to Him.
ATE ATE UTH AHI IAUl (1150-14, 3a, we 5) karan kaaran pooran samrath. ||1]|| The Creator, the Cause of causes, the Perfect All-powerful Lord. ||1]|
ys at Ge TIT HS AS I (1150-14, Ss, ne 5) parabh kee ot gahhu man mayray. Grab hold of the Support of God, O my mind.
TIS THS TSH niraug FANS SY SF yes SF UU TIS Il (1150-14, Fa@, we 5) charan kamal gurmukh aaraaDhahu dusman dookh na aavai nayray. ||1|| rahaa-o. As Gurmukh, worship and adore His Lotus Feet; enemies and pains shall not even approach you. ||1]||Pause| |
nm ge fg fesse ATT Il (1150-15, 3a@, He 5) aapay van tarin taribhavan saar. He Himself is the Essence of the forests and fields, and all the three worlds.
W & Afs ude AA Il (1150-15, Sa@, Hs 5) jaa kai soot paro-i-aa sansaar. The universe is strung on His Thread.
wmy fre Hast Adafit I (1150-15, Sa@, 42 5) aapay siv saktee sanjogee. He is the Uniter of Shiva and Shakti - mind and matter.
uify fosarat nm Sait Qi (1150-16, Sa@, 2 5) aap nirbaanee aapay bhogee. ||2| | He Himself is in the detachment of Nirvaanaa, and He Himself is the Enjoyer. ||2| |
AS as UNG 35 3S ALE II (1150-16, Sa, He 5) jat kat paykha-o tat tat so-ay. Wherever I look, there He is.
fH fag ga ardt aE il (1150-16, Fa, v3 5) tis bin doojaa naahee ko-ay. Without Him, there is no one at all.
Wag soot aH a Sar i (1150-17, 3e€, He 5) saagar taree-ai naam kai rang. In the Love of the Naam, the world-ocean is crossed.
TE We SSA AUAA Wil (1150-17, Fa, 2 5) gun gaavai naanak saaDhsang. ||3]|| Nanak sings His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3]|
Hafs gafs wats |fA AT a I (1150-17, 338, nH 5) mukat bhugat jugat vas jaa kai. Liberation, the ways and means of enjoyment and union are under His Control.
Car andt fas AS SS Il (1150-18, Sa, H2 5) oonaa naahee kichh jan taa kai. His humble servant lacks nothing.
afs fasur far of AYA I (1150-18, 338, 8 5) kar kirpaa jis ho-ay suparsan. That person, with whom the Lord, in His Mercy, is pleased
SSA VA ASt AS US IISINUOM (1150-18, Sa, He 5)
naanak daas say-ee jan Dhan. ||4||37||50|| - O slave Nanak, that humble servant is blessed. ||4]|37||50||
SI HIS U Il (1150-19)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
sast Hfs wise afHE Il (1150-19, Sa, Hz 5) bhagtaa man aanand gobind. The minds of the Lord's devotee are filled with bliss.
mnfafs se faart AS fees Il (1150-19, SaG, Hz 5) asthit bha-ay binsee sabh chind. They become stable and permanent, and all their anxiety is gone.
Yat AW
3 3H faafh ae fae wefo it (1151-1, S38, n8 5) bhai bharam binas ga-ay khin maahi. Their fears and doubts are dispelled in an instant.
UTSgTH sro His wife WA (aisi-1, 3a@, He 5) paarbarahm vasi-aa man aa-ay. ||1]| The Supreme Lord God comes to dwell in their minds. ||1||
TH TH AS AS AOS I 1151-1, 358, He 5) raam raam sant sadaa sahaa-ay. The Lord is forever the Help and Support of the Saints.
ufg wots ae usHAg ste sfoor use AS ofe NU TIS it (1151-2, Sa, 2 5)
ghar baahar naalay parmaysar rav rahi-aa pooran sabh thaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Inside the home of the heart, and outside as well, the Transcendent Lord is always with us, permeating and pervading all places. ||1]||Pause| |
US HS WeS Hafs Tus il 1151-2, Fa, ne 5) Dhan maal joban jugat gopaal. The Lord of the World is my wealth, property, youth and ways and means.
Abt yre fos AY yfsure il (1151-3, 3a, H8 5) jee-a paraan nit sukh partipaal. He continually cherishes and brings peace to my soul and breath of life.
MUS UA AG St gay TE Il (1151-3, 308, v2 5) apnay daas ka-o day raakhai haath. He reaches out with His Hand and saves His slave.
fond o 23 Ae dt AE QU 1151-3, 3a8, v2 5) nimakh na chhodai sad hee saath. ||2|| He does not abandon us, even for an instant; He is always with us. ||2||
ofa AT UtsH mies o AE I 1151-4, 3a, He 5) har saa pareetam avar na ko-ay. There is no other Beloved like the Lord.
Afs ANTS ATS APE I (1151-4, F@, v8 5) saar sam"aalay saachaa so-ay. The True Lord takes care of all.
Hs fust AS FO satFS Il 1151-4, Fa8, v2 5) maat pitaa sut banDh naraa-in. The Lord is our Mother, Father, Son and Relation.
wife Fate Sas TS WES ll 1151-5, FaS, v2 5)
aad jugaad bhagat gun gaa-in. ||3]|
Since the beginning of time, and throughout the ages, His devotees sing His Glorious Praises. ||3]|
fan at ug ys a fs Ag I 1151-5, 3a, He 5) tis kee Dhar parabh kaa man jor. My mind is filled with the Support and the Power of the Lord.
Sa far sa Sat FT Il (1151-5, 3s@, we 5) ayk binaa doojaa nahee hor. Without the Lord, there is no other at all.
Sod a Hfe feg usHeEs Il (1151-6, Sa, v2 5) naanak kai man ih purkhaarath. Nanak's mind is encouraged by this hope,
YS INST AS AMIIT USUSCUUAU (1151-6, SIG, 4 5)
parabhoo hamaaraa saaray su-aarath. ||4]|38]|51]| that God will accomplish my objectives in life. ||4||38]|51]|
SI HIST U Il (1151-7)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
3 a 3@ ufsur fines ofa aM I (151-7, 3a, nH 5)
bhai ka-o bha-o parhi-aa simrat har naam.
Fear itself becomes afraid, when the mortal remembers the Lord's Name in meditation.
nae faurfa fet fg Te at GA A TS YTS AH NU FHS I c1si-7, 398, v8 5)
Sagal bi-aaDh mitee tarihu gun kee daas kay ho-ay pooran kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All the diseases of the three gunas - the three qualities - are cured, and tasks of the Lord's slaves are perfectly accomplished. ||1]|Pause] |
fs & Ba Ae’ TE eta fs a fife yas oH I caisi-s, 398, ws 5)
har kay lok sadaa gun gaavahi tin ka-o mili-aa pooran Dhaam.
The people of the Lord always sing His Glorious Praises; they attain His Perfect Mansion.
Ho a ah aie feo wat df usts Gan ThE AH IAI (1151-9, 3a8, nH: 5)
jan kaa daras baachhai din raatee ho-ay puneet Dharam raa-ay jaam. ||1]|
Even the Righteous Judge of Dharma and the Messenger of Death yearn, day and night, to be sanctified by the Blessed Vision of the Lord's humble servant. ||1]|
aH au oe He feet ATaHfa fifenr mifsrts Il 151-9, 358, v2 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mad nindaa saaDhsang miti-aa abhimaan.
Sexual desire, anger, intoxication, egotism, slander and egotistical pride are eradicted in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
WMA HS sefs essa aoa fSo aA AS ATaS MQWNBE MUM (1151-10, FW, v2 5)
aisay sant bhayteh vadbhaagee naanak tin kai sad kurbaan. ||2]|39||52|| By great good fortune, such Saints are met. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. [12] 139] [521]
SI HIST U I (1151-11)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Us HAM A Use Is I 151-11, 3a, He 5) panch majmee jo panchan raakhai. One who harbors the five thieves, becomes the embodiment of these five.
fiufemr sRat fos Sfo aH II (151-11, 358, He 5) mithi-aa rasnaa nit uth bhaakhai. He gets up each day and tells lies.
Sa sate ad uss I 1151-11, 3a@, ne 5) chakar banaa-ay karai pakhand. He applies ceremonial religious marks to his body, but practices hypocrisy.
sfo sfa ud AA fer FT UA cisi-12, Ss, 8 5) jhur jhur pachai jaisay tari-a rand. ||1]| He wastes away in sadness and pain, like a lonely widow. ||1||
ofa & BH faat AS FS Il (1151-12, $s, H2 5) har kay naam binaa sabh jhooth. Without the Name of the Lord, everything is false.
fas ae ud Hats 3 urea AS caala AAS HS UU TIS Ml (1151-12, 338, v8 5)
bin gur pooray mukat na paa-ee-ai saachee dargahi saakat mooth. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Perfect Guru, liberation is not obtained. In the Court of the True Lord, the faithless cynic is plundered. ||1]|Pause] |
Het adte aves odt WS Il 1151-13, 398, v2 5) so-ee kucheel kudrat nahee jaanai. One who does not know the Lord's Creative Power is polluted.
Stun afte 3 Afs dfs HS Ml (1151-14, a8, He 5)
leepi-ai thaa-ay na such har maanai.
Ritualistically plastering one's kitchen square does not make it pure in the Eyes of the Lord.
Misd Her sag fas GS i (1151-14, Fa, ne 5) antar mailaa baahar nit Dhovai. If a person is polluted within, he may wash himself everyday on the outside,
AMt wears must ufs 8S WU (151-14, 3a@, He 5) saachee dargahi apnee pat khovai. ||2|| but in the Court of the True Lord, he forfeits his honor. ||2||
Heo arafs ad Bure it 1151-15, Se, v2 5) maa-i-aa kaaran karai upaa-o. He works for the sake of Maya,
oats o ws Ato ur i (1151-15, Sa@, ne 5) kabeh na ghaalai seeDhaa paa-o. but he never places his feet on the right path.
fafs ator fan dis o mire I cisi-15, 3a8, 2 5) jin kee-aa tis cheet na aanai. He never even remembers the One who created him.
Tat TSt HAT SATS USI 1151-16, SW, ws 5) koorhee koorhee mukhahu vakhaanai. ||3]| He speaks falsehood, only falsehood, with his mouth. ||3]|
fA & AGH Ad AGS Il (1151-16, 3a@, v2 5) jis no karam karay kartaar. That person, unto whom the Creator Lord shows Mercy,
AWoHfa df fsa faGorg i (151-16, 338, 2 5) saaDhsang ho-ay tis bi-uhaar. deals with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
dfs oH sats fAG war Fa Il (1151-17, Fa@, v2 5) har naam bhagat si-o laagaa rang. One who lovingly worships the Lord's Name,
ad sod fsH He odt FT NiSOlUsil (1151-17, Fs, He 5)
kaho naanak tis jan nahee bhang. ||4||40||53]| says Nanak - no obstacles ever block his way. ||4||40]|53]|
SI HIST U Il (1151-18)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
feeax a@ feed HATE II (1151-18, Sa8, He 5) nindak ka-o fitkay sansaar. The entire universe curses the slanderer.
sea or sor faSag I (151-18, 3s, m3 5) nindak kaa jhoothaa bi-uhaar. False are the dealings of the slanderer.
(SEA AT HB MTSTT Il (1151-18, Fa@, He 5) nindak kaa mailaa aachaar. The slanderer's lifestyle is filthy and polluted.
aA MUS AG TUST'T MAUI (1151-19, Fae, He 5) daas apunay ka-o raakhanhaar. ||1]|| The Lord is the Saving Grace and the Protector of His slave. ||1]|
fseq Hor fee a 3TH Il (1151-19, 3a8, He 5) nindak mu-aa nindak kai naal. The slanderer dies with the rest of the slanderers.
UTSgdH USHAfs AS Ie fSea a fafs asta ars AU TIC Wi (1151-19, FW, 48 5) paarbarahm parmaysar jan raakhay nindak kai sir karhki-o kaal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, protects and saves His humble servant. Death roars and thunders over the head of the slanderer. ||1]|Pause| |
Yat AqU2 feea at afonr afe & HS Il (1152-1, 308, 2 5)
nindak kaa kahi-aa ko-ay na maanai. No one belives what the slanderer says.
Sea 3S af UST Il (1152-1, Fa, vs 5) nindak jhooth bol pachhutaanay. The slanderer tells lies, and later regrets and repents.
owag uesfe fra cafe warfa Il (1152-2, 388, He 5) haath pachhoreh sir Dharan lagaahi. He wrings his hands, and hits his head against the ground.
fsea a vet 23 as iil (1152-2, 3a8, nH: 5) nindak ka-o da-ee chhodai naahi. ||2|| The Lord does not forgive the slanderer. ||2| |
dfs a aA fxs Fa | Ha Il (1152-2, Sa, He 5) har kaa daas kichh buraa na maagai. The Lord's slave does not wish anyone ill.
fsea AG wal Fu Ara Il (1152-3, Sa8, He 5) nindak ka-o laagai dukh saa"gai. The slanderer suffers, as if stabbed by a spear.
aa fa@ afar ue urrfa it 1152-3, 3a8, Hz 5) bagulay ji-o rahi-aa pankh pasaar. Like a crane, he spreads his feathers, to look like a swan.
HY 3 Sfemr si afeur dtefs wai 152-4, 3a, He 5) mukh tay boli-aa taa’ kadhi-aa beechaar. ||3]| When he speaks with his mouth, then he is exposed and driven out. ||3]|
msart aga ATE I (1152-4, Sa@, Hz 5) antarjaamee kartaa so-ay. The Creator is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
dfs AS ad A feoee af il 1152-4, 358, v2 5) har jan karai so nihchal ho-ay. That person, whom the Lord makes His Own, becomes stable and steady.
Ufe a VA ATS waats Il (1152-5, 3a, He 5) har kaa daas saachaa darbaar. The Lord's slave is true in the Court of the Lord.
Ho soa aft sz stats usisawalusll 1152-5, sa, He 5)
jan naanak kahi-aa tat beechaar. ||4||41]|54]| Servant Nanak speaks, after contemplating the essence of reality. ||4||41]|54]|
SI HIS U Il (1152-6)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
efe ag Afs ag mre il (1152-6, 3a8, v2 5) du-ay kar jor kara-o ardaas. With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.
AG fitz us fSA at THA I (1152-6, S58, He 5) jee-o pind Dhan tis kee raas. My soul, body and wealth are His property.
Het Ha AMM agST'T Il 1152-6, 3aG, He 5) so-ee mMayraa su-aamee karnaihaar. He is the Creator, my Lord and Master.
afe arg aret afsars IU (1152-7, 338, He 5) kot baar jaa-ee balihaar. ||1]| Millions of times, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||1]|
Ag uf yasts at il (1152-7, eG, He 5) saaDhoo Dhoor puneet karee. The dust of the feet of the Holy brings purity.
Ho & fears fiefs us fintss HOH HOH at HS at uA TIC Wt (1152-7, Fa8, v8 5)
man kay bikaar miteh parabh simrat janam janam kee mail haree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Remembering God in meditation, the mind's corruption is eradicated, and the filth of countless incarnations is washed away. ||1]|Pause||
wv at fas ufo Aare fears Il (1152-8, 338, Hs 5) jaa kai garih meh sagal niDhaan. All treasures are in His household.
aT ot AST urea He Il (1152-9, 3a@, v2 5) jaa kee sayvaa paa-ee-ai maan. Serving Him, the mortal attains honor.
AIS HOTA UIST Il (1152-9, SC, ws 5) Sagal manorath pooranhaar. He is the Fulfiller of the mind's desires.
Amt YTS SASS MUTT IIQIl (1152-9, sa, He 5) jee-a paraan bhagtan aaDhaar. ||2|| He is the Support of the soul and the breath of life of His devotees. ||2| |
We we nists Aas USA Il (1152-9, 3a@, Hs 5) ghat ghat antar sagal pargaas. His Light shines in each and every heart.
afu afu Alef SS TAESA I (1152-10, Fa, v2 5) jap jap jeeveh bhagat guntaas. Chanting and meditating on God, the Treasure of Virtue, His devotees live.
aw at AZ o faaat ATE I (1152-10, 3a8, He 5) jaa kee sayv na birthee jaa-ay. Service to Him does not go in vain.
Ho 36 nists Sa fomrf= ail (1152-10, 3a8, v2 5) man tan antar ayk Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]| Deep within your mind and body, meditate on the One Lord. ||3]|
ad Gueth efeor ASy Il 1152-11, 338, He 5) gur updays da-i-aa santokh. Following the Guru's Teachings, compassion and contentment are found.
oy fours fasHe fea aa Il 1152-11, 3a8, He 5) naam niDhaan nirmal ih thok. This Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the immaculate object.
ate fagur stn ofs fe it 1152-12, 338, He 5) kar kirpaa leejai larh laa-ay. Please grant Your Grace, O Lord, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.
BIO AHS aoa fos fame iisns2Qnuull 152-12, se, v3 5)
charan kamal naanak nit Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||42]|55]| Nanak meditates continually on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||4]]42]|55] |
SI HIS U Il (1152-13)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Afsad mus Hot wmagete Il (1152-13, sa@, He 5) satgur apunay sunee ardaas. The True Guru has listened to my prayer.
ASH witfenrt Aare IA Il (1152-13, Fa@, He 5) Kaaraj aa-i-aa saglaa raas. All my affairs have been resolved.
Ho 36 nists ys fomrfenr it (1152-13, 3a, Hs 5) man tan antar parabhoo Dhi-aa-i-aa. Deep within my mind and body, I meditate on God.
TT UT FI ATS Votenw WAU (1152-14, Fa, v2 5) gur pooray dar sagal chukaa-i-aa. ||1]| The Perfect Guru has dispelled all my fears. ||1||
HS 3 ZS ANG WIE Il (1152-14, Fa, nz 5) sabh tay vad samrath gurdayv. The All-powerful Divine Guru is the Greatest of all.
Afs AY uret fSA at AS i TIS Il (1152-15, Fae, nz 5) sabh sukh paa-ee tis kee sayv. rahaa-o. Serving Him, I obtain all comforts. ||Pause] |
Ww ot ater Ag foe SE I (1152-15, 358, v2 5) jaa kaa kee-aa sabh kichh ho-ay. Everything is done by Him.
fSA a ong o He ate I (1152-15, 3a, He 5) tis kaa amar na maytai ko-ay. No one can erase His Eternal Decree.
USAIN UTHAT MSU Ill (1152-16, S38, H2 5) paarbarahm parmaysar anoop. The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, is incomparably beautiful.
HeG Hots ag fA a TY MII (1152-16, Sse, 12 5) safal moorat gur tis kaa roop. ||2|| The Guru is the Image of Fulfillment, the Embodiment of the Lord. ||2||
W a nists SA dfs BH Il (1152-16, 3a, ne 5) jaa kai antar basai har naam. The Name of the Lord abides deep within him.
a ft Ua A YON fame I (1152-17, 338, 8 5) jo jo paykhai so barahm gi-aan. Wherever he looks, he sees the Wisdom of God.
ain fare at a nfs ugary il (1152-17, 308, He 5) bees bisu-ay jaa kai man pargaas. His mind is totally enlightened and illuminated.
fSH Ho & uTaqaN at fEerA ISI (1152-17, 398, 18 5) tis jan kai paarbarahm kaa nivaas. ||3]|| Within that person, the Supreme Lord God abides. ||3]||
fSA Td AG Ae Act SHAG Il (1152-18, Sa@, Hz 5) tis gur ka-o sad karee namaskaar. I humbly bow to that Guru forever.
fan ad a@ Ae WE afore Il (1152-18, 3a@, 3 5) tis gur ka-o sad jaa-o balihaar. I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru.
Afsag & vdeo Ofe afe ute Il 1152-18, Se, v2 5) satgur kay charan Dho-ay Dho-ay peevaa. I wash the feet of the Guru, and drink in this water.
ad soa Aly AfU Ae Ale ISISSNUEN (1152-19, a8, He 5) gur naanak jap jap sad jeevaa. ||4]|43]|56] | Chanting and meditating forever on Guru Nanak, I live. ||4]|43]|56]|
ust aqus
Td SIS HIG YU USSG WB 1153-1) raag bhairo mehlaa 5 parh-taal ghar 3 Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (1153-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
usfsures ys fgurs ae6 WS Tat Il (1153-2, Ss, vs 5) partipaal parabh kirpaal kavan gun ganee. God is the Compassionate Cherisher. Who can count His Glorious Virtues?
mifoad da ad Soa Aa a Tat Al FITS I (1153-2, SeG, He 5) anik rang baho tarang sarab ko Dhanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Countless colors, and countless waves of joy; He is the Master of all. ||1]|Pause] |
mfoa fori nifex fame uifex ATU ATE SN Il (1153-3, Fs@, He 5)
anik gi-aan anik Dhi-aan anik jaap jaap taap.
Endless spiritual wisdom, endless meditations, endless chants, intense meditations and austere self-disciplines.
mfok afes ufss aes visa urs Hat NAM (1153-3, SeB, He 5)
anik gunit Dhunit lalit anik Dhaar munee. ||1]|
Countless virtues, musical notes and playful sports; countless silent sages enshrine Him in their hearts. ||1||
nifoa ove wifes aA ford fours uifoo ATE nifoa su ifs da fiefs WA HOt I (1153-4, 398, He 5)
anik naad anik baaj nimakh nimakh anik savaad anik dokh anik rog miteh jas sunee. Countless melodies, countless instruments, countless tastes, each and every instant. Countless mistakes and countless diseases are removed by hearing His Praise.
TA AC MUTT SF SeT UCT AIS UA! Tes FH AZ AIS AG SH vot HQANAMUANCHAUDNUDNES I (1153-5, FaS, He 5)
naanak sayv apaar dayv tatah khatah barat poojaa gavan bhavan jaatar karan sagal fal punee. ||2]]1][57]]8][21]|71|57|193]|
O Nanak, serving the Infinite, Divine Lord, one earns all the rewards and merits of performing the six rituals, fasts, worship services, pilgrimages to sacred rivers, and journeys to sacred shrines. ||2||1]|57||8]]21]|7||57||93]|
3dC mAcudion HIG A WE 2 1153-7) bhairo asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Bhairao, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1153-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MSH Hid TH IH Hfs wITSH SlofA ag stars Il 1153-8, SeS, He 1)
aatam meh raam raam meh aatam cheenas gur beechaaraa.
The Lord is in the soul, and the soul is in the Lord. This is realized through the Guru's Teachings.
nifys aat rafe ueret gu are IB HTS IAI (1153-8, Sa, He 1)
amrit banee sabad pachhaanee dukh kaatai ha-o maaraa. ||1||
The Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani is realized through the Word of the Shabad. Sorrow is dispelled, and egotism is eliminated. ||1]|
Soa IGH da Fd Ill (1153-9, Se, He 1) naanak ha-umai rog buray. O Nanak, the disease of egotism is so very deadly.
Ad tut 3g Sar Feo wy uA Aafe ge NU! TIS Il (1153-9, Sa, He 1)
jah daykhaa™ tah aykaa baydan aapay bakhsai sabad Dhuray. ||1]| rahaa-o. Wherever I look, I see the pain of the same disease. The Primal Lord Himself bestows the Shabad of His Word. ||1]||Pause] |
mm use UTdeTS FTls ASA F Fe Il (1153-10, 3s8, we 1) aapay parkhay parkhanhaarai bahur soolaak na ho-ee. When the Appraiser Himself appraises the mortal, then he is not tested again.
faa ag sefa set afs AS us srvet AG ASt MMI (1153-10, Fa, He 1)
jin ka-o nadar bha-ee gur maylay parabh bhaanaa sach so-ee. ||2| |
Those who are blessed with His Grace meet with the Guru. They alone are true, who are pleasing to God. ||2]|
u@s ust Sse salt Jat aafs Asa I 1153-11, 3s, He pa-un paanee baisantar rogee rogee Dharat sabhogee. Air, water and fire are diseased; the world with its enjoyments is diseased.
Hs fust wfenr da ft dot dat ade Ada Wi «153-11, 38, He
maat pitaa maa-i-aa dayh se rogee rogee kutamb sanjogee. ||3]||
Mother, father, Maya and the body are diseased; those united with their relatives are diseased. ||3]|
dat your fare Age" salt Aas AATST | (1153-12, 338, He 1) rogee barahmaa bisan sarudraa rogee sagal sansaaraa. Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are diseased; the whole world is diseased.
dfs ue dfs se A HAS Td a ASE Sos Sil (1153-12, Fa@, nz 1)
har pad cheen bha-ay say muktay gur kaa sabad veechaaraa. ||4||
Those who remember the Lord's Feet and contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad are liberated. ||4||
dat AS ANS Aodion Us use fA Sfa sg Il (1153-13, 308, He 1)
rogee saat samund sandee-aa khand pataal se rog bharay.
The seven seas are diseased, along with the rivers; the continents and the nether regions of the underworlds are full of disease.
dfs & Ba fk Ais HIS Aeet aet oefa a Mull (1153-13, 38, He 1)
har kay lok se saach suhaylay sarbee thaa-ee nadar karay. ||5||
The people of the Lord dwell in Truth and peace; He blesses them with His Grace everywhere. ||5||
dat US BIAS SUS Sat Jat MSat Il (1153-14, Sa, Hz 1)
rogee khat darsan bhaykh-Dhaaree naanaa hathee anaykaa.
The six Shaastras are diseased, as are the many who follow the different religious orders.
ae ase ads ad aud od yste fea Sar WE (1153-15, Fa, v2 1)
bayd katayb karahi kah bapuray nah boojheh ik aykaa. ||6||
What can the poor Vedas and Bibles do? People do not understand the One and Only Lord. ||6]|
fhe aA fe A ofa adit Ae His AY Sra I (1153-15, Fa, Hz 1) mith ras khaa-ay so rog bhareejai kand mool sukh naahee. Eating sweet treats, the mortal is filled with disease; he finds no peace at all.
on feats vats me Hofer nis ate ugstdt DI (1153-16, 38, He 1)
naam visaar chaleh an maarag ant kaal pachhutaahee. ||7|| Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they walk on other paths, and at the very last moment, they regret and repent. ||7||
Stefa son dao sofa ufsor ae fears sfenr I (1153-16, 338, 43 1)
tirath bharmai rog na chhootas parhi-aa baad bibaad bha-i-aa.
Wandering around at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, the mortal is not cured of his disease. Reading scripture, he gets involved in useless arguments.
vfam ga A uifae eso fer at Hosta Sfemr tH 1153-17, 3a8, He 1D) dubiDhaa rog so aDhik vadayraa maa-i-aa kaa muhtaaj bha-i-aa. ||8]| The disease of duality is so very deadly; it causes dependence on Maya. ||8]|
aenfy Avo Rafe Hod nfs ATS fSR da afeor i (1153-18, Fa, He 1)
gurmukh saachaa sabad salaahai man saachaa tis rog ga-i-aa.
One who becomes Gurmukh and praises the True Shabad with the True Lord in his mind is cured of his disease.
SOA Tid Ae Moles fess fas aS aah stare ufemr WENA (1153-18, SaS, He 1)
naanak har jan an-din nirmal jin ka-o karam neesaan pa-i-aa. ||9|]1]| O Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is immaculate, night and day; he bears the insignia of the Lord's Grace. ||9|]1]|
Uat AUB
SIC HIG 3 We 2 (1154-2) bhairo mehlaa 3 ghar 2 Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1154-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fafs ass fea vos Surfer it (1154-3, a8, He 3) tin kartai ik chalat upaa-i-aa. The Creator has staged His Wondrous Play.
Mode sel Hae Aetent I (1154-3, Sa@, vs 3) anhad banee sabad sunaa-i-aa. I listen to the Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, and the Bani of His Word.
HoHfe 3% TaHfe gether | (1154-3, 3s, He 3) manmukh bhoolay gurmukh bujhaa-i-aa. The self-willed manmukhs are deluded and confused, while the Gurmukhs understand.
AIS ATS ATeT mfeA 1154-4, Fs, 2 3) kaaran kartaa kardaa aa-i-aa. ||1|| The Creator creates the Cause that causes. ||1]||
ad a Age As nists fomre il 1154-4, 338, ve 3) gur kaa sabad mayrai antar Dhi-aan. Deep within my being, I meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
JG aad 5 3G dg a oH NA TICS Ih (1154-4, SaC, v2 3) ha-o kabahu na chhoda-o har kaa naam. ||1|| rahaa-o. I shall never forsake the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
fust users use uotfemr It (1154-5, Se, vs 3) pitaa parahlaad parhan pathaa-i-aa. Prahlaad's father sent him to school, to learn to read.
B uret ud & weft | 1154-5, Sa, He 3) lai paatee paaDhay kai aa-i-aa. He took his writing tablet and went to the teacher.
om faa ad use mies Il (1154-6, 3a, He 3) naam binaa nah parha-o achaar. He said, "I shall not read anything except the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Het udior fafa eg afie Hats Wi (1154-6, 3a8, v2 3) mayree patee-aa likh dayh gobind muraar. ||2|| Write the Lord's Name on my tablet."||2| |
uz ufsere fAG afar He I (1154-6, Fe, vs 3) putar par-hilaad si-o kahi-aa maa-ay. Prahlaad's mother said to her son,
udtedts & Usd Tot AMSMTES I (1154-7, SaB, 2 3) parvirat na parhahu rahee samjhaa-ay. "I advise you not to read anything except what you are taught."
foss@ oat ofe MG HS of I (1154-7, 358, ne 3) nirbha-o daataa har jee-o mayrai naal. He answered, "The Great Giver, my Fearless Lord God is always with me.
A dfs 238 38 afs oa aie ail 1154-7, 338, ne 3) jay har chhoda-o ta-o kul laagai gaal. ||3]| If I were to forsake the Lord, then my family would be disgraced."||3]|
yserte Afs wes feared il (1154-8, eG, v3 3) parahlaad sabh chaatrhay vigaaray. "Prahlaad has corrupted all the other students.
JHa afm o He MUS ASH ASS Il 1154-8, SaG, v2 3) hamaaraa kahi-aa na sunai aapnay kaaraj savaaray. He does not listen to what I say, and he does his own thing.
HS dat Hfs sats fesret il 154-9, Sa@, vs 3) sabh nagree meh bhagat darirhaa-ee. He instigated devotional worship in the townspeople."
He Ast a fas o SASH ISI (1154-9, SaB, 2 3) dusat sabhaa kaa kichh na vasaa-ee. ||4|| The gathering of the wicked people could not do anything against him. ||4||
Hs Hoa Stet YOrs Il (1154-9, 3S, 2 3) sandai markai kee-ee pookaar. Sanda and Marka, his teachers, made the complaint.
HS 23 gd By Hfe Il (1154-10, 3a@, v2 3) sabhay dait rahay jhakh maar. All the demons kept trying in vain.
Sas Aa at ufs ae ASt I (1154-10, SaG, He 3) bhagat janaa kee pat raakhai so-ee. The Lord protected His humble devotee, and preserved his honor.
ats & afomt for Tet Null 1154-10, Sa, v2 3)
keetay kai kahi-ai ki-aa ho-ee. ||5||
What can be done by mere created beings? ||5]|
fags Anat efS aH vorfenr Il 1154-11, se, v2 3)
kirat sanjogee dait raaj chalaa-i-aa.
Because of his past karma, the demon ruled over his kingdom. ofs 3 a fate orf gerfeor i cis4-11, 338, He 3)
har na boojhai tin aap bhulaa-i-aa. He did not realize the Lord; the Lord Himself confused him.
uz yore fAG ee gatfenr Il ais4—11, Sa8, vs 3) putar parahlaad si-o vaad rachaa-i-aa. He started an argument with his son Prahlaad.
nit 3 FS aH Ss nifeme Well (1154-12, Fs, v2 3) anDhaa na boojhai kaal nayrhai aa-i-aa. | |6|| The blind one did not understand that his death was approaching. ||6||
yore ad fefa afimr afa char svar it (1154-12, 358, v8 3) parahlaad kothay vich raakhi-aa baar dee-aa taalaa. Prahlaad was placed in a cell, and the door was locked.
fosse wad His o svet Ae nists Te Tus I (1154-13, Fae, ns 3) nirbha-o baalak mool na dar-ee mayrai antar gur gopaalaa.
The fearless child was not afraid at all. He said, "Within my being, is the Guru, the Lord of the World."
dist de Adie ad nadet are gafemr Il 1154-13, 38, v2 3)
keetaa hovai sareekee karai anhodaa naa-o Dharaa-i-aa.
The created being tried to compete with his Creator, but he assumed this name in vain.
a Ufe fofimr A orf ugat Ae fA ee gorfemr DN (1154-14, 3a8, He 3)
jo Dhur likhi-aa so aa-ay pahutaa jan si-o vaad rachaa-i-aa. ||7]||
That which was predestined for him has come to pass; he started an argument with the Lord's humble servant. ||7]||
fust yore fAG aaA Boret Il (1154-14, Sa, ve 3) pitaa parahlaad si-o guraj uthaa-ee. The father raised the club to strike down Prahlaad, saying,
Ad! SHS ASA TATET Il (1154-15, SaS, vs 3)
kahaa™ tum"aaraa jagdees gusaa-ee. "Where is your God, the Lord of the Universe, now?"
Aas VST ifs Aaret ih (1154-15, 3a@, v2 3) jagjeevan daataa ant sakhaa-ee. He replied, "The Life of the World, the Great Giver, is my Help and Support in the end.
Ad Sat SI Sow AHTET CH (1154-15, FaB, He 3)
jah daykhaa tah rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||8]|| Wherever I look, I see Him permeating and prevailing."||8| |
ay Surfs afe wry fearfemr i (154-16, 38, 2 3) thamh upaarh har aap dikhaa-i-aa. Tearing down the pillars, the Lord Himself appeared.
nad fy Hfe user i (1154-16, Sa8, He 3) aha‘kaaree dait maar pachaa-i-aa. The egotistical demon was killed and destroyed.
sas yfs més srt Save Il (1154-16, 3a8, nz 3) bhagtaa man aanand vajee vaDhaa-ee. The minds of the devotees were filled with bliss, and congratulations poured in.
mus Aza AG S Sanit tll 1154-17, Fa, v1 3) apnay sayvak ka-o day vadi-aa-ee. ||9|| He blessed His servant with glorious greatness. ||9||
HME HoSt HT Curfeor th (1154-17, S58, He 3) jaman marnaa moh upaa-i-aa. He created birth, death and attachment.
mies ATat oes fesfit urfemr I 1154-17, S58, He 3) aavan jaanaa kartai likh paa-i-aa. The Creator has ordained coming and going in reincarnation.
ysere & arata ofa my fearfimr 1 1154-18, 338, 48 3)
parahlaad kai kaaraj har aap dikhaa-i-aa. For the sake of Prahlaad, the Lord Himself appeared.
SIS A AG vita wifEni 90M (1154-18, Fs, He 3) bhagtaa kaa bol aagai aa-i-aa. ||10|| The word of the devotee came true. ||10]|
ve ast oft ag asta Aas Il (1154-19, 338, ne 3) dayv kulee lakhimee ka-o karahi jaikaar. The gods proclaimed the victory of Lakshmi, and said,
HST Sofi or gu fSeT Il (1154-19, 3G, we 3) maataa narsingh kaa roop nivaar. "O mother, make this form of the Man-lion disappear!"
oto 36 ad 3 ATA ATE I (1154-19, Fa, He 3) lakhimee bha-o karai na saakai jaa-ay. Lakshmi was afraid, and did not approach.
ua aquu
YISE AG VsUat Bar mif—E AAU 1155-1, Fs, vs 3) parahlaad jan charnee laagaa aa-ay. ||11]|| The humble servant Prahlaad came and fell at the Lord's Feet. ||11]|
Afsafe on fourg festfenr |i 1155-1, 338, vs 3) satgur naam niDhaan drirh-aa-i-aa. The True Guru implanted the treasure of the Naam within.
TH HS sot As fer i (1155-2, Fs, v2 3) raaj maal jhoothee sabh maa-i-aa. Power, property and all Maya is false.
Bat od Jd BUSHE Il 1155-2, Sa, 2 3) lobhee nar rahay laptaa-ay. But still, the greedy people continue clinging to them.
dfs & on fag waar FHS AATTE NAVI (1155-2, Sa, He 3) har kay naam bin dargeh milai sajaa-ay. ||12] | Without the Name of the Lord, the mortals are punished in His Court. ||12]]|
Ad BSA AF a Ad ATE I 1155-3, Sa, He 3) kahai naanak sabh ko karay karaa-i-aa. Says Nanak, everyone acts as the Lord makes them act.
A uses frat ofe fA foes wfenr it 155-3, S38, He 3)
Say parvaan jinee har si-o chit laa-i-aa.
They alone are approved and accepted, who focus their consciousness on the Lord. SIs A niatarg aget wife Ih 1155-3, Sa, v2 3)
bhagtaa kaa angeekaar kardaa aa-i-aa. He has made His devotees His Own.
aes nut gy feerfeor WISnUl2il (1155-4, Fae, Hs 3) kartai apnaa roop dikhaa-i-aa. ||13]|1||2]| The Creator has appeared in His Own Form. ||13]||1]|2||
SIC HIS 3 Il (1155-4) bhairo mehlaa 3. Bhairao, Third Mehl:
qd As 3 nifys coe ufeor gen feAS ssret I (1155-4, 3a8, v8 3)
gur sayvaa tay amrit fal paa-i-aa ha-umai tarisan bujhaa-ee.
Serving the Guru, I obtain the Ambrosial Fruit; my egotism and desire have been quenched.
ofa at any foe nfs efi Hon Hofa AMET NU (1155-5, 3a, He 3)
har kaa naam hirdai man vasi-aa mansaa maneh samaa-ee. ||1] |
The Name of the Lord dwells within my heart and mind, and the desires of my mind are quieted. ||1]|
ofa ME faur agg AS furs il 1155-6, FaG, He 3) har jee-o kirpaa karahu mayray pi-aaray. O Dear Lord, my Beloved, please bless me with Your Mercy.
wofes dfs we ete AO Hid ad a Aafe Cars Al TIC Il 1155-6, Sa, v2 3)
an-din har gun deen jan maa"gai gur kai sabad uDhaaray. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Night and day, Your humble servant begs for Your Glorious Praises; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is saved. ||1||Pause| |
AS Aa aC AH Fife o Aa TSt vig Ta S Bret Il (1155-7, FG, we 3)
sant janaa ka-o jam johi na saakai ratee anch dookh na laa-ee.
The Messenger of Death cannot even touch the humble Saints; it does not cause them even an iota of suffering or pain.
uify safe AAS AG Safa A Sot Asse NM (1155-7, Se, He 3)
aap tareh saglay kul taareh jo tayree sarnaa-ee. ||2||
Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Lord, save themselves, and save all their ancestors as well. ||2||
sas at UA safe J um Sa Sat Sfsmret it (1155-8, Fs, we 3) bhagtaa kee paij rakheh too aapay ayh tayree vadi-aa-ee. You Yourself save the honor of Your devotees; this is Your Glory, O Lord.
HOH HoH a faofeu eu wets efor gst o Tet BI (1155-8, Fa, He 3)
janam janam kay kilvikh dukh kaateh dubiDhaa ratee na raa-ee. ||3]|
You cleanse them of the sins and the pains of countless incarnations; You love them without even an iota of duality. ||3]|
oH He Ham fas asta at J wm Vf gsret il 155-9, Sa, v2 3)
ham moorh mugaDh kichh boojheh naahee too aapay deh bujhaa-ee.
I am foolish and ignorant, and understand nothing. You Yourself bless me with understanding.
A 30 oe At agHt neg & Adal WET ISI (1155-9, 308, He 3) jo tuDh bhaavai so-ee karsee avar na karnaa jaa-ee. ||4|| You do whatever You please; nothing else can be done at all. ||4]|
mas Gurfe sg co ofenr sat ars THT I (1155-10, 398, v8 3)
jagat upaa-ay tuDh DhanDhai laa-i-aa bhoo“dee kaar kamaa-ee.
Creating the world, You have linked all to their tasks - even the evil deeds which men do.
WOH USE Hat Toor Aae Hats  uret WUll (1155-11, 3s, we 3)
janam padaarath joo-ai haari-aa sabdai surat na paa-ee. ||5||
They lose this precious human life in the gamble, and do not understand the Word of the Shabad. ||5]|
Houfe nats fs fas 5 AS eaHfS vifemrs niarer il (1155-11, 398, 8 3)
manmukh mareh tin kichhoo na soojhai durmat agi-aan anDhaaraa. The self-willed manmukhs die, understanding nothing; they are enveloped by the darkness of evil-mindedness and ignorance.
3ene ut 5 ete aa dt afs He faa aa fafs ara HEN (1155-12, Ss, 42 3) bhavjal paar na paavahi kab hee doob mu-ay bin gur sir bhaaraa. ||6||
They do not cross over the terrible world-ocean; without the Guru, they drown and die. ||6]|
And Aafe 33 Ho ATS ofa ufs wrfu flere I 1155-12, Sa, ne 3)
saachai sabad ratay jan saachay har parabh aap milaa-ay.
True are those humble beings who are imbued with the True Shabad; the Lord God unites them with Himself.
ad at seat Hate usrst Ate Jd fee BES NDI 1155-13, Fa, He 3)
gur kee banee sabad pachhaatee saach rahay liv laa-ay. ||7]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, they come to understand the Shabad. They remain lovingly focused on the True Lord. ||7]]|
3 urfu Sane 33 ASF fosHS ae a Hale Ass I (1155-13, Sa, vs 3)
too” aap nirmal tayray jan hai nirmal gur kai sabad veechaaray.
You Yourself are Immaculate and Pure, and pure are Your humble servants who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Sod fsa a He afead TH oH Cfe Os NCNQNSI (1155-14, Fa, ne 3)
naanak tin kai sad balihaarai raam naam ur Dhaaray. ||8]|2]|3||
Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those, who enshrine the Lord's Name within their hearts. ||8]]2]|3]|
3d@ Hoe u mAeudor wg 2 (1155-16) bhairo mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa ghar 2 Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars YATE It (1155-16) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fan on fee Aet Ss TH I (1155-17, 308, v2 5) jis naam ridai so-ee vad raajaa. He alone is a great king, who keeps the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within his heart.
fan oy fee fA Us AAT I (1155-17, 398, H8 5) jis naam ridai tis pooray kaajaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his tasks are perfectly accomplished.
fan on fee fate afe ae ure Il (1155-17, 338, He 5) jis naam ridai tin kot Dhan paa-ay. One who keeps the Naam in his heart, obtains millions of treasures.
om faa HOH fase AS IAI (1155-18, 3a, He 5)
naam binaa janam birthaa jaa-ay. ||1]|| Without the Naam, life is useless. ||1]|
fan Ard fam dfs ag TAA Il (1155-18, 3a, He 5) tis saalaahee jis har Dhan raas. I praise that person, who has the capital of the Lord's Wealth.
A zsovat fan ae HASfe TS NU TIS Ut (1155-18, Fa, v2 5) so vadbhaagee jis gur mastak haath. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is very fortunate, on whose forehead the Guru has placed His Hand. ||1||Pause| |
fan on fee fan ae wet Aor Il 1155-19, 358, v2 5) jis naam ridai tis kot ka-ee sainaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart, has many millions of armies on his side.
fan on fee fSH AOA HAST Il (1155-19, 3a8, v2 5) jis naam ridai tis sahj sukhainaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart, enjoys peace and poise.
ust aque
fAR oH fee A ASS Ine I 1156-1, 398, 8 5) jis naam ridai so seetal hoo-aa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart becomes cool and calm.
on faor fgg HteS pT NI 156-1, Fa, v2 5)
naam binaa Dharig jeevan moo-aa. ||2] | Without the Naam, both life and death are cursed. ||2||
fan on fee A Heo HAST II (1156-1, 358, He 5) jis naam ridai so jeevan muktaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.
fan on fee fan AS dt aS II (1156-2, 358, nH 5) jis naam ridai tis sabh hee jugtaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart knows all ways and means.
fan on fee fate a fafa uret i (1156-2, 338, He 5) jis naam ridai tin na-o niDh paa-ee. One who keeps the Naam in his heart obtains the nine treasures.
on faar aft ure Aret SII (1156-2, 3aB, nH 5) naam binaa bharam aavai jaa-ee. ||3]| Without the Naam, the mortal wanders, coming and going in reincarnation. ||3]|
fan on foe A Sug|TI Il (1156-3, S58, He 5) jis naam ridai so vayparvaahaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is carefree and independent.
fan on fee fon Ae dt we Il 1156-3, 398, v2 5) jis naam ridai tis sad hee laahaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart always earns a profit.
fan on fee fan es usta Il (1156-4, 3a8, v2 5) jis naam ridai tis vad parvaaraa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a large family.
OH faa HOHE WSS ISI (1156-4, FaB, He 5) naam binaa manmukh gaavaaraa. ||4|| Without the Naam, the mortal is just an ignorant, self-willed manmukh. ||4||
fan on fee for foges niAS Il (1156-4, a8, He 5) jis naam ridai tis nihchal aasan. One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a permanent position.
fan on fee for sufs foerAe Il (1156-5, 358, v2 5) jis naam ridai tis takhat nivaasan. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is seated on the throne.
fan oH fee A ATE ATS Il (1156-5, 3a, ne 5) jis naam ridai so saachaa saahu. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the true king.
SHS oat ufs SAT WU (1156-5, FeV, He 5) naamheen naahee pat vaysaahu. ||5]| Without the Naam, no one has any honor or respect. ||5||
fan on fee A AS His ATST II (1156-6, 3a, He 5) jis naam ridai so sabh meh jaataa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is famous everywhere.
fan on fee A uae feast II (1156-6, 358, v2 5) jis naam ridai so purakh biDhaataa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the Embodiment of the Creator Lord.
fan oH fee AAS 3 Bo Il (1156-6, 358, v8 5) jis naam ridai so sabh tay oochaa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the highest of all.
om fas aft Hat HT MEI (1156-7, 398, v8 5) naam binaa bharam jonee moochaa. ||6]| Without the Naam, the mortal wanders in reincarnation. ||6||
fan on foe fsR yafe user Il (1156-7, 338, 8 5) jis naam ridai tis pargat pahaaraa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart sees the Lord manifested in His Creation.
fan on fee far fixferr niarar il 1156-7, 338, He 5) jis naam ridai tis miti-aa anDhaaraa. One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his darkness is dispelled.
fan oH fee A UaY UPSTE Il (1156-8, 35@, He 5) jis naam ridai so purakh parvaan. One who keeps the Naam in his heart is approved and accepted.
om far fefe mre AWS IDI (1156-8, Sa, He 5) naam binaa fir aavan jaan. ||7|| Without the Naam, the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||7]||
fate on urfenr fan sfe& fours il (1156-9, 3a@, nz 5) tin naam paa-i-aa jis bha-i-o kirpaal. He alone receives the Naam, who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy.
Wonafs ufo Sa TUS Il 1156-9, Sa, ve 5) saaDhsangat meh lakhay gopaal. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World is understood.
MISS WE Jd AY ue I 1156-9, SaS, He 5) aavan jaan rahay sukh paa-i-aa. Coming and going in reincarnation ends, and peace is found.
aT aed 33 33 frerfeor ecuaisil 1156-10, 3s, v2 5) kaho naanak tatai tat milaa-i-aa. ||8]|1||4]| Says Nanak, my essence has merged in the Essence of the Lord. ||8]|1]|4]|
SIC HIS U Il (1156-10)
bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
afe fara atd wiesrg il (1156-10, 3G, m2 5) kot bisan keenay avtaar. He created millions of incarnations of Vishnu.
afe Fons AT a GHATS Il (1156-11, 358, 48 5) kot barahmand jaa kay Dharamsaal. He created millions of universes as places to practice righteousness.
afe Hon Bure ANTES Il 1156-11, 358, He 5) kot mahays upaa-ay samaa-ay. He created and destroyed millions of Shivas.
afe FIA Ad AAS BS AU! 1156-11, Fa, ve 5) kot barahmay jag saajan laa-ay. ||1]|| He employed millions of Brahmas to create the worlds. ||1]|
MA Uat afes THA Il 1156-11, a8, He 5) aiso Dhanee guvind hamaaraa. Such is my Lord and Master, the Lord of the Universe.
wate 6 AAS ae fanaa A FIG Il (1156-12, FsC, Hz 5) baran na saaka-o gun bisthaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I cannot even describe His Many Virtues. ||1]]Pause| |
afte ufeur ar at Azae il (1156-12, Sa@, v2 5) kot maa-i-aa jaa kai sayvkaa-ay. Millions of Mayas are His maid-servants.
afte ba at at fromfe it 1156-13, 338, v2 5) kot jee-a jaa kee sihjaa-ay.
Millions of souls are His beds.
afe Gurenar 3d nifar il (1156-13, 3a@, He 5)
kot upaarjanaa tayrai ang. Millions of universes are the limbs of His Being.
afe sas SAS ofa Afar iQ (1156-13, Sa, v2 5) kot bhagat basat har sang. ||2|| Millions of devotees abide with the Lord. ||2]|
afe szufs Ags SHAS Il (1156-13, 338, He 5) kot chhatarpat karat namaskaar. Millions of kings with their crowns and canopies bow before Him.
afe fiz oes I Mrs I 1156-14, Fa, v2 5) kot indar thaadhay hai du-aar. Millions of Indras stand at His Door.
afe sae a ot ferret ufa ii (156-14, 3a@, ue 5)
kot baikunth jaa kee daristee maahi. Millions of heavenly paradises are within the scope of His Vision.
afe om at ot ohafs afa ail (1156-14, 3a8, He 5)
kot naam jaa kee keemat naahi. ||3]| Millions of His Names cannot even be appraised. ||3]|
afe yshars 3 AT at Bre Il (1156-15, Fs@, He 5) kot pooree-at hai jaa kai naad. Millions of celestial sounds resound for Him.
afe mrad ufes fare I (1156-15, 338, v2 5) kot akhaaray chalit bismaad. His Wondrous Plays are enacted on millions of stages.
afe nafs fre nrfomrarg il (1156-15, 3a@, 42 5) kot sakat siv aagi-aakaar. Millions of Shaktis and Shivas are obedient to Him.
afte hat SS nrars gil (1156-16, sa, 42 5) kot jee-a dayvai aaDhaar. ||4|| He gives sustenance and support to millions of beings. ||4||
afe Stee AT a VIS HET Il (1156-16, SsG, Hz 5) kot tirath jaa kay charan majhaar. In His Feet are millions of sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
afe ufex AUS BH US Il (1156-16, Fa@, He 5) kot pavitar japat naam chaar. Millions chant His Sacred and Beautiful Name.
afe urst AIS UAT Il (1156-17, Fa@, He 5) kot poojaaree kartay poojaa. Millions of worshippers worship Him.
afe farsg MST S SAT UI (1156-17, Fae, Hz 5) kot bisthaaran avar na doojaa. ||5|| Millions of expanses are His; there is no other at all. ||5||
afte ufout at at fesHe JA Il (1156-17, 3a@, Hz 5) kot mahimaa jaa kee nirmal hans. Millions of swan-souls sing His Immaculate Praises.
afe Grafs wr at ass AIHA Il (1156-18, 3a@, 42 5) kot ustat jaa kee karat barahmans. Millions of Brahma's sons sing His Praises.
afe usee Gufs far wfo il 1156-18, 338, v2 5) kot parla-o opat nimakh maahi. He creates and destroys millions, in an instant.
afe dat 3d Te 5 Af MEN (1156-18, 3a8, He 5) kot gunaa tayray ganay na jaahi. ||6|| Millions are Your Virtues, Lord - they cannot even be counted. ||6||
afe famrat axafa farming i (1156-19, 338, v2 5) kot gi-aanee katheh gi-aan. Millions of spiritual teachers teach His spiritual wisdom.
afte fomrat aes fami Il 1156-19, 338, H2 5) kot Dhi-aanee Dharat Dhi-aan. Millions of meditators focus on His meditation.
afe suing su dt aS Il (1156-19, 3aG, v2 5) kot tapeesar tap hee kartay. Millions of austere penitents practice austerities.
Uat AqQuD
afe Hotnd dfs Hfs JIS DM (1157-1, 358, He 5) kot muneesar mon meh rahtay. ||7|| Millions of silent sages dwell in silence. ||7]|
uifzas og nates Amt i ules sfoor we visart i (1157-1, 338, we 5)
avigat naath agochar su-aamee. poor rahi-aa ghat antarjaamee.
Our Eternal, Imperishable, Incomprehensible Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is permeating all hearts.
AS AS Sus Sa BAT I (1157-2, 3a@, v2 5) jat kat daykh-a-u tayraa vaasaa. Wherever I look, I see Your Dwelling, O Lord.
soa a afs aS YSrAr WeUQUUIl (1157-2, Fs, Hz 5)
naanak ka-o gur kee-o pargaasaa. ||8||2||5]| The Guru has blessed Nanak with enlightenment. ||8||2||5||
3d HIST U Il (1157-3) bhairo mehlaa 5. Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Afsafe H aS ats VS Il (1157-3, Se, He 5) satgur mo ka-o keeno daan. The True Guru has blessed me with this gift.
WHS ISO Tha AIS SH I (1157-3, Fa, v2 5) amol ratan har deeno naam. He has given me the Priceless Jewel of the Lord's Name.
Hoa fase SA MITSST I (1157-3, Sa, v2 5) sahj binod choj aanantaa. Now, I intuitively enjoy endless pleasures and wondrous play.
soa ag us fifeS mifssr ai 1157-4, 3a@, Hs 5) naanak ka-o parabh mili-o achintaa. ||1]| God has spontaneously met with Nanak. ||1]|
AJ Boa atats Ts Art Il (1157-4, Fs, ne 5) kaho naanak keerat har saachee. Says Nanak, True is the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise.
wdfe sofe fsa Af Ho Tet NAN TIC ih 1157-4, Fa@, vs 5) bahur bahur tis sang man raachee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Again and again, my mind remains immersed in it. ||1]|Pause| |
mifss THs SAS STE Il (1157-5, 3aG, ve 5) achint hamaarai bhojan bhaa-o. Spontaneously, I feed on the Love of God.
mites THs BS oS I (1157-5, 3a@, v2 5) achint hamaarai leechai naa-o. Spontaneously, I take God's Name.
mites Jud Aafe urs il (1157-5, Se, He 5) achint hamaarai sabad uDhaar. Spontaneously, I am saved by the Word of the Shabad.
wifes IHS FI FT ST NA (1157-6, Fa, n2 5) achint hamaarai bharay bhandaar. ||2|| Spontaneously, my treasures are filled to overflowing. ||2| |
Miss THS ASA UT Il (1157-6, 39S, 3 5) achint hamaarai kaaraj pooray. Spontaneously, my works are perfectly accomplished.
mpsS THs wa FEAT Il (1157-6, Fa@, we 5) achint hamaarai lathay visooray. Spontaneously, I am rid of sorrow.
mfss THs Fat HIST I 1157-7, SaG, v2 5)
achint hamaarai bairee meetaa.
Spontaneously, my enemies have become friends. wifes ct feg ue efh att Si (1157-7, 358, He 5)
achinto hee ih man vas keetaa. ||3]| Spontaneously, I have brought my mind under control. ||3||
mfss YS TH abort fewrAr il (1157-7, Fa, 3 5) achint parabhoo ham kee-aa dilaasaa. Spontaneously, God has comforted me.
mfss TH UTS MITAT Il (1157-8, Fae, He 5) achint hamaaree pooran aasaa. Spontaneously, my hopes have been fulfilled.
miss TH aS Aare fats | (1157-8, a8, Hs 5) achint ham"aa ka-o sagal siDhaa“t. Spontaneously, I have totally realized the essence of reality.
wifes dH aS afe AS HT igi 1157-8, a8, v2 5) achint ham ka-o gur deeno mant. ||4]| Spontaneously, I have been blessed with the Guru's Mantra. ||4||
miss dH fear SF Il (1157-9, 3aG, v2 5) achint hamaaray binsay bair. Spontaneously, I am rid of hatred.
mfds Jud fee nits I (1157-9, a8, v8 5) achint hamaaray mitay anDhayr. Spontaneously, my darkness has been dispelled.
wifes dt ufs atese rior Il 1157-9, 338, v2 5) achinto hee man keertan meethaa. Spontaneously, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise seems so sweet to my mind.
wifes dt ug wife wie stor ull 1157-9, 3a, He 5) achinto hee parabh ghat ghat deethaa. ||5]| Spontaneously, I behold God in each and every heart. ||5||
mfds fufeS J Aas SIN Il (1157-10, 3aG, v2 5) achint miti-o hai saglo bharmaa. Spontaneously, all my doubts have been dispelled.
wifes fA nfs AY fa II 1157-10, 338, Hs 5) achint vasi-o man sukh bisraamaa. Spontaneously, peace and celestial harmony fill my mind.
mMfds TH MISTS SH Il (1157-11, 3sG, v2 5) achint hamaarai anhat vaajai. Spontaneously, the Unstruck Melody of the Sound-current resounds within me.
mites Ind dfse aA WEN (1157-11, 3a8, v2 5) achint hamaarai gobind gaajai. ||6|| Spontaneously, the Lord of the Universe has revealed Himself to me. ||6]|
mfss THT HS Usa I (1157-11, Se, He 5) achint hamaarai man patee-aanaa. Spontaneously, my mind has been pleased and appeased.
fosee dot nifszs uerar i (1157-11, 3a@, He 5) nihchal Dhanee achint pachhaanaa. I have spontaneously realized the Eternal, Unchanging Lord.
wifes CufAS wares fastar it (1157-12, 338, v2 5) achinto upji-o sagal bibaykaa. Spontaneously, all wisdom and knowledge has welled up within me.
mids oat ofa afs af Sat DI (1157-12, a8, v2 5) achint charee hath har har taykaa. ||7|| Spontaneously, the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, has come into my hands. ||7]|
mites ys ufe foftmr Sy i 1157-13, sa, Hs 5) achint parabhoo Dhur likhi-aa laykh. Spontaneously, God has recorded my pre-ordained destiny.
wifes fufes ys sag Sa il (1157-13, 398, He 5) achint mili-o parabh thaakur ayk. Spontaneously, the One Lord and Master God has met me.
fos wits Aart aet i 1157-13, 358, v2 5)
chint achintaa saglee ga-ee. Spontaneously, all my cares and worries have been taken away.
YS ATA AkAK BAA Het NCUBWEN (157-13, Se, He 5)
parabh naanak naanak naanak ma-ee. ||8]|3]|6] | Nanak, Nanak, Nanak, has merged into the Image of God. ||8]|3]||6] |
398 wet sas at | asta AMIE wae 9 (1157-15) bhairo banee bhagtaa kee. kabeer jee-o ghar 1 Bhairao, The Word Of The Devotees, Kabeer Jee, First House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1157-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
feg ue AS dfs & oS Il (1157-16, 358, sas adie FH) in Dhan mayray har ko naa-o. The Name of the Lord - this alone is my wealth.
as o wus afs a we NA TIS Il (1157-16, Sa8, sas adits Hh) gaa™th na baaDha-o baych na khaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I do not tie it up to hide it, nor do I sell it to make my living. ||1]||Pause] |
a@ Hd ast oC AS set Il 1157-16, 38, sas adits Hh naa-o mayray khaytee naa-o mayray baaree. The Name is my crop, and the Name is my field.
sats AIG AG Aale SHS AU (1157-17, Fa, sas aes HH) bhagat kara-o jan saran tum"aaree. ||1]| As Your humble servant, I perform devotional worship to You; I seek Your Sanctuary.
[41
ag He Hfeor aS AT Uet I (1157-17, Fa, sas alta FH) naa-o mayray maa-i-aa naa-o mayray poonjee. The Name is Maya and wealth for me; the Name is my capital.
guia efs WSS oot At QM (1157-17, sa@, sas aes Ff) tumeh chhod jaan-o nahee doojee. ||2| | I do not forsake You; I do not know any other at all. ||2]|
o@ He dfau oe AS set I 1157-18, 3e8, sas asta Ah naa-o mayray banDhip naa-o mayray bhaa-ee. The Name is my family, the Name is my brother.
o@ He Afa nifs df weet SI 1157-18, 358, sas adie Th naa-O mayray sang ant ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||3]| The Name is my companion, who will help me in the end. |[3]|
Hear ufo fan Te GSA Il 1157-18, 3e8, sas adits rh) maa-i-aa meh jis rakhai udaas. One whom the Lord keeps detached from Maya
afs adts 3G St St SH ISIN (1157-19, 338, sas adits Fh
kahi kabeer ha-o taa ko daas. ||4||1]| - says Kabeer, I am his slave. ||4|[1]|
Sta MH Sta ATS Il (1157-19, 3a@, sas aeite Hh) naa“gay aavan naa"gay jaanaa. Naked we come, and naked we go.
afe o sfad SHAT IST IAI (1157-19, 38C, sas adte AH ko-ay na rahihai raajaa raanaa. ||1|| No one, not even the kings and queens, shall remain. ||1||
Ua qqut
oH oa 58 fafa AS II 1158-1, 358, sas adits Th raam raajaa na-o niDh mayrai. The Sovereign Lord is the nine treasures for me.
HU JS ASST US 3S NU TTS I 1158-1, 3a, sas ade wh
sampai hayt kalat Dhan tayrai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The possessions and the spouse to which the mortal is lovingly attached, are Your wealth, O Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
WES Ad O WS Hast i 1158-1, 3a8, sas awit Ft) aavat sang na jaat sangaatee. They do not come with the mortal, and they do not go with him.
as sf ufs sid get QI (1158-2, 388, sas ast A)
kahaa bha-i-o dar baa‘Dhay haathee. ||2]| What good does it do him, if he has elephants tied up at his doorway? ||2]||
Sa Te AS a sfenr Il (1158-2, se, sas ate Ah lankaa gadh sonay kaa bha-i-aa. The fortress of Sri Lanka was made out of gold,
Had Teg foor & afer wail iss-2, sa, sas aats wh) moorakh raavan ki-aa lay ga-i-aa. ||3]| but what could the foolish Raawan take with him when he left? ||3] |
ats adts fxs ae stots il (1158-3, 3a, sas ate Hh kahi kabeer kichh gun beechaar. Says Kabeer, think of doing some good deeds.
38 AMM ee Ja she NI 1158-3, saC, sas adits Ft)
chalay ju-aaree du-ay hath jhaar. ||4]|2]| In the end, the gambler shall depart empty-handed. ||4||2||
Hor qo Her FEZ il c1ss-3, 3a@, sas ats sf mailaa barahmaa mailaa ind. Brahma is polluted, and Indra is polluted.
ote Her Hot FT VE MAUI (1158-4, 3aC, sas ate FH) rav mailaa mailaa hai chand. ||1|| The sun is polluted, and the moon is polluted. ||1]|
Hort Hest fg HATS Il (1158-4, 358, sas adits Th) mailaa maltaa ih sansaar. This world is polluted with pollution.
fea ofs fase A at nS o UT NU TIS I (1158-4, 3a8, sas adits Ah ik har nirmal jaa kaa ant na paar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only the One Lord is Immaculate; He has no end or limitation. ||1||Pause]|
AS qohste & SIA Il (1158-5, 3a8, sas ats sh mailay barahmandaa-i kai ees. The rulers of kingdoms are polluted.
H® fofa ang feo SIA IQ (1158-5, 388, sas ate Ah mailay nis baasur din tees. ||2|| Nights and days, and the days of the month are polluted. ||2| |
Hot Hat Her dt il 1158-5, 3a@, sas adte Hf) mailaa motee mailaa heer. The pearl is polluted, the diamond is polluted.
Hort ug urea nig td IS (1158-6, 3a8, sas ate Fh) mailaa pa-un paavak ar neer. ||3]| Wind, fire and water are polluted. ||3]|
HS fae Has HAA Il (1158-6, 3a, sas aete rt) mailay siv sankraa mahays. Shiva, Shankara and Mahaysh are polluted.
H® fro wfoe wre Sy Igil (1158-6, 3e8, sas aete Th)
mailay siDh saaDhik ar bhaykh. ||4]|
The Siddhas, seekers and strivers, and those who wear religious robes, are polluted. [141]
ADS 5S
HS Adit AIH Het ASfs Il 1158-7, 3e8, sas adits A mailay jogee jangam jataa sahayt. The Yogis and wandering hermits with their matted hair are polluted.
Het afeor SA AAS Ul (1158-7, 338, sas aes Ah mailee kaa-i-aa hans samayt. ||5|| The body, along with the swan-soul, is polluted. ||5||
afs ads 3 AS uses Il fone 3 A THf We NENSI (1158-7, 3a8, sas asta at)
kahi kabeer tay jan parvaan. nirmal tay jo raameh jaan. ||6||3]| Says Kabeer, those humble beings are approved and pure, who know the Lord. [16] 13] |
Ho ate Hat forser ats Sat il (1158-8, Sa, sas aete man kar makaa kiblaa kar dayhee. Let your mind be Mecca, and your body the temple of worship.
FHT UGH TT Sat Al 1158-8, aC, sas adte Hh bolanhaar param gur ayhee. ||1]| Let the Supreme Guru be the One who speaks. ||1]|
aT J Hot ater Sea I (1158-9, 3a, sas adits wh) kaho ray mulaa™ baa‘g nivaaj. O Mullah, utter the call to prayer.
Sa HAS SA SISTA NA TIC Il 1158-9, 30C, sas aete Ah ayk maseet dasai darvaaj. ||1|| rahaa-o. The one mosque has ten doors. ||1||Pause] |
fufhfufs SHA SdH AEs I cis8-9, 338, sas aete Fh) misimil taamas bharam kadooree. So slaughter your evil nature, doubt and cruelty;
ote & Us af Aga NN (158-10, 338, sas sets FH) bhaakh lay panchai ho-ay sabooree. ||2]| consume the five demons and you shall be blessed with contentment. ||2||
foe saa ot AoE Sa Il (1158-10, 338, sas ets Ft) hindoo turak kaa saahib ayk. Hindus and Muslims have the same One Lord and Master.
AT Ad HB AT Ad AY USM (1158-10, 3a, sas aaa Ah kah karai mulaa™ kah karai saykh. ||3]| What can the Mullah do, and what can the Shaykh do? |[3]|
ats adte I sfemr feerar il (1158-11, 338, sas ate Ah
kahi kabeer ha-o bha-i-aa divaanaa. Says Kabeer, I have gone insane.
uff ufA Hour ofA AHA SII Gis8-11, sae, sas aets Fh
mus mus manoo-aa sahj samaanaa. | |4||4] | Slaughtering, slaughtering my mind, I have merged into the Celestial Lord. ||4||4||
dat & Afar Afsst faordt i A Afsst aan afe feast wail ciss-12, 338, sas ate A gangaa kai sang salitaa bigree. so salitaa gangaa ho-ay nibree. ||1]| When the stream flows into the Ganges, then it becomes the Ganges. ||1]|
faafsS asta on eI I (1158-12, 38, sas adits zh
bigri-o kabeeraa raam duhaa-ee. Just so, Kabeer has changed.
AY ste nis asts & AST NA TIS I 1158-13, 3a@, sas aes Fh)
saach bha-i-o an kateh na jaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. He has become the Embodiment of Truth, and he does not go anywhere else. ||1]|Pause] |
due a Afa seed faafss i 158-13, 308, sas asta at) chandan kai sang tarvar bigri-o. Associating with the sandalwood tree, the tree nearby is changed;
H sdeg vv dfe foafes nn (158-13, 308, sas acts Ah so tarvar chandan ho-ay nibri-o. ||2| | that tree begins to smell just like the sandalwood tree. ||2||
UTdA a Afar star faafsS i ci5s-14, 338, gas adits Hh) paaras kai sang taa™baa bigri-o. Coming into contact with the philosophers’ stone, copper is transformed;
A sia ove df foafeS i3sil ciss-14, 3a8, sas adie th so taa‘baa kanchan ho-ay nibri-o. ||3]| that copper is transformed into gold. ||3]|
H30 Afar aete feats i 1158-14, 3e8, sas adte A santan sang kabeeraa bigri-o. In the Society of the Saints, Kabeer is transformed;
A ade oH afe feafsS isu 1158-15, 338, sas asta xt so kabeer raamai ho-ay nibri-o. ||4||5|| that Kabeer is transformed into the Lord. ||4]|5]]|
He fea fe Her got il (1158-15, 3a@, gars asta Hh
maathay tilak hath maalaa baanaa”.
Some apply ceremonial marks to their foreheads, hold malas in their hands, and wear religious robes.
Bae aH fuser AAT A (1158-15, S58, sas aete Ah logan raam khil-a-unaa jaanaa”. ||1|| Some people think that the Lord is a play-thing. ||1]|
Ag UG eGo SE OTH ST I 158-16, 358, sas aes AH ja-o ha-o ba-uraa ta-o raam toraa. If I am insane, then I am Yours, O Lord.
Bd HSH AT WS HST NU TIS I (1158-16, 3a, sas aaa Ah log maram kah jaanai moraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. How can people know my secret? ||1]||Pause| |
338 5 ust UAE o SST II 1158-17, 398, sas ats HH) tora-o na paatee pooja-o na dayvaa. I do not pick leaves as offerings, and I do not worship idols.
oH sats fas fedes AS MQM (1158-17, ss8, sas aete Fh
raam bhagat bin nihfal sayvaa. ||2]| Without devotional worship of the Lord, service is useless. ||2]|
Afsdg UAC Het At HATSS Il (1158-17, 3a, sas ats Fh) satgur pooja-o sadaa sadaa manaava-o. I worship the True Guru; forever and ever, I surrender to Him.
MA AS Psa AY USS SI (1158-18, 3a, sas aeta Ah aisee sayv dargeh sukh paava-o. ||3]|| By such service, I find peace in the Court of the Lord. ||3]|
Bd Ad AGtg ASIA Il 1158-18, 3aC, sas adte A log kahai kabeer ba-uraanaa. People say that Kabeer has gone insane.
AGT A HIN TH ufgsst siell (1158-18, 3s, sas adits Ft)
kabeer kaa maram raam pahichaanaa”. ||4||6|| Only the Lord realizes the secret of Kabeer. ||4]|6]|
Cafe WS as SS fart I ciss-i9, 3G, sas ais Ft) ulat jaat kul do-oo bisaaree. Turning away from the world, I have forgotten both my social class and ancestry.
Ho Hoa fs 35s THA IAI (1158-19, 3a, sas adits Hh)
sunn sahj meh bunat hamaaree. ||1] | My weaving now is in the most profound celestial stillness. ||1] |
THT SIT TI F A ll 1158-19, Fs@, sas setts Ht) hamraa jhagraa rahaa na ko-oo. I have no quarrel with anyone.
usar qque
Ufss Hot SS SB VU IHS i 1159-1, 398, sas ats HH)
pandit mulaa™ chhaaday do-oo. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have abandoned both the Pandits, the Hindu religious scholars, and the Mullahs, the Muslim priests. ||1]]Pause| |
afe afe nmy ning ufsar]e@ I (1159-1, 388, sas adie Ft) bun bun aap aap pahiraava-o. I weave and weave, and wear what I weave.
Ad odt wry so dfs Wee iil 1159-1, 308, sas adits Hf) jah nahee aap tahaa ho-ay gaava-o. ||2| | Where egotism does not exist, there I sing God's Praises. ||2||
Ufss Hot A fof Sor It 1159-2, 388, sas acts Ah pandit mulaa” jo likh dee-aa. Whatever the Pandits and Mullahs have written,
ats 3S TH As 5 SMT Ill (1159-2, 33, sas aete Hh chhaad chalay ham kachhoo na lee-aa. ||3]| I reject; I do not accept any of it. ||3]|
foe feo foafie & rte Il 1159-2, a8, sas adits Hh) ridai ikhlaas nirakh lay meeraa. My heart is pure, and so I have seen the Lord within.
wiry Ufa dfs fee ata SIDI (1159-3, 388, sas adte A) aap khoj khoj milay kabeeraa. ||4]||7| | Searching, searching within the self, Kabeer has met the Lord. ||4||7]||
fasas nireg det o Ufe Il (1159-3, 308, sas adte Hh) nirDhan aadar ko-ee na day-ay. No one respects the poor man.
wy W368 ad Gg fefs o ase NA TIE I (1159-3, 3a8, sas adits FH) laakh jatan karai oh chit na Dharay-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. He may make thousands of efforts, but no one pays any attention to him. ||1]|Pause]|
Ag fess AeUS & ATE I (1159-4, 308, sas adie rh) ja-o nirDhan sarDhan kai jaa-ay. When the poor man goes to the rich man,
mat Sor uife feafe nail (1159-4, 3a@, sas asta at) aagay baithaa peeth firaa-ay. ||1]| and sits right in front of him, the rich man turns his back on him. ||1]|
AG Hae fasas & ATE I 1159-5, 358, sas adits Th ja-o sarDhan nirDhan kai jaa-ay. But when the rich man goes to the poor man,
eho nireg Shor eotE WIM (1159-5, sa@, sas aete Ah
dee-aa aadar lee-aa bulaa-ay. ||2]| the poor man welcomes him with respect. ||2||
fasag Haug toG set Il (1159-5, 308, sas adie th) nirDhan sarDhan don-o bhaa-ee. The poor man and the rich man are both brothers.
ys at aero Het AST BI (1159-6, 3a, sas ats Ft)
parabh kee kalaa na maytee jaa-ee. ||3]| God's pre-ordained plan cannot be erased. ||3]|
afs adte fasas 3 Het I (1159-6, 358, sas adie th) kahi kabeer nirDhan hai so-ee. Says Kabeer, he alone is poor,
vw a foge oH 5 det ISIC (1159-6, 358, sas aete Th jaa kay hirdai naam na ho-ee. ||4]|8]| who does not have the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in his heart. ||4]|8]|
ad As 3 Sats AHS Il (1159-7, 3a, gars acts Hh) gur sayvaa tay bhagat kamaa-ee. Serving the Guru, devotional worship is practiced.
3a f2a HOA Sot UST I (1159-7, 3a8, sas arte Hh
tab ih maanas dayhee paa-ee. Then, this human body is obtained.
fen edt aC fAHats Fe il 1159-7, 308, sas adits Hh is dayhee ka-o simrahi dayv. Even the gods long for this human body.
A Odt 39 dfs at AS NU (1159-7, 3a8, sas ate AH so dayhee bhaj har kee sayv. ||1|| So vibrate that human body, and think of serving the Lord. ||1]|
ang afse sf HS WT Il (1159-8, 3s@, sas adits Ht) bhajahu gobind bhool mat jaahu. Vibrate, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and never forget Him.
HOA HOH a Sdt ST UU! TIS Il (1159-8, 3aC, sas acta Hh)
maanas janam kaa ayhee laahu. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is the blessed opportunity of this human incarnation. ||1]||Pause] |
Aa GA AT da odt wrfenr | 1159-8, 3a@, sas asta rh) jab lag jaraa rog nahee aa-i-aa. As long as the disease of old age has not come to the body,
Aa Ba ate qAt adt asm Il (is9-9, Se@, sas ait Ht) jab lag kaal garsee nahee kaa-i-aa. and as long as death has not come and seized the body,
wa Sd fae set odt aot Il (1159-9, 3a@, sas adits Hh)
jab lag bikal bha-ee nahee baanee. and as long as your voice has not lost its power,
afa Sfo J HS Atsaurst iQil (1159-10, 3s@, sas adte Hh)
bhaj layhi ray man saarigpaanee. ||2| | O mortal being, vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World. ||2]|
MEO SAA SHIA AS SSH Il (1159-10, 3a@, sas acta Ah
ab na bhajas bhajas kab bhaa-ee. If you do not vibrate and meditate on Him now, when will you, O Sibing of Destiny?
wie nis o Stam AT II (1159-10, 388, sas aete Th) aavai ant na bhaji-aa jaa-ee. When the end comes, you will not be able to vibrate and meditate on Him.
A fae asta Het wie ATE Il (1159-11, 308, gas ade Ff) jo kichh karahi so-ee ab saar. Whatever you have to do - now is the best time to do it.
fefs uesT 6 UST UT ISI (1159-11, 308, gars adits Hh fir pathutaahu na paavhu paar. ||3] |
Otherwise, you shall regret and repent afterwards, and you shall not be carried across to the other side. ||3]|
A Aza A Ofer Az Il (1159-11, 308, sas ate Hh SO sayvak jo laa-i-aa sayv. He alone is a servant, whom the Lord enjoins to His service.
fae dt ue fodae Fe Il 1159-11, 308, sas adte Ah tin hee paa-ay niranjan dayv. He alone attains the Immaculate Divine Lord.
ad ffs 3 at ye Aur| Il 1159-12, 3a, saz ats FH) gur mil taa kay khul"ay kapaat. Meeting with the Guru, his doors are opened wide,
Sofa 5 ore Hot MS Il 1159-12, 3a8, sas aes Ah bahur na aavai jonee baat. ||4|| and he does not have to journey again on the path of reincarnation. ||4]|
fedt 3a nrg fea Sat ae Il (1159-12, 308, sas adits Hh ihee tayraa a-osar ih tayree baar. This is your chance, and this is your time.
uz sists 3 ty free i cis9-13, 388, sas adte Fh) ghat bheetar too daykh bichaar. Look deep into your own heart, and reflect on this.
as ads Ais & whe Il 159-13, 3a8, sas adte Hh) kahat kabeer jeet kai haar. Says Kabeer, you can win or lose.
ag fafa afoS yorts uate NUNC! (1159-13, 3a@, sas acts Fh)
baho biDh kahi-o pukaar pukaar. ||5]|1]|9]| In so many ways, I have proclaimed this out loud. ||5||1||9]|
fre ot udt aA afta ATE II (1159-14, 398, sas adie Th siv kee puree basai buDh saar. In the City of God, sublime understanding prevails.
30 3H fife & aay fees Il (1159-14, 338, sas afte Ft) tah tum" mil kai karahu bichaar. There, you shall meet with the Lord, and reflect on Him.
as Bs at ASt us Il (1159-14, 3a@, sas aes Ft) eet oot kee sojhee parai. Thus, you shall understand this world and the next.
age agH Ae afe afs Hs WAM (1159-15, 35@, sas adits Th ka-un karam mayraa kar kar marai. ||1]| What is the use of claiming that you own everything, if you only die in the end? ||1]|
for ue Gufs ara fimrg il cis9-15, 3a@, sas atts Ht) nij pad oopar laago Dhi-aan. I focus my meditation on my inner self, deep within.
TH TH OH Hat qdH famirg AU TIS il (1159-15, SsC, sas aete A) raajaa raam naam moraa barahm gi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Name of the Sovereign Lord is my spiritual wisdom. ||1||Pause| |
He wars sftor so il is9-16, 338, sas ate Ft) mool du-aarai banDhi-aa banDh. In the first chakra, the root chakra, I have grasped the reins and tied them.
ofe Gufs afs shim ¥z Il (1159-16, 338, sas aes Fh) rav oopar geh raakhi-aa chand. I have firmly placed the moon above the sun.
UBH Gos AIA TU Il (1159-16, Sa, sas alte Fh pachham du-aarai sooraj tapai. The sun blazes forth at the western gate.
Ha 33 fits Gufs SA 2H (1159-17, ss@, sas aes Hf) mayr dand sir oopar basai. ||2|| Through the central channel of the Shushmanaa, it rises up above my head. ||2]|
UASH Bud at fies Bs Il (1159-17, 3a, sas acts Fh) pascham du-aaray kee sil orh. There is a stone at that western gate,
fsa fre Cuts fasot ms i (159-17, 338, sas ats Fh) tih sil oopar khirhkee a-or. and above that stone, is another window.
fasat Gufs SAS En Il (1159-18, 3a, sas ats Ft) khirhkee oopar dasvaa du-aar. Above that window is the Tenth Gate.
afs xate St a iT S UT WSUUION (1159-18, Sa, sas adits FH)
kahi kabeer taa kaa ant na paar. ||3||2||10]| Says Kabeer, it has no end or limitation. ||3]|2||10]|
A Hot A Ho fAE Bd? II (1159-18, 338, sas ate FH) so mulaa™ jo man si-o larai. He alone is a Mullah, who struggles with his mind,
ad Guefh ae fAG Ag II (1159-19, 338, sas adits th) gur updays kaal si-o jurai. and through the Guru's Teachings, fights with death.
as UTH AT HIE HTS Il (1159-19, 3a@, gars adits Ff) kaal purakh kaa mardai maan. He crushes the pride of the Messenger of Death.
(SA He AS Ae AGH INA (1159-19, 3s8, sas aete FH) tis mulaa ka-o sadaa salaam. ||1|| Unto that Mullah, I ever offer greetings of respect. ||1]|
Yat AIEO
3 Upfs as ef Fse_ Il (1160-1, Sae, sas sets Ft) hai hajoor kat door bataavhu. God is present, right here at hand; why do you say that He is far away?
ves Wa Hes UST AU IIE Il (1160-1, 3a8, sas adits FH) dundar baaDhhu sundar paavhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. Tie up your disturbing passions, and find the Beauteous Lord. ||1||Pause||
at A A atfent gerd Il (1160-1, 338, sas adte 7) kaajee so jo kaa-i-aa beechaarai. He alone is a Qazi, who contemplates the human body,
afin at nafs YIN USAT Il (1160-2, Se@, sas adits Fh kaa-i-aa kee agan barahm parjaarai. and through the fire of the body, is illumined by God.
Hue fide o tet Saar Il (1160-2, 308, sas adie rh supnai bind na day-ee jharnaa. He does not lose his semen, even in his dreams;
fA aHt AC Aa S HIS MQM (1160-2, 3a, sas adits Hh)
tis kaajee ka-o jaraa na marnaa. ||2|| for such a Qazi, there is no old age or death. ||2||
AH AdS'9 Ff Bfe Ag 3S Il (1160-3, 308, sas ade Ff) So surtaan jo du-ay sar taanai. He alone is a sultan and a king, who shoots the two arrows,
wots Ast safe mrs Il (1160-3, 338, sas adie baahar jaataa bheetar aanai. gathers in his outgoing mind,
Tas HIG Hf BAAT A Il (1160-3, eC, sas aeita rh) gagan mandal meh laskar karai. and assembles his army in the realm of the mind's sky, the Tenth Gate.
A Has9 sg fafs os Nall (1160-4, 338, sas ate Fh) so surtaan chhatar sir Dharai. ||3]| The canopy of royalty waves over such a sultan. ||3]|
Hat HIy Gay AT Il (1160-4, 3sC, sas adits th jogee gorakh gorakh karai. The Yogi cries out, "Gorakh, Gorakh".
fos TH BH BBs Il (1160-4, Fa, sas aes Ft) hindoo raam naam uchrai. The Hindu utters the Name of Raam.
HAGHTS aT Sa wee Il (1160-5, Sa@, sas adits Ht) musalmaan kaa ayk khudaa-ay. The Muslim has only One God.
eas aT ATH stom ANTE NSISNAUI (1160-5, Fs@, sas ate Ft)
kabeer kaa su-aamee rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||4]|3]|11]| The Lord and Master of Kabeer is all-pervading. ||4||3||11]|
HIG U Il (1160-5)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
A uTag AG ATS SS Il (1160-5, 358, v2 5) jo paathar ka-o kahtay dayv. Those who call a stone their god
ot at fagat Je AS I (1160-6, SaG, He 5) taa kee birthaa hovai sayv. - their service is useless.
a urag af utet urf& i cii60-6, 338, He 5) jo paathar kee paa‘-ee paa-ay. Those who fall at the feet of a stone god
fA at wre niatet ATE IAI (1160-6, Sa, He 5) tis kee ghaal ajaa‘-ee jaa-ay. ||1|| - their work is wasted in vain. ||1]|
SAT JH AS FHS Il (1160-7, Fa, ne 5) thaakur hamraa sad bolantaa. My Lord and Master speaks forever.
Hea Abr a ys aS SST UA FIC Il (160-7, FG, ws 5) sarab jee-aa ka-o parabh daan daytaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. God gives His gifts to all living beings. ||1]|Pause] |
nists FB 5 WS IT II (1160-7, 358, He 5) antar day-o na jaanai anDh. The Divine Lord is within the self, but the spiritually blind one does not know this.
gy ot Afar ure ST Il (1160-8, Sa@, He 5) bharam kaa mohi-aa paavai fanDh. Deluded by doubt, he is caught in the noose.
3 UTag 88 BT fas SfE il (1160-8, Sa8, He 5) na paathar bolai naa kichh day-ay. The stone does not speak; it does not give anything to anyone.
ae AGH feses FAT lil (1160-8, Fa, ve 5) fokat karam nihfal hai sayv. ||2|| Such religious rituals are useless; such service is fruitless. ||2| |
A frasa a@ deg Bae Il (1160-9, 358, v2 5) jay mirtak ka-o chandan charhaavai. If a corpse is anointed with sandalwood oil,
BAS AIT ASH SH US Ill (1160-9, 3a@, v2 5) us tay kahhu kavan fal paavai. what good does it do?
A fkasa a@ fare ufos gBret Il (1160-9, Sa@, He 5) jay mirtak ka-o bistaa maahi rulaa-ee. If a corpse is rolled in manure,
at fhasa ar fam ufe AST NBII (1160-10, Sa@, 42 5) taa’ mirtak kaa ki-aa ghat jaa-ee. ||3]| what does it lose from this? ||3]|
as adits IG ATE usta Il (1160-10, Sa@, 13 5) kahat kabeer ha-o kaha-o pukaar. Says Kabeer, I proclaim this out loud
FHS SY ATS IETS Il (1160-10, Sa, He 5) samajh daykh saakat gaavaar. - behold, and understand, you ignorant, faithless cynic.
eH StS BIZ WI WS Il (1160-11, Fs, we 5) doojai bhaa-ay bahut ghar gaalay. The love of duality has ruined countless homes.
TH SAS J AS ANS ISIAH (1160-11, Fa, Hz 5)
raam bhagat hai sadaa sukhaalay. ||4||4||12| | The Lord's devotees are forever in bliss. ||4]|4||12]]|
We Hfo He fem & ST I (1160-11, Fs@, v2 5) jal meh meen maaz-i-aa kay bayDhay. The fish in the water is attached to Maya.
chua usa Hfenr & SE Il (1160-12, SaG, v2 5) deepak patang maa-i-aa kay chhayday. The moth fluttering around the lamp is pierced through by Maya.
aH Hf axes aS fam it (1160-12, 338, v2 5) kaam maa-i-aa kunchar ka-o bi-aapai. The sexual desire of Maya afflicts the elephant.
Sfentans fear urfemr Hfs UA AI (1160-12, 3a@, 48 5) bhu-i-angam bharing maa-i-aa meh khaapay. ||1]| The snakes and bumble bees are destroyed through Maya. ||1]|
Hfenr mt Host STeT I (1160-13, 3aG, He 5) maa-i-aa aisee mohnee bhaa-ee. Such are the enticements of Maya, O Siblings of Destiny.
AS Abt 33 sIaTet AU TIS I (1160-13, Fa@, v2 5) jaytay jee-a taytay dehkaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. As many living beings are there are, have been deceived. ||1]|Pause| |
uet figer ure ufo TS Il (1160-13, Fa, 42 5) pankhee marig maa-i-aa meh raatay. The birds and the deer are imbued with Maya.
Arad Hat nif AST Il (1160-14, Se, Hz 5) saakar maakhee aDhik santaapay. Sugar is a deadly trap for the flies.
3d Gre whenr Hfo Sar Il (1160-14, Sa@, v2 5) turay usat maa-i-aa meh bhaylaa. Horses and camels are absorbed in Maya.
fra s@aHte wtfeor Hfs Bsr WI (1160-14, Fae, 2 5) siDh cha-oraaseeh maa-i-aa meh khaylaa. ||2|| The eighty-four Siddhas, the beings of miraculous spiritual powers, play in Maya. ||2]|
fem Ast Hfeor & Fer it (1160-15, FsG, Hz 5) chhi-a jatee maa-i-aa kay bandaa. The six celibates are slaves of Maya.
de SE ASH Mg FET Il (1160-15, Fae, 3 5) navai naath sooraj ar chandaa. So are the nine masters of Yoga, and the sun and the moon.
su sdtag ufenr ufo AST I (1160-15, 3s, 2 5) tapay rakheesar maa-i-aa meh sootaa. The austere disciplinarians and the Rishis are asleep in Maya.
Hfent His are vig UT TSI" BI (1160-16, Sa, ws 5) maa-i-aa meh kaal ar panch dootaa. ||3]| Death and the five demons are in Maya. ||3]|
Hore frome utfeur ufo ast Il (1160-16, Fa@, Hz 5) Su-aan si-aal maa-i-aa meh raataa. Dogs and jackals are imbued with Maya.
3g US nrg fHurst i 1160-17, 358, v2 5) bantar cheetay ar singhaataa. Monkeys, leopards and lions,
HAS UST MI GAT Il (1160-17, Sg, ve 5) maa‘jaar gaadar ar loobraa. cats, sheep, foxes,
fasa Hs Hfeur ufo Us ISI (1160-17, S38, 12 5) birakh mool maa-i-aa meh paraa. ||4|| trees and roots are planted in Maya. ||4||
Hfenr nists StS FS Il (1160-18, SaG, Hz 5) maa-i-aa antar bheenay dayv. Even the gods are drenched with Maya,
Arad fer nig TaSz Il (1160-18, Fa@, v8 5)
Saagar indraa ar Dhartayv. as are the oceans, the sky and the earth.
ats ade fra Ges fsa HfEMr I (1160-18, Sa, H2 5) kahi kabeer jis udar tis maa-i-aa. Says Kabeer, whoever has a belly to fill, is under the spell of Maya.
3a se Fa AY ufeMr WUNUNISIl (1160-18, SeG, H2 5) tab chhootay jab saaDhoo paa-i-aa. ||5||5||13]| The mortal is emancipated only when he meets the Holy Saint. ||5||5]|13]|
AG BAI Het Ast AP Il (1160-19, Sa, 2 5) jab lag mayree mayree karai. As long as he cries out, "Mine! Mine!",
3a BAI AH Sa odt Ad Il (1160-19, 3a@, 2 5) tab lag kaaj ayk nahee sarai. none of his tasks is accomplished.
wa Hot Hot fife ATE II (1160-19, a8, He 5) jab mayree mayree mit jaa-ay. When such possessiveness is erased and removed,
Yat AXEA
3a Ys aa Asafa wife All (1161-1, Fs, ve 5) tab parabh kaaj savaareh aa-ay. ||1]| then God comes and resolves his affairs. ||1]|
mrt famig frets Hat Il (1161-1, SaG, He 5) aisaa gi-aan bichaar manaa. Contemplate such spiritual wisdom, O mortal man.
dfs at o faneg Bu SHAT NU TIS I (161-1, Fa@, ns 5) har kee na simrahu dukh bhanjnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the Destroyer of pain? ||1]|Pause]|
wa oa fit gd ga nfs Il (1161-2, Fa8, v2 5) jab lag singh rahai ban maahi. As long as the tiger lives in the forest,
3a BT IG SH Tt ts il (1161-2, FG, we 5) tab lag ban foolai hee naahi. the forest does not flower.
aa ot firs fur ax@ wfe i cic1-3, a8, He 5) jab hee si-aar singh ka-o khaa-ay.
But when the jackal eats the tiger,
S15 Tat Aarest FoaTS iM (161-3, Fa, ne 5)
fool rahee saglee banraa-ay. ||2|| then the entire forest flowers. ||2]|
Ms FS Td fSs Il 161-3, Fae, 2 5) jeeto boodai haaro tirai. The victorious are drowned, while the defeated swim across.
ae usAet ufs Ss i (1161-3, Fa, ne 5) gur parsaadee paar utrai. By Guru's Grace, one crosses over and is saved.
aA adts Ad AHSTE Il (1161-4, Sa, v2 5) daas kabeer kahai samjhaa-ay. Slave Kabeer speaks and teaches:
ATG TH ddd fee STE iWSNENASll (1161-4, Fa, v2 5)
kayval raam rahhu liv laa-ay. ||3||6||14] | remain lovingly absorbed, attuned to the Lord alone. ||3||6||14||
Hats Afe AOS FATAL Il (1161-4, Sa, nz 5) satar Sai-ay salaar hai jaa kay. He has 7,000 commanders,
Het BY Usa ST a Il (1161-5, 3G, He 5) savaa laakh paikaabar taa kay. and hundreds of thousands of prophets;
Ae aw adinifa afe mort il cisi-5, 3e8, v2 5) saykh jo kahee-ahi kot athaasee. He is said to have 88,000,000 shaykhs,
Bus afe AT a ae UAT IAI (1161-5, Sa@, 42 5)
chhapan kot jaa kay khayl khaasee. ||1]| and 56,000,000 attendants. ||1]|
H ata at & TAS Il (1161-6, Fa, v2 5) mo gareeb kee ko gujraavai. I am meek and poor - what chance do I have of being heard there?
HABA Sts HIG kX US UU TIS Il (1161-6, Fa, we 5) majlas door mahal ko paavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
His Court is so far away; only a rare few attain the Mansion of His Presence. ||1]|Pause] |
Sain adst J YG Ura Il (1161-6, SaG, v2 5)
taytees karorhee hai khayl khaanaa. He has 33,000,000 play-houses.
seat wu fed feerat i (161-7, 388, v2 5) cha-uraasee lakh firai divaanaa”. His beings wander insanely through 8.4 million incarnations.
aa nireH as fas outs feuret il (1161-7, se@, v2 5) baabaa aadam ka-o kichh nadar dikhaa-ee. He bestowed His Grace on Adam, the father of mankind,
Cfo st fsAfs wodt uret iQi ci61-7, 3a, He 5) un bhee bhisat ghanayree paa-ee. ||2|| who then lived in paradise for a long time. ||2]|
fee UBIG A A ATE F gat Il (161-8, Fa, we 5) dil khalhal jaa kai jarad roo baanee. Pale are the faces of those whose hearts are disturbed.
efs asa ad Ast Il 1161-8, 3a@, H2 5) chhod katayb karai saitaanee. They have forsaken their Bible, and practice Satanic evil.
voor eH SA J Bet Il (61-8, Sa, 112 5) dunee-aa dos ros hai lo-ee. One who blames the world, and is angry with people,
must athot ure At SII (1161-9, Fa, ne 5) apnaa kee-aa paavai so-ee. ||3]| shall receive the fruits of his own actions. ||3]|
SH US JH Het fours Il cici-9, Fa, v2 5) tum daatay ham sadaa bhikhaaree. You are the Great Giver, O Lord; I am forever a beggar at Your Door.
28 nag df sAarct Il (161-9, 358, v2 5) day-o jabaab ho-ay bajgaaree. If I were to deny You, then I would be a wretched sinner.
SA Adts Sdt UST AHTAT Il (1161-9, Sa@, He 5) daas kabeer tayree panah samaanaa”. Slave Kabeer has entered Your Shelter.
fas orf Ta FIM IID NAUI (1161-10, Sa, He 5)
bhisat najeek raakh rehmaanaa. ||4||7||15]| Keep me near You, O Merciful Lord God - that is heaven for me. ||4]|7]|15]|
AZ et VHS ATS FT SI Il (1161-10, Sa, m2 5) sabh ko-ee chalan kahat hai oohaa™. Everyone speaks of going there,
o HSS FAS I ATT UU! TIS Il (1161-11, Fa, v2 5) naa jaan-o baikunth hai kahaa™. ||1|| rahaa-o. but I do not even know where heaven is. ||1]|]Pause| |
ny MY aT HSH @ ATOe Il (1161-11, STS, v8 5) aap aap kaa maram na jaanaa”. One who does not even know the mystery of his own self,
Ws St SxS Saat AU (1161-11, Fa, ne 5) baatan hee baikunth bakhaanaa”. ||1|| speaks of heaven, but it is only talk. ||1]|
Aa GA HS FAS At MMA Il (1161-12, Fa, v2 5) jab lag man baikunth kee aas. As long as the mortal hopes for heaven,
3a BA St BIS (SSA NII (1161-12, Ss@, v1 5)
tab lag naahee charan nivaas. ||2| | he will not dwell at the Lord's Feet. ||2]|
uret AS B UIT USS Il (1161-12, SaG, He 5) khaa-ee kot na paral pagaaraa. Heaven is not a fort with moats and ramparts, and walls plastered with mud;
OT ASS FAS VMS MBI (1161-12, Sa, He 5) naa jaan-o baikunth du-aaraa. ||3]| I do not know what heaven's gate is like. ||3]|
afs ante wie adit arte il 1161-13, 3s€, 42 5) kahi kameer ab kahee-ai kaahi. Says Kabeer, now what more can I say?
AUHaS FxS vTfT NITCIIE! (1161-13, Fd, Hz 5) saaDhsangat baikunthay aahi. ||4||8]|16] | The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is heaven itself. ||4]|8]|16]|
faG ota ae dar set Il (1161-14, Sa, He 5) ki-o leejai gadh bankaa bhaa-ee. How can the beautiful fortress be conquered, O Siblings of Destiny?
ded AS mg Seg wT NA TTS I 161-14, Sa8, 2 5) dovar kot ar tayvar khaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It has double walls and triple moats. ||1||Pause| |
uty ud HT He HSA MSt usaw HEMT I 1161-14, 3e@, v2 5)
paa‘ch pachees moh mad matsar aadee parbal maa-i-aa.
It is defended by the five elements, the twenty-five categories, attachment, pride, jealousy and the awesomely powerful Maya.
He dda aA Hd 6 Ud AT ae swatfent A (1161-15, Se, He 5)
jan gareeb ko jor na pahuchai kahaa kara-o raghuraa-i-aa. ||1]|
The poor mortal being does not have the strength to conquer it; what should I do now, O Lord? ||1]|
an faedt ey AY Basal uy US VISTA Il (1161-15, Sa, He 5)
kaam kivaaree dukh sukh darvaanee paap punn darvaajaa.
Sexual desire is the window, pain and pleasure are the gate-keepers, virtue and sin are the gates.
QU yOS Ho aS CesT ST HO HSA TH QI (161-16, 3a, He 5)
kroDh parDhaan mahaa bad dundar tah man maavaasee raajaa. ||2||
Anger is the great supreme commander, full of argument and strife, and the mind is the rebel king there. ||2]|
Are Hod eu HHS a Tafa as TEE I (1161-16, Fs, He 5)
savaad sanaah top mamtaa ko kubuDh kamaan chadhaa-ee.
Their armor is the pleasure of tastes and flavors, their helmets are worldly attachments; they take aim with their bows of corrupt intellect.
fara ste ad we sists fe ae at o WET ISI C1161-17, 3a8, H8 5)
tisnaa teer rahay ghat bheetar i-o gadh lee-o na jaa-ee. ||3]|
The greed that fills their hearts is the arrow; with these things, their fortress is impregnable. ||3]|
Un ustst Hafs geet aor fame verfemr | (61-18, 398, 8 5)
paraym paleetaa surat havaa-ee golaa gi-aan chalaa-i-aa.
But I have made divine love the fuse, and deep meditation the bomb; I have launched the rocket of spiritual wisdom.
qun wae Hon ust Safe de fisfemr igi ici-is, 338, 8 5) barahm agan sehjay parjaalee aykeh chot sijhaa-i-aa. ||4|| The fire of God is lit by intuition, and with one shot, the fortress is taken. ||4]|
HS A3y & Bs Ha 3d Vls CaS Il (1161-19, Sa, 2 5) sat santokh lai larnay laagaa toray du-ay darvaajaa. Taking truth and contentment with me, I begin the battle and storm both the gates.
Wonafs wig as at faur 3 uafeS ge A TH Mull (1161-19, Fs, v2 5)
saaDhsangat ar gur kee kirpaa tay pakri-o gadh ko raajaa. ||5||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and by Guru's Grace, I have captured the king of the fortress. ||5||
at AAEQ
saes sifs nafs fires ot act are SF SAT I (1162-1, 338, 2 5)
bhagvat bheer sakat simran kee katee kaal bhai faasee. With the army of God's devotees, and Shakti, the power of meditation, I have snapped the noose of the fear of death.
an ots wiz6 az Cufs oa StS vifsort NEUEN (1162-1, 338, H2 5)
daas kameer charh"i-o garh" oopar raaj lee-o abhinaasee. ||6||9||17]|
Slave Kabeer has climbed to the top of the fortress; I have obtained the eternal, imperishable domain. ||6||9||17]|
da aAtets afsd aste il (1162-2, 3a8, He 5) gang gusaa-in gahir gambheer. The mother Ganges is deep and profound.
Hate aifa afs ud oats NAM (1162-2, Ss, He 5) janjeer baa“Dh kar kharay kabeer. ||1]| Tied up in chains, they took Kabeer there. ||1||
HO 6 fsa 35 ad AB SITE Il (1162-3, S58, He 5) man na digai tan kaahay ka-o daraa-ay. My mind was not shaken; why should my body be afraid?
Tdo AHS fas sf ANTE I TIC I (1162-3, FaG, v2 5) charan kamal chit rahi-o samaa-ay. rahaa-o. My consciousness remained immersed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
dar at safe Act set Arte I (1162-4, Sa, He 5) gangaa kee lahar mayree tutee janjeer. The waves of the Ganges broke the chains,
fyaarer ug 83 ats QM (1162-4, Sa, ve 5) marigchhaalaa par baithay kabeer. ||2|| and Kabeer was seated on a deer skin. ||2]|
af kate A Hat S ATE Il (1162-4, 3a, ns 5) kahi kambeer ko-oo sang na saath. Says Kabeer, I have no friend or companion.
AS 8G TUS FT DSA ISUNIONACI (1162-5, Fa, ne 5)
jal thal raakhan hai raghunaath. ||3||10]|18]| On the water, and on the land, the Lord is my Protector. ||3||10||18]|
338 ade AG wmeudt we 2 (1162-6)
bhairo kabeer jee-o asatpadee ghar 2 Bhairao, Kabeer Jee, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars Arte I (1162-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MoH Ta ats SS IA | (1162-7, Fa, sas ata Fh)
agam darugam garh rachi-o baas. God constructed a fortress, inaccessible and unreachable, in which He dwells.
aw ufs Afs Ad USA Il (1162-7, 338, sas adie zt) jaa meh jot karay pargaas. There, His Divine Light radiates forth.
fanat sua df nS Il (1162-7, 358, sas adits FH) bijulee chamkai ho-ay anand. Lightning blazes, and bliss prevails there,
fag uss ys ae afse Al (1162-7, 338, sas ats Ht) jih pa-orh"ay parabh baal gobind. ||1]| where the Eternally Young Lord God abides. ||1]||
feg HIG a an fees Od Il (1162-8, 358, sas adits Th) ih jee-o raam naam liv laagai. This soul is lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name.
AT HIG Se FH Ta UU TIS Il (1162-8, Sa, sas alta sh jaraa maran chhootai bharam bhaagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. It is saved from old age and death, and its doubt runs away. ||1]|Pause]|
made ado fAG Ho ot UHfS II 162-9, 338, sas adie Hh abran baran si-o man hee pareet. Those who believe in high and low social classes,
IGH wets wefs ats Il 1162-9, 3a8, sas ade Hf) ha-umai gaavan gaavahi geet. only sing songs and chants of egotism.
WSde AWE IS Soa Ill (1162-9, 30S, sas aeta wh) anhad sabad hot jhunkaar. The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, resounds in that place,
fag u@s ys At dures iQ (1162-10, 3a@, sas acta Ht) jih pa-orh"ay parabh saree gopaal. | |2|| where the Supreme Lord God abides. ||2||
U3 HSS HTS HST Il (1162-10, Fa, sas adits Ft) khandal mandal mandal mandaa. He creates planets, solar systems and galaxies;
fant wires Sifs fant Fst II (1162-10, 338, sas ats Hf) tari-a asthaan teen tari-a khanda. He destroys the three worlds, the three gods and the three qualities.
Wa Midas Sfowr wis iT Il (1162-11, 3s8, sas aelte rh agam agochar rahi-aa abh ant. The Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord God dwells in the heart.
Ug 5 Ue a TIS HS MSI (1162-11, 38, sas adits HH) paar na paavai ko DharneeDhar mant. ||3]| No one can find the limits or the secrets of the Lord of the World. ||3]|
TVS UIU TU UTA Il (1162-11, sa, sas aets Fh kadlee puhap Dhoop pargaas. The Lord shines forth in the plantain flower and the sunshine.
dH UaH Hf SE feeA I (1162-12, 38, sas aate th)
raj pankaj meh lee-o nivaas. He dwells in the pollen of the lotus flower.
SMTSA BH ms nists HS Il (1162-12, 358, sas adits du-aadas dal abh antar mant. The Lord's secret is within the twelve petals of the heart-lotus.
Ad UGS At AHS AT Sil (1162-12, 3a@, sas acts Ah jah pa-urhay saree kamlaa kant. ||4|| The Supreme Lord, the Lord of Lakshmi dwells there. ||4||
mag Gan uf Ba AA II (1162-13, 38, sas adits Ah araDh uraDh mukh laago kaas. He is like the sky, stretching across the lower, upper and middle realms.
Ho 436 vfo afs usarA Il (1162-13, 358, sas adte FH) sunn mandal meh kar pargaas. In the profoundly silent celestial realm, He radiates forth.
Cot Fan ardt FE Il (1162-13, Sa, gas aes Ft) oohaa”™ sooraj naahee chand. Neither the sun nor the moon are there,
mite fade Ad MSS NUIl (1162-13, 388, sas asta Ht) aad niranjan karai anand. ||5|| but the Primal Immaculate Lord celebrates there. ||5||
A gonfs fifs A Are Il (1162-14, 338, sas aes Hh) so barahmand pind so jaan. Know that He is in the universe, and in the body as well.
He Adete af fenaTs Il (1162-14, 308, sas adits Th) maan sarovar kar isnaan. Take your cleansing bath in the Mansarovar Lake.
Ad AAT as FT ATU Il (1162-14, 308, sas adie Th soha™ so jaa ka-o hai jaap. Chant "Sohang" - "He is me."
WT ag fous 5 df ua mg uy EI (1162-15, 338, sas adits rH) jaa ka-o lipat na ho-ay punn ar paap. ||6|| He is not affected by either virtue or vice. ||6]|
MAIS TIS WH Sdt SH Il (1162-15, 3a, sas adits Hh
abran baran ghaam nahee chhaam. He is not affected by either high or low social class, sunshine or shade.
Med o Ushi ag ot AM Il (1162-15, 308, sas adte Hh) avar na paa-ee-ai gur kee saam. He is in the Guru's Sanctuary, and nowhere else.
adt 3 ad nite © AME Il (1162-16, 358, sas adie Hf) taaree na tarai aavai na jaa-ay. He is not diverted by diversions, comings or goings.
Ho Hon yfo sfoG ANTE WD (1162-16, 338, sas adits Ah
sunn sahj meh rahi-o samaa-ay. ||7| | Remain intuitively absorbed in the celestial void. ||7]||
Ho HO WS A APE Il (1162-16, 3a, sas adie zh) man maDhay jaanai jay ko-ay. One who knows the Lord in the mind
6b 4A
A 88 A nm ofF i 162-17, 3a8, sas adie a) jo bolai so aapai ho-ay. - whatever he says, comes to pass.
nfs xfs ufs wAfag a | (1162-17, 338, sas aes fh jot mantar man asthir karai. One who firmly implants the Lord's Divine Light, and His Mantra within the mind
afs ade A yrat Ss UCU (1162-17, 338, sas ats Hf)
kahi kabeer so paraanee tarai. ||8]|1]| - says Kabeer, such a mortal crosses over to the other side. ||8||1]|
afe AT AT A UTA Il (1162-17, 338, sas aets HH) kot soor jaa kai pargaas. Millions of suns shine for Him,
af HIS nig AFIS Il (1162-18, 308, sas adie kot mahaadayv ar kabilaas. millions of Shivas and Kailash mountains.
vom afe A a HIeS Ad Il (1162-18, 3a@, sas adie th) durgaa kot jaa kai mardan karai. Millions of Durga goddesses massage His Feet.
gout afe de Bas Wl (1162-18, 338, sas ants Hf) barahmaa kot bayd uchrai. ||1]| Millions of Brahmas chant the Vedas for Him. ||1]|
AG AEC 3B ATG TH Il (1162-19, 38, sas adits Hh) ja-o jaacha-o ta-o kayval raam. When I beg, I beg only from the Lord.
me tz FAG ardt AH NA FIC Il (1162-19, 3aC, sas adits Ft)
aan dayv si-o naahee kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I have nothing to do with any other deities. ||1]|Pause| |
afe den aafs BIS II (1162-19, 338, sas ate Fh) kot chandarmay karahi charaak. Millions of moons twinkle in the sky.
Us IES
Ad Sane Aefs US Il (1163-1, 358, sas adits Ah) sur tayteesa-o jayveh paak. Three hundred thirty million gods eat the Lord's offerings.
Oe qd afe oe TINT Il (1163-1, 3a@, sas ate FH) nav garah kot thaadhay darbaar. The nine stars, a million times over, stand at His Door.
UeH afe a a ufsaes IQH (1163-1, 338, sas adits Hh Dharam kot jaa kai partihaar. ||2]| Millions of Righteous Judges of Dharma are His gate-keepers. ||2| |
uze afe wGard feafs Il 1163-2, 338, sas ate pavan kot cha-ubaaray fireh. Millions of winds blow around Him in the four directions.
wna afe Aa fansafe il (1163-2, 338, sas asta Ht) baasak kot sayj bisathrahi. Millions of serpents prepare His bed.
Ae afe AT a uTsters Il (1163-2, 3a, sas adte A samund kot jaa kay paaneehaar. Millions of oceans are His water-carriers.
dHrefs afe niarsd STg ISI (1163-3, 3a8, sas adte AH
romaaval kot athaarah bhaar. ||3]| The eighteen million loads of vegetation are His Hair. ||3]|
afe ans sofa F339 Il (1163-3, 3a8, sas adits A kot kamayr bhareh bhandaar. Millions of treasurers fill His Treasury.
afea Sut ad Atars Il (1163-3, 3a@, sas acta at) kotik lakhmee karai seegaar. Millions of Lakshmis adorn themselves for Him.
afeax uy us ag fasta Il (1163-3, 338, sas adie th kotik paap punn baho hireh. Many millions of vices and virtues look up to Him.
fe afe a & As aafs gil (1163-4, 3a@, sas arte Fh indar kot jaa kay sayvaa karahi. ||4|| Millions of Indras serve Him. ||4] |
eua afe a at ufsore Il (1163-4, 338, sas adits Ft) chhapan kot jaa kai partihaar. Fifty-six million clouds are His.
Saat Saat ors nrg Il (1163-4, 3s@, gars adits Fh nagree nagree khi-at apaar. In each and every village, His infinite fame has spread.
BE Fat FIs FAAS | 1163-5, Fae, sas alte Fh) lat chhootee vartai bikraal. Wild demons with dishevelled hair move about.
afe ae AS TUS lull (1163-5, 3sC, sas ate rh kot kalaa khaylai gopaal. ||5|| The Lord plays in countless ways. ||5||
afe Aa AT a PINT Il (1163-5, 3a, sas adits wh) kot jag jaa kai darbaar. Millions of charitable feasts are held in His Court,
aga afe asfs AAT Il (1163-6, 3a@, sas adits FH) ganDharab kot karahi jaikaar. and millions of celestial singers celebrate His victory.
fafenr afe AS To ad Il (1163-6, 3a8, sas aes Ah) bidi-aa kot sabhai gun kahai. Millions of sciences all sing His Praises.
3G UTaATH a viz 5 BI IlEll 1163-6, SG, sas alta Fh) ta-oo paarbarahm kaa ant na lahai. ||6|| Even so, the limits of the Supreme Lord God cannot be found. ||6]|
wee afe Aa Test Il TSS AS AT SF Sst Il (1163-6, 308, sas asta wt) baavan kot jaa kai romaavalee. raavan sainaa jah tay chhalee. Rama, with millions of monkeys, conquered Raawan's army.
HdA afe ag AIS UTS Il (1163-7, 308, sas aes Ah) sahas kot baho kahat puraan. Billions of Puraanas greatly praise Him;
Pande a Hfar HS ID Il (1163-7, 3e@, sas alte Fh)
durjoDhan kaa mathi-aa maan. ||7|| He humbled the pride of Duyodhan. ||7||
aeu afe A a we 5 Tafa Il (1163-8, 398, sas adits Hh) kandarap kot jaa kai lavai na Dhareh. Millions of gods of love cannot compete with Him.
mad wists HOA Jats Il (1163-8, 3eC, sas aete Ft) antar antar mansaa hareh. He steals the hearts of mortal beings.
ats aate Afs Afsaurs Il (1163-8, 3a, sas asta kahi kabeer sun saarigpaan. Says Kabeer, please hear me, O Lord of the World.
Sfo ms us HA BS UCUQNACHOMl (1163-9, 3a@, sas adits Hh deh abhai pad maa‘ga-o daan. ||8]|2||18]|20]| I beg for the blessing of fearless dignity. ||8]|2||18]|20]|
3dG oat SHEE AE at we 9 (1163-10) bhairo banee naamday-o jee-o kee ghar 1 Bhairao, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:
qe Afsars YATE II (1163-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
J fava as AS Ys Il (1163-11, Se@, sas onze Hh ray jihbaa kara-o sat khand. O my tongue, I will cut you into a hundred pieces,
wt 3 Guath At df= Nall (163-11, 388, sas see sh jaam na uchras saree gobind. ||1]| if you do not chant the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
dat & faga of & ote il 1163-11, 3e8, sas anes AH rangee lay jihbaa har kai naa-ay. O my tongue, be imbued with the Lord's Name.
Ada date dfs afe fomrfe nan ar it a163-u1, 3a, sas ane Ff)
surang rangeelay har har Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and imbue yourself with this most excellent color. ||1]|Pause| |
fufemr fase ned aH Il (1163-12, 338, sas one Fh
mithi-aa jihbaa avray’ kaam. O my tongue, other occupations are false.
fogare uz fea ofs & SH NM (1163-12, 3a, sas SHE FH) nirbaan pad ik har ko naam. ||2|| The state of Nirvaanaa comes only through the Lord's Name. ||2| |
mA ate nis UAT AST I (1163-13, Fa@, sas se Fh asa‘kh kot an poojaa karee. The performance of countless millions of other devotions
2a 3 UAT GH Tet USI (1163-13, S3@, sas one Ht) ayk na poojas naamai haree. ||3]| is not equal to even one devotion to the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
yse oHee fed AST Il (1163-13, 358, sas SHS FH) paranvai naamday-o ih karnaa. Prays Naam Dayyv, this is my occupation.
MOS JU 3d Saves USUI (1163-14, 33S, sas one FH) anant roop tayray naaraa-inaa. ||4]|1]| O Lord, Your Forms are endless. ||4]|1]|
Ud US UT Vat UTTAT Il (1163-14, Fs, sas se HH)
par Dhan par daaraa parharee. One who stays away from others' wealth and others' spouses
aa foafe aA Badd WAU (1163-14, 3a8, sas one At
taa kai nikat basai narharee. ||1]| - the Lord abides near that person. ||1||
Ad ans Safest Il (1163-14, 3aG, sas ane FH) jo na bhajantay naaraa-inaa. Those who do not meditate and vibrate on the Lord
f35 AHS AIS IAA NU! TIS Il (1163-15, 358, sas one Th
tin kaa mai na kara-o darsanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. - Ido not even want to see them. ||1||Pause]|
faa & stafe go nize il (1163-15, 358, sas anes AH jin kai bheetar hai antraa. Those whose inner beings are not in harmony with the Lord,
AA UA SA Gf Sa IQ (1163-15, 308, sas SHE AH jaisay pas taisay o-ay naraa. ||2|| are nothing more than beasts. ||2||
ysets SHES Stata faar Il (1163-16, 338, sas seS Hh)
paranvat naamday-o naakeh binaa. Prays Naam Dayv, a man without a nose
St Ad SSA BAST MSI (1163-16, Sa, sas onee A
naa sohai batees lakhnaa. ||3]||2|| does not look handsome, even if he has the thirty-two beauty marks. ||3]||2]|
SU aes TSS ust i aus aE SH sta yrat WAU (1163-16, Fa, sas ane Fh
dooDh katorai gadvai paanee. kapal gaa-ay naamai duhi aanee. ||1]||
Naam Dayv milked the brown cow, and brought a cup of milk and a jug of water to his family god. ||1]|
eg ulg afie THE I (1163-17, 338, sas one HH) dooDh pee-o gobinday raa-ay. "Please drink this milk, O my Sovereign Lord God.
eg ul He Ho UstorTe I (1163-17, 3a, sas ane Fh dooDh pee-o mayro man patee-aa-ay. Drink this milk and my mind will be happy.
odt 3 wa x ay fare a TIS Il (1163-18, 358, sas ane Ah
naahee ta ghar ko baap risaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Otherwise, my father will be angry with me."||1]||Pause] |
Hfes addt niflys act il (1103-18, 358, sas oHee FH) so-in katoree amrit bharee. Taking the golden cup, Naam Dayv filled it with the ambrosial milk,
B OH dfs wit Udt MQM (1163-18, Sa, sas see At) lai naamai har aagai Dharee. ||2|| and placed it before the Lord. ||2]|
Sa sas He fase SA i oH Uf sates TA ISI (1163-19, 358, as ane Ah ayk bhagat mayray hirday basai. naamay daykh naraa-in hasai. ||3||
The Lord looked upon Naam Dayv and smiled. "This one devotee abides within my heart."||3] |
ey ure sag ufs afemr i 1163-19, sa, sas ones Ht) dooDh pee-aa-ay bhagat ghar ga-i-aa. The Lord drank the milk, and the devotee returned home.
UST AAEB
OH Ue a SIAS SEM SII (1164-1, 3aB, sas ones Hh
naamay har kaa darsan bha-i-aa. ||4]|3]| Thus did Naam Dayv come to receive the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. [41131]
H a@dt Ha IH SST Il (1164-1, 358, sas anes Ah mai ba-uree mayraa raam bhataar. I am crazy - the Lord is my Husband.
ots ofs a a as fares A (1164-1, 338, sas one FH) rach rach taa ka-o kara-o singaar. ||1]|| I decorate and adorn myself for Him. ||1]|
38 fee 38 SUS 38 SES Sa Il (1164-2, 358, sas onze Ah bhalay ninda-o bhalay ninda-o bhalay ninda-o log. Slander me well, slander me well, slander me well, O people.
36 HO TH fimrs Aa NU TIS Il (1164-2, 308, sas ane TH) tan man raam pi-aaray jog. ||1|| rahaa-o. My body and mind are united with my Beloved Lord. ||1||Pause] |
we fare arg fAG 3 att Il (1164-3, 3a@, sas one Hh) baad bibaad kaahoo si-o na keejai. Do not engage in any arguments or debates with anyone.
dA IH sates UlA QI (1164-3, 308, sas ane HH rasnaa raam rasaa-in peejai. ||2|| With your tongue, savor the Lord's sublime essence. ||2||
ma Aba ats wet afe wire i 164-3, 3a@, sas onze Ah
ab jee-a jaan aisee ban aa-ee. Now, I know within my soul, that such an arrangement has been made;
fos ques atAS sAet ISI (164-4, 308, sas ane Ah mila-o gupaal neesaan bajaa-ee. ||3]| I will meet with my Lord by the beat of the drum. |[3]|
Grafs feet ad oF AEF Il (1164-4, 358, sas anes AH ustat nindaa karai nar ko-ee. Anyone can praise or slander me.
On Alda Fes ASt SiS (1164-4, eB, sas see FH) naamay sareerang bhaytal so-ee. ||4||4] | Naam Dayv has met the Lord. ||4]||4] |
aag dfs us ul & SS I (1164-5, 398, sas ones A) kabhoo kheer khaad ghee-o na bhaavai. Sometimes, people do not appreciate milk, sugar and ghee.
TAT UT UT TX HAS Il (1164-5, Fa, sas ose HH) kabhoo ghar ghar took magaavai. Sometimes, they have to beg for bread from door to door.
TAT TIS VS fasTS UU! (1164-5, Fa@, sas ane Fh kabhoo kooran chanay binaavai. ||1]|| Sometimes, they have to pick out the grain from the chaff. ||1]|
fA@ ay ae FE adh F are I (1164-6, 358, sas oR Th ji-o raam raakhai ti-o rahee-ai ray bhaa-ee. As the Lord keeps us, so do we live, O Siblings of Destiny.
ofa at HfoHt fas AAG 3 WET NU TIS Il (1164-6, SeC, sas ane FH)
har kee mahimaa kichh kathan na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord's Glory cannot even be described. ||1]|Pause| |
TAT FF FIT SIS Il (1164-7, 39@, sas anes FH) kabhoo turay turang nachaavdi. Sometimes, people prance around on horses.
aag ute usd & urs MI (1164-7, 3G, sas anree Ft) kabhoo paa-ay panhee-o na paavai. ||2|| Sometimes, they do not even have shoes for their feet. ||2||
aT We AUet ASS I (1164-7, 39@, sas ones A) kabhoo khaat supaydee suvaavai. Sometimes, people sleep on cozy beds with white sheets.
aay sft tmrg o ure ISI (1164-7, 338, sas ones Fh) kabhoo bhoom pai-aar na paavai. ||3|| Sometimes, they do not even have straw to put down on the ground. ||3]||
sats anes fea ony fens Il (1164-8, 3a8, sas oH Th) bhanat naamday-o ik naam nistaarai. Naam Dayv prays, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, can save us.
fag ag fxs fsa ufe Gas Iigiull (164-8, a8, sas ane Th) jih gur milai tin paar utaarai. ||4||5]| One who meets the Guru, is carried across to the other side. ||4]|5||
JAS WSS 3d VIS MEM I (1164-9, 3a, sas ae Hh hasat khaylat tayray dayhuray aa-i-aa. Laughing and playing, I came to Your Temple, O Lord.
sats ATS SH uate Borer Ail (1164-9, Sa, sas see
bhagat karat naamaa pakar uthaa-i-aa. ||1]| While Naam Dayv was worshipping, he was grabbed and driven out. ||1]|
dest ats Ast when aheEnT Il 164-9, 3e8, sas onze Fh) heenrhee jaat mayree jaadim raa-i-aa. I am of a low social class, O Lord;
atu & Hath ard AG orfemr Al TICS Il (1164-10, 3a8, sas see Fh) chheepay kay janam kaahay ka-o aa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. why was I born into a family of fabric dyers? ||1]||Pause| |
B AHSt vies us]ete il (1164-10, 3s8, sas onze Fh)
lai kamlee chali-o paltaa-ay. I picked up my blanket and went back,
Zod Ue Hor ATE IQ (1164-11, 308, sas ae Th) dayhurai paachhai baithaa jaa-ay. ||2| | to sit behind the temple. ||2||
fa@ fa ont ofa ge Bud Il (1164-11, 358, gas anes Ah ji-o ji-o naamaa har gun uchrai. As Naam Dayv uttered the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
sas Hot aS tom fed NSNEI (164-11, 308, sas ane TH) bhagat janaa™ ka-o dayhuraa firai. ||3]|6]| the temple turned around to face the Lord's humble devotee. ||3]||6]|
SIG oHee ME wae 2 (1164-12) bhairo naamday-o jee-o ghar 2 Bhairao, Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe I (1164-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AA SH YS Maar Ml (1164-13, Sve, gars ones Fh) jaisee bhookhay pareet anaaj. As the hungry person loves food,
fgwss AS ASt AA Il (1164-13, 5G, sas ane Hh) tarikhaava"t jal saytee kaaj. and the thirsty person is obsessed with water,
AA HS Fes UTS Il (1164-13, SC, sas one Ht) jaisee moorh kutamb paraa-in. and as the fool is attached to his family
MAT on US safE|S NA (1164-13, 358, sas SHS FH) aisee naamay pareet naraa-in. ||1]| - just so, the Lord is very dear to Naam Dayv. ||1]|
on Ulfs aatee writ Il (1164-14, eC, sas ones Ah naamay pareet naaraa-in laagee. Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord.
Hon Hate safe saat wan ToS ll 1164-14, 308, sas onze Ah sahj subhaa-ay bha-i-o bairaagee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He has naturally and intuitively become detached from the world. ||1]|Pause] |
AAT Ud Usa IS Sra Il (1164-14, 358, sas oe Ah jaisee par purkhaa rat naaree. Like the woman who falls in love with another man,
Bat od US aT fasard il (1164-15, 308, sas oes HH lobhee nar Dhan kaa hitkaaree. and the greedy man who loves only wealth,
amt use anat fumirst il 1164-15, 3a8, gars onze Hh
kaamee purakh kaamnee pi-aaree. and the sexually promiscuous man who loves women and sex,
MAT oH UTS HTS MQM (1164-15, 3a@, sas one Hh) aisee naamay pareet muraaree. ||2]| just so, Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord. ||2||
Fret ulfS fa wmd we Il (1164-16, Sa@, sas onree Fh) Saa-ee pareet je aapay laa-ay. But that alone is real love, which the Lord Himself inspires;
Td usAet Sfaar AES Il (1164-16, 358, sas oHee AH gur parsaadee dubiDhaa jaa-ay. by Guru's Grace, duality is eradicated.
aay 6 Seta sour AHTE it (1164-16, 3a, sas ones FH) kabahu na tootas rahi-aa samaa-ay. Such love never breaks; through it, the mortal remains merged in the Lord.
on fas ofenr Afes of= ISI (1164-17, 338, sas see
naamay chit laa-i-aa sach naa-ay. ||3]| Naam Dayv has focused his consciousness on the True Name. ||3]|
AAT UlfS afax wig HST I (1164-17, Sa@, sas one Hh) jaisee pareet baarik ar maataa. Like the love between the child and its mother,
MAT dfs ASt HS IST I (1164-17, FaV, sa ee FH) aisaa har saytee man raataa. so is my mind imbued with the Lord.
yee SHES orait ulfS I (164-18, 358, sas see Hh) paranvai naamday-o laagee pareet. Prays Naam Dayv, I am in love with the Lord.
difse aA IHS BHS NSIAIDI (1164-18, 308, sas SNS Th)
gobid basai hamaarai cheet. ||4||1]|7]| The Lord of the Universe abides within my consciousness. ||4||1||7]||
we oft ofa fSurd iar il (164-18, 388, sas one At) ghar kee naar ti-aagai anDhaa. The blind fool abandons the wife of his own home,
Ua a9éu
ug ost fAG urs dor il (1165-1, 3eC, sas ose AH
par naaree si-o ghaalai DnhanDhaa. and has an affair with another woman.
AA fitaes of Ar faarArar II (1165-1, 33@, sas one Hh) jaisay simbal daykh soo-aa bigsaanaa. He is like the parrot, who is pleased to see the simbal tree;
Mis ot AT HT BUSTA UU (1165-1, Fae, gars ones Fh
ant kee baar moo-aa laptaanaa. ||1] | but in the end, he dies, stuck to it. ||1]|
unt @T We MAS HT Il (1165-2, SaC, sas oHeE Fh)
paapee kaa ghar agnay maahi. The home of the sinner is on fire.
Hos dd fees aa ats al TIE I (1165-2, 308, sas ane Th)
jalat rahai mitvai kab naahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. It keeps burning, and the fire cannot be extinguished. ||1]||Pause] |
ofa at sats 3 Se ATE I (1165-2, 3a, sas ane FH) har kee bhagat na daykhai jaa-ay. He does not go to see where the Lord is being worshipped.
Had efs wnrafa ute il 1165-3, 338, sas ane FH) maarag chhod amaarag paa-ay. He abandons the Lord's Path, and takes the wrong path.
HOT FH nis AVE I (1165-3, Fo, sas see A) moolhu bhoolaa aavai jaa-ay. He forgets the Primal Lord God, and is caught in the cycle of reincarnation.
nifys ofa ofe faa ute Qi (1165-3, 338, sas anes FH) amrit daar laad bikh khaa-ay. ||2]| He throws away the Ambrosial Nectar, and gathers poison to eat. ||2||
fAS Sy kus wrasse il (1165-4, 8s, gars ance Ft) ji-o baisvaa kay parai akhaaraa. He is like the prostitute, who comes to dance,
aug ufsts axats Atara I (165-4, 3a8, sas onze Fh) kaapar pahir karahi see“gaaraa. wearing beautiful clothes, decorated and adorned.
Ud 3S fess ATA Il (1165-4, 3G, sas one FH) pooray taal nihaalay saas. She dances to the beat, exciting the breath of those who watch her.
ZA TS AH AT SA IB (1165-5, 3a8, sas one FH) vaa kay galay jam kaa hai faas. ||3]| But the noose of the Messenger of Death is around her neck. ||3]|
a ad Haste fer aa Il (1165-5, 3a, sas see jaa kay mastak likhi-o karmaa. One who has good karma recorded on his forehead,
A afa ufs 3 ad ot Agar Il (1165-5, 308, sas ones A) so bhaj par hai gur kee sarnaa. hurries to enter the Guru's Sanctuary.
AIS SHES feg seg Il 1165-6, 398, sas anise Hh kahat naamday-o ih beechaar. Says Naam Dayv, consider this:
fee fafa Hag Cseg ute NSIQICH (1165-6, 338, sas oe Fh)
in biDh santahu utarahu paar. ||4]|2||8]| O Saints, this is the way to cross over to the other side. ||4||2]|8] |
Hat Haat ATE yaTs Il (1165-6, 3a8, sas anee AH) sandaa markaa jaa-ay pukaaray. Sanda and Marka went and complained to Harnaakhash,
us odt IN dt uf ag Il (1165-7, 388, sas ane FH) parhai nahee ham hee pach haaray. "Your son does not read his lessons. We are tired of trying to teach him.
TH Ad Ad 3H SHS Belt AS fears NU (1165-7, 3a8, sas one FH)
raam kahai kar taal bajaavai chatee-aa sabhai bigaaray. ||1]||
He chants the Lord's Name, clapping his hands to keep the beat; he has spoiled all the other students. ||1]|
oH oH Hfus ad Il (1165-7, 338, sas oe HA) raam naamaa japibo karai. He chants the Lord's Name,
fase ofa rt & fae od NU TIE Il (1165-8, 358, sas one FH) hirdai har jee ko simran Dharai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
and he has enshrined meditative remembrance of the Lord within his heart."||1]|Pause| |
anu aff atet As IH feast ad cast Il (1165-8, 3a, sas anes FH) basuDhaa bas keenee sabh raajay bintee karai patraanee. "Your father the king has conquered the whole world", said his mother the queen.
uz yfoee afar adt HS ffs 3B MiSs Sat II (1165-9, 3s, sas ane Fh poot par-hilaad kahi-aa nahee maanai tin ta-o a-urai thaanee. ||2]|
"O Prahlad my son, you do not obey him, so he has decided to deal with you in another way."| |2| |
ene AS fife H3a0 Curfeor agng mia wsdt Il 165-9, 338, sas one FH) dusat sabhaa mil mantar upaa-i-aa karsah a-oDh ghanayree. The council of villians met and resolved to send Prahlaad into the life hereafter.
fafs 33 Ae Hore Ss ote oa oh wfeor Sat SII (1165-10, 3a8, sas SHE Th)
gir tar jal ju-aalaa bhai raakhi-o raajaa raam maa-i-aa fayree. ||3]|
Prahlaad was thrown off a mountain, into the water, and into a fire, but the Sovereign Lord God saved him, by changing the laws of nature. ||3]|
afte usa ae 3 afuG xfs av FO Sfo TS Il (1165-10, 358, sas ane Th)
kaadh kharhag kaal bhai kopi-o mohi bataa-o jo tuhi raakhai.
Harnaakhash thundered with rage and threatened to kill Prahlaad. "Tell me, who can save you?"
uls ulstag fgsee cat ds ofa of sre ell (165-11, 338, sas onee FH)
peet peetaa™bar taribhavan Dhanee thambh maahi har bhaakhai. ||4]|
Prahlaad answered, "The Lord, the Master of the three worlds, is contained even in this pillar to which I am tied."||4] |
Jdoun fate ous fares afs og Ate Hoa Il (1165-12, 308, sas see Hh) harnaakhas jin nakhah bidaari-o sur nar kee-ay sanaathaa.
The Lord who tore Harnaakhash apart with His nails proclaimed Himself the Lord of gods and men.
afs oHee oH odefe fred IH MIS US BST NUNS (165-12, 388, sas eS A)
kahi naamday-o ham narhar Dhi-aaveh raam abhai pad daataa. ||5]|3]|9|| Says Naam Dayv, I meditate on the Lord, the Man-lion, the Giver of fearless dignity. HS1I31191]
HOSS Ys AS F SH Il (1165-13, 39@, sas anes Ft) sultaan poochhai sun bay naamaa. The Sultan said, "Listen, Naam Dayv:
SUG TH SHS AH MAUI (1165-13, 358, sas oe Ah daykh-a-u raam tum"aaray kaamaa. ||1|| let me see the actions of your Lord."||1]|
SH HBSS Stas Il (1165-13, 3a8, sas see naamaa sultaanay baaDhilaa. The Sultan arrested Naam Dayv,
aus 3a ofa sos Vl TIS Il (1165-14, SaC, sas sne= FH) daykh-a-u tayraa har beethulaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. and said, "Let me see your Beloved Lord."||1]|Pause| |
fanfifs aS eg Atete i (1165-14, sa, saz anes Ht) bismil ga-oo dayh jeevaa-ay. "Bring this dead cow back to life.
Sg Wdete HGS STE WI (1165-14, SsC, sas one FH) naatar gardan maara-o thaa™-ay. ||2|| Otherwise, I shall cut off your head here and now."||2||
afer mrt fore df i (1165-15, 338, sas SHS FH) baadisaah aisee ki-o ho-ay. Naam Dayv answered, "O king, how can this happen?
fanfifs aur a Ate af 13 (1165-15, 338, sas ones At bismil kee-aa na jeevai ko-ay. ||3]| No one can bring the dead back to life. ||3]|
Ha ahr aE o TE il (1165-15, 33, sas ones Ft) mayraa kee-aa kachhoo na ho-ay. I cannot do anything by my own actions.
afa J oy dfs J ALE ISI (1165-16, 358, sas SNR Ah kar hai raam ho-ay hai so-ay. ||4|| Whatever the Lord does, that alone happens."||4| |
afer sae nidarta il (1165-16, 338, sas aes FH) baadisaahu charh"i-o aha"kaar. The arrogant king was enraged at this reply.
da JASt He vHorfe lull 1165-16, 3a, sas onze At
gaj hastee deeno chamkaar. ||5|| He incited an elephant to attack. ||5||
JeO Ad BH at HE Il 1165-17, 358, gas ane Ah rudan karai naamay kee maa-ay. Naam Dayv's mother began to cry,
efs aH at 3 safo wee EN (1165-17, 308, sas BNE Th) chhod raam kee na bhajeh khudaa-ay. ||6||
and she said, "Why don't you abandon your Lord Raam, and worship his Lord Allah?"||6]|
3 UG sa Vast 3 J ASt HAS Il 1165-17, Fae, sas ones Fh na ha-o tayraa poo‘garhaa na too mayree maa-ay. Naam Dayv answered, "I am not your son, and you are not my mother.
fiz us 38 fs ae ae DN (165-18, 388, sas ones Ah pind parhai ta-o har gun gaa-ay. ||7|| Even if my body dies, I will still sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord."||7]||
ad THe AS at SS Il (1165-18, 358, sas anes Ah karai gajind sund kee chot. The elephant attacked him with his trunk,
ont Gud ofa at Ge Iti (1165-18, 358, sas oS Ah
naamaa ubrai har kee ot. ||8]| but Naam Dayv was saved, protected by the Lord. ||8]||
AH HOt AsI ABH Il (1165-19, saC, sas snree Ft) kaajee mulaa™ karahi salaam. The king said, "The Qazis and the Mullahs bow down to me,
fefs foe Hat Hfemr HT ICI (1165-19, FG, sas oUee Ft) in hindoo mayraa mali-aa maan. ||9|| but this Hindu has trampled my honor."||9]|
WEA Fost HST Il (1165-19, Ss@, sas onee FH) baadisaah bayntee sunayhu. The people pleaded with the king, "Hear our prayer, O king.
Us WE
OH Ad Sfs Aart ST IIOll (1166-1, 3a, sas nee FH) naamay sar bhar sonaa layho. ||10|| Here, take Naam Dayv's weight in gold, and release him."||10]|
He BE 38 enfa ug Il (1166-1, 358, sas anes Ah maal lay-o ta-o dojak para-o. The king replied, "If I take the gold, then I will be consigned to hell,
ae efs voor aS sa NA (1166-1, 358, sas one Fh) deen chhod dunee-aa ka-o bhara-o. ||11]| by forsaking my faith and gathering worldly wealth."||11]|
ued Fat TAT 3 Il (1166-2, Sa8, sas onze FH) paavhu bayrhee haathhu taal. With his feet in chains, Naam Dayv kept the beat with his hands,
SH We TS AUB IAI (1166-2, Sa, sas ane wh) naamaa gaavai gun gopaal. ||12| | singing the Praises of the Lord. ||12]|
ddl HHO AE Cuet ad Il (1166-2, 38, sas one FH) gang jamun ja-o ultee bahai. "Even if the Ganges and the Jamunaa rivers flow backwards,
38 aor afe ATS IT NII (1166-2, 358, sas aH Ht) ta-o naamaa har kartaa rahai. ||13]| I will still continue singing the Praises of the Lord."||13]|
AS west Fa stSt Het I (1166-3, 3eC, sas one FH)
saat gharhee jab beetee sunee. Three hours passed,
wag 6 utes fysze det NII (1166-3, 398, saS THE FH) ajahu na aa-i-o taribhavan Dhanee. ||14|| and even then, the Lord of the three worlds had not come. ||14]|
UESS BH SAE Il 1166-3, 3aV, sas ane Ft) paakhantan baaj bajaa-ilaa. Playing on the instrument of the feathered wings,
des vs adfse urfear quill c1is6-4, 3a, sas anise FH) garurh charh"ay gobind aa-ilaa. ||15]| the Lord of the Universe came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||15||
nud sas ule at yfsure il (1166-4, 338, sas ones Ft) apnay bhagat par kee partipaal. He cherished His devotee,
TIS VS oS TUS AEM (1166-4, Fa, sas onve FH) garurh charh"ay aa-ay gopaal. ||16]| and the Lord came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||16]|
ats 3 Use feast ag Il 1166-5, 358, sas ones Ah kaheh ta Dharan ikodee kara-o. The Lord said to him, "If you wish, I shall turn the earth sideways.
add 3% ats Gufs aS NWI c1i66-5, Fa, sas anes Ht) kaheh ta lay kar oopar Dhara-o. ||17]|| If you wish, I shall turn it upside down. ||17]|
ads 3 Het TS SS horfe i (1166-5, sa, sas onze Fh kaheh ta mu-ee ga-oo day-o jee-aa-ay. If you wish, I shall bring the dead cow back to life.
Ag aet Se ustorfe NAc Il (1166-6, 3a, sas anes 7) sabh ko-ee daykhai patee-aa-ay. ||18] | Everyone will see and be convinced."||18] |
OH! USS AG HAS Il (1166-6, 3a@, sas SHE FH) naamaa paranvai sayl masayl. Naam Dayv prayed, and milked the cow.
as eoet gS ATS NACI (1166-6, 338, sas see FH) ga-oo duhaa-ee bachhraa mayl. ||19]| He brought the calf to the cow, and milked her. ||19]|
vue afs Wa Heat Sat I (1166-7, Sa, sas see Fh dooDheh duhi jab matukee bharee. When the pitcher was filled with milk,
B MEAT & nia Tat WOM (1166-7, 3a@, sas snes Fh) lay baadisaah kay aagay Dharee. ||20]| Naam Dayv took it and placed it before the king. ||20]||
MteAT HIG Hid ATE Il (1166-7, a, sas SH FH) baadisaahu mahal meh jaa-ay. The king went into his palace,
m@ue at we walt MME NIA (1166-8, Sa8, as Ses Fh)
a-ughat kee ghat laagee aa-ay. ||21]| and his heart was troubled. ||21]|
aH Hot fest SIHTE Il (1166-8, SeC, sas sree FH) kaajee mulaa™ bintee furmaa-ay. Through the Qazis and the Mullahs, the king offered his prayer,
aut foe H Fat AE QI 166-8, 33S, sas one Ht) bakhsee hindoo mai tayree gaa-ay. ||22|| "Forgive me, please, O Hindu; I am just a cow before you."||22| |
SH ad Hod SEAT Il (1166-9, 3a, sas aH TH) naamaa kahai sunhu baadisaah. Naam Dayv said, "Listen, O king:
feg fae ustor 1S feerfe 12311 (1166-9, 3a8, sas ane th) ih kichh patee-aa mujhai dikhaa-ay. ||23]| have I done this miracle? ||23]||
fen usior at fed usa Il (1166-9, 358, sas ones Ah is patee-aa kaa ihai parvaan. The purpose of this miracle is
AtS Ale eT ASS WQSIl (1166-10, SaS, sas snHee Hh
saach seel chaalahu sulitaan. ||24]| that you, O king, should walk on the path of truth and humility."||24] |
SHES AS Sfont AHTE Il (1166-10, 358, sas one FH) naamday-o sabh rahi-aa samaa-ay. Naam Dayv became famous everywhere for this.
fife foe As oH ufo AT QUI (1166-10, Fs, sas oHee Ft) mil hindoo sabh naamay peh jaahi. ||25] | The Hindus all went together to Naam Dayv. ||25]|
ag na at ag o He aM Il ci66-u1, 38, sas ane ZH) ja-o ab kee baar na jeevai gaa-ay. If the cow had not been revived,
3 OHSS A UST ATE NEI (166-11, 358, saT OS Fh) ta naamdayv kaa patee-aa jaa-ay. ||26]|| people would have lost faith in Naam Dayv. ||26||
on at atefs adt AAS I (1166-11, 308, sas aNee A naamay kee keerat rahee sansaar. The fame of Naam Dayv spread throughout the world.
sas Hot SB Bufanr ufs QD il (1166-12, ss@, sas ane Fh) bhagat janaa™ lay uDhri-aa paar. ||27]| The humble devotees were saved and carried across with him. ||27]||
Hale AGH fSea sfeor Be il 166-12, 3e8, sas anree FH) sagal kalays nindak bha-i-aa khayd. All sorts of troubles and pains afflicted the slanderer.
OH SSeS ST SF MACWAUIAO Ml (1166-12, 3s, sas oHee AH
naamay naaraa-in naahee bhayd. ||28||1]|10]| There is no difference between Naam Dayv and the Lord. ||28]|1]|10]|
WI 2 Il (1166-13) ghar 2. Second House:
AG qe 3 AHS HOTS II (1166-13, 358, sas oN Th ja-o gurday-o ta milai muraar. By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one meets the Lord.
Ag ase 3 sd ute Il 166-13, 358, sas ane Th ja-o gurday-o ta utrai paar. By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one is carried across to the other side.
AG TIES 3 HAS 3d Il (1166-14, 358, sas anes AH ja-o gurday-o ta baikunth tarai. By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one swims across to heaven.
AG ase F Hes He NU (1166-14, 3a8, sas oNHee FH)
ja-o gurday-o ta jeevat marai. ||1||
By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one remains dead while yet alive. ||1]| Afs Afs Afs AfS AS TIeS Il (1166-14, SeC, sas aneee FH)
sat sat sat sat sat gurdayv. True, True, True True, True is the Divine Guru.
3S JO 3S Fo nls AS AZ UU TIS ll 1166-15, FaS, sas anes Hh jhooth jhooth jhooth jhooth aan sabh sayv. ||1|| rahaa-o. False, false, false, false is all other service. ||1]|Pause]|
AG Tse 3 aM fess II (1166-15, 358, sas oN Fh)
ja-o gurday-o ta naam darirh-aavai.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is implanted within.
AG ase 6 td fen WS I (1166-15, 358, sas aN TH) ja-o gurday-o na dah dis Dhaavai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not wander in the ten directions.
AG TINS us 3 Efe Il (1166-16, FG, sas one FH) ja-o gurday-o panch tay door. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the five demons are kept far away.
AG Tes 3 Hfsa Ss iM (166-16, 3s, sas se Fh ja-o gurday-o na maribo jhoor. ||2]| When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not die regretting. ||2] |
AG Tes J vifys seat i (1166-16, 35@, sas ae FH)
ja-o gurday-o ta amrit baanee.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is blessed with the Ambrosial Bani of the Word.
AG TIeS J naa ATot Il (1166-17, ssC, sas oe FH) ja-o gurday-o ta akath kahaanee. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one speaks the Unspoken Speech.
AG Tse SF vifts ST il 166-17, 398, sas ne Ah ja-o gurday-o ta amrit dayh. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body becomes like ambrosial nectar.
AG Tes oH Aly Ss ISI (1166-17, 358, sas SHS AH
ja-O gurday-o naam jap layhi. ||3]|
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one utters and chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
AG Tes seq J AS Il (1166-18, 39, sas one Ff) ja-o gurday-o bhavan tarai soojhai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one sees the three worlds.
AG qses Su ue Fs Il (1106-18, 3a, sas ane Fh
ja-o gurday-o ooch pad boojhai.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the state of supreme dignity.
AG TseS 3 AMA MATA I (1166-18, 338, sas oe
ja-o gurday-o ta sees akaas. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's head is in the Akaashic ethers.
AG TIeS Ae ATATHH ISI (1166-19, 3a, sas one Hh)
ja-O gurday-o sadaa saabaas. ||4|| When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is always congratulated everywhere. [141]
AG ade Het Sait i (1166-19, Fa8, sas oe FH) ja-o gurday-o sadaa bairaagee. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one remains detached forever.
Ag Tse us fee favre i (1166-19, 3a@, sas onze Ah ja-o gurday-o par nindaa ti-aagee. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one forsakes the slander of others.
ust AIED
AG Tes FI FH SA Il (1167-1, 3a8, sas onze HH ja-o gurday-o buraa bhalaa ayk. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one looks upon good and bad as the same.
AG Tse foorefs Se Wull (1167-1, ss@, sas onze FH) ja-o gurday-o lilaateh laykh. ||5]| When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has good destiny written on his forehead.
[5] |
Ag ase ag odt fad Il (1167-1, 358, sas anes Ah ja-o gurday-o kanDh nahee hirai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the wall of the body is not eroded.
AG gee saa fed il (1167-1, 358, sas anes Ah ja-o gurday-o dayhuraa firai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the temple turns itself towards the mortal.
AG TseS 3 sufs set Il (1167-2, 308, sas one Hh ja-o gurday-o ta chhaapar chhaa-ee. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's home is constructed.
AG Tse fron fearret MEI (1167-2, 338, sas ones AH ja-o gurday-o sihaj niksaa-ee. ||6|| When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's bed is lifted up out of the water. ||6| |
AG TIeS J nOAfS Ser Il (1167-2, seG, sas onHVe= FH)
ja-o gurday-o ta athsath naa-i-aa.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
AG TseS 3fo va Sarfeor Il (1167-3, saC, sas se FH)
ja-o gurday-o tan chakar lagaa-i-aa.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body is stamped with the sacred mark of Vishnu.
AG TIeS J EMEA AST Il (1167-3, Sa8, sas ave
ja-o gurday-o ta du-aadas sayvaa.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has performed the twelve devotional services.
AG qse@ AS fay AS IDI (1167-3, 358, sas ane Th) ja-o gurday-o sabhai bikh mayvaa. ||7]|| When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, all poison is transformed into fruit. ||7]|
AG qses J AA SS Il (1167-4, 39@, sas onee FH) ja-o gurday-o ta sansaa tootai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, skepticism is shattered.
AG Tes FAH SF we Il (1167-4, 398, sas ones A) ja-o gurday-o ta jam tay chhootai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one escapes from the Messenger of Death.
AG ase 3 SCHG Sg Il (1167-4, 3a8, sas aNIS FH) ja-o gurday-o ta bha-ojal tarai. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
AG ase J Hah o He ICI (1167-5, 358, sas anes AH
ja-O gurday-o ta janam na marai. ||8] |
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is not subject to the cycle of reincarnation. ||8]||
AG TIeS nioen ABTS Il (1167-5, SeC, sas oNHe= FH)
ja-o gurday-o ath-das bi-uhaar.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the rituals of the eighteen Puraanas.
AG TIES nls SS Il (1167-5, aC, sas oes AH
ja-o gurday-o athaarah bhaar.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, it is as if one has made an offering of the eighten loads of vegetation.
fag TdeS nied odt AT I (1167-6, S58, sas ane FH) bin gurday-o avar nahee jaa-ee. When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one needs no other place of rest.
SHES Td at ATSTET MENAUQNAUI (1167-6, FsC, sas oHee Fh)
naamday-o gur kee sarnaa-ee. ||9||1||2||11]| Naam Dayv has entered the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||9]|1]|2]|11]|
338 sat afer FIG at we 2 (1167-7) bhairo banee ravidaas jee-o kee ghar 2 Bhairao, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee, Second House:
qe Afsars ure il (1167-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fas 2a Cun Sdt wTAT I (1167-8, 308, saz afeerA Th bin daykhay upjai nahee aasaa. Without seeing something, the yearning for it does not arise.
a tA A dfe fear I (1167-8, S88, sas afer At jo deesai so ho-ay binaasaa. Whatever is seen, shall pass away.
ado Afys HAT OH Il (1167-8, 308, sas ofeerH Ah baran sahit jo jaapai naam. Whoever chants and praises the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
A Hat ae fagany All (1167-8, 33, sas afer Ah So jogee kayval nihkaam. ||1|| is the true Yogi, free of desire. ||1]|
Udd TH Je AG aet Il (1167-9, 358, sas seen Ah parchai raam ravai ja-o ko-ee. When someone utters the Name of the Lord with love,
UTSH UGA Bfaa os Jet NA TIS Il (1167-9, 358, sas see Ah paaras parsai dubiDhaa na ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
it is as if he has touched the philosopher's stone; his sense of duality is eradicated. ||1]|Pause] |
A nfs no ot efaor ute | (1167-9, 308, sas afer Th) sO mun man kee dubiDhaa khaa-ay. He alone is a silent sage, who destroys the duality of his mind.
fag eurd 3 Ba ANTE I (1167-10, 358, sas TEA FH) bin du-aaray tarai lok samaa-ay. Keeping the doors of his body closed, he merges in the Lord of the three worlds.
Ho a ASS As aet aM Il (1167-10, 308, sas see Ah man kaa subhaa-o sabh ko-ee karai. Everyone acts according to the inclinations of the mind.
ads fe A mss Fd NII (1167-10, 388, sas see Ah kartaa ho-ay so anbhai rahai. ||2|| Attuned to the Creator Lord, one remains free of fear. ||2] |
SG AGS SH FIT Il 1167-11, Fa, sas sheen Hh) fal kaaran foolee banraa-ay. Plants blossom forth to produce fruit.
So oa sa SG fret ii (1167-11, 338, sas afeen Fh) fal laagaa tab fool bilaa-ay. When the fruit is produced, the flowers wither away.
fom asa AeH wifsmreA il (1167-11, 308, sas sfeera th gi-aanai kaaran karam abhi-aas. For the sake of spiritual wisdom, people act and practice rituals.
famig sfent 3d AHI BA III (1167-12, 3e8, sas afer FH) gi-aan bha-i-aa tah karmah naas. ||3]| When spiritual wisdom wells up, then actions are left behind. ||3]|
flys arse efa we AfEors II (1167-12, 338, sas afeen Ft) gharit kaaran daDh mathai sa-i-aan. For the sake of ghee, wise people churn milk.
Hes HAS Ae fesse Il (1167-12, 338, sas sfeea Hh
jeevat mukat sadaa nirbaan.
Those who are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive - are forever in the state of Nirvaanaa.
afs aferA USH AIT Il (1167-13, 3a@, sas sfeen At)
kahi ravidaas param bairaag. Says Ravi Daas, O you unfortunate people,
foe ony at & AUfA MISTE ISI (1167-13, 3a, sas sfeerA Tt) ridai raam kee na japas abhaag. ||4||1|| why not meditate on the Lord with love in your heart? ||4]|1]|
SHU Il (1167-13) naamdayv. Naam Dayv:
mG ABET AAS Il (1167-14, 3a8, sas onze wh) aa-o kalandar kaysvaa. Come, O Lord of beautiful hair,
ats wMaeTSt SAST I TIS il (1167-14, 3aC, sas anise Hh) kar abdaalee bhaysvaa. rahaa-o. wearing the robes of a Sufi Saint. ||Pause| |
fafs oro awd fafs atet aBA AUS UGE I (1167-14, 338, sas oTHeS FH)
jin aakaas kulah sir keenee ka-usai sapat pa-yaalaa. Your cap is the realm of the Akaashic ethers; the seven nether worlds are Your sandals.
oud UA ot Hes So fea fafa ss TUT IA (1167-15, 358, sas ane Ah
chamar pos kaa mandar tayraa ih biDh banay gupaalaa. ||1|| The body covered with skin is Your temple; You are so beautiful, O Lord of the World.
[21
Bus afe a ude Sa Awd AOA feAS Il (1167-15, 3a8, sas SNE Th) chhapan kot kaa payhan tayraa solah sahas ijaaraa. The fifty-six million clouds are Your gowns, the 16,000 milkmaids are your skirts.
ST MSI HUT SI Ado AS AAS Ill (1167-16, 3a, sas SHE rh)
bhaar athaarah mudgar tayraa sahnak sabh sansaaraa. ||2|| The eighteen loads of vegetation is Your stick, and all the world is Your plate. ||2]|
oot Hofafe Ho Hews HoH fee TAS Il (1167-16, 3a, sas Ve FH)
dayhee mehjid man ma-ulaanaa sahj nivaaj gujaarai.
The human body is the mosque, and the mind is the priest, who peacefully leads the prayer.
at aGer AS afee Sa fedarg rad BI (1167-17, 3a, sas STE FH) beebee ka-ulaa sa-o kaa-in tayraa nirankaar aakaarai. ||3]| You are married to Maya, O Formless Lord, and so You have taken form. ||3]|
sats ads AS 3S feos fag ufy aIS yars Il (1167-17, 3a8, sas see Fh)
bhagat karat mayray taal chhinaa-ay kih peh kara-o pukaaraa.
Performing devotional worship services to You, my cymbals were taken away; unto whom should I complain?
oH a AMM niger fed Aare SPAS SIA (1167-18, 388, sas one Fh)
naamay kaa su-aamee antarjaamee firay sagal baydaysvaa. ||4||1]|
Naam Dayv's Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, wanders everywhere; He has no specific home. ||4||1]|
Us qVét
TI FAS HIS Wwe 9 BeuE ESS (1168-1) raag basant mehlaa 1 ghar 1 cha-upday dutukay Raag Basant, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas, Du-Tukas:
9B ATS on aes usy fossa faseg nieve Hats mist AS aT YATE I 68-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
HO HTS HHSat Uist Het SAS Il (1168-4, ws, He 1) maahaa maah mumaarkhee charhi-aa sadaa basant. Among the months, blessed is this month, when spring always comes.
udges fos nafs Afe wet Het afHeS NAN (1168-4, as, He 1)
parfarh chit samaal so-ay sadaa sadaa gobind. ||1]||
Blossom forth, O my consciousness, contemplating the Lord of the Universe, forever and ever. ||1]|
Sfomr GH Aefs ferrfe Il (68-5, a3, He 1) bholi-aa ha-umai surat visaar. O ignorant one, forget your egotistical intellect.
JH uf dtofs Ho ae fefs qe & fs NA TIC Il ci6s-5, wis, He 1
ha-umai maar beechaar man gun vich gun lai saar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Subdue your ego, and contemplate Him in your mind; gather in the virtues of the Sublime, Virtuous Lord. ||1||Pause] |
aH US Anat Jet UH SG SG famrs Il (1168-6, wis, uz 1)
karam payd saakhaa haree Dharam ful fal gi-aan.
Karma is the tree, the Lord's Name the branches, Dharmic faith the flowers, and spiritual wisdom the fruit.
us usufs are wet Yar Ho MSHS MII (1168-6, aH, He 1) pat paraapat chhaav ghanee chookaa man abhimaan. ||2||
Realization of the Lord are the leaves, and eradication of the pride of the mind is the shade. ||2||
mot avefs xot aret Hf nimde AU OH Il (1168-7, HS, He 1)
akhee kudrat kannee banee mukh aakhan sach naam.
Whoever sees the Lord's Creative Power with his eyes, and hears the Guru's Bani with his ears, and utters the True Name with his mouth,
ufs a ug Ua dor war Hata fore lS cics-7, wy, Hs 1) pat kaa Dhan pooraa ho-aa laagaa sahj Dhi-aan. ||3]|| attains the perfect wealth of honor, and intuitively focuses his meditation on the Lord.
[I3I|
Hd gst niteat Sug ATH AHS Il (1168-8, wy, He 1) maahaa rutee aavnaa vaykhhu karam kamaa-ay. The months and the seasons come; see, and do your deeds.
Sat Ud 5 Hat fa TeHfe gd ANTS Sal Cic8-8, ay, H2 1)
naanak haray na sookhee je gurmukh rahay samaa-ay. ||4||1]|
O Nanak, those Gurmukhs who remain merged in the Lord do not wither away; they remain green forever. ||4]|1||
HIS V SAS Ill (1168-9)
mehlaa 1 basant. First Mehl, Basant:
ofS mre AGA SHS Hf Il (1168-9, sts, He 1) rut aa-eelay saras basant maahi. The season of spring, so delightful, has come.
dfa as sefs fk 3d TE I ci6s-9, aig, He 1) rang raatay raveh se tayrai chaa-ay. Those who are imbued with love for You, O Lord, chant Your Name with joy.
fon uA Bae BAG ute All (1168-10, ay, He 1) kis pooj charhaava-o laga-o paa-ay. ||1]|| Whom else should I worship? At whose feet should I bow? ||1]|
ST UALS SA AIG TE Il (1168-10, wis, He 1)
tayraa daasan daasaa kaha-o raa-ay. I am the slave of Your slaves, O my Sovereign Lord King.
Hales Hats & fs af an TIS Il 168-10, ais, Hs jagjeevan jugat na milai kaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Life of the Universe, there is no other way to meet You. ||1||Pause]|
sot Hats Sar BTZ FU Il 1168-11, ay, He 1)
tayree moorat aykaa bahut roop. You have only One Form, and yet You have countless forms.
fon uA Bares SS gu it (1168-11, a3, He 1) kis pooj charhaava-o day-o Dhoop. Which one should I worship? Before which one should I burn incense?
37 nis 6 ufeor aot uf I (68-11, fz, He 1) tayraa ant na paa-i-aa kahaa paa-ay. Your limits cannot be found. How can anyone find them?
ST GAS SH AIG TE QM (1168-12, wis, He 1) tayraa daasan daasaa kaha-o raa-ay. ||2|| I am the slave of Your slaves, O my Sovereign Lord King. ||2]|
3d Afs Has Afs Steer Il (1168-12, ats, He 1) tayray sath sambat sabh teerthaa. The cycles of years and the places of pilgrimage are Yours, O Lord.
3d Ag OH USHA Il (1168-13, ats, Hs 1) tayraa sach naam parmaysraa. Your Name is True, O Transcendent Lord God.
oot afs mifeats adt wet I 68-13, ats, He 1) tayree gat avigat nahee jaanee-ai. Your State cannot be known, O Eternal, Unchanging Lord God.
MEMES SH TUTEM ISI (1168-13, ahs, He 1) anjaanat naam vakhaanee-ai. ||3]| Although You are unknown, still we chant Your Name. |[3]|
SOA SUS fort aT Il (1168-14, aHy, He 1) naanak vaychaaraa ki-aa kahai. What can poor Nanak say?
AS BA AGT SAA Il (1168-14, ay, ue 1) sabh lok salaahay ayksai. All people praise the One Lord.
fig soa Bat urs T il (1168-14, ats, we 1) sir naanak lokaa paav hai. Nanak places his head on the feet of such people.
afsodt WE AS 3d aS TJ NINN (1168-14, ats, He 1) balihaaree jaa-o jaytay tayray naav hai. ||4||2|| I am a Sacrifice to Your Names, as many as there are, O Lord. ||4||2]|
SHS HIS 4 Il (1168-15) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
Hfes at wBar ae ANI Il (1168-15, HHS, Hz 1) su-inay kaa cha-ukaa kanchan ku-aar. The kitchen is golden, and the cooking pots are golden.
gu ahr ara aos faAErg Il (1168-15, ws, He 1) rupay kee-aa kaaraa bahut bisthaar. The lines marking the cooking square are silver.
dar at eg ads at orfar |i (1168-16, wis, He 1) gangaa kaa udak karantay kee aag. The water is from the Ganges, and the firewood is sanctified.
aga urat eu fA ats All (1i6s-16, sts, Hs 1) garurhaa khaanaa duDh si-o gaad. ||1]| The food is soft rice, cooked in milk. ||1]|
3 Ho BH aa 3 UTE Il (1168-16, wg, He 1) ray man laykhai kabhoo na paa-ay. O my mind, these things are worthless,
Uar ae wh 3 sta AS ote an TIS I (1169-1, ats, we 1)
jaam na bheejai saach naa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. if you are not drenched with the True Name. ||1]||Pause] |
TA nis ote defo uth i (1169-1, afg, He 1) das ath leekhay hoveh paas. One may have the eighteen Puraanas written in his own hand;
ad Se Hua UTS Il (1169-1, sy, He 1) chaaray bayd mukhaagar paath. he may recite the four Vedas by heart,
usat oe Zdot at ets I (1169-2, ag, He 1) purbee naavai varnaa™ kee daat. and take ritual baths at holy festivals and give charitable donations;
ZdIS OH Ad fee TS IQ (1169-2, sty, He 1) varat naym karay din raat. ||2] | he may observe the ritual fasts, and perform religious ceremonies day and night. ||2||
at Het defs AY Il (1169-2, as, Hs kaajee mulaa™ hoveh saykh. He may be a Qazi, a Mullah or a Shaykh,
Adit HAH Fae Se Il (1169-3, ats, He 1) jogee jangam bhagvay bhaykh. a Yogi or a wandering hermit wearing saffron-colored robes;
ot farsdt aout oft Af i) (1169-3, ats, He 1) ko girhee karmaa kee sanDh. he may be a householder, working at his job;
fas 33 As ustofh sfo WS ci69-3, wz, He 1)
bin boojhay sabh kharhee-as banDh. ||3]||
but without understanding the essence of devotional worship, all people are eventually bound and gagged, and driven along by the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
AS Aba fedt fAfs ars il (1169-3, ais, He 1) jaytay jee-a likhee sir kaar. Each person's karma is written on his forehead.
adat Gufs defar ATS Il (1169-4, ats, He 1) karnee upar hovag saar. According to their deeds, they shall be judged.
JOH Adfo HSH WT Il (1169-4, ws, He 1) hukam karahi moorakh gaavaar. Only the foolish and the ignorant issue commands.
Soa Ard & feefs Fag SUSI (1169-4, ws, He 1 naanak saachay kay sifat bhandaar. ||4]|3]| O Nanak, the treasure of praise belongs to the True Lord alone. ||4]||3]|
SHS HIS 3 StAT Il (1169-5)
basant mehlaa 3 teejaa. Basant, Third Mehl:
ang Gare featag da il (169-5, wiz, Hs 3) bastar utaar digambar hog. A person may take off his clothes and be naked.
Aematg fot SHS AAT Il (1169-5, as, He 3) jataaDhaar ki-aa kamaavai jog. What Yoga does he practice by having matted and tangled hair?
Ho fSdHe odt PAS ITs Il (1169-6, ss, He 3) man nirmal nahee dasvai du-aar. If the mind is not pure, what use is it to hold the breath at the Tenth Gate?
gf afk mre Hat ag ST UI (1169-6, aA, He 3) bharam bharam aavai moorh"aa vaaro vaar. ||1|| The fool wanders and wanders, entering the cycle of reincarnation again and again.
[21
Sa fomreg HX Hot Il (1169-6, ay, He 3) ayk Dhi-aavahu moorh" manaa. Meditate on the One Lord, O my foolish mind,
ug G3fe ata fea fast 1d TIS Il (1169-7, sty, He 3) paar utar jaahi ik khinaa™. ||1|| rahaa-o. and you shall cross over to the other side in an instant. ||1]|Pause| |
fAfyfs AAS aats Sfimre i (1169-7, wis, He 3)
simrit saastar karahi vakhi-aan. Some recite and expound on the Simritees and the Shaastras;
Soret Het usa UTE Il (1169-7, wy, us 3) naadee baydee parh"ahi puraan. some sing the Vedas and read the Puraanas;
unds fenfe ufs aue anf Il (1169-8, wis, Hs 3) pakhand darisat man kapat kamaahi. but they practice hypocrisy and deception with their eyes and minds.
fo a Heer Sfs ofs II (169-8, ss, He 3) tin kai rama-ee-aa nayrh naahi. ||2| | The Lord does not even come near them. |[2||
A a MAT Amt af I (169-8, as, He 3) jay ko aisaa sanjmee ho-ay. Even if someone practices such self-discipline,
fgur fer UAT ASE Il (1169-9, ats, He 3) kir-aa visaykh poojaa karay-i. compassion and devotional worship
nists SF Ho fafimr arfo II (1169-9, a3, He 3) antar lobh man bikhi-aa maahi. - if he is filled with greed, and his mind is engrossed in corruption,
6fe fade aA uta Sil (169-9, afz, He 3) o-ay niranjan kaisay paahi. ||3]| how can he find the Immaculate Lord? ||3]|
otst dur ad for df= il ci69-9, az, He 3) keetaa ho-aa karay ki-aa ho-ay. What can the created being do?
fan 3 urfy gore APE I (1169-10, aig, He 3) jis no aap chalaa-ay so-ay. The Lord Himself moves him.
eld Ad 3t SIH FATS Il (1169-10, wy, ue 3) nadar karay taa’ bharam chukaa-ay. If the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then his doubts are dispelled.
TAH FS St ATS UTS |Wil (1169-10, wy, Hs 3)
hukmai boojhai taa’ saachaa paa-ay. ||4]|
If the mortal realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he obtains the True Lord. [141]
fan HG vise Hor SfE I 169-11, ats, He 3) jis jee-o antar mailaa ho-ay. If someone's soul is polluted within,
stea s2 fersg SfF Il (1169-11, a3, He 3)
tirath bhavai disantar lo-ay. what is the use of his traveling to sacred shrines of pilgrimage all over the world?
Soe fesha Afsargs AaT il (1169-11, aig, He 3) naanak milee-ai satgur sang. O Nanak, when one joins the Society of the True Guru,
38 Sens A SefA AT MUNI (1169-12, HAE, He 3) ta-o bhavjal kay tootas banDh. ||5||4]| then the bonds of the terrifying world-ocean are broken. ||5||4||
SHS HIS Y Il (1169-12) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
Hae Seo Sot ufeor Hg Il (1169-12, ats, we 1) sagal bhavan tayree maa-i-aa moh. All the worlds have been fascinated and enchanted by Your Maya, O Lord.
x x bon] 6
H nied 6 CIA Aga 37 Il (1169-12, ws, He 1)
mai avar na deesai sarab toh.
I do not see any other at all - You are everywhere.
3 Afe oer Ger Sz I (1169-13, ay, He 1) too sur naathaa dayvaa dayv. You are the Master of Yogis, the Divinity of the divine.
dfs on fies TT VIS AS WAU (1169-13, ss, He 1) har naam milai gur charan sayv. ||1]| Serving at the Guru's Feet, the Name of the Lord is received. ||1]|
Hd Hed asd ast BS Il (1169-13, wis, He 1) mayray sundar gahir gambheer laal. O my Beauteous, Deep and Profound Beloved Lord.
Tse TH SH To We J wudug Aga US AU TIS Il (1169-14, wey, we 1) gurmukh raam naam gun gaa-ay too aprampar sarab paal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name. You are Infinite, the Cherisher of all. ||1]|Pause] |
fas AT 3 ured ofs a AT Il (1169-14, as, He 1) bin saaDh na paa-ee-ai har kaa sang. Without the Holy Saint, association with the Lord is not obtained.
faa Td HS Hote via Il (1169-15, ay, He 1D bin gur mail maleen ang. Without the Guru, one's very fiber is stained with filth.
faa ofe ont 3 AG OE Il (1169-15, ats, He 1) bin har naam na suDh ho-ay. Without the Lord's Name, one cannot become pure.
ad Aafe AB ATT AE QM (1169-15, ay, He 1 gur sabad salaahay saach so-ay. ||2|| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, sing the Praises of the True Lord. ||2]|
W aS 3 Tafy TUsdg Il (1169-16, a#3, He 1) jaa ka-o too raakhahi rakhanhaar. O Savior Lord, that person whom You have saved
Afsag fuerets aats ATT II (1169-16, ats, He 1) satguroo milaaveh karahi saar. - You lead him to meet the True Guru, and so take care of him.
fag JGH HHS UsTITE I 1169-16, a3, He 1) bikh ha-umai mamtaa parahraa-ay. You take away his poisonous egotism and attachment.
Afs gy faa oH THE SI (1169-17, ats, He 1) sabh dookh binaasay raam raa-ay. ||3]| You dispel all his sufferings, O Sovereign Lord God. ||3]|
3H afs ffs af qo Ate I (1169-17, aig, He 1) ootam gat mit har gun sareer. His state and condition are sublime; the Lord's Glorious Virtues permeate his body.
THs Yate TH OH Fe Il (1169-17, wy, ve 1)
gurmat pargatay raam naam heer.
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, the diamond of the Lord's Name is revealed.
foe orait oth sft eA SE i (1169-18, ws, Hs 1) liv laagee naam taj doojaa bhaa-o. He is lovingly attuned to the Naam; he is rid of the love of duality.
Ho Sa Tid TT Td far sill (169-18, ws, He 1) jan naanak har gur gur milaa-o. ||4||5|| O Lord, let servant Nanak meet the Guru. ||4]|5||
SHS HIS Y Il (1169-18) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
Hot Aat AIS AST STE Il (1169-19, ay, He 1) mayree sakhee sahaylee sunhu bhaa-ay. O my friends and companions, listen with love in your heart.
Aa fug stare Afar Ave il (169-19, wis, Hs 1) mayraa pir reesaaloo sang Saa-ay. My Husband Lord is Incomparably Beautiful; He is always with me.
6g nay 3 wdbat ATT ae I (1169-19, ats, Hz 1) oh alakh na lakhee-ai kahhu kaa-ay. He is Unseen - He cannot be seen. How can I describe Him?
Ua 9920 afta Afar fearfe a af Ail (1170-1, as, He 1)
gur sang dikhaa-i-o raam raa-ay. ||1|| The Guru has shown me that my Sovereign Lord God is with me. ||1]|
fies Aut AIS dfs TS Fs i 1170-1, wy, He 1)
mil sakhee sahaylee har gun banay.
Joining together with my friends and companions, I am adorned with the Lord's Glorious Virtues.
dfs ys Afar dats ea ans Tenfe YAS HS HS NA FITS Il (1170-1, Hy, He
har parabh sang khayleh var kaaman gurmukh khojat man manay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The sublime soul-brides play with their Lord God. The Gurmukhs look within themselves; their minds are filled with faith. ||1]|Pause] |
Honet eoate ofa 3B il (1170-2, wis, uz 1) manmukhee duhaagan naahi bhay-o. The self-willed manmukhs, suffering in separation, do not understand this mystery.
6g ufe wie we Aga US Il (1170-2, ws, He 1) oh ghat ghat raavai sarab paray-o. The Beloved Lord of all celebrates in each and every heart.
aenty fas até Af SE ii 1170-3, ats, ne 1) gurmukh thir cheenai sang day-o. The Gurmukh is stable, knowing that God is always with him.
afs oH fesfeor ay AYE NI (1170-3, sty, He 1) gur naam drirh-aa-i-aa jap japay-o. ||2]| The Guru has implanted the Naam within me; I chant it, and meditate on it. ||2]|
fas ag sats 3 ae Of It (1170-3, ats, He 1
bin gur bhagat na bhaa-o ho-ay.
Without the Guru, devotional love does not well up within. fae ad HS o Aa Ste Ii 1170-4, af, He
bin gur sant na sang day-ay. Without the Guru, one is not blessed with the Society of the Saints.
faa ae ngs do oF il 1170-4, ag, ne 1» bin gur anDhulay DhanDh ro-ay. Without the Guru, the blind cry out, entangled in worldly affairs.
Ho dente foes He Aafe safe Si (1170-4, ats, He 1)
man gurmukh nirmal mal sabad kho-ay. ||3||
That mortal who becomes Gurmukh becomes immaculate; the Word of the Shabad washes away his filth. ||3]|
dfs Ho HfaS afs Ava Il (1170-5, ais, He 1) gur man maari-o kar sanjog. Uniting with the Guru, the mortal conquers and subdues his mind.
mifofofa ae sats Aa Il (1170-5, ats, He 1) ahinis raavay bhagat jog. Day and night, he savors the Yoga of devotional worship.
ad AS Ast ey fee Fa i (1170-5, ws, nz 1) gur sant sabhaa dukh mitai rog. Associating with the Saint Guru, suffering and sickness are ended.
HS BSA Tis SI AIA AG WWEN (1170-6, wy, He 1) jan naanak har var sahj jog. ||4||6]| Servant Nanak merges with his Husband Lord, in the Yoga of intuitive ease. ||4||6]|
SHS HIS 4 Il (1170-6) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
my ages AT ATH Il (1170-6, as, Hs 1) aapay kudrat karay saaj. By His Creative Power, God fashioned the creation.
Ag orfy fess TH TAH Il 1170-6, ws, He
sach aap nibayrhay raaj raaj. The King of kings Himself adminsters true justice.
Gants SSH Fifer Ae i 1170-7, ay, we 1) gurmat ootam sang saath. The most sublime Word of the Guru's Teachings is always with us.
dfs ou artes Fafa ora All (1170-7, ws, He 1) har naam rasaa-in sahj aath. ||1]| The wealth of the Lord's Name, the source of nectar, is easily acquired. ||1]|
H3 fansfh 3 He oH SfS I (1170-7, az, He 1) mat bisras ray man raam bol. So chant the Name of the Lord; do not forget it, O my mind.
nuUdUd MEH vided Tafa of urfu sere vise Sf 4a TIC il 1170-8, wy, He aprampar agam agochar gurmukh har aap tulaa-ay atul tol. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is Infinite, Inaccessible and Incomprehensible; His weight cannot be weighed, but He Himself allows the Gurmukh to weigh Him. ||1]|Pause] |
Gd Vss Adets TafHy Sg il (1170-9, sty, He 1) gur charan sarayveh gursikh tor. Your GurSikhs serve at the Guru's Feet.
dd AZ 3d Sta Ne 3g Il (1170-9, ay, we 1)
gur sayv taray taj mayr tor.
Serving the Guru, they are carried across; they have abandoned any distinction between 'mine' and ‘yours’.
od feea Sat nfs AST Il (1170-9, wy, He 1) nar nindak lobhee man kathor. The slanderous and greedy people are hard-hearted.
ad Az 3 set fA ST FT MQM (1170-10, ss, wz 1) gur sayv na bhaa-ee se chor chor. ||2|| Those who do not love to serve the Guru are the most thieving of thieves. ||2||
Ts 3S" HUA Sals SE Il (1170-10, wy, ve 1)
gur tuthaa bakhsay bhagat bhaa-o.
When the Guru is pleased, He blesses the mortals with loving devotional worship of the Lord.
afs 36 ure ofe Hats a Il (1170-10, a3, Hz 1)
gur tuthai paa-ee-ai har mahal thaa-o.
When the Guru is pleased, the mortal obtains a place in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
uddte fee of sats wa Il (1170-11, af, He 1) parhar nindaa har bhagat jaag. So renounce slander, and awaken in devotional worship of the Lord.
dfs sats ATS ASH Sa WI (1170-11, ws, He 1 har bhagat suhaavee karam bhaag. ||3]|| Devotion to the Lord is wonderful; it comes through good karma and destiny. ||3] |
ad vfs free ad SAS Il 1170-11, ais, He D gur may! milaavai karay daat. The Guru unites in union with the Lord, and grants the gift of the Name.
aatry fumrd feo FfS Il 1170-12, wis, Hs 1) gursikh pi-aaray dinas raat. The Guru loves His Sikhs, day and night.
2 oH usufs ag 3fA fe Il (1170-12, wis, He fal naam paraapat gur tus day-ay. They obtain the fruit of the Naam, when the Guru's favor is bestowed.
ad aaa urets fess af= Sli (1170-12, as, Hs 1) kaho naanak paavahi virlay kay-ay. ||4]|7]| Says Nanak, those who receive it are very rare indeed. ||4||7]|
SHS Hoe 3 fea sar I (1170-13)
basant mehlaa 3 ik tukaa. Basant, Third Mehl, Ik-Tukas:
Whoa se ASX AST AP Il (1170-13, wy, ve 3) saahib bhaavai sayvak sayvaa karai. When it pleases our Lord and Master, His servant serves Him.
Hes He Afs ae Bud MAUI (1170-13, ats, He 3) jeevat marai sabh kul uDhrai. ||1]| He remains dead while yet alive, and redeems all his ancestors. ||1]|
3dt safs 3 239 fomr & TA Il (1170-14, ag, He 3)
tayree bhagat na chhoda-o ki-aa ko hasai.
I shall not renounce Your devotional worship, O Lord; what does it matter if people laugh at me?
AS oH AS fase SA NU TIS Il (1170-14, as, He 3) saach naam mayrai hirdai vasai. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Name abides within my heart. ||1]|Pause| |
AA Hear Hfs yrst HST TI Il (1170-15, wy, Hs 3) jaisay maa-i-aa mohi paraanee galat rahai. Just as the mortal remains engrossed in attachment to Maya,
SA AS HS TH OM Jes Fd MQM (1170-15, ay, He 3) taisay sant jan raam naam ravat rahai. ||2|| so does the Lord's humble Saint remain absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||2| |
H yee Ha Cufs agg efemr il (1170-15, ats, 4: 3) mai moorakh mugaDh oopar karahu da-i-aa. I am foolish and ignorant, O Lord; please be merciful to me.
38 Ages JIS ufeMr ISI (1170-16, HS, v8 3) ta-o sarnaagat raha-o pa-i-aa. ||3]| May I remain in Your Sanctuary. ||3||
AIS BSA HAT & fETSH AH Il (1170-16, wy, He 3) kahat naanak sansaar kay nihfal kaamaa. Says Nanak, worldly affairs are fruitless.
as ure &t ure nifys OT SICH (1170-17, ws, He 3) gur parsaad ko paavai amrit naamaa. ||4]|8]|
Only by Guru's Grace does one receive the Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. [14118]
HIS 9 SHS FFF We 2 1170-18)
mehlaa 1 basant hindol ghar 2 First Mehl, Basant Hindol, Second House:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1170-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
WS aH fau uf Hoey Ales Sort Ha Il (1170-19, ats fis, He 1)
Saal garaam bip pooj manaavahu sukarit tulsee maalaa.
O Brahmin, you worship and believe in your stone-god, and wear your ceremonial rosary beads.
oH OH Alu aa Stag efeur agg fener IAI (1170-19, wis fe, He 1)
raam naam jap bayrhaa baa‘Dhahu da-i-aa karahu da-i-aalaa. ||1]|
Chant the Name of the Lord. Build your boat, and pray, "O Merciful Lord, please be merciful to me."||1]|
var AAD9
ad AGT fieT HOH TSS7 Il ai7i-1, ats fess, we 1) kaahay kalraa sinchahu janam gavaavahu. Why do you irrigate the barren, alkaline soil? You are wasting your life away!
ad sola fess ad TI BST NU TIS Il 71-1, wis fF3s, uz kaachee dhahag divaal kaahay gach laavhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. This wall of mud is crumbling. Why bother to patch it with plaster? ||1||Pause| |
ad disse we fés udeg fan stafs Ho HET I 1171-2, ais f83z, He
kar harihat maal tind parovahu tis bheetar man jovhu.
Let your hands be the buckets, strung on the chain, and yoke the mind as the ox to pull it; draw the water up from the well.
vifys fag sag famrs 38 Het a Jeg lM 7-2, wig fie, He
amrit sinchahu bharahu ki-aaray ta-o maalee kay hovhu. ||2||
Irrigate your fields with the Ambrosial Nectar, and you shall be owned by God the Gardener. ||2||
an ag ufe agg SAS asd cast set I (71-3, ats fsa, ne 1)
kaam kroDh du-ay karahu basolay godahu Dhartee bhaa-ee.
Let sexual desire and anger be your two shovels, to dig up the dirt of your farm, O Siblings of Destiny.
fa@ diag fS@ 3H AY ued fass 3 Afemr Fret ISH (i71-3, wig fI3s, He 1) ji-o godahu ti-o tum" sukh paavhu kirat na mayti-aa jaa-ee. ||3]| The more you dig, the more peace you shall find. Your past actions cannot be erased.
[I3]|
wad 3 of TAS de AF asl cere Il wi7-4, wis fI3s, Hs 1) bagulay tay fun hansulaa hovai jay too karahi da-i-aalaa. The crane is again transformed into a swan, if You so will, O Merciful Lord.
ysets aoa GAS GA cfeor agg fener ISAC! Ci71-4, ay fITs, He 1 paranvat naanak daasan daasaa da-i-aa karahu da-i-aalaa. ||4]|1]|9]| Prays Nanak, the slave of Your slaves: O Merciful Lord, have mercy on me. ||4||1||9]|
SHS Hoe 9 fIss I (1171-5) basant mehlaa 1 hindol. Basant, First Mehl, Hindol:
Wgdet 2a AS fae AST UeaSs US Se Il 71-5, ats fi8e, He 1
saahurarhee vath sabh kichh saajhee payvkarhai Dhan vakhay.
In the House of the Husband Lord - in the world hereafter, everything is jointly owned; but in this world - in the house of the soul-bride's parents, the soul-bride owns them separately.
uf gant SH SS wer ardt TA UU ciz7i-6, wig fsa, we 1)
aap kuchjee dos na day-oo jaanaa naahee rakhay. ||1||
She herself is ill-mannered; how can she blame anyone else? She does not know how to take care of these things. ||1]|
He Atfoe IG nm sath serat Il 171-6, wis fs, He 1 mayray saahibaa ha-o aapay bharam bhulaanee. O my Lord and Master, I am deluded by doubt.
mud fed Aet wer nied & AST Sat UI TTS Ul 1171-7, wis fF3s, He akhar likhay say-ee gaavaa avar na jaanaa banee. ||1|| rahaa-o. I sing the Word which You have written; I do not know any other Word. ||1]||Pause| |
afe ante ufsafs dat st su Weg St Il (1171-7, wis fs, He 1) kadh kaseedaa pahirahi cholee taa™ tum" jaanhu naaree. She alone is known as the Lord's bride, who embroiders her gown in the Name.
A wg wufs gato wats defo as filmit NN 71-8, ats fsa, He 1 jay ghar raakhahi buraa na chaakhahi hoveh kant pi-aaree. ||2]|
She who preserves and protects the home of her own heart and does not taste of evil, shall be the Beloved of her Husband Lord. ||2]|
nS ufsor ufss ato efe ore efe arer i cai7i-s, wiz fe3s, Hs 1)
jay too” parhi-aa pandit beenaa du-ay akhar du-ay naavaa.
If you are a learned and wise religious scholar, then make a boat of the letters of the Lord's Name.
ysefs Soa Sa Bure A ate Afs ANTS USUINAON (1171-9, HHS FBS, He 1) paranvat naanak ayk langhaa-ay jay kar sach samaavaa’. ||3||2||10]|
Prays Nanak, the One Lord shall carry you across, if you merge in the True Lord. [13] 12] ]10]|
SHS fi3sw HIS A Il (1171-9)
basant hindol mehlaa 1. Basant Hindol, First Mehl:
TH as Sadt at eAeT ots fimrg i c71-10, sty fs, v2 1) raajaa baalak nagree kaachee dustaa naal pi-aaro. The king is just a boy, and his city is vulnerable. He is in love with his wicked enemies.
efe net of amr usin ufss agg sites AI (1171-10, ats f83e, He 1
du-ay maa-ee du-ay baapaa parhee-ah pandit karahu beechaaro. ||1]|
He reads of his two mothers and his two fathers; O Pandit, reflect on this. ||1]| Fomt ufssat su Sg HST MW ci7i-11, wis 3s, Hs 1D
su-aamee panditaa tum" dayh matee.
O Master Pandit, teach me about this.
fas fafa ure@ yroust di ToS it cai7i-u, wig fide, ue 1)
kin biDh paava-o paraanpatee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
How can I obtain the Lord of life? ||1]||Pause] |
stsfe wats sonufs Hest Aare US ufSor I ai71-12, ats f3e, He 1)
bheetar agan banaaspat ma-ulee saagar pandhai paa-i-aa. There is fire within the plants which bloom; the ocean is tied into a bundle.
Je Hed ve we ot sists mA famrg o urfeMr I (71-12, ats 3B, 3 1)
chand sooraj du-ay ghar hee bheetar aisaa gi-aan na paa-i-aa. ||2]|
The sun and the moon dwell in the same home in the sky. You have not obtained this knowledge. ||2]|
oH gest wre fea net Sa asfe It (1171-13, ats fe3e, He 1 raam ravantaa jaanee-ai ik maa-ee bhog karay-i. One who knows the All-pervading Lord, eats up the one mother - Maya.
3 a wee Weis for ue Agee Wail 171-13, wis 3s, He 1D taa kay lakhan jaanee-ahi khimaa Dhan sangar-hay-ay. ||3]| Know that the sign of such a person is that he gathers the wealth of compassion. ||3]]|
afoot Hats 36 ufenr Hats far dt ASt SAT I 171-14, ws FFTs, ws kahi-aa suneh na khaa-i-aa maaneh tin"aa hee saytee vaasaa. The mind lives with those who do not listen, and do not admit what they eat.
ysets ooa wats oar fs Sor fas HAT ISIZNAAU (1171-14, wg FFTs, He 1)
paranvat naanak daasan daasaa khin tolaa khin maasaa. ||4]|3]|11]|
Prays Nanak, the slave of the Lord's slave: one instant the mind is huge, and the next instant, it is tiny. ||4]]3]|11]|
SHS fFsG HIS Y I (1171-15)
basant hindol mehlaa 1. Basant Hindol, First Mehl:
We AY Td AMES Tig HS FH TSS Il (1171-15, avy fF3s, ve 1)
saachaa saahu guroo sukh-daata har maylay bhukh gavaa-ay.
The Guru is the True Banker, the Giver of peace; He unites the mortal with the Lord, and satisfies his hunger.
ate fasur ofs safs fesre niofes ofg Te AS UA ai7i-16, wis fFFs, He 1)
kar kirpaa har bhagat drirh-aa-ay an-din har gun gaa-ay. ||1]|
Granting His Grace, He implants devotional worship of the Lord within; and then night and day, we sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
HS Zold FHS BS Tg I (1171-16, aty FIs, He 1) mat bhooleh ray man chayt haree. O my mind, do not forget the Lord; keep Him in your consciousness.
fag ag nafs ant 3 Set qoute ue ony oat NU TTS Ut cu7i-17, wis fF35, He 1) bin gur mukat naahee tarai lo-ee gurmukh paa-ee-ai naam haree. ||1|| rahaa-o. Without the Guru, no one is liberated anywhere in the three worlds. The Gurmukh obtains the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause| |
fag saat odt Afsag ureha fag scar odt safs oot i 71-17, ais F835, He 1
bin bhagtee nahee satgur paa-ee-ai bin bhaagaa nahee bhagat haree.
Without devotional worship, the True Guru is not obtained. Without good destiny, devotional worship of the Lord is not obtained.
fag war ASHa 3 Usha aath fs ofa ant Tet MQ Ci71-18, ats ITs, He 1)
bin bhaagaa satsang na paa-ee-ai karam milai har naam haree. ||2||
Without good destiny, the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is not obtained. By the grace of one's good karma, the Lord's Name is received. ||2]|
ufe wfe qua Guré 2a ugae Tafa AS AST Il 1171-19, ats PBs, He 1)
ghat ghat gupat upaa-ay vaykhai pargat gurmukh sant janaa.
In each and every heart, the Lord is hidden; He creates and watches over all. He reveals Himself in the humble, Saintly Gurmukhs.
ofa ofa asta A ofe dfa ste ofe Ae nifys ou Har BI c171-19, ats fe, He 1)
har har karahi so har rang bheenay har jal amrit naam manaa. ||3]|
Those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are drenched with the Lord's Love. Their minds are drenched with the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
usr 9AD2 fro ag sufs fxs efsnret aanfa A usaTs AS I (1172-1, ats fe3s, He 1)
jin ka-o takhat milai vadi-aa-ee gurmukh say parDhaan kee-ay. Those who are blessed with the glory of the Lord's Throne - those Gurmukhs are renowned as supreme.
uTgH fe se A UGA SHA Tis Ts Afa HES USUSiIil (1172-1, ats fF3s, He 1)
paaras bhayt bha-ay say paaras naanak har gur sang thee-ay. ||4||4]|12]]|
Touching the philosopher's stone, they themselves becomes the philosopher's stone; they become the companions of the Lord, the Guru. ||4]|4]|12]|
SHS HIS 3 WI YESA (1172-3) basant mehlaa 3 ghar 1 dutukay Basant, Third Mehl, First House, Du-Tukas:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1172-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hy gst Hfs AE SAS Il (1172-4, ws, He 3) maahaa rutee meh sad basant. Throughout the months and the seasons, the Lord is always in bloom.
fas dfoor As Aba AS Ml 1172-4, wis, nH 3) jit hari-aa sabh jee-a jant. He rejuvenates all beings and creatures.
fo IG nmat fagH AS Il (1172-4, wis, v2 3) ki-aa ha-o aakhaa kiram jant. What can I say? I am just a worm.
3m fas 3 ufenr vrfe nfs Wl (1172-4, as, He 3) tayraa kinai na paa-i-aa aad ant. ||1]| No one has found Your beginning or Your end, O Lord. ||1]|
3 Afoa ot aafs AS il (1172-5, as, 2 3) tai saahib kee karahi sayv. Those who serve You, Lord,
UdH AY Ueto MSH SS UA TIS Il (1172-5, wy, He 3) param sukh paavahi aatam dayv. ||1|| rahaa-o. obtain the greatest peace; their souls are so divine. ||1]|Pause| |
AGH de St AS A Il (1172-6, wg, v2 3) karam hovai taa™ sayvaa karai. If the Lord is merciful, then the mortal is allowed to serve Him.
Td UIA MSs Hes Il (1172-6, ay, He 3) gur parsaadee jeevat marai. By Guru's Grace, he remains dead while yet alive.
motes AS oH Bud Il (1172-6, ag, He 3) an-din saach naam uchrai. Night and day, he chants the True Name;
fee fafa yret F3g Ss NI (1172-6, HF, He 3) in biDh paraanee dutar tarai. ||2|| in this way, he crosses over the treacherous world-ocean. ||2||
fay nifgs aeafa Bure i (1172-7, wis, He 3) bikh amrit kartaar upaa-ay. The Creator created both poison and nectar.
HATS fod aG eff eo WS I (1172-7, wg, v2 3) sansaar birakh ka-o du-ay fal laa-ay. He attached these two fruits to the world-plant.
MN ATS AT ATES Il (1172-7, sy, He 3) aapay kartaa karay karaa-ay. The Creator Himself is the Doer, the Cause of all.
a faq ave FSR USES IBN (1172-8, as, He 3) jo tis bhaavai tisai khavaa-ay. ||3]| He feeds all as He pleases. ||3]|
Soa fA S Sela ASE Il (1172-8, arg, He 3) naanak jis no nadar karay-i. O Nanak, when He casts His Glance of Grace,
wifys oH wmy Sfe i (1172-8, wis, ve 3) amrit naam aapay day-ay. He Himself bestows His Ambrosial Naam.
fatter at amar Hots AaTE Il (1172-9, sg, He 3)
bikhi-aa kee baasnaa maneh karay-i. Thus, the desire for sin and corruption is ended.
nuat grat nitty ASS WSU (1172-9, sAS, He 3)
apnaa bhaanaa aap karay-i. ||4]|1]| The Lord Himself carries out His Own Will. ||4]|1]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1172-9)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
as Ate fs oty fear Il (1172-9, aig, He 3) raatay saach har naam nihaalaa. Those who are attuned to the True Lord's Name are happy and exalted.
cfeor agg ys ae efenrer | (1172-10, wg, v8 3) da-i-aa karahu parabh deen da-i-aalaa. Take pity on me, O God, Merciful to the meek.
fan faa weg adt A afe I (1172-10, ats, He 3) tis bin avar nahee mai ko-ay. Without Him, I have no other at all.
fa@ are f3@ at AE NU (1172-10, ats, He 3) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakhai so-ay. ||1|| As it pleases His Will, He keeps me. ||1]|
ae dures As Hfs se Il (1172-11, wg, vs 3) gur gopaal mayrai man bhaa-ay. The Guru, the Lord, is pleasing to my mind.
afd 3 AAS zane ea fas Aofa foe ag vfs fhe nai ToS it (172-11, ay, He 3) reh na saka-o darsan daykhay bin sahj mila-o gur mayl milaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot even survive, without the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. But I shall easily unite with the Guru, if He unites me in His Union. ||1]|Pause] |
feg Ho Sst Bf Barat Il (1172-12, ws, 2 3) ih man lobhee lobh lubhaanaa. The greedy mind is enticed by greed.
oH farts aafs UsS AT Il (1172-12, as, He 3) raam bisaar bahur pachhutaanaa. Forgetting the Lord, it regrets and repents in the end.
faess feorfe aa AS Sar i (1172-12, ws, vs 3) bichhurat milaa-ay gur sayv raa"gay. The separated ones are reunited, when they are inspired to serve the Guru.
dfs oH UG HASfa SSSa AT MQ (1172-13, ss, Hz 3)
har naam dee-o mastak vadbhaagay. ||2]| They are blessed with the Lord's Name - such is the destiny written on their foreheads. ||2| |
u@ze ural at fea fa Asta Il (1172-13, aS, He 3) pa-un paanee kee ih dayh sareeraa. This body is built of air and water.
ICH da ates sf ute i (1172-14, ats, He 3) ha-umai rog kathin tan peeraa. The body is afflicted with the terribly painful illness of egotism.
TInt TH SH VT TE Ter i 1172-14, ats, ve 3) gurmukh raam naam daaroo gun gaa-i-aa. The Gurmukh has the Medicine: singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
afe fasur afs da aefeur 3 1172-14, xfs, nH: 3) kar kirpaa gur rog gavaa-i-aa. ||3]|| Granting His Grace, the Guru has cured the illness. ||3]|
ats ser miarat Sts BS Il (1172-15, ws, v8 3) chaar nadee-aa agnee tan chaaray. The four evils are the four rivers of fire flowing through the body.
FFAS ASS AS MIAS Il (1172-15, ws, us 3) tarisnaa jalat jalay aha‘kaaray. It is burning in desire, and burning in egotism.
afs Fa saat SS Ml (1172-15, sFS, He 3) gur raakhay vadbhaagee taaray. Those whom the Guru protects and saves are very fortunate.
He soa Cfa ofa nifys os ISIN (1172-16, HTS, He 3) jan naanak ur har amrit Dhaaray. ||4||2|| Servant Nanak enshrines the Ambrosial Name of the Lord in his heart. ||4]|2]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1172-16)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
dfs Ae A ofe a Sa Il (1172-16, a3, Hs 3) har sayvay so har kaa log. One who serves the Lord is the Lord's person.
A'S Hd ae & de AT Ill (1172-16, ais, He 3) saach sahj kaday na hovai sog. He dwells in intuitive peace, and never suffers in sorrow.
HOHY HE ost dfs He HFT I (1172-17, ats, He 3) manmukh mu-ay naahee har man maahi. The self-willed manmukhs are dead; the Lord is not within their minds.
Hf Hfe AHfo st fs arfo WAN (1172-17, ats, He 3)
mar mar jameh bhee mar jaahi. ||1|| They die and die again and again, and are reincarnated, only to die once more. ||1]|
A Ao Ale fae dfs He HT II (1172-18, sg, He 3) say jan jeevay jin har man maahi. They alone are alive, whose minds are filled with the Lord.
Arg ANTE Afs AMT WAU TIS Il (1172-18, ws, He 3) saach sam"aalih saach samaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. They contemplate the True Lord, and are absorbed in the True Lord. ||1||Pause] |
dfs 6 Aefe 3 of 3 Efe Il 1172-18, ay, He 3) har na sayveh tay har tay door. Those who do not serve the Lord are far away from the Lord.
fersg sefa fafs uefa ofs il (1172-19, afg, H 3) disantar bhaveh sir paavahi Dhoor. They wander in foreign lands, with dust thrown on their heads.
Ufg nM AS BS Ste il (1172-19, sy, He 3) har aapay jan lee-ay laa-ay. The Lord Himself enjoins His humble servants to serve Him.
fso Ae AY o fe B SHE QM 1172-19, ag, H 3) tin sadaa sukh hai til na tamaa-ay. ||2|| They live in peace forever, and have no greed at all. ||2||
UST 1993
sels AI Ya vifSHr i 1173-1, sty, Hs 3) nadar karay chookai abhimaan. When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, egotism is eradicated.
ATS Usa US HTS Il (1173-1, as, ve 3) saachee dargeh paavai maan. Then, the mortal is honored in the Court of the True Lord.
fs AME Se we Tals I 173-1, ww, He 3) har jee-o vaykhai sad hajoor. He sees the Dear Lord always close at hand, ever-present.
qs a Fate sour saute Si (1173-2, wis, He 3)
gur kai sabad rahi-aa bharpoor. ||3]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he sees the Lord pervading and permeating all. ||3]|
ba AS at ad ufsurs il 1173-2, wis, Hs 3) jee-a jant kee karay partipaal. The Lord cherishes all beings and creatures.
Od USAT AE AHN Il (1173-2, sHy, He 3) gur parsaadee sad sam"aal. By Guru's Grace, contemplate Him forever.
efs Ard ufs fAG wie Ate I (1173-2, ats, He 3) dar saachai pat si-o ghar jaa-ay. You shall go to your true home in the Lord's Court with honor.
Soa OTH eaTet ute SISK (1173-3, ats, He 3)
naanak naam vadaa-ee paa-ay. ||4||3]| O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall be blessed with glorious greatness. ||4||3]]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1173-3)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
nists uA Ho S ofS il (1173-3, ag, He 3) antar poojaa man tay ho-ay. One who worships the Lord within his mind,
xb SA
Sa FY nig o ale Il 1173-4, ats, ne 3) ayko vaykhai a-or na ko-ay. sees the One and Only Lord, and no other.
eH Sat sTs Ty ur i (1173-4, wets, Hs 3) doojai lokee bahut dukh paa-i-aa. People in duality suffer terrible pain.
Afsafe Ho Sa fearfeor Wai (1173-4, ats, He 3) satgur maino ayk dikhaa-i-aa. ||1]| The True Guru has shown me the One Lord. ||1||
Hat ug efor AE BAZ Il 1173-5, ws, Hs 3) mayraa parabh ma-oli-aa sad basant. My God is in bloom, forever in spring.
feg no H@fenor arfe ae af#e nA TIS Ut 1173-5, wZ, He 3)
ih man ma-oli-aa gaa-ay gun gobind. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This mind blossoms forth, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause] |
Td UST SH ATT seg il (1173-5, ay, ue 3) gur poochhahu tum" karahu beechaar. So consult the Guru, and reflect upon His wisdom;
3t ys ATS sal fimrg i (1173-6, wis, Hs 3) taa’ parabh saachay lagai pi-aar. then, you shall be in love with the True Lord God.
wy efs dfs aAS Ste Il (1173-6, stg, He 3)
aap chhod hohi daasat bhaa-ay. Abandon your self-conceit, and be His loving servant.
38 parle ZA fs mrfe NH (1173-6, ats, He 3) ta-o jagjeevan vasai man aa-ay. ||2| | Then, the Life of the World shall come to dwell in your mind. ||2]|
Sas aT AE SH Tals Il (1173-7, wi, we 3) bhagat karay sad vaykhai hajoor. Worship Him with devotion, and see Him always ever-present, close at hand.
Ae ys Ae stor saute i (1173-7, ats, He 3) mayraa parabh sad rahi-aa bharpoor. My God is forever permeating and pervading all.
fen saat a ast we 3 ll (1173-7, ats, He 3) is bhagtee kaa ko-ee jaanai bhay-o. Only a rare few know the mystery of this devotional worship.
Ag Hat ys MISH SE SI (1173-8, aH, Hs 3) sabh mayraa parabh aatam day-o. ||3]| My God is the Enlightener of all souls. ||3] |
mma Afsag Afs frre i (1173-8, ais, He 3) aapay satgur mayl milaa-ay. The True Guru Himself unites us in His Union.
Aantes fA orfu fez Be il 1173-8, wy, He 3) jagjeevan si-o aap chit laa-ay. He Himself links our consciousness to the Lord, the Life of the World.
HO 36 door AOA ASS Il (1173-9, ws, He 3) man tan hari-aa sahj subhaa-ay. Thus, our minds and bodies are rejuvenated with intuitive ease.
SOA STH Fd fF BES IISil (1173-9, sty, He 3)
naanak naam rahay liv laa-ay. ||4]|4]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, we remain attuned to the String of His Love. ||4]|4||
SHS HIS 3 Il (1173-9)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
Sats zee dfs ZA Hfs wMfe Il 1173-10, ats, He 3) bhagat vachhal har vasai man aa-ay. The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He dwells within their minds,
ad facut 3 Ada ASE Il (1173-10, as, H2 3) gur kirpaa tay sahj subhaa-ay. by Guru's Grace, with intuitive ease.
sats ad fees wiry Safe I (1173-10, wg, He 3) bhagat karay vichahu aap kho-ay. Through devotional worship, self-conceit is eradicated from within,
se ot Ate floret SFE WA (1173-11, ats, He 3)
tad hee saach milaavaa ho-ay. ||1]| and then, one meets the True Lord. ||1||
sas Aufs Ae ofe ys eorts I (1173-11, wis, He 3) bhagat soheh sadaa har parabh du-aar. His devotees are forever beauteous at the Door of the Lord God.
Gd & fs vrs Un fimrfa nan ToS i 1173-11, Fy, 8 3) gur kai hayt saachai paraym pi-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Loving the Guru, they have love and affection for the True Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
sats ad A Ae feone de it (1173-12, arts, He 3)
bhagat karay so jan nirmal ho-ay.
That humble being who worships the Lord with devotion becomes immaculate and pure.
ae weet fees IGH BfE I (1173-12, as, He 3) gur sabdee vichahu ha-umai kho-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, egotism is eradicated from within.
dfs MG wrfu SA nfs wre i (1173-12, ats, He 3) har jee-o aap vasai man aa-ay. The Dear Lord Himself comes to dwell within the mind,
He AS Afe AofA ANTE MQH (1173-13, wf, He 3) sadaa saa‘t sukh sahj samaa-ay. ||2|| and the mortal remains immersed in peace, tranquility and intuitive ease. ||2||
Afy gs fSo AS SAS Il (1173-13, as, He 3) saach ratay tin sad basant. Those who are imbued with Truth, are forever in the bloom of spring.
HO 30 dour ofe ae afee Il 1173-13, as, He 3)
man tan hari-aa rav gun guvind.
Their minds and bodies are rejuvenated, uttering the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
fag aS Ha AAT Il (1173-14, ats, Hs 3) bin naavai sookaa sansaar. Without the Lord's Name, the world is dry and parched.
wate frat AS Ss ST WB (1173-14, HF, Hs 3) agan tarisnaa jalai vaaro vaar. ||3]| It burns in the fire of desire, over and over again. ||3]|
Het ad fa ofa AG aS Il 1173-14, wy, ve 3) so-ee karay je har jee-o bhaavai. One who does only that which is pleasing to the Dear Lord
Ret AY Adis ave fas we Il (1173-15, ay, He 3) sadaa sukh sareer bhaanai chit laavai. - his body is forever at peace, and his consciousness is attached to the Lord's Will.
mual ug Ag Adfad ABMs il (1173-15, ws, He 3) apnaa parabh sayvay sahj subhaa-ay. He serves His God with intuitive ease.
Soa OTH ZA Nfs wfE ISU (1173-15, as, He 3)
naanak naam vasai man aa-ay. ||4]|5]| O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in his mind. ||4]|5]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1173-16)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
Hfenr Hg Aafe ABE Il (1173-16, ats, He 3) maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaa-ay. Attachment to Maya is burnt away by the Word of the Shabad.
HO 36 Ueno Asa SS Il (1173-16, wt, He 3) man tan hari-aa satgur bhaa-ay. The mind and body are rejuvenated by the Love of the True Guru.
Hefeg fay ofs & eurfs tl 1173-16, ats, v2 3) Safli-o birakh har kai du-aar. The tree bears fruit at the Lord's Door,
Anat sat omy fumrfs il 1173-17, ws, 48 3)
saachee banee naam pi-aar. ||1]| in love with the True Bani of the Guru's Word, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
[21
= HO dwt AGA ASE Il (1173-17, ay, Hs 3) ay man hari-aa sahj subhaa-ay. This mind is rejuvenated, with intuitive ease;
Ae 2% oa Afsag ste a ToS th (1173-17, as, He 3) sach fal laagai satgur bhaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. loving the True Guru, it bears the fruit of truth. ||1]||Pause| |
~ SN
mim SS wim wa il (1173-18, sy, Hs 3) aapay nayrhai aapay door. He Himself is near, and He Himself is far away.
Gs & Aafe Se AE Tals il (1173-18, sy, vs 3) gur kai sabad vaykhai sad hajoor. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is seen to be ever-present, close at hand.
ae wat sot aootS i (1173-18, ats, ve 3) chhaav ghanee foolee banraa-ay. The plants have blossomed forth, giving a dense shade.
aente faa Hof ASE iQ (1173-19, ay, He 3) gurmukh bigsai sahj subhaa-ay. ||2|| The Gurmukh blossoms forth, with intuitive ease. ||2]|
mates atdse aats fee TAS Il (1173-19, ay, He 3) an-din keertan karahi din raat. Night and day, he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, day and night.
Afsafe aeet fess afo saifs il (1173-19, ag, 12 3) satgur gavaa-ee vichahu jooth bharaa"t. The True Guru drives out sin and doubt from within.
Ua 9998 usus Sf afonm ferme il (1174-1, ats, He 3)
parpanch vaykh rahi-aa vismaad. Gazing upon the wonder of God's Creation, I am wonder-struck and amazed.
ToHfa urea om YATE ISI (1174-1, wf, He 3) gurmukh paa-ee-ai naam parsaad. ||3]| The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, by His Grace. ||3]|
nny ads Afs JA ST Ml (1174-2, ay, v2 3) aapay kartaa sabh ras bhog. The Creator Himself enjoys all delights.
A fae ad Het ug Ja Il (1174-2, ats, He 3) jo kichh karay so-ee par hog. Whatever He does, surely comes to pass.
za Us (3G Oo SHES Il (1174-2, wis, ue 3) vadaa daataa til na tamaa-ay. He is the Great Giver; He has no greed at all.
Soe feeb Fae SHES USiEll (1174-2, sts, He 3) naanak milee-ai sabad kamaa-ay. ||4]|6|| O Nanak, living the Word of the Shabad, the mortal meets with God. ||4]|6] |
BAZ HIS 3 Il (1174-3)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
ud Sal AG AST AHS Il (1174-3, ws, we 3) poorai bhaag sach kaar kamaavai. By perfect destiny, one acts in truth.
ea 33 fefs fe 3 mir] i 1174-3, ats, 2 3) ayko chaytai fir jon na aavai. Remembering the One Lord, one does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation.
He® HoH fER Aa Hfo mrfeor It 1174-4, wis, He 3) safal janam is jag meh aa-i-aa. Fruitful is the coming into the world, and the life of one
Afs oth Hota AHEM NA (1174-4, as, He 3)
saach naam sahj samaa-i-aa. ||1]| who remains intuitively absorbed in the True Name. ||1]|
Tafa aa aag fee ote il (1174-4, wis, He 3) gurmukh kaar karahu liv laa-ay. The Gurmukh acts, lovingly attuned to the Lord.
dfs oH Aeg fess ny gente Al TIS il (1174-5, wis, He 3) har naam sayvhu vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Be dedicated to the Lord's Name, and eradicate self-conceit from within. ||1]|Pause] |
fH Ao at J ATS aret I 1174-5, ats, ne 3) tis jan kee hai saachee banee. True is the speech of that humble being;
ad a Aafe Ha Hts AHTAt Il (1174-5, as, He 3) gur kai sabad jag maahi samaanee. through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is spread throughout the world.
TJ Ha UA ATS ALE Il (1174-6, arts, He 3) chahu jug pasree saachee so-ay. Throughout the four ages, his fame and glory spread.
Of Is" AS Use TE MQM 1174-6, ag, He 3)
naam rataa jan pargat ho-ay. ||2||
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Lord's humble servant is recognized and renowned. ||2||
fefa Ard Aafe ad foe ote i (1174-6, az, v2 3) ik saachai sabad rahay liv laa-ay. Some remain lovingly attuned to the True Word of the Shabad.
A He Ars AS OTE I 1174-7, as, nH: 3) say jan saachay saachai bhaa-ay. True are those humble beings who love the True Lord.
Arg foorfefs ef oafe it (174-7, ag, He 3) saach Dhi-aa-in daykh hajoor. They meditate on the True Lord, and behold Him near at hand, ever-present.
AS Hot ot ual UaA Ofe WSN (1174-7, ats, Hs 3)
sant janaa kee pag pankaj Dhoor. ||3]|| They are the dust of the lotus feet of the humble Saints. ||3]|
Sa AGS neg o ALE Il (1174-8, aHy, He 3) ayko kartaa avar na ko-ay. There is only One Creator Lord; there is no other at all.
qd Aaet Hore TE i (1174-8, ag, ve 3) gur sabdee maylaavaa ho-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, comes Union with the Lord.
fafe AS Afenr fate oA urea It 1174-8, wis, He 3) jin sach sayvi-aa tin ras paa-i-aa. Whoever serves the True Lord finds joy.
Soa AJA OTH AMMEM SIDI (1174-9, sy, He 3)
naanak sehjay naam samaa-i-aa. ||4||7|| O Nanak, he is intuitively absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4]|7]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1174-9)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
sats acts Ae ef TAfs I 174-9, ay, He 3)
bhagat karahi jan daykh hajoor.
The Lord's humble servant worships Him, and beholds Him ever-present, near at hand.
AS Aa at uot Ue Ofs Il (1174-10, aig, we 3) sant janaa kee pag pankaj Dhoor. He is the dust of the lotus feet of the humble Saints.
Ufg ASt Ae dota fee BTS il 1174-10, wis, Hs 3) har saytee sad raheh liv laa-ay. Those who remain lovingly attuned to the Lord forever
ud Alsat chor gSte wal 1174-10, sty, Hs 3) poorai satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ay. ||1]| are blessed with understanding by the Perfect True Guru. ||1]|
aA at amy feaer set SE I 1174-11, ats, He 3) daasaa kaa daas virlaa ko-ee ho-ay. How rare are those who become the slave of the Lord's slaves.
OSH ust ure APE AN TIS tt (1174-11, wis, we 3) ootam padvee paavai so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. They attain the supreme status. ||1]||Pause]|
Sa AST wed & ate It (1174-11, as, v2 3) ayko sayvhu avar na ko-ay. So serve the One Lord, and no other.
fas Afet Wet AY SAE I (1174-12, as, He 3) jit sayvi-ai sadaa sukh ho-ay. Serving Him, eternal peace is obtained.
ot Gg Hd 6 mite AME I (1174-12, ag, He 3) naa oh marai na aavai jaa-ay. He does not die; He does not come and go in reincarnation.
fan fae meg ASt fa@ He Qu 1174-12, as, nu 3) tis bin avar sayvee ki-o maa-ay. ||2|| Why should I serve any other than Him, O my mother? ||2| |
A Ao Ard fast ATS UetfeMr Il 1174-13, ats, v8 3) say jan saachay jinee saach pachhaani-aa. True are those humble beings who realize the True Lord.
mtu Hts ADA OTH AHEM Il (1174-13, sts, He 3)
aap maar sehjay naam samaani-aa.
Conquering their self-conceit, they merge intuitively into the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
qanfa an uaufs dfe i 1174-13, ag, He 3) gurmukh naam paraapat ho-ay. The Gurmukhs gather in the Naam.
Ho fesHe fase Ag AE ISI 1174-14, ag, He 3) man nirmal nirmal sach so-ay. ||3]| Their minds are immaculate, and their reputations are immaculate. ||3]|
fats fomirg ator fH fs 3 ATE Il 1174-14, ag, He 3) jin gi-aan kee-aa tis har too jaan. Know the Lord, who gave you spiritual wisdom,
Ag Aafe yg Sa fers i (1174-15, wis, us 3)
saach sabad parabh ayk sinjaan. and realize the One God, through the True Word of the Shabad.
dfs oh we st Afo SE Wt (1174-15, ats, He 3) har ras chaakhai taa’ suDh ho-ay. When the mortal tastes the sublime essence of the Lord, he becomes pure and holy.
Soa OTH TS AD ALE NICH (1174-15, ats, He 3) naanak naam ratay sach so-ay. ||4||8]| O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam - their reputations are true. ||4]|8] |
SHS HIS 3 Ill (1174-16)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
oH IS aat at aats Bus Il (1174-16, ais, ue 3)
naam ratay kulaa™ kaa karahi uDhaar.
Those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord - their generations are redeemed and saved.
Fret arat oH fumis il (1174-16, ats, He 3) saachee banee naam pi-aar. True is their speech; they love the Naam.
HOHY FS ATS HITS I (1174-16, AZ, He 3) manmukh bhoolay kaahay aa-ay. Why have the wandering self-willed manmukhs even come into the world?
SHY 3S AON TSS WAU (1174-17, ay, ve 3) naamhu bhoolay janam gavaa-ay. ||1|| Forgetting the Naam, the mortals waste their lives away. ||1]|
Hes Hd His HS STS | (1174-17, sy, ve 3) jeevat marai mar maran savaarai. One who dies while yet alive, truly dies, and embellishes his death.
ad a Rafe ATS Bs ars NA TIS Ut (1174-17, sts, He 3)
gur kai sabad saach ur Dhaarai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he enshrines the True Lord within his heart. ||1]|Pause] |
qenfy AY sHo ules AST Il (1174-18, ats, 2 3) gurmukh sach bhojan pavit sareeraa. Truth is the food of the Gurmukh; his body is sanctified and pure.
HO fSsHe Ae Tat Tsai (1174-18, ws, vs 3) man nirmal sad gunee gaheeraa. His mind is immaculate; he is forever the ocean of virtue.
AH Hd 3 me ATE I (1174-19, ats, He 3) jammai marai na aavai jaa-ay. He is not forced to come and go in the cycle of birth and death.
ad UsATet AS ANTE MQ (1174-19, ws, 4 3) gur parsaadee saach samaa-ay. ||2| | By Guru's Grace, he merges in the True Lord. ||2]|
AT’ AST ATT UES Il (1174-19, ag, v2 3) saachaa sayvhu saach pachhaanai. Serving the True Lord, one realizes Truth.
ad a Aafe ofa uefa StS Il (1174-19, ats, He 3)
gur kai sabad har dar neesaanai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he goes to the Lord's Court with his banners flying proudly.
ust q9qDuU
efs ATS AY Hat SE Wl (1175-1, ay, ne 3) dar saachai sach sobhaa ho-ay. In the Court of the True Lord, he obtains true glory.
for wie ear ure APE SI (175-1, as, H: 3) nij ghar vaasaa paavai so-ay. ||3]| He comes to dwell in the home of his own inner being. ||3]|
wif mse AS Ag AS Il (1175-1, as, He 3) aap abhul sachaa sach so-ay. He cannot be fooled; He is the Truest of the True.
dfs Afs gata en ufs ae i (1175-2, ats, 2 3) hor sabh bhooleh doojai pat kho-ay. All others are deluded; in duality, they lose their honor.
Ara’ AS Aret sat ll (1175-2, ais, ve 3) saachaa sayvhu saachee banee. So serve the True Lord, through the True Bani of His Word.
Soa SH Ae ANTel ISIN (1175-2, aS, Hs 3)
naanak naamay saach samaanee. ||4]|9]| O Nanak, through the Naam, merge in the True Lord. ||4||9||
SHS HIS 3 Il (1175-3)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
fag aoH AS Sat FHret I 1175-3, wis, v2 3) bin karmaa sabh bharam bhulaa-ee. Without the grace of good karma, all are deluded by doubt.
Hor Hf sos SY UST I (1175-3, ais, He 3) maa-i-aa mohi bahut dukh paa-ee. In attachment to Maya, they suffer in terrible pain.
HoH nid oBa o uret Il (1175-4, ats, nH 3)
manmukh anDhay tha-ur na paa-ee. The blind, self-willed manmukhs find no place of rest.
faret at atst farn]et Hf AHTET NA (1175-4, aS, He 3)
bistaa kaa keerhaa bistaa maahi samaa-ee. ||1] | They are like maggots in manure, rotting away in manure. ||1]|
JaH HS A AS UdSTS Il (1175-4, arty, He 3) hukam mannay so jan parvaan. That humble being who obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command is accepted.
ad a Aafe of otr|S Ul TIS Il (1175-5, ats, He 3)
gur kai sabad naam neesaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is blessed with the insignia and the banner of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Afs oS frat ofe fof urfemr i (1175-5, wis, Hs 3) saach ratay jin"aa Dhur likh paa-i-aa. Those who have such pre-ordained destiny are imbued with the Naam.
dfs at oH Ae fe SteMT Ih (1175-5, aS, He 3) har kaa naam sadaa man bhaa-i-aa. The Name of the Lord is forever pleasing to their minds.
Afsag ot sat Wet AY SE I (1175-6, ats, He 3) satgur kee banee sadaa sukh ho-ay. Through the Bani, the Word of the True Guru, eternal peace is found.
ast Afs fre APE NQH (1175-6, as, He 3) jotee jot milaa-ay so-ay. ||2]| Through it, one's light merges into the Light. ||2] |
Sa BH 3d AAT Il (1175-6, ws, vs 3)
ayk naam taaray sansaar. Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, can save the world.
Ts UdATET STH fumirg il (1175-7, HS, H8 3) gur parsaadee naam pi-aar. By Guru's Grace, one comes to love the Naam.
fae oH Hafs fas & uret Il (1175-7, ats, He 3) bin naamai mukat kinai na paa-ee. Without the Naam, no one obtains liberation.
Us TTI 3 SH US uret Bll 1175-7, ws, we 3) pooray gur tay naam palai paa-ee. ||3]| Through the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained. ||3]|
Ags fam nef gee I (1175-8, wy, Hs 3) so boojhai jis aap bujhaa-ay. He alone understands, whom the Lord Himself causes to understand.
Afsad At oH fexe il (1175-8, wiz, us 3) satgur Sayvaa naam darirh-aa-ay. Serving the True Guru, the Naam is implanted within.
fre feax AST A AS UPSTE Il (1175-8, as, He 3) jin ik jaataa say jan parvaan. Those humble beings who know the One Lord are approved and accepted.
BSA OTH FS Us SATS ISIAON (1175-9, HHS, He 3)
naanak naam ratay dar neesaan. ||4||10||
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, they go to the Lord's Court with His banner and insignia. ||4]|10]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1175-9)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
fgur ag Afsarg fesre i (1175-9, ats, v2 3) kirpaa karay satguroo milaa-ay. Granting His Grace, the Lord leads the mortal to meet the True Guru.
mmy wify ZA fe mire Il (1175-10, af, He 3) aapay aap vasai man aa-ay. The Lord Himself comes to abide in his mind.
fogee HfS Ae HS Ute Il (1175-10, ss, H8 3)
nihchal mat sadaa man Dheer. His intellect becomes steady and stable, and his mind is strengthened forever.
dfs TE We Tat Tdts Al 1175-10, sy, v2 3) har gun gaavai gunee gaheer. ||1]|| He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Ocean of Virtue. ||1]|
ong 38 Hole fag ate i 175-11, xfs, v2 3) naamhu bhoolay mareh bikh khaa-ay. Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord - those mortals die eating poison.
fger Aon fefs nrefs ATE NA TIC tl 75-11, ws, us 3)
baritha janam fir aavahi jaa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Their lives are wasted uselessly, and they continue coming and going in reincarnation. ||1]|Pause] |
ag 3u acta fe AS & SPE I (175-11, arts, He 3) baho bhaykh karahi man saa‘t na ho-ay. They wear all sorts of religious robes, but their minds are not at peace.
ag wiferfs wnat ufS af& I 1175-12, sts, ne 3) baho abhimaan apnee pat kho-ay. In great egotism, they lose their honor.
A zssret fae Hae ustfEmr il (1175-12, ag, He 3) say vadbhaagee jin sabad pachhaani-aa. But those who realize the Word of the Shabad, are blessed by great good fortune.
Mots APT ws fs wTfSMr Il (1175-12, ws, v8 3)
baahar jaadaa ghar meh aani-aa. ||2]| They bring their distractible minds back home. ||2]|
Wd Ho SAS Ma wRTST Il (1175-13, SHS, He 3)
ghar meh vasat agam apaaraa. Within the home of the inner self is the inaccessible and infinite substance.
aenfs ants Aafe steer il (1175-13, as, Hs 3)
gurmat khojeh sabad beechaaraa. Those who find it, by following the Guru's Teachings, contemplate the Shabad.
on oO fafa uret wa dt ate Il (1175-14, ats, He 3)
naam nav niDh paa-ee ghar hee maahi.
Those who obtain the nine treasures of the Naam within the home of their own inner being,
He dfa as Afes Mrfs Sil (1175-14, ats, Hs 3) sadaa rang raatay sach samaahi. ||3]|| are forever dyed in the color of the Lord's Love; they are absorbed in the Truth. |[3]|
mifu ad fas ATE 6 ANE Il (1175-14, ats, He 3) aap karay kichh karan na jaa-ay. God Himself does everything; no one can do anything at all by himself.
mmy ate we forte i 1175-15, az, He 3) aapay bhaavai la-ay milaa-ay. When God so wills, He merges the mortal into Himself.
SA 3 83 Set & She Il (1175-15, ws, He 3) tis tay nayrhai naahee ko door. All are near Him; no one is far away from Him.
aod StH stout saufs SNA (1175-15, ay, He 3)
naanak naam rahi-aa bharpoor. ||4]|11]| O Nanak, the Naam is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||11]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1175-16)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
ad Aaet dfs sfs Aste I (1175-16, ats, He 3) gur sabdee har chayt subhaa-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, remember the Lord with love,
oH OM SfA Jd MUTE I (1175-16, ats, H 3) raam naam ras rahai aghaa-ay. and you shall remain satisfied by the sublime essence of the Lord's Name.
ae adése a ure vfs arfo i (1175-16, ats, H2 3) kot kotantar kay paap jal jaahi. The sins of millions upon millions of lifetimes shall be burnt away.
Ales Hats ote oth AH NA (1175-17, aS, He 3)
jeevat mareh har naam samaahi. ||1]]| Remaining dead while yet alive, you shall be absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1]|
dfs at as afe AG AS I (1175-17, ag, He 3) har kee daat har jee-o jaanai. The Dear Lord Himself knows His own bountiful blessings.
ad a Rafe feg ne H@femr afe Teast BT SUS WAU TIC Uh 1175-17, wy, ve 3) gur kai sabad ih man ma-oli-aa har gundaataa naam vakhaanai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This mind blossoms forth in the Guru's Shabad, chanting the Name of the Lord, the Giver of virtue. ||1]|Pause] |
sae fh oft vats 3 ofe I 1175-18, wg, He 3) bhagvai vays bharam mukat na ho-ay. No one is liberated by wandering around in saffron-colored robes.
ad Hay vfs & ure Afe I (1175-18, ats, He 3) baho sanjam saa‘t na paavai ko-ay. Tranquility is not found by strict self-discipline.
aenfs om uaufs df& it 1175-19, a3, v2 3)
gurmat naam paraapat ho-ay.
But by following the Guru's Teachings, one is blessed to receive the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
saat dfs ure ALE NQN (1175-19, ats, He 3) vadbhaagee har paavai so-ay. ||2|| By great good fortune, one finds the Lord. ||2||
ate Hid IH oth Samrat il (1175-19, sts, He 3) kal meh raam naam vadi-aa-ee. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, glorious greatness comes through the Lord's Name.
ust 9VDE
Gs us 3 ufeor ArT I (1176-1, arty, He 3) gur pooray tay paa-i-aa jaa-ee. Through the Perfect Guru, it is obtained.
otH TS Ae AY Uret Il (1176-1, ay, v8 3) naam ratay sadaa sukh paa-ee. Those who are imbued with the Naam find everlasting peace.
fae oH IGH Afe ATet ISI (1176-1, ats, He 3) bin naamai ha-umai jal jaa-ee. ||3]| But without the Naam, mortals burn in egotism. ||3]|
essa Is SH ST Il (1176-2, sty, vs 3) vadbhaagee har naam beechaaraa. By great good furtune, some contemplate the Lord's Name.
Be TH OTH TY AI Il (1176-2, ay, Hs 3) chhootai raam naam dukh saaraa. Through the Lord's Name, all sorrows are eradicated.
fase efhor A aofs UATE I (1176-2, ats, He 3) hirdai vasi-aa so baahar paasaaraa. He dwells within the heart, and pervades the external universe as well.
Soa We AT Gurssds NII (1176-3, aH, He 3)
naanak jaanai sabh upaavanhaaraa. ||4]|12]| O Nanak, the Creator Lord knows all. ||4]|12]|
SHS Hoe 3 fea Sa I 1176-3) basant mehlaa 3 ik tukay. Basant, Third Mehl, Ik-Tukas:
3a aor fagH AZ Il (1176-3, sts, Hs 3) tayraa kee-aa kiram jant. I am just a worm, created by You, O Lord.
Sfo 3 At orf HS WU 3176-4, aS, He 3) deh ta jaapee aad mant. ||1]| If you bless me, then I chant Your Primal Mantra. ||1]|
ae orf Starst Hat HAE I (1176-4, ws, He 3) gun aakh veechaaree mayree maa-ay. I chant and reflect on His Glorious Virtues, O my mother.
of afu afs & wae ute nai TIC il (1176-4, stg, v2 3) har jap har kai laga-o paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meditating on the Lord, I fall at the Lord's Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
Od YAS Bre SH AME i (1176-5, ss, He 3) gur parsaad laagay naam su-aad. By Guru's Grace, I am addicted to the favor of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ad AON Weteg Sfe SHE QM (1176-5, as, He 3) kaahay janam gavaavahu vair vaad. ||2|| Why waste your life in hatred, vengeance and conflict? ||2| |
ata fasur attat gar mifsurg il 1176-5, ats, ve 3) gur kirpaa keen"ee chookaa abhimaan. When the Guru granted His Grace, my egotism was eradicated,
Hoa afe ufenr afe am iil (1176-6, wis, He 3) sahj bhaa-ay paa-i-aa har naam. ||3]| and then, I obtained the Lord's Name with intuitive ease. ||3]|
Cay Cur Age AN Il (1176-6, ay, He 3) ootam oochaa sabad kaam. The most lofty and exalted occupation is to contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
Soa SUS AY OH ISU (1176-6, aS, He 3) naanak vakhaanai saach naam. ||4||1]|13]| Nanak chants the True Name. ||4/]1]]13]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1176-7)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
wonufs Heat sfsor SAS Il 1176-7, wis, Hz 3) banaspat ma-ulee charhi-aa basant. The season of spring has come, and all the plants have blossomed forth.
feg Ho H@feur Afsag Afar Ail (1176-7, ws, Hs 3) in man ma-oli-aa satguroo sang. ||1|| This mind blossoms forth, in association with the True Guru. ||1]|
3H Arg fomr|eg Har HOT Il (1176-8, ws, He 3) tum" saach Dhi-aavahu mugaDh manaa. So meditate on the True Lord, O my foolish mind.
St AY ureg AS HAT NA TIS Il (1176-8, HIS, v8 3) taa’ sukh paavhu mayray manaaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Only then shall you find peace, O my mind. ||1]|Pause] |
fez ufo n@fet afer mise Il (1176-8, aig, He 3) it man ma-uli-ai bha-i-aa anand. This mind blossoms forth, and I am in ecstasy.
nifys eo ufeor on af#e QU (1176-9, fs, He 3)
amrit fal paa-i-aa naam gobind. ||2||
I am blessed with the Ambrosial Fruit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||2| |
Sa Sa AS wifey Sars Il (1176-9, ats, He 3) ayko ayk sabh aakh vakhaanai. Everyone speaks and says that the Lord is the One and Only.
TSH FS St Sat AS MSI (1176-10, wy, Hs 3) hukam boojhai taa" ayko jaanai. ||3]| By understanding the Hukam of His Command, we come to know the One Lord. ||3]|
AIS BA IGH Ad B ALE I 1176-10, a3, v2 3) kahat naanak ha-umai kahai na ko-ay. Says Nanak, no one can describe the Lord by speaking through ego.
wilds tue As Atos S SE USNVNAI (1176-10, aS, He 3)
aakhan vaykhan sabh saahib tay ho-ay. ||4||2||14]| All speech and insight comes from our Lord and Master. ||4||2||14]]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1176-11)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
Afs Wa Sd ats TS Il (1176-11, ay, He 3) sabh jug tayray keetay ho-ay. All the ages were created by You, O Lord.
Afsag 32 Hfs sfo Je NA c176-11, as, He 3) satgur bhaytai mat buDh ho-ay. ||1]| Meeting with the True Guru, one's intellect is awakened. ||1||
dfs ME wm So frfe it 176-11, as, He 3) har jee-o aapay laihu milaa-ay. O Dear Lord, please blend me with Yourself;
ad a Rafe Ae oH ANTS AU TITS Hl (1176-12, as, He 3) gur kai sabad sach naam samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. let me merge in the True Name, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause| |
Hfs SHS Jd Afs BE Il (1176-12, ats, He 3) man basant haray sabh lo-ay. When the mind is in spring, all people are rejuvenated.
cots setts on oth AY SE NN (1176-13, ats, He 3) faleh fulee-ah raam naam sukh ho-ay. ||2|| Blossoming forth and flowering through the Lord's Name, peace is obtained. ||2||
He’ SHS Wd Ase Aes Il (1176-13, wy, ve 3) sadaa basant gur sabad veechaaray. Contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one is in spring forever,
TH OH Te Ss WS Ill (1176-13, ats, He 3) raam naam raakhai ur Dhaaray. ||3]| with the Lord's Name enshrined in the heart. ||3]|
Hf SHS 3g Ho door GE Il (1176-14, ws, He 3) man basant tan man hari-aa ho-ay. When the mind is in spring, the body and mind are rejuvenated.
sod feg 3g fasy aH on ee ue AE NSNSNAUI (1176-14, aS, He 3) naanak ih tan birakh raam naam fal paa-ay so-ay. ||4||3]|15]| O Nanak, this body is the tree which bears the fruit of the Lord's Name. ||4||3]|15]|
SHS HIS 3 Il (1176-15)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
fsq sHs A ofe we ate I 1176-15, wiz, H8 3) tin" basant jo har gun gaa-ay. They alone are in the spring season, who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ud stat ots sats AIFS UA (1176-15, aS, He 3) poorai bhaag har bhagat karaa-ay. ||1]| They come to worship the Lord with devotion, through their perfect destiny. ||1]|
fen Ho aG SHS at wa B ALE I (1176-15, arty, He 3) is man ka-o basant kee lagai na so-ay. This mind is not even touched by spring.
feg Ho Afr eA SE NU TIS I 1176-16, ws, we 3) ih man jali-aa doojai do-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This mind is burnt by duality and double-mindedness. ||1||Pause| |
feg He Ud star aan OME II (1176-16, stZ, He 3) ih man DhanDhai baa“Dhaa karam kamaa-ay. This mind is entangled in worldly affairs, creating more and more karma.
Hfeur yor Aer fasts iQ (1176-17, ws, He 3) maa-i-aa moothaa sadaa billaa-ay. ||2]| Enchanted by Maya, it cries out in suffering forever. ||2||
feg Ho ge AT AfSaT Se Ut (1176-17, ws, v8 3) ih man chhootai jaa‘ satgur bhaytai. This mind is released, only when it meets with the True Guru.
Hae at fefs wire o SS SII (1176-17, aS, He 3) jamkaal kee fir aavai na faytai. ||3]|| Then, it does not suffer beatings by the Messenger of Death. ||3]|
feg Ho set ofa Shor Sate i (1176-18, ats, H2 3) ih man chhootaa gur lee-aa chhadaa-ay. This mind is released, when the Guru emancipates it.
Sod Hfeor Hg Aafe ASTE IsisiIell (1176-18, as, He 3)
naanak maa-i-aa moh sabad jalaa-ay. ||4||4||16]| O Nanak, attachment to Maya is burnt away through the Word of the Shabad. [1414] [26] |
SHS HIS 3 Il (1176-19)
basant mehlaa 3. Basant, Third Mehl:
BAS visor sot AGE I (1176-19, w#y, we 3) basant charhi-aa foolee banraa-ay. Spring has come, and all the plants are flowering.
ofa riba As gate ote fas BE uA 1176-19, ats, He 3)
ayhi jee-a jant fooleh har chit laa-ay. ||1]|
These beings and creatures blossom forth when they focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||1]|
Yat A9D2
feo fafa feg ne afer de Il 1177-1, as, He 3) in biDh ih man hari-aa ho-ay. In this way, this mind is rejuvenated.
dfs ofa any wu fes Tat Tenfa JOH ae af NaN ToS I 1177-1, as, He 3)
har har naam japai din raatee gurmukh ha-umai kadhai Dho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, day and night, egotism is removed and washed away from the Gurmukhs. ||1]||Pause] |
Afsad wet Aa ASS Il (1177-2, ws, vs 3)
satgur banee sabad sunaa-ay. The True Guru speaks the Bani of the Word, and the Shabad, the Word of God.
feg Aa dfeor Afsae SES QI 4177-2, ws, He 3) ih jag hari-aa satgur bhaa-ay. ||2|| This world blossoms forth in its greenery, through the love of the True Guru. ||2] |
SS SH Sa At omy BS i (1177-2, ay, ue 3) fal fool laagay jaa‘ aapay laa-ay. The mortal blossoms forth in flower and fruit, when the Lord Himself so wills.
nfs wat St ASAT urs WSN 1177-3, ww, we 3) mool lagai taa™ satgur paa-ay. ||3]| He is attached to the Lord, the Primal Root of all, when he finds the True Guru. |[3]|
mtfu SH3 Aas AS Sst Il 1177-3, wis, ve 3) aap basant jagat sabh vaarhee. The Lord Himself is the season of spring; the whole world is His Garden.
aoa us star sas forest ISNUNADI (4177-3, BAS, He 3)
naanak poorai bhaag bhagat niraalee. ||4]|5||17]| O Nanak, this most unique devotional worship comes only by perfect destiny. [41151] 171]
SHS fi3se HIS 3 We 2 1177-5) basant hindol mehlaa 3 ghar 2 Basant Hindol, Third Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (1177-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad at vat fees afour set ag Fae fees af Wet II (1177-6, wis fF3s, He 3)
gur kee banee vitahu vaari-aa bhaa-ee gur sabad vitahu bal jaa-ee.
I am a Sacrifice to the Word of the Guru's Bani, O Siblings of Destiny. I am devoted and dedicated to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Td Ward Ae nua set ag saat fas wet iil 177-6, w#s 83s, us 3)
gur saalaahee sad apnaa bhaa-ee gur charnee chit laa-ee. ||1]|
I praise my Guru forever, O Siblings of Destiny. I focus my consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||1]|
Hd Hoe IH OTH fos OTe Il (1177-7, wis fF3s, He 3) mayray man raam naam chit laa-ay. O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Lord's Name.
HO 36 3a dfeor de fea ofa at ew ute NAN TIS I (1177-7, ats fF3s, 2 3) man tan tayraa hari-aa hovai ik har naamaa fal paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Your mind and body shall blossom forth in lush greenery, and you shall obtain the fruit of the Name of the One Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
afs aa A Cad set afe an vifts Uborfe I 1177-8, wis F835, Hs 3)
gur raakhay say ubray bhaa-ee har ras amrit pee-aa-ay.
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, O Siblings of Destiny. They drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's sublime essence.
fess JH ey Cfo afeur aret we gor HfS nrfe NQH (1177-8, ats FETs, He 3) vichahu ha-umai dukh uth ga-i-aa bhaa-ee sukh vuthaa man aa-ay. ||2]|
The pain of egotism within is eradicated and banished, O Siblings of Destiny, and peace comes to dwell in their minds. ||2]|
ufs wm frat 3 sufhGe avet nae afore frefe I (1177-9, wis F835, He 3)
Dhur aapay jin"aa no bakhsi-on bhaa-ee sabday la-i-an milaa-ay.
Those whom the Primal Lord Himself forgives, O Siblings of Destiny, are united with the Word of the Shabad.
ufs fSqr at urysint set AsHats Afs free Wai ci77-10, wis fs, Hs 3)
Dhoorh tin"aa kee aghulee-ai bhaa-ee satsangat mayl milaa-ay. ||3]|
The dust of their feet brings emancipation; in the company of Sadh Sangat, the True Congregation, we are united with the Lord. ||3]|
uify age ad ify aret fafe afemr aier Ag afe I (1177-10, ats fI3s, He 3) aap karaa-ay karay aap bhaa-ee jin hari-aa kee-aa sabh ko-ay.
He Himself does, and causes all to be done, O Siblings of Destiny; He makes everything blossom forth in green abundance.
soa Hfe sfe AY Ae ZA avet Hate froret TE NSNANACHIVNACHZON (1177-11, aH f3%, He 3)
naanak man tan sukh sad vasai bhaa-ee sabad milaavaa ho-ay.
[14] 2] ]18]]12]]18] [30] |
O Nanak, peace fills their minds and bodies forever, O Siblings of Destiny; they are united with the Shabad. ||4||1]|18]|12||18]|30]|
Td SHS Hos 8 we 9 fea SA 1177-13) raag basant mehlaa 4 ghar 1 ik tukay Raag Basant, Fourth Mehl, First House, Ik-Tukay:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1177-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fA unst Hen foots AAS 177-14, wig, He 4) ji-o pasree sooraj kiran jot. Just as the light of the sun's rays spread out,
f@ wie whe Heer Gf3 Ufs NA 177-14, as, He 4) ti-o ghat ghat rama-ee-aa ot pot. ||1|| the Lord permeates each and every heart, through and through. ||1] |
ea ufs afeor Aa ae Wt (1177-14, wis, us 4) ayko har ravi-aa sarab thaa-ay. The One Lord is permeating and pervading all places.
ae Aaet frsha Act fe nan soe th (1177-15, as, ve 4)
gur sabdee milee-ai mayree maa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we merge with Him, O my mother. ||1]|Pause] |
ufe ufe nists Sa ofe APE WN 1177-15, ats, He 4) ghat ghat antar ayko har so-ay.
The One Lord is deep within each and every heart. ate fife fea yare of& NH 3177-15, Ht, Hs 4)
gur mili-ai ik pargat ho-ay. ||2]| Meeting with the Guru, the One Lord becomes manifest, radiating forth. ||2||
Sa Sq ston souls i (1177-16, wy, vs 4) ayko ayk rahi-aa bharpoor. The One and Only Lord is present and prevailing everywhere.
WAS 5d Sst Weta es Sil 1177-16, wy, Hs 4) saakat nar lobhee jaaneh door. ||3]| The greedy, faithless cynic thinks that God is far away. ||3]|
Sa Sa sas ofa SE il (1177-16, ag, ve 4) ayko ayk vartai har lo-ay. The One and Only Lord permeates and pervades the world.
Sod dfs Sa AI A AE SUA 1177-17, wAZ, He 4) naanak har ayko karay so ho-ay. ||4||1]| O Nanak, whatever the One Lord does comes to pass. ||4||1]|
SHS HIS g Il (1177-17) basant mehlaa 4. Basant, Fourth Mehl:
dfs fear ef Ae Ue il (1177-17, ag, v2 4) rain dinas du-ay saday pa-ay. Day and night, the two calls are sent out.
Ho dfs frnag nifs FET ofy BE NA 1177-18, aS, He 4)
man har simrahu ant sadaa rakh la-ay. ||1]||
O mortal, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, who protects you forever, and saves you in the end. ||1]|
Ufa ofs Bf Ae HS AT Il (1177-18, ss, H3 4) har har chayt sadaa man mayray. Concentrate forever on the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind.
Ag oToA oy sft ys ufeor Tes Weg TE YS AT AU TTS I 1177-18, wets, ws 4) sabh aalas dookh bhanj parabh paa-i-aa gurmat gaavhu gun parabh kayray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
God the Destroyer of all depression and suffering is found, through the Guru's Teachings, singing the Glorious Praises of God. ||1||Pause||
HoH fefa fefs IGH HE Il (1177-19, as, He 4) manmukh fir fir ha-umai mu-ay. The self-willed manmukhs die of their egotism, over and over again.
Ua qqot
ane efs Hurd AH ufe TS MQ (1178-1, as, He 4)
kaal dait sanghaaray jam pur ga-ay. ||2|| They are destroyed by Death's demons, and they must go to the City of Death. ||2] |
asnte ots fs ate fee wat i (1178-1, wis, H2 4) gurmukh har har har liv laagay. The Gurmukhs are lovingly attached to the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
WOH HIS SS CY Sa WI (1178-1, ws, we 4) janam maran do-oo dukh bhaagay. ||3]|| Their pains of both birth and death are taken away. ||3]|
sas Aa aS ate faxgut ast Il (1178-2, sy, He 4) bhagat janaa ka-o har kirpaa Dhaaree. The Lord showers His Mercy on His humble devotees.
Td Sea So fufonr goers WSN (1178-2, ss, He 4)
gur naanak tuthaa mili-aa banvaaree. ||4||2||
Guru Nanak has shown mercy to me; I have met the Lord, the Lord of the forest. [4112] |
SHS fi3sG HIS 8 We 2 (1178-3) basant hindol mehlaa 4 ghar 2 Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars urrfe i (1178-3) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH BH 336 Gost aS Hefa Sa Barat I 1178-4, ais fsa, we 4) raam naam ratan koth-rhee garh mandar ayk lukaanee. The Lord's Name is a jewel, hidden in a chamber of the palace of the body-fortress.
Afsag fee 3 deba fife Ast AAS MOT WAI (1178-4, ats fie, He 4)
satgur milai ta khojee-ai mil jotee jot samaanee. ||1||
When one meets the True Guru, then he searches and finds it, and his light merges with the Divine Light. ||1]|
Hog AY Ae ta fete i ci7s-s, wiz fF3a, He 4) maaDho saaDhoo jan dayh milaa-ay. O Lord, lead me to meet with the Holy Person, the Guru.
eus tan uy Afs aAtg ules UGH UE UTE NAN TIE Il (1178-5, wy FFTs, He 4) daykhat daras paap sabh naaseh pavitar param pad paa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all my sins are erased, and I obtain the supreme, sublime, sanctified status. ||1]|Pause| |
us da fife ae oadint aH BH UG fofant I 1178-6, ats fsa, He 4)
panch chor mil laagay nagree-aa raam naam Dhan hiri-aa.
The five thieves join together and plunder the body-village, stealing the wealth of the Lord's Name.
Tents aH ud 3a uad US AES TH Caf IM (1178-6, ats FBG, He 4)
gurmat khoj paray tab pakray Dhan saabat raas ubri-aa. ||2]|
But through the Guru's Teachings, they are traced and caught, and this wealth is recovered intact. ||2| |
unis 3dH Cure afe aa foe nists wfeer yfemr Ih (1178-7, ats FISH, He 4)
pakhand bharam upaav kar thaakay rid antar maa-i-aa maa-i-aa.
Practicing hypocrisy and superstition, people have grown weary of the effort, but still, deep within their hearts, they yearn for Maya, Maya.
Ag yey uses ufemr mifemre nity aefenr ail (1178-8, wiz 83s, 48 4)
saaDhoo purakh purakhpat paa-i-aa agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-i-aa. ||3]||
By the Grace of the Holy Person, I have met with the Lord, the Primal Being, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled. ||3]|
Adios HaetA TATE ats fagur ATG fares Il (1178-8, ats ISH, He 4)
jagannaath jagdees gusaa-ee kar kirpaa saaDh milaavai.
The Lord, the Lord of the Earth, the Lord of the Universe, in His Mercy, leads me to meet the Holy Person, the Guru.
saa Aifs de Ho ists fos fase of Te We NSUAUII (1178-9, ats fe, He 4) naanak saa“t hovai man antar nit hirdai har gun gaavai. ||4]|1]|3]|
O Nanak, peace then comes to abide deep within my mind, and I constantly sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord within my heart. ||4]]1]|3]|
SHS HIS 8 FISTS Il (1178-10) basant mehlaa 4 hindol. Basant, Fourth Mehl, Hindol:
3H VS Ue SS MH TATE GH ald fag SHOE Il (1178-10, siz fess, us 4)
tum" vad purakh vad agam gusaa-ee ham keeray kiram tumnachhay.
You are the Great Supreme Being, the Vast and Inaccessible Lord of the World; Iam a mere insect, a worm created by You.
ofa de eens aag us faa aa Afsad BIS TH Fe NA (1178-10, wis f¥3e, ue 4) har deen da-i-aal karahu parabh kirpaa gur satgur charan ham banchhay. ||1]|
O Lord, Merciful to the meek, please grant Your Grace; O God, I long for the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||1]|
dfde MG AsHafs fs afe fxuE i (1178-11, ws fie, He 4)
gobind jee-o satsangat mayl kar kirpachhay.
O Dear Lord of the Universe, please be merciful and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
HOH HoH & faofeu He sfeor fife Hats afe ys Jos NA TIS Il (1178-12, wis Bs, He 4)
janam janam kay kilvikh mal bhari-aa mil sangat kar parabh hanchhay. ||1|| rahaa-o. I was overflowing with the filthy sins of countless past lives. But joining the Sangat, God made me pure again. ||1||Pause| |
Sue Ae WS uifsast ofe AfUs ufss ute I (1178-12, ats 3s, ue 4)
tum"raa jan jaat avijaataa har japi-o patit paveechhay.
Your humble servant, whether of high class or low class, O Lord - by meditating on You, the sinner becomes pure.
ofs at nae se0 3 ule ofe Ast afe ys fess NII (1178-13, ws fFTa, He 4)
har kee-o sagal bhavan tay oopar har sobhaa har parabh dinchhay. ||2||
The Lord exalts and elevates him above the whole world, and the Lord God blesses him with the Lord's Glory. ||2]|
ms oars vet ys fimre Afs ys HOA PSE Il (1178-14, wis FIs, Hs 4)
jaat ajaat ko-ee parabh Dhi-aavai sabh pooray maanas tinchhay.
Anyone who meditates on God, whether of high class or low class, will have all of his hopes and desires fulfilled.
A ufe = 2 ud de Aa fre ate ofes ofa Sve NSN (178-14, ats FFTs, He 4)
say Dhan vaday vad pooray har jan jin" har Dhaari-o har urchhay. ||3]|
Those humble servants of the Lord who enshrine the Lord within their hearts, are blessed, and are made great and totally perfect. ||3] |
oH ate dn agg mifs act afe offs faur ys foe Il 1178-15, wig fide, us 4)
ham dhee“dhay dheem bahut at bhaaree har Dhaar kirpaa parabh milchhay.
I am so low, I am an utterly heavy lump of clay. Please shower Your Mercy on me, Lord, and unite me with Yourself.
AS ood Tg uUfeor aig 3S GH MES ulss ute USNS (1178-16, ats fIFa, He 4) jan naanak gur paa-i-aa har toothay ham kee-ay patit paveechhay. ||4]|2]|4||
The Lord, in His Mercy, has led servant Nanak to find the Guru; I was a sinner, and now I have become immaculate and pure. ||| |4||2||4||
SHS FISH HIS Il (1178-16) basant hindol mehlaa 4. Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:
Hat fea fag Hour ofa 3 Aa fos ate afe on ofA ate il (1178-17, wis FI3B, Hs 4)
mayraa ik khin manoo-aa reh na sakai nit har har naam ras geeDhay. My mind cannot survive, even for an instant, without the Lord. I drink in continually the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fa@ atsa safe ufsS afe ust af are fase fasta Wil (1178-17, stg fI3s, He 4) ji-o baarik rasak pari-o than maataa than kaadhay bilal bileeDhay. ||1]|
It is like a baby, who joyfully sucks at his mother's breast; when the breast is withdrawn, he weeps and cries. ||1]|
difse AG AS HS So OH She HO Il 1178-18, ats fsa, He 4)
gobind jee-o mayray man tan naam har beeDhay.
O Dear Lord of the Universe, my mind and body are pierced through by the Name of the Lord.
zs ata ag Afsag ufeor fete afer oa af AT Wan ToS Ul (1178-18, ats fISs, He 4)
vadai bhaag gur satgur paa-i-aa vich kaa-i-aa nagar har seeDhay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, I have found the Guru, the True Guru, and in the body-village, the Lord has revealed Himself. ||1]|Pause| |
Uar qqoe
Wo & AA ATA d AS ofa fasts ys ofa sO lt (1179-1, wig fede, we 4)
jan kay saas saas hai jaytay har bireh parabhoo har beeDhay.
Each and every breath of the Lord's humble servant is pierced through with love of the Lord God.
fAG AS ane Uifs vifs acct fas AS SY AASB IQ (1179-2, wis fT, ne 4)
ji-o jal kamal pareet at bhaaree bin jal daykhay sukleeDhay. ||2||
As the lotus is totally in love with the water and withers away without seeing the water, so am I in love with the Lord. ||2||
no Afus an fadna deals Cuefit ag afs ye i (1179-2, wiz fede, Hs 4)
jan japi-o naam niranjan narhar updays guroo har pareeDhay.
The Lord's humble servant chants the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord reveals Himself.
HOH HOH at JH He foart ofe nifiyfS afs afs sta Si (179-3, wis f3s, He 4) janam janam kee ha-umai mal niksee har amrit har jal neeDhay. ||3||
The filth of egotism which stained me for countless lifetimes has been washed away, by the Ambrosial Water of the Ocean of the Lord. ||3]|
THe AGH 6 fase Sas SH UA Tug musa Il (1179-4, aig fis, He 4)
hamray karam na bichrahu thaakur tum" paij rakhahu apneeDhay.
Please, do not take my karma into account, O my Lord and Master; please save the honor of Your slave.
dfs ae Afs faoG dost Ao SSA ASS uetT ISISNUll (1179-4, ais PBs, He 4) har bhaavai sun bin-o bayntee jan naanak saran paveeDhay. ||4||3]|5]|
O Lord, if it pleases You, hear my prayer; servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. [413] 151]
SHS fISB HIS Il (1179-5) basant hindol mehlaa 4. Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:
Ho fis fis safH soft so oe fee wie aot Sr US II (1179-5, ais f¥3e, He 4)
man khin khin bharam bharam baho Dhaavai til ghar nahee vaasaa paa-ee-ai.
Each and every moment, my mind roams and rambles, and runs all over the place. It does not stay in its own home, even for an instant.
dfs nian Fae eg fafs ofes wis vets orfs SAS Wl (1179-6, wiz fIFs, He 4)
gur ankas sabad daaroo sir Dhaari-o ghar mandar aan vasaa-ee-ai. ||1]|
But when the bridle of the Shabad, the Word of God, is placed over its head, it returns to dwell in its own home. ||1]|
difse mG AsHats nfs ofa foment i 1179-7, ats fe3e, He 4)
gobind jee-o satsangat mayl har Dhi-aa-ee-ai.
O Dear Lord of the Universe, lead me to join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, so that I may meditate on You, Lord.
ICH da afeor AY ufemr afe Hof fa ware NA TIS Ut (1179-7, sts FFs, He 4) ha-umai rog ga-i-aa sukh paa-i-aa har sahj samaaDh lagaa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am cured of the disease of egotism, and I have found peace; I have intuitively entered into the state of Samaadhi. ||1]|Pause] |
ufg Jo BS AT Hed we Ho shmr ofa o Have Il 1179-8, ag f¥3s, Hs 4)
ghar ratan laal baho maanak laaday man bharmi-aa leh na sakaa-ee-ai.
This house is loaded with countless gems, jewels, rubies and emeralds, but the wandering mind cannot find them.
fA@ Gs au don fas ae fC Asats Ay BISM NI 1179-9, wis fF3a, H 4)
ji-o odaa koop guhaj khin kaadhai ti-o satgur vasat lahaa-ee-ai. ||2||
As the water-diviner finds the hidden water, and the well is then dug in an instant, so do we find the object of the Name through the True Guru. ||2]|
fas oA Afsag ATG 3 ufemr 3 foo foo og Ales II 1179-9, wig 3s, He 4)
jin aisaa satgur saaDh na paa-i-aa tay Dharig Dharig nar jeevaa-ee-ai.
Those who do not find such a Holy True Guru - cursed, cursed are the lives of those people.
HoH uereg ufs ee ufenr ast ges ASA SI (1179-10, Hts fF3e, He 4)
janam padaarath punn fal paa-i-aa ka-udee badlai jaa-ee-ai. | |3] |
The treasure of this human life is obtained when one's virtues bear fruit, but it is lost in exchange for a mere shell. ||3]|
HOneS dfs fe ys fas ate frou ag freer it (179-11, ats FBG, Hs 4) maDhusoodan har Dhaar parabh kirpaa kar kirpaa guroo milaa-ee-ai. O Lord God, please be merciful to me; be merciful, and lead me to meet the Guru.
Wo sea fosare ue ufenr fife AG ofe Te webs sisi 179-11, wiz fF3a, He 4) jan naanak nirbaan pad paa-i-aa mil saaDhoo har gun gaa-ee-ai. ||4||4]|6]|
Servant Nanak has attained the state of Nirvaanaa; meeting with the Holy people, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4]|4]|6]|
SHS fISB HIS 8 Il 1179-12) basant hindol mehlaa 4. Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:
mee we sfenr vy faftmr fa Hone Het HE Il 1179-12, ais f¥3e, He 4)
aavan jaan bha-i-aa dukh bikhi-aa dayh manmukh sunjee sunj.
Coming and going, he suffers the pains of vice and corruption; the body of the self- willed manmukh is desolate and vacant.
oH OH fas us odt Sfaur Af uad as ABZ WAU (1179-13, wis 3s, vs 4)
raam naam khin pal nahee chayti-aa jam pakray kaal salunj. ||1]|
He does not dwell on the Lord's Name, even for an instant, and so the Messenger of Death seizes him by his hair. ||1]|
difse Me faa GBH HAST He I 1179-14, ats fie, He 4) gobind jee-o bikh ha-umai mamtaa munj. O Dear Lord of the Universe, please rid me of the poison of egotism and attachment.
AsHats as at ofe first fife Hats ofs gH SE NU TIS I 1179-14, ais FB, He 4) satsangat gur kee har pi-aaree mil sangat har ras bhunj. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Sat Sangat, Guru's True Congregation is so dear to the Lord. So join the Sangat, and taste the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
AsHats AT efeor afs HoT Ades ATG UE Il (1179-15, wis fT, Hs 4)
satsangat saaDh da-i-aa kar maylhu sarnaagat saaDhoo pannj.
Please be kind to me, and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the Holy; I seek the Sanctuary of the Holy.
JH sae UTag ate Sy ys 3H ete ete FY Fz MQM (1179-15, ws FFs, ve 4)
ham dubday paathar kaadh layho parabh tum" deen da-i-aal dukh bhanj. ||2||
I am a heavy stone, sinking down - please lift me up and pull me out! O God, Merciful to the meek, You are the Destroyer of sorrow. ||2]|
dfs Grafs oss foe nists pom AsHafs fife afa Se it 1179-16, ats fie, He 4)
har ustat Dhaarahu rid antar su-aamee satsangat mil buDh lanj.
I enshrine the Praises of my Lord and Master within my heart; joining the Sat Sangat, my intellect is enlightened.
ofg oH OH US waret oH ats fees wh Se USI (1179-17, His fs, He 4) har naamai ham pareet lagaanee ham har vitahu ghum vanj. ||3]|| I have fallen in love with the Lord's Name; I am a sacrifice to the Lord. ||3]|
Wo & ufs Hoee dfs ys of oH te” ole SE il 1179-18, wis FFs, ws 4)
jan kay poor manorath har parabh har naam dayvhu har lanj.
O Lord God, please fulfill the desires of Your humble servant; please bless me with Your Name, O Lord.
He waa His 3fe woe sfeur 3 afe Hy AE afs Fe USUUNDNIQNACHANSIN (1179-18, SHs f§3s, He 4) 7
jan naanak man tan anad bha-i-aa hai gur mantar dee-o har bhanj.
4115] 171]12] [18] ]71 1371]
Servant Nanak's mind and body are filled with ecstasy; the Guru has blessed him with the Mantra of the Lord's Name. ||4||5]]7||12]|18]|7||37]|
Yat AICO
SHS HIS Uwe I ESA (1180-1) basant mehlaa 5 ghar 1 dutukay Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Du-Tukay:
qe Afsas ure Il (1180-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad ASE ats SHAS Il (1180-2, ws, Hz 5) gur sayva-o kar namaskaar. I serve the Guru, and humbly bow to Him.
MIA TH'S HABIT Il (1180-2, aHy, He 5) aaj hamaarai mangalchaar. Today is a day of celebration for me.
MIA TH'S HIT MST Il (1180-2, aH, He 5) aaj hamaarai mahaa anand. Today I am in supreme bliss.
fos wet 32 afHe NAW (1180-2, as, He 5) chint lathee bhaytay gobind. ||1]| My anxiety is dispelled, and I have met the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
ming THT fafa SAS Il (1180-3, mts, Hs 5) aaj hamaarai garihi basant. Today, it is springtime in my household.
Ts WS ys SH IAT NA TIS Il (1180-3, wy, ue 5) gun gaa-ay parabh tum" bay-ant. ||1|| rahaa-o. I sing Your Glorious Praises, O Infinite Lord God. ||1]||Pause] |
MIA HS FS STA Il (1180-3, sty, He 5) aaj hamaarai banay faag. Today, I am celebrating the festival of Phalgun.
us Hatt fife Bese war Il (1180-4, ws, He 5) parabh sangee mil khaylan laag. Joining with God's companions, I have begun to play.
dot alot AS AS Il (1180-4, ats, He 5) holee keenee sant sayv. I celebrate the festival of Holi by serving the Saints.
IT Bar wifs Bes SS MI (1180-4, sy, ve 5) rang laagaa at laal dayv. ||2]|| I am imbued with the deep crimson color of the Lord's Divine Love. ||2] |
HO 30 H@fsS mifs migu il cis0-4, as, 3 5) man tan ma-uli-o at anoop. My mind and body have blossomed forth, in utter, incomparable beauty.
Ha ordt eS TU Il (1180-5, wy, Hs 5) sookai naahee chhaav Dhoop. They do not dry out in either sunshine or shade;
ASt FSt Toor Ff il (1180-5, ws, we 5) saglee rootee hari-aa ho-ay. they flourish in all seasons.
Ae SHS Td fs SS ISI (1180-5, ay, He 5) sad basant gur milay dayv. ||3]| It is always springtime, when I meet with the Divine Guru. |[3]|
fasy AfHe od usw Il (1180-6, a3, He 5) birakh jami-o hai paarjaat. The wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree has sprouted and grown.
SS Bd SH ISS BHT Il (1180-6, ay, wu: 5) fool lagay fal ratan bhaa“t. It bears flowers and fruits, jewels of all sorts.
fgufs nurs dfs qed ate | (1180-6, wiz, He 5) taripat aghaanay har gunah gaa-ay. I am satisfied and fulfilled, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Ho ose Ufa ofa ofa fommM= isnall ciso-6, ais, He 5)
jan naanak har har har Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||1]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||4||1]|
SHS HIS U Il (1180-7)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
Jewat US HS TS ATS Il (1180-7, wy, He 5) hatvaanee Dhan maal haat keet. The shopkeeper deals in merchandise for profit.
wordt Fe ufo BS i 1180-7, ag, v2 5) joo-aaree joo-ay maahi cheet. The gambler's consciousness is focused on gambling.
MHOt Ate ye UTE Il (1180-8, as, v2 5) amlee jeevai amal khaa-ay. The opium addict lives by consuming opium.
f3@ afs Ho Ae ofe forte ail cis0-s, ats, He 5) ti-o har jan jeevai har Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]| In the same way, the humble servant of the Lord lives by meditating on the Lord.
[21
nue df AS x Fe Il (1180-8, HS, He 5) apnai rang sabh ko rachai. Everyone is absorbed in his own pleasures.
fas ufs ofemr faz fs3 sat A TIE Il ciso-9, sy, He 5) jit parabh laa-i-aa tit tit lagai. ||1]| rahaa-o. He is attached to whatever God attaches him to. ||1]|Pause||
Hu AH He feafsare il (1180-9, ats, H2 5) maygh samai mor nirtikaar. When the clouds and the rain come, the peacocks dance.
dz fy fasts aBars i (1180-9, wig, He 5) chand daykh bigsahi ka-ulaar. Seeing the moon, the lotus blossoms.
Hat afga Sf mse Il (1180-10, arty, H: 5) maataa baarik daykh anand. When the mother sees her infant, she is happy.
f3@ afe xo Hefo fy af NN Cis0-10, sty, He 5)
ti-o har jan jeeveh jap gobind. ||2]|
In the same way, the humble servant of the Lord lives by meditating on the Lord of the Universe. ||2| |
fiw Jo Ae SHS HA Il (1180-10, ay, He 5) singh ruchai sad bhojan maas. The tiger always wants to eat meat.
ve Uf As fas SA II (1180-11, ay, H 5) ran daykh sooray chit ulaas. Gazing upon the battlefield, the warrior's mind is exalted.
fasus a nifs ae filmi il (180-11, ws, He 5) kirpan ka-o at Dhan pi-aar. The miser is totally in love with his wealth.
dfs AS AS ote Ife wMOr”, Sil (1180-11, sty, v3 5) har jan ka-o har har aaDhaar. ||3]| The humble servant of the Lord leans on the Support of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
Hea da fea gat ue Il (1180-12, a3, H2 5) sarab rang ik rang maahi. All love is contained in the Love of the One Lord.
Hee Aa AY dfs & OTE Il (1180-12, ay, v2 5) sarab sukhaa sukh har kai naa-ay. All comforts are contained in the Comfort of the Lord's Name.
farts usufs feg fears il (1180-12, ag, H3 5) tiseh paraapat ih niDhaan. He alone receives this treasure,
SOA TdT fAA AT VS ISN (1180-13, wFs, He 5) naanak gur jis karay daan. ||4]|2]| O Nanak, unto whom the Guru gives His gift. ||4]|2]|
SHS HIS U Il (1180-13)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
fsH sH3 fan ys fxurs il c1180-13, sty, Hs 5) tis basant jis parabh kirpaal. He alone experiences this springtime of the soul, unto whom God grants His Grace.
faq SHs fan ag efeers Il (1180-13, az, He 5) tis basant jis gur da-i-aal. He alone experiences this springtime of the soul, unto whom the Guru is merciful.
Hae fsn & fam Sa AN Il (1180-14, wy, He 5) mangal tis kai jis ayk kaam. He alone is joyful, who works for the One Lord.
fsH Ae SH faR feet ony Al (1180-14, wg, He 5)
tis sad basant jis ridai naam. ||1||
He alone experiences this eternal springtime of the soul, within whose heart the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides. ||1]|
fafa 3° & BAZ ast il (1180-14, ag, ve 5) garihi taa kay basant ganee. This spring comes only to those homes,
Wa atese dfs gat Al TIS I (1180-15, wy, He 5) jaa kai keertan har Dhunee. ||1|| rahaa-o. in which the melody of the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises resounds. ||1]||Pause] |
UfS urTsqaH HBTS Har Il (1180-15, ay, ws 5)
pareet paarbarahm ma-ul manaa. O mortal, let your love for the Supreme Lord God blossom forth.
farirg ane ufs AST Il (1180-15, wy, Hs 5) gi-aan kamaa-ee-ai poochh janaa”. Practice spiritual wisdom, and consult the humble servants of the Lord.
A sunt faa AOA Il (1180-16, wiz, He 5) so tapsee jis saaDhsang. He alone is an ascetic, who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Re fomrat fam aafs Fa ii c1s0-16, ss, He 5) sad Dhi-aanee jis gureh rang. ||2]| He alone dwells in deep, continual meditation, who loves his Guru. ||2| |
A fses@ faa 3@ ufemr | ciso-16, wig, us 5) say nirbha-o jin" bha-o pa-i-aa.
He alone is fearless, who has the Fear of God. A Ader fa gH afeor | ciso-17, wiz, Hs 5)
so sukhee-aa jis bharam ga-i-aa. He alone is peaceful, whose doubts are dispelled.
A featst fan feet ate i cis0-17, a3, ne 5) so ikaa™tee jis ridaa thaa-ay. He alone is a hermit, who heart is steady and stable.
Het fogse ATS of= ISI (1180-17, Hs, He 5) so-ee nihchal saach thaa-ay. ||3]|| He alone is steady and unmoving, who has found the true place. ||3]|
Sar un Sa UifS i ciso-is, wiz, us 5) aykaa khojai ayk pareet. He seeks the One Lord, and loves the One Lord.
BIAS USHS TS StS Il (1180-18, sty, He 5) darsan parsan heet cheet. He loves to gaze upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
dfs Ga Jar ATA HTS Il (1180-18, wIS, Hz 5) har rang rangaa sahj maan. He intuitively enjoys the Love of the Lord.
Sa UA (SA AS ATHS III (1180-18, sty, vs 5) naanak daas tis jan kurbaan. ||4|[3]| Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to that humble being. ||4]|3]|
ular 19C%
SHS HIS U Il (1181-1)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
fia ure 3H fils ae I cusi-1, wig, ue 5) jee-a paraan tum" pind deen". You gave us our soul, breath of life and body.
Hag Hee Ofe AfS ate Il cisi-1, wis, Hs 5) mugaDh sundar Dhaar jot keen". I am a fool, but You have made me beautiful, enshrining Your Light within me.
Afs mfr ys SH efenirs | (isi-1, wy, v3 5) sabh jaachik parabh tum" da-i-aal. We are all beggars, O God; You are merciful to us.
oH AUS des fers Il (1181-2, wy, He 5) naam japat hovat nihaal. ||1|| Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, we are uplifted and exalted. ||1]|
Ae USN AGS AGE AA Il (1181-2, wy, ue 5) mayray pareetam kaaran karan jog. O my Beloved, only You have the potency to act,
IG we SHS AAG Fa AU! FITC Il (1181-2, ats, we 5) ha-o paava-o tum tay sagal thok. ||1]| rahaa-o. and cause all to be done. ||1||Pause| |
oy AUS des Burg Il 1181-3, as, wu: 5) naam japat hovat uDhaar. Chanting the Naam, the mortal is saved.
OH AUS AY AIA Ard Il (1181-3, wAy, He 5) naam japat sukh sahj saar. Chanting the Naam, sublime peace and poise are found.
oy Aus ufs Hat dF Il 1181-3, ag, He 5) naam japat pat sobhaa ho-ay. Chanting the Naam, honor and glory are received.
oy Aus faus ardt af Qi cusi-4, ats, He 5) naam japat bighan naahee ko-ay. ||2|| Chanting the Naam, no obstacles shall block your way. ||2||
Ww aes fed Fos VT Il (1181-4, ws, He 5) jaa kaaran ih dulabh dayh. For this reason, you have been blessed with this body, so difficult to obtain.
AS He ys Uf Il cisi-4, wy, ws 5) so bol mayray parabhoo deh. O my Dear God, please bless me to speak the Naam.
Wants vfs feg fA I cisi-s, wis, Hs 5) saaDhsangat meh ih bisraam. This tranquil peace is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ret foe aut ys 3d OH ISI (isi-s, sg, He 5) sadaa ridai japee parabh tayro naam. ||3]| May I always chant and meditate within my heart on Your Name, O God. ||3]|
33 fag gar afe ata i cisi-s, wz, Hs 5) tujh bin doojaa ko-ay naahi. Other than You, there is no one at all.
Ag 3d 8G 33 nfs ATG II cisi-6, as, H: 5)
sabh tayro khayl tujh meh samaahi. Everything is Your play; it all merges again into You.
fa@ are F358 aft S Il cisi-6, ais, He 5) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakh lay. As it pleases Your Will, save me, Lord.
HY Sot UT Te fHS sisil cisi-6, ay, v2 5) sukh naanak pooraa gur milay. ||4||4|| O Nanak, peace is obtained by meeting with the Perfect Guru. ||4||4] |
SHS HIS U Il (1181-7) basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
av o
ys UfsH He Afar gfe Il cisi-7, wis, we 5) parabh pareetam mayrai sang raa-ay. My Beloved God, my King is with me.
fants ef4 o@ ater HAE I cisi-7, as, He 5) jisahi daykh ha-o jeevaa maa-ay.
Gazing upon Him, I live, O my mother.
w ot fiefs eu o Se I cusi-7, ag, nH 5)
jaa kai simran dukh na ho-ay. Remembering Him in meditation, there is no pain or suffering.
af efeur fereg farfo xfs nal cusi-s, a3, He: 5) kar da-i-aa milaavhu tiseh mohi. ||1]| Please, take pity on me, and lead me on to meet Him. ||1||
He UTSH YTS MOTE He Il (1181-8, wy, He 5) mayray pareetam paraan aDhaar man. My Beloved is the Support of my breath of life and mind.
Ae yrs AS 3d TS NAN TIC Il (isi-s, wy, He 5) jee-o paraan sabh tayro Dhan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. This soul, breath of life, and wealth are all Yours, O Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
Ww ag dafo af og SS Il (usi-9, wg, v2 5) jaa ka-o khojeh sur nar dayv. He is sought by the angels, mortals and divine beings.
Hie Ho AY B Bld Fz Il (1181-9, ay, ve 5)
mun jan saykh na laheh bhayv.
The silent sages, the humble, and the religious teachers do not understand His mystery.
aw at afs ffs adt o we Il cisi-9, wis, Hs 5) jaa kee gat mit kahee na jaa-ay. His state and extent cannot be described.
whe wife whe whe sfomt AME MQ (1181-10, sy, Hs 5)
ghat ghat ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2|| In each and every home of each and every heart, He is permeating and pervading.
21 |
WT a SIS MISS H Il 1181-10, ay, v2 5) jaa kay bhagat aanand mai. His devotees are totally in bliss.
W a SIs A SS F Il 1181-10, sty, He 5) jaa kay bhagat ka-o naahee khai. His devotees cannot be destroyed.
Wa saIs ag ost SF Il ciisi-u, wy, He 5) jaa kay bhagat ka-o naahee bhai. His devotees are not afraid.
Wa sas A Ae A ISI (usi-11, stg, He 5) jaa kay bhagat ka-o sadaa jai. ||3]| His devotees are victorious forever. ||3]|
age Gun sat adt WE Il cisi-11, wis, He 5) ka-un upmaa tayree kahee jaa-ay. What Praises of Yours can I utter?
Auest ug sfoG ANTE I (isi-11, ws, He 5) sukh-daata parabh rahi-o samaa-ay. God, the Giver of peace, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.
Soa AS SA VS Il (1181-12, wy, v2 5) naanak jaachai ayk daan. Nanak begs for this one gift.
afe fasur xfs fo OH NSU (usi-12, sts, He 5) kar kirpaa mohi dayh naam. ||4||5]]| Be merciful, and bless me with Your Name. ||4]|5]]|
SHS HIS U Il (1181-12)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
ffs uret fA Is |! I (1181-13, ats, v2 5) mil paanee ji-o haray boot. As the plant turns green upon receiving water,
Aunts SS ISH FS Il c1isi-13, wy, Hs 5) saaDhsangat ti-o ha-umai chhoot. just so, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, egotism is eradicated.
AAT OTA dts Hite I (1181-13, ats, He 5) jaisee daasay Dheer meer. Just as the servant is encouraged by his ruler,
3A Barge aed ute NA (1181-13, sts, He 5) taisay uDhaaran gurah peer. ||1|| we are saved by the Guru. ||1]|
3H US YS CSTs Ill (1181-14, wy, ue 5) tum daatay parabh daynhaar. You are the Great Giver, O Generous Lord God.
fon fon fSH SHAATS IA TIS Il (1181-14, ats, v2 5) nimakh nimakh tis namaskaar. ||1]| rahaa-o. Each and every instant, I humbly bow to You. ||1||Pause]|
fanfo usrufs AGA | (181-14, as, He 5) jisahi paraapat saaDhsang. Whoever enters the Saadh Sangat
SH Ae Bar uUTSAIH Fa Il (1181-15, sty, ue 5) tis jan laagaa paarbarahm rang. - that humble being is imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God.
3 due 3 se Hass Il cusi-15, ws, He 5) tay banDhan tay bha-ay mukat. He is liberated from bondage.
sas meats Aa Has MQM (1181-15, a3, He 5) bhagat araaDheh jog jugat. ||2|| His devotees worship Him in adoration; they are united in His Union. ||2]|
Og Hse Tan Ufe Il cisi-i6, wiz, us 5) naytar santokhay daras paykh. My eyes are content, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
TAS WES TE MSa Il (1181-16, sts, He 5) rasnaa gaa-ay gun anayk. My tongue sings the Infinite Praises of God.
Ao gst TT YAS I (1181-16, ay, H2 5) tarisnaa boojhee gur parsaad. My thirst is quenched, by Guru's Grace.
Ho witurat dfs dats AMS NII (1181-16, ws, He 5) man aaghaanaa har raseh su-aad. ||3]|| My mind is satisfied, with the sublime taste of the Lord's subtle essence. ||3] |
AA Bd VIS AS Ill (1181-17, ay, ve 5) sayvak laago charan sayv. Your servant is committed to the service of Your Feet,
mife usd wudud 2S I (1181-17, ws, He 5) aad purakh aprampar dayv. O Primal Infinite Divine Being.
Hae Burge Sg OH Il (1181-17, ag, He 5) sagal uDhaaran tayro naam. Your Name is the Saving Grace of all.
soa utes feg fears isiell (1isi-1s, x3, He 5) naanak paa-i-o ih niDhaan. ||4||6]| Nanak has received this teasure. ||4||6]|
SHS HIS U Il (1181-18)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
SH 8S BS S Ad Il (1181-18, wis, v2 5) tum bad daatay day rahay. You are the Great Giver; You continue to give.
Aba yre Hfo afe Fd il (iisi-19, wy, He 5) jee-a paraan meh rav rahay. You permeate and pervade my soul, and my breath of life.
“AS As SHS us Il (1181-19, avy, uz 5) deenay saglay bhojan khaan. You have given me all sorts of foods and dishes.
Hfo fosae fea To 3 AS IAI (181-19, sts, He 5) mohi nirgun ik gun na jaan. ||1]| I am unworthy; I know none of Your Virtues at all. ||1]|
JG ag 5 WHS Sat AVG Il 1isi-19, ay, He 5) ha-o kachhoo na jaan-o tayree saar. I do not understand anything of Your Worth.
UST AAT 3 ats afs Hat ys efenrs NAN TIS Il (1182-1, ay, He 5)
too kar gat mayree parabh da-i-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Save me, O my Merciful Lord God. ||1]|Pause] |
AU 3 SUS AGH Alls Il (1182-1, sy, He 5) jaap na taap na karam keet. I have not practiced meditation, austerities or good actions.
wire ort ae SHS il (1182-2, wy, ws 5) aavai naahee kachhoo reet. I do not know the way to meet You.
Ho Hts aa mA SS I (1182-2, ws, 2 5) man meh raakha-o aas ayk. Within my mind, I have placed my hopes in the One Lord alone.
OH 3d At SIS SA MM (1182-2, wis, 2 5) naam tayray kee tara-o tayk. ||2|| The Support of Your Name shall carry me across. ||2]|
Ada Fst ys SH Yates Il (1182-2, wis, vs 5) sarab kalaa parabh tum" parbeen. You are the Expert, O God, in all powers.
ms 3 uefa nafs Hts Il (1182-3, ay, He 5) ant na paavahi jaleh meen. The fish cannot find the limits of the water.
MoH MoH Bs 3 ST il (1182-3, ag, v2 5) agam agam oochah tay ooch. You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable, the Highest of the High.
JH Gd JH ATS HT ISI (1182-3, ws, we 5) ham thoray tum bahut mooch. |[3]| I am small, and You are so very Great. ||3]|
faa 3 fourfenr A arat I (1182-4, ag, 12 5) jin too Dhi-aa-i-aa say ganee. Those who meditate on You are wealthy.
fa 3 urfenr A Oat I (1182-4, ag, He 5) jin too paa-i-aa say Dhanee. Those who attain You are rich.
fafe 3 Afeor Fat A il (1182-4, wy, He 5) jin too sayvi-aa sukhee say. Those who serve You are peaceful.
HS Adle SSA UP NSIDI (1182-4, ats, He 5) sant saran naanak paray. ||4||7|| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||4||7]|
SHS HIS U Il (1182-5)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
fsa 3 Afe fats J off ii (1182-5, wg, He 5) tis too sayv jin too kee-aa. Serve the One who created You.
fan uata fats Ate thor | 182-5, ats, He 5) tis araaDh jin jee-o dee-aa. Worship the One who gave you life.
fSA at wag dfs fefs a & HA Il (1182-6, ws, wn 5) tis kaa chaakar hohi fir daan na laagai. Become His servant, and you shall never again be punished.
fA at afe Userct fefs sy F Ha WAU (1182-6, wy, ws 5) tis kee kar potdaaree fir dookh na laagai. ||1]| Become His trustee, and you shall never again suffer sorrow. ||1]|
tes aa ofa far yrat Il (1182-6, ag, He 5) ayvad bhaag hohi jis paraanee. That mortal who is blessed with such great good fortune,
A ure feg ue fasaret di gore il (1182-7, ats, He 5) SO paa-ay ih pad nirbaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. attains this state of Nirvaanaa. ||1]|Pause] |
ort Ae Aza fagar i (1182-7, ag, w2 5) doojee sayvaa jeevan birthaa. Life is wasted uselessly in the service of duality.
Re Tet FT USS MIA I (1182-7, wy, ws 5) kachhoo na ho-ee hai pooran arthaa. No efforts shall be rewarded, and no works brought to fruition.
HTSH AST ust TIS Il (1182-8, wis, He 5) maanas sayvaa kharee duhaylee. It is so painful to serve only mortal beings.
Ag at AS Het AIST NMI (1182-8, ws, v2 5) saaDh kee sayvaa sadaa suhaylee. ||2|| Service to the Holy brings lasting peace and bliss. ||2||
A Safa Wet AY STeT II (1182-8, ais, He 5) jay lorheh sadaa sukh bhaa-ee. If you long for eternal peace, O Siblings of Destiny,
AY Hols Tafa asvet Il (1182-9, wy, He 5) saaDhoo sangat gureh bataa-ee. then join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; this is the Guru's advice.
Ca mba Fem 3H Il (1182-9, ws, we 5) oohaa japee-ai kayval naam. There, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is meditated on.
AY Hafs UrsaTH MSI (1182-9, aE, He 5) saaDhoo sangat paargraam. ||3]| In the Saadh Sangat, you shall be emancipated. ||3]|
Hae 33 vfs 33 fame il 1182-9, as, Hz 5) Sagal tat meh tat gi-aan. Among all essences, this is the essence of spiritual wisdom.
Hea fame ufo fa famire il (1182-10, ws, Hz 5) sarab Dhi-aan meh ayk Dhi-aan. Among all meditations, meditation on the One Lord is the most sublime.
dfs atsse ufos SSH War Il (1182-10, wy, He 5) har keertan meh ootam Dhunaa. The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is the ultimate melody.
Soa Td fyfs aS TS Sci (1182-10, ws, v2 5)
naanak gur mil gaa-ay gunaa. ||4]|8]| Meeting with the Guru, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||8]|
SHS HIS U Il (1182-11)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
fan Sos HY ufes dE Il (1182-11, wg, ne 5) jis bolat mukh pavit ho-ay. Chanting His Name, one's mouth becomes pure.
fan fanas fosHe 3 APE It (1182-11, a3, He 5) jis simrat nirmal hai so-ay. Meditating in remembrance on Him, one's reputation becomes stainless.
fan nied AH fas o Ad Il (1182-12, wy, He 5) jis araaDhay jam kichh na kahai. Worshipping Him in adoration, one is not tortured by the Messenger of Death.
fan at AS AS fas BI NA (1182-12, ay, He 5) jis kee sayvaa sabh kichh lahai. ||1]| Serving Him, everything is obtained. ||1]|
oH OM fH TH IH Il 1182-12, ag, He 5) raam raam bol raam raam. The Lord's Name - chant the Lord's Name.
fSnragd Ho & Aas aH NA TIS Il (1182-13, sty, vs 5) ti-aagahu man kay sagal kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. Abandon all the desires of your mind. ||1]|Pause] |
fan & Us Usfs MATA II (1182-13, as, He 5) jis kay Dhaaray Dharan akaas. He is the Support of the earth and the sky.
uife wie fA at d YarA Il (1182-13, wg, He 5) ghat ghat jis kaa hai pargaas. His Light illuminates each and every heart.
fan fanes ufss usts dfe tl (1182-14, ais, He 5) jis simrat patit puneet ho-ay. Meditating in remembrance on Him, even fallen sinners are sanctified;
mis ats fefa fefa o df NN (1182-14, as, He 5) ant kaal fir fir na ro-ay. ||2]| in the end, they will not weep and wail over and over again. ||2] |
Aas OSH His SSH TSH Il (1182-14, arty, He 5) sagal Dharam meh ootam Dharam. Among all religions, this is the ultimate religion.
TH KISS & Gufs ASH Il (1182-15, wy, we 5) karam kartoot kai oopar karam. Among all rituals and codes of conduct, this is above all.
frA a wots Afs od Sz Il (1182-15, ws, vs 5) jis ka-o chaaheh sur nar dayv. The angels, mortals and divine beings long for Him.
HS AS at Ga AS Sl (1182-15, ws, ve 5) sant sabhaa kee lagahu sayv. |[3]| To find Him, commit yourself to the service of the Society of the Saints. ||3]|
mife usta fA abort Bre Il (1182-16, ay, v3 5) aad purakh jis kee-aa daan. One whom the Primal Lord God blesses with His bounties,
fan a@ fifemr afe fears il (1182-16, as, He 5) tis ka-o mili-aa har niDhaan. obtains the treasure of the Lord.
fan at afs fiefs adt o Ate I (1182-16, a3, He 5) tis kee gat mit kahee na jaa-ay. His state and extent cannot be described.
Sea AS Tle Sle forts sie (1182-17, ws, u3 5) naanak jan har har Dhi-aa-ay. ||4]|9]| Servant Nanak meditates on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|9]|
SHS HIS U Il (1182-17)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
Ho 36 State weit fmm it (1182-17, sts, He 5)
man tan bheetar laagee pi-aas. My mind and body are gripped by thirst and desire.
afe efenrts ust Het MTA II (1182-18, ats, 42 5) gur da-i-aal pooree mayree aas. The Merciful Guru has fulfilled my hopes.
faofeu are ATOHfar Il (1182-18, ats, He 5) kilvikh kaatay saaDhsang. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all my sins have been taken away.
oH AfuG ofs am dfar AI (1182-18, ats, He 5) naam japi-o har naam rang. ||1|| I chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; I am in love with the Name of the Lord.
[21
ad usAte SHS FST Il (1182-19, ws, ns 5) gur parsaad basant banaa. By Guru's Grace, this spring of the soul has come.
do AHS fose Sfs ord Het Het Ufs AA AST NA TIE Il (1182-19, ats, He 5)
charan kamal hirdai ur Dhaaray sadaa sadaa har jas sunaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within my heart; I listen to the Lord's Praise, forever and ever. ||1]|Pause| |
UST AACS
AHde AMM arse ATE Il (1183-1, wy, ve 5) samrath su-aamee kaaran karan. Our All-powerful Lord and Master is the Doer of all, the Cause of all causes.
Hfs nora ys Sat ASE Il (1183-1, wy, ve 5) mohi anaath parabh tayree saran. I am an orphan - I seek Your Sanctuary, God.
Aba AS 3d yrorfe i 1183-1, ag, Hs 5) jee-a jant tayray aaDhaar. All beings and creatures take Your Support.
ate fasur ys &fs fensts i211 (183-1, wis, us 5)
kar kirpaa parabh layhi nistaar. ||2|| Be merciful, God, and save me. ||2||
Sz USS VU OA VT Il (1183-2, sty, nz 5) bhav khandan dukh naas dayv. God is the Destroyer of fear, the Remover of pain and suffering.
Afs ad Hfe HS 3 At AS Il (1183-2, sty, vs 5) Sur nar mun jan taa kee sayv. The angelic beings and silent sages serve Him.
Use MATH A at Rot HFT Il (1183-2, aig, He 5) Dharan akaas jaa kee kalaa maahi. The earth and the sky are in His Power.
so dior vfs AS ufo SI (1183-3, ats, He 5) tayraa dee-aa sabh jant khaahi. ||3]| All beings eat what You give them. ||3]|
nisart ys efenrs Il (1183-3, aig, Hs 5) antarjaamee parabh da-i-aal. O Merciful God, O Searcher of hearts,
mus BA AS seta forts il (1183-3, wis, H2 5) apnay daas ka-o nadar nihaal. please bless Your slave with Your Glance of Grace.
afa fasur xfs Fo BS Il (1183-4, ag, v2 5) kar kirpaa mohi dayh daan. Please be kind and bless me with this gift,
afu Ate oa Sd BH IIIO! (1133-4, wy, He 5) jap jeevai naanak tayro naam. ||4]|10]| that Nanak may live in Your Name. ||4||10]|
SHS HIS U Il (1183-4)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
oH dfat AS TS uns Il (1183-5, sy, He 5) raam rang sabh ga-ay paap. Loving the Lord, one's sins are taken away.
TH AUS AE Sdt ASU Il (1183-5, sty, nH 5) raam japat kachh nahee santaap. Meditating on the Lord, one does not suffer at all.
difse wus Afs fe nits i c1is3-5, ats, He 5) gobind japat sabh mitay anDhayr. Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, all darkness is dispelled.
dfs fAnes AS Sts ST NA (1183-5, HAS, He 5) har simrat kachh naahi fayr. ||1]| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the cycle of reincarnation comes to an end.
[21
SHS JH TH IA Il (1183-6, arty, v2 5) basant hamaarai raam rang. The love of the Lord is springtime for me.
Hs wot fAG AST Aa NU TIC Il 183-6, FS, He 5) sant janaa si-o sadaa sang. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am always with the humble Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
HS Wot aot Cuew il 1183-7, wis, v2 5) sant janee kee-aa updays. The Saints have shared the Teachings with me.
Ad dfs sas A Ufs SF Il 1183-7, ats, He 5) jah gobind bhagat so Dhan days. Blessed is that country where the devotees of the Lord of the Universe dwell.
dfs safsdie Sfemre are Il (1183-7, ats, He 5) har bhagtiheen udi-aan thaan. But that place where the Lord's devotees are not, is wilderness.
ag yAte wife wife use iQIl (1183-8, wis, He 5) gur parsaad ghat ghat pachhaan. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, realize the Lord in each and every heart. ||2]|
dfs ataso JA Sa Sa Il (1183-8, sty, He 5) har keertan ras bhog rang. Sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and enjoy the nectar of His Love.
Ho UY ATS J AT AM Il (1183-8, wy, us 5) man paap karat too sadaa sang. O mortal, you must always restrain yourself from committing sins.
foafe uy ys ATET'S Il (1183-9, wy, ve 5) nikat paykh parabh karanhaar. Behold the Creator Lord God near at hand.
Ss Os Ys AGH ATT ISI (1183-9, arty, He 5) eet oot parabh kaaraj saar. ||3]| Here and hereafter, God shall resolve your affairs. ||3]|
do SHS fAG wai frre I (1183-9, ats, He 5) charan kamal si-o lago Dhi-aan. I focus my meditation on the Lord's Lotus Feet.
afs fasur ufs ats erg il (1183-10, aig, ue 5) kar kirpaa parabh keeno daan. Granting His Grace, God has blessed me with this Gift.
Sfoor AS Fat at ae gfe i 1183-10, wig, Hs 5) tayri-aa sant janaa kee baachha-o Dhoor. I yearn for the dust of the feet of Your Saints.
Afu sax AuMt Ae Jafs Wel (1183-10, aH, He 5) jap naanak su-aamee sad hajoor. ||4]|11]| Nanak meditates on his Lord and Master, who is ever-present, near at hand. ||4]|11]|
SHS HIS U Il (1183-11)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
Ad udHAg fos ST Il (1183-11, ws, He 5) sach parmaysar nit navaa. The True Transcendent Lord is always new, forever fresh.
ad fasu 3 fSs VST Il (1183-11, ws, H2 5) gur kirpaa tay nit chavaa. By Guru's Grace, I continually chant His Name.
ys Taes Het ary | (1183-11, ay, He 5) parabh rakhvaalay maa-ee baap. God is my Protector, my Mother and Father.
aw a fanefs odt H3TE IU (1183-12, ats, He 5) jaa kai simran nahee santaap. ||1]| Meditating in remembrance on Him, I do not suffer in sorrow. ||1]|
UAH fonret fea nfs fea ote i (1183-12, afs, nH 5) khasam Dhi-aa-ee ik man ik bhaa-ay. I meditate on my Lord and Master, single-mindedly, with love.
qs ys at Het Aeeret ATS AMfofa shor af ofS ua TIS il (183-12, wy, vs 5)
gur pooray kee sadaa sarnaa-ee saachai saahib rakhi-aa kanth laa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I seek the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru forever. My True Lord and Master hugs me close in His Embrace. ||1]|Pause] |
nue AS ufs mrfu Ta Il (1183-13, ws, Hs 5) apnay jan parabh aap rakhay. God Himself protects His humble servants.
wAe ws Als Sf aat Il (1183-13, aHy, He 5) dusat doot sabh bharam thakay. The demons and wicked enemies have grown weary of struggling against Him.
fag aa AS Sot ATE Il (1183-14, aig, He 5) bin gur saachay nahee jaa-ay. Without the True Guru, there is no place to go.
eu tH fersts gd ote NH (1133-14, a3, He 5)
dukh days disantar rahay Dhaa-ay. ||2||
Wandering through the lands and foreign countries, people only grow tired and suffer in pain. ||2]|
fags Bar ot fhefA arfs il (1183-14, wis, us 5)
kirat on"aa kaa mitas naahi. The record of their past actions cannot be erased.
6fe nrurat difamr rf ufo i 1183-15, as, H 5) O-ay apnaa beeji-aa aap khaahi. They harvest and eat what they have planted.
Ae at suena ify APE I (1183-15, ats, He 5) jan kaa rakhvaalaa aap so-ay. The Lord Himself is the Protector of His humble servants.
He a@ udfs o Hata af= NI (1183-15, wt, He 5) jan ka-o pahuch na sakas ko-ay. ||3]| No one can rival the humble servant of the Lord. ||3]|
yfs oA ga ats ASS Mf II (1183-16, HZ, Hs 5) parabh daas rakhay kar jatan aap. By His own efforts, God protects His slave.
Ms YIS A A YSTY Il (1183-16, aS, we 5) akhand pooran jaa ko partaap. God's Glory is perfect and unbroken.
we afse fos dS ate i 1183-16, ats, H2 5) gun gobind nit rasan gaa-ay. So sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe with your tongue forever.
Soa Ale ofa vas fomrfe neil (1183-17, ws, He 5)
naanak jeevai har charan Dhi-aa-ay. ||4||12|| Nanak lives by meditating on the Feet of the Lord. ||4||12]|
SHS HIS U Il (1183-17)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
Td VIE AdSS SY Ter Il (1183-17, wy, us 5) gur charan sarayvat dukh ga-i-aa. Dwelling at the Guru's Feet, pain and suffering go away.
ursqgatyH ufs adt Hfemr il 1183-18, wg, H3 5) paarbarahm parabh karee ma-i-aa. The Supreme Lord God has shown mercy to me.
Ava HOTA YIS STH Il (1183-18, aS, He 5) sarab manorath pooran kaam. All my desires and tasks are fulfilled.
Afu He Soa IH BM INA (1183-18, sts, He 5) jap jeevai naanak raam naam. ||1]| Chanting the Lord's Name, Nanak lives. ||1]|
W afs Aaet fas ofe fats nr] Il 1183-19, ats, H2 5) saa rut suhaavee jit har chit aavai. How beautiful is that season, when the Lord fills the mind.
fag Afsas dA faooist was fefs fefe mre AS NU TICS It (1183-19, HS, He 5) bin satgur deesai billaa‘tee saakat fir fir aavai jaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the True Guru, the world weeps. The faithless cynic comes and goes in reincarnation, over and over again. ||1]|Pause| |
UsT AICB
A uses faa dfs us TAA I (1184-1, wig, He 5) say Dhanvant jin har parabh raas. They alone are rich, who have the Wealth of the Lord God.
OH au ae Aafe ote il (1184-1, wy, ne 5) kaam kroDh gur sabad naas. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, sexual desire and anger are eradicated.
3 faon fogs ue ufeor it (1184-1, ats, He 5) bhai binsay nirbhai pad paa-i-aa. Their fear is dispelled, and they attain the state of fearlessness.
ad fufs sofa aA fomrfenr i211 (1184-2, ats, He 5) gur mil naanak khasam Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||2]| Meeting with the Guru, Nanak meditates on his Lord and Master. ||2]|
Wonats yfs at feerA il (1184-2, wg, ue 5) saaDhsangat parabh kee-o nivaas. God dwells in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
of Afy Af Tet uss MTA II (1184-2, ets, He 5) har jap jap ho-ee pooran aas. Chanting and meditating on the Lord, one's hopes are fulfilled.
ate af Hodis sfe sfomr il (1184-3, wis, He 5) jal thal mahee-al rav rahi-aa. God permeates and pervades the water, the land and the sky.
asd fife arate of of afer il (1184-3, wis, He 5)
gur mil naanak har har kahi-aa. ||3]| Meeting with the Guru, Nanak chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
mAé fafa o fofa ea i aath uaufs fA OH ST Il (1184-4, as, He 5)
asat siDh nav niDh ayh. karam paraapat jis naam dayh.
The eight miraculous spiritual powers and the nine treasures are contained in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. This is bestowed when God grants His Grace.
ys Afu afy Atefo Sd OA Il (1184-4, wis, ue 5) parabh jap jap jeeveh tayray daas. Your slaves, O God, live by chanting and meditating on Your Name.
ad ffs soa GHS YIA INSIISI (1184-5, aS, ws 5)
gur mil naanak kamal pargaas. ||4]|13]| O Nanak, the heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth. ||4||13] |
SH Hoe u we 9 fea SX 1184-6) basant mehlaa 5 ghar 1 ik tukay Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Ik-Tukay:
qe Afsas ure II (1184-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hae fear afl ust il 184-7, wig, He 5) sagal ichhaa jap punnee-aa. Meditating on the Lord, all desires are fulfilled,
ufs HS fast fesfonr Wail cis4-7, wis, Hs 5) parabh maylay chiree vichhunni-aa. ||1]| and the mortal is re-united with God, after having been separated for so long. ||1]|
3H deg dfie Gee AT Il (1184-7, wg, v2 5) tum ravhu gobindai ravan jog. Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, who is worthy of meditation.
fas dfn AY AOA ST NA TIC Il (1184-7, ay, v2 5) jit ravi-ai sukh sahj bhog. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Meditating on Him, enjoy celestial peace and poise. ||1]|Pause| |
ats fasut seta featfemi i (1184-8, as, He 5) kar kirpaa nadar nihaali-aa. Bestowing His Mercy, He blesses us with His Glance of Grace.
muet amy nifty ANTM QI (1184-8, aA, He 5) apnaa daas aap sam"aali-aa. ||2|| God Himself takes care of His slave. ||2]|
Aa Aovet ofA got Il (1184-9, as, He 5) Sayj Suhaavee ras banee. My bed has been beautified by His Love.
nife foe us AY Tost SII (1184-9, wig, He 5) aa-ay milay parabh sukh Dhanee. ||3]| God, the Giver of Peace, has come to meet me. ||3]|
HI TE nee & Atatant Il (1184-9, aig, us 5) mayraa gun avgan na beechaari-aa. He does not consider my merits and demerits.
YS Toad VIS UAMfaM NSIAUIAII (1184-10, aH, He 5)
parabh naanak charan poojaaree-aa. ||4]|1]|14]| Nanak worships at the Feet of God. ||4]|1]|14]|
SHS HIS U Il (1184-10)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
fxofay faa arte aar il (1184-10, ats, H 5) kilbikh binsay gaa-ay gunaa. The sins are erased, singing the Glories of God;
mates Curt AJA Ta" Il (1184-10, as, He 5) an-din upjee sahj Dhunaa. ||1|| night and day, celestial joy wells up. ||1]|
Ho H@fae afs sae Afar i (184-11, sty, He 5) man ma-uli-o har charan sang. My mind has blossomed forth, by the touch of the Lord's Feet.
ate fasur Ay He 8 fos TS ahs oH Sar NU TIS it cis4-11, wy, ws 5) kar kirpaa saaDhoo jan bhaytay nit raatou har naam rang. ||1|| rahaa-o. By His Grace, He has led me to meet the Holy men, the humble servants of the Lord. I remain continually imbued with the love of the Lord's Name. ||1]|Pause] |
afes fasur yare TUS | (1184-12, mtg, us 5) kar kirpaa pargatay gopaal. In His Mercy, the Lord of the World has revealed Himself to me.
ofs of Burg tte eens 21 (1184-12, ws, He 5)
larh laa-ay uDhaaray deen da-i-aal. ||2||
The Lord, Merciful to the meek, has attached me to the hem of His robe and saved me. |[2]|
feg Ho dur ATG Ofs I iis4-12, wig, He 5) in man ho-aa saaDh Dhoor. This mind has become the dust of the Holy;
fos ft Amit Tafs WS (1184-13, wg, He 5) nit daykhai su-aamee hajoor. ||3]| I behold my Lord and Master, continually, ever-present. ||3] |
am au fre met il (1184-13, wis, Hs 5) kaam kroDh tarisnaa ga-ee. Sexual desire, anger and desire have vanished.
Sot YS fagur set NSUAUAUI (1184-13, HAS, us 5)
naanak parabh kirpaa bha-ee. ||4]|2||15]| O Nanak, God has become kind to me. ||4||2|]15]]|
SHS HIS U Il (1184-14)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
da fuer? ys wrt it c1is4-14, aetg, m2 5) rog mitaa-ay parabhoo aap. God Himself has cured the disease.
TeX IY nus aT ay All (1134-14, ws, ys 5) baalak raakhay apnay kar thaap. ||1]| He laid on His Hands, and protected His child. ||1]|
Aifs AoA fafo AE BAZ Il (1184-15, wis, He 5) saat sahj garihi sad basant. Celestial peace and tranquility fill my home forever, in this springtime of the soul.
Gs ys at Avat ore afore gu Afu ofa ofs HF Ul TIS I (1184-15, wty, we 5)
gur pooray kee sarnee aa-ay kali-aan roop jap har har mant. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru; I chant the Mantra of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Embodiment of emancipation. ||1]|Pause]|
Rat Hau a] ufs mrfiy ii (184-16, ag, ue 5) sog santaap katay parabh aap. God Himself has dispelled my sorrow and suffering.
aa nua a@ fos fos AfY IQH (1184-16, ats, H8 5) gur apunay ka-o nit nit jaap. ||2|| I meditate continually, continuously, on my Guru. ||2]|
A AO So AY oS Il (1184-16, wy, He 5) jo jan tayraa japay naa-o. That humble being who chants Your Name,
Afs 2 ure fagse TE WS Sil (1184-17, arty, us 5)
sabh fal paa-ay nihchal gun gaa-o. ||3]|
obtains all fruits and rewards; singing the Glories of God, he becomes steady and stable. ||3||
SSA SIS SSt SHS il (1184-17, ws, v3 5) naanak bhagtaa bhalee reet. O Nanak, the way of the devotees is good.
Ayes Aue Sts ats NSUSIAEM (1184-17, HFS, He 5) sukh-daata japday neet neet. ||4]|3]|16]| They meditate continually, continuously, on the Lord, the Giver of peace. ||4||3]|16]]|
SHS HIS U Il (1184-18)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
JAH ats ate FSS Il (1184-18, wy, ws 5) hukam kar keen"ay nihaal. By His Will, He makes us happy.
mus Aza AG stent efenrs il 1184-18, wis, He 5) apnay sayvak ka-o bha-i-aa da-i-aal. ||1]| He shows Mercy to His servant. ||1]|
afs ys AS UT shor | (1184-19, ay, He 5) gur poorai sabh pooraa kee-aa. The Perfect Guru makes everything perfect.
nifys on fee ufo sor an TIS it (is4-19, ss, ue 5) amrit naam rid meh dee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He implants the Amrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the heart. ||1]|Pause]|
AH UsH Hae ae B Sets I (1is4-19, wis, v2 5) karam Dharam mayraa kachh na beechaari-o. He does not consider the karma of my actions, or my Dharma, my spiritual practice.
ugar qacu
ad uatd Sense fonstsG ii (1185-1, wis, He 5) baah pakar bhavjal nistaari-o. ||2|| Taking me by the arm, He saves me and carries me across the terrifying world-ocean.
21 |
ufs arfe He fess ae Il (1185-1, sg, He 5) parabh kaat mail nirmal karay. God has rid me of my filth, and made me stainless and pure.
Td us at Adet Us ISI (1185-1, ay, HW 5) gur pooray kee sarnee paray. ||3]| I have sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
nifu asta orf ageas Il (1185-2, ats, H2 5) aap karahi aap karnaihaaray. He Himself does, and causes everything to be done.
ats faxsur stax Burg iSisiIil (1185-2, sy, Hs 5)
kar kirpaa naanak uDhaaray. ||4]|4]|17]| By His Grace, O Nanak, He saves us. ||4||4||17]|
SHS HIG U (1185-3) basant mehlaa 5 Basant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars ure I (1185-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ey FG SH SH Il (1185-4, aH, we 5) daykh fool fool foolay. Behold the flowers flowering, and the blossoms blossoming forth!
md fsurfar four i ciss-4, atg, v3 5) aha" ti-aag ti-aagay. Renounce and abandon your egotism.
BIS AHS UTS Il (1185-4, wy, He 5) charan kamal paagay. Grasp hold of His Lotus Feet.
3H fag Us Asta Il (1185-4, ay, He 5) tum milhu parabh sabhaagay. Meet with God, O blessed one.
dfs Sf3 Ho AS Il TIS I (1185-4, aig, ve 5) har chayt man mayray. rahaa-o. O my mind, remain conscious of the Lord. ||Pause| |
AUS IA AS Il (1185-5, ay, H2 5) saghan baas koolay. The tender young plants smell so good,
fefx 3d Afx ASS I (1185-5, wHE, we 5) ik rahay sook kathoolay. while others remain like dry wood.
SHS ofS niet il 1185-5, wis, nz 5) basant rut aa-ee. The season of spring has come;
UISHST FT MAU (1185-5, sHE, He 5) parfooltaa rahay. ||1]| it blossoms forth luxuriantly. ||1]|
ma oe wifes F i (1185-6, ay, He 5) ab kaloo aa-i-o ray. Now, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga has come.
fea oH Seg FST Il (1185-6, wig, ue 5) ik naam bovhu bovhu. Plant the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
ma ofS atdt ard Il (1185-6, arty, He 5) an root naahee naahee. It is not the season to plant other seeds.
HS SdH JBI FHI Il (1185-6, ay, ve 5) mat bharam bhoolahu bhoolahu. Do not wander lost in doubt and delusion.
ad fxs ofa ue i fan HASfax I Bar I 1185-7, ay, He 5)
gur milay har paa-ay. jis mastak hai laykhaa.
One who has such destiny written on his forehead, shall meet with the Guru and find the Lord.
Ho 3f3 OH F Il (1185-7, aS, He 5) man rut naam ray. O mortal, this is the season of the Naam.
To Ad BOA Ts Jd Ts JF MUAH (1185-7, ws, He 5) gun kahay naanak har haray har haray. ||2||18]| Nanak utters the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||2]|18]|
SHS HIS uU wg 2 fISB 1185-9) basant mehlaa 5 ghar 2 hindol Basant, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Hindol:
qe Afsars yATfe il (1185-9) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofe feag frag He set ofan ofs aay fee ote I (1185-10, wiz F335, Hs 5)
ho-ay ikatar milhu mayray bhaa-ee dubiDhaa door karahu liv laa-ay.
Come and join together, O my Siblings of Destiny; dispel your sense of duality and let yourselves be lovingly absorbed in the Lord.
dfs SH & deg Hat Tenfy sng Aer feefE NAN (1185-10, ats f¥3e, He 5)
har naamai kay hovhu jorhee gurmukh baishu safaa vichhaa-ay. ||1]|
Let yourselves be joined to the Name of the Lord; become Gurmukh, spread out your mat, and sit down. ||1]||
fea fafa uA arg ate Il (1185-11, ais fi3s, He 5) in" biDh paasaa dhaalahu beer. In this way, throw the dice, O brothers.
qenfy oy Aug fea wat nis afte og oat ute NU ToS I cis5-11, ats fF3e, He 5) gurmukh naam japahu din raatee ant kaal nah laagai peer. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. At the very last moment, you shall not have to suffer in pain. ||1||Pause| |
dH UdH SH UCuls AAG AS Add SH Ard ll (1185-12, avy fe3e, us 5) karam Dharam tum" cha-uparh saajahu sat karahu tum" saaree. Let righteous actions be your gameboard, and let the truth be your dice.
ay a0 BF Hg Ase MAT US Safa films NN (1185-12, ats FBS, He 5) kaam kroDh lobh moh jeetahu aisee khayl har pi-aaree. ||2] |
Conquer sexual desire, anger, greed and worldly attachment; only such a game as this is dear to the Lord. ||2||
Cfs fenas ads uses AE Jie mrs I 1185-13, ats fie, He 5)
uth isnaan karahu parbhaatay so-ay har aaraaDhay.
Rise in the early hours of the morning, and take your cleansing bath. Before you go to bed at night, remember to worship the Lord.
fous w@ Sure Ha Afsag AY AOA ASt us AS BI (1185-13, ats FE, He 5) bikh-rhay daa-o langhaavai mayraa satgur sukh sahj saytee ghar jaatay. ||3]||
My True Guru will assist you, even on your most difficult moves; you shall reach your true home in celestial peace and poise. ||3]||
~ SA
dfs mmy 4S wmy Se afe wm seq Tetfemr I 1185-14, ats fF3s, He 5)
har aapay khaylai aapay daykhai har aapay rachan rachaa-i-aa.
The Lord Himself plays, and He Himself watches; the Lord Himself created the creation.
Ho aoa Dente Hod 4S A fafs ant whe wrfeor sNAIAell (1185-15, ats fITs, He 5) jan naanak gurmukh jo nar khaylai so jin baajee ghar aa-i-aa. ||4||1]|19]|
O servant Nanak, that person who plays this game as Gurmukh, wins the game of life, and returns to his true home. ||4]|1]|19]|
SHS He u fFSS Il (1185-16)
basant mehlaa 5 hindol. Basant, Fifth Mehl, Hindol:
3c gees 3d Wels m@g o BA AE Il (1185-16, aH FFTs, He 5) tayree kudrat toohai jaaneh a-or na doojaa jaanai. You alone know Your Creative Power, O Lord; no one else knows it.
fan 3 faut asta AS fimrd Het 3S USTs AU (1185-16, ats fF3e, He 5) jis no kirpaa karahi mayray pi-aaray so-ee tujhai pachhaanai. ||1|| He alone realizes You, O my Beloved, unto whom You show Your Mercy. ||1]|
Stor sast aS afer il (1185-17, wis fs, H2 5) tayri-aa bhagtaa ka-o balihaaraa. I am a Sacrifice to Your devotees.
WS AVS Ae ys Sa Ja Sg MS NA TIE Il (1185-17, wis fIBs, us 5) thaan suhaavaa sadaa parabh tayraa rang tayray aapaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your place is eternally beautiful, God; Your wonders are infinite. ||1]|Pause] |
Sot AS 53 3 FS MST S VA ATS Il (1185-18, why fI3s, Hs 5) tayree sayvaa tujh tay hovai a-or na doojaa kartaa. Only You Yourself can perform Your service. No one else can do it.
SIS 3ST Het 30 HS HAA S J FT TIT NM (1185-18, wis fF3a, we 5) bhagat tayraa so-ee tuDh bhaavai jis no too rang Dhartaa. ||2]| He alone is Your devotee, who is pleasing to You. You bless them with Your Love.
21 |
UST AcE
3S TT TS TST Sy od & SH Il (1136-1, wiz fF3a, we 5) too vad daataa too vad daanaa a-or nahee ko doojaa. You are the Great Giver; You are so very Wise. There is no other like You.
3 ANGE Hom Ha IS foo Aret Sot UAT BI (1186-1, aty fFsa, He 5) too samrath su-aamee mayraa ha-o ki-aa jaanaa tayree poojaa. ||3]|| You are my All-powerful Lord and Master; I do not know how to worship You. |[3]|
37 HIG uidivg AS fimrd feng Sat FT Svat I (1186-2, ats f¥3e, Hz 5) tayraa mahal agochar mayray pi-aaray bikham tayraa hai bhaanaa. Your Mansion is imperceptible, O my Beloved; it is so difficult to accept Your Will.
ad aed ee ufeor eurg af SST HAT MAST NSINOMN (1186-2, ats FFTs, He 5) kaho naanak dheh pa-i-aa du-aarai rakh layvhu mugaDh ajaanaa. ||4]|2]|20||
Says Nanak, I have collapsed at Your Door, Lord. I am foolish and ignorant - please save me! ||4]|2||20]|
SHS fISB HIS U Il (1186-3) basant hindol mehlaa 5. Basant Hindol, Fifth Mehl:
He 3 38 ory o AS sath fammit wid Hot All (1186-3, wis FIs, Hs 5)
mool na boojhai aap na soojhai bharam bi-aapee aha“ manee. ||1||
The mortal does not know the Primal Lord God; he does not understand hmself. He is engrossed in doubt and egotism. ||1]||
fust ursqaH ys Tot Il (1186-4, wiz fide, us 5) pitaa paarbarahm parabh Dhanee. My Father is the Supreme Lord God, my Master.
Hfa fensteg fasarat Al FITS il c1s6-4, avs fIFs, He 5) mohi nistaarahu nirgunee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I am unworthy, but please save me anyway. ||1]|Pause| |
Gufs usa@ ys 3 de feo sherct afe Fat NI cis6-5, wis fe, He 5)
Opat parla-o parabh tay hovai ih beechaaree har janee. ||2||
Creation and destruction come only from God; this is what the Lord's humble servants believe. ||2||
on us aA sf aS ate ufo AMS A Tat SII (1186-5, wis fede, we 5) naam parabhoo kay jo rang raatay kal meh sukhee-ay say ganee. ||3]|
Only those who are imbued with God's Name are judged to be peaceful in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||3]|
neg Cu 5 det AS soa SdH TT ast USISNIWUI (1186-6, wAy ITs, Hs 5) avar upaa-o na ko-ee soojhai naanak taree-ai gur bachnee. ||4]|3]|21]|
It is the Guru's Word that carries us across; Nanak cannot think of any other way. [14] 131]21]|
qe Afsas ure I (1186-7) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ta FHS fiss Hos t Il 1186-7) raag basant hindol mehlaa 9. Raag Basant Hindol, Ninth Mehl:
AG feg 36 fufaor ATE II (1186-7, ats f3e, H2 9) saaDho ih tan mithi-aa jaan-o. O Holy Saints, Know that this body is false.
Ww sisfs HTH SAS OAS Ste USTs AU TIC Il 1186-7, ais FISH, He 9) yaa bheetar jo raam basat hai saacho taahi pachhaano. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord who dwells within it - recognize that He alone is real. ||1|]Pause| |
feg na 3 Hufs Aus at Shy aT MISTS II (1186-8, ats fe, He 9) ih jag hai sampat supnay kee daykh kahaa aidaano. The wealth of this world is only a dream; why are you so proud of it?
fa fas AE & BS ST AT BUSTS UI (1186-9, ws FIT, ws 9) sang tihaarai kKachhoo na chaalai taahi kahaa laptaano. ||1]|| None of it shall go along with you in the end; why do you cling to it? ||1]]|
Cnsfs fee eB uals afe atts Sfs wr I c1is6-9, wiz 3s, Hs 9)
ustat nindaa do-oo parhar har keerat ur aano.
Leave behind both praise and slander; enshrine the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises within your heart.
HO SSA AS Tt H UTS SA UTY SHS MUA (1186-10, sty FFTs, we 9)
jan naanak sabh hee mai pooran ayk purakh bhagvaano. ||2||1]|
O servant Nanak, the One Primal Being, the Lord God, is totally permeating everywhere. |[2||1]|
SHS HIS € Il (1186-10) basant mehlaa 9. Basant, Ninth Mehl:
unt cht A an SAE Il (1186-10, a3, v2 9) paapee hee-ai mai kaam basaa-ay. The heart of the sinner is filled with unfulfilled sexual desire.
Ho due a 3 afas & ATE NA TIE I c1is6-11, ws, He 9) man chanchal yaa tay gahi-o na jaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. He cannot control his fickle mind. ||1]||Pause||
Halt Ha Mig AfeMrA Il (1186-11, ats, He 9) jogee jangam ar sanni-aas. The Yogis, wandering ascetics and renunciates
As ot ufg stat fea SA INA (1186-11, ay, He 9)
sabh hee par daaree ih faas. ||1]|| - this net is cast over them all. ||1]|
fafs fafa ofe & on marta Il (1186-12, sg, He 9) jihi jihi har ko naam sam"aar. Those who contemplate the Name of the Lord
3 32 Wad Bsg us QI (1186-12, ws, H 9) tay bhav saagar utray paar. ||2|| cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|
HS Boa Tle at AGS Il (1186-12, sty, He 9) jan naanak har kee sarnaa-ay. Servant Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord.
an OH Sd TS ATE NSN (1136-13, AZ, He 9)
deejai naam rahai gun gaa-ay. ||3]||2]|
Please bestow the blessing of Your Name, that he may continue to sing Your Glorious Praises. ||3]|2||
SHS HIS € Il (1186-13)
basant mehlaa 9. Basant, Ninth Mehl:
Het H US UTES af BH II (1136-13, ats, He 9) maa-ee mai Dhan paa-i-o har naam. O mother, I have gathered the wealth of the Lord's Name.
Ho He Wes 3 sles afs FS fAATH NU TIS I c1is6-13, wy, we 9) man mayro Dhaavan tay chhooti-o kar baitho bisraam. ||1|| rahaa-o. My mind has stopped its wanderings, and now, it has come to rest. ||1]|Pause| |
Hien HHS 36 3 eat CufaS foo fame il (1186-14, wis, us 9)
maa-i-aa mamtaa tan tay bhaagee upji-o nirmal gi-aan.
Attachment to Maya has run away from my body, and immaculate spiritual wisdom has welled up within me.
Ss Ho Sd uth 6 Wa Tt sats aS IAI (1186-14, sty, He 9)
lobh moh ayh paras na saakai gahee bhagat bhagvaan. ||1]|
Greed and attachment cannot even touch me; I have grasped hold of devotional worship of the Lord. ||1]|
HOH HOH OT HAT aT ISG OH We UE Il (1186-15, wy, Hs 9)
janam janam kaa sansaa chookaa ratan naam jab paa-i-aa.
The cynicism of countless lifetimes has been eradicated, since I obtained the jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fgHo Aas fart Ho 3 for AY HT AHS NI (1186-16, aH, us 9)
tarisnaa sakal binaasee man tay nij sukh maahi samaa-i-aa. ||2| |
My mind was rid of all its desires, and I was absorbed in the peace of my own inner being. ||2||
Wag ds vfenre fas fafa A afie Ts We Il (1186-16, ats, He 9)
jaa ka-o hot da-i-aal kirpaa niDh so gobind gun gaavai.
That person, unto whom the Merciful Lord shows compassion, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
ag aoa feo fafa at HU AG gene urs NSN (1186-17, ag, Hs 9) kaho naanak ih biDh kee sampai ko-oo gurmukh paavai. ||3||3]|| Says Nanak, this wealth is gathered only by the Gurmukh. ||3]|3]|
SHS HIS € Il (1186-17)
basant mehlaa 9. Basant, Ninth Mehl:
Ho ao fants& IH oH Il (1186-17, sts, He 9) man kahaa bisaari-o raam naam. O my mind, how can you forget the Lord's Name?
30 faarn AH fA Ud aH NAN TIE Il (1186-18, ats, He 9)
tan binsai jam si-o parai kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
When the body perishes, you shall have to deal with the Messenger of Death. ||1]|Pause| |
feg Aa ge a uss Il (1186-18, ay, He 9) ih jag Dhoo-ay kaa pahaar. This world is just a hill of smoke.
Ua AAD 3 Aro ufenr foro fafa nail c187-1, ats, H2 9)
tai saachaa maani-aa kih bichaar. ||1]| What makes you think that it is real? ||1]|
U6 ae Aus TT i (1187-1, wiz, us 9) Dhan daaraa sampat garayh. Wealth, spouse, property and household
ae Af & WS ANS BI IQ (1187-1, ay, He 9) kachh sang na chaalai samajh layh. ||2|| - none of them shall go along with you; you must know that this is true! ||2||
fea safs aafes afe Afar i (1187-2, wis, H8 9) ik bhagat naaraa-in ho-ay sang. Only devotion to the Lord shall go with you.
ad aoa 3x fsa Sa dfar Sigil 1187-2, ws, ns 9) kaho naanak bhaj tih ayk rang. ||3]||4|| Says Nanak, vibrate and meditate on the Lord with single-minded love. ||3||4||
SHS HIS € Il (1187-2)
basant mehlaa 9. Basant, Ninth Mehl:
aT SSS I 3S BF WAT Il (1187-2, wy, us 9) kahaa bhooli-o ray jhoothay lobh laag. Why do you wander lost, O mortal, attached to falsehood and greed?
ae faafes ofse mig AT NA TIS i (1187-3, sty, nH 9) kachh bigri-o naahin ajahu jaag. ||1|| rahaa-o. Nothing has been lost yet - there is still time to wake up! ||1||Pause] |
AH Aue & fEg Aa WS Il (1187-3, ay, He 9) sam supnai kai ih jag jaan. You must realize that this world is nothing more than a dream.
faon feo H AST HTS IAI (1187-4, arty, He 9) binsai chhin mai saachee maan. ||1]| In an instant, it shall perish; know this as true. ||1]|
Hfat 3d ofa ans StS Il (1187-4, ats, He 9) sang tayrai har basat neet. The Lord constantly abides with you.
fon MAT SA Sto HTS NI (1187-4, aS, He 9) nis baasur bhaj taahi meet. ||2|| Night and day, vibrate and meditate on Him, O my friend. ||2||
ag nis at df Aate Il (1187-5, ats, H2 9) baar ant kee ho-ay sahaa-ay. At the very last instant, He shall be your Help and Support.
AT SSA TS STA TTS MSUUI (1187-5, ws, He 9) kaho naanak gun taa kay gaa-ay. ||3||5|| Says Nanak, sing His Praises. ||3||5]|
SHS HIS 1 mAcuder we 9 Taam (1187-6) basant mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa ghar 1 dutukee-aa Basant, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House, Du-Tukees:
qe Afsas ure I (1187-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ad aGur ou odt SHS i (1187-7, ws, Hs 1) jag ka-oo-aa naam nahee cheet. The world is a crow; it does not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
om farts ford Su SHS Il 1187-7, a3, ne 1) naam bisaar girai daykh bheet. Forgetting the Naam, it sees the bait, and pecks at it.
Honor 38 SHS wists i c1s7-7, sts, vs 1) manoo-aa dolai cheet aneet. The mind wavers unsteadily, in guilt and deceit.
vag fAS set 35 uss NA (187-7, aE, He 1) jag si-o tootee jhooth pareet. ||1]| I have shattered my attachment to the false world. ||1]|
any au fay sx Sd Il (1187-8, a3, He 1 kaam kroDh bikh bajar bhaar. The burden of sexual desire, anger and corruption is unbearable.
oH faa aA TS VT UA TIE Il (1187-8, ats, He 1) naam binaa kaisay gun chaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Without the Naam, how can the mortal maintain a virtuous lifestyle? ||1]|Pause] |
We AS aT wHs us il (1187-8, ay, we 1) ghar baaloo kaa ghooman ghayr. The world is like a house of sand, built on a whirlpool;
aaufA wat geaer Sfs il (1187-9, wis, He 1) barkhas banee budbudaa hayr. it is like a bubble formed by drops of rain.
Hg ge 3 ofs vat SVfe Il 1187-9, aig, we 1) matar boond tay Dhar chak fayr. It is formed from a mere drop, when the Lord's wheel turns round.
Hea Afs oH at fe WU (1187-9, aig, He 1) sarab jot naamai kee chayr. ||2|| The lights of all souls are the servants of the Lord's Name. ||2||
Ava Gufe ag fafs 4a i (1187-10, wfs, ws 1) sarab upaa-ay guroo sir mor. My Supreme Guru has created everything.
sats as ua wa Sg il (1187-10, ats, He 1) bhagat kara-o pag laaga-o tor. I perform devotional worship service to You, and fall at Your Feet, O Lord.
oth gs WIG 35 GT Il (1187-10, wy, He 1) naam rato chaaha-o tujh or. Imbued with Your Name, I long to be Yours.
oY vate VS A VT NSM (1187-11, afs, He 1)
naam duraa-ay chalai so chor. ||3]|
Those who do not let the Naam become manifest within themselves, depart like thieves in the end. ||3]|
ufs det fag nists uf& i is7-11, ats, He 1) pat kho-ee bikh anchal paa-ay. The mortal loses his honor, gathering sin and corruption.
AY of oS ufs fA whe Ate I cis7-u1, ats, He saach naam rato pat si-o ghar jaa-ay. But imbued with the Lord's Name, you shall go to your true home with honor.
A fas atefa us safe i (1187-12, wis, Hs 1) jo kichh keen"as parabh rajaa-ay. God does whatever He wills.
3 HS fogs@ Het we sil (1187-12, ats, He 1) bhai maanai nirbha-o mayree maa-ay. ||4|| One who abides in the Fear of God, becomes fearless, O my mother. ||4| |
anHfs ad Hefe Sa Il (1187-12, a3, v2 1) kaaman chaahai sundar bhog. The woman desires beauty and pleasure.
UTS SB HIS FA Fa Il (1187-12, sty, Hs 1) paan fool meethay ras rog. But betel leaves, garlands of flowers and sweet tastes lead only to disease.
S
ute faa SS Aa Il (1187-13, ag, He 1) kheelai bigsai tayto sog. The more she plays and enjoys, the more she suffers in sorrow.
us Ades atefa da ull (is7-13, wis, Hs 1) parabh sarnaagat keen"as hog. ||5|| But when she enters into the Sanctuary of God, whatever she wishes comes to pass.
[5] |
aus ufsetA mfce Afters il (1187-13, ss, He 1) kaaparh pahiras aDhik seegaar. She wears beautiful clothes with all sorts of decorations.
net sot gu fears il 1187-14, ats, H2 1) maatee foolee roop bikaar. But the flowers turn to dust, and her beauty leads her into evil.
MITA HOA SiG Sg Il (1187-14, sHy, He 1) aasaa mansaa baa™Dho baar. Hope and desire have blocked the doorway.
on fast Hat wg ag MEN (1187-14, aHs, Hs 1) naam binaa soonaa ghar baar. ||6]|| Without the Naam, one's hearth and home are deserted. ||6||
Meg ust TH ants it (1187-15, wy, us 1) gaachhahu putree raaj ku-aar. O princess, my daughter, run away from this place!
OH SEI AY ey AS Il (1187-15, aig, He 1) naam bhanahu sach dot savaar. Chant the True Name, and embellish your days.
fyS Aeg ys YH wore I (1187-15, ay, Hs 1D pari-o sayvhu parabh paraym aDhaar. Serve your Beloved Lord God, and lean on the Support of His Love.
aa Aaet fay faurn foes il 187-15, fs, He 1)
gur sabdee bikh ti-aas nivaar. ||7]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, abandon your thirst for corruption and poison. ||7]||
Hofe vfs Shor Hoe Afs il (1187-16, a#3, He 1) mohan mohi lee-aa man mohi. My Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind.
ad a Wate usta Sho Il (1187-16, a#3, He 1) gur kai sabad pachhaanaa tohi. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have realized You, Lord.
Tr SS Bots ys Tits il (1187-16, ay, we 1) naanak thaadhay chaaheh parabhoo du-aar. Nanak stands longingly at God's Door.
3d of Ase fasur offs Weal (1187-17, a3, He 1) tayray naam santokhay kirpaa Dhaar. ||8||1]| I am content and satisfied with Your Name; please shower me with Your Mercy.
[18] {21
SHS HIS 4 Il (1187-17)
basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
Ho 36S sone orfe we it cis7-17, ats, He 1) man bhoola-o bharmas aa-ay jaa-ay. The mind is deluded by doubt; it comes and goes in reincarnation.
mis Sag Sse fran HE Il (1187-18, wis, He 1) at lubaDh lubhaana-o bikham maa-ay. It is lured by the poisonous lure of Maya.
od mAfag UA Sa ste Il 1187-18, ats, He 1) nah asthir deesai ayk bhaa-ay. It does not remain stable in the Love of the One Lord.
fA Hie axzeior afe ue Wall (1187-18, wis, He 1 ji-o meen kundlee-aa kanth paa-ay. ||1|| Like the fish, its neck is pierced by the hook. ||1]|
Ho 3oC AHSfA AS OTS I 1187-19, ats, He 1) man bhoola-o samjhas saach naa-ay. The deluded mind is instructed by the True Name.
Td Aa Mas AIA ste Al JTS Il 1187-19, wis, uz 1) gur sabad beechaaray sahj bhaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with intuitive ease. ||1]|Pause]|
Us qaet
Ho JOC SoHfA Seg Sg Il (1188-1, aHy, He 1) man bhoola-o bharmas bhavar taar. The mind, deluded by doubt, buzzes around like a bumble bee.
fas fase ord ag fears il cuss-1, xfs, H2 1)
bil birthay chaahai baho bikaar.
The holes of the body are worthless, if the mind is filled with such great desire for corrupt passions.
Hares fa@ aafA aH Il (1188-1, sg, He 1) maigal ji-o faasas kaamhaar. It is like the elephant, trapped by its own sexual desire.
afs safe afaS At HTS IQI (1188-2, as, He 1) karh banDhan baaDhi-o sees maar. ||2|| It is caught and held tight by the chains, and beaten on its head. ||2||
HO Ha Bes Safsdte il (1188-2, ay, He 1) man mugDhou daadar bhagtiheen. The mind is like a foolish frog, without devotional worship.
ofg gHe Haut SH SS Il (1188-2, wy, we 1)
dar bharsat saraapee naam been.
It is cursed and condemned in the Court of the Lord, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
a a ats 5 ust aM Sls Il (1188-3, ws, He 1) taa kai jaat na paatee naam leen. He has no class or honor, and no one even mentions his name.
Afs gy AUet Ted ate Sil (1188-3, ay, He 1) sabh dookh sakhaa-ee gunah been. ||3]| That person who lacks virtue - all of his pains and sorrows are his only companions.
[I3I|
HG VS 5 Wet Stax IY Il (1188-3, ay, He 1) man chalai na jaa-ee thaak raakh. His mind wanders out, and cannot be brought back or restrained.
fag dfs oA TS ufs 3 APY Il (1188-4, ws, He 1) bin har ras raatay pat na saakh. Without being imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord, it has no honor or credit.
3 umd Asst orf Img I (1188-4, ay, He 1) too aapay surtaa aap raakh. You Yourself are the Listener, Lord, and You Yourself are our Protector.
ufs ose Fe AS rf gi ciss—4, ws, He 1) Dhar Dhaaran daykhai jaanai aap. ||4|| You are the Support of the earth; You Yourself behold and understand it. ||4] |
mifu gore fan aIG ATE Il (1iss-5, ws, He 1) aap bhulaa-ay kis kaha-o jaa-ay. When You Yourself make me wander, unto whom can I complain?
ad HS fase aI HAE Il c1iss-5, wis, He 1) gur maylay birthaa kaha-o maa-ay. Meeting the Guru, I will tell Him of my pain, O my mother.
Wee ESC TE ANTE Il 1188-5, ay, He 1) avgan chhoda-o gun kamaa-ay. Abandoning my worthless demerits, now I practice virtue.
ad get TS As AHS WUll (1188-6, HHS, He 1)
gur sabdee raataa sach samaa-ay. ||5|| Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am absorbed in the True Lord. ||5]|
Afsas fufemt ufs Ssu af= i ciss-6, wiz, ue satgur mili-ai mat ootam ho-ay. Meeting with the True Guru, the intellect is elevated and exalted.
Ho fesHe JEN ae GfE Il ciss-6, ats, He 1) man nirmal ha-umai kadhai Dho-ay. The mind becomes immaculate, and egotism is washed away.
Ret Has dfa o Aa ae Il ciss-7, a3, v2 1) sadaa mukat banDh na sakai ko-ay. He is liberated forever, and no one can put him in bondage.
Het on eure niGg 3 afe Ell (1188-7, ats, He sadaa naam vakhaanai a-or na ko-ay. ||6]| He chants the Naam forever, and nothing else. ||6]|
HO ofa a ae wis ATE I 188-7, ats, He man har kai bhaanai aavai jaa-ay. The mind comes and goes according to the Will of the Lord.
AS fs Sa fas ATE 3 ATE I c1iss-s, as, He 1) sabh meh ayko kichh kahan na jaa-ay. The One Lord is contained amongst all; nothing else can be said.
AS JaH eds Jaty ANTE Il (1iss-8, ats, He 1) sabh hukmo vartai hukam samaa-ay. The Hukam of His Command pervades everywhere, and all merge in His Command.
wu Aa AS fSH SATE NDI (1188-8, a3, 4 1) dookh sookh sabh tis rajaa-ay. || 7] | Pain and pleasure all come by His Will. ||7]||
3 MSG 3 FG Ae TT Il (1188-9, wHy, ws 1) too abhul na bhoolou kaday naahi. You are infallible; You never make mistakes.
ad Aa Here Hfs marts il (1iss-9, ws, He 1)
gur sabad sunaa-ay mat agaahi.
Those who listen to the Word of the Guru's Shabad - their intellects become deep and profound.
3 He@ sag Aa HTT I (1iss-9, ats, Hs 1) too mota-o thaakur sabad maahi. You, O my Great Lord and Master, are contained in the Shabad.
HO Boa Hout A AST ICQ (1188-10, ws, He 1)
man naanak maani-aa sach salaahi. ||8||2|| O Nanak, my mind is pleased, praising the True Lord. ||8]|2||
SHS HIS 4 Il (1188-10)
basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
Zane of flminm fan ae dfE I ciss-10, aig, He 1) darsan kee pi-aas jis nar ho-ay. That person, who thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan,
Sag Ie uddia SfS I ciss-11, ws, v2 1) aykat raachai parhar do-ay. is absorbed in the One Lord, leaving duality behind.
fe vse Hfe nifys ate ii ciss-u1, wiz, Hs 1) door darad math amrit khaa-ay. His pains are taken away, as he churns and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
Tenfe gs Sax ATE AU ciss-u1, wis, we gurmukh boojhai ayk samaa-ay. ||1]| The Gurmukh understands, and merges in the One Lord. ||1||
3d TdHS AS ast Aware | c1iss-12, wis, 4 1D tayray darsan ka-o kaytee billaa-ay. So many cry out for Your Darshan, Lord.
fear & diofA aa Aafe free na soe i ciss-12, ais, He 1)
virlaa ko cheenas gur sabad milaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
How rare are those who realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad and merge with Him. ||1]|Pause] |
ae aus aute fea adit i ciss-12, wfg, ve 1) bayd vakhaan kaheh ik kahee-ai. The Vedas say that we should chant the Name of the One Lord.
6g anis nig fats wdht Il ciss-13, ats, H: 1) oh bay-ant ant kin lahee-ai. He is endless; who can find His limits?
Sa asst fafs Aa ahor il c1ss-13, a3, nz 1) ayko kartaa jin jag kee-aa. There is only One Creator, who created the world.
WS AS Us Has UdMM iQ (1188-13, ss, He 1) baajh kalaa Dhar gagan Dharee-aa. ||2]| Without any pillars, He supports the earth and the sky. |[2]|
Sa famre fomre ufs arat i ciss-14, ais, ue 1
ayko gi-aan Dhi-aan Dhun banee.
Spiritual wisdom and meditation are contained in the melody of the Bani, the Word of the One Lord.
Sa fara maa ATret Il (1188-14, ais, us 1) ayk niraalam akath kahaanee. The One Lord is Untouched and Unstained; His story is unspoken.
Sa AGE Ae SlATS Il (1188-14, ats, v2 1) ayko sabad sachaa neesaan. The Shabad, the Word, is the Insignia of the One True Lord.
Us TI 3 WE WE ISI (1188-15, wy, Hs 1) pooray gur tay jaanai jaan. ||3]| Through the Perfect Guru, the Knowing Lord is known. ||3]|
Sa usH fes Ag set I (1188-15, wis, He 1) ayko Dharam darirhai sach ko-ee. There is only one religion of Dharma; let everyone grasp this truth.
gents ya afer afar At Ul c1iss-15, wiz, we 1) gurmat pooraa jug jug so-ee. Through the Guru's Teachings, one becomes perfect, all the ages through.
Mode st Sa fF BT Il (1188-16, wy, He 1) anhad raataa ayk liv taar. Imbued with the Unmanifest Celestial Lord, and lovingly absorbed in the One,
6g qanfa ure niwy mre Ill (1188-16, ats, He 1) oh gurmukh paavai alakh apaar. ||4|| the Gurmukh attains the invisible and infinite. | |4]|
Sa sus Sa UPSATT Il (1188-16, ats, He 1) ayko takhat ayko paatisaahu. There is one celestial throne, and One Supreme King.
Heat eet Puss Il (1188-17, as, us 1) sarbee thaa-ee vayparvaahu. The Independent Lord God is pervading all places.
fA at abhor fyaee ATT Il (1188-17, wis, ue 1) tis kaa kee-aa taribhavan saar. The three worlds are the creation of that Sublime Lord.
6g wan nidigs SAAT ull (188-17, wy, He 1) oh agam agochar aykankaar. ||5]| The One Creator of the Creation is Unfathomable and Incomprehensible. ||5]|
Sat Hats ATSt aS I (1188-17, ay, we 1) aykaa moorat saachaa naa-o. His Form is One, and True is His Name.
fsa foas Avg for i ciss-is, az, Hs 1 tithai nibrhai saach ni-aa-o. True justice is administered there.
Ardt Adat ufs uses Il (1188-18, wis, v8 1) saachee karnee pat parvaan. Those who practice Truth are honored and accepted.
Adt Usa US HE Ill (1188-18, a#y, He 1) saachee dargeh paavai maan. ||6|| They are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||6]|
Sar sais Sat FT SE il (1188-19, ay, He 1 aykaa bhagat ayko hai bhaa-o. Devotional worship of the One Lord is the expression of love for the One Lord.
fas 3 sat w]e AE II ciss-19, a3, He 1)
bin bhai bhagtee aava-o jaa-o.
Without the Fear of God and devotional worship of Him, the mortal comes and goes in reincarnation.
ad 3 ANS ad fore Il (1188-19, ais, Hs
gur tay samajh rahai mihmaan.
One who obtains this understanding from the Guru dwells like an honored guest in this world.
Ua qace
dfs a TS AG USES IDI (1189-1, HFs, He 1)
har ras raataa jan parvaan. ||7]|| That humble being who is imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord is certified and approved. ||7]|
fes Os Gu@ AGA TSO I (1199-1, as, us 1) it ut daykh-a-u sehjay raava-o. I see Him here and there; I dwell on Him intuitively.
33 fag oad fan o av]SC Il 1189-1, ag, He 1) tujh bin thaakur kisai na bhaava-o. I do not love any other than You, O Lord and Master.
Soa JGH Aafe Aefenr Il c1is9-2, ats, He 1) naanak ha-umai sabad jalaa-i-aa. O Nanak, my ego has been burnt away by the Word of the Shabad.
Afsafe Anat ean featfemr |CUSI (1189-2, ats, Hs 1) satgur saachaa daras dikhaa-i-aa. ||8]||3]|| The True Guru has shown me the Blessed Vision of the True Lord. ||8]]3]|
BAZ HIS 4 Il (1189-2) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
JUS WS o US UT Il (1189-2, wy, He 1) chanchal cheet na paavai paaraa. The fickle consciousness cannot find the Lord's limits.
MSS AS B Ba Il (1189-3, sty, we 1) aavat jaat na laagai baaraa. It is caught in non-stop coming and going.
ey WE Hea AIST Il (1189-3, wy, vs 1) dookh ghano maree-ai kartaaraa. I am suffering and dying, O my Creator.
fag usu & ad B ATS AI (1189-3, sy, He 1) bin pareetam ko karai na saaraa. ||1|| No one cares for me, except my Beloved. ||1]|
AS 83H fan ura star il c1is9-4, ats, ve 1) sabh ootam kis aakha-o heenaa. All are high and exalted; how can I call anyone low?
ofe saat Afs ath usta ual TIS il (1189-4, ws, Hz 1)
har bhagtee sach naam pateenaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Devotional worship of the Lord and the True Name has satisfied me. ||1||Pause] |
mun ats wat sI3T Il (1189-4, ats, Hs 1) a-ukhaDh kar thaakee bahutayray. I have taken all sorts of medicines; I am so tired of them.
fas ey ga fag Ta AT Il cis9-5, wis, He 1) ki-o dukh chookai bin gur mayray. How can this disease be cured, without my Guru?
fag ofa sarst ga wed Il (1189-5, ats, He 1) bin har bhagtee dookh ghanayray. Without devotional worship of the Lord, the pain is so great.
eu AY BS SAT AS MQM (1139-5, wg, He 1) dukh sukh daatay thaakur mayray. ||2|| My Lord and Master is the Giver of pain and pleasure. ||2||
da zs faG sia die il cis9-6, afg, He 1) rog vado ki-o baa“Dha-o Dheeraa. The disease is so deadly; how can I find the courage?
da 33 A are ute I (1139-6, a3, nz 1) rog bujhai so kaatai peeraa. He knows my disease, and only He can take away the pain.
H nieae Ho Hf Adte Il (1189-6, ag, He 1) mai avgan man maahi sareeraa. My mind and body are filled with faults and demerits.
Bes HAS Tf AS ss Sil (189-7, wis, we dhoodhat khojat gur maylay beeraa. ||3]| I searched and searched, and found the Guru, O my brother! ||3]|
Td a Aa aT Ths oS il 1189-7, ay, we 1) gur kaa sabad daaroo har naa-o. The Word of the Guru's Shabad, and the Lord's Name are the cures.
fa@ 3 outa fe TIS i 1189-7, wis, He 1) ji-o too raakhahi tivai rahaa-o. As You keep me, so do I remain.
Ag dat as ef feerS it s9-7, ws, v2 1) jag rogee kah daykh dikhaa-o. The world is sick; where should I look?
ofa feantes fogHe ar iisil (is9-8, ais, Hs 1 har nirmaa-il nirmal naa-o. ||4| | The Lord is Pure and Immaculate; Immaculate is His Name. ||4]|
wg fs we A ofr feare I (1s9-8, af, He 1) ghar meh ghar jo daykh dikhaavai. The Guru sees and reveals the Lord's home, deep within the home of the self;
Td HISt A Hols gars Il (1189-8, wy, He 1) gur mahlee so mahal bulaavai. He ushers the soul-bride into the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
Ho Hfa Hour fes Hfs BST Il (1189-9, aH, He 1) man meh manoo-aa chit meh cheetaa. When the mind remains in the mind, and the consciousness in the consciousness,
MA Jie X Sa wStse™ Mull (1189-9, ay, ue aisay har kay log ateetaa. ||5|| such people of the Lord remain unattached. ||5]|
Jay Aa 3 safe fearAr il (1189-9, as, 2 1)
harakh sog tay raheh niraasaa. They remain free of any desire for happiness or sorrow;
nifys of ofs ath fSetAr Il (1189-10, ws, He 1) amrit chaakh har naam nivaasaa. tasting the Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar, they abide in the Lord's Name.
nrg ues gd fs Bar Il (1189-10, sty, He 1) aap pachhaan rahai liv laagaa. They recognize their own selves, and remain lovingly attuned to the Lord.
Hon Als Tents Sa Ta NEM (1189-10, ws, Hz 1)
janam jeet gurmat dukh bhaagaa. ||6]||
They are victorious on the battlefield of life, following the Guru's Teachings, and their pains run away. ||6||
afs thor Ag ifs ute@ I cis9-11, wis, He 1) gur dee-aa sach amrit peeva-o. The Guru has given me the True Ambrosial Nectar; I drink it in.
Hota HIS Ales Tt ATES I cis9-11, Fs, He 1D sahj mara-o jeevat hee jeeva-o. Of course, I have died, and now I am alive to live.
wus afs Tag TT TS Il (1189-12, ay, ve 1) apno kar raakho gur bhaavai. Please, protect me as Your Own, if it pleases You.
Sud dfe A ssf ANTS NDI (1189-12, ats, He 1) tumro ho-ay so tujheh samaavai. ||7|| One who is Yours, merges into You. ||7]|
sat AS ey da femme | (1189-12, afg, He 1) bhogee ka-o dukh rog vi-aapai. Painful diseases afflict those who are sexually promiscuous.
ufe wfe afe afar ys AME II (1189-12, wis, He 1) ghat ghat rav rahi-aa parabh jaapai. God appears permeating and pervading in each and every heart.
AY ey dt 3 aa Aafe mMSts Il (1189-13, aig, He 1) sukh dukh hee tay gur sabad ateetaa. One who remains unattached, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad
Soa ITH Je fos SS Wcusil 189-13, ws, we 1) naanak raam ravai hit cheetaa. ||8]|4|| - O Nanak, his heart and consciousness dwell upon and savor the Lord. ||8]||4]|
SHS Hoe 9% fea sar | cis9-14) basant mehlaa 1 ik tukee-aa. Basant, First Mehl, Ik-Tukee:
HZ SAH vig aefa As il (1189-14, ay, we 1) mat bhasam anDhoolay garab jaahi. Do not make such a show of rubbing ashes on your body.
feo fafa oat Fa ofa NA (1139-14, ats, He 1) in biDh naagay jog naahi. ||1]| O naked Yogi, this is not the way of Yoga! ||1]|
HS avd farfeS 3 TH OH Il (1189-15, wy, He 1) moorh"ay kaahay bisaari-o tai raam naam. You fool! How can you have forgotten the Lord's Name?
ms ats Sd nits AH NA TITS I (1189-15, ay, He 1) ant kaal tayrai aavai kaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. At the very last moment, it and it alone shall be of any use to you. ||1]||Pause] |
Gd ufs SH Asg sterg il (1189-15, ay, ve 1) gur poochh tum karahu beechaar. Consult the Guru, reflect and think it over.
Ad fus so AfsaUTts NK (1189-16, ws, Hz 1) jah daykh-a-u tah saarigpaan. ||2|| Wherever I look, I see the Lord of the World. ||2]|
foot IB nme AT AE STs Il (1189-16, ay, v2 1) ki-aa ha-o aakhaa jaa” kachhoo naahi. What can I say? I am nothing.
afs ufs As 3d ofS ISI (189-17, ats, He 1) jaat pat sabh tayrai naa-ay. ||3]| All my status and honor are in Your Name. |[3]|
ad HS vag efy gate Ate Il (1139-17, ws, He 1) kaahay maal darab daykh garab jaahi. Why do you take such pride in gazing upon your property and wealth?
VHS TI 3d aE HTT Sil 1189-17, wy, ws chaltee baar tayro kachhoo naahi. ||4|| When you must leave, nothing shall go along with you. ||4||
us Hfe fas sag ate Il (1189-18, wis, He 1) panch maar chit rakhahu thaa-ay. So subdue the five thieves, and hold your consciousness in its place.
na Hats at fed uifS ull (1189-18, ws, He 1) jog jugat kee ihai paa’-ay. ||5|| This is the basis of the way of Yoga. ||5||
ICH tas 3d HS HAT Il (1189-18, ay, Hs 1) ha-umai paikharh tayray manai maahi. Your mind is tied with the rope of egotism.
of 6 U3te us Hats ATs HEN (is9-18, ats, He 1)
har na cheeteh moorhay mukat jaahi. ||6]| You do not even think of the Lord - you fool! He alone shall liberate you. ||6]|
H3 dfs feRfent aH efA urfo I ”is9-19, ats, He 1) mat har visri-ai jam vas paahi. If you forget the Lord, you will fall into the clutches of the Messenger of Death.
nis arte HS Fe UT DI (1189-19, wy, He 1) ant kaal moorhay chot khaahi. ||7]|| At that very last moment, you fool, you shall be beaten. ||7| |
at ago
ad Aa Meats wiry ATE Il (1190-1, wis, He 1 gur sabad beechaareh aap jaa-ay. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and be rid of your ego.
ATS Aa fe SA MMe II (1190-1, sty, He 1) saach jog man vasai aa-ay. ||8]|| True Yoga shall come to dwell in your mind. ||8]|
fafe mG fits fest fan ssfa ofa i (1190-1, a3, He 1) jin jee-o pind ditaa tis cheeteh naahi. He blessed you with body and soul, but you do not even think of Him.
Hat HATS HS Aa Sts UCM (1190-2, wHs, He 1D marhee masaanee moorhay jog naahi. ||9]| You fool! Visiting graves and cremation grounds is not Yoga. ||9]|
TE SoA FS TSt STE Il (1190-2, ay, we 1) gun naanak bolai bhalee baan. Nanak chants the sublime, glorious Bani of the Word.
3H dg HAY BI ues WAMU! (1190-2, HE, He 1) tum hohu sujaakhay layho pachhaan. ||10]|5|| Understand it, and appreciate it. ||10||5]]|
SHS HIS 4 Il (1190-3) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
efaa eaHfs most as Il (1190-3, ats, He 1) dubiDhaa durmat aDhulee kaar. In duality and evil-mindedness, the mortal acts blindly.
HoHfe SoH HFS TAS WAM (1190-3, sHS, He 1) manmukh bharmai majh gubaar. ||1]| The self-willed manmukh wanders, lost in the darkness. ||1]|
HO niger nigst Hf wre I (1190-4, a#s, He 1) man anDhulaa anDhulee mat laagai. The blind man follows blind advice.
qd adat fag SIH 5 TH WAU! TIS ll 1190-4, ats, He 1) gur karnee bin bharam na bhaagai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Unless one takes the Guru's Way, his doubt is not dispelled. ||1]]Pause| |
Honfa vias aaHfs & sret il (1190-4, ars, Hz 1) manmukh anDhulay gurmat na bhaa-ee. The manmukkh is blind; he does not like the Guru's Teachings.
un 3S mifsHTg 3 AST QM (190-5, aH, He 1) pasoo bha-ay abhimaan na jaa-ee. ||2|| He has become a beast; he cannot get rid of his egotistical pride. ||2]|
wd BeaAld HS Cure i (1190-5, wig, He 1) lakh cha-oraaseeh jant upaa-ay. God created 8.4 million species of beings.
Hd Sad ae frafA AHS ISI (1190-5, HZ, He 1) mayray thaakur bhaanay siraj samaa-ay. ||3]| My Lord and Master, by the Pleasure of His Will, creates and destroys them. ||3]|
AIS FS Sat AAT MIs Il (1190-6, wy, uz 1) saglee bhoolai nahee sabad achaar. All are deluded and confused, without the Word of the Shabad and good conduct.
A AMS fA TT AGS gil (1190-6, ay, He 1) so samjhai jis gur kartaar. ||4|| He alone is instructed in this, who is blessed by the Guru, the Creator. ||4||
Td A WAT SAT SS Il (1190-7, ay, v2 1) gur kay chaakar thaakur bhaanay. The Guru's servants are pleasing to our Lord and Master.
aufA Be ardt AH AS NUM (1190-7, sHZ, He 1) bakhas lee-ay naahee jam kaanay. ||5|| The Lord forgives them, and they no longer fear the Messenger of Death. ||5]|
faa & fase Sat ati | 1190-7, ais, He 1) jin kai hirdai ayko bhaa-i-aa. Those who love the One Lord with all their heart
~~ SN
MY HS SdH VaTfEn IEll (1190-8, ws, He 1 aapay maylay bharam chukaa-i-aa. ||6]| - He dispels their doubts and unites them with Himself. ||6]|
SHISHA HTT mrs | (1190-8, ws, He 1) baymuhtaaj bay-ant apaaraa. God is Independent, Endless and Infinite.
Afs ustd ASIST WOM (1190-8, ats, Hz 1) sach pateejai karnaihaaraa. ||7]| The Creator Lord is pleased with Truth. ||7]||
SSX FB TT AHS Il (1190-8, wy, we 1) naanak bhoolay gur samjhaavai. O Nanak, the Guru instructs the mistaken soul.
fa fear ae fear] Well (1190-9, stg, He 1) ayk dikhaavai saach tikaavai. ||8]||6]| He implants the Truth within him, and shows him the One Lord. ||8]|6||
SHS HIS 4 Il (1190-9) basant mehlaa 1. Basant, First Mehl:
mn} SET SH ALS Ml 1190-9, ats, we 1) aapay bhavraa fool bayl. He Himself is the bumble bee, the fruit and the vine.
mma Hats Hts Afs Wl (1190-10, ats, He 1)
aapay sangat meet mayl. ||1||
He Himself unites us with the Sangat - the Congregation, and the Guru, our Best Friend. ||1||
MAT SSI STA B Il (1190-10, ay, He 1) aisee bhavraa baas lay. O bumble bee, suck in that fragrance,
IST SH FS TF NU TIS I (1190-10, a3, we 1) tarvar foolay ban haray. ||1|| rahaa-o. which causes the trees to flower, and the woods to grow lush foliage. ||1]|Pause] |
mn} ager as wif Il (1190-10, ag, Hz 1) aapay kavliaa kant aap. He Himself is Lakshmi, and He Himself is her husband.
mmy ae Aafe aty 2H (1190-11, sts, H3 1)
aapay raavay sabad thaap. ||2|| He established the world by Word of His Shabad, and He Himself ravishes it. ||2]|
ming weg TS uty il (190-11, wf, He 1) aapay bachhroo ga-oo kheer. He Himself is the calf, the cow and the milk.
wind HET GH AST WS (190-11, az, we 1) aapay mandar thamh sareer. ||3]| He Himself is the Support of the body-mansion. ||3]||
my Agel ATETST Il (1190-12, ws, ve 1) aapay karnee karanhaar. He Himself is the Deed, and He Himself is the Doer.
mma dante ate stag sil (1190-12, ats, us 1) aapay gurmukh kar beechaar. ||4|| As Gurmukh, He contemplates Himself. ||4] |
3 ate afs Gufs ageog I (1190-12, aig, we 1) too kar kar daykheh karanhaar. You create the creation, and gaze upon it, O Creator Lord.
Afs Aba wre fe nrg Wull (1190-13, ats, He 1) jot jee-a asa‘kh day-ay aDhaar. ||5|| You give Your Support to the uncounted beings and creatures. ||5||
3 Ag AIT Te Ads Il (1190-13, a¥ys, we 1) too sar saagar gun gaheer. You are the Profound, Unfathomable Ocean of Virtue.
3 mags fedAe UsH ote IEll (1190-13, wy, He 1) too akul niranjan param heer. ||6]| You are the Unknowable, the Immaculate, the most Sublime Jewel. ||6| |
3 MMI ATT ATE AT Il (1190-14, wis, we 1) too aapay kartaa karan jog. You Yourself are the Creator, with the Potency to create.
fssdes THs Aut BST IDI 190-14, sty, ne 1) nihkayval raajan sukhee log. ||7]|| You are the Independent Ruler, whose people are at peace. ||7| |
Soa ONY fs SH AMfe Il (1190-14, ay, ws 1) naanak Dharaapay har naam su-aad. Nanak is satisfied with the subtle taste of the Lord's Name.
fag dfs ag UlsH ASH The WCDI (190-15, HF, He 1 bin har gur pareetam janam baad. ||8]|7]|| Without the Beloved Lord and Master, life is meaningless. ||8]|7| |
SHS FISH HIS VW 2 (1190-16) basant hindol mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Basant Hindol, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars ATE II (1190-16) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
6¢ As seed Sie whe ats HI@fs Sts TIS Il (1190-17, wis FFs, He 1)
na-o sat cha-odah teen chaar kar mahlat chaar bahaalee.
The nine regions, the seven continents, the fourteen worlds, the three qualities and the four ages - You established them all through the four sources of creation, and You seated them in Your mansions.
ad Ue vd dla Me Sar Sar sat AU (1190-17, wis fF8s, He 1 chaaray deevay chahu hath dee-ay aykaa aykaa vaaree. ||1|| He placed the four lamps, one by one, into the hands of the four ages. ||1] |
fhoses HOAeS HO wat AEs SHS UU TIS i 1190-18, ws fFFs, we miharvaan maDhusoodan maaDhou aisee sakat tum"aaree. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O Merciful Lord, Destroyer of demons, Lord of Lakshmi, such is Your Power - Your Shakti. ||1]|Pause] |
wig ufg SAAT ued Sat UGH ad fHaers Il (1190-18, ats fF3s, He 1)
ghar ghar laskar paavak tayraa Dharam karay sikdaaree.
Your army is the fire in the home of each and every heart. And Dharma - righteous living is the ruling chieftain.
Test ta fs fea 2a aa Sa FaTH MQM (1190-19, wis 3s, He 1)
Dhartee dayg milai ik vayraa bhaag tayraa bhandaaree. ||2||
The earth is Your great cooking pot; Your beings receive their portions only once. Destiny is Your gate-keeper. ||2||
a Aggy de fete Ha aee as yr Il (1190-19, wis FFs, He D
naa saaboor hovai fir mangai naarad karay khu-aaree.
But the mortal becomes unsatisfied, and begs for more; his fickle mind brings him disgrace.
Yast AEA
Ba mas seharat m@ae ufs SoSH SI cisi-1, ats fF3s, we 1) lab aDhayraa bandeekhaanaa a-ugan pair luhaaree. ||3]|| Greed is the dark dungeon, and demerits are the shackles on his feet. ||3]|
Unt ug us fos Hears uy as acest Il (191-1, wig fFFe, we poonjee maar pavai nit mudgar paap karay kotvaaree. His wealth constantly batters him, and sin acts as the police officer.
ae var we He AAT Seta SHS Vil cis1-2, wig fia, He 1) bhaavai changa bhaavai mandaa jaisee nadar tum"aaree. ||4]| Whether the mortal is good or bad, he is as You look upon him, O Lord. ||4||
wife usd AG me Ada Aat net edt i (91-2, ats fide, Hes
aad purakh ka-o alhu kahee-ai saykhaa™ aa-ee vaaree.
The Primal Lord God is called Allah. The Shaykh's turn has now come. 226 Velour ag oar mat atefs TSt Null (191-3, ats fF3s, He 1)
dayval dayviti-aa kar laagaa aisee keerat chaalee. ||5|| The temples of the gods are subject to taxes; this is what it has come to. ||5]|
am stat foe HAo ote Ju woes il cisi-3, ay fess, He 1)
koojaa baa“g nivaaj muslaa neel roop banvaaree.
The Muslim devotional pots, calls to prayer, prayers and prayer mats are everywhere; the Lord appears in blue robes.
ufs wie Hho Asat Abort sat nr|eg SH MEN (191-4, ats fsa, He 1
ghar ghar mee-aa sabhnaa" jee-aa™ bolee avar tumaaree. ||6]|
In each and every home, everyone uses Muslim greetings; your speech has changed, O people. ||6||
a 3 ute Hdtufs wfog aval aGe Tt I (191-4, ats fE3s, He 1)
jay too meer maheepat saahib kudrat ka-un hamaaree.
You, O my Lord and Master, are the King of the earth; what power do I have to challenge You?
wd Az ABH ada wife wie frefs Surat WOM Ci91-5, wis fide, He 1)
chaaray kunt salaam karhigay ghar ghar sifat tum"aaree. ||7]|
In the four directions, people bow in humble adoration to You; Your Praises are sung in each and every heart. ||7]||
sive fififs va wo fae or fe feast I cisi-6, wiz fs, He 1)
tirath simrit punn daan kichh laahaa milai dihaarhee.
Making pilgrimages to sacred shrines, reading the Simritees and giving donations in charity - these do bring any profit.
soa on fxs efsuret Har wet AST UCU (1191-6, His FFs, He 1) naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee maykaa gharhee sam"aalee. ||8||1||8]|
O Nanak, glorious greatness is obtained in an instant, remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||8]|1]|8]|
SHS FSG ws 2 HIS 1191-8) basant hindol ghar 2 mehlaa 4 Basant Hindol, Second House, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure I (191-8) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aifeur sate fea aoa efimr fuse ue fag & Joet Il (1191-9, ats f3a, He 4) kaa’-i-aa nagar ik baalak vasi-aa khin pal thir na rahaa-ee. Within the body-village there lives a child who cannot hold still, even for an instant.
mfoa Cure Ase afs aa ad arg Sane IAI (1191-9, ats fF3e, He 4)
anik upaav jatan kar thaakay baara™ baar bharmaa-ee. ||1]|
It makes so many efforts, and grows weary, but still, it wanders restlessly again and again. ||1]|
He Sag wea feas us mires il (191-10, ats fF3s, Hs 4) mayray thaakur baalak ikat ghar aan. O my Lord and Master, Your child has come home, to be one with You.
Afsag fee 3 us urea se TH oH SATS NU TIS I c1i9i-10, wig fF3a, 2 4) satgur milai ta pooraa paa-ee-ai bhaj raam naam neesaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting the True Guru, he finds the Perfect Lord. Meditating and vibrating on the Name of the Lord, he receives the Insignia of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
feg fuasa Hat Adis 3 AS Aa fas TH BH Set Sth It cai91-11, ats f93s, He 4)
ih mirtak marhaa sareer hai sabh jag jit raam naam nahee vasi-aa.
These are dead corpses, these bodies of all the people of the world; the Name of the Lord does not dwell in them.
oH oH af Gea yorfenr fefs afaor dur afimr 21 cis1-12, ats fie, He 4) raam naam gur udak chu-aa-i-aa fir hari-aa ho-aa rasi-aa. ||2||
The Guru leads us to taste the water of the Lord's Name, and then we savor and enjoy it, and our bodies are rejuvenated. ||2| |
H fosus fosus Adte AS fam fea aaHfa vos feerfemr I c1i91-12, ats F835, He 4) mai nirkhat nirkhat sareer sabh khoji-aa ik gurmukh chalat dikhaa-i-aa.
I have examined and studied and searched my entire body, and as Gurmukh, I behold a miraculous wonder.
awdd fa He Afs reas ofe TeHst wie ufemr sil ci91-13, ats fs, He 4)
baahar khoj mu-ay sabh saakat har gurmatee ghar paa-i-aa. ||3]||
All the faithless cynics searched outside and died, but following the Guru's Teachings, I have found the Lord within the home of my own heart. |[3]|
dot de ufenre se o fA fano face wife mrfeor i cu91-14, ais f3s, He 4) deenaa deen da-i-aal bha-ay hai ji-o krisan bidar ghar aa-i-aa.
God is Merciful to the meekest of the meek; Krishna came to the house of Bidar, a devotee of low social status.
fufes Aeor seat ute AS fae vid woe Sfa Mfr igi ci91-14, ats FS, He 4) mili-o sudaamaa bhaavnee Dhaar sabh kichh aagai daalad bhanj samaa-i-aa. ||4] | Sudama loved God, who came to meet him; God sent everything to his home, and ended his poverty. ||4| |
TH OM ot Un eadt AS Safes nrfy geet I (91-15, ats fF3s, He 4)
raam naam kee paij vadayree mayray thaakur aap rakhaa-ee.
Great is the glory of the Name of the Lord. My Lord and Master Himself has enshrined it within me.
A Afs Was acts sdlet fea gst fe o weet Ul (1191-16, ais f3e, He 4)
jay sabh saakat karahi bakheelee ik ratee til na ghataa-ee. ||5]|
Even if all the faithless cynics continue slandering me, it is not diminished by even one iota. ||5]|
He at Gusts d on aor vo fefA Hat ust Il (1191-16, as f83s, He 4)
jan kee ustat hai raam naamaa dah dis sobhaa paa-ee.
The Lord's Name is the praise of His humble servant. It brings him honor in the ten directions.
foea Was ufe 3 Aa fe mueE wfs Sot wet El ci9i-17, ws FIs, Hs 4)
nindak saakat khav na sakai til apnai ghar lookee laa-ee. ||6] |
The slanderers and the faithless cynics cannot endure it at all; they have set fire to their own houses. ||6||
He a Ao fife Hat ure Te Hfs TS USAT I (1191-17, ahs 3S, He 4)
jan ka-o jan mil sobhaa paavai gun meh gun pargaasaa.
The humble person meeting with another humble person obtains honor. In the glory of the Lord, their glory shines forth.
Ae Sag & WS UISH fimrd # defo GAS SAT DI (91-18, Hts FBS, He 4)
mayray thaakur kay jan pareetam pi-aaray jo hoveh daasan daasaa. ||7||
The servants of my Lord and Master are loved by the Beloved. They are the slaves of His slaves. ||7||
WM AS wudug asst wy Af flere il c1i91-19, ats fF3s, He 4) aapay jal aprampar kartaa aapay may! milaavai. The Creator Himself is the Water; He Himself unites us in His Union.
Sod TsHfa Ata fore fa AS Aefs ANTS NCHAUIEN (191-19, ats fF3e, He 4) naanak gurmukh sahj milaa-ay ji-o jal jaleh samaavai. ||8||1||9]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is absorbed in celestial peace and poise, like water blending with water. ||8]|1]|9]]|
Ua VatQ
SHS HIS Uwe A Beam (1192-2) basant mehlaa 5 ghar 1 dutukee-aa Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Du-Tukee:
qe Afsars yArfe i (1192-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afe Arndt Ho Afy fumes Il (1192-3, wis, He 5) sun saakhee man jap pi-aar. Listen to the stories of the devotees, O my mind, and meditate with love.
mAHS Cufsnt afs Sa ars il (1192-3, ay, ve 5) ajaamal uDhri-aa kahi ayk baar. Ajaamal uttered the Lord's Name once, and was saved.
Teta It ATH Il (1192-3, ay, He 5) baalmeekai ho-aa saaDhsang. Baalmeek found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
y a@ firfeor ofa foriat Ail (1192-3, ag, He 5) Dharoo ka-o mili-aa har nisang. ||1]|| The Lord definitely met Dhroo. ||1]|
Sfoor Hat AEG VIS Fo Il (1192-4, wis, 2 5) tayri-aa santaa jaacha-o charan rayn. I beg for the dust of the feet of Your Saints.
B HASta SSeS ata faut So Al FICS i (1192-4, ay, vs 5)
lay mastak laava-o kar kirpaa dayn. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please bless me with Your Mercy, Lord, that I may apply it to my forehead. ||1]|Pause] |
aoa Cudt dfs ad Sz Il (1192-5, ag, He 5) ganikaa uDhree har kahai tot. Ganika the prostitute was saved, when her parrot uttered the Lord's Name.
anfee fomrfes ofa at& He i (1192-5, fg, us 5) gaj-indar Dhi-aa-i-o har kee-o mokh. The elephant meditated on the Lord, and was saved.
fy HEH BSE SA Il (1192-5, wis, Hs 5) bipar sudaamay daalad bhanj. He delivered the poor Brahmin Sudama out of poverty.
THO 3 St SH Ae MM (1192-6, wig, we 5) ray man too bhee bhaj gobind. ||2|| O my mind, you too must meditate and vibrate on the Lord of the Universe. ||2| |
afag CurfsS ufh yas il (1192-6, ats, He 5)
baDhik uDhaari-o kham par-haar. Even the hunter who shot an arrow at Krishna was saved.
afar Gudt nig] ad Il (1192-6, arg, He 5) kubijaa uDhree angusat Dhaar. Kubija the hunchback was saved, when God placed His Feet on her thumb.
faeg GorfeS eas ate Il (1192-6, wiz, v8 5) bidar uDhaari-o daasat bhaa-ay. Bidar was saved by his attitude of humility.
3 Ho 3 St ate forte 13 (1192-7, wz, H 5) ray man too bhee har Dhi-aa-ay. ||3]|| O my mind, you too must meditate on the Lord. |[3]|
ysore at ofe UA mmr Il (1192-7, wig, He 5) parahlaad rakhee har paij aap. The Lord Himself saved the honor of Prahlaad.
SAS eos dust set wa I (1192-7, wis, ne 5) bastar chheenat daropatee rakhee laaj. Even when she was being disrobed in court, Dropatee's honor was preserved.
fate fafe Afewt nis arg il (1192-8, aty, He 5)
jin jin sayvi-aa ant baar.
Those who have served the Lord, even at the very last instant of their lives, are saved.
g Ho Afe J usta urs Mil (1192-8, ay, He 5) ray man sayv too pareh paar. ||4]| O my mind, serve Him, and you shall be carried across to the other side. ||4||
U6 Afeor ame gfe it (1192-8, ats, He 5) Dhannai sayvi-aa baal buDh. Dhanna served the Lord, with the innocence of a child.
fgaue ae fife set fafa | ci92-9, wiz, us 5) tarilochan gur mil bha-ee siDh. Meeting with the Guru, Trilochan attained the perfection of the Siddhas.
wat ag afe atS yara i 1192-9, wig, ve 5) baynee ka-o gur kee-o pargaas. The Guru blessed Baynee with His Divine Illumination.
3 Ho gs St dfs VA UII 1192-9, ag, Hs 5) ray man too bhee hohi daas. ||5]|| O my mind, you too must be the Lord's slave. ||5||
Ave fsurfa nisAs i 1192-10, ws, v3 5) jaidayv ti-aagi-o aha“mayv. Jai Dayv gave up his egotism.
oet Gufs Ag AS Il (1192-10, ay, Hs 5) naa-ee uDhaari-o sain sayv. Sain the barber was saved through his selfless service.
HG sifar 5 3B AT ALE il (1192-10, wty, ws 5) man deeg na dolai kahoo-a" jaa-ay. Do not let your mind waver or wander; do not let it go anywhere.
Ho 3 st sant Aafe ue Well (1192-10, a3, He 5) man too bhee tarseh saran paa-ay. ||6|| O my mind, you too shall cross over; seek the Sanctuary of God. ||6] |
fag negq”y safe aS mrt it (1192-11, wfg, us 5) jih anoograhu thaakur kee-o aap. O my Lord and Master, You have shown Your Mercy to them.
AS Se gas ate Il (1192-11, ats, nH: 5) say tai’ leenay bhagat raakh. You saved those devotees.
fso a Te vide o StetaS afe it (1192-11, ag, v2 5) tin kaa gun avgan na beechaari-o ko-ay. You do not take their merits and demerits into account.
fea fafa ef Ho Bar AZ NDI (1192-12, ws, H2 5) ih biDh daykh man lagaa sayv. ||7]| Seeing these ways of Yours, I have dedicated my mind to Your service. ||7]||
atts fomrfeS Sa Sa il (1192-12, ats, ue 5) kabeer Dhi-aa-i-o ayk rang. Kabeer meditated on the One Lord with love.
SHee dfs AG sAfs Afar ii (1192-13, wig, He 5)
naamdayv har jee-o baseh sang. Naam Dayv lived with the Dear Lord.
sean fomre ys migu il (1192-13, afy, Hu 5) ravidaas Dhi-aa-ay parabh anoop. Ravi Daas meditated on God, the Incomparably Beautiful.
TI HSA SS Aes TU UCUAUI (1192-13, ws, we 5) gur naanak dayv govind roop. ||8]||1]| Guru Nanak Dayv is the Embodiment of the Lord of the Universe. ||8]|1]|
SHS HIS U Il (1192-14)
basant mehlaa 5. Basant, Fifth Mehl:
wife AOH SH rife ufo I (1192-14, wig, He 5) anik janam bharamay jon maahi. The mortal wanders in reincarnation through countless lifetimes.
ofa fanaa fae aefax uta il (1192-14, fs, He 5) har simran bin narak paahi. Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, he falls into hell.
sats fagar us Fs il (1192-14, wiz, we 5) bhagat bihoonaa khand khand. Without devotional worship, he is cut apart into pieces.
fag 38 AH SS Sd NA (1192-15, wig, we 5) bin boojhay jam dayt dand. ||1|| Without understanding, he is punished by the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
disse SAT HS AST HIST I (1192-15, wty, ne 5) gobind bhajahu mayray sadaa meet. Meditate and vibrate forever on the Lord of the Universe, O my friend.
Arg Hae afg Ae UifSs ud FITS il 4192-15, ws, us 5)
saach sabad kar sadaa pareet. ||1|| rahaa-o. Love forever the True Word of the Shabad. ||1]||Pause| |
ASY 3 MSS AT AH Il (1192-16, aig, Hs 5) santokh na aavat kahoo-a™ kaaj. Contentment does not come by any endeavors.
OH aed Afs Her AT II (1192-16, aE, He 5) Dhoomm baadar sabh maa-i-aa saaj. All the show of Maya is just a cloud of smoke.
UN AGS od HaMfS Il (1192-16, ws, we 5) paap karantou nah sangaa-ay. The mortal does not hesitate to commit sins.
fry at HST nS ATAE QI (1192-17, as, He 5) bikh kaa maataa aavai jaa-ay. ||2] | Intoxicated with poison, he comes and goes in reincarnation. ||2| |
38 3G ass aa fears Il (1192-17, wis, He 5) ha-o ha-o karat baDhay bikaar. Acting in egotism and self-conceit, his corruption only increases.
Hd SF Fa AAS Il (1192-17, wy, ve 5) moh lobh doobou sansaar. The world is drowning in attachment and greed.
af afa He =f ator | (1192-17, wig, He 5) kaam kroDh man vas kee-aa. Sexual desire and anger hold the mind in its power.
Hus oH 6 ofa Smt Sil (1192-18, as, He 5) supnai naam na har lee-aa. ||3]| Even in his dreams, he does not chant the Lord's Name. ||3]||
aa dt TH As HaSIS Il (1192-18, ats, He 5) kab hee raajaa kab manganhaar. Sometimes he is a king, and sometimes he is a beggar.
eu AY ad AAT Il (1192-18, aig, 42 5) dookh sookh baaDhou sansaar. The world is bound by pleasure and pain.
Ho Buge a ATA Sts Il (1192-19, as, He 5) man uDhran kaa saaj naahi. The mortal makes no arrangements to save himself.
umy dae fos us afa ieil (1192-19, ats, Hz 5) paap banDhan nit pa-ut jaahi. ||4||
The bondage of sin continues to hold him. ||4]| Hs Hts AB Aa SAT Il (1192-19, ag, Hs 5)
eeth meet ko-oo sakhaa naahi. He has no beloved friends or companions.
mify Stfa mmr dt utfo il ci92-19, stg, Hs 5) aap beej aapay hee khaa‘hi. He himself eats what he himself plants.
Us qats
W a ate TS fears I (1193-1, wy, He 5) jaa kai keen"ai hot bikaar. He gathers up that which brings corruption;
A efs vfemr fas ufo Tes ull (1193-1, a3, He 5) say chhod chali-aa khin meh gavaar. ||5|| leaving them, the fool must depart in an instant. ||5]|
Hfenr vfs ag safimr il (1193-1, sg, He 5) maa-i-aa mohi baho bharmi-aa. He wanders in attachment to Maya.
fags su ats xafimr il (1193-2, ats, He 5) kirat raykh kar karmi-aa. He acts in accordance with the karma of his past actions.
aged nifsus rfl il 193-2, ag, Hs 5) karnaihaar alipat aap. Only the Creator Himself remains detached.
oot Buy ys Us uty HEN (1193-2, ais, Hs 5) nahee layp parabh punn paap. ||6]| God is not affected by virtue or vice. ||6]|
ofa Sg afte efenrs I (1193-3, ats, He 5) raakh layho gobind da-i-aal. Please save me, O Merciful Lord of the Universe!
Sot Hate uss fxurs il (1193-3, ats, ve 5) tayree saran pooran kirpaal. I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect Compassionate Lord.
33 fag git Sdt SS I (1193-3, ag, He 5) tujh bin doojaa nahee thaa-o. Without You, I have no other place of rest.
ate fasur ys ty oS IDI (1193-3, wis, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh dayh naa-o. ||7|| Please take pity on me, God, and bless me with Your Name. ||7]||
3 AGS JF ATET'T Il (1193-4, sAy, vs 5) too kartaa too karanhaar. You are the Creator, and You are the Doer.
3 Gus ag weg Il (1193-4, wy, He 5) too oochaa too baho apaar. You are High and Exalted, and You are totally Infinite.
ate fasur afs SI OTE il (1193-4, ais, v3 5) kar kirpaa larh layho laa-ay. Please be merciful, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.
SSA BA YS at AGSMhe CUM (1193-5, ay, He 5)
naanak daas parabh kee sarnaa-ay. ||8]||2|| Slave Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God. ||8]|2]|
SHS at SI HIG U (1193-6) basant kee vaar mahal 5 Basant Kee Vaar, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure II (1193-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs a any fourfe & dg afer sre I (1193-7, ag, 2 5) har kaa naam Dhi-aa-ay kai hohu hari-aa bhaa-ee. Meditate on the Lord's Name, and blossom forth in green abundance.
adfh fads urn feo ofS Aaet I (1193-7, ats, He 5) karam likhantai paa-ee-ai ih rut suhaa-ee. By your high destiny, you have been blessed with this wondrous spring of the soul.
ze fae fase H@femr nifys ee uret i (1193-7, wig, He 5) van tarin taribhavan ma-oli-aa amrit fal paa-ee. See all the three worlds in bloom, and obtain the Fruit of Ambrosial Nectar.
fife AG AY Cun Bet As set Il (1193-8, arty, He 5) mil saaDhoo sukh oopjai lathee sabh chhaa-ee. Meeting with the Holy Saints, peace wells up, and all sins are erased.
ood fang &a on feta safe o oet 9 (1193-8, sg, He 5)
naanak simrai ayk naam fir bahurh na Dhaa-ee. ||1]|
O Nanak, remember in meditation the One Name, and you shall never again be consigned to the womb of reincarnation.. ||1]|
UA ad HoTaet afes AST ST I (1193-9, ay, He 5) panjay baDhay mahaabalee kar sachaa dho-aa. The five powerful desires are bound down, when you lean on the True Lord.
witue wae mofens fete ea usu Il (1193-9, ats, He 5) aapnay charan japaa-i-an vich da-yu kharho-aa. The Lord Himself leads us to dwell at His Feet. He stands right in our midst.
da Aa Als fufe ae fos oe fodur It (1193-10, ats, H2 5)
rog sog sabh mit ga-ay nit navaa niro-aa.
All sorrows and sicknesses are eradicated, and you become ever-fresh and rejuvenated.
feo df= on fonrfeer fefs ufe 3 Hor Il (1193-10, a3, v2 5)
din rain naam Dhi-aa-idaa fir paa-ay na mo-aa.
Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. You shall never again die.
fan 3 Guftmr aoot et fefe dur iQ (193-11, ay, He 5) jis tay upji-aa naankaa so-ee fir ho-aa. ||2|| And the One, from whom we came, O Nanak, into Him we merge once again. ||2| |
foag Gun ag Jd ao He ANTS I (1193-11, ats, He 5) kithhu upjai kah rahai kah maahi samaavai. Where do we come from? Where do we live? Where do we go in the end?
Hat aa Afs WAH a aes ahifs urs It 1193-11, wig, He 5) jee-a jant sabh khasam kay ka-un keemat paavai. All creatures belong to God, our Lord and Master. Who can place a value on Him?
oats fourfefs nafs fos A sas ATS Il (1193-12, afy, v2 5) kahan Dhi-aa-in sunan nit say bhagat suhaavai. Those who meditate, listen and chant, those devotees are blessed and beautified.
MEH Midd Afsa SAG Be F Be Il (1193-12, ay, ws 5) agam agochar saahibo doosar lavai na laavai. The Lord God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable; there is no other equal to Him.
Ag ud dfs Quefior sag Aes SIU (1193-13, ag, Hs 5) sach poorai gur updaysi-aa naanak sunaavai. ||3||1]| The Perfect Guru has taught this Truth. Nanak proclaims it to the world. ||3]|1]|
SHS oat saat at il (1193-14) basant banee bhagtaa" kee. Basant, The Word Of The Devotees,
oats At we A (1193-14) kabeer jee ghar 1 Kabeer Jee, First House:
qe Afsara ure il (1193-14) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
H@at Uest HEfemr MATA II (1193-15, ats, sas ate Hh) ma-ulee Dhartee ma-oli-aa akaas. The earth is in bloom, and the sky is in bloom.
ufe wife HEfemrt MSH YSTA IA (1193-15, HHS, sas ote Fh) ghat ghat ma-oli-aa aatam pargaas. ||1]|| Each and every heart has blossomed forth, and the soul is illumined. ||1]|
oa IH Hefour nos STE Il (1193-15, Hts, sas adte Ah) raajaa raam ma-oli-aa anat bhaa-ay. My Sovereign Lord King blossoms forth in countless ways.
Ag fu 30 dont ANTE NU TIS Il (1193-16, ws, sas aete FH) jah daykh-a-u tah rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Wherever I look, I see Him there pervading. ||1||Pause| |
eset HBS ote Fe Il (1193-16, ats, sas ate Ft) dutee-aa ma-ulay chaar bayd. The four Vedas blossom forth in duality.
fafyfs Heat fA@ ase lI (1193-16, ats, sas adits Hh) simrit ma-ulee si-o katayb. ||2]| The Simritees blossom forth, along with the Koran and the Bible. ||2] |
Hag Hefee rat fore il (1193-17, ats, sas adie Ff) sankar ma-uli-o jog Dhi-aan. Shiva blossoms forth in Yoga and meditation.
ads & AMM As AHS IIBIAI (1193-17, a#s, sas adits Th)
kabeer ko su-aamee sabh samaan. ||3]||1|| Kabeer's Lord and Master pervades in all alike. ||3||1]|
uUfss AS HS ufs UTS Il (1193-17, ats, sas ate Hh) pandit jan maatay parh" puraan. The Pandits, the Hindu religious scholars, are intoxicated, reading the Puraanas.
Hat HS Hat fomrs i 1193-18, ats, sas adits zt) jogee maatay jog Dhi-aan. The Yogis are intoxicated in Yoga and meditation.
Hfomrat HS MAS Il (1193-18, ats, sas ate A sani-aasee maatay aha“mayv. The Sannyaasees are intoxicated in egotism.
Sunt HS Su a SS NUL (1193-18, ats, sas asta zt) tapsee maatay tap kai bhayv. ||1]| The penitents are intoxicated with the mystery of penance. ||1]||
AS HE HS AGH AT Il (1193-19, Hs, sas aets Ht) sabh mad maatay ko-oo na jaag. All are intoxicated with the wine of Maya; no one is awake and aware.
Ha dt 3d We HAS ST NU! TIS Il (1193-19, ais, sas ate Fh) sang hee chor ghar musan laag. ||1|| rahaa-o. The thieves are with them, plundering their homes. ||1||Pause| |
Wa AACS wig viaT Il (1193-19, ats, sas aets HH) jaagai sukday-o ar akoor. Suk Dayv and Akrur are awake and aware.
Yat AgKs
JESS Wa Ufs SAT I (1194-1, wy, sas ats Fh) hanvant jaagai Dhar lankoor. Hanuman with his tail is awake and aware.
Hag Wel VIO AS Il (1194-1, ay, sas adits th) sankar jaagai charan sayv. Shiva is awake, serving at the Lord's Feet.
ots Aa SH ASS MQ (1194-1, ats, sas adie zh) kal jaagay naamaa jaidayv. ||2|| Naam Dayv and Jai Dayv are awake in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||2||
Was ASS FT YSTS Il (1194-1, wis, sas acta wh) jaagat sovat baho parkaar. There are many ways of being awake, and sleeping.
aonte at Het Ag Il (1194-2, ats, sas adte a) gurmukh jaagai so-ee saar. To be awake as Gurmukh is the most excellent way.
fen edt a nifta ant Il (1194-2, as, sas asta Hh) is dayhee kay aDhik kaam. The most sublime of all the actions of this body,
ats aad St TH BH ISI (1194-2, a3, sas adie
kahi kabeer bhaj raam naam. ||3]|2|| says Kabeer, is to meditate and vibrate on the Lord's Name. |[3]|2||
Afe WAN Jd AEM I (1194-3, ats, sas adte A jo-ay khasam hai jaa-i-aa. The wife gives birth to her husband.
ufs ary defen i (1194-3, a3, sas ate A) poot baap khaylaa-i-aa. The son leads his father in play.
fag Ager dtg fuerfenr NA (194-3, ais, sas ait Ft) bin sarvanaa kheer pilaa-i-aa. ||1]| Without breasts, the mother nurses her baby. ||1]|
sug Sa afe x aE Il (1194-3, wis, sas adie rh) daykhhu logaa kal ko bhaa-o. Behold, people! This is how it is in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Afs Hawret must HS NA TIS Il (1194-4, wis, sas atte FH) sut muklaa-ee apnee maa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. The son marries his mother. ||1]|Pause| |
ual fae IdM HIST I (1194-4, ats, sas adie FH) pagaa bin huree-aa maartaa. Without feet, the mortal jumps.
ave fio furs fae IAS II (1194-4, ats, gas adie Ah badnai bin khir khir haastaa. Without a mouth, he bursts into laughter.
for fas og U AS Il 1194-5, wis, sas adits Fh nidraa bin nar pai sovai. Without feeling sleepy, he lays down and sleeps.
fas ane ute fas] QI (1194-5, ats, sas ate th bin baasan kheer bilovai. ||2|| Without a churn, the milk is churned. ||2||
fag vias aS Bet Il (194-5, ats, sas ats A) bin asthan ga-oo lavayree. Without udders, the cow gives milk.
us fas we wodt il (1194-5, ats, sas adte Hh) paiday bin baat ghanayree. Without travelling, a long journey is made.
fag Afsagd we & uret Il (1194-6, wis, sas aceite Ah bin satgur baat na paa-ee. Without the True Guru, the path is not found.
A THT ANSE NSIUI (1194-6, a3, sas asta
kaho kabeer samjhaa-ee. ||3]||3]| Says Kabeer, see this, and understand. ||3]||3||
YTSE USES USS AN Il (1194-6, ay, sas ots Ft) parahlaad pathaa-ay parhan saal. Prahlaad was sent to school.
Hfat Aa FT BlS as Il (1194-7, a3, sas aceite wh) sang sakhaa baho lee-ay baal. He took many of his friends along with him.
Ha ag ustefh mis A Il (1194-7, wig, sas adit Hf) mo ka-o kahaa parh"aavas aal jaal. He asked his teacher, "Why do you teach me about worldly affairs?
Hat udior fafr tg At atures Wl (1194-7, ws, sas adits Fh mayree patee-aa likh dayh saree gopaal. ||1]|| Write the Name of the Dear Lord on my tablet."||1]|
odt es F Ma TH OH Il (1194-8, ay, saz adie Th) nahee chhoda-o ray baabaa raam naam. O Baba, I will not forsake the Name of the Lord.
Ad nis use fae odt an uA TIS I (1194-8, wis, sas aete FH) mayro a-or parh"an si-o nahee kaam. ||1]| rahaa-o. I will not bother with any other lessons. ||1||Pause| |
Hs Hoa afos Ate il (1194-8, ats, sas adte at) sandai markai kahi-o jaa-ay. Sanda and Marka went to the king to complain.
ysere gore afar ofS i (1194-9, wtg, sas adie A) parahlaad bulaa-ay bayg Dhaa-ay. He sent for Prahlaad to come at once.
3TH Ads at Ss TS I (1194-9, wy, sas ats Hh) too raam kahan kee chhod baan. He said to him, "Stop uttering the Lord's Name.
3B 395 as Ae afeS ws ii (1194-9, wis, sas ats Ht) tujh turat chhadaa-oo mayro kahi-o maan. |[2|| I shall release you at once, if you obey my words."||2||
H ag Ad ASST AS FP Il (1194-10, ats, sas ate Ah mo ka-o kahaa sataavahu baar baar. Prahlaad answered, "Why do you annoy me, over and over again?
ufs Ae ae fats ate uss Il (1194-10, wis, sas atte Hh parabh jal thal gir kee-ay pahaar. God created the water, land, hills and mountains.
fea mH 5 238 aafe afe I (1194-10, ats, saz adits Ah ik raam na chhoda-o gureh gaar. I shall not forsake the One Lord; if I did, I would be going against my Guru.
H a@ urfs ats ae ofa of Sil aic4-u1, ats, sas adte A) mo ka-o ghaal jaar bhaavai maar daar. ||3]| You might as well throw me into the fire and kill me."||3]|
ate usa afus forte i cic4-11, ats, sas asta Hf) kaadh kharhag kopi-o risaa-ay. The king became angry and drew his sword.
33 odd dfs gate Il 94-11, ats, sas ade Ah tujh raakhanhaaro mohi bataa-ay. "Show me your protector now!"
us us 3 foan & fares Il (1194-12, wis, sas odie fh) parabh thambh tay niksay kai bisthaar. So God emerged out of the pillar, and assumed a mighty form.
JIOUA Bfe ou fees gil (1194-12, wis, sas adte Ah harnaakhas chhaydi-o nakh bidaar. ||4|| He killed Harnaakhash, tearing him apart with his nails. ||4] |
Gfe ugH use Pete Sz Il (1194-12, wis, sas adits Ft) O-ay param purakh dayvaaDh dayv. The Supreme Lord God, the Divinity of the divine,
safs dfs oafhu Sz Il (1194-13, ats, sas ate A bhagat hayt narsingh bhayv. for the sake of His devotee, assumed the form of the man-lion.
afs ads & BY} UP Il (1194-13, ats, sas asta at) kahi kabeer ko lakhai na paar. Says Kabeer, no one can know the Lord's limits.
ysere Burd nifea as UNI (1194-13, ws, sas wets Ah
parahlaad uDhaaray anik baar. ||5||4]| He saves His devotees like Prahlaad over and over again. ||5||4]|
feH 35 Ho HO Heo UT Il (1194-14, ats, sas adie rh) is tan man maDhay madan chor. Within the body and mind are thieves like sexual desire,
fate fame a36 fofs ste He I (1194-14, ats, sas adte A) jin gi-aan ratan hir leen mor. which has stolen my jewel of spiritual wisdom.
H nara ys aIe af i (1194-14, ws, sas ante ah mai anaath parabh kaha-o kaahi. I am a poor orphan, O God; unto whom should I complain?
tt 3 fags H & vets NA (1194-15, wis, sas aes Fh) ko ko na bigooto mai ko aahi. ||1|| Who has not been ruined by sexual desire? What am I? ||1]|
Hag ede Fy AfIS o ATE Il (1194-15, ais, sas adte Hh) maaDha-o daarun dukh sahi-o na jaa-ay. O Lord, I cannot endure this agonizing pain.
Ae vue afa fe ao safe Nd TIC Il (1194-15, sis, sas ate Hf) mayro chapal buDh si-o kahaa basaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. What power does my fickle mind have against it? ||1]|Pause] |
Hod Hove fre Harte Il (1194-16, ats, sas adte Ah sanak sanandan siv sukaad. Sanak, Sanandan, Shiva and Suk Dayv
ots GHG WS FINE Il (1194-16, wy, sas aete Ah naabh kamal jaanay barahmaad. were born out of Brahma's naval chakra.
ofa Ae Aait Heats I (1194-16, a3, sas adie zt) kab jan jogee jataaDhaar. The poets and the Yogis with their matted hair
AS nus MBA VS ATs NM (1194-17, sis, sas adte Hh)
sabh aapan a-osar chalay saar. ||2]| all lived their lives with good behavior. ||2| |
3 oerg Hfs as ata i ci94-17, wis, sas ots Ht) too athaahu mohi thaah naahi. You are Unfathomable; I cannot know Your depth.
ys dar ova ey aIe ate Il (1194-17, ais, sas ote Ft) parabh deenaa naath dukh kaha-o kaahi. O God, Master of the meek, unto whom should I tell my pains?
Hd HOH Hee By ofa dhe I (1194-18, ats, sas adie Ah moro janam maran dukh aath Dheer. Please rid me of the pains of birth and death, and bless me with peace.
HY Add To 3G aats NSUUI (1194-18, as, sas ate FH)
sukh saagar gun ra-o kabeer. ||3]||5|| Kabeer utters the Glorious Praises of God, the Ocean of peace. ||3]|5]|
oteg Sa Fos UTS Il (1194-18, ats, sas ate eh) naa-ik ayk banjaaray paach. There is one merchant and five traders.
wag Usa Ad AS Il (1194-19, a3, sas asta sh) baraDh pacheesak sang kaach. The twenty-five oxen carry false merchandise.
OG adit an aifs orfs il (1194-19, ats, sas adits th na-o bahee-aa™ das gon aahi. There are nine poles which hold the ten bags.
ants wdste wait Sts WA (1194-19, sts, sas adte Hh
kasan bahtar laagee taahi. ||1|| The body is tied by the seventy-two ropes. ||1]||
Hfo “iA gon fAG odie are Il (1194-19, ais, gas ate af) mohi aisay banaj si-o naheen kaaj. I don't care at all about such commerce.
dar qaty
fro we He fas ae fara il TIS I ci95-1, sty, sas afte Fh) jih ghatai mool nit badhai bi-aaj. rahaa-o. It depletes my capital, and the interest charges only increase. ||Pause| |
AS AS fife aod ate Il (1195-1, aty, sas ats Fh) Saat soot mil banaj keen. Weaving the seven threads together, they carry on their trade.
AGH Seat Aa Sts Il (1195-2, ats, sas adte Ah karam bhaavnee sang leen. They are led on by the karma of their past actions.
Sie Aarst ags af Il (1195-2, wis, sas adte wh
teen jagaatee karat raar. The three tax-collectors argue with them.
3S Fons IE Sts Ql (1195-2, ats, sas adte Ah
chalo banjaaraa haath jhaar. ||2]| The traders depart empty-handed. ||2||
Unt forat sow Sz Il (1195-2, ats, sas alte Fh) poonjee hiraanee banaj toot. Their capital is exhausted, and their trade is ruined.
ao fen ats ates sfe il ci95-3, wiz, sas ata Fh) dah dis taa“do ga-i-o foot. The caravan is scattered in the ten directions.
ats ats HS ASA ATH Il (1195-3, sts, sas adte Ah
kahi kabeer man sarsee kaaj. Says Kabeer, O mortal, your tasks will be accomplished,
Hon AHS 3 SdH SH ISBIEN (1195-3, aig, sas asta At)
sahj samaano ta bharam bhaaj. ||3]||6|| when you merge in the Celestial Lord; let your doubts run away. ||3]||6||
SHS fF3G wg 2 1195-5) basant hindol ghar 2 Basant Hindol, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (1195-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hat Fat fust st For AS dt Sw Ba Il (1195-5, why fis, sas aate HH) maataa joothee pitaa bhee joothaa joothay hee fal laagay. The mother is impure, and the father is impure. The fruit they produce is impure.
uefa FS At St HS AS Hols vista NU (1195-6, sts fI3s, sas ate Ht) aavahi joothay jaahi bhee joothay joothay mareh abhaagay. ||1]| Impure they come, and impure they go. The unfortunate ones die in impurity. ||1]|
ag Ufss AT AEG SS Il (1195-6, wis fF3a, sas alte Fh) kaho pandit soochaa kavan thaa-o. Tell me, O Pandit, O religious scholar, which place is uncontaminated?
not aff J sho we NA TIC Il (1195-6, ats F385, sas adie FH) jahaa™ bais ha-o bhojan khaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. Where should I sit to eat my meal? ||1||Pause] |
fue qot Fos To ads 3g Als WS Il (1195-7, wiz fsa, sas ata Fh) jinbaa joothee bolat joothaa karan naytar sabh joothay. The tongue is impure, and its speech is impure. The eyes and ears are totally impure.
fet ot afs Saath act gan mrafe & BS | 1195-7, wiz fF3s, sas sets FH) indree kee jooth utras naahee barahm agan kay loothay. ||2|| The impurity of the sexual organs does not depart; the Brahmin is burnt by the fire.
121] wats St Fat ust For Tot Sf uerfenr | ci95-8, wiz fF3s, sas adits Ft)
agan bhee joothee paanee joothaa joothee bais pakaa-i-aa. The fire is impure, and the water is impure. The place where you sit and cook is impure.
Hol Adel uUdHS Sar Fo ot afe wfenr nS (195-8, wis FIIs, sas sets A) joothee karchhee parosan laagaa joothay hee baith khaa-i-aa. ||3]|| Impure is the ladle which serves the food. Impure is the one who sits down to eat it.
[SII
Tas Fo Var Ho" Fot Stat aS Il (1195-9, ats fI3s, sas ata Fh
gobar joothaa cha-ukaa joothaa joothee deenee kaaraa.
Impure is the cow dung, and impure is the kitchen square. Impure are the lines that mark it off.
ats adts Set og AS Arat udt fras SNM (1195-9, as fi3s, sas aets Fh)
kahi kabeer tay-ee nar soochay saachee paree bichaaraa. ||4||1||7|| Says Kabeer, they alone are pure, who have obtained pure understanding. ||4||1]||7||
THOSE At WT A (1195-11) raamaanand jee ghar 1 Raamaanand Jee, First House:
qe Afsars ure I (1195-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
as Weba F we Se IT Il (1195-01, ats f3s, sas de FH) kat jaa-ee-ai ray ghar laago rang. Where should I go? My home is filled with bliss.
Ha fos 5 VS Ho SEG Ua NU ITS I 195-11, ats f¥3e, sas TUTSe AH mayraa chit na chalai man bha-i-o pang. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My consciousness does not go out wandering. My mind has become crippled. ||1]|Pause] |
ta fren Ho set CHa Il (1195-12, ats fie, gas se Th) ayk divas man bha-ee umang. One day, a desire welled up in my mind.
uf Jeo UM FT AaiT I (1195-12, ats fie, sas aarse Ah ghas chandan cho-aa baho suganDh. I ground up sandalwood, along with several fragrant oils.
UA Wt FIN oe il (1195-13, avy fis, sas Tse Fh) poojan chaalee barahm thaa-ay. I went to God's place, and worshipped Him there.
A yoy ast] ag Ho dt afe All (1195-13, ats fide, sas TUNE Hh) so barahm bataa-i-o gur man hee maahi. ||1]| That God showed me the Guru, within my own mind. ||1||
As welt 3d AS us Il (1195-13, ats fess, sas orgs AH jahaa jaa-ee-ai tah jal pakhaan. Wherever I go, I find water and stones.
3 ufs afoS FAS ANS Il (1195-14, wig feds, sas TISe Fh) too poor rahi-o hai sabh samaan. You are totally pervading and permeating in all.
ae uss As ea Ale Il (1195-14, ats 83s, sas ane Th) bayd puraan sabh daykhay jo-ay. I have searched through all the Vedas and the Puraanas.
Cat 38 went AE Stato aE 12 (1195-14, wig f¥8a, sas INKSe A) oohaa™ ta-o jaa-ee-ai ja-o eehaa™ na ho-ay. ||2]| I would go there, only if the Lord were not here. ||2||
Afsag H safest So il (1195-15, ats f3s, sas Ide FH) satgur mai balihaaree tor. I am a sacrifice to You, O my True Guru.
fafs Hae frases 3H are He Il (1195-15, wig fF8s, sas rss A) jin sakal bikal bharam kaatay mor. You have cut through all my confusion and doubt.
THSE AMM FHS YIN Il (1195-15, aig fi3s, sas Tse FH) raamaanand su-aamee ramat barahm. Raamaanand's Lord and Master is the All-pervading Lord God.
Gd a Aa aS afe AGH ISNA (1195-15, sts 8s, sas Ins Th
gur kaa sabad kaatai kot karam. |[3||1]|
The Word of the Guru's Shabad eradicates the karma of millions of past actions. 311411
SHS sat aHeS At at (1195-17)
basant banee naamday-o jee kee Basant, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsara ure il (1195-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Whog Hace ASA SH Il (1195-17, wy, sas anes Ah saahib sanktavai sayvak bhajai. If the servant runs away when his master is in trouble,
fadans 3 Ate SS AB GH AU (1195-17, ay, sas one FM) chirankaal na jeevai do-oo kul lajai. ||1]| he will not have a long life, and he brings shame to all his family. ||1]|
dt safs 5 es gS SA TA Il (1195-18, wis, sas ones FH)
tayree bhagat na chhoda-o bhaavai log hasai.
I shall not abandon devotional worship of You, O Lord, even if the people laugh at me.
TIO AHS HS Shas SA AU TIT I (1195-18, ats, sas onze Ah charan kamal mayray hee-aray basai™. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord's Lotus Feet abide within my heart. ||1]||Pause] |
AA mus ofa yrst HIS HIS Il (1195-19, HHS, sas See FH) jaisay apnay dhaneh paraanee maran maa‘dai. The mortal will even die for the sake of his wealth;
SA OAS Hot TH BH B SS MQM (1195-19, ats, sas one Th) taisay sant janaa™ raam naam na chhaadai™. ||2|| in the same way, the Saints do not forsake the Lord's Name. ||2]|
dar afer deedt HATS A AH Il (1195-19, ats, sas ane Fh) gangaa ga-i-aa godaavree sansaar kay kaamaa. Pilgrimages to the Ganges, the Gaya and the Godawari are merely worldly affairs.
Ua qate
oats HUHS df 3 ACA SH BIA (1196-1, His, sas see Hh naaraa-in suparsan ho-ay ta sayvak naamaa. ||3]||1]| If the Lord were totally pleased, then He would let Naam Dayv be His servant. ||3]|1]|
Bes Bole uifs atsg HA Il (1196-1, ats, sas ones FH) lobh lahar at neejhar baajai. The tidal waves of greed constantly assault me.
ent SF AAS MAUI (1196-2, aH, sas oes Ft)
kaa-i-aa doobai kaysvaa. ||1|| My body is drowning, O Lord. ||1||
HATS AMS ofe TFs I (1196-2, Hts, sas ane Th sansaar samunday taar gobinday. Please carry me across the world-ocean, O Lord of the Universe.
afe 8 ay dew aul JIC il 1196-2, ats, sas ane th) taar lai baap beethulaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Carry me across, O Beloved Father. ||1||Pause| |
mfoe Fat IS Ufe o AAC Il (1196-2, wis, sas see Hh) anil bayrhaa ha-o khayv na saaka-o. I cannot steer my ship in this storm.
3 ug & Ufent Mos Ql 1196-3, ats, sas anee Hh tayraa paar na paa-i-aa beethulaa. ||2| | I cannot find the other shore, O Beloved Lord. ||2]|
dg teors Afsag fs 5H AS Il (1196-3, wis, sas ones Ht) hohu da-i-aal satgur mayl too mo ka-o. Please be merciful, and unite me with the True Guru;
uty S3Tg AAS IIB (1196-4, ay, sas see Fh) paar utaaray kaysvaa. ||3]| carry me across, O Lord. ||3]|
oH ad JS sha Sto WSS Il (1196-4, a3, sas aes Ah naamaa kahai ha-o tar bhee na jaan-o. Says Naam Dayv, I do not know how to swim.
Hag as dfs ag Sfo stow sili (i96-4, ats, sas onze Fh) mo ka-o baah deh baah deh beethulaa. ||4||2|| Give me Your Arm, give me Your Arm, O Beloved Lord. ||4]|2]|
Hon mete of Hat ast wast I (1196-5, ats, sas Hee A) sahj aval Dhoorh manee gaadee chaaltee. Slowly at first, the body-cart loaded with dust starts to move.
ute fasar & afa diast All (1196-5, ats, sas ane ZH) peechhai tinkaa lai kar haa“ktee. ||1]| Later, it is driven on by the stick. |[1]|
AA USES Bfefe Tact i 1196-5, wy, sas see Ff) jaisay pankat tharootit haa™ktee. The body moves along like the ball of dung, driven on by the dung-beetle.
Afs Geo Dot Sst IU! TIS Il (1196-6, ats, sas one FH) sar Dhovan chaalee laadulee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The beloved soul goes down to the pool to wash itself clean. ||1]]|Pause] |
ast ae fags faast il 1196-6, aig, sas anes Ah Dhobee Dhovai birah biraataa. The washerman washes, imbued with the Lord's Love.
Us BIS AI HS FST IQ (1196-6, sis, sas ose Ah
har charan mayraa man raataa. ||2]| My mind is imbued with the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||2||
sats SHES ath Sour Il (1196-7, wis, sas ones Fh bhanat naamday-o ram rahi-aa. Prays Naam Dayv, O Lord, You are All-pervading.
MUS Sas ud ats SfEnt NZIS (196-7, ats, sas oe A) apnay bhagat par kar da-i-aa. ||3]|3]| Please be kind to Your devotee. ||3]||3]|
SHS sat afer Ht at (1196-8) basant banee ravidaas jee kee Basant, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1196-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
gato ASS ae ote Il (1196-9, ats, sas afeern Fh) tujheh sujhantaa kachhoo naahi. You know nothing.
ufsorer Sa Ss fs Il (1196-9, ety, sas sheen Fh) pahiraavaa daykhay oobh jaahi. Seeing your clothes, you are so proud of yourself.
TIasSt AT SS SS il 1196-9, sis, sas sheen Fh) garabvatee kaa naahee thaa-o. The proud bride shall not find a place with the Lord.
3c asefs Gufs BE AS Ul (1196-9, wy, gars sheen Fh) tayree gardan oopar lavai kaa-o. ||1|| Above your head, the crow of death is cawing. ||1]|
3 ate asafo aest Il (1196-10, a3, sas afer Fh) too kaa’-ay garbeh baavlee. Why are you so proud? You are insane.
AA seg Yaad J SAS vat Soot UU TTS Il (1196-10, wis, sas afeen Ht) jaisay bhaada-o khoombraaj too tis tay kharee utaavalee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Even the mushrooms of summer live longer than you. ||1||Pause||
AA Ada Sot UTES Se Il (1196-11, a3, sas seer Ah jaisay kurank nahee paa-i-o bhayd. The deer does not know the secret;
fe Aaa FS YSA Il (196-11, wiz, sas steer Ft) tan suganDh dhoodhai pardays. the musk is within its own body, but it searches for it outside.
MU 36 aT A Ad Mes Il (1196-11, sty, sas aon th ap tan kaa jo karay beechaar. Whoever reflects on his own body
SH Sdt AHAAT AS WITT 12 (196-11, ais, sas ofeen Hh tis nahee jamkankar karay khu-aar. ||2]| - the Messenger of Death does not abuse him. ||2]|
UZ As aA AafT widTaY Il (1196-12, sig, sas sheen FH) putar kaltar kaa karahi aha‘kaar. The man is so proud of his sons and his wife;
SAT BU HAST Il (1196-12, ats, sas sfeera AH thaakur laykhaa maganhaar. his Lord and Master shall call for his account.
as oT ey Ad AG Il (1196-12, ats, gas ofeern Hh fayrhay kaa dukh sahai jee-o. The soul suffers in pain for the actions it has committed.
ure fanfo yarefs ul@ ut@ Si (1196-13, ats, sas ofeeH Fh) paachhay kiseh pukaareh pee-o pee-o. ||3]|| Afterwards, whom shall you call, "Dear, Dear."||3]|
AY at AS Ss Ge i (1196-13, ats, sas sfeer Fh) saaDhoo kee ja-o layhi ot. If you seek the Support of the Holy,
3d frefa uu As afe afe Il (196-13, ais, sas afer Zh) tayray miteh paap sabh kot kot. millions upon millions of your sins shall be totally erased.
afo sfern FAY OH Il (1196-14, wf, sas afer Ah kahi ravidaas jo japai naam. Says Ravi Daas, one who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
fsH wfs 3 HOH 6 Afe AH BIA (1196-14, Hts, sas steer Hf) tis jaat na janam na jon kaam. ||4]|1]| is not concerned with social class, birth and rebirth. ||4||1]]|
SHS ads A 1196-15) basant kabeer jee-o Basant, Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (1196-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Had at AAT Sot VS Il (1196-16, ats, sas adte Hh) surah kee jaisee tayree chaal. You walk like a cow.
Sot Us| Cufs SHA aH NA (1196-16, af, gars aes Ft) tayree poo™chhat oopar jhamak baal. ||1|| The hair on your tail is shiny and lustrous. ||1]|
fen we ufo oA Ss She wis i (1196-16, ats, sas acts Ht) is ghar meh hai so too dhoondh khaahi. Look around, and eat anything in this house.
ui@s fon dt a s ufs ct fs na TIC it (1196-17, ay, sas adts FA) a-or kis hee kay too mat hee jaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o. But do not go out to any other. ||1||Pause] |
wat wets Fs utes Il (1196-17, aH3, sas aete Fh) chaakee chaateh choon khaahi. You lick the grinding bowl, and eat the flour.
wat at Stag aot B ats 2 (1196-17, ats, sas adie AD
chaakee kaa cheethraa kahaa" lai jaahi. ||2]| Where have you taken the kitchen rags? ||2]|
ala ud Sct sas Sie Il (1196-18, wis, sas adits Ah chheekay par tayree bahut deeth. Your gaze is fixed on the basket in the cupboard.
HS Sadt Het Sat ud uifS Sil (1196-18, ats, sas asta th mat lakree sotaa tayree parai peeth. ||3]| Watch out - a stick may strike you from behind. ||3]|
afs adtes sa 38 ate Il (1196-18, ats, sas adie Ah kahi kabeer bhog bhalay keen. Says Kabeer, you have over-indulged in your pleasures.
Hf AB ug Se SH IU (1196-19, ats, sas ate FH) mat ko-00 maarai eet dhaym. ||4||1]| Watch out - someone may throw a brick at you. ||4||1]|
Yat AAD
Ta Asa Bus HIS 4 We 4 (1197-1)
raag saarag cha-upday mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Saarang, Chau-Padas, First Mehl, First House:
96 ATS on aes usy fos fares nies Has mast AS aT YATE I 1197-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
MUS SAT at IG Sat Il (1197-4, Aa, He 1) apunay thaakur kee ha-o chayree. I am the hand-maiden of my Lord and Master.
3s Td AaHizo ys & ICH wefa feast wai FS i (1197-4, ada, we
charan gahay jagjeevan parabh kay ha-umai maar nibayree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have grasped the Feet of God, the Life of the world. He has killed and eradicated my egotism. ||1]|Pause| |
Yds UTH AS USAT UTSH YTS THT Il (1197-4, Ada, Hs 1)
pooran param jot parmaysar pareetam paraan hamaaray.
He is the Perfect, Supreme Light, the Supreme Lord God, my Beloved, my Breath of Life.
Huo dfs Ser Ho Ha ASA Age Stes UA (1197-5, Aa, He 1)
mohan mohi lee-aa man mayraa samjhas sabad beechaaray. ||1||
The Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind; contemplating the Word of the Shabad, I have come to understand. ||1]|
HoH die dat Hs sat ufs safe ute ASS I 1197-6, Ada, Hs 1)
manmukh heen hochhee mat jhoothee man tan peer sareeray.
The worthless self-willed manmukh, with false and shallow understanding - his mind and body are held in pain's grip.
Aa at TH Sats TSt TH AUS HS TS NM 1197-6, Ada, He 1)
jab kee raam rangeelai raatee raam japat man Dheeray. ||2||
Since I came to be imbued with the Love of my Beautiful Lord, I meditate on the Lord, and my mind is encouraged. ||2||
ICH efs set Saas sa Act Aafs Mat Il (1197-7, Aa, He 1)
ha-umai chhod bha-ee bairaagan tab saachee surat samaanee.
Abandoning egotism, I have become detached. And now, I absorb true intuitive understanding.
nae fadro fAG Ho whoo fardt oA Sarst 3 1197-7, Ada, Hz 1)
akul niranjan si-o man maani-aa bisree laaj lokaanee. ||3]||
The mind is pleased and appeased by the Pure, Immaculate Lord; the opinions of other people are irrelevant. ||3]|
39 sfeu ad SH AA HS YISH Yrs MMOS IN (1197-8, Ada, He 1)
bhoor bhavikh naahee tum jaisay mayray pareetam paraan aDhaaraa.
There is no other like You, in the past or in the future, O my Beloved, my Breath of Life, my Support.
dfs & oty ast Haas Soa TH SSS UU (1197-8, Aa, He 1)
har kai naam ratee sohaagan naanak raam bhataaraa. ||4]|1||
The soul-bride is imbued with the Name of the Lord; O Nanak, the Lord is her Husband. ||4||1]|
ATI HIST % Il (1197-9)
saarag mehlaa 1. Saarang, First Mehl:
dfs faa fas sdb ea fam i (97-9, ada, v2 1) har bin ki-o rahee-ai dukh bi-aapai. How can I survive without the Lord? I am suffering in pain.
fade ATE & dot GA fio fas ys are Aad A TIS I (1197-10, wa, vs 1) jinvaa saad na feekee ras bin bin parabh kaal santaapai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
My tongue does not taste - all is bland without the Lord's sublime essence. Without God, I suffer and die. ||1]|Pause] |
Wa BT TIA S USA YISH Sa Ba su furs it (1197-10, Adar, v3 1)
jab lag daras na parsai pareetam tab lag bhookh pi-aasee.
As long as I do not attain the Blessed Vision of my Beloved, I remain hungry and thirsty.
dng eus dt He Honor Aw ofA AHS faarat Ail (1197-11, Ada, He 1)
darsan daykhat hee man maani-aa jal ras kamal bigaasee. ||1||
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is pleased and appeased. The lotus blossoms forth in the water. ||1]|
Cafe wads Ten Fer afaws HT ATH | (1197-11, wsa, Hz 1)
oonav ghanhar garjai barsai kokil mor bairaagai.
The low-hanging clouds crack with thunder and burst. The cuckoos and the peacocks are filled with passion,
sded fasu fada sfeniant wis furs Ge ATH NN (1197-12, Aa, H2 1)
tarvar birakh bihang bhu-i-angam ghar pir Dhan sohaagai. ||2||
along with the birds in the trees, the bulls and the snakes. The soul-bride is happy when her Husband Lord returns home. ||2||
afse asf gate aeuat fus or AoA o AEM II (1197-13, Asa, He 1) kuchil kuroop kunaar kulakhnee pir kaa sahj na jaani-aa.
She is filthy and ugly, unfeminine and ill-mannered - she has no intuitive understanding of her Husband Lord.
ofs JA dat THe oot fFust ans eu AHEM WI (1197-13, Aa, He 1)
har ras rang rasan nahee tariptee durmat dookh samaani-aa. ||3]||
She is not satisfied by the sublime essence of her Lord's Love; she is evil-minded, immersed in her pain. ||3||
wife & ATS OT BU Ue BT VY VIE Ate Il (1197-14, Aa, He 1)
aa-ay na jaavai naa dukh paavai naa dukh darad sareeray.
The soul-bride does not come and go in reincarnation or suffer in pain; her body is not touched by the pain of disease.
Sod YS 3 AIH Avast ys cus dt Ho Ms Wi (1197-14, ada, us 1
naanak parabh tay sahj suhaylee parabh daykhat hee man Dheeray. ||4]|2]|
O Nanak, she is intuitively embellished by God; seeing God, her mind is encouraged. [4112] |
ATID HIS 4% Il (1197-15)
saarag mehlaa 1. Saarang, First Mehl:
fe ardt AS ys fips il (1197-15, Arsar, He 1)
door naahee mayro parabh pi-aaraa. My Beloved Lord God is not far away.
Afsag aefs Ad He Hfonr afs us UTS mOTST AU TI'S ll (1197-15, Adar, He 1)
satgur bachan mayro man maani-aa har paa-ay paraan aDhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind is pleased and appeased by the Word of the True Guru's Teachings. I have found the Lord, the Support of my breath of life. ||1]||Pause] |
usr qatt feo fafa ofs firth za anifs as Ao fume it 1198-1, Wa, He 1)
in biDh har milee-ai var kaaman Dhan sohaag pi-aaree. This is the way to meet your Husband Lord. Blessed is the soul-bride who is loved by her Husband Lord.
AMS Fdo AG AIA Ya" Tos Rafe stars uA (1198-2, Argar, He 1)
jaat baran kul sahsaa chookaa gurmat sabad beechaaree. ||1||
Social class and status, race, ancestry and skepticism are eliminated, following the Guru's Teachings and contemplating the Word of the Shabad. ||1]|
fA Ho HS MfsHTS 3 St a fA Ss feATS Il (1198-2, Aa, He 1)
jis man maanai abhimaan na taa ka-o hinsaa lobh visaaray.
One whose mind is pleased and appeased, has no egotistical pride. Violence and greed are forgotten.
Hofa ge zo ons fue at aonfe ofa Aes NM (1198-3, Aa, He 1)
Sahj ravai var kaaman pir kee gurmukh rang savaaray. ||2||
The soul-bride intuitively ravishes and enjoys her Husband Lord; as Gurmukh, she is embellished by His Love. ||2| |
ws wnt Ulfs aca Rost wher Ho UAT Il (1198-4, Ada, He 1) jaara-o aisee pareet kutamb sanbanDhee maa-i-aa moh pasaaree. Burn away any love of family and relatives, which increases your attachment to Maya.
fan uists ulfs on on ost efaar aH feast SII (198-4, Ada, Hs 1 jis antar pareet raam ras naahee dubiDhaa karam bikaaree. ||3]|| One who does not savor the Lord's Love deep within, lives in duality and corruption.
[SII
nists Jo uense fos & Bd o wD firs I 1198-5, Aa, He 1) antar ratan padaarath hit kou durai na laal pi-aaree.
His Love is a priceless jewel deep within my being; the Lover of my Beloved is not hidden.
Soa Tete an mHwa Afar afar nists act sisil ciss-5, Aa, He 1
naanak gurmukh naam amolak jug jug antar Dhaaree. ||4||3||
O Nanak, as Gurmukh, enshrine the Priceless Naam deep within your being, all the ages through. ||4|[3]|
Ada HIG 8 We A (1198-7) saarang mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Saarang, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsas urrfe il (198-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ufs & AS Aart at TH Ofe il (1198-8, Asa, He 4) har kay sant janaa kee ham Dhoor. I am the dust of the feet of the humble Saints of the Lord.
fife AsHafs usH ue ufeur nrsH aH sft seus A TIES il ci98-8, Asa, He 4) mil satsangat param pad paa-i-aa aatam raam rahi-aa bharpoor. ||1|| rahaa-o. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have obtained the supreme status. The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is all-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause| |
Afsag AS fee AS urea fawfed vu ae vfs ef il (198-9, Ardar, we 4)
satgur sant milai saa“t paa-ee-ai kilvikh dukh kaatay sabh door.
Meeting the Saintly True Guru, I have found peace and tranquility. Sins and painful mistakes are totally erased and taken away.
WISH Ffs set usefos usY fadHe thmr safe Wal ciss-9, Ada, Hs 4) aatam jot bha-ee parfoolit purakh niranjan daykhi-aa hajoor. ||1]|
The Divine Light of the soul radiates forth, gazing upon the Presence of the Immaculate Lord God. ||1||
zs ofa ASHats ut ofa ots oH sfont sours I (1198-10, Adar, He 4)
vadai bhaag satsangat paa-ee har har naam rahi-aa bharpoor.
By great good fortune, I have found the Sat Sangat; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is all-prevading everywhere.
WOAfS Stee HAG Abt ASHas ust are fs ii ci9s-11, Asa, He 4)
athsath tirath majan kee-aa satsangat pag naa-ay Dhoor. ||2||
I have taken my cleansing bath at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, bathing in the dust of the feet of the True Congregation. ||2]|
eons faors Hote His det fore TAT Bar HT AT Il (1198-11, Avda, ws 4) durmat bikaar maleen mat hochhee hirdaa kusuDh laagaa moh koor. Evil-minded and corrupt, filthy-minded and shallow, with impure heart, attached to
enticement and falsehood.
fag aon fa Hats uréha IH femrfu afer HE sfe WSN (198-12, Adar, He 4)
bin karmaa ki-o sangat paa-ee-ai ha-umai bi-aap rahi-aa man jhoor. ||3||
Without good karma, how can I find the Sangat? Engrossed in egotism, the mortal remains stuck in regret. ||3]||
og tfeors feu afs afe At wae AsAats ua fe Il (198-13, Ada, Hs 4)
hohu da-i-aal kirpaa kar har jee maaga-o satsangat pag Dhoor.
Be kind and show Your Mercy, O Dear Lord; I beg for the dust of the feet of the Sat Sangat.
area Ag fxs afe urea AS afe Sfent aH Tafs USN (1198-13, Adar, He 4)
naanak sant milai har paa-ee-ai jan har bhayti-aa raam hajoor. ||4]|1]|
O Nanak, meeting with the Saints, the Lord is attained. The Lord's humble servant obtains the Presence of the Lord. ||4]|1]|
Ardal HIS Il (1198-14)
saarang mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
disse IHS AG afsarcst il (1198-14, Ada, He 4) gobind charnan ka-o balihaaree. I am a Sacrifice to the Feet of the Lord of the Universe.
SHS Ads 6 Wet sda alu fe ofa ute Bast dil FOS I (1198-14, Adar, ve 4) bhavjal jagat na jaa-ee tarnaa jap har har paar utaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot swim across the terrifying world ocean. But chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am carried across across. ||1||Pause] |
fose ysts sat ys act As Aafs atest i (198-15, ardar, ne 4) hirdai parteet banee parabh kayree sayvaa surat beechaaree. Faith in God came to fill my heart; I serve Him intuitively, and contemplate Him.
motes IH oH Afu fase Hae Ao Tears INA (1198-16, Ara, He 4)
an-din raam naam jap hirdai sarab kalaa gunkaaree. ||1||
Night and day, I chant the Lord's Name within my heart; it is all-powerful and virtuous. ||1||
Us Ma mata” sfeor Aa oret Hfs Sfe mise mud Il (1198-16, Adar, He 4)
parabh agam agochar ravi-aa sarab thaa-ee man tan alakh apaaree.
God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, All-pervading everywhere, in all minds and bodies; He is Infinite and Invisible.
ad fasues se sa ufeur fase vise wurst ii (1198-17, ada, He 4) gur kirpaal bha-ay tab paa-i-aa hirdai alakh lakhaaree. ||2|| When the Guru bebomes merciful, then the Unseen Lord is seen within the heart.
21 |
nists ofs oY Ava Uselod AAS aS fa sfemr midard I (1198-18, Arda, He 4)
antar har naam sarab DharneeDhar saakat ka-o door bha-i-aa aha‘kaaree.
Deep within the inner being is the Name of the Lord, the Support of the entire earth, but to the egotistical shaakta, the faithless cynic, He seems far away.
fA Aes 6 aa gslo Hot set Tet USI (198-18, Arda, we 4) tarisnaa jalat na kabhoo boojheh joo-ai baajee haaree. ||3]|| His burning desire is never quenched, and he loses the game of life in the gamble.
131] Gos sos ofa Fs wets ate fess fas ost I c1i98-19, Ardar, we 4)
oothat baithat har gun gaavahi gur kichant kirpaa Dhaaree. Standing up and sitting down, the mortal sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, when the Guru bestows even a tiny bit of His Grace.
Soa faa ag seta set dD fSo at UA ASH INQ (1198-19, Ada, He 4)
naanak jin ka-o nadar bha-ee hai tin kee paij savaaree. ||4||2|| O Nanak, those who are blessed by His Glance of Grace - He saves and protects their honor. ||4]|2]|
Ua qa
ATSA HIG 8 Il (1199-1)
saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofe nifgs om eg furs Il (1199-1, wda, He 4) har har amrit naam dayh pi-aaray. O my Beloved Lord, Har, Har, please bless me with Your Ambrosial Name.
fra Gufs ante He utter fs5 AX aA ASS UA TITS I (1199-2, Agar, He 4)
jin oopar gurmukh man maani-aa tin kay kaaj savaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those whose minds are pleased to be Gurmukh - the Lord completes their projects. ||1]|Pause] |
WHS te se Te vra fF a su fees Il (1199-2, Adar, He 4) jo jan deen bha-ay gur aagai tin kay dookh nivaaray. Those humble beings who become meek before the Guru-their pains are taken away.
wofes salsa ads TT oa AT a Aafe ASTs MAUI (1199-3, Ada, He 4)
an-din bhagat karahi gur aagai gur kai sabad savaaray. ||1]|
Night and day, they perform devotional worship services to the Guru; they are embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
fos on nifys ga dAo IA aefa GA eters Il (1199-3, Adar, ne 4)
hirdai naam amrit ras rasnaa ras gaavahi ras beechaaray.
Within their hearts is the ambrosial essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they savor this essence, sing the praises of this essence, and contemplate this essence.
ae uarte vifys oa difeur Gfe uefa He Emrs MQM (1199-4, Arar, He 4)
gur parsaad amrit ras cheen"i-aa o-ay paavahi mokh du-aaray. ||2]|
By Guru's Grace, they are aware of this ambrosial essence; they find the Gate of Salvation. ||2]|
Afsag use ive vuiver Hfs fAA fesst STH nMOS Il (1199-5, Adar, He 4)
satgur purakh achal achlaa mat jis darirh-taa naam aDhaaray.
The True is the Primal Being, Unmoving and Unchanging. One who takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord - his intellect becomes focused and steady.
fSH ora AG Se ura ou Afsae a afsas ISI (1199-5, Aa, He 4) tis aagai jee-o dayva-o apunaa ha-o satgur kai balihaaray. ||3]|| I offer my soul to Him; I am a Sacrifice to my True Guru. ||3]|
Hound aft en ate ora vista mifamre Tas i 1199-6, ada, Hs 4)
manmukh bharam doojai bhaa-ay laagay antar agi-aan gubaaray.
The self-willed manmukhs are stuck in doubt and attached to duality; the darkness of spiritual ignorance is within them.
Afsag wat oefs o ire a Gaeta & urd ISI (1199-7, Aa, He 4) satgur daataa nadar na aavai naa urvaar na paaray. ||4||
They do not see the True Guru, the Giver; they are not on this shore, or the other. [141]
Hea wife ufe sent Aymit Asa Awe AG UT Il (1199-7, Aa, He 4)
sarbay ghat ghat ravi-aa su-aamee sarab kalaa kal Dhaaray.
Our Lord and Master is permeating and pervading each and every heart; He is supremely Potent to exercise His Might.
Sod VAS VA AIS J ate fagur SI Bars NUNS (1199-8, Aa, He 4) naanak daasan daas kahat hai kar kirpaa layho ubaaray. ||5||3]| Nanak, the slave of His slaves, says, please, be merciful and save me! ||5]|3]|
ASA HIS" 8 Il (1199-8)
saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
difse at wt ars oONfE Il (1199-8, Ada, He 4) gobid kee aisee kaar kamaa-ay. This is the way to work for the Lord.
A fae ad 8 As afs wag aonfe oth gag fos oe NA TIS Il 1199-9, Ava, He 4) jo kichh karay so sat kar maanhu gurmukh naam rahhu liv laa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever He does, accept that as true. As Gurmukh, remain lovingly absorbed in His Name. ||1||Pause]|
difse ulfs wait mfs viet wes ferfs AS ATE I (1199-10, Ada, He 4)
gobid pareet lagee at meethee avar visar sabh jaa-ay.
The Love of the Lord of the Universe seems supremely sweet. Everything else is forgotten.
wofes JIA Sfeur Ho Hfenr HST AfS fete il (1199-10, Aa, He 4)
an-din rahas bha-i-aa man maani-aa jotee jot milaa-ay. ||1]|
Night and day, he is in ecstasy; his mind is pleased and appeased, and his light merges into the Light. ||1||
ma ge afe sa dt uo fsus Aifs eA nfs mrfe tt (1199-11, Ada, He 4)
jab gun gaa-ay tab hee man tariptai saa“t vasai man aa-ay.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, his mind is satisfied. Peace and tranquility come to abide within his mind.
ad fasus se sa ufenr ofe vaat fos Ste Qi (199-11, ada, us 4)
gur kirpaal bha-ay tab paa-i-aa har charnee chit laa-ay. ||2||
When the Guru becomes merciful, the mortal finds the Lord; he focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||2||
Hf yarA set ote fimrfenr famris sf fee ote i (199-12, ada, 2 4)
mat pargaas bha-ee har Dhi-aa-i-aa gi-aan tat liv laa-ay.
The intellect is enlightened, meditating on the Lord. He remains lovingly attuned to the essence of spiritual wisdom.
nists Afs yaet He Hour ofs AofA Prfo ware SI (1199-13, Ada, He 4) antar jot pargatee man maani-aa har sahj samaaDh lagaa-ay. ||3]||
The Divine Light radiates forth deep within his being; his mind is pleased and appeased. He merges intuitively into Celestial Samaadhi. ||3]|
fase aud fas aue anefs Hug dfs of HETte Il (1199-13, Ada, nH 4)
hirdai kapat nit kapat kamaaveh mukhahu har har sunaa-ay.
One whose heart is filled with falsehood, continues to practice falsehood, even while he teaches and preaches about the Lord.
nists BF HT Tas JI aS Ta we Vil (1199-14, wrdar, oe 4)
antar lobh mahaa gubaaraa tuh kootai dukh khaa-ay. ||4||
Within him is the utter darkness of greed. He is thrashed like wheat, and suffers in pain. ||4||
Wa AYHS se us HS TaHfe use ote i (1199-14, ardar, ne 4) jab suparsan bha-ay parabh mayray gurmukh parchaa laa-ay. When my God is totally pleased, the mortal tunes in and becomes Gurmukh.
Soa OH fadne ufsur an AUS AY UTE IUIISII (1199-15, Ara, He 4)
naanak naam niranjan paa-i-aa naam japat sukh paa-ay. ||5||4||
Nanak has obtained the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. Chanting the Naam, he has found peace. ||5||4]|
ATS HIG 8 Il (1199-15)
saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
HI HO TH OTH HO Hat Il (1199-16, Arar, He 4) mayraa man raam naam man maanee. My mind is pleased and appeased by the Name of the Lord.
Ae dhe Afsafe utfSs waret nfs afe af xa Aart WA TI'S il (1199-16, Asay, He 4) mayrai hee-arai satgur pareet lagaa-ee man har har kathaa sukhaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The True Guru has implanted divine love within my heart. The Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind. ||1||Pause| |
aie fens deg Fo Gufs A Veg mies IAT Il (1199-17, Adar, Hs 4)
deen da-i-aal hovhu jan oopar jan dayvhu akath kahaanee.
Please be merciful to Your meek and humble servant; please bless Your humble servant with Your Unspoken Speech.
Hs ot fife fs oA urfemr afe nfs sfs Hite warat Wal (1199-17, Ada, He 4)
sant janaa mil har ras paa-i-aa har man tan meeth lagaanee. ||1]|
Meeting with the humble Saints, I have found the sublime essence of the Lord. The Lord seems so sweet to my mind and body. ||1]|
ofa & df a3 Saat fas Tans ony ust Il (1199-18, Avda, 8 4)
har kai rang ratay bairaagee jin" gurmat naam pachhaanee.
They alone are unattached, who are imbued with the Lord's Love; through the Guru's Teachings, they realize the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
uae uae fifeor Ay ufent AS gat nTSS AST I (1199-19, Ara, Hs 4)
purkhai purakh mili-aa sukh paa-i-aa sabh chookee aavan jaanee. ||2]|
Meeting with the Primal Being, one finds peace, and one's comings and goings in reincarnation are ended. ||2||
oat fasg Sar ys AoMit gAat BH Tara Il (1199-19, Adar, He 4)
nainee birahu daykhaa parabh su-aamee rasnaa naam vakhaanee.
With my eyes, I gaze lovingly upon God, my Lord and Master. I chant His Name with my tongue.
Ust 4200
Azal atese Hae fea wat fase afe ofa sat SI (1200-1, Adar, ne 4)
sarvanee keertan sun-o din raatee hirdai har har bhaanee. ||3]||
With my ears, I listen to the Kirtan of His Praises, day and night. I love the Lord, Har, Har, with all my heart. ||3]|
ud Hot afs zAafs wre 3B Banfs oth warat Il (1200-2, Ava, He 4)
panch janaa gur vasgat aanay ta-o unman naam lagaanee.
When the Guru helped me to overcome the five thieves, then I found ultimate bliss, attached to the Naam.
Ho soa ote faour ot afs aH oh ANAT IISNUII (1200-2, Arar, He 4)
jan naanak har kirpaa Dhaaree har raamai naam samaanee. ||4]|5]| The Lord has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; he merges in the Lord, in the Name of the Lord. ||4]]|5]|
ATS HIS 8 Il (1200-3)
saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
fu HS TH BY Us ATT Il (1200-3, Asa, ne 4) jap man raam naam parhho saar. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and study His Excellence.
oH OH fag fag odt det dg foses AS fas NU TIS I (1200-3, Aa, ne 4) raam naam bin thir nahee ko-ee hor nihfal sabh bisthaar. ||1]| rahaa-o. Without the Lord's Name, nothing is steady or stable. All the rest of the show is useless. ||1]||Pause] |
for ata for sabat aGd FCA A es I (1200-4, Ada, ne 4)
ki-aa leejai ki-aa tajee-ai ba-uray jo deesai so chhaar.
What is there to accept, and what is there to reject, O madman? Whatever is seen Shall turn to dust.
fan faftmr a@ 3H vryst afs ATog AT atts AG fAfs stg NU (1200-5, Ardar, He 4)
jis bikhi-aa ka-o tum" apunee kar jaanhu saa chhaad jaahu sir bhaar. ||1]|
That poison which you believe to be your own - you must abandon it and leave it behind. What a load you have to carry on your head! ||1]|
fe fae ue use mBu sis wre ofS & Aa Teg I (1200-5, wrda, oe 4)
til til pal pal a-oDh fun ghaatai boojh na sakai gavaar.
Moment by moment, instant by instant, your life is running out. The fool cannot understand this.
A fae ad fa ria o we feg Aas aT ETS MQM (1200-6, Ada, He 4)
so kichh karai je saath na chaalai ih saakat kaa aachaar. ||2]|
He does things which will not go along with him in the end. This is the lifestyle of the faithless cynic. ||2]|
Ha Ho a Afar fire ad 3B uefa He eres Il (1200-7, Ada, He 4)
sant janaa kai sang mil ba-uray ta-o paavahi mokh du-aar.
So join together with the humble Saints, O madman, and you shall find the Gate of Salvation.
fag ASHa AY fas o ufeor ae ye Fe seg SI 1200-7, da, m2 4)
bin satsang sukh kinai na paa-i-aa jaa-ay poochhahu bayd beechaar. ||3] |
Without the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, no one finds any peace. Go and ask the scholars of the Vedas. ||3]|
Ta TE As ag ws 3O sls ATE UAT Il (1200-8, Adar, v3 4) raanaa raa-o sabhai ko-oo chaalai jhooth chhod jaa-ay paasaar. All the kings and queens shall depart; they must leave this false expanse.
Sa HS Ae fag faves fae IH BH nIMUITE ISIE! (1200-8, Aa, He 4)
naanak sant sadaa thir nihchal jin raam naam aaDhaar. ||4]|6||
O Nanak, the Saints are eternally steady and stable; they take the Support of the Name of the Lord. ||4]]|6]|
Ada HIS 8 we 3 BUT (1200-10)
saarag mehlaa 4 ghar 3 dupdaa Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Third House, Du-Padas:
qe Afsara YATE II (1200-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad US SITS IS Afot AU I (1200-11, Asa, we 4) kaahay poot jhagrat ha-o sang baap. O son, why do you argue with your father?
fie & He astd SH IE fSo fAG sags uy NAN TIS Il 1200-11, Ada, He 4) jin kay janay badeeray tum ha-o tin si-o jhagrat paap. ||1|| rahaa-o. It is a sin to argue with the one who fathered you and raised you. ||1||Pause] |
faa US a SH ea ads UG A ue fanfs o mm Il (1200-12, Aa, 2 4) jis Dhan kaa tum garab karat ha-o so Dhan kiseh na aap. That wealth, which you are so proud of - that wealth does not belong to anyone.
fas uf efs ate fair oa 3G od uss NAN (1200-12, Aa, He 4)
khin meh chhod jaa-ay bikhi-aa ras ta-o laagai pachhutaap. ||1]||
In an instant, you shall have to leave behind all your corrupt pleasures; you shall be left to regret and repent. ||1]|
A 3Hd us dS Amt ofe fo & Frag AU Il (1200-13, Adar, He 4) jo tumray parabh hotay su-aamee har tin kay jaapahu jaap. He is God, your Lord and Master - chant the Chant of that Lord.
GueH AGS Sod Ho SH AG AE Hog SE ATE AST QUAD (1200-13, Aa, He 4) updays karat naanak jan tum ka-o ja-o sunhu ta-o jaa-ay santaap. ||2||1||7]| Servant Nanak spreads the Teachings; if you listen to it, you shall be rid of your pain. H2q121171I
Add HIG 8 We U TUS USS (1200-15) saarag mehlaa 4 ghar 5 dupday parh-taal
Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House, Du-Padas, Partaal:
qe Afsara yATfe il (1200-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afu Ho Adora HalAd Hates HOHS fAE uifSs oait H afe ofa ufs 2a AS feo AS TFS UA FI Il 1200-16, Aa, He 4)
jap man jagannaath jagdeesro jagjeevano manmohan si-o pareet laagee mai har har har tayk sabh dinas sabh raat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, the Life of the World, the Enticer of the mind; fall in love with Him. I take the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, all day and all night. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs at unr nifoa nifed nifed Te Wes Aa SWE YoHtea Jz Ta AMM aloo o ATS II (1200-17, ATdar, He 4)
har kee upmaa anik anik anik gun gaavat suk naarad barahmaadik tav gun su-aamee ganin na jaat.
Endless, endless, endless are the Praises of the Lord. Suk Dayv, Naarad and the gods like Brahma sing His Glorious Praises. Your Glorious Virtues, O my Lord and Master, cannot even be counted.
3 ofa auizg 3 afs aig F fs Amit J ora at ats mmust SHS WAU 200-18, Asa, v2 4)
too har bay-ant too har bay-ant too har su-aamee too aapay hee jaaneh aapnee bhaa™t. ||1||
O Lord, You are Infinite, O Lord, You are Infinite, O Lord, You are my Lord and Master; only You Yourself know Your Own Ways. ||1]|
afs & feafe foate afs faxe dt ans 3 ofs & AS AD Ute Sas Il (1200-19, Adar, 3 4) har kai nikat nikat har nikat hee bastay tay har kay jan saaDhoo har bhagaat.
Those who are near, near to the Lord - those who dwell near the Lord - those humble servants of the Lord are the Holy, the devotees of the Lord.
3 dfs & Ho afe fae afm fHS AA Ao Ba ASS ASS frets NINA (1200-19, ASar, H2 4)
tay har kay jan har si-o ral milay jaisay jan naanak sallai salal milaat. ||2]|1]|8]| Those humble servants of the Lord merge with their Lord, O Nanak, like water merging with water. ||2]|1]|8]|
UST AOA
Adal HIS 8 Il (1201-1)
saarang mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
Afu Ho oddd Odds Homi ufe nae te ter At oH oH or ofa UisH He NU awe II (1201-1, ATdat, Hs 4)
jap man narharay narhar su-aamee har sagal dayv dayvaa saree raam raam naamaa har pareetam moraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord, your Lord and Master. The Lord is the Most Divine of all the divine beings. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, the Lord, my most Dear Beloved. ||1]|Pause||
fas fafs ae aes ofs & To Wes TH aS Wes fos fafs oH Us Hae es TH HAT II (1201-3, A'Sat, He 4)
jit garihi gun gaavtay har kay gun gaavtay raam gun gaavtay tit garihi vaajay panch sabad vad bhaag mathoraa.
That household, in which the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung, in which the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung, in which His Glorious Praises are sung, where the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, resound - great is the destiny written on the forehead of one who lives in such a household.
fsq Ho & vfs uu ae Afs du ae Afs da ae aH au Bs Hg mifore ae fSq HO a dfs ute xe UT FI UU (1201-4, Adar, 2 4)
tin" jan kay sabh paap ga-ay sabh dokh ga-ay sabh rog ga-ay kaam kroDh lobh moh abhimaan ga-ay tin" jan kay har maar kadhay panch choraa. ||1||
All the sins of that humble being are taken away, all the pains are taken away, all diseases are taken away; sexual desire, anger, greed, attachment and egotistical pride are taken away. The Lord drives the five thieves out of such a person of the Lord.
[21 fs TH sag oe AY dfs & AS AY AeA AUT His aula aay ofe aie mrey ois a
HO AY Il (1201-5, Anda, Hs 4)
har raam bolhu har saaDhoo har kay jan saaDhoo jagdees japahu man bachan karam har har aaraaDhoo har kay jan saaDhoo.
Chant the Name of the Lord, O Holy Saints of the Lord; meditate on the Lord of the Universe, O Holy people of the Lord. Meditate in thought, word and deed on the Lord, Har, Har. Worship and adore the Lord, O Holy people of the Lord.
ofs aH afe ofs an Sf Afs ur TET Il (1201-6, Avda, He 4)
har raam bol har raam bol sabh paap gavaaDhoo.
Chant the Name of the Lord, chant the Name of the Lord. It shall rid you of all your sins.
fos fos Aas AT Ae AST ose Af HaetAT Il (1201-7, Aa, He 4)
nit nit jaagran karahu sadaa sadaa aanand jap jagdeesoraa.
Continually and continuously remain awake and aware. You shall be in ecstasy forever and ever, meditating on the Lord of the Universe.
Ho fee SH UST AS SH UST UH nigg aH Hy Ho aoa dia fAe fe afs sas ST NQUQANCH 201-7, ATHa, He 4)
man ichhay fal paavhu sabhai fal paavhu Dharam arath kaam mokh jan naanak har si- o milay har bhagat toraa. ||2||2||9]|
Servant Nanak: O Lord, Your devotees obtain the fruits of their minds' desires; they obtain all the fruits and rewards, and the four great blessings - Dharmic faith, wealth and riches, sexual success and liberation. ||2]|2||9||
ATS HIG" 8 Il (1201-9)
Saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
fu Hs HO HOAeS oie Alda USHA AS USHA Ys visa Il (1201-9, Ardar, we 4) jap man maaDho maDhusoodno har sareerango parmaysaro sat parmaysaro parabh antarjaamee.
O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of Wealth, the Source of Nectar, the Supreme Lord God, the True Transcendent Being, God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
AS us ot Is AS ANS & ST ofa YISH aS HE ua TTS it (1201-9, war, ws 4)
sabh dookhan ko hantaa sabh sookhan ko daataa har pareetam gun gaa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He is the Destroyer of all suffering, the Giver of all peace; sing the Praises of my Beloved Lord God. ||1||Pause]|
dfs wie we wie sAst fs vfs a ufe sas fe we aésfe SASH dfs tus a WES Il (1201-10, Ata, Hs 4)
har ghat ghatay ghat bastaa har jal thalay har bastaa har thaan thaanantar bastaa mai har daykhan ko chaa-o.
The Lord dwells in the home of each and every heart. The Lord dwells in the water, and the Lord dwells on the land. The Lord dwells in the spaces and interspaces. I have such a great longing to see the Lord.
act ure HS ofa at Ae AS Ae Ulsn AS AS Hfs wea fears I (1201-11, Wa, Hs 4) ko-ee aavai santo har kaa jan santo mayraa pareetam jan santo mohi maarag dikhlaavai.
If only some Saint, some humble Saint of the Lord, my Holy Beloved, would come, to show me the way.
fSH Ao a IE nfs nfs Get UE All 1201-12, wa, He 4) tis jan kay ha-o mal mal Dhovaa paa-o. ||1]| I would wash and massage the feet of that humble being. ||1]|
dfs AS a ofa fhfemr ofs Aaa 3 ffeer aanfa ate fer i a201-12, ada, us 4)
har jan ka-o har mili-aa har sarDhaa tay mili-aa gurmukh har mili-aa.
The Lord's humble servant meets the Lord, through his faith in the Lord; meeting the Lord, he becomes Gurmukh.
He nfs sfs wre se H Sftmr ae TET it 1201-13, wa, v2 4) mayrai man tan aanand bha-ay mai daykhi-aa har raa-o. My mind and body are in ecstasy; I have seen my Sovereign Lord King.
Ho saa aS fagur set ofa at fagut set AaretAs fas set Il (1201-14, Aa, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o kirpaa bha-ee har kee kirpaa bha-ee jagdeesur kirpaa bha-ee. Servant Nanak has been blessed with Grace, blessed with the Lord's Grace, blessed with the Grace of the Lord of the Universe.
H mofes Ae Ae Ae ofa Afr afs SE UQUSNIOM (1201-14, Ada, He 4)
mai andino sad sad sadaa har japi-aa har naa-o. ||2||3||10]|
I meditate on the Lord, the Name of the Lord, night and day, forever, forever and ever. ||2]|3]|10||
ATS HIS 8 Il (1201-15)
saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
Afu He fegs@ Il (1201-15, Aa, He 4) jap man nirbha-o. O my mind, meditate on the Fearless Lord,
Afs Afs Ae AFS Il (1201-16, Aa, Hz 4)
sat sat sadaa sat. who is True, True, Forever True.
fesey nore Hats Il (1201-16, Asa, He 4) nirvair akaal moorat. He is free of vengeance, the Image of the Undying,
migat ASS Il (1201-16, Arda, Hs 4) aajoonee sambha-o. beyond birth, Self-existent.
He He mates fomrfe fedars faaorst na aS il 1201-16, Aa, H2 4) mayray man andino Dhi-aa-ay nirankaar niraahaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O my mind, meditate night and day on the Formless, Self-sustaining Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs zane ag dfs wane as afe afe 3m fro At Hat 3] Stee UTsSS ATS IS feaarat il (1201-17, Arar, He 4)
har darsan ka-o har darsan ka-o kot kot taytees siDh jatee jogee tat tirath parbhavan karat rahat niraahaaree.
For the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, the three hundred thirty million gods, and millions of Siddhas, celibates and Yogis make their pilgrimages to sacred shrines and rivers, and go on fasts.
fso Ho at Aa ate uct fag a@ faces Jez goers WAU (1201-18, Ada, He 4)
tin jan kee sayvaa thaa-ay pa-ee jin" ka-o kirpaal hovat banvaaree. ||1||
The service of the humble person is approved, unto whom the Lord of the World shows His Mercy. |]|1]]|
fs & FT AS 3B 3 OSH Bas 3S A HSS Ts TH HTS I (1201-19, wrdar, we 4)
har kay ho sant bhalay tay ootam bhagat bhalay jo bhaavat har raam muraaree. They alone are the good Saints of the Lord, the best and most exalted devotees, who are pleasing to their Lord.
fag at nigt ad Ha Homi faq at ooa ofa UA ASH INSU (1201-19, Ada, He 4) jin" kaa ang karai mayraa su-aamee tin" kee naanak har paij savaaree. ||2||4||11]|
Those who have my Lord and Master on their side - O Nanak, the Lord saves their honor. ||2]|4]|11]|
UST 922
ASA HIG 8 USSG Il (1202-1)
saarag mehlaa 4 parh-taal. Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Partaal:
afu Ho dfee ofs afee gat fours vs fqafe a ys HS Ho afe Sf ofe use mifsomt
HAN FITS Wl (1202-1, Ada, He 4)
jap man govind har govind gunee niDhaan sabh sarisat kaa parabho mayray man har bol har purakh abhinaasee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Treasure of Virtue, the God of all creation. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the Eternal, Imperishable, Primal Lord God. ||1]|Pause| |
ofa a an vifys afe ofa ad A ubat fan ay fimrat It 1202-3, ada, ne 4)
har kaa naam amrit har har haray so pee-ai jis raam pi-aasee.
The Name of the Lord is the Ambrosial Nectar, Har, Har, Har. He alone drinks it in, whom the Lord inspires to drink it.
ofs nity efenig efeur afe AS fAR Afsag A AS oe ae wifys SH Tea UU (1202-3, Ada, H3 4)
har aap da-i-aal da-i-aa kar maylai jis satguroo so jan har har amrit naam chakhaasee. H1II
The Merciful Lord Himself bestows His Mercy, and He leads the mortal to meet with the True Guru. That humble being tastes the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
[21
Ho Agfs Ae Ae He ofa ae fs a Ag EY SIH SE AAT II (1202-4, Adar, He 4)
jo jan sayveh sad sadaa mayraa har haray tin kaa sabh dookh bharam bha-o jaasee. Those who serve my Lord, forever and ever - all their pain, doubt and fear are taken away.
Hd Sod oH we St He fA whysa als uy fRuseAt QUAI! (1202-5, Adar, He 4)
jan naanak naam la-ay taa™ jeevai ji-o chaatrik jal pee-ai tariptaasee. ||2||5||12|| Servant Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and so he lives, like the song- bird, which is satisfied only by drinking in the water. ||2||5]|12||
ATS HIG 8 Il (1202-6)
Saarag mehlaa 4. Saarang, Fourth Mehl:
afu He fast IH I (1202-6, Ada, He 4) jap man siree raam. O my mind, meditate on the Supreme Lord.
TH IHS TH Il (1202-6, Aa, He 4) raam ramat raam. The Lord, the Lord is All-pervading.
Afs AS IH Il (1202-6, Aa, He 4) sat sat raam. True, True is the Lord.
aod seo Ae TH TH OH ae for Aaaa NU! TIS I (1202-6, Aa, He 4)
bolhu bha-ee-aa sad raam raam raam rav rahi-aa sarabgay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
O Siblings of Destiny, chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, forever. He is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause] |
oH mmd orfy nm Ag ads ITH ny wiMfy wey ASS Aa Il (1202-7, Ada, He 4)
raam aapay aap aapay sabh kartaa raam aapay aap aap sabhat jagay.
The Lord Himself is Himself the Creator of all. The Lord Himself is Himself pervading the whole world.
fan orfy feu ad Aa oH ON OH OTE AAG TH On fs Sea NU (1202-8, Adar, He 4) jis aap kirpaa karay mayraa raam raam raam raa-ay so jan raam naam liv laagay. H1II
That person, upon whom my Sovereign Lord King, Raam, Raam, Raam, bestows His Mercy - that person is lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name. ||1||
oH OH ot Cunt tug vfs Asd A Sas Aol ot ufs aa fete afena wa II (1202-9, Aa, H8 4)
raam naam kee upmaa daykhhu har santahu jo bhagat janaa™ kee pat raakhai vich kalijug agay.
O Saints of the Lord, behold the Glory of the Name of the Lord; His Name saves the honor of His humble devotees in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Ws SSa T vig kh Hs TH ae AHS eu Te Als Fa WANEUISI (1202-9, wrdar, we 4) jan naanak kaa ang kee-aa mayrai raam raa-ay dusman dookh ga-ay sabh bhagay. [12] ]6]]13]|
My Sovereign Lord King has taken servant Nanak's side; his enemies and attackers have all run away. ||2||6||13]|
Ada Hoe u vue we A (1202-11) saarang mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsars yrrfe it (1202-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afsas Hats aS af WE Il (1202-12) satgur moorat ka-o bal jaa-o. I am a sacrifice to the Image of the True Guru.
nists form ofza fa ve at Hee Bane afe ure nan TIE il (1202-12, ada, ue 5) antar pi-aas chaatrik ji-o jal kee safal darsan kad paa™-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
My inner being is filled with a great thirst, like that of the song-bird for water. When shall I find the Fruitful Vision of His Darshan? ||1]||Pause| |
nora & oe Aaa ufsusa safs zee ofa aE i (1202-13, Ada, we 5)
anaathaa ko naath sarab partipaalak bhagat vachhal har naa-o.
He is the Master of the masterless, the Cherisher of all. He is the Lover of the devotees of His Name.
Wag afe 5 we yrat fn Jefe MATS NAM (1202-13, Ardar, we 5) jaa ka-o ko-ay na raakhai paraanee tis too deh asraa-o. ||1|| That mortal, whom no one can protect - You bless him with Your Support, O Lord.
[21 foufoor ug foafsor afs foafeor 5 aS i (1202-14, Aga, He 5)
niDhri-aa Dhar nigti-aa gat nithaavi-aa too thaa-o. Support of the unsupported, Saving Grace of the unsaved, Home of the homeless.
au fen we sot J Hat Sat atals ATH AHS NM (1202-14, Adar, we 5)
dah dis jaa‘-o tahaa‘ too sangay tayree keerat karam kamaa-o. ||2||
Wherever I go in the ten directions, You are there with me. The only thing I do is sing the Kirtan of Your Praises. ||2]|
San 3 oy wy 3 Sar Sat ats ffs afo o Aa I (1202-15, ada, He 5)
aykas tay laakh laakh tay aykaa tayree gat mit kahi na sakaa-o.
From Your Oneness, You become tens of thousands, and from tens of thousands, You become One. I cannot describe Your state and extent.
3 aig Sct fils act ust AS 3g AS fers 03a (1202-16, rsa, ws 5) too bay-ant tayree mit nahee paa-ee-ai sabh tayro khayl dikhaa-o. ||3]| You are Infinite - Your value cannot be appraised. Everything I see is Your play. ||3]|
AS a Ha ATG fae ante ais AGS AE fees BE I (1202-16, Ha, Ht 5) saaDhan kaa sang saaDh si-o gosat har saaDhan si-o liv laa-o. I speak with the Company of the Holy; I am in love with the Holy people of the Lord.
He soa ufeor 3 THis aie tg can nfs WES Sal (1202-17, Aa, He 5)
jan naanak paa-i-aa hai gurmat har dayh daras man chaa-o. ||4]|1]|
Servant Nanak has found the Lord through the Guru's Teachings; please bless me with Your Blessed Vision; O Lord, my mind yearns for it. ||4]|1]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1202-18)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs HE visa ATS II (1202-18, Aa, He 5) har jee-o antarjaamee jaan. The Dear Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
ass Foe Hu S suet Art Ss uSTS AU! TI'S Il (1202-18, Argar, we 5)
karat buraa-ee maanukh tay chhapaa-ee saakhee bhoot pavaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The mortal does evil deeds, and hides from others, but like the air, the Lord is present everywhere. ||1||Pause] |
BAS OH AGS ue ASH nists SFT ASS Il (1202-19, wrdar, we 5)
baisnou naam karat khat karmaa antar lobh joothaan.
You call yourself a devotee of Vishnu and you practice the six rituals, but your inner being is polluted with greed.
AS Ast at fee" Ags Fa AS vifaMrs UA (1202-19, Ardar, we 5) sant sabhaa kee nindaa kartay doobay sabh agi-aan. ||1|| Those who slander the Society of the Saints, shall all be drowned in their ignorance.
[1
UST 9203
aafe AH ure fasts us eee nists 3S HS Il (1203-1, Ada, 3 5)
karahi som paak hireh par darbaa antar jhooth gumaan.
The mortal eats the food which he has carefully prepared, and then steals the wealth of others. His inner being is filled with falsehood and pride.
AAS ae at fafa odt wrefa flmmt Ho & HTS II! (1203-1, Adar, Hs 5) saastar bayd kee biDh nahee jaaneh bi-aapay man kai maan. ||2]| He knows nothing of the Vedas or the Shaastras; his mind is gripped by pride. ||2]|
Hfor aes asta Afs eas fa@ Aedt Pee Il (1203-2, Aa, He 5) sanDhi-aa kaal karahi sabh vartaa ji-o safree damfaan. He says his evening prayers, and observes all the fasts, but this is all just a show.
ys gore sts ue faves Afs AHS ISI (1203-2, Argar, 42 5)
parabhoo bhulaa-ay oojharh paa-ay nihfal sabh karmaan. ||3]|
God made him stray from the path, and sent him into the wilderness. All his actions are useless. ||3]|
A fomrot A and ufsor fan act faut saree Il (1203-3, Adar, ne 5)
So gi-aanee so baisnou parh"-aa jis karee kirpaa bhagvaan.
He alone is a spiritual teacher, and he alone is a devotee of Vishnu and a scholar, whom the Lord God blesses with His Grace.
Gfo Afsag Af usH ue ufeor afer Aare fATS ISI 1203-3, Arde, He 5)
on satgur sayv param pad paa-i-aa uDhri-aa sagal bisvaan. ||4||
Serving the True Guru, he obtains the supreme status and saves the whole world. [141]
foor JH aad fae afa adt red ys are (SS Far] Il (1203-4, Ada, Hs 5) ki-aa ham kathah kichh kath nahee jaanah parabh bhaavai tivai bolaan. What can I say? I don't know what to say. As God wills, so do I speak.
AUGHats at ufs fea Hie AS aoa UES AS UII (1203-5, Aa, He 5) saaDhsangat kee Dhoor ik maa‘ga-o jan naanak pa-i-o saraan. ||5||2]|
I ask only for the dust of the feet of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Servant Nanak seeks their Sanctuary. ||5||2||
ATS HIS U Il (1203-6)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma Hd SWS Fd Il (1203-6, Aa, Hs 5) ab moro naachno raho. Now, my dancing is over.
we dale AoA utes Afsas aefs ws UU! TIS I (1203-6, Ada, He 5)
laal rageelaa sehjay paa-i-o satgur bachan laho. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have intuitively obtained my Darling Beloved. Through the Word of the True Guru's Teachings, I found Him. ||1||Pause| |
ang afoot AA Afar Aadt fi—ot gee Cus ad Il (1203-7, Ada, He 5) ku-aar kanniaa jaisay sang sahayree pari-a bachan uphaas kaho. The virgin speaks with her friends about her husband and they laugh together;
AG afer fas stafe urfeG sa ne ats oH NA (1203-7, Ada, He 5) ja-o surijan garih bheetar aa-i-o tab mukh kaaj lajo. ||1]| but when he comes home, she becomes shy, and modestly covers her face. ||1]|
fA@ afad aod ufsG aad Jz fed it 1203-8, Aa, He 5)
ji-o kaniko kothaaree charhi-o kabro hot firo. When gold is melted in the crucible, it flows freely everywhere.
wa 3 AU se 0 Mefs 3a 3 ae fas NN (1203-8, Aa, He 5) jab tay suDh bha-ay hai baareh tab tay thaan thiro. ||2|| But when it is made into pure solid bars of gold, then it remains stationary. ||2]|
mG feo sf 38 58 aS Has wet US Il (1203-9, Ada, Hs 5)
ja-o din rain ta-oo la-o baji-o moorat gharee palo.
As long as the days and the nights of one's life last, the clock strikes the hours, minutes and seconds.
ardood Sfe fhotes sa fefs aa 3 SfeS Si (1203-9, Avda, He 5) bajaavanhaaro ooth siDhaari-o tab fir baaj na bha-i-o. ||3]]| But when the gong player gets up and leaves, the gong is not sounded again. ||3]|
AA as Gea ule ures sa Gg fs fee il (1203-10, Ada, Hi: 5) jaisay kumbh udak poor aani-o tab ohu bhinn daristo. When the pitcher is filled with water, the water contained within it seems distinct.
aT aoa AT AS Hfs ates nis nis fs IsiSil 1203-10, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak kumbh jalai meh daari-o ambhai ambh milo. ||4]|3]|
Says Nanak, when the pitcher is emptied out, the water mingles again with water. [4113] |
ATS HIS UY Il (1203-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma us foot TI I (1203-11, Asa, He 5) ab poochhay ki-aa kahaa. Now if he is asked, what can he say?
Bo on nifys gv ola wea fay fA afo go NAN TIS tl 4203-11, Avda, ne 5)
laino naam amrit ras neeko baavar bikh si-o geh rahaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He was supposed to have gathered the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, but instead, the mad-man was busy with poison. ||1]||Pause] |
Tos HoH fedars ufes ws ast ges Il 1203-12, Aa, He 5)
dulabh janam chirankaal paa-i-o jaata-o ka-udee badlahaa.
This human life, so difficult to obtain, was finally obtained after such a long time. He is losing it in exchange for a shell.
TE &t waa ores ofes aes fase fea WU (1203-13, Ardar, we 5) kaathooree ko gaahak aa-i-o laadi-o kaalar birakh jivhaa. ||1]| He came to buy musk, but instead, he has loaded dust and thistle grass. ||1]|
wfes og wae a set Hole oadt Ae Cats us Il (1203-13, Aa, H2 5) aa-i-o laabh laabhan kai taa-ee mohan thaaga-uree si-o ulajh pahaa. He comes in search of profits, but he is entangled in the enticing illusion of Maya.
ae ged oe det d fefe feg m@ng afe Ba NN (1203-14, Ada, He 5)
kaach baadrai laal kho-ee hai fir in a-osar kad lahaa. ||2||
He loses the jewel, in exchange for mere glass. When will he have this blessed opportunity again? ||2]|
HIG uy Sa TE ot Sag E30 UH SAT Il (1203-14, Aa, ue 5)
Sagal paraaDh ayk gun naahee thaakur chhodah daas bhajhaa.
He is full of sins, and he has not even one redeeming virtue. Forsaking his Lord and Master, he is involved with Maya, God's slave.
net HAfe Ases at fonret fAS SHAG efs AST USI (1203-15, Ada, Hs 5)
aa-ee masat jarhvat kee ni-aa-ee ji-o taskar dar saa‘ni"aa. ||3]|
And when the final silence comes, like inanimate matter, he is caught like a thief at the door. ||3]|
ws Gurg 3 at AS ois SAT AgNt ule FI Il (1203-16, Asa, 3 5) aan upaa-o na ko-oo soojhai har daasaa sarnee par rahaa. I cannot see any other way out. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord's slaves.
aT sod 3a dt He echt AE Aas mBae Hfe TaT IISISIl (1203-16, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak tab hee man chhutee-ai ja-o saglay a-ugan mayt Dharhaa. ||4]|4]| Says Nanak, the mortal is emancipated, only when all his demerits and faults are erased and eradicated. ||4||4||
ATID HIS U Il (1203-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het aifs aot fipa age faarferS 1 (1203-17, ardar, ue 5) maa-ee Dheer rahee pari-a bahut biraagi-o. O mother, my patience is gone. I am in love with my Husband Lord.
mifsa sts orgu dad faq fAG gs 3 Stas uA TIS i (1203-18, ada, ws 5)
anik bhaa“t aanoop rang ray tin" si-o ruchai na laagi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
There are so many kinds of incomparable pleasures, but I am not interested in any of them. ||1]|Pause| |
fofa and fina fun nfs fa@ ate usa odt Afar | 1203-18, Arar, ue 5)
nis baasur pari-a pari-a mukh tayra-o nee“d palak nahee jaagi-o.
Night and day, I utter, "Pri-a, Pri-a - Beloved, Beloved" with my mouth. I cannot sleep, even for an instant; I remain awake and aware.
wd and SAS uifoa Atara 3 fae fus AS fay wfaS nai 1203-19, Ada, H8 5)
haar kajar bastar anik seegaar ray bin pir sabhai bikh laagi-o. ||1||
Necklaces, eye make-up, fancy clothes and decorations - without my Husband Lord, these are all poison to me. ||1]|
YT 92oV
use ue ds sifs afe aS ao fipy SAAS it (1204-1, Adar, Hs 5)
poochha-o poochha-o deen bhaa‘t kar ko-00 kahai pari-a daysaa‘gi-o.
I ask and ask, with humility, "Who can tell me which country my Husband Lord lives in?"
TE SE AS Ho 30 Maus AIR de ule THE NN (1204-1, Ada, nH 5)
hee'-o day‘-u sabh man tan arpa-o sees charan par raakhi-o. ||2||
I would dedicate my heart to him, I offer my mind and body and everything; I place my head at his feet. ||2]|
de Feat MHS eA FE AUHKals wees | (1204-2, Ada, we 5)
charan bandnaa amol daasro day’-u saaDhsangat ardaagi-o.
I bow at the feet of the voluntary slave of the Lord; I beg him to bless me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
aay feu dfs ys fhoreg fou earn trerfarS nit (1204-2, ardar, Hs 5)
karahu kirpaa mohi parabhoo milaavhu nimakh daras paykhaagi-o. ||3]||
Show Mercy to me, that I may meet God, and gaze upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan every moment. ||3]|
fenfe set sa state orfe@ Ha Ho uiafes AlserfaS i (1204-3, ada, ne 5)
darisat bha-ee tab bheetar aa-i-o mayraa man an-din seetlaagi-o.
When He is Kind to me, He comes to dwell within my being. Night and day, my mind is calm and peaceful.
ad vod wh Hae we AEE wMoTe Stas igiull 1204-4, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak ras mangal gaa-ay sabad anaahad baaji-o. ||4||5||
Says Nanak, I sing the Songs of Joy; the Unstruck Word of the Shabad resounds within me. ||4]|5||
ATS HIS U Il (1204-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het Afs Afs Afs ofa Afs AfSs AS ATO I (1204-5, Ada, He 5)
maa-ee sat sat sat har sat sat sat saaDhaa. O mother, True, True True is the Lord, and True, True, True is His Holy Saint.
aS TT Aus ates H sa Todt war ua TIS il (1204-5, Ada, ws 5) bachan guroo jo poorai kahi-o mai chheek gaa“three baaDhaaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Word which the Perfect Guru has spoken, I have tied to my robe. ||1||Pause] |
fofA was ofmig faaat afe AAbaS Fara i (1204-6, wrda, He 5)
nis baasur nakhi-atar binaasee rav sasee-ar baynaaDhaa.
Night and day, and the stars in the sky shall vanish. The sun and the moon shall vanish.
fafs sAo Ae use Afed fefe ATT gee MSHA INA (1204-6, Aa, He 5)
gir basuDhaa jal pavan jaa-igo ik saaDh bachan atlaaDhaa. ||1]|
The mountains, the earth, the water and the air shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint shall endure. ||1]|
nis faort Ad fae Gaga AS faara Il (1204-7, Aa, He 5)
and binaasee jayr binaasee ut-bhuj sayt binaaDhaa.
Those born of eggs shall pass away, and those born of the womb shall pass away. Those born of the earth and sweat shall pass away as well.
ata faomt uefs faomt fefa Aa wee fogesar IIQI (1204-7, Ada, Hz 5)
chaar binaasee khateh binaasee ik saaDh bachan nihchalaaDhaa. ||2|| The four Vedas shall pass away, and the six Shaastras shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint is eternal. ||2]|
wa faarAt 3H feet ATSa St Fa Il (1204-8, Ada, He 5)
raaj binaasee taam binaasee saatak bhee baynaaDhaa.
Raajas, the quality of energetic activity shall pass away. Taamas, the quality of lethargic darkness shall pass away. Saatvas, the quality of peaceful light shall pass away as well.
fenfens 3 Fae faort fefa ATG ses MEO SI (1204-9, Asa, Hs 5) daristimaan hai sagal binaasee ik saaDh bachan aagaaDhaa. ||3]|
All that is seen shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint is beyond destruction. ||3||
mma nif niu dt nm As nme Ye fearar il (1204-9, Ara, He 5) aapay aap aap hee aapay sabh aapan khayl dikhaaDhaa. He Himself is Himself by Himself. All that is seen is His play.
ufes o wet adt sis I ys Soa ae fHfs ST IIE 1204-10, Aa, He 5)
paa-i-o na jaa-ee kahee bhaa™t ray parabh naanak gur mil laaDhaa. ||4]|6]| He cannot be found by any means. O Nanak, meeting with the Guru, God is found. [14] 16]
ATID HIS U Il (1204-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
He nfs athe ae afFe i 204-11, Ada, He 5) mayrai man baasibo gur gobind. The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, dwells within my mind.
not fuse safe 3 cag Sot oad AY MTSE NU! TIC Il (1204-11, Ada, He 5)
jahaa™ simran bha-i-o hai thaakur tahaa‘ nagar sukh aanand. ||1]| rahaa-o. Wherever my Lord and Master is remembered in meditation - that village is filled with peace and bliss. ||1||Pause| |
Wot HAs Sag flmrd sat sy AS nie Il (1204-12, Ardar, He 5)
jahaa™ beesrai thaakur pi-aaro tahaa’ dookh sabh aapad.
Wherever my Beloved Lord and Master is forgotten - all misery and misfortune is there.
Wo Fo ate ose Has Ju sot AS AY AYES MWA (1204-12, Ardar, M8 5)
jah gun gaa-ay aanand mangal roop tahaa™ sadaa sukh sampad. ||1]|
Where the Praises of my Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss and Joy are sung - eternal peace and wealth are there. ||1]|
Ad Azo ule aa o Hoba 3a Ho Sfemrs Sfemrae Il (1204-13, Avda, He 5)
jahaa sarvan har kathaa na sunee-ai tah mahaa bha-i-aan udi-aanad.
Wherever they do not listen to the Stories of the Lord with their ears - the utterly desolate wilderness is there.
Hd aleso AUHafS JA Sd AWS FA SHE IQ (1204-14, Ada, Hs 5)
jahaa™ keertan saaDhsangat ras tah saghan baas falaa‘nad. ||2||
Where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung with love in the Saadh Sangat - there is fragrance and fruit and joy in abundance. ||2||
fag fanaa afe sau rte Aart miGu fyase Il (1204-14, ada, us 5)
bin simran kot barakh jeevai saglee a-oDh barithaanad.
Without meditative remembrance on the Lord, one may live for millions of years, but his life would be totally useless.
Sa fou dfiz sno afs 38 Ae Het HleToeS SI (1204-15, Ada, He 5)
ayk nimakh gobind bhajan kar ta-o sadaa sadaa jeevaanad. ||3]||
But if he vibrates and meditates on the Lord of the Universe, for even a moment, then he shall live forever and ever. ||3]|
Rafe Hafe Rafe ys use eta ATOMS farsurSe Il (1204-15, Adar, He 5)
Saran Saran saran parabh paava-o deejai saaDhsangat kirpaanad.
O God, I seek Your Sanctuary, Your Sanctuary, Your Sanctuary; please mercifully bless me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
aoa ufe sfuS 3 Aaa H Aare Te fata ASE USIDI (1204-16, Ada, Hs 5)
naanak poor rahi-o hai sarab mai sagal gunaa biDh jaa‘nad. ||4||7]|
O Nanak, the Lord is All-pervading everywhere, amongst all. He knows the qualities and the condition of all. ||4||7||
ATS HIS UY Il (1204-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma dfs IH SIAG US Il (1204-17, Ada, v2 5)
ab mohi raam bharosa-o paa-ay. Now, I have obtained the Support of the Lord.
An Aofe ufse agetafa 3 3 sefo Save NU TIC th 1204-17, Ada, nH 5)
jo jo saran pari-o karunaaniDh tay tay bhaveh taraa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Those who seek the Sanctuary of the Ocean of Mercy are carried across the world- ocean. ||1||Pause] |
Afa APES wig AofA ATES AoA Taf TSS | (1204-18, Ada, He 5)
sukh so-i-o ar sahj samaa-i-o sahsaa gureh gavaa-ay.
They sleep in peace, and intuitively merge into the Lord. The Guru takes away their cynicism and doubt.
A wos Het ofs at Ho ses SH US AI (1204-19, Adar, He 5) jo chaahat so-ee har kee-o man baa™chhat fal paa-ay. ||1|| Whatever they wish for, the Lord does; they obtain the fruits of their minds' desires.
[21|
fase aug 33 fimre we Aeat aa AOS Il (1204-19, Ada, He 5)
hirdai japa-o naytar Dhi-aan laava-o sarvanee kathaa sunaa-ay.
In my heart, I meditate on Him; with my eyes, I focus my meditation on Him. With my ears, I listen to His Sermon.
UST QVou
Tat VHS Haat SaAT A TAS Is TE WE Il 1205-1, wa, v3 5)
charnee chala-o maarag thaakur kai rasnaa har gun gaa-ay. |[2||
With my feet, I walk on my Lord and Mater's Path. With my tongue, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2]|
efus fenfe Ava Hae gu Cadt AS ATS i (1205-1, Asa, H2 5)
daykhi-o darisat sarab mangal roop ultee sant karaa-ay.
With my eyes, I see the Lord, the Embodiment of Absolute Bliss; the Saint has turned away from the world.
utes we one on de sis 5 AST WES MSI (1205-2, Ardar, Hs 5)
paa-i-o laal amol naam har chhod na kathoo jaa-ay. ||3]||
I have found the Priceless Name of the Beloved Lord; it never leaves me or goes anywhere else. ||3]|
ae Cunt asa aset famr aa ag SSeS I (1205-2, wa, ne 5) kavan upmaa ka-un badaa-ee ki-aa gun kaha-o reejhaa-ay. What praise, what glory and what virtues should I utter, in order to please the Lord?
oS fgurs de efeur ys Ae BSA VA CATES ISIC (1205-3, Aa, Hs 5)
hot kirpaal deen da-i-aa parabh jan naanak daas dasaa-ay. ||4||8]|
That humble being, unto whom the Merciful Lord is kind - O servant Nanak, he is the slave of God's slaves. ||4]|8] |
ATS HIS UY Il (1205-4)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
6fe AY a fA safe Hass Il (1205-4, Aa, He 5) o-ay sukh kaa si-o baran sunaavat. Who can I tell, and with whom can I speak, about this state of peace and bliss?
woe fase ufa ys vane Hfs Haws TS WSS UA TIS il (1205-4, wrdar, ne 5)
anad binod paykh parabh darsan man mangal gun gaavat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am in ecstasy and delight, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. My mind sings His Songs of Joy and His Glories. ||1]|Pause] |
fanny set uf farret ufs ad farsures it (1205-5, Anda, H2 5)
bisam bha-ee paykh bismaadee poor rahay kirpaavat.
I am wonderstruck, gazing upon the Wondrous Lord. The Merciful Lord is All- pervading everywhere.
UIE nifts oH uwE fA whe Tar HASTSST WAU (1205-5, Adar, He 5)
pee-o amrit naam amolak ji-o chaakh goongaa muskaavat. ||1]|
I drink in the Invaluable Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Like the mute, I can only smile - I cannot speak of its flavor. ||1]|
AA US aU ates THES Fs F wrSs ASS Il (1205-6, Arar, Hi: 5) jaisay pavan banDh kar raakhi-o boojh na aavat jaavat. As the breath is held in bondage, no one can understand its coming in and going out.
Ww aQ foe yarn sfe6 afs Cur at adt o wf AT|s QI (1205-6, Avda, ne 5) jaa ka-o ridai pargaas bha-i-o har u-aa kee kahee na jaa-ay kahaavat. ||2| | So is that person, whose heart is enlightened by the Lord - his story cannot be told.
21 |
me Cure AS fas aAdmifs SS APA urTSs I (1205-7, Ada, 8 5) aan upaav jaytay kichh kahee-ahi taytay seekhay paavat. As many other efforts as you can think of - I have seen them and studied them all.
nifss oe fas stafe yafeS want AA UsUTSS BI (1205-8, Ada, He 5)
achint laal garih bheetar pargati-o agam jaisay parkhaavat. ||3]||
My Beloved, Carefree Lord has revealed Himself within the home of my own heart; thus I have realized the Inaccessible Lord. ||3]|
fosae fodars nifsoHt vise sf a WES II (1205-8, Aa, He 5)
nirgun nirankaar abhinaasee atulo tuli-o na jaavat.
The Absolute, Formless, Eternally Unchanging, Immeasurable Lord cannot be measured.
AJ aoa mind fats Aer fH dt aS safe mrss ISIC (205-9, Aa, He 5) kaho naanak ajar jin jari-aa tis hee ka-o ban aavat. ||4||9]|
Says Nanak, whoever endures the unendurable - this state belongs to him alone. [14119] |
ATS HIS U Il (1205-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fauct feo dfs fe] dt qed Il (1205-10, Ada, He 5) bikh-ee din rain iv hee gudaarai. The corrupt person passes his days and nights uselessly.
afig 5 sn uidata west HoH at FAG TS UU TTS il (1205-10, wa, Hs 5)
gobind na bhajai aha-buDh maataa janam joo-ai ji-o haarai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He does not vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe; he is intoxicated with egotistical intellect. He loses his life in the gamble. ||1]|Pause] |
oH miner ulfs o fSA fA us fee fosard Il (1205-11, Ava, 8 5)
naam amolaa pareet na tis si-o par nindaa hitkaarai.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is priceless, but he is not in love with it. He loves only to slander others.
aug aifa nerd fee a Urs uTSa ATS AU (1205-11, Adar, He 5) chhaapar baa“Dh savaarai tarin ko du-aarai paavak jaarai. ||1]| Weaving the grass, he builds his house of straw. At the door, he builds a fire. ||1]|
aed uc Sore Hate uifys Ho FSS Il (1205-12, Adar, 4 5)
kaalar pot uthaavai moo‘deh amrit man tay daarai.
He carries a load of sulfur on his head, and drives the Ambrosial Nectar out of his mind.
Ge sag and fo ufsor gots safe fefe sro QU (1205-12, Aa, 18 5)
odhai bastar kaajar meh pari-aa bahur bahur fir jhaarai. ||2| |
Wearing his good clothes, the mortal falls into the coal-pit; again and again, he tries to shake it off. ||2]|
are ug 37% ufs ore uf ute HAAS II (1205-13, Aa, He 5) kaatai payd daal par thaadhou khaa-ay khaa-ay muskaarai. Standing on the branch, eating and eating and smiling, he cuts down the tree.
fafa afe arse ufsé fect feet frs avs BN (1205-14, Aa, He 5) giri-o jaa-ay rasaatal pari-o chhitee chhitee sir bhaarai. ||3]| He falls down head-first and is shattered into bits and pieces. ||3]||
fosed Hf 2a soe ugfe o Aa Hers Il (1205-14, Avda, we 5)
nirvairai sang vair rachaa-ay pahuch na sakai gavaarai.
He bears vengeance against the Lord who is free of vengeance. The fool is not up to the task.
AT Sea Hse a are urggqan fadars SiAoll (1205-15, Ardar, He 5)
kaho naanak santan kaa raakhaa paarbarahm nirankaarai. ||4||10]|
Says Nanak, the Saving Grace of the Saints is the Formless, Supreme Lord God. [14] [10] |
ATI HIS U Il (1205-15)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
wets Afs 38 FHS 3 Aone Il (1205-15, Arsar, He 5) avar sabh bhoolay bharmat na jaani-aa. All the others are deluded by doubt; they do not understand.
aq Aug A a fose efor fate sefs sa uetfoer all TIC Il (1205-16, Aa, v2 5) ayk suDhaakhar jaa kai hirdai vasi-aa tin baydeh tat pachhaani-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. That person, within whose heart the One Pure Word abides, realizes the essence of the Vedas. ||1]|Pause| |
udfeafs wea AS fas Jehat Sat Sa USTs Il (1205-17, Ada, v2 5) parvirat maarag jaytaa kichh ho-ee-ai taytaa log pachaaraa. He walks in the ways of the world, trying to please people.
Ag wo fee odt usar 3E BE nid nite NA (1205-17, Aa, He 5) ja-o la-o ridai nahee pargaasaa ta-o la-o anDh anDhaaraa. ||1]| But as long as his heart is not enlightened, he is stuck in pitch black darkness. ||1]||
AA dest Aa ag fafa fas sta oot A II (1205-18, Aa, He 5) jaisay Dhartee saaDhai baho biDh bin beejai nahee jaa“mai. The land may be prepared in every way, but nothing sprouts without being planted.
oH oH faa nafs & det F 3S Brat mifHrs M21 (1205-18, Aa, 2 5)
raam naam bin mukat na ho-ee hai tutai naahee abhimaanai. ||2| |
Just so, without the Lord's Name, no one is liberated, nor is egotistical pride eradicated. ||2||
dle fase vfs AH us 3G AA SHA Il (1205-19, Adar, H3 5) neer bilovai at saram paavai nainoo kaisay reesai. The mortal may churn water until he is sore, but how can butter be produced?
fag aa 32 Hats 6 arg foes oot AAT SI (1205-19, Ardar, He 5)
bin gur bhaytay mukat na kaahoo milat nahee jagdeesai. ||3]||
Without meeting the Guru, no one is liberated, and the Lord of the Universe is not met. |[3]|
UST AoE
dns dns fed dtorfee Aga Aer afe aT Il (1206-1, Ada, He 5)
khojat khojat ihai beechaari-o sarab sukhaa har naamaa.
Searching and searching, I have come to this realization: all peace and bliss are in the Name of the Lord.
ad ood fan sfe uss A a Sy HEMT INIA (1206-1, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak tis bha-i-o paraapat jaa kai laykh mathaamaa. ||4||11]|
Says Nanak, he alone receives it, upon whose forehead such destiny is inscribed. [14] [12]
ATID HIS U Il (1206-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Motes TH A TS AIM Il (1206-2, Ada, He 5) an-din raam kay gun kahee-ai. Night and day, utter the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Hae uerse Aaa AY fafa Ho ates SH SIMA AU TTS Ml (1206-2, rsa, we 5)
sagal padaarath sarab sookh siDh man baa‘chhat fal lahee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You shall obtain all wealth, all pleasures and successes, and the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause| |
weg AS urs AMES fans us mifsxerAt Il (1206-3, Ada, Hs 5)
aavhu sant paraan sukh-daatay simreh parabh abhinaasee.
Come, O Saints, let us meditate in remembrance on God; He is the Eternal, Imperishable Giver of Peace and Praanaa, the Breath of Life.
mead ag de gy so ufs sfaS we SAT A (1206-4, Adar, He 5)
anaathah naath deen dukh bhanjan poor rahi-o ghat vaasee. ||1||
Master of the masterless, Destroyer of the pains of the meek and the poor; He is All- pervading and permeating, abiding in all hearts. |[1]|
Wes HOS AS'Ss Aa Te FA Ut Sse aH I (1206-4, Aa, vs 5)
gaavat sunat sunaavat sarDhaa har ras pee vadbhaagay.
The very fortunate ones drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, singing, reciting and listening to the Lord's Praises.
ate AGA fhe Als 36 3 TH OH fHS Weal MQM (1206-5, Adar, He 5)
kal kalays mitay sabh tan tay raam naam liv jaagay. ||2||
All their sufferings and struggles are wiped away from their bodies; they remain lovingly awake and aware in the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
any au 36 fa fee ofe finafe Hae ZS Il (1206-5, Aa, He 5)
QA - == =
kaam kroDh jhooth taj nindaa har simran banDhan tootay. So abandon your sexual desire, greed, falsehood and slander; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall be released from bondage.
HI Has Mid nig HHS AS fas 3 FS ISM (1206-6, Asa, Hs 5)
moh magan aha™ anDh mamtaa gur kirpaa tay chhootay. ||3]|
The intoxication of loving attachments, egotism and blind possessiveness are eradicated by Guru's Grace. |[3]|
3 ANGE UaqaH Hom ats fasur AG ST Il (1206-6, Arsa, He 5)
too samrath paarbarahm su-aamee kar kirpaa jan tayraa.
You are All-Powerful, O Supreme Lord God and Master; please be Merciful to Your humble servant.
ufe sfoS Asa His SAT SSA A UT ST MII 1206-7, Avda, we 5) poor rahi-o sarab meh thaakur naanak so parabh nayraa. ||4||12| |
My Lord and Master is All-pervading and prevailing everywhere; O Nanak, God is Near. [14] [121]
ATS HIS U Il (1206-7)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Berd AIeS GIS Il (1206-8, Ada, He 5) balihaaree gurdayv charan. I am a Sacrifice to the Feet of the Divine Guru.
Wa Afa uwsgqon fomrehst Cun oct afs age Al TIS Il (1206-8, Adar, ne 5)
jaa kai sang paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ee-ai updays hamaaree gat karan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I meditate with Him on the Supreme Lord God; His Teachings have emancipated me. ||1]|Pause] |
wu da 3 Aas faoA A ore Tis AS Ags Il (1206-9, Ardar, we 5)
dookh rog bhai sagal binaasay jo aavai har sant saran.
All pains, diseases and fears are erased, for one who comes to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Saints.
mify AU Medd SH AUS SS AHA SIS SIS INA (1206-9, Arar, v2 5)
aap japai avrah naam japaavai vad samrath taaran taran. ||1||
He Himself chants, and inspires others to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord. He is Utterly All-Powerful; He carries us across to the other side. ||1]|
Ww &t HZ Sard HVAT BS AG AST IS Il (1206-10, Arar, He 5) jaa ko mantar utaarai sahsaa oonay ka-o subhar bharan. His Mantra drives out cynicism, and totally fills the empty one.
dfs SHS at utfamr Hos 3 ad Sfo WIT UTS IlQIl (1206-10, Adar, 2 5)
har daasan kee aagi-aa maanat tay naahee fun garabh paran. ||2||
Those who obey the Order of the Lord's slaves, do not enter into the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||2||
3IS6 At ZIG AHSS Wes VY AS 3 A AGH HIS Il (1206-11, Awa, v2 5)
bhagtan kee tahal kamaavat gaavat dukh kaatay taa kay janam maran.
Whoever works for the Lord's devotees and sings His Praises - his pains of birth and death are taken away.
wT ag safe faurs dow fats afs afe wag Age NII (1206-11, Ada, He 5)
jaa ka-o bha-i-o kirpaal beethulaa tin har har ajar jaran. ||3||
Those unto whom my Beloved becomes Merciful, endure the Unendurable Ecstasy of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
dfs dAfs nurs AdfA AHS HY 3 Sd A'S Ado Ill (1206-12, Ada, vs 5)
har raseh aghaanay sahj samaanay mukh tay naahee jaat baran.
Those who are satisfied by the Sublime Essence of the Lord, merge intuitively into the Lord; no mouth can describe their state.
osNn
qd yAte aoa AS OH Us AU AU Bugs ISIN (1206-13, ATSar, He 5)
gur parsaad naanak santokhay naam parabhoo jap jap uDhran. ||4||13]|
By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, they are content; chanting and meditating on God's Name, they are saved. ||4]|13]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1206-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ames dt Ht ae foto vas ate 11 (1206-13, Ada, He 5) gaa-i-o ree mai gun niDh mangal gaa-i-o. I sing, OI sing the Songs of Joy of my Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
38 Hana 38 fea mene ne are dtsteS na gas Il 1206-14, Ada, 2 5)
bhalay sanjog bhalay din a-osar ja-o gopaal reejhaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Fortunate is the time, fortunate is the day and the moment, when I become pleasing to the Lord of the World. ||1]||Pause] |
H3d VIS HIS HT Il (1206-15, Adar, v3 5) santeh charan morlo maathaa. I touch my forehead to the Feet of the Saints.
THs MASA AS TF TA WA (1206-15, Adar, He 5) hamray mastak sant Dharay haathaa. ||1]|| The Saints have placed their hands on my forehead. ||1]|
ATT HZ AIS HOM Il (1206-15, Agar, H2 5) saaDhah mantar morlo manoo-aa. My mind is filled with the Mantra of the Holy Saints,
33 TZ IS 3 TSM IM! (1206-15, wa, ue 5) taa tay gat ho-ay tarai gunee-aa. ||2]| and I have risen above the three qualities] | 2] |
asd VIA Sf Sa Fa Il (1206-16, Aa, v2 5)
bhagtah daras daykh nain rangaa.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of God's devotees, my eyes are filled with love.
GS HI SS FH AA Ml! (1206-16, wrday, ws 5) lobh moh tootay bharam sangaa. ||3]|| Greed and attachment are gone, along with doubt. ||3]|
AT Soa AY AIH MSeT Il (1206-16, Aa, He 5) kaho naanak sukh sahj anandaa. Says Nanak, I have found intuitive peace, poise and bliss.
afs Sif fxs uMTSeT Vasil (1206-17, Ada, 8 5) kholi” bheet milay parmaanandaa. ||4]|14]| Tearing down the wall, I have met the Lord, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss.
[141]14]|
ATS HIG UWI 2 (1206-18) Saarag mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsara yATfe II (1206-18) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aA aC vfs Ahr Fearet | (1206-19, Asa, ne 5) kaisay kaha-o mohi jee-a baydnaa-ee. How can I express the pain of my soul?
zane fimrn fut utfs Héue He 3 ad ag fafa xoret Nd TIC I (1206-19, Ada, He 5) darsan pi-aas pari-a pareet manohar man na rahai baho biDh umkaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa- O.
I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Enticing and Lovely Beloved. My mind cannot survive - it yearns for Him in so many ways. ||1]||Pause| |
Yat 92oD
fasefs fase@ finn uifs Sarat afe ue@ afe eanret il (1207-1, arda, v2 5)
chitvan chitva-o pari-a pareet bairaagee kad paava-o har darsaa-ee.
I think thoughts of Him; I miss the Love of my Beloved. When will I obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?
W360 ae feg ug aot Us AS FF AS fheoret WAU 1207-1, Pda, we 5) jatan kara-o ih man nahee Dheerai ko-oo hai ray sant milaa-ee. ||1] | I try, but this mind is not encouraged. Is there any Saint who can lead me to God?
[111 AU su HAH Uo Afs dHe fsR neue Afs AY ATT II (1207-2, Aa, He 5)
jap tap sanjam punn sabh homa-o tis arpa-o sabh sukh jaa™-ee. Chanting, penance, self-control, good deeds and charity - I sacrifice all these in fire; I dedicate all peace and places to Him.
2a fouy fipn van feure faq H30 & sf Fret QI (1207-3, Aa, He 5)
ayk nimakh pari-a daras dikhaavai tis santan kai bal jaa‘-ee. ||2]|
One who helps me to behold the Blessed Vision of my Beloved, for even an instant - I am a Sacrifice to that Saint. ||2]|
ase fora ass dost ASS fee saret Il (1207-3, Ada, ne 5) kara-o nihoraa bahut bayntee sayva-o din rainaa-ee. I offer all my prayers and entreaties to him; I serve him, day and night.
He wifes JG Aa faurae a fet as Aaret SI (1207-4, Ada, H8 5) maan abhimaan ha-o sagal ti-aaga-o jo pari-a baat sunaa-ee. ||3]| I have renounced all pride and egotism; he tells me the stories of my Beloved. ||3]|
ofa sfes set 38 fants afe Afsate uate feet i 207-4, wrdar, v3 5)
daykh charitar bha-ee ha-o bisman gur satgur purakh milaa-ee.
I am wonder-struck, gazing upon the wondrous play of God. The Guru, the True Guru, has led me to meet the Primal Lord.
ys da efenres vfs fas ufo fem AS oSa Sufs geet SUA 4207-5, Aa, Hs 5) parabh rang da-i-aal mohi garih meh paa-i-aa jan naanak tapat bujhaa-ee.
[4] [21] 151]
I have found God, my Merciful Loving Lord, within the home of my own heart. O Nanak, the fire within me has been quenched. ||4]|1]|15]]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1207-6)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
3H 3 fas fAugs wa ardt Il (1207-6, Agar, 42 5) ray moorh"ay too ki-o simrat ab naahee. You fool, why are you not meditating on the Lord now?
dda wa xfs Cau sy aest fony fony ae aidt a TIE il 1207-6, Ada, He 5) narak ghor meh uraDh tap kartaa nimakh nimakh gun gaa“hee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the awful hell of the fire of the womb, you did penance, upside-down; each and every instant, you sang His Glorious Praises. ||1]|Pause] |
wifox AOH FHS ot ure HOA HOH EBS Il (1207-7, Ada, Hs 5)
anik janam bharmatou hee aa-i-o maanas janam dulbhaahee.
You wandered through countless incarnations, until finally you attained this priceless human birth.
qs rife efs Ae feathe 3B oat nie oft AN (1207-8, Aa, He 5)
garabh jon chhod ja-o niksi-o ta-o laago an thaa“hee. ||1||
Leaving the womb, you were born, and when you came out, you became attached to other places. ||1||
ats gaet saret fea sfo foses AIH ANTS Il (1207-8, Ada, He 5) karahi buraa-ee thagaa-ee din rain nihfal karam kamaahee. You practiced evil and fraud day and night, and did useless deeds.
KE OT SI MIs wa ote of ey urd iQ (1207-9, Ada, ue 5)
kan naahee tuh gaahan laagay Dhaa-ay Dhaa-ay dukh paa‘hee. ||2]|
You thrash the straw, but it has no wheat; running around and hurrying, you obtain only pain. |[2||
fufemr Fifa afs suetes Cats ufsS aA II (1207-10, Asa, He 5) mithi-aa sang koorh laptaa-i-o urajh pari-o kusmaa‘hee. The false person is attached to falsehood; he is entangled with transitory things.
UsH of wa uach sed 3B ae Het Cfo ATS ISI (1207-10, Ada, He 5)
Dharam raa-ay jab pakras bavray ta-o kaal mukhaa uth jaahee. ||3||
And when the Righteous Judge of Dharma seizes you, O madman, you shall arise and depart with your face blackened. ||3]|
A fifeor ys fhesfenr fr Hasta Sy fesatat i a207-u1, Avda, we 5)
so mili-aa jo parabhoo milaa-i-aa jis mastak laykh likhaa™hee.
He alone meets with God, whom God Himself meets, by such pre-ordained destiny written on his forehead.
a saa fq Ae afeodt A uifsu ad HO HT NSNQNIEN (1207-11, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak tin" jan balihaaree jo alip rahay man maa‘hee. ||4]|2]|16]|
Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to that humble being, who remains unattached within his mind. ||4]|2]]16]|
ATID HIS U Il (1207-12)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fa@ Atlee uta fag yret i 1207-12, ada, 2 5) ki-o jeevan pareetam bin maa-ee. How can I live without my Beloved, O my mother?
wa fagss 3 fraser fos ufo sae 3B ret AN TIE I (1207-13, Aa, He 5)
jaa kay bichhurat hot mirtakaa garih meh rahan na paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Separated from Him, the mortal becomes a corpse, and is not allowed to remain within the house. ||1]|Pause| |
Fhe dha urs & erst AT a Afar AIT I (1207-13, Adar, us 5)
jee-a hee’-a paraan ko daataa jaa kai sang suhaa-ee.
He is the Giver of the soul, the heart, the breath of life. Being with Him, we are embellished with joy.
ag feu Hag xfs must ys Hares TE set Ail (1207-14, Aa, He 5) karahu kirpaa santahu mohi apunee parabh mangal gun gaa-ee. ||1||
Please bless me with Your Gace, O Saint, that I may sing the songs of joyful praise to my God. ||1]|
dds Hse a Ha He Gufs Sag fs aeet il (1207-14, Asa, H: 5) charan santan kay maathay mayray oopar nainhu Dhoor baa‘chhaa-ee". I touch my forehead to the feet of the Saints. My eyes long for their dust.
fag yAfe fst ys arse af af at a TE ATT NNSA 4207-15, Asa, He 5)
jih parsaad milee-ai parabh naanak bal bal taa kai ha-o jaa-ee. ||2||3||17]| By His Grace, we meet God; O Nanak, I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||2||3]|17]]|
ATID HIS U Il (1207-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Gor ning & IS af ATS I (1207-16, Ada, He 5) u-aa a-osar kai ha-o bal jaa-ee. I am a Sacrifice to that occasion.
mS Udd MUS Us fAHdS esaait Tha uret UA FIC il 207-16, wsa, uz 5)
aath pahar apnaa parabh simran vadbhaagee har paa‘-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate in remembrance on my God; by great good fortune, I have found the Lord. ||1||Pause| |
38 HT VA WHS A SSH AG AS Tet Il (1207-17, rsa, we 5) bhalo kabeer daas daasan ko ootam sain jan naa-ee. Kabeer is good, the slave of the Lord's slaves; the humble barber Sain is sublime.
Gu 3 Cu oHes AHEM See oag afe wiret WAU (1207-17, Ada, HH 5)
ooch tay ooch naamday-o samadrasee ravidaas thaakur ban aa-ee. ||1]|
Highest of the high is Naam Dayv, who looked upon all alike; Ravi Daas was in tune with the Lord. ||1]|
HG fiz 35 US AUS a feg Ho AS Jaret Il (1207-18, Ada, He 5)
jee-o pind tan Dhan saaDhan kaa ih man sant raynaa-ee.
My soul, body and wealth belong to the Saints; my mind longs for the dust of the Saints.
As ysty san Als SA Soa FHS TATE MIUSUACH (1207-19, Ada, He 5)
sant partaap bharam sabh naasay naanak milay gusaa-ee. ||2||4||18]|
And by the radiant Grace of the Saints, all my doubts have been erased. O Nanak, I have met the Lord. ||2]|4]|18]|
ATS HIS U Il (1207-19)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hove us Afsae orf il 1207-19, wrdar, we 5) manorath pooray satgur aap. The True Guru fulfills the mind's desires.
Yar qQot
Ra@ uerse fanafs AT a nite use He Ho AMY NA TIE Il (1208-1, Avda, He 5)
Sagal padaarath simran jaa kai aath pahar mayray man jaap. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All wealth and treasures are obtained by remembering Him in meditation; twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, meditate on Him. ||1]||Pause| |
nifqs OU Homi Sa A ule fSA dt fRusA I (1208-1, Ada, ne 5)
amrit naam su-aamee tayraa jo peevai tis hee tariptaas.
Your Name is Ambrosial Nectar, O my Lord and Master. Whoever drinks it in is satisfied.
HOH HOH & foofas safe ora esas TE we NU (1208-2, Aa, He 5)
janam janam kay kilbikh naaseh aagai dargeh ho-ay khalaas. ||1]|
The sins of countless incarnations are erased, and hereafter, he shall be saved and redeemed in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
Aofe surat orf ass uTsqan use wifsqaTA Il (1208-3, Asa, He 5) saran tumaaree aa-i-o kartay paarbarahm pooran abinaas. I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Creator, O Perfect Supreme Eternal Lord God.
ats fasut 33 ado fmres aoa Hf Ste San fur IQUE! (1208-3, Aa, He 5)
kar kirpaa tayray charan Dhi-aava-o naanak man tan daras pi-aas. ||2||5||19]| Please be kind to me, that I may meditate on Your Lotus Feet. O Nanak, my mind and body thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2||5||19]|
ATS HIG UWI SZ (1208-5)
saarag mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (1208-5) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ho aI Bae nits A I (1208-6, Aa, v2 5) man kahaa lubhaa-ee-ai aan ka-o. O my mind, why are you lured away by otherness?
as Ss yg Ae Hoel Aha Afar SI TH AS UA FTE il (1208-6, Asa, we 5)
eet oot parabh sadaa sahaa-ee jee-a sang tayray kaam ka-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Here and hereafter, God is forever your Help and Support. He is your soul-mate; He will help you succeed. ||1]||Pause| |
nifys on fymr ulfs Heda fed meres ute a I 1208-7, Ada, Hs 5)
amrit naam pari-a pareet manohar ihai aghaavan paa™n ka-o.
The Name of your Beloved Lover, the Fascinating Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar. Drinking it in, you shall find satisfaction.
MS HIS I AUT ASS at STs Stat fms A ual (1208-7, Adar, H8 5)
akaal moorat hai saaDh santan kee thaahar neekee Dhi-aan ka-o. ||1||
The Being of Immortal Manifestation is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Meditate on Him in that most sublime place. ||1]|
wet 4g ua usua at Hofs Sarge Hie AE i 1208-8, Agar, He 5)
banee mantar mahaa purkhan kee maneh utaaran maa“n ka-o.
The Bani, the Word of the Supreme Lord God, is the greatest Mantra of all. It eradicates pride from the mind.
dfs afoS aoa AY aot afs oor fa aE NQNUON (1208-8, Ada, He 5) khoj lahi-o naanak sukh thaanaa™ har naamaa bisraam ka-o. |]2]|1]|20]|
Searching, Nanak found the home of peace and bliss in the Name of the Lord. [12] ]1][20]|
ATID HIS U Il (1208-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Ae Hae afte ae i 1208-9, war, ne 5) man sadaa mangal gobind gaa-ay. O my mind, sing forever the Songs of Joy of the Lord of the Universe.
da Aa 33 frefs Aare ory fone dha afe any fomrfe nan Tr Il (1208-9, Ada, 2 5) rog sog tayray miteh sagal agh nimakh hee-ai har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. All your disease, sorrow and sin will be erased, if you meditate on the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||1]||Pause||
efs fimrou ag vsaet AG Aset fe ue i (1208-10, Ardar, He 5) chhod si-aanap baho chaturaa-ee saaDhoo sarnee jaa-ay paa-ay. Abandon all your clever tricks; go and enter the Sanctuary of the Holy.
Ag df= fours die Bu Sho FH 3 J] Gan THE NU 1208-11, Adar, He 5)
ja-o ho-ay kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan jam tay hovai Dharam raa-ay. ||1|| When the Lord, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor becomes merciful, the Messenger of Death is changed into the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||1] |
San fag adt & GAT ns 6 ME Be STS Il (1208-11, Avda, He 5) aykas bin naahee ko doojaa aan na bee-o lavai laa-ay. Without the One Lord, there is no other at all. No one else can equal Him.
Hs fust set Soa & AMES Tle YTS AME QNVNQAUI (4208-12, Asa, He 5)
maat pitaa bhaa-ee naanak ko sukh-daata har paraan saa-ay. ||2||2||21|| The Lord is Nanak's Mother, Father and Sibling, the Giver of Peace, his Breath of Life. 212] [22]|
ATID HIS U Il (1208-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs Ae Aas Sus Aa & I (1208-13, Adar, He 5) har jan sagal uDhaaray sang kay. The Lord's humble servant saves those who accompany him.
ge uals uley HO HOH HOH A FU Tg NU FIC Ml 4208-13, wa, we 5)
bha-ay puneet pavitar man janam janam kay dukh haray. ||1]| rahaa-o. Their minds are sanctified and rendered pure, and they are rid of the pains of countless incarnations. ||1]|Pause| |
Hafa 3 feat Ay urfeor fas fAG atAfe ASS it (1208-14, Adar, He 5)
maarag chalay tin"ee sukh paa-i-aa jin" si-o gosat say taray.
Those who walk on the path find peace; they are saved, along with those who speak with them.
g33 ug vin au fs 3 Arg Afr fs us WAU (1208-14, Adar, oH 5)
boodat ghor anDh koop meh tay saaDhoo sang paar paray. ||1]||
Even those who are drowning in the horrible, deep dark pit are carried across in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
faa & oa as o eet fSq ATG Afar He AS Il (1208-15, Ardar, we 5) jin" kay bhaag baday hai bhaa-ee tin" saaDhoo sang mukh juray. Those who have such high destiny turn their faces toward the Saadh Sangat.
faq at ofe ate fos area ys He fasur as NQNBNI2I (1208-15, Aa, Hs 5) tin" kee Dhoor baa“chhai nit naanak parabh mayraa kirpaa karay. ||2||3||22||
Nanak longs for the dust of their feet; O God, please shower Your Mercy on me! [12] 13] [22]|
ATID HIS U Il (1208-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
offs AS TH IH TH foes | (1208-16, wa, He 5) har jan raam raam raam Dhi-aa"-ay. The humble servant of the Lord meditates on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
Sa usa AY ATU AHH afe Hao US UU! TI Il (1208-17, Ada, He 5)
ayk palak sukh saaDh samaagam kot baiku"thah paa™-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who enjoys peace in the Company of the Holy, even for an instant, obtains millions of heavenly paradises. ||1]||Pause| |
vos 20 afu ds usta aH at SH foes II (1208-17, Ada, He 5)
dulabh dayh jap hot puneetaa jam kee taraas nivaarai.
This human body, so difficult to obtain, is sanctified by meditating on the Lord. It takes away the fear of death.
Ho ufss & ufsa @sefs afs oor fs WS A (1208-18, Aa, He 5)
mahaa patit kay paatik utreh har naamaa ur Dhaarai. ||1||
Even the sins of terrible sinners are washed away, by cherishing the Lord's Name within the heart. ||1]|
A A AS OH AA fSdHs 3 aT HOH HGS SY SA Il (1208-18, Ada, He 5)
jo jo sunai raam jas nirmal taa kaa janam maran dukh naasaa.
Whoever listens to the Immaculate Praises of the Lord - his pains of birth and death are dispelled.
aT soa urehy esarait Ho 30 dfe fearAr INS (1208-19, ATda, He 5)
kaho naanak paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee™ man tan ho-ay bigaasaa. ||2||4]|23]|
Says Nanak, the Lord is found by great good fortune, and then the mind and body blossom forth. ||2||4]|23]|
Yat 920K
Add HIG U BUS We 8 (1209-2) saarag mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 4 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Fourth House:
qe Afsars YATE Il (1209-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hue ute uted as Hedbor | 1209-3, Ada, He 5) mohan ghar aavhu kara-o jodree-aa. O my Fascinating Lord, I pray to You: come into my house.
Hg aI nifsHs se 3m Va Sot fir fador wan Fas il 1209-3, Ada, ws 5)
maan kara-o abhimaanai bola-o bhool chook tayree pari-a chiree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I act in pride, and speak in pride. I am mistaken and wrong, but I am still Your hand- maiden, O my Beloved. ||1]||Pause| |
foate HOG nig UUs ot seth sath ea Sam I (1209-4, Ada, He 5)
nikat sun-o ar paykha-o naahee bharam bharam dukh bharee-aa.
I hear that You are near, but I cannot see You. I wander in suffering, deluded by doubt.
dfs faurs ae ofo use fre ores Ho odor NA (1209-4, Arar, He 5)
ho-ay kirpaal gur laahi paardo mila-o laal man haree-aa. ||1]|
The Guru has become merciful to me; He has removed the veils. Meeting with my Beloved, my mind blossoms forth in abundance. ||1]|
Sa fous A fard Aomit we afe fear we sdtor Il (1209-5, Ada, He 5)
ayk nimakh jay bisrai su-aamee jaan-o kot dinas lakh baree-aa.
If I were to forget my Lord and Master, even for an instant, it would be like millions of days, tens of thousands of years.
HUHafs at ste AC uret 3B area ofa Afar fish NIQNAIEI 209-6, Ara, He 5)
saaDhsangat kee bheer ja-o paa-ee ta-o naanak har sang miree-aa. ||2||1]|24]| When I joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, I met my Lord. [21111241]
ATI HIS U Il (1209-6)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma foot AEG Ae faATet II (1209-6, Ada, He 5) ab ki-aa socha-o soch bisaaree. Now what should I think? I have given up thinking.
ade A ASt af sfour Ufo ae sfeost wa TIS Il (1209-7, Ada, v2 5)
karnaa saa so-ee kar rahi-aa deh naa-o balihaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You do whatever You wish to do. Please bless me with Your Name - I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause] |
ug fern of act fittor fry aa 43 uf agarst i 209-7, Ada, He 5)
chahu dis fool rahee bikhi-aa bikh gur mantar mookh garurhaaree.
The poison of corruption is flowering forth in the four directions; I have taken the GurMantra as my antidote.
ve ef ahs ats mua fas Ae AHO mifsurst AU (1209-8, Ada, He 5)
haath day-ay raakhi-o kar apunaa ji-o jal kamlaa alipaaree. ||1]|
Giving me His Hand, He has saved me as His Own; like the lotus in the water, I remain unattached. ||1]|
J ont fae H foo JA AS SH dt aw OT Il (1209-9, Ada, 2 5) ha-o naahee kichh mai ki-aa hosaa sabh tum hee kal Dhaaree. I am nothing. What am I? You hold all in Your Power.
soa ata ules sfs ue Iu AS Aa NQNVNQUII (1209-9, Aa, He 5)
naanak bhaag pari-o har paachhai raakh sant sadkaaree. ||2||2||25]| Nanak has run to Your Sanctuary, Lord; please save him, for the sake of Your Saints. H21]2|[25]|
ATID HIS U Il (1209-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma dfs Aga Bure fgars Il (1209-10, Ada, v2 5) ab mohi sarab upaav birkaatay. Now I have abandoned all efforts and devices.
age ATE ANGE AnH ols San 3 Het AS UA! TIS Il (1209-10, wrda, nz 5)
karan kaaran samrath su-aamee har aykas tay mayree gaatay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My Lord and Master is the All-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes, my only Saving Grace. ||1||Pause] |
ea ota TU Ag JT nis |S SH SS Il (1209-11, wa, Hs 5) daykhay naanaa roop baho rangaa an naahee tum bhaa"tay. I have seen numerous forms of incomparable beauty, but nothing is like You.
ots nurg Ada AS stad Abt YTS AYES IAI (1209-12, Arda, He 5)
day“hi aDhaar sarab ka-o thaakur jee-a paraan sukh-daatay. ||1]|
You give Your Support to all, O my Lord and Master; You are the Giver of peace, of the soul and the breath of life. ||1]|
gus gus ofs Ae ufss 3C ag fife Bae UTS II (1209-12, Ada, Hs 5) bharmatou bharmatou haar ja-o pari-o ta-o gur mil charan paraatay. Wandering, wandering, I grew so tired; meeting the Guru, I fell at His Feet.
WI Sa H Asa AY ufenr fea Ate fost TS NIQNSNEN (1209-13, Adar, 8 5) kaho naanak mai sarab sukh paa-i-aa ih sookh bihaanee raatay. ||2||3||26]||
Says Nanak, I have found total peace; this life-night of mine passes in peace. [12] 13] 126] |
ATS HIS U Il (1209-14)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma fs wafas J afs Sar il (1209-14, Ada, He 5) ab mohi labDhi-o hai har taykaa. Now I have found the Support of my Lord.
Tes fens se Aueet nigs wfsaq Far ai FI il (1209-14, rsa, ws 5)
gur da-i-aal bha-ay sukh-daa-ee anDhulai maanik daykhaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Guru, the Giver of peace, has become merciful to me. I was blind - I see the jewel of the Lord. ||1||Pause]|
are wifamia fsua faaHebor afa frarA fader il «209-15, Avda, us 5) kaatay agi-aan timar nirmalee-aa buDh bigaas bibaykaa.
I have cut away the darkness of ignorance and become immaculate; my discriminationg intellect has blossomed forth.
fAG He sda eo AS det T ASA SaT FS Sar WAI (1209-15, Ada, ne 5)
ji-o jal tarang fayn jal ho-ee hai sayvak thaakur bha-ay aykaa. ||1]|
As the waves of water and the foam become water again, the Lord and His servant become One. ||1]|
Ad 3 Cfo 30 dt orfeS AS dt Sa Sar It (1209-16, Aa, nH 5) jah tay uthi-o tah hee aa-i-o sabh hee aykai aykaa. He is taken in again, into what from which he came; all is one in the One Lord.
ood ferfe ore Aa oet yrsust dfs ANAT NQNSNQON (1209-16, Adar, He 5)
naanak darisat aa-i-o sarab thaa-ee paraanpatee har samkaa. ||2||4||27]| O Nanak, I have come to see the Master of the breath of life, all-pervading everywhere. ||2||4||27]||
ATID HIS U Il (1209-17)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hat He Sa ot flip ya i 1209-17, wary, 2 5) mayraa man aykai hee pari-a maa‘gai. My mind longs for the One Beloved Lord.
Ufa ore Aga ae 2H fipr dH o ANAfE Bat UAV! TIS il (1209-18, Arar, ne 5) paykh aa-i-o sarab thaan days pari-a rom na samsar laagai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have looked everywhere in every country, but nothing equals even a hair of my Beloved. ||1||Pause]|
H ols vifea sro ag fine fsa fae fenfe o ad gata II (1209-18, Anda, He 5)
mai neeray anik bhojan baho binjan tin si-o darisat na karai ruchaagai.
All sorts of delicacies and dainties are placed before me, but I do not even want to look at them.
ofa aA ad fipn flor ufa Sa fA@ mits anor Sasa All 1209-19, Arar, 2 5)
har ras chaahai pari-a pari-a mukh tayrai ji-o al kamlaa lobhaa"gai. ||1]|
I long for the sublime essence of the Lord, calling, "Pri-o! Pri-o! - Beloved! Beloved!", like the Bumble bee longing for the lotus flower. ||1]|
UST A29O
we fous HOHIS Bes AYevEt Asad Il (1210-1, Ada, He 5)
gun niDhaan manmohan laalan sukh-daa-ee sarbaa‘gai.
The Treasure of Virtue, the Enticer of the mind, my Beloved is the Giver of peace to all.
afs aoa ys ufos uate frog Aer af wat WQNUNQCH (1210-1, Ada, He 5)
gur naanak parabh paahi pathaa-i-o milhu sakhaa gal laagai. ||2]|5||28]|
Guru Nanak has led me to You, O God. Join with me, O my Best Friend, and hold me close in Your Embrace. ||2||5||28]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1210-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma Hd oad fAG He HTT I (1210-2, Aa, He 5) ab moro thaakur si-o man maanaa’”. Now my mind is pleased and appeased by my Lord and Master.
AG fxures viene se 3 feg efeS ene faorar all TIC Il (1210-2, Ada, v2 5) saaDh kirpaal da-i-aal bha-ay hai ih chhaydi-o dusat bigaanaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Holy Saint has become kind and compassionate to me, and has destroyed this demon of duality. ||1||Pause| |
3H dt Hea SHfo fimrs 3H dt Awe AAS II (1210-3, Aa, He 5) tum hee sundar tumeh si-aanay tum hee sughar sujaanaa. You are so beautiful, and You are so wise; You are elegant and all-knowing.
Has Hal “ig famre fomres fea far o atafs rat all (1210-4, Ada, He 5) sagal jog ar gi-aan Dhi-aan ik nimakh na keemat jaanaa”. ||1]| All the Yogis, spiritual teachers and meditators do not know even a bit of Your value.
[21
3H ot afea sufs sgufs gH ufs Id sareTaT Il (1210-4, Asay, He 5)
tum hee naa-ik tum"ahi chhatarpat tum poor rahay bhagvaanaa.
You are the Master, You are the Lord under the royal canopy; You are the perfectly pervading Lord God.
ureQ Ue AS AS dfs SHA AS ATA WIAWENEN (1210-5, Avda, v2 5) paava-o daan sant sayvaa har naanak sad kurbaanaa™. ||2]|6]|29]|
Please bless me with the gift of service to the Saints; O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Lord. ||2||6||29]|
ATID HIS U Il (1210-6)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ae fs SHS mre finn Far i ci2i0-6, wrgar, ue 5) mayrai man cheet aa-ay pari-a rangaa. The Love of my Beloved comes into my conscious mind.
fanfes do do wfeor a safe Aaet Har WA TIS Ml 1210-6, Ada, He 5)
bisri-o DhanDh banDh maa-i-aa ko rajan sabaa-ee jangaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have forgotten the entangling affairs of Maya, and I spend my life-night fighting with evil. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs AZ afe foe are ofs ufeor ASAT I (1210-7, Aa, He 5)
har sayva-o har ridai basaava-o har paa-i-aa satsangaa.
I serve the Lord; the Lord abides within my heart. I have found my Lord in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
MA fife Hogg UlsH AY US HY Har IA (1210-7, Adar, He 5) aiso mili-o manohar pareetam sukh paa-ay mukh mangaa. ||1]|
So I have met with my enticingly beautiful Beloved; I have obtained the peace which I asked for. ||1]|
fy mus afe afk afs ete sa sa ferar il (1210-8, Adar, ne 5)
pari-o apnaa gur bas kar deenaa bhoga-o bhog nisangaa.
The Guru has brought my Beloved under my control, and I enjoy Him with unrestrained pleasure.
fass@ s& soa 3@ fifeur afe ufeG usar NQNDIBON (1210-9, Aa, He 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay naanak bha-o miti-aa har paa-i-o faathangaa. ||2||7||30||
I have become fearless; O Nanak, my fears have been eradicated. Chanting the Word, I have found the Lord. ||2||7||30] |
ATID HIS UY Il (1210-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ME a PIAS AG ATat Il (1210-10, Adar, vs 5) har jee-o kay darsan ka-o kurbaanee. I am a Sacrifice to the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Dear Lord.
ado Se He Azad ud eat fipa nif Arar Al FTES il 1210-10, Asa, ws 5)
bachan naad mayray saravnahu pooray dayhaa pari-a ank samaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The Naad, the Sound-current of His Word fills my ears; my body has settled gently into the Lap of my Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
gefe 3 afe atet Heats ofa utes Aus AAT II (1210-11, Ardar, He 5)
chhootar tay gur kee-ee sohaagan har paa-i-o sugharh sujaanee.
I was a discarded bride, and the Guru has made me a happy soul-bride. I have found the Elegant and All-knowing Lord.
fag wa Hf SHS adt wes A aS fife arrat 9 1210-11, Ada, He 5)
jih ghar meh baisan nahee paavat so thaan mili-o baasaanee. ||1||
That home, in which I was not even allowed to sit - I have found that place in which I can dwell. ||1]|
Ga & aff ores sats seq fafs ait wre Aarst i (1210-12, Ada, He 5)
un" kai bas aa-i-o bhagat bachhal jin raakhee aan santaanee.
God, the Love of His devotees, has come under the control of those who protect the honor of His Saints.
I TSA fs Af He Wont As Yat cfs Sarat INCU BUI (1210-12, Ada, ws 5)
kaho naanak har sang man maani-aa sabh chookee kaan lokaanee. ||2||8]|31] | Says Nanak, my mid is pleased and appeased with the Lord, and my subservience to other people has come to an end. ||2||8]|31]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1210-13)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
wa Ae Us 3 A Ze Il (1210-13, Avda, we 5) ab mayro panchaa tay sang tootaa. Now my association with the five thieves has come to an end.
TdnG tfy se fe ores Ts fag 3 get AU TIE I (1210-14, Asay, we 5)
darsan daykh bha-ay man aanad gur kirpaa tay chhootaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my mind is in ecstasy; by Guru's Grace, I am released. ||1]|Pause| |
fron ae aos ag Usher mifeax Ia ATeT Il (1210-14, Asa, He 5) bikham thaan bahut baho Dharee-aa anik raakh soorootaa. The impregnable place is guarded by countless ramparts and warriors.
fn rg ag uggs ad AS ASA SS BET UI (1210-15, Ada, ws 5)
bikham gaarah kar pahuchai naahee sant saanath bha-ay lootaa. ||1] |
This impregnable fortress cannot be touched, but with the assistance of the Saints, I have entered and robbed it. ||1]|
XS NA EN
WIS US AS US ular mw HS wMY!ST Il (1210-15, Aa, Hs 5) bahut khajaanay mayrai paalai pari-aa amol laal aakhootaa. I have found such a great treasure, a priceless, inexhaustible supply of jewels.
Wo sod ufs fasur odt 3B Ha ufo ofe SA Wet NQANCNSIN (1210-16, Arar, 18 5) jan naanak parabh kirpaa Dhaaree ta-o man meh har ras ghootaa. ||2||9||32]| O servant Nanak, when God showered His Mercy on me, my mind drank in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||9||32| |
ATID HIS U Il (1210-17)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma Hd oad fA@ He Star Il (1210-17, Ada, 2 5) ab mayro thaakur si-o man leenaa. Now my mind is absorbed in my Lord and Master.
ye ae afte ud chor Castes fa we Htar ai TIS Ut 1210-17, Adar, v8 5)
paraan daan gur poorai dee-aa urjhaa-i-o ji-o jal meenaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has blessed me with the gift of the breath of life. I am involved with the Lord, like the fish with the water. ||1]|Pause]|
OH AU BST He HSA fT wafu Aa BS ator Il (1210-18, Ada, He 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mad matsar ih arap sagal daan keenaa.
I have cast out sexual desire, anger, greed, egotism and envy; I have offered all this as a Gift.
Hg feats ofa mug afs He 3 fife Rares ystar nail (1210-19, Ada, He 5)
mantar drirh-aa-ay har a-ukhaDh gur dee-o ta-o mili-o sagal parbeenaa. ||1] |
The Guru has implanted the medicine of the Lord's Mantra within me, and I have met with the All-knowing Lord God. ||1]||
fag 3a 3 oa He afs Ie det ys Star I (1210-19, mda, ws 5)
garihu tayraa too thaakur mayraa gur ha-o kho-ee parabh deenaa.
My household belongs to You, O my Lord and Master; the Guru has blessed me with God, and rid me of egotism.
UST AAA
aT sod H AWA we ufemr fe gals sag UAtST NQNIONSSIN (211-1, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak mai sahj ghar paa-i-aa har bhagat bhandaar khajeenaa. ||2||10||33]| Says Nanak, I have found the Lord with intuitive ease, within the home of my own heart. Devotional worship of the Lord is a treasure over-flowing. ||2||10||33]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1211-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hue Afs ha 33 5 Srafs i c2i-2, wrda, we 5) mohan sabh jee-a tayray too taareh. O my Enticing Lord, all beings are Yours - You save them.
eefo Hure fony fasur 3 afe gis Corefa nail TIS Il 21-2, wa, He 5) chhuteh sanghaar nimakh kirpaa tay kot barahmand uDhaareh. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Even a tiny bit of Your Mercy ends all cruelty and tyranny. You save and redeem millions of universes. ||1]|Pause] |
asta maeth sos FSst fore fone AMTafs I (211-3, Ada, Hs 5) karahi ardaas bahut baynantee nimakh nimakh saamaa"rahi. I offer countless prayers; I remember You each and every instant.
dg faurs ve eu sro oe Uff fersrefs Nl (1211-3, Aa, nH 5)
hohu kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan haath day-ay nistaareh. ||1]|
Please be merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the poor; please give me Your hand and save me. ||1]|
foor & gufs aus adinifs ag & fan 6 wats it c2i-4, ada, v3 5) ki-aa ay bhoopat bapuray kahee-ahi kaho ay kis no maareh. And what about these poor kings? Tell me, who can they kill?
TY IY Wy ANSTS AF SSA Ads SHS MANAUS (1211-5, Avda, He 5)
raakh raakh raakh sukh-daatay sabh naanak jagat tum"aarahi. ||2]|11]|34]| Save me, save me, save me, O Giver of peace; O Nanak, all the world is Yours. []2]]12][34]|
ATS HIS U Il (1211-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma dfs og utes afs amr Il (i2ii-6, Ada, He 5) ab mohi Dhan paa-i-o har naamaa. Now I have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Name.
ge nifes fare AS est 3 feg fafae Sy wenr NU TIC Ul c211-6, Ada, Hs 5) bha-ay achint tarisan sabh bujhee hai ih likhi-o laykh mathaamaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have become carefree, and all my thirsty desires are satisfied. Such is the destiny written on my forehead. ||1||Pause||
ans dns sfeG sat fefe wrfeS ta fara it 211-7, Aa, v2 5)
khojat khojat bha-i-o bairaagee fir aa-i-o dayh giraamaa.
Searching and searching, I became depressed; I wandered all around, and finally came back to my body-village.
ats farts AGer feg afse ofa sfsG we mremr Al C1211-7, Ada, He 5) gur kirpaal sa-udaa ih jori-o hath chari-o laal agaamaa. ||1|| The Merciful Guru made this deal, and I have obtained the priceless jewel. ||1]|
MS SUS For A Adify SS Sa ATH Il (1211-8, Asa, He 5) aan baapaar banaj jo karee-ah taytay dookh sahaamaa. The other deals and trades which I did, brought only sorrow and suffering.
difae sno a fess enidt afe aH staat TH SH IQNAQUBUI (1211-8, Aa, He 5)
gobid bhajan kay nirbhai vaapaaree har raas naanak raam naamaa. ||2||12||35]|| Fearless are those traders who deal in meditation on the Lord of the Universe. O Nanak, the Lord's Name is their capital. ||2]|12||35]|
ATS HIS U Il (1211-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ae ufs fA] wat fpr sar i ci2i1-9, ada, us 5) mayrai man misat lagay pari-a bolaa. The Speech of my Beloved seems so sweet to my mind.
afs ag uate ys Ae we Ae cfeors afe sar dl TIS il 211-10, wa, we 5)
gur baah pakar parabh sayvaa laa-ay sad da-i-aal har dholaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Guru has taken hold of my arm, and linked me to God's service. My Beloved Lord is forever merciful to me. ||1]|Pause] |
ys 3 oad Aaa ufsuraq dfs aay Afss Als ae il (211-10, Avda, ue 5)
parabh too thaakur sarab partipaalak mohi kaltar sahit sabh golaa.
O God, You are my Lord and Master; You are the Cherisher of all. My wife and I are totally Your slaves.
HS SS A 30 3d fea oY Sa H SH UW C2u-u, wa, ws 5) maan taan sabh toohai toohai ik naam tayraa mai ol"aa. ||1]| You are all my honor and power - You are. Your Name is my only Support. ||1]|
A sufs Srrafs 38 @H SHS WA aeefs ASA FHT I (1211-12, Adar, v8 5)
jay takhat baisaaleh ta-o daas tum"aaray ghaas badhaaveh kaytak bolaa.
If You seat me on the throne, then I am Your slave. If You make me a grass-cutter, then what can I say?
WS Soa & US Use fas AI SAT aT MSH NQNIWIBEM (1211-12, Arar, He 5)
jan naanak kay parabh purakh biDhaatay mayray thaakur agah atolaa. ||2||13||36]|| Servant Nanak's God is the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, Unfathomable and Immeasurable. ||2||13||36||
ASA HIS UY Il (1211-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dHa' TH ATS TE AT Il (1211-13, Ada, we 5) rasnaa raam kahat gun soha", The tongue becomes beautiful, uttering the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Sa fous Gurfe Ayre Sf vias Ho AS UU TIC ih 211-14, Aa, He 5)
ayk nimakh opaa-ay samaavai daykh charit man moha", ||1|| rahaa-o.
In an instant, He creates and destroys. Gazing upon His Wondrous Plays, my mind is fascinated. ||1]||Pause||
fan Afent nfs df gon mifs foe we ee AT I 21-14, Ada, He 5)
jis suni-ai man ho-ay rahas at ridai maan dukh joha”.
Listening to His Praises, my mind is in utter ecstasy, and my heart is rid of pride and pain.
AY utes ey ofs utes af= ret ys 3ST AU (1211-15, Adar, He 5)
sukh paa-i-o dukh door paraa-i-o ban aa-ee parabh toha™. ||1]|
I have found peace, and my pains have been taken away, since I became one with God. ||1]|
foofeu ae Ho fsa det 3 afe are wfeor Sz 21-15, ada, us 5)
kilvikh ga-ay man nirmal ho-ee hai gur kaadhay maa-i-aa daroha”.
Sinful resides have been wiped away, and my mind is immaculate. The Guru has lifted me up and pulled me out of the deception of Maya.
aT seat HA ys ufeor age ade ANAT NQNWISIN (1211-16, Asa, He 5) kaho naanak mai so parabh paa-i-aa karan kaaran samrathoha’., ||2||14]|37]|
Says Nanak, I have found God, the All-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes. [12] ]14]137]|
ASA HIS UY Il (1211-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dod efaS Vos SHAT Il (1211-17, Aa, He 5) nainhu daykhi-o chalat tamaasaa. With my eyes, I have seen the marvellous wonders of the Lord.
AS J Ufs AS I 3 Ss MAH MH We SAT NU TIS Il (1211-17, Ada, wi 5)
sabh hoo door sabh hoo tay nayrai agam agam ghat vaasaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He is far from all, and yet near to all. He is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, and yet He dwells in the heart. ||1]|Pause| |
gS 3 38 fares o Bares HSS AT USAT II (1211-18, Ardar, He 5)
abhool na bhoolai likhi-o na chalaavai mataa na karai pachaasaa.
The Infallible Lord never makes a mistake. He does not have to write His Orders, and He does not have to consult with anyone.
fas nfs Ata nets fad sats eH TESA IAI (1211-18, Arar, He 5)
khin meh saaj savaar binaahai bhagat vachhal guntaasaa. ||1]||
In an instant, He creates, embellishes and destroys. He is the Lover of His devotees, the Treasure of Excellence. ||1]||
nig gu xfs dug afee afs fee at& usarAr il (1211-19, wa, He 5) anDh koop meh deepak bali-o gur ridai kee-o pargaasaa. Lighting the lamp in the deep dark pit, the Guru illumines and enlightens the heart.
UST A292
I SSA TIA Ufe AY ufeor AS YsS Tet MAT NQUGUNSCH (1212-1, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak daras paykh sukh paa-i-aa sabh pooran ho-ee aasaa. ||2||15||38]|
Says Nanak, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I have found peace, and all my hopes have been fulfilled. ||2]|15]|38]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1212-1)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
TIOd afse Asa AIST Il (1212-2, Ada, v2 5) charnah gobind maarag suhaavaa. The most beautiful path for the feet is to follow the Lord of the Universe.
wis Hea AST foes oe SS Stee TST NU TIS It (1212-2, Ada, ni 5) aan maarag jaytaa kichh Dhaa-ee-ai tayto hee dukh haavaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The more you walk on any other path, the more you suffer in pain. ||1||Pause] |
63 Udls Se VIA UY JAS USS SIH? Il (1212-3, Avda, ws 5)
naytar puneet bha-ay daras paykhay hasat puneet tehlaavaa.
The eyes are sanctified, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. Serving Him, the hands are sanctified.
foe uals foe ofs afhG HAS uss AS GSS AU (1212-3, Adar, H2 5)
ridaa puneet ridai har basi-o masat puneet sant Dhooraavaa. ||1||
The heart is sanctified, when the Lord abides within the heart; that forehead which touches the dust of the feet of the Saints is sanctified. ||1]|
Raa fours any afe afs & fan ath fefimr fafs uret il (1212-4, Ada, He 5)
sarab niDhaan naam har har kai jis karam likhi-aa tin paavaa.
All treasures are in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; he alone obtains it, who has it written in his karma.
Ho ston a ag us sfeS Afy AoA ioe fao|T NQNIENSEN (1212-4, Asa, He 5)
jan naanak ka-o gur pooraa bhayti-o sukh sehjay anad bihaavaa. ||2||16||39]|| Servant Nanak has met with the Perfect Guru; he passes his life-night in peace, poise and pleasure. ||2||16||39]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1212-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fourfeS nifS ag ony AT I (1212-5, Adar, He 5)
Dhi-aa-i-o ant baar naam sakhaa.
Meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; at the very last instant, it shall be your Help and Support.
Wo Hs fs AS set BUGS So SIT TH UU TIS Il (1212-6, wrda, ws 5)
jah maat pitaa sut bhaa-ee na pahuchai tahaa tahaa too rakhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In that place where your mother, father, children and siblings shall be of no use to you at all, there, the Name alone shall save you. ||1]||Pause| |
nin au fas ufs fate firfeS fam HAS Sy fea i (1212-6, Asa, Hs 5)
anDh koop garih meh tin simri-o jis mastak laykh likhaa.
He alone meditates on the Lord in the deep dark pit of his own household, upon whose forehead such destiny is written.
ye Us Hats afe det AS 3d Tat fear WAU (212-7, Ada, Hs 5)
khool"ay banDhan mukat gur keenee sabh toohai tuhee dikhaa. ||1]|
His bonds are loosened, and the Guru liberates him. He sees You, O Lord, everywhere. ||1]|
nifys on ub He fseufsur nme TAS Tar Il (1212-8, Avda, 2 5)
amrit naam pee-aa man taripti-aa aaghaa-ay rasan chakhaa.
Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, his mind is satisfied. Tasting it, his tongue is satiated.
ad sod AY Ada H ufenr ate ordt Aare fsa QNWIBOll (1212-8, Aa, He 5) kaho naanak sukh sahj mai paa-i-aa gur laahee sagal tikhaa. ||2||17]||40||
Says Nanak, I have obtained celestial peace and poise; the Guru has quenched all my thirst. ||2]]17]|40]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1212-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
a ffs wth ys fomrfenr it (212-9, Ada, Hs 5)
gur mil aisay parabhoo Dhi-aa-i-aa. Meeting the Guru, I meditate on God in such a way,
sfe6 faurs efor eu SHG Bd 3 TSt afer al TIS tt 1212-10, Ada, v2 5) bha-i-o kirpaal da-i-aal dukh bhanjan lagai na taatee baa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
that He has become kind and compassionate to me. He is the Destroyer of pain; He does not allow the hot wind to even touch me. ||1]||Pause| |
aS AA AA IH SS 33 dt Te EMT I (1212-10, ara, He 5) jaytay saas saas ham laytay taytay hee gun gaa-i-aa. With each and every breath I take, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
fonu 3 fad wet o fad Ae Aa AS AEM NA 212-11, Aa, He 5)
nimakh na bichhurai gharee na bisrai sad sangay jat jaa-i-aa. ||1||
He is not separated from me, even for an instant, and I never forget Him. He is always with me, wherever I go. ||1||
J af afs af af sao aHe a afs af ae eorfenr I (1212-11, Ada, He 5)
ha-o bal bal bal bal charan kamal ka-o bal bal gur darsaa-i-aa.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to His Lotus Feet. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
AT SAHA ATT Ue aC AY Arad Ho urf&or IUACUSIU (1212-12, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak kaahoo parvaahaa ja-o sukh saagar mai paa-i-aa. ||2||18]|41]|
Says Nanak, I do not care about anything else; I have found the Lord, the Ocean of peace. ||2||18]|41]|
ATID HIS U Il (1212-13)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
He nfs Ase Ga TT Mtoe ll (1212-13, Ada, He 5) mayrai man sabad lago gur meethaa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad seems so sweet to my mind.
ufeS asy sfes usara ufe ufe afe afe ster ul TIC il 212-14, Ada, vz 5) khuli"a-o karam bha-i-o pargaasaa ghat ghat har har deethaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My karma has been activated, and the Divine Radiance of the Lord, Har, Har, is manifest in each and every heart. ||1]|Pause] |
USgIH winst Hs Asa as we sor il (1212-14, ada, ue 5)
paarbarahm aajonee sambha-o sarab thaan ghat beethaa.
The Supreme Lord God, beyond birth, Self-existent, is seated within every heart everywhere.
se6 uaufs nifqs ont afs af ys vaator AU (1212-15, Ada, He 5)
bha-i-o paraapat amrit naamaa bal bal parabh charneethaa. ||1]|
I have come to obtain the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lotus Feet of God. ||1||
AsHats at Se uf weit ate Aare Stee HAStor Il (1212-16, Aa, He 5)
satsangat kee rayn mukh laagee kee-ay sagal tirath majneethaa.
I anoint my forehead with the dust of the Society of the Saints; it is as if I have bathed at all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
TI FSA Sa IHS FS F Tis FT F BI HAS MINIMUMS (1212-16, Adar, Hs 5)
kaho naanak rang chalool bha-ay hai har rang na lahai majeethaa. ||2||19]||42|| Says Nanak, I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love; the Love of my Lord shall never fade away. ||2]|19||42]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1212-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs safe om SAG afs Ara it (1212-17, ada, 2 5) har har naam dee-o gur saathay. The Guru has given me the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, as my Companion.
fone Fag Ys did SAS AIS sy Hat SS VU TIS i (1212-17, wrda, we 5)
nimakh bachan parabh hee-arai basi-o sagal bhookh mayree laathay. ||1]| rahaa-o. If the Word of God dwells within my heart for even an instant, all my hunger is relieved. ||1||Pause]|
fgur fours ae afea oaT AY AHD AS se Il (1212-18, Avda, He 5)
kirpaa niDhaan gun naa-ik thaakur sukh samooh sabh naathay.
O Treasure of Mercy, Master of Excellence, my Lord and Master, Ocean of peace, Lord of all.
fa win dfs Sct AyMt miGe ester orm fess ll (1212-19, Ada, v2 5) ayk aas mohi tayree su-aamee a-or dutee-aa aas biraathay. ||1]| My hopes rest in You alone, O my Lord and Master; hope in anything else is useless.
[21
oe fgush dfy vars afe ag os AT HE Il (1212-19, Ada, v8 5)
nain tariptaasay daykh darsaavaa gur kar Dhaaray mayrai maathay.
My eyes were satisfied and fulfilled, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, when the Guru placed His Hand on my forehead.
Yat 9293
aT sod Huse AY ufeor HOH HIS F BE MQUQONSSll 1213-1, Aa, He 5) kaho naanak mai atul sukh paa-i-aa janam maran bhai laathay. ||2||20||43]|
Says Nanak, I have found immeasurable peace; my fear of birth and death is gone. ||2]|20]|43]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1213-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
oS TS aT AT AT I (1213-2, Ara, He 5) ray moorh"ay aan kaahay kat jaa-ee. You fool: why are you going somewhere else?
Afat Hog wits 3 3 sf ste fry wet A TIS Wt 0213-2, Ada, wi: 5)
sang manohar amrit hai ray bhool bhool bikh khaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The Enticing Ambrosial Amrit is with you, but you are deluded, totally deluded, and you eat poison. ||1]|Pause| |
ys Hed vse nou fas fSn AC ge odt Tet I 1213-3, Adar, He 5)
parabh sundar chatur anoop biDhaatay tis si-o ruch nahee raa-ee.
God is Beautiful, Wise and Incomparable; He is the Creator, the Architect of Destiny, but you have no love for Him.
Hofs fa@ wes ug HfoS sfs saat uret wa 1213-3, wrda, 3 5)
mohan si-o baavar man mohi-o jhooth thag-uree paa-ee. ||1]|
The mad-man's mind is enticed by Maya, the enticer; he has taken the intoxicating drug of falsehood. ||1]|
safes efiare faurs vu gest Hae fre safe nret i 213-4, Ada, He 5)
bha-i-o da-i-aal kirpaal dukh hartaa santan si-o ban aa-ee.
The Destroyer of pain has become kind and compassionate to me, and I am in tune with the Saints.
Aa fours wed Hfs ure ag area Afs ANTST NQNVUISIl (1213-5, Ada, He 5) sagal niDhaan gharai meh paa-ay kaho naanak jot samaa-ee. ||2]||21]||44||
I have obtained all treasures within the home of my own heart; says Nanak, my light has merged into the Light. ||2||21||44]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1213-5)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Gui fir uifs sis ufsedior i 213-6, ada, ue 5) o-a™ pari-a pareet cheet pahilaree-aa. My consciousness has loved my Beloved God, since the very beginning of time.
Af 3G suq IG He Afsag SEH ATA Atedr NA TICE Il (1213-6, Ada, He 5)
jo ta-o bachan dee-o mayray satgur ta-o mai saaj seegree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When You blessed me with the Teachings, O my True Guru, I was embellished with beauty. ||1]||Pause] |
JH JBI SH AS niger JH ufss SH ufss udu i (1213-7, Arsa, ne 5)
ham bhoolah tum sadaa abhoolaa ham patit tum patit uDhree-aa.
I am mistaken; You are never mistaken. I am a sinner; You are the Saving Grace of sinners.
dH ote fasy SH Horde oH Afar Afar SAS WAU (1213-7, Arar, He 5)
ham neech birakh tum mailaagar laaj sang sang basree-aa. ||1]|
I am a lowly thorn-tree, and You are the sandalwood tree. Please preserve my honor by staying with me; please stay with me. ||1]|
3H date dle Cuardt oH for sud Had | 1213-8, Ada, He 5)
tum gambheer Dheer upkaaree ham ki-aa bapuray jantree-aa.
You are deep and profound, calm and benevolent. What am I? Just a poor helpless being.
Td faurs sea of ASS 3B Act Afe AAs NQNQIUWSUIl (1213-8, Argar, He 5)
gur kirpaal naanak har mayli-o ta-o mayree sookh sayjree-aa. ||2||22||45]||
The Merciful Guru Nanak has united me with the Lord. I lay on His Bed of Peace. [|2]|22]|45]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1213-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Gfe feon ufe useat Il (1213-9, Ada, He 5) man o-ay dinas Dhan parvaanaa”. O my mind, blessed and approved is that day,
Hee 3 wet Ana AS Afsas Afar famrat nai Fas il 1213-10, Aa, v2 5)
safal tay gharee sanjog suhaavay satgur sang gi-aanaa”. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
and fruitful is that hour, and lucky is that moment, when the True Guru blesses me with spirtual wisdom. ||1]|Pause| |
fs Aaa Ufs Hover Ufs es fats rat I (1213-10, Avda, He 5)
Dhan subhaag Dhan sohaagaa Dhan dayt jin maanaa”.
Blessed is my good destiny, and blessed is my Husband Lord. Blessed are those upon whom honor is bestowed.
feg 36 SHe AS fag US SHe HE AG aaaat NA (1213-11, Ada, ue 5)
ih tan tum"raa sabh garihu Dhan tumraa hee’-u kee-o kurbaanaa”. ||1]|
This body is Yours, all my home and wealth are Yours; I offer my heart as a sacrifice to You. ||1||
afe ong an AY ure fea fone ufe fererat II (1213-12, Avda, 8 5)
kot laakh raaj sukh paa-ay ik nimakh paykh daristaanaa’,
I obtain tens of thousands and millions of regal pleasures, if I gaze upon Your Blessed Vision, even for an instant.
AG add Hu Aea feo Sri AU ara NZ F Wot NQNQSIEN (1213-12, Aa, He 5) ja-o kahhu mukhahu sayvak ih baisee-ai sukh naanak ant na jaanaa’. ||2||23]|46]| When You, O God, say, "My servant, stay here with me", Nanak knows unlimited peace. ||2||23||46]||
ATS HIS UY Il (1213-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ma He AOA ee afeMM | (1213-13, Asa, He 5) ab moro sahsaa dookh ga-i-aa. Now I am rid of my skepticism and sorrow.
m@a Cure nae fsurfa 23 Afsas Hof ufeor nan go tl 1213-13, Ada, He 5)
a-or upaav sagal ti-aag chhoday satgur saran pa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I have abandoned and forsaken all other efforts, and come to the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||1]|Pause] |
Rea fafa asa Afs Hed id Ta Aare dt ufeor i 1213-14, Ada, He 5)
sarab siDh kaaraj sabh savray aha” rog sagal hee kha-i-aa.
I have attained total perfection, and all my works are perfectly completed; the illness of egotism has been totally eradicated.
afe usa fas ufo u set 3 a fife ofe ofe afomr al (1213-15, Aa, He 5)
kot paraaDh khin meh kha-o bha-ee hai gur mil har har kahi-aa. ||1]|
Millions of sins are destroyed in an instant; meeting with the Guru, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
us aA afs zHafs até He fase fassfeor i (1213-15, Aa, He 5)
panch daas gur vasgat keenay man nihchal nirbha-i-aa.
Subduing the five thieves, he Guru has made them my slaves; my mind has become stable and steady and fearless.
mife 5 ATS 6 AS Ut 3S fag Soa THEM INVISION (1213-16, Aa, He 5)
aa-ay na jaavai na kat hee dolai thir naanak raaja-i-aa. ||2||24||47]|| It does not come or go in reincarnation; it does not waver or wander anywhere. O Nanak, my empire is eternal. ||2||24||47]||
ATID HIS UY Il (1213-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
us Hd fes Os AE ATT I (1213-17, Adar, He 5)
parabh mayro it ut sadaa sahaa-ee. Here and hereafter, God is forever my Help and Support.
HOHIS AS Aba & fimrd aea aT AS wet wa TIC il 1213-17, Aa, nz 5)
manmohan mayray jee-a ko pi-aaro kavan kahaa gun gaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He is the Enticer of my mind, the Beloved of my soul. What Glorious Praises of His can I sing and chant? ||1||Pause| |
ofs frets os ose Het Het mBeret Il (1213-18, Aa, He 5)
khayl khilaa-ay laad laadaavai sadaa sadaa andaa-ee.
He plays with me, He fondles and caresses me. Forever and ever, He blesses me with bliss.
ufsud afaa at fonret AA HS fusTet AN (1213-18, Adar, He 5) paratipaalai baarik kee ni-aa-ee jaisay maat pitaa-ee. ||1]| He cherishes me, like the father and the mother love their child. ||1]|
fH fag foe sot ofa Aetn farts 5 wag AT I 1213-19, Adar, Hs 5) tis bin nimakh nahee reh sakee-ai bisar na kabhoo jaa-ee. I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant; I shall never forget Him.
UST 9298
ag ood fife Hanafs 3 Hae se fos wet NINQUISTH (1214-1, Ada, He 5)
kaho naanak mil santsangat tay magan bha-ay liv laa-ee. ||2||25||48]| Says Nanak, joining the Society of the Saints, I am enraptured, lovingly attuned to my Lord. ||2||25]|48]|
ATID HIS U Il (1214-1)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
muat Hts AMmt arent | 1214-2, Aa, v2 5) apnaa meet su-aamee gaa-ee-ai. Sing of your Lord and Master, your Best Friend.
WA 5 Mes ag at att AaETST ys fora ud TIS il (1214-2, ada, ws 5) aas na avar kaahoo kee keejai sukh-daata parabh Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Do not place your hopes in anyone else; meditate on God, the Giver of peace. ||1]|Pause] |
AY Hae atemre frafs wie fA ot rset ureter I (1214-3, Avda, He 5) sookh mangal kali-aan jisahi ghar tis hee sarnee paa-ee-ai. Peace, joy and salvation are in His Home. Seek the Protection of His Sanctuary.
fsnfo faurfa wou A Ae 3B on Bo afe We NAN (1214-3, Ada, He 5)
tiseh ti-aag maanukh jay sayvhu ta-o laaj lon ho-ay jaa-ee-ai. ||1||
But if you forsake Him, and serve mortal beings, your honor will dissolve like salt in water. ||1||
ea Ge uadt oad at a fife nfs sf ure it (1214-4, ada, ni 5)
ayk ot pakree thaakur kee gur mil mat buDh paa-ee-ai.
I have grasped the Anchor and Support of my Lord and Master; meeting with the Guru, I have found wisdom and understanding.
qe fours soa us fixfoor Fares vot Hose NQNVENSEM (1214-4, Adar, He 5)
gun niDhaan naanak parabh mili-aa sagal chukee muhtaa-ee-ai. ||2||26||49]| Nanak has met God, the Treasure of Excellence; all dependence on others is gone. [|2]|26]|49]|
ATS HIS U Il (1214-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ge ASat ys AIG AS MW (1214-5, Adar, He 5) ot sataanee parabh jee-o mayrai. I have the Almighty Support of my Dear Lord God.
fenfe 3 famreg nies arg aS whe Hots ys ST IU TIS i (1214-6, wrdar, we 5) darisat na li-aava-o avar kaahoo ka-o maan mahat parabh tayrai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I do not look up to anyone else. My honor and glory are Yours, O God. ||1||Pause]|
nidhers atG yfs mud arfe shor fey wes Il (1214-6, Adar, ne 5)
angeekaar kee-o parabh apunai kaadh lee-aa bikh ghayrai.
God has taken my side; He has lifted me up and pulled me out of the whirlpool of corruption.
nifys on nigug ufe ate af ufser ag Us WA (1214-7, Aa, He 5)
amrit naam a-ukhaDh mukh deeno jaa-ay pa-i-aa gur pairai. ||1]|
He has poured the medicine of the Naam, the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, into my mouth; I have fallen at the Guru's Feet. ||1]|
aes Cunt ase fa Hu fosae & WSS Il (1214-8, wa, v2 5) kavan upmaa kaha-o ayk mukh nirgun kay daatayrai. How can I praise You with only one mouth? You are generous, even to the unworthy.
ate fra AG nus ats SSX AY WSF NQNOIUON (1214-8, ASAT, M3 5) kaat silak ja-o apunaa keeno naanak sookh ghanayrai. ||2||27||50||
You cut away the noose, and now You own me; Nanak is blessed with myriad joys. [12] |27]|50]|
ATID HIS U Il (1214-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ys faunas eu faarit it 214-9, Aga, 2 5) parabh simrat dookh binaasee. Remembering God in meditation, pains are dispelled.
sfe€ faurs Aba paest Jet Aare wrt Wai TITS Ml 1214-9, Ada, ve 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal jee-a sukh-daata ho-ee sagal khalaasee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
When the Giver of peace to the soul becomes merciful, the mortal is totally redeemed. ||1]|Pause] |
neg 5 aC AS ys fas ag & fan ula AAT I (1214-10, Ada, Hs 5) avar na ko-oo soojhai parabh bin kaho ko kis peh jaasee. I know of none other than God; tell me, who else should I approach?
fag weg f38 mug oad AS fas SH St UAT NAN (1214-11, Fa, nH 5)
ji-o jaanhu ti-o raakho thaakur sabh kichh tum hee paasee. ||1]|
As You know me, so do You keep me, O my Lord and Master.I have surrendered everything to You. ||1]|
ve efe aad ufs mud Ae Heo vifsaret il 214-11, Ada, ws 5) haath day-ay raakhay parabh apunay sad jeevan abhinaasee. God gave me His Hand and saved me; He has blessed me with eternal life.
aT aaa Hie nee ster 3 aret AH at SH NQANQCHUAN (1214-12, Ada, He 5)
kaho naanak man anad bha-i-aa hai kaatee jam kee faasee. ||2||28]|51|| Says Nanak, my mind is in ecstasy; the noose of death has been cut away from my neck. ||2||28]|51]|
ATS HIS U Il (1214-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Wd He AS as s3fa ANTS Il (1214-13, Aa, He 5) mayro man jat kat tujheh sam"aarai. My mind contemplates You, O Lord, all the time.
oH Mfea ae fust us Ae fa wafs SE us nA TIS I (1214-13, Adar, we 5)
ham baarik deen pitaa parabh mayray ji-o jaaneh ti-o paarai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am Your meek and helpless child; You are God my Father. As You know me, You save me. ||1||Pause| |
Wa 34 Fa SHAG Ha wes AY AUS I (1214-14, Adar, Hs 5) jab bhukhou tab bhojan maa“gai aghaa-ay sookh saghaarai. When I am hungry, I ask for food; when I am full, I am totally at peace.
3a nida Aa SH Afr SHS Seas SS Jers UU (1214-14, Ada, He 5)
tab arog jab tum sang bastou chhutkat ho-ay ravaarai. ||1||
When I dwell with You, I am free of disease; if I become separated from You, I turn to dust. ||1]|
aes SAG SA VHS a aU aryST Il (1214-15, Aa, v2 5) kavan basayro daas daasan ko thaapi-o thaapanhaarai. What power does the slave of Your slave have, O Establisher and Disestablisher?
oy 8 fand 3a Alea Usha feast aoa feg ATS NQNQENUM (1214-15, Aa, He 5)
naam na bisrai tab jeevan paa-ee-ai bintee naanak ih saarai. ||2||29]|52| | If I do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, then I die. Nanak offers this prayer. ||2]|29||52]|
ATID HIS U Il (1214-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ho 3 3 38 ofs usteS I (1214-16, Adar, 4: 5) man tay bhai bha-o door paraa-i-o. I have shaken off fear and dread from my mind.
OSs Semis THs oss ATA AA TS WES ua FICS i 1214-17, wa, us 5)
laal da-i-aal gulaal laadilay sahj sahj gun gaa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With intuitive ease, peace and poise, I sing the Glorious Praises of my Kind, Sweet, Darling Beloved. ||1||Pause| |
Gs Fors ans feu 3 safe o as UES it (1214-17, Arar, He 5) gur bachnaat kamaat kirpaa tay bahur na kathoo Dhaa-i-o. Practicing the Guru's Word, by His Grace, I do not wander anywhere anymore.
gos Gurfa Aarfa AY “IAS safs zee fafs uve NAN (1214-18, Ada, He 5)
rahat upaaDh samaaDh sukh aasan bhagat vachhal garihi paa-i-o. ||1]|
The illusion has been dispelled; I am in Samaadhi, Sukh-aasan, the position of peace. I have found the Lord, the Lover of His devotees, within the home of my own heart.
[11
ore fase as niTéer AH Adfa ANTES I (1214-19, Aa, He 5)
naad binod kod aanandaa sehjay sahj samaa-i-o.
| The Sound-current of the Naad, playful joys and pleasures - I am intuitively, easily absorbed into the Celestial Lord.
ade’ nifu ages nm ag aod ify mmufeS NIQNZoNUsil (1214-19, Aa, He 5)
karnaa aap karaavan aapay kaho naanak aap aapaa-i-o. ||2||30||53]| He Himself is the Creator, the Cause of causes. Says Nanak, He Himself is All-in-all. [|2]|30]|[53]|
Yat A2qU
ASA HIS U Il (1215-1)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
nifqs ou Hofs mrad I (1215-1, Avda, us 5) amrit naam maneh aaDhaaro. The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of the mind.
fis thor fA a Ass TI ys SHAS NU TIS ll 1215-1, Ara, ws 5)
jin dee-aa tis kai kurbaanai gur pooray namaskaaro. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice to the One who gave it to me; I humbly bow to the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
gst fener Aah Fee oH ay fay AST I (1215-2, Adar, Hs 5)
boojhee tarisnaa sahj suhaylaa kaam kroDh bikh jaaro.
My thirst is quenched, and I have been intuitively embellished. The poisons of sexual desire and anger have been burnt away.
wife 3 ate aA fea oad AT MITA fadard NU (1215-3, Ada, He 5) aa-ay na jaa-ay basai ih thaahar jah aasan nirankaaro. ||1|| This mind does not come and go; it abides in that place, where the Formless Lord sits.
[21
Sa ude SX TUS Sa TAT I (1215-3, mda, wi 5)
aykai pargat aykai guptaa aykai DhunDhookaaro.
The One Lord is manifest and radiant; the One Lord is hidden and mysterious. The One Lord is abysmal darkness.
orf ufo nifs ys Het ag area ATT Stes NQNSAUUBII (1215-4, Ada, He 5) aad maDh ant parabh so-ee kaho naanak saach beechaaro. ||2||31||54||
From the beginning, throughout the middle and until the end, is God. Says Nanak, reflect on the Truth. ||2||31]|54]|
ATID HIS U Il (1215-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fag ys dao 8 ATE wet II 4215-5, Ada, He 5) bin parabh rahan na jaa-ay gharee. Without God, I cannot survive, even for an instant.
Ava FY SY ot uss A aA AY FT Tet AU TTS Il (1215-5, wrdar, we 5) sarab sookh taahoo kai pooran jaa kai sukh hai haree. ||1]| rahaa-o. One who finds joy in the Lord finds total peace and perfection. ||1]||Pause] |
Hae gu yrs tes Uo fAHes woe Wat Il (1215-5, Ada, He 5)
mangal roop paraan jeevan Dhan simrat anad ghanaa.
God is the Embodiment of bliss, the Breath of Life and Wealth; remembering Him in meditation, I am blessed with absolute bliss.
@S AH Ae Ae Hdl To JAS! ASO FST MAI (1215-6, Avda, He 5)
vad samrath sadaa sad sangay gun rasnaa kavan bhanaa. ||1||
He is utterly All-powerful, with me forever and ever; what tongue can utter His Glorious Praises? ||1||
we ufest He ufegt ufey HOS AISI"? Il (1215-7, Avda, we 5)
thaan pavitaraa maan pavitaraa pavitar sunan kehanhaaray.
His Place is sacred, and His Glory is sacred; sacred are those who listen and speak of Him.
aT soa 3 386 ules a Hf AS SHS NQUBQNUUI (1215-7, Ada, He 5) kaho naanak tay bhavan pavitaraa jaa meh sant tum"aaray. ||2]|32||55]| Says Nanak, that dwelling is sacred, in which Your Saints live. ||2]|32]|55] |
ASA HIS UY Il (1215-8)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ono Aust Sot Tot i 215-8, Arga, we 5) rasnaa japtee toohee toohee. My tongue chants Your Name, Your Name.
HS aes 3H ot ufsuraa fies Hse fea sat uA TIS I 1215-8, ada, vs 5)
maat garabh tum hee partipaalak mitar mandal ik tuhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In the mother's womb, You sustained me, and in this mortal world, You alone help me. ||1]|]Pause| |
suHfo fust 3H dt efe ust gufs Hts fas grt il (215-9, Avda, we 5) tumeh pitaa tum hee fun maataa tumeh meet hit bharaataa. You are my Father, and You are my Mother; You are my Loving Friend and Sibling.
3H uderd SHfg wrorg SHfo Ahr YTSeTST AI (1215-9, Adar, He 5) tum parvaar tumeh aaDhaaraa tumeh jee-a paraan-daataa. ||1|| You are my Family, and You are my Support. You are the Giver of the Breath of Life.
[21] SHfo unter Sufo Ade SH St HSK We Il (1215-10, Aa, He 5)
tumeh khajeenaa tumeh jareenaa tum hee maanik laalaa. You are my Treasure, and You are my Wealth. You are my Gems and Jewels.
SH UsHS TI 3 US 3B ota SS fogs NNBBNUEN (1215-11, Aa, He 5)
tumeh paarjaat gur tay paa-ay ta-o naanak bha-ay nihaalaa. ||2]|33]|56||
You are the wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree. Nanak has found You through the Guru, and now he is enraptured. ||2||33||56]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1215-11)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
WT ay wus ot fats wrs i (1215-11, Ardar, we 5) jaahoo kaahoo apuno hee chit aavai. Wherever he goes, his consciousness turns to his own.
Hog t Ud des oa at ufs WS NU TIS ll (1215-12, Adar, v2 5) jo kaahoo ko chayro hovat thaakur hee peh jaavai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Whoever is a chaylaa (a servant) goes only to his Lord and Master. ||1]||Pause| |
mua ufo ge wus ufo Aa wus ot ufs fagar it (1215-12, Arga, He 5) apnay peh dookh apunay peh sookhaa apnay hee peh birthaa. He shares his sorrows, his joys and his condition only with his own.
mus ufo HTS MUS ufs Sat nUS Tt Ufa mga NA (1215-13, Aa, He 5)
apunay peh maan apunay peh taanaa apnay hee peh arthaa. ||1||
He obtains honor from his own, and strength from his own; he gets an advantage from his own. ||1]|
fas dt aH Hae Us fier fas dt ary HOSTS I (1215-14, Aa, He 5)
kin hee raaj joban Dhan milkhaa kin hee baap mehtaaree.
Some have regal power, youth, wealth and property; some have a father and a mother.
AVA FA SS TT US UTS MTA TH MQWASUUII (1215-14, APGar, He 5)
sarab thok naanak gur paa-ay pooran aas hamaaree. ||2||34||57| | I have obtained all things, O Nanak, from the Guru. My hopes have been fulfilled. [121134] [571]
ASA HIS U Il (1215-15)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Bo Het a HE HIG Il (1215-15, Arar, He 5) jhootho maa-i-aa ko mad maan. False is intoxication and pride in Maya.
qa Ha ofs afe ays Af auretas AS UU TIS il 1215-15, Adar, ws 5)
Dharoh moh door kar bapuray sang gopaaleh jaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Get rid of your fraud and attachment, O wretched mortal, and remember that the Lord of the World is with you. ||1||Pause||
fiufeor oH Fae vig Cus Ate HOA nis UTS Il (1215-16, Ada, He 5) mithi-aa raaj joban ar umray meer malak ar khaan. False are royal powers, youth, nobility, kings, rulers and aristocrats.
fufeor anug Haig vsaet fife SAS urs WAU (1215-16, Aa, He 5) mithi-aa kaapar suganDh chaturaa-ee mithi-aa bhojan paan. ||1]|| False are the fine clothes, perfumes and clever tricks; false are the foods and drinks.
[21
ate dud aA eA H3d at ASS Il (1215-17, Adar, 4 5)
deen baDhro daas daasro santeh kee saaraan.
O Patron of the meek and the poor, I am the slave of Your slaves; I seek the Sanctuary of Your Saints.
Hate Hae df ofa fre soa & fs yrs NQNBUNUCH (1215-17, Ara, He 5) maa‘gan maa‘ga-o ho-ay achintaa mil naanak kay har paraan. ||2]|35||58]|
I humbly ask, I beg of You, please relieve my anxiety; O Lord of Life, please unite Nanak with Yourself. ||2||35]|58]|
ATID HIS U Il (1215-18)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
nual fesat ag o ATS Il (1215-18, Argar, He 5) apunee itnee kachhoo na saaree. By himself, the mortal cannot accomplish anything.
mio aA mfoa wees CafsG wire AAS UU TIS Il 1215-19, Aa, ns 5)
anik kaaj anik Dhaavrataa urjhi-o aan janjaaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He runs around chasing all sorts of projects, engrossed in other entanglements. ||1]|Pause] |
feGn ots & cata Haft Sat ara AT SS I (1215-19, Ardar, He 5) di-us chaar kay deeseh sangee oohaa™ naahee jah bhaaree. His companions of these few days will not be there when he is in trouble.
UST 929E
fae faG afe us fos ofeS A fh odt erst A (216-1, Ada, He 5)
tin si-o raach maach hit laa-i-o jo kaam nahee gaavaaree. ||1||
He is hand and glove with those who are of no use to him; the poor wretch is affectionately involved with them. ||1]|
IG odt ardt fas Ha oT THs SA UST Il (1216-2, Aa, He 5) ha-o naahee naahee kichh mayraa naa hamro bas chaaree. I am nothing; nothing belongs to me. I have no power or control.
AIS ATES SSA A US ASS Afar Surat NAUSENUCN (1216-2, Asa, He 5) karan karaavan naanak kay parabh santan sang uDhaaree. ||2||36]|59]|
O Creator, Cause of causes, Lord God of Nanak, I am saved and redeemed in the Society of the Saints. ||2]|36||59]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1216-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hust HIS Id B Set Il 1216-3, Aa, He 5) mohnee mohat rahai na horee. The Great Enticer Maya keeps enticing, and cannot be stopped.
Atos fio Aare at flmrdt sf o aT Sat AU TTS Il (1216-3, ada, ws 5) saaDhik siDh sagal kee pi-aaree tutai na kaahoo toree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
She is the Beloved of all the Siddhas and seekers; no one can fend her off. ||1]|Pause] |
ue WAY Cues Hoag Steg Tes B Sat Il (1216-4, Avda, ne 5)
khat saastar uchrat rasnaagar tirath gavan na thoree.
Reciting the six Shaastras and visiting sacred shrines of pilgrimage do not decrease her power.
UA UX AIT BH Suhr So HS F Sat AU 1216-4, wrgar, we 5)
poojaa chakar barat naym tapee-aa oohaa gail na chhoree. ||1]||
Devotional worship, ceremonial religious marks, fasting, vows and penance - none of these will make her release her hold. ||1]|
nig au fs ufss 33 AG AST As USH ats Hat I 1216-5, Asa, Hs 5)
anDh koop meh patit hot jag santahu karahu param gat moree.
The world has fallen into the deep dark pit. O Saints, please bless me with the supreme status of salvation.
Wonafs soa sf Hast VaAS UNS Sat NINBONEOMN (1216-6, Aa, He 5) saaDhsangat naanak bha-i-o muktaa darsan paykhat bhoree. ||2||37||60||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has been liberated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, even for an instant. ||2||37]||60] |
ATID HIS U Il (1216-6)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ad aaa J ute weet Il (1216-6, Ada, v3 5) kahaa karahi ray khaat khaatulee. Why are you working so hard to earn profits?
uefs nies 3a OHS fs Ant Sot FT Hest NAN TIS Il (1216-7, Ada, 2 5)
pavan afaar tor chaamro at jajree tayree ray maatulee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
You are puffed up like a bag of air, and your skin is very brittle. Your body has grown old and dusty. ||1]|Pause] |
Cut 3 ass Sa S afeS HA MA HA SS Seat Il (1216-7, Ada, 2 5)
oohee tay hari-o oohaa lay Dhari-o jaisay baasaa maas dayt jhaatulee.
You move things from here to there, like the hawk swooping down on the flesh of its prey.
ezoug farts vias fa@ nedt eg sd afo Test Al (1216-8, Ada, Hs 5)
dayvanhaar bisaari-o anDhulay ji-o safree udar bharai bahi haatulee. ||1]|
You are blind - you have forgotten the Great Giver. You fill your belly like a traveller at an inn. ||1||
We fears faors 35 TA AT WS SI Ste Mea Il (1216-9, Ardar, we 5)
saad bikaar bikaar jhooth ras jah jaano tah bheer baatulee.
You are entangled in the taste of false pleasures and corrupt sins; the path which you have to take is very narrow.
ATI Soa AHS F fords org of us Sct Test NANScuEeal (1216-9, Ada, ve 5) kaho naanak samajh ray i-aanay aaj kaal khul"ai tayree gaa™thulee. ||2||38]|61||
Says Nanak: figure it out, you ignorant fool! Today or tomorrow, the knot will be untied! ||2||38]|61||
ATID HIG U Il (1216-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ae Me Af sad Who Il (1216-10, Ada, He 5) gur jee-o sang tuhaarai jaani-o. O Dear Guru, by associating with You, I have come to know the Lord.
afe Aa Gur at as 5 ud st vans st Hf Na TTS Il 1216-11, Ada, 2 5)
kot joDh u-aa kee baat na puchhee-ai taa’ dargeh bhee maani-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. There are millions of heroes, and no one pays any attention to them, but in the Court of the Lord, I am honored and respected. ||1]||Pause] |
TES HB YS at ada Hea gy fens il (1216-12, wrdar, we 5) kavan mool paraanee kaa kahee-ai kavan roop daristaani-o. What is the origin of the human beings? How beautiful they are!
Afs yarn set Het Af vas to sefSS Al (1216-12, Avda, ne 5) jot pargaas bha-ee maatee sang dulabh dayh bakhaani-o. ||1]|| When God infuses His Light into clay, the human body is judged to be precious. ||1]|
3H 3 AS SHS AU STE 3H 3 33 USS Il (1216-13, Wa, H8 5)
tum tay sayv tum tay jap taapaa tum tay tat pachhaani-o.
From You, I have learned to serve; from You, I have learned to chant and meditate; from You, I have realized the essence of reality.
ad HASfa ufs act Aedt Soa BA SASS NQNBENEI (1216-13, Aa, He 5)
kar mastak Dhar katee jayvree naanak daas dasaani-o. ||2||39]||62|| Placing His Hand on my forehead, He has cut away the bonds which held me; O Nanak, I am the slave of His slaves. ||2]|39]|62]||
ATS HIS U Il (1216-14)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs ofa HE Hea AB GH Il (1216-14, Aa, He 5) har har dee-o sayvak ka-o naam. The Lord has blessed His servant with His Name.
HOH at a sud set Aa Ta IH WU TTS I (1216-14, Adar, v2 5)
maanas kaa ko bapuro bhaa-ee jaa ko raakhaa raam. ||1|| rahaa-o.
What can any poor mortal do to someone who has the Lord as his Savior and Protector? ||1]|Pause| |
wmf Hot Ae my ust orf Hex AX AMA Il (1216-15, Aar, He 5)
aap mahaa jan aapay panchaa aap sayvak kai kaam.
He Himself is the Great Being; He Himself is the Leader. He Himself accomplishes the tasks of His servant.
My Aas FS fies SAT MSIAH IAI (1216-16, Arsar, He 5)
aapay saglay doot bidaaray thaakur antarjaam. ||1]|
Our Lord and Master destroys all demons; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||1]|
nny ufs mt Aza at orf AS Fare Il (1216-16, Aa, He 5) aapay pat raakhee sayvak kee aap kee-o banDhaan. He Himself saves the honor of His servants; He Himself blesses them with stability.
wife qarfe Aza at TH SSR A UT AS |QNSONESI (1216-17, Aa, He 5)
aad jugaad sayvak kee raakhai naanak ko parabh jaan. ||2||40||63]| From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, He saves His servants. O Nanak, how rare is the person who knows God. ||2]||40]||63]|
ATID HIS U Il (1216-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
3 Ae Hts mer ats ye Il (1216-17, Arsa, ne 5) too mayray meet sakhaa har paraan. O Lord, You are my Best Friend, my Companion, my Breath of Life.
Ho U6 AIG fils AS sue fed So ALS SHS OS NAN TIS I (1216-18, Ada, He 5) man Dhan jee-o pind sabh tumraa ih tan seeto tumrai Dhaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind, wealth, body and soul are all Yours; this body is sewn together by Your Blessing. ||1||Pause] |
3H ot He wifoa yaar SH St AS Hrs Il (1216-19, Ada, us 5)
tum hee dee-ay anik parkaaraa tum hee dee-ay maan.
You have blessed me with all sorts of gifts; you have blessed me with honor and respect.
Hel Het 3H dt ufs sug nisant AS NA (1216-19, Aa, He 5) Sadaa sadaa tum hee pat raakho antarjaamee jaan. ||1|| Forever and ever, You preserve my honor, O Inner-knower, O Searcher of hearts.
[21
Yat 9299
fis Aso Moor 3 SAT 3 mS Use Il (1217-1, Arar, He 5)
jin santan jaani-aa too thaakur tay aa-ay parvaan.
Those Saints who know You, O Lord and Master - blessed and approved is their coming into the world.
Ho a Ha Usha esac Soa Hse A AITS NUE (1217-1, Aa, He 5)
jan kaa sang paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee naanak santan kai kurbaan. ||2||41||64||
The Congregation of those humble beings is obtained by great good fortune; Nanak is a sacrifice to the Saints. ||2||41]||64| |
ASA HIS UY Il (1217-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
add afs efenrs Asg Het I 1217-2, Ada, He 5) karahu gat da-i-aal santahu moree. Save me, O Merciful Saint!
3H ANSE AIS aaa Set SH St at VU TIS Mt (1217-2, wrda, ws 5)
tum samrath kaaran karnaa tootee tum hee joree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You are the All-powerful Cause of causes. You have ended my separation, and joined me with God. ||1]]Pause| |
HOH HOH & faust 3H ard AHfS Af Ss uTSt I (1217-3, Adar, He 5)
janam janam kay bikh-ee tum taaray sumat sang tumaarai paa-ee.
You save us from the corruption and sins of countless incarnations; associating with You, we obtain sublime understanding.
uifea rife gH ys fares Ata Ath afs aret nail (1217-4, Ada, Hs 5)
anik jon bharamtay parabh bisrat saas saas har gaa-ee. ||1||
Forgetting God, we wandered through countless incarnations; with each and every breath, we sing the Lord's Praises. ||1]|
At Ale fee AG a SS ufss USS I (1217-4, Adar, He 5) jo jo sang milay saaDhoo kai tay tay patit puneetaa. Whoever meets with the Holy Saints - those sinners are sanctified.
aI Soa A a Zoe (Sle AON USSG AST NQNSQUEUI (217-5, Ara, He 5)
kaho naanak jaa kay vadbhaagaa tin janam padaarath jeetaa. ||2||42||65]|| Says Nanak, those who have such high destiny, win this invaluable human life. [12]142]|65]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1217-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
oad feast ade AS MMSE i 1217-6, Aa, He 5) thaakur bintee karan jan aa-i-o. O my Lord and Master, Your humble servant has come to offer this prayer.
Ava AY uTSe HUA FA Hos SI'S SES UU TIS i (1217-6, ada, ws 5)
sarab sookh aanand sahj ras sunat tuhaaro naa-i-o. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Hearing Your Name, I am blessed with total peace, bliss, poise and pleasure. ||1]|Pause] |
fgur fours AY & Arad FA AS fo At STSS Ul (1217-7, wa, 4: 5) kirpaa niDhaan sookh kay saagar jas sabh meh jaa ko chhaa-i-o. The Treasure of Mercy, the Ocean of Peace - His Praises are diffused everywhere.
HsAfa da SH ate wrust ny fen|tE wait (1217-7, Avda, ue 5) satsang rang tum kee-ay apnaa aap daristaa-i-o. ||1]|| O Lord, You celebrate in the Society of the Saints; You reveal Yourself to them. ||1]|
dod Afal Hao at AS Vso STH AATEE Il (1217-8, Awa, us 5)
nainhu sang santan kee sayvaa charan jhaaree kaysaa-i-o.
With my eyes I see the Saints, and dedicate myself to serving them; I wash their feet with my hair.
WTS UIT VIHS H36 a AY soa feg ufES iIussneell (1217-8, Aa, He 5)
aath pahar darsan santan kaa sukh naanak ih paa-i-o. ||2||43]|66] | Twenty-four hours a day, I gaze upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Saints; this is the peace and comfort which Nanak has received. ||2]||43||66]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1217-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ww at IH oH fee walt il (1217-9, Ada, He 5) jaa kee raam naam liv laagee. One who is lovingly absorbed in the Lord's Name
Ano Afse’ HIS AoA A adha asarat AU TIC il 1217-9, Aa, us 5)
sajan suridaa suhaylaa sehjay so kahee-ai badbhaagee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
is a good-hearted friend, intuitively embellished with happiness. He is said to be blessed and fortunate. ||1]|Pause] |
dfes faarg uisu Htfeur 3 ordafa fers fanreit i 1217-10, Ava, 2 5)
rahit bikaar alap maa-i-aa tay aha‘-buDh bikh ti-aagee.
He is rid of sin and corruption, and detached from Maya; he has renounced the poison of egotistical intellect.
Tn fimrn orn Safe at 2a dha flor urait wai 217-11, Avda, He 5)
daras pi-aas aas aykeh kee tayk hee-ai™ pari-a paagee. ||1||
He thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and he places his hopes in the One Lord alone. The Feet of his Beloved are the Support of his heart. ||1]|
wifes Afe wae Cfo ano nifss JAS Saat | 1217-11, Ada, nH 5)
achint so-ay jaagan uth baisan achint hasat bairaagee.
He sleeps, wakes, rises up and sits down without anxiety; he laughs and cries without anxiety.
ad aad fats Aas Sarat A Hen ahs Ae Sat NNSSNEDI (1217-12, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak jin jagat thagaanaa so maa-i-aa har jan thaagee. ||2||44||67] | Says Nanak, she who has cheated the world - that Maya is cheated by the humble servant of the Lord. ||2||44]|67]||
ATID HIS U Il (1217-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
wa He Bufs tS yos Il (1217-13, Ada, Hs 5) ab jan oopar ko na pukaarai. Now, no one complains about the Lord's humble servant.
yas AG AH CH AIT TT USHA 3 AS HS UU TIS Ml (1217-13, Avda, we 5) pookaaran ka-o jo udam kartaa gur parmaysar taa ka-o maarai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Whoever tries to complain is destroyed by the Guru, the Transcendent Lord God. ||1]|Pause] |
fosed Hf 2a gore ofe wang GI TS Il (1217-14, Ada, 2 5)
nirvairai sang vair rachaavai har dargeh oh haarai.
Whoever harbors vengeance against the One who is beyond all vengenace, shall lose in the Court of the Lord.
uife qarfe ys at efsnret Ae at UA ASS AU (1217-14, Adar, He 5)
aad jugaad parabh kee vadi-aa-ee jan kee paij savaarai. ||1]|
From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, it is the glorious greatness of God, that He preserves the honor of His humble servants. ||1]|
foss@ se nae 3@ fifeur vas GHG MUS Il (1217-15, Aa, H 5)
nirbha-o bha-ay sagal bha-o miti-aa charan kamal aaDhaarai.
The mortal becomes fearless, and all his fears are taken away, when he leans on the Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Gs a safe wus a aaa yas sfeG AAS NQNSUNECH (1217-16, Aa, He 5)
gur kai bachan japi-o naa-o naanak pargat bha-i-o sansaarai. ||2||45||68] |
Chanting the Name, through the Guru's Word, Nanak has become famous throughout the world. ||2||45]|68] |
ATID HIS U Il (1217-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs AS efsor Aa nme | (1217-17, Aa, He 5) har jan chhodi-aa saglaa aap. The Lord's humble servant has discarded all self-conceit.
fiG weg fS@ sug TASt uty Flet UsSTY NAN TIS I (1217-17, wa, He 5)
ji-o jaanhu ti-o rakhahu gusaa-ee paykh jeevaa” partaap. ||1|| rahaa-o.
As You see fit, You save us, O Lord of the World. Beholding Your Glorious Grandeur, I live. ||1]]Pause| |
ag GuefA AT at Hats faofAS Aas ASYM (1217-18, Aa, He 5)
gur updays saaDh kee sangat binsi-o sagal santaap.
Through the Guru's Instruction, and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all sorrow and suffering is taken away.
fg AZ Ufe ANZ stots Aes AsTaS AY NA (1217-18, ATSar, He 5) mitar satar paykh samat beechaari-o sagal sambhaakhan jaap. ||1|| I look upon friend and enemy alike; all that I speak is the Lord's meditation. ||1]|
sufs gt Ase ymurs Afs nioge faAH se faAe Il (1217-19, Aa, He 5)
tapat bujhee seetal aaghaanay sun anhad bisam bha-ay bismaad.
The fire within me is quenched; I am cool, calm and tranquil. Hearing the unstruck celestial melody, I am wonder-struck and amazed.
Moe sfeur stad His ATE UTS UT SS MQUSENECM (1217-19, ATA, He 5)
anad bha-i-aa naanak man saachaa pooran pooray naad. ||2||46||69]| I am in ecstasy, O Nanak, and my mind is filled with Truth, through the perfect perfection of the Sound-current of the Naad. ||2||46]|69] |
Yat AA
ASA HIG U Il (1218-1)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hs afs Hd AOA Cafonr | 218-1, Aa, He 5) mayrai gur moro sahsaa utaari-aa. My Guru has rid me of my cynicism.
fan ae a webs afsodt Het AST Ie Sfmt al TIC Il 1218-2, Ada, He 5) tis gur kai jaa-ee-ai balihaaree sadaa sadaa ha-o vaari-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to that Guru; I am devoted to Him, forever and ever. ||1]|Pause] |
ad a oy AfuG fea ast aa & Bao Hf Whar I (1218-2, Aa, He 5) gur kaa naam japi-o din raatee gur kay charan man Dhaari-aa. I chant the Guru's Name day and night; I enshrine the Guru's Feet within my mind.
qe at ofs ase fos ne faafer He Safar wail (218-3, Ardar, we 5) gur kee Dhoor kara-o nit majan kilvikh mail utaari-aa. ||1]| I bathe continually in the dust of the Guru's Feet, washing off my dirty sins. ||1]|
Td ud at AGS fos Ae TT wus SHAOTfaMM II (1218-4, Asa, HE 5) gur pooray kee kara-o nit sayvaa gur apnaa namaskaari-aa. I continually serve the Perfect Guru; I humbly bow to my Guru.
Ava eo aa ate ud soa afe ferstanr Qs SS0N (1218-4, Ada, Hs 5)
sarab falaa deen"ay gur poorai naanak gur nistaari-aa. ||2||47]|70]|
The Perfect Guru has blessed me with all fruitful rewards; O Nanak, the Guru has emancipated me. ||2||47||70||
ATID HIS U Il (1218-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
frees oH UTS afs urs I (1218-5, Adar, Hs 5)
simrat naam paraan gat paavai.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal attains salvation.
fkefo SGA IA AS oA AGHA fos Se Ul TIS il 1218-5, Ada, ve 5)
miteh kalays taraas sabh naasai saaDhsang hit laavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
His sorrows are dispelled, and his fears are all erased; he is in love with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs ofs ofe ofa nfs mrad sHot dfs AA WS Il (1218-6, Aa, He 5)
har har har har man aaraaDhay rasnaa har jas gaavai.
His mind worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har; his tongue sings the Praises of the Lord.
ofa mifsuts aH au feet Hes Sa BS NU (1218-7, Aa, He 5) taj abhimaan kaam kroDh nindaa baasudayv rang laavai. ||1]|
Abandoning egotistical pride, sexual desire, anger and slander, he embraces love for the Lord. ||1]|
aHes efeure oraag afie as ATS Il (1218-7, Ada, He 5)
daamodar da-i-aal aaraaDhahu gobind karat sohaavai.
Worship and adore the Merciful Lord God; chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, you shall be embellished and exalted.
aT sod As at af gar ofa afe wah ANS] NQNSCIHOAN (1218-8, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak sabh kee ho-ay raynaa har har daras samaavai. ||2||48]|71] | Says Nanak, whoever becomes the dust of all, merges in the Blesed Vision of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||48]|71]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1218-9)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
MUS TI UT ASI Il (1218-9, Avda, we 5) apunay gur pooray balihaarai. I am a Sacrifice to my Perfect Guru.
ye ysTy AG BH A TA STS UU TIS i (218-9, wrda, ne 5) pargat partaap kee-o naam ko raakhay raakhanhaarai. ||1|| rahaa-o. My Savior Lord has saved me; He has revealed the Glory of His Name. ||1]|Pause] |
forse oe Hea oA nus AAS Ta faers | (1218-10, wa, Hz 5) nirbha-o kee-ay sayvak daas apnay saglay dookh bidaarai. He makes His servants and slaves fearless, and takes away all their pain.
mie Gure faurfat He Ads Bdo aH fees aS AI (1218-10, Aa, He 5) aan upaav ti-aag jan saglay charan kamal rid Dhaarai. ||1]| So renounce all other efforts, and enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within your mind.
[21
ure nord HIS AHS Us Sa SAAT | (1218-11, ada, we 5)
paraan aDhaar meet saajan parabh aykai aykankaarai.
God is the Support of the breath of life, my Best Friend and Companion, the One and Only Creator of the Universe.
AS 3 BY SAT SHA A MST IT SHAS MQUSEMO (1218-11, Avda, we 5) sabh tay ooch thaakur naanak kaa baar baar namaskaarai. ||2||49]||72]|
Nanak's Lord and Master is the Highest of all; again and again, I humbly bow to Him. [12]149]|72]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1218-12)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
faa ofa 3 & AT as] Il (1218-12, Aa, 2 5) bin har hai ko kahaa bataavhu. Tell me: other than the Lord, who exists?
HY AT age! H aes fA ys Ae fomreg ud FHS Il (1218-13, Adar, ve 5)
sukh samooh karunaa mai kartaa tis parabh sadaa Dhi-aavahu. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Creator, the Embodiment of Mercy, bestows all comforts; meditate forever on that God. ||1||Pause] |
Wo Afs ude AST SA Us oT AA WT Il (1218-13, Ada, Hs 5) jaa kai soot paro-ay jantaa tis parabh kaa jas gaavhu. All creatures are strung on His Thread; sing the Praises of that God.
fruits oas fats AS fas dar ore ag ufo AT]YT IAI (1218-14, Aa, He 5)
simar thaakur jin sabh kichh deenaa aan kahaa peh jaavhu. ||1||
Meditate in remembrance on that Lord and Master who gives you everything. Why would you go to anyone else? ||1]|
Hee Ae Hom He at Ho Ses SH UST Il (1218-14, Awa, ue 5)
safal sayvaa su-aamee mayray kee man baa'chhat fal paavhu.
Service to my Lord and Master is fruitful and rewarding; from Him, you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires.
aI sod BE BI & Vo AY Ast wis Weg NQNUONDSI (1218-15, Awa, He 5)
kaho naanak laabh laahaa lai chaalahu sukh saytee ghar jaavhu. ||2||50||73]| Says Nanak, take your profits and leave; you shall go to your true home in peace. [|2]|50]|73]|
ATID HIG U Il (1218-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
SAT SH Adaret witfenr |i (1218-16, wa, us 5) thaakur tum" sarnaa-ee aa-i-aa. O my Lord and Master, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
Cats afeG He Ho a AAT Ae 3 PIAS UE A TIS Il (1218-16, Aa, He 5) utar ga-i-o mayray man kaa sansaa jab tay darsan paa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The anxiety of my mind departed, when I gazed upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1||Pause]|
nodes Hot fase wat wrest ay AurfeMr | 1218-17, Ada, He 5) anbolat mayree birthaa jaanee apnaa naam japaa-i-aa. You know my condition, without my speaking. You inspire me to chant Your Name.
eu B'S AY Adih AWS Hise Moe TS Wear IAI (1218-18, Aa, He 5)
dukh naathay sukh sahj samaa-ay anad anad gun gaa-i-aa. ||1||
My pains are gone, and I am absorbed in peace, poise and bliss, singing Your Glorious Praises. ||1]|
ag uate afe ats mus fas nig gu 3 Hfeor It (218-18, Asa, He 5)
baah pakar kadh leenay apunay garih anDh koop tay maa-i-aa.
Taking me by the arm, You lifted me up, out of the deep dark pit of household and Maya.
ad sea dfs due ae fees vrfe freer NINUAUIDBI (1218-19, Aa, He 5)
kaho naanak gur banDhan kaatay bichhurat aan milaa-i-aa. ||2]|51]|74|| Says Nanak, the Guru has broken my bonds, and ended my separaation; He has united me with God. ||2]|51]|74]|
Yar 92a
ATS HIS U Il (1219-1)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs A oM at afs oret il (1219-1, Ada, Hs 5) har kay naam kee gat thaa‘dhee. The Name of the Lord is cooling and soothing.
ae uae fryfS Arg Ae HAS SAS OST AU TIS Mt 1219-1, Adar, we 5)
bayd puraan simrit saaDhoo jan khojat khojat kaadhee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Searching, searching the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, the Holy Saints have realized this. ||1]|Pause| |
fre fads nig fee a a ufo Aes fefaor Ii (219-2, Arda, ue 5) siv biranch ar indar lok taa meh jaltou firi-aa. In the worlds of Shiva, Brahma and Indra, I wandered around, burning up with envy.
frufs frufs qemit sé Hise gy eae gH fofsmr NAN (1219-2, Aga, He 5)
simar simar su-aamee bha-ay seetal dookh darad bharam hiri-aa. ||1]|
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my Lord and Master, I became cool and calm; my pains, sorrows and doubts are gone. ||1||
A a sfeG uss se30 gals af ofs Set I (1219-3, Ada, He 5)
jo jo tari-o puraatan navtan bhagat bhaa-ay har dayvaa.
Whoever has been saved in the past or the present, was saved through loving devotional worship of the Divine Lord.
soe at Fost us Me fs AS AS AS NQNUIUOUI (1219-3, Adar, He 5) naanak kee baynantee parabh jee-o milai sant jan sayvaa. ||2||52||75]||
This is Nanak's prayer: O Dear God, please let me serve the humble Saints. [12] |52]|75]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1219-4)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl;
fase nifqs ae afs ar@ i (1219-4, ada, He 5) jihvay amrit gun har gaa-o. O my tongue, sing the Ambrosial Praises of the Lord.
ofa ofs sf am vfs ofs at Cag us a SS NA TIC I (219-5, Adar, Hs 5)
har har bol kathaa sun har kee uchrahu parabh ko naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, listen to the Lord's Sermon, and chant God's Name. ||1||Pause]|
TH OH W30 US Avg Hla 3fe Beg aE Il (1219-5, Ada, 2 5) raam naam ratan Dhan sanchahu man tan laavhu bhaa-o.
So gather in the jewel, the wealth of the Lord's Name; love God with your mind and body.
wis fags fufeor afe reg Are fed Hore nal (1219-6, Asa, v3 5) aan bibhoot mithi-aa kar maanhu saachaa ihai su-aa-o. ||1] | You must realize that all other wealth is false; this alone is the true purpose of life.
[21
Hb urs Hats & esr San fre fee wE Il (1219-6, da, v8 5)
jee-a paraan mukat ko daataa aykas si-o liv laa-o.
He is the Giver of the soul, the breath of life and liberation; lovingly tune in to the One and Only Lord.
AT Soa ST at Aderet SS Aa nifimrS |IAWUSUDEll (1219-7, Aa, ue 5)
kaho naanak taa kee sarnaa-ee dayt sagal api-aa-o. ||2||53||76|| Says Nanak, I have entered His Sanctuary; He gives sustenance to all. ||2||53]|76] |
ATID HIS UY Il (1219-8)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dat odt Ao AS Adet Il (1219-8, Ada, He 5) hotee nahee kavan kachh karnee. I cannot do anything else.
fed Ge uret finfs Hag cure Sa at Agat NU! TIS I (1219-8, Arar, nH 5)
ihai ot paa-ee mil santeh gopaal ayk kee sarnee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have taken this Support, meeting the Saints; I have entered the Sanctuary of the One Lord of the World. ||1]|Pause] |
us ou fee femr 30 nfo fae fimrfa at aget i (1219-9, ada, ne 5)
panch dokh chhidar i-aa tan meh bikhai bi-aaDh kee karnee.
The five wicked enemies are within this body; they lead the mortal to practice evil and corruption.
nA ius feor ate Te YAS AS 3G AdeNt Al (1219-9, Avda, us 5) aas apaar dinas gan raakhay garsat jaat bal jarnee. ||1]|| He has infinite hope, but his days are numbered, and old age is sapping his strength.
[21
Woe aa feos AY Aad Ase eu F Jet Il (1219-10, Aa, v2 5)
anaathah naath da-i-aal sukh saagar sarab dokh bhai harnee.
He is the Help of the helpless, the Merciful Lord, the Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of all pains and fears.
Hfs aes fases aod oA uf Ate Us Boat NIQNUSIDIIN (1219-11, Ada, He 5)
man baa'chhat chitvat naanak daas paykh jeevaa parabh charnee. ||2||54]|77]| Slave Nanak longs for this blessing, that he may live, gazing upon the Feet of God. [12] |54]|771|
ATID HIS U Il (1219-11)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ata dfs & an fae ATE Il (1219-12, Aa, He 5) feekay har kay naam bin saad. Without the Lord's Name, flavors are tasteless and insipid.
nifts 3A atese fs aren vifafath uss SS UU FITS Ml (1219-12, APIar, ws 5) amrit ras keertan har gaa-ee-ai ahinis pooran naad. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Sing the Sweet Ambrosial Praises of the Lord's Kirtan; day and night, the Sound- current of the Naad will resonate and resound. ||1]|Pause]|
fanaa Aifs Ho AY uTeit fife afo Aare fara] I (1219-13, Ada, He 5)
simrat saa‘t mahaa sukh paa-ee-ai mit jaahi sagal bikhaad.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, total peace and bliss are obtained, and all sorrows are taken away.
dfs ofs os WoAfa ue wis S wt]eg fe NA (1219-13, Ada, He 5)
har har laabh saaDhsang paa-ee-ai ghar lai aavhu laad. ||1]||
The profit of the Lord, Har, Har, is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; so load it and bring it on home. ||1]|
AS 3 Gu Gu 3 Os nig Sdt Ha I (1219-14, Adar, we 5) sabh tay ooch ooch tay oocho ant nahee marjaad. He is the Highest of all, the Highest of the high; His celestial ecomony has no limit.
wate o AAG oto HoH Ufe Td AHS NQANUUNOTI (1219-14, Ada, He 5)
baran na saaka-o naanak mahimaa paykh rahay bismaad. ||2||55||78]| Nanak cannot even express His Glorious Grandeur; gazing upon Him, he is wonder- struck. ||2]|55||78] |
ATID HIS U Il (1219-15)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
mites Hoo uss A sat Il (1219-15, Ada, Hz 5) aa-i-o sunan parhan ka-o banee. The mortal came to hear and chant the Word of the Guru's Bani.
on ferAts als no wate fase HOH Udat IU TIS Il (1219-16, Aa, Hs 5)
naam visaar lageh an laalach birthaa janam paraanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
But he has forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and he has become attached to other temptations. His life is totally worthless! ||1]|Pause] |
AHS nies Bfs Ho AS adt ASo MEE ATat I (1219-16, Aa, Hz 5)
samajh achayt chayt man mayray kathee santan akath kahaanee.
O my unconscious mind, become conscious and figure it out; the Saints speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.
wg 7 dfs fee maa sea mTSS Het MAUI (1219-17, Ara, He 5)
laabh laihu har ridai aaraaDhahu chhutkai aavan jaanee. ||1]|
So gather in your profits - worship and adore the Lord within your heart; your coming and going in reincarnation shall end. ||1]|
Gey Aafs frmreu suat efs 5 SH Surat I (1219-17, Ada, v8 5)
udam sakat si-aanap tum"ree deh ta naam vakhaanee.
Efforts, powers and clever tricks are Yours; if You bless me with them, I repeat Your Name.
Ret sas safs A wa sea A US svat MQNUEWOEN (1219-18, Ardar, He 5)
say-ee bhagat bhagat say laagay naanak jo parabh bhaanee. ||2||56||79]| They alone are devotees, and they alone are attached to devotional worship, O Nanak, who are pleasing to God. ||2||56||79]||
ATID HIS U Il (1219-19)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Uses OH A SEAS Il (1219-19, Avda, Hz 5) Dhanvant naam kay vanjaaray. Those who deal in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are wealthy.
Ast AIT OH UG Wed Td a Aae Sears AU FITS Il (1219-19, Aa, 2 5) saa‘jhee karahu naam Dhan khaatahu gur kaa sabad veechaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
So become a partner with them, and earn the wealth of the Naam. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|Pause] |
UST 922O
esg aue of fasea A ys Afar fers i (1220-1, Ada, He 5) chhodahu kapat ho-ay nirvairaa so parabh sang nihaaray. Abandon your deception, and go beyond vengeance; see God who is always with you.
AY Ug Seng AY UG Ae Aa 6 weg TS AU (1220-1, Ada, v8 5)
sach Dhan vanjahu sach Dhan sanchahu kabhoo na aavhu haaray. ||1]| Deal only in this true wealth and gather in this true wealth, and you shall never suffer loss. ||1]|
us uses fag faues ardt niles Sd FSS Il (1220-2, Adar, v2 5) khaat kharchat kichh nikhutat naahee agnat bharay bhandaaray. Eating and consuming it, it is never exhausted; God's treasures are overflowing.
AT Soa AS Aft AST USZIN X STS MUUDICON (1220-2, Ada, He 5)
kaho naanak sobhaa sang jaavhu paarbarahm kai du-aaray. ||2||57||80||
Says Nanak, you shall go home to the Court of the Supreme Lord God with honor and respect. ||2||57||80]|
ATS HIS U Il (1220-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
us Ht Hfs aee mare fears i (1220-3, Avda, He 5) parabh jee mohi kavan anaath bichaaraa. O Dear God, I am wretched and helpless!
TES HS S HGY ator feg ussTy FITS AU FITC tl (1220-4, Arar, we 5) kavan mool tay maanukh kari-aa ih partaap tuhaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
From what source did you create humans? This is Your Glorious Grandeur. ||1]|Pause| |
Ht yrs Ada & BS TE Ad 3 Ate ws Il (1220-4, arda, us 5)
jee-a paraan sarab kay daatay gun kahay na jaahi apaaraa.
You are the Giver of the soul and the breath of life to all; Your Infinite Glories cannot be spoken.
As & ulsH Aa ufsusa Age wet irae WAU (1220-5, Ardar, He 5) sabh kay pareetam sarab partipaalak sarab ghataa‘ aaDhaaraa. ||1]| You are the Beloved Lord of all, the Cherisher of all, the Support of all hearts. ||1]|
afe 5 we sudt afs ffs mmufo Sa UATE II (1220-5, Aa, He 5) ko-ay na jaanai tumree gat mit aapeh ayk pasaaraa. No one knows Your state and extent. You alone created the expanse of the Universe.
AT Se HST Soa Fe Aa ule Sarat NANUCUCAUI (1220-6, Aa, He 5)
saaDh naav baithaavahu naanak bhav saagar paar utaaraa. ||2||58]|81]|
Please, give me a Seat in the boat of the Holy; O Nanak, thus I shall cross over this terrifying world-ocean, and reach the other shore. ||2||58]|81] |
ATS HIS U Il (1220-7)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
nite IH Hafs Zsa Il 1220-7, Aa, He 5) aavai raam saran vadbhaagee. One who comes to the Lord's Sanctuary is very fortunate.
San fae fae dg 5 We iets Cure fonrat nai TIC il (1220-7, Ada, ni 5) aykas bin kichh hor na jaanai avar upaav ti-aagee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He knows of no other than the One Lord. He has renounced all other efforts. ||1]|Pause] |
Ho ae SH rad ofe fs AOAfa AY ufeMr I (1220-8, Ada, He 5)
man bach karam aaraaDhai har har saaDhsang sukh paa-i-aa.
He worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, in thought, word and deed; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he finds peace.
Woe fase nie Aa IA AS Hola ANfEor AM (1220-9, Aa, He 5)
anad binod akath kathaa ras saachai sahj samaa-i-aa. ||1||
He enjoys bliss and pleasure, and savors the Unspoken Speech of the Lord; he merges intuitively into the True Lord. ||1]|
ate fosur Ht must até St at SSH Bret I (1220-9, Ardar, He 5)
kar kirpaa jo apunaa keeno taa kee ootam banee.
Sublime and exalted is the speech of one whom the Lord, in His Mercy makes His Own.
HUF soa fensdhat AIS ys fegast NIWUCNCII (1220-10, Arar, He 5)
saaDhsang naanak nistaree-ai jo raatay parabh nirbaanee. ||2||59]|82| |
Those who are imbued with God in the state of Nirvaanaa, O Nanak, are emancipated in the Saadh Sangat. ||2||59||82||
ATID HIS UY Il (1220-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
wW 3 AY Hate at Il (1220-10, Avda, 42 5) jaa tay saaDhoo saran gahee. Since I grasped hold of the Sanctuary of the Holy,
AfS Aon fe sfeS yarar fase aE B Tat NA TIS lt (1220-11, Ada, v2 5)
saat sahj man bha-i-o pargaasaa birthaa kachh na rahee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
my mind is illuminated with tranquility, peace and poise, and I am rid of all my pain. ||1]|Pause] |
dg faurs an eg nua feast So act I 1220-11, ada, He 5)
hohu kirpaal naam dayh apunaa bintee ayh kahee.
Please be merciful to me, O Lord, and bless me with Your Name; this is the prayer I offer to You.
nig fagors fans ys fanes utes og Adt AI 4220-12, Ada, v8 5)
aan bi-uhaar bisray parabh simrat paa-i-o laabh sahee. ||1||
I have forgotten my other occupations; remembering God in meditation, I have obtained the true profit. ||1]|
ag 3 CufAS sdt AHS Aet SAS AT I (1220-13, Adar, He 5) jah tay upji-o tahee samaano saa-ee basat ahee. We shall merge again into the One from whom we came; He is the Essence of Being.
AT aoa SdH Tfe afES ASt APS Ae NQNEONcS (1220-13, Ada, He 5)
kaho naanak bharam gur kho-i-o jotee jot samhee. ||2||60]|83] |
Says Nanak, the Guru has eradicated my doubt; my light has merged into the Light. ||2||60]|83]|
ATID HIS U Il (1220-14)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dAat TH A AA AE Il (1220-14, Aa, Hs 5) rasnaa raam ko jas gaa-o. O my tongue, sing the Praises of the Lord.
nits Hore ferris Aas 38 SH ATS al TIC Il (1220-14, Avda, ve 5)
aan su-aad bisaar saglay bhalo naam su-aa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Abandon all other tastes and flavors; the taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is so sublime. ||1]|Pause| |
3d ane safe fase Sa fhe foe we il 1220-15, Ada, He 5)
charan kamal basaa-ay hirdai ayk si-o liv laa-o.
Enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within your heart; let yourself be lovingly attuned to the One Lord.
Wonats dfs foans safe rife & wr@ ail 1220-15, Ada, v2 5)
saaDhsangat hohi nirmal bahurh jon na aa-o. ||1||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall become immaculate and pure; you shall not come to be reincarnated again. ||1]|
AS yo vorg Sos fears a il 1220-16, Asa, ve 5)
jee-o paraan aDhaar tayraa too nithaavay thaa-o.
You are the Support of the soul and the breath of life; You are the Home of the homeless.
AYA AA AHS dfs dfs Stead Ae ats AE NQNEAUITSI (1220-16, ATS, He 5)
saas saas sam"aal har har naanak sad bal jaa-o. ||2||61]|84]| With each and every breath, I dwell on the Lord, Har, Har; O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||61]|84]|
ATID HIS U Il (1220-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Yao afie soo fos fomr€ i (1220-17, ada, us 5) baikunth gobind charan nit Dhi-aa-o. To meditate on the Lotus Feet of the Lord of the Universe is heaven for me.
Hats uersg AG Hats nifys ate a aS UU TIS il 1220-18, wrdar, ws 5)
mukat padaarath saaDhoo sangat amrit har kaa naa-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is the treasure of liberation and the Lord's Ambrosial Name. ||1||Pause] |
3H ae Hala Azat Hfeor aaT SAS I (1220-18, rsa, we 5)
ootam kathaa suneejai sarvanee ma-i-aa karahu bhagvaan.
O Lord God, please be kind to me, that I may hear with my ears Your Sublime and Exalted Sermon.
wes AS SG ua yas ureba AY PAA AI (1220-19, Adar, Hs 5)
aavat jaat do-oo pakh pooran paa-ee-ai sukh bisraam. ||1]|
My cycle of coming and going is finally completed, and I have attained peace and tranquility. ||1]|
UST A229
Aus AUS 33 stetes sats AsA|S St Il (1221-1, Arda, He 5)
soDhat soDhat tat beechaari-o bhagat saraysat pooree.
Searching and searching, I have realized the essence of reality: devotional worship is the most sublime fulfillment.
ag aad fea oH on fag vied Hae fafa Sat NQNEQNCUN (1221-1, APSA, He 5)
kaho naanak ik raam naam bin avar sagal biDh ooree. ||2||62]|85] | Says Nanak, without the Name of the One Lord, all other ways are imperfect. [12] |62]|85]|
ATI HIS UY Il (1221-2)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
We AST VST Il (1221-2, Arar, Hs 5) saachay satguroo daataaraa. The True Guru is the True Giver.
SdHS ety Aas eu SAT VIO AHS Asa NA JIS Il (1221-2, wa, ve 5) darsan daykh sagal dukh naaseh charan kamal balihaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all my pains are dispelled. Iam a sacrifice to His Lotus Feet. ||1]||Pause| |
Afs usnnAg Afs AG Ho fesse ote a Gre Il (1221-3, Aa, He 5)
sat parmaysar sat saaDh jan nihchal har kaa naa-o.
The Supreme Lord God is True, and True are the Holy Saints; the Name of the Lord is steady and stable.
sats seat USqoH at nifaarat TE aS Al 4221-3, wrsa, ws 5)
bhagat bhaavnee paarbarahm kee abhinaasee gun gaa-o. ||1]||
So worship the Imperishable, Supreme Lord God with love, and sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]|
wan nidied ffs adt uvebot wares wet wars | (1221-4, Aa, He 5)
agam agochar mit nahee paa-ee-ai sagal ghataa aaDhaar.
The limits of the Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord cannot be found; He is the Support of all hearts.
Sod VT BMT AT SAG A aT iS 6 UP” MQUNESICEN (1221-5, Avda, He 5)
naanak vaahu vaahu kaho taa ka-o jaa kaa ant na paar. ||2||63]|86] | O Nanak, chant, "Waaho! Waaho!" to Him, who has no end or limitation. ||2|]63]|86] |
ATID HIS UY Il (1221-5)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Td A VIS SA HS He Il (1221-5, Ada, we 5) gur kay charan basay man mayrdi. The Feet of the Guru abide within my mind.
ufe sfoS sag AS wet forte aA AS Ss NU TIS Ml 1221-6, Ada, 3 5)
poor rahi-o thaakur sabh thaa-ee nikat basai sabh nayrai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
My Lord and Master is permeating and pervading all places; He dwells nearby, close to all. ||1]]Pause| |
gue Sf oH fee wet Harifar af mret il (1221-6, Adar, He 5)
banDhan tor raam liv laa-ee satsang ban aa-ee.
Breaking my bonds, I have lovingly tuned in to the Lord, and now the Saints are pleased with me.
HoH uesg sfe ustst fear Aas UATST INU (1221-7, Aa, He 5)
janam padaarath bha-i-o puneetaa ichhaa sagal pujaa-ee. ||1]|
This precious human life has been sanctified, and all my desires have been fulfilled. H1II
Wag faur agg us AT A dfs a AA WS Il (1221-8, Ada, He 5) jaa ka-o kirpaa karahu parabh mayray so har kaa jas gaavai. O my God, whoever You bless with Your Mercy - he alone sings Your Glorious Praises.
WTS Udd He Ts We AS aoa AE sf WS NQANESICII (1221-8, Ada, He 5)
aath pahar gobind gun gaavai jan naanak sad bal jaavai. ||2||64||87||
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to that person who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, twenty-four hours a day. ||2]|64||87]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1221-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ateo 3G obs ofe ter Il 1221-9, Ada, He 5) jeevan ta-o ganee-ai har paykhaa. A person is judged to be alive, only if he sees the Lord.
add fur utsy Honus dfs san at Sa UA TIE il (1221-9, wrda, ne 5)
karahu kirpaa pareetam manmohan for bharam kee raykhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please be merciful to me, O my Enticing Beloved Lord, and erase the record of my doubts. ||1||Pause| |
aS Hos fag As 6 Guns fag faAA for Aart I (1221-10, Ada, He 5)
kahat sunat kichh saa‘t na upjat bin bisaas ki-aa saykhaa’.
By speaking and listening, tranquility and peace are not found at all. What can anyone learn without faith?
ys fSurfa urs A oes ST ot Hf wat ASA AU (1221-10, Adar, ws 5) parabhoo ti-aag aan jo chaahat taa kai mukh laagai kaalaykhaa. ||1|| One who renounces God and longs for another - his face is blackened with filth. ||1]|
wa oth Age AY AMM mre & HSS Se Il (1221-11, Aa, He 5)
jaa kai raas sarab sukh su-aamee aan na maanat bhaykhaa.
One who is blessed with the wealth of our Lord and Master, the Embodiment of Peace, does not believe in any other religious doctrine.
SSR TIA Has HS Hiss yso nies PAA NQNEUNCTI (1221-12, Arar, He 5)
naanak daras magan man mohi-o pooran arath bisaykhaa. ||2||65||88]| O Nanak, one whose mind is fascinated and intoxicated with the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan - his tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||2||65||88] |
ASA HIS UY Il (1221-12)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
frnge aH & fea OH II (1221-13, Aa, He 5) simran raam ko ik naam. Meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
aSHS vag dfo fas nists afe we feRars Al TIS Il (1221-13, Aa, v2 5)
kalmal dagaDh hohi khin antar kot daan isnaan. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In this way, the sins of your past mistakes shall be burnt off in an instant. It is like giving millions in charity, and bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1]||Pause| |
nite Hans fg AH ures fag afs dae fare I (1221-14, Ada, He 5)
aan janjaar baritha saram ghaalat bin har fokat gi-aan.
Entangled in other affairs, the mortal suffers uselessly in sorrow. Without the Lord, wisdom is useless.
HOH HIS AAS 3 Se AAS SHS AY fora ual 1221-14, Ada, ws 5)
janam maran sankat tay chhootai jagdees bhajan sukh Dhi-aan. ||1]||
The mortal is freed of the anguish of death and birth, meditating and vibrating on the Blissful Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
Sot Hale use AY ATES ats fag Seg BS Il (1221-15, Asa, ve 5)
tayree saran pooran sukh saagar kar kirpaa dayvhu daan.
I seek Your Sancutary, O Perfect Lord, Ocean of Peace. Please be merciful, and bless me with this gift.
frnfs frnfs soa ys ate faofa wife nifsrs n2nééncel 0221-15, ada, us 5)
simar simar naanak parabh jeevai binas jaa-ay abhimaan. ||2||66||89]|| Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, Nanak lives; his egotistical pride has been eradicated. ||2||66||89]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1221-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
yes Het fa ga AS Sa Il 1221-16, Ada, ws 5) Dhoorat so-ee je Dhur ka-o laagai. He alone is a Dhoorat, who is attached to the Primal Lord God.
Ret udug Het axug vfs Sa UN FA Urs AU TIS Il (1221-16, Avda, ne 5)
so-ee DhuranDhar so-ee basunDhar har ayk paraym ras paagai. ||1]| rahaa-o. He alone is a Dhurandhar, and he alone is a Basundhar, who is absorbed in the sublime essence of Love of the One Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
WIT Ad 5 AS WS A YTS Sot HA Il (1221-17, Arar, we 5)
balbanch karai na jaanai laabhai so Dhoorat nahee moorh"aa.
One who practices deception and does not know where true profit lies is not a Dhoorat - he is a fool.
Aorsg fsurfa merrata ates oo fA YS IS" WAU (1221-18, Aa, Hs 5)
Su-aarath ti-aag asaarath rachi-o nah simrai parabh roorhaa. ||1||
He abandons profitable enterprises and is involved in unprofitable ones. He does not meditate on the Beauteous Lord God. ||1||
Aet vse fhora ufss A AT A Tar I (1221-18, Avda, we 5)
so-ee chatur si-aanaa pandit so sooraa so daanaa”.
He alone is clever and wise and a religious scholar, he alone is a brave warrior, and he alone is intelligent,
AoAfa fats ofs afs AfuS soa A UdgeTST IQNEDICON (1221-19, Aa, He 5)
saaDhsang jin har har japi-o naanak so parvaanaa. ||2||67]||90]| who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. O Nanak, he alone is approved. ||2]||67||90||
Yat 9222
ASA HIS UY Il (1222-1)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ofa of HS Hat at Hefe I (1222-1, Aa, He 5) har har sant janaa kee jeevan. The Lord, Har, Har, is the life of the humble Saints.
feed oA Sa vifys AY Aas TH ON GA Utefe AN TIE Il (1222-1, Adar, ne 5) bikhai ras bhog amrit sukh saagar raam naam ras peevan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Instead of enjoying corrupt pleasures, they drink in the Ambrosial Essence of the Name of the Lord, the Ocean of Peace. ||1]|Pause] |
Hale TH SH US Iss" HS 3s Stata Atefs Il (1222-2, Ada, He 5)
sanchan raam naam Dhan ratnaa man tan bheetar seevan.
They gather up the priceless wealth of the Lord's Name, and weave it into the fabric of their mind and body.
Tfs Sa Tar se HS Ber TH oH FA Utefs IA (1222-2, Ada, v8 5)
har rang raa‘g bha-ay man laalaa raam naam ras kheevan. ||1||
Imbued with the Lord's Love, their minds are dyed in the deep crimson color of devotional love; they are intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord's Name.
[111 fa iat ne fHe Casts an oH Afar Stef th (1222-3, ada, ve 5)
ji-o meenaa jal si-o urjhaano raam naam sang leevan. As the fish is immersed in water, they are absorbed in the Lord's Name.
aod Hs aise ot fouret afs ge urs AY Stele QNECUEU (1222-4, Asa, He 5)
naanak sant chaatrik kee ni-aa-ee har boond paan sukh theevan. ||2||68]|91]| O Nanak, the Saints are like the rainbirds; they are comforted, drinking in the drops of the Lord's Name. ||2]|68]|91]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1222-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Us A SHITS HS] Il (1222-5, Avda, vs 5) har kay naamheen baytaal. Without the Name of the Lord, the mortal is a ghost.
AT ads aves 331 Afs Fas HA UU! TIS I (1222-5, Aa, ne 5) jaytaa karan karaavan taytaa sabh banDhan janjaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. All the actions he commits are just shackles and bonds. ||1]|Pause||
fag ys AZ ass me Ae fase aS aS I (1222-5, Adar, Hs 5) bin parabh sayv karat an sayvaa birthaa kaatai kaal. Without serving God, one who serves another wastes his time uselessly.
wa FH orf Hurd yrot Sa SHd ACS TSH IAI (1222-6, wrdar, ne 5)
jab jam aa-ay sanghaarai paraanee tab tumro ka-un havaal. ||1||
When the Messenger of Death comes to kill you, O mortal, what will your condition be then? ||1||
afd SI VA MUS AC Ae Het fags Il (1222-6, Adar, 8 5) raakh layho daas apunay ka-o sadaa sadaa kirpaal. Please protect Your slave, O Eternally Merciful Lord.
AY fears area US HS AGHAST Us HS NIANECNEN (1222-7, Ada, He 5)
sukh niDhaan naanak parabh mayraa saaDhsang Dhan maal. ||2||69]|92]| O Nanak, my God is the Treasure of Peace; He is the wealth and property of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||69]|92]|
ASA HIS UY Il (1222-8)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hfs safe an & faGors I 1222-8, Avda, He 5) man tan raam ko bi-uhaar. My mind and body deal only in the Lord.
UH safs as ao ad UTS od AAT UU TIS tl 4222-8, Adar, we 5)
paraym bhagat gun gaavan geeDhay pohat nah sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Imbued with loving devotional worship, I sing His Glorious Praises; I am not affected by worldly affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
Azatl atese fanaa Aomit feg AG a mre” il (1222-9, Ada, He 5)
sarvanee keertan simran su-aamee ih saaDh ko aachaar.
This is the way of life of the Holy Saint: he listens to the Kirtan, the Praises of his Lord and Master, and meditates in remembrance on Him.
TIS THE MAfals fee nists UAT YTS A maT WAU (1222-9, Adar, He 5)
charan kamal asthit rid antar poojaa paraan ko aaDhaar. ||1]|
He implants the Lord's Lotus Feet deep within his heart; worship of the Lord is the support of his breath of life. ||1]|
us de efenres Hog 8Sst fasur wrsst org il 4222-10, Aa, He 5)
parabh deen da-i-aal sunhu baynantee kirpaa apnee Dhaar. O God, Merciful to the meek, please hear my prayer, and shower Your Blessings upon me.
on fours BusG fos Ha aoa Ae sss QIN (1222-11, Ada, He 5) naam niDhaan uchara-o nit rasnaa naanak sad balihaar. ||2]|70||93]|
I continually chant the treasure of the Naam with my tongue; Nanak is forever a sacrifice. ||2||70||93] |
ATS HIG UY Il (1222-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & aHdle Hfs Sat Il (1222-12, Ada, H2 5) har kay naamheen mat thoree. Without the Name of the Lord, his intellect is shallow.
faunas ofa fadtag oas feos nig eu ust nA ToS Nl 1222-12, Adar, nH 5)
simrat naahi sireeDhar thaakur milat anDh dukh ghoree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
He does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, his Lord and Master; the blind fool suffers in terrible agony. ||1||Pause] |
ofa & on fA@ ulfs 3 oct mifoa Su ag At I (1222-13, Ada, He 5)
har kay naam si-o pareet na laagee anik bhaykh baho joree.
He does not embrace love for the Name of the Lord; he is totally attached to various religious robes.
Bes TIS HA T aS AS Pals AS Sat AU (1222-13, wrdar, we 5)
tootat baar na laagai taa ka-o ji-o gaagar jal foree. ||1]|
His attachments are shattered in an instant; when the pitcher is broken, the water runs out. ||1]|
afs fasu safs ga dh Ho ufss UN IA Ut I (1222-14, ada, ne 5)
kar kirpaa bhagat ras deejai man khachit paraym ras khoree.
Please bless me, that I may worship You in loving devotion. My mind is absorbed and intoxicated with Your Delicious Love.
St UH Sct Ageet ys fas nrS o Tat INDUS (1222-14, Ada, He 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee parabh bin aan na horee. ||2||71||94| | Nanak, Your slave, has entered Your Sanctuary; without God, there is no other at all. [21]71] 1941 |
ATS HIS UY Il (1222-15)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fase a niGrg He fT I (1222-15, Ada, He 5) chitva-o vaa a-osar man maahi. In my mind, I think about that moment,
dfe frag frag Hs AHS Te afee fos fa na TIE Il (1222-16, Adar, v8 5) ho-ay ikatar milhu sant saajan gun gobind nit gaahi. ||1]| rahaa-o.
when I join the Gathering of the Friendly Saints, constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||1]||Pause] |
fag dfs 3x6 AS aH adits 33 fase AMT II (1222-16, Ha, nH 5) bin har bhajan jaytay kaam karee-ah taytay birthay jaa‘hi. Without vibrating and meditating on the Lord, whatever deeds you do will be useless.
yas UsHTSe Hie Ht6 fsa fas TAS ats NA (1222-17, Adar, H8 5)
pooran parmaanand man meetho tis bin doosar naahi. ||1]|
The Perfect Embodiment of Supreme Bliss is so sweet to my mind. Without Him, there is no other at all. ||1]]|
WU 3U AAH OSH AY AUS StH 3 ASEM Be I (1222-17, Ada, He 5)
jap tap sanjam karam sukh saaDhan tul na kachhoo-ai laahi.
Chanting, deep meditation, austere self-discipline, good deeds and other techniques to being peace - they are not equal to even a tiny bit of the Lord's Name.
TIO AHS BSA HO Sa vaso Afar Afs NIAWVUCUIl (1222-18, Aa, He 5)
charan kamal naanak man bayDhi-o charnah sang samaahi. ||2||72||95|| Nanak's mind is pierced through by the Lotus Feet of the Lord; it is absorbed in His Lotus Feet. ||2||72||95]|
ATI HIS UY Il (1222-19)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Aa ys Hat hiss i 4222-19, ada, ve 5) mayraa parabh sangay antarjaamee. My God is always with me; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Wd! TAS Us YH AY fAHes oH AMAT UU TIS Ml (1222-19, wrdar, we 5)
aagai kusal paachhai khaym sookhaa simrat naam su-aamee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I find happiness in the world hereafter, and peace and pleasure in this world, meditating in remembrance on the Name of my Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||
Yat 9223
Ane Hts Ae dfs AS To Gus dfs afer It 1223-1, ada, He 5)
Saajan meet sakhaa har mayrai gun gopaal har raa-i-aa.
The Lord is my Best Friend, my Buddy, my Companion. I sing the Glorious Praises of my Sovereign Lord King.
fants o wet fou fase 3 ud ag fherfenr Al 1223-2, Ada, He 5)
bisar na jaa-ee nimakh hirdai tay poorai guroo milaa-i-aa. ||1||
I shall not forget Him in my heart, even for an instant; I have met with the Perfect Guru. ||1||
afe fasur at aA nus Abort as SfA AT a I 1223-2, Ada, He 5) kar kirpaa raakhay daas apnay jee-a jant vas jaa kai. In His Mercy, He protects His slave; all beings and creatures are in His Power.
Sar fee yss USHAT SB St HSA TS WQNOBULEN (1223-3, Avda, we 5)
aykaa liv pooran parmaysur bha-o nahee naanak taa kai. ||2||73||96]|
One who is lovingly attuned to the One, the Perfect Transcendent Lord God, O Nanak, is rid of all fear. ||2||73]|96] |
ATI HIS U Il (1223-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Wa TH a as TE Il (1223-4, Aa, 2 5) jaa kai raam ko bal ho-ay. One who has the Lord's Power on his side
AIS Hava UTS ST aX TY SB fam ate na FHS it 1223-4, Ada, vs 5) Sagal manorath pooran taahoo kay dookh na bi-aapai ko-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o. - all his desires are fulfilled, and no pain afflicts him. ||1]|Pause] |
A He sas @H fon us a fe Hist fo ALE I (1223-4, Ada, He 5) jo jan bhagat daas nij parabh kaa sun jeevaa" tis so-ay. That humble devotee is a slave of his God, who listens to Him, and so lives.
Ben asG vane UNe & aafH uaafs GE NA 1223-5, Ada, He 5)
udam kara-o darsan paykhan kou karam paraapat ho-ay. ||1]|
I have made the effort to gaze upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; it is obtained only by good karma. ||1]|
qs usAret fenfe fare era rat aS i (1223-6, wrdar, we 5) gur parsaadee darisat nihaara-o doosar naahee ko-ay. It is only by Guru's Grace that I see His Vision with my eyes which none can equal.
ag tfy soa nus AG vdo Het AS Of NQNDBIKDI (1223-6, Ada, He 5) daan deh naanak apnay ka-o charan jeevaa™ sant Dho-ay. ||2||74]|97]|
Please bless Nanak with this Gift, that he may wash the Feet of the Saints, and so live. [12]174]1971|
ATS HIS U Il (1223-7)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hes TH A Te MES I 1223-7, wa, vs 5) jeevat raam kay gun gaa-ay. I live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
add fur cus died fanfs 5 ag ct ate nan ToS It 1223-7, Aa, He 5)
karahu kirpaa gopaal beethulay bisar na kab hee jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Please be Merciful to me, O my Loving Lord of the Universe, that I may never forget You. ||1]||Pause] |
HO 30 US AS SHI Hom wre o eat ATE I 1223-8, Asa, He 5)
man tan Dhan sabh tumraa su-aamee aan na doojee jaa-ay.
My mind, body, wealth and all are Yours, O my Lord and Master; there is nowhere else for me at all.
fa@ 3 outa fe at aoe TH US we A (1223-8, Ada, ws 5) ji-o too raakhahi tiv hee rahnaa tum"raa pain"ai khaa-ay. ||1]| As You keep me, so do I survive; I eat and I wear whatever You give me. ||1||
Wonafs & af afs wet sofs o Ho OF II (1223-9, Aa, He 5)
saaDhsangat kai bal bal jaa-ee bahurh na janmaa Dhaa-ay.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I shall never again fall into reincarnation.
Soa UA Sot Asset faG ae fSS vor] iQnouNeci (1223-9, Ada, He 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaa-ay. ||2||75||98]| Slave Nanak seeks Your Sancuary, Lord; as it pleases Your Will, so do You guide him. [12]175][98] |
ATID HIS U Il (1223-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
HO J OH a AY ATS Il (1223-10, Aa, He 5) man ray naam ko sukh saar. O my mind, the Naam is the most sublime peace.
me aH fears Hfeur Aare etAfs ers AU TIS ll (1223-11, Aa, He 5)
aan kaam bikaar maa-i-aa sagal deeseh chhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Other affairs of Maya are corrupt. They are nothing more than dust. ||1]|Pause] |
fafs nia au ufss yrat Soa UT TAT | (1223-11, Asa, vs 5) garihi anDh koop patit paraanee narak ghor gubaar.
The mortal has fallen into the deep dark pit of household attachment; it is a horrible, dark hell.
uifoa Hot SHS TIS SHS AS BT WAU (1223-12, Avda, ne 5)
anik jonee bharmat haari-o bharmat baara™ baar. ||1||
He wanders in various incarnations, growing weary; he wanders through them again and again. ||1]|
ufs3 uree Sats dee ete fagur org Il (1223-12, Ada, He 5)
patit paavan bhagat bachhal deen kirpaa Dhaar.
O Purifier of sinners, O Lover of Your devotees, please shower Your Mercy on Your meek servant.
ad afs soa BS Hat ATGAfa Corg NQNDENKEN 1223-13, Aa, He 5)
kar jorh naanak daan maa"gai saaDhsang uDhaar. ||2||76||99]|
With palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing: O Lord, please save me in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||76]||99] |
ATS HIS UY Il (1223-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fasts TH A UTS | (1223-14, Ada, He 5) biraajit raam ko partaap. The Glorious Radiance of the Lord has spread out everywhere.
yifa faorfa Gurfa AS at fear StS s7r NA TIE i 1223-14, Aa, Hz 5)
aaDh bi-aaDh upaaDh sabh naasee binsay teenai taap. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The doubts of my mind and body are all erased, and I am rid of the three diseases. ||1]|Pause] |
fgAS Fst uss AS MAT Ya Aa ASU Il (1223-15, Avda, we 5)
tarisnaa bujhee pooran sabh aasaa chookay sog santaap.
My thirst is quenched, and my hopes have all been fulfilled; my sorrows and sufferings are over.
TE Wes nigs nifaarAt HS Jo MSH QTY MAUI (1223-15, Ada, He 5)
gun gaavat achut abhinaasee man tan aatam Dharaap. ||1]||
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Unmoving, Eternal, Unchanging Lord God, my mind, body and soul are comforted and encouraged. ||1]|
OH FT SF HE HSAG AY A Afar WU Il (1223-16, Ardar, we 5)
kaam kroDh lobh mad matsar saaDhoo kai sang khaap.
Sexual desire, anger, greed, pride and envy are destroyed in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ss ZS F AeoITS SSA A HET AY MAUNDOUAOON (1223-16, ATSar, He 5)
bhagat vachhal bhai kaatanhaaray naanak kay maa-ee baap. ||2||77||100]| He is the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear; O Nanak, He is our Mother and Father. ||2||77||100] |
ATS HIS UY Il (1223-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
mMTsg OH faa AAS Il (1223-17, Aa, He 5) aatur naam bin sansaar. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is miserable.
fgufs 3 des gat wr fes oat fatto rs nA TIS i 1223-17, Ada, ws 5) taripat na hovat kookree aasaa it laago bikhi-aa chhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Like a dog, its desires are never satisfied; it clings to the ashes of corruption. ||1]|Pause| |
ufe saat orf sofes AoHS sd AS Il (1223-18, Ada, He 5)
paa-ay thag-uree aap bhulaa-i-o janmat baaro baar.
Administering the intoxicating drug, God Himself leads the mortals astray; they are reincarnated again and again.
dfs a free fond o fanfsS AHA ATS wT IA 1223-18, Aa, He 5)
har kaa simran nimakh na simri-o jamkankar karat khu-aar. ||1]|
He does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, even for an instant, and so the Messenger of Death makes him suffer. ||1||
dg faurs ve eu sHo Sfour Ass at TeTT Il (1223-19, Ada, He 5)
hohu kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan tayri-aa santeh kee raavaar.
Please be merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the meek and the poor; let me be the dust of the feet of the Saints.
Yat 4228
SSA WH VIA UST AST HS 3S A MUTT NQAWOCUAOAI (1224-1, Ara, He 5)
naanak daas daras parabh jaachai man tan ko aaDhaar. ||2||78||101] |
Slave Nanak asks for the Blessed Vision of God. It is the Support of his mind and body. ||2||78]]1021]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1224-1)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hor dfs & an fae Ae I (1224-1, Aa, He 5) mailaa har kay naam bin jee-o. Without the Name of the Lord, the soul is polluted.
fefs yufs Ans orf sorfemr fre oat ut wan TIS it 1224-2, wda, vs 5)
tin parabh saachai aap bhulaa-i-aa bikhai thag-uree pee-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The True Lord God has Himself administered the intoxicating drug of corruption, and led the mortal astray. ||1||Pause]|
afe HH FHS ag stat fats adt asT uret I 1224-2, Adar, He 5)
kot janam bharmatou baho bhaa™tee thit nahee kathoo paa-ee.
Wandering through millions of incarnations in countless ways, he does not find stability anywhere.
us Asay Hof 3 Sfeur AAS wires ATET WAU (1224-3, Adar, H8 5)
pooraa satgur sahj na bhayti-aa saakat aavai jaa-ee. ||1]||
The faithless cynic does not intuitively meet with the Perfect True Guru; he continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||1]|
ofy Sg us Afe eS SH YS MIN MRIS Il (1224-3, Avda, Hs 5)
raakh layho parabh sammrith daatay tum parabh agam apaar.
Please save me, O All-powerful Lord God, O Great Giver; O God, You are Inaccessible and Infinite.
SOA VA Sct Adset Sense SsfaS urs NIANDEWIOM (1224-4, Adar, 2 5)
naanak daas tayree sarnaa-ee bhavjal utri-o paar. ||2||79||102]| Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, to cross over the terrible world-ocean, and reach the other shore. ||2||79]||102]|
ATS HIS U Il (1224-5)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
SHE AG TH SX TE WE Il (1224-5, wrda, uz 5) raman ka-o raam kay gun baad. To chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord is Sublime.
Wroprfa fomreht ushng nifys AT AS WU TI'S tl 1224-5, Avda, ve 5) saaDhsang Dhi-aa-ee-ai parmaysar amrit jaa kay su-aad. ||1|| rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on the Transcendent Lord God; The taste of His essence is Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause]|
fines 8a nies uifsot aon wfeur Hr| I (1224-6, Avda, v8 5)
simrat ayk achut abhinaasee binsay maa-i-aa maad.
Meditating in remembrance on the One Unmoving, Eternal, Unchanging Lord God, the intoxication of Maya wears off.
Hon “od node ufs arat safe o se far] ul (1224-6, Avda, ne 5)
sahj anad anhad Dhun banee bahur na bha-ay bikhaad. ||1]|
One who is blessed with intuitive peace and poise, and the vibrations of the Unstruck Celestial Bani, never suffers again. ||1]|
Footed qIHted Wes WS AA yfowre| il (1224-7, ardar, us 5)
sankaadik barahmaadik gaavat gaavat suk par-hilaad.
Even Brahma and his sons sing God's Praises; Sukdayv and Prahlaad sing His Praises as well.
ules mf Hose ofs on Afu area of faMTES NQItCONIOSI (1224-8, Aa, He 5)
peevat ami-o manohar har ras jap naanak har bismaad. ||2||80||103]| Drinking in the fascinating Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's sublime essence, Nanak meditates on the Amazing Lord. ||2||80||103]|
ATID HIS U Il (1224-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ate uu & FT AS Il (1224-9, wrda, we 5) keen"ay paap kay baho kot. He commits many millions of sins.
feon dot gas ont asia art Ez Ul TIC Il 1224-9, Ada, ve 5) dinas rainee thakat naahee kateh naahee chhot. ||1|| rahaa-o. Day and night, he does not get tired of them, and he never finds release. ||1||Pause| |
Ho" and feu famrct fafs Boret Uz i 1224-10, Ada, He 5) mahaa bajar bikh bi-aaDhee sir uthaa-ee pot. He carries on his head a terrible, heavy load of sin and corruption.
Gufs aett fasts stsfs mHfs YA SS UA (1224-10, Adar, Hs 5) ughar ga-ee-aa™ khineh bheetar jameh garaasay jhot. ||1]| In an instant, he is exposed. The Messenger of Death seizes him by his hair. ||1]|
un uds Gre aeus nifsa Hat B|S i (1224-11, Aa, nH 5)
pas parayt usat garDhabh anik jonee layt.
He is consigned to countless forms of reincarnation, into beasts, ghosts, camels and donkeys.
SH AUHfa die Soa AE O Ba SS MANCUAOBII (1224-11, Aa, He 5)
bhaj saaDhsang gobind naanak kachh na laagai fayt. ||2||81]|104| |
Vibrating and meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, you shall never be struck or harmed at all. ||2]|81]|104]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1224-12)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
nit urefa fang & aes Il (1224-12, rsa, He 5) anDhay khaaveh bisoo kay gataak. He is so blind! He is eating loads of poison.
00 Azo Adlg AS dfes AA afes 33 we NA FTE Il (1224-12, Ada, He 5)
nain sarvan sareer sabh huti-o saas ga-i-o tat ghaat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
His eyes, ears and body are totally exhausted; he shall lose his breath in an instant. ||1]|Pause| |
wong sets ea & uufo wfeor adorn ofe il 0224-13, Ada, He 5) anaath ranjan udar lay pokheh maa-i-aa ga-ee-aa haat. Making the poor suffer, he fills his belly, but the wealth of Maya shall not go with him.
faafad ads ads uss efo aa 3 Wats etfe AI (1224-13, Ada, He 5)
kilbikh karat karat pachhutaavahi kabahu na saakeh chhaa"t. ||1||
Committing sinful mistakes again and again, he regrets and repents, but he can never give them up. ||1||
feea AHESt unfe Hurfes cefs Hs Sufs Here Il (1224-14, Ardar, we 5) nindak jamdootee aa-ay sanghaari-o dayveh moond upar mataak. The Messenger of Death comes to slaughter the slanderer; he beats him on his head.
Sot ius aevS niuA aS wet Ho nua ale SS MQANCAIAIOUN (1224-15, Aa, He 5)
naanak aapan kataaree aapas ka-o laa-ee man apnaa keeno faat. ||2||82||105]| O Nanak, he cuts himself with his own dagger, and damages his own mind. ||2]|82]]105]|
ATID HIS U Il (1224-16)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Sat fea oft wie ate Il (1224-16, Arsar, He 5) tootee nindak kee aDh beech. The slanderer is destroyed in mid-stream.
Ae a ort orf AMM sHe as urfe uget Hts uu FITS i (1224-16, Arar, we 5) jan kaa raakhaa aap su-aamee baymukh ka-o aa-ay pahoochee meech. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Our Lord and Master is the Saving Grace, the Protector of His humble servants; those who have turned their backs on the Guru are overtaken by death. ||1||Pause]|
Gn at afoor afe 5 Heel Adt B AAS US I (1224-17, Ada, He 5) us kaa kahi-aa ko-ay na sun-ee kahee na baisan paavai. No one listens to what he says; he is not allowed to sit anywhere.
ott ey nit saa SS FT Hat SIMS AU (1224-17, Aa, v2 5)
eehaa™ dukh aagai narak bhunchai baho jonee bharmaavai. ||1]|
He suffers in pain here, and falls into hell hereafter. He wanders in endless reincarnations. ||1]|
yae sfeur ast qaHst ats orret urfemi (1224-18, ada, ne 5)
pargat bha-i-aa khandee barahmandee keetaa apnaa paa-i-aa.
He has become infamous across worlds and galaxies; he receives according to what he has done.
aoa Hols fossG aes at noe Has Te Whar [IANcsiqo€ ll (1224-18, Avda, v2 5)
naanak saran nirbha-o kartay kee anad mangal gun gaa-i-aa. ||2]||83]|106] | Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Fearless Creator Lord; he sings His Glorious Praises in ecstasy and bliss. ||2||83||106| |
ASA HIS U Il (1224-19)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fZAat Vos BT Uda I (1224-19, wa, He 5) tarisnaa chalat baho parkaar. Desire plays itself out in so many ways.
ust 922U yas 33 3 asg Fale vfs usst TH AU FHS il 1225-1, ada, ws 5)
pooran hot na katahu baateh ant partee haar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. But it is not fulfilled at all, and in the end, it dies, exhausted. ||1]||Pause| |
ANS AY o Aon Cun fea fem fagate i (1225-1, wrda, we 5) saat sookh na sahj upjai ihai is bi-uhaar. It does not produce tranquility, peace and poise; this is the way it works.
nm Ud aT aS 6 WS aH Aufe ats UA (1225-2, Aa, He 5)
aap par kaa kachh na jaanai kaam kroDheh jaar. ||1]|
He does not know what belongs to him, and to others. He burns in sexual desire and anger. ||1]|
HATS Avag ef ferfuG ea Beg The Il (1225-2, Ada, vs 5) sansaar saagar dukh bi-aapi-o daas layvhu taar. The world is enveloped by an ocean of pain; O Lord, please save Your slave!
Udo GHG Adee Sod Ae Ae afsats IlQNcCSiIAODI (1225-3, Aa, He 5)
charan kamal sarnaa-ay naanak sad sadaa balihaar. ||2||84||107] | Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet; Nanak is forever and ever a sacrifice. ||2||84]|107]|
ATS HIS U Il (1225-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
J unt 3 aea at HfS SHS Il 1225-4, Ada, He 5) ray paapee tai kavan kee mat leen. O sinner, who taught you to sin?
foHy uct 3 fhnfs Aymit MH fits fafs ate wan go@ it 225-4, Avda, n2 5)
nimakh gharee na simar su-aamee jee-o pind jin deen. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You do not contemplate your Lord and Master, even for an instant; it was He who gave you your body and soul. ||1]||Pause] |
ug ules Aes Ader ony fares Ute Il (1225-5, Aa, He 5)
khaat peevat savant sukhee-aa naam simrat kheen.
Eating, drinking and sleeping, you are happy, but contemplating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you are miserable.
as Ges faawre agst sot des Se NA (1225-5, Ada, He 5) garabh udar billaat kartaa tahaa™ hovat deen. ||1|| In the womb of your mother, you cried and whined like a wretch. ||1]|
Ho He faars aor nifeet Afs SHte Il (1225-6, Adar, ue 5)
mahaa maad bikaar baaDhaa anik jon bharmeen.
And now, bound by great pride and corruption, you shall wander in endless incarnations.
dfae fans aes eu adnifs AY soa dfs ue se MQUCUIIOTH (1225-6, ATda, He 5) gobind bisray kavan dukh ganee-ah sukh naanak har pad cheen”. ||2||85||108]| You have forgotten the Lord of the Universe; what misery will be your lot now? O Nanak, peace is found by realizing the sublime state of the Lord. ||2||85||108]|
ATS HIS U Il (1225-7)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het dt asad Be at Il 1225-7, Ada, He 5) maa-ee ree charnah ot gahee. O mother, I have grasped the Protection, the Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet.
zane ufe Aa He HfoG vats AS set NA TIS tl (1225-8, Ara, He 5)
darsan paykh mayraa man mohi-o durmat jaat bahee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is fascinated, and evil- mindedness is taken away. ||1||Pause] |
ward marta Ss oifsorat af ATS o at I 1225-8, Avda, He 5)
agah agaaDh ooch abhinaasee keemat jaat na kahee.
He is Unfathomable, Incomprehensible, Exalted and High, Eternal and Imperishable; His worth cannot be appraised.
me af ufy ufs Ho faafAe ufs sfyS Aa Hot NAN (1225-9, Ardar, H8 5)
jal thal paykh paykh man bigsi-o poor rahi-o sarab mahee. ||1||
Gazing upon Him, gazing upon Him in the water and on the land, my mind has blossomed forth in ecstasy. He is totally pervading and permeating all. ||1||
ate efenms utsn Honus fife Arad ate At I (1225-9, Ada, Hs 5)
deen da-i-aal pareetam manmohan mil saaDhah keeno sahee.
Merciful to the meek, my Beloved, Enticer of my mind; meeting with the Holy, He is known.
frfe frufs Ales afs aaa AH at Sta 3B Sat MQNCENIOCN (1225-10, Aa, He 5) simar simar jeevat har naanak jam kee bheer na fahee. ||2||86]||109] |
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Nanak lives; the Messenger of Death cannot catch or torment him. ||2||86]|109]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1225-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het dt He He HSSNTS I (1225-11, Adar, He 5) maa-ee ree man mayro matvaaro. O mother, my mind is intoxicated.
Ufa efens vise AY use of ofA aus ws WA TIS Ml (1225-11, Asa, oH 5) paykh da-i-aal anad sukh pooran har ras rapi-o khumaaro. ||1|| rahaa-o. Gazing upon the Merciful Lord, I am filled with bliss and peace; imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord, I am intoxicated. ||1]|Pause| |
fSooHS se CAS AA Wes als 5 FSS AS Il (1225-12, wrdar, we 5)
nirmal bha-ay oojal jas gaavat bahur na hovat kaaro.
I have become spotless and pure, singing the Sacred Praises of the Lord; I shall never again be dirtied.
3do AHS fA sat aet SfeG use mrs All 1225-12, Ada, He 5) charan kamal si-o doree raachee bhayti-o purakh apaaro. ||1||
My awareness is focused on the Lotus Feet of God; I have met the Infinite, Supreme Being. ||1]|
ad afs we Aaa US cha ste Card i (1225-13, wa, v2 5) kar geh leenay sarbas deenay deepak bha-i-o ujaaro. Taking me by the hand, He has given me everything; He has lit up my lamp.
aa OTH Sha Fat AST AHT SSF NQUCONAAO!N (1225-13, Adar, He 5)
naanak naam rasik bairaagee kulah samoohaa" taaro. ||2||87]|110]|
O Nanak, savoring the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I have become detached; my generations have been carried across as well. ||2||87||110||
ATS HIS UY Il (1225-14)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het ot mie fats ufe Atfs i (1225-14, Ada, 3 5) maa-ee ree aan simar mar jaa“hi. O mother, by meditating in remembrance on some other, the mortal dies.
fsurfa diffe hore & est arfenr Af su\|tfa NA TITS i 1225-15, Ada, He 5) ti-aag gobid jee-an ko daataa maa-i-aa sang laptaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Forsaking the Lord of the Universe, the Giver of souls, the mortal is engrossed and entangled in Maya. ||1]|Pause| |
oy farfe vats me Hef oda us Hfo ute II (1225-15, Arda, He 5)
naam bisaar chaleh an maarag narak ghor meh paahi.
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he walks on some other path, and falls into the most horrible hell.
uifsa AA aes 3 ore aes aefs gua Al (1225-16, Ardar, He 5)
anik sajaa‘-ee ganat na aavai garbhai garabh bharmaahi. ||1||
He suffers uncounted punishments, and wanders from womb to womb in reincarnation. ||1]|
A uses A ufses ofe at Aafe AHTfE II (1225-17, Aa, He 5)
say Dhanvantay say pativantay har kee saran samaahi.
They alone are wealthy, and they alone are honorable, who are absorbed in the Sanctuary of the Lord.
ae yAte Soa Aa ASS safe o yre|fes AT NINCCUAVUI (1225-17, ATS, He 5)
gur parsaad naanak jag jeeti-o bahur na aavahi jaa“hi. ||2||88||111]| By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, they conquer the world; they do not come and go in reincarnation ever again. ||2||88]|111]|
ATID HIS U Il (1225-18)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
ofa at afewst Forts Il (1225-18, Ada, He 5) har kaatee kutiltaa kuthaar. The Lord has cut down the crooked tree of my deceit.
3H 46 Td Fe fus sisfs TH oH Usate NU FITS il 4225-18, Ada, ws 5) bharam ban dahan bha-ay khin bheetar raam naam parhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. The forest of doubt is burnt away in an instant, by the fire of the Lord's Name. ||1]|Pause] |
aH au fsa ugar ares ATG & Afar Hs Il (1225-19, Ada, Hs 5)
kaam kroDh nindaa parharee-aa kaadhay saaDhoo kai sang maar.
Sexual desire, anger and slander are gone; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have beaten them and driven them out.
UST AQ2E
WOH use TeHfe Fifsur safe o at THT WAU (1226-1, Ada, He 5)
janam padaarath gurmukh jeeti-aa bahur na joo-ai haar. ||1||
The Gurmukh is successful in this priceless human life; he shall not lose it in the gamble ever again. ||1]|
mS UIT US A TE Wed uso Aafe stats il (1226-1, Avda, w2 5)
aath pahar parabh kay gun gaavah pooran sabad beechaar.
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and contemplate the Perfect Word of the Shabad.
SSA VAS WH AS SI UST UST SHAAT NIANCENIII (1226-2, Adar, He 5) naanak daasan daas jan tayraa punah punah namaskaar. ||2||89]|112||
Servant Nanak is the slave of Your slaves; over and over again, he bows in humble reverence to You. ||2||89||112| |
ATS HIS U Il (1226-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ut USHAT AT ATS Il (1226-3, Aa, He 5) pothee parmaysar kaa thaan. This Holy Book is the home of the Transcendent Lord God.
AOA ets Te ase vss FH farrae ua TIS i 1226-3, rsa, we 5)
saaDhsang gaavahi gun gobind pooran barahm gi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whoever sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, has the perfect knowledge of God. ||1]||Pause] |
Woe fka Ade ufo Sets fess wreat fomre il 1226-4, Ada, He 5)
saaDhik siDh sagal mun locheh birlay laagai Dhi-aan.
The Siddhas and seekers and all the silent sages long for the Lord, but those who meditate on Him are rare.
fants furs dfs Ha Amit uss St at ATH AU (1226-4, Arar, H8 5)
jisahi kirpaal ho-ay mayraa su-aamee pooran taa ko kaam. ||1||
That person, unto whom my Lord and Master is merciful - all his tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||1]|
Wa fot ZA Ss SHO fH WS AGG ATS Il (1226-5, Ada, 2 5) jaa kai ridai vasai bhai bhanjan tis jaanai sagal jahaan. One whose heart is filled with the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, knows the whole world.
fas ue fang adt AS aes feo aoa Hid BS MQNKONWSI (1226-5, Aa, He 5)
khin pal bisar nahee mayray kartay ih naanak maa“gai daan. ||2||90]|113]|
May I never forget You, even for an instant, O my Creator Lord; Nanak begs for this blessing. ||2||90]|113]|
ASA HIS U Il (1226-6)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Jo" Ass get HT Il (1226-6, Asa, He 5) voothaa sarab thaa-ee mayhu. The rain has fallen everywhere.
noe Hae a ofs AA Use YateS SJ A TTS Il (1226-6, Asa, He 5)
anad mangal gaa-o har jas pooran pargati-o nayhu. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Singing the Lord's Praises with ecstasy and bliss, the Perfect Lord is revealed. ||1]|Pause] |
and ac va feth we fafa Sa wT 6 aT II (1226-7, Ada, Hs 5)
chaar kunt dah dis jal niDh oon thaa-o na kayhu.
On all four sides and in the ten directions, the Lord is an ocean. There is no place where He does not exist.
faur fafa afde uss Abt oe AS ST WAU (1226-8, Adar, 8 5) kirpaa niDh gobind pooran jee-a daan sabh dayh. ||1|| O Perfect Lord God, Ocean of Mercy, You bless all with the gift of the soul. ||1]|
Afs Afs ofs Afs Hom AfSs AGHA Il (1226-8, Aa, He 5)
sat sat har sat su-aamee sat saaDhsangayhu.
True, True, True is my Lord and Master; True is the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Afs 3 He fae ussifSs Curt aoa SI SAAT NQNEAUIAAI (1226-9, Aa, He 5)
sat tay jan jin parteet upjee naanak nah bharmayhu. ||2||91]|114|| True are those humble beings, within whom faith wells up; O Nanak, they are not deluded by doubt. ||2||91]|114]|
ATID HIS U Il (1226-9)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
difse AS FAT YTS neg Il (1226-10, Asa, He 5) gobid jee-o too mayray paraan aDhaar. O Dear Lord of the Universe, You are the Support of my breath of life.
Wao Hts Aoet SH at ST AS UTSTS AU TIS I (1226-10, Adar, Hs 5)
Saajan meet sahaa-ee tum hee too mayro parvaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You are my Best Friend and Companion, my Help and Support; You are my family. ||1]|Pause] |
ag Hasta ofse AS HS AOA TS We I (1226-10, wa, v2 5)
kar mastak Dhaari-o mayrai maathai saaDhsang gun gaa-ay.
You placed Your Hand on my forehead; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
SHot faut 3 AS Se ure Ala IH BMH fore IA 4226-11, Ada, He 5)
tumree kirpaa tay sabh fal paa-ay rasak raam naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]|
By Your Grace, I have obtained all fruits and rewards; I meditate on the Lord's Name with delight. ||1]|
uifase ste caret Afsafe cag SHS HH I (1226-12, Asa, we 5) abichal neev Dharaa-ee satgur kabhoo dolat naahee. The True Guru has laid the eternal foundation; it shall never be shaken.
Td soa Aa se elena Aaa Aer fafa urs WIANCVUAWI 1226-12, ASAT, He 5)
gur naanak jab bha-ay da-i-aaraa sarab sukhaa niDh paa‘hee. ||2]|92]|115]| Guru Nanak has become merciful to me, and I have been blessed with the treasure of absolute peace. ||2]|92]|115]|
ATID HIS U Il (1226-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
foadt oH at AT YU Il (1226-13, Aa, He 5) nibhee naam kee sach khayp. Only the true merchandise of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, stays with you.
og ofa ae ae fofa ue fae ufo misu NA TIE Il 1226-13, Aa, He 5)
laabh har gun gaa-ay niDh Dhan bikhai maahi alayp. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the treasure of wealth, and earn your profit; in the midst of corruption, remain untouched. ||1]||Pause] |
os
bat #3 Aas ASH virus ys forts it 1226-14, wa, we 5) jee-a jant sagal santokhay aapnaa parabh Dhi-aa-ay. All beings and creatures find contentment, meditating on their God.
330 ASH wre ASE safe Afs o UTE NAN (1226-15, Aa, He 5)
ratan janam apaar jeeti-o bahurh jon na paa-ay. ||1||
The priceless jewel of infinite worth, this human life, is won, and they are not consigned to reincarnation ever again. ||1]|
se faure efenres aifre sfenr Ag Aa Il (1226-15, Adar, 48 5)
bha-ay kirpaal da-i-aal gobid bha-i-aa saaDhoo sang.
When the Lord of the Universe shows His kindness and compassion, the mortal finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
dfs sae TH Soa UTet Sar US AG Fa NIANCSUAAEN (1226-16, Adar, He 5)
har charan raas naanak paa-ee lagaa parabh si-o rang. ||2||93||116|| Nanak has found the wealth of the Lotus Feet of the Lord; he is imbued with the Love of God. ||2]|93]|116]|
ATID HIS U Il (1226-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het ot ufs aot fare Il (1226-17, Aa, He 5) maa-ee ree paykh rahee bismaad. O mother, I am wonder-struck, gazing upon the Lord.
Mode USt Ha Ho HfyS wrsaA 3 a AS UU TIS il 1226-17, Avda, 48 5) anhad Dhunee mayraa man mohi-o achraj taa kay savaad. ||1|| rahaa-o. My mind is enticed by the unstruck celestial melody; its flavor is amazing! ||1]||Pause| |
Hg fust dou d Het ufe ofa & nifoere i (1226-17, Aa, He 5) maat pitaa banDhap hai so-ee man har ko ahilaad. He is my Mother, Father and Relative. My mind delights in the Lord.
WoHfa we ado dfse fasfAs AF USHTS IU (1226-18, Ada, He 5)
saaDhsang gaa-ay gun gobind binsi-o sabh parmaad. ||1]|
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all my illusions are dispelled. ||1||
sat oufe adt sad Afat gH S AAS we I (1226-19, Avda, Hs 5) doree lapat rahee charnah sang bharam bhai saglay khaad. I am lovingly attached to His Lotus Feet; my doubt and fear are totally consumed.
fg nurg Soa AS ar softs o Afs FHS NIANCSNAVI (1226-19, Ada, He 5) ayk aDhaar naanak jan kee-aa bahur na jon bharmaad. ||2||94||117] | Servant Nanak has taken the Support of the One Lord. He shall not wander in reincarnation ever again. ||2||94||117]|
Yat 922Q9
ATID HIS UY Il (1227-1)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het St HSt BTS ANT Il (1227-1, Arga, 2 5) maa-ee ree maatee charan samooh. O mother, I am totally intoxicated with the Lord's Feet.
San fas IS vis 5 WSS Usher aE AS BI NU! TIS Il 1227-1, Asa, 2 5) aykas bin ha-o aan na jaan-o dutee-aa bhaa-o sabh looh. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I know of none other than the Lord. I have totally burnt off my sense of duality. ||1]|Pause| |
fsurfar dures wed A ager S faftr & wT il (1227-2, wrda, He 5)
ti-aag gopaal avar jo karnaa tay bikhi-aa kay khooh.
To abandon the Lord of the World, and become involved with anything else, is to fall into the pit of corruption.
aon fimrn He He HfaS ast sax F OT UU (1227-3, Adar, v8 5)
daras pi-aas mayraa man mohi-o kaadhee narak tay Dhooh. ||1]||
My mind is enticed, thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. He has lifted me up and out of hell. ||1]|
As ute fife Ayes fasrt IGH IT Il (1227-3, Ada, Hs 5)
sant parsaad mili-o sukh-daata binsee ha-umai hooh.
By the Grace of the Saints, I have met the Lord, the Giver of peace; the noise of egotism has been stilled.
oH Sha TS TH Sea HESS HS 3S AT UQNCUNAIE (1227-4, Arar, He 5)
raam rang raatay daas naanak ma-uli-o man tan jooh. ||2||95||118]|
Slave Nanak is imbued with the Love of the Lord; the forests of his mind and body have blossomed forth. ||2]|95]|118]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1227-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
faorn ara & faBoSs Il (1227-5, Aa, He 5) binsay kaach kay bi-uhaar. The false dealings are finished.
on 3H fife Aonafs fed war nfo ATS NAN TIS Ul 1227-5, Aa, He 5)
raam bhaj mil saaDhsangat ihai jag meh saar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meditate, vibrate on the Lord. This is the most excellent thing in the world. ||1||Pause| |
as 63 3 3fe asg oH fase of il (1227-5, Ardar, He 5)
eet oot na dol kathoo naam hirdai Dhaar.
Here and hereafter, you shall never waver; enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart.
ad vse Sfoe fifes salt Cafes HATS NA (1227-6, Aa, He 5)
gur charan bohith mili-o bhaagee utri-o sansaar. ||1]|
The boat of the Guru's Feet is found by great good fortune; it shall carry you across the world-ocean. ||1] |
me af Hdtafs ufs sfeS Aes Sa wes Il (1227-6, APSA, He 5) jal thal mahee-al poor rahi-o sarab naath apaar. The Infinite Lord is totally permeating and pervading the water, the land and the sky.
ofa on nifys ul aaa vie oA Afs urs NQNCENIAEN (1227-7, Aa, Hs 5)
har naam amrit pee-o naanak aan ras sabh khaar. ||2||96]|119] | Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name; O Nanak, all other tastes are bitter. [|2]|96]]119]|
ATID HIS U Il (1227-8)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
3 3 AGE UST A Il (1227-8, Ada, H3 5) taa tay karan palaah karay. You whine and cry
Ho faarg Ho He HS fAHeS ofo Js NAN TIC Il 1227-8, Ada, He 5)
mahaa bikaar moh mad maatou simrat naahi haray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
- you are intoxicated with the great corruption of attachment and pride, but you do not remember the Lord in meditation. ||1]|Pause] |
WoHfa AUS Sates fe A Sy A Il (1227-9, Aa, He 5)
saaDhsang japtay naaraa-in tin kay dokh jaray.
Those who meditate on the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy - the guilt of their minstakes is burnt away.
Hes eu ufe Gfe HON us a Aft FS WAU (1227-9, Adar, He 5) safal dayh Dhan o-ay janmay parabh kai sang ralay. ||1|| Fruitful is the body, and blessed is the birth of those who merge with God. ||1||
aig uese nine eA fafa As Gufs ATT Bs Il (1227-10, Asa, 2 5)
chaar padaarath asat dasaa siDh sabh oopar saaDh bhalay.
The four great blessings, and the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers - above all these are the Holy Saints.
aod OHA Ufe Ae Se Custs Sta us WQNCONION (1227-10, Asa, Hs 5)
naanak daas Dhoor jan baa“chhai uDhrahi laag palay. ||2]|97]|120]||
Slave Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of the humble; attached to the hem of His robe, he is saved. ||2||97||120] |
ATID HIS UY Il (1227-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Uf A SH A AS At it (1227-11, Awa, He 5) har kay naam kay jan kaa"khee. The Lord's humble servants yearn for the Lord's Name.
Hfs 3fo sete Sct AY Was us van Cufs aa mms UU FIC Ul 4227-12, Avda, ne 5) man tan bachan ayhee sukh chaahat parabh daras daykheh kab aakhee. ||1]|| rahaa- O. In thought, word and deed, they long for this peace, to gaze with their eyes upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||1]|Pause]|
3 ais usqon Amt afs Sct wfe o wrest it (1227-12, rsa, we 5) too bay-ant paarbarahm su-aamee gat tayree jaa-ay na laakhee. You are Endless, O God, my Supreme Lord and Master; Your state cannot be known.
3d GHG ulfs He Sftor afs Asan nists att WAU 1227-13, Ada, He 5)
charan kamal pareet man bayDhi-aa kar sarbas antar raakhee. ||1]|
My mind is pierced through by the Love of Your Lotus Feet; this is everything to me - I enshrine it deep within my being. ||1]|
ge use fafyfs Ag Ao feo set sAot ard i 227-14, Asay, He 5)
bayd puraan simrit saaDhoo jan ih banee rasnaa bhaakhee.
In the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, the humble and the Holy chant this Bani with their tongues.
Af an aH sta fensdhat dg estor faset AM NQNKCH IVA (1227-14, Aa, He 5) jap raam naam naanak nistaree-ai hor dutee-aa birthee saakhee. ||2]|98||121]||
Chanting the Lord's Name, O Nanak, I am emancipated; other teachings of duality are useless. ||2||98]|121]|
ATID HIS U Il (1227-15)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het oH ot 3 Hat I (1227-15, Agar, H8 5) maakhee raam kee too maakhee. A fly! You are just a fly, created by the Lord.
Wd van so 5 Sala Ho fattor we oat UA TIS il 4227-15, Avda, we 5) jah durganDh tahaa too baiseh mahaa bikhi-aa mad chaakhee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Wherever it stinks, you land there; you suck in the most toxic stench. ||1||Pause]|
fasts wnerts 3 feag 3 uefa feo fafa Set mrdt i 227-16, Agar, He 5) kiteh asthaan too tikan na paavahi ih biDh daykhee aakhee. You don't stay put anywhere; I have seen this with my eyes.
Ha’ fag 3 af 5 afsur AS us afse at unt al (1227-17, Ada, HE 5)
santaa bin tai ko-ay na chhaadi-aa sant paray gobid kee paakhee. ||1||
You have not spared anyone, except the Saints - the Saints are on the side of the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
Hit Hs AAS 3 Hd fag Hat fas 3 ort | (1227-17, wa, v2 5) jee-a jant saglay tai mohay bin santaa kinai na laakhee. You have enticed all beings and creatures; no one knows You, except the Saints.
soa BHA Tle ateste TS Aa Aafs Ag Ara NQANCCENIAVI (1227-18, Aa, He 5)
naanak daas har keertan raataa sabad surat sach saakhee. ||2]|99||122||
Slave Nanak is imbued with the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. Focusing his consciousness on the Word of the Shabad, he realizes the Presence of the True Lord. [|2]|99]]122]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1227-19)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het ot aret AM at SA Il (1227-19, Ada, He 5)
maa-ee ree kaatee jam kee faas. O mother, the noose of Death has been cut away.
dfs dfs Aus Asa AY ue ats TAS CeA IA TIS Il (1227-19, Ada, He 5)
har har japat sarab sukh paa-ay beechay garsat udaas. ||1|| rahaa-o. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have found total peace. I remain unattached in the midst of my household. ||1]|Pause] |
Us qQ2e ate fas ate afe nud Curt ean fumirA Il (1228-1, Ada, v8 5)
kar kirpaa leenay kar apunay upjee daras pi-aas. Granting His Grace, He has made me His Own. The thirst for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan wells up within me.
HaAfa ffs ofs ae we faont estor tA NA (1228-1, Aa, He 5)
satsang mil har gun gaa-ay binsee dutee-aa aas. ||1]||
Joining the Society of the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; I have given up other hopes. ||1]|
Ho Cfeurg nizet 3 are Hea AS afaG i 1228-2, Ada, He 5)
mahaa udi-aan atvee tay kaadhay maarag sant kahi-o.
The Saint has pulled me out of the utterly desolate wilderness, and shown me the path.
us Van uy Als OA The SSA ISG BIS MINION ISM (1228-2, Aa, Hz 5)
daykhat daras paap sabh naasay har naanak ratan lahi-o. ||2||100||123]| Gazing upon His Darshan, all sins are taken away; Nanak is blessed with the jewel of the Lord. ||2||100]|123]|
ATS HIS U Il (1228-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Het ot mifaS yn at dfs i (1228-3, Avda, ue 5) maa-ee ree ari-o paraym kee khor. O mother, I am involved with the Love of the Lord;
Zdne dfs fimmn nfs Hee Has 3 aet Sfe nA TIS Il (1228-4, Ada, He 5)
darsan ruchit pi-aas man sundar sakat na ko-ee tor. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I am intoxicated with it. My mind has such a longing and thirst for the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Beauteous Lord. No one can break this. ||1]||Pause] |
ure He ufs fus AS dou dfs AGSA US He Il (1228-4, Ada, Hs 5)
paraan maan pat pit sut banDhap har sarbas Dhan mor.
The Lord is my breath of life, honor, spouse, parent, child, relative, wealth - everything.
fga Adte ums fan]et fan fae afs Was Ts WAI (1228-5, Aa, He 5)
Dharig sareer asat bistaa kiram bin har jaanat hor. ||1]|
Cursed is this body of bones, this pile of maggots and manure, if it knows any other than the Lord. ||1]|
sfeS faurs dis eu SAS UT UTA AT Il (1228-5, Ardar, we 5)
bha-i-o kirpaal deen dukh bhanjan paraa poorbalaa jor.
The Destroyer of the pains of the poor has become merciful to me, by the power of the karma of my past actions.
soa Hafs faut foto rare faofa vis fads 21IAUIISll (1228-6, Aa, He 5)
naanak saran kirpaa niDh saagar binsi-o aan nihor. ||2||101]|124]| Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Treasure, the Ocean of Mercy; my subservience to others is past. ||2||101||124||
ASA HIS UY Il (1228-7)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Slat IH at Ufs ALE II (1228-7, Aa, He 5) neekee raam kee Dhun so-ay. The Lord's melody is noble and sublime.
TIS TH nou AMM Aus ATG ae ud FHS il 1228-7, Asa, 3 5)
charan kamal anoop su-aamee japat saaDhoo ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lotus Feet of my Lord and Master are incomparably beautiful. Meditating on them, one becomes Holy. ||1||Pause] |
fesest GUS VdAo ASH aE OE Il (1228-8, Ada, He 5)
chitvataa gopaal darsan kalmalaa kadh Dho-ay.
Just by thinking of the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the Lord of the World, the dirty sins are washed away.
HOH Hdo fears niag ofs ate as fe Il (1228-8, Aa, He 5) janam maran bikaar ankur har kaat chhaaday kho-ay. ||1]| The Lord cuts down and weeds out the corruption of the cycle of birth and death.
[11
ust usta fats ffir fra ure afe 1 (1228-9, Arde, 48 5) paraa poorab jisahi likhi-aa birlaa paa-ay ko-ay. How rare is that person who has such pre-ordained destiny, to find the Lord.
ITE TE TUG ATS FSA AG AMS MINN Auill (1228-9, Ara, v2 5)
ravan gun gopaal kartay naankaa sach jo-ay. ||2||102||125]||
Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Creator, the Lord of the Universe - O Nanak, this is Truth. ||2||102||125]|
ATID HIS UY Il (1228-10)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & om at Hfs Are Il (1228-10, Avda, Hz 5) har kay naam kee mat saar. The intellect of one who dwells on the Name of the Lord is excellent.
dfs frrfa A ore awefo fea AS fanars NA TIS i (1228-10, Ada, He 5)
har bisaar jo aan raacheh mithan sabh bisthaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who forgets the Lord and becomes involved with some other - all his showy pretensions are false. ||1]||Pause] |
AWOHafH sa AMMt uy Ges Urs Il (1228-11, Aa, He 5)
saaDhsangam bhaj su-aamee paap hovat khaar.
Meditate, vibrate on our Lord and Master in the Company of the Holy, and your sins Shall be eradicated.
sdoraae arte fase safe HOH BHT NA (1228-11, Aa, He 5)
charnaarbind basaa-ay hirdai bahur janam na maar. ||1||
When the Lord's Lotus Feet abide within the heart, the mortal is never again caught in the cycle of death and birth. |]1||
afd moqa of BS Sa aH MUOs Il (1228-12, Avda, H3 5)
kar anugrah raakh leenay ayk naam aDhaar.
He showers us with His kindness and compassion; He saves and protects those who take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.
feo ofs fines Fe soa HY Cre esata MQNIORNIEI (1228-12, Adar, He 5) din rain simrat sadaa naanak mukh oojal darbaar. ||2||103]|126]||
Meditating in remembrance on Him, day and night, O Nanak, your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||2||103]|126]|
ATID HIS U Il (1228-13)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Hat F TH ot Ufa Hat Il (1228-13, Arar, He 5) maanee too” raam kai dar maanee. Honored - you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
AWaHfa fits sfe ae ae feat As nifsHrst al TIS i (1228-14, Avda, He 5) saaDhsang mil har gun gaa-ay binsee sabh abhimaanee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; your egotistical pride will be totally dispelled. ||1]|Pause| |
ats mogqg vuat ats stat aenfa us farrat i (1228-14, Adar, He 5)
Dhaar anoograhu apnee kar leenee gurmukh poor gi-aanee.
Showering His kindness and compassion, He shall make you His Own. As Gurmukh, your spiritual wisdom shall be perfect.
AVa AY wTSE UST SkaAT TAA feat All (1228-15, Arsar, HW 5)
sarab sookh aanand ghanayray thaakur daras Dhi-aanee. ||1]| |
All peace and all sorts of ecstasy are obtained, by meditating on the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of my Lord and Master. ||1]|
feate zasts AT Het AOS Bs fen AST WOT Il (1228-15, Aa, He 5)
nikat vartan saa sadaa suhaagan dah dis saa-ee jaanee.
She who dwells close to her Lord is always the pure, happy soul-bride; she is famous in the ten directions.
fina gar dfar ast arattes aad fH aaHat QANIOSIIIII (1228-15, Aa, Hs 5)
pari-a rang rang ratee naaraa-in naanak tis kurbaanee. ||2||104||127]|
She is imbued with the Love of her Loving Beloved Lord; Nanak is a sacrifice to her. ||2]|104]]127]|
ATID HIS U Il (1228-16)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
3M Bao vA SIA Il (1228-16, Ara, He 5) tu-a charan aasro ees. O Lord, I take the Support of Your Lotus Feet.
SHfg use WA SHfo Afr SUSI SH ASIA I TTS Ml (1228-16, Ara, wi 5)
tumeh pachhaanoo saak tumeh sang raakhanhaar tumai jagdees. rahaa-o.
You are my Best Friend and Companion; I am with You. You are our Protector, O Lord of the Universe. ||1]||Pause| |
3 THs TH Sue ade fs Os SH Tt TS I (1228-17, wrdar, we 5) too hamro ham tumray kahee-ai it ut tum hee raakhay. You are mine, and I am Yours; here and hereafter, You are my Saving Grace.
3 Mig mudug AM ge fas xet BF AU (1228-17, Adar, v3 5)
too bay-ant aprampar su-aamee gur kirpaa ko-ee laakhai. ||1]|
You are Endess and Infinite, O my Lord and Master; by Guru's Grace, a few understand. ||1||
fag sad fag aS AT So nisaAM ATS II (1228-18, Ada, He 5) bin baknay bin kahan kahaavan antarjaamee jaanai. Without being spoken, without being told, You know all, O Searcher of hearts.
WT a@ His BE US SS A AS PIT HS MINGOUNIACI (1228-18, Ara, He 5)
jaa ka-o mayl la-ay parabh naanak say jan dargeh maanay. ||2||105]|128]|
One whom God unites with Himself, O Nanak, that humble being is honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2||105]|128] |
Yat 922K
A HIe uweue we U (1229-2) saarang mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 5 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Fifth House:
qe Afsars yATfe il (1229-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ufe sta nite AH fears Il (1229-3, Aa, He 5) har bhaj aan karam bikaar. Meditate, vibrate on the Lord; other actions are corrupt.
HS He 3 88S FAST as YA AAT NU FIC I (1229-3, Ara, He 5)
maan moh na bujhat tarisnaa kaal garas sansaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Pride, attachment and desire are not quenched; the world is in the grip of death. ||1]|Pause] |
ug ules JAS Aes miu fast nme I (1229-3, Ada, He 5) khaat peevat hasat sovat a-oDh bitee asaar. Eating, drinking, laughing and sleeping, life passes uselessly.
oda Cefa ss eS AHfs atest ATS A (1229-4, Adar, He 5)
narak udar bharmant jalto jameh keenee saar. ||1]||
The mortal wanders in reincarnation, burning in the hellish environment of the womb; in the end, he is destroyed by death. ||1||
ud du aes fears fear ung TS AT BrP Il (1229-4, wrdar, us 5) par daroh karat bikaar nindaa paap rat kar jhaar. He practices fraud, cruelty and slander against others; he sins, and washes his hands.
fast Asae Fs St SH HT Hot nits |QM (1229-5, Aa, Hs 5)
binaa satgur boojh naahee tam moh mahaa" anDhaar. ||2||
Without the True Guru, he has no understanding; he is lost in the utter darkness of anger and attachment. ||2||
fay saGat wfe us fats 3 fans Il (1229-5, Avda, Hs 5)
bikh thag-uree khaa-ay mootho chit na sirjanhaar.
He takes the intoxicating drugs of cruelty and corruption, and is plundered. He is not conscious of the Creator Lord God.
dfae qua df ses faurd usa nfs wrdarg Sil (1229-6, Ada, He 5)
gobind gupat ho-ay rahi-o ni-aaro maatang mat aha‘kaar. ||3]|
The Lord of the Universe is hidden and unattached. The mortal is like a wild elephant, intoxicated with the wine of egotism. ||3]|
afs four ys AS TA VIS AHS MUG II (1229-7, Ada, we 5) kar kirpaa parabh sant raakhay charan kamal aDhaar. In His Mercy, God saves His Saints; they have the Support of His Lotus Feet.
ad Als sa Aafs wes due usy yng SUAVE (1229-7, Aa, He 5)
kar jor naanak saran aa-i-o gopaal purakh apaar. ||4||1]|129]| With his palms pressed together, Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Primal Being, the Infinite Lord God. ||4||1]|129]|
ATS HIG U We E USS (1229-9)
saarag mehlaa 5 ghar 6 parh-taal Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House, Partaal:
qe Afsara yATfe it (1229-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HS 390 Sf TS MAG Il (1229-10, Aa, He 5) subh bachan bol gun amol. Chant His Sublime Word and His Priceless Glories.
faadt faars il (1229-10, nda, 43 5) kinkree bikaar. Why are you indulding in corrupt actions?
ey ot eters Il (1229-10, Ada, He 5) daykh ree beechaar. Look at this, see and understand!
aa Aae fomrfe Hoe ute Il (1229-10, Ada, He 5)
gur sabad Dhi-aa-ay mahal paa-ay.
Meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
ofa Afar Ja ATS HIT AH AU TIC il 1229-11, Avda, v2 5) har sang rang kartee mahaa kayl. ||1|| rahaa-o. Imbued with the Love of the Lord, you shall totally play with Him. ||1]|Pause||
Hue dt AAS Il (1229-11, Ada, He 5) supan ree sansaar. The world is a dream.
faot fares il (1229-11, Ara, He 5) mithnee bisthaar. Its expanse is false.
Rat onfe Hfo Hfoet fio uifs fae Ae WA (1229-11, Ardar, He 5)
sakhee kaa-ay mohi mohilee pari-a pareet ridai mayl. ||1]|
O my companion, why are you so enticed by the Enticer? Enshrine the Love of Your Beloved within your heart. ||1]|
Aaa ot uffS fuming i (1229-12, ardar, us 5) sarab ree pareet pi-aar. He is total love and affection.
yg Het dt efemrg il (1229-12, ada, ue 5) parabh sadaa ree da-i-aar. God is always merciful.
ae mre nie go I (1229-12, Aa, v2 5) kaa‘-ay™ aan aan ruchee-ai. Others - why are you involved with others?
ofa Afar Afar usb i (1229-13, Adar, we 5) har sang sang khachee-di. Remain involved with the Lord.
AG AOS ure | (1229-13, Ada, He 5) ja-o saaDhsang paa-ay. When you join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
aT Sea Ths fomreS i (1229-13, Avda, vs 5) kaho naanak har Dhi-aa-ay. says Nanak, meditate on the Lord.
Ma Td AHfT AB WUUIASBON (1229-13, Ara, He 5)
ab rahay jameh mayl. ||2]|1]|130]| Now, your association with death is ended. ||2||1||130]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1229-14)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
AVo’ AT VS AT Il (1229-14, Adar, ue 5) kanchnaa baho dat karaa. You may make donations of gold,
ath ae maf mar I (1229-14, Argar, He 5) bhoom daan arap Dharaa. and give away land in charity
HO uifea Ae ufez ATT Il (1229-15, Avda, He 5) man anik soch pavitar karat. and purify your mind in various ways,
Sd FT OH 3G Ho BIS AHS Ba NA TIS ll (1229-15, Avda, He 5)
naahee ray naam tul man charan kamal laagay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
but none of this is equal to the Lord's Name. Remain attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1]|Pause| |
otg ae fads FS Il (1229-15, Aa, He 5) chaar bayd jihav bhanay. You may recite the four Vedas with your tongue,
A MAE WAC ASS AS Il (1229-16, Avda, 3 5) das asat khasat sarvan sunay. and listen to the eighteen Puraanas and the six Shaastras with your ears,
oot 3fe afse SH US Il (1229-16, Aa, He 5)
nahee tul gobid naam Dhunay.
but these are not equal to the celestial melody of the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
HO BIS AHS Ba MAUI (1229-16, Ara, He 5) man charan kamal laagay. ||1|| Remain attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1]|
ads Afa As Be Il (1229-17, Ada, H 5) barat sanDh soch chaar. You may observe fasts, and say your prayers, purify yourself
far afe faarars Il (1229-17, Adar, He 5) kir-aa kunt niraahaar. and do good deeds; you may go on pilgrimages everywhere and eat nothing at all.
MUTA ATS UTAATT Il (1229-17, Ata, Hs 5) apras karat paaksaar. You may cook your food without touching anyone;
foeet AaH ag faAars Il 1229-17, Ada, He 5) nivlee karam baho bisthaar. you may make a great show of cleansing techniques,
gu du ass ofa oH StH BF Ha Il (1229-18, Arga, 42 5)
Dhoop deep kartay har naam tul na laagay.
and burn incense and devotional lamps, but none of these are equal to the Lord's Name.
oH efenrg Afs ete Fost Il (1229-18, Aa, He 5) raam da-i-aar sun deen bayntee. O Merciful Lord, please hear the prayer of the meek and the poor.
J UIA 30 UNS HS Sa OH fHAS Sa MQANVNIASUI (1229-18, ATda, He 5)
dayh daras nain paykha-o jan naanak naam misat laagay. ||2||2||131]|
Please grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, that I may see You with my eyes. The Naam is so sweet to servant Nanak. ||2]|2]|131]|
ATI HIS U Il (1229-19)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
oH TH OH Ah SHS IH ATES NA TIS Il (1229-19, Ada, v2 5) raam raam raam jaap ramat raam sahaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam. The Lord is your Help and Support. ||1]|Pause] |
UST 923B0
H36 & VIS Sa aH au Bs ford qe aus se faurs sala nrst uret All 1230-1, FATda, H3 5)
santan kai charan laagay kaam kroDh lobh ti-aagay gur gopaal bha-ay kirpaal labaDh apnee paa-ee. ||1]|
Grasping hold of the Feet of the Saints, I have abandoned sexual desire, anger and greed. The Guru, the Lord of the World, has been kind to me, and I have realized my destiny. ||1||
faor gH Ha vin ce Heer & da Yass AAT StaT BI AG Fare Il (1230-2, Ada, v2 5) binsay bharam moh anDh tootay maa-i-aa kay banDh pooran sarbatar thaakur nah ko-o0 bairaa-ee.
My doubts and attachments have been dispelled, and the blinding bonds of Maya have been broken. My Lord and Master is pervading and permeating everywhere; no one is an enemy.
Fomit Huns Se ASH Hes SU Te Asa aA VIS Sta SoA TS Wet NINSNISM (1230-3, FATda, H3 5)
Su-aamee suparsan bha-ay janam maran dokh ga-ay santan kai charan laag naanak gun gaa-ee. ||2||3||132||
My Lord and Master is totally satisfied with me; He has rid me of the pains of death and birth. Grasping hold of the Feet of the Saints, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||3]|132||
ATI HIS U Il (1230-4)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
dfs od ofa wag sf afe ad nfs oS NAN TIC Il (1230-4, Ada, He 5)
har haray har mukhahu bol har haray man Dhaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har; enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, within your mind. ||1||Pause] |
Heo Hoe salts ade mifod utsa UsTIIS Il (1230-4, Avda, He 5)
sarvan sunan bhagat karan anik paatik punahcharan.
Hear Him with your ears, and practice devotional worship - these are good deeds, which make up for past evils.
Ado ude AY vite ate PATS NAM (1230-5, ASAT, HE 5) Saran paran saaDhoo aan baan bisaaray. ||1]| So seek the Sanctuary of the Holy, and forget all your other habits. ||1]|.
ofs sso Yifs ats atfs urea Hfg HoT UStS Il (1230-5, Arar, Hs 5) har charan pareet neet neet paavnaa meh mahaa puneet. Love the Lord's Feet, continually and continuously - the most sacred and sanctified.
Aza s ule Ads AH Su AT Il (1230-6, Ardar, we 5)
sayvak bhai door karan kalimal dokh jaaray.
Fear is taken away from the servant of the Lord, and the dirty sins and mistakes of the past are burnt away.
AIS HAS HOS HAS IIS ASH JIS Il (1230-6, Aa, v2 5)
kahat mukat sunat mukat rahat janam rahtay.
Those who speak are liberated, and those who listen are liberated; those who keep the Rehit, the Code of Conduct, are not reincarnated again.
TH TH AT FS TOA SZ MIT NAUNISM (1230-7, Arar, H 5) raam raam saar bhoot naanak tat beechaaray. ||2||4]|133]|
The Lord's Name is the most sublime essence; Nanak contemplates the nature of reality. ||2||4]|133]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1230-8)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
oH Sats Ha AS fsurfar Aare AH WA TIS il (1230-8, Adar, He 5)
naam bhagat maag sant ti-aag sagal kaamee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I beg for devotion to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; I have forsaken all other activities. ||1]]Pause| |
ulfs of afe forte ae afte ret fe II (1230-8, Ada, 18 5)
pareet laa-ay har Dhi-aa-ay gun gobind sadaa gaa-ay.
Meditate lovingly on the Lord, and sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
dfs AS at 35 Bis SSIS AMMA AU (1230-9, Adar, He 5)
har jan kee rayn baa‘chh dainhaar su-aamee. ||1||
I long for the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant, O Great Giver, my Lord and Master. ||1]||
Aga GAS AY faATH weet orSe oH AH at ae ofa 3A frHfs visa II 4230-9, Ada, H8 5)
sarab kusal sukh bisraam aandaa aanand naam jam kee kachh naahi taraas simar antarjaamee.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the ultimate ecstasy, bliss, happiness, peace and tranquility. The fear is death is dispelled by meditating in remembrance on the Inner- knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Sa Ave dfs Bio AAS Ads SU JIS Il (1230-10, Aa, He 5)
ayk saran gobind charan sansaar sagal taap haran.
Only the Sanctuary of the Feet of the Lord of the Universe can destroy all the suffering of the world.
SS TU ATH Soa UIST NNUAL (1230-11, ASAT, He 5)
naav roop saaDhsang naanak paargaraamee. ||2||5||134||
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is the boat, O Nanak, to carry us across to the other side. ||2||5]|134]|
ATID HIS U Il (1230-11)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
To WS WSS TT SS I (1230-12, Ada, ve 5) gun laal gaava-o gur daykhay. Gazing upon my Guru, I sing the Praises of my Beloved Lord.
us 3 Sa set AE AGHA ua FS NU TIS Ml (1230-12, Adar, He 5)
panchaa tay ayk chhootaa ja-o saaDhsang pag ra-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I escape from the five thieves, and I find the One, when I join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||
fene@ ag Af 6 wfe He famrfar Ho I (1230-12, Ara, He 5)
darisat-a-o kachh sang na jaa-ay maan ti-aag mohaa.
Nothing of the visible world shall go along with you; abandon your pride and attachment.
ea ofa uifs ae fife wrorfa Aa All 1230-13, Adar, Hs 5)
aykai har pareet laa-ay mil saaDhsang sohaa. ||1]|
Love the One Lord, and join the Saadh Sangat, and you shall be embellished and exalted. ||1]|
utes 3 ae fears Aas MTA Yat Il (1230-13, Adar, He 5) paa-i-o hai gun niDhaan sagal aas pooree. I have found the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence; all my hopes have been fulfilled.
aed His mde se ate faa arg Sat uIWENIUll (1230-14, Arar, Hs 5) naanak man anand bha-ay gur bikham gaarah toree. ||2||6]|135]|
Nanak's mind is in ecstasy; the Guru has shattered the impregnable fortress. [12] 16] |135]|
ATS HIS UY Il (1230-14)
Saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
fe faaatait i dASst SaATS WAU TIC il 1230-15, Ara, v2 5)
man biraagaigee. khojtee darsaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
My mind is neutral and detached; I seek only the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]|Pause] |
Ag Ase Afe & fYS dhs fomrfEs i 1230-15, Ada, ws 5) saaDhoo santan sayv kai pari-o hee-arai Dhi-aa-i-o. Serving the Holy Saints, I meditate on my Beloved within my heart.
mee gut ufe & TG HIS urSGait WAU (1230-15, Ardar, we 5) aanand roopee paykh kai ha-o mahal paav-ogee. ||1]| Gazing upon the Embodiment of Ecstasy, I rise to the Mansion of His Presence. ||1]|
an adt As faurfa a 3G Aafs usait I (1230-16, Ada, H2 5) kaam karee sabh ti-aag kai ha-o saran par-ugee. I work for Him; I have forsaken everything else. I seek only His Sanctuary.
sea AH afs fs IG TT HaTSCait NANDNASEN (1230-16, Aa, He 5)
naanak su-aamee gar milay ha-o gur manaav-ugee. ||2||7||136] |
O Nanak, my Lord and Master hugs me close in His Embrace; the Guru is pleased and satisfied with me. ||2||7]||136]|
ATS HIS U Il (1230-17)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
MAT df= ust i 1230-17, Aa, He 5) aisee ho-ay paree. This is my condition.
Woes Benrs Ul TIS il 4230-17, Ada, ve 5)
jaantay da-i-aar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Only my Merciful Lord knows it. ||1]|Pause] |
H3d fuss faurfa & He Hae ufs SatES | (1230-18, Ada, He 5)
maatar pitar ti-aag kai man santan paahi baychaa-i-o. I have abandoned my mother and father, and sold my mind to the Saints.
wh HOH ae det WE eG afe Tat NU (1230-18, Aa, He 5)
jaat janam kul kho-ee-ai ha-o gaava-o har haree. ||1]|
I have lost my social status, birth-right and ancestry; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
Ba aca 3 eet ys foals farats at it (1230-19, wrdar, we 5) lok kutamb tay tootee-ai parabh kirat kirat karee. I have broken away from other people and family; I work only for God.
dfs H a Cueto area AfS Sa TH NQNCHIBIN (1230-19, Adar, He 5) gur mo ka-o updaysi-aa naanak sayv ayk haree. ||2]|8]|137]|| The Guru has taught me, O Nanak, to serve only the One Lord. ||2||8||137]|
UST 923A
ATI HIS U Il (1231-1)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
WS BS HIS TUS F Il (1231-1, wrsa, He 5) laal laal mohan gopaal too. You are my Loving Beloved Enticing Lord of the World.
ate JAS unre AS Asa H yfsurs FU TIS ll 1231-1, wa, ws 5)
keet hasat paakhaan jant sarab mai partipaal too. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
You are in worms, elephants, stones and all beings and creatures; You nourish and cherish them all. ||1]|Pause| |
oo ofs ufs date Aat Il (1231-2, Ardar, Hs 5) nah door poor hajoor sangay. You are not far away; You are totally present with all.
Hed FAH F WAU (1231-2, Asa, we 5) sundar rasaal too. ||1]| You are Beautiful, the Source of Nectar. ||1]|
Od AIG AIS J ASI AG Il (1231-3, Aa, He 5) nah baran baran nah kulah kul. You have no caste or social class, no ancestry or family.
Tor YS fxsUs J MVNCUISCH (1231-3, Aa, He 5)
naanak parabh kirpaal too. ||2]||9]|138]| Nanak: God, You are Merciful. ||2||9||138]|
ATS He U Il (1231-3)
saarag mehlaa 5. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
TIS AS frst He Ve Aa Ag ll (1231-3, wa, ws 5)
karat kayl bikhai mayl chandar soor mohay.
Acting and play-acting, the mortal sinks into corruption. Even the moon and the sun are enticed and bewitched.
Guns faars Yes aCudt sdézarg Hes nifoa ae ass fess fas Gus Gs 11 aoE II (1231-4, Adal, H3 5)
upjataa bikaar dundar na-uparee jhunantkaar sundar anig bhaa-o karat firat bin gopaal Dhohay. rahaa-o.
The disturbing noise of corruption wells up, in the tinkling ankle bells of Maya the beautiful. With her beguiling gestures of love, she seduces everyone except the Lord. | |Pause| |
sifs 386 sucte at ave aath o WS Adt Couns vin Uo ofes AA NO AEE IT NI (1231-5, ATdat, Hs 5)
teen bha-unay laptaa-ay rahee kaach karam na jaat sahee unmat anDh DhanDh rachit jaisay mahaa saagar hohay. ||1]||
Maya clings to the three worlds; those who are stuck in wrong actions cannot escape her. Drunk and engrossed in blind worldly affairs, they are tossed about on the mighty ocean. ||1||
Gud of Ha oH ate cot aH at aA fsa ues oH A a fins aoa GS NANAONAZENS UNAS NAW (1231-6, Aa, He 5)
uDhray har sant daas kaat deenee jam kee faas patit paavan naam jaa ko simar naanak ohay. ||2||10||139]|3]|13]|155]|
The Saint, the slave of the Lord is saved; the noose of the Messenger of Death is snapped. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Purifier of sinners; O Nanak, remember Him in meditation. ||2||10||139]|3]]13]]155]|
qe Afsas yrrfe i (1231-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TT AST HIS € Il (1231-8) raag saarang mehlaa 9. Raag Saarang, Ninth Mehl:
ofs fas 3d & 3 Have I (1231-8, Adar, He 9) har bin tayro ko na sahaa-ee. No one will be your help and support, except the Lord.
at at us fust As ates t org t Set UU TIS il (1231-8, Ardar, we 9)
kaa‘ kee maat pitaa sut banitaa ko kaahoo ko bhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Who has any mother, father, child or spouse? Who is anyone's brother or sister? ||1]|Pause] |
US Udet wg Hufs Hardt HW HfSS wrsaret Il (1231-9, Aa, He 9) Dhan Dharnee ar sampat sagree jo maani-o apnaa-ee. All the wealth, land and property which you consider your own
30 Be ae Af 5 WS aT Sho Buret AU (1231-9, Aa, Hs 9)
tan chhootai kachh sang na chaalai kahaa taahi laptaa-ee. ||1]||
- when you leave your body, none of it shall go along with you. Why do you cling to them? ||1]|
de ufos Ae eu sho 3 AE ofe o geet II (1231-10, Aa, He 9)
deen da-i-aal sadaa dukh bhanjan taa si-o ruch na badhaa-ee.
God is Merciful to the meek, forever the Destroyer of fear, and yet you do not develop any loving relationship with Him.
Sod IS Aas AS fxfeur fa Hust Jaret QUA (1231-11, Aa, He 9) naanak kahat jagat sabh mithi-aa ji-o supnaa rainaa-ee. ||2]||1|| Says Nanak, the whole world is totally false; it is like a dream in the night. ||2]|1||
Ardat Hoe € Il (1231-11)
saarang mehlaa 9. Saarang, Ninth Mehl:
ad Hoe fafanr fA suerdt i (1231-11, Ada, us 9) kahaa man bikhi-aa si-o laptaahee. O mortal, why are you engrossed in corruption?
W Fa Hid AG sdG 3 ure feta urefa feta AS WAN TIS it 1231-12, rsa, we 9) yaa jag meh ko-oo rahan na paavai ik aavahi ik jaahee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
No one is allowed to remain in this world; one comes, and another departs. ||1]|Pause] |
ata 36 ue Aufs at at a fHe Sg ward Il (1231-12, Ada, He 9) kaa’ ko tan Dhan sampat kaa™ kee kaa si-o nayhu lagaahee. Who has a body? Who has wealth and property? With whom should we fall in love?
a dA A Aa faa fa@ wes at act Al (1231-13, Aa, He 9) jo deesai so sagal binaasai ji-o baadar kee chhaahee. ||1]| Whatever is seen, shall all disappear, like the shade of a passing cloud. ||1]|
3fa uifsuts Hafs Hae ag Hats dfo fee He II 1231-14, Ada, He 9)
taj abhimaan saran santan gahu mukat hohi chhin maahee.
Abandon egotism, and grasp the Sanctuary of the Saints; you shall be liberated in an instant.
Ho soa Ses Sno faa AY AUS St oS NNN (1231-14, Aa, He 9)
jan naanak bhagvant bhajan bin sukh supnai bhee naahee. ||2]|2]|
O servant Nanak, without meditating and vibrating on the Lord God, there is no peace, even in dreams. ||2]|2]|
Ardat Hoe t I (1231-15)
saarang mehlaa 9. Saarang, Ninth Mehl:
AT I MUS HOH TST] Il (1231-15, Aa, He 9) kahaa nar apno janam gavaavai. O mortal, why have you wasted your life?
Hfeor ufe fatter off safe oH Aefs odt mre A TIC Ih (1231-15, Ada, Hs 9)
maa-i-aa mad bikhi-aa ras rachi-o raam saran nahee aavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. Intoxicated with Maya and its riches, involved in corrupt pleasures, you have not sought the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
fey HAT AIG FT AUS Uf aT Bae Il (1231-16, Ada, He 9) ih sansaar sagal hai supno daykh kahaa lobhaavai. This whole world is just a dream; why does seeing it fill you with greed?
A Gun A Hae fae JIS 3 AT US UI (1231-16, Adar, He 9) jo upjai so sagal binaasai rahan na ko-oo paavai. ||1]| Everything that has been created will be destroyed; nothing will remain. ||1]|
fiufemr 39 And afs Hiss feo fafa wry dor} i (1231-17, Aa, He 9) mithi-aa tan saacho kar maani-o ih biDh aap banDhaavai. You see this false body as true; in this way, you have placed yourself in bondage.
WS SSA AG AS HAS TH SHS fSs BS NUS (1231-18, Ada, Hs 9)
jan naanak so-oo jan muktaa raam bhajan chit laavai. ||2]||3||
O servant Nanak, he is a liberated being, whose consciousness lovingly vibrates, and meditates on the Lord. ||2||3]|
Ardat Hoe € Il (1231-18)
saarang mehlaa 9. Saarang, Fifth Mehl:
Ho af cag 3 ole TS MES I (1231-18, Asay, He 9) man kar kabhoo na har gun gaa-i-o. In my mind, I never sang the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Us 92Z2Q fafimmmas afeS fafh ang ate ors ate 9 TIE Il 1232-1, Aa, He 9)
bikhi-aaskat rahi-o nis baasur keeno apno bhaa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I remained under the influence of corruption, night and day; I did whatever I pleased. ||1]|Pause] |
ad Guen Afes afs arate ug eat BUSES Il (1232-1, War, ve 9) gur updays suni-o neh kaanan par daaraa laptaa-i-o. I never listened to the Guru's Teachings; I was entangled with others' spouses.
ug fee arafs ag ores ANSE og AHSTES NAM (1232-2, Adar, He 9) par nindaa kaaran baho Dhaavat samjhi-o nah samjhaa-i-o. ||1]| | I ran all around slandering others; I was taught, but I never learned. ||1]||
as aIG H must adot fas fafa AoW TSTEE Il (1232-3, Ada, He 9) kahaa kaha-o mai apunee karnee jih biDh janam gavaa-i-o. How can I even describe my actions? This is how I wasted my life.
afs soa As nigae H ufo af ST AeSTES NQISNSNISNISENSNWE (1232-3, Aa, H8 9)
kahi naanak sabh a-ugan mo meh raakh layho sarnaa-i-o.
[12] 14113] 13] [139] [4] [159]|
Says Nanak, I am totally filled with faults. I have come to Your Sanctuary - please save me, O Lord! ||2]|4]|3]|13]|139]|4]]159]|
Ta Asa MAUS HIS A WET A (1232-5) raag saarag asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Saarang, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, First House:
qe Afsara YATE I (1232-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa fas fas tet Hot HET Il (1232-6, Ada, He 1) har bin ki-o jeevaa mayree maa-ee. How can I live, O my mother?
A AeA Sa AA AUS H fe fas JG B AST NAN TIC Il (1232-6, wa, He
jai jagdees tayraa jas jaacha-o mai har bin rahan na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Hail to the Lord of the Universe. I ask to sing Your Praises; without You, O Lord, I cannot even survive. ||1]||Pause| |
ofa at fimmn fumrrt anifs tu@ sfs Aaret | (1232-7, Ada, He 1)
har kee pi-aas pi-aasee kaaman daykh-a-u rain sabaa-ee. I am thirsty, thirsty for the Lord; the soul-bride gazes upon Him all through the night.
Alog oa Ha He Blot ug ATS Ube uset NA (1232-7, Aa, He 1)
sareeDhar naath mayraa man leenaa parabh jaanai peer paraa-ee. ||1]|
My mind is absorbed into the Lord, my Lord and Master. Only God knows the pain of another. ||1||
des Adtfs ute o of faa ae Aaet af uiSt I (1232-8, Ada, He 1)
ganat sareer peer hai har bin gur sabdee har paa’-ee.
My body suffers in pain, without the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I find the Lord.
dg efeors faut afs ofe HG afe fAG got AHTeT HQ (1232-8, Aa, He 1)
hohu da-i-aal kirpaa kar har jee-o har si-o rahaa‘ samaa-ee. ||2]|
O Dear Lord, please be kind and compassionate to me, that I might remain merged in You, O Lord. ||2||
MA Jes Jeg HS AS ala voat fos wet il (1232-9, Ada, He
aisee ravat ravhu man mayray har charnee chit laa-ee.
Follow such a path, O my conscious mind, that you may remain focused on the Feet of the Lord.
fann se ae fe Hdue fess AofA AHet SII (1232-9, Aa, He 1)
bisam bha-ay gun gaa-ay manohar nirbha-o sahj samaa-ee. ||3]|
I am wonder-struck, singing the Glorious Praises of my Fascinating Lord; I am intuitively absorbed in the Fearless Lord. ||3]|
fase on Ae ufs fasee we o atHfS uret Il (1232-10, Ada, He 1)
hirdai naam sadaa Dhun nihchal ghatai na keemat paa-ee.
That heart, in which the Eternal, Unchanging Naam vibrates and resounds, does not diminish, and cannot be evaluated.
fag ae Ag aet fosug Afsafe gs gset sil 1232-11, Ada, He 1)
bin naavai sabh ko-ee nirDhan satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||4||
Without the Name, everyone is poor; the True Guru has imparted this understanding. [141]
YisH urs se Afs AASt es He fre ret it (1232-11, Aga, Hs 1)
pareetam paraan bha-ay sun sajnee doot mu-ay bikh khaa-ee.
My Beloved is my breath of life - listen, O my companion. The demons have taken poison and died.
wa at Curt sa at SHt dae set nfs svat Hull (1232-12, Ada, He 1) jab kee upjee tab kee taisee rangul bha-ee man bhaa-ee. ||5|| As love for Him welled up, so it remains. My mind is imbued with His Love. ||5]|
Hoa AH Ae foe dfs fA Alet of To Wet Il 1232-12, wa, He 1)
sahj samaaDh sadaa liv har si-o jeevaa™ har gun gaa-ee.
I am absorbed in celestial samaadhi, lovingly attached to the Lord forever. I live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ad a Aafe gat Saat fon wis sat wet Well (1232-13, Aa, He 1)
gur kai sabad rataa bairaagee nij ghar taarhee laa-ee. ||6]||
Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have become detached from the world. In the profound primal trance, I dwell within the home of my own inner being. ||6]|
AU 3A OH Ho oA Hilo fon whe 33 GAT Il 1232-13, Aa, He 1)
suDh ras naam mahaa ras meethaa nij ghar tat gusaa’-ee",
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is sublimely sweet and supremely delicious; within the home of my own self, I understand the essence of the Lord.
3d St He AO StS Thor ot TaHfS uret DI 1232-14, Wa, He 1) tah hee man jah hee tai raakhi-aa aisee gurmat paa-ee. ||7| | Wherever You keep my mind, there it is. This is what the Guru has taught me. ||7]||
Hod Hote qoute feerfea sats a3 fs iret i 1232-14, wa, us 1)
sanak sanaad barahmaad indraadik bhagat ratay ban aa-ee.
Sanak and Sanandan, Brahma and Indra, were imbued with devotional worship, and came to be in harmony with Him.
aoa Te fag wet o Ale Ths a SH SSST NCUA (1232-15, Aa, He 1)
naanak har bin gharee na jeevaa™ har kaa naam vadaa-ee. ||8||1|| O Nanak, without the Lord, I cannot live, even for an instant. The Name of the Lord is glorious and great. ||8]|1||
ATID HIS 4 Il (1232-16)
Saarag mehlaa 1. Saarang, First Mehl:
fs faa fag dtd He Ha Il (1232-16, Ada, He 1) har bin ki-o Dheerai man mayraa. Without the Lord, how can my mind be comforted?
afe amu & oy fiona Arg feats fore na TIS il 1232-16, Asa, Hs 1)
kot kalap kay dookh binaasan saach drirh-aa-ay nibayraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The guilt and sin of millions of ages is erased, and one is released from the cycle of reincarnation, when the Truth is implanted within. ||1]]Pause| |
au foefs as 3G HNS Un Ae oO ait i (1232-17, Ada, He
kroDh nivaar jalay ha-o mamtaa paraym sadaa na-o rangee.
Anger is gone, egotism and attachment have been burnt away; I am imbued with His ever-fresh Love.
nose fants re ys wfenr afe fasntee Halt Wall 232-17, Ada, 48 1)
anbha-o bisar ga-ay parabh jaachi-aa har nirmaa-il sangee. ||1]||
Other fears are forgotten, begging at God's Door. The Immaculate Lord is my Companion. ||1]|
due Hfs faurfa 38 sae ufenr Sa Aafe fos weit Il (1232-18, Aa, He 1)
chanchal mat ti-aag bha-o bhanjan paa-i-aa ayk sabad liv laagee.
Forsaking my fickle intellect, I have found God, the Destroyer of fear; I am lovingly attuned to the One Word, the Shabad.
dfs oA ot fur foerdt afe Afs BE assrat iQ (1232-19, Ada, ue 1)
har ras chaakh tarikhaa nivaaree har mayl la-ay badbhaagee. ||2| |
Tasting the sublime essence of the Lord, my thirst is quenched; by great good fortune, the Lord has united me with Himself. ||2]|
wads fife se Had AS TIHfS AT fear Il (1232-19, Aa, He 1)
abhrat sinch bha-ay subhar sar gurmat saach nihaalaa.
The empty tank has been filled to overflowing. Following the Guru's Teachings, I am enraptured with the True Lord.
Us 9233 Ho of ath as fevaee orfe warfe efenrer BI (1233-1, Aa, He 1)
man rat naam ratay nihkayval aad jugaad da-i-aalaa. ||3|| My mind is imbued with love for the Naam. The Immaculate Lord is merciful, from the beginning of time, and througout the ages. ||3]|
Hofe vfs Sor Ho Hat aS Svar fos wait i 1233-2, Aa, He 1)
mohan mohi lee-aa man moraa badai bhaag liv laagee.
My mind is fascinated with the Fascinating Lord. By great good fortune, I am lovingly attuned to Him.
Ag stots faofeu eu ae He fSdHS nist Sil (1233-2, Aa, He 1)
saach beechaar kilvikh dukh kaatay man nirmal anraagee. ||4]|
Contemplating the True Lord, all the resides of sins and mistakes are wiped away. My mind is pure and immaculate in His Love. ||4| |
MIs AST Aad aad med Sat Mo UAT ll (1233-3, Asa, He 1)
gahir gambheer saagar ratnaagar avar nahee an poojaa.
God is the Deep and Unfathomable Ocean, the Source of all jewels; no other is worthy of worship.
Hag dete 3H 3 SHO Meg B Wor SAT UI (1233-3, Arar, He 1) sabad beechaar bharam bha-o bhanjan avar na jaani-aa doojaa. ||5]|
I contemplate the Shabad, the Destroyer of doubt and fear; I do not know any other at all. ||5]|
Hout ug fesHe ue difeor ats gA gS mifteret I (1233-4, Arga, He 1)
manoo-aa maar nirmal pad cheeni-aa har ras ratay aDhikaa-ee.
Subduing my mind, I have realized the pure status; I am totally imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord.
San fag H neg 3 Wot Afsafs gs gTsret Well 1233-5, Ada, He 1)
aykas bin mai avar na jaanaa™ satgur boojh bujhaa-ee. ||6]|
I do not Know any other except the Lord. The True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||6||
WOH Midis Move uinst TsHfs Sa font Il 1233-5, Ada, He 1)
agam agochar anaath ajonee gurmat ayko jaani-aa.
God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, Unmastered and Unborn; through the Guru's Teachings, I know the One Lord.
Had 3d ot fas 38 He tS Ho HfeMr IDI 1233-6, Aa, He 1)
subhar bharay naahee chit dolai man hee tay man maani-aa. ||7]||
Filled to overflowing, my consciousness does not waver; through the Mind, my mind is pleased and appeased. ||7]||
qd usr naa adh as age] Aet | (1233-6, Ada, He 1) gur parsaadee aktha-o kathee-ai kaha-o kahaavai so-ee. By Guru's Grace, I speak the Unspoken; I speak what He makes me speak.
Soa Ute efennse IHS nied o Wout get WCQI (1233-7, Aa, He 1) naanak deen da-i-aal hamaaray avar na jaani-aa ko-ee. ||8]|2|| O Nanak, my Lord is Merciful to the meek; I do not know any other at all. ||8]|2]|
Ada HIG 3 mASud wed (1233-8)
saarag mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa ghar 1 Saarang, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
qe Afsars yATfE il (1233-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ho Hd dfs & of Ssret Il (1233-9, Aa, He 3) man mayray har kai naam vadaa-ee. O my mind, the Name of the Lord is glorious and great.
of faa nied 3 Wet aet ofa a ofh Hats afs uret an TIE Il 1233-9, Aa, He 3) har bin avar na jaanaa ko-ee har kai naam mukat gat paa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I know of none, other than the Lord; through the Lord's Name, I have attained liberation and emancipation. ||1||Pause]|
Rafe 38 Sao WHATS fodae dfs ASt foe wet i (1233-10, Aa, He 3)
sabad bha-o bhanjan jamkaal nikhanjan har saytee liv laa-ee.
Through the Word of the Shabad, I am lovingly attuned to the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, the Destroyer of the Messenger of Death.
dfs AMeTS" TaHfe WS" AOA Sfmt AMTST IAM (1233-10, Aa, He 3)
har sukh-daata gurmukh jaataa sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ee. ||1||
As Gurmukh, I have realized the Lord, the Giver of peace; I remain intuitively absorbed in Him. ||1]]|
sas a sno dfs oH fadne Use safs aset Il 1233-11, Ada, Hs 3)
bhagtaa™ kaa bhojan har naam niranjan pain"an bhagat badaa-ee.
The Immaculate Name of the Lord is the food of His devotees; they wear the glory of devotional worship.
fon ufs aA Ae ofs Aefe ofe efs AST ust QI (1233-11, Ara, He 3)
nij ghar vaasaa sadaa har sayvan har dar sobhaa paa-ee. ||2||
They abide in the home of their inner beings, and they serve the Lord forever; they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2]|
HoH ofa ard Hout SB nigg F AF ATH Il (1233-12, rsa, we 3)
manmukh buDh kaachee manoo-aa dolai akath na kathai kahaanee.
The intellect of the self-willed manmukh is false; his mind wavers and wobbles, and he cannot speak the Unspoken Speech.
aanfs fesse ofa ufe efhmr nifigs Ast ast SI (1233-13, Adar, He 3)
gurmat nihchal har man vasi-aa amrit saachee baanee. ||3]|
Following the Guru's Teachings, the Eternal Unchanging Lord abides within the mind; the True Word of His Bani is Ambrosial Nectar. ||3]|
Ho & 3da Aafe fees TH AafA AST I (1233-13, Aa, He 3)
man kay tarang sabad nivaaray rasnaa sahj subhaa-ee.
The Shabad calms the turbulent waves of the mind; the tongue is intuively imbued with peace.
Afsas fife adit we nud fafo af ASt foe wet ell (1233-14, Ada, He 3)
satgur mil rahee-ai sad apunay jin har saytee liv laa-ee. ||4||
So remain united forever with your True Guru, who is lovingly attuned to the Lord. [41]
Ho Aafe Hd ST HAS Je Ufa vaat fos wet Il (1233-14, Aa, He 3)
man sabad marai taa mukto hovai har charnee chit laa-ee.
If the mortal dies in the Shabad, then he is liberated; he focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet.
dfs Ag Aad Ae AS fesHs oe Aula ASST Hull 1233-15, Aa, He 3)
har sar Saagar sadaa jal nirmal naavai sahj subhaa-ee. ||5||
The Lord is an Ocean; His Water is Forever Pure. Whoever bathes in it is intuitively imbued with peace. ||5||
Hae ghee Ae df aS TBH FAS Hrs Il (1233-16, Ada, Hs 3)
sabad veechaar sadaa rang raatay ha-umai tarisnaa maaree.
Those who contemplate the Shabad are forever imbued with His Love; their egotism and desires are subdued.
nists fesaze dfs sent As MSH TH HITS NEM (1233-16, Aa, He 3)
antar nihkayval har ravi-aa sabh aatam raam muraaree. ||6||
The Pure, Unattached Lord permeates their inner beings; the Lord, the Supreme Soul, is pervading all. ||6]|
Rea Afe gd Afs TS A 3d fe TS Il (1233-17, Aa, Hs 3)
sayvak sayv rahay sach raatay jo tayrai man bhaanay.
Your humble servants serve You, O Lord; those who are imbued with the Truth are pleasing to Your Mind.
efam HIG 3 US Afar Sot TS STS G USES WDM (1233-17, Adar, we 3)
dubiDhaa mahal na paavai jag jhoothee gun avgan na pachhaanay. ||7||
Those who are involved in duality do not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; caught in the false nature of the world, they do not discriminate between merits and demerits. ||7||
nm Af we weg adha AY Hae Ag Aat Il (1233-18, Ada, He 3) aapay mayl la-ay akath kathee-ai sach sabad sach banee.
When the Lord merges us into Himself, we speak the Unspoken Speech; True is the Shabad, and True is the Word of His Bani.
Sa ATS As AHS Tis a STH Terat CIA (1233-18, ASar, He 3)
naanak saachay sach samaanay har kaa naam vakhaanee. ||8]|1]|
O Nanak, the true people are absorbed in the Truth; they chant the Name of the Lord. [18] [21]
ATId HIG 3 Il (1233-19)
saarag mehlaa 3. Saarang, Third Mehl:
Ho Ad de a aH ms Hot Il (1233-19, Aa, He 3) man mayray har kaa naam at meethaa. O my mind, the Name of the Lord is supremely sweet.
Yat 9238
HOH HOH a faafer se sxe TaHfy Sa Stor A TS Il 1234-1, Aa, He 3) janam janam kay kilvikh bha-o bhanjan gurmukh ayko deethaa. ||1]| rahaa-o. It is the Destroyer of the sins, the guilt and fears of countless incarnations; the Gurmukh sees the One Lord. ||1||Pause] |
afe adss & uu fase fe Aret Hfs arene It (1234-1, Arar, He 3) kot kotantar kay paap binaasan har saachaa man bhaa-i-aa. Millions upon millions of sins are erased, when the mind comes to love the True Lord.
of fag weg 5 AS UM Afsate Fa geen AU (1234-2, Adar, He 3)
har bin avar na soojhai doojaa satgur ayk bujhaa-i-aa. ||1||
I do not know any other, except the Lord; the True Guru has revealed the One Lord to me. |[1]|
UH uae fas wife effort AIA Id AHTET Il (1234-3, Ada, He 3)
paraym padaarath jin ghat vasi-aa sehjay rahay samaa-ee.
Those whose hearts are filled with the wealth of the Lord's Love, remain intuitively absorbed in Him.
Hafe 33 A Sot Jos TS Adi Ase il (1234-3, Ardar, ws 3)
sabad ratay say rang chaloolay raatay sahj subhaa-ee. ||2||
Imbued with the Shabad, they are dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love. They are imbued with the Lord's celestial peace and poise. ||2||
dHo' Hae sete sh TSt we set Sa Bet i (1234-4, Ada, v2 3)
rasnaa sabad veechaar ras raatee laal bha-ee rang laa-ee.
Contemplating the Shabad, the tongue is imbued with joy; embracing His Love, it is dyed a deep crimson.
TH oH fesaee Whur Ho fgufsur AHS niet SI 4234-4, Ada, He 3)
raam naam nihkayval jaani-aa man taripti-aa saat aa-ee. ||3]|
I have come to know the Name of the Pure Detached Lord; my mind is satisfied and comforted. ||3]|
ufss ufs ufs Hat Afs wa of Su aa Sua tl 1234-5, Avda, ne 3)
pandit parh" parh" monee sabh thaakay bharam bhaykh thakay bhaykh-Dhaaree. The Pandits, the religious scholars, read and study, and all the silent sages have grown weary; they have grown weary of wearing their religious robes and wandering all around.
ag usAte fadao ufeor AS Aafe eterct ieil (1234-5, Aa, ne 3)
gur parsaad niranjan paa-i-aa saachai sabad veechaaree. ||4]|
By Guru's Grace, I have found the Immaculate Lord; I contemplate the True Word of the Shabad. ||4| |
mat ase feats Afs TS ATS Aa Hfo SteMr Il (1234-6, Ada, He 3)
aavaa ga-on nivaar sach raatay saach sabad man bhaa-i-aa.
My coming and going in reincarnation is ended, and I am imbued with Truth; the True Word of the Shabad is pleasing to my mind.
Afsag Afe wet AY uTeht fafs fees mre Tetfenr ull (1234-7, Aa, He 3)
satgur sayv sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai jin vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa. ||5||
Serving the True Guru, eternal peace is found, and self-conceit is eliminated from within. ||5]|
And Aafe Aon Ufs Cun xfs ATS fos wet I (1234-7, Aa, He 3)
saachai sabad sahj Dhun upjai man saachai liv laa-ee.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, the celestial melody wells up, and the mind is lovingly focused on the True Lord.
WH Midd OH fednae TaHfe Hf SATE EN (1234-8, Adar, He 3)
agam agochar naam niranjan gurmukh man vasaa-ee. ||6||
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord, abides in the mind of the Gurmukh. ||6]|
San ufo Ag Aas eas feaer Sq USTs Il (1234-8, Aa, ns 3)
aykas meh sabh jagto vartai virlaa ayk pachhaanai.
The whole world is contained in the One Lord. How rare are those who understand the One Lord.
Rafe He 3 Ag fas AS niafes Sat AS MDI (1234-9, Ardar, we 3)
sabad marai taa sabh kichh soojhai an-din ayko jaanai. ||7||
One who dies in the Shabad comes to know everything; night and day, he realizes the One Lord. ||7]|
fAH 3 oefs ad Het AS gS IY Ads AAG AT Il (1234-10, wd, we 3)
jis no nadar karay so-ee jan boojhai hor kahnaa kathan na jaa-ee.
That humble being, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, understands. Nothing else can be said.
sod of gS Ae Saat Sa Aafe foe wet WCW 1234-10, Ada, He 3)
naanak naam ratay sadaa bairaagee ayk sabad liv laa-ee. ||8||2||
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are forever detached from the world; they are lovingly attuned to the One Word of the Shabad. ||8]|2]|
ASA HIG 3 Il (1234-11)
saarag mehlaa 3. Saarang, Third Mehl:
Ho Hd dfs at nee ATeat I (1234-11, Aa, He 3) man mayray har kee akath kahaanee. O my mind, the Speech of the Lord is unspoken.
dfs sefa ad Het AS ue Tonfa fees wret Ul TIS th 1234-11, Ada, He 3)
har nadar karay so-ee jan paa-ay gurmukh virlai jaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
That humble being who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace, obtains it. How rare is that Gurmukh who understands. ||1||Pause] |
ufs afed asts wat adts ag & Rafe uefonr it (1234-12, Ada, He 3)
har gahir gambheer gunee gaheer gur kai sabad pachhaani-aa.
The Lord is Deep, Profound and Unfathomable, the Ocean of Excellence; He is realized through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
ag fafa acu ast ofe en fag Fae sGafonr A (1234-13, Adar, Hs 3)
baho biDh karam karahi bhaa-ay doojai bin sabdai ba-uraani-aa. ||1]|
Mortals do their deeds in all sorts of ways, in the love of duality; but without the Shabad, they are insane. ||1]|
ofs oth oe Het AS fosHe fefs Her uf o Tet I 1234-13, Adar, Hs 3)
har naam naavai so-ee jan nirmal fir mailaa mool na ho-ee.
That humble being who bathes in the Lord's Name becomes immaculate; he never becomes polluted again.
on fas Ag Aa d Her en sath ufs Tet QM (1234-14, Adar, Hs 3)
naam binaa sabh jag hai mailaa doojai bharam pat kho-ee. ||2] |
Without the Name, the whole world is polluted; wandering in duality, it loses its honor. ||2||
for fast for Hafo fsorat H st eso ure I (1234-15, Adar, Hs 3) ki-aa darirh-aa™ ki-aa sangrahi ti-aagee mai taa boojh na paa-ee. What should I grasp? What should I gather up or leave behind? I do not know.
dfs efeure feu afe afs ae oni df Aare SI (1234-15, Aa, He 3)
hohi da-i-aal kirpaa kar har jee-o naamo ho-ay sakhaa-ee. ||3]|
O Dear Lord, Your Name is the Help and Support of those whom You bless with Your kindness and compassion. ||3]|
Ae Ay est aH feast fan ove fSn ate we Il 1234-16, Aa, He 3)
sachaa sach daataa karam biDhaataa jis bhaavai tis naa-ay laa-ay.
The True Lord is the True Giver, the Architect of Destiny; as He pleases, He links mortals to the Name.
OT word Aet gs fAA S nef gee sil (1234-16, Ardar, we 3)
guroo du-aarai so-ee boojhai jis no aap bujhaa-ay. ||4||
He alone comes to understand, who enters the Guru's Gate, whom the Lord Himself instructs. ||4||
ofy fame fe Ho adt 3S mret ABS AAT Il (1234-17, Ada, He 3)
daykh bismaad ih man nahee chaytay aavaa ga-on sansaaraa.
Even gazing upon the wonders of the Lord, this mind does not think of Him. The world comes and goes in reincarnation.
Afsag AS Aet es US He ToS WUll (1234-17, Asa, Hs 3)
satgur sayvay so-ee boojhai paa-ay mokh du-aaraa. ||5||
Serving the True Guru, the mortal comes to understand, and finds the Door of Salvation. ||5||
fig Ug AS A ae 3 feasts Afsate gs gTsret I (1234-18, ada, Hs 3)
jin" dar soojhai say kaday na vigaarheh satgur boojh bujhaa-ee.
Those who understand the Lord's Court, never suffer separation from him. The True Guru has imparted this understanding.
AY HAH adel fasts orefs mree ATS Jaret Ell (1234-18, Aa, He 3)
sach sanjam karnee kirat kamaaveh aavan jaan rahaa-ee. ||6||
They practice truth, self-restraint and good deeds; their comings and goings are ended. ||6||
A efe Ave Ag anrefa fro Tafa ATE yrOTST II (1234-19, Aa, He 3)
say dar saachai saach kamaaveh jin gurmukh saach aDhaaraa.
In the Court of the True Lord, they practice Truth. The Gurmukhs take the Support of the True Lord.
Yat q23Bu
HOH BH SoH gore a gEts Sars WI 1235-1, Ada, ve 3)
manmukh doojai bharam bhulaa-ay naa boojheh veechaaraa. ||7||
The self-willed manmukhs wander, lost in doubt and duality. They do not know how to contemplate the Lord. ||7||
nm auf wmy fe omy afe afe Se i (1235-1, Aa, ve 3) aapay gurmukh aapay dayvai aapay kar kar vaykhai. He Himself is the Gurmukh, and He Himself gives; He Himself creates and beholds.
Sod A Ho ate ue d fro at ufs ure BF CHS (1235-2, Ada, He 3)
naanak say jan thaa-ay pa-ay hai jin kee pat paavai laykhai. ||8]|3]|
O Nanak, those humble beings are approved, whose honor the Lord Himself accepts. [8113] |
ATS HIS U MASUeMIT We A (1235-3)
saarag mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa ghar 1 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
qe Afsara Arte it (1235-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
GASt ugsy Sad Stor Il (1235-4, Ada, v2 5) gusaa-ee™ partaap tuhaaro deethaa. O Lord of the World, I gaze upon Your wondrous glory.
ade ages Guile Anes Age szufs stor ud JIS il 4235-4, arda, ne 5)
karan karaavan upaa-ay samaavan sagal chhatarpat beethaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are the Doer, the Cause of causes, the Creator and Destroyer. You are the Sovereign Lord of all. ||1||Pause] |
Ta TE TH se Ja Cfo 3S ATS AIMEE Il (1235-5, sa, Hs 5)
raanaa raa-o raaj bha-ay rankaa un jhoothay kahan kahaa-i-o.
The rulers and nobles and kings shall become beggars. Their ostentatious shows are false
JMS TH Ae AOHfs Sta AS Wet AA AES All 1235-5, Arar, He 5) hamraa raajan sadaa salaamat taa ko sagal ghataa jas gaa-i-o. ||1]|| . My Sovereign Lord King is eternally stable. His Praises are sung in every heart. ||1]|
Cunt Had THs at AST AIS AT UTS Il (1235-6, Avda, we 5) upmaa sunhu raajan kee santahu kahat jayt paahoochaa. Listen to the Praises of my Lord King, O Saints. I chant them as best I can.
SAH Fs ATT Bsa SS Tt FS Sor Ii (1235-6, Avda, we 5) baysumaar vad saah daataaraa oochay hee tay oochaa. ||2|| My Lord King, the Great Giver, is Immeasurable. He is the Highest of the high. ||2||
uefs udfES Aas nas uUTSa AAS Adi Il (1235-7, Aa, v2 5) pavan paro-i-o sagal akaaraa paavak kaasat sangay. He has strung His Breath throughout the creation; He locked the fire in the wood.
ald Udfe afs ae Sas afe 5 fan dt Aat SI (1235-7, Aa, H 5) neer Dharan kar raakhay aykat ko-ay na kis hee sangay. ||3]| He placed the water and the land together, but neither blends with the other. ||3]|
ufe ufe aa one at ws ute wis ssfs Gyro il 1235-8, Ada, He 5)
ghat ghat kathaa raajan kee chaalai ghar ghar tujheh omaahaa.
In each and every heart, the Story of our Sovereign Lord is told; in each and every home, they yearn for Him.
iby a3 Afs we afeor yen fara AHS SII (1235-8, Ard, He 5)
jee-a jant sabh paachhai kari-aa parathmay rijak samaahaa. ||4||
Afterwards, He created all beings and creatures; but first, He provided them with sustenance. ||4||
nt fag ase A uM agar HAPS arg eat i (1235-9, ardar, we 5) jo kichh karnaa so aapay karnaa maslat kaahoo deen"ee.
Whatever He does, He does by Himself. Who has ever given Him advice?
mfod A360 afe ade feure Ast Art stot Mull (1235-10, Avda, us 5)
anik jatan kar karah dikhaa-ay saachee saakhee cheen"ee. ||5||
The mortals make all sorts of efforts and showy displays, but He is realized only through the Teachings of Truth. ||5]|
dfs sas ats TS mS Slat SH Tsret Il 1235-10, ada, He 5)
har bhagtaa kar raakhay apnay deenee naam vadaa-ee.
The Lord protects and saves His devotees; He blesses them with the glory of His Name.
fafs fafs adt mefamr AS at 3 3° He geet Wel 4235-11, Avda, ne 5)
jin jin karee avgi-aa jan kee tay tai’ dee-ay rurh"aa-ee. ||6]|
Whoever is disrespectful to the humble servant of the Lord, shall be swept away and destroyed. ||6||
Hafs 3& AOHafs afs fae & nieae Afs usofaMr I 1235-11, Ada, He 5)
mukat bha-ay saaDhsangat kar tin kay avgan sabh parhari-aa.
Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, are liberated; all their demerits are taken away.
fa6 a fy se facuer f35 se Aare Sfmt DI (1235-12, Ada, He 5)
tin ka-o daykh bha-ay kirpaalaa tin bhav saagar tari-aa. ||7]||
Seeing them, God becomes merciful; they are carried across the terrifying world- ocean. ||7||
JH 36 Sle SH as Ava aeals ACS sora Il (1235-12, Adar, us 5)
ham naan"ay neech tum"ay bad saahib kudrat ka-un beechaaraa.
I am lowly, I am nothing at all; You are my Great Lord and Master - how can I even contemplate Your creative potency?
HO 30 ASG Id SAA SY DSA BH MOMS NCUA (1235-13, Aa, He 5)
man tan seetal gur daras daykhay naanak naam aDhaaraa. ||8]|1]|
My mind and body are cooled and soothed, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Nanak takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||8]|1]|
ATS HIS U MAUS We E (1235-15)
saarag mehlaa 5 asatpadee ghar 6 Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Sixth House:
qe Afsars yrfe il (1235-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MoH Marfa HoT AS AA Il (1235-16, Asa, He 5) agam agaaDh sunhu jan kathaa. Listen to the Story of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable.
USAIN ot MIA AST WAU! FI il (1235-16, Adar, w2 5) paarbarahm kee achraj sabhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The glory of the Supreme Lord God is wondrous and amazing! ||1||Pause||
He Het Afsdd SHAS Il (1235-16, Ada, Hs 5) sadaa sadaa satgur namaskaar. Forever and ever, humbly bow to the True Guru.
ad fasut 3 To ae mrs Il (1235-17, Ada, 2 5) gur kirpaa tay gun gaa-ay apaar. By Guru's Grace, sing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
Ho Stsfs JS usaA Il (1235-17, Aa, He 5) man bheetar hovai pargaas. His Light shall radiate deep within your mind.
fomits nite nifamire fear IA (1235-17, Aa, He 5) gi-aan anjan agi-aan binaas. ||1]| With the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom, ignorance is dispelled. ||1||
ffs ordt aT at fares Il (1235-18, Aa, He 5) mit naahee jaa kaa bisthaar. There is no limit to His Expanse.
Hat ST at wes MUS Il (1235-18, Adar, He 5) sobhaa taa kee apar apaar. His Glory is Infinite and Endless.
mfsx Ja A a We o ATT Il (1235-18, Aa, He 5) anik rang jaa kay ganay na jaahi. His many plays cannot be counted.
Aa Jae Pag fs ats MQM (1235-19, Asa, we 5) sog harakh duhhoo meh naahi. ||2| | He is not subject to pleasure or pain. ||2||
mfoad Yoh A a Fe ofS aafs Il (1235-19, Arda, He 5) anik barahmay jaa kay bayd Dhun karahi. Many Brahmas vibrate Him in the Vedas.
wifsa Hon SfA fomre cafe it (1235-19, Ada, He 5) anik mahays bais Dhi-aan Dhareh. Many Shivas sit in deep meditation.
UST WIZE
mMfoa UTE IAT MESS Il (1236-1, Aa, H2 5) anik purakh ansaa avtaar. Many beings take incarnation.
ufo fEe SS Bsas WS (1236-1, Arar, Hs 5) anik indar oobhay darbaar. ||3]| Many Indras stand at the Lord's Door. ||3]|
misax UZS USA MT Old Il (1236-1, Aa, He 5) anik pavan paavak ar neer. Many winds, fires and waters.
miok 330 Arad efa dts il (1236-2, ada, ue 5) anik ratan saagar daDh kheer. Many jewels, and oceans of butter and milk.
mio He AAS oftmrts i 1236-2, Asa, He 5) anik soor sasee-ar nakhi-aat. Many suns, moons and stars.
mfok fet Set aT SHS Sil (1236-2, Aa, He 5) anik dayvee dayvaa baho bhaa"t. ||41| Many gods and goddesses of so many kinds. ||4]|
mfsax SAO nifsax AHAS Il (1236-3, Aa, He 5) anik basuDhaa anik kaamDhayn. Many earths, many wish-fulfilling cows.
miok uTdHS nifsa HfY Fo Il (1236-3, Ada, He 5) anik paarjaat anik mukh bayn. Many miraculous Elysian trees, many Krishnas playing the flute.
mMiok MATA nifSax UTS Il (1236-3, Aa, He 5) anik akaas anik paataal. Many Akaashic ethers, many nether regions of the underworld.
wife Het rbot sures ull (1236-4, Anda, He 5) anik mukhee japee-ai gopaal. ||5| | Many mouths chant and meditate on the Lord. ||5||
nifea AAS fAfyfS use i (1236-4, Ardar, He 5) anik saastar simrit puraan. Many Shaastras, Simritees and Puraanas.
mifoa Fas Jes afemrs Il (1236-4, Ada, He 5) anik jugat hovat bakhi-aan. Many ways in which we speak.
mifea Ads Aafs fears il (1236-5, Ada, He 5) anik sarotay suneh niDhaan. Many listeners listen to the Lord of Treasure.
Hoe Abt UTS SASS MEM (1236-5, Agar, H2 5) sarab jee-a pooran bhagvaan. ||6|| The Lord God totally permeates all beings. ||6||
mfok TdH vifSa ANT Il (1236-5, Aa, He 5) anik Dharam anik kumayr. Many righteous judges of Dharma, many gods of wealth.
misa ade uifoa afea ANT Il (1236-6, Aa, He 5) anik baran anik kanik sumayr. Many gods of water, many mountains of gold.
Misa AY S230 SH Bld Il (1236-6, Aa, He 5) anik saykh navtan naam layhi. Many thousand-headed snakes, chanting ever-new Names of God.
USAIN a nis  SfT WII 1236-6, Avda, ve 5) paarbarahm kaa ant na tayhi. ||7]|| They do not know the limits of the Supreme Lord God. ||7||
mfoa udba wifsa 3d Ys Il (1236-7, Ada, He 5) anik puree-aa anik tah khand. Many solar systems, many galaxies.
mifex JU Fa FINS Il (1236-7, Avda, we 5) anik roop rang barahmand. Many forms, colors and celestial realms.
mifox For mifex SS UB Il (1236-7, Asa, Hz 5) anik banaa anik fal mool. Many gardens, many fruits and roots.
mitufo Fan witufs MAE Ici (1236-8, Asa, He 5) aapeh sookham aapeh asthool. ||8] | He Himself is mind, and He Himself is matter. ||8]|
mfok Aarfe feoA mg TTS Il (1236-8, Ada, v2 5) anik jugaad dinas ar raat. Many ages, days and nights.
miok use mifox Ssuts Il (1236-8, Ada, v8 5) anik parla-o anik utpaat. Many apocalypses, many creations.
mifex Aba aT at faa Hes i (1236-9, Arar, He 5) anik jee-a jaa kay garih maahi. Many beings are in His home.
SHS TH UTS AS ofS CM 1236-9, Asay, v2 5) ramat raam pooran sarab thaa™-ay. ||9]| The Lord is perfectly pervading all places. ||9||
mfoa Hear at at wat o ATE Il 1236-9, Avda, Hs 5) anik maa-i-aa jaa kee lakhee na jaa-ay. Many Mayas, which cannot be known.
mifsa aer ae safe af il (1236-10, Avda, He 5)
anik kalaa khaylai har raa-ay. Many are the ways in which our Sovereign Lord plays.
mifoa ufos afes Halts Il (1236-10, Aa, He 5) anik Dhunit lalit sangeet. Many exquisite melodies sing of the Lord.
mfsx TUS ysae SI PHS NAO (1236-10, Avda, ws 5) anik gupat pargatay tah cheet. ||10]| Many recording scribes of the conscious and subconscious are revealed there. ||10]|
AS 3 Ov Sas A a Af Il (1236-11, Avda, He 5) sabh tay ooch bhagat jaa kai sang. He is above all, and yet He dwells with His devotees.
MTS UIT TO Wefs dfar il 1236-11, Aa, vs 5) aath pahar gun gaavahi rang. Twenty-four hours a day, they sing His Praises with love.
Mfod MATTE MTSE SATS Il (1236-11, Arar, v2 5) anik anaahad aanand jhunkaar. Many unstruck melodies resound and resonate with bliss.
Gur GA aT as MZ BUTT WAU: (1236-12, Aa, He 5) u-aa ras kaa kachh ant na paar. ||11]| There is no end or limit of that sublime essence. ||11]|
Afs use AS MAES Il (1236-12, Adar, v8 5) sat purakh sat asthaan. True is the Primal Being, and True is His dwelling.
Cu 3 Cz fasne fagea Il (1236-12, Ara, 18 5) ooch tay ooch nirmal nirbaan. He is the Highest of the high, Immaculate and Detached, in Nirvaanaa.
mua at aArets nity il (1236-13, Aa, H8 5) apunaa kee-aa jaaneh aap. He alone knows His handiwork.
mma wife we afo& famrfu il 1236-13, Avda, v2 5) aapay ghat ghat rahi-o bi-aap.
He Himself pervades each and every heart. faur feure ator Sfenie I (1236-13, Avda, Hs 5)
kirpaa niDhaan naanak da-i-aal. The Merciful Lord is the Treasure of Compassion, O Nanak.
fate Afumr stead FS SS STS NAUUUAUBUD I 4236-14, Ada, He 5)
jin japi-aa naanak tay bha-ay nihaal. ||12||1]|2]|2||3]|7]|
Those who chant and meditate on Him, O Nanak, are exalted and enraptured. 22,1212 1131171]
Addl 23S HIG U (1236-15)
saarag chhant mehlaa 5 Saarang, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1236-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
As Vdha nies aT VST Il (1236-16, Asa, H3 5) sabh daykhee-ai anbhai kaa daataa. See the Giver of fearlessness in all.
ufe ufe use FI mifsurst il (1236-16, Ardar, He 5) ghat ghat pooran hai alipaataa. The Detached Lord is totally permeating each and every heart.
ufe ufe use ats fardisa Ae sda fAG Faq shor I (1236-16, Adar, He 5) ghat ghat pooran kar bistheeran jal tarang ji-o rachan kee-aa. Like waves in the water, He created the creation.
ofs GA We Sa wes nite o short & shor | 1236-17, Ada, nz 5) habh ras maanay bhog ghataanay aan na bee-aa ko thee-aa. He enjoys all tastes, and takes pleasure in all hearts. There is no other like Him at all.
ofa dat fea gat sag ASAfa Ys AST Il (1236-17, wa, ve 5)
har rangee ik rangee thaakur satsang parabh jaataa.
The color of the Lord's Love is the one color of our Lord and Master; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, God is realized.
Soa Va Sto fas Aw Hie AS Sd nies ar VST IAI (1236-18, Aa, He 5)
naanak daras leenaa ji-o jal meenaa sabh daykhee-ai anbhai kaa daataa. ||1]|| O Nanak, I am drenched with the Blessed Vision of the Lord, like the fish in the water. I see the Giver of fearlessness in all. ||1]|
ase Bunt eB aga Fsret Il (1236-19, Ada, He 5) ka-un upmaa day-o kavan badaa-ee. What praises should I give, and what approval should I offer to Him?
use ufs sfoS Aa set I (1236-19, Asa, 2 5) pooran poor rahi-o sarab thaa-ee. The Perfect Lord is totally pervading and permeating all places.
YIS HOHIS we ule Ave Aa fis sa sret | (1236-19, Adar, Hs 5)
pooran manmohan ghat ghat sohan jab khinchai tab chhaa-ee.
The Perfect Enticing Lord adorns each and every heart. When He withdraws, the mortal turns to dust.
Yat 9239
fas o maag ffs afs AU wet MISA Sor nret Ih (1237-1, Aa, v2 5)
ki-o na aaraaDhahu mil kar saaDhahu gharee muhtak baylaa aa-ee.
Why do you not worship and adore Him? Join together with the Holy Saints; any instant, your time shall come.
wag wag Ag A fas UA Afar 3 ae AT I 1237-1, Arda, we 5) arath darab sabh jo kichh deesai sang na kachhhoo jaa-ee. All your property and wealth, and all that you see - none of it will go along with you.
aT saa die de wraug aes Cunt Se geo Fsret lM (1237-2, wa, ue 5)
kaho naanak har har aaraaDhahu kavan upmaa day-o kavan badaa-ee. ||2||
Says Nanak, worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har. What praise, and what approval, can I offer to Him? ||2]|
ye AS HS SAT AAT Il (1237-3, rdar, we 5) poochha-o sant mayro thaakur kaisaa. I ask the Saints, what is my Lord and Master like?
Ite mau SI AAT Il (1237-3, Aa, He 5) hee-o araapa-u™ dayh sadaysaa. I offer my heart, to one who brings me news of Him.
ag AeA us He aA AT HIS USAT Il (1237-3, Aa, He 5) dayh sadaysaa parabh jee-o kaisaa kah mohan parvaysaa. Give me news of my Dear God; where does the Enticer live?
nial nial HUETEt UTS FoHet aS ASTI SAT Il (1237-4, Avda, we 5)
ang ang sukh-daa-ee pooran barahmaa-ee thaan thaanantar daysaa.
He is the Giver of peace to life and limb; God is totally permeating all places, interspaces and countries.
gue 3 Hast ufe wife Fas afs 3 AA dfs AAT Il (1237-4, Aa, He 5)
banDhan tay muktaa ghat ghat jugtaa kahi na saka-o har jaisaa.
He is liberated from bondage, joined to each and every heart. I cannot say what the Lord is like.
fy ofss staat Ho HfeS ys te AS SAT AAT BI (1237-5, Ada, Hs 5)
daykh charit naanak man mohi-o poochhai deen mayro thaakur kaisaa. ||3]|
Gazing upon His wondrous play, O Nanak, my mind is fascinated. I humbly ask, what is my Lord and Master like? ||3]|
ate fasur mus ufo mirfeni il 1237-6, Anda, He 5) kar kirpaa apunay peh aa-i-aa. In His Kindness, He has come to His humble servant.
ufe A fee fas vee sAfenr Il 1237-6, Ada, H2 5) Dhan so ridaa jih charan basaa-i-aa. Blessed is that heart, in which the Lord's Feet are enshrined.
do sAtfeur AS Harfenr wifemre vids aefenr | 1237-6, Ada, Hz 5)
charan basaa-i-aa sant sangaa-i-aa agi-aan anDhayr gavaa-i-aa.
His Feet are enshrined within, in the Society of the Saints; the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
sfeur yarn foe Corn ys Sater urfeur | 1237-7, Adar, He 5) bha-i-aa pargaas ridai ulaas parabh lorheedaa paa-i-aa. The heart is enlightened and illumined and enraptured; God has been found.
ey ator AY We Hid Fo" HIT Moe AaAfeMe Il (1237-7, Asa, He 5) dukh naathaa sukh ghar meh voothaa mahaa anand sehjaa-i-aa. Pain is gone, and peace has come to my house. The ultimate intuitive peace prevails.
aT sea Hue ufenr ate faut mys ufa orfenr sia 1237-8, Aa, Hs 5) kaho naanak mai pooraa paa-i-aa kar kirpaa apunay peh aa-i-aa. ||4||1]|
Says Nanak, I have found the Perfect Lord; in His Kindness, He has come to His humble servant. ||4]|1]|
Ada at ea He es Ife HIN JAS at Ufs (1237-10) Saarang kee vaar mehlaa 4 raa-ay mahmay hasnay kee Dhuian Vaar Of Saarang, Fourth Mehl, To Be Sung To The Tune Of Mehma-Hasna:
96 Afsars yATfe it (1237-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HOAX HIS 2 Il (1237-11)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
TT AHt ug fee HS ao 3G Sl il 1237-11, Adar, ws 2)
gur kunjee paahoo nival man kothaa tan chhat.
The key of the Guru opens the lock of attachment, in the house of the mind, under the roof of the body.
Sot Td fag Ho at sa © Cus nied o Aet Tle NAN (1237-11, Ada, He 2) naanak gur bin man kaa taak na ugh-rhai avar na kunjee hath. ||1]|
O Nanak, without the Guru, the door of the mind cannot be opened. No one else holds the key in hand. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1237-12)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
3 Stn Tait set Sfe il 1237-12, ada, we 1) na bheejai raagee naadee bayd. He is not won over by music, songs or the Vedas.
3 stn Ast famrot Afar it 1237-12, Aa, He 1) na bheejai surtee gi-aanee jog. He is not won over by intuitive wisdom, meditation or Yoga.
3 oA Aait ats SfA i 1237-13, Aa, He 1) na bheejai sogee keetai roj. He is not won over by feeling sad and depressed forever.
& Ste gut Hest Sat i 237-13, ada, we 1)
na bheejai roopee™ maalee™ rang. He is not won over by beauty, wealth and pleasures.
3 ota stefa sfent Sfar i 1237-13, Ada, He 1) na bheejai tirath bhavi-ai nang. He is not won over by wandering naked at sacred shrines.
5 oth ast ats ufs Il 1237-13, Ada, He 1)
na bheejai daatee™ keetai punn.
He is not won over by giving donations in charity. 3 Sin ste Sfeur Afe Wt 1237-14, Aa, He 1)
na bheejai baahar baithi-aa sunn. He is not won over by living alone in the wilderness.
3 stn 3fs Hote fats AS II 0237-14, Ada, He 1) na bheejai bhayrh mareh bhirh soor. He is not won over by fighting and dying as a warrior in battle.
3 Stet AS deta OF il (1237-14, wrdar, we 1) na bheejai kaytay hoveh Dhoorh. He is not won over by becoming the dust of the masses.
Bur faint Ho aX af— it 1237-15, wrdar, ue 1) laykhaa likee-ai man kai bhaa-ay. The account is written of the loves of the mind.
Soa SA ATS STE QM (1237-15, Ada, He 1) naanak bheejai saachai naa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, the Lord is won over only by His Name. ||2||
HIS 4% Il (1237-15)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Oe fant ue aT ad MSs Il 1237-15, Asa, He 1) nav chhi-a khat kaa karay beechaar. You may study the nine grammars, the six Shaastras and the six divions of the Vedas.
fafa fea Gud svg nfSTE Il (1237-16, Aa, He 1) nis din uchrai bhaar athaar. You may recite the Mahaabhaarata.
fate st nig o ufeur Sto i 1237-16, Ada, He 1) tin bhee ant na paa-i-aa tohi. Even these cannot find the limits of the Lord.
om fage Hats fa@ df= i 1237-16, Adar, 8 1) naam bihoon mukat ki-o ho-ay. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can anyone be liberated?
ofs SAS ¥dH nig 3 When I 1237-17, Wea, He 1) naabh vasat barahmai ant na jaani-aa. Brahma, in the lotus of the navel, does not know the limits of God.
Tate Baa oH UStEMt SI (1237-17, Aa, He 1) gurmukh naanak naam pachhaani-aa. ||3]| The Gurmukh, O Nanak, realizes the Naam. ||3]|
ust Il (1237-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nmy uifu fader fafe wry Burfser i 237-17, Ada, He 1) aapay aap niranjanaa jin aap upaa-i-aa.
The Immaculate Lord Himself, by Himself, created Himself. mm ue dateso AS Aas Aster Il 1237-18, Aa, He 1)
aapay khayl rachaa-i-on sabh jagat sabaa-i-aa. He Himself created the whole drama of all the world's play.
3 ae urfy frafors wrfeor Hg eorfeur I 4237-18, Ada, He 1)
tarai gun aap sirji-an maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-i-aa.
He Himself formed the three gunas, the three qualities; He increased the attachment to Maya.
ad usAet Cad faa stat atfemr Il 1237-19, Ada, He 1) gur parsaadee ubray jin bhaanaa bhaa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, they are saved - those who love the Will of God.
SSA AY ZIse" AS Als AHEM INA (1237-19, Aa, He 1)
naanak sach varatdaa sabh sach samaa-i-aa. ||1]| O Nanak, the True Lord is pervading everywhere; all are contained within the True Lord. ||1]|
Yat 923
HOAX HIS 2 Il (1238-1)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
mify Cure area nm ga Sa Il (1238-1, Arar, He 2) aap upaa-ay naankaa aapay rakhai vayk. He Himself creates, O Nanak; He establishes the various creatures.
He fan 3 wmdibat at Ager Afge Sa Il (1238-1, Ada, He 2) mandaa kis no aakhee-ai jaa‘ sabhnaa saahib ayk. How can anyone be called bad? We have only One Lord and Master.
Hao Atos Sa d Se OO STE Il (1238-2, Ada, He 2)
sabhnaa saahib ayk hai vaykhai DhanDhai laa-ay.
There is One Lord and Master of all; He watches over all, and assigns all to their tasks.
fort Sat far nrarer urst set arf i 1238-2, Adar, He 2) kisai thorhaa kisai aglaa khaalee ko-ee naahi. Some have less, and some have more; no one is allowed to leave empty.
wets Sa ats Sa fed aafs fears il (1238-3, ada, v8 2) aavahi nangay jaahi nangay vichay karahi vithaar. Naked we come, and naked we go; in between, we put on a show.
SOA JAH B ASH nid avEt ars MAU (1238-3, Aa, He 2)
naanak hukam na jaanee-ai agai kaa-ee kaar. ||1||
O Nanak, one who does not understand the Hukam of God's Command - what will he have to do in the world hereafter? ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1238-4)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
frofa afu fhat a@ sa frofA afu & we I 1238-4, Aa, He 1)
jinas thaap jee-aa™ ka-o bhayjai jinas thaap lai jaavai.
He sends out the various created beings, and he calls back the various created beings again.
nmr arf Bart nmy S&S SA ATS Il (1238-4, Ada, we 1)
aapay thaap uthaapai aapay aytay vays karaavai.
He himself establishes, and He Himself disestablishes. He fashions them in various forms.
As Hba feats mast mm fatto ure i (1238-5, Asa, He 1)
jaytay jee-a fireh a-uDhootee aapay bhikhi-aa paavai.
And all the human beings who wander around as beggars, He Himself gives in charity to them.
Bu dos BY vos ates atefs GS Il (1238-5, wa, ve
laykhai bolan laykhai chalan kaa-it keecheh daavay.
As it is recorded, the mortals speak, and as it is recorded, they walk. So why put on all this show?
H@ His userar Ss atoa wifey ASS I (1238-6, Arar, oe 1)
mool mat parvaanaa ayho naanak aakh sunaa-ay.
This is the basis of intelligence; this is certified and approved. Nanak speaks and proclaims it.
adal Gufs df suen A A A ATS il (1238-6, ada, He 1) karnee upar ho-ay tapaavas jay ko kahai kahaa-ay. ||2|| By past actions, each being is judged; what else can anyone say? ||2||
ugat Il (1238-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
TsHfa vos sateGe qe usaet wrfemr i (1238-7, Ada, v8 1) gurmukh chalat rachaa-i-on gun pargatee aa-i-aa.
The Guru's Word makes the drama play itself out. Through virtue, this becomes evident.
qaaeat Ae Gud ofs xfs errfenr | 1238-7, Ava, He 1) gurbaanee sad uchrai har man vasaa-i-aa. Whoever utters the Word of the Guru's Bani - the Lord is enshrined in his mind.
Rafs aet gu afenr fre afS Aerfemr It 1238-8, Ada, He 1) sakat ga-ee bharam kati-aa siv jot jagaa-i-aa. Maya's power is gone, and doubt is eradicated; awaken to the Light of the Lord.
fro a us Us 0 ag use feorfeor | (1238-8, Ada, He 1) jin kai potai punn hai gur purakh milaa-i-aa. Those who hold onto goodness as their treasure meet the Guru, the Primal Being.
Sa Aan fut sd ahs oth AHEMM IQ (1238-9, Aa, He 1) naanak sehjay mil rahay har naam samaa-i-aa. ||2|| O Nanak, they are intuitively absorbed and blended into the Name of the Lord. ||2||
HBA HIS 2 Il (1238-9)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
AS 3S Zertfanr faftmr FS af | (1238-9, Ada, v2 2)
saah chalay vanjaari-aa likhi-aa dayvai naal.
The merchants come from the Banker; He sends the account of their destiny with them.
fod Gufs gon dfs seba eAS Arf I (1238-10, Ada, 8 2)
likhay upar hukam ho-ay la-ee-ai vasat sam"aal.
On the basis of their accounts, He issues the Hukam of His Command, and they are left to take care of their merchandise.
AS wet Zanset Fag Far ute Il (1238-10, Awa, He 2) vasat la-ee vanjaara-ee vakhar baDhaa paa-ay. The merchants have purchased their merchandise and packed up their cargo.
aet os & vs feta 3s US TStE i (1238-11, wrdar, we 2)
kay-ee laahaa lai chalay ik chalay mool gavaa-ay.
Some depart after having earned a good profit, while others leave, having lost their investment altogether.
ast fas 3 HfaG fan adba AveafA i 1238-11, Ada, He 2) thorhaa kinai na mangi-o kis kahee-ai saabaas. No one asks to have less; who should be celebrated?
det fa" a aoa fA Aas Se TA NA (1238-12, Aa, He 2)
nadar tinaa ka-o naankaa je saabat laa-ay raas. ||1]|
The Lord casts His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, upon those who have preserved their capital investment. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1238-12)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
als afs fees feefs AS Il 1238-12, Ada, He 1)
jurh jurh vichhurhay vichhurh jurhay.
United, the united separate, and separated, they unite again. Alfe Aife He HE ATS I (1238-13, Aa, He 1)
jeev jeev mu-ay mu-ay jeevay. Living, the living die, and dying, they live again.
afsur & ay afsor a FS AS TT VS JE il (1238-13, Asa, we 1)
kayti-aa kay baap kayti-aa kay baytay kaytay gur chaylay hoo-ay.
They become the fathers of many, and the sons of many; they become the gurus of many, and the disciples.
Mid UTE TSS 3 uiTS fort AST for TE TE Ml (1238-14, Asa, He 1)
aagai paachhai ganat na aavai ki-aa jaatee ki-aa hun hoo-ay.
No account can be made of the future or the past; who knows what shall be, or what was?
Hg ada’ fags ata fit af afa agst aT AP Il (1238-14, Awa, He 1)
sabh karnaa kirat kar likee-ai kar kar kartaa karay karay.
All the actions and events of the past are recorded; the Doer did, He does, and He will do.
Houfa Hb canta sch aoa sect oefes AP MQ (1238-15, Ada, He 1)
manmukh maree-ai gurmukh taree-ai naanak nadree nadar karay. ||2||
The self-willed manmukh dies, while the Gurmukh is saved; O Nanak, the Gracious Lord bestows His Glance of Grace. ||2]|
UugST Il (1238-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Houfa SAT SoH FT EH Baer il (1238-15, Asa, we 1) manmukh doojaa bharam hai doojai lobhaa-i-aa. The self-willed manmukh wanders in duality, lured and enticed by duality.
TT AUS THe FS niefEnt Il (1238-16, Asa, Hs 1) koorh kapat kamaavday koorho aalaa-i-aa. He practices falsehood and deception, telling lies.
uz aeyZ Hy IS J AS ey Aafewr I (1238-16, wrsa, He 1) putar kalatar moh hayt hai sabh dukh sabaa-i-aa. Love and attachment to children and spouse is total misery and pain.
aH efe aa Hts saHfo SaHfEMr I 1238-17, Ada, 42 1)
jam dar baDhay maaree-ah bharmeh bharmaa-i-aa.
He is gagged and bound at the door of the Messenger of Death; he dies, and wanders lost in reincarnation.
Houfa Aon Teter area fs efemr Sil (1238-17, Aa, He 1) manmukh janam gavaa-i-aa naanak har bhaa-i-aa. ||3]| The self-willed manmukh wastes his life; Nanak loves the Lord. ||3]|
HBA HIST 2 Il (1238-18)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
fia sfauret SI aH at 3 TS Ho HM Il (1238-18, Aa, He 2)
jin vadi-aa-ee tayray naam kee tay ratay man maahi.
Those who are blessed with the glorious greatness of Your Name - their minds are imbued with Your Love.
aoa nfs Fao Be uifys SAT il (1238-18, Ardar, we 2) naanak amrit ayk hai doojaa amrit naahi. O Nanak, there is only One Ambrosial Nectar; there is no other nectar at all.
oe nfs Ho Hfs ub aa usATfE I (1238-19, Arar, He 2) naanak amrit manai maahi paa-ee-ai gur parsaad. O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained within the mind, by Guru's Grace.
feat uta dat fA@ fas a fester orfe ail (238-19, Avda, Hs 2) tin"ee peetaa rang si-o jin" ka-o likhi-aa aad. ||1|| They alone drink it in with love, who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1||
Yat 92a
HIS 2 Il (1239-1)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
atst fom Arerdhat ad Afe Aref i (1239-1, Arar, He 2) keetaa ki-aa salaahee-ai karay so-ay saalaahi. Why praise the created being? Praise the One who created all.
aoa Sat AIT SAT Vrsr Gf Il (1239-1, Arsar, He 2) naanak aykee baahraa doojaa daataa naahi. O Nanak, there is no other Giver, except the One Lord.
ads A Aerie fafs atst ners i (1239-2, Ada, He 2) kartaa so salaahee-ai jin keetaa aakaar. Praise the Creator Lord, who created the creation.
aa A ATerdh fa ASA S yrag Il (1239-2, Ada, He 2) daataa so salaahee-ai je sabhsai day aaDhaar. Praise the Great Giver, who gives sustenence to all.
area nif Adte F ust fA SST Il (1239-3, ard, Hs 2) naanak aap sadeev hai pooraa jis bhandaar. O Nanak, the treasure of the Eternal Lord is over-flowing.
za af Had nis BF uses III (1239-3, Aa, He 2) vadaa kar salaahee-ai ant na paaraavaar. ||2|| Praise and honor the One, who has no end or limitation. ||2| |
ust II (1239-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofa a any fours 3 Afet we uTet I (1239-4, Aar, He 2) har kaa naam niDhaan hai sayvi-ai sukh paa-ee. The Name of the Lord is a treasure. Serving it, peace is obtained.
oy fadno Guat ufS fA whe Art I (1239-4, Adar, He 2) naam niranjan uchraa’™ pat si-o ghar jaa‘-ee. I chant the Name of the Immaculate Lord, so that I may go home with honor.
aenfy wat ou o on foe SASH I (1239-5, Ada, He 2) gurmukh banee naam hai naam ridai vasaa-ee. The Word of the Gurmukh is the Naam; I enshrine the Naam within my heart.
nfs weg efA afe Afsag famret ii (1239-5, wrdar, Hs 2) mat pankhayroo vas ho-ay satguroo Dhi-aa-ee". The bird of the intellect comes under one's control, by meditating on the True Guru.
soa nifty vfenies dfe on foe wet igil 1239-5, Ada, He 2)
naanak aap da-i-aal ho-ay naamay liv laa-ee. ||4|| O Nanak, if the Lord becomes merciful, the mortal lovingly tunes in to the Naam. ||4]|
HBA HIS 2 Il (1239-6)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
fay fa@ ant Soe fa wm) WE FE Il (1239-6, Aa, He 2) tis si-o kaisaa bolnaa je aapay jaanai jaan. How can we speak of Him? Only He knows Himself.
ott wT at at fed Afog A UdeTES Il (1239-7, Aa, He 2) cheeree jaa kee naa firai saahib so parvaan. His decree cannot be challenged; He is our Supreme Lord and Master.
Stdt fAA At Boat HtT HBA ABS Il (1239-7, Aa, He 2) cheeree jis kee chalnaa meer malak salaar. By His Decree, even kings, nobles and commanders must step down.
a fA aS Boat AST sat are Il (1239-7, Aa, He 2) jo tis bhaavai naankaa saa-ee bhalee kaar. Whatever is pleasing to His Will, O Nanak, is a good deed.
frat det veer ofa fear fag ofs il (1239-8, arda, ne 2) jin"aa cheeree chalnaa hath tin"aa kichh naahi. By His Decree, we walk; nothing rests in our hands.
Whoa at sans df Cot ass urs il (1239-8, Ada, He 2)
saahib kaa furmaan ho-ay uthee karlai paahi.
When the Order comes from our Lord and Master, all must rise up and take to the road.
Ad stat ffir Sat gan ants Il (1239-9, Ada, He 2) jayhaa cheeree likhi-aa tayhaa hukam kamaahi. As His Decree is issued, so is His Command obeyed.
WS nels Soa Ae Bat ATT Il (1239-9, Ada, He 2) ghalay aavahi naankaa saday uthee jaahi. ||1]| Those who are sent, come, O Nanak; when they are called back, they depart and go.
[11
HIS 2 Il (1239-10)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
frefs frat a@ suri Aet Uses Il (1239-10, Aa, He 2) sifat jinaa ka-o bakhsee-ai say-ee potaydaar. Those whom the Lord blesses with His Praises, are the true keepers of the treasure.
oat fe a feshor fear fxs F3rs I (1239-10, ardar, He 2) kunjee jin ka-o ditee-aa tin"aa milay bhandaar. Those who are blessed with the key - they alone receive the treasure.
Wd sad J Te foawta 3 ahifs usess I (1239-11, Adar, He 2) jah bhandaaree hoo gun niklahi tay kee-ah parvaan. That treasure, from which virtue wells up - that treasure is approved.
deta fat AG StSaT OTH fAqT SIATS MQM (1239-11, Adar, He 2)
nadar tin"aa ka-o naankaa naam jin"aa neesaan. ||2]|
Those who are blessed by His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, bear the Insignia of the Naam. |[2||
UugST Il (1239-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
on fadae foone afat AY Tet I (1239-12, Ada, He 2)
naam niranjan nirmalaa suni-ai sukh ho-ee.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is immaculate and pure; hearing it, peace is obtained.
Afe Afe vfs eAret eS AG et h (1239-12, ada, 3 2)
sun sun man vasaa-ee-ai boojhai jan ko-ee.
Listening and hearing, It is enshrined in the mind; how rare is that humble being who realizes it.
adfent Bofenr o feAd Are AG At Il (1239-13, Ada, He 2) bahdi-aa uth-di-aa na visrai saachaa sach so-ee. Sitting down and standing up, I shall never forget Him, the Truest of the true.
sas AG OH nO T OH AY TET II (1239-13, Aa, He 2) bhagtaa ka-o naam aDhaar hai naamay sukh ho-ee. His devotees have the Support of His Name; in His Name, they find peace.
sod His ste afe sfomr qanfa ofe Aet ull (1239-13, Ada, He 2)
naanak man tan rav rahi-aa gurmukh har so-ee. ||5]|
O Nanak, He permeates and pervades mind and body; He is the Lord, the Guru's Word. ||5]||
HEX HIS Y Il (1239-14)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Soa sets 3m A A fue urbe I (1239-14, Ada, He 1) naanak tulee-ah tol jay jee-o pichhai paa-ee-ai. O Nanak, the weight is weighed out, when the soul is placed on the scale.
fear 3 unfs ae A Us UT ate FHS I (1239-15, Ada, He 1) ikas na pujeh bol jay pooray pooraa kar milai. Nothing is equal to speaking of the One, who perfectly unites us with the Perfect Lord.
SI MIMS STI SB Il (1239-15, Aa, wz 1) vadaa aakhan bhaaraa tol. To call Him glorious and great carries such a heavy weight.
dd ICSt HSt IVS FH I (1239-15, Aa, ve 1) hor ha-ulee matee ha-ulay bol. Other intellectualisms are lightweight; other words are lightweight as well.
Uast urat USAT ST Il (1239-16, Ada, He 1) Dhartee paanee parbat bhaar. The weight of the earth, water and mountains
fa &3 38 Afonras Il 1239-16, Aa, He 1) ki-o kandai tolai suni-aar. - how can the goldsmith weigh it on the scale?
SO HAT Isa UAE I (1239-16, Adar, He 1) tolaa maasaa ratak paa-ay. What weights can balance the scale?
Sea Ufeor efe uATe Il (1239-16, Aa, He 1) naanak puchhi-aa day-ay pujaa-ay. O Nanak, when questioned, the answer is given.
Hae nifomr nidt ary il 4239-17, Arda, M8 1) moorakh anDhi-aa anDhee Dhaat. The blind fool is running around, leading the blind.
ats ats ade AItEfS mY NA (1239-17, Aa, He 1) kahi kahi kahan kahaa-in aap. ||1|| The more they say, the more they expose themselves. ||1||
HIS 4% Il (1239-17)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
nafs mut Aofs mBar nrfy o Ant mre I (1239-18, Ada, He 1)
aakhan a-ukhaa sunan a-ukhaa aakh na jaapee aakh.
It is difficult to chant it; it is difficult to listen to it. It cannot be chanted with the mouth.
fefa orf nrafs Hae svufo mea Bau fee Tf Il 1239-18, Wa, He 1)
ik aakh aakhahi sabad bhaakhahi araDh uraDh din raat.
Some speak with their mouths and chant the Word of the Shabad - the low and the high, day and night.
A fag dfe 3 fag fern AY gus AS II 1239-19, Adar, M8 1) jay kihu ho-ay ta kihu disai jaapai roop na jaat. If He were something, then He would be visible. His form and state cannot be seen.
Afs ade AIS ad we mBue| we afy il (1239-19, ada, He 1)
sabh kaaran kartaa karay ghat a-ughat ghat thaap.
The Creator Lord does all deeds; He is established in the hearts of the high and the low.
UST 428O nmafs mBut areot wirfy @ AT yrfy QM (1240-1, Aa, He 1)
aakhan a-ukhaa naankaa aakh na jaapai aakh. ||2|| It is so difficult to chant it, O Nanak; it cannot be chanted with the mouth. ||2||
ust Il (1240-1) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe Afen Ho doAbA aH AMS met Il 1240-1, Aa, He 1 naa-ay suni-ai man rehsee-ai naamay saat aa-ee. Hearing the Name, the mind is delighted. The Name brings peace and tranquility.
ofe afen He fgushba AS BU Tevet I (1240-2, Avda, He 1) naa-ay suni-ai man taripat-ee-ai sabh dukh gavaa-ee. Hearing the Name, the mind is satisfied, and all pains are taken away.
afe Afent a Gun on efsuret il (1240-2, rsa, v3 1)
naa-ay suni-ai naa-o oopjai naamay vadi-aa-ee.
Hearing the Name, one becomes famous; the Name brings glorious greatness. on dt As At ufs OM ats uret Il (1240-3, Adar, He 1)
naamay hee sabh jaat pat naamay gat paa-ee. The Name brings all honor and status; through the Name, salvation is obtained.
qanty ony fame aoe fee wet ill 1240-3, Ada, He gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai naanak liv laa-ee. ||6]| | The Gurmukh meditates on the Name; Nanak is lovingly attuned to the Name. ||6||
HOAX HIST Y Il (1240-4)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
als 6 wat Ais o SST Il (1240-4, Asa, He 1) jooth na raagee™ jooth na vaydee”. Impurity does not come from music; impurity does not come from the Vedas.
alo 3 Be AsH at Set Il (1240-4, Arsar, we 1) jooth na chand sooraj kee bhaydee. Impurity does not come from the phases of the sun and the moon.
alo o viat ale 3 Bret Il (1240-4, Adar, Hs 1) jooth na annee jooth na naa-ee.
Impurity does not come from food; impurity does not come from ritual cleansing baths.
aie 3 Hig efyot AS Bret Il (1240-5, Adar, He 1) jooth na meehu var"i-ai sabh thaa-ee. Impurity does not come from the rain, which falls everywhere.
aio 6 ast Afo o urTet I (1240-5, Arda, He 1) jooth na Dhartee jooth na paanee. Impurity does not come from the earth; impurity does not come from the water.
aie 5 use Hfs AHTAt Il (1240-5, Arde, He 1) jooth na pa-unai maahi samaanee. Impurity does not come from the air which is diffused everywhere.
Soe foafeor ge andt af= i 1240-6, Ada, He 1) naanak niguri-aa gun naahee ko-ay. O Nanak, the one who has no Guru, has no redeeming virtues at all.
nfs Sfmt He For TE UU 1240-6, wrdar, ws 1) muhi fayri-ai muhu joothaa ho-ay. ||1]| Impurity comes from turning one's face away from God. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1240-6)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Soa Vo Ado A sfe we afe Il (1240-6, Ada, He 1)
naanak chulee-aa suchee-aa jay bhar jaanai ko-ay.
O Nanak, the mouth is truly cleansed by ritual cleansing, if you really know how to do it.
Hes vat fomre at daft ar ws SE I (1240-7, Ada, ne 1) surtay chulee gi-aan kee jogee kaa jat ho-ay. For the intuitively aware, cleansing is spiritual wisdom. For the Yogi, it is self-control.
quHe vot Hsu at farsdt a AS BS Il (1240-7, wrda, ws 1) barahman chulee santokh kee girhee kaa sat daan. For the Brahmin, cleansing is contentment; for the householder, it is truth and charity.
TH vot fone at ufsur Ag famre Il 1240-8, Aa, He 1) raajay chulee ni-aav kee parhi-aa sach Dhi-aan. For the king, cleansing is justice; for the scholar, it is true meditation.
urat fas 3 duet yf utS foe ate it (1240-8, ada, ne 1) paanee chit na Dhop-ee mukh peetai tikh jaa-ay. The consciousness is not washed with water; you drink it to quench your thirst.
ural fust Aas a fefe uret AS UfE QI (1240-9, Ada, Hs 1) paanee pitaa jagat kaa fir paanee sabh khaa-ay. ||2]| Water is the father of the world; in the end, water destroys it all. ||2]|
UgST Il (1240-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe Afam As fafa 3 fafa fue wire I (1240-9, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay suni-ai sabh siDh hai riDh pichhai aavai.
Hearing the Name, all supernatural spiritual powers are obtained, and wealth follows along.
ofe Afamt o€ fafa fxs Ho fefeor urs I (1240-10, Aa, He 1)
naa-ay suni-ai na-o niDh milai man chindi-aa paavai.
Hearing the Name, the nine treasures are received, and the mind's desires are obtained.
ofe Afan Hay df aco sao fomre |) (1240-10, Ava, He 1) naa-ay suni-ai santokh ho-ay kavlaa charan Dhi-aavai. Hearing the Name, contentment comes, and Maya meditates at one's feet.
one Afemt Hog Gun AdA AY UTS Il (1240-11, Ardar, He 1) naa-ay suni-ai sahj oopjai sehjay sukh paavai. Hearing the Name, intuitive peace and poise wells up.
THs oS usb BSA TS We WOW (1240-11, Aa, ve 1)
gurmatee naa-o paa-ee-ai naanak gun gaavai. ||7]|
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Name is obtained; O Nanak, sing His Glorious Praises. ||7]||
HEX HIS Y Il (1240-12)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
eu fefs tne uf nee ufa cose AAS Il 1240-12, waa, He 1) dukh vich jaman dukh maran dukh vartan sansaar. In pain, we are born; in pain, we die. In pain, we deal with the world.
ey ey niet wirdba ufs ufs aafa yas Il (1240-12, ada, He 1) dukh dukh agai aakhee-ai parh" parh" karahi pukaar. Hereafter, there is said to be pain, only pain; the more the mortals read, the more
they cry out. eu ober ust user AY 3 foafeS afe I (1240-13, Avda, He 1)
dukh kee-aa pandaa khul"ee-aa sukh na nikli-o ko-ay. The packages of pain are untied, but peace does not emerge.
eu fefe HG Aefeor edior afer SE I 1240-13, Ada, He 1) dukh vich jee-o jalaa-i-aa dukhee-aa chali-aa ro-ay. In pain, the soul burns; in pain, it departs weeping and wailing.
Sod frest sfsur ue 3q ofan dfE I 1240-14, Aa, He 1)
naanak siftee rati-aa man tan hari-aa ho-ay.
O Nanak, imbued with the Lord's Praise, the mind and body blossom forth, rejuvenated.
eu abort nat wshafe st ey ag TE AU (1240-14, Avda, ws dukh kee-aa agee maaree-ah bhee dukh daaroo ho-ay. ||1|| In the fire of pain, the mortals die; but pain is also the cure. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1240-15)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Soa Tab SA IT SA I SA AT Il (1240-15, wrda, ws 1)
naanak dunee-aa bhas rang bhasoo hoo bhas khayh.
O Nanak, worldly pleasures are nothing more than dust. They are the dust of the dust of ashes.
SA SA Antal St SA SdH ST Il (1240-15, Aa, He 1) bhaso bhas kamaavnee bhee bhas bharee-ai dayh. The mortal earns only the dust of the dust; his body is covered with dust.
W He feag adit sm star ate I 1240-16, Ada, 3 1) jaa jee-o vichahu kadhee-ai bhasoo bhari-aa jaa-ay. When the soul is taken out of the body, it too is covered with dust.
mat BH Hfand Ta sASt UTS iQ (1240-16, Asa, Hs 1)
agai laykhai mangi-ai hor dasoonee paa-ay. ||2| |
And when one's account is called for in the world hereafter, he receives only ten times more dust. ||2||
ust Il (1240-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe Afam Afs HAN AH Sfs 3 MTS II (1240-17, Wa, He 1)
Naa-ay suni-ai such sanjamo jam nayrh na aavai.
Hearing the Name, one is blessed with purity and self-control, and the Messenger of Death will not draw near.
ofe afent ufe seat mires Tees Il (1240-17, Aa, Hs 1) naa-ay suni-ai ghat chaannaa aan"ayr gavaavai. Hearing the Name, the heart is illumined, and darkness is dispelled.
ofe Afamt wimg gsi wer oS ure Il (1240-18, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay suni-ai aap bujhee-ai laahaa naa-o paavai.
Hearing the Name, one comes to understand his own self, and the profit of the Name is obtained.
ofe Afent uu adhufs fasHe Ag UTS Il (1240-18, Aa, He 1) naa-ay suni-ai paap katee-ah nirmal sach paavai. Hearing the Name, sins are eradicated, and one meets the Immaculate True Lord.
sod ote Afent ny CAs a qonyfe fore itil (1240-18, Ada, He 1)
naanak naa-ay suni-ai mukh ujlay naa-o gurmukh Dhi-aavai. ||8||
O Nanak, hearing the Name, one's face becomes radiant. As Gurmukh, meditate on the Name. ||8]|
HEX HIS Y Il (1240-19)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
wig aates Ast ates il (1240-19, Aa, He 1) ghar naaraa-in sabhaa naal. In your home, is the Lord God, along with all your other gods.
UA AS TH SETS Ml (1241-1, Aa, He 1) pooj karay rakhai naavaal. You wash your stone gods and worship them.
UST A2BA
AT JSS SH VHS Il (1241-1, wa, ws 1) kungoo channan ful charhaa-ay. You offer saffron, sandalwood and flowers.
udt UU aIs HSS Il (1241-1, Aa, ne 1) pairee pai pai bahut manaa-ay. Falling at their feet, you try so hard to appease them.
Hen Hfar Hifer ue ate i (241-1, Arde, He 1) maanoo-aa mang mang pain"ai khaa-ay. Begging, begging from other people, you get things to wear and eat.
mitt art nia AATE I (1241-2, Ada, He 1) anDhee kammee anDh sajaa-ay. For your blind deeds, you will be blindly punished.
sfimr ef o Hefent ge Il (1241-2, Ada, He 1) bhukhi-aa day-ay na mardi-aa rakhai. Your idol does not feed the hungry, or save the dying.
WOT Saat nidt AG WA (1241-2, Ada, He 1) anDhaa jhagrhaa anDhee sathai. ||1]| The blind assembly argues in blindness. ||1]|
HIS 4 Il (1241-3)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AS west Ha Afs AS ae UTS Il (1241-3, Aa, He 1) sabhay surtee jog sabh sabhay bayd puraan. All intuitive understanding, all Yoga, all the Vedas and Puraanas.
HS ade 3u Als AS ats fame I (1241-3, Ada, He 1) sabhay karnay tap sabh sabhay geet gi-aan. All actions, all penances, all songs and spiritual wisdom.
AS gut Afa Afs Afs Stee Afs ae I (1241-3, Adar, He 1) sabhay buDhee suDh sabh sabh tirath sabh thaan. All intellect, all enlightenment, all sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Afs ufsAdion ng Afs Afs war Afs wre Il (1241-4, Ada, He 1) sabh paatisaahee-aa amar sabh sabh khusee-aa sabh khaan. All kingdoms, all royal commands, all joys and all delicacies.
AS HSH Ve Afs AS Aa filme Il (1241-4, Ada, He 1) sabhay maanas dayv sabh sabhay jog Dhi-aan. All mankind, all divinites, all Yoga and meditation.
AS ude ds Afs AS Aba AIS Il (1241-5, Ada, He 1) sabhay puree-aa khand sabh sabhay jee-a jahaan. All worlds, all celestial realms; all the beings of the universe.
Jat Boe nius aTHt FI ABH Il 1241-5, Aa, we 1)
hukam chalaa-ay aapnai karmee vahai kalaam.
According to His Hukam, He commands them. His Pen writes out the account of their actions.
Soa Ae As of= Ag AS Stars IQ (1241-6, ada, He 1)
naanak sachaa sach naa-ay sach sabhaa deebaan. ||2||
O Nanak, True is the Lord, and True is His Name. True is His Congregation and His Court. ||2||
ust Il (1241-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
one Hfomt Ay Gur on afs Tet I (1241-6, Adar, oe 1) naa-ay mani-ai sukh oopjai naamay gat ho-ee. With faith in the Name, peace wells up; the Name brings emancipation.
ofe Hfom ufs urea fase ofs Ret I (1241-7, Ada, He 1) naa-ay mani-ai pat paa-ee-ai hirdai har so-ee. With faith in the Name, honor is obtained. The Lord is enshrined in the heart.
ofe Hfomt gene sult fefe fawa a det i (1241-7, wa, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai bhavjal langhee-ai fir bighan na ho-ee.
With faith in the Name, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, and no obstructions are ever again encountered.
ofe Hfomt ue use SH AS Bet Il (1241-8, Aa, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai panth pargataa naamay sabh lo-ee.
With faith in the Name, the Path is revealed; through the Name, one is totally enlightened.
soa Afsate fiufet a@ Haba fae ee Wet CN c24i-3, Aa, He 1)
naanak satgur mili-ai naa-o mannee-ai jin dayvai so-ee. ||9]|
O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, one comes to have faith in the Name; he alone has faith, who is blessed with it. ||9]|
HX H2 Y Il (1241-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
udior dst fafs ad fea fe fomre it 241-9, wa, we 1
puree-aa khanda sir karay ik pair Dhi-aa-ay.
The mortal walks on his head through the worlds and realms; he meditates, balaced on one foot.
u@s Hfe nfs Au ad fra HSt 3S SE I 1241-9, Aa, He 1)
pa-un maar man jap karay sir mundee talai day-ay.
Controlling the wind of the breath, he meditates within his mind, tucking his chin down into his chest.
fan Gufs Go fea fea fan 3 ra Adfe I (1241-10, Aa, He 1) kis upar oh tik tikai kis no jor karay-i. What does he lean on? Where does he get his power?
fan 3 adh soot fan 6 agar OE I (1241-10, Ara, He 1) kis no kahee-ai naankaa kis no kartaa day-ay. What can be said, O Nanak? Who is blessed by the Creator?
Ta TIS nus Hoy wy TafE Al (241-11, Arga, ws hukam rahaa-ay aapnai moorakh aap ganay-ay. ||1]| God keeps all under His Command, but the fool shows off himself. ||1]|
He 4 Il (1241-11) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
vo umd afe afe adt a afe afe Wt c2ai-11, Adar, M8 1) hai hai aakhaa™ kot kot kotee hoo kot kot. He is, He is - I say it millions upon millions, millions upon millions of times.
ning ningt Het Het aoe @ wire Ste i (1241-12, Asa, He 1) aakhoo™ aakhaa™ sadaa sadaa kahan na aavai tot. With my mouth I say it, forever and ever; there is no end to this speech.
a UG Gai o ont Ses sufs APS I (1241-12, Aa, He 1) naa ha-o thakaa™ na thaakee-aa ayvad rakheh jot. I do not get tired, and I will not be stopped; this is how great my determination is.
Soa wn vy fie Gufs nmge SA MQM (1241-12, Ada, He naanak chasi-ahu chukh bind upar aakhan dos. ||2|| O Nanak, this is tiny and insignificant. To say that it is more, is wrong. ||2||
ugat Il (1241-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe Hfom ae Gud AS aca Aafeor | (1241-13, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai kul uDhrai sabh kutamb sabaa-i-aa. With faith in the Name, all one's ancestors and family are saved.
ofe Hfom Hafs Gus fae fee srrfeor it (1241-14, ada, He naa-ay mani-ai sangat uDhrai jin ridai vasaa-i-aa. With faith in the Name, one's associates are saved; enshrine it within your heart.
ofe Hfom Afs Gad fas aAe gAfemr It (1241-14, Ada, He 1) naa-ay mani-ai sun uDhray jin rasan rasaa-i-aa. With faith in the Name, those who hear it are saved; let your tongue delight in it.
ofe Hfom wu su aet fae ofy feos wfeur it c24-15, ada, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai dukh bhukh ga-ee jin naam chit laa-i-aa.
With faith in the Name, pain and hunger are dispelled; let your consciousness be attached to the Name.
aaa oH feat Hertoor fro ag frerfenr AON (1241-15, Asa, HE 1) naanak naam tinee salaahi-aa jin guroo milaa-i-aa. ||10|| O Nanak, they alone Praise the Name, who meet with the Guru. ||10]|
HEX H2 Y Il (1241-16)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
As gst Afs feo Afs fast Afs Se Il (1241-16, Ada, He 1) sabhay raatee sabh dih sabh thitee sabh vaar. All nights, all days, all dates, all days of the week;
AS gst Hd Als Als Gast As TS Il (1241-16, Aa, He 1) sabhay rutee maah sabh sabh Dhartee™ sabh bhaar. All seasons, all months, all the earth and everything on it.
AS urat u@e Als Afs mast UTS Il (1241-17, Aa, He 1) sabhay paanee pa-un sabh sabh agnee paataal. All waters, all winds, all fires and underworlds.
AS udmr ds ats Afs Sur Bt wrars Il (1241-17, Aa, He 1) sabhay puree-aa khand sabh sabh lo-a lo-a aakaar. All solar systems and galaxies, all worlds, people and forms.
Jay 3 At asa afs Aa ATS Il (1241-18, Aa, He 1)
hukam na jaapee kayt-rhaa kahi na sakeejai kaar.
No one knows how great the Hukam of His Command is; no one can describe His actions.
nirafa gato wifey uofa afe fest Steve Il (1241-18, Aa, He 1) aakhahi thakeh aakh aakh kar siftee’ veechaar. Mortals may utter, chant, recite and contemplate His Praises until they grow weary.
fz o ute gust soa Ad TST AI (1241-19, Ada, He 1) tarin na paa-i-o bapurhee naanak kahai gavaar. ||1|| The poor fools, O Nanak, cannot find even a tiny bit of the Lord. ||1]]|
He % Il (1241-19)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
mat use A fest Sut Ag TATE Il (1241-19, Aa, He 1) akhee™ parnai jay firaa’ daykhaa™ sabh aakaar. If I were to walk around with my eyes wide open, gazing at all the created forms;
ust famrat ufsst uet de ates Il (1241-19, Ada, He 1) puchhaa gi-aanee pandhitaa’ puchhaa bayd beechaar.
I could ask the spiritual teachers and religious scholars, and those who contemplate the Vedas;
UST 4282
Yat tet HSA HO Adfs MEST Il (1242-1, Aa, He 1) puchhaa dayvaa™ maansaa” joDh karahi avtaar. I could ask the gods, mortal men, warriors and divine incarnations;
fra AHTUt Afs Hat Whe Sat esas Il (1242-1, Ada, us 1) siDh samaaDhee sabh sunee jaa-ay daykhaa™ darbaar. I could consult all the Siddhas in Samaadhi, and go to see the Lord's Court.
wat Ao Afs of= fos & fee ATS Il (1242-2, Ada, He 1) agai sachaa sach naa-ay nirbha-o bhai vin saar. Hereafter, Truth is the Name of all; the Fearless Lord has no fear at all.
dd at Hat ag fus niftmr nig steve Il 1242-2, ada, He 1)
hor kachee matee kach pich anDhi-aa anDh beechaar.
False are other intellectualisms, false and shallow; blind are the contemplations of the blind.
Soa AGH Healt seta sure urfs iQ (1242-3, ada, ue 1)
naanak karmee bandagee nadar langhaa-ay paar. ||2]| O Nanak, by the karma of good actions, the mortal comes to meditate on the Lord; by His Grace, we are carried across. ||2| |
ust Il (1242-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofe Hfomt voHfs aet ufs usaet wrfenr | 1242-3, ada, He 1) naa-ay mani-ai durmat ga-ee mat pargatee aa-i-aa. With faith in the Name, evil-mindedness is eradicated, and the intellect is enlightened.
oe Hfomt IGN aet Afs gar getfeor I (1242-4, Ada, He 1) naa-o mani-ai ha-umai ga-ee sabh rog gavaa-i-aa. With faith in the Name, egotism is eradicated, and all sickness is cured.
one Hfont on Gur Aon AY Ute I (1242-4, Ardar, He 1) naa-ay mani-ai naam oopjai sehjay sukh paa-i-aa.
Believing in the Name, The Name wells up, and intuitive peace and poise are obtained.
one Hom AS Cur ofe dfs SAE it (1242-5, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai saa“t oopjai har man vasaa-i-aa.
Believing in the Name, tranquility and peace well up, and the Lord is enshrined in the mind.
Soa OTH IS0 JD Tenfy ala fomrfeor naa (1242-5, Aa, He 1) naanak naam ratann hai gurmukh har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||11]| O Nanak, the Name is a jewel; the Gurmukh meditates on the Lord. ||11]|
HEX H2 Y Il (1242-6)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
dg Adta de aet 3a SH ret 3a Ma I (1242-6, Aa, He 1) hor sareek hovai ko-ee tayraa tis agai tuDh aakhaa”. If there were any other equal to You, O Lord, I would speak to them of You.
30 Mat SO AES A nid oS AAMT II (1242-6, Ada, He 1) tuDh agai tuDhai saalaahee mai anDhay naa-o sujaakhaa. You, I praise You; I am blind, but through the Name, I am all-seeing.
Ast wigs AS Heel afore ofS ASTeT I (1242-7, Ada, He 1)
jaytaa aakhan saahee sabdee bhaakhi-aa bhaa-ay subhaa-ee.
Whatever is spoken, is the Word of the Shabad. Chanting it with love, we are embellished.
SOA FIST SS nitus AS Sat Sfsniet il 1242-7, wa, we 1) naanak bahutaa ayho aakhan sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||1]| Nanak, this is the greatest thing to say: all glorious greatness is Yours. ||1]||
He % Il (1242-8) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
at 3 fir fom weadt at AH fom are Il (1242-8, Aa, He 1) jaa’ na si-aa ki-aa chaakree jaa” jammay ki-aa kaar. When there was nothing, what happened? What happens when one is born?
iN
Afs AGE ATS A VY Sd Sg Il (1242-8, Aa, wz 1) sabh kaaran kartaa karay daykhai vaaro vaar. The Creator, the Doer, does all; He watches over all, again and again
A gu A Aft ofS ad SST Il (1242-9, Aa, He 1) jay chupai jay mangi-ai daat karay daataar. . Whether we keep silent or beg out loud, the Great Giver blesses us with His gifts.
fea wast vfs Has fefs tufs rag Il 1242-9, Ada, He 1)
ik daataa sabh mangtay fir daykheh aakaar.
The One Lord is the Giver; we are all beggars. I have seen this throughout the Universe.
Sod Se Waa Ate SeeTT Ql (1242-10, wa, ue 1 naanak ayvai jaanee-ai jeevai dayvanhaar. ||2|| Nanak knows this: the Great Giver lives forever. ||2]|
UgST Il (1242-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
one Hfomt wefs Gur aH HPs Tet Il (1242-10, Ardar, we 1)
naa-ay mani-ai surat oopjai naamay mat ho-ee.
With faith in the Name, intuitive awareness wells up; through the Name, intelligence comes.
ofe Hfom ae Gud on Afe ASt I (1242-11, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai gun uchrai naamay sukh so-ee.
With faith in the Name, chant the Glories of God; through the Name, peace is obtained.
ofe vfomt gu adn fefs gy o det i 1242-11, ada, He 1) naa-ay mani-ai bharam katee-ai fir dukh na ho-ee. With faith in the Name, doubt is eradicated, and the mortal never suffers again.
ofe Hfam Arendt urat nfs Tet Wt 1242-11, Ada, He 1)
naa-ay mani-ai salaahee-ai paapaa‘ mat Dho-ee.
With faith in the Name, sing His Praises, and your sinful intellect shall be washed clean.
aoa UT TI 3 ae Haha fas Se ASt WIM 1242-12, wrdar, we
naanak pooray gur tay naa-o mannee-ai jin dayvai so-ee. ||12] |
O Nanak, through the Perfect Guru, one comes to have faith in the Name; they alone receive it, unto whom He gives it. ||12]|
HEX H2 Y Il (1242-12)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
AWAY Fe UTS UST I (1242-13, Avda, we 1) saastar bayd puraan parh"a‘taa. Some read the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Puraanas.
YASS MAST Il (1242-13, Arsa, we 1) pookaarantaa ajaanantaa. They recite them, out of ignorance.
Wt gS St AS At Il (1242-13, ada, He 1) jaa" boojhai taa‘ soojhai so-ee. If they really understood them, they would realize the Lord.
SSS MMS TA S Tet WAU (1242-13, Arde, we 1) naanak aakhai kook na ho-ee. ||1]| Nanak says, there is no need to shout so loud. ||1]|
He & Il (1242-14)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
WIG 3a st Ag fas HT IS aa J TehT Mh (1242-14, wrda, we 1) jaa‘ ha-o tayraa taa™ sabh kichh mayraa ha-o naahee too hoveh. When I am Yours, then everything is mine. When I am not, You are.
WM AAS wy AVS Hast Aas ude|fa il (1242-14, Avda, v2 1)
aapay saktaa aapay surtaa saktee jagat paroveh.
You Yourself are All-powerful, and You Yourself are the Intuitive Knower. The whole world is strung on the Power of Your Shakti.
~~ %
nm SH MM Ae dvar dfs afs Se il (1242-15, wa, we 1)
aapay bhayjay aapay saday rachnaa rach rach vaykhai.
You Yourself send out the mortal beings, and You Yourself call them back home. Having created the creation, You behold it.
Soa AM Ast aet Ag ue fs SA QM (1242-15, Aa, He 1)
naanak sachaa sachee naa™-ee sach pavai Dhur laykhai. ||2]|
O Nanak, True is the Name of the True Lord; through Truth, one is accepted by the Primal Lord God. ||2]|
UgST Il (1242-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oy fade mie Jd fxG oft Aret I 1242-16, Aa, He 1) naam niranjan alakh hai ki-o lakhi-aa jaa-ee. The Name of the Immaculate Lord is unknowable. How can it be known?
oy fadne of 3 fas ureint aret I (1242-16, Aa, He 1)
naam niranjan naal hai ki-o paa-ee-ai bhaa-ee.
The Name of the Immaculate Lord is with the mortal being. How can it be obtained, O Siblings of Destiny?
oH fede zase sfenr AS oet I (1242-17, Ada, He 1)
naam niranjan varatdaa ravi-aa sabh thaa‘-ee. The Name of the Immaculate Lord is all-pervading and permeating everywhere.
as us 3 urea fore ef feet i 1242-17, wrdar, He 1) gur pooray tay paa-ee-ai hirdai day-ay dikhaa-ee. Through the Perfect Guru, it is obtained. It is revealed within the heart.
Sod Sed AGH ae ge freshy set 19811 (1242-18, Aa, He 1)
naanak nadree karam ho-ay gur milee-ai bhaa-ee. ||13]|
O Nanak, when the Merciful Lord grants His Grace, the mortal meets with the Guru, O Siblings of Desitny. ||13] |
HX H2 Y Il (1242-18)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
afe det as Het wa It Hees II (1242-18, Aa, He 1)
kal ho-ee kutay muhee khaaj ho-aa murdaar.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, people have faces like dogs; they eat rotting carcasses for food.
as af af sGaer gor aH Sarg Il (1242-19, ada, ws 1) koorh bol bol bha-ukanaa chookaa Dharam beechaar. They bark and speak, telling only lies; all thought of righteousness has left them.
fro ritefenr ufs odt ufeor vet APE I (1242-19, Ada, He 1) jin jeevandi-aa pat nahee mu-i-aa mandee so-ay. Those who have no honor while alive, will have an evil reputation after they die.
Yat 9283
fofimr de ateat aest ad ASE WA (1243-1, Adar, He 1)
likhi-aa hovai naankaa kartaa karay so ho-ay. ||1||
Whatever is predestined, happens, O Nanak; whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. ||1]|
He 1% Il 1243-1) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
dot deer ado usA de ASheres Il 1243-1, Ada, ve 1) rannaa ho-ee-aa boDhee-aa puras ho-ay sa-ee-aad. Women have become advisors, and men have become hunters.
Ht® AHH Ae Sot WrSt aA MITA I (1243-2, Aa, He 1) seel sanjam such bhannee khaanaa khaaj ahaaj.
Humility, self-control and purity have run away; people eat the uneatable, forbidden food.
Han afer ufs wrue ufs @fs vat ofs Il 1243-2, ada, He 1) saram ga-i-aa ghar aapnai pat uth chalee naal. Modesty has left her home, and honor has gone away with her.
Sod AU Sa J nis o Ae ShS iil (1243-2, Ada, ne 1) naanak sachaa ayk hai a-or na sachaa bhaal. ||2| | O Nanak, there is only One True Lord; do not bother to search for any other as true.
[21] uGat Il (1243-3)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
wdfe SAH Bus ad nists Tard il 1243-3, ada, ne 1) baahar bhasam laypan karay antar gubaaree. You smear your outer body with ashes, but within, you are filled with darkness.
fier Sat ag Su ad VaHfs nia Il 1243-3, Aa, He
khinthaa jholee baho bhaykh karay durmat aha™kaaree.
You wear the patched coat and all the right clothes and robes, but you are still egotistical and proud.
Afoa Hag 3 Gud wife Ha UATE I (1243-4, Ada, He 1)
saahib sabad na oochrai maa-i-aa moh pasaaree.
You do not chant the Shabad, the Word of Your Lord and Master; you are attached to the expanse of Maya.
isis Boy SIH I SIH Wer I (1243-4, ada, ve 1) antar laalach bharam hai bharmai gaavaaree. Within, you are filled with greed and doubt; you wander around like a fool.
BSA BH B VsEt HM ae Tea IW (1243-5, wrda, oe 1)
naanak naam na chayt-ee joo-ai baajee haaree. ||14||
Says Nanak, you never even think of the Naam; you have lost the game of life in the gamble. ||14]|
HX H2 Y Il (1243-5)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
we fa@ uifs dé we ize for union fame aE Il (1243-5, Ada, He 1)
lakh si-o pareet hovai lakh jeevan ki-aa khusee-aa ki-aa chaa-o.
You may be in love with tens of thousands, and live for thousands of years; but what good are these pleasures and occupations?
feefanr fen ofe feds Sa wet nfo Ate tt (1243-6, Aa, He 1)
vichhurhi-aa vis ho-ay vichhorhaa ayk gharhee meh jaa-ay.
And when you must separate from them, that separation is like poison, but they will be gone in an instant.
A AG efgur for ue st fefs aGar ute i (1243-6, Ardar, Hi 1)
jay sa-o var"i-aa mithaa khaajai bhee fir ka-urhaa khaa-ay.
You may eat sweets for a hundred years, but eventually, you will have to eat the bitter as well.
for unr fafs a ore aGase ofF ATE II (1243-7, Aa, He 1) mithaa khaaDhaa chit na aavai ka-urh-tan Dhaa-ay jaa-ay. Then, you will not remember eating the sweets; bitterness will permeate you.
fot aGat SS Sa Il (1243-7, Ada, He 1) mithaa ka-urhaa dovai rog. The sweet and the bitter are both diseases.
Soa nits fears Faq Il (1243-8, Aa, He 1) naanak ant vigutay bhog. O Nanak, eating them, you will come to ruin in the end.
sfy sfx suet Sars SMe Il (1243-8, Adar, He 1) jhakh jhakh jhakh-naa jhagrhaa jhaakh. It is useless to worry and struggle to death.
ofa sfy ats sufs fsq uf All (1243-8, Ada, He 1) jhakh jhakh jaahi jhakheh tin” paas. ||1]| Entangled in worries and struggles, people exhaust themselves. ||1||
He % Il (1243-9) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
aug are darfent gifar il 1243-9, Ava, v2 1) kaaparh kaath rangaa-i-aa raa‘g. They have fine clothes and furniture of various colors.
We TT Als Aa Aa ll (1243-9, ada, He 1) ghar gach keetay baagay baag. Their houses are painted beautifully white.
Ae AdH afd Ho BofEnk Ih (1243-9, Aa, He 1) saad sahj kar man khaylaa-i-aa. In pleasure and poise, they play their mind games.
3 Ad WAY Ade AofEnr Il (1243-10, Aa, v2 1) tai sah paashu kahan kahaa-i-aa. When they approach You, O Lord, they shall be spoken to.
for afs a ast urfer I (1243-10, Ada, He 1) mithaa kar kai ka-urhaa khaa-i-aa. They think it is sweet, so they eat the bitter.
fafs a@s fs da mrfemr It 1243-10, Ada, v2 1) tin ka-urhai tan rog jamaa-i-aa.
The bitter disease grows in the body.
a fefs fot us ue i 1243-11, Ada, He 1)
jay fir mithaa payrhai paa-ay.
If, later on, they receive the sweet,
38 aGase garth ute ii (1243-11, Aga, He 1)
ta-o ka-urh-tan chookas maa-ay. then their bitterness shall be gone, O mother.
Soa ToHfe urs AE i 1243-11, Aa, He 1) naanak gurmukh paavai so-ay. O Nanak, the Gurmukh is blessed to receive
fan 6 urufs fetter df NN 4243-12, Ada, He 1) jis no paraapat likhi-aa ho-ay. ||2|| what he is predestined to receive. ||2||
ugat Il (1243-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fro a fase He au| J wag Geter Ih (1243-12, Ada, ve
jin kai hirdai mail kapat hai baahar Dhovaa-i-aa.
Those whose hearts are filled with the filth of deception, may wash themselves on the outside.
IZ AUS SHS AZ udaet wrfenr i 1243-12, Aga, He 1) koorh kapat kamaavday koorh pargatee aa-i-aa. They practice falsehood and deception, and their falsehood is revealed.
wiefa dfe A faas oo eu surfer | (1243-13, Ada, He andar ho-ay so niklai nah chhapai chhapaa-i-aa. That which is within them, comes out; it cannot be concealed by concealment.
gs wets ofan fete gat ufenr i (1243-13, Arse, He 1)
koorhai laalach lagi-aa fir joonee paa-i-aa.
Attached to falsehood and greed, the mortal is consigned to reincarnation over and over again.
oa A ain A weet as fof ufeor quill 4243-14, Aa, He 1)
naanak jo beejai so khaavnaa kartai likh paa-i-aa. ||15]||
O Nanak, whatever the mortal plants, he must eat. The Creator Lord has written our destiny. ||15]|
HBA Hs 2 Il (1243-14)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
aa ATat Set iret uy US shes Il 1243-15, Ardar, ne 2) kathaa kahaanee baydee™ aanee paap punn beechaar. The Vedas bring forth stories and legends, and thoughts of vice and virtue.
2 t Bal B B tal odla Hala Mess Il (1243-15, Aa, ne 2)
day day lainaa lai lai daynaa narak surag avtaar.
What is given, they receive, and what is received, they give. They are reincarnated in heaven and hell.
sn fon wet front soft se AAS I (1243-15, Aa, He 2) utam maDhim jaatee™ jinsee bharam bhavai sansaar. High and low, social class and status - the world wanders lost in superstition.
mifys aret 53 zuret famine fore fefa niet il 1243-16, Avda, He 2)
amrit banee tat vakhaanee gi-aan Dhi-aan vich aa-ee.
The Ambrosial Word of Gurbani proclaims the essence of reality. Spiritual wisdom and meditation are contained within it.
agate nmdt gqanfy ast wast aah fomret i 1243-17, Ada, He 2)
gurmukh aakhee gurmukh jaatee surtee’ karam Dhi-aa-ee.
The Gurmukhs chant it, and the Gurmukhs realize it. Intuitively aware, they meditate on it.
Jan AH Jan fefs se Jon niefs Se i 1243-17, Ada, v2 2)
hukam saaj hukmai vich rakhai hukmai andar vaykhai.
By the Hukam of His Command, He formed the Universe, and in His Hukam, He keeps it. By His Hukam, He keeps it under His Gaze.
Soa Mad ICH se st at fedba SF Ail 1243-18, Aa, ve 2)
naanak agahu ha-umai tutai taa™ ko likee-ai laykhai. ||1]|
O Nanak, if the mortal shatters his ego before he departs, as it is pre-ordained, then he is approved. ||1||
He % Il (1243-18)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
az uad Us uy Ava aaa aT SME I (1243-18, Avda, He 1) bayd pukaaray punn paap surag narak kaa bee-o. The Vedas proclaim that vice and virtue are the seeds of heaven and hell.
A dtd A Cae vier wre AIG II (1243-19, Adar, He 1)
jo beejai so ugvai khaa‘daa jaanai jee-o.
Whatever is planted, shall grow. The soul eats the fruits of its actions, and understands.
fomrg Herd eat afs AS AST aS Il (1243-19, Ada, He 1) gi-aan salaahay vadaa kar sacho sachaa naa-o. Whoever praises spiritual wisdom as great, becomes truthful in the True Name.
Ag din AY Cae vans uShat ae il (1243-19, Ada, 2 1)
sach beejai sach ugvai dargeh paa-ee-ai thaa-o.
When Truth is planted, Truth grows. In the Court of the Lord, you shall find your place of honor.
Us 928s ae aud famre ath anit us dfe i 1244-1, wrda, we 1)
bayd vapaaree gi-aan raas karmee palai ho-ay. The Vedas are only merchants; spiritual wisdom is the capital; by His Grace, it is received.
Soa TH aga ale o slant AfE IQ (1244-1, Asa, He 1)
naanak raasee baahraa lad na chali-aa ko-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, without capital, no one has ever departed with profit. ||2] |
ust Il (1244-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fou fasy sg Hobs wifys oa urfemr | (1244-2, Ada, He 1) nimm birakh baho sanchee-ai amrit ras paa-i-aa. You can water a bitter neem tree with ambrosial nectar.
faring Hf ferrdoa ag eo Uborfenr i 1244-2, ada, we 1) bisee-ar mantar visaahee-ai baho dooDh pee-aa-i-aa. You can feed a venomous snake lots of milk.
Hony nfs 3 fanet uae sretfenr Il (1244-3, Ada, He 1)
manmukh abhinn na bhij-ee pathar navaa-i-aa.
The self-willed manmukh is resistant; he cannot be softened. You might as well water a stone.
fay nfs nifys fittba fas ar ee urfemr It (1244-3, Ada, Hs 1) bikh meh amrit sinchee-ai bikh kaa fal paa-i-aa. Irrigating a poisonous plant with ambrosial nectar, only poisonous fruit is obtained.
soa Halls Afs sie AS fay ofo wfeor MEN 1244-4, Ada, He 1)
naanak sangat mayl har sabh bikh leh jaa-i-aa. ||16||
O Lord, please unite Nanak with the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, so that he may be rid of all poison. ||16]|
HX H2 Y Il (1244-4)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Hofe o HIS Ufeor uet fats o Sg I (1244-4, Argar, He 1) maran na moorat puchhi-aa puchhee thit na vaar. Death does not ask the time; it does not ask the date or the day of the week.
feaat afer fefa afe 3s feaat ad are il (1244-5, Ada, Hs 1) ikn"ee ladi-aa ik lad chalay ikn"ee baDhay bhaar. Some have packed up, and some who have packed up have gone.
feat det Arast fear Tet ATS Il (1244-5, Arde, He 1) ikn"aa ho-ee saakh-tee ikn"aa ho-ee saar. Some are severely punished, and some are taken care of.
GAA Ae efor gS Fa Sn Il (1244-6, Ada, ve 1) laskar sanai damaami-aa chhutay bank du-aar. They must leave their armies and drums, and their beautiful mansions.
Sot Vat erg at st fefa Tet srg UU (1244-6, Ada, He 1) naanak dhayree chhaar kee bhee fir ho-ee chhaar. ||1]| O Nanak, the pile of dust is once again reduced to dust. ||1]|
He % Il (1244-7)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Soa Vat efa ust fet Het a| Il (1244-7, Ada, we 1) naanak dhayree dheh pa-ee mitee sandaa kot. O Nanak, the pile shall fall apart; the fortress of the body is made of dust.
Stafe sg safer de = Aor d| N2QH 1244-7, Ada, He 1) bheetar chor bahaali-aa khot vay jee-aa khot. ||2|| The thief has settled within you; O soul, your life is false. ||2]|
uGat Il (1244-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fae viefa fer He J oe Se oa Sefer Il (1244-8, Aa, He 1) jin andar nindaa dusat hai nak vadhay nak vaDhaa-i-aa. Those who are filled with vicious slander, shall have their noses cut, and be shamed.
Ho agu wate wer ares Ho HSMM tt (1244-8, Asa, He 1) mahaa karoop dukhee-ay sadaa kaalay muh maa-i-aa. They are totally ugly, and always in pain. Their faces are blackened by Maya.
sea Cfs fas ug vag fssts safe oH safer It (1244-9, Aa, He 1)
bhalkay uth nit par darab hireh har naam churaa-i-aa.
They rise early in the morning, to cheat and steal from others; they hide from the Lord's Name.
dfs HG fso at Hafs Hs ae ofy Bs afe TfeMr It 1244-9, wa, He 1)
har jee-o tin kee sangat mat karahu rakh layho har raa-i-aa.
O Dear Lord, let me not even associate with them; save me from them, O my Sovereign Lord King.
ston ufemt fasts anee HoHfe ee urfemr 991 (1244-10, Aa, He 1)
naanak pa-i-ai kirat kamaavday manmukh dukh paa-i-aa. ||17]||
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs act according to their past deeds, producing nothing but pain. ||17]|
HBa H8 8 Il (1244-10)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Ag act d uA oT MAN AS a OE Il (1244-11, Aa, He 4) sabh ko-ee hai khasam kaa khasmahu sabh ko ho-ay. Everyone belongs to our Lord and Master. Everyone came from Him.
JaH UstS YAH AT STAY Ue ATE Il (1244-11, Aa, He 4) hukam pachhaanai khasam kaa taa sach paavai ko-ay. Only by realizing the Hukam of His Command, is Truth obtained.
aenfe mmy vere gato SA ate 244-1, Ada, He 4) gurmukh aap pachhaanee-ai buraa na deesai ko-ay. The Gurmukh realizes his own self; no one appears evil to him.
Sea TaHfa on foment Afsert orfenr APE WU 1244-12, Aa, He 4)
naanak gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee-ai sahilaa aa-i-aa so-ay. ||1||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Fruitful is his coming into the world. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1244-13)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Aso ast wif J mM ABST Il (1244-13, Aa, 2 4) sabhnaa daataa aap hai aapay maylanhaar. He Himself is the Giver of all; He unites all with Himself.
aoa Aafe fH 3 feests faa Afenr dfs SSTg NM (1244-13, Ara, He 4)
naanak sabad milay na vichhurheh jinaa sayvi-aa har daataar. ||2||
O Nanak, they are united with the Word of the Shabad; serving the Lord, the Great Giver, they shall never be separated from Him again. ||2]|
ugat Il (1244-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aenty fase Aifs 3 a Cafe nrfeor it (1244-14, Ada, He 4) gurmukh hirdai saa“t hai naa-o ugav aa-i-aa. Peace and tranquility fill the heart of the Gurmukh; the Name wells up within them.
Au 3u Stee HAH ad HS US ofeMr I (1244-14, Adar, He 4)
jap tap tirath sanjam karay mayray parabh bhaa-i-aa.
Chanting and meditation, penance and self-discipline, and bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage - the merits of these come by pleasing my God.
foset AU dfs Age Aofs TE afenr it (1244-15, Avda, He 4)
hirdaa suDh har sayvday soheh gun gaa-i-aa.
So serve the Lord with a pure heart; singing His Glorious Praises, you shall be embellished and exalted.
He ofa AG SS seer Tenfa sarfemr Ih 1244-15, Ada, 2 4) mayray har jee-o ayvai bhaavdaa gurmukh taraa-i-aa. My Dear Lord is pleased by this; he carries the Gurmukh across.
Soa ToHfe Afenrs se vfs Hofer NACI (1244-16, Ada, He 4) naanak gurmukh mayli-an har dar sohaa-i-aa. ||18]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is merged with the Lord; he is embellished in His Court. ||18]|
HX H3 Y Il (1244-16)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Uses fee St ad nredt ua a WE Il (1244-16, wa, He 1) Dhanvantaa iv hee kahai avree Dhan ka-o jaa-o. Thus speaks the wealthy man: I should go and get more wealth.
sod fasue fsa fefs fas fefe fers a wail 1244-17, Ada, He 1) naanak nirDhan tit din jit din visrai naa-o. ||1|| Nanak becomes poor on that day when he forgets the Lord's Name. ||1]|
He 4% Il (1244-17)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Hod vs ferfa ASA we mrsAT Il (1244-17, Adar, He 1) sooraj charhai vijog sabhsai ghatai aarjaa. The sun rises and sets, and the lives of all run out.
36 HO Is" Sfa aASt TS a fe Il (1244-18, Aa, He 1) tan man rataa bhog ko-ee haarai ko jinai. The mind and body experience pleasures; one loses, and another wins.
Ag & ston sfx wirafe cafe 3 arfhot i (1244-18, veda, oe 1) sabh ko bhari-aa fook aakhan kahan na tham'-ee-ai. Everyone is puffed up with pride; even after they are spoken to, they do not stop.
area Se urfy gx eee Ufa us IM (1244-19, Arsar, we 1)
naanak vaykhai aap fook kadhaa-ay dheh pavai. ||2||
O Nanak, the Lord Himself sees all; when He takes the air out of the balloon, the body falls. ||2||
Uugat Il (1244-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AsAafs on fears 3 frag dfs urfeor it 1244-19, ada, He 1)
satsangat naam niDhaan hai jithahu har paa-i-aa.
The treasure of the Name is in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. There, the Lord is found.
usar q28uU Td udAet wife wear meg setenv Il 1245-1, wa, we 1)
gur parsaadee ghat chaannaa aan"ayr gavaa-i-aa. By Guru's Grace, the heart is illumined, and darkness is dispelled.
So ursth sd ave df mrfenr it 1245-1, ada, ve lohaa paaras bhaytee-ai kanchan ho-ay aa-i-aa. Iron is transformed into gold, when it touches the Philosopher's Stone.
sod Afsafe fife a@ urehy ffs any foerfeur i 245-2, ada, He 1)
naanak satgur mili-ai naa-o paa-ee-ai mil naam Dhi-aa-i-aa.
O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, the Name is obtained. Meeting Him, the mortal meditates on the Name.
faa a US Ua 3 fSot PanS Ufer AEN (1245-2, Aa, He 1)
jin" kai potai punn hai tin"ee darsan paa-i-aa. ||19]|
Those who have virtue as their treasure, obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. []19]|
HX H2 Y Il (1245-3)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
faa fsar ot Fifenr fa fafa fats Safo aS i (1245-3, arda, we 1) Dharig tinaa kaa jeevi-aa je likh likh vaycheh naa-o. Cursed are the lives of those who read and write the Lord's Name to sell it.
ast fro at Cas woes fomr ar il (1245-3, Ada, He 1 khaytee jin kee ujrhai khalvaarhay ki-aa thaa-o. Their crop is devastated - what harvest will they have?
Ae AGH add wat Bola o Se Il (1245-4, Ada, He 1) sachai sarmai baahray agai laheh na daad. Lacking truth and humility, they shall not be appreciated in the world hereafter.
nates fd o mma mete aevet ate il 1245-4, ada, ve 1) akal ayh na aakhee-ai akal gavaa-ee-ai baad. Wisdom which leads to arguments is not called wisdom.
noel Atos Aba nroest ureht He Il (1245-5, Aa, He 1) aklee saahib sayvee-ai aklee paa-ee-ai maan. Wisdom leads us to serve our Lord and Master; through wisdom, honor is obtained.
weet ufs & ashy nrest ats BS | (1245-5, Aa, vs 1) aklee parh" kai bujhee-ai aklee keechai daan. Wisdom does not come by reading textbooks; wisdom inspires us to give in charity.
Sot Ta Ig Sg dfs Tei ASS MAUI (1245-6, Aa, He 1) naanak aakhai raahu ayhu hor galaa™ saitaan. ||1|| Says Nanak, this is the Path; other things lead to Satan. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (1245-6) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
AA Ad ATS SA Mat aot Aas I 1245-6, Adar, Hs 2) jaisaa karai kahaavai taisaa aisee banee jaroorat. Mortals are known by their actions; this is the way it has to be.
Jefe fea Fa sa defo mA adh Aas I (1245-7, rsa, we 2)
hoveh liny jhiny nah hoveh aisee kahee-ai soorat.
They should show goodness, and not be deformed by their actions; this is how they are called beautiful.
n GA fee A eS Ue St area aI HATS MI (1245-7, Adar, ws 2)
jo os ichhay so fal paa-ay taa™ naanak kahee-ai moorat. ||2]|
Whatever they desire, they shall receive; O Nanak, they become the very image of God. ||2||
UgST Il (1245-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Afsag nifys fey 3 nifgs off efor i (1245-8, Ada, He 2) satgur amrit birakh hai amrit ras fali-aa. The True Guru is the tree of ambrosia. it bears the fruit of sweet nectar.
fan usufs A od aa Aaet fifemr | 1245-8, Ada, He 2) jis paraapat so lahai gur sabdee mili-aa. He alone receives it, who is so pre-destined, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Afsad & ate A VS aia ASt afer th 1245-9, Ada, He 2) satgur kai bhaanai jo chalai har saytee rali-aa. One who walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru, is blended with the Lord.
Anas rife o Haet wfe wae afer | (1245-9, Aa, He 2) jamkaal johi na sak-ee ghat chaanan bali-aa. The Messenger of Death cannot even see him; his heart is illumined with God's Light.
aoa sat fHorfents fefe areata o afer iQO1l (1245-10, Arar, He 2)
naanak bakhas milaa-i-an fir garabh na gali-aa. ||20||
O Nanak, God forgives him, and blends him with Himself; he does not rot away in the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||20] |
HX H3 Y Il (1245-10)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Ay zes Asy stee famre fomre fenare Il 1245-10, Ada, He 1)
sach varat santokh tirath gi-aan Dhi-aan isnaan.
Those who have truth as their fast, contentment as their sacred shrine of pilgrimage, spiritual wisdom and meditation as their cleansing bath,
efent gest fant AUNTS S HSA UTS Il (1245-11, Adar, He 1)
da-i-aa dayvtaa khimaa japmaalee tay maanas parDhaan.
kindness as their deity, and forgiveness as their chanting beads - they are the most excellent people.
aafs ast Aafs wear fama aget SE It 1245-11, Wa, He 1)
jugat Dhotee surat cha-ukaa tilak karnee ho-ay.
Those who take the Way as their loincloth, and intuitive awareness their ritualistically purified enclosure, with good deeds their ceremonial forehead mark,
ae sno soot feaar s aet afE NAM (1245-12, Aa, He 1) bhaa-o bhojan naankaa virlaa ta ko-ee ko-ay. ||1]| and love their food - O Nanak, they are very rare. ||1]|
HIG! 3 Il (1245-12)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
OSH BH AY A AP Il (1245-12, Aa, He 3) na-umee naym sach jay karai. On the ninth day of the month, make a vow to speak the Truth,
am au fanart Gad i (1245-13, ada, He 3) kaam kroDh tarisnaa uchrai. and your sexual desire, anger and desire shall be eaten up.
AMT GA us A oa Sarent Sa af AES Il (1245-13, Aa, He 3)
dasmee dasay du-aar jay thaakai aykaadasee ayk kar jaanai.
On the tenth day, regulate your ten doors; on the eleventh day, know that the Lord is One.
eurent us eras afs ae SE Seat HO HTS Il (1245-13, Aa, He 3)
du-aadasee panch vasgat kar raakhai ta-o naanak man maanai.
On the twelfth day, the five thieves are subdued, and then, O Nanak, the mind is pleased and appeased.
WAT ZIZ in us Jo aTs fie foo SA QM (1245-14, Aa, He 3)
aisaa varat raheejai paaday hor bahut sikh ki-aa deejai. | |2| |
Observe such a fast as this, O Pandit, O religious scholar; of what use are all the other teachings? ||2||
UgST Il (1245-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
gufs on da ate Hate fy Heme I (1245-15, Adar, He 3) bhoopat raajay rang raa-ay sa\cheh bikh maa-i-aa. Kings, rulers and monarchs enjoy pleasures and gather the poison of Maya.
ats afs JS ease ug cag gatemr Il (1245-15, Ada, He 3) kar kar hayt vaDhaa-iday par darab churaa-i-aa. In love with it, they collect more and more, stealing the wealth of others.
uz aes 3 feRafe ag Uifs sarfenr | (1245-16, wa, He 3)
putar kaltar na vishahi baho pareet lagaa-i-aa.
They do not trust their own children or spouses; they are totally attached to the love of Maya.
eufenr ot wfenr ufs wet ugsta usstfemr | 1245-16, ada, He 3) vaykh-di-aa hee maa-i-aa Dhuhi ga-ee pachhuteh pachhutaa-i-aa. But even as they look on, Maya cheats them, and they come to regret and repent.
AH fe ad His soa ole stent QA (1245-17, Adar, He 3)
jam dar baDhay maaree-ah naanak har bhaa-i-aa. ||21||
Bound and gagged at Death's door, they are beaten and punished; O Nanak, it pleases the Will of the Lord. ||21]|
HX H3 Y Il (1245-17)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
foros fegat a] ats i (1245-17, Arsar, He 1) gi-aan vihoonaa gaavai geet. The one who lacks spiritual wisdom sings religious songs.
se HOt we HAMS Il (1245-17, Aa, He 1) bhukhay mulaa™ gharay maseet. The hungry Mullah turns his home into a mosque.
Hue Se a As UTS I (1245-18, Aa, He 1) makhtoo ho-ay kai kann parhaa-ay. The lazy unemployed has his ears pierced to look like a Yogi.
Sag Ad Ig AS TSS I (1245-18, Ada, He 1) fakar karay hor jaat gavaa-ay. Someone else becomes a pan-handler, and loses his social status.
ag ute Aee Hare ATE Il (1245-18, Ada, He 1) gur peer sadaa-ay mangan jaa-ay. One who calls himself a guru or a spiritual teacher, while he goes around begging
Tot His 3 wan UTS i (1245-19, wrda, we 1) taa kai mool na lagee-ai paa-ay. - don't ever touch his feet.
wrtes ute fas Jag Sfe il (1245-19, ada, He 1)
ghaal khaa-ay kichh hathahu day-ay.
One who works for what he eats, and gives some of what he has Sea IT UsSty AE IAI (1245-19, Adar, He 1)
naanak raahu pachhaaneh say-ay. ||1|| - O Nanak, he knows the Path. |[1]|
He 4% Il (1246-1)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ust ABE
Hod fa nid qu ator fase o ATeat Il (1246-1, wrsa, He
manhu je anDhay koop kahi-aa birad na jaanan"ee.
Those mortals whose minds are like deep dark pits do not understand the purpose of life, even when it is explained to them.
Hie nit St aefs ferfe us aU Il (1246-1, Adar, He 1) man anDhai oo‘Dhai kaval disni" kharay karoop. Their minds are blind, and their heart-lotuses are upside-down; they look totally ugly.
fefa afs wets afoor asfs 3 od AWS Ag Il (1246-2, Arar, He 1)
ik kahi jaaneh kahi-aa bujheh tay nar sugharh saroop.
Some know how to speak, and understand what they are told. They are wise and beautiful.
feast are 3 Se 3 aM GA GA GAB Fels Il (1246-2, wa, He 1)
iknaa naad na bayd na gee-a ras ras kas na jaanant. Some do not understand about the Sound-current of the Naad or the Vedas, music, virtue or vice.
feast nfo 5 afd 5 nafs Ag wg at 3B 3 BES Il (1246-3, Ada, He 1)
iknaa suDh na buDh na akal sar akhar kaa bhay-o na laahant.
Some are not blessed with understanding, intelligence, or sublime intellect; they do not grasp the mystery of God's Word.
Soa A od MAfs us fa fag Te Tes Ads iil 1246-3, Ada, nz 1)
naanak say nar asal khar je bin gun garab karant. ||2||
O Nanak, they are donkeys; they are very proud of themselves, but they have no virtues at all. ||2||
uGat Il (1246-4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aenfy As ufes J oS AU Hem | 1246-4, Ada, 2 1) gurmukh sabh pavit hai Dhan sampai maa-i-aa. To the Gurmukh, everything is sacred: wealth, property, Maya.
dfs wafa FH uses SS AY ufo It (1246-4, Ada, He 1 har arath jo kharchaday day“day sukh paa-i-aa. Those who spend the wealth of the Lord find peace through giving.
a dfs am foorfee fee Sfe 5 urfenr Il (1246-5, Ada, He 1) jo har naam Dhi-aa-iday tin tot na aa-i-aa. Those who meditate on the Lord's Name shall never be deprived.
Tan sedt oreer wfenr Afe urfenr it (1246-5, Aa, He 1) gurmukhaa™ nadree aavdaa maa-i-aa sut paa-i-aa. The Gurmukhs come to see the Lord, and leave behind the things of Maya.
soa sdst dg fats o nreet ofa at Arfemr 12211 (1246-6, Ada, He 1)
naanak bhagtaa™ hor chit na aavee har naam samaa-i-aa. ||22||
O Nanak, the devotees do not think of anything else; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||22]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1246-6)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afsagd Aefe A Psarait I (1246-7, Aa, v2 4) satgur sayvan say vadbhaagee. Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.
Ae Aafe frat Sa fess wrait it 1246-7, da, ve 4) sachai sabad jin"aa ayk liv laagee. They are lovingly attuned to the True Shabad, the Word of the One God.
farsa aca ufo Hof ATCT I (1246-7, Ada, He 4) girah kutamb meh sahj samaaDhee. In their own household and family, they are in natural Samaadhi.
soa OTH JS A AS Saat WA (1246-8, Ada, He 4) naanak naam ratay say sachay bairaagee. ||1]| O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are truly detached from the world. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1246-8)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Wes Ae 5 Jeet atar are & ue I (1246-8, ada, we 4)
gantai sayv na hova-ee keetaa thaa-ay na paa-ay. Calculated service is not service at all, and what is done is not approved.
Rae Ae 6 ores Afe o Ba STS Il (1246-8, Aa, He 4)
sabdai saad na aa-i-o sach na lago bhaa-o.
The flavor of the Shabad, the Word of God, is not tasted if the mortal is not in love with the True Lord God.
Afsag fimrs o waet Hoole mire ATE I (1246-9, Ada, He 4)
satgur pi-aaraa na lag-ee manhath aavai jaa-ay.
The stubborn-minded person does not even like the True Guru; he comes and goes in reincarnation.
a fea fea mara ad 3t oA feut fuera ATE II (1246-9, Aa, He 4) jay ik vikh agaahaa bharay taa™ das vikhaa™ pichhaahaa jaa-ay. He takes one step forward, and ten steps back.
Afsad at Ae Wad A vals AfsasT STE Il (1246-10, Aa, He 4)
satgur kee sayvaa chaakree jay chaleh satgur bhaa-ay.
The mortal works to serve the True Guru, if he walks in harmony with the True Guru's Will.
ning dee Afsag 3 fs AOA Td ANTE Il (1246-10, Ardar, we 4)
aap gavaa-ay satguroo no milai sehjay rahai samaa-ay.
He loses his self-conceit, and meets the True Guru; he remains intuitively absorbed in the Lord.
oad feat an o dad Ae Afes feof Wu (1246-11, Adar, ne 4) naanak tin"aa naam na veesrai sachay mayl milaa-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, they never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they are united in Union with the True Lord. ||2||
Uugat Il (1246-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WS HEA KISS TF TIS F Ure I (1246-12, wa, Hs 4) khaan malook kahaa-iday ko rahan na paa-ee. They call themselves emperors and rulers, but none of them will be allowed to stay.
az Hes ae adhe fas vf & wet Il (1246-12, ada, we 4) garh" mandar gach geeree-aa kichh saath na jaa-ee. Their sturdy forts and mansions - none of them will go along with them.
Afes wnufs uz ea fon fo soot i 246-12, Ada, ne 4) so-in saakhat pa-un vayg Dharig Dharig chaturaa-ee. Their gold and horses, fast as the wind, are cursed, and cursed are their clever tricks.
este nifys users aafs ag HG suret Il (1246-13, Ada, He 4) chhateeh amrit parkaar karahi baho mail vaDhaa-ee. Eating the thirty-six delicacies, they become bloated with pollution.
ood A te fsAfs o Weal HoHfe BY UTet QS (1246-13, Adar, He 4)
naanak jo dayvai tiseh na jaanan"ee manmukh dukh paa-ee. ||23]|
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukh does not know the One who gives, and so he suffers in pain. ||23]|
HBa He 3 Il (1246-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ufs ufs ufss Hot aa trad sfe aa Saas I (1246-14, Avda, ne 3)
parh"” parh" pandit monee thakay daysantar bhav thakay bhaykh-Dhaaree.
The Pandits, the religious scholars and the silent sages read and recite until they get tired. They wander through foreign lands in their religious robes, until they are exhausted.
en ate o@ ae 6 ufefs ey oar mits Seat Il (1246-15, Ada, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay naa-o kaday na paa-in dukh laagaa at bhaaree.
In love with duality, they never receive the Name. Held in the grasp of pain, they suffer terribly.
Hee nid 3 ae Asta wfeur & faa I (1246-15, Asa, He 3)
moorakh anDhay tarai gun sayveh maa-i-aa kai bi-uhaaree.
The blind fools serve the three gunas, the three dispositions; they deal only with Maya.
wiefs que Ges sde a et US uss Ter Il (1246-16, Aa, He 3) andar kapat udar bharan kai taa-ee paath parheh gaavaaree. With deception in their hearts, the fools read sacred texts to fill their bellies.
Afsag Ae A AY ue fA JEH fees Het I (1246-16, Aa, He 3) satgur sayvay so sukh paa-ay jin ha-umai vichahu maaree. One who serves the True Guru finds peace; he eradicates egotism from within.
aod use Toa! fea oS I gs sas AU (1246-17, ada, ws 3)
naanak parh-naa gunnaa ik naa-o hai boojhai ko beechaaree. ||1]|
O Nanak, there is One Name to chant and dwell on; how rare are those who reflect on this and understand. ||1]]|
He 3 Il (1246-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Sial niear otal Aat fs JaH usm foo alte Il (1246-17, Aa, He 3)
naa“gay aavnaa naa“gay jaanaa har hukam paa-i-aa ki-aa keejai.
Naked we come, and naked we go. This is by the Lord's Command; what else can we do?
fan at eAS Het & afear dH fan fA att i (1246-18, Ada, He 3) jis kee vasat so-ee lai jaa-igaa ros kisai si-o keejai. The object belongs to Him; He shall take it away; with whom should one be angry.
Tenfy de A ate" HS AoA dfs GA UA II (1246-19, Ada, He 3)
gurmukh hovai so bhaanaa mannay sehjay har ras peejai.
One who becomes Gurmukh accepts God's Will; he intuitively drinks in the Lord's sublime essence.
SOA ANSTS AUT HOfoT JAS TH Pet MQM (1246-19, Ada, He 3) naanak sukh-daata sadaa salaahihu rasnaa raam raveejai. ||2]| O Nanak, praise the Giver of peace forever; with your tongue, savor the Lord. ||2||
ust 928d u@at il 4247-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
as afenr Atears ag sits aaret i (1247-1, Avda, He 3) garheh kaa-i-aa seegaar baho bhaa“t banaa-ee. The fortress of the body has been decorated and adorned in so many ways.
da Uda astfenr ufsafa as HET I (1247-1, Adar, He 3) rang parang kateefi-aa pahirahi Dhar maa-ee. The wealthy wear beautiful silk robes of various colors.
Oe HUE volta ag AST Fare Il (1247-2, aa, He 3) laal supayd duleechi-aa baho sabhaa banaa-ee. They hold elegant and beautiful courts, on red and white carpets.
ey ural wy Saat Tea Tae Il (1247-2, ada, v2 3)
dukh khaanaa dukh bhognaa garbai garbaa-ee.
But they eat in pain, and in pain they seek pleasure; they are very proud of their pride.
SSA SH B Vise nifs SS SaveHh MIVSil (1247-2, Aa, ue 3)
naanak naam na chayti-o ant la-ay chhadaa-ee. ||24||
O Nanak, the mortal does not even think of the Name, which shall deliver him in the end. ||24] |
HBa H8 3 Il (1247-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hon Afe Ast Wate ANTE I (1247-3, Ada, He 3) sehjay sukh sutee sabad samaa-ay. She sleeps in intuitive peace and poise, absorbed in the Word of the Shabad.
nm yfs Afs wet af we i (1247-3, ada, Hs 3) aapay parabh mayl la-ee gal laa-ay. God hugs her close in His Embrace, and merges her into Himself.
ufo gat Hota ASS i 1247-4, Arsa, He 3) dubiDhaa chookee sahj subhaa-ay. Duality is eradicated with intuitive ease.
nists on efawr ufe rte i 1247-4, Ada, 2 3) antar naam vasi-aa man aa-ay. The Naam comes to abide in her mind.
A afe we fa sfe wate Il 1247-4, Ada, He 3) say kanth laa-ay je bhann gharhaa-ay. He hugs close in His Embrace those who shatter and reform their beings.
Soa A Ofte fs A afs onfs free ai 247-5, Ada, He 3) naanak jo Dhur milay say hun aan milaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, those who are predestined to meet Him, come and meet Him now. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (247-5) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
frat on fearfaor foo wu Aufa dfs i 1247-5, Avda, He 3)
jin"ee naam visaari-aa ki-aa jap jaapeh hor.
Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord - so what if they chant other chants?
fare niefa ate AUS UO Sis II (1247-6, Ada, He 3) bistaa andar keet say muthay DhanDhai chor. They are maggots in manure, plundered by the thief of worldly entanglements.
BSA SH F AAT FS Bos fa iil (1247-6, wrdar, we 3) naanak naam na veesrai jhoothay laalach hor. ||2|| O Nanak, never forget the Naam; greed for anything else is false. ||2||
uQat Il (1247-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
oH Adis oH Hfs wAfas Afar Het I 1247-7, Ada, He 3)
naam salaahan naam man asthir jag so-ee.
Those who praise the Naam, and believe in the Naam, are eternally stable in this world.
fase ofs afe fase ga Sot FST it (1247-7, rsa, He 3) hirdai har har chitvai doojaa nahee ko-ee. Within their hearts, they dwell on the Lord, and nothing else at all.
ofy df ofs Gud fag fas afs At i 1247-8, Ada, He 3)
rom rom har uchrai khin khin har so-ee.
With each and every hair, they chant the Lord's Name, each and every instant, the Lord.
aTenfe ASH Hass fesHe He vet | (1247-8, Aa, He 3)
gurmukh janam sakaarthaa nirmal mal kho-ee.
The birth of the Gurmukh is fruitful and certified; pure and unstained, his filth is washed away.
Sod AHteet usy fourfenr ona us Tet iQuil (1247-8, Ada, Hs 3)
naanak jeevdaa purakh Dhi-aa-i-aa amraa pad ho-ee. ||25] |
O Nanak, meditating on the Lord of eternal life, the status of immortality is obtained. [|25]|
H@q H3 3 Ill (1247-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
frat on ferrfoor ag aan antets afe il (1247-9, Ada, nH 3) jinee naam visaari-aa baho karam kamaaveh hor. Those who forget the Naam and do other things,
ood FH ufs sa Hbofs fae Hot Gufs Fs NA 4247-10, Aa, He 3)
naanak jam pur baDhay maaree-ah ji-o san"ee upar chor. ||1]|
O Nanak, will be bound and gagged and beaten in the City of Death, like the thief caught red-handed. ||1]||
He U Il (1247-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Usfs Aest yraA Ade AUfemr ats |e i (1247-10, Aa, He 5) Dharat suhaavarhee aakaas suhandaa japandi-aa har naa-o. The earth is beauteous, and the sky is lovely, chanting the Name of the Lord.
aad oH fegfenr faq 36 wets aE QM (1247-11, rsa, 42 5) naanak naam vihooni-aa tin" tan khaaveh kaa-o. ||2|| O Nanak, those who lack the Naam - their carcasses are eaten by the crows. ||2| |
ugat Il (1247-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
on Aedes 71S ate for HIS SAT Il (1247-12, Ada, He 5) naam salaahan bhaa-o kar nij mahlee vaasaa. Those who lovingly praise the Naam, and dwell in the mansion of the self deep within,
Gfe aufs afs 3 mrect fefs dfo 3 faamAT Il (1247-12, Aa, He 5) o-ay baahurh jon na aavnee fir hohi na binaasaa. do not enter into reincarnation ever again; they shall never be destroyed.
dfs ASt dfa safe gd AS ATA foreT I 1247-13, Ada, He 5)
har saytee rang rav rahay sabh saas giraasaa.
They remain immersed and absorbed in the love of the Lord, with every breath and morsel of food.
dfs a da ae 5 Bad Tafa userT I 1247-13, Aa, He 5) har kaa rang kaday na utrai gurmukh pargaasaa. The color of the Lord's Love never fades away; the Gurmukhs are enlightened.
Gfe faa afs & Hfenig ata The UAT QEN (1247-13, Aa, He 5)
o-ay kirpaa kar kai mayli-an naanak har paasaa. ||26]||
Granting His Grace, He unites them with Himself; O Nanak, the Lord keeps them by His side. ||26]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1247-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
favg feg Ho wud fefs 3 IGH agZ iar” | (1247-14, Aa, He 3) jichar ih man lahree vich hai ha-umai bahut aha"kaar. As long as his mind is disturbed by waves, he is caught in ego and egotistical pride.
Rae Ae & orect ath & wat fumrg I (1247-15, Aa, He 3)
sabdai saad na aavee naam na lagai pi-aar.
He does not find the taste of the Shabad, and he does not embrace love for the Name.
Aa afe & ucet fan at uf ufy df urs i 1247-15, Aa, He 3) sayvaa thaa-ay na pav-ee tis kee khap khap ho-ay khu-aar. His service is not accepted; worrying and worrying, he wastes away in misery.
Sod Aa Het wih A fe od Cafe il (1247-16, Ada, ne 3)
naanak sayvak so-ee aakhee-ai jo sir Dharay utaar.
O Nanak, he alone is called a selfless servant, who cuts off his head, and offers it to the Lord.
Afsas ot ovat Hifs we AEE ge Ba offs NAN (1247-16, Aa, He 3) satgur kaa bhaanaa man la-ay sabad rakhai ur Dhaar. ||1|| He accepts the Will of the True Guru, and enshrines the Shabad within his heart. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1247-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
A AU Bu AS Wat A MAH STS Il (1247-17, Avda, He 3)
SO jap tap sayvaa chaakree jo khasmai bhaavai.
That is chanting and meditation, work and selfless service, which is pleasing to our Lord and Master.
nm Sun Afse SE wmys aS] I (1247-17, Aa, He 3)
aapay bakhsay mayl la-ay aapat gavaavai.
The Lord Himself forgives, and takes away self-conceit, and unites the mortals with Himself.
fifemr ae 5 ates wat APS flrs II (1247-18, Aa, He 3)
mili-aa kaday na veechhurhai jotee jot milaavai.
United with the Lord, the mortal is never separated again; his light merges into the Light.
Soa TT USA A gsHt faA wef gsTS QM (1247-18, Ada, He 3) naanak gur parsaadee so bujhsee jis aap bujhaavai. ||2||
O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, the mortal understands, when the Lord allows him to understand. ||2||
ugat Il (1247-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
AS a Ba fefs J Hony nidardt Il (1247-19, Aa, He 3) sabh ko laykhay vich hai manmukh aha‘kaaree. All are held accountable, even the egotistical self-willed manmukhs.
dfs oH ae 6 Bset ANAS fAfs wrt Il (1247-19, Ada, He 3)
har naam kaday na chayt-ee jamkaal sir maaree.
They never even think of the Name of the Lord; the Messenger of Death shall hit them on their heads.
Yat F2Q8e
ury faarg Hod Afs BE sg sd Il (1248-1, Asa, we 3) paap bikaar manoor sabh laday baho bhaaree. Their sin and corruption are like rusty slag; they carry such a heavy load.
Hoa foun saree faS adit sect Il (1248-1, ada, He 3) maarag bikham daraavanaa ki-o taree-ai taaree. The path is treacherous and terrifying; how can they cross over to the other side?
aoa dfs Te A Cad ofa ath Bardt QDI (1248-2, Ada, He 3) naanak gur raakhay say ubray har naam uDhaaree. ||27]||
O Nanak, those whom the Guru protects are saved. They are saved in the Name of the Lord. ||27]||
HBa Hs 3 Il (1248-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
fee Afsag AS AY dt Hfe HHfo Ss Ses I (1248-2, Ada, He 3)
vin satgur sayvay sukh nahee mar jameh vaaro vaar.
Without serving the True Guru, no one finds peace; mortals die and are reborn, over and over again.
Ha Sagat ures wT En ste fears i (1248-3, Ardar, we 3)
moh thag-ulee paa-ee-an baho doojai bhaa-ay vikaar.
They have been given the drug of emotional attachment; in love with duality, they are totally corrupt.
fefa as usAret Gad fSH Ho aS asta Als SHAATS Il (1248-3, Aa, He 3) ik gur parsaadee ubray tis jan ka-o karahi sabh namaskaar. Some are saved, by Guru's Grace. Everyone humbly bows before such humble beings.
area notes oH fomrfe 3 nists fas uefa He Grs UI (1248-4, Adar, Hs 3)
naanak an-din naam Dhi-aa-ay too antar jit paavahi mokh du-aar. ||1||
O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, deep within yourself, day and night. You shall find the Door of Salvation. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1248-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hfeur xfs ferrfaor AG He|St fs BMH I (1248-5, Aa, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi visaari-aa sach marnaa har naam.
Emotionally attached to Maya, the mortal forgets truth, death and the Name of the Lord.
Ua adfsur Aon afeur niefs ea ATH Il (1248-5, Adar, He 3)
DhanDhaa karti-aa janam ga-i-aa andar dukh sahaam.
Engaged in worldly affairs, his life wastes away; deep within himself, he suffers in pain.
aoa Afsagd Afe AY ufenr fag uate feof TITY NI 1248-6, Asa, He 3) naanak satgur sayv sukh paa-i-aa jin" poorab likhi-aa karaam. ||2]|
O Nanak, those who have the karma of such pre-ordained destiny, serve the True Guru and find peace. ||2||
UgST Il (1248-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Sut ust dfs on fefa Su o Tet i (1248-6, Aa, ne 3)
laykhaa parhee-ai har naam fir laykh na ho-ee.
Read the account of the Name of the Lord, and you shall never again be called to account.
ufe 6 Ha afe ofa ufs AS Set Il (1248-7, Aa, HH: 3) puchh na sakai ko-ay har dar sad dho-ee. No one will question you, and you will always be safe in the Court of the Lord.
AHS fs F 3a Asa fos Tet il 1248-7, ada, ve 3) jamkaal milai day bhayt sayvak nit ho-ee. The Messenger of Death will meet you, and be your constant servant.
ud TT 3 HIG fer ufs usa|Y Bet Il (1248-8, Ada, Hs 3)
pooray gur tay mahal paa-i-aa pat pargat lo-ee.
Through the Perfect Guru, you shall find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. You shall be famous throughout the world.
Soa Mode Uot vfs ene fifemr ofs ASt NQCI (1248-8, Ada, He 3) naanak anhad Dhunee dar vajday mili-aa har so-ee. ||28]|
O Nanak, the unstruck celestial melody vibrates at your door; come and merge with the Lord. ||28] |
HBa Hs 3 Il (1248-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Ts oe afoot A ad AUT J AY AY Il (1248-9, Adar, He 3) gur kaa kahi-aa jay karay sukhee hoo sukh saar. Whoever follows the Guru's Teachings, attains the most sublime peace of all peace.
ad at avat 3B achat Bea u|fa uTT NU (1248-9, Arar, He 3)
gur kee karnee bha-o katee-ai naanak paavahi paar. ||1]|
Acting in accordance with the Guru, his fear is cut away; O Nanak, he is carried across. ||1||
He 3 Il (1248-10)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ag usar of Ghat aH B Her SPE I (1248-10, Avda, He 3) sach puraanaa naa thee-ai naam na mailaa ho-ay. The True Lord does not grow old; His Naam is never dirtied.
Td a TS AVS safe 6 nies SE Il (1248-10, Ada, He 3) gur kai bhaanai jay chalai bahurh na aavan ho-ay. Whoever walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, shall not be reborn again.
soa of fertfon urea Aret fF HQ (1248-11, Aa, He 3) naanak naam visaari-ai aavan jaanaa do-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, those who forget the Naam, come and go in reincarnation. ||2]|
ugat Il (1248-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Has AS AS BS dfs tg ASE I 1248-11, Ada, He 3)
mangat jan jaachai daan har dayh subhaa-ay.
I am a beggar; I ask this blessing of You: O Lord, please embellish me with Your Love.
ofa vane at fimirn 3 eanfs faust ii (1248-12, ada, v8 3)
har darsan kee pi-aas hai darsan tariptaa-ai.
I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; His Darshan brings me satisfaction.
fag us ust 3 tes fas Sa Hat fe I (1248-12, Adar, He 3) khin pal gharhee na jeev-oo bin daykhay maraa™ maa-ay. I cannot live for a moment, for even an instant, without seeing Him, O my mother.
Afsats ote feutemr afe sfoor AS ate Il (1248-13, Ada, He 3)
satgur naal dikhaali-aa rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ay.
The Guru has shown me that the Lord is always with me; He is permeating and pervading all places.
Afsor orfy Cortes ef aoa fee ote NQCI (1248-13, Aa, He 3) suti-aa aap uthaal day-ay naanak liv laa-ay. ||29]| He Himself wakes the sleepers, O Nanak, and lovingly attunes them to Himself. ||29| |
HBa Hs 3 Il (1248-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
HoHY sfs 3 Weat Gor niefs an au widarg i (1248-14, Adar, ne 3)
manmukh bol na jaanan"ee onaa andar kaam kroDh aha™kaar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not even know how to speak. They are filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.
we are o Weal Ae fasets fears Il (1248-15, Avda, He 3)
thaa-o kuthaa-o na jaannee sadaa chitvahi bikaar.
They do not know the difference between good and bad; they constantly think of corruption.
esd Sa Hatt Sa dfs afar il (1248-15, wrdar, ws 3) dargeh laykhaa mangee-ai othai hohi koorhi-aar. In the Lord's Court, they are called to account, and they are judged to be false.
nm fqAfe Gureing urfu ag aterg Il 248-16, ada, we 3) aapay sarisat upaa-ee-an aap karay beechaar. He Himself creates the Universe. He Himself contemplates it.
Sod fan s wmiby As eas wef AfeMrs NAM (1248-16, Aa, He 3) naanak kis no aakhee-ai sabh vartai aap sachiaar. ||1|| O Nanak, whom should we tell? The True Lord is permeating and pervading all. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1248-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
dfs aanfe feat wrerfour fae aot uarufs SE II (1248-17, Ada, He 3)
har gurmukh tin"ee araaDhi-aa jin" karam paraapat ho-ay.
The Gurmukhs worship and adore the Lord; they receive the good karma of their actions.
soa JC sfeadt fsa a@ fro ofa yfs sfhmr AE HQH (1248-17, Ada, He 3) naanak ha-o balihaaree tin" ka-o jin" har man vasi-aa so-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those whose minds are filled with the Lord. ||2]|
UugST Il (1248-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
WA Ad AZ GA aT Hles wWhenr il (1248-18, ada, ve 3) aas karay sabh lok baho jeevan jaani-aa. All people cherish hope, that they will live long lives.
fos Htee a fas az Hsu ASfanr I (1248-18, Ada, He 3) nit jeevan ka-o chit garh” mandap savaari-aa. They wish to live forever; they adorn and embellish their forts and mansions.
zoeu ats Cure afer fofs nrfenr i 1248-19, Ara, He 3) valvanch kar upaav maa-i-aa hir aani-aa. By various frauds and deceptions, they steal the wealth of others.
Anas feos ATA nie we Father Il 1248-19, Aa, He 3)
jamkaal nihaalay saas aav ghatai baytaali-aa.
But the Messenger of Death keeps his gaze on their breath, and the life of those goblins decreases day by day.
uot qaet Soa Td ASS Cad dfs Ta Tuetemt SOM (1249-1, Ada, ve 3)
naanak gur sarnaa-ee ubray har gur rakhvaali-aa. ||30|| Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Guru, and is saved. The Guru, the Lord, is his Protector. ||30] |
HBa H8 3 Il (1249-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ufs ufs ufss ae sured wfeor Ho Forte Il 1249-2, Ada, ne 3)
parh parh pandit vaad vkhaanday maa-i-aa moh su-aa-ay.
Reading and writing, the Pandits engage in debates and disputes; they are attached to the flavors of Maya.
en ote on ferfant He Hod fe AAT I (1249-2, Adar, Hs 3)
doojai bhaa-ay naam visaari-aa man moorakh milai sajaa-ay.
In the love of duality, they forget the Naam. Those foolish mortals shall receive their punishment.
fafe at fSA o Asst Per fara ANTE I (1249-3, Adar, we 3) jini’ keetay tisai na sayvn"ee daydaa rijak samaa-ay. They do not serve the One who created them, who gives sustenance to all.
AH oT aot aed 3 acm fefs fefs wrefa Ate I (1249-3, Ada, He 3)
jam kaa faahaa galhu na katee-ai fir fir aavahi jaa-ay.
The noose of Death around their necks is not cut off; they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again.
fra ag usta foftimr Afsag fiufeor fae norte i 249-4, Argar, He 3) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa satgur mili-aa tin aa-ay. The True Guru comes and meets those who have such pre-ordained destiny.
mates oH fomrfee aoa As AMTE IAM (1249-4, Ada, He 3)
an-din naam Dhi-aa-iday naanak sach samaa-ay. ||1]|
Night and day, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; O Nanak, they merge into the True Lord. ||1]||
Hs 3 Il (249-5) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Ay zenfs Ay Aee fa qonfe Ut uta i 249-5, ada, He 3) sach vanjahi sach sayvday je gurmukh pairee paahi. Those Gurmukhs who fall at His Feet deal with the True Lord and serve the True Lord.
Soa Td aA se A VOld AGA Afs AMS Il (1249-5, Ada, He 3)
naanak gur kai bhaanai jay chaleh sehjay sach samaahi. ||2||
O Nanak, those who walk in harmony with the Guru's Will are intuitively absorbed in the True Lord. |[2]|
ust Il (1249-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mA fete oifs ey wet HoHfe fas wfeur Il (1249-6, Aa, He 3)
aasaa vich at dukh ghanaa manmukh chit laa-i-aa. In hope, there is very great pain; the self-willed manmukh focuses his consciousness on it.
aaHfy se fea us AY UfeMt Il (1249-7, Adar, He 3) gurmukh bha-ay niraas param sukh paa-i-aa. The Gurmukhs become desireless, and attain supreme peace.
fed frss Bern nifeus fee ofenr Il 1249-7, Ada, He 3)
vichay girah udaas alipat liv laa-i-aa.
In the midst of their household, they remain detached; they are lovingly attuned to the Detached Lord.
Gat Aa fera 3 fenmuet afe arat arfemrt It (1249-7, Avda, He 3)
Onaa sog vijog na vi-aapa-ee har bhaanaa bhaa-i-aa.
Sorrow and separation do not cling to them at all. They are pleased with the Lord's Will.
Soa Tie ASt Ae safe ad ute we fharfenr Sal 1249-8, Aa, Hs 3)
naanak har saytee sadaa rav rahay Dhur la-ay milaa-i-aa. ||31]|
O Nanak, they remain forever immersed in the Primal Lord, who blends them with Himself. ||31]|
HBa Hs 3 Il (1249-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
uaet wns fas adho fest dt ra dfE i 1249-9, ada, He 3) paraa-ee amaan ki-o rakhee-ai ditee hee sukh ho-ay. Why keep what is held in trust for another? Giving it back, peace is found.
ad a Age dd & fea da & usage 5 Ae Il (1249-9, Ada, ne 3)
gur kaa sabad gur thai tikai hor thai pargat na ho-ay.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad rests in the Guru; it does not appear through anyone else.
mid =fA Hed ufeur ufs whe sae ATE I (1249-10, Ada, He 3) a‘n"ay vas maanak pa-i-aa ghar ghar vaychan jaa-ay. The blind man finds a jewel, and goes from house to house selling it.
Gat usu 6 niteet wre & Us UTE I (1249-10, Area, He 3) Onaa parakh na aavee adh na palai paa-ay. But they cannot appraise it, and they do not offer him even half a shell for it.
a urfu use 3 rect St uradion reg ofeG usate Il (1249-11, Adar, v2 3) jay aap parakh na aavee taa™ paarkhee-aa thaavhu la-i-o parkhaa-ay. If he cannot appraise it himself, then he should have it appraised by an appraiser.
a Ga ote fos we st ee wd 38 fafa Us UTE II (1249-11, Ada, He 3)
jay os naal chit laa-ay taa‘ vath lahai na-o niDh palai paa-ay.
If he focuses his consciousness, then he obtains the true object, and he is blessed with the nine treasures.
ufs de ufs Aa sat yor faa Afsare ASt o SE I 1249-12, Ada, He 3)
ghar hodai Dhan jag bhukhaa mu-aa bin satgur sojhee na ho-ay.
The wealth is within the house, while the world is dying of hunger. Without the True Guru, no one has a Clue.
Rae Hise vfs sfs cA fsa Aa fera 3 afe I 1249-12, Ada, He 3)
sabad seetal man tan vasai tithai sog vijog na ko-ay.
When the cooling and soothing Shabad comes to dwell in the mind and body, there is no sorrow or separation there.
ers uget orf ee AT HIN MITY TSE Il (1249-13, Agar, wz 3)
vasat paraa-ee aap garab karay moorakh aap ganaa-ay.
The object belongs to someone else, but the fool is proud of it, and shows his shallow nature.
aed fag a8 fas 5 uteG fete fefa mre AS AI (1249-13, Adar, He 3) naanak bin boojhay kinai na paa-i-o fir fir aavai jaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, without understanding, no one obtains it; they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1249-14)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hie wise sfeur fifemr afs ulsy ASA AME AS films i 249-14, ada, ve 3)
man anad bha-i-aa mili-aa har pareetam sarsay sajan sant pi-aaray.
My mind is in ecstasy; I have met my Beloved Lord. My beloved friends, the Saints, are delighted.
A Ufs fxs 3 feeate aag fa nef AS ATT I (1249-15, Adar, Hs 3)
jo Dhur milay na vichhurheh kabhoo je aap maylay kartaaray.
Those who are united with the Primal Lord shall never be separated again. The Creator has united them with Himself.
nists Hae sfeor ag ufenr Aas gy fees Il (1249-15, Adar, He 3)
antar sabad ravi-aa gur paa-i-aa saglay dookh nivaaray.
The Shabad permeates my inner being, and I have found the Guru; all my sorrows are dispelled.
dfs Aue Het Hardt nists gat Ss ws Il (1249-16, Aa, He 3)
har sukh-daata sadaa salaahee antar rakhaa™ ur Dhaaray.
I praise forever the Lord, the Giver of peace; I keep Him enshrined deep within my heart.
HoHy fae at suet fa ad fa Ad Aafe Aes Il (1249-16, Aa, He 3)
manmukh tin kee bakheelee ke karay je sachai sabad savaaray.
How can the self-willed manmukh gossip about those who are embellished and exalted in the True Word of the Shabad?
Gar at orfu ufs sent Ha filmes Ageafs US TT Brg Il (1249-17, Adar, ve 3)
onaa dee aap pat rakhsee mayraa pi-aaraa sarnaagat pa-ay gur du-aaray.
My Beloved Himself preserves the honor of those who have come to the Guru's Door seeking Sanctuary.
TX WIHfe A AIG SS HY SAS FIs Il (1249-18, Arsar, He 3) naanak gurmukh say suhaylay bha-ay mukh oojal darbaaray. ||2||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are filled with joy; their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
UugST Il (1249-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fensdct use ag uifs fife Ho earfemr II (1249-18, Ada, He 3) istaree purkhai baho pareet mil moh vaDhaa-i-aa. The husband and wife are very much in love; joining together, their love increases.
uz weg fos se fear Hfo wfemr 1 (1249-19, Asa, He 3) putar kalatar nit vaykhai vigsai mohi maa-i-aa. Gazing on his children and his wife, the man is pleased and attached to Maya.
off ugefh ue safe orfs nfs urfeor tt (1249-19, Adar, He 3)
days pardays Dhan choraa-ay aan muhi paa-i-aa.
Stealing the wealth of his own country and other lands, he brings it home and feeds them.
UST 9Quo
nifs de 2a fedg a Aa & ester Il (1250-1, Avda, we 3) ant hovai vair viroDh ko sakai na chhadaa-i-aa. In the end, hatred and conflict well up, and no one can save him.
ood fee oe foo Hg fas ofa ey urfeor 13211 (1250-1, Aa, He 3)
naanak vin naavai Dharig moh jit lag dukh paa-i-aa. ||32] |
O Nanak, without the Name, those loving attachments are cursed; engrossed in them, he suffers in pain. ||32]]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1250-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
qonfy nifys ou 3 fas wa AS gu ATE II (1250-2, Adar, He 3) gurmukh amrit naam hai jit khaaDhai sabh bhukh jaa-ay. The Guru's Word is the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam. Eating it, all hunger departs.
fara fs 3 deet oH SA fs mete I 1250-2, Ardar, we 3) tarisnaa mool na hova-ee naam vasai man aa-ay. There is no thirst or desire at all, when the Naam comes to dwell in the mind.
faa oe fa dg war fsa da oat 3fe of I 1250-3, Ada, He 3) bin naavai je hor khaanaa tit rog lagai tan Dhaa-ay. Eating anything other than the Name, disease runs to afflict the body.
Sa JA AA Ase AS er mn we feos wall 1250-3, Aa, v2 3)
naanak ras kas sabad salaahnaa aapay la-ay milaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, whoever takes the Praise of the Shabad as his spices and flavors - the Lord unites him in His Union. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (250-4) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hor niefs HG Age J fas AT Hort SE I (1250-4, Adar, He 3)
jee-aa andar jee-o sabad hai jit sah maylaavaa ho-ay.
The life within all living beings is the Word of the Shabad. Through it, we meet our Husband Lord.
fag nae Afa urég 3 Ase use| SE I (1250-5, Aa, He 3) bin sabdai jag aan"ayr hai sabday pargat ho-ay. Without the Shabad, the world is in darkness. Through the Shabad, it is enlightened.
ufss Hot ufs ufs aa Su aa Sq GFE II 1250-5, Ada, He 3)
pandit monee parh parh thakay bhaykh thakay tan Dho-ay.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages read and write until they are weary. The religious fanatics are tired of washing their bodies.
faa nae fas o ufeG edte vs SE Il (1250-6, Aa, v2 3)
bin sabdai kinai na paa-i-o dukhee-ay chalay ro-ay.
Without the Shabad, no one attains the Lord; the miserable depart weeping and Wailing.
Sad Seat ursha aaty usrufS SE iQ (1250-6, wrdar, we 3)
naanak nadree paa-ee-ai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, by His Glance of Grace, the Merciful Lord is attained. ||2| |
ugat Il (1250-7)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
ferst used mfs og af He uerfemr I 250-7, Avda, He 3)
istaree purkhai at nayhu bahi mand pakaa-i-aa. The husband and wife are very much in love; sitting together, they make evil plans.
fenet Ag fag sort HS ys Sen | (1250-7, Avda, He 3) disdaa sabh kichh chalsee mayray parabh bhaa-i-aa. All that is seen shall pass away. This is the Will of my God.
faG adm fas afar t eg Gurfeor i 250-8, Ada, He 3) ki-o rahee-ai thir jag ko kKadhahu upaa-i-aa. How can anyone remain in this world forever? Some may try to devise a plan.
Gs us at godt fag xo Rafer il 1250-8, Asa, He 3) gur pooray kee chaakree thir kanDh sabaa-i-aa. Working for the Perfect Guru, the wall becomes permanent and stable.
aoa SutA fkerfemte ote oth Aatfent NSZil (1250-8, Aa, He 3)
naanak bakhas milaa-i-an har naam samaa-i-aa. ||33]|
O Nanak, the Lord forgives them, and merges them into Himself; they are absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||33]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1250-9)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hfeor xfs ferrfoor aa ar 3B IS wrg Il (1250-9, Adar, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi visaari-aa gur kaa bha-o hayt apaar.
Attached to Maya, the mortal forgets the Fear of God and Guru, and love for the Infinite Lord.
@fs wots Afo Hfs aet vfs 3 wat fimrg I (1250-10, Aa, He 3)
lobh lahar suDh mat ga-ee sach na lagai pi-aar.
The waves of greed take away his wisdom and understanding, and he does not embrace love for the True Lord.
aente fro Age Hie SA VdaT HY BME Il (1250-10, Ada, He 3)
gurmukh jinaa sabad man vasai dargeh mokh du-aar.
The Word of the Shabad abides in the mind of the Gurmukhs, who find the Gate of Salvation.
Sea nT Af BE MM AUASIT MAUI (1250-11, Asa, He 3) naanak aapay mayl la-ay aapay bakhsanhaar. ||1]|| O Nanak, the Lord Himself forgives them, and unites them in Union with Himself. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1250-11)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
sod fan faa wet o Heat fend Ad o fe II 4250-11, Aa, H: 4)
naanak jis bin gharhee na jeevnaa visray sarai na bind.
O Nanak, without Him, we could not live for a moment. Forgetting Him, we could not succeed for an instant.
fH fre fas Hs sb frAfs oHSt FFE QW 250-12, Adar, Hs 4) tis si-o ki-o man roosee-ai jisahi hamaaree chind. ||2|| O mortal, how can you be angry with the One who cares for you? ||2||
He 8 Il (1250-12)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
Wee uitfenr fSsHfser of aayfa any forte i (1250-12, ada, vs 4) saavan aa-i-aa jhimjhimaa har gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay. The rainy season of Saawan has come. The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord's Name.
ey sy ast Ag VavEAt Hig Sor SaaT BTS I (1250-13, wa, v2 4) dukh bhukh kaarhaa sabh chukaa-isee meehu vuthaa chhahbar laa-ay. All pain, hunger and misfortune end, when the rain falls in torrents.
AS Uafs set Tdorect nig aftr doe ote I (1250-14, Aa, He 4) sabh Dharat bha-ee haree-aavalee ann jammi-aa bohal laa-ay. The entire earth is rejuvenated, and the grain grows in abundance.
dfs nifés gore four afe afe wm ure ate I (1250-14, Adar, He 4)
har achint bulaavai kirpaa kar har aapay paavai thaa-ay.
The Carefree Lord, by His Grace, summons that mortal whom the Lord Himself approves.
dfs fanfo fred AS AST FMS Be Sate I (1250-15, Aa, He 4) har tiseh Dhi-aavahu sant janhu jo antay la-ay chhadaa-ay. So meditate on the Lord, O Saints; He shall save you in the end.
dfs otefs safs née o Ae AY ZA Hf Me Il (1250-15, Aa, He 4)
har keerat bhagat anand hai sadaa sukh vasai man aa-ay.
The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises and devotion to Him is bliss; peace shall come to dwell in the mind.
fat asHfa oH mrafomr fsor eu ge afs ATE II (1250-16, Ada, He 4)
jin"aa gurmukh naam araaDhi-aa tinaa dukh bhukh leh jaa-ay.
Those Gurmukhs who worship the Naam, the Name of the Lord - their pain and hunger departs.
Ae ood fgus af ge ofs cane tg ASE SI (1250-16, Ada, He 4)
jan naanak tariptai gaa-ay gun har darsan dayh subhaa-ay. ||3]|
Servant Nanak is satisfied, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. Please embellish him with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3]|
ust Il (1250-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
qs us at ots fos tS Gs ASS I (1250-17, Ada, Hs 4) gur pooray kee daat nit dayvai charhai savaa-ee-aa. The Perfect Guru bestows His gifts, which increase day by day.
sfh te orfy efeors 5 ett sure Il 1250-18, Avda, He 4)
tus dayvai aap da-i-aal na chhapai chhapaa-ee-aa.
The Merciful Lord Himself bestows them; they cannot be concealed by concealment.
fos xem yarH Confs fee weer I (1250-18, Aa, Hs 4)
hirdai kaval pargaas unman liv laa-ee-aa.
The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and the mortal is lovingly absorbed in the state of supreme bliss.
A a ad GA ct dn fife set ure I (1250-18, Aa, He 4) jay ko karay us dee rees sir chhaa-ee paa-ee-aa. If anyone tries to challenge him, the Lord throws dust on his head.
aoa nufs afe 3 Reet ud Afsae at efsuretor sell 1250-19, Ada, Hs 4) naanak aparh ko-ay na sak-ee pooray satgur kee vadi-aa-ee-aa. ||34|| O Nanak, no one can equal the glory of the Perfect True Guru. ||34| |
UST AQUA
HBa H8 3 Il (1251-1)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
WHg fudge J fH ate fimreu 5 voEt 3 Jafs agat ATE Il (1251-1, Aa, 2 3)
amar vayparvaahu hai tis naal si-aanap na chal-ee na hujat karnee jaa-ay.
The Order of the Lord is beyond challenge. Clever tricks and arguments will not work against it.
ny efs Agee ue His we SATE Il (1251-2, Aa, He 3) aap chhod sarnaa-ay pavai man la-ay rajaa-ay. So abandon your self-conceit, and take to His Sanctuary; accept the Order of His Will.
Tanfe AH Ss 3 Baet ICH fess ATE I (1251-2, Aa, ne 3)
gurmukh jam dand na lag-ee ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay.
The Gurmukh eliminates self-conceit from within himself; he shall not be punished by the Messenger of Death.
Soa Aza Het wmiba fa Afe ad fee ote Wall (1251-2, Awa, ve 3)
naanak sayvak so-ee aakhee-ai je sach rahai liv laa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, he alone is called a selfless servant, who remains lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (251-3) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ats afs As Hats Sot il (1251-3, wrda, we 3) daat jot sabh soorat tayree. All gifts, light and beauty are Yours.
agz fimreu gn Het I 4251-3, Aa, He 3) bahut si-aanap ha-umai mayree. Excessive cleverness and egotism are mine.
Wg AGH anata Sis Hfs femmi TBH ae 3 Ya Sat I (1251-4, Ada, ws 3)
baho karam kamaaveh lobh mohi vi-aapay ha-umai kaday na chookai fayree. The mortal performs all sorts of rituals in greed and attachment; engrossed in egotsim, he shall never escape the cycle of reincarnation.
soa oifu age aga FH fSA aS ATS Tw Vast WN (1251-4, Ada, He 3) naanak aap karaa-ay kartaa jo tis bhaavai saa-ee gal changayree. ||2|| O Nanak, the Creator Himself inspires all to act. Whatever pleases Him is good. ||2| |
ugat Hs U II (1251-5)
pa-orhee mehlaa 5. Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
Ay Wet AY USS! AY BH MOE Il (1251-5, Aa, He 5)
sach khaanaa sach painnaa sach naam aDhaar.
Let Truth be your food, and Truth your clothes, and take the Support of the True Name.
afs us Horfeur yg teeTs I 1251-6, wa, 3 5) gur poorai maylaa-i-aa parabh dayvanhaar. The True Guru shall lead you to meet God, the Great Giver.
aa us fo Afamr Afumr fedarg il (1251-6, Asa, Hs 5) bhaag pooraa tin jaagi-aa japi-aa nirankaar. When perfect destiny is activated, the mortal meditates on the Formless Lord.
AQ Halls Sferrt Stow HATE Il (1251-6, Arsa, He 5)
saaDhoo sangat lagi-aa tari-aa sansaar.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall cross over the world- ocean.
ood frefs Hors afs us a Hag BUI (1251-7, Ada, HB 5) naanak sifat salaah kar parabh kaa jaikaar. ||35]| O Nanak, chant God's Praises, and celebrate His Victory. ||35]|
HBa Hs U Il (1251-7)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
AS Aba ANTS nut feos AT Il (1251-8, Avda, vs 5) sabhay jee-a samaal apnee mihar kar. In Your Mercy, You care for all beings and creatures.
mid ural He Ganfe ey ome SfH 3g Il (1251-8, Aa, He 5)
ann paanee much upaa-ay dukh daalad bhann tar.
You produce corn and water in abundance; You eliminate pain and poverty, and carry all beings across.
maeth Hat wats det fanfe og I (1251-8, Aa, He 5) ardaas sunee daataar ho-ee sisat thar. The Great Giver listened to my prayer, and the world has been cooled and comforted.
Beg afe warts wrret AS Js Il (1251-9, Ada, He 5) layvhu kanth lagaa-ay apdaa sabh har. Take me into Your Embrace, and take away all my pain.
SSA OH ftmrf—E ys at ASS We MAI (1251-9, Adar, ws 5)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay parabh kaa safal ghar. ||1]|
Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the House of God is fruitful and prosperous. ||1]|
He U Il (1251-10)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Zo Hu ASS JAH atst Ags Il (1251-10, Aa, v2 5) vuthay maygh suhaavanay hukam keetaa kartaar. Rain is falling from the clouds - it is so beautiful! The Creator Lord issued His Order.
fora Gute mere ofe uct Arf Il (1251-10, Aa, He 5) rijak upaa-i-on aglaa thaa‘dh pa-ee sansaar. Grain has been produced in abundance; the world is cooled and comforted.
36 HO dient dfeur fans aM wns Il (1251-11, Aa, He 5)
tan man hari-aa ho-i-aa simrat agam apaar.
The mind and body are rejuvenated, meditating in remembrance on the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord.
afd fasur ys viuat Ad fAaAeTS Il (1251-11, Arar, H3 5) kar kirpaa parabh aapnee sachay sirjanhaar. O my True Creator Lord God, please shower Your Mercy on me.
dist Gafo A acts aaa Ae Ssfsors QI (1251-12, Ada, v2 5) keetaa lorheh so karahi naanak sad balihaar. ||2|| He does whatever He pleases; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2| |
Uugat Il (1251-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
zat wrfy man o eat Sfsuret it (1251-12, Ada, He 5) vadaa aap agamm hai vadee vadi-aa-ee. The Great Lord is Inaccessible; His glorious greatness is glorious!
ag Aaet Sf feafior nists AMS mre i 251-13, Ada, He 5)
gur sabdee vaykh vigsi-aa antar saat aa-ee.
Gazing upon Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I blossom forth in ecstasy; tranquility comes to my inner being.
Ag wm orfy zaser wm F avet | 1251-13, Avda, He 5) sabh aapay aap varatdaa aapay hai bhaa-ee. All by Himself, He Himself is pervading everywhere, O Siblings of Destiny.
mifu ag AS ode AS JatH Beret i (1251-14, Avda, ns 5)
aap naath sabh nathee-an sabh hukam chalaa-ee.
He Himself is the Lord and Master of all. He has subdued all, and all are under the Hukam of His Command.
Sod dfs ae A Ad AS VS set MSENAU AT Ul (1251-14, Aa, He 5) naanak har bhaavai so karay sabh chalai rajaa-ee. ||36]|1|| suDh.
O Nanak, the Lord does whatever He pleases. Everyone walks in harmony with His Will. ||36]]1]| Sudh] |
Tg Aa sat ssi at | (1251-16) raag saarang banee bhagtaa” kee. Raag Saarang, The Word Of The Devotees.
aatd At il (1251-16)
kabeer jee. Kabeer Jee:
96 Afsars yATfe I (1251-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad od TeaA adt IS Il 1251-17, wa, sas aete zh) kahaa nar garbas thoree baat. O mortal, why are you so proud of small things?
Aso No
Ho 2H oH cat ag Tat wis Se AS NU TIS I 1251-17, wea, sas adie Hh
man das naaj takaa chaar gaa“thee ai‘dou taydhou jaat. ||1|| rahaa-o. With a few pounds of grain and a few coins in your pocket, you are totally puffed up with pride. ||1]|Pause||
as ysu we AS ure fe BY fat Ags Il (1251-17, Ada, sas aes Ft)
bahut partaap gaa‘-o sa-o paa-ay du-ay lakh takaa baraat.
With great pomp and ceremony, you control a hundred villages, with an income of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
feen ots at agg Afodt AA ge Js US INA (1251-18, Aa, sas ade 7)
divas chaar kee karahu saahibee jaisay ban har paat. ||1]| The power you exert will last for only a few days, like the green leaves of the forest.
[2
a ag & omfes feg ug a aS S WS Il (1251-19, wrda, sas ais Ff)
naa ko-oo lai aa-i-o ih Dhan naa ko-oo lai jaat.
No one has brought this wealth with him, and no one will take it with him when he goes.
wo J 3 uifua sgufs fas nfs ae fas I (1251-19, Asa, sas ata A) raavan hoo’ tay aDhik chhatarpat khin meh ga-ay bilaat. ||2]| Emperors, even greater than Raawan, passed away in an instant. ||2||
Yat A2Qu2
fs & As Ae fag ung A Ole oH AUS I (1252-1, ada, sas ate Fh)
har kay sant sadaa thir poojahu jo har naam japaat.
The Lord's Saints are steady and stable forever; they worship and adore Him, and chant the Lord's Name.
fro a@ faut aes 3d dfse 3 ASAfa fiers 3N 1252-1, Ada, sas asta Ah
jin ka-o kirpaa karat hai gobid tay satsang milaat. ||3]|
Those who are mercifully blessed by the Lord of the Universe, join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||3]|
Hs fust sfost AS Hufs nifs o Ves AAS I 1252-2, wa, sas aeite Fh) maat pitaa banitaa sut sampat ant na chalat sangaat. Mother, father, spouse, children and wealth will not go along with you in the end.
aS ads TH 3H ACT AGH Masa WS ISIN (1252-2, Ada, sas aete Fh)
kahat kabeer raam bhaj ba-uray janam akaarath jaat. ||4||1]|
Says Kabeer, meditate and vibrate on the Lord, O madman. Your life is uselessly wasting away. ||4]|1]|
oAAH fHfs oot ASt Sa i (1252-3, ada, sas alts Ht) raajaasaram mit nahee jaanee tayree. I do not know the limits of Your Royal Ashram.
ee
3d A36 at IS Bat NAN TTS ll (1252-3, ada, sas ate Hh
tayray santan kee ha-o chayree. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am the humble slave of Your Saints. ||1]|Pause] |
JAS We A des ore des ATE A OTA I (1252-4, Ada, sas adie th)
hasto jaa-ay so rovat aavai rovat jaa-ay so hasai.
The one who goes laughing returns crying, and the one who goes crying returns laughing.
basto ho-ay ho-ay so oojar oojar ho-ay so basai. ||1]| What is inhabited becomes deserted, and what is deserted becomes inhabited. ||1]|
WS 3 8S ate 8H 3 aor qu Zs HY ATS Il (1252-5, wrda, sas alte Ft)
jal tay thal kar thal tay koo-aa koop tay mayr karaavai.
The water turns into a desert, the desert turns into a well, and the well turns into a mountain.
Uest 3 wroarth vere ve niorih fore] W211 (1252-5, ada, sas adie rh)
Dhartee tay aakaas chadhaavai chadhay akaas giraavai. ||2]|
From the earth, the mortal is exalted to the Akaashic ethers; and from the ethers on high, he is thrown down again. ||2]|
sud 3 TH aS TH SF SUH I (1252-6, Ada, sas adie th) bhaykhaaree tay raaj karaavai raajaa tay bhaykhaaree. The beggar is transformed into a king, and the king into a beggar.
4S Hod 3 ufss ates Ufss 3 Hast ISI (1252-6, Ada, sas ats Ht) khal moorakh tay pandit karibo pandit tay mugDhaaree. ||3]|
The idiotic fool is transformed into a Pandit, a religious scholar, and the Pandit into a fool. ||3]|
od 3 A UY Age UsUS SA SH Il (1252-7, Aa, saz adie Th) naaree tay jo purakh karaavai purkhan tay jo naaree. The woman is transformed into a man, and the men into women.
ag wats AY &t UISH SA Hats aferst ISIN 4252-7, sa, sas aes Ff) kaho kabeer saaDhoo ko pareetam tis moorat balihaaree. ||4||2||
Says Kabeer, God is the Beloved of the Holy Saints. I am a sacrifice to His image. [14112] |
Aa sat SHES at at i (1252-8) saarang banee naamday-o jee kee. Saarang, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsare YATE Il (1252-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ae 3 Ho fafimr aa ATE Il 1252-9, Aa, sas aniee FH) kaa-ay™ ray man bikhi-aa ban jaa-ay. O mortal, why are you going into the forest of corruption?
3S 3 Sans we UU IHS Ml 1252-9, wda, sas se Fh) bhoolou ray thagmooree khaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. You have been misled into eating the toxic drug. ||1]||Pause| |
AA Hts urat xfs Td Il (1252-9, Aa, sas oS Ft) jaisay meen paanee meh rahai. You are like a fish living in the water;
aes AG ot Af St BI Il (1252-10, Ada, sas ane Ah kaal jaal kee suDh nahee lahai. you do not see the net of death.
froa Auret Sis BT Il (1252-10, ada, sas ones th) jinbaa su-aadee leelit loh. Trying to taste the flavor, you swallow the hook.
MA afsa aot sfaS HT NU (1252-10, Ada, sas one Fh aisay kanik kaamnee baaDhi-o moh. ||1]| You are bound by attachment to wealth and woman. ||1]|
fa Ho Hat AS wre | (1252-11, Ada, sas anes Ft) ji-o maDh maakhee sanchai apaar. The bee stores up loads of honey;
HO ote ufe eat ares Il (1252-01, Ada, sas ones th maDh leeno mukh deenee chhaar. then someone comes and takes the honey, and throws dust in its mouth.
TS we as As ate Wi (1252-11, wrda, sas anes Fh ga-oo baachh ka-o sanchai kheer. The cow stores up loads of milk;
ae atta efo Sf nidte N21 (1252-11, wea, sas anee FH) galaa baa“Dh duhi lay-ay aheer. ||2]| then the milkman comes and ties it by its neck and milks it. ||2]|
Hfeor arafs AH mifs as Il (1252-12, ada, sas oHee Fh) maa-i-aa kaaran saram at karai. For the sake of Maya, the mortal works very hard.
A wtfenr & ws Ue Il (1252-12, ada, sas ones wt) SO maa-i-aa lai gaadai Dharai. He takes the wealth of Maya, and buries it in the ground.
mits He AHS Sot HZ Il (1252-12, Avda, sas ose Fh at sanchai samjhai nahee moorh". He acquires so much, but the fool does not appreciate it.
ug dest 36 dfs aes ofF Si (1252-13, Ada, sas oHee Hh) Dhan Dhartee tan ho-ay ga-i-o Dhoorh. ||3]| His wealth remains buried in the ground, while his body turns to dust. ||3]|
amy au fanart ofS A I (1252-13, Ada, sas ones Ft) kaam kroDh tarisnaa at jarai. He burns in tremendous sexual desire, unresolved anger and desire.
HUH S TAT Sot AT Il (1252-13, ada, sas sUee Ft) saaDhsangat kabhoo nahee karai. He never joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
AIS SHES ZT st one it 252-14, wea, sas anes Ah kahat naamday-o taa chee aan. Says Naam Dayv, seek God's Shelter;
fess of srbt saree SIA 0252-14, Ada, sas SHS Fh) nirbhai ho-ay bhajee-ai bhagvaan. ||4||1]| be fearless, and vibrate on the Lord God. ||4||1]|
weg at o ds HUE H AG II 1252-14, Ada, sas ones FH) badahu kee na hod maaDha-o mo si-o. Why not make a bet with me, O Lord of Wealth?
Sad 3 Ho Ho S Sag US ufsG J 5 AE NAN TTS NN (1252-15, Aa, sas one Th) thaakur tay jan jan tay thaakur khayl pari-o hai to si-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
From the master comes the servant, and from the servant, comes the master. This is the game I play with You. ||1||Pause] |
nitus SB SIT nis niu BaS UAT Il (1252-15, Ada, sas ones Ht)
aapan day-o dayhuraa aapan aap lagaavai poojaa.
You Yourself are the deity, and You are the temple of worship. You are the devoted worshipper.
WS 3 BIT Sd FF AGS AIS HSS AS SA AU (1252-16, wrda, sas see Fh
jal tay tarang tarang tay hai jal kahan sunan ka-o doojaa. ||1||
From the water, the waves rise up, and from the waves, the water. They are only different by figures of speech. ||1]|
nuts are nirufa ard mmf SATS SI Il (1252-16, Avda, sas ose Fh) aapeh gaavai aapeh naachai aap bajaavai tooraa. You Yourself sing, and You Yourself dance. You Yourself blow the bugle.
RIS SHES F Hs sag AG ST F UT QU (1252-17, wrda, sas ones FA)
kahat naamday-o too” mayro thaakur jan ooraa too pooraa. ||2||2||
Says Naam Dayv, You are my Lord and Master. Your humble servant is imperfect; You are perfect. ||2]|2||
aA miso He for FU Il (1252-17, Asa, sas ose Fh) daas aninn mayro nij roop. Says God: my slave is devoted only to me; he is in my very image.
wane ford su Zet Hes usAS Hats aes fT qu WU TIS ll 0252-18, ada, sas ones af)
darsan nimakh taap tar-ee mochan parsat mukat karat garih koop. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The sight of him, even for an instant, cures the three fevers; his touch brings liberation from the deep dark pit of household affairs. ||1]|Pause] |
Het aut sags save aa sary 3 se Hf Il (1252-18, wa, sas oe Fh) mayree baa‘Dhee bhagat chhadaavai baa‘Dhai bhagat na chhootai mohi.
The devotee can release anyone from my bondage, but I cannot release anyone from his.
Yat qQus
Sa AH HW a af sia 38 efe HU HeE 8 SE NU (1253-1, Ada, sas one HH) ayk samai mo ka-o geh baa™Dhai ta-o fun mo pai jabaab na ho-ay. ||1]| If, at any time, he grabs and binds me, even then, I cannot protest. ||1]|
H ae 80 aS at Hlefe Hat Atefe HS SA I 1253-2, Ada, sas anes Ah mai gun banDh sagal kee jeevan mayree jeevan mayray daas. I am bound by virtue; I am the Life of all. My slaves are my very life.
OHSS WT a Aba MA SA St a UN YAPA NQUBI (1253-2, Wea, sas SHS Fh naamdayv jaa kay jee-a aisee taiso taa kai paraym pargaas. ||2||3]|
Says Naam Dayv, as is the quality of his soul, so is my love which illuminates him. 2113] |
ASA ll (1253-4) saarang. Saarang:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1253-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3 30 for uae Afs ater i 1253-5, ada, sas use Ah tai nar ki-aa puraan sun keenaa. So what have you accomplished by listening to the Puraanas?
nsUeat sas Sat Curt gH WE o Slo Ul FHS il 1253-5, wa, sas unde Ht) anpaavnee bhagat nahee upjee bhookhai daan na deenaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Faithful devotion has not welled up within you, and you have not been inspired to give to the hungry. ||1||Pause| |
ay 3 fanfes au a fanfes 33 5 sfe SS I (1253-6, wa, saz uMrdse A)
kaam na bisri-o kroDh na bisri-o lobh na chhooti-o dayvaa.
You have not forgotten sexual desire, and you have not forgotten anger; greed has not left you either.
ug fsa Ha 3 oot Sct foes set AS AS AU (1253-6, rsa, sas use Fh)
par nindaa mukh tay nahee chhootee nifal bha-ee sabh sayvaa. ||1]||
Your mouth has not stopped slandering and gossiping about others. Your service is useless and fruitless. ||1]|
we ute wg fA fas US so mrt I (1253-7, Ada, sas ude Ft)
baat paar ghar moos biraano payt bharai apraaDhee.
By breaking into the houses of others and robbing them, you fill your belly, you sinner.
fafo usea afte nruetefs ret mifafeor Act 2H 1253-7, Ada, sas uMrde Ff)
jihi parlok jaa-ay apkeerat so-ee abidi-aa saaDhee. ||2||
But when you go to the world beyond, your guilt will be well known, by the acts of ignorance which you committed. ||2||
fort 38 Ho 3 oot Sct Aha efeor St US Il 1253-8, Asa, sas ude A) hinsaa ta-o man tay nahee chhootee jee-a da-i-aa nahee paalee.
Cruelty has not left your mind; you have not cherished kindness for other living beings.
usHee ATOHs ffs xa uss o TST NSIAUIEN 0253-8, Aa, sas uMTse ah
parmaanand saaDhsangat mil kathaa puneet na chaalee. ||3]|1]||6|| Parmaanand has joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Why have you not followed the sacred teachings? ||3]|1]|6]|
ats vo fs fayus & Ad Il (1253-10, ada, sas AeeTA Ft) chhaad man har bimukhan ko sang. O mind, do not even associate with those who have turned their backs on the Lord.
AT HIS" U ASA Il (1253-11)
saarang mehlaa 5 soordaas. Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Sur Daas:
qe Afsars urrfe il 1253-11) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofg & Aa SA dfs Ba I 1253-12, wea, sas yeeTA wh har kay sang basay har lok. The people of the Lord dwell with the Lord.
36 Ho nafu AeaH AS MafUus nee HoH Ufs $a UU TIS Il 1253-12, ada, sas Hae aft)
tan man arap sarbas sabh arpi-o anad sahj Dhun jhok. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
They dedicate their minds and bodies to Him; they dedicate everything to Him. They are intoxicated with the celestial melody of intuitive ecstasy. ||1]||Pause] |
Zane ufy se foafruet ue 3 Aas FS | 1253-13, wea, sas FETA FH)
darsan paykh bha-ay nirbikha-ee paa-ay hai saglay thok.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, they are cleansed of corruption. They obtain absolutely everything.
nT AHS fHe aH 6 oem Hed ado Moa All (4253-13, AWA, sas AIeA Ft) aan basat si-o kaaj na kachhoo-ai sundar badan alok. ||1]| They have nothing to do with anything else; they gaze on the beauteous Face of God.
[11
from Hee sfa wre a wes fre andt sis Fa I (1253-14, Ada, sas FeeTA FH)
si-aam sundar taj aan jo chaahat ji-o kustee tan jok.
But one who forsakes the elegantly beautiful Lord, and harbors desire for anything else, is like a leech on the body of a leper.
HIGH HO Ufs ofa Ble aes feg uTSe NUNIT (1253-14, Asa, sas FeETA Fh) soordaas man parabh hath leeno deeno ih parlok. ||2||1||8]|
Says Sur Daas, God has taken my mind in His Hands. He has blessed me with the world beyond. ||2]]1]|8]|
Ada ate AS I 1253-16) saarang kabeer jee-o. Saarang, Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars yrrfe II (1253-16) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfs fas aBa AIST HS ST Il (1253-16, Ada, sas ate Ah har bin ka-un sahaa-ee man kaa. Other than the Lord, who is the Help and Support of the mind?
Hs fust set AS afost fos oa AS Ss aT NU TIC Ul 1253-17, wa, sas ast Ah maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banitaa hit laago sabh fan kaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Love and attachment to mother, father, sibling, child and spouse, is all just an illusion. ||1]|Pause] |
Md AC fas Sao stag fant SISA US A Il (1253-17, Wa, sas aete FH) aagay ka-o kichh tulhaa baa‘Dhahu ki-aa bharvaasaa Dhan kaa. So build a raft to the world hereafter; what faith do you place in wealth?
aw fara fen aid at fesoq Ga Soa NU (1253-18, Aa, sas ate FH) kahaa bisaasaa is bhaa“day kaa itnak laagai thankaa. ||1|| What confidence do you place in this fragile vessel; it breaks with the slightest stroke.
[21
HIG UH Us eo ureg Ofs ateg AS AO A Il (1253-18, Aa, sas aate At)
sagal Dharam punn fal paavhu Dhoor baa‘chhahu sabh jan kaa.
You shall obtain the rewards of all righteousness and goodness, if you desire to be the dust of all.
ad Say Hod 3 Asg feg Ho Sas UNT Fo A QUIEN (1253-19, Ada, sas setts Ht) kahai kabeer sunhu ray santahu ih man udan pankhayroo ban kaa. ||2||1||9]| Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: this mind is like the bird, flying above the forest. 2121/91]
Yst 9Qug
TH HOS BuS HIS VW 4 (1254-1) raag malaar cha-upday mehlaa 1 ghar 1 Raag Malaar, Chau-Padas, First Mehl, First House:
9B ATS on aes usy fos fares nieve Has mrst AS aT YAS I (1254-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
urat utet gHet AGar fenfs afer 3 Heat I (1254-4, Hare, He 1) khaanaa peenaa hasnaa sa-unaa visar ga-i-aa hai marnaa. Eating, drinking, laughing and sleeping, the mortal forgets about dying.
WAH feAta unidt atat foo alee odt TIST NAM (1254-4, vers, Hs 1)
khasam visaar khu-aaree keenee Dharig jeevan nahee rahnaa. ||1||
Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal is ruined, and his life is cursed. He cannot remain forever. ||1]|
urat Sat omy fimreg il 1254-5, vars, Hs 1) paraanee ayko naam Dhi-aavahu. O mortal, meditate on the One Lord.
must ufs Ast wl AST NA FITS Il (1254-5, ners, Hs 1) apnee pat saytee ghar jaavhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. You shall go to your true home with honor. ||1 Pause] |
3u6 Refs 33 fomr tefo niafs Sets gafo odt i (1254-5, Hers, He 1)
tuDhno sayveh tujh ki-aa dayveh maa‘geh layveh raheh nahee.
Those who serve You - what can they give You? They beg for and receive what cannot remain.
3 ost aher Asa a Aor niet A Sat QM (1254-6, were, He 1) too daataa jee-aa sabhnaa kaa jee-aa andar jee-o tuhee. ||2]| You are the Great Giver of all souls; You are the Life within all living beings. ||2]|
aenfs fourets fa nifys urefa Aet AS Tat il (1254-7, vers, we gurmukh Dhi-aavahi se amrit paavahi say-ee soochay hohee. The Gurmukhs meditate, and receive the Ambrosial Nectar; thus they become pure.
mifofefa on Aug F yret HS Te Tot WSN (1254-7, wars, He 1)
ahinis naam japahu ray paraanee mailay hachhay hohee. ||3]|
Day and night, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortal. It makes the filthy immacuate. ||3]|
adt sf afer wy So 3d At Sat I (1254-8, Hers, He 1) jayhee rut kaa-i-aa sukh tayhaa tayho jayhee dayhee. As is the season, so is the comfort of the body, and so is the body itself.
soa ofa AoSt At fas aS TS Act NSN (1254-8, HoT, He 1) naanak rut suhaavee saa-ee bin naavai rut kayhee. ||4||1|| O Nanak, that season is beautiful; without the Name, what season is it? ||4]|1]|
HOS HIS 4% Il (1254-9)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
ase fase aa mud utsn ofa eg vrfs fare I (1254-9, ners, He 1) kara-o bin-o gur apnay pareetam har var aan milaavai. I offer prayers to my Beloved Guru, that He may unite me with my Husband Lord.
Afe we ud HSS HS Ha BS Ist TS WS NU (1254-9, wars, ws 1)
sun ghan ghor seetal man moraa laal ratee gun gaavai. ||1||
I hear the thunder in the clouds, and my mind is cooled and soothed; imbued with the Love of my Dear Beloved, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]|
dA Wot Ha HS Sto" Il (1254-10, news, Hs 1) baras ghanaa mayraa man bheenaa. The rain pours down, and my mind is drenched with His Love.
nifts Fe Ast This afte Hat ue ale sft Star ua TIS it 1254-10, vers, ws 1) amrit boond suhaanee hee-arai gur mohee man har ras leenaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The drop of Ambrosial Nectar pleases my heart; the Guru has fascinated my mind, which is drenched in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
Hota Adt za aHfe flmrdt fan ae saSt HS How I (1254-11, Hers, He 1)
sahj sukhee var kaaman pi-aaree jis gur bachnee man maani-aa.
With intuitive peace and poise, the soul-bride is loved by her Husband Lord; her mind is pleased and appeased by the Guru's Teachings.
fe efs ofs set Aoafe nfs sf Un Aerfemr WI (1254-12, Hers, He 1)
har var naar bha-ee sohagan man tan paraym sukhaani-aa. ||2||
She is the happy soul-bride of her Husband Lord; her mind and body are filled with joy by His Love. ||2||
nieae fsurfa set Saas omfag ea Asa Tet Il 1254-12, nas, He 1)
avgan ti-aag bha-ee bairaagan asthir var sohaag haree.
Discarding her demerits, she becomes detached; with the Lord as her Husband, her marriage is eternal.
Aa feria fsa ae 5 fenra ofa yfs urret fasur at Si 0254-13, Hers, Hs 1) sog vijog tis kaday na vi-aapai har parabh apnee kirpaa karee. ||3]| She never suffers separation or sorrow; her Lord God showers her with His Grace.
[I3I|
WEE WE Sdt Ho faves us Ts at Ge at i (1254-14, wars, we 1) aavan jaan nahee man nihchal pooray gur kee ot gahee. Her mind is steady and stable; she does not come and go in reincarnation.
Soa TH an Afu qenfy us Aafs AE AST ISIN (1254-14, Hes, He 1)
naanak raam naam jap gurmukh Dhan sohagan sach sahee. ||4||2||
She takes the Shelter of the Perfect Guru. O Nanak, as Gurmukh, chant the Naam; you shall be accepted as the true soul-bride of the Lord. ||4]|2]|
HOTT HIS 4% Il (1254-15)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
Ant Aafs oft adt feus JEN aes Tetfemr I (1254-15, wes, He 1)
saachee surat naam nahee tariptai ha-umai karat gavaa-i-aa.
They pretend to understand the Truth, but they are not satisfied by the Naam; they waste their lives in egotism.
Ua qQuu ud U6 ud Sd os fSer fay wet su urfeor It 1255-1, news, He 1)
par Dhan par naaree rat nindaa bikh khaa-ee dukh paa-i-aa. Caught in slander and attachment to the wealth and women of others, they eat poison and suffer in pain.
Hae die 3 cue 3 ge His Hf Her Her I (1255-1, Hers, 8 1)
sabad cheen bhai kapat na chhootay man mukh maa-i-aa maa-i-aa.
They think about the Shabad, but they are not released from their fear and fraud; the minds and mouths are filled with Maya, Maya.
mMaAald Sts Be mits st His AON ASH Teter A (1255-2, Hers, He 1)
ajgar bhaar laday at bhaaree mar janmay janam gavaa-i-aa. ||1]|
Loading the heavy and crushing load, they die, only to be reborn, and waste their lives again. ||1]|
Hfs ave Fae HofeEMM | 1255-2, Hers, He 1) man bhaavai sabad suhaa-i-aa. The Word of the Shabad is so very beautiful; it is pleasing to my mind.
oft afi rife su ag ate afs ae Ae ufeor Na Tae Ul (1255-3, vers, He 1)
bharam bharam jon bhaykh baho keen"ay gur raakhay sach paa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The mortal wanders lost in reincarnation, wearing various robes and clothes; when he is saved and protected by the Guru, then he finds the Truth. ||1]|Pause] |
stefa 3x foes 3 as ofs at aH & afer I (1255-3, nore, He 1)
tirath tayj nivaar na n"aatay har kaa naam na bhaa-i-aa.
He does not try to wash away his angry passions by bathing at sacred shrines. He does not love the Name of the Lord.
330 uesg Uddte fsurfamr AS a SS St orfenr Ih (1255-4, Has, He 1)
ratan padaarath parhar ti-aagi-aa jat ko tat hee aa-i-aa. He abandons and discards the priceless jewel, and he goes back from where he came.
fara ate se 63 dt 3 Os dt fa Aen I 1255-5, Hors, He 1)
bistaa keet bha-ay ut hee tay ut hee maahi samaa-i-aa. And so he becomes a maggot in manure, and in that, he is absorbed.
nifae Fore ga vifteret fag ae Aon o UTfeMM I (1255-5, Has, He 1)
aDhik su-aad rog aDhikaa-ee bin gur sahj na paa-i-aa. ||2]|
The more he tastes, the more he is diseased; without the Guru, there is no peace and poise. ||2||
Az Aafs dof Te are TaHfY fomre asters il 1255-6, ners, ve 1)
sayvaa surat rahas gun gaavaa gurmukh gi-aan beechaaraa.
Focusing my awareness on selfless service, I joyfully sing His Praises. As Gurmukh, I contemplate spiritual wisdom.
art Gur set faorn oC afe af ae agsTa I (1255-6, ners, He 1)
khojee upjai baadee binsai ha-o bal bal gur kartaaraa.
The seeker comes forth, and the debater dies down; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Guru, the Creator Lord.
oH ate JS dents 3S J ale ASIST ST I (1255-7, vos, He 1)
ham neech hotay heenmat jhoothay too sabad savaaranhaaraa.
I am low and wretched, with shallow and false understanding; You embellish and exalt me through the Word of Your Shabad.
MSH Dis SIZ IGE AY BI SISTS SM (1255-7, Hors, we 1)
aatam cheen tahaa too taaran sach taaray taaranhaaraa. ||3]||
And wherever there is self-realization, You are there; O True Lord Savior, You save us and carry us across. ||3]|
Safa nets aot ge 3d famr fom aa nner il (1255-8, Hers, He 1)
bais suthaan kahaa™ gun tayray ki-aa ki-aa katha-o apaaraa.
Where should I sit to chant Your Praises; which of Your Infinite Praises should I chant?
nie & web may mist SF SA STASI I (1255-8, wars, we 1)
alakh na lakhee-ai agam ajonee too” naathaa™ naathanhaaraa.
The Unknown cannot be known; O Inaccessible, Unborn Lord God, You are the Lord and Master of masters.
fan ufs efe aS 3 ar As Aa FT VST Il (1255-9, wars, Hs 1)
kis peh daykh kaha-o too kaisaa sabh jaachak too daataaraa.
How can I compare You to anyone else I see? All are beggars - You are the Great Giver.
safsdte aaa vfs tug fea an fxs Cfa oat ISN 1255-10, Hes, He 1)
bhagtiheen naanak dar daykhhu ik naam milai ur Dhaaraa. ||4||3]|
Lacking devotion, Nanak looks to Your Door; please bless him with Your One Name, that he may enshrine it in his heart. ||4]|3]|
HOT HIS 41 Il (1255-10)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
fafe ue fus a Ae 6 Afour AT faoU Fea AHS Il (1255-10, Has, He 1)
jin Dhan pir kaa saad na jaani-aa saa bilakh badan kumlaanee.
The soul-bride who has not known delight with her Husband Lord, shall weep and wail with a wretched face.
set foart aH at at fag Te Saf Sorat WAU (1255-11, Hara, He 1)
bha-ee niraasee karam kee faasee bin gur bharam bhulaanee. ||1]|
She becomes hopeless, caught in the noose of her own karma; without the Guru, she wanders deluded by doubt. ||1]|
aan wor Hat fug wife wirfemr | (1255-12, ners, Hs 1) baras ghanaa mayraa pir ghar aa-i-aa. So rain down, O clouds. My Husband Lord has come home.
ae Wet ag mus UTSH fAfs ofs us ure frerfenr Wa TIC il 4255-12, ners, Hs 1) bal jaavaa™ gur apnay pareetam jin har parabh aan milaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. I am a sacrifice to my Guru, who has led me to meet my Lord God. ||1||Pause| |
5630 Uifs Ae oad fAG nisfes safs Have I (1255-13, Hers, He 1)
na-utan pareet sadaa thaakur si-o an-din bhagat suhaavee.
My love, my Lord and Master is forever fresh; I am embellished with devotional worship night and day.
Hats sé afs can feerfenr afar afar safs AsrTSt QI 255-13, wears, He 1)
mukat bha-ay gur daras dikhaa-i-aa jug jug bhagat subhaavee. ||2||
I am liberated, gazing on the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Devotional worship has made me glorious and exalted throughout the ages. ||2||
oH ad fyaTe AT SHI FAT IG ST Ml 1255-14, vars, 2 1) ham thaaray taribhavan jag tumraa too mayraa ha-o tayraa. I am Yours; the three worlds are Yours as well. You are mine, and I am Yours.
Afsafe fife fade ufeor safe o senfs Sa SI (1255-15, Hers, He 1)
satgur mili-ai niranjan paa-i-aa bahur na bhavjal fayraa. ||3] |
Meeting with the True Guru, I have found the Immaculate Lord; I shall not be consigned to this terrifying world-ocean ever again. ||3]|
nud furs ofs ofa feast 3B ae ATS Alas Il 1255-15, Has, He 1)
apunay pir har daykh vigaasee ta-o Dhan saach seegaaro.
If the soul-bride is filled with delight on seeing her Husband Lord, then her decorations are true.
nae fadro faAG Afs AMT TeHfs oF nO ISI (1255-16, Has, He 1)
akul niranjan si-o sach saachee gurmat naam aDhaaro. ||4||
With the Immaculate Celestial Lord, she becomes the truest of the true. Following the Guru's Teachings, she leans on the Support of the Naam. ||4]|
Hats set due afs us Aafe Aafs ufS uret I (1255-16, Hers, He 1)
mukat bha-ee banDhan gur khol"ay sabad surat pat paa-ee.
She is liberated; the Guru has untied her bonds. Focusing her awareness on the Shabad, she attains honor.
Sot TH OH fee nists asHfe Afs feoret ust 4255-17, Hers, He 1) naanak raam naam rid antar gurmukh mayl milaa-ee. ||5||4||
O Nanak, the Lord's Name is deep within her heart; as Gurmukh, she is united in His Union. ||5||4]|
HIG % HO Il (1255-18)
mehlaa 1 malaar. First Mehl, Malaar:
ud Ua us US ud Bat ICH fae fears it (1255-18, vars, He 1) par daaraa par Dhan par lobhaa ha-umai bikhai bikaar. Others' wives, others' wealth, greed, egotism, corruption and poison;
ene aC sfx fee uset aH AT UTS IAI (1255-18, Hes, He 1) dusat bhaa-o taj nind paraa-ee kaam kroDh chandaar. ||1]| evil passions, slander of others, sexual desire and anger - give up all these. ||1]|
HIG His FS MAM MUTT Il (1255-19, HES, He 1) mahal meh baithay agam apaar. The Inaccessible, Infinite Lord is sitting in His Mansion.
sists nifys Aet Ho ure fAA Td a Hae ISS MSS NU! TI'S ll 1255-19, vars, Hs 1) bheetar amrit so-ee jan paavai jis gur kaa sabad ratan aachaar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
That humble being, whose conduct is in harmony with the jewel of the Guru's Shabad, obtains the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause] |
at Aue
eu AY eG AH ale AS Fa Sw AAMT Il (1256-1, wore, Hs 1) dukh sukh do-oo sam kar jaanai buraa bhalaa sansaar. He sees pleasure and pain as both the same, along with good and bad in the world.
Afo fo nafs of ofs wet ASsHafs ae fimrs II 4256-1, Hes, He 1)
suDh buDh surat naam har paa-ee-ai satsangat gur pi-aar. ||2||
Wisdom, understanding and awareness are found in the Name of the Lord. In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, embrace love for the Guru. ||2]|
mfsfafh oo ats on usufs TT Sst PFET Ill (1256-2, Hors, ue 1)
ahinis laahaa har naam paraapat gur daataa dayvanhaar.
Day and night, profit is obtained through the Lord's Name. The Guru, the Giver, has given this gift.
aente fra Fret He ue fAA 6 oefs Ad ATS Nl (1256-3, Has, He 1)
gurmukh sikh so-ee jan paa-ay jis no nadar karay kartaar. ||3]|
That Sikh who becomes Gurmukh obtains it. The Creator blesses him with His Glance of Grace. ||3]|
afenr Hoe Hed we dfs a fen nfs ont AfS wns I (1256-3, Hos, He 1)
kaa-i-aa mahal mandar ghar har kaa tis meh raakhee jot apaar.
The body is a mansion, a temple, the home of the Lord; He has infused His Infinite Light into it.
Sod TeHfy Hols serha safe HS ABST ST WSWUll 1256-4, Hews, He 1)
naanak gurmukh mahal bulaa-ee-ai har maylay maylanhaar. ||4]|5||
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is invited to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; the Lord unites him in His Union. ||4]|5]|
HOT HIG A WI 2 (1256-6) malaar mehlaa 1 ghar 2 Malaar, First Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsare YATE I (1256-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
use uTet WE ATS I (1256-7, Hes, He 1) pavnai paanee jaanai jaat. Know that the creation was formed through air and water;
afent mats ad fests i 1256-7, Hers, He 1) kaa-i-aa" agan karay nibhraa“t. have no doubt that the body was made through fire.
Aufs Abort ATS A aE il 1256-7, Hers, He 1) jameh jee-a jaanai jay thaa-o. And if you know where the soul comes from,
Hest ufss st at BE WU 1256-7, Hors, He 1) surtaa pandit taa kaa naa-o. ||1]| you shall be known as a wise religious scholar. ||1]|
we dfse o wWebafs we | (1256-8, Has, He 1) gun gobind na jaanee-ahi maa-ay. Who can know the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, O mother?
Masia’ fxs ATS B AVE Il (1256-8, Hors, He 1) andeethaa kichh kahan na jaa-ay. Without seeing Him, we cannot say anything about Him.
for afte orfy zurehot wfE i TIS i (1256-8, vars, He 1) ki-aa kar aakh vakhaanee-ai maa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. How can anyone speak and describe Him, O mother? ||1||Pause| |
Cufs uefa omnis ufeurts i (1256-9, Hers, He 1) oopar dar asmaan pa-i-aal. He is high above the sky, and beneath the nether worlds.
fa af adit tg eters i 1256-9, ners, ne 1) ki-o kar kahee-ai dayh veechaar. How can I speak of Him? Let me understand.
faa faget A AU fourfe 1 det ATS AAT |r MQM (1256-10, Has, He 1) bin jinvaa jo japai hi-aa-ay. ko-ee jaanai kaisaa naa-o. ||2|| Who knows what sort of Name is chanted, in the heart, without the tongue? ||2| |
aaat seat ad feasts i 1256-10, ners, He 1) kathnee badnee rahai nibhraa‘t. Undoubtedly, words fail me.
Ags de fA ets Il (1256-11, ware, M3 1) so boojhai hovai jis daat. He alone understands, who is blessed.
mfofefh nists ad foe ote il (1256-11, wars, He 1) ahinis antar rahai liv laa-ay. Day and night, deep within, he remains lovingly attuned to the Lord.
Het use fa Afs AAfE NSN 256-11, Has, He 1 so-ee purakh je sach samaa-ay. ||3]| He is the true person, who is merged in the True Lord. ||3]|
wf adie Aza A SE I 1256-11, Has, He 1) jaat kuleen sayvak jay ho-ay. If someone of high social standing becomes a selfless servant,
J Al Adal ATT B AE Il (1256-12, vars, He 1) taa kaa kahnaa kahhu na ko-ay. then his praises cannot even be expressed.
fefs Hast Aza dE Il 1256-12, wars, He 1) vich sanaatee™ sayvak ho-ay. And if someone from a low social class becomes a selfless servant,
area usb ufad APE NSINUEN (1256-12, Hers, Hs 1) naanak pan"ee-aa pahirai so-ay. ||4]|1]|6]| O Nanak, he shall wear shoes of honor. ||4]|1]|6]]|
HOTT HIS 4% Il (1256-13)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
ey gam feq TY Fe Il (1256-13, wars, He 1) dukh vaychhorhaa ik dukh bhookh. The pain of separation - this is the hungry pain I feel.
fea TY AASST WHET Il (1256-13, Hare, He 1) ik dukh sakatvaar jamdoot. Another pain is the attack of the Messenger of Death.
fea vu da oa sfs ote II 1256-14, Hers, He 1) ik dukh rog lagai tan Dhaa-ay. Another pain is the disease consuming my body.
JES IB WT OTE AU (1256-14, wars, ws 1) vaid na bholay daaroo laa-ay. || 1] | O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||1]|
Zz SIS WT OME Il (1256-14, vars, we 1) vaid na bholay daaroo laa-ay. O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine.
de Je BU Td Ate Il (1256-14, vars, 2 1) darad hovai dukh rahai sareer. The pain persists, and the body continues to suffer.
MAT STG Ba F MT UU TIS I 1256-15, wars, Hs 1) aisaa daaroo lagai na beer. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your medicine has no effect on me. ||1||Pause||
UAH ferrfs ate SA Sa Il (1256-15, Hers, He 1) khasam visaar kee-ay ras bhog. Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal enjoys sensual pleasures;
at 3fs Gfe use da Il (1256-15, Hara, He 1) taa tan uth khalo-ay rog. then, disease rises up in his body.
Ho nit a fee ANTE Il (1256-16, Hes, He 1) man anDhay ka-o milai sajaa-ay. The blind mortal receives his punishment.
ZEB IB WT OTE ll (1256-16, wars, 3 1) vaid na bholay daaroo laa-ay. ||2|| O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||2]|
SLO A SH VLS SA Il (1256-16, nw, He 1) chandan kaa fal chandan vaas. The value of sandalwood lies in its fragrance.
HEH OT SH WE fT AMA Il (1256-17, Hors, He 1) maanas kaa fal ghat meh saas. The value of the human lasts only as long as the breath in the body.
AA afent ofenr ef urfe i 1256-17, Hers, He 1) Saas ga-i-ai kaa-i-aa dhal paa-ay. When the breath is taken away, the body crumbles into dust.
aT a ue afe & afe Si (1256-17, Hes, He 1) taa kai paachhai ko-ay na khaa-ay. ||3]| After that, no one takes any food. ||3]|
ave atten fogs IA Il (1256-18, Hers, He 1) kanchan kaa-i-aa nirmal hans. The mortal's body is golden, and the soul-swan is immaculate and pure,
fam ufo on fadae “iA I (1256-18, Hers, He 1) jis meh naam niranjan a's. if even a tiny particle of the Immaculate Naam is within.
eu da Als afer Tete Il (1256-18, vers, He 1) dookh rog sabh ga-i-aa gavaa-ay. All pain and disease are eradicated.
Boa SetA AS STS USI 1256-19, vers, He 1)
naanak chhootas saachai naa-ay. ||4||2]|7]| O Nanak, the mortal is saved through the True Name. ||4||2]||7]||
HOT HIS 41 Il (1256-19)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
ey HIT HIS Ths SH Il (1256-19, Hare, He 1) dukh mahuraa maaran har naam. Pain is the poison. The Lord's Name is the antidote.
fos Hsu Utne ofe Be Il (1256-19, Has, He 1) silaa santokh peesan hath daan. Grind it up in the mortar of contentment, with the pestle of charitable giving.
Yat 92Qu2
fos fas So 5 Sth Sg Il 1257-1, wars, He 1) nit nit layho na chheejai dayh. Take it each and every day, and your body shall not waste away.
mis aS AH HTS ST NUL (1257-1, Hes, He 1) ant kaal jam maarai thayh. ||1]| At the very last instant, you shall strike down the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
MAT arg uD AST | (1257-1, wars, He 1) aisaa daaroo khaahi gavaar. So take such medicine, O fool,
fas wa 3d wfo feare Na TIS i 1257-2, nes, 2 1) jit khaaDhai tayray jaahi vikaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. by which your corruption shall be taken away. ||1]||Pause] |
TH HS WIS AS SS Il (1257-2, nas, He 1) raaj maal joban sabh chhaa‘v. Power, wealth and youth are all just shadows,
ofa fede atafe ar] il (1257-2, Hers, He 1) rath firandai deeseh thaav. as are the vehicles you see moving around.
2d 5 Eo de WE Il 1257-3, Hors, He 1) dayh na naa-o na hovai jaat. Neither your body, nor your fame, nor your social status shall go along with you.
Ga feg ma AS TAS MQM (1257-3, Hers, He 1) othai dihu aithai sabh raat. ||2| | In the next world it is day, while here, it is all night. ||2]|
Are afg AHO fsAar fiwS SB it 257-3, wears, ve 1) saad kar samDhaa’ tarisnaa ghi-o tayl. Let your taste for pleasures be the firewood, let your greed be the ghee,
any au nraret fa AS I 1257-4, Hears, He 1) kaam kroDh agnee si-o mayl. and your sexual desire and anger the cooking oil; burn them in the fire.
oH Aa MT UTS UTES Il (1257-4, HOG, He 1) hom jag ar paath puraan. Some make burnt offerings, hold sacred feasts, and read the Puraanas.
A fSAR oS A UsSTS MBI (1257-4, Hos, He 1) jo tis bhaavai so parvaan. ||3]| Whatever pleases God is acceptable. ||3]||
SU Wa SI SH SAG Il (1257-5, Hors, He 1) tap kaagad tayraa naam neesaan. Intense meditation is the paper, and Your Name is the insignia.
fre a@ fefimr eg fears il (1257-5, Hers, He 1) jin ka-o likhi-aa ayhu niDhaan. Those for whom this treasure is ordered,
A uses fenfo wie ate i (1257-5, ners, He 1) say Dhanvant diseh ghar jaa-ay. look wealthy when they reach their true home.
Soa Hat Gat HFS ISUSICH (1257-6, Hers, He 1)
naanak jannee Dhannee maa-ay. ||4]|3]|8]| O Nanak, blessed is that mother who gave birth to them. ||4||3]|8]|
HOS HIS 4% Il (1257-6)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
Wa AUS 8B FS Il (1257-6, Hors, vz 1) baagay kaaparh bolai bain. You wear white clothes, and speak sweet words.
~
SH Sa AS SI SES Il (1257-6, HO, H2 1) lammaa nak kaalay tayray nain. Your nose is sharp, and your eyes are black.
aad Afog Sftmr Se WAU (1257-7, vers, He 1) kabahoo™ saahib daykhi-aa bhain. ||1]| Have you ever seen your Lord and Master, O sister? ||1]|
Sst Cfs vat urnrfa i fea Ayes So STE Wt 257-7, ves, ue 1)
oodaa™ ood charhaa™ asmaan. saahib sammrith tayrai taan.
O my All-powerful Lord and Master, by Your power, I fly and soar, and ascend to the heavens.
me ofS Sats Sut Ste Il (1257-8, Hers, He 1) jal thal doongar daykhaa” teer. I see Him in the water, on the land, in the mountains, on the river-banks,
ae Fests Atos ae II (1257-8, Hers, He 1) thaan thanantar saahib beer. ||2|| in all places and interspaces, O brother. ||2||
fafe 36 Af ote arf Ue I (1257-8, Has, He 1) jin tan saaj dee-ay naal khanbh. He fashioned the body, and gave it wings;
mfg fara se at S3 i 1257-9, vara, He 1) at tarisnaa udnai kee danjh. He gave it great thirst and desire to fly.
Setd Ad St gut dhe Il (1257-9, wars, He 1) nadar karay taa’ banDhaa™ Dheer. When He bestows His Glance of Grace, I am comforted and consoled.
fA sus (38 Sut ste WSN 1257-9, Hers, He 1) ji-o vaykhaalay ti-o vaykhaa™ beer. ||3]| As He makes me see, so do I see, O brother. ||3]|
3 fea 36 wfear 5 Atfaodt WS Il (1257-9, He, He 1) na ih tan jaa-igaa na jaahigay khanbh. Neither this body, nor its wings, shall go to the world hereafter.
uge urat mfaet At ASST Il (1257-10, Has, He 1) pa-unai paanee agnee kaa san-banDh. It is a fusion of air, water and fire.
Soa AIH de Hub afe ae ule it (1257-10, nw, He 1)
naanak karam hovai japee-ai kar gur peer.
O Nanak, if it is in the mortal's karma, then he meditates on the Lord, with the Guru as his Spiritual Teacher.
Afs ANTS ST Adte ISIBNEN (1257-11, Has, He 1)
sach samaavai ayhu sareer. ||4||4||9]| This body is absorbed in the Truth. ||4||4]|9]|
HOS HIG 3 BVeue We A (1257-12)
malaar mehlaa 3 cha-upday ghar 1 Malaar, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1257-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fadarg nrarg J nm wm sath SHES Il 1257-13, Har, He 3) nirankaar aakaar hai aapay aapay bharam bhulaa-ay. The Formless Lord is formed by Himself. He Himself deludes in doubt.
afs afs aga nm Sy fas av] fos HES I 1257-13, nes, He 3) kar kar kartaa aapay vaykhai jit bhaavai tit laa-ay. Creating the Creation, the Creator Himself beholds it; He enjoins us as He pleases.
Rea a Sa efsnret A AS JAH HOS AU (1257-14, Hos, He 3)
sayvak ka-o ayhaa vadi-aa-ee jaa ka-o hukam manaa-ay. ||1||
This is the true greatness of His servant, that he obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command. ||1]|
WITUST Brat MY ATS Td fagur 3 GIA Il 1257-14, vars, He 3) aapnaa bhaanaa aapay jaanai gur kirpaa tay lahee-ai. Only He Himself knows His Will. By Guru's Grace, it is grasped.
eo nafs fre ufe wire Htefeur nfs sdb a TITS (1257-15, vars, v2 3)
ayhaa sakat sivai ghar aavai jeevdi-aa mar rahee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When this play of Shiva and Shakti comes to his home, he remains dead while yet alive. ||1]|Pause| |
ae us ufs ee sure gon faAS NAAT Il (1257-15, Hare, He 3)
vayd parhai parh vaad vakhaanai barahmaa bisan mahaysaa.
They read the Vedas, and read them again, and engage in arguments about Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
eo fgae weur fafs Aas gofenr ASH HIS AT AAT Il (1257-16, Hors, Hs 3)
ayh tarigun maa-i-aa jin jagat bhulaa-i-aa janam maran kaa sahsaa.
This three-phased Maya has deluded the whole world into cynicism about death and birth.
TST USA Sat AS YX HOT MEAT MI (1257-17, vars, ws 3) gur parsaadee ayko jaanai chookai manhu andaysaa. ||2|| By Guru's Grace, know the One Lord, and the anxiety of your mind will be allayed.
21 |
TH de Hoe uigterst SH fF AIT TH Il 1257-17, wars, 3 3) ham deen moorakh aveechaaree tum chintaa karahu hamaaree. I am meek, foolish and thoughtless, but still, You take care of me.
dg efeore afe aA SAT at Het at SHS I (1257-18, Hors, He 3) hohu da-i-aal kar daas daasaa kaa sayvaa karee tumaaree. Please be kind to me, and make me the slave of Your slaves, so that I may serve You.
ea fourg efe 3 uruer oifofefA oH TurNt USM (1257-18, Hers, He 3)
ayk niDhaan deh too apnaa ahinis naam vakhaanee. ||3]|
Please bless me with the treasure of the One Name, that I may chant it, day and night. ||3]|
TIS TSA TI USA FST ASt MAT AS SS Il (1257-19, vars, we 3) kahat naanak gur parsaadee boojhhu ko-ee aisaa karay veechaaraa. Says Nanak, by Guru's Grace, understand. Hardly anyone considers this.
fa we Gufs fq geet SA feg AAS Il (1257-19, ners, He 3) ji-o jal oopar fayn budbudaa taisaa ih sansaaraa. Like foam bubbling up on the surface of the water, so is this world.
Yat qQutc
fan 3 dor fsrfo Ayer gfe afeor UATE IIA (1258-1, Hers, He 3)
jis tay ho-aa tiseh samaanaa chook ga-i-aa paasaaraa. ||4||1||
It shall eventually merge back into that from which it came, and all its expanse shall be gone. ||4|[1]|
HOT HIS 3 Il (1258-1)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
fot Jan uetfenr AAS ICH Aafe AEE | (1258-2, Has, He 3)
jinee hukam pachhaani-aa say maylay ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay.
Those who realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command are united with Him; through the Word of His Shabad, their egotism is burnt away.
Het sats ast feo wat Ate ad fee OTE I (1258-2, ners, He 3)
sachee bhagat karahi din raatee sach rahay liv laa-ay.
They perform true devotional worship day and night; they remain lovingly attuned to the True Lord.
He’ Ay dfs fue ae a Aafe ASE IA (1258-3, Hers, He 3)
Sadaa sach har vaykh-day gur kai sabad subhaa-ay. ||1]|
They gaze on their True Lord forever, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with loving ease. ||1]|
Ho 3 IaH Hfs AY OE Il (1258-3, Hers, He 3) man ray hukam man sukh ho-ay. O mortal, accept His Will and find peace.
Us svat muet seer faa aun fSH fas o af na TIC I (1258-3, vers, He 3) parabh bhaanaa apnaa bhaavdaa jis bakhsay tis bighan na ko-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. God is pleased by the Pleasure of His Own Will. Whomever He forgives, meets no obstacles on the way. ||1]||Pause| |
3 ae AS OSs I o afe sats o STE Il (1258-4, Hers, He 3)
tarai gun sabhaa Dhaat hai naa har bhagat na bhaa-ay.
Under the influence of the three gunas, the three dispositions, the mind wanders everywhere, without love or devotion to the Lord.
afs Hats ae o Izet IGH AGH ANT Il (1258-5, Har, He 3) gat mukat kaday na hova-ee ha-umai karam kamaahi. No one is ever saved or liberated, by doing deeds in ego.
Wfos ae A dha ufemt forsfs feats Qi 258-5, Hers, He 3)
saahib bhaavai so thee-ai pa-i-ai kirat firaahi. ||2||
Whatever our Lord and Master wills, comes to pass. People wander according to their past actions. ||2]|
Afsas sfemt He ufs ad ofa an SA Hfe nef It (1258-6, nes, He 3)
satgur bhayti-ai man mar rahai har naam vasai man aa-ay.
Meeting with the True Guru, the mind is overpowered; the Lord's Name comes to abide in the mind.
fA ot aus ot ue ae fag 3 ATE Il (1258-6, vos, He 3) tis kee kKeemat naa pavai kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. The value of such a person cannot be estimated; nothing at all can be said about him.
sea ufe ear dfimr AS Id ANTE ISI (1258-7, Hers, He 3) cha-uthai pad vaasaa ho-i-aa sachai rahai samaa-ay. ||3]|| He comes to dwell in the fourth state; he remains merged in the True Lord. ||3]|
Aa ofs ys wan ove 3 otis ave o ATE II (1258-7, Hers, He 3) mayraa har parabh agam agochar hai keemat kahan na jaa-ay. My Lord God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. His value cannot be expressed.
qe usr esha Age ars SHE Il (1258-8, Hers, He 3) gur parsaadee bujhee-ai sabday kaar kamaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, he comes to understand, and live the Shabad.
aoa oH Aerts 3 ote fs fs Hat ute WM (1258-8, wars, Hs 3) naanak naam salaahi too har har dar sobhaa paa-ay. ||4||2||
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||4||2||
HOT HIG 3 Il (1258-9)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
Tanfe cet fear gS fA S sels aafe Il (1258-9, wars, 3 3)
gurmukh ko-ee virlaa boojhai jis no nadar karay-i.
Rare is that person who, as Gurmukh, understands; the Lord has bestowed His Glance of Grace.
ae fag ost at ardt sun oefe aefe Il (1258-9, nas, He 3) gur bin daataa ko-ee naahee bakhsay nadar karay-i. There is no Giver except the Guru. He grants His Grace and forgives.
as fifet AMS Gur uses on Bee ual 1258-10, vars, we 3)
gur mili-ai saa“t oopjai an-din naam la-ay-ay. ||1||
Meeting the Guru, peace and tranquility well up; chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. ||1]|
Ad He ote nits on forfe i 258-11, wars, ve 3) mayray man har amrit naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, meditate on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
Afsag use fxs a ure afs oF Aet AE 9 TITS HN (1258-11, ners, He 3) satgur purakh milai naa-o paa-ee-ai har naamay sadaa samaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Meeting with the True Guru and the Primal Being, the Name is obtained, and one remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1]|Pause] |
HOHY Ae" fees feats afe o fan dt ofS Il 1258-12, ware, He 3) manmukh sadaa vichhurhay fireh ko-ay na kis hee naal. The self-willed manmukhs are forever separated from the Lord; no one is with them.
ICH st dad ffs ws AHA I (1258-12, Has, H2 3)
ha-umai vadaa rog hai sir maaray jamkaal.
They are stricken with the great disease of egotism; they are hit on the head by the Messenger of Death.
dans AsHats 3 feexts mates oH ANT INQ (4258-13, Hers, He 3)
gurmat satsangat na vichhurheh an-din naam sam"aal. ||2]|
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are never separated from the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. They dwell on the Naam, night and day. ||2||
Asa ads Sa S fos afe cuts Seg i (1258-13, wars, v2 3)
sabhnaa kartaa ayk too nit kar daykheh veechaar.
You are the One and Only Creator of all. You continually create, watch over and contemplate.
fefe aanfa orfu frocfeer sun safs gars I (1258-14, Hers, He 3)
ik gurmukh aap milaa-i-aa bakhsay bhagat bhandaar.
Some are Gurmukh - You unite them with Yourself. You bless then with the treasure of devotion.
3 omy Ag fag Weer faR nia at Yas USI (1258-14, Her, He 3) too aapay sabh kichh jaandaa kis aagai karee pookaar. ||3]|| You Yourself know everything. Unto whom should I complain? ||3]||
ofa ofs on nifgs 3 cedt urfemr ate I (1258-15, Hers, He 3)
har har naam amrit hai nadree paa-i-aa jaa-ay.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. By the Lord's Grace, it is obtained.
wofes dfs ufs Gad ad & Hof ASE Ih (1258-15, nes, He 3)
an-din har har uchrai gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, night and day, the intuitive peace and poise of the Guru is obtained.
Soa oH fours J on dt fas ote sisi 1258-16, Hare, He 3) naanak naam niDhaan hai naamay hee chit laa-ay. ||4||3]|
O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. Focus your consciousness on the Naam. [4113] |
HOT HIG 3 Il (1258-16)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
Tg Wad ret Aue us arafes Aet Il (1258-16, Hers, He 3) gur saalaahee sadaa sukh-daata parabh naaraa-in so-ee. I praise the Guru, the Giver of peace, forever. He truly is the Lord God.
ae usAfe ug ue ufeor est |fsnret Tet I (1258-17, nas, v2 3)
gur parsaad param pad paa-i-aa vadee vadi-aa-ee ho-ee.
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. His glorious greatness is glorious!
wofes Te We fos Avs Afs AHS AST NAM (1258-18, Hers, He 3) an-din gun gaavai nit saachay sach samaavai so-ee. ||1|| One who sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, merges in the True Lord. ||1]|
Ho & dente fee steal 1258-18, ners, He 3) man ray gurmukh ridai veechaar. O mortal, contemplate the Guru's Word in your heart.
sft az acy ICH fay fyAe vas fee MTS NA TIS tl (1258-18, vers, we 3)
taj koorh kutamb ha-umai bikh tarisnaa chalan ridai sam"aal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Abandon your false family, poisonous egotism and desire; remember in your heart, that you will have to leave. ||1]||Pause| |
Afsag SS TH BH at dg VST aet ard I (1258-19, nas, He 3) satgur daataa raam naam kaa hor daataa ko-ee naahee. The True Guru is the Giver of the Lord's Name. There is no other giver at all.
yar qourt
Fiba og fe fgusA AS oth AMT II (1259-1, Hers, v8 3)
jee-a daan day-ay tariptaasay sachai naam samaahee.
Bestowing the gift of the soul, He satisfies the mortal beings, and merges them in the True Name.
motes dfs sfeur fee nists AofA AHO Bart NM 1259-1, Hers, He 3)
an-din har ravi-aa rid antar sahj samaaDh lagaahee. ||2|| Night and day, they ravish and enjoy the Lord within the heart; they are intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||2||
Afsag Hat feg Ho Sfeur fase AST aret | (1259-2, Has, He 3)
satgur sabdee ih man bhaydi-aa hirdai saachee banee.
The Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, has pierced my mind. The True Word of His Bani permeates my heart.
AT ys ney o wet ofr asf nae aot I (1259-2, ners, Hs 3) mayraa parabh alakh na jaa-ee lakhi-aa gurmukh akath kahaanee. My God is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Gurmukh speaks the Unspoken.
nm efear ad AaeTst Hub Afsauret ISI 1259-3, Hers, He 3)
aapay da-i-aa karay sukh-daata japee-ai saaringpaanee. ||3] |
When the Giver of peace grants His Grace, the mortal being meditates on the Lord, the Life of the Universe. ||3]|
wie Fret dofs 3 de TaHfe Hote fomrfenr | 1259-4, ners, He 3)
aavan jaanaa bahurh na hovai gurmukh sahj Dhi-aa-i-aa.
He does not come and go in renicarnation any longer; the Gurmukh meditates intuitively.
Ho dt 3 Ho fifeor Aymit Ho dt He Aarfenr I 259-4, Hers, He 3)
man hee tay man mili-aa su-aamee man hee man samaa-i-aa.
From the mind, the mind merges into our Lord and Master; the mind is absorbed into the Mind.
APS dt Ag Ate usth fees wiry aetfemr isi (1259-5, Hers, He 3)
saachay hee sach saach pateejai vichahu aap gavaa-i-aa. ||4| |
In truth, the True Lord is pleased with truth; eradicate egotism from within yourself. [141]
Sa Sa ZA His Aut VA nie 3 Ae I (1259-5, wars, ws 3) ayko ayk vasai man su-aamee doojaa avar na ko-ee. Our One and Only Lord and Master dwells within the mind; there is no other at all.
ea on nifys o Hor afar feos Ag Aet I (1259-6, nes, He 3) ayko naam amrit hai meethaa jag nirmal sach so-ee. The One Name is Sweet Ambrosial Nectar; it is Immaculate Truth in the world.
aoa oH ys 3 urea fra a gfe fofimr Tet WUNsil (1259-6, Hers, Hs 3) naanak naam parabhoo tay paa-ee-ai jin ka-o Dhur likhi-aa ho-ee. ||5||4|| O Nanak, the Name of God is obtained, by those who are so predestined. ||5||4]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1259-7)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
ae dusa an Afs Gud ag a Age Stes | (1259-7, Hers, He 3) gan ganDharab naamay sabh uDhray gur kaa sabad veechaar.
All the heavenly heralds and celestial singers are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
JH ufs Ae vfs srfenr afe whim Sfe wfe i 1259-8, ners, He 3)
ha-umai maar sad man vasaa-i-aa har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
They contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Subduing their ego, the Name abides in their minds; they keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.
frAfs sre Ret gS fAA S nm we fete i (1259-8, were, 2 3)
jisahi bujhaa-ay so-ee boojhai jis no aapay la-ay milaa-ay.
He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand; the Lord unites him with Himself.
wWofes Seal Hae aie ate ad fee ote All (1259-9, Hare, He 3)
an-din banee sabday gaa‘vai saach rahai liv laa-ay. ||1]|
Night and day, he sings the Word of the Shabad and the Guru's Bani; he remains lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||1]|
Ho Hd fg fas STH ANTS Il (1259-9, ware, He 3) man mayray khin khin naam sam"aal. O my mind, each and every moment, dwell on the Naam.
ad at fs Age AY nists Het foad Sd of NAN TIS Il (1259-10, vars, He 3)
gur kee daat sabad sukh antar sadaa nibhai tayrai naal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Shabad is the Guru's Gift. It shall bring you lasting peace deep within; it shall always stand by you. ||1||Pause| |
HOH Udy ae 6 Ta TA She TY US Il (1259-10, wars, Hs 3)
manmukh pakhand kaday na chookai doojai bhaa-ay dukh paa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs never give up their hypocrisy; in the love of duality, they suffer in pain.
on ferrfs faftmr His as fase AO TSS Il (1259-11, Hares, He 3)
naam visaar bikhi-aa man raatay birthaa janam gavaa-ay.
Forgetting the Naam, their minds are imbued with corruption. They waste away their lives uselessly.
fea tor fefs ofa 5 wre niofeg FET UES Il (1259-11, Hors, He 3)
ih vaylaa fir hath na aavai an-din sadaa pachhutaa-ay.
This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; night and day, they shall always regret and repent.
hfe His HOH ae B gS fener HT ATS III (1259-12, Hers, He 3)
mar mar janmai kaday na boojhai vistaa maahi samaa-ay. ||2||
They die and die again and again, only to be reborn, but they never understand. They rot away in manure. ||2||
asta ath 33 A Sud ad a Aa Sete Il (1259-13, Has, He 3) gurmukh naam ratay say uDhray gur kaa sabad veechaar.
The Gurmukhs are imbued with the Naam, and are saved; they contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ales Hats of om fourfenr afe afm Bfs as il (1259-13, nes, He 3)
jeevan mukat har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
Meditating on the Name of the Lord, they are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive. They enshrine the Lord within their hearts.
HO 36 fooHe fase His SSH SSH eet Tet It 1259-14, vars, we 3)
man tan nirmal nirmal mat ootam ootam banee ho-ee.
Their minds and bodies are immaculate, their intellect is immaculate and sublime. Their speech is sublime as well.
Sa YTY SA US WS UAT niSg F AST MSI (1259-14, vers, we 3) ayko purakh ayk parabh jaataa doojaa avar na ko-ee. ||3]|| They realize the One Primal Being, the One Lord God. There is no other at all. ||3]|
nm ad age ys wm nint sete ASE Il (1259-15, wars, He 3)
aapay karay karaa-ay parabh aapay aapay nadar karay-i.
God Himself is the Doer, and He Himself is the Cause of causes. He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
HO 36 TS" Td at aeat AST Aals AALS Il (1259-15, ners, He 3)
man tan raataa gur kee banee sayvaa surat samay-ay.
My mind and body are imbued with the Word of the Guru's Bani. My consciousness is immersed in His service.
wists from urea mise conf df wate i (1259-16, ners, He 3) antar vasi-aa alakh abhayvaa gurmukh ho-ay lakhaa-ay. The Unseen and Inscrutable Lord dwells deep within. He is seen only by the Gurmukh.
Sod fan ae fsn nm te ore fos vorfe gill (1259-16, Has, He 3)
naanak jis bhaavai tis aapay dayvai bhaavai tivai chalaa-ay. ||4||5||
O Nanak, He gives to whomever He pleases. According to the Pleasure of His Will, He leads the mortals on. ||4||5]|
HOS HIG 3 ESA Il (1259-17)
malaar mehlaa 3 dutukay. Malaar, Third Mehl, Du-Tukas:
Afsag 3 urs ug TI HIG A AS Il (1259-17, nas, He 3)
satgur tay paavai ghar dar mahal so thaan.
Through the True Guru, the mortal obtains the special place, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence in his own home.
Ts Aaet Fa MSHS AU (1259-18, vars, He 3) gur sabdee chookai abhimaan. ||1]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, his egotistical pride is dispelled. ||1]|
fe a@ feerfe fofimr ofa oH Il (1259-18, Hare, He 3) jin ka-o lilaat likhi-aa Dhur naam. Those who have the Naam inscribed on their foreheads,
motes oH Ae Aer fowrefs AST Saag uefa HS WAU! TITS Il (1259-18, vars, He 3) an-din naam sadaa sadaa Dhi-aavahi saachee dargeh paavahi maan. ||1|| rahaa-o. meditate on the Naam night and day, forever and ever. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1]|Pause||
Ho ot fafa Afsas 3 we nrafes oat Ae ofa fAG fami I (1259-19, ners, He 3)
man kee biDh satgur tay jaanai an-din laagai sad har si-o Dhi-aan.
From the True Guru, they learn the ways and means of the mind. Night and day, they focus their meditation on the Lord forever.
Yast 92EO
ad Hate Js Het saat ofs eaag At ur|fs WS II (1260-1, 4a, He 3)
gur sabad ratay sadaa bairaagee har dargeh saachee paavahi maan. ||2||
Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they remain forever detached. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2]|
feg He 8S Jan at ar fea fue ufo va fer fefs mre] Il (1260-2, Hare, He 3)
ih man khaylai hukam kaa baaDhaa ik khin meh dah dis fir aavai.
This mind plays, subject to the Lord's Will; in an instant, it wanders out in the ten directions and returns home again.
a nm oefa ad fs ys Aro St feg He Tenfe Saar SA MIS ISI (1260-2, Hers, He 3) jaa‘ aapay nadar karay har parabh saachaa taa™ ih man gurmukh tatkaal vas aavai.
31] When the True Lord God Himself bestows His Glance of Grace, then this mind is instantly brought under control by the Gurmukh. ||3]|
fen Ho ot fafa Ho J we gs Aafe Sets ii 1260-3, wes, He 3)
is man kee biDh man hoo jaanai boojhai sabad veechaar.
The mortal comes to know the ways and means of the mind, realizing and contemplating the Shabad.
aad oH fourfe Aes se Wag fAS uefa ufs NSNEN (1260-4, Hers, He 3)
naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay sadaa too bhav saagar jit paavahi paar. ||4||6||
O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. [14] 16] |
HOT HIG 3 Il (1260-4)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
me fis ure Afs fn & we whe afar AHTET II (1260-5, Hers, He 3)
jee-o pind paraan sabh tis kay ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-ee.
Soul, body and breath of life are all His; He is permeating and pervading each and every heart.
fan fag 4 meg 3 Wet Afsate dor sere AI (1260-5, Hers, He 3)
aykas bin mai avar na jaanaa satgur dee-aa bujhaa-ee. ||1]|
Except the One Lord, I do not know any other at all. The True Guru has revealed this to me. ||1]|
Ho Hd OTH JIG fos Bret i (1260-6, nse, Hs 3) man mayray naam raha-o liv laa-ee. O my mind, remain lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
wifene nidied oridug asst ad a Aafe ofa fomret a TIS I (1260-6, vars, He 3) adisat agochar aprampar kartaa gur kai sabad har Dhi-aa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I meditate on the Lord, the Unseen, Unfathomable and Infinite Creator. ||1||Pause] |
HO 36 Sin Sa foe ae ATA Jd ANTE Il (1260-7, Hara, He 3)
man tan bheejai ayk liv laagai sehjay rahay samaa-ee.
Mind and body are pleased, lovingly attuned to the One Lord, intuitively absorbed in peace and poise.
Gs usASt gH Se oral Sa oth fee wet iI (1260-7, Hers, He 3)
gur parsaadee bharam bha-o bhaagai ayk naam liv laa-ee. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, doubt and fear are dispelled, being lovingly attuned to the One Name. |[2||
Gd Fst AY ag ante afs Hfs sa ct uret Il (1260-8, nas, He 3)
gur bachnee sach kaar kamaavai gat mat tab hee paa-ee.
When the mortal follows the Guru's Teachings, and lives the Truth, then he attains the state of emancipation.
afe Ho fants ase fafe on ath fee wet IBI1 (1260-8, Hes, He 3)
kot maDhay kiseh bujhaa-ay tin raam naam liv laa-ee. ||3] |
Among millions, how rare is that one who understands, and is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord. ||3]|
Ad AT ta 30 Sa Het feo gents sft uret i 1260-9, nara, He 3)
jah jah daykhaa tah ayko so-ee ih gurmat buDh paa-ee.
Wherever I look, there I see the One. This understanding has come through the Guru's Teachings.
HO 30 US Ust fSH Ia Soa ny TeTet SIDI 1260-9, Hers, He 3)
man tan paraan Dharee" tis aagai naanak aap gavaa-ee. ||4||7]|
I place my mind, body and breath of life in offering before Him; O Nanak, self-conceit is gone. ||4||7]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1260-10)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
Aa yg Ara eu foese Hae uso Art I (1260-10, Hare, He 3)
mayraa parabh saachaa dookh nivaaran sabday paa-i-aa jaa-ee.
My True Lord God, the Eradicator of suffering, is found through the Word of the Shabad.
ast TS AE Soe efs AS ufs uret Al (1260-11, nas, ne 3)
bhagtee raatay sad bairaagee dar saachai pat paa-ee. ||1]|
Imbued with devotional worship, the mortal remains forever detached. He is honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1]|
Ho ¢ Ho fAG JIG AHS II (1260-11, Has, He 3) man ray man si-o raha-o samaa-ee. O mind, remain absorbed in the Mind.
qoute an at Ho stn ofa Ast fs wet 1d TIS i (1260-12, vars, 2 3)
gurmukh raam naam man bheejai har saytee liv laa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
The mind of the Gurmukh is pleased with the Lord's Name, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Aa us mfs wan wig Wants ef gsret I (1260-12, ners, He 3)
mayraa parabh at agam agochar gurmat day-ay bujhaa-ee.
My God is totally Inaccessible and Unfathomable; through the Guru's Teachings, He is understood.
Ay AnH adel ofa atefs ofa Ast foe wet iI 1260-13, Hers, He 3)
sach sanjam karnee har keerat har saytee liv laa-ee. ||2||
True self-discipline rests in singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2]|
nm Age Ag Ant umd fae ASt APS fret It (1260-14, Hers, He 3)
aapay sabad sach saakhee aapay jin" jotee jot milaa-ee.
He Himself is the Shabad, and He Himself is the True Teachings; He merges our light into the Light.
oot act uGe eae aanfe nifys uret 3 1260-14, Hers, Hs 3) dayhee kaachee pa-un vajaa-ay gurmukh amrit paa-ee. ||3]| The breath vibrates through this frail body; the Gurmukh obtains the ambrosial nectar.
[I3]|
nm ATA AS ad GE A AG aot ANTE II (1260-15, Has, He 3)
aapay Saajay sabh kaarai laa-ay so sach rahi-aa samaa-ee.
He Himself fashions, and He Himself links us to our tasks; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.
Soa OH fast set fos art oH Se Saret ISIC (1260-15, HeTS, He 3)
naanak naam binaa ko-ee kichh naahee naamay day-ay vadaa-ee. ||4]||8]| O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is anything. Through the Naam,we are blessed with glory. ||4]|8]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1260-16)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
ICH faa Ho for wfeur nimare STH I (1260-16, Hers, He 3) ha-umai bikh man mohi-aa ladi-aa ajgar bhaaree. The mortal is enticed by the poison of corruption, burdened with such a heavy load.
das Aa Hfe ufeer gH fay afs yest AI (1260-16, nara, He 3)
garurh sabad mukh paa-i-aa ha-umai bikh har maaree. ||1||
The Lord has placed the magic spell of the Shabad into his mouth, and destroyed the poison of ego. ||1]|
HO J UGH He Su SSH I (1260-17, Has, He 3) man ray ha-umai moh dukh bhaaree. O mortal, egotism and attachment are such heavy loads of pain.
fed 3eHG Aas 3 Wet sea" Tanfe 3g Aa Sat NA! FIC i (1260-17, vers, ue 3)
ih bhavjal jagat na jaa-ee tarnaa gurmukh tar har taaree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
This terrifying world-ocean cannot be crossed; through the Lord's Name, the Gurmukh crosses over to the other side. ||1]||Pause| |
3 ae wher Hg UATE AS Zas nad Il (1260-18, Hers, He 3) tarai gun maa-i-aa moh pasaaraa sabh vartai aakaaree. Attachment to the three-phased show of Maya pervades all the created forms.
3dr ae AsHafs ue sect ufs Sard 2H (1260-19, wars, Hs 3)
turee-aa gun satsangat paa-ee-ai nadree paar utaaree. ||2| | In the Sat Sangat, the Society of the Saints, the state of supreme awareness is attained. The Merciful Lord carries us across. ||2||
deo du Aad J FT MAAt sgarhs Il (1260-19, Hare, He 3) chandan ganDh suganDh hai baho baasnaa behkaar. The smell of sandalwood is so sublime; its fragrance spreads out far and wide.
UST AEG
Ufs AS adet SSH F ofa atafs afer farts WB (1261-1, Hers, Hs 3)
har jan karnee ootam hai har keerat jag bisthaar. ||3]|
The lifestyle of the Lord's humble servant is exalted and sublime. He spreads the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises throughout the world. ||3]|
faur fgur ats sag He ofa afe afs Bs ate I (1261-1, vars, ue 3)
kirpaa kirpaa kar thaakur mayray har har har ur Dhaar.
O my Lord and Master, please be merciful, merciful to me, that I may enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, Har, within my heart.
woe Afsag ust ufeor yfs Afar on Hats SICH (1261-2, Hers, He 3)
naanak satgur pooraa paa-i-aa man japi-aa naam muraar. ||4]|9] |
Nanak has found the Perfect True Guru; in his mind, he chants the Name of the Lord. [41/91]
HOT HIG 3 WI Q (1261-3)
malaar mehlaa 3 ghar 2 Malaar, Third Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas urrfe I (1261-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
feg He forsdt fx fea Ho Seat il (1261-4, Hare, He 3) ih man girhee ke ih man udaasee. Is this mind a householder, or is this mind a detached renunciate?
fx fea He nese AST mifSarAt Il (1261-4, news, Hz 3) ke ih man avran sadaa avinaasee. Is this mind beyond social class, eternal and unchanging?
fa fea Ho vue fa feg Ho Saat il (1261-4, ners, ne 3) ke ih man chanchal ke ih man bairaagee. Is this mind fickle, or is this mind detached?
feR Ho AG HHS fags Sait Al 4261-5, Hers, He 3) is man ka-o mamtaa kithhu laagee. ||1]| How has this mind been gripped by possessiveness? ||1]|
ufss fH HO a ATT Seg I (1261-5, nas, v2 3) pandit is man kaa karahu beechaar. O Pandit, O religious scholar, reflect on this in your mind.
med fx aos usts Borefs svg NA TIC Il (1261-6, nse, v2 3) avar ke bahutaa parheh uthaaveh bhaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Why do you read so many other things, and carry such a heavy load? ||1||Pause] |
Hfear HHS ATS Bret | (1261-6, Hers, He 3) maa-i-aa mamtaa kartai laa-ee. The Creator has attached it to Maya and possessiveness.
Sg Jan ate feAfe Curet il 261-6, wars, ve 3) ayhu hukam kar sarisat upaa-ee. Enforcing His Order, He created the world.
Td UGAet FST SEF Il (1261-7, Hers, ve 3) gur parsaadee boojhhu bhaa-ee. By Guru's Grace, understand this, O Siblings of Destiny.
He Jog ofa at AdSet MQ (1261-7, news, uz 3) sadaa rahhu har kee sarnaa-ee. ||2| | Remain forever in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||
A ufss Ff fst gat aft Us Bars ih (1261-7, nas, He 3) so pandit jo tihaa’ gunaa kee pand utaarai. He alone is a Pandit, who sheds the load of the three qualities.
Motes Sa SH TUTE Il (1261-8, Has, He 3) an-din ayko naam vakhaanai. Night and day, he chants the Name of the One Lord.
Afsad at So cttmr SE i a261-8, ness, He 3) satgur kee oh deekhi-aa lay-ay. He accepts the Teachings of the True Guru.
Afsag wirat Abr aefe Il (1261-8, nes, He 3) satgur aagai sees Dharay-ay. He offers his head to the True Guru.
Het wi@d Jd fSaars Il (1261-9, Hare, He 3) sadaa alag rahai nirbaan. He remains forever unattached in the state of Nirvaanaa.
A Ufss Usad USSTS ISI (1261-9, Hers, He 3) so pandit dargeh parvaan. ||3]|| Such a Pandit is accepted in the Court of the Lord. |[3]|
Hao' Hfs Sa SA SAS Il (1261-9, Has, nz 3) sabhnaa™ meh ayko ayk vakhaanai. He preaches that the One Lord is within all beings.
xb SA
at Sa FY St Sat ATS Il (1261-10, Hors, He 3) jaa‘ ayko vaykhai taa™ ayko jaanai. As he sees the One Lord, he knows the One Lord.
ee
Wa gun AS ALE I (1261-10, Hers, He 3) jaa ka-o bakhsay maylay so-ay. That person, whom the Lord forgives, is united with Him.
ma Ga Het AY dE ISil (1261-10, Hers, He 3) aithai othai sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||4|| He finds eternal peace, here and hereafter. ||4]|
aS sod ae fafa ad foo afe it (1261-10, vars, He 3) kahat naanak kavan biDh karay ki-aa ko-ay. Says Nanak, what can anyone do?
Het vats wa a four TE i (1261-11, nes, He 3) so-ee mukat jaa ka-o kirpaa ho-ay. He alone is liberated, whom the Lord blesses with His Grace.
wofes dfg Te We AS Il 1261-11, Hes, He 3) an-din har gun gaavai so-ay. Night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
WAY ae at fete ao TE NUNAUAON (1261-12, were, Hz 3)
saastar bayd kee fir kook na ho-ay. ||5||1]|10]|
Then, he no longer bothers with the proclamations of the Shaastras or the Vedas. [15] 141] [20]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1261-12)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
afy af Hfe Hone SaHET II (1261-12, Hers, He 3)
bharam bharam jon manmukh bharmaa-ee.
The self-willed manmukhs wander lost in reincarnation, confused and deluded by doubt.
AHA Hd fos uls geet I (1261-13, Hers, He 3) jamkaal maaray nit pat gavaa-ee. The Messenger of Death constantly beats them and disgraces them.
Afsad Ae AH at aE Garett Il (1261-13, Hare, He 3) satgur sayvaa jam kee kaan chukaa-ee. Serving the True Guru, the mortal's subservience to Death is ended.
dfs yg fhfenr Hoe we uTet AU (1261-13, Hers, Hs 3) har parabh mili-aa mahal ghar paa-ee. ||1]| He meets the Lord God, and enters the Mansion of His Presence. ||1]|
yret auf 6TH forte i 4261-14, wera, 8 3) paraanee gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay. O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
HoH use vfs dfeur ast ses ATE NA TIS I (1261-14, ves, He 3)
janam padaarath dubiDhaa kho-i-aa ka-udee badlai jaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
In duality, you are ruining and wasting this priceless human life. You trade it away in exchange for a shell. ||1]|Pause] |
afe fasur aanfas wat fimirg i (1261-15, ners, He 3)
kar kirpaa gurmukh lagai pi-aar.
The Gurmukh falls in love with the Lord, by His Grace. nists safs ofa afe Sfs we Il (1261-15, Hers, He 3)
antar bhagat har har ur Dhaar. He enshrines loving devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, deep within his heart.
Jens Asfe Swed Il (1261-15, Hwa, He 3) bhavjal sabad langhaavanhaar. The Word of the Shabad carries him across the terrifying world-ocean.
ofa Ard fer Afemrs II (1261-16, Hers, He 3) dar saachai disai sachiaar. ||2| | He appears true in the True Court of the Lord. ||2]|
YJ AGH ad Afsag odt ufEnr il 1261-16, nwa, ue 3) baho karam karay satgur nahee paa-i-aa. Performing all sorts of rituals, they do not find the True Guru.
fag ae soft 38 ag HEMT I (1261-16, Hers, He 3) bin gur bharam bhoolay baho maa-i-aa. Without the Guru, so many wander lost and confused in Maya.
ICH HHS Sg HT SarfEMM | 1261-17, vars, He 3) ha-umai mamtaa baho moh vaDhaa-i-aa. Egotism, possessiveness and attachment rise up and increase within them.
en afe Houfe ey ufemr SI 1261-17, Hers, Hs 3) doojai bhaa-ay manmukh dukh paa-i-aa. ||3]| In the love of dualty, the self-willed manmukhs suffer in pain. ||3]|
MN ATS MGI METI Il (1261-18, Hers, He 3) aapay kartaa agam athaahaa. The Creator Himself is Inaccessible and Infinite.
Oe Aaet AubA AT BIT Il (1261-18, Hers, He 3) gur sabdee japee-ai sach laahaa. Chant the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and earn the true profit.
TAT Jafs ofa SuTeT Il (1261-18, wars, He 3) haajar hajoor har vayparvaahaa. The Lord is Independent, Ever-present, here and now.
UST AVE
SSA ASHP STH ANTI NSUVNAUI (1262-1, Hers, He 3)
naanak gurmukh naam samaahaa. ||4]|2]|11]| O Nanak, the Gurmukh merges in the Naam. ||4||2||11]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1262-1)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
Hes HAS ATHSt Ba Il (1262-1, nwa, ue 3)
jeevat mukat gurmatee laagay.
Those who are attached to the Guru's Teachings, are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.
dfs at sats mafes AE Ara Il (1262-2, vars, He 3)
har kee bhagat an-din sad jaagay.
They remain forever awake and aware night and day, in devotional worship of the Lord.
Afsag Aets niu aTet= il (1262-2, ners, Hz 3) satgur sayveh aap gavaa-ay. They serve the True Guru, and eradicate their self-conceit.
J8 f3a Aa & AS BAS ute NAM (1262-2, naw, He 3) ha-o tin jan kay sad laaga-o paa-ay. ||1|| I fall at the feet of such humble beings. ||1]|
8 Het Ae ahs aA Te Wet Il (1262-3, nas, He 3)
ha-o jeevaa™ sadaa har kay gun gaa-ee. Constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I live.
Gd & Age Ho oA Mio af a oth Hats afs uret NA TIS I 1262-3, ners, He 3) gur kaa sabad mahaa ras meethaa har kai naam mukat gat paa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is such totally sweet elixir. Through the Name of the Lord, I have attained the state of liberation. ||1||Pause] |
Hite Hg uifamire gas Il (1262-4, Hers, He 3) maa-i-aa moh agi-aan gubaar. Attachment to Maya leads to the darkness of ignorance.
HOHY HT HAT WSS Il (1262-4, ners, Hs 3) manmukh mohay mugaDh gavaar. The self-willed manukhs are attached, foolish and ignorant.
mofes Ua ass feofe il (1262-4, Has, He 3) an-din DhanDhaa karat vihaa-ay. Night and day, their lives pass away in worldly entanglements.
fa vfs AHfs fs AATE NM (1262-5, Hers, He 3) mar mar jameh milai sajaa-ay. ||2]| They die and die again and again, only to be reborn and receive their punishment.
121] agate IH ath fees Bet i (1262-5, Hare, He 3)
gurmukh raam naam liv laa-ee. The Gurmukh is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord.
Ts Brafs ST BUTTE I (1262-5, vers, He 3) koorhai laalach naa laptaa-ee. He does not cling to false greed.
A fae de Aofa ASE I 1262-6, ners, He 3) jo kichh hovai sahj subhaa-ay. Whatever he does, he does with intuitive poise.
dfs oA ule dHS SATE SI (1262-6, Hers, He 3) har ras peevai rasan rasaa-ay. ||3|| He drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; his tongue delights in its flavor. ||3]|
afe Ho fants ssret Il (1262-6, Has, He 3) kot maDhay kiseh bujhaa-ee. Among millions, hardly any understand.
MT aA S Sanit Il (1262-7, Hows, Hz 3) aapay bakhsay day vadi-aa-ee. The Lord Himself forgives, and bestows His glorious greatness.
a Ufa fifeor A feefs o Fret II (1262-7, Hers, He 3) jo Dhur mili-aa so vichhurh na jaa-ee. Whoever meets with the Primal Lord God, shall never be separated again.
Soa Uf dfs StH AHS NSNSINIVI (1262-7, Her, He 3)
naanak har har naam samaa-ee. ||4]|3]|12|| Nanak is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|3]|12]|
HOT HIG 3 Il (1262-8)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
dHoT SH AS ASt AT Il (1262-8, Hare, He 3) rasnaa naam sabh ko-ee kahai. Everyone speaks the Name of the Lord with the tongue.
Afsag AS 3 SH Bd Il (1262-8, Has, He 3) satgur sayvay taa naam lahai. But only by serving the True Guru does the mortal receive the Name.
gue 33 Hats wie gd i (1262-9, ners, He 3) banDhan torhay mukat ghar rahai. His bonds are shattered, and he stays in the house of liberation.
ae Aaet wnAfag wis ad Wall (1262-9, ners, He 3) gur sabdee asthir ghar bahai. ||1]| Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he sits in the eternal, unchanging house.
[21
He Ho aS IH ASA Il (1262-9, Has, He 3) mayray man kaahay ros kareejai. O my mind, why are you angry?
OI ASHfa TH SH I Tes niafeo fase getA UU! TITS il 1262-9, ners, ns 3) laahaa kaljug raam naam hai gurmat an-din hirdai raveejai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the source of profit. Contemplate and appreciate the Guru's Teachings within your heart, night and day. ||1||Pause]|
aato fas fas faeete i 1262-10, vars, v3 3) baabeehaa khin khin billaa-ay. Each and every instant, the rainbird cries and calls.
fag fue fa ate o ute Il (1262-11, Has, He 3) bin pir daykhay nee'd na paa-ay. Without seeing her Beloved, she does not sleep at all.
feg 22a Afour 3 ATE tt 1262-11, nas, He 3) ih vaychhorhaa sahi-aa na jaa-ay. She cannot endure this separation.
Afsag fxs st fHS ASE NN (1262-11, Hes, He 3) satgur milai taa’ milai subhaa-ay. ||2|| When she meets the True Guru, then she intuitively meets her Beloved. ||2| |
SHdte fasn sy ute il (1262-12, Hes, He 3) naamheen binsai dukh paa-ay. Lacking the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal suffers and dies.
fgAot Aloo seo ATE I 4262-12, Hers, He 3) tarisnaa jali-aa bhookh na jaa-ay. He is burnt in the fire of desire, and his hunger does not depart.
fee Ser OM B Ufenr ATE Il 1262-12, Hors, H8 3) vin bhaagaa naam na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. Without good destiny, he cannot find the Naam.
ag fafa aar aH SHE N3Il 1262-13, Hers, v8 3) baho biDh thaakaa karam kamaaz-ay. ||3]|| He performs all sorts of rituals until he is exhausted. ||3] |
3 Te wet Fe seg Il (1262-13, ers, ne 3)
tarai gun banee bayd beechaar.
The mortal thinks about the Vedic teachings of the three gunas, the three dispositions.
fafimor He fafimr erurg Il (1262-13, Hers, He 3) bikhi-aa mail bikhi-aa vaapaar. He deals in corruption, filth and vice.
fs Aonfs fefs dfs wnig Il (1262-14, Hers, He 3) mar janmeh fir hohi khu-aar. He dies, only to be reborn; he is ruined over and over again.
aanfy sdior ae Sts os Sil (1262-14, Hers, He 3) gurmukh turee-aa gun ur Dhaar. ||4|| The Gurmukh enshrines the glory of the supreme state of celestial peace. ||4||
Te HS HS AS AE I (1262-14, Hers, Hs 3) gur maanai maanai sabh ko-ay. One who has faith in the Guru - everyone has faith in him.
Td Fst HS ABS fe I (1262-15, wars, He 3) gur bachnee man seetal ho-ay. Through the Guru's Word, the mind is cooled and soothed.
ag afar Ast feos AS ALE Il (1262-15, Hers, He 3) chahu jug sobhaa nirmal jan so-ay. Throughout the four ages, that humble being is known to be pure.
Soa ToHfe fear af] NUNSNISNENASIQAM (1262-15, Hers, He 3)
naanak gurmukh virlaa ko-ay. ||5||4]|13]|9]]13]|22]| O Nanak, that Gurmukh is so rare. ||5||4]|13]|9||13]|22]|
Td HOS HIS 8 We VTeUE (1262-17) raag malaar mehlaa 4 ghar 1 cha-upday Raag Malaar, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1262-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
notes ofs ofa fmrfes fase HPS aeHfS ga feATst I (1262-18, wars, 3 4)
an-din har har Dhi-aa-i-o hirdai mat gurmat dookh visaaree.
Night and day, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart; through the Guru's Teachings, my pain is forgotten.
AS MITA HOA de Ze oie ote yfs fsur arg WAU (1262-18, wars, He 4)
sabh aasaa mansaa banDhan tootay har har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree. ||1] | The chains of all my hopes and desires have been snapped; my Lord God has showered me with His Mercy. ||1]|
Sat ofa ofa walt Stet I (1262-19, Hers, He 4) nainee har har laagee taaree. My eyes gaze eternally on the Lord, Har, Har.
Afsag ef xa Ho faafAS ne safe sfeG goers A FITS Il 1262-19, vars, He 4)
satgur daykh mayraa man bigsi-o jan har bhayti-o banvaaree. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Gazing on the True Guru, my mind blossoms forth. I have met with the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||1]|Pause] |
Us AVES fafs oat any ferrfeur Har ofe fe Sn a afs walt at Il (1263-1, nas, He 4)
jin aisaa naam visaari-aa mayraa har har tis kai kul laagee gaaree. One who forgets such a Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his family is dishonored.
ofs fn & afs usafs 3 ading fA faa] afe Hose NI (1263-2, vers, He 4) har tis kai kul parsoot na karee-ahu tis biDhvaa kar mehtaaree. ||2|| His family is sterile and barren, and his mother is made a widow. ||2]||
dfs ofe ris fuoreg ag AU faa uifofofA ofs Sfs ardt i (1263-2, wars, 12 4)
har har aan milaavhu gur saaDhoo jis ahinis har ur Dhaaree.
O Lord, let me meet the Holy Guru, who night and day keep the Lord enshrined in his heart.
dfs ste aa ao fry fear fae aioe ef neste SI (1263-3, Hers, He 4) gur deethai gur kaa sikh bigsai ji-o baarik daykh mehtaaree. ||3]| Seeing the Guru, the GurSikh blossoms forth, like the child seeing his mother. ||3] |
ue fue a fea ot Af er fefs den Stfs aad I (1263-4, nos, He 4)
Dhan pir kaa ik hee sang vaasaa vich ha-umai bheet karaaree.
The soul-bride and the Husband Lord live together as one, but the hard wall of egotism has come between them.
dfs us IH sts Sat Ae soa FHS aHSTSt UNA (1263-4, Hers, He 4)
gur poorai ha-umai bheet toree jan naanak milay banvaaree. ||4||1]|
The Perfect Guru demolishes the wall of egotism; servant Nanak has met the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||4||1]|
HOT HIS 8 Il (1263-5)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
Gar AHS Hered AAS! 3 ass Sen ofs ATG at Tet Il (1263-5, wars, we 4)
gangaa jamunaa godaavree sarsutee tay karahi udam Dhoor saaDhoo kee taa-ee. The Ganges, the Jamunaa, the Godaavari and the Saraswati - these rivers strive for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
famed HS SI us THe fefs THat HE AY at Of TSet UA (1263-6, ners, He 4)
kilvikh mail bharay paray hamrai vich hamree mail saaDhoo kee Dhoor gavaa-ee. ||1]| Overflowing with their filthy sins, the mortals take cleansing baths in them; the rivers’ pollution is washed away by the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1]|
stefa norte HAS Bret Il (1263-7, Hers, He 4)
tirath athsath majan naa-ee.
Instead of bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, take your cleansing bath in the Name.
AsHats at ufs ust Sf sat As TaHS HS aeret UU TIS i (1263-7, vars, ws 4) satsangat kee Dhoor paree ud naytree sabh durmat mail gavaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. When the dust of the feet of the Sat Sangat rises up into the eyes, all filthy evil- mindedness is removed. ||1]||Pause] |
Wddoet su saitefa wiret aerg THUG HATH II (1263-8, Has, He 4) jaaharnavee tapai bhaageerath aanee kaydaar thaapi-o mehsaa-ee. Bhaageerat'h the penitent brought the Ganges down, and Shiva established Kaydaar.
aH feAS sres ag fits afe As AS uret IM (1263-8, wars, Hs 4)
kaa‘see krisan charaavat gaa-oo mil har jan sobhaa paa-ee. ||2|| Krishna grazed cows in Kaashi; through the humble servant of the Lord, these places became famous. ||2| |
fise Stee eet at ats fssa sels ofs AG at TET I 1263-9, veT, He 4)
jitnay tirath dayvee thaapay sabh titnay locheh Dhoor saaDhoo kee taa-ee.
And all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage established by the gods, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
fs ow Ay fxs as AO & fSA at ofe Hf wet WSN (1263-10, Here, He 4) har kaa sant milai gur saaDhoo lai tis kee Dhoor mukh laa-ee. ||3]| Meeting with the Lord's Saint, the Holy Guru, I apply the dust of His feet to my face.
[131] frset fqrfe suet HS Homi As fsset Be gfe AG at Sret Il (1263-10, ere, He 4)
jitnee sarisat tumree mayray su-aamee sabh titnee lochai Dhoor saaDhoo kee taa-ee. And all the creatures of Your Universe, O my Lord and Master, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
aed fete ce fra fetmr fA rg of & afs ute Suret Si 0263-11, wars, Hs 4) naanak lilaat hovai jis likhi-aa tis saaDhoo Dhoor day har paar langhaa-ee. ||4]|2]|
O Nanak, one who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, is blessed with the dust of the feet of the Holy; the Lord carries him across. ||4||2] |
HOT HIS 8 Il (1263-12)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
faq Ae a ofa vio ware fA afe afe faut ag I (1263-12, Hers, He 4) tis jan ka-o har meeth lagaanaa jis har har kirpaa karai. The Lord seems sweet to that humble being who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord.
fA at gu vu Afs Ose A ofe Te as Sas WU (1263-13, mars, we 4)
tis kee bhookh dookh sabh utrai jo har gun har uchrai. ||1]|
His hunger and pain are totally taken away; he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
afu Ho ofs afe afe fensd Il (1263-13, Has, He 4) jap man har har har nistarai. Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, the mortal is emancipated.
Gd a Feo ade Als fowre se Aa ute ud NU TIS I (1263-13, ners, He 4)
gur kay bachan karan sun Dhi-aavai bhav saagar paar parai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
One who listens to the Guru's Teachings and meditates on them, is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause] |
fSH Ho aA OH ote faas fan ofa afs fart ad Il (1263-14, Hes, He 4)
tis jan kay ham haat bihaajhay jis har har kirpaa karai.
I am the slave of that humble being, who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord, Har, Har.
dfs Ae a fife AY usin AS Bans HS Tes Ml (1263-15, ners, He 4)
har jan ka-o mili-aa sukh paa-ee-ai sabh durmat mail harai. ||2| |
Meeting with the Lord's humble servant, peace is obtained; all the pollution and filth of evil-mindedness is washed away. ||2||
ofs Ae AG oie gu Barat AS fyus wT afe Ta fess il (1263-15, mers, we 4)
har jan ka-o har bhookh lagaanee jan tariptai jaa har gun bichrai.
The humble servant of the Lord feels hunger only for the Lord. He is satisfied only when he chants the Lord's Glories.
Ufs a AG dis AS a His afs fares sfe Hs SI (1263-16, HoT, He 4)
har kaa jan har jal kaa meenaa har bisrat foot marai. ||3] | The humble servant of the Lord is a fish in the Water of the Lord. Forgetting the Lord, he would dry up and die. ||3]|
fafs ea ulfs oet AWS & aS fan nfs Os I (1263-17, Hes, He 4) jin ayh pareet laa-ee so jaanai kai jaanai jis man Dharai. He alone knows this love, who enshrines it within his mind.
Wo Hoa oie Sf AY UTS AS 3H at FU Se MUM (1263-17, wars, Hs 4)
jan naanak har daykh sukh paavai sabh tan kee bhookh tarai. ||4]|3||
Servant Nanak gazes upon the Lord and is at peace; The hunger of his body is totally satisfied. ||4||3]|
HOT HIG 8 Il (1263-18)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
fase ha a3 ufs ate fase ffs are fee II (1263-18, vers, He 4)
jitnay jee-a jant parabh keenay titnay sir kaar likhaavai.
All the beings and creatures which God has created - on their foreheds, He has written their destiny.
ofa Ho a fe ae earet ofa Ae ofa aS BS AU (1263-19, Has, Hs 4)
har jan ka-o har deen" vadaa-ee har jan har kaarai laavai. ||1]|
The Lord blesses His humble servant with glorious greatness. The Lord enjoins him to his tasks. ||1]|
Afsag ofa ofa an fear] i (1263-19, vers, He 4) satgur har har naam darirh-aavai. The True Guru implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within.
Ust 92EB
dfs sag ae & fru HS ove Ofs SCHG HAS SgS NU TIS Nh (1264-1, new, He 4)
har bolhu gur kay sikh mayray bhaa-ee har bha-ojal jagat taraavai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Chant the Name of the Lord, O Sikhs of the Guru, O my Siblings of Destiny. Only the Lord will carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause| |
A OT AG AS UA AS A AG HS Tile YS SS I (1264-1, wavs, ws 4)
jo gur ka-o jan poojay sayvay so jan mayray har parabh bhaavai.
That humble being who worships, adores and serves the Guru is pleasing to my Lord God.
ofs at Ae Afsag ung afe fas rf Sas QM (1264-2, vers, we 4)
har kee sayvaa satgur poojahu kar kirpaa aap taraavai. ||2||
To worship and adore the True Guru is to serve the Lord. In His Mercy, He saves us and carries us across. ||2]|
soft 38 nifemrat uigs gf sfh se SITS Il (1264-2, wore, ue 4)
bharam bhoolay agi-aanee anDhulay bharam bharam fool toraavai.
The ignorant and the blind wander deluded by doubt; deluded and confused, they pick flowers to offer to their idols.
foont@ unfo Ha Adefs AS fraet urs TES BI (1264-3, worG, He 4)
nirjee-o poojeh marhaa sarayveh sabh birthee ghaal gavaavai. ||3]||
They worship lifeless stones and serve the tombs of the dead; all their efforts are useless. ||3]|
gon fie A Afsag adbt ofs afs wer ASS I (1264-4, vers, He 4)
barahm binday so satgur kahee-ai har har kathaa sunaavai.
He alone is said to be the True Guru, who realizes God, and proclaims the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.
fsH dd a@ ees sno ue ucas ag fafa vfs afs ufy Hug fon Uo at fefa Sfe 5 mre Sil 264-4, Hers, He 4)
tis gur ka-o chhaadan bhojan paat patambar baho biDh sat kar mukh sanchahu tis punn kee fir tot na aavai. ||4| |
Offer the Guru sacred foods, clothes, silk and satin robes of all sorts; know that He is True. The merits of this shall never leave you lacking. ||4||
Afsag 2 ussty afe Hats A nifys wae ASS Il (1264-5, vars, He 4)
satgur day-o partakh har moorat jo amrit bachan sunaavai.
The Divine True Guru is the Embodiment, the Image of the Lord; He utters the Ambrosial Word.
Sot Sa 3S fSH AS aA A fa voat fas BS NUN (1264-6, HES, He 4)
naanak bhaag bhalay tis jan kay jo har charnee chit laavai. ||5||4]|
O Nanak, blessed and good is the destiny of that humble being, who focuses his consciousness on the Feet of the Lord. ||5||4]|
HOT HIS 8 Il (1264-7)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
faa & dod see As Afsag 3 AS 38 3G SHS I 1264-7, vs, He 4)
jin" kai hee-arai basi-o mayraa satgur tay sant bhalay bhal bhaa"t.
Those whose hearts are filled with my True Guru - those Saints are good and noble in every way.
fq ea Aa He fear oe fsa a Ae sf APS AI (1264-7, Hers, He 4)
tin" daykhay mayraa man bigsai ha-o tin kai sad bal jaa“t. ||1|| Seeing them, my mind blossoms forth in bliss; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||1]|
fomrat ofa sag fea aS Il (1264-8, Has, He 4) gi-aanee har bolhu din raat. O spiritual teacher, chant the Name of the Lord, day and night.
fq at fA gu AS Csdt A ASHES TH BA YTS NU TIS Il (1264-8, wore, Hs 4)
tin" kee tarisnaa bhookh sabh utree jo gurmat raam ras khaa"t. ||1]| rahaa-o.
All hunger and thirst are satisfied, for those who partake of the sublime essence of the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||Pause] |
dfs & A AT Ae Ao fe fufemr afs wfE sats I (1264-9, ners, He 4)
har kay daas saaDh sakhaa jan jin mili-aa leh jaa-ay bharaa‘t.
The slaves of the Lord are our Holy companions. Meeting with them, doubt is taken away.
fA Ae eu fsa fsa ore ole THe (SE Sat 3 Ble ars ATO TBH SAS NQM (1264-10, v9, H8 4)
ji-o jal duDh bhinn bhinn kaadhai chun hansulaa ti-o dayhee tay chun kaadhai saaDhoo ha-umai taat. ||2]|
As the swan separates the milk from the water, the Holy Saint removes the fire of egotism from the body. ||2]|
faa & ulfs oct ofa fase 3 auet og fas que SHS II (1264-11, Hers, He 4)
jin kai pareet naahee har hirdai tay kaptee nar nit kapat kamaa"t.
Those who do not love the Lord in their hearts are deceitful; they continually practice deception.
fs0 a@ fomr ast of ues Gf orfu ifs omy dt uifS Si 264-11, Hes, He 4) tin ka-o ki-aa ko-ee day-ay khavaalai o-ay aap beej aapay hee khaa™t. | |3]| What can anyone give them to eat? Whatever they themselves plant, they must eat.
[I3I|
dfs a fags Het fs He a ofa wm AS ufo mim THAT I (1264-12, ners, He 4) har kaa chihan so-ee har jan kaa har aapay jan meh aap rakhaa‘t. This is the Quality of the Lord, and of the Lord's humble servants as well; the Lord
places His Own Essence within them.
U9 UG Tg ssa AHeAl fate foe" Casfs sé SoS USUUll (1264-13, ners, Hs 4) Dhan Dhan guroo naanak samadrasee jin nindaa ustat taree taraa™t. ||4]|5]| Blessed, blessed, is Guru Nanak, who looks impartially on all; He crosses over and transcends both slander and praise. ||4||5||
HOT HIG 8 Il (1264-14)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
MEH Midd SH ofs SSH ofe fasur 3 Afy wher Ih (1264-14, wars, v8 4)
agam agochar naam har ootam har kirpaa tay jap la-i-aa.
The Name of the Lord is inaccessible, unfathomable, exalted and sublime. It is chanted by the Lord's Grace.
ASAats AG uret saat Afar ATG ure ufeMI NAM (1264-14, HET, He 4)
satsangat saaDh paa-ee vadbhaagee sang saaDhoo paar pa-i-aa. ||1||
By great good fortune, I have found the True Congregation, and in the Company of the Holy, I am carried across. ||1]||
He nfs mofes nee sfemr Il 1264-15, nas, He 4) mayrai man an-din anad bha-i-aa. My mind is in ecstasy, night and day.
ad usAte oH old Afimr Ad HS aT gH 3G Tent A JIS Il (1264-15, vars, ws 4) gur parsaad naam har japi-aa mayray man kaa bharam bha-o ga-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. By Guru's Grace, I chant the Name of the Lord. Doubt and fear are gone from my mind. ||1]||Pause] |
fae dfs arfemr fae ofs afimr fae Aafs of Hog afe Hfemr I 1264-16, Hers, He 4)
jin har gaa-i-aa jin har japi-aa tin sangat har maylhu kar ma-i-aa. Those who chant and meditate on the Lord - O Lord, in Your Mercy, please unite me with them.
fo a van tf wy ufeer ey TBH da afer NI 1264-17, Hes, He 4) tin kaa daras daykh sukh paa-i-aa dukh ha-umai rog ga-i-aa. ||2]| Gazing upon them, I am at peace; the pain and disease of egotism are gone. ||2| |
A mates fase on fourefa Ag OH fsat a AES sfemr Il (1264-18, nara, He 4)
jo an-din hirdai naam Dhi-aavahi sabh janam tinaa kaa safal bha-i-aa.
Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord in their hearts - their lives become totally fruitful.
Gf orfu 3d fqrfe As sot Ag ae st ute ufeMr ISI (1264-18, Has, He 4)
O-ay aap taray sarisat sabh taaree sabh kul bhee paar pa-i-aa. ||3]| They themselves swim across, and carry the world across with them. Their ancestors and family cross over as well. ||3]|
su mma nrfy Gurfenr AS Aa Su nm ath afte wfenr Il 1264-19, ners, He 4) tuDh aapay aap upaa-i-aa sabh jag tuDh aapay vas kar la-i-aa. You Yourself created the whole world, and You Yourself keep it under Your control.
Uat 9Eu
Ho ated a@ ufs fasur ost fay seer arte wien sell (1265-1, ners, Hs 4)
jan naanak ka-o parabh kirpaa Dhaaree bikh dubdaa kaadh la-i-aa. | |4]|6] |
God has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; He has lifted him up, and rescued him from the ocean of poison. ||4||6| |
HOT HIG 8 Il (1265-2)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
Os usAet vifys oot uber fSAo su o AST Il (1265-2, were, He 4)
gur parsaadee amrit nahee pee-aa tarisnaa bhookh na jaa-ee.
Those who do not drink in the Ambrosial Nectar by Guru's Grace - their thirst and hunger are not relieved.
HOHY HX ASS uidarat IBH fefs Ty ure il (1265-2, wars, Hs 4)
manmukh moorh" jalat aha‘kaaree ha-umai vich dukh paa-ee.
The foolish self-willed manmukh burns in the fire of egotistical pride; he suffers painfully in egotism.
wes WS fase HoH Teter ef oe UssTet Il (1265-3, Hare, He 4)
aavat jaat birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa dukh laagai pachhutaa-ee.
Coming and going, he wastes his life uselessly; afflicted with pain, he regrets and repents.
fan 3 Gun fsafo o vats fog Aiee for wet Wall 265-4, wars, He 4)
jis tay upjay tiseh na cheeteh Dharig jeevan Dharig khaa-ee. ||1]| He does not even think of the One, from whom he originated. Cursed is his life, and cursed is his food. ||1]|
yret auf 6TH fomiret I 1265-4, wera, He 4) paraanee gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ee. O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
dfs fs faut ag ag HS Ife oe tH AHTST IAN TIS Il (1265-5, Hare, He 4)
har har kirpaa karay gur maylay har har naam samaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lord, Har, Har, in His Mercy leads the mortal to meet the Guru; he is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]||Pause] |
HOHY HOH Sfeur od fase nres WS BAH I (1265-5, Has, He 4) manmukh janam bha-i-aa hai birthaa aavat jaat lajaa-ee. The life of the self-willed manmukh is useless; he comes and goes in shame.
at afa sa nifsurat oBH fete Aes FET II (1265-6, Hers, Hs 4)
kaam kroDh doobay abhimaanee ha-umai vich jal jaa-ee.
In sexual desire and anger, the proud ones are drowned. They are burnt in their egotism.
fso fafa 3 afa set nfs ufo Ss wale ey ust II (1265-6, Ho, He 4)
tin siDh na buDh bha-ee mat maDhim lobh lahar dukh paa-ee.
They do not attain perfection or understanding; their intellect is dimmed. Tossed by the waves of greed, they suffer in pain.
ae fage Ho ey ufemr AH usd frBoret II (1265-7, Hers, He 4)
gur bihoon mahaa dukh paa-i-aa jam pakray billaa-ee. ||2]|
Without the Guru, they suffer in terrible pain. Seized by Death, they weep and wail. [21]
dfs & on nidivg ufeor qenfa Haft ASTET II (1265-8, Hers, He 4)
har kaa naam agochar paa-i-aa gurmukh sahj subhaa-ee.
As Gurmukh, I have attained the Unfathomable Name of the Lord, with intuitive peace and poise.
oy fours efhor we nists gar dfs Te aet | (1265-8, Hare, He 4)
naam niDhaan vasi-aa ghat antar rasnaa har gun gaa-ee.
The treasure of the Naam abides deep within my heart. My tongue sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Het nidfe ad fes wat Sa nate fees wet | (1265-9, Hers, H2 4) sadaa anand rahai din raatee ayk sabad liv laa-ee. I am forever in bliss, day and night, lovingly attuned to the One Word of the Shabad.
oH UeTde Aon ufenr fea Afsad at Sfanret Sil 0265-9, vars, us 4)
naam padaarath sehjay paa-i-aa ih satgur kee vadi-aa-ee. ||3]|
I have obtained the treasure of the Naam with intuitive ease; this is the glorious greatness of the True Guru. ||3]|
Afsad 3 of ofe His favor Afsag a Ae af AT II (1265-10, Hare, He 4)
satgur tay har har man vasi-aa satgur ka-o sad bal jaa-ee.
Through the True Guru, the Lord, Har, Har, comes to dwell within my mind. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.
HO 36 Mafu sue AS Id ad vaat fos wet Il (1265-11, Hers, He 4)
man tan arap rakha-o sabh aagai gur charnee chit laa-ee.
I have dedicated my mind and body to Him, and placed everything before Him in offering. I focus my consciousness on His Feet.
net fgur aay Ts ys nm ST fare i 1265-11, wars, us 4) apnee kirpaa karahu gur pooray aapay laihu milaa-ee. Please be merciful to me, O my Perfect Guru, and unite me with Yourself.
JH Bd Fd BS Sos aoa ufs Suret Si (1265-12, ners, we 4) ham loh gur naav bohithaa naanak paar langhaa-ee. ||4]||7|| I am just iron; the Guru is the boat, to carry me across. ||4]|7]||
HOT HIG 8 USSG WI ZS (1265-13)
malaar mehlaa 4 parh-taal ghar 3 Malaar, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
qe Afsas urrfe il (1265-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dfg He Sos Aten ont fife WOAafs ofs So NA TIC Wt (1265-14, ners, He 4)
har jan bolat sareeraam naamaa mil saaDhsangat har tor. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The humble servant of the Lord chants the Name of the Supreme Lord; he joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Lord's Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs us yond dfs us Avg fan Sas FT odt FT MAU (1265-14, ars, He 4)
har Dhan banjahu har Dhan sanchahu jis laagat hai nahee chor. ||1||
Deal only in the wealth of the Lord, and gather only the wealth of the Lord. No thief can ever steal it. |]1]|
afgza na sas fes wat afs wfege at us WI (1265-15, Hes, Hs 4)
chaatrik mor bolat din raatee sun ghanihar kee ghor. ||2]|
The rainbirds and the peacocks sing day and night, hearing the thunder in the clouds. [21]
A aes 3 fa Hie ude A fag ofe Aus FT Sat FT SM (1265-16, ware, Hs 4) jo bolat hai marig meen pankhayroo so bin har jaapat hai nahee hor. ||3]|| Whatever the deer, the fish and the birds sing, they chant to the Lord, and no other.
I3I|
aan AS afe atefs aret sfe afeG AH oT AS AT WSIAUITH (1265-16, Hers, He 4)
naanak jan har keerat gaa-ee chhoot ga-i-o jam kaa sabh sor. ||4]|1||8]| Servant Nanak sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; the sound and fury of Death has totally gone away. ||4]|1]|8]|
HOT HIG 8 Il (1265-17)
malaar mehlaa 4. Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
TH OH Sfe af GAS ASST | (1265-17, Hes, He 4)
raam raam bol bol khojtay badbhaagee.
They speak and chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam; the very fortunate ones seek Him.
ofs x Ug as ase WB ST a ue Hat AU TIS Il (1265-18, vars, we 4) har kaa panth ko-oo bataavai ha-o taa kai paa-ay laagee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whoever shows me the Way of the Lord - I fall at his feet. ||1]|Pause] |
ofa ard Hts Aeret on Ufa FAG UtfS walt I (1265-18, Hers, He 4) har hamaaro meet sakhaa-ee ham har si-o pareet laagee. The Lord is my Friend and Compansion; I am in love with the Lord.
UST AEE dfs oH arefa of on Safa mg ester UlfS TH fSmrsit Wall (1266-1, Hers, He 4)
har ham gaavahi har ham boleh a-or dutee-aa pareet ham ti-aagee. ||1]| I sing of the Lord, and I speak of the Lord; I have discarded all other loves. ||1]|
Hone He UsH oH fs USE Sait Il (1266-1, vars, He 4)
manmohan moro pareetam raam har parmaanand bairaagee.
My Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; The Detached Lord God is the Embodiment of Supreme bliss.
dfs fa Aes J area fea fons us ufe Sat HQANQNENENISIENSAUI 1266-2, Hes, He 4)
har daykhay jeevat hai naanak ik nimakh palo mukh laagee. ||2||2||9]|9]|13]|9||31]| Nanak lives by gazing upon the Lord; may I see Him for a moment, for even just an instant. ||2]|2]|9]]9]|13][9]|31]|
TH HOS HIS u weue wT (1266-4)
raag malaar mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 1 Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
qe Afsars ure I (1266-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
foor 3 Hota foor 3 fasefa foor 3 aafs Bure il (1266-5, ves, He 5) ki-aa too socheh ki-aa too chitvahi ki-aa too’ karahi upaa-ay. What are you so worried about? What are you thinking? What have you tried?
J ag agg used ay at fra dures ATS Al (1266-5, vars, ws 5) taa ka-o kahhu parvaah kaahoo kee jih gopaal sahaa-ay. ||1|| Tell me - the Lord of the Universe - who controls Him? ||1||
adn Hwy Ret wife ude wire Il (1266-6, Hers, He 5)
barsai maygh sakhee ghar paahun aa-ay.
The rain showers down from the clouds, O companion. The Guest has come into my home.
Hfo a faur fofa oes og fafa oft AHS NU TIS I (1266-6, Hare, He 5)
mohi deen kirpaa niDh thaakur nav niDh naam samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am meek; my Lord and Master is the Ocean of Mercy. I am absorbed in the nine treasures of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
nifoa yas SHS Bg ate ag fire firA|TS II (1266-7, Hors, He 5) anik parkaar bhojan baho kee-ay baho binjan mistaa-ay. I have prepared all sorts of foods in various ways, and all sorts of sweet deserts.
adt wanes Ae ufes gfe weg sa dfs TS QM (1266-7, Hers, He 5)
karee paaksaal soch pavitaraa hun laavhu bhog har raa-ay. ||2||
I have made my kitchen pure and sacred. Now, O my Sovereign Lord King, please sample my food. ||2||
ene fees AHO JIA fefs Hfes we mrss Il (1266-8, Hers, He 5)
dusat bidaaray saajan rahsay ihi mandir ghar apnaa-ay.
The villains have been destroyed, and my friends are delighted. This is Your Own Mansion and Temple, O Lord.
mG fafa we date orfeur 3B 4 Afs Ae Ue III (1266-8, Hers, He 5) ja-o garihi laal rangee-o aa-i-aa ta-o mai sabh sukh paa-ay. ||3]| When my Playful Beloved came into my household, then I found total peace. ||3]|
As Ast Ge qe us fe HASIa Sy fares I (1266-9, ners, He 5)
sant sabhaa ot gur pooray Dhur mastak laykh likhaa-ay.
In the Society of the Saints, I have the Support and Protection of the Perfect Guru; this is the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon my forehead.
WS SSA AZ daer urfeor feta TY S Ba ne SAU (1266-10, wars, Hs 5)
jan naanak kant rangeelaa paa-i-aa fir dookh na laagai aa-ay. ||4]|1]| Servant Nanak has found his Playful Husband Lord. He shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||4|[1]|
HBS HIS U Il (1266-10)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
dts oof afea wa dst fio utd de o FET II (1266-10, Has, He 5) kheer aDhaar baarik jab hotaa bin kheerai rahan na jaa-ee. When the baby's only food is milk, it cannot survive without its milk.
Afs Aas ws fy ste se Gg feufs mre? ail (1266-11, Hers, He 5)
saar sam"aal maataa mukh neerai tab oh taripat aghaa-ee. ||1]|
The mother takes care of it, and pours milk into its mouth; then, it is satisfied and fulfilled. ||1]|
JH Mtoe fst YX BST Il (1266-12, wars, He 5) ham baarik pitaa parabh daataa. I am just a baby; God, the Great Giver, is my Father.
gots afaa mfx wed adorns OCT Sat AT AST UU TIT I (1266-12, Hera, He 5) bhooleh baarik anik lakh baree-aa an tha-ur naahee jah jaataa. ||1|| rahaa-o. The child is so foolish; it makes so many mistakes. But it has nowhere else to go. ||1||Pause] |
Jue nfs aoa aud at Hau male AT AS Il (1266-13, ners, Hs 5) chanchal mat baarik bapuray kee sarap agan kar maylai. The mind of the poor child is fickle; he touches even snakes and fire.
HST fust afe ofe Ie noe HofA Sa BS MMi (1266-13, news, He 5)
maataa pitaa kanth laa-ay raakhai anad sahj tab khaylai. ||2||
His mother and father hug him close in their embrace, and so he plays in joy and bliss. ||2]|
fan or fust 3 AS Homi fA alsa se SAT I (1266-14, Hers, He 5)
jis kaa pitaa too hai mayray su-aamee tis baarik bhookh kaisee.
What hunger can the child ever have, O my Lord and Master, when You are his Father?
o€ fofa on fours fafa 33 His sie A BAT BI (1266-14, Hers, Hs 5)
nav niDh naam niDhaan garihi tayrai man baa‘chhai so laisee. ||3]|
The treasure of the Naam and the nine treasures are in Your celestial household. You fulfill the desires of the mind. ||3]|
fust forurfs urfemr fea cot afaa yf Hid ABST I (1266-15, Hare, He 5)
pitaa kirpaal aagi-aa ih deenee baarik mukh maa‘gai so daynaa.
My Merciful Father has issued this Command: whatever the child asks for, is put into his mouth.
ood wf ean ys ud dfs fye sats fos Baar SII (1266-16, Hers, He 5)
naanak baarik daras parabh chaahai mohi hirdai baseh nit charnaa. ||4]|2||
Nanak, the child, longs for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. May His Feet always dwell within my heart. ||4][2||
HBS HIS U Il (1266-17)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Rae fact afs wrog afeor sfaS Aare wear il (1266-17, Hers, Hs 5)
sagal biDhee jur aahar kari-aa taji-o sagal andaysaa.
I tried everything, and gathered all devices together; I have discarded all my anxieties.
AGH AIG nidfsS wa at SAT AT STIAT MAU (1266-17, Ho, He 5)
kaaraj sagal araambhi-o ghar kaa thaakur kaa bhaarosaa. ||1||
I have begun to set all my household affairs right; I have placed my faith in my Lord and Master. ||1||
Hoba SH Sa Ao Il (1266-18, Hears, He 5) sunee-ai baajai baaj suhaavee. I listen to the celestial vibrations resonating and resounding.
3g sfeur F finn we ue fafs Hares AoeT A TIS Il (1266-18, ers, He 5)
bhor bha-i-aa mai pari-a mukh paykhay garihi mangal suhlaavee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Sunrise has come, and I gaze upon the Face of my Beloved. My household is filled with peace and pleasure. ||1||Pause| |
Hoor ofe etd aot uss AST AS Il (1266-19, HwrE, Hs 5)
manoo-aa laa-ay savaaray thaanaa™ poochha-o santaa jaa-ay.
I focus my mind, and embellish and adorn the place within; then I go out to speak with the Saints.
ans dns H urge fife safs as fofe urs iH (1266-19, ners, v2 5)
khojat khojat mai paahun mili-o bhagat kara-o niv paa-ay. ||2||
Seeking and searching, I have found my Husband Lord; I bow at His Feet and worship Him with devotion. ||2]|
UST IED ma finn orf aA fafs vats sa oH Has arfenr it 1267-1, ners, v8 5)
jab pari-a aa-ay basay garihi aasan tab ham mangal gaa-i-aa. When my Beloved came to live in my house, I began to sing the songs of bliss.
HS AAS AS se AIS YS UT ag frofeur SN (1267-2, Hers, He 5) meet saajan mayray bha-ay suhaylay parabh pooraa guroo milaa-i-aa. ||3]|| My friends and companions are happy; God leads me to meet the Perfect Guru. ||3]|
Aedt AIS se woe als ASA THT UP Il (1267-2, Hers, He 5) sakhee sahaylee bha-ay anandaa gur kaaraj hamray pooray. My friends and companions are in ecstasy; the Guru has completed all my projects.
aT Soa Fg fife Fuerst sfs F At TS WISI (1267-3, wars, H8 5)
kaho naanak var mili-aa sukh-daata chhod na jaa-ee dooray. ||4]|3]|
Says Nanak, I have met my Husband, the Giver of peace; He shall never leave me and go away. ||4][3]|
HBS HIS U Il (1267-4)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
TH 3 ale ate 3 Heufs afs Su HoT AG Fas Il (1267-4, Hw, He 5)
raaj tay keet keet tay surpat kar dokh jathar ka-o bhartay.
From a king to a worm, and from a worm to the lord of gods, they engage in evil to fill their bellies.
faur fofa afs ure ag unto mrsH wurst TIS WAU (1267-4, Hers, Hs 5)
kirpaa niDh chhod aan ka-o poojeh aatam ghaatee hartay. ||1]|
They renounce the Lord, the Ocean of Mercy, and worship some other; they are thieves and killers of the soul. ||1]|
dfs fangs 3 fe eft Hes Il (1267-5, Has, He 5) har bisrat tay dukh dukh martay. Forgetting the Lord, they suffer in sorrow and die.
mifsa aes gus ag Ast Sax 3 AY TIS UU TIS il 1267-5, vars, ws 5)
anik baar bharmeh baho jonee tayk na kaahoo Dhartay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
They wander lost in reincarnation through all sorts of species; they do not find shelter anywhere. ||1]|Pause| |
fsortar Fumi ore aS feses Hs Ha yw UT F Il (1267-6, HoT, HE 5)
ti-aag su-aamee aan ka-o chitvat moorh mugaDh khal khar tay.
Those who abandon their Lord and Master and think of some other, are foolish, stupid, idiotic donkeys.
aad oe Sufs as Aag fear AAS TH SgS MQM (1267-7, wars, ve 5)
kaagar naav langheh kat saagar baritha kathat ham tartay. ||2||
How can they cross over the ocean in a paper boat? Their eogtistical boasts that they will cross over are meaningless. ||2]| |
fre fadfs ving Aa AS ae mrafe ufo AES II (1267-7, HOS, He 5) siv biranch asur sur jaytay kaal agan meh jartay. Shiva, Brahma, angels and demons, all burn in the fire of death.
Soa Adls VIO AHS at SH 3 SIT YS AGS ISIS (1267-8, wars, v3 5)
naanak saran charan kamlan kee tum" na daarahu parabh kartay. ||3]|4||
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet; O God, Creator, please do not send me into exile. ||3]|4||
TA HBS HIS U Pus we (1267-9)
raag malaar mehlaa 5 dupday ghar 1 Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, First House:
qe Afsas urrfe II (1267-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
us Ae Gfe Sarai fSnreit it (1267-10, wars, He 5) parabh mayray o-ay bairaagee ti-aagee. My God is detached and free of desire.
JG fea fug fon fag sfo 5 AAG ulfs dst wait 1d TIS Ul 1267-10, ers, vs 5) ha-o ik khin tis bin reh na saka-o pareet hamaaree laagee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant. Iam so in love with Him. ||1]|Pause] |
@s a Afar xfs yg fats wre AS ute fs Feit II 1267-11, Hara, He 5)
un kai sang mohi parabh chit aavai sant parsaad mohi jaagee.
Associating with the Saints, God has come into my consciousness. By their Grace, I have been awakened.
Afs GueH se Ho foo ae we dfat sat Wa c267-11, Hers, He 5)
sun updays bha-ay man nirmal gun gaa-ay rang raa‘gee. ||1||
Hearing the Teachings, my mind has become immaculate. Imbued with the Lord's Love, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1]|
feg Ho ef ate As Hist faurs se gsaraT I (1267-12, Hers, 2 5)
ih man day-ay kee-ay sant meetaa kirpaal bha-ay badbhaagee”.
Dedicating this mind, I have made friends with the Saints. They have become merciful to me; I am very fortunate.
Ho AY uUfent gals 6 AAG Iq Soa AS Ut NUAUUII 4267-12, Hers, H 5)
mahaa sukh paa-i-aa baran na saaka-o rayn naanak jan paagee. ||2||1]|5|| I have found absolute peace - I cannot describe it. Nanak has obtained the dust of the feet of the humble. ||2||1]|5]|
HBS HIS U Il (1267-13)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Het Hf UtsuH eg fore? I (1267-13, vars, 18 5) maa-ee mohi pareetam dayh milaa-ee. O mother, please lead me to union with my Beloved.
Hae AVS! AY ste Ast fro wis we BATES UA TIS Il 1267-14, vars, He 5)
Sagal sahaylee sukh bhar sootee jih ghar laal basaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
All my friends and companions sleep totally in peace; their Beloved Lord has come into the homes of their hearts. ||1]|Pause] |
Hfs nizae ys Ae efenrer Hf fasafs foo ssaet Il (1267-14, Hers, He 5)
mohi avgan parabh sadaa da-i-aalaa mohi nirgun ki-aa chaturaa-ee.
I am worthless; God is forever Merciful. I am unworthy; what clever tricks could I try?
ase saate FH finn Afr ast fea TH at Soret ual (1267-15, ves, ne 5)
kara-o baraabar jo pari-a sang raatee™ ih ha-umai kee dheethaa-ee. ||1||
I claim to be on a par with those who are imbued with the Love of their Beloved. This is my stubborn egotism. ||1]|
set fonrat Aefe fea sat ae Afsas use AYMETET II (1267-16, Has, He 5)
bha-ee nimaanee saran ik taakee gur satgur purakh sukh-daa-ee.
I am dishonored - I seek the Sanctuary of the One, the Guru, the True Guru, the Primal Being, the Giver of peace.
fa fouy ufo vat AS ey afer aoa Afe Sfo feast NQNQNEI (1267-16, Hs, He 5)
ayk nimakh meh mayraa sabh dukh kaati-aa naanak sukh rain bihaa-ee. ||2||2||6||
In an instant, all my pains have been taken away; Nanak passes the night of his life in peace. ||2||2||6]|
HOS HIS U Il (1267-17)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
aaA Hw at fe fae o BE Il (1267-17, Hare, us 5) baras maygh jee til bilam na laa-o. Rain down, O cloud; do not delay.
aan fimrd Hof Rod df mee Het His TS al TIC il 1267-18, vas, v2 5)
baras pi-aaray maneh saDhaaray ho-ay anad sadaa man chaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
O beloved cloud, O support of the mind, you bring lasting bliss and joy to the mind. ||1]|Pause] |
oH Sot ug Aur He FS faS Hog faArs i (1267-18, wars, He 5) ham tayree Dhar su-aamee-aa mayray too ki-o manhu bisaaray. I take to Your Support, O my Lord and Master; how could You forget me?
UST AVEC fenst gu sat at fouret As sot fae SITS WAU (1268-1, vars, He 5)
istaree roop chayree kee ni-aa-ee sobh nahee bin bhartaaray. ||1]|| I am Your beautiful bride, Your servant and slave. I have no nobility without my Husband Lord. ||1]|
fao@ Afa wa oad He far mre fast ars | (1268-2, Hors, He 5)
bin-o suni-o jab thaakur mayrai bayg aa-i-o kirpaa Dhaaray.
When my Lord and Master listened to my prayer, He hurried to shower me with His Mercy.
aT asa Ad fos Aaa ufs AST 3S wfVTS NQNBIDI (1268-2, Has, He 5)
kaho naanak mayro bani-o suhaago pat sobhaa bhalay achaaray. ||2]|3]|7]|| Says Nanak, I have become just like my Husband Lord; I am blessed with honor, nobility and the lifestyle of goodness. ||2||3]|7]|
HBS HIS U Il (1268-3)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
UfsH Aret amy fowrfe i (1268-3, wars, us 5) pareetam saachaa naam Dhi-aa-ay. Meditate on the True Name of your Beloved.
wu vse faon se Ag Ts at Hats fee SATE NV TIS I 1268-3, wars, ws 5)
dookh darad binsai bhav saagar gur kee moorat ridai basaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The pains and sorrows of the terrifying world-ocean are dispelled, by enshrining the Image of the Guru within your heart. ||1||Pause] |
AHS Js cut vfs fenmt ofa Aaeret wrfeur | (1268-4, Hors, He 5)
dusman hatay dokhee sabh vi-aapay har sarnaa-ee aa-i-aa.
Your enemies shall be destroyed, and all the evil-doers shall perish, when you come to the Sanctuary of the Lord.
Tues Ta t THU any uersg ufenr All (1268-5, Hers, v2 5)
raakhanhaarai haath day raakhi-o naam padaarath paa-i-aa. ||1||
The Savior Lord has given me His Hand and saved me; I have obtained the wealth of the Naam. ||1]|
ate fasur faofeu Afs are on feaHe fo Shor Il 1268-5, nara, He 5)
kar kirpaa kilvikh sabh kaatay naam nirmal man dee-aa.
Granting His Grace, He has eradicated all my sins; He has placed the Immaculate Naam within my mind.
qe foarg sad ufs efhor wats ea Ss Shor USI (1268-6, Hears, He 5)
gun niDhaan naanak man vasi-aa baahurh dookh na thee-aa. ||2]|4]|8]|
O Nanak, the Treasure of Virtue fills my mind; I shall never again suffer in pain. 21141181]
HBS HIS U Il (1268-7)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
ys Ad UTSH Ure fumird I (1268-7, vars, H8 5) parabh mayray pareetam paraan pi-aaray. My Beloved God is the Lover of my breath of life.
Un safs mud oH ea efenrs nig os UU TIS il 1268-7, wars, Hs 5) paraym bhagat apno naam deejai da-i-aal anoograhu Dhaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please bless me with the loving devotional worship of the Naam, O Kind and
Compassionate Lord. ||1]|Pause||
frns@ saa sod UISH fee Sas wT II (1268-8, Hers, He 5) simra-o charan tuhaaray pareetam ridai tuhaaree aasaa. I meditate in remembrance on Your Feet, O my Beloved; my heart is filled with hope.
Hs Aor ufo as Fost uf wane at fummar All (1268-8, vars, He 5)
sant janaa peh kara-o bayntee man darsan kee pi-aasaa. ||1]|
I offer my prayer to the humble Saints; my mind thirsts for the Blssed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1]||
fags HaS Atlee ots fres Ao AG eanS SHA Il (1268-9, Ha, He 5)
bichhurat maran jeevan har miltay jan ka-o darsan deejai.
Separation is death, and Union with the Lord is life. Please bless Your humble servant with Your Darshan.
oH nurg Hes US Sa US HS fagur ats NQUUNEN (1268-9, Hers, He 5)
naam aDhaar jeevan Dhan naanak parabh mayray kirpaa keejai. ||2||5||9]|
O my God, please be Merciful, and bless Nanak with the support, the life and wealth of the Naam. ||2||5]|9]|
HSS HIS U Il (1268-10)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
ma nud utsH fA@ afe miret il 268-10, ners, He 5) ab apnay pareetam si-o ban aa-ee. Now, I have become just like my Beloved.
oH IH SHS AY UTES aaA Hw AMSTET NAN TIE Il (1268-11, Hers, Hz 5)
raajaa raam ramat sukh paa-i-o baras maygh sukh-daa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Dwelling on my Sovereign Lord King, I have found peace. Rain down, O peace-giving cloud. ||1||Pause| |
fea ue fares odt AY Aa OH Se fofo ust I (1268-11, Has, He 5)
ik pal bisrat nahee sukh saagar naam navai niDh paa-ee.
I cannot forget Him, even for an instant; He is the Ocean of peace. Through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.
Cty ses yas TS at SS AT ATT UI (1268-12, vars, we 5)
udout bha-i-o pooran bhaavee ko bhaytay sant sahaa-ee. ||1]|
My perfect destiny has been activated, meeting with the Saints, my help and support. [11|
AY Cur gu Ad@ faa uTaqaH fee wret Il 1268-12, wars, He 5)
sukh upjay dukh sagal binaasay paarbarahm liv laa-ee.
Peace has welled up, and all pain has been dispelled, lovingly attuned to the Supreme Lord God.
3feG HA afos 3 Aa dfs soa Bae fomimet NQNENAON (1268-13, Ha, He 5)
tari-o sansaar kathin bhai saagar har naanak charan Dhi-aa-ee. ||2||6||10]| The arduous and terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, O Nanak, by meditating on the Feet of the Lord. ||2]|6]|10]|
HBS HIS U Il (1268-14)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
wisdd Sah Aas Aa Stent |i 1268-14, wars, us 5) ghanihar baras sagal jag chhaa-i-aa. The clouds have rained down all over the world.
ge faurs UISH ys Ae vise Hares AY ufemr A TIS ll (1268-14, Hara, Hs 5)
bha-ay kirpaal pareetam parabh mayray anad mangal sukh paa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. My Beloved Lord God has become merciful to me; I am blessed with ecstasy, bliss and peace. ||1]|Pause| |
fue aSn fZHs AS Fst us_oH His forfenr i 1268-15, wars, He 5)
mitay kalays tarisan sabh boojhee paarbarahm man Dhi-aa-i-aa.
My sorrows are erased, and all my thirsts are quenched, meditating on the Supreme Lord God.
AUGAfd ASH Hao feed ote 5 aSg OEM AI (1268-16, HeS, 4 5)
saaDhsang janam maran nivaaray bahur na kathoo Dhaa-i-aa. ||1||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, death and birth come to an end, and the mortal does not wander anywhere, ever again. ||1]|
Ho 30 oH fodafs Ta vas ane fee afer Il (1268-16, nas, He 5)
man tan naam niranjan raata-o charan kamal liv laa-i-aa.
My mind and body are imbued with the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; I am lovingly attuned to His Lotus Feet.
vidtorg aS ufs nus sea SA AeStfEnr INDIA (1268-17, Has, HE 5)
angeekaar kee-o parabh apnai naanak daas sarnaa-i-aa. ||2||7||11]| God has made Nanak His Own; slave Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||2]||7||11]|
HBS HIS U Il (1268-18)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
faess fa@ Ate Gfe Flee I (1268-18, nara, nH 5) bichhurat ki-o jeevay o-ay jeevan. Separated from the Lord, how can any living being live?
fasts Gorn vin fod at Sao AHS FA ules IA TIS Il (1268-18, Hors, He 5)
chiteh ulaas aas milbay kee charan kamal ras peevan. ||1|| rahaa-o. My consciousness is filled with yearning and hope to meet my Lord, and drink in the sublime essence of His Lotus Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
faa a@ fimrr surct uisn f85 a@ nisg oct Il (1268-19, vars, 8 5) jin ka-o pi-aas tumaaree pareetam tin ka-o antar naahee. Those who are thirsty for You, O my Beloved, are not separated from You.
fis ag fans He oH fimre A He Hie ATT NA (1268-19, wars, H8 5) jin ka-o bisrai mayro raam pi-aaraa say moo-ay mar jaa“hee”. ||1|| Those who forget my Beloved Lord are dead and dying. ||1]|
at qe
fe sf sfe sfoor Aarts Uys HET TAS I (1269-1, wars, He 5)
man tan rav rahi-aa jagdeesur paykhat sadaa hajooray.
The Lord of the Universe is permeating and pervading my mind and body; I see Him Ever-present, here and now
aod oe sos As nists Ase soot FIUT MQNCIII (1269-1, Hers, He 5)
naanak rav rahi-o sabh antar sarab rahi-aa bharpooray. ||2||8]|12]| . O Nanak, He is permeating the inner being of all; He is all-pervading everywhere. [12] |8]]12]|
HBS HIS U Il (1269-2)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & axle aBa ABS 5 3S Il (1269-2, Hare, He 5) har kai bhajan ka-un ka-un na taaray. Vibrating and meditating on the Lord, who has not been carried across?
ua 30 He 30 fat 3a aaT 3a AY Afa Surg A TIS I (1269-3, vwrg, ns 5)
khag tan meen tan marig tan baraah tan saaDhoo sang uDhaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those reborn into the body of a bird, the body of a fish, the body of a deer, and the body of a bull - in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they are saved. ||1]|Pause] |
2z GS US as AY feos oa AS Css UT Il (1269-3, vara, ne 5)
dayv kul dait kul jakh-y kinnar nar saagar utray paaray.
The families of gods, the families of demons, titans, celestial singers and human beings are carried across the ocean.
AH SHO Ad AY Af st ax se FETs UA (1269-4, wars, He 5)
jo jo bhajan karai saaDhoo sang taa kay dookh bidaaray. ||1||
Whoever meditates and vibrates on the Lord in the Saadh Sangat - his pains are taken away. ||1]|
aH ada Ho fafimr oA fea 3 se foes Il (1269-4, He, He 5)
kaam karoDh mahaa bikhi-aa ras in tay bha-ay niraaray.
Sexual desire, anger and the pleasures of terrible corruption - he keeps away from these.
ate vfiore nufs age H Soa Ae afsaS WINENIBI (1269-5, Ha, He 5)
deen da-i-aal jaapeh karunaa mai naanak sad balihaaray. ||2||9||13]|
He meditates on the Lord, Merciful to the meek, the Embodiment of Compassion; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2]|9]|13]|
HBS HIS U Il (1269-6)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
mia H afAG afs TW] Il (1269-6, Hers, He 5) aaj mai baisi-o har haat. Today, I am seated in the Lord's store.
om oh Ast afs ne fA HIE ANS w]e NU TIS I (1269-6, Hare, He 5)
naam raas saajhee kar jan si-o jaa‘-o na jam kai ghaat. ||1|| rahaa-o.
With the wealth of the Lord, I have entered into partnership with the humble; I shall not have take the Highway of Death. ||1]||Pause] |
Of neq uUsqaH Ia FH A YS AUS Il (1269-7, nara, ue 5)
Dhaar anoograhu paarbarahm raakhay bharam kay khul"ay kapaat.
Showering me with His Kindness, the Supreme Lord God has saved me; the doors of doubt have been opened wide.
SAH ATG ys Ufeor wre wae fafa w]e Il (1269-7, ners, He 5)
baysumaar saahu parabh paa-i-aa laahaa charan niDh khaat. ||1]|
I have found God, the Banker of Infinity; I have earned the profit of the wealth of His Feet. ||1]|
Hofe adt wes ifs faofaa are od aif] | (1269-8, Hers, He 5)
saran gahee achut abhinaasee kilbikh kaadhay hai chhaa“t.
I have grasped the protection of the Sanctuary of the Unchanging, Unmoving, Imperishable Lord; He has picked up my sins and thrown them out.
afe xen fe aH area Safe & Ast HS MNIONII (1269-8, HTS, He 5)
kal kalays mitay daas naanak bahur na jonee maat. ||2||10||14||
Slave Nanak's sorrow and suffering has ended. He shall never again be squeezed into the mold of reincarnation. ||2||10]|14||
HBS HIS U Il (1269-9)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
ag fafa ufemr va fos Il (1269-9, nore, He 5) baho biDh maa-i-aa moh hiraano. In so many ways, attachment to Maya leads to ruin.
afe Ho ag fase Reg yss says fars AU TIE Il (1269-10, vars, we 5)
kot maDhay ko-oo birlaa sayvak pooran bhagat chiraano. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Among millions, it is very rare to find a selfless servant who remains a perfect devotee for very long. ||1]|Pause] |
fes @s 3fo 3f AN Ute 3q US JS fess II (1269-10, Hors, H8 5)
it ut dol dol saram paa-i-o tan Dhan hot biraano.
Roaming and wandering here and there, the mortal finds only trouble; his body and wealth become strangers to himself.
Sa vate ags dfamiet FS Afar FATS WAU (1269-11, vars, He 5)
log duraa-ay karat thagi-aa-ee hotou sang na jaano. ||1||
Hiding from people, he practices deception; he does not know the One who is always with him. ||1||
flyer Udit His te ote fea Hae fefe mrs I (1269-11, nara, He 5)
marig pankhee meen deen neech ih sankat fir aano.
He wanders through troubled incarnations of low and wretched species as a deer, a bird and a fish.
ATI Soa UTS UT SIT AUHAS AY HS NINA (1269-12, HES, He 5)
kaho naanak paahan parabh taarahu saaDhsangat sukh maano. ||2||11]|15]|
Says Nanak, O God, I am a stone - please carry me across, that I may enjoy peace in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2]|11]|15]|
HBS HIS U Il (1269-13)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
He He fay uret dt Het I (1269-13, Hare, He 5) dusat mu-ay bikh khaa-ee ree maa-ee. The cruel and evil ones died after taking poison, O mother.
fan a Aba fso dt ofa wt As ys aS fagur miret A TIC il 269-13, vara, us 5)
jis kay jee-a tin hee rakh leenay mayray parabh ka-o kirpaa aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
And the One, to whom all creatures belong, has saved us. God has granted His Grace. ||1]|Pause] |
nisaaHt AS fs Zas Zt SS AAT are I (1269-14, Hara, He 5)
antarjaamee sabh meh vartai taa bha-o kaisaa bhaa-ee.
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is contained within all; why should I be afraid, O Siblings of Destiny?
Af Aoet efs o wet ys SA Asst SST AI 1269-14, Hers, He 5)
sang sahaa-ee chhod na jaa-ee parabh deesai sabhnee thaa-ee”. ||1||
God, my Help and Support, is always with me. He shall never leave; I see Him everywhere. ||1]|
more arg te eu sna orf oe ofS wet Il (1269-15, Hes, He 5)
anaathaa naath deen dukh bhanjan aap lee-ay larh laa-ee.
He is the Master of the masterless, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor; He has attached me to the hem of His robe.
ofs at Ge Flefo BA 3 TSA YS ATS NINIUAEM (1269-16, wars, He 5)
har kee ot jeeveh daas tayray naanak parabh sarnaa-ee. ||2||12||16]| O Lord, Your slaves live by Your Support; Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. [|2]]12]]16]|
HBS HIS U Il (1269-16)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Ho Hd dfs A VIS Tete Il (1269-17, Hara, He 5) man mayray har kay charan raveejai. O my mind, dwell on the Feet of the Lord.
Zan fimrn Ad He HfaS of ue warfe fest a ToS i (1269-17, vers, v2 5)
daras pi-aas mayro man mohi-o har pankh lagaa-ay mileejai. ||1]| rahaa-o.
My mind is enticed by thirst for the Blessed Vision of the Lord; I would take wings and fly out to meet Him. ||1]|Pause] |
ans FAS Hed UES ATT AS TSA Il (1269-18, wars, Hs 5) khojat khojat maarag paa-i-o saaDhoo sayv kareejai. Searching and seeking, I have found the Path, and now I serve the Holy.
ufs wogqy Aomt As Sw MoT oA UTA IAI (1269-18, Hers, Hs 5)
Dhaar anoograhu su-aamee mayray naam mahaa ras peejai. ||1]|
O my Lord and Master, please be kind to me, that I may drink in Your most sublime essence. ||1]|
safe ofa afs Aast wre wes forsur att Il (1269-19, wars, He 5)
taraahi taraahi kar sarnee aa-ay jalta-o kirpaa keejai.
Begging and pleading, I have come to Your Sanctuary; I am on fire - please shower me with Your Mercy!
ad dfs SI SH nus a soa mus aA NQNIBNAI (1269-19, Hers, He 5) kar geh layho daas apunay ka-o naanak apuno keejai. ||2||13]|17]|
Please give me Your Hand - I am Your slave, O Lord. Please make Nanak Your Own. [12]]13]]17]|
UST 920
HOS He U Il (1270-1)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
us a sats see fasete i 1270-1, we, Hs 5) parabh ko bhagat bachhal birdaari-o. It is God's Nature to love His devotees.
fsea nfs vse 3m US nus AA eases NA TIE Il (1270-1, Has, H2 5)
nindak maar charan tal deenay apuno jas vartaa-i-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He destroys the slanderers, crushing them beneath His Feet. His Glory is manifest everywhere. ||1||Pause| |
AA og ate AS Aa His efeor Abe fs UES I 1270-2, ne, He 5)
jai jai kaar kKeeno sabh jag meh da-i-aa jee-an meh paa-i-o.
His Victory is celebrated all throughout the world. He blesses all creatures with compassion.
afe ofe wus aA ahs asst aE 5 ote il 1270-3, wars, He 5)
kanth laa-ay apuno daas raakhi-o taatee vaa-o na laa-i-o. ||1||
Hugging him close in His Embrace, the Lord saves and protects His slave. The hot winds cannot even touch him. ||1]|
waters aS HS AoMHt gu s@ Afe AeEE I (1270-3, vars, Hs 5)
angeekaar kee-o mayray su-aamee bharam bha-o mayt sukhaa-i-o.
My Lord and Master has made me His Own; dispelling my doubts and fears, He has made me happy.
HT mide ag TA ois & soe fA fs wrfEE NINISUATH (1270-4, ves, He 5)
mahaa anand karahu daas har kay naanak bisvaas man aa-i-o. ||2||14]|18]| The Lord's slaves enjoy ultimate ecstasy; O Nanak, faith has welled up in my mind. [|2]|14]]18]|
Ta HSS HIS uBeue we 2 (1270-5) raag malaar mehlaa 5 cha-upday ghar 2 Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:
qe Afsare YATE Il (1270-5) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aoufa A FIN UATE Il (1270-6, Hers, He 5) gurmukh deesai barahm pasaar. The Gurmukh sees God pervading everywhere.
Taufa 3 geht fares i 1270-6, Hers, He 5)
gurmukh tarai gunee-aa" bisthaar.
The Gurmukh knows that the universe is the extension of the three gunas, the three dispositions.
aaHfe are Fe FT Il (1270-6, nwa, uz 5) gurmukh naad bayd beechaar.
The Gurmukh reflects on the Sound-current of the Naad, and the wisdom of the Vedas.
fag ae us ule vitrg WU (1270-6, wars, Hs 5) bin gur pooray ghor anDhaar. ||1]| Without the Perfect Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness. ||1]|
Hd Ho Td Ts ATS AST AY ure I (1270-7, vars, ve 5) mayray man gur gur karat sadaa sukh paa-ee-ai. O my mind, calling on the Guru, eternal peace is found.
ae Gueth afs fase ef wth fata mre uA fom a gare i 4270-7, nes, v2 5)
gur updays har hirdai vasi-o saas giraas apnaa khasam Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord comes to dwell within the heart; I meditate on my Lord and Master with every breath and morsel of food. ||1]|Pause] |
ad x ade feed als WE Il (1270-8, was, He 5) gur kay charan vitahu bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to the Guru's Feet.
Td & Te nofeo fos aw il (1270-8, vars, us 5) gur kay gun an-din nit gaa-o. Night and day, I continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Guru.
ae at ufs ase fears Il (1270-9, wars, 42 5)
gur kee Dhoorh kara-o isnaan. I take my cleansing bath in the dust of the Guru's Feet.
APS esas ust HT Ql 1270-9, nse, v2 5) saachee dargeh paa-ee-ai maan. ||2|| I am honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||
Td Sfvgq SSHG SISITS Il (1270-9, Hors, v2 5) gur bohith bhavjal taaranhaar. The Guru is the boat, to carry me across the terrifying world-ocean.
ats sfem 6 dfe afs mare I 1270-10, Hes, He 5) gur bhayti-ai na ho-ay jon a-utaar. Meeting with the Guru, I shall not be reincarnated ever again.
ad at AS A AS Ue Il (1270-10, Has, He 5) gur kee sayvaa so jan paa-ay. That humble being serves the Guru,
Ww as aath fofior fs mre 11311 (1270-10, Hers, He 5) jaa ka-o karam likhi-aa Dhur aa-ay. ||3]| who has such karma inscribed on his forehead by the Primal Lord. ||3]|
ag Hat Atefs aT war, | 270-11, wars, ve 5) gur mayree jeevan gur aaDhaar. The Guru is my life; the Guru is my support.
ag Hat zasfe TT uss Il (1270-11, Has, He 5) gur mayree vartan gur parvaar. The Guru is my way of life; the Guru is my family.
as HT YAH Alsad AgSret Il (1270-12, Hews, 2 5) gur mayraa khasam satgur sarnaa-ee. The Guru is my Lord and Master; I seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
Sot UT USAIN AT at AH S uret USUAUIAEN (4270-12, vara, He 5)
naanak gur paarbarahm jaa kee keem na paa-ee. ||4||1]|19]| O Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God; His value cannot be estimated. [411] 129]]
HBS HIS U Il (1270-13)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Gd a BIS fase SAS I (1270-13, uss, v2 5) gur kay charan hirdai vasaa-ay. I enshrine the Lord's Feet within my heart;
afd fasur yfs wif fre i 1270-13, ners, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh aap milaa-ay. in His Mercy, God has united me with Himself.
mus Aza AG BE UZ BME Il (1270-13, wars, ws 5) apnay sayvak ka-o la-ay parabh laa-ay. God enjoins His servant to his tasks.
a at abafs adt o ATES NAN (1270-14, Hers, He 5)
taa kee keemat kahee na jaa-ay. ||1|| His worth cannot be expressed. ||1]|
ats fasur use AYeTS Il (1270-14, HES, He 5) kar kirpaa pooran sukh-daatay. Please be merciful to me, O Perfect Giver of peace.
SHat faur 3 F fats orefe mre use 39 Sar TS NU TIS ll (1270-14, vers, we 5) tum"ree kirpaa tay too™ chit aavahi aath pahar tayrai rang raatay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Your Grace, You come to mind; I am imbued with Your Love, twenty-four hours a day. ||1||Pause| |
WE HSS AF ST SBTST Il (1270-15, Hrs, Hs 5) gaavan sunan sabh tayraa bhaanaa. Singing and listening, it is all by Your Will.
TAH FS A AVS AHS Il (1270-15, wars, Hs 5) hukam boojhai so saach samaanaa. One who understands the Hukam of Your Command is absorbed in Truth.
afu afu Atefs Sat oS i (1270-16, ners, He 5) jap jap jeeveh tayraa naa‘-o. Chanting and meditating on Your Name, I live.
33 fag er adt AS MQM 270-16, ners, 12 5) tujh bin doojaa naahee thaa-o. ||2|| Without You, there is no place at all. ||2||
eu AY Ads JAH GATE Il (1270-16, ners, He 5) dukh sukh kartay hukam rajaa-ay. Pain and pleasure come by Your Command, O Creator Lord.
ae SUA ae Sfe AATE Il (1270-17, Hare, He 5)
bhaanai bakhas bhaanai day-ay sajaa-ay.
By the Pleasure of Your Will You forgive, and by the Pleasure of Your Will You award punishment.
eat fafenit ar aest mrfy Il (1270-17, ners, He 5) duhaa” siri-aa” kaa kartaa aap. You are the Creator of both realms.
ITS WET STF UTS Ill (1270-17, Hews, ne 5) kurbaan jaa‘-ee tayray partaap. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to Your Glorious Grandeur. ||3]|
Sat aHfs so ASPs I (1270-18, vars, 48 5) tayree keemat toohai jaaneh. You alone know Your value.
3 uma gsty vfs wrt sarefs il (1270-18, Hers, H8 5) too aapay boojheh sun aap vakaaneh. You alone understand, You Yourself speak and listen.
At sas A ST SE Il (1270-18, Has, He 5) say-ee bhagat jo tuDh bhaanay. They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to Your Will.
UST 929
Sod (3G A AE ATHES IIQNQOM (1271-1, wars, v2 5)
naanak tin kai sad kurbaanay. ||4]|2||20|| Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||4||2||20]|
HBS HIS U Il (1271-1)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
USHA duit efenry il (1271-1, Hers, He 5) parmaysar ho-aa da-i-aal. The Transcendent Lord God has become merciful;
Ay FIA vifiys ors i 1271-2, vera, ue 5) maygh varsai amrit Dhaar. Ambrosial Nectar is raining down from the clouds.
Hae Aba AS USA Il 1271-2, ners, ue 5) saglay jee-a jant tariptaasay. All beings and creatures are satisfied;
ASH ME UT TA WAU (1271-2, wars, He 5) kaaraj aa-ay pooray raasay. ||1|| their affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1]|
Het Het Ho OTH AHS Il (1271-2, ners, He 5) sadaa sadaa man naam sam"aal. O my mind, dwell on the Lord, forever and ever.
qs us at Ae ure wie Ca fous af ua TIS il 1271-3, were, us 5)
gur pooray kee sayvaa paa-i-aa aithai othai nibhai naal. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Serving the Perfect Guru, I have obtained it. It shall stay with me both here and hereafter. ||1]|Pause| |
Vu Ft F FAGTS Ill (1271-3, Hos, 2 5) dukh bhannaa bhai bhanjanhaar. He is the Destroyer of pain, the Eradicator of fear.
mrufent Abt at atSt ATS i 1271-4, Hors, He 5) aapni-aa jee-aa kee keetee saar. He takes care of His beings.
USTs Het fITSs Il (1271-4, Hare, He 5) raakhanhaar sadaa miharvaan. The Savior Lord is kind and compassionate forever.
Ret Het Asha ATA] QM (1271-4, wwe, ve 5) sadaa sadaa jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to Him, forever and ever. ||2]|
ae aetfenr as nrfu il 1271-5, ners, He 5) kaal gavaa-i-aa kartai aap. The Creator Himself has eliminated death.
Het Ae He FSH 3 Af il 271-5, Hers, He 5) Sadaa sadaa man tis no jaap. Meditate on Him forever and ever, O my mind.
fenfe ofs at Afs AS Il (1271-5, Hers, He 5) darisat Dhaar raakhay sabh jant. He watches all with His Glance of Grace and protects them.
ae Wed fos fos saSS NI 1271-5, Hos, He 5) gun gaavhu nit nit bhagvant. ||3]| Continually and continuously, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3]|
Sa ATS MY MM I (1271-6, Has, He 5) ayko kartaa aapay aap. The One and Only Creator Lord is Himself by Himself.
dfs & sas Wefs UTS Il (1271-6, Has, He 5) har kay bhagat jaaneh partaap. The Lord's devotees know His Glorious Grandeur.
ote at UA seer nef Il (1271-6, Hers, He 5) naavai kee paij rakh-daa aa-i-aa. He preserves the Honor of His Name.
Sod 88 FSA at Soren NsiSnVUi (1271-7, Hers, H2 5) naanak bolai tis kaa bolaa-i-aa. ||4]|3||21]|| Nanak speaks as the Lord inspires him to speak. ||4||3]|21]|
HOS HIS UY Il (1271-7)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
as AdSret Aas fears il (1271-7, Hers, He 5) gur sarnaa-ee sagal niDhaan. All treasures are found in the Sanctuary of the Guru.
APS eats uTehat He Il 1271-8, Hers, He 5) saachee dargahi paa-ee-ai maan. Honor is obtained in the True Court of the Lord.
3H 38 ey de As ATE I (1271-8, Hare, He 5) bharam bha-o dookh darad sabh jaa-ay. Doubt, fear, pain and suffering are taken away,
AUHfa Ae dfs TS aE Ail 271-8, Hers, v2 5)
saaDhsang sad har gun gaa-ay. ||1||
forever singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]|
Ho HS TT UT AVMs I (1271-9, wars, 2 5) man mayray gur pooraa saalaahi. O my mind, praise the Perfect Guru.
ony fous mug feo wat ne fee eo ute Nan TIE I (1271-9, Hara, nH 5)
naam niDhaan japahu din raatee man chinday fal paa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Chant the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause||
Afsag Aes wigs o AfE Il (1271-10, Hes, He 5) satgur jayvad avar na ko-ay. No one else is as great as the True Guru.
TI USAIN USHA AE i (1271-10, Hers, He 5) gur paarbarahm parmaysar so-ay. The Guru is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God.
HOH HIS TH FS IH Il (1271-10, vars, ws 5) janam maran dookh tay raakhai. He saves us from the pains of death and birth,
Hfeur fra fefs aafs 5 TS QM 271-11, Hes, He 5) maa-i-aa bikh fir bahurh na chaakhai. ||2|| and we will not have to taste the poison of Maya ever again. ||2||
ad at HfoH AAG B ATE Il (1271-11, vars, 2 5) gur kee mahimaa kathan na jaa-ay. The Guru's glorious grandeur cannot be described.
Te USHA ATS OTE ll (1271-11, Hers, He 5) gur parmaysar saachai naa-ay. The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, in the True Name.
HY HAH Adel AS Are Il (1271-12, vars, ue 5) sach sanjam karnee sabh saachee. True is His self-discipline, and True are all His actions.
H Ho fess A ae Afa Tet SI (1271-12, Hers, H 5) sO man nirmal jo gur sang raachee. ||3]| Immaculate and pure is that mind, which is imbued with love for the Guru. ||3]|
TT ys ure Ss sre Ml (1271-12, wars, ws 5) gur pooraa paa-ee-ai vad bhaag. The Perfect Guru is obtained by great good fortune.
any ag 83 He 3 fSurfa it 1271-13, Hers, He 5)
kaam kroDh lobh man tay ti-aag. Drive out sexual desire, anger and greed from your mind.
ate fasu ag sae feetr il (1271-13, Hers, H3 5) kar kirpaa gur charan nivaas. By His Grace, the Guru's Feet are enshrined within.
Soe at YS AY MITA SUSI (1271-13, wars, Hs 5)
naanak kee parabh sach ardaas. ||4||4||22]| Nanak offers his prayer to the True Lord God. ||4||4||22]|
TH HBT HIG U USSG WI 2 (1271-15)
raag malaar mehlaa 5 parh-taal ghar 3 Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1271-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aa Hots fut efemrs fA ga ahr it 1271-16, ners, He 5) gur manaar pari-a da-i-aar si-o rang kee-aa. Pleasing the Guru, I have fallen in love with my Merciful Beloved Lord.
ate dt Aas Atas Il (1271-16, Hors, He 5) keeno ree sagal see“gaar. I have made all my decorations,
SfAS ct Aare fears Il 1271-16, He, He 5) taji-o ree sagal bikaar. and renounced all corruption;
Wes wAfag shor na ToS lt 1271-17, nes, 2 5) Dhaavto asthir thee-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. my wandering mind has become steady and stable. ||1]||Pause| |
MA THe ute a wry aete a afe AS fAE Aa Wt (1271-17, Hes, He 5) aisay ray man paa-ay kai aap gavaa-ay kai kar saaDhan si-o sang. O my mind, lose your self-conceit by associating with the Holy, and you shall find Him.
an safe fyea naw afae dt oH oy 88 HOT 8s fs ASbor WA (1271-18, Hes, He 5) baajay bajeh maridang anaahad kokil ree raam naam bolai maDhur bain at suhee-aa. H1II
The unstruck celestial melody vibrates and resounds; like a song-bird, chant the Lord's Name, with words of sweetness and utter beauty. ||1]|
MA 33 wane at As ofS yng finn ontw 3A dt Afar AS aS Il (1271-18, Hers, us 5) aisee tayray darsan kee sobh at apaar pari-a amogh taisay hee sang sant banay.
Such is the glory of Your Darshan, so utterly inifinte and fruitful, O my Love; so do we become by associating with the Saints.
3z BSS BH FSG Il (1271-19, Has, He 5) bhav utaar naam bhanay. Vibrating, chanting Your Name, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
SH STH SH HG Il (1271-19, Hod, He 5) ram raam raam maal. They dwell on the Lord, Raam, Raam, chanting on their malas;
UST 9292 ufs aes ofa Afar after Wt 1272-1, wars, 43 5)
man fayrtay har sang sangee-aa. their minds are turned towards the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Ae ated fyS UISH hor WINANS (1272-1, Hes, Hs 5) jan naanak pari-o pareetam thee-aa. ||2||1]|23]| O servant Nanak, their Beloved Lord seems so sweet to them. ||2]|1]|23]|
HBS HIS U Il (1272-2)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
HO WS FH FS Il (1272-2, Has, ve 5) man ghanai bharmai banai. My mind wanders through the dense forest.
Crufa safA TS il (1272-2, nas, He 5) umak taras chaalai. It walks with eagerness and love,
ys fhoat at oT NU TIS Il 272-2, wars, 2 5) parabh milbay kee chaah. ||1|| rahaa-o. hoping to meet God. ||1||Pause]|
3 a6 Het Hfo ret ad Seq ofa Al 1272-3, wars, Hs 5)
tarai gun maa-ee mohi aa-ee kaha™-o baydan kaahi. ||1||
Maya with her three gunas - the three dispositions - has come to entice me; whom can I tell of my pain? ||1]|
uta Cure Hard ate ofo wa Arafs we il (1272-3, Hes, He 5) aan upaav sagar kee-ay neh dookh saakeh laahi. I tried everything else, but nothing could rid me of my sorrow.
Bq Hale AY ote fhe Te afsefs ats NQNQNIWI (1272-4, wars, 8 5)
bhaj saran saaDhoo naankaa mil gun gobindeh gaahi. ||2||2||24||
So hurry to the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak; joining them, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||2||2||24||
HBS HIS U Il (1272-4)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
finn at Fe Aosot stat Wl 1272-4, ners, ue 5) pari-a kee sobh suhaavanee neekee. The glory of my Beloved is noble and sublime.
TI IT Ta MUAT nse Hares FA seat Stet WAU TIS Il (1272-5, wwrg, Hs 5)
haahaa hoohoo ganDharab apsaraa anand mangal ras gaavnee neekee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The celestial singers and angels sing His Sublime Praises in ecstasy, happiness and joy. |]1||Pause]|
ufos ofes aod uioa sifs ag fafa gu fearedt stat all 1272-5, Hers, HE 5)
Dhunit lalit gun-ga-y anik bhaa‘t baho biDh roop dikhaavanee neekee. ||1||
The most worthy beings sing God's Praises in beautiful harmonies, in all sorts of ways, in myriads of sublime forms. ||1]|
fafs 3d 86 AS 320 Saufa wie wle wae seat Stat Il (1272-6, Hara, Hs 5)
gir tar thal jal bhavan bharpur ghat ghat laalan chhaavnee neekee.
Throughout the mountains, trees, deserts, oceans and galaxies, permeating each and every heart, the sublime grandeur of my Love is totally pervading.
WoHfa THe sa utes saa AT a Seat Stet NQNBNQUI (1272-7, Has, He 5)
saaDhsang raam-ee-aa ras paa-i-o naanak jaa kai bhaavnee neekee. ||2||3]|25] | In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Love of the Lord is found; O Nanak, sublime is that faith. ||2]|3]|25||
HBS HIS U Il (1272-8)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
aa uifs fimrd saa ane fee nists os A TIS Il 4272-8, vars, Hs 5)
gur pareet pi-aaray charan kamal rid antar Dhaaray. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
With love for the Guru, I enshrine the Lotus Feet of my Lord deep within my heart. ||1]|Pause] |
dA Hees van ufUs we fofsy TS | (1272-9, vars, us 5)
daras safli-o daras paykhi-o ga-ay kilbikh ga-ay.
I gaze on the Blessed Vision of His Fruitful Darshan; my sins are erased and taken away.
Ho fodHe BAS WAU (1272-9, Hers, He 5) man nirmal ujee-aaray. ||1]]| My mind is immaculate and enlightened. ||1]|
fann faAn fan set Il 1272-9, Hare, He 5) bisam bismai bisam bha-ee. I am wonderstruck, stunned and amazed.
mul afe Jas oH Bet Il (1272-10, Has, He 5) agh kot hartay naam la-ee. Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, millions of sins are destroyed.
Td VIS HASA Ss Udt Il (1272-10, Hare, He 5) gur charan mastak daar pahee. I fall at His Feet, and touch my forehead to them.
ys Sa Sot Sa Tat I (1272-10, wars, ns 5) parabh ayk too“hee ayk tuhee. You alone are, You alone are, O God.
BIS SAX BIS Il (1272-11, nara, vs 5) bhagat tayk tuhaaray. Your devotees take Your Support.
HS SOA ASS SMS NWSE (4272-11, Hse, Hz 5)
jan naanak saran du-aaray. ||2]||4||26]|| Servant Nanak has come to the Door of Your Sanctuary. ||2||4]|26]|
HOS HIS U Il (1272-11)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
dA ASA MiMfaMT i (1272-11, Hers, He 5) baras Saras aagi-aa. Rain down with happiness in God's Will.
Ofs MSS ATS SAT NU! TITS i 1272-12, srs, wz 5) hohi aanand sagal bhaag. ||1|| rahaa-o. Bless me with total bliss and good fortune. ||1]|Pause| |
H3 Hat Ho udes ffs Aw Us ATT WAU 4272-12, Hers, He 5)
sant sangay man parfarhai mil maygh Dhar suhaag. ||1]|
My mind blossoms forth in the Society of the Saints; soaking up the rain, the earth is blessed and beautified. ||1]|
wours uff Ae I (1272-13, vera, He 5) ghanghor pareet mor. The peacock loves the thunder of the rain clouds.
fas wiga ge Ss il (1272-13, wars, Hs 5) chit chaatrik boond or. The rainbird's mind is drawn to the rain-drop
MA Sfe Hat Ho HT Il (1272-13, Hers, He 5) aiso har sangay man moh. - so is my mind enticed by the Lord.
fSorfar urfsor to I 1272-13, Hers, He 5) ti-aag maa-i-aa Dhoh. I have renounced Maya, the deceiver.
ffs AS Soe AfaMr MQNUNQI I (1272-13, HES, Hs 5) mil sant naanak jaagi-aa. ||2||5||27]| Joining with the Saints, Nanak is awakened. ||2||5||27]|
HBS HIS U Il (1272-14)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Ts Tues we sts il (1272-14, Hers, ue 5) gun gopaal gaa-o neet. Sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World.
oH OH Us BMS NA TIC tl (1272-14, nase, He 5)
raam naam Dhaar cheet. ||1|| rahaa-o. Enshrine the Lord's Name in your consciousness. ||1]||Pause| |
efs we sta ane fife ArgMr & Afar Wl 1272-15, vers, Hs 5)
chhod maan taj gumaan mil saaDhoo-aa kai sang.
Forsake your pride, and abandon your ego; join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ofa frfs Sa ofa fife aifs Se tS Wal 1272-15, Hare, He 5)
har simar ayk rang mit jaa‘hi dokh meet. ||1]|
Meditate in loving remembrance on the One Lord; your sorrows shall be ended, O friend. ||1]|
UTIAIH FS BfEnrs | (1272-16, wars, us 5) paarbarahm bha-ay da-i-aal. The Supreme Lord God has become merciful;
faofa ae fat HATS Il (1272-16, nara, He 5) binas ga-ay bikhai janjaal. corrupt entanglements have come to an end.
AT at at BIS Ba I (1272-16, Hare, He 5) saaDh janaa™ kai charan laag. Grasping the feet of the Holy,
Soa We THfse StS NANEWVCH (1272-17, Hw, vz 5) naanak gaavai gobind neet. ||2]||6||28]| Nanak sings forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World. ||2||6||28]|
HOS HIS UY Il (1272-17)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
We TIS Hs FU il (1272-17, wars, ue 5) ghan garjat gobind roop. The Embodiment of the Lord of the Universe roars like the thunder-cloud.
Ts Wes AY VS MAU TIS I (1272-17, Hass, v2 5) gun gaavat sukh chain. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Singing His Glorious Praises brings peace and bliss. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs BIo Ade 3ds Aas Ufs weds" GA HS MAUI (1272-18, Hers, He 5)
har charan saran taran saagar Dhun anhataa ras bain. ||1|| The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet carries us across the world-ocean. His Sublime Word is the unstruck celestial melody. ||1]|
ufaa fumin fos AdST MISH AG BS Il (1272-18, ws, He 5)
pathik pi-aas chit sarovar aatam jal lain. The thirsty traveller's consciousness obtains the water of the soul from the pool of nectar.
Ufa GdA UH AS aoe afe fasur ys Fs NQUDNEN (1272-19, Hers, He 5)
har daras paraym jan naanak kar kirpaa parabh dain. ||2||7||29|| Servant Nanak loves the Blessed Vision of the Lord; in His Mercy, God has blessed him with it. ||2]|7||29]|
Yat 9293
HOT HIG U Il (1273-1)
malaar mehlaa 5. Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
d dfae 3 due od efenre we UU TIS Il (1273-1, nes, nH 5) hay gobind hay gopaal hay da-i-aal laal. ||1]|| rahaa-o. O Lord of the Universe, O Lord of the World, O Dear Merciful Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
ure oa nova AY de cae fees WAU (1273-1, Hers, Hs 5)
paraan naath anaath sakhay deen darad nivaar. ||1]||
You are the Master of the breath of life, the Companion of the lost and forsaken, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor. ||1]|
3 AYE Mia use Ho Hier ofs MI (1273-2, Hers, Hs 5) hay samrath agam pooran mohi ma-i-aa Dhaar. ||2]| O All-powerful, Inaccessible, Perfect Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy. ||2]|
nig qu He sfenre sea uty Ssrg WSICISON (1273-2, Hors, He 5)
anDh koop mahaa bha-i-aan naanak paar utaar. ||3||8]|30]|
Please, carry Nanak across the terrible, deep dark pit of the world to the other side. [13] 18] [30] |
HOS HIG 9 MASUSh We A (1273-4) malaar mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa ghar 1 Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
qe Afsars urrfe it 1273-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TaAet SS Ste alg ad fag fus ste B uret Il (1273-5, nos, He 1)
chakvee nain need neh chaahai bin pir nee“d na paa-ee.
The chakvi bird does not long for sleepy eyes; without her beloved, she does not sleep.
Hg vg fyS sa sat fale fate wat urNt Wail (1273-5, vars, He 1)
soor char"ai pari-o daykhai nainee niv niv laagai paa‘-ee. || 1]|
When the sun rises, she sees her beloved with her eyes; she bows and touches his feet. ||1]|
furs are UH AMET I (1273-6, vara, He 1) pir bhaavai paraym sakhaa-ee. The Love of my Beloved is pleasing; it is my Companion and Support.
fsn fae wet odt afar Ate mirt fimmnr ferret an gr@ i 4273-6, wars, He 1)
tis bin gharhee nahee jag jeevaa aisee pi-aas tisaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without Him, I cannot live in this world even for an instant; such is my hunger and thirst. ||1]]Pause| |
Hdefa ane fasts uramt faa Aofa weet i 1273-7, Hers, He 1)
sarvar kamal kiran aakaasee bigsai sahj subhaa-ee.
The lotus in the pool blossoms forth intuitively and naturally, with the rays of the sun in the sky.
utsH uifS sot we wt St ATS feet NQN 273-7, Hers, He 1) pareetam pareet banee abh aisee jotee jot milaa-ee. ||2]| Such is the love for my Beloved which imbues me; my light has merged into the Light.
[21 |
afza ae fas fy fyu@ 23 fasu ad famaret i 1273-8, Hare, He 1)
chaatrik jal bin pari-o pari-o tayrai bilap karai billaa-ee.
Without water, the rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! - Beloved! Beloved!" It cries and wails and laments.
WSdd wd TH fefk san fae AS fimrA & AST BI 1273-8, Hes, He 1)
ghanhar ghor dasou dis barsai bin jal pi-aas na jaa-ee. ||3]|
The thundering clouds rain down in the ten directions; its thirst is not quenched until it catches the rain-drop in its mouth. ||3]|
His foe Cur AS dt 3S Ae eu USte aH II (1273-9, Hos, He 1)
meen nivaas upjai jal hee tay sukh dukh purab kamaa-ee.
The fish lives in water, from which it was born. It finds peace and pleasure according to its past actions.
fas fae afs 5 Aa us Ae fae Hae Heo fSH Sie ISI (1273-10, Ha, He 1)
khin til reh na sakai pal jal bin maran jeevan tis taa‘-ee. ||4]|
It cannot survive without water for a moment, even for an instant. Life and death depend on it. ||4||
Ue eet fug en foeat AS ag ufs Hae USTET Il (1273-10, Hare, He 1)
Dhan vaadhee pir days nivaasee sachay gur peh sabad pathaa-ee".
The soul-bride is separated from her Husband Lord, who lives in His Own Country. He sends the Shabad, His Word, through the True Guru.
ae Hafs yg fee fost safs ast gauret ull 1273-11, vars, He 1)
gun sangrahi parabh ridai nivaasee bhagat ratee harkhaa-ee. ||5||
She gathers virtues, and enshrines God within her heart. Imbued with devotion, she is happy. ||5]|
fue fy@ ad AS o ASt aS ave YS uret 1273-11, wars, He 1)
pari-o pari-o karai sabhai hai jaytee gur bhaavai pari-o paa-ee’,
Everyone cries out, "Beloved! Beloved!" But she alone finds her Beloved, who is pleasing to the Guru.
fy@ as Ae dt vfs Hat sedt Af fhoret WEN (1273-12, Hers, He 1)
pari-o naalay sad hee sach sangay nadree mayl milaa-ee. ||6]|
Our Beloved is always with us; through the Truth, He blesses us with His Grace, and unites us in His Union. ||6]|
AS ufo He HE 3 Het whe wie afar AHTeT II 1273-13, HOS, He 1)
sabh meh jee-o jee-o hai so-ee ghat ghat rahi-aa samaa-ee.
He is the life of the soul in each and every soul; He permeates and pervades each and every heart.
aa usAte we dt ugar AOA ot AMET DI (1273-13, HES, He 1)
gur parsaad ghar hee pargaasi-aa sehjay sahj samaa-ee. ||7||
By Guru's Grace, He is revealed within the home of my heart; I am intuitively, naturally, absorbed into Him. ||7]||
MUST AH ASST MM AvSTS TAS ih (1273-14, Hare, He 1) apnaa kaaj savaarahu aapay sukh-daatay gosaa’-ee".
He Himself shall resolve all your affairs, when you meet with the Giver of peace, the Lord of the World.
aa usAte we dt fug ufenr 38 aoa sufs gSTet CNA 4273-14, Hors, He 1)
gur parsaad ghar hee pir paa-i-aa ta-o naanak tapat bujhaa-ee. ||8]||1]|
By Guru's Grace, you shall find your Husband Lord within your own home; then, O Nanak, the fire within you shall be quenched. ||8]|1]|
HOTS HIG 4% Il (1273-15)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
was ata dd aad AS fas afe A ax ard Il (1273-15, Hors, He 1) jaagat jaag rahai gur sayvaa bin har mai ko naahee. Remain awake and aware, serving the Guru; except for the Lord, no one is mine.
nifsa Ho afs dE 3 ure nig arg Ufa UTdt NA (1273-16, Has, He 1 anik jatan kar rahan na paavai aach kaach dhar paa™“hee. ||1]|
Even by making all sorts of efforts, you shall not remain here; it shall melt like glass in the fire. ||1]|
feH 35 US A ATT TIF AAT Il (1273-16, Ho, H3 1) is tan Dhan kaa kahhu garab kaisaa. Tell me - why are you so proud of your body and wealth?
faons as 3 Sd sed ICH Tafa wt Aa MAT NAN TIC Ih 1273-17, Has, He 1)
binsat baar na laagai bavray ha-umai garab khapai jag aisaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They shall vanish in an instant; O madman, this is how the world is wasting away, in egotism and pride. ||1||Pause] |
HHA YS Tees TH UTA AST Il (1273-18, vers, He 1)
jai jagdees parabhoo rakhvaaray raakhai parkhai so-ee.
Hail to the Lord of the Universe, God, our Saving Grace; He judges and saves the mortal beings.
Ast 3 3st 33 dt 3S SH Als nies © Set QM (1273-18, Hers, He 1) jaytee hai taytee tujh hee tay tum" sar avar na ko-ee. ||2]| All that is, belongs to You. No one else is equal to You. ||2||
aba Cure wats |fA atet wm agente nine il 1273-19, Here, He 1)
jee-a upaa-ay jugat vas keenee aapay gurmukh anjan.
Creating all beings and creatures, their ways and means are under Your control; You bless the Gurmukhs with the ointment of spiritual wisdom.
wd wove Aa fafs Hat ave farses SIH F YAS ISI (1273-19, Her, He 1)
amar anaath sarab sir moraa kaal bikaal bharam bhai khanjan. ||3]||
My Eternal, Unmastered Lord is over the heads of all. He is the Destroyer of death and rebirth, doubt and fear. ||3]|
Ust 9298
ade az feg na 3 aud date fogs vaoet I 1274-1, nos, He 1) kaagad kot ih jag hai bapuro rangan chihan chaturaa-ee. This wretched world is a fortress of paper, of color and form and clever tricks.
areal At ge ug ufs de woth He fre SET USN (1274-1, weFS, Hs 1)
naan"ee see boond pavan pat khovai janam marai khin taa-ee™. ||4}|
A tiny drop of water or a little puff of wind destroys its glory; in an instant, its life is ended. ||4||
Set Cues AA we Seeg Haus we we Ht Il (1274-2, Hers, He 1) nadee upkhanth jaisay ghar tarvar sarpan ghar ghar maahee. It is like a tree-house near the bank of a river, with a serpent's den in that house.
Cadet set aot wg sae” AaulS SA TA HS HTT UI (1274-3, vers, HE 1)
ultee nadee kahaa™ ghar tarvar sarpan dasai doojaa man maa‘hee. ||5]|
When the river overflows, what happens to the tree house? The snake bites, like duality in the mind. ||5]|
was ad fomre foure ag seat faftor aanfs Art I 4274-3, nore, He 1
gaarurh gur gi-aan Dhi-aan gur bachnee bikhi-aa gurmat jaaree.
Through the magic spell of the Guru's spiritual wisdom, and meditation on the Word of the Guru's Teachings, vice and corruption are burnt away.
Ho 36 Ue Se Ag utemr afte at sats feat Wéll (1274-4, Hare, He 1)
man tan hay"v bha-ay sach paa-i-aa har kee bhagat niraaree. ||6||
The mind and body are cooled and soothed and Truth is obtained, through the wondrous and unique devotional worship of the Lord. ||6]|
Ast F 33t 3g We J Ase Hho efenrer it 1274-5, ves, we 1) jaytee hai taytee tuDh jaachai too sarab jee-aa”™ da-i-aalaa. All that exists begs of You; You are merciful to all beings.
3udt Aefs ud ufs aug AS FHS Ture DI (1274-5, Hera, He 1)
tum"ree saran paray pat raakho saach milai gopaalaa. ||7||
I seek Your Sanctuary; please save my honor, O Lord of the World, and bless me with Truth. ||7]|
wat ofa nig odt AS afte ASH SHS I (1274-6, vers, He 1)
baaDhee DhanDh anDh nahee soojhai baDhik karam kamaavai.
Bound in worldly affairs and entanglements, the blind one does not understand; he acts like a murderous butcher.
Afsas fxs 3 ASfh asth Ae His femme ANTS ITI (1274-6, Hers, He 1)
satgur milai ta soojhas boojhas sach man gi-aan samaavai. ||8]||
But if he meets with the True Guru, then he comprehends and understands, and his mind is imbued with true spiritual wisdom. ||8]||
fosae ea Are fag aret H use TT wrasse il (1274-7, vers, He 1) nirgun dayh saach bin kaachee mai poochha-o gur apnaa. Without the Truth, this worthless body is false; I have consulted my Guru on this.
aoa A ys ys feure fag AS Aa AUST WEN (1274-8, Hers, HE 1)
naanak so parabh parabhoo dikhaavai bin saachay jag supnaa. ||9||2]|
O Nanak, that God has revealed God to me; without the Truth, all the world is just a dream. ||9||2||
HOS HIG 4% Il (1274-8)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
sige Hie ae dt 3 AY uefo Aida Rafe AIET UA (1274-8, Hers, He 1)
chaatrik meen jal hee tay sukh paavahi saaring sabad suhaa-ee. || 1] |
The rainbird and the fish find peace in water; the deer is pleased by the sound of the bell. ||1||
dfs sata sf Hat Het na TIS Ut 1274-9, wars, He 1 rain babeehaa boli-o mayree maa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The rainbird chirps in the night, O my mother. ||1]|Pause| |
finn fAG uifs o Bu! aag AS StS AT QM (1274-10, ers, 3 1) pari-a si-o pareet na ultai kabhoo jo tai bhaavai saa-ee. ||2|| O my Beloved, my love for You shall never end, if it is Your Will. ||2] |
ate wet ICH sfs wet AY nfs foe AHTET NSN (1274-10, Hors, He 1)
need ga-ee ha-umai tan thaakee sach mat ridai samaa-ee. ||3]|
Sleep is gone, and egotism is exhausted from my body; my heart is permeated with the Teachings of Truth. ||3]|
gat fasdt CaS gear ute on ASTet Wi 4274-11, Hors, He 1)
rookhee” birkhee’ ooda-o bhookhaa peevaa naam subhaa-ee. | |4]|
Flying among the trees and plants, I remain hungry; lovingly drinking in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied. ||4]|
BVO 3d Bas fawwst vane filma saret Mull (1274-11, Hers, He 1)
lochan taar laltaa billaatee darsan pi-aas rajaa-ee. ||5||
I stare at You, and my tongue cries out to You; I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||5]|
finn fags Htarg adt 35° 3g STU arug vif o ATT EN (1274-12, Hers, He 1)
pari-a bin seegaar karee taytaa tan taapai kaapar ang na suhaa-ee. ||6]|
Without my Beloved, the more I decorate myself, the more my body burns; these clothes do not look good on my body. ||6||
mud fumird fas fea fug ofa a AS fas fHS ote o Uret IDI (1274-13, Hers, He 1) apnay pi-aaray bin ik khin reh na sak"a-u bin milay need na paa-ee. ||7]| Without my Beloved, I cannot survive even for an instant; without meeting Him, I cannot sleep. ||7||
fug orf o 3S aust Afsate chor feast ci (1274-14, vers, He 1)
pir najeek na boojhai bapurhee satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ee. ||8] |
Her Husband Lord is nearby, but the wretched bride does not know it. The True Guru reveals Him to her. ||8]|
Rofa fifeor sa dt ay urfemr fsAar Aafe gsret wel (1274-14, ners, He 1)
sahj mili-aa tab hee sukh paa-i-aa tarisnaa sabad bujhaa-ee. ||9||
When she meets Him with intuitive ease, she finds peace; the Word of the Shabad quenches the fire of desire. ||9]|
AT Sea 33 3 HS Wiouor ahs ATS 3 WET IIONSI (1274-15, HES, He 1) kaho naanak tujh tay man maani-aa keemat kahan na jaa-ee. ||10||3]|
Says Nanak, through You, O Lord, my mind is pleased and appeased; I cannot express Your worth. ||10||3]|
HOS HIG 9 nAeUdIMT We 2 (1274-16)
malaar mehlaa 1 asatpadee-aa ghar 2 Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars yATfe It (1274-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
mast Sst AS SI ONG il 1274-17, Hers, He 1) akhlee oo“dee jal bhar naal. The earth bends under the weight of the water,
Zag Su ay uss il 1274-17, ners, H2 1) doogar oocha-o garh paataal. the lofty mountains and the caverns of the underworld.
Aad Ase Ts Aa Stats i (1274-17, uss, ue 1) Saagar seetal gur sabad veechaar. Contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the oceans become calm.
Hada Hast ICH fs NAM (1274-18, Hes, He 1) maarag muktaa ha-umai maar. ||1]| The path of liberation is found by subduing the ego. ||1]|
H ngs are at AfS Il (1274-18, Hers, He 1) mai anDhulay naavai kee jot. I am blind; I seek the Light of the Name.
on nafs ver ae a Fs SfS NA TTS Ml (1274-18, ves, He 1)
naam aDhaar chalaa gur kai bhai bhayt. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I walk on the path of mystery of the Guru's Fear. ||1]|Pause] |
usar q29u Afsad Aaet ua ATE Il 1275-1, Hers, He 1)
satgur sabdee paaDhar jaan. Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, the Path is known.
ad a saat ATS SAS | (1275-1, vars, He 1) gur kai takee-ai saachai taan. With the Guru's Support, one is blessed with the strength of the True Lord.
OH ANTS Jat IE ll 1275-1, wears, He 1) naam sam"aalas roorh"ee baan. Dwell on the Naam, and realize the Beauteous Word of His Bani.
& ge ug wan fete ii 1275-2, ves, ue 1)
thai’ bhaavai dar lahas piraan. ||2]| If it is Your Will, Lord, You lead me to find Your Door. ||2||
Qst ant Sa fee TT Il (1275-2, wars, He 1) oodaa" baisaa ayk liv taar. Flying high or sitting down, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord.
qd a Asfe SH nMOS Il (1275-2, Has, He 1) gur kai sabad naam aaDhaar. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I take the Naam as my Suppport.
a AS Sag o Sst ws i 1275-2, vers, ws 1) naa jal doongar na oochee Dhaar. There is no ocean of water, no mountain ranges rising up.
fon wf SAT ST Ha 6 WHSTS Ill (1275-3, nara, Hz 1)
nij ghar vaasaa tah mag na chaalanhaar. ||3]||
I dwell within the home of my own inner being, where there is no path and no one travelling on it. ||3]|
fag uf Ata 32 fafa wrefa sta How o AM I 1275-3, Hors, Hs 1)
jit ghar vaseh toohai biDh jaaneh beeja-o mahal na jaapai.
You alone know the way to that House in which You dwell. No one else knows the Mansion of Your Presence.
Afsaqgd FST AHS 3 det AS AG efaor | I 1275-4, Has, He 1)
satgur baajhahu samajh na hovee sabh jag dabi-aa chhaapai.
Without the True Guru, there is no understanding. The whole world is buried under its nightmare.
ade USS ad faowse fas TT SHB AT Il 1275-4, Hos, He 1)
karan palaav karai billata-o bin gur naam na jaapai.
The mortal tries all sorts of things, and weeps and wails, but without the Guru, he does not know the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
US Usa Hfs SH Ese A TT Age fey INI 1275-5, Hos, He 1)
pal pankaj meh naam chhadaa-ay jay gur sabad sinjaapai. ||4] |
In the twinkling of an eye, the Naam saves him, if he realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||
feta Hoe wit HAT TST Il (1275-6, Hers, He 1) ik moorakh anDhay mugaDh gavaar. Some are foolish, blind, stupid and ignorant.
fefa Afsas & SF OM MOE Il (1275-6, Hos, He 1) ik satgur kai bhai naam aDhaar. Some, through fear of the True Guru, take the Support of the Naam.
Aret arat Hot nfs ore il (1275-6, vers, ue 1) saachee banee meethee amrit Dhaar. The True Word of His Bani is sweet, the source of ambrosial nectar.
fafs utst fsa He ers Mull (1275-7, Hers, He 1) jin peetee tis mokh du-aar. ||5|| Whoever drinks it in, finds the Door of Salvation. ||5]|
on 8 ote foe ert a Adal Ay Feat I (1275-7, Has, He 1)
naam bhai bhaa-ay ridai vasaahee gur karnee sach banee.
One who, through the love and fear of God, enshrines the Naam within his heart, acts according to the Guru's Instructions and knows the True Bani.
fez zon uefs Hot wife wie Afs ApTet II 1275-7, Has, He 1D
ind varsai Dharat suhaavee ghat ghat jot samaanee.
When the clouds release their rain, the earth becomes beautiful; God's Light permeates each and every heart.
ae dtafa outs nit fears at strat i 1275-8, ners, v2 1)
kaalar beejas durmat aisee niguray kee neesaanee.
The evil-minded ones plant their seed in the barren soil; such is the sign of those who have no Guru.
Asad wsg we nie gfe He fag uret Well 1275-8, vars, ue 1) satgur baajhahu ghor anDhaaraa doob mu-ay bin paanee. ||6||
Without the True Guru, there is utter darkness; they drown there, even without water. [161]
A fag ats A YS TATE II (1275-9, vers, Hs 1) jo kichh keeno so parabhoo rajaa-ay. Whatever God does, is by His Own Will.
a Ufa fefimr A Azet & ATE I (1275-9, Hers, He 1) jo Dhur likhi-aa so maytnaa na jaa-ay. That which is pre-ordained cannot be erased.
JAH aa ars AHFE Il (1275-10, vars, Hz 1) hukmay baaDhaa kaar kamaa-ay. Bound to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the mortal does his deeds.
Sa Aafe ae Afs ANTE DN (1275-10, Hers, He 1) ayk sabad raachai sach samaa-ay. ||7]|| Permeated by the One Word of the Shabad, the mortal is immersed in Truth. ||7||
ag fefa gan eas us 3a" og fefA oH USS I (1275-10, Hara, He 1)
chahu dis hukam vartai parabh tayraa chahu dis naam pataala”.
Your Command, O God, rules in the four directions; Your Name pervades the four corners of the nether regions as well.
AS vfs Hae Zas US ATS aatH AHS Sores | (1275-11, wars, He 1)
sabh meh sabad vartai parabh saachaa karam milai bay-aala™.
The True Word of the Shabad is pervading amongst all. By His Grace, the Eternal One unites us with Himself.
WHE Hoe aA fafs Ss ufaur fear ars il (1275-11, wars, ws 1)
jaa‘man marnaa deesai sir oobhou khuDhi-aa nidraa kaala”.
Birth and death hang over the heads of all beings, along with hunger, sleep and dying.
Soa OH fHS His STS ATS Sela TAS NCUAUI (1275-12, Has, He 1)
naanak naam milai man bhaavai saachee nadar rasaala™. ||8]|1]|41| The Naam is pleasing to Nanak's mind; O True Lord, Source of bliss, please bless me with Your Grace. ||8]|1]||4||
HOTT HIG 4% Il (1275-13)
malaar mehlaa 1. Malaar, First Mehl:
Hae Hats afs ATSB WS Il (1275-13, Hos, He 1) maran mukat gat saar na jaanai. You do not understand the nature of death and liberation.
aS Fat Td ASfe ues Al 1275-13, Hears, He 1) kanthay baithee gur sabad pachhaanai. ||1]|| You are sitting on the river-bank; realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
3 om orfs erat wee I 1275-14, Hers, He 1) too kaisay aarh faathee jaal. You stork! - how were you caught in the net?
nid & Wefs foe mf wa TIS i 275-14, vars, Hs 1) alakh na jaacheh ridai sam"aal. ||1|| rahaa-o. You do not remember in your heart the Unseen Lord God. ||1||Pause| |
Sa Aha aX Aho urd i 1275-14, ners, we 1) ayk jee-a kai jee-aa khaahee. For your one life, you consume many lives.
me Sast gst AG HTS NM (1275-15, Has, He 1) jal tartee boodee jal maahee. ||2]| You were supposed to swim in the water, but you are drowning in it instead. ||2||
Aaa Abr ate ysurat il 1275-15, vers, Hs 1) sarab jee-a kee-ay paratpaanee. You have tormented all beings.
Aa ual Sa Tt uszot MSI (1275-15, Hers, He 1)
jab pakrhee tab hee pachhutaanee. ||3]| When Death seizes you, then you shall regret and repent. ||3]|
Aa afe em ust nifs art il 1275-16, nara, He 1)
jab gal faas parhee at bhaaree. When the heavy noose is placed around your neck,
Cis o Ara Uy UAT ISI (1275-16, Hers, He 1) ood na saakai pankh pasaaree. ||4|| you may spread your wings, but you shall not be able to fly. ||4||
off gato Houta aretta i (1275-16, Hes, 4 1) ras choogeh manmukh gaavaar. You enjoy the tastes and flavors, you foolish self-willed manmukh.
oat sefo ae femora stots ui 0275-17, wes, 48 1)
faathee chhooteh gun gi-aan beechaar. ||5]|
You are trapped. You can only be saved by virtuous conduct, spiritual wisdom and contemplation. ||5||
Afsag Afe 3S AAS I 1275-17, vas, we 1) satgur sayv tootai jamkaal. Serving the True Guru, you will shatter the Messenger of Death.
foge ATT ASE ANH Well (1275-17, Hes, He 1) hirdai saachaa sabad sam"aal. ||6]| In your heart, dwell on the True Word of the Shabad. ||6||
Tents AM Ase FAT Il (1275-18, Hare, He 1) gurmat saachee sabad hai saar. The Guru's Teachings, the True Word of the Shabad, is excellent and sublime.
dfs a any aa Cfa ofa Di 275-18, Hers, He 1) har kaa naam rakhai ur Dhaar. ||7|| Keep the Name of the Lord enshrined in your heart. ||7||
A eu urd fa sa faer it 1275-18, Has, He 1 say dukh aagai je bhog bilaasay. One who is obsessed with enjoying pleasures here, shall suffer in pain hereafter.
Soa Hats odt fo SS AS UCNQNUI (1275-19, HES, He 1) naanak mukat nahee bin naavai saachay. ||8||2||5|| O Nanak, there is no liberation without the True Name. ||8||2||5||
HOS HIG 3 mAcUuc we 4 Il (1276-1)
malaar mehlaa 3 asatpadee-aa ghar 1. Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
UST IIE qe Afsare YATE Il (1276-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aH de a Afsag urn fee aan ufemr 3 Ae Il (1276-2, Has, He 3)
karam hovai taa satgur paa-ee-ai vin karmai paa-i-aa na jaa-ay.
If it is in his karma, then he finds the True Guru; without such karma, He cannot be found.
Afsag fifon dee debt at ofe at df safe a 1276-2, nes, He 3) satgur mili-ai kanchan ho-ee-ai jaa” har kee ho-ay rajaa-ay. ||1|| He meets the True Guru, and he is transformed into gold, if it is the Lord's Will. ||1]|
Ho Ad Ufa ote at fas Ste il (1276-3, Has, He 3) man mayray har har naam chit laa-ay. O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Afsas 3 ofs ure Ave ofs fAG gd FE NA TITS Mh 1276-3, vs, He 3)
satgur tay har paa-ee-ai saachaa har si-o rahai samaa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord is found through the True Guru, and then he remains merged with the True Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
Afsas 3 fomrg Gur st fea AAT ATE I (1276-4, were, Hs 3) satgur tay gi-aan oopjai taa’ ih sansaa jaa-ay. Spiritual wisdom wells up through the True Guru, and then this cynicism is dispelled.
Afsag 3 dfs gsm aes Hat od UTE NN (1276-4, Hers, He 3)
satgur tay har bujhee-ai garabh jonee nah paa-ay. ||2||
Through the True Guru, the Lord is realized, and then, he is not consigned to the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||2||
ae usAet dies Hd fe Fle Aa SHE Il (1276-5, nes, He 3)
gur parsaadee jeevat marai mar jeevai sabad kamaa-ay.
By Guru's Grace, the mortal dies in life, and by so dying, lives to practice the Word of the Shabad.
Hafs wore Het ue fa fees wry Tete Bi 1276-5, ners, He 3) mukat du-aaraa so-ee paa-ay je vichahu aap gavaa-ay. ||3]| He alone finds the Door of Salvation, who eradicates self-conceit from within himself.
H3II ae usr fre wife HH fees Rats Tete Il (1276-6, Has, He 3)
gur parsaadee siv ghar jammai vichahu sakat gavaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, the mortal is reincarnated into the Home of the Lord, having eradicated Maya from within.
wed od fade sfo ue use uay frofé ie 1276-6, na, He 3)
achar charai bibayk buDh paa-ay purkhai purakh milaa-ay. ||4||
He eats the uneatable, and is blessed with a discriminating intellect; he meets the Supreme Person, the Primal Lord God. ||4| |
W3s It AAT ss TVS HS TASTE I (1276-7, vw, we 3)
Dhaatur baajee sansaar achayt hai chalai mool gavaa-ay.
The world is unconscious, like a passing show; the mortal departs, having lost his capital.
oo dfs ASHafs uh aot us uf! ull (1276-8, Hers, He 3)
laahaa har satsangat paa-ee-ai karmee palai paa-ay. ||5||
The profit of the Lord is obtained in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; by good karma, it is found. ||5||
Afsas fee fas o ufeor nfs sug fee stefa i 1276-8, ners, v2 3)
satgur vin kinai na paa-i-aa man vaykhhu ridai beechaar.
Without the True Guru, no one finds it; see this in your mind, and consider this in your heart.
zo Te ufenr sense Sad uta Ell (1276-9, ners, He 3)
vadbhaagee gur paa-i-aa bhavjal utray paar. ||6]|
By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Guru, and crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||6||
dfs ont ofe 2a 3 ofa af SH wi” Il (1276-9, Has, He 3)
har naamaa™ har tayk hai har har naam aDhaar.
The Name of the Lord is my Anchor and Support. I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
faut add ag Hog dfs AIG we He enIE IDI 1276-10, Has, He 3)
kirpaa karahu gur maylhu har jee-o paava-o mokh du-aar. ||7||
O Dear Lord, please be kind and lead me to meet the Guru, that I may find the Door of Salvation. ||7]|
HASte fete fofior ufs sats Heat & ATE Il 1276-10, Hers, He 3)
mastak lilaat likhi-aa Dhur thaakur maytnaa na jaa-ay.
The pre-ordained destiny inscribed on the mortal's forehead by our Lord and Master cannot be erased.
Bea A AS UsS de fre oe sar SS CUA 1276-11, ware, Hs 3) naanak say jan pooran ho-ay jin har bhaanaa bhaa-ay. ||8]|1]|
O Nanak, those humble beings are perfect, who are pleased by the Lord's Will. [8] {11 |
HOT HIG 3 Il (1276-11)
malaar mehlaa 3. Malaar, Third Mehl:
ae wet Ad Fase" 3 TE Ad seg Il (1276-12, vars, ne 3)
bayd banee jag varatdaa tarai gun karay beechaar.
The world is involved with the words of the Vedas, thinking about the three gunas - the three dispositions.
fag oS AH SS Ad Hla HOH SS ST Il (1276-12, vars, He 3)
bin naavai jam dand sahai mar janmai vaaro vaar.
Without the Name, it suffers punishment by the Messenger of Death; it comes and goes in reincarnation, over and over again.
Afsas 32 nafs df we He Enis WU 1276-12, Has, He 3) satgur bhaytay mukat ho-ay paa-ay mokh du-aar. ||1]|| Meeting with the True Guru, the world is liberated, and finds the Door of Salvation.
[21] Ho J Afsag Afe ATE Il (1276-13, Hers, He 3)
man ray satgur sayv Samaa-ay. O mortal, immerse yourself in service to the True Guru.
zs ota as us ufenr ofa afe on fire nan IHS Mt 1276-13, vers, oe 3)
vadai bhaag gur pooraa paa-i-aa har har naam Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Perfect Guru, and meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
ofa nrue ave fqrfe Curet ofa nmd Sfe maorg Il (1276-14, Hers, He 3)
har aapnai bhaanai sarisat upaa-ee har aapay day-ay aDhaar.
The Lord, by the Pleasure of His Own Will, created the Universe, and the Lord Himself gives it sustenance and support.
dfs wmue ave He faaHe aor ofa fa oar films Il (1276-15, Hers, He 3)
har aapnai bhaanai man nirmal kee-aa har si-o laagaa pi-aar.
The Lord, by His Own Will, makes the mortal's mind immaculate, and lovingly attunes him to the Lord.
dfs a ae Afsag Sfeur AS ASH ASSISTS III (1276-15, Hers, He 3)
har kai bhaanai satgur bhayti-aa sabh janam savaaranhaar. ||2]|
The Lord, by His Own Will, leads the mortal to meet the True Guru, the Embellisher of all his lives. ||2||
ag ag wet AS 3 TeHfe gS ae I 1276-16, ves, oH: 3)
vaahu vaahu banee sat hai gurmukh boojhai ko-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Word of His Bani. Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand.
ag ag afs us Aodht fn Aes neg o AE II (1276-16, Hers, He 3) vaahu vaahu kar parabh salaahee-ai tis jayvad avar na ko-ay. Waaho! Waaho! Praise God as Great! No one else is as Great as He.
nm sun Afs we aah usufs dE Sil 1276-17, ves, 12 3)
aapay bakhsay mayl la-ay karam paraapat ho-ay. ||3]| When God's Grace is received, He Himself forgives the mortal, and unites him with Himself. ||3]|
Aa Afog Hod Afsats chor feafe i 1276-17, ne, ne 3) saachaa saahib maahro satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ay. The True Guru has revealed our True, Supreme Lord and Master.
nifys FIA Ho Asda Afs ad fees ote i 1276-18, Hers, He 3)
amrit varsai man santokhee-ai sach rahai liv laa-ay.
The Ambrosial Nectar rains down and the mind is satisfied, remaining lovingly attuned to the True Lord.
dfs & afe Ae odimrent fefs Aa ot aHOTE ISI 1276-18, Hes, He 3)
har kai naa-ay sadaa haree-aavalee fir sukai naa kumlaa-ay. | |4| |
In the Lord's Name, it is forever rejuvenated; it shall never wither and dry up again. [141]
ust 9299 fag Afsas fas o utes Hf Sug & Ustorfe I 1277-1, nos, 2 3)
bin satgur kinai na paa-i-o man vaykhhu ko patee-aa-ay. Without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord; anyone can try and see.
fs fasur 3 Afsag ureha Se AafA ASE Il 1277-2, nes, He 3)
har kirpaa tay satgur paa-ee-ai bhaytai sahj subhaa-ay.
By the Lord's Grace, the True Guru is found, and then the Lord is met with intuitive ease.
HoH sath gorteur fas svar afs us & UTE Ul (1277-2, Hors, He 3)
manmukh bharam bhulaa-i-aa bin bhaagaa har Dhan na paa-ay. ||5]|
The self-willed manmukh is deluded by doubt; without good destiny, the Lord's wealth is not obtained. ||5]|
3 de AS Os 2 ufs ufs aafo Seg Il 1277-3, He, 2 3)
tarai gun sabhaa Dhaat hai parh parh karahi veechaar.
The three dispositions are completely distracting; people read and study and contemplate them.
Hats ae 3 Jeet og ufefe He BMT Il (1277-3, Hers, He 3) mukat kaday na hova-ee nahu paa-ini" mokh du-aar. Those people are never liberated; they do not find the Door of Salvation.
faa Afsad das 3 sodt ath o wa fimrg EN (277-4, Hos, He 3)
bin satgur banDhan na tuthee naam na lagai pi-aar. | |6||
Without the True Guru, they are never released from bondage; they do not embrace love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6]|
ufs ufs ufss Hat aa Set at nifsnmA i 1277-4, nes, He 3)
parh parh pandit monee thakay baydaa”™ kaa abhi-aas.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages, reading and studying the Vedas, have grown weary.
dfs on fefs o ureet og fon ute dS SH Il (1277-5, Has, He 3)
har naam chit na aavee nah nij ghar hovai vaas.
They do not even think of the Lord's Name; they do not dwell in the home of their own inner being.
anos frag 3 Css nists au] feaA IDI (1277-5, Hes, He 3)
jamkaal sirahu na utrai antar kapat vinaas. ||7||
The Messenger of Death hovers over their heads; they are ruined by the deceit within themselves. ||7||
dfs oe 6 AS & Use fee oat urfemr & ATE I (1277-6, Has, He 3) har naavai no sabh ko partaapdaa vin bhaagaa™ paa-i-aa na jaa-ay. Everyone longs for the Name of the Lord; without good destiny, it is not obtained.
sete ad ag sem ots on ZA Hfs wrfe I 1277-6, nas, He 3)
nadar karay gur bhaytee-ai har naam vasai man aa-ay.
When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal meets the True Guru, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within the mind.
area oH ot uls Gun ofe fA gat wrfS WCQ 4277-7, Hers, H8 3)
naanak naamay hee pat oopjai har si-o rahaa’ samaa-ay. ||8||2||
O Nanak, through the Name, honor wells up, and the mortal remains immersed in the Lord. ||8]|2]|
HSS HIG 2 nAcuet WJ 2 Il (1277-8)
malaar mehlaa 3 asatpadee ghar 2. Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
qe Afsars yArfe il (1277-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofs ofe feu ad ag at as BES Il (1277-9, nas, v2 3) har har kirpaa karay gur kee kaarai laa-ay. When the Lord shows His Mercy, He enjoins the mortal to work for the Guru.
eu uate of OH SATE Il (1277-9, Hos, He 3) dukh pal"ar har naam vasaa-ay. His pains are taken away, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within.
Ant afs ATS fos SE Il (1277-9, Has, He 3) saachee gat saachai chit laa-ay. True deliverance comes by focusing one's consciousness on the True Lord.
ad at aat Aafe ASS WAU 4277-10, Hews, He 3)
gur kee banee sabad sunaa-ay. ||1]|| Listen to the Shabad, and the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1]|
Ho He fe ofa Afe fears il 4277-10, Hers, He 3) man mayray har har sayv niDhaan. O my mind, serve the Lord, Har, Har, the true treasure.
ad fasur 3 ofa ag ue nafea oat Aofa fore nai Fae Il (1277-10, nas, He 3) gur kirpaa tay har Dhan paa-ee-ai an-din laagai sahj Dhi-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the wealth of the Lord is obtained. Night and day, focus your meditation on the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
fag fus anf ad Atargs il 0277-11, nes, H2 3) bin pir kaaman karay see“gaar. The soul-bride who adorns herself without her Husband Lord,
woudal adm fs df ynrs il 1277-11, Hes, He 3) duhchaarnee kahee-ai nit ho-ay khu-aar. is ill-mannered and vile, wasted away into ruin.
Hone & feg afe nirarg i (1277-12, Hers, He 3) manmukh kaa ih baad aachaar. This is the useless way of life of the self-willed manmukh.
ag dH feasts on fertta iQ (277-12, vers, Hs 3) baho karam darirhaaveh naam visaar. ||2]| Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he performs all sorts of empty rituals.
21 |
agate anfe afer Afters il (1277-13, Hers, v3 3) gurmukh kaaman bani-aa seegaar. The bride who is Gurmukh is beautifully embellished.
Rae fus whim Ca ats il 1277-13, Hers, He 3) sabday pir raakhi-aa ur Dhaar. Through the Word of the Shabad, she enshrines her Husband Lord within her heart.
Sq users ICH Hf Il (1277-13, Hes, He 3) ayk pachhaanai ha-umai maar. She realizes the One Lord, and subdues her ego.
Harvest adh ofa Sil 1277-14, ners, He 3) sobhaavantee kahee-ai naar. ||3]| That soul-bride is virtuous and noble. ||3]|
fae ag as fas & ufemr It (1277-14, nar, He 3) bin gur daatay kinai na paa-i-aa. Without the Guru, the Giver, no one finds the Lord.
Hou Sis eA Satfenr | 1277-14, vers, ue 3) manmukh lobh doojai lobhaa-i-aa. The greedy self-willed manmukh is attracted and engrossed in duality.
mA fomrat seg af i 1277-14, vers, He 3) aisay gi-aanee boojhhu ko-ay. Only a few spiritual teachers realize this,
fag ad 32 Hats 3 SPS ISI (1277-15, Hers, He 3) bin gur bhaytay mukat na ho-ay. ||4|| that without meeting the Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||4]|
afs afs age ad AS AE i (1277-15, Hors, v2 3) kahi kahi kahan kahai sabh ko-ay. Everyone tells the stories told by others.
fag Ho He safs 3 SE i 1277-15, vers, He 3) bin man moo-ay bhagat na ho-ay. Without subduing the mind, devotional worship does not come.
famits HSt AHS USA Il (1277-16, Hews, He 3) gi-aan matee kamal pargaas. When the intellect achieves spiritual wisdom, the heart-lotus blossoms forth.
faz ufe on oft fee HUI (1277-16, Hers, He 3) tit ghat naamai naam nivaas. ||5|| The Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in that heart. ||5| |
ICH sats ad AS AE I (1277-16, Has, He 3) ha-umai bhagat karay sabh ko-ay. In egotism, everyone can pretend to worship God with devotion.
Oo HO Stat St AY SE I (1277-17, HES, He 3) naa man bheejai naa sukh ho-ay. But this does not soften the mind, and it does not bring peace.
ats afd ATE wim ATSTES | (1277-17, Hors, He 3) kahi kahi kahan aap jaanaa-ay. By speaking and preaching, the mortal only shows off his self-conceit.
fasdt safs AS ASH ASS WEN (1277-17, Hers, He 3) birthee bhagat sabh janam gavaa-ay. ||6|| His devotional worship is useless, and his life is a total waste. ||6]|
A 303 Afsad Hf SES Il (1277-18, Hears, He 3)
say bhagat satgur man bhaa-ay.
They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to the Mind of the True Guru. mates OTH Id fest BE il (1277-18, Hears, He 3)
an-din naam rahay liv laa-ay. Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Name.
He dt oy suf dyfe il 1277-18, ners, 12 3) sad hee naam vaykheh hajoor. They behold the Naam, the Name of the Lord, ever-present, near at hand.
Yat 9Q9e
Gs & Hate sfoor saute WO 1278-1, Hers, He 3)
gur kai sabad rahi-aa bharpoor. ||7]||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is pervading and permeating everywhere. HII
mma aan efe fimirg i (1278-1, ners, He 3) aapay bakhsay day-ay pi-aar. God Himself forgives, and bestows His Love.
ICH da ea" AAS I (1278-1, Has, He 3) ha-umai rog vadaa sansaar. The world is suffering from the terrible disease of egotism.
ad fasur 3 So da ATE I 1278-2, nas, He 3) gur kirpaa tay ayhu rog jaa-ay. By Guru's Grace, this disease is cured.
Soa ATS As AMS NCHAUISNUNTCH (1278-2, HeTS, He 3)
naanak saachay saach samaa-ay. ||8]||1]|3]|5]|8]| O Nanak, through the Truth, the mortal remains immersed in the True Lord. H8][1] 13115118]
TI HST SS HIS U Il (1278-3)
raag malaar chhant mehlaa 5. Raag Malaar, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yArfe il (1278-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
UfsH YH sats x BS i (1278-4, were, ws 5) pareetam paraym bhagat kay daatay. My Beloved Lord is the Giver of loving devotional worship.
MUS AS Aft IS Il (1278-4, wera, ue 5) apnay jan sang raatay. His humble servants are imbued with His Love.
Wo Afar aS feon ws fea fad Hog 3 SIA II (1278-4, Has, He 5)
jan sang raatay dinas raatay ik nimakh manhu na veesrai.
He is imbued with His servants, day and night; He does not forget them from His Mind, even for an instant.
aus ae fafa net Hat AGS TE Aart Il (1278-5, ves, He 5)
gopaal gun niDh sadaa sangay sarab gun jagdeesrai.
He is the Lord of the World, the Treasure of virtue; He is always with me. All glorious virtues belong to the Lord of the Universe.
HO Hfs Slat vas Hal BH SA AS HS II (1278-5, Has, He 5)
man mohi leenaa charan sangay naam ras jan maatay.
With His Feet, He has fascinated my mind; as His humble servant, I am intoxicated with love for His Name.
area UISH furs Fed fears afe HO ATS IA 1278-6, Hers, He 5) naanak pareetam kirpaal sadahoo™ kinai kot maDhay jaatay. ||1]| O Nanak, my Beloved is forever Merciful; out of millions, hardly anyone realizes Him.
[2
UISH Sct afs via wRus Il (1278-6, wera, 3 5) pareetam tayree gat agam apaaray. O Beloved, Your state is inaccessible and infinite.
Ha" ufS3 SH 3d Il (1278-7, ners, He 5) mahaa patit tum" taaray. You save even the worst sinners.
ufs3 urea sats zee feu fitg Amir i (1278-7, Hes, He 5)
patit paavan bhagat vachhal kirpaa sinDh su-aamee-aa.
He is the Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His devotees, the Ocean of mercy, our Lord and Master.
H3Ad 3H fora FE Ae Hissar Il 4278-7, nes, He 5)
satsangay bhaj nisangay ra‘-o sadaa antarjaamee-aa.
In the Society of the Saints, vibrate and meditate on Him with commitment forever; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
afe Hon gus Hot 3 oH fres 3S Il (1278-8, Hors, He 5)
kot janam bharmant jonee tay naam simrat taaray.
Those who wander in reincarnation through millions of births, are saved and carried across, by meditating in remembrance on the Naam.
Sa TIA fumraA aie AE urfu SI ANTS IQ (1278-8, Har, He 5) naanak daras pi-aas har jee-o aap layho sam"aaray. ||2]|
Nanak is thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Dear Lord; please take care of him. ||2]|
Ts FIG AHS HS BS Il (1278-9, Hare, He 5) har charan kamal man leenaa. My mind is absorbed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
YS AS AS Sd Hae Il (1278-9, wars, ue 5) parabh jal jan tayray meenaa. O God, You are the water; Your humble servants are fish.
me His ys Me Sa sd fsa ws B ASM Il (1278-9, vers, He 5)
jal meen parabh jee-o ayk toohai bhinn aan na jaanee-ai.
O Dear God, You alone are the water and the fish. I know that there is no difference between the two.
dfs sa Beg BH Veg 3B yA rsh i (1278-10, ners, Hs 5)
geh bhujaa layvhu naam dayvhu ta-o parsaadee maanee-ai.
Please take hold of my arm and bless me with Your Name. I am honored only by Your Grace.
SH AUHa Sa dal furs diffe ctor il (1278-10, ners, ne 5)
bhaj saaDhsangay ayk rangay kirpaal gobid deenaa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, vibrate and meditate with love on the One Lord of the Universe, who is Merciful to the meek.
mare ote Adete aoa afd Hfent muar ator ISI (1278-11, Hers, He 5)
anaath neech sarnaa-ay naanak kar ma-i-aa apunaa keenaa. ||3]|| Nanak, the lowly and helpless, seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, who in His Kindness has made him His Own. |[3]|
mMTUA aS ning fesfenr | 1278-12, Hare, He 5) aapas ka-o aap milaa-i-aa. He unites us with Himself.
3H SAS ofa ahem Il 4278-12, Hers, He 5) bharam bhanjan har raa-i-aa. Our Sovereign Lord King is the Destroyer of fear.
ndda AMM wisermt fee ae fofa firrfenr i 278-12, Hers, Hz 5)
aacharaj su-aamee antarjaamee milay gun niDh pi-aari-aa.
My Wondrous Lord and Master is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. My Beloved, the Treasure of virtue, has met me.
Ho Hae AY Cur adfie ae fos Afar i (1278-13, wars, 3 5)
mahaa mangal sookh upjay gobind gun nit saari-aa.
Supreme happiness and peace well up, as I cherish the Glorious Virtues of the Lord of the Universe.
fife Fifa AS Sf Ho uate fesfimr urfemr Ih 1278-13, Hes, He 5)
mil sang sohay daykh mohay purab likhi-aa paa-i-aa.
Meeting with Him, I am embellished and exalted; gazing on Him, I am fascinated, and I realize my pre-ordained destiny.
faadis aoa Hate fo at frat ofe afs fomrfenr eal (1278-14, Hers, He 5)
binvant naanak saran tin kee jin"ee har har Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4||1]| Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. [4] 121]
ZT HOS at HIG I TS AGA Sa He at Uf Il 1278-15, ners, He 5)
vaar malaar kee mehlaa 1 raanay kailaas tathaa maalday kee Dhun. Vaar Of Malaar, First Mehl, Sung To The Tune Of Rana Kailaash And Malda:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1278-15)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HOA HIS 3 Il (1278-16)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ats fife He sora fag Zo ues Aterg Il (1278-16, Hers, He 3) gur mili-ai man rehsee-ai ji-o vuthai Dharan seegaar. Meeting with the Guru, the mind is delighted, like the earth embellished by the rain.
AS fen Idrest Ad 3d AST SH Il (1278-16, Has, He 3) sabh disai haree-aavalee sar bharay subhar taal. Everything becomes green and lush; the pools and ponds are filled to overflowing.
Wied Je Ae da fAS HATS BS Il 1278-17, nas, He 3) andar rachai sach rang ji-o manjeethai laal. The inner self is imbued with the deep crimson color of love for the True Lord.
aus fear Av Hfe ad a Hate feos Il (1278-17, Hes, He 3)
kamal vigsai sach man gur kai sabad nihaal.
The heart-lotus blossoms forth and the mind becomes true; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is ecstatic and exalted.
Yat A2oK
HOH Bit sae T Sug sete feats it (1279-1, wars, vs 3) manmukh doojee taraf hai vaykhhu nadar nihaal. The self-willed manmukh is on the wrong side. You can see this with your own eyes.
adt aa fren fa fafe SA AHaTS Il (1279-1, nas, He 3) faahee faathay mirag ji-o sir deesai jamkaal. He is caught in the trap like the deer; the Messenger of Death hovers over his head.
ufour fare fear sct ant atu fees Il (1279-2, ners, He 3) khuDhi-aa tarisnaa nindaa buree kaam kroDh vikraal. Hunger, thirst and slander are evil; sexual desire and anger are horrible.
Sat wat aefs o oreet frag Hate o ad Ses Il (1279-2, ners, He 3) aynee akhee nadar na aavee jichar sabad na karay beechaar. These cannot be seen with your eyes, until you contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
30 se Asda Ya nis AAG I (1279-3, vars, ws 3) tuDh bhaavai santokhee-aa™ chookai aal janjaal. Whoever is pleasing to You is content; all his entanglements are gone.
HO 3d Tg Afemt qs ust sfs i 1279-3, vers, us 3) mool rahai gur sayvi-ai gur pa-orhee bohith. Serving the Guru, his capital is preserved. The Guru is the ladder and the boat.
To Bt FFB F AT Hs AG WAU (1279-3, wars, us 3)
naanak lagee tat lai too’ sachaa man sach. ||1]|
O Nanak, whoever is attached to the Lord receives the essence; O True Lord, You are found when the mind is true. ||1]|
HIS 4% Il (1279-4)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Ja Ug Jaq UT TT ust fon FS Il (1279-4, Has, He 1) hayko paaDhar hayk dar gur pa-orhee nij thaan. There is one path and one door. The Guru is the ladder to reach one's own place.
ISS sag soo Als AY ASS SH MQM (1279-4, Has, He 1) roorha-o thaakur naankaa sabh sukh saacha-o naam. ||2]|
Our Lord and Master is so beautiful, O Nanak; all comfort and peace are in the Name of the True Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (1279-5) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nmite wiry Af wiry UeTfsmt Il (1279-5, Hers, He 1)
aapeen"ai aap saaj aap pachhaani-aa.
He Himself created Himself; He Himself understands Himself. wag Usts feefs deur sfsur | 1279-5, Has, He 1)
ambar Dharat vichhorh chando-aa taani-aa. Separating the sky and the earth, He has spread out His canopy.
fee aH" aae dots wae otAfenr | (1279-6, Hers, He 1) vin tham"aa gagan rahaa-ay sabad neesaani-aa. Without any pillars, He supports the sky, through the insignia of His Shabad.
Hag ve Cure af AHEM Il 1279-6, wars, 3 1) sooraj chand upaa-ay jot samaani-aa. Creating the sun and the moon, He infused His Light into them.
ate afs feas oa festfenr il (1279-7, nes, x2 1) kee-ay raat dinant choj vidaani-aa. He created the night and the day; Wondrous are His miraculous plays.
sige UeH eters Bee UTEfEnt Il (1279-7, Hers, He 1)
tirath Dharam veechaar naavan purbaani-aa.
He created the sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where people contemplate righteousness and Dharma, and take cleansing baths on special occasions.
30 Afs nied 3 afe fo orfy eerfemr II 1279-8, Hers, He 1) tuDh sar avar na ko-ay ke aakh vakhaani-aa. There is no other equal to You; how can we speak and describe You?
Ae sufs foe da wires atfenr Ail 1279-8, Hes, He 1) sachai takhat nivaas hor aavan jaani-aa. ||1|| You are seated on the throne of Truth; all others come and go in reincarnation. ||1]|
Had H2 Y Il (1279-9)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Sod Arete A ZA UT Gara AE Il 1279-9, nas, 2 1) naanak saavan jay vasai chahu omaahaa ho-ay. O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four are delighted:
ovat fsa Hebat sro ufs ag SE WAU (1279-9, Hare, He 1) naagaa™ mirgaa’ machhee-aa™ rasee-aa™ ghar Dhan ho-ay. ||1]| the snake, the deer, the fish and the wealthy people who seek pleasure. ||1]|
He &% Il (1279-10)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Sod Aefs A ZA UT Seat TE Il (1279-10, Haw, H 1) naanak saavan jay vasai chahu vaychhorhaa ho-ay. O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four suffer the pains of separation:
aret ust faaaar vet weg SPE QIN (1279-10, Hors, He 1) gaa-ee putaa nirDhanaa panthee chaakar ho-ay. ||2| | the cow's calves, the poor, the travellers and the servants. ||2]|
ugat Il (1279-11) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 Ae Afeorg fats AY eosteur Il (1279-11, Hers, He 1) too sachaa sachiaar jin sach vartaa-i-aa. You are True, O True Lord; You dispense True Justice.
aor sat fe cee surfemr th (1279-11, nes, v2 1) baithaa taarhee laa-ay kaval chhapaa-i-aa. Like a lotus, You sit in the primal celestial trance; You are hidden from view.
gon ea aote nig o urfemr I 1279-11, Hare, He 1) barahmai vadaa kahaa-ay ant na paa-i-aa. Brahma is called great, but even he does not know Your limits.
o fsR ay 6 ute fate 3 feu It 1279-12, vers, He 1) naa tis baap na maa-ay kin too jaa-i-aa. You have no father or mother; who gave birth to You?
o fH gu 6 Te do Aafenr | (1279-12, wars, He 1)
naa tis roop na raykh varan sabaa-i-aa. You have no form or feature; You transcend all social classes.
o f3A gu fumrn gat Ofer Ih (1279-13, ners, He 1) naa tis bhukh pi-aas rajaa Dhaa-i-aa. You have no hunger or thirst; You are satisfied and satiated.
ad ufo wry Af AEE sestfEMr | (1279-13, Hors, He 1) gur meh aap samo-ay sabad vartaa-i-aa.
You have merged Yourself into the Guru; You are pervading through the Word of Your Shabad.
Ae ot user vfs Aarfenr 211 4279-13, Hers, He 1)
sachay hee patee-aa-ay sach samaa-i-aa. ||2]| When he is pleasing to the True Lord, the mortal merges in Truth. ||2]|
Ha H3 Y Il (1279-14)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
2e sofenr seat uafs Pes sig i (1279-14, ners, 2 1) vaid bulaa-i-aa vaidgee pakarh dhandholay baa™h. The physician was called in; he touched my arm and felt my pulse.
Su Se & Weel aga ASH Hf AU (1279-14, Hes, He 1) bholaa vaid na jaan-ee karak kalayjay maahi. ||1]| The foolish physician did not know that the pain was in the mind. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (1279-15) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
2u Se Hee J ulset Sq USS Il (1279-15, vars, we 2) vaidaa vaid suvaid too pahilaa’ rog pachhaan. O physician, you are a competent physician, if you first diagnose the disease.
mT ag Gis wy firs FS Far wrfe it (1279-15, wars, ws 2) aisaa daaroo lorh lahu jit vanjai rogaa ghaan. Prescribe such a remedy, by which all sorts of illnesses may be cured.
fag wg da Cfonifa sis AY ZA rte Il (1279-16, wars, 8 2)
jit daaroo rog uthi-ah tan sukh vasai aa-ay.
Administer that medicine, which will cure the disease, and allow peace to come and dwell in the body.
da aetets wmuat 3 aoa SE ASTE QM (1279-16, ness, Hs 2)
rog gavaa-ihi aapnaa ta naanak vaid sadaa-ay. ||2]|
Only when you are rid of your own disease, O Nanak, will you be known as a physician. ||2||
u@at Il (1279-17)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
gon fang HUA Se Gurfemr | (1279-17, wars, ue 2)
barahmaa bisan mahays dayv upaa-i-aa. Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva and the deities were created.
gon fes ae uA afer il (1279-17, Hers, He 2) barahmay ditay bayd poojaa laa-i-aa. Brahma was given the Vedas, and enjoined to worship God.
GA Mesa TH THA wife || 1279-18, Hers, v8 2) das avtaaree raam raajaa aa-i-aa. The ten incarnations, and Rama the king, came into being.
eat Hs Of gath Aafemr Il (1279-18, Hers, He 2) daitaa maaray Dhaa-ay hukam sabaa-i-aa. According to His Will, they quickly killed all the demons.
on Hon Az fsat viz o urfemr I (1279-18, Hers, Hs 2) ees mahaysur sayv tin"ee ant na paa-i-aa. Shiva serves Him, but cannot find His limits.
Felt atHfs ute sus gatfenr | 1279-19, vars, v8 2) sachee keemat paa-ay takhat rachaa-i-aa. He established His throne on the principles of Truth.
zoho do ofe wimg eurfemr | (1279-19, Has, He 2) dunee-aa DhanDhai laa-ay aap chhapaa-i-aa. He enjoined all the world to its tasks, while He keeps Himself hidden from view.
UST AQco
UdH ATE AGH UsT SIN EM ISI 1280-1, Hare, vs 2) Dharam karaa-ay karam Dharahu furmaa-i-aa. ||3]| The Primal Lord has ordained that mortals must practice righteousness. ||3]||
HBA H8 2 Il (1280-1)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
Wee otfenr 3 wet aS fefs adT i (1280-1, Has, He 2) Saavan aa-i-aa hay sakhee kantai chit karayhu. The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; think of your Husband Lord.
aed Ste Hots coaret fe vredt Sar ST WAU (1280-2, wars, we 2)
naanak jhoor mareh duhaaganee jin" avree laagaa nayhu. ||1||
O Nanak, the discarded bride is in love with another; now she weeps and wails, and dies. ||1]|
H8 2 Il (280-2) mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Wee otfent J Adt ABT FdAST'S Il (1280-2, Hare, He 2)
Saavan aa-i-aa hay sakhee jalhar barsanhaar.
The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; the clouds have burst forth with rain.
sod Afa Hee Aoeret fre Aa onfe fimrg i211 (1280-3, Hers, Hs 2)
naanak sukh savan sohaaganee jin” sah naal pi-aar. ||2||
O Nanak, the blessed soul-brides sleep in peace; they are in love with their Husband Lord. ||2]|
UugST Il (1280-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm} fés use Horarst ofan Il (1280-3, Hare, He 2) aapay chhinjh pavaa-ay malaakhaarhaa rachi-aa. He Himself has staged the tournament, and arranged the arena for the wrestlers.
we sag ute aanfa fer i (1280-4, Hers, He 2) lathay bharhthoo paa-ay gurmukh machi-aa. They have entered the arena with pomp and ceremony; the Gurmukhs are joyful.
HOHY Hd Usts Hoe afenit Il (1280-4, Hes, He 2) manmukh maaray pachhaarh moorakh kachi-aa. The false and foolish self-willed manmukhs are defeated and overcome.
wify fas He vrfy wef arse afer i (1280-4, ners, He 2) aap bhirhai maaray aap aap kaaraj rachi-aa. The Lord Himself wrestles, and He Himself defeats them. He Himself staged this play.
HSo' UAH Sa FT TaHfe WSbA Il (1280-5, Has, He 2) sabhnaa khasam ayk hai gurmukh jaanee-ai. The One God is the Lord and Master of all; this is known by the Gurmukhs.
gant fee fafa Su fee aeH HASTE II (1280-5, Ha, He 2) hukmee likhai sir laykh vin kalam masvaanee-ai. He writes the inscription of His Hukam on the foreheads of all, without pen or ink.
AsHafs Hoy fae af Te Wet Sus Il (1280-6, ns, 2 2)
satsangat maylaap jithai har gun sadaa vakhaanee-ai.
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, Union with Him is obtained; there, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are chanted forever.
Sod AU Hae Hots AY USEPA Ill (1280-6, Hare, He 2) naanak sachaa sabad salaahi sach pachhaanee-ai. ||4|| O Nanak, praising the True Word of His Shabad, one comes to realize the Truth. ||4]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1280-7)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Cafe Safe urfeur nrefs as er Fa Il (1280-7, wars, we 3) oo‘nav ooNnav aa-i-aa avar karay“daa vann. Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds are changing color.
for wrat faq ATS fAG As IAT Sa Il (1280-7, nes, v2 3) ki-aa jaanaa tis saah si-o kayv rahsee rang. How do I know whether my love for my Husband Lord shall endure?
Ja sfour faq ant fre ufs s@ ar SE II (1280-8, ners, He 3)
rang rahi-aa tin" kaamnee jin" man bha-o bhaa-o ho-ay.
The love of those soul-brides endures, if their minds are filled with the Love and the Fear of God.
Soa ¥ ate aad fsa fs AY d AE NAM (1280-8, Hers, He 3) naanak bhai bhaa-ay baahree tin tan sukh na ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, she who has no Love and Fear of God - her body shall never find peace.
[21
Hs 3 Il (280-9) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Cafe Gofe orfeur ean tg fara it (280-9, wars, Hs 3) oo%nav ooNnav aa-i-aa varsai neer nipang. Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and pure water rains down.
eae ey oar fsq anat fag aS fA Hf Sa NM (1280-10, ers, He 3)
naanak dukh laagaa tin" kaamnee jin" kantai si-o man bhang. ||2]|
O Nanak, that soul-bride suffers in pain, whose mind is torn away from her Husband Lord. ||2||
UST Il (1280-10)
pa-orhee.
Pauree:
de sae" Cure fea zofsur Il (1280-10, Has, He 3)
dovai tarfaa upaa-ay ik varti-aa. The One Lord created both sides and pervades the expanse.
az aret zoste niefs ee wfsmr i 280-11, Hers, He 3)
bayd banee vartaa-ay andar vaad ghati-aa. The words of the Vedas became pervasive, with arguments and divisions.
udfzafs foafeafs gar ee fefs aan fed Safar i 280-11, ners, He 3)
parvirat nirvirat haathaa dovai vich Dharam firai raibaari-aa.
Attachment and detachment are the two sides of it; Dharma, true religion, is the guide between the two.
HoHY oe afaurg fsat fossS esas Thaw Il (1280-12, Has, He 3)
manmukh kachay koorhi-aar tin"ee nihcha-o dargeh haari-aa.
The self-willed manmukhs are worthless and false. Without a doubt, they lose in the Court of the Lord.
Vast Aafe AST oH ay fAat fame | (1280-12, wars, Hs 3)
gurmatee sabad soor hai kaam kroDh jin"ee maari-aa.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are the true spiritual warriors; they have conquered sexual desire and anger.
Ae niefa Hofs Aafe Aetfanr i (1280-13, Hers, He 3)
sachai andar mahal sabad savaari-aa.
They enter into the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, embellished and exalted by the Word of the Shabad.
A saz 30 Stee Ae ofe fimrfanr i (1280-13, Hers, 2 3) say bhagat tuDh bhaavday sachai naa-ay pi-aari-aa. Those devotees are pleasing to Your Will, O Lord; they dearly love the True Name.
Afsag Aefe wruar faqr feeg JG Sfanr ull «280-14, ware, He 3) satgur sayvan aapnaa tin"aa vitahu ha-o vaari-aa. ||5]| I am a Sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru. ||5||
HBa Hs 3 Il (1280-14)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Cafe Gofe orfeur zaA ate sat Il (1280-14, wars, 3 3)
ooNnav ooNnav aa-i-aa varsai laa-ay jharhee.
Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and water rains down in torrents.
Sod SS VS AT A A HES Het Tat MAUI (1280-15, naw, ve 3) naanak bhaanai chalai kant kai so maanay sadaa ralee. ||1]|| O Nanak, she walks in harmony with the Will of her Husband Lord; she enjoys peace
and pleasure forever. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1280-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
foor Cfo Cfo Sug sus fen mut ofa fae ofs it (1280-15, nas, He 3)
ki-aa uth uth daykhhu bapurhay” is mayghai hath kichh naahi.
Why are you standing up, standing up to look? You poor wretch, this cloud has nothing in its hands.
fafe So Hy ustfenr fsAH Tag HS HiT Il (1280-16, Has, He 3) jin ayhu maygh pathaa-i-aa tis raakho man maa‘hi. The One who sent this cloud - cherish Him in your mind.
fSH 3 fe eAfert wT as sets adfe i (1280-17, Has, H 3)
tis no man vasaa-isee jaa ka-o nadar karay-i.
He alone enshrines the Lord in his mind, upon whom the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace.
Soa Sed ad AS Ade UST ASE NII (1280-17, nwa, ve 3)
naanak nadree baahree sabh karan palaah karay-i. ||2|| O Nanak, all those who lack this Grace, cry and weep and wail. ||2||
UST Il (1280-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
A dfs net Aden fA ATS o Bat SP Il (1280-18, Hers, He 3) so har sadaa sarayvee-ai jis karat na laagai vaar. Serve the Lord forever; He acts in no time at all.
mate nian ate fae ufo ats GATTETS Il (1280-18, Hare, He 3) aadaanay aakaas kar khin meh dhaahi usaaranhaar. He stretched the sky across the heavens; in an instant, He creates and destroys.
nm Aas Gufs a aeafs ad <terg II (1280-19, nas, He 3) aapay jagat upaa-ay kai kudrat karay veechaar. He Himself created the world; He contemplates His Creative Omnipotence.
HOH Mil Sa Hah TISt TS HTT I (1280-19, news, ve 3)
manmukh agai laykhaa mangee-ai bahutee hovai maar.
The self-willed manmukh will be called to account hereafter; he will be severely punished.
UST ACA
aenfy ufs fae Sar foas sun frefS F3rg Il (1281-1, 4a, 2 3)
gurmukh pat si-o laykhaa nibrhai bakhsay sifat bhandaar.
The Gurmukh's account is settled with honor; the Lord blesses him with the treasure of His Praise.
Ga Je 5 nus Ta S HEM YSTS Il (1281-1, wars, ws 3) othai hath na aprhai kook na sunee-ai pukaar. No one's hands can reach there; no one will hear anyone's cries.
6a Afsag sat de afe we nist Se Il (1281-2, nas, He 3) othai satgur baylee hovai kadh la-ay antee vaar. The True Guru will be your best friend there; at the very last instant, He will save you.
Sor Hat} dd Ae dt Afsag fafs agsrS Ell (1281-2, nas, ne 3) aynaa jantaa no hor sayvaa nahee satgur sir kartaar. ||6||
These beings should serve no other than the True Guru or the Creator Lord above the heads of all. ||6]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1281-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Was fA Ss J yas fA Ss BI AS ale il (1281-3, ners, we 3) baabeehaa jis no too pookaardaa tis no lochai sabh ko-ay. O rainbird, the One unto whom you call - everyone longs for that Lord.
nuat fasu afs & ZAAt ze fee ofaor SE II (1281-3, Hers, He 3)
apnee kirpaa kar kai vassee van tarin hari-aa ho-ay.
When He grants His Grace, it rains, and the forests and fields blossom forth in their greenery.
Ts usAret ure fear gs ofS il (1281-4, vers, He 3) gur parsaadee paa-ee-ai virlaa boojhai ko-ay. By Guru's Grace, He is found; only a rare few understand this.
adfemt Bofenr fas famreot wet wet AY SPE I (281-4, Has, He 3)
bahdi-aa uth-di-aa nit Dhi-aa-ee-ai sadaa sadaa sukh ho-ay.
Sitting down and standing up, meditate continually on Him, and be at peace forever and ever.
oe vifys Ae dt zane" Tanfe ee ofa APE NAM 1281-5, Her, He 3) naanak amrit sad hee varasdaa gurmukh dayvai har so-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar rains down forever; the Lord gives it to the Gurmukh.
[21
Hs 3 Il (281-5) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
conte det Heat naeth ad fee ote i (281-6, Has, He 3)
kalmal ho-ee maydnee ardaas karay liv laa-ay.
When the people of the world are suffering in pain, they call upon the Lord in loving prayer.
Ae Afeor ao & thea 22 Ate ASE Il c1281-6, ners, He 3) sachai suni-aa kann day Dheerak dayvai sahj subhaa-ay. The True Lord naturally listens and hears and gives comfort.
fet 6 sarfeur gor soag Otel (1281-7, Hers, He 3) indrai no furmaa-i-aa vuthaa chhahbar laa-ay. He commands the god of rain, and the rain pours down in torrents.
mio Us Cun ag wat atHfs age o AME II (1281-7, Has, He 3)
an Dhan upjai baho ghanaa keemat kahan na jaa-ay.
Corn and wealth are produced in great abundance and prosperity; their value cannot be estimated.
aod oH Hots 5 Asa Ahr Ser fora Hate Il (1281-7, wars, ue 3)
naanak naam salaahi too sabhnaa jee-aa daydaa rijak sambaahi.
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings.
fag wa AY Gun fete gy o wat mre NN (281-8, Hers, He 3) jit khaaDhai sukh oopjai fir dookh na laagai aa-ay. ||2|| Eating this, peace is produced, and the mortal never again suffers in pain. ||2||
ust Il (1281-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofs MG Aa AY 3 Ae Sfa frost c28i-9, vars, we 3)
har jee-o sachaa sach too sachay laihi milaa-ay.
O Dear Lord, You are the Truest of the True. You blend those who are truthful into Your Own Being.
en wit sae FT ats fHs o fife ATE I (281-9, vrs, He 3)
doojai doojee taraf hai koorh milai na mili-aa jaa-ay.
Those caught in duality are on the side of duality; entrenched in falsehood, they cannot merge into the Lord.
nm afs feefant wm aeafs ef feerfé i (281-10, nas, He 3)
aapay jorh vichhorhi-ai aapay kudrat day-ay dikhaa-ay.
You Yourself unite, and You Yourself separate; You display Your Creative Omnipotence.
Ha Ag feria 3 uote fester corte it (281-10, vers, we 3)
moh sog vijog hai poorab likhi-aa kamaa-ay.
Attachment brings the sorrow of separation; the mortal acts in accordance with pre- ordained destiny.
IG sfeodt fsa aG Ft ofe veet ad fees OTE II (1281-11, Has, He 3) ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o jo har charnee rahai liv laa-ay. I am a Sacrifice to those who remain lovingly attached to the Lord's Feet.
fa ne ufo ane mfsus od mMAt ges Tete i (1281-11, ners, He 3) ji-o jal meh kamal alipat hai aisee banat banaa-ay. They are like the lotus which remains detached, floating upon the water.
A Ade Ae Ave fae fees wry Tete it (1281-12, ners, He 3) say sukhee-ay sadaa sohnay jin” vichahu aap gavaa-ay. They are peaceful and beautiful forever; they eradicate self-conceit from within.
fsq Aa feria ae odt AF ofe & wife AAEM (1281-12, Hers, He 3)
tin" sog vijog kaday nahee jo har kai ank samaa-ay. ||7]|
They never suffer sorrow or separation; they are merged in the Being of the Lord. HI7II
HBa H8 3 Il (1281-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Soa A Ard faa fa AS foe TE i (1281-13, nes, H2 3) naanak so salaahee-ai jis vas sabh kichh ho-ay. O Nanak, praise the Lord; everything is in His power.
fsA Adfeg uretd fSn fas weg & af II (1281-13, Hers, He 3) tisai sarayvihu paraaneeho tis bin avar na ko-ay. Serve Him, O mortal beings; there is none other than Him.
aonfy ofs us ufs eA St Ret AT AY SE II (1281-14, Hers, He 3)
gurmukh har parabh man vasai taa™ sadaa sadaa sukh ho-ay.
The Lord God abides within the mind of the Gurmukh, and then he is at peace, forever and ever.
Hom fe 3 deet AS fest feag ATE Il (1281-15, vers, He 3) sahsaa mool na hova-ee sabh chintaa vichahu jaa-ay. He is never cynical; all anxiety has been taken out from within him.
A fag of A Aon of age fas o ATE II (1281-15, Hers, He 3) jo kichh ho-ay so sehjay ho-ay kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. Whatever happens, happens naturally; no one has any say about it.
Re Afog ufs eA st fe fefeor em ute i ci281-16, ners, He 3) sachaa saahib man vasai taa‘ man chindi-aa fal paa-ay. When the True Lord abides in the mind, then the mind's desires are fulfilled.
Sod fae at orfamr rfl Ae fa oferta US ute ail (1281-16, Hers, He 3) naanak tin kaa aakhi-aa aap sunay je la-i-an pannai paa-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, He Himself hears the words of those, whose accounts are in His Hands.
[21
He 3 Il (1281-17)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
nifys Ae PAE Isls TFET Il (1281-17, Hors, He 3) amrit sadaa varasdaa boojhan boojhanhaar. The Ambrosial Nectar rains down continually; realize this through realization.
aanfy fast afsor ofa nifgs afm @fa ofa i 281-17, Hers, ue 3)
gurmukh jin"ee bujhi-aa har amrit rakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
Those who, as Gurmukh, realize this, keep the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar enshrined within their hearts.
ofa nifys utefa wet cfr aS TBH fRAar arfa | (i2si-18, vers, He 3)
har amrit peeveh sadaa rang raatay ha-umai tarisnaa maar.
They drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, and remain forever imbued with the Lord; they conquer egotism and thirsty desires.
nif ofa at on 3 an fara ofe it (i2si-18, were, Hs 3)
amrit har kaa naam hai varsai kirpaa Dhaar.
The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; the Lord showers His Grace, and it rains down.
Sa THY oedt otfenr ae wSH TH Hats NM (1281-19, Has, He 3) naanak gurmukh nadree aa-i-aa har aatam raam muraar. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh comes to behold the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||2||
UST At2 ugat Il (1282-1)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
nize fa sont fee 38 urfemr o ate I (1282-1, Has, He 3)
atul ki-o tolee-ai vin tolay paa-i-aa na jaa-ay.
How can the unweighable be weighed? Without weighing Him, He cannot be obtained. ad a Rafe aterdt ge nfs gd ANTE I (1282-1, Has, He 3)
gur kai sabad veechaaree-ai gun meh rahai samaa-ay.
Reflect on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and immerse yourself in His Glorious Virtues.
murat ning nofy Sort om FHS fete i (1282-2, wars, He 3) apnaa aap aap tolsee aapay milai milaa-ay.
He Himself weighs Himself; He unites in Union with Himself. fA ot aS a ue ae fos ATE I (1282-2, v8, He 3)
tis kee kKeemat naa pavai kahnaa kichhoo na jaa-ay. His value cannot be estimated; nothing can be said about this.
JG aeodt as urue fats wet gs fest sete i (1282-3, Hers, ve 3) ha-o balihaaree gur aapnay jin sachee boojh ditee bujhaa-ay. I am a Sacrifice to my Guru; He has made me realize this true realization.
Was HA nifys Beha Hou gs B UTS Il (1282-3, wars, Hs 3)
jagat musai amrit lootee-ai manmukh boojh na paa-ay.
The world has been deceived, and the Ambrosial Nectar is being plundered. The self- willed manmukh does not realize this.
fee oe ae o UOHt AH HON TSE I (1282-4, ners, He 3) vin naavai naal na chalsee jaasee janam gavaa-ay. Without the Name, nothing will go along with him; he wastes his life, and departs.
TIHSt Wat fsat we shor est or fas & SATE cM (1282-4, ners, He 3)
gurmatee jaagay tin"ee ghar rakhi-aa dootaa kaa kichh na vasaa-ay. ||8]|
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings and remain awake and aware, preserve and protect the home of their heart; demons have no power against them. ||8] |
HBa H8 3 Il (1282-5)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
ago a faoote o sorte So He UAH aT IaH Hfo Il (1282-5, Hers, He 3) baabeehaa naa billaa-ay naa tarsaa-ay ayhu man khasam kaa hukam man.
O rainbird, do not cry out. Do not let this mind of yours be so thirsty for a drop of water. Obey the Hukam, the Command of your Lord and Master,
Soa Jot Hfom fsa Gad vs seats Jo INA (1282-6, Hors, He 3) naanak hukam mani-ai tikh utrai charhai chavgal vann. ||1]|| and your thirst shall be quenched. Your love for Him shall increase four-fold. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (282-6) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
wate AS xfs Sat aA I Aw dt fa feats I (1282-6, nas, He 3) baabeehaa jal meh tayraa vaas hai jal hee maahi firaahi. O rainbird, your place is in the water; you move around in the water.
WG ot ATS 3 AEdt StF AAS UAT Il (1282-7, vw, we 3) jal kee saar na jaanhee taa™ too’ kookan paahi. But you do not appreciate the water, and so you cry out.
WS 86 vd fefh zane ust a aS ars i (1282-7, nar, He 3) jal thal chahu dis varasdaa khaalee ko thaa-o naahi. In the water and on the land, it rains down in the ten directions. No place is left dry.
&3 nfs zone feu nefs aa fsar & ofa Il (1282-8, nar, He 3) aytai jal varsadai tikh mareh bhaag tinaa kay naahi. With so much rain, those who are die of thirst are very unfortunate.
Soa dente fae Ast uet fas efor He HAT MQH (1282-8, Hes, He 3) naanak gurmukh tin sojhee pa-ee jin vasi-aa man maahi. ||2| | O Nanak, the Gurmukhs understand; the Lord abides within their minds. ||2||
UugST Il (1282-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
og Hat fio ute fas nis o urfemr It (1282-9, Hers, He 3)
naath jatee siDh peer kinai ant na paa-i-aa.
The Yogic Masters, celibates, Siddhas and spiritual teachers - none of them has found the limits of the Lord.
aanfa an fowrfe 3 mrfenr i 1282-10, Hers, v2 3) gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay tujhai samaa-i-aa. The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, and merge in You, O Lord.
aa este gag fSA ot afer It 1282-10, vars, He 3) jug chhateeh gubaar tis hee bhaa-i-aa. For thirty-six ages, God remained in utter darkness, as He pleased.
nor fig wmee fs zestfenr | (1282-10, Has, He 3) jalaa bimb asraal tinai vartaa-i-aa. The vast expanse of water swirled around.
tS Mots wien Arts Aafenr i (1282-11, Hers, v2 3) neel aneel agamm sarjeet sabaa-i-aa. The Creator of all is Infinite, Endless and Inaccessible.
mate Curet ee gu fsafenr it 1282-11, ners, He 3) agan upaa-ee vaad bhukh tihaa-i-aa. He formed fire and conflict, hunger and thirst.
wotor ot fafs ore eat ser It (1282-12, were, 2 3) dunee-aa kai sir kaal doojaa bhaa-i-aa. Death hangs over the heads of the people of the world, in the love of duality.
aa susan fafs Age gether el (1282-12, Hes, He 3) rakhai rakhanhaar jin sabad bujhaa-i-aa. ||9|| The Savior Lord saves those who realize the Word of the Shabad. ||9]|
HBa Hs 3 Il (1282-12) salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
feg He AS 3 Zane Zan TE ASE I (1282-13, nas, He 3) ih jal sabh tai varasdaa varsai bhaa-ay subhaa-ay. This rain pours down on all; it rains down in accordance with God's Loving Will.
A fear sdored A aanfa gd AAA I 1282-13, ners, He 3) say birkhaa haree-aavlay jo gurmukh rahay samaa-ay. Those trees become green and lush, which remain immersed in the Guru's Word.
Sod odd AY dfe Sar Hat at ey ATE IAI (1282-13, Hers, He 3) naanak nadree sukh ho-ay aynaa jantaa kaa dukh jaa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, by His Grace, there is peace; the pain of these creatures is gone. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1282-14)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
feat sf= sHfomr zor soae STE I (1282-14, Hers, 2 3) bhinnee rain chamki-aa vuthaa chhahbar laa-ay. The night is wet with dew; lightning flashes, and the rain pours down in torrents.
fA ZS nig US aTs Sun At AG As TATE I (1282-15, wars, ws 3) jit vuthai an Dhan bahut oopjai jaa‘ saho karay rajaa-ay. Food and wealth are produced in abundance when it rains, if it is the Will of God.
fas wd Hoe fgusha Ahat wafs wee it 1282-15, ners, He 3)
jit khaaDhai man taripat-ee-ai jee-aa" jugat samaa-ay.
Consuming it, the minds of His creatures are satisfied, and they adopt the lifestyle of the way.
feg ug ads aT AG I ae nr|S aS ATE I (1282-16, nas, He 3)
in Dhan kartay kaa khayl hai kaday aavai kaday jaa-ay.
This wealth is the play of the Creator Lord. Sometimes it comes, and sometimes it goes.
fomrotor at ag aH d Ae dt dd ANTE Il (1282-16, Hers, He 3) gi-aanee-aa kaa Dhan naam hai sad hee rahai samaa-ay. The Naam is the wealth of the spiritually wise. It is permeating and pervading forever.
sod fas ag sefe ad si feg ae Us ue iil (1282-17, Has, He 3) naanak jin ka-o nadar karay taa™ ih Dhan palai paa-ay. ||2]| O Nanak, those who are blessed with His Glance of Grace receive this wealth. ||2] |
ust Il (1282-17) pa-orhee. Pauree:
uify aoe ad uf a8 & fAG adt uae Il (1282-17, Has, He 3)
aap karaa-ay karay aap ha-o kai si-o karee pukaar. He Himself does, and causes all to be done. Unto whom can I complain?
mm} Sa Hat orfu AIS ArT Il (1282-18, Hare, He 3) aapay laykhaa mangsee aap karaa-ay kaar. He Himself calls the mortal beings to account; He Himself causes them to act.
a fq oe A abt Jan Ad WT Il (1282-18, nos, He 3) jo tis bhaavai so thee-ai hukam karay gaavaar. Whatever pleases Him happens. Only a fool issues commands.
mify gave Sct nMy TUASTT Il (1282-19, Hers, He 3) aap chhadaa-ay chhutee-ai aapay bakhsanhaar. He Himself saves and redeems; He Himself is the Forgiver.
SAR
nm Sy AS orf ASA S yas Il (1282-19, Hare, He 3) aapay vaykhai sunay aap sabhsai day aaDhaar. He Himself sees, and He Himself hears; He gives His Support to all.
Ag fg fa ease fats fafa ad asters il (1282-19, nas, He 3) sabh meh ayk varatdaa sir sir karay beechaar. He alone is pervading and permeating all; He considers each and every one.
Us qQu3 Tanta wiry Sardi wat Afs firs il 1283-1, Hers, He 3)
gurmukh aap veechaaree-ai lagai sach pi-aar. The Gurmukh reflects on the self, lovingly attached to the True Lord.
Sod fan 6 nmdiba wml SeeTTT IAOMl (1283-1, ness, we 3) naanak kis no aakhee-ai aapay dayvanhaar. ||10]|| O Nanak, whom can we ask? He Himself is the Great Giver. ||10||
HBa H8 3 Il (1283-2)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
wate fg Aas I HS a Saf SHE I 1283-2, nas, v2 3)
baabeehaa ayhu jagat hai mat ko bharam bhulaa-ay. This world is a rainbird; let no one be deluded by doubt.
feg arta un o fA S gee ST Il (1283-2, ners, He 3) ih baabee“haa pasoo hai is no boojhan naahi. This rainbird is an animal; it has no understanding at all.
nifys ofa a on 3 fas us fee fe It 1283-3, nes, v8 3) amrit har kaa naam hai jit peetai tikh jaa-ay. The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, thirst is quenched.
Soa TTHfe fag uber fsq agfs os await mre Al (1283-3, were, vs 3) naanak gurmukh jin" pee-aa tin” bahurh na laagee aa-ay. ||1]| O Nanak, those Gurmukhs who drink it in shall never again be afflicted by thirst. ||1]|
Hs 3 Il (283-4) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Hod Hise aa J ofa fomrfent AifS SE i (1283-4, ners, He 3)
malaar seetal raag hai har Dhi-aa-i-ai saa“t ho-ay.
Malaar is a calming and soothing raga; meditating on the Lord brings peace and tranquility.
ofa Me ret faut ad st as AS BLE Il (1283-4, Hes, He 3)
har jee-o apnee kirpaa karay taa™ vartai sabh lo-ay.
When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, then the rain falls on all the people of the world.
26 thor qafs df asat 3 Aterg SE Il 1283-5, nas, He 3)
vuthai jee-aa jugat ho-ay Dharnee no seegaar ho-ay.
From this rain, all creatures find the ways and means to live, and the earth is embellished.
Sod fed Ads AS AS I HS dt S AS AE Il (1283-5, na, He 3) naanak ih jagat sabh jal hai jal hee tay sabh ko-ay. O Nanak, this world is all water; everything came from water.
qs ust & fear gs A AG HAS Aer AS MQM (1283-6, vars, we 3)
gur parsaadee ko virlaa boojhai so jan mukat sadaa ho-ay. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, a rare few realize the Lord; such humble beings are liberated forever. ||2||
ust Il (1283-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Het fudey feat J Tet Il (1283-7, vers, we 3) sachaa vayparvaahu iko too Dhanee. O True and Independent Lord God, You alone are my Lord and Master.
3 Ag fas wm} orfu eA fom aet i 1283-7, Hare, 42 3) too sabh kichh aapay aap doojay kis ganee. You Yourself are everything; who else is of any account?
HEH FST ade Het SO Het Il (1283-7, wars, He 3) maanas koorhaa garab sachee tuDh manee. False is the pride of man. True is Your glorious greatness.
met aGe safe Guret Heat Il (1283-8, Hers, He 3)
aavaa ga-on rachaa-ay upaa-ee maydnee.
Coming and going in reincarnation, the beings and species of the world came into being.
Afsag Ae wituer nifenr FSH aret Il (1283-8, Hers, He 3)
satgur sayvay aapnaa aa-i-aa tis ganee.
But if the mortal serves his True Guru, his coming into the world is judged to be worthwhile.
A GH fess mfe 3 Adt TEs Tet Il 1283-9, nas, v2 3) jay ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay ta kayhee ganat ganee. And if he eradicates eogtism from within himself, then how can he be judged?
Hone Hfs aera fa gor vfs Tat i 1283-9, nas, v2 3)
manmukh mohi gubaar ji-o bhulaa manjh vanee.
The self-willed manmukh is lost in the darkness of emotional attachment, like the man lost in the wilderness.
ae uy MAY ore fea wat AAU (1283-9, Has, He 3) katay paap asa‘kh naavai ik kanee. ||11]| Countless sins are erased, by even a tiny particle of the Lord's Name. ||11]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1283-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Weld UAH aT HIG } ASdt HIG efe mre ute | (1283-10, ners, v2 3)
baabeehaa khasmai kaa mahal na jaanhee mahal daykh ardaas paa-ay.
O rainbird, you do not know the Mansion of your Lord and Master's Presence. Offer your prayers to see this Mansion.
wives ste asst sofa Sfemr afte o ute it 1283-11, Hare, He 3) aapnai bhaanai bahutaa boleh boli-aa thaa-ay na paa-ay. You speak as you please, but your speech is not accepted.
YAH st wag J A fee A ew ute I (1283-11, ners, He 3)
khasam vadaa daataar hai jo ichhay so fal paa-ay.
Your Lord and Master is the Great Giver; whatever you desire, you shall receive from Him.
aaa fom gust wars at fsa Ate all (1283-12, Hes, He 3)
baabeehaa ki-aa bapurhaa jagtai kee tikh jaa-ay. ||1]|
Not only the thirst of the poor rainbird, but the thirst of the whole world is quenched. H11I
He 3 Il (1283-12)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
ato fsot of sfeor Aon Afes AEE i (1283-12, Hers, He 3) baabeehaa bhinnee rain boli-aa sehjay sach subhaa-ay. The night is wet with dew; the rainbird sings the True Name with intuitive ease.
feg ne Ha Ae 3 He feo GE 5 ATE I (1283-13, Ho, M2 3) ih jal mayraa jee-o hai jal bin rahan na jaa-ay. This water is my very soul; without water, I cannot survive.
ad Aaet we uh fees ny Tete it (1283-13, nears, He 3)
gur sabdee jal paa-ee-ai vichahu aap gavaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, this water is obtained, and egotism is eradicated from within.
sod fan fae vA o Hect A Afsate chor feote I (1283-14, Hes, He 3)
naanak jis bin chasaa na jeevdee so satgur dee-aa milaa-ay. ||2] |
O Nanak, I cannot live without Him, even for a moment; the True Guru has led me to meet Him. ||2| |
ust Il (1283-14) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ys USS WAY H Tes o TS Il (1283-14, Hors, He 3) khand pataal asa‘kh mai ganat na ho-ee. There are countless worlds and nether regions; I cannot calculate their number.
3 aes ates sy frert 30 set I (1283-15, were, 3 3) too kartaa govind tuDh sirjee tuDhai go-ee. You are the Creator, the Lord of the Universe; You create it, and You destroy it.
wy wants Heat 35 dt S Tet Il 1283-15, vars, He 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh maydnee tujh hee tay ho-ee. The 8.4 million species of beings issued forth from You.
feta at us HSA Tafa ATSfT TET I (1283-16, wars, we 3) ik raajay khaan malook kaheh kahaaveh ko-ee. Some are called kings, emperors and nobles.
fefa AD Aevefa Afs ug eH Urs Ft Il (1283-16, vers, He 3) ik saah sadaaveh sanch Dhan doojai pat kho-ee. Some claim to be bankers and accumulate wealth, but in duality they lose their honor.
fefa us fea Has Aso fafs Aet I (1283-16, Hes, He 3) ik daatay ik mangtay sabhnaa sir so-ee. Some are givers, and some are beggars; God is above the heads of all.
fee ove aad storvefs Tet I (1283-17, Hers, He 3) vin naavai baajaaree-aa bheehaaval ho-ee. Without the Name, they are vulgar, dreadful and wretched.
as faut saat AY AT A Tet WIM (1283-17, ves, M3 3) koorh nikhutay naankaa sach karay so ho-ee. ||12]|
Falsehood shall not last, O Nanak; whatever the True Lord does, comes to pass. [|12]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1283-18)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
wae Test Hoe ufeor niSaese|st vfs il 1283-18, wes, we 3)
baabeehaa gunvantee mahal paa-i-aa a-uganvantee door.
O rainbird, the virtuous soul-bride attains the Mansion of her Lord's Presence; the unworthy, unvirtuous one is far away.
nists 33 ofs ZA Tenfa Aer Tats I (1283-18, vers, He 3)
antar tayrai har vasai gurmukh sadaa hajoor.
Deep within your inner being, the Lord abides. The Gurmukh beholds Him ever- present.
TA USS 3 Jeet eat aefe fares I (1283-19, vas, we 3) kook pukaar na hova-ee nadree nadar nihaal. When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal no longer weeps and wails.
aed OTH TS Han fs Aafe TT HX wes WAU (1283-19, wars, ws 3)
naanak naam ratay sehjay milay sabad guroo kai ghaal. ||1]| |
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam intuitively merge with the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
Yat 92s
H3 3 Il (284-1) mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Tat sost ad ate fag Sg Abt SS I (1284-1, ness, us 3)
baabeehaa bayntee karay kar kirpaa dayh jee-a daan.
The rainbird prays: O Lord, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the gift of the life of the soul.
me fag flmrn 3 Css gefa Aifs HS YS I (1284-1, vers, He 3)
jal bin pi-aas na ootrai chhutak jaa‘hi mayray paraan.
Without the water, my thirst is not quenched, and my breath of life is ended and gone.
3 AUS Big FT TSS BUG Il (1284-2, vars, ws 3)
too sukh-daata bay-ant hai gundaataa nayDhaan.
You are the Giver of peace, O Infinite Lord God; You are the Giver of the treasure of virtue.
Soa Tenfy sufh we nifs sat dE sa|Ts NM (1284-2, ners, ve 3) naanak gurmukh bakhas la-ay ant baylee ho-ay bhagvaan. ||2|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh is forgiven; in the end, the Lord God shall be your only friend.
[121] Uugat Il (1284-3)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
nm Aas Gurfe a Te miBaes ad segs I (1284-3, nas, ne 3) aapay jagat upaa-ay kai gun a-ugan karay beechaar. He created the world; He considers the merits and demerits of the mortals.
3 Te Asa Hae 9 ot o us fimrg I (1284-4, ners, Hs 3)
tarai gun sarab janjaal hai naam na Dharay pi-aar.
Those who are entangled in the three gunas - the three dispositions - do not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ae efs nae aed waa dfs wre Il (1284-4, ners, He 3) gun chhod a-ugan kamaavday dargeh hohi khu-aar. Forsaking virtue, they practice evil; they shall be miserable in the Court of the Lord.
WM WOH fsat afer fears wre AAAs I (1284-5, vars, 8 3) joo-ai janam tinee haari-aa kit aa-ay sansaar. They lose their life in the gamble; why did they even come into the world?
Ae Aafe Ho Hfeor nifofefa oft fumrfa i 1284-5, ners, He 3)
sachai sabad man maari-aa ahinis naam pi-aar.
But those who conquer and subdue their minds, through the True Word of the Shabad - night and day, they love the Naam.
frat uset Sfa ofan AST niee mrs Il (1284-6, Hare, He 3) jinee purkhee ur Dhaari-aa sachaa alakh apaar. Those people enshrine the True, Invisible and Infinite Lord in their hearts.
3 Gees fours oto wrt nreatfenrs i 1284-6, vars, He 3) too gundaataa niDhaan heh asee avgani-aar. You, O Lord, are the Giver, the Treasure of virtue; I am unvirtuous and unworthy.
fan aun A ufest ae Aaet Steg ISI (1284-7, Has, He 3)
jis bakhsay so paa-isee gur sabdee veechaar. ||13]|
He alone finds You, whom You bless and forgive, and inspire to contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||13]]|
HBa H8 U Il (1284-7)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
ats 3 feast rast frat fers aS i 1284-7, ners, He 5)
raat na vihaavee saaktaa™ jin"aa visrai naa-o.
The faithless cynics forget the Name of the Lord; the night of their lives does not pass in peace.
wast fen AIST soa Ts Te AE All (1284-8, nas, ue 5)
raatee dinas suhaylee-aa naanak har gun gaa™-o. ||1||
Their days and nights become comfortable, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1]|
Hé U Il (1284-8) mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
I36 Adds Heat JS Hat HafS Il (1284-8, Hers, He 5) ratan javayhar maankaa habhay manee mathann. All sorts of jewels and gems, diamonds and rubies, shine forth from their foreheads.
ood A ufs afenr Ad Ufs Aafs QI (1284-9, Hers, He 5) naanak jo parabh bhaani-aa sachai dar sohann. ||2|| O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God, look beautiful in the Court of the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (1284-9) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Au’ Afsag Afe Ay AHEM | (1284-9, Hers, Hs 5) sachaa satgur sayv sach sam"aali-aa. Serving the True Guru, I dwell on the True Lord.
nifs uur orf fa Afsare viet wre II (1284-10, Hers, He 5) ant khalo-aa aa-ay je satgur agai ghaali-aa. The work you have done for the True Guru shall be very useful in the end.
Ufa & Aa AHA Het TueTfem I (1284-10, Hers, He 5) pohi na sakai jamkaal sachaa rakhvaali-aa.
The Messenger of Death cannot even touch that person who is protected by the True Lord.
ae Ard fs verte eter afer i (1284-11, Has, He 5) gur saakhee jot jagaa-ay deevaa baali-aa. Lighting the lamp of the Guru's Teachings, my awareness has been awakened.
Hou fee are afamrs fests safer it (284-11, vers, ue 5)
manmukh vin naavai koorhi-aar fireh baytaali-aa.
The self-willed manmukhs are false; without the Name, they wander around like demons.
UH HEA Uf us! nized afer I (1284-11, Hers, He 5)
pasoo maanas chamm palaytay andrahu kaali-aa.
They are nothing more than beasts, wrapped up in human skin; they are black- hearted within.
Ae 20s AY Ad Aafe feofemr it (1284-12, Hare, He 5) sabho vartai sach sachai sabad nihaali-aa. The True Lord is pervading all; through the True Word of the Shabad, He is seen.
area oH fears 3 ud ate Sefer IVI (1284-12, mars, Hs 5) naanak naam niDhaan hai poorai gur daykhaali-aa. ||14||
O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. The Perfect Guru has revealed it to me. [|14]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1284-13)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Weld Jay uetfeor ad a Adfa ASE I (1284-13, ners, He 3)
baabeehai hukam pachhaani-aa gur kai sahj subhaa-ay.
The rainbird realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command with intuitive ease through the Guru.
Ay ear efeur afs Tat soaT STS il (1284-14, ves, He 3) maygh varsai da-i-aa kar goorhee chhahbar laa-ay. The clouds mercifully burst forth, and the rain pours down in torrents.
wats aa yas sto wet AY Shor ufe mre il (1284-14, vers, ve 3)
baabeehay kook pukaar reh ga-ee sukh vasi-aa man aa-ay.
The cries and wailings of the rainbird have ceased, and peace has come to abide in its mind.
Soa A Ard fa Ser Heat Hor fara ANTE Al (1284-15, ners, He 3)
naanak so salaahee-ai je day“daa sabhnaa” jee-aa rijak samaa-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, praise that Lord, who reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings and creatures. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1284-15)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
wtga 35 Wad foor sy fefe fra o fag uts fa we it (1284-15, vars, ws 3)
chaatrik too na jaanhee ki-aa tuDh vich tikhaa hai kit peetai tikh jaa-ay.
O rainbird, you do not know what thirst is within you, or what you can drink to quench it.
en ate sdfhor nifys We us 3 UTE Il (1284-16, vars, He 3) doojai bhaa-ay bharammi-aa amrit jal palai na paa-ay. You wander in the love of duality, and you do not obtain the Ambrosial Water.
sete ad A ymuat st Afsag fs Fate | 1284-17, ne, He 3)
nadar karay jay aapnee taa™ satgur milai subhaa-ay.
When God casts His Glance of Grace, then the mortal automatically meets the True Guru.
soa Afsad 3 nifys Ae wfeor AoA sf ANTE HQ (1284-17, Hers, He 3)
naanak satgur tay amrit jal paa-i-aa sehjay rahi-aa samaa-ay. ||2] |
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Water is obtained from the True Guru, and then the mortal remains merged in the Lord with intuitive ease. ||2||
UgST Il (1284-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fefa ze dfs anfs wf Ae o Sedt I (1284-18, na, He 3) ik van khand baiseh jaa-ay sad na dayvhee. Some go and sit in the forest realms, and do not answer any calls.
fefa ues aag sfs AIse AS Tet Il (1284-18, vars, He 3) ik paalaa kakar bhann seetal jal hay“vahee. Some, in the dead of winter, break the ice and immerse themselves in freezing water.
fefa arn sarefs nifar HG o Tedt I (1284-19, were, Hs 3) ik bhasam charh"aavahi ang mail na Dhovhee. Some rub ashes on their bodies, and never wash off their dirt.
fefa wet faere foros ae we Feat il (1284-19, nas, 2 3)
ik jataa bikat bikraal kul ghar khovhee.
Some look hideous, with their uncut hair matted and dishevelled. They bring dishonor to their family and ancestry.
usr qacu fefa aa feats feo ofS ste & Aedt Il (1285-1, ners, He 3)
ik nagan fireh din raat nee“d na sovhee. Some wander naked day and night and never sleep.
fefa mats aorets nia wiry fededt i 1285-1, ners, v2 3) ik agan jalaaveh ang aap vigovahee. Some burn their limbs in fire, damaging and ruining themselves.
fee oe 36 ag fomr afs gect Il (1285-2, Has, He 3)
vin naavai tan chhaar ki-aa kahi rovhee. Without the Name, the body is reduced to ashes; what good is it to speak and cry then?
Hofs wAH ert fa Afsag edt Ul (1285-2, Hers, He 3)
sohan khasam du-aar je satgur sayvhee. ||15]|
Those who serve the True Guru, are embellished and exalted in the Court of their Lord and Master. ||15]|
HBa H8 3 Il (1285-3)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
arate nfs 28 sfeor st efs wet uars Il (1285-3, ners, He 3)
baabeehaa amrit vaylai boli-aa taa’ dar sunee pukaar.
The rainbird chirps in the ambrosial hours of the morning before the dawn; its prayers are heard in the Court of the Lord.
MS gaHS dur zang forsur ofs il 1285-3, Hare, He 3) mayghai no furmaan ho-aa varsahu kirpaa Dhaar. The order is issued to the clouds, to let the rains of mercy shower down.
JG fsa a sfease frat AY sftmr fs ofa II (1285-4, Hers, He 3) ha-o tin kai balihaarnai jinee sach rakhi-aa ur Dhaar. I am a Sacrifice to those who enshrine the True Lord within their hearts.
soa SH AS Jdrest ag a Ate Sterfs Wal (1285-4, Hers, He 3)
naanak naamay sabh haree-aavalee gur kai sabad veechaar. ||1||
O Nanak, through the Name, all are rejuvenated, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1285-5)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
wet fee Sct fr 3 Cad AAG aafa UaTS II (1285-5, Has, He 3)
baabeehaa iv tayree tikhaa na utrai jay sa-o karahi pukaar.
O rainbird, this is not the way to quench your thirst, even though you may cry out a hundred times.
Sed Afsag urehat sect Cun fimrg it 1285-6, Has, He 3) nadree satgur paa-ee-ai nadree upjai pi-aar. By God's Grace, the True Guru is found; by His Grace, love wells up.
soa Atos nfs A fess wfo fears QI (1285-6, Has, He 3)
naanak saahib man vasai vichahu jaahi vikaar. ||2]|
O Nanak, when the Lord and Master abides in the mind, corruption and evil leave from within. ||2||
ugat Il (1285-7)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
fefa aot @ss uf gag ynrfenr | (1285-7, Hers, He 3)
ik jainee ujharh paa-ay Dharahu khu-aa-i-aa.
Some are Jains, wasting their time in the wilderness; by their pre-ordained destiny, they are ruined.
fso Hfa ot ou 3 Stefe arfemr | (1285-7, ners, He 3)
tin mukh naahee naam na tirath n"aa-i-aa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is not on their lips; they do not bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
oat fra Hote o se aafenr | (1285-8, Has, He 3) hathee sir khohaa-ay na bhad karaa-i-aa. They pull out their hair with their hands, instead of shaving.
afse sats feo ats Hae & TEM Ih (1285-8, Hare, He 3) kuchil raheh din raat sabad na bhaa-i-aa. They remain unclean day and night; they do not love the Word of the Shabad.
f36 Wf 3 ufs & AGH ASH TSfEnr Il (1285-8, Has, He 3)
tin jaat na pat na karam janam gavaa-i-aa.
They have no status, no honor, and no good karma. They waste away their lives in vain.
His FS SS For afer I (1285-9, ners, Hs 3) man joothai vayjaat joothaa khaa-i-aa. Their minds are false and impure; that which they eat is impure and defiled.
fag Aad ores & fas dt ufemr it 1285-9, vars, He 3) bin sabdai aachaar na kin hee paa-i-aa. Without the Shabad, no one achieves a lifestyle of good conduct.
aanfa Guiorfs Afs Arfemr WIEN (1285-10, Hers, He 3) gurmukh o-ankaar sach samaa-i-aa. ||16]| The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord God, the Universal Creator. ||16] |
HBa H8 3 Il (1285-10)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Wefs AeA aHet aa Aaet Sets Il 1285-10, Hers, Hs 3)
Saavan sarsee kaamnee gur sabdee veechaar.
In the month of Saawan, the bride is happy, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Soa Ae Hoat Td a IFS wrrfs Wail 1285-11, xa, He 3) naanak sadaa suhaaganee gur kai hayt apaar. ||1]|| O Nanak, she is a happy soul-bride forever; her love for the Guru is unlimited. ||1]|
He 3 Il (1285-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
Wefs US Te wodt fa en ste fing it (1285-11, vars, we 3) saavan dajhai gun baahree jis doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar. In Saawan, she who has no virtue is burned, in attachment and love of duality.
area fus at ATS 6 Aeet AS Ales WATT MM (1285-12, Hare, He 3)
naanak pir kee saar na jaan-ee sabh seegaar khu-aar. ||2||
O Nanak, she does not appreciate the value of her Husband Lord; all her decorations are worthless. ||2]|
UugaT Il (1285-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ae nied nis@ aie o ustAet Il (1285-12, Hers, v8 3) sachaa alakh abhay-o hath na pateeja-ee. The True, Unseen, Mysterious Lord is not won over by stubbornness.
fefa refs ga ud afar o stret il 1285-13, Hare, He 3)
ik gaavahi raag paree-aa raag na bheej-ee. Some sing according to traditional ragas, but the Lord is not pleased by these ragas.
fefa ofe afs uate ae sats o atret I (1285-13, Hes, He 3)
ik nach nach pooreh taal bhagat na keej-ee. Some dance and dance and keep the beat, but they do not worship Him with devotion.
feta nig o ufo Hoe fear foo offret Il (1285-14, Hers, He 3) ik ann na khaahi moorakh tinaa ki-aa keej-ee. Some refuse to eat; what can be done with these fools?
frat det aos fae o ctaet i (1285-14, ners, He 3) tarisnaa ho-ee bahut kivai na Dheej-ee. Thirst and desire have greatly increased; nothing brings satisfaction.
aH eats & But uf nett th 1285-14, ners, He 3) karam vaDheh kai lo-a khap mareeja-ee. Some are tied down by rituals; they hassle themselves to death.
oo on AAS nifys ubset il (1285-15, Hers, He 3) laahaa naam sansaar amrit peej-ee. In this world, profit comes by drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
ofa sat mASfs aTaHfY urTEt NADI (1285-15, Has, He 3) har bhagtee asnayhi gurmukh gheej-ee. ||17]|| The Gurmukhs gather in loving devotional worship of the Lord. ||17]|
HBA H8 3 Il (1285-16)
salok mehlaa 3. Shalok, Third Mehl:
Dente Hos Ta A ass fo Ho 3a Alse SPE I (1285-16, nar, He 3)
gurmukh malaar raag jo karahi tin man tan seetal ho-ay.
Those Gurmukhs who sing in the Raga of Malaar - their minds and bodies become cool and calm.
ad Aaet Sa uetfsur Sa Ae APE Il (1285-16, ner, He 3) gur sabdee ayk pachhaani-aa ayko sachaa so-ay. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they realize the One, the One True Lord.
HO 36 Ae Ag Hs AS Ast ALE Il (1285-17, Hers, He 3)
man tan sachaa sach man sachay sachee so-ay.
Their minds and bodies are true; they obey the True Lord, and they are known as true.
wiefe Het sats J AoA dt ufs SE I (1285-17, Has, He 3)
andar sachee bhagat hai sehjay hee pat ho-ay.
True devotional worship is deep within them; they are automatically blessed with honor.
afera ufo ue niurg J HOHY ITO ALE Il (1285-18, Har, He 3)
kalijug meh ghor anDhaar hai manmukh raahu na ko-ay.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, there is utter darkness; the self-willed manmukh cannot find the way.
A waa soot faa aeufa usa] dE Ail 1285-18, Hers, He 3) say vadbhaagee naankaa jin gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||1|| O Nanak, very blessed are those Gurmukhs, unto whom the Lord is revealed. ||1]||
He 3 Il (1285-19)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fee zah afe efimr Gat nfs Cun we Il (1285-19, Has, He 3) ind varsai kar da-i-aa lokaa’ man upjai chaa-o. The clouds rain down mercifully, and joy wells up in the minds of the people.
fan a gaty fee zone fan a Ae afead AIG II (1285-19, Hors, He 3)
jis kai hukam ind varasdaa tis kai sad balihaarai jaa’-o.
I am forever a sacrifice to the One, by whose Command the clouds burst forth with rain.
Yat Ate
Tafa APE ANS AS A TE WE I (1286-1, vars, ve 3)
gurmukh sabad sam"aalee-ai sachay kay gun gaa-o.
The Gurmukhs dwell on the Word of the Shabad. They sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Sa STH IS Ao fSdHs AIHA Afs AHS IQ (1286-1, vars, He 3)
naanak naam ratay jan nirmalay sehjay sach samaa-o. ||2]|
O Nanak, those humble beings who are imbued with the Naam are pure and immaculate. They are intuitively merged in the True Lord. ||2||
UugSt Il (1286-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
us Afsag Afe yar urfemr Il (1286-2, Hers, He 3) pooraa satgur sayv pooraa paa-i-aa. Serving the Perfect True Guru, I have found the Perfect Lord.
ud oath fourfe us rae vfs eAfemr i (1286-2, were, He 3)
poorai karam Dhi-aa-ay pooraa sabad man vasaa-i-aa.
Meditating on the Perfect Lord, by perfect karma, I have enshrined the Shabad within my mind.
ud fomris fomris He gorfenr I (1286-3, were, Hs 3) poorai gi-aan Dhi-aan mail chukaa-i-aa. Through perfect spiritual wisdom and meditation, my filth has been washed away.
ofa Ate stefa ate Hour otfemr i 1286-3, ners, He 3)
har sar tirath jaan manoo-aa naa-i-aa.
The Lord is my sacred shrine of pilgrimage and pool of purification; I wash my mind in Him.
Rafe Hd He Hs Us ASet HEMT I (1286-4, Hors, He 3) sabad marai man maar Dhan janaydee maa-i-aa.
One who dies in the Shabad and conquers his mind - blessed is the mother who gave birth to him.
efs Ad Afsorg Ae wrfenr | (1286-4, Hes, He 3) dar sachai sachiaar sachaa aa-i-aa. He is true in the Court of the Lord, and his coming into this world is judged to be true.
ufé 6 Aa afe At UAH ofr I (1286-4, Hors, He 3) puchh na sakai ko-ay jaa‘ khasmai bhaa-i-aa. No one can challenge that person, with whom our Lord and Master is pleased.
Sea Ay Aerts ffir urea Aci 1286-5, Hers, Hs 3)
naanak sach salaahi likhi-aa paa-i-aa. ||18]| O Nanak, praising the True Lord, his pre-ordained destiny is activated. ||18] |
HX H2 Y Il (1286-5)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, Third Mehl:
~ Aen EN
Godt SS WSS SE Ts [Sow Il (1286-5, vars, ve 1)
kulhaa™ day‘day baavlay laiNday vaday nilaj.
Those who give out ceremonial hats of recognition are fools; those who receive them have no shame.
TT us 5 Weet feats F4 SA Il (1286-6, ware, Hs 1) choohaa khad na maav-ee tikal ban"ai chhaj. The mouse cannot enter its hole with a basket tied around its waist.
efe eniet A Hafs fro a@ efe fA Ato II (1286-6, Hers, He 1) dayni" du-aa-ee say mareh jin ka-o dayn se jaahi. Those who give out blessings shall die, and those that they bless shall also depart.
Soa JaH o ATuet fos wfe ANT Il (1286-7, Her, He 1) naanak hukam na jaap-ee kithai jaa-ay samaahi. O Nanak, no one knows the Lord's Command, by which all must depart.
SAS uigSt Sa SH ASal AT S'S Il (1286-7, Hors, He 1)
fasal ahaarhee ayk naam saavnee sach naa-o.
The spring harvest is the Name of the One Lord; the harvest of autumn is the True Name.
H Hoge ferrfeor aA & Ufa ATE II (1286-8, HoT, He 1) mai mehdood likhaa-i-aa khasmai kai dar jaa-ay. I receive a letter of pardon from my Lord and Master, when I reach His Court.
Tom a Ud Ase AS nets Aig Il (1286-8, Hers, He 1) dunee-aa kay dar kayt-rhay kaytay aavahi jaa‘hi. There are so many courts of the world, and so many who come and go there.
as Hafs Has aS Afar Afar who NA (1286-8, Hes, He 1) kaytay mangeh mangtay kaytay mang mang jaahi. ||1]|| There are so many beggars begging; so many beg and beg until death. ||1||
He 4% Il (1286-9) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
AG He Ast fue as we Ufa A oat fe II (1286-9, Hos, He 1)
Sa-O man hastee ghi-o gurh khaavai panj sai daanaa khaa-ay.
The elephant eats a hundred pounds of ghee and molasses, and five hundred pounds of corn.
Ba Fa YT sre Aa afemt ussTtE | 1286-10, wars, Hs 1)
dakai fookai khayh udaavai saahi ga-i-ai pachhutaa-ay.
He belches and grunts and scatters dust, and when the breath leaves his body, he regrets it.
nidt gfx Het Seat Il (1286-10, wars, He 1) anDhee fook mu-ee dayvaanee. The blind and arrogant die insane.
uAtH fet fefa stat il (1286-10, Here, He 1) khasam mitee fir bhaanee. Submitting to the Lord, one become pleasing to Him.
my ae fest a gare afe vat fawserfe i 286-11, vers, Hs 1) aDh gul"'aa chirhee kaa chugan gain charhee billaa-ay. The sparrow eats only half a grain, then it flies through the sky and chirps.
UAH ae Go vat fa ad yee wee it (1286-11, nes, He 1)
khasmai bhaavai ohaa changee je karay khudaa-ay khudaa-ay.
The good sparrow is pleasing to her Lord and Master, if she chirps the Name of the Lord.
Rast Ald Hd A fifeur vs fue U fe it (286-12, vars, He 1)
saktaa seehu maaray sai miri-aa sabh pichhai pai khaa-ay.
The powerful tiger kills hundreds of deer, and all sorts of other animals eat what it leaves.
dfs Asa we 3 HS Ao aft UESste Il (1286-12, Hers, He 1)
ho-ay sataanaa ghurai na maavai saahi ga-i-ai pachhutaa-ay.
It becomes very strong, and cannot be contained in its den, but when it must go, it regrets.
nitr fan 6 Sfx ASS Il (1286-13, He, He 1) anDhaa kis no buk sunaavai. So who is impressed by the roar of the blind beast?
UAH HAS S BS Il (1286-13, HorE, He 1) khasmai mool na bhaavai. He is not pleasing at all to his Lord and Master.
ma fAS Uifs ad mex far nix STs afo we I (1286-13, were, Hs 1) ak si-o pareet karay ak tidaa ak daalee bahi khaa-ay. The insect loves the milkweed plant; perched on its branch, it eats it.
UAH ae Go var fa ad yee yee Il (1286-14, ners, He 1)
khasmai bhaavai oho changa je karay khudaa-ay khudaa-ay.
It becomes good and pleasing to its Lord and Master, if it chirps the Name of the Lord.
Soa volo ute feos afy ats wa Tet il (1286-14, vars, 2 1) naanak dunee-aa chaar dihaarhay sukh keetai dukh ho-ee. O Nanak, the world lasts for only a few days; indulging in pleasures, pain is produced.
Te a8 ofs wed efs 5 Aa TET Il (1286-15, Hors, He 1)
galaa vaalay hain ghanayray chhad na sakai ko-ee.
There are many who boast and brag, but none of them can remain detached from the world.
Hat fHS He I (1286-15, HES, He 1) makhee™ mithai marnaa. The fly dies for the sake of sweets.
fas 3 sufa fa dfs 5 ure fs SB AAT FIST NM (1286-15, wars, Hs 1)
jin too rakheh tin nayrh na aavai tin bha-o saagar tarnaa. ||2||
O Lord, death does not even approach those whom You protect. You carry them across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2]|
UsST I (1286-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Wa ida 3 Tat Ae MSA MUTT Il (1286-16, Hers, He 1) agam agochar too Dhanee sachaa alakh apaar. You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable, O Invisible and Infinite True Lord Master.
3 ws Als Has feat SET Il (1286-16, vars, He 1) too daataa sabh mangtay iko dayvanhaar. You are the Giver, all are beggars of You. You alone are the Great Giver.
frat Afeor fast AY ufenr TaHSt Stes Il (1286-17, Hers, He 1) jinee sayvi-aa tinee sukh paa-i-aa gurmatee veechaar. Those who serve You find peace, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.
feaat 6 3g Se geet wfemr ofs fimrg Il (1286-17, Hors, He 1) iknaa no tuDh ayvai bhaavdaa maa-i-aa naal pi-aar. Some, according to Your Will, are in love with Maya.
qd & Aafe nerdy nists Un fimrg il (1286-18, ners, Hs 1)
gur kai sabad salaahee-ai antar paraym pi-aar.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, praise the Lord with love and affection within.
fee uist safs 5 dzet fee Afsag 5 oat fimrg II (1286-18, Hes, He 1) vin pareetee bhagat na hova-ee vin satgur na lagai pi-aar. Without love, there is no devotion. Without the True Guru, love is not enshrined.
3 ys Als 39 Aee fea wet aT yar Il (1286-19, Hos, HE 1)
too parabh sabh tuDh sayvday ik dhaadhee karay pukaar.
You are the Lord God; everyone serves You. This is the prayer of Your humble minstrel.
efo we ASsdion Ae on FHS mrOTEs NACI (1286-19, Hers, He 1) deh daan santokhee-aa sachaa naam milai aaDhaar. ||19] |
Please bless me with the gift of contentment, that I may receive the True Name as my Support. ||19]|
Yat 92D
HEX H2 Y Il (1287-1)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
wat are we fefs are il (1287-1, Hare, He 1) raatee kaal ghatai din kaal. Through the night the time ticks away; through the day the time ticks away.
fen afeor aff use Il (1287-1, Has, He 1) chhijai kaa-i-aa ho-ay paraal. The body wears away and turns to straw.
zsts zafsur Aaa AAS Il (1287-2, Hors, He 1)
vartan varti-aa sarab janjaal. All are involved and entangled in worldly entanglements.
Stomr sfx afenr su 37 Il 1287-2, Hears, v8 1) bhuli-aa chuk ga-i-aa tap taal. The mortal has mistakenly renounced the way of service.
not sfy sfx ufemr Sfe il (1287-2, Has, He 1) anDhaa jhakh jhakh pa-i-aa jhayr. The blind fool is caught in conflict, bothered and bewildered.
fue defo fomrefa efa il 1287-3, Hors, He 1) pichhai roveh li-aaveh fayr. Those who weep after someone has died - can they bring him back to life?
fag 33 fas AS Sra Il (1287-3, vers, we 1) bin boojhay kichh soojhai naahee. Without realization, nothing can be understood.
Hfeur sfo FS fs ATT I 1287-3, Hors, He 1) mo-i-aa ro“hi ro‘day mar jaa‘hee™. The weepers who weep for the dead shall themselves die as well.
Sa YAH SS SrS Il (1287-4, Hse, we 1) naanak khasmai ayvai bhaavai. O Nanak, this is the Will of our Lord and Master.
Ret He fafs fats o mrs ai 1287-4, Hers, He 1) say-ee mu-ay jin chit na aavai. ||1|| Those who do not remember the Lord, are dead. ||1||
He 4% Il (1287-4) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
yor fimrg Ulf wet Hor Sg set i 1287-4, ners, He 1) mu-aa pi-aar pareet mu-ee mu-aa vair vaadee. Love dies, and affection dies; hatred and strife die.
<6 afent ay feather eet Sa Tat Il (1287-5, wars, He 1) vann ga-i-aa roop vinsi-aa dukhee dayh rulee. The color fades, and beauty vanishes; the body suffers and collapses.
fxag urfenr ag afenr fag 3 ALG ford At I (1287-5, ners, He 1) kithhu aa-i-aa kah ga-i-aa kihu na see-o kihu see. Where did he come from? Where is he going? Did he exist or not?
Hfe nfs rer ater atts ar gat Il (1287-6, Hors, 2 1) man mukh galaa go-ee-aa keetaa chaa-o ralee. The self-willed manmukh made empty boasts, indulging in parties and pleasures.
Sa Ad oH fae fhe us ufs ur|t IQI (4287-6, Hers, He 1) naanak sachay naam bin sir khur pat paatee. ||2|| O Nanak, without the True Name, his honor is torn away, from head to foot. ||2| |
ugat Il (1287-7) pa-orhee. Pauree:
nifys OW Ae quest nis ofS Aaret I (1287-7, Hes, He 1)
amrit naam sadaa sukh-daata antay ho-ay sakhaa-ee.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever the Giver of peace. It shall be your Help and Support in the end.
MS IT AIS ITS ars AS S Uret Il (1287-7, news, we 1) baajh guroo jagat ba-uraanaa naavai saar na paa-ee. Without the Guru, the world is insane. It does not appreciate the worth of the Name.
Afsag Refs A uses fre Ast APS floret 1 1287-8, ers, He 1)
satgur sayveh say parvaan jin" jotee jot milaa-ee.
Those who serve the True Guru are accepted and approved. Their light merges into the Light.
A Afod A Aa So fam ost His SATS I (1287-8, Has, He 1)
so saahib so sayvak tayhaa jis bhaanaa man vasaa-ee.
That servant who enshrines the Lord's Will within his mind, becomes just like his Lord and Master.
witue ate ag fate ay ufeer nfo nig ane Il (1287-9, ners, He 1)
aapnai bhaanai kaho kin sukh paa-i-aa anDhaa anDh kamaa-ee.
Tell me, who has ever found peace by following his own will? The blind act in blindness.
fatter oe ot on andt Hae seo AT Il (1287-9, ners, He 1)
bikhi-aa kaday hee rajai naahee moorakh bhukh na jaa-ee.
No one is ever satisfied and fulfilled by evil and corruption. The hunger of the fool is not satisfied.
en Ag & ofa feast fag Afsae gs 3 uret Il (1287-10, vers, He 1) doojai sabh ko lag vigutaa bin satgur boojh na paa-ee. Attached to duality, all are ruined; without the True Guru, there is no understanding.
Afsag Az A AY ue fan 3 fas ad gat ION (1287-10, Hers, He 1)
satgur sayvay so sukh paa-ay jis no kirpaa karay rajaa-ee. ||20||
Those who serve the True Guru find peace; they are blessed with Grace by the Will of the Lord. ||20]|
HX H2 4 Il (1287-11)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Aan UeH vfs soot A oe Us UTE I (1287-11, Hors, He 1)
saram Dharam du-ay naankaa jay Dhan palai paa-ay.
Modesty and righteousness both, O Nanak, are qualities of those who are blessed with true wealth.
Aug fag 3 areha fas ffs det ofS it 1287-11, wore, He 1) so Dhan mitar na kaa‘dhee-ai jit sir chotaa’ khaa-ay. Do not refer to that wealth as your friend, which leads you to get your head beaten.
fis & us US ZA fo a TE sols Il (1287-12, Hes, He 1) jin kai palai Dhan vasai tin kaa naa-o fakeer. Those who possess only this worldly wealth are known as paupers.
faq a fose 5 safe 3 oo Tat Tats WAU (1287-12, wera, He 1) jin" kai hirdai too vaseh tay nar gunee gaheer. ||1]| But those, within whose hearts You dwell, O Lord - those people are oceans of virtue.
[1
He & Il (1287-13)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
eut vot Hosha ae 3 wafa Se I 1287-13, Hes, He 1)
dukhee dunee sahayrhee-ai jaa-ay ta lageh dukh.
Worldly possessions are obtained by pain and suffering; when they are gone, they leave pain and suffering.
Sod AY oH fag fan 5 Sat Se Il (1287-13, Has, He 1) naanak sachay naam bin kisai na lathee bhukh. O Nanak, without the True Name, hunger is never satisfied.
gut sao OSs At Sat St ge I (1287-14, vers, Hs 1) roopee bhukh na utrai jaa’ daykhaa™ taa’ bhukh. Beauty does not satisfy hunger; when the man sees beauty, he hungers even more.
HS JA Adld & SS Bald SY Ml (1287-14, Hers, ue 1) jaytay ras sareer kay taytay lageh dukh. ||2|| As many as are the pleasures of the body, so many are the pains which afflict it. ||2]|
H8 & Il (1287-14)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
witt ot nig He Hfe nid Sq nig Il (1287-14, Hes, He 1) anDhee kammee anDh man man anDhai tan anDh. Acting blindly, the mind becomes blind. The blind mind makes the body blind.
foafs ofan famr dha at 3S use FT Il (1287-15, Hers, He 1) chikarh laa-i-ai ki-aa thee-ai jaa‘ tutai pathar banDh. Why make a dam with mud and plaster? Even a dam made of stones gives way.
ag Sat ast dt BT ZHI OT TS Il (1287-15, Hors, He 1)
banDh tutaa bayrhee nahee naa tulhaa naa haath.
The dam has burst. There is no boat. There is no raft. The water's depth is unfathomable.
Sa Ad OH fee AS SS AG Ill (1287-16, Has, He 1) naanak sachay naam vin kaytay dubay saath. ||3]|| O Nanak, without the True Name, many multitudes have drowned. ||3]|
He &% Il (1287-16)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
oY He Afeat wy HS Ju we AS fats ATT Il (1287-16, Hare, He 1)
lakh man su-inaa lakh man rupaa lakh saahaa sir saah.
Thousands of pounds of gold, and thousands of pounds of silver; the king over the heads of thousands of kings.
BY GAA BY SA SA Set west ufsars il (1287-17, vars, ue 1)
lakh laskar lakh vaajay nayjay lakhee ghorhee paatisaah.
Thousands of armies, thousands of marching bands and spearmen; the emperor of thousands of horsemen.
fra wfeg Sweat nafs uret wires Il 1287-17, Hers, He 1) jithai saa-ir langh-naa agan paanee asgaah. The unfathomable ocean of fire and water must be crossed.
aut fefa 3 uireet ondt ue AIT Il (1287-18, Hers, He 1) kanDhee dis na aavee Dhaahee pavai kahaah. The other shore cannot be seen; only the roar of pitiful cries can be heard.
soa Ga wretfs ATS det ufSATS Iii (1287-18, Hers, He 1) naanak othai jaanee-ahi saah kay-ee paatisaah. ||4| | O Nanak, there, it shall be known, whether anyone is a king or an emperor. ||4]|
UugST Il (1287-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
feaor ner Arte dfe garehr Il (1287-19, Hara, He 1) iknaa galee’ janjeer band rabaanee-ai. Some have chains around their necks, in bondage to the Lord.
aa gets Afs Ae UETEM Il (1287-19, Hes, He 1) baDhay chhuteh sach sach pachhaanee-ai. They are released from bondage, realizing the True Lord as True.
usr qQrt foftimr us ue A Ae ASA I (1288-1, Hes, He 1)
likhi-aa palai paa-ay so sach jaanee-ai.
One whose pre-ordained destiny is activated, comes to know the True Lord. gant afe fass afeor we Il (1288-1, Has, He 1
hukmee ho-ay nibayrh ga-i-aa jaanee-ai.
By God's Command, it is ordained. When the mortal goes, he knows.
sCne sed Aafe uss Il (1288-1, Hos, He 1)
bha-ojal taaranhaar sabad pachhaanee-ai. Realize the Word of the Shabad, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
JT WS HTS UTS web Il (1288-2, vers, He 1) chor jaar joo-aar peerhay ghaanee-ai. Thieves, adulterers and gamblers are pressed like seeds in the mill.
feza ofesara fre geereht | (1288-2, vars, He 1) nindak laa-itbaar milay harh"vaanee-ai. Slanderers and gossipers are hand-cuffed.
aon Afs mafe A SaaS ATEHA QAI (1288-2, HES, He 1) gurmukh sach samaa-ay so dargeh jaanee-ai. ||21]||
The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord, and is famous in the Court of the Lord. [|21]|
HBa Hs 2 Il (1288-3)
salok mehlaa 2. Shalok, Second Mehl:
ag eats ufsAT Hod uss SS Il 1288-3, wars, He 2) naa-o fakeerai paatisaahu moorakh pandit naa-o. The beggar is known as an emperor, and the fool is known as a religious scholar.
nid a ag uray SS AT AMS Il (1288-3, vars, vs 2) anDhay kaa naa-o paarkhoo ayvai karay gu-aa-o. The blind man is known as a seer; this is how people talk.
feats a a wGudt ast us aS I (1288-4, nos, v2 2) ilat kaa naa-o cha-uDhree koorhee pooray thaa-o. The trouble-maker is called a leader, and the liar is seated with honor.
Soa TeHfa wreha afe at Sa four nail 1288-4, ners, ve 2) naanak gurmukh jaanee-ai kal kaa ayhu ni-aa-o. ||1|| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs know that this is justice in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1]|
He 4% Il (1288-5)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Jdat ant 3 fraerat Sar ufgnr ar@ i (1288-5, vars, ve 1) harnaa™ baajaa’ tai sikdaaraa’ ayn"aa parh"-aa naa-o. Deer, falcons and government officials are known to be trained and clever.
ait oat afs coef mrat avdt aS il (1288-5, ners, He 1) faa“Dhee lagee jaat fahaa-in agai naahee thaa-o. When the trap is set, they trap their own kind; hereafter they will find no place of rest.
A ufsur A ufss stor frat are oS Il (1288-6, Hors, He 1) so parhi-aa so pandit beenaa jin"ee kamaanaa naa-o. He alone is learned and wise, and he alone is a scholar, who practices the Name.
ufsé @ As viefa HH ot Gufs dS sie Il (1288-6, ners, He 1) pahilo day jarh andar jammai taa upar hovai chhaa”-o. First, the tree puts down its roots, and then it spreads out its shade above.
TH Ald HAEH FS Il (1288-7, Hors, He 1) raajay seeh mukdam kutay. The kings are tigers, and their officials are dogs;
mfe warfefs 8S AS il 1288-7, vers, He 1) jaa-ay jagaa-ini" baithay sutay. they go out and awaken the sleeping people to harass them.
Tag coer ufets wr il (1288-7, ners, we 1) chaakar nahdaa paa-ini" ghaa-o. The public servants inflict wounds with their nails.
v3 fus afsd ofe Arg Il (1288-8, Hos, He 1) rat pit kutiho chat jaahu. The dogs lick up the blood that is spilled.
fra abot dat ATS I (1288-8, Hors, He 1) jithai jee-aa hosee saar. But there, in the Court of the Lord, all beings will be judged.
Sat Set SESH Ql (1288-8, Hers, He 1)
nakee™ vadhee" laa-itbaar. ||2||
Those who have violated the people's trust will be disgraced; their noses will be cut off. ||2]|
ugat Il (1288-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
mify Cure Heat nm age ATT Il (1288-9, Hers, He 1) aap Uupaa-ay maydnee aapay kardaa saar. He Himself creates the world, and He himself takes care of it.
3 fag SdH 5 Sha OTH & Ba fumr” Il (1288-9, Hors, He 1)
bhai bin bharam na katee-ai naam na lagai pi-aar.
Without the Fear of God, doubt is not dispelled, and love for the Name is not embraced.
Afsas 3 38 Cun urea Hy Hrs I (1288-9, vars, He 1) satgur tay bha-o oopjai paa-ee-ai mokh du-aar. Through the True Guru, the Fear of God wells up, and the Door of Salvation is found.
3 3 Aon ues fife rst AS wRIE II (1288-10, Hes, He 1)
bhai tay sahj paa-ee-ai mil jotee jot apaar.
Through the Fear of God, intuitive ease is obtained, and one's light merges into the Light of the Infinite.
3 3 3ne Subba Tost Ses I (1288-10, nas, He 1)
bhai tay bhaijal langhee-ai gurmatee veechaar.
Through the Fear of God, the terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.
3 3 fesse uch fan nis B ursrerg Il (1288-11, Hers, He 1) bhai tay nirbha-o paa-ee-ai jis daa ant na paaraavaar. Through the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord is found; He has no end or limitation.
HOHY & at ATS @ Weal feAor Aes Aafs yas Il (1288-11, Hare, He 1)
manmukh bhai kee saar na jaannee tarisnaa jaltay karahi pukaar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not appreciate the value of the Fear of God. Burning in desire, they weep and wail.
Sod te dt Ss AY ufeor Tenst Efe we M22Il (1288-12, Has, He 1)
naanak naavai hee tay sukh paa-i-aa gurmatee ur Dhaar. ||22||
O Nanak, through the Name, peace is obtained, by enshrining the Guru's Teachings within the heart. ||22||
HEX H2 Y Il (1288-12)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
TU TH SASt FH ATE FS ll (1288-13, wars, oe 1) roopai kaamai dostee bhukhai saadai gandh. Beauty and sexual desire are friends; hunger and tasty food are tied together.
wa HS wis fits frets Cur ACs usw I 288-13, vers, Hs 1)
labai maalai ghul mil michal oo‘ghai sa-urh palangh.
Greed is bound up in its search for wealth, and sleep will use even a tiny space as a bed.
sa au unig df eas fueS nig Il (1288-13, Hers, He 1) bha‘ukai kop khu-aar ho-ay fakarh pitay anDh. Anger barks and brings ruin on itself, blindly pursuing useless conflicts.
wu var area fee oe ufo ao NAM (1288-14, Hes, He 1) chupai changa naankaa vin naavai muhi ganDh. ||1]| It is good to be silent, O Nanak; without the Name, one's mouth spews forth only filth.
[21
He &% Il (1288-14)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
TH HS gu AS AAS UA Sa Il (1288-14, wars, He 1) raaj Maal roop jaat joban panjay thag. Royal power, wealth, beauty, social status and youth are the five thieves.
Sot salt Hal Sfamr fas o Tet GA Il (1288-15, Has, He 1) aynee thagee™ jag thagi-aa kinai na rakhee laj. These thieves have plundered the world; no one's honor has been spared.
Sor safe oa A fA as at Ust us it ci2ss-15, ners, He 1) aynaa thagni" thag say je gur kee pairee paahi. But these thieves themselves are robbed, by those who fall at the Guru's Feet.
Soa AIH aId dfs AS HS WT lll (1288-16, Has, He 1) naanak karmaa baahray hor kaytay muthay jaahi. ||2|| O Nanak, the multitudes who do not have good karma are plundered. ||2||
UgST Il (1288-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ufsor Baers Bar Hay i (1288-16, nse, ve 1) parhi-aa laykhaydaar laykhaa mangee-di. The learned and educated are called to account for their actions.
fee ae afanrg niGer Sait i (1288-17, vers, He 1) vin naavai koorhi-aar a-ukhaa tangee-ai. Without the Name, they are judged false; they become miserable and suffer hardship.
m@we go ao Tebat Foti i 1288-17, ners, v2 1) a-ughat ruDhay raah galee-aa™ rokee-aa". Their path becomes treacherous and difficult, and their way is blocked.
Ret ugetg Aafe Hse it (1288-17, Hes, He 1)
sachaa vayparvaahu sabad santokhee-aa”.
Through the Shabad, the Word of the True and Independent Lord God, one becomes content.
sd deste “aT Ta 6 BIE Il (1288-18, Hare, He 1) gahir gabheer athaahu haath na labh-ee. The Lord is deep and profound and unfathomable; His depth cannot be measured.
Hd ufs dat org fee Ta af & Seat Il (1288-18, Has, He 1)
muhay muhi chotaa khaahu vin gur ko-ay na chhutsee.
Without the Guru, the mortals are beaten and punched in the face and the mouth, and no one is released.
ufs ASt wife AT SH Sash | (1288-19, Hers, He 1) pat saytee ghar jaahu naam vakhaanee-ai. Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one returns to his true home with honor.
gant Arg farsa Ser ASMA SII (1288-19, Hrs, He 1) hukmee saah giraah day‘daa jaanee-ai. ||23]|
Know that the Lord, by the Hukam of His Command, gives sustenance and the breath of life. ||23]|
Yar qace
HX H3 % Il (1289-1)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
uge urat mratet Ate fsa fer uri fom UTS I (1289-1, Hers, He 1) pa-unai paanee agnee jee-o tin ki-aa khusee-aa ki-aa peerh. Living beings are formed of air, water and fire. They are subject to pleasure and pain.
uest ustat wrorat fefa ef gofe srte Il (1289-1, wars, He 1)
Dhartee paataalee aakaasee ik dar rahan vajeer. In this world, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in the Akaashic ethers of the heavens, some remain ministers in the Court of the Lord.
feaar eat ore fefa ufs dfs aAdte Il (1289-2, xe, He 1) iknaa vadee aarjaa ik mar hohi jaheer. Some live long lives, while others suffer and die.
fefa & uta fous art fefa wet feafa eoite Il (1289-2, ners, He 1)
ik day khaahi nikhutai naahee ik sadaa fireh fakeer.
Some give and consume, and still their wealth is not exhausted, while others remain poor forever.
JaHt AH JaHt ed SAX BA Hs Be Il (1289-3, Hare, He 1) hukmee saajay hukmee dhaahay ayk chasay meh lakh. In His Will He creates, and in His Will He destroys thousands in an instant.
AS & 3a ofanr gan 3S 54 Il (1289-3, Hare, He 1)
sabh ko nathai nathi-aa bakhsay torhay nath.
He has harnessed everyone with His harness; when He forgives, he breaks the harness.
Zor feet Ja SY BST Gy Il (1289-4, nore, ue 1) varnaa chihnaa baahraa laykhay baajh alakh. He has no color or features; He is invisible and beyond calculation.
faS adhy fas nmi AU AS AT II (1289-4, Hers, He 1) ki-o kathee-ai ki-o aakhee-ai jaapai sacho sach. How can He be described? He is known as the Truest of the True.
Ada’ AAS’ ATT AT STAM MIT Ms Il (1289-4, Hass, ue 1)
karnaa kathnaa kaar sabh naanak aap akath.
All the actions which are done and described, O Nanak, are done by the Indescribable Lord Himself.
maa at Kat ASfE Il (1289-5, Hare, He 1) akath kee kathaa sunay-ay. Whoever hears the description of the indescribable,
fafa afa fafa famrg FET AY SPE NAM (1289-5, Hers, He 1) riDh buDh siDh gi-aan sadaa sukh ho-ay. ||1|| is blessed with wealth, intelligence, perfection, spiritual wisdom and eternal peace.
[21
He 4% Il (1289-6) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
WA Ad 5 5S AG ST Il (1289-6, nw, we 1) ajar jarai ta na-o kul banDh. One who bears the unbearable, controls the nine holes of the body.
un ye de fag AT Il (1289-6, vars, He 1)
poojai paraan hovai thir kanDh.
One who worships and adores the Lord with his breath of life, gains stability in his body-wall.
a 3 ntfeur axTt ST ATE Il (1289-6, Hors, He 1) kahaa" tay aa-i-aa kahaa™ ayhu jaan. Where has he come from, and where will he go?
HS HIS Td UTSTE Il (1289-7, Has, He 1) jeevat marat rahai parvaan. Remaining dead while yet alive, he is accepted and approved.
JAH FS FF USS Il (1289-7, wor, vs 1)
hukmai boojhai tat pachhaanai.
Whoever understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, realizes the essence of reality.
fey USAT TT 3 WE Il (1289-7, vars, we 1) ih parsaad guroo tay jaanai. This is known by Guru's Grace.
Te SST GSA AS Ill (1289-7, Hors, ve 1) ho“daa farhee-ag naanak jaan. O Nanak, know this: egotism leads to bondage.
ot IG at H Wat US MI (1289-8, wars, Hs 1)
naa ha-o naa mai joonee paan. ||2||
Only those who have no ego and no self-conceit, are not consigned to reincarnation. [21]
UugST Il (1289-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ust on Avera dfe gat fixfemr i (1289-8, Hers, He 1) parh"ee-ai naam saalaah hor buDhee"™ mithi-aa. Read the Praise of the Lord's Name; other intellectual pursuits are false.
fag Ad Surg HOH faafemr Il (1289-9, vers, v2 1) bin sachay vaapaar janam birthi-aa. Without dealing in Truth, life is worthless.
m3 3 uTaerg & fas dt ufemr il 289-9, wars, He 1) ant na paaraavaar na kin hee paa-i-aa. No one has ever found the Lord's end or limitation.
AS Aa dee gag f36 AY 6 SEM I (1289-9, nears, Hs 1)
sabh jag garab gubaar tin sach na bhaa-i-aa.
All the world is enveloped by the darkness of egotistical pride. It does not like the Truth.
38 oy fers sels SfS3ur Il (1289-10, Hers, He 1)
chalay naam visaar taavan tati-aa.
Those who depart from this world, forgetting the Naam, shall be roasted in the frying pan.
weet niefs 3m efaar wiser | (1289-10, ners, He 1) baldee andar tayl dubiDhaa ghati-aa. They pour the oil of duality within, and burn.
nitfent Got ae fed Gefsmr il (1289-11, ners, He 1)
aa-i-aa uthee khay! firai uvti-aa.
They come into the world and wander around aimlessly; they depart when the play is finished.
SOA AS HS Ad SsnM iQsil (1289-11, Hers, v2 1) naanak sachai mayl sachai rati-aa. ||24|| O Nanak, imbued with Truth, the mortals merge in Truth. ||24||
HX H3 % Il (1289-11)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ufset Hg ffir HA nies SA I (1289-11, Hes, He 1) pahilaa’ maasahu nimmi-aa maasai andar vaas. First, the mortal is conceived in the flesh, and then he dwells in the flesh.
at uf HA fs fifeor gs TH So HA II (1289-12, Hors, He 1) jee-O paa-ay maas muhi mili-aa had chamm tan maas. When he comes alive, his mouth takes flesh; his bones, skin and body are flesh.
HAY Sots afent HT HMA PETE" II (1289-12, Hers, He 1) maasahu baahar kadhi-aa mammaa maas giraas. He comes out of the womb of flesh, and takes a mouthful of flesh at the breast.
Hd WA ot dts HA at HA nef ATA II (1289-13, Hers, He 1) muhu maasai kaa jeebh maasai kee maasai andar saas. His mouth is flesh, his tongue is flesh; his breath is in the flesh.
zat dur forfour ufs & wrfeor HA I (1289-13, Hers, He 1) vadaa ho-aa vee-aahi-aa ghar lai aa-i-aa maas. He grows up and is married, and brings his wife of flesh into his home.
HAG ot HA Cur HAG AS A Il (1289-14, vers, Hs 1) maasahu hee maas oopjai maasahu sabho saak. Flesh is produced from flesh; all relatives are made of flesh.
Afsafe fufet gan ash st a wre aH I (1289-14, Hare, He 1)
satgur mili-ai hukam bujhee-ai taa‘ ko aavai raas.
When the mortal meets the True Guru, and realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then he comes to be reformed.
uf ge 3d se Sa Tele PASTA NU (1289-15, HES, He 1)
aap chhutay nah chhootee-ai naanak bachan binaas. ||1||
Releasing himself, the mortal does not find release; O Nanak, through empty words, One is ruined. ||1]|
He % Il (1289-15) mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
HA HA ats Hoy Sas famre fore sot ATE Il (1289-15, ners, He 1)
maas maas kar moorakh jhagrhay gi-aan Dhi-aan nahee jaanai.
The fools argue about flesh and meat, but they know nothing about meditation and spiritual wisdom.
aGe WH AGE Aa aoe fan ufs UT ANTE Il (1289-16, Has, He 1) ka-un maas ka-un saag kahaavai kis meh paap samaanay. What is called meat, and what is called green vegetables? What leads to sin?
dat Hf dH Aa ate Vefsur at aes Il (1289-17, ners, He 1)
gai‘daa maar hom jag kee-ay dayviti-aa kee baanay.
It was the habit of the gods to kill the rhinoceros, and make a feast of the burnt offering.
HA efs aff sa uasts TSt HSA UTE Il (1289-17, Hors, He 1)
maas chhod bais nak pakrheh raatee maanas khaanay.
Those who renounce meat, and hold their noses when sitting near it, devour men at night.
eg afs Sat & feuarefs fare ftmrg Sct AS I 1289-17, vers, HE 1)
farh kar lokaa™ no dikhlaavahi gi-aan Dhi-aan nahee soojhai.
They practice hypocrisy, and make a show before other people, but they do not understand anything about meditation or spiritual wisdom.
aad nit AE for adit ad o afont gS Il (1289-18, Hers, He 1)
naanak anDhay si-o ki-aa kahee-ai kahai na kahi-aa boojhai.
O Nanak, what can be said to the blind people? They cannot answer, or even understand what is said.
viot Af fa vig ane fan foe fa See ordt il (1289-19, nes, Hs 1) anDhaa so-ay je anDh kamaavai tis ridai se lochan naahee. They alone are blind, who act blindly. They have no eyes in their hearts.
Hs fust at gas feuds Het HA © UTdt II (1289-19, ners, He 1)
maat pitaa kee rakat nipannay machhee maas na khaa‘hee.
They are produced from the blood of their mothers and fathers, but they do not eat fish or meat.
UST ACO ferst use at fofa Her Ga Ho ad I (1290-1, ners, He 1)
istaree purkhai jaa‘ nis maylaa othai manDh kamaahee. But when men and women meet in the night, they come together in the flesh.
HAd fSH HAT HA JH HA A SIS Il (1290-1, Hers, He 1) maasahu nimmay maasahu jammay ham maasai kay bhaa“day. In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.
farirg fimrg ae AS ot IT ATS Urs Il (1290-2, wavs, we 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan kachh soojhai naahee chatur kahaavai paa“day.
You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.
WIT A HA Het AMM we aT HA Vas I (1290-2, nore, He 1)
baahar kaa maas mandaa su-aamee ghar kaa maas changayraa.
O master, you believe that flesh on the outside is bad, but the flesh of those in your own home is good.
dba as Afs WA Je Ae ofr SAT Ih (1290-3, Hes, He 1) jee-a jant sabh maasahu ho-ay jee-ay la-i-aa vaasayraa. All beings and creatures are flesh; the soul has taken up its home in the flesh.
usd sufa sy sft este nig ag fe AT Il (1290-3, vars, ue 1)
abhakh bhakheh bhakh taj chhodeh anDh guroo jin kayraa.
They eat the uneatable; they reject and abandon what they could eat. They have a teacher who is blind.
HAd fSH HAT HA IH HA A SIS II (1290-4, Hors, He 1) maasahu nimmay maasahu jammay ham maasai kay bhaa“day. In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.
famirg fimrg ae AS ad BIT ATS UTS I (1290-4, vars, we 1)
gi-aan Dhi-aan kachh soojhai naahee chatur kahaavai paa“day.
You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.
HA usel HA ASST VI Afel HA AHS? Il (1290-4, Hors, He 1)
maas puraanee maas kaytaabee™ chahu jug maas kamaanaa.
Meat is allowed in the Puraanas, meat is allowed in the Bible and the Koran. Throughout the four ages, meat has been used.
afa ata Zorfo was GS HA AHTST II (1290-5, Has, He 1) jaj kaaj vee-aahi suhaavai othai maas samaanaa. It is featured in sacred feasts and marriage festivities; meat is used in them.
fenst use fourfo HA UTSATS ABST Il (1290-5, wars, He 1) istaree purakh nipjahi maasahu paatisaah sultaanaa”, Women, men, kings and emperors originate from meat.
A Gfe fenfo safe Ate St Co a BS BBS Il (1290-6, nas, vs 1) jay o-ay diseh narak jaa‘day taa™ un" kaa daan na lainaa. If you see them going to hell, then do not accept charitable gifts from them.
fa sofa Hof Be Fug Sg firsrat il (1290-7, nsw, v2 1) day“daa narak surag laiday daykhhu ayhu Dhinyaanaa. The giver goes to hell, while the receiver goes to heaven - look at this injustice.
uf 5 as Sa TSS us ya fFrar il (1290-7, ners, He 1)
aap na boojhai lok bujhaa-ay paa‘day kharaa si-aanaa.
You do not understand your own self, but you preach to other people. O Pandit, you are very wise indeed.
us 3 We dt ard fag HA Bus il 1290-7, vers, we 1) paa™day too jaanai hee naahee kithhu maas upannaa. O Pandit, you do not know where meat originated.
Sfenig nig ore aura Sfemig fesSE at Il (1290-8, Hers, He 1)
to-i-ahu ann kamaad kapaahaa” to-i-ahu taribhavan gannaa.
Corn, Sugar cane and cotton are produced from water. The three worlds came from water.
sur nme 38 ag fafa get Sut aTs fearar II 1290-8, Hers, He 1) to-aa aakhai ha-o baho biDh hachhaa toai bahut bikaaraa. Water says, "I am good in many ways." But water takes many forms.
SS JA efs de Afsumt soa ad fearar QI (1290-9, vars, He 1) aytay ras chhod hovai sani-aasee naanak kahai vichaaraa. ||2| |
Forsaking these delicacies, one becomes a true Sannyaasee, a detached hermit. Nanak reflects and speaks. ||2||
UugST Il (1290-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
JG fomr nmr fea rts Sa nis 3 fae dt urfemr | (1290-10, Hare, He 1) ha-o ki-aa aakhaa ik jeebh tayraa ant na kin hee paa-i-aa. What can I say with only one tongue? I cannot find your limits.
Ae Ade sets A SS dt wfo ANfEMr I (1290-10, Hers, He 1) sachaa sabad veechaar say tujh hee maahi samaa-i-aa. Those who contemplate the True Word of the Shabad are absorbed into You, O Lord.
fefa sae 2q afs sone fee Afsas fas o ufemr I 1290-11, Hers, He 1)
ik bhagvaa vays kar bharamday vin satgur kinai na paa-i-aa.
Some wander around in saffron robes, but without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord.
on fersd safe aa 30 nies mmy warfer I (1290-11, Hers, He 1)
days disantar bhav thakay tuDh andar aap lukaa-i-aa.
They wander in foreign lands and countries until they grow weary, but You hide Yourself within them.
qd a Aa Wo J ats Woe urfy feerfemr Il 1290-12, ners, He 1)
gur kaa sabad ratann hai kar chaanan aap dikhaa-i-aa.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is a jewel, through which the Lord shines forth and reveals Himself.
nual wiry ustfent aaHst Afs AHEM II (1290-12, Hare, He 1)
aapnaa aap pachhaani-aa gurmatee sach samaa-i-aa.
Realizing one's own self, following the Guru's Teachings, the mortal is absorbed into Truth.
Met ACS Sado sag frst Fate | 1290-13, news, He 1) aavaa ga-on bajaaree-aa baajaar jinee rachaa-i-aa. Coming and going, the tricksters and magicians put on their magic show.
fea fag Aa Ae fre Hfe AS Stem QUil 4290-13, Hers, He 1)
ik thir sachaa salaahnaa jin man sachaa bhaa-i-aa. ||25] | But those whose minds are pleased by the True Lord, praise the True One, the Ever- stable Lord. ||25]||
HEX H3 Y Il (1290-14)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
soa Heat aH fasy ee nifys ee fer il (1290-14, ners, ne 1) naanak maa-i-aa karam birakh fal amrit fal vis. O Nanak, the tree of actions done in Maya yields ambrosial fruit and poisonous fruit.
AS AWE ATS" Ad fAA SS FSA INA (4290-15, Hears, He 1) sabh kaaran kartaa karay jis khavaalay tis. ||1]| The Creator does all deeds; we eat the fruits as He ordains. ||1]|
He 2 Il (1290-15)
mehlaa 2. Second Mehl:
Sea Toba aha efsnreint nrait ASt ATG Il 1290-15, vers, vs 2) naanak dunee-aa kee-aa™ vadi-aa-ee-aa™ agee saytee jaal. O Nanak, burn worldly greatness and glory in the fire.
Sot Aart on fertenr fea o VSM StH QI (1290-16, Hrs, He 2)
aynee jalee-ee” naam visaari-aa ik na chalee-aa naal. ||2||
These burnt offerings have caused mortals to forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Not even one of them will go along with you in the end. ||2]|
UugST Il (1290-16) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fafs fafe of& feds gat verfeor I (1290-17, Hers, He 2)
sir sir ho-ay nibayrh hukam chalaa-i-aa. He judges each and every being; by the Hukam of His Command, He leads us on.
33 ofa foaz 3d His stfemr | (1290-17, Hers, v8 2) tayrai hath nibayrh toohai man bhaa-i-aa. Justice is in Your Hands, O Lord; You are pleasing to my mind.
aS vee sts afe o Tat I (1290-17, Hare, He 2) kaal chalaa-ay bann ko-ay na rakhsee. The mortal is bound and gagged by Death and lead away; no one can rescue him.
Ag Aaetar ae stant SeAt Il (1290-18, Hers, He 2) jar jarvaanaa ka‘ni" charhi-aa nachsee. Old age, the tyrant, dances on the mortal's shoulders.
Afsag afog sz Ast Tat Il (1290-18, Hare, He 2) satgur bohith bayrh sachaa rakhsee. So climb aboard the boat of the True Guru, and the True Lord will rescue you.
wale So SSIS niofes Sunt Il (1290-18, vars, He 2) agan bhakhai bharhhaarh an-din bhakhsee. The fire of desire burns like an oven, consuming mortals night and day.
STE Vat Sa Jat Seat Il (1290-19, nave, v2 2)
faathaa chugai chog hukmee chhutsee.
Like trapped birds, the mortals peck at the corn; only through the Lord's Command will they find release.
TIT AS A IT AZ fSySHt NEI (1290-19, vars, we 2) kartaa karay so hog koorh nikhutsee. ||26| | Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass; falsehood shall fail in the end. ||26]|
Yat 9K
HEX H3 Il (1291-1)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
ug Hf we tafe ef A Afsag Use AAS Il (1291-1, Hers, He 1)
ghar meh ghar daykhaa-ay day-ay so satgur purakh sujaan.
The True Guru is the All-knowing Primal Being; He shows us our true home within the home of the self.
uv Hae Ufsars ufs 3d FH ASE SATS Il (1291-1, vars, He 1)
panch sabad Dhunikaar Dhun tah baajai sabad neesaan.
The Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, resonate and resound within; the insignia of the Shabad is revealed there, vibrating gloriously.
au Sui use 3d YS HIG ITS Il (1291-2, nos, v2 1)
deep lo-a paataal tah khand mandal hairaan.
Worlds and realms, nether regions, solar systems and galaxies are wondrously revealed.
ag ug afigz so Ate sefs AeSsTS Il (1291-2, Hes, He 1) taar ghor baajintar tah saach takhat sultaan. The strings and the harps vibrate and resound; the true throne of the Lord is there.
Huns a ufs aa aAfs Afe Hats fee ote i (1291-3, Hos, He 1)
sukhman kai ghar raag sun sunn mandal liv laa-ay.
Listen to the music of the home of the heart - Sukhmani, peace of mind. Lovingly tune in to His state of celestial ecstasy.
wae wat shard HOA Hofs AME Il (1291-3, Hers, He 1) akath kathaa beechaaree-ai mansaa maneh samaa-ay. Contemplate the Unspoken Speech, and the desires of the mind are dissolved.
Cafe ane nififs sfeur feg He asT 6 AME I (1291-4, ners, He 1)
ulat kamal amrit bhari-aa ih man katahu na jaa-ay.
The heart-lotus is turned upside-down, and is filled with Ambrosial Nectar. This mind does not go out; it does not get distracted.
mat Amy & Sad vite warts ANTE II (1291-4, Hers, He 1)
ajpaa jaap na veesrai aad jugaad samaa-ay.
It does not forget the Chant which is chanted without chanting; it is immersed in the Primal Lord God of the ages.
Afs Aebor us fees TaHfe for wis SH I (1291-5, Hers, He 1)
sabh sakhee-aa panchay milay gurmukh nij ghar vaas.
All the sister-companions are blessed with the five virtues. The Gurmukhs dwell in the home of the self deep within.
Rae uff feg we od aoa St aT SA NA (1291-5, Hare, He 1) sabad khoj ih ghar lahai naanak taa kaa daas. ||1]|| Nanak is the slave of that one who seeks the Shabad and finds this home within. ||1]|
He 4% Il (1291-6)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
fatetits faxes gator erst Il (1291-6, Hers, He 1) chilimil bisee-aar dunee-aa faanee. The extravagant glamor of the world is a passing show.
TSS MAS HS TS B HST Il (1291-6, warE, Hs 1) kaaloob akal man gor na maanee. My twisted mind does not believe that it will end up in a grave.
Ho aia aHsdta 3 edhe werfeor i (1291-7, wars, He 1) man kameen kamatreen too daree-aa-o khudaa-i-aa. I am meek and lowly; You are the great river.
Sa de HS etfs nied wad din o afeMr Ih 1291-7, ne, He 1)
ayk cheej mujhai deh avar jahar cheej na bhaa-i-aa.
Please, bless me with the one thing; everything else is poison, and does not tempt me.
yaa aH art faeHfs yerfemr il (1291-8, were, Hs 1) puraab khaam koojai hikmat khudaa-i-aa. You filled this fragile body with the water of life, O Lord, by Your Creative Power.
HS Bora J AeISt orfenr | (1291-8, wars, He 1) man tu-aanaa too kudratee aa-i-aa. By Your Omnipotence, I have become powerful.
Hal aod tare HASts fas vs AetfeEnr Il (1291-8, Hare, He 1) Sag naanak deebaan mastaanaa nit charhai savaa-i-aa. Nanak is a dog in the Court of the Lord, intoxicated more and more, all the time.
MSA Tow Yoa SH Yee IQ (1291-9, Hears, Hs 1) aatas dunee-aa khunak naam khudaa-i-aa. ||2|| The world is on fire; the Name of the Lord is cooling and soothing. ||2| |
ust aet Hs U II (1291-9) pa-orhee navee mehlaa 5. New Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
AS ds VSS VHS Safe I (1291-10, Hare, v2 5) sabho vartai chalat chalat vakhaani-aa. His wonderful play is all-pervading; it is wonderful and amazing!
UTSYIH USHA Toute As | (1291-10, ners, us 5) paarbarahm parmaysar gurmukh jaani-aa. As Gurmukh, I know the the Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God.
oa Afs fears Hate stats il (1291-10, Hers, He 5)
lathay sabh vikaar sabad neesaani-aa.
All my sins and corruption are washed away, through the insignia of the Shabad, the Word of God.
Ag Afat Gurg se footer | (1291-11, ere, Hs 5) saaDhoo sang uDhaar bha-ay nikaani-aa. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and becomes free.
frnfs frfs wag Afs dar HfsHr | 291-11, Hers, He 5)
simar simar daataar sabh rang maani-aa.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Great Giver, I enjoy all comforts and pleasures.
usage sfeor AAfs fog etetfeur i (1291-12, ners, He 5)
pargat bha-i-aa sansaar mihar chhaavaani-aa.
I have become famous throughout the world, under the canopy of His kindness and grace.
mma aafA fHore Ae Agate Il (1291-12, Hare, He 5)
aapay bakhas milaa-ay sad kurbaani-aa.
He Himself has forgiven me, and united me with Himself; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.
Sod Be free wAH stent 12911 (1291-12, Hare, H3 5)
naanak la-ay milaa-ay khasmai bhaani-aa. ||27]||
O Nanak, by the Pleasure of His Will, my Lord and Master has blended me with Himself. ||27]|
HX H2 Y Il (1291-13)
salok mehlaa 1. Shalok, First Mehl:
Ud A AGE AGH US US Sst US HA Il (1291-13, Har, He 1) Dhan so kaagad kalam Dhan Dhan bhaa“daa Dhan mas. Blessed is the paper, blessed is the pen, blessed is the inkwell, and blessed is the ink.
US Burd soot fate oy feuteor AG NA (1291-13, Hers, He 1) Dhan laykhaaree naankaa jin naam likhaa-i-aa sach. ||1|| Blessed is the writer, O Nanak, who writes the True Name. ||1||
He % Il (1291-14)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
nny uct aon nif Gufs Sy fs F i (291-14, wera, we 1)
aapay patee kalam aap upar laykh bhe too”.
You Yourself are the writing tablet, and You Yourself are the pen. You are also what is written on it.
SA AIA FST GA AT F | (1291-15, wars, He 1) ayko kahee-ai naankaa doojaa kaahay koo. ||2| | Speak of the One Lord, O Nanak; how could there be any other? ||2]|
ust I (1291-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 uma urfy zaser orfy wes geet Il (1291-15, vers, we 1)
too” aapay aap varatdaa aap banat banaa-ee.
You Yourself are all-pervading; You Yourself made the making. 30 fag sat & Sot J sfoor AH II (1291-16, werE, M8 1)
tuDh bin doojaa ko nahee too rahi-aa samaa-ee. Without You, there is no other at all; You are permeating and pervading everywhere.
sat afs fufs 3d Weer 3g SHAS uret I (1291-16, vers, we tayree gat mit toohai jaandaa tuDh keemat paa-ee. You alone know Your state and extent. Only You can estimate Your worth.
3 Moe nidigs MAH F Tans feat i 1291-16, wars, vs 1)
too alakh agochar agam hai gurmat dikhaa-ee.
You are invisible, imperceptible and inaccessible. You are revealed through the Guru's Teachings.
nists mifamre wu say D ae farts aevet It (1291-17, nos, He 1)
antar agi-aan dukh bharam hai gur gi-aan gavaa-ee.
Deep within, there is ignorance, suffering and doubt; through the spiritual wisdom of the Guru, they are eradicated.
fan feu ats fon Afs Sfo A ont fomret | (1291-18, Hers, He 1) jis kirpaa karahi tis mayl laihi so naam Dhi-aa-ee. He alone meditates on the Naam, whom You unite with Yourself, in Your Mercy.
3 AIT UTY wai FT stent AS set Il (1291-18, ware, Hs 1)
too kartaa purakh agamm hai ravi-aa sabh thaa-ee.
You are the Creator, the Inaccessible Primal Lord God; You are all-pervading everywhere.
fag 3 ofefe Afeor fz a Ba SSA TE Wet MACAU AT Ml (1291-19, wars, we
jit too laa-ihi sachi-aa tit ko lagai naanak gun gaa-ee. ||28]|1]| suDh.
To whatever You link the mortal, O True Lord, to that he is linked. Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises. ||28]|1]] Sudh] |
Yat AQ
TH HOST Tat SIS SHES A at 1292-1) raag malaar banee bhagat naamdayv jee-o kee Raag Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsars yArfe it (1292-1) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
AMS sure ae nas fadHo Il (1292-2, ners, sas ane th)
sayveelay gopaal raa-ay akul niranjan.
Serve the King, the Sovereign Lord of the World. He has no ancestry; He is immaculate and pure.
sats oe th Weta AS AS NU TIC Il (1292-2, vers, sas nee Ft)
bhagat daan deejai jaacheh sant jan. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Please bless me with the gift of devotion, which the humble Saints beg for. ||1]|Pause] |
mW 3 ufe fea fen Aafes dao seo fesAr AUS Ba AUS Us Il (1292-2, ners, sas SoHE Ah
jaa chai ghar dig disai saraa-ichaa baikunth bhavan chitarsaalaa sapat lok saamaan pooree-alay.
His Home is the pavilion seen in all directions; His ornamental heavenly realms fill the seven worlds alike.
Wo ufs oft aurdt de Han des aGsa ae sus aces A AT fiat Il (1292-3, nes, Sas SHE At)
jaa‘ chai ghar lachhimee ku-aaree chand sooraj deevrhay ka-utak kaal bapurhaa kotvaal so karaa siree.
In His Home, the virgin Lakshmi dwells. The moon and the sun are His two lamps; the wretched Messenger of Death stages his dramas, and levies taxes on all.
AMAT aH At SaTaT AU (1292-4, ners, sas ones FH) SO aiSaa raajaa saree narharee. ||1|| Such is my Sovereign Lord King, the Supreme Lord of all. ||1]|
Wo ufs gee Fon vse Hy stem fate fag AAG TSH Ui (1292-4, nos, sas oes FH) jaa chai ghar kulaal barahmaa chatur mukh daa‘vrhaa jin bisav sansaar raacheelay. In His House, the four-faced Brahma, the cosmic potter lives. He created the entire universe.
Wo ufs Sag Peo AIS Ty 33 Aaa farms sre Il (1292-5, vars, sas ones Ff) jaa‘ kai ghar eesar baavliaa jagat guroo tat saarkhaa gi-aan bhaakheelay.
In His House, the insane Shiva, the Guru of the World, lives; he imparts spiritual wisdom to expain the essence of reality.
uy us AS stair ered fag aug Sebo Ii (1292-6, ners, sas anes Hh)
paap punn jaa™ chai daa‘gee-aa du-aarai chitar gupat laykhee-aa.
Sin and virtue are the standard-bearers at His Door; Chitr and Gupt are the recording angels of the conscious and subconscious.
UdH af uget ufsarg | 1292-6, ners, sas anes Fi) Dharam raa-ay parulee partihaar. The Righteous Judge of Dharma, the Lord of Destruction, is the door-man.
AMAT aa At aus MQM (1292-7, ners, sas ones Ft) SO aiSaa raajaa saree gopaal. ||2|| Such is the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the World. ||2||
ats ufs ae cuss fet gus adorn aes wre Il (1292-7, ners, sas ones th
jaa‘ chai ghar gan ganDharab rikhee bapurhay dhaadhee-aa gavant aachhai.
In His Home are the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, Rishis and poor minstrels, who sing so sweetly.
Ava AAS ag sub isan wiraart Hseta IG FolT AS Il (1292-8, ners, sas oes Ft) sarab saastar baho roopee-aa angaroo-aa aakhaarhaa mandleek bol boleh kaachhay. All the Shaastras take various forms in His theater, singing beautiful songs.
ICT 8H AT TF USES Il (1292-8, vers, sas ane Fh) cha-ur dhool jaa chai hai pavan. The wind waves the fly-brush over Him;
Sat Hats AS B SSS Il (1292-9, ners, sas see chayree sakat jeet lay bhavan. His hand-maiden is Maya, who has conquered the world.
Mis SAX AS SAT Il (1292-9, vars, sas nee A) and took jaa chai bhasmatee. The shell of the earth is His fireplace.
A maint oat fasee ust ISI (1292-9, ners, sas ones at) SO aisaa raajaa taribhavan patee. ||3]| Such is the Sovereign Lord of the three worlds. ||3]|
WS wis TSH ue ATA Sot MAS AA PHM I (1292-9, vers, sas see Fh)
jaa‘ chai ghar koormaa paal sahsar fanee baasak sayj vaaloo-aa.
In His Home, the celestial turtle is the bed-frame, woven with the strings of the thousand-headed snake.
WOTSI STS FoTHUSt Hal feast adst Hwy Her uretarsor | (1292-10, ners, sas anise Fh athaarah bhaar banaaspatee maalnee chhinvai karorhee maygh maalaa paaneehaaree-aa.
His flower-girls are the eighteen loads of vegetation; His water-carriers are the nine hundred sixty million clouds.
oY URS ATS ASAT I (1292-11, vers, sas oes Fh) nakh parsayv jaa chai sursaree. His sweat is the Ganges River.
AUS AHS At Ss waaet Il (1292-11, Has, gas one th) sapat samund jaa™ chai gharhthalee. The seven seas are His water-pitchers.
So Abt A Ss foset Il 1292-11, ners, sas anee A) aytay jee-a jaa’ chai vartanee. The creatures of the world are His household utensils.
A mat aa fgsee vet iil (1292-12, ners, sas ones Fh) SO aisaa raajaa taribhavan Dhanee. ||4|| Such is the Sovereign Lord King of the three worlds. ||4||
mW 3 ule fore Fast wane Y ysere viadia ase on fa go ae dues Fae IT Il (1292-12, HOS, STS SHS Hh)
jaa chai ghar nikat vartee arjan Dharoo parahlaad ambreek naarad nayjai siDh buDh gan ganDharab baanvai haylaa.
In His home are Arjuna, Dhroo, Prahlaad, Ambreek, Naarad, Nayjaa, the Siddhas and Buddhas, the ninety-two heavenly heralds and celestial singers in their wondrous play.
So Aba at sd afe wet it (1292-13, ners, gars ones A) aytay jee-a jaa‘ chai heh gharee. All the creatures of the world are in His House.
Hea faurfue nisg got il (1292-13, ners, sas one Fh)
sarab bi-aapik antar haree. The Lord is diffused in the inner beings of all.
yse oHeS st dt orf= I (1292-14, ners, sas oHee FH) paranvai naamday-o taa™ chee aan. Prays Naam Dayv, seek His Protection.
Ags SIS AS SATS UNA (4292-14, Hers, sas see Fh Sagal bhagat jaa chai neesaan. ||5||1]| All the devotees are His banner and insignia. ||5||1||
HS" Il (1292-14)
malaar. Malaar:
Has 3 6 farts 5 3 fart Il (1292-14, vere, sas one Ht) mo ka-o too" na bisaar too na bisaar. Please do not forget me; please do not forget me,
30 fans gHeor NU TIS I 1292-15, vars, sas anes Fh) too na bisaaray raam-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. please do not forget me, O Lord. ||1]|Pause]|
uerest feg gH Ad HS Cufe AS afer Il (1292-15, vers, sas one Ht) aalaavantee ih bharam jo hai mujh oopar sabh kopilaa. The temple priests have doubts about this, and everyone is furious with me.
He Ae ats ute Cotes ag ag ay soar il (1292-16, wars, sas ane Fh) sood sood kar maar uthaa-i-o kahaa kara-o baap beethulaa. ||1||
Calling me low-caste and untouchable, they beat me and drove me out; what should I do now, O Beloved Father Lord? ||1]|
He Jz AG vals tua Hats 3 WS AfEsr II (1292-16, vers, sas Se Fh moo-ay hoo-ay ja-o mukat dayhugay mukat na jaanai ko-ilaa. If You liberate me after I am dead, no one will know that I am liberated.
= usr 4 a te aos Sct Un fueSst Tar QI 1292-17, ners, sas one FH)
ay pandee-aa mo ka-o dhaydh kahat tayree paij pichha‘udee ho-ilaa. ||2]|
These Pandits, these religious scholars, call me low-born; when they say this, they tarnish Your honor as well. ||2||
3 8 tiene furs adding ¥ nifsan sfeS urea Il (1292-18, vars, sas ones Ff) too jo da-i-aal kirpaal kahee-at hai’ atibhuj bha-i-o apaarlaa.
You are called kind and compassionate; the power of Your Arm is absolutely unrivalled.
efa dior tam ant aS Ushi a fueSaer SII (1292-18, Hers, sas SHE Fh)
fayr dee-aa dayhuraa naamay ka-o pandee-an ka-o pichhvaarlaa. ||3]|2||
The Lord turned the temple around to face Naam Dayv; He turned His back on the Brahmins. ||3]|2]]|
Yat 9X3
Hos gat sas seen At at (1293-2)
malaar banee bhagat ravidaas jee kee Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:
qe Afsare YATE Il (1293-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
oad Hot Hot ats fates Sus Il (1293-3, nore, sas ofan Ah naagar janaa’ mayree jaat bikhi-aat chamaara’. O humble townspeople, I am obviously just a shoemaker.
foe oH afie To AS NU FIC Il 1293-3, ners, sas sfeerA th) ridai raam gobind gun saara™. ||1|| rahaa-o. In my heart I cherish the Glories of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause| |
HdAdt ABS fas wot J AS As As St US Il (1293-3, ners, sas afeen Fh) sursaree salal kirat baarunee ray sant jan karat nahee paana”. Even if wine is made from the water of the Ganges, O Saints, do not drink it.
Aa nufez os nied WS F AeA fess ofo HE mrs NA 1293-4, ners, sas afeerA ah suraa apvitar nat avar jal ray sursaree milat neh ho-ay aana”. ||1||
This wine, and any other polluted water which mixes with the Ganges, is not separate from it. ||1]|
3a ofe wrufes afs wsbt 3 AA wae Aas shes Il (1293-5, ners, sas afeen Fh)
tar taar apvitar kar maanee-ai ray jaisay kaagraa karat beechaara’.
The palmyra palm tree is considered impure, and so its leaves are considered impure as well.
sas TASS fdr fa Cus urba afs SHAS II (1293-5, wars, sas sfeerA Ht) bhagat bhaag-ut likee-ai tih oopray poojee-ai kar namaskaara™. ||2]|
But if devotional prayers are written on paper made from its leaves, then people bow in reverence and worship before it. ||2] |
Het ws ae steer tg deat fesfo sarsHt TA UAT II (1293-6, Hers, sas afeern Ah mayree jaat kut baa‘dhlaa dhor dhovantaa niteh banaarsee aas paasaa.
It is my occupation to prepare and cut leather; each day, I carry the carcasses out of the city.
wa fay usure fats acts s3Cfs 33 on Agee see SAT BIA (1293-7, Hers, sas afer Hh)
ab bipar parDhaan tihi karahi dand-ut tayray naam sarnaa-ay ravidaas daasaa. 31121]
Now, the important Brahmins of the city bow down before me; Ravi Daas, Your slave, seeks the Sanctuary of Your Name. |[3]||1]|
HB Il (1293-8)
malaar. Malaar:
fs Aus 3B Aa USH AEOA uls STH AH Shs Sat yrs AE Il (1293-8, ners, sas ofeen Ft) har japat tay-oo janaa padam kavlaas pat taas sam tul nahee aan ko-oo.
Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Lotus Feet - none are equal to them.
2a dt Sa nida de farafss urs F yore saufs AS il TIS I (1293-8, ners, sas ofeen Ht)
ayk hee ayk anayk ho-ay bisathri-o aan ray aan bharpoor so-oo. rahaa-o.
The Lord is One, but He is diffused in many forms. Bring in, bring in, that All- pervading Lord. ||Pause] |
Wa ses Sd nied odt Usha oA at fs yreu she i (1293-9, ners, sas ofeea Fh) jaa kai bhaagvat laykhee-ai avar nahee paykhee-ai taas kee jaat aachhop chheepaa. He who writes the Praises of the Lord God, and sees nothing else at all, is a low-class, untouchable fabric-dyer by trade.
form ufo Saba Hoa Hf unimt om at SHar AUS She A (1293-10, ners, sas ofeen
bi-aas meh laykhee-ai sanak meh paykhee-ai naam kee naamnaa sapat deepaa. ||1]| The Glory of the Name is seen in the writings of Vyaas and Sanak, throughout the seven continents. ||1]|
Wo fe sade ae aS 3 ag asfe wonita AY Ad] Ute Il (1293-11, ners, sas afer Ht)
jaa kai eed bakreed kul ga-oo ray baDh karahi maanee-ah saykh saheed peeraa. And he whose family used to kill cows at the festivals of Eed and Bakareed, who worshipped Shayks, martyrs and spiritual teachers,
Wa ay At act us vit Het fg F Sa usa ass II (1293-11, vers, sas afeerA Ft) jaa kai baap vaisee karee poot aisee saree tihoo ray lok parsiDh kabeeraa. ||2| | whose father used to do such things - his son Kabeer became so successful that he is now famous throughout the three worlds. ||2| |
Wa aca a te ns tg des feos wing darvaet MTA UT II (1293-12, Hers, sas ofeerA Th) jaa kay kutamb kay dhaydh sabh dhor dhovant fireh ajahu bannaarsee aas paasaa. And all the leather-workers in those families still go around Benares removing the dead cattle
nitarg Afos fay asf s3Cfs fsa 36 sfeeA SAS SA III (1293-13, Hers, sas ofeeTA af)
aachaar sahit bipar karahi dand-ut tin tanai ravidaas daasaan daasaa. ||3||2| |
- the ritualistic Brahmins bow in reverence before their son Ravi Daas, the slave of the Lord's slaves. ||3]|2||
HO (1293-15) malaar Malaar:
qe Afsars yrrfe I (1293-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fas fimrg urs avg ase Safa 3 Il 1293-16, ners, sas ofeen Ht)
milat pi-aaro paraan naath kavan bhagat tay.
What sort of devotional worship will lead me to meet my Beloved, the Lord of my breath of life?
AUHafs uet UsH AS Il TIS Il (1293-16, ners, sas sheen Fh)
saaDhsangat paa-ee param gatay. rahaa-o.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained the supreme status. | |Pause| |
HS aud aI BS Gee il 1293-16, ners, sas seen FH) mailay kapray kahaa la-o Dhova-o. How long shall I wash these dirty clothes?
wea Ste AT Ba ASS Ul (1293-17, ners, sas sfeern FH) aavaigee need kahaa lag sova-o. ||1]| How long shall I remain asleep? ||1]|
net Aet Afes Het Het ates i 1293-17, ners, sas afer Hh jo-ee jo-ee jori-o so-ee so-ee faati-o.
Whatever I was attached to, has perished.
36 aoln Cfo at Tet THEE 2M (1293-18, wera, sas seen Ft)
jhoothai banaj uth hee ga-ee haati-o. ||2|| The shop of false merchandise has closed down. ||2||
ag afer sfe6 7a Be Il (1293-18, ners, sas ofeern Th) kaho ravidaas bha-i-o jab laykho. Says Ravi Daas, when the account is called for and given,
net Het ate Het Het SHE uSnVSil 1293-18, wes, sas sheen Ff) jo-ee jo-ee keeno so-ee so-ee daykhi-o. ||3||1][3]| whatever the mortal has done, he shall see. ||3]|1]|3]|
Yar Wate
Ta ASst BBuE HIS 8 we 4 (1294-1) raag kaanrhaa cha-upday mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Raag Kaanraa, Chau-Padas, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe ATS on aes usy feos fares nieve Hats niet AS Ts YATE I (1294-2) ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ho He AG Hot ffs Thar il (1294-4, avast, He 4) mayraa man saaDh janaa™ mil hari-aa. Meeting with the Holy people, my mind blossoms forth.
o@ afs af afs afs A not ag fife Hafs ute Csfeor nai TITe tl 1294-4, wast, He 4)
ha-o bal bal bal bal saaDh janaa™ ka-o mil sangat paar utri-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o.
I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those Holy beings; joining the Sangat, the Congregation, I am carried across to the other side. ||1]|Pause| |
fs ofg four agg ys must TH AT Hot uat UfsMM Il (1294-5, area, He 4)
har har kirpaa karahu parabh apnee ham saaDh janaa” pag pari-aa.
O Lord, Har, Har, please bless me with Your Mercy, God, that I may fall at the feet of the Holy.
uo U6 AG fro ots ys wfonr fife ATG ufss Gufsur Nall (1294-5, wos, He 4)
Dhan Dhan saaDh jin har parabh jaani-aa mil saaDhoo patit uDhri-aa. ||1||
Blessed, blessed are the Holy, who know the Lord God. Meeting with the Holy, even sinners are saved. ||1]|
Hour 3S ve ag ag fata ffs AG eAafs afenr II (1294-6, ass, He 4)
manoo-aa chalai chalai baho baho biDh mil saaDhoo vasgat kari-aa.
The mind roams and rambles all around in all directions. Meeting with the Holy, it is overpowered and brought under control,
fa@’ ne 33 uANfee safe qfA Hite Aas fer QI 294-7, asst, Hs 4) ji-u’ jal tant pasaari-o baDhak garas meenaa vasgat khari-aa. ||2||
just as when the fisherman spreads his net over the water, he catches and overpowers the fish. ||2||
dfs & AS AS 3 ola fife AS Aart He Bd I (1294-7, aes, He 4)
har kay sant sant bhal neekay mil sant janaa mal lahee-aa.
The Saints, the Saints of the Lord, are noble and good. Meeting with the humble Saints, filth is washed away.
ICH vas afenr As slats fae Aafs aug afer ISI (1294-8, ast, He 4) ha-umai durat ga-i-aa sabh neekar ji-o saabun kaapar kari-aa. ||3]| All the sins and egotism are washed away, like soap washing dirty clothes. ||3]|
HASta fete fafor ufs sats as Asad sda Sa Ufa Il 1294-9, area, He 4) mastak lilaat likhi-aa Dhur thaakur gur satgur charan ur Dhari-aa.
According to that pre-ordained destiny inscribed on my forehead by my Lord and Master, I have enshrined the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru, within my heart.
Ag Wee sy sn ys fen Ae Sea TH Gufs SIAM (1294-9, aos, He 4) sabh daalad dookh bhanj parabh paa-i-aa jan naanak naam uDhri-aa. ||4||1]|
I have found God, the Destroyer of all poverty and pain; servant Nanak is saved through the Naam. ||4||1||
ATAST HIG 8 Il (1294-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
HI HO AS AST UM I Il (1294-10, aear, He 4) mayraa man sant janaa pag rayn. My mind is the dust of the feet of the Saints.
dfs ofa ae wat fife Hats He ae fs df So NA TITS i 1294-11, aos, He 4)
har har kathaa sunee mil sangat man koraa har rang bhayn. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Joining the Sangat, the Congregation, I listen to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har. My crude and uncultured mind is drenched with the Love of the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
dH uifss mds 6 Woo afs ffs afs ate Afess fase il (1294-11, wes, ue 4)
ham achit achayt na jaaneh gat mit gur kee-ay suchit chitayn.
I am thoughtless and unconscious; I do not know God's state and extent. The Guru has made me thoughtful and conscious.
ufs ae efeurts ate visitas nfs ofe afs oH AUS IA (1294-12, ares, He 4) parabh deen da-i-aal kee-o a“geekarit man har har naam japayn. ||1]|
God is Merciful to the meek; He has made me His Own. My mind chants and meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
ofe & AS fats Ho YIsH afe SSS Ths 3s I (1294-13, asst, ue 4)
har kay sant mileh man pareetam kat dayva-o hee-araa tayn.
Meeting with the Lord's Saints, the Beloveds of the mind, I would cut out my heart, and offer it to them.
dfs & AS fhe ofs fixfemr oH ate ufss use IQ (1294-13, asst, He 4) har kay sant milay har mili-aa ham kee-ay patit pavayn. ||2| | Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I meet with the Lord; this sinner has been sanctified.
21 |
ofa & AS Bsn Afar adits faa fufeor uvag AS Il (1294-14, aos, He 4)
har kay jan ootam jag kahee-ahi jin mili-aa paathar sayn.
The humble servants of the Lord are said to be exalted in this world; meeting with them, even stones are softened.
var qatu Ao ot ufo gate o HAS Ge Ss aie afs aa SI (1295-1, aaa, He 4)
jan kee mahimaa baran na saaka-o o-ay ootam har har kayn. ||3]| I cannot even describe the noble grandeur of such humble beings; the Lord, Har, Har, has made them sublime and exalted. ||3]|
3H Ue ATT es YS AMM GH send THA VS I (1295-1, as, Hs 4)
tum" har saah vaday parabh su-aamee ham vanjaaray raas dayn.
You, Lord are the Great Merchant-Banker; O God, my Lord and Master, I am just a poor peddler; please bless me with the wealth.
Ho aod a@ efenr ys ureg afe aug aie fg Ss Si (1295-2, ass, ue 4)
jan naanak ka-o da-i-aa parabh Dhaarahu lad vaakhar har har layn. ||4]|2]]|
Please bestow Your Kindness and Mercy upon servant Nanak, God, so that he may load up the merchandise of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4[|2]|
START HIG 8 Il (1295-3)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Af Ho TH SH UPAA Il (1295-3, wast, He 4)
jap man raam naam pargaas. O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and be enlightened.
dfs & AS fife uifs warat fes farsa GEA NAN TIS Il 1295-3, asst, Hs 4)
har kay sant mil pareet lagaanee vichay girah udaas. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meet with the Saints of the Lord, and focus your love; remain balanced and detached within your own household. ||1||Pause] |
dH ofa fase wfuG on aaafe ufs feu act faaumA il 1295-4, arse, He 4)
ham har hirdai japi-o naam narhar parabh kirpaa karee kirpaas.
I chant the Name of the Lord, Nar-Har, within my heart; God the Merciful has shown His Mercy.
motes noe sfeur ue faafhor Gan se fhe at nITA IAI (1295-5, ares, He 4) an-din anad bha-i-aa man bigsi-aa udam bha-ay milan kee aas. ||1]|
Night and day, I am in ecstasy; my mind has blossomed forth, rejuvenated. I am trying - I hope to meet my Lord. ||1]|
JH dfs Aumt yifs weret fasd ATA HS IN TA Il (1295-5, ass, He 4)
ham har su-aamee pareet lagaa-ee jitnay saas lee-ay ham garaas.
I am in love with the Lord, my Lord and Master; I love Him with every breath and morsel of food I take.
froin zie se fis nists sfe ve wfenr & SA QI (1295-6, was, He 4)
kilbikh dahan bha-ay khin antar toot ga-ay maa-i-aa kay faas. ||2| |
My sins were burnt away in an instant; the noose of the bondage of Maya was loosened. ||2||
fort TH faaH for aan anets Hoe Ha TH YS SA Il (1295-7, ares, He 4)
ki-aa ham kiram ki-aa karam kamaaveh moorakh mugaDh rakhay parabh taas.
I am such a worm! What karma am I creating? What can I do? I am a fool, a total idiot, but God has saved me.
niedemid ured std ASHas fife 3d SHA ISI 1295-7, aes, He 4)
avganee-aaray paathar bhaaray satsangat mil taray taraas. ||3]|
I am unworthy, heavy as stone, but joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I am carried across to the other side. ||3]|
ast fqrfe adt aaetats 3 Afs Ga on ote fafimre It 295-8, ares, He 4)
jaytee sarisat karee jagdeesar tay sabh ooch ham neech bikhi-aas.
The Universe which God created is all above me; I am the lowest, engrossed in corruption.
THs NAS Afat Ta HS AS Soa Afs Se Ys UA ISIS (1295-9, aes, He 4) hamray avgun sang gur maytay jan naanak mayl lee-ay parabh paas. ||4]|3]|
With the Guru, my faults and demerits have been erased. Servant Nanak has been united with God Himself. ||4]|3]|
TOAST HIG 8 Il (1295-9)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
He nfs a any AfUs ae Ser I (1295-9, asst, He 4) mayrai man raam naam japi-o gur vaak. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, through the Guru's Word.
dfs ofe four act aaretafs vous ear ae afeS AS sax NA TIS Il (1295-10, waar, H3 4)
har har kirpaa karee jagdeesar durmat doojaa bhaa-o ga-i-o sabh jhaak. ||1|| rahaa- O. The Lord, Har, Har, has shown me His Mercy, and my evil-mindedness, love of duality and sense of alienation are totally gone, thanks to the Lord of the Universe. ||1]|Pause| |
ae gu da ate ag ule ule oH aes TUS Il (1295-11, wos, He 4)
naanaa roop rang har kayray ghat ghat raam ravi-o guplaak.
There are so many forms and colors of the Lord. The Lord is pervading each and every heart, and yet He is hidden from view.
dfs & AS fixe ats yae Gufs ae fatto & Sax WAU 4295-11, asst, Hs 4)
har kay sant milay har pargatay ughar ga-ay bikhi-aa kay taak. ||1]|
Meeting with the Lord's Saints, the Lord is revealed, and the doors of corruption are shattered. ||1]||
HZ wot at ads ag Ast faa Cfa ofa afe afha AS I (1295-12, aos, He 4)
sant janaa kee bahut baho sobhaa jin ur Dhaari-o har rasik rasaak.
The glory of the Saintly beings is absolutely great; they lovingly enshrine the Lord of Bliss and Delight within their hearts.
ofs & AS fs ofe fiifeor AA AS Sf TSTA NM (1295-13, was, He 4)
har kay sant milay har mili-aa jaisay ga-oo daykh bachhraak. ||2||
Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I meet with the Lord, just as when the calf is seen - the cow is there as well. ||2||
dfs & HS Aa Hfs oie dfs 3 AG SSH ASA AS Il (1295-13, arasr, Hs 4)
har kay sant janaa meh har har tay jan ootam janak janaak.
The Lord, Har, Har, is within the humble Saints of the Lord; they are exalted - they know, and they inspire others to know as well.
fae afe fose aA aAat fe wet HAS HASTA SI (1295-14, aaa, He 4)
tin har hirdai baas basaanee chhoot ga-ee muskee muskaak. ||3]||
The fragrance of the Lord permeates their hearts; they have abandoned the foul stench. ||3]|
SHd AS 3H Tt us ale oe Thy SI ms musa Il (1295-14, aos, ve 4) tumray jan tum" hee parabh kee-ay har raakh layho aapan apnaak. You make those humble beings Your Own, God; You protect Your Own, O Lord.
Hos o'6a a Aut ofa svet ns fust gau ofe Ae ISIS (1295-15, aes, H3 4)
jan naanak kay sakhaa har bhaa-ee maat pitaa banDhap har saak. ||4||4| The Lord is servant Nanak's companion; the Lord is his sibling, mother, father, relative and relation. ||4||4||
START HIG 8 Il (1295-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho de ots TH OH AfU SHS I (1295-16, west, He 4) mayray man har har raam naam jap cheet.
O my mind, consciously chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
of ofs ens wheor afs eat as & Aafe SE as FHS Wall TIS Ih (1295-16, wast, He 4) har har vasat maa-i-aa garheh vayrh"ee gur kai sabad lee-o garh jeet. ||1]| rahaa-o. The commodity of the Lord, Har, Har, is locked in the fortress of Maya; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have conquered the fortress. ||1||Pause| |
fifeur soft sof ag sfimr wad uz ay Ho US II (1295-17, aos, He 4)
mithi-aa bharam bharam baho bharmi-aa lubDho putar kaltar moh pareet.
In false doubt and superstition, people wander all around, lured by love and emotional attachment to their children and families.
AA Sded at Se Stfeor fas nfo faafa ate ta SHS Wail (1295-18, aos, He 4) jaisay tarvar kee tuchh chhaa-i-aa khin meh binas jaa-ay dayh bheet. ||1]| But just like the passing shade of the tree, your body-wall shall crumble in an instant.
[21
THe US UTSH AS BSH fra fife His af ysis 1 295-19, was, He 4)
hamray paraan pareetam jan ootam jin mili-aa man ho-ay parteet.
The humble beings are exalted; they are my breath of life and my beloveds; meeting them, my mind is filled with faith.
ude oH sfenr we nists wAfag aH sfenr dfar UtS M211 (1295-19, arear, He 4)
parchai raam ravi-aa ghat antar asthir raam ravi-aa rang pareet. ||2||
Deep within the heart, I am happy with the Pervading Lord; with love and joy, I dwell upon the Steady and Stable Lord. ||2| |
ust Ite dfs & AS AS Ao ole faa fxfent Ho far dailfS i) 1296-1, west, He 4)
har kay sant sant jan neekay jin mili-aa’ man rang rangeet. The humble Saints, the Saints of the Lord, are noble and sublime; meeting them, the mind is tinged with love and joy.
ofs dq Bd 3 Css aag ate ate we fs ofa yifS usu (1296-2, wae, 3 4)
har rang lahai na utrai kabhoo har har jaa-ay milai har pareet. ||[3]|
The Lord's Love never fades away, and it never wears off. Through the Lord's Love, one goes and meets the Lord, Har, Har. ||3]|
JH ag uy ale murat afs are afes aeHS I (1296-2, ares, v8 4)
ham baho paap kee-ay apraaDhee gur kaatay katit kateet.
I am a sinner; I have committed so many sins. The Guru has cut them, cut them, and hacked them off.
dfs ofa oH AG yfy mug AS ssa ufss uslfs Iisiull 4296-3, was, He 4)
har har naam dee-o mukh a-ukhaDh jan naanak patit puneet. ||4]|5]|
The Guru has placed the healing remedy of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, into my mouth. Servant Nanak, the sinner, has been purified and sanctified. ||4||5| |
TOAST HIG 8 Il (1296-4)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
afl Ho TH OH AGATE Il (1296-4, aes, He 4) jap man raam naam jagannaath. Chant, O my mind, the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.
wHe ud ud fay fatter afsag ofe ste SF Ia AU TIS I (1296-4, arse, ue 4) ghooman ghayr paray bikh bikhi-aa satgur kaadh lee-ay day haath. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I was caught in the whirlpool of poisonous sin and corruption. The True Guru gave me His Hand; He lifted me up and pulled me out. ||1||Pause||
Fomit ns fedre avafa 3H af ST TN unit ure Il (1296-5, area, He 4) su-aamee abhai niranjan narhar tum" raakh layho ham paapee paath.
O my Fearless, Immaculate Lord and Master, please save me - I am a sinner, a sinking stone.
am au fatter dfs oss He GI 3d Afar ATE NA (1296-5, as, He 4)
kaam kroDh bikhi-aa lobh lubh-tay kaasat loh taray sang saath. ||1||
I am lured and enticed by sexual desire, anger, greed and corruption, but associating with You, I am carried across, like iron in the wooden boat. ||1]|
3H SS UTM BS MH Miaigs TH Els FI uTet Sat TE Il (1296-6, was, He 4)
tum" vad purakh bad agam agochar ham dhoodh rahay paa-ee nahee haath.
You are the Great Primal Being, the most Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord God; I search for You, but cannot find Your depth.
3 ud ud mudug AoMt 3 mus wala mr AaSa MI (1296-7, as, Hs 4)
too parai parai aprampar su-aamee too aapan jaaneh aap jagannaath. ||2||
You are the farthest of the far, beyond the beyond, O my Lord and Master; You alone know Yourself, O Lord of the Universe. ||2]|
mifene ides oH fomre AsHafs ffs ATG UTE I 1296-7, wos, He 4)
adrist agochar naam Dhi-aa-ay satsangat mil saaDhoo paath.
I meditate on the Name of the Unseen and Unfathomable Lord; joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have found the Path of the Holy.
dfs dfs ae Hot fife Hats afe afs AfuG wee ae ATE ISI (1296-8, aos, He 4)
har har kathaa sunee mil sangat har har japi-o akath kath kaath. ||3]|
Joining the congregation, I listen to the Gospel of the Lord, Har, Har; I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, and speak the Unspoken Speech. ||3]||
THe US AAA TAT TH ay SI AGS Il (1296-9, war, He 4)
hamray parabh jagdees gusaa-ee ham raakh layho jagannaath.
My God is the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe; please save me, O Lord of all Creation.
WS 6d DH UA HS A US Aa” faur mag AS AVE ISIE! (1296-9, area, He 4)
jan naanak daas daas daasan ko parabh karahu kirpaa raakho jan saath. ||4]|6] | Servant Nanak is the slave of the slave of Your slaves. O God, please bless me with Your Grace; please protect me and keep me with Your humble servants. ||4||6]|
ATOR HIG 8 UISS WI U Il (1296-11)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4 parh-taal ghar 5. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Fifth House:
qe Afsas yATfe Il (1296-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HO AUT SH TUS Il (1296-12, asst, Hz 4)
man jaapahu raam gupaal. O mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the World.
dfs J35 ASI WS Il (1296-12, ast, uz 4)
har ratan javayhar laal. The Lord is the Jewel, the Diamond, the Ruby.
ofe aaHfe wis SAA Il (1296-12, ast, He 4)
har gurmukh gharh taksaal. The Lord fashions the Gurmukhs in His Mint.
dfs FF fase Ul TIC Il 1296-12, aos, v2 4) har ho ho kirpaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Lord, please, please, be Merciful to me. ||1]|Pause] |
SHI Ts Man nidivd Sa te fowr aa faost TH TH TH TH BS Ill (1296-13, ast, He 4) tumray gun agam agochar ayk jeeh ki-aa kathai bichaaree raam raam raam raam laal. Your Glorious Virtues are inaccessible and unfathomable; how can my one poor tongue describe them? O my Beloved Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, Raam.
suet At wee aa 5 5 3 St ols WS afs Af set fore fors feos IAN (1296-14, aest, H3 4)
tumree jee akath kathaa too too too hee jaaneh ha-o har jap bha-ee nihaal nihaal nihaal. ||1||
O Dear Lord, You, You, You alone know Your Unspoken Speech. I have become enraptured, enraptured, enraptured, meditating on the Lord. ||1]|
Jud ofe yrs At AMM ofa Hist Ad Hfs sfo Ate dfs Jd Js TH BH UG HS Il (1296-14, aeatT, He 4)
hamray har paraan sakhaa su-aamee har meetaa mayray man tan jeeh har haray haray raam naam Dhan maal.
The Lord, my Lord and Master, is my Companion and my Breath of Life; the Lord is my Best Friend. My mind, body and tongue are attuned to the Lord, Har, Haray, Haray. The Lord is my Wealth and Property.
wa aa fas ae dt avg of ofs od od To We THs VC afs as JE afs 3s HO Soa ola Afu set fous fears fogs NQANAIDI (1296-15, asst, He 4)
jaa ko bhaag tin lee-o ree suhaag har har haray haray gun gaavai gurmat ha-o bal balay ha-o bal balay jan naanak har jap bha-ee nihaal nihaal nihaal. ||2||1||7]|
She alone obtains her Husband Lord, who is so pre-destined. Through the Guru's Teachings, she sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray, Haray. Iam a sacrifice, a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lord, O servant Nanak. Meditating on the Lord, I have become enraptured, enraptured, enraptured. 2141171]
TOAST HIG 8 Il (1296-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Ufs TS WI AGE Il (1296-16, west, ue 4) har gun gaavhu jagdees. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.
Sar Ald ate SY aA Il (1296-17, wast, v2 4) aykaa jeeh keechai lakh bees. Let my one tongue become two hundred thousand
atu ofa ofa Aafe AUIA II (1296-17, wast, He 4)
jap har har sabad japees. - with them all, I will meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, and chant the Word of the Shabad.
dfs oF fain nal TIC il 1296-17, was, He 4) har ho ho kirpees. ||1|| rahaa-o. O Lord, please, please, be Merciful to me. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs fas ats Aymit gH ofe ofs Ae ofe Afu AU ofe AfU AU AY AUG AAA II 1296-
17, Host, He 4)
har kirpaa kar su-aamee ham laa-ay har sayvaa har jap japay har jap japay jap jaapa- O jagdees.
O Lord, my Lord and Master, please be Merciful to me; please enjoin me to serve You. I chant and meditate on the Lord, I chant and meditate on the Lord, I chant and meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
Sud AS TH Auf 3 BSH fFa aS IE wh unt wh wth At Wal (4296-18, asst, He 4) tumray jan raam jaapeh tay ootam tin ka-o ha-o ghum ghumay ghum ghum jees.
[11] Your humble servants chant and meditate on You, O Lord; they are sublime and exalted. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them. ||1]|
Yat 9a
Uf SH Bs Vs SS SS BUA asta ft 3g TSA Il (1297-1, wae, we 4)
har tum vad vaday vaday vad oochay so karahi je tuDh bhaavees.
O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great, the Greatest of the Great, the most Lofty and High. You do whatever You please.
Wo soa vifys ubor AHS US US UG US US Tg AHA MQUQITH (1297-2, aoe, Hs 4) jan naanak amrit pee-aa gurmatee Dhan Dhan Dhan Dhan Dhan guroo saabees.
2] 121/81]
Servant Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar through the Guru's Teachings. Blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed and praised is the Guru. ||2]|2]|8]|
START HIG 8 Il (1297-3)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
SH IH Hfe TH Il (1297-3, asst, He 4) bhaj raamo man raam. O mind, meditate and vibrate on the Lord, Raam, Raam.
fA TUS TY SSH Il (1297-3, aos, He 4) jis roop na raykh vadaam. He has no form or feature - He is Great!
ASHats fe SA TH Il (1297-3, was, He 4) satsangat mil bhaj raam. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, vibrate and meditate on the Lord.
as dd Ta HAH AU! TIC Il 1297-4, aos, ve 4) bad ho ho bhaag mathaam. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is the high destiny written on your forehead. ||1||Pause||
fas fafo Hefs ofs ds rH fess uf wrod oISe SH OTH TH TM Il (1297-4, was, He 4) jit garihi mandar har hot jaas tit ghar aando aanand bhaj raam raam raam.
That household, that mansion, in which the Lord's Praises are sung - that home is filled with ecstasy and joy; so vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
TH OH Fo Weg oe UlsH Cueth ag ae AfsaT AY IZ ofe ve da Us Td SH TH TH TH IAI 297-5, aos, He 4)
raam naam gun gaavhu har pareetam updays guroo gur satiguraa sukh hot har haray har haray haray bhaj raam raam raam. ||1||
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Name of the Lord, the Beloved Lord. Through the Teachings of the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru, you shall find peace. So vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Har, Haray, Har, Haray, Haray, the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
[1
AS farfe we af SH fans ast AS FTF TH TH TH Il (1297-6, was, ue 4)
sabh sisat Dhaar har tum kirpaal kartaa sabh too too too raam raam raam.
You are the Support of the whole universe, Lord; O Merciful Lord, You, You, You are the Creator of all, Raam, Raam, Raam.
HO Boa AdStaISt OT DSHS SH TH TH TH NQUSBICN (1297-7, wos, He 4) jan naanko sarnaagatee dayh gurmatee bhaj raam raam raam. ||2||3]|9]| Servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; please bless him with the Guru's Teachings, that he may vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam. ||2||3]|9]|
START HIG 8 Il (1297-7)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Afsad We ua WS Il (1297-8, west, ue 4) satgur chaata-o pag chaat. I eagerly kiss the Feet of the True Guru.
fas fut afs uae ae Il (1297-8, west, He 4) jit mil har paaDhar baat. Meeting Him, the Path to the Lord becomes smooth and easy.
3H dfs SA FA Ue We| Il (1297-8, wast, He 4) bhaj har ras ras har gaat. I lovingly vibrate and meditate on the Lord, and gulp down His Sublime Essence.
dfs oo fee fowr]e na TIS i 1297-8, asst, He 4) har ho ho likhay lilaat. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Lord has written this destiny on my forehead. ||1]|Pause] |
We aGH fafoor afs ag ag fares fo wfoe Aaior afe Ae Het | ATS Il (1297-9, aos, H8 4)
khat karam kiri-aa kar baho baho bisthaar siDh saaDhik jogee-aa kar jat jataa jat jaat. Some perform the six rituals and rites; the Siddhas, seekers and Yogis put on all sorts of pompous shows, with their hair all tangled and matted.
ate su 3 urea afs gan Ha ole ue ASHast Cuefh ag Ts As Aor dfs dfs ou]
IAI (1297-10, ast, He 4)
kar bhaykh na paa-ee-ai har barahm jog har paa-ee-ai satsangtee updays guroo gur sant janaa khol khol kapaat. ||1||
Yoga - Union with the Lord God - is not obtained by wearing religious robes; the Lord is found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and the Guru's Teachings. The humble Saints throw the doors wide open. ||1]|
3 oudug emit ufs nrg 3 saute sfoor we as ate fea fea fea Sa ale we II (1297-11, ASST, Hs 4)
too aprampar su-aamee at agaahu too bharpur rahi-aa jal thalay har ik iko ik aykai har thaat.
O my Lord and Master, You are the farthest of the far, utterly unfathomable. You are totally pervading the water and the land. You alone are the One and Only Unique Lord of all creation.
3 wets vs fafa gsfo wm Ae aoa a Us ufe we fe we wie of wrS NIIION (1297-12, ASST, He 4)
too jaaneh sabh biDh boojheh aapay jan naanak kay parabh ghat ghatay ghat ghatay ghat har ghaat. ||2||4]|10]|
You alone know all Your ways and means. You alone understand Yourself. Servant Nanak's Lord God is in each heart, in every heart, in the home of each and every heart. |[2||4]|10]|
START HIG 8 Il (1297-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Af He afs|e HT I (1297-13, avest, He 4) jap man gobid maaDho. O mind, chant and meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.
dfs ofa mia wart il (1297-13, avast, He 4) har har agam agaaDho. The Lord, Har, Har, is inaccessible and unfathomable.
Hfs asHfs ofs ys BT Il 1297-13, wast, ue 4) mat gurmat har parabh laaDho. Through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect attains the Lord God.
ufs 3 o fea foot an TIS Mh 1297-14, was, He 4) Dhur ho ho likhay lilaaDho. ||1|| rahaa-o. This is the pre-ordained destiny written on my forehead. ||1||Pause| |
fay wfenr Afs ag fos faors FY urétt ofa sq AS AS Hast fife Afsagy as AT II (1297-14, aTSST, Hs 4)
bikh maa-i-aa sanch baho chitai bikaar sukh paa-ee-ai har bhaj sant sant sangtee mil satguroo gur saaDho.
Collecting the poison of Maya, people think of all sorts of evil. But peace is found only by vibrating and meditating on the Lord; with the Saints, in the Sangat, the Society of the Saints, meet the True Guru, the Holy Guru.
fa gfs wen Hod Se aus (SC ulss As fils Hast AU des TaHst AU TT UA 1297- 15, ASST, He 4)
ji-o chhuhi paaras manoor bha-ay kanchan ti-o patit jan mil sangtee suDh hovat gurmatee suDh haaDho. ||1]|
Just as when the iron slag is transmuted into gold by touching the Philosopher's Stone - when the sinner joins the Sangat, he becomes pure, through the Guru's Teachings.
[21
fag ane Afa So ag sas (SG unit Afa 3d AO AG Hast as Afsag Te AT Il (1297- 16, ASST, He 4) -
ji-o kaasat sang lohaa baho tartaa ti-o paapee sang taray saaDh saaDh sangtee gur satguroo gur saaDho.
Just like the heavy iron which is carried across on the wooden raft, sinners are carried across in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and the Guru, the True Guru, the Holy Guru.
ote aaa Ute MAH D aet HE TT Ts THe A orf so AG ATS FTT NANI (1297-17, ASST, H8 4)
chaar baran chaar aasram hai ko-ee milai guroo gur naanak so aap tarai kul sagal taraaDho. ||2||5]|11]|
There are four castes, four social classes, and four stages of life. Whoever meets the Guru, Guru Nanak, is himself carried across, and he carries all his ancestors and generations across as well. ||2||5||11]|
START HIG 8 Il (1297-18)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Ufs AA WT SASS Il (1297-18, wes, He 4)
har jas gaavhu bhagvaan. Sing the Praises of the Lord God.
HA Wes UY GIS Il (1297-19, aaa, Hs 4) jas gaavat paap lahaan. Singing His Praises, sins are washed away.
Hfs wants Afs AA BS Il (1297-19, west, He 4) mat gurmat sun jas kaan. Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, listen to His Praises with your ears.
dfs FF fase nal TIC Il (1297-19, asst, He 4) har ho ho kirpaan. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Lord shall be Merciful to you. ||1]|Pause] |
usr qatt 3d Ho fourefe fea nfs fea fefs 3 rg AY uefa Afu ats af an fours II (1298-1,
aTMaT, H8 4)
tayray jan Dhi-aavahi ik man ik chit tay saaDhoo sukh paavahi jap har har naam niDhaan.
Your humble servants focus their consciousness and meditate on You with one- pointed mind; those Holy beings find peace, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Treasure of Bliss.
Crsts asf ys Sd fife AG ATT AST AT ASAT SAS A (1298-1, aos, He 4) ustat karahi parabh tayree-aa mil saaDhoo saaDh janaa gur satguroo bhagvaan. ||1|| They sing Your Praises, God, meeting with the Holy, the Holy people, and the Guru, the True Guru, O Lord God. ||1||
fas & fase 3 Amit 3 AY ee uefa 3 3a Be fig 3 sas oie FS II (1298-2, wae, Hs 4)
jin kai hirdai too su-aamee tay sukh fal paavahi tay taray bhav sinDh tay bhagat har jaan.
They alone obtain the fruit of peace, within whose hearts You, O my Lord and Master, abide. They cross over the terrifying world-ocean - they are known as the Lord's devotees.
aTMaT, H8 4)
tin sayvaa ham laa-ay haray ham laa-ay haray jan naanak kay har too too too too too bhagvaan. ||2||6||12]|
Please enjoin me to their service, Lord, please enjoin me to their service. O Lord God, You, You, You, You, You are the Lord of servant Nanak. ||2||6||12]|
aTOST HIG UWI 2 = (1298-5) kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsas yrrfe I (1298-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
aeba ae atures ferut fafa il (1298-6, asst, He 5) gaa-ee-ai gun gopaal kirpaa niDh. Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World, the Treasure of Mercy.
eu faenso Hues Afsag Wa ses of Aa fafa Nan TIS I (1298-6, asst, He 5) dukh bidaaran sukh-daatay satgur jaa ka-o bhaytat ho-ay sagal siDh. ||1|| rahaa-o. The True Guru is the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of peace; meeting Him, one is totally fulfilled. ||1||Pause| |
faHes oH Hata AMOS Il (1298-7, aes, He 5) simrat naam maneh saDhaarai. Meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Support of the mind.
afe uadt fs ufs ard WA (1298-7, ares, He 5) kot paraaDhee khin meh taarai. ||1]| Millions of sinners are carried across in an instant. ||1]]|
WT ag vfs wre Te wa Il (1298-7, aest, He 5) jaa ka-o cheet aavai gur apnaa. Whoever remembers his Guru,
a aS ey odt fH Aus Mil (1298-8, asst, ue 5) taa ka-o dookh nahee til supnaa. ||2]| shall not suffer sorrow, even in dreams. ||2||
W a@ Afsag vrs Te Il (1298-8, aos, He 5) jaa ka-o satgur apnaa raakhai. Whoever keeps his Guru enshrined within
H Ho dfd GA FAST Ves ISI (1298-8, ast, He 5) so jan har ras rasnaa chaakhai. ||3]| - that humble being tastes the sublime essence of the Lord with his tongue. ||3]|
aT Sea fs stat Hfemr | (1298-9, arear, Hs 5) kaho naanak gur keenee ma-i-aa. Says Nanak, the Guru has been Kind to me;
Jars uals He BAe sfenr sal (1298-9, aos", He 5) halat palat mukh oojal bha-i-aa. ||4||1]| here and herafter, my face is radiant. ||4||1]|
TOS HIG U Il (1298-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
maa s3f0 Amt nue Il (1298-10, west, He 5) aaraaDha-o tujheh su-aamee apnay. I worship and adore You, my Lord and Master.
Gos 803 Aes was ATA ATA AA fs AUS AU TIS Il (1298-10, ase, Hs 5)
oothat baithat sovat jaagat saas saas saas har japnay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Standing up and sitting down, while sleeping and awake, with each and every breath, I meditate on the Lord. ||1]||Pause| |
a a fase afH& ony Il (1298-11, avast, H2 5) taa kai hirdai basi-o naam. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides within the hearts of those,
wv a Aum ate Be INA (1298-11, asst, He 5) jaa ka-o su-aamee keeno daan. ||1]| whose Lord and Master blesses them with this gift. ||1]|
ata fase niet ATS I (1298-11, wast, 43 5) taa kai hirdai aa-ee saa“t. Peace and tranquility come into the hearts of those
SAT SS TT FISTS MQl (1298-12, arse, Hs 5) thaakur bhaytay gur bachnaa‘t. ||2]| who meet their Lord and Master, through the Word of the Guru. ||2] |
Aga ao Het usete i on Hy aT as afs ee ail 298-12, was, ve 5)
sarab kalaa so-ee parbeen. naam mantar jaa ka-o gur deen. ||3]|
Those whom the Guru blesses with the Mantra of the Naam are wise, and blessed with all powers,. ||3]|
AT aa ST a ales AE Il (1298-13, ast, He 5) kaho naanak taa kai bal jaa-o. Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to those
aera xfs ufenr fats are isilQi (1298-13, asst, He 5) kalijug meh paa-i-aa jin naa-o. ||4]|2]| who are blessed with the Name in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||4]|2]|
TOS HIG U Il (1298-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ates ys at ar Ast SAAT Il (1298-14, arse, He 5) keerat parabh kee gaa-o mayree rasnaa’. Sing the Praises of God, O my tongue.
misa ae ats deo Ase Cat vas aie At a MAST AU TIS il (1298-14, arazr, we 5) anik baar kar bandan santan oohaa™ charan gobind jee kay basnaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Humbly bow to the Saints, over and over again; through them, the Feet of the Lord of the Universe shall come to abide within you. ||1]|Pause| |
misa sits ats eng & UTSS Il (1298-15, ast, He 5) anik bhaa“t kar du-aar na paava-o. The Door to the Lord cannot be found by any other means.
afe faurs 3 ofa ofs famr]e ail 298-15, aos, He 5) ho-ay kirpaal ta har har Dhi-aava-o. ||1]|| When He becomes Merciful, we come to meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|
afe xan af SI AT Il (1298-15, aost, He 5) kot karam kar dayh na soDhaa. The body is not purified by millions of rituals.
Wants Hfs He USAT III (1298-16, ast, He 5)
saaDhsangat meh man parboDhaa. ||2||
The mind is awakened and enlightened only in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2]|
feo 3 ast ag dat HEM Il (1298-16, wax, He 5) tarisan na boojhee baho rang maa-i-aa. Thirst and desire are not quenched by enjoying the many pleasures of Maya.
oH SS Ada AY usr Sil (1298-16, aes, He 5) naam lait sarab sukh paa-i-aa. ||3]| Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, total peace is found. ||3]|
UTSAIH AA SS BEM Il (1298-17, ass, He 5) paarbarahm jab bha-ay da-i-aal. When the Supreme Lord God becomes Merciful,
WT HSA SS Se AAS ISI (1298-17, ass, Hs 5) kaho naanak ta-o chhootay janjaal. ||4||3]| says Nanak, then one is rid of worldly entanglements. ||4]|3]|
TOS HIG UY Il (1298-18)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
MA Hier diffe S Il (1298-18, asst, He 5) aisee maa‘g gobid tay. Beg for such blessings from the Lord of the Universe:
CUS Aso ot Aa AG ot ats aH Af USH TS UA TIS I (1298-18, ass, He 5)
tahal santan kee sang saaDhoo kaa har naamaa” jap param gatay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
to work for the Saints, and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Chanting the Name of the Lord, the supreme status is obtained. ||1]|Pause]|
Unt GIA" STAT ATAT Il (1298-19, arsat, He 5) poojaa charnaa thaakur sarnaa. Worship the Feet of Your Lord and Master, and seek His Sanctuary.
Het GAS A us Me Aa NA (1298-19, area, He 5) so-ee kusal jo parabh jee-o karnaa. ||1|| Take joy in whatever God does. ||1||
Hee d3 fea vaes St Il 1298-19, aoa, v2 5) safal hot ih durlabh dayhee. This precious human body becomes fruitful,
Yar qa
Ww ag Afsag Hfemr addt iI 1299-1, west, He 5) jaa ka-o satgur ma-i-aa karayhee. ||2|| when the True Guru shows His Kindness. ||2]|
mifamita SoH faeH wea Sa Il (1299-1, asst, He 5) agi-aan bharam binsai dukh dayraa. The house of ignorance, doubt and pain is destroyed,
wa fg safes aa Ua Sil (1299-1, wos, us 5) jaa kai hirdai baseh gur pairaa. ||3]|| for those within whose hearts the Guru's Feet abide. ||3]]|
Wontar dsfar ys foerfenr i (1299-2, asst, ue 5) saaDhsang rang parabh Dhi-aa-i-aa. In the Saadh Sangat, lovingly meditate on God.
aT ated fats yar urfemir leis 299-2, aes, He 5) kaho naanak tin pooraa paa-i-aa. ||4||4|| Says Nanak, you shall obtain the Perfect Lord. ||4||4]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1299-3)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
SIs FIs FT als wet Il (1299-3, aos, He 5) bhagat bhagtan hoo" ban aa-ee. Devotion is the natural quality of God's devotees.
36 HS WSs se Sad AC nus Sle fhoret 9d TIS I (1299-3, avast, us 5)
tan man galat bha-ay thaakur si-o aapan lee-ay milaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Their bodies and minds are blended with their Lord and Master; He unites them with Himself. ||1]|Pause] |
Meo SH WS FS Il 1299-4, asst, He 5) gaavanhaaree gaavai geet. The singer sings the songs,
3 Gud 3A fag BS NA (1299-4, aes, He 5) tay uDhray basay jih cheet. ||1]| but she alone is saved, within whose consciousness the Lord abides. ||1]|
ua f¥Ae udHST? Il (1299-4, asst, H: 5) paykhay binjan parosanhaarai. The one who sets the table sees the food,
fas SHG ote 3 fRuss NM (1299-5, asa, ue 5) jih bhojan keeno tay tariptaarai. ||2|| but only one who eats the food is satisfied. ||2] |
nifod Hid ats SHOTS Il (1299-5, avast, He 5) anik savaa%g kaachhay bhaykh-Dhaaree. People disguise themselves with all sorts of costumes,
AA AT 3A feR]|rdt BI (1299-5, wear, He 5) jaiso saa taiso daristaaree. ||3]|| but in the end, they are seen as they truly are. ||3]|
AIS ASS AMS HAS Il (1299-6, ares, ws 5) kahan kahaavan sagal janjaar. Speaking and talking are all just entanglements.
aad TH AV adel ATS WSU (1299-6, asa, He 5)
naanak daas sach karnee saar. ||4]|5|| O slave Nanak, the true way of life is excellent. ||4]|5]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1299-6)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
3d Ho dfs AA HOS CHa 19 TIE Il (1299-7, asst, He 5) tayro jan har jas sunat umaahi-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Your humble servant listens to Your Praises with delight. ||1]|Pause| |
Hofs yarn Ufe us at Ast AS as UYe urfaG ail 299-7, area, ne 5)
maneh pargaas paykh parabh kee sobhaa jat kat paykha-o aahi-o. ||1]|
My mind is enlightened, gazing upon the Glory of God. Wherever I look, there He is. [11]
Ag 3 ud ud 3 Ca ales asta metas iI (1299-8, wax, 8 5)
sabh tay parai parai tay oochaa gahir gambheer athaahi-o. ||2||
You are the farthest of all, the highest of the far, profound, unfathomable and unreachable. ||2]|
6fs ufs fife sase a@ no fA use oes SI (1299-8, aos, He 5)
ot pot mili-o bhagtan ka-o jan si-o pardaa laahi-o. ||3]||
You are united with Your devotees, through and through; You have removed Your veil for Your humble servants. ||3]|
aa uAte we Te oea Aon AHO ANTE SIEll (1299-9, ass, He 5)
gur parsaad gaavai gun naanak sahj samaaDh samaahi-o. ||4]|6] | By Guru's Grace, Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises; he is intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||4]|6] |
ATOST HIG U Il (1299-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
H36 ufs orf Carga wrfE& wai TIS Il (1299-10, arear, He 5) santan peh aap uDhaaran aa-i-o. ||1|| rahaa-o. I have come to the Saints to save myself. ||1]||Pause| |
who ses IS uals ais ofa HZ festES wai 299-10, was, v2 5)
darsan bhaytat hot puneetaa har har mantar darirh-aa-i-o. ||1]|
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, I am sanctified; they have implanted the Mantra of the Lord, Har, Har, within me. ||1]|
are dal 3& Ho foane ofa ofa Bug wifes 2H (1299-11, aes, He 5)
kaatay rog bha-ay man nirmal har har a-ukhaDh khaa-i-o. ||2||
The disease has been eradicated, and my mind has become immaculate. I have taken the healing medicine of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2]|
wAfas se SA AY wat agfs 6 asT OFEE SI (1299-11, was, He 5)
asthit bha-ay basay sukh thaanaa bahur na kathoo Dhaa-i-o. ||3]||
I have become steady and stable, and I dwell in the home of peace. I shall never again wander anywhere. ||3]|
As une sd ae SI Soa fous o HET sil (1299-12, aes, He 5)
sant parsaad taray kul logaa naanak lipat na maa-i-o. ||4||7||
By the Grace of the Saints, the people and all their generations are saved; O Nanak, they are not engrossed in Maya. ||4]|7]|
ATOST HIG U Il (1299-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
fanfs wet As sts uset il (1299-13, asst, Hs 5) bisar ga-ee sabh taat paraa-ee. I have totally forgotten my jealousy of others,
wa 3 AUGHKafs Hf uret NA TITS Il (1299-13, arose, He 5)
jab tay saaDhsangat mohi paa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
since I found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1]||Pause] | o a Sot Sot fara Aare Aft TH AG sf net IAI (1299-14, aos, He 5)
naa ko bairee nahee bigaanaa sagal sang ham ka-o ban aa-ee. ||1] | No one is my enemy, and no one is a stranger. I get along with everyone. ||1]|
A Us ate A 3s Hee Sa AHS AY S Uet MQI (1299-14, aoe, He 5)
jo parabh keeno so bhal maani-o ayh sumat saaDhoo tay paa-ee. ||2|| Whatever God does, I accept that as good. This is the sublime wisdom I have obtained from the Holy. ||2]|
AS xfs afe sfoor ys Sa Ute Ufey Soe fearATET SICH (1299-15, aeaT, He 5)
sabh meh rav rahi-aa parabh aykai paykh paykh naanak bigsaa-ee. ||3]|8]| The One God is pervading in all. Gazing upon Him, beholding Him, Nanak blossoms forth in happiness. ||3]|8]|
STOST HIG U Il (1299-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
SAT AG SIS UTA Il (1299-16, asst, He 5) thaakur jee-o tuhaaro parnaa. O my Dear Lord and Master, You alone are my Support.
Hg HIS SHS Gufs Het Ge SHS ASS UU TIS I (1299-16, ara, ws 5) maan mahat tum"aarai oopar tum"ree ot tum"aaree sarnaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my Honor and Glory; I seek Your Support, and Your Sanctuary. ||1]|Pause| |
Sua uA Sd SH Sua OH fee B agar Il (1299-17, wos, He 5)
tum'"ree aas bharosaa tum"raa tumraa naam ridai lai Dharnaa.
You are my Hope, and You are my Faith. I take Your Name and enshrine it within my heart.
SHd YS SH Afa HIS A A Ao ASt ASt aga AU (1299-17, asst, He 5)
tumro bal tum sang suhaylay jo jo kahhu so-ee so-ee karnaa. ||1]|
You are my Power; associating with You, I am embellished and exalted. I do whatever You say. ||1]|
Hot efor nfeor wy ue dg faurs 3 SCAG Saar Il (1299-18, ares, v2 5)
tumree da-i-aa ma-i-aa sukh paava-o hohu kirpaal ta bha-ojal tarnaa.
Through Your Kindness and Compassion, I find peace; when You are Merciful, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
Ws US BH Ufa utes fea STE Soa AT BIT NIC (1299-19, asst, He 5)
abhai daan naam har paa-i-o sir daari-o naanak sant charnaa. ||2||9]|
Through the Name of the Lord, I obtain the gift of fearlessness; Nanak places his head on the feet of the Saints. ||2]||9||
Yast Y3Oo
TOS HIG U Il (1300-1)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
A Hale Bao fas went Il (1300-1, wast, He 5) saaDh saran charan chit laa-i-aa. In the Sanctuary of the Holy, I focus my consciousness on the Lord's Feet.
Hus ot as Hot tt quar om Hz Afsag fester wan ToS i 4300-1, was, we 5) supan kee baat sunee paykhee supnaa naam mantar satguroo drirh-aa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
When I was dreaming, I heard and saw only dream-objects. The True Guru has implanted the Mantra of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me. ||1]|Pause] |
od fgusé oH Aafe ofs safe safe fefe afer II (1300-2, asst, He 5)
nah tariptaano raaj joban Dhan bahur bahur fir Dhaa-i-aa.
Power, youth and wealth do not bring satisfaction; people chase after them again and again.
Ay utfemr fgno As ast 3 AMS uret ae afer IAI (1300-3, avast, He 5)
sukh paa-i-aa tarisnaa sabh bujhee hai saa‘t paa-ee gun gaa-i-aa. ||1]|
I have found peace and tranquility, and all my thirsty desires have been quenched, singing His Glorious Praises. ||1]||
fag 3S un ot fonret gf vfo fanrfuG wfenr i (1300-3, asst, Hs 5)
bin boojhay pasoo kee ni-aa-ee bharam mohi bi-aapi-o maa-i-aa.
Without understanding, they are like beasts, engrossed in doubt, emotional attachment and Maya.
AOA fa AH Aedt act soa Aafa ANE NINAOI (1300-4, asst, He 5)
saaDhsang jam jayvree kaatee naanak sahj samaa-i-aa. ||2||10|| But in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the noose of Death is cut, O Nanak, and one intuitively merges in celestial peace. ||2||10||
TOS HIG U Il (1300-5)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfs & wae fase aE tl (1300-5, ares, He 5) har kay charan hirdai gaa-ay. Sing of the Lord's Feet within your heart.
Hise wy As Hats fants fants fos forte nan Fa il (1300-5, woz, ue 5)
seetiaa sukh saa“t moorat simar simar nit Dhi-aa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditate, meditate in constant remembrance on God, the Embodiment of soothing peace and cooling tranquility. ||1]|]Pause| |
AAS MTA IS Use afe ASH SY ATE IAI (1300-6, asst, He 5)
Sagal aas hot pooran kot janam dukh jaa-ay. ||1]|
All your hopes shall be fulfilled, and the pain of millions of deaths and births shall be gone. ||1]|
Us Be mda fafoor AT Afr AHS Il (1300-6, ass, He 5)
punn daan anayk kiri-aa saaDhoo sang samaa-ay.
Immerse yourself in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and you shall obtain the benefits of giving charitable gifts, and all sorts of good deeds.
sty Hay fire area aos ae & ue NAA (1300-7, asst, He 5) taap santaap mitay naanak baahurh kaal na khaa-ay. ||2||11]|
Sorrow and suffering shall be erased, O Nanak, and you shall never again be devoured by death. ||2||11]|
ATOR HIG UWI 2 (1300-8)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 3 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
qe Afsare YATE II (1300-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
adba AsAfa ys famire il (1300-9, areat, 48 5) kathee-ai satsang parabh gi-aan. Speak of God's Wisdom in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
yds UsH AS USHA fAHeSs ure HS UU TIS Il 1300-9, arses, we 5)
pooran param jot parmaysur simrat paa-ee-ai maan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Meditating in remembrance on the Perfect Supreme Divine Light, the Transcendent Lord God, honor and glory are obtained. ||1]|Pause||
Mes AS Id AH OA fAHss A Afar ll (1300-10, ase, Hs 5)
aavat jaat rahay saram naasay simrat saaDhoo sang.
One's comings and goings in reincarnation cease, and suffering is dispelled, meditating in remembrance in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
ufss uals dfo furs stafa uagqan & far Ail 1300-10, asst, He 5) patit puneet hohi khin bheetar paarbarahm kai rang. ||1]| Sinners are sanctified in an instant, in the love of the Supreme Lord God. ||1]|
A A aa Ae dg atese ST at SIMS OA I (1300-11, was, He 5)
jo jo kathai sunai har keertan taa kee durmat naas.
Whoever speaks and listens to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is rid of evil- mindedness.
AIS HOTA US GS UTS TS MMA MUVUIA (1300-11, ass, He 5)
Sagal manorath paavai naanak pooran hovai aas. ||2]|1]|12|| All hopes and desires, O Nanak, are fulfilled. ||2]|1]]12||
aTOST HIG U Il (1300-12)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
AHS feta af X SH Il (1300-12, asst, H2 5)
saaDhsangat niDh har ko naam.
The Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Afar Aovet For & ATH WAU TITS I (1300-12, avast, He 5) sang sahaa-ee jee-a kai kaam. ||1]|| rahaa-o. It is the Companion of the soul, its Helper and Support. ||1]||Pause| |
Hz 30 fafs HAS Ae Il (1300-13, asst, He 5) sant rayn nit majan karai. Continually bathing in the dust of the feet of the Saints,
HOH HOH & fafa Te AU (1300-13, arear, He 5) janam janam kay kilbikh harai. ||1]| the sins of countless incarnations are washed away. ||1]|
AS Hot at Get arat il (1300-13, ase, Hs 5) sant janaa kee oochee baanee. The words of the humble Saints are lofty and exalted.
frufs finife 3d STS YTSt UUM 4300-14, ass, He 5)
simar simar taray naanak paraanee. ||2]|2||13]||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance, O Nanak, mortal beings are carried across and saved. ||2||2||13]|
ATOST HIG U Il (1300-14)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
AY dfs Id Ts TATE I (1300-14, aos", we 5) saaDhoo har haray gun gaa-ay. O Holy people, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Haray.
HS 36 U6 UTS US a fANES Fu ATE NAN TIC Il 1300-14, was, we 5)
maan tan Dhan paraan parabh kay simrat dukh jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Mind, body, wealth and the breath of life - all come from God; remembering Him in meditation, pain is taken away. ||1||Pause] |
as 8s as Sarefa Sa fA HG STE Al 1300-15, ass, we 5) eet oot kahaa lobhaaveh ayk si-o man laa-ay. ||1]| Why are you entangled in this and that? Let your mind be attuned to the One. ||1]||
Ho ufez AS wire ffs Afar aifse forte NN (1300-16, asst, He 5)
mahaa pavitar sant aasan mil sang gobid Dhi-aa-ay. ||2||
The place of the Saints is utterly sacred; meet with them, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe. ||2| |
Hae fsurtar Hate urfeS aoa So fHote NSNSIIWll (1300-16, aS, Hs 5)
Sagal ti-aag saran aa-i-o naanak layho milaa-ay. ||3]|3]|14]|
O Nanak, I have abandoned everything and come to Your Sanctuary. Please let me merge with You. ||3]|3]]14||
ATOST HIG U Il (1300-17)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ufe ufe far AHS us wma feats NV FITC il 4300-17, was, He 5)
paykh paykh bigsaa-o saajan parabh aapnaa ikaa"t. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Gazing upon and beholding my Best Friend, I blossom forth in bliss; my God is the One and Only. ||1]|Pause| |
wigs’ AY Hon Hots 3H wTS ad SHS WAM (1300-18, aos, HE 5) aandaa sukh sahj moorat tis aan naahee bhaa't. ||1]| He is the Image of Ecstasy, Intuitive Peace and Poise. There is no other like Him. ||1]]|
fines fea ae afe afe fife afe GAHS ANS IIQI (1300-18, west, 43 5)
simrat ik baar har har mit kot kasmal jaa“t. ||2|| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, even once, millions of sins are erased. ||2]||
UST YOY Ge THs ea ants foe sfenis AHS BI C301-1, wax, He 5)
gun ramant dookh naaseh rid bha-i-ant saat. ||3]| Uttering His Glorious Praises, suffering is eradicated, and the heart becomes tranquil and calm. |[3]|
nifys aA Ue gH aoa ofa Sfa TS USUI (301-1, wesT, He 5)
amritaa ras pee-o rasnaa naanak har rang raat. ||4||4||15]|
Drink in the Sweet, Sublime Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak, and be imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||4||4]|15]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1301-2)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
AHe AS we AST WAU TIS Il 1301-2, aos, ws 5) Saajnaa sant aa-o mayrai. ||1|| rahaa-o. O friends, O Saints, come to me. ||1]|Pause]|
mise ae afte Hares anne fufe ats uss Wall 1301-3, ast, He 5)
aandaa gun gaa-ay mangal kasmalaa mit jaahi parayrai. ||1||
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with pleasure and joy, the sins will be erased and thrown away. ||1]|
AS do us Ha sear fafa af vids iW (1301-3, asst, ue 5)
sant charan Dhara-o maathai chaa“dnaa garihi ho-ay anDhayrai. ||2]|
Touch your forehead to the feet of the Saints, and your dark household shall be illumined. ||2||
As unte ane faa afte sn uf SF Si 301-4, wos, He 5)
sant parsaad kamal bigsai gobind bhaja-o paykh nayrai. ||3]|
By the Grace of the Saints, the heart-lotus blossoms forth. Vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and see Him near at hand. ||3]|
ys fgur 3 As ue afe ofa Soa BT FT NSNUNIEN (1301-4, wes, Hs 5)
parabh kirpaa tay sant paa-ay vaar vaar naanak uh bayrai. ||4]|5|]16]|
By the Grace of God, I have found the Saints. Over and over again, Nanak is a sacrifice to that moment. ||4]|5||16]|
TOS HIG U Il (1301-5)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
BIO Ade dus Sat Il (1301-5, was, ue 5) charan saran gopaal tayree. I seek the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet, O Lord of the World.
Ho HS Od SoH Thy BA fe Fat nail TIS Il 1301-6, aos, v2 5)
moh maan Dhoh bharam raakh leejai kaat bayree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Save me from emotional attachment, pride, deception and doubt; please cut away these ropes which bind me. ||1||Pause] |
YSS AAS ATA Il (1301-6, ass, He 5) boodat sansaar saagar. I am drowning in the world-ocean.
Gud of fAHfe Taras IA (1301-6, aes, He 5) uDhray har simar ratnaagar. ||1]| Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the Source of Jewels, I am saved. ||1]|
Hiser dfs ou Sa Il 301-7, was, He 5) seetlaa har naam tayraa. Your Name, Lord, is cooling and soothing.
YIS SAT YF AF Ml (1301-7, was, we 5) poorno thaakur parabh mayraa. ||2| | God, my Lord and Master, is Perfect. ||2]|
ae ede foes 3S Il (1301-7, aaa, He 5) deen darad nivaar taaran. You are the Deliverer, the Destroyer of the sufferings of the meek and the poor.
ofa faut fefa ufss Burae I3Il a301-8, west, He 5) har kirpaa niDh patit uDhaaran. ||3]| The Lord is the Treasure of Mercy, the Saving Grace of sinners. ||3]|
ate AaH eu af ute i (301-8, aos, He 5) kot janam dookh kar paa-i-o. I have suffered the pains of millions of incarnations.
Aut soa afs oH festeS ienenqoil a301-8, west, Hs 5)
sukhee naanak gur naam darirh-aa-i-o. ||4||6||17]||
Nanak is at peace; the Guru has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me. |[4][6]]17]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1301-9)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ufs Ga ulfs sae Afar wait I (1301-9, asst, Hs 5) Dhan uh pareet charan sang laagee. Blessed is that love, which is attuned to the Lord's Feet.
afe wry avy AY ure orfe fre uss asset IU TIES il (1301-9, was, Hs 5)
kot jaap taap sukh paa-ay aa-ay milay pooran badbhaagee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The peace which comes from millions of chants and deep meditations is obtained by perfect good fortune and destiny. ||1]||Pause] |
Hf nove BH AG 3a nies Ge Aart fo fSurait i 1301-10, asst, He 5) mohi anaath daas jan tayraa avar ot saglee mohi ti-aagee. I am Your helpless servant and slave; I have given up all other support.
3g 30H ae us fines fame nine ffs Aes Aait NA 301-11, asst, He 5)
bhor bharam kaatay parabh simrat gi-aan anjan mil sovat jaagee. ||1]|
Every trace of doubt has been eradicated, remembering God in meditation. I have applied the ointment of spiritual wisdom, and awakened from my sleep. ||1] |
3 erg wits as omit feu fg yaa Tsarat | 301-11, wax, Hs 5)
too athaahu at bado su-aamee kirpaa sinDh pooran ratnaagee.
You are Unfathomably Great and Utterly Vast, O my Lord and Master, Ocean of Mercy, Source of Jewels.
soa Aa de afs on Hit HASAE ofS ofsS ys ura NAWDUNACI (4301-12, wos, He 5) naanak jaachak har har naam maa™gai mastak aan Dhari-o parabh paagee.
2] 171 ]18]|
Nanak, the beggar, begs for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; he rests his forehead upon God's Feet. ||2||7||18]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1301-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ates Fed AUS AH I (1301-13, asst, He 5) kuchil kathor kapat kaamee. I am filthy, hard-hearted, deceitful and obsessed with sexual desire.
fig wats f3@ sf AMM an TIS Il 301-13, was, He 5) ji-o jaaneh ti-o taar su-aamee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please carry me across, as You wish, O my Lord and Master. ||1||Pause] |
3 Neg Hale Aa S outs wrust ae Os NAM (1301-14, aos", Hs 5) too samrath saran jog too raakhahi apnee kal Dhaar. ||1]|
You are All-powerful and Potent to grant Sanctuary. Exerting Your Power, You protect us. ||1]|
Au sTu OH Afe AHH ont feo fad Sears Il (1301-14, wes, He 5)
jaap taap naym such sanjam naahee in biDhay chhutkaar.
Chanting and deep meditation, penance and austere self-discipline, fasting and purification - salvation does not come by any of these means.
des ug nig 3 areg ys area dels foots NINCHIEN (1301-15, aTSsT, He 5)
garat ghor anDh tay kaadhahu parabh naanak nadar nihaar. ||2||8]|19]|
Please lift me up and out of this deep, dark ditch; O God, please bless Nanak with Your Glance of Grace. ||2]||8]|19]|
aTOST HIG UWI 8 (1301-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 4 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1301-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
sates SIUus SHAATS Il (1301-17, ast, He 5) naaraa-in narpat namaskaarai. The one who bows in humble reverence to the Primal Lord, the Lord of all beings
MA Ts as af afe wet orf nas Hfs svg NAN TIS I (1301-17, wast, He 5)
aisay gur ka-o bal bal jaa-ee-ai aap mukat mohi taarai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
- lama sacrifice, a sacrifice to such a Guru; He Himself is liberated, and He carries me across as well. ||1]||Pause| |
ALS ALS ASS TS Ada viz dt As urs Il (1301-18, avast, He 5)
kavan kavan kavan gun kahee-ai ant nahee kachh paarai.
Which, which, which of Your Glorious Virtues should I chant? There is no end or limitation to them.
ory ore oe act aT a TI MA sters IAI (1301-18, wast, He 5)
laakh laakh laakh ka-ee korai ko hai aiso beechaarai. ||1] |
There are thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, many millions of them, but those who contemplate them are very rare. ||1]|
Uat 9302 fann fann fann dt set J we THIS Jas Il 1302-1, ass, 12 5)
bisam bisam bisam hee bha-ee hai laal gulaal rangaarai. I am wonder-struck, wonder-struck, wonder-struck and amazed, dyed in the deep crimson color of my Beloved.
TI HSA AIS FA met F fAS oh Tar HATS UINAUIOM (1302-1, as", Hs 5) kaho naanak santan ras aa-ee hai ji-o chaakh goongaa muskaarai. ||2||1]|20|| Says Nanak, the Saints savor this sublime essence, like the mute, who tastes the sweet candy, but only smiles. ||2]|1]|20||
TOS HIG U Il (1302-2)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
6 Wat Hse ys fae nS Il (1302-2, aear, He 5) na jaanee santan parabh bin aan. The Saints do not know any other except God.
Gz ote AS Ufa AHS Hie BAS His HS NU TIS Il 1302-2, was, He 5)
ooch neech sabh paykh samaano mukh bakno man maan. ||1|| rahaa-o. They look upon all equally, the high and the low; they speak of Him with their mouths, and honor Him in their minds. ||1]||Pause] |
ufe ufe ufs od AY ATS S SAo AS YS Il (1302-3, ass, we 5)
ghat ghat poor rahay sukh saagar bhai bhanjan mayray paraan.
He is pervading and permeating each and every heart; He is the Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of fear. He is my praanaa - the Breath of Life.
Hots yarn ste au othe Hz AE Ts ars MAU 0302-4, aresr, we 5)
maneh pargaas bha-i-o bharam naasi-o mantar dee-o gur kaan. ||1]|
My mind was enlightened, and my doubt was dispelled, when the Guru whispered His Mantra into my ears. ||1]|
AIS TI 3 AGE" H visarmt fara it 1302-4, wax, we 5) karat rahay kartaga-y karunaa mai antarjaamee gi-yaan. He is All-powerful, the Ocean of Mercy, the All-knowing Searcher of Hearts.
WTS UIT Soa AA IWS Hide AC Ths SS NANVVUI (1302-5, asst, He 5)
aath pahar naanak jas gaavai maa“gan ka-o har daan. ||2||2||21|| Twenty-four hours a day Nanak sings His Praises, and begs for the Gift of the Lord. 212] [221]
TOS HIG U Il (1302-6)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
Is Aes AG wet AF Il (1302-6, ars, v2 5) kahan kahaavan ka-o ka-ee kaytai. Many speak and talk about God.
MA HS fags J Rea A 3S Ha A FS NU TIS Il 1302-6, wast, He 5)
aiso jan birlo hai sayvak jo tat jog ka-o baytai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
But one who understands the essence of Yoga - such a humble servant is very rare] |1||Pause| |
eu odt Ag AY dtd FT Sa Sat SS I (1302-7, was, ve 5) dukh naahee sabh sukh hee hai ray aykai aykee naytai. He has no pain - he is totally at peace. With his eyes, he sees only the One Lord.
aw dt AS so Hd FT Te Sdt AS AS IAI (1302-7, wos, He 5) buraa nahee sabh bhalaa hee hai ray haar nahee sabh jaytai. ||1]| No one seems evil to him - all are good. There is no defeat - he is totally victorious.
[4 |
Ha atdt Het gout dd efs art fas BS Il (1302-8, asst, He 5)
sog naahee sadaa harkhee hai ray chhod naahee kichh laytai.
He is never in sorrow - he is always happy; but he gives this up, and does not take anything.
aI soa AO die afs ae J aT oS AT FHS IU 3N2Q2Ml_ (1302-8, waar, v2 5)
kaho naanak jan har har har hai kat aavai kat ramtai. ||2||3]|22||
Says Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is himself the Lord, Har, Har; he does not come and go in reincarnation. ||2||3||22||
TOS HIG U Il (1302-9)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
He & utsy fanfs o Ate i 1302-9, asst, ue 5)
hee-ay ko pareetam bisar na jaa-ay. I pray that my heart may never forget my Beloved.
36 Ho des se fsa Aa Host fs act Het HE an TIE Il 1302-9, wos, v2 5)
tan man galat bha-ay tih sangay mohnee mohi rahee moree maa-ay. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My body and mind are blended with Him, but the Enticer, Maya, is enticing me, O my mother. ||1]|Pause] |
AA ufo aoe fy Te myst 38 38 TI FT nicarfE Il (1302-10, asx, we 5)
jai jai peh kaha-o baritha ha-o apunee tay-oo tay-oo gahay rahay atkaa-ay. Those unto whom I tell my pain and frustration - they themselves are caught and stuck.
nifoa sifs at Sa At st ot aife odt SHE All (1302-11, wast, He 5) anik bhaa‘t kee aykai jaalee taa kee ganth nahee chhoraa-ay. ||1|| In all sorts of ways, Maya has cast the net; the knots cannot be loosened. ||1]|
fess feas aoa oH ue Hse dt Ado TE I (1302-11, asst, He 5) firat firat naanak daas aa-i-o santan hee sarnaa-ay. Wandering and roaming, slave Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Saints.
ae nifsmia sau Ho Hen SE afs Barf iWSiI3il (1302-12, ass, ue 5)
kaatay agi-aan bharam moh maa-i-aa lee-o kanth lagaa-ay. ||2||4||23]| The bonds of ignorance, doubt, emotional attachment and the love of Maya have been cut; God hugs me close in His Embrace. ||2]||4||23]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1302-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
mee da fase THT Il (1302-13, ast, He 5) aanad rang binod hamaarai. My home is filled with ecstasy, pleasure and joy.
oH Wea oH fimreg SU IHS US OS AU TIS Il 1302-13, asst, He 5)
naamo gaavan naam Dhi-aavan naam hamaaray paraan aDhaarai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I sing the Naam, and I meditate on the Naam. The Naam is the Support of my breath of life. ||1]|Pause] |
oH fama oy fenorat ofs SH IHS ATaH AST Il (1302-14, wast, He 5)
naamo gi-aan naam isnaanaa har naam hamaaray kaaraj savaarai.
The Naam is spiritual wisdom, the Naam is my purifying bath. The Naam resolves all my affairs.
dfs oH Ast an asret sGne fae ay dfs SS AU (1302-14, wast, He 5)
har naamo sobhaa naam badaa-ee bha-ojal bikham naam har taarai. ||1||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is glorious grandeur; the Naam is glorious greatness. The Name of the Lord carries me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]||
WH USTIE BS nino sfeS uarufs qe Baars Il (1302-15, asst, ue 5)
agam padaarath laal amolaa bha-i-o paraapat gur charnaarai.
The Unfathomable Treasure, the Priceless Gem - I have received it, through the Guru's Feet.
AW soa ys se furs Hale se Thad SEATS NQNUNQIl (1302-16, as, He 5)
kaho naanak parabh bha-ay kirpaalaa magan bha-ay hee-arai darsaarai. ||2||5||24]| Says Nanak, God has become Merciful; my heart is intoxicated by the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||2||5||24]|
ATOST HIG U Il (1302-17)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
AAS HIS AMM Sg Il 1302-17, arest, He 5) Saajan meet su-aamee nayro. My Friend, my Best Friend, my Lord and Master, is near.
Uus HOS ASS A Ad As HH Fd AT Ss NA TIS I (1302-17, ass, ve 5)
paykhat sunat sabhan kai sangay thorai kaaj buro kah fayro. ||1]| rahaa-o.
He sees and hears everything; He is with everyone. You are here for such short time - why do you do evil? ||1||Pause] |
on fast AS Buches ag Sot at AS Sg Il (1302-18, arses, He 5) naam binaa jayto laptaa-i-o kachhoo nahee naahee kachh tayro. Except for the Naam, whatever you are involved with is nothing - nothing is yours.
ens
wind fenfe nres AS usa|e Sto HfsS San wiTT WA (1302-18, asst, He 5)
aagai darisat aavat sabh pargat eehaa mohi-o bharam anDhayro. ||1]| Hereafter, everything is revealed to your gaze; but in this world, all are enticed by the darkness of doubt. ||1]|
nicfas AS Safest Ha wfeor Peaug srg FEA II (1302-19, wast, He 5)
atki-o sut banitaa sang maa-i-aa dayvanhaar daataar bisayro.
People are caught in Maya, attached to their children and spouses. They have forgotten the Great and Generous Giver.
Yat 9303
AT asa Sa SIAC Hus AEST ST TT HS NQANENQUI (1303-1, asst, He 5)
kaho naanak aykai bhaarosa-o banDhan kaatanhaar gur mayro. ||2||6||25|| Says Nanak, I have one article of faith; my Guru is the One who releases me from bondage. ||2||6||25] |
aTOST HIG U Il (1303-1)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
fra 2 H3afs SHS afas i 1303-2, asst, He 5) bikhai dal santan tum"rai gaahi-o. Your Saints have overwhelmed the wicked army of corruption.
Suet 2a sd cag Aafs SHH orfaS wan TIS i (1303-2, asst, He 5)
tumree tayk bharosaa thaakur saran tum"aaree aahi-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They take Your Support and place their faith in You, O my Lord and Master; they seek Your Sanctuary. ||1||Pause] |
HOH HOH A HI udtes PIAS Ste feta il 1303-3, arasr, He 5)
janam janam kay mahaa paraachhat darsan bhayt mitaa-i-o.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, the terrible sins of countless lifetimes are erased.
safe yarn moe Crore AofA AArfo AMES WAI (1303-3, asst, Hs 5)
bha-i-o pargaas anad ujee-aaraa sahj samaaDh samaahi-o. ||1]|
I am illumined, enlightened and filled with ecstasy. I am intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||1]|
aCe Ad SHS ae St SH ANGE MATTE I (1303-4, asst, He 5) ka-un kahai tum tay kachh naahee tum samrath athaahi-o. Who says that You cannot do everything? You are Infinitely All-powerful.
fgur fours Ja IU TA OH TSA S STIS WQANONEM (1303-4, assy, we 5)
kirpaa niDhaan rang roop ras naam naanak lai laahi-o. ||2||7||26||
O Treasure of Mercy, Nanak savors Your Love and Your Blissful Form, earning the Profit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||7||26] |
aTOST HIG U Il (1303-5)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ass yrat ofs fu ats I (1303-5, araer, Hs 5) boodat paraanee har jap Dheerai. The drowning mortal is comforted and consoled, meditating on the Lord.
faon Ho SdH BU Utd NAN TIC Il 1303-5, asst, He 5) binsai moh bharam dukh peerai. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is rid of emotional attachment, doubt, pain and suffering. ||1||Pause| |
fins? feo dfs ae & Vas Il (1303-6, asst, He 5) simra-o din rain gur kay charnaa. I meditate in remembrance, day and night, on the Guru's Feet.
AS aS UNS SHat Ada" MAU (1303-6, asst, He 5) jat kat paykha-o tumree sarnaa. ||1|| Wherever I look, I see Your Sanctuary. ||1||
As yAte dfs & Te afenr | 1303-7, area, He 5) sant parsaad har kay gun gaa-i-aa. By the Grace of the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Td SSS GSA AY UE NUCH IM (1303-7, asa, He 5) gur bhaytat naanak sukh paa-i-aa. ||2||8]|27]| Meeting with the Guru, Nanak has found peace. ||2||8]|27]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1303-8)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
fauas oH Hofs AY ure II 1303-8, aes, He 5) simrat naam maneh sukh paa-ee-ai. Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, peace of mind is found.
Ag Aor fife afs AA Shr a TI i 1303-8, wast, He 5) saaDh janaa mil har jas gaa-ee-ai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Meeting the Holy Saint, sing the Praises of the Lord. ||1]||Pause||
afs fasur ys fat SAS Il (1303-9, aos, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh ridai basayro. Granting His Grace, God has come to dwell within my heart.
TIS ASO & Ha HT AU (1303-9, aves, Hs 5) charan santan kai maathaa mayro. ||1]|| I touch my forehead to the feet of the Saints. ||1]|
UTSAIH AC fAHTT Hat Il (1303-9, asa, He 5) paarbarahm ka-o simrahu manaa”. Meditate, O my mind, on the Supreme Lord God.
Tafa aaa ole AA AST NQUENQACH (1303-10, as, He 5) gurmukh naanak har jas sunaa™. ||2||9]|28] | As Gurmukh, Nanak listens to the Praises of the Lord. ||2||9]|28]|
TOAST HIG U Il (1303-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
Hd Ho US Bao YS UPAS Il (1303-10, arse", He 5) mayray man pareet charan parabh parsan. My mind loves to touch the Feet of God.
ona ofa ofs safe fgusrat nis a@ ASuy Ys IAS NA TIS Il 1303-11, as, Hs 5) rasnaa har har bhojan tariptaanee akhee-an ka-o santokh parabh darsan. ||1]|| rahaa- 0. My tongue is satisfied with the Food of the Lord, Har, Har. My eyes are contented with the Blessed Vision of God. ||1]|Pause]|
adate ufs aa AA UISH ASHE SU Aas He ISAS Il (1303-11, ass, we 5) karnan poor rahi-o jas pareetam kalmal dokh sagal mal harsan. My ears are filled with the Praise of my Beloved; all my foul sins and faults are erased.
uo Uo AMM AY Ue nial Hal afm HS APAS IAI (1303-12, asst, He 5)
paavan Dhaavan su-aamee sukh panthaa ang sang kaa-i-aa sant sarsan. ||1]|
My feet follow the Path of Peace to my Lord and Master; my body and limbs joyfully blossom forth in the Society of the Saints. ||1]|
Hote at ude vifsarat wire Sure alas adt AGAG Il (1303-13, aos", He 5)
saran gahee pooran abhinaasee aan upaav thakit nahee karsan.
I have taken Sanctuary in my Perfect, Eternal, Imperishable Lord. I do not bother trying anything else.
ad dfs He ea AS MUS nid UT ATA Sdt HAAS INAONQEII (1303-14, asst, He 5) kar geh lee-ay naanak jan apnay anDh ghor saagar nahee marsan. ||2||10||29]| Taking them by the hand, O Nanak, God saves His humble servants; they shall not perish in the deep, dark world-ocean. ||2||10||29||
aTOST HIG U Il (1303-14)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
AIAS AUS MUS US Dds Hons Ate mifoa adr Al TIS ll 1303-15, asst, vz 5) kuhkat kapat khapat khal garjat marjat meech anik baree-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those fools who bellow with rage and destructive deceit, are crushed and killed innumerable times. ||1]||Pause| |
Wd HS mS 3s afhs fos UlsH UES FHS we adr WAI 1303-15, wear, He 5)
aha’ mat an rat kumit hit pareetam paykhat bharmat laakh garee-aa. ||1|| Intoxicated with egotism and imbued with other tastes, I am in love with my evil enemies. My Beloved watches over me as I wander through thousands of incarnations. ||1]|
wifes fagors ures fafa dies HH HE HS atu AST II (1303-16, ast, He 5)
anit bi-uhaar achaar biDh heenat mam mad maat kop jaree-aa. My dealings are false, and my lifestyle is chaotic. Intoxicated with the wine of emotion, I am burning in the fire of anger.
age faurs due te do soa Cug Aafe ud NQNIAUNSON (1303-17, asst, He 5) karun kirpaal gopaal deen banDh naanak uDhar saran paree-aa. ||2||11]|30||
O Merciful Lord of the World, Embodiment of Compassion, Relative of the meek and the poor, please save Nanak; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2||11]|30||
aTOST HIG U Il (1303-18)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
Abt Yrs HTS BST Il (1303-18, ass, He 5)
jee-a paraan maan daataa. The Giver of the soul, the breath of life and honor
dfs fangs ot ae Ai TIS il (1303-18, ast, He 5) har bisratay hee haan. ||1]|| rahaa-o. - forgetting the Lord, all is lost. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs] fsurta urs orate vifgs ate sf urate il (1303-18, ass, He 5)
gobind ti-aag aan laageh amrito daar bhoom paageh.
You have forsaken the Lord of the Universe, and become attached to another - you are throwing away the Ambrosial Nectar, to take dust.
fat oA fA nTAeS HS oS AY HTS WAU (1303-19, ae, He 5)
bikhai ras si-o aaskat moorhay kaahay sukh maan. ||1]|
What do you expect from corrupt pleasures? You fool! What makes you think that they will bring peace? ||1]|
uot 908 oth afa afs fimrfuG won ct at uf II 1304-1, aosr, 2 5)
kaam kroDh lobh bi-aapi-o janam hee kee khaan. Engrossed in unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger and greed, you shall be consigned to reincarnation.
ufsa use Hale wrfeG Bug aaa ATS NQNIANSUI (1304-1, aes, He 5)
patit paavan saran aa-i-o uDhar naanak jaan. ||2||12]|31]| But I have entered the Sanctuary of the Purifier of sinners. O Nanak, I know that I Shall be saved. ||2||12]|31]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1304-2)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
mifesas IH & warafies il 1304-2, aes, He 5) aviloka-o raam ko mukhaarbind. I gaze on the Lotus-like Face of the Lord.
ans dns 336 utes fandt AS fee an TIC Il 1304-2, aos, ve 5)
khojat khojat ratan paa-i-o bisree sabh chind. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Searching and seeking, I have found the Jewel. I am totally rid of all anxiety. ||1]|Pause] |
do SHS feet ofs i (1304-3, aes, He 5) charan kamal ridai Dhaar. Enshrining His Lotus Feet within my heart,
Csfoor ey HS NA (1304-3, aes, He 5) utri-aa dukh mand. ||1]| pain and wickedness have been dispelled. ||1]|
TH US ude's Hd ASSA Afse il (1304-3, asst, He 5) raaj Dhan parvaar mayrai sarbaso gobind. The Lord of all the Universe is my kingdom, wealth and family.
AUCH os utes aoa fefs o HPS NIMS (1304-4, aes, He 5)
saaDhsangam laabh paa-i-o naanak fir na marand. ||2||13||32| | In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has earned the Profit; he shall never die again. ||2]|13]|32||
ASST HIS UW U (1304-5)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 5 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:
qe Afsara yATfe Il (1304-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
YS UA 3TH Mate I (1304-6, aos, He 5) parabh poojho naam araaDh. Worship God, and adore His Name.
ad Afsaa TIat Sar i (1304-6, asst, uz 5) gur satgur charnee laag. Grasp the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru.
dfs ued HS Marfa Il (1304-6, wear, He 5) har paavhu man agaaDh. The Unfathomable Lord shall come into your mind,
Ad ats od ae fear nan ToS I (1304-6, asst, He 5) jag jeeto ho ho gur kirpaaDh. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and by Guru's Grace, you shall be victorious in this world. ||1]]Pause| |
mifsx ut Hag fafa deat AT ust ft ofe Set Il (1304-7, arse, He 5)
anik poojaa mai baho biDh khojee saa poojaa je har bhaavaas.
I have studied countless ways of worship in all sorts of ways, but that alone is worship, which is pleasing to the Lord's Will.
Het ot fea ust Fat fam Sa ATH STA II (1304-7, aest, He 5) maatee kee ih putree joree ki-aa ayh karam kamaas. This body-puppet is made of clay - what can it do by itself?
us ag uate fan wef weg A SU HS froth A (1304-8, ares, He 5) parabh baah pakar jis maarag paavhu so tuDh jant milaas. ||1]|
O God, those humble beings meet You, whom You grasp by the arm, and place on the Path. ||1]|
ued Ge H afe o AS fea ofa at Ge H uPA II (1304-9, wax, He 5) avar ot mai ko-ay na soojhai ik har kee ot mai aas. I do not know of any other support; O Lord, You are my only Hope and Support.
fomr ete ad niger Il 1304-9, araar, He 5) ki-aa deen karay ardaas. I am meek and poor - what prayer can I offer?
AG AS ute Ys FSSA II (1304-9, aTssr, He 5) ja-o sabh ghat parabhoo nivaas. God abides in every heart.
Ys TIoo at HfS fuMrA Il 1304-10, aes, He 5)
parabh charnan kee man pi-aas. My mind is thirsty for the Feet of God.
Hs Sod BHA ads J SH Te afs af AS StH AA NQNUIBSI (1304-10, as, He 5)
jan naanak daas kahee-at hai tum"raa ha-o bal bal sad bal jaas. ||2]|1||33]| Servant Nanak, Your slave, speaks: I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to You. ||2]]1]|33]|
Ast HIG UW E (1304-12)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 6 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:
96 Afsars yArfe it (1304-12) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Aas Curse oH fpr 3g Il 1304-13, ara, He 5) jagat uDhaaran naam pari-a tayrai. Your Name, O my Beloved, is the Saving Grace of the world.
o¢ fafa ant fours ofa As Il (1304-13, aes, He 5) nav niDh naam niDhaan har kayrai. The Lord's Name is the wealth of the nine treasures.
Os Fa Fa FH MGUS Il (1304-13, araer, Hz 5) har rang rang rang anoopayrdi. One who is imbued with the Love of the Incomparably Beautiful Lord is joyful.
ad J HO Hfs Halos Il (1304-13, aos, He 5) kaahay ray man mohi magnayrai. O mind, why do you cling to emotional attachments?
dod GU AT SIAM Il (1304-14, ast, He 5) nainhu daykh saaDh darsayrai. With your eyes, gaze upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Holy.
A ute fan fous fess an gre il 1304-14, arest, He 5) SO paavai jis likhat lilayrai. ||1|| rahaa-o. They alone find it, who have such destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||1]||Pause] |
AG AT AS vss Il (1304-14, asst, He 5) sayva-o saaDh sant charnayrai. I serve at the feet of the Holy Saints.
weg ufe ufeg ads Il (1304-15, ast, Hs 5) baa‘chha-o Dhoor pavitar karayrai. I long for the dust of their feet, which purifies and sanctifies.
WMOAfS HHS HB AST Il (1304-15, asst, He 5)
athsath majan mail katayrai.
Just like the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, it washes away filth and pollution.
Af Af foMred He adt HS Il (1304-15, arest, He 5) Saas Saas Dhi-aavahu mukh nahee morai. With each and every breath I meditate on Him, and never turn my face away.
fas Hfat 5 IS BUY Ad Il (1304-16, asst, He 5) kichh sang na chaalai laakh karorai. Of your thousands and millions, nothing shall go along with you.
us at a on ifs uads AU (1304-16, ast, He 5) parabh jee ko naam ant pakrorai. ||1]| Only the Name of God will call to you in the end. ||1]|
HOT Hs Sa fEsas Il (1304-16, asst, He 5) mansaa maan ayk nirankayrai. Let it be your wish to honor and obey the One Formless Lord.
Aas fsnrag a EAT Il (1304-17, was, He 5) Sagal ti-aagahu bhaa-o doojayrai. Abandon the love of everything else.
aeS AT IS Ts fit FF it 1304-17, wos, us 5) kavan kahaa™ ha-o gun pari-a tayrai. What Glorious Praises of Yours can I utter, O my Beloved?
wale & AAG Sa SBI Il (1304-17, asst, 2 5) baran na saaka-o ayk lutayrai. I cannot describe even one of Your Virtues.
zane fimrm sos vfs AS Il (1304-18, asst, He 5) darsan pi-aas bahut man mayrai. My mind is so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
fie BSA PS AIST TT AT NUS (1304-18, ast, He 5) mil naanak dayv jagat gur kayrai. ||2||1]|34|| Please come and meet Nanak, O Divine Guru of the World. ||2||1]|34]|
Us qBo0u
aTOST HIG U Il (1305-1)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
MAT Be fad eaAS USHA IU! FITS ll (1305-1, asst, He 5) aisee ka-un biDhay darsan parsanaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. How may I obtain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan? ||1||Pause||
win fun Aes Hots Sufar HE SaAAT WAU (1305-1, aos, He 5) aas pi-aas safal moorat umag hee-o tarsanaa. ||1]|| I hope and thirst for Your wish-fulfilling image; my heart yearns and longs for You.
1111] dle ate fimraA Hie Asa afe ASST Il (1305-2, asst, we 5)
deen leen pi-aas meen santnaa har santnaa. The meek and humble Saints are like thirsty fish; the Saints of the Lord are absorbed in Him.
dfs H3at at 3S Il 1305-2, aesr, H3 5) har santnaa kee rayn. I am the dust of the feet of the Lord's Saints.
TE mrafu Ss Il 1305-3, ares, vs 5) hee-o arap dayn. I dedicate my heart to them.
ys se 9 fasus Il (1305-3, asst, He 5) parabh bha-ay hai kirpayn. God has become Merciful to me.
HS Hg fsurfa efE 3B aaa afe AG Sear NQNQNSUI (1305-3, aS, He 5)
maan moh ti-aag chhodi-o ta-o naanak har jee-o bhaytnaa. ||2||2||35]|
Renouncing pride and leaving behind emotional attachment, O Nanak, one meets with the Dear Lord. ||2||2||35]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1305-4)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
dam Sa ase A Fa Il (1305-4, asst, He 5) rangaa rang rangan kay rangaa. The Playful Lord imbues all with the Color of His Love.
ate JAS UIs AS Aa AU TIS Il (1305-4, arssr, we 5) keet hasat pooran sabh sangaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. From the ant to the elephant, He is permeating and pervading all. ||1||Pause] |
ads 3H Stee Afss aa Il (1305-5, wear, He 5) barat naym tirath sahit gangaa. Some go on fasts, make vows, and take pilgrimages to sacred shrines on the Ganges.
AG JSS FY MF Sa Il (1305-5, wae, ue 5) jal hayvat bhookh ar nangaa. They stand naked in the water, enduring hunger and poverty.
UAT AIS HBA Il (1305-5, was, Hs 5) poojaachaar karat maylangaa. They sit cross-legged, perform worship services and do good deeds.
TA AGH fSea wSaT Il (1305-6, arses, He 5) chakar karam tilak khaatangaa. They apply religious symbols to their bodies, and ceremonial marks to their limbs.
PIAS 32 fas ASH INA (1305-6, arsst, He 5)
darsan bhaytay bin satsangaa. ||1]|
They read through the Shaastras, but they do not join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||1]||
ute feats uifs sas fazar i (1305-6, aaar, He 5)
hath nigrahi at rahat bitangaa. They stubbornly practice ritualistic postures, standing on their heads.
JG da fmm va o Fa Il 1305-7, aos, Hs 5) ha-o rog bi-aapai chukai na bhangaa. They are afflicted with the disease of egotism, and their faults are not covered up.
am au mifs feAe Aa Il 1305-7, asst, He 5) kaam kroDh at tarisan jarangaa. They burn in the fire of sexual frustration, unresolved anger and compulsive desire.
A Has ood fan Afsag Ya NQUNSIBEN (1305-7, wast, He 5) so mukat naanak jis satgur changa. ||2]||3||36]|| He alone is liberated, O Nanak, whose True Guru is Good. ||2]|3]||36]||
ATOST HIG UWI D (1305-9) kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 7 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:
qe Afsara YATE II (1305-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
faa sf aret aet ffs Ara AAT II (1305-10, arasr, He 5) tikh boojh ga-ee ga-ee mil saaDh janaa. My thirst has been quenched, meeting with the Holy.
UT Sa BI AIA AAS Jd To West West west wan fimrfe nai ga il 1305-10, west, H8 5)
panch bhaagay chor sehjay sukhaino haray gun gaavtee gaavtee gaavtee daras pi- aar. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The five thieves have run away, and I am in peace and poise; singing, singing, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I obtain the Blessed Vision of my Beloved. ||1]|Pause] |
AAT adt ys H fAG H fAe mit IG AA age Il (1305-11, asst, He 5) jaisee karee parabh mo si-o mo si-o aisee ha-o kaisay kara-o. That which God has done for me - how can I do that for Him in return?
NS sus afs as af as ales qet ua 1305-11, wes, ws 5) hee-o tum"aaray bal balay bal balay bal ga-ee. ||1]| I make my heart a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||1]|
ufas U AS uf foorfe fomrfe uifs ote I 0305-12, area, He 5) pahilay pai sant paa-ay Dhi-aa-ay Dhi-aa-ay pareet laa-ay. First, I fall at the feet of the Saints; I meditate, meditate, lovingly attuned to You.
us WS 3d aud fag H30 afa ster" Il (1305-12, wos, He 5) parabh thaan tayro kayhro jit jantan kar beechaar. O God, where is that Place, where You contemplate all Your beings?
mfok BA atats acts SIH Il (1305-13, asst, vs 5) anik daas keerat karahi tuhaaree. Countless slaves sing Your Praises.
Het fifes A aes HE SSA SAT af ANTE II (1305-13, ast, He 5)
so-ee mili-o jo bhaavto jan naanak thaakur rahi-o samaa-ay.
He alone meets You, who is pleasing to Your Will. Servant Nanak remains absorbed in his Lord and Master.
Sa Zt Sat SH WQANUZI | 305-14, asst, v2 5) ayk toohee toohee toohee. ||2]||1||37]| You, You, You alone, Lord. ||2||1]|37]|
aTOST HIG UWI C (1305-15)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 8 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Eighth House:
qe Afsara yAfe It (1305-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fSurciha me HS cust efenre we Tdi He Vas Fo AU TIS Il (1305-16, aast, He 5) ti-aagee-ai gumaan maan paykh-taa da-i-aal laal haa‘ haa" man charan rayn. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Give up your pride and your self-conceit; the Loving, Merciful Lord is watching over all. O mind, become the dust of His Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs AS HS Tus fami fore iil (1305-16, asst, He 5)
har sant mant gupaal gi-aan Dhi-aan. ||1]||
Through the Mantra of the Lord's Saints, experience the spiritual wisdom and meditation of the Lord of the World. ||1]|
fose afie afe sao ane ulfs ofe de efenis Haat II (1305-17, as", He 5)
hirdai gobind gaa-ay charan kamal pareet laa-ay deen da-i-aal mohnaa.
Within your heart, sing the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and be lovingly attuned to His Lotus Feet. He is the Fascinating Lord, Merciful to the meek and the humble.
foures efenr Hfemr ofs Il (1305-18, asst, He 5) kirpaal da-i-aa ma-i-aa Dhaar. O Merciful Lord, please bless me with Your Kindness and Compassion.
SOA Hd SH VS Il (1305-18, asst, Hz 5) naanak maagai naam daan. Nanak begs for the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Sf HT SIH Aas vifsHS UIUC (1305-18, ast, He 5) taj moh bharam sagal abhimaan. ||2||1||38]| I have abandoned emotional attachment, doubt and all egotistical pride. ||2||1]|38]|
TOS HIG U Il (1305-19)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
YS AIG HBS TIS BIO Ad fHS mre adt Cur ua TIS i (1305-19, ass, we 5) parabh kahan malan dahan lahan gur milay aan nahee upaa-o. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Speaking of God, filth and pollution are burnt away; This comes by meeting with the Guru, and not by any other efforts. ||1]|Pause]|
ust AoE
Jeo USS HSS INO ordt Sous AMT All (1306-1, wast, v2 5)
tatan khatan jatan homan naahee dandDhaar su-aa-o. ||1]||
Making pilgrimages to sacred rivers, observing the six rituals, wearing matted and tangled hair, performing fire sacrifices and carrying ceremonial walking sticks - none of these are of any use. ||1||
A360 S136 SUS FHS Mifod AHS ASS Sdt AT ust SG | (1306-1, as, ue 5)
jatan bhaa™tan tapan bharman anik kathan kathtay nahee thaah paa-ee thaa-o.
All sorts of efforts, austerities, wanderings and various speeches - none of these will lead you to find the Lord's Place.
Afa Aad AUST AY Bsa SH SE NNVQISEM (1306-2, ast, He 5)
soDh sagar soDhnaa sukh naankaa bhaj naa-o. ||2]|2||39||
I have considered all considerations, O Nanak, but peace comes only by vibrating and meditating on the Name. ||2]|2||39]|
Ast HIG UWI C (1306-3)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 9 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House:
qe Afsara yATfE II (1306-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ufs3 ureg Safa 3eq SIGS BIS SIS MAUI TIC Il (1306-4, asst, Hz 5)
patit paavan bhagat bachhal bhai haran taaran taran. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear - He carries us across to the other side. ||1||Pause]|
30 fsus van Ufy AA Sf HOS ATS IA (1306-4, ast, He 5)
nain tiptay daras paykh jas tokh sunat karan. ||1]|
My eyes are satisfied, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; my ears are satisfied, hearing His Praise. ||1]|
urs aa nieve US ele afse Age Il (1306-5, aos", He 5)
paraan naath anaath daatay deen gobid saran.
He is the Master of the praanaa, the breath of life; He is the Giver of Support to the unsupported. I am meek and poor - I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe.
mA udS Bu faaTHs at Ge saa fs FIs MUAUION (1306-5, aE, He 5)
aas pooran dukh binaasan gahee ot naanak har charan. ||2||1]|40||
He is the Fulfiller of hope, the Destroyer of pain. Nanak grasps the Support of the Feet of the Lord. ||2||1]|40]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1306-6)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
TIO Ado cents SAT mS Srdt ATE Il (1306-6, aos, He 5)
charan saran da-i-aal thaakur aan naahee jaa-ay.
I seek the Sanctuary of the Feet of my Merciful Lord and Master; I do not go anywhere else.
ufss urea fase Hom Cues ate fomrfe nai TIS il 1306-7, was, He 5)
patit paavan birad su-aamee uDhratay har Dhi-aa-ay. ||1]| rahaa-o.
It is the Inherent Nature of our Lord and Master to purify sinners. Those who meditate on the Lord are saved. ||1]||Pause] |
AAS ae fears Arad ufss HT HTS NIT II (1306-7, ast, He 5)
saisaar gaar bikaar saagar patit moh maan anDh.
The world is a swamp of wickedness and corruption. The blind sinner has fallen into the ocean of emotional attachment and pride,
fares Hfemr Aft do Il (1306-8, asst, He 5) bikal maa-i-aa sang DhanDh. bewildered by the entanglements of Maya.
ag ae ys orfy areg of Sg afte THE WA (1306-8, asst, He 5)
kar gahay parabh aap kaadhahu raakh layho gobind raa-ay. ||1]|| God Himself has taken me by the hand and lifted me up and out of it; save me, O Sovereign Lord of the Universe. ||1]|
MOTE oa Hoa Hae afe uny fAaTA Il (1306-9, atest, He 5)
anaath naath sanaath santan kot paap binaas.
He is the Master of the masterless, the Supporting Lord of the Saints, the Neutralizer of millions of sins.
Hfs Zan at fumimA Il (1306-9, aos, He 5) man darsanai kee pi-aas. My mind thirsts for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Ys UI DHSA Il (1306-9, asx, He 5) parabh pooran guntaas. God is the Perfect Treasure of Virtue.
fxures efi TUG Soa Ts TAS Ao ATE NUAUNSAUI (1306-10, asst, v3 5)
kirpaal da-i-aal gupaal naanak har rasnaa gun gaa-ay. ||2||2||41]||
O Nanak, sing and savor the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Kind and Compassionate Lord of the World. ||2||2||41]]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1306-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ag ag mfsax sTIC Il (1306-10, aes", H8 5) vaar vaara-o anik daara-o. Countless times, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice
AY fips Ada UB TS AU! TIS Il (1306-11, wast, ue 5)
sukh pari-a suhaag palak raat. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
to that moment of peace, on that night when I was joined with my Beloved. ||1||Pause] |
afsa Hed ure An At Hfo as feo fAG SS NA 306-11, asst, He 5) kanik mandar paat sayj sakhee mohi naahi in si-o taat. ||1]|| Mansions of gold, and beds of silk sheets - O sisters, I have no love for these. ||1]|
Has WS nifoa sa fas SH BOA TS Il (1306-12, wast, He 5)
mukat laal anik bhog bin naam naanak haat.
Pearls, jewels and countless pleasures, O Nanak, are useless and destructive without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
gu sno Sth Ae Met fipa Afer Ate feos NQNSISIN (1306-12, ass, He 5)
rookho bhojan bhoom sain sakhee pari-a sang sookh bihaat. ||2]||3]|42]|
Even with only dry crusts of bread, and a hard floor on which to sleep, my life passes in peace and pleasure with my Beloved, O sisters. ||2||3]||42||
ATOST HIG U Il (1306-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
Md 3d HY AS Il (1306-13, aasT, He 5) aha’ toro mukh joro. Give up your ego, and turn your face to God.
TT WI ATS HO Be Il (1306-13, wast, v2 5) gur gur karat man loro. Let your yearning mind call out, "Guru, Guru".
finn uffs fimrd HF NA TIC It 1306-14, asst, He 5) pari-a pareet pi-aaro moro. ||1|| rahaa-o. My Beloved is the Lover of Love. ||1]||Pause| |
fafo AA AoSt urate sar 3d st Sa Us ess AG AA Sg UA (1306-14, aoe, Hs 5) garihi sayj suhaavee aagan chainaa toro ree toro panch dootan si-o sang toro. ||1]|| The bed of your household shall be cozy, and your courtyard shall be comfortable; shatter and break the bonds which tie you to the five thieves. ||1]|
ute 3 ate aA for urate So ane fears Il (1306-15, wos, Hs 5)
aa-ay na jaa-ay basay nij aasan oo‘Dh kamal bigsoro.
You shall not come and go in reincarnation; you shall dwell in your own home deep within, and your inverted heart-lotus shall blossom forth.
eeot IGH Ad Il (1306-15, ast, He 5) chhutkee ha-umai soro. The turmoil of egotism shall be silenced.
reg t re ys soa Tat AIT lIUUSSI (1306-16, wos, Hs 5) gaa-i-o ree gaa-i-o parabh naanak gunee gahayro. ||2||4||43]| Nanak sings - he sings the Praises of God, the Ocean of Virtue. ||2||4]|43] |
aoa" Hs UW € Il (1306-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 9. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House:
st 3 wf Har ofa ATU II (1306-16, avost, He 5) taa’ tay jaap manaa har jaap. This is why you should chant and meditate on the Lord, O mind.
A AS 8e ass US Wad HT Hae MT STU Il TIC Il 1306-17, asst, He 5)
jo sant bayd kahat panth gaakhro moh magan aha" taap. rahaa-o.
The Vedas and the Saints say that the path is treacherous and difficult. You are intoxicated with emotional attachment and the fever of egotism. ||Pause] |
A oS HS Af sudt Hf Ho AST INA (1306-17, asst, He 5)
jo raatay maatay sang bapuree maa-i-aa moh santaap. ||1]|
Those who are imbued and intoxicated with the wretched Maya, suffer the pains of emotional attachment. ||1||
oH Aus AG AS Gud frAfs Gorey wm Il (1306-18, was, He 5) naam japat so-oo jan uDhrai jisahi uDhaarahu aap. That humble being is saved, who chants the Naam; You Yourself save him.
fasta wf Ho SIH STA AT YSU INQUUUGIl 1306-18, asst, He 5)
binas jaa-ay moh bhai bharmaa naanak sant partaap. ||2]||5||44|| Emotional attachment, fear and doubt are dispelled, O Nanak, by the Grace of the Saints. ||2]|5]|44| |
Uat W309
Nxt HIS U We IO (1307-2)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 10 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Tenth House:
qe Afsars yATfe i (1307-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MA BS tI Ht As AS Me afsats I 1307-3, aos, He 5) aiso daan dayh jee santahu jaat jee-o balihaar. Give me that blessing, O Dear Saints, for which my soul would be a sacrifice.
He Hot Us edt Cals faate aft rot Hefs AUMT es Hg foets nan TIS il (1307-3, aeat, Hs 5)
maan mohee panch dohee urajh nikat basi-o taakee saran saaDhoo-aa doot sang nivaar. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Enticed by pride, entrapped and plundered by the five thieves, still, you live near them. I have come to the Sanctuary of the Holy, and I have been rescued from my association with those demons. ||1]|Pause||
afe Hon rife sfHe ofa ufs& eurfs ai 1307-4, wos, Hs 5)
kot janam jon bharmi-o haar pari-o du-aar. ||1||
I wandered through millions of lifetimes and incarnations. I am so very tired - I have fallen at God's Door. ||1]|
foaour df= set fife ony wiorg i 1307-4, aos, He 5)
kirpaa gobind bha-ee mili-o naam aDhaar.
The Lord of the Universe has become Kind to me; He has blessed me with the Support of the Naam.
POs HOH AES Joa Be Sots uts MQUNAUISUll 4307-5, was, He 5)
dulabh janam safal naanak bhav utaar paar. ||2||1]|45]| This precious human life has become fruitful and prosperous; O Nanak, I am carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||1||45]|
ASST HIG U WI AWA (1307-6)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5 ghar 11 Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Eleventh House:
qe Afsara YATE Il (1307-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
dA ASS nis MTS Il (1307-7, wes, He 5) sahj subhaa-ay aapan aa-ay. He Himself has come to me, in His Natural Way.
Oe HWS As fears i 1307-7, wos, us 5) kachhoo na jaanou kachhoo dikhaa-ay. I know nothing, and I show nothing.
~
us fxfeG AY as 3B AU TIS Il 1307-7, wast, He 5)
parabh mili-o sukh baalay bholay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I have met God through innocent faith, and He has blessed me with peace. ||1]|Pause] |
Heafar fuse Ara Aare Il (1307-8, ast, He 5)
sanjog milaa-ay saaDh sangaa-ay.
By the good fortune of my destiny, I have joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
AST 6 WE wats SAE Il (1307-8, ass", H2 5) kathoo na jaa-ay ghareh basaa-ay. I do not go out anywhere; I dwell in my own home.
qo fears yates fea FB WAM (1307-8, area, He 5) gun niDhaan pargati-o ih cholai. ||1]| God, the Treasure of Virtue, has been revealed in this body-robe. ||1] |
TIO BIE MTS SHES Il (1307-9, asa, He 5) charan lubhaa-ay aan tajaa-ay. I have fallen in love with His Feet; I have abandoned everything else.
WS Fare Ada AHS Il (1307-9, asst, ve 5) thaan thanaa-ay sarab samaa-ay. In the places and interspaces, He is All-pervading.
TAfa TAA BSA TS FS NIAUISEN 1307-9, asst, He 5) rasak rasak naanak gun bolai. ||2||1]|46] | With loving joy and excitement, Nanak speaks His Praises. ||2||1||46]|
STOST HIG U Il (1307-10)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
dfse oad fese eaSTt I (1307-10, ast, He 5) gobind thaakur milan duraa-ee’. It is so hard to meet the Lord of the Universe, my Lord and Master.
ustHfs gu man watss sfaS Aga AHTET AU TIS I (1307-10, ass, we 5)
parmit roop agamm agochar rahi-o sarab samaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
His Form is Immeasurable, Inaccessible and Unfathomable; He is All-pervading everywhere. ||1]||Pause] |
ade sefe ot uve ute nifsa Bafs vaaet Al (307-11, ass, Hs 5)
kahan bhavan naahee paa-i-o paa-i-o anik ukat chaturaa-ee. ||1]|
By speaking and wandering, nothing is gained; nothing is obtained by clever tricks and devices. ||1]||
W360 W36 Mifod Cure 3 3C fifes AG fasuret Il 1307-12, ass, He 5) jatan jatan anik upaav ray ta-o mili-o ja-o kirpaa-ee. People try all sorts of things, but the Lord is only met when He shows His Mercy.
ys cfenrs faurs four fafa AS ata AS FH QUIN (1307-12, ase, Hs 5) parabhoo da-i-aar kirpaar kirpaa niDh jan naanak sant raynaa-ee. ||2]||2||47]||
God is Kind and Compassionate, the Treasure of Mercy; servant Nanak is the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||2||2||47]|
TOS HIG U Il (1307-13)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
Het fangs IH IH IH Il (1307-13, asst, He 5)
maa-ee simrat raam raam raam. O mother, I meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
us fear ardt FTF i 1307-14, asst, He 5) parabh binaa naahee hor. Without God, there is no other at all.
fase@ vaorsfie wma fofh Sa A TIC It 1307-14, was, He 5) chitva-o charnaarbind saasan nis bhor. ||1]| rahaa-o. I remember His Lotus Feet with every breath, night and day. ||1]||Pause] |
ore uifs ate nmus Ses Sot AT Il (1307-14, aoe, He 5) laa-ay pareet keen aapan tootat nahee jor. He loves me and makes me His Own; my union with Him shall never be broken.
US HO US AGSH dfs To fod AY He NAN (1307-15, aS, He 5)
paraan man Dhan sarbaso har gun niDhay sukh mor. ||1]|
He is my breath of life, mind, wealth and everything. The Lord is the Treasure of Virtue and Peace. ||1]||
as 63 oH use foous fee afs i (1307-15, aoe, He 5) eet oot raam pooran nirkhat rid khor. Here and hereafter, the Lord is perfectly pervading; He is seen deep within the heart.
HS Ads 3d6 Bod faofAS ey ws INSIST (1307-16, aes, He 5)
sant saran taran naanak binsi-o dukh ghor. ||2||3||48]| In the Sanctuary of the Saints, I am carried across; O Nanak, the terrible pain has been taken away. ||2||3||48]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1307-16)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
HS A US Hal MAST Il (1307-17, wos, He 5) jan ko parabh sangay asnayhu. God's humble servant is in love with Him.
WHS 3 Hg Ae fafs 33 AF AT NU TIS ll (1307-17, wax, we 5) Saajno too meet mayraa garihi tayrai sabh kayhu. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are my Friend, my very best Friend; everything is in Your Home. ||1||Pause] |
HS HIG SS HAG US Set AS ST NA (1307-17, ass, He 5) maan maa‘ga-o taan maa‘ga-o Dhan lakhmee sut dayh. ||1||
I beg for honor, I beg for strength; please bless me with wealth, property and children. ||1||
Hats Fats gals uss USHSE UH fSUrs Il (1307-18, ass, He 5)
mukat jugat bhugat pooran parmaanand param niDhaan.
You are the Technology of liberation, the Way to worldly success, the Perfect Lord of Supreme Bliss, the Transcendent Treasure.
User qBot
3 afe safs fare aoa Ae AST ATA NQUISEN (1308-1, asst, He 5)
bhai bhaa-ay bhagat nihaal naanak sadaa sadaa kurbaan. ||2||4]|49]| In the Fear of God and loving devotion, Nanak is exalted and enraptured, forever and ever a Sacrifice to Him. ||2]|4]|49]|
aTOST HIG U Il (1308-1)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 5. Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:
ATS ATS VIY YIU Vat Il (1308-1, ass, He 5) karat karat charach charach charcharee. The debaters debate and argue their arguments.
na fours su fomre fees fess uss ues Used NU TIE Il 1308-2, asst, He 5)
jog Dhi-aan bhaykh gi-aan firat firat Dharat Dharat Dharcharee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Yogis and meditators, religious and spiritual teachers roam and ramble, wandering endlessly all over the earth. ||1]|Pause| |
MT MS Md MET HF HS HS BeTET Il (1308-3, ass, we 5) aha’ aha’ ahai avar moorh moorh moorh bavra-ee. They are egotistical, self-centered and conceited, foolish, stupid, idiotic and insane.
Afs WS AS AS AS’ Het Het Het as Tet IA (1308-3, avast, He 5)
jat jaat jaat jaat sadaa sadaa sadaa sadaa kaal ha-ee. ||1]||
Wherever they go and wander, death is always with them, forever and ever and ever and ever. ||1]|
HS HS HS fSurfa fuas fas foafe foafe HET TET II (1308-4, west, He 5)
maan maan maan ti-aag mirat mirat nikat nikat sadaa ha-ee.
Give up your pride and stubborn self-conceit; death, yes, death, is always close and near at hand.
oid Id Id SH AIS Sod Hog J Uz faq SHo SHo BHO Miler oH Tet HQANUNUONIANEI 4308-4, asst, He 5)
har haray haray bhaaj kahat naanak sunhu ray moorh bin bhajan bhajan bhajan ahilaa janam ga-ee. ||2]|5||50||12||62||
Vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Har, Haray, Haray. Says Nanak, listen you fool: without vibrating, and meditating, and dwelling on Him, your life is uselessly wasting away. |[2|[5]|50]]12]|62]|
Host MACUSMT HIG 8 WIA (1308-6)
kaanrhaa asatpadee-aa mehlaa 4 ghar 1 Kaanraa, Ashtapadees, Fourth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsare YATE II (1308-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Afu He TH OH AY US Il (1308-7, ast, He 4) jap man raam naam sukh paavaigo. Chant the Name of the Lord, O mind, and find peace.
fa@ fa@ wu fee ay ue Afsag Afe AS NAN TICS Il (1308-7, asst, He 4)
ji-o ji-o japai tivai sukh paavai satgur sayv samaavaigo. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The more you chant and meditate, the more you will be at peace; serve the True Guru, and merge in the Lord. ||1|]Pause| |
sas Hot at fue fue Sot oH AUS AY USaT Il (1308-8, ast, He 4)
bhagat janaa™ kee khin khin lochaa naam japat sukh paavaigo.
Each and every instant, the humble devotees long for Him; chanting the Naam, they find peace.
Wo JH Are ae AS Slate fas are fas 5 AWST IU (1308-8, aos, He 4)
an ras saad ga-ay sabh neekar bin naavai kichh na sukhaavaigo. ||1||
The taste of other pleasures is totally eradicated; nothing pleases them, except the Name. ||1]|
gents ofe ofe Hat oar ag HIS SUS AES Il (1308-9, asa, He 4)
gurmat har har meethaa laagaa gur meethay bachan kadhaavaigo.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord seems sweet to them; the Guru inspires them to speak sweet words.
Afsag wel usy usdsn wat fA fos west iQ (1308-9, wear, He 4)
satgur banee purakh purkhotam banee si-o chit laavaigo. ||2]|
Through the Word of the True Guru's Bani, the Primal Lord God is revealed; so focus your consciousness on His Bani. ||2| |
Taaet Hos Aa He Sfenr ne stor for wife nreai i 1308-10, aes, He 4)
gurbaanee sunat mayraa man darvi-aa man bheenaa nij ghar aavaigo.
Hearing the Word of the Guru's Bani, my mind has been softened and saturated with it; my mind has returned to its own home deep within.
3d wious ust was fas aA SST WS BNMSa NI (1308-11, wast, He 4)
tah anhat Dhunee baajeh nit baajay neejhar Dhaar chu-aavaigo. ||3]|
The Unstruck Melody resonates and resounds there continuously; the stream of nectar trickles down constantly. ||3]|
oH on fea fe foe awe Ho Tas ath Aa II 1308-11, asst, He 4)
raam naam ik til til gaavai man gurmat naam samaavaigo.
Singing the Name of the One Lord each and every instant, and following the Guru's Teachings, the mind is absorbed in the Naam.
OW He oF nfs are OM at fFusTeSa sil (1308-12, asst, He 4)
naam sunai naamo man bhaavai naamay hee tariptaavaigo. ||4||
Listening to the Naam, the mind is pleased with the Naam, and satisfied with the Naam. ||4||
afsa afen ufod so aaa atug sifs gardai Il (1308-12, area, He 4) kanik kanik pahiray baho kangnaa kaapar bhaa“t banaavaigo. People wear lots of bracelets, glittering with gold; they wear all sorts of fine clothes.
on fast vfs dla fears Hoth He fefe mreat iull (1308-13, asst, He 4)
naam binaa sabh feek fikaanay janam marai fir aavaigo. ||5| |
But without the Naam, they are all bland and insipid. They are born, only to die again, in the cycle of reincarnation. ||5]|
Hfenr ues ues 3 atét we wHis ule weed Il (1308-14, asst, Hs 4) maa-i-aa patal patal hai bhaaree ghar ghooman ghayr ghulaavaigo. The veil of Maya is a thick and heavy veil, a whirlpool which destroys one's home.
uvy faorg Hos Afs ars fay Use Shes ASAT NEN (1308-14, was, He 4)
paap bikaar manoor sabh bhaaray bikh dutar tari-o na jaavaigo. ||6]|
Sins and corrupt vices are totally heavy, like rusted slag. They will not let you cross over the poisonous and treacherous world-ocean. ||6||
38 aaa sfeur od sfog ag dee Aafe Jae Il (1308-15, as, He 4)
bha-o bairaag bha-i-aa hai bohith gur khayvat sabad taraavaigo.
Let the Fear of God and neutral detachment be the boat; the Guru is the Boatman, who carries us across in the Word of the Shabad.
aH an ofa sem ats TH oth AWS IDI (1308-16, ast, He 4)
raam naam har bhaytee-ai har raamai naam samaavaigo. ||7| |
Meeting with the Lord, the Name of the Lord, merge in the Lord, the Name of the Lord. ||7||
mifomris ote refer ae famrde ofe Aared Il (1308-16, arest, He 4)
agi-aan laa-ay savaali-aa gur gi-aanai laa-ay jagaavaigo.
Attached to ignorance, people are falling asleep; attached to the Guru's spiritual wisdom, they awaken.
Soa Se nits fa are fSS Voss CUA (1308-17, wast, He 4) naanak bhaanai aapnai ji-o bhaavai tivai chalaavaigo. ||8]|1]| O Nanak, by His Will, He makes us walk as He pleases. ||8]|1]|
TART HIG 8 Il (1308-17)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
afu ue fs ofs ou SaeSa Il (1308-17, ass, He 4) jap man har har naam taraavaigo. O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and be carried across.
At WU Aet afs ure fA g yfowe MSA UA TIE I 1308-18, wast, He 4)
jo jo japai so-ee gat paavai ji-o Dharoo par-hilaad samaavaigo. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whoever chants and meditates on it is emancipated. Like Dhroo and Prahlaad, they merge in the Lord. ||1||Pause] |
uat q20t four fur four afs ofs HG afs fasur of wareai i (1309-1, avast, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kirpaa kar har jee-o kar kirpaa naam lagaavaigo. Mercy, mercy, mercy - O Dear Lord, please shower Your Mercy on me, and attach me to Your Name.
ate fasu Afsag freed fits Afsae oy fomreat il 4309-1, aaa, He 4)
kar kirpaa satguroo milaavhu mil satgur naam Dhi-aavaigo. ||1]||
Please be Merciful, and lead me to meet the True Guru; meeting the True Guru, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
HOH AON at IGH HS ot ffs Hafs He ofs ASAT I (1309-2, aos, He 4)
janam janam kee ha-umai mal laagee mil sangat mal leh jaavaigo.
The filth of egotism from countless incarnations sticks to me; joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, this filth is washed away.
fe So Stes Hf ane ofa Hate Te Ts Ursa MMi (1309-3, ass, He 4)
ji-o lohaa tari-o sang kaasat lag sabad guroo har paavaigo. ||2||
As iron is carried across if it is attached to wood, one who is attached to the Word of the Guru's Shabad finds the Lord. ||2] |
Hafs Az fies AsHafs ffs Hafs ofs dA ured | (1309-3, wast, He 4)
sangat sant milhu satsangat mil sangat har ras aavaigo.
Joining the Society of the Saints, joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, you shall come to receive the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
faa Hafs aen ad uifsHot afe urat das ued SII (1309-4, aes, He 4)
bin sangat karam karai abhimaanee kadh paanee cheekarh paavaigo. ||3]||
But not joining the Sangat, and committing actions in egotistical pride, is like drawing out clean water, and throwing it in the mud. |[3]|
SIs Ao a Us sded WS dfs GA Hie Bae I (1309-5, wast, He 4)
bhagat janaa kay har rakhvaaray jan har ras meeth lagaavaigo.
The Lord is the Protector and Saving Grace of His humble devotees. The Lord's Sublime Essence seems so sweet to these humble beings.
fas fue any efe efsuret afsag Gueth ANTSd ISI (1309-5, aos, He 4)
khin khin naam day-ay vadi-aa-ee satgur updays samaavaigo. ||4||
Each and every instant, they are blessed with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam; through the Teachings of the True Guru, they are absorbed in Him. ||4]|
sas Ho ag Ae fafe st we foefs St SH TS UST Il (1309-6, aos, v2 4) bhagat janaa ka-o sadaa niv rahee-ai jan niveh taa fal gun paavaigo.
Bow forever in deep respect to the humble devotees; if you bow to those humble beings, you shall obtain the fruit of virtue.
A fee vAe adfs sat at JasTuA fAC ufs ASaT NUll (1309-6, aes, He 4) jo nindaa dusat karahi bhagtaa kee harnaakhas ji-o pach jaavaigo. ||5|| Those wicked enemies who slander the devotees are destroyed, like Harnaakhash.
[5] |
Wo Hs ug Hie faurar sy SUS UA ATS Il (1309-7, assy, we 4)
barahm kamal put meen bi-aasaa tap taapan pooj karaavaigo.
Brahma, the son of the lotus, and Vyaas, the son of the fish, practiced austere penance and were worshipped.
fi Sag de A UY SINS SIH YaST Mell (1309-8, assy, we 4)
jo jo bhagat ho-ay so poojahu bharman bharam chukaavaigo. ||6||
Whoever is a devotee - worship and adore that person. Get rid of your doubts and superstitions. ||6||
ws onfs df Hs sag Ha Hos Ua ofa ford | (1309-8, asst, He 4)
jaat najaat daykh mat bharmahu suk janak pagee”™ lag Dhi-aavaigo.
Do not be fooled by appearances of high and low social class. Suk Dayv bowed at the feet of Janak, and meditated.
WO6 fe uet fra Gufs fig Hour f3e so SHA MDI (1309-9, aos", Hs 4)
joothan jooth pa-ee sir oopar khin manoo-aa til na dulaavaigo. ||7]||
Even though Janak threw his left-overs and garbage on Suk Dayv's head, his mind did not waver, even for an instant. ||7]|
Hod ASA 8d fiurafs s@ Hat ufs S seat il (1309-10, aaa, we 4)
janak janak baithay singhaasan na-o munee Dhoor lai laavaigo.
Janak sat upon his regal throne, and applied the dust of the nine sages to his forehead.
ood faut far afs sag H MALS BA ATS WCQ (1309-10, asst, He 4)
naanak kirpaa kirpaa kar thaakur mai daasan daas karaavaigo. ||8||2]|
Please shower Nanak with your Mercy, O my Lord and Master; make him the slave of Your slaves. ||8]|2] |
TOAST HIG 8 Il (1309-11)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Ho Tents ah To Wea Il 1309-11, wast, He 4) man gurmat ras gun gaavaigo. O mind, follow the Guru's Teachings, and joyfully sing God's Praises.
fave Sa dfs wy act we adt afe fmredt ail TITS tl (1309-12, ast, v2 4)
jihnvaa ayk ho-ay lakh kotee lakh kotee kot Dhi-aavaigo. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If my one tongue became hundreds of thousands and millions, I would meditate on Him millions and millions of times. ||1]|Pause] |
HOA eat AfuG Aust ofa Aufsur nig o urea I (1309-12, ast, He 4)
sahas fanee japi-o saykhnaagai har japti-aa ant na paavaigo.
The serpent king chants and meditates on the Lord with his thousands of heads, but even by these chants, he cannot find the Lord's limits.
3 nrg ofS went went 3 HPs TeHfS HE Soe Sat MAUI (1309-13, arse, He 4)
too athaahu at agam agam hai mat gurmat man thehraavaigo. ||1||
You are Utterly Unfathomable, Inaccessible and Infinite. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, the mind becomes steady and balanced. ||1]|
fae 3 wfuUG Set Ae ate ale Auf AG AY USAT Il (1309-14, aras, He 4)
jin too japi-o tay-ee jan neekay har japti-ahu ka-o sukh paavaigo.
Those humble beings who meditate on You are noble and exalted. Meditating on the Lord, they are at peace.
fred oH AS da dum fane nifa afs wed I (1309-14, asst, He 4)
bidar daasee sut chhok chhohraa krisan ank gal laavaigo. ||2| |
Bidur, the son of a slave-girl, was an untouchable, but Krishna hugged him close in His Embrace. ||2]|
7 3 Gufs set 3 He ae nif SISA IN (1309-15, aT, He 4) jal tay opat bha-ee hai kaasat kaasat ang taraavaigo. Wood is produced from water, but by holding onto wood, one is saved from drowning.
oH Ao ofa urfu Aes must fase TuTSa NBII (1309-15, aS, He 4)
raam janaa har aap savaaray apnaa birad rakhaavaigo. ||3]||
The Lord Himself embellishes and exalts His humble servants; He confirms His Innate Nature. ||3]|
JH Ue BI BI 8S Ua Td Aafs OS SHST I (1309-16, wast, He 4)
ham paathar loh loh bad paathar gur sangat naav taraavaigo.
I am like a stone, or a piece of iron, heavy stone and iron; in the Boat of the Guru's Congregation, I am carried across,
fa@ AsHafs sfee Hod HS Ho Hfe Seat ISI (1309-17, wast, He 4)
ji-o satsangat tari-o julaaho sant janaa man bhaavaigo. ||4||
like Kabeer the weaver, who was saved in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. He became pleasing to the minds of the humble Saints. ||4| |
ud Use Fos Bos nrafar uf fimrsat it (1309-17, waz, He 4) kharay kharo-ay baithat oothat maarag panth Dhi-aavaigo. Standing up, sitting down, rising up and walking on the path, I meditate.
Afsaqg suo sue JD Afsag wag Hafs AoT]ST MUI (1309-18, west, He 4)
satgur bachan bachan hai satgur paaDhar mukat janaavaigo. ||5| |
The True Guru is the Word, and the Word is the True Guru, who teaches the Path of Liberation. ||5||
AWAfe AA Af ae uret o fsorAfe oy fomreai (1309-18, aes, He 4)
Saasan Saas Saas bal paa-ee hai nihsaasan naam Dhi-aavaigo.
By His Training, I find strength with each and every breath; now that I am trained and tamed, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Gs USA St IGH FS J Tans oth AHS EM (1309-19, was", Hs 4)
gur parsaadee ha-umai boojhai tou gurmat naam samaavaigo. ||6| |
By Guru's Grace, egotism is extinguished, and then, through the Guru's Teachings, I merge in the Naam. ||6]|
usr 939 Afsag ast Aha dhs at stadte odt Stat Il (1310-1, asst, He 4)
satgur daataa jee-a jee-an ko bhaagheen nahee bhaavaigo. The True Guru is the Giver of the life of the soul, but the unfortunate ones do not love Him.
fefs Sa zor ofa 3 mre UTS USTST MDI 1310-1, wast, He 4)
fir ayh vaylaa haath na aavai partaapai pachhutaavaigo. ||7]||
This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; in the end, they will suffer in torment and regret. ||7]|
Aa IO BS 3G MUS Td vid Ve sla Usa I (1310-2, aos, He 4)
jay ko bhalaa lorhai bhal apnaa gur aagai dheh dheh paavaigo.
If a good person seeks goodness for himself, he should bow low in humble surrender to the Guru.
Soa efenr efor afs sag H Afsad SAN BST ICUS 1310-2, wear, v2 4) naanak da-i-aa da-i-aa kar thaakur mai satgur bhasam lagaavaigo. ||8]|3]|
Nanak prays: please show kindness and compassion to me, O my Lord and Master, that I may apply the dust of the True Guru to my forehead. ||8]|3]|
TOAST HIG 8 Il (1310-3)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
HO dfs dfat TS" Wea Il 1310-3, asst, He 4) man har rang raataa gaavaigo. O mind, be attuned to His Love, and sing.
3337 se 0 foons Tents ofa ware UI TIS Il 1310-4, aos, He 4)
bhai bhai taraas bha-ay hai nirmal gurmat laag lagaavaigo. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Fear of God makes me fearless and immaculate; I am dyed in the color of the Guru's Teachings. ||1]||Pause| |
dfs sf ast Ae Saat afs faate fsar whe mired il 1310-4, avast, He 4)
har rang raataa sad bairaagee har nikat tinaa ghar aavaigo.
Those who are attuned to the Lord's Love remain balanced and detached forever; they live near the Lord, who comes into their house.
fae at ux fxs st rite afs fasur nrfu fesreat ail (1310-5, west, He 4)
tin kee pank milai taa‘ jeevaa kar kirpaa aap divaavaigo. ||1||
If I am blessed with the dust of their feet, then I live. Granting His Grace, He Himself bestows it. ||1]|
efor dfs wat 3 urat Hfs AT Ja © MTS II (1310-6, asst, He 4)
dubiDhaa lobh lagay hai paraanee man korai rang na aavaigo.
Mortal beings are attached to greed and duality. Their minds are unripe and unfit, and will not accept the Dye of His Love.
fefs GufeS HoH de qe svat ae use fHS Ja BS 2M 1310-6, wos, ne 4)
fir ulti-o janam hovai gur bachnee gur purakh milai rang laavaigo. ||2||
But their lives are transformed through the Word of the Guru's Teachings. Meeting with the Guru, the Primal Being, they are dyed in the color of His Love. ||2| |
feet oA eA efs wes 3 Teor fis 3 feareat II (1310-7, wear, He 4)
indree dasay dasay fun Dhaavat tarai gunee-aa khin na tikaavaigo.
There are ten organs of sense and action; the ten wander unrestrained. Under the influence of the three dispositions, they are not stable, even for an instant.
Afsag ude ZHafs wre Ha Hats A USa ISI (1310-8, aes, He 4)
satgur parchai vasgat aavai mokh mukat so paavaigo. ||3]|
Coming in contact with the True Guru, they are brought under control; then, salvation and liberation are attained. ||3]|
Gniats Sa afe sfour Ag San wf ANTS Il (1310-8, west, He 4)
o-ankaar ayko rav rahi-aa sabh aykas maahi samaavaigo.
The One and Only Creator of the Universe is All-pervading everywhere. All shall once again merge into the One.
ea Jy Sa ag Jal Ag Say Fels VHT Isil (1310-9, was, we 4) ayko roop ayko baho rangee sabh aykat bachan chalaavaigo. ||4|| His One Form has one, and many colors; He leads all according to His One Word. ||4]|
Tanfy Sa Sa vest TaHfy de merSa | 1310-9, ast, He 4) gurmukh ayko ayk pachhaataa gurmukh ho-ay lakhaavaigo. The Gurmukh realizes the One and Only Lord; He is revealed to the Gurmukh.
aonty afe fs for Host msde ASE SHSa WUll (1310-10, asst, He 4)
gurmukh jaa-ay milai nij mahlee anhad sabad bajaavaigo. ||5]|
The Gurmukh goes and meets the Lord in His Mansion deep within; the Unstruck Word of the Shabad vibrates there. ||5]|
Hit az AS faAfe Curet qonfa Fat UTS I 310-11, asst, He 4)
jee-a jant sabh sisat upaa-ee gurmukh sobhaa paavaigo.
God created all the beings and creatures of the universe; He blesses the Gurmukh with glory.
fag as 32 & HOG 5 ure ofS Ae oY UST HEN (1310-11, wes, He 4)
bin gur bhaytay ko mahal na paavai aa-ay jaa-ay dukh paavaigo. ||6||
Without meeting the Guru, no one obtains the Mansion of His Presence. They suffer the agony of coming and going in reincarnation. ||6]|
MST HOH fess HS UlsH ate fasur ag fersat il (1310-12, wer, Hs 4)
anayk janam vichhurhay mayray pareetam kar kirpaa guroo milaavaigo.
For countless lifetimes, I have been separated from my Beloved; in His Mercy, the Guru has united me with Him.
Afsas feos not AY ufeor Hfs Hote faarSd IDI 310-12, ast, He 4)
satgur milat mahaa sukh paa-i-aa mat maleen bigsaavaigo. ||7]||
Meeting the True Guru, I have found absolute peace, and my polluted intellect blossoms forth. ||7]|
dfs ofe faut agg Hates H AIO of GarSat I (1310-13, as, He 4)
har har kirpaa karahu jagjeevan mai sarDhaa naam lagaavaigo.
O Lord, Har, Har, please grant Your Grace; O Life of the World, instill faith in the Naam within me.
aoa TT IT J Afsag H Asay vel fered ucisil 1310-14, ass, we 4)
naanak guroo guroo hai satgur mai satgur saran milaavaigo. ||8]|4||
Nanak is the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru; I am immersed in the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||8]|4||
START HIG 8 Il (1310-15)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
HS WINS VS VHS I (1310-15, ast, He 4) man gurmat chaal chalaavaigo. O mind, walk on the Path of the Guru's Teachings.
fa@ Hae HAS cin 3fs a3 aa nian Hae fesea ual TIS Il (1310-15, was, He 4)
ji-o maigal masat deejai tal kunday gur ankas sabad darirh-aavaigo. ||1]|| rahaa-o. Just as the wild elephant is subdued by the prod, the mind is disciplined by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1]||Pause] |
Jos VS VS wd wd feth gg Ta ofa fos Wea Il (1310-16, wos, He 4)
chaltou chalai chalai dah dah dis gur raakhai har liv laavaigo.
The wandering mind wanders, roams and rambles in the ten directions; but the Guru holds it, and lovingly attunes it to the Lord.
Afsag Fae ef fee vise ufe nifigs ou Ursa Al (1310-16, area, He 4)
satgur sabad day-ay rid antar mukh amrit naam chu-aavaigo. ||1]|
The True Guru implants the Word of the Shabad deep within the heart; the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, trickles into the mouth. ||1]|
farints fan sd 3 uss Tg Tes AaE Hfy usar I 1310-17, wer, Hs 4)
bisee-ar bisoo bharay hai pooran gur garurh sabad mukh paavaigo.
The snakes are filled with poisonous venom; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the antidote - place it in your mouth.
when sfenia fon dfs 3 ore fay ofa ofa foe oredr IQI (1310-18, asst, He 4) maa-i-aa bhu-i-ang tis nayrh na aavai bikh jhaar jhaar liv laavaigo. ||2| |
Maya, the serpent, does not even approach one who is rid of the poison, and lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||
Ang BS odd Hf Hae ae fue ufo wis Hera I (1310-19, avosT, He 4)
su-aan lobh nagar meh sablaa gur khin meh maar kadhaavaigo.
The dog of greed is very powerful in the village of the body; the Guru strikes it and drives it out in an instant.
AS Asy cen orfs ae afe oadt dfs Te Wea WI (1310-19, wast, He 4)
sat santokh Dharam aan raakhay har nagree har gun gaavaigo. ||3]||
Truth, contentment, righteousness and Dharma have settled there; in the village of the Lord, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
ust AAA
uaa Ha fowss 3 ust ag fewss arfe aereat Il (311-1, west, He 4)
pankaj moh nighrat hai paraanee gur nighrat kaadh kadhaavaigo.
The mortal beings are sinking in the swamp of emotional attachment; the Guru lifts them up, and saves them from sinking.
fo ofa nafs Ae wre ag Tet 2 feaoreai igi (311-2, asst, He 4)
taraahi taraahi saran jan aa-ay gur haathee day niklaavaigo. ||4| |
Crying, "Save me! Save me!", the humble come to His Sanctuary; the Guru reaches out His Hand, and lifts them up. ||4]|
Hussd AAS AS Tet AS sat Ue frat it 311-2, wast, He 4)
supnantar sansaar sabh baajee sabh baajee khayl khilaavaigo.
The whole world is like a game in a dream, all a game. God plays and causes the game to be played.
BI oH THs & wed dfs cad UO Sa WU 311-3, wast, He 4)
laahaa naam gurmat lai chaalahu har dargeh paiDhaa jaavaigo. ||5||
So earn the Profit of the Naam by following the Guru's Teachings; you shall go to the Court of the Lord in robes of honor. ||5]|
ICH ad age JOH uy afes ors MST Il 1311-3, ass, He 4)
ha-umai karai karaavai ha-umai paap ko-ilay aan jamaavaigo.
They act in egotism, and make others act in egotism; they collect and gather up the blackness of sin.
wifenr ane wuerest Je A aA A ueorSd MEN (311-4, wos, He 4)
aa-i-aa kaal dukh-daa-ee ho-ay jo beejay so khalaavaigo. ||6||
And when death comes, they suffer in agony; they must eat what they have planted. [16] |
Had TH oH US Hed B uay VS uls UST I (1311-4, arssT, He 4)
santahu raam naam Dhan sanchahu lai kharach chalay pat paavaigo.
O Saints, gather the Wealth of the Lord's Name; if you depart after packing these provisions, you shall be honored.
ufé uafs tefs agsa ofe te Sfe 5 mrSa MDI 311-5, west, He 4)
khaa-ay kharach dayveh bahutayraa har dayday tot na aavaigo. ||7]|
So eat, spend, consume and give abundantly; the Lord will give - there will be no deficiency. ||7||
TH OH U6 JD fee nisfs US Te AsSTSt UST II (311-6, wast, He 4)
raam naam Dhan hai rid antar Dhan gur sarnaa-ee paavaigo.
The wealth of the Lord's Name is deep within the heart. In the Sanctuary of the Guru, this wealth is found.
Sod efenr efor afe ast wy eee SA ANTS NCU (311-6, aos, He 4)
naanak da-i-aa da-i-aa kar deenee dukh daalad bhanj samaavaigo. ||8]|5| |
O Nanak, God has been kind and compassionate; He has blessed me. Removing pain and poverty, He has blended me with Himself. ||8]|5||
TART HIG 8 Il (1311-7)
kaanrhaa mehlaa 4. Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:
Ho Asad Aefe fomrsa i 311-7, wast, He 4) man satgur saran Dhi-aavaigo. O mind, seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru, and meditate.
So fase de Hf wsA as UGA a SE mrSa NA TIC Il 311-8, aes, He 4) lohaa hiran hovai sang paaras gun paaras ko ho-ay aavaigo. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Iron is transformed into gold by touching the philosopher's stone; it takes on its qualities. ||1||Pause| |
Afsag Ho us J UGH A OG A SS UST Il (1311-8, wast, He 4)
satgur mahaa purakh hai paaras jo laagai so fal paavaigo.
The True Guru, the Great Primal Being, is the philosopher's stone. Whoever is attached to Him receives fruitful rewards.
fa aa Guefh sa ufsere ag Aza UA IHS NU 3-9, wear, He 4)
ji-o gur updays taray par-hilaadaa gur sayvak paij rakhaavaigo. ||1]|
Just as Prahlaad was saved by the Guru's Teachings, the Guru protects the honor of His servant. ||1]|
Afsag ase FdS J Sta Te svot wifys urea Il cisi1-10, wos, He 4)
satgur bachan bachan hai neeko gur bachnee amrit paavaigo.
The Word of the True Guru is the most Sublime and Noble Word. Through the Guru's Word, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained.
fa@ niadifa ona ue ue Afsag He ave fomrSa M2 311-10, aes, He 4)
ji-o ambreek amraa pad paa-ay satgur mukh bachan Dhi-aavaigo. ||2||
Ambreek the king was blessed with the status of immortality, meditating on the Word of the True Guru. ||2||
Afsas Hafe nafs nfs svet HOT AO afe foams il 311-11, ast, He 4)
satgur saran saran man bhaa-ee suDhaa suDhaa kar Dhi-aavaigo.
The Sanctuary, the Protection and Sanctuary of the True Guru is pleasing to the mind. It is sacred and pure - meditate on it.
efenrs ae se 3 Afsas ofa wea ve feared nail c3i-11, wast, He 4)
da-i-aal deen bha-ay hai satgur har maarag panth dikhaavaigo. ||3]|
The True Guru has become Merciful to the meek and the poor; He has shown me the Path, the Way to the Lord. |[3]|
Afsaa Hefs ue A ad fs5 aus AS us wrSa I 311-12, asst, He 4)
satgur saran pa-ay say thaapay tin raakhan ka-o parabh aavaigo.
Those who enter the Sanctuary of the True Guru are firmly established; God comes to protect them.
A o& Ag AU Ao Cuts fete Gad fA Barred si cs1-13, ass, we 4)
jay ko sar sanDhai jan oopar fir ulto tisai lagaavaigo. ||4||
If someone aims an arrow at the Lord's humble servant, it will turn around and hit him instead. ||4||
dfs ofs ofe afe ofa ng Refs fsa esa HS fesed Il (1311-13, wast, He 4)
har har har har har sar sayveh tin dargeh maan divaavaigo.
Those who bathe in the Sacred Pool of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, are blessed with honor in His Court.
qanfs asHfs aes fomrefs afs afs fife fs fieereat nuit 31-14, west, He 4) gurmat gurmat gurmat Dhi-aavahi har gal mil mayl milaavaigo. ||5||
Those who meditate on the Guru's Teachings, the Guru's Instructions, the Guru's Wisdom, are united in the Lord's Union; He hugs them close in His Embrace. ||5]|
Tonfy ae se J TeHfe qe usd oy farsa i 1311-15, aos, He 4)
gurmukh naad bayd hai gurmukh gur parchai naam Dhi-aavaigo.
The Guru's Word is the Sound-current of the Naad, The Guru's Word is the wisdom of the Vedas; coming in contact with the Guru, meditate on the Naam.
ofs ofa gu ofs gu de fs AS AS UA ATSa Wl (1311-15, wer, He 4)
har har roop har roopo hovai har jan ka-o pooj karaavaigo. ||6||
In the Image of the Lord, Har, Har, one becomes the Embodiment of the Lord. The Lord makes His humble servant worthy of worship. ||6]|
Has od Afsag adt aor 3 ayy dfs SINS I (1311-16, wos, He 4)
saakat nar satgur nahee kee-aa tay baymukh har bharmaavaigo.
The faithless cynic does not submit to the True Guru; the Lord makes the non-believer wander in confusion.
8s Gls Ayre ot Hafs fay wheor adfa Barat WOM (1311-17, aes, He 4)
lobh lahar su-aan kee sangat bikh maa-i-aa karang lagaavaigo. ||7]|
The waves of greed are like packs of dogs. The poison of Maya sticks to the body- Skeleton. ||7||
TH OH AS Aa a staat Ba Hafs oH fowrea il 1311-17, was, ue 4)
raam naam sabh jag kaa taarak lag sangat naam Dhi-aavaigo.
The Lord's Name is the Saving Grace of the whole world; join the Sangat, and meditate on the Naam.
soa TY Ty us He ASHals Thy ANS NCHE (311-18, wos, He 4) naanak raakh raakh parabh mayray satsangat raakh samaavaigo. ||8||6]| O my God, please protect and preserve Nanak in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; save him, and let him merge in You. ||8]||6||
seat 4 Il (1311-19)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six] |
Yat 9392
Host #3 HIS U (1312-1)
kaanrhaa chhant mehlaa 5 Kaanraa, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsas yrrfe it (1312-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
A Gud fae FH fomre Il 1312-2, west, us 5) say uDhray jin raam Dhi-aa-ay. They alone are saved, who meditate on the Lord.
Ase Went & ath o mre Il (1312-2, arear, He 5) jatan maa-i-aa kay kaam na aa-ay. Working for Maya is useless.
oH fomre vfs ae ure ofe dfs 3 asaraior Il 1312-2, west, He 5)
raam Dhi-aa-ay sabh fal paa-ay Dhan Dhan tay badbhaagee-aa.
Meditating on the Lord, all fruits and rewards are obtained. They are blessed, blessed and very fortunate.
ASAfa wa otH wat Sa fAG fee wal i 1312-3, wes, ne 5)
satsang jaagay naam laagay ayk si-o liv laagee-aa.
They are awake and aware in the True Congregation; attached to the Naam, they are lovingly attuned to the One.
fa He Ha feos ATG wf ae f3s x US I (1312-3, was", He 5)
taj maan moh bikaar saaDhoo lag tara-o tin kai paa-ay.
I have renounced pride, emotional attachment, wickedness and corruption; attached to the Holy, I am carried across at their feet.
faodfs aoa Hofs Aum assert TaAS UTS WA 1312-4, arssr, He 5)
binvant naanak saran su-aamee badbhaag darsan paa-ay. ||1]|
Prays Nanak, I have come to the Sanctuary of my Lord and Master; by great good fortune, I obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]|
ffs Arg fos SAO SITES | (1312-5, avast, He 5) mil saaDhoo nit bhajah naaraa-in. The Holy meet together, and continually vibrate and meditate on the Lord.
Ala TAK AMM Te ates il 1312-5, west, He 5) rasak rasak su-aamee gun gaa-in. With love and excitement, they sing the Glorious Praises of their Lord and Master.
ae ate ates fs mfHe uled HOH HS SATS I (1312-5, asst, vs 5)
gun gaa-ay jeevah har ami-o peevah janam marnaa bhaag-ay.
Singing His Praises they live, drinking in the Lord's Nectar; the cycle of birth and death is over for them.
AsAfa ureht ate famreta agis TY o WAS Il (1312-6, waz, ve 5)
satsang paa-ee-ai har Dhi-aa-ee-ai bahurh dookh na laag-ay.
Finding the True Congregation and meditating on the Lord, one is never again afflicted with pain.
afte efeor as use fears AS AS ofS I (1312-6, west, He 5) kar da-i-aa daatay purakh biDhaatay sant sayv kamaa-in. By the Grace of the Great Giver, the Architect of Destiny, we work to serve the Saints.
fasets aoa wo Ufe ates afs cath Haft ANTES MQM (1312-7, weer, He 5)
binvant naanak jan Dhoor baa‘chheh har daras sahj samaa-in. ||2]|
Prays Nanak, I long for the dust of the feet of the humble; I am intuitively absorbed in the Blessed Vision of the Lord. ||2||
HIS AS SAT AUS Il (1312-8, ast, ws 5) saglay jant bhajahu gopaalai. All beings vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World.
WU 3U ABH YSIS UT Il (1312-8, ara, Hs 5)
jap tap sanjam pooran ghaalai.
This brings the merits of chanting and meditation, austere self-discipline and perfect service.
fos Sng Homi nisernit Hew WOH AafeEur | 1312-8, west, He 5)
nit bhajahu su-aamee antarjaamee safal janam sabaa-i-aa.
Vibrating and meditating continuously on our Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, one's life becomes totally fruitful.
difse achat fos fonreha users ret vrfmr i 1312-9, avast, He 5)
gobid gaa-ee-ai nit Dhi-aa-ee-ai parvaan so-ee aa-i-aa.
Those who sing and meditate continually on the Lord of the Universe - their coming into the world is blessed and approved.
Au stu HAH ofe ofs fadno afie as Afa aS Il (1312-10, aes, H2 5)
jap taap sanjam har har niranjan gobind Dhan sang chaalai.
The Immaculate Lord, Har, Har, is meditation and chanting, and austere self- discipline; only the Wealth of the Lord of the Universe shall go along with you in the end.
faadfs aoa af efeur dia afs ase sae urs ISI 1312-10, west, He 5)
binvant naanak kar da-i-aa deejai har ratan baaDha-o paalai. ||3]|
Prays Nanak, please grant Your Grace, O Lord, and bless me with the Jewel, that I may carry it in my pocket. ||3]|
HASIS PA MST | (1312-11, ast, He 5) mangalchaar choj aanandaa. His Wondrous and Amazing Plays are blissful
ate forsur fix USHTSST Il 1312-11, asst, He 5) kar kirpaa milay parmaanandaa. - granting His Grace, He bestows supreme ecstasy.
ys fxs Homi Huge fees Ho at Usher it 312-11, asst, Hs 5)
parabh milay su-aamee sukhhagaamee ichh man kee punnee-aa.
God, my Lord and Master, the Bringer of peace, has met me, and the desires of my mind are fulfilled.
art aaoret Aon AHS softs ef | Fator it 312-12, wos, ue 5)
bajee baDhaa-ee sehjay samaa-ee bahurh dookh na runnee-aa.
Congratulations pour in; I am intuitively absorbed in the Lord. I shall never again cry out in pain.
3 afe oe AY feue faarg fear HET I (1312-13, aes, He 5)
lay kanth laa-ay sukh dikhaa-ay bikaar binsay mandaa.
He hugs me close in His Embrace, and blesses me with peace; the evil of sin and corruption is gone.
foods aoa fee AoMit use USHTSST IIA (1312-13, aes, He 5)
binvant naanak milay su-aamee purakh parmaanandaa. ||4||1||
Prays Nanak, I have met my Lord and Master, the Primal Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss. ||4]|1]|
Nos at MI HIS 8 HA at eg at USt (1312-15)
kaanrhay kee vaar mehlaa 4 moosay kee vaar kee Dhunee Vaar Of Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl, Sung To The Tune Of The Ballad Of Musa:
qe Afsars ure il (1312-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa H8 8 Il (1312-16)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
oH on fours Ufa THis gy Ba Of I (1312-16, was, He 4)
raam naam niDhaan har gurmat rakh ur Dhaar.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and enshrine the Treasure of the Lord's Name within your heart.
ane oA dfs gg ISH faftmr wfs it (1312-16, wos, He 4)
daasan daasaa ho-ay rahu ha-umai bikhi-aa maar. Become the slave of the Lord's slaves, and conquer egotism and corruption.
HOH Ueda Aifsur ae o mie ae Il (1312-17, west, He 4) janam padaarath jeeti-aa kaday na aavai haar. You shall win this treasure of life; you shall never lose.
US Us essai aoa’ fae Tenis dfs oA AMS WAN (1312-17, aes, He 4)
Dhan Dhan vadbhaagee naankaa jin gurmat har ras saar. ||1||
Blessed, blessed and very fortunate are those, O Nanak, who savor the Sublime Essence of the Lord through the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1312-18)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dies afee dfee ofs afee aat fours Il (1312-18, ast, He 4)
govind govid govid har govid gunee niDhaan.
Govind, Govind, Govind - the Lord God, the Lord of the Universe is the Treasure of Virtue.
dize afee TaHfs fomrehat si wags urTsint He Il 1312-18, asst, He 4)
govid govid gurmat Dhi-aa-ee-ai taa’ dargeh paa-ee-ai maan.
Meditating on Govind, Govind, the Lord of the Universe, through the Guru's Teachings, you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
Uat 9393
dfee dfee afeg afu uy Caer use Il (1313-1, wos, He 4)
govid govid govid jap mukh oojlaa parDhaan.
Meditating on God, chanting Govind, Govind, Govind, your face shall be radiant; you shall be famous and exalted.
soa Ig dfee ofa fis ffs afe ufemr any QM (1313-2, wast, He 4)
naanak gur govind har jit mil har paa-i-aa naam. |[2||
O Nanak, the Guru is the Lord God, the Lord of the Universe; meeting Him, you shall obtain the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
ust Il (1313-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3 omy dt fra Afaet J omy ot aa Hate I 313-2, wae, oe 4) too” aapay hee siDh saaDhiko too aapay hee jug jogee-aa. You Yourself are the Siddha and the seeker; You Yourself are the Yoga and the Yogi.
3 omy ot oA sAiat J omy Tt sa Saher I 1313-3, was, we 4) too aapay hee ras rasee-arhaa too aapay hee bhog bhogee-aa. You Yourself are the Taster of tastes; You Yourself are the Enjoyer of pleasures.
3 omy urfy easer 3 my aafe A Tai Il (1313-3, was, He 4) too aapay aap varatdaa too aapay karahi so hogee-aa. You Yourself are All-pervading; whatever You do comes to pass.
HsHafs Afsad Us 06 Us Us U6 fas fife afe guar geal I 1313-4, aos, He 4) satsangat satgur Dhan Dhano Dhan Dhan Dhano jit mil har bulag bulogee-aa. Blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the True Guru. Join them - speak and chant the Lord's Name.
Afs agg Hud dfs ofs od ofa afe ad ofa sas Afs uy Bdsm NA 1313-5, west, He 4) sabh kahhu mukhahu har har haray har har haray har bolat sabh paap lahogee-aa.
[11] Let everyone chant together the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray, Har, Har, Haray; chanting Har, all sins are washed away. ||1]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1313-6)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofa ofa ofa an 3 TaHfe ure afE II (1313-6, arost, He 4)
har har har har naam hai gurmukh paavai ko-ay.
Har, Har, Har, Har is the Name of the Lord; rare are those who, as Gurmukh, obtain it.
ICH HHS on dfe vans ae OE II (1313-6, wast, He 4) ha-umai mamtaa naas ho-ay durmat kadhai Dho-ay. Egotism and possessiveness are eradicated, and evil-mindedness is washed away.
Sod nates Te Sud faa aG afe feftor df wan 1313-7, wast, He 4)
naanak an-din gun uchrai jin ka-o Dhur likhi-aa ho-ay. ||1]|
O Nanak, one who is blessed with such pre-ordained destiny chants the Lord's Praises, night and day. ||1||
He 8 Il (1313-7)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ofa wma orfy efenre afs om ad A OE II 1313-7, was, He 4) har aapay aap da-i-aal har aapay karay so ho-ay. The Lord Himself is Merciful; whatever the Lord Himself does, comes to pass.
dfs wmt onfy ease afe Aes wreg & AfE I 1313-8, arast, He 4) har aapay aap varatdaa har jayvad avar na ko-ay. The Lord Himself is All-pervading. There is no other as Great as the Lord.
A ofa ug ae A abt a ofa ys ad A OPE I (1313-9, aaa, He 4)
jo har parabh bhaavai so thee-ai jo har parabh karay so ho-ay.
Whatever pleases the Lord God's Will comes to pass; whatever the Lord God does is done.
aS fas o ureter ans ys ofa ALE Il (1313-9, wax, He 4) keemat kinai na paa-ee-aa bay-ant parabhoo har so-ay. No one can appraise His Value; the Lord God is Endless.
Soa ToHfe dfs Aer sq HS Ase SE II 1313-10, aoa, He 4) naanak gurmukh har salaahi-aa tan man seetal ho-ay. ||2]|
O Nanak, as Gurmukh, praise the Lord; your body and mind shall be cooled and soothed. ||2]||
UST Il (1313-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ag fs Sct warteat 3 ule wife ate Fa Fase Il (1313-10, was, He 4)
sabh jot tayree jagjeevanaa too ghat ghat har rang rangnaa.
You are the Light of all, the Life of the World; You imbue each and every heart with Your Love.
Afs fomrefa sg Ae usu S Als Als use fede I (1313-11, aes, He 4)
sabh Dhi-aavahi tuDh mayray pareetamaa too sat sat purakh niranjanaa.
All meditate on You, O my Beloved; You are the True, True Primal Being, the Immaculate Lord.
fea ws Ag Aas fsudinr afe prefs AS Hat Hae Il (1313-11, aes, He 4) ik daataa sabh jagat bhikhaaree-aa har jaacheh sabh mang mangnaa. The One is the Giver; the whole world is the beggar. All the beggars beg for His Gifts.
ACA SAT AF 3d 3d TINS Ala Va Gas I 1313-12, wos", vs 4)
sayvak thaakur sabh toohai toohai gurmatee har chang changnaa.
You are the servant, and You are the Lord and Master of all. Through the Guru's Teachings, we are ennobled and uplifted.
Afs add Hud fadian sd fedtan Jd fas wets AS SH SHA III! (1313-13, ars, He 4)
sabh kahhu mukhahu rikheekays haray rikheekays haray jit paavahi sabh fal falnaa. 2] |
Let everyone say that the Lord is the Master of the senses, the Master of all faculties; through Him, we obtain all fruits and rewards. ||2]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1313-14)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ots an fourfe Ho fs ead uets HS Il (1313-14, west, He 4)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ay man har dargeh paavahi maan.
O mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
a feefs A ee ufert ae Aaet wat fomre It 1313-14, ast, He 4)
jo ichheh so fal paa-isee gur sabdee lagai Dhi-aan.
You shall obtain the fruits that you desire, focusing your meditation on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
faofeu uy vfs acinifo gH ga IS Il 1313-15, arest, He 4)
kilvikh paap sabh katee-ah ha-umai chukai gumaan.
All your sins and mistakes shall be wiped away, and you shall be rid of egotism and pride.
aaHfy ane feafior AF MSH YH UES Il (1313-15, as, He 4) gurmukh kamal vigsi-aa sabh aatam barahm pachhaan. The heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth, recognizing God within every soul.
dfs af fasur ofs ys AS ated Af dfs STH NA (1313-16, ares, He 4)
har har kirpaa Dhaar parabh jan naanak jap har naam. ||1|| O Lord God, please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, that he may chant the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (1313-17) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofs om ufes 3 on AUS By ATE I 1313-17, aos, He 4)
har har naam pavit hai naam japat dukh jaa-ay.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Sacred and Immaculate. Chanting the Naam, pain is dispelled.
fra ag usta feftmr fae ufs efor orfe i 0313-17, wos, He 4) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin man vasi-aa aa-ay. God comes to abide in the minds of those who have such pre-ordained destiny.
Afsad a ake A US foo ee By Of ATE I 1313-18, west, He 4) satgur kai bhaanai jo chalai tin daalad dukh leh jaa-ay. Those who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru are rid of pain and poverty.
nitue ate fas o ute Ae Sug nfs users I 1313-18, aos, He 4) aapnai bhaanai kinai na paa-i-o jan vaykhhu man patee-aa-ay. No one finds the Lord by his own will; see this, and satisfy your mind.
Ho Sod VHS UA I A Asad Sa UTE MQM (1313-19, ast, He 4) jan naanak daasan daas hai jo satgur laagay paa-ay. ||2]|| Servant Nanak is the slave of the slave of those who fall at the Feet of the True Guru.
[21 |
ugat Il (1313-19) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Ust 9398
3S wssts saug Uf ads AS Set aes Aare I (1314-1, wos, He 4)
too” thaan thanantar bharpoor heh kartay sabh tayree banat banaavanee.
You are pervading and permeating all places and interspaces, O Creator. You made all that has been made.
da uda fraAfe AS AH ag So fafa sifs Curset It 1314-1, was, He 4)
rang parang sisat sabh saajee baho baho biDh bhaa™t upaavanee.
You created the entire universe, with all its colors and shades; in so many ways and means and forms You formed it.
AS Sct afs Ast fete casts THIS 3d weet Il (1314-2, was, He 4) sabh tayree jot jotee vich varteh gurmatee tuDhai laavnee. O Lord of Light, Your Light is infused within all; You link us to the Guru's Teachings.
fro dfs efenrs fae nfsag Hafs yf agents ofs msTeet I (1314-2, west, He 4)
jin hohi da-i-aal tin satgur mayleh mukh gurmukh har samjhaavanee.
They alone meet the True Guru, unto whom You are Merciful; O Lord, You instruct them in the Guru's Word.
Afs Soo TH GH At OH GH fag wae vy gy AS ofa Aeet NBII (1314-3, wos, He 4) sabh bolhu raam ramo saree raam ramo jit daalad dukh bhukh sabh leh jaavnee. ||3]| Let everyone chant the Name of the Lord, chant the Name of the Great Lord; all poverty, pain and hunger shall be taken away. ||3||
HBa H2 8 Il (1314-4) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
ofa ofs nifgs on 3A fe ifs ofs Ga ofa i 314-4, wast, Hs 4)
har har amrit naam ras har amrit har ur Dhaar.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet; enshrine this Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord within your heart.
fefs Hafs of us ease" asg Aa Seta it 1314-5, aos, He 4)
vich sangat har parabh varatdaa bujhahu sabad veechaar.
The Lord God prevails in the Sangat, the Holy Congregation; reflect upon the Shabad and understand.
fe ofa ofa any fourfenr fay oBH aet ofa i 314-5, aes, He 4)
man har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa bikh ha-umai kadhee maar.
Meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within the mind, the poison of egotism is eradicated.
fas ofa ofs on 3 S36 fe AM ASH AS Te I (1314-6, aes, we 4)
jin har har naam na chayti-o tin joo-ai janam sabh haar.
One who does not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, shall totally lose this life in the gamble.
dfs 36 ofa Vater of owt ats Sa fs Il (1314-6, arses, He 4)
gur tuthai har chaytaa-i-aa har naamaa har ur Dhaar.
By Guru's Grace, one remembers the Lord, and enshrines the Lord's Name within the heart.
He aoa S HY Cxe fsa Ad coats NAN (1314-7, aos, He 4) jan naanak tay mukh ujlay tit sachai darbaar. ||1]| O servant Nanak, his face shall be radiant in the Court of the True Lord. ||1]|
Hs 8 Il (1314-8) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs otefs sy on J fefe afsna agat ATS Il (1314-8, arest, He 4)
har keerat utam naam hai vich kalijug karnee saar.
To chant the Lord's Praise and His Name is sublime and exalted. This is the most excellent deed in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Hfs aenfs atefs ure afs oor ofa fe ag Il (1314-8, aos, He 4)
mat gurmat keerat paa-ee-ai har naamaa har ur haar.
His Praises come through the Guru's Teachings and Instructions; wear the Necklace of the Lord's Name.
zsaat fae dfs fomrfeur fae AGfumr ofs Fars Il (1314-9, west, He 4)
vadbhaagee jin har Dhi-aa-i-aa tin sa-upi-aa har bhandaar.
Those who meditate on the Lord are very fortunate. They are entrusted with the Treasure of the Lord.
faa oe fa aon ores fos JH Sf unrE II (1314-9, wast, He 4)
bin naavai je karam kamaavnay nit ha-umai ho-ay khu-aar.
Without the Name, no matter what people may do, they continue to waste away in egotism.
afe gaat nfs overaha fafs ot fefs ure ere Il 1314-10, wast, He 4)
jal hastee mal naavaalee-ai sir bhee fir paavai chhaar.
Elephants can be washed and bathed in water, but they only throw dust on their heads again.
dfs Hog Afsag efeur afe ufe SA Sears I (1314-11, wast, He 4)
har maylhu satgur da-i-aa kar man vasai aykankaar.
O Kind and Compassionate True Guru, please unite me with the Lord, that the One Creator of the Universe may abide within my mind.
fro aaHfa afs ofe Hfoor Ae stea fSq AAS IQI (1314-11, aes, He 4)
jin gurmukh sun har mani-aa jan naanak tin jaikaar. ||2||
Those Gurmukhs who listen to the Lord and believe in Him - servant Nanak salutes them. ||2]|
ust Il (1314-12) pa-orhee. Pauree:
TH OH Sug I SSH ale atea UTE THT Il (1314-12, was, He 4)
raam naam vakhar hai ootam har naa-ik purakh hamaaraa.
The Lord's Name is the most sublime and precious merchandise. The Primal Lord God is my Lord and Master.
dfs ae aor ofs wm eas AS AAS aor TEAST I 1314-12, wast, He 4)
har khayl kee-aa har aapay vartai sabh jagat kee-aa vanjaaraa.
The Lord has staged His Play, and He Himself permeates it. The whole world deals in this merchandise.
AS fs Sct Hat fefe ass AS AY So UAT I 0314-13, wos, He 4) sabh jot tayree jotee vich kartay sabh sach tayraa paasaaraa. Your Light is the light in all beings, O Creator. All Your Expanse is True.
Afs fomrefs 3a Hee A ets asst afe fedora i (1314-14, ast, He 4)
sabh Dhi-aavahi tuDh safal say gaavahi gurmatee har nirankaaraa.
All those who meditate on You become prosperous; through the Guru's Teachings, they sing Your Praises, O Formless Lord.
Afs Ved HUT Adios HdloTG HaHies fas sens ute Bsa gil 1314-14, asst, He 4) sabh chavahu mukhahu jagannaath jagannaath jagjeevano jit bhavjal paar utaaraa. [41 |
Let everyone chant the Lord, the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||
HBa H8 8 Il (1314-15)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
JHot fava Sa YS Tig X TE GH MAT Il (1314-15, ass, us 4)
hamree jihbaa ayk parabh har kay gun agam athaah.
I have only one tongue, and the Glorious Virtues of the Lord God are Unapproachable and Unfathomable.
dH fa ats wus feurfaur ats SH Ss Mia MAIS Il 1314-16, west, H8 4)
ham ki-o kar japah i-aani-aa har tum vad agam agaah.
I am ignorant - how can I meditate on You, Lord? You are Great, Unapproachable and Immeasurable.
ofs eg ys His SoH ae Afsae & ular UT Il (1314-16, aos, He 4)
har dayh parabhoo mat ootmaa gur satgur kai pag paah.
O Lord God, please bless me with that sublime wisdom, that I may fall at the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru.
AsHats ofs Afs ys IH unit Aft Sas i 1314-17, west, ue 4)
satsangat har mayl parabh ham paapee sang taraah.
O Lord God, please lead me to the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where even a sinner like myself may be saved.
Ho soa ag dfs sufk Sg afs 3S Afs fers II 1314-17, wast, He 4) jan naanak ka-o har bakhas laihu har tuthai mayl milaah. O Lord, please bless and forgive servant Nanak; please unite him in Your Union.
dfs fasur afte Af= Fost JH unit fagH Sq T NA (1314-18, wast, He 4)
har kirpaa kar sun bayntee ham paapee kiram taraah. ||1||
O Lord, please be merciful and hear my prayer; I am a sinner and a worm - please save me! ||1||
He 8 Il (1314-19)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs aad fau Aadteo ag Afsag Afs efenrs il 1314-19, west, He 4)
har karahu kirpaa jagjeevanaa gur satgur may! da-i-aal.
O Lord, Life of the World, please bless me with Your Grace, and lead me to meet the Guru, the Merciful True Guru.
ae Ae dfs gH sehr afs dur ata forse i 1314-19, ares, He 4) gur sayvaa har ham bhaa-ee-aa har ho-aa har kirpaal. I am happy to serve the Guru; the Lord has become merciful to me.
art 93qU
AS wir Hon! feAdt His Yar nies AAG Il (1315-1, wae, Hs 4)
sabh aasaa mansaa visree man chookaa aal janjaal.
All my hopes and desires have been forgotten; my mind is rid of its worldly entanglements.
afs 38 on feafeur on ate Rafe foe Il (1315-1, aos, He 4)
gur tuthai naam drirh-aa-i-aa ham kee-ay sabad nihaal.
The Guru, in His Mercy, implanted the Naam within me; I am enraptured with the Word of the Shabad.
Ho sala nse US ufent dfs oat dfs US A] MQM (1315-2, wast, Hs 4) jan naanak atut Dhan paa-i-aa har naamaa har Dhan maal. ||2]| Servant Nanak has obtained the inexhaustible wealth; the Lord's Name is his wealth
and property. ||2||
ust Il (1315-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Uf SH Fs es eS Fs Os AS Gufs Ss Wat I 0315-3, wae, 3 4)
har tum" vad vaday vaday vad oochay sabh oopar vaday vadounaa.
O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great, the Greatest of the Great, the Most Lofty and Exalted of all, the Greatest of the Great.
a fourefs fs urdug ofe afe ofa fomrfe gd 3 Tor il 1315-3, wes, He 4)
jo Dhi-aavahi har aprampar har har har Dhi-aa-ay haray tay honaa.
Those who meditate on the Infinite Lord, who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, are rejuvenated.
a wef Hefs Sa AA AMM foe ae uy Soe I (1315-4, TST, He 4)
jo gaavahi suneh tayraa jas su-aamee tin kaatay paap katonaa.
Those who sing and listen to Your Praises, O my Lord and Master, have millions of sins destroyed.
3H AA dfs use WS His TEMS Hfe eS SS TH SST I (1315-4, wast, He 4)
tum jaisay har purakh jaanay mat gurmat mukh vad vad bhaag vadonaa.
I know that those divine beings who follow the Guru's Teachings are just like You, Lord. They are the greatest of the great, so very fortunate.
Afs fomreg orfe AS warfe AS usaf AS Ae AST AS HS Soa VA PAT Mull (1315-5, aeaT, He 4)
sabh Dhi-aavahu aad satay jugaad satay partakh satay sadaa sadaa satay jan naanak daas dasonaa. ||5||
Let everyone meditate on the Lord, who was True in the primal beginning, and True throughout the ages; He is revealed as True here and now, and He shall be True forever and ever. Servant Nanak is the slave of His slaves. ||5||
HBa H8 8 Il (1315-6)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Jud dfs nartear ofs Afus of ae HF Il (1315-6, was, He 4) hamray har jagjeevanaa har japi-o har gur mant. I meditate on my Lord, the Life of the World, the Lord, chanting the Guru's Mantra.
dfs man vidied wan dfs ofa fier wrfe wifes 1 1315-7, aos, He 4)
har agam agochar agam har har mili-aa aa-ay achint.
The Lord is Unapproachable, Inaccessible and Unfathomable; the Lord, Har, Har, has spontaneously come to meet me.
ofa wm whe wh ease afe wim wef fants it 1315-7, asst, us 4)
har aapay ghat ghat varatdaa har aapay aap bi-ant. The Lord Himself is pervading each and every heart; the Lord Himself is Endless.
dfs wm AS IA sae ols nM Aear AZ Il 1315-8, ass, He 4) har aapay sabh ras bhogdaa har aapay kavliaa kant. The Lord Himself enjoys all pleasures; the Lord Himself is the Husband of Maya.
dfs omy fefimr ufeer AS frAfe Guret Hh AS I 4315-8, was, He 4)
har aapay bhikhi-aa paa-idaa sabh sisat upaa-ee jee-a jant.
The Lord Himself gives in charity to the whole world, and all the beings and creatures which He created.
dfs teg ae efenrs us ofa Hats afs AS AS I (1315-9, wear, He 4)
har dayvhu daan da-i-aal parabh har maa“geh har jan sant.
O Merciful Lord God, please bless me with Your Bountiful Gifts; the humble Saints of the Lord beg for them.
Hs soa a ys wef fee gH aed Us TE SF NA (1315-10, avast, He 4)
jan naanak kay parabh aa-ay mil ham gaavah har gun chhant. ||1]|
O God of servant Nanak, please come and meet me; I sing the Songs of the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||
He 8 Il (1315-10)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ofg ys AWE 3H ofa H Hfs Sf on AStfe I 1315-10, aos, He 4)
har parabh sajan naam har mai man tan naam sareer.
The Name of the Lord God is my Best Friend. My mind and body are drenched with the Naam.
Afs wrt aenfa udder Ae area Afe ate te QU (1315-11, wos, He 4)
Sabh aasaa gurmukh pooree-aa jan naanak sun har Dheer. ||2| |
All the hopes of the Gurmukh are fulfilled; servant Nanak is comforted, hearing the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
uGat Il (1315-12, asst, He 4) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ofs Osu ofoor on 3 afs usy fade HS il 1315-12, ass, we 4)
har ootam hari-aa naam hai har purakh niranjan ma-ulaa.
The Lord's Sublime Name is energizing and rejuvenating. The Immaculate Lord, the Primal Being, blossoms forth.
A Aue dfs ofs feo af fso AS vaso fos aBor Il 1315-12, wes, He 4)
jo japday har har dinas raat tin sayvay charan nit ka-ulaa.
Maya serves at the feet of those who chant and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, day and night.
fos Afs Ae AS Abt Hs ofe ZA foafe AS ACs I (1315-13, wos, He 4)
nit saar samaal"ay sabh jee-a jant har vasai nikat sabh ja-ulaa. The Lord always looks after and cares for all His beings and creatures; He is with all, near and far.
Ags faa orf gsfert fan Afsag use ys ACS Il 0315-13, aos, oe 4)
so boojhai jis aap bujhaa-isee jis satgur purakh parabh sa-ulaa.
Those whom the Lord inspires to understand, understand; the True Guru, God, the Primal Being, is pleased with them.
Afs weg de dfee od dfee sd ae Jd TE Wes Tat ANGST IE (1315-14, wos, v2 4) sabh gaavhu gun govind haray govind haray govind haray gun gaavat gunee sama- ulaa. ||6]|
Let everyone sing the Praise of the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe; singing the Praise of the Lord, one is absorbed in His Glorious Virtues. ||6] |
HBa H8 8 Il (1315-15)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Afsur afs yg 3fs ufo ofe ofa Aafia ANTE I (1315-15, asa, He 4)
suti-aa har parabh chayt man har sahj samaaDh samaa-ay.
O mind, even in sleep, remember the Lord God; let yourself be intuitively absorbed into the Celestial State of Samaadhi.
Ho sa Uf de we ufo TT 3a" AS HAMS NAM (1315-16, aS, He 4)
jan naanak har har chaa-o man gur tuthaa maylay maa-ay. ||1]||
Servant Nanak's mind longs for the Lord, Har, Har. As the Guru pleases, he is absorbed into the Lord, O mother. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1315-16)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs fear Ast fussst af fea He fefs II (1315-16, west, He 4) har ikas saytee pirharhee har iko mayrai chit. I am in love with the One and Only Lord; the One Lord fills my consciousness.
Ho aed fea nurg ofs us fear 3 afs ufS in (1315-17, was, He 4)
jan naanak ik aDhaar har parabh ikas tay gat pat. ||2]|
Servant Nanak takes the Support of the One Lord God; through the One, he obtains honor and salvation. ||2||
ugat Il (1315-18) pa-orhee. Pauree:
ud Ase eA Hfs THs esac moTe Sf Il (1315-18, wes, He 4)
panchay sabad vajay mat gurmat vadbhaagee anhad vaji-aa.
The Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrate with the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings; by great good fortune, the Unstruck Melody resonates and resounds.
Wee HE TH Ag hme qe wat afee afr i 1315-18, asst, Hs 4)
aanad mool raam sabh daykhi-aa gur sabdee govid gaji-aa.
I see the Lord, the Source of Bliss, everywhere; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord of the Universe is revealed.
urfe qarfe 2H afs Sa Hfs aeHfs fe ys sf I 1315-19, asst, He 4)
aad jugaad vays har ayko mat gurmat har parabh bhaji-aa.
From the primal beginning, and throughout the ages, the Lord has One Form. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, I vibrate and meditate on the Lord God.
dfs teg we cfenrs ys AS aug Ufe ys Orr Il 4315-19, was, He 4)
har dayvhu daan da-i-aal parabh jan raakho har parabh laji-aa.
O Merciful Lord God, please bless me with Your Bounty; O Lord God, please preserve and protect the honor of Your humble servant.
ust 93% Als U9 add ad Afsag ag Afsag fas ffs ofe use| afr DI (1316-1, wos, He 4)
sabh Dhan kahhu gur satguroo gur satguroo jit mil har parh-daa kaji-aa. ||7]|| Let everyone proclaim: Blessed is the Guru, the True Guru, the Guru, the True Guru; meeting Him, the Lord covers their faults and deficiencies. ||7| |
H@a H8 8 Il (1316-2) salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
sats Adeg Cas Had 3d Sdfs Il (1316-2, was, He 4) bhagat sarovar uchhlai subhar bharay vahann. The sacred pool of devotional worship is filled to the brim and overflowing in torrents.
frat Afsag Hfour AS SSA SS Sa BIS NA (1316-2, asst, He 4) jinaa satgur mani-aa jan naanak vad bhaag lahann. ||1]| Those who obey the True Guru, O servant Nanak, are very fortunate - they find it.
[21
Hs 8 Il (1316-3) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofs an mA ote ofs a To aa B ATT Il (1316-3, wos, He 4)
har har naam asa‘kh har har kay gun kathan na jaahi.
The Names of the Lord, Har, Har, are countless. The Glorious Virtues of the Lord, Har, Har, cannot be described.
dfs ofa mam merfa afe Ae fas fafa feats fests I 1316-4, aos, He 4)
har har agam agaaDh har jan kit biDh mileh milaahi.
The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible and Unfathomable; how can the humble servants of the Lord be united in His Union?
dfs dfs AA AUS AUS Ho fea faq odt ahifs uf= II 1316-4, was, He 4)
har har jas japat japant jan ik til nahee keemat paa-ay.
Those humble beings meditate and chant the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, but they do not attain even a tiny bit of His Worth.
Hs soa dfs wan ys ofa Af Bg ws SPE II (1316-5, aes, He 4)
jan naanak har agam parabh har mayl laihu larh laa-ay. ||2]|
O servant Nanak, the Lord God is Inaccessible; the Lord has attached me to His Robe, and united me in His Union. ||2] |
ugat Il (1316-6) pa-orhee. Pauree:
dfs man vided wan dfs fag afs ofa cane firt Il 1316-6, ast, He 4)
har agam agochar agam har ki-o kar har darsan pikhaa. The Lord is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. How will I see the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?
fags zug df= A eaaba fH gy o feu Il (316-6, was, Hs 4)
kichh vakhar ho-ay so varnee-ai tis roop na rikhaa.
If He were a material object, then I could describe Him, but He has no form or feature.
fam ase unfy gefe ef Het we fee Il (1316-7, aest, He 4)
jis bujhaa-ay aap bujhaa-ay day-ay so-ee jan dikhaa.
Understanding comes only when the Lord Himself gives understanding; only such a humble being sees it.
AsHafs Afsag vers 3 fas ais we fire i 1316-7, wast, He 4)
satsangat satgur chatsaal hai jit har gun sikhaa.
The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the True Guru, is the school of the soul, where the Glorious Virtues of the Lord are studied.
U9 U9 A SAa U6 ad Uo Aer Afsag fas fife ofe Sur feet cI (1316-8, wos, He 4) Dhan Dhan so rasnaa Dhan kar Dhan so paaDhaa satguroo jit mil har laykhaa likhaa. [181]
Blessed, blessed is the tongue, blessed is the hand, and blessed is the Teacher, the True Guru; meeting Him, the Account of the Lord is written. ||8]|
HBa H8 8 Il (1316-9)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
ofa of on nifys 3 ofe aubt Afsag ate I 1316-9, wos, He 4)
har har naam amrit hai har japee-ai satgur bhaa-ay.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. Meditate on the Lord, with love for the True Guru.
dfs of om ufes 3 ofe nus AOS BY ATE II (1316-9, wast, He 4)
har har naam pavit hai har japat sunat dukh jaa-ay.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har is Sacred and Pure. Chanting it and listening to it, pain is taken away.
dfs oy fsat nrafomr fae Hasta fofior ofs ufe il 4316-10, ass, He 4)
har naam tinee aaraaDhi-aa jin mastak likhi-aa Dhur paa-ay.
They alone worship and adore the Lord's Name, upon whose foreheads such pre- ordained destiny is written.
dfs edad He UsTeafs fae afte nfs sfhmr wrfe it 1316-11, aest, He 4)
har dargeh jan painaa-ee-an jin har man vasi-aa aa-ay.
Those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord; the Lord comes to abide in their minds.
Ho saa S HY CxS faa ofa Afeor nfs Ste NA (1316-11, wos, He 4)
jan naanak tay mukh ujlay jin har suni-aa man bhaa-ay. ||1]||
O servant Nanak, their faces are radiant. They listen to the Lord; their minds are filled with love. ||1||
He 8 Il (1316-12)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dfs ofs om foors 3 conf urfenr ate i (316-12, west, He 4) har har naam niDhaan hai gurmukh paa-i-aa jaa-ay. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the greatest treasure. The Gurmukhs obtain it.
fre ufs Hasta fetimr fae Afsae fufemr wrfe i (1316-12, west, H2 4)
jin Dhur mastak likhi-aa tin satgur mili-aa aa-ay.
The True Guru comes to meet those who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads.
36 HO Ase dfenr Aifs ext ufo wrfe I 1316-13, aos, He 4)
tan man seetal ho-i-aa saa‘t vasee man aa-ay.
Their bodies and minds are cooled and soothed; peace and tranquility come to dwell in their minds.
Soa Tied de wefent AF Bee sy Of ATE IQ (1316-14, aes, He 4)
naanak har har cha-udi-aa sabh daalad dukh leh jaa-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all poverty and pain is dispelled. [21]
Uugat Il (1316-14)
pa-orhee. Pauree:
J@ afr f35 aS Ae Ae faa Afsag Hat filmer Sham | (1316-14, avast, He 4) ha-o vaari-aa tin ka-o sadaa sadaa jinaa satgur mayraa pi-aaraa daykhi-aa. I am a Sacrifice, forever and ever, to those who have seen my Beloved True Guru.
fsa a8 fifeor us Afsag fro aS ufs Hasta Sf il (1316-15, woz, He 4)
tin ka-o mili-aa mayraa satguroo jin ka-o Dhur mastak laykhi-aa.
They alone meet my True Guru, who have such pre-ordaind destiny written upon their foreheads.
ofa man fmrfeur asst fsa gu odt ys sfimr I (1316-16, wast, He 4)
har agam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmatee tis roop nahee parabh raykh-i-aa.
I meditate on the Inaccessible Lord, according to the Guru's Teachings; God has no form or feature.
ad sate fourfenr frat wan safe 3 sas Aza ate Sfomr Il 1316-16, aaa, He 4)
gur bachan Dhi-aa-i-aa jinaa agam har tay thaakur sayvak ral ayki-aa.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings and meditate on the Inaccessible Lord, merge with their Lord and Master and become one with Him.
Ais AIT HUT 3d ddd Sd Sddd Sd ddd Tig Ha Te sats feAfaor el (1316-17, atest, Hs 4)
sabh kahhu mukhahu nar narharay nar narharay nar narharay har laahaa har bhagat vasaykhi-aa. ||9]|
Let everyone proclaim out loud, the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the Lord; the profit of devotional worship of the Lord is blessed and sublime. ||9]]|
HBa H8 8 Il (1316-18)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
TH OH DH oe ad TH TH TH TS It (1316-18, wast, He 4)
raam naam ram rav rahay ram raamo raam rameet.
The Lord's Name is permeating and pervading all. Repeat the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam.
ufe wfe wrsH ou 3 ufs de at dfa SHS I 316-19, wos, He 4)
ghat ghat aatam raam hai parabh khayl kee-o rang reet.
The Lord is in the home of each and every soul. God created this play with its various colors and forms.
dfs fate 2A Aadleat userA atS aa HIS II (1316-19, aos, He 4)
har nikat vasai jagjeevanaa pargaas kee-o gur meet.
The Lord, the Life of the World, dwells near at hand. The Guru, my Friend, has made this clear.
UST IBA ofa Aumt afs ys fsa fee fro fefimr ofs afs ofS Wt (1317-1, aoe, He 4)
har su-aamee har parabh tin milay jin likhi-aa Dhur har pareet. They alone meet the Lord, the Lord God, their Lord and Master, whose love for the Lord is pre-ordained.
HS SSA OH foorfenr as sets AfuUs Hfs SHS wail 317-1, wes, ue 4)
jan naanak naam Dhi-aa-i-aa gur bachan japi-o man cheet. ||1]|
Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, chant it consciously with your mind. ||1]]|
He 8 Il (1317-2)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ofs ys Ane Ss wg afar SA esata | (1317-2, wast, He 4)
har parabh sajan lorh lahu bhaag vasai vadbhaag.
Seek the Lord God, your Best Friend; by great good fortune, He comes to dwell with the very fortunate ones.
afs us tearfenr saa ate fee wrfar QI (1317-3, ass, He 4)
gur poorai daykhaali-aa naanak har liv laag. ||2||
Through the Perfect Guru, He is revealed, O Nanak, and one is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||
ust Il (1317-3) pa-orhee. Pauree:
US Us AVS Hes wat fas dfs AS ufos Stat Il 1317-3, wast, He 4)
Dhan Dhan suhaavee safal gharhee jit har sayvaa man bhaanee.
Blessed, blessed, beauteous and fruitful is that moment, when service to the Lord becomes pleasing to the mind.
dfs aa Heed HS Tea” Hd dfs ys nae ATat I (1317-4, wos, us 4)
har kathaa sunavhu mayray gursikhahu mayray har parabh akath kahaanee.
So proclaim the story of the Lord, O my GurSikhs; speak the Unspoken Speech of my Lord God.
faG ureint fa eb Hat ofs us Awe AATeT Il (1317-4, aS, He 4)
ki-o paa-ee-ai ki-o daykhee-ai mayraa har parabh sugharh sujaanee. How can I attain Him? How can I see Him? My Lord God is All-knowing and All-seeing.
ofa Afs feure orfu ats aa gaat ath AHTet Il (1317-5, wos, He 4)
har mayl dikhaa-ay aap har gur bachnee naam samaanee.
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, the Lord reveals Himself; we merge in absorption in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fae feed soa Stour A Aue fa fegaret I90N (1317-5, ast, He 4) tin vitahu naanak vaari-aa jo japday har nirbaanee. ||10]|| Nanak is a sacrifice unto those who meditate on the Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||10]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1317-6)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
ufs ys 33 Sfee famrs nine ag SE Il 1317-6, was, He 4)
har parabh ratay lo-inaa gi-aan anjan gur day-ay.
One's eyes are anointed by the Lord God, when the Guru bestows the ointment of spiritual wisdom.
Hus Ane ufeur AS soa Hota fHSfE WAN (1317-7, ares, He 4) mai parabh sajan paa-i-aa jan naanak sahj milay-ay. ||1]|
I have found God, my Best Friend; servant Nanak is intuitively absorbed into the Lord.
[21
He 8 Il (1317-7)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
dante nists Aifs 3 ufs fs at AAfE I 317-7, aes, He 4)
gurmukh antar saat hai man tan naam samaa-ay.
The Gurmukh is filled with peace and tranquility deep within. His mind and body are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
oy fase ont us oft ad fee ote II 1317-8, ares, He 4)
naam chitvai naamo parhai naam rahai liv laa-ay.
He thinks of the Naam, and reads the Naam; he remains lovingly attuned to the Naam.
oy uerag urehat fest aet fate I 1317-8, aost, He 4) naam padaarath paa-ee-ai chintaa ga-ee bilaa-ay. He obtains the Treasure of the Naam, and is rid of anxiety.
Afsate fife ou Cur feAe sy AS ALE I (0317-9, weer, Hs 4) satgur mili-ai naam oopjai tarisnaa bhukh sabh jaa-ay. Meeting with the True Guru, the Naam wells up, and all hunger and thirst depart.
SOA SH sso on us uf— MQM (1317-9, wear, He 4) naanak naamay rati-aa naamo palai paa-ay. ||2|| O Nanak, one who is imbued with the Naam, gathers the Naam in his lap. ||2]|
ust Il (1317-10) pa-orhee. Pauree:
3g wml nas Cure a su ym enafs atst II 1317-10, aoa, He 4) tuDh aapay jagat upaa-ay kai tuDh aapay vasgat keetaa. You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself control it.
fefa Hone ats aatfenig feat nfs ag far FIST I 317-10, aoe, H8 4)
ik manmukh kar haaraa-i-an iknaa may! guroo tinaa jeetaa.
Some are self-willed manmukhs - they lose. Others are united with the Guru - they win.
ofs Osu ofs ys oH 3 Te sels ASH SIT Il (1317-11, wae, Hs 4)
har ootam har parabh naam hai gur bachan sabhaagai leetaa.
The Name of the Lord, the Lord God is Sublime. The fortunate ones chant it, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings.
ey wee As of afer At ae ag ofs est i 0317-12, was, we 4) dukh daalad sabho leh ga-i-aa jaa‘ naa-o guroo har deetaa. All pain and poverty are taken away, when the Guru bestows the Lord's Name.
Afs AI HIS HOTS AaHIS fafs wars Curfe AS fh ast NIU (1317-12, ass, He 4) sabh sayvhu mohno manmohno jagmohno jin jagat upaa-ay sabho vas keetaa. ||11]| Let everyone serve the Enticing Enticer of the Mind, the Enticer of the World, who created the world, and controls it all. ||11]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1317-13)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Ho nists ISH da oF gf 3S HOH TIAA I (1317-13, was, Hs 4)
man antar ha-umai rog hai bharam bhoolay manmukh durjanaa.
The disease of egotism is deep within the mind; the self-willed manmukhs and the evil beings are deluded by doubt.
aoa sa zene fife Afsas ATT AMAT AU (1317-14, aes, Hs 4)
naanak rog vanjaa-ay mil satgur saaDhoo sajnaa. ||1|| O Nanak, the disease is cured only by meeting with the True Guru, the Holy Friend.
[21
He 8 Il (1317-14)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
HO 36 StH Aarset AT Ser af SS Il 1317-14, wast, He 4) man tan taam sagaaravaa jaa‘ daykhaa har nainay. My mind and body are embellished and exalted, when I behold the Lord with my eyes.
ood A ys H fes 3G Ate AE AS MQM (1317-15, was, He 4) naanak so parabh mai milai ha-o jeevaa sad sunay. ||2| | O Nanak, meeting with that God, I live, hearing His Voice. ||2||
ust Il (1317-15) pa-orhee. Pauree:
Adore AMAT ATS MUSUT UTY MSG Il (1317-15, as, He 4)
jagannaath jagdeesar kartay aprampar purakh atol.
The Creator is the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, the Infinite Primal Immeasurable Being.
ofs on fwreg He Tefrag afs SSH afs SH MAG I 317-16, wos, Hs 4)
har naam Dhi-aavahu mayray gursikhahu har ootam har naam amol.
Meditate on the Lord's Name, O my GurSikhs; the Lord is Sublime, the Lord's Name is Invaluable.
fae fomrfenr foe fear ofS 3 fs odt ofa Fw Il 1317-16, wast, He 4)
jin Dhi-aa-i-aa hirdai dinas raat tay milay nahee har rol.
Those who meditate on Him in their hearts, day and night, merge with the Lord - there is no doubt about it.
zsaat Hats fhe Te Afsaes ys IS ll 1317-17, was, we 4)
vadbhaagee sangat milai gur satgur pooraa bol.
By great good fortune, they join the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, and speak the Word of the Guru, the Perfect True Guru.
As fwreg og wate sates fas Ya" AH FAT FAB NII (1317-18, was, He 4) sabh Dhi-aavahu nar naaraa-ino naaraa-ino jit chookaa jam jhagarh jhagol. ||12| | Let everyone meditate on the Lord, the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, by which all disputes and conflicts with Death are ended. ||12||
HBa H2 8 Il (1317-18)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
dfs Ae ofe of wefeur Ag After ares Il 1317-19, asst, He 4)
har jan har har cha-udi-aa sar sanDhi-aa gaavaar.
The humble servant of the Lord chants the Name, Har, Har. The foolish idiot shoots arrows at him.
Soa dfs AS Ufa fee Cus fae Aftmr fon fefs Hs NA (1317-19, asst, He 4)
naanak har jan har liv ubray jin sanDhi-aa tis fir maar. ||1||
O Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is saved by the Love of the Lord. The arrow is turned around, and kills the one who shot it. ||1]|
Uat aAe
He 8 Il (1318-1)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
ordt Uf are afs ofa any firife il (318-1, ass, Hs 4)
akhee paraym kasaa-ee-aa har har naam pikha‘ni".
The eyes which are attracted by the Lord's Love behold the Lord through the Name of the Lord.
A afd gH tue Aa Soa ate festa QM (1318-1, wos, we 4) jay kar doojaa daykh-day jan naanak kadh dicha‘ni". ||2|| If they gaze upon something else, O servant Nanak, they ought to be gouged out.
21 |
ust Il (1318-2) pa-orhee. Pauree:
rife ate Hotes uss wrudug AST Il (1318-2, ass, He 4) jal thal mahee-al poorno aprampar so-ee. The Infinite Lord totally permeates the water, the land and the sky.
aba Hs ufsurse A ad A det I 1318-2, wear, He 4) jee-a jant partipaaldaa jo karay so ho-ee. He cherishes and sustains all beings and creatures; whatever He does comes to pass.
ws fust AS avs Hts fSH fag odt At II 318-3, aos, He 4) maat pitaa sut bharaat meet tis bin nahee ko-ee. Without Him, we have no mother, father, children, sibling or friend.
ufe wfe nists afe afoor afimrg AS set II (1318-3, arest, He 4)
ghat ghat antar rav rahi-aa japi-ahu jan ko-ee.
He is permeating and pervading deep within each and every heart; let everyone meditate on Him.
AIS AUT dus Tos ude AS Bet All (1318-4, wast, He 4)
Sagal japahu gopaal gun pargat sabh lo-ee. ||13]|
Let all chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World, who is manifest all over the world. ||13]|
HBa H2 8 Il (1318-4)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
aanfy fee fa AAS ofe ys ure Fa i 318-4, wast, Hs 4) gurmukh milay se sajnaa har parabh paa-i-aa rang. Those Gurmukhs who meet as friends are blessed with the Lord God's Love.
Wo Soa SH Hots 3 ols Os coals SF AU (1318-5, wos, we 4)
jan naanak naam salaahi too lud lud dargahi vanj. ||1||
O servant Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; you shall go to His court in joyous high spirits. ||1]|
H8 8 Il (1318-5) mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
fs 3d WS ASA ST Als Abort SHS Il (1318-6, ass, He 4) har toohai daataa sabhas daa sabh jee-a tum"aaray. Lord, You are the Great Giver of all; all beings are Yours.
Afs 30 3 wraae og Ufa films | 1318-6, ast, He 4) sabh tuDhai no aaraaDhaday daan deh pi-aaray. They all worship You in adoration; You bless them with Your Bounty, O Beloved.
dfs as wats ve afer vig gor AAT Il (1318-6, wast, He 4)
har daatai daataar hath kadhi-aa meehu vuthaa saisaaray.
The Generous Lord, the Great Giver reaches out with His Hands, and the rain pours down on the world.
nig Afior ust ar@ afe afs oH ANTS Il (1318-7, ass", Hs 4) ann jammi-aa khaytee bhaa-o kar har naam sam"aaray. The corn germinates in the fields; contemplate the Lord's Name with love.
We Soa Hd we ys dfs SH was QI (1318-7, wos, He 4) jan naanak mangai daan parabh har naam aDhaaray. ||2| | Servant Nanak begs for the Gift of the Support of the Name of his Lord God. ||2]]|
ust Il (1318-8) pa-orhee. Pauree:
fest He ot udtot mot Ae Aree Il (1318-8, aaer, Hs 4) ichhaa man kee pooree-ai japee-ai sukh saagar. The desires of the mind are satisfied, meditating on the Ocean of Peace.
dfs & Vso Mads as Aafe Wares Il (1318-8, ass, He 4)
har kay charan araaDhee-ah gur sabad ratnaagar. Worship and adore the Feet of the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the jewel mine.
fife Arg Afar Garg afe ae AH Ara Il (1318-9, was, He 4)
mil saaDhoo sang uDhaar ho-ay faatai jam kaagar.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and the Decree of Death is torn up.
HOH uevsg Asha afl of Faas | (1318-9, ast, He 4) janam padaarath jeetee-ai jap har bairaagar. The treasure of this human life is won, meditating on the Lord of Detachment.
Ais ueg Hele Asay at far TY BAT Wil (1318-10, was, Hs 4)
sabh pavahu saran satguroo kee binsai dukh daagar. ||14||
Let everyone seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru; let the black spot of pain, the scar of suffering, be erased. ||14] |
HBa H8 8 Il (1318-10)
salok mehlaa 4. Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
UG PSet AAS AAS AS arf | (1318-11, ass, we 4) ha-o dhoo“dhay“dee sajnaa sajan maidai naal. I was seeking, searching for my Friend, but my Friend is right here with me.
He aaa ney & Seba TaHfe efa feet Wall (1318-11, ast, He 4) jan naanak alakh na lakhee-ai gurmukh deh dikhaal. ||1]| O servant Nanak, the Unseen is not seen, but the Gurmukh is given to see Him. ||1]|
He 8 Il (1318-12)
mehlaa 4. Fourth Mehl:
soa Uifs aret fats Ad fSH fo soe o ATT II (1318-12, asst, He 4) naanak pareet laa-ee tin sachai tis bin rahan na jaa-ee. O Nanak, I am in love with the True Lord; I cannot survive without Him.
Afsag fe 3 yar uréint afe afk TAS TAT II 1318-12, wos", Hs 4)
satgur milai ta pooraa paa-ee-ai har ras rasan rasaa-ee. ||2||
Meeting the True Guru, the Perfect Lord is found, and the tongue savors His Sublime Essence. ||2||
ugat Il (1318-13) pa-orhee. Pauree:
aet we a He a Cote War] Il (1318-13, aes, He 4) ko-ee gaavai ko sunai ko uchar sunaavai. Some sing, some listen, and some speek and preach.
HOH HOH at HS Ese Ho fefenr urs Il (1318-13, ast, He 4)
janam janam kee mal utrai man chindi-aa paavai.
The filth and pollution of countless lifetimes is washed away, and the wishes of the mind are fulfilled.
Wize Wat Heb ofa AX TE We Il (1318-14, wast, ue 4) aavan jaanaa maytee-ai har kay gun gaavai. Coming and going in reincarnation ceases, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
umfy sofa Hat sats AS AST SITS Il (1318-14, wast, He 4)
aap tareh sangee taraahi sabh kutamb taraavai.
They save themselves, and save their companions; they save all their generations as well.
He sod fan sfsrse HAS ofs ys SS QUI AT Il 1318-15, asst, He 4) jan naanak tis balihaarnai jo mayray har parabh bhaavai. ||15||1]| suDh.
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to those who are pleasing to my Lord God. ||15||1]| Sudh] |
Ta Ast salt SHES AG at 1318-16) raag kaanrhaa banee naamdayv jee-o kee Raag Kaanraa, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsars yATfe II (1318-16)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: MA OH oe nisaAMt Il 1318-17, west, sas SHS FH)
aiso raam raa-ay antarjaamee. Such is the Sovereign Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts;
AA wduS Hf ges udeTst NA TIC Il (1318-17, was, sas HVE Ff)
jaisay darpan maahi badan parvaanee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He sees everything as clearly as one's face reflected in a mirror. ||1]|Pause] |
SA wet we Sy @ ete Il 1318-17, west, sas ones Ah basai ghataa ghat leep na chheepai. He dwells in each and every heart; no stain or stigma sticks to Him.
a0s HAST WS 3 SA NAM (1318-18, wast, sas SHR Th) banDhan muktaa jaat na deesai. ||1]| He is liberated from bondage; He does not belong to any social class. ||1]|
urat Hifo SY WY AAT Il (1318-18, west, sas ones wt) paanee maahi daykh mukh jaisaa. As one's face is reflected in the water,
OH A AMM sos MAT QUAI (1318-18, wast, AT SHS Fh) naamay ko su-aamee beethal aisaa. ||2||1]| so does Naam Dayv's Beloved Lord and Master appear. ||2||1||
var 93a
Ta Anis HIS 8 (1319-1) raag kali-aan mehlaa 4 Raag Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
Asan aes usy forse fares vers Hats oral AS aT YATE I 1319-2) ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
TH SH TH nis & urfeor | 1319-4, afemrs, He 4) raamaa ram raamai ant na paa-i-aa. The Lord, the Beauteous Lord - no one has found His limits.
oH ated yfsurg Sue J as use fust Ha wrfenr nai FITS it (1319-4, afemrs, ve 4) ham baarik partipaaray tumray too bad purakh pitaa mayraa maa-i-aa. ||1]| rahaa-o. I am a child - You cherish and sustain me. You are the Great Primal Being, my Mother and Father. ||1]|Pause| |
dfs & OH MAY Ma Tia me ma Tis TET | (1319-5, afters, He 4)
har kay naam asa‘kh agam heh agam agam har raa-i-aa.
The Names of the Lord are Countless and Unfathomable. My Sovereign Lord is Unfathomable and Incomprehensible.
dat fomrst Aefs ag atat fea fs oot ats urfenr 4 319-5, afmrs, He 4)
gunee gi-aanee surat baho keenee ik til nahee kKeemat paa-i-aa. ||1]|
The virtuous and the spiritual teachers have given it great thought, but they have not found even an iota of His Value. ||1]|
dfae qe dfae Ae wets ge dfse viz 3 ufemr It 1319-6, afer, He 4)
gobid gun gobid sad gaavahi gun gobid ant na paa-i-aa.
They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe forever. They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, but they do not find His limits.
3 ofhfs vise medusa AeMit ag mbt ars o urfemr I (1319-7, afm, He 4)
too amit atol aprampar su-aamee baho japee-ai thaah na paa-i-aa. ||2| |
You are Immeasurable, Unweighable, and Infinite, O Lord and Master; no matter how much one may meditate on You, Your Depth cannot be fathomed. ||2]|
Grafs asfs sudt Ao HO Toe aefe ofa afenr I 1319-7, afters, H: 4)
ustat karahi tumree jan maaDhou gun gaavahi har raa-i-aa.
Lord, Your humble servants praise You, singing Your Glorious Praises, O Sovereign Lord.
3H 7G fofa TH HIS Sue 3a nig 3 asT UfeMr SI (1319-8, afenrs, He 4) tum" jal niDh ham meenay tumray tayraa ant na kathoo paa-i-aa. ||3]| You are the ocean of water, and I am Your fish. No one has ever found Your limits.
[I3I|
Ao AG faut agg HOES ois teg oH AUTEM II (1319-9, afemrs, He 4)
jan ka-o kirpaa karahu maDhsoodan har dayvhu naam japaa-i-aa.
Please be Kind to Your humble servant, Lord; please bless me with the meditation of Your Name.
H Yee nigs oy 2a dT AS Boa TeHfe ufeMr suai 1319-9, afemrs, vs 4) mai moorakh anDhulay naam tayk hai jan naanak gurmukh paa-i-aa. ||4||1]|
I am a blind fool; Your Name is my only Support. Servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, has found it. ||4]|1]|
atemie HIS 8 Il (1319-10)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
Ufs AS TS Wes TAM I 1319-10, afemrs, ue 4)
har jan gun gaavat hasi-aa. The humble servant of the Lord sings the Lord's Praise, and blossoms forth.
dfs as sats wat Hfs asHfs ufs HASte ufs ffm Wai TIS Il (1319-10, afenrs, He 4) har har bhagat banee mat gurmat Dhur mastak parabh likhi-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
My intellect is embellished with devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, through the Guru's Teachings. This is the destiny which God has recorded on my forehead. ||1||Pause] |
ad & ud free feg ast ufo ate ofa afe afimr il 1319-11, afsmrs, 2 4)
gur kay pag simra-o din raatee man har har har basi-aa.
I meditate in remembrance on the Guru's Feet, day and night. The Lord, Har, Har, Har, comes to dwell in my mind.
dfs ofa ofs otefs afa act wih Seo AA fA NAN (1319-12, afemrs, He 4)
har har har keerat jag saaree ghas chandan jas ghasi-aa. ||1||
The Praise of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, is Excellent and Sublime in this world. His Praise is the sandalwood paste which I rub. ||1]|
dfs Ae dfs afe of fee wet vfs wes dfs ufemr I 1319-12, afenrs, He 4)
har jan har har har liv laa-ee sabh saakat khoj pa-i-aa.
The humble servant of the Lord is lovingly attuned to the Lord, Har, Har, Har; all the faithless cynics pursue him.
fA@ fags Hafa vie og fSea ua oale fe vfs NI (1319-13, afemrs, He 4)
ji-o kirat sanjog chali-o nar nindak pag naagan chhuhi jali-aa. ||2| |
The slanderous person acts in accordance with the record of his past deeds; his foot trips over the snake, and he is stung by its bite. ||2]|
qo & 3H de Te Aum 3H afa Af AS amr It 319-14, afenrs, ue 4)
jan kay tum" har raakhay su-aamee tum" jug jug jan rakhi-aa.
O my Lord and Master, You are the Saving Grace, the Protector of Your humble servants. You protect them, age after age.
ao sfenr ef adt adiet As afe afe sfe ufemr sit 1319-14, afters, v3 4)
kahaa bha-i-aa dait karee bakheelee sabh kar kar jhar pari-aa. ||3]| What does it matter, if a demon speaks evil? By doing so, he only gets frustrated.
[I3I|
AS dba Hs ufs ate Afs as uf aftr i (1319-15, afters, ue 4) jaytay jee-a jant parabh kee-ay sabh kaalai mukh garsi-aa. All the beings and creatures created by God are caught in the mouth of Death.
dfs Ae ofa fs ofs yfs Ta AS SSA Asls ule SII 4319-16, afenrs, Hs 4)
har jan har har har parabh raakhay jan naanak saran pa-i-aa. ||4||2| | The humble servants of the Lord are protected by the Lord God, Har, Har, Har; servant Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||4||2||
afemits HIS 8 Il (1319-16)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
UST 932o
Hd Ho AU Ay Haas Il (1320-1, aera, He 4) mayray man jap jap jaga‘naathay. O my mind, chant and meditate on the Master of the Universe.
as Guefh ofa on foorfes vfs faofas eu we dl TIS Il 1320-1, afmrs, v2 4) gur updays har naam Dhi-aa-i-o sabh kilbikh dukh laathay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Through the Guru's Teachings, meditate on the Lord's Name, and be rid of all the painful past sins. ||1]|Pause||
dHat Sa AA Me BAA ST Sih FT FHOE Il (1320-2, afemra, ue 4)
rasnaa ayk jas gaa-ay na saakai baho keejai baho rasunathay.
I have only one tongue - I cannot sing His Praises. Please bless me with many, many tongues.
ag ag fag us Afs refs ae afs 3 Aals Ys SHOES NA (1320-2, afemrs, He 4)
baar baar khin pal sabh gaavahi gun kahi na sakahi parabh tumnathay. ||1]|
Again and again, each and every instant, with all of them, I would sing His Glorious Praises; but even then, I would not be able to sing all of Your Praises, God. ||1]|
oH ag Ulfs walt ys HoMit mH Sas us fears Il (1320-3, afters, us 4) ham baho pareet lagee parabh su-aamee ham lochah parabh dikhnathay. I am so deeply in love with God, my Lord and Master; I long to see God's Vision.
3H 8s BS Ah Ais aA SH AST IH fase N21 (1320-3, aera, ne 4) tum bad daatay jee-a jee-an kay tum jaanhu ham birthay. ||2]| You are the Great Giver of all beings and creatures; only You know our inner pain.
21 |
aot ued ug ase us ot ag fa5 a@ fomr fead I (1320-4, afm, ne 4)
ko-ee maarag panth bataavai parabh kaa kaho tin ka-o ki-aa dinthay.
If only someone would show me the Way, the Path of God. Tell me - what could I give him?
AZ 36 HO mau mafy mrau set HS ys fess WI! (1320-5, afer, ne 4)
sabh tan man arpa-o arap araapa-o ko-ee maylai parabh milthay. ||3]|
I would surrender, offer and dedicate all my body and mind to him; if only someone would unite me in God's Union! ||3]|
dfs & Ws IIS FS Fd AS" IH Ze ala ats Fao Il (1320-5, afters, ue 4)
har kay gun bahut bahut baho sobhaa ham tuchh kar kar barnathay.
The Glorious Praises of the Lord are so many and numerous; I can describe only a tiny bit of them.
Jud fs Aas YS SHI Ho BOA A YS AHA IIISll (1320-6, afemrs, us 4) hamree mat vasgat parabh tumrai jan naanak kay parabh samrathay. ||4||3]|
My intellect is under Your control, God; You are the All-powerful Lord God of servant Nanak. ||4||3]|
afemnis HIS 8 Il (1320-7)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
Hd Ho Afu dfs qe wee Hoaet Il (1320-7, afemrs, us 4) mayray man jap har gun akath suntha-ee. O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, which are said to be inexpressible.
UdH ide AS AH HY Dd Ae ule ofa feaaet NA TIE tl 1320-7, afers, He 4) Dharam arath sabh kaam mokh hai jan peechhai lag firtha-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o. Rightousness and Dharmic faith, success and prosperity, pleasure, the fulfillment of desires and liberation - all follow the humble servant of the Lord like a shadow. ||1]|Pause] |
A ofa ofa any fimre afe ae fan aaa Hee II (1320-8, afemrs, He 4)
so har har naam Dhi-aavai har jan jis badbhaag math-ee.
That humble servant of the Lord who has such good fortune written on his forehead meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ad vaafs ys Sw Ha SI se ON forfeaet all 1320-9, afemrs, He 4)
jah dargahi parabh laykhaa maagai tah chhutai naam Dhi-aa-itha-ee. ||1]|
In that Court, where God calls for the accounts, there, you shall be saved only by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
JHd UU Fd WOH HOH A VY ISH HG Barer Il 1320-9, afemrs, ve 4)
hamray dokh baho janam janam kay dukh ha-umai mail lagtha-ee.
I am stained with the filth of the mistakes of countless lifetimes, the pain and pollution of egotism.
afte ofe faur of vfs aere AS foofse ure aTeet i211 4320-10, afer, He 4)
gur Dhaar kirpaa har jal naavaa-ay sabh kilbikh paap gath-ee. ||2]|
Showering His Mercy, the Guru bathed me in the Water of the Lord, and all my sins and mistakes were taken away. ||2| |
We & fee nists ys Homi we af afs ow sHaet I (1320-10, afters, He 4)
jan kai rid antar parabh su-aamee jan har har naam bhajtha-ee.
God, our Lord and Master, is deep within the hearts of His humble servants. They vibrate the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ad nist ming urfe gos d 3d Te OH ASST SI (1320-11, afer, He 4)
jah antee a-osar aa-ay banat hai tah raakhai naam saath-ee. ||3] |
And when that very last moment comes, then the Naam is our Best Friend and Protector. ||3]|
Wo 3a aA ets ofe afs us ofa AfUG Aaloaet II (1320-12, afsnrs, He 4)
jan tayraa jas gaavahi har har parabh har japi-o jaga‘natha-ee.
Your humble servants sing Your Praises, O Lord, Har, Har; they chant and meditate on the Lord God, the Master of the Universe.
Ho aod & us Te AMM JH urag gy gsaet Iisil (1320-12, afenrs, ue 4)
jan naanak kay parabh raakhay su-aamee ham paathar rakh budtha-ee. ||4||4]| O God, my Saving Grace, Lord and Master of servant Nanak, please save me, the sinking stone. ||4]|4] |
afemis HIS 8 Il (1320-13)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
JHat fasest ofa ys AS II (1320-13, afemrs, He 4) hamree chitvanee har parabh jaanai. Only the Lord God knows my innermost thoughts.
n@g act fee ad fs ae at us at at afer fea faq Sot HS AU TIS Il 1320-14, afemits, H3 4)
a-or ko-ee nind karai har jan kee parabh taa kaa kahi-aa ik til nahee maanai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If someone slanders the humble servant of the Lord, God does not believe even a tiny bit of what he says. ||1]|Pause| |
uz As fsurfa Ae ate ngs HAS 3 Ce Sag Sas Il (1320-14, afemrs, we 4)
a-or sabh ti-aag sayvaa kar achut jo sabh tay ooch thaakur bhagvaanai.
So give up everything else, and serve the Imperishable; The Lord God, our Lord and Master, is the Highest of all.
dfs AS 3 wS Afs 6 AA Vol wrfe us ole AS IAI (1320-15, afer, He 4)
har sayvaa tay kaal johi na saakai charnee aa-ay pavai har jaanai. ||1]|
When you serve the Lord, Death cannot even see you. It comes and falls at the feet of those who know the Lord. ||1||
Tage of of Ha AM a aS ANfs Sf UY ars I (1320-16, afemra, He 4) jaa ka-o raakh lay-ay mayraa su-aamee taa ka-o sumat day-ay pai kaanai. Those whom my Lord and Master protects - a balanced wisdom comes to their ears.
a a@ at wuts 3 Aa AT at sats Ha YZ HTS III 1320-16, afm, He 4) taa ka-o ko-ee apar na saakai jaa kee bhagat mayraa parabh maanai. ||2|| No one can equal them; their devotional worship is accepted by my God. ||2]|
dfs & oH fess fu Ae A Mat ua fea fene UES Il (1320-17, afenrs, H2 4)
har kay choj vidaan daykh jan jo khotaa kharaa ik nimakh pachhaanai.
So behold the Wondrous and Amazing Play of the Lord. In an instant, He distinguishes the genuine from the counterfeit.
3 3 Ho a nog afer 3d fee AG HS US UES ISI (1320-18, afenrs, 2 4)
taa tay jan ka-o anad bha-i-aa hai rid suDh milay khotay pachhutaanai. ||3]|
And that is why His humble servant is in bliss. Those of pure heart meet together, while the evil ones regret and repent. ||3]|
3H dfs aS ANGE AoMt fea wa ss uA aie BS Il (1320-18, afer, He 4)
tum har daatay samrath su-aamee ik maaga-o tujh paashu har daanai.
Lord, You are the Great Giver, our All-powerful Lord and Master; O Lord, I beg for only one gift from You.
He soa a ofa feu afs ain Ae sAfs fee dfs af Bas SIU (1320-19, afenrs, He 4) jan naanak ka-o har kirpaa kar deejai sad baseh ridai mohi har charaanai. | |4]||5| | Lord, please bless servant Nanak with Your Grace, that Your Feet may abide forever within my heart. ||4]|5||
UST AB2A
ates HIS 8 Il (1321-1)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
us ain faur fears gn ofe Te ae Il (1321-1, afters, Hs 4) parabh keejai kirpaa niDhaan ham har gun gaavhagay.
O God, Treasure of Mercy, please bless me, that I may sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
JG SHdt ase fos orn us xfs aa af wefodt A TIS Il (1321-2, afters, He 4) ha-o tumree kara-o nit aas parabh mohi kab gal laavhigay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I always place my hopes in You; O God, when will you take me in Your Embrace? ||1]|Pause] |
JH atex Har fenre fust ANSTSfod Il 1321-2, afer, He 4) ham baarik mugaDh i-aan pitaa samjaavhigay. I am a foolish and ignorant child; Father, please teach me!
Hs fug fue sfe faorfs wars fus svefaat Al (1321-3, afemrs, He 4)
sut khin khin bhool bigaar jagat pit bhaavhigay. ||1]|
Your child makes mistakes again and again, but still, You are pleased with him, O Father of the Universe. ||1]|
A dfs Aum 3H tg Het IN uaa Il (1321-3, afemrs, He 4) jo har su-aamee tum dayh so-ee ham paavhagay. Whatever You give me, O my Lord and Master - that is what I receive.
Hfa ert ardt os fAR ula TH Ada IN (1321-4, afers, Hs 4) mohi doojee naahee tha-ur jis peh ham jaavhagay. ||2|| There is no other place where I can go. ||2||
a dfs xefs sas fsar afe srefad Il (1321-4, afemrs, He 4) jo har bhaaveh bhagat tinaa har bhaavhigay. Those devotees who are pleasing to the Lord - the Lord is pleasing to them.
nat Afs free Afs ofs Wesd SII (1321-5, afenrs, He 4)
jotee jot milaa-ay jot ral jaavhagay. ||3]||
Their light merges into the Light; the lights are merged and blended together. ||3]| dfs wit af furs orfu fee wrefod i 1321-5, afmrs, He 4)
har aapay ho-ay Kirpaal aap liv laavhigay. The Lord Himself has shown mercy; He lovingly attunes me to Himself.
HO soa Ade ent ale WA TaSfod ISIEll 1321-6, afer, He 4)
jan naanak saran du-aar har laaj rakhaavhigay. ||4||6||
Servant Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Door of the Lord, who protects his honor. [14] 16]
seat 4 Il (1321-6)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six] |
atemig SUS HIS 8 (1321-7) kali-aan bhopaalee mehlaa 4 Kalyaan Bhopaalee, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il 1321-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
USI USHAT HOM wy foese SITES Il 1321-8, afore Surat, v2 4) paarbarahm parmaysur su-aamee dookh nivaaran naaraa-inay.
O Supreme Lord God, Transcendent Lord and Master, Destroyer of pain, Transcendental Lord God.
Hae sas Aefs AY ATE Se fafa sae ate fFETHE NU TIC Il 1321-8, afenrs Sura, v2 4)
sagal bhagat jaacheh sukh saagar bhav niDh taran har chintaamanay. ||1]| rahaa-o. All Your devotees beg of You. Ocean of peace, carry us across the terrifying world- ocean; You are the Wish-fulfilling Jewel. ||1]|Pause] |
die vfeors Aan eHes dfs visa afFe I (1321-9, afters Surat, He 4)
deen da-i-aal jagdees damodar har antarjaamee gobinday.
Merciful to the meek and poor, Lord of the world, Support of the earth, Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts, Lord of the Universe.
3 foas@ faa Aten fourfeor asHfs vata ofe Hae NAN (1321-10, afemrs Surat, Hs 4) tay nirbha-o jin sareeraam Dhi-aa-i-aa gurmat muraar har mukanday. ||1||
Those who meditate on the Supreme Lord become fearless. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, they meditate on the Lord, the Liberator Lord. ||1]|
HIMIAT Vda Ads A ore 3 Ao Be fafa ufe us Il (1321-10, afenrs Suet, He 4) jagdeesur charan saran jo aa-ay tay jan bhav niDh paar paray.
Those who come to Sanctuary at the Feet of the Lord of the Universe - those humble beings cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
sas Aa at Un dfs Te He coe yrfy ofe feu AT NANI (1321-11, afemrs Sura, He 4) bhagat janaa kee paij har raakhai jan naanak aap har kirpaa karay. ||2||1]|7]|
The Lord preserves the honor of His humble devotees; O servant Nanak, the Lord Himself showers them with His Grace. ||2||1||7]|
Ta Amie HIS U WTA (1321-13) raag kali-aan mehlaa 5 ghar 1 Raag Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl, First House:
qe Afsars ure I 1321-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
THe So fasur afte il (1321-14, afemrs, Hz 5) hamaarai ayh kirpaa keejai. Please grant me this blessing:
wife Hade VIS AHS fAG Ho efe efa HS 9 TIC it 1321-14, afers, 2 5)
al makrand charan kamal si-o man fayr fayr reejhai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
May the bumble-bee of my mind be immersed again and again in the Honey of Your Lotus Feet. ||1]||Pause] |
mis Her AG ae 3 aent dle Fe Tha AS St UA (1321-14, afemrs, He 5) aan jalaa si-o kaaj na kachhoo-ai har boond chaatrik ka-o deejai. ||1]|
I am not concerned with any other water; please bless this songbird with a Drop of Your Water, Lord. ||1]|
faa feos ant Hae ufy vane SSS AA NVA (1321-15, afenrs, He 5) bin milbay naahee santokhaa paykh darsan naanak jeejai. ||2||1||
Unless I meet my Lord, I am not satisfied. Nanak lives, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||2||1]|
Aone HIS U Il (1321-16, afer, He 5) kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
Wha SH A ATS Il (1321-16, afm, He 5) jaachik naam jaachai jaachai. This beggar begs and begs for Your Name, Lord.
Ada Od Ava a otea AY AMT & BS AU TIS It (1321-16, afenrs, v2 5) sarab Dhaar sarab kay naa-ik sukh samooh kay daatay. ||1|| rahaa-o. You are the Support of all, the Master of all, the Giver of absolute peace. ||1]||Pause| |
ast ast Hiafe wat sreshor A urea A (1321-17, afemrs, He 5)
kaytee kaytee maa%gan maagai bhaavnee-aa so paa-ee-ai. ||1]|
So many, so very many, beg for charity at Your Door; they receive only what You are pleased to give. ||1||
Hee HeG HES Va J ugh uatA TS WeM I (1321-17, afemrs, ve 5)
safal safal safal daras ray paras paras gun gaa-ee-ai.
Fruitful, fruitful, fruitful is the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; touching His Touch, I sing His Glorious Praises.
Soa 33 35 fae fess dts ste fare 12N21 (1321-18, afr, He 5)
naanak tat tat si-o milee-ai heerai heer biDhaa-ee-ai. ||2]|2]|
O Nanak, one's essence is blended into the Essence; the diamond of the mind is pierced through by the Diamond of the Lord. ||2]|2||
Yat 9322
atone HIS U Il (1322-1)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
Hd Bw at AST Il (1322-1, afer, He 5) mayray laalan kee sobhaa. O, the Wondrous Glory of my Beloved!
He e360 HO dat AS UA TIS Il 1322-1, afenrs, He 5) sad navtan man rangee sobhaa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My mind is rejuvenated forever by His Wondrous Love. ||1]||Pause] |
qo Hon faa ufs fer sats ae AA ait WA (1322-1, afemrs, He 5)
barahm mahays siDh mun indraa bhagat daan jas mangee. ||1||
Brahma, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra beg for the charity of His Praise and devotion to Him. ||1]|
na fame fms Aue Aare Aufs sdait i 1322-2, afers, He 5)
jog gi-aan Dhi-aan saykhnaagai sagal jaapeh tarangee.
Yogis, spiritual teachers, meditators and the thousand-headed serpent all meditate on the Waves of God.
OW asd Hse fears A Us a AS Halt NQUSI 4322-3, afer, ue 5) kaho naanak santan balihaarai jo parabh kay sad sangee. ||2||3]|
Says Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to the Saints, who are the Eternal Companions of God. 21131]
amis HIG UWE 2 (1322-4) kali-aan mehlaa 5 ghar 2 Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
qe Afsars yArfe i 1322-4) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3d nfs ofa afe ute Il (1322-5, afemrs, H2 5) tayrai maan har har maan. Belief in You, Lord, brings honor.
35 8S Aes Hoa nia vidt AY urs wa TIS i 1322-5, afer, ue 5)
nain bain sarvan sunee-ai ang angay sukh paraan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
To see with my eyes, and hear with my ears - every limb and fiber of my being, and my breath of life are in bliss. ||1||Pause| |
fez @3 vs fefh afeG Ha fSafa Mf NA (1322-5, afr, He 5)
it ut dah dis ravi-o mayr tineh samaan. ||1||
Here and there, and in the ten directions You are pervading, in the mountain and the blade of grass. ||1]|
AS ast 33 Udbat afs use ufs usure Il (1322-6, afer, He 5) jat kataa tat paykhee-ai har purakh pat parDhaan. Wherever I look, I see the Lord, the Supreme Lord, the Primal Being.
Wonfa 3H SF fee AA SOX FIN famirs INU (1322-6, afer, He 5)
saaDhsang bharam bhai mitay kathay naanak barahm gi-aan. ||2]||1]||4||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, doubt and fear are dispelled. Nanak speaks the Wisdom of God. ||2||1]|4]|
ates HIB U Il (1322-7)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
Ts Se Ufs mse Fe Il (1322-7, afemrs, v2 5)
gun naad Dhun anand bayd.
The Glory of God is the Sound-current of the Naad, the Celestial Music of Bliss, and the Wisdom of the Vedas.
aas Hos Hfe Hort fife AS Hsst NA TIS Il 1322-8, afters, H2 5)
kathat sunat mun janaa mil sant mandlee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Speaking and listening, the silent sages and humble beings join together, in the Realm of the Saints. ||1||Pause] |
fami fame He BTS HS Sa JAS OH AUS 3g uy Ysat NA (1322-8, afenrs, He 5)
gi-aan Dhi-aan maan daan man rasik rasan naam japat tah paap khandlee. ||1|| Spiritual wisdom, meditation, faith and charity are there; their minds savor the Taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Chanting it, sins are destroyed. ||1||
na Hats fame sats nafs Hae 33 SS AY Zu yNiZat Il 1322-9, afenrs, He 5)
jog jugat gi-aan bhugat surat sabad tat baytay jap tap akhandlee.
This is the technology of Yoga, spiritual wisdom, devotion, intuitive knowledge of the Shabad, certain knowledge of the Essence of Reality, chanting and unbroken intensive meditation.
6fs ufs fife Ais Soa aE TY S STS NANQUUI (1322-10, afemrs, He 5)
ot pot mil jot naanak kachhoo dukh na dandlee. ||2||2||5]|
Through and through, O Nanak, merging into the Light, you shall never again suffer pain and punishment. ||2||2||5]|
atemitg HIG U Il (1322-10)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
age fafa a at aa aa Il 1322-11, afenra, v2 5) ka-un biDh taa kee kahaa kara-o. What should I do, and how should I do it?
ues fomre famre AASfomr or UE AA ATS NU TIC i 1322-11, afer, ne 5) Dharat Dhi-aan gi-aan sastargi-aa ajar pad kaisay jara-o. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Should I center myself in meditation, or study the spiritual wisdom of the Shaastras? How can I endure this unendurable state? ||1||Pause| |
fara Hon fio nfs fear & efs Aafs us Al (1322-12, afemrs, He 5)
bisan mahays siDh mun indraa kai dar saran para-o. ||1]|
Vishnu, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra - at whose door should I seek sanctuary? ||1]|
ag ufs we ag ufs Ase afe HO Hats ATE il (1322-12, afenrs, 3 5)
kaahoo peh raaj kaahoo peh surgaa kot maDhay mukat kaha-o.
Some have power and influence, and some are blessed with heavenly paradise, but out of millions, will anyone find liberation?
AI TSA OH IA ueMat AY BIS TIS WNBWEN (1322-13, afsnrs, us 5) kaho naanak naam ras paa-ee-ai saaDhoo charan gaha-o. ||2||3||6||
Says Nanak, I have attained the Sublime Essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I touch the feet of the Holy. ||2]|3]|6] |
afemits HIS U Il (1322-13)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
yrouts efenies use ys AM Il (1322-14, afemrs, u8 5) paraanpat da-i-aal purakh parabh sakhay. The Lord of the Breath of Life, the Merciful Primal Lord God, is my Friend.
qs rife ate anes ATS BU faoHS dia TS AU TIC Il 1322-14, afenrs, ve 5)
garabh jon kal kaal jaal dukh binaasan har rakhay. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The Lord saves us from the womb of reincarnation and the noose of death in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; He takes away our pain. ||1]|Pause] |
oH Udt Hale Sat il (1322-15, afemrs, He 5) naam Dhaaree saran tayree. I enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within; I seek Your Sanctuary, Lord.
ys efenis Sa At WAU (1322-15, afer, ve 5) parabh da-i-aal tayk mayree. ||1]| O Merciful Lord God, You are my only Support. ||1||
more Ute MITASS Il (1322-15, afters, He 5) anaath deen aasvant. You are the only Hope of the helpless, the meek and the poor.
oy AyMt Hafs HS IH 0322-15, afsnrs, v8 5) naam su-aamee maneh mant. ||2|| Your Name, O my Lord and Master, is the Mantra of the mind. ||2||
33 faa ys fag 5 AS Il (1322-16, afemrs, He 5) tujh binaa parabh kichhoo na jaanoo. I know of nothing except You, God.
Ade Aa His SH US'S Ill (1322-16, afenirs, v2 5) sarab jug meh tum pachhaanoo. ||3]|| Throughout all the ages, I realize You. ||3]||
dfs ufs aA fofa aA Il (1322-16, afer, He 5) har man basay nis baasro. O Lord, You dwell in my mind night and day.
Tse Soa MTA ISIIDI 1322-17, afer, He 5) gobind naanak aasro. ||4]|4]|7]| The Lord of the Universe is Nanak's only Support. ||4]|4]|7]|
ates HIS U Il (1322-17)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
Hfs 3fe AR sas Il (1322-17, aera, He 5) man tan jaapee-ai bhagvaan. Within my mind and body I meditate on the Lord God.
Gd Us AYAS Se Ae AY afemirs AU TIS Il (1322-18, afemrs, us 5)
gur pooray suparsan bha-ay sadaa sookh kali-aan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru is pleased and satisfied; I am blessed with eternal peace and happiness. ||1]|Pause] |
Hea aan fafa se fe ae TUG Il (1322-18, afenrs, us 5)
sarab kaaraj siDh bha-ay gaa-ay gun gupaal.
All affairs are successfuly resolved, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World.
fife AroHats ys fins atom sy ATH IAI (1322-19, afemrs, He 5)
mil saaDhsangat parabhoo simray naathi-aa dukh kaal. ||1]|
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I dwell upon God, and the pain of death is taken away. ||1]|
afs fasur ys Afar as@ feg dfs AS il 1322-19, afters, He 5) kar kirpaa parabh mayri-aa kara-o din rain sayv. Please take pity on me, O my God, that I may serve You day and night.
Yat 9323
TSX UH ATSISt Ts UT UTS SS NQUUNCI (1323-1, afer, Hs 5)
naanak daas sarnaagatee har purakh pooran dayv. ||2||5||8]| Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Perfect, Divine Primal Being. [12] 15] 181]
atemitg HIS U Il (1323-1)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
ug Ha nissat WE Il (1323-1, afer, Hs 5) parabh mayraa antarjaamee jaan. My God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts.
ats fasu use UsHAS forse AY Aa stATS IA TITS i (1323-2, afemirs, ve 5) kar kirpaa pooran parmaysar nihchal sach sabad neesaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Take pity on me, O Perfect Transcendent Lord; bless me with the True Eternal Insignia of the Shabad, the Word of God. ||1]|Pause] |
dfs faa ure 3 aet ANGE Sat oA Sa nfs STE Il (1323-2, afenra, He 5)
har bin aan na ko-ee samrath tayree aas tayraa man taan.
O Lord, other than You, no one is all-powerful. You are the Hope and the Strength of my mind.
Hea wet a as Ant efo A ufsde WES IU (1323-3, afemrs, He 5)
sarab ghataa kay daatay su-aamee deh so pahiran khaan. ||1]|
You are the Giver to the hearts of all beings, O Lord and Master. I eat and wear whatever You give me. ||1]|
Hats His vseet Ast Ty Sa US HE Il (1323-4, afer, ws 5)
surat mat chaturaa-ee sobhaa roop rang Dhan maan.
Intuitive understanding, wisdom and cleverness, glory and beauty, pleasure, wealth and honor,
Aga AY Hise stad Af TH SH Atoms NQUENCN (1323-4, afemrs, Hs 5)
sarab sookh aanand naanak jap raam naam kali-aan. ||2||6]|9||
all comforts, bliss, happiness and salvation, O Nanak, come by chanting the Lord's Name. ||2||6]|9]|
atemitg HIG U Il (1323-5)
kali-aan mehlaa 5. Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:
dfs BIS Ads ates ATS Il (1323-5, afer, He 5) har charan saran kali-aan karan. The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet bring salvation.
us oH ufss uSs IA TIC Il (1323-5, afer, ue 5) parabh naam patit paavno. ||1]|| rahaa-o. God's Name is the Purifier of sinners. ||1]|Pause| |
Forfa vfu feta AHaTS FSA S WSS NU (1323-6, afenrs, He 5)
saaDhsang jap nisang jamkaal tis na khaavno. ||1]|
Whoever chants and meditates in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall undoubtedly escape being consumed by the Messenger of Death. ||1]|
Hats Fats uifsa AY af safs BS F BSS I (1323-6, afers, us 5)
mukat jugat anik sookh har bhagat lavai na laavno.
Liberation, the key to success, and all sorts of comforts do not equal loving devotional worship of the Lord.
US UA SIT VA Sod safes Hfs 6 WSS MUDIUAON (1323-7, afer, He 5) parabh daras lubaDh daas naanak bahurh jon na Dhaavno. ||2||7||10]|
Slave Nanak longs for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan; he shall never again wander in reincarnation. ||2||||7||10||
afemis HIS 8 MAeUudnIT II (1323-8)
kali-aan mehlaa 4 asatpadee-aa. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars YATE il (1323-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH SH TH fs HS Ste Il (1323-9, afenrs, He 4) raamaa ram raamo sun man bheejai. Hearing the Name of the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, my mind is drenched with joy.
ofa of on nifys oA Hier gents Aon UA NA TIE Il 1323-9, afemrs, He 4)
har har naam amrit ras meethaa gurmat sehjay peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar, the most Sweet and Sublime Essence; through the Guru's Teachings, drink it in with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause] |
ane ufo fa@ od Sead nfa Hath ofe aeta i (1323-10, afr, He 4)
kaasat meh ji-o hai baisantar math sanjam kaadh kadheejai.
The potential energy of fire is within the wood; it is released if you know how to rub it and generate friction.
oH On 0 fs AEet 3s Tes ate EIA INA (1323-10, afemrs, He 4)
raam naam hai jot sabaa-ee tat gurmat kaadh la-eejai. ||1]|
In just the same way, the Lord's Name is the Light within all; the Essence is extracted by following the Guru's Teachings. ||1]|
OG BIsH o@ Ud aa aH Nifys TAS VER I (1323-11, afters, ne 4)
na-o darvaaj navay dar feekay ras amrit dasvay chu-eejai.
There are nine doors, but the taste of these nine doors is bland and insipid. The Essence of Ambrosial Nectar trickles down through the Tenth Door.
four fur fosur afe fimrs as Aaet ofs oA UA IQI 1323-11, afemrs, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kirpaa kar pi-aaray gur sabdee har ras peejai. ||2||
Please take pity on me - be kind and compassionate, O my Beloved, that I may drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2| |
afent odd dad J dla fefs AGet die IA ate I (1323-12, afer, He 4)
kaa-i-aa nagar nagar hai neeko vich sa-udaa har ras keejai.
The body-village is the most sublime and exalted village, in which the merchandise of the Lord's Sublime Essence is traded.
I36 WS WHS wise Afsas AST SA WI (1323-12, afenrs, He 4)
ratan laal amol amolak satgur sayvaa leejai. ||3] |
The most precious and priceless gems and jewels are obtained by serving the True Guru. ||3||
Afsag wan wan I oad fs Aa sats Ad Il 1323-13, afenrs, He 4) satgur agam agam hai thaakur bhar saagar bhagat kareejai.
The True Guru is Inaccessible; Inaccessible is our Lord and Master. He is the overflowing Ocean of bliss - worship Him with loving devotion.
faur fur ate de oH Afsa fea ge oy Hie SA si 7323-14, afer, Hs 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kar deen ham saaring ik boond naam mukh deejai. | |4| |
Please take pity on me, and be Merciful to this meek song-bird; please pour a drop of Your Name into my mouth. ||4]|
TOSS BS WS J Ido HO dao AC Te SH Il (1323-14, afenrs, v2 4)
laalan laal laal hai rangan man rangan ka-o gur deejai.
O Beloved Lord, please color my mind with the Deep Crimson Color of Your Love; I have surrendered my mind to the Guru.
oH IH TH df TS IA aAa aea fos ulA Mull (1323-15, afenrs, He 4)
raam raam raam rang raatay ras rasik gatak nit peejai. ||5||
Those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, continually drink in this essence in big gulps, savoring its sweet taste. ||5]|
aAu Aus dy d Aad afe ave ate Udi I (1323-15, afenrs, He 4)
basuDhaa sapat deep hai saagar kadh kanchan kaadh Dhareejai.
If all the gold of the seven continents and the oceans was taken out and placed before them,
Hd oad a Ao fea 3 Wels ofs wats afe aA UIA NEI (1323-16, afer, He 4)
mayray thaakur kay jan inahu na baachheh har maageh har ras deejai. | |6| |
the humble servants of my Lord and Master would not even want it. They beg for the Lord to bless them with the Lord's Sublime Essence. ||6||
Was 3d YSt Ae su fos sas sa ASA I (1323-17, afers, ue 4)
saakat nar paraanee sad bhookhay nit bhookhan bhookh kareejai.
The faithless cynics and mortal beings remain hungry forever; they continually cry out in hunger.
wes ofe ofa uifs wfimr ou ane a fafa Sh DI 1323-17, afemrs, He 4) Dhaavat Dhaa-ay Dhaaveh pareet maa-i-aa lakh kosan ka-o bith deejai. ||7]|
They hurry and run, and wander all around, caught in the love of Maya; they cover hundreds of thousands of miles in their wanderings. ||7| |
ofs ofa afe fs afs Ae SSH fomr Guor fq St I 1323-18, afemrs, ws 4)
har har har har har jan ootam ki-aa upmaa tin" deejai.
The humble servants of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, are sublime and exalted. What praise can we bestow upon them?
Yat 9328
TH OH sf meg 5 Bunt Ae Soa faur ada NCU (1324-1, afemrs, He 4)
raam naam tul a-or na upmaa jan naanak kirpaa kareejai. ||8||1||
Nothing else can equal the Glory of the Lord's Name; please bless servant Nanak with Your Grace. ||8]||1]|
ates HIS 8 Il (1324-1)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
TH TT USA USA APA Il (1324-1, afemra, He 4) raam gur paaras paras kareejai. O Lord, please bless me with the Touch of the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone.
oH fovaet Hos ifs de fife Afsae usA att A TIS Il 1324-2, afenrs, vs 4) ham nirgunee manoor at feekay mil satgur paaras keejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I was unworthy, utterly useless, rusty slag; meeting with the True Guru, I was transformed by the Philosopher's Stone. ||1]|Pause| |
Hea Hats sao Afs sets fafs nmr orA ad Il (1324-2, afemrs, He 4) surag mukat baikunth sabh baa™chheh nit aasaa aas kareejai. Everyone longs for paradise, liberation and heaven; all place their hopes in them.
dfs vane & AS Hats 3 Hats ffs vane fFufs Ho Ut NA (1324-3, afmrs, Hs 4)
har darsan kay jan mukat na maa‘geh mil darsan taripat man Dheejai. ||1]|
The humble long for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; they do not ask for liberation. Their minds are satisfied and comforted by His Darshan. ||1]|
Her Hg AES Jd avd HT ATHY Va Baile Il (1324-4, aera, ne 4)
maa-i-aa moh sabal hai bhaaree moh kaalakh daag lageejai.
Emotional attachment to Maya is very powerful; this attachment is a black stain which Sticks.
Hd Sag a Ao nifseus 3 Has fae nearet Ua o SIA III (1324-4, afemrs, He 4) mayray thaakur kay jan alipat hai muktay ji-o murgaa-ee pank na bheejai. ||2| |
The humble servants of my Lord and Master are unattached and liberated. They are like ducks, whose feathers do not get wet. ||2| |
dee aA sfenian eat fas fit dee at Il (1324-5, afemre, He 4)
chandan vaas bhu-i-angam vayrhee kiv milee-ai chandan leejai.
The fragrant sandalwood tree is encircled by snakes; how can anyone get to the sandalwood?
afte usa ad famre aga fry fe Sfe oA UIA ISI 1324-6, afters, He 4)
kaadh kharhag gur gi-aan karaaraa bikh chhayd chhayd ras peejai. ||3]|
Drawing out the Mighty Sword of the Guru's Spiritual Wisdom, I slaughter and kill the poisonous snakes, and drink in the Sweet Nectar. ||3]|
wife ntfs AHO ag alot US SHST SAH AA Il (1324-6, afm, He 4) aan aan samDhaa baho keenee pal baisantar bhasam kareejai. You may gather wood and stack it in a pile, but in an instant, fire reduces it to ashes.
He Sq uu AAS og ate fife ATG wat StH USI (1324-7, afer, He 4)
mahaa ugar paap saakat nar keenay mil saaDhoo lookee deejai. | |4| |
The faithless cynic gathers the most horrendous sins, but meeting with the Holy Saint, they are placed in the fire. ||4| |
AQ ATC AT Ao ole fits wists on Ost I (1324-8, afer, Hs 4)
saaDhoo saaDh saaDh jan neekay jin antar naam Dhareejai.
The Holy, Saintly devotees are sublime and exalted. They enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, deep within.
udH fousH se ATU He AS ofa saree feats Null (1324-8, afenrs, Hs 4)
paras nipras bha-ay saaDhoo jan jan har bhagvaan dikheejai. ||5||
By the touch of the Holy and the humble servants of the Lord, the Lord God is seen. [511
Was AS ad Test stout fas ats ae Tah I (1324-9, afemrs, us 4)
Saakat soot baho gurjhee bhari-aa ki-o kar taan taneejai.
The thread of the faithless cynic is totally knotted and tangled; how can anything be woven with it?
33 AS fag fear odt WAS Aa 3 Ate MEI (1324-9, afemrs, Hs 4) tant soot kichh niksai naahee saakat sang na keejai. ||6| |
This thread cannot be woven into yarn; do not associate with those faithless cynics. [16] |
Afsas WoHafs 3 otet fife Hats oy setH II 1324-10, afemrs, He 4)
satgur saaDhsangat hai neekee mil sangat raam raveejai.
The True Guru and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, are exalted and sublime. Joining the Congregation, meditate on the Lord.
Wists Io Aedd Hea Td fagut 3 SA NDI (1324-10, afer, He 4)
antar ratan javayhar maanak gur kirpaa tay leejai. ||7]||
The gems, jewels and precious stones are deep within; by Guru's Grace, they are found. ||7]|
Ha Stag Tat Sat I AMM GH fa ats fires frets | 1324-11, afenrs, ue 4) mayraa thaakur vadaa vadaa hai su-aamee ham ki-o kar milah mileejai. My Lord and Master is Glorious and Great. How can I be united in His Union?
aed Ais frre Ts uT Ae AS ysS SA UCI (1324-12, afer, Hs 4)
naanak mayl milaa-ay gur pooraa jan ka-o pooran deejai. ||8||2||
O Nanak, the Perfect Guru unites His humble servant in His Union, and blesses him with perfection. ||8]|2||
atemitg HIG 8 Il (1324-12)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
TH SH TH IH Tete Il (1324-13, afer, He 4) raamaa ram raamo raam raveejai. Chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the All-pervading Lord.
Ag AG AG Ao Ole ffs AY fe Sa att UA TIS Ul (1324-13, aferrs, we 4) saaDhoo saaDh saaDh jan neekay mil saaDhoo har rang keejai. ||1]| rahaa-o. The Holy, the humble and Holy, are noble and sublime. Meeting with the Holy, I joyfully love the Lord. ||1]||Pause] |
Ht HS AS Ad dD AS Ho 3Gs 3G Adin Il 1324-14, afters, He 4) jee-a jant sabh jag hai jaytaa man dolat dol kareejai. The minds of all the beings and creatures of the world waver unsteadily.
four faur afs vg fereg Aa GHe aC SH StH NA 1324-14, afemrs, He 4)
kirpaa kirpaa kar saaDh milaavhu jag thamman ka-o thamm deejai. ||1]|
Please take pity on them, be merciful to them, and unite them with the Holy; establish this support to support the world. ||1]|
aAT 38 38 AS Cute fife AG Vas Fo Il (1324-15, afenrs, He 4)
basuDhaa talai talai sabh oopar mil saaDhoo charan ruleejai.
The earth is beneath us, and yet its dust falls down on all; let yourself be covered by the dust of the feet of the Holy.
mits QsuH nifs 3H deg AS frAfe BIS 3H TA MM (1324-15, afers, Hs 4)
at ootam at ootam hovhu sabh sisat charan tal deejai. ||2]| You shall be utterly exalted, the most noble and sublime of all; the whole world will place itself at your feet. ||2]|
aan Afs set fre stot orfs ust Hats SdH Il (1324-16, afenrs, He 4)
gurmukh jot bhalee siv neekee aan paanee sakat bhareejai.
The Gurmukhs are blessed with the Divine Light of the Lord; Maya comes to serve them.
Hoes fsan as avot Ave ofa off afe om UiA ISI (1324-17, afer, He 4)
maindant niksay gur bachnee saar chab chab har ras peejai. ||3]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, they bite with teeth of wax and chew iron, drinking in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||3]|
TH OH MOGg ag ater ge AY yee fests Il (1324-17, afer, Hs 4)
raam naam anoograhu baho kee-aa gur saaDhoo purakh mileejai.
The Lord has shown great mercy, and bestowed His Name; I have met with the Holy Guru, the Primal Being.
qs TH on fandige ale dfs Aas Seo AA UIA ISI (1324-18, afenrs, He 4)
gun raam naam bistheeran kee-ay har sagal bhavan jas deejai. ||4||
The Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name have spread out everywhere; the Lord bestows fame all over the world. ||4]|
Arg ATG ATC His UisH fas Fa ofs  AatA Il (1324-18, afemrs, we 4)
saaDhoo saaDh saaDh man pareetam bin daykhay reh na sakeejai.
The Beloved Lord is within the minds of the Holy, the Holy Saadhus; without seeing Him, they cannot survive.
fA Ae His Ae Ae UIs o fre Ae fas Sfe HetA NU (1324-19, afer, Hs 4)
ji-o jal meen jala™ jal pareet hai khin jal bin foot mareejai. ||5||
The fish in the water loves only the water. Without water, it bursts and dies in an instant. ||5||
Yat 9B2Qu
Ho visa vista 3 fas & fe ATT Of o Ube II (1325-1, afer, He 4)
mahaa abhaag abhaag hai jin kay tin saaDhoo Dhoor na peejai.
Those who have terrible luck and bad fortune do not drink in the water which washes the dust of the feet of the Holy.
for FAS ASS ASS sot asta Ss TSH TS oF ee MEN (1325-1, afemrs, He 4)
tinaa tisnaa jalat jalat nahee boojheh dand Dharam raa-ay kaa deejai. ||6| |
The burning fire of their desires is not extinguished; they are beaten and punished by the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||6]|
Afs Stee was Fa Us ate foe aris ares Sq St I 1325-2, afemrs, ve 4)
sabh tirath barat jag-y punn kee-ay hivai gaal gaal tan chheejai.
You may visit all the sacred shrines, observe fasts and sacred feasts, give generously in charity and waste away the body, melting it in the snow.
WIS 3G TH OH J THs & UA 3 3B SSI IDI 1325-3, afer, ne 4)
atulaa tol raam naam hai gurmat ko pujai na tol tuleejai. ||7||
The weight of the Lord's Name is unweighable, according to the Guru's Teachings; nothing can equal its weight. ||7]|
3z TS YH YH F Wala Aa sea als Usa Il (1325-3, afenrs, ws 4) tav gun barahm barahm too jaaneh jan naanak saran pareejai. O God, You alone know Your Glorious Virtues. Servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary.
3 Fe fofa His on 33 ate four Afat Ta ICSI 1325-4, afer, Hs 4)
too jal niDh meen ham tayray kar kirpaa sang rakheejai. ||8||3]|
You are the Ocean of water, and I am Your fish. Please be kind, and keep me always with You. ||8]|3]|
ates HIS 8 Il (1325-5)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
TH SH TH UA Aaa Il (1325-5, afemrs, He 4) raamaa ram raamo pooj kareejai. I worship and adore the Lord, the All-pervading Lord.
He 30 wafu us@ AS ye oA TENS famrg festa na TIC i 1325-5, afer, ne 4) man tan arap Dhara-o sabh aagai ras gurmat gi-aan darirheejai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I surrender my mind and body, and place everything before Him; following the Guru's Teachings, spiritual wisdom is implanted within me. ||1||Pause| |
qo oH Te AY sded fos yfs vfs UA ASIA II (1325-6, afemrs, we 4)
barahm naam gun saakh tarovar nit chun chun pooj kareejai.
God's Name is the tree, and His Glorious Virtues are the branches. Picking and gathering up the fruit, I worship Him.
MISH SE 2G o orgy ah ord UA ASA IU (1325-6, afm, He 4) aatam day-o day-o hai aatam ras laagai pooj kareejai. ||1]| The soul is divine; divine is the soul. Worship Him with love. ||1]|
fasa sfa ns na nfs foone faefs feof om Uta I (1325-7, afemrs, He 4)
bibayk buDh sabh jag meh nirmal bichar bichar ras peejai. One of keen intellect and precise understanding is immaculate in all this world. In thoughtful consideration, he drinks in the sublime essence.
ag ure uersg ufeur Afsas a@ feg Ho SH IQI (1325-8, afemrs, He 4) gur parsaad padaarath paa-i-aa satgur ka-o ih man deejai. ||2]| By Guru's Grace, the treasure is found; dedicate this mind to the True Guru. ||2]|
fasHad uifs dtd sta dtd die facta it (1325-8, afemrs, ue 4)
nirmolak at heero neeko heerai heer biDheejai.
Priceless and utterly sublime is the Diamond of the Lord. This Diamond pierces the diamond of the mind.
HO HSt AS Id ad Aaet fas dtr uate SSA ISI (1325-9, afer, He 4)
man motee saal hai gur sabdee jit heeraa parakh la-eejai. ||3]|
The mind becomes the jeweller, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; it appraises the Diamond of the Lord. ||3]|
Hats AS Afar ofa Ss fas uty usA ates SA Il (1325-9, afemrs, vs 4)
sangat sant sang lag oochay ji-o peep palaas khaa-ay leejai.
Attaching oneself to the Society of the Saints, one is exalted and uplifted, as the palaas tree is absorbed by the peepal tree.
AS 3d Hfe yrat SSH TS TH SH FA SAMA ISI (1325-10, afer, Hs 4)
sabh nar meh paraanee ootam hovai raam naamai baas baseejai. | |4| |
That mortal being is supreme among all people, who is perfumed by the fragrance of the Lord's Name. ||4||
fsaHe fasHe adH a0 até fos Anat odt AST II (1325-11, afeors, He 4)
nirmal nirmal karam baho keenay nit saakhaa haree jarheejai.
One who continually acts in goodness and immaculate purity, sprouts green branches in great abundance.
UdH 3 2 afs fomre fearfeur goers aA afar SA ull 4325-11, afters, He 4) Dharam ful fal gur gi-aan drirh-aa-i-aa behkaar baas jag deejai. ||5||
The Guru has taught me that Dharmic faith is the flower, and spiritual wisdom is the fruit; this fragrance permeates the world. ||5]|
fa afs ea nfs efi As yan fenfe fea att Il (1325-12, afer, ue 4) ayk jot ayko man vasi-aa sabh barahm darisat ik keejai. The One, the Light of the One, abides within my mind; God, the One, is seen in all.
WISH TH AS Sa I uA AS Vso 3G fig UIA MEN (1325-12, afer, He 4)
aatam raam sabh aykai hai pasray sabh charan talay sir deejai. ||6||
The One Lord, the Supreme Soul, is spread out everywhere; all place their heads beneath His Feet. ||6]|
on fast sae og tug fae wih wih oe SetH II 1325-13, afemrs, He 4)
naam binaa naktay nar daykhhu tin ghas ghas naak vadheejai.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, people look like criminals with their noses cut off; bit by bit, their noses are cut off.
Has od ndardt adbufs fas oe fog AAA DI 1325-14, afm, Hs 4) saakat nar aha‘kaaree kahee-ahi bin naavai Dharig jeeveejai. ||7]| The faithless cynics are called egotistical; without the Name, their lives are cursed.
II7II
AWG Bd AA AA Ho Mists 3s Aas Hale ude Il 1325-14, afemre, He 4)
jab lag saas saas man antar tat baygal saran pareejai.
As long as the breath breathes through the mind deep within, hurry and seek God's Sanctuary.
aed four faur afs osg HA vas Ue ICISI (1325-15, fens, He 4)
naanak kirpaa kirpaa kar Dhaarahu mai saaDhoo charan pakheejai. ||8]|4||
Please shower Your Kind Mercy and take pity upon Nanak, that he may wash the feet of the Holy. ||8]|4]|
afemis HIS 8 Il (1325-16)
kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
TH HAT BIS Tet Il (1325-16, afew, we 4) raamaa mai saaDhoo charan Dhuveejai. O Lord, I wash the feet of the Holy.
faofsu vue dfs fis nists He cag fasur att A TIS Il 1325-16, afemrs, He 4) kilbikh dahan hohi khin antar mayray thaakur kirpaa keejai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
May my sins be burnt away in an instant; O my Lord and Master, please bless me with Your Mercy. ||1]||Pause] |
Has Hoe te ud ufe oe mis sane AG we SH Il (1325-17, afemrs, He 4)
mangat jan deen kharay dar thaadhay at tarsan ka-o daan deejai.
The meek and humble beggars stand begging at Your Door. Please be generous and give to those who are yearning.
af afo nafs ys wre 4 aS TeHfS on fest AU (1325-17, afemrs, He 4)
taraahi taraahi saran parabh aa-ay mo ka-o gurmat naam darirheejai. ||1] |
Save me, save me, O God - I have come to Your Sanctuary. Please implant the Guru's Teachings, and the Naam within me. ||1]|
OH Ady sad Hig Aa fos Sfs SiS FS Ade Il (1325-18, afer, Hs 4)
kaam karoDh nagar meh sablaa nit uth uth joojh kareejai.
Sexual desire and anger are very powerful in the body-village; I rise up to fight the battle against them.
nidherg aay sfi SeT TT uT ats TSA QI (1325-19, afemrs, vs 4) angeekaar karahu rakh layvhu gur pooraa kaadh kadheejai. ||2|| Please make me Your Own and save me; through the Perfect Guru, I drive them out.
[121] wists wats Aa mifs fafimr foe Hise Age Te ete Il 1325-19, afemre, He 4)
antar agan sabal at bikhi-aa hiv seetal sabad gur deejai. The powerful fire of corruption is raging violently within; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the ice water which cools and soothes.
UST IE 3fs His AMS ofe nifderet da are Aft ASA SI (1326-1, afenrs, He 4)
tan man saa‘t ho-ay aDhikaa-ee rog kaatai sookh saveejai. ||3]| My mind and body are calm and tranquil; the disease has been cured, and now I sleep in peace. ||3]|
fa Hen fase sor Aaa oet AS ule wie TH Te Il (1326-2, afemrs, we 4)
ji-o sooraj kiran ravi-aa sarab thaa-ee sabh ghat ghat raam raveejai.
As the rays of the sun spread out everywhere, the Lord pervades each and every heart.
Arg ATC fHS 3A ure 3g for wis Sfonr uty ell (1326-2, afer, we 4)
saaDhoo saaDh milay ras paavai tat nij ghar baithi-aa peejai. ||4||
Meeting the Holy Saint, one drinks in the Sublime Essence of the Lord; sitting in the home of your own inner being, drink in the essence. ||4||
Wo ag uUlfs walt Te ASt fA vat Sf ASA II (1326-3, afer, Hs 4)
jan ka-o pareet lagee gur saytee ji-o chakvee daykh sooreejai.
The humble being is in love with the Guru, like the chakvi bird which loves to see the sun.
fosus fosus fs As faadt uy are nifgs uty Hull 4326-4, afm, He 4)
nirkhat nirkhat rain sabh nirkhee mukh kaadhai amrit peejai. ||5||
She watches, and keeps on watching all through the night; and when the sun shows its face, she drinks in the Amrit. ||5]|
Has Ans admits ag Set aT Pans AS SdH Il (1326-4, afer, He 4)
saakat su-aan kahee-ahi baho lobhee baho durmat mail bhareejai.
The faithless cynic is said to be very greedy - he is a dog. He is overflowing with the filth and pollution of evil-mindedness.
nus Hote asts ag ast fsar ar fers fom ath Ell (1326-5, afer, He 4) aapan sSu-aa-ay karahi baho baataa tinaa kaa visaahu ki-aa keejai. ||6|| He talks excessively about his own interests. How can he be trusted? ||6] |
Ag ATG Ate fife Hats fs ate oA ote aetA Il (1326-6, afemrs, Hs 4)
saaDhoo saaDh saran mil sangat jit har ras kaadh kadheejai. I have sought the Sanctuary of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I have found the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
usguars safs so ger yfy AS sas dfs IA NDI (1326-6, afenrs, He 4)
par-upkaar boleh baho gunee-aa mukh sant bhagat har deejai. ||7]|
They do good deeds for others, and speak of the Lord's many Glorious Virtues; please bless me to meet these Saints, these devotees of the Lord. ||7]||
3 ofan fens efenr ufs ast AS efenr ofa af BA Il (1326-7, afemrs, we 4) too agam da-i-aal da-i-aa pat daataa sabh da-i-aa Dhaar rakh leejai.
You are the Inaccessible Lord, Kind and Compassionate, the Great Giver; please shower us with Your Mercy, and save us.
Aaa dba wales Sa aoa ufsurs ashy CUI (1326-8, afemrs, He 4)
sarab jee-a jagjeevan ayko naanak partipaal kareejai. ||8||5||
You are the Life of all the beings of the world; please cherish and sustain Nanak. [8] 15] |
atemig HIS g Il (1326-8) kali-aan mehlaa 4. Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:
TH JH BAS BA AA Il (1326-8, afer, He 4) raamaa ham daasan daas kareejai. O Lord, please make me the slave of Your slaves.
ma ofa ATA ofe Ho nists AG Ofe fut NU TTS Ml 1326-9, afer, ue 4)
jab lag saas ho-ay man antar saaDhoo Dhoor piveejai. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
As long as there is breath deep within my mind, let me drink in the dust of the Holy. ||1]|Pause| |
Hog ade AYaTa His Ufs AY at SUA Il (1326-9, afemrs, Hs 4)
sankar naarad saykhnaag mun Dhoor saaDhoo kee locheejai.
Shiva, Naarad, the thousand-headed cobra king and the silent sages long for the dust of the Holy.
320 326 ules afa Als AT AY Vso Tee NA (1326-10, afer, He 4) bhavan bhavan pavit hohi sabh jah saaDhoo charan Dhareejai. ||1]| All the worlds and realms where the Holy place their feet are sanctified. ||1]|
ft oH nag As SH fife ATG Afar Tat Il (1326-11, afemrs, He 4)
taj laaj aha‘kaar sabh tajee-ai mil saaDhoo sang raheejai.
So let go of your shame and renounce all your egotism; join with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and remain there.
UeH afe at ate yore faa sae orfe aete IQH (1326-11, afenrs, He 4)
Dharam raa-ay kee kaan chukhaavai bikh dubdaa kaadh kadheejai. | |2| |
Give up your fear of the Righteous Judge of Dharma, and you shall be lifted up and saved from drowning in the sea of poison. ||2]|
soft Aa ag Cfs Ha adits ffs ATG Fifer Tats Il 1326-12, afemrs, Hs 4)
bharam sookay baho ubh suk kahee-ahi mil saaDhoo sang hareejai.
Some are standing, parched and shrivelled up by their doubts; joining the Saadh Sangat, they are rejuvenated.
3 3 faoy us feo 3 ate ate vg vale wall SI (1326-12, afemrs, Hs 4) taa tay bilam pal dhil na keejai jaa-ay saaDhoo charan lageejai. ||3|| So do not delay, even for an instant - go and fall at the feet of the Holy. ||3]|
TH OH atese 335 SE ofa AT UTA TIA I (1326-13, afemirs, He 4)
raam naam keertan ratan vath har saaDhoo paas rakheejai.
The Kirtan of the Praise of the Lord's Name is a priceless jewel. The Lord has given it for the Holy to keep.
Aq ave ad Afs Afs afe we fSH ora ote OIA IISII (1326-14, afemra, He 4)
jo bachan gur sat sat kar maanai tis aagai kaadh Dhareejai. ||4||
Whoever accepts and follows the Word of the Guru's Teachings as True - this Jewel is taken out and given to him. ||4||
santahu sunhu sunhu jan bhaa-ee gur kaadhee baah kukeejai. Listen, O Saints; listen, humble Siblings of Destiny: the Guru raises His Arms and sends out the call.
A TSH a@ AY AY fos Sag Si Afsag Aafs UStA NUIl (1326-15, afemra, He 4)
jay aatam ka-o sukh sukh nit lorhahu taa™ satgur saran paveejai. ||5||
If you long for everlasting peace and comfort for your soul, then enter the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||5]|
A es aa df nfs star st gents on feSth Il 1326-16, afm, He 4)
jay vad bhaag ho-ay at neekaa taa™ gurmat naam darirheejai.
If you have great good fortune and are very noble, then implant the Guru's Teachings and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within.
AS Wenn Hg fey Aa sdbat Aon Ufe aA UA NEI (1326-16, afenrs, He 4)
sabh maa-i-aa moh bikham jag taree-ai sehjay har ras peejai. ||6||
Emotional attachment to Maya is totally treacherous; drinking in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, you shall easily, intuitively cross over the world-ocean. ||6||
Hfeor yfeor & FH uiftaret fefe ufeor ud udth Il (1326-17, afer, He 4) maa-i-aa maa-i-aa kay jo aDhikaa-ee vich maa-i-aa pachai pacheejai. Those who are totally in love with Maya, Maya, shall rot away in Maya.
mifemre nits Ho Ug faust uote ofa ofe StH IDI 1326-18, afenrs, He 4)
agi-aan anDhayr mahaa panth bikh-rhaa aha"kaar bhaar lad leejai. ||7]|
The path of ignorance and darkness is utterly treacherous; they are loaded down with the crushing load of egotism. ||7||
Sod TH IH GH GH GH TH FS ats ale Il (1326-18, afer, v2 4) naanak raam ram ram ram ram raamai tay gat keejai. O Nanak, chanting the Name of the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, one is emancipated.
Afsag fxs so oH fess IH on aS firsts CIE! (1326-19, afters, He 4) satgur milai taa naam drirh-aa-ay raam naamai ralai mileejai. ||8]|6]|
Meeting the True Guru, the Naam is implanted within; we are united and blended with the Lord's Name. ||8]|6]|
sat 4 Il (1326-19)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six||
Ust 9329 qe Asan aes usy forse fares nieve Hats nigel AS as YATE I 0327-1)
ik-o‘kaar satnaam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ta ussst fasta Hoe 9 Beue we 4 Il 4327-3) raag parbhaatee bibhaas mehlaa 1 cha-upday ghar 1. Raag Parbhaatee Bibhaas, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
oe so seer ote ufS uA Il (1327-4, ys frsrH, He 1) naa-ay tayrai tarnaa naa-ay pat pooj. Your Name carries us across; Your Name brings respect and worship.
oS ST Tet HS HAE Il (1327-4, ysrst fasTH, He 1) naa-o tayraa gahnaa mat maksood. Your Name embellishes us; it is the object of the awakened mind.
ofe 33 a Hd AS Ate I 1327-4, ysrst faarA, He 1) naa-ay tayrai naa-o mannay sabh ko-ay. Your Name brings honor to everyone's name.
fee ore ufs agg o ofe NU 1327-5, ysrst fasTA, He 1) vin naavai pat kabahu na ho-ay. ||1|| Without Your Name, no one is ever respected. ||1]|
med fAuireu Aart UA Il (1327-5, ysrst fasrm, He 1) avar si-aanap saglee paaj. All other clever tricks are just for show.
AMMA S UT AT UU TIS ll (1327-5, ysrst fram, we 1)
jai bakhsay tai pooraa kaaj. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Whoever the Lord blesses with forgiveness - his affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1]|Pause| |
ag 3a ste oS laeS Il (1327-6, yorst fasrn, He 1) naa-o tayraa taan naa-o deebaan. Your Name is my strength; Your Name is my support.
a 3a BAA S'S ABS} Il (1327-6, ysrst fara, He 1) naa-o tayraa laskar naa-o sultaan. Your Name is my army; Your Name is my king.
ofe 3d HS HIF UdSTE Il (1327-6, ystst fasTH, He 1) naa-ay tayrai maan mahat parvaan. Your Name brings honor, glory and approval.
Sot oedt aot us StS M21 1327-7, ysrst fas, He 1) tayree nadree karam pavai neesaan. ||2|| By Your Grace, one is blessed with the banner and the insignia of Your Mercy. ||2||
ofe 33 AoA ote ATT Il (1327-7, ust fearA, He 1) naa-ay tayrai sahj naa-ay saalaah. Your Name brings intuitive peace and poise; Your Name brings praise.
oe 3a nifys fay Cfo Ate I 1327-7, ust fasrH, He 1) naa-o tayraa amrit bikh uth jaa-ay. Your Name is the Ambrosial Nectar which cleans out the poison.
ofe 33 vfs AY ents Hf wrfe I (1327-8, ysrst faarn, He 1) naa-ay tayrai sabh sukh vaseh man aa-ay. Through Your Name, all peace and comfort comes to abide in the mind.
fag oe aot wn ufs Ate SI (1327-8, ysrst fasrH, He 1)
bin naavai baaDhee jam pur jaa-ay. ||3]|
Without the Name, they are bound and gagged, and dragged off to the City of Death. [1311
Oat Fat We Sd SA Il (1327-8, ysrst fasrn, He 1)
naaree bayree ghar dar days. Man is involved with his wife, hearth and home, land and country,
Ho abort ure atefs SA il 4327-9, ysrst fran, He 1) man kee-aa khusee-aa keecheh vays. the pleasures of the mind and fine clothes;
at Ae 3t fee 3 ute Il (1327-9, ysst farm, He 1) jaa‘ saday taa™ dhil na paa-ay. but when the call comes, he cannot delay.
aed ag as se ATE Snail 1327-9, ysrst fasrA, we 1) naanak koorh koorho ho-ay jaa-ay. ||4||1]| O Nanak, in the end, the false turn out to be false. ||4||1]|
ystTst HIS % Il (1327-10)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
37 BH Io AGH Woes Hafs fsa SE il 1327-10, ysst, ve
tayraa naam ratan karam chaanan surat tithai lo-ay.
Your Name is the Jewel, and Your Grace is the Light. In awareness, there is Your Light.
nite vidt sud Aare Str ME Wall 1327-10, ysrst, Hes anDhayr anDhee vaaprai sagal leejai kho-ay. ||1|| Darkness fills the dark, and then everything is lost. ||1]|
feg HATS Aare fears i 1327-11, ysrst, He 1) ih sansaar sagal bikaar. This whole world is corrupt.
3T OY WT weg oAls aTeog mug NU TIS i (1327-11, ysrst, v2 1) tayraa naam daaroo avar naasat karanhaar apaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your Name is the only cure; nothing else works, O Infinite Creator Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
uss Udit Sa arg defs wre Shs I 1327-12, ysst, v2 1) paataal puree-aa ayk bhaar hoveh laakh karorh. One side of the scale holds tens of thousands, millions of nether regions and realms.
30 we ahs st ue at fd Jefe dfs i (1327-12, ysrst, He 1)
tayray laal keemat taa pavai jaa™ sirai hoveh hor. ||2||
O my Beloved, Your Worth could only be estimated if something else could be placed on the other side of the scale. ||2||
Yat 9B2Qt
ear 3 AY Qunta Wet Jefe ee Ml (1328-1, yest, we 1) dookhaa tay sukh oopjahi sookhee hoveh dookh. Out of pain, pleasure is produced, and out of pleasure comes pain.
fag ufa 3 Prednis fss yfs oat su SN (328-1, yas, Hs 1) jit mukh too salaahee-ah tit mukh kaisee bhookh. ||3]| That mouth which praises You - what hunger could that mouth ever suffer? ||3]||
Boa HIY SAX FJ vleT SH" AA Il (1328-2, ysrst, we 1) naanak moorakh ayk too avar bhalaa saisaar. O Nanak, you alone are foolish; all the rest of the world is good.
fag 3fs oH 3 Gun A 38 dfs ynre Si (328-2, yest, we 1) jit tan naam na oopjai say tan hohi khu-aar. ||4||2||
That body in which the Naam does not well up - that body becomes miserable. [4112] |
YystTst HIS % Il (1328-3)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
A Waofe 8 FH Bud Hate zat wfeur tt 328-3, ysst, us 1) jai kaaran bayd barahmai uchray sankar chhodee maa-i-aa. For His sake, Brahma uttered the Vedas, and Shiva renounced Maya.
A ode fo se Gert Set Hey & urfemr NA (328-3, ust, He D
jai kaaran siDh bha-ay udaasee dayvee maram na paa-i-aa. ||1]||
For His sake, the Siddhas became hermits and renunciates; even the gods have not realized His Mystery. ||1]||
aa nfs Are Hf APT adh She Are Tet Il 1328-4, ysrst, He 1)
baabaa man saachaa mukh saachaa kahee-ai taree-ai saachaa ho-ee.
O Baba, keep the True Lord in your mind, and utter the Name of the True Lord with your mouth; the True Lord will carry you across.
SANG FY H te SS Tia HPS US AST UU TIS I (1328-5, ysrst, we
dusman dookh na aavai nayrhai har mat paavai ko-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Enemies and pain shall not even approach you; only a rare few realize the Wisdom of the Lord. ||1||Pause]|
wate fia uze at aret Sifs on & STAT II (1328-5, ysrst, He 1)
agan bimb pavnai kee banee teen naam kay daasaa.
Fire, water and air make up the world; these three are the slaves of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
3 SHAG HOH 8 Bela TAG aS USA IMI (1328-6, yas, He 1)
tay taskar jo naam na layveh vaaseh kot panchaasaa. ||2||
One who does not chant the Naam is a thief, dwelling in the fortress of the five thieves. ||2||
A oa Sa ad damit nfs fefs sos ges Il (1328-6, ys, He 1)
jay ko ayk karai changi-aa-ee man chit bahut bafaavai.
If someone does a good deed for someone else, he totally puffs himself up in his conscious mind.
SS Te Sshor sfamreion SE o uss] WN (1328-7, ysst, ve aytay gun aytee-aa chang-aa-ee-aa day-ay na pachhotaavai. ||3] | The Lord bestows so many virtues and so much goodness; He does not ever regret it.
I3I|
30 Woufs fsa US us Soa aT US AST Il (1328-7, ysst, ne 1) tuDh saalaahan tin Dhan palai naanak kaa Dhan so-ee. Those who praise You gather the wealth in their laps; this is Nanak's wealth.
Aa He ad Gar ag AH at Soa 5 Jet SNS (1328-8, ysst, He jay ko jee-o kahai onaa ka-o jam kee talab na ho-ee. ||4|[3]|
Whoever shows respect to them is not summoned by the Messenger of Death. [4113] |
YystTst HIS % Il (1328-8)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Wa TY Sa AS ard Sat HY HAT II (1328-9, ys, Hs 1) jaa kai roop naahee jaat naahee naahee mukh maasaa. One who has no beauty, no social status, no mouth, no flesh
Afsafe fxs fodae ufeur 3d of F fs|erAT All (1328-9, yas, He 1)
satgur milay niranjan paa-i-aa tayrai naam hai nivaasaa. ||1]|
- meeting with the True Guru, he finds the Immaculate Lord, and dwells in Your Name. |[1]|
miSu AoA SS ates it (1328-10, ysrst, He 1) a-oDhoo sehjay tat beechaar. O detached Yogi, contemplate the essence of reality,
w 3 fefs o ured AAs NA TIS Il (1328-10, yas, He 1) jaa tay fir na aavhu saisaar. ||1]|| rahaa-o. and you shall never again come to be born into the world. ||1]|Pause| |
W a AGH St UH ardt ard Afs HHT Il (1328-10, Sst, He 1) jaa kai karam naahee Dharam naahee naahee such maalaa. One who does not have good karma or Dharmic faith, sacred rosary or mala
fre afS dog ofa uret Asae THs NM (1328-11, ysrst, Hs 1) siv jot kannahu buDh paa-ee satguroo rakhvaalaa. ||2| | - through the Light of God, wisdom is bestowed; the True Guru is our Protector. ||2]|
W a FIs oS SH dt Bd saraet Il (1328-11, yas, He 1) jaa kai barat naahee naym naahee naahee bakbaa-ee. One who does not observe any fasts, make religious vows or chant
as weds ot fos ant Afsagy soHret WB (1328-12, yest, Hs 1)
gat avgat kee chint naahee satguroo furmaa-ee. ||3]|
- he does not have to worry about good luck or bad, if he obeys the Command of the True Guru. ||3]|
W ao oA ard faan ont fefs nafs mysret II 1328-12, yarst, He 1)
jaa kai aas naahee niraas naahee chit surat samjhaa-ee. One who is not hopeful, nor hopeless, who has trained his intuitive consciousness
33 aC ugH 33 fixfer owoar sfo uret Isisil (1328-13, yest, He 1)
tant ka-o param tant mili-aa naankaa buDh paa-ee. ||4]|4|| - his being blends with the Supreme Being. O Nanak, his awareness is awakened. [141141]
YysTst HIS % Il (1328-14)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
3 at afoot efs usSe Il (1328-14, ysrst, He 1) taa kaa kahi-aa dar parvaan. What he says is approved in the Court of the Lord.
fry nifgs efe AH af ATE NAN (1328-14, ysrst, Hs 1) bikh amrit du-ay sam kar jaan. ||1|| He looks upon poison and nectar as one and the same. ||1]|
for adhat Aaa sfoor ANE I 1328-15, ysTst, He 1 ki-aa kahee-ai sarbay rahi-aa samaa-ay. What can I say? You are permeating and pervading all.
A fae eas AS Sct arte an TTC It 1328-15, yas, He 1) jo kichh vartai sabh tayree rajaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever happens, is all by Your Will. ||1]|Pause] |
yaret AfS gar mifsHTe I 1328-15, ysst, we 1) pargatee jot chookaa abhimaan. The Divine Light shines radiantly, and egotistical pride is dispelled.
Afsata hor nifys St WI (1328-16, ysrst, He 1) satgur dee-aa amrit naam. ||2]| The True Guru bestows the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
afe ufo urfior A AS ATE Il (1328-16, yest, He 1) kal meh aa-i-aa so jan jaan. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, one's birth is approved,
ATS VII UTS HE MBI (1328-16, ysrst, He 1) saachee dargeh paavai maan. ||3]| if one is honored in the True Court. ||3]|
ade’ Hoa nae wile ATE I (1328-17, ysrst, He 1) kahnaa sunnaa akath ghar jaa-ay. Speaking and listening, one goes to the Celestial Home of the Indescribable Lord.
aaat seat Sea Als ATE NSNUI (1328-17, Yysst, He 1
kathnee badnee naanak jal jaa-ay. ||4||5|| Mere words of mouth, O Nanak, are burnt away. ||4]|5||
YystTst HIS Y Il (1328-18)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
nifys ste famrfs ue HAS none Stee Afar ae i (1328-18, ysrst, He 1)
amrit neer gi-aan man majan athsath tirath sang gahay.
One who bathes in the Ambrosial Water of spiritual wisdom takes with him the virtues of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
ae Gueth wed Hea AS fra A MfA Bs NU (1328-18, ysTst, He 1)
gur updays javaahar maanak sayvay sikh so khoj lahai. ||1||
The Guru's Teachings are the gems and jewels; the Sikh who serves Him searches and finds them. ||1]|
ad AHS Stee odt afF Il (1328-19, ysrst, He 1) gur samaan tirath nahee ko-ay. There is no sacred shrine equal to the Guru.
Ag Hsu SH Te SE NA TTS I (1328-19, ysrst, He sar santokh taas gur ho-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru encompasses the ocean of contentment. ||1]|Pause] |
usr qsae ag cedure wet ve fosne fifeor vaufs He Is Il (1329-1, yas, He 1)
gur daree-aa-o sadaa jal nirmal mili-aa durmat mail harai. The Guru is the River, from which the Pure Water is obtained forever; it washes away the filth and pollution of evil-mindedness.
Afsafe ufent ust SSS UA UIST SS AT MI (1329-1, ysst, we 1)
satgur paa-i-ai pooraa naavan pasoo paraytahu dayv karai. ||2||
Finding the True Guru, the perfect cleansing bath is obtained, which transforms even beasts and ghosts into gods. ||2]|
ost Afs of 3m dhe ATT USNS AIM Il (1329-2, ysrst, v2 1)
rataa sach naam tal hee-al so gur parmal kahee-ai.
He is said to be the Guru, with the scent of sandalwood, who is imbued with the True Name to the bottom of His Heart.
Ww ot aH domnufs ABS 3H ve feS THM ZI (1329-2, yas, He 1)
jaa kee vaas banaaspat sa-urai taas charan liv rahee-ai. ||3]|
By His Fragrance, the world of vegetation is perfumed. Lovingly focus yourself on His Feet. ||3]|
aonfa bat urs Cunfs asuf fire wha prea 1 1329-3, ysst, ue 1) gurmukh jee-a paraan upjahi gurmukh siv ghar jaa-ee-ai. The life of the soul wells up for the Gurmukh; the Gurmukh goes to the House of God.
qenfy soa Afs ANTeha TaHfe for ue uh eile 1329-4, ysrst, ne 1) gurmukh naanak sach samaa-ee-ai gurmukh nij pad paa-ee-ai. | |4]|6] |
The Gurmukh, O Nanak, merges in the True One; the Gurmukh attains the exalted state of the self. ||4||6||
YysTst HIS Y Il (1329-4) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
ae usAet fefeur gerd ufs ufs ure He I (1329-5, ysrst, He 1)
gur parsaadee vidi-aa veechaarai parh parh paavai maan.
By Guru's Grace, contemplate spiritual knowledge; read it and study it, and you shall be honored.
nmr Ho min Usarfma urfemr nis STH NUL (1329-5, ysrst, Hs 1)
aapaa maDhay aap pargaasi-aa paa-i-aa amrit naam. ||1]||
Within the self, the self is revealed, when one is blessed with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. |]1]|
AIS FHT AAS Il (1329-6, ysrst, He 1) kartaa too mayraa jajmaan. O Creator Lord, You alone are my Benefactor.
fea vfret 8 3 ufo war tfo nreret BH NA TIC Il 1329-6, yor, He 1) ik dakhinaa ha-o tai peh maaga-o deh aapnaa naam. ||1|| rahaa-o. I beg for only one blessing from You: please bless me with Your Name. ||1]|Pause]|
Us SAad Wes aa gor His nifsHre Il (1329-7, yest, Hs 1)
panch taskar Dhaavat raakhay chookaa man abhimaan.
The five wandering thieves are captured and held, and the egotistical pride of the mind is subdued.
fenfe faardt vaHfs svat maT GaN fare II (1329-7, ust, He 1D
disat bikaaree durmat bhaagee aisaa barahm gi-aan. ||2||
Visions of corruption, vice and evil-mindedness run away. Such is the spiritual wisdom of God. ||2]|
Ag AS Wee cleo aed afe yrufs ust OS I (1329-8, ysrst, He 1)
jat sat chaaval da-i-aa kanak kar paraapat paatee Dhaan.
Please bless me with the rice of truth and self-restraint, the wheat of compassion, and the leaf-plate of meditation.
SU aH Asy ule afte wir Hag Ve USI (1329-8, ysst, Hs 1)
dooDh karam santokh ghee-o kar aisaa maa"ga-o daan. ||3]|
Bless me with the milk of good karma, and the clarified butter, the ghee, of compassion. Such are the gifts I beg of You, Lord. ||3]|
fin deg afs mG wedt AoA gee dig ub 1 1329-9, ysrst, we 1)
khimaa Dheeraj kar ga-oo lavayree sehjay bachhraa kheer pee-ai.
Let forgiveness and patience be my milk-cows, and let the calf of my mind intuitively drink in this milk.
frefs HOH a aust Ha of Te Soa Fes II MIDI (1329-9, ysrst, He 1)
sifat saram kaa kaprhaa maa"ga-o har gun naanak ravat rahai. ||4||7]|
I beg for the clothes of modesty and the Lord's Praise; Nanak chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||7]|
YystTst HIS % Il (1329-10)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
wes fads 5 Thm ves faS atime wf i 1329-10, ysrst, He 1)
aavat kinai na raakhi-aa jaavat ki-o raakhi-aa jaa-ay.
No one can hold anyone back from coming; how could anyone hold anyone back from going?
fan 3 dor Het ug we AT GA dt fa Me NA 1329-11, yas, He 1)
jis tay ho-aa so-ee par jaanai jaa‘ us hee maahi samaa-ay. ||1]|
He alone thoroughly understands this, from whom all beings come; all are merged and immersed in Him. |[1]|
3d Fag Sot TE tt (0329-11, ysst, we toohai hai vaahu tayree rajaa-ay. Waaho! - You are Great, and Wondrous is Your Will.
ni fae acts Het ug dea nied o aga ATE NU TITS Hh (1329-12, ysrst, ne 1) jo kichh karahi so-ee par ho-ibaa avar na karnaa jaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever You do, surely comes to pass. Nothing else can happen. ||1||Pause]|
AA Jdde at ner fés was J fea Aust da Sa sds FT I 1329-12, ysst, He 1) jaisay harhat kee maalaa tind lagat hai ik sakhnee hor fayr bharee-at hai. The buckets on the chain of the Persian wheel rotate; one empties out to fill another.
3H dt feg ae uAN ot fA BA at Sfsnret 121 329-13, ysrst, He 1) taiso hee ih khayl khasam kaa ji-o us kee vadi-aa-ee. ||2]| This is just like the Play of our Lord and Master; such is His Glorious Greatness. ||2||
Hast & nrafar uf & Bact oefs yaret il (1329-14, ysrst, ue
surtee kai maarag chal kai ultee nadar pargaasee.
Following the path of intuitive awareness, one turns away from the world, and one's vision is enlightened.
Hfs dats ey gon famrat ae forsdt aBq Set Si 329-14, ysst, us 1)
man veechaar daykh barahm gi-aanee ka-un girhee ka-un udaasee. ||3]| Contemplate this in your mind, and see, O spiritual teacher. Who is the householder, and who is the renunciate? ||3]|
fan at om fan ct AGfu a So afonr fagare Il (1329-15, ysrst, He 1) jis kee aasaa tis hee sa-up kai ayhu rahi-aa nirbaan. Hope comes from the Lord; surrendering to Him, we remain in the state of nirvaanaa.
fan 3 dor Het afs wfour soa faadt Gert A udSTS III (1329-15, ysTst, He 1
jis tay ho-aa so-ee kar maani-aa naanak girhee udaasee so parvaan. ||4||8]|
We come from Him; surrendering to Him, O Nanak, one is approved as a householder, and a renunciate. ||4||8]|
YystTst HIS % Il (1329-16)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
fenfe faordt dufs sit g@ fSR & af ATS II (1329-16, ysrst, He 1) disat bikaaree banDhan baa‘Dhai ha-o tis kai bal jaa-ee. I am a sacrifice to that one who binds in bondage his evil and corrupted gaze.
uy Ua at ATSB eS sor fed neret WAU (1329-17, ys, Hs 1)
paap punn kee saar na jaanai bhoolaa firai ajaa-ee. ||1||
One who does not know the difference between vice and virtue wanders around uselessly. ||1||
3OI AY OH AISA Il (1329-17, yas, He 1) bolhu sach naam kartaar. Speak the True Name of the Creator Lord.
ofe safe 3 wee ST NU TIS ll (1329-18, ysrst, ue 1 fun bahurh na aavan vaar. ||1|| rahaa-o. Then, you shall never again have to come into this world. ||1]||Pause| |
Cu 3 ofs aly aay F Sty A ABIS Il (1329-18, ysrst, Hs 1) oochaa tay fun neech karat hai neech karai sultaan. The Creator transforms the high into the low, and makes the lowly into kings.
frat we AAfenr Af 3 UT UTES MI (1329-19, ysst, we 1)
jinee jaan sujaani-aa jag tay pooray parvaan. ||2]|
Those who know the All-knowing Lord are approved and certified as perfect in this world. ||2]|
3 aS AHS Wel A A gar Tet Il (1329-19, ysrst, we
taa ka-o samjhaavan jaa-ee-ai jay ko bhoolaa ho-ee. If anyone is mistaken and fooled, you should go to instruct him.
UST W330
MM YS AT AS ATS MAT FS get SM (1330-1, ysrst, we 1)
aapay khayl karay sabh kartaa aisaa boojhai ko-ee. ||3]| The Creator Himself plays all the games; only a few understand this. ||3]|
oe ysts Hafe four ag vat udtse Il 1330-1, ysrst, ne 1)
naa-o parbhaatai sabad Dhi-aa-ee-ai chhodahu dunee pareetaa.
Meditate on the Name, and the Word of the Shabad, in the early hours before dawn; leave your worldly entanglements behind.
ysets aoa GAS oA Atal Thonn fsfs Atst sitll 4330-2, ysrst, ue 1)
paranvat naanak daasan daasaa jag haari-aa tin jeetaa. ||4||9]| Prays Nanak, the slave of God's slaves: the world loses, and he wins. ||4]|9]|
ystst HIS Y Il (1330-2) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Ho Hfenr He afer He Uet wert i (1330-2, ysrst, v2 1) man maa-i-aa man Dhaa-i-aa man pankhee aakaas. The mind is Maya, the mind is a chaser; the mind is a bird flying across the sky.
3a Hate faetant sag ZS" ATATH Il (1330-3, ysrst, He 1)
taskar sabad nivaari-aa nagar vuthaa saabaas.
The thieves are overpowered by the Shabad, and then the body-village prospers and celebrates.
Ws wuts ate ofa AAs JS TA AU (1330-3, ys, Hs 1) jaa too raakhahi raakh laihi saabat hovai raas. ||1]| Lord, when You save someone, he is saved; his capital is safe and sound. ||1]|
MAT oH IS0 fafa AS | (1330-4, ust, He 1 aisaa naam ratan niDh mayrai. Such is my Treasure, the Jewel of the Naam;
aenfs efo sae ufat 3d A TIS i 1330-4, yas, He 1)
gurmat deh laga-o pag tayrai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
please bless me with the Guru's Teachings, so that I may fall at Your Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
HO Halt He sar HS HY IrSTg I (1330-5, ysrst, we 1) man jogee man bhogee-aa man moorakh gaavaar. The mind is a Yogi, the mind is a pleasure-seeker; the mind is foolish and ignorant.
HO WS HO Hast’ Ho fAfs TT KISS | (1330-5, ysrst, nz
man daataa man mangtaa man sir gur kartaar.
The mind is the giver, the mind is the beggar; the mind is the Great Guru, the Creator.
us ufs ay user mA gay Shes III (1330-6, ysrst, He 1) panch maar sukh paa-i-aa aisaa barahm veechaar. ||2||
The five thieves are conquered, and peace is attained; such is the contemplative wisdom of God. ||2| |
ufe wfe Sa sureht as o efi ate i 1330-6, ysrst, He ghat ghat ayk vakhaanee-ai kaha-o na daykhi-aa jaa-ay. The One Lord is said to be in each and every heart, but no one can see Him.
ue us Tam fag are uls ATE II (1330-7, ysrst, we D
khoto pootho raalee-ai bin naavai pat jaa-ay.
The false are cast upside-down into the womb of reincarnation; without the Name, they lose their honor.
Ww 3 Hofe St fife sat at Sat af TATE WSN (1330-7, ysst, He 1) jaa too mayleh taa mil rahaa™ jaa‘ tayree ho-ay rajaa-ay. ||3]| Those whom You unite, remain united, if it is Your Will. ||3]|
ATS HSH 3d Us AG ug SI ISTE Il (1330-8, ysst, we 1) jaat janam nah poochhee-ai sach ghar layho bataa-ay. God does not ask about social class or birth; you must find your true home.
AW ats AT ufs 3 A AGH OHMS Il (1330-8, ysrst, He 1) Saa jaat saa pat hai jayhay karam kamaa-ay. That is your social class and that is your status - the karma of what you have done.
HOH HIS VY arent ssa Set STE isiqoll (1330-9, ysrst, Hs 1) janam maran dukh kaatee-ai naanak chhootas naa-ay. ||4]|10] |
The pains of death and rebirth are eradicated; O Nanak, salvation is in the Lord's Name. ||4||10]|
YystTst HIB % Il (1330-9)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Was faa HS nT II 1330-9, ys, Hs 1) jaagat bigsai mootho anDhaa. He is awake, and even happy, but he is being plundered - he is blind!
aes avat fafa urd War i (1330-10, ysrst, He 1) gal faahee sir maaray DhanDhaa. The noose is around his neck, and yet, his head is busy with worldly affairs.
WITAT ITS HORT ATE Il (1330-10, ysrst, He 1)
aasSaa aavai mansaa jaa-ay. In hope, he comes and in desire, he leaves.
Gast stat fas & SATE NAN (1330-10, ysrst, He 1)
urjhee taanee kichh na basaa-ay. ||1]| The strings of his life are all tangled up; he is utterly helpless. ||1]|
WelA Ale ATaeT ST Il (1330-11, ysrst, He 1) jaagas jeevan jaaganhaaraa. The Lord of Awareness, the Lord of Life is awake and aware.
AY Ara wifs Sora UU TIC it 1330-11, ysrst, wes 1) sukh saagar amrit bhandaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. He is the Ocean of peace, the Treasure of Ambrosial Nectar. ||1]|Pause] |
ata 3 38 nig 6 AS SSt aS AHEM (1330-11, ysrst, we 1)
kahi-o na boojhai anDh na soojhai bho“dee kaar kamaa-ee.
He does not understand what he is told; he is blind - he does not see, and so he does his evil deeds.
mm ulfs Un ushAg aant fies Soret MN (1330-12, ysrst, He 1)
aapay pareet paraym parmaysur karmee milai vadaa-ee. ||2||
The Transcendent Lord Himself showers His Love and Affection; by His Grace, He bestows glorious greatness. ||2||
feo fea ore fae fae ata wenn vg weet I 1330-12, usrst, He 1)
din din aavai til til chheejai maa-i-aa moh ghataa-ee.
With the coming of each and every day, his life is wearing away, bit by bit; but still, his heart is attached to Maya.
fag TT FS SSIS We Fa BA Tet Tet SM 1330-13, yest, we 1) bin gur boodo tha-ur na paavai jab lag doojee raa-ee. ||3]||
Without the Guru, he is drowned, and finds no place of rest, as long as he is caught in duality. ||3]|
wmifofofa rier Sf mas AY ey uate aHreT I 1330-13, ysrst, He 1)
ahinis jee-aa daykh sam"aalai sukh dukh purab kamaa-ee. Day and night, God watches over and takes care of His living beings; they receive pleasure and pain according to their past actions.
adds Ag Stim iat Sto fs eset SUVA 1330-14, ysrst, He 1)
karamheen sach bheekhi-aa maa‘gai naanak milai vadaa-ee. ||4||11||
Nanak, the unfortunate one, begs for the charity of Truth; please bless him with this glory. ||4]]11]|
YystTst HIB % Il (1330-15)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
HAfe AIS Hae Afar Pho i (1330-15, ysst, He 1) masat kara-o moorakh jag kahee-aa. If I remain silent, the world calls me a fool.
mfoa sa Sat foe Td Il 1330-15, ysrst, He 1 aDhik baka-o tayree liv rahee-aa. If I talk too much, I miss out on Your Love.
38 YX SI Taats I (1330-16, yest, we 1) bhool chook tayrai darbaar. My mistakes and faults will be judged in Your Court.
OH feat AA MITES WAU (1330-16, ysTst, He 1) naam binaa kaisay aachaar. ||1|| Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can I maintain good conduct? ||1]|
MA BTS HS HATS Il (1330-16, ysTst, Hs 1) aisay jhooth muthay sansaaraa. Such is the falsehood which is plundering the world.
feea fee nS fumirar na ToS i 1330-16, ysrst, nz 1) nindak nindai mujhai pi-aaraa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The slanderer slanders me, but even so, I love him. ||1]|Pause| |
fan fsefo ret fafa AS I 4330-17, ys, He 1) jis nindeh so-ee biDh jaanai. He alone knows the way, who has been slandered.
Gd a Age Ufa SAS Il (1330-17, ysrst, ve 1)
gur kai sabday dar neesaanai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is stamped with the Lord's Insignia in His Court.
ATE SH nisdafs WE Il (1330-17, ysrst, He 1 kaaran naam antargat jaanai. He realizes the Naam, the Cause of causes, deep within himself.
fan 6 oefe ad Het fafa AE 2H (1330-18, ysrst, He 1 jis no nadar karay so-ee biDh jaanai. ||2]| He alone knows the way, who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace. ||2| |
HHS CaS Ag ALE i (1330-18, yest, we 1) mai mailou oojal sach so-ay. I am filthy and polluted; the True Lord is Immaculate and Sublime.
su orfs & Sor TE il 1330-18, yarst, He 1) ootam aakh na oochaa ho-ay. Calling oneself sublime, one does not become exalted.
HoH fe Hot fry ate i 1330-19, ysrst, He 1) manmukh khooli" mahaa bikh khaa-ay. The self-willed manmukh openly eats the great poison.
aenfy df A ae STE NI (1330-19, ysst, He 1) gurmukh ho-ay so raachai naa-ay. ||3]| But one who becomes Gurmukh is absorbed in the Name. ||3]||
wid FB HAT AST Il (1330-19, ysst, ne 1) anDhou bolou mugaDh gavaar. I am blind, deaf, foolish and ignorant,
Us 9339 de aty ad sfanre it 331-1, yest, we
heenou neech burou buri-aar. the lowest of the low, the worst of the worst.
alae & Us aH fimrg Il 1331-1, ysst, He 1) neeDhan kou Dhan naam pi-aar. I am poor, but I have the Wealth of Your Name, O my Beloved.
feg ue AS dg faftmr erg ei 1331-1, ysst, He D ih Dhan saar hor bikhi-aa chhaar. ||4|| This is the most excellent wealth; all else is poison and ashes. ||4| |
Grafs feet Age Steg | 1331-2, yest, nz 1 ustat nindaa sabad veechaar. I pay no attention to slander and praise; I contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
A te fH a Aare Il 1331-2, yas, He 1) jo dayvai tis ka-o jaikaar. I celebrate the One who blesses me with His Bounty.
3 sunfa ats ufs ofe i 1331-2, ysrst, 8 1)
too bakhsahi jaat pat ho-ay.
Whomever You forgive, O Lord, is blessed with status and honor. Soa Ad ATS AE NUNIM (1331-3, ys, He 1)
naanak kahai kahaavai so-ay. ||5||12]| Says Nanak, I speak as He causes me to speak. ||5||12||
YysTst HIS 9 Il (1331-3) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
ufeor He eorfenr Ut we at TE i 1331-3, ysrst, He 1)
khaa-i-aa mail vaDhaa-i-aa paiDhai ghar kee haan.
Eating too much, one's filth only increases; wearing fancy clothes, one's home is disgraced.
afax sfx eve vorfeur fae are fay whe Nall 4331-4, ust, He 1)
bak bak vaad chalaa-i-aa bin naavai bikh jaan. ||1]]|
Talking too much, one only starts arguments. Without the Name, everything is poison - know this well. ||1]|
aan nT fe aie He Star i 1331-4, ysrst, He baabaa aisaa bikham jaal man vaasi-aa. O Baba, such is the treacherous trap which has caught my mind;
faae stat Aofa userfAmr nai TIS il 1331-5, ysst, He 1
bibal jhaag sahj pargaasi-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
riding out the waves of the storm, it will be enlightened by intuitive wisdom. ||1]|Pause] |
fry uvet fou Soar fy oft ara OrfE Il 1331-5, yas, He 1) bikh khaanaa bikh bolnaa bikh kee kaar kamaa-ay. They eat poison, speak poison and do poisonous deeds.
mH efe aa Hts Sef APS STS QM 1331-6, ysst, we
jam dar baaDhay maaree-ah chhootas saachai naa-ay. ||2||
Bound and gagged at Death's door, they are punished; they can be saved only through the True Name. ||2||
fae orfeor foe afent afer foots & fe il 331-6, yrs, He 1) jiv aa-i-aa tiv jaa-isee kee-aa likh lai jaa-ay. As they come, they go. Their actions are recorded, and go along with them.
Houta He aretfenr eaara fees FATE WBN (1331-7, ysrst, He manmukh mool gavaa-i-aa dargeh milai sajaa-ay. ||3]| The self-willed manmukh loses his capital, and is punished in the Court of the Lord.
31 Ad dé Ay fesns aa Aaet Stee i (1331-7, ust, ve
jag khotou sach nirmalou gur sabdee™ veechaar. The world is false and polluted; only the True One is Pure. Contemplate Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
3 30 fees wWeluifa fro uists famre Hate Ilei «331-8, yest, He D tay nar virlay jaanee-ahi jin antar gi-aan muraar. ||4|| Those who have God's spiritual wisdom within, are known to be very rare. ||4]|
MAG Ad StS_ Sd MHI MSs AGU Il (1331-8, yest, we 1)
ajar jarai neejhar jharai amar anand saroop.
They endure the unendurable, and the Nectar of the Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss, trickles into them continuously.
ood AS a Hie AS are aug US WUNasil (1331-9, ysrst, He 1)
naanak jal kou meen sai thay bhaavai raakho pareet. ||5||13]|
O Nanak, the fish is in love with the water; if it pleases You, Lord, please enshrine such love within me. ||5||13]|
YystTst HIS % Il (1331-9)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
ats Se Jad FST Il (1331-9, ysrst, ve 1)
geet naad harakh chaturaa-ee. Songs, sounds, pleasures and clever tricks;
JIA da sonfetA aret | 1331-10, ysst, He 1) rahas rang furmaa-is kaa-ee. joy, love and the power to command;
Use urar dS o uret i 1331-10, ysst, us 1) pain"an khaanaa cheet na paa-ee. fine clothes and food - these have no place in one's consciousness.
Ag Ada AY ot SATE NA (1331-10, ysrst, He 1) saach sahj sukh naam vasaa-ee. ||1] | True intuitive peace and poise rest in the Naam. ||1]|
fom Frat for ad AIS Il (1331-11, yas, He 1) ki-aa jaanaa” ki-aa karai karaavai. What do I know about what God does?
on fear safe fae 5 Aa] NU ToS Il 1331-11, ust, He 1)
naam binaa tan kichh na sukhaavai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, nothing makes my body feel good. ||1]|Pause] |
Fat PHBE ATE MTSE Mt (1331-11, ysst, we 1) jog binod savaad aanandaa. Yoga, thrills, delicious flavors and ecstasy;
Hfs As afe sats afer it 1331-12, ysrst, ve mat sat bhaa-ay bhagat gobindaa. wisdom, truth and love all come from devotion to the Lord of the Universe.
atefs ag ars for Ae Il (1331-12, ysrst, ns keerat karam kaar nij sandaa. My own occupation is to work to praise the Lord.
wists Jes TH Tee NIN (1331-12, ysst, v2 1) antar ravtou raaj ravindaa. ||2|| Deep within, I dwell on the Lord of the sun and the moon. ||2]|
fy fy uifs uf Ss ord nt (1331-13, ysst, we 1) pari-o pari-o pareet paraym ur Dhaaree. I have lovingly enshrined the love of my Beloved within my heart.
dar ara ul@ soerat Il (1331-13, ysrst, He 1) deenaa naath pee-o banvaaree. My Husband Lord, the Lord of the World, is the Master of the meek and the poor.
mofeg SH BS ysard ll (1331-13, yest, we 1) an-din naam daan baratkaaree. Night and day, the Naam is my giving in charity and fasting.
fgufs sda 33 sterst Si (1331-14, ysrst, ve 1) taripat tarang tat beechaaree. ||3]| The waves have subsided, contemplating the essence of reality. ||3]|
nae aa foot H AT Il 1331-14, yas, He 1) akthou katha-o ki-aa mai jor. What power do I have to speak the Unspoken?
sats adt aafefs Ae I 1331-14, ysTst, He 1) bhagat karee karaa-ihi mor. I worship You with devotion; You inspire me to do so.
nists SA Ya HHT I (1331-15, ysrst, He 1) antar vasai chookai mai mor. You dwell deep within; my egotism is dispelled.
fan At ve oot FT Vil (1331-15, ysrst, ws 1) kis sayvee doojaa nahee hor. ||4]| So whom should I serve? There is no other than You. ||4] |
Td HX AME HI" TA HST Il (1331-15, ysrst, uz 1) gur kaa sabad mahaa ras meethaa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is utterly sweet and sublime.
MAT nifys nists Stor i 1331-15, yarst, He 1) aisaa amrit antar deethaa. Such is the Ambrosial Nectar I see deep within.
fats ofr yar ue ofS I 1331-16, yest, oe 1) jin chaakhi-aa pooraa pad ho-ay. Those who taste this, attain the state of perfection.
eae ofuG sf AY df NUNIT (1331-16, ysst, He 1) naanak Dharaapi-o tan sukh ho-ay. ||5||14|| O Nanak, they are satisfied, and their bodies are at peace. ||5||14]|
YysTst HIS % Il (1331-17)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
nists fy wafe Ho HfSEMr nie B Tareas Il (1331-17, ysrst, v2 1)
antar daykh sabad man maani-aa avar na raa‘ganhaaraa.
Deep within, I see the Shabad, the Word of God; my mind is pleased and appeased. Nothing else can touch and imbue me.
mfstafh Aor ef ANTS fA dt at Agar AI (1331-17, ysst, He 1
ahinis jee-aa daykh samaalay tis hee kee sarkaaraa. ||1]|
Day and night, God watches over and cares for His beings and creatures; He is the Ruler of all. ||1]|
Ae ys afar we wifs IF Il (1331-18, ysrst, He 1) mayraa parabh raa“g ghanou at roorhou. My God is dyed in the most beautiful and glorious color.
ae fens YISH HoHTS ifs TA BS ATS WAU TIS ll 1331-18, yest, we 1)
deen da-i-aal pareetam manmohan at ras laal sagoorhou. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Merciful to the meek and the poor, my Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; He is so very sweet, imbued with the deep crimson color of His Love. ||1]|Pause] |
Cufs ay aae ufsost vifiys uleeaoret I 1331-19, ysrst, He 1) oopar koop gagan panihaaree amrit peevanhaaraa. The Well is high up in the Tenth Gate; the Ambrosial Nectar flows, and I drink it in.
fan at soot A fafa we aenfy fame Sera 12H 1331-19, ysrst, He 1)
jis kee rachnaa so biDh jaanai gurmukh gi-aan veechaaraa. ||2||
The creation is His; He alone knows its ways and means. The Gurmukh contemplates spiritual wisdom. ||2||
Uast 9332 und fasts ofa ane frat AfA ufs Ae AHrfeur Ih 1332-1, ysrst, He 1)
pasree kiran ras kamal bigaasay sas ghar soor samaa-i-aa. The rays of light spread out, and the heart-lotus joyfully blossoms forth; the sun enters into the house of the moon.
ans fadfa Hom xfs Hat ae yAtfe us urfemr 3B 332-2, ysrst, He 1)
kaal biDhuns mansaa man maaree gur parsaad parabh paa-i-aa. ||3]|
I have conquered death; the desires of the mind are destroyed. By Guru's Grace, I have found God. ||3]|
mits ath sf vee TSt SAT Fa B AS Il 1332-2, ysst, we at ras rang chaloolai raatee doojaa rang na ko-ee. I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love. I am not colored by any other color.
ood safe sAe aS afe sfomr ys Aet enqUil 0332-3, ysst, He 1)
naanak rasan rasaa-ay raatay rav rahi-aa parabh so-ee. ||4||15]||
O Nanak, my tongue is saturated with the taste of God, who is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4[|15]|
YystTst HIS A Il (1332-4)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
wad Hfs wee ufu wets vg fant nfs Afemrat i 1332-4, ysrst, He 1) baarah meh raaval khap jaaveh chahu chhi-a meh sani-aasee. The Yogis are divided into twelve schools, the Sannyaasees into ten.
nat ouster faye fag Fae aes |rAt A (1332-4, ysrst, we 1)
jogee kaaprhee-aa sirkhoothay bin sabdai gal faasee. ||1]|
The Yogis and those wearing religious robes, and the Jains with their all hair plucked out - without the Word of the Shabad, the noose is around their necks. ||1]|
Hafe JS UT FI | (1332-5, ysrst, we 1) sabad ratay pooray bairaagee. Those who are imbued with the Shabad are the perfectly detached renunciates.
mule JAS Hf stir Aret Sa atte fee weit Al FIC Il 0332-5, ysrst, us 1)
a-uhath hasat meh bheekhi-aa jaachee ayk bhaa-ay liv laagee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
They beg to receive charity in the hands of their hearts, embracing love and affection for the One. ||1]|Pause] |
qoHe Se uate ats fatour agat AGH ATES I (1332-6, ysrst, ws 1)
barahman vaad parheh kar kiri-aa karnee karam karaa-ay.
The Brahmins study and argue about the scriptures; they perform ceremonial rituals, and lead others in these rituals.
fag 33 fae AS act Hone fests gy ue QM 1332-6, yest, we 1)
bin boojhay kichh soojhai naahee manmukh vichhurh dukh paa-ay. ||2| | Without true understanding, those self-willed manmukhs understand nothing. Separated from God, they suffer in pain. ||2]|
Rafe fies A Forest ATS} EsaT HS Il 1332-7, ysrst, He 1)
sabad milay say soochaachaaree saachee dargeh maanay.
Those who receive the Shabad are sanctified and pure; they are approved in the True Court.
mates otH date fee oa Afar Aft As ANTS SI (1332-8, ysst, He 1
an-din naam ratan liv laagay jug jug saach samaanay. ||3]||
Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Naam; throughout the ages, they are merged in the True One. ||3]|
Hal® AH UsH Afs HAH AU su Stee Aafe SA Il 1332-8, ysst, He 1)
saglay karam Dharam such sanjam jap tap tirath sabad vasay.
Good deeds, righteousness and Dharmic faith, purification, austere self-discipline, chanting, intense meditation and pilgrimages to sacred shrines - all these abide in the Shabad.
area Afsae fs frerfeor va uses AS SA IBIIE! (1332-9, Yast, He 1) naanak satgur milai milaa-i-aa dookh paraachhat kaal nasay. ||4||16]|
O Nanak, united in union with the True Guru, suffering, sin and death run away. [14] 116] |
ystst HIS % Il (1332-10)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Ha at de AUG Ho Halfs of atefs 3g ST Il 1332-10, ysrst, He 1)
santaa kee rayn saaDh jan sangat har keerat tar taaree.
The dust of the feet of the Saints, the Company of the Holy, and the Praises of the Lord carry us across to the other side.
as ad sus AH sau Tenfy fee wast Al 1332-10, yest, He 1)
kahaa karai bapuraa jam darpai gurmukh ridai muraaree. ||1| |
What can the wretched, terrified Messenger of Death do to the Gurmukhs? The Lord abides in their hearts. ||1||
ate WE Ateo OH faa il 4332-11, ysrst, He 1 jal jaa-o jeevan naam binaa. Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, life might just as well be burnt down.
dfs afu wry Aue met aenfe nrS ATE HoT NU TIS Ut 1332-11, ust, He
har jap jaap japa-o japmaalee gurmukh aavai saad manaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Gurmukh chants and meditates on the Lord, chanting the chant on the mala; the Flavor of the Lord comes into the mind. ||1]||Pause||
ae Suen AY AY A as femr fsR Gur adh | 1332-12, ysrst, He
gur updays saach sukh jaa ka-o ki-aa tis upmaa kahee-ai.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings find true peace - how can I even describe the glory of such a person?
WS Hdd ISS USGS AAS Tenfe SsbA NIN (1332-12, ysst, v2 1) laal javayhar ratan padaarath khojat gurmukh lahee-ai. ||2|| The Gurmukh seeks and finds the gems and jewels, diamonds, rubies and treasures.
[21 | aie famrg fomrg us AS Sa Rafe fee BS Il 1332-13, uss, He 1)
cheenai gi-aan Dhi-aan Dhan saachou ayk sabad liv laavai. So center yourself on the treasures of spiritual wisdom and meditation; remain lovingly attuned to the One True Lord, and the Word of His Shabad.
forse forage fouaes fogs sat we SI 1332-14, ysrst, He 1)
niraalamb nirhaar nihkayval nirbha-o taarhee laavai. ||3]|
Remain absorbed in the Primal State of the Fearless, Immaculate, Independent, Self- sufficient Lord. ||3]|
Wes AUS 3d AG feos Cuet ave Sas Il 1332-14, ysrst, He 1)
Saa-ir sapat bharay jal nirmal ultee naav taraavai.
The seven seas are overflowing with the Immaculate Water; the inverted boat floats across.
Wf ws ofa goes Tene AafA ANTS ISI (1332-15, ysTSt, He 1
baahar jaatou thaak rahaavai gurmukh sahj samaavai. ||4| |
The mind which wandered in external distractions is restrained and held in check; the Gurmukh is intuitively absorbed in God. ||4||
A faadt A oA Gert fafe qaoufe wry uerfenr it 1332-15, ysst, He 1)
so girhee so daas udaasee jin gurmukh aap pachhaani-aa.
He is a householder, he is a renunciate and God's slave, who, as Gurmukh, realizes his own self.
SSI AI veg Sdt SA ATS Hale He Hts NUNAI (1332-16, ys, Hs 1)
naanak kahai avar nahee doojaa saach sabad man maani-aa. ||5||17]||
Says Nanak, his mind is pleased and appeased by the True Word of the Shabad; there is no other at all. ||5]|17]|
Td ysst HIS 3 BBue 1332-17) raag parbhaatee mehlaa 3 cha-upday Raag Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas:
qe Afsars yArfe i 1332-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Tafa feo set gs Fae afoot ANTE Il (1332-18, ysrst, 2 3)
gurmukh virlaa ko-ee boojhai sabday rahi-aa samaa-ee.
Those who become Gurmukh and understand are very rare; God is permeating and pervading through the Word of His Shabad.
of gS Ae AY ue Ate ad fee Get NAM (1332-18, ys, He 3)
naam ratay sadaa sukh paavai saach rahai liv laa-ee. ||1|| Those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, find everlasting peace; they remain lovingly attuned to the True One. ||1]|
Yat 9333
dfs ots SH AUT AS Set Il (1333-1, ysrst, He 3) har har naam japahu jan bhaa-ee. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O Siblings of Destiny.
aa uAte Ho mAfag Je niofes ofa aft afomr mrret Al TIS Il 1333-1, ysrst, ne 3) gur parsaad man asthir hovai an-din har ras rahi-aa aghaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
By Guru's Grace, the mind becomes steady and stable; night and day, it remains satisfied with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
mofes sats agg fea ast fER Aa a war get Il (1333-2, ysrst, He 3)
an-din bhagat karahu din raatee is jug kaa laahaa bhaa-ee.
Night and day, perform devotional worship service to the Lord, day and night; this is the profit to be obtained in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Siblings of Destiny.
Ret Ho fasHe He o oa Afs oth fos wet 211 (1333-2, ysrst, He 3)
Sadaa jan nirmal mail na laagai sach naam chit laa-ee. ||2]|
The humble beings are forever immaculate; no filth ever sticks to them. They focus their consciousness on the True Name. |[2]||
AY Atarg Afsag fearrfeor oth est efsuret i (1333-3, ysrst, 12 3)
sukh seegaar satguroo dikhaa-i-aa naam vadee vadi-aa-ee.
The True Guru has revealed the ornamentation of peace; the Glorious Greatness of the Naam is Great!
WS Sag 3d ae Sfe 5 wre] Ae dfs AST Set ISI (1333-4, ysst, He 3)
akhut bhandaar bharay kaday tot na aavai sadaa har sayvhu bhaa-ee. ||3]|
The Inexhaustible Treasures are overflowing; they are never exhausted. So serve the Lord forever, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3]|
Ss AA
nm adst fan 6 te fsa SA nfs met i (1333-4, yest, He 3) aapay kartaa jis no dayvai tis vasai man aa-ee. The Creator comes to abide in the minds of those whom He Himself has blessed.
aad oH fourfe re s Afsata chor feat sia 1333-5, ysrst, He 3) naanak naam Dhi-aa-ay sadaa too satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ee. ||4]|1]| O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, which the True Guru has revealed. ||4||1]|
YsTst HIS 3 Il (1333-6)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
fosaerd ag suff & Aomit wma Sg fiesret I 1333-6, ysrst, ve 3)
nirgunee-aaray ka-o bakhas lai su-aamee aapay laihu milaa-ee.
I am unworthy; please forgive me and bless me, O my Lord and Master, and unite me with Yourself.
3 fnig 3a viz 5 ufeor Aae Sg TTT AU (1333-6, ysst, Hs 3)
too bi-ant tayraa ant na paa-i-aa sabday dayh bujhaa-ee. ||1]||
You are Endless; no one can find Your limits. Through the Word of Your Shabad, You bestow understanding. ||1]|
ofa ME su feed als wet II 4333-7, ysrst, He 3) har jee-o tuDh vitahu bal jaa-ee. O Dear Lord, I am a sacrifice to You.
3 HS maut Su ord IG AST Jot ASST NAN TIC Il 1333-7, ysrst, ve 3)
tan man arpee tuDh aagai raakha-o sadaa rahaa™ sarnaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I dedicate my mind and body and place them in offering before You; I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever. ||1]||Pause] |
wu oe fefe net ay Romi ofs oH Ufo Sfamret It 1333-8, ysret, He 3)
aapnay bhaanay vich sadaa rakh su-aamee har naamo deh vadi-aa-ee.
Please keep me forever under Your Will, O my Lord and Master; please bless me with the Glorious Greatness of Your Name.
Us TI 3 TS AY niafeg Aah ANE Mil (1333-9, ysrst, we 3)
pooray gur tay bhaanaa jaapai an-din sahj samaa-ee. ||2||
Through the Perfect Guru, God's Will is revealed; night and day, remain absorbed in peace and poise. ||2]|
3d awe salsa A 30 ae] wm aufh feet II 1333-9, ust, He 3)
tayrai bhaanai bhagat jay tuDh bhaavai aapay bakhas milaa-ee.
Those devotees who accept Your Will are pleasing to You, Lord; You Yourself forgive them, and unite them with Yourself.
33 ae Fe AY Ufeor ats fener nafs geet SII (1333-10, ysrst, He 3)
tayrai bhaanai sadaa sukh paa-i-aa gur tarisnaa agan bujhaa-ee. ||3]||
Accepting Your Will, I have found everlasting peace; the Guru has extinguished the fire of desire. ||3]|
A 3 Aes AIS ATS Mey F ATS AT Il (1333-10, ysrst, vs 3) jo too karahi so hovai kartay avar na karnaa jaa-ee. Whatever You do comes to pass, O Creator; nothing else can be done.
Bod Se ASS Meg o TS YT Ts F uret US 1333-11, ysrst, ws 3)
naanak naavai jayvad avar na daataa pooray gur tay paa-ee. ||4]||2||
O Nanak, nothing is as great as the Blessing of the Name; it is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||4]|2]|
YysTst HIG 3 Il (1333-11)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
aanfa af rrefoor fat fs nerfs af AST II (1333-12, ysrst, He 3) gurmukh har salaahi-aa jinna tin salaahi har jaataa. The Gurmukhs praise the Lord; praising the Lord, they know Him.
fey SoH afeur I eA AT & ale USS AU (1333-12, ysrst, He 3)
vichahu bharam ga-i-aa hai doojaa gur kai sabad pachhaataa. ||1||
Doubt and duality are gone from within; they realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. [11I
ofs Me 3 He fea Aet i 0333-13, ys, Hs 3) har jee-o too mayraa ik so-ee. O Dear Lord, You are my One and Only.
30 mi 30 Wet afs Hf 33 3 Tet NA TTS I 333-13, ysrst, He 3) tuDh japee tuDhai saalaahee gat mat tujh tay ho-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I meditate on You and praise You; salvation and wisdom come from You. ||1]||Pause] |
aanfy revafs A AE ufefs Hor nifigs ATS II 1333-14, ysrst, Hs 3)
gurmukh saalaahan say saad paa-in meethaa amrit saar.
The Gurmukhs praise You; they receive the most excellent and sweet Ambrosial Nectar.
He Hot ae o cat qa Agel Sarg QM (1333-14, ysrst,, vs 3)
sadaa meethaa kaday na feekaa gur sabdee veechaar. ||2|| This Nectar is forever sweet; it never loses its taste. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
fafs Htot ofeur Het wre fon fees af ATeT II 1333-15, yas, He 3) jin meethaa laa-i-aa so-ee jaanai tis vitahu bal jaa-ee. He makes it seem so sweet to me; I am a Sacrifice to Him.
Rafe Aad Het Hues fess nity Teeth ISI (1333-15, ysrst, He 3)
sabad salaahee sadaa sukh-daata vichahu aap gavaa-ee. ||3]||
Through the Shabad, I praise the Giver of peace forever. I have eradicated self- conceit from within. ||3]|
Afsag Ha Het I oa A fee A Sw US Il 1333-16, ysrst, He 3) satgur mayraa sadaa hai daataa jo ichhai so fal paa-ay. My True Guru is forever the Giver. I receive whatever fruits and rewards I desire.
Sod oH fue efsuret ae Agel AY US ISISI 1333-16, ysst, He 3) naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee gur sabdee sach paa-ay. ||4||3]|
O Nanak, through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the True One is found. ||4]|3]|
YysTst HIS 3 Il (1333-17)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
A Sot Aeeet fs ME So J TIS AT Il 1333-17, ysst, we 3) jo tayree sarnaa-ee har jee-o tin too raakhan jog. Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, are saved by Your Protective Power.
30 Aes H neg 3 AS OT a Iu] FT NU (1333-18, ys, Hs 3)
tuDh jayvad mai avar na soojhai naa ko ho-aa na hog. ||1]|
I cannot even conceive of any other as Great as You. There never was, and there never shall be. ||1]|
dfs ME Ae Sat AGSeT Il 1333-18, ysrst, ne 3) har jee-o sadaa tayree sarnaa-ee. O Dear Lord, I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever.
fag are f38 aug AS AM Ss Sct Sfmt 9 TITS th 1333-18, ysrst, ne 3) ji-o bhaavai ti-o raakho mayray su-aamee ayh tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. As it pleases You, You save me, O my Lord and Master; this is Your Glorious Greatness. ||1||Pause| |
A Sct Aeeet afe He fSo at aaa yfsurs It (1333-19, yest, He 3) jo tayree sarnaa-ee har jee-o tin kee karahi partipaal. O Dear Lord, You cherish and sustain those who seek Your Sanctuary.
ust 9338 wify faut afs aag ofa AG Ufa o Aa AHATS MQM (1334-1, ysrst, He 3)
aap kirpaa kar raakho har jee-o pohi na sakai jamkaal. ||2|| O Dear Lord, the Messenger of Death cannot even touch those whom You, in Your Mercy, protect. ||2||
Sot Aseet At ofs HG at Ga we o ATE I 1334-1, ust, He 3) tayree sarnaa-ee sachee har jee-o naa oh ghatai na jaa-ay. True Is Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; it never diminishes or goes away.
A ofa efs en ate oa Gg AH S fe ATE NSN (1334-2, ysrst, Hs 3)
jo har chhod doojai bhaa-ay laagai oh jammai tai mar jaa-ay. ||3]||
Those who abandon the Lord, and become attached to the love of duality, shall continue to die and be reborn. ||3]|
A Sot Aeeet fs Me fs ea gu fas as Il (1334-2, ysrst, ws 3)
jo tayree sarnaa-ee har jee-o tinaa dookh bhookh kichh naahi.
Those who seek Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, shall never suffer in pain or hunger for anything.
aoa BY Aefs Het 3 AY Aafe ANTS SII (1334-3, Yysrst, Hs 3) naanak naam salaahi sadaa too sachai sabad samaahi. ||4||4| |
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord forever, and merge in the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||4| |
ystTst HIS 3 Il (1334-4)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
aanfy ofe atG Ae fMreg Aa oa Ahr uss Il (1334-4, ysrst, He 3) gurmukh har jee-o sadaa Dhi-aavahu jab lag jee-a paraan. As Gurmukh, meditate on the Dear Lord forever, as long as there is the breath of life.
qs Aaet Ho fesse dur gar yf mifsHrs il (1334-4, ysrst, ws 3)
gur sabdee man nirmal ho-aa chookaa man abhimaan.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind becomes immaculate, and egotistical pride is expelled from the mind.
Hes Won fsR yrat a ofa & oft ANTS IAI (1334-5, ust, He 3) safal janam tis paraanee kayraa har kai naam samaan. ||1]|
Fruitful and prosperous is the life of that mortal being, who is absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1]|
Hd Ho ad at fra wet Il (1334-6, ysTst, He 3) mayray man gur kee sikh suneejai. O my mind, listen to the Teachings of the Guru.
dfs & ON Ae AMES! AOA dfs IA UIA NA TICS I (1334-6, yorst, He 3)
har kaa naam sadaa sukh-daata sehjay har ras peejai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Name of the Lord is the Giver of peace forever. With intuitive ease, drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
He ustels f3o for ule SAT AoA dt AY Tet I 1334-6, ys, Hs 3)
mool pachhaanan tin nij ghar vaasaa sehjay hee sukh ho-ee.
Those who understand their own origin dwell within the home of their inner being, in intuitive peace and poise.
qd a Wate ane udarthor BH eaHfs Bet Il 1334-7, ysrst, He 3)
gur kai sabad kamal pargaasi-aa ha-umai durmat kho-ee.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and egotism and evil-mindedness are eradicated.
Ago Hid Sa AY eas feser gS get MM (1334-8, ys, Hs 3) sabhnaa meh ayko sach vartai virlaa boojhai ko-ee. ||2|| The One True Lord is pervading amongst all; those who realize this are very rare.
[21 | TIHSt Ho fosHs dur nifys ST FS I (1334-8, ysst, ve 3)
gurmatee man nirmal ho-aa amrit tat vakhaanai. Through the Guru's Teachings, the mind becomes immaculate, speaking the Ambrosial Essence.
dfs a ay Ae Hfe efor fefe Ho dt Ha HTS Il (1334-9, ysrst, He 3)
har kaa naam sadaa man vasi-aa vich man hee man maanai.
The Name of the Lord dwells in the mind forever; within the mind, the mind is pleased and appeased.
Re afsodt ae nus fees fas ors TH USTs ISI (1334-9, ysrst, He 3)
sad balihaaree gur apunay vitahu jit aatam raam pachhaanai. ||3]|
I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, through whom I have realized the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3]|
HOA AotH Afsagd 3 Afeor fase HoH Tether It 1334-10, ysrst, He 3)
maanas janam satguroo na sayvi-aa birthaa janam gavaa-i-aa.
Those human beings who do not serve the True Guru - their lives are uselessly wasted.
Sets ad 3 Afsag AS AGA Aol AMEMM Il (1334-10, ysrst, He 3)
nadar karay taa satgur maylay sehjay sahj samaa-i-aa.
When God bestows His Glance of Grace, then we meet the True Guru, merging in intuitive peace and poise.
area oY fHS sfemret us afar fomrfenr isu 0334-11, ysrst, Hs 3)
naanak naam milai vadi-aa-ee poorai bhaag Dhi-aa-i-aa. ||4||5||
O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Naam is bestowed; by perfect destiny, meditate. [41151]
ystst HIS 3 Il (1334-12)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
nm sifs aa ag dait frAfe Gurfe ufs ae ahr I 1334-12, ysrst, vs 3)
aapay bhaa™t banaa-ay baho rangee sisat upaa-ay parabh khayl kee-aa.
God Himself fashioned the many forms and colors; He created the Universe and staged the play.
afs afs 24 ad ave Aas Air S fena cor al 1334-12, yas, He 3)
kar kar vaykhai karay karaa-ay sarab jee-aa no rijak dee-aa. ||1]|
Creating the creation, He watches over it. He acts, and causes all to act; He gives sustenance to all beings. ||1]||
wet ares Hf Shen INH Il (1334-13, ysrst, v8 3) kalee kaal meh ravi-aa raam. In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord is All-pervading.
ufe ufe ufs sfoor ys Sa TaHfs usae ale afs oH NU TIS Mt (1334-13, ysrst, we 3) ghat ghat poor rahi-aa parabh ayko gurmukh pargat har har naam. ||1|| rahaa-o. The One God is pervading and permeating each and every heart; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed to the Gurmukh. ||1]|Pause| |
qust oy zs fetes asafa wie wie afs saute afonr i 1334-14, ysrst, Hs 3)
guptaa naam vartai vich kaljug ghat ghat har bharpoor rahi-aa.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is hidden, but it is pervasive in the Dark Age. The Lord is totally pervading and permeating each and every heart.
on 330 fae fore yateur A aa Aaaret ofa ufemr I (1334-15, ysrst, ne 3) naam ratan tinaa hirdai pargati-aa jo gur sarnaa-ee bhaj pa-i-aa. ||2]|
The Jewel of the Naam is revealed within the hearts of those who hurry to the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||2||
feet ua ud afk ure fine Hoy ToHfS we II (1334-16, yas, He 3)
indree panch panchay vas aanai khimaa santokh gurmat paavai.
Whoever overpowers the five sense organs, is blessed with forgiveness, patience and contentment, through the Guru's Teachings.
AUG U6 fs AG es UT A S Sata oe TE WS MSM (1334-16, ysst, we 3)
so Dhan Dhan har jan vad pooraa jo bhai bairaag har gun gaavai. ||3]||
Blessed, blessed, perfect and great is that humble servant of the Lord, who is inspired by the Fear of God and detached love, to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3]|
qd SHI ed A aS a a afer o fefs ad Il (1334-17, ust, He 3)
gur tay muhu fayray jay ko-ee gur kaa kahi-aa na chit Dharai.
If someone turns his face away from the Guru, and does not enshrine the Guru's Words in his consciousness
afa wmurg ag Hu He FH foe Ad A oof Ud ISI (1334-17, ysTst, He 3) kar aachaar baho sampa-o sanchai jo kichh karai so narak parai. ||4| |
- he may perform all sorts of rituals and accumulate wealth, but in the end, he will fall into hell. ||4]|
Sa Hae Sa us eas AS San 3 CsufS Vs I 1334-18, ysrst, ne 3)
ayko sabad ayko parabh vartai sabh aykas tay utpat chalai.
The One Shabad, the Word of the One God, is prevailing everywhere. All the creation came from the One Lord.
Soa Tanta nfs fre aenfa of ofs wife gS wunel 1334-18, ysrst, ne 3)
naanak gurmukh mayl milaa-ay gurmukh har har jaa-ay ralai. ||5||6] |
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is united in union. When the Gurmukh goes, he blends into the Lord, Har, Har. ||5||6||
Yystst HIS 3 Il (1334-19)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
Hd HO Ws Must ATEfT | (1334-19, ysrst, He 3)
mayray man gur apnaa saalaahi. O my mind, praise your Guru.
Yat 933u
us sg de Hfy HAS AE of & TS ahs nV TTS i (1335-1, ysrst, ue 3)
pooraa bhaag hovai mukh mastak sadaa har kay gun gaahi. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Perfect destiny is inscribed upon your forehead and face; sing the Praises of the Lord forever. ||1||Pause] |
nifys on sxe dfs SfF i 1335-1, ysrst, ne 3) amrit naam bhojan har day-ay. The Lord bestows the Ambrosial Food of the Naam.
afe Ho aet feaor SE it (1335-2, ysrst, He 3) kot maDhay ko-ee virlaa lay-ay. Out of millions, only a rare few receive it
fA & niuat sets ade All 1335-2, ysrst, He 3) jis no apnee nadar karay-i. ||1]| - only those who are blessed by God's Glance of Grace. ||1||
Td X BIE HS HT SAVE Il (1335-2, ysrst, ue 3) gur kay charan man maahi vasaa-ay. Whoever enshrines the Guru's Feet within his mind,
SY MST niga ATE Il (1335-3, ysrst, He 3) dukh an"ayraa andrahu jaa-ay. is rid of pain and darkness from within.
MY Arat we fete iQ 4335-3, ysrst, ue 3) aapay saachaa la-ay milaa-ay. ||2||
The True Lord unites him with Himself. ||2]| aa at aat AG afe fimrg il 1335-3, ysrst, He 3)
gur kee banee si-o laa-ay pi-aar. So embrace love for the Word of the Guru's Bani.
ma Ge Sg niarg il 1335-4, ysrst, He 3) aithai othai ayhu aDhaar. Here and hereafter, this is your only Support.
~ SA
my te fAaAoT ST ISI (1335-4, ysrst, Hs 3) aapay dayvai sirjanhaar. ||3]| The Creator Lord Himself bestows it. ||3]|
Ha" HOTS MUST STAT Il (1335-4, ysrst, He 3) sachaa manaa-ay apnaa bhaanaa. One whom the Lord inspires to accept His Will,
Het sas AWS AATST Il 1335-4, ysTst, He 3) so-ee bhagat sugharh sojaanaa. is a wise and knowing devotee.
Sod (SA A AT ATAST NUDNANDNVVSI (1335-5, ysrst, He 3)
naanak tis kai sad kurbaanaa. ||4||7||17]||7||24] | Nanak is forever a sacrifice to him. ||4]|7||17]|7||24] |
ysTst Hae 8 fasTA (1335-6) parbhaatee mehlaa 4 bibhaas Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl, Bibhaas:
qe Afsars YATE Il (1335-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ala Ale Ts Wes Tents fee Souls oth Bare Il (1335-7, ysrst fasrH, He 4)
rasak rasak gun gaavah gurmat liv unman naam lagaan.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with joyous love and delight; I am enraptured, lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
wifys dA uber ag Aaet JH oH feed AaHS IU! 4335-7, ysrst fasTH, Hs 4)
amrit ras pee-aa gur sabdee ham naam vitahu kurbaan. ||1]]|
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I drink in the Ambrosial Essence; I am a sacrifice to the Naam. ||1||
THe Adeleo Ths YS Il (1335-8, ysrst fram, we 4) hamray jagjeevan har paraan. The Lord, the Life of the World, is my Breath of Life.
fs Osu fee nists se afs Hs AES afs ars ual TTS il 1335-8, ysst fra, we 4) har ootam rid antar bhaa-i-o gur mant dee-o har kaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Lofty and Exalted Lord became pleasing to my heart and my inner being, when the Guru breathed the Mantra of the Lord into my ears. ||1]||Pause] |
nteg HS frog Ad avet fife afe afs on Tare Il (1335-9, ysrst fram, He 4)
aavhu sant milhu mayray bhaa-ee mil har har naam vakhaan.
Come, O Saints: let us join together, O Siblings of Destiny; let us meet and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
fas fafa fa@ ureht ys nus H a@ agg Buen afe ee II (1335-9, yest fren, He 4) kit biDh ki-o paa-ee-ai parabh apunaa mo ka-o karahu updays har daan. ||2|| How am I to find my God? Please bless me with the Gift of the Lord's Teachings. ||2| |
AsHats Hfo ofs ofs efrmr fife Hats ofs ae AS Il (1335-10, ysrst fraH, He 4) satsangat meh har har vasi-aa mil sangat har gun jaan.
The Lord, Har, Har, abides in the Society of the Saints; joining this Sangat, the Lord's Glories are known.
zs aa AsHafs uet ag Afsag uth sae] ISI 1335-11, yas fasrH, He 4)
vadai bhaag satsangat paa-ee gur satgur paras bhagvaan. ||3]|
By great good fortune, the Society of the Saints is found. Through the Guru, the True Guru, I receive the Touch of the Lord God. ||3]|
To Wed us MH SAT A To ats sd Fa Il (1335-12, ysrst form, ne 4)
gun gaavah parabh agam thaakur kay gun gaa-ay rahay hairaan.
I sing the Glorious Praises of God, my Inaccessible Lord and Master; singing His Praises, I am enraptured.
Ho sea ag afte fasur ust af an AG firs te ISI (1335-12, ysst fasrA, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o gur kirpaa Dhaaree har naam dee-o khin daan. ||4]|1]| The Guru has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; in an instant, He blessed him with the Gift of the Lord's Name. ||4]|1]|
YysTst HIS 8 Il (1335-13)
parbhaatee mehlaa 4. Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
Cae Ay TsHfe ofs data AS sfs Mela Tle aT Il (1335-13, ysrst, Hs 4)
ugvai soor gurmukh har boleh sabh rain sam"aalih har gaal.
With the rising of the sun, the Gurmukh speaks of the Lord. All through the night, he dwells upon the Sermon of the Lord.
THe yfs TH SI Bet TH ATT YS Ts SS MAU (1335-14, ysrst, we 4)
hamrai parabh ham loch lagaa-ee ham karah parabhoo har bhaal. ||1]|| My God has infused this longing within me; I seek my Lord God. ||1]|
Aa He ATT Ofs Tes I 1335-14, ysrst, He 4) mayraa man saaDhoo Dhoor ravaal. My mind is the dust of the feet of the Holy.
ofa ofs on feates afe Hilo ae ual stad TH IS UU! TIE Il 1335-15, ysrst, ue 4) har har naam darirh-aa-i-o gur meethaa gur pag jhaarah ham baal. ||1|| rahaa-o. The Guru has implanted the Sweet Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within me. I dust the Guru's Feet with my hair. ||1]]Pause| |
Has ag fee sf niordt Hfs ea Hfenr AS Il 1335-15, ust, He 4)
saakat ka-o din rain anDhaaree mohi faathay maa-i-aa jaal.
Dark are the days and nights of the faithless cynics; they are caught in the trap of attachment to Maya.
fas use ofa ys foe o afh fafe aa ag fafa ae IN 1335-16, yarst, He 4)
khin pal har parabh ridai na vasi-o rin baaDhay baho biDh baal. ||2]|
The Lord God does not dwell in their hearts, even for an instant; every hair of their heads is totally tied up in debts. ||2||
AsHats ffs Hf af uret IS SS HHS ANH Il (1335-17, ysrst, He 4)
satsangat mil mat buDh paa-ee ha-o chhootay mamtaa jaal.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, wisdom and understanding are obtained, and one is released from the traps of egotism and possessiveness.
dfs ont ofa His sare ats ae Aafe fogs ISI (335-17, yest, He 4)
har naamaa har meeth lagaanaa gur kee-ay sabad nihaal. ||3]| The Lord's Name, and the Lord, seem sweet to me. Through the Word of His Shabad, the Guru has made me happy. ||3]||
JH whet Td man TATE ae ate fagur yfsurs il 1335-18, ysrst, we 4)
ham baarik gur agam gusaa-ee gur kar kirpaa partipaal.
I am just a child; the Guru is the Unfathomable Lord of the World. In His Mercy, He cherishes and sustains me.
fay 3nS sae ate SI US Dd FSA IS TUS NII (1335-19, ysrst, ve 4)
bikh bha-ojal dubday kaadh layho parabh gur naanak baal gupaal. ||4]|2]|
I am drowning in the ocean of poison; O God, Guru, Lord of the World, please save Your child, Nanak. ||4]|2] |
YsTst HIS 8 Il (1335-19)
parbhaatee mehlaa 4. Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
fea fug afe ufs fas ost ae we IAA FAI Il 1335-19, ystst, ue 4)
ik khin har parabh kirpaa Dhaaree gun gaa-ay rasak raseek.
The Lord God showered me with His Mercy for an instant; I sing His Glorious Praises with joyous love and delight.
st I33E
Wes Hos eS se Has frat gente fas ate ute All 1336-1, ysrst, ns 4)
gaavat sunat do-oo bha-ay muktay jinaa gurmukh khin har peek. ||1||
Both the singer and the listener are liberated, when, as Gurmukh, they drink in the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||1]|
He nfs ofs ofs ot BH GA Stet I (1336-2, ysrst, He 4) mayrai man har har raam naam ras teek. The Sublime Essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is enshrined within my mind.
TaHfe oH Alse AS ufenr ots afs aH Ulor oA Ste INA TIS I (1336-2, ysrst, us 4) gurmukh naam seetal jal paa-i-aa har har naam pee-aa ras jheek. ||1]| rahaa-o.
As Gurmukh, I have obtained the cooling, soothing Water of the Naam. I eagerly drink in the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1]|Pause] |
fas fe fase ifs sarat far HASta SAS Ste I (1336-3, ys, Hs 4)
jin har hirdai pareet lagaanee tinaa mastak oojal teek.
Those whose hearts are imbued with the Love of the Lord have the mark of radiant purity upon their foreheads.
ofs we Ast AS Aa Cute fae fete Soe AfA ater NII (1336-4, ysrst, Hs 4)
har jan sobhaa sabh jag oopar ji-o vich udvaa sas keek. ||2]|
The Glory of the Lord's humble servant is manifest throughout the world, like the moon among the stars. ||2]|
fro ofa fase oy 3 cH fsa Afs aan Ser Il (1336-4, ysTst, He 4)
jin har hirdai naam na vasi-o tin sabh kaaraj feek.
Those whose hearts are not filled with the Lord's Name - all their affairs are worthless and insipid.
AA Htergd ad fo HOU on for sae Ba Ale ISM (1336-5, ysTst, He 4)
jaisay seegaar karai dayh maanukh naam binaa naktay nak keek. ||3]|
They may adorn and decorate their bodies, but without the Naam, they look like their noses have been cut off. ||3]|
ufe wfe sHeer sus on af AS eos AS fo Ste Il (1336-5, yas, He 4)
ghat ghat rama-ee-aa ramat raam raa-ay sabh vartai sabh meh eek. The Sovereign Lord permeates each and every heart; the One Lord is all-pervading everywhere.
Ho sea ag dfs fagu ust ad suo foMrfes wet Hie sisi 1336-6, ysrst, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o har kirpaa Dhaaree gur bachan Dhi-aa-i-o gharee meek. ||4][3]| The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, I have meditated on the Lord in an instant. ||4]|3]|
YsTst HIS 8 Il (1336-7)
parbhaatee mehlaa 4. Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
ma efenis fut ufs ordt ufy afs afe oH TH AP Il (1336-7, ustst, He 4)
agam da-i-aal kirpaa parabh Dhaaree mukh har har naam ham kahay. God, the Inaccessible and Merciful, has showered me with His Mercy; I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with my mouth.
ufss urea dfs an fomrfes nafs faofaa ure Be IAI (1336-8, ysTst, He 4)
patit paavan har naam Dhi-aa-i-o sabh kilbikh paap lahay. ||1]|
I meditate on the Name of the Lord, the Purifier of sinners; I am rid of all my sins and mistakes. ||1]|
Afu He TH BH Sle Fd Il (1336-8, ysst, He 4) jap man raam naam rav rahay. O mind, chant the Name of the All-pervading Lord.
ae vfeors eu sno aes gas on ues Bd NA TIS Il 1336-9, ysrst, He 4) deen da-i-aal dukh bhanjan gaa-i-o gurmat naam padaarath lahay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
I sing the Praises of the Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pain. Following the Guru's Teachings, I gather in the Wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
afer sate safe ofs afAS nfs aaHfs afs afe Ad Il (1336-9, ysrst, ve 4)
kaa-i-aa nagar nagar har basi-o mat gurmat har har sahay.
The Lord abides in the body-village; through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed.
Aoife dete om ofe yates wis Hefe afe yg Bd II (1336-10, ysst, Hs 4)
sareer Sarovar naam har pargati-o ghar mandar har parabh lahay. ||2]|
In the lake of the body, the Lord's Name has been revealed. Within my own home and mansion, I have obtained the Lord God. ||2||
A dd SoH SoH Cfeurds 3 AAS HS HT I (1336-11, yarst, Hs 4)
jo nar bharam bharam udi-aanay tay saakat moorh muhay.
Those beings who wander in the wilderness of doubt - those faithless cynics are foolish, and are plundered.
fa@ fya ofs aA aA SAO af sfHG sro ae ISI (1336-11, ysst, He 4)
ji-o marig naabh basai baas basnaa bharam bharmi-o jhaar gahay. ||3]||
They are like the deer: the scent of musk comes from its own navel, but it wanders and roams around, searching for it in the bushes. ||3]|
3H @s wan warfa Sfo ys HfS te afe ys Be Il (1336-12, ysst, He 4)
tum vad agam agaaDh boDh parabh mat dayvhu har parabh lahay.
You are Great and Unfathomable; Your Wisdom, God, is Profound and Incomprehensible. Please bless me with that wisdom, by which I might attain You, O Lord God.
Ho soa a ats we fafs ofs6 ofs oH OTH afe 3d ISISII (1336-13, ysst, He 4)
jan naanak ka-o gur haath sir Dhari-o har raam naam rav rahay. ||4||4|| The Guru has placed His Hand upon servant Nanak; he chants the Name of the Lord. [141141]
YsTst HIS 8 Il (1336-13)
parbhaatee mehlaa 4. Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
Hfs oat utfs aH on ate afs AfuUs afs ys ese Il 1336-14, ysst, He 4)
man laagee pareet raam naam har har japi-o har parabh vadfaa.
My mind is in love with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; I meditate on the Great Lord God.
Afsag aeo AUS dre afs oct ofa ys faue|r ual (1336-14, ysst, He 4)
satgur bachan sukhaanay hee-arai har Dhaaree har parabh kirpfaa. ||1]|
The Word of the True Guru has become pleasing to my heart. The Lord God has showered me with His Grace. ||1]|
Hd HO SH TH OM Jia feHye|r Il (1336-15, ysrst, He 4) mayray man bhaj raam naam har nimkhafaa. O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord's Name every instant.
ofs af we AGS afs us af ant Hfs Sis SASF NU TIS Il 1336-15, ysrst, ws 4)
har har daan dee-o gur poorai har naamaa man tan basfaa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru has blessed me with the gift of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The Lord's Name abides in my mind and body. ||1]||Pause] |
afenr safe eae wis Hefs afl ret aoufy aaue|r Il 1336-16, yas, He 4) kaa-i-aa nagar vasi-o ghar mandar jap sobhaa gurmukh karpafaa.
The Lord abides in the body-village, in my home and mansion. As Gurmukh, I meditate on His Glory.
Jars uals AS se AIS HY CAS TsHfe Sa|r MQM (1336-17, ysrst, He 4)
halat palat jan bha-ay suhaylay mukh oojal gurmukh tarfaa. ||2||
Here and hereafter, the Lord's humble servants are embellished and exalted; their faces are radiant; as Gurmukh, they are carried across. ||2| |
nose dfs ofa ofs fee oat afs Ba ofa afe feHeer il 1336-17, ysrst, He 4) anbha-o har har har liv laagee har ur Dhaari-o gur nimkhafaa.
I am lovingly attuned to the Fearless Lord, Har, Har, Har; through the Guru, I have enshrined the Lord within my heart in an instant.
afe afe & eu AS Ho & ate ofa ae fea UB|T SI (1336-18, yas, He 4)
kot kot kay dokh sabh jan kay har door kee-ay ik palfaa. ||3]|
Millions upon millions of the faults and mistakes of the Lord's humble servant are all taken away in an instant. ||3]|
SHe AS SH Tt 3 WS US ATES AS 3 HUST Il (1336-19, ysrst, He 4)
tumray jan tum hee tay jaanay parabh jaani-o jan tay mukhfaa.
Your humble servants are known only through You, God; knowing You, they becomes supreme.
ofa of wiry ofa afs ae ufo AS Soa Jie ys fea|T NSU (1336-19, ysTst, He 4)
har har aap Dhari-o har jan meh jan naanak har parabh ikfaa. ||4||5|| The Lord, Har, Har, has enshrined Himself within His humble servant. O Nanak, the Lord God and His servant are one and the same. ||4||5]|
Yat 9339
YysTst HIS 8 Il (1337-1)
parbhaatee mehlaa 4. Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
ad Afsate on festes ofs ofs gH He Ae ofa AfuST II (1337-1, ysrst, He 4)
gur satgur naam darirh-aa-i-o har har ham mu-ay jeevay har japibhaa.
The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord within me. I was dead, but chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been brought back to life.
U9 U9 ag ag Afsag us fay sae a Sf atest Al (1337-2, ysst, He 4)
Dhan Dhan guroo gur satgur pooraa bikh dubday baah day-ay kadhibhaa. ||1]| Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru; He reached out to me with His Arm, and pulled me up and out of the ocean of poison. ||1]|
Afy He TH BH vaUtST II (1337-3, ysrst, Hs 4) jap man raam naam arDhaa‘bhaa. O mind, meditate and worship the Lord's Name.
Curifl Surfs o ureint asg ate us ate ys HS UU FHS il 1337-3, ysst, vs 4) upjamp upaa-ay na paa-ee-ai kathoo gur poorai har parabh laabhaa. ||1]|| rahaa-o. God is never found, even by making all sorts of new efforts. The Lord God is obtained only through the Perfect Guru. ||1]|Pause| |
TH OH SA TH GATES GA Ur aSHfS SAS Il (1337-4, ysrst,, Hs 4)
raam naam ras raam rasaa-in ras pee-aa gurmat rasbhaa.
The Sublime Essence of the Lord's Name is the source of nectar and bliss; drinking in this Sublime Essence, following the Guru's Teachings, I have become happy.
BI Hod ave fife Hats afs Sa ofeS afs afast i (1337-4, ysst, we 4)
loh manoor kanchan mil sangat har ur Dhaari-o gur haribhaa. ||2| |
Even iron slag is transformed into gold, joining the Lord's Congregation. Through the Guru, the Lord's Light is enshrined within the heart. ||2| |
ICH fatmr fos ofs sas us aes Hfa ofsar Il 1337-5, yas, He 4)
ha-umai bikhi-aa nit lobh lubhaanay put kalat mohi lubhibhaa.
Those who are continually lured by greed, egotism and corruption, who are lured away by emotional attachment to their children and spouse
f36 Ud HS 3 AS Aad S HOH FI FIST" ISM (1337-6, ysrst, we 4)
tin pag sant na sayvay kabhoo tay manmukh bhoombhar bharbhaa. ||3] |
- they never serve at the feet of the Saints; those self-willed manmukhs are filled with ashes. ||3]|
SHI To 3H dt Ys ASg JH ud Ig SH AdSs Il (1337-6, ysst, we 4)
tumray gun tum hee parabh jaanhu ham paray haar tum sarnabhaa.
O God, You alone know Your Glorious Virtues; I have grown weary - I seek Your Sanctuary.
fiG Wag (38 mag AnMi AS SSA SA SHOT IVIEM (1337-7, ysrst, v8 4)
ji-o jaanhu ti-o raakho su-aamee jan naanak daas tumnabhaa. ||4]|6||
As You know best, You preserve and protect me, O my Lord and Master; servant Nanak is Your slave. ||4||6]|
sat 4 Il (1337-7)
chhakaa 1. First Set of Six] |
ysTst fasTA USS HIB 8 (1337-8)
parbhaatee bibhaas parh-taal mehlaa 4 Prabhaatee, Bibhaas, Partaal, Fourth Mehl:
qe fsa YATE I (1337-8) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
afu He dfs ofa aH fears Il (1337-9, ysrst faarn, He 4) jap man har har naam niDhaan. O mind, meditate on the Treasure of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Ufs Saad usta HS Il (1337-9, ysrst fasrH, He 4) har dargeh paavahi maan. You shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
fafe Afumr 3 us uss A TIS Il 1337-9, ysrst frarA, He 4) jin japi-aa tay paar paraan. ||1|| rahaa-o. Those who chant and meditate shall be carried across to the other shore. ||1]||Pause| |
Afe Ho of dfs oH ate flrs Il (1337-10, ysrst fasrn, He 4) sun man har har naam kar Dhi-aan. Listen, O mind: meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Hie Ho dfs ates wieAfS HATS II (1337-10, ysTst fasrn, He 4)
sun man har keerat athsath majaan.
Listen, O mind: the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is equal to bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Af Ho TaHfe uefa HTS NA (1337-10, ysTst fasrA, He 4) sun man gurmukh paavahi maan. ||1|| Listen, O mind: as Gurmukh, you shall be blessed with honor. ||1||
Af He USHA UsUS Il (1337-11, ysrst fasrn, He 4) jap man parmaysur parDhaan. O mind, chant and meditate on the Supreme Transcendent Lord God.
firs HS Ty AS|TS I (1337-11, ysrst farm, ve 4) khin khovai paap kotaan. Millions of sins shall be destroyed in an instant.
fHe Sea Ths SASS MAUD I 1337-11, ysrst fasrA, He 4)
mil naanak har bhagvaan. |[{2||1||71| O Nanak, you shall meet with the Lord God. ||2||1]|7]|
ystst Hoe u fasTA (1337-13) parbhaatee mehlaa 5 bibhaas Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas:
qe Afsars yrrfe il 1337-13) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ho dfs amr 36 AS ATM Il (1337-14, ysrst faarA, He 5) man har kee-aa tan sabh saaji-aa. The Lord created the mind, and fashioned the entire body.
us 33 fe Afs feefaor Il 1337-14, yarst faorH, He 5) panch tat rach jot nivaaji-aa. From the five elements, He formed it, and infused His Light within it.
fram usts sese a urat il 0337-14, ysrst fasrm, v2 5) sihjaa Dharat bartan ka-o paanee. He made the earth its bed, and water for it to use.
fond 3 ferred Ae Afsaurst NAM (1337-15, ysTst fasrA, He 5) nimakh na visaarahu sayvhu saarigpaanee. ||1|| Do not forget Him for an instant; serve the Lord of the World. ||1]|
Ho Asad Afe df= us TS Il 1337-15, ysrst fan, He 5) man satgur sayv ho-ay param gatay. O mind, serve the True Guru, and obtain the supreme status.
Jed Aa 3 sala feos st gz urefs yous AU! TIS Ml (1337-15, ysrst fromm, we 5) harakh sog tay raheh niraaraa taa‘ too paavahi paranpatay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
If you remain unattached and unaffected by sorrow and joy, then you shall find the Lord of Life. ||1]|Pause] |
aus sa JA mfx SIS Il (1337-16, ysrst fasrH, v2 5) kaaparh bhog ras anik bhunchaa-ay. He makes all the various pleasures, clothes and foods for you to enjoy.
HS fust ASe Aas FOS Il 1337-16, ysrst fasrH, ve 5) maat pitaa kutamb sagal banaa-ay. He made your mother, father and all relatives.
fara AHS Ale afs HTS I 1337-17, ysrst from, v8 5) rijak samaahay jal thal meet. He provides sustenance to all, in the water and on the land, O friend.
A ofa Reg atst ats M21 (1337-17, ysrst fasrn, v2 5) so har sayvhu neetaa neet. ||2|| So serve the Lord, forever and ever. ||2]|
so Aeret wo af= o JS Il (1337-17, ysrst fas, He 5) tahaa sakhaa-ee jah ko-ay na hovai. He shall be your Helper and Support there, where no one else can help you.
afe mura fea firs Hfs GS i 1337-18, yest framH, He 5) kot apraaDh ik khin meh Dhovadi. He washes away millions of sins in an instant.
ats ad Sdt UES Il (1337-18, yarst fasrH, He 5) daat karai nahee pachhotaavai. He bestows His Gifts, and never regrets them.
Sar aun fefs safe o gees NSN (1337-18, yest fusrn, He 5) aykaa bakhas fir bahur na bulaavai. ||3]| He forgives, once and for all, and never asks for one's account again. ||3]|
Uat 933t faxss Anat ufeor ais | 1338-1, ysrst fon, v2 5)
kirat sanjogee paa-i-aa bhaal. By pre-ordained destiny, I have searched and found God.
AGHats Hfs SA TU ll 1338-1, yest feern, 2 5) saaDhsangat meh basay gupaal. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World abides.
ae fife wre SHS BME Il (1338-1, ysrst fon, He 5) gur mil aa-ay tumrai du-aar. Meeting with the Guru, I have come to Your Door.
HS SOA PIAS UT HAs NIA (1338-2, ysrst fra, He 5) jan naanak darsan dayh muraar. ||4||1]| O Lord, please bless servant Nanak with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||4]|1]|
YysTst HIS U Il (1338-2)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
ys at AS Ho at AST Il (1338-2, yarst, He 5) parabh kee sayvaa jan kee sobhaa. Serving God, His humble servant is glorified.
am au fe fsH Sar il 1338-3, ysrst, ne 5) kaam kroDh mitay tis lobhaa. Unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger and unsatisfied greed are eradicated.
oH 3d Ho a Sates Il (1338-3, ysrst, He 5) naam tayraa jan kai bhandaar. Your Name is the treasure of Your humble servant.
qo wets ys aA furs All 1338-3, ysrst, He 5) gun gaavahi parabh daras pi-aar. ||1]|| Singing His Praises, I am in love with the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||1]|
Hot sats ys SHfs Aart Il (1338-4, ysrst, He 5) tumree bhagat parabh tumeh janaa-ee. You are known, O God, by Your devotees.
ate Hed HS Be saveSt uA TIS il 1338-4, ysrst, vs 5) kaat jayvree jan lee-ay chhadaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Breaking their bonds, You emancipate them. ||1]|Pause| |
A Ae TS us a Sa Il (1338-4, ysrst, we 5) jo jan raataa parabh kai rang. Those humble beings who are imbued with God's Love
fefs ry urfeur ys & Afar il 1338-5, ysrst, Hs 5) tin sukh paa-i-aa parabh kai sang. find peace in God's Congregation.
fan oA otfenr Het AS Il (1338-5, ysTst, He 5) jis ras aa-i-aa so-ee jaanai. They alone understand this, to whom this subtle essence comes.
Ufa Ufa He Hfs TIS NM 338-5, ysst, He 5) paykh paykh man meh hairaanai. ||2]| Beholding it, and gazing upon it, in their minds they are wonderstruck. ||2||
A Ader AS 3 OSH ALE Il (1338-6, ysrst, we 5) so sukhee-aa sabh tay ootam so-ay. They are at peace, the most exalted of all,
vw ot fge efi ys Ae I 1338-6, ysrst, He 5) jaa kai hirdai vasi-aa parabh so-ay. within whose hearts God dwells.
Het fase wire o ATE Il 1338-6, ysrst, He 5) so-ee nihchal aavai na jaa-ay. They are stable and unchanging; they do not come and go in reincarnation.
mofeg us & Td Te AE SI (1338-7, ysrst, ne 5) an-din parabh kay har gun gaa-ay. ||3]|| Night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3]|
3' AG ATI Aas SHAA Il (1338-7, ysrst, ve 5) taa ka-o karahu sagal namaskaar. All bow down in humble respect to those
Wa His use faders il 1338-7, ust, Hs 5) jaa kai man pooran nirankaar. whose minds are filled with the Formless Lord.
afa fasur Hf Stag FEST I (1338-8, ysrst, He 5) kar kirpaa mohi thaakur dayvaa. Show mercy unto me, O my Divine Lord and Master.
Soa Bud AS at AST SII (1338-8, ysTSt, He 5) naanak uDhrai jan kee sayvaa. ||4]|2]| May Nanak be saved, by serving these humble beings. ||4||2||
YysTst HIS U Il (1338-8)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
ae Wes yf de me i 1338-9, ysrst, v2 5) gun gaavat man ho-ay anand. Singing His Glorious Praises, the mind is in ecstasy.
mS ud fAHSe saes Il (1338-9, ysrst, He 5) aath pahar simra-o bhagvant. Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate in remembrance on God.
wv ot finrafs amon Ate I (1338-9, ystst, He 5) jaa kai simran kalmal jaahi. Remembering Him in meditation, the sins go away.
fSA Td at IH saat us IAI 4338-9, ysrst, He 5) tis gur kee ham charnee paahi. ||1]| I fall at the Feet of that Guru. ||1]|
HHfs eg AS fimrs il 1338-10, ysrst, He 5) Sumat dayvhu sant pi-aaray. O beloved Saints, please bless me with wisdom;
fans oy Hfo fersTs ail TIE Il (1338-10, ysrst, He 5)
simra-O naam mohi nistaaray. ||1|| rahaa-o.
let me meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and be emancipated. ||1]|Pause] |
fate af afoor yaar Alor |i 1338-11, ysrst, vs 5) jin gur kahi-aa maarag seeDhaa. The Guru has shown me the straight path;
Hare fsurtat ath afe ator i 1338-11, yest, He 5)
Sagal ti-aag naam har geeDhaa. I have abandoned everything else. I am enraptured with the Name of the Lord.
fsH aa a Ae fs ASH Il 1338-11, ysrst, He 5) tis gur kai sadaa bal jaa-ee-ai. I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru;
dfs fanes fan ae 3 USP N21 1338-12, ysst, He 5) har simran jis gur tay paa-ee-ai. ||2|| I meditate in remembrance on the Lord, through the Guru. ||2||
ass uot fate ass safeur it 1338-12, ysrst, ve 5) boodat paraanee jin gureh taraa-i-aa. The Guru carries those mortal beings across, and saves them from drowning.
fan yAfe Ho oot Hf I (1338-13, ysrst, He 5) jis parsaad mohai nahee maa-i-aa. By His Grace, they are not enticed by Maya;
Jos ues fafs asts Aeon Il (1338-13, ysrst, Hs 5) halat palat jin gureh savaari-aa. in this world and the next, they are embellished and exalted by the Guru.
fsH as Sufs Het IG Stomr 13 1338-13, ysrst, He 5) tis gur oopar sadaa ha-o vaari-aa. ||3]| I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru. ||3]|
Ho Ha 3 abhor famirat il 1338-14, ysrst, ue 5) mahaa mugaDh tay kee-aa gi-aanee. From the most ignorant, I have been made spiritually wise,
TT UT At Maa TITAT Il (1338-14, ysrst, Hz 5) gur pooray kee akath kahaanee. through the Unspoken Speech of the Perfect Guru.
UTSYIH SSA TIeS Il (1338-14, ysrst, we 5) paarbarahm naanak gurdayv. The Divine Guru, O Nanak, is the Supreme Lord God.
zs afar ure ofa AS NSISI (1338-15, ys, He 5) vadai bhaag paa-ee-ai har sayv. ||4||3]]| By great good fortune, I serve the Lord. ||4|[3]|
YysTst HIS U Il (1338-15)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Hae we fue Ae He mrs oy Aufenr i 1338-15, ysst, He 5)
saglay dookh mitay sukh dee-ay apnaa naam japaa-i-aa.
Eradicating all my pains, He has blessed me with peace, and inspired me to chant His Name.
ate fagur must AS we Aare vas freer Il (1338-16, ysrst, He 5)
kar kirpaa apnee sayvaa laa-ay saglaa durat mitaa-i-aa. ||1|| In His Mercy, He has enjoined me to His service, and has purged me of all my sins.
[4] JH Mf Asfs ys CfEnrs Il (1338-16, ysrst, ve 5)
ham baarik saran parabh da-i-aal. I am only a child; I seek the Sanctuary of God the Merciful.
niede ofe tte ufs mud ofe ste AS ae serfs Na TIS lt 1338-17, ysrst, ve 5) avgan kaat kee-ay parabh apunay raakh lee-ay mayrai gur gopaal. ||1|| rahaa-o. Erasing my demerits and faults, God has made me His Own. My Guru, the Lord of the World, protects me. ||1||Pause| |
avy uy far fas stafe se furs TASH Il (1338-17, ysrst, He 5)
taap paap binsay khin bheetar bha-ay kirpaal gusaa-ee.
My sicknesses and sins were erased in an instant, when the Lord of the World became merciful.
AfA ata ureqoy mat nud Afsae & af Are QI 1338-18, yest, He 5)
Saas Saas paarbarahm araaDhee apunay satgur kai bal jaa-ee. ||2||
With each and very breath, I worship and adore the Supreme Lord God; Iama sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2] |
Wa vided femis Homi st at nis o ure Il (1338-19, ysrst, He 5)
agam agochar bi-ant su-aamee taa kaa ant na paa-ee-di.
My Lord and Master is Inaccessible, Unfathomable and Infinite. His limits cannot be found.
wa ufe cet caest mya ys foment Sil (1338-19, yas, He 5) laahaa khaat ho-ee-ai Dhanvantaa apunaa parabhoo Dhi-aa-ee-ai. ||3]| We earn the profit, and become wealthy, meditating on our God. ||3]|
Yar yaa
mS UdT UTSAIH fomret Het Het TS afEnr it 1339-1, ysrst, ve 5)
aath pahar paarbarahm Dhi-aa-ee sadaa sadaa gun gaa-i-aa.
Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on the Supreme Lord God; I sing His Glorious Praises forever and ever.
TI SSA AT YS HIG USAIN TT uUfenr usigil (1339-2, ysrst, we 5)
kaho naanak mayray pooray manorath paarbarahm gur paa-i-aa. ||4||4||
Says Nanak, my desires have been fulfilled; I have found my Guru, the Supreme Lord God. ||4]|4]|
YysTst HIS U Il (1339-2)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
fines an fafa Afs oA Il 1339-2, ysrst, us 5) simrat naam kilbikh sabh naasay. Meditating in rememberance on the Naam, all my sins have been erased.
Ad oH afe stot TA Il (1339-3, ysrst, ve 5) sach naam gur deenee raasay. The Guru has blessed me with the Capital of the True Name.
ys at edad ASSS Il (1339-3, ysrst, ne 5) parabh kee dargeh sobhaavantay. God's servants are embellished and exalted in His Court;
Rea Afe Het ATS WAU (1339-3, ysrst, He 5) sayvak sayv sadaa sohantay. ||1]| serving Him, they look beauteous forever. ||1||
dfs ofs SH Aug Hs SET Il (1339-4, ysrst, He 5) har har naam japahu mayray bhaa-ee. Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my Siblings of Destiny.
Has da eu Afs faonfs nifamrg nite ue 3 AST NAN TIS Il 1339-4, ysrst, He 5) saglay rog dokh sabh binsahi agi-aan anDhayraa man tay jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. All sickness and sin shall be erased; your mind shall be rid of the darkness of ignorance. ||1||Pause| |
HOH HdO Tfs aa HTS Il (1339-5, ysrst, He 5) janam maran gur raakhay meet. The Guru has saved me from death and rebirth, O friend;
dfs & OH fAG orait ytfS i (1339-5, ysrst, ne 5) har kay naam si-o laagee pareet. I am in love with the Name of the Lord.
afe AH A TE ABA Il (1339-5, ysst, we 5) kot janam kay ga-ay kalays. The suffering of millions of incarnations is gone;
A fSA TS A IG FA IQIl (1339-6, yas, He 5) jo tis bhaavai so bhal hos. ||2] | whatever pleases Him is good. ||2||
fan ad aB IG Ae af ATT II (1339-6, ysrst, He 5) tis gur ka-o ha-o sad bal jaa-ee. I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru;
fan uATfe of aH fomret It 1339-6, ysrst, He 5) jis parsaad har naam Dhi-aa-ee. by His Grace, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
MAT Te usb Zsarait | (1339-7, ysrst, ws 5) aisaa gur paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee. By great good fortune, such a Guru is found;
fra fees an fee oat SBI 4339-7, ysst, He 5)
jis miltay raam liv laagee. ||3]| meeting Him, one is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||3]||
ate fasur ursqaH Avimt || 4339-7, ysrst, ue 5) kar kirpaa paarbarahm su-aamee. Please be merciful, O Supreme Lord God, O Lord and Master,
Aas wet & isa i 1339-8, ysrst, ns 5) sagal ghataa kay antarjaamee. Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts.
MTS Udd Must fee STE Il 1339-8, ysrst, He 5) aath pahar apunee liv laa-ay. Twenty-four hours a day, I am lovingly attuned to You.
AG Sod ys at Agate isiull (1339-8, ysrst, ue 5) jan naanak parabh kee sarnaa-ay. ||4]|5|| Servant Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. ||4]|5]|
YysTst HIS U Il (1339-9)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
ate fasur nud ufs ate i 1339-9, ysrst, ne 5) kar kirpaa apunay parabh kee-ay. In His Mercy, God has made me His Own.
Ts XT SH AUS AS SE Il (1339-9, ysrst, ns 5) har kaa naam japan ka-o dee-ay. He has blessed me with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
MTS UIT To ate afse il (1339-9, ysrst, He 5) aath pahar gun gaa-ay gubind. Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
3 faon Gact AS fee NAN (1339-10, ysTst, He 5) bhai binsay utree sabh chind. ||1]| Fear is dispelled, and all anxiety has been alleviated. ||1]||
Gad Afsagd seat Star Il (1339-10, ysrst, He 5) ubray satgur charnee laag. I have been saved, touching the Feet of the True Guru.
A dg ad Het 3m Hie Ho at Hfs faurfar nail Tr Il 1339-10, ysrst, He 5)
jo gur kahai so-ee bhal meethaa man kee mat ti-aag. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Whatever the Guru says is good and sweet to me. I have renounced the intellectual wisdom of my mind. ||1||Pause] |
fe 3fe efimr afs ys Aet Il (1339-11, ysrst, He 5)
man tan vasi-aa har parabh so-ee. That Lord God abides within my mind and body.
afe aen foe faurs o det II 1339-11, ysrst, He 5) kal kalays kichh bighan na ho-ee. There are no conflicts, pains or obstacles.
Ret Het us riba & Afar i (1339-12, ysrst, ue 5) sadaa sadaa parabh jee-a kai sang. Forever and ever, God is with my soul.
Bsdt HS oH a fa NM 1339-12, yest, He 5) utree mail naam kai rang. ||2|| Filth and pollution are washed away by the Love of the Name. ||2] |
3dIo AHS fA sai fimirag il 1339-12, yas, He 5) charan kamal si-o laago pi-aar. I am in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord;
faoR aH aU MATS Il (1339-13, yarst, He 5) binsay kaam kroDh aha‘kaar. I am no longer consumed by sexual desire, anger and egotism.
ys foo a Hea AST Il (1339-13, ysrst, He 5) parabh milan kaa maarag jaanaa". Now, I know the way to meet God.
ate sats ots fAG He HST ISI (1339-13, ysrst, He 5) bhaa-ay bhagat har si-o man maanaa”. ||3]| Through loving devotional worship, my mind is pleased and appeased with the Lord.
[I3I|
Hfs AME AS HIS AIS Il (1339-14, ysrst, He 5) sun sajan sant meet suhaylay. Listen, O friends, Saints, my exalted companions.
SH ISO Ts Mad MSS Il (1339-14, ysrst, v2 5) naam ratan har agah atolay. The Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is unfathomable and immeasurable.
Ret Het us Fe fofa wey I (1339-14, ysst, ve 5) sadaa sadaa parabh gun niDh gaa-ee-ai. Forever and ever, sing the Glories of God, the Treasure of Virtue.
AT Sa SsoTat ure ISiEll (1339-15, ysrst, He 5) kaho naanak vadbhaagee paa-ee-ai. ||4||6|| Says Nanak, by great good fortune, He is found. ||4||6]|
YystTst HIS U Il (1339-15)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
A Uoes ASt AY ATS Il (1339-15, ystst, He 5) say Dhanvant say-ee sach saahaa. They are wealthy, and they are the true merchants,
dfs at Fda SH FEAT AU (1339-16, ysTst, He 5)
har kee dargeh naam visaahaa. ||1|| who have the credit of the Naam in the Court of the Lord. ||1]|
dfs ots SH AUT HS HIS Il (1339-16, ysrst, He 5) har har naam japahu man meet. So chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in your mind, my friends.
Ts us urea zssrat fosHs yss SHS ua TIS il (1339-16, ys, us 5)
gur pooraa paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee nirmal pooran reet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune, and then one's lifestyle becomes perfect and immaculate. ||1]||Pause||
urfent ag set Sarat Il (1339-17, ysrst, He 5) paa-i-aa laabh vajee vaaDhaa-ee. They earn the profit, and the congratulations pour in;
Ha yAtfe ofe & Ts Wet ikl (1339-17, ysrst, us 5) sant parsaad har kay gun gaa-ee. ||2]| by the Grace of the Saints, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
HES HOH Aleo UTSTS Il (1339-18, ysTst, He 5) safal janam jeevan parvaan. Their lives are fruitful and prosperous, and their birth is approved;
ad usAet ofs Fa HS Ill (1339-18, ysrst, He 5) gur parsaadee har rang maan. ||3]| by Guru's Grace, they enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||3]|
faoR AH AT niarg Il (1339-18, ysrst, He 5) binsay kaam kroDh aha‘kaar. Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away;
Sea THY Ssate ufs silDil 1339-19, ysrst, vs 5) naanak gurmukh utreh paar. ||4||7]| O Nanak, as Gurmukh, they are carried across to the other shore. ||4||7||
ystst HIS U Il (1339-19)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
TT UT st St at AS I (1339-19, ysrst, we 5) gur pooraa pooree taa kee kalaa. The Guru is Perfect, and Perfect is His Power.
UST Y38o
ad A Aad Ae’ Ae Mes Il (1340-1, ysrst, Hs 5) gur kaa sabad sadaa sad atlaa. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is unchanging, forever and ever.
Ts ot wet fra His SA il Ty VIE A ST aT SA AI (1340-1, ysst, we 5)
gur kee banee jis man vasai. dookh darad sabh taa kaa nasai. ||1||
All pains and afflictions run away from those, whose minds are filled with the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1]|
dfs dat TS HE TH TS We Il (1340-2, ysrst, ve 5) har rang raataa man raam gun gaavai. Imbued with the Lord's Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Has AY Ost aS AU TIS ll 1340-2, ysrst, we 5) mukto saaDhoo Dhooree naavai. ||1|| rahaa-o. They are liberated, bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1]|Pause] |
ad usAret Bag urfs il (1340-2, ysrst, He 5)
gur parsaadee utray paar. By Guru's Grace, they are carried across to the other shore;
38 saH faor fears Il (1340-3, ysrst, He 5) bha-o bharam binsay bikaar. they are rid of fear, doubt and corruption.
HO 36 Mists SA TT BIO" ll (1340-3, yarst, nz 5) man tan antar basay gur charnaa. The Guru's Feet abide deep within their minds and bodies.
fogs ATG ud Tis APS MQM (1340-3, ys, He 5)
nirbhai saaDh paray har sarnaa. ||2|| The Holy are fearless; they take to the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2| |
Woe AIH TA AY Wd Il (1340-4, ysrst, He 5) anad sahj ras sookh ghanayray. They are blessed with abundant bliss, happiness, pleasure and peace.
SANG SY B MS ST Il (1340-4, ysrst, Hs 5) dusman dookh na aavai nayray. Enemies and pains do not even approach them.
Gifs us mys afs aa it 1340-4, ust, us 5) gur poorai apunay kar raakhay. The Perfect Guru makes them His Own, and protects them.
dfs oH Aus faofay Afs Bes Sil (1340-4, ysrst, ue 5) har naam japat kilbikh sabh laathay. ||3]| Chanting the Lord's Name, they are rid of all their sins. ||3]|
H3 AHS fia Fe AIS Il 1340-5, ysrst, ve 5) sant saajan sikh bha-ay suhaylay. The Saints, spiritual companions and Sikhs are exalted and uplifted.
afs us ys fA & HS i 0340-5, ysst, ws 5) gur poorai parabh si-o lai maylay. The Perfect Guru leads them to meet God.
HOH HIS FU Sto" afEni Il (1340-5, ysrst, He 5) janam maran dukh faahaa kaati-aa. The painful noose of death and rebirth is snapped.
aT soa dfs user afer siti (1340-6, ysrst, Hz 5)
kaho naanak gur parh-daa dhaaki-aa. ||4||8]| Says Nanak, the Guru covers their faults. ||4]|8]|
YystTst HIS U Il (1340-6)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Afsafs us SH Shor Il (1340-6, ysrst, Hs 5) satgur poorai naam dee-aa. The Perfect True Guru has bestowed the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Moe Has afemite HET AY asH Aare aA shor Al TIS tl 1340-7, ysrst, ve 5)
anad mangal kali-aan sadaa sukh kaaraj saglaa raas thee-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
I am blessed with bliss and happiness, emancipation and eternal peace. All my affairs have been resolved. ||1]||Pause| |
TIS AHS WI A His FS Il (1340-8, ysrst, Hz 5) charan kamal gur kay man voothay. The Lotus Feet of the Guru abide within my mind.
wy Use gH PISA BS AU (1340-8, ysrst, He 5) dookh darad bharam binsay jhoothay. ||1]| I am rid of pain, suffering, doubt and fraud. ||1]||
fos @fs areg ys at aret Il 4340-8, ysrst, ne 5) nit uth gaavhu parabh kee banee. Rise early, and sing the Glorious Word of God's Bani.
mS Udd ofa fAHeT yrat iQ (1340-9, ysrst, He 5) aath pahar har simrahu paraanee. ||2|| Twenty-four hours a day, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, O mortal. ||2]|
ufs wafs ys Asst Bret i (1340-9, ysrst, ws 5) ghar baahar parabh sabhnee thaa-ee. Inwardly and outwardly, God is everywhere.
Afar Aoet AT IG Aret SI 4340-9, ysrst, He 5) sang sahaa-ee jah ha-o jaa-ee. ||3]| Wherever I go, He is always with me, my Helper and Support. ||3] |
efe ag Afs adt meth il (1340-10, yas, He 5)
du-ay kar jorh karee ardaas. With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.
He AU Bog PSSA ISIC (1340-10, ysrst, He 5) sadaa japay naanak guntaas. ||4||9|| O Nanak, I meditate forever on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||4||9||
YystTst HIS U Il (1340-10)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
UuTSGIH US HWS AAS Il (1340-11, ysrst, He 5) paarbarahm parabh sugharh sujaan. The Supreme Lord God is All-wise and All-knowing.
Ts us ue essa waAS aS Wet ATaES UU TIS Il (1340-11, ysrst, we 5)
gur pooraa paa-ee-ai vadbhaagee darsan ka-o jaa-ee-ai kurbaan. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1]||Pause] |
fof HS Aafe ASe Il (1340-12, ysrst, He 5)
kilbikh maytay sabad santokh.
My sins are cut away, through the Word of the Shabad, and I have found contentment.
oH MTS Iu AT Il (1340-12, ysrst, He 5) naam araaDhan ho-aa jog. I have become worthy of worshipping the Naam in adoration.
AOA fat Init UTE I (1340-12, ysTst, v2 5) saaDhsang ho-aa pargaas. In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have been enlightened.
TIO AHS HO Hts FSSA NAM (1340-13, ysrst, He 5)
charan kamal man maahi nivaas. ||1]| The Lord's Lotus Feet abide within my mind. ||1]|
fate aor ffs shor aft i 340-13, ysrst, He 5)
jin kee-aa tin lee-aa raakh. The One who made us, protects and preserves us.
YS US MSE AT GE Il (1340-13, ysrst, Hs 5) parabh pooraa anaath kaa naath. God is Perfect, the Master of the masterless.
fats foe forsur ots il (1340-14, ysrst, He 5) jisahi nivaajay kirpaa Dhaar. Those, upon whom He showers His Mercy
UTS AGH 3S MIST NI (1340-14, ysrst, we 5) pooran karam taa kay aachaar. ||2| | - they have perfect karma and conduct. ||2]|
ae we fos fos fos ae Il (1340-14, ysrst, He 5) gun gaavai nit nit nit navay. They sing the Glories of God, continually, continuously, forever fresh and new.
wey wears vfs o SS Il (1340-14, ysrst, He 5) lakh cha-oraaseeh jon na bhavay. They do not wander in the 8.4 million incarnations.
Stat Sat yas UAT Il (1340-15, ysrst, He 5) eehaa™ oohaa”™ charan poojaaray. Here and hereafter, they worship the Lord's Feet.
HY BAS AS Tas WS (1340-15, ysst, ue 5) mukh oojal saachay darbaaray. ||3]|| Their faces are radiant, and they are honored in the Court of the Lord. |[3]|
fA HASta afs afsmit gre i (1340-15, ysrst, He 5) jis mastak gur Dhari-aa haath. That person, upon whose forehead the Guru places His Hand
afe Ho & fear BA Il (1340-16, ysrst, He 5) kot maDhay ko virlaa daas. - out of millions, how rare is that slave.
rites af Hobos Us saute Il 1340-16, yarst, Hs 5) jal thal mahee-al paykhai bharpoor. He sees God pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.
aad Sua fH Aa at Ufs ISIION (1340-16, ysrst, He 5) naanak uDhras tis jan kee Dhoor. ||4||10]| Nanak is saved by the dust of the feet of such a humble being. ||4]|10]|
Yystst HIS U Il (1340-17)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
TINS WET TT Us MUS Il (1340-17, ysrst, we 5) kurbaan jaa-ee gur pooray apnay. I am a Sacrifice to my Perfect Guru.
fan uATfe ofs afs AY AUS AU TIS Il (1340-17, ysrst, us 5) jis parsaad har har jap japnay. ||1|| rahaa-o. By His Grace, I chant and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause| |
wifys set HES feos I 1340-18, yarst, Hs 5) amrit banee sunat nihaal. Listening to the Ambrosial Word of His Bani, I am exalted and enraptured.
faofh ae fafinor HAT NA (1340-18, ysrst, He 5) binas ga-ay bikhi-aa janjaal. ||1]| My corrupt and poisonous entanglements are gone. ||1]||
Arg Hae fAG arait uffs i 1340-19, ysrst, ne 5) saach sabad si-o laagee pareet. I am in love with the True Word of His Shabad.
dfs ys wry mitfenr SHS iI (1340-19, ysrst, ws 5) har parabh apunaa aa-i-aa cheet. ||2]| The Lord God has come into my consciousness. ||2||
OH AUS IMT UPA Il (1340-19, ysrst, He 5) naam japat ho-aa pargaas. Chanting the Naam, I am enlightened.
UST A38q
Gd Hae ator fee fees Sil 1341-1, ysrst, ve 5) gur sabday keenaa ridai nivaas. ||3]|| The Word of the Guru's Shabad has come to dwell within my heart. ||3]|
ds AHGa Het Semis Il 1341-1, ysrst, vs 5) gur samrath sadaa da-i-aal. The Guru is All-powerful and Merciful forever.
ofa Afu Afu area SS SIH USUI (1341-1, Ysst, He 5) har jap jap naanak bha-ay nihaal. ||4||11]| Chanting and meditating on the Lord, Nanak is exalted and enraptured. ||4||11||
YysTst HIS U Il (1341-2)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Ts TI Ads Ae’ AY ue Ih (1341-2, ysrst, ve 5) gur gur karat sadaa sukh paa-i-aa. Chanting Guru, Guru, I have found eternal peace.
ae eens se fagurer nrret oH orf Aurfemr A TITS Il 0341-3, ysrst, vs 5)
deen da-i-aal bha-ay kirpaalaa apnaa naam aap japaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o.
God, Merciful to the meek, has become kind and compassionate; He has inspired me to chant His Name. ||1]|Pause] |
AsHats fife sfeor yarn i 1341-3, ysrst, Hs 5) santsangat mil bha-i-aa pargaas. Joining the Society of the Saints, I am illumined and enlightened.
ofa ate AUS UTS Set MTA NAN (1341-4, ysrst, He 5)
har har japat pooran bha-ee aas. ||1|| Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, my hopes have been fulfilled. ||1]|
Haag afore AY Hie FS Il (1341-4, ysrst, we 5) sarab kali-aan sookh man voothay. I am blessed with total salvation, and my mind is filled with peace.
Ts TE WS TI SHA FS MANA 1341-5, ysrst, He 5)
har gun gaa-ay gur naanak toothay. ||2||12]|
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; O Nanak, the Guru has been gracious to me. [|2]|12]|
ysTst Hoe u wg 2 fasTA 1341-6) parbhaatee mehlaa 5 ghar 2 bibhaas Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Bibhaas:
qe Afsas ure II (1341-6) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
MST F TA S'S il (1341-7, ysrst fasrH, 2 5) avar na doojaa thaa-o. There is no other place of rest,
ard fas ats a il 1341-7, ysrst fasmn, He 5) naahee bin har naa-o. none at all, without the Lord's Name.
Hea fafa afemire i 1341-7, ysrst fasn, vs 5) sarab siDh kali-aan. There is total success and salvation,
Yas Sha Aas AH UU 1341-7, yas fs, ws 5) pooran hohi sagal kaam. ||1]| and all affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1]|
dfs & BH AUbA Sts Il 1341-8, ysrst fusrH, He 5) har ko naam japee-ai neet. Constantly chant the Name of the Lord.
aH au nidarg fear wa Sa us wai ToS Il (1341-8, yarst fearn, we 5) kaam kroDh aha‘kaar binsai lagai aykai pareet. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away; let yourself fall in love with the One Lord. ||1]]Pause| |
ony ord gy sa Hale USS AS I 1341-8, ysrst far, ws 5)
naam laagai dookh bhaagai saran paalan jog.
Attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, pain runs away. In His Sanctuary, He cherishes and sustains us.
Afsag 32 AH 3 3M fan Ufa FS AFaT MI 1341-9, ysst fusrn, He 5)
satgur bhaytai jam na taytai jis Dhur hovai sanjog. ||2||
Whoever has such pre-ordained destiny meets with the True Guru; the Messenger of Death cannot grab him. ||2]|
dfs fear famrfe of ofs sag Ho A SIH Il 1341-9, ysrst fas, He 5) rain dinas Dhi-aa-ay har har tajahu man kay bharam. Night and day, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; abandon the doubts of your mind.
WUHats ots fs fAAfT uss TSH MSI (1341-10, ysst fasrA, He 5)
saaDhsangat har milai jisahi pooran karam. ||3]||
One who has perfect karma joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meets the Lord. ||3]||
HOH HOH faure faon afy StS vet i (1341-10, ysrst fasrH, v8 5) janam janam bikhaad binsay raakh leenay aap. The sins of countless lifetimes are erased, and one is protected by the Lord Himself.
Hs fust HIS ave HO Sta Tie oe AH NSNANIBI (1341-11, ysrst fasH, He 5)
maat pitaa meet bhaa-ee jan naanak har har jaap. ||4||1]]13]]| He is our Mother, Father, Friend and Sibling; O servant Nanak, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4]|1]|13]|
ysTst Hoe u f¥sTA USS (1341-12)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5 bibhaas parh-taal Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas, Partaal:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1341-12) ik-o’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TH TH TH TH AU Il (1341-13, ysrst fasn, He 5) ram raam raam raam jaap. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
afs aan Ss Ho faofh wfe wis sry a ToS I 1341-13, ysrst fasrH, He 5)
kal kalays lobh moh binas jaa-ay aha™ taap. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Conflict, suffering, greed and emotional attachment shall be dispelled, and the fever of egotism shall be relieved. ||1]|]Pause| |
ny fsurfa AS vse ofa He ufes afs UTE NA (1341-13, yest freA, He 5)
aap ti-aag sant charan laag man pavit jaahi paap. ||1]||
Renounce your selfishness, and grasp the feet of the Saints; your mind shall be sanctified, and your sins shall be taken away. ||1]|
aoa aha =e) AS TUS ae yg HET SPY NIANAUIAI 1341-14, Yysrst frsTA, He 5) naanak baarik kachhoo na jaanai raakhan ka-o parabh maa-ee baap. ||2||1||14]|
Nanak, the child, does not know anything at all. O God, please protect me; You are my Mother and Father. ||2||1]|14]|
YysTst HIS U Il (1341-15)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
TIO AHS Ads SA Il (1341-15, ysrst, He 5) charan kamal saran tayk. I have taken the Shelter and Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Gz HU aig oag Aaa Gufs Jat Sa AU TTS I (1341-15, ysrst, we 5)
ooch mooch bay-ant thaakur sarab oopar tuhee ayk. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are Lofty and Exalted, Grand and Infinite, O my Lord and Master; You alone are above all. ||1]|Pause| |
ure nord ey fees Poors aft fase Wil (1341-16, ysrst, He 5)
paraan aDhaar dukh bidaar dainhaar buDh bibayk. ||1]|
He is the Support of the breath of life, the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of discriminating understanding. ||1]|
OHA Bods His mato ys AA Il (1341-17, ysst, He 5) namaskaar rakhanhaar man araaDh parabhoo mayk. So bow down in respect to the Savior Lord; worship and adore the One God.
HS 39 AIG HAS DSA US AY MSS QUIN (1341-17, ysTH, He 5) sant rayn kara-o majan naanak paavai sukh anayk. ||2||2||15||
Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Saints, Nanak is blessed with countless comforts. [2] 12]]15]|
ust 9a82 ysTst mAcudion Hoe 9 fasTA (1342-1)
parbhaatee asatpadee-aa mehlaa 1 bibhaas Prabhaatee, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Bibhaas:
qe Afsars urrfe it 1342-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
efam a@dt He aGafenr I 1342-2, yast fasmm, He 1) dubiDhaa ba-uree man ba-uraa-i-aa. The insanity of duality has driven the mind insane.
3S wale ASH TeteMr Il (1342-2, ysrst fas, ve 1) jhoothai laalach janam gavaa-i-aa. In false greed, life is wasting away.
wufe oot efe dao ufeor i (1342-2, yest fren, He 1) lapat rahee fun banDh na paa-i-aa. Duality clings to the mind; it cannot be restrained.
Afsafe aa amy fearfenr il 4342-3, ysrst faemm, ws 1) satgur raakhay naam drirh-aa-i-aa. ||1]| The True Guru saves us, implanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord within. |]1]|
SHO Hd © HSM He Il (1342-3, ystst fusrH, He 1) naa man marai na maa-i-aa marai. Without subduing the mind, Maya cannot be subdued.
fafs foe oot Het we nae <teorfe s@ wag Sg NA JIS Il (1342-3, ysrst fasrH, ne 1) jin kichh kee-aa so-ee jaanai sabad veechaar bha-o saagar tarai. ||1]|| rahaa-o. The One who created this, He alone understands. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, one is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1]|Pause]|
Heer Afs IA nara | 1342-4, yarst from, He 1)
maa-i-aa sanch raajay aha™kaaree.
Gathering the wealth of Maya, kings become proud and arrogant. Hear Afa o 3S fimrdt il 1342-4, yarst fan, ne 1)
maa-i-aa saath na chalai pi-aaree. But this Maya that they love so much shall not go along with them in the end.
Hfeor HHS I ag dait I (1342-5, ysrst farm, He 1) maa-i-aa mamtaa hai baho rangee. There are so many colors and flavors of attachment to Maya.
faa ove & Afa & Hatt MQM (1342-5, ysrst fas, He 1) bin naavai ko saath na sangee. ||2|| Except for the Name, no one has any friend or companion. ||2| |
fa@ Ho tufs ug HO SAT Il (1342-5, ysrst fasrH, He 1) ji-o man daykheh par man taisaa. According to one's own mind, one sees the minds of others.
AAt HOA SAT SAT Il (1342-6, yarst fasTH, He 1) jaisee mansaa taisee dasaa. According to one's desires, one's condition is determined.
AAT AGH St fee Be Il (1342-6, ysrst fearA, He 1) jaisaa karam taisee liv laavai. According to one's actions, one is focused and tuned in.
Afsag ufs AGA We UTS ISI (1342-6, ysrst fas, He 1) satgur poochh sahj ghar paavai. ||3]| Seeking the advice of the True Guru, one finds the home of peace and poise. ||3]|
afar afte He eA STE Il 1342-7, ysrst fae, vs 1) raag naad man doojai bhaa-ay. In music and song, the mind is caught by the love of duality.
nists ue HoT ey UTE Il 1342-7, ysrst fas, He 1) antar kapat mahaa dukh paa-ay. Filled with deception deep within, one suffers in terrible pain.
Afsag Se ASt ute It 1342-7, yest fas, He 1) satgur bhaytai sojhee paa-ay. Meeting with the True Guru, one is blessed with clear understanding,
Ae of ad fee ote ell (1342-7, ysst faarn, He 1) sachai naam rahai liv laa-ay. ||4|| and remains lovingly attuned to the True Name. ||4||
Ae Aafe AY AHS Il (1342-8, yest fusrH, He 1) sachai sabad sach kamaavai. Through the True Word of the Shabad, one practices Truth.
Ret set ofa TE WS Il 1342-8, yarst fas, He 1) sachee banee har gun gaavai. He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, through the True Word of His Bani.
fon wife SA MMe Us UTS Il (1342-8, ysTst freA, He 1) nij ghar vaas amar pad paavai. He dwells in the home of his own heart deep within, and obtains the immortal status.
3 efs AS AST urs MUI (1342-9, yarst faoTH, He 1) taa dar saachai sobhaa paavai. ||5|| Then, he is blessed with honor in the Court of the True Lord. ||5]|
aad Ae fag sats o et Il 1342-9, ysrst fron, He 1) gur sayvaa bin bhagat na ho-ee. Without serving the Guru, there is no devotional worship,
MOA Aso Ad A AST I (1342-9, ysrst frarA, He 1) anayk jatan karai jay ko-ee. even though one may make all sorts of efforts.
ICH Ha AES FET Il (1342-9, yarst fusTH, He 1) ha-umai mayraa sabday kho-ee. If one eradicates egotism and selfishness through the Shabad,
fSdHS on ZA ufo et WEN (1342-10, ysrst fas, He 1) nirmal naam vasai man so-ee. ||6|| the Immaculate Naam comes to abide in the mind. ||6]|
fen na ufs Hae aAgat FATT Il (1342-10, ysrst fasrn, He 1) is jag meh sabad karnee hai saar. In this world, the practice of the Shabad is the most excellent occupation.
faa Hae Jd HT Ta Il 1342-10, ysrst fuse, ve 1) bin sabdai hor moh gubaar. Without the Shabad, everything else is the darkness of emotional attachment.
Rae on oe Cfs ofa it (1342-11, ysrst fear, v2 1) sabday naam rakhai ur Dhaar. Through the Shabad, the Naam is enshrined within the heart.
Rae afs Hfs He Bnrs MDI 1342-11, yarst fusrn, He 1) sabday gat mat mokh du-aar. ||7]|| Through the Shabad, one obtains clear understanding and the door of salvation. ||7]|
Wed oS ats Puss Il (1342-11, ysst fusrH, He 1) avar naahee kar daykhanhaaro. There is no other Creator except the All-seeing Lord God.
Ara? orf migu murs Il (1342-12, yarst fas, He 1) Saachaa aap anoop apaaro. The True Lord Himself is Infinite and Incomparably Beautiful.
TH 3H SSH as Tet Il 1342-12, ysrst frsrH, He 1) raam naam ootam gat ho-ee. Through the Lord's Name, one obtains the most sublime and exalted state.
Sod Ufa Bd AS AST UCN (1342-12, ysrst fasrA, He 1) naanak khoj lahai jan ko-ee. ||8]]1]| O Nanak, how rare are those humble beings, who seek and find the Lord. ||8]]1||
YysTst HIS % Il (1342-13)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Hfeor Hfo Aes Aa Stent | 1342-13, ysst, Hz 1) maa-i-aa mohi sagal jag chhaa-i-aa. Emotional attachment to Maya is spread out all over the world.
omnfs ofa ath Sarfenr i 0342-13, yas, He 1) kaaman daykh kaam lobhaa-i-aa. Seeing a beautiful woman, the man is overcome with sexual desire.
HS ave fA Ia sorfeor | 1342-14, ysrst, ve 1) sut kanchan si-o hayt vaDhaa-i-aa. His love for his children and gold steadily increases.
AS fae nua fea ITH usteor WA (1342-14, ysrst, He 1) sabh kichh apnaa ik raam paraa-i-aa. ||1|| He sees everything as his own, but he does not own the One Lord. ||1]|
MAT ATE AUG AUST I (1342-14, ysst, He 1) aisaa jaap japa-o japmaalee. I meditate as I chant on such a mala,
eu AY Uddld Sats feast NAN TIC i (1342-15, ysrst, He 1
dukh sukh parhar bhagat niraalee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
that I rise above pleasure and pain; I attain the most wondrous devotional worship of the Lord. ||1||Pause]|
ae fours 3a nis & urfenr Il 1342-15, ysrst, He 1) gun niDhaan tayraa ant na paa-i-aa. O Treasure of Virtue, Your limits cannot be found.
Ars Aafe 35 Ho ANfEMM Ih (1342-15, ysrst, He 1)
saach sabad tujh maahi samaa-i-aa. Through the True Word of the Shabad, I am absorbed into You.
met ae 30 vty Tater Il (1342-16, ysrst, He 1) aavaa ga-on tuDh aap rachaa-i-aa. You Yourself created the comings and goings of reincarnation.
Ret sas fro Afs fes wfenr 21 1342-16, ysrst, us say-ee bhagat jin sach chit laa-i-aa. ||2|| They alone are devotees, who focus their consciousness on You. ||2]|
famitg fomrrg agate fesaret il (1342-17, ysrst, He 1) gi-aan Dhi-aan narhar nirbaanee. Spiritual wisdom and meditation on the Lord, the Lord of Nirvaanaa
fae Afsas Se af & Frat Il (1342-17, ust, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay ko-ay na jaanee. - without meeting the True Guru, no one knows this.
Ha® Aded Afs AHat Il (1342-17, uss, He 1) Sagal sarovar jot samaanee. The Lord's Light fills the sacred pools of all beings.
mitod gu feeg ATarat SI (1342-18, ysrst, He 1) aanad roop vitahu kurbaanee. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice to the Embodiment of Bliss. ||3]|
ae sas TINSt US Il 1342-18, ysrst, He 1) bhaa-o bhagat gurmatee paa-ay. Through the Guru's Teachings, one achieves loving devotional worship.
ICH fess Aafe ABS I (1342-18, ysst, He 1) ha-umai vichahu sabad jalaa-ay. The Shabad burns away egotism from within.
Yat 9383
Weg aa ofr TIS i (1343-1, ysrst, v2 1) Dhaavat raakhai thaak rahaa-ay. The wandering mind is restrained and held in its place.
Ae oH Hfs SAS Sil (1343-1, ysst, He 1) sachaa naam man vasaa-ay. ||4|| The True Name is enshrined in the mind. ||4| |
fann fase gd usHret i (1343-1, ysrst, He bisam binod rahay parmaadee. The exciting and intoxicating worldly plays come to an end,
Tas Hour Sa fees Beit il 1343-1, ysst, us 1)
gurmat maani-aa ayk liv laagee.
for those who accept the Guru's Teachings, and become lovingly attuned to the One Lord.
efy fosfaor Ae fo virait I 1343-2, ysrst, He 1)
daykh nivaari-aa jal meh aagee. Seeing this, the fire in the water is extinguished.
AS de ZSe at UUM (1343-2, ys, we 1) so boojhai hovai vadbhaagee. ||5|| They alone realize this, who are blessed by great good fortune. ||5]|
Afsag AS SIH aS Il (1343-2, ysrst, ve 1) satgur sayvay bharam chukaa-ay. Serving the True Guru, doubt is dispelled.
wofes Aa Afe fee SES Il 1343-3, uss, He 1)
an-din jaagai sach liv laa-ay.
Those who are lovingly attuned to the True Lord remain awake and aware night and day.
Sa WS nied o ATE Il (1343-3, yore, He 1) ayko jaanai avar na ko-ay. They know the One Lord, and no other.
Huerst Ae foone df nell (1343-3, ysrst, ne 1) sukh-daata sayvay nirmal ho-ay. ||6|| Serving the Giver of peace, they become immaculate. ||6]|
Az Aafs Aafe Sets il 1343-4, ysrst, us 1)
sayvaa surat sabad veechaar.
Selfless service and intuitive awareness come by reflecting upon the Word of the Shabad.
AU Su HAH ICH Hf II 1343-4, ysrst, He 1) jap tap sanjam ha-umai maar. Chanting, intensive meditation and austere self-discipline come by subduing the ego.
Heo HAS A ASE ASS Il 1343-4, ysrst, ys jeevan mukat jaa sabad sunaa-ay. One becomes Jivan-mukta - liberated while yet alive, by listening to the Shabad.
Hdl JIS AS AY UTES IDI (1343-5, ysrst, Hs 1) sachee rahat sachaa sukh paa-ay. ||7|| Living a truthful way of life, one finds true peace. ||7]|
HYest BY ASSIST Il (1343-5, ysrst, He 1) sukh-daata dukh maytanhaaraa. The Giver of peace is the Eradicator of pain.
meg 6 ASH Stat ara i (1343-5, ysrst, He 1) avar na soojhas beejee kaaraa. I cannot conceive of serving any other.
3G HO U6 Ufa mrat aft | (1343-5, ysrst, He 1) tan man Dhan har aagai raakhi-aa. I place my body, mind and wealth in offering before Him.
SOA Ad HIT SA Ve MCI (1343-6, ysrst, He 1) naanak kahai mahaa ras chaakhi-aa. ||8]|2|| Says Nanak, I have tasted the supreme, sublime Essence of the Lord. ||8]|2||
ystTst HIS Y Il (1343-6) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
fSest AIH SuiaH TSt FIX USA AT AT Il (1343-6, ysrst, ws 1)
nivlee karam bhu-angam bhaathee raychak poorak kumbh karai.
You may perform exercises of inner purification, and fire up the furnace of the Kundalini, inhaling and exhaling and holding the breath.
fag Afsaa fag ASt adt san ger StS HS I (1343-7, ysrst, we
bin satgur kichh sojhee naahee bharmay bhoolaa bood marai.
Without the True Guru, you will not understand; deluded by doubt, you shall drown and die.
niu sfeor afte afa Ge nisg at HS Ae B Bd Il (1343-7, ysrst, we 1)
anDhaa bhari-aa bhar bhar Dhovai antar kee mal kaday na lahai.
The spiritually blind are filled with filth and pollution; they may wash, but the filth within shall never depart.
om fast dae vfs as fa atarg soft gH NAM 1343-8, ys, He 1)
naam binaa fokat sabh karmaa ji-o baajeegar bharam bhulai. ||1]|
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all their actions are useless, like the magician who deceives through illuions. ||1]|
We AH OH fadue Het Il 1343-9, ysrst, He 1) khat karam naam niranjan so-ee. The merits of the six religious rituals are obtained through the Immaculate Naam.
3 Te Wag weqe Hat ual TS il 1343-9, ysrst, ws 1) too gun saagar avgun mohee. ||1|| rahaa-o. You, O Lord, are the Ocean of virtue; I am so unworthy. ||1]|Pause] |
Heer dor oset vans ars faare Il (1343-9, ysrst, He 1)
maa-i-aa DhanDhaa Dhaavnee durmat kaar bikaar.
Running around chasing the entanglements of Maya is an evil-minded act of corruption.
Hay ory aaa afs o Aa AS Il (1343-10, ysrst, Hs 1) moorakh aap ganaa-idaa boojh na sakai kaar. The fool makes a show of his self-conceit; he does not know how to behave.
HOT Hfeur Heat HOH SB UMTS Il (1343-10, ysrst, He 1)
mansaa maa-i-aa mohnee manmukh bol khu-aar.
The self-willed manmukh is enticed by his desires for Maya; his words are useless and empty.
HAG Bol UTS A SAS TS AST MM! (1343-11, ysrst, we 1)
majan jhoothaa chandaal kaa fokat chaar see“gaar. ||2||
The ritual cleansings of the sinner are fradulent; his rituals and decorations are useless and empty. ||2]|
Bot Ho at His 3 aget ate frre it 0343-11, yas, Hs 1) jhoothee man kee mat hai karnee baad bibaad. False is the wisdom of the mind; its actions inspire useless disputes.
3d fefe nidage J WAH 3 UTS APE Il (1343-12, ysrst, we 1)
jhoothay vich ahankaran hai khasam na paavai saad.
The false are filled with egotism; they do not obtain the sublime taste of their Lord and Master.
faa ove dg antSat feat wis ATE Il (1343-12, yor, He 1) bin naavai hor kamaavanaa fikaa aavai saad. Without the Name, whatever else they do is tasteless and insipid.
endl Ast feadin faa ast res fe 138i 1343-13, ysst, ne 1)
dustee sabhaa viguchee-ai bikh vaatee jeevan baad. ||3]|
Associating with their enemies, they are plundered and ruined. Their speech is poison, and their lives are useless. ||3] |
& oft 38 HoT & AST I (1343-13, yest, we 1) ay bharam bhoolay marahu na ko-ee. Do not be deluded by doubt; do not invite your own death.
Afsag Afe Wet AY TST I 1343-13, yas, He 1) satgur sayv sadaa sukh ho-ee. Serve the True Guru, and you shall be at peace forever.
faa Afsaa nafs fas & uTet i 1343-14, yas, He 1) bin satgur mukat kinai na paa-ee. Without the True Guru, no one is liberated.
mets Ato Hafs Hfs ATET ISI (1343-14, ysTst, He 1)
aavahi jaa‘hi mareh mar jaa-ee. ||4]| They come and go in reincarnation; they die, only to be reborn and die again. ||4||
fg Ads J 3 TE WS Il 1343-14, ysrst, ne 1) ayhu sareer hai tarai gun Dhaat. This body wanders, caught in the three dispositions.
fen & feomy Aa ASYM 1343-15, ysst, He 1) is NO vi-aapai sog santaap. It is afflicted by sorrow and suffering.
A Agd fan Het o Sy Il 1343-15, ysst, He 1) so sayvhu jis maa-ee na baap. So serve the One who has no mother or father.
feag ga PAST nig wiry MUI (1343-15, ys, Hs 1) vichahu chookai tisnaa ar aap. ||5|| Desire and selfishness shall depart from within. ||5]|
Ad Ad Sa 3g 30d Aet Il 1343-16, ysrst, Hs jah jah daykhaa tah tah so-ee. Wherever I look, I see Him.
faa Afsag se Hats o det II 1343-16, ysTst, He 1) bin satgur bhaytay mukat na ho-ee. Without meeting the True Guru, no one is liberated.
fase AY Sd adel AT Il (1343-16, ysrst, ne 1) hirdai sach ayh karnee saar. Enshrine the True One in your heart; this is the most excellent action.
dg AZ UGS UA yng Mell (1343-17, ysrst, we 1) hor sabh pakhand pooj khu-aar. ||6|| All other hypocritical actions and devotions bring only ruin. ||6||
eta ya St AAS USS Il (1343-17, ysrst, we dubiDhaa chookai taa‘ sabad pachhaan. When one is rid of duality, then he realizes the Word of the Shabad.
ufs arofa Sat afs AS I (1343-17, yas, He 1) ghar baahar ayko kar jaan. Inside and out, he knows the One Lord.
fo nfs Age I AT Il (1343-18, ysrst, He 1) ayhaa mat sabad hai saar. This is the most Excellent Wisdom of the Shabad.
fefs ofaor wre ues Brg NDI (1343-18, ysrst, He 1) vich dubiDhaa maathai pavai chhaar. ||7|| Ashes fall on the heads of those who are in duality. ||7]|
adel atefs TaHfs AS Il (1343-18, ysrst, He 1) karnee keerat gurmat saar. To praise the Lord through the Guru's Teachings is the most excellent action.
H3 Ast We fame sterg i 1343-19, yarst, nz 1) sant sabhaa gun gi-aan beechaar. In the Society of the Saints, contemplate the Glories of God and His spiritual wisdom.
HO Hd Ales Hs ATS Il (1343-19, ysrst, He 1) man maaray jeevat mar jaan. Whoever subdues his mind, knows the state of being dead while yet alive.
SSA Sed SET USS ICI (1343-19, ysrst, ne 1)
naanak nadree nadar pachhaan. ||8]|3]|| O Nanak, by His Grace, the Gracious Lord is realized. ||8]||3]|
ust Iss YysTst HIS 9 BAat I (1344-1)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1 dakh-nee. Prabhaatee, First Mehl, Dakhnee:
asy sur wifofeor ferst fsa efy = wafer i 344-1, ysrst weet, we 1) gotam tapaa ahili-aa istaree tis daykh indar lubhaa-i-aa. Ahalyaa was the wife of Gautam the seer. Seeing her, Indra was enticed.
HOA Adts fass sat ge St His ues Emr WU (1344-1, ysrst weet, we 1) Sahas sareer chihan bhag hoo-ay taa man pachhotaa-i-aa. ||1]||
When he received a thousand marks of disgrace on his body, then he felt regret in his mind. |]1]|
aet AE & FB St Il (1344-2, ysrst weet, we 1) ko-ee jaan na bhoolai bhaa-ee. O Siblings of Destiny, no one knowingly makes mistakes.
A 38 faa urfu gee 38 fA gSrTet AU TIS I (1344-2, ysrst east, we
so bhoolai jis aap bhulaa-ay boojhai jisai bujhaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. He alone is mistaken, whom the Lord Himself makes so. He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand. ||1]||Pause| |
fafs oat sfe fyent ufs on arate abt o uret i 1344-3, ysrst wat, ve 1)
tin haree chand parithmee pat raajai kaagad keem na paa-ee.
Harichand, the king and ruler of his land, did not appreciate the value of his pre- ordained destiny.
m@ue We 3 Us ad faS fae surth faoret iQ (1344-3, ysrst weet, He 1)
a-ugan jaanai ta punn karay ki-o ki-o naykhaas bikaa-ee. ||2| |
If he had known that it was a mistake, he would not have made such a show of giving in charity, and he would not have been sold in the market. ||2]|
Is ureret uast Hat wea gf TIS Il (1344-4, yorst euet, we 1) kara-o adhaa-ee Dhartee maa“gee baavan roop bahaanai. The Lord took the form of a dwarf, and asked for some land.
fag ufenris wfe fag saiot A af JU UES ISI (1344-4, ysrst west, we
ki-o pa-i-aal jaa-ay ki-o chhalee-ai jay bal roop pachhaanai. ||3]|
If Bal the king has recognized Him, he would not have been deceived, and sent to the underworld. ||3]|
OW AOA & H3t data faorfA uatfenr I 344-5, ysrst wut, us 1) raajaa janmayjaa day matee™ baraj bi-aas parh"aa-i-aa. Vyaas taught and warned the king Janmayjaa not to do three things.
fafs af wal worsg wre farss o 9S verfenr ISI (1344-6, yarst weet, He 1)
tini" kar jag athaarah ghaa-ay kirat na chalai chalaa-i-aa. | |4]|
But he performed the sacred feast and killed eighteen Brahmins; the record of one's past deeds cannot be erased. ||4||
Tes 3 Tet Jan uetat sat ofe Aavet Il (1344-6, ysrst weet, ne 1)
ganat na ganee™ hukam pachhaanaa bolee bhaa-ay subhaa-ee.
I do not try to calculate the account; I accept the Hukam of God's Command. I speak with intuitive love and respect.
A fae zos 30 Ao AS Scot Sfomret ull 1344-7, yarst weet, He 1
jo kichh vartai tuDhai salaahee™ sabh tayree vadi-aa-ee. ||5]|
No matter what happens, I will praise the Lord. It is all Your Glorious Greatness, O Lord. ||5||
Tene mfsus Su ae o Ha Ae Id AgSvet Il (1344-7, ysrst wut, ne 1)
gurmukh alipat layp kaday na laagai sadaa rahai sarnaa-ee.
The Gurmukh remains detached; filth never attaches itself to him. He remains forever in God's Sanctuary.
HOHY Ha vita SS ad eft wa ussTEt Ell 1344-8, ysrst weet, He 1)
manmukh mugaDh aagai chaytai naahee dukh laagai pachhutaa-ee. ||6||
The foolish self-willed manmukh does not think of the future; he is overtaken by pain, and then he regrets. ||6] |
nm ad ave aga fafs Sa gear gobs i 1344-8, ysst weet, He 1) aapay karay karaa-ay kartaa jin ayh rachnaa rachee-ai. The Creator who created this creation acts, and causes all to act.
dfs wifers 3 ASt Abs mifsHTS U ud DN 1344-9, ysst weet, He 1)
har abhimaan na jaa-ee jee-ahu abhimaanay pai pachee-ai. || 7] |
O Lord, egotistical pride does not depart from the soul. Falling into egotistical pride, one is ruined. ||7]|
go fete dor AS aet ast wrf o FS Il 1344-9, yorst weet, He DY bhulan vich kee-aa sabh ko-ee kartaa aap na bhulai. Everyone makes mistakes; only the Creator does not make mistakes.
Sod Afs ofh farsa a ae UsATS mRYS NCIS (1344-10, yarst weet, He 1
naanak sach naam nistaaraa ko gur parsaad aghulai. ||8||4]| O Nanak, salvation comes through the True Name. By Guru's Grace, one is released. [81141 |
YysTst HIS A Il (1344-11) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
MTS ASST STH MUTT Il (1344-11, ystst, us 1) aakh-naa sunnaa naam aDhaar. To chant and listen to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my Support.
ua gefe afeor zarg il 1344-11, ysrst, ve 1) DhanDhaa chhutak ga-i-aa vaykaar. Worthless entanglements are ended and gone.
fa@ Hof eA ufs Het I 1344-11, ysrst, we ji-o manmukh doojai pat kho-ee. The self-willed manmukh, caught in duality, loses his honor.
fag oS H meg 3 at UU (1344-12, ysrst, He 1) bin naavai mai avar na ko-ee. ||1]| Except for the Name, I have no other at all. ||1]|
Afe Ho wid HTH TST Il (1344-12, yest, ws 1) sun man anDhay moorakh gavaar. Listen, O blind, foolish, idiotic mind.
WSS AS OH Sd oa fag TI ys TS TS NU TIS i (1344-12, ysrst, we
aavat jaat laaj nahee laagai bin gur boodai baaro baar. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
Aren't you ashamed of your comings and goings in reincarnation? Without the Guru, you shall drown, over and over again. ||1||Pause] |
fem Ho Hfenr dfs for II 1344-13, ysrst, He 1) is man maa-i-aa mohi binaas. This mind is ruined by its attachment to Maya.
fs gon fefimr st adit oA I 0344-13, yas, He 1) Dhur hukam likhi-aa taa‘ kahee-ai kaas. The Command of the Primal Lord is pre-ordained. Before whom should I cry?
qoute fear HS set i 1344-14, ysrst, ve 1) gurmukh virlaa cheen"ai ko-ee. Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand this.
om fager Hats & Tet QM 0344-14, yas, Hs 1) naam bihoonaa mukat na ho-ee. ||2]| Without the Naam, no one is liberated. ||2||
aft afi 38 we seat Il 1344-14, ysst, ue 1) bharam bharam dolai lakh cha-uraasee. People wander lost, staggering and stumbling through 8.4 million incarnations.
fag qo 8S AN at SAT I 1344-15, ys, He 1)
bin gur boojhay jam kee faasee.
Without knowing the Guru, they cannot escape the noose of Death. feg Hour fas fas fs ufemrfe i 1344-15, ysst, He 1)
ih manoo-aa khin khin oobh pa-i-aal. This mind, from one moment to the next, goes from the heavens to the underworld.
TaHfe sf SH ANTS USI 1344-15, ysrst, we gurmukh chhootai naam sam"aal. | |3]| The Gurmukh contemplates the Naam, and is released. ||3]|
nm Ae fee o SE I (1344-16, ysrst, He 1) aapay saday dhil na ho-ay. When God sends His Summons, there is no time to delay.
Rafe Hd Afoer rte APE I (1344-16, ysrst, He 1) sabad marai sahilaa jeevai so-ay. When one dies in the Word of the Shabad, he lives in peace.
faa aa Ast fan 3 SE I (1344-16, ysrst, He 1) bin gur sojhee kisai na ho-ay. Without the Guru, no one understands.
mM ad AIS AE Sil (1344-17, ysst, Hz 1) aapay karai karaavai so-ay. ||4|| The Lord Himself acts, and inspires all to act. ||4]|
Sag vars dfs TE WS Il (1344-17, ust, ve 1) jhagarh chukhaavai har gun gaavai. Inner conflict comes to an end, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
ya Afsag Aafa AHS Il (1344-17, ysrst, we 1) pooraa satgur sahj samaavai. Through the Perfect True Guru, one is intuitively absorbed into the Lord.
feg He Sus 3B Sages Il 1344-18, ysrst, He 1) in man dolat ta-o thehraavai. This wobbling, unsteady mind is stabilized,
Ag adel afs ara AHS NUM (1344-18, yas, He 1) sach karnee kar kaar kamaavai. ||5|| and one lives the lifestyle of true actions. ||5||
nists For fas Afs ae ii 1344-18, ysrst, we 1) antar joothaa ki-o such ho-ay. If someone is false within his own self, then how can he be pure?
Reet Ge feaer af= i 1344-19, yas, He 1) sabdee Dhovai virlaa ko-ay. How rare are those who wash with the Shabad.
Tenfy vet AT HTS Il 1344-19, ysrst, He 1) gurmukh ko-ee sach kamaavai. How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, live the Truth.
WISE Weal ofa TIS NEM (1344-19, ysTst, He 1) aavan jaanaa thaak rahaavai. ||6]|| Their comings and goings in reincarnation are over and done. ||6]|
Yat q3gu
3G urat Ulet AY ATS Il (1345-1, yas, He 1) bha-o khaanaa peenaa sukh saar. Those who eat and drink the Fear of God, find the most excellent peace.
dfs AS Hats us UT ll (1345-1, ysrst, He 1) har jan sangat paavai paar. Associating with the humble servants of the Lord, they are carried across.
sa & EN
Ae 8% sare fumirg il (1345-1, ysrst, ve 1) sach bolai bolaavai pi-aar. They speak the Truth, and lovingly inspire others to speak it as well.
ad a Aa Adal J ATT WDM (1345-1, ysrst, He gur kaa sabad karnee hai saar. || 7] | The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the most excellent occupation. ||7]||
Ufd AA ASH TSH Uls UAT II (1345-2, ysrst, He 1)
har jas karam Dharam pat poojaa.
Those who take the Lord's Praises as their karma and Dharma, their honor and worship service
OH FU warat His SAT Il (1345-2, yas, Hs 1) kaam kroDh agnee meh bhoo'jaa. - their sexual desire and anger are burnt off in the fire.
dfs 3A ofr 3B He ST Il 1345-2, ysrst, ue 1) har ras chaakhi-aa ta-o man bheejaa. They taste the sublime essence of the Lord, and their minds are drenched with it.
Yyssts aSa MST & FAT MCMUN (1345-3, ysrst, He 1) paranvat naanak avar na doojaa. ||8||5|| Prays Nanak, there is no other at all. ||8]|5||
ystst HIS 9 Il (1345-3) parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
oH OH Afy nists UAT II (1345-3, Yast, He 1) raam naam jap antar poojaa. Chant the Lord's Name, and worship Him deep within your being.
Gd Age shots weg St TAT NA (1345-4, ysrst, He 1) gur sabad veechaar avar nahee doojaa. ||1|| Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and no other. ||1]|
Sa ae afoot AS Set I (1345-4, ysst, He 1) ayko rav rahi-aa sabh thaa-ee. The One is pervading all places.
Meg 3 CA fA UA BaTet UU TIS ll (1345-4, ysrst, we 1) avar na deesai kis pooj charhaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. I do not see any other; unto whom should I offer worship? ||1||Pause] |
HO 36 “iat Abas SS uf I (1345-5, ysrst, He 1) man tan aagai jee-arhaa tujh paas. I place my mind and body in offering before You; I dedicate my soul to You.
fa are 38 sug nigeth QI 1345-5, ysrst, He 1) ji-o bhaavai ti-o rakhahu ardaas. ||2|| As it pleases You, You save me, Lord; this is my prayer. ||2||
Ad fade’ dfs TAS FATE Il (1345-6, ysrst, He 1) sach jihvaa har rasan rasaa-ee. True is that tongue which is delighted by the sublime essence of the Lord.
THs sefH ys AGSTet Sl (1345-6, ysrst, He 1) gurmat chhootas parabh sarnaa-ee. ||3]| Following the Guru's Teachings, one is saved in the Sanctuary of God. ||3]|
OSH UsH ufs AS aS it (1345-6, ysst, ue 1) karam Dharam parabh mayrai kee-ay. My God created religious rituals.
oH zaret fats AIH ATS Sil (1345-7, ysrst, He 1) naam vadaa-ee sir karmaa™ kee-ay. ||4]| He placed the glory of the Naam above these rituals. ||4| |
Afsas & efA wie ueTse Il (1345-7, ust, He 1) satgur kai vas chaar padaarath. The four great blessings are under the control of the True Guru.
Ste ANTE Sa fasts ull 345-7, ysrst, Hs 1) teen samaa-ay ayk kirtaarath. ||5|| When the first three are put aside, one is blessed with the fourth. ||5||
Afsafe ae vats famrat i) 1345-8, ysst, ye 1 satgur dee-ay mukat Dhi-aanaa”. Those whom the True Guru blesses with liberation and meditation
ofa ue die se ugUrST Ell (1345-8, ysrst, He 1) har pad cheeneh bha-ay parDhaanaa. ||6|| realize the Lord's State, and become sublime. ||6||
HO 36 Ase af gs Tsret I (1345-8, ysrst, we 1) man tan seetal gur boojh bujhaa-ee. Their minds and bodies are cooled and soothed; the Guru imparts this understanding.
yg foe fate atHfs uret Oi 345-9, ysrst, ne 1) parabh nivaajay kin keemat paa-ee. ||7]| Who can estimate the value of those whom God has exalted? ||7]|
aT aod ats gs gTsret il (1345-9, ysrst, He 1) kaho naanak gur boojh bujhaa-ee. Says Nanak, the Guru has imparted this understanding;
on fast afs fas o uret IcHEN (1345-9, ysst, He 1) naam binaa gat kinai na paa-ee. ||8]||6|| without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is emancipated. ||8]|6]|
ystst HIS % Il (1345-10)
parbhaatee mehlaa 1. Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
fefa ufs suff oe afs ys wet ges Tere I (1345-10, ysst, oe 1) ik Dhur bakhas la-ay gur poorai sachee banat banaa-ee. Some are forgiven by the Primal Lord God; the Perfect Guru makes the true making.
dfs da TS AS Sa ATT ey faAs ufs uret All 1345-10, ysrst, He 1)
har rang raatay sadaa rang saachaa dukh bisray pat paa-ee. ||1||
Those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord are imbued with Truth forever; their pains are dispelled, and they obtain honor. ||1||
Bot TaHfs at BSTEet I (1345-11, ysrst, He 1) jhoothee durmat kee chaturaa-ee. False are the clever tricks of the evil-minded.
faons ae 5 oa at AU TIS Ut 1345-11, ysst, ve
binsat baar na laagai kaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. They shall disappear in no time at all. ||1]|Pause| |
HoH aS ey ede fenmufA HoHfe ey o AST II (1345-12, ysrst, He 1)
manmukh ka-o dukh darad vi-aapas manmukh dukh na jaa-ee.
Pain and suffering afflict the self-willed manmukh. The pains of the self-willed manmukh shall never depart.
AY ey ost qanfe Ast Af BE Asset MQ (1345-12, ysrst, ue 1) sukh dukh daataa gurmukh jaataa mayl la-ay sarnaa-ee. ||2|| The Gurmukh recognizes the Giver of pleasure and pain. He merges in His Sanctuary.
[2] | HOHY 3 wis sats o JefA ICH usta fees Il (1345-13, ysrst, He 1)
manmukh tay abh bhagat na hovas ha-umai pacheh divaanay. The self-willed manmukhs do not know loving devotional worship; they are insane, rotting away in their egotism.
feg Hour fas Cts ufeorst za ofa AAS S AS MSI (1345-13, ysrst, He 1)
ih manoo-aa khin oobh paa-i-aalee jab lag sabad na jaanay. ||3]|
This mind flies in an instant from the heavens to the underworld, as long as it does not know the Word of the Shabad. ||3]|
gu fimmrr nat sfeur fsufs adt fag Afsars ure i 1345-14, ysrst, we 1) bhookh pi-aasaa jag bha-i-aa tipat nahee bin satgur paa-ay. The world has become hungry and thirsty; without the True Guru, it is not satisfied.
Hon Add fxs Ae uréhy wear UOT we lgil 1345-15, yas, He 1)
Sahjai sahj milai sukh paa-ee-ai dargeh paiDhaa jaa-ay. ||4]|
Merging intuitively in the Celestial Lord, peace is obtained, and one goes to the Lord's Court wearing robes of honor. ||4||
add Bat sar fea nt fogHe aa at aret i (1345-15, ysrst, ve 1)
dargeh daanaa beenaa ik aapay nirmal gur kee banee. The Lord in His Court is Himself the Knower and Seer; the Word of the Guru's Bani is Immaculate.
Mn Aes Ag Stersth um gs ug fesaret ull (1345-16, yas, Hs 1) aapay surtaa sach veechaaras aapay boojhai pad nirbaanee. ||5] | He Himself is the Awareness of Truth; He Himself understands the state of nirvaanaa.
[5] |
AS 3da mast uze ste 3 fife was Curfeur ih 1345-16, ysrst, ne 1)
jal tarang agnee pavnai fun tarai mil jagat upaa-i-aa. He made the waves of water, the fire and the air, and then joined the three together to form the world.
MAT ae eo fse a dior goo ofa gofeor Wel 1345-17, yas, He 1)
aisaa bal chhal tin ka-o dee-aa hukmee thaak rahaa-i-aa. ||6||
He blessed these elements with such power, that they remain subject to His Command. ||6]||
WMA Ho fees wa viefs usta wATS UTfemr Ih 1345-18, yest, He 1)
aisay jan virlay jag andar parakh khajaanai paa-i-aa.
How rare are those humble beings in this world, whom the Lord tests and places in His Treasury.
wf ae 3 se mists HHS BS vorfenr HD (1345-18, ysrst, He 1)
jaat varan tay bha-ay ateetaa mamtaa lobh chukaa-i-aa. ||7]|
They rise above social status and color, and rid themselves of possessiveness and greed. ||7]||
oth gS Stee A fssne vy JeH Ae vorfenr I (1345-19, ysst, He 1)
naam ratay tirath say nirmal dukh ha-umai mail chukaa-i-aa.
Attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are like immaculate sacred shrines; they are rid of the pain and pollution of egotism.
Sod fsa x vas uns frat qenfa Aver arfemr WH MN (1345-19, ysrst, He 1)
naanak tin kay charan pakhaalai jinaa gurmukh saachaa bhaa-i-aa. ||8]|7|| Nanak washes the feet of those who, as Gurmukh, love the True Lord. ||8]|7]||
UST IVE ysTst Hoe 3 fasTA (1346-2)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3 bibhaas Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Bibhaas:
qe Afsara YATE Il (1346-2) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
qs ust sy 3 dle Heg 3d STS I (1346-3, ysrst fas, vs 3)
gur parsaadee vaykh too har mandar tayrai naal. By Guru's Grace, see that the Temple of the Lord is within you.
dfs Heg Hae Urba afs ont ST ANTS IAI (1346-3, ysst fas, He 3)
har mandar sabday khojee-ai har naamo layho sam"aal. ||1]|
The Temple of the Lord is found through the Word of the Shabad; contemplate the Lord's Name. ||1]|
Ho He Aafe su da oe Il (1346-4, ysrst fran, He 3) man mayray sabad rapai rang ho-ay. O my mind, be joyfully attuned to the Shabad.
Ret safs AS ofs Hes yaret ATS APE NAN TITS I 1346-4, ysrst from, He 3)
sachee bhagat sachaa har mandar pargatee saachee so-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o.
True is devotional worship, and True is the Temple of the Lord; True is His Manifest Glory. ||1]]Pause| |
dfs Hea Sg Adte do fomrfs safe usa]| SE I (1346-4, ysrst frsTH, He 3) har mandar ayhu sareer hai gi-aan ratan pargat ho-ay. This body is the Temple of the Lord, in which the jewel of spiritual wisdom is revealed.
HOHY HS 3 West Hef ofs Hes 3 TE QM 1346-5, ysrst fas, ws 3)
manmukh mool na jaannee maanas har mandar na ho-ay. ||2||
The self-willed manmukhs do not know anything at all; they do not believe that the Lord's Temple is within. ||2]|
dfs Hes ofa Ae Afar ohm Jaf Aes i (1346-6, yarst fear, He 3) har mandar har jee-o saaji-aa rakhi-aa hukam savaar. The Dear Lord created the Temple of the Lord; He adorns it by His Will.
ufs 3u fefimr A oneat afe 5 AzET? ISI (1346-6, ysrst fasrA, He 3) Dhur laykh likhi-aa so kamaavanaa ko-ay na maytanhaar. ||3]| All act according to their pre-ordained destiny; no one can erase it. ||3]|
Fae dts ay ufear Ad of= filme i 1346-7, ysrst fren, He 3) sabad cheeneh sukh paa-i-aa sachai naa-ay pi-aar. Contemplating the Shabad, peace is obtained, loving the True Name.
dfs Hed Hae Ada’ ave AS NUTS ISll (1346-7, ysst fusrn, He 3)
har mandar sabday sohnaa kanchan kot apaar. ||4] |
The Temple of the Lord is embellished with the Shabad; it is an Infinite Fortress of God. ||4]|
dfs Hes Ss Has J a feo wsTE Il 1346-8, ysrst fas, He 3) har mandar ayhu jagat hai gur bin ghoranDhaar. This world is the Temple of the Lord; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
a a@ ats une HOHY nid Tes UI (1346-8, ysrst fesTA, He 3) doojaa bhaa-o kar poojday manmukh anDh gavaar. ||5|| The blind and foolish self-willed manmukhs worship in the love of duality. ||5]|
fra Sut Haha fee ea wh o we Il 1346-9, ysrst fasrn, He 3)
jithai laykhaa mangee-ai tithai dayh jaat na jaa-ay.
One's body and social status do not go along to that place, where all are called to account.
Afy 33 A Gad ede eH STS Wel (1346-9, ysrst fires, He 3)
saach ratay say ubray dukhee-ay doojai bhaa-ay. ||6||
Those who are attuned to Truth are saved; those in the love of duality are miserable. [16] |
ofs Hes ufo ony faurg oT ao ashe Ha TST Il (1346-9, ysrst fas, Hs 3)
har mandar meh naam niDhaan hai naa boojheh mugaDh gavaar.
The treasure of the Naam is within the Temple of the Lord. The idiotic fools do not realize this.
ad usAet dfanr ate aftr Sfs ofa WD (1346-10, ysrst fram, He 3) gur parsaadee cheen'i-aa har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar. ||7|| By Guru's Grace, I have realized this. I keep the Lord enshrined within my heart. ||7]|
ad at wet qd 3 Wat fa afte gs da ote Il 1346-11, ysst feo, ve 3)
gur kee banee gur tay jaatee je sabad ratay rang laa-ay.
Those who are attuned to the love of the Shabad know the Guru, through the Word of the Guru's Bani.
ufez urea A Ae foone ofs & ott PE Itch (346-11, ysst faarn, He 3)
pavit paavan say jan nirmal har kai naam samaa-ay. ||8| |
Sacred, pure and immaculate are those humble beings who are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||8]|
dfs Hea ofa a ve 3 afm Aafe Aes Il (1346-12, ysrst faerA, He 3)
har mandar har kaa haat hai rakhi-aa sabad savaar.
The Temple of the Lord is the Lord's Shop; He embellishes it with the Word of His Shabad.
fan fefs AGert Sa on Tenfe Sf Aes NCI (1346-12, ysst freA, He 3)
tis vich sa-udaa ayk naam gurmukh lain savaar. ||9||
In that shop is the merchandise of the One Name; the Gurmukhs adorn themselves with it. ||9]|
ofs Hes fs He SVE F for eA Ste Il (1346-13, ysrst fasrA, we 3)
har mandar meh man lohat hai mohi-aa doojai bhaa-ay.
The mind is like iron slag, within the Temple of the Lord; it is lured by the love of duality.
urafa sfent ave sfeor ahifs adt a ATE ION (1346-13, ysTst fasTA, He 3)
paaras bhayti-ai kanchan bha-i-aa keemat kahee na jaa-ay. ||10||
Meeting with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone, the mind is transformed into gold. Its value cannot be described. ||10||
dfs Hea nfs ofs ZA Ae fodste AE II 1346-14, ysrst freA, He 3) har mandar meh har vasai sarab nirantar so-ay. The Lord abides within the Temple of the Lord. He is pervading in all.
Soa Tent carbo Ae ABST TE IAA 1346-14, yest fusrH, He 3) naanak gurmukh vanjee-ai sachaa sa-udaa ho-ay. ||11]|1]| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs trade in the merchandise of Truth. ||11]|1]|
YystTst HIS 3 Il (1346-15)
parbhaatee mehlaa 3. Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
3 ofe wal A AS Wee asf WH He Bsa I 1346-15, uss, Hs 3)
bhai bhaa-ay jaagay say jan jaagran karahi ha-umai mail utaar.
Those who remain awake and aware in the Love and Fear of God, rid themselves of the filth and pollution of egotism.
He" wWafo we wtuer suf uw SAHA arefa Hs WAM (1346-16, ysTst, He 3)
sadaa jaageh ghar apnaa raakhahi panch taskar kaadheh maar. ||1]| They remain awake and aware forever, and protect their homes, by beating and driving out the five thieves. ||1]|
Ho Ae aaHfe aH fomrf=e il 1346-16, ysrst, 2 3) man mayray gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay. O my mind, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fas Hofer ofs uh Ho Ret aon aE A TITS Ml (1346-17, ys, ve 3)
jit maarag har paa-ee-ai man say-ee karam kamaa-ay. ||1|| rahaa-o. O mind, do only those deeds which will lead you to the Path of the Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
qenfa Aon ufs Cur ey IH fea ATE I (1346-17, ys, Hs 3)
gurmukh sahj Dhun oopjai dukh ha-umai vichahu jaa-ay.
The celestial melody wells up in the Gurmukh, and the pains of egotism are taken away.
dfs ont ofa nfs ZA Hon die TE WE iQ 1346-18, yest, He 3)
har naamaa har man vasai sehjay har gun gaa-ay. ||2| | The Name of the Lord abides in the mind, as one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
TaHst Hu Ave dia Thmr Bf wf Il (1346-19, ysrst, He 3)
gurmatee mukh sohnay har raakhi-aa ur Dhaar.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings - their faces are radiant and beautiful. They keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.
me Ga Ay wet afu afe afa Sad us Sil (1346-19, ysrst, v2 3)
aithai othai sukh ghanaa jap har har utray paar. |[3]|
Here and hereafter, they find absolute peace; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are carried across to the other shore. ||3]|
ua 9389 J@H fefs rage o dzet af safs o uset VE I 1347-1, ysst, He 3)
ha-umai vich jaagran na hova-ee har bhagat na pav-ee thaa-ay. In egotism, one cannot remain awake and aware, and one's devotional worship of the Lord is not accepted.
Hou Ufs set a wale ate eA AIH AHTE Sil (1347-1, ys, Hs 3)
manmukh dar dho-ee naa laheh bhaa-ay doojai karam kamaa-ay. ||4||
The self-willed manmukhs find no place in the Court of the Lord; they do their deeds in the love of duality. ||4] |
fga are fgg Uae frat ert ote fips i 1347-2, ysrst, we 3)
Dharig khaanaa Dharig pain"naa jin"aa doojai bhaa-ay pi-aar.
Cursed is the food, and cursed are the clothes, of those who are attached to the love of duality.
fare a ats fan]et as nf Hafo dfs wre ull 7347-2, ysst, He 3)
bistaa kay keerhay bistaa raatay mar jameh hohi khu-aar. ||5]|
They are like maggots in manure, sinking into manure. In death and rebirth, they are wasted away to ruin. ||5||
fe a8 Afsag sfeur fae fees afe AE I (1347-3, ysrst, He 3) jin ka-o satgur bhayti-aa tinaa vitahu bal jaa-o. I am a Sacrifice to those who meet with the True Guru.
fae at Hafs ffs gat AS AfS AS WE 1347-3, ysrst, He 3)
tin kee sangat mil rahaa’ sachay sach samaa-o. ||6||
I shall continue to associate with them; devoted to Truth, I am absorbed in Truth. [161]
ud ota ag ure Cure fas 3 ufenr Ae I 1347-4, ysst, Hs 3) poorai bhaag gur paa-ee-ai upaa-ay kitai na paa-i-aa jaa-ay. By perfect destiny, the Guru is found. He cannot be found by any efforts.
Afsas 3 AoW Cur ICH Fate ATE DI (1347-4, ysrst, Hs 3)
satgur tay sahj oopjai ha-umai sabad jalaa-ay. ||7||
Through the True Guru, intuitive wisdom wells up; through the Word of the Shabad, egotism is burnt away. ||7]|
dfs Hdset SH HO He AS fas Ade AT I (1347-5, ysrst, ve 3) har sarnaa-ee bhaj man mayray sabh kichh karnai jog. O my mind, hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord; He is Potent to do everything.
Soa OH 0 Sind A fas AP A IT UCUQIDNQNEN (1347-5, YS, He 3) naanak naam na veesrai jo kichh karai so hog. ||8||2||7||2||91|
O Nanak, never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Whatever He does, comes to pass. ||8][2||71|2||9]|
faarA ystst Hoe u mAcudT (1347-7) bibhaas parbhaatee mehlaa 5 asatpadee-aa Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1347-7)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru: HS fust set AS afest Il 0347-8, from ysrst, He 5)
maat pitaa bhaa-ee sut banitaa. Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse
Tats Fa mde fA WAS Il 1347-8, fear ysrst, ws 5) choogeh chog anand si-o jugtaa. - involved with them, people eat the food of bliss.
Bafs ufsG Ha Hts HoT I (1347-8, faarA ysrst, He 5) urajh pari-o man meeth mohaaraa. The mind is entangled in sweet emotional attachment.
TS WIA AT YS MATS WAU (1347-9, festa ust, ve 5) gun gaahak mayray paraan aDhaaraa. ||1]|| Those who seek God's Glorious Virtues are the support of my breath of life. ||1]|
Sa THe vise Il (1347-9, fear ysrst, vs 5) ayk hamaaraa antarjaamee. My One Lord is the Inner-Knower, the Searcher of hearts.
ud fat Hn fea San at fafs reo es use AMM a TIC I 1347-9, freA yt, He 5) Dhar aykaa mai tik aykas kee sir saahaa vad purakh su-aamee. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
He alone is my Support; He is my only Protection. My Great Lord and Master is over and above the heads of kings. ||1||Pause] |
Be sate fag Het cots Tet il (1347-10, fram yssH, ve 5) chhal naagan si-o mayree tootan ho-ee. I have broken my ties to that deceitful serpent.
afs afer fea sot Gat i 1347-10, fra ysrst, Hs 5) gur kahi-aa ih jhoothee Dhohee. The Guru has told me that it is false and fraudulent.
Hfy Hat wet aBat= i 1347-11, fear ysrst, us 5) mukh meethee khaa-ee ka-uraa-ay. Its face is sweet, but it tastes very bitter.
nifys oft He sfoor werfe 1 4347-11, freA ust, He 5) amrit naam man rahi-aa aghaa-ay. ||2|| My mind remains satisfied with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2]|
es Ho fA aet feafe i 347-11, fram yas, He 5) lobh moh si-o ga-ee vikhot. I have broken my ties with greed and emotional attachment.
ats farts dfs atat efe it (1347-12, faorA ysrst, He 5) gur kirpaal mohi keenee chhot. The Merciful Guru has rescued me from them.
fed saest AIS WS WS Il (1347-12, fears ysrst, ve 5) ih thagvaaree bahut ghar gaalay. These cheating thieves have plundered so many homes.
oH ats af Ste farsurs Sil (1347-12, fears yorst, He 5) ham gur raakh lee-ay kirpaalay. ||3]| The Merciful Guru has protected and saved me. ||3]|
am au faAG ote & Sfonr Il (1347-13, faovA ysrst, He 5) kaam kroDh si-o thaat na bani-aa. I have no dealings whatsoever with sexual desire and anger.
ae Quen xfs ast afew i 1347-13, fara ysrst, He 5) gur updays mohi kaanee suni-aa. I listen to the Guru's Teachings.
Ad 2uG 3g HI GIS I (1347-13, fro ust, He 5) jah daykh-a-u tah mahaa chandaal. Wherever I look, I see the most horrible goblins.
ofa se nus afe dues eit 1347-14, fram ysrst, He 5) raakh lee-ay apunai gur gopaal. ||4]| My Guru, the Lord of the World, has saved me from them. ||4| |
GA Sd H adt wavafs Il 1347-14, fuera ust, He 5)
das naaree mai karee duhaagan. I have made widows of the ten sensory organs.
afa afour ea aAfo frarate i 347-14, from ysrst, He 5) gur kahi-aa ayh raseh bikhaagan. The Guru has told me that these pleasures are the fires of corruption.
feo Hoddt sAvsfe Ate i 347-15, faa ysTst, He 5) in sanbanDhee rasaatal jaa-ay. Those who associate with them go to hell.
oH afte aa ofa fee ote ull (1347-15, fear ysrst, He 5) ham gur raakhay har liv laa-ay. ||5|| The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||5||
mone fAG HA@S est il 1347-15, faa ust, He 5) aha‘mayv si-o maslat chhodee. I have forsaken the advice of my ego.
afs afour feg Hay Fst I 1347-16, fasrr ysrst, He 5) gur kahi-aa ih moorakh hodee. The Guru has told me that this is foolish stubbornness.
feg dug we adt o US Il (1347-16, fava Yost, He 5) ih neeghar ghar kahee na paa-ay. This ego is homeless; it shall never find a home.
oH afte ate we fee we Ell (1347-16, fears yorst, He 5) ham gur raakh lee-ay liv laa-ay. ||6]| The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||6||
fee Sao fA ON Se Fave Il 1347-17, feoA ys, v2 5) in logan si-o ham bha-ay bairaa-ee. I have become alienated from these people.
ea fas ufo efe 6 wetet i (1347-17, fasra ysrst, ws 5) ayk garih meh du-ay na khataa‘-ee. We cannot both live together in one home.
mie ys ufo nists afar il 0347-17, frava ysrst, ue 5) aa-ay parabh peh anchar laag. Grasping the hem of the Guru's Robe, I have come to God.
Ad SUA US Agata WOM (1347-18, frava ysrst, ve 5) karahu tapaavas parabh sarbaag. ||7]|| Please be fair with me, All-knowing Lord God. ||7]||
ys ofA 88 ate fone 11 1347-18, fava ysrst, ne 5) parabh has bolay kee-ay ni-aa’-ay”. God smiled at me and spoke, passing judgement.
AIG ES Hot AST GES Il (1347-18, fax ysrst, v2 5) sagal doot mayree sayvaa laa-ay. He made all the demons perform service for me.
3 oag feg fag A ST I (1347-19, fear ysrst, He 5) too” thaakur ih garihu sabh tayraa. You are my Lord and Master; all this home belongs to You.
aT Sea Tle Aho fers WCU 347-19, front ysrst, He 5) kaho naanak gur kee-aa nibayraa. ||8]||1|| Says Nanak, the Guru has passed judgement. ||8||1]|
YystTst HIS U Il (1347-19)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Yat 93et
HO Hfo AT HIT MTATST I (1348-1, ysrst, He 5) man meh kroDh mahaa aha‘kaaraa. Within the mind dwell anger and massive ego.
um asts sags faAaTs I (1348-1, ysrst, 42 5) poojaa karahi bahut bisthaaraa. Worship services are performed with great pomp and ceremony.
ats fenae 3fo 3x FSS Il (1348-1, ysrst, He 5) kar isnaan tan chakar banaa-ay. Ritual cleansing baths are taken, and sacred marks are applied to the body.
M3d St HS aa Sto WS NU (1348-1, ysrst, He 5) antar kee mal kab hee na jaa-ay. ||1|| But still, the filth and pollution within never depart. ||1||
fez Aafh us fas cto urfemr It (1348-2, yarst, vs 5) it sanjam parabh kin hee na paa-i-aa. No one has ever found God in this way.
saat wet He Hfowr aefemr al TIS Il 1348-2, ysrst, ve 5)
bhag-utee mudraa man mohi-aa maa-i-aa. ||1]|| rahaa-o.
The sacred mudras - ritualistic hand gestures - are made, but the mind remains enticed by Maya. ||1||Pause]|
uru asfa ust & af F il (1348-3, ysrst, He 5) paap karahi panchaa” kay bas ray. They commit sins, under the influence of the five thieves.
stefa of aats Afs S3g I (1348-3, ysrst, He 5) tirath naa-ay kaheh sabh utray. They bathe at sacred shrines, and claim that everything has been washed off.
adfe anets of& feria i 1348-3, ysst, Hz 5) bahur kamaaveh ho-ay nisank. Then they commit them again, without fear of the consequences.
an ufs aif ud ASS iQ (1348-4, ysrst, ue 5) jam pur baa“Dh kharay kaalank. ||2|| The sinners are bound and gagged, and taken to the City of Death. ||2]|
wars aft sAtefo STE I (1348-4, ysrst, nH 5) ghooghar baaDh bajaaveh taalaa. The ankle-bells shake and the cymbals vibrate,
nists aue feafs Fas Il (1348-4, ysrst, v2 5) antar kapat fireh baytaalaa. but those who have deception within wander lost like demons.
Sot St APY & HMI Il (1348-5, ysTst, He 5) varmee maaree saap na moo-aa. By destroying its hole, the snake is not killed.
yg AS fas WS fats J thor Sil 1348-5, ysrst, we 5) parabh sabh kichh jaanai jin too kee-aa. ||3]| God, who created you, knows everything. ||3]|
Unis Sy at & SAT Il (1348-5, ysst, we 5) poo“ar taap gayree kay bastaraa. You worship fire and wear saffron colored robes.
nuer at Hifgnr fas 3 SAS Il (1348-6, ysrst, He 5) apdaa kaa maari-aa garih tay nastaa. Stung by your misfortune, you abandon your home.
on efs usenfs ofeor I 1348-6, ysrst, Hz 5) days chhod pardayseh Dhaa-i-aa. Leaving your own country, you wander in foreign lands.
UT VSS BS B nrfEnr Isl 1348-6, ysrst, He 5) panch chandaal naalay lai aa-i-aa. ||4]| But you bring the five rejects with you. ||4||
ae sate fare Sar il (1348-7, ysrst, ue 5) kaan faraa-ay hiraa-ay tookaa. You have split your ears, and now you steal crumbs.
ufs ufe Hat fyustes 3 YaT Il (1348-7, ys, we 5) ghar ghar maagai tariptaavan tay chookaa. You beg from door to door, but you fail to be satisfied.
afost efs ge sefe ug ardt Il (1348-7, ust, He 5) banitaa chhod bad nadar par naaree. You have abandoned your own wife, but now you sneak glances at other women.
afk o ure Ho eftmrdt iui 1348-8, ysrst, v2 5) vaysS na paa-ee-ai mahaa dukhi-aaree. ||5]| God is not found by wearing religious robes; you are utterly miserable! ||5||
8 ot de For Hot i (1348-8, ysrst, we 5) bolai naahee ho-ay baithaa monee. He does not speak; he is on silence.
nists aeu seve Hot I (1348-8, ystst, He 5) antar kalap bhavaa-ee-ai jonee. But he is filled with desire; he is made to wander in reincarnation.
mo 3 JIS BY Vt ATS Il (1348-9, ysrst, nz 5) ann tay rahtaa dukh dayhee sahtaa. Abstaining from food, his body suffers in pain.
TaH 3 FS fenrfimr HAs ell 0348-9, ys, Hs 5)
hukam na boojhai vi-aapi-aa mamtaa. | |6] |
He does not realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command; he is afflicted by possessiveness. ||6||
fae Afsas fas o uret un TS Il (1348-9, ysret, He 5) bin satgur kinai na paa-ee param gatay. Without the True Guru, no one has attained the supreme status.
usd Aare ae AALS II (1348-10, ysrst, H 5) poochhahu sagal bayd simritay. Go ahead and ask all the Vedas and the Simritees.
HOHY AGH Ad wiATeT I (1348-10, ysTSt, He 5) manmukh karam karai ajaa-ee. The self-willed manmukhs do useless deeds.
fAS TH ws SST o SET MDI (1348-10, ysst, He 5) ji-o baaloo ghar tha-ur na thaa-ee. ||7]|| They are like a house of sand, which cannot stand. ||7||
fan 6 3 afde eferer It 1348-11, ysrst, He 5) jis no bha-ay gobind da-i-aalaa. One unto whom the Lord of the Universe becomes Merciful,
as a s00 fate afas ure i (1348-11, ysrst, ue 5)
gur kaa bachan tin baaDhi-o paalaa. sews the Word of the Guru's Shabad into his robes.
afe Ho aet AS fearfeor i 1348-11, ysrst, He 5) kot maDhay ko-ee sant dikhaa-i-aa. Out of millions, it is rare that such a Saint is seen.
Sod fsa a Af safeur cil (1348-12, yas, He 5) naanak tin kai sang taraa-i-aa. ||8]| O Nanak, with him, we are carried across. ||8]||
XS 4
A de Sa ST PaAS USM II (1348-12, ysrst, He 5) jay hovai bhaag taa darsan paa-ee-ai. If one has such good destiny, then the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is obtained.
uf 33 AS Fey sae UU TIS TAT I (1348-12) aap tarai sabh kutamb taraa-ee-ai. ||1|| rahaa-o doojaa. ||2|| He saves himself, and carries across all his family as well. ||1]|SECOND PAUSE] |2] |
YystTst HIS U Il (1348-13)
parbhaatee mehlaa 5. Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
fines an fxofae Afs aS Il (1348-13, ysrst, He 5) simrat naam kilbikh sabh kaatay. Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, all the sins are erased.
UdH GE & Aas SS Il (1348-14, ysrst, He 5) Dharam raa-ay kay kaagar faatay. The accounts held by the Righteous Judge of Dharma are torn up.
AaHats ffs ofs oA ufo th 348-14, ysrst, He 5) saaDhsangat mil har ras paa-i-aa. Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
urggoH fee ufo AHEM AI (1348-14, ysTst, He 5)
paarbarahm rid maahi samaa-i-aa. ||1]|
I have found the Sublime Essence of the Lord. The Supreme Lord God has melted into my heart. |[1]|
TH SHS Ue oe AY UfEMT Il 1348-15, ysrst, He 5) raam ramat har har sukh paa-i-aa. Dwelling on the Lord, Har, Har, I have found peace.
3d OA Uda AdotfeEnt NA FICS I (1348-15, ysrst, He 5) tayray daas charan sarnaa-i-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Your slaves seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1]|Pause] |
gor age fufenr niftmrg il (1348-15, ysrst, Hs 5) chookaa ga-on miti-aa anDhi-aar. The cycle of reincarnation is ended, and darkness is dispelled.
afte feuefenr Hats Enis Il 1348-16, ysrst, ve 5) gur dikhlaa-i-aa mukat du-aar. The Guru has revealed the door of liberation.
dfs UH safs HS 3G AE TST Il (1348-16, ysrst, ne 5) har paraym bhagat man tan sad raataa. My mind and body are forever imbued with loving devotion to the Lord.
ys Aatfeor sa St AST MI (1348-16, ysst, He 5) parabhoo janaa-i-aa tab hee jaataa. ||2|| Now I know God, because He has made me know Him. ||2||
ufe wie nists afeor APE I 1348-17, yest, He 5) ghat ghat antar ravi-aa so-ay. He is contained in each and every heart.
fan faa sta ardt af& i (1348-17, ysrst, ne 5) tis bin beejo naahee ko-ay. Without Him, there is no one at all.
ag fada 22 S sont Il 1348-17, ysrst, He 5) bair biroDh chhayday bhai bharmaa”. Hatred, conflict, fear and doubt have been eliminated.
ufs ufs msn ats GaN ISI 1348-18, ysst, He 5) parabh punn aatmai keenay Dharmaa. ||3]| God, the Soul of Pure Goodness, has manifested His Righteousness. ||3] |
o ba eX HS SIT J AS Bal Il (1348-18, ystst, He 5) mahaa tarang tay kaa“dhai laagaa. He has rescued me from the most dangerous waves.
HOH HOH AT eT aS Il (1348-18, ysrst, ne 5) janam janam kaa tootaa gaa“dhaa. Separated from Him for countless lifetimes, I am united with Him once again.
AU SU ARH OH AH fem I (1348-19, ysrst, He 5)
jap tap sanjam naam sam"aali-aa.
Chanting, intense meditation and strict self-discipline are the contemplation of the Naam.
mus stats seta feofemi iigil (1348-19, yest, He 5) apunai thaakur nadar nihaali-aa. ||4|| My Lord and Master has blessed me with His Glance of Grace. ||4]|
Hares Aa afore fsaret il (1348-19, ysrst, He 5) mangal sookh kali-aan tithaa-ee™. Bliss, peace and salvation are found in that place,
art qast
Ad ASA Tus TASH Il (1349-1, ysrst, He 5) jah sayvak gopaal gusaa-ee. where the servants of the Lord of the World abide.
Us HYAS SS TU Il 1349-1, ysst, He 5) parabh suparsan bha-ay gopaal. God, the Lord of the World, is pleased and satisfied with me.
HOH HOH & fe fase Mull (1349-1, ysrst, He 5) janam janam kay mitay bitaal. ||5|| My disharmony with Him of so many lifetimes is ended. ||5||
oH Aa SIA SU UF Il (1349-2, ysrst, we 5)
hom jag uraDh tap poojaa.
Burnt offerings, sacred feasts, intense meditations with the body upside-down, worship services
afe ste ferore asta i (1349-2, ysrst, He 5) kot tirath isnaan kareejaa. and taking millions of cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage
Tdo SHS fany foe ars i 1349-2, ysrst, v2 5)
charan kamal nimakh ridai Dhaaray.
- the merits of all these are obtained by enshrining the Lord's Lotus Feet within the heart, even for an instant.
difse Aus Afs areH ATS MEI (1349-3, yas, He 5) gobind japat sabh kaaraj saaray. ||6|| Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, all one's affairs are resolved. ||6]|
Cs 3 Cor ys ag Il (1349-3, ysrst, we 5)
oochay tay oochaa parabh thaan. God's Place is the highest of the high.
dfs AS Bets Hate famrs il (1349-3, yest, Hs 5)
har jan laaveh sahj Dhi-aan. The Lord's humble servants intuitively focus their meditation on Him.
OA DAS at aes ots il (1349-4, ysrst, He 5) daas daasan kee baa‘chha-o Dhoor. I long for the dust of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
Hee oer usu saute Dil 1349-4, ysrst, Hs 5) sarab kalaa pareetam bharpoor. ||7| | My Beloved Lord is overflowing with all powers. ||7| |
Hg furs ofg UISH ST Il (1349-4, ysrst, He 5) maat pitaa har pareetam nayraa. My Beloved Lord, my Mother and Father, is always near.
HIS AHS SSSA ST Il (1349-5, ysrst, He 5)
meet saajan bharvaasaa tayraa. O my Friend and Companion, You are my Trusted Support.
AT Ts BS MUS BA Il (1349-5, ysrst, He 5) kar geh leenay apunay daas. God takes His slaves by the hand, and makes them His Own.
Afu HS Soa TESA UCUSUVNDNIM (1349-5, ysrst, He 5)
jap jeevai naanak guntaas. ||8]|3]|2]|7]|12]| Nanak lives by meditating on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||8]|3]|2]|7||12] |
fasvA ystst wat sas adie At at (1349-7)
bibhaas parbhaatee banee bhagat kabeer jee kee Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars ure I (1349-7) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Hao Hee at Har STH Il 1349-8, fear ysrst, gars adie Ft) maran jeevan kee sankaa naasee. My anxious fears of death and rebirth have been taken away.
nue Sf AIA UIA NA (1349-8, fromA YS, sas ate Hh
aapan rang sahj pargaasee. ||1]| The Celestial Lord has shown His Love for me. ||1]|
yaret fs firfemr niftmrer iI (1349-8, frana ysrst, gars alte Ht) pargatee jot miti-aa anDhi-aaraa. The Divine Light has dawned, and darkness has been dispelled.
TH 336 Ufeur ass ass AU TIS Il 1349-9, fears Yost, ars aceite FH)
raam ratan paa-i-aa karat beechaaraa. ||1|| rahaa-o. Contemplating the Lord, I have obtained the Jewel of His Name. ||1]|Pause] |
Wd Mo? oy Ufs ufemrar Il (1349-9, from ysrst, gars atte Fh) jah anand dukh door pa-i-aanaa. Pain runs far away from that place where there is bliss.
HO HOt fF SS BASH IQ (1349-9, feeA ysrst, gars aceite Ah man maanak liv tat lukaanaa. ||2|| The jewel of the mind is focused and attuned to the essence of reality. ||2]|
A fxs dur A Sa svat Il (1349-10, fuorn ysst, sas adie fh jo kichh ho-aa so tayraa bhaanaa. Whatever happens is by the Pleasure of Your Will.
A fee a3 A ofA ANTS ISI (1349-10, fava ust, sas adits Ft) jo iv boojhai so sahj samaanaa. ||3]| Whoever understands this, is intuitively merged in the Lord. ||3]|
ads aa fxofaa awe dter il 1349-10, faerr ysrst, sas adits Ah) kahat kabeer kilbikh ga-ay kheenaa. Says Kabeer, my sins have been obliterated.
Ho Stent AaHlea Ble" NU (1349-11, freA usSt, sas aete A) man bha-i-aa jagjeevan leenaa. ||4]|1]| My mind has merged into the Lord, the Life of the World. ||4]]1]]|
ystst Il (1349-11) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
Wed Sa HAS aA J nied Hoy fan AT Il (1349-11, ust, sas adie th
alhu ayk maseet basat hai avar mulakh kis kayraa.
If the Lord Allah lives only in the mosque, then to whom does the rest of the world belong?
foe Hofs an foeHt es ufo SS 3 FST AU (1349-12, ysst, sas alta Hh)
hindoo moorat naam nivaasee duh meh tat na hayraa. ||1||
According to the Hindus, the Lord's Name abides in the idol, but there is no truth in either of these claims. ||1]|
Mod TH Aes 3a Set Il (1349-12, ysrst, sas adits Hh alah raam jeeva-o tayray naa-ee. O Allah, O Raam, I live by Your Name.
3 ats frooHfs Art A TIS Il 1349-13, yest, sas ats Fh)
too kar mihraamat saa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Please show mercy to me, O Master. ||1]|Pause| |
uo ofA at at aA ufefh nied HATH I (1349-13, ysrst, sas adits Ah
dakhan days haree kaa baasaa pachhim alah mukaamaa. The God of the Hindus lives in the southern lands, and the God of the Muslims lives in the west.
feo ufo df fee fete dag Sdt SBa HAN III (1349-14, ust, sas adits Th
dil meh khoj dilai dil khojahu ayhee tha-ur mukaamaa. ||2]|
So search in your heart - look deep into your heart of hearts; this is the home and the place where God lives. ||2||
qaHs fomrrm acts sGatar arat HT THATS Il (1349-14, ysst, sas aete A)
barahman gi-aas karahi cha-ubeesaa kaajee mah ramjaanaa. The Brahmins observe twenty-four fasts during the year, and the Muslims fast during the month of Ramadaan.
fomrdd HA UTA a oe Sa nfs fears Bil (1349-15, ust, sas adie rh)
gi-aareh maas paas kai raakhay aykai maahi niDhaanaa. ||3]| The Muslims set aside eleven months, and claim that the treasure is only in the one month. |[3]|
av @sth HAS aor for HATS fag aS I 1349-15, ysrst, sas atte Fh)
kahaa udeesay majan kee-aa ki-aa maseet sir naa’-ay™.
What is the use of bathing at Orissa? Why do the Muslims bow their heads in the mosque?
feo ufo aue foe aad for JA ae AIS ISil 1349-16, yas, gas ate FH)
dil meh kapat nivaaj gujaarai ki-aa haj kaabai jaa‘-ay™. ||41|
If someone has deception in his heart, what good is it for him to utter prayers? And what good is it for him to go on pilgrimage to Mecca? ||4]|
SS mss HIE’ AH S AS JU SHS Il (1349-16, yest, sas acta A) aytay a-urat mardaa saajay ay sabh roop tum"aaray. You fashioned all these men and women, Lord. All these are Your Forms.
as UAT TH vied a AS Te Uls HS UM (1349-17, ysrst, sas sete Fh) kabeer poongraa raam alah kaa sabh gur peer hamaaray. ||5]| Kabeer is the child of God, Allah, Raam. All the Gurus and prophets are mine. ||5]|
AIS Ads HoT Sd ode UdT Sa at Agae Il (1349-17, ys, gas ate FH) kahat kabeer sunhu nar narvai parahu ayk kee sarnaa. Says Kabeer, listen, O men and women: seek the Sanctuary of the One.
ABs OU Aug J yrot 3a dt fead Sao" WENN (1349-18, ysrst, sas adits Fh)
kayval naam japahu ray paraanee tab hee nihchai tarnaa. ||6||2] |
Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortals, and you shall surely be carried across. ||6||2||
YSTst Il (1349-18) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
mets nied og Surfeur geafs & AS se I 1349-19, ysst, gars aets Ft) aval alah noor upaa-i-aa kudrat kay sabh banday. First, Allah created the Light; then, by His Creative Power, He made all mortal beings.
2a OF 3 Ag Aa Culm as 38 A HS AI (1349-19, ysst, sas anita Fh) ayk noor tay sabh jag upji-aa ka-un bhalay ko manday. ||1|| From the One Light, the entire universe welled up. So who is good, and who is bad?
[1
UST WBuUO
Ba SHH F FST Fret I 1350-1, ysst, sas alta Fh)
logaa bharam na bhoolahu bhaa-ee. O people, O Siblings of Destiny, do not wander deluded by doubt.
ufed wea uaa His fea ufs sos Aa otet uA TIS Il 1350-1, ysst, gars aes Fh khaalik khalak khalak meh khaalik poor rahi-o sarab thaa"-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o.
The Creation is in the Creator, and the Creator is in the Creation, totally pervading and permeating all places. ||1||Pause]|
Het Sa nda sifs af AG AHI? Il (1350-2, yest, sas ade Ah maatee ayk anayk bhaa™t kar saajee saajanhaarai. The clay is the same, but the Fashioner has fashioned it in various ways.
o ae UT HS a BIS OT Ag UT Ass MQMl (1350-2, ysst, sas aete rh) naa kachh poch maatee kay bhaa“day naa kachh poch kumbhaarai. ||2|| There is nothing wrong with the pot of clay - there is nothing wrong with the Potter.
[21 |
AS Hf AS Sa ASt fSA a or AS aE Tet Il 1350-3, ysst, sas adie FH) sabh meh sachaa ayko so-ee tis kaa kee-aa sabh kachh ho-ee. The One True Lord abides in all; by His making, everything is made.
Jan UeTé A Sa WS Set adh ASt NI 1350-3, ust, sas adie rh)
hukam pachhaanai so ayko jaanai bandaa kahee-ai so-ee. ||3] |
Whoever realizes the Hukam of His Command, knows the One Lord. He alone is said to be the Lord's slave. ||3]|
MOI MOY o At ofeor ats as eta Hor Il 1350-4, ysst, sas aes Fh)
alhu alakh na jaa-ee lakhi-aa gur gurh deenaa meethaa.
The Lord Allah is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Guru has blessed me with this Sweet molasses.
afta ats Adt Hart ot Ava fodAe ster gill 1350-4, ysst, sas adits Ft)
kahi kabeer mayree sankaa naasee sarab niranjan deethaa. ||4]|3]| Says Kabeer, my anxiety and fear have been taken away; I see the Immaculate Lord pervading everywhere. ||4]|3]|
ystst Il (1350-5) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
Ye ASA AIT HS BS SS" AG fess Il (1350-5, yet, sas acts Fh)
bayd katayb kahhu mat jhoothay jhoothaa jo na bichaarai.
Do not say that the Vedas, the Bible and the Koran are false. Those who do not contemplate them are false.
ag As ufo Sa vere aus Ue 3E fa Haat HTS NAN (1350-5, ust, sas adits Th) ja-o sabh meh ayk khudaa-ay kahat ha-o ta-o ki-o murgee maarai. ||1]| You say that the One Lord is in all, so why do you kill chickens? ||1]|
Hot add fourG yeret il (1350-6, ysst, sas ate Ff) mulaa™’ kahhu ni-aa-o khudaa-ee. O Mullah, tell me: is this God's Justice?
3d HO A SIH B WEST NA TIS Il 1350-6, ysst, sas adits Fh) tayray man kaa bharam na jaa-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. The doubts of your mind have not been dispelled. ||1]]|Pause] |
uate AG orfonr ea feat Het aS faAfyfs shor it 1350-7, ysst, sas adits ah) pakar jee-o aani-aa dayh binaasee maatee ka-o bismil kee-aa.
You seize a living creature, and then bring it home and kill its body; you have killed only the clay.
WS AGU MaTS Balt aT THs for shor i 350-7, ysst, sas aetts Ft)
jot saroop anaahat laagee kaho halaal ki-aa kee-aa. ||2|| The light of the soul passes into another form. So tell me, what have you killed? ||2]||
foor Ca ura ahr He Ofenr for HAS fre afenr 1 (1350-8, ysrst, sas ats Ht) ki-aa ujoo paak kee-aa muhu Dho-i-aa ki-aa maseet sir laa-i-aa.
And what good are your purifications? Why do you bother to wash your face? And why do you bother to bow your head in the mosque?
Ag feo ufo que foes dated fomr gn are fenr 1311 1350-9, ysst, sas adie Hf) ja-o dil meh kapat nivaaj gujaarahu ki-aa haj kaabai jaa-i-aa. ||3] |
Your heart is full of hypocrisy; what good are your prayers or your pilgrimage to Mecca? ||3||
3 aura ug oot Afsur fSA ot HoH & AfoMr Il (1350-9, ysst, gars oats Ft) too” naapaak paak nahee soojhi-aa tis kaa maram na jaani-aa. You are impure; you do not understand the Pure Lord. You do not know His Mystery.
afte oats feats 3 gor tHe FAG Ho whom sisi (1350-10, ysst, sas afta Fh)
kahi kabeer bhisat tay chookaa dojak si-o man maani-aa. ||4||4]| Says Kabeer, you have missed out on paradise; your mind is set on hell. ||4||4]|
ystst Il (1350-11) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
Hd Afar 3ct te tevag moufs vorfe mre I 1350-11, ysst, sas adits
sunn sanDhi-aa tayree dayv dayvaakar aDhpat aad samaa-ee.
Hear my prayer, Lord; You are the Divine Light of the Divine, the Primal, All-pervading Master.
fra morta nis odt fer ofa gd Aaret NU 1350-11, yest, gars adits Hf)
siDh samaaDh ant nahee paa-i-aa laag rahay sarnaa-ee. ||1]||
The Siddhas in Samaadhi have not found Your limits. They hold tight to the Protection of Your Sanctuary. ||1]|
Sy wrest ¢ used fadae Afsas uAg set II (1350-12, ysrst, sas ats Ht)
layho aartee ho purakh niranjan satgur poojahu bhaa-ee.
Worship and adoration of the Pure, Primal Lord comes by worshipping the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.
ore! HoH foam stad view 3 ofr Aret AU TIS Il (1350-12, yarst, sas ants Fh thaadhaa barahmaa nigam beechaarai alakh na lakhi-aa jaa-ee. ||1]| rahaa-o.
Standing at His Door, Brahma studies the Vedas, but he cannot see the Unseen Lord. ||1]|Pause] |
BJ 3B ON ator ast qug ea SAS It (1350-13, ysrst, sas ait Fh)
tat tayl naam kee-aa baatee deepak dayh uj-yaaraa.
With the oil of knowledge about the essence of reality, and the wick of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, this lamp illluminates my body.
is Oe AeA Hafeor Fs FFI MQM (1350-13, ysst, sas sets Ht)
jot laa-ay jagdees jagaa-i-aa boojhai boojhanhaaraa. ||2||
I have applied the Light of the Lord of the Universe, and lit this lamp. God the Knower knows. ||2||
Ud APE MoT IH Aa Atsaurst |i 1350-14, yest, sas oats Ff)
panchay sabad anaahad baajay sangay saringpaanee.
The Unstruck Melody of the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrates and resounds. I dwell with the Lord of the World.
ads aA Sct uirest atot faders fagarat wSNUll (1350-14, yest, sas adits Ff)
kabeer daas tayree aartee keenee nirankaar nirbaanee. ||3||5]| Kabeer, Your slave, performs this Aartee, this lamp-lit worship service for You, O Formless Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||3]|5||
ysst wal sas SHES At at 1350-16) parbhaatee banee bhagat naamdayv jee kee Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
qe Afsars ure II (1350-16) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Ho ot fase He ot AS & gsH via ad | 1350-17, ysst, sas ane Fh man kee birthaa man hee jaanai kai boojhal aagai kahee-ai. The mind alone knows the state of the mind; I tell it to the Knowing Lord.
Ms ITH Jeet H ST AA VINA NA (1350-17, uss, gas aH Ah antarjaamee raam ravaa‘-ee mai dar kaisay chahee-ai. ||1||
I chant the Name of the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts - why should I be afraid? ||1]|
AOhas Ture GASH | 1350-18, ysst, gas anes ah
bayDhee-alay gopaal gosaa-ee. My mind is pierced through by the love of the Lord of the World.
Aa ys sent Age Set AU TITS Il (1350-18, ysst, sas ane Fh)
mayraa parabh ravi-aa sarbay thaa-ee. ||1]|| rahaa-o. My God is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause| |
HS TS HS US HTS FT UTAH Il (1350-18, ysst, sas oe Ht) maanai haat maanai paat maanai hai paasaaree. The mind is the shop, the mind is the town, and the mind is the shopkeeper.
H® FA lat Set SHS J AAS Il (1350-19, ysst, sas ane wh) maanai baasai naanaa bhaydee bharmat hai sansaaree. ||2|| The mind abides in various forms, wandering all across the world. ||2]|
ad a Rafe Ss Ho TS ofa Agfa AHTAt Il (1350-19, ysst, sas anes Ah
gur kai sabad ayhu man raataa dubiDhaa sahj samaanee.
This mind is imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and duality is easily overcome.
Yat ABUq
Hs Jay Jan J nm fogs@ AHS Stes SI (1351-1, ysst, sas ane wh sabho hukam hukam hai aapay nirbha-o samat beechaaree. ||3]||
He Himself is the Commander; all are under His Command. The Fearless Lord looks on all alike. ||3]|
A Ho Ate sats usdSH ST St mifsars aet Il 1351-1, ysst, sas anes Ah
jo jan jaan bhajeh purkhotam taa chee abigat banee.
That humble being who knows, and meditates on the Supreme Primal Being - his word becomes eternal.
OH ad Hanes ufeur frse iow fasrat Sid 0351-2, ysst, sas anes Ah
naamaa kahai jagjeevan paa-i-aa hirdai alakh bidaanee. ||4||1]| Says Naam Dayv, I have found the Invisible, Wondrous Lord, the Life of the World, within my heart. ||4][1]|
YysTst Il (1351-3) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
uit qarfe warfe wal Aa St aT nis B AEM I (1351-3, ust, gas anes Ah
aad jugaad jugaad jugo jug taa kaa ant na jaani-aa.
He existed in the beginning, in the primeval age, and all throughout the ages; His limits cannot be known.
Ava fedsts oH sfoor afe wir gy marie AI 0351-3, ysst, sas one Ht)
sarab nirantar raam rahi-aa rav aisaa roop bakhaani-aa. ||1]| The Lord is pervading and permeating amongst all; this is how His Form can be described. ||1]|
dfse WH AGE AH Il 1351-4, ysst, sas ones FH) gobid gaajai sabad baajai. The Lord of the Universe appears when the Word of His Shabad is chanted.
mee gut As THe IU TIS il 1351-4, ysst, sas se Fh) aanad roopee mayro raam-ee-aa. ||1|| rahaa-o. My Lord is the Embodiment of Bliss. ||1]|Pause] |
wee sty as se aA Ss Ae ofaer il 1351-5, yest, sas anes Fh
baavan beekhoo baanai beekhay baas tay sukh laagilaa.
The beautiful fragrance of sandalwood emanates from the sandalwood tree, and attaches to the other trees of the forest.
Raa orfe usnofe an] dee Steer MQM 1351-5, yest, sas one FH)
sarbay aad paramlaad kaasat chandan bhai-ilaa. ||2| |
God, the Primal Source of everything, is like the sandalwood tree; He transforms us woody trees into fragrant sandalwood. ||2||
3H U UGA UH 8 BT Aa ave Sfear Il 1351-6, ysst, sas see FH)
tum" chay paaras ham chay lohaa sangay kanchan bhai-ilaa.
You, O Lord, are the Philosopher's Stone, and I am iron; associating with You, I am transformed into gold.
3 ters 339 BS oat As AHSH SII (1351-6, ysst, sas aHee Fh
too da-i-aal ratan laal naamaa saach samaa-ilaa. ||3]|2]| You are Merciful; You are the gem and the jewel. Naam Dayv is absorbed in the Truth. |]3][2||
YysTst Il (1351-7) parbhaatee. Prabhaatee:
nae uae fea sles Burfenr i 1351-7, ysst, sas ones FH) akul purakh ik chalit upaa-i-aa. The Primal Being has no ancestry; He has staged this play.
ufe wife nists you Sarfeor Al 4351-7, ysst, sas ee Fh) ghat ghat antar barahm lukaa-i-aa. ||1]|| God is hidden deep within each and every heart. ||1||
aba oat HfS 3 AS Set II 351-8, yest, sas oe Fh) jee-a kee jot na jaanai ko-ee. No one knows the Light of the soul.
3H aor FSH Tet NU TTS Il 351-8, ysst, sas ane Hh) tai mai kee-aa so maaloom ho-ee. ||1|| rahaa-o. Whatever I do, is known to You, Lord. ||1]|Pause| |
fag yarftor Het SE il (1351-8, ysst, sas snes A) ji-o pargaasi-aa maatee kumbhay-o. Just as the pitcher is made from clay,
mu dt Aas HSS SE 2M 351-9, yast, sas anee Hh aap hee kartaa beethul day-o. ||2|| everything is made from the Beloved Divine Creator Himself. ||2| |
Hit at dag aay fam | 351-9, ust, gas anes Ah jee-a kaa banDhan karam bi-aapai. The mortal's actions hold the soul in the bondage of karma.
A fe ator A nimi mt Sil 0351-9, yest, sas ones Ff) jo kichh kee-aa so aapai aapai. ||3]| Whatever he does, he does on his own. ||3]|
ysefs onee feg He fase Ad II 1351-10, ysst, sas ones Fh paranvat naamday-o ih jee-o chitvai so lahai. Prays Naam Dayv, whatever this soul wants, it obtains.
WHE dE AS vias Id WII (1351-10, ysst, sas anes AH amar ho-ay sad aakul rahai. ||4]|3]| Whoever abides in the Lord, becomes immortal. ||4]|3]|
ysst sas Sat At at 351-11) parbhaatee bhagat baynee jee kee Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Baynee Jee:
qe Afsars yA it (1351-11) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
3fs deg HASSE ust I 1351-12, yest, sas Bet Fh tan chandan mastak paatee. You rub your body with sandalwood oil, and place basil leaves on your forehead.
foe nists ad 36 AST I 1351-12, yast, sas Bet zh)
rid antar kar tal kaatee. But you hold a knife in the hand of your heart.
oat fenfe sar fee Bar il 1351-12, ysst, sas Fat AH
thag disat bagaa liv laagaa. You look like a thug; pretending to meditate, you pose like a crane.
afy SAS UTS HY Sa NA (1351-12, ysst, sas Bet Hh daykh baisno paraan mukh bhaagaa. ||1|| You try to look like a Vaishnaav, but the breath of life escapes through your mouth.
[21
afs saes dz fesht i 0351-13, ysst, sas Fat Ff)
kal bhagvat band chiraa’ma’. You pray for hours to God the Beautiful.
ag fenfe oa fafa ard 1d TIS tl 1351-13, yas, sas Fat sh
karoor disat rataa nis baada”. ||1|| rahaa-o. But your gaze is evil, and your nights are wasted in conflict. ||1]|Pause] |
fosufs fenars dtd I 1351-14, ysst, sas Bet Hh) nitparat isnaan sareera’. You perform daily cleansing rituals,
efe ast aan yf ote i 351-14, ysst, gas Bet wh
du-ay Dhotee karam mukh kheera”. wear two loin-cloths, perform religious rituals and put only milk in your mouth.
foe edt Afomrat il 0351-14, ysst, sas Fat Hh ridai chhuree sanDhi-aanee. But in your heart, you have drawn out the sword.
ug tag fords at aot iQ 1351-14, yest, sas Fat AH
par darab hiran kee baanee. |[2|| You routinely steal the property of others. ||2| |
fre unt UX TSA ll (1351-15, ysst, sas Set FH) sil poojas chakar ganaysa". You worship the stone idol, and paint ceremonial marks of Ganesha.
fafa wath safs yer il (1351-15, ysst, sas Bet Hh nis jaagas bhagat parvaysa”. You remain awake throughout the night, pretending to worship God.
Udl OTSA fas MASH I (1351-15, yest, sas Bet Fh pag naachas chit akarma”. You dance, but your consciousness is filled with evil.
S BUS OT MOH Ill 1351-16, ysst, sas Fat Hh ay lampat naach aDharma”. ||3]| You are lewd and depraved - this is such an unrighteous dance! ||3]||
fifat ims SGA HHT Il 1351-16, ysst, sas Fat AH marig aasan tulsee maalaa. You sit on a deer-skin, and chant on your mala.
as Cre faq TuTH Il 1351-16, ysst, sas Fat FA kar oojal tilak kapaalaa. You put the sacred mark, the tilak, on your forehead.
foe az afe Fert i 1351-16, ysrst, sas Bet Hh)
ridai koorh kanth rudraakha".
You wear the rosary beads of Shiva around your neck, but your heart is filled with falsehood.
J Suz fans vise sil 1351-17, yest, sas Feat FH ray lampat krisan abhaakha”. ||4]| You are lewd and depraved - you do not chant God's Name. ||4| |
fate MSH 33 5 Denn il 351-17, ysst, sas Fat AH
jin aatam tat na cheen'i-aa. Whoever does not realize the essence of the soul
AS dae SH mietfenrt i (1351-17, ysst, sas Fat AH
sabh fokat Dharam abeeni-aa. - all his religious actions are hollow and false.
ad Sat Toute fore i 351-18, ysst, sas Bat AH kaho baynee gurmukh Dhi-aavai. Says Baynee, as Gurmukh, meditate.
faa Afsag Fe 6 US] MUNA (1351-18, Yast, sas At rh
bin satgur baat na paavai. ||5||1]| Without the True Guru, you shall not find the Way. ||5]|1||
ust 9Bu2 qe ATS on aes usy fos fares ners Has mast AS aT YATE I 4352-1
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Ta AASSt HIST € Il (1352-3) raag jaijaavantee mehlaa 9. Raag Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:
on frfa oy fife fed 33 oft To 1352-4, Anest, He 9)
raam simar raam simar ihai tayrai kaaj hai.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord - meditate on the Lord; this alone shall be of use to you.
Hfeor &t Hg fsurg ys a at Hale Ba Il (1352-4, AaSst, vs 9) maa-i-aa ko sang ti-aag parabh joo kee saran laag. Abandon your association with Maya, and take shelter in the Sanctuary of God.
Was AY HS fifeor ss AS ATA T UU TIS Il 1352-4, Ares, 8 9)
jagat sukh maan mithi-aa jhootho sabh saaj hai. ||1|| rahaa-o.
Remember that the pleasures of the world are false; this whole show is just an illusion. ||1]]Pause| |
Hue fa@ us uete ard ufs ATS HVS Il (1352-5, Sst, Hs 9) supnay ji-o Dhan pachhaan kaahay par karat maan. You must understand that this wealth is just a dream. Why are you so proud?
ag at Sf AA BAU a THT UA 1352-5, ASH, He 9) baaroo kee bheet jaisay basuDhaa ko raaj hai. ||1]| The empires of the earth are like walls of sand. ||1]|
Sod AG ads WS faafa Ad Sd WS Il 1352-6, Anes, He 9) naanak jan kahat baat binas jaihai tayro gaat. Servant Nanak speaks the Truth: your body shall perish and pass away.
feo fea afs ae ae 3A WS MAT NN (1352-6, AneSt, He 9) chhin chhin kar ga-i-o kaal taisay jaat aaj hai. ||2||1]| Moment by moment, yesterday passed. Today is passing as well. ||2||1]|
Anest Hoe € Il (1352-7) jaijaavantee mehlaa 9. Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:
TH 3H TH 3H WOH fAaS J Il (1352-7, AeSt, n2 9) raam bhaj raam bhaj janam siraat hai. Meditate on the Lord - vibrate on the Lord; your life is slipping away.
AIG AT Ae Ag AHS Sd faS ers Il (1352-8, AAS, ns 9) kaha-o kahaa baar baar samjhat nah ki-o gavaar. Why am I telling you this again and again? You fool - why don't you understand?
faons 3d Bd Ie SF AH WS TF NU TIS I 1352-8, ANTS, He 9) binsat nah lagai baar oray sam gaat hai. ||1]| rahaa-o. Your body is like a hail-stone; it melts away in no time at all. ||1]|Pause| |
Ha SdH ote efs afte a aH Bfs I (1352-9, AWS, He 9) sagal bharam daar deh gobind ko naam layhi. So give up all your doubts, and utter the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
wifs ae Af 3d fed Sa AS FT AU 1352-9, ASS, He 9) ant baar sang tayrai ihai ayk jaat hai. ||1|| At the very last moment, this alone shall go along with you. ||1||
faftior fry fa ferfs ys & AA Se Ofs I 1352-10, AaSst, ne 9) bikhi-aa bikh ji-o bisaar parabh kou jas hee-ay Dhaar. Forget the poisonous sins of corruption, and enshrine the Praises of God in your heart.
Sod Ho ats yatta MBA fess FT NVQ (1352-10, ASS, He 9) naanak jan kahi pukaar a-osar bihaat hai. ||2]|2]| Servant Nanak proclaims that this opportunity is slipping away. ||2||2||
AMSst Hos € Il (1352-11) jaijaavantee mehlaa 9. Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:
J Ho aGo ats de F Sat Il (1352-11, Anes, He 9) ray man ka-un gat ho-ay hai tayree. O mortal, what will your condition be?
fea na ufo oH oH A 3G Sdt AfSS afe Il 1352-11, Anes, He 9) ih jag meh raam naam so ta-o nahee suni-o kaan. In this world, you have not listened to the Lord's Name.
fafimis fA uifs oats His atae Sat NAN TIS Il 0352-12, Arrest, ve 9)
bikhi-an si-o at lubhaan mat naahin fayree. ||1|| rahaa-o.
You are totally engrossed in corruption and sin; you have not turned your mind away from them at all. ||1]|Pause] |
HOH & HOH Blo faHde og fou ate Il 1352-12, AnSst, He 9)
maanas ko janam leen simran nah nimakh keen.
You obtained this human life, but you have not remembered the Lord in meditation, even for an instant.
ag AY safe ete ua udt Sat WU 1352-13, FASS, He 9)
daaraa sukh bha-i-o deen pagahu paree bayree. ||1]|
For the sake of pleasure, you have become subservient to your woman, and now your feet are bound. ||1]|
Soa Ho ats uate AUS fa Har UATE Il (1352-13, AaSSt, He 9) naanak jan kahi pukaar supnai ji-o jag pasaar. Servant Nanak proclaims that the vast expanse of this world is just a dream.
fines od faS nats wfenr AT at SST QUIN 4352-14, ASS, He 9)
simrat nah ki-o muraar maa-i-aa jaa kee chayree. ||2||3]| Why not meditate on the Lord? Even Maya is His slave. ||2||3]|
AAWSst Hoe € Il (1352-14) jaijaavantee mehlaa 9. Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:
as Ad MS Ad HOH MTA T Il (1352-14, ASS, He 9) beet jaihai beet jaihai janam akaaj ray. Slipping away - your life is uselessly slipping away.
fafa fes nfs & use AHSS Sd J MAAS Il (1352-15, ATS, He 9)
nis din sun kai puraan samjhat nah ray ajaan.
Night and day, you listen to the Puraanas, but you do not understand them, you ignorant fool!
we 38 ughss orfs aa AT Sh FT UU TIS Ul 1352-15, Aves, ws 9) kaal ta-o pahoochi-o aan kahaa jaihai bhaaj ray. ||1]| rahaa-o. Death has arrived; now where will you run? ||1||Pause| |
Yat q3uZ
wAfag A ufos ta A SE 30C Se FT AT I 1353-1, Anes, He 9) asthir jo maani-o dayh so ta-o tayra-o ho-ay hai khayh. You believed that this body was permanent, but it shall turn to dust.
fas 3 afe & om Sfa Hae fEarA F AU (1353-1, AAS, He 9) ki-o na har ko naam layhi moorakh nilaaj ray. ||1]| Why don't you chant the Name of the Lord, you shameless fool? ||1]|
oH sats He orfs ats & 3 HS A HE Il (1353-2, Anes, ws 9)
raam bhagat hee-ay aan chhaad day tai man ko maan.
Let devotional worship of the Lord enter into your heart, and abandon the intellectualism of your mind.
aoa Ho fea sate Aa ufo faa F QUI 4353-2, AASS, He 9) naanak jan ih bakhaan jag meh biraaj ray. ||2||4]| O Servant Nanak, this is the way to live in the world. ||2||4]|
qe ATS on aes usy foase fares nieve Hels migot AS Ts YATE I 1353-4) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
HBA AIAfast HIS 4 Il (1353-6)
salok sehaskiritee mehlaa 1. Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl:
ufs uAa Aftmr ard il 1353-7, ranfest, He 1) parh" pustak sanDhi-aa baada”. You study the scriptures, say your prayers and argue;
free UAA Bate AYE Il (1353-7, HoAfRSt, He 1) sil poojas bagul samaaDha". you worship stones and sit like a crane, pretending to meditate.
uf so fagas ATS Il (1353-7, Fonts, 2 1) mukh jhooth bibhookhan saara’. You speak lies and well-ornamented falsehood,
sue fsa fred il 1353-7, Honfest, Hs 1) taraipaal tihaal bichaara”. and recite your daily prayers three times a day.
aes Her fsmar fesse Il (1353-8, HoAfgSt, He 1) gal maalaa tilak lilaata™. The mala is around your neck, and the sacred tilak mark is on your forehead.
efe ast aAy au? | 1353-8, Honest, He 1) du-ay Dhotee bastar kapaata™. You wear two loin cloths, and keep your head covered.
A Wofh got aa I 1353-8, nonfest, He 1) jo jaanas barahma’ karma”. If you know God and the nature of karma,
HS dac fend AGH Il (1353-8, HaAfESHt, He 1) sabh fokat nischai karma’. you know that all these rituals and beliefs are useless.
ag ated ford fare i) 1353-9, wonfest, ue 1) kaho naanak nischou Dhi-yaavai. Says Nanak, meditate on the Lord with faith.
fag Afsag Fe o US NU (1353-9, HOARE, He 1) bin satgur baat na paavai. ||1]| Without the True Guru, no one finds the Way. ||1]|
[odes SH HOHA Wee Yan o fAeS I (1353-9, AOAfRST, He 1) nihfala’ tas-y janmas-y jaavad barahm na bindtay. The mortal's life is fruitless, as long as he does not know God.
Aad AAA Ts USAT Sats & Il (1353-10, AaAPAS, Hz 1) saagra’ sansaarsa-y gur parsaadee tareh kay. Only a few, by Guru's Grace, cross over the world-ocean.
ATE ATE AHIG FT AT Soa serfs Il (1353-10, HAfRSH, He 1)
karan kaaran samrath hai kaho naanak beechaar.
The Creator, the Cause of causes, is All-powerful. Thus speaks Nanak, after deep deliberation.
ade ads af 3 fats ae set offs i (1353-11, HOARE, He 1)
kaaran kartay vas hai jin kal rakhee Dhaar. ||2||
The Creation is under the control of the Creator. By His Power, He sustains and supports it. ||2||
fal Aad famrs Aad Fe AME JF AHS Il (1353-11, AoAfest, ue 1)
jog sabda™ gi-aan sabda™ bayd sabda™ ta barahmaneh.
The Shabad is Yoga, the Shabad is spiritual wisdom; the Shabad is the Vedas for the Brahmin.
ugt Aad He Hae Ae Aae Us (AST Il (1353-12, noAfxst, He 1)
kha-ytaree sabda™ soor sabda™ soodar sabda” paraa kirteh.
The Shabad is heroic bravery for the Khshaatriya; the Shabad is service to others for the Soodra.
Hea Aad 3 Sa Hae A a Wofh SE Il (1353-12, AUAfeSH, He 1)
sarab sabda™ ta ayk sabda” jay ko jaanas bhay-o.
The Shabad for all is the Shabad, the Word of the One God, for one who knows this secret.
Sod Sa UA DT Het fadno SE Sil (1353-13, AeA, He 1) naanak taa ko daas hai so-ee niranjan day-o. ||3]| Nanak is the slave of the Divine, Immaculate Lord. ||3]]|
a fan 3 nee ter Se Sars orsn Il ors At aAeeH A act Wath Sz Il (1353-13, AUAfest, 3 1)
ayk krisan™ ta sarab dayvaa dayv dayvaa ta aatmah. aatma”™ saree baasavdaivas-y jay ko-ee jaanas bhayv.
The One Lord is the Divinity of all divinities. He is the Divinity of the soul.
Sod Sta HA DS Het fodue Ses igil 1353-14, ATARSH, He 1)
naanak taa ko daas hai so-ee niranjan dayv. ||4||
Nanak is the slave of that one who knows the Secrets of the soul and the Supreme Lord God. He is the Divine Immaculate Lord Himself. | |4| |
HOa AIAfast Hs U (1353-15)
salok sehaskaritee mehlaa 5 Shalok Sehskritee , Fifth Mehl:
qe ATS on aes usy fos faves urs Has mrst AS AT YATE I 1353-15) ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
assy ws ase fust ase afest fase AST II (1353-17, HOAfESH, He 5)
katanch maataa katanch pitaa katanch banitaa binod sutah.
Who is the mother, and who is the father? Who is the son, and what is the pleasure of marriage?
ass avs His fos due asa Ho ASaS I (1353-17, HaAfest, He 5)
katanch bharaat meet hit banDhav katanch moh kutamb-yatay.
Who is the brother, friend, companion and relative? Who is emotionally attached to the family?
oS Os
TST BUS Hat gu wis fSnra ass i 1353-18, raAfyst, He 5) katanch chapal mohnee roopa™ paykhantay ti-aaga" karot. Who is restlessly attached to beauty? It leaves, as soon as we see it.
TIS Aa SAIS HHI SSA BAT MGS FHT INA (1353-18, ATAfASt, ue 5)
rahant sang bhagvaan simran naanak labDha-ya" achut tanah. ||1||
Only the meditative remembrance of God remains with us. O Nanak, it brings the blessings of the Saints, the sons of the Imperishable Lord. ||1]|
Yat q3ug
fgats Hs fust Add fos AST FS saST Il (1354-1, ATAARST, He 5)
Dharigant maat pitaa sanayha™ Dharig sanayha™ bharaat baa“Dhvah.
Cursed is loving attachment to one's mother and father; cursed is loving attachment to one's siblings and relatives.
faa Ad afest freA AST I 354-1, HoAfgSt, He 5) Dharig sneh-a” banitaa bilaas sutah. Cursed is attachment to the joys of family life with one's spouse and children.
fgar AE foyoTTA HT | 1354-2, HaAfxst, He 5) Dharig sneh-a™ garihaarath kah. Cursed is attachment to household affairs.
WUHG Ad Als acl SAPS SHAT iil (1354-2, HaAfest, Hs 5)
saaDhsang sneh sati-ya" sukh-ya‘ basant naankah. ||2]|
Only loving attachment to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is True. Nanak dwells there in peace. ||2||
fees Od Mes ass Il (1354-2, AaAfeSHt, Hs 5) mith-yant dayha™ kheenant balana”. The body is false; its power is temporary.
weaufs Agur fossa Hfeor it 1354-3, AoAfgSt, He 5) barDhant jaroo-aa hit-yant maa-i-aa. It grows old; its love for Maya increases greatly.
MSS MTAT nas FSH Il (1354-3, ATAfgst, ue 5) at-yant aasaa aathit-y bhavana’. The human is only a temporary guest in the home of the body, but he has high hopes.
Tos AT sorS UGH | (1354-3, naAfest, we 5) ganant savasaa bhaiyaan Dharma", The Righteous Judge of Dharma is relentless; he counts each and every breath.
uss HI Fu PIB, VI IS TAL SSS Il (1354-3, HaAfSHt, He 5)
patant moh koop durlabha-y dayha™ tat aasar-ya™ naanak.
The human body, so difficult to obtain, has fallen into the deep dark pit of emotional attachment. O Nanak, its only support is God, the Essence of Reality.
dfie afte afte dure fur ail 1354-4, roAfsst, He 5)
gobind gobind gobind gopaal kirpaa. ||3]|
O God, Lord of the World, Lord of the Universe, Master of the Universe, please be kind to me. ||3]|
as AS Jus SU BUS IAS VINES Il (1354-4, AoAfRSH, ve 5)
kaach kota’ rachant to-ya™ laypana™ rakat charamneh.
This fragile body-fortress is made up of water, plastered with blood and wrapped in Skin.
des unig ats ofos ate gu mmrsgse Il (1354-5, HaAfast, He 5)
navant du-aara™ bheet rahita’ baa-ay roopa’ asthambhnah.
It has nine gates, but no doors; it is supported by pillars of wind, the channels of the breath.
difse oH og fandfS mfamrat wréfs wmfag i 1354-5, noAfest, He 5)
gobind naama"™ nah simrant agi-aanee jaanant asthira’.
The ignorant person does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe; he thinks that this body is permanent.
vues ts Buds ATU Ads DO Il (1354-6, HOAfSH, He 5) durlabh dayh uDhrant saaDh saran naanak. This precious body is saved and redeemed in the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak,
ofa ofa ofs ofa ofa od AUfs INS (1354-6, HoAfeS, He 5)
har har har har har haray japant. ||4|| chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, Haray. ||4]|
ASS SU MIS Td YTS BIS fas il 354-7, waAfest, we 5) subhant tu-ya™ achut gunga-ya™ poorana™ bahulo kirpaalaa. O Glorious, Eternal and Imperishable, Perfect and Abundantly Compassionate,
ass Ss Asafa murs il (1354-7, naAfESt, He 5) gambheera" oochai sarbag apaaraa. Profound and Unfathomable, Lofty and Exalted, All-knowing and Infinite Lord God.
fefaur funt fa wee I 1354-7, ATAfESH, He 5) bhariti-aa pari-a‘ bisraam charna’. O Lover of Your devoted servants, Your Feet are a Sanctuary of Peace.
MOTE BE SSA APES MUI (1354-8, HoAfaSt, He 5) anaath naathay naanak sarna”. ||5|| O Master of the masterless, Helper of the helpless, Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||5]|
fait wis afoe ysss GY meu Il (1354-8, noAfRSt, He 5) marigee paykhant baDhik par-haarayn lakh-y aavDhah. Seeing the deer, the hunter aims his weapons.
Md AA TUS TUG SSA IH SES Ell (1354-9, HaAARst, we 5)
aho jas-y rakhayn gopaalah naanak rom na chhayd-ytay. ||6]|
But if one is protected by the Lord of the World, O Nanak, not a hair on his head will be touched. ||6||
a WSs AIS" WHS AS Aes As vse fers Il (1354-9, waAfgst, Hs 5) baho jatan kartaa balvant kaaree sayvant sooraa chatur disah. He may be surrounded on all four sides by servants and powerful warriors;
ft ae SHS Sud od fds HIE AetyT Il (1354-10, HoAfgSt, He 5) bikham thaan basant oochah nah simrant marna™ kadaa“cheh. he may dwell in a lofty place, difficult to approach, and never even think of death.
defs urfamr saree UTUT Soa alet ATA niaTUS IDI (1354-10, HoAfESH, He 5)
hovant aagi-aa bhagvaan pukhah naanak keetee saas akarkhatay. ||7]|
But when the Order comes from the Primal Lord God, O Nanak, even an ant can take away his breath of life. ||7]|
Rad 33 fos ufeor ates ast aan fasur i 1354-11, Honfgst, He 5)
sabda" rata™ hita’ ma-i-aa keerta™ kalee karam kritu-aa.
To be imbued and attuned to the Word of the Shabad; to be kind and compassionate; to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - these are the most worthwhile actions in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
fréfs Sars SdH HE Il 1354-12, HoAfest, He 5) mitant tatraagat bharam moha". In this way, one's inner doubts and emotional attachments are dispelled.
SINS THE Asay ats I (1354-12, aAfest, ve 5) bhagvaan ramnaN sarbatar thaani-ya’. God is pervading and permeating all places.
fene 3u Mw BIAS SAS AT PAST Il (1354-12, ATAfRSH, He 5) darisat tu-ya‘ amogh darsana™ basant saaDh rasnaa. So obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; He dwells upon the tongues of the Holy.
fe ofa ofa Jd aoe find AY AUST ITH (1354-13, HoAfgSHt, He 5) har har har haray naanak pari-a" jaap japnaa. ||8||
O Nanak, meditate and chant the Name of the Beloved Lord, Har, Har, Har, Haray. [18] |
us gu wes thi wes afe AAbs SY Tals Il (1354-13, HoAfgst, He 5) ghatant roopa™ ghatant deepa™ ghatant rav sasee-ar nakh-yatar gagana”. Beauty fades away, islands fade away, the sun, moon, stars and sky fade away.
wes su fafa so fas i 1354-14, roAfgst, He 5) ghatant basuDhaa gir tar sikha‘da’, The earth, mountains, forests and lands fade away.
WET BSS AS ITS TS Il 1354-14, woAfest, we 5) ghatant lalnaa sut bharaat heeta™. One's spouse, children, siblings and loved friends fade away.
wes afox Hfsa wfemr Age I 1354-14, AaAfeSt, He 5) ghatant kanik maanik maa-i-aa savroopa", Gold and jewels and the incomparable beauty of Maya fade away.
Od WET ATS TUS MPS Il (1354-15, HIAfeSHt, He 5) nah ghatant kayval gopaal achut. Only the Eternal, Unchanging Lord does not fade away.
mMAfad soa AT AS CM (1354-15, HoAfySt, He 5) asthira’ naanak saaDh jan. ||9]| O Nanak, only the humble Saints are steady and stable forever. ||9||
od fase can fase unt it 1354-16, HoAfgst, He 5) nah bilamb Dharma’ bilamb paapa”. Do not delay in practicing righteousness; delay in committing sins.
fess ont SHS BF Il (1354-16, HoAfEst, us 5) darirh-aa‘t naama" tajant lobha™. Implant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within yourself, and abandon greed.
Rafe As fafa ow yas can wes II (1354-16, HoAfest, He 5)
saran santa” kilbikh naasa’ paraapta™ Dharam lakh-yin.
In the Sanctuary of the Saints, the sins are erased. The character of righteousness is received by that person,
Soa fad AYAS HUST NAO (1354-17, HAfESt, He 5) naanak jih suparsan maaDhvah. ||10]| O Nanak, with whom the Lord is pleased and satisfied. ||10]|
fas Ho weu ad ads afest fase AT I (1354-17, Hof, He 5)
mirat moha™ alap buDh-ya™ rachant banitaa binod saaha’.
The person of shallow understanding is dying in emotional attachment; he is engrossed in pursuits of pleasure with his wife.
Hae Stan afoa ATI I (1354-18, AoAfESH, He 5) jouban bahikaram kanik kundlah. With youthful beauty and golden earrings,
afes Hfes ASfs aAS fess wfeor af i (1354-18, Honest, He 5) bachitar mandir sobhant bastaraa it-yant maa-i-aa bi-yaapita™. wondrous mansions, decorations and clothes - this is how Maya clings to him.
J ngs Hofs HS SSA F SASTSE BHI IMAI (1354-18, HIAfESH, He 5)
hay achut saran sant naanak bho bhagvaana-ay namah. ||11]|
O Eternal, Unchanging, Benevolent Lord God, O Sanctuary of the Saints, Nanak humbly bows to You. ||11]|
ma oOo 0 =
HoH 3S HIS Jad SAG Sa FJ Ia Ml (1354-19, HoAfySH, ve 5)
janma’ ta marna™ harkha™ ta soga’ bhoga” ta roga”.
If there is birth, then there is death. If there is pleasure, then there is pain. If there is enjoyment, then there is disease.
Cu 3 ate TA" A UG Il (1354-19, FoAfast, He 5) ooncha™ ta neecha™ naan"aa so moocha". If there is high, then there is low. If there is small, then there is great.
Yat qsuu
TH SHS nifsHTs J AS I (1355-1, HAE, H 5) raaja‘ ta maana™ abhimaana” ta heena’.
If there is power, then there is pride. If there is egotistical pride, then there will be a fall.
ufgafs Haat east faarAS Il (1355-1, HaAfeSt, He 5) parvirat maarga™ vartant binaasana”. Engrossed in worldly ways, one is ruined.
afte sHo AT Hae wAfad Soa SSS SHOTS III (1355-1, HaAPRSH, He 5)
gobind bhajan saaDh sangayn asthira’ naanak bhagvant bhajnaasna”. ||12|| Meditating and vibrating on the Lord of the Universe in the Company of the Holy, you shall become steady and stable. Nanak vibrates and meditates on the Lord God. ||12]|
fasts dd Hfs sa far i 1355-2, AaAfgst, He 5) kirpant haree-a™ mat tat gi-aana”, By the Grace of God, genuine understanding comes to the mind.
faarify gor AAS aS Il (1355-3, naAfgst, ue 5) bigseeDhiy buDhaa kusal thaana”, The intellect blossoms forth, and one finds a place in the realm of celestial bliss.
ats fafimt fSorfar Hrd i 1355-3, AaAfest, He 5) bas-yant rikhi-a™ ti-aag maana’,. The senses are brought under control, and pride is abandoned.
Hises feed fes As far i (1355-3, noAfest, we 5) seetiant rid-ya™ darirh sant gi-aana™. The heart is cooled and soothed, and the wisdom of the Saints is implanted within.
ISS AON Tfa VIA Bet Il 1355-4, AOAfESH, He 5) rahant janma™ har daras leenaa. Reincarnation is ended, and the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan is obtained.
WHS Soa AGS Heat 9SBll 1355-4, ATAfESH, He 5)
baajant naanak sabad beenaa™. ||13]|
O Nanak, the musical instrument of the Word of the Shabad vibrates and resounds within. ||13]]|
AIS Fe" Tes Tor Hes wer ag fafa yorar i 1355-4, woAfest, ue 5)
kahant baydaa gunant gunee-aa sunant baalaa baho biDh parkaaraa.
The Vedas preach and recount God's Glories; people hear them by various ways and means.
fess Afafenr ofa af ferurer il (1355-5, nonfest, He 5) darirh-aa‘t subidi-aa har har kirpaalaa. The Merciful Lord, Har, Har, implants spiritual wisdom within.
OH US AUS TSA CHIT TT AUST IW (1355-5, ATA, He 5)
naam daan jaachant naanak dainhaar gur gopaalaa. ||14||
Nanak begs for the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The Guru is the Great Giver, the Lord of the World. ||14]|
od fea wes fus grag og fos AE BA AT Il 1355-6, raAfest, ue 5)
nah chintaa maat pit bharaatah nah chintaa kachh lok kah.
Do not worry so much about your mother, father and siblings. Do not worry so much about other people.
od fea safest As Hise ufeafs ufemr Aedued Il (1355-6, HoAfgSt, Hs 5)
nah chintaa banitaa sut meetah parvirat maa-i-aa sanbhanDhnah.
Do not worry about your spouse, children and friends. You are obsessed with your involvements in Maya.
cients Sa sdeG UTUT SHA Ada Abt yfsursagd WAI (1355-7, HaAfESt, He 5) da-i-aal ayk bhagvaan pukhah naanak sarab jee-a partipaalkeh. ||15]|
The One Lord God is Kind and Compassionate, O Nanak. He is the Cherisher and Nurturer of all living beings. ||15]|
nifes fes nifos fas vifes omar ag fafa yard i (1355-8, noAfest, He 5)
anit-y vita’ anit-y chita’ anit-y aasaa baho biDh parkaara”.
Wealth is temporary; conscious existence is temporary; hopes of all sorts are temporary.
nifss IS ord aa Het Hee fears i (1355-8, HoAfaSt, He 5)
anit-y hayta aha‘ banDha™ bharam maa-i-aa malana™ bikaara™.
The bonds of love, attachment, egotism, doubt, Maya and the pollution of corruption are temporary.
feds ifs naa Foals oo fAHSS HSE FT Il (1355-9, HoAfyst, He 5)
firant jon anayk jhathraagan nah simrant maleen buDh-ya”,
The mortal passes through the fire of the womb of reincarnation countless times. He does not remember the Lord in meditation; his understanding is polluted.
d dfae ass Hfeur soa ufss Gorge AT AGI IAEI (1355-9, HOARZSH, He 5)
hay gobind karat ma-i-aa naanak patit uUDhaaran saaDh sangmah. ||16]|
O Lord of the Universe, when You grant Your Grace, even sinners are saved. Nanak dwells in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||16]|
fads fats ufss uss WSs Sety SAIS I (1355-10, HoAfgst, He 5)
girant gir patit paataala™ jalant daydeep-y baisvaa™tareh.
You may drop down from the mountains, and fall into the nether regions of the underworld, or be burnt in the blazing fire,
adfs ward Su Sdal SUS YT fsa At J HeST I 1355-11, HaAfysHt, He 5)
bahant agaah to-ya™ taranga™ dukhant garah chintaa janma™ ta marnah.
or swept away by the unfathomable waves of water; but the worst pain of all is household anxiety, which is the source of the cycle of death and rebirth.
mifoa AUIS 3 fAUS coe MAGS MAES MARS AE AT AAT MAI (1355-11, HOAfRSH, He 5)
anik saaDhana" na siDh-yatai naanak asthambha™ asthambha”™ asthambha™ sabad saaDh savajni". ||17]|
No matter what you do, you cannot break its bonds, O Nanak. Man's only Support, Anchor and Mainstay is the Word of the Shabad, and the Holy, Friendly Saints. ||17]||
us ee mifsa Is HOH Stee HoT frye I (1355-12, ronfgst, Hs 5) ghor dukh-ya" anik hat-ya™ janam daaridara’ mahaa bikh-yaad”. Excruciating pain, countless killings, reincarnation, poverty and terrible misery
fics nae fds afa ant SSA AA USA AHe SAH Ads NACI (1355-13, HOARE, He 5) mitant sagal simrant har naam naanak jaisay paavak kaasat bhasma” karot. ||18]| are all destroyed by meditating in remembrance on the Lord's Name, O Nanak, just as fire reduces piles of wood to ashes. ||18]|
niuers Hes YH Te THT wey YTS | 1355-13, ATAfASt, He 5)
anDhkaar simrat parkaasa™ gun ramant agh khandnah.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the darkness is illuminated. Dwelling on His Glorious Praises, the ugly sins are destroyed.
foe SHS 3 SIS UST ASH ATS HT fSTHSI Il (1355-14, HaAfESt, Hs 5)
rid basant bhai bheet dootah karam karat mahaa niramleh.
Enshrining the Lord deep within the heart, and with the immaculate karma of doing good deeds, one strikes fear into the demons.
HOH HIE TIS AS" AY AT HW CaAST Il (1355-14, AoAfASt, He 5)
janam maran rahant sarotaa sukh samooh amogh darasneh.
The cycle of coming and going in reincarnation is ended, absolute peace is obtained, and the Fruitful Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Hafe Hat AS fipn sea A saree Mt ass UAC 1355-15, HaAfest, He 5)
saran joga™ sant pari-a naanak so bhagvaan khayma’" karot. ||19]|
He is Potent to give Protection, He is the Lover of His Saints. O Nanak, the Lord God blesses all with bliss. ||19]|
Ue ASS mig@eted (SAH MTA UTST Il (1355-16, HaAfyST, He 5)
paachha" karot agarneeveh niraasa™ aas poornah.
Those who were left behind - the Lord brings them to the front. He fulfills the hopes of the hopeless.
fase Su Used dali Sa Uso Il (1355-16, HOAfESH, He 5) nirDhan bha-ya‘ Dhanvantah rogee-a™ rog khandnah. He makes the poor rich, and cures the illnesses of the ill.
SsaIs sas WS TH BH TE ASST Il (1355-16, ATAfest, ue 5)
bhagat-ya™ bhagat daana™ raam naam gun keeratneh.
He blesses His devotees with devotion. They sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord's Name.
USHIH UY VSI sot Td As fa 5 BIS MOM (1355-17, HaAfASt, Hs 5) paarbarahm purakh daataareh naanak gur sayvaa ki na labh-yatai. ||20]| O Nanak, those who serve the Guru find the Supreme Lord God, the Great Giver||20]|
mud Ud Wded fogads Us OH SII Ill (1355-18, HoAfxSHt, He 5) aDhra™ Dhara’ Dhaarnah nirDhana’ Dhan naam narhareh. He gives Support to the unsupported. The Name of the Lord is the Wealth of the poor.
MoE oe difded Fodle 3H AAST Il (1355-18, HOAfESt, He 5)
anaath naath gobindah balheen bal kaysvah.
The Lord of the Universe is the Master of the masterless; the Beautiful-haired Lord is the Power of the weak.
Ava FS CWS vgs ce gus HET Il (1355-19, Hants, He 5)
sarab bhoot da-yaal achut deen baa‘Dhav daamodareh.
The Lord is Merciful to all beings, Eternal and Unchanging, the Family of the meek and humble.
AVA UIS UY Fae'oI SIS FSG ATS" HUT Il (1355-19, HaAfgSt, Hs 5)
sarabga-y pooran purakh bhagvaaneh bhagat vachhal karunaa ma-yeh. The All-knowing, Perfect, Primal Lord God is the Lover of His devotees, the Embodiment of Mercy.
at que
ufe whe SHS MAST USAIN USHATT Ill (1356-1, HTAfRSH, He 5)
ghat ghat basant baasudayveh paarbarahm parmaysureh.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent, Luminous Lord, dwells in each and every heart.
Mls sod faurs yAe oo fads og fandfs sates QU (1356-1, AIAfRSH, He 5) jaachant naanak kirpaal parsaada™ nah bisrant nah bisrant naaraa-ineh. ||21]| Nanak begs for this blessing from the Merciful Lord, that he may never forget Him, never forget Him. ||21] |
Od ANSE 3d Aea Sd US us USHSH I (1356-2, HoAfeSt, He 5)
nah samratha™ nah sayvka™ nah pareet param parkhotama”.
I have no power; I do not serve You, and I do not love You, O Supreme Sublime Lord God.
32 une faunas ont soa fauns af ofe TT 22M (1356-3, Hanes, He 5) tav parsaad simartay naama” naanak kirpaal har har gura™. ||22]|
By Your Grace, Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Merciful Lord, Har, Har. ||22||
ade UNS ads ror faRH ses BSS BS I (1356-3, HAAS, He 5)
bharan pokhan karant jee-aa bisraam chhaadan dayvant daana”.
The Lord feeds and sustains all living beings; He blesses them gifts of restful peace and fine clothes.
fRAS ISS ASH VSI BIST Il 1356-4, HaARsH, ne 5) sirja‘t ratan janam chatur chaytnah. He created the jewel of human life, with all its cleverness and intelligence.
ISS AY MTSE YATET Il (1356-4, HoAfgst, we 5) vartant sukh aanand parsaadeh. By His Grace, mortals abide in peace and bliss.
fangs sea dfs afs gd il (1356-4, HAE, H2 5) simrant naanak har har haray. O Nanak, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, Haray,
wifes To fests 3 WQS 1356-5, AIAARSH, He 5) anit-y rachnaa nirmoh tay. ||23]|| the mortal is released from attachment to the world. ||23]|
aS UT YIAS SIS HUST Il (1356-5, HoAfESH, He 5)
daana" paraa poorbayn bhu‘chantay maheepatay.
The kings of the earth are eating up the blessings of the good karma of their past lives.
faudls 3d Hes Gad aoa fadars BY FAS MSI (1356-5, HIAfRST, He 5)
bipreet buDh-ya™ maarat lokah naanak chirankaal dukh bhogtay. ||24]|
Those cruel-minded rulers who oppress the people, O Nanak, shall suffer in pain for a very long time. ||24| |
fger niggd dfies mA fAHee fetsag II (1356-6, HoAfest, He 5)
baritha anugraha™ gobindah jas-y simran ridantrah.
Those who meditate in remembrance on the Lord in their hearts, look upon even pain as God's Grace.
widal Hot tal fafAhys aget HOT NQUIl (1356-7, FOAfRS, He 5)
aarog-ya™ mahaa rog-ya” bisimritay karunaa ma-yeh. ||25||
The healthy person is very sick, if he does not remember the Lord, the Embodiment of Mercy. ||25]|
THe ATS atass HAUGH FI WEST Il (1356-7, HIAfESt, H2 5)
ramna” kayvla™ keeratana’ suDharma™ dayh Dhaarnah.
To sing the Kirtan of God's Praises is the righteous duty incurred by taking birth in this human body.
nits ou aafes aoa ules AS 3 fFUs NEM (1356-8, AaAPRS, He 5)
amrit naam naaraa-in naanak peevta” sant na tariptayatay. ||26]|
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak. The Saints drink it in, and never have enough of it. ||26]|
Hue Ale AS AH HSA TaHST Il (1356-8, AaAfESHt, Hs 5) sahan seel santa’ sam mitarsa-y durajneh. The Saints are tolerant and good-natured; friends and enemies are the same to them.
woe SHS Mifsa yards fSea nren df CufSA|s 112911 (1356-9, HaAfRST, He 5) naanak bhojan anik parkaarayn nindak aavaDh ho-ay uptistatay. ||27]||
O Nanak, it is all the same to them, whether someone offers them all sorts of foods, or slanders them, or draws weapons to kill them. ||27]|
fsgnars 5d 3ef3 od 3efS WS Sao Il (1356-9, HAfESt, He 5) tiraskaar nah bhavant nah bhavant maan bhangnah. They pay no attention to dishonor or disrespect.
Hat die od sels od Udfs HATS BUST Il (1356-10, HOAfESH, He 5) sobhaa heen nah bhavant nah pohant sansaar dukhnah. They are not bothered by gossip; the miseries of the world do not touch them.
afte on wufs fife AG Herd Soa A yret AY BAST WQCI (1356-10, Hanes, He 5) gobind naam japant mil saaDh sangah naanak say paraanee sukh baasnah. ||28]| Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and chant the Name of the Lord of the Universe - O Nanak, those mortals abide in peace. ||28]|
Aol AT AY AS vis Hod Sts fSyYST Il (1356-11, HaAfgSt, He 5)
sainaa saaDh samooh soor ajita sa“naaha”™ tan nimartaah.
The Holy people are an invincible army of spiritual warriors; their bodies are protected by the armor of humility.
WTeUd TE dfse THe Ge Ts Ase AT VIHST Il (1356-12, HTAfESH, He 5) aavDhah gun gobind ramna" ot gur sabad kar charamneh.
Their weapons are the Glorious Praises of the Lord which they chant; their Shelter and Shield is the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
mMIgGss MA Ta otdT FSS YS HST Il (1356-12, AaAfest, He 5) aaroorh-tay asav rath naagah bujhantay parabh maargah. The horses, chariots and elephants they ride are their way to realize God's Path.
frags fossct AZ Ao os Turse atesoT I (1356-13, HaAFRSH, He 5)
bichartay nirabh-ya™ satar sainaa Dhaa-yantay gopaal keeratneh.
They walk fearlessly through the armies of their enemies; they attack them with the Kirtan of God's Praises.
frss fay Arras aoa SH adfs Ue TAIT MCI (1356-13, HaAfest, He 5) jittay bisav sansaarah naanak vas-ya™ karot panch taskarahi. ||29]| They conquer the entire world, O Nanak, and overpower the five thieves. ||29]|
figa fare dasa sad EH sor she FaHfsa Il 1356-14, ATAfESH, He 5)
marig tarisnaa ganDharab nagra™ darum chhaa-yaa rach duramtih.
Misled by evil-mindedness, mortals are engrossed in the mirage of the illusory world, like the passing shade of a tree.
330 aée Ha fer findfS area TH TH BHT IBON (1356-14, HoAfgst, He 5)
tatah kutamb moh mith-yaa simrant naanak raam raam naamah. ||30||
Emotional attachment to family is false, so Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||30||
ou fafeur fours foot oe Tea oH atasod Il (1356-15, HaAfgst, He 5)
nach bidi-aa niDhaan nigama™ nach gunga-y naam keeratneh.
I do not possess the treasure of the wisdom of the Vedas, nor do I possess the merits of the Praises of the Naam.
OU I IS6 AS BI VUG VSI VST Il (1356-16, HaAfest, He 5)
nach raag ratan kantha™ nah chanchal chatur chaatureh.
I do not have a beautiful voice to sing jewelled melodies; I am not clever, wise or shrewd.
oa Cfen wag went soa AUAfE ue Ufs3T NSU 1356-16, ATAfRSH, He 5)
bhaag udim labDha-ya™ maa-i-aa naanak saaDhsang khal panditah. ||31||
By destiny and hard work, the wealth of Maya is obtained. O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, even fools become religious scholars. ||31]||
AS THalG TH TH Hert JAS Sv YH Urget Il (1356-17, Hants, Hs 5)
kanth ramneey raam raam maalaa hasat ooch paraym Dhaarnee.
The mala around my neck is the chanting of the Lord's Name. The Love of the Lord is my silent chanting.
ato afs # OSH ASA Cuge So Seot I32Il (1356-17, HOAs, He 5) jeeh bhan jo utam salok uDharna”™ nain nandnee. ||32]| Chanting this most Sublime Word brings salvation and joy to the eyes. ||32| |
aa 43 den A uret fasts HOH FAST Il (1356-18, HaoAfest, He 5) gur mantar heensa-y jo paraanee Dharigant janam bharsatnah. That mortal who lacks the Guru's Mantra - cursed and contaminated is his life.
AAT Had ddusd aad AIUSI 3f% YS S31 356-18, HIAfest, He 5) kookrah sookrah garaDh-bheh kaakah sarapneh tul khalah. ||33]| That blockhead is just a dog, a pig, a jackass, a crow, a snake. ||33]|
TdSesee SHS foeti oH WEST Il (1356-19, HIAfESt, He 5)
charnaarbind bhajana’ rid-ya‘ naam Dhaarnah.
Whoever contemplates the Lord's Lotus Feet, and enshrines His Name within the heart,
Yat q3u2
MISS AUTHGE aod Sd feAefs AHESST IBVll (1357-1, HaAPRSH, He 5)
keeratana™’ saaDhsangayn naanak nah darisat-a‘t jamdootneh. ||34]|
and sings the Kirtan of His Praises in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, shall never see the Messenger of Death. ||34| |
OU TIGS US Ju ST LISS AIT THST Il (1357-1, HHfySH, we 5)
nach durlabha™ dana’ roopa™ nach durlabha™ savarag raajnah.
Wealth and beauty are not so difficult to obtain. Paradise and royal power are not so difficult to obtain.
OU PIGS SHO f¥AS ov FIGS AS visa Il (1357-2, HoHfESH, HE 5)
nach durlabha™ bhojana” biXjana‘ nach durlabha™ savachh ambreh.
Foods and delicacies are not so difficult to obtain. Elegant clothes are not so difficuilt to obtain.
ou vases AS fey gS aus oy vIEs Sfost faerAT Il (1357-2, HoAfESH, He 5)
nach durlabha™ sut mitar bharaat baa“Dhav nach durlabha" banitaa bilaaseh. Children, friends, siblings and relatives are not so difficult to obtain. The pleasures of woman are not so difficult to obtain.
ou woes fafeur ude ou PISS VSI VIG Il (1357-3, HoAfest, ue 5)
nach durlabha” bidi-aa parbeena™ nach durlabha™ chatur chanchleh.
Knowledge and wisdom are not so difficult to obtain. Cleverness and trickery are not so difficult to obtain.
TISS SA SASS SHI SHA aly AGHA feu ys WSUll 1357-3, AoAfRst, we 5) durlabha™ ayk bhagvaan naamah naanak labDhi-ya‘ saaDhsang kirpaa parabha”. [135] |
Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is difficult to obtain. O Nanak, it is only obtained by God's Grace, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||35]|
WS AST 330 EAs Ysa HIT UTS BAT Il (1357-4, HaHFRSH, He 5)
jat katah tatah darista’ savarag marat pa-yaal lokah.
Wherever I look, I see the Lord, whether in this world, in paradise, or the nether regions of the underworld.
Haag se afies soa Bu Bu 3 feus Bell 1357-5, woAfest, ue 5)
sarbatar ramna™ gobindah naanak layp chhayp na lip-yatai. ||36]|
The Lord of the Universe is All-pervading everywhere. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||36||
freor suits nifgs BAet Met AAO II (1357-5, HORfESHt, He 5) bikhyaa bha-yant amrita™ darustaa™ sakhaa savajni". Poison is transformed into nectar, and enemies into friends and companions.
ed sufs AY 3 StS 3 fessu Il (1357-6, HaAfEst, we 5) dukha™ bha-yant sukh-ya™ bhai bheeta™ ta nirabhyeh. Pain is changed into pleasure, and the fearful become fearless.
ae fase fag ont aoa fours afe ofs TIT WADI (1357-6, HaAfESt, He 5)
thaan bihoon bisraam naama"™ naanak kirpaal har har gurah. ||37]|
Those who have no home or place find their place of rest in the Naam, O Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||37]|
Aaa Ales HH AS Ade USS HH USS Il (1357-7, HUAfySt, He 5)
sarab seel mama™ seela” sarab paavan mam paavnah.
He blesses all with humility; He has blessed me with humility as well. He purifies all, and He has purified me as well.
Ada AISa HH ATS" SSA BU Bu 3 fSyS WScil 1357-7, AaAfRSH, us 5) sarab kartab mama” kartaa naanak layp chhayp na lip-yatai. ||38]|
The Creator of all is the Creator of me as well. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||38]|
Od ASS Be Ved So Ase Feo PEST Il (1357-8, AaAfest, ve 5) nah seetla’ chandar dayvah nah seetla’ baavan chandnah. The moon-god is not cool and calm, nor is the white sandalwood tree.
od HisS HIS SE TSA AIS ATG HAST Stil (1357-8, ATAfESt, He 5)
nah seetla’ seet rutayn naanak seetla’ saaDh savajni". ||39]|
The winter season is not cool; O Nanak, only the Holy friends, the Saints, are cool and calm. ||39]||
HZ IH aH ont WS Asay UIST Il (1357-9, HoAfgSH, He 5)
mantra’ raam raam naama™ Dha-yaana sarbatar poornah.
Through the Mantra of the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, one meditates on the All- pervading Lord.
aS AY ey AY Hols foaHe fadeged I (1357-9, Hanfyst, He 5)
ga-yaana sam dukh sukha™ jugat nirmal nirvairneh.
Those who have the wisdom to look alike upon pleasure and pain, live the immaculate lifestyle, free of vengeance.
sums Asay Aber us cu faeafass il (1357-10, ranfxst, us 5) da-yaala’ sarbatar jee-aa panch dokh bivarjiteh. They are kind to all beings; they have overpowered the five thieves.
SHS AUS SISS MSU HG AS ANG FIST Il (1357-10, HAfaSH, He 5)
bhojana™ gopaal keeratana™ alap maa-yaa jal kamal rahtah.
They take the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise as their food; they remain untouched by Maya, like the lotus in the water.
Quen AH fey AZT Saes Sals set Il 1357-11, HoAfRSH, He 5)
updaysa™ sam mitar satreh bhagvant bhagat bhaavnee.
They share the Teachings with friend and enemy alike; they love the devotional worship of God.
us fee og Afs Hee ory fafa Aas ISAT Il (1357-11, AoAfgSHt, He 5) par nindaa nah sarot sarvana” aap ti-yaag sagal raynukeh. They do not listen to slander; renouncing self-conceit, they become the dust of all.
Uc BUS uss YUTaT GSA STH AT AAST ISOll (1357-12, HUAtest, Hs 5) khat lakh-yan poorana’ pukhah naanak naam saaDh savajni™. ||40] | Whoever has these six qualities, O Nanak, is called a Holy friend. ||40]|
MT Sas Ae HS AAS AMY ATT Il (1357-13, ATAfRSt, Hs 5) ajaa bhogant kand moola™ basantay sameep kayhrah. The goat enjoys eating fruits and roots, but if it lives near a tiger, it is always anxious.
33 WS AAS Soa Aa gad femrus edi 1357-13, HoAfEst, He 5) tatar gatay sansaarah naanak sog harkha” bi-aapatay. ||41]| This is the condition of the world, O Nanak; it is afflicted by pleasure and pain. ||41]|
ao fad afe fas mrad fersfire He I 1357-14, HoAfRSt, He 5)
chhala™ chhidara™ kot bighana™ apraaDha" kilbikh mala’.
Fraud, false accusations, millions of diseases, sins and the filthy residues of evil mistakes;
SdH HS HS oS He Her femrfus | 1357-14, Honest, He 5) bharam moha™ maan apmaana™ mada’ maa-yaa bi-aapita™. doubt, emotional attachment, pride, dishonor and intoxication with Maya
figs Fon Hifs ssa uifsa Sure & fs Wt (1357-15, HARSH 5)
mitar-yo janam bharmant narkah anik upaava™ na siDh-yatai.
- these lead mortals to death and rebirth, wandering lost in hell. In spite of all sorts of efforts, salvation is not found.
fsdHs ATT Had AUS Soa Tues BMF Il (1357-15, AoAfySt, He 5)
nirmala’ saaDh sangah japant naanak gopaal naama",
Chanting and meditating on the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, mortals become immaculate and pure.
sHfs we afte fos YST 82 (1357-16, HaAfeSt, He 5) ramant gun gobind nit parteh. ||42]| They continually dwell upon the Glorious Praises of God. ||42]||
3de ATE AMM IHS Als USHA Il (1357-16, HoAfxst, vs 5)
taran saran su-aamee raman seel parmaysureh.
In the Sanctuary of the Kind-hearted Lord, our Transcendent Lord and Master, we are carried across.
ATE ATE AHI BG VS YS UTS Il (1357-17, HaAfgst, ue 5) karan kaaran samartheh daan dayt parabh poornah. God is the Perfect, All-powerful Cause of causes; He is the Giver of gifts.
fodH MITA ATE Ads MIG MTHAT Il (1357-17, AaAtest, Hs 5) niraas aas karna™ sagal arath aalyeh. He gives hope to the hopeless. He is the Source of all riches.
ae fours fandfs aaa Aa ASS AfsaT NBII 1357-17, HIAfSH, He 5)
gun niDhaan simrant naanak sagal jaachant jaachikeh. ||43]|
Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Treasure of Virtue; we are all beggars, begging at His Door. ||43]|
ITH AGS aH Hot Ta AGA AYES Il (1357-18, HoAfASt, He 5) durgam sathaan sugama™ mahaa dookh sarab sookh-nah. The most difficult place becomes easy, and the worst pain turns into pleasure.
PIsdS FU SdH Aas fuUNS 3 ASHS Il (1357-19, HIAESH, He 5)
durbachan bhayd bharama”™ saakat pisana™ ta surajneh.
Evil words, differences and doubts are obliterated, and even faithless cynics and malicious gossips become good people.
wAfas Aa Jad Ss dle 3 feased Il (1357-19, HOPES, He 5)
asthita” sog harkha™ bhai kheena” ta nirabhveh.
They become steady and stable, whether happy or sad; their fears are taken away, and they are fearless.
Yat qsut
3 nicht Ho sald GH OSH BYES YS HfeMr I 1358-1, HaAPESH, He 5)
bhai atvee-a‘ mahaa nagar baasa‘ Dharam lakh-yan parabh ma-i-aa.
The dreadful woods become a well-populated city; such are the merits of the righteous life of Dharma, given by God's Grace.
A HOH TH IH Ie Aafs SHA Ifa fa VS BIS ISVSll (1358-1, HOAs, He 5) saaDh sangam raam raam ramna" saran naanak har har da-yaal charna’. ||44]| Chanting the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, the Lotus Feet of the Merciful Lord are found. ||44||
3 oifts AS ATH wifs sweat ag HFeoT Il (1358-2, HoAfeSt, Hs 5)
hay ajit soor sangraama™ at balnaa baho maradneh.
O emotional attachment, you are the invincible warrior of the battlefield of life; you totally crush and destroy even the most powerful.
We dogs Ss Hed uA uet figod i 1358-2, woAfest, we 5)
gan ganDharab dayv maanukh-ya™ pas pankhee bimohneh.
You entice and fascinate even the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, gods, mortals, beasts and birds.
ufs adeTd SAAS ASE SHA ATeATT sull (1358-3, ATHFSH, He 5)
har karanhaara’ namaskaara™ saran naanak jagdeesvareh. ||45]|
Nanak bows in humble surrender to the Lord; he seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe. ||45]||
J ant ova faqni ag Hat gHSeT Il (1358-3, HaAfest, ue 5)
hay kaama™ narak bisraama™ baho jonee bharmaavneh.
O sexual desire, you lead the mortals to hell; you make them wander in reincarnation through countless species.
fas Jae 3 Ba aH AU su Ale faersed I 1358-4, waAfgst, Hs 5)
chit harna™ tarai lok gam-ya" jap tap seel bidaarneh.
You cheat the consciousness, and pervade the three worlds. You destroy meditation, penance and virtue.
neu AY nies dae Su ate AHS Il (1358-4, FOAfxSt, He 5)
alap sukh avit chanchal ooch neech samaavneh.
But you give only shallow pleasure, while you make the mortals weak and unsteady; you pervade the high and the low.
se § faifes AO Ha Ge aoa arafeead SEI (1358-5, HOAfST, He 5)
tav bhai bimu'chit saaDh sangam ot naanak naaraa-ineh. ||46]|
Your fear is dispelled in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, through the Protection and Support of the Lord. ||46]|
J AS HS AU Ady aa B SusHAs Il (1358-6, HaAfRst, Hs 5) hay kal mool kroDh-a™ kadanch karunaa na uparjatay. O anger, you are the root of conflict; compassion never rises up in you.
fautis Hie eH adfs fass adfs FE Haa|T Il (1358-6, HaAfgSt, He 5)
bikh-yant jeeva™ vas-ya™ karot nirt-ya‘ karot jathaa marakteh.
You take the corrupt, sinful beings in your power, and make them dance like monkeys.
mfx AAS SSS AHESI Se Aat MMM} Sa Il (1358-7, AaAfxSt, He 5)
anik saasan taarhant jamdooteh tav sangay aDhama™ narah.
Associating with you, mortals are debased and punished by the Messenger of Death in SO many ways.
ae Bu SHS BUNS UT Soa Asa Aha Tar Ags III (1358-7, HaAfest, He 5)
deen dukh bhanjan da-yaal parabh naanak sarab jee-a rakh-yaa karot. ||47]||
O Destroyer of the pains of the poor, O Merciful God, Nanak prays for You to protect all begins from such anger. ||47| |
J Sa Bue Ha fates nifsa wodt ASS Il (1358-8, HOAfSH, He 5) hay lobhaa lampat sang sirmohreh anik lahree kalolatay. O greed, you cling to even the great, assaulting them with countless waves.
wes Her ag yard nifea sifs ag SHS Il (1358-8, HoAfeSt, He 5)
Dhaavant jee-aa baho parkaara™ anik bhaa™t baho doltay.
You cause them to run around wildly in all directions, wobbling and wavering unsteadily.
ou fis og fend oe wus oe HS fust 3s BATT II (1358-9, FTAA, Hs 5) nach mitra" nach ista’ nach baaDhav nach maat pitaa tav lajyaa. You have no respect for friends, ideals, relations, mother or father.
wade wets orate ur oped Aft AHA Il (1358-10, HoAfESt, He 5)
akrana™ karot akhaad-ya khaad-ya"™ asaaj-ya‘ saaj samajyaa.
You make them do what they should not do. You make them eat what they should not eat. You make them accomplish what they should not accomplish.
gto oto Aste omit faarfy saa aie ogITT istil (1358-10, AoAfEST, He 5)
taraahi taraahi saran su-aamee big-yaapati naanak har narhareh. ||48]|
Save me, save me - I have come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord and Master; Nanak prays to the Lord. ||48]|
J AGH HIS HS MIaATS UNTSHT I (1358-11, HTAASt, He 5)
hay janam maran moola™ aha‘kaara™ paapaatmaa.
O egotism, you are the root of birth and death and the cycle of reincarnation; you are the very soul of sin.
fred sHfS Ay fests ufo nor farteod it (1358-11, naAfest, He 5)
mitra’ tajant satra’ darirh-aa‘t anik maa-yaa bisteerni".
You forsake friends, and hold tight to enemies. You spread out countless illusions of Maya.
wes Wes Bas Het eu AY aT Sas Il (1358-12, HIAfESH, He 5)
aavant jaavant thakant jee-aa dukh sukh baho bhognah.
You cause the living beings to come and go until they are exhausted. You lead them to experience pain and pleasure.
gH sure Cfeura sHe Ho fare mA Fa|eT Il (1358-12, HAAS, He 5)
bharam bha-yaan udi-aan ramna™ mahaa bikat asaaDh rognah.
You lead them to wander lost in the terrible wilderness of doubt; you lead them to contract the most horrible, incurable diseases.
ae uraqan ushyge orat soa ofe dfs TF Stl (1358-13, HaAfeSt, He 5)
baid-ya‘ paarbarahm parmaysvar aaraaDh naanak har har haray. ||49]|
The only Physician is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God. Nanak worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||49]|
v ure ora aified faur fours Aare Ts Il 1358-13, Hanes, He 5)
hay paraan naath gobindah kirpaa niDhaan jagad guro.
O Lord of the Universe, Master of the Breath of life, Treasure of Mercy, Guru of the World.
J AAS SU Ide ATS" H AS SU Te Il (1358-14, ATAfESH, He 5)
hay sansaar taap harnah karunaa mai sabh dukh haro.
O Destroyer of the fever of the world, Embodiment of Compassion, please take away all my pain.
d Aofe Aa eared Stat ove HUT a Il (1358-14, HORST, He 5)
hay saran jog da-yaaleh deenaa naath ma-yaa karo.
O Merciful Lord, Potent to give Sanctuary, Master of the meek and humble, please be kind to me.
rdte yAE dle ANE fads oar TH DHE HUST UO (1358-15, HOAfESH, He 5) sareer savasth kheen sam-ay simrant naanak raam daamodar maaDhvah. ||50||
Whether his body is healthy or sick, let Nanak meditate in remembrance on You, Lord. ||50]|
TIE GHG ATE THE TUG alasod Il (1358-16, HIAfESt, He 5)
charan kamal sarna™ ramna™ gopaal keeratneh.
I have come to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet, where I sing the Kirtan of His Praises.
AT Ade SIS SOA HI AIS F TSIT MUU (1358-16, HOAs, He 5)
saaDh sangayn tarna’ naanak mahaa saagar bhai dutrah. ||51||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak is carried across the utterly terrifying, difficult world-ocean. ||51]|
fs HAR ser uray TA aa TyT UTHATT Il (1358-17, HOAfySH, He 5)
sir mastak rakh-yaa paarbrahma” hast kaa-yaa rakh-yaa parmaysvareh.
The Supreme Lord God has procted my head and forehead; the Transcendent Lord has protected my hands and body.
MSH Te dures AM ae VIE Ty AEST Il (1358-17, HaHFRSH, He 5)
aatam rakh-yaa gopaal su-aamee Dhan charan rakh-yaa jagdeesvareh.
God, my Lord and Master, has saved my soul; the Lord of the Universe has saved my wealth and feet.
Ava TH TT was F EU fAsTAST Il (1358-18, HaAfgSHt, He 5) sarab rakh-yaa gur da-yaaleh bhai dookh binaasneh. The Merciful Guru has protected everything, and destroyed my fear and suffering.
SUS FSG MGS VE Aas SSA UTY MIST WU (1358-18, AoAfRS, He 5)
bhagat vachhal anaath naathay saran naanak purakh achuteh. ||52| |
God is the Lover of His devotees, the Master of the masterless. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Imperishable Primal Lord God. ||52||
Ho ae Utes wtavH SHSd AHe SAS Il (1358-19, HOAfESH, He 5)
jayn kalaa Dhaari-o aakaasa™ baisa“taara™ kaasat baysta’. His Power supports the sky, and locks fire within wood.
AS oo Af Ae oug APs ATA Aste Use Il (1358-19, FoAfeSt, He 5)
jayn kalaa sas soor nakh-yatar jot-ya" saasa™ sareer Dhaarna’,.
His Power supports the moon, the sun and the stars, and infuses light and breath into the body.
ar aaur
Ad As Hs aes ufsus od SES HOT FaeT Il (1359-1, HaAfest, ue 5)
jayn kalaa maat garabh paritpaala‘ nah chhaydant jathar rognah.
His Power provides nourishment in the womb of the mother, and does not let disease strike.
30 AS MAES Added sod Sd fexfs 3da SuST USI (1359-2, HoAfESH, He 5)
tayn kalaa asthambha"™ sarovara™ naanak nah chhijant tarang toyneh. ||53]|
His Power holds back the ocean, O Nanak, and does not allow the waves of water to destroy the land. ||53]|
amet ata gue fase Aeay FSET Il 1359-2, naAfest, He 5) gusaa’-ee garist roopayn simarna” sarbatar jeevnah. The Lord of the World is Supremely Beautiful; His Meditation is the Life of all.
wad AS Hae soa HE Hdd Tis SITET NUS (1359-3, AaAfEst, He 5)
labDha-ya™ sant sangayn naanak savachh maarag har bhagat-neh. ||541|
In the Society of the Saints, O Nanak, He is found on the path of devotional worship of the Lord. ||54]|
HAG Sdos AS AGEN Sds wlGad Il (1359-3, HAfaH, He 5) maska™ bhagnant saila’ kardama™ tarant papeelkeh. The mosquito pierces the stone, the ant crosses the swamp,
Arad Suifs fist sr usar vided I (1359-4, HoAfESt, He 5) saagra™ laNghant pi-anga™ tam pargaas anDhkah. the cripple crosses the ocean, and the blind sees in the darkness,
AQ Hafs fandfs afte nafs aoa afe ofa Je Null (1359-4, HAfESHt, He 5) saaDh sangayn simrant gobind saran naanak har har haray. ||55|| meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||55] |
fea de we fay one de war THT Il (1359-5, HoAfRSt, He 5)
tilak heena™ jathaa bipraa amar heena” jathaa raajnah.
Like a Brahmin without a sacred mark on his forehead, or a king without the power of command,
usa He Aa HIG Soa UH He 3a" FAST uel (1359-5, HaAfRSt, He 5) aavaDh heena” jathaa soorar naanak Dharam heena” tathaa baisnveh. ||56]| or a warrior without weapons, so is the devotee of God without Dharmic Faith. ||56]|
Oo AY 6 Va B Tet @ fAMM I 1359-6, HoAfESt, He 5)
na sa‘kha™ na chakara™ na gadaa na si-aama”.
God has no conch-shell, no religious mark, no paraphernalia; he does not have blue Skin.
MASH TU TIT AGH Il (1359-6, HTAfESH, He 5) ascharaj roopa™ rahant janma’. His Form is Wondrous and Amazing. He is beyond incarnation.
33 33 AGfs Fe Il (1359-7, HIAfESHt, Hz 5) nayt nayt kathant baydaa. The Vedas say that He is not this, and not that.
Gu He one afFeT Il (1359-7, HoAfgSt, He 5) ooch mooch apaar gobindah. The Lord of the Universe is Lofty and High, Great and Infinite.
SHfs Aa fsen nies FSfs Sa asa UDI (1359-7, HOAs, He 5)
basant saaDh rid-ya™ achut bujhant naanak badbhaagee-ah. ||57]|
The Imperishable Lord abides in the hearts of the Holy. He is understood, O Nanak, by those who are very fortunate. ||57| |
Sfemra aA6 Had Host Ars fms waT Il 359-8, HAfySH, He 5)
udi-aan basana™ sa‘saara‘ sanbanDhee savaan si-aal kharah.
Living in the world, it is like a wild jungle. One's relatives are like dogs, jackals and donkeys.
fant AES Ho He Hfed Hot wT Ue SAAT Il (1359-8, Honest, He 5)
bikham sathaan man moh madira’ mahaa™ asaaDh panch taskarahi.
In this difficult place, the mind is intoxicated with the wine of emotional attachment; the five unconquered thieves lurk there.
THs HIF SdH SHE id SA Stee afoaT Il (1359-9, HoAfgst, He 5)
heet moh bhai bharam bharmana”™ aha’ faa‘s teekh-yan kathineh.
The mortals wander lost in love and emotional attachment, fear and doubt; they are caught in the sharp, strong noose of egotism.
Urea Sui MATE ud wien Ste SI BuUlod Il (1359-10, Hove, He 5)
paavak to-a asaaDh ghora™ agam teer nah langhnah.
The ocean of fire is terrifying and impassable. The distant shore is so far away; it cannot be reached.
SH AUHfa due asa dfs vse Ade Cuge fur ilucil (1359-10, HoAfESH, He 5)
bhaj saaDhsang gopaal naanak har charan saran uDhran kirpaa. ||58]|
Vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; O Nanak, by His Grace, we are saved at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||58]|
fgur ads afie dud Aas Ja YseT Il (1359-11, AaAfest, He 5) kirpaa karant gobind gopaalah sagal-ya™ rog khandnah. When the Lord of the Universe grants His Grace, all illnesses are cured.
AY Haile Te THS Hoa Ase UTS USHATT MUI (1359-11, HoAfSH, Hs 5)
saaDh sangayn gun ramat naanak saran pooran parmaysureh. ||59]|
Nanak chants His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, in the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord God. ||59||
from nos woe feeut sft SaeT | 1359-12, waMfgst, we 5)
si-aamala’ maDhur maanukh-ya" rid-ya" bhoom vairnah.
The mortal is beautiful and speaks sweet words, but in the farm of his heart, he harbors cruel vengeance.
fasts defs fiufaur S36 AT AAT EON (1359-12, HOAFRSH, He 5)
nivant hovant mithi-aa chaytna™ sant savajni". ||60] |
He pretends to bow in worship, but he is false. Beware of him, O friendly Saints. ||60]|
Mes HATS WET wes AMT fos YS Il (1359-13, HOAfESt, He 5) achayt moorhaa na jaanant ghatant saasaa nit partay. The thoughtless fool does not know that each day, his breaths are being used up.
fens Ho Hedt atfeur ans afeur aTAS Il (1359-13, HoAfest, Hs 5)
chhijant mahaa sundree kaa’-i-aa kaal kanniaa garaastay.
His most beautiful body is wearing away; old age, the daughter of death, has seized it.
dofs usu aca Bier nifes omar fafimr fase il 1359-14, AoAfESH, He 5)
rachant pukhah kutamb leelaa anit aasaa bikhi-aa binod.
He is engrossed in family play; placing his hopes in transitory things, he indulges in corrupt pleasures.
gHfs gHfs ag HOH Ota Aafs SSA ATS" HAT WEA (1359-14, HaAfRSt, Hs 5)
bharmant bharmant baho janam haari-o saran naanak karunaa ma-yeh. ||61]|| Wandering lost in countless incarnations, he is exhausted. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Embodiment of Mercy. ||61]|
dv fava 3 gna HOS fit Ser I 4359-15, HoAfest, He 5) hay jihbay hay rasgay maDhur pari-a tu-ya™, O tongue, you love to enjoy the sweet delicacies.
AS JS UdH He ness SAI AT MSIST Ill (1359-16, HIAfESHt, He 5)
sat hata’ param baada" avrat aythah suDh achharneh.
You are dead to the Truth, and involved in great disputes. Instead, repeat the holy words:
disse VHT HTS WEI (1359-16, AoAfEST, He 5)
gobind daamodar maaDhvay. ||62]|| Gobind, Daamodar, Maadhav. ||62||
Tats STH HES HS Il (1359-16, HIAPESt, He 5) garbant naaree madon mata”. Those who are proud, and intoxicated with the pleasures of sex,
YGHSS AGS ATS Il (1359-17, HOAs, ue 5) balvant balaat kaarnah. and asserting their power over others,
TIS GHS 3d SHs fee ANS fa ABHST Il (1359-17, AaAfgSHt, He 5)
charan kamal nah bhajant tarin samaan Dharig janamneh.
never contemplate the Lord's Lotus Feet. Their lives are cursed, and as worthless as straw.
J usar gre afte fangs Zot 0S II 1359-17, HoAfest, He 5)
hay papeelkaa garastay gobind simran tu-ya’ Dhanay.
You are as tiny and insignificant as an ant, but you shall become great, by the Wealth of the Lord's Meditation.
SOA ifs ST SH OHI IESIl (1359-18, HOAfEST, He 5)
naanak anik baar namo namah. ||63]| Nanak bows in humble worship, countless times, over and over again. ||63]|
fge THF Aaa 3 Tat I (1359-18, woAfesH, ue 5) tarin ta mayra™ sehka” ta haree-a™. The blade of grass becomes a mountain, and the barren land becomes green.
ys 3 sd CS J sd Il 1359-19, Honfgst, we 5) booda” ta taree-a™ oona™ ta bharee-a’. The drowning one swims across, and the empty is filled to overflowing.
nigerd afe Ae ATs Il (1359-19, HoAfRSt, He 5) anDhkaar kot soor ujaara™. Millions of suns illuminate the darkness,
foods aoa dfs Te Vas WEVil (1359-19, HIAfESt, He 5) binvant naanak har gur dayaara”™. ||64]| prays Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||64 |
Yat IBEO
quHed fat Suse YIN AGH fA UTE Il (1360-1, HaAfeSt, M2 5) barahmaneh sang uDharna™ barahm karam je poornah. Associating with the Brahmin, one is saved, if his actions are perfect and God-like.
WSH IS AAS Td 3 od SHa fades IléuUll (1360-1, HOAfRSH, He 5)
aatam rata’ sansaar gaha™ tay nar naanak nihfaleh. ||65]|
Those whose souls are imbued with the world - O Nanak, their lives are fruitless. [|65]|
ug vas fase ag feus age Buse Aaa Hh a Il (1360-2, HoAfESH, He 5)
par darab hirna™ baho vighan karna™ ucharna” sarab jee-a kah.
The mortal steals the wealth of others, and makes all sorts of problems; his preaching is only for his own livelihood.
oe wet fyAat oifsufs Hs HS ATH ATS fA ATT NEEM (1360-2, HaAfASt, He 5)
la-o la-ee tarisnaa atipat man maa-ay karam karat se sookrah. ||66||
His desire for this and that is not satisfied; his mind is caught in Maya, and he is acting like a pig. ||66]||
HS AHS vse Buse F ESdT Il (1360-3, HOAs, He 5)
matay samayv charna™ uDharna™ bhai dutrah.
Those who are intoxicated and absorbed in the Lord's Lotus Feet are saved from the terrifying world-ocean.
Mda Ufsax Ide SSA AT AdH @ AAW INEDISII (1360-3, HOAs, He 5)
anayk paatik harna’ naanak saaDh sangam na sansyah. ||67||4]|
Countless sins are destroyed, O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; there is no doubt about this. ||67]||4||
HIG U dA (1360-5)
mehlaa 5 gaathaa Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa:
qe Afsara YATE II (1360-5) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
TIUT YIU AU USA HOY ST HBS Il (1360-6, aver, Hs 5)
karpoor puhap suganDhaa paras manukh-y dayha™ maleena”,
Camphor, flowers and perfume become contaminated, by coming into contact with the human body.
MT gfas eae aaa nife TGIE wigs WAU (1360-6, aver, 3 5) majaa ruDhir daruganDhaa naanak ath garbayn agyaanano. ||1|| O Nanak, the ignorant one is proud of his foul-smelling marrow, blood and bones.
[11
USHE UTHS nTaTAT chu Gu finised il TE SE TIS Ba fast AT 3 fAGS 1121 (1360-7, ar, He 5) -
parmaano parjant aakaaseh deep lo-a sikhandnah. gachhayn nain bhaarayn naanak binaa saaDhoo na siDh-yatai. ||2||
Even if the mortal could reduce himself to the size of an atom, and shoot through the ethers, worlds and realms in the blink of an eye, O Nanak, without the Holy Saint, he Shall not be saved. ||2| |
we Afs ds nae fence fifa I (1360-8, are, 18 5) jaano sat hovanto marno daristayn mithi-aa. Know for sure that death will come; whatever is seen is false.
otefs wfa sea sefs aoa AT AGE ISI (1360-8, arer, ne 5)
keerat saath chalantho bhanant naanak saaDh sangayn. ||3]|
So chant the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; this alone shall go along with you in the end. ||3||
Hor fas sone fen] fussy ste II (1360-9, are, H8 5) maa-yaa chit bharmayn isat mitraykh baa‘Dhvah. The consciousness wanders lost in Maya, attached to friends and relatives.
Bad AT Ae Soa AY MAGS AU SAS Ill (1360-9, avar, we 5)
labDha-ya saaDh sangayn naanak sukh asthaana™ gopaal bhajna". ||4]|
Vibrating and meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, the eternal place of rest is found. ||4]|
Hoard Hate fou faou fa Geog I (1360-10, are, v2 5)
mailaagar sangayn nimm birakh se chandnah.
The lowly nim tree, growing near the sandalwood tree, becomes just like the sandalwood tree.
fate SHS SA BSA mS Efa o SIS Ul (1360-10, aver, He 5)
nikat basanto baa“so naanak aha™ buDh na bohtay. ||5]|
But the bamboo tree, also growing near it, does not pick up its fragrance; it is too tall and proud. ||5||
Wa Hs HUGS AG HG HS HIST Il (1360-11, aer, He 5) gaathaa gunf gopaal katha’ matha’ maan maradneh. In this Gaat'haa, the Lord's Sermon is woven; listening to it, pride is crushed.
JS Uv ASE SSA is WE YTS Ill (1360-11, are, we 5) hata" panch satrayn naanak har baanay par-haarneh. ||6]| The five enemies are killed, O Nanak, by shooting the Arrow of the Lord. ||6]|
ave AT AY Us’ BIA aS ATHST Il (1360-12, aver, ve 5) bachan saaDh sukh panthaa lahanthaa bad karamneh. The Words of the Holy are the path of peace. They are obtained by good karma.
TIS HSH HISO THE BSA Tis AIST MDI (1360-12, aver, v2 5)
rahantaa janam marnayn ramna™ naanak har keeratneh. ||7||
The cycle of birth and death is ended, O Nanak, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||7]||
ug sfene sate oo AS US AUST | (1360-13, aver, ne 5) patar bhurijayn jharhee-ya™ nah jarhee-a™ payd sapantaa. When the leaves wither and fall, they cannot be attached to the branch again.
on fage fst aoa ads afe aA Fat UTI (1360-13, ar, He 5)
naam bihoon bikhmataa naanak bahant jon baasro rainee. ||8]|
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, there is misery and suffering. The mortal wanders in reincarnation day and night. ||8]|
aol AU Ade SIS FS SST Il (1360-14, wer, He 5)
bhaavnee saaDh sangayn labha‘ta™ bad bhaagnah.
One is blessed with love for the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune.
dfs SH TE IHS BSA AAS Aras od femuesd itll (1360-14, aer, He 5)
har naam gun ramna™ naanak sansaar saagar nah bi-aapneh. ||9]|
Whoever sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, O Nanak, is not affected by the world-ocean. ||9||
er Ts wud AHSS PAIS AST Il (1360-15, aver, we 5) gaathaa goorh apaara™ samjhana” birlaa janah. This Gaat'haa is profound and infinite; how rare are those who understand it.
HATS AH SHe Soa dfie IHS AT HAH IIAOll (1360-15, aver, He 5) sansaar kaam tajna‘ naanak gobind ramna™ saaDh sangmah. ||10]|
They forsake sexual desire and worldly love, O Nanak, and praise the Lord in the Saadh Sangat. ||10]|
ANZ ATG sear afe su fae” Il (1360-16, aver, He 5)
sumantar saaDh bachnaa kot dokh binaasneh.
The Words of the Holy are the most sublime Mantra. They eradicate millions of sinful mistakes.
Tis BE THS WS SSA IG ANT SUGET MAUI (1360-16, aver, we 5) har charan kamal Dha-yaana naanak kul samooh uDhaarneh. ||11]|
Meditating on the Lotus Feet of the Lord, O Nanak, all one's generations are saved. []11]|
Hed Hed Aed AS HO dfs atesaT Il (1360-17, ae, He 5) sundar mandar sainah jayn maDh-y har keeratneh. That palace is beautiful, in which the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
HAS THE dies ssa SAT BS HAST 921 (1360-17, aver, we 5)
muktay raman gobindah naanak labDha-ya™ bad bhaagnah. ||12]|
Those who dwell on the Lord of the Universe are liberated. O Nanak, only the most fortunate are so blessed. ||12]||
ofa wad fig AfHS II (1360-18, arer, He 5) har labDho mitar sumito. I have found the Lord, my Friend, my very Best Friend.
faerge ae 3 fas il (1360-18, are, 2 5) bidaaran kaday na chito. He shall never break my heart.
W oT MAES 3H mifHs Il (1360-18, aver, v2 5) jaa kaa asthal tol amito. His dwelling is eternal; His weight cannot be weighed.
Het soa Aart Abort Afar fos 931 (1360-19, aver, He 5) so-ee naanak sakhaa jee-a sang kito. ||13]| Nanak has made Him the Friend of his soul. ||13]|
MUAA HES AS UZT ll (1360-19, are, Hs 5) apjasa™ mitant sat putreh. One's bad reputation is erased by a true son,
fAnasa feet aa HZST Il (1360-19, are, He 5) simartab-y ridai gur mantarneh. who meditates in his heart on the Guru's Mantra.
Yast ABEA
YUISH Sass MS Il (1361-1, ara, He 5)
pareetam bhagvaan achut. The Beloved Eternal Lord God,
Soa HAT ATMS SIST Ail (1361-1, aver, He 5) naanak sansaar saagar taarnah. ||14|| O Nanak, carries us across the world-ocean. ||14||
Hoe fange adfsies i (1361-1, wer, nH: 5) marna”™ bisrana™ gobindah. It is death to forget the Lord of the Universe.
Mee fs SH OSST Il (1361-2, are, He 5) jeevana™ har naam Dha-yaavaneh. It is life to meditate on the Name of the Lord.
BIS AT AME Il (1361-2, aa, nz 5) labh-na‘ saaDh sangayn. The Lord is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
aed os yste fered Wil 1361-2, aer, 42 5) naanak har poorab likh-neh. ||15]| O Nanak, by pre-ordained destiny. ||15]|
ano fase suid HY argat feed Il (1361-2, are, He 5)
dasan bihoon bhu-yaa‘ga™ mantra™ gaarurhee nivaara”.
The snake-charmer, by his spell, neutralizes the poison and leaves the snake without fangs.
af Gurse AS Il (1361-3, aver, He 5) bayaaDh upaarhan santa”. Just so, the Saints remove suffering;
SOA BAT ATHET IGE (1361-3, ara, Hs 5) naanak labaDh karamneh. ||16]| O Nanak, they are found by good karma. ||16]|
Wa AA THe Ade Asay AMiST Il (1361-3, ae, ve 5) jath kath ramna’™ sarna™ sarbatar jee-anah. The Lord is All-pervading everywhere; He gives Sanctuary to all living beings.
3a GIs UH SSE Il (1361-4, aver, ue 5) tath lagna” paraym naanak. The mind is touched by His Love, O Nanak,
USA WI PIAS WAI (1361-4, are, Hz 5) parsaada™ gur darasneh. ||17]| by Guru's Grace, and the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||17]|
sderatae Ho fad i (1361-4, aver, 42 5) charnaarbind man biDh-ya". My mind is pierced through by the Lord's Lotus Feet.
fA Ada TAGES Il (1361-4, are, w 5) siDh-ya™ sarab kusalneh. I am blessed with total happiness.
TE Wels sot FF UT UITAET NACI (1361-5, ae, He 5) gaathaa gavant naanak bhab-ya™ paraa poorabneh. ||18]|
Holy people have been singing this Gaat'haa, O Nanak, since the very beginning of time. ||18]|
HS 8S SHS Tee AU Aas Cuged il AAS Arad SSA USSU AGH B BFS IACI (1361- 5, amar, H3 5)
subh bachan ramna™ gavna™ saaDh sangayn uDharneh. sansaar saagra™ naanak punrap janam na labh-yatai. ||19||
Chanting and singing the Sublime Word of God in the Saadh Sangat, mortals are saved from the world-ocean. O Nanak, they shall never again be consigned to reincarnation. ||19]|
ae UTS AAT sherds Il (1361-6, aver, we 5) bayd puraan saastar beechaara”. People contemplate the Vedas, Puraanas and Shaastras.
Saas aH Ss Ud Il (1361-6, wer, He 5) aykankaar naam ur Dhaara”.
But by enshrining in their hearts the Naam, the Name of the One and Only Creator of the Universe,
TSI AHT Aas Surg Il (1361-7, are, ue 5) kulah samooh sagal uDhaara”. everyone can be saved.
WSS SSA A BF |MQOMl (1361-7, ara, vz 5) badbhaagee naanak ko taara™. ||20]| By great good fortune, O Nanak, a few cross over like this. ||20] |
fruse afte oni Suse Fw AYTET Il (1361-7, are, He 5)
simarna’ gobind naama™ uDharna™ kul samoohneh.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of Lord of the Universe, all one's generations are saved.
wefan AT Aas aoa Psat Sets PIAS MU (1361-8, are, Hs 5)
labDhi-a” saaDh sangayn naanak vadbhaagee bhaytant darasneh. ||21||
It is obtained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is seen. ||21||
Aaa tu udfsurait Aga usH fesses i 361-8, aver, ue 5) sarab dokh para‘tiaagee sarab Dharam darirh-aa‘tanh. Abandon all your evil habits, and implant all Dharmic faith within.
waafe ATM Hale sea HAS fexess NII (1361-9, aver, He 5)
labh-Dhayn saaDh sangayn naanak mastak likh-yan-a. ||22||
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is obtained, O Nanak, by those who have such destiny written upon their foreheads. ||22||
TU J TES JIE SIS AYUSSS Il (1361-9, er, He 5) hoyo hai hovanto haran bharan sampooran-a. God was, is, and shall always be. He sustains and destroys all.
AY ASH WE toa YS age M2QSll (1361-10, are, Hs 5) saaDhoo satam jaano naanak pareet kaarna”. ||23]| Know that these Holy people are true, O Nanak; they are in love with the Lord. ||23]|
HYS FS ISS IOS AHS GHEE Il (1361-10, wer, He 5)
sukhayn bain ratana’ rachana™ kasumbh ra‘gan-a.
The mortal is engrossed in sweet words and transitory pleasures which shall soon fade away.
da Hal faGal Soa AY Oo AUST MQSIl (1361-11, aver, He 5)
rog sog bioga’ naanak sukh na supnah. ||24||
Disease, sorrow and separation afflict him; O Nanak, he never finds peace, even in dreams. ||24||
Sd HIG U (1361-12)
funhay mehlaa 5 Phunhay, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe Il (1361-12) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ofa ASH man HASfA SurSst Il (1361-13, esd, vs 5)
haath kalamm agamm mastak laykhaavatee.
With Pen in Hand, the Unfathomable Lord writes the mortal's destiny upon his forehead.
Cafes sfuS As Afar nigu guest il (1361-13, gad, Hs 5) urajh rahi-o sabh sang anoop roopaavatee.
The Incomparably Beautiful Lord is involved with all. Grats age 3 ATE HUT STSMM Il (1361-13, sod, He 5)
ustat kahan na jaa-ay mukhahu tuhaaree-aa. I cannot utter Your Praises with my mouth.
Hot ef ean soa afsadtor IAI (1361-14, god, He 5) mohee daykh daras naanak balihaaree-aa. ||1||
Nanak is fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I am a sacrifice to You. ||1]|
Hz Ast ufo Sf fa atefs A aT Il (1361-14, gad, He 5) sant sabhaa meh bais ke keerat mai kahaa”. Seated in the Society of the Saints, I chant the Lord's Praises.
maul Ag Atears Sg AIG AS feer il (1361-15, ead, He 5) arpee sabh seegaar ayhu jee-o sabh divaa. I dedicate all my adornments to Him, and give all this soul to Him.
win funret AA A afs feereit | 1361-15, god, He 5) aas pi-aasee sayj so kant vichhaa-ee-ai. With hopeful yearning for Him, I have made the bed for my Husband.
dfsat HASfa Je Ta 3 AAS USM NM (1361-15, gad, He 5)
harihaa’ mastak hovai bhaag ta saajan paa-ee-ai. ||2]|
O Lord! If such good destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, then I shall find my Friend. ||2||
Ret aH Id SHG AS fas Af II (1361-16, gad, He 5) sakhee kaajal haar tambol sabhai kichh saaji-aa. O my companion, I have prepared everything: make-up, garlands and betel-leaves.
Hed ote Ata for nine utfamr Il (1361-16, god, He 5)
solah kee-ay seegaar ke anjan paaji-aa.
I have embellished myself with the sixteen decorations, and applied the mascara to my eyes.
A ufs mre oS 3 AS fas ue Il 1361-17, god, He 5) jay ghar aavai kant ta sabh kichh paa-ee-ai. If my Husband Lord comes to my home, then I obtain everything.
dfagt &3 as Aterg AS fase ASM NI (1361-17, gad, He 5) harihaa’ kantai baajh seegaar sabh birthaa jaa-ee-ai. ||3]| O Lord! Without my Husband, all these adornments are useless. ||3]|
fan wife efior XZ AT SIMS Il (1361-18, sod, v2 5) jis ghar vasi-aa kant saa vadbhaagnay. Very fortunate is she, within whose home the Husband Lord abides.
fan afeur og Atars Aret AOE Il (1361-18, god, He 5) tis bani-aa habh seegaar saa-ee sohaagnay. She is totally adorned and decorated; she is a happy soul-bride.
o@ Ast of mifss ufs wR Use II (1361-19, gad, He 5) ha-o sutee ho-ay achint man aas puraa-ee-aa. I sleep in peace, without anxiety; the hopes of my mind have been fulfilled.
dfaat wT ufs orfeer as 3 AS fs usr ISI (1361-19, esd, He 5)
harihaa™ jaa ghar aa-i-aa kant ta sabh kichh paa-ee-aa. | |4]|
O Lord! When my Husband came into the home of my heart, I obtained everything. [141]
Ust AED
mit fest wig fox wim UsTel II (1362-1, gad, He 5) aasaa itee aas ke aas puraa-ee-ai. My hope is so intense, that this hope alone should fulfill my hopes.
Afsas se efenrs J ys urehat I (1362-1, sad, Hs 5) satgur bha-ay da-i-aal ta pooraa paa-ee-ai. When the True Guru becomes merciful, then I attain the Perfect Lord.
H 3fs meade sos fa meade etfemr Il (1362-1, god, He 5)
mai tan avgan bahut ke avgan chhaa-i-aa. My body is filled with so many demerits; I am covered with faults and demerits.
dfs Afsaa se eens 3 HO Soa INull (1362-2, sad, He 5)
harihaa’ satgur bha-ay da-i-aal ta man thehraa-i-aa. ||5]|
O Lord! When the True Guru becomes Merciful, then the mind is held in place. ||5]| AT soa ans snis fomrfer it 1362-3, sod, v2 5)
kaho naanak bay-ant bay-ant Dhi-aa-i-aa. Says Nanak, I have meditated on the Lord, Infinite and Endless.
esd feg HAY Afsag Safer Il 1362-3, sod, He 5) dutar ih sansaar satguroo taraa-i-aa. This world-ocean is so difficult to cross; the True Guru has carried me across.
fifeur wre ae At UsT uTfeMT I (1362-3, sos, He 5) miti-aa aavaa ga-on jaa” pooraa paa-i-aa. My comings and goings in reincarnation ended, when I met the Perfect Lord.
dfad nifys offs a on Afsad 3 urfemr ell 1362-4, ead, Hs 5)
harihaa’ amrit har kaa naam satgur tay paa-i-aa. ||6||
O Lord! I have obtained the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord from the True Guru. ||6||
He ofa wey orate AY BAST Il (1362-4, gad, He 5) mayrai haath padam aagan sukh baasnaa. The lotus is in my hand; in the courtyard of my heart I abide in peace.
Rat Hd afe ase Uf Za STAG II (1362-5, gad, He 5) sakhee morai kanth ratann paykh dukh naasnaa. O my companion, the Jewel is around my neck; beholding it, sorrow is taken away.
WAG Afar ques Aas AY IH The Il 1362-5, ead, He 5) baasa-o sang gupaal sagal sukh raas har. I abide with the Lord of the World, the Treasury of Total Peace. O Lord!
Jfeat fafa fafa oe fafa safe fA AT ats MDI 1362-6, sod, He 5)
harihaa™ riDh siDh nav niDh baseh jis sadaa kar. ||7]| All wealth, spiritual perfection and the nine treasures are in His Hand. ||7]||
ug fan sefe ata Ret at aris Il (1362-6, ead, He 5) par tari-a raavan jaahi say-ee taa laajee-ah. Those men who go out to enjoy other men's women shall suffer in shame.
fosyfs fasts ug vag fee aS Srothoifs il (1362-7, gad, w2 5) nitparat hireh par darab chhidar kat dhaakee-ah. Those who steal the wealth of others - how can their guilt be concealed?
dfs TE THS ulfeyz AIS AG Set Il (1362-7, sad, ws 5)
har gun ramat pavitar sagal kul taar-ee.
Those who chant the Sacred Praises of the Lord save and redeem all their generations.
dfadt Has se usls UagaH sterget cil (1362-8, gad, ue 5) harihaa’ suntay bha-ay puneet paarbarahm beechaara-ee. ||8]|
O Lord! Those who listen and contemplate the Supreme Lord God become pure and holy. ||8]|
Gufs aS nary 3S Us ATT Il (1362-8, gad, Hs 5) oopar banai akaas talai Dhar sohtee. The sky above looks lovely, and the earth below is beautiful.
zd fen sua Safe He aS HIST II (1362-8, gad, He 5) dah dis chamkai beejul mukh ka-o johtee. Lightning flashes in the ten directions; I behold the Face of my Beloved.
uns fes@ faefa ui as ust i (1362-9, ead, He 5) khojat fira-o bidays pee-o kat paa-ee-ai. If I go searching in foreign lands, how can I find my Beloved?
dfaait A HASfa Je Ta SF Vata AHS NCI (1362-9, gad, He 5)
harihaa’ jay mastak hovai bhaag ta daras samaa-ee-ai. ||9]|
O Lord! If such destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, I am absorbed in the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||9] |
fsS AS ae odt 30 Afr Il (1362-10, gad, He 5) dithay sabhay thaav nahee tuDh jayhi-aa. I have seen all places, but none can compare to You.
wag yay fears 3t 3 Afr II (1362-10, god, 3 5)
baDhohu purakh biDhaatai taa’ too sohi-aa.
The Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, has established You; thus You are adorned and embellished.
SAet AWS nu Mou THEA Ud Il (1362-11, Sad, H3 5) vasdee saghan apaar anoop raamdaas pur. Ramdaspur is prosperous and thickly populated, and incomparably beautiful.
Ufaat Staak AAS Ah Stent THSTA Ag IQOll (1362-11, esd, v3 5) harihaa’ naanak kasmal jaahi naa-i-ai raamdaas sar. ||10]|
O Lord! Bathing in the Sacred Pool of Raam Daas, the sins are washed away, O Nanak. ||10]|
ofga fas afss AAAS TS I (1362-12, god, He 5) chaatrik chit suchit so saajan chaahee-ai. The rainbird is very smart; in its consciousness, it longs for the friendly rain.
fan Afar oat ure FSA AG mirdht i 1362-12, god, He 5) jis sang laagay paraan tisai ka-o aahee-ai. It longs for that, to which its breath of life is attached.
a9 a6 fess SoA Fz AS ASE Il (1362-12, god, we 5) ban ban firat udaas boond jal kaarnay. It wanders depressed, from forest to forest, for the sake of a drop of water.
dfaat f38 ofs He Hid OH aaa SfHITIS WAU (1362-13, god, He 5)
harihaa’ ti-o har jan maa‘gai naam naanak balihaarnay. ||11||
O Lord! In just the same way, the humble servant of the Lord begs for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Nanak is a sacrifice to him. ||11]|
fs o fag nigu HeH & ASMA II (1362-13, sod, Hs 5)
mit kaa chit anoop maramm na jaanee-ai.
The Consciousness of my Friend is incomparably beautiful. Its mystery cannot be known.
WIA Tot wus A SS USTs I (1362-14, gad, we 5) gaahak gunee apaar so tat pachhaanee-di. One who purchases the priceless virtues realizes the essence of reality.
fests fos morfe 3 dS Sa wast Il (1362-14, gad, He 5)
chiteh chit samaa-ay ta hovai rang ghanaa.
When the consciousness is absorbed in the supreme consciousness, great joy and bliss are found.
dfast Jue safe wife J ur|fe AT Tar 9M (1362-15, goa, He 5) harihaa™ chanchal choreh maar ta paavahi sach Dhanaa. ||12|| O Lord! When the fickle thieves are overcome, the true wealth is obtained. ||12||
Aus Sst set afaS at o niger il (1362-15, gs, Hs 5) supnai oobhee bha-ee gahi-o kee na anchlaa. In a dream, I was lifted up; why didn't I grasp the hem of His Robe?
Hed use faofas uf He Far Il (1362-16, esd, Hs 5) sundar purakh biraajit paykh man banchlaa. Gazing upon the Beautiful Lord relaxing there, my mind was charmed and fascinated.
WAG 3 aA VIS ATT AT USM I (1362-16, gad, v2 5) khoja-o taa kay charan kahhu kat paa-ee-ai. I am searching for His Feet - tell me, where can I find Him?
dfast Ret ASS ase wet FS urea 1931 (1362-16, god, Hs 5) harihaa’ so-ee jatann bataa-ay sakhee pari-o paa-ee-ai. ||13]| O Lord! Tell me how I can find my Beloved, O my companion. |]|13]|
de 6 eufs AU fA Se feof II (1362-17, esd, He 5) nain na daykheh saaDh se nain bihaali-aa. The eyes which do not see the Holy - those eyes are miserable.
AIO © Hodt ae age Hfe urfemr |i (1362-17, gad, v2 5)
karan na sunhee naad karan mund ghaali-aa.
The ears which do not hear the Sound-current of the Naad - those ears might just as well be plugged.
dHat AU 3 oH fe fae af ASH II (1362-18, ead, He 5) rasnaa japai na naam til til kar katee-ai. The tongue which does not chant the Naam ought to be cut out, bit by bit.
dfsat wa fand afse afe fes feo webt 1981 1362-18, god, He 5)
harihaa™ jab bisrai gobid raa-ay dino din ghatee-ai. ||14]|
O Lord! When the mortal forgets the Lord of the Universe, the Sovereign Lord King, he grows weaker day by day. ||14||
UAHA SA UT HIT HS afew Il (1362-19, sod, He 5)
pankaj faathay pank mahaa mad gu"fi-aa.
The wings of the bumble bee are caught in the intoxicating fragrant petals of the lotus.
nia Ha Caste fares Afr i 1362-19, sod, Hz 5) ang sang urjhaa-ay bisratay su‘fi-aa. With its limbs entangled in the petals, it loses its senses.
Uat IES 3 ag ni Hts fa 3d fant TS II (1363-1, god, Hs 5)
hai ko-oo aisaa meet je torai bikham gaa“th. Is there any such friend, who can untie this difficult knot?
oad feg Hus og fa ge BfE AHS NIUII (1363-1, god, He 5)
naanak ik sareeDhar naath je tootay lay-ay saa™th. ||15]|
O Nanak, the One Supreme Lord and Master of the earth reunites the separated ones. []15]|
We TA niSsa YH US AS Ill (1363-2, Gad, ve 5) Dhaava-o dasaa anayk paraym parabh kaarnay. I run around in all directions, searching for the love of God.
us Asef gs ase fafa He II (1363-2, sad, H3 5) panch sataaveh doot kavan biDh maarnay. The five evil enemies are tormenting me; how can I destroy them?
She we sorte oH ys gem Il (1363-2, gad, He 5) teekhan baan chalaa-ay naam parabh Dha-yaa-ee-ai. Shoot them with the sharp arrows of meditation on the Name of God.
feat Hat fret ws yas TT ureet MEM (1363-3, sad, we 5)
harihaa’ mahaa™ bikhaadee ghaat pooran gur paa-ee-ai. || 16] |
O Lord! The way to slaughter these terrible sadistic enemies is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||16||
Afsas atat ots ufs o feuzet i (1363-3, gad, ve 5)
satgur keenee daat mool na nikhuta-ee. The True Guru has blessed me with the bounty which shall never be exhausted.
weg sud Afs qanfe ecet Il (1363-4, god, He 5) kaavahu bhunchahu sabh gurmukh chhut-ee. Eating and consuming it, all the Gurmukhs are emancipated.
nifys ou fours fest 3fh af i (1363-4, esd, Hs 5) amrit naam niDhaan ditaa tus har. The Lord, in His Mercy, has blessed me with the treasure of the Ambrosial Naam.
Soa Het nota ae o Atfs His AI 1363-5, god, He 5) naanak sadaa araaDh kaday na jaa‘hi mar. ||17]| O Nanak, worship and adore the Lord, who never dies. ||17]|
fad We Sas A BS AIST Il (1363-5, Zod, He 5) jithai jaa-ay bhagat so thaan suhaavanaa. Wherever the Lord's devotee goes is a blessed, beautiful place.
Has de AY ofa on fmreat | (1363-5, god, v2 5) saglay ho-ay sukh har naam Dhi-aavanaa. All comforts are obtained, meditating on the Lord's Name.
Hh asfs Hors fSea HE ufs Il 1363-6, god, He 5) jee-a karan jaikaar nindak mu-ay pach.
People praise and congratulate the devotee of the Lord, while the slanderers rot and die.
AHS fe MITE Soa OH Af NACI (1363-6, god, He 5)
Saajan man aanand naanak naam jap. ||18]| Says Nanak, O friend, chant the Naam, and your mind shall be filled with bliss. ||18]|
ues ufss udls asd Sdt ASM Il (1363-7, gaa, He 5) paavan patit puneet katah nahee sayvee-di. The mortal never serves the Immaculate Lord, the Purifier of sinners.
BS Sta yng AT Ba Vsh I (1363-7, ssa, we 5) jhoothai rang khu-aar kahaa™ lag khayvee-ai. The mortal wastes away in false pleasures. How long can this go on?
TadeCdt ufy ad AY Hfent I 1363-8, sad, He 5) harichand-uree paykh kaahay sukh maani-aa. Why do you take such pleasure, looking at this mirage?
dfaat 38 afsact f3a fa coats Afenr NACI (1363-8, god, He 5)
harihaa™ ha-o balihaaree tinn je dargahi jaani-aa. ||19]|
O Lord! I am a sacrifice to those who are known and approved in the Court of the Lord. ||19]|
lS AH MSa deta faaTs WS Il (1363-9, ead, He 5) keenay karam anayk gavaar bikaar ghan. The fool commits countless foolish actions and so many sinful mistakes.
Hot zaus ZH HS AT Sg 3G Il (1363-9, gad, Hs 5) mahaa daruga™“Dhat vaas sath kaa chhaar tan. The fool's body smells rotten, and turns to dust.
fess@ area Tats HIS BI A ET Il (1363-9, ad, He 5) firta-o garab gubaar maran nah jaan-ee. He wanders lost in the darkness of pride, and never thinks of dying.
Tas sfaseCst uf ard AT HTHET MOM (1363-10, god, He 5) harihaa™ harichand-uree paykh kaahay sach maan-ee. ||20]| O Lord! The mortal gazes upon the mirage; why does he think it is true? ||20]|
fan ot un m@u fA ABE aut II (1363-10, sad, Hs 5) jis Kee poojai a-oDh tisai ka-un raakh-ee. When someone's days are over, who can save him?
ava nifsax Cure aot BE sraet Il 1363-11, god, He 5)
baidak anik upaav kahaa" la-o bhaakh-ee. How long can the physicians go on, suggesting various therapies?
Sa ofs ges ata 3d nreet Il (1363-11, god, He 5) ayko chayt gavaar kaaj tayrai aavee. You fool, remember the One Lord; only He shall be of use to you in the end.
dfadt fas oe 36 ag fga Ag Feet QAI (1363-12, gad, He 5)
harihaa™ bin naavai tan chhaar baritha sabh jaav-ee. ||21]|
O Lord! Without the Name, the body turns to dust, and everything goes to waste. [|21]|
m@ug ay nrg mwa Ulpet I 1363-12, god, He 5) a-ukhaDh naam apaar amolak peej-ee. Drink in the medicine of the Incomparable, Priceless Name.
firfs fife uwefo AS Hae a etret II 1363-13, gad, He 5) mil mil khaaveh sant sagal ka-o deej-ee. Meeting and joining together, the Saints drink it in, and give it to everyone.
fan uaufs df fSA dt ures Il (1363-13, ead, He 5) jisai paraapat ho-ay tisai hee paavnay. He alone is blessed with it, who is destined to receive it.
deat JG afsodt fo fa she Fa PSF QI 1363-13, sod, ue 5) harihaa™ ha-o balihaaree tin" je har rang raavnay. ||22]| O Lord! I am a sacrifice to those who enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||22]|
Zu Het Ha feaor dfenr il 1363-14, gad, He 5) vaidaa sandaa sang ikthaa ho-i-aa. The physicians meet together in their assembly.
m@ue ne afr fefe orf usfenr i 1363-14, gad, He 5) a-ukhad aa-ay raas vich aap khalo-i-aa. The medicines are effective, when the Lord Himself stands in their midst.
AH Gort AgH HASH df Unf Il (1363-15, gad, He 5) jo jo onaa karam sukaram ho-ay pasri-aa. Their good deeds and karma become apparent.
ofeat wu da Afs uy 3a 3S frrfonr WISI 1363-15, gsd, Hs 5) harihaa’ dookh rog sabh paap tan tay khisri-aa. ||23]| O Lord! Pains, diseases and sins all vanish from their bodies. ||23] |
BIS HIG U (1363-17) cha-ubolay mehlaa 5 Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe I (1363-17) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ANS AG feR yn at en fag dst AS II (1363-18, weRS, ve 5) samman ja-o is paraym kee dam ki-yahoo hotee saat. O Samman, if one could buy this love with money,
veo Js A da dfs fate fxs AS afe il 1363-18, Tead, He 5) raavan hutay so rank neh jin sir deenay kaat. ||1]|
then consider Raawan the king. He was not poor, but he could not buy it, even though he offered his head to Shiva. ||1]|
Ulf Un 36 ufs afour sty o Tet TT Il (1363-19, SERS, ne 5)
pareet paraym tan khach rahi-aa beech na raa-ee hot.
My body is drenched in love and affection for the Lord; there is no distance at all between us.
TIS FHS HO Sas ysq ASS AAA lM (1363-19, FS, ws 5)
charan kamal man bayDhi-o boojhan surat sanjog. ||2]|
My mind is pierced through by the Lotus Feet of the Lord. He is realized when one's intuitive consciousness is attuned to Him. ||2]|
UST IZEB
Wad He Sfents ao oe US SA SoH Il HAS YH fusH a TSS Sa ale ASH Ill (1364- 1, BBHS, He 5)
Saagar mayr udi-aan ban nav khand basuDhaa bharam. moosan paraym piramm kai gan-o ayk kar karam. ||3]|
I would cross the oceans, mountains, wilderness, forests and the nine regions of the earth in a single step, O Musan, for the Love of my Beloved. ||3]|
HAS HAG YH at sdt FT viag Ste il 1364-2, sess, we 5) moosan maskar paraym kee rahee jo ambar chhaa-ay. O Musan, the Light of the Lord's Love has spread across the sky;
ata gad AHS xfs Soa TI BUSTE Sil (1364-2, Teas, He 5) beeDhay baa‘Dhay kamal meh bhavar rahay laptaa-ay. ||4]| I cling to my Lord, like the bumble bee caught in the lotus flower. ||4]|
AU SU AAH Ide AY HS HIS Mg TST Il (1364-2, TCHS, v2 5)
jap tap sanjam harakh sukh maan mahat ar garab.
Chanting and intense meditation, austere self-discipline, pleasure and peace, honor, greatness and pride
HAS fone YH ufs ate ats SS Ase Ul (1364-3, Teas, He 5) moosan nimkhak paraym par vaar vaar day‘-u sarab. ||5|| - O Musan, I would dedicate and sacrifice all these for a moment of my Lord's Love.
[5] |
HAS HSH 3 Ae Has fags AAT Il (1364-3, VERS, Hs 5)
moosan maram na jaan-ee marat hirat sansaar.
O Musan, the world does not understand the Mystery of the Lord; it is dying and being plundered.
yn fudu 3 afaS CafsS fra faGara Nell 1304-4, vez, He 5)
paraym piramm na bayDhi-o urjhi-o mith bi-uhaar. ||6|| It is not pierced through by the Love of the Beloved Lord; it is entangled in false pursuits. ||6||
wy ey Ae Ash fees Un feos Il 1364-4, vas, ne 5)
ghab dab jab jaaree-ai bichhurat paraym bihaal.
When someone's home and property are burnt, because of his attachment to them, he suffers in the sorrow of separation.
HAS 3a ot Hb fares use eens IDI (1364-5, TS, ws 5) moosan tab hee moosee-ai bisrat purakh da-i-aal. ||7]|| O Musan, when mortals forget the Merciful Lord God, then they are truly plundered.
II7II
Wa UN Ayre 3 vas fase Ho HAT II (1364-5, TERS, He 5) jaa ko paraym su-aa-o hai charan chitav man maahi. Whoever enjoys the taste of the Lord's Love, remembers His Lotus Feet in his mind.
aoe frsdt FIN wis 3 AST AMO ITI (1364-6, Beas, He 5) naanak birhee barahm kay aan na kathoo jaahi. ||8]| O Nanak, the lovers of God do not go anywhere else. ||8]|
wed urel SS ws VIS Ts fares Il (1364-6, TIS, He 5) lakh ghaatee™ oo‘chou ghano chanchal cheet bihaal. Climbing thousands of steep hillsides, the fickle mind becomes miserable.
ate ate fafhs wat aget AHS AHS ICI (1364-7, Seas, He 5)
neech keech nimrit ghanee karnee kamal jamaal. ||9]| Look at the humble, lowly mud, O Jamaal: the beautiful lotus grows in it. ||9]|
OHS 36 nine fiom de seo fas Ta Il (1364-7, TTB, ne 5) kamal nain anjan si-aam chandar badan chit chaar. My Lord has lotus-eyes; His Face is so beautifully adorned.
HAS Had HSH fAC ds Us afs TST NAO (1364-8, BERS, 3 5) moosan magan maramm si-o khand khand kar haar. ||10]|
O Musan, I am intoxicated with His Mystery. I break the necklace of pride into bits. ||10]|
Hag sfeS fipa yn fAS AU so fies via I (1364-8, BERS, 2 5)
magan bha-i-o pari-a paraym si-o sooDh na simrat ang.
I am intoxicated with the Love of my Husband Lord; remembering Him in meditation, I am not conscious of my own body.
yate sf AS Gut Hfs SrSa MOH UST MAUI (1364-9, TSHS, Hs 5) pargat bha-i-o sabh lo-a meh naanak aDham patang. ||11]|
He is revealed in all His Glory, all throughout the world. Nanak is a lowly moth at His Flame. ||11||
HBA sas adie AIG A 1364-10) salok bhagat kabeer jee-o kay Shaloks Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:
qe Afsars ATE II (1364-10) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ats Hot frsat sro Gufs ay Il 0364-11, Ha, sas ade Fh kabeer mayree simrnee rasnaa oopar raam. Kabeer, my rosary is my tongue, upon which the Lord's Name is strung.
wife Fare Hae sas ST at AY PAA NAN (1364-11, ABs, sas ate FH)
aad jugaadee sagal bhagat taa ko sukh bisraam. ||1]| From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, all the devotees abide in tranquil peace. ||1||
ade Hat ats aB As a IASI? Il (1364-12, F8a, sas ate Ff) kabeer mayree jaat ka-o sabh ko rasnayhaar. Kabeer, everyone laughs at my social class.
afsodt fen wis a@ fro Afus frenogs N21 1364-12, H8a, sas ate Hh balihaaree is jaat ka-o jih japi-o sirjanhaar. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice to this social class, in which I chant and meditate on the Creator. ||2||
aats sana for asf av sores AMG Il 1364-13, H8a, sas ate A kabeer dagmag ki-aa karahi kahaa dulaaveh jee-o. Kabeer, why do you stumble? Why does your soul waver?
Ava AY &t oft TH SH FA UIE ISI (1364-13, ABA, sas ats A) sarab sookh ko naa-iko raam naam ras pee-o. ||3]|
He is the Lord of all comforts and peace; drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord's Name. |[3]|
Tas AIS a ase as Gufs wes AAS Il 1364-14, ABA, sas ats A) kabeer kanchan kay kundal banay oopar laal jarhaa-o. Kabeer, earrings made of gold and studded with jewels,
dtAfs aa are fa fag Hfe ot aS gil (1364-14, ABa, sas ate Ft)
deeseh daaDhay kaan ji-o jin" man naahee naa-o. ||4]| look like burnt twigs, if the Name is not in the mind. ||4]|
adie wat Sa org A tes firesa dfF Il 1364-15, Hea, sas adits Th) kabeer aisaa ayk aaDh jo jeevat mirtak ho-ay. Kabeer, rare is such a person, who remains dead while yet alive.
fous df & ae de AS Uue 3a ALE Ul 0364-15, HBA, sas ate Fh)
nirbhai ho-ay kai gun ravai jat paykha-o tat so-ay. ||5]|
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, he is fearless. Wherever I look, the Lord is there. ||5||
ade WT fea IS Hort ure sfenr nse Il (1364-15, HBA, sas sets Ft) kabeer jaa din ha-o moo-aa paachhai bha-i-aa anand. Kabeer, on the day when I die, afterwards there shall be bliss.
Hf fufeS us orust Halt safo afFeE WEll 1364-16, A8a, sas adits Fh
mohi mili-o parabh aapnaa sangee bhajeh gobind. ||6||
I shall meet with my Lord God. Those with me shall meditate and vibrate on the Lord of the Universe. ||6||
adid AS 3 dH 8d WH Sia 38 AS AE Il (1364-16, Aaa, sas adits Ah kabeer sabh tay ham buray ham taj bhalo sabh ko-ay. Kabeer, I am the worst of all. Everyone else is good.
fate oir ate afsor Hts oHret APE DI (364-17, Ba, sas ats Fh)
jin aisaa kar boojhi-aa meet hamaaraa so-ay. ||7]|| Whoever understands this is a friend of mine. ||7]|
aad iret ufo ufo mfea ad afe SA il (1364-17, Aaa, sas ate A) kabeer aa-ee mujheh peh anik karay kar bhays. Kabeer, she came to me in various forms and disguises.
JH Te aT nmus Sfs aS TSA ICI (1364-18, HBA, sas ate Fh) ham raakhay gur aapnay un keeno aadays. ||8|| My Guru saved me, and now she bows humbly to me. ||8]|
aaa Het urbe fra ut AY Of I (1364-18, ABA, sas ate Fh) kabeer so-ee maaree-ai jin moo-ai sukh ho-ay. Kabeer, kill only that, which, when killed, shall bring peace.
3S SHAS AAT AS BS Ale INCI (1364-19, Haa, sas ade TH) bhalo bhalo sabh ko kahai buro na maanai ko-ay. ||9|| Everyone shall call you good, very good, and no one shall think you are bad. ||9]|
oats TSH Jets ardor ars BS AT Il (1364-19, HSA, sas sets Ft) kabeer raatee hoveh kaaree-aa kaaray oobhay jant. Kabeer, the night is dark, and men go about doing their dark deeds.
at avy
& ad Gfs wes fk wis we SaAeT INIONl (1365-1, Aaa, sas aes Ah
lai faahay uth Dhaavtay se jaan maaray bhagvant. ||10] |
They take the noose and run around; but rest assured that God shall destroy them. ||10]|
wate deo a fase sor SS Va USA I (1365-1, ABa, sas ats Fh) kabeer chandan kaa birvaa bhalaa bayrheha-o dhaak palaas. Kabeer, the sandalwood tree is good, even though it is surrounded by weeds.
Gf st dea dfe ad aA A See UTA IAI (1365-2, ASa, sas adie Ah o-ay bhee chandan ho-ay rahay basay jo chandan paas. ||11]||
Those who dwell near the sandalwood tree, become just like the sandalwood tree. []11]|
ade ay set afsur fe us sag afe I (1365-2, Ba, sas adits Ht) kabeer baa‘s badaa-ee boodi-aa i-o mat doobahu ko-ay. Kabeer, the bamboo is drowned in its egotistical pride. No one should drown like this.
dee a foae SA aA AiO o TE NII (1365-3, Hae, sas adie Ah
chandan kai niktay basai baa‘s suganDh na ho-ay. ||12]|
Bamboo also dwells near the sandalwood tree, but it does not take up its fragrance. ||12]|
add ae aeteur vot fae vat a Tat ATE I (1365-3, H8a, sas adie Ft)
kabeer deen gavaa-i-aa dunee si-o dunee na chaalee saath.
Kabeer, the mortal loses his faith, for the sake of the world, but the world shall not go along with him in the end.
ufe aoat ufo arefe nud af 1981 (1365-4, H8a, sas adits Th
paa-ay kuhaarhaa maari-aa gaafal apunai haath. ||13]| The idiot strikes his own foot with the axe by his own hand. ||13]|
adts Ad Ad UG fefeG aBsa oe f= Il (1365-4, H8a, sas ate kabeer jah jah ha-o firi-o ka-utak thaa-o thaa-ay. Kabeer, wherever I go, I see wonders everywhere.
fea oH Hoot aoe CAs HS SHE 981 (1365-5, ABA, sas ata Fh) ik raam sanayhee baahraa oojar mayrai bhaa’-ay. ||14]| But without the devotees of the One Lord, it is all wilderness to me. ||14]|
ads H30 at Sar sat safe aASt we Il 1305-5, Aaa, sas adits Ft)
kabeer santan kee jhungee-aa bhalee bhath kustee gaa-o.
Kabeer, the dwelling of the Saints is good; the dwelling of the unrighteous burns like an oven.
uifal wag fsa uGwsd fas ot afe & SS NWI (1365-6, HBA, sas aes Ah
aag laga-o tih Dha-ulhar jih naahee har ko naa-o. ||15]|
Those mansions in which the Lord's Name is not chanted might just as well burn down. ||15]|
oats HS He for set Ft yrys forfo ATE Il (1365-6, Ha, sas sets Ft) kabeer sant moo-ay ki-aa ro-ee-ai jo apunay garihi jaa-ay. Kabeer, why cry at the death of a Saint? He is just going back to his home.
deg Was Mus FW de gre faarfe NIEIl (1365-7, F8a, sas ete Th) rovhu saakat baapuray jo haatai haat bikaa-ay. ||16]|| Cry for the wretched, faithless cynic, who is sold from store to store. ||16]|
add Was MATS AAT BAS at Us II (1365-7, HBA, sas aete FH) kabeer saakat aisaa hai jaisee lasan kee khaan. Kabeer, the faithless cynic is like a piece of garlic.
sn AS
ad 8S weha usae df foes il 1365-8, A8a, sas ete Hf) konay baithay khaa-ee-ai pargat ho-ay nidaan. ||17]|| Even if you eat it sitting in a corner, it becomes obvious to everyone. ||17] |
ada whior sual USS SAGOTS Il (1365-8, H8a, sas adits Th) kabeer maa-i-aa dolnee pavan jhakolanhaar. Kabeer, Maya is the butter-churn, and the breath is the churning-stick.
Hag Hug afer af ubt HATS ACH 1365-9, ABA, sas ate FH) santahu maakhan khaa-i-aa chhaachh pee-ai sansaar. ||18] | The Saints eat the butter, while the world drinks the whey. ||18]|
ats Hfenr seat uea ed fos ure Il (1365-9, Hea, sas adie Hh kabeer maa-i-aa dolnee pavan vahai hiv Dhaar. Kabeer, Maya is the butter-churn; the breath flows like ice water.
fafs fasfeur fafs ufemr nies faseoors NACI (1365-10, HBA, sas aes A)
jin bilo-i-aa tin khaa-i-aa avar bilovanhaar. ||19] | Whoever does the churning eats the butter; the others are just churning-sticks. ||19]|
ate wfeor sact ufA ufa oe ofe i 1365-10, Ha, sas adits Ah kabeer maa-i-aa chortee mus mus laavai haat. Kabeer, Maya is the thief, which breaks in and plunders the store.
Sa adie ot HA fafe atet sag Fr|S Moll (1365-11, ABA, sas ate Fh) ayk kabeeraa naa musai jin kKeenee baarah baat. ||20]| Only Kabeer is not plundered; he has cut her into twelve pieces. ||20]|
ade AY 3 SU Afar Aate F ATs HIS II (1365-11, ABA, sas oats Ht) kabeer sookh na ay"h jug karahi jo bahutai meet. Kabeer, peace does not come in this world by making lots of friends.
A fos wafo Sa fae 3 AY Uefa otS N29 (1365-12, FBa, sas adie Ah
jo chit raakhahi ayk si-o tay sukh paavahi neet. ||21]|
Those who keep their consciousness focused on the One Lord shall find eternal peace. [|21]|
adie fan Hed 3 Hal Sd AS fs MISE Il (1365-12, ABA, sas ate Fh) kabeer jis marnay tay jag darai mayray man aanand. Kabeer, the world is afraid of death - that death fills my mind with bliss.
HIS Tt S usb YTS USHSE 122i (1365-13, Aaa, sas alte Fh) marnay hee tay paa-ee-ai pooran parmaanand. ||22|| It is only by death that perfect, supreme bliss is obtained. ||22]|
oH uesg ute & atte aS & YG Il (1365-13, ABs, sas aete Ft) raam padaarath paa-ay kai kabeeraa gaa™th na khol". The Treasure of the Lord is obtained, O Kabeer, but do not undo its knot.
oot ues Sat uUTsY dt WI Sot HB QS (1365-14, Aa, sas aets Ht) nahee patan nahee paarkhoo nahee gaahak nahee mol. ||23]| There is no market to sell it, no appraiser, no customer, and no price. ||23]||
ade so fa@ uifs afs a at Sag TH Il (1365-14, aa, sas adits A) kabeer taa si-o pareet kar jaa ko thaakur raam. Kabeer, be in love with only that one, whose Master is the Lord.
Ufss TH gust vrefs AVS AH N2QSIl (1365-15, HBA, sas Tats Ht) pandit raajay bhooptee aavahi ka-unay kaam. ||24| |
The Pandits, the religious scholars, kings and landlords - what good is love for them? [|24]|
ade uifs fea fag ate ore faa ate I) (1365-15, nda, sas ate Ah) kabeer pareet ik si-o kee-ay aan dubiDhaa jaa-ay. Kabeer, when you are in love with the One Lord, duality and alienation depart.
ae BE AA ag ae wale HSTE QUI (1365-16, H8a, sas ate rt) bhaavai laa“bay kays kar bhaavai gharar mudaa-ay. ||25]| You may have long hair, or you may shave your head bald. ||25]||
AAs Aa AHS at dodt nig ud fSA whe Il (1365-16, Ha, sas ate Ah kabeer jag kaajal kee kothree anDh paray tis maahi. Kabeer, the world is a room filled with black soot; the blind fall into its trap.
JG sfeodt fsa aG Uff a olafh ats NQEI (1365-17, A8a, sas adits Th) ha-o balihaaree tin ka-o pais jo neekas jaahi. ||26] | I am a Sacrifice to those who are thrown in, and still escape. ||26]|
adie feg so Whar nag 3 Bg Safe Il (1365-17, Has, sas adie Hh kabeer ih tan jaa-igaa sakahu ta layho bahor. Kabeer, this body shall perish; save it, if you can.
Sia Ue 3 Te fra a BU Adis MQDIl (1365-18, Aaa, sas ate A) naa“gay paavhu tay ga-ay jin kay laakh karor. ||27]|
Even those who have tens of thousands and millions, must depart bare-footed in the end. ||27]||
ade feg so Whar aed nef ote II (1365-18, Ba, sas ate Ff) kabeer ih tan jaa-igaa kavnai maarag laa-ay. Kabeer, this body shall perish; place it on the path.
a Hats afe AO at & dfs a TS ATE NQcil 1365-18, Asa, sas adits rt) kai sangat kar saaDh kee kai har kay gun gaa-ay. ||28]||
Either join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, or sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||28]|
THT HIT HIS Aa Hor ufs st o When ate Il (1365-19, ASa, gars alte Ft) kabeer martaa martaa jag moo-aa mar bhee na jaani-aa ko-ay. Kabeer, dying, dying, the whole world has to die, and yet, none know how to die.
Ua 93EE
WA HIS A Hd dfs o Hes AE NQCI (1366-1, HBA, sas ate Ft) aisay marnay jo marai bahur na marnaa ho-ay. ||29]|| Let those who die, die such a death, that they shall never have to die again. ||29] |
add HOH HOH Bss J dE B aS HS Il (1306-1, Ha, sas adie th)
kabeer maanas janam dulambh hai ho-ay na baarai baar.
Kabeer, it is so difficult to obtain this human body; it does not just come over and over again.
fas 36 eo ure safe fasts safe 6 wafs TT NZOMl (1366-1, H8a, sas aete Hh)
ji-o ban fal paakay bhu-ay gireh bahur na laageh daar. ||30] | It is like the ripe fruit on the tree; when it falls to the ground, it cannot be re-attached to the branch. ||30]|
eae st ads 3 3d aS aaty il (1366-2, Sa, sas aes Ht) kabeeraa tuhee kabeer too tayro naa-o kabeer. Kabeer, you are Kabeer; your name means great.
TH W309 sa ue AE ufs safo Adte BAU (1366-3, HBA, sas adie FH)
raam ratan tab paa-ee-ai ja-o pahilay tajeh sareer. ||31]||
O Lord, You are Kabeer. The Jewel of the Lord is obtained, when the mortal first gives up his body. ||31]|
ads suo subat sud afas o Sf I (1306-3, Ha, sas adie Hh kabeer jhankh na jhankhee-ai tumro kahi-o na ho-ay. Kabeer, do not struggle in stubborn pride; nothing happens just because you say so.
dH ad FW afe ad Afe 6 Ae AE NBQIl 1366-4, HBA, sas ate Fh) karam kareem jo kar rahay mayt na saakai ko-ay. ||32|| No one can erase the actions of the Merciful Lord. ||32||
oats SACS TH at Bor fea 3 AfE Il 1366-4, ABA, sas ata Fh) kabeer kasa-utee raam kee jhoothaa tikai na ko-ay. Kabeer, no one who is false can withstand the Touchstone of the Lord.
oH AAG?t A Ad A nfs Het SE BSI 1366-5, HBA, sas ate FH) raam kasa-utee so sahai jo mar jeevaa ho-ay. ||33]|
He alone can pass the test of the Lord's Touchstone, who remains dead while yet alive. ||33]|
ats Cre ufssts aug urs Aurdt urs il (1366-5, HBA, sas aete A) kabeer oojal pahirahi kaapray paan supaaree khaahi. Kabeer, some wear gaudy robes, and chew betel leaves and betel nuts.
San dig & oH fae aa AN ule AO Sell (1366-6, ABA, sas adie
aykas har kay naam bin baaDhay jam pur jaa“hi. ||34]|
Without the Name of the One Lord, they are bound and gagged and taken to the City of Death. ||34] |
AAT Ha ATHT FS SA IAT Ill (1366-6, H8a, sas aets Fh) kabeer bayrhaa jarjaraa footay chhay™k hajaar. Kabeer, the boat is old, and it has thousands of holes.
uge age fats ae 3a fas fs svg SUI (1366-6, Ha, sas ate Ft)
haroo-ay haroo-ay tir ga-ay doobay jin sir bhaar. ||35||
Those who are light get across, while those who carry the weight of their sins on their heads are drowned. ||35]||
aad Ts Ad fas wadt AA Ad fAG wA II (1366-7, Fda, sas ate Ft) kabeer haad jaray ji-o laakree kays jaray ji-o ghaas. Kabeer, the bones burn like wood, and the hair burns like straw.
feg na nest efy & sfeS adie Berm EI (1366-7, HBa, sas adie FH) ih jag jartaa daykh kai bha-i-o kabeer udaas. ||36|| Seeing the world burning like this, Kabeer has become sad. ||36||
add asa 3 ahi oH BUS TS Il (1366-8, H8a, sas ade th kabeer garab na keejee-ai chaam lapaytay haad. Kabeer, do not be so proud of your bones wrapped up in skin.
des Gufs sg 3a 3 Sfo UsSt WS NBII (1366-8, Fa, sas ats A)
haivar oopar chhatar tar tay fun Dharnee gaad. ||37]||
Those who were on their horses and under their canopies, were eventually buried under the ground. ||37]||
MS Tae s atriot Gar Sf wrevA | 1366-9, aa, sas alte Fh) kabeer garab na keejee-ai oochaa daykh avaas. Kabeer, do not be so proud of your tall mansions.
ning ate gfe Scat Gufs WH wTA NACI! (1366-9, HBA, sas aes Ft)
aaj kaali” bhu-ay laytnaa oopar jaamai ghaas. ||38]|
Today or tomorrow, you shall lie beneath the ground, and the grass shall grow above you. ||38]|
add asa 3 abit da o gab af& I (1366-10, naa, sas adits Ah kabeer garab na keejee-ai rank na hasee-ai ko-ay. Kabeer, do not be so proud, and do not laugh at the poor.
wing Hoe Ae Hfo faor wee for SE NSKCI (1366-10, Ba, sas ate HH) ajahu so naa-o samundar meh ki-aa jaan-o ki-aa ho-ay. ||39]|| Your boat is still out at sea; who knows what will happen? ||39]|
add dea o abit oot Sf Ada I 1366-11, ABA, sas ade Ff) kabeer garab na keejee-ai dayhee daykh surang. Kabeer, do not be so proud, looking at your beautiful body.
nig ates sti Aga fAG atgdt stidt ISON! (1366-11, H8a, sas ete Hf)
aaj kaali" taj jaahugay ji-o kaa’churee bhuyang. ||40]|
Today or tomorrow, you will have to leave it behind, like the snake shedding its skin. | |40]|
ade Sea I 5 Ble S TH 3H F Sle Il (1366-12, Aa, sas alte Ft) kabeer lootnaa hai ta loot lai raam naam hai loot. Kabeer, if you must rob and plunder, then plunder the plunder of the Lord's Name.
fefe ue usSTa yrs Ada Sle NSU (1366-12, Fea, sas oats Ht)
fir paachhai pachhutaahugay paraan jaahingay chhoot. ||41]|
Otherwise, in the world hereafter, you will regret and repent, when the breath of life leaves the body. ||41||
adie mint act 3 aot vrs ufs ore vrfar il 1366-13, H8a, sas adits rh) kabeer aisaa ko-ee na janmi-o apnai ghar laavai aag. Kabeer, there is no one born, who burns his own home,
utg@ ofsart ats a add IH fe Sa Ig2il 1366-13, Aaa, sas ate A paa'cha-o larikaa jaar kai rahai raam liv laag. ||42|| and burning his five sons, remains lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||42| |
ad Saat suet ofaat a8 ate Il 1366-14, FBa, sas adits Th) ko hai larikaa baych-ee larikee baychai ko-ay. Kabeer, how rare are those who sell their son and sell their daughter
Ast ad ate fA@ ofa Af son ASfE SSI (366-14, HBA, sas ate FH) Saajhaa karai kabeer si-o har sang banaj karay-i. ||43]| and, entering into partnership with Kabeer, deal with the Lord. ||43]|
add feg sarest HS AAT of Ate Il (1366-15, H&a, sas adte Hh
kabeer ih chaytaavnee mat sahsaa reh jaa-ay. Kabeer, let me remind you of this. Do not be skeptical or cynical.
Ue saa sae fo a as B ute Isell (1366-15, Aaa, sas adits TH)
paachhai bhog jo bhogvay tin ko gurh lai khaahi. | |44] |
Those pleasures which you enjoyed so much in the past - now you must eat their fruits. ||44]|
add H Wee ufsa 3s ufsa fae 36 Aa II (1366-16, H8a, sas adits Th) kabeer mai jaani-o parhibo bhalo parhibay si-o bhal jog. Kabeer, at first, I thought learning was good; then I thought Yoga was better.
sats 3 ase aH at Te] (SEC ST iigull (1366-16, aa, sas adits Ah
bhagat na chhaada-o raam kee bhaavai ninda-o log. ||45]||
I shall never abandon devotional worship of the Lord, even though people may Slander me. ||45]||
ade Sa fa fee aust faa ufo ardt famre il 1366-17, H8a, sas adits rh) kabeer log ke nindai bapurhaa jih man naahee gi-aan.
Kabeer, how can the wretched people slander me? They have no wisdom or intelligence.
oH adte ofe ad nied SH AS OM IE (1366-17, H&A, sas adie A
raam kabeeraa rav rahay avar tajay sabh kaam. ||46]| Kabeer continues to dwell upon the Lord's Name; I have abandoned all other affairs. ||46]|
ads usent & umud ug fefh wait orfar i) 366-18, Ha, sas ade Ah kabeer pardaysee kai ghaaghrai chahu dis laagee aag. Kabeer, the robe of the stranger-soul has caught fire on all four sides.
fier vfs afear set aa nite & Sa 8D Il 1366-18, ABA, sas ate Fh)
khinthaa jal ko-ilaa bha-ee taagay aa™ch na laag. ||47]|
The cloth of the body has been burnt and reduced to charcoal, but the fire did not touch the thread of the soul. ||47] |
adte fiter ats afee set ug SF HSS Il (1366-19, Fa, sas adits Fh)
kabeer khinthaa jal ko-ilaa bha-ee khaapar foot mafoot.
Kabeer, the cloth has been burnt and reduced to charcoal, and the begging bowl is shattered into pieces.
nat aus aes orate sdt fasts sci 1366-19, Fa, gars welts Ft) jogee bapurhaa khayli-o aasan rahee bibhoot. ||48|| The poor Yogi has played out his game; only ashes remain on his seat. ||48]|
at IZED
ad ad Afe west stefe nfs AS Il (1367-1, Hea, sas adte Ah kabeer thorai jal maachhulee jheevar mayli-o jaal. Kabeer, the fish is in the shallow water; the fisherman has cast his net.
fea dus 8 gents fete ate AHS ANTS SEI (1367-1, Fea, sas ats Hh) ih toghnai na chhootsahi fir kar samund sam"aal. ||49]| You shall not escape this little pool; think about returning to the ocean. ||49||
ads Ae 3 esha AC nfs urd SE II (1367-2, H&a, sas adie Th) kabeer samund na chhodee-ai ja-o at khaaro ho-ay. Kabeer, do not leave the ocean, even if it is very salty.
uufe uufs Fes 3G 3 afad AE UOll (1367-3, Ba, sas ate Fh) pokhar pokhar dhoodh-tay bhalo na kahihai ko-ay. ||50|| If you poke around searching from puddle to puddle, no one will call you smart. ||50||
ade foarte afs ae aiult ardt af& | (1367-3, Hea, sas ate Ah kabeer nigusaa‘-ay™ bahi ga-ay thaa‘ghee naahee ko-ay. Kabeer, those who have no guru are washed away. No one can help them.
ae adtat »rust ass df= A Ode Udall 4367-3, F8a, sas ate Ff)
deen gareebee aapunee kartay ho-ay so ho-ay. ||51]| Be meek and humble; whatever happens is what the Creator Lord does. ||51]|
oats aH at gate sot AAS ot ast HAE Il (1367-4, ABA, sas ate Fh)
kabeer baisna-o kee kookar bhalee saakat kee buree maa-ay.
Kabeer, even the dog of a devotee is good, while the mother of the faithless cynic is bad.
6a fos AS dfs oH AA Go uu faRToS ATE UI 1367-5, HBa, sas adie Ah
oh nit sunai har naam jas uh paap bisaahan jaa-ay. ||52]| The dog hears the Praises of the Lord's Name, while the other is engaged in sin. [|52]|
oats Isat eas feg Iisa IS Il 1367-5, A8a, sas aeta Ht) kabeer harnaa dooblaa ih haree-aaraa taal. Kabeer, the deer is weak, and the pool is lush with green vegetation.
or modt fa He ast dee as ilusil (1367-6, Aaa, sas ate Ft) laakh ahayree ayk jee-o kaytaa bancha-o kaal. ||53]| Thousands of hunters are chasing after the soul; how long can it escape death? ||53]|
ads dar ste wwe acts ulefs foo te Il 1367-6, H8a, sas adie Hh kabeer gangaa teer jo ghar karahi peeveh nirmal neer. Kabeer, some make their homes on the banks of the Ganges, and drink pure water.
fas fs safs o nafs df fe afs mH adits Nlusil 1367-7, Has, sas aete Zh)
bin har bhagat na mukat ho-ay i-o kahi ramay kabeer. ||54||
Without devotional worship of the Lord, they are not liberated. Kabeer proclaims this. [|54]|
adie He feene sfeor AAT aiar Ste I 1367-7, ABs, sas adie FH) kabeer man nirmal bha-i-aa jaisaa gangaa neer. Kabeer, my mind has become immaculate, like the waters of the Ganges.
Ue od dfs fed ass adte adts uull 1367-8, Hae, sas adie Ah paachhai laago har firai kahat kabeer kabeer. ||55]| The Lord follows after me, calling, "Kabeer! Kabeer!"||55] |
oats Toet Ubud Yat Saw stS il (1367-8, Fa, sas aats FH) kabeer hardee pee-aree choo“naa™ oojal bhaa-ay. Kabeer, tumeric is yelow, and lime is white.
TH Hodt 3E fus Fa geo Tete uel 1367-9, F8a, sas ate Ff) raam sanayhee ta-o milai don-o baran gavaa-ay. ||56|| You shall meet the Beloved Lord, only when both colors are lost. ||56]|
aHe Jet ulsse Id Fs feds 3 TIE Il (1367-9, Ba, sas sets FH) kabeer hardee peertan harai choon chihan na rahaa-ay. Kabeer, tumeric has lost its yellow color, and no trace of lime's whiteness remains.
wfeodt feo uifs a@ fag ats sag ae ATE UI (1367-10, Ha, sas aete Ah
balihaaree ih pareet ka-o jih jaat baran kul jaa-ay. ||57]|| I am a Sacrifice to this love, by which social class and status, color and ancestry are taken away. ||57]||
ads Hats eure Has oet eae ote I (1367-10, H8a, sas aes Fh) kabeer mukat du-aaraa sankuraa raa-ee das-ay™ bhaa-ay. Kabeer, the door of liberation is very narrow, less than the width of a mustard seed.
He 38 Hae de safes foar fae a Ate uci (1367-11, Ba, sas ate Th) man ta-o maigal ho-ay rahi-o nikso ki-o kai jaa-ay. ||58]| Your mind is larger than an elephant; how will it pass through? ||58]|
ade wat Afsag A fs Zor ad ure Il (1367-11, F8a, sas adie Fh) kabeer aisaa satgur jay milai tuthaa karay pasaa-o. Kabeer, if I meet such a True Guru, who mercifully blesses me with the gift,
Hats era Hoes AOA wre AE ut (1367-12, Hea, sas ate Fh)
mukat du-aaraa moklaa sehjay aava-o jaa-o. ||59|| then the door of liberation will open wide for me, and I will easily pass through. ||59]|
ads ao dfs ate o arudt a xfs we adt WE Il (1367-12, Hea, sas ate Th)
kabeer naa mohi chhaan na chhaapree naa mohi ghar nahee gaa-o. Kabeer, I have no hut or hovel, no house or village.
HS fs ue AS TAS ATS o TS EOll (1367-13, aa, sas adits Fh) mat har poochhai ka-un hai mayray jaat na naa-o. ||60|| I hope that the Lord will not ask who I am. I have no social status or name. ||60]|
adie xfs Hed oT we FT HIE Safe a VST | (1367-13, ABs, sas adits Hh kabeer muhi marnay kaa chaa-o hai mara-o ta har kai du-aar. Kabeer, I long to die; let me die at the Lord's Door.
HS dfs us AGS FT US THs HS MEU (1367-14, Ba, sas aes Ft) mat har poochhai ka-un hai paraa hamaarai baar. ||61|| I hope that the Lord does not ask, "Who is this, lying at my door?"||61||
add ot JH dint 3 acted a afs Aa Ate Il (1367-14, Aaa, sas adits Ah
kabeer naa ham kee-aa na karhigay naa kar sakai sareer.
Kabeer, I have not done anything; I shall not do anything; my body cannot do anything.
foor WSC fae dfs aor se agts adte E2QI 1367-15, H8a, sas ats ki-aa jaan-o kichh har kee-aa bha-i-o kabeer kabeer. ||62||
I do not Know what the Lord has done, but the call has gone out: "Kabeer, Kabeer."||62| |
ade AUS J seat & fro ufe fear TH I (1367-15, ABA, sas oats Ht) kabeer supnai hoo barrhaa-ay kai jih mukh niksai raam. Kabeer, if someone utters the Name of the Lord even in dreams,
a a ud at wadt AS So a WH NESI (1367-16, H8a, sas ade th) taa kay pag kee paanhee mayray tan ko chaam. ||63]| I would make my skin into shoes for his feet. ||63]]|
oats Het & TH Usd HOA THE SS il (1367-16, waa, sas alta Fh) kabeer maatee kay ham pootray maanas raakhi-o naa-o. Kabeer, we are puppets of clay, but we take the name of mankind.
ag fren & UTS as aS old SS NEV (1367-17, Ha, sas setts Fh) chaar divas kay paahunay bad bad roo“Dheh thaa-o. ||64]| We are guests here for only a few days, but we take up so much space. ||64|
aad Hfset ate urfemir wimg ube ubrfe | 0367-17, nea, sas adits sh)
kabeer mahidee kar ghaali-aa aap peesaa-ay peesaa-ay. Kabeer, I have made myself into henna, and I grind myself into powder.
3 Ad FS 5 ue aay 6 wet UTS EU (1367-18, ASA, sas alte Ft) tai sah baat na poochhee-ai kabahu na laa-ee paa-ay. ||65||
But You, O my Husband Lord, have not asked about me; You have never applied me to Your Feet. ||65||
adie fas efs ores wisn get odt af& Il 1367-18, H8a, sas adits Th) kabeer jih dar aavat jaati-ahu hatkai naahee ko-ay. Kabeer, that door, through which people never stop coming and going
An S&S
A Ug aA som A vg MAT fe EEN (1367-19, HBa, sas adits Ah so dar kaisay chhodee-ai jo dar aisaa ho-ay. ||66] | - how can I leave such a door as that? ||66] |
ae sa au Cafes qe at wale sale I (1367-19, Fa, sas ats Ht) kabeer doobaa thaa pai ubri-o gun kee lahar jhabak. Kabeer, I was drowning, but the waves of virtue saved me in an instant.
Yat aVwEc
wa ffs sa Hens sa Cafe ufsS JB safe NEI (1368-1, AB, sas ate Fh) jab daykhi-o bayrhaa jarjaraa tab utar pari-o ha-o farak. ||67| | When I saw that my boat was rotten, then I immediately got out. ||67]|
ats unt sats o sveet ofs unt o HITE I (1368-2, Aaa, sas adits Fh)
kabeer paapee bhagat na bhaav-ee har poojaa na suhaa-ay. Kabeer, the sinner does not like devotion to the Lord; he does not appreciate worship.
Ht See uss wo fasta so ATE Et (368-2, Aaa, sas adie Ah maakhee chandan parharai jah biganDh tah jaa-ay. ||68|| The fly abandons the sandalwood tree, and goes after the rotten smell. ||68] |
aes FF Hor Jat Hot Hor AS AATE Il (1368-3, Aaa, sas sets Ht) kabeer baid moo-aa rogee moo-aa moo-aa sabh sansaar. Kabeer, the physician is dead, and the patient is dead; the whole world is dead.
Sq aaa a Hot fg at FzGTT WECM (1368-3, HSA, sas sets Ff) ayk kabeeraa naa moo-aa jih naahee rovanhaar. ||69|| Only Kabeer is not dead; there is no one to mourn for him. ||69]|
ade oy 3 fourfes Hat oreit fs i (1368-4, naa, sas adie Ah kabeer raam na Dhi-aa-i-o motee laagee khor. Kabeer, I have not meditated on the Lord; such is the bad habit I have developed.
afer sat ae at a Ga ug aafs DOM (1368-4, HBA, sas aes Hf)
kaa-i-aa haa“dee kaath kee naa oh char"ai bahor. ||70]| The body is a wooden pot; it cannot be put back on the fire. ||70]|
adie wnt dfs udt Ha & sv]es ale Il (1368-4, HBA, sas ate FH) kabeer aisee ho-ay paree man ko bhaavat keen. Kabeer, it came to pass, that I did whatever I pleased.
Hae 3 four sauat Aa ofa fRaGT Ste DAI (1368-5, ASA, sas aes FH) marnay tay ki-aa darapnaa jab haath siDha-uraa leen. ||71]|| Why should I be afraid of death? I have invited death for myself. ||71]|
TMS TA t Ts PAA To aS usb se Il (1308-5, wa, sas aets Ht)
kabeer ras ko gaa‘do choosee-ai gun ka-o maree-ai ro-ay.
Kabeer, the mortals suck at the sugar cane, for the sake of the sweet juice. They should work just as hard for virtue.
WeToMis HSA 3G 3 Afad AE NDI (1368-6, HBA, sas ete Th) avgunee-aaray maansai bhalo na kahihai ko-ay. ||72|| The person who lacks virtue - no one calls him good. ||72||
aes wats AS sat nig ots AT Sle Il (1368-6, Fa, gars alte Ft) kabeer gaagar jal bharee aaj kaali" jaihai foot. Kabeer, the pitcher is full of water; it will break, today or tomorrow.
TT 7 3 sate wrus ng HS Stafad Ble OSI (1368-7, ASa, sas sets Ff) gur jo na cheeteh aapno aDh maajh leejhigay loot. ||73]| Those who do not remember their Guru, shall be plundered on the way. ||73]|
THT FAT TH t HStor HT SS Il (1368-8, ASA, sas aes Ht) kabeer kookar raam ko mutee-aa mayro naa-o. Kabeer, I am the Lord's dog; Moti is my name.
TS IHS Aedt wa fis So WES OVil 1368-8, ABA, sas ate Fh) galay hamaaray jayvree jah khinchai tah jaa-o. ||74|| There is a chain around my neck; wherever I am pulled, I go. ||74||
ads Aust are at fomr feusrefa Sf i 1368-8, H8a, sas asta Ah
kabeer japnee kaath kee ki-aa dikhlaavahi lo-ay. Kabeer, why do you show other people your rosary beads?
fase IH 5 Sadi feo Aust for GE oul! 1368-9, Aaa, sas adie Hh hirdai raam na chaythee ih japnee ki-aa ho-ay. ||75|| You do not remember the Lord in your heart, so what use is this rosary to you? ||75]|
adie fares satis Hfs SA HS 6 HS AfF II (1368-9, HBA, sas ate FH)
kabeer birahu bhuyangam man basai mant na maanai ko-ay.
Kabeer, the snake of separation from the Lord abides within my mind; it does not respond to any mantra.
on faGatt ar Hbt Aba 3 aa SE DEN (1368-10, HBA, sas adte FH)
raam bi-ogee naa jee-ai jee-ai ta ba-uraa ho-ay. ||76]||
One who is separated from the Lord does not live; if he does live, he goes insane. ||76]|
ads usn des fSq J Sa AGT Il (1368-10, Ha, sas aes Hh) kabeer paaras chandnai tin" hai ayk suganDh. Kabeer, the philosopher's stone and sandalwood oil have the same good quality.
faa ffs 38 Osu se SI WS fea DI (368-11, Fae, sas alte Fh)
tih mil tay-oo ootam bha-ay loh kaath nirganDh. ||77||
Whatever comes into contact with them is uplifted. Iron is transformed into gold, and ordinary wood becomes fragrant. ||77||
add AH at Sar gat I Gg odt Afoor WE Il 368-11, ABA, sas ate FH) kabeer jam kaa thay“gaa buraa hai oh nahee sahi-aa jaa-ay. Kabeer, Death's club is terrible; it cannot be endured.
ea a AG dfs fifes fate Shor nists ote Oc (1368-12, Fea, sas atte Fh ayk jo saaDhoo mohi mili-o tini" lee-aa anchal laa-ay. ||78]|| I have met with the holy man; he has attached me to the hem of his robe. ||78]|
aad FE ad WS dt se wg AS SAA II (1368-12, FSA, sas ats Ht)
kabeer baid kahai ha-o hee bhalaa daaroo mayrai vas.
Kabeer, the physician says that he alone is good, and all the medicine is under his control.
fes 38 SHS are at Fa oS SE UA DEI (1308-13, Aaa, sas adits Ah ih ta-o basat gupaal kee jab bhaavai lay-ay khas. ||79]|| But these things belong to the Lord; He takes them away whenever He wishes. ||79]||
aad oCatfs nruat fee eA BI SATE Il (1368-14, ABa, sas adits Hh) kabeer na-ubat aapnee din das layho bajaa-ay. Kabeer, take your drum and beat it for ten days.
Set oe Anal fag safe o fad orfe coll 1368-14, H8a, sas adits Th nadee naav sanjog ji-o bahur na milhai aa-ay. ||80|| Life is like people meeting on a boat on a river; they shall not meet again. ||80| |
adits AS ANefs HA AGE AON age FoatE Il 1368-15, Ha, sas ate A) kabeer saat samundeh mas kara-o kalam kara-o banraa-ay. Kabeer, if I could change the seven seas into ink and make all the vegetation my pen,
aA ade AC ATE die AA feus o ATE ICU (1368-15, Ha, sas adie Ft) basuDhaa kaagad ja-o kara-o har jas likhan na jaa-ay. ||81]|| and the earth my paper, even then, I could not write the Praises of the Lord. ||81]|
ade rf qos four ad fost SA Tus Il (1368-16, H8a, sas adits Th kabeer jaat julaahaa ki-aa karai hirdai basay gupaal. Kabeer, what can my lowly status as a weaver do to me? The Lord dwells in my heart.
oat THe afe fe gato As AAS CI (1368-16, ASa, sas aes FH) kabeer rama-ee-aa kanth mil chookeh sarab janjaal. ||82||
Kabeer, the Lord hugs me close in His Embrace; I have forsaken all my entanglements. ||82| |
ads wa at odt Hes Uf wate Il 1368-17, Hea, sas adie Th) kabeer aisaa ko nahee mandar day-ay jaraa-ay. Kabeer, will anyone set fire to his home
ulg@ ofea ufs a ad TH fS SE cS 1368-17, H8a, sas adits Th paa"cha-o larikay maar kai rahai raam li-o laa-ay. ||83]| and kill his five sons (the five thieves) to remain lovingly attached to the Lord? ||83]|
aes ui &t odt feg 3q SS Sle Il (1368-18, Ha, sas alte Fh) kabeer aisaa ko nahee ih tan dayvai fook. Kabeer, will anyone burn his own body?
nit BI 3 Wet sys sata afe ceil (1368-18, ABA, sas aets Fh) anDhaa log na jaan-ee rahi-o kabeeraa kook. ||84||
The people are blind - they do not know, although Kabeer continues to shout at them. ||84]|
adits Ast uard fas vat Ho Jo te HATS Il (1368-19, HBA, sas ate Fh) kabeer satee pukaarai chih charhee sun ho beer masaan. Kabeer, the widow mounts the funeral pyre and cries out, "Listen, O brother funeral
pyre.
Sa Aafeor vfs aes mH SH ay fara cull (368-19, Aaa, sas aes Ah
log sabaa-i-aa chal ga-i-o ham tum kaam nidaan. ||85] | All people must depart in the end; it is only you and I."||85] |
uar avec ads He udt sf fs fs vs fer Ate Il (1369-1, naa, sas asta Th)
kabeer man pankhee bha-i-o ud ud dah dis jaa-ay. Kabeer, the mind has become a bird; it soars and flies in the ten directions.
A AA Hats fre ASA Se ute CEN (1369-1, H8a, sas ade Th)
jo jaisee sangat milai so taiso fal khaa-ay. ||86]|
According to the company it keeps, so are the fruits it eats. ||86]| add A ag dns ufeS Het Bg II (1369-2, Aaa, sas adits Ah
kabeer jaa ka-o khojtay paa-i-o so-ee tha-ur. Kabeer, you have found that place which you were seeking.
Ret fefs & 3 sfeur wT AG aIT nig WC (1369-2, Ba, sas aes Ft) so-ee fir kai too bha-i-aa jaa ka-o kahtaa a-or. ||87]|| You have become that which you thought was separate from yourself. ||87]| |
ats Ht HIG ana at AS foafe a Afs I 1369-3, H8a, sas adie Hh
kabeer maaree mara-o kusang kee kaylay nikat jo bayr.
Kabeer, I have been ruined and destroyed by bad company, like the banana plant near the thorn bush.
Gu 38 Ca id Was Aa 5 Sf ICC (1369-3, Ba, sas aes Ft)
uh jhoolai uh cheeree-ai saakat sang na hayr. ||88]||
The thorn bush waves in the wind, and pierces the banana plant; see this, and do not associate with the faithless cynics. ||88] |
ads avg uaet fafa od vfeS ad ar] Il (1369-4, naa, sas adie Ft) kabeer bhaar paraa-ee sir charai chali-o chaahai baat.
Kabeer, the mortal wants to walk on the path, carrying the load of others’ sins on his head.
MUS Sad a 3d Ma mMBu| wr| Ice ll (1369-4, Hea, sas adie Ah
apnay bhaareh naa darai aagai a-ughat ghaat. ||89]||
He is not afraid of his own load of sins; the road ahead shall be difficult and treacherous. ||89||
ads so at oat wed ost AT UATE Il (1369-5, H8a, sas adits rh)
kabeer ban kee daaDhee laakree thaadhee karai pukaar. Kabeer, the forest is burning; the tree standing in it is crying out,
fs ofA use BIS & AS Trt ae ICOM (1369-5, HBA, sas ats HH) mat bas para-o luhaar kay jaarai doojee baar. ||90] |
"Do not let me fall into the hands of the blacksmith, who would burn me a second time."||90] |
oats 8a HSS efe He ef HIST UTS Il (1369-6, Fa, sas alts Ft) kabeer ayk marantay du-ay moo-ay do-ay marantah chaar. Kabeer, when one died, two were dead. When two died, four were dead.
and Hdsd sd He ofs you efe ata IEA (1369-6, Fa, sas sete Fh)
chaar marantah chhah moo-ay chaar purakh du-ay naar. ||91]| When four died, six were dead, four males and two females. ||91]||
oats efy ef na sfeur ag 6 ufenr og Il (1369-7, Aaa, sas ats Ft)
kabeer daykh daykh jag dhoo“dhi-aa kahoo-a™ na paa-i-aa tha-ur.
Kabeer, I have seen and observed, and searched all over the world, but I have found no place of rest anywhere.
fats ofe a on 6 Sf as gas MT ICQI (1369-7, Aaa, sas ate Ff)
jin har kaa naam na chayti-o kahaa bhulaanay a-or. ||92||
Those who do not remember the Lord's Name - why do they delude themselves in other pursuits? ||92]|
ads Hafs adba va at nifs ad fagarg il (1309-8, Hea, sas adie rh) kabeer sangat karee-ai saaDh kee ant karai birbaahu. Kabeer, associate with the Holy people, who will take you to Nirvaanaa in the end.
Has Ha 3 ahi ATS df fears ICSI (1369-8, HBa, sas adie FH) saakat sang na keejee-ai jaa tay ho-ay binaahu. ||93]| Do not associate with the faithless cynics; they would bring you to ruin. ||93]|
adie va Hfs sf ais a wa nfo sfoG wre I (1369-9, A&a, sas ade Ah kabeer jag meh chayti-o jaan kai jag meh rahi-o samaa-ay. Kabeer, I contemplate the Lord in the world; I know that He is permeating the world.
fre dfs at on 3 Sf36 sets HOH’ MMe Keil (1369-9, Aaa, sas adie Ft)
jin har kaa naam na chayti-o baadeh janmay” aa-ay. ||94]|
Those who do not contemplate the Name of the Lord - their birth into this world is useless. ||94||
adte ninat adit 3H at nied yim fSeaTA I (1369-10, HSa, sas adits FH)
kabeer aasaa karee-ai raam kee avrai aas niraas. Kabeer, place your hopes in the Lord; other hopes lead to despair.
odfa uate 3 Het FH ofs oH BEA CUI (1369-10, HBA, sas ate Ff)
narak pareh tay maan-ee jo har naam udaas. ||95||
Those who dissociate themselves from the Lord's Name - when they fall into hell, then they will appreciate its value. ||95]||
adie fra Anat ags ate aA at& o HIS II (1309-11, 8a, sas adie Th) kabeer sikh saakhaa bahutay kee-ay kayso kee-o na meet. Kabeer has made many students and disciples, but he has not made God his friend.
we 8 dfs fies a ate nica vs ICE! (1369-11, FBa, sas ade FH)
chaalay thay har milan ka-o beechai atki-o cheet. ||96]|
He set out on a journey to meet the Lord, but his consciousness failed him half-way. ||96]|
ads ase sus four ad HE IH 3 ad ATE Il 1369-12, A8a, sas ate Fh) kabeer kaaran bapuraa ki-aa karai ja-o raam na karai sahaa-ay. Kabeer, what can the poor creature do, if the Lord does not give him assistance?
fas fag set ug ce ASt yfe nfs AE CDN (1369-13, ABA, sas adie FH)
jih jih daalee pag Dhara-o so-ee mur mur jaa-ay. ||97]|| Whatever branch he steps on breaks and collapses. ||97| |
adie ness a8 Guens He HW ufs d SZ Il (1369-13, ABA, sas ate Ff) kabeer avrah ka-o updaystay mukh mai par hai rayt. Kabeer, those who only preach to others - sand falls into their mouths.
ofA farst aes wor we aT Ys WCC (1369-14, ABs, sas ate Ah
raas biraanee raakh-tay khaa-yaa ghar kaa khayt. ||98] | They keep their eyes on the property of others, while their own farm is being eaten up. ||98]|
oats AY ot Hafs JIS AG at SAT UTS Il (1309-14, Fae, sas aes Ft)
kabeer saaDhoo kee sangat raha-o ja-o kee bhoosee khaa-o.
Kabeer, I will remain in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, even if I have only coarse bread to eat.
dod” A dfed Was Af 6 WS ICC (1369-15, H8a, sas adits Th) honhaar so ho-ihai saakat sang na jaa-o. ||99]|| Whatever will be, will be. I will not associate with the faithless cynics. ||99]|
aatd Hafs AG at feo fea gar Is Il (1309-15, ABa, sas sets Ft) kabeer sangat saaDh kee din din doonaa hayt. Kabeer, in the Saadh Sangat, love for the Lord doubles day by day.
Has adt atadt ge df 5 AT ION! (1369-15, A8a, sas ats Ft) saakat kaaree kaa‘bree Dho-ay ho-ay na sayt. ||100]|
The faithless cynic is like a black blanket, which does not become white by being washed. ||100]||
oats Ho Hfsur adt an Hse aH I (1369-16, Aaa, sas oats Ht) kabeer man mooNdi-aa nahee kays mundaa-ay kaa"-ay. Kabeer, you have not shaved your mind, so why do you shave your head?
nt fos ahor A Ho ahr Hat HS MAE AOA (1369-16, ABA, sas seta Fh) jo kichh kee-aa so man kee-aa moo“daa moond ajaa™-ay. ||101]| Whatever is done, is done by the mind; it is useless to shave your head. ||101] |
ads TH 3 est 39 ue ATE 3 AS II (1369-17, Has, sas adie Ah kabeer raam na chhodee-ai tan Dhan jaa-ay ta jaa-o. Kabeer, do not abandon the Lord; your body and wealth shall go, so let them go.
336 aHS fas sfoor wHfs oth ANTE 1190211 (1369-17, Aaa, sas adits Hh)
charan kamal chit bayDhi-aa raameh naam samaa-o. ||102|| My consciousness is pierced by the Lord's Lotus Feet; I am absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||102]|
aad HTH HT aes Sfe Tet AS TS Il (1369-18, Ba, sas oats Fh) kabeer jo ham jant bajaavtay toot ga-ee™ sabh taar. Kabeer, all the strings of the instrument I played are broken.
az fro fam ad 3S SAHSoTT I908l (1369-18, H8a, sas ate Ff) jant bichaaraa ki-aa karai chalay bajaavanhaar. ||103]| What can the poor instrument do, when the player has departed as well. ||103]|
oat Hf Hs fsa ag at AS SoH 3 ATE I (1369-19, ABA, sas ats Ht) kabeer maa-ay moonda-o tih guroo kee jaa tay bharam na jaa-ay. Kabeer, shave the mother of that guru, who does not take away one's doubt.
UST 9300
mu sa Bd ae Hf 3B AS soe 908ll (1370-1, A8a, sas adits A) aap dubay chahu bayd meh chaylay dee-ay bahaa-ay. ||104| | He himself is drowning in the four Vedas; he drowns his disciples as well. ||104||
ads AS uy ate TY 3S VATE I 1370-1, Aaa, sas adits Ah kabeer jaytay paap kee-ay raakhay talai duraa-ay. Kabeer, whatever sins the mortal has committed, he tries to keep hidden under cover.
usde 38 foes AS Aa Ue TH TTS NIOUII (1370-1, ABA, sas aes Fh)
pargat bha-ay nidaan sabh jab poochhay Dharam raa-ay. ||105||
But in the end, they shall all be revealed, when the Righteous Judge of Dharma investigates. ||105]||
adie ofs a frnge ats & ufeS aos a?s II (1370-2, H8a, sas ade th)
kabeer har kaa simran chhaad kai paali-o bahut kutamb.
Kabeer, you have given up meditating on the Lord, and you have raised a large family.
um aga ofa afer aret sfomr & Fa AOE! 1370-3, Ha, sas adie Ah
DhanDhaa kartaa reh ga-i-aa bhaa-ee rahi-aa na banDh. ||106|| You continue to involve yourself in worldly affairs, but none of your brothers and relatives remain. ||106||
ade ofs a fines ats & ofS nares ATE II 1370-3, HBA, sas ate Ff)
kabeer har kaa simran chhaad kai raat jagaavan jaa-ay. Kabeer, those who give up meditation on the Lord, and get up at night to wake the spirits of the dead,
Heufe df & mess we nus wfe 190211 (1370-4, HBA, sas ate Ff) sarpan ho-ay kai a-utarai jaa-ay apunay khaa-ay. ||107]|| shall be reincarnated as snakes, and eat their own offspring. ||107]||
ads ofs a fines ats & mrdet ae ofs Il 1370-4, HBA, sas adits Th)
kabeer har kaa simran chhaad kai aho-ee raakhai naar.
Kabeer, the woman who gives up meditation on the Lord, and observes the ritual fast of Ahoi,
Tedt dfs a mead avg Ad Ho Utes NAOCII (1370-5, Has, sas aete Ah gadhee ho-ay kai a-utarai bhaar sahai man chaar. ||108]| Shall be reincarnated as a donkey, to carry heavy burdens. ||108| |
ads vsaet mifs wot ofs vfu fose wfs il 1370-5, F8a, sas ate Ff)
kabeer chaturaa-ee at ghanee har jap hirdai maahi. Kabeer, it is the most clever wisdom, to chant and meditate on the Lord in the heart.
Hot Cufs dar fas 3 otdT Sf AOKI (1370-6, HBA, sas aes Fh) sooree oopar khaylnaa girai ta thaahar naahi. ||109]| It is like playing on a pig; if you fall off, you will find no place of rest. ||109]|
ade Het He dfs 3 aT fy aha IMF II (1370-6, Ha, sas adits Th kabeer so-ee mukh Dhan hai jaa mukh kahee-ai raam. Kabeer, blessed is that mouth, which utters the Lord's Name.
edt fan at wut ufeg adfeat FY AION! 1370-7, ABA, sas aetts Fh) dayhee kis kee baapuree pavitar ho-igo garaam. ||110]|| It purifies the body, and the whole village as well. ||110]|
ad Het ae set A ae dfs & SA II 1370-7, Aaa, sas adits Ah kabeer so-ee kul bhalee jaa kul har ko daas. Kabeer, that family is good, in which the Lord's slave is born.
fT AS TH S Sur A aw VS USA NVA (1370-8, FSA, sas oats Ht) jih kul daas na oopjai so kul dhaak palaas. ||111]|| But that family in which the Lord's slave is not born is as useless as weeds. ||111]|
ade J Me ade AUS Wo Be uA Suara Il (1370-8, Aa, sas asta A)
kabeer hai ga-ay baahan saghan ghan laakh Dhajaa fahraahi. Kabeer, some have lots of horses, elephants and carriages, and thousands of banners waving.
feur Fy 3 fou sot AG ate fAHeS feo ATT NAIK (1370-9, ABA, sas ate FH) i-aa sukh tay bhikh-yaa bhalee ja-o har simrat din jaahi. ||112]|
But begging is better than these comforts, if one spends his days meditating in remembrance on the Lord. ||112||
ads As Ha UG fefes Hes au vere Il 1370-9, aa, sas ate A) kabeer sabh jag ha-o firi-o maa‘dal kanDh chadhaa-ay. Kabeer, I have wandered all over the world, carrying the drum on my shoulder.
aet ay ot oot AS cet Sfx APE III 0370-10, ASa, sas sets Fh) ko-ee kaahoo ko nahee sabh daykhee thok bajaa-ay. ||113]| No one belongs to anyone else; I have looked and carefully studied it. ||113]|
Hota Hat stead via foot wre i 1370-10, H8a, sas aete Tt) maarag motee beethray anDhaa niksi-o aa-ay. The pearls are scattered on the road; the blind man comes along.
nfs fas nate at Aas Csut we 199811 (1370-11, Hea, sas ate Fh) jot binaa jagdees kee jagat ulanghay jaa-ay. ||114|| Without the Light of the Lord of the Universe, the world just passes them by. ||114] |
as an oats a Cus us SH I (1370-11, Sa, sas ata FH) boodaa bans kabeer kaa upji-o poot kamaal. My family is drowned, O Kabeer, since the birth of my son Kamaal.
dfs ox fine ats & ufs & ror Hw 1AVWUII (1370-12, ABA, sas ate Ff) har kaa simran chhaad kai ghar lay aa-yaa maal. ||115]| He has given up meditating on the Lord, in order to bring home wealth. ||115]|
oats AG a@ fea reba Ate o StH aE I 1370-12, Haa, sas ats FH) kabeer saaDhoo ka-o milnay jaa-ee-ai saath na leejai ko-ay. Kabeer, go out to meet the holy man; do not take anyone else with you.
ue uo etdba ore df A OE 199! 1370-13, Fas, sas ate Ah paachhai paa-o na deejee-ai aagai ho-ay so ho-ay. ||116]|| Do not turn back - keep on going. Whatever will be, will be. ||116] |
ads ag afaS fag Aedt fsa Hs Fag ats Il 1370-13, Aaa, sas adte Hf) kabeer jag baaDhi-o jih jayvree tih mat banDhhu kabeer. Kabeer, do not bind yourself with that chain, which binds the whole world.
nafs nret Bo fa Ae AAS AdtT AVI (1370-14, ABs, sas ate Ah jaiheh aataa lon ji-o son samaan sareer. ||117]|| As the salt is lost in the flour, so shall your golden body be lost. ||117]|
ads dA CfsE 36 wis Asret Aas Il 1370-15, H8a, sas ade Th)
kabeer hans udi-o tan gaadi-o sojhaa-ee sainaah.
Kabeer, the soul-swan is flying away, and the body is being buried, and still he makes gestures.
Mad HE o eset Jaret SST NAAT (1370-15, ABA, sas alts Ft) ajhoo jee-o na chhod-ee rankaa-ee nainaah. ||118]| Even then, the mortal does not give up the cruel look in his eyes. ||118]|
ats 30 favs 33 a8 Hea HOG 3m aS II 1370-15, A8a, sas ats Fh kabeer nain nihaara-o tujh ka-o sarvan sun-o tu-a naa-o. Kabeer: with my eyes, I see You, Lord; with my ears, I hear Your Name.
Ho Cus sunt on At vdeo ANG fer oS IACI (1370-16, Haa, sas ade Ah bain uchara-o tu-a naam jee charan kamal rid thaa-o. ||119]|
With my tongue I chant Your Name; I enshrine Your Lotus Feet within my heart. ||119]|
adits Hea oda 3H sfeG Afsag & usATfe II (1370-17, aa, sas adits Ah kabeer surag narak tay mai rahi-o satgur kay parsaad. Kabeer, I have been spared from heaven and hell, by the Grace of the True Guru.
Jdo AHS at HEA Hfs sa nfs nrg yrfe 192011 4370-17, ABs, sas ats Ff)
charan kamal kee ma-uj meh raha-o ant ar aad. ||120]| From beginning to end, I abide in the joy of the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||120]|
add JIS HS at HEA a afs AA Baws Il (1370-18, Aaa, sas aes Ah kabeer charan kamal kee ma-uj ko kahi kaisay unmaan. Kabeer, how can I even describe the extent of the joy of the Lord's Lotus Feet?
afos aG Ast adt Sar Ht ug|g 192411 (1370-18, Ha, sas ate Ft) kahibay ka-o sobhaa nahee daykhaa hee parvaan. ||121]|| I cannot describe its sublime glory; it has to be seen to be appreciated. ||121]||
ade tfy a fxs age ad 3 & ust I 1370-19, naa, sas adits Ah kabeer daykh kai kih kaha-o kahay na ko patee-aa-ay. Kabeer, how can I describe what I have seen? No one will believe my words.
dfs AA SH Cot go Jaf TS ATE 1192211 (1370-19, ABA, sas ate Ff) har jaisaa taisaa uhee raha-o harakh gun gaa-ay. ||122|| The Lord is just as He is. I dwell in delight, singing His Glorious Praises. ||122||
UsT ABI
ade ga fess st ga ofa gfe fess 1 AA seats aA He Wher HHS ST 923i 1371-1, H@a, sas adte At)
kabeer chugai chitaarai bhee chugai chug chug chitaaray. jaisay bachrahi koo‘’j man maa-i-aa mamtaa ray. ||123]|
Kabeer, the flamingo pecks and feeds, and remembers her chicks. She pecks and pecks and feeds, and remembers them always. Her chicks are very dear to her, just like the love of wealth and Maya is dear to the mortal's mind. ||123]|
ads nigg wood atfeur soft sd AT 3 Il 1371-2, Aaa, sas adte Hf)
kabeer ambar ghanhar chhaa-i-aa barakh bharay sar taal.
Kabeer, the sky is overcast and cloudy; the ponds and lakes are overflowing with water.
afza fr@ sans ad fS5 & ABS JSS 929i 1371-2, ABs, sas aes Ft) chaatrik ji-o tarsat rahai tin ko ka-un havaal. ||124] | Like the rainbird, some remain thirsty - what is their condition? ||124||
adits vaet AG fofh tes orf fxs uses i 371-3, naa, sas adits Ah
kabeer chak-ee ja-o nis beechhurai aa-ay milai parbhaat.
Kabeer, the chakvi duck is separated from her love through the night, but in the morning, she meets him again.
A od faed on fHO o fea fxs o TES AQUI 1371-3, FBa, sas adie Ah jo nar bichhuray raam si-o naa din milay na raat. ||125]|
Those who are separated from the Lord do not meet Him in the day, or in the night. ||125]|
ade safes faster sa F Ae HEfs II 4371-4, Ba, sas ate Fh) kabeer rainaa-ir bichhori-aa rahu ray sankh majhoor. Kabeer: O conch shell, remain in the ocean.
UG VEG UTat PAs STIs AT WIEN (1371-5, A8a, sas aes Fh) dayval dayval Dhaahrhee dayseh ugvat soor. ||126||
If you are separated from it, you shall scream at sunrise from temple to temple. ||126]|
oats AS four aefs wa sf 3 TY Il 371-5, Fae, sas ate Fh) kabeer sootaa ki-aa karahi jaag ro-ay bhai dukh. Kabeer, what are you doing sleeping? Wake up and cry in fear and pain.
W at amar did His A fa@ AS AY IVI (1371-6, ABA, sas ate Fh) jaa kaa baasaa gor meh so ki-o sovai sukh. ||127]| Those who live in the grave - how can they sleep in peace? ||127] |
oats AS" four acts Sis fa a Aufs Hats II 1371-6, Hae, sas adts Fh) kabeer sootaa ki-aa karahi uth ke na jaapeh muraar. Kabeer, what are you doing sleeping? Why not rise up and meditate on the Lord?
fea feo Hee dfea aia ads urfe 9Qcil (371-7, aa, sas adits Ah ik din sovan ho-igo laa‘bay god pasaar. ||128]| One day you shall sleep with your legs outstretched. ||128]|
oats AS four xafs ot TT wg AT ll 0371-7, ABA, sas atts Ft) kabeer sootaa ki-aa karahi baithaa rahu ar jaag. Kabeer, what are you doing sleeping? Wake up, and sit up.
Taha 3s des aT Ha Af SAT WIEN 371-3, Asa, sas aeita Fh) jaa kay sang tay beechhuraa taa hee kay sang laag. ||129]| Attach yourself to the One, from whom you have been separated. ||129]|
add AS at de 3 esha wefa war WE Il 1371-8, Ba, sas ate FH) kabeer sant kee gail na chhodee-ai maarag laagaa jaa-o. Kabeer, do not leave the Society of the Saints; walk upon this Path.
ues dt uats df sea mbt SS 98011 (1371-9, Hea, sas adits Fh) paykhat hee punneet ho-ay bhaytat japee-ai naa-o. ||130]| See them, and be sanctified; meet them, and chant the Name. ||130]||
THT HAS AT 3 ohribat eats Ahr ster il 1371-9, ABA, sas ats Fh) kabeer saakat sang na keejee-ai dooreh jaa-ee-ai bhaag. Kabeer, do not associate with the faithless cynics; run far away from them.
WHS ad usb 3B As Ha VAT ISU (1371-10, H8a, sas adits rt) baasan kaaro parsee-ai ta-o kachh laagai daag. ||131]|| If you touch a vessel stained with soot, some of the soot will stick to you. ||131]|
ats IH 8 VisS Ae ugfss wrfe i (1371-10, Aaa, sas ate Fh) kabeeraa raam na chayti-o jaraa pahoo'chi-o aa-ay. Kabeer, you have not contemplated the Lord, and now old age has overtaken you.
ort Hfes enrg 3 ne for orfenr afte 193211 4371-11, Aa, sas adte Hh) laagee mandir du-aar tay ab ki-aa kaadhi-aa jaa-ay. ||132|| Now that the door of your mansion is on fire, what can you take out? ||132]|
add ade A sfe6 FH ate agate Il 1371-11, aa, sas adits Ah kabeer kaaran so bha-i-o jo keeno kartaar. Kabeer, the Creator does whatever He pleases.
fH fag GAG & oot Sa fraASTE 923i (1371-12, Fa, sas ate Fh) tis bin doosar ko nahee aykai sirjanhaar. ||133]| There is none other than Him; He alone is the Creator of all. ||133]]|
aad 6H Ba colo uate Bal nis I 1371-12, Asa, sas ate Ah kabeer fal laagay falan paakan laagay aa™b. Kabeer, the fruit trees are bearing fruit, and the mangoes are becoming ripe.
me ugets wAH aS AG dife o udt ate 1IaeII 0371-13, Aaa, sas aete Fh) jaa-ay pahoocheh khasam ka-o ja-o beech na khaahee kaa“b. ||1341| They will reach the owner, only if the crows do not eat them first. ||134]|
oats oad Unf Hf 8 Hoole Stee AT I 1371-13, Fa, sas sets FH)
kabeer thaakur poojeh mol lay manhath tirath jaahi.
Kabeer, some buy idols and worship them; in their stubborn-mindedness, they make pilgrimages to sacred shrines.
eu edt Aig ufs 3S seo whe NIBUIl (1371-14, ABA, sas alts Ht)
daykhaa daykhee savaa‘g Dhar bhoolay bhatkaa khaahi. ||135]|
They look at one another, and wear religious robes, but they are deluded and lost. ||135]|
aes UTS USHAT ator uA AS AATE ll (1371-14, FSA, sas ats A) kabeer paahan parmaysur kee-aa poojai sabh sansaar. Kabeer, someone sets up a stone idol and all the world worships it as the Lord.
eH SISA FIT FS TS WS NISE (1371-15, Haa, sas sets Ft) is bharvaasay jo rahay booday kaalee Dhaar. ||136|| Those who hold to this belief will be drowned in the river of darkness. ||136] |
ads aae at Gadt HA X AGH AUS I (1371-15, Ha, sas aes FH) kabeer kaagad kee obree mas kay karam kapaat. Kabeer, the paper is the prison, and the ink of rituals are the bars on the windows.
ude act fusent uss ust ge] 193911 (1371-16, Hea, sas adte A)
paahan boree pirathmee pandit paarhee baat. ||137]||
The stone idols have drowned the world, and the Pandits, the religious scholars, have plundered it on the way. ||137]||
ads ate ads wafo ag ne asst Ae 37 Il (1371-16, Ha, sas adte Ff)
kabeer kaal karantaa abeh kar ab kartaa su-ay taal.
Kabeer, that which you have to do tomorrow - do it today instead; and that which you have to do now - do it immediately!
ue og 3 dear AG fra ule wr] are NACI (1371-17, Faa, sas ate Fh) paachhai kachhoo na ho-igaa ja-o sir par aavai kaal. ||138] |
Later on, you will not be able to do anything, when death hangs over your head. ||138]|
adie wat as fea tfmr Fat Get ere Il 0371-17, A8a, sas adte Th kabeer aisaa jant ik daykhi-aa jaisee Dho-ee laakh. Kabeer, I have seen a person, who is as shiny as washed wax.
aA due sd Tot xfs dart ana 9S ll (1371-18, A8a, sas adte FH)
deesai chanchal baho gunaa mat heenaa naapaak. ||139]|
He seems very clever and very virtuous, but in reality, he is without understanding, and corrupt. ||139]|
ade Hat af a AH o ad fSAaS Il (1371-18, HBA, sas ate Ft) kabeer mayree buDh ka-o jam na karai tiskaar. Kabeer, the Messenger of Death shall not compromise my understanding.
fafe feg aur frofror A Afumr usfeears IOI (1371-19, Fa, sas wets Fh)
jin ih jamoo-aa sirji-aa so japi-aa parvidagaar. ||140] |
I have meditated on the Lord, the Cherisher, who created this Messenger of Death. ||140]|
aay aAsst sur seg SE AS HA Il (1371-19, H8a, sas aete Fh) kabeer kastooree bha-i-aa bhavar bha-ay sabh daas. Kabeer, the Lord is like musk; all His slaves are like bumble bees.
ust 9392 fig fas safs ade at f38 fs aH foeA 19891 4372-1, Fda, sas ate Ft)
ji-o ji-o bhagat kabeer kee ti-o ti-o raam nivaas. ||141]|| The more Kabeer worships Him, the more the Lord abides within his mind. ||141]||
ade agate ufsS aca a aid afs afeS am Il 1372-1, Hea, sas ate th)
kabeer gahgach pari-o kutamb kai kaa™thai reh ga-i-o raam.
Kabeer, the mortal has fallen into the grip of family life, and the Lord has been set aside.
wife ug adh of & ahefs GH OM 982II (1372-2, Fda, sas aete Fh)
aa-ay paray Dharam raa-ay kay beecheh Dhoomaa Dhaam. ||142||
The messengers of the Righteous Judge of Dharma descend upon the mortal, in the midst of all his pomp and ceremony. ||142||
THT HAS J AKT SH IH St AE Il (1372-2, ASA, sas ata Fh)
kabeer saakat tay sookar bhalaa raakhai aachhaa gaa-o.
Kabeer, even a pig is better than the faithless cynic; at least the pig keeps the village clean.
6g Aas sua Hfe afeor afe 5 BI oS 1983Il (1372-3, Aaa, sas adie Ah uho saakat bapuraa mar ga-i-aa ko-ay na laihai naa-o. ||143]| When the wretched, faithless cynic dies, no one even mentions his name. ||143]|
ads agst aGst rife & Ae or ada II (1372-4, Hea, sas adits Th)
kabeer ka-udee ka-udee jor kai joray laakh karor.
Kabeer, the mortal gathers wealth, shell by shell, accumulating thousands and millions.
vost aa 3 ae fifeS wet Sact Se eel 0372-4, Aaa, sas adits Ah
chaltee baar na kachh mili-o la-ee langotee tor. ||144||
But when the time of his departure comes, he takes nothing at all with him. He is even stripped of his loin-cloth. ||144]|
oats SAS Tur S for sfenr yer Het ws I 1372-5, Hea, sas sets Hh) kabeer baisno hoo-aa ta ki-aa bha-i-aa maalaa maylee™ chaar. Kabeer, what good is it to become a devotee of Vishnu, and wear four malas?
wofe ave sao staf act Fars 198ull 1372-5, Aaa, sas adte Ff) baahar kanchan baarhaa bheetar bharee bhangaar. ||145] |
On the outside, he may look like pure gold, but on the inside, he is stuffed with dust. ||145]|
ade dat aff gg ge ot Sia Ho aT nifsHTE II 1372-6, Hae, sas adie Ah kabeer rorhaa ho-ay rahu baat kaa taj man kaa abhimaan. Kabeer, let yourself be a pebble on the path; abandon your egotistical pride.
mT oet em dfe sho fHs sae INAWEN (1372-6, HBA, sas ate FH) aisaa ko-ee daas ho-ay taahi milai bhagvaan. || 146] | Such a humble slave shall meet the Lord God. ||146]|
oats dat gor 3 for sfeur vet as wy Ue il 372-7, naa, sas adits Fh)
kabeer rorhaa hoo-aa ta ki-aa bha-i-aa panthee ka-o dukh day-ay.
Kabeer, what good would it be, to be a pebble? It would only hurt the traveller on the path.
MAT So oA o fAG asst nfs YT NADI 1372-7, ABs, sas adie FH) aisaa tayraa daas hai ji-o Dharnee meh khayh. ||147]| Your slave, O Lord, is like the dust of the earth. ||147]|
ade Ys Jet 3 four sfenr AS SiS wad uvfat il 1372-8, ABA, sas ots Ht)
kabeer khayh hoo-ee ta-o ki-aa bha-i-aa ja-o ud laagai ang.
Kabeer, what then, if one could become dust? It is blown up by the wind, and sticks to the body.
dfs AS MAT UTdhn fAS ust APs NASI 1372-8, A8a, sas aete Th) har jan aisaa chaahee-ai ji-o paanee sarbang. ||148]| The humble servant of the Lord should be like water, which cleans everything. ||148]|
oats ust dur s for sfenr Ate sts df Il (1372-9, ABA, sas aete Fh)
kabeer paanee hoo-aa ta ki-aa bha-i-aa seeraa taataa ho-ay. Kabeer, what then, if one could become water? It becomes cold, then hot.
dfs AS MAT oTSba AAT ofa dt SE NISC (1372-9, Hea, sas adits rh) har jan aisaa chaahee-ai jaisaa har hee ho-ay. ||149]| The humble servant of the Lord should be just like the Lord. ||149]|
Cu seq aoaTHal frufs oA soSTE I 1372-10, H8a, sas aete Fh)
ooch bhavan kankaamnee sikhar Dhajaa fehraa-ay. The banners wave above the lofty mansions, filled with gold and beautiful women.
oS set Hoa ASAfa Te WE WqUOll (1372-10, Asa, sas sete Fh) taa tay bhalee maDhookree satsang gun gaa-ay. ||150]|
But better than these is dry bread, if one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord in the Society of the Saints. ||150]|
aad ue 3 Cag sor gH sas fA OFF I 1372-11, H8a, sas oats Fh) kabeer paatan tay oojar bhalaa raam bhagat jih thaa-ay. Kabeer, the wilderness is better than a city, if the Lord's devotees live there.
TH Addl ads AH UT AS SHE NIU (1372-11, Aaa, sas aes FH)
raam sanayhee baahraa jam pur mayray bhaa™-ay. ||151|| Without my Beloved Lord, it is like the City of Death for me. ||151]|
ads dd AHS & visd AIA HS A we Il 1372-12, Asa, sas adie Hh kabeer gang jamun kay antray sahj sunn kay ghaat. Kabeer, between the Ganges and Jamunaa Rivers, on the shore of Celestial Silence,
30 ads He dint das ufe AS FS AWM (372-12, ABA, sas ate FH)
tahaa kabeerai mat kee-aa khojat mun jan baat. ||152||
there, Kabeer has made his home. The silent sages and the humble servants of the Lord search for the way to get there. ||152]|
ads AAT Curt us 3 AE Set foad GFF I 1372-13, Aa, sas adie Th
kabeer jaisee upjee payd tay ja-o taisee nibhai orh.
Kabeer, if the mortal continues to love the Lord in the end, as he pledged in the beginning,
ote fan a aya unfo 3 30 ads NWSI 1372-13, ABA, sas ate Ft)
heeraa kis kaa baapuraa pujeh na ratan karorh. ||153]| no poor diamond, not even millions of jewels, can equal him. ||153]|
ada ta nds cfs dtr ge feorfe i 1372-14, nea, sas adie oh kabeeraa ayk achambha-o daykhi-o heeraa haat bikaa-ay. Kabeer, I saw a strange and wonderful thing. A jewel was being sold in a store.
Wands aa ast ses ATE qUsll (1372-14, A8a, sas aete Th) banjanhaaray baahraa ka-udee badlai jaa-ay. ||154|| Because there was no buyer, it was going in exchange for a shell. ||154]|
aaa AT fomrg SI US FT AT 3S ST UY Il (1372-15, Fae, sas ata Fh)
kabeeraa jahaa gi-aan tah Dharam hai jahaa jhooth tah paap.
Kabeer, where there is spiritual wisdom, there is righteousness and Dharma. Where there is falsehood, there is sin.
As 8s 30a 0 Ao fine 3a rf aU 0372-15, ABA, sas adie Fh)
jahaa lobh tah kaal hai jahaa khimaa tah aap. ||155]| Where there is greed, there is death. Where there is forgiveness, there is God Himself. ||155]|
ade Hfenr sat 3 for sfeur AB He Sfaor odt ATE I 1372-16, Aaa, sas adits A) kabeer maa-i-aa tajee ta ki-aa bha-i-aa ja-o maan taji-aa nahee jaa-ay. Kabeer, what good is it to give up Maya, if the mortal does not give up his pride?
HS Hot Hfaed TS HS AS aC uf! QUE (1372-17, H8a, sas aes Th maan munee munivar galay maan sabhai ka-o khaa-ay. ||156]|
Even the silent sages and seers are destroyed by pride; pride eats up everything. ||156]|
adie Ano Afsaeg A fifemr nee A Mfr Sa I 1372-17, ABA, sas adie FH) kabeer saachaa satgur mai mili-aa sabad jo baahi-aa ayk. Kabeer, the True Guru has met me; He aimed the Arrow of the Shabad at me.
was dt sf fife afeor ufsor asa Sq WO! (1372-18, Aaa, sas aete Ft) laagat hee bhu-ay mil ga-i-aa pari-aa kalayjay chhayk. ||157]||
As soon as it struck me, I fell to the ground with a hole in my heart. ||157] | ade Ae Afsag four as Ae frat ufs ga I 1372-18, Fa, sas aets Ht)
kabeer saachaa satgur ki-aa kKarai ja-o sikhaa meh chook. Kabeer, what can the True Guru do, when His Sikhs are at fault?
nit fas wart fAS aA aneba Sq UCI (1372-19, Aaa, sas alte Fh)
anDhay ayk na laag-ee ji-o baa‘s bajaa-ee-ai fook. ||158]|
The blind do not take in any of His Teachings; it is as useless as blowing into bamboo. ||158]|
eats 3 a ade AUS we szust at ofs il 1372-19, w8a, sas acta Ht) kabeer hai gai baahan saghan ghan chhatarpatee kee naar. Kabeer, the wife of the king has all sorts of horses, elephants and carriages.
Yat 9393
3H Ue3sd 6 UH Tie Ho at ufsata NACI 1373-1, Aaa, sas ate AD taas patantar na pujai har jan kee panihaar. ||159] | But she is not equal to the water-carrier of the Lord's humble servant. ||159] |
ats fau act fat fechr fae ofa sat xB rg Il 1373-2, A8a, sas adits Fh
kabeer nrip naaree ki-o nindee-ai ki-o har chayree ka-o maan.
Kabeer, why do you slander the wife of the king? Why do you honor the slave of the Lord?
6a nia Hed fat aS Ga find afs on SEO 1373-2, Ha, sas adits Th oh maag savaarai bikhai ka-o oh simrai har naam. ||160]|
Because one combs her hair for corruption, while the other remembers the Name of the Lord. ||160]|
oate gat uret fats set Afsare sat ate i 0373-3, rae, sas oats Ft) kabeer thoonee paa-ee thit bha-ee satgur banDhee Dheer. Kabeer, with the Support of the Lord's Pillar, I have become steady and stable.
adie dia softer ye Adee Ste NIE (1373-3, HBA, sas acts Fh
kabeer heeraa banji-aa maan sarovar teer. ||161]|
The True Guru has given me courage. Kabeer, I have purchased the diamond, on the banks of the Mansarovar Lake. ||161]|
adits ofe dita na Aud B A HIS Te] Il 1373-4, F8a, sas ade Fh)
kabeer har heeraa jan ja-uharee lay kai maa™dai haat.
Kabeer, the Lord is the Diamond, and the Lord's humble servant is the jeweller who has set up his shop.
wa ot uehafs uray sa dtas at ATS NEI 1373-4, ABA, sas aets Fh
jab hee paa-ee-ah paarkhoo tab heeran kee saat. ||162|| As soon as an appraiser is found, the price of the jewel is set. || 162] |
adie an ud ofa find via faunas fos i 0373-5, Aaa, sas adie FH)
kabeer kaam paray har simree-ai aisaa simrahu nit.
Kabeer, you remember the Lord in meditation, only when the need arises. You should remember Him all the time.
WHS UT A ads dfs afer add fas ESI 1373-5, ABA, sas ate Fh)
amraa pur baasaa karahu har ga-i-aa bahorai bit. ||163]| You shall dwell in the city of immortality, and the Lord shall restore the wealth you lost. ||163]|
ads Aa aG eff 38 Sa As fea TH Il 1373-6, ABA, sas aes Th) kabeer sayvaa ka-o du-ay bhalay ayk sant ik raam. Kabeer, it is good to perform selfless service for two - the Saints and the Lord.
TH FH US Hafs a AS AUS OH IASI (1373-6, H8a, sas adits Th) raam jo daataa mukat ko sant japaavai naam. ||164||
The Lord is the Giver of liberation, and the Saint inspires us to chant the Naam. | |164] |
adie fas Hefa ufss ae ue udt adte il 0373-7, A8a, sas adie FH)
kabeer jih maarag pandit ga-ay paachhai paree baheer.
Kabeer, the crowds follow the path which the Pandits, the religious scholars, have taken.
fea newe wet on at fsa ofs afsG adie naéull 1373-7, ABs, sas adie Ht)
ik avghat ghaatee raam kee tih charh rahi-o kabeer. ||165] |
There is a difficult and treacherous cliff on that path to the Lord; Kabeer is climbing that cliff. || 165] |
aes gshort & Sa Hot wes aS at ats Il 1373-8, Aaa, sas alte Fh)
kabeer dunee-aa kay dokhay moo-aa chaalat kul kee kaan.
Kabeer, the mortal dies of his worldly troubles and pain, after worrying about his family.
3a 8 fan a SHA Aa S Usa HATS EEN (1373-8, HBA, sas ate A)
tab kul kis kaa laajsee jab lay Dhareh masaan. ||166]| Whose family is dishonored, when he is placed on the funeral pyre? ||166]|
ade salad J Tys aT BIS at ATS Il (1373-9, Hae, sas alta Fh) kabeer doob-higo ray baapuray baho logan kee kaan.
Kabeer, you shall drown, you wretched being, from worrying about what other people think.
USAT X Ht Tu J nus St AG IED 1373-10, HBA, sas sets Ft) paarosee kay jo hoo-aa too apnay bhee jaan. ||167|| You know that whatever happens to your neighbors, will also happen to you. ||167]||
oats set HOt sar fata & SH I 1373-10, HBA, sas sets Ft) kabeer bhalee maDhookree naanaa biDh ko naaj. Kabeer, even dry bread, made of various grains, is good.
aS AT &t Sot as SH IS TH NEC (1373-10, ABA, sas aes Ft) daavaa kaahoo ko nahee badaa days bad raaj. ||168]| No one brags about it, throughout the vast country and great empire. ||168]|
agig we use d3 J fasere ad fore Il (1373-11, Ha, sas adits Ah kabeer daavai daajhan hot hai nirdaavai rahai nisank. Kabeer, those who brag, shall burn. Those who do not brag remain carefree.
A Ho fosere ad A ae fee A da NEC 1373-11, HBa, sas ats Hf) jo jan nirdaavai rahai so ganai indar so rank. ||169]|
That humble being who does not brag, looks upon the gods and the poor alike. ||169]|
ade uf AHO Aded sa Ul o Aa et ate Il (1373-12, ABA, sas ate FH) kabeer paal samuhaa sarvar bharaa pee na sakai ko-ee neer. Kabeer, the pool is filled to overflowing, but no one can drink the water from it.
wa as 3 utes F fe sfe UIE ate WON! (1373-12, Raa, sas ate Fh) bhaag baday tai paa-i-o too” bhar bhar pee-o kabeer. ||170]| By great good fortune, you have found it; drink it in handfuls, O Kabeer. ||170]|
ads usas ad funfo f3@ feg far Aste tl 1373-13, Aa, sas adits Th) kabeer parbhaatay taaray khiseh ti-o ih khisai sareer. Kabeer, just as the stars disappear at dawn, so shall this body disappear.
= ofe wg ao fanfo A afe sfo adits 199A 1373-13, ABs, sas ate FH) ay du-ay akhar naa khiseh so geh rahi-o kabeer. ||171]|| Only the letters of God's Name do not disappear; Kabeer holds these tight. ||171]||
ads ast ae at va fet walt wrfar i 1373-14, ASa, sas ade aH)
kabeer kothee kaath kee dah dis laagee aag. Kabeer, the wooden house is burning on all sides.
Ufss ufss vfs ue nee Cag stfer 195211 (1373-14, Ha, sas sete Fh)
pandit pandit jal moo-ay moorakh ubray bhaag. ||172]|
The Pandits, the religious scholars, have been burnt to death, while the illiterate ones run to safety. ||172||
ade AAT vfs ag aare ea fate I (1373-15, FSa, sas ats FH) kabeer sansaa door kar kaagad dayh bihaa-ay. Kabeer, give up your skepticism; let your papers float away.
wee wud Afa a dfs vast fos ote 19931 1373-15, H8a, sas adits Th) baavan akhar soDh kai har charnee chit laa-ay. ||173] |
Find the essence of the letters of the alphabet, and focus your consciousness on the Lord. ||173]|
add HZ 3 es Aset Ae afea frafs mAs I 1373-16, Ha, sas ade Ah
kabeer sant na chhaadai sant-ee ja-o kotik mileh asant.
Kabeer, the Saint does not forsake his Saintly nature, even though he meets with millions of evil-doers.
Hira std afee 3 Ales" o SHS NII 1373-17, H8a, sas ast Hh mali-aagar bhuyangam baydhi-o ta seetaltaa na tajant. ||174||
Even when sandalwood is surrounded by snakes, it does not give up its cooling fragrance. ||174]|
adts Ho Ase sfeor urfenr gon famirg il 1373-17, Hea, sas aate Hh) kabeer man seetal bha-i-aa paa-i-aa barahm gi-aan. Kabeer, my mind is cooled and soothed; I have become God-conscious.
fate Ayre Aa Aono AAS & Bea ANTS QUI (1373-18, Hea, sas aete FH) jin ju-aalaa jag jaari-aa so jan kay udak samaan. ||175|| The fire which has burnt the world is like water to the Lord's humble servant. ||175]|
ads Ast franoos ot wd ardt afe I 1373-18, Ha, sas ate FH) kabeer saaree sirjanhaar kee jaanai naahee ko-ay. Kabeer, no one knows the Play of the Creator Lord.
a WS nis got & oA deat dE NDEI (1373-19, HBA, sas ate Tt) kai jaanai aapan Dhanee kai daas deevaanee ho-ay. ||176]| Only the Lord Himself and the slaves at His Court understand it. ||176]|
oats sat set A SB ufenr fer TET AS StH Il (1373-19, Fa, gars alts Ft) kabeer bhalee bha-ee jo bha-o pari-aa disaa ga-ee™ sabh bhool. Kabeer, it is good that I feel the Fear of God; I have forgotten everything else.
uot 9298 6x afte ust sfeor ate fifes eles afs 19991 0374-1, Fae, sas aes Fh)
oraa gar paanee bha-i-aa jaa-ay mili-o dhal kool. ||177|| The hail-stone has melted into water, and flowed into the ocean. ||177]|
ade ofs rate & usher stat ST Il 1374-1, ABa, sas ats Fh) kabeeraa Dhoor sakayl kai puree-aa baa‘’Dhee dayh. Kabeer, the body is a pile of dust, collected and packed together.
feen ofs & uu nifs as at AT ICI 1374-2, Ha, sas adits Fh divas chaar ko paykhnaa ant khayh kee khayh. ||178]| It is a show which lasts for only a few days, and then dust returns to dust. ||178]|
oats AeA vie t Ce set AS VT Il (1374-2, ASa, sas ais Ft) kabeer sooraj chaa™d kai udai bha-ee sabh dayh. Kabeer, bodies are like the rising and setting of the sun and the moon.
ae afae & faa fxs uate set AS AT NIE (1374-3, ABA, sas ate Fh)
gur gobind kay bin milay palat bha-ee sabh khayh. ||179]|
Without meeting the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, they are all reduced to dust again. ||179]|
Ad nose 30 8 Sd HO BC 30 Ofe ats I 1374-3, HBA, sas adie Hf) jah anbha-o tah bhai nahee jah bha-o tah har naahi. Where the Fearless Lord is, there is no fear; where there is fear, the Lord is not there.
afus adte faafs & HS HoT Ho Hf ACO (1374-4, Ha, sas adits rh)
kahi-o kabeer bichaar kai sant sunhu man maahi. ||180|| Kabeer speaks after careful consideration; hear this, O Saints, in your minds. ||180] |
oats frag fas atoor adt fsa Ae ate faote i 0374-4, Aaa, sas adts A) kabeer jinahu kichhoo jaani-aa nahee tin sukh need bihaa-ay. Kabeer, those who do not know anything, pass their lives in peaceful sleep.
oH 7 OFS" esa ust udt sae ACU 0374-5, Aaa, sas aete Ft) hamhu jo boojhaa boojhnaa pooree paree balaa-ay. ||181]|| But I have understood the riddle; I am faced with all sorts of troubles. ||181] |
ads Hs ass yortfeor ute vars miBT I 374-5, F8a, sas adte FH) kabeer maaray bahut pukaari-aa peer pukaarai a-or.
Kabeer, those who are beaten cry a lot; but the cries of the pain of separation are different.
Bat Jz HSH at so aetat SBT Aci 1374-6, A8a, sas adits rh)
laagee chot maramm kee rahi-o kabeeraa tha-ur. ||182]| Struck by the Mystery of God, Kabeer remains silent. || 182] |
ads v2 Hat AG at was Bf BAA II 1374-6, H8a, sas adits Th) kabeer chot suhaylee sayl kee laagat lay-ay usaas. Kabeer, the stroke of a lance is easy to bear; it takes away the breath.
3c Add Age ot SH TT H VA NACI (1374-7, ABA, sas adits Ht)
chot sahaarai sabad kee taas guroo mai daas. ||183]|
But one who endures the stroke of the Word of the Shabad is the Guru, and I am his Slave. ||183]|
ade Hat Hors famr vefo Atet o soa SE I 1374-7, HBA, sas ate FH)
kabeer mulaa’ munaaray ki-aa chadheh saa‘-ee na bahraa ho-ay.
Kabeer: O Mullah, why do you climb to the top of the minaret? The Lord is not hard of hearing.
WT wee J aa ef fee dt state Afe Wacell 0374-8, Aaa, gars alte Ft)
jaa kaaran too’ baa“g deh dil hee bheetar jo-ay. ||184]|
Look within your own heart for the One, for whose sake you shout your prayers. | |184]|
Aa Aydt aoe for oA are ATE I 1374-9, HBA, sas ete Fh
saykh sabooree baahraa ki-aa haj kaabay jaa-ay.
Why does the Shaykh bother to go on pilgrimage to Mecca, if he is not content with himself?
aad A at few Anafs oot St aS aot yee NACUIl (4374-9, ABA, sas ate Hh)
kabeer jaa kee dil saabat nahee taa ka-o kahaa™ khudaa-ay. ||185]| Kabeer, one whose heart is not healthy and whole - how can he attain his Lord? ||185]|
ads ned at afs seat fro fies vu ATE I 1374-10, H8a, sas adie Hh
kabeer alah kee kar bandagee jih simrat dukh jaa-ay. Kabeer, worship the Lord Allah; meditating in remembrance on Him, troubles and pains depart.
feo ufo niet ugae aS eest ofe NACE 1374-10, HBA, sas ate Fh)
dil meh saa‘-ee pargatai bujhai balantee naa‘-ay. ||186]|
The Lord shall be revealed within your own heart, and the burning fire within shall be extinguished by His Name. ||186]|
add rdt ate HOH I AIST SC THs Il 1374-1, Aaa, sas adits Ah kabeer joree kee-ay julam hai kahtaa naa-o halaal. Kabeer, to use force is tyranny, even if you call it legal.
vests Sur nisin sa dea aBo JSS NACI 0374-11, ABA, sas ate Fh) daftar laykhaa maa‘gee-ai tab ho-igo ka-un havaal. ||187]|
When your account is called for in the Court of the Lord, what will your condition be then? ||187]||
ade ue wer dtedt vr fe nifys Se il 0374-12, waa, sas aie Fh) kabeer khoob khaanaa kheechree jaa meh amrit lon. Kabeer, the dinner of beans and rice is excellent, if it is flavored with salt.
Ja det aS Tost arT]S AVS NACI (1374-12, A8a, sas ade Th hayraa rotee kaarnay galaa kataavai ka-un. ||188] | Who would cut his throat, to have meat with his bread? ||188]|
add Td war sa Sh fee HT Jo ST Il 1374-13, Aa, sas adits rh)
kabeer gur laagaa tab jaanee-ai mitai moh tan taap.
Kabeer, one is known to have been touched by the Guru, only when his emotional attachment and physical illnesses are eradicated.
Jay Aa US odt sa ate nme wef WACK 1374-13, Aa, sas aes Ah
harakh sog daajhai nahee tab har aapeh aap. ||189]| He is not burned by pleasure or pain, and so he becomes the Lord Himself. ||189] |
add TH ade nfs se 3 at fs Sa fees I 1374-14, ABA, sas ate Ff)
kabeer raam kahan meh bhayd hai taa meh ayk bichaar.
Kabeer, it does make a difference, how you chant the Lord's Name, 'Raam’. This is something to consider.
Het oH AS aot Het aBsaTT ICO (1374-14, A8a, sas ate FH) so-ee raam sabhai kaheh so-ee ka-utakhaar. ||190] | Everyone uses the same word for the son of Dasrath and the Wondrous Lord. ||190] |
ads TH oH ag afos fs fade | 1374-15, HBA, sas ate ZH)
kabeer raamai raam kaho kahibay maahi bibayk.
Kabeer, use the word 'Raam', only to speak of the All-pervading Lord. You must make that distinction.
ea nidsate fife afenr Sa ANTS Sa NACA (1374-15, HBA, sas ate ayk anaykeh mil ga-i-aa ayk samaanaa ayk. ||191]|
One 'Raam' is pervading everywhere, while the other is contained only in himself. ||191]|
add AT we AT o Aebafs ofe at AS ate Il 1374-16, A&a, sas adte A)
kabeer jaa ghar saaDh na sayvee-ah har kee sayvaa naahi. Kabeer, those houses in which neither the Holy nor the Lord are served
3 wg Hod|e ATSe FS BAfT fF5 HT NACI 1374-16, Hoa, sas ate Ft)
tay ghar marhat saarkhay bhoot baseh tin maahi. ||192]| - those houses are like cremation grounds; demons dwell within them. ||192||
TMS TI Ju MST FIT TT aS Il (1374-17, HSA, sas aaa Ft) kabeer goongaa hoo-aa baavraa bahraa hoo-aa kaan. Kabeer, I have become mute, insane and deaf.
ureg 3 fiiae sfeor wfonr Afsag ae 9K3ll 0374-17, F8a, sas ate Ah paavhu tay pingul bha-i-aa maari-aa satgur baan. ||193]| I am crippled - the True Guru has pierced me with His Arrow. ||193]|
oats Asad FIA Moor ae A Sa Il (1374-18, Hoa, sas ate Fh) kabeer satgur soormay baahi-aa baan jo ayk. Kabeer, the True Guru, the Spiritual Warrior, has shot me with His Arrow.
was ot safe fats ufemr us adH SA NASI (1374-19, HSA, sas ate Ft) laagat hee bhu-ay gir pari-aa paraa karayjay chhayk. ||194|| As soon as it struck me, I fell to the ground, with a hole in my heart. ||194]|
ate fosHe de worn ot ufs aet aft faars il (1374-19, Fax, sas alte Fh) kabeer nirmal boond akaas kee par ga-ee bhoom bikaar. Kabeer, the pure drop of water falls from the sky, onto the dirty ground.
Yat q30u
fas Hafs fe nioet df wet go es ACUI 1375-1, F8a, sas aes Th)
bin sangat i-o maa‘n-ee ho-ay ga-ee bhath chhaar. ||195]|
You must acknowledge this, that without the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, it turns into burnt ashes. ||195]||
ate fooHe de worn at Stat fh fete i 1375-1, ASa, sas sets Ft) kabeer nirmal boond akaas kee leenee bhoom milaa-ay. Kabeer, the pure drop of water falls from the sky, and mixes with the dust.
mfoa frais ufs ae o fagerdt ATE ACEI (1375-2, Hea, sas ate Ah
anik si-aanay pach ga-ay naa nirvaaree jaa-ay. ||196]|
Millions of clever people may try, but they will fail - it cannot be made separate again. ||196]|
ade ga are 38 ae a neat fixfemr were i (1375-2, naa, sas adits Ah kabeer haj kaabay ha-o jaa-ay thaa aagai mili-aa khudaa-ay. Kabeer, I was going on a pilgrimage to Mecca, and God met me on the way.
Ret us fh afs ufeor 38 fats souret af& 9tl1 0375-3, ABa, sas adits Fh saa’-ee mujh si-o lar pari-aa tujhai kini" furmaa-ee gaa-ay. ||197]| He scolded me and asked, "Who told you that I am only there?"||197] |
ads ga are df af& afeor ast ae ate I 1375-4, F8a, sas ate Ff) kabeer haj kaabai ho-ay ho-ay ga-i-aa kaytee baar kabeer. Kabeer, I went to Mecca - how many times, Kabeer?
Ret Hs xfs fom ust HUT 3 8S ute AEC 1375-4, ABA, sas ate FH) saa’-ee mujh meh ki-aa khataa mukhahu na bolai peer. ||198]|
O Lord, what is the problem with me? You have not spoken to me with Your Mouth. ||198] |
adte Atha a Hefo Hg afs as ofo FW IES Il (1375-5, HSA, sas adte rh) kabeer jee-a jo maareh jor kar kahtay heh jo halaal. Kabeer, they oppress living beings and kill them, and call it proper.
vesg vel na ofe d dear aBa Jes NVC 0375-5, HBA, sas ate Fh) daftar da-ee jab kaadh hai ho-igaa ka-un havaal. ||199]| When the Lord calls for their account, what will their condition be? ||199] |
add Hg oer A yon do Bf Fae wee I (1375-6, Fea, sas adits Ah kabeer jor kKee-aa so julam hai lay-ay jabaab khudaa-ay. Kabeer, it is tyranny to use force; the Lord shall call you to account.
vests Su stan He Hd Hfs UAE NQOOll (1375-6, HBA, sas ete Th) daftar laykhaa neeksai maar muhai muhi khaa-ay. ||200] | When your account is called for, your face and mouth shall be beaten. ||200]|
aes Sar tar AVE AS few Fet SE i 0375-7, Sa, sas aes HH) kabeer laykhaa daynaa suhaylaa ja-o dil soochee ho-ay. Kabeer, it is easy to render your account, if your heart is pure.
A ATS chars Hfs uso ued AfE 2Q0Ull (1375-7, Ha, sas ate rh) us saachay deebaan meh palaa na pakrai ko-ay. ||201|| In the True Court of the Lord, no one will seize you. ||201]|
aad dest org wrarn vfs vfs F act yraa I (1375-8, ASa, sas ata Ft) kabeer Dhartee ar aakaas meh du-ay too” baree abaDh. Kabeer: O duality, you are mighty and powerful in the earth and the sky.
YS BIAS AA ud Mig BETH fT Il202Il (1375-8, H8a, sas aes Fh) khat darsan sansay paray ar cha-oraaseeh siDh. ||202|| The six Shaastras and the eighty-four Siddhas are entrenched in skepticism. ||202]|
adie Ha He uf fae dt FH fae TA Sa I 1375-9, Aaa, sas ast Ah kabeer mayraa mujh meh kichh nahee jo kichh hai so tayraa. Kabeer, nothing is mine within myself. Whatever there is, is Yours, O Lord.
3a 33 a@ AGUS fomr wa HA 1Q08ll (1375-9, Aaa, sas adits Ah tayraa tujh ka-o sa-upatay ki-aa laagai mayraa. ||203]| If I surrender to You what is already Yours, what does it cost me? ||203]|
aad J 3 AIST SF ToT HS Hfg IIS FT Il (1375-10, Fda, sas oats FH)
kabeer too™ too” kartaa too hoo-aa mujh meh rahaa na hoo".
Kabeer, repeating, "You, You", I have become like You. Nothing of me remains in myself.
ma omar ug at fife afeor AS SuS STF iol 1375-10, Asa, sas aete Fh)
jab aapaa par kaa mit ga-i-aa jat daykh-a-u tat too. ||204] |
When the difference between myself and others is removed, then wherever I look, I see only You. ||204||
add frarsa feses 3S ATS MTA Il (1375-11, HBA, sas aes Fh) kabeer bikaareh chitvatay jhoothay kartay aas. Kabeer, those who think of evil and entertain false hopes
Hove afe 3 ufss TS Sfs fear OUI! (1375-11, ABA, sas aete Fh) manorath ko-ay na poori-o chaalay ooth niraas. ||205]|| - none of their desires shall be fulfilled; they shall depart in despair. ||205]|
adie ofs a fines Fad A Ader AATfe Il 1375-10, Aaa, sas adie Ah
kabeer har kaa simran jo karai so sukhee-aa sansaar.
Kabeer, whoever meditates in remembrance on the Lord, he alone is happy in this world.
fez @3 asfs 5 Suet fan Te faHOTS IQOEI (1375-12, Ha, sas ate Fh)
it ut kateh na dol-ee jis raakhai sirjanhaar. ||206| | One who is protected and saved by the Creator Lord, shall never waver, here or hereafter. | |206] |
aad urat ulas Afsag Se sate il 0375-13, wea, sas ate Hh)
kabeer ghaanee peerh-tay satgur lee-ay chhadaa-ay.
Kabeer, I was being crushed like sesame seeds in the oil-press, but the True Guru saved me.
Ut Usa Seat UTA Tet ofS Ql 1375-13, Ba, sas oats Fh)
paraa poorablee bhaavnee pargat ho-ee aa-ay. ||207]|| My pre-ordained primal destiny has now been revealed. ||207||
adie 28 28 feo afeur famra aes ate i 0375-14, naa, sas adits Ah
kabeer taalai tolai din ga-i-aa bi-aaj badhanta-o jaa-ay.
Kabeer, my days have passed, and I have postponed my payments; the interest on my account continues to increase.
a fe se 3 ug efes ae udd orfe 0c (375-14, Haa, sas adits Fh)
naa har bhaji-o na khat fati-o kaal pahoo“cho aa-ay. ||208] |
I have not meditated on the Lord and my account is still pending, and now, the moment of my death has come! ||208] |
HIG U Il (1375-15)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ade gag sGaort ada fue Cfo te Il (1375-15, HBa, sas afte Ft) kabeer kookar bha-ukanaa karang pichhai uth Dhaa-ay. Kabeer, the mortal is a barking dog, chasing after a carcass.
ant Afsag ufeur fafs Je Shor gate Qt ll 1375-16, Hea, sas aete Ft)
karmee satgur paa-i-aa jin ha-o lee-aa chhadaa-ay. ||209|| By the Grace of good karma, I have found the True Guru, who has saved me. ||209] |
HIG U Il (1375-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
adie uest AT ot SHAG SAfe as Il (1375-16, H8a, sas adie FH)
kabeer Dhartee saaDh kee taskar baiseh gaahi. Kabeer, the earth belongs to the Holy, but it is being occupied by thieves.
gest ata & fanruct Co a ag ats 129011 (1375-17, Fa, sas aets Fh) Dhartee bhaar na bi-aapa-ee un ka-o laahoo laahi. ||210]|| They are not a burden to the earth; they receive its blessings. ||210]||
HIG U Il (1375-17)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
Tad TSS AGS SY aC HIS STE Il 1375-18, Asa, sas ate Ah kabeer chaaval kaarnay tukh ka-o muhlee laa-ay. Kabeer, the rice is beaten with a mallet to get rid of the husk.
fal aHat FAS Sa ys TSH TPS NWI (1375-18, Ha, sas arate FH)
sang kusangee baistay tab poochhai Dharam raa-ay. ||211]||
When people sit in evil company, the Righteous Judge of Dharma calls them to account. ||211]||
oH Hifeur Hfomr ad fase HIS Il 1375-18, A8a, sas ade th naamaa maa-i-aa mohi-aa kahai tilochan meet. Trilochan says, O Naam Dayv, Maya has enticed you, my friend.
and dhig ates TH 5 BST WF 129i (1375-19, Aa, sas aes Ah) kaahay chheepahu chhaa-ilai raam na laavhu cheet. ||212]|
Why are you printing designs on these sheets, and not focusing your consciousness on the Lord? ||212]|
ont ad fssuar He 3 TH ANTS I (1375-19, Ha, sas aes Fh) naamaa kahai tilochanaa mukh tay raam sam"aal. Naam Dayv answers, O Trilochan, chant the Lord's Name with your mouth.
ust 93DE
va u@ afs ay AS Us fade of% 1129811 (1376-1, ABA, sas aes Ft)
haath paa-o kar kaam sabh cheet niranjan naal. ||213]||
With your hands and feet, do all your work, but let your consciousness remain with the Immaculate Lord. ||213]|
HIG U Il (1376-1)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
TAS THT F sot TH fan J & ST i (1376-2, Fa, sas alte Ft) kabeeraa hamraa ko nahee ham kis hoo kay naahi. Kabeer, no one belongs to me, and I belong to no one else.
fafs fg sao safer fSA dt ats Arts 129811 (1376-2, H8a, sas ate Ft)
jin ih rachan rachaa-i-aa tis hee maahi samaahi. ||214]| The One who created the creation - into Him I shall be absorbed. ||214||
ate otets wirer fate ufsor fos 3 ore oe Il 1376-3, Aaa, sas aets A)
kabeer keecharh aataa gir pari-aa kichhoo na aa-i-o haath. Kabeer, the flour has fallen into the mud; nothing has come into my hands.
utas utes ofamr wet foafour Are 129Ull (1376-3, HBA, sas aes FH)
peesat peesat chaabi-aa so-ee nibhi-aa saath. ||215]|| That which was eaten while it was being ground - that alone is of any use. ||215]|
add Ho WS AS HS Was dt nae ad Il (1376-4, Hea, sas adits Th) kabeer man jaanai sabh baat jaanat hee a-ugan karai. Kabeer, the mortal knows everything, and knowing, he still makes mistakes.
aT ot THOS Ts ty AF us WME! (1376-4, ASA, sas ots Ht) kaahay kee kuslaat haath deep koo-ay parai. ||216] | What good is a lamp in one's hand, if he falls into the well? ||216]|
ate oat uifs ane fA sen Sa oATS Il (1376-5, ABs, sas ate Ft) kabeer laagee pareet sujaan si-o barjai log ajaan. Kabeer, I am in love with the All-knowing Lord; the ignorant ones try to hold me back.
3s AS Sct fas as wT a Abt USS QW 0376-5, FSA, sas ots Ht) taa si-o tootee ki-o banai jaa kay jee-a paraan. ||217]|| How could I ever break with the One, who owns our soul and breath of life. ||217]|
adits a6 Hsu 33 afs ad Hag Het Il (1376-6, H8a, sas adie FH) kabeer kothay mandap hayt kar kaahay marahu savaar. Kabeer, why kill yourself for your love of decorations of your home and mansion?
ad Ae Sie ga wat 3 ues ote INQAC I (1376-6, Aaa, sas adits Hh) kaaraj saadhay teen hath ghanee ta pa-unay chaar. ||218]| In the end, only six feet, or a little more, shall be your lot. ||218]|
adits HH fesee a ad fomr He fas] Sf I 1376-7, HBA, sas ate Ff)
kabeer jo mai chitva-o naa karai ki-aa mayray chitvay ho-ay.
Kabeer, whatever I wish for does not happen. What can I accomplish by merely thinking?
nust fasten ofs ad AAS fats o SE QAI (1376-7, ABA, sas ets FH) apnaa chitvi-aa har karai jo mayray chit na ho-ay. ||219]|| The Lord does whatever He wishes; it is not up to me at all. ||219]|
He 3 Il (376-8)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
fest fs orfy anfert uifss fa mm) Sfe i 1376-8, ABA, He 3) chintaa bhe aap karaa-isee achint bhe aapay day-ay. God Himself makes the mortals anxious, and He Himself takes the anxiety away.
Soa A Ard fa Asat ATS ASE Ql (1376-9, Ha, Hz 3) naanak so salaahee-ai je sabhnaa saar karay-i. ||220]|| O Nanak, praise the One, who takes care of all. ||220]|
He U Il (1376-9)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ads IH 3 Sf36 fefaor aes Hts Il 1376-9, H8a, sas ate Hh
kabeer raam na chayti-o firi-aa laalach maahi.
Kabeer, the mortal does not remember the Lord; he wanders around, engrossed in greed.
uy adst Hf afeor ma ust fae wfs 122911 1376-10, Hea, sas ate Hh)
paap karantaa mar ga-i-aa a-oDh punee khin maahi. ||221]|| Committing sins, he dies, and his life ends in an instant. ||221]||
aate afenr art aaet 2H arSt WS Il 1376-10, Hea, sas aete FH)
kabeer kaa-i-aa kaachee kaarvee kayval kaachee Dhaat. Kabeer, the body is like a clay vessel or a brittle metal pot.
Aas sufs 3 IH 3A ots FS fasSt FS 1122211 (1376-11, Hea, sas aete FH)
saabat rakheh ta raam bhaj naahi ta binthee baat. ||222|| If you wish to keep it safe and sound, then vibrate and meditate on the Lord; otherwise, the thing shall break. ||222| |
HT AA AA Tah o ASM MATS Il (1376-11, ASA, sas ata Fh) kabeer kayso kayso kookee-ai na so-ee-ai asaar. Kabeer, chant the Name of the Beautifully-haired Lord; do not sleep unaware.
ofS FEE A ATS TAT A AS YSTST M122 (1376-12, ASA, sas aeite Ft) raat divas kay kooknay kabhoo kay sunai pukaar. ||223]|| Chanting His Name night and day, the Lord will eventually hear your call. ||223]|
ads afenr anst se safer ne aed HO HS Il 1376-12, H8a, sas ate Hh kabeer kaa-i-aa kajlee ban bha-i-aa man kunchar ma-y mant. Kabeer, the body is a banana forest, and the mind is an intoxicated elephant.
MiaH WS I3O J dee fase AZ N2Q2Vll (1376-13, ABA, sas aes FH) ankas ga-yaan ratan hai khayvat birlaa sant. ||224|| The jewel of spiritual wisdom is the prod, and the rare Saint is the rider. ||224| |
add TH 339 HY aadt use rat Uf I 1376-13, HBA, sas ate Fh)
kabeer raam ratan mukh kothree paarakh aagai khol.
Kabeer, the Lord's Name is the jewel, and the mouth is the purse; open this purse to the Appraiser.
at onfe fisat ade Sat Hod Hf Quill 1376-14, ABA, sas adits th ko-ee aa-ay milaigo gaahkee laygo mahgay mol. ||225]|| If a buyer can be found, it will go for a high price. ||225] |
ads TH an Wes odt ufes aeq ASH Il (1376-14, Ha, sas ate A)
kabeer raam naam jaani-o nahee paali-o katak kutamb.
Kabeer, the mortal does not know the Lord's Name, but he has raised a very large family.
uo dt ufo vfs afes aafe set o Fa NQ2EI (1376-15, H&a, sas adits Fh)
DhanDhay hee meh mar ga-i-o baahar bha-ee na bamb. ||226|| He dies in the midst of his worldly affairs, and then he is not heard in the external world. ||226||
aad vind} as Hea us usw set farts il 0376-15, nea, sas adie Ft) kabeer aakhee kayray maatukay pal pal ga-ee bihaa-ay. Kabeer, in the blink of an eye, moment by moment, life is passing by.
HO HAS o eset AH thot SHOT wMfe 1122911 (1376-16, Fax, sas ate Ah
man janjaal na chhod-ee jam dee-aa damaamaa aa-ay. ||227||
The mortal does not give up his worldly entanglements; the Messenger of Death walks in and beats the drum. ||227]||
ade sseg gut TH FT ew Tut ATT Il (1376-16, Ba, sas ate Fh) kabeer tarvar roopee raam hai fal roopee bairaag. Kabeer, the Lord is the tree, and disillusionment with the world is the fruit.
efeor gut Ag 3d fats stor are frre 12Q2IcI 4376-17, FA, sas ats Ht)
chhaa-i-aa roopee saaDh hai jin taji-aa baad bibaad. ||228] | The Holy man, who has abandoned useless arguments, is the shade of the tree. ||228]|
ade wat ata sf sag HA SSS Il 1376-17, Ha, sas adits Th)
kabeer aisaa beej bo-ay baarah maas falant.
Kabeer, plant the seeds of such a plant, which shall bear fruit throughout the twelve months,
Hise atfeur afsg ee uUdt Aw ATT IQ2CI (1376-18, Ha, sas adte Th
seetal chhaa-i-aa gahir fal pankhee kayl karant. ||229] | with cooling shade and abundant fruit, upon which birds joyously play. ||229]|
ads Wat sdeg Va SH Guard HST | 1376-18, A8a, sas adie Ah kabeer daataa tarvar da-yaa fal upkaaree jeevant. Kabeer, the Great Giver is the tree, which blesses all with the fruit of compassion.
udt 3@ ferredt fara Hew SST |QSOll 1376-19, Aa, sas adte FH) pankhee chalay disaavaree birkhaa sufal falant. ||230| | When the birds migrate to other lands, O Tree, you bear the fruits. ||230]|
oats ATT Hat usTust foto dfs fesse Il (1376-19, Fe, gars alte Ft)
kabeer saaDhoo sang paraapatee likhi-aa ho-ay lilaat.
Kabeer, the mortal finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, if he has such destiny written upon his forehead.
Yat 9399
Hafs ussg usin Sao MWS WE NIU (1377-1, A8a, sas ete FH)
mukat padaarath paa-ee-ai thaak na avghat ghaat. ||231||
He obtains the treasure of liberation, and the difficult road to the Lord is not blocked. ||231]|
oats Sa wast wirat ust virdt J FS wT il 0377-2, Fa, sas wats Fh) kabeer ayk gharhee aaDhee gharee aaDhee hoo" tay aaDh. Kabeer, whether is is for an hour, half an hour, or half of that,
3136 Ast GH! A ald A BS I1Q32il (1377-2, Asa, sas adie Ah
bhagtan saytee gostay jo keenay so laabh. ||232|| whatever it is, it is worthwhile to speak with the Holy. ||232] |
ade sta west Aa ute A A Urst uifs I 4377-2, A8a, sas ate Fh kabeer bhaa“g maachhulee suraa paan jo jo paraanee khaa‘hi. Kabeer, those mortals who consume marijuana, fish and wine
sea sas 3n ate 3 AS asf Aifs 123311 (1377-3, H8a, sas ate Th)
tirath barat naym kee-ay tay sabhai rasaatal jaa‘hi. ||233]|
- no matter what pilgrimages, fasts and rituals they follow, they will all go to hell. ||233]|
ate Bee ats go B AHS We HM II (1377-4, H8a, sas aes Th) neechay lo-in kar raha-o lay saajan ghat maahi. Kabeer, I keep my eyes lowered, and enshrine my Friend within my heart.
AS dA uae Ut AG fant Sues ots i2Q3sil 1377-4, A8a, sas adie Fh) sabh ras khayla-o pee-a sa-o kisee lakhaava-o naahi. ||234|| I enjoy all pleasures with my Beloved, but I do not let anyone else know. ||234| |
nS WH UCAfS wat Sut fasus ad AIG II 1377-5, Ha, sas adits Th aath jaam cha-usath gharee tu-a nirkhat rahai jee-o. Twenty-four hours a day, every hour, my soul continues to look to You, O Lord.
ale Seo fas age As we Fu ui i2aull (1377-5, Aaa, sas adie Ah neechay lo-in ki-o kara-o sabh ghat daykh-a-u pee-o. ||235]|| Why should I keep my eyes lowered? I see my Beloved in every heart. ||235]|
Ho Ret uba nfs AG aA rhe ufo aA fa ut II (1377-6, Aaa, sas adits Ah
sun sakhee pee-a meh jee-o basai jee-a meh basai ke pee-o.
Listen, O my companions: my soul dwells in my Beloved, and my Beloved dwells in my soul.
AS UG FSC adt we ufo ATS for UTS WQBEN 1377-6, Fa, sas aes Fh)
jee-o pee-o boojha-o nahee ghat meh jee-o ke pee-o. ||236] |
I realize that there is no difference between my soul and my Beloved; I cannot tell whether my soul or my Beloved dwells in my heart. ||236| |
TMS FHS TT I AIS a sass HT Tg ots Il 1377-7, ABa, sas aes Ft)
kabeer baaman guroo hai jagat kaa bhagtan kaa gur naahi.
Kabeer, the Brahmin may be the guru of the world, but he is not the Guru of the devotees.
wats Cats & ufs Hor we@ seg HT 12Q2D 1 (1377-7, Aaa, sas ate Fh) arajh urajh kai pach moo-aa chaara-o baydahu maahi. ||237]|| He rots and dies in the perplexities of the four Vedas. ||237] |
dfs 3 uig 33 nfs faust wet vot 3 ATE II 0377-8, Has, sas ate ZH) har hai khaa“d rayt meh bikhree haathee chunee na jaa-ay. The Lord is like sugar, scattered in the sand; the elephant cannot pick it up.
afs adte afs sot gsret att of& & wfe NQ8cI 1377-8, Aaa, sas adits Ah
kahi kabeer gur bhalee bujhaa-ee keetee ho-ay kai khaa-ay. ||238]|| Says Kabeer, the Guru has given me this sublime understanding: become an ant, and feed on it. ||238]|
ads AG sfo va fudH ot Ata ote afe afe i 0377-9, naa, saz adits Ah
kabeer ja-o tuhi saaDh piramm kee sees kaat kar go-ay.
Kabeer, if you desire to play the game of love with the Lord, then cut off your head, and make it into a ball.
wos des TS afe A fee fe 3 SE NQEtil (1377-10, Hea, sas aets Ah khaylat khaylat haal kar jo kichh ho-ay ta ho-ay. ||239]| Lose yourself in the play of it, and then whatever will be, will be. ||239]|
ads Ag sfs va fudn at ura ASt 8S Il 0377-10, Aaa, sas ate Ff)
kabeer ja-o tuhi saaDh piramm kee paakay saytee khayl.
Kabeer, if you desire to play the game of love with the Lord, play it with someone with committment.
ard HAAG ufs a o ufs set & 3G IQsoll (1377-11, Aa, sas adits Th) kaachee sarsa-u™ pay! kai naa khal bha-ee na tayl. ||240]| Pressing the unripe mustard seeds produces neither oil nor flour. ||240||
gus safe nig afs mig das ast AS Il 0377-1, wBa, sas aes Ft) dhoo™dhat doleh anDh gat ar cheenat naahee sant. Searching, the mortal stumbles like a blind person, and does not recognize the Saint.
afa ant fag uti fag sasg SASS 28M 1377-12, Aaa, sas aete fh kahi naamaa ki-o paa-ee-ai bin bhagtahu bhagvant. ||241]|| Says Naam Dayv, how can one obtain the Lord God, without His devotee? ||241]||
ofa A dite ats a ate mre at MA Il (1377-12, Ada, sas aete Ah)
har so heeraa chhaad kai karahi aan kee aas. Forsaking the Diamond of the Lord, the mortals put their hopes in another.
3 30 tna wfod As smd SSSA 2Q2II (1377-13, ABA, sas aes Ff) tay nar dojak jaahigay sat bhaakhai ravidaas. ||242| | Those people shall go to hell; Ravi Daas speaks the Truth. ||242||
ade AG fag acs 3 eH ag ot 3 AT ATT Il 0377-13, waa, sas acta wh)
kabeer ja-o garihu karahi ta Dharam kar naahee ta kar bairaag.
Kabeer, if you live the householder's life, then practice righteousness; otherwise, you might as well retire from the world.
Yat fas ad SA AS MST |Qsll 1377-14, Aaa, sas adits Ah
bairaagee banDhan karai taa ko bado abhaag. ||243]|
If someone renounces the world, and then gets involved in worldly entanglements, he shall suffer terrible misfortune. ||243] |
H@a AY edte A (1377-15) salok saykh fareed kay Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee:
qe Afsas yrrfe il 1377-15) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fas feos ua edt Ard we fete i 1377-16, F8a, AU edie Th jit dihaarhai Dhan varee saahay la-ay likhaa-ay. The day of the bride's wedding is pre-ordained.
Hod fa xt Hatet HT Sas orf— | 1377-16, Aaa, Fa edie wh
malak je kannee suneedaa muhu daykhaalay aa-ay.
On that day, the Messenger of Death, of whom she had only heard, comes and shows its face.
fie fouret adba gat g azare I 1377-16, Ba, Ae ste Fh) jind nimaanee kadhee-ai hadaa koo karhkaa-ay. It breaks the bones of the body and pulls the helpless soul out.
Ad fed 3 soot fie & AHSTE Il (1377-17, Hea, Fe ste Ft) saahay likhay na chalnee jindoo koo™ samjhaa-ay. That pre-ordained time of marriage cannot be avoided. Explain this to your soul.
fig zodt Hos Sa S WHT ugStE Il 1377-17, Aaa, Fa ede AH jind vahutee maran var lai jaasee parnaa-ay. The soul is the bride, and death is the groom. He will marry her and take her away.
nus Jet afs at a af wat Oe I 1377-18, Ba, Au |dte Hh aapan hathee jol kai kai gal lagai Dhaa-ay. After the body sends her away with its own hands, whose neck will it embrace?
zed foot usnes ast o Hat orfe i 1377-18, aa, AU |dte zh)
vaalahu nikee puraslaat kannee na sunee aa-ay. The bridge to hell is narrower than a hair; haven't you heard of it with your ears?
odter fost udetet ust & wimg Hoe UI (1377-19, ABs, AY |dte Ah
fareedaa kirhee pava‘dee-ee kharhaa na aap muhaa-ay. ||1|| Fareed, the call has come; be careful now - don't let yourself be robbed. ||1]|
Sota" UI VISA Wust vor vomit sfF Il 377-19, Asa, Per |dte FH) fareedaa dar darvaysee gaakh-rhee chalaa‘ dunee-aa™ bhat. Fareed, it is so difficult to become a humble Saint at the Lord's Door.
Yat qBoe
Sfe Gort eat faa Fer wis 2H 1378-1, ABs, Fe sdte A)
baneh uthaa-ee potlee kithai vanjaa ghat. ||2| | I am so accustomed to walking in the ways of the world. I have tied and picked up the bundle; where can I go to throw it away? ||2]|
fas 3 93 fas o AS wor ast ofa Il 1378-1, Aaa, AY adie kijh na bujhai kijh na sujhai dunee-aa gujhee bhaahi. I know nothing; I understand nothing. The world is a smouldering fire.
Ret Ae var ats ant 3 I St Vst orfs ZI (1378-1, Aa, Fe ede Ah saa-ee’ mayrai changa keetaa naahee ta ha" bhee dajhaa™ aahi. ||3]| My Lord did well to warn me about it; otherwise, I would have been burnt as well.
[I3I|
odie A wet fae Gas Anis ga Sat Il (1378-2, Hea, Fe ede AH
fareedaa jay jaanaa til thorh-rhay sammal buk bharee.
Fareed, if I had known that I had so few sesame seeds, I would have been more careful with them in my hands.
A Wet Ag Seat ot Gat HS At Ill 1378-2, Aaa, Ae ede HM)
jay jaanaa saho nandh-rhaa taa™ thorhaa maan karee. ||4]|
If I had known that my Husband Lord was so young and innocent, I would not have been so arrogant. ||4||
A Fert oe fare utst uret aife I 1378-3, Aaa, Fu edie FH) jay jaanaa larh chhijnaa peedee paa-ee™ gandh. If I had known that my robe would come loose, I would have tied a tighter knot.
3 Aes Hots ad AS Aa fser dfs Null 1378-3, Aaa, AY adie Ff)
tai jayvad mai naahi ko sabh jag dithaa handh. ||5]|
I have found none as great as You, Lord; I have looked and searched throughout the world. ||5||
oder AZ nate ste as fey 5 Se Il 1378-4, Aaa, Fe edte A)
fareedaa jay too akal lateef kaalay likh na laykh.
Fareed, if you have a keen understanding, then do not write black marks against anyone else.
ntuos fates ufo fag otet ate Sy El (1378-4, Aaa, Fe sdte Fh) aapnarhay gireevaan meh sir nee“vaa™ kar daykh. ||6]|
Look underneath your own collar instead. ||6||
adhe A 3 Hrafe nant far o ure ulfiy 1 4378-5, ABa, Fe edte Fh
fareedaa jo tai maaran mukee-aa" tin"aa na maaray ghumm.
Fareed, do not turn around and strike those who strike you with their fists. ntuss ufe Aretha Us fare sft Woll 1378-5, wBa, mr edie HH)
aapnarhai ghar jaa-ee-ai pair tin"aa day chumm. ||7]| Kiss their feet, and return to your own home. ||7]|
odie At 3G uce 2G St Ist Tat HAG I (1378-6, H8a, Ae ste FH)
fareedaa jaa ta-o khatan vayl taa™ too rataa dunee si-o.
Fareed, when there was time for you to earn good karma, you were in love with the world instead.
Hoa Aevet otfs At sft St ofenr IIc Il 378-6, Aaa, Ae ede Ah marag savaa-ee neehi jaa" bhari-aa taa™ ladi-aa. ||8|| Now, death has a strong foothold; when the load is full, it is taken away. ||8] |
ey sdtet a dhor ast Jet 8s Il (1378-7, Aaa, Au edie Hh) daykh fareedaa jo thee-aa daarhee ho-ee bhoor. See, Fareed, what has happened: your beard has become grey.
Mad ost wifenr fuer soon Bis ICI (1378-7, Aaa, Fe ede A) agahu nayrhaa aa-i-aa pichhaa rahi-aa door. ||9|| That which is coming is near, and the past is left far behind. ||9]|
ay adie fa dot nag det fA I (1378-8, aa, Fe edte Ah daykh fareedaa je thee-aa sakar ho-ee vis. See, Fareed, what has happened: sugar has become poison.
Ret asg nitus see adit faA i40ll (1378-8, A8a, Au |dte Th) saa-ee baajhahu aapnay vaydan kahee-ai kis. ||10]| Without my Lord, who can I tell of my sorrow? ||10]|
odter ont df usteini vfs afs HE AS Il 1378-9, ABs, Fe |dte Hh fareedaa akhee daykh pateenee-aa™ sun sun reenay kann. Fareed, my eyes have become weak, and my ears have become hard of hearing.
Ary udtel nish da adet Fo AU 1378-9, Aaa, Fe ede sh saakh pakandee aa-ee-aa hor karay“dee vann. ||11|| The body's crop has become ripe and turned color. ||11]||
oder aret frat o afeor aGat ae af& I 1378-10, ABA, Ae |dte Th
fareedaa kaalee™ jinee na raavi-aa Dha-ulee raavai ko-ay.
Fareed, those who did not enjoy their Spouse when their hair was black - hardly any of them enjoy Him when their hair turns grey.
afa net fr@ fusost da seer SE 1921 1378-10, ABA, AU |dte Th kar saa‘-ee si-o pirharhee rang navaylaa ho-ay. ||12]| So be in love with the Lord, so that your color may ever be new. ||12||
Hs 3 Il (1378-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
oder ast uGat Afog AeT ST A a fefs AP Il (1378-11, Ha, He 3)
fareedaa kaalee Dha-ulee saahib sadaa hai jay ko chit karay.
Fareed, whether one's hair is black or grey, our Lord and Master is always here if one remembers Him.
nimuat orfenr fusH 3 waet A Bs AS AE I (1378-11, Aaa, He 3)
aapnaa laa-i-aa piram na lag-ee jay lochai sabh ko-ay.
This loving devotion to the Lord does not come by one's own efforts, even though all may long for it.
&g fuen fimre wAH at A are 3 OfE 9811 (1378-12, Ha, He 3)
ayhu piram pi-aalaa khasam kaa jai bhaavai tai day-ay. ||13]|
This cup of loving devotion belongs to our Lord and Master; He gives it to whomever He likes. ||13]]|
odte fre Sfee va Hfouor A fees H FS I 1378-12, ABa, Fe edte Fh fareedaa jin" lo-in jag mohi-aa say lo-in mai dith. Fareed, those eyes which have enticed the world - I have seen those eyes.
HS Seo Hofer A uet Ate afye NASI 1378-13, ASa, Ae ede FH)
kajal raykh na sehdi-aa say pankhee soo-ay bahith. ||14|| Once, they could not endure even a bit of mascara; now, the birds hatch their young in them! |[14]|
odter gafenr atafenr Hst tfenr fos il 1378-13, Aaa, Fe edie A) fareedaa kookaydi-aa chaa‘gaydi-aa matee daydi-aa nit. Fareed, they shouted and yelled, and constantly gave good advice.
a Aste Zefeur A fas eafo fas oUil 1378-14, ABA, AE ete Ah
jo saitaan vanjaa-i-aa say kit fayreh chit. ||15]]|
But those whom the devil has spoiled - how can they turn their consciousness towards God? ||15]|
sorter at uerdt ST Il 1378-14, ABa, Ae edie FH) fareedaa thee-o pavaahee dabh. Fareed, become the grass on the path,
A Aet Safa AT I 1378-14, ABa, AU edie Th jay saa'-ee lorheh sabh. if you long for the Lord of all.
fea fenfo fer wsrsinifs i (1378-15, H8a, Ae |dte Ft) ik chhijeh bi-aa lataarhee-ah. One will cut you down, and another will trample you underfoot;
ot pret & ofe asia MEI (1378-15, ASA, Ae |dte AD taa" saa-ee dai dar vaarhee-ah. ||16]| then, you shall enter the Court of the Lord. ||16]|
sdter ug 3 Seba wa AST 3 Ate Il (1378-15, Aaa, Au edie Fh fareedaa khaak na nindee-ai khaakoo jayd na ko-ay. Fareed, do not slander the dust; noting is as great as dust.
Htefeur Ua 38 yfeor Cufe HE WADI 378-16, ABs, Ae edte FH) jeevdi-aa pairaa talai mu-i-aa upar ho-ay. ||17]| When we are alive, it is under our feet, and when we are dead, it is above us. ||17]|
oder WT Be TST far BI FT AS ST Il (1378-16, Ha, Au este Fh
fareedaa jaa lab taa nayhu ki-aa lab ta koorhaa nayhu.
Fareed, when there is greed, what love can there be? When there is greed, love is false.
fasg sfs sureha suf 3S AT NACI 1378-17, Hea, Fe sdte Ah kichar jhat laghaa-ee-ai chhapar tutai mayhu. ||18]| How long can one remain in a thatched hut which leaks when it rains? ||18]|
edie Hae Hae foor sefo efe aot HSfs Il 1378-17, Fea, Fe edie 7H) fareedaa jangal jangal ki-aa bhaveh van kandaa morhayhi. Fareed, why do you wander from jungle to jungle, crashing through the thorny trees?
zt sa fonreint rare for eto AEN (1378-18, Aaa, Ae edie Fh vasee rab hi-aalee-ai jangal ki-aa dhoodhayhi. ||19]| The Lord abides in the heart; why are you looking for Him in the jungle? ||19]|
edter feat foot Hult ae sare sfeSty i (1378-18, Ha, Au edie Fh fareedaa inee nikee janghee-ai thal doongar bhavi-omi", Fareed, with these small legs, I crossed deserts and mountains.
mig edte ana A aot aGhH ION (1378-19, Ba, Ae ste Hh) aj fareedai koojrhaa sai kohaa™ thee-om. ||20]| But today, Fareed, my water jug seems hundreds of miles away. ||20]|
soter ast ean ufe ufy Bote uA Il 1378-19, Aaa, Ay edte Ft)
Fareed, the nights are long, and my sides are aching in pain.
ust qaot fog faqr a Fifenr frat festet MA QU (1379-1, ABa, Ae ete A)
Dhig tin"aa daa jeevi-aa jinaa vidaanee aas. ||21|| Cursed are the lives of those who place their hopes in others. ||21]|
edtet AH der afonr first orfefsnit i 1379-1, Hea, Ae |dte A
fareedaa jay mai hodaa vaari-aa mitaa aa-irhi-aa™.
Fareed, if I had been there when my friend came, I would have made myself a sacrifice to him.
Jat HS Hale fAS Gufs nigra 122K 1379-2, Aa, Fe sdte Ah hayrhaa jalai majeeth ji-o upar angaaraa. ||22]| Now my flesh is burning red on the hot coals. ||22]|
oder SS omy fendi feats stA A] I (1379-2, Aaa, Ae ede Hh) fareedaa lorhai daakh bij-uree-aa™ kikar beejai jat. Fareed, the farmer plants acacia trees, and wishes for grapes.
de Oo asset Uo SS US MQSll (1379-3, Ha, Fa edie Ah handhai unn kataa-idaa paiDhaa lorhai pat. ||23]| He is spinning wool, but he wishes to wear silk. ||23]|
oder male feas ef we ate fimrd Og Il (1379-3, H8a, He edte Hh) fareedaa galee-ay chikarh door ghar naal pi-aaray nayhu. Fareed, the path is muddy, and the house of my Beloved is so far away.
vor 3 fon aaet ddt 3 SS ST MQVell 1379-4, A8a, Au |dte th chalaa ta bhijai kamblee rahaa™ ta tutai nayhu. ||24]|
If I go out, my blanket will get soaked, but if I remain at home, then my heart will be broken. ||24||
fan fra axaet nies ZAG Ag Il 1379-4, HBa, Fe edie Ff) bhija-o sija-o kamblee alah varsa-o mayhu. My blanket is soaked, drenched with the downpour of the Lord's Rain.
ate fer faq" Ane SSE ot ST MQUil 1379-4, Aaa, Ay edte A jaa-ay milaa tinaa sajnaa tuta-o naahee nayhu. ||25]|| I am going out to meet my Friend, so that my heart will not be broken. ||25]||
oder H Saret ug BT HS Hot de ATE I 1379-5, Aaa, Ae sdte Ah fareedaa mai bholaavaa pag daa mat mailee ho-ay jaa-ay. Fareed, I was worried that my turban might become dirty.
moe Ig 6 Weel fag st fet we NEN 4379-5, Aaa, Ae ste Fh
gahilaa roohu na jaan-ee sir bhee mitee khaa-ay. ||26]|| My thoughtless self did not realize that one day, dust will consume my head as well. ||26]|
odte nad us foes as Hf Hist VT II (1379-6, H8a, AU edte Hh fareedaa sakar khand nivaat gurh maakhi-o maa"jhaa duDh. Fareed: sugar cane, candy, sugar, molasses, honey and buffalo's milk
AS Zs fHduit ga 5 uAfe ST MQM (1379-6, Ha, Ay edte Fh sabhay vastoo mithee-aa™ rab na pujan tuDh. ||27]| - all these things are sweet, but they are not equal to You. ||27]|
oder det Hat are at wes Het se Il 1379-7, Aaa, AU adie FH) fareedaa rotee mayree kaath kee laavan mayree bhukh. Fareed, my bread is made of wood, and hunger is my appetizer.
fot ut dust we Adfed SY Qc (1379-7, Hea, Au edie HH)
jinaa khaaDhee choprhee ghanay sehnigay dukh. ||28]|| Those who eat buttered bread, will suffer in terrible pain. ||28]|
oot wot ufe & Ser uret ut i 1379-8, waa, Ae |dte Hh) rukhee sukhee khaa-ay kai thandhaa paanee pee-o. Eat dry bread, and drink cold water.
odter df uset Gust at SaAS AIG NICH (1379-8, Aaa, Fe sdte Ah fareedaa daykh paraa-ee choprhee naa tarsaa-ay jee-o. ||29]| Fareed, if you see someone else's buttered bread, do not envy him for it. ||29]|
MA oO ASt a3 fAG nia HS fs ATE II 1379-9, HBA, Fe |dte Fh)
aj na sutee kant si-o ang murhay murh jaa-ay.
This night, I did not sleep with my Husband Lord, and now my body is suffering in pain.
wf ugg soaet SH fa@ Sfe feat 3011 (1379-9, Aa, Fe edt Ah jaa-ay puchhahu dohaaganee tum ki-o rain vihaa-ay. ||30] | Go and ask the deserted bride, how she passes her night. ||30]|
Age fet of wd UH ot are il (1379-10, A8a, Fu |dte th
saahurai dho-ee naa lahai pay-ee-ai naahee thaa-o.
She finds no place of rest in her father-in-law's home, and no place in her parents’ home either.
fug asst 5 ueet us Aaa SE Sal 1379-10, Aaa, Fe edie 7)
pir vaat-rhee na puchh-ee Dhan sohagan naa-o. ||31]|
Her Husband Lord does not care for her; what sort of a blessed, happy soul-bride is she? ||31||
Agd Usa AS at KT nisi MAT I (1379-11, ABs, Au edie FH)
saahurai pay-ee-ai kant kee kant agamm athaahu.
In her father-in-law's home hereafter, and in her parents' home in this world, she belongs to her Husband Lord. Her Husband is Inaccessible and Unfathomable.
Soa A AUeel FH SS FUT!STT 132i (1379-11, ABA, Ae edte FH) naanak so sohaaganee jo bhaavai bayparvaah. ||32|| O Nanak, she is the happy soul-bride, who is pleasing to her Carefree Lord. ||32]||
ost Ost Aadt Ast wrfe ofse il 1379-11, Hea, Fe sdte Ah naatee Dhotee sambhee sutee aa-ay nachind. Bathing, washing and decorating herself, she comes and sleeps without anxiety.
odie aot A ast fos ct Tet aget ag SSI 1379-12, ABA, Au edie A) fareedaa rahee so bayrhee hiny dee ga-ee kathooree ganDh. ||33]| Fareed, she still smells like asafoetida; the fragrance of musk is gone. ||33]|
mae Ae oO sat A AD US o AME I (1379-10, ABa, Te |dte HH)
joban jaa‘day naa daraa™ jay sah pareet na jaa-ay.
I am not afraid of losing my youth, as long as I do not lose the Love of my Husband Lord.
odte fast dae uifs fae af we aHefe 1aeil (1379-13, Ha, Au |dte FH) fareedaa kitee joban pareet bin suk ga-ay kumlaa-ay. ||34]| Fareed, so many youths, without His Love, have dried up and withered away. ||34]|
edte fiz ude ae vy faofs feevee BE II 1379-13, HBA, AY este Th
fareedaa chint khatolaa vaan dukh bireh vichhaavan layf.
Fareed, anxiety is my bed, pain is my mattress, and the pain of separation is my blanket and quilt.
Sg INT leet 3 Aga AS SY BUI (1379-14, Aaa, Fe edie A) ayhu hamaaraa jeevnaa too saahib sachay vaykh. ||35|| Behold, this is my life, O my True Lord and Master. ||35]|
fase farsa nindint fasar 3 ABI Il (1379-14, Waa, Au edie sh birhaa birhaa aakhee-ai birhaa too sultaan. Many talk of the pain and suffering of separation; O pain, you are the ruler of all.
adter fag sfs frag o Gur A 39 ATE HATS ISEM (1379-15, Faa, He ede Hh) fareedaa jit tan birahu na oopjai so tan jaan masaan. ||36||
Fareed, that body, within which love of the Lord does not well up - look upon that body as a cremation ground. ||36||
sdter & fen ateor adit ds fests i 1379-15, HBa, Pu |edte A) fareedaa ay vis gandlaa Dharee-aa™ khand livaarh. Fareed, these are poisonous sprouts coated with sugar.
fefa awe ats ae fefa wat Te Barts 1391 1379-16, ABs, Au ede FH) ik raahayday reh ga-ay ik raaDhee ga-ay ujaarh. ||37]|| Some die planting them, and some are ruined, harvesting and enjoying them. ||37]|
ode os qetfeur dfe a ofa aefeor Aft I (1379-16, Ha, Fe ede Hh
fareedaa chaar gavaa-i-aa handh kai chaar gavaa-i-aa samm.
Fareed, the hours of the day are lost wandering around, and the hours of the night are lost in sleep.
a
Bat sg Harbor J nitd ag af Wc 0379-17, wBa, Me edie Hh laykhaa rab mangaysee-aa too aa‘ho kayr"ay kamm. ||38]| God will call for your account, and ask you why you came into this world. ||38]|
odie ofs waen wfe a fae fs waters | 1379-17, aa, Me dts Hh) fareedaa dar darvaajai jaa-ay kai ki-o ditho gharhee-aal. Fareed, you have gone to the Lord's Door. Have you seen the gong there?
Sg feent uh gn Sat a fom Iw Stil (1379-18, Hea, Fa sdte Ah ayhu nidosaa™ maaree-ai ham dosaa” daa ki-aa haal. ||39]| This blameless object is being beaten - imagine what is in store for us sinners! ||39]|
wate wate nrdhat usdt I ATE II 379-19, H8a, Fe |dte wh gharhee-ay gharhee-ay maaree-ai pahree lahai sajaa-ay. Each and every hour, it is beaten; it is punished every day.
A dat usin fa@ set sf= feote igo 1379-19, n8a, Au |dte th
so hayrhaa gharhee-aal ji-o dukhee rain vihaa-ay. ||40]|| This beautiful body is like the gong; it passes the night in pain. ||40]|
UST Ato
ae dot Ay edle aafe walt FT ll (1380-1, ABs, AY edie Th budhaa ho-aa saykh fareed kamban lagee dayh. Shaykh Fareed has grown old, and his body has begun to tremble.
AAG efor dee St Sq TAT BT 84 (1380-1, A8a, Fe dts Fh)
jay sa-o vareh-aa jeevnaa bhee tan hosee khayh. ||41]|
Even if he could live for hundreds of years, his body will eventually turn to dust. ||41]| odie af usfent SHart vet HS o Ufo Il 1380-1, Aaa, Ae edte HM)
fareedaa baar paraa-i-ai baisnaa saa‘-ee mujhai na deh. Fareed begs, O Lord, do not make me sit at another's door.
A 3 Se Tat AG Adteg Sfa Sil (1380-2, ASa, Ay ste HH)
jay too ayvai rakhsee jee-o sareerahu layhi. ||42]|
If this is the way you are going to keep me, then go ahead and take the life out of my body. ||42||
afa aoa fafs wat efs & AT SIT Il (1380-2, Ha, Ae sdte Ah
kanDh kuhaarhaa sir gharhaa van kai sar lohaar.
With the axe on his shoulder, and a bucket on his head, the blacksmith is ready to cut down the tree.
ede 3G Sat Ag yruaer 3 Sata nifemrs sail (1380-3, Fa, Au edie Hh) fareedaa ha-o lorhee saho aapnaa too lorheh angi-aar. ||43]| Fareed, I long for my Lord; you long only for the charcoal. ||43] |
odie feaar nitet niarer feaar ovdt BS Il 1380-3, ABs, Ae edte Hh) fareedaa iknaa aataa aglaa iknaa naahee lon. Fareed, some have lots of flour, while others do not even have salt.
wat we freunfs set wrt aes sell 1380-4, Ax, Ae edte FH) agai ga-ay sinjaapsan chotaa™ khaasee ka-un. ||44]| When they go beyond this world, it shall be seen, who will be punished. ||44] |
uf cH es fafs Sct AS FS Il 1380-4, Aaa, Ae |dte FH)
paas damaamay chhat sir bhayree sado rad.
Drums were beaten in their honor, there were canopies above their heads, and bugles announced their coming.
amfe AS Ales ufo Ste miSsht aS isull (1380-5, ABs, Au edie FH)
jaa-ay sutay jeeraan meh thee-ay ateemaa gad. ||45]| They have gone to sleep in the cemetary, buried like poor orphans. ||45]||
edie aS Hsu HS Base st TS Il (1380-5, ASA, AY edte Ah fareedaa kothay mandap maarhee-aa usaarayday bhee ga-ay. Fareed, those who built houses, mansions and lofty buildings, are also gone.
Ga Ase afs Te aat wife ue geil 1380-6, wSa, Me edie Fh koorhaa sa-udaa kar ga-ay goree aa-ay pa-ay. ||46]|| They made false deals, and were dropped into their graves. ||46] |
odter fgets Har nro fits o aret He I 380-6, H8a, Au edt Ah
fareedaa khintharh maykhaa aglee-aa jind na kaa-ee maykh.
Fareed, there are many seams on the patched coat, but there are no seams on the soul.
aot nmi niryet ve HATER AY III (1380-7, Hea, Ae sdte Ah vaaree aapo aapnee chalay masaa-ik saykh. ||47]| The shaykhs and their disciples have all departed, each in his own turn. ||47]||
edter vg det asfenr Hoa afoot wife II (1380-7, H8a, Ae edte fareedaa duhu deevee balandi-aa malak bahithaa aa-ay. Fareed, the two lamps are lit, but death has come anyway.
as Sst we ofenr des afer gets iiscil «380-8, wea, Ae edte Ah
garh leetaa ghat luti-aa deevrhay ga-i-aa bujhaa-ay. ||48]|
It has captured the fortress of the body, and plundered the home of the heart; it extinguishes the lamps and departs. ||48]|
edtet Sy ourd fa dior fa fafs dor fsers i (1380-8, FBa, Ae ete Th fareedaa vaykh kapaahai je thee-aa je sir thee-aa tilaah. Fareed, look at what has happened to the cotton and the sesame seed,
x oN
He nig ade FS afefemrs il (1380-9, Hea, Fe sdte Ah kamaadai ar kaagdai kunnay ko-ili-aah. the sugar cane and paper, the clay pots and the charcoal.
He ne adfeur fa Ante fEors Stil (1380-9, A8a, Fe |dte Ah
manday amal karaydi-aa ayh sajaa-ay tinaah. ||49]|| This is the punishment for those who do evil deeds. ||49]|
edie afs HAe AS ae fete ast az Shs 1 1380-10, Aaa, Ae ste A)
fareedaa kann muslaa soof gal dil kaatee gurh vaat. Fareed, you wear your prayer shawl on your shoulders and the robes of a Sufi; your words are sweet, but there is a dagger in your heart.
afte fen woes fefs nifomrdt af nuoll (1380-10, Aa, Ay edte A)
baahar disai chaannaa dil anDhi-aaree raat. ||50|| Outwardly, you look bright, but your heart is dark as night. ||50]|
odie gat a3 3 fos FA 36 te Afe II (380-11, Aaa, Ae Sdte HH) fareedaa ratee rat na niklai jay tan cheerai ko-ay. Fareed, not even a drop of blood would issue forth, if someone cut my body.
A 30 a3 oa fhe fsa sfs as 5 OE UU 380-11, Haa, Fe edte Ah jo tan ratay rab si-o tin tan rat na ho-ay. ||51]| Those bodies which are imbued with the Lord - those bodies contain no blood. ||51]|
He 3 Il (1380-12)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
feg 39 AS 33 9 oS faa 38 8 SE II 1380-12, Aaa, He 3) ih tan sabho rat hai rat bin tann na ho-ay. This body is all blood; without blood, this body could not exist.
A Ad gs nmue faz safe Se Iso STE Il (1380-12, HBA, He 3) jo sah ratay aapnay tit tan lobh rat na ho-ay. Those who are imbued with their Lord, do not have the blood of greed in their bodies.
3 ufeat 3o ute df os a3 fees ATE II (1380-13, H&A, He 3)
bhai pa-i-ai tan kheen ho-ay lobh rat vichahu jaa-ay.
When the Fear of God fills the body, it becomes thin; the blood of greed departs from within.
fag Sxafs ws Ao dfs 3 ofa a 3B eas He TSE I (1380-13, Aaa, He 3)
ji-o baisantar Dhaat suDh ho-ay ti-o har kaa bha-o durmat mail gavaa-ay.
Just as metal is purified by fire, the Fear of God removes the filthy residues of evil- mindedness.
Sod 3 Ho Ade fa as de da ote ui 1380-14, Ba, He 3)
naanak tay jan sohnay je ratay har rang laa-ay. ||52||
O Nanak, those humble beings are beautiful, who are imbued with the Lord's Love. [|52]|
edie Het Heed ute og frag Bst SE I (1380-14, Ba, Ay ste Fh) fareedaa so-ee sarvar dhoodh lahu jithahu labhee vath. Fareed, seek that sacred pool, in which the genuine article is found.
sufs we fomr de feats 5a TE WUsil (1380-15, Fa, Ae edte A)
chhaparh dhoodhai ki-aa hovai chikarh dubai hath. ||53]|
Why do you bother to search in the pond? Your hand will only sink into the mud. [153]
edie 6a a3 0 afeG sat at Hera I (1380-15, Haa, Ay |dte Hh
fareedaa nandhee kant na raavi-o vadee thee mu-ee-aas.
Fareed, when she is young, she does not enjoy her Husband. When she grows up, she dies.
US Feet as HS Ao ot fHesrA Wusil (1380-16, ASa, Ae edie Fh) Dhan kookay“dee gor may" tai sah naa milee-aas. ||54|| Lying in the grave, the soul-bride cries, "I did not meet You, my Lord."||54]|
odte fra ufemr ast ust Het St usm Il 4380-16, HB, Aer edie Fh)
fareedaa sir pali-aa daarhee palee muchhaa” bhee palee-aa”.
Fareed, your hair has turned grey, your beard has turned grey, and your moustache has turned grey.
J HO Ms Wes Hats fom ssi WuUll 1380-17, Aaa, Ae edte Ah ray man gahilay baavilay maaneh ki-aa ralee-aa™. ||55]| O my thoughtless and insane mind, why are you indulging in pleasures? ||55]|
edie ad uae asa fug atest foes Il (1380-17, Aaa, AY ete Ah
fareedaa kothay Dhukan kayt-rhaa pir need-rhee nivaar.
Fareed, how long can you run on the rooftop? You are asleep to your Husband Lord - give it up!
fi feo oo wee ae feats feats uéll 1380-18, Hea, Fe edte Ah
jo dih laDhay gaanvay ga-ay vilaarh vilaarh. ||56||
The days which were allotted to you are numbered, and they are passing, passing away. ||56||
odie dd Hsu nSion 83 3 we fas Il 1380-18, Hea, Ae sdte Ah fareedaa kothay mandap maarhee-aa ayt na laa-ay chit. Fareed, houses, mansions and balconies - do not attach your consciousness to these.
fist uet niseet af & ort fs Wud 380-19, Hx, Ae edte FH) mitee pa-ee atolavee ko-ay na hosee mit. ||57]|| When these collapse into heaps of dust, none of them will be your friend. ||57| |
ode" Hsu He 3 Of= Hoa Astral fefs afs ii (1380-19, Bax, Mer ste Fh)
fareedaa mandap maal na laa-ay marag sataanee chit Dhar.
Fareed, do not focus on mansions and wealth; center your consciousness on death, your powerful enemy.
Us AL Aret arf Antes fre dt 38 Pear WUcil (381-1, ABs, Me ede Fh
saa-ee jaa-ay sam"aal jithai hee ta-o vanjnaa. ||58]| Remember that place where you must go. ||58]|
ode frat ant ofs ae 3 ans ferfe it cssi-1, A8a, Fu |dte Hh) fareedaa jin"ee kammee naahi gun tay kammrhay visaar. Fareed, those deeds which do not bring merit - forget about those deeds.
HS Aofier dtedt pret & vaafs uci 31-2, Aa, Ae ede Hh) mat sarmindaa theevhee saa‘-ee dai darbaar. ||59]| Otherwise, you shall be put to shame, in the Court of the Lord. ||59]|
adie afoot af sad feo ot ofa sate il (381-2, Hea, Ae ede Hh)
fareedaa saahib dee kar chaakree dil dee laahi bharaa‘d. Fareed, work for your Lord and Master; dispel the doubts of your heart.
Veni S Sst gut x Hteife iéoll 1381-3, Asa, AU edie Ah darvaysaa™ no lorhee-ai rukhaa™ dee jeeraa'd. ||60]| The dervishes, the humble devotees, have the patient endurance of trees. ||60] |
iN
diet as HS AUS ATH HST SA Il (1381-3, Ha, Fa edte Ah fareedaa kaalay maiday kaprhay kaalaa maidaa vays. Fareed, my clothes are black, and my outfit is black.
Todt stout H fer Sa Ad VISA WEA (1381-4, ASA, AU |dte A) gunhee bhari-aa mai firaa lok kahai darvays. ||61] | I wander around full of sins, and yet people call me a dervish - a holy man. ||61]|
sat sf 3 use A nfs cet Sf I 381-4, Hea, Fe sdte Ah tatee to-ay na palvai jay jal tubee day-ay. The crop which is burnt will not bloom, even if it is soaked in water.
oder Ff soafe ga St ssUt SSE EQ (1381-5, ABA, Ae edie Ah fareedaa jo dohaagan rab dee jhooraydee jooray-ay. ||62]|| Fareed, she who is forsaken by her Husband Lord, grieves and laments. ||62]|
At anidt 3 aS Sterdt St HHS Il 381-5, Hea, Aa edte wh
jaa‘ ku-aaree taa chaa-o veevaahee taa’ maamlay.
When she is a virgin, she is full of desire; but when she is married, then her troubles begin.
edter &d ues ef3 anrdt 5 dha ES (1381-6, Hea, AU edie Hh) fareedaa ayho pachhotaa-o vat ku-aaree na thee-ai. ||63] | Fareed, she has this one regret, that she cannot be a virgin again. ||63] |
aed act ust wife Coa Is Il (1381-6, Aaa, Fe ete wh) kalar kayree chhaprhee aa-ay ulthay hanjh. The swans have landed in a small pond of salt water.
fag data o ulefs se Het 53 Esl (1381-6, Ha, Au ete Ft) chinjoo borhni" naa peeveh udan sandee danjh. ||64]| They dip in their bills, but do not drink; they fly away, still thirsty. ||64| |
dn @sfs ad ufeur a fesrafe Ae I (1381-7, Aaa, Au ete FH)
hans udar koDhrai pa-i-aa lok vidaaran jaa-ay.
The swans fly away, and land in the fields of grain. The people go to chase them away.
Ties Sas Wee JA sagt ate WEUll (381-7, Aa, Ae |dte A) gahilaa lok na jaandaa hans na koDhraa khaa-ay. ||65|| The thoughtless people do not know, that the swans do not eat the grain. ||65] |
afte af aebut udhat fragt SAS 3s Il 1381-8, ABa, Ae edte Fh chal chal ga-ee-aa pankhee-aa" jin"ee vasaa-ay tal. The birds which lived in the pools have flown away and left.
adie Ag stor st sort Ga ase feas EEN 381-8, Aaa, Ae |dte Ah
fareedaa sar bhari-aa bhee chalsee thakay kaval ikal. | |66] |
Fareed, the overflowing pool shall also pass away, and only the lotus flowers shall remain. ||66]||
odie fee fae aff Age ata ofS wh Il (381-9, Aaa, Ae edie Hh
fareedaa it siraanay bhu-ay savan keerhaa larhi-o maas.
Fareed, a stone will be your pillow, and the earth will be your bed. The worms shall eat into your flesh.
astzor Fa wud feas ufeor uth Edi 381-9, Hea, Ae |edte kayt-rhi-aa jug vaapray ikat pa-i-aa paas. ||67]|| Countless ages will pass, and you will still be lying on one side. ||67]||
adler Sot wat Host Sct Sad BH Il (1381-10, A8a, Au |dte Hh)
fareedaa bhannee gharhee savannvee tutee naagar laj.
Fareed, your beautiful body shall break apart, and the subtle thread of the breath Shall be snapped.
MATES SHS a us sat wi WECI (1381-10, Hx, Ae dts FH) ajraa-eel faraystaa kai ghar naathee aj. ||68]| In which house will the Messenger of Death be a guest today? ||68] |
Sdier Fat ust Aeoet Set Sas Be Il (1381-11, ASa, Au ede A)
fareedaa bhannee gharhee savannvee tootee naagar laj.
Fareed, your beautiful body shall break apart, and the subtle thread of the breath Shall be snapped.
A Ane off ag 8 A fa wrefe mre NEC 381-11, Aa, Fe sdte AH jo sajan bhu-ay bhaar thay say ki-o aavahi aj. ||69] | Those friends who were a burden on the earth - how can they come today? ||69]|
odter § foe afsur fa 6 set SHS I (1381-12, H8a, Au edte Ah fareedaa bay nivaajaa kuti-aa ayh na bhalee reet. Fareed: O faithless dog, this is not a good way of life.
aad of o nirfenr uA eas HAS DON (1381-12, Ha, Ae |dte A)
kabhee chal na aa-i-aa panjay vakhat maseet. ||70|| You never come to the mosque for your five daily prayers. ||70]||
so odte Cx Ath Hag foe Tats II (381-13, HBA, Ae ste FH) uth fareedaa ujoo saaj subah nivaaj gujaar. Rise up, Fareed, and cleanse yourself; chant your morning prayer.
fn fig niet o foe A fg afl Barts Ol «381-13, H8a, Ae |dte Th jo sir saa‘-ee naa nivai so sir kap utaar. ||71|| The head which does not bow to the Lord - chop off and remove that head. ||71]|
a fig wet o foe A fg oth aife II cssi-14, Aa, Fe edte Ah jo sir saa-ee naa nivai so sir keejai kaa’-ay. That head which does not bow to the Lord - what is to be done with that head?
aS dfs nerd aos AS af D211 (1381-14, Aa, Ae |dte Ah kunnay hayth jalaa-ee-ai baalan sandai thaa-ay. ||72|| Put it in the fireplace, instead of firewood. ||72||
edter faa 33 wfumr frat 3 AfEGfo Il (3si-15, Aaa, Ae edte Ah) fareedaa kithai taiday maapi-aa jin"ee too jani-ohi. Fareed, where are your mother and father, who gave birth to you?
3 ung Gf ofe ae F uit B ustefs OSI (1381-15, Aaa, Ae ste A)
tai paashu o-ay lad ga-ay too” ajai na pateenohi. ||73]|
They have left you, but even so, you are not convinced that you shall also have to go. [173] |
edtet He Hee afe ce fee ofa il 3si-16, H8a, AY ete Ah fareedaa man maidaan kar to-ay tibay laahi. Fareed, flatten out your mind; smooth out the hills and valleys.
mat His o MTS SHa Het sha OSI (1381-16, Ba, Ae edie Fh) agai mool na aavsee dojak sandee bhaahi. ||74|| Hereafter, the fires of hell shall not even approach you. ||74||
HIG U Il (1381-17)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
adtet uma uma Hf wea ZA ga fs Il (1381-17, aa, Fe edie 7)
fareedaa khaalak khalak meh khalak vasai rab maahi. Fareed, the Creator is in the Creation, and the Creation abides in God.
He fon 3 wmdibat at fsa fag vet as oul c3si-17, Hea, Fe edte Ah mandaa kis no aakhee-ai jaa’ tis bin ko-ee naahi. ||75]| Whom can we call bad? There is none without Him. ||75||
odte fa fefts are afimr A ae aus Te Il 4381-18, Aaa, Ae |dte Ah
fareedaa je dihi naalaa kapi-aa jay gal kapeh chukh.
Fareed, if on that day when my umbilical cord was cut, my throat had been cut instead,
uate 6 fest HHS At o fest ey DEI 381-18, Hea, Ae |dte Ah
pavan na itee maamlay sahaa™ na itee dukh. ||76]| I would not have fallen into so many troubles, or undergone so many hardships. ||76]|
VIE VSHE TSH A Haig sf TE Il (1381-19, wea, Ay edte chaban chalan ratann say sunee-ar bahi ga-ay. My teeth, feet, eyes and ears have stopped working.
Js HSt Wo A St BG TES WD (1381-19, ABs, Au edte Ah hayrhay mutee Dhaah say jaanee chal ga-ay. ||77]| My body cries out, "Those whom I knew have left me!"||77]|
sdtet gd a ser ate TA His © JETS Il (i3si-19, Aa, Ae |dte fareedaa buray daa bhalaa kar gusaa man na hadhaa-ay. Fareed, answer evil with goodness; do not fill your mind with anger.
Yat YBt2
oot da 3 waet us AS fos ute NOCH (1382-1, Aaa, Ae |dte FH) dayhee rog na lag-ee palai sabh kichh paa-ay. ||78]| Your body shall not suffer from any disease, and you shall obtain everything. ||78]|
odter uy usgat Bot AIST Sa Il (1382-1, ABs, Ae edt] Ah fareedaa pankh paraahunee dunee suhaavaa baag. Fareed, the bird is a guest in this beautiful world-garden.
oCals et Aa HE vos a ate AH NOK (1382-2, ABA, Ae edie FH) na-ubat vajee subah si-o chalan kaa kar saaj. ||79]| The morning drums are beating - get ready to leave! ||79||
ede ofS agat Ssh Afsor fH o SS il 1382-2, ASa, Ay ste Hf) fareedaa raat kathooree vandee-ai suti-aa milai na bhaa-o. Fareed, musk is released at night. Those who are sleeping do not receive their share.
fiqr oe oteres fq fms avr icoll 1382-3, ABa, me ste HH) jin"aa nain nee“draavalay tin"aa milan ku-aa-o. ||80]| Those whose eyes are heavy with sleep - how can they receive it? ||80] |
edter A fieur ey Hs x ey Aarfemt Afar Il (1382-3, Aaa, Ay ede Hh) fareedaa mai jaani-aa dukh mujh koo dukh sabaa-i-ai jag. Fareed, I thought that I was in trouble; the whole world is in trouble!
Cs ois a Sftmr st ute wife So wife WCU (1382-4, ASA, Me edie Fh
oochay charh kai daykhi-aa taa ghar ghar ayhaa ag. ||81]|
When I climbed the hill and looked around, I saw this fire in each and every home. ||81]|
HIG U Il (1382-4)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
edt sfh dareat HfS ferret aa Il 1382-5, ASa, Au ede A) fareedaa bhoom rangaavalee manjh visoolaa baag. Fareed, in the midst of this beautiful earth, there is a garden of thorns.
A Ho ulfe fast far nig & Bar cI 1382-5, Aa, Au edte Hh
jo jan peer nivaaji-aa tin"aa anch na laag. ||82!|
Those humble beings who are blessed by their spiritual teacher, do not suffer even a scratch. ||82] |
HIG U Il (1382-6)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
edte Gua Aoest Aft Aost Sd Il (1382-6, ABs, Fe ede Ah
fareedaa umar suhaavarhee sang suvannrhee dayh. Fareed, life is blessed and beautiful, along with the beautiful body.
fess aet urdinifs fiat fumirs ST ICSI (1382-6, ABs, Fe sdte HA) virlay kay-ee paa-ee-an jin"aa pi-aaray nayh. ||83]| Only a rare few are found, who love their Beloved Lord. ||83] |
aut ze o ats 3B st Sut Sear | (1382-7, Aaa, Me sdte wh) kanDhee vahan na dhaahi ta-o bhee laykhaa dayvnaa. O river, do not destroy your banks; you too will be asked to give your account.
frafe va ane ede fFerS HE aT csi 1382-7, Aa, Me ste Fh) jiDhar rab rajaa-ay vahan tiDhaa-oo ga™-o karay. ||84]| The river flows in whatever direction the Lord orders. ||84||
oder sur ASt feg afenr Fat ASt TH | 1382-7, Fea, Au este Fh fareedaa dukhaa saytee dihu ga-i-aa soolaa™ saytee raat. Fareed, the day passes painfully; the night is spent in anguish.
Yat usd uUTsal Fat Aug StS ICUll (1382-8, Asa, Ae edte AH kharhaa pukaaray paat-nee bayrhaa kapar vaat. ||85|| The boatman stands up and shouts, "The boat is caught in the whirlpool!"||85] |
Sut St set ed act as IFS Il (1382-8, Asa, Ae ete A) lammee lammee nadee vahai kanDhee kayrai hayt. The river flows on and on; it loves to eat into its banks.
a3 6 aud for ad A use Jd AVS IItEN (1382-9, ABA, AU |dte Th bayrhay no kapar ki-aa karay jay paatan rahai suchayt. ||86|| What can the whirlpool do to the boat, if the boatman remains alert? ||86]||
oder Tet A AWE Sto feq Feet 5 Bat Il (1382-9, Ada, Ae ede Hh)
fareedaa galee™ so sajan veeh ik dhoo‘dhaydee na lahaa”,
Fareed, there are dozens who say they are friends; I search, but I cannot find even one.
gat fa@ niato orafs far ur fust Cl (1382-10, Aa, Fe edte Ah Dhukhaa” ji-o maa‘leeh kaaran tin"aa maa piree. ||87]| I yearn for my beloved like a smouldering fire. ||87]|
edt feg 36 sGaa fas fas edit aBe Il (1382-10, Aaa, AY edie 7) fareedaa ih tan bha-ukanaa nit nit dukhee-ai ka-un. Fareed, this body is always barking. Who can stand this constant suffering?
aot eA S dot fast sat ues wccll (1382-11, Asa, Ae edte Ah kannee bujay day rahaa™ kitee vagai pa-un. ||88] | I have put plugs in my ears; I don't care how much the wind is blowing. ||88||
Sota ga uaat ucthot Hf Set Fas Il (1382-11, Fa, Me ste Fh fareedaa rab khajooree pakee-aa™ maakhi-a na-ee vaha™ni". Fareed, God's dates have ripened, and rivers of honey flow.
Aa de stost A Gna 7a uefe Itt (1382-12, A8a, AU edie Th jo jo vanjai’ deehrhaa so umar hath pavann. ||89]| With each passing day, your life is being stolen away. ||89]|
edie 39 Hot fling shor seh desta ora Il 1382-12, Fa, Ae ste Fh
fareedaa tan sukaa pinjar thee-aa talee-aa‘ khoo“deh kaag.
Fareed, my withered body has become a skeleton; the crows are pecking at my palms.
Wn A de 3 ufss tu de A Ta COM (1382-13, Aaa, AU adie HM)
ajai so rab na baahurhi-o daykh banday kay bhaag. ||90]||
Even now, God has not come to help me; behold, this is the fate of all mortal beings. ||90]|
aa ada safer Aare ufeor HA Il (1382-13, ABA, AU edie Th kaagaa karang dhandholi-aa saglaa khaa-i-aa maas. The crows have searched my skeleton, and eaten all my flesh.
= efe da nfs su fue us af oA KU (1382-14, Ha, AU |dte A) ay du-ay nainaa mat chhuha-o pir daykhan kee aas. ||91]| But please do not touch these eyes; I hope to see my Lord. ||91]||
oe dfs 3 fine aA 3 Cate rte Il (1382-14, Fa, Ae edte A) kaagaa choond na pinjraa basai ta udar jaahi. O crow, do not peck at my skeleton; if you have landed on it, fly away.
fag flies He Ag ZA HAS fSE ats NCQ (1382-15, Fa, Au edte A) jit pinjrai mayraa saho vasai maas na tidoo khaahi. ||92| | Do not eat the flesh from that skeleton, within which my Husband Lord abides. ||92]|
odie dia fouret As ad foufonr wife mr il 1382-15, Hea, Fe edte Ah fareedaa gor nimaanee sad karay nighri-aa ghar aa-o. Fareed, the poor grave calls out, "O homeless one, come back to your home.
Haug He vial HdST 5 Stang tSIl (1382-16, HBA, AY edie Th sarpar maithai aavnaa marnahu na dari-aahu. ||93]| You shall surely have to come to me; do not be afraid of death."||93] |
Sat Seat cufenr ast vfs Tet Il 1382-16, Hea, Ae |dte Ah aynee lo-inee daykh-di-aa kaytee chal ga-ee. These eyes have seen a great many leave.
oder Sai nmi nimuat H nimuet uet Xeil 1382-17, A8a, Ae |dte wh fareedaa lokaa” aapo aapnee mai aapnee pa-ee. ||94]| Fareed, the people have their fate, and I have mine. ||94||
niu Hetats H fiefs A fifemr me SE I 1382-17, H8a, Fe |dte Th
aap savaareh mai mileh mai mili-aa sukh ho-ay.
God says, "If you reform yourself, you shall meet me, and meeting me, you shall be at peace.
ade A 3 Ha ae sole Ag Aa Sa ae cull (1382-18, Aaa, Ae edie A) fareedaa jay too mayraa ho-ay raheh sabh jag tayraa ho-ay. ||95] | O Fareed, if you will be mine, the whole world will be yours."||95]|
aut 83 gust fassa 8S tie Il (1382-18, Aa, AY sdte Ah kanDhee utai rukh-rhaa kichrak bannai Dheer. How long can the tree remain implanted on the river-bank?
odie ad sis sein forsg set ste ICE (1382-19, ABA, AU edie Th fareedaa kachai bhaa'dai rakhee-ai kichar taa-ee neer. ||96]| Fareed, how long can water be kept in a soft clay pot? ||96]|
ode Hoe fenue sto Te Sr orfenr Sts Il 1382-19, Aa, Ae |dte Fh fareedaa mahal nisakhan reh ga-ay vaasaa aa-i-aa tal.
Fareed, the mansions are vacant; those who lived in them have gone to live underground.
Yat 93c3s
dat A foHretor eons Jot HPs | 1383-1, Sa, Me edie Fh) goraa™ say nimaanee-aa bahsan roohaa”™ mal. They remain there, in those unhonored graves.
mrdt Aut dealt vos vig fx afs CDI (1383-1, A8a, Ae sdte TH) aakhee™ saykhaa bandagee chalan aj ke kal. ||97]|
O Shaykh, dedicate yourself to God; you will have to depart, today or tomorrow. [1971 |
edtet HGS a dar Se fen faG edinr] Sa Il (1383-2, A8a, AY edte Hh fareedaa ma-utai daa bannaa ayvai disai ji-o daree-aavai dhaahaa. Fareed, the shore of death looks like the river-bank, being eroded away.
Mat tHe Shmor Heht IS us AIT I (1383-2, Waa, Ae edte Fh agai dojak tapi-aa sunee-ai hool pavai kaahaahaa. Beyond is the burning hell, from which cries and shrieks are heard.
feaat 6 AS Ast iret fafa feast Sugers Il 1383-3, A8a, Ae edie Th iknaa no sabh sojhee aa-ee ik firday vayparvaahaa. Some understand this completely, while others wander around carelessly.
mH fa atfsur vot feta A esa Gara ¢cll (1383-3, H8a, Aer ete Ft)
amal je keeti-aa dunee vich say dargeh ohaagaa. ||98]| Those actions which are done in this world, shall be examined in the Court of the Lord. ||98]|
adhe udinre AS qa Fo" Aw AT | (1383-4, ABa, Fe |dte wh fareedaa daree-aavai kan"ai bagulaa baithaa kayl karay. Fareed, the crane perches on the river bank, playing joyfully.
AS AIS IS 6 wifss IA Ue Il (1383-4, ASa, Me edie Hh kayl karayday hanjh no achintay baaj pa-ay. While it is playing, a hawk suddenly pounces on it.
aa ue fsH ga & aot fendi Il 1383-4, waa, Ae ede Hh baaj pa-ay tis rab day kaylaa™ visree-aa™. When the Hawk of God attacks, playful sport is forgotten.
a nfs fefs o 33 vfs A et ga anit eK 1383-5, ABA, Ae |dte Th jo man chit na chaytay san so gaalee rab kee-aa™. ||99]| God does what is not expected or even considered. ||99]|
Ae 3 He tadt VS uret nife il 1383-5, ABs, Me ede Fh saadhay tarai man dayhuree chalai paanee ann. The body is nourished by water and grain.
unfes der vot fete fs umgat sfq II (1383-6, Ha, Ae edie A) aa-i-o bandaa dunee vich vat aasoonee baneh. The mortal comes into the world with high hopes.
HOAs HES A rer AS ISTH Bho Il 1383-6, H8a, Au |dte Hh) malkal ma-ut jaa‘ aavsee sabh darvaajay bhann. But when the Messenger of Death comes, it breaks down all the doors.
fsar fumrfaur arent niet fear dfs i 1383-7, naa, Fe |dte A) tin"aa pi-aari-aa bhaa-ee-aa™ agai ditaa baneh. It binds and gags the mortal, before the eyes of his beloved brothers.
aug der ufo vg Afsur & afs i 1383-7, ABA, Me ede Fh vaykhhu bandaa chali-aa chahu jani-aa dai ka‘ni". Behold, the mortal being is going away, carried on the shoulders of four men.
oder one fa ats vot fete waar ure aft I9OOI! (1383-8, A8a, Ae edte Hh fareedaa amal je keetay dunee vich dargeh aa-ay kamm. ||100]|
Fareed, only those good deeds done in the world will be of any use in the Court of the Lord. ||100]|
adter 38 afsordt faq Udon Hares fiat SH I (1383-8, Aaa, AY edte FH) fareedaa ha-o balihaaree tin" pankhee-aa jangal jin"aa vaas. Fareed, I am a sacrifice to those birds which live in the jungle.
aad vale afs eafs ga 3 safe UA NIOUI (1383-9, HBA, Fe sate Ff) kakar chugan thal vasan rab na chhodan paas. ||101]|
They peck at the roots and live on the ground, but they do not leave the Lord's side. ||101]|
ede ofs fedt ze afimr us 33 3fs ufo Il 1383-9, FBa, Ae ede A fareedaa rut firee van kambi-aa pat jharhay jharh paahi. Fareed, the seasons change, the woods shake and the leaves drop from the trees.
aed Ast Cent gde faa ats 902i (1383-10, Asa, He ste Ft)
chaaray kundaa dhoo‘dhee-aa™ rahan kithaa-oo naahi. ||102||
I have searched in the four directions, but I have not found any resting place anywhere. ||102||
odie ufs uder un adt axaeat ufss il (1383-10, H&a, Fe sdte Ah fareedaa paarh patolaa Dhaj karee kamblarhee pahiray-o. Fareed, I have torn my clothes to tatters; now I wear only a rough blanket.
frat ert Ag fies Aet SA AGE 903 (1383-11, ABs, Au |dte Ah jin"ee vaysee saho milai say-ee vays karay-o. ||103]]| I wear only those clothes which will lead me to meet my Lord. ||103]|
He 3 Il (383-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
anfe uder usst oaeat ufssfe i 1383-11, Fax, He 3) kaa-ay patolaa paarh-tee kamblarhee pahiray-ay. Why do you tear apart your fine clothes, and take to wearing a rough blanket?
Soa We dt Sfonr Ag fe A stots TH ase NAOBII (1383-12, Ha, He 3)
naanak ghar hee baithi-aa saho milai jay nee-at raas karay-i. ||104||
O Nanak, even sitting in your own home, you can meet the Lord, if your mind is in the right place. ||104] |
He U Il (1383-13)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
edhe ag frat efsoreior afs tafe nrarg Il (1383-13, Ha, Au edte Hh) fareedaa garab jin"aa vadi-aa-ee-aa Dhan joban aagaah. Fareed, those who are very proud of their greatness, wealth and youth,
uel 3% Uat fAS fea fa HtoT AOU (1383-13, Aaa, Au edie Fh) khaalee chalay Dhanee si-o tibay ji-o meehahu. ||105|| shall return empty-handed from their Lord, like sandhills after the rain. ||105]|
ode fs nu saree frat ferrfaGe or Il 1383-14, ABa, Fe edie A fareedaa tinaa mukh daraavanay jinaa visaari-on naa-o. Fareed, the faces of those who forget the Lord's Name are dreadful.
me vu wsfanr nat SBI o SE OE! (1383-14, Ha, Fe sdte Ah
aithai dukh ghanayri-aa agai tha-ur na thaa-o. ||106||
They suffer terrible pain here, and hereafter they find no place of rest or refuge. || 106] |
odie fues of 5 wfaGfo Hees nfeGfo i 1383-15, H8a, Ae edie Th
fareedaa pichhal raat na jaagi-ohi jeevad-rho mu-i-ohi.
Fareed, if you do not awaken in the early hours before dawn, you are dead while yet alive.
a 3 og ferfoor 3 aff & fenfeGfa 190211 1383-15, Hea, Ae sdte Ah jay tai rab visaari-aa ta rab na visari-ohi. ||107|| Although you have forgotten God, God has not forgotten you. ||107]|
He U Il (1383-16)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ode XZ SSH aT THITH | (1383-16, H8a, Fu |dte Hh) fareedaa kant rangvaalaa vadaa vaymuhtaaj. Fareed, my Husband Lord is full of joy; He is Great and Self-sufficient.
Mod Ast sfsur Sg Asst ATA IOI (1383-16, H8a, AY edte FH) alah saytee rati-aa ayhu sachaavaa™ saaj. ||108]| To be imbued with the Lord God - this is the most beautiful decoration. ||108]|
He U Il (1383-17)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ode vy AY fea ats feo 3 ofa fears II (1383-17, Ha, Ae |edte
fareedaa dukh sukh ik kar dil tay laahi vikaar.
Fareed, look upon pleasure and pain as the same; eradicate corruption from your heart.
WI Se A Fo st wat BIT NIOC! (1383-17, ABs, Fe sdte HA) alah bhaavai so bhalaa taa™ labhee darbaar. ||109]|
Whatever pleases the Lord God is good; understand this, and you will reach His Court. ||109]|
He U Il (1383-18)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
ote gat eet enet J at exfo ote il (1383-18, ASa, Au edie A) fareedaa dunee vajaa-ee vajdee too” bhee vajeh naal. Fareed, the world dances as it dances, and you dance with it as well.
Het HG o ener fAA mise ATET ATT AOI (1383-18, A8a, Ae |dte wh so-ee jee-o na vajdaa jis alhu kardaa saar. ||110]|| That soul alone does not dance with it, who is under the care of the Lord God. ||110]|
He U Il (1383-19)
mehlaa 5. Fifth Mehl:
edtea fee ast fen vat fag vat o fas oft II 1383-19, HBa, AY ete Th) fareedaa dil rataa is dunee si-o dunee na kitai kamm. Fareed, the heart is imbued with this world, but the world is of no use to it at all.
Yat ABs
fre satet arast A urea us asf AAAI (1384-1, Fae, He sdte A)
misal fakeeraa’ gaakh-rhee so paa-ee-ai poor karamm. ||111]|
It is so difficult to be like the fakeers - the Holy Saints; it is only achieved by perfect karma. ||111]|
ufss udd Soa" Sw St ust TFS Il (1384-1, waa, AY ste Th)
pahilai pahrai fulrhaa fal bhee pachhaa raat.
The first watch of the night brings flowers, and the later watches of the night bring fruit.
A Wale Sdfe A At AS SAS 199211 (1384-2, waa, Fe ste Fh) jo jaaga‘ni" lahann say saa-ee kanno daat. ||112]| Those who remain awake and aware, receive the gifts from the Lord. ||112]|
ast Afos Heber for 3s fs oe | (1384-2, Aaa, Ae adie Ff)
daatee saahib sandee-aa ki-aa chalai tis naal. The gifts are from our Lord and Master; who can force Him to bestow them?
fefa wale o wale feagr Afsur fe Bats 199311 1384-2, Aaa, Ay |dte Ah
ik jaaganday naa lahni" ikn"aa suti-aa day-ay uthaal. ||113]|
Some are awake, and do not receive them, while He awakens others from sleep to bless them. ||113]|
eels ATT F 38 sis wet ae I (1384-3, H@a, AY edte dh
dhoodhaydee-ay suhaag koo ta-o tan kaa-ee kor. You search for your Husband Lord; you must have some fault in your body.
faa’ or@ Hoaret faq" Sa B TT NAVI (1384-4, ABA, Fe edte Fh jin"aa naa-o suhaaganee tin"aa jhaak na hor. ||114]| Those who are known as happy soul-brides, do not look to others. ||114||
Had HS AHS & AS aT Ses Ill (1384-4, ABs, Ae adie FH) sabar manjh kamaan ay sabar kaa neehno. Within yourself, make patience the bow, and make patience the bowstring.
Aad Ae VS Wor Us S At WAWII (1384-4, ABA, Fe |dte FH)
sabar sandaa baan khaalak khataa na karee. ||115]|| Make patience the arrow, the Creator will not let you miss the target. ||115]|
Aad niefs Aradt 3q SS Wale I 1384-5, Ha, Ae edte Ah sabar andar saabree tan ayvai jaalayni". Those who are patient abide in patience; in this way, they burn their bodies.
dfs ontfa yerfe & 33 3 fan Bf NIE (1384-5, Hea, Fe edte Ah hon najeek khudaa-ay dai bhayt na kisai dayn. ||116]| They are close to the Lord, but they do not reveal their secret to anyone. ||116]|
Hag &79 AMrg AS der feg aaa Il (1384-6, nBa, Au edie AM) sabar ayhu su-aa-o jay too” bandaa dirh karahi. Let patience be your purpose in life; implant this within your being.
efa diets edinr@ efe o dtefs Sagat IAW II (1384-6, Hea, Fe |dte
vaDh theeveh daree-aa-o tut na theeveh vaahrhaa. ||117]|| In this way, you will grow into a great river; you will not break off into a tiny stream. ||117]|
adtet eager aust Sust udtfS i 1384-7, Aaa, Au |dte A
fareedaa darvaysee gaakh-rhee choprhee pareet. Fareed, it is difficult to be a dervish - a Holy Saint; it is easier to love bread when it is buttered.
feats fas weba voerret SHS NAIC 1384-7, ABA, AU edie Th ikan kinai chaalee-ai darvaysaavee reet. ||118]| Only a rare few follow the way of the Saints. ||118]|
39 SU 390 MAG TeE Ts TSE Il (1384-8, ASA, Au ste A) tan tapai tanoor ji-o baalan had bala“ni". My body is cooking like an oven; my bones are burning like firewood.
Udt wat ffs gat a yf fudt Hote WAAtl 394-8, Aaa, Ae edie Fh) pairee thakaa” sir julaa’ jay moo” piree mila’ni™. ||119]| If my feet become tired, I will walk on my head, if I can meet my Beloved. ||119]|
36 6 sue 360 fAS THE TS o ATG I (1384-9, HBA, Ae edie Hh) tan na tapaa-ay tanoor ji-o baalan had na baal. Do not heat up your body like an oven, and do not burn your bones like firewood.
fafs uct fomr efanr niefs fudt forts 192011 1384-9, H&a, AY |dte A
sir pairee ki-aa fayrhi-aa andar piree nihaal. ||120] |
What harm have your feet and head done to you? Behold your Beloved within yourself. ||120]|
UG Peel AASt AAS HS 3 Il (1384-10, ASA, Ae ste HH) ha-o dhoodhaydee sajnaa sajan maiday naal. I search for my Friend, but my Friend is already with me.
Sod ney o edt dente fe feurfs 19291 1384-10, A8a, Ae edie wh naanak alakh na lakhee-ai gurmukh day-ay dikhaal. ||121]|
O Nanak, the Unseen Lord cannot be seen; He is revealed only to the Gurmukh. []121]|
on afy sdfenr gar wirfeor are i 1384-11, A8a, Ae edte Ah hansaa daykh tarandi-aa bagaa aa-i-aa chaa-o. Seeing the swans swimming, the cranes became excited.
sfa ue aa aus fhe sf Gufs we 192211 (1384-11, Aaa, Fu ede FH)
dub mu-ay bag bapurhay sir tal upar paa-o. ||122||
The poor cranes were drowned to death, with their heads below the water and their feet sticking out above. ||122]||
H wfeor es JAD StH ats Aa Il 1384-12, H8a, Fe edie Ah mai jaani-aa vad hans hai taa‘ mai keetaa sang. I knew him as a great swan, so I associated with him.
A Wet ad sus AO S Sat Mia I2VZll (1384-12, ABA, Au |dte FH)
jay jaanaa bag bapurhaa janam na bhayrhee ang. ||123]|
If I had known that he was a only wretched crane, I would never in my life have crossed paths with him. ||123]|
for dA fomr saer aA a oefe ag I 1384-13, Aaa, Fu edie Ff) ki-aa hans ki-aa bagulaa jaa ka-o nadar Dharay. Who is a swan, and who is a crane, if God blesses him with His Glance of Grace?
A fA TS BST AI JH AP NIQil (1384-13, A8a, Ae sdte Ah jay tis bhaavai naankaa kaagahu hans karay. ||124]| If it pleases Him, O Nanak, He changes a crow into a swan. ||124| |
Heed Udt Jas adtes UMA Il (1384-14, Hae, Ay edie Hh sarvar pankhee haykrho faaheevaal pachaas. There is only one bird in the lake, but there are fifty trappers.
feg 36 sud as fant AS Sat MTA 92QUll 1384-14, Aaa, Ay ecte A ih tan lahree gad thi-aa sachay tayree aas. ||125]|
This body is caught in the waves of desire. O my True Lord, You are my only hope! ||125]|
ATS H WU ASS WE ACS A HSM HS I (1384-14, A8a, Au |dte HA) kavan so akhar kavan gun kavan so manee-aa mant. What is that word, what is that virtue, and what is that magic mantra?
aE H 2H UC adt fas Sfh ors AZ N9QENl 1384-15, Aaa, Ae |dte Hh) kavan so vayso ha-o karee jit vas aavai kant. ||126]| What are those clothes, which I can wear to captivate my Husband Lord? ||126]|
foze A ntug vee Te fava Heb HS I 1384-15, ABs, Ae edt] Ah nivan so akhar khavan gun jihbaa manee-aa mant. Humility is the word, forgiveness is the virtue, and sweet speech is the magic mantra.
& 3 3 3A afa St aft mrt AZ 19291 (1384-16, w8a, Ta ste Ht) ay tarai bhainay vays kar taa‘ vas aavee kant. ||127]| Wear these three robes, O sister, and you will captivate your Husband Lord. ||127]||
Hfs det df femrar Il 1384-16, ASA, Ae ete FH) mat hodee ho-ay i-aanaa. If you are wise, be simple;
ae de dfe fesrat il 1384-17, naa, Fe edie Th taan hoday ho-ay nitaanaa. if you are powerful, be weak;
Weds NITY SSE Il (1384-17, ABA, AY edie Th anhoday aap vandaa-ay. and when there is nothing to share, then share with others.
A MAT STS ASE WAC (1384-17, ABa, Au |dte rh ko aisaa bhagat sadaa-ay. ||128]| How rare is one who is known as such a devotee. ||128] |
fea fear 5 wefe Agat H Ae Tat Il (1384-17, A8a, Au edie Th ik fikaa na gaalaa-ay sabhnaa mai sachaa Dhanee. Do not utter even a single harsh word; your True Lord and Master abides in all.
fore 3 adt ofa Head AS MABE NIC (1384-18, Ha, Fa edte Ah hi-aa-o na kaihee thaahi maanak sabh amolvay. ||129] | Do not break anyone's heart; these are all priceless jewels. ||129]||
ABa" HS HEX SIS HS HAST Il (1384-18, Ha, Ay sete Ah sabhnaa man maanik thaahan mool machaa"gvaa. The minds of all are like precious jewels; to harm them is not good at all.
A 38 fudor a fhe frre 5 ad adt & 9801 (1384-19, Aaa, Ae edte jay ta-o piree-aa dee sik hi-aa-o na thaahay kahee daa. ||130]| If you desire your Beloved, then do not break anyone's heart. ||130]|
Uat qBcu qe ATS on aes usy fos fares nies vals mast AS aT YATE I 385-1)
ik-o‘kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Hea At Hear HIS U Il (1385-3)
sava-yay saree mukhbaak-y mehlaa 5. Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl:
mife UY AIST ATE ATE AF MM Il (1385-4, Heat, ve 5) aad purakh kartaar karan kaaran sabh aapay. O Primal Lord God, You Yourself are the Creator, the Cause of all causes.
Ava sus saute Aare we cfs fiery i (1385-4, Hea, He 5) sarab rahi-o bharpoor sagal ghat rahi-o bi-aapay. You are All-pervading everywhere, totally filling all hearts.
aug eu vals aS ao Sct afs Aga at gut ad mm afe ufs It (1385-5, Hea, Hs 5) ba-yaapat daykhee-ai jagat jaanai ka-un tayree gat sarab kee rakh-yaa karai aapay har pat.
You are seen pervading the world; who can know Your State? You protect all; You are our Lord and Master.
mfsenAt oifsars wird orf SsufS i (1385-5, Fea, He 5) abhinaasee abigat aapay aap utpat. O my Imperishable and Formless Lord, You formed Yourself.
SA Tot Sa nis St SH SS I (1385-6, Ae, He 5) aykai toohee aykai an naahee tum bhat. You are the One and Only; no one else is like You.
ofe nig ant useg aCe 3 ad deg nas fus d Ae YS A MT" Il (1385-6, HEU, He 5) har ant naahee paaraavaar ka-un hai karai beechaar jagat pitaa hai sarab paraan ko aDhaar.
O Lord, You have no end or limitation. Who can contemplate You? You are the Father of the world, the Support of all life.
Ae Soa sas fs sf yon AHAfs Sa Fito famr gars Il (1385-7, AEG, He 5)
jan naanak bhagat dar tul barahm samsar ayk jeeh ki-aa bakhaanai.
Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?
ot fa afe afe afe af Ae afsota al (1385-8, Hea, He 5)
haa™ ke bal bal bal bal sad balihaar. ||1|| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||1]|
vifys yes Afs nize sad fs ud dt 3 ud wre wre ufs II (1385-8, Hea, He 5)
amrit parvaah sar atul bhandaar bhar parai hee tay parai apar apaar par.
Streams of Ambrosial Nectar flow; Your Treasures are unweighable and overflowing in abundance. You are the Farthest of the far, Infinite and Incomparably Beautiful.
nus seo ats HfE 3 BAS Ofe Gufs uss Sa fory J ule il (1385-9, AEG, He 5) aapuno bhaavan kar mantar na doosro Dhar opat parloua aykai nimakh to ghar. You do whatever You please; You do not take advice from anyone else. In Your Home, creation and destruction happen in an instant.
nis od AHAlS Criord fasufs afe uses ats on Se afe afe il (1385-10, Hea, He 5) aan naahee samsar ujee-aaro nirmar kot paraachhat jaahi naam lee-ay har har.
No one else is equal to You; Your Light is Immaculate and Pure. Millions of sins are washed away, chanting Your Name, Har, Har.
Ae Soa sag efe sf yon AHAfs Sa Fito for gers Il 1385-11, AEG, He 5)
jan naanak bhagat dar tul barahm samsar ayk jeeh ki-aa bakhaanai.
Your devotees are at Your Door, God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?
ot fa af afs afs afe Ae afsota 21 (1385-11, Fea, He 5)
haa™ ke bal bal bal bal sad balihaar. ||2|| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||2||
AIS Se5 OG Sa SF ate fared ufs se Aa ufs wef F Ears il (1385-12, wet, we 5) sagal bhavan Dhaaray ayk thay" kee-ay bisthaaray poor rahi-o sarab meh aap hai niraaray.
You established all the worlds from within Yourself, and extended them outward. You are All-pervading amongst all, and yet You Yourself remain detached.
dfs as ot vis urd Aba As Afs aS Aas A VST Sa iw HITS Ill (1385-13, AEG, He 5) har gun naahee ant paaray jee-a jant sabh thaaray sagal ko daataa aykai alakh muraaray.
O Lord, there is no end or limit to Your Glorious Virtues; all beings and creatures are Yours. You are the Giver of all, the One Invisible Lord.
at 9tE
ny dt Ode Ud aves J Sud aga fade ost HY S HATS Il (1386-1, Hea, He 5)
aap hee Dhaaran Dhaaray kudrat hai daykhaaray baran chihan naahee mukh na masaaray.
He Himself supports the Universe, revealing His All-powerful Creative Potency. He has no color, form, mouth or beard.
Ae Soa sas afte sf yon AHAfs Sa Fito far gars Il 1386-1, Hea, He 5)
jan naanak bhagat dar tul barahm samsar ayk jeeh ki-aa bakhaanai.
Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?
ot fa af afs afe afe Ae afsota Sil (1386-2, Hea, He 5)
haa” ke bal bal bal bal sad balihaar. ||3]| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||3]|
Ava we fours atnfs 3 ars oS Cs 3 Cs ASA YS Sd FS Il (1386-3, Fea, Hs 5) sarab gun niDhaana™ keemat na ga-yaana Dha-yaana oochay tay oochou jaaneejai parabh tayro thaana”.
You are the Treasure of all virtue; who can know the value of Your spiritual wisdom and meditation? O God, Your Place is known as the highest of the high.
Ho US 3d US Sa AS F HIS Aes Sunt SE as F aT S Il (1386-3, AEG, we 5)
man Dhan tayro paraana” aykai soot hai jahaana’ kavan upmaa day-o baday tay badaana”.
Mind, wealth and the breath of life belong to You alone, Lord. The world is strung upon Your Thread. What praises can I give to You? You are the Greatest of the great.
WS ag 3d 3C nia org UC naw aor dT us AGA S UMS Il (1386-4, AEG, He 5) jaanai ka-un tayro bhay-o alakh apaar day-o akal kalaa hai parabh sarab ko Dhaana”. Who can know Your Mystery? O Unfathomable, Infinite, Divine Lord, Your Power is unstoppable. O God, You are the Support of all.
Ae Soa sag efe sf gon AHAfs Sa Fito far sus I (1386-5, AEG, He 5)
jan naanak bhagat dar tul barahm samsar ayk jeeh ki-aa bakhaanai.
Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?
ot fa af afe afs afs Ae afsota lei (1386-5, AEG, He 5)
haa” ke bal bal bal bal sad balihaar. ||41| I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||4||
fodarg nitard nse ude vifsaret Il (1386-6, Fea, H 5) nirankaar aakaar achhal pooran abhinaasee. O Formless, Formed, Undeceivable, Perfect, Imperishable,
TES TSS gu fess faarAt i 1386-6, Hee, Hs 5) harakhvant aanant roop nirmal bigaasee. Blissful, Unlimited, Beautiful, Immaculate, Blossoming Lord:
ae wets anizs nis fea fae act unt i (1386-7, Hea, He 5)
gun gaavahi bay-ant ant ik til nahee paasee.
Countless are those who sing Your Glorious Praises, but they do not know even a tiny bit of Your extent.
wag dfs faus A Ae us SHfo fest II (1386-7, Het, He 5) jaa ka-o ho‘hi kirpaal so jan parabh tumeh milaasee. That humble being upon whom You shower Your Mercy meets with You, O God.
fs ufs 3 ufe Ao fas faure ofs ofa sa Il (1386-8, Hea, He 5)
Dhan Dhan tay Dhan jan jih kirpaal har har bha-ya-o.
Blessed, blessed, blessed are those humble beings, upon whom the Lord, Har, Har, showers His Mercy.
dfs Ig soe fas ust fA ASH HIS BI a sfaS WUll (1386-8, Hea, He 5) har gur naanak jin parsi-o se janam maran duh thay rahi-o. ||5]| Whoever meets with the Lord through Guru Nanak is rid of both birth and death. ||5]|
Afs afs ofs Afs Afs AS AfSs sehr Il (1386-9, AEG, 2 5) sat sat har sat sat satay sat bhanee-ai. The Lord is said to be True, True, True, True, the Truest of the True.
CAT oS 3 MST UT UBTSS ASM Il (1386-9, AEG, He 5) doosar aan na avar purakh pa-uraatan sunee-ai. There is no other like Him. He is the Primal Being, the Primal Soul.
nifys ofs & ou SS vfs AS AY UTS II (1386-10, AEG, He 5) amrit har ko naam lait man sabh sukh paa-ay. Chanting the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, the mortal is blessed with all comforts.
Ad dA THs 30 AS feufs mews Il (1386-10, AEG, He 5) jayh rasan chaakhi-o tayh jan taripat aghaa-ay. Those who taste it with their tongues, those humble beings are satisfied and fulfilled.
fad Sag AUAS su AsHafs fsa fimrg Il 1386-11, Hea, He 5)
jih thaakur suparsan bha-yo satsangat tih pi-aar.
That person who becomes pleasing to his Lord and Master, loves the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
ofa ag aoa fag usth fq AS aw ate Burg él 1386-11, wea, He 5) har gur naanak jin" parsi-o tin" sabh kul kee-o uDhaar. ||6]| Whoever meets with the Lord through Guru Nanak, saves all his generations. ||6||
Ag Ast dye AY Ad ufs Ufse Il (1386-12, Hew, He 5) sach sabhaa deebaan sach sachay peh Dhari-o. True is His Congregation and His Court. The True Lord has established Truth.
Ae sufs foea AY SuTeH ates Il (1386-12, Hea, He 5) sachai takhat nivaas sach tapaavas kari-o. Sitting upon His Throne of Truth, He administers True Justice.
Afs frafie HATE urfu mgs o JHE Il (1386-13, AEG, He 5)
sach sirji-ya-o sansaar aap aabhul na bhula-o.
The True Lord Himself fashioned the Universe. He is Infallible, and does not make mistakes.
I36 OH nug aH BI US MSE Il (1386-13, Hea, He 5)
ratan naam apaar keem nahu pavai amula-o.
The Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord, is the jewel. Its value cannot be appraised - it is priceless.
fro faurs du@ afte Ava AY fssT US II (1386-14, Fea, Hs 5)
jih kirpaal ho-ya-o gobind sarab sukh tinhoo paa-ay.
That person, upon whom the Lord of the Universe showers His Mercy obtains all comforts.
dfs ag soa fag uth 3 safe fefs Afs 3 mre NDI (1386-14, Hea, Hs 5)
har gur naanak jin" parsi-o tay bahurh fir jon na aa-ay. ||7]|
Those who touch the Feet of the Lord through Guru Nanak, do not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation ever again. ||7]||
azo Aa ao ae We aco fafa Cats adh Il (1380-15, Heat, He 5)
kavan jog ka-un ga-yaan Dhayaan kavan biDh ustat karee-ai. What is the Yoga, what is the spiritual wisdom and meditation, and what is the way, to praise the Lord?
fra mfoa 3am ats fog ahr o ud II 1386-16, Hea, He 5)
siDh saaDhik taytees kor tir keem na paree-dai.
The Siddhas and seekers and the three hundred thirty million gods cannot find even a tiny bit of the Lord's Value.
quent Heats AY TE wiz o UES Il (1386-16, AEG, He 5)
barahmaadik sankaad saykh gun ant na paa-ay.
Neither Brahma, nor Sanak, nor the thousand-headed serpent king can find the limits of His Glorious Virtues.
wad aes adt afte ufs qa sfoS AHS I (1386-17, AEG, He 5)
agahu gahi-o nahee jaa-ay poor sarab rahi-o samaa-ay.
The Inapprehensible Lord cannot be apprehended. He is pervading and permeating amongst all.
fo act faa core yfs Afe AS Bat Sas Il (1386-17, Hea, 3 5)
jih kaatee silak da-yaal parabh say-ay jan lagay bhagtay.
Those whom God has mercifully freed from their nooses - those humble beings are attached to His devotional worship.
dfs ag aoa fag usfAS 3 fes CS Ae HAS ICI (1386-18, AEG, He 5)
har gur naanak jin" parsi-o tay it ut sadaa muktay. ||8]|
Those who meet with the Lord through Guru Nanak are liberated forever, here and hereafter. ||8]|
ys esg asrg ufsS wea fea AgAaT Il (1386-18, AEG, Hs 5) parabh daata-o daataar pari-ya-o jaachak ik sarnaa. I am a beggar; I seek the Sanctuary of God, the Giver of givers.
fie we HS 35 AT ofa SCAG SIS I (1386-19, Hea, He 5)
milai daan sant rayn jayh lag bha-ojal tarnaa.
Please bless me with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints; grasping them, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
faofs ag@ nraeth Had A SAT BTS Il (1386-19, Heat, He 5) binat kara-o ardaas sunhu jay thaakur bhaavai. Please listen to my prayer, if it pleases You, O my Lord and Master.
Yat YBCO
eg van His we safs feg He SITS Il (1387-1, Hea, He 5)
dayh daras man chaa-o bhagat ih man thehraavai.
My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. This mind abides in devotional worship.
we sag niors His AS ates Cust fea aH TSH II (1387-1, AEG, 43 5)
bali-o charaag anDh-yaar meh sabh kal uDhree ik naam Dharam.
The lamp is lit in the darkness; all are saved in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, through the One Name and faith in the Dharma.
Yas Ade dfs so Hf AS SSA DT USYIH IC (1387-2, wee, ve 5)
pargat sagal har bhavan meh jan naanak gur paarbarahm. ||9||
The Lord is revealed in all the worlds. O servant Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God. ||9]|
Hea At Hua HIS U (1387-3) Sava-yay saree mukhbaak-y mehlaa 5 Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yrrfe il (1387-3) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
ad td Hd efs sidt Ho ase ave afamrst Il 1387-4, AEG, He 5)
kaachee dayh moh fun baa‘Dhee sath kathor kucheel kugi-aanee.
This body is frail and transitory, and bound to emotional attachment. I am foolish, stone-hearted, filthy and unwise.
Wes FHS Ig Od Wes ursyqun at ats oot Aat Il (1387-4, AEG, He 5)
Dhaavat bharmat rahan nahee paavat paarbarahm kee gat nahee jaanee.
My mind wanders and wobbles, and will not hold steady. It does not know the state of the Supreme Lord God.
nas gu Went He HST fasTs feos aS uifsHrat il (1387-5, AEG, Hs 5)
joban roop maa-i-aa mad maataa bichrat bikal badou abhimaanee.
I am intoxicated with the wine of youth, beauty and the riches of Maya. I wander around perplexed, in excessive egotistical pride.
ud US ud nuere og fSer wa Het Aha aefs fosrst i 1387-5, AEG, we 5)
par Dhan par apvaad naar nindaa yeh meethee jee-a maahi hitaanee. The wealth and women of others, arguments and slander, are sweet and dear to my soul.
aed sf ass Guret Uys ASS YS visSAMHT II (1387-6, AEG, He 5)
balbanch chhap karat upaavaa paykhat sunat parabh antarjaamee.
I try to hide my deception, but God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts, sees and hears all.
His can vor Ae of ores Hates rhe & erat i 387-7, wet, He 5)
seel Dharam da-yaa such naasit aa-i-o saran jee-a kay daanee.
I have no humility, faith, compassion or purity, but I seek Your Sanctuary, O Giver of life.
ade ade Ansa fAdtus sty SI sea A AMM IAI 1387-7, AEG, He 5)
kaaran karan samrath sireeDhar raakh layho naanak kay su-aamee. ||1||
The All-powerful Lord is the Cause of causes. O Lord and Master of Nanak, please save me! ||1]|
atafs ads AIS HONS Hideo uy feeTsa AE Il (1387-8, Hea, He 5) keerat karan saran manmohan johan paap bidaaran ka-o. The Praises of the Creator, the Enticer of the mind, are potent to destroy sins.
fs 33s Sas AHeE As fafa goa ANT Bursa AG Il (1387-9, AEG, Hs 5) har taaran taran samrath sabhai biDh kulah samooh uDhaaran sa-o. The All-powerful Lord is the boat, to carry us across; He saves all our generations.
fos ofS mes wh AsHafs SdH vids Hes as TE Il (1387-9, Hea, nH 5)
chit chayt achayt jaan satsangat bharam anDhayr mohi-o kat Dha™-u.
O my unconscious mind, contemplate and remember Him in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Why are you wandering around, enticed by the darkness of doubt?
Has wudt oA ue fAHIS TH BY FAT Afar BE ll (1387-10, ea, we 5)
moorat gharee chasaa pal simran raam naam rasnaa sang la-o.
Remember Him in meditation, for an hour, for a moment, even for an instant. Chant the Name of the Lord with your tongue.
dee WH neu AY 806 afe HOH AT eu FE Il (1387-10, AEG, He 5)
hochha-o kaaj alap sukh banDhan kot jannam kahaa dukh bha*-u.
You are bound to worthless deeds and shallow pleasures; why do you spend millions of lifetimes wandering in such pain?
fret AS OH SH Soa TH Shar wrsH FAC TS iQ (1387-11, wea, He 5)
sikh-yaa sant naam bhaj naanak raam rang aatam si-o ra‘-u. ||2||
Chant and vibrate the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, through the Teachings of the Saints. Meditate on the Lord with love in your soul. ||2| |
dua 33 us 3fs fects vaos 20 Aetfe ot I (1387-12, AEG, He 5)
ranchak rayt khayt tan nirmit durlabh dayh savaar Dharee.
The little sperm is planted in the body-field of the mother, and the human body, so difficult to obtain, is formed.
we ue AU AY sus Ha] ate faufs oot Il (1387-12, Hea, He 5)
khaan paan soDhay sukh bhu'chat sankat kaat bipat haree.
He eats and drinks, and enjoys pleasures; his pains are taken away, and his suffering is gone.
Hs fust set mig dou gee at AS AS ust Il (1387-13, Fea, He 5) maat pitaa bhaa-ee ar banDhap boojhan kee sabh soojh paree. He is given the understanding to recognize mother, father, siblings and relatives.
gauHs des feo ufs fos ores foafe fin Adt I 4387-13, AEG, He 5) baraDhmaan hovat din parat nit aavat nikat bikhamm jaree. He grows day by day, as the horrible specter of old age comes closer and closer.
J do do ce wen fan fAufs Aomit Sa wet i (1387-14, AEG, He 5)
ray gun heen deen maa-i-aa kiram simar Su-aamee ayk gharee.
You worthless, petty worm of Maya - remember your Lord and Master, at least for an instant!
ag afs dg faus fau fafa aoa afte SdH Sct ISI (1387-14, AEG, Hs 5) kar geh layho kirpaal kirpaa niDh naanak kaat bharamm bharee. ||3]|
Please take Nanak's hand, O Merciful Ocean of Mercy, and take away this heavy load of doubt. ||3]|
¢ Ho HA far ufo asas AISA ATS Ht Hulse Il (1387-15, AEG, He 5)
ray man moos bilaa meh garbat kartab karat mahaa‘ mughnaa”.
O mind, you are a mouse, living in the mousehole of the body; you are so proud of yourself, but you act like an absolute fool.
Hus 8S 3o Afa sos Her Halse FHS UST Il (1387-16, AEG, He 5)
sampat dol jhol sang jhoolat maa-i-aa magan bharmat ghughnaa.
You swing in the swing of wealth, intoxicated with Maya, and you wander around like an owl.
HS sfest AH AY dau a fAG He Safe A UST II (1387-16, Hea, He 5)
sut banitaa saajan sukh banDhap taa si-o moh badhi-o so ghanaa.
You take pleasure in your children, spouse, friends and relatives; your emotional attachment to them is increasing.
Sf sta vid HH niag diss ma aes wor Il 1387-17, AEG, He 5)
bo-i-o beej aha’ mam ankur beetat a-oDh karat aghnaa’.
You have planted the seeds of egotism, and the sprout of possessiveness has come up. You pass your life making sinful mistakes.
fog Hae uns Hy fasus sas sats sa TAS Il (1387-17, AEG, He 5)
mirat manjaar pasaar mukh nirkhat bhu‘chat bhugat bhookh bhukhnaa.
The cat of death, with his mouth wide-open, is watching you. You eat food, but you are still hungry.
frnfs gure efenrs ASHafs Ba Ad ASS AUST Iii 1387-18, Hea, He 5)
simar gupaal da-i-aal satsangat naanak jag jaanat supnaa. ||4||
Meditate in remembrance on the Merciful Lord of the World, O Nanak, in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Know that the world is just a dream. ||4]|
Yat qsct
2d 6 dd 3 Od © ls" Hien HS AT BE aa Il (1388-1, AEG, He 5)
dayh na gayh na nayh na neetaa maa-i-aa mat kahaa la-o gaarahu.
Neither body, nor house, nor love last forever. You are intoxicated with Maya; how long will you be proud of them?
Bz 5 us 5 ued 5 Wes Fost Ws fee & faoag Il (1388-1, Hea, He 5)
chhatar na patar na cha-ur na chaavar bahtee jaat ridai na bichaarahu.
Neither crown, nor canopy, nor servants last forever. You do not consider in your heart that your life is passing away.
va 6 oi 3 an furs fea ufo foras ota foray il (1388-2, FEU, 8 5)
rath na asav na gaj singhaasan chhin meh ti-aagat naa“g siDhaarahu.
Neither chariots, nor horses, nor elephants or royal thrones shall last forever. In an instant, you will have to leave them, and depart naked.
He 3 ats 3 nts & won Afar 3 a fenfe feared Il (1388-3, Hew, He 5) soor na beer na meer na khaanam sang na ko-oo darisat nihaarahu. Neither warrior, nor hero, nor king or ruler last forever; see this with your eyes.
ae 3 Ge 5 AAS Set aS fas SB AT SST Il (1388-3, ea, Hs 5)
kot na ot na kos na chhotaa karat bikaar do-oo kar jhaarahu.
Neither fortress, nor shelter, nor treasure will save you; doing evil deeds, you shall depart empty-handed.
fu 3 UZ ABZ AHS AY Cues AS fase at stag Il (1388-4, met, He 5)
mitar na putar kaltar saajan sakh ultat jaat birakh kee chhaa‘rahu.
Friends, children, spouses and friends - none of them last forever; they change like the shade of a tree.
da cores usd ys uss feo fea fAHag via wruTag I (1388-5, AEG, He 5)
deen da-yaal purakh parabh pooran chhin chhin simrahu agam apaarahu. God is the Perfect Primal Being, Merciful to the meek; each and every instant, meditate in remembrance on Him, the Inaccessible and Infinite.
Alufs oa Hafe Soa AS U sales faur afte Stag WUll 1388-5, Fea, He 5)
sareepat naath saran naanak jan hay bhagvant kirpaa kar taarahu. ||5]|
O Great Lord and Master, servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; please shower him with Your Mercy, and carry him across. ||5||
UTS HS BS Ha Ade ds ws FS B ur Il (1388-6, wea, ne 5)
paraan maan daan mag johan heet cheet day lay lay paaree.
I have used up my breath of life, sold my self-respect, begged for charity, committed highway robbery, and dedicated my consciousness to the love and pursuit of acquiring wealth.
WMHs AS HIS AS set ST SS Tet foot Il (1388-6, wet, He 5)
Saajan sain meet sut bhaa-ee taahoo tay lay rakhee niraaree.
I have kept it secretly hidden from my friends, relatives, companions, children and siblings.
Wes ures ad aHeo fes fafa ass mu So A Il (1388-7, AEG, He 5) Dhaavan paavan koor kamaavan ih biDh karat a-oDh tan jaaree. I ran around practicing falsehood, burning up my body and growing old.
AGH UdH HAH AY OH Vue Afar Aare fafa Tet i (1388-8, AEG, He 5)
karam Dharam sanjam such naymaa chanchal sang sagal biDh haaree.
I gave up good deeds, righteousness and Dharma, self-discipline, purity, religious vows and all good ways; I associated with the fickle Maya.
un Udt fasy mmees ag fafa fs sf mifS oct I cisss-s, Hea, ne 5)
pas pankhee birakh asthaavar baho biDh jon bharmi-o at bhaaree.
Beasts and birds, trees and mountains - in so many ways, I wandered lost in reincarnation.
fas Us TA STH Set fAHfes Star ova yroufs Are Il (1388-9, wee, He 5)
khin pal chasaa naam nahee simri-o deenaa naath paraanpat saaree. I did not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord, for a moment, or even an instant. He is the Master of the meek, the Lord of all life.
ue UTS HIS JA SH Nis at ag IS AST ura Il (1388-9, Hea, He 5)
khaan paan meeth ras bhojan ant kee baar hot kat khaaree.
The food and drink, and the sweet and tasty dishes became totally bitter at the last moment.
Soa HS VIO Afa Gud dfs wheur nae ve Als st MEI (1388-10, AEG, He 5)
naanak sant charan sang uDhray hor maa-i-aa magan chalay sabh daaree. ||6||
O Nanak, I was saved in the Society of the Saints, at their feet; the others, intoxicated with Maya, have gone, leaving everything behind. ||6||
qoute fre ee Hotad sla dAfa SAT TS WSS Il (1388-11, Wea, He 5)
barahmaadik siv chhand muneesur rasak rasak thaakur gun gaavat.
Brahma, Shiva, the Vedas and the silent sages sing the Glorious Praises of their Lord and Master with love and delight.
fe nise uns dau cafe aa ures efs OSs II (1388-11, Hea, He 5) indar munindar khojtay gorakh Dharan gagan aavat fun Dhaavat.
Indra, Vishnu and Gorakh, who come to earth and then go to heaven again, seek the Lord.
faa Hoy te nig woe fea faq a at HEH © USS Il (1388-12, FET, Hs 5)
siDh manukh-y dayv ar daanav ik til taa Ko maram na paavat.
The Siddhas, human beings, gods and demons cannot find even a tiny bit of His Mystery.
fipn ys ulfS Un aA sast ofe Ae 3 a Path AHTSS Il (1388-13, Fea, He 5)
pari-a parabh pareet paraym ras bhagtee har jan taa kai daras samaavat.
The Lord's humble servants are imbued with love and affection for God their Beloved; in the delight of devotional worship, they are absorbed in the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
fsnfs faorfa ure aG arefs He US IAS Hae wih Wes Il (1388-13, AEG, He 5)
tiseh ti-aag aan ka-o jaacheh mukh dant rasan sagal ghas jaavat.
But those who forsake Him, and beg from another, shall see their mouths, teeth and tongues wear away.
o Ho Hs fants FUSS Soa WA SEfT AHSTSS IDI (1388-14, Het, He 5)
ray man moorh simar sukh-daata naanak daas tujheh samjhaavat. ||7||
O my foolish mind, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the Giver of peace. Slave Nanak imparts these teachings. ||7]|
Hfeur ga fada aes gH HT & af gate ufsS F Il (1388-15, ea, He 5)
maa-i-aa rang birang karat bharam moh kai koop gubaar pari-o hai.
The pleasures of Maya shall fade away. In doubt, the mortal falls into the deep dark pit of emotional attachment.
Sar ag mort 3 Hes fart ony fat Geg sfoG J il (1388-15, wet, He 5)
aytaa gab akaas na maavat bistaa ast kiram udar bhari-o hai.
He is so proud, even the sky cannot contain him. His belly is filled with manure, bones and worms.
zd fen ofe no fafimr a ug os aifs nifamre ofa J Il 1388-16, Hea, He 5)
dah dis Dhaa-ay mahaa bikhi-aa ka-o par Dhan chheen agi-aan hari-o hai.
He runs around in the ten directions, for the sake of the great poison of corruption. He steals the wealth of others, and in the end, he is destroyed by his own ignorance.
nae as Ae sf aS AHS 3o fas Hiss F I 1388-17, AEG, we 5)
joban beet jaraa rog garsi-o jamdootan dann mirat mari-o hai.
His youth passes away, the illnesses of old age seize him, and the Messenger of Death punishes him; such is the death he dies.
mised rife Has da FIS AAS sy Aas alas F I 1388-17, wea, He 5)
anik jon sankat narak bhu‘chat saasan dookh garat gari-o hai.
He suffers the agony of hell in countless incarnations; he rots away in the pit of pain and condemnation.
un safs Gusfs A ooa afs faa Ay urfu afeS F NCI 1388-18, Fea, He 5) paraym bhagat uDhrahi say naanak kar kirpaa sant aap kari-o hai. ||8]|
O Nanak, those whom the Saint mercifully takes as his own, are carried across by their loving devotional worship. ||8]|
TE AHI SB AAG HSTs UTS Jet MTA THe Il (1388-19, Het, we 5)
gun samooh fal sagal manorath pooran ho-ee aas hamaaree.
All virtues are obtained, all fruits and rewards, and the desires of the mind; my hopes have been totally fulfilled.
ni@ua HZ Sz us eu Jd Asa da USS Tears Il (1388-19, wea, ue 5)
a-ukhaDh mantar tantar par dukh har sarab rog khandan gunkaaree.
The Medicine, the Mantra, the Magic Charm, will cure all illnesses and totally take away all pain.
uar qatt aH au He HSA fA faofA wis ofs oH Sard i (1389-1, Hea, He 5)
kaam kroDh mad matsar tarisnaa binas jaahi har naam uchaaree. Lust, anger, egotism, jealousy and desire are eliminated by chanting the Name of the Lord.
fenars ae stus Afs fafoor sae aH fase ys ord Il (1389-2, Heat, ne 5)
isnaan daan taapan such kiri-aa charan kamal hirdai parabh Dhaaree.
The merits of cleansing baths, charity, penance, purity and good deeds, are obtained by enshrining the Lotus Feet of God within the heart.
Ao Hts Aa fe dou Aba os ys yrs miurdt Il (1389-2, wea, we 5)
Saajan meet sakhaa har banDhap jee-a Dhaan parabh paraan aDhaaree.
The Lord is my Friend, my Very Best Friend, Companion and Relative. God is the Sustenance of the soul, the Support of the breath of life.
Ge adt Aum ANGaT BSA VA HET afsast itil (1389-3, Feat, Hs 5)
ot gahee su-aamee samartheh naanak daas sadaa balihaaree. ||9|| I have grasped the Shelter and Support of my All-powerful Lord and Master; slave Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||9||
neq afeS 3 AS UN TA BIS AHS Ala I (1389-3, Hea, Hs 5) aavaDh kati-o na jaat paraym ras charan kamal sang. Weapons cannot cut that person who delights in the love of the Lord's Lotus Feet.
aefs afaG o as fad He Tan Ufa Il (1389-4, Hea, He 5) daavan banDhi-o na jaat biDhay man daras mag.
Ropes cannot bind that person whose mind is pierced through by the Vision of the Lord's Way.
ured Ass 3 AS SoS Ae Ofs Bar Il (1389-4, Het, He 5)
paavak jari-o na jaat rahi-o jan Dhoor lag.
Fire cannot burn that person who is attached to the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant.
ald o AatA Ste vata ofa ufa ufar il (1389-5, Hea, He 5) neer na saakas bor chaleh har panth pag. Water cannot drown that person whose feet walk on the Lord's Path.
Soa da ey mw He fee ofa aH far WANAOM (1389-5, Hea, Hz 5)
naanak rog dokh agh moh chhiday har naam khag. ||1]|10]]|
O Nanak, diseases, faults, sinful mistakes and emotional attachment are pierced by the Arrow of the Name. ||1||10]|
Cen afs wa ag ast fasta mifsx ATA BT YENI Il (1389-6, Fett, He 5)
udam kar laagay baho bhaatee bichrahi anik saastar baho khatoo-aa.
People are engaged in making all sorts of efforts; they contemplate the various aspects of the six Shaastras.
SAH Bate Stee AT FHS HUH Sd suf ag Hemi Il (1389-7, Hea, He 5)
bhasam lagaa-ay tirath baho bharamtay sookham dayh banDheh baho jatoo-aa. Rubbing ashes all over their bodies, they wander around at the various sacred shrines of pilgrimage; they fast until their bodies are emaciated, and braid their hair into tangled messes.
fag dfs sno nae va wes fA Un sete AS A Tene Il (1389-7, AEG, He 5)
bin har bhajan sagal dukh paavat ji-o paraym badhaa-ay soot kay hatoo-aa. Without devotional worship of the Lord, they all suffer in pain, caught in the tangled web of their love.
UA UX AIS AH ifea sits aefa ats Fem NIANAAUION (1389-8, Hee, Hz 5) poojaa chakar karat sompaakaa anik bhaa‘t thaateh kar thatoo-aa. ||2||11]|20]| They perform worship ceremonies, draw ritual marks on their bodies, cook their own food fanatically, and make pompous shows of themselves in all sorts of ways. [|2]]12][20]|
HZElS HIG uf XA (1389-10) Sava-ee-ay mahlay pahilay kay 1 Swaiyas In Praise Of The First Mehl:
qe Afsars yAfe II (1389-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fea Hfs use fomrfe gages | (1389-11, Heete HTs ufsds 2, as) ik man purakh Dhi-aa-ay bardaataa. Meditate single-mindedly on the Primal Lord God, the Bestower of blessings.
HS Hog Het faftmrst | 1389-11, Heete nod ufss 2, as) sant sahaar sadaa bikhi-aataa. He is the Helper and Support of the Saints, manifest forever.
3H Udo B fee a|NS Il (1389-11, Hees nad ufys &, as) taas charan lay ridai basaava-o. Grasp His Feet and enshrine them in your heart.
3B UGH TT Sot Ts WES IU 1389-12, Aeete nas ufss &, aw) ta-O param guroo naanak gun gaava-o. ||1]| Then, let us sing the Glorious Praises of the most exalted Guru Nanak. ||1]|
TEE Ts UH TI AY AI UIs faese ABE Ag Il (1389-12, Heete nas ufyds a, as) gaava-o gun param guroo sukh saagar durat nivaaran sabad saray.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the most exalted Guru Nanak, the Ocean of peace, the Eradicator of sins, the sacred pool of the Shabad, the Word of God.
Wefs asta dts Hfs Aare Hat Ham foMrg Us I (1389-13, Hee HTS ufys 3, as) gaavahi gambheer Dheer mat saagar jogee jangam Dhi-aan Dharay.
The beings of deep and profound understanding, oceans of wisdom, sing of Him; the Yogis and wandering hermits meditate on Him.
wets feats sas ufserfea uirsy 3H fafs rte | (389-13, neet® Had ufsd 2, a) gaavahi indraad bhagat par-hilaadik aatam ras jin jaani-o. Indra and devotees like Prahlaad, who know the joy of the soul, sing of Him.
afa a% AHA Wee ad aoa TH Ha fafs HES QN (389-14, Hee HIS ufvd 2, as) kab kal sujas gaava-o gur naanak raaj jog jin maani-o. ||2||
KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||2||
Weta Hoots Fas AAAS Ths TA YUIS ATA AB Il (1389-15, Hee wTs ufys 2, ws)
gaavahi jankaad jugat jogaysur har ras pooran sarab kalaa. King Janak and the great Yogic heroes of the Lord's Way, sing the Praises of the All- powerful Primal Being, filled with the sublime essence of the Lord.
wets Aeate AG frofea His AS Wels Mew SH Il (1389-15, Hee ngs ufyds 2, as) gaavahi sankaad saaDh siDhaadik mun jan gaavahi achhal chhalaa.
Sanak and Brahma's sons, the Saadhus and Siddhas, the silent sages and humble servants of the Lord sing the Praises of Guru Nanak, who cannot be deceived by the great deceiver.
We Te GH nies sed sats ate oA APSE Il (1389-16, Heete Hs ufyd B, aw) gaavai gun Dhom atal mandlavai bhagat bhaa-ay ras jaani-o.
Dhoma the seer and Dhroo, whose realm is unmoving, sing the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the ecstasy of loving devotional worship.
afa a% AAA Wee ad aoa TH Ha fafs wfES 3 1389-17, Heete Hs ufyd B, a) kab kal sujas gaava-o gur naanak raaj jog jin maani-o. ||3]|
KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||3]|
Wefs afuerte onfe HAAS wRIdUT MISTS Ss Il (1389-17, Hee HTS ufys B, as) gaavahi kapilaad aad jogaysur aprampar avtaar varo.
Kapila and the other Yogis sing of Guru Nanak. He is the Avataar, the Incarnation of the Infinite Lord.
We AHedls UTATHAD Ad AST dU SH Ts Il (1389-18, Heete nd ulyd 2, as) gaavai jamadgan parasraamaysur kar kuthaar ragh tayj hari-o.
Parasraam the son of Jamdagan, whose axe and powers were taken away by Raghuvira, sing of Him.
Gd mgg fees Te we AoasH fats WES I (1389-19, Hees Hd ufos 3, aw)
uDhou akroor bidar gun gaavai sarbaatam jin jaani-o.
Udho, Akrur and Bidur sing the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the Lord, the Soul of All.
afa a% AHA Wee ad aoa TH Ha fafs wes gil 1389-19, nese HIS ufyd 2, as) kab kal sujas gaava-o gur naanak raaj jog jin maani-o. ||4||
KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||4]|
Yat q3ato
Vets Te sds Bhs ue ean qoHfea frndfa Ts Il 1390-1, neste uss ufss 2, as) gaavahi gun baran chaar khat darsan barahmaadik simranth gunaa.
The four castes and the six Shaastras sing His Glorious Praises; Brahma and the others contemplate His Virtues.
ae Te AA AGA fava oA vite nifs fee ofa Gor il (1390-2, Feet® Has ufyd 2, aw) gaavai gun says sahas jihbaa ras aad ant liv laag Dhunaa.
The thousand-tongued serpent king sings His Praises with delight, remaining lovingly attached to Him.
We TE HTeS Saat fats fomre fodste wfss i 1390-2, pete uss ufyds 2, aw) gaavai gun mahaaday-o bairaagee jin Dhi-aan nirantar jaani-o.
Shiva, detached and beyond desire, sings the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the Lord's endless meditation.
afa a@ AHA Wee ad aoa TH Ha fafs HES Null 1390-3, Hee Hass ufyd 2, a) kab kal sujas gaava-o gur naanak raaj jog jin maani-o. ||5||
KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||5]|
vA Ha Whee afhG foses fasts i 1390-4, Heet® Had ufd 2, a)
raaj jog maani-o basi-o nirvair ridantar.
He mastered Raja Yoga, and enjoys sovereignty over both worlds; the Lord, beyond hate and revenge, is enshrined within His Heart.
fqrfe Aare Cudt oft & sfeG fadste i 1390-4, neet® nod ufsd 3, a)
sarisat sagal uDhree naam lay tari-o nirantar.
The whole world is saved, and carried across, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
ae wets Hoate wife Aoate Aad Slat Il (1390-5, Heels Has ufys 2, ae)
gun gaavahi sankaad aad jankaad jugah lag. Sanak and Janak and the others sing His Praises, age after age.
fs ufs ag Ufs HoH HAGE 3S Afar Il (1390-5, Fecte Has ufyd , aw) Dhan Dhan gur Dhan janam sakyath bhalou jag. Blessed, blessed, blessed and fruitful is the sublime birth of the Guru into the world.
uss udt Aare Ufe afe AS oe SUSE | (1390-6, Heete nd ufyd 2, as)
paataal puree jaikaar Dhun kab jan kal vakhaani-o. Even in the nether regions, His Victory is celebrated; so says KAL the poet.
dfs oH dha Soa Td TH Aa SHAS Ell 1390-6, Heete Hass ufyd B, aw)
har naam rasik naanak gur raaj jog tai maani-o. ||6]|
You are blessed with the Nectar of the Lord's Name, O Guru Nanak; You have mastered Raja Yoga, and enjoy sovereignty over both worlds. ||6||
Asafa 3 wfsG sfeG afs wea afeE Il 1390-7, neste 17s ufys 2, ae)
satjug tai maani-o chhali-o bal baavan bhaa-i-o.
In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, You were pleased to deceive Baal the king, in the form of a dwarf.
33 3 fs oy awen ate I (1390-38, Heet® nad ufsd 2, aw) taraytai tai maani-o raam raghoovans kahaa-i-o. In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yuga, You were called Raam of the Raghu dynasty.
eumufs fare Hats aA fassse atG Il (1390-8, Het? 17d ufss 3, as)
du-aapur krisan muraar kans kirtaarath kee-o.
In the Brass Age of Dwaapur Yuga, You were Krishna; You killed Mur the demon and saved Kans.
Cqns a@ TH nS Sas Ho BE Il (1390-9, Heet® wos ufvd 2, aw)
ugarsain ka-o raaj abhai bhagtah jan dee-o.
You blessed Ugrasain with a kingdom, and You blessed Your humble devotees with fearlessness.
afsafa une Soa Ts vide yng ATES Il (1390-9, Heet® uss ufss 3, as)
kalijug parmaan naanak gur angad amar kahaa-i-o.
In the Iron Age, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, You are known and accepted as Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Das.
At ag oH uifses nee orfe uote SHES DI (1390-10, Heete Hod ufsd 3, 3B) Saree guroo raaj abichal atal aad purakh furmaa-i-o. ||7]||
The sovereign rule of the Great Guru is unchanging and permanent, according the Command of the Primal Lord God. ||7]||
Ve We seen sas ACS fFSyS I (1390-10, Heete was ufys 2, a) gun gaavai ravidaas bhagat jaidayv tarilochan. His Glorious Praises are sung by the devotees Ravi Daas, Jai Dayv and Trilochan.
SH SIs AGT AST Wefs AH BIS Il (1390-11, Aes HTS ufys a, aw)
naamaa bhagat kabeer sadaa gaavahi sam lochan.
The devotees Naam Dayv and Kabeer praise Him continually, knowing Him to be even-eyed.
sas Sf Te de Af MSH Ja WE Il (1390-11, Hees Is ufvd &, as) bhagat bayn gun ravai sahj aatam rang maanai. The devotee Baynee sings His Praises; He intuitively enjoys the ecstasy of the soul.
na fourfs as fomrfs far ys nies 3 ATS Il (1390-12, Hehe Hos ufys 2, as)
jog Dhi-aan gur gi-aan binaa parabh avar na jaanai.
He is the Master of Yoga and meditation, and the spiritual wisdom of the Guru; He knows none other except God.
AYue@ udtus ae ge aan fete AA aE It 1390-12, Heet® nad ufys 2, aw) sukh-day-o parteekh-yat gun ravai gotam rikh jas gaa-i-o. Sukh Dayv and Preekhyat sing His Praises, and Gautam the rishi sings His Praise.
afta a AHA aoa Id fos ese Afar StES Ici (1390-13, Heete Has ufsd 3, as)
kab kal sujas naanak gur nit navtan jag chhaa-i-o. ||8]| Says KAL the poet, the ever-fresh praises of Guru Nanak are spread throughout the world. ||8]|
ae Wefs warts sas ararfe Stan Il (1390-13, Heete Had ufs &, as)
gun gaavahi paa-yaal bhagat naagaad bhuyangam.
In the nether worlds, His Praises are sung by the devotees like Shaysh-naag in serpent form.
Hee Te Je AS Halt AfS HaM Il 1390-14, Hees nd ufys &, as) mahaaday-o gun ravai sadaa jogee jat jangam. Shiva, the Yogis and the wandering hermits sing His Praises forever.
ae we ufs wa fafs de wage stefent il (1390-14, next? was ufss 3, a) gun gaavai mun bayaas jin bayd ba-yaakaran beechaari-a. Vyaas the silent sage, who studied the Vedas and its grammar, sings His Praise.
qu ae Gud fafs gat As fqAfe Hedh II (1390-15, Heete Hos ufys 2, as) barahmaa gun uchrai jin hukam sabh sarisat savaaree-a. His Praises are sung by Brahma, who created the entire universe by God's Command.
quHs us use Aon Te fesae AH ATES Il (1390-15, Heete was ufss B, 3) barahmand khand pooran barahm gun nirgun sam jaani-o.
God fills the galaxies and realms of the universe; He is known to be the same, manifest and unmanifest.
AU 8G AHA sod Td Ada wa fats whe ti 1390-16, Het Has ufys B, as) jap kal sujas naanak gur sahj jog jin maani-o. ||9|| KAL chants the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Yoga. ||9]|
ae Wefs oe ova Ufs ag Ate ANTES Il (1390-17, Fete Has ufvd 3, aw)
gun gaavahi nav naath Dhan gur saach samaa-i-o.
The nine masters of Yoga sing His Praises; blessed is the Guru, who is merged into the True Lord.
HUST TS Je HS Vas ATES | (1390-17, Heet® uss ufys 2, as) maa‘Dhaataa gun ravai jayn chakarvai kahaa-i-o. Maandhaataa, who called himself ruler of all the world, sings His Praises.
Te We afe TE Aus uss SAS Il (1390-17, Heete nss ufvs 2, a) gun gaavai bal raa-o sapat paataal basantou. Bal the king, dwelling in the seventh underworld, sings His Praises.
ssafe qe Gud Ae aa Afa TIS Il (1390-18, Hees nd ufys 2, as) bharthar gun uchrai sadaa gur sang rahantou. Bhart'har, abiding forever with Gorakh, his guru, sings His Praises.
usar ugss nial Td SSA AA WES Il (1390-18, Hee Hs ufys 3, as) doorbaa paroora-o angrai gur naanak jas gaa-i-o. Doorbaasaa, King Puro and Angra sing the Praises of Guru Nanak.
afta ae AAA aoa ae ule we AOfA ANTES IAOIl (1390-19, Heete Hs ufd 3, as)
kab kal sujas naanak gur ghat ghat sahj samaa-i-o. ||10]|| Says KAL the poet, the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak intuitively permeate each and every heart. ||10]|
Yat 93x
AES HIG TH A 2 (1391-1) Sava-ee-ay mahlay doojay kay 2 Swaiyas In Praise Of The Second Mehl:
qe Afsas yArfe it (1391-1)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het use UG ATS AGE AIST AGE ANGE Il (1391-2, Aeet® yas EA 2, aw AT) so-ee purakh Dhan kartaa kaaran kartaar karan samratho. Blessed is the Primal Lord God, the Creator, the All-powerful Cause of causes.
Asay US Sa HAStA SH Ufes fats Ta il (1391-2, wees was vA a, aw ATs) satguroo Dhan naanak mastak tum Dhari-o jin hatho. Blessed is the True Guru Nanak, who placed His hand upon Your forehead.
3 ofa HAsta oa Aofs fhe zo@ efx afs og ae ufo Sfoa maria Il 1391-3, Heet® Hdd TA A, AG Add)
ta Dhari-o mastak hath sahj ami-o vuth-o chhaj sur nar gan mun bohiy agaaj.
When He placed His hand upon Your forehead, then the celestial nectar began to rain down in torrents; the gods and human beings, heavenly heralds and sages were drenched in its fragrance.
He deg ore dee Wes BE asin us gs Sa wis Thy S AHA Il (1391-3, Hees wd TA A, AG Add)
maari-o kantak kaal garaj Dhaavat lee-o baraj panch bhoot ayk ghar raakh lay samaj. You challenged and subdued the cruel demon of death; You restrained Your wandering mind; You overpowered the five demons and You keep them in one home.
Ad MSC as eurfs dats AHS As va Banfs foe ate fodorfa it 391-4, Hecke nas EA a, AS Ads)
jag jeeta-o gur du-aar khayleh samat saar rath unman liv raakh nirankaar.
Through the Guru's Door, the Gurdwara, You have conquered the world; You play the game even-handedly. You keep the flow of your love steady for the Formless Lord.
ag ates ae Aud Aus dh HSTg Bel Aas Ag uaa Hats UA (1391-5, HEete Hs EH a, AS AU)
kaho keerat kal sahaar sapat deep majhaar lahnaa jagtar gur paras muraar. ||1|| O Kal Sahaar, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||1]|
W at feafe nifts os aeu ule Care fSuHe orate AT BSA TMS Il (1391-6, AES nTs TA A, AG Add)
jaa kee darisat amrit Dhaar kaalukh khan utaar timar ag-yaan jaahi daras du-aar. The Stream of Ambrosial Nectar from His eyes washes away the slime and filth of sins; the sight of His door dispels the darkness of ignorance.
Gf #7 Aefo Hae AS aust fun ae 3 oa Be Bata ale fagsra Il (1391-7, Feete nds EA A, AG Add)
o-ay jo sayveh sabad saar gaakh-rhee bikham kaar tay nar bhav utaar kee-ay nirbhaar.
Whoever accomplishes this most difficult task of contemplating the most sublime Word of the Shabad - those people cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and cast off their loads of sin.
ASHdts Aon Ate Ae Td stots feHdt gs Ate usH flmrfe i c301-8, Heete Hos EA a, AS Ad)
satsangat sahj saar jaageelay gur beechaar nimmree bhoot sadeev param pi-aar. The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is celestial and sublime; whoever remains awake and aware, contemplating the Guru, embodies humility, and is imbued forever with the Supreme Love of the Lord.
ag ates ae Add Aus chy HS Bel Aas Ag Uda Hate MQM (391-8, Hees us FA a, AS Add)
kaho keerat kal sahaar sapat deep majhaar lahnaa jagtar gur paras muraar. ||2||
O Kal Sahaar, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||2]|
3 38 fefs@ on »nrg fone 7H faerg wfoe fro AHO Hho & rorg I (1391-9, Aeete HIG EA A, AG Add)
tai ta-o darirha-o naam apaar bimal jaas bithaar saaDhik siDh sujan jee-aa ko aDhaar. You hold tight to the Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord; Your expanse is immaculate. You are the Support of the Siddhas and seekers, and the good and humble beings.
33 Hoa Te ngs Hag HATE Ag Jold Ady AS UH Fes Il (1391-10, Hees was EA
a, AS AI)
too taa janik raajaa a-utaar sabad sansaar saar raheh jagtar jal padam beechaar. You are the incarnation of King Janak; the contemplation of Your Shabad is sublime throughout the universe. You abide in the world like the lotus on the water.
afsu 3g da faeg HATS Su foes ors fafafa 3d Sa fos 3g II 1391-11, Heete Hd TA A, AG Add)
kalip tar rog bidaar sansaar taap nivaar aatmaa taribaDh tayrai ayk liv taar.
Like the Elyisan Tree, You cure all illnesses and take away the sufferings of the world. The three-phased soul is lovingly attuned to You alone.
ag atefs ae Add Aus dh HST Bel Aas Ag usta Hats SI (391-12, Rese ws FA a, AS AIT)
kaho keerat kal sahaar sapat deep majhaar lahnaa jagtar gur paras muraar. ||3]|
O Kal Sahaar, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||3]|
3 a geofa utes we Afr ag uses Afo mina fafs aot Bouts Il (1391-13, Feet? HIG TH A, AG Add)
tai taa hadrath paa-i-o maan sayvi-aa gur parvaan saaDh ajgar jin kee-aa unmaan. You were blessed with glory by the Prophet; You serve the Guru, certified by the Lord, who has subdued the snake of the mind, and who abides in the state of sublime bliss.
fe dfs Gan AHS MTsHt Ssfemrs AWEeba nies als TT uss Il (1391-13, Hee ns EA a, AS Ad)
har har daras samaan aatmaa vantgi-aan jaanee-a akal gat gur parvaan.
Your Vision is like that of the Lord, Your soul is a fount of spiritual wisdom; You know the unfathomable state of the certified Guru.
Ww ot ferfe nee oe fans aft Aas ufofe Ale Hog Aafs faerfe i (1391-14, Fees wos ETA A, AG Add)
jaa kee darisat achal thaan bimal buDh suthaan pahir seel sanaahu sakat bidaar.
Your Gaze is focused upon the unmoving, unchanging place. Your Intellect is immaculate; it is focused upon the most sublime place. Wearing the armor of humility, you have overcome Maya.
ag ates ae Add Aus chy Hed Bel Aas Ag udiA Hate ISI (1391-15, FEMS nTs EA a, AS AU)
kaho keerat kal sahaar sapat deep majhaar lahnaa jagtar gur paras muraar. ||4]|
O Kal Sakaar, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||4]|
fenfe uss SH IGS VIS MU UY YSAS Il (1391-16, HELE HIs EA A, a)
darisat Dharat tam haran dahan agh paap parnaasan.
Casting Your Glance of Grace, you dispel the darkness, burn away evil, and destroy sin.
Hee Ad FHs!Ys ATH nig ay FASTA Il (1391-16, AEA wIs EAS, aH)
sabad soor balvant kaam ar kroDh binaasan.
You are the Heroic Warrior of the Shabad, the Word of God. Your Power destroys sexual desire and anger.
és Ho sh ave Ave Wha ufsurse Il (1391-17, Heete Has EA A, aH)
lobh moh vas karan saran jaachik partipaalan.
You have overpowered greed and emotional attachment; You nurture and cherish those who seek Your Sanctuary.
WISH JS AVE AE ifs aH WE Il 1391-17, wees uss EA 2, as)
aatam rat sangar-han kahan amrit kal dhaalan.
You gather in the joyful love of the soul; Your Words have the Potency to bring forth Ambrosial Nectar.
Afsag ae Afsas fseq APS ora AU Se Il (1391-18, Hees HI BA a, aw) satguroo kal satgur tilak sat laagai so pai tarai.
You are appointed the True Guru, the True Guru in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; whoever is truly attached to You is carried across.
ag was fests vias TH Aa BIS AP Ul (1391-18, Heee Has TA A, as)
gur jagat firanseeh angara-o raaj jog lahnaa karai. ||5||
The lion, the son of Pheru, is Guru Angad, the Guru of the World; Lehnaa practices Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||5||
at yaX2
Aer nos fas od aaa faG fear wa Il (1392-1, Hee Hs EA B, a) sadaa akal liv rahai karan si-o ichhaa chaarah. Your mind remains lovingly attuned to the Lord forever; You do whatever you desire.
aH Aud fag foe ue an fEHe eters I (1392-2, Heete nas UA S, 3B)
darum sapoor ji-o nivai khavai kas bimal beechaareh.
Like the tree heavy with fruit, You bow in humility, and endure the pain of it; You are pure of thought.
fed 33 vfs nea afs nie fasret II 1392-2, Heet® Hs BA A, as) ihai tat jaani-o sarab gat alakh bidaanee. You realize this reality, that the Lord is All-pervading, Unseen and Amazing.
Hon ate Afes fasts nifys ae wet il 1392-3, weet? nad EF 2, ae) sahj bhaa-ay sanchi-o kiran amrit kal banee. With intuitive ease, You send forth the rays of the Ambrosial Word of power.
qd aH wre 3 ufeG AS ASy Wola Bet Il (1392-3, Heete Hos EA A, a) gur gam parmaan tai paa-i-o sat santokh garaahaj la-you. You have risen to the state of the certified Guru; you grasp truth and contentment.
ofa usfhG ae AHS Ho PIAS BIS SU IlEll (1392-4, Aeet® uss EAB, as)
har parsi-o kal samulavai jan darsan lahnay bha-you. ||6]|
KAL proclaims, that whoever attains the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of Lehnaa, meets with the Lord. ||6]|
Hfs fara utes aofs ag geafa SG il 4392-4, neet® wos eA 2, az) man bisaas paa-i-o gahar gahu hadrath dee-o. My mind has faith, that the Prophet has given You access to the Profound Lord.
wIs oA 3fo sou mfHe nisgafs utG Il (1392-5, neete Hass EFF, ae)
garal naas tan nathyo ami-o antargat pee-o.
Your body has been purged of the deadly poison; You drink the Ambrosial Nectar deep within.
fete faara was vrosfa ae dt Fatste I 392-5, Heete Has eA A, a)
rid bigaas jaagi-o alakh kal Dharee jugantar.
Your Heart has blossomed forth in awareness of the Unseen Lord, who has infused His Power throughout the ages.
Afsag Aon Mrfo sfes Anis fadste i 1392-6, neet® nas EA A, aw) satgur sahj samaaDh ravi-o saamaan nirantar. O True Guru, You are intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi, with continuity and equality.
Cas fas fee gaa finifsa AGHS FAS Il (1392-6, Hees wIs BA A, a)
udaara-o chit daarid haran pikhantai kalmal tarsan.
You are open-minded and large-hearted, the Destroyer of poverty; seeing You, sins are afraid.
He dfa Aofa ae Gud HA HUG BIS FAS IDI (1392-7, Heete Hos EA A, a)
sad rang sahj kal uchrai jas jampa-o lahnay rasan. ||7]|
Says KAL, I lovingly, continually, intuitively chant the Praises of Lehnaa with my tongue. ||7]|
OY neu OY nTUOTG mg OH AHO AY Ae ON SINS Ad Il (1392-7, Heet® wos ER , oe)
naam avkhaDh naam aaDhaar ar naam samaaDh sukh sadaa naam neesaan sohai. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is our medicine; the Naam is our support; the Naam is the peace of Samaadhi. The Naam is the insignia which embellishes us forever.
dfa 33 3H fAe ae oH Af oad FI Il (1392-8, Heet® Has FAB, aw)
rang ratou naam si-o kal naam sur narah bohai.
KAL is imbued with the Love of the Naam, the Naam which is the fragrance of gods and human beings.
on ude fafs ufeG As yates afe SFE II (1392-9, Heet® Ts ER A, a)
naam paras jin paa-i-o sat pargati-o rav lo-ay.
Whoever obtains the Naam, the Philosopher's Stone, becomes the embodiment of Truth, manifest and radiant throughout the world.
wants ust Ts a nioAfS HAS AE cil (1392-9, Hees ws BAF, aw)
darsan parsi-ai guroo kai athsath majan ho-ay. ||8]|
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, it is as if one has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||8]|
Ay Stee wg fenarg nig SHo SC AY Ae AY SUS Ad Il (1392-10, neet® nad FA A, as) sach tirath sach isnaan ar bhojan bhaa-o sach sadaa sach bhaakhant sohai.
The True Name is the sacred shrine, the True Name is the cleansing bath of purification and food. The True Name is eternal love; chant the True Name, and be embellished.
Ag ufe@ ag nafe Ay SH Hast Sd Il (1392-10, neet® Has EA A, a)
sach paa-i-o gur sabad sach naam sangtee bohai.
The True Name is obtained through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, is fragrant with the True Name.
fa AY HAH fds A ats Ho AH SUS Il (1392-11, Heete ngs EA 2, a)
jis sach sanjam varat sach kab jan kal vakhaan.
KAL the poet utters the Praises of the one whose self-discipline is the True Name, and whose fast is the True Name.
TaAlS Usfimt TI AX AY ASH UPSTS ICI (1392-11, AeA was PAS, aw)
darsan parsi-ai guroo kai sach janam parvaan. ||9]|
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, one's life is approved and certified in the True Name. ||9]|
wifi fenfe AS ad Id wl UNL AA HS Il (1392-12, Heete vgs ER A, Zs) ami-a darisat subh karai harai agh paap sakal mal.
When You bestow Your Ambrosial Glance of Grace, You eradicate all wickedness, sin and filth.
OH AU nig BF Hd Sf Ad AS BG Il (1392-12, Hees ngs ER , zw)
kaam kroDh ar lobh moh vas karai sabhai bal.
Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment - You have overcome all these powerful passions.
Ret AY Hie SA SY AAD Ye Il (1392-13, Heet® was EH A, Zw) sadaa sukh man vasai dukh sansaarah khovai. Your mind is filled with peace forever; You banish the sufferings of the world.
ag 3 fofa edior@ HoH TH arse GS I (1392-13, Heet® Has EH, zw) gur nav niDh daree-aa-o janam ham kaalakh Dhovai. The Guru is the river of the nine treasures, washing off the dirt of our lives.
Hag 26 ag Aeba wifofath Aafa ASE Il (1392-14, Heet® wos HH A, Zs)
so kaho tal gur sayvee-ai ahinis sahj subhaa-ay.
So speaks TAL the poet: serve the Guru, day and night, with intuitive love and affection.
Tarte Usfimt TI a AGH HIS TY ATE VON (1392-14, Hees ngs EA B, zs)
darsan parsi-ai guroo kai janam maran dukh jaa-ay. ||10||
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru, the pains of death and rebirth are taken away. ||10]|
AZele HIG STA AB 1392-16) sava-ee-ay mahlay teejay kay 3 Swaiyas In Praise Of The Third Mehl:
qe Afsas ATE II (1392-16) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Het use frefa Arata at fea SH MES AAS Il (1392-17, Hele HIS Sh 2, as) so-ee purakh sivar saachaa jaa kaa ik naam achhal sansaaray.
Dwell upon that Primal Being, the True Lord God; in this world, His One Name is Undeceivable.
fafs sas Senne 3d fined Het oH UsTTS Il (1392-17, Heete Hos Sh 3, as)
jin bhagat bhavjal taaray simrahu so-ee naam parDhaan.
He carries His devotees across the terrifying world-ocean; meditate in remembrance on His Naam, Supreme and Sublime.
fs3 oth afha soa soe afuG AS Ae frat | 1392-18, neste ws FA 2, az)
tit naam rasik naanak lahnaa thapi-o jayn sarab siDhee.
Nanak delighted in the Naam; He established Lehnaa as Guru, who was imbued with all supernatural spiritual powers.
afe Ho ae Hadt atefs AS oMdeA faster Il (1392-18, Hees Hos Sh &, ae)
kav jan kal-y sabuDhee keerat jan amardaas bistree-yaa. So speaks KALL the poet: the glory of the wise, sublime and humble Amar Daas is spread throughout the world.
otefs afe fasts yafe HArso ATE SdST HSGAT Il (1392-19, Heete ngs SA 3, ae)
keerat rav kiran pargat sansaarah saakh tarovar mavalsaraa.
His Praises radiate throughout the world, like the rays of the sun, and the branches of the maulsar (fragrant) tree.
Cafe efuefs ufa mg uAfh AA og mifa oa II (1392-19, Fees Hod SHA B, as)
utar dakh-nahi pub ar pascham jai jai kaar japanth naraa. In the north, south, east and west, people proclaim Your Victory.
ust q3ats ofs oy safe genta aseae Cafe ata uAfh adhor i (1393-1, neete nos StF 8, as)
har naam rasan gurmukh baraad-ya-o ulat gang pascham Dharee-aa. The Guru spoke the Lord's Name with His mouth and broadcast it throughout the world, to turn the tide of the hearts of men.
Het OU nee SSI FS TIS MGT Td a Sfont Al 1393-2, Hee ngs Sh 2, as) so-ee naam achhal bhagtah bhav taaran amardaas gur ka-o furi-aa. ||1||
That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||1||
fanafs Fret om wy org feta Arfoe fro Perfo Tar | (1393-2, Heete nas HA 2, ae) simrahi so-ee naam jakh-y ar kinnar saaDhik siDh samaaDh haraa.
The gods and heavenly heralds, the Siddhas and seekers and Shiva in Samaadhi meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
frnafs sug nied Y HIG Sete YTore SI Il (1393-3, Hee nas TAF, aw)
simrahi nakh-yatar avar Dharoo mandal naardaad parahlaad varaa.
The stars and the realms of Dhroo, and devotees like Naaraad and Prahlaad meditate on the Naam.
AAMg nig Ae OH Carafes AS Sui fafs Cufonr i (1393-4, wees nas FAS, aw) Sasee-ar ar soor naam ulaaseh sail lo-a jin uDhri-aa. The moon and the sun long for the Naam; it has saved even mountain ranges.
Het OU nee SSI FS STS MGT Ts aC sfowr | (1393-4, nets Hs FA 2, aw) so-ee naam achhal bhagtah bhav taaran amardaas gur ka-o furi-aa. ||2||
That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||2||
Het on frefe og ova faduo fre Hoots AyUfar II (1393-5, Heet® Hos Sh 2, as) so-ee naam sivar nav naath niranjan siv sankaad samuDhri-aa.
Dwelling upon that Immaculate Naam, the nine Yogic masters, Shiva and Sanak and many others have been emancipated.
sears fra su fas TS vigdta sense Sfomr Il 1393-6, Hees Hos SH 2, ae) chavraaseeh siDh buDh jit raatay ambreek bhavjal tari-aa.
The eighty-four Siddhas, the beings of supernatural spiritual powers, and the Buddhas are imbued with the Naam; it carried Ambreek across the terrifying world-ocean.
Cus niag fSeue aur ate ots fowfed Tir Il (1393-6, Meets nos SA s, aw) uDha-o akroor tilochan naamaa kal kabeer kilvikh hari-aa.
It has erased the sins of Oodho, Akroor, Trilochan, Naam Dayv and Kabeer, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
Het OU ne SSI FS TIS METH Td aC sfonr i3ll 1393-7, Heats ngs HA A, aw) so-ee naam achhal bhagtah bhav taaran amardaas gur ka-o furi-aa. ||3] |
That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||3]||
fs3 ath ofa 33tn fomrets ast sutas ufe sfrmr | (1393-7, neete nas SA, as) tit naam laag taytees Dhi-aavahi jatee tapeesur man vasi-aa.
The three hundred thirty million angels meditate, attached to the Naam; it is enshrined within the minds of the celibates and ascetics.
Ret ony fifa atare fuss sae fos nifgs ofr i 1393-8, weet? wad SA 2, ae) so-ee naam simar gangayv pitaameh charan chit amrit rasi-aa.
Bhisham Pitama, the son of the Ganges, meditated on that Naam; his consciousness delighted in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Feet.
fez ony ag aists agu HfS AS ate Hats Cadi I (1393-9, neete wad SAS, as)
tit naam guroo gambheer garoo-a mat sat kar sangat uDhree-aa.
The great and profound Guru has brought forth the Naam; accepting the teachings as true, the Holy Congregation has been saved.
Het OU nee SIs FS SIS MGT Td aC sfonr iigil (1393-9, neete ns SHA 2, aw) so-ee naam achhal bhagtah bhav taaran amardaas gur ka-o furi-aa. ||4| |
That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||4| |
on fafs Hafs fats af HaSsT ATT Il (1393-10, Heete Has AA 2, az)
naam kit sansaar kiran rav surtar saakhah.
The Glory of the Naam shines forth, like the rays of the sun, and the branches of the Elysian Tree.
Cafe vfufe uff efA unfit AA STH II (1393-11, Fees H0s SAG, aw)
utar dakhin pub days pascham jas bhaakhah.
In the countries of the north, south, east and west, the Praises of the Naam are chanted.
HoH 3 feg naw fas on dfs fee foerA It (1393-11, Heete Had A B, aw) janam ta ih sakyath jit naam har ridai nivaasai. Life is fruitful, when the Name of the Lord abides in the heart.
Afs ad ae sues fant Pane MATA Il (1393-12, Heete Had SF 3, a)
sur nar gan ganDharab chhi-a darsan aasaasai.
The angelic beings, heavenly heralds, celestial singers and the six Shaastras yearn for the Naam.
3e@ uffg 38 36 am Af ag OfeMG | 1393-12, neet® wad SA 2, a)
bhala-o parsiDh tayjo tanou kal-y jorh kar Dhayaa-i-o.
The son of Tayj Bhaan of the Bhalla dynasty is noble and famous; with his palms pressed together, KALL meditates on Him.
Het OU Sas SeHS WdE Td NGS SF UTES ull 1393-13, Hee HTS Sh 2, as) so-ee naam bhagat bhavjal haran gur amardaas tai paa-i-o. ||5||
The Naam takes away the fears of the devotees about the word-ocean; Guru Amar Daas has obtained it. ||5]|
on fonrefs tz 33th nig foe fro 3d of US GaNT OS Il 1393-13, Heete was FHA 2, aS)
naam Dhi-aavahi dayv taytees ar saaDhik siDh nar naam khand barahmand Dhaaray. The thirty-one million gods meditate on the Naam, along with the Siddhas and seekers; the Naam supports solar systems and galaxies.
Ad oH ANUS Jey Aa AN afe AOS Il (1393-14, Heet® Hos SA 2, as)
jah naam samaaDhi-o harakh sog sam kar sahaaray.
One who meditates on the Naam in Samaadhi, endures sorrow and joy as one and the same.
on fadufs Aga H sas ad fee Ofs II (1393-14, Heche Hs FA 2, ae) naam siroman sarab mai bhagat rahay liv Dhaar. The Naam is the most sublime of all; the devotees remain lovingly attuned to it.
Het ou uersg ond ad sth AE agata ell 1393-15, Hect® Has Sh 2, as)
so-ee naam padaarath amar gur tus dee-o kartaar. ||6||
Guru Amar Daas was blessed with the treasure of the Naam, by the Creator Lord, in His Pleasure. ||6] |
Afs Hee Fife wees AS ote Hats Aus agent Hfs fosefs Stet Il (1393-16, Hees vas TA a, TS)
sat soora-o seel balvant sat bhaa-ay sangat saghan garoo-a mat nirvair leenaa.
He is the Warrior Hero of Truth, humility is His Power. His Loving Nature inspires the Congregation with deep and profound understanding; He is absorbed in the Lord, free of hate and vengeance.
fan ten ofs cee un APS Seo ster Il 1393-16, Heete ngs SA B, aw)
jis Dheeraj Dhur Dhaval Dhujaa sayt baikunth beenaa.
Patience has been His white banner since the beginning of time, planted on the bridge to heaven.
ugAfd HS fimrg fad aeSTIT AAT Il (1393-17, Hee Hs SA B, aw) parseh sant pi-aar jih kartaareh sanjog. The Saints meet their Beloved Guru, who is united with the Creator Lord.
Afsag Afe AY utes ots afs ASS AT DI (1393-17, AeAS vss BA B, aH) satguroo sayv sukh paa-i-o amar gur keeta-o jog. ||7]|| Serving the True Guru, they find peace; Guru Amar Daas has given them this ability.
I7II
OH SSE OH TA WE nig SHG OH OA Ae oer fe fi aret Il (1393-18, Fede ws SA a, XB)
naam naavan naam ras khaan ar bhojan naam ras sadaa chaa-y mukh mist banee. The Naam is His cleansing bath; the Naam is the food He eats; the Naam is the taste He enjoys. With deep yearning, He chants the Sweet Bani of the Guru's Word forever.
ufe Afsag Afes fan ure afs mam At Il (1393-19, HES HIS SF B, aw) Dhan satgur sayvi-o jis pasaa-ay gat agam jaanee.
Blessed is service to the True Guru; by His Grace, the State of the Unfathomable Lord is known.
QS AFT AHUS UAC SH fSsA Il (1393-19, Hees nos SA A, 3B) kul sambooh samuDhray paa-ya-o naam nivaas. All Your generations are totally saved; You dwell in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
yar yatg
HAGE ASH AGU Ty USA wT YA Nil (1394-1, Heats was HF &, aw) sakyath janam kal-yuchrai gur paras-yi-o amar pargaas. ||8| |
So speaks KALL: fruitful is the life of one who meets with Guru Amar Daas, radiant with the Light of God. ||8]|
afeq afe ofse fafa Aone HY AS Il (1394-1, Hecte Hos SA 2, as)
baarij kar daahinai siDh sanmukh mukh jovai.
On His right hand is the sign of the lotus; the Siddhis, the supernatural spiritual powers, await His Command.
fafa SA aieifa a Sie Satsa HT Il (1394-2, Heete nas FA 2, as) riDh basai baa“vaa“g jo teen lokaantar mohai. On His left are worldly powers, which fascinate the three worlds.
foe SA niadi@ Afe oA fsa dt ASE I (1394-2, Heete Hus AB, ae) ridai basai ak-hee-o so-ay ras tin hee jaata-o. The Inexpressible Lord abides in His Heart; He alone knows this joy.
Hug sats Gud yng ag fes df TSE Il (1394-3, Heet® Has TA 2, ae) mukhahu bhagat uchrai amar gur it rang raata-o. Guru Amar Daas utters the words of devotion, imbued with the Love of the Lord.
HASfa ate AEC aeH ae Afs as Ofenis I 1394-3, Heet® uss FA 2, a) mastak neesaan sacha-o karam kal-y jorh kar Dhayaa-i-a-o.
On His forehead is the true insignia of the Lord's Mercy; with his palms pressed together, KALL meditates on Him.
udtnS ag Afsad fsaq nee fees fate ufemis iti (1394-4, rete Hos SAS, 3B) parsi-o guroo satgur tilak sarab ichh tin paa-i-a-o. ||9|| Whoever meets with the Guru, the certified True Guru, has all his desires fulfilled.
[9I|
TIE J Ud AQUA BIS Wd MHS USS TH Il (1394-4, wees nas FAA A, Aw-Ws)
charan ta par sakyath charan gur amar paval ra-y. Supremely fruitful are the feet which walk upon the path of Guru Amar Daas.
Ja 3 Ud HAUS Ja Gals TT Mg UT Il (1394-5, Heche Hos BA 2, we-sU)
hath ta par sakyath hath lageh gur amar pa-y. Supremely fruitful are the hands which touch the feet of Guru Amar Daas.
dtd 3 ug Hawes Hh ad yng Sfen I (1394-5, Hee Hos SA 2, We-TRD) jeeh ta par sakyath jeeh gur amar bhanijai. Supremely fruitful is the tongue which utters the praises of Guru Amar Daas.
de 3 ud Faw outs ag wn fufeA I (1394-6, Heete Hos TA 2, Fe-e) nain ta par sakyath na-yan gur amar pikhijai. Supremely fruitful are the eyes which behold Guru Amar Daas.
Age 3 ud Haus Aes Ts wing APSA Il (1394-6, Heete vss FA 3, Ae-AT) sarvan ta par sakyath sarvan gur amar sunijai. Supremely fruitful are the ears which hear the Praises of Guru Amar Daas.
Rang AG fas dot aA as yen for Aas fus II 1394-7, ese nos AA 2, Ae-wesu) sakyath so hee-o jit hee-a basai gur amardaas nij jagat pit. Fruitful is the heart in which Guru Amar Daas, the Father of the world, Himself abides.
Rang A fig weu ge F fie fos aa ong fos ANION (1394-7, Hee HIS SF 2, Fw- ATU)
sakyath so sir jaalap bhanai jo sir nivai gur amar nit. ||1]|10]|
Fruitful is the head, says Jaalap, which bows forever before Guru Amar Daas.
|| 1] |10]|
f3 od By 30 34 f8 og faue og Adm I (1394-8, Hee Has HA, Aw-F) te nar dukh nah bhukh te nar niDhan nahu kahee-ahi. They do not suffer pain or hunger, and they cannot be called poor.
fs od Aa og OM f3 og A is o Gdns Il (1394-9, Hee HTS SHA B, Ae-wEU) te nar sok nahu hu-ai te nar say ant na lahee-ah. They do not grieve, and their limits cannot be found.
f3 ad A og Ada fF oa AG AGA ANU Il (1394-9, Hees Hs BA 2, FS-FWeU)
te nar sayv nahu karahi te nar sa-y sahas sampeh. They do not serve anyone else, but they give gifts to hundreds and thousands.
fs og wate sofo fs og Cafu faeufa II (1394-10, Heete nas SA A, Aw-weU) te nar duleechai baheh te nar uthap bithpahi. They sit on beautiful carpets; they establish and disestablish at will.
Hu safe fS ag AAT nfo mis ue fou nfo fT I (1394-10, Heche Has SAB, Aw-TEU) sukh laheh te nar sansaar meh abhai pat rip maDh tih. They find peace in this world, and live fearlessly amidst their enemies.
Hau fs od WHY Se Ts MMGeA AYAS fag MUNA (1394-11, HEAS Hs SAF FB, FS- FATSU)
sakyath te nar jaalap bhanai gur amardaas suparsan jih. ||2||11]|
They are fruitful and prosperous, says Jaalap. Guru Amar Daas is pleased with them. [2] 1121]
3 ufem@ fea nfs ufanG fea afe fea vets i c304-11, Het? Hos SA 2, Fe-AR) tai padhi-a-o ik man dhari-a-o ik kar ik pachhaani-o.
You read about the One Lord, and enshrine Him in Your mind; You realize the One and Only Lord.
oufe aufe ufo fea fea vs ofe 6 ATEE I (1394-12, Heche nod SA A, Aw-D)
na-yan ba-yan muhi ik ik duhu thaa-ay na jaani-o.
With Your eyes and the words You speak, You dwell upon the One Lord; You do not know any other place of rest.
Hufs fea uesty fea fear ufo Ste I 1394-13, necte nad HA 2, Aw-F)
supan ik partakh ik ikas meh leena-o.
You know the One Lord while dreaming, and the One Lord while awake. You are absorbed in the One.
on fea nig uff fro UstiA & dtSS I 394-13, Fecte Hos SAB, Fe-wEU) tees ik ar panj siDh paitees na kheena-o. At the age of seventy-one, You began to march towards the Indestructible Lord.
feag fa ou wud nie J fea fea afs zofani@ II (1394-13, Heete Hes TA A, Fe-e) ikahu je laakh lakhahu alakh hai ik ik kar varni-a-o.
The One Lord, who takes hundreds of thousands of forms, cannot be seen. He can only be described as One.
Ts oMHIeA Wey se 3 fea Sats fea Hfam wSnIi (1394-14, Meets ws BA 2, wS-
FATSU)
gur amardaas jaalap bhanai too ik lorheh ik manni-a-o. ||3]|12]|
So speaks Jaalap: O Guru Amar Daas, You long for the One Lord, and believe in the One Lord alone. ||3]|12||
fa Hfs at Aefe ft HAS OH AHTST II 1394-15, Heet® Hos AA 2, ww-AsU)
je mat gahee jaidayv je mat naamai sammaanee.
The understanding which Jai Dayv grasped, the understanding which permeated Naam Dayv,
fa xfs fgauo fafs sas aeitafa Aret I (1394-15, Heche wos SA A, we-AeU)
je mat tarilochan chit bhagat kambeereh jaanee.
the understanding which was in the consciousness of Trilochan and known by the devotee Kabeer,
Janta AIS TH Hug fos sret I (1394-16, Heete Hos St A, wB-AsU) rukmaa‘gad kartoot raam jampahu nit bhaa-ee. by which Rukmaangad constantly meditated on the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny,
vind ysefe Hafe afte afs uret i (1394-16, neete® nos FA 2, ww-FeU) ammreek parahlaad saran gobind gat paa-ee.
which brought Ambreek and Prahlaad to seek the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe, and which brought them to salvation
3 33 au fen sat A fs Ae Wet Hats I (1394-17, Feet Has FAB, Ae-eU)
tai lobh kroDh tarisnaa tajee so mat jal-y jaanee jugat.
-says JALL that sublime understanding has brought You to renounce greed, anger and desire, and to know the way.
qd wHseA fon sas od Sfe can ur] Hass ISIN (1394-17, Heete Has SA 2, Awe) gur amardaas nij bhagat hai daykh daras paava-o mukat. ||4]|13]|
Guru Amar Daas is the Lord's own devotee; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, one is liberated. ||4]|13]|
dg wHseA usHst uoth ufsa faaAfs | (1394-18, Fete Hs FA 2, Fe-R) gur amardaas parsee-ai puham paatik binaaseh. Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the earth is purged of its sin.
ag wee ust fio vfoe wrAAfs i 1394-18, Het Hs SA A, we-A) gur amardaas parsee-ai siDh saaDhik aasaaseh. The Siddhas and seekers long to meet with Guru Amar Daas.
Tg wHseA usta fimre adit u yfafs il 1394-19, neete ned AA A, Fe-weU) gur amardaas parsee-ai Dhi-aan lahee-ai pa-o mukihi.
Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the mortal meditates on the Lord, and his journey comes to its end.
Td wage usta nis we as viata i 1394-19, Hect® Hod SA A, Aww) gur amardaas parsee-ai abha-o labhai ga-o chukihi.
Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the Fearless Lord is obtained, and the cycle of reincarnation is brought to an end.
ar qatu
fea fife vas a 38 a0 wr AAR Woes Ofo II (1395-1, Fests HTS AA A, We-7e)
ik binn dugan jo ta-o rahai jaa sumantar maanvahi leh.
Realizing the One Lord, love of duality ceases, and one comes to accept the Sublime Mantra of the Guru.
Weu uega fess ae unset SS frsfo Wudell 1395-2, Heete Hos SA 2, AS-D) jaalpaa padaarath it-rhay gur amardaas dithai mileh. ||5||14]|
So speaks Jaalap: countless treasures are obtained, by the sight of Guru Amar Daas. [15] 1141]
Ag 3H adage A fes sola HafonG il 1395-2, neste nad SA 2, ates) sach naam kartaar so darirh naanak sangar-hi-a-o. Guru Nanak gathered up the True Name of the Creator Lord, and implanted it within.
3 3 nige se yale aH ded fee sfon I (1395-3, neete wad FHA 2, ates)
taa tay angad lahnaa pargat taas charnah liv rahi-a-o.
Through Him, Lehnaa became manifest in the form of Guru Angad, who remained lovingly attuned to His Feet.
faa afe ad mse ort SSA TH Te AS TuTSE Il (1395-3, Heete uss HA B, ates) tit kul gur amardaas aasaa nivaas taas gun kavan vakhaana-o.
Guru Amar Daas of that dynasty is the home of hope. How can I express His Glorious Virtues?
A Te nie win fad Te viz o Wee Il (1395-4, Hee nIs BA B, ates) jo gun alakh agamm tinah gun ant na jaana-o. His Virtues are unknowable and unfathomable. I do not know the limits of His Virtues.
Sfoa@ fears foonci As Hats aw Cuge Il (1395-5, Heet® Hos Sh B, ates) bohitha-o biDhaatai niramyou sabh sangat kul uDhran.
The Creator, the Architect of Destiny, has made Him a boat to carry all His generations across, along with the Sangat, the Holy Congregation.
Td MHIeA ates ad sto Shs yt UT ATS NAUNWI (1395-5, AeMAe HIS FA 2, ates) gur amardaas keerat kahai taraahi taraahi tu-a paa saran. ||1]|15]|
So speaks Keerat: O Guru Amar Daas, please protect me and save me; I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1]]15]|
nfu oafes aor ute Hal Hfo Udstaae Il (1395-6, HeetS Hs BAA 2, ates) aap naraa-in kalaa Dhaar jag meh parvari-ya-o. The Lord Himself wielded His Power and entered the world.
fadarfa nrarg Afs Aa Hate afen I 1395-6, Hees Has SA 2, ates)
nirankaar aakaar jot jag mandal kari-ya-o.
The Formless Lord took form, and with His Light He illuminated the realms of the world.
Ad Ad 3d sdug AE chute suas il (1395-7, Heete Hs SA B, ates)
jah kah tah bharpoor sabad deepak deepaa-ya-o. He is All-pervading everywhere; the Lamp of the Shabad, the Word, has been lit.
fas frus Hates sz afs sae freA | 1395-7, neet® nad SHA 2, ates)
jih sikhah sangarahi-o tat har charan milaa-ya-o. Whoever gathers in the essence of the teachings shall be absorbed in the Feet of the Lord.
Tot ats SHS nests vise BIE Afer Int | (1395-8, Rees nss FHA 2, ates)
naanak kul nimmal avtar-yi-o angad lahnay sang hu-a.
Lehnaa, who became Guru Angad, and Guru Amar Daas, have been reincarnated into the pure house of Guru Nanak.
TT MHITH SIE SIS HOH AGH U' ASS SM MIME! (1395-8, AeAS Hass BF 2, ates)
gur amardaas taaran taran janam janam paa saran tu-a. ||2||16]| Guru Amar Daas is our Saving Grace, who carries us across; in lifetime after lifetime, I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||2||16]|
mu su AS Asy fufe zane ae fre Il (1395-9, Heat nad FA 2, ates)
jap tap sat santokh pikh darsan gur sikhah.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, the Gursikh is blessed with chanting and deep meditation, truth and contentment.
Hefe usfs 3 Casto ef AH ua at fees Il 1395-9, Fests Has TA &, ates)
saran pareh tay ubrahi chhod jam pur kee likhah. Whoever seeks His Sanctuary is saved; his account is cleared in the City of Death.
sats ate saug fee Bud AIT Il (1395-10, Hees 17s HA 2, ates) bhagat bhaa-ay bharpoor ridai uchrai kartaarai. His heart is totally filled with loving devotion; he chants to the Creator Lord.
Tg avg edie ust SHST TS Il (1395-10, neste uss BA B, ates) gur ga-uhar daree-aa-o palak duba‘t-yah taarai. The Guru is the river of pearls; in an instant, he carries the drowning ones across.
oad af sue nests ae asad Css Il (1395-11, Feete Has A 2, ates)
naanak kul nimmal avtar-yi-o gun kartaarai uchrai.
He was reincarnated into the House of Guru Nanak; He chants the Glorious Praises of the Creator Lord.
Ts wHIeHA fig Afens fsq ey efse usaf us WSN (395-11, FEES HIS SFB, ates)
gur amardaas jin" sayvi-a-o tin" dukh daridar parhar parai. ||3]|17]|
Those who serve Guru Amar Daas - their pains and poverty are taken away, far away. [311271]
fats fase meth as ug afa fs 6 AAG Il (1395-12, Feet? Hos SHA B, ates) chit chitva-o ardaas kaha-o par kahi bhe na saka-o. I consciously pray within my consciousness, but I cannot express it in words.
Rea fos 33 ufk AOHafs JB 3a Il (1395-13, Fete HIS FHF 2, aftes)
sarab chint tujh paas saaDhsangat ha-o taka-o.
I place all my worries and anxieties before You; I look to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, for help.
3d gafh ue sins 38 ae Afog at AS Il (1395-13, Heete Has TA A, dies)
tayrai hukam pavai neesaan ta-o kara-o saahib kee sayvaa.
By the Hukam of Your Command, I am blessed with Your Insignia; I serve my Lord and Master.
wa ag ty as fenfe on aes fy HST I (1395-14, HESS HIS BF B, ates)
jab gur daykhai subh disat naam kartaa mukh mayvaa.
When You, O Guru, gaze at me with Your Glance of Grace, the fruit of the Naam, the Name of the Creator, is placed within my mouth.
WOH MSY AGE UTU A PINSfy A ATE Il (1395-14, Hect® ngs SA 2, ates)
agam alakh kaaran purakh jo furmaaveh so kaha-o.
The Unfathomable and Unseen Primal Lord God, the Cause of causes - as He orders, so do I speak.
TT MHITA aE ATE fae J sufg fFs JIS USNACH (1395-15, HeAS Has TA B, ates) gur amardaas kaaran karan jiv too rakheh tiv raha-o. ||4||18] |
O Guru Amar Daas, Doer of deeds, Cause of causes, as You keep me, I remain; as You protect me, I survive. ||4]|18]|
fae & Il (1395-15) bhikhay kay. Of Bhikhaa:
ag famrs ug fomre sa fk@ sa fore I (1395-15, Fete 19d SA 2, fry
gur gi-aan ar Dhi-aan tat si-o tat milaavai.
In deep meditation, and the spiritual wisdom of the Guru, one's essence merges with the essence of reality.
Afs Ae ATehn fea festa fos WS Il (1395-16, HEME HIs HA 2, fro
sach sach jaanee-ai ik chiteh liv laavai.
In truth, the True Lord is recognized and realized, when one is lovingly attuned to Him, with one-pointed consciousness.
aH au af ad ues CSS 5 WS Il (1395-16, Heche HTS SA 2, fr)
kaam kroDh vas karai pavan udant na Dhaavai.
Lust and anger are brought under control, when the breath does not fly around, wandering restlessly.
fadarg & ZA Ufh gan afs ates ur} | (1395-17, Feet? Hd SAB, fry
nirankaar kai vasai days hukam bujh beechaar paavai.
Dwelling in the land of the Formless Lord, realizing the Hukam of His Command, His contemplative wisdom is attained.
ate ufo gu aes usy A Ae fate fas aha i (1395-17, neste was TAG, far)
kal maahi roop kartaa purakh so jaanai jin kichh kee-a-o.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Guru is the Form of the Creator, the Primal Lord God; he alone knows, who has tried it.
ag fife@ Afe four ad Aon df ean eis NAIC (1395-18, HES was SA 2, fr) gur mili-ya-o so-ay bhikhaa kahai sahj rang darsan dee-a-o. ||1||19]]|
So speaks Bhikhaa: I have met the Guru. With love and intuitive affection, He has bestowed the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||19]|
aus Hs 3G |Sfs AG aTST (FS Il (1395-19, Hee Hs TA 2, fry rahi-o sant ha-o tol saaDh bahutayray dithay. I have been searching for the Saints; I have seen so many Holy and spiritual people.
Hfourat surg yug & ufss fees | (1395-19, nect® Hs TA 2, fr) Sani-aasee tapsee-ah mukhahu ay pandit mithay. The hermits, Sannyaasees, ascetics, penitents, fanatics and Pandits all speak sweetly.
wan fa Je fefas fas ag useG Bae I 1395-19, ect® Has SA 2, fr baras ayk ha-o firi-o kinai nahu parcha-o laa-ya-o. I wandered around lost for a year, but no one touched my soul.
ust qate ads ast Fat Jos & UAT o rae I (1396-1, Heete Has FA 2, fry
kehti-ah kahtee sunee rahat ko khusee na aa-ya-o. I listened to preachers and teachers, but I could not be happy with their lifestyles.
fs on ef eA a fq a Te TS fomr aI Il 1396-1, wees was TA 2, far)
har naam chhod doojai lagay tin" kay gun ha-o ki-aa kaha-o.
Those who have abandoned the Lord's Name, and become attached to duality - why should I speak in praise of them?
ag eta frog fstmr fre 3 safe fs FIV NON (1396-2, Fees uss TAF, fr)
gur da-yi milaa-ya-o bhikhi-aa jiv too rakheh tiv raha-o. ||2||20| | So speaks Bhikhaa: the Lord has led me to meet the Guru. As You keep me, I remain; as You protect me, I survive. ||2||20||
ufafa mofo Aarg fomrfs 3 urAfs ufsnrG I 1396-3, Fete Hos SF, FB)
pahir samaaDh sanaahu gi-aan hai aasan charhi-a-o.
Wearing the armor of Samaadhi, the Guru has mounted the saddled horse of spiritual wisdom.
UH Ue ad afte sas Ales Afs fami i (1396-3, neet® Had A 2, As)
Dharamm Dhanakh kar gahi-o bhagat seelah sar larhi-a-o.
Holding the bow of Dharma in His Hands, He has shot the arrows of devotion and humility.
3 fos ofs nize ufo Aafe as or afsE II (1396-4, Heche Hos SA 2, FB)
bhai nirbha-o har atal man sabad gur nayjaa gadi-o.
He is fearless in the Fear of the Eternal Lord God; He has thrust the spear of the Word of the Guru's Shabad into the mind.
OH FU Ss Ho wus us ws PSS It (1396-4, nets nas SAB, 7B)
kaam kroDh lobh moh apat panch doot bikhandi-o.
He has cut down the five demons of unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger, unsatisfied greed, emotional attachment and self-conceit.
3ES ITS SH Sar fauls aE aaa ale Il (1396-5, Hees nos SAB, AB)
bhala-o bhoohaal tayjo tanaa nript naath naanak bar.
Guru Amar Daas, the son of Tayj Bhaan, of the noble Bhalla dynasty, blessed by Guru Nanak, is the Master of kings.
Td wHIeA AG AG sf= 3 ee frse fes AO afs NANQAUI (1396-5, HEete Has SA 2, AB) gur amardaas sach sal-y bhan tai dal jita-o iv juDh kar. ||1]|21]|
SALL speaks the truth; O Guru Amar Daas, you have conquered the army of evil, fighting the battle this way. ||1]|21]|
WoTT FE TAM FHSS AHH FAS WSs 3 MMS Il (1396-6, Hees ngs TA 3, 3m) ghanhar boond basu-a romaaval kusam basant ganant na aavai.
The raindrops of the clouds, the plants of the earth, and the flowers of the spring cannot be counted.
dfe AfA fasfs Ges Aad & da Soa unis A UTS | (1396-7, Heete uss SA B, 3m)
rav sas kiran udar saagar ko gang tarang ant ko paavai.
Who can know the limits of the rays of the sun and the moon, the waves of the ocean and the Ganges?
gz fons famrs Afsae & afa AS 3G Cod A WS Il (1396-7, Feels vss SA 3, 3m) rudr Dhi-aan gi-aan satgur kay kab jan bhal-y unah jo gaavai.
With Shiva's meditation and the spiritual wisdom of the True Guru, says BHALL the poet, these may be counted.
~~
3S WHE Te 3d Sat Brot Sfo sfs mr|]S NAM (1396-8, Hees HTS SA B, 3B)
bhalay amardaas gun tayray tayree upmaa tohi ban aavai. ||1||22|| O Guru Amar Daas, Your Glorious Virtues are so sublime; Your Praises belong only to You. |[1][22]|
Azele HIG BBA AS (1396-10) Sava-ee-ay mahlay cha-uthay kay 4 Swaiyas In Praise Of The Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsars ure I (1396-10) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fea Hfs use fadHe fomre? Il 1396-11, Heet® Had Bea 2, az) ik man purakh niranjan Dhi-aava-o. Meditate single-mindedly on the Immaculate Primal Lord God.
ag uAte of Te AE WSS Il (1396-11, Hees vss wea 2, aH) gur parsaad har gun sad gaava-o. By Guru's Grace, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.
ae wes nfs of= faarar il 1396-11, Heete Had VES B, as) gun gaavat man ho-ay bigaasaa. Singing His Praises, the mind blossoms forth in ecstasy.
Afsas ufs Hod ot MITAT Il (1396-12, Heete Hs BEA A, 3B) satgur poor janah kee aasaa. The True Guru fulfills the hopes of His humble servant.
Afsag Afe ugh us uA Il (1396-12, Heete HTS Vea 2, as) satgur sayv param pad paa-ya-o. Serving the True Guru, the supreme status is obtained.
mfsonAt oifsars fami | 1396-12, Hee HIS BC 2, a) abhinaasee abigat Dhi-aa-ya-o. Meditate on the Imperishable, Formless Lord God.
fH 32 Shas & FU Il 1396-13, Hee Hs Ves 2, xB) tis bhaytay daaridar na champai. Meeting with Him, one escapes poverty.
AS AIT SH TE AY Il (1396-13, neste was wea 2, as) kal-y sahaar taas gun jampai. Kal Sahaar chants His Glorious Praises.
Hu ae fas AAS Ho Ad wifi ay AT ae sft Il 1396-13, Heete HIS BEA R, as) jampa-o gun bimal sujan jan kayray ami-a naam jaa ka-o furi-aa.
I chant the pure praises of that humble being who has been blessed with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
fefs Haag Afe nee gH UoT ay fodne Bfe afer Il (1396-14, Fete nds BEA A, a) in satgur sayv sabad ras paa-yaa naam niranjan ur Dhari-aa.
He served the True Guru and was blessed with the sublime essence of the Shabad, the Word of God. The Immaculate Naam has been enshrined in his heart.
dfs on otha dfiz Te Wa Wa 3S AHS Ad Il (1396-15, Heete ngs Vea 2, aw)
har naam rasik gobind gun gaahak chaahak tat samat saray.
He enjoys and savors the Lord's Name, and purchases the Glorious Virtues of the Lord of the Universe. He seeks the essence of reality; he is the Fountain of even-handed justice.
Ofte ASH SAT IIO'H 3 AT THEA Ad isd 3d MAUI (1396-15, Aeete us Va A, aH)
kav kal-y thakur hardaas tanay gur raamdaas sar abhar bharay. ||1]|
So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||1||
ees uses ifn one ue vifys Adea AE Sfamr Il (1396-16, Hees HTS Vea 2, aw) chhutat parvaah ami-a amraa pad amrit sarovar sad bhari-aa.
The stream of ambrosial nectar flows and the immortal status is obtained; the pool is forever overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar.
3 ulefo AS acts His HAS Ue fHog AS adr | (1396-16, Feet? Hs BEA 2, aw) tay peeveh sant karahi man majan pub jinahu sayvaa karee-aa.
Those Saints who have served the Lord in the past drink in this Nectar, and bathe their minds in it.
fsa 3@ foefs nos ue dot nae HS 3 Bug Ug II (1396-17, Heete H7d VBA A, as) tin bha-o nivaar anbhai pad deenaa sabad matar tay uDhar Dharay.
God takes their fears away, and blesses them with the state of fearless dignity. Through the Word of His Shabad, He has saved them.
Oe AH SAT IGA 3S UWI THEA Ad isd SF Ql! (1396-18, Heels ngs Vea a, aw)
kav kal-y thakur hardaas tanay gur raamdaas sar abhar bharay. ||2]|
So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||2||
Asad His az fae ASHals MrSH Sf VHS SUT Il (1396-18, Meets vss ves s, as) satgur mat goorh" bimal satsangat aatam rang chalool bha-yaa.
The True Guru's understanding is deep and profound. The Sat Sangat is His Pure Congregation. His Soul is drenched in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love.
Wd Ho AEG AafaA usara mis fadaa wats BI Il (1396-19, nets uss wa 2, as) jaag-yaa man kaval sahj parkaas-yaa abhai niranjan ghareh lahaa.
The Lotus of His mind remains awake and aware, illuminated with intuitive wisdom. In His own home, He has obtained the Fearless, Immaculate Lord.
at yao
Asdfe eats ofs on fearon fsa yates eff ug ae Il (1397-1, neete nad Vea 2, aw) satgur da-yaal har naam darirh-aa-yaa tis parsaad vas panch karay.
The Merciful True Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me, and by His Grace, I have overpowered the five thieves.
Ofe AS SAT INH 36 AT THA Ag isd 3d ISI (1397-1, Aeete uss ves 2, as)
kav kal-y thakur hardaas tanay gur raamdaas sar abhar bharay. ||3]|
So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||3]|
Mose Bone vias fee oat USA Sfeut AIH We Il (1397-2, Hee HIS BCA 2, aH) anbha-o unmaan akal liv laagee paaras bhayti-aa sahj gharay.
With intuitive detachment, He is lovingly attuned to the Fearless, Unmanifest Lord; He met with Guru Amar Daas, the Philosopher's Stone, within his own home.
Asad usAfe us ue ua sats ae Sarg Fg Il (1397-3, Heels nas Vea 2, az) satgur parsaad param pad paa-yaa bhagat bhaa-ay bhandaar bharay.
By the Grace of the True Guru, He attained the supreme status; He is overflowing with the treasures of loving devotion.
Hfeur ASHTZ HE SB oar fos war Hsu AP Il (1397-3, Hee HIs BEA 3, as) mayti-aa janmaa™t maran bha-o bhaagaa chit laagaa santokh saray.
He was released from reincarnation, and the fear of death was taken away. His consciousness is attached to the Lord, the Ocean of contentment.
Ofte AS SAT JOH 36 TAT THA Ad isd 3d IS (1397-4, Hees ngs Va A, az)
kav kal-y thakur hardaas tanay gur raamdaas sar abhar bharay. ||4]|
So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||4||
wed 3d UGG wurg fee vise ofsS || (1397-4, Hee HS BCA 3, as) abhar bharay paa-ya-o apaar rid antar Dhaari-o. He fills the empty to overflowing; He has enshrined the Infinite within His heart.
ey SH MSH ys Hfs 33 stots i 1397-5, Heet® 1d Bea 2, a)
dukh bhanjan aatam parboDh man tat beechaari-o.
Within His mind, He contemplates the essence of reality, the Destroyer of pain, the Enlightener of the soul.
Re ofe of of UN TA MM ATSfe | (1397-5, Hees ws BRA A, aH)
sadaa chaa-ay har bhaa-ay paraym ras aapay jaan-ay.
He yearns for the Lord's Love forever; He Himself knows the sublime essence of this Love.
Asad & usrte Aon ASt da Hrafe (1397-6, Heete Hd VA , az) satgur kai parsaad sahj saytee rang maan-ay. By the Grace of the True Guru, He intuitively enjoys this Love.
soa UATE nie AHfS afe wnfe yng ZastES i (1397-6, neete ngs wa 3, as) naanak parsaad angad sumat gur amar amar vartaa-i-o.
By the Grace of Guru Nanak, and the sublime teachings of Guru Angad, Guru Amar Daas broadcast the Lord's Command.
TI THEA AHI 3 uies ws uE UTES Wu (1397-7, Hees wad Bea F, as)
gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tai’ atal amar pad paa-i-o. ||5]|
So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the status of eternal and imperishable dignity. ||5]|
Hay Adefa SA uifimt GA IAS YSTA Il 1397-8, Heete Hs VES 2, as) santokh sarovar basai ami-a ras rasan parkaasai. You abide in the pool of contentment; Your tongue reveals the Ambrosial Essence.
fas AMS Gun vas Tdsts SA Il (1397-8, Aes Has Vea a, aw) milat saa“t upjai durat doorantar naasai. Meeting with You, a tranquil peace wells up, and sins run far away.
HY Arad ufo fés afs nfs o J] Il 1397-8, Hees nds BEA A, as) sukh saagar paa-i-a-o binn har mag na hutai. You have attained the Ocean of peace, and You never grow tired on the Lord's path.
HAH AS HSy AIG AST HSS Il (1397-9, Hee Hs BCA A, az) Sanjam sat santokh seel sannahu mafutai. The armor of self-restraint, truth, contentment and humility can never be pierced.
Afsag ynre fan 6 fafee afar AA Sy aTfEMs I (1397-9, meets 17s Bea A, as)
satgur parmaan biDh nai siri-o jag jas toor bajaa-i-a-o.
The Creator Lord certified the True Guru, and now the world blows the trumpet of His Praises.
TI THEA THIS 3 MS ws uE ufEMS Ell (1397-10, Hees ws Ves 3, aw) gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tai abhai amar pad paa-i-a-o. ||6] |
So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the state of fearless immortality. ||6||
nd fas@ Afsas une His Sa fama it (1397-10, neete ws Bea A, a)
jag jita-o satgur parmaan man ayk Dhi-aa-ya-o.
O certified True Guru, You have conquered the world; You meditate single-mindedly on the One Lord.
ufe ofe Afsad weer fafs on festa I 1397-11, neste wos Bea A, a)
Dhan Dhan satgur amardaas jin naam darirhaa-ya-o.
Blessed, blessed is Guru Amar Daas, the True Guru, who implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, deep within.
6 fafa an fours fafa fafa 3° at SAT I (1397-12, Aeete nTs Bea 2, as)
nav niDh naam niDhaan riDh siDh taa kee daasee.
The Naam is the wealth of the nine treasures; prosperity and supernatural spiritual powers are His slaves.
Hon Aded fifee usy SsfeG mifsarit i 1397-12, neet® nod Bea &, as)
sahj sarovar mili-o purakh bhayti-o abhinaasee.
He is blessed with the ocean of intuitive wisdom; He has met with the Imperishable Lord God.
wife & sas fas ofa sa A afe on feafenie i 1397-13, rect? 108 Vea 2, as)
aad lay bhagat jit lag taray so gur naam darirhaa-i-a-o.
The Guru has implanted the Naam deep within; attached to the Naam, the devotees have been carried across since ancient times.
TI THEA AGUS 3 dia YH uersy ufos DI (1397-13, weete was Vea &, 3B) gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tai har paraym padaarath paa-i-a-o. ||7]||
So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Love. ||7||
UH sats udea UlfS uaSt & Jefe Il (1397-14, Hees nds BCA a, aw) paraym bhagat parvaah pareet publee na hut-ay. The flow of loving devotion and primal love does not stop.
Afsad Aae “erg wifi oes SA Tete Il (1397-14, Hee Has BA 2, aH) satgur sabad athaahu ami-a Dhaaraa ras gut-ay.
The True Guru drinks in the stream of nectar, the sublime essence of the Shabad, the Infinite Word of God.
Hfs west Hsu fust Afs AIA AHA Il (1397-15, Hee Hs BCA A, az)
mat maataa santokh pitaa sar sahj samaa-ya-o.
Wisdom is His mother, and contentment is His father; He is absorbed in the ocean of intuitive peace and poise.
wot Hsfenie Aas Td safe saa Il 1397-15, nee ngs Vea 3, as)
aajonee sambhvi-a-o jagat gur bachan taraa-ya-o.
The Guru is the Embodiment of the Unborn, Self-illumined Lord; by the Word of His Teachings, the Guru carries the world across.
wifsas uted vrisug Hf ae Ase SATENIs | (1397-16, Het Hs BCA A, az) abigat agochar aparpar man gur sabad vasaa-i-a-o.
Within His mind, the Guru has enshrined the Shabad, the Word of the Unseen, Unfathomable, Infinite Lord.
TI THEA AHI 3 Aas Surgs ufenrS itil 1397-16, Hees wad Bea s, as)
gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tai jagat uDhaaran paa-i-a-o. ||8]|
So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the Lord, the Saving Grace of the world. ||8]|
nas Curse a faurg Sal3sd SS IGE Il (1397-17, HES HTS BA 2, aD)
jagat uDhaaran nav niDhaan bhagtah bhav taaran.
The Saving Grace of the world, the nine treasures, carries the devotees across the world-ocean.
nifys ge ofs on fan at faa faese il 1397-17, Hees 1s BESS, as) amrit boond har naam bis kee bikhai nivaaran. The Drop of Ambrosial Nectar, the Lord's Name, is the antidote to the poison of sin.
Hon 3ded sfae famre nifts Se wa il 1397-18, weete 17s Bea S, as)
sahj tarovar fali-o gi-aan amrit fal laagay. The tree of intuitive peace and poise blossoms and bears the ambrosial fruit of spiritual wisdom.
aa yuAfe ueinfs ufs 3 AS ASS Il (1397-18, Heetz uss Vea 2, aes) gur parsaad paa-ee-ah Dhan tay jan badbhaagay. Blessed are those fortunate people who receive it, by Guru's Grace.
3 Has se Afsad Hate His as Use UM Il (1397-19, Hee HTS BSA 3, aH)
tay muktay bha-ay satgur sabad man gur parchaa paa-i-a-o.
They are liberated through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru; their minds are filled with the Guru's Wisdom.
TI THEA AHI 3 Aa SAS SrfeS iil 0397-19, reve wad Bea A, as)
gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tai sabad neesaan bajaa-i-a-o. ||9|| So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You beat the drum of the Shabad. ||9||
Yar gate
AW AO’ Aon sets Hsu Hates Ae Ale HoT Ad Il (1398-1, Heete Hs VA A, az) sayj saDhaa sahj chhaavaan santokh saraa-icha-o sadaa seel sannahu sohai.
On the bed of faith, with the blankets of intuitive peace and poise and the canopy of contentment, You are embellished forever with the armor of humility.
ad Hate AHS SH Sa Harfe FT Il (1398-2, Hees ngs BEA 2, as)
gur sabad samaachri-o naam tayk sangaad bohai.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you practice the Naam; You lean on its Support, and give Your Fragrance to Your companions.
mAate 3G one Afsas Afar foeTy Il 1398-2, Hees vss Bea A, as) ajonee-o bhalyu amal satgur sang nivaas. You abide with the Unborn Lord, the Good and Pure True Guru.
TI THEA THIS Im ATH Adefs IA VOM! (1398-3, Heete was VT S, aw)
gur raamdaas kal-yuchrai tu-a sahj sarovar baas. ||10]||
So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You abide in the sacred pool of intuitive peace and poise. ||10||
ag fre a8 AYAS on ofa foe foe Il (1398-3, Heete Hos Bea A, as) gur jin" ka-o suparsan naam har ridai nivaasai. The Lord's Name abides in the hearts of those who are pleasing to the Guru.
faa a8 TT AYAS Pay TIshs OA Il (1398-4, Meets ws Bea a, as) jin" ka-o gur suparsan durat doorantar naasai. Sins run far away from those who are pleasing to the Guru.
ag fae aC AYAS HG nifsHts foes Il 1398-4, Heete nds BCA 2, am) gur jin" ka-o suparsan maan abhimaan nivaarai. Those who are pleasing to the Guru eradicate pride and egotism from within.
faa a@ ag AYAS Aafe ofa SeHG I Il (1398-5, HELIS Hs Ve 2, ae)
jin" ka-o gur suparsan sabad lag bhavjal taarai.
Those who are pleasing to the Guru are attached to the Shadad, the Word of God; they are carried across the terrifying world-ocean.
ude YyHTS ad ufene fso AaWE ASH Afar Il 398-5, Hees nas wea A, az) parcha-o parmaan gur paa-i-a-o tin sakaytha-o janam jag.
Those who are blessed with the wisdom of the certified Guru - blessed and fruitful is their birth into the world.
At ag Aste sa ae ata sats Hats AS AT Slat NAA (1398-6, Hees HTS Bea &, aw) saree guroo saran bhaj kal-y kab bhugat mukat sabh guroo lag. ||11]|
KALL the poet runs to the Sanctuary of the Great Guru; attached to the Guru, they are blessed with worldly enjoyments, liberation and everything. ||11]|
Afsafe tr Sfenr Fa WA AHTE Il (1398-6, Hee nas Va S, aH) satgur khaymaa taani-aa jug jooth samaanay. The Guru has pitched the tent; under it, all the ages are gathered.
Mose i SH Sa fAS Sas MWS Il (1398-7, Hee HTS BSS 2, aH)
anbha-o nayjaa naam tayk jit bhagat aghaanay.
He carries the spear of intuition, and takes the Support of Naam, the Name of the Lord, through which the devotees are fulfilled.
TT SSI Hide wg sas Ufs Afal AWS Il (1398-7, Heete ngs Vea 2, as)
gur naanak angad amar bhagat har sang samaanay.
Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, through devotional worship, have merged into the Lord.
fed TH AT TT THEA SH IJ FA WS NII (1398-8, Hees Hs BES A, aH) ih raaj jog gur raamdaas tum" hoo ras jaanay. ||12]| O Guru Raam Daas, You alone know the taste of this Raja Yoga. ||12]|
Hoa Afe fats afeor Confs ga afar i 1398-8, Fete Hs BA A, az)
janak so-ay jin jaani-aa unman rath Dhari-aa.
He alone is enlightened like Janaka, who links the chariot of his mind to the state of ecstatic realization.
AS HS ANS usa Ag Sfmt Il (1398-9, Hect® HTS Va 2, aw) sat santokh samaachray abhraa sar bhari-aa. He gathers in truth and contentment, and fills up the empty pool within.
WAG Aa we udt fan Sfe A US Il (1398-9, Hee Hs BEA AB, az)
akath kathaa amraa puree jis day-ay so paavai.
He speaks the Unspoken Speech of the eternal city. He alone obtains it, unto whom God gives it.
feg Hoa TH TI THEA 35 dt fs mr] 119311 (1398-10, Fete Hs VA A, az) ih janak raaj gur raamdaas tujh hee ban aavai. ||13]| O Guru Raam Daas, Your sovereign rule, like that of Janak, is Yours alone. ||13]|
Afsag ou 2a fae nfs wu fes fea Ao BU UY ag aS de] AIG II (1398-10, Heet® Had wGa a, 55) :
satgur naam ayk liv man japai darirh"u tin" jan dukh paap kaho kat hovai jee-o.
Tell me, how can sin and suffering cling to that humble being who chants the Naam, given by the Guru, with single-minded love and firm faith?
age 30 furs ug A a fefy oe nae foe des aH ao AS AIG Il (1398-11, Fede 10d TEA a, 5G)
taaran taran khin matar jaa ka-o darisat Dhaarai sabad rid beechaarai kaam kroDh khovai jee-o.
When the Lord, the Boat to carry us across, bestows His Glance of Grace, even for an instant, the mortal contemplates the Shabad within his heart; unfulfilled sexual desire and unresolved anger are eradicated.
fs Ase VST nH ae fast mifafefA ors os uBA SAS AE I (1398-12, Heels HTS TGA a, 5G)
jee-an sabhan daataa agam ga-yaan bikh-yaataa ahinis Dhayaan Dhaavai palak na sovai jee-o.
The Guru is the Giver to all beings; He speaks the spiritual wisdom of the Unfathomable Lord, and meditates on Him day and night. He never sleeps, even for an instant.
Ww a@ tus fee we on A fsurg ure aanfe aris eanfs He Ge AIG II 1398-13, neet® HIS BIS, 5G)
jaa ka-o daykhat daridar jaavai naam so niDhaan paavai gurmukh ga-yaan durmat mail Dhovai jee-o.
Seeing Him, poverty vanishes, and one is blessed with the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The spiritual wisdom of the Guru's Word washes away the filth of evil-mindedness.
Afsag ou a foe nfs wu fes foo Ae ee UU ag as JS AE WAU (1398-14, eee Hs TCE a, 35)
satgur naam ayk liv man japai darirh tin jan dukh paap kaho kat hovai jee-o. ||1]| Tell me, how can sin and suffering cling to that humble being who chants the Naam, given by the Guru, with single-minded love and firm faith? ||1]|
USH ASH Us AsaT uret TF Il (1398-15, Meets ws Bes A, 35) Dharam karam poorai satgur paa-ee hai. Dharmic faith and the karma of good deeds are obtained from the Perfect True Guru.
vw at Ae fa wa uf Ao Afe og Wet Ase ATS Sa fos wet T Il (1398-15, Hecte Hs TEA a, 5G)
jaa kee sayvaa siDh saaDh mun jan sur nar jaacheh sabad saar ayk liv laa-ee hai. The Siddhas and Holy Saadhus, the silent sages and angelic beings, yearn to serve Him; through the most excellent Word of the Shabad, they are lovingly attuned to the One Lord.
ofs We a Sa yong fous fadarg niag aaoo sefs geet FT i (1398-16, Hees Hs TCA a, 5G)
fun jaanai ko tayraa apaar nirbha-o nirankaar akath kathanhaar tujheh bujhaa-ee hai. Who can know Your limits? You are the Embodiment of the Fearless, Formless Lord. You are the Speaker of the Unspoken Speech; You alone understand this.
SdH 3G AAS SCT Hot AWS AH A 3 Ss aS THiS Wet F Il (1398-17, neste vss VES a, 08)
bharam bhoolay sansaar chhutahu joonee sanghaar jam ko na dand kaal gurmat Dhayaa-ee hai.
O foolish worldly mortal, you are deluded by doubt; give up birth and death, and you shall not be punished by the Messenger of Death. Meditate on the Guru's Teachings.
Ho uret Hara ates uifafatt Ay Te asH us AfsaT ut F MI (1398-17, AeA Has TEE A, 5g)
man paraanee mugaDh beechaar ahinis jap Dharam karam poorai satgur paa-ee hai. [2] |
You foolish mortal being, reflect on this in your mind; chant and meditate day and night. Dharmic faith and the karma of good deeds are obtained from the Perfect True Guru. ||2||
8 afe afs we Afsag AS OH Us Il (1398-18, HES HIS BSA 2, 3a) ha-o bal bal jaa-o satgur saachay naam par. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, to the True Name, O my True Guru.
aes Cunt 88 age Ast Ade Sa HU JAS’ GAT Aa dfs AT Il (1398-19, Heet® Hdd Vea B, 3%)
kavan upmaa day-o kavan sayvaa saray-o ayk mukh rasnaa rasahu jug jor kar.
What Praises can I offer to You? What service can I do for You? I have only one mouth and tongue; with my palms pressed together, I chant to You with joy and delight.
of6 HS FS AH WS HSS VA SHG SH A ong Arg Ue ata fee ua il (1398-19, wees HIS BEA A, 3B)
fun man bach karam jaan anat doojaa na maan naam so apaar saar deeno gur rid Dhar.
In thought, word and deed, I know the Lord; I do not worship any other. The Guru has enshrined the most excellent Name of the Infinite Lord within my heart.
Yar gate
38 afe USA UGA ae ava gfe deo AAA AA PAHES MG 3a Il (1399-1, Hee wIs Ba a, 38)
nal-y kav paaras paras kach kanchnaa hu-ay chandnaa subaas jaas simrat an tar.
So speaks NALL the poet: touching the Philosopher's Stone, glass is transformed into gold, and the sandalwood tree imparts its fragrance to other trees; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, I am transformed.
WT a tus end an au dt feed at oG af afs we Afsag AS ON UP IIZII (1399-2, AES HIS VEE a, 3H)
jaa kay daykhat du-aaray kaam kroDh hee nivaaray jee ha-o bal bal jaa-o satgur saachay naam par. ||3||
Seeing His Door, I am rid of sexual desire and anger. I am a Sacrifice, a sacrifice, to the True Name, O my True Guru. ||3]|
TH HA sus Us TI THEA Il 1399-3, nets uss wea B, 3) raaj jog takhat dee-an gur raamdaas. Guru Raam Daas was blessed with the Throne of Raja Yoga.
YEH SSA VE AIS SH nse Safe HOY AS AhaS YA Il (1399-3, Hees 17s wea 3, 35) parathmay naanak chand jagat bha-yo aanand taaran manukh-y jan kee-a-o pargaas. First, Guru Nanak illuminated the world, like the full moon, and filled it with bliss. To carry humanity across, He bestowed His Radiance.
Os nie chr fours vies ae famrg ug gs afk AS AHS 3 FA Il (1399-4, Heels 17d TCE a, 35)
gur angad dee-a-o niDhaan akath kathaa gi-aan panch bhoot bas keenay jamat na taraas.
He blessed Guru Angad with the treasure of spiritual wisdom, and the Unspoken Speech; He overcame the five demons and the fear of the Messenger of Death.
Gd wing ag At Als afeafa st ufs mes Sus TS VIG ACH AA Il (1399-5, Hee nas TCA a, 5G)
gur amar guroo saree sat kalijug raakhee pat aghan daykhat gat charan kaval jaas. The Great and True Guru, Guru Amar Daas, has preserved honor in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. Seeing His Lotus Feet, sin and evil are destroyed.
AS fafa wis@ ue sa dt sue une TH Ha sug eis TS THEA Vil (1399-6, weet? HIS VSS A, 5G)
sabh biDh maani-ya-o man tab hee bha-ya-o parsann raaj jog takhat dee-an gur raamdaas. ||4||
When His mind was totally satisfied in every way, when He was totally pleased, He bestowed upon Guru Raam Daas the Throne of Raja Yoga. ||4||
Js Il (1399-7)
rad. Radd:
fants ofs@ usfs ug feGu nig ude 3 Std Ad vied niOS Mote ahi Il (1399-7, neete HIS VSS A, 5G)
jisahi Dhaari-ya-o Dharat ar vi-um ar pavan tay neer sar avar anal anaad kee-a-o.
He established the earth, the sky and the air, the water of the oceans, fire and food.
AfA fafa fof Ae fete Ae soot se Sw Chu | (1399-8, wets vss Vea S, 3H) sas rikh nis soor din sail taroo-a fal ful dee-a-o.
He created the moon, the starts and the sun, night and day and mountains; he blessed the trees with flowers and fruits.
Afs od Aus AHS foo ofS fesse AWA Il (1399-8, Heels HIS Ba 2, 35)
sur nar sapat samudar ki-a Dhaari-o taribhavan jaas.
He created the gods, human beings and the seven seas; He established the three worlds.
Ret Sa on of on vfs ufeG ae yrs YSrA INAUUII (1399-9, Heete HIS RA A, 3s) so-ee ayk naam har naam sat paa-i-o gur amar pargaas. ||1]|5||
Guru Amar Daas was blessed with the Light of the One Name, the True Name of the Lord. ||1]|5]|
ad ave sfenie Ase as Azefe AEG II (1399-9, Heet® Has BA A, 5z) kachahu kanchan bha-i-a-o sabad gur sarvaneh suni-o. Glass is transformed into gold, listening to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
fay 3 nifgs ga@ on Afsag ufe sfenie i (1399-10, neet® Had BA A, 3z) bikh tay amrit hu-ya-o naam satgur mukh bhani-a-o. Poison is transformed into ambrosial nectar, speaking the Name of the True Guru.
Bue du we sefe Afsag Afe Wes Il (1399-11, Heats HTS VER 2, 3) loha-o ho-ya-o laal nadar satgur jad Dhaarai. Iron is transformed into jewels, when the True Guru bestows His Glance of Grace.
UTE Heat ad famirg aa afonS sted il (1399-11, Heet® 1s yea 2, 35)
paahan maanak karai gi-aan gur kahi-a-o beechaarai.
Stones are transformed into emeralds, when the mortal chants and contemplates the spiritual wisdom of the Guru.
arog Anis Afsafs abu@ eu efse fs5 & afent | 1399-12, Het? HTs Bea 3, 3a) kaathahu sareekhand satgur kee-a-o dukh daridar tin kay ga-i-a.
The True Guru transforms ordinary wood into sandalwood, eradicating the pains of poverty.
Aisadg deo faq ustror A uA uds Afs og Stemi NEN (1399-12, Fete HIS VES A, 3B) satguroo charan jin" parsi-aa say pas parayt sur nar bha-i-a. ||2||6]|
Whoever touches the Feet of the True Guru, is transformed from a beast and a ghost into an angelic being. ||2||6||
aH ag ofe ]fs cafe for ara ferfe i (1399-13, neete wos VOR A, 3B) jaam guroo ho-ay val dhaneh ki-aa gaarav dij-ay. One who has the Guru on his side - how could he be proud of his wealth?
mH ag ofe =f we aa fomr farfe i (1399-13, eee Ts BEA S, 3m)
jaam guroo ho-ay val lakh baahay ki-aa kij-ay.
One who has the Guru on his side - what would hundreds of thousands of supporters do for him?
mH ag df= afs famrs nig fms vias ule Il (1399-14, Hees Hos BCR H, 3B) jaam guroo ho-ay val gi-aan ar Dhi-aan anan par.
One who has the Guru on his side, does not depend on anyone else for spiritual wisdom and meditation.
mH ag of fs Fae ATH A AMT ule Il (1399-14, Feet wos BAB, 3B)
jaam guroo ho-ay val sabad saakhee so sachah ghar.
One who has the Guru on his side contemplates the Shabad and the Teachings, and abides in the Home of Truth.
Hag ag uaa AU WA S| als AT I (1399-15, Hee HIS VO B, 3B)
jo guroo guroo ahinis japai daas bhat baynat kahai.
The Lord's humble slave and poet utters this prayer: whoever chants to the Guru night and day,
A Og OH foe ufo ud A ASH HIS GIS Fd NSIS (1399-15, AeA Has BEA a, 3B) jo guroo naam rid meh Dharai so janam maran duh thay rahai. ||3]||7]||
whoever enshrines the Name of the Guru within his heart, is rid of both birth and death. ||3]|7]|
ae fag ug viorg ag fag AHS 3 MMS I (1399-16, HE HIS AH, 3B)
gur bin ghor anDhaar guroo bin samajh na aavai.
Without the Guru, there is utter darkness; without the Guru, understanding does not come.
as fag nafs 3 fafa ag fas Hats o ures I (1399-17, Hees HTS BEA S, 3B)
gur bin surat na siDh guroo bin mukat na paavai.
Without the Guru, there is no intuitive awareness or success; without the Guru, there is no liberation.
TT AT AY seg TI AT J HG HG Il (1399-17, neete nad Bea s, 55)
gur kar sach beechaar guroo kar ray man mayray.
So make Him your Guru, and contemplate the Truth; make Him your Guru, O my mind.
dd Ad Hae AUS mwe acts AT 3g Il (1399-18, Heete ngs wea 2, 3B)
gur kar sabad sapunn aghan kateh sabh tayray.
Make Him your Guru, who is embellished and exalted in the Word of the Shabad; all your sins shall be washed away.
ag safe sale TI Ts Ad Tg Als afe 5G af I (1399-18, Hees uss a F, 35)
gur na-yan ba-yan gur gur karahu guroo sat kav nal-y kahi.
So speaks NALL the poet: with your eyes, make Him your Guru; with the words you speak, make Him your Guru, your True Guru.
fate ag 3 Shon og ahaS 3 wire AAT Hf IIT (1399-19, HeeS Hs VA a, 3H) jin guroo na daykhi-a-o nahu kee-a-o tay akyath sansaar meh. ||4]||8]|
Those who have not seen the Guru, who have not made Him their Guru, are useless in this world. ||4||8]|
TT TT TI AT Ho Hg Il (1399-19, nevis nad ya a, 35) guroo guroo gur kar man mayray. Dwell upon the Guru, the Guru, the Guru, O my mind.
Yat Yoo
Be 3de ANE afenfa Hos AHO Hae fAA AT Il (1400-1, HESS Ts VA B, 3B) taaran taran samrath kalijug sunat samaaDh sabad jis kayray.
The All-powerful Guru is the Boat to carry us across in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. Hearing the Word of His Shabad, we are transported into Samaadhi.
ofs vufs oR Aue He A ues fimrg aS fT SF Il (1400-1, Hees Has BEA Z, 3B) fun dukhan naas sukh-daa-yak soora-o jo Dharat Dhi-aan basat tih nayray.
He is the Spiritual Hero who destroys pain and brings peace. Whoever meditates on Him, dwells near Him.
ys@ yay fee ofa frnes Hy Sas ony fe UTT I (1400-2, AEee Has Vea a, 3B) poora-o purakh ridai har simrat mukh daykhat agh jaahi parayray.
He is the Perfect Primal Being, who meditates in remembrance on the Lord within his heart; seeing His Face, sins run away.
ag ats aft fafa fafa was TI TT TI AT Ha A MUI (1400-3, Hees Has VES A, 3B) ja-o har buDh riDh siDh chaahat guroo guroo gur kar man mayray. ||5||9]|
If you long for wisdom, wealth, spiritual perfection and properity, O my mind, dwell upon the Guru, the Guru, the Guru. ||5||9]|
Tg Hy ete ag AY UTA Il (1400-3, Hees nas BEA a, 35) guroo mukh daykh garoo sukh paa-ya-o. Gazing upon the Face of the Guru, I find peace.
Jat @ fimrn fusA fuds ot des fafa aS fafa fee I (1400-4, neete nos BET A, 35) hutee jo pi-aas pi-oos pivann kee banchhat siDh ka-o biDh milaa-ya-o.
I was thirsty, yearning to drink in the Nectar; to fulfill that wish, the Guru laid out the way.
UIs F HS SST SA TA HHS AS F ed fefA UAE II (1400-4, Hees HTS BEA A, 35) pooran bho man tha-ur baso ras baasan si-o jo daha’ dis Dhaa-ya-o.
My mind has become perfect; it dwells in the Lord's Place; it had been wandering in all directions, in its desire for tastes and pleasures.
afte ae afte udt AH Aes Sie farm sora II 1400-5, Heche was Be 2, 35) gobind vaal gobind puree sam jal-yan teer bipaas banaa-ya-o. Goindwal is the City of God, built on the bank of the Beas River.
mag ey fs aus a A Te HY Uf aT AY UAE NENION (1400-5, Heete 1s BES A, 35) ga-ya-o dukh door barkhan ko so guroo mukh daykh garoo sukh paa-ya-o. ||6||10]| The pains of so many years have been taken away; gazing upon the Face of the Guru, I find peace. ||6]|10]|
AH ag fAfs Ja age Il (1400-6, Heete Has VES B, 3B) samrath guroo sir hath Dhar-ya-o. The All-powerful Guru placed His hand upon my head.
ate atet far afs on thug fan efy ada unis Ja Il 1400-6, Heetd wad Bea 2, az) gur keenee kirpaa har naam dee-a-o jis daykh charann aghann har-ya-o.
The Guru was kind, and blessed me with the Lord's Name. Gazing upon His Feet, my sins were dispelled.
fofA aA Sa AHS foMrs ASH AS AZ 3 SIC Il (1400-7, Aeete wIs VES B, 3B) nis baasur ayk samaan Dhi-aan so naam sunay sut bhaan dar-ya-o.
Night and day, the Guru meditates on the One Lord; hearing His Name, the Messenger of Death is scared away.
3fo A A MTA Aas Tg at ursA ste UGH ATE Il (1400-8, Heete nad VES A, 5B)
bhan daas so aas jagtar guroo kee paaras bhayt paras kar-ya-o.
So speaks the Lord's slave: Guru Raam Daas placed His Faith in Guru Amar Daas, the Guru of the World; touching the Philosopher's Stone, He was transformed into the Philosopher's Stone.
THEA Ig oe Afs ats AHeE ag fAfs Ta UTS MONI (1400-8, Hees Has BAS, 35) raamdaas guroo har sat kee-ya-o samrath guroo sir hath Dhar-ya-o. ||7||11]| Guru Raam Daas recognized the Lord as True; the All-powerful Guru placed His hand
upon His head. ||7||11]|
Ma TUT SA HS at BA Il (1400-9, Heete ngs Bea A, 3s) ab raakho daas bhaat kee laaj. Now, please preserve the honor of Your humble slave.
AA wet on sas ufsare at TISUA SI AT MA Il (1400-9, Heet® 17s Vea F, 33) jaisee raakhee laaj bhagat par-hilaad kee harnaakhas faaray kar aaj.
God saved the honor of the devotee Prahlaad, when Harnaakhash tore him apart with his claws.
Sfs gust on at ofe ys at dies SA cto ag AA II (1400-10, Heet® Hd BCA F, 33) fun daropatee laaj rakhee har parabh jee chheenat bastar deen baho saaj.
And the Dear Lord God saved the honor of Dropadi; when her clothes were stripped from her, she was blessed with even more.
ROH nue Ss Thm afsat uss us fa aA Il (1400-11, Fees Ts BEA S, 3m) sodaamaa apdaa tay raakhi-aa ganikaa parh"at pooray tih kaaj.
Sudaamaa was saved from misfortune; and Ganikaa the prostitute - when she chanted Your Name, her affairs were perfectly resolved.
At Afsas Uns cena df gag SA Te at SA ICI (1400-11, Hee HTB BES 2, 3s)
saree satgur suparsan kaljug ho-ay raakho daas bhaat kee laaj. ||8]|12]| O Great True Guru, if it pleases You, please save the honor of Your slave in this Dark Age of kali Yuga. ||8]|12]|
SBoar Il (1400-12) jholnaa. Jholnaa:
GJ II IJ II TJ Wy yrehrg Il (1400-12, Heete HIS Va a, aie) guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap paraanee-ahu. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O mortal beings.
Rag ofa ofe mu ay de fafa wt onfe mifofafa oA APS af ASM II (1400-13, Fete HIS VEE A, aie)
sabad har har japai naam nav niDh apai rasan ahinis rasai sat kar jaanee-ahu.
Chant the Shabad, the Word of the Lord, Har, Har; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, brings the nine treasures. With your tongue, taste it, day and night, and know it as true.
fe UH da urea aaHufs foment nis wea sag sHg dfs Aebag I (1400-13, Aeete HIS VEE a, aie)
fun paraym rang paa-ee-ai gurmukheh Dhi-aa-ee-ai ann maarag tajahu bhajahu har gayaanee-ahu.
Then, you shall obtain His Love and Affection; become Gurmukh, and meditate on Him. Give up all other ways; vibrate and meditate on Him, O spiritual people.
avo ad foe cag ue g afk aay HON ae Cusg Ute aie Hoh I (1400-14, Hex 17s vee a, Tz)
bachan gur rid Dharahu panch bhoo bas karahu janam kul uDhrahu davaar har maanee-ahu.
Enshrine the Word of the Guru's Teachings within your heart, and overpower the five passions. Your life, and your generations, shall be saved, and you shall be honored at the Lord's Door.
ng 3 AS AY fes OS SH dseg TT Ts TI TI Tg AY Yomi AUIS (1400-15, Eee HIG BVA A, We)
ja-o ta sabh sukh it ut tum banchhvahu guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap paraanee-ahu. []11 1131]
If you desire all the peace and comforts of this world and the next, then chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O mortal beings. ||1||13]|
TT Ts Ts Ts ag Aly Afs ate I (1400-16, Hees nos Vea a, ache) guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap sat kar. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, and know Him as true.
Me Fs WS fours vfs His usg oe uifsfefA asg see Ta fee afs i (1400-16, Heete HIG VBA A, Az)
agam gun jaan niDhaan har man Dharahu Dhayaan ahinis karahu bachan gur ridai Dhar.
Know that the Lord is the Treasure of Excellence. Enshrine Him in your mind, and meditate on Him. Enshrine the Word of the Guru's Teachings within your heart.
of6 Tg 7S fIHs red HAG Ady AS Tafa Sag oH Av Ia Als Il (1400-17, Hees ns vee a, Tz)
fun guroo jal bimal athaah majan karahu sant gursikh tarahu naam sach rang sar. Then, cleanse yourself in the Immaculate and Unfathomable Water of the Guru; O Gursikhs and Saints, cross over the Ocean of Love of the True Name.
Re foseg fadarg foes@ wu Un ag Age off aes fes safe ofa I (1400-18, neete 19a sea a, Tie)
sadaa nirvair nirankaar nirbha-o japai paraym gur sabad ras karat darirh bhagat har. Meditate lovingly forever on the Lord, free of hate and vengeance, Formless and Fearless; lovingly savor the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and implant devotional worship of the Lord deep within.
Hag Ho JH SAg OH TSHfY sag TI Ig Ts Ts Tg AY ALS ats NNW (1400-19, Heele Hs yea a, aie)
mugaDh man bharam tajahu naam gurmukh bhajahu guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap sat kar. ||2||14||
O foolish mind, give up your doubts; as Gurmukh, vibrate and meditate on the Naam. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, and know Him as true. ||2||14]]|
UST ABOA
TT TT TI AsT TT Shs wet I (1401-1, wees 17s wea 3, aie) guroo gur gur karahu guroo har paa-ee-ai. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru; through the Guru, the Lord is obtained.
Cefa ag afed asts Suis afe ont oa dts Hfe flees fee wre Il (1401-1, Heche 19s VER a, Wwe)
udaDh gur gahir gambheer bay-ant har naam nag heer man milat liv laa-ee-ai.
The Guru is an Ocean, deep and profound, infinite and unfathomable. Lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name, you shall be blessed with jewels, diamonds and emeralds.
of6 TI USHS AGA ATS AVS USA HS vonfs foes Aafe TT geht it (1401-2, wees ss Tea a, Ate)
fun guroo parmal saras karat kanchan paras mail durmat hirat sabad gur Dha-yaa-ee- ai.
And, the Guru makes us fragrant and fruitful, and His Touch transforms us into gold. The filth of evil-mindedness is washed away, meditating on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
wf used seas Ae ots fra ae ae fs AG AS firs SEM I (1401-3, Hees 19s dea a, Tz)
amrit parvaah chhutkant sad davaar jis ga-yaan gur bimal sar sant sikh naa-ee-ai. The Stream of Ambrosial Nectar flows constantly from His Door. The Saints and Sikhs bathe in the immaculate pool of the Guru's spiritual wisdom.
on fase fours ofa Cfa usd TT Ts TY aay Ag ae wha WSU (401-4, eee HIG BVA A, Ae)
naam nirbaan niDhaan har ur Dharahu guroo gur gur karahu guroo har paa-ee-dai. [131115]
Enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart, and dwell in Nirvaanaa. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru; through the Guru, the Lord is obtained. ||3]|15]|
Gs Ts Ts Ts Tg wy Ho F Il 401-5, wets 17s Ves 2, aviz) guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap man ray. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind.
wv at Az fhe feo Afos AS yA Te Selo SSA As Su Als Ao FT Il (1401-5, Heete ns vee a, Tie)
jaa kee sayv siv siDh saaDhik sur asur gan tareh taytees gur bachan sun kann ray. Serving Him, Shiva and the Siddhas, the angels and demons and servants of the gods, and the thrity-three million gods cross over, listening to the Word of the Guru's Teachings.
ofs safs 3 AS fos sas ag ag ats sfes ysore aa feos Hfs Aa F Il (1401-6, Hecte HIS BVA a, Az)
fun tareh tay sant hit bhagat gur gur karahi tari-o parahlaad gur milat mun jann ray. And, the Saints and loving devotees are carried across, chanting Guru, Guru. Prahlaad and the silent sages met the Guru, and were carried across.
sofa osefe Hoate sfs qaHufs sefs fea on ofa Sag FA Nis F Il (1401-7, Heete 1s dea a, Tie)
tareh naardaad sankaad har gurmukheh tareh ik naam lag tajahu ras ann ray.
Naarad and Sanak and those men of God who became Gurmukh were carried across; attached to the One Name, they abandoned other tastes and pleasures, and were carried across.
aA dafs ad SH TsHfY wd TT TT TT AU HS F NIVENQEN (1401-8, FeEAe HIG VBA A, Te)
daas baynat kahai naam gurmukh lahai guroo gur guroo gur guroo jap man ray.
[14] [16] |29]|
This is the prayer of the Lord's humble slave: the Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, chanting Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind. ||4||16]|29]|
fadt ag Atos AS Gufs I (401-9, Fete Had Vea A, aviz) siree guroo saahib sabh oopar. The Great, Supreme Guru showered His Mercy upon all;
adt fgur Asafa fats g ufs il a401-9, rete Hos BEA B, atte) karee kirpaa satjug jin Dharoo par. in the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, He blessed Dhroo.
At ysere sas Cuda i 401-9, weet nad wea 2, aie) saree parahlaad bhagat uDhree-a". He saved the devotee Prahlaad,
TA HS Ha us Usb | (1401-10, HeAz nas Vs 3, acte) hast kamal maathay par Dharee-a™. placing the Lotus of His Hand upon his forehead.
mod Ju Aba Sat o AT Il (401-10, Hee wad ves a, aciz) alakh roop jee-a lakh-yaa na jaa-ee. The Unseen Form of the Lord cannot be seen.
Af fra Hae AGSTeSH Il (1401-10, Heete nas Vea 2, aciz) saaDhik siDh sagal sarnaa-ee. The Siddhas and seekers all seek His Sanctuary.
Td & do Als Aba Weg Il (1401-10, Aeet® nas Bea 2, aiz) gur kay bachan sat jee-a Dhaarahu. True are the Words of the Guru's teachings. Enshrine them in your soul.
HSH HOH Ud fers | 401-1, eee Hos Vea a, aie) maanas janam dayh nistaarahu. Emancipate your body, and redeem this human incarnation.
TT ATH dee ae ae fag ster 3 ate il 401-11, weet was VA 2, aciz)
gur jahaaj khayvat guroo gur bin tari-aa na ko-ay.
The Guru is the Boat, and the Guru is the Boatman. Without the Guru, no one can cross over.
aa urfe yg ueba aa fie nafs 3 ofF I (401-12, Heet® Hos Ba 3, acie) gur parsaad parabh paa-ee-ai gur bin mukat na ho-ay. By Guru's Grace, God is obtained. Without the Guru, no one is liberated.
ad soa foafe aA goers I (1401-12, Hect® Has Vea 2, aviz) gur naanak nikat basai banvaaree. Guru Nanak dwells near the Creator Lord.
fats soe afu Afs afar odt Il (1401-12, Feet® nod va a, actz) tin lahnaa thaap jot jag Dhaaree. He established Lehnaa as Guru, and enshrined His Light in the world.
Bde UG UH a aM | (1401-13, Feet Has Vea A, aaiz) lahnai panth Dharam kaa kee-aa. Lehnaa established the path of righteousness and Dharma,
MHITA 3G AC Shor Il 1401-13, Hee HIS Bea 2, aciez) amardaas bhalay ka-o dee-aa. which He passed on to Guru Amar Daas, of the Bhalla dynasty.
fats At Hea At fag suG i 1401-13, neste was Bea a, aie) tin saree raamdaas sodhee thir thap-ya-o. Then, He firmly established the Great Raam Daas of the Sodhi dynasty.
ofa a on med fof mr i 401-14, neet® wad wea 2, acie) har kaa naam akhai niDh ap-ya-o. He was blessed with the inexhaustible treasure of the Lord's Name.
mu ofa on ret fafa vg afar aa Ae afs eye wdbi | 1401-14, Heats was BER A, arte) ap-ya-o har naam akhai niDh chahu jug gur sayvaa kar fal lahee-a”.
He was blessed with the treasure of the Lord's Name; throughout the four ages, it is inexhaustible. Serving the Guru, He received His reward.
defo A vse Aofs AY uefs Use ToHfe Adm Il (1401-15, eet 17d BEA 2, ariz) bandeh jo charan saran sukh paavahi parmaanand gurmukh kahee-a’.
Those who bow at His Feet and seek His Sanctuary, are blessed with peace; those Gurmukhs are blessed with supreme bliss.
ussta fa ursqaH Amit orfe gf uae sae Il (1401-15, AeA was Vea a, actz) partakh dayh paarbarahm su-aamee aad roop pokhan bharna”.
The Guru's Body is the Embodiment of the Supreme Lord God, our Lord and Master, the Form of the Primal Being, who nourishes and cherishes all.
Afsag ag Afe vise afs a at Al THETA SIS SIS NAUI (1401-16, Heet® ns Bea 2, aie) satgur gur sayv alakh gat jaa kee saree raamdaas taaran tarna™. ||1]|
So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||1]|
fad vifys wee aret Ang Ao Auto afs fafets oS Il (1401-17, Hees Hos BS A, aciz) jih amrit bachan banee saaDhoo jan jaapeh kar bichit chaa-o. The Holy people chant the Ambrosial Words of His Bani with delight in their minds.
moe fos Has WS PIAS ASS AAS Il (1401-17, Hee nds va 2, aciz)
aanand nit mangal gur darsan safal sansaar.
The Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan is fruitful and rewarding in this world; it brings lasting bliss and joy.
HAs ASS ddl TI PIAS USHS USH uf|esz AS Il (1401-18, Aeete ngs Vea 2, aie) sansaar Safal gangaa gur darsan parsan param pavitar gatay.
The Guru's Darshan is fruitful and rewarding in this world, like the Ganges. Meeting Him, the supreme sacred status is obtained.
fists an Sa ufss A yet afa Ae fhe aa af FS Il 401-19, Hee usd BCA 2, aciz) jeeteh jam lok patit jay paraanee har jan siv gur ga-yaan ratay.
Even sinful people conquer the realm of Death, if they become the Lord's humble servants, and are imbued with the Guru's spiritual wisdom.
wath fseq Hes vAaa wis ufs defo AT ot AGS Il (401-19, Heete HIS Vea 2, aie) raghubans tilak sundar dasrath ghar mun banchheh jaa kee sarna”.
He is certified, like the handsome Ram Chander in the house of Dasrath of the Raghwa dynasty. Even the silent sages seek His Sanctuary.
Yat Yor
Afsag ag Afe mee afs a at At THETA SIS SIS NI! (1402-1, Aeete ngs Bea 2, aie) satgur gur sayv alakh gat jaa kee saree raamdaas taaran tarna™. ||2]|
So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||2||
HAY MH Ag Soo" ois oH ae Hf wer Il (1402-1, Hee Hs BA B, aciz) sansaar agam saagar tulhaa har naam guroo mukh paa-yaa.
The Name of the Lord, from the Mouth of the Guru, is the Raft to cross over the unfathomable world-ocean.
Afa HoH Hee sar fes wet St usstfs tl 1402-2, necte uss yea a, aviz)
jag janam maran bhagaa ih aa-ee hee-ai parteet.
The cycle of birth and death in this world is ended for those who have this faith in their hearts.
uasts dha net fro wo & fsq aG uedt Cu set I 1402-3, neet® 10d Bea 2, aciz) parteet hee-ai aa-ee jin jan kai tin" ka-o padvee uch bha-ee.
Those humble beings who have this faith in their hearts, are awarded the highest status.
3fa wher Hg SF nig Bey aH au at fear Tet | (1402-3, Heet® wos Bea 3, ariz)
taj maa-i-aa moh lobh ar laalach kaam kroDh kee baritha ga-ee.
They forsake Maya, emotional attachment and greed; they are rid of the frustrations of possessiveness, sexual desire and anger.
MESA YIN FI AS sear fea fefy age ATE Il (1402-4, Hees was Bea 4, aie) avlok-yaa barahm bharam sabh chhut-yaa dib-y darisat kaaran karna”,
They are blessed with the Inner Vision to see God, the Cause of causes, and all their doubts are dispelled.
Afsag ag Afe vise afs a at Al THETA SIS SdS INI (1402-4, Hee uss wea 2, acfe) satgur gur sayv alakh gat jaa kee saree raamdaas taaran tarna™. ||3]|
So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||3]|
ugsTy Ae qd a ufe wie user Sa AA AS & Il (1402-5, Heels ngs BEA A, aie) partaap sadaa gur kaa ghat ghat pargaas bha-yaa jas jan kai.
The Glorious Greatness of the Guru is manifest forever in each and every heart. His humble servants sing His Praises.
fefa usfo Hefs arefo usststs ats EATS II (1402-6, Heete Hos Vea a, aciz)
ik parheh suneh gaavahi parbhaatihi karahi isnaan.
Some read and listen and sing of Him, taking their cleansing bath in the early hours of the morning before the dawn.
fers asfs ussts AO Hfs ae ua fafa Afos a II 1402-6, Feet nad VES A, aie) isnaan karahi parbhaat suDh man gur poojaa biDh sahit kara’.
After their cleansing bath in the hours before the dawn, they worship the Guru with their minds pure and clear.
avo 36 ae usth usA ae AS AgUt OS Us I (1402-7, Feels wos Bea A, mie) kanchan tan ho-ay paras paaras ka-o jot saroopee Dhayaan Dhara”,
Touching the Philosopher's Stone, their bodies are transformed into gold. They focus their meditation on the Embodiment of Divine Light.
Hanes AGS AS aS xfs sfoor ufs ag fafa gas Il (1402-8, Hees nos VES A, aciz) jagjeevan jagannaath jal thal meh rahi-aa poor baho biDh barana”.
The Master of the Universe, the very Life of the World pervades the sea and the land, manifesting Himself in myriads of ways.
Afsag ag Afe wee afs a at At THETA TIS BS II (1402-8, Heete wTs Va 2, ache) satgur gur sayv alakh gat jaa kee saree raamdaas taaran tarna”. ||4||
So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||4||
frog Fs faqs got wat Set rte ares 3 AE" Il (1402-9, nete Has VA A, acte)
jinahu baat nischal Dharoo-a jaanee tay-ee jeev kaal tay bachaa.
Those who realize the Eternal, Unchanging Word of God, like Dhroo, are immune to death.
faq sfeS AYE ge fis fea ufo HoT fia Fats Aa FS Il (1402-9, Hees ns Vea &, ae)
tin" tari-o samudar rudar khin ik meh jalhar bimb jugat jag rachaa.
They cross over the terrifying world-ocean in an instant; the Lord created the world like a bubble of water.
Aseat Hest ASHafs UsHSe Tg Hfy HT Il (1402-10, Hee Has VETS, mez)
kundlanee surjhee satsangat parmaanand guroo mukh machaa.
The Kundalini rises in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; through the Word of the Guru, they enjoy the Lord of Supreme Bliss.
frdt ag Afog AS Gufs Hs Fe AH ASA AST NUM (1402-11, Hee wos VA a, maiz) siree guroo saahib sabh oopar man bach krem sayvee-ai sachaa. ||5||
The Supreme Guru is the Lord and Master over all; so serve the True Guru, in thought, word and deed. ||5||
stag Stags shag ots AS Il (1402-11, Hees Had Vea a, aviz) vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahi jee-o. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o.
as SS HUT Ho afe Aa Ha AS ATS HW Ae fants edt avs ufo HIG I (1402-12, Heet® HIG VBA A, Te)
kaval nain maDhur bain kot sain sang sobh kahat maa jasod jisahi dahee bhaat khaahi jee-o.
You are lotus-eyed, with sweet speech, exalted and embellished with millions of companions. Mother Yashoda invited You as Krishna to eat the sweet rice.
afte gy mis nigu Ho He Ha set faast Hae sosors 4S ute A i 1402-13, Hees vss vee a, Tie)
daykh roop at anoop moh mahaa mag bha-ee kinknee sabad jhanatkaar khayl paahi jee-o.
Gazing upon Your supremely beautiful form, and hearing the musical sounds of Your Silver bells tinkling, she was intoxicated with delight.
OS ASH JAH Ifa ag ae Afe Aa Sta SH WS WS uss dm ota A It (1402-14, APES ngs BEA a, aie)
kaal kalam hukam haath kahhu ka-un mayt sakai ees bamm-yu ga-yaan Dhayaan Dharat hee-ai chaahi jee-o.
Death's pen and command are in Your hands. Tell me, who can erase it? Shiva and Brahma yearn to enshrine Your spiritual wisdom in their hearts.
Afs Ag At foea urfe usy Ae sot Stag stag Shoag sho A NAMEN (402-14, Heele HIS yea a, aie)
sat saach saree nivaas aad purakh sadaa tuhee vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahi jee-o. ||1]|6||
You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||1||6||
oH OTH USH OH AU aU fodiars SHH Aaa aC ats AE I (1402-15, Heels HIS EA B, ae)
raam naam param Dhaam suDh buDh nireekaar baysumaar sarbar ka-o kaahi jee-o. You are blessed with the Lord's Name, the supreme mansion, and clear understanding. You are the Formless, Infinite Lord; who can compare to You?
Had fas saz fos sy ofsG Jaqun fe oy fees AG I (1402-16, Fete 17d BA 2, ae)
suthar chit bhagat hit bhaykh Dhari-o harnaakhas hari-o nakh bidaar jee-o.
For the sake of the pure-hearted devotee Prahlaad, You took the form of the man- lion, to tear apart and destroy Harnaakhash with your claws.
AY 3a get wen orfy wry at sen wrudug ursqun we ag sfo AE I (1402-17, net? HIS VEE a, aie)
sankh chakar gadaa padam aap aap kee-o chhadam aprampar paarbarahm lakhai ka- un taahi jee-o.
You are the Infinite Supreme Lord God; with your symbols of power, You deceived Baliraja; who can know You?
Afs Ay At foea urfe use Ae sot Shag stag stag sho AG NINN (1402-18, AGele HIS BES a, aie)
sat saach saree nivaas aad purakh sadaa tuhee vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahi jee-o. ||2||7]|
You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||2||7||
uls SHO ae eH fut Afss ao He Ha] AA He Uy ota FIG II (1402-19, Heche wd vee a, Ai)
peet basan kund dasan pari-a sahit kanth maal mukat sees mor pankh chaahi jee-o. As Krishna, You wear yellow robes, with teeth like jasmine flowers; You dwell with Your lovers, with Your mala around Your neck, and You joyfully adorn Your head with the crow of peacock feathers.
Yat 98o3
Sens as Ute oH vial wise na Ae aor wus Carfa AG i (1403-1, Hees Hs VA A, ae)
bayvjeer baday Dheer Dharam ang alakh agam khayl kee-aa aapnai uchhaahi jee-o. You have no advisors, You are so very patient; You are the Upholder of the Dharma, unseen and unfathomable. You have staged the play of the Universe with joy and delight.
nee aE sat 5 fe sis Sa sfoor AME Ass fo gy UfeG ATS & AS FE II (1403-1, Heele Hs yea a, aie)
akath kathaa kathee na jaa-ay teen lok rahi-aa samaa-ay sutah siDh roop Dhari-o saahan kai saahi jee-o.
No one can speak Your Unspoken Speech. You are pervading the three worlds. You assume the form of spiritual perfection, O King of kings.
Afs Ag At foarte use Ae sot Stag stag shoag Sho AE Nath (1403-2, Heele Hs yea a, aie)
sat saach saree nivaas aad purakh sadaa tuhee vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahiguroo vaahi jee-o. ||3]|8]|
You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||3]|8]|
Afsag Afsag Afsag afte AG I (403-3, neste HIS Vea a, aie) satguroo satguroo satgur gubind jee-o. The True Guru, the True Guru, the True Guru is the Lord of the Universe Himself.
Hefs 2o5 AAG HOS sly sas AE aus fosasa srt Sa ve ws sfee AE il (1403-4, AGES HIS BES a, aie)
balihi chhalan sabal malan bhagat falan kaan" ku-ar nihklank bajee dank charhhoo dal ravind jee-o.
Enticer of Baliraja, who smothers the mighty, and fulfills the devotees; the Prince Krishna, and Kalki; the thunder of His army and the beat of His drum echoes across the Universe.
TH JE TIS UES AAG FS AAG ATE Aa Fs rfy gt cate ce AoA uy Sloe AS Il (1403-5, Hele HIS VA A, Mie)
raam ravan durat davan sakal bhavan kusal karan sarab bhoot aap hee dayvaaDh dayv sahas mukh fanind jee-o.
The Lord of contemplation, Destroyer of sin, who brings pleasure to the beings of all realms, He Himself is the God of gods, Divinity of the divine, the thousand-headed king cobra.
TSH AGH He AE IMI AT AHS ao af Uw ules fats fare AS i (1403-6, Hees 17s Bea a, We)
jaram karam machh kachh hu-a baraah jamunaa kai kool khay! khayli-o jin binn jee-o. He took birth in the Incarnations of the Fish, Tortoise and Wild Boar, and played His part. He played games on the banks of the Jamunaa River.
oy Ag we wg 3H fag Ho aie Afsag Afsag Afsasg afse ME sit 403-7, Hele HIs yea a, aie)
naam saar hee-ay Dhaar taj bikaar man ga-yand satguroo satguroo satgur gubind jee- o. [141/91]
Enshrine this most excellent Name within your heart, and renounce the wickedness of the mind, O Gayand the True Guru, the True Guru, the True Guru is the Lord of the Universe Himself. ||4]|9] |
fact ag fact ag fast ag AfS ATS I 403-8, Feete 17d Vea a, atte) siree guroo siree guroo siree guroo Sat jee-o. The Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the True, Dear Lord.
as afoor He far fare Ag aS Hy fed fafa was of awe wala usH afs AE II (1403-8, HES HIS Bea A, aviz) -
gur kahi-aa maan nij niDhaan sach jaan mantar ihai nis baasur ho-ay kal-yaan laheh param gat jee-o.
Respect and obey the Guru's Word; this is your own personal treasure - know this mantra as true. Night and day, you shall be saved, and blessed with the supreme status.
ay au BF Hd Ae He fA SS OE ION a du are Af ofS MIG II (1403-9, Heet® HIS VEE a, aie)
kaam kroDh lobh moh jan jan si-o chhaad Dhohu ha-umai kaa fanDh kaat saaDhsang rat jee-o.
Renounce sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment; give up your games of deception. Snap the noose of egotism, and let yourself be at home in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
20 ag fan Adg fos faorn Aas SI Bao AHS Ae AG fess ag Hfs AIG II (1403-10, Heele Hs yea a, aie)
dayh gayhu tari-a sanayhu chit bilaas jagat ayhu charan kamal sadaa say-o darirh-taa kar mat jee-o.
Free your consciousness of attachment to your body, your home, your spouse, and the pleasures of this world. Serve forever at His Lotus Feet, and firmly implant these teachings within.
oy Ag de wg se fag Ho aie fret ag fast ag fret ae ALS AS NUNION (1403-11, Heele Hs yea a, aie)
naam saar hee-ay Dhaar taj bikaar man ga-yand siree guroo siree guroo siree guroo sat jee-o. ||5||10]|
Enshrine this most excellent Name within your heart, and renounce the wickedness of the mind, O Gayand. the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the True, Dear Lord. ||5]|10]|
ACA S FIT WT AT PITT So AG ACA Il (1403-12, neete vod ves 2, aie)
sayvak kai bharpoor jug jug vaahguroo tayraa sabh sadkaa.
Your servants are totally fulfilled, throughout the ages; O Waahay Guru, it is all You, forever.
fadarg ys Ae ROHS afs o Aa AB FT AE A Il (1403-13, Hees vss Vea 3, aie) nirankaar parabh sadaa salaamat kahi na sakai ko-oo too kad kaa.
O Formless Lord God, You are eternally intact; no one can say how You came into being.
quwt fare fad 3 ares fo a Hg Sor HS HE AT Il (1403-13, Heet® Hos Bea 2, aciz) barahmaa bisan siray tai agnat tin ka-o moh bha-yaa man mad kaa.
You created countless Brahmas and Vishnus; their minds were intoxicated with emotional attachment.
veTH we Als Curet fara tor AS J AG Se a Il (1403-14, Heels ns Vea a, aie) chavraaseeh lakh jon upaa-ee rijak dee-aa sabh hoo ka-o tad kaa. You created the 8.4 million species of beings, and provide for their sustanance.
ACA S FIUT TT AA VITT 37 AG AeA UA! (1403-15, wees was Vea a, actz) sayvak kai bharpoor jug jug vaahguroo tayraa sabh sadkaa. ||1||11]|
Your servants are totally fulfilled, throughout the ages; O Waahay Guru, it is all You, forever. ||1||11]]|
SJ SJ AT FST SHAT Il (1403-15, HeSle HIS Va A, az)
vaahu vaahu kaa badaa tamaasaa. Waaho! Waaho! Great! Great is the Play of God!
nnd oA urfy dt fas] nm Ge AT USAT I (1403-16, Fee HIS Ves 2, mez) aapay hasai aap hee chitvai aapay chand soor pargaasaa. He Himself laughs, and He Himself thinks; He Himself illumines the sun and the moon.
nM AS uM ae eS wy aba wife wife aA il (1403-16, Hee nas Sa 2, ache)
aapay jal aapay thal tham"an aapay kee-aa ghat ghat baasaa.
He Himself is the water, He Himself is the earth and its support. He Himself abides in each and every heart.
mma ag ning efe oat mim Arts mia Tt UAT Il (1403-17, Heete HIS BEA 2, aciz) aapay nar aapay fun naaree aapay saar aap hee paasaa.
He Himself is male, and He Himself is female; He Himself is the chessman, and He Himself is the board.
aenty Hafs AS faesg ST AT a SST SHAT IQA (1403-17, HEete HIS Vea A, ale) gurmukh sangat sabhai bichaarahu vaahu vaahu kaa badaa tamaasaa. ||2||12]|
As Gurmukh, join the Sangat, and consider all this: Waaho! Waaho! Great! Great is the Play of God! ||2]|12||
abhor ue as HS SHAT Sods Sot AS Tsar Il (1403-18, Heels nas Vea A, aviz) kee-aa khayl bad mayl tamaasaa vaahiguroo tayree sabh rachnaa.
You have formed and created this play, this great game. O Waahay Guru, this is all You, forever.
3 mle af oats urls ufs sgt vifys 3 HIS AT a Bea Il (1403-19, Hees nos BES B, ae)
too jal thal gagan pa-yaal poor rah-yaa amrit tay meethay jaa kay bachnaa.
You are pervading and permeating the water, land, skies and nether regions; Your Words are sweeter than Ambrosial Nectar.
Hots qoHtea geen ares at ans fadaa AVS Il (1403-19, HeAe wss Bea A, acie) maaneh barahmaadik rudraadik kaal kaa kaal niranjan jachnaa.
Brahmas and Shivas respect and obey You. O Death of death, Formless Lord, I beg of You.
UST Woe
ae unfe uch usHsg ASHafs AST He SST Il (1404-1, Heete ngs Ve 2, aciz)
gur parsaad paa-ee-ai parmaarath satsangat saytee man khachnaa.
By Guru's Grace, the greatest thing is obtained, and the mind is involved with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
abot Ye as AS SHAT IIT Sot AT JIS USUISIUSIM (1404-2, Hees nas VES &, aciz) kee-aa khayl bad mayl tamaasaa vaahguroo tayree sabh rachnaa. ||3||13]|42] |
You have formed and created this play, this great game. O Waahay Guru, this is all Your making. ||3||13]|42]|
Ma Mes wate urfe fam afe o AS Il (1404-2, Heete Hos Vea a, HET) agam anant anaad aad jis ko-ay na jaanai. The Lord is Inaccessible, Infinite, Eternal and Primordial; no one knows His beginning.
fre fadfs ofa avs fests fan FE gas | (1404-3, nets was wa 2, aT) siv biranch Dhar Dhayaan niteh jis bayd bakhaanai. Shiva and Brahma meditate on Him; the Vedas describe Him again and again.
fadarg faseg nig adt GHe Aet Il (1404-3, nected wad Vea a, vow) nirankaar nirvair avar nahee doosar ko-ee. The Lord is Formless, beyond hate and vengeance; there is no one else like Him.
SHO TSE AHY SIS SIS YS AET Il (1404-4, wees ws ea 3, vew) bhanjan garh"an samath taran taaran parabh so-ee. He creates and destroys - He is All-powerful; God is the Boat to carry all across.
oat yard fafs wal atG AS HES GAS" FA Il (1404-4, Heete nos Bea 2, nET)
naanaa parkaar jin jag kee-o jan mathuraa rasnaa rasai.
He created the world in its various aspects; His humble servant Mat'huraa delights in His Praises.
At Afs OW ads Use TT THEA fasT FA IAI (1404-5, Heete HIS BEA 2, nET) Saree sat naam kartaa purakh gur raamdaas chitah basai. ||1]|
Sat Naam, the Great and Supreme True Name of God, the Personification of Creativity, dwells in the Consciousness of Guru Raam Daas. ||1]|
Gg ANE afta adr ge aft AAAS AYTIS AE Il (1404-5, nets was VES a, nT) guroo samrath geh karee-aa Dharuv buDh sumat sam"aaran ka-o.
I have grasped hold of the All-powerful Guru; He has made my mind steady and stable, and embellished me with clear consciousness.
Sf GH UM cudfs AE my UA sda foese aE Il (1404-6, neet® vss wea a, veT)
fun Dharamm Dhujaa fahrant sadaa agh punj tarang nivaaran ka-o.
And, His Banner of Righteousness waves proudly forever, to defend against the waves of sin.
HET AS Ate ad Ahr ATG A IST aS 3 feeTGS AE It (1404-7, Hees nas Va a, wa) mathuraa jan jaan kahee jee-a saach so a-or kachhoo na bichaaran ka-o.
His humble servant Mat'hraa knows this as true, and speaks it from his soul; there is nothing else to consider.
dfs on Stee as afe H se Aa ute Bsreq AE II (1404-7, Fete Hes BEA A, HET) har naam bohith badou kal mai bhav saagar paar utaaran ka-o. ||2||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the Great Ship, to carry us all across the terrifying world-ocean, safely to the other side. ||2]|
Has dt AsHafs Aa Ada Js AA Wes J Il (1404-8, nect® nd Vea A, nT)
santat hee satsangat sang surang ratay jas gaavat hai.
The Saints dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; imbued with pure celestial love, they sing the Lord's Praises.
gH ug ofsS usotos urfy ad fee ofe & es FT I (1404-9, Heete Hos Vea 2, nET) Dharam panth Dhari-o DharneeDhar aap rahay liv Dhaar na Dhaavat hai.
The Support of the Earth has established this Path of Dharma; He Himself remains lovingly attuned to the Lord, and does not wander in distraction.
HET afs aa 38 Ba a Ho fees dt ew ures T Il (1404-9, Heete was Ba 2, neT) mathuraa bhan bhaag bhalay un" kay man ichhat hee fal paavat hai.
So speaks Mat'huraa: those blessed with good fortune receive the fruits of their minds' desires.
oe & AS & fq TH AT FBS Ag fos Hes T NSM (1404-10, Hees ws BEA S, waT) rav kay sut ko tin” taraas kahaa jo charann guroo chit laavat hai. ||3]|
Those who focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet, they do not fear the judgement of Dharamraj. ||3]|
fooHs oH AU udUdS Aad sda Yates fea yrag Il (1404-11, Aeete nos VSS A, veT) nirmal naam suDhaa parpooran sabad tarang paragtit din aagar.
The Immaculate, Sacred Pool of the Guru is overflowing with the waves of the Shabad, radiantly revealed in the early hours before the dawn.
asd astd mars nfs ss Aad Ae AS fafa Gorda Il (1404-11, Feet? Hs BEA 2, nT) gahir gambheer athaah at bad subhar sadaa sabh biDh ratnaagar.
He is Deep and Profound, Unfathomable and utterly Great, eternally overflowing with all sorts of jewels.
AS Hos asl ase fe AH A fhfeS Ty aa Il (1404-12, Hees 17s Ves s, vgT) sant maraal karahi kantoohal tin jam taraas miti-o dukh kaagar.
The Saint-swans celebrate; their fear of death is erased, along with the accounts of their pain.
TSAI TIS Lid Asa AG VIAG TI ATS AY Aa IVil (1404-13, Hees uss va F, was) kaljug durat door karbay ka-o darsan guroo sagal sukh saagar. ||4||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the sins are taken away; the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan is the Ocean of all peace and comfort. ||4| |
WT ag ufs we ud fers AIS Fa aa a AG urs TSH YS AS Il (1404-13, Hees was Ta a, HES)
jaa ka-o mun Dhayaan Dharai firat sagal jug kabahu ka ko-oo paavai aatam pargaas ka-o.
For His Sake, the silent sages meditated and focused their consciousness, wandering all the ages through; rarely, if ever, their souls were enlightened.
ae wat Afos fadfe an ae wa fhe nfs afo o sas afsorn AE I (1404-14, Heete Hd Ta a, HES)
bayd banee sahit biranch jas gaavai jaa ko siv mun geh na tajaat kabilaas ka‘-u.
In the Hymns of the Vedas, Brahma sang His Praises; for His Sake, Shiva the silent sage held his place on the Kailaash Mountain.
W a Hat Ast fro wfoe nda su Ae Ae su oe fees CoA AE Il (1404-15, Hees Hs Ta a, HES)
jaa kou jogee jatee siDh saaDhik anayk tap jataa joot bhaykh kee-ay firat udaas ka-o. For His Sake, the Yogis, celibates, Siddhas and seekers, the countless sects of fanatics with matted hair wear religious robes, wandering as detached renunciates.
A fsfe afsafe Au ofe four ost Aba on at aavet vet TT THEA A Mull (1404-16,
Agee HIG BEA A, HAT)
so tin satgur sukh bhaa-ay kirpaa Dhaaree jee-a naam kee badaa-ee da-ee gur raamdaas ka-o. ||5||
That True Guru, by the Pleasure of His Will, showered His Mercy upon all beings, and blessed Guru Raam Daas with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam. ||5]|
on fours fimre nissafs 3H ua fs Sa YEA I (1404-17, Hees Hs VCS 2, HET) naam niDhaan Dhi-aan antargat tayj punj tihu log pargaasay.
He focuses His Meditation deep within; the Embodiment of Light, He illuminates the three worlds.
Tus VIA Sela FH SHS VU uddld AY AoA faarA Il (1404-18, Hees nas Bea a, waT) daykhat daras bhatak bharam bhajat dukh parhar sukh sahj bigaasay.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, doubt runs away, pain is eradicated, and celestial peace spontaneously wells up.
Rea fra Ae vfs ofss oils AHS fAS AAH ASA Il (1404-18, Hees Hos BEA S, wae) sayvak sikh sadaa at lubhit al samooh ji-o kusam subaasay.
The selfless servants and Sikhs are always totally captivated by it, like bumble bees lured by the fragrance of the flower.
fens afe orf au@ fag AES SUT TT THEA ell (1404-19, reve nas Bea a, aT) bid-yamaan gur aap thap-ya-o thir saacha-o takhat guroo raamdaasai. ||6| | The Guru Himself established the Eternal Throne of Truth, in Guru Raam Daas. ||6] |
User qgou
ae AAG Hor He Hos nifys on thx ANE Il (1405-1, Heet® uss wea 3, vew) taar-ya-o sansaar maa-yaa mad mohit amrit naam dee-a-o samrath.
The Universe is intoxicated with the wine of Maya, but it has been saved; the All- powerful Guru has blessed it with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
ofs atefsds re AU Hufs fofa nrg fafa 3 date Ae I (1405-1, Feet? Had BRA A, HET) fun keertivant sadaa sukh sampat riDh ar siDh na chhod-ay sath.
And, the Praiseworthy Guru is blessed with eternal peace, wealth and prosperity; the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhis never leave him.
afs as mises Hoafes Aefa oth afeG fe 3a I (1405-2, next? Hed BEA A, HET) daan badou ativant mahaabal sayvak daas kahi-o ih tath.
His Gifts are vast and great; His awesome Power is supreme. Your humble servant and slave speaks this truth.
afd AT usST AT at A a SAA UfeS afs Te ONSEN (1405-3, HEee ws BETS, waT)
taahi kahaa parvaah kaahoo kee jaa kai basees Dhari-o gur hath. ||7||49]| One, upon whose head the Guru has placed His Hand - with whom should he be concerned? ||7||49||
Sis seq saute afoS Het I 1405-3, Hees Hs Be A, ws) teen bhavan bharpoor rahi-o so-ee. He is totally pervading and permeating the three realms;
WUS ASA amis o Aas aet Il (1405-4, AeAS nTs wea 2, 3) apan saras kee-a-o na jagat ko-ee. in all the world, He has not created another like Himself.
nue nity nity dt Cura i 1405-4, neet® nas ea 2, as) aapun aap aap hee upaa-ya-o. He Himself created Himself.
Afe od MAT nis odt UTA Il 1405-4, Heete Hos Bea 2, aH) sur nar asur ant nahee paa-ya-o. The angels, human beings and demons have not found His limits.
ua odt nig Ad MAT Oo Te aye YAS fed I (1405-5, Fete vss ea 2, ws) paa-ya-o nahee ant suray asureh nar gan ganDharab khojant firay.
The angels, demons and human beings have not found His limits; the heavenly heralds and celestial singers wander around, searching for Him.
mifsart nee mot ASG UTaSH MRuTS Us Il (1405-5, Heete HTS Va A, as) abhinaasee achal ajonee sambha-o purkhotam apaar paray.
The Eternal, Imperishable, Unmoving and Unchanging, Unborn, Self-Existent, Primal Being of the Soul, the Infinity of the Infinite,
ATE ATE ANE Het Het Aaa Fhe Hfs ofsas il (1405-6, neete uss ws 2, ws) karan kaaran samrath sadaa so-ee sarab jee-a man Dhayaa-i-ya-o. the Eternal All-powerful Cause of causes - all beings meditate on Him in their minds.
At ae SHEA AG AG Aa Hf 3 ofs us UE UTETE A (1405-6, Heet® Has BEA A, as) saree gur raamdaas ja-yo ja-y jag meh tai har param pad paa-i-ya-o. ||1]|
O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||1]|
Afsafe sofa sats act fea nfs 3a He Ue afie Shas i (1405-7, Heete 17s Va A, as) satgur naanak bhagat karee ik man tan man Dhan gobind dee-a-o.
Nanak, the True Guru, worships God single-mindedly; He surrenders His body, mind and wealth to the Lord of the Universe.
niate mids Hols fon ost mon ate sft TAG TiS i (1405-8, reds 17s Ves a, zm) angad anant moorat nij Dnaaree agam ga-yaan ras ras-ya-o hee-a-o.
The Infinite Lord enshrined His Own Image in Guru Angad. In His heart, He delights in the spiritual wisdom of the Unfathomable Lord.
dfs wHsetA aay amis afk ag ag ats TEU I (1405-9, Hees ngs VA A, ws)
gur amardaas kartaar kee-a-o vas vaahu vaahu kar Dhayaa-i-ya-o.
Guru Amar Daas brought the Creator Lord under His control. Waaho! Waaho! Meditate on Him!
At ae SHEA AG AG Aa Hf 3 ofs Us UE UPETE II (1405-9, Fete HIS BEA A, aH) saree gur raamdaas ja-yo ja-y jag meh tai har param pad paa-i-ya-o. ||2]|
O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. |[2||
ode Y YISE AE UN Sas Ts A A AES Il (1405-10, Ae 17s Vea 4, aw)
naarad Dharoo parahlaad sudaamaa pub bhagat har kay jo gana™.
Naarad, Dhroo, Prahlaad and Sudaamaa are accounted among the Lord's devotees of the past.
nigdia Hoes Bue oH nieg ads FS Il (1405-11, Heels HTS Vea 2, 3s) ambreek ja-ydayv tarilochan naamaa avar kabeer bhana”. Ambreek, Jai Dayv, Trilochan, Naam Dayv and Kabeer are also remembered.
fo & mesg su afs festa wR Aas ufs afeae I 1405-11, neet® Had Vea , us)
tin kou avtaar bha-ya-o kal bhintar jas jagtar par chhaa-i-ya-o.
They were incarnated in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; their praises have spread over all the world.
At ae SHEA AG AG Aa Hf 3 ofs USN UE UfETE SII (1405-12, Heete Hass Bea A, aH) saree gur raamdaas ja-yo ja-y jag meh tai har param pad paa-i-ya-o. ||3]|
O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||3]|
Hon afe fads 33 og aH au fixfen a fSE II 1405-12, Heete HTS BEA A, aH) mansaa kar simrant tujhai nar kaam kroDh miti-a-o jo tina’.
Those who meditate in remembrance on You within their minds - their sexual desire and anger are taken away.
we afs fruds 35 faq eu efee freu@ F FHS II (1405-13, Heete nad BEA S, 3B) baachaa kar simrant tujhai tin" dukh daridar miti-ya-o jo khina’.
Those who remember You in meditation with their words, are rid of their poverty and pain in an instant.
OSH afd So VIA USA UGA Ad aH Se AA TEUS I (1405-14, Heels ngs BA A, ay) karam kar tu-a daras paras paaras sar bal-y bhat jas gaa-i-ya-o.
Those who obtain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, by the karma of their good deeds, touch the Philosopher's Stone, and like BALL the poet, sing Your Praises.
At ae SHEA AG AG Aa Hfs 3 ofe UsH UE UES ISI (1405-14, Fete HTS BEA A, as) saree gur raamdaas ja-yo ja-y jag meh tai har param pad paa-i-ya-o. ||4]|
O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||4]|
fag Afsag fads one & fare fiefs fre I 1405-15, Heet® HIS VBA A, 3s)
jih satgur simrant na-yan kay timar miteh khin.
Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru - the darkness of their eyes is removed in an instant.
fag Afsas findfa foe afs any fes fee i 405-16, Heet® Hs Vea 2, 3s)
jih satgur simranth ridai har naam dino din.
Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru within their hearts, are blessed with the Lord's Name, day by day.
fag Afsas fandfa shot ot sufs fire] i 1405-16, Heet® Has VA A, 3s)
jih satgur simranth jee-a kee tapat mitaavai.
Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru within their souls - the fire of desire is extinguished for them.
fas Afsas findfa foto fifa og fof ure II (1405-17, Heete 1s BOA A, aH)
jih satgur simranth riDh siDh nav niDh paavai.
Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru, are blessed with wealth and prosperity, Supernatural spiritual powers and the nine treasures.
Ret aHea ag ae safe fife Has ofs dfs asg Il 1405-17, Hehe nas Ba 2, ws) so-ee raamdaas gur bal-y bhan mil sangat Dhan Dhan karahu.
So speaks BALL the poet: Blessed is Guru Raam Daas; joining the Sangat, the Congregation, call Him blessed and great.
fag Afsas ofa us uch A Afsag fied Sag NUNUII (1405-18, HES Hs BEA 2, as) jih satgur lag parabh paa-ee-ai so satgur simrahu marahu. ||5||54|| Meditate on the True Guru, O men, through Whom the Lord is obtained. ||5||54||
fafs Hae oof usH ue ufeS AST ass & EfSE WA I (1405-19, Feet? Has VA A, 3s) jin sabad kamaa-ay param pad paa-i-o sayvaa karat na chhodi-o paas.
Living the Word of the Shabad, He attained the supreme status; while performing selfless service, He did not leave the side of Guru Amar Daas.
33 aug We ue Crys eu efee niurs & OA Il (1405-19, Heete Has BA A, ws)
taa tay ga-uhar ga-yaan pargat ujee-aara-o dukh daridar anDh-yaar ko naas. From that service, the light from the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines forth, radiant and bright; it has destroyed pain, poverty and darkness.
Ust AoE
afe ates HAS veo ufs orate fsq aH aU AN A Odt TA Il (1406-1, Heete Had vA FZ, a)
kav keerat jo sant charan murh laageh tin" kaam kroDh jam ko nahee taraas.
So speaks Keerat the poet: those who grasp hold of the feet of the Saints, are not afraid of death, sexual desire or anger.
fae nice vif Afat oon ad fe TT MMSSTH A AT THA UI (1406-2, eet? nd Vea a, 8S)
jiv angad ang sang naanak gur tiv gur amardaas kai gur raamdaas. ||1||
Just as Guru Nanak was part and parcel, life and limb with Guru Angad, so is Guru Amar Daas one with Guru Raam Daas. ||1||
fafe Afsag Afe uevsa uae fof was dfs veo fA Il (1406-3, Heete Hs BEA A, as) jin satgur sayv padaarath paa-ya-o nis baasur har charan nivaas.
Whoever serves the True Guru obtains the treasure; night and day, he dwells at the Lord's Feet.
3 3 Aafs Awe ate 38 wofs 3H Heras UMS ASA Il (1406-3, Heet® Has BA A, am) taa tay sangat saghan bhaa-ay bha-o maaneh tum malee-aagar pargat subaas.
And so, the entire Sangat loves, fears and respects You. You are the sandalwood tree; Your fragrance spreads gloriously far and wide.
y ysere adts fasee oH ST Cun F YONA Il (1406-4, eee nas Bea a, 3s)
Dharoo parahlaad kabeer tilochan naam lait upjayo jo pargaas.
Dhroo, Prahlaad, Kabeer and Trilochan chanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and His Illumination radiantly shines forth.
fra furs ifs dfs son His Het AS ATT TT THEA NI (1406-5, wees ss Beas, ws) jih pikhat at ho-ay rahas man so-ee sant sahaar guroo raamdaas. ||2||
Seeing Him, the mind is totally delighted; Guru Raam Daas is the Helper and Support of the Saints. ||2]|
Tota a fsdHa WSS atat sats Un fess wet il (1406-5, Heee ws Bea A, as) naanak naam niranjan jaan-ya-o keenee bhagat paraym liv laa-ee.
Guru Nanak realized the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. He was lovingly attuned to loving devotional worship of the Lord.
a 3 nae nia Af sa Afed fate nae Hafs at ate geet Il (1406-6, HeAte HTS Vea B, a)
taa tay angad ang sang bha-yo saa-ir tin sabad surat kee neev rakhaa-ee.
Gur Angad was with Him, life and limb, like the ocean; He showered His consciousness with the Word of the Shabad.
Td MHA at mae aa J fea ths as aAdt & AT I (1406-7, Hees 19d BRA A, aS) gur amardaas kee akath kathaa hai ik jeeh kachh kahee na jaa-ee. The Unspoken Speech of Guru Amar Daas cannot be expressed with only one tongue.
Ret fay nae se AC wa TT THETA aS fst ast SI (1406-7, Heats was Vea &, a)
sodhee sarisat sakal taaran ka-o ab gur raamdaas ka-o milee badaa-ee. ||3]||
Guru Raam Daas of the Sodhi dynasty has now been blessed with Glorious Greatness, to carry the whole world across. ||3]|
dH ueafs sd Sa TE ot nifys arf fea fer wet i (1406-8, Heete 17s Bea 2, as) ham avgun bharay ayk gun naahee amrit chhaad bikhai bikh khaa-ee.
I am overflowing with sins and demerits; I have no merits or virtues at all. I abandoned the Ambrosial Nectar, and I drank poison instead.
Hor HT SdH U 3S AS UT fAS YTS Saret il (1406-9, wees vss Bea S, uw)
maa-yaa moh bharam pai bhoolay sut daaraa si-o pareet lagaa-ee.
I am attached to Maya, and deluded by doubt; I have fallen in love with my children and spouse.
fea @3n ug Afs6 aa Hafs fa feos AH SA feeTet II (1406-9, Heet® Has BA A, as) ik utam panth suni-o gur sangat tih milant jam taraas mitaa-ee.
I have heard that the most exalted Path of all is the Sangat, the Guru's Congregation. Joining it, the fear of death is taken away.
fea nseth re atefs at aad THETA Tu APS ISUUCTH (1406-10, Hee HIS BA 2, a)
ik ardaas bhaat keerat kee gur raamdaas raakho sarnaa-ee. ||4]|58] |
Keerat the poet offers this one prayer: O Guru Raam Daas, save me! Take me into Your Sanctuary! ||4||58]|
Hg Hfs fasta ani any afs aA ues I (1406-11, net? was Bea 2, AB)
moh mal bivas kee-a-o kaam geh kays pachhaarh-ya-o.
He has crushed and overpowered emotional attachment. He seized sexual desire by the hair, and threw it down.
au ufs usdfs Se yenre fAG ss@ i 1406-11, neet® as Vea 2, Aw) kroDh khand parchand lobh apmaan si-o jhaarh-ya-o. With His Power, He cut anger into pieces, and sent greed away in disgrace.
HOH OS ad hfs Jan A Of AHS Il (1406-12, Rese HIS Vea 2, AB)
janam kaal kar jorh hukam jo ho-ay so mannai.
Life and death, with palms pressed together, respect and obey the Hukam of His Command.
32 Wag sfionG fia Svs AYUAS Il (1406-12, Heete nas BA 3, AB)
bhav saagar banDhi-a-o sikh taaray suparsannai.
He brought the terrifying world-ocean under His Control; by His Pleasure, He carried His Sikhs across.
fafs wrsuz Ad Sus Ha Sa AAS ats Il 1406-13, HeAS nTs wea 2, AB)
sir aatpat sachou takhat jog bhog sanjut bal.
He is seated upon the Throne of Truth, with the canopy above His Head; He is embellished with the powers of Yoga and the enjoyment of pleasures.
TT THEA A AG ste 5 news TH visa SAS Al (1406-13, Heete Has VES A, 7B) gur raamdaas sach sal-y bhan too atal raaj abhag dal. ||1]|
So speaks SALL the poet: O Guru Raam Daas, Your sovereign power is eternal and unbreakable; Your army is invincible. ||1]|
3 Afsag Vd Fait orf wmt USHA Il (1406-14, Heels nas Ba S, 7B) too satgur chahu jugee aap aapay parmaysar.
You are the True Guru, throughout the four ages; You Yourself are the Transcendent Lord.
Hfe og foes fro fre ATS GIT UT I (1406-14, Heet® Hs BEA 2, AB)
sur nar saaDhik siDh sikh sayvant Dhurah Dhur.
The angelic beings, seekers, Siddhas and Sikhs have served You, since the very beginning of time.
uife qarfe mote oer odt fF Brg I (1406-15, Heetz was BA 3, Aw)
aad jugaad anaad kalaa Dhaaree tarihu lo-ah.
You are the Primal Lord God, from the very beginning, and throughout the ages; Your Power supports the three worlds.
wan foo Cuse Aa Affe wirdmrg Il (1406-15, HES HIS VA A, AB)
agam nigam uDhran jaraa jamihi aaro-ah.
You are Inaccessible; You are the Saving Grace of the Vedas. You have conquered old age and death.
ad mHoetA fag afonG usarHt Sage SdE Il 1406-16, Hee HTS BSA 2, AB)
gur amardaas thir thapi-a-o pargaamee taaran taran.
Guru Amar Daas has permanently established You; You are the Emancipator, to carry all across to the other side.
mul nized ge 5 AG afe TI THEA Set AGES INUEOM (1406-16, Heete HTS VES 2, 7s) agh antak badai na sal-y kav gur raamdaas tayree saran. ||2||60]||
So speaks SALL the poet: O Guru Raam Daas, You are the Destroyer of sins; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2||60||
Hele HIS UAS AU (1406-18) Sava-ee-ay mahlay panjvay kay 5 Swaiyas In Praise Of The Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars yATfe I (1406-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
fad Fat use tee nifsot i 406-19, Heet® Has Une 3, as) simara™ so-ee purakh achal abhinaasee. Meditate in remembrance on the Primal Lord God, Eternal and Imperishable.
fan fAHss FIHfS HS SAT Il 1406-19, HEL Hs ve B, as) jis simrat durmat mal naasee. Remembering Him in meditation, the filth of evil-mindedness is eradicated.
Afsag soe aes fate wes Il (1406-19, Heete Has AS 2, aw) satgur charan kaval rid Dhaara’. I enshrine the Lotus Feet of the True Guru within my heart.
UST AVOID
Td MHS Te Hola feos | (1407-1, Heets nos uae 3, as) gur arjun gun sahj bichaara”. With intuitive peace and poise, I contemplate the Glorious Virtues of Guru Arjun.
Ts THEA wfs aha YSrAr | (1407-1, Heke ngs vas aX, 7s) gur raamdaas ghar kee-a-o pargaasaa. He was revealed in the House of Guru Raam Daas,
AIS HSSa USt MAT Il (1407-1, Hees ns Uae 2, aH) Sagal manorath pooree aasaa. and all hopes and desires were fulfilled.
3 Hons Tents oH uStss I (1407-2, Heche w9s Ae 2, a) tai janmat gurmat barahm pachhaani-o. From birth, He realized God through the Guru's Teachings.
ae rife ag AAA SafEG I 1407-2, neet® wos Uae 3, ae) kal-y jorh kar sujas vakhaani-o. With palms pressed together, KALL the poet speaks His praises.
sats Ha a ASN fa Hoa Sua | (1407-2, Aeete nd vHe 2, aw) bhagat jog kou jaitvaar har janak upaa-ya-o. The Lord brought Him into the world, to practice the Yoga of devotional worship.
Hae Ty usatHS sis JAs SAGE Il (1407-3, neete wos Une s, ae)
sabad guroo parkaasi-o har rasan basaa-ya-o.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad has been revealed, and the Lord dwells on His tongue.
Td Sot niagte wg ota BSH ue ua | (1407-3, Heete nos UAe 3, az)
gur naanak angad amar laag utam pad paa-ya-o.
Attached to Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, He attained the supreme status.
ad wane ule Td THEA sas Cate nrg Al (1407-4, Heche nas vas 3, as) gur arjun ghar gur raamdaas bhagat utar aa-ya-o. ||1]|| In the House of Guru Raam Daas, the devotee of the Lord, Guru Arjun was born. ||1]|
qa CoutfomG fate Aas aA Il (1407-4, Heche nas vAe 3, ae)
badbhaagee unmaani-a-o rid sabad basaa-ya-o.
By great good fortune, the mind is uplifted and exalted, and the Word of the Shabad dwells in the heart.
He Hea Hsftone afe on fear i 0407-5, neet® nod uae 3, as)
man maanak santhokhi-a-o gur naam darirhaa"-ya-o.
The jewel of the mind is contented; the Guru has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within.
Wa mass usgqoy Afsafs sana I (1407-5, Aeete Has wae B, as)
agam agochar paarbarahm satgur darsaa-ya-o.
The Inaccessible and Unfathomable, Supreme Lord God is revealed through the True Guru.
Td uMsAS wls TI THETA nas SITUS IQ (1407-6, Heels Has vas 2, as)
gur arjun ghar gur raamdaas anbha-o thahraa-ya-o. ||2||
In the House of Guru Raam Daas, Guru Arjun has appeared as the Embodiment of the Fearless Lord. ||2||
Hod TH assent ASH nTBlST Il (1407-6, Heete Has ve B, as)
janak raaj bartaa-i-aa satjug aaleenaa.
The benign rule of Raja Janak has been established, and the Golden Age of Sat Yuga has begun.
ad Ae Ho Hort musty ustet Il (1407-7, Heete nas vas 2, as)
gur sabday man maani-aa apteej pateenaa.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind is pleased and appeased; the unsatisfied mind is satisfied.
Dd Sg AY ole Ata Afsaeg Afar Stet Il 1407-7, Hees vss As 2, as) gur naanak sach neev saaj satgur sang leenaa. Guru Nanak laid the foundation of Truth; He is blended with the True Guru.
Ts Mane wis Ts THEA mrudug ster Sil 1407-8, Heete nos vA 3, as)
gur arjun ghar gur raamdaas aprampar beenaa. ||3]||
In the House of Guru Raam Daas, Guru Arjun has appeared as the Embodiment of the Infinite Lord. ||3]|
ae as@ ain ofe af A3f mrefsG fers afa Afsafe ANTES II (1407-8, Heete 17s
~ = NS
UAS a, We)
khayl goorh"a-o kee-a-o har raa-ay santokh samaachri-ya-o bimal buDh satgur samaana-o.
The Sovereign Lord King has staged this wondrous play; contentment was gathered together, and pure understanding was infused in the True Guru.
winist HafeniG AAA a aSaf=s serfs i 1407-9, neet® wos Uae 3, a) aajonee sambhvi-a-o sujas kal-y kavee-an bakhaani-a-o. KALL the poet utters the Praises of the Unborn, Self-existent Lord.
af sala vias ea afe vias ona fears il (1407-10, Aeete uss Une 2, 7s)
gur naanak angad var-ya-o gur angad amar niDhaan.
Guru Nanak blessed Guru Angad, and Guru Angad blessed Guru Amar Daas with the treasure.
Gis THAA MdHo FIC USA UTA YATES IISIl (1407-10, Hee nas UNS a, as) gur raamdaas arjun var-ya-o paaras paras parmaan. ||4||
Guru Raam Daas blessed Guru Arjun, who touched the Philosopher's Stone, and was certified. ||4||
He Ale wigHs MAG wrest ASE Il (1407-11, Aeete 17d vAS 2, ae) sad jeevan arjun amol aajonee sambha-o. O Guru Arjun, You are Eternal, Invaluable, Unborn, Self-existent,
Bu Sno Ud BY foes wR MSs Il (1407-11, HESS HIS AS B, ae) bha-y bhanjan par dukh nivaar apaar anmbha-o. the Destroyer of fear, the Dispeller of pain, Infinite and Fearless.
Mad WE FH FS VIE ASS AY USE Il 1407-12, neve ngs vas a, aH)
agah gahan bharam bharaa“t dahan seetal sukh daata-o.
You have grasped the Ungraspable, and burnt away doubt and skepticism. You bestow cooling and soothing peace.
wMTHSe Cufenis usy use faarsS Il (1407-12, neve 1d vAe &, as) asambha-o udvi-a-o purakh pooran biDhaata-o. The Self-existent, Perfect Primal Lord God Creator has taken birth.
Sos uife nigre wing Afsard Aafe ANS i 1407-13, Heete Hos Une 3, aes) naanak aad angad amar satgur sabad samaa-i-a-o.
First, Guru Nanak, then Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, the True Guru, have been absorbed into the Word of the Shabad.
U9 U9 Ag THEA ag fats usw ust frees Null (1407-13, Hees Hs vAe &, as) Dhan Dhan guroo raamdaas gur jin paaras paras milaa-i-a-o. ||5||
Blessed, blessed is Guru Raam Daas, the Philosopher's Stone, who transformed Guru Arjun unto Himself. ||5] |
AA Oe WH Aa Nels Hefs oa Hats fre TIS Il (1407-14, Hees 17d AS 2, aw)
jai jai kaar jaas jag andar mandar bhaag jugat siv rahtaa.
His victory is proclaimed all over the world; His Home is blessed with good fortune; He remains united with the Lord.
Ts us wag as sit fee wait Hele FI ATS Il (1407-15, HELIS nas UAS , 3B)
gur pooraa paa-ya-o bad bhaagee liv laagee maydan bhar sahtaa.
By great good fortune, He has found the Perfect Guru; He remains lovingly attuned to Him, and endures the load of the earth.
Bu SHe ud ule fasrag aw AY Sfo AA FAST Il (1407-15, Heete vss Uae 3, a)
bha-y bhanjan par peer nivaaran kal-y sahaar tohi jas baktaa.
He is the Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of the pains of others. Kall Sahaar the poet utters Your Praise, O Guru.
afs ret Td THETA 3g UH UAT MSHS Tle FaST NEM (1407-16, Hee HIS Ue B, aw) kul sodhee gur raamdaas tan Dharam Dhujaa arjun har bhagtaa. ||6||
In the Sodhi family, is born Arjun, the son of Guru Raam Daas, the holder of the banner of Dharma and the devotee of God. ||6] |
UH ule TsHfs asty us ey PHASE Il (1407-17, Hees Has Une 2, ae)
Dharamm Dheer gurmat gabheer par dukh bisaaran.
The Support of the Dharma, immersed in the deep and profound Teachings of the Guru, the Remover of the pains of others.
Ree Ag dfs AH Berg nds fesse Il (1407-17, Heete Has vas B, 7s)
sabad saar har sam udaar aha‘mayv nivaaran.
The Shabad is excellent and sublime, kind and generous like the Lord, the Destroyer of egotism.
Ho oe Afsas famrfs nfs we o TS I 1407-18, Heet® HIS UA B, as)
mahaa daan satgur gi-aan man chaa-o na hutai.
The Great Giver, the spiritual wisdom of the True Guru, His mind does not grow weary of its yearning for the Lord.
Afses ofa on Hy ae fafa a fou! Il 407-18, Hees nas Une &, xB)
satvant har naam mantar nav niDh na nikhutai.
The Embodiment of Truth, the Mantra of the Lord's Name, the nine treasures are never exhausted.
Td THEA 3o Aa H Adia ver sham Il (1407-19, neste nos vas A, ae)
gur raamdaas tan sarab mai sahj chando-aa taani-a-o.
O Son of Guru Raam Daas, You are contained amidst all; the canopy of intuitive wisdom is spread above You.
Ts MHS AGI 3 TH Hat IA MSs DI (1407-19, Hees wads wae &, aw)
gur arjun kal-yuchrai tai raaj jog ras jaani-a-o. ||7||
So speaks KALL the poet: O Guru Arjun, You know the sublime essence of Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||7]||
Us qgot
3 fasa@ wien ora nfs wise waa | (1408-1, Aeete nad Ae B, as)
bhai nirbha-o maani-a-o laakh meh alakh lakhaa-ya-o.
In the Fear of God, You enjoy the Fearless Lord; among the thousands of beings, You see the Unseen Lord.
MoH widied afs asty Afsafe use | (1408-1, Heete nos vas A, a) agam agochar gat gabheer satgur parchaa-ya-o.
Through the True Guru, You have realized the state of the Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Profound Lord.
Gd ude Uses TH fs Aa AHA Il (1408-2, Hees nad He 2, ae)
gur parchai parvaan raaj meh jog kamaa-ya-o.
Meeting with the Guru, You are certified and approved; You practice Yoga in the midst of wealth and power.
Ufs ufs ag ufs med Ad ASI STU Il (1408-2, Hees nas vHe 2, as)
Dhan Dhan gur Dhan abhar sar subhar bharaa-ya-o.
Blessed, blessed, blessed is the Guru, who has filled to overflowing the pools which were empty.
qd aH ute wing aes Afs Hsu Afeas Il (1408-3, Heete wos vas 3, as)
gur gam parmaan ajar jari-o sar santokh samaa-i-ya-o.
Reaching up to the certified Guru, You endure the unendurable; You are immersed in the pool of contentment.
Td MdHo ASV 3 Aol Aa for uf—eaS cil (408-3, Hees wad Uae &, aw)
gur arjun kal-yuchrai tai sahj jog nij paa-i-ya-o. ||8]|
So speaks KALL: O Guru Arjun, You have intuitively attained the state of Yoga within Yourself. ||8] |
mS dA sels ae UTS nied nus Ts As Hale IBH fees il (1408-4, wets vss ve a, OS)
ami-o rasnaa badan bar daat alakh apaar gur soor sabad ha-umai nirvaar-ya-o.
Nectar drips from Your tongue, and Your mouth gives Blessings, O Incomprehensible and Infinite Spiritual Hero. O Guru, the Word of Your Shabad eradicates egotism.
usdg foefong Ha Hata for whe AITS i (1408-5, Hees wos Uae &, ae) panchaahar nidli-a-o sunn sahj nij ghar sahaar-ya-o.
You have overpowered the five enticers, and established with intuitive ease the Absolute Lord within Your own being.
ofa oth afar wa Cus Afsag fae afte i (1408-5, neet® wos Uae 3, a)
har naam laag jag uDhar-ya-o satgur ridai basaa-i-a-o.
Attached to the Lord's Name, the world is saved; enshrine the True Guru within your heart.
Td WIAs AGIs 3 Aodd AGA ShrfemS iti (1408-6, Hees wads ve &, 3B) gur arjun kal-yuchrai tai jankah kalas deepaa-i-a-o. ||9]| So speaks KALL: O Guru Arjun, You have illliminated the highest pinnacle of wisdom.
[9I|
Hage Il (1408-7)
sorthay. Sorat'h
TI MaHS UTE UNS UGA WS dt Il (1408-7, Aeete ngs vas 3, ves)
gur arjun purakh parmaan paartha-o chaalai nahee.
: Guru Arjun is the certified Primal Person; like Arjuna, He never leaves the field of battle.
Oe OH SATS Afsad Aafe Aeon IA (1408-7, Fees HIS VAs B, Ha)
nayjaa naam neesaan satgur sabad savaari-a-o. ||1||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is His spear and insignia. He is embellished with the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru. ||1]|
sense Afeg AS oH Udt at Sfoa Il (408-8, Heete Has Uns B, vgs) bhavjal saa-ir sayt naam haree kaa bohithaa. The Lord's Name is the Boat, the Bridge to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
am Afsad A dg oth afar Aa Bugs lH (1408-8, eee Hs wae 2, veT) tu-a satgur sa“ hayt naam laag jag uDhar-yao. ||2]| You are in love with the True Guru; attached to the Naam, You have saved the world.
21 |
nas Curse aH Asad SS Ufes | (1408-9, Hees Hs Ue 3, HET)
jagat uDhaaran naam satgur tuthai paa-i-a-o.
The Naam is the Saving Grace of the world; by the Pleasure of the True Guru, it is obtained.
wa ots ued Als oH adsts ust ust NSN (1408-9, Heats was URS A, weT)
ab naahi avar sar kaam baarantar pooree parhee. ||3]|12|| Now, I am not concerned with anything else; at Your Door, I am fulfilled. ||3]|12]|
nfs afu afs orf ag Seq TITUS Il (1408-10, Aeets ngs Uae 2, vas) jot roop har aap guroo naanak kahaa-ya-o. The Embodiment of Light, the Lord Himself is called Guru Nanak.
a 3 nige sug 33 fAC 33 fro I (1408-10, Fect® Hs URS 2, HET) taa tay angad bha-ya-o tat si-o tat milaa-ya-o. From Him, came Guru Angad; His essence was absorbed into the essence.
wate fasu ofs wag Afsag fag aha ii (1408-11, Feet wed vA 2, vee) angad kirpaa Dhaar amar satgur thir kee-a-o. Guru Angad showed His Mercy, and established Amar Daas as the True Guru.
MHIeTA MHIS SZ TT THs Shas i 408-11, wees ngs UA a, ngT) amardaas amrat chhatar gur raameh dee-a-o. Guru Amar Daas blessed Guru Raam Daas with the umbrella of immortality.
TI THEA Van ustA afy HAT nis qAE Il (1408-12, Heete nas vas 2, wes)
gur raamdaas darsan paras kahi mathuraa amrit ba-yan.
So speaks Mat'huraa: gazing upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of Guru Raam Daas, His speech became as sweet as nectar.
Hats Us yore us Tg nade fintg Sue NAM (1408-12, eee 19s URS a, was)
moorat panch parmaan purakh gur arjun pikhahu na-yan. ||1]|
With your eyes, see the certified Primal Person, Guru Arjun, the Fifth Manifestation of the Guru. ||1||
ARs gy AS oH AS sy ofeS Sfs I (408-13, wees was URS 2, HET)
sat roop sat naam sat santokh Dhari-o ur.
He is the Embodiment of Truth; He has enshrined the True Name, Sat Naam, Truth and contentment within His heart.
nite ust ugsty fer neg HASfea Ufs II (1408-13, eee wos URS a, wee) aad purakh partakh likh-ya-o achhar mastak Dhur. From the very beginning, the Primal Being has written this destiny upon His forehead.
ya ats HaHa Sa aut Hales SAS il (1408-14, wees ws Uae a, vow)
pargat jot jagmagai tayj bhoo-a mandal chhaa-ya-o.
His Divine Light shines forth, dazzling and radiant; His Glorious Grandeur pervades the realms of the world.
urdH udfA Ud UST ais Tg ATS Il (1408-15, Hees nos vA a, vas) paaras paras paras paras gur guroo kahaa-ya-o. Meeting the Guru, touching the Philosopher's Stone, He was acclaimed as Guru.
ste Has Hats Aer fag of fes AOHY FIT Il (1408-15, Hees Has VAS &, wae)
bhan mathuraa moorat sadaa thir laa-ay chit sanmukh rahhu.
So speaks Mat'huraa: I constantly focus my consciousness on Him; as sunmukh, I look to Him.
RSHa ATH wdHS Tg Aare fiqhy ofer fasgg ii (1408-16, neste Has UNS &, HET) kaljug jahaaj arjun guroo sagal sarisat lag bitrahu. ||2]|
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, Guru Arjun is the Boat; attached to him, the entire universe is safely carried across. ||2]|
fsa He Weg Fas us Wes aA safe aA A a fos oH FAG I (1408-16, Heete HI une a, HES)
tih jan jaachahu jagtar par jaanee-at baasur ra-yan baas jaa ko hit naam si-o.
I beg from that humble being who is known all over the world, who lives in, and loves the Name, night and day.
UdH Mstg USHA ao dfa dat PA 3 wats U sds on AAG I (1408-17, Hees was Ae a, HES")
param ateet parmaysur kai rang rang-y-ou baasnaa tay baahar pai daykhee-at Dhaam Si-O.
He is supremely unattached, and imbued with the Love of the Transcendent Lord; he is free of desire, but he lives as a family man.
nus udug use fA Un od fag sass oA dt IVs aH FAG I 1408-18, Heete was Une a, HET)
apar parampar purakh si-o paraym laag-y-ou bin bhagvant ras naahee a-urai kaam si- O. He is dedicated to the Love of the Infinite, Limitless Primal Lord God; he has no concerns for any other pleasure, except for the Lord God.
HET & US AT HG wens Te sas a If ute safe fife on FAG SI (1408-19, Heche HIG UAS aA, HAT)
mathuraa ko parabh sarab ma-y arjun gur bhagat kai hayt paa-ay rahi-o mil raam si-o. HI3II
Guru Arjun is the All-pervading Lord God of Mat'huraa. Devoted to His Worship, he remains attached to the Lord's Feet. ||3]|
at ago
niz 6 ures 22 Ae ufe f¥a Ho fe Har at I (1409-1, Heete Hos URS a, HET) ant na paavat dayv sabai mun indar mahaa siv jog karee. All the gods, silent sages, Indra, Shiva and Yogis have not found the Lord's limits
ofs az fadts feats safe afs au o SSE Sa wet I 409-1, Heels nas Uae 2, vET) fun bayd biranch bichaar rahi-o har jaap na chhaadi-ya-o ayk gharee.
- not even Brahma who contemplates the Vedas. I shall not give up meditating on the Lord, even for an instant.
HET Ao &t us ae wore o Hats fA fore ast I (1409-2, Feet wos URS a, HET) mathuraa jan ko parabh deen da-yaal hai sangat sarisat nihaal karee.
The God of Mat'huraa is Merciful to the meek; He blesses and uplifts the Sangats throughout the Universe.
THETA TT Aa 33s aC Ts Als vians whe Tat Sil 1409-3, Meets ws Uae a, veT) raamdaas guroo jag taaran ka-o gur jot arjun maahi Dharee. ||4|| Guru Raam Daas, to save the world, enshrined the Guru's Light into Guru Arjun. ||4]|
Aa mg 3 fs HOT SHH Mess Crag vite aha Il (1409-3, eet ned Ae a, HET) jag a-or na yaahi mahaa tam mai avtaar ujaagar aan kee-a-o.
In the great darkness of this world, the Lord revealed Himself, incarnated as Guru Arjun.
fae & eu afea ofs ae Hae fie nifys ony Ubye Il (1409-4, neete wos UAe &, wes) tin kay dukh kotik door ga-ay mathuraa jin" amrit naam pee-a-o.
Millions of pains are taken away, from those who drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, says Mat'huraa.
feg uofs 3 Hs vats J Ho se fase 5 AS SiS Il (1409-5, Hees Hs vAe S, waT) ih paDhat tay mat chookeh ray man bhayd bibhayd na jaan bee-a-o.
O mortal being, do not leave this path; do not think that there is any difference between God and Guru.
uate foe as nraHs & ofs uss qatH foeA SiS ull (1409-6, weets vss URS a, ves) partachh ridai gur arjun kai har pooran barahm nivaas lee-a-o. ||5|| The Perfect Lord God has manifested Himself; He dwells in the heart of Guru Arjun.
[5] |
ma 3G odt ava fears Ct sa we HS fess ag WUE II (1409-6, Heche Hos URS 2, HET) jab la-o nahee bhaag lilaar udai tab la-o bharamtay firtay baho Dhaa-ya-o.
As long as the destiny written upon my forehead was not activated, I wandered around lost, running in all directions.
ate us AHE H yss B aug fife F Sat FT USA I (1409-7, ees ws URS a, ve) kal ghor samudar mai boodat thay kabhoo mit hai nahee ray pachhotaa-ya-o.
I was drowning in the horrible world-ocean of this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, and my remorse would never have ended.
33 frog ad HET Aa 30 AG nies FOU | (1409-8, Hee Hs UNS 3, HET) tat bichaar yahai mathuraa jag taaran ka-o avtaar banaa-ya-o.
O Mat'huraa, consider this essential truth: to save the world, the Lord incarnated Himself.
mu fag vans te ag fefs Hae Als Tes o wIaG Ell (1409-8, Feet wd Uae a, vow) jap-ya-o jin" arjun dayv guroo fir sankat jon garabh na aa-ya-o. ||6]|
Whoever meditates on Guru Arjun Dayv, shall not have to pass through the painful womb of reincarnation ever again. ||6]||
ate AME se gu yate ais aH Surge Il (1409-9, nets Had vAe a, HAT)
kal samudar bha-ay roop pargat har naam uDhaaran.
In the ocean of this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name has been revealed in the Form of Guru Arjun, to save the world.
aAfs AS faa fee va afee fesse Il (1409-10, Heet® Had URS 2, nes)
baseh sant jis ridai dukh daridar nivaaran.
Pain and poverty are taken away from that person, within whose heart the Saint abides.
focHe su vrs 3H fie nied 3 AST Il (1409-10, Heet® Had URS a, HET)
nirmal bhaykh apaar taas bin avar na ko-ee.
He is the Pure, Immaculate Form of the Infinite Lord; except for Him, there is no other at all.
Ho av fafs wan sag fsa myAfs At I (1409-10, Fete Hos Uae a, HET) man bach jin jaani-a-o bha-ya-o tih samsar so-ee. Whoever knows Him in thought, word and deed, becomes just like Him.
ute sae oe Us ufo ALS Agut sfoS sfs ii (409-11, Hee nad ve a, HIT) Dharan gagan nav khand meh jot savroopee rahi-o bhar.
He is totally pervading the earth, the sky and the nine regions of the planet. He is the Embodiment of the Light of God.
3f6 HET Ag SE od AT Mang ussy ha WOUNAEN (1409-12, HEete Hes URS a, wes) bhan mathuraa kachh bhayd nahee gur arjun partakh-y har. ||7||19]|
So speaks Mat'huraa: there is no difference between God and Guru; Guru Arjun is the Personification of the Lord Himself. ||7||19]|
MA ddl HS wee fra Aafs AS oS Il (1409-12, HESS nos vas &, feta)
ajai gang jal atal sikh sangat sabh naavai.
The stream of the Lord's Name flows like the Ganges, invincible and unstoppable. The Sikhs of the Sangat all bathe in it.
fos uae adinfs se gon uf are i 1409-13, Heche 4d wae 2, fede)
nit puraan baachee-ah bayd barahmaa mukh gaavai.
It appears as if the holy texts like the Puraanaas are being recited there and Brahma himself sings the Vedas.
win ved fafs eB on ifs ufe Shr i (1409-13, Heels nad Uae 2, afi)
ajai chavar sir dhulai naam amrit mukh lee-a-o.
The invincible chauri, the fly-brush, waves over His head; with His mouth, He drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
ad oad fats ey vrfy ushAts ehx il (1409-14, neete nas Une a, ofedA)
gur arjun sir chhatar aap parmaysar dee-a-o.
The Transcendent Lord Himself has placed the royal canopy over the head of Guru Arjun.
ffs aoa nig on Id aT THEA ote ufs TAS I (1409-14, Feet? HIs UA 2, ofstA) mil naanak angad amar gur gur raamdaas har peh ga-ya-o.
Guru Nanak, Guru Angad, Guru Amar Daas and Guru Raam Daas met together before the Lord.
vfaaA wafs AA Hese A age Ad At AT HAS UA (1409-15, Heats Hos Uae 2, ohiA) harbans jagat jas sanchar-ya-o so kavan kahai saree gur mu-ya-o. ||1]|
So speaks HARBANS: Their Praises echo and resound all over the world; who can possibly say that the Great Gurus are dead? ||1||
ee udt ufo aa vif usHAT SUE Il (1409-16, Hee ws wae &, ofsdA)
dayv puree meh ga-ya-o aap parmaysvar bhaa-ya-o.
When it was the Will of the Transcendent Lord Himself, Guru Raam Daas went to the City of God.
dfs fiurne chu fadt ae so Hoa | (1409-16, Heet® Has UA 3, aieda) har singhaasan dee-a-o siree gur tah bathaa-ya-o. The Lord offered Him His Royal Throne, and seated the Guru upon it.
Jon au As te Sfo AA AG AG Huts Il (1409-17, Heet® Hos Une B, afedA)
rahas kee-a-o sur dayv tohi jas ja-y ja-y jampeh.
The angels and gods were delighted; they proclaimed and celebrated Your victory, O Guru.
wad awe 3 attr uvy f3q state aufs i (1409-17, neste usd vas 2, feta) asur ga-ay tay bhaag paap tin" bheetar kampeh. The demons ran away; their sins made them shake and tremble inside.
are Aum f3q add a Ag THEA fas ufeaS il (1409-18, next nos wae a, afein) kaatay so paap tin” marahu kay gur raamdaas jin” paa-i-ya-o. Those people who found Guru Raam Daas were rid of their sins.
sz fiurng fusemit ae wane aS Surfer IN VU€EU IIo 122 W€o 19a (1409-18, Heete HIS UAS a, TfssA)
chhatar singhaasan pirathmee gur arjun ka-o day aa-i-a-o.
[]2] [22] [9] 11] |10]|10]|22]|60]|143]|
He gave the Royal Canopy and Throne to Guru Arjun, and came home. []2]|22][9]]11]|10]] 10] |22]|60)|143]|
usr 9890 qe ATS on aes usy fesse fares nieve Hats migot AS Ts YATE I (1410-1)
ik-o’kaar sat naam kartaa purakh nirbha-o nirvair akaal moorat ajoonee saibha™ gur parsaad.
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
HOa Sai SF She Il (1410-3)
salok vaaraa™ tay vaDheek. Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars.
HIS 4 Il (1410-3)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Csat Usa afodt aistet i (1410-4, A8a est 3 ecita, He 1) utangee pai-ohree gahiree gambheeree. O you with swollen breasts, let your consciousness become deep and profound.
HAfs Adon fae act foze o ATE Get Il (1410-4, H8a Set 3 ecia, He 1) sasurh suhee-aa kiv karee nivan na jaa-ay thanee. O mother-in-law, how can I bow? Because of my stiff nipples, I cannot bow.
as fa oar fasest Adte aBswodt Il (1410-4, Hea erat 3 etita, He 1) gach je lagaa girvarhee sakhee-ay Dha-ulharee. O sister, those mansions built as high as mountains
A ot woe fso H HU 3 asa Gat AU (1410-5, Aaa Sat Sethe, He 1)
say bhee dhahday dith mai munDh na garab thanee. ||1]|
- I have seen them come crumbling down. O bride, do not be so proud of your nipples. ||1]|
Afe HO JaedS Tat SS NT I (1410-5, HSa sat 3 eee, we 1) sun munDhay harnaakhee-ay goorhaa vain apaar. O bride with deer-like eyes, listen to the words of deep and infinite wisdom.
ufser ens fhefs & 3t ats Surg Il (1410-6, Hoa eat 3 acta, v2 1) pahilaa vasat sinjaan kai taa‘ keechai vaapaar. First, examine the merchandise, and then, make the deal.
cot fed ganar ft & Aarg il (1410-6, ABa eat 3 etha, we 1)
dohee dichai durjanaa mitraa‘ koo" jaikaar.
Proclaim that you will not associate with evil people; celebrate victory with your friends.
fas ddt Ane frefe og HO Steg I (1410-7, Aaa eat 3 ata, we 1) jit dohee sajan milan lahu munDhay veechaar. This proclamation, to meet with your friends, O bride - give it some thought.
3O HO Uta ANS! MAT IAS ATS Il (1410-7, Aaa eat 3 ecita, ne 1) tan man deejai sajnaa aisaa hasan saar. Surrender mind and body to the Lord your Friend; this is the most excellent pleasure.
fan AG 37g 3 atest fa fen BHETS Il (1410-7, Hoa Sst 3 eta, He 1 tis sa-o nayhu na keech-ee je disai chalanhaar. Do not fall in love with one who is destined to leave.
Sod faat fee afe afsur fsaqr feeg ATAE IQ 410-8, HSa sat 3 eta, we 1) naanak jin"ee iv kar bujhi-aa tin"aa vitahu kurbaan. ||2]| O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who understand this. ||2]|
AS ag ute 3g US fq AG Il (1410-9, Hoa erat 3 ea, He 1) jay too’ taaroo paan taahoo puchh tirh"a’-n" kal. If you wish to swim across the water, then consult those who know how to swim.
3g ud AAS Ser Sat aut WS (1410-9, Hoa erat 3 ecita, we 1) taahoo kharay sujaan vanjaa ayn"ee kapree. ||3]| Those who have survived these treacherous waves are very wise. ||3]|
3a Bus Gos Badt Zale Bana Il (1410-9, Hea erat 3 ecita, Hz 1) jharh jhakharh ohaarh lahree vahan lakhaysaree. The storm rages and the rain floods the land; thousands of waves rise and surge.
Afsasd fh@ orerfe as safe ofa 3B Sil (1410-10, HBx eet 3 ecia, He 1)
satgur si-o aalaa-ay bayrhay duban naahi bha-o. ||4||
If you cry out for help from the True Guru, you have nothing to fear - your boat will not sink. ||4]|
Soa Toa aAt Tet Il (1410-10, waa sat S ecia, we 1) naanak dunee-aa kaisee ho-ee. O Nanak, what has happened to the world?
Wed firs 3 sfoS get i 410-1, Aaa eat 3 ect, ne 1) saalak mit na rahi-o ko-ee. There is no guide or friend.
aet eat Is gorfeur | (410-11, Hea eat 3 Scie, He 1) bhaa-ee banDhee hayt chukaa-i-aa. There is no love, even among brothers and relatives.
vor arse tte Tefenr ull 1410-11, Hea eat 3 ec, He 1) dunee-aa kaaran deen gavaa-i-aa. ||5||
For the sake of the world, people have lost their faith. ||5|| dd ate & fo aafs Il (1410-12, H8a eet 3 eta, He 1)
hai hai kar kai ohi karayn. They cry and weep and wail.
ast fuefs firg dds i (410-12, Ba eat 3 eda, He 1) gal"aa pitan sir khohayn. They slap their faces and pull their hair out.
oe Sfo nig vate ANTE Il (1410-12, Aa eat S eta, He 1) naa-o lain ar karan samaa-ay. But if they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they shall be absorbed into it.
Sod fse afer ATE NEN (1410-12, HBax eat 3 eta, He 1) naanak tin balihaarai jaa-ay. ||6|| O Nanak, I am a Sacrifice to them. ||6||
J He Stfa 3 SoM AG wafer WE Il (1410-13, H8a Sat 3 ecita, He 1)
ray man deeg na dolee-ai seeDhai maarag Dhaa-o.
O my mind, do not waver or walk on the crooked path; take the straight and true path.
Ue ay sae nia male Sore Il 1410-13, Hea Sat 3 eta, He 1) paachhai baagh daraavno aagai agan talaa-o. The terrible tiger is behind you, and the pool of fire is ahead.
RIA Abas ufs afoG wt a nieg o Sa Il (1410-14, HBa eat 3 ecita, 2 1) sahsai jee-araa par rahi-o maa ka-o avar na dhang. My soul is skeptical and doubtful, but I cannot see any other way to go.
ood TeHfy echt ofs ulsH fAG Aa DN (410-14, Ha eet 3 ecia, He 1)
naanak gurmukh chhutee-ai har pareetam si-o sang. ||7||
O Nanak, as Gurmukh, dwell with your Beloved Lord, and you shall be saved. ||7|| ay Hd He Hm fan Afsag stir GE Il (1410-15, Hea Sat 3 ecita, He 1)
baagh marai man maaree-ai jis satgur deekhi-aa ho-ay.
The tiger is killed, and the mind is killed, through the Teachings of the True Guru. nity use ofa fxs safe o Hoe SE I 1410-15, Ha eet 3 |cita, He 1)
aap pachhaanai har milai bahurh na marnaa ho-ay. One who understands himself, meets with the Lord, and never dies again.
UST AAA
atets wg o aset Sar sets foots i (1411-1, Aaa est 3 eta, He 1) keecharh haath na bood-ee aykaa nadar nihaal.
One who sees the One and Only Lord with his eyes - his hands shall not get muddy and dirty.
Soa THY Cad TI Ades At us cil 411-1, 8a eat 3 ecia, ne 1) naanak gurmukh ubray gur sarvar sachee paal. ||8]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; the Guru has surrounded the ocean with the embankment of Truth. ||8]|
wale Hd AS Os wg fee ae fofa we ats I 4-2, Hea Sst 3 eda, He 1
agan marai jal lorh lahu vin gur niDh jal naahi.
If you wish to put out the fire, then look for water; without the Guru, the ocean of water is not found.
Hof He SoHE A Be ASH OMT Il (1411-2, ABa Set 3 etie, He 1)
janam marai bharmaa-ee-ai jay lakh karam kamaahi.
You shall continue to wander lost in reincarnation through birth and death, even if you do thousands of other deeds.
AH Warts o oat AUS Afsag fe Il 141-3, A8a Set 3 tia, He 1)
jam jaagaat na lag-ee jay chalai satgur bhaa-ay.
But you shall not be taxed by the Messenger of Death, if you walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
Sod fedns MMs ue Td fa AS Hote Ci 41-3, Aaa sat 3 ecia, we 1) naanak nirmal amar pad gur har maylai maylaa-ay. | |9| |
O Nanak, the immaculate, immortal status is obtained, and the Guru will unite you in the Lord's Union. ||9||
Tod adt sust aBor His uf ate i 41-4, nea eat 3 ecita, ve 1) kalar kayree chhaprhee ka-oo-aa mal mal naa-ay. The crow rubs and washes itself in the mud puddle.
HO 30 Ho medal fen act att wre i c4i-4, na eet 3 ecta, He 1) man tan mailaa avgunee binn bharee ganDhee aa-ay.
Its mind and body are polluted with its own mistakes and demerits, and its beak is filled with dirt.
Heed df o wher ara aut Afer il 041-5, Hea eat 3 ect, ne 1) sarvar hans na jaani-aa kaag kupankhee sang. The swan in the pool associated with the crow, not knowing that it was evil.
Was fas virt ys J asg format sar i 41-5, Ax est 3 ecte, He 1)
saakat si-o aisee pareet hai boojhhu gi-aanee rang.
Such is the love of the faithless cynic; understand this, O spiritually wise ones, through love and devotion.
Ha AS pag ats Tenfe AGH HE Il (1411-6, Hea eat 3 ett, ne 1) sant sabhaa jaikaar kar gurmukh karam kamaa-o. So proclaim the victory of the Society of the Saints, and act as Gurmukh.
fSdHS ASE Soa Tg Stag ed All (1411-6, ABa erat 3 cia, vs 1)
nirmal n"aavan naankaa gur tirath daree-aa-o. ||10]|
Immaculate and pure is that cleansing bath, O Nanak, at the sacred shrine of the Guru's river. ||10]|
HOH a ee fant aeat at of sats 3 7S Il 1411-7, Ha set 3 cite, 2 1)
janmay kaa fal ki-aa ganee jaa‘ har bhagat na bhaa-o.
What should I account as the rewards of this human life, if one does not feel love and devotion to the Lord?
uo a af oat fs ert aS il 4-7, Ha est 3 etter, we 1) paiDhaa khaaDhaa baad hai jaa‘ man doojaa bhaa-o. Wearing clothes and eating food is useless, if the mind is filled with the love of duality.
TUS HSS BS T Hf For ors Il (4-8, wea sat 3 ecita, ws 1) vaykhan sunnaa jhooth hai mukh jhoothaa aalaa-o. Seeing and hearing is false, if one speaks lies.
aoa SY Aets 5 IT ISH mrss WS VU (1411-8, Sa sat 3 ecia, we 1)
naanak naam salaahi too hor ha-umai aava-o jaa-o. ||11]|
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; everything else is coming and going in egotism. ||11]]|
dfs fess ardt we fu Sas AAT |9QIl (1411-9, Hea Sei F eta, He 1) hain virlay naahee ghanay fail fakarh sansaar. ||12]|
The Saints are few and far between; everything else in the world is just a pompous show. ||12]|
Sod Sl ss xd Hes odt SS Il (1411-9, H8a Sst 3 ecia, we naanak lagee tur marai jeevan naahee taan. O Nanak, one who is struck by the Lord dies instantaneously; the power to live is lost.
de ASt A Hd Balt AT UsSTS Il (1411-10, HSA eat 3 |cita, ne 1) chotai saytee jo marai lagee saa parvaan. If someone dies by such a stroke, then he is accepted.
fan 6 we fSH Gad Balt St UPSTES Il (1411-10, H8a Set 3 eta, He 1) jis no laa-ay tis lagai lagee taa parvaan. He alone is struck, who is struck by the Lord; after such a stroke, he is approved.
fusH dan 3 foas ofenr ffs AAfs 1981 (411-10, Ra eet 3 etie, He 1) piram paikaam na niklai laa-i-aa tin sujaan. ||13]| The arrow of love, shot by the All-knowing Lord, cannot be pulled out. ||13]|
sist te age fa ae AAMT I (4-11, Hea Set 3 cia, He 1) bhaa‘daa Dhovai ka-un je kachaa saaji-aa. Who can wash the unbaked clay pot?
og Ufa sete aa utter i c4ii-11, Aa eat 3 ecite, He 1) Dhaatoo panj ralaa-ay koorhaa paaji-aa. Joining the five elements together, the Lord made a false cover.
sist ned TH A SA STSAT I (1411-12, Aa erat 3 ecita, He 1) bhaa‘daa aanag raas jaa” tis bhaavsee. When it pleases Him, He makes it right.
USH Afs ATMS Sar SSH NASI (1411-12, Hea eat F Scie, we 1)
param jot jaagaa-ay vaajaa vaavsee. ||14|| The supreme light shines forth, and the celestial song vibrates and resounds. ||14| |
Hod fat nid wu afer fase o reat Il 4-13, Aa eat 3 ecia, we 1)
manhu je anDhay ghoop kahi-aa birad na jaannee.
Those who are totally blind in their minds, do not have the integrity to keep their word.
nfs nit SU aes feats us ATU I (411-13, FSa eat 3 echa, we 1) man anDhai oo'Dhai kaval disan kharay karoop. With their blind minds, and their upside-down heart-lotus, they look totally ugly.
fefa af rate afoor asts 3 od AUS AGU Il (1411-14, HBa erat 3 eta, He 1)
ik kahi jaanan kahi-aa bujhan tay nar sugharh saroop.
Some know how to speak and understand what they are told. Those people are wise and good-looking.
feao oe 5 BE O am IA IA AA 9 Wels Il (1411-14, Hoa Sat F ecia, He 1)
iknaa naad na bayd na gee-a ras ras kas na jaanant.
Some do not know the Sound-current of the Naad, spiritual wisdom or the joy of song. They do not even understand good and bad.
feao fafa 5 sfa o mats AS orig aT 3G 8 BIS Il (411-15, Ba eat 3 |cita, He 1)
iknaa siDh na buDh na akal sar akhar kaa bhay-o na laahant.
Some have no idea of perfection, wisdom or understanding; they know nothing about the mystery of the Word.
Sot 3 Od MAS us fa fag TE TAIT AGT NUM (1411-15, HBa sat 3 |cita, ve 1)
naanak tay nar asal khar je bin gun garab karant. ||15]| O Nanak, those people are really donkeys; they have no virtue or merit, but still, they are very proud. ||15]||
A gone F fee AIH Il (1411-16, Hea erat 3 ecia, He 1) so barahman jo bindai barahm. He alone is a Brahmin, who knows God.
AU SU AAH AHS ATH Il (1411-16, HBx eat 3 |cita, ne 1) jap tap sanjam kamaavai karam. He chants and meditates, and practices austerity and good deeds.
Hie Hse aT Te UH Il (1411-16, Hoa eat 3 ecita, He 1) seel santokh kaa rakhai Dharam. He keeps to the Dharma, with faith, humility and contentment.
que 33 de HAS Il (1411-17, w8a Set 3 ati, He 1) banDhan torhai hovai mukat. Breaking his bonds, he is liberated.
Het FINS UAE FAAS AEM (1411-17, Ha set 3 ecite, ws 1) so-ee barahman poojan jugat. ||16|| Such a Brahmin is worthy of being worshipped. ||16]|
ust AT ASH AT A Il (1411-17, ra erat 3 ecite, Hs 1) khatree so jo karmaa kaa soor. He alone is a Kh'shaatriyaa, who is a hero in good deeds.
Us WS a ad Adte Il (1411-18, Aaa eat 3 ect, ne 1) punn daan kaa karai sareer. He uses his body to give in charity;
UZ use aH BS Il 1411-18, Aa eet 3 cia, He 1) khayt pachhaanai beejai daan. he understands his farm, and plants the seeds of generosity.
A ust Saad USS Il (1411-18, HBa eat 3 eciar, ne 1) so khatree dargeh parvaan. Such a Kh'shaatriyaa is accepted in the Court of the Lord.
BI BF A AT AHS Il (1411-18, HSa erat 3 eda, we 1) lab lobh jay koorh kamaavai. Whoever practices greed, possessiveness and falsehood,
nuaSt SST mM UTS WAI (1411-19, ABa eat 3 ecite, He 1) apnaa keetaa aapay paavai. ||17]|| shall receive the fruits of his own labors. ||17]|
36 6 sure 360 fAS THE TS 5 ATS I (1411-19, Aa eat 3 ecia, He 1) tan na tapaa-ay tanoor ji-o baalan had na baal. Do not heat your body like a furnace, or burn your bones like firewood.
fafe Udt for efanr niefa fust Ayr NACH C4119, Ha erat 3 eta, He 1)
sir pairee ki-aa fayrhi-aa andar piree sam"aal. ||18]|
What have your head and feet done wrong? See your Husband Lord within yourself. ||18]|
UST ABA
Haat wet Ag ZA Aa faa we o af Il 1412-1, Ha eat 3 eta, ne 1) sabhnee ghatee saho vasai sah bin ghat na ko-ay. God the Cosmic Husband dwells within all hearts; without Him, there is no heart at all.
ood 3 Aoet frat qenfe usa]| dE VEN (1412-1, Aa eet 3 ecie, He 1)
naanak tay sohaaganee jin"aa gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||19]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are the happy, virtuous soul-brides; the Lord is revealed to them. ||19]|
AG 3 UH Bos a WE I (1412-2, nSa eat 3 eta, we 1) ja-o ta-o paraym khaylan kaa chaa-o. If you desire to play this game of love with Me,
fg ufs set aet Hat wr i 1412-2, waa erat 3 cite, He 1)
sir Dhar talee galee mayree aa-o. then step onto My Path with your head in hand.
fez Hofa ug adhe Il 1412-3, FBa eet 3 ete, He 1) it maarag pair Dhareejai. When you place your feet on this Path,
fra din ats o AA NOM (1412-3, Ha eet 3 ecita, 2 1) sir deejai kaan na keejai. ||20]| give Me your head, and do not pay any attention to public opinion. ||20||
one fara erst as gat ute il 1412-3, ASa erat 3 eta, we 1) naal kiraarhaa dostee koorhai koorhee paa-ay. False is friendship with the false and greedy. False is its foundation.
HIS 3 AY Hfemr wre fas aS IU (1412-4, ABA eat 3 eta, we 1) maran na jaapai mooli-aa aavai kitai thaa-ay. ||21]| O Moollah, no one knows where death shall strike. ||21]|
foros TE nifamores UAT Il (1412-4, HBA erat S ec, He 1) gi-aan heena™ agi-aan poojaa.
Without spiritual wisdom, the people worship ignorance. nig FIST SS CAT Il (1412-5, Ha eet 3 eta, we 1)
anDh vartaavaa bhaa-o doojaa. ||22]|| They grope in the darkness, in the love of duality. ||22||
aa fag fomre aan fag fame Il (1412-5, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 1)
gur bin gi-aan Dharam bin Dhi-aan.
Without the Guru, there is no spiritual wisdom; without Dharma, there is no meditation.
Ae fag Ad HS B Aeat Wl (1412-5, Ha eet 3 ecta, we 1) sach bin saakhee moolo na baakee. ||23]|| Without Truth, there is no credit; without capital, there is no balance. ||23]|
HS ws Bt VS ll 1412-6, Ha erat 3 ecita, Hs 1) maanoo ghalai uthee chalai. The mortals are sent into the world; then, they arise and depart.
Ae odt feSdt TS Isl (1412-6, Asa Sst 3 ecia, ve VY saad naahee ivayhee galai. ||24]| There is no joy in this. ||24||
TH Sd UG NSE iste 3H niftars Il (1412-6, H8a Sat 3 eta, He 1) raam jhurai dal maylvai antar bal aDhikaar. Raam Chand, sad at heart, assembled his army and forces.
aad at Aor Ae nfs sfs AS wR Il (1412-7, Hoa Sst 3 eta, He 1 bantar kee sainaa sayvee-ai man tan jujh apaar. The army of monkeys was at his service; his mind and body became eager for war.
Ast & afeor wofid SEXES HS ASA I (1412-7, Hoa set 3 ecta, we 1) seetaa lai ga-i-aa dehsiro lachhman moo-o saraap. Raawan captured his wife Sita, and Lachhman was cursed to die.
Sod ads assay afs Fy afy Cafu aul (1412-8, naa erat 3 ecita, ne 1)
naanak kartaa karanhaar kar vaykhai thaap uthaap. ||25]|
O Nanak, the Creator Lord is the Doer of all; He watches over all, and destroys what He has created. ||25||
Ho Hig Ss THE AIS" BENE AT Il (1412-8, ASA erat 3 ecta, we 1) man meh jhoorai raamchand seetaa lachhman jog. In his mind, Raam Chand mourned for Sita and Lachhman.
Jeesg oration orfenr afs Ana I (1412-9, H8a Sat 3 eta, He 1) hanvantar aaraaDhi-aa aa-i-aa kar sanjog. Then, he remembered Hanuman the monkey-god, who came to him.
ge ey 3 ANSE fSfe ys MS AH I (1412-9, ABA erat 3 eta, we 1) bhoolaa dait na samjha-ee tin parabh kee-ay kaam. The misguided demon did not understand that God is the Doer of deeds.
Soa Suderg A fass 3 feet ant iQEN (1412-10, Aa sat S echa, He 1) naanak vayparvaahu so kirat na mit-ee raam. ||26]|| O Nanak, the actions of the Self-existent Lord cannot be erased. ||26]|
odd Add Add ATT AS UT MQ (1412-10, HSa Fat 3 etta, He 1) laahour sahar jahar kahar savaa pahar. ||27]|| The city of Lahore suffered terrible destruction for four hours. ||27]|
HIG! 3 Il (1412-11)
mehlaa 3. Third Mehl:
wd Ad” nifys Ag fest St we WICH (1412-11, Hea eet 3 ecita, Hs 3) laahour sahar amrit sar siftee daa ghar. ||28]| The city of Lahore is a pool of ambrosial nectar, the home of praise. ||28]|
HIS % Il (1412-12)
mehlaa 1. First Mehl:
Bend fomr staat Sfe o wire nist Il (1412-12, Hea eat 3 eta, He 1
udosaahai ki-aa neesaanee tot na aavai annee.
What are the signs of a prosperous person? His stores of food never run out. Berha we dt zat afset Jat Gat il (412-12, naa eat 3 ecita, we 1)
udosee-a gharay hee vuthee kurhi-ee” rannee Dhammee.
Prosperity dwells in his home, with the sounds of girls and women.
Ast dot we frome gets gat St i (1412-13, wBa erat 3 ecitey, He 1)
satee rannee gharay si-aapaa rovan koorhee kammee. All the women of his home shout and cry over useless things.
A Be A tS od US CH ASH QC (1412-13, Aaa SS the, He 1)
jo layvai so dayvai naahee khatay damm sahamee. ||29||
Whatever he takes, he does not give back. Seeking to earn more and more, he is troubled and uneasy. ||29]||
usd 3 dre aeer ATG SHG Il (1412-14, Ha erat 3 ech, Hs 1) pabar too” haree-aavlaa kavlaa kanchan vann. O lotus, your leaves were green, and your blossoms were gold.
a tus AfsGfs ast denn tadt aaa A Sle Sq Il (1412-14, HBa Set 3 ecia, He 1) kai dokh-rhai sarhi-ohi kaalee ho-ee-aa dayhuree naanak mai tan bhang. What pain has burnt you, and made your body black? O Nanak, my body is battered.
Wart urat & Gd A AST AT Aa Il 1412-15, ABa Set 3 ecie, He 1) jaanaa paanee naa lahaa™ jai saytee mayraa sang. I have not received that water which I love.
fas f86 39 uses VS Yeats JB BON (1412-15, Hea Sst 3 edhe, He VY
jit dithai tan parfurhai charhai chavgan vann. ||30]|
Seeing it, my body blossomed forth, and I was blessed with a deep and beautiful color. ||30||
af 3 aet Hifeor usfe o afeor af& I (1412-16, Hea Set 3 eta, He 1) raj na ko-ee jeevi-aa pahuch na chali-aa ko-ay. No one lives long enough to accomplish all he wishes.
fomrat He FET Ae Hast ot ufs SE I 1412-16, HBa Set 3 tia, He 1) gi-aanee jeevai sadaa sadaa surtee hee pat ho-ay. Only the spiritually wise live forever; they are honored for their intuitive awareness.
Hdd Ade Het net Se aet feats it (1412-16, n&a eat 3 eta, v2 1) sarfai sarfai sadaa sadaa ayvai ga-ee vihaa-ay. Bit by bit, life passes away, even though the mortal tries to hold it back.
Sod fan S nmiby fee ufenr dt BS wie 34 0412-17, A8a Set 3 athe, He 1) naanak kis no aakhee-ai vin puchhi-aa hee lai jaa-ay. ||31]|
O Nanak, unto whom should we complain? Death takes one's life away without anyone's consent. ||31]|
ono tng TH 6 fs VS AI get TS Il (1412-17, H8a Ss 3 etia, He 1) dos na day-ahu raa-ay no mat chalai jaa’ budhaa hovai. Do not blame the Sovereign Lord; when someone grows old, his intellect leaves him.
Tost AS wed st nis usar ust SS BI (1412-18, Aa eet 3 ecia, vs 1)
galaa‘ karay ghanayree-aa taa™ ann"ay pavnaa khaatee tovai. ||32|| The blind man talks and babbles, and then falls into the ditch. ||32]]|
ud at otter AS fas us ute eft fas ardt il 412-18, H&a est 3 edie, He 1) pooray kaa kee-aa sabh kichh pooraa ghat vaDh kichh naahee. All that the Perfect Lord does is perfect; there is not too little, or too much.
Soa TaHfe MAT AS YS Hifs ATT SSI (1412-19, AB eat 3 etha, He 1)
naanak gurmukh aisaa jaanai pooray maa™hi samaa™hee. ||33]|
O Nanak, knowing this as Gurmukh, the mortal merges into the Perfect Lord God. [133] |
Ust 9893
HEd HIG 3 (1413-1)
salok mehlaa 3 Shalok, Third Mehl:
qe Afsas ure it (1413-1) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
nifsoras fa 3 umd fo & Ho vfs SaH Il (1413-2, Hea erat 3 ecita, He 3)
abhi-aagat ayh na aakhee-ahi jin kai man meh bharam. Do not call the wandering beggars holy men, if their minds are filled with doubt.
fs0 & fes oat 3d AT OaH NA (1413-2, H8a Sst 3 ecita, He 3) tin kay ditay naankaa tayho jayhaa Dharam. ||1]| Whoever gives to them, O Nanak, earns the same sort of merit. ||1]|
wis fade udH ue St at Staa OfE Il 1413-3, A8a Set 3 eta, He 3) abhai niranjan param pad taa kaa bheekhak ho-ay. One who begs for the supreme status of the Fearless and Immaculate Lord
fA a Se SSaT feger us AE QM (1413-3, Hx eat 3 |cita, ne 3)
tis kaa bhojan naankaa virlaa paa-ay ko-ay. ||2]|
- how rare are those who have the opportunity, O Nanak, to give food to such a person. ||2||
de ufsz Asot fe ust fe os i 1413-3, Aaa eat 3 |cita, He 3) hovaa pandit jotkee vayd parhaa mukh chaar. If I were a religious scholar, an astrologer, or one who could recite the four Vedas,
oe ust fefe wehor mus vA Ses MBI (1413-4, Bax eat 3 ect, He 3)
navaa khanda vich jaanee-aa apnay chaj veechaar. ||3]|
I could be famous throughout the nine regions of the earth, for my wisdom and thoughtful contemplation. ||3]|
Guus ASt wry Azar visas a WS I (1413-4, Hea erat F ect, ve 3) barahman kailee ghaat kanjkaa anchaaree kaa Dhaan. If a Brahmin kills a cow or a female infant, and accepts the offerings of an evil person,
feza fecat a3 adion wet AST nif I (1413-5, Hoa erat 3 ecita, ne 3)
fitak fitkaa korh badee-aa sadaa sadaa abhimaan.
he is cursed with the leprosy of curses and criticism; he is forever and ever filled with egotistical pride.
uty 23 ats fats soar fea oH Il (1413-5, Ha sat S ecita, He 3)
paahi aytay jaahi veesar naankaa ik naam. One who forgets the Naam, O Nanak, is covered by countless sins.
AS gat webs fea ad sz fame isi (1413-6, Aaa eat 3 ecita, He 3) sabh buDhee jaalee-ah ik rahai tat gi-aan. ||4]| Let all wisdom be burnt away, except for the essence of spiritual wisdom. ||4| |
Ha Fi Ufe fofimr A Afe o Aa afF Il (1413-6, Ba Set 3 etha, He 3) maathai jo Dhur likhi-aa so mayt na sakai ko-ay. No one can erase that primal destiny written upon one's forehead.
aoe fetter A ase A as fAA S oefs FS Ul (1413-7, ASa erat 3 ecia, wi: 3) naanak jo likhi-aa so varatdaa so boojhai jis no nadar ho-ay. ||5||
O Nanak, whatever is written there, comes to pass. He alone understands, who is blessed by God's Grace. ||5||
frst on ferfeor as wets war ll (1413-7, Aa est 3 etha, we 3)
jinee naam visaari-aa koorhai laalach lag.
Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and become attached to greed and fraud,
do wfenr Hvat nists fora uifar i) 413-8, Hea erat 3 ecita, ve 3)
DhanDhaa maa-i-aa mohnee antar tisnaa ag.
are engrossed in the entanglements of Maya the enticer, with the fire of desire within them.
frat efe o Saat wfeur oat ofe il (1413-8, ABax et 3 ecia, He 3)
jin"aa vayl na toombrhee maa-i-aa thagay thag.
Those who, like the pumpkin vine, are too stubborn climb the trellis, are cheated by Maya the cheater.
HoHfe dfs sorehufs or fsdt efor Afer il (1413-9, waa erat 3 ecita, He 3)
manmukh baneh chalaa-ee-ah naa milhee vag sag.
The self-willed manmukhs are bound and gagged and led away; the dogs do not join the herd of cows.
nity sere soba wm Afs fete i (1413-9, Hea erat 3 ect, He 3)
aap bhulaa-ay bhulee-ai aapay mayl milaa-ay.
The Lord Himself misleads the misguided ones, and He Himself unites them in His Union.
Soa TaHfy sch A VS Afsas ste Ell 1413-10, Aaa eat F ecita, He 3)
naanak gurmukh chhutee-ai jay chalai satgur bhaa-ay. ||6]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; they walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||6||
Hardt Asda St AS ASM Il (1413-10, HBa erat F tite, He 3) Saalaahee salaahnaa bhee sachaa saalaahi. I praise the Praiseworthy Lord, and sing the Praises of the True Lord.
Soa Ae Sa Vg gist ugg yrfs WOM (1413-11, HBa eat 3 ecita, ue 3) naanak sachaa ayk dar beebhaa parhar aahi. ||7|| O Nanak, the One Lord alone is True; stay away from all other doors. ||7||
Soa Ad Ad H fesS so 30 AST ALE I 1413-11, HBA Set 3 cia, 2 3) naanak jah jah mai fira-o tah tah saachaa so-ay. O Nanak, wherever I go, I find the True Lord.
Ag ta 30 Sad Tenfe usa] OE tcl (1413-12, Bx erat 3 |e, He 3) jah daykhaa tah ayk hai gurmukh pargat ho-ay. ||8]| Wherever I look, I see the One Lord. He reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||8] |
eu ferrge Fae 3 A fs SAS ae I (1413-12, HBa erst 3 etha, He 3) dookh visaaran sabad hai jay man vasaa-ay ko-ay. The Word of the Shabad is the Dispeller of sorrow, if one enshrines it in the mind.
ad fasur 3 ufs eA agen ueafs oF CN 1413-13, Ba Set 3 etia, He 3) gur kirpaa tay man vasai karam paraapat ho-ay. ||9|| By Guru's Grace, it dwells in the mind; by God's Mercy, it is obtained. ||9]|
aod JS IS aes uf He yale we mA II (1413-13, ABA Set 3 Scie, we 3) naanak ha-o ha-o kartay khap mu-ay khoohan lakh asa‘kh. O Nanak, acting in egotism, countless thousands have wasted away to death.
Afsag fxd wad ATS Aafe mse AOI (1413-14, Ba eat 3 ect, He 3) satgur milay so ubray saachai sabad alankh. ||10]||
Those who meet with the True Guru are saved, through the Shabad, the True Word of the Inscrutable Lord. ||10]|
faa’ Afsas fea His Afeor fse AS wa ute il 1413-14, Aa erat 3 cite, ve 3)
jinaa satgur ik man sayvi-aa tin jan laaga-o paa-ay.
Those who serve the True Guru single-mindedly - I fall at the feet of those humble beings.
ad Aaet ofa nfs SA fen at se ATE I (1413-15, HBa eat 3 |cita, He 3)
gur sabdee har man vasai maa-i-aa kee bhukh jaa-ay.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord abides in the mind, and the hunger for Maya departs.
A no fosne Cad fa aanfe oth Ae It (1413-15, Ba erat 3 ecita, He 3)
say jan nirmal oojlay je gurmukh naam samaa-ay.
Immaculate and pure are those humble beings, who, as Gurmukh, merge in the Naam.
aod ofa ufsArdhor aster ath 3S USAT AAU (1413-16, Hae erat 3 ete, we 3)
naanak hor patisaahee-aa koorhee-aa naam ratay paatisaah. ||11]|
O Nanak, other empires are false; they alone are true emperors, who are imbued with the Naam. ||11]|
fAG usa uf sast ofe 3 fs BS sast THE I 1413-16, HBa Set 3 EAha, He 3) ji-o purkhai ghar bhagtee naar hai at lochai bhagtee bhaa-ay.
The devoted wife in her husband's home has a great longing to perform loving devotional service to him;
Yd JA Awe Asset US FA HS UTE I (1413-17, ABA Set 3 ecita, ns 3) baho ras saalnay savaardee khat ras meethay paa-ay. she prepares and offers to him all sorts of sweet delicacies and dishes of all flavors.
fs wet sas Aa ofe on foes ote Il 1413-17, HBa Sat 3 etha, He 3)
ti-o banee bhagat salaahday har naamai chit laa-ay.
In the same way, the devotees praise the Word of the Guru's Bani, and focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name.
HG 36 06 ora Thmr fhe Sfoor ae mre ATE I (1413-18, HBa eat S etita, He 3)
man tan Dhan aagai raakhi-aa sir vaychi-aa gur aagai jaa-ay.
They place mind, body and wealth in offering before the Guru, and sell their heads to Him.
3 FAIS SIS ay Bue ys Bt ule hots i (1413-18, wa eet 3 eta, we 3)
bhai bhagtee bhagat baho lochday parabh lochaa poor milaa-ay.
In the Fear of God, His devotees yearn for His devotional worship; God fulfills their desires, and merges them with Himself.
UST 1898
ofs ys zugeg o fag wet fsuste i 414-1, nea eet 3 ecita, He 3)
har parabh vayparvaahu hai kit khaaDhai tiptaa-ay.
My Lord God is Self-existent and Independent. What does He need to eat to be satisfied?
Afsad a awe A US fsusA aie Te WE I 1414-1, aa wat 3 acta, ne 3)
satgur kai bhaanai jo chalai tiptaasai har gun gaa-ay.
Whoever walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru, and sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, is pleasing to Him.
US U6 aoala soa fa Ve Afsas STS IQ (1414-2, HBa eet F ecita, ns 3) Dhan Dhan kaljug naankaa je chalay satgur bhaa-ay. ||12]|
Blessed, blessed are they, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Nanak, who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||12]|
Afsag o AfeS wae 3 ofS Sg ote Il (1414-3, HBa eet 3 eta, He 3)
satguroo na sayvi-o sabad na rakhi-o ur Dhaar.
Those who do not serve the True Guru, and do not keep the Shabad enshrined in their hearts
fon fsor ar dtfenr fas wre Aeris i (1414-3, A8a eat 3 etita, He 3) Dhig tinaa kaa jeevi-aa kit aa-ay sansaar. - cursed are their lives. Why did they even come into the world?
TaHst 3@ ufs ue st ofs aff oat fimrfe i 414-3, Hea eat 3 ecita, ne 3)
gurmatee bha-o man pavai taa™ har ras lagai pi-aar.
If one follows the Guru's Teachings, and keeps the Fear of God in his mind, then he is lovingly attuned to the sublime essence of the Lord.
oe fis ufs foftmr ne aaa ufe Cafe 9S 414-4, HBA Set 3 cia, He 3) naa-o milai Dhur likhi-aa jan naanak paar utaar. ||13]| By his primal destiny, he obtains the Name; O Nanak, he is carried across. ||13]|
Heer Hfs Aa safimr we HA uafs o OPE I (1414-5, HBx erat 3 |cia, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi jag bharmi-aa ghar musai Khabar na ho-ay.
The world wanders lost in emotional attachment to Maya; it does not realize that its own home is being plundered.
am afa Ho fofs afer Hone niot SFE I (1414-5, HBa eet 3 |cia, He 3)
kaam kroDh man hir la-i-aa manmukh anDhaa lo-ay.
The self-willed manmukh is blind in the world; his mind is lured away by sexual desire and anger.
fomre usa Us TS Hus Tens Aa ALE il 414-6, HSa erat F ecite, Hs 3)
gi-aan kharhag panch doot sanghaaray gurmat jaagai so-ay.
With the sword of spiritual wisdom, kill the five demons. Remain awake and aware to the Guru's Teachings.
oH 330 UdafHot Ho So fSeaHe fe Il (1414-6, H8a eet 3 ata, He 3) naam ratan pargaasi-aa man tan nirmal ho-ay. The Jewel of the Naam is revealed, and the mind and body are purified.
SHdle sae feats fas are afa dE Il (1414-7, Hoa sat 3 eta, He 3)
naamheen naktay fireh bin naavai bahi ro-ay.
Those who lack the Naam wander around lost, with their noses cut off; without the Name, they sit and cry.
Soa A Ufs ass foftimr A Hfe 6 Aa AE NII (1414-7, Hoa eat 3 ecita, He 3) naanak jo Dhur kartai likhi-aa so mayt na sakai ko-ay. ||14]| O Nanak, no one can erase that which is pre-ordained by the Creator Lord. ||14]|
qene dfs as ufeur ag a Rafe stots i (1414-8, Hea eat 3 ecita, ne 3) gurmukhaa har Dhan khati-aa gur kai sabad veechaar.
The Gurmukhs earn the wealth of the Lord, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
oH uesg ufsor nis] sd SST Il (1414-8, Hoa Sat 3 etita, ne 3) naam padaarath paa-i-aa atut bharay bhandaar. They receive the wealth of the Naam; their treasures are overflowing.
dfs we wet Cuafa viz B uTserg | (1414-9, H8a eat 3 ecita, He 3)
har gun banee uchrahi ant na paaraavaar.
Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, they utter the Glorious Praises of the Lord, whose end and limitations cannot be found.
Sod AS AGE Aas ad SH fHaHoTT WWII (1414-9, Aaa eat 3 ecita, nz 3) naanak sabh kaaran kartaa karai vaykhai sirjanhaar. ||15]|| O Nanak, the Creator is the Doer of all; the Creator Lord beholds all. ||15]|
dante nists AA J Ho sigur eAS| noTfA I (1414-10, H8a eat 3S etita, He 3) gurmukh antar sahj hai man charhi-aa dasvai aakaas.
Within the Gurmukh is intuitive peace and poise; his mind ascends to the Tenth Plane of the Akaashic Ethers.
fsa Sus gud ofs nis on AY SA I 0414-10, ABA erat 3 acta, we 3) tithai oo“gh na bhukh hai har amrit naam sukh vaas.
No one is sleepy or hungry there; they dwell in the peace of the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
ood ey AY fenmrus odt fra wisn IH YSrA IME! (1414-11, Hea eat 3 ect, He 3) naanak dukh sukh vi-aapat nahee jithai aatam raam pargaas. ||16]||
O Nanak, pain and pleasure do not afflict anyone, where the Light of the Lord, the Supreme Soul, illuminates. ||16] |
OH a0 at seat AS ae wre ue tt (1414-11, HBa erat 3B ecita, ve 3) kaam kroDh kaa cholrhaa sabh gal aa-ay paa-ay. All have come, wearing the robes of sexual desire and anger.
fefa Gunfo fefa faofa nifo gan wre ATE I 1414-12, H8a Set 3 Etia, He 3)
ik upjahi ik binas jaa“hi hukmay aavai jaa-ay.
Some are born, and some pass away. They come and go according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
HHE HIS 3 Yael FI Ba TA SES il (1414-12, HSa erat 3 acta, we 3)
jaman maran na chuk-ee rang lagaa doojai bhaa-ay. Their comings and goings in reincarnation do not end; they are imbued with the love of duality.
aufe af seeing Ade aS FAME NV (1414-13, Fa erat 3 ecita, He 3) banDhan banDh bhavaa-ee-an karnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. ||17] |
Bound in bondage, they are made to wander, and they cannot do anything about it. []17]|
fre a fac oding fsa Afsag fifemr orfe i 0414-13, Aa eat 3 ecie, vs 3) jin ka-o kirpaa Dhaaree-an tinaa satgur mili-aa aa-ay. Those, upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, come and meet the True Guru.
Afsafs fxs Coet set ufe Atfeor AofA ASE I 414-14, HBa Set 3 ecita, ns 3)
satgur milay ultee bha-ee mar jeevi-aa sahj subhaa-ay.
Meeting with the True Guru, they turn away from the world; they remain dead while still alive, with intuitive peace and poise.
Soa saat sfsur ufe ofe of morte Ach 1414-14, Hea Sat 3 |tita, He 3)
naanak bhagtee rati-aa har har naam samaa-ay. ||18]| O Nanak, the devotees are imbued with the Lord; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||18]|
HOHY Bue Hfs 3 nists sIs VST I 1414-15, HBA sat 3 ecita, ns 3) manmukh chanchal mat hai antar bahut chaturaa-ee. The intellect of the self-willed manmukh is fickle; he is very tricky and clever within.
ais’ astsor fase afer fea foe ate & uret i 1414-15, ABa eat 3 ecia, v2 3) keetaa karti-aa birthaa ga-i-aa ik til thaa-ay na paa-ee.
Whatever he has done, and all that he does, is useless. Not even an iota of it is acceptable.
us Bo FH dine AS UH TE a Art I (1414-16, Ha eat 3 ecia, ne 3)
punn daan jo beejday sabh Dharam raa-ay kai jaa-ee.
The charity and generosity he pretends to give will be judged by the Righteous Judge of Dharma.
fag Afsag AHorTS o eset EH ate ynret I 1414-17, Ba Sat 3 eta, we 3)
bin satguroo jamkaal na chhod-ee doojai bhaa-ay khu-aa-ee. Without the True Guru, the Messenger of Death does not leave the mortal alone; he is ruined by the love of duality.
Hao Aer oes o nreet AG uTe Hie ArT II (1414-17, HBA Sat 3 ecita, He 3) joban jaa‘daa nadar na aavee jar pahuchai mar jaa-ee. Youth slips away imperceptibly, old age comes, and then he dies.
UZ Ges HI US SF ifs Sat a B Aes I 1414-18, HSA Sat 3 ecita, ne 3)
put kalat moh hayt hai ant baylee ko na sakhaa-ee.
The mortal is caught in love and emotional attachment to children and spouse, but none of them will be his helper and support in the end.
Afsag Ae A AY ue oe SA nfs ret Il (1414-18, naa Sat F Scie, He 3) satgur sayvay so sukh paa-ay naa-o vasai man aa-ee. Whoever serves the True Guru finds peace; the Name comes to abide in the mind.
Soa A es zoe fA ATHY STH AHTST NACI (1414-19, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 3) naanak say vaday vadbhaagee je gurmukh naam samaa-ee. ||19]|
O Nanak, great and very fortunate are those who, as Gurmukh, are absorbed in the Naam. ||19]|
HOHY OH 6 Vsol fas ove BU SE Il (1414-19, HBA Set 3 cia, v2 3)
manmukh naam na chaytnee bin naavai dukh ro-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs do not even think of the Name; without the Name, they cry in pain.
Uat asqU
MISH TH o uns SA fa AY TE it (1415-1, HBA est 3 ecta, we 3) aatmaa raam na poojnee doojai ki-o sukh ho-ay. They do not worship the Lord, the Supreme Soul; how can they find peace in duality?
JGH uisfs He J Aafe 6 arefs OE I (1415-1, Hex eat 3 ecita, v2 3)
ha-umai antar mail hai sabad na kaadheh Dho-ay.
They are filled with the filth of egotism; they do not wash it away with the Word of the Shabad.
oon fag are Hfoor He HoH UeTGE UE NOM (1415-2, Aaa eat 3 cia, He 3) naanak bin naavai maili-aa mu-ay janam padaarath kho-ay. ||20]||
O Nanak, without the Name, they die in their filth; they waste the priceless opportunity of this human life. ||20||
HOH 8S vias fsa nfs iat at SH Il (1415-2, HBx erat 3 ect, ne 3) manmukh bolay anDhulay tis meh agnee kaa vaas. The self-willed manmukhs are deaf and blind; they are filled with the fire of desire.
Wat Has o asa Aafe 6 Adhd YSA Il (1415-3, Aa erat S Scie, He 3)
banee surat na bujhnee sabad na karahi pargaas.
They have no intuitive understanding of the Guru's Bani; they are not illumined with the Shabad.
Gar nimuat niefs afa odt ag sufs 3 aes fer Il (1415-3, HBa eet 3 |Aia, He 3) Onaa aapnee andar suDh nahee gur bachan na karahi visaas. They do not know their own inner being, and they have no faith in the Guru's Word.
fomrdior niefs ag Hae 3 fos of foe Aer fern I 1415-4, Hea Sat 3 ecita, He 3) gi-aanee-aa andar gur sabad hai nit har liv sadaa vigaas.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is within the being of the spiritually wise ones. They always blossom in His love.
ofa famrohor at see IG Ae afseodt SA Il (1415-4, Ha erat 3 ecita, He 3) har gi-aanee-aa kee rakh-daa ha-o sad balihaaree taas. The Lord saves the honor of the spiritually wise ones.I am forever a sacrifice to them.
aente A dfs AGS He SSA ST AT A QUI (1415-5, H8a Sst 3 etita, He 3) gurmukh jo har sayvday jan naanak taa kaa daas. ||21]|| Servant Nanak is the slave of those Gurmukhs who serve the Lord. ||21]|
fier sfmian Aeu dF Aa uifaor firs HE 1415-5, Hea eat 3 ecita, ne 3)
maa-i-aa bhu-i-angam sarap hai jag ghayri-aa bikh maa-ay.
The poisonous snake, the serpent of Maya, has surrounded the world with its coils, O mother!
fay a ngs dfs on 3d ae aes Aa Hie Ute I (1415-6, Aaa erat 3 acta, ni 3)
bikh kaa maaran har naam hai gur garurh sabad mukh paa-ay.
The antidote to this poisonous venom is the Name of the Lord; the Guru places the magic spell of the Shabad into the mouth.
fra ag usta fefimr fsa Afsag fufeor orfe i 415-7, naa est 3 etta, He 3) jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin satgur mili-aa aa-ay. Those who are blessed with such pre-ordained destiny come and meet the True Guru.
ffs nfsas foone dfeor feu 3@H afeur faerfe 1 415-7, Hea Sat 3 ecita, He 3) mil satgur nirmal ho-i-aa bikh ha-umai ga-i-aa bilaa-ay.
Meeting with the True Guru, they become immaculate, and the poison of egotism is eradicated.
Tana a ny Cas dfs waa Ast ute il (1415-8, w8a eet 3 ecia, He 3)
gurmukhaa kay mukh ujlay har dargeh sobhaa paa-ay.
Radiant and bright are the faces of the Gurmukhs; they are honored in the Court of the Lord.
Ho aed Ae aves fsa A wate Afsag Ste Qi (1415-8, Aaa ei 3 etia, H: 3) jan naanak sadaa kurbaan tin jo chaaleh satgur bhaa-ay. ||22||
Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||22]|
Afsas usy foses 3d fos fase afe foe ofe i (1415-9, Hea eat 3 ecita, ne 3)
satgur purakh nirvair hai nit hirdai har liv laa-ay.
The True Guru, the Primal Being, has no hatred or vengeance. His heart is constantly attuned to the Lord.
faved ate Sg safeer nue ute Sot OTS i (1415-9, HSa erat 3 ecite, Hs 3)
nirvairai naal vair rachaa-idaa apnai ghar lookee laa-ay.
Whoever directs hatred against the Guru, who has no hatred at all, only sets his own home on fire.
nists au uidag 3 niofes AS Het ey UTE II (1415-10, HBa eat 3 acta, ne 3) antar kroDh aha“kaar hai an-din jalai sadaa dukh paa-ay. Anger and egotism are within him night and day; he burns, and suffers constant pain.
as afe afs fos sGae fay wo eA oe I (45-11, HSa est 3 Etta, He 3)
koorh bol bol nit bha-ukday bikh khaaDhay doojai bhaa-ay. They babble and tell lies, and keep on barking, eating the poison of the love of duality.
fay wfenr arate sane fefs wie whe ufs eve i (1415-11, HBa eat 3 ecita, He 3)
bikh maa-i-aa kaaran bharamday fir ghar ghar pat gavaa-ay.
For the sake of the poison of Maya, they wander from house to house, and lose their honor.
anor ag us fas fust on fsa Ave I (1415-12, HBA erat 3 |chta, He 3) baysu-aa kayray poot ji-o pitaa naam tis jaa-ay. They are like the son of a prostitute, who does not know the name of his father.
dfs of on 3 Bsat aes wef unre i (1415-12, Ba erat 3 ecita, nz 3)
har har naam na chaytnee kartai aap khu-aa-ay.
They do not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the Creator Himself brings them to ruin.
ofa qanfy fasur udintg Ae fees urfu fHorfe i 0415-13, ABa erat 3 ecita, He 3)
har gurmukh kirpaa Dhaaree-an jan vichhurhay aap milaa-ay.
The Lord showers His Mercy upon the Gurmukhs, and reunites the separated ones with Himself.
We aed fan sfeose A Afsag oat ute Qi (1415-13, Hea Sei 3 ecia, He 3) jan naanak tis balihaarnai jo satgur laagay paa-ay. ||23]|| Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to those who fall at the Feet of the True Guru. ||23]|
on aa A Gud fag ae FH ule AE I (415-14, HBa est 3 etia, He 3)
naam lagay say oobray bin naavai jam pur jaa“hi.
Those who are attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are saved; without the Name, they must go to the City of Death.
Sod fas are AY odt one Te ussts NQSIl (1415-14, ABa eat 3S eta, He 3)
naanak bin naavai sukh nahee aa-ay ga-ay pachhutaahi. ||24]|
O Nanak, without the Name, they find no peace; they come and go in reincarnation with regrets. ||24| |
fos oes ofa ae st uf sfeor miSe I (1415-15, HBa eat 3 eta, He 3) chintaa Dhaavat reh ga-ay taa” man bha-i-aa anand. When anxiety and wanderings come to an end, the mind becomes happy.
as uAet ashy AT ae Ast forse it (1415-15, Hea erat 3 ect, He 3) gur parsaadee bujhee-ai saa Dhan sutee nichind. By Guru's Grace, the soul-bride understands, and then she sleeps without worry.
fe ag usta fattmr fsa Sfeur ae aE I (1415-16, HBA est 3 ecta, He 3)
jin ka-o poorab likhi-aa tin"aa bhayti-aa gur govind.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny meet with the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
Soa Hon fife gd fe user usHSe Quill (1415-16, HBa eat 3 ecita, ve 3) naanak sehjay mil rahay har paa-i-aa parmaanand. ||25]|
O Nanak, they merge intuitively into the Lord, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss. [|25]|
Afsag Aes wiuat ae Aaet Sterfe i 1415-17, Aa eat 3 eciz, ns 3) satgur Sayvan aapnaa gur sabdee veechaar. Those who serve their True Guru, who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad,
Afsas ot ovat ifs Sfe afs an safe a fe Il (1415-17, Hea Sat 3 eta, He 3)
satgur kaa bhaanaa man lain har naam rakheh ur Dhaar.
who honor and obey the Will of the True Guru, who keep the Lord's Name enshrined within their hearts,
ma Ga Hdmis ofs ath wat enrfs il 1415-18, H&a erat 3 ecia, 2 3)
aithai othai mannee-an har naam lagay vaapaar.
are honored, here and hereafter; they are dedicated to the business of the Lord's Name.
aon Rafe frevue fos AMS eoete Il 1415-18, Aa eet 3 ecia, He 3)
gurmukh sabad sinjaapadai tit saachai darbaar.
Through the Word of the Shabad, the Gurmukhs gain recognition in that Court of the True Lord.
Ae Age use Ay nists fusH fimis Il (1415-19, Hea eet 3 etter, He 3)
sachaa sa-udaa kharach sach antar piram pi-aar.
The True Name is their merchandise, the True Name is their expenditure; the Love of their Beloved fills their inner beings.
AHA ofs 3 uieet orf gun ATS Il (1415-19, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 3)
jamkaal nayrh na aavee aap bakhsay kartaar.
The Messenger of Death does not even approach them; the Creator Lord Himself forgives them.
at asa
SSA OH JS A Uoes do fasus Ig AAT NEN (1416-1, HBA erat 3 ecita, ne 3) naanak naam ratay say Dhanvant hain nirDhan hor sansaar. ||26||
O Nanak, they alone are wealthy, who are imbued with the Naam; the rest of the world is poor. ||26||
Ho at 2a ofa an dfs fag oS Sed 5 OE Il (1416-1, Hoa Sat S ecia, He 3)
jan kee tayk har naam har bin naavai thavar na thaa-o.
The Lord's Name is the Support of the Lord's humble servants. Without the Lord's Name, the there is no other place, no place of rest.
TIHst aE nfs SA AIA Adfs ANTE Il (1416-2, H8a set 3 eta, He 3)
gurmatee naa-o man vasai sehjay sahj samaa-o.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the Name abides in the mind, and one is intuitively, automatically absorbed in the Lord.
zasat oH fonrfeur uifofafA wer a@ il (1416-2, nea erat 3 ecita, He 3)
vadbhaagee naam Dhi-aa-i-aa ahinis laagaa bhaa-o. Those with great good fortune meditate on the Naam; night and day, they embrace love for the Name.
Wo soa Hat ofS fas Ie Ae AsHe WE Ql (1416-3, Aaa set 3 ecia, ws 3) jan naanak mangai Dhoorh tin ha-o sad kurbaanai jaa-o. ||27]|| Servant Nanak begs for the dust of their feet; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||27]|
oY BaAls Heal fSHat ASSt Ad UAT Il (1416-4, ABa erat 3 eciz, us 3) lakh cha-oraaseeh maydnee tisnaa jaltee karay pukaar. The 8.4 million species of beings burn in desire and cry in pain.
feg Hg wfeer Ag uAfeor oe 3S 3 nist Se II (1416-4, Hoa eat 3 ecita, He 3) in moh maa-i-aa sabh pasri-aa naal chalai na antee vaar.
All this show of emotional attachment to Maya shall not go with you at that very last instant.
faa ofa nifs o nest fam mrat adt uae Il (1416-5, HBa Set 3 etia, He 3)
bin har saat na aavee kis aagai karee pukaar.
Without the Lord, peace and tranquility do not come; unto whom should we go and complain?
gaat Afsag ufeur afer gon frag Il 1416-5, Hoa est 3 eta, He 3) vadbhaagee satgur paa-i-aa boojhi-aa barahm bichaar.
By great good fortune, one meets the True Guru, and comes to understand the contemplation of God.
fare nafs AS afs Tet Ae aoa ole Sfe Oe NICH (1416-6, ABA eat 3 edie, ns 3) tisnaa agan sabh bujh ga-ee jan naanak har ur Dhaar. ||28] |
The fire of desire is totally extinguished, O servant Nanak, enshrining the Lord within the heart. ||28] |
MA US AIS AHSS NZ O USSG Il (1416-6, HSa eat 3 ecita, ns 3) asee khatay bahut kamaavday ant na paaraavaar. I make so many mistakes, there is no end or limit to them.
fs faa afs a aufk Sg IG unit es Tous Il (1416-7, Hea sat 3 ecita, ns 3) har kirpaa kar kai bakhas laihu ha-o paapee vad gunahgaar. O Lord, please be merciful and forgive me; I am a sinner, a great offender.
dfs ME Sa sa 3 ureet F aufA froresog I (1416-7, Ha est 3 eta, we 3)
har jee-o laykhai vaar na aavee too” bakhas milaavanhaar.
O Dear Lord, if You made an account of my mistakes, my turn to be forgiven would not even come. Please forgive me, and unite me with Yourself.
Gd 36 ofa ys Afeor As fasfeu afe fears i (1416-8, Hea erat 3 ecita, He 3)
gur tuthai har parabh mayli-aa sabh kilvikh kat vikaar.
The Guru, in His Pleasure, has united me with the Lord God; He has cut away all my sinful mistakes.
faor ofa afs on fomrfeur Ae area fsa Aas QCM (1416-9, HBa erat 3 ect, He 3) jinaa har har naam Dhi-aa-i-aa jan naanak tin" jaikaar. ||29]|
Servant Nanak celebrates the victory of those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||29]|
feafs feefs F fre Afsag & S ate Il (1416-9, naa Sai F etha, He 3)
vichhurh vichhurh jo milay satgur kay bhai bhaa-ay.
Those who have been separated and alienated from the Lord are united with Him again, through the Fear and the Love of the True Guru.
HOH Hde fagee se aTaHfy an fomrfe i (1416-10, Hea eat S ecita, He 3)
janam maran nihchal bha-ay gurmukh naam Dhi-aa-ay.
They escape the cycle of birth and death, and, as Gurmukh, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
as AY Hats Hs dts Is BIG Il (1416-10, ASA erat 3 echta, we 3)
gur saaDhoo sangat milai heeray ratan labha™ni".
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Guru's Congregation, the diamonds and jewels are obtained.
TSA WS nwa Tafa afa sdfe Soll 416-11, Hea eat 3 ecita, vs 3) naanak laal amolkaa gurmukh khoj laha‘ni". ||30]| O Nanak, the jewel is priceless; the Gurmukhs seek and find it. ||30] |
HOHY 3H 3 Use fod Ales fod SA Il (1416-11, Ba erat 3 |cita, He 3)
manmukh naam na chayti-o Dhig jeevan Dhig vaas.
The self-willed manmukhs do not even think of the Naam. Cursed are their lives, and cursed are their homes.
fan a fest wat Usa A fs o SAS TESTA Il (1416-12, HBa eet 3 |e, He 3)
jis daa ditaa khaanaa painnaa so man na vasi-o guntaas.
That Lord who gives them so much to eat and wear - they do not enshrine that Lord, the Treasure of Virtue, in their minds.
feg no Hafe 3 sfee fae JS we SH Il (1416-12, Aaa Sat 3 etia, ns 3)
ih man sabad na baydi-o ki-o hovai ghar vaas.
This mind is not pierced by the Word of the Shabad; how can it come to dwell in its true home?
HoHdor sorerat ores ats Hera I 1416-13, Aa Set 3 eth, He 3)
manmukhee-aa duhaaganee aavan jaan mu-ee-aas.
The self-willed manmukhs are like discarded brides, ruined by coming and going in the cycle of reincarnation.
Tented oH Aa J HAS Hat fofimmA Il (1416-13, Aaa eat 3 ecita, He 3)
gurmukh naam suhaag hai mastak manee likhi-aas.
The Gurmukhs are embellished and exalted by the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the jewel of destiny is engraved upon their foreheads.
ofa ofs om fa wfaur ofe fase SHS YAH Il (1416-14, HBa eat 3 ecita, ne 3)
har har naam ur Dhaari-aa har hirdai kamal pargaas.
They enshrine the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within their hearts; the Lord illumines their heart-lotus.
Afsag Aes virus IG Ae afeost SH Il (1416-14, H8a erat 3 Etita, He 3) satgur sayvan aapnaa ha-o sad balihaaree taas. I am forever a sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru.
soa fo HY CxS fae nisfs SH USA SAU (1416-15, Ha eat F ecita, He 3)
naanak tin mukh ujlay jin antar naam pargaas. ||31||
O Nanak, radiant and bright are the faces of those whose inner beings are illuminated with the Light of the Naam. ||31]|
Rafe ud Het Ae fas faa Hae Hats o Jet Il (1416-16, Hea Sai 3 eta, He 3)
sabad marai so-ee jan sijhai bin sabdai mukat na ho-ee.
Those who die in the Word of the Shabad are saved. Without the Shabad, no one is liberated.
3y aad ag aH feas ate en usH fedet Il (1416-16, Ha erat 3 eta, He 3)
bhaykh karahi baho karam vigutay bhaa-ay doojai paraj vigo-ee.
They wear religious robes and perform all sorts of rituals, but they are ruined; in the love of duality, their world is ruined.
sod fas Afsag oe o urn AAG Ss aet 32H (1416-17, Aaa sat S eta, He 3) naanak bin satgur naa-o na paa-ee-ai jay sa-o lochai ko-ee. ||32||
O Nanak, without the True Guru, the Name is not obtained, even though one may long for it hundreds of times. ||32||
us or ag nfs es Ca Sut T Gar Tet Il (1416-17, ABa est 3 ecia, He 3) har kaa naa-o at vad oochaa oochee hoo oochaa ho-ee. The Name of the Lord is utterly great, lofty and high, the highest of the high.
nufs af= o naet AAG Be set Il 1416-18, Aa eat 3 |cia, He 3) aparh ko-ay na sak-ee jay sa-o lochai ko-ee. No one can climb up to it, even though one may long for it, hundreds of times.
Hf HAH Jat o Jeet af Su se AS ASH I (1416-18, Ha eat S ecia, He 3)
mukh sanjam hachhaa na hova-ee kar bhaykh bhavai sabh ko-ee.
Speaking about self-discipline, no one become pure; everyone walks around wearing religious robes.
ae at uGat wfe vs aah uaufs Tet il 416-19, Ba eet 3 |e, He 3) gur kee pa-orhee jaa-ay charhai karam paraapat ho-ee. Those blessed by the karma of good deeds go and climb the ladder of the Guru.
wists orf ZA ae Hae eters afe | (1416-19, Bx eat 3 |cita, He 3) antar aa-ay vasai gur sabad veechaarai ko-ay.
The Lord comes and dwells within that one who contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Ust ABAD
Soa Aafe Hd HO Hoba AS AM AE SSI (1417-1, ABax erat 3B ecita, ve 3)
naanak sabad marai man maanee-ai saachay saachee so-ay. ||33] |
O Nanak, when someone dies in the Word of the Shabad, the mind is pleased and appeased. True is the reputation of those who are true. ||33]|
Heer Hg ey Aa d fay vse sfoor 3 Ae I (1417-1, Hoa Sat 3 etia, He 3) maa-i-aa moh dukh saagar hai bikh dutar tari-aa na jaa-ay.
Emotional attachment to Maya is a treacherous ocean of pain and poison, which cannot be crossed.
AT As age ufs we JOH aes feafE It (1417-2, naa eat 3 eta, He 3) mayraa mayraa karday pach mu-ay ha-umai karat vihaa-ay. Screaming, "Mine, mine!", they rot and die; they pass their lives in egotism.
Hone Gserg o ug 3 ma fete ad BuSTE Il (1417-2, Hoa eet 3 ecita, ne 3) manmukhaa urvaar na paar hai aDh vich rahay laptaa-ay.
The self-willed manmukhs are in limbo, neither on this side, nor the other; they are stuck in the middle.
A Ofs fofter A oneat aeat aS @ AVE Il (1417-3, HBA est 3 etha, we 3) jo Dhur likhi-aa so kKamaavanaa karnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. They act as they are pre-destined; they cannot do anything else.
TaHst famrg we Hfs SA AS efor gay ASE I (1417-3, n8a erat 3 ecita, ne 3) gurmatee gi-aan ratan man vasai sabh daykhi-aa barahm subhaa-ay.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the jewel of spiritual wisdom abides in the mind, and then God is easily seen in all.
sod Afsafe sfsa esac vs 3 sCnfe ufs Surf= sell 0417-4, wa set 3 etha, He 3) naanak satgur bohithai vadbhaagee charhai tay bha-ojal paar langhaa-ay. ||34||
O Nanak, the very fortunate ones embark on the Boat of the True Guru; they are carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||34| |
fag Afsags ost a odt FH ofs oH SfE MITE I (1417-5, H8a Set 3 |cita, He 3)
bin satgur daataa ko nahee jo har naam day-ay aaDhaar.
Without the True Guru, there is no giver who can bestow the Support of the Lord's Name.
ad fasur 3 a nfs eA Ae ad Cfs fe II (1417-5, Hea Sat 3 etia, He 3)
gur kirpaa tay naa-o man vasai sadaa rahai ur Dhaar.
By Guru's Grace, the Name comes to dwell in the mind; keep it enshrined in your heart.
fanart a8 fsufs dfe afs & ofe fimrfa i (1417-6, naa eat 3 eta, He 3)
tisnaa bujhai tipat ho-ay har kai naa-ay pi-aar.
The fire of desire is extinguished, and one finds satisfaction, through the Love of the Name of the Lord.
Soa ToHfe ursha afe wurst fasur ofe Sul 1417-6, Aa eat 3 ecita, He 3) naanak gurmukh paa-ee-ai har apnee kirpaa Dhaar. ||35]|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the Lord, when He showers His Mercy. ||35]|
fag Fae Fags safer aE as BATE I (1417-7, HBA erat 3 ecita, Hs 3)
bin sabdai jagat barli-aa kahnaa kachhoo na jaa-ay. Without the Shabad, the world is so insane, that it cannot even be described.
dfs wa A Gad Aafe ad fee ote I 1417-7, Hea Set 3 ecie, He 3)
har rakhay say ubray sabad rahay liv laa-ay.
Those who are protected by the Lord are saved; they remain lovingly attuned to the Word of the Shabad.
Soa Ads AS fas Wee fate set ges Tete WEN (1417-8, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 3)
naanak kartaa sabh kichh jaandaa jin rakhee banat banaa-ay. ||36|| O Nanak, the Creator who made this making knows everything. ||36||
oH wa Afs Stee ufs ufss aa UTE Il (1417-8, Ha sat 3 edie, He 3)
hom jag sabh teerthaa parh" pandit thakay puraan.
The Pandits, the religious scholars, have grown weary of making fire-offerings and sacrifices, making pilgrimages to all the sacred shrines, and reading the Puraanas.
fag ufemr vg & feet fefs IBN uIee ATE II (1417-9, H8a Sst 3 ecita, He 3)
bikh maa-i-aa moh na mit-ee vich ha-umai aavan jaan.
But they cannot get rid of the poison of emotional attachment to Maya; they continue to come and go in egotism.
Afsas fife ne Cadt ofs afimr use WATS II (1417-10, Hoa Sat 3 ecita, ne 3) satgur mili-ai mal utree har japi-aa purakh sujaan.
Meeting with the True Guru, one's filth is washed off, meditating on the Lord, the Primal Being, the All-knowing One.
frat ofs afs ys Afenr AS SSA AE ATAE IBM (1417-10, Aaa est 3 ecita, ne 3) jinaa har har parabh sayvi-aa jan naanak sad kurbaan. ||37]|| Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who serve their Lord God. ||37]||
Hor Hg ag fesse ag nm Se fears Il 1417-11, HBa Set 3 eth, He 3)
maa-i-aa moh baho chitvaday baho aasaa lobh vikaar.
Mortals give great thought to Maya and emotional attachment; they harbor great hopes, in greed and corruption.
Houfa wmfas ao dint fs faofh wfe fas ere i (1417-11, ABa Set 3 |cia, He 3) manmukh asthir naa thee-ai mar binas jaa-ay khin vaar.
The self-willed manmukhs do not become steady and stable; they die and are gone in an instant.
zs oa de Afsag fue JEN 3H fore II 1417-12, H8a Set 3 etia, He 3)
vad bhaag hovai satgur milai ha-umai tajai vikaar.
Only those who are blessed with great good fortune meet the True Guru, and leave behind their egotism and corruption.
dfs oH Alu AY UfeMr AS Soa ASE Sterg Sci (1417-12, ABa eet 3 edie, ns 3) har naamaa jap sukh paa-i-aa jan naanak sabad veechaar. ||38]|
Chanting the Name of the Lord, they find peace; servant Nanak contemplates the Word of the Shabad. ||38]|
faa Afsae sats 3 Jeet ofh 3 oat flmra I 1417-13, H8a Sst 3 eta, He 3)
bin satgur bhagat na hova-ee naam na lagai pi-aar.
Without the True Guru, there is no devotional worship, and no love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Ho Soa OH mafoor ae a ofs fimrfs wach (1417-14, Aa eet 3 |cita, ne 3) jan naanak naam araaDhi-aa gur kai hayt pi-aar. ||39]|
Servant Nanak worships and adores the Naam, with love and affection for the Guru. [|39]|
Seat a SAT 3 aA A oT ue SATE I (1417-14, Hoa Sei 3S ita, nH: 3) lobhee kaa vaysaahu na keejai jay kaa paar vasaa-ay. Do not trust greedy people, if you can avoid doing so.
wifs ats fsa od fra ga 6 ute It 1417-15, n8a eet 3 ech, He 3)
ant kaal tithai Dhuhai jithai hath na paa-ay.
At the very last moment, they will deceive you there, where no one will be able to lend a helping hand.
HOHY ASt Aa ad fs ae Vay Bae i (1417-15, HBa sat 3 ecita, ve 3)
manmukh saytee sang karay muhi kaalakh daag lagaa-ay.
Whoever associates with the self-willed manmukhs, will have his face blackened and dirtied.
Ho oe fsq Bshat wafs AON TeTe Ut (1417-15, Aa eat 3 ect, we 3) muh kaalay tin” lobhee-aa™ jaasan janam gavaa-ay. Black are the faces of those greedy people; they lose their lives, and leave in disgrace.
ABHafs ofa vfs ys afs on SA Hfs mete i 1417-16, Hea erat 3 ect, ne 3)
satsangat har mayl parabh har naam vasai man aa-ay.
O Lord, let me join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; may the Name of the Lord God abide in my mind.
HOH Hs at HS Cad Ho asa Us To a= gol (1417-17, Aa eat 3 ecia, He 3) janam maran kee mal utrai jan naanak har gun gaa-ay. ||40] |
The filth and pollution of birth and death is washed away, O servant Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||40] |
ufs ofs ufs aes fatter A Hear oe ATE WN (1417-17, ABA est 3 ecia, He 3) Dhur har parabh kartai likhi-aa so maytnaa na jaa-ay. Whatever is pre-destined by the Lord God Creator, cannot be erased.
mG fis Ag fsR & uferis ad afe TE I 1417-18, Ba erst 3 ecita, He 3) jee-o pind sabh tis daa partipaal karay har raa-ay. Body and soul are all His. The Sovereign Lord King cherishes all.
gas feea gu af% He Sat ve 5 faa us i (1417-18, Sa Sst 3 ecita, we 3)
chugal nindak bhukhay rul mu-ay aynaa hath na kithaa-oo paa-ay.
The gossipers and slanderers shall remain hungry and die, rolling in the dust; their hands cannot reach anywhere.
Wdfs unis As aH acta fs fogs Que ANTE | (1417-19, Hx eat 3 |e, He 3) baahar pakhand sabh karam karahi man hirdai kapat kamaa-ay.
Outwardly, they do all the proper deeds, but they are hypocrites; in their minds and hearts, they practice deception and fraud.
afs Adis a atba A nifS user wre Wh 1417-19, Ha eet 3 ecia, v3 3)
khayt sareer jo beejee-ai so ant khalo-aa aa-ay.
Whatever is planted in the farm of the body, shall come and stand before them in the end.
UsT AwAc
woe at us ast fs aS auth freef—] Weal 418-1, Ba Sat 3 cia, He 3) naanak kee parabh bayntee har bhaavai bakhas milaa-ay. ||41]||
Nanak offers this prayer: O Lord God, please forgive me, and unite me with Yourself. [|41]|
HO MISE WE B ASEl BAS VIA Il (1418-1, H8a Set 3 etia, He 3)
man aavan jaan na sujh-ee naa sujhai darbaar.
The mortal being does not understand the comings and goings of reincarnation; he does not see the Court of the Lord.
Hfeor Hfs usfenr nists wifemres Tas Il (1418-2, Hex erat 3 |cita, He 3)
maa-i-aa mohi palayti-aa antar agi-aan gubaar.
He is wrapped up in emotional attachment and Maya, and within his being is the darkness of ignorance.
3a 3g AS whom fafs SS Ba AT BT Il (1418-2, HBa eat 3 edie, He 3) tab nar sutaa jaagi-aa sir dand lagaa baho bhaar. The sleeping person wakes, only when he is hit on the head by a heavy club.
Tena agit Gufs afs sfsor A urfefs He EMM” Il (1418-3, Hex eat 3 |cita, ne 3) gurmukhaa" karaa™ upar har chayti-aa say paa-in mokh du-aar. The Gurmukhs dwell upon the Lord; they find the door of salvation.
soa wif Cfo Gud AS ACH SI UTSTT N2Ml (1418-3, HBA erat F ecite, He 3) naanak aap ohi uDhray sabh kutamb taray parvaar. ||42||
O Nanak, they themselves are saved, and all their relatives are carried across as well. ||42||
Rafe Hd A HM AMY Il (1418-4, HBA erat F ect, He 3) sabad marai SO mu-aa jaapai. Whoever dies in the Word of the Shabad, is known to be truly dead.
ae usAet of aft gy i (4is-4, wBa erat 3 edie, us 3) gur parsaadee har ras Dharaapai. By Guru's Grace, the mortal is satisfied by the sublime essence of the Lord.
dfs zante aa Aafe fren i (418-5, Hea eat 3 ecita, He 3) har dargahi gur sabad sinjaapai. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is recognized in the Court of the Lord.
fag Hae HoT od AS ate Il (1418-5, Hea Set 3 eta, He 3) bin sabdai mu-aa hai sabh ko-ay. Without the Shabad, everyone is dead.
HOHY HM nual ASH BPE Il (418-5, HBa eat S etita, He 3) manmukh mu-aa apunaa janam kho-ay. The self-willed manmukh dies; his life is wasted.
dfs on 0 Sata nifs vu SE Il (1418-6, H8a Set 3 eta, He 3) har naam na cheeteh ant dukh ro-ay. Those who do not remember the Name of the Lord, shall cry in pain in the end.
Sod AIS Ad A SE ssil (1418-6, Aa set 3 etia, ve 3) naanak kartaa karay so ho-ay. ||43]| O Nanak, whatever the Creator Lord does, comes to pass. ||43]|
Tenfe ge ae ardt frat nists Aafs fomrs il (1418-6, Aa erat 3 Scie, He 3)
gurmukh budhay kaday naahee jin"aa antar surat gi-aan.
The Gurmukhs never grow old; within them is intuitive understanding and spiritual wisdom.
Re Ae dfs Te sels nists Aan fomre il 1418-7, Hea Sat 3 cia, He 3)
sadaa sadaa har gun raveh antar sahj Dhi-aan.
They chant the Praises of the Lord, forever and ever; deep within, they intuitively meditate on the Lord.
6fe net niéfe faa sofs ofe afs Sa AAS I (1418-7, HBx eat 3 ecita, He 3)
o-ay sadaa anand bibayk raheh dukh sukh ayk samaan.
They dwell forever in blissful knowledge of the Lord; they look upon pain and pleasure as one and the same.
fSar oedt feat urfeur Ag nITSH TH UES ISI (1418-8, Ha eat 3 |e, He 3) tinaa nadree iko aa-i-aa sabh aatam raam pachhaan. ||44|| They see the One Lord in all, and realize the Lord, the Supreme Soul of all. ||44]|
Hoy wea frefa marie o faa nists ofs nafs art il (1418-9, Hea eat 3 cia, He 3) manmukh baalak biraDh samaan hai jin"aa antar har surat naahee.
The self-willed manmukhs are like stupid children; they do not keep the Lord in their thoughts.
fefs JGH AdH anee AS UGH TE a Ait I (1418-9, Ha eat S ecita, He 3)
vich ha-umai karam kamaavday sabh Dharam raa-ay kai jaa“hee.
They do all their deeds in egotism, and they must answer to the Righteous Judge of Dharma.
aenfy ve fasns ad a Aafe Wate Il (1418-10, Aa eet 3 eta, He 3) gurmukh hachhay nirmalay gur kai sabad subhaa-ay.
The Gurmukhs are good and immaculately pure; they are embellished and exalted with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Gat HS usa 3 wae fa vote Afsag SE I 1418-10, H8a eet 3 |cia, He 3)
onaa mail patang na lag-ee je chalan satgur bhaa-ay.
Not even a tiny bit of filth sticks to them; they walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
Hou afs 3 Cad AAG dee Ute II (4is-11, HBa est 3 Etta, He 3) manmukh jooth na utrai jay sa-o Dhovan paa-ay. The filth of the manmukhs is not washed away, even if they wash hundreds of times.
Soa TeHfy Hons ae a nif ATE iigull 418-11, Hea eat 3 ecita, ve 3) naanak gurmukh mayli-an gur kai ank samaa-ay. ||45]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are united with the Lord; they merge into the Guru's Being. [145]
aT ad AAT FAS Il (1418-12, A8a eet 3 eta, He 3) buraa karay so kayhaa sijhai. How can someone do bad things, and still live with himself?
witue dfo wm dt es Il 418-12, ABa eet 3 eta, He 3) aapnai rohi aapay hee dajhai. By his own anger, he only burns himself.
HOHfe AHS Jas BS Il (1418-12, Ha erat 3 |e, ne 3) manmukh kamlaa ragrhai lujhai. The self-willed manmukh drives himself crazy with worries and stubborn struggles.
aenty of fsa vs fae AS Il (1418-13, Hea est F ecita, He 3) gurmukh ho-ay tis sabh kichh sujhai. But those who become Gurmukh understand everything.
Soa TeHfy Ho fAG BS sell 1418-13, Aa eet 3 ecia, He 3) naanak gurmukh man si-o lujhai. ||46|| O Nanak, the Gurmukh struggles with his own mind. ||46]|
faa Afsag usy o AfeG Aafe o aS Steg Il (418-13, ABA Sat 3 aca, He 3)
jinaa satgur purakh na sayvi-o sabad na keeto veechaar.
Those who do not serve the True Guru, the Primal Being, and do not reflect upon the Word of the Shabad
Gfe Hen afs o nrdinis uA Sa WEST Il (1418-14, HSA erst 3 eta, we 3) O-ay Maanas joon na aakhee-an pasoo dhor gaavaar. - do not call them human beings; they are just animals and stupid beasts.
Gor nists famre 3 fomrg 3 of AG Utfs o fimrg I (i4is-14, HBa est 3 ecia, He 3) onaa antar gi-aan na Dhi-aan hai har sa-o pareet na pi-aar.
They have no spiritual wisdom or meditation within their beings; they are not in love with the Lord.
HoHy He fears ufo ufs AHfs Ss SMS Il (1418-15, Ha eat S ecita, He 3)
manmukh mu-ay vikaar meh mar jameh vaaro vaar.
The self-willed manmukhs die in evil and corruption; they die and are reborn, again and again.
Hiefeur 3 fxs A dive afs wares Co whe II (1418-16, Ha Set 3 eta, He 3) jeevdi-aa no milai so jeevday har jagjeevan ur Dhaar.
They alone live, who join with the living; enshrine the Lord, the Lord of Life, within your heart.
Soa TdHfy Ave fos Ae veafe ISI (1418-16, Ha eat 3 ecita, He 3) naanak gurmukh sohnay tit sachai darbaar. ||47]|| O Nanak, the Gurmukhs look beautiful in that Court of the True Lord. ||47] |
dfs Hea ofs Afar ofs ZA fam ots I 1418-17, Hea Sat 3 eta, He 3) har mandar har saaji-aa har vasai jis naal. The Lord built the Harimandir, the Temple of the Lord; the Lord dwells within it.
TIHst ofa ufsor afer vo usATs I (1418-17, Ba eet 3 eta, He 3)
gurmatee har paa-i-aa maa-i-aa moh parjaal.
Following the Guru's Teachings, I have found the Lord; my emotional attachment to Maya has been burnt away.
dfs Hefs SAS nida 3 de fof aH ATS I (1418-18, Ha eat 3 Ect, ne 3)
har mandar vasat anayk hai nav niDh naam samaal.
Countless things are in the Harimandir, the Temple of the Lord; contemplate the Naam, and the nine treasures will be yours.
US Sdest aoa frat qaHfe wor afe ahs Il (i4is-18, HBA eat 3 ita, He 3) Dhan bhagvantee naankaa jinaa gurmukh laDhaa har bhaal.
Blessed is that happy soul-bride, O Nanak, who, as Gurmukh, seeks and finds the Lord.
soot as Hes Ufaor ofe fose ufeor as sci (1418-19, Hea eat 3 ecita, ve 3) vadbhaagee garh mandar khoji-aa har hirdai paa-i-aa naal. ||48]|
By great good fortune, one searches the temple of the body-fortress, and finds the Lord within the heart. ||48] |
HoH vd feta fefs ao ifs foro Se fears Il 1418-19, Hea Set 3 ecia, He 3) manmukh dah dis fir rahay at tisnaa lobh vikaar.
The self-willed manmukhs wander lost in the ten directions, led by intense desire, greed and corruption.
ar ava
wheor Hg 3 gaet fs HHfs STs Se Il (1419-1, H8a erat 3 ect, v2 3)
maa-i-aa moh na chuk-ee mar jameh vaaro vaar.
Their attachment to Maya does not cease; they die, only to be reborn, over and over again.
Afsag Afe AY ufeur nifs fsAar sfa fears Il (1419-1, HBax erat 3 Etita, He 3) satgur sayv sukh paa-i-aa at tisnaa taj vikaar. Serving the True Guru, peace is found; intense desire and corruption are discarded.
HOH HIS At SY Ment AS Boa Ade stats iSstil (1419-2, naa erat 3 edie, ns 3) janam maran kaa dukh ga-i-aa jan naanak sabad beechaar. ||49||
The pains of death and birth are taken away; servant Nanak reflects upon the Word of the Shabad. ||49]|
ofa of an fourfe Ho fs aaa wets HS Il (1419-2, Aaa eat S ecita, He 3)
har har naam Dhi-aa-ay man har dargeh paavahi maan.
Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O mortal being, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
faofed uu Afs admnfo GH Ya MTG Il (1419-3, HSa Sat F ect, we 3)
kilvikh paap sabh katee-ah ha-umai chukai gumaan.
All your sins and terrible mistakes shall be taken away, and you shall be rid of your pride and egotism.
TaHfy ane feat AF MSH YH UES Il (1419-4, HBa eat 3 euita, vs 3) gurmukh kamal vigsi-aa sabh aatam barahm pachhaan. The heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth, realizing God, the Soul of all.
dfs ofs fasur of ys AS Soa Af dfs SH MUON (1419-4, HBa erst F eth, Hs 3)
har har kirpaa Dhaar parabh jan naanak jap har naam. ||50] |
O Lord God, please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, that he may chant the Name of the Lord. ||50]|
UsAd Gsest Webt set at Afsarg at ars SHAE I (1419-5, HBa Tat S eta, He 3) Dhanaasree Dhanvantee jaanee-ai bhaa-ee jaa‘ satgur kee kaar kamaa-ay.
In Dhanaasaree, the soul-bride is known to be wealthy, O Siblings of Destiny, when she works for the True Guru.
36 HO ACY Abt AG set we Jath fer? il (1419-5, H&a erat 3 ecita, He 3)
tan man sa-upay jee-a sa-o bhaa-ee la-ay hukam firaa-o.
She surrenders her body, mind and soul, O Siblings of Destiny, and lives according to the Hukam of His Command.
Ad Srefe sng set wo Safa 3g WE Il (1419-6, Hoa eat 3 eta, ne 3) jah baisaaveh baisah bhaa-ee jah bhayjeh tah jaa-o. I sit where He wishes me to sit, O Siblings of Destiny; wherever He sends me, I go.
Ses US dd a Odt TH AST AT oS Il (1419-6, H8a Set 3 etia, He 3)
ayvad Dhan hor ko nahee bhaa-ee jayvad sachaa naa-o.
There is no other wealth as great, O Siblings of Destiny; such is the greatness of the True Name.
Hel Ae A Te Wet ove} Het AS a Afar TIS Il (1419-7, HBa eat 3 |cita, ne 3)
sadaa sachay kay gun gaavaa™ bhaa-ee sadaa sachay kai sang rahaa-o. I sing forever the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; I shall remain with the True One forever.
Use Te sfamreior set nruet ufS & AE wmy ute | (1419-7, Aaa eat 3 ecita, ve 3) painan gun chang-aa-ee-aa bhaa-ee aapnee pat kay saad aapay khaa-ay.
So wear the clothes of His Glorious Virtues and goodness, O Siblings of Destiny; eat and enjoy the flavor of your own honor.
fSA at foot rreardhba set vane aG fs Ate I (1419-8, n8a eet 3 etia, He 3)
tis kaa ki-aa salaahee-ai bhaa-ee darsan ka-o bal jaa-ay.
How can I praise Him, O Siblings of Destiny? I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Afsas fetes stor efsureinn aret aafht fs St urf& i 419-9, HBa eat 3 etita, He 3) satgur vich vadee-aa vadi-aa-ee-aa bhaa-ee karam milai taa‘ paa-ay.
Great is the Glorious Greatness of the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny; if one is blessed with good karma, He is found.
fefa gan vfs o Aredt svet en ofS feate il (1419-9, nBa eat 3 eta, Hs 3)
ik hukam man na jaannee bhaa-ee doojai bhaa-ay firaa-ay.
Some do not know how to submit to the Hukam of His Command, O Siblings of Destiny; they wander around lost in the love of duality.
Hafs det o fees aret anf fies o aS il (1419-10, Ba erat 3 |cia, He 3)
sangat dho-ee naa milai bhaa-ee baisan milai na thaa-o.
They find no place of rest in the Sangat, O Siblings of Destiny; they find no place to Sit.
Soa Jan fsa" Hotent set faa us arfenr ar Il (1419-10, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 3) naanak hukam tinaa manaa-isee bhaa-ee jinaa Dhuray kamaa-i-aa naa-o.
Nanak: they alone submit to His Command, O Siblings of Destiny, who are pre- destined to live the Name.
faq feeg 38 afur aret fo0 a@ Ae afeaod WE NUN (1419-11, Ha eat 3 ecita, He 3) tin" vitahu ha-o vaari-aa bhaa-ee tin ka-o sad balihaarai jaa-o. ||51]| I am a Sacrifice to them, O Siblings of Destiny, I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||51]|
A asiot Asbo fa aa saat walle il (1419-12, wBa erat 3 ecita, ne 3) say daarhee-aa™ sachee-aa je gur charnee laga‘ni". Those beards are true, which brush the feet of the True Guru.
notes Aefs ag nua niofes mate gifs il (1419-12, nex erat 3 ecita, ne 3) an-din sayvan gur aapnaa an-din anad raha“ni". Those who serve their Guru night and day, live in bliss, night and day.
Sea A Hd Ade Ad efe ferfs wu (1419-13, wBa erat 3 ecita, ue 3) naanak say muh sohnay sachai dar disa“ni®. ||52|| O Nanak, their faces appear beautiful in the Court of the True Lord. ||52||
HY Ad AY oS Ag safs AG anf Il (1419-13, Ha Set 3 eta, He 3) mukh sachay sach daarhee-aa sach boleh sach kamaahi.
True are the faces and true are the beards, of those who speak the Truth and live the Truth.
He Aad Hie efAor Afsas yifs ANT II (1419-14, H8a erat 3 ecita, He 3)
sachaa sabad man vasi-aa satgur maa‘hi samaa‘hi.
The True Word of the Shabad abides in their minds; they are absorbed in the True Guru.
Het SA AY US Bsn uest uifs il (1419-14, ABa eat 3 ecie, ns 3)
sachee raasee sach Dhan utam padvee paa‘hi.
True is their capital, and true is their wealth; they are blessed with the ultimate status.
Ay Hate Ag nfs Sf At ara ats I (1419-15, HBa eat S ecita, He 3) sach suneh sach man lain sachee kaar kamaahi. They hear the Truth, they believe in the Truth; they act and work in the Truth.
Het wadd SH AS Hs AS I (1419-15, Aaa eat 3 ecita, ve 3) sachee dargeh baisnaa sachay maahi samaahi.
They are given a place in the Court of the True Lord; they are absorbed in the True Lord.
aod fee Afsas Ay 5 Usb HOH 3S AT WUBI (1419-16, HBA est 3 eta, He 3) naanak vin satgur sach na paa-ee-ai manmukh bhoolay jaa“hi. ||53]|
O Nanak, without the True Guru, the True Lord is not found. The self-willed manmukhs leave, wandering around lost. ||53]||
mato fy ye ad Aafafa yn fimrfa II (1419-16, Bax eat 3 eta, Hs 3)
baabeehaa pari-o pari-o karay jalniDh paraym pi-aar.
The rainbird cries, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" She is in love with the treasure, the water.
ad fs Hise AS ufenr vfs wu foerseTgy il (1419-17, Ha eat 3 ecita, He 3)
gur milay seetal jal paa-i-aa sabh dookh nivaaranhaar.
Meeting with the Guru, the cooling, soothing water is obtained, and all pain is taken away.
SA Ya ATA Gu Ya Ta USS Il (1419-17, HSA erat 3 eta, we 3)
tis chukai sahj oopjai chukai kook pukaar.
My thirst has been quenched, and intuitive peace and poise have welled up; my cries and screams of anguish are past.
Soa Tent vfs df on sug fs wie usil (419-18, Hea eat 3 eta, ne 3) naanak gurmukh saa“t ho-ay naam rakhahu ur Dhaar. ||54]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are peaceful and tranquil; they enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within their hearts. ||54]|
wate J Ag ue Ad AS fee Oe I (1419-18, Ba Sst 3 Scie, He 3) baabeehaa too” sach cha-o sachay sa-o liv laa-ay. O rainbird, chirp the True Name, and let yourself be attuned to the True Lord.
Sfouor sa afte ue qenfa of mete Il (1419-19, na eet 3 etia, He 3) boli-aa tayraa thaa-ay pavai gurmukh ho-ay alaa-ay. Your word shall be accepted and approved, if you speak as Gurmukh.
Rag difs fou Gad Hfs & gate I 1419-19, n8a est 3 etia, He 3) sabad cheen tikh utrai man lai rajaa-ay.
Remember the Shabad, and your thirst shall be relieved; surrender to the Will of the Lord.
UST ABO
Ts Ast Sfx ZINE Fe us Alt ASTES I (1420-1, wBa erat 3 cay, we 3)
chaaray kundaa jhok varasdaa boond pavai sahj subhaa-ay.
The clouds are heavy, hanging low, and the rain is pouring down on all sides; the rain-drop is received, with natural ease.
We dt 3 AS Cun fag we fier & AE It (1420-1, HBa est 3 etia, He 3) jal hee tay sabh oopjai bin jal pi-aas na jaa-ay. From water, everything is produced; without water, thirst is not quenched.
aoe ole AS fats uler SA su o wat orfS wuail 0420-2, waa erat 3 ecta, we 3) naanak har jal jin pee-aa tis bhookh na laagai aa-ay. ||55||
O Nanak, whoever drinks in the Water of the Lord, shall never feel hunger again. [|55]|
wate 3 Hof af AS Hate ASS il (1420-2, wBa erat 3 ecia, we 3) baabeehaa too™ sahj bol sachai sabad subhaa-ay. O rainbird, speak the Shabad, the True Word of God, with natural peace and poise.
AS fae 39 ofe 3 Afsate dior feenfe Il 1420-3, naa eat 3 etia, He 3) sabh kichh tayrai naal hai satgur dee-aa dikhaa-ay. Everything is with you; the True Guru will show you this.
nity ustefa UISH fe Zor sees OE Il (1420-3, HBA eat 3 ecia, He 3)
aap pachhaaneh pareetam milai vuthaa chhahbar laa-ay.
So understand your own self, and meet your Beloved; His Grace shall rain down in torrents.
fSfi fet nifgs sane fare gu AS ATE II 1420-4, Hea erat 3 ecia, Hs 3)
jhim jhim amrit varasdaa tisnaa bhukh sabh jaa-ay.
Drop by drop, the Ambrosial Nectar rains down softly and gently; thirst and hunger are completely gone.
Ta USS o Jeet St ALS foots i 1420-4, wSa erat 3 ecita, we 3) kook pukaar na hova-ee jotee jot milaa-ay. Your cries and screams of anguish have ceased; your light shall merge into the Light.
soa Afy Hef Aoaet Ad of ANTE NUEN (1420-5, HBa erat 3 ecita, He 3)
naanak sukh savni" sohaaganee sachai naam samaa-ay. ||56]|
O Nanak, the happy soul-brides sleep in peace; they are absorbed in the True Name. ||56]|
Usd uAfy Sfaor AS Jat uSTte Il (1420-5, H8a eet 3 etia, He 3) Dharahu khasam bhayji-aa sachai hukam pathaa-ay. The Primal Lord and Master has sent out the True Hukam of His Command.
fee san efenr afe gat soa BLE il (1420-5, wBa erat 3 eciter, Hs 3) ind varsai da-i-aa kar goorh"ee chhahbar laa-ay. Indra mercifully sends forth the rain, which falls in torrents.
wate sf xfs AY af at sg de yfs ute it (1420-6, n&a erat 3 ecta, He 3) baabeehay tan man sukh ho-ay jaa™ tat boond muhi paa-ay.
The body and mind of the rainbird are happy. only when the rain-drop falls into its mouth.
Mg US sds Cun dest Hat ute | (1420-6, H&a erat 3S ett, He 3) an Dhan bahutaa upjai Dhartee sobhaa paa-ay. The corn grows high, wealth increases, and the earth is embellished with beauty.
Wofes SA safs ad Td a Aste AME I (1420-7, H8a Set 3 eta, He 3)
an-din lok bhagat karay gur kai sabad samaa-ay.
Night and day, people worship the Lord with devotion, and are absorbed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
nm Ae auth we ate faut ad TATE Il (1420-7, A8a Set 3 eta, He 3) aapay sachaa bakhas la-ay kar kirpaa karai rajaa-ay.
The True Lord Himself forgives them, and showering them with His Mercy, He leads them to walk in His Will.
dfs TE Weg aHat AY Aafe ANE | (1420-8, HBx erat 3 |ciia, ne 3) har gun gaavhu kaamnee sachai sabad samaa-ay.
O brides, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and be absorbed in the True Word of His Shabad.
3 oa Hod Aterg afeg Afe dog foe we Il 1420-8, HBax eet 3 ata, He 3) bhai kaa sahj seegaar karihu sach rahhu liv laa-ay. Let the Fear of God be your decoration, and remain lovingly attuned to the True Lord.
Sa OH Hfs SA dfs eae BE sate UI (1420-9, Aaa erat 3 ecita, Hs 3) naanak naamo man vasai har dargeh la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||57| |
O Nanak, the Naam abides in the mind, and the mortal is saved in the Court of the Lord. ||57]|
aedto Aaet dest A fests Sis vata wrote il (1420-9, H8a eat 3 ect, nH 3)
baabeehaa saglee Dhartee jay fireh ood charheh aakaas. The rainbird wanders all over the earth, soaring high through the skies.
Afsats fifemt we uréba got su fmm Il (1420-10, Hae erst 3 eta, He 3)
satgur mili-ai jal paa-ee-ai chookai bhookh pi-aas.
But it obtains the drop of water, only when it meets the True Guru, and then, its hunger and thirst are relieved.
m@ fils As fan oa AS fae fA & uF II 1420-10, H8a Set 3 ETha, He 3) jee-o pind sabh tis kaa sabh kichh tis kai paas. Soul and body and all belong to Him; everything is His.
fee Sfomr vs fas weer fan vid ate nett il 1420-11, Hea eet 3 eta, He 3) vin boli-aa sabh kichh jaandaa kis aagai keechai ardaas. He knows everything, without being told; unto whom should we offer our prayers?
sod ufe ufe Sa Taser Hafe AT UPA UCI (1420-12, Hea eat 3 ecita, He 3)
naanak ghat ghat ayko varatdaa sabad karay pargaas. ||58] |
O Nanak, the One Lord is prevading and permeating each and every heart; the Word of the Shabad brings illumination. ||58] |
Sod fSA SHS Jd fa Afsag Afe ATE Il (1420-12, Hea Set 3 |cita, v2 3) naanak tisai basant hai je satgur sayv samaa-ay. O Nanak, the season of spring comes to one who serves the True Guru.
dfs ZS" HS 3O AT UdeSs AS Aa Idee SE util (1420-13, nea eat 3 ecita, we 3) har vuthaa man tan sabh parfarhai sabh jag haree-aaval ho-ay. ||59] |
The Lord rains His Mercy down upon him, and his mind and body totally blossom forth; the entire world becomes green and rejuvenated. ||59]|
Hae Het eHs o fas So HO foo SE lt (1420-13, Aaa eat 3 aca, ni: 3) sabday sadaa basant hai jit tan man hari-aa ho-ay. The Word of the Shabad brings eternal spring; it rejuvenates the mind and body.
Soa OTH © Sind fats fafoor As afe NEON (1420-14, Fax eat F eta, H: 3) naanak naam na veesrai jin siri-aa sabh ko-ay. ||60]|
O Nanak, do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, which has created everyone. ||60]|
Sod fSar sHs J frat aeHfa efhor nfs AE I 1420-14, Hea Set 3 ecite, He 3) naanak tinaa basant hai jinaa gurmukh vasi-aa man so-ay.
O Nanak, it is the spring season, for those Gurmukhs, within whose minds the Lord abides.
dfs FS HS 3o Uses AS Ha Sfonr SE NEU (1420-15, ABa erat 3 |cita, ne 3)
har vuthai man tan parfarhai sabh jag hari-aa ho-ay. ||61] |
When the Lord showers His Mercy, the mind and body blossom forth, and all the world turns green and lush. ||61]||
@ss Shs 3Gs8 Seat web for Il 1420-15, A8a Set 3 eta, He 3) vadrhai jhaal jhalumbhlai naavrhaa la-ee-ai kis. In the early hours of the morning, whose name should we chant?
oe web USHA SoS WHE AHA NEMl (1420-16, H8a erst 3 etita, ve 3) naa-o la-ee-ai parmaysrai bhannan gharhan samrath. ||62||
Chant the Name of the Transcendent Lord, who is All-powerful to create and destroy. ||62]|
TIVE StF F aate sala sot ITE I (1420-16, Ha eet 3 echa, we 3)
harhat bhee too™ too” karahi boleh bhalee baan.
The Persian wheel also cries out, "Too! Too! You! You!", with sweet and sublime sounds.
Afog Ae Jefe F faor Sut aafa yas il 1420-17, ABA sat 3 etter, Hs 3)
saahib sadaa hadoor hai ki-aa uchee karahi pukaar.
Our Lord and Master is always present; why do you cry out to Him in such a loud voice?
fafs nas Gurfe ofs da aor fSA feed AgaE Il (1420-17, H8a Sst 3 ecia, He 3) jin jagat upaa-ay har rang kee-aa tisai vitahu kurbaan. I am a Sacrifice to that Lord who created the world, and who loves it.
ny dats st Ag feo Ae Sy Ses Il (1420-18, Hoa eat 3 ecita, ne 3) aap chhodeh taa™ saho milai sachaa ayhu veechaar.
Give up your selfishness, and then you shall meet your Husband Lord. Consider this Truth.
ICH feat dwar afs B Aa ATS Il (1420-18, HSA Set 3 ecia, He 3)
ha-umai fikaa bolnaa bujh na sakaa kaar. Speaking in shallow egotism, no one understands the Ways of God.
ze fas fgaee 33 fomrfee nofes Ae feos Il (1420-19, HBax erat 3 etia, He 3)
van tarin taribhavan tujhai Dhi-aa-idaa an-din sadaa vihaan.
The forests and fields, and all the three worlds meditate on You, O Lord; this is the way they pass their days and nights forever.
faa Afsad fas o ufeor af afe aa Stars I (1420-19, Ha erat 3 ecita, ne 3)
bin satgur kinai na paa-i-aa kar kar thakay veechaar.
Without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord. People have grown weary of thinking about it.
UST 982Q Sefg ad A niTuat st wm Sf Aes I (1421-1, Ha erat 3 etia, we 3)
nadar karahi jay aapnee taa™ aapay laihi savaar. But if the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then He Himself embellishes us.
Soa TIHfe frat fimrfeur mre A ugsE ESI (1421-1, HSa sat 3 eee, we 3)
naanak gurmukh jin"ee Dhi-aa-i-aa aa-ay say parvaan. ||63]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Lord; blessed and approved is their coming into the world. ||63]|
Ad 3 Sdet Gust Aa SHS SH Il (1421-2, A8a eet 3 eta, He 3)
jog na bhagvee kaprhee jog na mailay vays.
Yoga is not obtained by wearing saffron robes; Yoga is not obtained by wearing dirty robes.
soa ufs afour da uha Afsae a Cueth iéeil 1421-2, nex eat 3 etic, ne 3) naanak ghar baithi-aa jog paa-ee-ai satgur kai updays. ||64]|
O Nanak, Yoga is obtained even while sitting in your own home, by following the Teachings of the True Guru. ||64||
wd a3 A 3efo Se uss Aa ote I (1421-3, Aaa eat 3 ecita, He 3) chaaray kundaa jay bhaveh bayd parheh jug chaar. You may wander in all four directions, and read the Vedas throughout the four ages.
Sod Ata se ofa Hie SA uefa HY Enis WEUll (1421-3, Ax erat 3 ect, ne 3) naanak saachaa bhaytai har man vasai paavahi mokh du-aar. ||65||
O Nanak, if you meet with the True Guru, the Lord shall come to dwell within your mind, and you shall find the door of salvation. ||65||
Sea JAH Zds WAH a fs set feats ve fas Il (1421-4, Hoa eat 3 etia, He 3)
naanak hukam vartai khasam kaa mat bhavee fireh chal chit.
O Nanak, the Hukam, the Command of your Lord and Master, is prevailing. The intellectually confused person wanders around lost, misled by his fickle consciousness.
HoHe AG afs est we fe vets fies I (1421-5, Hx erat 3 |cita, ne 3)
manmukh sa-o kar dostee sukh ke puchheh mit.
If you make friends with the self-willed manmukhs, O friend, who can you ask for peace?
qeny AG afs eAst Afsag AG ote fas it (1421-5, Hea Sat 3 eta, He 3) gurmukh sa-o kar dostee satgur sa-o laa-ay chit. Make friends with the Gurmukhs, and focus your consciousness on the True Guru.
HHE HIE TA HS AeA St AY Tet fs WEE (1421-6, Aaa erat 3 eciter, Hs 3) jaman maran kaa mool katee-ai taa’ sukh hovee mit. ||66]|
The root of birth and death will be cut away, and then, you shall find peace, O friend. ||66]|
stom urfy AHStTEAt AT aS Sela AP Il (1421-6, HBax erat 3 ecie, ns 3)
bhuli-aa‘ aap samjhaa-isee jaa ka-o nadar karay.
The Lord Himself instructs those who are misguided, when He casts His Glance of Grace.
Soa Sed Adt Ade UBT AP WED (1421-7, Asa sat 3S |cia, we 3)
naanak nadree baahree karan palaah karay. ||67|| O Nanak, those who are not blessed by His Glance of Grace, cry and weep and wail. [167]|
HBA HIS 8 (1421-8)
salok mehlaa 4 Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
qe Afsas ure il (1421-8)
ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
essdior Aaarat faa aenfe fier afe oe i 421-9, na est 3 ecia, He 4) vadbhaagee-aa sohaaganee jin"aa gurmukh mili-aa har raa-ay.
Blessed and very fortunate are those happy soul-brides who, as Gurmukh, meet their Sovereign Lord King.
nists fs userAion atoa of ANTE WAN (1421-9, HBax eet F ecita, He 4)
antar jot pargaasee-aa naanak naam samaa-ay. ||1||
The Light of God shines within them; O Nanak, they are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. |]1]|
ag ag Afsag use Jd fafs Ag AST APE I (1421-10, H&a eat 3 eta, He 4)
vaahu vaahu satgur purakh hai jin sach jaataa so-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, the Primal Being, who has realized the True Lord.
fas fife four Bad 3q Ho Aise SE I (1421-10, Hea Sat 3 eta, He 4) jit mili-ai tikh utrai tan man seetal ho-ay. Meeting Him, thirst is quenched, and the body and mind are cooled and soothed.
ag ag Afsag Afs use Jd fan 6 ANS AS APE I (1421-11, H8a Set 3 ata, He 4)
vaahu vaahu satgur sat purakh hai jis no samat sabh ko-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, the True Primal Being, who looks upon all alike.
ag ag Afsag foses 3d fan foo Crate sfe df Wt (421-11, Rea eat 3S eta, He 4) vaahu vaahu satgur nirvair hai jis nindaa ustat tul ho-ay.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, who has no hatred; slander and praise are all the same to Him.
ag ag Afsag ane 3 fan nists yon Seg Il (1421-12, Ba est 3 cia, He 4) vaahu vaahu satgur sujaan hai jis antar barahm veechaar.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the All-knowing True Guru, who has realized God within.
ag ag Afsag fadarg o fAA MIS o USS Il (1421-12, Fa Sa Ss the, He 4)
vaahu vaahu satgur nirankaar hai jis ant na paaraavaar.
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the Formless True Guru, who has no end or limitation.
ag ag Afsag 3d fa Ag feare ALS II (1421-13, naa ert 3 eta, Hs 4) vaahu vaahu satguroo hai je sach drirh-aa-ay so-ay. Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, who implants the Truth within.
soa Afsad ag ag fan 3 oy uaafs SE NH (1421-13, Hea eat 3 ecia, He 4)
naanak satgur vaahu vaahu jis tay naam paraapat ho-ay. ||2||
O Nanak, Blessed and Great is the True Guru, through whom the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is received. ||2]|
dfs ys Aa Afser qoute om afe (1421-14, Ava erat 3 ecia, He 4) har parabh sachaa sohilaa gurmukh naam govind. For the Gurmukh, the true Song of Praise is to chant the Name of the Lord God.
mofes oH Heder ofa Afumr yfs mrss Il (1421-15, Aaa Set 3 etite, He 4) an-din naam salaahnaa har japi-aa man aanand. Chanting the Praises of the Lord, their minds are in ecstasy.
soa Sts ufsor yIsS USHSET Il (1421-15, HSa erat S ecar, He 4) vadbhaagee har paa-i-aa pooran parmaanand. By great good fortune, they find the Lord, the Embodiment of perfect, supreme bliss.
Hs SSea oH Hefour gots o Hfs 3fe Sa Wl (1421-16, ABA eet 3 eta, He 4)
jan naanak naam sahaali-aa bahurh na man tan bhang. ||3]|
Servant Nanak praises the Naam, the Name of the Lord; no obstacle will block his mind or body. ||3]||
4 fudor Ag 3g fae ARE fleets fumrfoor i (421-16, Hea erat 3 ecita, He 4) moo” piree-aa sa-o nayhu ki-o sajan mileh pi-aari-aa. I am in love with my Beloved; how can I meet my Dear Friend?
UG geet fa AAS Af AS Il (1421-17, HBa erat 3 ecia, He 4) ha-o dhoodhaydee tin sajan sach savaari-aa. I seek that friend, who is embellished with Truth.
Afsag Ht fs 3 A fhe 3 feg He Stor It 1421-17, Awa eet 3 ata, He 4) satgur maidaa mit hai jay milai ta ih man vaari-aa. The True Guru is my Friend; if I meet Him, I will offer this mind as a sacrifice to Him.
veo Hf fug off ofs Ane froneafonr | (1421-18, naa erat 3 ett, Hs 4) day“daa moo” pir das har sajan sirjanhaari-aa. He has shown me my Beloved Lord, my Friend, the Creator.
aoa JC fug sot mua Afsaad ate feafemr ell (1421-18, Hea eat S cia, He 4) naanak ha-o pir bhaalee aapnaa satgur naal dikhaali-aa. ||4| |
O Nanak, I was searching for my Beloved; the True Guru has shown me that He has been with me all the time. ||4||
wg ust forst ug Hs HAMS TSS Il (1421-19, HBA erat 3 Scie, Hs 4)
ha-o kharhee nihaalee panDh mat moo" sajan aav-ay.
I stand by the side of the road, waiting for You; O my Friend, I hope that You will come.
a orfs feos wig Hf fug Af fkoree I (1421-19, Bx erat 3 ect, He 4) ko aan milaavai aj mai pir mayl milaava-ay. If only someone would come today and unite me in Union with my Beloved.
Usk A22 JG HG act fon fees BS Usha FH fudt fess I (1422-1, Hoa Sat 3 eta, He 4)
ha-o jee-o karee tis vita-o cha-o khannee-ai jo mai piree dikhaava-ay. I would cut my living body into four pieces for anyone who shows me my Beloved.
area ofa ofe efenrgs St TT ust ASS UI (1422-1, ABA erat 3 ecia, ws 4)
naanak har ho-ay da-i-aal taaY gur pooraa maylaava-ay. ||5||
O Nanak, when the Lord becomes merciful, then He leads us to meet the Perfect Guru. ||5||
nists Ag ICH sis wfenr gat mre ATE I 1422-2, ra erat 3 ecite, ws 4)
antar jor ha-umai tan maa-i-aa koorhee aavai jaa-ay.
The power of egotism prevails within, and the body is controlled by Maya; the false ones come and go in reincarnation.
Afsag a gantfeur rife 3 Anat esd sfoor o ATE II 1422-2, Hea eat 3 aria, ne 4) satgur kaa furmaa-i-aa man na sakee dutar tari-aa na jaa-ay.
If someone does not obey the Command of the True Guru, he cannot cross over the treacherous world-ocean.
Sef ad fra ymuat AVS Afsag SE Il 1422-3, A8a Set 3 etia, He 4)
nadar karay jis aapnee so chalai satgur bhaa-ay.
Whoever is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace, walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.
Afsag a eanS AES Jd A fee A Sw ute Il (1422-4, H8a Set 3 eta, He 4)
satgur kaa darsan safal hai jo ichhai so fal paa-ay.
The Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan is fruitful; through it, one obtains the fruits of his desires.
frat Afsag Hfont 38 fee a war ute it 1422-4, H8a eat 3 ecia, ne 4) jinee satgur manni-aa™ ha-o tin kay laaga-o paa-ay. I touch the feet of those who believe in and obey the True Guru.
Sod Stat aA dD fa males ad fee ote Nel 1422-5, HBa eet 3 ecita, He 4) naanak taa kaa daas hai je an-din rahai liv laa-ay. ||6||
Nanak is the slave of those who, night and day, remain lovingly attuned to the Lord. [16] |
fro fudt fimrg fae vane faS feushe it 1422-5, nea erat 3 ect, Hs 4)
jinaa piree pi-aar bin darsan ki-o taripat-ee-ai.
Those who are in love with their Beloved - how can they find satisfaction without His Darshan?
Sod fes Hote qonfu feg He Tart NDI (1422-6, aa Sat F ethe, He 4) naanak milay subhaa-ay gurmukh ih man rehsee-ai. ||7||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meet Him with ease, and this mind blossoms forth in joy. HI7II
frat fudt flmrg faS Alefe furs aad i (1422-6, HBa erat 3 ete, He 4) jinaa piree pi-aar ki-o jeevan pir baahray. Those who are in love with their Beloved - how can they live without Him?
At Ag uf wmyar ota alate St Ig ICI (1422-7, Aaa erat 3 cite, He 4) jaa‘ saho daykhan aapnaa naanak theevan bhee haray. ||8|| When they see their Husband Lord, O Nanak, they are rejuvenated. ||8]|
frat aenfe niefs 3g 3 UtSsH AS ofemr I (1422-7, Ha eet 3 ecita, He 4) jinaa gurmukh andar nayhu tai pareetam sachai laa-i-aa. Those Gurmukhs who are filled with love for You, my True Beloved,
Tat ms 3g Sa Uf Afr WEN 1422-8, HBA erat 3 |cite, He 4) raatee atai dayhu naanak paraym samaa-i-aa. ||9] | O Nanak, remain immersed in the Lord's Love, night and day. ||9] |
Tafa Ast wrt fas UlsH Aer ure i (1422-8, wBa erat 3 ecia, He 4) gurmukh sachee aaskee jit pareetam sachaa paa-ee-ai. The love of the Gurmukh is true; through it, the True Beloved is attained.
wofes dats nSfe Soa Hof AHEM INAON (1422-9, Hea eat 3 etita, He 4) an-din raheh anand naanak sahj samaa-ee-ai. ||10] | Night and day, remain in bliss, O Nanak, immersed in intuitive peace and poise. ||10||
Aa UH fimrg qa ys 3 urea I 1422-9, wSa erst 3 eta, oe 4) sachaa paraym pi-aar gur pooray tay paa-ee-ai. True love and affection are obtained from the Perfect Guru.
TAT 5 IS ST BSA Tis TE TEMA WAU (1422-10, wSa erat 3 etita, we 4) kabhoo na hovai bhang naanak har gun gaa-ee-ai. ||11|| They never break, O Nanak, if one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||11]|
faa viefs Het Sg fas rteta fist feafemr i 1422-10, ra erat 3 ect, us 4) jin"aa andar sachaa nayhu ki-o jeevni" piree vihooni-aa. How can those who have true love within them live without their Husband Lord?
aanfs AS orfu soa fact feefanr 19211 (1422-11, Ba erat F ecite, He 4)
gurmukh maylay aap naanak chiree vichhunni-aa. ||12]|
The Lord unites the Gurmukhs with Himself, O Nanak; they were separated from Him for such a long time. ||12]|
fe a@ YH fimrg 36 nmt afer aan ats Il (1422-11, ABa erat 3 eta, He 4) jin ka-o paraym pi-aar ta-o aapay laa-i-aa karam kar. You grant Your Grace to those whom You Yourself bless with love and affection.
Sot Sd feats 4 wafea tA oH ae ISI (1422-12, Fax eat 3 eta, He 4) naanak layho milaa-ay mai jaachik deejai naam har. ||13]|
O Lord, please let Nanak meet with You; please bless this beggar with Your Name. |13]|
qenfy dA Toufa FS il 1422-12, H8a Set 3 etita, He 4) gurmukh hasai gurmukh rovai. The Gurmukh laughs, and the Gurmukh cries.
fa aanfa ad vet safs Je i 1422-13, Hea eet 3 aca, nH: 4) je gurmukh karay saa-ee bhagat hovai. Whatever the Gurmukh does, is devotional worship.
aTenfy de A aS AST Il (1422-13, waa erat 3 aca, ne 4) gurmukh hovai so karay veechaar. Whoever becomes Gurmukh contemplates the Lord.
TINY SSA UTS UTTF NAVI (1422-13, ABa erat S ect, He 4) gurmukh naanak paavai paar. ||14]| The Gurmukh, O Nanak, crosses over to the other shore. ||14]|
faa niets oy fours od aearat Stora i 1422-14, nda Set 3 ata, nH: 4) jinaa andar naam niDhaan hai gurbaanee veechaar. Those who have the Naam within, contemplate the Word of the Guru's Bani.
fs5 a Hu Ae Cue fas AS veata Il (1422-14, Ada eat 3 ecia, He 4) tin kay mukh sad ujlay tit sachai darbaar. Their faces are always radiant in the Court of the True Lord.
fo sofenr Bofenr ae o fend fa orfu suA aastfe Il (1422-14, HBa eat 3 ecita, He 4) tin bahdi-aa uth-di-aa kaday na visrai je aap bakhsay kartaar. Sitting down and standing up, they never forget the Creator, who forgives them.
Soa Taf fee o feeats fa HS fAsHSTts WAU (1422-15, Aa erat 3 |cie, He 4) naanak gurmukh milay na vichhurheh je maylay sirjanhaar. ||15||
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are united with the Lord. Those united by the Creator Lord, shall never be separated again. ||15]|
ad utat at wadt Hot asst AY ATT Il (1422-16, Hea svat S ecita, He 4)
gur peeraa™ kee chaakree mahaa”™ karrhee sukh saar.
To work for the Guru, or a spiritual teacher, is terribly difficult, but it brings the most excellent peace.
Sets ad fAA rust fsH we Js fumrs Il (1422-16, H8a erat 3 Etia, He 4) nadar karay jis aapnee tis laa-ay hayt pi-aar. The Lord casts His Glance of Grace, and inspires love and affection.
Afsas at AS ofamr SCAG Sd AAT Il (1422-17, HBa Set 3 eth, He 4)
satgur kee sayvai lagi-aa bha-ojal tarai sansaar.
Joined to the service of the True Guru, the mortal being crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
Ho fefeur ae ufert nists fade shes il (1422-17, nBa eat 3 ecita, He 4) man chindi-aa fal paa-isee antar bibayk beechaar.
The fruits of the mind's desires are obtained, with clear contemplation and discriminating understanding within.
aoe Afsats fifemt ys ureha Ag gy feeseT eT NEI (1422-18, HBA erat 3 eciter, we 4) naanak satgur mili-ai parabh paa-ee-ai sabh dookh nivaaranhaar. ||16]|
O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, God is found; He is the Eradicator of all sorrow. ||16]|
HoH Ae A ad eH ate fas we i 1422-18, naa eat 3 eta, we 4)
manmukh sayvaa jo karay doojai bhaa-ay chit laa-ay.
The self-willed manmukh may perform service, but his consciousness is attached to the love of duality.
Us aes aca do Wife Ho Sate Il (1422-19, naa eat 3 eta, He 4) put kalat kutamb hai maa-i-aa moh vaDhaa-ay. Through Maya, his emotional attachment to children, spouse and relatives increases.
dats Sut Hath act nifs a Aat sate | (1422-19, nea eat 3 ecita, we 4)
dargahi laykhaa mangee-ai ko-ee ant na sakee chhadaa-ay.
He shall be called to account in the Court of the Lord, and in the end, no one will be able to save him.
Yat 9823
fag oe AS ey ST eueet Ho HE I (1423-1, naa Se 3 athe, He 4) bin naavai sabh dukh hai dukh-daa-ee moh maa-ay. Without the Lord's Name, all is pain. Attachment to Maya is agonizingly painful.
Soa TeHfa sedt orfeor Ha Hf feefs As ATE NII (1423-1, HBA Set 3 eta, He 4) naanak gurmukh nadree aa-i-aa moh maa-i-aa vichhurh sabh jaa-ay. ||17]|
O Nanak, the Gurmukh comes to see, that attachment to Maya separates all from the Lord. ||17]|
TaHfe IaH HS AT AT JAH Tt AY wes Il 1423-2, HBa eat 3 ecita, ns 4)
gurmukh hukam mannay sah kayraa hukmay hee sukh paa-ay.
The Gurmukh obeys the Order of her Husband Lord God; through the Hukam of His Command, she finds peace.
JAH AS JAH Mad JaH AH AWE Il (1423-3, Hea erat 3 eta, ne 4) hukmo sayvay hukam araaDhay hukmay samai samaa-ay. In His Will, she serves; in His Will, she worship and adores Him.
JAH VIZ 3H Av HAH Ho fSfent swe urs I (1423-3, AB erat 3 ect, He 4) hukam varat naym such sanjam man chindi-aa fal paa-ay.
In His Will, she merges in absorption. His Will is her fast, vow, purity and self- discipline; through it, she obtains the fruits of her mind's desires.
Re Aoife fa gan 3s Afsag AS fee we I (1423-3, Hoa eet 3 eta, He 4)
Sadaa suhaagan je hukmai bujhai satgur sayvai liv laa-ay.
She is always and forever the happy, pure soul-bride, who realizes His Will; she serves the True Guru, inspired by loving absorption.
aan faut ad faa Cuts fsor Jan we fee NACI (1423-4, Ha est 3 eta, He 4) naanak kirpaa karay jin oopar tinaa hukmay la-ay milaa-ay. ||18]|
O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, are merged and immersed in His Will. ||18]|
HoHfe Jan o 3S gust fas Jen AGH aM Il (1423-5, Raa Sai 3 ete, He 4) manmukh hukam na bujhay bapurhee nit ha-umai karam kamaa-ay.
The wretched, self-willed manmukhs do not realize His Will; they continually act in ego.
@dS OH AD AH UAT UNS SoH B AME Il (1423-5, Ha erat 3 ett, Hs 4)
varat naym such sanjam poojaa pakhand bharam na jaa-ay.
By ritualistic fasts, vows, purities, self-disciplines and worship ceremonies, they still cannot get rid of their hypocrisy and doubt.
wisdd AAG Hfeor vfs aa fas gASt ag Cave Il (1423-6, Hea Sei 3 etia, He 4) antrahu kusuDh maa-i-aa mohi bayDhay ji-o hastee chhaar udaa-ay.
Inwardly, they are impure, pierced through by attachment to Maya; they are like elephants, who throw dirt all over themselves right after their bath.
fafs Guré fSA 3 dats fae 3S fas we UTS II (1423-6, Hoa eat 3 |cita, He 4)
jin upaa-ay tisai na cheeteh bin chaytay ki-o sukh paa-ay.
They do not even think of the One who created them. Without thinking of Him, they cannot find peace.
aoa uslg aor ofs aes ote fetter THES AEN (1423-7, Fa eet 3 ecita, Hs 4) naanak parpanch kee-aa Dhur kartai poorab likhi-aa kamaa-ay. ||19] |
O Nanak, the Primal Creator has made the drama of the Universe; all act as they are pre-ordained. ||19]|
asHty ussts set Ho Hfout nisfes AS ATS AHS Il (1423-8, HBa erat 3 echt, He 4) gurmukh parteet bha-ee man maani-aa an-din sayvaa karat samaa-ay.
The Gurmukh has faith; his mind is contented and satisfied. Night and day, he serves the Lord, absorbed in Him.
nists Afsag Ts AS uA Afsas a VaR SH AS Me Il (1423-8, Sa erat 3 eta, we 4) antar satgur guroo sabh poojay satgur kaa daras daykhai sabh aa-ay.
The Guru, the True Guru, is within; all worship and adore Him. Everyone comes to see the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Hoba Afsas usH dtect fas fifeor fora gu AS ATE I (1423-9, Hoa eat 3 |cita, He 4) mannee-ai satgur param beechaaree jit mili-ai tisnaa bhukh sabh jaa-ay.
So believe in the True Guru, the supreme sublime Contemplator. Meeting with Him, hunger and thirst are completely relieved.
JG Ae Ae Sfsodt Te nus A Us AST Se flofe i 1423-10, n8a erat 3 ecita, He 4) ha-o sadaa sadaa balihaaree gur apunay jo parabh sachaa day-ay milaa-ay. I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, who leads me to meet the True Lord God.
Soa AIH ufeur faq AS A Ts Vaat Ba we i2oll (1423-10, naa sat F ete, He 4) naanak karam paa-i-aa tin sachaa jo gur charnee lagay aa-ay. ||20||
O Nanak, those who come and fall at the Feet of the Guru are blessed with the karma of Truth. ||20]|
fro fudur AG og A AME HOTS Il 1423-11, Hea Sat 3 etita, He 4)
jin piree-aa sa-o nayhu say sajan mai naal. That Beloved, with whom I am in love, that Friend of mine is with me.
wists sofa IG feat st forse sat AH QUI 1423-11, H8a Sat 3 |cita, He 4)
antar baahar ha-o firaa‘ bhee hirdai rakhaa samaal. ||21]|
I wander around inside and outside, but I always keep Him enshrined within my heart. [|21]|
frat fea ufo fea fafs fomrfemr Afsas AG fas ote Il (1423-12, H&a erat 3 Edita, He 4) jinaa ik man ik chit Dhi-aa-i-aa satgur sa-o chit laa-ay.
Those who meditate on the Lord single-mindedly, with one-pointed concentration, link their consciousness to the True Guru.
fae at eu su oGH es da afenr fageu se fee OE I 1423-13, Hea Sei 3 eta, He 4) tin kee dukh bhukh ha-umai vadaa rog ga-i-aa nirdokh bha-ay liv laa-ay.
They are rid of pain, hunger, and the great illness of egotism; lovingly attuned to the Lord, they become free of pain.
ae wets ge Guafe Te ufo AS ANTE I 1423-13, Hae Sat F ete, He 4)
gun gaavahi gun uchrahi gun meh savai samaa-ay.
They sing His Praises, and chant His Praises; in His Glorious Praises, they sleep in absorption.
ood Td ud 3 fer Hota fife ys wrf=S 122M 423-14, ABA eet 3 eta, He 4) naanak gur pooray tay paa-i-aa sahj mili-aa parabh aa-ay. ||22||
O Nanak, through the Perfect Guru, they come to meet God with intuitive peace and poise. ||22||
HoHfe ufenr Hg I ath o war fumrg i (1423-15, Ba eet 3 eta, we 4)
manmukh maa-i-aa moh hai naam na lagai pi-aar.
The self-willed manmukhs are emotionally attached to Maya; they are not in love with the Naam.
TT AHS AZ Aus fs AT wT Il (1423-15, wSa erat 3 ecita, we 4) koorh kamaavai koorh sanghrai koorh karai aahaar. They practice falsehood, gather falsehood, and eat the food of falsehood.
fag ufemr ug Af nafs nifs df As aT I (1423-15, HB Sat 3 |cita, He 4)
bikh maa-i-aa Dhan sanch mareh ant ho-ay sabh chhaar.
Gathering the poisonous wealth and property of Maya, they die; in the end, they are all reduced to ashes.
dH Us Afs HAH aate nists Ss fears Il (1423-16, Hoa eat S eta, He 4)
karam Dharam such sanjam karahi antar lobh vikaar.
They perform religious rituals of purity and self-discipline, but they are filled with greed, evil and corruption.
Sod Hote fa ane A ate o ue Baad SE yn Ql (1423-17, Ha eat 3 |e, He 4) naanak manmukh je kamaavai so thaa-ay na pavai dargeh ho-ay khu-aar. ||23]|
O Nanak, the actions of the self-willed manmukhs are not accepted; in the Court of the Lord, they are miserable. ||23]|
Rao wal fete A sor avet fas efhmr vfs wrfe I 0423-17, n&a eet 3 eta, He 4) sabhnaa raagaa" vich so bhalaa bhaa-ee jit vasi-aa man aa-ay.
Among all Ragas, that one is sublime, O Siblings of Destiny, by which the Lord comes to abide in the mind.
Td SE AS AY J AHS ad o ATE Il (1423-18, Hada Set S eta, He 4)
raag naad sabh sach hai keemat kahee na jaa-ay.
Those Ragas which are in the Sound-current of the Naad are totally true; their value cannot be expressed.
Ta ore aoe fest Jou 3 gfsor ATS il (1423-18, ABs erst 3 ett, oe 4)
raagai naadai baahraa inee hukam na boojhi-aa jaa-ay.
Those Ragas which are not in the Sound-current of the Naad - by these, the Lord's Will cannot be understood.
aed IaH es fsor ata af Afsas 3 ASt UTE II (1423-19, Ha erat 3 eciter, He 4) naanak hukmai boojhai tinaa raas ho-ay satgur tay sojhee paa-ay.
O Nanak, they alone are right, who understand the Will of the True Guru.
AS fae fon 3 dfeor fa@ fSA ct arte ie (1423-19, H8a eet 3 ecita, He 4)
sabh kichh tis tay ho-i-aa ji-o tisai dee rajaa-ay. ||24]| Everything happens as He wills. ||24||
UST 982s
Afsasa fefs nifgs on 3 nifigs ad aafe i (1404-1, Ba erat 3 edie, us 4) satgur vich amrit naam hai amrit kahai kahaa-ay. The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within the True Guru.
TIHst oH fens faans oH fowrfe il (1424-2, naa sai 3 eta, He 4)
gurmatee naam nirmalo nirmal naam Dhi-aa-ay.
Following the Guru's Teachings, one meditates on the Immaculate Naam, the Pure and Holy Naam.
nifys wat 33 0 Toute SA fe orfe th 1424-2, nBa eat 3 ecita, He 4)
amrit banee tat hai gurmukh vasai man aa-ay.
The Ambrosial Word of His Bani is the true essence. It comes to abide in the mind of the Gurmukh.
fase aH usarfaor Ast AfS free I 0424-3, Aaa eat 3 ecia, He 4)
hirdai kamal pargaasi-aa jotee jot milaa-ay.
The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and one's light merges in the Light.
aoa Afsad fs5 aG AfeGe fae ufs HASfa sta feuf= Null (1424-3, H8a est 3 edie, v2
4)
naanak satgur tin ka-o mayli-on jin Dhur mastak bhaag likhaa-ay. ||25||
O Nanak, they alone meet with the True Guru, who have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||25]|
mete fsnat nifat d Hone gu 3 ATE Il (1424-4, Hae eat 3 ete, He 4) andar tisnaa ag hai manmukh bhukh na jaa-ay. Within the self-willed manmukhs is the fire of desire; their hunger does not depart.
HU ay Ag ag d afs sfomr BuSte I (1424-4, waa erat 3 ecite, Hs 4)
moh kutamb sabh koorh hai koorh rahi-aa laptaa-ay.
Emotional attachments to relatives are totally false; they remain engrossed in falsehood.
wofes fest fas] fest gor Ate i (1424-5, Hea eat 3 eta, He 4) an-din chintaa chintvai chintaa baDhaa jaa-ay. Night and day, they are troubled by anxiety; bound to anxiety, they depart.
HHE HIS 5 Yael IGH AGH ANTE Il (1424-5, HSa Sat 3 eta, He 4) jaman maran na chuk-ee ha-umai karam kamaa-ay. Their comings and goings in reincarnation never end; they do their deeds in egotism.
qe Adee Cad aaa GE safe NEM (1424-6, H8a eet 3 eta, He 4) gur sarnaa-ee ubrai naanak la-ay chhadaa-ay. ||26|| But in the Guru's Sanctuary, they are saved, O Nanak, and set free. ||26]|
Afsagd use dfs fomrfee AsHafs Afsas Ste i 1424-6, Hoa Sat 3 etia, He 4) satgur purakh har Dhi-aa-idaa satsangat satgur bhaa-ay.
The True Guru meditates on the Lord, the Primal Being. The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, loves the True Guru.
HsHats Afsad Ae dfs AS TT Hote i 1424-7, A8a set 3 acta, ve 4)
satsangat satgur sayvday har maylay gur maylaa-ay.
Those who join the Sat Sangat, and serve the True Guru - the Guru unites them in the Lord's Union.
fg sno vas AAS J ag Stee of Sate Il (1424-7, Hea Sat 3 atta, He 4)
ayhu bha-ojal jagat sansaar hai gur bohith naam taraa-ay.
This world, this universe, is a terrifying ocean. On the Boat of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Guru carries us across.
Tart ser Hfoor ag us us Surfs it (1424-8, wax eat 3 ecia, we 4)
gursikhee bhaanaa mani-aa gur pooraa paar langhaa-ay.
The Sikhs of the Guru accept and obey the Lord's Will; the Perfect Guru carries them across.
Tora ot fe ufs efo oH unt st afs uifs ii 1424-8, naa erat 3 ecita, He 4) gursikhaa™ kee har Dhoorh deh ham paapee bhee gat paa‘hi.
O Lord, please bless me with the dust of the feet of the Guru's Sikhs. I am a sinner - please save me.
uf HASta fs ys fehor as ate fife wife | (1424-9, nae erat 3 etia, He 4)
Dhur mastak har parabh likhi-aa gur naanak mili-aa aa-ay.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads by the Lord God, come to meet Guru Nanak.
nHaad Hts feefone of esa BS sate i (1424-10, Hea Set 3 eta, He 4) jamkankar maar bidaari-an har dargeh la-ay chhadaa-ay.
The Messenger of Death is beaten and driven away; we are saved in the Court of the Lord.
ae 6 AAA Safe sor fs fHofe QI (1424-10, HBA eat 3 eta, Hs 4) gursikhaa no saabaas hai har tuthaa may! milaa-ay. ||27]|
Blessed and celebrated are the Sikhs of the Guru; in His Pleasure, the Lord unites them in His Union. ||27]|
afs us fs on feafenr fafs feos sou gorfemr il (1424-11, ra erat 3 ecita, ws 4) gur poorai har naam dirhaa-i-aa jin vichahu bharam chukaa-i-aa.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me; it has dispelled my doubts from within.
oH on ofa ates afte ats weE Ha Safer I (1424-11, Hea svat F ecita, He 4)
raam naam har keerat gaa-ay kar chaanan mag daykhaa-i-aa.
Singing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord's Name, the Lord's path is illuminated and shown to His Sikhs.
ICH fs Sa foe oat vise ou sAfenr | (1424-12, Aaa erat 3 |cita, 2 4)
ha-umai maar ayk liv laagee antar naam vasaa-i-aa.
Conquering my egotism, I remain lovingly attuned to the One Lord; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells within me.
TaHst AH rife 5 Aa Ae ote wafer | 1424-13, ABA Set 3 eta, He 4)
gurmatee jam johi na sakai sachai naa-ay samaa-i-aa.
I follow the Guru's Teachings, and so the Messenger of Death cannot even see me; I am immersed in the True Name.
Ag wm orfu ees ast A ove A ofS ofemr I (1424-13, Hea Set 3 atta, 2 4) sabh aapay aap vartai kartaa jo bhaavai so naa-ay laa-i-aa. The Creator Himself is All-pervading; as He pleases, He links us to His Name.
Ho aod ag we si le faa oe fas fe Afemr Ich (1424-14, Hoa Sat 3 eta, He 4) jan naanak naa-o la-ay taa™ jeevai bin naavai khin mar jaa-i-aa. ||28]|
Servant Nanak lives, chanting the Name. Without the Name, he dies in an instant. [|28]|
Ho nists IH da shh 3S IGH AAS TIAA Il (1424-14, aa eet 3 ecite, ws 4)
man antar ha-umai rog bharam bhoolay ha-umai saakat durjanaa.
Within the minds of the faithless cynics is the disease of egotism; these evil people wander around lost, deluded by doubt.
aoa sa gets ffs Afsae AT AAS QCM (1424-15, Ha erat 3 eciter, He 4)
naanak rog gavaa-ay mil satgur saaDhoo sajnaa. ||29|| O Nanak, this disease is eradicated only by meeting with the True Guru, the Holy Friend. ||29] |
TINS Ifa ahs FF il 1424-16, Hoa Set 3 eta, we 4) gurmatee har har bolay. Following the Guru's Teachings, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
ofa uf cnet feor ofS afe ast afe sft SB it 1424-16, wBa erat 3 ecita, us 4)
har paraym kasaa-ee dinas raat har ratee har rang cholay.
Attracted by the Lord's Love, day and night, the body-robe is imbued with the Lord's Love.
dfs AAT usY 3 BSsel AS Sfmt AAS HSS I (1424-16, HBa eat 3 |e, He 4)
har jaisaa purakh na labh-ee sabh daykhi-aa jagat mai tolay.
I have not found any being like the Lord, although I have searched and looked all over the world.
qs Afsafs ay festenr He uss 5 aT 3B Il (1424-17, Ha eet 3 ecia, ws 4)
gur satgur naam dirhaa-i-aa man anat na kaahoo dolay.
The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam within; now, my mind does not waver or wander anywhere else.
Ho aoa dig A UA I AT Afsad A AS HS ISOll (1424-18, aa sai F etha, we 4) jan naanak har kaa daas hai gur satgur kay gul golay. ||30]||
Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord, the slave of the slaves of the Guru, the True Guru. ||30]|
Yat 982u
HOAX HIS U (1425-1)
salok mehlaa 5 Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
qe Afsars ure il 1425-1) ik-o‘’kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
v3 Ret fa ny o Hae fret fest AST IN (1425-2, Hae erat 3 ect, He 5)
ratay say-ee je mukh na morha‘ni" jin"ee sinjaataa saa-ee.
They alone are imbued with the Lord, who do not turn their faces away from Him - they realize Him.
ofz sfz uge ad faadt frat ata & miret Al 1425-2, maa erat S ecite, He 5) jharh jharh pavday kachay birhee jin"aa kaar na aa-ee. ||1]| The false, immature lovers do not know the way of love, and so they fall. ||1]|
ual fegat ure udad ast ASt AS Il (1425-3, aa erat 3 ect, ws 5) Dhanee vihoonaa paat patambar bhaahee saytee jaalay. Without my Master, I will burn my silk and satin clothes in the fire.
ust fete Bseat At asa FAT FS Ml (1425-3, ABs eat 3 citar, He 5) Dhoorhee vich ludand-rhee sohaa™ naanak tai sah naalay. ||2]| Even rolling in the dust, I look beautiful, O Nanak, if my Husband Lord is with me.
21 |
ad a Rafe maha ay Sfar Fava i 1425-4, w8a eet 3 etita, ve 5)
gur kai sabad araaDhee-ai naam rang bairaag.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I worship and adore the Naam, with love and balanced detachment.
Mis us Fae sea Aes Hg fg Ta WS (1425-4, waa eet 3 ecita, ws 5)
jeetay panch bairaa-ee-aa naanak safal maaroo ih raag. ||3]|
When the five enemies are overcome, O Nanak, this musical measure of Raga Maaroo becomes frtuiful. ||3]|
wy fea 3 oe 38 frst fuse efs farsa Il (1425-5, HBa eet 3 ete, He 5)
jaa‘ moo’ ik ta lakh ta-o jitee pinnay dar kit-rhay.
When I have the One Lord, I have tens of thousands. Otherwise, people like me beg from door to door.
ane face afe6 wan fafs ats A fend Sil (4425-5, Hea at S ete, He 5)
baaman birthaa ga-i-o jannam jin keeto so visray. ||4| |
O Brahmin, your life has passed away uselessly; you have forgotten the One who created you. ||4||
Rafe A aA uldba oa & Stor SS Il (1425-6, Ha eat 3 eta, He 5) sorath so ras peejee-ai kabhoo na feekaa ho-ay. In Raga Sorat'h, drink in this sublime essence, which never loses its taste.
Soa TH aH Te Weifs waa fens AE Mull 1425-6, Ha erat 3 ect, He 5) naanak raam naam gun gaa-ee-ah dargeh nirmal so-ay. ||5||
O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, one's reputation is immaculate in the Court of the Lord. ||5]]|
A ufs va onfu fsa afe 3 Heat I 1425-7, waa erat 3 ect, He 5) jo parabh rakhay aap tin ko-ay na maar-ee. No one can kill those whom God Himself protects.
nivts on faure Het Te ASST I (1425-7, AB erat 3 ecita, ve 5)
andar naam niDhaan sadaa gun saar-ee.
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within them. They cherish His Glorious Virtues forever.
Sat 2a nial His sts ys Urset i (1405-8, wea eet F ecita, we 5)
aykaa tayk agamm man tan parabh Dhaar-ee.
They take the Support of the One, the Inaccessible Lord; they enshrine God in their mind and body.
SI dq org a & Bsrset i (1425-8, Hoa eat S ecita, v2 5) lagaa rang apaar ko na utaara-ee. They are imbued with the Love of the Infinite Lord, and no one can wipe it away.
aanfy sfe ae afte Hof AY ATSET I (1425-8, Aa sat F ecita, He 5)
gurmukh har gun gaa-ay sahj sukh saar-ee.
The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; they obtain the most excellent celestial peace and poise.
Soa oH fours foe Sfa araet EN (1425-9, HBax erat S eta, He 5) naanak naam niDhaan ridai ur haar-ee. ||6|| O Nanak, they enshrine the treasure of the Naam in their hearts. | |6] |
ad A var ufe wut des ots I (1425-9, Aaa eat 3 edie, He 5) karay so changa maan duyee ganat laahi. Whatever God does, accept that as good; leave behind all other judgements.
nual oefs foots mmt ST OE il 1425-10, H8a Sst 3 etita, He 5) apnee nadar nihaal aapay laihu laa-ay. He shall cast His Glance of Grace, and attach you to Himself.
Ho tg Hat Cuer fea SoH ATE Il (1425-10, Ha eat 3 ecita, He 5) jan dayh matee updays vichahu bharam jaa-ay. Instruct yourself with the Teachings, and doubt will depart from within.
A Uf fofimr Sy Het AS OE II 1425-10, H8a eet 3 eta, He 5) jo Dhur likhi-aa laykh so-ee sabh kamaa-ay. Everyone does that which is pre-ordained by destiny.
Ag ag fsn & af eat ofa AME I (1425-11, HBA erat 3 etha, He 5) sabh kachh tis dai vas doojee naahi jaa-ay. Everything is under His control; there is no other place at all.
Soa AY noe se ys at Hie SATE WDM (1425-11, Hea eet 3 eta, He 5) naanak sukh anad bha-ay parabh kee man rajaa-ay. ||7]| Nanak is in peace and bliss, accepting the Will of God. ||7]|
ag us fro frufour ret se fogs il (1425-12, Ba erat 3 eta, He 5) gur pooraa jin simri-aa say-ee bha-ay nihaal. Those who meditate in remembrance on the Perfect Guru, are exalted and uplifted.
o'Od STH NIUS' AIH mie SAA NCI (1425-12, Hoa eet 3 eite, 2 5) naanak naam araaDhanaa kaaraj aavai raas. ||8]| O Nanak, dwelling on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all affairs are resolved. ||8]|
unit AGH AHSe Ase TS THE Il (1425-13, ABa erat 3 ecita, ve 5) paapee karam kamaavday karday haa-ay haa-ay. The sinners act, and generate bad karma, and then they weep and wail.
Sod fAS Hafs Horst FG He GH ITS ICI (1425-13, HBA erat F etter, Hs 5)
naanak ji-o mathan maaDhaanee-aa ti-o mathay Dharam raa-ay. ||9]|
O Nanak, just as the churning stick churns the butter, so does the Righteous Judge of Dharma churn them. ||9]]|
on fturfefe AHAo ASH USTTE AIS Il 1425-14, Aa eat F ecita, He 5) naam Dhi-aa-in saajnaa janam padaarath jeet. Meditating on the Naam, O friend, the treasure of life is won.
Soa UGH MA vets ats eq USS IMO (1425-14, HBa erat F ecita, nz 5) naanak Dharam aisay chaveh keeto bhavan puneet. ||10|| O Nanak, speaking in Righteousness, one's world becomes sanctified. ||10] |
usat aefe fot aefe anstor i 425-15, Hea erat 3 ecia, He 5) khubh-rhee kuthaa-ay mithee galan kumantaree-aa. I am stuck in an evil place, trusting the sweet words of an evil advisor.
Soa ASt Cad frat star HET NAA (1425-15, Aa erat 3 |cite, He 5) naanak say-ee ubray jinaa bhaag mathaahi. ||11]|
O Nanak, they alone are saved, who have such good destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||11]]|
Aaa wet ASfe A IS AT MUS Il (1425-16, HBA vet 3 ecie, He 5)
sut-rhay sukhee sava‘ni" jo ratay sah aapnai.
They alone sleep and dream in peace, who are imbued with the Love of their Husband Lord.
Un feeo cat AG mid usa BSE 92M (1425-16, HBA eat 3 ecita, Hs 5)
paraym vichhohaa Dhanee sa-o athay pahar lava“ni". ||12]|
Those who have been separated from the Love of their Master, scream and cry twenty-four hours a day. ||12] |
Ass wiAY Hemet TSt ATES Il (1425-17, ABA eet 3 ete, we 5) sut-rhay asa‘kh maa-i-aa jhoothee kaarnay. Millions are asleep, in the false illusion of Maya.
Soa A Ale fa TAA OH Barge ISI (1425-17, Aa erat Z ecita, ne 5) naanak say jaaga‘ni" je rasnaa naam uchaarnay. ||13]|
O Nanak, they alone are awake and aware, who chant the Naam with their tongues. [|13]|
feat fare Ufe JHE FS Sa AYA I (1425-17, Wea est 3 ecita, vs 5) marig tisnaa paykh bhulnay vuthay nagar ganDharab. Seeing the mirage, the optical illusion, the people are confused and deluded.
frat AS wafomr sea Hf Ste Ss NASI (1425-18, Hx eat F ecitar, He 5) jinee sach araaDhi-aa naanak man tan fab. ||14||
Those who worship and adore the True Lord, O Nanak, their minds and bodies are beautiful. ||14] |
ufss urge UTSIIH AYa UTe MUTT Il (1425-18, HBA eat 3 stile, He 5)
patit uUDhaaran paarbarahm samrath purakh apaar.
The All-powerful Supreme Lord God, the Infinite Primal Being, is the Saving Grace of sinners.
Us 982E fants Gard aoa A fans franeg es NWI (1426-1, Hea est S eta, v2 5)
jisahi uDhaaray naankaa so simray sirjanhaar. ||15]| Those whom He saves, meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord. ||15]||
ent fs aeest fear AG fags ote I (1426-1, Aa est 3 etha, Hs 5) doojee chhod kuvaatarhee ikas sa-o chit laa-ay. Forsake duality and the ways of evil; focus your consciousness on the One Lord.
SH TST HHT CHE SAeat ATE AEM (1426-2, Ha sat 3 eta, we 5) doojai bhaavee™ naankaa vahan lurh"a“darhee jaa-ay. ||16]| In the love of duality, O Nanak, the mortals are being washed downstream. ||16]|
fades aaa Aer aale Zafar Il (1426-2, HSa erat 3B ecita, He 5) tintarhay baajaar sa-udaa karan vanjaari-aa. In the markets and bazaars of the three qualities, the merchants make their deals.
He zug frat Sfent A AVS UAT IVI (1426-3, HBX erat F eit, 2 5) sach vakhar jinee ladi-aa say sachrhay paasaar. ||17]| Those who load the true merchandise are the true traders. ||17]||
Ue UH 3 weet got fed seta il (1426-3, Hea est 3 eta, He 5) panthaa paraym na jaan-ee bhoolee firai gavaar. Those who do not know the way of love are foolish; they wander lost and confused.
aed ofa fanafe & uGe safe nigra ACI (1426-4, Hoa eat 3 |cia, He 5) naanak har bisraa-ay kai pa-uday narak anDh-yaar. ||18]| O Nanak, forgetting the Lord, they fall into the deep, dark pit of hell. ||18]|
Hear Hod o atAd Hat Sut SH I 1426-4, HSA eat 3 ecita, ne 5) maa-i-aa manhu na veesrai maa‘gai dammaa™ damm. In his mind, the mortal does not forget Maya; he begs for more and more wealth.
A ys fats o rect soa odt AdfH AEN (1426-5, Hex erat 3 ect, He 5) So parabh chit na aavee naanak nahee karamm. ||19]||
That God does not even come into his consciousness; O Nanak, it is not in his karma. []19]|
fseg ufs 3 gate frag nif fue i 0426-5, HBA erat 3 eta, He 5) tichar mool na thurhee“do jichar aap kirpaal. The mortal does not run out of capital, as long as the Lord Himself is merciful.
Hae mMyS Aa soa uty usts TS HD IlQOll (1426-6, Ha erat 3 tite, vs 5) sabad akhut baabaa naankaa khaahi kharach Dhan maal. ||20]|
The Word of the Shabad is Guru Nanak's inexhaustible treasure; this wealth and capital never runs out, no matter how much it is spent and consumed. ||20||
ug fates A Bat fular Aret Sf Il (1426-6, HBa eat S eta, He 5) khanbh vikaa™d-rhay jay lahaa™ ghinnaa saavee tol. If I could find wings for sale, I would buy them with an equal weight of my flesh.
Sfs Aatet nmué Bat A ANS |fH 2A (1426-7, HBA eat 3 ect, v2 5) tann jarhaa’-ee aapnai lahaa™ so sajan tol. ||21|| I would attach them to my body, and seek out and find my Friend. ||21]|
AA AT ufsarg fafs Avot S ATT Il (1426-7, HBa erat 3 |ciia, He 5) sajan sachaa paatisaahu sir saahaa™ dai saahu. My Friend is the True Supreme King, the King over the heads of kings.
fan uf afofenr Adba Asai et SAT 122i (1426-8, H8a Set 3 eta, He 5) jis paas bahithi-aa sohee-ai sabhnaa™ daa vaysaahu. ||22]| Sitting by His side, we are exalted and beautified; He is the Support of all. ||22]|
qe Afsars yArfe I (1426-9) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad. One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
HBa Hos € Il (1426-10)
salok mehlaa 9. Shalok, Ninth Mehl:
qo afse wes adt ASH naga ale Il (1426-10, Aaa, He 9) gun gobind gaa-i-o nahee janam akaarath keen. If you do not sing the Praises of the Lord, your life is rendered useless.
aT saa dfs sn Ho fas fafa Aw ae Hie IAI (1426-10, Fa, He 9)
kaho naanak har bhaj manaa jih biDh jal ka-o meen. ||1]|
Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; immerse your mind in Him, like the fish in the water. ||1||
fafimrs fA@ ard ofa for o dfs Saw Il (1426-11, HBa, He 9)
bikhi-an si-o kaahay rachi-o nimakh na hohi udaas.
Why are you engrossed in sin and corruption? You are not detached, even for a moment!
AT BSA SH Tis Hot ud O AH Ot SA MQM (1426-11, HSA, He 9)
kaho naanak bhaj har manaa parai na jam kee faas. ||2| |
Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord, and you shall not be caught in the noose of death. ||2]|
son fe dt afes at wa se AIS I (1426-12, Faa, He 9) tarnaapo i-o hee ga-i-o lee-o jaraa tan jeet. Your youth has passed away like this, and old age has overtaken your body.
AT asa SH Us Hot mia WS J afs NSN (1426-12, Aaa, He 9) kaho naanak bhaj har manaa a-oDh jaat hai beet. ||3]| Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; your life is fleeting away! ||3]|
fasta sfe6 AS odt are uTfEs morte Il (1426-13, HBA, He 9) biraDh bha-i-o soojhai nahee kaal pahoochi-o aan. You have become old, and you do not understand that death is overtaking you.
AT sod od Hed fa & SH SASS IVI (1426-13, HSa, He 9) kaho naanak nar baavray ki-o na bhajai bhagvaan. ||4|| Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you not remember and meditate on God? ||4| |
ug oat Hufs Aare fats mot af Hts Il (1426-14, HBa, He 9) Dhan daaraa sampat sagal jin apunee kar maan. Your wealth, spouse, and all the possessions which you claim as your own
feo H AEs Halt odt Sta AS fe Ul (1426-14, ABs, He 9) in mai kachh sangee nahee naanak saachee jaan. ||5|| - none of these shall go along with you in the end. O Nanak, know this as true. ||5]]|
ufss Bursa 3 Jae dfs nies & VE I (1426-15, HBA, He 9) patit uDhaaran bhai haran har anaath kay naath. He is the Saving Grace of sinners, the Destroyer of fear, the Master of the masterless.
ad aoa fsa wSba Ae’ SAS 3H AME NEN (1426-15, HBA, He 9) kaho naanak tih jaanee-ai sadaa basat tum saath. ||6]| Says Nanak, realize and know Him, who is always with you. ||6||
36 U6 fag 3 a AG Si fAG Sg & aS II (1426-16, FBa, He 9) tan Dhan jih to ka-o dee-o taa™ si-o nayhu na keen. He has given you your body and wealth, but you are not in love with Him.
AT asa od Ted mag fas SHzs cho IDI 1426-16, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak nar baavray ab ki-o dolat deen. ||7]|| Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you now shake and tremble so helplessly? ||7| |
36 US Au AY UG mg faa Sta OM II (1426-17, FSA, He 9) tan Dhan sampai sukh dee-o ar jih neekay Dhaam. He has given you your body, wealth, property, peace and beautiful mansions.
AT Sea AS J Ho" fAHeS ats B IH ICI (1426-17, Sa, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa simrat kaahi na raam. ||8]| Says Nanak, listen, mind: why don't you remember the Lord in meditation? ||8]|
AS AY VS TH FT VAT Stas ale Il (1426-18, ABA, we 9) sabh sukh daataa raam hai doosar naahin ko-ay. The Lord is the Giver of all peace and comfort. There is no other at all.
ad aaa Afs 3 Hort fsa fanaa afs SE KI (1426-18, Fa, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa tih simrat gat ho-ay. ||9]| Says Nanak, listen, mind: meditating in remembrance on Him, salvation is attained.
[9I|
ust 9822 fag fanss afs ure fsa sa 3 3 HIS II (1427-1, Fa, He 9)
jih simrat gat paa-ee-ai tin bhaj ray tai meet. Remembering Him in meditation, salvation is attained; vibrate and meditate on Him, O my friend.
aT sod AS J Hot meu wes J Sts IAOMl (1427-1, HBA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa a-oDh ghatat hai neet. ||10|| Says Nanak, listen, mind: your life is passing away! ||10]|
ulg 33 a 39 Se Wo VST AWS Il (1427-2, HSA, He 9) paa™ch tat ko tan rachi-o jaanhu chatur sujaan. Your body is made up of the five elements; you are clever and wise - know this well.
fag 3 CufaxG araar ste stfa HHT NAA (1427-2, HBa, He 9)
jih tay upji-o naankaa leen taahi mai maan. ||11]|
Believe it - you shall merge once again into the One, O Nanak, from whom you originated. ||11]|
we We H ofa FSA Ase ates yots Il (1427-3, ABA, He 9) ghat ghat mai har joo basai santan kahi-o pukaar. The Dear Lord abides in each and every heart; the Saints proclaim this as true.
a saa fsa aq Hat 3G fafa sata ute 92M (1427-3, Ha, He 9)
kaho naanak tih bhaj manaa bha-o niDh utreh paar. ||12||
Says Nanak, meditate and vibrate upon Him, and you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||12||
HY zy fag ugh dt SF Hg Mis Il (1427-4, ABA, He 9)
sukh dukh jih parsai nahee lobh moh abhimaan.
One who is not touched by pleasure or pain, greed, emotional attachment and egotistical pride
AI HSA AS FT Hat A HSS SASS WII (1427-4, ABA, we 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa so moorat bhagvaan. ||13]| - says Nanak, listen, mind: he is the very image of God. ||13]|
Grafs fSfeur onfe fafo aue Bo ANTS Il (1427-5, Haa, He 9) ustat nindi-aa naahi jihi kanchan loh samaan. One who is beyond praise and slander, who looks upon gold and iron alike
ad sod Afs J Hot Hats ste 3 ATS IASI (1427-5, HBA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa mukat taahi tai jaan. ||14|| - says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||14||
Jay Ad Wa Sdt Sct HIS ANTS Il (1427-6, Fa, He 9) harakh sog jaa kai nahee bairee meet samaan. One who is not affected by pleasure or pain, who looks upon friend and enemy alike
ad sod Afs J Hot Hats ata 3 AMS NIU (1427-6, HBA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa mukat taahi tai jaan. ||15]| - says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||15]||
3 aT ag ts afs afs S HST MN Il (1427-7, ABA, He 9) bhai kaahoo ka-o dayt neh neh bhai maanat aan. One who does not frighten anyone, and who is not afraid of anyone else
aT saa As J Hat famrat afo gate AEM (1427-7, Ha, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa gi-aanee taahi bakhaan. ||16]| - says Nanak, listen, mind: call him spiritually wise. ||16]||
fafa fafimr Aart sat StS Su Fava | (1427-8, Ava, v2 9)
jihi bikhi-aa saglee tajee lee-o bhaykh bairaag.
One who has forsaken all sin and corruption, who wears the robes of neutral detachment
AT BSA HS FT Ho fsa SS HA SAT NII (1427-8, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa tih nar maathai bhaag. ||17]| - says Nanak, listen, mind: good destiny is written on his forehead. ||17]]|
fafs wrfemr HHS Set AS 3 sfeG Bera | 1427-9, Aaa, Hs 9) jihi maa-i-aa mamtaa tajee sabh tay bha-i-o udaas. One who renounces Maya and possessiveness and is detached from everything
AT Bsa HS F Hor fsa wife gan (SSA ATI (1427-9, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa tih ghat barahm nivaas. ||18|| - says Nanak, listen, mind: God abides in his heart. ||18]|
fafo yrst BH Set asst aH UES I (1427-10, ABs, He 9) jihi paraanee ha-umai tajee kartaa raam pachhaan. That mortal, who forsakes egotism, and realizes the Creator Lord
aT Sea FJ Hats og fEd HS ATS HS NACI (1427-10, HBa, He 9) kaho naanak vahu mukat nar ih man saachee maan. ||19]| - says Nanak, that person is liberated; O mind, know this as true. ||19]|
3 BHO PaHfs Ido afe H afs a BMH Il (1427-11, ABA, He 9)
bhai naasan durmat haran kal mai har ko naam.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Name of the Lord is the Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of evil-mindedness.
fafa feo A soa SH Hes dfs fsa aH NQO1l (1427-11, ABA, He 9)
nis din jo naanak bhajai safal hohi tih kaam. ||20] |
Night and day, O Nanak, whoever vibrates and meditates on the Lord's Name, sees all of his works brought to fruition. ||20] |
fase de dfie sag Ads Hod dfs oH Il (1427-12, ASA, He 9)
jihbaa gun gobind bhajahu karan sunhu har naam.
Vibrate with your tongue the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; with your ears, hear the Lord's Name.
aT aaa Afs ¢ Hot uss & AH A OH MQUI (1427-12, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa pareh na jam kai Dhaam. ||21]|| Says Nanak, listen, man: you shall not have to go to the house of Death. ||21]|
A Yat HHST SH BST HT MIA Il (1427-13, ABA, He 9)
jo paraanee mamtaa tajai lobh moh ahakaar. That mortal who renounces possessiveness, greed, emotional attachment and egotism
AT aa nits 3d mMBTo BS Sug MQ (1427-13, ABs, ve 9) kaho naanak aapan tarai a-uran layt uDhaar. ||22|| - says Nanak, he himself is saved, and he saves many others as well. ||22]|
fa@ Aust nig Udar mA Hat aC ATS Il (1427-14, Has, He 9) ji-o supnaa ar paykhnaa aisay jag ka-o jaan. Like a dream and a show, so is this world, you must know.
feo H aE ATS Sdt aoa fas SHS |QSll (1427-14, ASA, He 9)
in mai kachh saacho nahee naanak bin bhagvaan. ||23]|| None of this is true, O Nanak, without God. ||23] |
fof fee wrfemr ares yrat Sms StS I (1427-15, ABA, He 9) nis din maa-i-aa kaarnay paraanee dolat neet. Night and day, for the sake of Maya, the mortal wanders constantly.
AEG H BSA AG sales firs BS Isl 1427-15, waa, v8 9)
kotan mai naanak ko-oo naaraa-in jih cheet. ||24||
Among millions, O Nanak, there is scarcely anyone, who keeps the Lord in his consciousness. | |24| |
AA AS 3 geset Cun fHow StS Il (1427-16, Aaa, He 9) jaisay jal tay budbudaa upjai binsai neet. As the bubbles in the water well up and disappear again,
Ad JUS" SA Tet aT Soa Afs HIST QUI (1427-16, HSA, H2 9)
jag rachnaa taisay rachee kaho naanak sun meet. ||25] | so is the universe created; says Nanak, listen, O my friend! ||25]|
yat ae 6 User Hfe wher & nig il (1427-16, aa, 48 9)
paraanee kachhoo na chayt-ee mad maa-i-aa kai anDh.
The mortal does not remember the Lord, even for a moment; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.
ad aod fae afs sno uss Sho AN ST NQEN 1427-17, Fas, He 9)
kaho naanak bin har bhajan parat taahi jam fanDh. ||26]||
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught by the noose of Death. ||26]|
AG AY ag wd Het Aafe IH at Bs I (1427-17, ABs, He 9) ja-o sukh ka-o chaahai sadaa saran raam kee layh. If you yearn for eternal peace, then seek the Sanctuary of the Lord.
AT SSA Als J HS" PIGST HOY VT |QDIl (1427-18, Ha, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa durlabh maanukh dayh. ||27|| Says Nanak, listen, mind: this human body is difficult to obtain. ||27]|
Hfeor arate Uredt HTH Ba MATS I (1427-18, HSA, Hs 9) maa-i-aa kaaran Dhaavhee moorakh log ajaan. For the sake of Maya, the fools and ignorant people run all around.
a stad fag dia sHo fase" HOH FATS NQCI (1427-19, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak bin har bhajan birthaa janam siraan. ||28|| Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, life passes away uselessly. ||28] |
A yal fafa fea sa gu oH Sa WS I 1427-19, ABA, He 9)
jo paraanee nis din bhajai roop raam tih jaan.
That mortal who meditates and vibrates upon the Lord night and day - know him to be the embodiment of the Lord.
Yat A82e
dfs Ae dfs nisg Sat Soa ATT HT] QCM (1428-1, ABA, He 9)
har jan har antar nahee naanak saachee maan. ||29]|
There is no difference between the Lord and the humble servant of the Lord; O Nanak, know this as true. ||29||
Ho Hfenr 4 efa afeG fanfeS afe ay i 1428-1, Aaa, He 9)
man maa-i-aa mai faDh rahi-o bisri-o gobind naam.
The mortal is entangled in Maya; he has forgotten the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
aT stad fag dis SH Alea ABS AM IBOll (1428-2, Aaa, He 9) kaho naanak bin har bhajan jeevan ka-unay kaam. ||30]|| Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, what is the use of this human life? ||30]|
urat oH 6 Uset Hfe wrfeor & nig Il (1428-2, Ha, He 9) paraanee raam na chayt-ee mad maa-i-aa kai anDh. The mortal does not think of the Lord; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.
ad sod uf sno fas uss fo AN ST NSAI (1428-3, ABA, He 9)
kaho naanak har bhajan bin parat taahi jam fanDh. ||31||
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught in the noose of Death. [131] |
HY HW 8g Halt se wa H Afar o ATS Il (1428-3, ABA, He 9)
sukh mai baho sangee bha-ay dukh mai sang na ko-ay.
In good times, there are many companions around, but in bad times, there is no one at all.
ad aoa die 3H Hor vfs AIST TE NBQI (1428-4, ABA, He 9)
kaho naanak har bhaj manaa ant sahaa-ee ho-ay. ||32| |
Says Nanak, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord; He shall be your only Help and Support in the end. ||32||
HOH HOH SaHS fefaG fxfeS 5 AH & 3H I (1428-4, Fa, Hs 9)
janam janam bharmat firi-o miti-o na jam ko taraas.
Mortals wander lost and confused through countless lifetimes; their fear of death is never removed.
ad aoa dfs 3H Ho fess uefa SA BSI (1428-5, ABs, He 9) kaho naanak har bhaj manaa nirbhai paavahi baas. ||33]|
Says Nanak, vibrate and meditate on the Lord, and you shall dwell in the Fearless Lord. ||33]|
q36 dds H ate ofa fufeS o He a WS Il (1428-5, HBA, He 9) jatan bahut mai kar rahi-o miti-o na man ko maan. I have tried so many things, but the pride of my mind has not been dispelled.
eons fhe aoa stu why SI sae SII (1428-6, ABA, He 9) durmat si-o naanak faDhi-o raakh layho bhagvaan. ||34|| I am engrossed in evil-mindedness, Nanak. O God, please save me! ||34||
we AMS oie fasta efs Sifs mene ATS Il (1428-7, HBA, He 9) baal ju-aanee ar biraDh fun teen avasthaa jaan. Childhood, youth and old age - know these as the three stages of life.
aT sad die sno fas fase AS St HS SUI (1428-7, Aaa, He 9)
kaho naanak har bhajan bin birthaa sabh hee maan. ||35||
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, everything is useless; you must appreciate this. ||35]||
ade JS Ho ae ufeG Ss a So I (1428-8, Aaa, 2 9)
karno huto so naa kee-o pari-o lobh kai fanDh.
You have not done what you should have done; you are entangled in the web of greed.
sod AHS of afeG ne fae des nit SEI (1428-8, ABA, He 9) naanak sami-o ram ga-i-o ab ki-o rovat anDh. ||36|| Nanak, your time is past and gone; why are you crying now, you blind fool? ||36||
Ho Hfeor 4 afk ofa faans ofos HIS Il (1428-9, ABA, He 9) man maa-i-aa mai ram rahi-o niksat naahin meet. The mind is absorbed in Maya - it cannot escape it, my friend.
ood Hots fas fas atss oto St BDI (1428-9, ABA, He 9) naanak moorat chitar ji-o chhaadit naahin bheet. ||37]|| Nanak, it is like a picture painted on the wall - it cannot leave it. ||37]|
od BIS aE ms ms at mVs set I (1428-10, HSA, He 9) nar chaahat kachh a-or a-urai kee a-urai bha-ee. The man wishes for something, but something different happens.
fases afuG saa aoa SAT af ust NACI (1428-10, ABs, He 9)
chitvat rahi-o thaga-ur naanak faasee gal paree. ||38] | He plots to deceive others, O Nanak, but he places the noose around his own neck instead. ||38]|
Wao Ws AVA ate eu a AE B AE It (1428-11, ASa, v8 9)
jatan bahut sukh kay kee-ay dukh ko kee-o na ko-ay.
People make all sorts of efforts to find peace and pleasure, but no one tries to earn pain.
ad sod Afs J Hot dfs ate A afe NSC (1428-11, HBA, He 9) kaho naanak sun ray manaa har bhaavai so ho-ay. ||39]| Says Nanak, listen, mind: whatever pleases God comes to pass. ||39]|
nas fsurdt fess J AS a VST IM II (1428-12, Aaa, 2 9) jagat bhikhaaree firat hai sabh ko daataa raam. The world wanders around begging, but the Lord is the Giver of all.
OWT sa Ho fAHg fsa yas defa aH MOM! (1428-12, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak man simar tih pooran hoveh kaam. ||40||
Says Nanak, meditate in remembrance on Him, and all your works will be successful. ||40]|
BS HG AT ad AT AUS FAG AS Il (1428-13, ABA, we 9)
jhoothai maan kahaa karai jag supnay ji-o jaan.
Why do you take such false pride in yourself? You must know that the world is just a dream.
feo H ae 3d odt BHA afos Sefs NSA (1428-13, Aaa, He 9) in mai kachh tayro nahee naanak kahi-o bakhaan. ||41|| None of this is yours; Nanak proclaims this truth. ||41]|
qe Ads 3 td a Hon feo A HIS I 1428-13, ABA, He 9) garab karat hai dayh ko binsai chhin mai meet. You are so proud of your body; it shall perish in an instant, my friend.
fafa yrat ofs AA ates soa fats Aa AHS SQN (1428-14, Aaa, He 9) jihi paraanee har jas kahi-o naanak tihi jag jeet. ||42|| That mortal who chants the Praises of the Lord, O Nanak, conquers the world. ||42| |
fro ufe fintge TH a A Od HAS WS Il (1428-14, Aaa, v2 9)
jih ghat simran raam ko so nar muktaa jaan.
That person, who meditates in remembrance on the Lord in his heart, is liberated - know this well.
fafa og dfs visa odt BSA ATS HT WSS (1428-15, HBA, v2 9)
tihi nar har antar nahee naanak saachee maan. ||43]| There is no difference between that person and the Lord: O Nanak, accept this as the Truth. ||43]|
ea sats saree fas yrat & ofa fe Il (1428-15, ABA, He 9) ayk bhagat bhagvaan jih paraanee kai naahi man. That person, who does not feel devotion to God in his mind
AA HAS AMS ssa HS StI SH Msi (1428-16, ABA, we 9) jaisay sookar su-aan naanak maano taahi tan. ||44|| - O Nanak, know that his body is like that of a pig, or a dog. ||44]|
Fomit & fag fa@ ret ors 3HS odt fos Il (1428-16, ABA, He 9) su-aamee ko garihu ji-o sadaa su-aan tajat nahee nit. A dog never abandons the home of his master.
aoa fea fafa af sH@ fea nfs ofe fea fats ieull (1428-17, Aa, He 9)
naanak ih biDh har bhaja-o ik man hu-ay ik chit. ||45] |
O Nanak, in just the same way, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord, single-mindedly, with one-pointed consciousness. ||45] |
see gas nig BS afa Ho HU TNS Il (1428-18, HBA, He 9)
tirath barat ar daan kar man mai Dharai gumaan.
Those who make pilgrimages to sacred shrines, observe ritualistic fasts and make donations to charity while still taking pride in their minds
sod foses ws fsa fa aus fEHo'S IISEll (1428-18, HBa, H2 9)
naanak nihfal jaat tih ji-o kunchar isnaan. ||46] |
- O Nanak, their actions are useless, like the elephant, who takes a bath, and then rolls in the dust. ||46] |
fra afuG ua sand do vfs 3 de Il 1428-18, Aa, He 9) sir kampi-o pag dagmagay nain jot tay heen. The head shakes, the feet stagger, and the eyes become dull and weak.
ag aoa feo fafa set 38 6 ate afh Sto NSN (1428-18, HBA, He 9)
kaho naanak ih biDh bha-ee ta-oo na har ras leen. ||47]| Says Nanak, this is your condition. And even now, you have not savored the sublime essence of the Lord. ||47] |
Yar agate
for afe SS Aas H a aT t HTT Il (1429-1, HBA, He 9) nij kar daykhi-o jagat mai ko kaahoo ko naahi. I had looked upon the world as my own, but no one belongs to anyone else.
sod fag ofa sats o fsa ae Ho fs Ist (1429-1, Fax, He 9)
naanak thir har bhagat hai tih raakho man maahi. ||48]|
O Nanak, only devotional worship of the Lord is permanent; enshrine this in your mind. ||48]|
Wa FIs AS 3S I ATS BI F HIS Il 1429-2, ASA, v2 9) jag rachnaa sabh jhooth hai jaan layho ray meet. The world and its affairs are totally false; know this well, my friend.
ats sea fag a ad fAS ae at SHS sti (1429-2, ABa, 3 9) kahi naanak thir naa rahai ji-o baaloo kee bheet. ||49]| Says Nanak, it is like a wall of sand; it shall not endure. ||49] |
oH aes veo aes A AG aT UST Il (1429-3, Ha, He 9) raam ga-i-o raavan ga-i-o jaa ka-o baho parvaar. Raam Chand passed away, as did Raawan, even though he had lots of relatives.
ad aoa fag ag odt Hus fa@ AAT UO! (1429-3, ABs, He 9) kaho naanak thir kachh nahee supnay ji-o sansaar. ||50|| Says Nanak, nothing lasts forever; the world is like a dream. ||50] |
fost at ot ateiba FH niadat dfF Il (1429-4, HSa, He 9) chintaa taa kee keejee-ai jo anhonee ho-ay. People become anxious, when something unexpected happens.
feg wed HATS & Sa fag odt AE UI (1429-4, HBA, He 9) in maarag sansaar ko naanak thir nahee ko-ay. ||51]|| This is the way of the world, O Nanak; nothing is stable or permanent. ||51]|
a GufaG A faofh 3 ud yA a oe II (1429-4, Ba, He 9)
jo upji-o so binas hai paro aaj kai kaal.
Whatever has been created shall be destroyed; everyone shall perish, today or tomorrow.
Soa Ts To Me & ats AS AA MUA! (1429-5, HBa, He 9) naanak har gun gaa-ay lay chhaad sagal janjaal. ||52||
O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and give up all other entanglements. [|52]|
ad Il (1429-5) dohraa. Dohraa:
aS sclas sas us aE 3 IS Sure it (1429-6, wBa, v3 9) bal chhutki-o banDhan paray kachhoo na hot upaa-ay. My strength is exhausted, and I am in bondage; I cannot do anything at all.
ad aed wie Ge ufs an fas dg AoE usil (1429-6, Aaa, He 9)
kaho naanak ab ot har gaj ji-o hohu sahaa-ay. ||53]|
Says Nanak, now, the Lord is my Support; He will help me, as He did the elephant. [153] |
a dot sue ee AS fas JS Cute | (1429-7, Aaa, He 9)
bal ho-aa banDhan chhutay sabh kichh hot upaa-ay.
My strength has been restored, and my bonds have been broken; now, I can do everything.
Soa AS fas SHI TAH SH dt Is ASE NUsll (1429-7, ABA, He 9) naanak sabh kichh tumrai haath mai tum hee hot sahaa-ay. ||54|| Nanak: everything is in Your hands, Lord; You are my Helper and Support. ||54||
Aa mer Afs sft ae aG 3 foafos Ate i (1429-8, ABA, we 9) sang sakhaa sabh taj ga-ay ko-oo na nib-hi-o saath. My associates and companions have all deserted me; no one remains with me.
ag aed fea frufs 4 fa Sa TSS NuUll (1429-8, ABA, He 9) kaho naanak ih bipat mai tayk ayk raghunaath. ||55|| Says Nanak, in this tragedy, the Lord alone is my Support. ||55||
ony ates Ag afeG safe ag aie il (1429-9, ABA, He 9)
naam rahi-o saaDhoo rahi-o rahi-o gur gobind.
The Naam remains; the Holy Saints remain; the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, remains.
ag aed fes was H fae Afus ae HS NUE (1429-9, Fax, He 9) kaho naanak ih jagat mai kin japi-o gur mant. ||56]| Says Nanak, how rare are those who chant the Guru's Mantra in this world. ||56]|
oH oH Ba H afes A a AH odt AE Il (1429-10, HSA, He 9) raam naam ur mai gahi-o jaa kai sam nahee ko-ay. I have enshrined the Lord's Name within my heart; there is nothing equal to it.
fad fangs Hae fee van Sod TE UDA (1429-10, ABA, He 9) jih simrat sankat mitai daras tuhaaro ho-ay. ||57||1||
Meditating in remembrance on it, my troubles are taken away; I have received the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||57]||1]|
Hereat HIS U Il (1429-11)
mundaavanee mehlaa 5. Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl:
ae fefs ffs erg uetG AZ ASsy Ses Il (1429-12, erect, ws 5)
thaal vich tinn vastoo pa-ee-o sat santokh veechaaro.
Upon this Plate, three things have been placed: Truth, Contentment and Contemplation.
nifys ou oad at ufeG fAA at ASA MOTs Il (1429-12, Hereet, He 5)
amrit naam thaakur kaa pa-i-o jis kaa sabhas aDhaaro.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of our Lord and Master, has been placed upon it as well; it is the Support of all.
Aa we Aa se fSA a se Coreg I (1429-13, Here, v2 5) jay ko khaavai jay ko bhunchai tis kaa ho-ay uDhaaro. One who eats it and enjoys it shall be saved.
&d SAS Sit og wet fos fos au Bfs ws I (1429-13, erect, 2 5) ayh vasat tajee nah jaa-ee nit nit rakh ur Dhaaro. This thing can never be forsaken; keep this always and forever in your mind.
3H AAG Udo Bla Sd AT Soa FIN UAT IAI (1429-14, Hereat, He 5)
tam sansaar charan lag taree-ai sabh naanak barahm pasaaro. ||1] |
The dark world-ocean is crossed over, by grasping the Feet of the Lord; O Nanak, it is all the extension of God. ||1]|
HOA HIS U Il (1429-14)
salok mehlaa 5. Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
3m ast WS ordt HS Aa atset Il (1429-14, erect, ve 5)
tayraa keetaa jaato naahee maino jog keeto-ee.
I have not appreciated what You have done for me, Lord; only You can make me worthy.
H fovafenrd & Te ost wm sen ufeGet it (1429-15, fereat, ne 5) mai nirguni-aaray ko gun naahee aapay taras pa-i-o-ee. I am unworthy - I have no worth or virtues at all. You have taken pity on me.
san ufeur froonfs det Afsag AME fixfer i 1429-15, Hereat, He 5) taras pa-i-aa mihraamat ho-ee satgur sajan mili-aa.
You took pity on me, and blessed me with Your Mercy, and I have met the True Guru, my Friend.
Soa OH fHS Si Hei Bq He ate for NA (1429-16, HeTeat, H2 5) naanak naam milai taa‘ jeevaa™ tan man theevai hari-aa. ||1|| O Nanak, if I am blessed with the Naam, I live, and my body and mind blossom forth.
[2
qe Afsars yrTfe (1429-18) ik-o‘kaar satgur parsaad One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
STA HS Il (1429-19)
raag maalaa. Raag Maalaa:
Ta Sa Afar UM AAS Il (1429-19, ws, -) raag ayk sang panch barangan. Each Raga has five wives,
Hfar mresrufs nte@ See Il (1429-19, nr, -) sang alaapeh aath-o nandan. and eight sons, who emit distinctive notes.
YEH Ta SIG F aati (1429-19, wes, -) paratham raag bhairo vai karhee. In the first place is Raag Bhairao.
UST W8ZBo
UT Tarot Aft Sard il (1430-1, wer, -) panch raagnee sang uchrahee. It is accompanied by the voices of its five Raaginis:
YEH Saat faesrsst | (1430-1, wer, -) paratham bhairvee bilaavalee. First come Bhairavee, and Bilaavalee;
Ufonrat arefa saat il (1430-1, 8, -) punni-aakee gaavahi banglee. then the songs of Punni-aakee and Bangalee;
ufe MAST at set arat Il (1430-1, us, -) pun aslaykhee kee bha-ee baaree. and then Asalaykhee.
= Sg at urs art Il (1430-2, ner, -) ay bhairo kee paacha-o naaree. These are the five consorts of Bhairao.
UsH Jae ferme Horta I (1430-2, ns, -) pancham harakh disaakh sunaaveh. The sounds of Pancham, Harakh and Disaakh;
SSH HO HTS ets WAU (1430-2, ner, -) bangaalam maDh maaDhav gaavahi. ||1|| the songs of Bangaalam, Madh and Maadhav. ||1]||
Bos fasres aedt wrust must ss I (1430-3, ne, -) lalat bilaaval gaavhee apunee apunee bhaa"t. Lalat and Bilaaval - each gives out its own melody.
wine uz sde A Weta afEs us NA (1430-3, ws, -) asat putar bhairav kay gaavahi gaa-in paatar. ||1]| when these eight sons of Bhairao are sung by accomplished musicians. ||1]|
eset HeEaABAa niterufs il (1430-4, ure, -) dutee-aa maalka-usak aalaapeh. In the second family is Maalakausak,
Afar srerat ura arufa i (1430-4, re, -) sang raagnee paacha-o thaapeh. who brings his five Raaginis:
sad mg Peau Il (1430-4, wer, -) goNdkaree ar dayvganDhaaree. Gondakaree and Dayv Gandhaaree,
aust Atgst Burst i (1430-5, ws, -) ganDhaaree seehutee uchaaree. the voices of Gandhaaree and Seehutee,
UaAdt & ura aet il 1430-5, ner, -) Dhanaasree ay paacha-o gaa-ee. and the fifth song of Dhanaasaree.
HS Tal AGHA Afar Bet |i (1430-5, ns, -) maal raag ka-usak sang laa-ee. This chain of Maalakausak brings along :
Hg HASHIG HST Il (1430-6, wer, -) maaroo masatang mayvaaraa. Maaroo, Masta-ang and Mayvaaraa,
YSIS AGHA Ssrs Il (1430-6, ws, -) parabalchand ka-usak ubhaaraa. Prabal, Chandakausak,
uue mG s@a oe WE Il (1430-6, us, -) kha-ukhat a-o bha-uraanad gaa-ay. Khau, Khat and Bauraanad singing.
MAS HBACA Afar BS Al (1430-6, ws, -)
asat maalka-usak sang laa-ay. ||1]| These are the eight sons of Maalakausak. ||1]|
ufs urfenié fase us ofa Afa mm] AS Il (1430-7, er, -) pun aa-i-a-o hindol panch naar sang asat sut. Then comes Hindol with his five wives and eight sons;
Gafs ate ase afee srg fraredt Ail (1430-7, Her, -) utheh taan kalol gaa-in taar milaavahee. ||1]| it rises in waves when the sweet-voiced chorus sings. ||1||
shat Peat iret | 1430-8, ns, -) taylangee dayvkaree aa-ee. There come Taylangee and Darvakaree;
aHSt HET AT Il (1430-8, weer, -) basantee sandoor suhaa-ee. Basantee and Sandoor follow;
HAA midtet & SIA Il (1430-8, wr, -) saras aheeree lai bhaarjaa. then Aheeree, the finest of women.
Afar wet uts@ nirgar i (1430-9, ums, -) sang laa-ee paa‘cha-o aarjaa. These five wives come together.
HOH Se SHAT MTS Il (1430-9, Heer, -) surmaanand bhaaskar aa-ay. The sons: Surmaanand and Bhaaskar come,
defsa Hae ATES Il (1430-9, wer, -) chandarbimb manglan suhaa-ay. Chandrabinb and Mangalan follow.
Hanae nig urfa faser il (1430-9, Her, -) sarasbaan a-o aahi binodaa. Sarasbaan and Binodaa then come,
Wefs AGA SHS AHS Il (1430-10, ws, -) gaavahi saras basant kamodaa. and the thrilling songs of Basant and Kamodaa.
WA UZ H AT ASS Il (1430-10, wer, -) asat putar mai kahay savaaree. These are the eight sons I have listed.
ufe niet Shue oft ardt Al (1430-10, rer, -)
pun aa-ee deepak kee baaree. ||1|| Then comes the turn of Deepak. ||1]|
aest ucHadt ast adt mrerfy i (1430-11, wer, -) kachhaylee patmanjree todee kahee alaap. Kachhaylee, Patamanjaree and Todee are sung;
Het mS art Afr cua x why WA 0430-11, wer, -) kaamodee a-0 goojree sang deepak kay thaap. ||1|| Kaamodee and Goojaree accompany Deepak. ||1]|
ASA ASH MS TH Ih 1430-11, wer, -) kaalankaa kuntal a-o raamaa. Kaalankaa, Kuntal and Raamaa,
AHOAAH PUR X SH Il (1430-12, ws, -) kamalkusam champak kay naamaa. Kamalakusam and Champak are their names;
TGS MF ASI ABS Il (1430-12, ws, -) ga-uraa a-o kaanraa kal-yaanaa. Gauraa, Kaanaraa and Kaylaanaa;
MA US Clue & AST MAUI (1430-12, wer, -) asat putar deepak kay jaanaa. ||1]| these are the eight sons of Deepak. ||1]|
AS fife fidtera S avefa il (1430-13, +1, -) sabh mil sireeraag vai gaavahi. All join together and sing Siree Raag,
urs Afal adate wets il (1430-13, wr, -) paa"cha-o sang barangan laaveh. which is accompanied by its five wives.:
Fad aTorest Ut Il (1430-13, ns, -) bairaaree karnaatee Dharee. Bairaaree and Karnaatee,
edt Wefs wimArSdt il 1430-14, wer, -) gavree gaaveh aasaavaree. the songs of Gawree and Aasaavaree;
fag ure fitaet mre it 1430-14, +e, -) tin paachhai sinDhvee alaapee. then follows Sindhavee.
frdtea fAG ursS art Wail 1430-14, ws, -) sireeraag si-o paa‘cha-o thaapee. ||1|| These are the five wives of Siree Raag. ||1]|
AS ASA AGS MST TS Sts Il (1430-14, ws, -) Saaloo saarag saagraa a-or gond gambheer. Saaloo, Saarang, Saagaraa, Gond and Gambheer
WAS UZ Alea a AS AT THts WA (1430-15, ws, -) asat putar sareeraag kay gund kumbh hameer. ||1|| - the eight sons of Siree Raag include Gund, Kumb and Hameer. ||1]|
WASH Hu Tar = aefa i (1430-15, ws, -) khastam maygh raag vai gaavahi. In the sixth place, Maygh Raag is sung,
utg@ Afal adate wets i (1430-16, ws, -) paa™cha-o sang barangan laaveh. with its five wives in accompaniment:
Rafe as Hodt gst | (1430-16, wer, -) sorath gond malaaree Dhunee. Sorat'h, Gond, and the melody of Malaaree;
ufe arefs MAT TS Tat ll (1430-16, us, -) pun gaavahi aasaa gun gunee. then the harmonies of Aasaa are sung.
Gs Afs Is Ufs Sat i (1430-17, wer, -) oochai sur sooha-o pun keenee. And finally comes the high tone Soohau.
Hy oer fA urs stat All (1430-17, wer, -) maygh raag si-o paa‘cha-o cheenee. ||1|| These are the five with Maygh Raag. ||1]|
HITT WATT ACTS Il (1430-17, Hs, -) bairaaDhar gajDhar kaydaaraa. Bairaadhar, Gajadhar, Kaydaaraa,
Wasa oe ME ABUTS Il (1430-18, Hw, -) jableeDhar nat a-o jalDhaaraa. Jabaleedhar, Nat and Jaladhaaraa.
ufe awefa Hag mG fim | (1430-18, x3, -) pun gaavahi sankar a-o si-aamaa. Then come the songs of Shankar and Shi-aamaa.
AY TST UTS X SH MAUI (1430-18, ww, -) maygh raag putran kay naamaa. ||1|| These are the names of the sons of Maygh Raag. ||1]|
une wa Cfo ae Afar serst SHA Il (1430-19, ns, -) khasat raag un gaa-ay sang raagnee tees. So all together, they sing the six Raagas and the thirty Raaginis,
AS UZ Ws A MSI CA SA NAIA (1430-19, wer, -) sabhai putar raagann kay athaarah das bees. ||1||1]| and all the forty-eight sons of the Raagas. ||1]]1]|
